r 


SHAKESPEARE'S  SONNETS. 


BALLANTYNH,    HANSOM   AND   CO. 
EDINBURGH    AND   LONDON 


sU  ettz  <of  e.  >  A////V 


«VV-, 


(SHAKESPEARE'S;  SONNETS 


(Sbiteb  toitlj  Jlotee  anb  Entrobuction 


BY 


THOMAS     TYLER,    M.A., 

KDITOR  OF  "SHAKESPEARE'S  SONNETS"  (1609)  IN  FACSIMILE;  AUTHOR 
OF  "THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  'HAMLET,'"  "  ECCLESIASTES,"  ETC. 


WITH  PORTRAITS  OF  WILLIAM  HERBERT,  EARL  OF  PEMBROKE 
AND  OF  HIS  MOTHER,  MARY,  COUNTESS  OF  PEMBROKE. 


LONDON: 

DAVID     NUTT,     270-71     STRAND. 
1890 


/v? 


631774 


*••'  If  any  should  be  curious  to  discover 
Whether  to  you  I  am  a  friend  or  lover,. 
Let  them  read  Shakespeare's  Sonnets,  taking  thence 
A  whetstone  for  their  dull  intelligence/' 

SHE.LLEY 


[All  rights  reserved. 


PREFACE. 


PREFIXED  to  the  fac-simile  edition  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets 
which,  some  three  or  four  years  ago,  I  edited  for  Dr.  Fur- 
nivall  was  a  somewhat  brief  Introduction  in  which  was  ex- 
pressed the  hope  that  I  might  be  able  before  very  long 
to  publish  a  fuller  account  of  the  questions  relating  to  the 
Sonnets,  and  also  of  the  interpretation  of  these  poems,  than 
was-  possible  in  the  limits  within  which  that  Introduction 
was  confined.  The  hope  thus  expressed  is  realised  in  the 
present  work. 

The  opinions  set  forth  in  the  brief  Introduction  to  which 
I  have  just  alluded  have  been  received  with  a  measure  of 
approval  much  greater  than,  considering  their  novelty  in 
several  particulars,  could  have  been  reasonably  anticipated. 
Not  unnaturally  attention  was  specially  directed  to  the 
evidence  adduced  concerning  the  persons  with  whom  the 
Sonnets  are  mainly  concerned.  It  is  now  about  half  a 
century  since  that  judicious  critic,  Hallam,  adopting  the 
hypothesis  of  Boaden  and  Bright,  said  of  the  identification 
of  William  Herbert,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  with  the  high-born, 
beautiful,  and  gifted  youth  for- whom  Shakespeare  expressed 
so  devoted  an  attachment,  that,  though  this  was  not  then 
strictly  proved,  yet  it  was  already  sufficiently  so  "to  de- 
mand our  assent."  The  evidence  which  it  is  now  possible 
to  adduce  places  the  theory  in  a  very  different  position 
from  that  which,  difficulties  notwithstanding,  obtained  for 
it  Hallam's  marked  approval.  As  to  the  lady  with  whom 

6 


preface. 


the  later  Sonnets  especially  are  concerned,  no  previous 
investigator  had,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  proposed  any  iden- 
tification wearing  even  the  semblance  of  probability.  But 
in  endeavouring  to  pursue  the  investigation  concerning 
Herbert  further  than  it  had  been  previously  carried,  the 
name  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  maid  of  honour,  Mrs.  Mary 
Fitton,  came  into  view.  And,  indeed,  if  the  identification 
of  Shakespeare's  male  friend  with  Herbert  has  been  proved, 
the  facts  of  the  Sonnets  render  certain  the  existence  of  an 
amorous  connection  between  Herbert  and  the  lady  who 
may  be  spoken  of  as  the  Sonnet-heroine.  There  was  at 
first  but  a  possibility  or  slight  probability ;  but  gradually, 
as  fact  after  fact  was  brought  to  light  from  contemporary 
records,  the  connected  series  closed  so  decisively  round  Mrs. 
Fitton  that  the  proof  in  her  case  became  not  less  clear  than 
it  had  been  in  the  case  of  Herbert.  The  facts  are  certainly 
remarkable ;  but,  in  connection  with  such  a  woman  as  Mrs. 
Fitton  must  have  been,  facts  somewhat  remarkable  and 
extraordinary  were  to  be  expected.  If  a  real  addition  to 
our  knowledge  of  Shakespeare's  life  has  been  made,  this 
result  has  not  been  attained  by  any  unscientific  and,  so 
to  speak,  cabalistic  methods,  such  as  those  which,  un- 
happily, have  of  late  attracted  so  large  a  share  of  public 
attention. 

Apart,  however,  from  the  questions  with  which  the 
Introduction  is  concerned,  the  present  volume  contains 
the  fullest  Commentary  on  the  Sonnets  which  has  yet  been 
published.  In  saying  this  I  have  not  the  least  wish  to 
detract  from  the  merits  of  Professor  Dowden's  valuable 
work  issued  a  few  years  ago.  I  venture  to  hope  that  I  shall 
not  be  found  chargeable  with  what  is  said  to  be  the  usual 
fault  of  commentators,  that  they  pass  over  places  which 
are  dark  and  difficult,  and  explain  what  needs  no  explana- 
tion. Having  in  view,  however,  readers  of  varying  intelli- 


preface, 


gence  and  attainments,  I  have  wished,  in  elucidation,  to  err 
by  excess  rather  than  defect.  In  interpreting  some  very 
difficult  places  I  have  received  valuable  assistance  which 
will  be  found  duly  acknowledged  in  the  commentary  on  the 
respective  passages.  The  text  I  have  given  is  somewhat 
conservative,  but  there  appeared  to  be  practical  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  printing,  as  the  basis  of  the  commentary,  the 
text  of  the  Quarto  of  1609,  with  its  spelling  and  punc- 
tuation. 

Thanks  are  due  to  the  Marquis  of  Salisbury  and  his 
librarian,  Mr.  R.  T.  Gunton,  for  very  valuable  information 
obtained  from  documents  in  his  lordship's  possession  at 
Hatfield,  to  Lord  De  Tabley  for  assistance  of  a  similar 
nature,  and,  for  important  aid  of  various  kinds,  to  Dr. 
F.  J.  Furnivall,  to  Dr.  Richard  Garnett,  to  Mr.  George 
Scharf,  Director  of  the  National  Portrait  Gallery,  to  Mr. 
J.  P.  Earwaker,  to  the  Rev.  P.  A.  Lyons,  to  Mr.  G.  Ber- 
nard Shaw,  to  Mr.  W.  T.  Lynn,  and  to  Mr.  Kensington, 
of  the  Department  of  Manuscripts,  British  Museum.  To 
my  friend  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison  very  special  acknow- 
ledgment is  required. 

With  regard  to  books  consulted,  I  ought,  perhaps,  to 
make  particular  mention  of  the  work  of  Professor  Dowdeu 
previously  alluded  to,  and  of  the  Shakespeare-Lexicon  of 
Dr.  A.  Schmidt. 

T.  T. 


NOTES   RELATING    TO    THE 
PORTRAITS. 

WILLIAM  HERBERT,  EARL  OF  PEMBROKE. 

THE  portrait  of  William  Herbert,  third  Earl  of  Pembroke, 
which  serves  as  frontispiece,  is  from  a  fine  print  in  the 
British  Museum.  The  engraving  was  executed,  as  the 
appended  inscription  shows,  from  a  painting  by  D.  Mytens, 
by  the  order  of  Philip  Herbert,  his  brother,  who  succeeded 
to  the  title.  It  has  thus  some  right  to  precedence  before 
other  engravings  as  representing  William  Herbert  in  the 
latter  part  of  his  life,  about  the  age,  perhaps,  of  forty-five. 
At  the  Portrait  Exhibition  of  1866  a  portrait  was  exhibited, 
said  to  represent  William  Herbert,  with  staff  of  office  in 
hand.  It  depicted  a  man  old  and  broken  down  in  constitu- 
tion. If  this  was  really  a  portrait  of  William  Herbert,  it 
must  have  been  taken,  it  would  seem,  very  shortly  before 
his  death,  when,  possibly  through  the  cause  mentioned  by 
Clarendon,  his  constitution  had  been  fatally  undermined, 
and  his  strength  and  vivacity  were  vanishing.1  The  source 
of  our  portrait  is  clearly  not  the  painting  at  Wilton,  en- 
graved by  Lodge,  and  attributed  to  Vandyck.  A  compari- 
son with  Lodge's  portrait  makes  this  sufficiently  evident. 
Indeed,  if  Vandyck  painted  the  Wilton  portrait,  it  would 

1  For  a  sight  of  a  photograph  of  this  portrait  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  L. 
G.  Holland,  assistant  librarian  of  the  National  Portrait  Gallery. 


IRotes  Delating  to  tbe  portraits. 


seem  that  the  portrait  must  have  been  executed  after 
William  Herbert's  death  from  some  previous  representa- 
tion ;  and  this  is,  I  believe,  asserted  to  have  been  the  fact. 
The  present  Lord  Pembroke  is  said  to  have  lately  acquired 
a  portrait  of  William  Herbert  by  Mytens;  but  I  am 
unable  to  say  whether  this  portrait  is  identical  with  that 
from  which  the  British  Museum  engraving  was  executed. 
There  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  that  a  man  of  the 
appearance  represented  in  the  engraving  may  have  been, 
from  eighteen  to  twenty-one,  exceedingly  handsome.1 

The  MS.  on  the  authority  of  which  the  autograph  (of 
reduced  size,  however)  is  given  is  in  the  British  Museum. 
The  initial  of  the  Christian  name  is  not  prefixed,  though 
William  Herbert's  father  seems  always,  or  usually,  to  have 
signed  "  H.  Pembroke,"  in  accordance  with  what  had  been 

1  The  following  from  a  letter  of  Sir  Dudley  Carleton's  to  Mr.  Winwood, 
dated  January  1604,  and  given  in  the  Winwood  Memorials  (vol.  ii.  p.  43), 
may  be  added  here  as  of  interest  on  more  than  one  account : — "William 
Herbert  is  brought  before  us  as  an  actor;  Philip  Herbert  was  one  of 
Shakespeare's  patrons,  according  to  the  Folio  of  1623,  and  it  is  note- 
worthy that  the  lady  he  married  was  sister  to  the  Bridget  Vere  who  in 
1597  was  about  to  be  married  to  William  Herbert  (p.  45) : — 

"  On  St.  John's  Day  we  had  the  Marriage  of  Sir  Philip  Herbert  and 
the  Lady  Susan  performed  at  Whitehall,  with  all  the  Honour  could  be 
done  a  great  favourite.  The  Court  was  great,  and  for  that  Day  put  on 
the  best  Bravery.  The  Prince  and  Duke  of  Hoist  led  the  Bride  to  Church, 
the  Queen  follow'd  her  from  thence.  The  King  gave  her,  and  she  in  her 
Tresses,  and  Trinketts  brided  and  bridled  it  so  handsomly,  and  indeed 
became  her  self  so  well,  that  the  King  said,  if  he  were  unmarried  he 
would  not  give  her,  but  keep  her  himself.  The  Marriage  Dinner  was 
kept  in  the  great  Chamber,  where  the  Prince  and  the  Duke  of  Hoist,  and 
the  great  Lords  and  Ladies  accompanied  the  Bride.  The  Ambassador  of 
Venice  was  the  only  bidden  Guest  of  Strangers,  and  he  had  place  above 
the  Duke  of  Hoist,  which  the  Duke  took  not  well.  ...  At  Night  there 
was  a  Mask  in  the  Hall,  which  for  Conceit  and  Fashion  was  suitable 
to  the  Occasion.  The  Actors,  were  the  Earle  of  Pembrook,  the  Lord 
Willoby,  Sir  Samuel  Hays,  Sir  Thomas  Germain,  Sir  Robert  Gary,  Sir 
John  Lee,  Sir  Eichard  Preston,  and  Sir  Thomas  Eager.  ...  No  Cere- 
mony was  omitted  of  Bride-Cakes,  Points,  Garters,  and  Gloves,  which 
have  been  ever  since  the  Livery  of  the  Court." 


Iftotes  IRelating  to  tbe  fcortraite. 


the  ordinary  custom.  The  practice,  indeed,  continued  by 
no  means  unusual  for  a  good  while  afterwards,  showing 
that  the  individual  name  was  not  by  any  means  so  fully 
merged  in  the  title  as  is  now  the  case.  This  is  of  some 
importance  with  regard  to  the  matter  discussed  on  p.  72. 


MARY,  COUNTESS  OF  PEMBROKE. 

This  portrait,  the  original  of  which  is  at  Penshurst,  is 
of  importance  with  reference  to  the  words  of  the  third 
Sonnet : — 

"  Thou  art  thy  mother's  glass,  and  she  in  thee 
Calls  back  the  lovely  April  of  her  prime." 

The  allusion  is  entirely  accordant  with  the  beauty  of 
"  Sidney's  sister,  Pembroke's  mother." 


MRS.  MARY  FITTOK 

When  I  wrote  what  is  to  be  found  on  page  80  (note),  I 
had  not  seen  the  coloured  sculptures,  in  Gawsworth  Church, 
of  Lady  Alice  Fitton  and  her  children,  Edward,  Richard, 
Anne,  and  Mary.  I  might  possibly  have  done  so,  if  I  had 
not  been  influenced  by  the  statement  of  Mr.  J.  P.  Earwaker 
(East  Cheshire,  vol.  ii.  p.  582)  that  the  figures  just  alluded 
to  "show  traces  of  having  been  highly  coloured."  *  Such 

1  Of  this  monument  Earwaker  says  :  "  It  was  placed  in  memory  of 
DAME  ALICE  FITTON,  the  widow  of  Sir  Edward  Fitton,  Knt.,  and 
daughter  and  heiress  of  Sir  John  Holcroft,  of  Holcroft,  co.  Lancaster, 
Knt.,  who  was  buried  at  Gawsworth,  Jan.  4,  1626-7.  She  is  represented 
wearing  a  large  hood,  her  head  resting  upon  her  right  arm,  her  left  hand 
being  placed  on  a  book  which  rests  on  her  knees.  In  front  of  her  are  the 
kneeling  figures  of  her  two  sons,  Sir  Edward  Fitton,  the  first  Baronet 
(so  created  in  1617),  and  then  deceased  (he  died  in  1619),  and  Richard 


motes  delating  to  tbe  iportratts. 


"  traces,"  it  seemed,  would  not  give  satisfactory  evidence  as 
to  Mary  Fitton's  hair  and  complexion ;  and  I  did  not  sup- 
pose that  any  very  trustworthy  representation  of  the  lady's 
features  would  be  found.  I  was  agreeably  surprised,  on  a 
visit  which  I  made  with  express  reference  to  this  work,  to 
find  that  the  colouring  was  in  a  much  better  condition  than 
Earwaker's  remark  had  led  me  to  expect,  and  that  the 
sculpture  had  been  executed  in  a  good  style  of  monumental 
art.  There  was  the  dark  complexion,  together  with  the 
black  hair  and  eyes,  so  graphically  depicted  in  the  second 
series  of  Sonnets.  The  colour  of  the  sculptured  Mary  Fitton 
was  the  more  remarkable  as  her  brother  Edward  is  repre- 
sented on  the  monument  as  fair  with  a  light  moustache. 
The  features  also  showed  accordance  with  Shakespeare's 
repeated  assertion  that  the  lady  of  the  Sonnets  was  not 
beautiful.  And  that  the  lips  and  the  eyes  were  features 
expressing  the  predominance  of  sensual  passion  was  not  to 
be  mistaken.  That  such  a  woman  should  exercise  a  certain 
kind  of  fascination  on  the  opposite  sex  can  scarcely  be 
difficult  for  a  spectator  to  believe.  The  expression  of  Mary's 
face  contrasts  strongly  with  that  of  her  sister,  Lady  New- 
digate.  If  the  monument  was  executed  in  1626  or  later, 
Mary  Fitton  must  have  been  forty-eight  years  old.  The  face 
in  the  sculpture  would  seem  to  represent  a  younger  person. 
Perhaps,  like  her  brothers,  she  may  have  been  already  dead, 
and  the  sculptor  may  have  been  compelled  to  work  from  a 

Fitton,  Esq.,  who  died  in  1610.  Behind  her  are  the  kneeling  figures  of 
her  two  daughters,  Anne  and  Mary.  These  figures  are  all  habited  in  the 
costume  of  the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  show  traces  of 
having  been  highly  coloured. "  The  monument  has  now  no  accompanying 
inscription,  referring  to  the  figures,  but  the  identification  might  have  been 
inferred  with  probability  from  the  contiguous  Fitton  monuments,  from 
the  costumes,  and  from  the  known  facts  with  regard  to  Lady  Alice  and 
her  children.  Mr.  Earwaker,  however,  was  so  fortunate  as  to  possess  a 
seventeenth  century  MS.  of  "Cheshire  Church  Notes,"  which  gave  more 
direct  evidence.  See  his  note  on  page  above  mentioned,  and  vol.  i.  p.  xxvi. 


motes  TRelatins  to  tbe  portraits. 


portrait.  Fortunately,  however,  the  work  appears  to  have 
been  well  done.  The  coiffure  is  very  noteworthy.  At  first 
it  may  seem  doubtful  whether  there  is  really  hair  rising 
from  the  forehead,  and  then  trained  back  on  the  head  over 
some  support,  but  a  careful  examination  of  the  monument 
leaves  no  doubt  concerning  the  matter.  It  may  be,  possibly, 
that  we  have  a  representation  of  false  hair  arranged  very 
artificially ;  but  certainly  the  hair  is  black,  and  so  far  agrees 
entirely  with  the  portraiture  in  the  Sonnets.  The  hair 
thus  agrees  also  with  the  colour  of  the  complexion  and  eyes. 
Unfortunately  the  tip  of  the  nose  has  been  broken  off,  and 
the  hands  appear  to  have  gone  long  since.  But,  according 
to  the  drawing  of  the  monument  figured  by  Earwaker,  the 
hands  of  Lady  Newdigate  have  disappeared  since  that 
drawing  was  made  in  1873  ;  an(^  so  a^so  ^as  Richard  Fit  ton 
lost  entirely,  or  nearly  so,  the  front  part  of  his  face.  It  is 
perhaps  worth  while  to  mention  that  Mary  Fitton  is  repre- 
sented as  short  in  stature,  or,  at  least,  as  shorter  than  her 
sister.  The  engraving  has  been  executed  after  a  drawing 
made  at  Gawsworth  expressly  for  this  work.1 

1  I  may  here  append  a  word  with  regard  to  an  objection  made  by  Mr. 
S.  L.  Lee  in  the  article  "  Mary  Fitton,"  Dictionary  of  National  Biography, 
to  the  assertion  that  in  Kemp's  Dedication  of  his  Nine  Days'  Wonder 
the  name  "Anne  "  was  wrongly  substituted  for  "  Mary  "  (cf.  pp.  76,  77, 
in  the  present  work).  It  is,  however,  certain  that  in  1600  there  was  DO 
maid  of  honour  Mrs.  Anne  Fitton  as  described  by  Kemp.  Recently  the 
Rev.  "W.  A.  Harrison — to  whom  is  due  the  first  indication  of  the  con- 
nection between  Kemp's  Dedication  and  the  dark  lady  of  the  Sonnets 
(Academy,  July  5, 1884) — happened  to  find  in  Lysons's  Environs  of  London, 
vol.  iii.  p.  450,  an  extract  from  the  register  of  St.  Dunstan's,  Stepney, 
stating  that  Anne  Fitton,  daughter  of  Sir  Edward  Fitton,  was  married  to 
John  Newdigate  on  April  30,  1587  (when  she  would  have  been  only  in  her 
thirteenth  year).  This  extract  has  since  been  verified  by  inspection  of 
the  register.  As  this  marriage  was  certainly  not  set  aside  as  invalid,  it 
seems  sufficiently  clear  that  Anne  Fitton  could  not  possibly  have  been 
maid  of  honour  in  1600.  There  must,  therefore,  have  been  a  mistake 
made  by  some  one.  But  whether  the  fault  lay  with  Kemp  or  his  printer 
it  is  scarcely  possibly  now  to  determine. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION, 

"       CHAP.  PAGE 

I.  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  SONNETS i 

§  i.  Alleged  Obscurity       .        ,        ,        %.'..,        .  i 

§  2.  Aim  and  Intention    .......  2 

§  3.  Poetical  Form    .        .        $....'    V       .        .  3 

§  4.  Orderly  Arrangement         .        • 5 

§  5.  Poetical  Merit                    ......  7 

§  6.  Concerned  with  Fact  ...        .        .  .10 

II.  THE  DEDICATION 12 

III.  SOME  CHRONOLOGICAL  INDICATIONS 16 

§  i.  The  Passionate  Pilgrim 16 

§  2.  Meres' s  "  Palladis  Tamia,  Wit's  Treasury  "     .        .  18 

§  3.  Historical  Allusions 22 

§  4.  The  Three  Years'  Space ,27 

IV.  SHAKESPEARE  AND  SOUTHAMPTON        .       .       »     .,       .  28 
V.  THE  RIVAL  POET 33 

VI.  Two  OTHER  CONTEMPORARY  POETS 36 

§  i.  Mar stori  s  "  In  Praise  of  his  Pygmalion" .        .        .  36 

§2.  Drayton's  "Idea"     .......  38 

VII.  WILLIAM  HERBERT       .«.•*....  44 

VIII.  THE  DARK  LADY 73 

IX.  SHAKESPEARE'S  BELIEF  IN  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  HIS  WORKS  93 

X.  THE  RELIGION  OF  SHAKESPEARE 96 

XI.  PHILOSOPHY  IN  THE  SONNETS        .       , 101 

XII.  FURTHER  PARTICULARS  IN  SHAKESPEARE'S  BIOGRAPHY        .  no 

§  i.  Allusions  to  Advancing  Age no 

§  2.  Shakespeare  Travelling 112 

§  3.  Shakespeare's  Dislike  of  the  Dramatic  Profession       .  113 

XIII.  THE  SCANDAL  CONCERNING  SHAKESPEARE  IN  1601         .       .  115 

XIV.  INDICATIONS  OF  GLOOM  IN  THE  SONNETS  AND  SOME  OTHER 

OF  SHAKESPEARE'S  WORKS 122 

XV.  SHAKESPEARE'S  SCHOLARSHIP 133 

XVI.  EDITIONS  OF  THE  SONNETS  IN  THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY  .  135 

XVII.  CRITICISM  OF  THE  TEXT 142 

XVIII.  SKETCH  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  INTERPRETATION      .        .        .145 

XIX.  DIVISION  AND  GROUPING 150 


Sonnets,  witb  motes. 


SONNETS,   WITH  NOTES. 

FIRST  SERIES. 

BONNET  PAGB 

I.  From  fairest  creatures  we  desire  increase     .        .  .157 

II.  When  forty  winters  shall  besiege  thy  brow    .        .  .158 

III.  Look  in  thy  glass,  and  tell  the  face  thou  viewest  .  .     159 

IV.  Unthrifty  loveliness,  why  dost  thou  spend    .        .  .     160 
V.  Those  hours,  that  with  gentle  work  did  frame       .  .161 

VI.  Then  let  not  Winter's  ragged  hand  deface    .         .  .     162 

VII.  Lo,  in  the  orient  when  the  gracious  light      .         .  .     163 

VIII.  Musick  to  hear,  why  hear'st  thou  musick  sadly  ?  .  .164 

IX.  Is  it  for  fear  to  wet  a  widow's  eye 166 

X.  For  shame  !  deny  that  thou  bear'st  love  to  any    .  .     167 

XI.  As  fast  as  thou  shalt  wane,  so  fast  thou  grow'st   .  .     168 

XII.  When  I  do  count  the  clock  that  tells  the  time      .  .     169 

XIII.  0  that  you  were  yourself  !  but,  love,  you  are        .  .170 

XIV.  Not  from  the  stars  do  I  my  judgment  pluck         .  .     171 
XV.  When  I  consider  everything  that  grows        .         .  .172 

XVI.  But  wherefore  do  not  you  a  mightier  way    .        .  .     173 

XVII.  Who  will  believe  my  verse  in  time  to  come  .         .  .     174 

"^  XVIII.  ^  Shall  I  compare  thee  to  a  summer'sday?      .        .  .     lyq 

XIX.  Devouring^ Time7  blunt  thou  the  KonVpaws .        .  .176 

XX.  A  woman's  face  with  Nature's  own  hand  painted  .  .     177 

XXI.  So  is  it  not  with  me  as  with  that  Muse          .         .  .178 

XXII.  My  glass  shall  not  persuade  me  I  am  old       .         .  .179 

XXIII.  As  an  unperfect  actor  on  the  stage        .        .         .  .180 

XXIV.  Mine  eye  hath  play'd  the  painter,  and  hath  stell'd  .     181 
•f-  XXV.  Let  those  who  are  in  favour  with  their  stars         .  .183 

XXVI.  Lord  of  my  love,  to  whom  in  vassalage         .        .  .184 

XXVII.  Weary  with  toil,  I  haste  me  to  my  bed         .        .  .     185 

XXVIII.  How  oan  I  then  return  in  happy  plight         .        .  .     186 

•f-  XXIX.  When  in  disgrace  with  fortune  and  men's  eyes     .  .187 

-p  XXX.  When  to  the  sessions  of  sweet  silent  thought        .  .188 

XXXI.  Thy  bosom  is  endeared  with  all  hearts  .        .         .  .189 

-f'XXXII.  If  thou  survive  my  well-contented  day ....     190 

-/XXXIII.  Full  many  a  glorious  morning  have  I  seen    .         .  .191 

XXXIV.  Why  didst  thou  promise  such  a  beauteous  day     .  .192 

^fXXXV.  No  more  be  griev'd  at  that  which  thou  hast  done  .     193 

XXXVI.  Let  me  confess  that  we  two  must  be  twain    .         .  .194 

XXXVII.  As  a  decrepit  father  takes  delight         .         .        .  .195 

XXXVIII.  How  can  my  Muse  want  subject  to  invent   .         .  .     196 

XXXIX.  0  how  thy  worth  with  manners  may  I  sing  .         .  .197 

XL.  Take  all  my  loves,  my  love,  yea,  take  them  all     .  .     198 


Sonnets,  witb  Wotes. 


SONNET  PAQB 

XLI.  Those  pretty  wrongs  that  liberty  commits    .        .-  .     199 

XLIL  That  thou  hast  her,  it  is  not  all  my  grief      ...    200 

XLIII.  When  most  I  wink,  then  do  mine  eyes  best  see    .  .     201 

XLIV.  If  the  dull  substance  of  my  flesh  were  thought      .  .     202 

XLV.  The  other  two,  slight  air  and  purging  fire     .         .  .     203 

XLVI.  Mine  eye  and  heart  are  at  a  mortal  war        .        .  .     204 

XLVIL  Betwixt  mine  eye  and  heart  a  league  is  took         .  .     205 

XLVIIL  How  careful  was  I  when  I  took  my  way        .        .  .     206 

XLIX.  Against  that  time,  if  ever  that  time  come    .        .  .     207 

L.  How  heavy  do  I  journey  on  the  way     ....     208 

LI.  Thus  can  my  love  excuse  the  slow  offence     .        .  .     209 

LH.  So  am  I  as  the  rich,  whose  blessed  key          . '       .  .210 

LIII.  What  is  your  substance,  whereof  are  you  made    .  .211 

LIV.  0  how  much  more  doth  beauty  beauteous  seem    .  .    212 

LV.  Not  marble,  nor  the  gilded  monument          .        .  .    213 

LVI.  Sweet  love,  renew  thy  force  ;  be  it  not  said  .        .  .     214 

LVII.  Being  your  slave,  what  should  I  do  but  tend        .  .215 

LVIII.  That  God  forbid,  that  made  me  first  your  slave    .  .     216 

LIX.  If  there  be  nothing  new,  but  that  which  is   .        .  .     217 

*/-LX.  Like  as  the  waves  make  towards  the  pebbled  shore  .     218 

LXI.  Is  it  thy  will,  thy  image  should  keep  open    .        .  .     219 

LXII.  Sin  of  self-love  possesseth  all  mine  eye          .        .  .     220 

LXIII.  Against  my  love  shall  be,  as  I  am  now  ....     221 

•f  LXIV.  When  I  have  seen  by  Time's  fell  hand  defac'd      .  .     222 

LXV.  Since  brass,  nor  stone,  nor  earth,  nor  boundless  sea  .     224 

LXVI.  Tir'd  with  all  these,  for  restful  death  I  cry  .        .  .     225 

LXVII.  Ah,  wherefore  with  infection  should  he  live          .  .     226 

LXVIII.  Thus  is  his  cheek  the  map  of  days  outworn  .         .  ,    227 

LXIX.  Those  parts  of  thee  that  the  world's  eye  doth  view  .     228 

LXX.  That  thou  art  blam'd  shall  not  be  thy  defect        .  .     229 

*f  LXXI.  No  longer  mourn  for  me  when  I  am  dead     .        .  .     230 

LXX1I.  0,  lest  the  world  should  task  you  to  recite   .        .  .231 

^LXXIII.  That  time  of  year  thou  may'st  in  me  behold         .  .     232 

LXXIV.  But  be  contented  :  when  that  fell  arrest       .        .  .     233 

LXXV.  So  are  you  to  my  thoughts,  as  food  to  life    .        .  .     234 

LXXVI.  Why  is  my  verse  so  barren  of  new  pride  ?     .        .  235 

LXXVII.  Thy  glass  will  show  thee  how  thy  beauties  wear  .  .     236 

LXXVIII.  So  oft  have  I  invok'd  thee  for  my  Muse        .        .  .237 

LXXIX.  Whilst  I  alone  did  call  upon  thy  aid     .        .        .  .238 

LXXX.  0,  how  I  faint  when  I  of  you  do  write  ....     239 

LXXXI.  Or  I  shall  live  your  epitaph  to  make     ....     240 

LXXXII.  I  grant  thou  wert  not  married  to  my  Muse  .         .  .     241 

LXXXIII.  I  never  saw  that  you  did  painting  need        .        .  .     242 


Sonnets,  witb  Iftotes. 


SONNET  PAGE 

LXXXIV.  Who  is  it  that  says  most  ?  which  can  say  more     .  .     243 

LXXXV.  My  tongue-tied  Muse  in  manners  holds  her  still  .  .     244 

LXXXVI.  Was  it  the  proud  full  sail  of  his  great  verse .         .  .     245 

LXXXVII.  Farewell  !  thou  art  too  dear  for  my  possessing      .  .     246 

LXXXVIII.  When  thou  shalt  be  dispos'd  to  set  me  light         .  .     247 

LXXXIX.  Say  that  thou  didst  f oresake  me  for  some  fault    .  .     248 

XC.  Then  hate  me  when  thou  wilt ;  if  ever,  now         .  .     249 

XCI.  Some  glory  in  their  birth,  some  in  their  skill        .  .     250 

XCII.  But  do  thy  worst  to  steal  thyself  away         .        .  .251 

XCIII.  So  shall  I  live,  supposing  thou  art  true         .        .  .     252 

XCIV.  They  that  have  power  to  hurt  and  will  do  none    .  .     253 

XCV.  How  sweet  and  lovely  dost  thou  make  the  shame  .     254 

XCVI.  Some  say,  thy  fault  is  youth,  some  wantonness    .  .     255 

-^-XCVII.  How  like  a  winter  hath  my  absence  been      .        .  .     256 

XCVIII.  From  you  have  I  been  absent  in  the  spring  .         .  .     257 

XCIX.  The  forward  violet  thus  did  I  chide      .        .        .  .258 

C.  Where  art  thou,  Muse,  that  thou  forget' st  so  long  .     259 

CI.  O  truant  Muse,  what  shall  be  thy  amends    .         .  .     260 

CII.  My  love  is  strengthen'd,  though  more  weak  in  seeming    261 

CUT.  Alack  !  what  poverty  my  Muse  brings  forth         .  .     262 

CIV.  To  me,  fair  friend,  you  never  can  be  old       .        .  .     263 

CV.  Let  not  my  love  be  called  idolatry         ....     264 

f-  CVI.  When  in  the  chronicle  of  wasted  time  ....     265 

-f-CVII.  Not  mine  own  fears,  nor  the  prophetic  soul .         .  .     266 

CVIII.  What's  in  the  brain  that  ink  may  character          .  .     267 

CIX.  0,  never  say  that  I  was  false  of  heart  ....     268 

-J-  CX.  Alas  !  'tis  true,  I  have  gone  here  and  there  .         .  .     269 

Y*CXI.  0,  for  my  sake  do  you  with  Fortune  chide    .        .  .     270 

CXII.  Your  love  and  pity  doth  the  impression  fill  .         .  .271 

CXIII.  Since  I  left  you,  mine  eye  is  in  my  mind      .        .  .     272 

CXIV.  Or  whether  doth  my  mind,  being  crown'd  with  you  .     273 

CXV.  Those  lines  that  I  before  have  writ,  do  lie    .        .  .     274 

•J-CXVI.  Let  me  not  to  the  marriage  of  true  minds    .        .  .     275 

CXVII.  Accuse  me  thus  ;  that  I  have  scanted  all      .        .  .     276 

CXVIII.  Like  as,  to  make  our  appetites  more  keen     .        .  .     277 

CXIX.  What  potions  have  I  drunk  of  Syren  tears    .        .  .278 

CXX.  That  you  were  once  unkind,  befriends  me  now     .  .     279 

CXXI.  'Tis  better  to  be  vile,  than  vile  esteemed      .        .  .280 

CXXII.  Thy  gift,  thy  tables,  are  within  my  brain     .        .  .281 

CXXIII.  No  !  Time,  thou  shalt  not  boast  that  I  do  change  .     282 

CXXIV.  If  my  dear  love  were  but  the  child  of  state  .         .  .283 

CXXV.  Were  't  aught  to  me  I  bore  the  canopy         .        .  .     284 

CXXVI.  0  thou,  my  lovely  boy,  who  in  thy  power    .        .  .286 


Sonnets,  witb  IRotes. 


SECOND  SERIES. 

SONNET  PAGB 

CXXVII.  In  the  old  age  black  was  not  counted  fair     .  .  .     287 

CXXVIII.  How  oft,  when  thou,  my  music,  music  play'st  .  .     288 

CXXIX.  The  expense  of  spirit  in  a  waste  of  shame     .  .  .     289 

CXXX.  My  mistress'  eyes  are  nothing  like  the  sun    .  .  .     290 

CXXXI.  Thou  art  as  tyrannous,  so  as  thou  art  .        .  .  .     291 

CXXXII.  Thine  eyes  I  love,  and  they,  as  pitying  me  .  .  .     292 

CXXXIII.  Beshrew  that  heart  that  makes  my  heart  to  groan  .     293 

CXXXI V.  So  now  I  have  confess'd  that  he  is  thine        .  .  .294 

CXXXV.  Whoever  hath  her  wish,  thou  hast  thy  Will  .  .     295 

CXXXVI.  If  thy  soul  check  thee  that  I  come  so  near   .  .  .297 

CXXXVII.  Thou  blind  fool,  Love,  what  dost  thou  to  mine  eyes  .     298 

CXXXVIII.  When  my  love  swears  that  she  is  made  of  truth  .  .     299 

CXXXIX.  0,  call  not  me  to  justify  the  wrong       .        .  .  .300 

CXL.  Be  wise  as  thou  art  cruel ;  do  not  press        .  .  .301 

CXLI.  In  faith  I  do  not  love  thee  with  mine  eyes   .  .  .     302 

CXLII.  Love  is  my  sin,  and  thy  dear  virtue  hate      .  .  .     303 

CXLIII.  Lo,  as  a  careful  housewife  runs  to  catch       .  .  .     304 

CXLIV.  Two  loves  I  have  of  comfort  and  despair      .  .  .305 

CXLV.  Those  lips  that  Love's  own  hand  did  make   .  .  .     306 

CXLVI.  Poor  soul,  the  centre  of  my  sinful  earth        .  .  .     307 

CXLVII.  My  love  is  as  a  fever,  longing  still         ....     309 

CXLVIII.  0  me,  what  eyes  hath  Love  put  in  my  head  .  .310 

CXLIX.  Canst  thou,  0  cruel !  say  I  love  thee  not      .  .  .311 

CL.  0,  from  what  power  hast  thou  this  powerful  might  .     312 

CLI.  Love  is  too  young  to  know  what  conscience  is  .  .313 

CL1I.  In  loving  thee  thou  know'st  I  am  forsworn  .  .  .     314 

THIRD  SEEIES. 

CLTII.  Cupid  laid  by  his  brand,  and  fell  asleep        .  .  .     315 

,  CLIV.  The  little  Love-god  lying  once  asleep    .        .  .  .     316 


SHAKESPEAKE'S    SONNETS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  SONNETS. 

§  i.  Alleged  Obscurity. — Of  the  numerous  questions  sug- 
gested by  Shakespeare's  works,  those  which  relate  to  the 
Sonnets  have  been  regarded  as  not  the  least  obscure,  per- 
haps even  as  the  most  difficult.  Yet  for  the  poet's  biography 
so  scanty  materials  are  presented  elsewhere,  that  the  Son- 
nets have,  in  this  respect,  peculiar  attractiveness.  None  of 
Shakespeare's  creations,  not  even  Hamlet  or  Prospero,  can 
be  completely  and  in  all  respects  identified  with  the  poet 
himself.  His  dramas  may  be  regarded  as  a  many-coloured 
veil,  concealing,  or  but  imperfectly  and  intermittently  dis- 
closing, the  soul  of  the  great  artificer.  But  in  the  Sonnets 
we  come  nearer  to  that  august  presence,  and  attain  a  more 
continuous,  if  not  an  unrestricted,  view.  The  possibility 
of  this  closer  approach  to  Shakespeare's  personality  has, 
however,  been  doubted.  "  His  supposed  self -revelation  in 
the  Sonnets,"  it  has  been  said,  "is  so  obscure,  that  only  a 
few  outlines  can  be  traced  by  the  boldest  conjecture."  "  In 
spite  of  the  ingenuity  of  commentators,  it  is  difficult,  and 
even  impossible,  to  derive  any  knowledge  of  Shakespeare's 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


inner  history  from  the  Sonnets." l  And  another  critic 
remarks,  "  Something  which  seems  more  than  human  in 
immensity  of  range  and  calmness  of  insight  moves  before 
us  in  the  Plays ;  but  from  the  nature  of  dramatic  writing, 
the  author's  personality  is  inevitably  veiled ;  .  .  .  and  even 
when  we  turn  to  the  Sonnets,  though  each  is  an  autobio- 
graphical confession,  we  find  ourselves  equally  foiled.  These 
revelations  of  the  poet's  innermost  nature  appear  to  teach 
us  less  of  the  man  than  the  tone  of  mind  which  we  trace, 
or  seem  to  trace,  in  Measure  for  Measure,  Hamlet,  and  the 
Tempest ;  the  strange  imagery  of  passion  which  passes  over 
the  magic  mirror  has  no  tangible  existence  before  or  behind 
it." l  It  may  be  hoped,  however,  that  the  reader  who 
follows  the  present  inquiry  will  come  to  a  different  conclu- 
sion. Of  the  several  problems  which  present  themselves, 
some  of  the  more  important  will,  it  is  believed,  yield 
entirely  to  ordinary  and  well-understood  critical  methods. 
With  regard  to  others,  without  resorting  to  any  special 
expedient  for  "  solving  the  Sonnets,"  we  may  at  least  attain 
results  of  reasonable  probability. 

§  2.  Aim  and  Intention. —  At  the  outset,  and  on  a  merely 
general  view,  one  or  two  remarks  may  be  made  as  to  the 
object  which  Shakespeare  had  in  view  when  composing  these 
poems.  The  Sonnets  have  been  described  as  "autobio- 
graphical." Such  a  description  may  possibly  mislead.  It 
may  be  regarded  as  implying  that  the  poet's  chief  intent 
was  to  communicate,  either  to  his  contemporaries  or  to 
posterity,  some  particulars  in  his  inner  life  or  his  outer 
history.  Certainly  such  a  view  would  be  inaccurate.  A 
man's  letters  to  his  friends  cannot  be  correctly  described 
as  autobiography,  even  though  they  may  convey  important 
information  concerning  various  facts  in  his  history.  And 
Shakespeare's  Sonnets  are  for  the  most  part  poetical  epistles. 


1  J.  R.  Green,  History  of  the  English  People,  vol.  ii.  pp.  473,  483. 
-  F.  T.  Palgrave,  Songs  and  Sonnets  of  Shakespeare,  p.  239. 


General  Wew  of  tbe  Sonnets. 


Some  of  them  have,  no  doubt,  a  different  character,  but 
these  we  may  for  the  present  disregard,  as  we  are  taking 
a  very  broad  and  general  view ;  and  we  need  not  now  con- 
sider the  question  whether  Shakespeare  wrote  all  or  any  of 
the  Sonnets  with  a  view  to  subsequent  publication. 

§  3.  Poetical  Form. — The  poetical  form  which  Shake- 
speare employed  has  been  criticised  as  being  inferior  to  that 
which  Milton  used  so  nobly  some  thirty  or  forty  years 
later.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is  unnecessary  to  distin- 
guish between  the  Miltonic  and  the  Petrarchan  Sonnet.  Of 
the  latter,  an  eminent  authority  on  the  subject  has  said  that 
it  aims  at  sonority,  while  "  tbe  qugst  of  ;the  Shakespearian 
^Sonnet"  is  " sweetness ;  and  the  sweetest  of  all  possible 
arrangements  in  English  versification  is  a  succession  of 
decasyllabic  quatrains  in  alternate  rhymes,  knit  together 
and  clinched  by  a  couplet." 1  On  this  view,  the  fitness  of 
the  form  which  Shakespeare  adopted  can  scarcely  be  ques- 
tioned. It  was  a  form,  moreover,  which  we  may  regard  as 
better  suited  for  poetical  epistles  of  varying  length  than  the 
more  sonorous  Petrarchan  or  Miltonic  Sonnet,  though  the 
latter  may  deserve  to  be  preferred  for  self-contained  and 
independent  poems.  Whether  poems  consisting  of  several 
Sonnet-stanzas  would  always  be  the  best  form  for  poetical 
epistles,  and  whether  Shakespeare's  plenitude  of  poetical 
force  would  not  have  been  unduly  hampered  by  any  form 
of  Sonnet,  are  questions  which  we  need  not  attempt  now 
to  determine  either  one  way  or  the  other.  It  must  be 
observed,  however,  that  though  the  form  which  Shakespeare 
adopted  now  bears  his  name,  yet  it  had  been  moulded  on 
English  ground  by  his  poetical  predecessors  and  contem- 
poraries, and  Sonnets  of  similar  form  had  been  linked 
together ;  as,  for  example,  by  Spenser.2 


1  Mr.  T.  Watts  in  Encyclopedia  Britannica  (gth  edit.),  art.  "Sonnet." 
Of.  also  Mr.  William  Sharp's  Introduction  to  Sonnets  of  the  Century. 

2  The  variation  in  Spenser's  Sonnets  need  not  be  here  taken  into  account. 


Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets* 


That  a  single  Shakespearian  Sonnet  is  comparatively 
seldom  an  independent  poem  will  be  sufficiently  manifest 
hereafter.  It  may  be  enough  here  to  give  one  or  two  examples 
of  continuation  and  connection.  Thus  Sonnet  65  begins — 

"  Since  brass,  nor  stone,  nor  earth,  nor  boundless  sea, 
But  sad  mortality  o'ersways  their  power,"  &c. 

Here  the  word  "  since  "  manifestly  refers  to  the  preceding 
Sonnet,  which  tells  of  the  ravages  of  Time ;  of  lofty  towers 
being  "down  rased,"  of  "brass  eternal,  slave  to  mortal 
rage,"  of  "the  firm  soil"  increasing  with  the  loss  of  "the 
wat'ry  main,"  and  of  "the  hungry  ocean  gaining  advantage 
on  the  kingdom  of  the  shore."  Not  much  farther  on  are 
four  Sonnets  (71  to  74)  linked  together  by  the  thought  that 
the  person  addressed  may  survive  the  poet,  and,  through 
excessive  love,  lament  unduly  for  his  death.  The  first  of 
these  Sonnets  puts  a  limit  to  the  grief :  all  mourning  is  to 
be  over  when  the  bell  ceases  tolling  : — 

"  No  longer  mourn  for  me  when  I  am  dead, 
Than  you  shall  hear  the  surly  sullen  bell 
Give  warning  to  the  world  that  I  am  fled 
From  this  vile  world,  with  vilest  worms  to  dwell." 

The  reason  alleged  in  the  last  twp_lin£S-of  the^  Sonnet  is 
fVinf.  ffift  "  wis;e^world  "  may  possibly  makgjt  mockat  undue 
lamentation  over  one  so  unworthy.  The  thonghToTthese 
last  two  lines  is  enlarged  upon  in  the  following  Sonnet  (72), 
in  which  the  poet  asserts  that  his  works  do  not  merit 
esteem,  though  they  are  loved  by  the  person  addressed. 
This  excessive  love  is  reverted  to  in  73,  but  accounted  for 
differently.  The  poet  is  in  the  autumn  of  life,  the  time 
of  yellow  leaves  and  leafless  boughs  : — 

"  This  thou  perceiv'st,  which  makes  thy  love  more  strong, 
To  love  that  well  which  thou  must  leave  ere  long." 

Of  the  Sonnets  mentioned  above  (71  to  74),  the  last  urges 
the  consolatory  thought  that  when  the  poet's  body  has 


General  Ifliew  ot  tbe  Sonnets. 


become  the  "prey  of  worms,"  and  has  been  yielded  up  to 
the  earth,  a  memorial  will  remain  in  his  verses.  In  these 
something  of  his  spirit  and  his  life  will  be  treasured  up  : — 

"  But  be  contented  :  when  that  fell  arrest 
Without  all  bail  shall  carry  me  away, 
My  life  hath  in  this  line  some  interest, 
Which  for  memorial  still  with  thee  shall  stay,"  &c. 

Perhaps  the  longest  chain  of  Sonnets  is  100  to  126, 
written  after  a  period  of  separation  and  estrangement. 
These  are  to  be  regarded,  most  probably,  as  a  single  poem, 
giving  various  explanations  relating  to  this  period,  and 
asserting  the  poet's  undiminished  affection. 

§  4.  Orderly  Arrangement. — But  are  the  Sonnets,  as  a 
whole,  arranged  in  due  order  and  in  chronological  sequence  1 
In  answer  to  this  question  it  may  be  said,  that  if,  as  we 
have  seen,  some  portions  are  duly  arranged,  this  will  render 
it  to  some  extent  probable  that  the  case  is  the  same  with 
the  whole  collection.  But  here  it  should  be  observed  that 
the  Sonnets  are  to  be  divided  into  two,  or,  perhaps  still 
better,  into  three  series.  By  far  the  larger  proportion,  i 
to  126,  are  addressed  to  an  intimate  male  friend  of  the 
poet,  a  youth  high-born,  and  wealthy,  and  beautiful.  127 
to  152  are  concerned  mainly  with  a  certain  lady  of  dark 
complexion,  the  poet's  mistress.  Then  there  remain  the 
last  two  Sonnets  in  the  collection,  153  and  154,  which  have 
a  character  of  their  own.  The  question  as  to  the  order  of 
arrangement  is,  however,  chiefly  of  importance  with  respect 
to  the  first  series,  i  to  126.  Or,  if  we  put  aside  100  to 
126,  mentioned  just  above,  we  may  restrict  the  question 
within  narrower  limits,  and  ask,  Are  i  to  99  arranged  in 
order  of  time,  in  the  right  order?  In  reply,  it  may  be 
observed  that  the  collection  begins  with  seventeen  Sonnets 
urging  on  the  poet's  friend  the  duty  and  desirableness  of 
perpetuating  his  beauty  in  offspring.  The  Sonnets  con- 
cerned with  this  subject  are  found  together,  not  scattered 
promiscuously  throughout  the  entire  number — a  fact  which 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


at  once  suggests  the  idea  of  arrangement.  Then  we  observe 
that,  although  in  one  of  these  first  Sonnets  the  poet,  com- 
plying with  old  custom,  addresses  his  friend  as  "  love"  (13), 
yet,  on  the  whole,  the  language  employed  does  not  express 
an  affection  so  warm  and  intimate  as  that  which  manifests 
itself  in  some  of  the  Sonnets  which  follow.  We  remark, 
also,  that,  even  in  these  first  Sonnets,  there  are  traces  of 
a  melancholic  view  of  the  world.  Youth  and  beauty  are 
fleeting.  Life's  golden  summer  must  give  place  to  "  hideous 
winter."  Old  age  creeps  on  with  stealthy  tread,  disfiguring 
the  glory  of  manhood  with  bareness  and  with  wrinkles. 
Time's  remorseless  scythe  will  level  all.  But  melancholy 
thus  expressed  appears  but  mild  when  compared  with  what 
is  to  follow.  By  and  by  the  gloom  will  deepen  into 
pessimistic  darkness.  The  poet,  wearied  with  the  world 
and  its  perversities,  will  cry  out  for  "restful  death"  (66). 
Manifestly,  when  this  occurs,  an  exhortation  to  marry  and 
beget  offspring  will  have  become  incongruous.  Further 
evidence  of  due  order  and  arrangement  is  furnished  by  a 
number  of  Sonnets  relating  to  another  poet,  a  rival,  or 
supposed  rival,  for  the  friend's  favour.  The  apprehension 
of  rivalry  is  at  first  ambiguously  expressed  (75,  line  6), 
then  (78  seq.)  more  and  more  openly  adverted  to,  till  in  86 
there  is  a  scarcely  doubtful  designation  of  the  person 
intended.  In  87,  Shakespeare,  not  having  succeeded  in 
ousting  his  rival,  bids  his  friend  farewell.  Thus,  that  the 
Sonnets  relating  to  the  rival  poet  are  in  the  right  order 
seems  scarcely  open  to  question.  And  considering  that 
we  have  to  do  with  poetical  epistles,  no  valid  objection  is 
furnished  by  the  fact  that  in  77  and  81  the  poet  glances 
aside  for  a  moment  from  this  subject.  Such  divergence 
would  be  quite  suitable  in  a  letter.  There  is  a  somewhat 
similar  series,  though  not  unbroken,  concerned  with  an 
offence  against  the  poet  committed  by  his  friend.  Here 
again  there  appears  no  reason  to  conclude  that  the  order 
in  which  the  Sonnets  are  found  is  not  the  order  of  composi- 


(General  Dtew  of  tbe  Sonnets. 


tion.  But  in  connection  with  this  preliminary  view  it  is 
unnecessary  to  adduce  further  evidence.  The  burden  of  proof 
lies  on  those  who  object  to  the  order  in  which  the  Sonnets 
were  first  printed.  It  is  for  them  to  show  that  the  order 
thus  given  is  not  the  right  order. 

§  5.  Poetical  Merit. — As  to  the  poetical  merit  of  the 
Sonnets,  a  few  remarks  may  not  be  out  of  place,  though  it 
is  scarcely  necessary  that  very  much  should  be  said ;  and 
the  enumeration  of  single  lines  or  phrases  which  excel  in 
strength  or  beauty  cannot  be  attempted.  Some  inequality 
with  regard  to  poetical  merit  was  of  course  inevitable. 
Moreover,  the  laudation  of  the  youth  addressed,  and  espe- 
cially of  his  personal  beauty,  may  seem  sometimes  over- 
strained,1 and  perhaps,  on  a  first  perusal,  a  little  monotonous. 
Of  this  fault,  if  such  it  be,  the  poet  appears  himself  to  have 
been  conscious : — 

"  Therefore  my  verse,  to  constancy  confin'd, 
One  thing  expressing,  leaves  out  difference. 
Fair,  kind,  and  true,  is  all  my  argument, — 
Fair,  kind,  and  true,  varying  to  other  words ; 
And  in  this  change  is  my  invention  spent, 
Three  themes  in  one,  which  wondrous  scope  affords  "  (105). 

76  also  may  be  compared,  where  the  poet  speaks  of  his  verse 
being  "  barren  of  new  pride,"  and  of  his  "  writing  still  all 
one,  ever  the  same." 

That  there  should  be  sometimes  exhibited  the  tendency 
of  the  age  to  quaint  conceits  is  not  wonderful.  Moreover, 
since  Shakespeare  is  the  author,  we  may  expect  to  find 
highly  metaphoric  language  and  not  infrequent  obscurity. 
But  there  is  also  Shakespeare's  exuberant  strength,  like 
"teeming  autumn,  big  with  rich  increase."  There  is 
majesty  and  surpassing  beauty.  In  majestic  strength  the 
Sonnet  on  sexual  passion  (129)  must  claim  pre-eminence. 

1  Compare  some  severe  but  not  quite  unjust  remarks  of  Hallam 
(Literature  of  Europe,  Part  III.  chap.  v.  §  48). 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

As  to  beauty,  among  several  claimants,  it  is  difficult  to  say 
which  should  be  preferred.  There  is  remarkable  beauty  in 
Sonnet  1 1 6,  especially  in  the  first  eight  lines  : — 

"  Let  me  not  to  the  marriage  of  true  minds 
Admit  impediments.     Love  is  not  love 
"Which  alters  when  it  alteration  finds, 
Or  bends  with  the  remover  to  remove  : 

0  no  ;  it  is  an  ever-fixed  mark, 

That  looks  on  tempests,  and  is  never  shaken  ; 

It  is  the  star  to  every  wandering  bark, 

Whose  worth's  unknown,  although  his  height  be  taken." 

Then  there  is  the  33rd  Sonnet,  with  its  magnificent 
description  of  a  brilliant  morning,  whose  splendour  becomes 
darkened  by  dense  and  threatening  clouds  : — 

"  Full  many  a  glorious  morning  have  I  seen 
Flatter  the  mountain-tops  with  sovereign  eye, 
Kissing  with  golden  face  the  meadows  green, 
Gilding  pale  streams  with  heavenly  alchymy  ; 
Anon  permit  the  basest  clouds  to  ride 
With  ugly  rack  on  his  celestial  face, 
And  from  the  forlorn  world  his  visage  hide, 
Stealing  unseen  to  west  with  this  disgrace." 

In  neither  case,  however — though  for  different  reasons — 
do  the  six  lines  concluding  the  Sonnet  seem  equal  to  those 
which  have  preceded.  I  may  omit  some  Sonnets  deserving 
mention,  but  there  are  two  (29,  30)  which  must  not  be 
passed  over.  In  the  second  of  these  (30),  the  poet  declares 
that  the  disappointments  he  has  endured  and  the  grievous 
bereavements  which  death  has  inflicted  are  all  compensated 
for  by  the  love  of  his  friend  : — 

"  When  to  the  sessions  of  sweet  silent  thought 

1  summon  up  remembrance  of  things  past, 
I  sigh  the  lack  of  many  a  thing  I  sought, 

And  with  old  woes  new  wail  my  dear  time's  waste  : 
Then  can  I  drown  an  eye,  unus'd  to  flow, 
For  precious  friends  hid  in  death's  dateless  night, 
And  weep  afresh  love's  long-since  cancell'd  woe, 
And  moan  the  expense  of  many  a  vanish'd  sight : 
Then  can  I  grieve  at  grievances  foregone, 


General  IDiew  of  tbe  Sonnets. 


And  heavily  from  woe  to  woe  tell  o'er 

The  sad  account  of  fore-bemoaned  moan, 

Which  I  new  pay  as  if  not  paid  before. 

But  if  the  while  I  think  on  thee,  dear  friend, 
All  losses  are  restor'd,  and  sorrows  end." 

The  reader  should  remark  in  passing  the  frequent  use 
of  alliteration,  of  which,  however,  he  may  find  plenty  of 
examples  elsewhere  in  these  poems.  The  chief  fault  of  this 
Sonnet  is  in  the  concluding  couplet,  which  seems  somewhat 
disappointing  and  inadequate.  The  29th  Sonnet  may  not  be 
in  all  respects  quite  equal  to  that  last  given,  but  it  certainly 
has  not  in  its  conclusion  the  fault  just  alluded  to: — 

"  When  in  disgrace  with  Fortune  and  men's  eyes, 
I  all  alone  beweep  my  outcast  state, 
And  trouble  deaf  Heaven  with  my  bootless  cries, 
And  look  upon  myself,  and  curse  my  fate, 
Wishing  me  like  to  one  more  rich  in  hope, 
Featur'd  like  him,  like  him  with  friends  possess'd, 
Desiring  this  man's  art,  and  that  man's  scope, 
With  what  I  most  enjoy  contented  least ; 
Yet  in  these  thoughts  myself  almost  despising, 
Haply  I  think  on  thee  ;  and  then  my  state, 
Like  to  the  lark  at  break  of  day  arising 
From  sullen  earth,  sings  hymns  at  heaven's  gate  ; 
For  thy  sweet  love  remember'd  such  wealth  brings, 
That  then  I  scorn  to  change  my  state  with  kings." l 

1  Wordsworth  selected  on  account  of  "the  various  merits  of  thought 
and  language  in  Shakespeare's  Sonnets  "  the  following,  adding,  however, 
that  there  are  "  many  others"  : — 27,  29,  30,  32,  33,  54,  64,  66,  68,  73,  76, 
86,  91,  92,  93,  97,  98,  105,  107,  108,  109,  in,  113,  114,  116,  117,  129. 
Mr.  T.  Hall  Caine,  in  his  Sonnets  of  Three  Centuries,  gives  29,  30,  33,  55, 

64,  66,  70,  71,  73,  90,  94,  97,  107,  116,  129,  138,  146.     Mr.  J.  Dennis, 
English  Sonnets,  gives  8,  17,  18,  27,  29,  30,  32,  33,  38,  54,  55,  60,  61,  64, 

65,  66,  71,  73,  76,  87,  91,  92,  98,  104,  106,  116,  129,  139,  146.     Mr.  S. 
Waddington,  English  Sonnets  by  Poets  of  the  Past,  selects  30,  33,  54,  66, 
71,  73,  98,  99,  106,  139,  143,  146.     It  will  thus  be  seen  that,  with  regard 
to  the  excellence  of  certain  Sonnets,  as  30,  33,  116,  there  is  a  remarkable 
consensus  of  opinion.      Mr.   Swinburne,  however  (quoted  by  Dowden), 
speaks  of  the  Sonnets  127  to  154  as  "incomparably  the  more  important 
and  altogether  precious  division  of  the  Sonnets."     Mr.  F.  T.  Palgrave,  in 
his  Songs  and  Sonnets  of  William  Shakespeare,  prints  the  whole,  with  the 
exception  only  of  20,  151,  153,  154. 


io  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

§  6.  Concerned  with,  Fact. — But  it  is  neither  from  beauty 
and  sweetness,  nor  majestic  strength,  that  the  Sonnets 
derive  their  chief  attractiveness.  Rather — in  accordance 
with  what  was  said  at  the  commencement  of  this  chapter — 
must  we  attribute  the  keen  interest  with  which  they  are 
investigated  to  the  hope  of  gaining  some  additional  know- 
ledge with  regard  to  Shakespeare  and  his  surroundings, 
or  of  making  a  nearer  approach  to  the  poet's  personality. 
But  are  the  Sonnets  concerned  with  actual  facts  ?  Are  they 
not  rather  to  be  regarded  as  mere  exercises  in  verse  ?  If 
this  question  could  be  answered  in  the  affirmative,  still 
the  interest  and  value  of  the  Sonnets  would  be  great,  as 
showing  the  themes  on  which  Shakespeare  elected  to  dis- 
course. But  that  any  competent  critic  should  have  looked 
on  the  Sonnets  as  mere  exercises  in  verse  can  scarcely 
be  other  than  surprising.  The  intensity  of  feeling  which 
they  display  is  not  to  be  mistaken,  and  the  incidents 
alluded  to  cannot  be  conceived  of  as  fictions.  Are  we  to 
suppose  Shakespeare  urging  in  seventeen  Sonnets  an  ideal 
youth  to  beget  ideal  offspring  ?  Then,  as  to  the  incident 
alluded  to  in  the  4oth  and  various  other  Sonnets,  is  it 
in  the  least  degree  probable  that  the  poet  speaks  of  a 
purely  imaginary  offence  and  grievance  ?  Or,  if  this  be 
thought  not  incredible,  take  the  Sonnets  relating  to  the 
rival  poet  (86  al).  Fortunately  it  has  become  possible  to 
indicate  the  person  actually  intended.  But  if  this  had  not 
been  the  case,  the  evidence  of  jealous  feeling  would  have 
been  sufficiently  clear.  It  has  been  suggested,  however,  that 
though  in  relation  to  the  first  series  of  Sonnets  the  evi- 
dence of  fact  and  reality  is  not  to  be  denied,  yet  the  case  is 
otherwise  with  the  later  Sonnets  concerned  with  the  dark 
lady  (127  to  152).  In  all  probability  this  suggestion  had 
its  origin  in  the  wish  to  free  Shakespeare's  moral  charac- 
ter from  certain  possible  imputations.  But  however  com- 
mendable the  motive,  such  a  view  must  be  rejected.  The 
impress  of  reality  is  stamped  on  these  Sonnets  with  unmis- 


General  IDiew  of  tbe  Sonnets, 


takable  clearness ;  and  besides,  several  of  them  are  linked 
indissolubly  to  the  first  series  (as  40  to  144).  We  must 
therefore  maintain — whatever  may  be  the  consequences 
resulting  from  this  position — that  the  Sonnets  as  a  whole 
are  concerned  with  actual  fact.  At  the  same  time  we  must 
beware  of  treating  them  as  though  they  were  mere  prosaic 
history.  Their  language  is  the  language  of  poetry,  some- 
times of  compliment,  and  as  such  it  should  certainly  be 
interpreted. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE    DEDICATION. 

To  the  original  edition  of  the  Sonnets  was  prefixed  the 
following  Dedication : — 

TO  .  THE  .  ONLIE  .  BEGETTER  .  OF  . 

THESE  .  INSVING  .  SONNETS  . 

Mr.  W.  H.  ALL.HAPPINESSE. 

AND  .  THAT  .  ETERNITIE  . 

PROMISED  . 

BY. 
OVR  .  EVER-LIVING  .  POET  . 

WISHETH  . 

THE  .  WELL-WISHING  . 

ADVENT VRER . IN . 

SETTING  . 

FORTH. 

T.  T. 

•  With  respect  to  the  initials,  it  may  be  remarked  that  on 
the  titles  of  books  the  representation  of  names  by  initial 
letters  was  formerly  much  more  common  than  is  the  case 
at  present.  As  to  who  was  intended  by  the  final  "  T.  T." 
there  need  be  no  question,  since  under  date  "  20  Maij," 
1609,  "  Shakespeares  sonnettes"  were  entered  in  the  Sta- 
tioners' Register  to  Thomas  Thorpe  : — 

"Thomas  Thorpe  Entred  for  his  copie  vnder  th[e  hjandes  of 
master  WILSON  and  master  Lownes  Warden 
a  Booke  called  SHAKESPEARE'S  sonnettes  vj&" 

1  Arber's  Transcript,  vol.  iii.  183!). 


Defcf cation.  13 


Thorpe,  therefore,  was  "the  well-wishing  adventurer  in 
setting  forth,"  that  is,  of  course,  in  publishing ;  and  there 
can  be  no  question  as  to  the  meaning  of  "  our  ever-living 
poet."  This  expression  can  refer  to  no  other  than  the 
author  of  the  Sonnets.  There  remain,  however,  two  ques- 
tions which  have  given  rise  to  much  discussion :  What  is 
meant  by  the  expression  "  the  onlie  begetter"  1  and,  Who 
was  "Mr.  W.  H.  "  ? 

As  to  the  meaning  of  the  expression  "  the  onlie  begetter," 
it  has  been  alleged  that  the  word  "  beget "  was  used  as 
meaning  "  get,"  "  obtain,"  "  procure."  The  "  onlie  be- 
getter "  therefore  must,  on  this  view,  be  the  person  who 
collected  or  obtained  the  Sonnets,  and  handed  them  over  to 
Thorpe.  Now  if  it  be  admitted  that  possibly  the  word 
"  beget "  might  be  used  with  the  meaning  just  adverted  to, 
this  will  not  settle  the  question  we  have  before  us.  We 
must  notice,  first,  that  it  is  obviously  "  Mr.  W.  H."  who  is 
designated  the  "onlie  begetter;"  but  this  fact  does  not 
help  us  very  far  towards  ascertaining  the  sense  of  the  latter 
expression.  But  reading  the  dedicatory  inscription  a  little 
further,  we  find  that  to  the  "  onlie  begetter  "  eternity  had 
been  "  promised  by  our  ever-living  poet ; "  for  no  other 
construction  is  at  all  reasonable  or  probable.  There  is  thus 
a  manifest  reference  to  the  numerous  places  in  the  Sonnets 
in  which  the  poet  promised  to  the  beautiful  youth  he  ad- 
dressed "  a  life  beyond  life,"  enduring  so  long  as  the  world 
itself  shall  endure.  But  still  it  may  be  contended,  though 
Mr.  W.  H.  is  to  be  identified  with  the  beautiful  youth  to 
whom  the  poet  had  "promised  eternity,"  this  does  not 
determine  certainly  the  meaning  of  "the  only  begetter." 
From  Thorpe's  point  of  view,  Mr.  W.  H.'s  chief  merit  may 
have  been  that  he  had  collected  the  Sonnets,  and  then 
handed  them  over  for  publication.  But  such  a  view  can 
scarcely  appear  in  any  way  likely.  Moreover,  there  is  in 
the  Sonnets  one  place  particularly  which  should  go  very  far 
towards  determining  the  sense  of  the  disputed  words.  The 
passage  is  to  be  found  in  Sonnet  38  : — 


14  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

"  0,  give  thyself  the  thanks,  if  aught  in  me 

Worthy  perusal  stand  against  thy  sight ; 

For  who's  so  dumb  that  cannot  write  to  thee, 

When  thou  thyself  dost  give  invention  light  ? 

Be  thou  the  tenth  Muse,  ten  times  more  in  worth 

Than  those  old  nine,  which  rhymers  invocate  ; 

And  he  that  calls  on  thee,  let  him  bring  forth 

Eternal  numbers  to  outlive  long  date. 

If  my  slight  Muse  do  please  these  curious  days, 
The  pain  be  mine,  but  thine  shall  be  the  praise."1 

Here  the  beautiful  youth  appears  as  the  cause  of  the 
poet's  writing  verses  "  worthy  perusal."  Whoever  invokes 
this  powerful  aid  is  to  "  bring  forth  eternal  numbers  to 
outlive  long  date."  The  quotation  thus  made  must  go  far 
towards  fixing  the  sense  of  "  the  onlie  begetter."  Evidence 
thus  adduced  from  the  Sonnets  themselves  as  to  the  "  be- 
getter "  must  be  regarded  as  of  especial  importance.  But 
to  speak  of  thought,  invention,  and  literary  composition 
as  partaking  of  the  nature  of  pregnancy  and  parturition 
appears  to  have  been  a  metaphor  common  enough  with 
the  Elizabethan  poets.  Thus  in  59,  2-4,  "Our  brains  .  .  . 
labouring  for  invention  bear  amiss  the  second  burthen  of  a 
former  child."  And  Spenser  in  his  second  Sonnet  says  :  — 

"  Unquiet  thought !  whom  at  the  first  I  bred 
Of  th'  inward  bale  of  my  love-pined  heart ; 
And  sithens  have  with  sighs  and  sorrows  fed, 
Till  greater  than  my  womb  thou  waxen  art, "  &c. 

To  the  explanation  of  "  the  onlie  begetter  "  thus  given  it 
may  be  objected,  however,  that  the  beautiful  youth  is  not 
the  subject  of  all  the  Sonnets.  But  certainly  he  is  the  sub- 
ject of  very  much  the  larger  portion;  and  this  portion, 
moreover,  stands  first,  and  next  after  the  Dedication.  He 
might,  therefore,  very  well  be  spoken  of  as  "  the  onlie 
begetter  of  these  insuing  sonnets,"  the  last  twenty-eight, 
like  the  Lover's  Complaint,  appended  to  the  first  edition, 
being  disregarded.  "  Thus,"  as  Dowden  observes,  "  was 

1  It  appears  from  this  couplet  that  the  Sonnets  were  not  intended  solely 
for  the  eye  of  the  person  first  addressed. 


ZTbe  2>eDf cation,  15 


Mr.  W.  H.  the  begetter  of  these  poems,  and  from  the  point 
of  view  of  a  complimentary  dedication,  he  might  well  be 
called  the  only  begetter."  l 

But  who  was  Mr.  W.  H.  ?  This  question  will  be  further 
considered  in  the  sequel  (Chap.  VII.).  But  there  are  several 
answers  which,  supported  by  no  valid  evidence,  need  only 
the  slightest  mention.  Thus  there  have  been  suggested 
Mr.  William  Hughes,  Mr.  William  Hall,  Mr.  William 
Hart,  Mr.  William  Hathaway,  Mr.  William  Shakespeare 
(the  H  of  the  Dedication  being  a  misprint  for  S),  and  also 
Mr.  William  Himself.  With  regard  to  the  first  of  these 
suggestions,  it  may  be  perhaps  mentioned  that  its  author, 
Tyrwhitt,  based  it  on  the  fact  that  in  the  first  edition,  at 
the  seventh  line  of  the  2oth  Sonnet,  the  word  "Hews" 
(hues)  is  in  italics,  and  begins  with  a  capital,  thus : — 

"A  man  in  hew  all  Hews  in  his  controwling." 

But  in  other  Sonnets  both  italics  and  capitals  are  used  far 
too  freely,  and  without  any  special  emphasis  being  intended, 
to  allow  us  for  a  moment  to  conclude  that  "the  onlie 
begetter  of  these  insuing  sonnets "  was  a  Mr.  William 
Hughes,  otherwise  unknown. 

According  to  another  opinion,  the  order  of  the  initials 
W.  H.  has  been  purposely  changed,  for  the  sake  of  disguise, 
from  H.  W.  The  person  really  intended  is  Henry  Wrio- 
thesley,  Earl  of  Southampton,  to  whom  the  Venus  and 
Adonis  and  Lucrece  were  dedicated.  On  this  opinion  some 
observations  will  be  found  in  Chapter  IV.  But  before 
making  any  further  attempt  to  identify  "  Mr.  W.  H.,"  it 
may  be  convenient  to  find,  if  we  can,  some  sure  indications 
of  time — a  matter  of  pre-eminent  importance  in  relation  to 
the  Sonnets. 

i  Mr.  P.  A.  Daniel  has  suggested  that  "onlie"  may  be  used  with  the 
sense  of  "chief."  Such  a  sense  would  suit  the  facts  very  well ;  and  it 
would  not  be  unprecedented.  The  dark  lady  would  thus  be  passed  over 
as  subordinate. 


CHAPTER  III. 

SOME   CHRONOLOGICAL  INDICATIONS. 

§  i.  The  Passionate  Pilgrim. — In  the  year  1599,  William 
Jaggard  published  The  Passionate  Pilgrim,  a  collection  of 
poetical  pieces  by  different  hands,  but  bearing  on  its  title 
the  name  of  Shakespeare.  Occupying  the  first  two  places 
in  this  book  are  two  Sonnets  which  differ  only  in  some 
subordinate  details  from  those  numbered  138  and  144  in 
the  first  edition  of  "  Shakespeare's  Sonnets,"  published  ten 
years  later.  The  second  of  these  Sonnets,  144,  is  especially 
important  with  regard  to  the  chronology.  The  poet  de- 
clares that  he  has  "  two  loves,"  the  one  "  a  woman  colour'd 
ill,"  and  the  other  "a  man  right  fair :  " — 

"  Two  Loues  I  baue,  of  Comfort,  and  Despaire, 
That  like  two  Spirits,  do  suggest  me  still : 
My  better  Angell  is  a  man  (right  faire), 
My  worser  Spirite  a  Woman  (colour'd  ill)." 

The  "man  right  fair"  is  thus  spoken  of  not  only  as  an 
"  angel,"  but  as  a  "better  angel."  There  is  thus  a  reason- 
able implication  that  he  was  not  only  endowed  with  pre- 
eminent beauty,  but  distinguished  also  by  amiability  and 
goodness.  These  facts,  and  especially  the  incidents  alluded 
to  (144,  lines  5  to  8),  the  formation  of  an  intimacy  between 
the  dark  lady,  the  "  woman  colour'd  ill,"  and  the  beautiful 
youth,  the  "  man  right  fair,"  together  with  the  woman  being 
the  wooer,  correspond  with  what  is  to  be  found  in  the  first 
series  of  Sonnets  : — 

"  Take  all  my  loves,  my  love,  yea,  take  them  all,"  &c.  (40). 


Some  Cbronologtcal  $n&f cations.  17 

"  And  when  a  woman  woos  what  woman's  son 
Will  sourly  leave  her  till  she  (Q.  he)  have  prevail'd  ? "  &c.  (41). 

Compare 

"Wooing  his  purity  with  her  foul  (faire,  Pass.  Pilg.)  pride"  (144,  line  8). 

Taking  this  correspondence  into  account,  there  seems  to  be 
no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  friendship  between  Shake- 
speare and  his  beautiful  young  friend  had  already  existed 
for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  when,  in  1599,  the  Passionate 
Pilgrim  made  its  appearance.  There  is  no  reason,  however, 
for  supposing  that  the  friendship  was  already  of  old  date. 
The  publisher,  Jaggard,  seems  to  have  been  anxious,  not 
unnaturally  perhaps,  to  print  new  poems  in  his  volume.  He 
was  indebted  to  Barnfield's  Poems  in  Divers  Humors,  pub- 
lished in  1598,  and  to  Shakespeare's  Loves  Labour's  Lost, 
of  the  same  year.  How  Jaggard  got  hold  of  Shakespeare's 
two  Sonnets  138  and  144,  we  do  not  know.  But  the  fact 
presents  no  difficulty,  since  poems  in  MS.  were  pretty  freely 
copied,  and  so  passed  from  one  hand  to  another.  And 
this  may  very  well  have  occurred  soon  after  the  first  compo- 
sition of  the  Sonnets  in  question.  But  had  the  friendship 
between  Shakespeare  and  his  youthful  male  friend  been  of 
long  standing  when  the  intimacy  was  formed  between  the 
dark  lady  and  this  same  beautiful  youth,  of  whom  we  may 
now  speak,  in  accordance  with  what  has  been  said  (Chapter 
II.),  as  "  Mr.  W.  H."  1  Some  answer  to  this  question  is 
given  by  Sonnet  33,  which  relates  to  this  incident,  or  rather 
to  its  effect  on  the  friendship  between  Shakespeare  and 
Mr.  "W.  H.  We  have  in  this  Sonnet  (taking  into  account 
also  34  and  35,  which  are  closely  connected)  pretty  clear 
evidence  that,  when  the  incident  in  question  occurred,  the 
friendship  had  been  very  brief — so  brief,  indeed,  that  its 
duration  could  be  spoken  of  as  "  one  hour  :  " — 

"  But  out,  alack  !  he  was  but  one  hour  mine, 
The  region  cloud  hath  mask'd  him  from  me  now." 

B 


1 8  Sbaftespeare's  Sonnets, 

Quotation  has  been  already  made  from  this  Sonnet  on 
account  of  its  great  poetical  beauty  (p.  8),  describing, 
as  it  does,  the  sun  which,  though  glorious  in  its  rising  at 
early  morn,  becomes  very  soon  concealed  from  view  by  dense 
clouds.  Such  had  been  the  poet's  friendship  with  Mr.  W. 
H.  Taking  this  into  account,  together  with  the  statement 
"he  was  but  one  hour  mine,"  it  must  be  concluded  that 
the  friendship  had  existed  but  a  short  time :  quite  possibly 
it  may  not  have  been  formed  many  months  before  the 
Passionate  Pilgrim  was  published. 

§  2.  Meres' s  " Palladia  Tamia,  Wit's  Treasury.''— In  the 
year  preceding  the  publication  of  the  Passionate  Pilgrim, 
Francis  Meres  published  his  Palladia  Tamia,  Wit's  Trea- 
sury. The  book  was  registered  on  September  7,  1598.  In 
this  work  the  author  mentions,  and.  highly  eulogises,  various 
contemporary  poets.  Meres,  who  was  not  improbably  a 
personal  friend  of  Shakespeare,  makes  express  mention  not 
only  of  several  of  Shakespeare's  other  works,  but  alludes  also 
to  his  "sugred  Sonnets  among  his  priuate  friends."  Are 
these  "  sugred  Sonnets  "to  be  identified  with  the  collection 
published  in  1609,  or  perhaps  with  a  part  of  it?  It  is,  of 
course,  possible  that  Shakespeare  may  have  written  Sonnets 
which  were  never  printed,  and  which  have  perished.  But 
I  should  think  it  not  unlikely,  taking  into  account  the  date 
above  mentioned,  September  1598,  that  Meres  may  very 
well  refer  to  some  of  the  Sonnets  in  our  existing  collection.1 
There  is,  however,  in  relation  to  Meres's  book,  another  fact 
of  great  importance,  namely,  that  there  exist  strong  grounds 
for  believing  that  Shakespeare  wrote  his  55th  Sonnet 
after  he  had  seen  Meres's  book.  There  is  in  Meres  the 


1  In  coming  to  a  conclusion  on  this  question,  it  is  important  to  observe, 
with  reference  to  the  period  of  the  year  1598,  when  Meres  made  his  allusion 
to  the  "  sugred  Sonnets,"  that  he  mentions  Chapman's  "  inchoate  Homer." 
Chapman  had  published  in  1598  seven  books  of  his  translation  of  the  Iliad. 
Moreover,  it  is  not  unimportant  that  the  section  on  poets  is  towards  the 
end  of  Meres's  book. 


Some  Gbronological  5nfcf cations*  19 

following  remarkable  passage,  partly  in  English,  and  partly 
in  Latin : — 

"  As  Quid  saith  of  his  worke, — 

Jamque  opus  execii,  quod  nee  Jouis  ira,  nee  ignis, 
Nee  potent  ferrum,  nee  edax  abolere  vetustas  ; 

And  as  Horace  saith  of  his, — 

Exegi  monumentum  acre  perennius, 
Regalique  situ  pyramidum  altius, 
Quod  non  imber  edax,  non  Aquilo  impotens 
Possit  diruere  aut  innumerabilis 
Annorum  series  etfuga  temporum; 

So  say  I  severally  of  Sir  Philip  Sidneys,  Spencers,  Daniels, 
Draytons,  Shakespeares,  and  Warners  workes — 

Non  louis  ira,  imbres,  Mars,  ferrum,  flamma,  senectus, 
Hoc  opus  unda,  lues,  turbo,  venena  ruent. 

Et  quanquam  ad  pulcherrimum  hoc  opus  euertendum  tres 
illi  Dii  conspirabunt,  Cronus,  Vulcanus,  et  pater  ipse 
gentis : — 

Non  tamcn  annorum  series,  non  flamma,  nee  ensis, 
jEternum  potuit  hoc  abolere  dieus." — Fol.  282. 

Meres,  it  will  be  observed,  quotes  both  from  Ovid  and 
Horace,  giving  also  an  appendix  of  his  own,  partly  in 
English  and  partly  in  Latin.  Then  in  his  appendix  he 
says,  "  So  say  I  severally,"  &c.,  respectively  of  the  works 
of  each  of  the  poets  named,  that  "  not  the  anger  of  Jupiter, 
storms,  Mars,  the  sword,  flame,  old  age,  the  wave,  pestilence, 
the  whirlwind,  poison,  shall  bring  this  work  to  ruin."  He 
then  adds  that,  though  there  should  be  a  conspiracy  of  the 
three  deities,  Cronus,  Yulcan,  Jupiter,  for  the  purpose  of 
overthrowing  the  work,  it  shall  be  proof  against  the  power 
of  time,  of  flame,  of  sword.  Let  the  reader  now  turn  to 
Shakespeare's  55th  Sonnet : — 

"  Not  marble,  nor  the  gilded  monuments 
Of  princes,  shall  outlive  this  powerful  rhyme, 
But  you  shall  shine  more  bright  in  these  contents 
Than  unswept  stone,  besmear'd  with  sluttish  time. 


20  Sbafcespeaxe's  Sonnets. 

When  wasteful  war  shall  statues  overturn, 
And  broils  root  up  the  work  of  masonry, 
Nor  Mars  his  sword  nor  war's  quick  fire  shall  burn 
The  living  record  of  your  memory. 
'Gainst  death  and  all  oblivious  enmity 
Shall  you  pace  forth  ;  your  praise  shall  still  find  room, 
Even  in  the  eyes  of  all  posterity 
That  wear  this  world  out  to  the  ending  doom. 
So  till  the  judgment  that  yourself  arise, 
You  live  in  this,  and  dwell  in  lovers'  eyes." 

Malone  compared  the  commencement  of  Horace's  ode, 
"  Exegi  monumentum,"  &c.,  apparently  not  remembering 
the  quotation  of  this  ode  by  Meres.  The  resemblance  of 
Shakespeare's  Sonnet  to  Horace's  ode  is  manifest,  not  only 
in  the  thought,  but  also  to  some  extent  in  the  language. 
Now,  though  evidence  is  wanting  that  Shakespeare  pos- 
sessed much,  if  any,  acquaintance  with  Horace  generally, 
yet  we  need  have  no  difficulty  in  believing  that,  after 
Meres's  book  had  been  published,  Shakespeare's  attention 
would  be  specially  directed  to  the  ode  in  question  (iii.  30), 
or  rather  to  that  portion  of  it  which  Meres  had  quoted. 
It  may  be  regarded,  indeed,  as  certain  that  the  award  of 
immortality  to  himself  and  other  distinguished  poets  would 
attract,  more  or  less,  the  notice  of  Shakespeare.  Very 
likely  he  received  a  presentation  copy  of  Wifs  Treasury. 
But  whether  this  was  the  case  or  not,  it  is  unlikely  that  he 
would  long  remain  ignorant  of  the  compliment  which  had 
been  paid  to  him.  And  as  evidence  that  he  did  in  fact 
become  acquainted  with  Meres's  book,  it  is  very  noteworthy 
that  there  are  some  things  in  the  55th  Sonnet  which  find 
their  analogies,  not  in  the  passage  from  Horace,  but  in 
Meres's  quotation  from  Ovid,  and  particularly  in  the  Latin 
of  Meres's  appendix.  It  is  Ovid,  and  not  Horace,  who 
speaks  of  the  destructive  agencies  of  fire  and  sword,  "nee 
ignis,  nee  poterit  ferrum."  But  the  seventh  line  of  the 
Sonnet — 

' '  Nor  Mars  his  sword  nor  war's  quick  fire  shall  burn," 


Some  Gbronologfcal  Snfcicatfons. 


finds  its  closest  analogy  in  Meres's  "  Non  .  .  .  Mars, 
ferrum,  flamma"  ("not  .  .  .  Mars,  the  sword,  flame"). 
So  close,  indeed,  is  the  resemblance,  that  it  is  scarcely  pos- 
sible to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  Meres's  Latin  suggested 
the  line  in  the  Sonnet.  This  conclusion  is  strengthened  by 
the  incongruity  which  manifests  itself  in  the  line,  the  verb 
"shall  burn"  suiting  only  "  war's  quick  fire,"  and  not  the 
preceding  "Mars  his  sword."  It  will  be  seen  upon  re- 
flection that  this  incongruity  is  easily  accounted  for  if  the 
words  "Mars,"  "sword,"  "fire,"  or  the  ideas  they  repre- 
sent, were  borrowed  all  together  from  Meres.  The  elements 
composing  this  line  are  not  to  be  found  in  combination 
elsewhere  in  Shakespeare,  nor  is  the  sword  of  Mars  else- 
where mentioned.  Then  the  expression  of  the  ninth  line, 
"all  oblivious  enmity,"1  finds  its  explanation  in  the  nume- 
rous influences  tending  to  produce  oblivion  mentioned  by 
Meres,  though  perhaps  the  word  "  enmity  "  has  especially  in 
view  Meres's  supposition  of  a  hostile  conspiracy  on  the  part 
of  the  three  deities.  Lastly,  what  Shakespeare  says  of 
"  overturning  statues  "  and  of  "  broils  rooting  out  the  work 
of  masonry,"  may  very  well  have  been  suggested  by  Meres's 
"  ad  pulcherrimum  hoc  opus  evertendum,"  though  this  per- 
haps is  not  quite  so  conclusive.  On  the  whole,  however, 
that  the  55th  Sonnet  was  suggested  by  the  passage  from 
Meres  seems  scarcely  open  to  question.  It  may  be  reason- 
ably inferred,  therefore,  that  Sonnet  55  was  written  after 
the  registration  of  Meres's  book  in  September  I598.2  So 
far  as  the  evidence  just  given  is  concerned,  the  Sonnet  may 
have  been  written  just  about  this  date,  or  a  good  while 
subsequently.  But  in  the  next  Sonnet  (56),  which  probably 
followed  after  no  very  long  interval,  we  find  the  words  "too 
contracted  new"  relating  apparently  to  the  poet  and  his 

1  So  Q.  not  "all-oblivious  enmity,"  as  the  expression  has  been  incor- 
rectly given. 

2  This  was  first  suggested  by  me  in  the  Athenaeum,  September  n,  1880. 


22  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

friend.  These  words  may  be  compared  with  those  pre- 
viously given  from  Sonnet  33,  "thou  wert  but  one  hour 
mine."  We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  when  the  55th 
Sonnet  was  written,  the  friendship  between  Shakespeare 
and  Mr.  W.  H.  was  still  a  new  friendship.  Taking  into 
account  what  was  said  before  with  respect  to  the  Passionate 
Pilgrim,  it  may  appear  not  unlikely  that  Sonnet  55  was 
written  early  in  1599,  or  late  in  the  previous  year.  Per- 
haps the  former  date  (1599),  beginning  the  year,  as  we  now 
do,  with  January,  would  be  preferable. 

§  3.  Historical  Allusions. — It  has  been  mentioned  above 
(p.  5)  that  Sonnets  100  to  126  form  probably  a  single 
connected  poem.  In  three  of  these  Sonnets,  104,  107,  124, 
there  are  chronological  indications  of  very  great  importance. 
Let  us  take  first  107  : — 

"  Not  mine  own  fears,  nor  the  prophetic  soul 
Of  the  wide  world  dreaming  on  things  to  come, 
Can  yet  the  lease  of  my  true  love  control, 
Suppos'd  as  forfeit  to  a  confin'd  doom. 
The  mortal  moon  hath  her  eclipse  endur'd, 
And  the  sad  augurs  mock  their  own  presage  ; 
Incertainties  now  crown  themselves  assur'd, 
And  peace  proclaims  olives  of  endless  age. 
Now  with  the  drops  of  this  most  balmy  time 
My  love  looks  fresh,  and  death  to  me  subscribes, 
Since  spite  of  him  I'll  live  in  this  poor  rhyme, 
While  he  insults  o'er  dull  and  speechless  tribes. 
And  thou  in  this  shalt  find  thy  monument, 
When  tyrants'  crests  and  tombs  of  brass  are  spent." 

Mr.  Gerald  Massey l  maintained  that,  in  what  is  said  in 
the  fifth  line  concerning  the  eclipse  of  "  the  mortal  moon," 
there  is  an  allusion  to  the  death  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and 
that  thus  the  date  of  the  Sonnet  is  1603.  This  view  cannot 
be  regarded  as  correct,  though  it  may  be  readily  conceded 
that  "the  mortal  moon"  is  in  all  probability  a  poetical 
designation  of  the  Queen.  She  was,  according  to  Eliza- 

1  The  Secret  Drama  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets,  2nd  edit.,  p.  312. 


Some  CbronolOQfcal  Snfcicattons.  23 

bethan  poets,  Cynthia,  goddess  of  the  shining  orb.1  But 
to  suppose  an  allusion  to  her  death  seems  altogether  out  of 
harmony  with  the  drift  and  scope  of  the  Sonnet.  Not- 
withstanding fears  and  forebodings,  the  poet's  love  for  his 
friend  shall  not  be  "  forfeit  to  a  confin'd  doom,"  but  shall 
ever  endure.  In  the  fifth  line  the  emphasis  is  obviously  on 
the  word  "  endur'd  "  : — 

"The  mortal  moon  hath  her  eclipse  endur'd." 

As  Dowden  justly  observes,  "  In  the  present  Sonnet  the 
moon  is  imagined  as  having  endured  her  eclipse,  and  come 
out  none  the  less  bright."  The  possibility  of  a  reference 
to  Elizabeth's  death  is  thus  precluded. 

There  occurred,  however,  not  far  from  the  close  of  Eliza- 
beth's life  and  reign,  an  event  which,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
see,  might  be  spoken  of  as  a  threatening  eclipse,  and  from 
which  the  Queen  might  be  represented  as  having  come  forth 
with  her  glory  undimmed.  That  event  was  the  rebellion 
of  Essex.  Moreover,  with  regard  to  this  event  we  may  go 
beyond  the  supposition  that  it  might  be  so  spoken  of. 
Within  a  week  of  the  abortive  attempt  of  Essex  to  call  out 
the  citizens  of  London,  Secretary  Cecil,  according  to  a  docu- 
ment in  the  Record  Office,  delivered  himself  to  the  following 
effect : — "  As  the  declining  of  the  Sun  bringes  generall 

1  A  very  good  example,  to  which  my  attention  was  directed  by  the  Eev. 
W.  A.  Harrison,  is  furnished  by  the  ode  "Of  Cynthia,"  which  stands  last 
in  Francis  Davison's  Poetical  Eapsody  (1602).  The  concluding  stanza  is — 

"  Times  yong  houres  attend  her  still, 
And  her  eyes  and  cheeks  do  fill, 

With  fresh  youth  and  beautie. 
All  her  louers  olde  do  grow, 
But  their  hartes  they  do  not  so 

In  their  Loue  and  duty." 

Then  follows  the  note, — "This  Song  was  sung  before  her  sacred  Maiestie 
at  a  show  on  horsebacke  wherewith  the  right  Honorable  the  Earle  of  Cum- 
berland presented  her  Highnesse  on  Maie  day  last."  The  apparent  date 
should  be  noted. 


24  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

darkness,  so  her  Maiesties  hurt  is  our  continuall  night ;  and 
although  the  one  by  course  of  Nature  may  be  renewed,  yet 
the  other  will  hardly  be  matched  in  any  future  age ;  how 
odious  then  ought  they  to  be  in  the  eye  of  all  good  sub- 
iects  that  haue  sought  the  vtter  ruine  of  so  blessed  a 
soueraine." l 

11  The  sad  augurs  mock  their  own  presage"  is  a  descrip- 
tion which,  we  may  well  believe,  would,  after  the  affair  of 
Sunday  February  8,  1601,  aptly  describe  the  feelings  of 
those  who  had  predicted  the  success  of  Essex.  And  then 
in  the  lines — 

"  Incertainties  now  crown  themselves  assur'd, 
And  peace  proclaims  olives  of  endless  age," 

we  may  find,  with  probability,  an  allusion  to  the  embassy 
sent  by  James,  the  Scotch  king,  to  congratulate  the  Queen 
on  putting  down  the  rebellion.  The  '  Uncertain  ties"  may 
refer  to  the  previously  doubtful  attitude  of  James.  If  the 
attempt  of  Essex  had  been  so  far  successful  as  to  stir  up  a 
civil  war,  it  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  James  would  have 
given  active  assistance  to  the  rebels.  Now,  however,  this 
uncertainty  was  removed.  And  now,  instead  of  hostilities, 
terms  of  "inviolable  unity  and  concord"  had  been  ratified 
between  the  two  monarchs.2  Further,  the  words  of  the 
ninth  line,  "the  drops  of  this  most  balmy  time,"  con- 
tain, as  seems  likely,  an  allusion  to  the  season  of  the  year 
when  the  Sonnet  was  written,  probably  the  spring  or 

1  State  Papers,  Domestic,  Elizabeth,  cclxxviii.     What  Shakespeare  says 
about  the  "  eclipse  of  the  mortal  moon"  may  be  advantageously  compared 
also  with  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  of  Bacon's  written  to  the 
Queen  prior  to  the  rebellion  : — "  The  devices  of  some  that  would  put  out 
all  your  Majesty's  lights,  and  fall  on  reckoning  how  many  years  you  have 
reigned,  which  I  beseech  our  blessed  Saviour  may  be  doubled,  and  that  I 
may  never  live  to  see  any  eclipse  of  your  glory"  (Spedding's  Bacon,  vol. 
ix.  p.  160).     There  can  thus  be  no  doubt  that  the  language  of  the  Sonnet 
would  be  entirely  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the  time. 

2  Camden,  Life  and  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  vol.  ii.  p.  338. 


Some  Cbronologfcal  Snfcications.  25 

early  summer  of  I6OI.1  At  this  time  the  interval  since 
the  rebellion  would  not  have  been  great,  and  therefore  the 
probability  of  allusions  such  as  those  suggested  would  be 
increased. 

In  Sonnet  124  we  may  find  other  allusions  entirely  in 
accordance  with  those  already  reviewed.  The  poet  declares 
that  his  love  for  his  friend  is  not  "  the  child  of  state  " — an 
expression  on  which  by  itself  not  very  much  could  be  based, 
but  which,  taken  with  the  context,  is  at  least  consistent 
with  the  supposition  that  the  poet  was  thinking  of  Essex 
and  the  dignities  he  attained — a  supposition  suitable  also 
to  what  is  said  of  "  Time's  love  "  and  "  Time's  hate."  In 
the  latter  part  of  the  Sonnet  Shakespeare  seems  to  conceive 
of  his  love  for  his  friend  Mr.  W.  H.  as  standing  alone, 
self-contained,  and  complete,  like  a  huge  pyramid  : — 

"  If  my  dear  love  were  but  the  child  of  state, 

It  might  for  Fortune's  bastard  be  unfather'd, 

As  subject  to  Time's  love  or  to  Time's  hate, 

Weeds  among  weeds,  or  flowers  with  flowers  gather'd. 

No,  it  was  builded  far  from  accident ; 

It  suffers  not  in  smiling  pomp,  nor  falls 

Under  the  blow  of  thralled  discontent, 

Whereto  th'  inviting  time  our  fashion  calls  : 

It  fears  not  policy,  that  heretick, 

Which  works  on  leases  of  short-number'd  hours, 

But  all  alone  stands  hugely  politick, 

That  it  nor  grows  with  heat,  nor  drowns  with  showers. 
To  this  I  witness  call  the  fools  of  Time, 
Which  die  for  goodness,  who  have  liv'd  for  crime." 

When  the  seventh  and  eighth  line  speak  of — 

"thralled  discontent, 
Whereto  th'  inviting  time  our  fashion  calls," 

there  is  obviously  an  allusion  to  contemporary  circumstances. 
The  expression  "thralled  discontent"  seems  to  suit  per- 
fectly the  state  of  things  after  the  rebellion,  if  we  take  the 

1  These  indications  of  time  in  Shakespeare  may  be  compared  with  the 
indications  of  time  and  season  in  Spenser's  Sonnets,  4,  19,  &c. 


26  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

word  "  thralled  "  as  referring  to  the  severe  measures  by  which 
the  rebellion  had  been  put  down,  and  by  which  discontent 
was  still  restrained.  The  disturbed  state  of  feeling  found, 
however,  conspicuous  expression  in  the  turbulent  Parliament 
which  assembled  in  the  autumn  of  1601,  and  which  was 
the  last  in  the  reign.  But  the  most  important  allusions  in 
the  Sonnet  are  to  be  found  in  those  remarkable  expressions 
of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  lines,  which  speak  of  "  the 
fools  of  Time"  as  "living  for  crime"  and  "dying  for  good- 
ness." Difficult  as  these  expressions  may  seem  at  first  sight, 
they  become  intelligible  when  considered  as  referring  to 
Essex  and  his  companions,  and  to  the  consequences  of  the 
rebellion.  The  "  fools  of  Time  "  are  those  whom  Time  does 
what  he  pleases  with,  now  raising  them  to  the  highest  dig- 
nities, and  now  bringing  them  down  to  the  scaffold.  Simi- 
larly we  have  in  116  "Love's  not  Time's  fool,"  expressing, 
as  the  context  clearly  shows,  the  idea  of  unswerving  con- 
stancy which  Time  cannot  affect  or  change.1  The  conspiracy 
and  rebellion  are  evidently  alluded  to  in  the  "living  for 
crime,"  while  in  the  "  dying  for  goodness  "  we  may  recognise 
with  equal  facility  an  ironical  allusion  to  the  popular 
regard  for  Essex,  after  his  execution,  as  the  "good  earl." 
And  the  line — 

"That  it  nor  grows  with  heat  nor  drowns  with  showers," 

is,  "  like  this  most  balmy  time  "  of  107,  entirely  in  accord- 
ance with  the  supposition  that  the  Sonnet  was  composed 
in  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  1601. 

1  Comp.  also  Measure  for  Measure,  Act  III.  sc.  i,  lines  11-13  : — 

"  Merely  thou  art  Death's  fool, 
For  him  thou  labour'st  by  thy  flight  to  shun, 
And  yet  runn'st  toward  him  still." 

Death  has  it  all  his  own  way,  and  may  be  imagined  to  be  merely  amused 
by  abortive  efforts  to  escape.  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  III.  sc.  i,  line  141, 
may  be  also  compared, — "  0  !  I  am  Fortune's  fool." 


Some  Gbconolosical  3nDicatfons.  27 

§  4.  The  Three  Years'  Space. — We  are  now  in  a  position 
to  consider  the  important  notice  of  time  in  Sonnet  104  : — 

"  Three  winters'  cold 

Have  from  the  forests  shook  three  summers'  pride, 
Three  beauteous  springs  to  yellow  autumn  turn'd 
In  process  of  the  seasons  have  I  seen, 
Three  April  perfumes  in  three  hot  Junes  burn'd, 
Since  first  I  saw  you  fresh,  which  yet  are  green." 

In  accordance  with  what  has  been  said  previously,  Son- 
nets 100  to  126  constitute  in  all  probability  a  single  poem, 
or  a  connected  series  written  about  the  same  time.  We 
have  just  seen  pretty  conclusive  reason  to  assign  some  of 
the  Sonnets  in  this  series  to  1601,  and  even  to  the  early 
summer  or  spring  of  that  year.  Accordingly,  Sonnet  104 
just  quoted,  which  indicates  that  three  years'  space  had 
elapsed  since  the  commencement  of  Shakespeare's  acquaint- 
ance with  Mr.  W.  H.,  must  be  regarded  as  having  the  same 
date.  Reckoning  back  from  the  spring  of  1601,  we  shall 
come  to  the  spring  of  1598.  And  the  reader  should  not 
fail  to  notice  the  prominence  given  to  the  vernal  season  in 
the  quotation  just  given.  "  Three  beauteous  springs  "  had 
been  changed  to  "  yellow  autumn,"  and  "  three  April  per- 
fumes "  burned  in  "  three  hot  Junes."  These  indications 
bring  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  acquaintance  commenced 
not  later  than  the  April  of  1598.  Such  a  date  would  allow 
a  sufficient  time  to  intervene  before  the  publication  of  the 
Passionate  Pilgrim  in  1599,  and  would  be  consistent  with 
the  friendship  being  still  spoken  of  as  "  new  "  when  Sonnets 
55  and  56  were  written,  if,  as  mentioned  above  (p.  22),  we 
place  their  composition  late  in  1598  or  early  in  1599. 

The  conclusions  we  have  thus  attained  are  independent 
of  the  identification  of  Mr.  W.  H.  with  any  particular 
person  known  to  history.  They  will  be  found,  however, 
of  great  importance  with  respect  to  this  identification 
(Chap.  VII.),  as  also  with  regard  to  some  other  questions 
which  will  be  discussed  in  Chapters  IV. -VI. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

SHAKESPEARE  AND   SOUTHAMPTON. 

THE  suggestion  has  been  made  that  Shakespeare's  friend  in 
the  Sonnets,  Mr.  W.  H.,  was  the  Earl  of  Southampton,  the 
patron  to  whom  the  poet  had  dedicated  his  Venus  and 
Adonis  and  Lucrece.1  But  the  difficulties  which  stand  in 
the  way  of  our  accepting  this  suggestion  are  altogether 
insuperable.  It  is  scarcely  to  be  doubted  that  the  W.  of 
W.  H.  represents  William.  The  evidence  of  the  punning 
Sonnets,  135,  136,  143,  is  not  easily  to  be  set  aside:  the 
"  Will "  of  these  Sonnets  is  too  emphatic.  Southampton's 
name,  however,  was  not  William,  but  Henry.  If,  however, 
we  could  pass  by  this  not  inconsiderable  difficulty,  and  could 
go  so  far  as  to  suppose  that,  for  the  purpose  of  disguise, 
the  order  of  the  initials  was  inverted,  and  that  W.  H. 
really  represents  H.  W.,  that  is,  Henry  Wriothesley,  Earl 
of  Southampton,  still  the  chronological  results  we  have 
already  attained  will  compel  us  altogether  to  reject  the 
suggestion.  Shakespeare's  acquaintance  with  Lord  South- 
ampton dates,  not  from  1598,  but  at  least  from  1593,  the 
date  of  the  Venus  and  Adonis,  when  Southampton  was  nine- 
teen. Then  in  1601,  our  date  for  Sonnets  100  to  126, 
Southampton  would  be  quite  past  the  age  when  he  could  be 
addressed  as  "lovely  boy"  (126),  or  when  he  would  feel 
complimented  by  being  told  that  his  "sweet  self"  resembled 
"cherubins"  (114).  It  would  be  superfluous,  therefore,  to 
attempt  to  show  the  inapplicability  to  Southampton  of  the 

1  N.  Drake,  Shakespeare  and  his  Times,  1817. 


Sbafcespeare  an&  Soutbampton.  29 

first  seventeen  Sonnets  and  of  various  other  particulars, 
including  that  personal  beauty  which  Shakespeare  so  highly 
extolled.  We  must  conclude,  then,  that  Mr.  W.  H.  was 
certainly  not  the  Earl  of  Southampton. 

There  is,  however,  in  relation  to  Southampton,  another 
matter  which  must  not  be  passed  over.  We  have  seen 
strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the  loyth  and  I24th 
Sonnets  allude  to  the  rebellion  of  the  Earl  of  Essex,  and  to 
the  downfall  of  that  nobleman  and  his  companions  (p.  24). 
This  downfall  Shakespeare  seems  to  have  regarded,  not 
with  regret,  or  even  indifference,  but  with  something  rather 
of  satisfaction.  And  yet  Southampton,  to  whom  he  had 
dedicated  his  two  poems,  had  been  a  prominent  member  of 
the  party  of  Essex.  Southampton,  it  is  true,  had  not  been 
put  to  death,  but  he  was  in  prison,  and,  in  the  spring  of 
1 60 1,  the  ultimate  issue  was  still  uncertain.  Are  we  to 
charge  Shakespeare  with  ingratitude  ?  There  can  scarcely  be 
a  doubt  that  the  dedication  of  the  Venus  and  Adonis  was 
acknowledged  by  a  present  of  greater  or  less  value.  We  can- 
not speak  so  confidently  with  regard  to  the  Lucrece.  It  has 
been  said  that  the  dedication  to  the  Lucrece  was  "  written, 
not  in  terms  of  timid  appeal,  like  the  earlier  dedication, 
but  in  words  of  strong  and  confident  affection."  l  In  the 
dedication  to  the  Venus  and  Adonis  Shakespeare  had  said, 
"  I  know  not  how  I  shall  offend  in  dedicating  my  vnpolisht 
lines  to  your  Lordship  ; "  but  he  prefaces  the  Lucrece  with 
the  declaration,  "  The  loue  I  dedicate  to  your  Lordship  is 
without  end :  whereof  this  Pamphlet  without  beginning 
is  but  a  superfluous  Moity.  The  warrant  I  haue  of  your 
Honourable  disposition,  not  the  worth  of  my  vntutord  Lines 
makes  it  assured  of  acceptance.  What  I  haue  done  is  yours, 
what  I  haue  to  doe  is  yours;  being  part  in  all  I  haue, 
denoted  yours.  Were  my  worth  greater,  my  duety  would 
shew  greater,  meane  time,  as  it  is,  it  is  bound  to  your 

1  Dowdea,  Shakespeare  Primer,  p.  23. 


30  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets. 

Lordship ;  to  whom  I  wish  long  life  still  lengthened  with 
all  happinesse."  It  is  thus  seen  that,  in  the  first  dedication, 
Shakespeare  had  expressed  doubt  as  to  the  reception  he 
might  meet  with ;  in  the  second  he  dedicates  to  South- 
ampton a  "  love  without  end."  But  still  there  is  in  the 
dedication  to  Lucrcce  language  not  at  all  suggestive  of  a 
close  friendship.  If  Shakespeare  had  been  on  terms  of 
intimacy  with  his  patron,  he  would  hardly  have  said  of  his 
poem,  "  The  warrant  I  have  of  your  honourable  disposition 
.  .  .  makes  it  assured  of  acceptance."  This  is  cold  indeed 
as  compared  with  the  language  addressed  to  Mr.  W.  H.  in 
the  Sonnets.  We  may  infer,  perhaps,  that  the  dedication 
to  Lucrece  implies  on  the  whole  a  desire  for  closer  relations. 
But  did  Southampton  respond  to  the  appeal  ?  We  have  no 
evidence  that  he  did.  The  usual  opinion,  however,  would 
seem  to  be  that  Southampton  was  pre-eminently  the  friend 
and  patron  of  Shakespeare.  But  the  editors  of  the  Folio 
of  1623  can  scarcely  have  taken  this  view.  Southampton 
was  still  alive  when  that  volume  was  issued;  but  the 
editors  pass  him  over  without  mention,  and  anxious  "  to 
keep  the  memory  of  so  worthy  a  friend  and  fellow  alive 
as  was  our  Shakespeare,"  and  "to  procure  his  orphans 
guardians,"  they  dedicate  the  book  to  the  brothers,  the 
Earls  of  Pembroke  and  Montgomery.  This  fact  is  very 
important,  and  it  not  unnaturally  suggests  a  possible  rup- 
ture or  estrangement  between  the  poet  and  his  first  patron. 
Shakespeare's  sensitive  soul  may  have  been  wounded  by  a 
real  or  fancied  slight.  Perhaps,  through  inadvertence,  he 
had  been  kept  waiting  in  an  ante-chamber  in  a  manner 
similar  to  that  which  so  seriously  provoked  Dr.  Johnson's 
anger.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  cause,  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that,  as  early  as  1601,  Shakespeare  had 
become  alienated  from  Southampton. 

Now  if  the  view  of  Sonnet  124  already  given  (p.  25)  is 
correct,  and  if,  when  Shakespeare  speaks  of  those  who 
"have  lived  for  crime"  and  yet  "die  for  goodness,"  he 


Sbafcespeare  ant)  Soutbampton,  31 

alludes  to  Essex  and  his  companions,  it  would  not  be 
unlikely  that  we  should  find,  in  close  connection,  some 
allusion  to  Southampton  and  the  relations  which  he  had 
sustained  to  Shakespeare.  Sonnet  124  we  have  placed  in 
1 60 1.  At  this  time  Southampton  was  suffering  imprison- 
ment as  a  convicted  rebel.  It  is,  therefore,  in  the  nature 
of  things  likely  enough  that  there  would  be  persons  very 
willing  to  remind  Shakespeare  of  the  "  love  without  end  " 
which  he  had  proffered  to  Southampton  in  the  widely- 
circulated  dedication  to  Lucrece.  This  would  be  the  more 
likely  if  Shakespeare  now  professed  adherence  to  the  Court 
party  and  strong  aversion  to  the  conspiracy  and  the  con- 
spirators.1 Such  persons  would  very  probably  hint  that 
Shakespeare  was  unfaithful,  and  that  he  had  not  "  a  true 
soul."  Thus  the  words  "informer"  and  "a  true  soul  "of 
the  last  line  but  one  in  Sonnet  125  admit  of  easy  expla- 
nation : — 

"  Hence,  thou  suborn'd  informer  !  a  true  soul, 
When  most  impeach'd,  stands  least  in  thy  control." 

And  what  precedes  (expressed  with  Shakespeare's  usual 
love  of  metaphor)  is  in  complete  accordance  with  that  view 
of  Shakespeare's  relations  to  his  first  patron  which  I  have 
suggested : — 

1  It  must  be  mentioned  here  that  no  relations  of  friendship,  or  intimacy 
of  any  sort  whatever,  between  Shakespeare  and  Essex  are  to  be  inferred 
from  what  is  said  concerning  the  latter  in  the  chorus  preceding  Act  v.  of 
Henry  V.  .•— 

"  As  by  a  lower  but  by  loving  likelihood, 
Were  now  the  general  of  our  gracious  empress 
(As  in  good  time  he  may),  from  Ireland  coming, 
Bringing  rebellion  broached  on  his  sword, 
How  many  would  the  peaceful  city  quit, 
To  welcome  him  ?  much  more,  and  much  more  cause, 
Did  they  this  Harry." 

The  last  words  are  to  be  noted,  as  well  as  the  hatred  for  rebellion  which 
Shakespeare  expresses.  And  if  Essex  himself  turned  rebel,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  surmise  the  fate  which  Shakespeare  would  desire  for  him. 


32  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

"  Were't  aught  to  me  I  bore  the  canopy, 
With  my  extern  the  outward  honouring, 
Or  laid  great  bases  for  eternity, 
Which  proves  more  short  than  waste  or  ruining." 

On  a  careful  consideration  of  the  context  it  may  be  seen 
that  Shakespeare  thus  implicitly  denies  that  he  had  been 
unfaithful.  He  had  never  been  on  terms  of  close  intimacy 
with  Essex  or  Southampton.  He  had  merely  "  borne  the 
canopy,"  as  in  a  public  pageant,  "  honouring  the  outward 
with  his  extern."  And  the  same  thing  also  is  implied  in 
the  lines  which  follow,  and  which  speak  of  the  mere 
"  gazing  "  of  the  "  dwellers  on  form  and  favour."  More- 
over, bearing  in  mind  the  dedication  to  the  Lucrece,  with 
its  "  love  without  end/'  we  need  have  no  difficulty  in  under- 
standing what  is  meant  by  the  "  eternity  which  proves  more 
short  than  waste  or  ruining."  In  1601  but  seven  years 
had  elapsed  since  that  dedication  was  published.  Editors 
have  been  wont  to  alter  in  the  Sonnet  "proves"  into 
"  prove."  But  the  singular  "  proves,"  as  given  in  the  First 
Quarto,  is  certainly  correct.  This  becomes  clear  when  we 
see  the  meaning.  Shakespeare  had  not  expected  that  a 
breach  between  Southampton  and  himself  would  ever  occur, 
but  the  event  had  shown  how  erroneous  was  his  anticipa- 
tion. The  "  love  without  end  "  had  proved  of  briefer  dura- 
tion than  even  seven  years.  As  to  the  plural  "  great  bases," 
there  is  very  probably  an  allusion  to  the  two  poems  dedi- 
cated to  Southampton.1 

1  It  is  not  by  any  means  denied  that,  with  an  antecedent  plural  noun, 
Shakespeare  employs  after  the  relative  a  verb  ending  in  s,  as  also  after 
a  plural  nominative,  though  in  these  cases  editors  have  not  uncommonly 
altered  the  verb  (see  Abbott,  Shakesp.  Gram.,  §§  247,  333).  In  Sonnet  125 
the  verb  has  evidently  been  changed  to  bring  it  into  apparent  agreement 
with  "great  bases."  But,  apart  from  grammatical  considerations,  we  can 
scarcely  regard  Shakespeare  as  intending  that  he  had  laid  "great  bases," 
which  bases,  however,  had  proved  too  short,  shorter  than  "waste  or 
ruining." 


CHAPTER  V. 
THE    RIVAL    POET. 

IT  may  be  convenient  to  consider  here,  also,  as  connected 
with  the  chronology,  the  question  relating  to  the  rival  poet 
of  86  and  preceding  Sonnets.  It  is  needless  to  discuss  the 
claims  of  Marlowe,  Drayton,  and  Daniel,  with  respect  to 
neither  of  whom  has  any  probable  case  been  presented.  To 
Professor  Minto  (Characteristics  of  English  Poets,  2nd  edit., 
p.  221  seq.)  is  due  the  identification  of  the  rival  poet  of  the 
Sonnets  with  George  Chapman,  an  identification  so  complete 
as  to  leave  no  reasonable  doubt  on  the  matter.  This  identi- 
fication will  be  found  also  to  agree  entirely  with  the  chro- 
nological results  which  we  have  already  attained.  Professor 
Minto  justly  contends  that  the  86th  Sonnet  gives  ample 
materials  for  determining  the  question  : — 

"  Was  it  the  proud  full  sail  of  his  great  verse, 

Bound  for  the  prize  of  all-too-precious  you, 

That  did  my  ripe  thoughts  in  my  brain  inhearse, 

Making  their  tomb  the  womb  wherein  they  grew  ? 

Was  it  his  spirit,  by  spirits  taught  to  write 

Above  a  mortal  pitch,  that  struck  me  dead  ? 

No,  neither  he,  nor  his  compeers  by  night, 

Giving  him  aid,  my  verse  astonished. 

He,  nor  that  affable  familiar  ghost 

Which  nightly  gulls  him  with  intelligence, 

As  victors,  of  my  silence  cannot  boast ; 

I  was  not  sick  of  any  fear  from  thence  : 

But  when  your  countenance  fil'd  up  his  line, 
Then  lack'd  I  matter ;  that  enfeebled  mine." 

"Chapman,"  says  Professor  Minto,  "was  a  man  of  over- 
powering enthusiasm,  ever  eager  in  magnifying  poetry,  and 

c 


34  Sbafcespeare'5  Sonnets, 

advancing  fervent  claims  to  supernatural  inspiration.  In 
1594  he  published  a  poem  called  The  Shadow  of  Night, 
which  goes  far  to  establish  his  identity  with  Shakespeare's 
rival.  In  the  Dedication,  after  animadverting  severely 
on  vulgar  searchers  after  knowledge,  he  exclaims,  'Now 
what  a  supererogation  in  wit  this  is,  to  think  Skill  so 
mightily  pierced  with  their  loves  that  she  should  prosti- 
tutely  show  them  her  secrets,  when  she  will  scarce  be  looked 
upon  by  others  but  with  invocation,  fasting,  icatching,  yea, 
not  without  having  drops  of  their  souls  like  a  heavenly  fami- 
liar.'" With  the  last  words  of  this  quotation  should  be 
compared  Shakespeare's  line, — 

"  He,  nor  that  affable  familiar  ghost." 

As  to  what  is  said,  in  the  Sonnet,  of  the  "compeers  by 
night "  and  the  being  "  nightly  gulled  with  intelligence," 
these  expressions  are  clearly  connected  with  Chapman's 
consecration  of  himself  to  Night : — 

"  To  thy  blacke  shades  and  desolation 
I  consecrate  my  life  ; " 

and  with  his  invitation  to  his  "  compeers  : " — 

"  All  you  possesst  with  indepressed  spirits, 
Indu'd  with  nimble  and  aspiring  wits, 
Come  consecrate  with  me  to  sacred  Night 
Your  whole  endeavours  and  detest  the  light :  " 

"  No  pen  can  anything  eternall  wright 
That  is  not  steept  in  humor  of  the  Night." 

Then  as  to  "  the  proud  full  sail  of  his  great  verse,"  of  which 
the  first  line  of  Sonnet  86  speaks,  the  language  used  suits 
entirely  the  grand  fourteen-syllable  metre  in  which  Chap- 
man wrote  his  translation  of  the  Iliad.  The  date  when 
Chapman  first  published  seven  books  of  the  Iliad,  1598,  is 
especially  noteworthy.  The  Sonnets  TOO  to  126  we  have 
placed  in  1601.  From  the  commencement  of  100, — 

"  Where  art  thou,  Muse,  that  thou  forget'st  so  long,"  &c., 


IRival  ipoct  35 


taken  together  with  the  lines  of  102, — 

"  Our  love  was  new,  and  then  but  in  the  spring, 
When  I  was  wont  to  greet  it  with  my  lays, 
As  Philomel  in  summer's  front  doth  sing, 
And  stops  his  pipe  in  growth  of  riper  days," 

it  seems  probable  that  when  i  oo  seq.  were  written  a  consider- 
able interval  had  elapsed  since  the  composition  of  the  larger 
number  of  the  Sonnets  i  to  99.  Thus  it  would  be  more 
likely  that  78  and  86  were  written  in  1598  or  1599  than 
in  1600.  The  latter  date  would  seem  scarcely  to  leave  a 
sufficient  interval  for  the  "so  long"  of  100.  Supposing, 
then,  that  the  Sonnets  referring  to  the  rival  poet  were 
written  in  1599,  Chapman's  "  Seaven  Iliades  "  would  have 
been  at  the  time  a  new  book,  and  so  would  be  likely  to 
attract  the  notice  of  Mr.  W.  H.,  and  excite  his  interest  in 
Chapman.  Shakespeare's  apprehensions,  therefore,  can 
scarcely  be  regarded  as  altogether  unreasonable,  especially 
if  we  remember  the  effect  which  a  first  acquaintance  with 
Chapman's  Homer  produced  on  a  great  poet  more  than 
two  hundred  years  afterwards.  I  allude,  of  course,  to  Keats, 
who  tells  us  that  on  "  hearing  Chapman  speak  out  loud  and 
bold,"— 

"  Then  felt  I  like  some  watcher  of  the  skies 
When  a  new  planet  swims  into  his  ken  ; 
Or  like  stout  Cortez  when,  with  eagle  eyes, 
He  stared  at  the  Pacific — and  all  his  men 
Looked  at  each  other  with  a  wild  surmise, 
Silent,  upon  a  peak  in  Darien." 


CHAPTER  VI. 

TWO   OTHER   CONTEMPORARY  POETS. 

§  i.  Marston's  "In  Praise  of  his  Pygmalion" — In  his 
32nd  Sonnet  Shakespeare  says  that  if,  after  his  death,  his 
friend  should  chance  to  "  re-survey  "  his  "  poor  rude  lines ;  " 
when  compared  with  "  the  bettering  of  the  time,"  they  may 
seem  "  outstripp'd  by  every  pen."  The  product  of  Shake- 
speare's muse,  "  exceeded  by  the  height  of  happier  men," 
may  be  left  far  behind.  But  Shakespeare  has  still  one 
request  to  make  :— 

"  0,  then  vouchsafe  me  but  this  loving  thought : 

'  Had  my  friend's  muse  grown  with  this  growing  age, 
A  dearer  birth  than  this  his  love  had  brought, 
To  march  in  ranks  of  better  equipage : 
But  since  he  died,  and  poets  better  prove, 
.Theirs  for  their  style  I'll  read,  his  for  his  love.'" 

Professor  Dowden,  in  commenting  on  this  Sonnet,  suggests 
whether  Shakespeare  might  not  have  "had  a  sense  of  the 
progress  of  poetry  in  the  time  of  Elizabeth."  There  is 
reason,  however,  to  recognise  an  allusion  more  special  than 
Professor  Dowden  suggests.  Moreover,  this  special  allusion 
not  only  enables  us  to  account  for  what  Shakespeare  says 
as  to  "  the  bettering  of  the  time ; "  it  is  also  entirely  in 
accordance  with,  and  confirmatory  of,  the  chronology  of  the 
Sonnets  already  set  forth.  The  metaphor  in  the  line  I  have 
italicised  is  drawn  pretty  obviously  from  the  march  of 
successive  ranks  of  soldiers  in  military  equipment.  There 
appears,  however,  some  incongruity  when  this  line  is  com- 
pared with  that  preceding.  The  "  bringing  a  dearer  birth  " 


otber  Contemporary  poets.  37 


to  march  in  better  equipped  ranks  can  scarcely  seem  alto- 
gether suitable.  There  is  here  a  remarkable  combination  of 
metaphors.  But  some  facts  in  relation  to  a  work  of 
Marston's  furnish  a  pretty  complete  explanation. 

In  1598  Marston  published  anonymously  his  Metamor- 
phosis of  Pigmalion's  Image  and  Certain  e  Satyres.  Marston 
seems  to  have  thought  that  Pigmalion's  Image  and  the  Satyres 
needed  a  connecting  or  harmonising  link,  lest  he  should 
seem  to  change  his  "hew  like  a  camelion."  He,  therefore, 
interposed  some  lines  said  to  be  "in  praise  of  his  Pig- 
inalion,"  but  looking  back  to  some  extent  to  the  one  poem, 
and  forward  to  the  others.  In  this  interposed  poem  Marston 
speaks  of  his  — 

"  Stanzaes  like  odd  bands 
Of  voluntaries  and  mercenarians  : 
Which  like  soldados  of  our  warlike  age, 
March  rich  bedight  in  warlike  equipage  : 
Glittering  in  daubed  lac'd  accoustrements, 
And  pleasing  sutes  of  loues  habiliments." 

There  is  no  great  difficulty  in  perceiving  that  we  have  here 
in  all  probability  the  source  of  Shakespeare's  line,  "To 
march  in  ranks  of  better  equipage."  The  analogy  is  too 
close  to  be  easily  explained  away.  But,  it  may  be  said,  is  it 
not  possible  that  Marston  borrowed  from  Shakespeare  ?  To 
this  question  the  answer  must  be  given,  that  the  congruity 
which,  as  already  observed,  is  absent  in  Shakespeare,  is 
clearly  seen  in  Marston.  It  is  entirely  suitable  that 
"  soldados  "  or  soldiers  should  "  march  "  richly  bedecked 
with  military  accoutrements.  It  may  be  maintained, 
therefore,  with  confidence,  that  Marston's  poem  preceded 
Shakespeare's.  Then,  as  to  what  Shakespeare  says  of  "  the 
bettering  of  the  time,"  and  of  his  being  in  the  future 
"  outstripp'd  by  every  pen,"  it  should  be  observed  that,  in 
accordance  with  the  view  of  Dr.  Grosart  (Introduction  to 
Marston's  Poems,  p.  xxvi.),  the  Pigmalion  owed  its  origin 
to  Shakespeare's  successful  Venus  and  Adonis.  It  need  not 


38  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

be  for  a  moment  supposed  that  Shakespeare  really  thought 
Marston's  poem  superior  to  his  own ;  but  it  is  likely  enough 
that  there  were  those  who,  for  reasons  of  their  own,  would 
give  it  the  preference,  and  would  proclaim  the  advent  of  a 
new  poet  whose  "  first  bloomes  of  his  poesie  "  showed  that 
he  was  destined  to  surpass  Shakespeare  and  the  rest.  As 
Dr.  Grosart  points  out,  Marston's  book  seems  to  have  gained 
immediate  popularity.  He  adduces  as  evidence  the  fact 
that  while  the  Pigmalion  was  entered  in  the  Stationers' 
Register  on  May  27,  1598,  so  soon  after  as  September  8, 
is  found  the  entry  of  Marston's  Scourge  of  Vilany.  Pos- 
sibly, too,  Shakespeare's  friend,  caught  by  the  general 
popularity,  had  been  eulogising  the  new  poem  as  of  very 
high  promise.  On  this  view  the  language  of  the  32nd 
Sonnet  presents  no  difficulty,  while  the  agreement  with 
the  chronology  supported  by  other  evidence  is  complete. 
According  to  this  chronology,  Sonnet  32  would  be  written  in 
1598,  probably  during  the  summer,  when  Marston's  poem 
was  at  the  full  height  of  its  popularity. 

§  2.  Draytoris  "Idea." — With  regard  to  the  chronological 
question,  the  relations  with  Shakespeare  of  another  con- 
temporary poet  are  also  of  some  importance,  and  therefore 
they  may  be  suitably  referred  to  here.  In  1594  Michael 
Drayton  published  a  small  volume  of  Sonnets  with  the  title 
Ideas  Mirrour.  In  these  poems  he  is  alleged  to  have  cele- 
brated an  early  attachment  to  a  lady  who  lived  by  the  river 
Ankor  or  Anker,  in  North  Warwickshire,  and  whom  he 
designated  by  the  poetical  name  of  "  Idea  :  " — 

"  Ardens  sweet  Ankor,  let  thy  glory  be 
That  fayre  Idea,  she  doth  Hue  by  thee  "  (Amour  24). 

This  collection  of  Sonnets,  which,  in  successive  editions, 
underwent  very  considerable  alterations,  cannot  be  said  to 
present  in  its  original  form  any  strong  resemblances  to 
Shakespeare's  work.  Taken  altogether,  these  fifty- one  Son- 
nets must  be  characterised  as  un-Shakespearian.  But  in 


otber  Contemporary  fcoets,  39 


1599  Dray  ton  published  another  edition  entitled  Idea; 
and  to  this  edition  he  appended  his  England's  Heroicall 
Epistles.1  The  number  of  Sonnets  was  increased  to  fifty- 
nine,  and  there  are  several  which,  on  account  of  resemblances 
in  language  or  thought,  will  readily  arrest  the  attention  of 
a  reader  familiar  with  Shakespeare's  Sonnets.  In  order  to 
form  a  just  conclusion  as  to  whether  these  resemblances 
were  caused  by  Drayton's  having  read  some  of  Shakespeare's 
Sonnets,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  not  only  the  fact 
of  the  change,  to  which  I  have  adverted,  but  also  the  time 
at  which  it  occurred.  There  is  an  instance  of  similarity  to 
which  more  than  once  attention  has  been  directed.  In  the 
1599  edition  of  Drayton's  Idea,  the  number  of  the  Sonnet 
alluded  to  is  22  (subsequently  20)  :  — 

"  An  euill  spirit  your  beauty  haunts  me  still, 
Wherewith  (alas)  I  haue  been  long  possest, 
Which  ceaseth  not  to  tempt  me  vnto  ill, 
Nor  gives  me  once  but  one  pore  minutes  rest. 
In  me  it  speakes,  whether  I  sleepe  or  wake, 
And  when  by  meanes  to  driue  it  out  I  try, 
With  greater  torments  then  it  me  doth  take, 
And  tortures  me  in  most  extreamity. 
Before  my  face  it  layes  all  my  dispaires, 
And  hastes  me  on  vnto  a  suddaine  death  ; 
Now  tempting  me,  to  drowne  my  selfe  in  teares, 
And  then  in  sighing  to  giue  vp  my  breath  : 
Thus  am  I  still  prouok'd  to  euery  euill 
By  this  good  wicked  spirit,  sweet  Angel  deuill." 

A  comparison  of  this  Sonnet  with  Shakespeare's  Sonnet 
144  can  scarcely  make  it  other  than  probable  that  the 
resemblance  is  not  accidental.  But  as  Sonnet  144  was 
contained  in  the  Passionate  Pilgrim  (1599),  it  might  seem 
possible  that  Drayton  had  seen  it  in  this  collection,  and 
that  he  imitated  it  later  in  the  same  year  in  the  Sonnet 
given  above.  We  should  not,  therefore,  have  made  much 

1  I  ought  perhaps  to  say  that  I  am  not  now  concerned  with  Drayton's 
Idea,  The  Shepheards  Garland,  Fashioned  in  Nine  Eglogs,  1593. 


40  Sbaftespeare's  Sonnets. 

advance  by  this  comparison  with  respect  to  the  chronology 
of  the  Sonnets.  But  there  are  other  similarities  with 
regard  to  which  an  explanation  such  as  that  just  given  is 
in  no  way  possible.  Take  for  example  lines  7-14  of  33  (as 
altered  in  1599):  these  must  be  compared  with  Shake- 
speare's 46th  and  47th  Sonnets,  which  did  not  make  their 
appearance  in  print  till  1609. 

"  To  Imagination.     Sonet  33. 
"  Whilst  yet  mine  eyes  doe  surfet  with  delight 

My  wofull  hart  imprison'd  in  my  brest, 

Wisheth  to  be  transform 'd  into  my  sight, 

That  it  like  those  in  looking  might  be  blest, 

But  while  mine  eyes  thus  greedily  doe  gaze, 

Finding  their  obiects  ouersoone  depart, 

These  now  the  others  happines  doe  praise, 

Wishing  themselues  that  they  were  now  my  hart ; 

That  eyes  had  hart,  or  that  the  hart  had  eyes, 

As  couetous  the  others  vse  to  haue  ;     • 

But  finding  reason  still  the  same  denies, 

This  to  each  other  mutually  they  craue, 
That  since  each  other  yet  they  cannot  bee, 
That  eyes  could  thinke,  or  that  my  hart  could  see." 

Drayton's  Sonnet  29,  To  the  Senses,  should  be  compared 
with  Shakespeare's  141.  But  to  quote  only  one  other 
Sonnet  from  Dray  ton  (43  in  1599  edition,  afterwards  44), 
in  this  may  be  found  resemblances  to  Shakespeare  which 
are  very  important : — 

"  Whilst  thus  my  penne  striues  to  eternize  thee, 
Age  rules  my  lines  with  wrinckles  in  my  face, 
Wherein  the  Map  of  all  my  misery, 
Is  modeld  out  the  world  of  my  disgrace, 
Whilst  in  dispight  of  tyrannizing  times, 
Medea  like  I  make  thee  young  againe, 
Proudly  thou  scorn 'st  my  world  outwearing  rimes, 
And  murther'st  vertue  with  thy  coy  disdaine  ; 
And  though  in  youth,  my  youth  vntimely  perrish 
To  keepe  thee  from  obliuion  and  the  graue, 
Ensuing  ages  yet  my  rimes  shall  cherrish 
Where  I  entomb'd  my  better  part  shall  saue  ; 

And  though  this  earthly  body  fade  and  die, 

My  name  shall  mount  vpon  eternitie." 


otbec  Contemporary  poets.  41 

We  notice,  first,  that  Drayton,  though  only  some  thirty-six 
years  of  age,  speaks  of  himself,  like  Shakespeare,  as  already 
aged.1  Age,  with  its  wrinkles,  is  ruling  lines  on  his  face — 
a  mode  of  expression  easy  to  be  paralleled  from  Shake- 
speare (cf.  2,  19,  62,  73).  Drayton,  however,  speaks  some- 
what inconsistently  of  his  youth  as  "  untimely  perishing."  2 
As  to  "  dispight  of  tyrannising  times  "  and  the  person  cele- 
brated in  his  verse  being  "  made  young  again,"  19  (Shaks.) 
may  be  compared  : — 

"  Yet  do  thy  worst,  old  Time,  despite  thy  wrong, 
My  love  shall  in  my  verse  ever  live  young." 

Like  Shakespeare  (55  aL),  Drayton  in  1599  anticipates 
eternal  renown ;  and  it  is  worth  noting  that,  in  the  previous 
year  (1598)  he  had  been  placed  among  the  poets  for  whom 
this  had  been  predicted  by  Meres,  Drayton's  name  standing 
next  before  Shakespeare's  (p.  19).  But  perhaps  most  re- 
markable of  all  is  what  Drayton  says  of  his  "  better  part  " 
being  preserved,  "  entomb'd  "  in  his  verse.  The  reader  of 
Shakespeare  may  at  once  recall  what  is  said  in  74  of  the 
poet's  friend  perusing,  after  Shakespeare's  death,  the  verses 
which  the  poet  had  dedicated  to  him  : — 

"  When  thou  re  vie  west  this,  thou  dost  review 
The  very  part  was  consecrate  to  thee. 
The  earth  can  have  but  earth,  which  is  his  due  ; 
My  spirit  is  thine,  the  better  part  of  me  ; " 


and  81, — 


;  When  you  entombed  in  men's  eyes  shall  lie, 
Your  monument  shall  be  my  gentle  verse 
Which  eyes  not  yet  created  shall  o'er-read. " 


The  evidence  is  not  yet  exhausted ;  but  enough  has  been 
said  to  show  the  probability  that,  before  th'e  issue  of  his 

1  A  fact  to  which,  if  I  recollect  rightly,  my  attention  was  directed  by 
Mr.  P.  Z.  Bound. 

2  Though  the  explanation  may  possibly  be  given  that  he  felt  himself  to 
be  "  ageing  "  prematurely. 


42  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets* 

Idea  in  1599,  Drayton  must  have  had  an  acquaintance  with 
some  portion  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets.  Such  acquaintance 
is  not  discernible  in  the  edition  of  1594;  and,  in  accor- 
dance with  what  has  been  previously  said,  this  fact  is  of 
great  importance  in  order  to  our  reaching  a  just  conclusion 
as  to  whether  Drayton  was  or  was  not  indebted  to  Shake- 
speare. As  several  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets  which  have 
been  mentioned  did  not  appear  in  print  till  1609,  it  follows 
that,  if  Drayton  had  seen  them  at  all,  he  must  have  seen 
them  in  manuscript.  A  circulation  in  this  form  is  pretty 
evidently  implied  in  what  Meres  says  of  Shakespeare's 
"  sugred  Sonnets  among  his  priuate  friends ;  "  and  we  may 
make  a  similar  inference  also  from  Jaggard's  getting  hold 
of  two  of  the  Sonnets  for  his  Passionate  Pilgrim}- 

But  if  Drayton  was  indebted  to  Shakespeare,  a  question 
of  some  importance  suggests  itself  as  to  how  far  this  fact 
is  in  accordance  with  chronological  conclusions  set  forth  in 
preceding  pages.  To  this  question  I  may  reply  that  I  can 
detect  no  allusion  to  the  Sonnets  100  to  126,  placed  above 
in  1 60 1.  The  allusions  and  analogies  are  concerned  only 
with  those  of  1598  and  I599-2  The  latest  Sonnet  with 
which  we  have  supposed  Drayton  to  have  been  acquainted 
is  the  8ist;  and  it  is  possible  that  this  Sonnet  may  have 
been  written  in  1598  (according  to  the  reckoning  of  the 
time).  But  there  are  apparently  no  indications  which 
would  enable  us  to  determine  this  point  with  precision.  It 
is  sufficient  if  we  regard  Drayton's  allusions  as  being  to 
Sonnets  of  1598  or  1599. 

How  Shakespeare  viewed  the  use  made  of  his  work  by 
Drayton  we  do  not  know;  but  it  may  be  supposed  not 
unlikely  that  he  regarded  it  with  magnanimous  indifference. 

1  The  circulation  of  works  in  MS.  in  Elizabethan  times  is  tolerably  well 
known,  but  the  following  example  from  Newman's  Dedication  to  Sidney's 
Astrophel  and  Stella  (1591)  is  apposite  : — "  Where  as  being  spred  abroade 
in  written  Coppies,  it  had  gathered  much  corruption  by  ill  Writers." 

2  Of  141.  mentioned  above,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  year. 


otber  Contemporary  poets.  43 


Perhaps  this  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  resem- 
blances did  not  disappear  in  later  editions  of  the  Idea.  On 
the  contrary,  it  would  rather  seem  that  further  sugges- 
tion was  subsequently  derived  from  the  same  source  ;  and 
Drayton,  moreover,  does  not  appear  to  have  been  deterred 
from  afterwards  borrowing  in  his  Nympltidia  from  the 
description  of  Queen  Mab  in  Romeo  and  Juliet,1  and,  in  his 
Barons'  Wars,  from  the  character  of  Brutus  as  described  by 
Antony  in  Julius  Ccesar.2  In  the  latter  case  this  occurred 
previously  to  the  publication  of  Julius  Ccesar  in  the  Folio 
of  1623.  It  is,  moreover,  remarkable  and  confirmatory  of 
the  view  just  given  that  already  in  1598  Drayton  was 
regarded  as  a  copier  or  imitator,  not  to  say  plagiarist. 
This  appears  from  the  following  lines  of  Edward  Guilpin  in 
his  Skialetheia  (Satyre  vi.  p.  64,  Grosart's  reprint)  :  — 

"  Drayton's  condemned  of  some  for  imitation, 
But  others  say  'twas  the  best  Poets  fashion." 

There  is  another  fact,  also,  with  regard  to  Drayton,  of  no 
small  importance  for  our  chronology.  Although,  as  above 
stated,  Idea,  with  its  quasi-  Shakespearian  insertions,  was 
added  to  England's  Heroicall  Epistles  in  1599,  Drayton  had 
in  1598  published  an  edition  of  the  Epistles  without  Idea. 
We  have  thus  grounds  for  thinking  that  Drayton  had  given 
his  Sonnets  their  Shakespearian  colouring  during  the 
interval.  And  this  view  is  entirely  in  accordance  with  the 
date  which  has  been  assigned  to  the  commencement  of 
Shakespeare's  Sonnets  and  to  the  composition  of  the  earlier 
portion. 

1  Chambers's  Cyclopcedia  of  English  Literature  (ed.  Carruthers),  vol.  i. 
p.  91. 

2  Collier's  Introduction  to  Poems  of  Drayton,  p.  xlviii. 


'  CHAPTER  VII. ' 
WILLIAM     HERBERT. 

THE  chronological  results  we  have  attained  place  us  in  a 
position  of  advantage  for  determining  the  question,  Who 
was  "Mr.  W.  H."  ?  The  only  answer,  of  any  probability 
on  other  grounds,  which  has  been  given  to  this  question 
identifies  Mr.  W.  H.  with  William  Herbert,  who  became 
Earl  of  Pembroke  on  the  death  of  his  father  in  the  January 
of  1 60 1  (according  to  our  reckoning).  To  William  Herbert, 
together  with  his  brother  Philip,  "the  most  noble  and 
incomparable  paire  of  brethren,"  was  dedicated  the  First 
Folio  edition  of  Shakespeare's  Plays  in  1623,  by  Shake- 
speare's friends  and  fellows,  Heminge  and  Condell.  The 
personal  acquaintance  with  Shakespeare  of  the  noblemen 
just  mentioned  is  clearly  implied  when  it  is  said  that  they 
had  " prosequnted "  both  the  Plays  "and  their  Authour 
liuing  with  so  much  f  auour. "  That  "  Mr.  W.  H. ' '  should  thus 
be  William  Herbert  is  a  suggestion  lying  so  ready  to  hand, 
that  it  is  almost  surprising  that  no  one  should  seem  to  have 
thought  of  it  before  the  days  of  Bright  (1819)  and  Boaden 

(1832). 

William  Herbert  was  born  on  April  8,  1580,  and  thus 
he  completed  his  eighteenth  year  in  1598.  It  was  in  the 
spring  of  the  year  just  named  that,  according  to  Rowland 
Whyte  (Sidney  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  43),  William  Herbert  was 
to  commence  residing  permanently  in  London.1  Here, 

1  "  My  Lord  Harbart  hath  with  much  adoe  brought  his  Father  to  con- 
sent that  he  may  Hue  at  London,  yet  not  before  the  next  Springe."  And 
about  a  week  later,  April  27,  1597,  Whyte  again  speaks  of  Herbert's  coming 
to  London  "  next  spring,"  that  is,  if  "  Leiden  "  is  a  misprint  for  "  London. " 


45 


however,  it  must  be  observed  that  a  fact  in  Herbert's  history 
of  great  importance  with  regard  to  the  Sonnets  was  dis- 
covered in  1884  by  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison.  The  fact  to 
which  I  allude  removes  pretty  completely  the  difficulty  with 
regard  to  Shakespeare's  urging  marriage  so  strongly  on  a 
youth  of  eighteen  (Sonnets  i  to  1 7).  From  letters  preserved 
in  the  Record  Office  it  appears  that  in  1597  the  parents 
of  William  Herbert  were  engaged  in  negotiations  for  his 
marriage  to  Bridget  Yere,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Oxford, 
and  granddaughter  of  the  great  Lord  Burleigh.  The  year 
1597,  it  will  be  observed,  was  the  year  preceding  that  in 
which  our  chronology  places  the  commencement  of  the 
Sonnets.  Both  the  Earl  and  Countess  of  Pembroke  wrote 
to  Lord  Burleigh  on  August  16,  1597,  expressing  their  satis- 
faction at  the  intended  match.  William  Herbert,  it  would 
seem,  had  had  an  agreeable  meeting  with  the  young  lady 
(a  damsel  of  thirteen) ;  and  the  Countess  finds  that  her  son's 
feelings  accord  with  her  own  wishes.1  She  hopes  the  affec- 
tion is  reciprocated.  A  fortnight  later  (September  3,  1597), 
it  appears,  from  a  letter  of  Lord  Pembroke's  to  Burleigh, 
that  two  chief  difficulties  had  arisen  :  first,  a  doubt  as  to 
whether  the  young  lady  would  be  bound  by  a  marriage  con- 
tracted at  so  early  an  age;  and,  secondly,  as  to  where  the 
young  lady  should  live  while  William  Herbert  was  travel- 
ling as  intended.2  William  Herbert  is,  however,  to  come 


1  She  says,  ' '  So  far  f oorth  I  find  my  sonns  best  lykeing  affection  and 
resolution  to  answere  my  desire  heerein  as  if  the  late  interview  have 
mutually  wrought  it  is  suffisient."    Her  husband,  in  his  letter  of  the  same 
date  (August  16),  says,  with  reference  to  the  matter,  "I  am  not  a  little 
glad  of  that  which  I  heare  ; "  from  which  it  would  seem  likely  that  the 
Countess  was  the  prime  mover  in  the  affair. 

2  Lord  Pembroke  writes  from  Wilton  at  the  date  named  :  "  My  good  L. 
My  servant  Massinger  hath  delivered  unto  me  yore  LPS  most  kinde  letters  ; 
and  further  acquainted  me  wth  such  matters  concerning  th'intended  mar- 
riage between  myne  eldest  sonne  and  the  lady  Brigett,  wch  it  pleased  yor 
LP  to  impart  vnto  him.     First,  that  yore  daughter  was  but  thirteen  yeares 
of  age  at  Ester  last,  &  that  yore  LP  therefore  rested  doubtfull  whether 

4 


46  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

up  to  town  at  the  beginning  of  Parliament  (Parliament 
met  in  October),  and  to  make  arrangements.  On  September 
8  the  Earl  of  Oxford,  the  father  of  the  young  lady,  expresses 
his  approval  of  the  match,  and  says  that  the  young  gentle- 
man has  good  parts,  and  has  been  well  brought  up.  He 
thinks  that  Lord  Pembroke,  on  account  of  his  state  of  health, 


a  marriage  would  binde  her  now  in  like  manner  as  it  did  my  sonne. 
Second,  whether  shee  should  in  the  time  of  my  sonnes  trauell  remayn  wth 
yore  LP  or  wth  my  wife.  Thirdly,  that  for  perfecting  of  conueyaunces 
between  vs  yore  LP  made  choice  of  Justice  Owen  to  ioine  wth  Baron  Ewens 
whom  I  had  named  for  my  selfe.  Lastly,  that  if  I  would  come  vp  to  the 
parlament,  you  conceaved  this  matter  might  then  be  concluded  with  the 
more  conveniency.  ffor  the  first :  I  haue  often  heard  it  from  Lawiers,  that 
after  a  woman  hath  atteyned  twelve  yeares  of  a[ge]  shee  is  by  law  enabled 
to  consent,  &  to  be  bound  by  marriage,  yf  t[his]  be  true  (as  yore  LP  may 
therin  be  soon  informed)  then  the  marriage  wth  yore  daughter  may  law- 
fully proceed  at  these  her  yeares  ;  and  shee  [therby]  shall  be  no  lesse  bound 
then  my  sonne,  yet  their  continuance  together  may  be  differred  in  respect 
of  their  yeares,  untill  yore  LP  shall  thinke  good,  as  I  willed  Massinger 
heertofore  to  let  you  vnderstand  that  for  preventing]  of  many  inconveni- 
ences I  preferred  a  marriage  before  a  contract ;  so  I  now  doe  (&  still  shall) 
remayne  of  the  same  mynde  vnless  yore  LP  shew  me  reason  t[o]  the  con- 
trary. For  the  second  ;  I  thinke  it  most  convenient  (yf  yore  LP  mislike  it 
not)  that  after  the  marriage  is  solemnized  &  my  sonne  gonne  to  travell, 
yore  daughter  should  remayne  wth  my  wife,  whose  care  of  h[er]  shall 
answere  the  nearness  whereby  she  shall  then  be  linked  vnto  her.  For  the 
third ;  I  doe  very  well  like  of  Justice  Owen  to  be  ioyned  wth  Baron 
Ewens ;  &  I  doubt  not  but  through  their  good  care  and  travell  all 
thinges  shall  be  concluded  to  our  contentmentes.  for  the  fouerth  ;  such 
is  the  present  state  of  my  body  that  I  cannot  come  to  this  parlament 
wthout  extreme  perrill  to  my  health,  as  Massinger  can  more  particularly 
informe  you.  And  that  your  LP  may  know  that  my  presence  for  this  priuat 
business  is  not  of  necessity  ;  I  first  assuer  you  that  I  will  make  a  iointure 
proportionable  to  that  wch  I  shall  finde  yore  LP  will  geeue  in  marriage  wth  yore 
daughter.  Secondly,  I  seeke  not  by  this  match  to  inrich  my  selfe  or  to 
advaunce  myne  younger  children,  for  what  soever  yore  LP  will  geeue  I  am 
contented  that  the  young  coople  presently  haue ;  yea  &  for  their  more 
honorable  maintenance,  I  will  increase  the  same  wth  as  great  an  yearly 
allowance  out  of  myne  owne  liuing,  as  (considering  myne  estate  &  course 
of  life)  I  may  conueniently  spare.  Thirdly,  vpon  hearing  from  yore  LP 
now  by  my  seruant,  I  will  so  instruct  &  authorize  Baron  Ew[ens]  (whom  I 
have  sent  for  to  come  vnto  me)  that  myne  absence  shall  be  no  hinderance  to 
the  matter.  Lastly,  my  sonne  him  selfe  at  the  beginning  of  the  parlament 


William  Iberbett.  47 


is  anxious  to  see  his  son  suitably  married.1  Why  the  match 
was  broken  off  does  not  appear.  Probably  William  Herbert 
backed  out  of  it  after  all.  This  view  accords  with  what  is 
said  in  Sonnet  40,  line  8,  of  Mr.  W.  H.'s  "refusing :" — 

"  By  wilful  taste  of  what  thyself  refusest." 

But,  whatever  view  may  be  taken  of  this  allusion,  with  the 
facts  just  adverted  to  before  us,  there  can  be  no  difficulty 
in  the  exhortations  of  Sonnets  i  to  17,  as  addressed  to  a 
youth  only  eighteen  years  old.  And  the  idea  that  the 
Countess,  William  Herbert's  mother,  had  something  to  do 
with  these  Sonnets  being  written  gains  increased  credibility 

shall  come  vp  both  to  attend  her  Mates  pleasure  for  his  intended  travell 
(whereunto  he  shall  accordingly  prepare  him  selfe)  and  also  to  performe 
what  by  yore  LP  and  me  shall  be  agreed  upon  for  his  purposed  marriage. 
This  is  all  I  can  yet  write  to  yre  LP  of  this  matter ;  yf  ther  is  anything 
you  further  desier  to  vndersta[nde]  I  will  satisfy  you  therin.  in  the  meane 
time,  good  my  L.  faill  not  t[o]  procure  me  licence  to  be  absent  from  the  par- 
lament  for  that  [I]  am  to  returne  into  Wales  to  attend  her  Mates  seruice 
there.  [My]  proxy  I  purpose  to  yore  LP  ;  yet  yf  it  please  you,  you  may 
te[ll]  her  Ma*y,  I  will  there  coriferre  it  where  she  shall  comaund  and  so 
wishing  to  yore  LP  and  to  my  selfe,  I  end.  At  Wilton  the  3  of  September 
1597.  Yore  LPS  most  faithfully  assured  PEMBROKE." 

I  have  given  this  letter  more  fully  on  account  of  its  special  importance 
with  respect  to  the  first  seventeen  Sonnets  ;  and  it  is  of  importance  also 
with  regard  to  other  particulars. 

1  Pembroke's  letter  appears  to  have  reached  Burleigh  on  September  6  ; 
it  was  then  transmitted  to  the  Earl  of  Oxford,  who  very  promptly  (Sep- 
tember 8)  replied.  He  says,  "  I  do  perseyue  how  bothe  my  lord  and  ladie 
doo  perseuer,  which  dothe  greatly  content  me.  .  .  .  My  Lord  of  Pembroke 
ys  a  man  syklye  and  therfore  yt  ys  to  be  gathered  he  desyrethe  in  hys 
lyf te  time  to  se  hys  sonne  bestowed  to  his  lekinge,  to  compas  wch  my  thinkes 
hys  offers  very  honorable,  hys  desyres  very  resonable.  Agayne  beinge 
agreable  to  youre  Lordships  fatherly  care  and  loue  to  my  daughter.  A 
thinge  wch  for  the  honor,  friendship,  and  lekinge  1  haue  to  the  mache 
very  agreable  to  me  so  that  all  partes  desyre  but  the  same  thynge.  I 
know  no  reason  to  delay  yt  but  according  to  there  desyres  to  accomplishe 
yt  wth  conuenient  speede  and  I  do  not  dout  but  youre  Lordship  and  my 
self  shall  receyue  great  comfort  therby.  for  the  ionge  gentelman  as  I 
vnderstand  hathe  been  well  brought  vp,  fayre  conditioned,  and  hathe  many 
good  partes  in  hym." 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  negotiation  had  proceeded  a  very  long  way. 


Sbafceepeare's  Sonnets, 


from  the  correspondence.1  Whether  William  Herbert  came 
up  to  London  in  the  October  of  1597,  or  whether,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  previous  arrangement,  he  began  to  reside 
in  town  in  the  spring  of  1598,  there  are  apparently  no 
adequate  grounds  for  deciding.  It  is  sufficient  for  our 
argument  if  the  spring  of  1598  was  the  time  when  he 
first  saw  Shakespeare.  In  accordance  with  what  has  been 
already  said,  he  would  then  be  eighteen,  an  age  entirely 
suitable  to  his  being  spoken  of  as  in  the  "  April  "  of  his 
life  (3,  line  10),  and  to  such  expressions  being  used  con- 
cerning him  as  those  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  first 
Sonnet  (lines  9  to  12),  "the  world's  fresh  ornament," 
"  herald  to  the  gaudy  spring"  "  thine  own  bud"  "tender 
churl."  On  coming  to  London,  Herbert  would  no  doubt 
live  at  Baynard's  Castle,  south  of  St.  Paul's,  and  on  the 
bank  of  the  Thames.  Now  Baynard's  Castle  was  very  near 
indeed  to  the  Blackfriars  Theatre,  and  there  is  at  least  a 
possibility  that  in  some  way  in  connection  with  this  theatre 
Herbert  might  have  become  acquainted  with  Shakespeare.2 
The  intervention  of  the  Countess  of  Pembroke  seems,  how- 
ever, more  probable,  especially  if  the  allusions  in  the  3rd 
Sonnet  are  considered,  allusions  agreeing  with  the  well- 
known  personal  beauty  of  the  Countess  :  — 

"  Thou  art  thy  mother's  glass,  and  she  in  thee 
Calls  back  the  lovely  April  of  her  prime." 


1  The  late  Mr.  Grant  White,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Sonnets  ( Works 
of  Shakespeare,  vol.  i.  p.  152,  ed.  1865),  savs  °f  *  to  17,  "There  seems  to 
be  no  imaginable  reason  for  seventeen  such  poetical  petitions.     But  that 
a  mother  should  be  thus  solicitous  is  not  strange,  or  that  she  should  long 
to  see  the  beautiful  children  of  her  own  beautiful  offspring.     The  desire 
for  grandchildren,  and  the  love  of  them,  seem  sometimes  even  stronger  than 
parental  yearning.     But  I  hazard  this  conjecture  with  little  confidence." 
But  the  documents  in  the  Record  Office,  quoted  just  before,  have  put  a 
new  complexion  on  this  matter,  i 

2  This  would  be  more  probable  just  at  this  time  than  shortly  afterwards, 
when  (as  it  would  seem)  the  Blackfriars  Theatre  was  leased  to  Evans  for 
the  performance  of  the  "Children  of  the  Chapel." 


MARY,    COUNTESS  OF   PEMBROKE. 


Tdillfam  fberbert.  49 


Anxious  that  her  son  should  marry,  and  the  trouble  she 
had  taken  in  1597  having  been,  as  we  have  seen,  resultless, 
she  may  in  consequence  have  suggested  to  Shakespeare  the 
writing  of  the  first  seventeen  Sonnets.  That  she  should 
extend  her  patronage  to  Shakespeare  is  likely  enough.  The 
sister  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  and  herself  a  lady  of  literary 
taste,  she  may  well  have  been  an  admirer  of  the  great 
genius  now  approaching  its  fullest  -maturity.1  Those  pro- 
clivities which  were  afterwards  to  manifest  themselves  so 
conspicuously  may  very  possibly  have  shown  themselves 
while  young  Herbert  was  still  in  the  country;  and  this 
may  account  for  the  difficulty  he  had  in  obtaining  permis- 
sion to  reside  in  London.  The  Countess  would  probably 
come  to  London  with  her  son ;  but,  having  regard  to  the  fact 
that  her  husband  the  Earl  was  suffering  from  serious  disease, 
it  may  very  well  have  occurred  that  he  remained  in  the 
country,  and  that  Shakespeare  was  not  brought  into  per- 
sonal contact  with  him.  In  his  letter  to  Lord  Burleigh 
from  Wilton,  September  3,  1597,  he  states  (supra,  p.  46) 
that  he  should  be  unable  to  attend  Parliament  without 
extreme  danger  to  his  health.  Thus,  in  Shakespeare's 
being  personally  unacquainted  with  Herbert's  father  some 
explanation  is  given  of  the  words  of  13,  "You  had  a 


1  Having  regard  to  the  relationship  of  the  Countess  and  her  son  to  Sir 
Philip  Sidney,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  accounting  for  such  allusions  to 
Sidney's  Arcadia  in  Sonnets  1-17,  as  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  has  pointed  out 
(Secret  Drama,  &c.,  and  edit.,  p.  36  seq.).  Such  quotations  or  allusions 
would  probably  be  regarded  as  complimentary.  Spenser's  lines  on  this 
distinguished  lady  may  be  given  :— 

' '  They  all  (quoth  he)  me  graced  goodly  well, 
That  all  I  praise  ;  but  in  the  highest  place, 
Urania,  sister  unto  Astrofell, 
In  whose  brave  mind  as  in  a  golden  coffer, 
All  heavenly  gifts  and  riches  locked  are  ; 
More  rich  than  pearls  of  Ind,  or  gold  of  Ophir, 
And  in  her  sex  more  wonderful  and  rare." 

— Colin  Clout's  Come  Home  Again. 
D 


50  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets, 

father ; "  and  it  certainly  becomes  more  easy  to  understand 
that  these  words  do  not  imply,  as  some  have  thought,  that 
the  father  of  the  person  addressed  was  dead.  This  sense 
would  be  here  tame  and  out  of  place.  It  is  safe  to  assert 
that  the  words  in  question  must  be  interpreted  in  accord- 
ance with  the  drift  and  scope  of  these  first  Sonnets.  The 
person  addressed  is  exhorted  to  do  as  his  father  did,  namely, 

beget  a  son  : — 

"  Dear  my  love,  you  know 
You  had  a  father ;  let  your  son  say  so." 

And  it  may  be  seen  on  reflection  that,  with  reference  to 
the  sense  intended,  it  would  have  been  less  suitable  for 
Shakespeare  to  write,  "  You  have  a  father ;  let  your  son  say 
so."  We  are  not  left,  however,  to  follow  merely  an  in- 
ference of  this  kind.  Shakespeare  has  used  elsewhere 
(Merry  Wives,  Act  iii.  sc.  4,  line  36)  a  strictly  analogous 
expression,  "  She's  coming ;  to  her,  coz :  0  boy,  tlwu  liadst 
a  father"  l  Shallow  thus  urges  Slender  to  woo  Anne  Page 
in  manly  fashion.  Slender,  however,  misunderstands  the 
meaning,  and  in  consequence  makes  himself  ridiculous  : — 
"  I  had  a  father,  Mistress  Anne ;  my  uncle  can  tell  you 
good  jests  of  him,"  &c.  But,  in  misunderstanding  the 
words  in  question,  he  gives  them  precisely  the  sense  some 
have  contended  for  in  the  Sonnet.  In  both  cases,  however, 
the  intention  is  to  exhort  to  manly  conduct,  though  with  an 
obvious  difference  of  detail. 

There  appear  to  be  no  letters  of  Rowland  Whyte's  to  tell 
us  what  William  Herbert  was  doing  in  the  year  1598.2 
According  to  our  chronology,  however,  it  was  in  all  pro- 


1  For  this  important  parallel  I  am  indebted  to  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison. 

3  According  to  a  letter  of  Tobie  Matthew's  of  September  15,  1598,  there 
was  then  some  talk  of  a  contemplated  marriage  between  William  Herbert 
and  Lady  Hatton,  who  must  have  been  considerably  older  than  he.  With 
regard  to  this  Mr.  Harrison  remarks,  "As  this  is  London  news,  William 
Herbert  was  presumably  there  at  that  time."  The  letter  is  in  the  Record 
Office. 


TOUtam  Iberbert.  51 


bability  during  this  year  that  he  was  concerned  in  the 
affair  to  which  the  4oth  and  other  Sonnets  relate.  Her- 
bert's part  therein  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  picture 
drawn  of  him  by  Lord  Clarendon  in  his  History  of  the 
Rebellion  (Book  i.  §  123): — "He  was  immoderately  given 
up  to  women.  But  therein  he  retained  such  a  power  and 
jurisdiction  over  his  very  appetite,  that  he  was  not  so  much 
transported  with  beauty  and  outward  allurements,  as  with 
those  advantages  of  the  mind  as  manifested  an  extraordinary 
wit,  and  spirit,  and  knowledge,  and  administered  great 
pleasure  in  the  conversation.  To  these  he  sacrificed  him- 
self, his  precious  time,  and  much  of  his  fortune."  What  is 
here  said  refers,  no  doubt,  wholly  or  chiefly  to  Herbert's 
more  mature  years,  but  his  being  fascinated  in  the  fair  sex 
by  other  endowments  rather  than  personal  attractions 
would  accord  completely  with  his  becoming  enamoured  of 
Shakespeare's  dark  mistress  (127  seq.),  if  what  Shakespeare 
himself  says  concerning  this  lady  is  to  be  regarded. 
Shakespeare  forgave  the  offence,  but  the  Sonnets  relating 
thereto,  and  especially  the  commencement  of  41  ("Those 
pretty  wrongs  that  liberty  commits,"  &c.),  convey  a  some- 
what unpleasant  impression.  One  would  rather  have  seen 
more  of  indignation,  and  somewhat  less  of  obsequious  com- 
pliance. Still  in  this  matter  the  character  of  the  lady, 
as  depicted  in  137  and  elsewhere,  would  naturally  have  no 
small  influence. 

Whyte's  letters  in  1599  give  several  notices  of  Herbert. 
In  August  there  would  seem  to  have  been  an  intention, 
whether  afterwards  fulfilled  or  not,  that  Herbert  should 
be  placed  at  the  head  of  two  hundred  horsemen,  "  to  attend 
her  Majesties  person."  And  at  this  time,  with  the  view, 
it  would  seem,  of  qualifying  himself  for  his  new  duties, 
he  was  "  s wagering  y*  among  the  Men  of  Warre,  and 
viewing  the  Maner  of  the  Musters."  During  the  next 
month,  September,  his  father,  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  be- 
came dangerously  ill,  and  Herbert  went  down  to  him  from 


52  Sbafcespeare'9  Sonnets* 

town  with  all  speed.  Whyte  says  that  Herbert,  after  his 
departure,  was  "  much  blamed  for  his  cold  and  weake 
Maner  of  pursuing  her  Majesties  fauour,  having  had  soe 
good  steps  to  lead  him  unto  it.  There  is  want  of  Spirit 
and  Courage  laid  to  his  charge,  and  that  he  is  a  melancholy 
young  man."  Whyte  seems  to  have  thought  that  Herbert 
might  prove  unfit  for  a  courtier,  and  in  consequence  might 
have  to  go  back  to  the  country.  Whether  Herbert's 
alleged  melancholy  proceeded  from  his  mind  being  pre- 
occupied with  other  matters,  and  what  those  matters  were, 
it  would  be  perhaps  rash  to  conjecture.  It  may  be  of 
some  importance,  however,  to  observe  that,  in  the  same 
letter  in  which  Whyte  speaks  of  Herbert's  uncourtier-like 
melancholy,  he  also  divulges  a  plan  he  had  formed  for 
bringing  about  a  marriage  between  Herbert  and  the  niece 
of  the  Lord  Admiral. 

Herbert's  father  soon  became,  for  a  time  at  least,  con- 
valescent. A  surgeon,  no  doubt  celebrated  at  the  time, 
had  gone  down  from  London  by  the  Queen's  order  or  per- 
mission, and  an  operation  was  successfully  performed.  At 
this  time  (September  19,  1599),  in  a  letter  to  the  Queen, 
preserved  in  the  Record  Office,  Herbert's  father  speaks  of 
his  son  in  terms  which  tend  to  show  that  too  much  weight 
should  not  be  given  to  the  rumours  about  Herbert's  melan- 
choly and  coldness  of  manner,  although  the  rumours  may 
have  been  not  without  some  grounds.  The  Earl  is  ex- 
ceedingly comforted  by  the  Queen's  gracious  opinion  of  his 
son,  which  in  Her  Majesty's  letters  to  him  not  long  since 
she  had  expressed,  and  with  his  son's  joyful  acknowledgments 
of  the  Queen's  favour.  On  October  6  Whyte  records  that 
Herbert  "  is  at  Court  and  much  bound  to  her  Majestie  for 
her  gracious  Fauor."  Again,  on  November  24,  "  My  Lord 
Harbert  is  exceedingly  beloued  at  Court  of  all  Men.  .  .  . 
He  goes  to  Ramsbury  to  see  his  Father  on  Wednesday  next." 
And  on  November  29,  using,  as  he  frequently  does,  ciphers 
to  represent  names,  he  writes,  "9000  [Lord  Herbert]  is 


William  Iberbert.  53 


highly  fauored  by  1500  [Queen],  for  at  his  departure  he  had 
access  vnto  her,  and  was  priuate  an  Houre ;  but  he  greatly 
wants  advise.  .  .  .  This  day  he  has  gone  to  see  2000  [his 
Father],  but  wilbe  heare  again  before  Christmas." 

According  to  our  chronology,  it  would  seem  likely  that 
about  this  time  Sonnets  90  to  96  were  written.  Identify- 
ing Herbert  with  the  friend  of  the  poet  to  whom  these 
Sonnets  were  addressed,  it  is  not  difficult  to  discern  one 
probable  cause  for  the  complaint  of  diminished  affection 
which  these  Sonnets  contain.  Herbert's  attendance  at 
Court  and  other  occupations  may  have  prevented  frequent 
personal  association  with  Shakespeare ;  and  thus  it  may 
have  seemed  to  Shakespeare  that  Herbert  wanted  to  leave 
him  (90),  and  steal  himself  away  (92),  and  thus  to  bring 
the  acquaintance  to  an  end.  Sonnet  91,  with  its  mention 
of  "high  birth"  and  ''wealth,"  " hounds,"  "hawks,"  and 
"horse,"  and  "garments  new-fangled  ill,"  is  entirely  in 
accordance  with  the  supposition  that  Shakespeare  has  in 
view  Herbert's  courtly  associations  and  employments.  But 
it  would  appear  that  there  must  have  been  also  at  this  time 
certain  particulars  in  Herbert's  character  and  conduct  de- 
serving of  grave  censure.  Shakespeare  compares  him  to 
"Eve's  apple"  (93),  and  in  95  and  96  speaks  out  pretty 
broadly  concerning  rumours  unfavourable  to  Herbert's 
moral  conduct  which  were  in  circulation.  With  respect  to 
these  rumours  the  reader  should  compare  Whyte's  state- 
ment that  "he  greatly  wants  advice;"  and,  notwithstanding 
Herbert's  advance  in  favour  at  Court,  it  is  quite  probable 
that  there  may  have  been  much  truth  in  the  rumours  in 
question.  It  is  Clarendon  who  records  Herbert's  great 
licentiousness,  who  also  asserts  that  he  "  was  the  most 
universally  beloved  and  esteemed  of  any  man  of  that  age." 

On  November  28,  1599,  Herbert  left  London  for  the 
country,  and  did  not  return  for  between  three  and  four 
months.  In  December,  according  to  Whyte,  he  became  ill 
with  an  ague,  and  about  the  middle  of  January,  when 


54  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

"  coming  up  towards  the  Court,"  he  had  a  severe  relapse, 
obliging  him  to  go  back.  Towards  the  end  of  the  month 
Herbert  writes  that  "he  hath  a  continuall  Paine  in  his 
Head,  and  finds  no  Manner  of  Ease,  but  by  taking  of 
Tobacco."  With  such  notices  as  we  have,  it  would  be  unwise 
to  connect  these  maladies  with  the  moral  aberrations  pre- 
viously adverted  to.  In  March,  however,  Herbert  again 
presented  himself  at  Court.  Writing  on  the  22nd  of  that 
month,  Whyte  says,  "  I  believe  he  will  prove  a  great  man 
in  Court." 

During  1600  Herbert  seems  to  have  been  very  much  his 
own  master.  At  his  solicitation  his  father's  presence  at 
Court  was  dispensed  with,  and  Lord  and  Lady  Pembroke 
arranged  to  stay  all  the  summer  at  Wilton.  On  May  26 
in  this  year,  Herbert,  accompanied  by  Sir  Charles  Danvers, 
went  by  water  "  almost  as  farre  as  Gravesend,"  to  see  Lady 
Rich  and  Lady  Southampton.  It  must  not  be  inferred 
from  this  visit  that  there  were  relations  of  an  amatory 
nature  between  Herbert  and  Lady  Rich,  nor  that  he  sym- 
pathised with  the  party  of  Essex,  even  though,  on  this 
occasion,  he  had  for  companion  Sir  Charles  Danvers,  who 
was  destined  to  lose  his  life  for  his  part  in  the  rebellion  of 
the  following  February. 

During  the  next  month,  on  June  16,  there  was  a  re- 
markable festivity  at  Blackfriars.  William  Herbert  was 
present,  as  also  was  a  lady  with  whom  we  shall  be  still 
further  concerned  in  the  sequel.  The  occasion  of  this 
festivity  was  the  marriage  of  Lord  Herbert  (son  of  the 
Earl  of  Worcester)  with  a  lady  of  the  Court,  Mrs.  Anne 
Russell.1  The  Queen  herself  was  there ;  and  having  come 
to  Blackfriars  by  water,  she  was  carried  from  the  waterside 
in  a  lectica  borne  by  six  knights.  The  bride  was  conducted 
to  church  by  the  nobleman  with  whom  we  are  now  more 


1  Of  course  in  Elizabethan  times  the  title  "  Mistress  "  did  not  indicate 
that  a  lady  had  been  previously  married. 


Wlliam  Iberbert.  55 


particularly  concerned,  William  Herbert  (son  of  Lord 
Pembroke)  and  Lord  Cobham.  The  Queen  supped  and 
passed  the  night  at  Lord  Cobham's.  After  supper  there 
was  a  masque  in  which  eight  ladies  splendidly  arrayed  were 
to  perform  a  new  and  unusual  dance.  The  names  of  the 
ladies  are  given  as  "  My  Lady  Doritye,  Mrs.  Fitton,  Mrs. 
Carey,  Mrs.  Onslow,  Mrs.  Southwell,  Mrs.  Bes  Russell, 
Mrs.  Darcy  and  my  Lady  Blanche  Somerset."  "Their 
Attire,"  Whyte  says,  "  is  this  :  Each  hath  a  skirt  of  Cloth 
of  Siluer,  a  Mantell  of  Carnacion  Taffete  cast  vnder  the 
Arme,  and  their  Haire  loose  about  their  Shoulders,  curiously 
knotted  and  interlaced."  The  leader  in  this  performance 
was  Mrs.  Fitton  or  Fytton,  the  lady  particularly  alluded  to 
above.  "And  delicate  it  was  to  see  8  Ladies  soe  pretily 
and  richly  attired."  "  Mrs.  Fitton  went  to  the  Queen,  and 
woed  her  to  dawnce ;  her  Majestie  asked  what  she  was ; 
Affection,  she  said.  Affection  !  said  the  Queen ;  Affection  is 
false.1  Yet  her  Majestie  rose  and  dawnced." 

Two  months  later  (August  16)  Whyte  says  of  William 
Herbert,  "My  Lord  Harbert  is  very  well.  I  now  heare 
litle  of  that  Matter  intended  by  600  [Earl  of  Nottingham] 
towards  hym  ;  only  I  observe  he  makes  very  much  of  hym ; 
but  I  dont  find  any  disposition  at  all  in  this  gallant  young 
lord  to  marry."  A  few  days  before  he  had  said,  "  My  Lord 
Harbert  is  very  well  thought  of,  and  keepes  company 
with  the  best  and  grauest  in  Court,  and  is  well  thought 
of  amongst  them."  Subsequently  in  this  year  (September 
and  October)  Herbert  was  training  himself  in  various 
accomplishments,  and  athletic  and  martial  exercises.  He 
has  resolved  "this  Yeare  to  shew  hymself  a  Man  at 
Arms." 


1  Chamberlain,  writing  to  Carleton,  says  that  the  masque  was  "in 
name  of  the  Muses  that  came  to  seeke  one  of  their  fellowes."  The  adroit 
substitution  of  "Affection"  for  the  name  of  a  Muse  was  probably  unex- 
pected. 


56  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

On  January  19  of  the  following  year,  1601  (according  to 
our  reckoning),  Herbert's  father  died.  In  a  letter  in  the 
Record  Office  from  John  Chamberlain  to  Dudley  Carleton 
on  February  3,  1601,  the  event  is  thus  alluded  to : — "The 
earle  of  Pembroke  died  a  fortnight  since,  leaving  his  lady 
as  bare  as  he  could,  and  bestowing  all  on  the  young  Lord, 
even  to  her  Jewells."  1  William  Herbert  was  now,  there- 
fore, Earl  of  Pembroke.  The  next  notice  we  have  of  this 
young  nobleman  refers  also  to  the  lady  mentioned  before  as 
taking  a  prominent  part  in  the  festivities  at  Blackfriars. 
It  is  to  be  found  in  the  postscript  of  a  letter  of  February  5, 
written  from  the  Court  by  Sir  Robert  Cecil  to  Sir  George 
Carew.  The  matter  recorded  is  to  a  considerable  extent  in 
harmony  with  particulars  previously  adverted  to  : — "  We 
have  no  news  but  that  there  is  a  misfortune  befallen  Mis- 
tress Fitton,  for  she  is  proved  with  child,  and  the  Earl  of 
Penbrooke,  being  examined,  confesseth  a  fact,  but  utterly 
renounceth  all  marriage.  I  fear  they  will  both  dwell  in 
the  Tower  awhile,  for  the  Queen  hath  vowed  to  send  them 
thither  "  (Calendar  of  Carew  MSS.).2  Reserving  some  com- 
ment on  this  extract,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  say  here  that 
the  facts  recorded  are  in  harmony  with  indications  of 
Herbert's  character  previously  adverted  to.  Then  we  come 
to  a  letter  (in  the  Record  Office)  from  Tobie  Matthew 
to  Dudley  Carleton  on  March  25,  which  contains  the  follow- 
ing remarkable,  and,  at  first  sight,  enigmatical  passage  : — 
"The  Earle  of  Pembrooke  is  committed  to  the  Fleet :  his 


1  Chamberlain's  Letters  during  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  edited  for 
the  Camden  Society  by  S.  Williams,  p.  100. 

2  In  a  letter  of  January  26  from  Sir  John  Stanhope  to  Sir  G.  Carew 
there  is  a  reference  relating  possibly  to  the  state  of  things  before  the 
examination  of  Pembroke :  "  Of  the  persecution  [which]  is  like  to  befall 
the  poor  maid's  chamber  in  Court,  and  of  Fytton's  afflictions,  and  lastly 
her  commitment  to  my  Lady  Hawkyns,  of  the  discouragement  thereby  of 
the  rest,  though  it  be  now  out  of  your  element  to  think  of,  yet  I  doubt 
not  but  that  some  friend  doth  more  particularly  advertise  you." 


Iberbcrt  57 


cause  is  deliuered  of  a  boy  who  is  dead."  1  The  words 
"  his  cause  "  seem  to  lay  the  blame  on  the  lady,  as  if  she 
had  been  the  wooer.  They  are  thus  in  harmony  with  what 
is  to  be  found  in  another  document  in  the  Record  Office  : — 
"  One  Mr3  Martin,  who  dwelt  at  the  Chopinge  Knife  near 
Ludgate,  tould  me  y*  she  hath  seene  preists  mary  gentle- 
women at  the  Courte,  in  that  tyme  when  that  Mres  Fytton 
was  in  great  fauour,  and  one  of  her  Maiesties  maids  of 
honor,  and  duringe  the  time  y*  the  Earle  of  Pembrooke 
fauord  her  she  would  put  off  her  head  tire  and  tucke  vpp 
her  clothes  and  take  a  large  white  cloake,  and  marche  as 
though  she  had  bene  a  man  to  meete  the  said  Earle  out  of 
the  Courte."  The  document  from  which  this  extract  is  taken 
is  concerned  with  the  proceedings  of  the  Jesuits.  It  has 
neither  date  nor  signature.  It  contains,  however,  an  allusion 
to  the  preparations  for  the  attack  on  Geneva,  which  occurred 
in  December  1602.  The  approximate  date  of  this  docu- 
ment may  therefore  be  given  as  October  1602,,  a  date  which 
has  been  marked  upon  it  in  pencil.  The  reader  should 
notice  how  the  "  great  favour  "  Mrs.  Fytton  is  here  described 
as  enjoying  agrees  with  the  prominent  position  she  occupied 
in  the  festivities  at  Blackfriars. 

We  have  now  no  difficulty  in  accounting  for  Lord  Pem- 
broke's imprisonment  in  the  Fleet.  The  offence  was  far 
too  grievous  to  be  overlooked  by  such  a  monarch  as  Eliza- 
beth. Mrs.  Fytton  had  been  not  only  a  maid  of  honour, 
but,  in  accordance  with  the  indications  given,  would  seem 
to  have  been  on  specially  intimate  relations  with  the  Queen. 
Lord  Pembroke,  however,  did  not  remain  very  long  in 
prison.  There  is  in  the  British  Museum  (Lansd.  MS.  88, 


1  When  this  allusion  was  first  discovered  the  words  "his  cause "  seemed 
difficult ;  but  it  was  rightly  suggested  by  Mr.  A.  H.  Grant  that  the  words 
would  mean  the  woman  who  was  the  cause  of  Lord  Pembroke's  getting  into 
trouble.  The  truth  of  this  suggestion  was  seen  when  the  allusions  in  other 
documents  were  discovered. 


58  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

leaf  23)  a  letter  from  him  to  Mr.  (or  Sir)  Michael  Hicks, 
asking  that  the  payment  of  a  loan  may  be  deferred  : — 

"  Sr,  If  you  will  renue  the  bonds  for  that  mony,  that 
will  be  shortly  due  vnto  you  from  me,  for  six  months 
longer,  you  shall  haue  yor  interest  truly  payd  at  the  day, 
&  the  same  security  wch  you  haue  allready,  &  besides  you 
shall  doe  me  a  very  extraordinarie  kindnes  wch  I  will  striue 
to  deserue  by  ever  being  yr  most  affectionate  frend, 

"  PEMBKOKE. 
"WHITEHALL  this  Sth  of  May." 

The  date  is  important.  The  letter  must  have  been 
written  about  the  time  which  evidence  previously  adduced 
indicates  as  that  when  the  reconciliation  between  Shake- 
speare and  his  friend  took  place,  and  Sonnets  100  to  126 
were  written.  The  imprisonment,  its  causes,  and  events 
connected  therewith,  together  with  the  change  which  ensued 
in  Pembroke's  position  with  regard  to  the  Queen  and 
Court,  might  well  cause  his  thoughts  to  revert  to  Shake- 
speare. And  there  may  possibly  have  been,  in  connection 
with  Mrs.  Fitton,  another  cause  for  Pembroke's  attention 
being  recalled  to  Shakespeare  (see  next  chapter).  On  the 
other  hand,  Shakespeare's  sympathy  may  very  well  have 
been  awakened  by  the  imprisonment  and  disgrace  of  his 
noble  friend,  which  was  probably  enough  the  common  talk 
of  the  town.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  (in  the  Sonnets) 
any  allusion  to  Pembroke's  imprisonment.  This,  we  may 
well  believe,  was  far  too  delicate  and  disagreeable  a  sub- 
ject to  be  even  hinted  at,  a  view  which  is  in  accordance  with 
allusions  to  be  found  in  letters  from  Pembroke  in  Lord 
Salisbury's  collection  at  Hatfield. 

Pembroke's  letter  to  Hicks,  already  cited,  was  dated  from 
Whitehall ;  and  it  appears  that  he  held,  or  was  intended 
to  hold,  some  office  in  connection  with  the  Parliament  which 
met  in  the  autumn  of  1601,  though  what  the  nature  of  the 


TOUUfam  Iberbert  59 


office  was,  if  other  than  supporting  the  Queen's  policy  in 
Parliament,  does  not  appear.  In  one  of  the  Hatfield  letters 
from  Pembroke  to  Sir  R.  Cecil  (bearing  merely  the  date 
1601),  he  asks  for  help  in  obtaining  the  Queen's  permission 
to  travel.  When  the  Parliament  is  ended  she  will  have  no 
employment  for  him.  Therefore  he  believes  the  suit  will 
not  be  difficult.  He  hopes  she  will  not  so  far  extend  her 
anger  to  him  as  to  confine  him  to  a  country  now  become 
"  hateful  to*  him  of  all  others."  After  a  statement  like  this 
we  need  not  wonder  that  Shakespeare  should  make  no 
allusion  to  the  imprisonment  and  connected  circumstances. 
Pembroke  appears  to  have  been  very  anxious  indeed  to 
obtain  permission  to  go  abroad,  and  the  Queen  seems  to 
have  given  permission  and  then  revoked  it.  In  a  letter  of 
June  19  to  Cecil  from  Baynard's  Castle  (Lord  Salisbury's 
Coll.)  Pembroke  says  : — 

"  SIR, — the  imposition  you  layd  upon  me  for  my  ward- 
ship, though  it  be  a  very  heavy  burthen  on  my  weake 
meanes,  hauing  so  many  greate  payments  to  make  besides, 
yet  since  it  is  her  Matie  pleasure,  I  will  not  dispute  it, 
but  wholly  submitt  my  self  to  her  sacred  will.  I  think  my 
self  much  fauoured  by  her  Matie  that  it  would  pleas  her  to 
giue  me  leaue  to  goe  abroad  to  follow  mine  owne  busines." 

We  may  thus  see  a  probable  reason  for  the  payment  to 
Hicks  being  deferred ;  and  what  he  says  of  "  the  imposition 
for  my  wardship"  receives  an  explanation  from  the  fact 
that,  his  father  dying  before  he  had  attained  his  majority, 
he  had  been  for  about  three  months  a  ward  of  the  Crown. 
Under  the  special  circumstances  the  fine  imposed  was  very 
probably  heavier  than  usual.  There  are,  however,  in  this 
letter  some  other  particulars  of  greater  interest,  including  an 
evident  allusion  to  the  recent  imprisonment  in  the  Fleet : — 

"I  cannot  forbeare  telling  of  you  that  yet  I  endure  a 
grieuous  Imprisonment,  &  so  (though  not  in  the  world's 
misjudging  opinion)  yet  in  myself,  I  feel  still  the  same  or  a 


60  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

WOTS  punishment,  for  doe  you  account  him  a  freeman  that 
is  restrained  from  coming  where  he  most  desires  to  be,  & 
debar'd  from  enjoying  that  comfort  in  respect  of  which  all 
other  earthly  joys  seeme  miseries,  though  he  have  a  whole 
world  els  to  walk  in  ?  In  this  vile  case  am  I,  whose 
miserable  fortune  it  is,  to  be  banish'd  from  the  sight  of  her, 
in  whose  fauor  the  ballance  consisted  of  my  misery  or 
happines,  and  whose  Incomparable  beauty  was  the  onely 
sonne  of  my  little  world,  that  alone  had  power  to  give  it 
life  and  heate.  Now  judge  you  whether  this  be  a  bondage 
or  no  :  for  mine  owne  part,  I  protest  I  think  my  fortune  as 
slauish  as  any  mans  that  lives  fettered  in  a  galley.  You 
haue  sayd  you  loued  me,  &  I  have  often  found  it ;  but  a 
greater  testimony  you  can  neuer  show  of  it  then  to  vse  your 
best  means  to  ridd  me  out  of  this  hell,  &  then  shall  I 
account  you  the  restorer  of  that  which  was  farre  dearer 
vnto  me  than  my  life." 

A  comparison  of  this  last  extract  with  several  of  the 
Sonnets  brings  into  view  some  analogies  which  are  at  least 
curious.  If  this  resemblance  stood  alone,  not  much  perhaps 
could  be  made  of  the  likeness  between  33,  line  9,  "  Even  so 
my  sun  one  early  morn  did  shine,"  and  "  the  onely  sonne  of 
my  little  world  "  in  the  letter.  It  must  be  observed,  how- 
ever, that  the  Queen  is  Pembroke's  sun ;  for  there  appears 
no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  Elizabeth  is  intended  by 
the  lady  of  "  incomparable  beauty."1  In  the  Sonnet  it  is 
Pembroke  himself  (or  rather  Herbert)  who  is  Shakespeare's 
sun.  But,  passing  over  one  or  two  other  resemblances, 
the  most  remarkable  analogy  and  correspondence  is  with 
Sonnets  57  and  58.  These  Sonnets  refer  to  a  brief  interval 
of  separation  and  estrangement  between  the  poet  and  his 
friend.  The  latter  is  addressed  in  57  as  "my  sovereign," 
probably  with  something  of  irony.  With  reference  to  the 

1  So  both  Mr.  Harrison  and  Dr.  Furnivali,  and  the  conclusion  appears 
irresistible. 


tberbert.  61 


interval,  the  poet  speaks  of  "the  bitterness  of  absence," 
and  describes  himself  as  "like  a  sad  slave."  Instead  of 
"the  bitterness  of  absence"  of  57,  there  is  in  58  the  re- 
markable line,  "  Th'imprison'd  absence  of  your  liberty." 
The  only  probable  interpretation  of  this  line  appears  to  be, 
that  Shakespeare  speaks  of  himself  as  "  imprison'd "  on 
account  of  the  absence  of  his  friend  (who  exercises  his 
"liberty"  to  go  where  he  pleases),  and  the  irrepressible 
and  unsatisfied  longing  which  the  poet  feels.  In  the 
thirteenth  line  (58)  the  poet  describes  the  waiting  for  his 
absent  friend  as  "  hell."  Now,  turning  again  to  the  latter, 
we  find  that,  as  Shakespeare  was  debarred  from  the  society 
of  his  friend,  called  in  57  his  "sovereign,"  so  Pembroke  is 
"debar'd  from  enjoying  that  comfort"  which  consisted 
in  the  presence  and  favour  of  the  lady  of  "  incomparable 
beauty,"  the  Queen ;  and  this  again  constituted  for  Pem- 
broke "  a  very  grievous  imprisonment,"  like  the  "  im- 
prisoned absence"  of  58.  And,  as  the  poet  is  a  "slave," 
surrendered  to  the  will  of  another,  so,  in  the  letter,  Pem- 
broke protests  that  he  thinks  his  "fortune  as  slauish  as 
any  mans  that  lives  fettered  in  a  galley."  Then  both 
Shakespeare  and  Pembroke  describe  themselves  as  being  in 
"hell."  These  various  resemblances  are  remarkable  and 
striking,  and  as  the  letter  was  written  from  London,  the 
possibility  may  suggest  itself  that,  if  it  was  written  by  the 
hand  of  Pembroke,  it  was  really  composed  by  Shakespeare. 
But  it  is  perhaps  more  likely  that  Pembroke  borrowed 
ideas  from  the  Sonnets  which  he  had  received  from  Shake- 
speare. The  words  "my  sovereign"  in  57,  and  some  coin- 
cidence of  circumstances,  may  have  caused  him  to  revert 
especially  to  57  and  58.1  Taken  together  with  other  evi- 
dence, the  resemblances  just  adverted  to  are  possibly  of 


1  Professor  Dowden  has  shown  (Academy,  January  30,  1886)  that  lan- 
guage in  part  closely  similar  to  that  of  Pembroke's  letter  and  the  Sonnets 
is  to  be  found  in  Chaucer  : — "  Arcite,  in  Chaucer's  tale,  has  seen  the  bright 


62  Sbafcespeare'e  Sonnets. 

some  importance,  as  tending  to  show  that  the  Sonnets  cited 
were  written  previously  to  the  date  of  the  letter,  June  19, 
1 60 1.  There  is  another  letter  of  Pembroke's,  to  be  noticed 
directly  (p.  64),  written  between  two  and  three  months  later, 
displaying  a  good  deal  of  literary  power;  but  it  is  very 
noteworthy  that  its  poetical  imagery  cannot  be  regarded 
as  borrowed  from  Shakespeare's  Sonnets.  This  letter, 
however,  was  not  written  from  London,  but  from  Rams- 
bury  in  Wiltshire.  Possibly  the  difference  of  imagery  may 
be  connected  with  the  difference  of  place  and  associations. 

A  letter  of  Pembroke's  in  August  (Hatfield  MSS.)  is 
interesting  as  showing  that  those  who,  according  to  Whyte, 
had  regarded  him  as  "a  melancholy  young  man"  (supra, 
p.  52),  had  probably  some  grounds  for  their  opinion,  though 
this  feature  in  his  character  may  have  helped  to  conciliate 
for  him  the  esteem  and  sympathy  of  the  poet  who  could 
write  such  Sonnets  as  66,  "  Tir'd  with  all  these,  for  restful 
death  I  cry,"  or  71,  "No  longer  mourn  for  me  when  I  am 
dead."  The  letter  referred  to  was  written  to  Cecil,  and  it 
bears  the  date  "13  August,  1601  :  " — 

"  Sr  I  have  not  yet  bene  a  day  in  the  country  &  I  am 
as  weary  of  it  as  if  I  had  been  prisoner  there  seaven  yere. 
I  see  I  shall  never  turn  good  Justice  of  peace,  th  erf  ore 
I  pray  if  the  Queene  determine  to  continue  my  banishment, 
&  preferr  sweet  Sr  Edward  before  me,  that  you  will  assist 
me  wth  yor  best  meanes  to  gett  leaue  to  goe  into  some  other 
land,  that  the  change  of  the  Climate  may  purge  me  of 

Emily  from  his  prison  window ;  he  is  enfranchised,  but  exiled  from  her 
sight,  while  Palamon  remains  in  the  cell.  Says  Arcite,  the  freeman  : — 

'  Alas  the  day  that  I  was  born  ! 
Now  is  my  prisonn  werse  than  biforn; 
Now  is  me  schape  eternally  to  dwelle 
Nought  in  purgatorie,  but  in  helle.' " 

An  argument  from  parallel  expressions  and  similar  imagery  is,  of  course, 
one  of  probability,  of  which  it  is  for  the  reader  to  judge. 


"GCUIltam  Iberbert.  63 


Melancholie,  for  els  I  shall  neuer  be  fitt  for  any  ciuill 
society.  I  have  written  sorrowfully  complaining  to  my 
Lo.  Admirall  that  he  will  be  pleased  to  moue  my  sute 
againe,  since  there  is  no  apparence  of  grace.  The  pattent 
of  the  forrest  of  Deane  could  not  so  speedily  be  gotten 
before  my  going  out  of  towne,  but  very  shortly  Arthur 
Massinger1  shall  attend  you  wth  it,  though  there  be  so 
much  part  under  generall  terms  that  I  feare  me  it  will 
seeme  slight,  let  me  still  haue  the  happines  to  be  beloued 
by  you  &  I  will  constantly  remaine, 

"  Yor  most  affectionate  frend 
to  be  comaunded 

"  PEMBROKE." 

The  patent  of  the  Forest  of  Dean,  conferring,  no  doubt, 
privileges  and  emoluments  of  greater  or  less  value,  was  to 
be  returned,  it  would  seem,  to  the  Queen,  in  order  that  the 
grant  made  to  the  late  Earl  of  Pembroke  might  be,  at  least 
as  his  son  and  successor  hoped,  renewed  by  her  to  himself. 
But  this  hope  was  not  to  be  realised.  Pembroke  was  to 
feel  still  more  what  a  woman,  and  that  woman  a  queen, 
can  do  when  piqued  and  offended.  Whatever  view  she 
may  have  taken  in  other  respects,  Pembroke  would  certainly 
appear  to  have  thought  that  one  element  of  her  indigna- 
tion was  the  spretce  injuria  formce.  It  is,  no  doubt,  on  this 
account  that,  in  the  letter  of  June  19,  evidently  intended 
to  reach  her  eye,  she  is  described  as  a  "lady  of  incompar- 
able beauty,"  notwithstanding  her  near  approach  to  the 
threescore  and  ten.  The  patent  of  the  Forest  of  Dean 
was,  however,  as  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison  has  discovered, 


1  This  would  certainly  appear  to  have  been  the  father  of  the  poet  Philip 
Massinger,  who  also  has  been  regarded  as  a  protege  of  the  Herberts.  On 
this  view,  however,  it  is,  as  has  been  remarked,  somewhat  surprising  that, 
in  dedicating  in  1624  his  play  The  Bondman  to  Philip,  Earl  of  Mont- 
gomery (brother  of  the  writer  of  the  above  letter),  he  says,  "I  could  never 
arrive  at  the  happiness  to  be  made  known  to  your  lordship." 


64  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

destined  for  Pembroke's  rival,  Sir  Edward  "Winter,  the 
.  "  sweet  Sir  Edward  "  mentioned  above.  This  appears  in  the 
following  extract  from  the  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domes- 
tic Series,  1603—1610;  and  the  entry  shows,  moreover,  that 
eventually  Pembroke  obtained  from  James  the  much-desired 
patent:  the  date  given  is  January  10,  1608: — "  Grant  to 
the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  on  surrender  of  Sir  Edw.  Winter, 
of  the  office  of  Constable  of  the  Castle  of  St.  Briavels,  in 
the  forest  of  Dean,  Gloucestershire,  with  the  keeping  of  the 
deer  and  woods  there."  It  is  probable,  from  the  language 
employed  in  Pembroke's  letter,  that  Winter  was  a  youth 
endowed  with  personal  beauty,  like  Pembroke  himself. 
The  fondness  of  the  Queen  for  these  young  men  makes  still 
more  conspicuous  a  feature  of  her  character  tolerably  well 
known. 

From  a  longer,  and  perhaps,  in  some  respects,  more 
important  letter,  written  about  three  weeks  later  from 
Pembroke  to  Cecil  (Hatfield  MSS.),  it  appears  that  the 
grant  to  Sir  Edward  Winter  had  been  already  made,  or  at 
least  resolved  on  : — 

"  Sr  what  loue  &  thankfullnes  you  could  haue  expected 
from  me  if  I  had  preuayled,  the  same  to  to  (sic)  the  best  of 
my  power  you  shall  find  me  ready  ready  (sic)  to  performe 
on  all  occasions  now  I  am  disgraced.  Her  Matie,  as  I  heard 
when  she  promised  Mr  Mumpersons  a  park,  after  my  Lo: 
yor  fathers  death,  when  she  knew  how  nearely  it  con- 
cerned my  Lo:  Burleigh  in  honor,  recalled  her  promise, 
preserued  my  Lo:  honor  &  gratiously  satisfy ed  her  seruant 
an  other  way.  If  it  had  pleased  her  Matie  as  gratiously  to 
haue  conceaved,  in  this  matter  of  the  forrest  of  Deane,  of 
that  poore  reputation  I  was  desirous  to  preserue,  the  main- 
tenance whereof  might  haue  enabled  to  doe  her  Matie  more 
honor  &  seruice  than  now  I  am  able  to  performe,  I  should 
haue  bene  happy  &  Sr  Edward  might  an  other  way  as  well 
haue  bene  satisfy  ed.  But  since  her  Matie  hath  in  her  wise- 


William  Derbert  65 


dome  thought  fitt  to  lay  this  disgrace  upon  me :  I  accuse 
nothing  but  mine  owne  unworthines  wch  since  I  so  plainly 
read  in  mine  owne  fortunes  I  will  alter  my  hopes,  and  teach 
them  to  propose  vrito  them  selvs  no  other  ends  then  such 
as  they  shall  be  sure  to  receaue  no  disgrace  in.  The  haulk 
that  is  once  canuast  will  the  next  time  take  heede  of  the 
nett,  and  shall  I  that  was  borne  a  man  &  capable  of  reason 
committ  greater  folly  than  byrds  that  haue  nought  but 
sence  to  direct  them  ?  If  her  Matie  make  this  the  return- 
ing way  for  her  fauor,  though  it  be  like  the  way  of  saluation 
narrow  &  crooked,  yet  my  hopes  dare  not  trauell  thorough 
the  ruggednes  of  it,  for  they  stumble  so  often  that  before 
they  come  half  way  they  despaire  of  passing  such  difficulties. 
There  be  some  things  yet  in  her  Matie3  hands  to  dispose  of, 
wch  if  it  would  pleas  her  to  grace  me  wth  might  happely  in 
some  measure,  patch  vp  my  disgraces  in  the  opinion  of  the 
world.  But  I  haue  vowed  neuer  againe  to  be  a  sutor,  since 
in  my  first  sute  I  haue  receaued  such  a  blow.  I  should  be 
infinitely  bound  to  you  if  you  could  but  gett  a  promise  that 
I  should  haue  leaue  to  trauell  after  the  Parliament :  it 
would  make  me  more  able  to  doe  her  Matie  &  my  cuntry 
seruice  &  lessen  if  not  wipe  out  the  memory  of  my  dis- 
graces but  whatsoeuer  shall  become  of  me,  I  will  euer  wish 
you  all  happines  &  continue 

"  Yor  most  affectionate  frend 

to  be  comaunded 

PEMBROKE. 
"  KAMSBUEY,  the  second 
of  September." 

The  repetition  of  the  words  "to"  and  "ready"  at  the 
commencement  of  the  letter  is  remarkable ;  and  it  may  be 
reasonably  accounted  for  as  caused  by  nervous  agitation 
consequent  on  receiving  intelligence  that  the  patent  had 
been  transferred  to  Winter.  In  accordance  with  what  was 
said  above,  this  letter  does  not  recall  the  language  and 


66  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

imagery  of  the  Sonnets.  The  letter  gives  evidence  of  Pem- 
broke's imaginative  power.  Buffeted  by  slights,  disgraces, 
and  disappointments,  he  is  like  the  newly-captured  hawk 
which  has  been  "canuast."  This  "canvassing"  appears  to 
describe  the  shaking  of  the  bird  in  a  canvas  bag  or  sheet, 
in  order  to  subdue  it  by  terror  into  obedience.1  Then  the 
seeming  way  of  return  to  the  Queen's  favour  is  like  the 
narrow  and  crooked  way  of  salvation,  but  so  intolerably 
rough  and  rugged,  that,  stumbling  again  and  again,  Pem- 
broke despairs  of  ever  reaching  the  goal.  The  request  for 
permission  to  travel  is  again  urged,  but  still  without  success. 
To  the  Shakespeare  student  the  letter  is  especially  inter- 
esting as  tending  to  show  that  William  Herbert  was  not 
wanting  in  such  intellectual  endowments  as  might  render 
him  not  quite  unworthy  of  the  high  honour  of  friendship 
with  Shakespeare. 

The  facts  which  have  been  set  forth  aid  materially  towards 
explaining  the  definite  close  to  which  in  126  Shakespeare 
brings  the  series  of  Sonnets  addressed  to  his  friend.  There 
was  a  break  in  the  course  of  Pembroke's  life.  If  the  Queen's 
favour  could  not  be  regained,  he  desired  strongly  to  go 
abroad.  The  request  for  permission  to  travel  was  urged 
again  and  again.  In  expectation  of  absence  and  separation 
for  an  indefinite  period,  Shakespeare  might  very  well  con- 
sider it  suitable  to  bring  the  series  of  Sonnets  to  a  conclu- 
sion. And  here  again  our  chronology,  which  places  Sonnets 
100  to  126  in  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  1601,  is  entirely 
in  accordance  with  the  facts. 

Pembroke's  strong  desire  to  go  abroad  in  order  to  wipe 
off  or  lessen  his  "disgraces  in  the  opinion  of  the  world" 
may  very  possibly  have  influenced  the  Queen  in  what  seems 
to  have  been  the  final  determination  of  her  resentful  mind 

1  Cotgrave  gives  as  signification  of  "  canvassed,"  berne",  forbatu.  "  For- 
batu,"  again,  is  represented  by  canuased,  or  beaten  thoroughly ;  swinged 
out  of  doors.  Among  the  meanings  of  "  berne" "  are  canuased,  or  tossed  in 


TiCltllfam  Iberbert  67 


that  he  should  be  banished  from  Court  and  "  keep  house  in 
the  country."  With  this  determination  and  the  facts  pre- 
viously mentioned  in  view,  we  need  have  no  difficulty  in 
understanding  the  lines  of  John  Davies  of  Hereford,  written 
on  the  accession  of  James  : — 

"  Pembrooke,  to  Court  (to  which  thou  wert  made  strange) 
Goe,  doe  thine  homage  to  thy  Soueraigne, 
Weepe,  and  reioyce,  for  this  sadd-ioyful  Change  ; 
Then  weepe  for  ioy,  thou  needst  not  tears  to  faine 
Sith  late  thine  Eies  did  naught  els  entertaine. " l 

Pembroke's  relations  with  Shakespeare,  if  interrupted 
during  the  closing  period  of  Elizabeth's  life,  were  probably 
resumed  after  the  accession  of  James.  In  this  particular 
the  words  employed  in  the  Dedication  of  the  First  Folio 
(1623)  scarcely  leave  room  for  doubt: — "But  since  your 
LL.  have  beene  pleas'd  to  thinke  these  trifles  some  thing 
heretofore ;  and  have  prosequuted  both  them,  and  their 
Authour  liuing  with  so  much  f auour ;  we  hope  that  (they 
out-liuing  him,  and  he  not  hauing  the  fate,  common  with 
some,  to  be  exequutor  to  his  owne  writings)  you  will  use 
the  like  indulgence  toward  them,  you  haue  done  vnto  their 
parent." 

The  question  may  suggest  itself  whether  the  "  favour " 
of  Pembroke  and  his  brother  took  so  practical  a  form  as  to 
contribute  to  the  worldly  prosperity  which  Shakespeare 
enjoyed  in  his  later  years.  In  accordance  with  the  ideas 
of  our  own  age,  it  has  been  too  customary  to  ascribe  this 
prosperity  mainly  or  exclusively  to  commercial  or  pro- 
fessional success  in  connection  with  the  theatre.  There  is, 
however,  a  well-known  tradition  recorded  by  Howe,  and 
alleged  to  have  been  derived  from  Davenant,  to  the  effect 
that  Lord  Southampton  "  gave  him  a  thousand  pounds  to 
go  through  with  a  purchase  which  he  heard  he  had  a  mind 
to."  The  time  when  this  tradition  was  recorded  by  Howe 

1  Microcosmos,  Preface,  in  vol.  i.  of  Dr.  Grosart's  edition. 


68  Sbafcespeare'6  Sonnets, 

was  too  distant  from  the  alleged  fact  for  us  to  allow  the 
record  to  pass  without  scrutiny.  In  its  origin  it  may  have 
been  a  mere  inference  from  the  dedications  to  the  Venus 
and  Adonis  and  Lucrece.  Or,  if  the  tradition  have  any 
truth  in  it,  most  likely  Southampton  has  become,  to  a  great 
extent,  confused  with  Pembroke,  so  that  the  latter  was 
really  the  bountiful  donor.  With  regard  to  his  friend  of 
the  Sonnets,  Shakespeare  speaks  of  that  friend's  "  dear 
purchas'd  right"  (117),  and  he  says  also,  in  53,  that  his 
bounty  was  "like  the  foizon  of  the  year."  Then  as  to 
Shakespeare's  having  a  mind  to  a  purchase,  it  should  be 
remembered  that  his  principal  purchases  or  investments 
were  made  after  the  dates  of  the  first  series  of  Sonnets. 
Moreover,  both  Clarendon  and  Antony  a  Wood  speak  of 
Pembroke's  liberality.  Clarendon  says  of  him  : — "  As  his 
conversation  was  most  with  men  of  the  most  pregnant  parts 
and  understanding,  so  towards  any  such,  who  needed  sup- 
port or  encouragement,  though  unknown,  if  fairly  recom- 
mended to  him,  he  was  very  liberal"  (Bk.  I.  §  122).  And 
Antony  a  Wood  says  in  the  AthencB  Oxonienses : — "  He  was 
not  only  a  great  favourer  of  learned  and  ingenious  men, 
but  was  himself  learned,  and  endowed  to  admiration  with  a 
poetical  genie,  as  by  those  amorous  and  not  inelegant  Aires 
and  poems  of  his  composition  doth  evidently  appear ;  some 
of  which  had  musical  notes  set  to  them  by  Henry  Lawes." 
The  poetical  tendency  thus  spoken  of  is  obviously  a 
matter  of  considerable  importance  with  regard  to  the 
friendship  with  Shakespeare.  It  must  be  added  that,  in 
the  year  1660,  was  published  a  small  volume  of  poems 
ascribed  to  Pembroke  and  Sir  Benjamin  Ruddier.  The 
volume  was  edited  by  John  Donne,  who,  however,  ad- 
mitted that  some  poems,  not  written  by  either  of  the 
writers  named  on  the  title,  may  have  surreptitiously  got 
in.  Hallam  has  asserted  (Lit.  of  Europe,  Part  III.  chap.  v. 
56)  that  the  poems  in  this  volume  furnish  no  illustration  of 
the  Sonnets.  This  statement,  however  well  founded  with 


"UHfllfam  Ibcrbert  69 


regard  to  most  of  these  poems,  can  scarcely  be  admitted 
with  respect  to  at  least  one,  for  whose  genuineness  there  is 
twofold  evidence.  Not  only  is  it  marked  P.  (Pembroke) 
in  the  volume,  but  it  appears  also,  with  some  important 
differences,  and  with  Pembroke's  name,  in  the  Browne  MS. 
in  the  British  Museum  (Lansd.  MS.  777,  f.  73),  a  MS. 
which  bears  the  date  1650,  that  is,  twenty  years  after 
Pembroke's  death;  but  the  poem  may  have  been  tran- 
scribed in  the  MS.  at  an  earlier  date.  The  original  form 
of  the  poem  is  probably  represented  in  the  MS.  : — 

"  Soules  ioye,  when  I  am  gone, 
And  you  alone, 
Which  cannot  be, 

Since  I  must  leaue  my  selfe  with  thee, 
And  carry  thee  with  me  ; l 

* '  Yet  when  vnto  our  Eyes 
Absence  denyes 
Each  others  sight 
And  makes  to  vs  a  constant  night 
When  others  change  to  light ; 

"  0  giue  no  waye  to  grief  e, 
But  let  beliefe 
Of  mutuall  loue 

This  wonder  to  the  vulgar  proue, 
Our  bodies,  not  we,  moue. 

"  Let  not  thy  wit  beweepe 
Wounds  but  sense  deepe 
For  while  we  misse, 
By  distance,  our  lipp-ioyning  blisse, 
Even  then  our  soules  shall  kisse. 

"  Fooles  haue  no  meanes  to  meete 
But  by  their  feete  ; 
Why  should  our  Claye 
Ouer  our  Spiritts  so  much  swaye, 
To  tye  vs  to  that  waye." 

1  Cf.  Ant.  and  Cle.,  Act.  i.  so.  3,  11.  102-104:— 

' '  Our  separation  so  abides  and  flies, 
That  thou,  residing  here,  go'st  yet  with  me, 
And  I,  hence  fleeting,  here  remain  with  thee." 


70  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

"  Soules  ioye "  of  the  first  line  occurs  also,  it  may  be  ob- 
served, in  Sidney's  Astrophil  and  Stella  (48).  But  when  in 
the  first  stanza  Pembroke  tells  his  lady-love  that,  while 
absent,  he  must  still  bear  her  with  him,  and  leave  himself 
with  her,  one  is  easily  reminded  of  the  exchange  of  hearts  of 
which  Shakespeare  speaks  in  22  and  in  62,  lines  13,  14  : — 

"  Tis  thee  (myself)  that  for  myself  I  praise, 
Painting  my  age  with  beauty  of  thy  days." 

Then,  as  in  the  Sonnets  (43,  line  13)  Shakespeare  says  that 
all  days  are  "  nights  to  see  "  till  he  sees  his  friend,  so  in 
the  poem  Pembroke  speaks  of  absence  as  making  "a  constant 
night,"  while  other  nights  "change  to  light."  Then,  as  to 
the  kissing  of  souls,  and  of  lovers  finding  a  way  to  meet 
other  than  "  by  their  feet,"  it  is  easy  to  see  a  resemblance 
to  those  meetings  by  night  of  which  Shakespeare  speaks 
in  27  : — 

"  For  then  my  thoughts  (from  far  where  I  abide) 
Intend  a  zealous  pilgrimage  to  thee, 
And  keep  my  drooping  eyelids  open  wide, 
Looking  on  darkness  which  the  blind  do  see ; 
Save  that  my  soul's  imaginary  sight  ] 
Presents  thy  shadow  to  my  sightless  view, 
Which,  like  a  jewel  hung  in  ghastly  night, 
Makes  black  night  beauteous,  and  her  old  face  new. " 

Similarities  such  as  these  must  be  taken  in  conjunction 
with  other  evidence  which  has  been  adduced.  They  are  cer- 
tainly worthy  of  consideration,  even  if  it  be  objected  that  they 
may  be  found  elsewhere  either  wholly  or  in  part.  At  least 
they  may  suffice  to  set  aside  the  assertion  of  Hallam  with 
regard  to  Pembroke's  Poems  and  Shakespeare's  Sonnets. 

With  regard  to  the  personal  beauty  of  William  Herbert, 
such  portraits  as  we  possess  would  scarcely  justify  those 
exceedingly  warm  eulogies  in  which  Shakespeare  indulged. 
But  these  portraits,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  represent  Her- 
bert in  mature  life,  of  the  age  probably  of  forty  or  more, 
when  the  beauty  of  youth  would  have  passed  away.  We 
should  remember  the  prediction  of  Shakespeare  himself : — 


"Militant  tberbert  71 


"  When  forty  winters  shall  besiege  thy  brow, 
And  dig  deep  trenches  in  thy  beauty's  field, 
Thy  youth's  proud  livery,  so  gaz'd  on  now, 
Will  be  a  tatter'd  weed,  of  small  worth  held  "  (2). 

William  Herbert's  mother  was  certainly  beautiful;  and 
it  is  probable  enough  that  this  beauty  would  be  inherited 
by  her  son  : — 

"  Thou  art  thy  mother's  glass,  and  she  in  thee 
Calls  back  the  lovely  April  of  her  prime." 

It  should  also  be  noticed  that,  with  regard  to  Philip, 
William  Herbert's  brother,  Clarendon  speaks  of  the  influ- 
ence exercised  by  his  "  comeliness  of  person  "in  "  drawing 
the  King's  eyes  towards  him  with  affection"  (Bk.  i.  127). 
The  allusion  is,  of  course,  to  King  James.  Francis  Osborne, 
also,  in  his  Memoires  on  the  Reigns  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and 
King  James,  speaks  of  Philip  as  "a  man  caressed  by  King 
James  for  his  handsome  face,  which  kept  him  not  long 
company."  There  need  not,  thus,  be  any  difficulty  in 
admitting  the  probability  that  William  Herbert  was  as  a 
youth  exceedingly  handsome,  though,  under  any  circum- 
stances, the  poetical  and  complimentary  character  of  the 
Sonnets  would  have  to  be  borne  in  mind. 

The  social  position  of  William  Herbert  and  the  high 
rank  of  his  family  would  suit  well  the  allusions  to  "  so  fair 
a  house  "  in  13,  to  his  "  birth  "  and  "  wealth  "  in  37,  and  to 
the  great  difference  between  the  station  of  the  poet  and 
that  of  his  friend ;  a  difference  preventing  public  recogni- 
tion of  the  acquaintance  : — 

"  I  may  not  ever-more  acknowledge  thee, 
Lest  my  bewailed  guilt  should  do  thee  shame, 
Nor  thou  with  public  kindness  honour  me, 
Unless  thou  take  that  honour  from  thy  name  "  (36). 

The  amiability  of  Shakespeare's  friend  is  not  only  expressly 
stated,  but  is  implied  also  in  the  poet's  deep  love.  Of 
Pembroke,  Clarendon  asserts  that  he  "  was  the  most  univer- 
sally beloved  and  esteemed  of  any  man  of  that  age." 


72  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

Pembroke's  licentiousness  has  been  already  alluded  to ; 
and  this  feature  of  his  character  is  entirely  in  accordance 
with  the  facts  of  the  Sonnets.  It  has  been  said  that, 
supposing  the  Sonnets  to  relate  to  actual  facts  with  which 
Pembroke  was  concerned,  he  would  have  felt  strong  repug- 
nance to  such  publication  of  his  early  transgressions  as  that 
made  in  1609  in  the  Sonnets.  But  it  may  be  answered, 
that  the  Sonnets  had  been  already,  to  a  greater  or  less 
extent,  diffused  in  manuscript.  Pembroke's  character, 
moreover,  was  probably  too  well  known  to  allow  of  his 
feeling  very  anxious  about  loss  of  reputation  on  the  ground 
alleged.  There  was,  however,  some  slight  concealment 
afforded  by  the  designation  Mr.  W.  H.,  seeing  that  he  had 
now  been  for  some  eight  years  Earl  of  Pembroke.  The 
designation  of  a  nobleman  by  his  family  name  rather  than 
his  title  cannot  be  looked  upon  as  unprecedented ; 1  and,  in 
addition  to  what  has  been  just  said,  it  may  be  observed  that 
there  was  a  special  propriety  in  such  designation  in  this 
case,  as  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  Sonnets  relate  to 
the  commencement  of  the  acquaintance  with  Shakespeare, 
and  to  a  period  considerably  antecedent  to  William  Her- 
bert's succession  to  the  title. 

A  much  smaller  amount  of  evidence  than  that  which  has 
been  adduced  would  raise  a  probability  that  William  Her- 
bert was  the  favoured  friend  of  Shakespeare.  But  if,  keep- 
ing always  in  view  the  Dedication  of  1623,  the  reader  takes 
into  account  the  multitude  of  accordant  particulars  which 
have  been  indicated,  he  can  scarcely  avoid  the  conclusion 
that  probability  has  become  changed  into  certainty. 

1  Professor  Minto  refers,  very  appropriately,  to  the  fact  that  Lord  Buck- 
hurst  is  designated  in  England's  Parnassus  (1600)  as  M.  Sackville.  This 
designation,  indeed,  with  slight  change  in  the  termination,  occurs  again 
and  again,  although  Thomas  Sackville  had  been  Baron  Buckhurst  for  a 
considerably  long-er  time  than  William  Herbert  had  been  Earl  of  Pembroke, 
when  the  Sonnets  were  issued  in  1609.  Moreover,  if  some  slight  disguise 
was  intended,  epithets  of  honour,  suitable  only  to  a  nobleman,  could  not 
be  added  to  the  "Mr.  W.  H."  of  the  Dedication. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

THE   DARK   LADY. 

As  the  first  series  of  Sonnets  (i  to  126)  is  mainly  occupied 
with  a  young  male  friend  of  Shakespeare's,  and  with  the 
relations  subsisting  between  this  friend  and  the  poet,  so  the 
second  series  (127  to  152)  is  chiefly  concerned  with  a  certain 
dark  lady,  between  whom  and  Shakespeare  there  was  evi- 
dently a  very  close  intimacy.  This  lady  was  a  brunette  of 
strongly  marked  type,  destitute  of  the  characteristics  of 
beauty  most  highly  valued  in  Shakespeare's  time.  The 
poet  could  note  in  her  "  a  thousand  errors  :  " — 

"  My  mistress'  eyes  are  nothing  like  the  sun  ; 
Coral  is  far  more  red  than  her  lips'  red  : 
If  snow  be  white,  why  then  her  breasts  are  dun  ; 
If  hairs  be  wires,  black  wires  grow  on  her  head. 
I  have  seen  roses  damask'd,  red  and  white, 
But  no  such  roses  see  I  in  her  cheeks. " 

She  had  not  even — so  it  would  seem — the  charm  of  a  soft 
and  melodious  voice  : — 

"  I  love  to  hear  her  speak, — yet  well  I  know 
That  music  hath  a  far  more  pleasing  sound  "  (130). 

She  was,  moreover,  of  blemished  character.  She  could  not 
be  satisfied  with  the  attentions  of  the  poet,  though  she 
professed  fidelity  (137,  138,  152).  Yet  to  Shakespeare  her 
looks  were  "pretty  looks"  (139);  and  he  could  disregard 
even  the  blackness  of  her  deeds  (131).  Though  she  was 
abhorred  by  others  (150),  her  attraction  was  to  him  so  irre- 


74  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

sistible  as  to  overpower  both  his  eyes  and  his  reason.  He 
became  mad  with  love  : — 

"  My  thoughts  and  my  discourse  as  mad  men's  are 
At  random  from  the  truth  vainly  express'd  ; 
For  I  have  sworn  thee  fair,  and  thought  thee  bright, 
Who  art  as  black  as  hell,  as  dark  as  night "  (147). 

What,  then,  was  the  cause  of  her  thus  dominating  over 
Shakespeare's  soul  ?  He  himself  asks  the  question  : — 

"0,  from  what  power  hast  thou  this  powerful  might, 
With  insufficiency  my  heart  to  sway  ? " 

' '  Whence  hast  thou  this  becoming  of  things  ill  ?  "  ( 150). 

Some  answer  is  afforded  by  the  repeated  mention  of  the 
lady's  raven-black,  quick-glancing  eyes  (127,  139).  Shake- 
speare loved  those  eyes  : — 

"  Thine  eyes  I  love,  and  they,  as  pitying  me, 
Knowing  thy  heart  torments  me  with  disdain  ; 
Have  put  on  black,  and  loving  mourners  be, 
Looking  with  pretty  ruth  upon  my  pain. 
And  truly  not  the  morning  sun  of  heaven 
Better  becomes  the  gray  cheeks  of  the  east, 
Nor  that  full  star  that  ushers  in  the  even, 
Doth  half  that  glory  to  the  sober  west, 
As  those  two  mourning  eyes  become  thy  face  "  (132). 

Then,  again,  Shakespeare  evidently  loved  music;  and  she 
was  skilled  in  touching  the  virginal.  He  was  spell-bound 
as  he  listened  to  "  the  wiry  concord,"  and  saw  the  "  jacks  " 
dance  and  leap,  swayed  by  her  gentle  fingers  (128).  She 
was  a  woman  of  quick  wit,  and  she  had  full  command  of 
her  powers.  She  could  woo  without  causing  disgust,  or  so 
use  disdain  as  to  quicken  desire.  Thus,  such  was  her  tact 
and  "  warrantise  of  skill"  (150),  that  she  knew  well,  not 
only  how  to  ensnare,  but  how  to  retain  the  prize  she  had 
won.  Probably  to  such  endowments  she  added  superior 
social  rank.  This  may  be  implied  in  her  skill  as  a  player 
on  the  virginal.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  such  an  accom- 
plishment, in  the  time  of  Elizabeth,  would  be  so  common 


S)arfc  Xafcg,  75 


as  the  pianoforte-playing  of  our  own  days.  A  conclusion 
similar  to  that  drawn  from  her  musical  skill  may  be  inferred 
also  from  her  soft  and  tender  hands  (128).  And  it  is  in 
accordance  with  other  indications  that  Shakespeare  speaks 
of  her  as  his  "  triumphant  prize  "  and  himself  as  "  proud  of 
this  pride"  (151). 

Here,  however,  the  question  may  suggest  itself,  Is  it 
possible  to  identify  the  dark  lady  of  the  Sonnets  with  any 
person  otherwise  known  ?  Identifying  Shakespeare's  friend 
Mr.  W.  H.  with  William  Herbert,  we  must  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  William  Herbert  had  amatory  relations 
with  the  dark  lady.  Contemporary  notices  already  cited 
show  that  he  had  amatory  relations  with  Mrs.  Mary  Fitton. 
This  fact  may  make  it  not  incredible  that  the  one  is  to  be 
identified  with  the  other.  There  is  certainly  a  remarkable 
similarity  of  characteristics.  In  both  we  may  see  strong 
passions  conjoined  with  an  imperious,  masterful  will.  The 
dark  lady  of  the  Sonnets  has  been  compared  with  Cleopatra, 
Thus  Professor  Dowden : — "  May  we  dare  to  conjecture 
that  Cleopatra,  queen, and  courtesan,  black  from  *  Phoebus' 
amorous  pinches,'  a  '  lass  unparalleled,'  has  some  kinship 
through  the  imagination  with  the  dark  lady  of  the  virgi- 
nal?" And  the  queenly,  commanding  qualities  of  Mrs. 
Fitton  are  not  to  be  mistaken.  Her  character,  in  its 
"strength,"  (150,  line  7)  resembles  that  of  her  royal 
mistress,  who  declared,  "  I  have  the  heart  of  a  king,  and  of 
a  king  of  England  too."  She  could,  as  we  learn  from  Mrs. 
Martin  (supi'a,  p.  57),  tuck  up  her  clothes,  take  off  her 
head-dress,  and,  attired  in  a  large  white  cloak,  march  off 
"  as  though  she  had  been  a  man,"  to  meet  the  Earl  of  Pem- 
broke outside  the  Court.  It  is  in  accordance  with  Mrs. 
Martin's  description  that  Mrs.  Fitton  takes  the  lead  in  the 
masque  and  dance  at  Blackfriars,  and  that  she  it  is  who 
asks  Elizabeth  to  dance,  telling  the  Queen  that  her  name  is 
"  Affection."  That  a  lady  endowed  with  characteristics  such 
as  those  of  Mrs.  Fitton  should  become  notorious  is  what 


76  Sbafcespeare'6  Sonnets. 

we  might  expect;  and  this  notoriety  is  probably  implied 
in  the  designation  "used  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Martin's 
testimony,  "that  Mrs.  Fytton."  It  seems  certainly  also 
implied  in  Tobie  Matthew's  description  of  her  as  "  his 
cause,"  that  is,  the  cause  of  Pembroke's  getting  into  trouble 
(supra,  p.  57),  without  any  further  indication  of  the  person 
intended.  This  description,  "his  cause,"  is  entirely  in 
accordance  with  what  is  said  in  the  Sonnets  concerning  the 
dark  lady's  conduct  to  both  the  poet  and  his  young  friend. 
With  regard  to  the  latter,  she  is  described  as  "wooing" 
him  (41,  144),  and  as  "running  after  him."  "So  run'st 
thou  after  that  which  flies  from  thee  "  (143,  line  9).  And 
Shakespeare  tells  the  dark  lady  that  it  would  be  unwise  for 
her  to  say  anything  about  his  "  amiss  "  lest  he  should  be 
tempted  to  show  that  her  "  sweet  self  "  was  guilty  of  his 
"faults,"  and  that  she  had  betrayed  him  into  sin  (151). 
Shakespeare's  "amiss"  and  his  being  "forsworn"  (152) 
resulted,  we  may  presume,  from  his  having  already  a  wife, 
who  was  living  probably  at  Stratford-on-Avon. 

We  are  not  able  to  connect  Mrs.  Fitton  personally  with 
Shakespeare  by  proof  as  direct  as  that  which,  in  the  case  of 
Herbert,  is  furnished  by  the  Dedication  of  the  First  Folio. 
The  Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison,  however,  some  time  ago  called 
attention  to  evidence  which  brings  Mrs.  Fitton  into  con- 
nection with  a  member  of  Shakespeare's  company,  that  is, 
the  Lord  Chamberlain's  company,  leaving  it  to  be  easily 
inferred  that  she  must  have  been  acquainted  with  the 
members  of  the  company  generally,  and  especially  with 
such  as  were  more  prominent.1  In  1600  William  Kemp, 
the  clown  in  the  company,  dedicated  his  Nine  daies  wonder 
to  "  Mistris  Anne  Fitton,  Mayde  of  Honour  to  most  sacred 
Mayde,  Royal  Queene  Elizabeth."  The  book  gives  an 
account  of  a  journey  which  Kemp  had  performed,  morris- 
dancing,  from  London  to  Norwich.  As  Dyce  maintained, 

1  Academy,  July  5,  1884. 


77 


when  he  edited  Kemp's  book  for  the  Camden  Society,  Mrs. 
Fitton's  Christian  name  was  given  erroneously  as  "  Anne." 
The  error  may  have  originated  from  Kemp  not  being  well 
acquainted  with  Mrs.  Fitton's  Christian  name.  Perhaps, 
however,  it  is  more  probable  that  he  wrote  "  Marie,"  a 
name  which  might  be  so  written  as  to  be  easily  mistaken 
for  "Anne."  But,  however  this  maybe,  Elizabeth  certainly 
had  no  maid  of  honour  Anne  Fitton  in  1599  or  1600.  It 
follows  that  the  person  intended  by  Kemp  was  the  Mrs. 
Mary  Fitton  with  whom  we  are  at  present  concerned ;  and  a 
good  deal  of  light  is  thus  thrown  on  her  character.  That 
one  of  the  Queen's  maids  of  honour  should  be  chosen  as  the 
patroness  of  a  publication  of  so  comparatively  frivolous  a 
character  as  this  of  Kemp's  might  well  seem  surprising. 
But  facts  already  adduced  make  this  much  less  wonderful. 
Kemp,  moreover,  adopts  a  style  of  address  which  under 
ordinary  circumstances  might  seem  most  unsuitable  in 
writing  publicly  to  a  distinguished  lady  of  the  Court.  "  In 
the  waine,"  he  says,  "  of  my  little  wit  I  am  forst  to  desire 
your  protection  else  every  Ballad-singer  will  proclaime  me 
bankrupt  of  honesty."  Afterwards  he  gives  as  one  of  the 
objects  he  had  in  view  in  the  publication,  "  To  shew  my 
duety  to  your  honourable  selfe,  whose  fauours  (among  other 
bountifull  friends)  make  me  (dispight  this  sad  world)  iudge 
my  hert  Corke  and  my  heeles  feathers,  so  that  me  thinkes 
I  could  fly  to  Rome  (at  least  hop  to  Rome,  as  the  olde 
Prouerb  is)  with  a  Morter  on  my  head."  These  facts  are 
interesting  and  important,  and,  even  taken  alone,  they  would 
go  far  towards  removing  the  difficulty  which  might  other- 
wise be  felt  about  Shakespeare's  forming  a  connection  with  a 
lady  of  so  high  rank  as  one  of  the  Queen's  maids  of  honour. 
An  objection,  however,  to  identifying  Mrs.  Fitton  with 
the  lady  of  the  Sonnets  has  been  drawn  from  this  very 
dedication  of  Kemp's.1  In  addressing  so  very  dark  a  lady 

1  Saturday  Review,  April  17,  1886,  p.  545. 


78  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

as  the  lady  of  the  Sonnets  evidently  was,  would  Kemp 
have  dared  to  speak  so  disparagingly  as  he  does  of  "a 
Blackamoore " ? — "But,  in  a  word,  your  poore  seruant  offers 
the  truth  of  his  progresse  and  profit  to  your  honourable 
view;  receive  it,  I  beseech  you,  such  as  it  is,  rude  and 
plaine ;  for  I  know  your  pure  iudgment  lookes  as  soone  to 
see  beauty  in  a  Blackamoore,  or  heare  smooth  speach  from 
a  Stammerer,  as  to  finde  any  thing  but  blunt  mirth  in  a 
Morrice  dauncer,  especially  such  a  one  as  Will  Kemp,  that 
hath  spent  his  life  in  mad  ligges  and  merry  iestes."  In 
reply  to  the  objection  just  mentioned,  it  must  be  observed 
that  though  the  lady  of  the  Sonnets  is  spoken  of  as  "  black  " 
in  contrast  to  Elizabethan  fairness,  yet  it  is  by  no  means 
implied  that  her  skin  was  like  that  of  a  negro.  No  :  she 
was  clearly  a  brunette:  her  complexion  was  "dun"  (130, 
line  3) — a  very  different  thing  indeed.  Then  Kemp's 
allusion  is  not  merely,  or  perhaps  mainly,  to  the  colour  of 
a  negro  or  "  blackamoor."  Probably  he  was  thinking  more 
of  the  features  and  modelling  of  the  face  of  a  negro,  with 
their  usual  unsightliness,  at  least  from  our  point  of  view. 
But,  in  any  case,  the  disparity  would  be  so  great  that 
Kemp's  allusion  can  present  no  insuperable  difficulty  in 
the  way  of  the  identification. 

What  has  just  been  said  about  Kemp  and  his  dedication 
may  easily  suggest  that,  on  Shakespeare's  company  per- 
forming at  Court,  Mrs.  Fitton  may  have  become  interested 
in  Shakespeare,  either  as  the  author  of  the  play  or  other- 
wise, and  so  have  introduced  herself  to  him.  A  woman 
such  as  she  was  would  scarcely  find  much  difficulty  about 
the  introduction.  This  hypothesis  agrees  well  with  what 
is  said  in  1 5 1  about  the  dark  lady  being  the  cause  of  Shake- 
speare's fault.  And  then,  with  respect  to  Shakespeare's 
performing  before  the  ladies  of  the  Court,  a  very  interesting 
and  important  piece  of  evidence  must  be  adduced. 

That  there  is  a  close  analogy  between  a  part  of  Love's 
Labour's  Lost  (Act  iv.  sc.  3,  line  245  sqq.)  and  some  lines 


2>arfc  XaDg*  79 


in  the  Sonnets  has  been  for  a  long  while  known.  Mr. 
Gerald  Massey  alluded  to  the  fact,  though  without  satis- 
factorily accounting  for  it.  Perhaps  the  best  illustration 
may  be  given  by  placing  together  four  lines  from  Sonnet 
127  and  four  lines  from  the  play  : — 

"  Therefore  my  mistress'  eyes1  are  raven-black, 
Her  eyes  so  suited,  and  they  mourners  seem, 
At  such  who,  not  born  fair,  no  beauty  lack, 
Slandering  creation  with  a  false  esteem  "  (127). 

"0,  if  in  black  my  lady's  brows  be  decked, 
It  mourns  that  painting  [and]  usurping  hair 
Should  ravish  doters  with  a  false  aspect, 
And  therefore  is  she  born  to  make  black  fair  " 

(L.  L.  L.,  Act  iv.  sc.  3). 

Recently  (1884)  in  the  Jahrbuch  of  the  German  Shake- 
speare Society,  Hermann  Isaac  asserted,  with  regard  to  the 
correspondences  just  adverted  to,  that  the  opinion  "that 
the  poet  wrote  the  play  a  little  after  1590,  and  then, 
towards  the  end  of  the  century,  took  Sonnet  127  therefrom, 
is  quite  inconceivable.  The  only  natural  explanation  is, 
that  he  at  a  certain  time  was  inspired  with  so  passionate  a 
devotion  to  his  brunette  lady-love,  that  he  not  only  cele- 
brated her  in  his  Sonnets,  but  also  introduced  her  into  his 
play  as  Rosaline,  and  had  her  praise  expressed  by  Biron, 
his  own  dramatic  representative.  The  passage  in  the 
play  must  have  been  written  very  soon  after  the  Sonnet ; 
but,  possibly,  the  question  might  arise  whether  the  Sonnet 
and  the  passage  in  the  play  belong  to  the  time  of  the  first 
composition  of  Love's  Labour 's  Lost,  1591  or  1592,  or  to 
that  of  the  re-editing  of  the  play,  about  1596." 

It  was  the  view  of  the  late  Mr.  Spedding  that  in  the 
fourth  act  "  nearly  the  whole  of  the  close  of  the  act,  from 
Berowne's  '  Who  sees  the  heavenly  Rosaline  ? '  "  (Act  iv. 
sc.  3,  line  221),  was  introduced  when,  according  to  the  title 
of  the  First  Quarto,  the  play  was  "corrected  and  aug- 

1  "  Hairs  "  is  a  conjectural  reading  instead  of  "  eyes." 


8o  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

mented."1  Now,  since  the  title  bears  the  date  1598,  it 
may  be  inferred  with  probability  that  the  re-editing  took 
place  either  in  this  year  or  in  that  next  preceding.2  More- 
over, it  is  very  important  that  the  play  is  given  "as  it  was 
presented  before  her  Highnes  this  last  Christmas."  "  Her 
Highness  "  was  the  Queen,  who  would  see  the  play,  accom- 
panied by  the  ladies  of  the  Court.  Mrs.  Fitton  would  thus 
probably  be  one  of  the  spectators ;  and,  if  she  was  the  lady 
celebrated  in  the  second  series  of  Sonnets,  it  is  not  difficult 
to  account  for  the  remarkable  agreement  between  the  Son- 
nets and  the  Play.  Shakespeare,  we  may  infer,  designed 
a  special  allusion  to  her  in  the  description  of  Rosaline,  just 
as,  in  what  is  said  of  the  Princess,  there  are  probably  some 
things  which  he  intended  specially  for  the  Queen ;  as,  for 
example,  the  Princess  being  called  "  a  gracious  moon"  the 
Queen's  poetical  designation  being  thus  used  (cf.  107,  line  5, 
and  supra,  p.  23).  And  here  it  must  be  observed  that  this 
evidence  points  to  the  conclusion  that  Mrs.  Fitton  was  in 
reality  of  exceptionally  dark  complexion,  a  matter  of  great 
importance.3  But  was  Mrs.  Fitton  a  maid  of  honour  in 


1  See  Furnivall's  "  Forewords "  to  L.  L.  L.  in  Shakspere  Quarto  Fac- 
simile, pp.  viii.,  ix. 

2  Rather  than  about  1596,  as  Hermann  Isaac  suggests. 

*  It  would  be  very  desirable  that  Shakespeare's  graphic  delineation  in 
the  Sonnets  should  be  compared  with  a  coloured  portrait  of  Mrs.  Fitton, 
if  such  could  be  found,  and  could  be  adequately  certified.  Portraits  of 
other  members  of  the  family,  father,  mother,  brother,  or  sister,  would  be 
of  less  value.  There  was,  and  probably  is,  in  existence  a  portrait  of  Mrs. 
Fitton's  great-uncle.  But  this  could  scarcely  give  conclusive  evidence. 
Mr.  George  Scharf,  Director  of  the  National  Portrait  Gallery  (to  whom,  at 
the  commencement  of  the  inquiry,  I  was  greatly  indebted  for  suggesting 
that  Elizabeth  had  a  maid  of  honour  named  Fytton,  and  not  Lytton,  as 
given  in  the  Calendar  of  State  Papers),  directed  my  attention  to  the  pic- 
ture, tolerably  well  known  through  engravings,  which  he  identified  (Arch. 
Journ.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  131)  as  representing  Elizabeth  going  in  procession  to 
the  wedding  at  Blackfriars.  He  thought  it  possible  that  Mrs.  Fitton  might 
be  depicted  as  one  of  the  ladies  in  a  group  behind  the  Queen.  But  it 
seems  doubtful  whether  Mrs.  Fitton  would  be  represented  at  alt.  The 
picture  would  most  likely  occupy  several  months  in  its  execution.  There- 


Bark  Xafcv?,  Si 


1597,  supposing  Christmas  of  that  year  to  be  the  time  when 
Love's  Labour's  Lost  was  acted  before  the  Queen?  The 
Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison,  to  whom  this  inquiry  has  been  so 
often  indebted,  discovered  (Harl.  MS.  1984,  f.  i46b)  a 
pedigree  with  the  entry, — 

"  Mary  ffitton 
Maid  of  honor 
to  Queene  Eliza, 

1595." 

Mary  Fitton  was  baptized  at  Gawsworth,  June  24,  1578 
so  that  we  may  take  her  age  as  being  seventeen  in  I595-1 
She  may  thus  very  well  have  seen  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  if 
acted  before  the  Court  at  the  Christmas  of  I597-2 

With  respect  to  the  identification  with  Mrs.  Fitton,  it  is 
not  unimportant  to  observe  that,  apparently,  the  dark  lady  of 

fore — whatever  may  have  been  the  original  intention — it  seems  doubtful 
whether,  after  the  affair  of  March  1601,  the  Queen  would  allow  either  Mrs. 
Fitton  or  Herbert  to  appear. 

1  According  to  the  version  of  138  in  the  Passionate  Pilgrim  (ninth  line), 
the  dark  lady  falsely  declared  herself  to  be  young.     But  elsewhere,  even 
in  130  and  150,  there  is  no  indication  of  her  being  other  than  young  ;  and 
this  indeed  seems  implied  in  such  expressions  as  "  pretty  ruth,"  "pretty 
looks,"  "lips  that  Love's  own  hand  did  make."    And  Shakespeare's  pre- 
tending to  be  youthful  also  implies  that  the  lady  was  young.    It  is  possible 
that  Jaggard  printed  138  from  an  inaccurate  copy  (cf.  some  remarks  by 
Dowden,  Introd.  to  facsimile  of  Passionate  Pilgrim,  p.  vii. ).    Perhaps,  how- 
ever, it  is  more  likely  that  some  one  altered  the  last  six  lines  to  conceal 
Mrs.  Fitton,  who,  in  1599,  was  in  high  favour  at  Court. 

2  There  are,  moreover,  grounds  for  thinking  that  the  Rosaline  of  Love's 
Labour's  Lost  was  originally  conceived  of  by  Shakespeare  as  pale  with 
black  eyes — "  A  whitely  wanton  with  a  velvet  brow,  with  two  pitch  balls 
stuck  in  her  face  for  eyes,"  (Act  iii.  11.  198,  199).     One  reason  for  this 
opinion  is,  that  in  Shakespeare's  Romeo  and  Juliet  there  was  also  a  Rosa- 
line, and  she  is  "  white  "  and  "  pale  "  and  with  "  black  eyes  "  (Act  ii.  sc.  4, 
11.  4, 14).     For  some  reason  or  other  Shakespeare  seems  to  have  associated 
these  characteristics  with  the  name  of  Rosaline.     But  Rosaline  of  Love's 
Labour's  Lost,  Act  iv.  sc.  3,  is  not  white  and  pale,  but  of  a  remarkably 
dark  complexion.     The  inconsistency  is,  however,  accounted  for,  if  we 
suppose  that  the  features  originally  given  were  changed,  when  the  play  was 
revised,  so  as  to  agree  with  the  characteristics  of  Mrs.  Fitton. 

F 


82  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

the  Sonnets,  notwithstanding  her  close  relations  with  Shake- 
speare, did  not  reside  with  him.  That  she  was  not  living 
with  the  poet  at  the  time  to  which  144  refers  comes  out 
pretty  clearly  : — 

"  But  being  both  from  me,  both  to  each  friend, 
I  guess  one  angel  in  another's  hell : 

Yet  this  shall  I  ne'er  know,  but  live  in  doubt 
Till  my  bad  angel  fire  my  good  one  out."  l 

And,  if  the  reference  is  to  Mrs.  Fitton,  we  can  easily  under- 
stand that  she,  as  one  of  the  Queen's  maids  of  honour, 
could  not  have  resided  with  Shakespeare. 

Can  we,  in  the  Sonnets,  detect  any  allusion  to  the  name 
"Fitton,"  a  name  which,  in  Elizabethan  English,  might 
be  played  upon  as  equivalent  to  "fit  one "  ?  In  reply  it 
may  be  said  that  Shakespeare,  after  alluding  to  the  lady's 
name  ("thy  name,"  151,  line  9),  speaks  of  her  as  pointed 
out  for  his  "  triumphant  prize;"  a  statement  easy  to  account 
for  if  her  name  was  understood  in  the  way  just  mentioned, 
if  she  was  the  Jit  one.  According  to  the  ideas  of  our  own 
day  this  may  seem  at  first  sight  somewhat  overstrained. 
But  sufficient  evidence  that  such  is  not  the  case  is  furnished 
by  a  monument  at  Gawsworth,  in  Cheshire,  the  former  abode 
of  the  Fittons.  This  monument,  which  was  erected  by  the 
Lady  Anne  Fitton,  Mrs.  Mary  Fitton's  sister-in-law,  has 
an  inscribed  tablet  concluding  with  the  lines  : — 

"  Whose  sovle's  and  body's  beavties  sentence  them 
FITTONS,  to  weare  a  heavenly  Diadem." 

(EARWAKER'S  East  Cheshire,  vol.  ii.  p.  583). 

It  is  thus  seen  that  such  a  play  on  the  name  as  I  have  sug- 
gested is  far  from  being  an  improbable  and  extravagant 
conceit.2 

1  If  134  is  to  be  taken  as  resting  on  a  basis  of  fact,  it  would  seem  that 
it  was  on  some  business  of  Shakespeare's  that  Herbert  first  went  to  the 
lady.     Possibly  he  went  to  see  Mrs.  Fitton  as  a  friend  of  Shakespeare. 

2  Having  regard  to  the  whole  of  this  isist  Sonnet,  it  is  not  very  diffi- 
cult to  see  that  there  might  be  a  play  on  the  name  in  a  special  sense.    And 


2>arfc  Xafc£.  83 


In  the  last  Sonnet  of  the  second  series — a  Sonnet  closely 
connected  with  that  immediately  preceding  —  there  are 
biographical  allusions  of  some  difficulty,  but  of  great  im- 
portance with  respect  to  the  identification  of  Mrs.  Mary 
Fitton  with  the  dark  lady  of  the  Sonnets : — 

"  In  loving  thee  thou  know'st  I  am  forsworn, 
But  thou  art  twice  forsworn,  to  me  love  swearing, 
In  act  thy  bed-vow  broke,  and  new  faith  torn 
In  vowing  new  hate  after  new  love  bearing"  (152,  lines  i  to  4). 

The  expression  "  in  act,"  at  the  commencement  of  the  third 
line,  will  be  noticed  more  particularly  directly.  It  may  be 
sufficient  here  to  observe  generally  that  the  lady  having 
charged  Shakespeare  with  unfaithfulness  to  another,  he 
replies  with  a  tu  quoque.  Mrs.  Fitton  comes  before  us  as 
maid  of  honour  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  bearing  suitably  to  the 
office  her  maiden  name :  what  do  we  know  as  to  any  con- 
jugal relations  which  she  formed  ?  The  Rev.  Frederick  C. 
Fitton,  late  Rector  of  Laverstoke,  Hants,  in  a  communica- 
tion which  he  sent  to  me  shortly  before  his  death,  stated 
that  he  had  in  his  possession  a  pedigree  of  the  Fitton 
family,  copied  by  his  father  (who  was  born  in  1779)  from  a 
MS.  by  Ormerod,  author  of  the  History  of  Cheshire,  con- 
taining the  entry, — 

"  CAPT.  LOUGHER    =    MART  FITTON    =     CAPT.  POLWHELE 
1st  husband.  maid  of  honour,  2nd  husband. 

had  one  bastard 

by  Wm-  E.  of  Pembroke, 

&  two  bastards  by  Sir 

Richard  Leveson,  Kt." 

The  authority  given  for  this  entry  was  "Sir  P.  L.'s  MSS.," 
meaning  certainly  the  MSS.  of  Sir  Peter  Leycester,  who 
was  born  in  1613,  and  died  in  1678.  The  approximate 
date  of  Mrs.  Fitton's  marriage  with  Captain  or  Mr.  Pol- 
whele  (thus  given  as  her  second  husband)  was  1607.  The 

with  reference  to  this  sense  the  use  of  "fit"  and  "fitness"  in  Cymbeline 
iv.  i  should  especially  be  compared. 


84  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

question  then  suggests  itself,  Was  she  married  to  Lougher 
in  early  youth,  previous  to  1595,  the  year  when  it  would 
seem,  according  to  evidence  previously  given,  she  became 
maid  of  honour  to  the  Queen  ?  So  far  as  age  is  concerned, 
this  in  Elizabethan  times  might  quite  possibly  have  been 
the  case.  Still,  there  is  a  difficulty  presented  by  the  fact 
of  Mrs.  Fitton's  being  subsequently  maid  of  honour  to 
Elizabeth,  and  bearing  her  maiden  name.  If  she  had  been 
previously  married  it  would  seem  that  she  must  have  been 
divorced,  or  the  marriage  must  have  been  regarded  as  null 
and  void.  Having  regard  to  the  age  of  the  lady,  the  latter 
would  seem  the  more  probable  alternative.  But  in  this 
latter  case  would  the  marriage  be  entitled  to  registration 
in  a  genealogy  ?  or  would  the  male  person  concerned  be 
rightly  designated  as  "  husband,"  at  least  without  comment 
or  explanation  ?  A  communication  recently  (1888)  made  by 
Lord  De  Tabley 1  casts  a  somewhat  new  light  on  Ormerod's 
entry.  After  research  in  the  MSS.  of  his  ancestor  Sir 
Peter  Leycester,  Lord  De  Tabley  asserts  that  Sir  Peter 
registered  Polwhele  as  Mrs.  Fitton's  first  husband  and 
Lougher  as  the  second,  and  also  that  the  additional  facts 
were  given  that  the  bastard  by  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  was 
a  son  (cf.  supra,  p.  57),  and  that  the  two  bastards  were 
daughters.  It  appears  thus,  either  that  Ormerod  made  a 
mistake,  or  that,  relying  on  some  other  MS.,  or  influenced 
by  some  other  cause,  he  purposely  deviated  from  the 


1  To  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison.  According  to  an  extract  made  by  Lord 
De  Tabley  from  "a  very  large  (elephant)  folio  of  Cheshire  genealogies 
with  coloured  arms,"  Mrs.  Fitton's  relations  to  her  two  husbands  stand 
thus  :— 

Sir  Edward  ffitton 

of  Gawesworth 

t  t 

This  Mary  ffitton  had  by  Will, 
Herbert  Earle  of  Pembrooke 
a  bastard 

and  also  by  Sir  Richard  Lusan 
she  had  two  bastard-daughters. 


Captaine  =  Mary  —  Captaine 

Lougher        ffitton       Polewheele 

2  husb :         mayd       i.  husband 

of  honour 


Dark  Xa&g.  85 


genealogy  to  which  Lord  De  Tabley  refers.  For  the 
present,  however,  it  appears  safest  to  reverse  the  order 
given  by  Ormerod,  and  to  take  Lougher  as  the  second 
husband  and  Polwhele  as  the  first,  though  this  course  is 
certainly  not  free  from  difficulty. 

The  date  of  Mrs.  Fitton's  marriage  with  Captain  or  Mr. 
Polwhele  can  be  ascertained  with  sufficient  accuracy.  The 
will  of  Mrs.  Fitton's  father  is  dated  4  March  1604  [1605], 
and  in  it  he  bequeaths  to  his  daughter  the  Lady  Anne 
Newdigate  a  bowl  or  piece  of  plate  of  silver  of  the  value  of 
£6.  133.  4d.,  "wth  myne  armes  in  colours  thereuppon. 
And  these  words  vnder  them,  *  The  guift  of  Sr  Edward 
Fytton,' "  and  a  like  bowl  with  arms  and  inscription  to 
"  my  daughter  Mary  Fytton."  At  this  time,  then,  Mary 
Fitton  still  bore  her  maiden  name.  The  will  of  her  great- 
uncle  Francis  Fitton  bears  date  three  years  subsequently, 
3ist  March  1608.  In  it  he  bequeathed  to  "  Mr.  William 
Pollewheele,  who  married  with  my  nece  Mris  Marie  Fitton 
younger  daughter  to  Sir  Edward  Fitton  knt.  deceased  my 
nephew  before  in  these  named  my  usual  riding  sword  being 
damasked  commonly  called  a  f  auchion  and  my  best  horse  or 
gelding  of  mine  to  his  owne  best  liking  as  a  remembrance 
and  token  of  my  love  to  him  and  to  his  now  wief." l  The 
expression  "  his  now  wife "  may  be  taken  as  implying  a 
recent  marriage.  This,  as  already  stated,  may  be  placed 
approximately  in  1607,  when  Mrs.  Fitton  would  be  in  her 
twenty-ninth  or  thirtieth  year,  a  somewhat  late  age  con- 
sidering her  temperament  and  the  usages  of  the  times. 
But  when  did  she  have  the  two  bastard  daughters  by  Sir 
Richard  Leveson  ?  Did  this  occur  in  the  years  between 
1 60 1  and  1607  ?  If  this  was  so,  how  came  it  about  that 
she  stood  so  well  with  her  father  and  with  her  great-uncle  ? 


1  For  information  with  regard  to  these  wills  I  am  indebted  to  particulars 
kindly  communicated  to  the  Kev.  W.  A.  Harrison  by  Mr.  J.  P.  Earwaker, 
author  of  the  history  of  East  Cheshire. 


86  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

And  how  could  Polwhele  persuade  himself  to  marry  her  ? 
Or  if  Polwhele  died  after  a  comparatively  short  interval, 
and  the  liaison  with  Leveson  was  subsequently  formed, 
then  there  will  remain  some  difficulty  as  to  the  marriage 
with  Lougher.  Are  we  to  look  for  an  explanation  to  Mrs. 
Fitton's  tact  and  "  warrantise  of  skill  "  ?  (Sonnet  150). 

But,  whether  with  Lougher  or  with  some  other  person, 
letters  in  Lord  Salisbury's  collection  give  evidence  tending 
to  the  conclusion  that  there  had  been  prior  to  1599  an 
actual  marriage,  or  what  might  be  considered  as  such.  On 
January  29,  1599,  Mrs.  Fitton's  father  writes  to  Sir  R. 
Cecil  :— 

"  Good  Mr.  Secretary  help  yor  poore  clyent  my  daughter 
to  her  porgon  wch  thus  longe  hath  rested  in  Sr  Henry  Wal- 
lop's hands,  yf  it  might  please  you  but  to  send  for  Mr 
Wallop  to  you  and  demand  of  him  whether  he  haue  not 
good  discharge  for  the  same,  and  such  discharge  as  Mr 
Tresorer  his  father  him  selfe  layde  downe  yor  honor  shold 
then  know  his  answer,  and  see  his  euasions  :  by  this  yor 
honor  byndeth  vs  both  and  without  this  I  shalbe  much 
distressed  or  els  my  poore  daughter  hindred,  To  yor  Lo 
protection  therfore  do  I  comend  the  cause  and  her  that  it 
doth  concerne." 

It  thus  appears  that  Mrs.  Fitton's  marriage-portion 
had  remained  for  a  good  while  in  the  hands  of  Sir  Henry 
Wallop,  the  Irish  Treasurer,  objection  being  made  to 
paying  it  over  to  the  lady,  on  the  ground  of  the  discharge 
not  being  a  good  one.  This  is  entirely  in  accordance  with 
the  supposition  that  there  was,  or  was  alleged  to  be,  some 
person  in  the  background  who  might  possibly  come  forward 
and  claim  the  money  on  the  ground  of  his  having  been 
married  to  Mrs.  Fitton. 

The  claim  was  destined,  however,  to  remain  still  for  a 
considerable  time  unsatisfied.  In  a  letter  of  Fitton's  to 
Cecil  (August  5,  1600)  he  says  that,  in  order  to  have  them 
duly  allowed,  he  has  sent  to  Ireland  his  Bills  for  ^1200, 


2>arfc  Xafcg.  87 


which  he  has  assigned  to  his  daughter  Mary ;  and  he  adds, 
"  I  now  eftsoones  besech  yor  honor  to  stande  good  to  her 
and  further  that  Sr  Henry  Wallop  may  give  her  her  dues." 
This  £1200  can  scarcely  be  an  additional  sum. 

Supposing  that  Mrs.  Fitton  had  been  married  in  early 
youth,  and  that  the  marriage  had  been  made  out  to  be 
illegal  and  null  and  void,  either  on  the  ground  that  the 
previous  consent  of  parents  had  not  been  obtained,  or  from 
some  other  cause,1  we  can  easily  see  that  a  plausible  objec- 
tion might  be  made  to  paying  over  to  her  her  marriage- 
portion.  Mrs.  Martin's  statement  about  priests  marrying 


1  As  to  the  setting  aside  in  Elizabethan  times  of  a  marriage  deemed 
undesirable,  the  following  quotation  from  a  letter  from  Sir  Robert  Cecil 
to  Sir  George  Carew  (June  24,  1602)  may  be  adduced: — "He  (i.e.,  Sir 
Edward  More's  son)  hath  been  very  lewdly  enticed  to  entangle  himself 
with  the  daughter  of  Arthur  Milles,  by  whom  he  hath  no  other  portion 
but  of  suspected  fame,  her  breeding  (as  it  is  said)  being  far  from  any  good 
discipline.  This  accident  having  wounded  the  father,  who  had  fixed  his 
especial  care  upon  him,  makes  him  desirous  by  all  means  possible  to 
remove  him  from  her  conversation,  to  see  if  it  can  be  possible  to  make 
him  see  his  blindness,  and  be  content  to  further  those  courses  which  may 
be  taken  to  prove  the  marriage  unlawful,  whereof  they  say  there  be  very 
many  just  occasions"  (Calendar  of  Carew  M SS. ,  1601-1603,  p.  252).  In 
Mrs.  Fitton's  case  a  more  summary  proceeding  was  probably  adopted,  the 
young  lady  being  taken  home  by  her  father. 

Then,  with  regard  to  the  consent  of  parents  being  required,  the  follow- 
ing quotation  may  be  made  : — "  In  respect  to  the  Consent  of  Parents ;  'tis 
said  in  our  Canons  that  children  may  not  marry  without  their  consent.  .  .  . 
And  marriages  that  are  made  contrary  to  the  Consent  of  Parents  are  pro- 
nounced to  be  invalid  both  by  the  Canon  and  Civil  Law  "  (Ayliffe,  Parergon 
Juris  Canonici,  p.  362).  Moreover,  it  is  of  considerable  importance  that 
Mary  Fitton's  elder  brother  incurred  his  father's  very  serious  displeasure 
by  marrying  without  consent.  In  a  letter  to  Lord  Burleigh  (MS.  Lansd. , 
71),  his  mother,  Lady  Fitton,  speaks  of  her  son  as  "  sure  to  fall  into  some 
desperate  action,  for  his  father  will  not  yett  do  any  thinge  for  him."  The 
letter  is  inscribed  "  15  May  1592,  La.  Phytton  to1  my  L.  interceding  with 
his  Lord3?  to  do  something  for  her  son :  who  hauing  married  wthout  his 
father's  consent  was  vnder  his  displeasure."  It  is  not  unlikely  that  Mary 
Fitton's  marriage  took  place  at  the  same  time,  but  that,  on  account  of 
her  youth — she  would  be  somewhat  under  fourteen,  or  about  this  age — a 
summary  proceeding,  such  as  that  above  adverted  to,  was  adopted. 


Sbaftespeare's  Sonnets. 

gentlewomen  at  Court  (supra,  p.  57)  would  seem  not  only 
consistent  with  the  supposition  that  Mrs.  Fitton  had  been 
married,  but  also  with  something  having  occurred  which 
caused  her  to  think  lightly  of  the  marriage- bond.  Then 
as  to  the  dark  lady  being  in  a  position  analogous  to  that  in 
which  we  have  supposed  Mrs.  Fitton  to  be,  there  is  evidence 
of  a  remarkable  character  in  the  Sonnets  themselves.  The 
expression  "in  act"  (152,  line  3,  "In  act  thy  bed- vow 
broke,"  &c.)  seems  to  have  been  overlooked  or  misinter- 
preted. As  the  words  in  question  are,  I  suppose,  commonly 
regarded,  they  are  not  only  superfluous,  but  they  are, 
moreover,  inconsistent  with  the  context ;  the  bed-vow  was 
broken  in  act,  when  the  lady  swore  to  love  the  poet.  If, 
however  (and  this  is  certainly  in  accordance  with  Eliza- 
bethan usage),  we  take  the  words  as  meaning  "  in  fact,"  "  in 
reality,"  a  new  light  is  thrown  on  the  passage.  There  is 
no  necessity  for  going  outside  Shakespeare  for  examples  of 
this  usage.  A  very  good  example  is  to  be  found  in  a 
passage  towards  the  end  of  the  first  act  of  Othello,  thus 
given  in  the  First  Folio  : — 

"  For  he's  embark'd 

With  such  loud  reason  to  the  Cyprus  Warres, 
(Which  euen  now  stands  in  Act)  that  for  their  soules 
Another  of  his  Fadome,  they  haue  none, 
To  lead  their  Businesse." 

In  the  third  line  of  this  quotation  the  editors  have  very 
commonly  changed  "stands"  into  the  plural  "stand"  (cf. 
note,  p.  32),  evidently  supposing  that  the  reference  is  to  the 
coming  Cyprus  wars.  This  change,  however,  is  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  ancient  authorities  ;  and  it  may  be  pronounced, 
with  some  confidence,  to  be  wrong.  Othello  is  not  yet 
formally  appointed  to  the  chief  command  in  the  "  Cyprus 
wars."  "  But,"  says  lago,  "  the  appointment  is  already  as 
good  as  made;  it  'even  now  stands  in  act.'  The  thing  is 
as  certain  as  if  he  were  already  '  embark'd ; '  there  is  '  such 
loud  reason '  for  it,  the  arguments  are  so  cogent ;  there  is 


Bark  Xa&g.  89 


indeed  no  other  man  to  be  found  whose  ability  can  equal 
his."  We  thus  have  a  very  good  example  of  the  phrase 
"  in  act  "  being  used  with  the  sense  above  mentioned.  And 
similarly — taking  "  in  act "  as  equivalent  to  "  in  reality," 
"  in  fact " — the  dark  lady  had  broken  her  marriage- vow  "  in 
act,"  though  she  may  have  alleged  that  the  marriage  was 
set  aside,  or  was  treated  as  null  and  void,  and  that  legally 
and  formally  she  had  been  guilty  of  no  breach.  It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  there  is  no  indication  whatever  of  a 
husband  as  likely  to  interpose  between  the  lady  of  the  Son- 
nets and  her  admirers ;  and  we  can  easily  account  for  this 
absence,  if  the  lady  was  in  the  position  just  suggested. 
And  if  this  was  also  the  position  of  Mrs.  Fitton,  it  is  easy 
to  explain  Wallop's  pretext  or  contention  that,  if  he  paid 
over  to  her  the  marriage-portion,  he  would  have  no  "  good 
discharge." 

Pembroke's  refusal  to  marry  Mrs.  Fitton,  when,  early  in 
1601,  her  condition  was  discovered,  and  he  in  consequence 
was  subjected  to  examination,  does  not  seem  to  have  proceeded 
mainly,  if  at  all,  from  her  having  been  previously  married. 
The  emphatic  words  employed,  with  regard  to  Pembroke, 
by  Cecil  in  his  letter  to  Carew  (supra,  p.  56)  are  very 
remarkable  :  he  "  utterly  renounceth  all  marriage."  These 
words  would  quite  accord  with  an  allegation  of  unchastity, 
or  of  a  want  of  " honesty,"  using  the  word  "honesty"  in 
the  wider  Elizabethan  sense.1  This  matter  is  important 
with  regard  to  what  is  said  of  the  dark  lady  in  137  and 
elsewhere.  Moreover,  there  is  in  Lord  Salisbury's  collection 
a  letter  from  Mrs.  Fitton's  father,  Sir  Edward  Fitton,  to 
Sir  R.  Cecil,  which  conveys  the  impression  that  the  charge  of 
want  of  "  honesty  "  had  actually  been  brought  against  Mrs. 


1  And  so  also  does  what  is  said  of  Pembroke's  "confessing  a  fact,"  a 
confession  which  by  no  means  necessarily  involves  an  avowal  of  paternity. 
Dr.  Furnivall  suggested  a  comparison  of  Winter's  Tale,  Act  iii.  sc.  2,  line 
86,  and  the  possibility  of  "fact"  meaning  "fault." 


90  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

Fitton  at  this  time,  and  had  been  adduced  by  Pembroke  as 
a  reason  for  discarding  her.  The  letter  bears  date  May  16 
[or  1 8],  1 60 1,  and  was  written  from  Stanner  (spelt  also 
Staner),1  where  Sir  Edward  was  compelled  to  stop  on 
account  of  his  daughter's  weakness.  She  must  be  left  there 
till  he  returns,  probably  from  Gawsworth  or  Macclesfield. 
With  regard  to  Pembroke  he  says  : — 

"  I  can  saye  nothinge  of  the  Erie  but  my  daughter  is 
confident  in  her  chance  before  God  and  wishethe  my  Lo 
and  she  might  but  meet  before  in  different  senes.  but  for 
my  self  I  expect  no  good  from  hyme  that  in  all  this  tyme 
hathe  not  showed  any  kindnes,  I  count  my  daughter  as 
good  a  gentlewoman  as  my  Lo  is  though  the  dignity  of 
honor  [be  greater  onlye  in  him]  wch  hathe  begiled  her  I 
ffeare,  except  my  lo8  honesty  bee  the  greater  vertuoes." 

Mrs.  Fitton's  alleged  confidence  as  to  the  result  of  an 
appearance  before  a  divine  tribunal  may  seem  at  first  some- 
what mysterious.  Her  wish  that  Pembroke  and  she,  before 
the  last  account,  may  meet  in  "different  scenes"  may 
possibly  allude  to  a  still  lingering  desire  for  marriage. 
Her  father,  on  the  other  hand,  entertains  no  such  expecta- 
tion :  he  "expects  no  good  from  him."  Since  the  affair  of 
now  two  or  three  months  ago  his  conduct  has  not  been  such 
as  to  justify  any  anticipation  of  this  kind;  he  has  not 
shown  "  any  kindness."  What  follows  certainly  gives  some 
probability  to  the  supposition  that  Sir  Edward  has  in  view 
the  suggested  marriage  and  Pembroke's  rejection  of  any 
such  idea.  In  his  judgment  Mrs.  Fitton  in  point  of  social 
status  is  as  good  as  Pembroke,  except,  indeed,  he  allows 
that  the  latter  is  a  nobleman,  and  has  such  dignity  as 
attaches  to  a  title.  Her  father  is  afraid  that  this  has  be- 

1  There  is  a  place  called  Stanner  Nab  (presumably  a  hill  or  eminence) 
a  few  miles  S.E.  of  Chester  city.  If  the  place  intended  was  situated  here, 
a  somewhat  circuitous  route  from  London  to  Gawsworth  or  Macclesfield 
must  have  been  taken.  But  the  route  adopted  was  probably  chosen  for 
the  sake  of  a  more  level  road. 


2>arfc  XaDg.  91 


gulled  her,  and  led  her  astray.  Then  follows  what  is,  for 
our  present  purpose,  a  very  important,  though  somewhat 
ambiguous  clause.  The  meaning  may  possibly  be  "  unless 
my  Lord's  honesty  have  greater  power  than  his  noble 
rank,"  or,  "  unless  my  Lord's  honesty  be  greater  than  my 
daughter's  virtues,"  or,  "unless  my  Lord's  honesty  be  the 
greatest  of  his  virtues  and  endowments."  But,  in  any  case, 
the  reference  to  Pembroke's  "  honesty  "  is  certainly  ironical. 
And,  considering  the  context,  it  is  difficult  or  impossible  to 
find  any  other  reason  for  this  ironical  reference  than  Pem- 
broke's having  refused  to  marry  Mrs.  Fitton  on  the  ground 
of  her  want  of  "  honesty."  With  this  sense  in  view  it  is 
easy  to  understand  the  allusion  to  the  divine  tribunal,  and 
to  Mrs.  Fitton's  being  "confident  in  her  chance  before 
God."  Sir  Edward  Fitton  was  not  a  master  of  literary  or 
epistolary  style,  but  the  construction  of  this  last  clause  is 
very  peculiar,  and  so  is  'the  spelling  of  the  word  "  vertuoes  "  l 
— a  mode  of  spelling  remarkable,  even  in  view  of  the  laxity 
and  eccentricity  of  Elizabethan  orthography.  The  subject 
was,  however,  an  unpleasant  one  for  Sir  Edward;  and, 
probably  enough,  facts  had  come  to  his  knowledge  which 
made  him  feel  awkward  in  alluding  to  it.  Very  likely  this 
state  of  feeling  is  reflected  in  the  construction  and  ortho- 
graphy. Though  Mrs.  Fitton's  previous  marriage  may, 
quite  possibly,  have  had  little  or  no  influence  on  Pem- 
broke's refusal  to  marry  her,  yet  it  is  in  every  way  likely 
that  it  had  very  much  to  do  with  the  development  of  her 
character  and  conduct,  as  depicted  in  the  Sonnets  and 
elsewhere.2 


1  Mr.  K.  T.  Gunton,  Lord  Salisbury's  librarian,  was  so  kind  as  to  re- 
examine  the  MS.   with  reference  to  the  spelling.     If  this  were  alone, 
however,  it  might  be  held  to  be  a  mere  slip  in  writing. 

2  It  may  seem  a  prosaic  view  of  the  renewed  association  between  Shake- 
speare and  Pembroke  in  1601  to  imagine  that  one  of  its  causes  may  have 
been  the  testimony  which  Shakespeare  might  be  able  to  give,  if  called 
upon,  with  respect  to  Mrs.  Fitton's  character.     I  am,  however,  far  from 


92  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

The  numerous  particulars  in  the  Sonnets  which  thus 
agree  with  what  we  know  from  other  sources  concerning 
Mrs.  Fitton  make  the  argument  identifying  her  with  the 
"  dark  lady  "  very  cogent  indeed,  even  if  we  have  not — 
what  the  Dedication  to  the  First  Folio  gives  us  in  the  case 
of  Herbert — direct  external  testimony  to  the  existence  of 
personal  relations  between  Mrs.  Fitton  and  Shakespeare. 
On  the  whole,  however,  the  evidence  concerning  Mrs.  Fitton 
can  scarcely  be  looked  upon  as  less  decisive. 


regarding  this  view  as  improbable.  The  Queen  was  greatly  enraged  ;  and 
if  she  had  commanded  a  marriage  with  Mrs.  Fitton,  it  might  have  been 
difficult  or  impossible  to  disobey.  It  would  be  important  for  Pembroke  to 
fortify  himself  against  being  constrained  in  this  matter  contrary  'to  his 
settled  resolve.  The  letter  cited  just  above  shows  that  the  idea  of  a 
marriage  had  not  yet  quite  dropped  out  of  view  even  in  May,  more  than 
three  months  after  Pembroke  had  "utterly  renounced  all  marriage."  Sir 
Edward,  however,  was  in  despair ;  but  he  was  scarcely  likely  to  abandon 
the  project  on  any  slight  grounds.  We  may  well  believe  that  he  would 
use  on  behalf  of  the  matrimonial  scheme  any  influence  at  Court  which  he 
could  command. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

SHAKESPEARE'S  BELIEF  IN  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  HIS 
WORKS. 

IT  has  been  said  not  uncommonly  that  Shakespeare  had  no 
consciousness  of  his  own  greatness,  and  that  he  did  not 
write  with  a  view  to  posthumous  fame.  The  alleged  proof 
is,  either  that  he  did  not  publish  a  collected  edition  of  his 
plays,  or  that  he  published  none  of  them  himself,  even 
separately.  Assertions  of  this  kind  may  be  sufficiently 
refuted  by  a  comparison  of  the  separate  editions  of  a  single 
play — Hamlet.  Whether  the  Hamlet  of  1604  was  or  was 
not  actually  published  by  the  authority  of  Shakespeare,  it 
gives  evidence  of  changes  in  the  text  which  could  have  pro- 
ceeded only  from  him — changes,  moreover,  which,  on  account 
of  their  subtlety  or  special  character,  were  certainly  not  made 
chiefly,  if  at  all,  with  a  view  to  presentation  on  the  stage. 
The  only  reasonable  conclusion  is,  that  Shakespeare  had 
in  view  those  who  would  carefully  study  his  work  in  time 
to  come.1  That  he  did  not  himself  collect  his  plays  was  a 
fact  connected  possibly  with  the  laws  of  dramatic  copy- 
right. 

We  are  not,  however,  left  to  decide  the  question  by  such 
inferences  as  those  just  mentioned.  The  Sonnets  contain 
predictions  of  posthumous  fame  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
strongest  confidence.  It  has  been  said  that  no  very  particular 
weight  should  be  assigned  to  such  predictions,  since  they  were 

1  Changes  of  the  kind  adverted  to  were  pointed  out  in  my  essay,  The 
Philosophy  of  "Hamlet." 


94  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

sufficiently  common  with  the  Elizabethan  poets.  And  no 
doubt  predictions  of  this  kind  are  to  be  found  not  only  in 
works  of  the  Elizabethan  era,  but  also  in  those  of  poets 
who  had  lived  long  ages  before.  The  doubt,  however,  sug- 
gests itself  whether,  in  the  whole  range  of  Elizabethan  litera- 
ture— to  limit  ourselves  to  that — there  can  be  found,  within 
a  compass  as  narrow  as  that  of  these  Sonnets,  predictions 
of  the  writer's  literary  immortality  equally  numerous,  and 
expressed  in  terms  of  similarly  strong  confidence.  But  the 
poet's  verse,  it  has  been  justly  remarked,  is  regarded  as  the 
means  through  which  his  friend  is  to  be  held  in  eternal 
remembrance.  And  certainly  these  predictions  lose  thereby 
something  of  the  egotistic  character  which  they  would 
otherwise  possess.  In  one  case,  indeed,  the  poet  dis- 
avows immortality  for  himself.  He  himself  is  to  be  lost 
in  the  common  oblivion,  while  his  verse  confers  on  his 
friend  eternal  renown  : — 

' '  From  hence  your  memory  death  cannot  take, 
Although  in  me  each  part  will  be  forgotten. 
Your  name  from  hence  immortal  life  shall  have, 
Though  I,  once  gone,  to  all  the  world  must  die  : 
The  earth  can  yield  me  but  a  common  grave, 
When  you  entombed  in  men's  eyes  shall  lie. 
Your  monument  shall  be  my  gentle  verse, 
Which  eyes  not  yet  created  shall  o'er-read  ; 
And  tongues  to  be,  your  being  shall  rehearse, 
When  all  the  breathers  of  the  world  are  dead  ; 
You  still  shall  live  (such  virtue  hath  my  pen) 
Where  breath  most  breathes,  even  in  the  mouths  of  men  "  (81). 

This  self-abnegation  is,  of  course,  a  poetical  fiction ;  but  it  is 
perhaps  worth  considering  whether  the  so  frequent  assertion 
of  the  immortality  of  his  verse  may  not  have  had  some  con- 
nection with  Shakespeare's  social  rank  being  so  far  inferior 
to  that  of  his  friend.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  felt  this 
inferiority  very  deeply,  and  as  a  reaction  from  the  impres- 
sion caused  by  such  disesteem,  there  may  have  arisen  within 
him  a  consciousness  of  his  innate  dignity.  Though  his 


^Belief  in  tbe  Smmortalftg  ot  bis  Works.         95 

friend  dared  not  in  public  acknowledge  the  acquaintance  (36), 
it  was,  nevertheless,  in  the  poet's  power  to  confer  unique 
and  surpassing  honour  on  that  friend.  Shakespeare  was 
evidently  aware  that  he  held  a  patent  of  the  very  highest 
nobility. 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  RELIGION  OF   SHAKESPEARE. 

THE  late  Rev.  J.  R.  Green  remarked,  with  reference  to 
Shakespeare's  religious  belief  : — "  It  is  hard  indeed  to  say 
whether  he  had  any  religious  belief  or  no.  The  religious 
phrases  which  are  thinly  scattered  over  his  works  are  little 
more  than  expressions  of  a  distant  and  imaginative  rever- 
ence. But  on  the  deeper  grounds  of  religious  faith  his 
silence  is  significant.  He  is  silent ;  and  the  doubt  of 
Hamlet  deepens  his  silence  about  the  afterworld.  '  To  die,' 
it  may  be,  was  to  him  as  it  was  to  Claudio,  ( to  go  we  know 
not  whither.'  Often  as  his  questionings  turn  to  the  riddle 
of  life  and  death,  he  leaves  it  a  riddle  to  the  last,  without 
heeding  the  common  theological  solutions  around  him."  l 
It  can  scarcely,  however,  be  correct  to  say  that  Shakespeare 
did  not  heed  any  of  "  the  common  theological  solutions 
around  him,"  though  it  may  be  true  that  he  accepted  none 
of  them,  neither  Puritanism,  nor  Anglicanism,  nor  Roman- 
ism. On  account  of  the  peculiar  character  of  the  Sonnets, 
the  question  as  to  Shakespeare's  religious  convictions  here 
acquires  a  special  interest.  Questionings  as  to  life  and 
death  are  abundant ;  but  the  evidence  to  be  found  in  these 
poems  serves  but  to  deepen  the  conclusion  derived  from  the 
plays.  There  are  two  or  three  allusions  to  common  theo- 
logical tenets,  which  should  certainly  have  all  the  weight  to 
which  they  are  entitled ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
these  allusions  can  be  regarded  as  other  than  conventional, 

1  History  of  the  English  People,  vol.  ii.  pp.  479.  480. 


TReligfon  of  Sbafcespeare.  97 


like  the  expressions  of  religious  belief  in  Shakespeare's 
will,  which  were  probably  introduced  by  a  country  attorney 
as  forming  part  of  a  customary  and  valid  document.  As 
such  we  may  conclude  with  some  probability  are  — 

"So  till  the  judgment  that  yourself  arise, 
You  live  in  this,  and  dwell  in  lovers'  eyes  "  (55)  ; 

and 

"  Then  give  me  welcome,  next  my  heaven,  the  best, 
Even  to  thy  pure  and  most  most  loving  breast"  (no). 

When  he  speaks  of  "  precious  friends  hid  in  death's  dateless 
night  "  (30)  there  is  no  accompanying  expression  of  hope 
that  they  will  be  restored  to  him  in  a  future  life.  Again, 
the  "  surly  sullen  bell  "  is  to  announce  the  poet's  departure 
from  the  world  (71);  but  he  will  not  then  have  gone  to 
enjoy  the  felicity  of  saints  and  angels  ;  on  the  contrary,  he 
will  have  "  fled  from  this  vile  world,"  "  to  dwell  with  vilest 
worms;"  to  be,  "perhaps,  compounded  with  clay."  Still 
more  important  is  74,  where  the  poet's  "  spirit,"  "  the  better 
part  "  of  him,  is  contrasted  with  his  body,  consigned  to  earth, 
"the  prey  of  worms,"  "too  base  to  be  remembered."  But 
we  find  that  the  "  spirit,"  this  "  better  part,"  is  still  to  live 
on.  not,  however,  in  Hades  or  Heaven,  but  in  the  verses 
which  he  has  composed  ;  — 

"  The  worth  of  that  (his  body)  is  that  which  it  contains  (his  spirit), 
And  that  is  this  (his  verse),  and  this  with  thee  remains." 

And  here  we  come  again  to  Shakespeare's  expectation  of  a 
literary  immortality.  But  this  question  has  been  just  before 
discussed. 

Mr.  C.  Armitage  Brown,  however,  asks,  with  reference 
to  the  subject  we  are  now  considering,  —  "  Have  we  nothing 
in  his  volume  of  Poems  where  he  willingly  expresses  his 
own  religious  feelings  ?  Yes,  one  entire  Sonnet,  and  no 
more,  proving  his  strong  faith  in  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  and  possibly,  as  a  friend  has  observed,  imbued  with 

G 


98  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

arguments  from  St.  Paul.  It  stands  in  his  Poems,  Sonnet 
146th."1  I  think,  however,  that  a  careful  consideration 
of  this  Sonnet  will  cause  us  to  question  Mr.  Brown's  view, 
or  possibly  we  may  come  to  an  opposite  conclusion  : — 

"  Poor  soul,  the  centre  of  my  sinful  earth, 
[Why  feed'st]  these  rebel  powers  that  thee  array  ? 2 
Why  dost  thou  pine  within,  and  suffer  dearth, 
Painting  thy  outward  walls  so  costly  gay  ? 
Why  so  large  cost,  having  so  short  a  lease, 
Dost  thou  upon  thy  fading  mansion  spend  ? 
Shall  worms,  inheritors  of  this  excess, 
Eat  up  thy  charge  ?    Is  this  thy  body's  end  ? 
Then,  soul,  live  thou  upon  thy  servant's  loss, 
And  let  that  pine  to  aggravate  thy  store, 
Buy  terms  divine  in  selling  hours  of  dross  ; 
Within  be  fed,  without  be  rich  no  more  : 
So  shalt  thou  feed  on  death,  that  feeds  on  men, 
And,  death  once  dead,  there's  no  more  dying  then." 

If,  however,  as  Mr.  Armitage  Brown  says,  this  Sonnet 
stands  alone  as  an  expression  of  religious  belief,  there  is 
obviously  some  ground  for  questioning  whether  the  inter- 
pretation which  Mr.  Brown  maintains  to  be  true  is  the 
right  one.  No  doubt,  on  a  superficial  view,  the  language 
employed  may  seem  quite  in  harmony  with  such  an  explana- 
tion. But  if  the  Sonnet  have  this  religious  significance, 
then  it  must  mean  that  Shakespeare  contemplated  attaining 
eternal  felicity  by  fasting  and  bodily  mortification,  gaining 
spiritual  wealth  by  the  pining  of  the  emaciated  body.  But 
the  supposition  that  Shakespeare  seriously  thought  of  adopt- 
ing an  ascetic  or  monastic  life  is  scarcely  to  be  entertained. 
Moreover,  it  is  of  great  importance,  with  regard  to  the  true 

1  Shakespeare's  Autobiographical  Poems,  pp.  221,  222. 

2  The  Quarto  gives  :— 

"  Poore  soule  the  center  of  my  sinfull  earth, 
My  sinfull  earth  these  rebbell  powres  that  thee  array,"  &c. 

The  repetition  of  "  my  sinfull  earth  "  is  obviously  wrong.  "  Why  feed'st " 
agrees  with  the  context,  and  "  feed'st"  occurs  in  i,  line  6. 


"Religion  of  Sbafcespeare,  99 


meaning,  that  though  in  no  other  Sonnet  is  language  used 
precisely  identical  or  parallel,  yet  the  conquest  over  death 
is  elsewhere  spoken  of,  and  is  so  spoken  of  with  reference  to 
the  immortality  of  the  poet's  verse.  Thus,  in  the  55th  Son- 
net the  friend  is  assured  that  through  the  poet's  "  powerful 
rhyme,"  which  will  be  more  enduring  than  marble  or  gilded 
monuments,  he  will  still  come  fully  forth  in  the  gaze  of 
men,  — 

"  'Gainst  Death  and  all  oblivious  enmity." 

Or,  again,  there  is  107,  where  the  poet  speaks  of  Death  as 
"  subscribing  "  to  him,  as  submissive  to  his  power  ;  but 
still  this  submission  is  brought  about  by  the  vital  force  of 
his  literary  compositions  :  — 

"  Death  to  me  subscribes, 
Since  spite  of  him  I'll  live  in  this  poor  rhyme, 
While  he  insults  o'er  dull  and  speechless  tribes." 

Such  being  the  case,  it  is  reasonable  to  explain  in  a  similar 
manner  the  "  dying  of  death  "  and  the  "  feeding  on  death  " 
spoken  of  in  the  Sonnet  we  are  now  more  particularly  con- 
sidering. Having  in  view  the  attainment  of  undying  fame, 
the  poet  summons  his  powers  to  the  composition  of  immortal 
works,  even  though  the  strain  on  the  body,  the  servant  of 
the  soul,  be  such  as  to  shorten  life.  Immortality  is  thus 
to  be  nourished  while  the  body  pines  and  dies.  By  an  easy 
and  not  unprecedented  metonymy  the  dying  body  is  identi- 
fied with  death  itself  :  — 

"  So  shalt  thou  feed  on  death,  that  feeds  on  men, 
And,  death  once  dead,  there's  no  more  dying  then." 

If  the  reader  thinks  of  the  succession  of  immortal  works 
which  followed  one  another  so  rapidly  from  the  poet's  pen 
in  the  first  years  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  also  of 
the  fact  that  he  died  at  the  age  of  fifty-two,  it  may  seem 
not  quite  unlikely  that  a  very  serious  purpose  was  expressed 
in  this  remarkable  Sonnet. 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


It  must  be  maintained,  then,  that,  so  far  as  the  Sonnets 
are  concerned,  evidence  on  the  whole  is  wanting  of  Shake- 
speare's faith  in  the  tenets  of  orthodox  Christianity.  With 
the  Sonnets  before  us  it  is  doubtful  whether  we  can  fairly 
admit,  with  due  regard  for  truth,  that  he  regarded  the 
Christian  faith  with  "distant  and  imaginative  reverence." 
But  if  this  were  admitted  no  further  concession  could  be 
easily  allowed.  It  is  possible,  however,  to  indicate  certain 
theological  or  philosophical  tenets  which  Shakespeare  seems 
to  have  regarded  with  more  or  less  of  approval,  though 
obviously  the  subject  requires  to  be  approached  with  caution 
and  reserve. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

PHILOSOPHY  IN  THE   SONNETS. 

ADDRESSING  ourselves  to  the  inquiry,  then,  with  all  due 
caution,  we  shall  perhaps  find  grounds  for  thinking  that 
Shakespeare  accepted,  with  more  or  less  definiteness,  three 
philosophical  doctrines,  forming  together  a  system  of  some 
completeness  : — (i)  The  doctrine  of  the  Ammo,  Mundi,  the 
Soul  of  the  World;  (2)  the  doctrine  of  Necessity;  (3)  the 
doctrine  of  the  Cycles.  So  far  as  the  Sonnets  are  concerned 
there  are  clear  indications  of  (i)  and  (3);  and  the  third 
implies  the  second.  These  doctrines,  it  is  true,  are  not 
tenets  of  the  Christian  faith;  but,  as  Dean  Plumptre  has 
justly  observed,  Shakespeare's  philosophy  "  is  not  a  Chris- 
tian view  of  life  and  death.  The  ethics  of  Shakespeare  are 
no  more  Cnristian,  in  any  real  sense  of  the  word,  than 
those  of  Sophocles  or  Goethe."  1 

The  first  of  the  doctrines  just  indicated  is  obviously  con- 
tained in  Sonnet  107,  which  speaks  of — 

"  The  prophetic  soul 
Of  the  wide  world  dreaming  on  things  to  come. " 

These  words  could  scarcely  be  looked  upon  as  a  mere  poetical 
embellishment,  even  if  they  stood  alone ;  but  this  is  by  no 
means  the  fact.  We  are  here  concerned  mainly  with  the 
Sonnets;  but  the  evidence  of  the  Plays  may  be  used  as 
subsidiary  and  illustrative.  Thus,  with  regard  to  the 
"  prophetic  soul"  of  the  world,  may  be  adduced  a  remark- 
able passage  in  Richard  III,,  Act  ii.  sc.  3,  lines  41-44  : — 

1  Commentary  on  Ecclcsiastes,  Appendix,  "Shakespeare  and  Koheleth." 


102  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

"  Before  the  days  of  change,  still  is  it  so  ; 
By  a  divine  instinct  men's  minds  mistrust 
Ensuing  danger  ;  as,  by  proof,  we  see 
The  water  swell  before  a  boist'rous  storm." 

Shakespeare  has  been  regarded  as  having  borrowed  here 
from  Holinshed,  who  says — "  Before  such  great  things, 
men's  hearts  of  a  secret  instinct  of  nature  misgive  them, 
as  the  sea  without  wind  swelleth  of  himself  some  time 
before  a  tempest."  And  a  connection  has  been  suggested 
with  St.  Luke  xxi.  25,  26,  where  the  Evangelist  speaks  of 
"  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring ;  men's  hearts  failing  them 
for  fear,  and  for  looking  after  those  things  which  are  coming 
on  the  earth."  Such  allusion  and  suggestion  are  probable 
enough;  but  it  is  observable  that  the  "secret  instinct  of 
nature,"  of  which  Holinshed  speaks,  has  been  transformed 
into  a  "  divine  instinct "  by  Shakespeare,  the  latter  expres- 
sion being  obviously  a  closer  approach  towards  "  the  wide 
world's  prophetic  soul"  as  spoken  of  in  the  Sonnet.  In 
this  connection  may  also  be  remembered  the  various  in- 
stances of  forebodings  to  be  found  in  Shakespeare,  as 
well  as  the  dreams  and  apparitions  which  come  as  pre- 
cursors of  following  evils.  There  are  in  Hamlet  notable 
examples.  In  relation  to  the  "grand  commission"  of 
Kosencrantz  and  Guildenstern,  and  the  embassy  to  England, 
there  was  in  Hamlet's  heart  "  a  kind  of  fighting  that  would 
not  let  him  sleep"  (Act  v.  sc.  2).  Similarly,  when  the 
hour  for  the  final  catastrophe  has  come,  he  says,  "Thou 
wouldst  not  think  how  ill  all's  here  about  my  heart ;  but  it 
is  no  matter."  " It  is  but  foolery;  but  it  is  such  a  kind  of 
gain-giving  as  would  perhaps  trouble  a  woman"  (Ibid.). 
These  and  the  like  we  may  take  as  instances  of  "  the  pro- 
phetic soul  of  the  world  "  speaking  in  and  through  the 
individual;  and,  so  far  as  Hamlet  himself  is  concerned, 
such  indications  are  accordant  also  with  the  fact  that  he  is 
the  creature  of  destiny,  kept  back  by  an  invisible  restraint, 
and  able  to  act  only  when  his  "  fate  cries  out,"  or  otherwise 


in  tbe  Sonnets,  103 


gives  the  sign  and  scope  for  action.  It  would  be  easy  to 
derive  illustration,  in  like  manner,  from  Macbeth,  who  also 
appears  as  the  puppet  of  the  invisible.  But,  passing  this 
by,  the  reader's  attention  may  be  called  to  a  very  noteworthy 
passage  in  the  Second  Part  of  Henry  /F.,  Act  iii.  sc.  i,  line 
45  seq.  Here,  moreover,  the  doctrine  of  the  cycles  and 
the  necessary  sequence  of  events  in  the  world  comes  before 
us  together  with  that  of  the  foreboding  of  the  prophetic 
soul  :  — 

"  K.  Hen.  0  God  !  that  one  might  read  the  book  of  fate, 
And  see  the  revolution  of  the  times 
Make  mountains  level,  and  the  continent, 
Weary  of  solid  firmness,  melt  itself 
Into  the  sea  !  and,  other  times,  to  see 
The  beachy  girdle  of  the  ocean 
Too  wide  for  Neptune's  hips  ;  how  chances  mock, 
And  changes  fill  the  cup  of  alteration 
With  divers  liquors.     O,  if  this  were  seen, 
The  happiest  youth,  viewing  his  progress  through, 
What  perils  past,  what  crosses  to  ensue, 
Would  shut  the  book,  and  sit  him  down  and  die." 

King  Henry  then  relates  that  ten  years  had  not  passed 
since  his  predecessor,  Richard,  and  the  Earl  of  Northum- 
berland were,  in  fullest  friendship,  feasting  together.  Two 
years  later  Northumberland  had  become  the  bosom  friend 
of  Henry  himself,  having  fallen  out  with  Richard,  "  giving 
him  defiance."  Then  Henry  tells  how  Richard  had  made 
a  certain  prophetic  speech  :  — 

"  '  Northumberland,  thou  ladder,  by  the  which 
My  cousin  Bolingbroke  ascends  my  throne  ;  ' 
Though  then,  Heaven  knows,  I  had  no  such  intent  ; 
But  that  necessity  so  bow'd  the  state, 
That  I  and  greatness  were  compelled  to  kiss  :  — 
'  The  time  shall  come  '  —  thus  did  he  follow  it  — 
'  The  time  will  come  that  foul  sin,  gathering  head, 
Shall  break  into  corruption  '  —  so  went  on, 
Foretelling  this  same  time's  condition 
And  the  division  of  our  amity." 

The  Earl  of  Warwick  replies  that  the  lives  of  men  repeat 


104  Sbafeespeare'6  Sonnets* 

what  has  happened  before,  and  that,  in  this  way,  if  a  man 
knows  the  past,  he  may  make  a  "perfect  guess"  as  to  the 
future.  The  passage  expresses  the  doctrine  of  the  cycles, 
and  is  extremely  interesting  with  reference  to  the  Sonnets 
in  which  this  doctrine  is  set  forth  with  even  greater  clear- 
ness : — 

"  War.  There  is  a  history  in  all  men's  lives, 
Figuring  the  nature  of  the  times  deceased, 
The  which  observed,  a  man  may  prophesy, 
With  a  near  aim,  of  the  main  chance  of  things 
As  yet  not  come  to  life,  which  in  their  seeds 
And  weak  beginnings  lie  intreasured. 
Such  things  become  the  hatch  and  brood  of  time  ; 
And,  by  the  necessary  form  of  this, 
King  Richard  might  create  a  perfect  guess, 
That  great  Northumberland,  then  false  to  him, 
Would,  of  that  seed,  grow  to  a  greater  falseness  ; 
W'hich  should  not  find  a  ground  to  root  upon, 
Unless  of  you. 

K.  Hen,  Are  these  things  then  necessities? 
Then  let  us  meet  them  like  necessities." 

The  king,  it  will  be  seen,  takes  what  is  said  as  involving 
a  necessary  sequence  of  things,  the  doctrine  of  necessity 
being,  as  already  observed,  implied  in  that  of  the  cycles. 
In  order,  however,  that  the  full  force  of  the  passage  may 
be  recognised,  it  is  desirable  to  take  into  account  what 
precedes.  The  king  has  been  unable  to  sleep.  He  is 
greatly  troubled  by  despatches  which  have  been  received, 
giving  evidence  of  sedition  and  corruption  in  the  state,  and 
he  is  in  anxious  perplexity  as  to  the  future.  That,  under 
such  circumstances,  he  should  desire  to  "  read  the  book  of 
fate  "  is  not  surprising.  But  one  might  have  thought  that 
his  attention  would  have  been  directed  to  the  vicissitudes 
of  state  affairs,  the  chances  of  war,  and  the  calamities  by 
which  kings  have  been  overthrown.  Instead  of  this,  how- 
ever, he  speaks  of  changes  in  the  physical  structure  of  the 
world,  the  levelling  of  mountains,  the  shrinking  back  of 
ocean,  and  the  melting  of  the  firm  and  solid  continent. 


in  tbe  Sonnets.  105 


The  reference  to  human  affairs  is  quite  subordinate.1  For 
this  fact  it  is  difficult  to  account,  unless  it  was  the  poet's 
intention  to  represent  man  and  his  affairs  as  governed  by 
the  same  laws  and  as  expressive  of  the  same  forces  as  those 
which  control  the  sea  and  mould  the  form  of  the  land.  And 
this  view  of  the  matter,  it  will  be  seen,  is  entirely  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  way  in  which  the  words  "  necessity  " 
and  "  necessary  "  are  employed  —  "  the  necessary  form  of 
this  :  "— 

"  Are  these  things  then  necessities? 
Then  let  us  meet  them  like  necessities." 

The  passage  just  quoted,  which  speaks  of  "  a  history  in 
all  men's  lives,  figuring  the  nature  of  the  times  deceased," 
was  written,  perhaps,  some  short  time  before  Sonnet  59,2 
which  expresses  the  doctrine  of  the  cycles  with  great  clear- 
ness, though  hypothetically  :  — 

"  If  there  be  nothing  new,  but  that  which  is 
Hath  been  before,  how  are  our  brains  beguil'd, 
Which,  labouring  for  invention,  bear  amiss 
The  second  burthen  of  a  former  child. 
0,  that  record  could  with  a  backward  look, 
Even  of  five  hundred  courses  of  the  sun, 
Show  me  your  image  in  some  antique  book 
Since  mind  at  first  in  character  was  done  ! 
That  I  might  see  what  the  old  world  could  say 
To  this  composed  wonder  of  your  frame  ; 
Whether  we  are  mended,  or  whe'r  better  they, 
Or  whether  revolution  be  the  same." 

It  will  be  seen  that  here  the  idea  is  not  simply  that  the 
lives  of  men  "  figure  the  nature  of  the  times  deceased,"  but 
the  absence  of  anything  really  new  is  supposed,  so  that  even 

1  A  fact  which  is  made  especially  conspicuous  in  the  Folio,  where  the 
words  from   "0,  if  this  were  seen"  to  "sit  him  down  and  die"  are 
omitted. 

2  The  date  of  the  writing,  or  completing,  of  2  Henry  IV.  is,  however, 
doubtful.     But  as  the  First  Quarto  did  not  appear  till  1600,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  the  passage  above  cited  may  have  been  written  about  the 
same  time  as  Sonnet  59. 


106  Sbafeespeare'6  Sonnets. 

the  brain  itself,  "  labouring  for  invention,'*  can  but  produce 
again  what  it  has  formerly  brought  forth.  What  follows 
as  to  "five  hundred  courses  of  the  sun"  would  seem  to  point 
to  pre-existence  in  this,  rather  than  in  some  former  world. 
And  here  it  is  worthy  to  be  observed  that  when  Shakespeare 
was  thus  contemplating  the  course  of  things,  the  idea  of  an 
ocean  of  being  seems  to  have  presented  itself  to  his  mind ; 
and  such  an  idea  is  in  accordance  with  what  is  said  in  the 
passage  quoted  from  2  Henry  IV.  about  the  ocean  and  its 
"  beachy  girdle."  Sonnet  60  commences  : — 

"  Like  as  the  waves  make  towards  the  pebbled  shore, 
So  do  our  minutes  hasten  to  their  end  ; 
Each  changing  place  with  that  which  goes  before, 
In  sequent  toil  all  forwards  do  contend. 
Nativity,  once  in  the  main  of  light, 
Crawls  to  maturity,"  &c. 

The  analogy  thus  brought  out  seems  well  deserving  of 
attention.  Whether  the  idea  of  an  ocean  was  suggested 
by  what  Holinshed  says  of  men's  hearts  being  moved  like 
the  waves  of  the  sea  (supra,  p.  102),  it  is  not  necessary  to 
determine.  The  conception  underlying  the  words  "the 
main  of  light "  is  probably  that  of  a  great  breadth  of  ocean 
illumined  by  the  sun,  though  in  the  sequel  the  metaphor  is 
changed. 

In  Sonnet  123,  which  was  probably  written  a  year  and 
a  half  or  two  years  after  59,  the  doctrine  of  the  cycles  is 
stated  definitely  and  without  hypothesis  : — 

"  No,  Time,  thou  shalt  not  boast  that  I  do  change  : 
Thy  pyramids  built  up  with  newer  might 
To  me  are  nothing  novel,  nothing  strange  ; 
They  are  but  dressings  of  a  former  sight. 
Our  dates  are  brief,  and  therefore  we  admire 
What  thou  dost  foist  upon  us  that  is  old  ; 
And  rather  make  them  born  to  our  desire 
Than  think  that  we  before  have  heard  them  told." 

The  expression  "thy  pyramids" — that  is,  the  "pyramids" 
of  Time — is  manifestly  figurative,  denoting  what  is  extra- 


pbtlosopbg  in  tbe  Sonnets.  107 

ordinary  and  stupendous.  But  if  such  things  are  "  nothing 
novel,"  "  nothing  strange,"  mere  dressings  up  again  of  a 
"  former  sight,"  it  would  seem  that  a  previous  state  of 
existence  precisely  resembling  the  present  must  be  implied. 
And  thus  we  have  more  fully  before  us  the  doctrine  of  the 
cycles. 

Here,  however,  the  question  presents  itself,  Were  the 
doctrines  of  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  of  the  cycles,  as 
expressed  in  the  Sonnets,  the  result  merely  of  Shakespeare's 
reflection  ?  If  not,  from  what  sources  did  he  derive  them  ? 
With  respect  to  the  anima  mundi,  the  soul  of  the  world,  the 
difficulty  is  not  great.  This  was  a  doctrine  prominent  in 
the  teaching  of  Giordano  Bruno,  who  suffered  martyrdom 
in  the  year  1600,  that  is,  a  little  before  Sonnet  107  was 
written.  Moreover,  Bruno  had  been  in  England  between 
1583  and  1585,  and  had  come  into  contact  with  Sir  Philip 
Sidney,  William  Herbert's  uncle,  so  that  an  allusion  to 
Bruno's  doctrine  is  in  no  way  unaccountable.1  There  is 
also  another  contemporary  of  Shakespeare  who  should 
here  be  mentioned,  Tommaso  Campanella,  who  entertained 
opinions  similar  to  those  of  Bruno  with  regard  to  the  world 
as  an  animated  being.  In  a  Sonnet  of  his  on  "  The  World 
as  an  Animal "  (II  mondo  e  un  animal)  he  says,  as  trans- 
lated by  Mr.  J.  A.  Symonds  : — 

"  Again,  the  earth  is  a  great  animal, 

Within  the  greatest ;  we  are  like  the  lice 
Upon  its  body,  doing  harm  as  they." 


1  In  the  Shakespeare  Jahrbuch,  vol.  xi.  p.  91,  there  is  an  article  by  W. 
Konig  on  "  Shakespeare  und  Giordano  Bruno."  The  writer  of  this  article, 
after  adducing  various  instances  in  Shakespeare  of  analogy  with  Bruno's 
doctrines  of  greater  or  less  probability,  strangely  denies  that  there  is  any 
point  of  connection  between  Shakespeare  and  Bruno's  doctrine  of  an  all- 
pervading  world-soul : — "  Sein  Glaube  aussert  sich  bald  in  einer  gewissen 
Gotttrunkenheit,  bald  in  einer  Art  Pantheismus,  da  er  eine  Alles  durch- 
dringende  Welt-Seele  annahm.  Auf  diesem  ganzen  Gebiete  zeigt  sich 
bei  Shakespeare  nicht  die  mindeste  Beriihrung  mit  Bruno."  Had  the 
writer  of  this  article  never  read  Sonnet  107  ? 


io8  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

Bruno  and  Campanella  were  not  the  first  propounders  of 
similar  doctrine;  but  for  our  present  purpose  it  is  not 
necessary  to  go  back  to  a  more  remote  antiquity. 

With  regard  to  the  doctrine  of  the  cycles,  the  difficulty 
is  perhaps  greater ;  though  here  again  some  points  of 
correspondence  in  the  writings  of  Bruno  and  Campanella 
might  possibly  be  detected.  But  the  doctrine,  as  it  appears 
in  the  59th  and  12  3rd  Sonnets,  was  the  doctrine  of  the 
ancient  Stoics,  which  was  reproduced  by  the  author  of  the 
Biblical  book  of  Ecclesiastes.1  Dean  Plumptre,  however, 
has  said  that  Shakespeare's  acquaintance  with  the  Bible 
generally  does  not  seem  to  have  been  very  extensive,  and 
about  Ecclesiastes  in  particular  he  probably  knew  but  little. 
And  he  proceeds  : — "  We  have  to  deal  accordingly  with  the 
phenomena  of  parallelism,  and  not  of  derivation.  But  the 
parallelism  is,  it  will  be  admitted,  sufficiently  suggestive. 
Does  Koheleth  teach  that  'there  is  nothing  new  under 
the  sun,'  that  '  if  there  is  anything  whereof  it  may  be  said, 
See  this  is  new,  it  hath  been  already  of  old  time  which  was 
before  us'  (Eccles.  i.  10),  Shakespeare  writes,  'No,  Time, 
thou  shalt  not  boast  that  I  do  change,' "  &c.2  I  should, 
however,  certainly  be  inclined  to  doubt  whether  Shake- 
speare had  paid  so  little  attention  to  the  Bible  as  Dean 
Plumptre  seems  to  think.  But  even  if  this  were  so  gene- 
rally, the  verses  in  the  first  chapter  of  Ecclesiastes  which 
contain  the  doctrine  of  the  cycles  are  so  salient  and  promi- 
nent, and  lend  themselves  so  easily  to  quotation,  that  I 
cannot  readily  allow  the  improbability  of  Shakespeare's 
having  obtained  his  knowledge  from  this  source.  Shake- 
speare does  not  speak  of  the  doctrine  as  derived  from  his 
own  reflection,  but  rather  as  an  hypothesis  received  from 


1  See  the  present  writer's  Ecclesiastes :  a  Contribution  to  its  Interpre- 
tation, p.  14. 

2  Commentary    on    Ecclesiastes,    Appendix,     "Shakespeare    and    Ko- 
heleth," p.  232. 


IPbUosopbg  in  tbe  Sonnets*  109 

without   or   heard    from   others  :     "If  there  be   nothing 
new,"  &C.1 

The  doctrine  of  an  unchanging  succession,  involving,  as 
it  does,  the  impossibility  of  permanent  progress,  not  un- 
naturally connects  itself  with  a  pessimistic  view  of  life. 
Such  a  view  appears  in  Ecclesiastes  :  and  in  these  Sonnets 
not  only  is  there  a  widely  pervading  tone  of  melancholy, 
but  the  poet  cries  out  for  death  : — 

"  Tired  with  all  these,  for  restful  death  I  cry." 

"  Tired  with  all  these,  from  these  would  I  be  gone, 
Save  that,  to  die,  I  leave  my  love  alone. " 


1  Professor  Arber  directed  my  attention  to  William  Baldwin's  Moral 
Philosophy  (1596,  et  al.)  as  possibly  influential  with  Shakespeare.  This 
work,  which  consists  of  extracts,  has  the  dictum,  "  There  is  no  new  thing 
in  this  world,"  with  the  name  of  Aristotle  appended.  And  it  is  said  of 
Pythagoras  that,  "  being  asked  what  new  thing  was  in  the  world,  he 
answered,  Nothing."  If  there  are  other  analogous  allusions,  they  have 
escaped  my  notice. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

FURTHER  PARTICULARS  IN  SHAKESPEARE'S   BIOGRAPHY. 

IMPORTANT  facts  in  relation  to  Shakespeare's  life  have  been 
already  considered.  The  biographical  materials  presented 
by  the  Sonnets  have  been,  however,  by  no  means  exhausted, 
as  may  be  seen  in  this  and  subsequent  sections.  A  few 
particulars  may  be  here  grouped  together. 

§  i.  Allusions  to  Advancing  Age. — In  certain  of  the 
Sonnets  Shakespeare  speaks  of  his  age  as  already  advanced, 
or  even  as  declining,  though,  according  to  the  conclusions 
before  expressed,  he  would  be,  when  the  Sonnets  in  question 
were  written,  but  about  thirty- four  or  thirty- five.  We 
may  take  as  an  example  73,  in  which,  though  with  beautiful 
imagery,  the  feeling  of  age  is  very  strongly  expressed  :— 

"  That  time  of  year  thou  may'st  in  me  behold 

When  yellow  leaves,  or  none,  or  few,  do  hang 

Upon  those  boughs  which  shake  against  the  cold 

Bare  ruin'd  choirs,  where  late  the  sweet  birds  sang. 

In  me  thou  see'st  the  twilight  of  such  day 

As  after  sunset  fadeth  in  the  west, 

Which  by-and-by  black  night  doth  take  away, 

Death's  second  self,  that  seals  up  all  in  rest. 

In  me  thou  see'st  the  glowing  of  such  fire, 

That  on  the  ashes  of  his  youth  doth  He, 

As  the  death-bed  whereon  it  must  expire, 

Consum'd  with  that  which  it  was  nourish'd  by. 
This  thou  perceiv'st,  which  makes  thy  love  more  strong 
To  love  that  well  which  thou  must  leave  ere  long." 

Certainly,  at  first  sight,  such  language  as  this  would  seem 
inconsistent  with  the  poet's  having  attained  only  the  age 
mentioned  above.  I  am  not  very  willing  to  accept  the 


ffurtber  particulars  in  Sbafcespeare's  3Btograpb£.    m 

explanation  that,  on  account  of  difference  in  the  conditions 
of  life,  the  signs  of  age  made  their  appearance  sooner  three 
centuries  ago  than  they  do  now.  It  is  more  to  the  purpose 
that,  as  compared  with  the  age  of  Herbert  at  eighteen 
("  the  world's  fresh  ornament,  and  only  herald  to  the  gaudy 
spring"  (i),  in  "the  lovely  April  "  of  his  prime  (3)),  not 
only  was  forty  (2),  but  even  thirty-four  or  thirty-five  a 
somewhat  advanced  age.  This  comparison,  expressed  or 
implied,  should  be  kept  in  view,  and  we  should  certainly 
not  lose  sight  of  the  hue  of  melancholy  which  is  so  clearly 
conspicuous  in  many  of  the  Sonnets  between  64  and  94.  A 
melancholic  tendency  would  have  an  important  effect  on 
such  exaggeration  of  age  as  appears  in  73  and  elsewhere. 
Drayton,  as  already  mentioned,  in  his  Idea,  when  only 
some  thirty-six  years  of  age,  speaks  of  himself  as  already 
aged  (supra,  p.  41).  This,  however,  may  be  accounted  for 
on  the  supposition  that  Drayton  was  imitating  Shakespeare. 
But  such  imitation  is  consistent  only  with  the  position  that 
Shakespeare  was  in  fact  but  thirty- four  or  thirty- five  years 
old  when  73  and  other  Sonnets  were  written,  as  the  date 
of  Drayton's  Idea  would  fix  the  date  before  which  these 
Sonnets,  or  some  of  them,  must  have  been  composed.  The 
two  following  stanzas  from  Lord  Byron's  poem  written  on 
the  completion  of  his  thirty-sixth  year  are  in  some  respects 
more  important,  since  it  is  in  no  way  probable  that  they 
were  written  in  conscious  imitation  of  Shakespeare  : — 

"  My  days  are  in  the  yellow  leaf, 

The  flowers  and  fruits  of  love  are  gone  ; 
The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief 
Are  mine  alone. 

"  The  fire  that  on  my  bosom  preys 

Is  lone  as  some  volcanic  isle  ; 
No  torch  is  kindled  at  its  blaze, — 
A  funeral  pile." 

Here  we  may  see  again,  as  in  73,  the  yellow  leaf,  the 
boughs  without  flower  or  fruit,  the  solitary  and  smothered 


ii2  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

fire,  while  the  "  death -bed  "  is  replaced  by  the  funeral  pile. 
The  objection  that  Shakespeare  could  not,  at  thirty-five, 
have  written  seriously  as  he  did  write  in  the  Sonnets,  is 
thus  seen  to  be  without  weight.  Of  course,  it  is  possible 
that  Shakespeare  may  have  become  in  appearance  pre- 
maturely aged;  but  for  the  interpretation  of  73,  &c.,  it  is 
not  necessary  to  affirm  this  as  even  probable. 

§  2.  Shakespeare  Travelling.  —  In  the  Sonnets  from  43 
to  5  2  we  have  several  interesting  glimpses  of  Shakespeare 
preparing  for  and  travelling  on  a  journey,  probably  to- 
gether with  his  company,  towards  some  provincial  towns. 
At  his  London  residence  he  leaves  behind  him  no  one  in 
whom  he  can  place  implicit  confidence.  All  his  valuables 
must  be  locked  up  and  secured  from  depredators  : — 

"  How  careful  was  I,  when  I  took  my  way, 
Each  trifle  under  truest  bars  to  thrust, 
That,  to  my  use,  it  might  unused  stay 
From  hands  of  falsehood,  in  sure  wards  of  trust !  "  (48). 

As  to  the  means  of  conveyance,  not  only  was  the  railway, 
with  its  iron  horse,  more  than  two  centuries  in  the  future  : 
even  the  stage-coach  was  not  yet.  The  Lord  Chamberlain's 
company  did  not  travel  perhaps,  as  Hamlet  gives  it,  "  each 
actor  on  his  ass,"  but  each  on  a  steed  hired  possibly  for 
the  road  to  the  next  important  town.  Shakespeare  cannot 
leave  London  and  his  valuable  young  friend  without  some 
misgivings.  And  the  sorry  hack  he  has  hired  seems  almost 
to  share  his  rider's  unwillingness  to  leave  London  behind. 
He  knows  nothing  of  swiftness,  even  when  urged  on  by  the 
spur : — 

"  How  heavy  do  I  journey  on  the  way 
When  what  I  seek — my  weary  travel's  end — 
Doth  teach  that  ease  and  that  repose  to  say, 
'Thus  far  the  miles  are  measured  from  thy  friend  ! ' 
The  beast  that  bears  me,  tired  with  my  woe, 
Plods  dully  on,  to  bear  that  weight  in  me, 
As  if  by  some  instinct  the  wretch  did  know 
His  rider  lov'd  not  speed,  being  made  from  thee  : 


ffurtber  particulars  in  Sbafcespeare's  :fi3iograpbE.    113 

The  bloody  spur  cannot  provoke  him  on, 

That  sometimes  anger  thrusts  into  his  hide, 

Which  heavily  he  answers  with  a  groan, 

More  sharp  to  me  than  spurring  to  his  side  : 
For  that  same  groan  doth  put  this  in  my  mind, 
My  grief  lies  onward,  and  my  joy  behind  "  (50). 

If  he  puts  up  for  the  night  at  an  inn,  besides  such  enter- 
tainment as  his  host  and  hostess  may  provide,  he  has 
carried  with  him  the  materials  for  another  feast  in  a  minia- 
ture portrait  of  his  friend.  This  being  drawn  forth,  his 
eye  invites  his  heart  to  "the  painted  banquet"  (47),  and 
his  thoughts  " present- absent "  go  "in  tender  embassy  of 
love  "(45)- 

"  Or,  if  they  sleep,  thy  picture  in  my  sight 
Awakes  my  heart  to  heart's  and  eye's  delight "  (47). 

§  3.  Shakespeare's  Dislike  of  the  Dramatic  Profession. — 
That  Shakespeare  should  have  expressed  a  dislike  for  the 
dramatic  profession  and  its  surroundings  has  been  looked 
upon  as  scarcely  credible,  and  yet  this  is  a  matter  on  which 
the  Sonnets  leave  no  room  for  doubt.  Here  mention  must 
be  especially  made  of  Sonnet  1 1 1  : — 

"  0,  for  my  sake  do  you  with  Fortune  chide, 
The  guilty  goddess  of  my  harmful  deeds, 
That  did  not  better  for  my  life  provide 
Than  public  means,  which  public  manners  breeds. 
Thence  comes  it  that  my  name  receives  a  brand, 
And  almost  thence  my  nature  is  subdued 
To  what  it  works  in,  like  the  dyer's  hand." 

It  thus  appears  that  to  Shakespeare  the  associations  and 
circumstances  of  the  theatre  seemed  debasing.  And  this 
feeling  might  well  be  deepened  by  intimacy  with  a  young 
nobleman  of  so  high  rank  as  William  Herbert.  With  the 
sensitiveness  of  his  poetic  nature,  Shakespeare  could  not 
but  deeply  feel  his  being  looked  upon  as  so  mean  a  person 
that  social  usage  would  not  allow  his  dearest  friend  to 
recognise  the  acquaintance  in  public  : — 

H 


U4  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnete. 

"  Which,  though  it  alter  not  love's  sole  effect, 
Yet  doth  it  steal  sweet  hours  from  love's  delight. 
I  may  not  ever  more  acknowledge  thee 
Lest  my  bewailed  guilt  should  do  thee  shame  ; 
Nor  thou  with  public  kindness  honour  me, 
Unless  thou  take  that  honour  from  thy  name  "  (36). 

Sonnet  37,  which  speaks  of  Shakespeare's  being  "made 
lame  "  by  the  "  spite  "  of  Fortune,  stands  in  close  connec- 
tion with  36.  Accordingly,  it  seems  to  me  that  Shake- 
speare's lameness  is  to  be  taken  figuratively  of  social 
disqualification  through  lack  of  fortune,  and  through  his 
consequently  following  an  occupation  looked  upon  as 
degrading.  I  should  not  even  think  it  likely  that  Shake- 
speare had  become  temporarily  lame  as  the  result  of  an 
accident.  Shakespeare's  dislike  of  the  dramatic  profession 
requires,  however,  to  be  considered  in  connection  with  the 
matter  treated  of  in  the  next  chapter ;  though,  at  the  same 
time,  we  should  not  disregard  the  view  of  the  actor's  calling 
given  in  Hamlet  (Act  iii.  sc.  2,  lines  18-39). 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

THE   SCANDAL  CONCERNING  SHAKESPEARE  IN    l6oi. 

IN  the  series  of  Sonnets  100  to  126  there  are  allusions  to 
some  scandal  which,  at  the  time  when  these  Sonnets  were 
written,  was  in  circulation  with  regard  to  Shakespeare. 
This  scandal  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  generally 
low  social  esteem  of  players,  though  it  was  in  some  manner 
connected  with  Shakespeare's  dramatic  engagements.  Such 
a  connection  is  indicated  by  what  is  said  in  1 1 1  of  Fortune, 
"the  guilty  goddess,"  having  made  so  ill  provision  for  the 
poet's  wants  that  he  was  compelled  to  depend  on  "  public 
means."  From  this  dependence  resulted  "  public  manners  " 
and  the  branding  of  the  poet's  name.  A  similar  inference 
is  to  be  drawn  from  no,  where  Shakespeare  speaks  of 
having  "gone  here  and  there,"  and  made  himself  look  like 
"a  motley,"  though  possibly  he  had  not  actually  played  in 
"  a  suit  of  motley  "  the  part  of  the  Fool : — 

"  Alas,  'tis  true,  I  have  gone  here  and  there, 
And  made  myself  a  motley  to  the  view, 
Gored  mine  own  thoughts,  sold  cheap  what  is  most  dear, 
Made  old  offences  of  affections  new." 

How  deeply  Shakespeare  felt  the  scandal  is  shown  by  the 
first  two  lines  of  112,  where  he  speaks  of  his  forehead  as 
though  branded  or  stamped  thereby  : — 

**  Your  love  and  pity  doth  the  impression  fill 
Which  vulgar  scandal  stamp'd  upon  my  brow. " 

The  great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  supposing  that  the  refer- 
ence is  merely  to  the  stage  and  acting  is  presented  by  the 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 


remarkable  language  of  Sonnet  121,  from  which  it  appears 
that  the  scandal  had  some  relation  to  Shakespeare's  moral 
character  :  — 

"  "Tis  better  to  be  vile  than  vile  esteem  'd, 
When  not  to  be  receives  reproach  of  being, 
And  the  just  pleasure  lost,  which  is  so  deem'd 
Not  by  our  feeling,  but  by  others'  seeing. 
For  why  should  others'  false  adulterate  eyes 
Give  salutation  to  my  sportive  blood  ? 
Or  on  my  frailties  why  are  frailer  spies, 
Which  in  their  wills  count  bad  what  I  think  good  ? 
No  —  I  am  that  I  am  ;  and  they  that  level 
At  my  abuses,  reckon  up  their  own  : 
I  may  be  straight,  though  they  themselves  be  bevel  ; 
By  their  rank  thoughts  my  deeds  must  not  be  shown  ; 
Unless  this  general  evil  they  maintain,  — 
All  men  are  bad,  and  in  their  badness  reign." 

The  expressions  here  printed  in  italics,  taken  together, 
can  scarcely  leave  a  doubt  as  to  the  general  nature  of  the 
matter  alluded  to.  These  expressions  are  incompatible 
with  the  supposition  that  the  scandal  proceeded  merely 
from  the  low  esteem  in  which  players  were  held.  Shake- 
speare does  not  deny  that  there  was  some  foundation  for 
the  scandal.  He  pleads,  however,  that  his  failings  had  been 
exaggerated,  and  that  his  accusers  were  worse  than  himself. 
A  complete  explanation  of  this  scandal  it  may  now  be 
impossible  to  attain,  but,  bearing  in  mind  the  date,  1601, 
to  which  chronological  indications  require  us  to  refer  the 
Sonnets  just  cited,  we  can  see  evidence  of  conditions  out  of 
which  scandal  might  very  easily  grow.  With  regard  to 
Shakespeare's  moral  character  and  reputation,  the  facts  to 
which  the  Sonnets  themselves  relate  must,  of  course,  be 
taken  into  account.  There  is,  besides,  contemporary  evidence 
coming  very  close  indeed  to  the  time  with  which  we  are 
now  concerned.  This  evidence  may,  perhaps,  be  considered 
slight  ;  possibly  it  may  not  be  strictly  and  literally  true, 
but,  nevertheless,  since  it  comes  from  a  contemporary 
source,  it  must  not  be  too  hastily  put  aside.  I  allude  to 


Scandal  in  1601,  117 


the  tolerably  well-known  story  concerning  Shakespeare, 
Burbage,  and  a  lady-citizen  who  so  much  admired  the  latter's 
impersonation  of  Richard  the  Third  that  she  invited  him  to 
visit  her  after  the  play,  and  to  the  trick  which  Shakespeare 
in  consequence  played  off.  This  story  (or  piece  of  scandal, 
if  it  be  such)  is  told  in  John  Manningham's  Diary,  with 
the  date  i3th  March  i6oi[-2].1  With  this  story  in  view  it 
is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  more  serious  scandal  of  a 
somewhat  similar  nature  may  have  arisen. 

Another  piece  of  evidence  of  about  the  same  date  is 
entitled  possibly  to  greater  attention.  This  is  to  be  found 
in  "TJie  Returne  from  Pernassus  :  or  the  Scourge  of  Simony. 
Publiquely  acted  by  the  Students  in  Saint  Johns  Colledge 
in  Cambridge."  In  Act  iv.  sc.  3  Shakespeare's  colleagues 
Burbage  and  Kemp  are  introduced.  The  latter  makes  a 
reference  to  Shakespeare  which  has  been  repeatedly  quoted  : 
—  "  Few  of  the  vniuersity  [men]  pen  plaies  well,  they  smell 
too  much  of  that  writer  Quid,  and  that  writer  Metamor- 
phosis, and  talke  too  much  of  Proserpina  &  luppiter.  Why 
heres  our  fellow  Shakespeare  puts  them  all  downe,  I  and 
Ben  lonson  too.  O  that  Ben  lonson  is  a  pestilent  fellow, 
he  brought  vp  Horace  giuing  the  Poets  a  pill,  but  our  fellow 
Shakespeare  hath  giuen  him  a  purge  that  made  him  beray  his 
credit."2  The  date  of  the  production  of  the  play  from  which 
this  extract  is  given  has  been  fixed  as  December  i6oi.3 

1  "  Vpon  a  tyme  when  Burbidge  played  Richard  III.  there  was  a  citizen 
grone  soe  farr  in  liking  with  him,  that  before  shee  went  from  the  play 
shee  appointed  him  to  come  that  night  vnto  hir  by  the  name  of  Richard 
the  Third.     Shakespeare  ouerhearing  their  conclusion  went  before,  was 

ntertained  and  at  his  game  ere  Burbidge  came.  Then  message  being 
brought  that  Richard  the  Third  was  at  the  dore,  Shakespeare  caused  re- 
turne  to  be  made  that  William  the  Conqueror  was  before  Richard  the 
Third.  Shakespeare's  name  William  (Mr.  Touse?)."  —  Camden  Society's 
edition  by  Bruce,  p.  39. 

2  Macray's  Pilgrimage  to  Pernassus,  p.  138. 

3  The  date  "has  been  proved  from  internal  evidence  (see  Professor 
Arber's  Introduction  to  his  reprint)  to  be  December,  1601,"  Macray's  Pre- 
face, p.  viii.     But  about  this  date  is  sufficient  for  us  here. 


Sbafcespeate's  Sonnets. 


In  1  60  1  there  was  in  progress,  or  reaching  its  climax,  a 
famous  literary  and  theatrical  quarrel,  in  which  Ben  Jonson 
was  one  of  the  principal  actors.  Mr.  Fleay  observes  — 
though  I  know  not  on  what  grounds  —  that  "the  quarrel 
was  known  as  the  'War  of  the  theatres.'"1  In  relation 
to  this  quarrel  two  dramatic  works  stand  out  with  especial 
prominence,  one  of  these  being  Ben  Jonson's  The  Poetaster  ; 
or  Ills  Arraignment,  and  the  other  Dekker's  Satiromastix,  or 
the  Untrussing  of  the  Humorous  Poet,  which  was  designed  as 
a  counterblast  to  the  Poetaster.  In  the  passage  of  the  Re- 
turn from  Parnassus  just  quoted,  there  is  clearly  an  allusion 
to  the  Poetaster  in  what  is  said  of  Ben  Jonson's  "  bringing 
up  Horace  giving  the  poets  a  pill."  In  the  Poetaster  (Act 
v.  sc.  i)  Horace  (that  is,  Jonson)  says,  —  • 

"  I  have  pills  about  me, 
Mixt  with  the  whitest  kind  of  hellebore, 
Would  give  him  a  light  vomit,  that  should  purge 
His  brain  and  stomach  of  those  tumorous  heats." 

The  pills  are  taken,  and  speedily  produce  their  due  effect. 
The  allusion  to  this  in  the  Return  from  Parnassus  is  clear 
enough;  but  what  is  referred  to  when  it  is  said  that 
"  Shakespeare  hath  given  him  (i.e.  Jonson)  a  purge  that 
made  him  beray  his  credit  ?  "  The  suggestion  easily  pre- 
sents itself  that  the  reference  is  to  the  Satiromastix.  What 
is  said  of  Jonson's  "  credit  "  having  been  tarnished  is  not 
difficult  to  explain  in  view  of  the  unsparing  severity  with 
which,  in  the  Satiromastix,  personal  and  other  characteristics 
of  Jonson's  are  satirised.  And  that  there  is  in  the  Return 
from  Parnassus  an  allusion  to  the  Satiromastix,  with  its 
"  untrussing  of  the  humorous  poet,"  is  rendered  very 
probable  indeed  by  what  Kemp  says  a  little  further  on  in 
the  same  scene:  —  "You  are  at  Cambridge  still  with  [size 

1  Chronicle  History  of  the  Life  and  Work  of  Shakespeare,  p.  36.  Dekker, 
however,  in  his  Eauens  Almanack,  speaks  of  "  another  ciuill  warre,"  which 
"  will  fal  between  players."  But  this  is  in  1609. 


Scanfcal  in  1601,  119 


que]  and  be  lusty  humorous  poets,  you  must  vntrusse,  I 
[made]  this  my  last  circuit,  purposely  because  I  would  be 
judge  of  your  actions."1  Here,  too,  we  have  the  idea  of 
"  arraignment  "  as  in  both  the  Poetaster  and  the  Satiro- 
mastix.  But  how  could  the  Satiromastix  be  ascribed  to 
Shakespeare,  so  that  it  could  be  said  that  it  was  he  who 
"  gave  the  purge  "  ?  Did  Dekker  write  it  at  Shakespeare's 
instigation  ?  If  not,  on  what  other  ground  could  the  attack 
on  Jonson  be  ascribed  to  Shakespeare  ?  The  action  of  the 
Satiromastix  takes  place  under  the  sway  of  King  William 
Rufus;  and  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  late  Mr.  Richard 
Simpson  that  this  monarch  was  intended  to  represent 
Shakespeare,2  who  thus  "presides  over  the  untrussing  of 
the  humorous  poet,"  being  "brought  in,"  Mr.  Simpson 
observes,  "as  William  Rufus  directing  the  punishment  of 
Jonson,  but  giving  no  brilliant  example  of  chastity  in  his 
own  person,"  Mr.  Simpson  places  in  close  relation  to  this 
the  story  already  alluded  to  about  Shakespeare  and  Bur- 
bage,  William  the  Conqueror  and  Richard  the  Third.  And 
certainly  the  way  in  which  William  Rufus  carries  off  Walter 
TerrilPs  bride  is  in  no  small  degree  analogous  to  what  is 
said  of  Shakespeare  in  the  William  the  Conqueror  story. 
The  suggestion  may  be  made  that  there  is  a  designed 
allusion  to  this  story  in  the  Satiromastix.  If  the  story  was 
widely  circulated  —  and  it  must  be  remembered  also  how 
close  in  point  of  time  is  Manningham's  notice  —  the  spec- 
tators of  the  play  would  have  little  difficulty  in  recognising 
Shakespeare,  notwithstanding  the  slight  change  of  William 
the  Conqueror  into  William  Rufus.  For  this  change, 
indeed,  Shakespeare's  light  hair  and  probably  ruddy  com- 
plexion would  easily  account.3 

1  I  still  quote  from  Mr.  Macray's  edition. 

2  North'  British  Review,  July  1870,  art.   "Ben  Jonson's  Quarrel  with 
Shakspeare,"  p.  416. 

3  Wivell  (Shakspeare  Portraits,  1827,  pp.  128,  129,  131)  says  of  the 
Stratford  bust,  that  it  was  "originally  coloured  to  resemble  life,  con- 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


If  Shakespeare  was  thus  intended  by  the  character  of 
King  William  Rufus,  it  is  not  easy  to  suppose  that  the 
Satiromastix  was  put  on  the  stage  at  his  instigation  or  with 
his  concurrence,  notwithstanding  that  it  was  acted  by  his 
own  company.  Mr.  Fleay  appears  to  be  of  opinion  that  this 
would  not  have  occurred  if  Shakespeare  had  been  in  London 
at  the  time  (Chronicle  History,  p.  43).  And  Mr.  Simpson 
thought  that  Shakespeare  was  much  vexed  at  the  attack 
on  himself  in  the  Satiromastix ;  and,  moreover,  that  "  he 
seems  to  refer  to  and  protest  against  the  general  ill-fame 
under  which  he  laboured  at  this  time  in  his  i2ist  Sonnet — 
'  'Tis  better  to  be  vile  than  vile  esteemed,' "  &C.1 

For  our  present  purpose,  however,  it  is,  in  accordance 
with  what  has  been  already  said,  not  necessary  to  affirm 
that  the  story  about  William  the  Conqueror  is  true,  nor 
need  we  assert  that  Shakespeare  was  satirised  in  Dekker's 
play.  It  is  sufficient,  with  reference  to  the  i2ist  Sonnet 
and  other  allusions  previously  quoted,  that  we  have  evidence 
that  in  or  about  1601  there  was  in  circulation  scandal 
affecting  Shakespeare's  moral  character  and  connected  with 
the  theatre,  and  also  that  there  was  at  the  same  time  a 


formably  to  the  taste  of  the  times  in  which  the  monument  was  erected, 
the  eyes  being  of  a  light  hazel,  and  the  hair  and  beard  auburn." 

"In  the  year  1748  this  monument  was  carefully  restored,  and  the 
original  colours  of  the  bust,  &c.,  as  much  as  possible  preserved  (by  Mr. 
John  Hall,  a  limner  of  Stratford)."  Subsequently  (1793)  it  was  "painted 
white  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Malone,"  p.  133. 

Mr.  Friswell  (Life  Portraits  of  Shakspeare,  1864,  p.  7)  says  : — "The  bust 
has  now  been  restored  to  its  last  coat  of  colour  by  Mr.  Collins  of  New  Bond 
Street,  who  prepared  for  it  a  bath  of  some  detergent,  which  entirely  took 
off  Malone's  whitewash,"  &c.  We  may  take  it,  then,  that  the  bust  repre- 
sents approximately  Shakespeare's  complexion,  colour  of  hair,  &c. 

The  following  quotation  from  Manningham's  Diary  may  also  be  given 
with  respect  to  contemporary  use  of  the  word  "Bufus:" — "I  askt  Mr. 
Leydall  whether  he  argued  a  case  according  to  his  opinion.  He  said, 
noe  !  but  he  sett  a  good  colour  upon  it.  I  told  him  he  might  well  doe 
soe,  for  he  neuer  wants  a  good  colour;  he  is  Rufus." 

1  North  British  Review,  loc.  cit.  p.  411. 


Scandal  in  1601.  121 


theatrical  quarrel  in  which  Shakespeare  was  supposed  to 
have  taken  part.  It  is  not  at  all  difficult  to  understand 
how,  from  such  elements,  scandal  and  slander  may  have 
grown  and  become  intensified  to  any  possible  degree  or 
extent.  Moreover,  the  scandal  was  probably  concerned  also 
with  other  matters  which  are  now  unknown.  But,  what- 
ever may  have  been  the  cause  or  causes  of  the  scandal,  there 
is  ground  for  believing  that  it  had  a  deep  and  powerful 
influence  on  Shakespeare's  mind,  and,  in  consequence,  on 
those  great  dramas  which  were  produced  during  several 
years  onward  from  I6OI.1 


1  What  is  said  in  the  Folio  Hamlet  (Act  ii.  sc.  2,  lines  372-376)  of  the 
"  throwing  about  of  brains "  and  the  "poet  and  the  player  going  to  cuffs 
in  the  question  "  may  very  well  pertain  to  the  quarrel  as  existing  in  1601. 
But,  as  this  is  absent  from  the  Quartos  of  1603  and  1604,  an  objection 
might  easily  be  made  to  the  citation  of  the  passage  as  authoritative. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

INDICATIONS  OF  GLOOM  IN  THE  SONNETS  AND  SOME 
OTHER  OF  SHAKESPEARE'S  WORKS. 

THERE  is  a  remarkable  passage  in  Hallam's  Literature  of 
Europe  (Part  III.,  chap.  vi.  §  42),  from  which  a  quotation 
must  here  be  made  : — "  There  seems  to  have  been  a  period 
in  Shakespeare's  life  when  his  heart  was  ill  at  ease,  and  ill 
content  with  the  world  or  his  own  conscience ;  the  memory 
of  hours  misspent,  the  pang  of  affection  misplaced  or  unre- 
quited, the  experience  of  man's  worser  nature,  which  inter- 
course with  unworthy  associates,  by  choice  or  circumstance 
peculiarly  teaches; — these,  as  they  sank  down  into  the 
depths  of  his  great  mind,  seem  not  only  to  have  inspired 
into  it  the  conception  of  Lear  and  Timon,  but  that  of  one 
primary  character,  the  censurer  of  mankind.  This  type  is 
first  seen  in  the  philosophic  melancholy  of  Jaques,  gazing 
with  an  undiminished  serenity,  and  with  a  gaiety  of  fancy, 
though  not  of  manners,  on  the  follies  of  the  world.  It 
assumes  a  graver  cast  in  the  exiled  Duke  of  the  same  play, 
and  next  one  rather  more  severe  in  the  Duke  of  Measure 
for  Measure.  In  all  these,  however,  it  is  merely  contem- 
plative philosophy.  In  Hamlet  this  is  mingled  with  the 
impulses  of  a  perturbed  heart  under  the  pressure  of  extra- 
ordinary circumstances ;  it  shines  no  longer,  as  in  the  former 
characters,  with  a  steady  light,  but  plays  in  fitful  corusca- 
tions under  feigned  gaiety  and  extravagance.  In  Lear  it 
is  the  sudden  flash  of  inspiration  across  the  incongruous 
imagery  of  madness ;  in  Timon  it  is  obscured  by  the 
exaggerations  of  misanthropy.  These  plays  all  belong  to 


5n&f cations  of  (5 loom.  123 

nearly  the  same  period :  As  You  Like  It  being  usually 
referred  to  1600,  Hamlet,  in  its  altered  form,  to  about  1602, 
Timonto  the  same  year,  Measure  for  Measure  to  1603,  and 
Lear  to  1604." 

In  this  passage  no  mention  is  made  of  some  plays  of 
Shakespeare  which  must  be  referred  to  the  period  in  ques- 
tion ;  and  objection  may  be  made  to  Hallam's  statements 
with  regard  to  certain  details.  Nevertheless  the  passage 
just  quoted  is  a  remarkable  one;  and  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  in  arriving  at  the  conclusion  expressed  Hallam  does 
not  seem  to  have  taken  any  account  of  the  Sonnets.  It 
will  be  seen,  however,  that  Hallam's  conclusions  derived 
from  the  Plays  are  in  singular  agreement  with  those  which 
we  have  attained  concerning  the  Sonnets.1  The  period  of 
Shakespeare's  life,  when  his  heart  was  ill  at  ease,  Hallam 
places  about  the  year  1600.  According  to  the  chronological 
indications  already  reviewed  it  was  a  little  before  this  time 
that  Shakespeare's  mistress  proved  unfaithful  to  him,  de- 
serting him  for  his  young  friend ;  that  his  feelings  were 
wounded  through  the  favour  supposed  to  be  shown  by  his 
friend  to  George  Chapman,  and  that  through  these  or  other 
causes  there  occurred  a  breach  of  the  intimacy  lasting  for 
some  time,  probably  about  eighteen  months  (1599-1601). 
During  this  interval  there  was,  as  shown  in  the  last  chapter, 
scandal  afloat  concerning  the  poet's  character,  but,  notwith- 
standing this,  and  the  "  wretched  errors  "  which  he  confesses 
that  he  had  committed  (119),  it  would  appear  nevertheless 
from  100  that  he  had  been  busy  with  literary  work.  Obvi- 
ously, however,  the  complimentary  language  of  this  Sonnet 


1  In  treating  of  the  Sonnets,  however,  in  Part  III.  chap,  v.,  Hallam 
adds  in  a  note  : — "Pembroke  succeeded  to  his  father  in  1601.  I  incline 
to  think  that  the  Sonnets  were  written  about  that  time,  some  probably 
earlier,  some  later.  That  they  were  the  same  as  Meres,  in  1598,  has  men- 
tioned ...  I  do  not  believe,  both  on  account  of  the  date,  and  from  the 
peculiarly  personal  allusions  they  contain." 


124  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  serious  estimate  by  Shakespeare  of 
the  value  of  his  work  : — 

"  Where  art  thou,  Muse,  that  them  forget'st  so  long 
To  speak  of  that  which  gives  thee  all  thy  might  ? 
Spend'st  thou  thy  fury  on  some  worthless  song, 
Darkening  thy  power  to  lend  base  subjects  light  ? 
Return,  forgetful  Muse,  and  straight  redeem 
In  gentle  numbers  time  so  idly  spent ; 
Sing  to  the  ear  that  doth  thy  lays  esteem, 
And  gives  thy  pen  both  skill  and  argument." 

On  which  of  his  works  was  Shakespeare  then  engaged  1 
In  1600  there  were  placed  on  the  Stationers'  Register  the 
titles  of  the  three  plays  Henry  F.,  Much  Ado  about  Nothing, 
and  As  You  Like  It.  This,  however,  does  not  enable  us  to 
determine  as  precisely  as  is  desirable  for  our  present  pur- 
pose the  date  of  composition.  And  a  remark  somewhat 
similar  may  be  made  with  regard  to  the  time  when  Twelfth 
Night  was  written,  though  this  may  very  possibly  be  of  the 
date  1599  or  I6OO.1  From  the  allusion  in  the  Chorus  before 
Act  v.  it  may  be  inferred  that  Henry  V.  was  written  in 
1599,  when  Essex  was  absent  in  Ireland.  Much  Ado  about 
Nothing  and  As  You  Like  It  were  probably  both  written  in 
or  about  the  year  1599.  The  former  play,  notwithstanding 
the  lively  encounters  of  Benedick  and  Beatrice,  conveys,  in 
relation  to  the  plot  against  Hero  and  its  consequences,  an 
impression  of  sadness — an  impression  which,  it  has  been 
observed,  "  would  have  been  too  tragical  had  not  Shake- 
speare carefully  softened  it,  in  order  to  prepare  for  a  fortu- 
nate catastrophe  "  (Schlegel).  In  As  You  Like  It  we  have, 
according  to  Hallam,  the  first  example  of  the  "  censurer  of 
mankind."  It  might  almost  be  said  that  we  have  a  double 
presentation  of  the  pessimistic  philosopher  in  Jaques  and 
his  comic  counterpart,  Touchstone.  The  one  seems  to  play 

1  The  entry  in  Manningham's  Diary  of  February  2,  i6oi[-2]  may  fix  the 
time  when  he  first  saw  the  play,  but  it  cannot  fix  certainly  the  date  of  its 
composition,  or  even  its  first  presentation  on  the  stage. 


of  ©loom,  125 


into  the  other's  hands.  This  comes  out  most  clearly,  per- 
haps, with  regard  to  the  speech  of  Touchstone,  as  reported 
in  Act  ii.  sc.  7,  lines  26-28  :  — 

"  And  so,  from  hour  to  hour,  we  ripe  and  ripe, 
And  then,  from  hour  to  hour,  we  rot  and  rot  ; 
And  thereby  hangs  a  tale." 

This  "tale,"  the  sorry  account  of  man's  life-history,  is  pro- 
bably to  be  understood  as  given  by  Jaques  in  the  well- 
known  passage  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  same  scene, 
"  All  the  world's  a  stage,"  and  giving  the  "  strange  eventful 
history  "  which  ends  — 

"  In  second  childishness  and  mere  oblivion, 
Sans  teeth,  sans  eyes,  sans  taste,  sans  everything." 

In  Twelfth  Night  the  most  noteworthy  thing,  with  reference 
to  our  present  purpose,1  is  the  clown's  song  at  the  end,  a 
'song  which  Charles  Knight  declared  to  be,  in  his  judgment, 
"  the  most  philosophical  clown's  song  upon  record."  But 
if  the  song  is  a  philosophical  song,  the  philosophy  has  a 
strong  tinge  of  pessimism.  The  course  of  things  in  the 
world  ever  goes  on  in  the  same  way  :  —  "  A  great  while  ago 
the  world  began."  Men  are  prone  to  evil,  and  for  evil- 
doers and  all,  the  world  is  at  best  a  rough  and  harsh  world, 
"  for  the  rain  it  raineth  every  day."  But  whatever  element 
of  melancholy  or  pessimism  there  may  be  in  the  three 
comedies  just  mentioned,  they  are  separated  by  a  wide 
gulf  from  those  so-called  "  bitter  comedies,"  Troilus  and 
Cressida  and  Measure  for  Measure.2  A  similar  remark 
might  be  made  with  regard  to  Julius  Csesar  and  the  tragedy 

1  Dr.  Furnivall  has  remarked,  with  regard  to  Twelfth  Wight,  in  his  Intro- 
duction to  the  Leopold  Shakspere  :  —  "  It  is  to  the  Sonnets  that  we  turn  for 
a  parallel  to  Viola's  pleading  with  Olivia  to  marry  the  Duke,  and  not  to 
forbear  to  leave  a  copy  of  her  beauty  to  the  world,  and  to  the  Sonnets  to 
his  mistress  for  Shakspere's  love  of  music"  (p.  lix.). 

2  The  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor  was  first  printed  (imperfectly)  in  1602  ; 
but  the  play  was  probably  written  before  Henry  V. 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


which  probably  stands  next  to  it  in  order  of  time,  Hamlet. 
Julius  C&sar  is  the  first  of  Shakespeare's  series  of  greater 
tragedies.  An  allusion  in  Weever's  Mirror  of  Martyrs 
(1601)  pretty  certainly  fixes  the  date  of  production  to  about 
1600.  The  play  is  very  symmetrical;  and  though  Fate  is 
everywhere  dominant,  steadily  working  on  to  the  tragical 
consummation,  the  play  cannot  be  called  pessimistic.  For 
the  vast  difference  which  appears  when  we  turn  to  Hamlet 
a  reason  may  be  assigned  if  at  this  point  we  place  (and,  as 
we  have  seen,  the  chronological  indications  are  entirely  in 
accordance  with  our  so  placing  it)  that  scandal  concerning 
his  character  which  pressed  on  Shakespeare  so  heavily 
(supra,  p.  115),  making  him  feel  as  if  his  forehead  had  been 
branded,  and  causing  him  to  speak  as  though  cut  off  from 
the  world,  with  his  ears  deaf  alike  to  flattery  and  censure 
(112).  To  the  hostility  to  mankind  thus  displayed  may  be 
ascribed  (as  being  at  least  one  cause)  the  deep  pessimism  of 
Hamlet.  Mankind  are  exhibited  in  this  play  as  though 
perhaps  attractive  without,  like  "the  most  beautified 
Ophelia,"  yet  incurably  diseased,  and  rotten  to  the  core.  It 
is  this  view  of  mankind  generally,  and  certainly  not  any 
special  depravity  on  the  part  of  Ophelia,  which  accounts  for 
Hamlet's  mysterious  treatment  of  her  while  she  was  sewing 
in  her  chamber,  when,  after  that  intent  look  at  her  with 
his  hand  over  his  brow,  drawing  back  "to  the  length  of  all 
his  arm,"  — 

"  He  rais'd  a  sigh  so  piteous  and  profound, 
That  it  did  seem  to  shatter  all  his  bulk, 
And  end  his  being  "  (Act  ii.  sc.  i,  lines  94-96). 

And  in  the  next  scene,  somewhat  less  obscurely,  after  speak- 
ing of  an  honest  man  as  excessively  rare,  only  one  such  in, 
two  or  ten  thousand,  Hamlet  describes  the  race  as  carrion 
putrefying  in  the  sun.     Elsewhere,  too,  in  the  play,  there 
are  various  things  quite  in  harmony  with  what  is  here  said.1 

1  See  the  present  writer's  Philosophy  of  "Hamlet." 


5nfcications  ot  (Bloom.  127 

The  poem  consisting  of  Sonnets  100  to  126,  which  speaks 
of  the  scandal  from  which  the  poet  was  suffering,  we  have 
placed  in  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  1601.  Probably 
at  this  very  time  Shakespeare  was  at  work  at  Hamlet,  for  on 
July  26,  1602,  there  was  entered  on  the  Stationers'  Register 
for  James  Roberts,  "  'The  Revenge  of  Hamlet,  Prince  [of] 
Denmarke,7  as  yt  was  latelie  acted  by  the  Lord  Chamber- 
layne  his  servantes."  Measure  for  Measure,  which  has  been 
described  by  Professor  Dowden  as  "  one  of  the  darkest  and 
most  painful  of  the  comedies  of  Shakspere,"  gives  very  pro- 
bable indications  of  having  been  written  about  the  same 
time  as  Hamlet,  though  with  respect  to  the  date  of  Measure 
for  Measure  we  cannot  appeal  to  the  Stationers'  Register. 
We  can  do  this,  however,  in  the  case  of  Troilus  and  Cressida. 
On  February  7,  i6o2[— 3] — that  is,  a  little  more  than  seven 
months  after  the  entry  of  Hamlet — there  occurs  another 
entry,  also  for  Roberts : — "  Entred  for  his  copie  in  full 
Court  holden  this  day  to  print  when  he  hath  gotten  suffi- 
cient authority  for  yt,  The  booke  of  '  Troilus  and  Cressida ' 
as  it  is  acted  by  my  lord  Chamberlens  Men."  As  the 
expression  "  the  Lord  Chamberlain's  Men  "  denotes  Shake- 
speare's company,  there  is  strong  reason  to  believe  that 
Shakespeare's  Troilus  and  Cressida,  probably  in  a  form 
differing  somewhat  from  that  which  has  come  down  to  us, 
was  in  process  of  representation  in  February  1603.  That 
the  play  was  somewhat  altered  and  retouched  previous  to 
its  being  printed  in  1609  is  quite  likely.  But,  even  on  this 
view  of  the  matter,  the  later  Troilus  and  Cressida  contains 
evident  indications  of  the  original  play,  with  some  curious 
links  connecting  it  with  Hamlet.  Two  of  these  are  espe- 
cially worthy  of  notice.  It  is  only  when  comparison  is 
made  with  Hamlet  that  we  can  at  all  make  out  their  mean- 
ing. At  the  commencement  of  the  second  act  Thersites  most 
mysteriously  speaks  of  Agamemnon  as  being  "a  botchy 
core,"  and  as  having  "  boils  full,  all  over,  generally."  The 
obscurity  diminishes  when  we  think  of  Hamlet  treating 


128  Sbafcespeare'6  Sonnets. 

Ophelia  as  a  diseased  person,  "  going  to  the  length  of  all 
his  arm,"  &c.  Underlying  both  is  the  idea  of  man's  ter- 
ribly repulsive  moral  disease.  And  there  is  the  not  less 
obscure  place  in  Act  v.  sc.  8,  line  i,  where  Hector,  standing 
over  the  body  of  the  man  in  splendid  armour,  whom  he  has  just 
killed,  addresses  him,  "  Most  putrefied  core,  so  fair  without." 
The  dimculty  is  at  once  removed  when  we  recollect  the 
"  most  beauti/zed  Ophelia,"  and  how  Hamlet  speaks  of  man- 
kind as  carrion  putrefying  in  the  sun  (Act.  ii.  sc.  2,  lines 
181,  182).  The  opinion  is  probably  correct  that  Troilus  and 
Cressida  owed  its  origin,  wholly  or  in  part,  to  Shakespeare's 
jealousy  of  Chapman,  and  to  his  fear  as  to  the  influence  which 
the  grand  translation  of  the  Iliad  might  exert  on  his  valu- 
able young  friend.  But  though  the  real  or  supposed  rivalry 
of  Chapman  may  have  been  the  primary  cause  for  the  ridi- 
cule poured  so  unsparingly  on  the  Homeric  heroes,  far  more 
potent,  probably,  was  Shakespeare's  disaffection  towards 
mankind.  Dowden  remarks  (Shakspere  Primer,  p.  129) : — 
"  All  the  Greek  heroes  who  fought  against  Troy  are  pitilessly 
exposed  to  ridicule ;  Helen  and  Cressida  are  light,  sensual, 
and  heartless,  for  whose  sake  it  seems  infatuated  folly  to 
strike  a  blow ;  Troilus  is  an  enthusiastic  young  fool ;  and 
even  Hector,  though  valiant  and  generous,  spends  his  life 
in  a  cause  which  he  knows  to  be  unprofitable,  if  not  evil. 
All  this  is  seen  and  said  by  Thersites,  whose  mind  is  made 
up  of  the  scum  of  the  foulness  of  human  life.  But  can 
Shakspere's  view  of  things  have  been  the  same  as  that 
of  Thersites  ? "  Perhaps  not  quite  so,  though  it  may  be 
difficult  to  find  a  nearer  approximation  to  the  truth.  In 
fact,  Dowden  himself  subsequently  admits  that  "a  mood 
of  contemptuous  depreciation  of  life  may  have  come  over 
Shakspere,  and  spoilt  him,  at  that  time,  for  a  writer  of 
comedies."  Altogether  there  is  no  other  key  to  the  riddle 
of  Troilus  and  Cressida  at  all  comparable  to  the  Sonnets, 
with  their  indications  of  Shakespeare's  rivalry  with  Chap- 


5nof  cations  of  (Bloom.  129 

man,  of  the  faithlessness  of  the  dark  lady,  and  of  Shake- 
speare's bitter  quarrel  with  the  world. 

Hallam  places  Timon  of  Athens  in  1602  ;  and  there  is  so 
striking  a  resemblance  in  spirit  between  Timon  and  Troilus 
and  Cressida,  that  this  may  not  unreasonably  incline  us  to 
place  the  two  plays  near  together  in  respect  of  date,  though, 
on  the  other  hand,  arguments  not  to  be  too  lightly  set 
aside  have  been  urged  in  favour  of  a  later  origin.  For  Lear 
Hallam  gives  the  date  1604,  which  is  perhaps  a  little  too 
early.  The  play  cannot  be  called  other  than  pessimistic. 
But  though  mankind  and  womankind  in  common,  from  the 
highest  to  the  lowest,  are  fiercely  denounced,  the  general 
impression  with  respect  to  human  nature  becomes  less 
painful,  in  view  of  the  love  and  devotion  of  Kent  and 
Cordelia.  Macbeth  seems  to  be  placed  by  Hallam  outside 
the  period  of  gloom.  But  though  the  prevailing  spirit  of 
the  play  differs  from  that  manifested  in  Hamlet  and  Troilus 
and  Cressida,  yet  there  is  still  an  exceedingly  sombre  and 
pessimistic  view  of  the  world.  Macbeth  at  the  outset  is  a 
man  of  average  goodness.  Malcolm  says  of  him  : — 

"  This  tyrant,  whose  sole  name  blisters  our  tongues, 
Was  once  thought  honest :  you  have  loved  him  well." 

(Act  iv.  sc.  3,  lines  12,  13). 

But  by  Fate  and  supernatural  powers  he  is  impelled  to 
atrocious  crime,  and  hurried  onward  to  destruction.  We 
have  thus  a  gloomy  view  of  the  world  and  of  the  possibilities 
latent  in  human  nature.1  To  discuss  here  Othello,  Corio- 
lanus,  and  Antony  and  Cleopatra  is  scarcely  necessary.  But 
it  must  be  added  that,  whatever  change  had  passed  over 
Shakespeare  when  he  wrote  even  the  Tempest  and  the 
Winter's  Tale,  he  had  certainly  not  come  round  to  an  opti- 

1  Shakespeare  seems  to  have  had  this  pessimistic  view  of  human  nature 
before  him  when  he  adopted  and  inserted  the  long  catalogue  of  latent 
vices  with  which  Malcolm  charges  himself.  Comp.  also  with  the  maggot- 
breeding  carrion  of  Hamlet,  Macbeth,  i.  2,  lines  n,  12,  "The  multiplying 
villanies  of  nature  do  swarm  upon  him. " 

I 


130  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

mistic  view  of  the  world.  This  is  shown  by  the  view  of 
essential  original  human  nature,  with  its  vices,  given  in 
Caliban ;  a  portraiture  marvellously  resembling  in  several 
respects  the  picture  which  Swift  gives  of  the  Yahoos  of 
Hony  hnhnm-land.  * 

In  accepting  in  the  main  Hallam's  opinion  with  regard 
to  the  period  of  gloom  in  Shakespeare's  history — an  opinion 
which,  as  to  indications  of  time  and  otherwise,  agrees  ex- 
ceedingly well  with  the  facts  of  the  Sonnets — we  should 
beware  of  over-stating  the  case  with  respect  to  the  com- 
mencement of  this  period.  Traces,  more  or  less  clear,  of  a 
pessimistic  view  of  things  may  be  detected  even  in  Shake- 
speare's earliest  works.  Thus,  of  that  "first  heir  of  his 
invention,"  Venus  and  Adonis,  Dr.  Furnivall  says  : — "  Two 
lines  there  are,  reflecting  Shakspere's  own  experience  of 
life — his  own  early  life  in  London  possibly — which  we  must 
not  fail  to  note ;  they  are  echoed  in  Hamlet : — 

'  For  misery  is  trodden  on  by  many, 
And  being  low,  never  reliev'd  by  any ' " 

(Introd.  to  Leopold  Shakspere,  p.  xxx. ). 

These  lines,  however,  are  by  no  means  the  only  expression 
of  a  pessimistic  tendency  to  be  found  in  Venus  and  Adonis. 
There  is  the  discourse  of  Venus  with  regard  to  the  pre- 
ponderant evils  of  love,  towards  the  close  of  the  poem ;  and 
a  few  stanzas  on  from  the  lines  just  quoted  there  is  the 
description  of  terrible  diseases  to  which  man  is  subject : — 

"  As  burning  fevers,  agues  pale  and  faint, 

Life-poisoning  pestilence  and  frenzies  wood, 

The  marrow-eating  sickness,  whose  attaint 

Disorder  breeds,  by  heating  of  the  blood  : 

Surfeits,  imposthumes,  grief,  and  damn'd  despair, 

Swear  Nature's  death,  for  framing  thee  so  fair"  (11.  739-744). 

Much  might  be  similarly  adduced  from  Lucrece.  But  to 
give  only  two  stanzas  : — 

1  This  subject  was  discussed  by  me  before  the  New  Shakspere  Society. 
See  Proceedings  of  that  Society  for  1887. 


•  5nfcicatfons  of  Gloom,  131 

"  Why  should  the  worm  intrude  the  maiden  bud? 
Or  hateful  cuckoo  hatch  in  sparrows'  nests  ? 
Or  toads  infect  fair  founts  with  venom  mud  ? 
Or  tyrant  folly  lurk  in  gentle  breasts  ? 
Or  kings  be  breakers  of  their  own  behests  ? 

But  no  perfection  is  so  absolute, 

That  some  impurity  doth  not  pollute  "  (11.  848-854). 

' '  The  patient  dies  while  the  physician  sleeps  ; 

The  orphan  pines  while  the  oppressor  feeds  ; 

Justice  is  feasting  while  the  widow  weeps  ; 

Advice  is  sporting  while  infection  breeds  : 

Thou  grant'st  no  time  for  charitable  deeds  : 
Wrath,  envy,  treason,  rape,  and  murder's  rages, 
The  heinous  hours  wait  on  them  as  their  pages  "  (11.  904-910). 

This  last  stanza,  incriminating  "  Opportunity,"  adumbrates 
the  pessimism  of  Sonnet  66.  Here,  too,  as  in  some  other 
parts  of  the  poem,  we  seem  to  have  almost  a  prophecy  of 
the  denunciations  in  Lear. 

Of  Shakespeare's  early  comedy,  Love's  Labour's  Lost, 
Dowden  remarks  (Sliakspere  Primer,  p.  64),  that,  "  with  its 
apparent  lightness,  there  is  a  serious  spirit  underlying  the 
play."  The  sportive  Berowne  is  dismissed  to  "jest  a 
twelvemonth  in  an  hospital," — 

"  Visit  the  speechless  sick,  and  still  converse 
With  groaning  wretches  ; " 

' '  To  move  wild  laughter  in  the  throat  of  death. " 

This  passage,  and  that  previously  quoted  from  the  Venus 
and  Adonis,  may  suggest  the  possibility  that  in  early  life, 
under  circumstances  now  unknown,  Shakespeare  witnessed 
examples  of  the  effects  of  disease  so  terrible  as  to  produce 
a  deep  and  enduring  effect  on  his  mind. 

The  fact,  at  any  rate,  is  apparent  that,  whether  from  the 
melancholy  associated  with  genius,  or  from  whatever  other 
cause,  though  the  gloom  of  the  Sonnets  was  deepened  by 
special  influences,  the  same  tendency  of  mind  is  discernible 
throughout  Shakespeare's  literary  career,  as  also  it  is  im- 
printed on  the  most  strongly  certified  of  all  the  alleged 


132  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

portraits  of  Shakespeare,  the  Droeshout  engraving  in  the 
First  Folio.  Of  the  Shakespeare  of  this  engraving,  as 
compared  with  the  Shakespeare  of  the  Sonnets,  Dr.  Furni- 
vall  remarks  : — "  In  the  Sonnets  we  have  the  gentle  Will, 
the  melancholy  mild-eyed  man  of  the  Droeshout  portrait. 
Shakespeare's  tender,  sensitive,  refined  nature  is  seen  clearly 
here  (i.e.,  in  the  Sonnets),  but  through  a  glass  darkly  in 
the  plays  "  (In trod,  to  Leopold  Shakspere,  p.  Ixiv.).1 

1  Mr.  G.  Bernard  Shaw,  in  a  paper  on  Troilus  and  Cressida,  read  some 
time  ago  before  the  New  Shakspere  Society,  adduced  several  instances  of 
Shakespeare's  displaying  a  pessimistic  tendency  or  portraying  pessimism 
in  certain  of  his  earlier  plays.  Some  of  these  may  be  here  noted. 

In  the  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona  (Act  v.  so.  4)  "an  ordinary  friend  is 
described  as  one  '  that's  without  faith  or  love.' " 

"  In  the  Comedy  of  Errors  Antipholus  speaks  of  his 

'  earthly  gross  conceit 
Smothered  in  errors,  feeble,  shallow,  weak '  "  (Act  iii.  sc.  2). 

Romeo  anticipates  the  fatalism  of  ' '  'Tis  paltry  to  be  Caesar ;  not  being 
Fortune,  he's  but  Fortune's  knave"  (Antony  and  Cleopatra,  Act  v.  sc.  2), 
by  exclaiming,  "I  am  Fortune's  fool"  (Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  iii.  sc.  i). 

"Richard  II.  gives  a  strong  indication  of  the  direction  in  which  Shake- 
speare's mind  was  travelling.  He  says, — 

'  Whatever  I  be, 

Nor  I,  nor  any  man,  that  but  man  is 
With  nothing  shall  be  pleased,  till  he  be  eased 
By  being  nothing1 "  (Act  v.  sc.  5). 

"King  Henry  IV.,  speaking  of  the  future,  exclaims, — 

'  Oh,  if  this  were  seen, 

The  happiest  youth,  seeing  his  progress  through, 
What  perils  past,  what  crosses  to  ensue, 
Would  shut  the  book,  and  sit  him  down  and  die ' 

(Part  2,  Act.  iii.  sc.  i). 

When  it  came  to  this,  Troilus  and  Cressida  was  evidently  not  far  off." 


CHAPTER  XY. 


IN  relation  to  the  Sonnets,  Shakespeare's  scholarship  scarcely 
requires  more  than  slight  treatment.  Of  course,  in  Sonnet 
78,  where  Shakespeare  speaks  of  himself  as  dumb,  and  con- 
trasts his  rude  and  heavy  ignorance  with  the  grace  and 
majesty  of  the  learned  Chapman,  the  expressions  so  em- 
ployed need  not  be  taken  quite  literally,  though  still  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare's  scholarship  would  not 
have  borne  comparison  with  that  of  the  translator  of  Homer. 
Probably  in  the  Stratford  grammar  school  he  had  been 
pretty  well  drilled  in  Lily's  Latin  Grammar,  and  very  likely 
he  had  read  some  portions  of  Ovid  in  the  original,  not- 
withstanding the  use  he  afterwards  made  of  Golding's 
translation.  Perhaps  he  had  little  or  no  general  acquaint- 
ance with  Horace.  The  quotation  or  allusion  in  Sonnet  55 
can  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for,  as  we  have  seen  (supra, 
p.  19),  without  such  acquaintance.  The  relation  between 
the  Comedy  of  Errors  and  the  Men&chmi  of  Plautus  it  is 
not  necessary  here  to  discuss  at  length.  It  appears  impro- 
bable that  Shakespeare  should  have  read  in  the  original  so 
difficult  an  author  as  Plautus ;  but,  in  view  of  known  facts, 
the  problem  need  not  be  very  perplexing.1  And,  though 
Shakespeare  may  not  have  been  entirely  ignorant  of  Greek, 
it  seems  in  no  way  likely  that  Sonnets  153  and  154  are 
versions  made  by  him  from  the  original  as  given  in  the 

1  Warner's  translation  was  published  in  1595,  and  the  suggestion  which 
has  been  made  that  Shakespeare  had  seen  this  in  MS.  is  possible,  or  he 
may  have  received  assistance  privately  from  some  unknown  scholar. 


134  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

Anthology.  From  there  being  two  versions  of  the  fable,  it 
would  seem  to  have  greatly  interested  Shakespeare,  but 
what  translation  he  employed  has  not  been  ascertained.1 

In  Sonnets  46,  87,  134,  and  elsewhere,  there  is  a  use  of 
legal  phraseology  which  it  is  perhaps  best  to  ascribe  to 
close  observation  of  what  was  going  on  around  rather  than 
to  Shakespeare's  having  obtained  temporary  employment 
in  a  lawyer's  office. 


1  Latin  translations  had  appeared  on  the  Continent,  though  not,  so  far 
as  is  known,  in  England.  Cf.  Hertzberg,  Shakespeare  Jahrbuch,  1878, 
pp.  161,  162. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

EDITIONS   OF  THE  SONNETS  IN  THE   SEVENTEENTH 
CENTURY. 

IN  1599,  as  stated  above,  appeared  TJie  Passionate  Pil- 
grim with  the  following  title  : — 

"  THE  PASSIONATE  PILGRIMS.  By  W.  Shakespeare.  AT 
LONDON  printed  for  W.  laggard,  and  are  to  be  sold  by  W.  Leake, 
at  the  Grey-hound  in  Panics  Churchyard.  1599." 

The  volume  derives,  perhaps,  its  chief  importance  from 
its  containing  two  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets,  138  and  144. 
When  these  Sonnets,  as  they  appeared  in  1599,  are  com- 
pared with  the  text  published  ten  years  later,  differences 
of  reading  become  manifest,  such  as  could  certainly  not 
have  arisen  from  faults  in  transcription  or  from  errors  of 
the  press.  To  give  an  example.  In  the  Passionate  Pil- 
grim the  seventh  and  eighth  lines  of  Sonnet  138  stand 
thus : — 

"  I  smiling,  credite  her  false  speaking  toung, 
Outfacing  faults  in  Loue  with  loues  ill  rest." 

In  the  Sonnets  of  1609  these  two  lines  have  become — 

"  Simply  I  credit  her  false-speaking  tongue, 
On  both  sides  thus  is  simple  truth  supprest." 

A  comparison  of  the  lines  thus  given  can  scarcely  leave 
a  doubt  of  intentional  alteration.  "  Outfacing  faults  with 
love's  ill  rest "  agrees  with  the  forced  smile  of  the  previous 
line  : — "  I  smiling  credit  her  falsehood."  In  the  second 
version,  one  might  think  "smiling"  would  have  been 
better  than  "simply;"  but  "simply"  and  "simple"  have 


136  Sbafcespeare'e  Sonnets. 

come  in  together.  "Vnskilfull  in  the  world's  false  for- 
geries" (P.  P.,  line  4)  becomes  "Vnlearned  in  the  world's 
false  subtilties"  in  1609;  a  tolerably  manifest  improve- 
ment. As  to  the  way  in  which  Jaggard  got  hold  of  the 
two  Sonnets,  nothing  can  here  be  added  to  what  was  said 
above. 

On  January  3,  1599  [1600],  an  entry  was  made  in  the 
Stationers'  Register  relating  to  a  book  which,  it  is  quite 
likely,  was  published,  but,  if  so,  no  copy  is  known  to  exist. 
The  entry  is  to  Eleazar  Edgar  : — 

"Entred  for  his  copye  under  the  handes  of  the  Wardens.  A 
booke  called  Amours  by  J.  D.  with  certen  oyr  [other]  sonnet es  by 
W.  S.  .  .  .  vjd."  i 

The  author  denoted  by  W.  S.  may  possibly  have  been 
Shakespeare;  but  under  the  circumstances  of  course  no 
decided  opinion  can  be  expressed. 

The  first  edition  of  the  collected  Sonnets  bears  the  title — 

"SHAKE-SPEARES  SONNETS.  Neuer  before  Imprinted. 
At  London.  By  G.  Eld  for  T.  T.  and  are  to  be  solde  by  William 
Aspley.  1609." 

Or,  instead  of  "  William  Aspley,"  is  found  "  lohn 
Wright,  dwelling  at  Christ  Church  gate." 

The  book  is  not  printed  quite  so  accurately  as  was  pos- 
sible at  the  time,  but  still  it  is  printed  fairly  well  It  is 
pretty  evident  that  Shakespeare  did  not  correct  successive 
proofs ;  but  there  is  no  probability  that  this  supervision  on 
the  part  of  the  author,  if  it  existed  at  all,  was  nearly  so 
common  and  indispensable  as  it  is  now.2  In  the  present 


1  Arber's  Transcript,  vol.  iii. 

2  But  it  would  seem  certainly  to  be  a  mistake  to  say  that  the  correction 
of  the  press  by  the  author  was  unknown  in  Elizabethan  times.     At  the 
end  of  Breton's  Will  of  Wit  (1599)  there  is  a  note — "What  faults  are 
escaped  in  the  printing,  finde  by  discretion,  and  excuse  the  author,  by 
other  worke  that  let  him  from  attendance  to  the  presse "  (Halliwell's 
Reprint,  1860). 

According  to  Mr.  Halliwell  Phillips,  in  May  1609  Shakespeare's  company 


E&fttons  in  Seventeenth  Century  137 

case  the  frequent  misprint  of  "their"  for  "thy"  (46  al.) 
furnishes  tolerably  conclusive  evidence.  The  question,  how- 
ever, remains  undecided  whether  the  printer,  or  "  the  well- 
wishing  adventurer  in  setting  forth,"  T.  T.  (Thomas  Thorpe), 
received  from  Shakespeare  the  MS.  of  the  Sonnets.  No 
sure  inference  can  be  drawn  from  the  use  of  the  expression 
"well-wishing."  Thorpe  may  have  wished  well  to  Shake- 
speare and  Mr.  W.  H.,  even  if  he  printed  the  Sonnets 
without  direct  sanction.  But  there  is  another  indication  of 
greater  importance.  That  Shakespeare  intended  the  publica- 
tion of  the  first  series  of  Sonnets  may,  as  already  mentioned 
(p.  14),  be  inferred  from  the  concluding  couplet  of  38  : — 

"  If  my  slight  Muse  do  please  these  curious  days, 
The  pain  be  mine,  but  thine  shall  be  the  praise  ; " 

and  the  indication  thus  given  should  be  taken  together 
with  Shakespeare's  frequent  predictions  of  the  immortality 
of  his  verses.  It  is  possible  that  Shakespeare  handed  the 
MS.  to  Thorpe,  and  then,  through  absence  from  London 
or  other  cause,  may  have  had  nothing  further  to  do  with 
the  publication  of  the  book.  That  Herbert  took  a  good 
deal  of  trouble  in  preserving  and  collecting  the  Sonnets, 
and  that,  having  so  done,  he  handed  them  over  to  Thorpe 
for  publication,  seems  to  me  not  quite  likely.  The  conjec- 
ture is  not,  perhaps,  altogether  improbable  that  whatever 
of  due  order  and  arrangement  the  Sonnets  as  published 
possess  was  given  to  them  by  Shakespeare  himself;  that 
copies  were  made  in  MS.  for  distribution  among  the  poet's 
"private  friends;"  that  one  of  these  copies  fell  into  the 
hands  of  Thorpe,  who  also  received  information  as  to  the 
patron  and  friend  of  the  "ever-living  poet,"  though,  in 
accordance  with  not  uncommon  usage,  he  thought  it  expe- 
dient to  give  only  initials. 

were  engaged  in  provincial  performances  (Outlines  of  the  Life  of  Shake- 
speare, 7th  ed.,  vol.  i.  p.  227).  But  no  inference  can  be  drawn  from  this 
as  to  Shakespeare's  being  in  or  out  of  London  when  the  book  was  printed. 


138  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

To  the  Sonnets  was  appended  "A  Louers  complaint.  By 
William  Shake-speare."  But  with  this  appendix  we  are 
not  now  concerned.  Altogether,  including  Title  and  Dedi- 
cation, there  were  but  forty  leaves. 

In  1640  was  issued  a  volume  which,  if  called  a  second 
edition  of  the  Sonnets,  can  be  so  called  only  when  the  word 
"edition"  is  used  with  considerable  freedom.  Sonnets  18, 
19,  43,  56,  75,  76,  96,  and  126  are  omitted,  and  with 
respect  to  the  rest  the  order  of  the  edition  of  1609  is  little 
regarded.  The  volume  contains,  besides  Shakespeare's 
work,  quasi- Shakespearian  poems  from  the  Passionate  Pil- 
grim and  other  sources,  as  well  as  a  number  of  translated 
pieces,  and  three  elegies  on  Shakespeare.  We  should  have, 
apparently,  to  regard  all  these  as  ascribed  to  Shakespeare, 
if  we  were  to  take  literally  the  heading  of  the  appendix  to 
the  book  : — "  An  Addition  of  some  excellent  Poems,  to  those 
precedent,  of  Renowned  Shakespeare,  By  other  Gentlemen." 
The  volume  is  much  thicker  than  that  of  1609,  is  printed 
on  a  much  smaller  page,  and  bears  the  title, — "  POEMS  : 
WRITTEN  BY  WIL.  SHAKESPEARE,  Gent.  Printed  at  London 
by  Tho.  Cotes,  and  are  to  be  sold  by  lohn  Benson,  dwelling 
in  St.  Dunstans  Church-yard.  i64o.'M 

The  publisher,  Benson,  prefixed  to  the  volume  an  Address 
to  the  Reader  which,  though  not  at  all  remarkable  for 
critical  discernment,  is  nevertheless  important  as  bearing 
testimony  to  the  Sonnets  being,  on  their  first  publication, 
less  popular  than  the  Plays  : — 

TO  THE  READER. 

T  Here  presume   (under  favour)  to  present  to  your  view 

some  excellent  and  sweetely  composed  Poems,  of  Master 

William  Shakespeare,   Which  in  themselves  appear e  of  the 

same  purity,  the  Authour  himself  e  then  living  avouched  ;  tliey 

1  There  is  also  on  the  title  a  floral  device  with  the  motto,  "HEB.  DDIM. 

HEB.  DDIEV." 


in  Seventeenth  Century  139 


had  not  the  fortune  by  reason  of  their  Infancie  in  his  death 
to  have  the  due  accomodatid  of  proportionable  glory  with  the 
rest  of  his  ever-living  Workes,  yet  the  lines  of  themselves  will 
afford  you  a  more  authentick  approbation  than  my  assurance 
any  way  can,  to  invite  your  allowance,  in  your  perusall  you 
shall  find  them  Seren,  cleere  and  eligantly  plaine,  such  gentle 
straines  as  shall  recreate  and  not  perplexe  your  braine,  no 
intricate  or  cloudy  stuffe  to  puzzell  intellect,  but  perfect  elo- 
quence ;  such  as  will  raise  your  admiration  to  his  praise  :  this 
assurance  I  know  will  not  differ  from  your  acknowledgment. 
And  certaine  I  am,  my  opinion  will  be  seconded  by  the  suffi- 
ciency of  these  ensuing  lines  ;  I  have  beene  somewhat  solicitus 
to  bring  this  forth  to  the  perfect  view  of  all  men  ;  and  in  so 
doing  glad  to  be  serviceable  for  the  continuance  of  glory  to  the 
deserved  Author  in  these  his  Poems. 

I.  B. 

How  Benson  could  write  of  the  "  elegant  plainness  "  of 
the  Sonnets,  and  of  there  being  nothing  intricate  in  them 
"  to  puzzle  intellect,"  it  may  not  be  quite  easy  to  under- 
stand.1 No  doubt,  however,  he  would  have  been  glad  to 
get  as  many  customers  for  the  book  as  possible.  Perhaps 
he  had  heard  it  objected  that  the  Sonnets  are  obscure  ;  and 
he  may  have  wished  to  meet  the  objection.  How  very  far 
he  was  from  understanding  the  Sonnets  is  shown  by  the 
arrangement  he  adopted,  and  by  the  titles  or  mottoes  which 
he  prefixed.  If  these  mottoes  are  not  of  much  value  with 
respect  to  the  meaning  of  the  Sonnets,  they  may,  neverthe- 
less, be  given  here  as  possessing  some  historical  import- 
ance :  — 

The  glory  of  beautie  .      67,  68,  69  ,    The  force  of  love  .     .     .     .    57,58 


Injurious  Time    60,  63,  64,  65,  66 
True  Admiration      .     .     •    53,  54 


The  beautie  of  Nature  ...     59 
Loves  crueltie I,  2,  3 


1  Dowden  considers,   however,  that  perhaps  Benson  refers  "to  the 
obscurity  of  the  reigning  '  metaphysical  school  of  poetry.'  " 


140 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


Youihfull  glory  .  .  .  13,  14,  15 
Good  admonition  .  .  .  16,  17 
Quicke  prevention  ....  7 
Magazine  of  beautie .  .  .  4,  5,  6 
An  invitation  to  Marriage  8,  9, 
10,  n,  12 

False  beleefe 138 

A  Temptation 144 

True  content 21 

A  bashfutt  Lover 23 

Strong  conceite 22 

The  Exchange 20 

A  disconsolation  .  .  27,  28,  29 
The  benefit  of  Friendship  30,  31, 32 
A  congratulation  .  .  38,  39,  40 
Losse  and  gaine  .  .  .  .41,42 
Melancholy  thoughts .  .  .  44,  45 
Loves  Releefe  ...  33,  34,  35 

Vnanimitie 36,  37 

A  Master-peece 24 

Happinesse  in  content  ...  25 
A  dutifull  Message  .  .  .  •  .  26 
Goe  and  come  quickly  .  .  50,  5 1 
Two  faithfuU  friends  .  .  46,  47 

Carelesse  neglect 48 

Stoute  resolution 49 

Sat  fuisse 62 

A  living  monument  ....  55 
Familiaritie  breeds  contempt  .  52 

P aliens  Armatus 6 1 

A  Valediction .  .  .  71,  72,  74 
Nil  magnis  Invidia  ....  70 

Love-sicke 80,  8 1 

The  Picture  of  true  Love  .  .116 
In  prayse  of  his  love  82,  83,  84,  85 
A  Resignation  .  .  .  .  86,  87 
A  Request  to  his  scornfidl  Love 

88,  89,  90,  91 

A  Lovers  affection  though  his 
Love  prove  unconstant      92,  93, 
94,  95 


Complaint  for  his  Loves  absence 

97,  98,  99 

An  invocation  to  his  Muse  100,  101 
Constant  Affection  104,  105,  106 
Amazement  ...  .  102,  103 
A  Lovers  excuse  for  his  long 

absence 109,  no 

A  complaint  .  .  .  .  in,  112 
Selfe  flattery  of  her  beautie  .  113, 

114,  H5 

Try  all  of  loves  constancy    .     H7i 
118,  119 
A  good  construction  of  his  Loves 

unkindnesse 120 

Errour  in  opinion  .  .  .  121 
Vpon  the  receit  of  a  Table  Boolce 

from  his  Mistris     .     .     .      122 

A  Vow 123 

Loves  safetie 124 

Anintreatie for  her  acceptance  125 
Vpon  her  playing  on  the  Vir- 

ginalls 128 

Immoderate  Lust  ....  129 
In  prayse  of  her  beautie  though 

black  .  .  127,  130,  131,  132 
Vnkinde  Abuse  .  .  .  133,  134 
A  Love-Suite  .  .  .  .  135,  136 
His  heart  wounded  by  her  eye 

137,  139,  140 
A  Protestation  .     .     .     .  141,  142 

An  Allusion 143 

Life  and  death 145 

A  consideration  of  death     .      146 

Immoderate  Passion  ...      147 

Love's  powerful  subtilty    148,  149, 

150 

Retaliation 78,  79 

Sunne  set 73,  77 

A  monument  to  Fame      .  107,  1 08 

Perjurie 151,  152 

Cupids  Treacherie      .     .  153,  154 


The  foregoing  list  is  restricted  to  the  Sonnets  included 


3£&ttfoit6  in  Seventecntb  Century,  141 

by  Benson,  omitting  extraneous  poems.  Why  18,  19,  43, 
56,  75,  76,  96,  126  should  have  been  excluded  it  is  not  alto- 
gether easy  to  see.  If  it  be  said  that  Benson  intended  to 
convey  the  impression  that  the  Sonnets  of  the  first  series 
were  addressed  to  a  woman,  and  that  some  of  those  just 
mentioned  would  not  agree  with  this  view,  still  it  must  be 
remembered  that  others  equally  unsuitable  to  the  theory 
in  question  were  admitted;  as  3,  16,  26. 

Notwithstanding  what  Benson  says  of  his  publication 
being  "  serviceable  for  the  continuance  of  glory  to  the 
Author,"  it  is  perhaps  best  regarded  as  a  bookseller's 
venture,  influenced  mainly  by  commercial  considerations. 
Whether  in  this  respect  the  book  was  successful  we  have 
apparently  no  means  of  ascertaining.1 

1  It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  seventy  years  later,  in  1710,  the 
edition  of  1609  was  reprinted,  and  issued  by  Lintott,  while,  simultaneously 
or  nearly  so,  another  edition,  which  has  been  ascribed  to  Gildon  as 
editor,  gave  substantially  the  edition  of  1640.  The  first  of  these  editions 
professes  to  give  "all  the  Miscellanies  of  Mr.  William  Shakespeare,  which 
were  Publish'd  by  himself  in  the  year  1609,  and  now  correctly  Printed 
from  those  Editions."  Among  those  "Miscellanies"  are  included  the 
"One  Hundred  and  Fifty  Four  Sonnets,  all  of  them  in  Praise  of  his 
Mistress."  The  second,  professing  to  be  the  seventh  volume  of  Shake- 
speare's works,  and  "Printed  for  E.  Curll,"  &c.,  heads  its  reprint,  so  far 
as  the  Sonnets  are  concerned,  as  "  Poems  on  several  occasions." 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

CRITICISM    OF    THE    TEXT. 

THE  criticism  of  the  text  in  the  Sonnets  is  not  attended 
with  difficulties  nearly  so  great  as  those  which  present 
themselves  in  relation  to  several  other  of  Shakespeare's 
works.  This  results  from  the  fact  that  the  edition  of  1609 
is  to  so  very  considerable  an  extent  the  sole  authority.  The 
great  critical  difficulty  of  the  Sonnets  is  presented  by  the 
commencement  of  the  second  line  in  146,  where,  in  the 
edition  of  1609,  are  found  the  words,  "My  sinfull  earth," 
repeated  from  the  end  of  the  first  line  : — 

"  Poore  soule  the  center  of  my  sinfull  earth, 
My  sinfull  earth  these  rebbell  powres  that  thee  array, 
Why  dost  thou  pine  within  and  suffer  dearth,"  &c. 

The  second  line  is  obviously  wrong.  Of  suggested  emenda- 
tions the  Cambridge  editors  give,  "Fool'd  by  those  rebel," 
Malone;  "Starv'd  by  the  rebel,"  Steevens  conj. ;  "Fool'd 
by  these  rebel,"  Dyce;  "Thrall  to  these  rebel,"  Anon.  conj. 
Professor  Dowden  adds  other  emendations  : — "  Foil'd  by 
these  rebel,"  F.  T.  Palgrave;  "Hemm'd  with  these  rebel," 
Furnivall;  "My  sins  these  rebel,"  Bullock;  "Slave  of 
these  rebel,"  Cartwright ;  "  My  sinful  earth  these  rebel 
powers  array,"  G.  Massey,  the  word  "  array  "  being  taken 
by  Massey  as  implying  set  their  battle  in  array  against  the 
soul.  Professor  Dowden  himself  gives  "  Press'd  by  these 
rebel."  I  regard  as  preferable  the  reading  "  Why  feed'st 
these  rebel,"  having  regard  to  the  scope  and  meaning  of 
the  Sonnet,  and  perhaps  also  to  the  vocalisation  of  the  line. 


Criticism  of  tbe  ZTejt  143 

*' "  Feed'st "  is  found  in  the  first  Sonnet  (line  7),  and  in  a 
context  where  the  thought  is  by  no  means  altogether  alien 
from  that  of  I46.1 

Before  the  1609  edition  was  printed,  it  is  not  quite 
improbable  that  the  Sonnets  generally,  or  the  major  part 
of  them,  had  been  subjected  to  revision.  In  this  process 
of  change  and  revision,  the  termination  of  one  line  may 
have  been  altered,  while  that  of  the  line  corresponding  with 
it  may,  through  oversight,  have  remained  unchanged.  We 
may  thus  account  for  the  terminations  of  25,  lines  9  and 

ii  : — 

"  The  painefull  warrior  famosed  for  worth, 

Is  from  the  booke  of  honour  rased  quite." 

Errors  of  the  press,  however,  sometimes  assume  a  strange 
aspect ;  and  whatever  may  be  the  fact  with  regard  to  the 
example  just  given,  there  need  not  be  much  difficulty  in 
ascribing  to  a  mistake  of  the  compositor  the  repetition  of 
"  loss  "  in  34,  lines  10,  12  : — 

"  Though  thou  repent,  yet  I  haue  still  the  losse, 
To  him  that  bears  the  strong  offenses  losse. " 

The  frequent  substitution  of  "  their  "  for  "  thy  "  in  the 
1609  Quarto  was  ascribed,  and  in  all  probability  rightly 
ascribed  by  Malone,  to  a  misunderstanding  of  the  manu- 
script. Either  "  thy  "  may  have  been  so  written  as  to  be 
mistaken  for  an  abbreviation  of  "  their,"  or  sufficient  dis- 
tinction may  not  have  been  made  between  the  abbreviated 
form  of  the  one  word  and  the  other.  Some  of  the  lines, 
however,  as  printed  in  the  Quarto  with  "  their,"  make 
nonsense,  which  it  may  seem  strange  that  Thorpe,  or  Eld 


1  With  regard  to  the  second  Sonnet,  Dowden  has  observed  : — "It  is 
curious  to  note  that  siege  and  livery  are  in  close  juxtaposition"  (Note  on 
146,  line  2).  Shakespeare  may  have  had  the  language  and  thought  of 
these  first  Sonnets  before  his  mind  when  he  wrote  146. 


144  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

the  printer,  should  have  overlooked.  An  example  may  be 
given  from  46,  a  Sonnet  in  which  "their"  occurs  wrongly 
four  times  :  — 

"  Mine  eye  and  heart  are  at  a  mortall  warre, 
How  to  deuide  the  conquest  of  thy  sight, 
Mine  eye,  my  heart  their  pictures  sight  would  barre,"  &c. 

In  other  cases  the  critic  requires  to  keep  in  view  both 
the  greater  laxity  of  Elizabethan  orthography,  and  also  the 
pretty  evident  fact  that  this  laxity  was  accompanied  by  a 
pronunciation  not  only  in  important  respects  differing  from 
that  which  now  prevails,  but  which  was,  even  in  the  mouths 
of  educated  persons,  more  obtuse  and  less  precise.  We 
may  thus  account  for  the  rhyme  "  steeld  "  and  "held"  in 
24,  lines  i,  3,  and  "  sheeds  "  and  "  deeds  "  in  34,  lines 


"  Ah  but  those  teares  are  pearle  which  thy  loue  sheeds, 
And  they  are  ritch,  and  ransome  all  ill  deeds." 

And,  of  course,  in  relation  to  the  Sonnets,  as  elsewhere,  the 
critic  should  so  far  observe  the  general  rule  that  the  more 
difficult  reading  is  to  be  preferred  as  to  be  on  his  guard 
against  accepting  too  readily  emendations  of  tempting 
facility.  Thus,  in  23,  line  9,  — 

"  0  let  my  books  be  then  the  eloquence,"  &c.  , 

though  on  a  superficial  view  the  suggested  emendation 
"looks"  may  seem  admissible,  a  more  thorough  considera- 
tion of  the  context  will  probably  suffice  to  show  that 
"  books  "  is  certainly  to  be  retained. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

SKETCH   OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  INTERPRETATION. 

IT  has  been  considered  that  in  Jonson's  Bartholomew  Fair 
(1614),  Act  v.  sc.  3,  there  is  an  allusion  to  Shakespeare's 
Sonnets,  or  the  circumstances  connected  with  them,  in  what 
is  said  of  Damon  and  Pythias,  "  two  faithful  friends  o'  the 
Bankside,"  who  "  have  but  one  drab. "  Considering  the  men- 
tion of  Burbage  and  the  Bankside,  together  with  other  allu- 
sions, the  supposed  reference  may  be  regarded  as  possible, 
though  I  should  not  like  to  say  more.  We  may  suppose, 
however,  that  to  Jonson  probably  the  main  facts  concerning 
Shakespeare,  his  friend,  and  the  dark  lady  would  be  known, 
even  if  such  knowledge  was  not  very  widely  diffused  among 
the  general  public.1  It  seems,  indeed,  not  quite  easy  to 
understand  how — if  the  facts  connected  with  the  Sonnets  had 
become  extensively  known — in  a  time  so  short  as  twenty- 
four  years  from  the  death  of  Shakespeare,  and  ten  from 
that  of  Herbert,  so  great  a  departure  from  the  truth  as 
that  manifested  by  the  edition  of  1640  could  possibly  have 

1  Dowden  mentions  this  supposed  allusion,  citing,  with  reference  to  it, 
Elze's  William  Shakespeare,  p.  499.  Dowden  remarks,  also,  in  the  same 
place  (larger  ed.  of  Sonnets,  p.  45),  that  some  critics  have  supposed  an 
allusion  to  Thorpe's  dedication  (to  Mr.  W.  H. )  in  Jonson's  dedication  of 
his  Epigrams  to  "  William  Earl  of  Pembroke,  Lord  Chamberlain,  &c." 
In  the  dedication  Jonson  says  that  he  dare  not  change  Pembroke's  title, 
and  that  there  was  nothing  in  his  Epigrams  in  expressing  which  he  needed 
to  employ  a  cipher.  But  there  may  possibly  be  an  allusion  to  playing  on 
the  "Will"  in  Pembroke's  name.  Cf.  Sonnets  135,  136,  and  also  John 
Davies  of  Hereford's  dedication  of  his  "Select  Second  Husband"  to 
Pembroke  contains  the  verse,  ' '  For  Will  (good-  Will)  desired  it  might  be 
YOU"  (Grosart's  Reprint  in  Chertsey  Worthies'  Library,  vol.  ii.). 

E 


146  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

occurred.     Even  upon  the  supposition  that  the  publisher 
Benson   thought   that   poems   in   which    affection  was  so 
warmly  expressed  would  suit  the  public  taste  better  when 
treated  as  addressed  to  a  woman,  he  could  scarcely  have 
made  so  great  changes  in  their  order,  and  have  given  some 
of  them  the  titles  prefixed  in  his  edition,  if  the  truth  with 
regard  to  the  Sonnets  had  been  very  widely  known.     What- 
ever the  cause — whether    that  the    Sonnets   did   "puzzle 
intellect,"  and  were  not  quite  so  " elegantly  plain"  and 
free  from  difficulty  as  Benson  wished  to  make  out — it  seems 
pretty  clear  that  he  was  right  in  saying  that  they  had  not 
obtained  their  "  due  accomodation  of  proportionable  glory." 
The  opinion  that  the  Sonnets  are  concerned  mainly  with 
female   fascinations — whether   previously  existing   in  the 
public  mind  or  originating  in  Benson's  publication — would 
seem  to  have  prevailed,  so  far,  indeed,  as  the  Sonnets  re- 
ceived any  attention,  for  considerably  more  than  a  century. 
When  the  edition  of   1609  was  reprinted,  circ.  1710,  the 
statement  appeared  on  the  title  that  all  the  hundred  and 
fifty-four  Sonnets  were  in  praise  of  the  poet's  mistress. 
Seventy  years  later  (1780)  Malone  gave  expression  to  the 
fact  of  which  the  evidence  was  unmistakable,  that  the  first 
one  hundred  and  twenty-six  Sonnets  were  addressed  to  a 
male  friend  of  the  poet's.     Here,  at  any  rate,  light  was  let 
in  on  the  darkness.     As  to  who  was  this  male  friend  of 
Shakespeare  no  suggestion  of  any  value  appears  to  have 
been   made   either   by    Malone   or   his   friends.      Malone 
thought  that  Tyrwhitt's  "conjecture  will  not  appear  im- 
probable"   that   "the  initials   W.    H.   in   the    Dedication 
stand   for   W.    Hughes,"    a   person    otherwise   unknown. 
Drake   in    1817    identified   Lord    Southampton   with    the 
subject  of  Sonnets  i  to  I26.1     As  to  the  last  twenty-eight, 
they  had,  in  his  opinion,  no  reference  to  any  particular 
individual.     Certainly,  however,  Southampton  is  not  the 

^  1  Shakespeare  and  his  Times,  vol.  ii.  p.  62. 


Sfcetcb  of  Ibtetorg  of  5nterpretatfon.  147 

person  addressed  in  the  first  series  of  Sonnets,  and  with 
regard  to  the  remainder,  Drake's  assertion  was  a  receding 
from  the  more  just  position  of  Malone  that  the  last 
"  twenty-eight  are  addressed  to  a  lady." 

It  was  not  long  after  the  date  of  Drake's  work  that  Mr. 
B.  Hey  wood  Bright  mentioned  in  a  private  communication 
(1819)  his  discovery  of  the  similarity  between  the  "W. 
H."  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Sonnets  and  the  name  of 
William  Herbert,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  to  whom  the  First 
Folio  had  been  dedicated.  Mr.  Bright  did  not,  however,  at 
the  time  issue  any  publication  giving  the  results  he  had 
attained ;  but  thirteen  years  later  (1832)  Mr.  James  Boaden, 
working  independently,  published  in  the  Gentleman's  Maga- 
zine conclusions  identical  with  those  at  which  Mr.  Bright 
had  arrived.  Some  difficulties  remained,  but  the  identity  of 
William  Herbert  with  Shakespeare's  friend  of  the  Sonnets 
was  shown  to  rest  on  grounds  of  much  probability;  and 
thus  a  very  important  additional  step  was  taken  towards 
the  true  understanding  of  the  Sonnets. 

This  step  was  accepted  and  sanctioned  by  Mr.  C.  Armi- 
tage  Brown  in  his  work  entitled  Shakespeare's  Autobio- 
graphical Poems  (1838).  Mr.  Brown  divided  the  Sonnets 
i  to  152  into  six  poems,  alleging  that  "the  two  Sonnets 
printed  at  the  end,  about  Cupid  and  a  nymph  of  Diana, 
belong  to  nothing  but  themselves."  Mr.  Brown's  division 
cannot  be  fully  accepted ;  it  was,  however,  as  follows  : — (I.) 
i  to  26.  "To  his  friend,  persuading  him  to  marry;"  (II.) 
2 7  to  55-  "To  his  friend — who  had  robbed  the  poet  of 
his  mistress — forgiving  him;"  (III.)  56  to  77.  "To  his 
friend,  complaining  of  his  coldness,  and  warning  him  of 
life's  decay ;"  (IV.)  78  to  101.  "To  his  friend,  complain- 
ing that  he  prefers  another  poet's  praises,  and  reproving 
him  for  faults  that  may  injure  his  character;  "  (Y.)  102  to 
126.  "To  his  friend,  excusing  himself  for  having  been  some 
time  silent,  and  disclaiming  the  charge  of  inconstancy ; " 
(VI.)  127  to  152.  "To  his  mistress  on  her  infidelity.'' 


148  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets* 

Mr.  Brown's  work  marks  a  distinct  advance  in  the  manner 
in  which  it  recognises  the  basis  of  fact  underlying  the 
Sonnets,  and  in  the  assignment  of  153  and  154  to  a  distinct 
group. 

Even  in  so  brief  a  sketch  as  this  Hallam  (1840)  may  be 
mentioned  on  account  of  his  firm  grasp  of  important  results 
previously  attained,  and  also  because  of  his  expressing  the 
opinion  that  the  Sonnets  were  written  about  the  year  1601, 
some  earlier  and  some  later.1  In  1866  Mr.  Gerald  Massey 
published  a  large  volume  on  the  Sonnets  (The  Secret  Drama 
of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets'),  which,  however,  unless  it  be  in 
some  matters  of  detail,  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  pro- 
moted the  true  interpretation.2  A  similar  remark  may  be 
made  with  regard  to  the  work  of  Mr.  Henry  Brown,  pub- 
lished in  1870;  a  work  in  some  respects  meritorious,  but 
disfigured  by  a  conceit  so  absurd  as  that  of  Shakespeare 
having  married  his  Muse  to  Herbert.3  Professor  Minto  in 
1874  made  an  important  addition  to  what  previous  inter- 
preters had  effected,  by  his  identification  of  the  rival  poet  with 
George  Chapman.4  In  1877,  as  a  part  of  the  Introduction 
to  the  Leopold  Shakspere  (1877),  Dr.  Furnivall  gave  the  fruits 
of  his  investigations  into  the  connection  of  the  Sonnets, 
making  in  this  respect  an  important  advance  on  the  work 
of  Mr.  Armitage  Brown.  Hertzberg  in  1878  (Shakespeare 
Jahrbuch)  was  able  to  indicate  the  source  whence  Sonnets 
153  and  154  were  derived.  In  1881  Professor  Dowden 
published  his  valuable  editions,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 
giving  the  results  of  his  own  researches  and  a  large  mass 
of  important  information.  With  regard  to  the  growing 
consensus  of  opinion  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Sonnets,  Dowden 
observes : — "  With  Wordsworth,  Sir  Henry  Taylor,  and 
Mr.  Swinburne;  with  Frangois  Victor  Hugo;  with  Kreyssig 

1  Literature  of  Europe,  Part  III.,  chaps,  v.,  vi. 

2  The  same  remark  may  be  made  of  the  new  edition,  1888. 

3  The  Sonnets  of  Shakespeare  Solved,  Lond.,  1870. 

4  Characteristics  of  English  Poets,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  221  sqq. 


Sfcetcb  of  Ibtetors  ot  Interpretation.  149 

Ulrici,  Gervinus,  and  Hermann  Isaac ;  with  Boaden,  Armi- 
tage  Brown,  and  Hallam;  with  Furnivall,  Spalding,  Rossetti, 
and  Palgrave,  I  believe  that  Shakespeare's  Sonnets  express 
his  own  feelings  in  his  own  person."  x 

Other  contributions  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Sonnets 
are  mentioned  elsewhere.  By  the  omission  of  various 
works  and  other  productions  from  this  brief  sketch,  I  do  not 
wish  to  be  understood  as  expressing  the  opinion  that  these 
are  without  value.  For  a  fuller  account  of  the  literature 
of  the  Sonnets  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  bibliographical 
notices  in  Professor  Dowden's  larger  edition.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  that  at  a  future  time  he  may  be  able  to  make  this 
part  of  his  work  even  yet  more  exhaustive,  by  including 
some  publications  which  he  mentions  as  having  been  inac- 
cessible to  him. 

1  Larger  edition  of  Shakspere's  Sonnets,  pp.  16,  17. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

DIVISION  AND   GROUPING. 

CONSIDERATIONS  have  been  already  adduced  tending  to  show 
that  the  Sonnets,  or  at  least  the  first  series  of  them  (i  to 
126),  are  in  the  right  order  as  they  are  found  in  the  Quarto 
of  1609.  Some  additional  observations  on  this  arrange- 
ment remain,  however,  to  be  made.  Professor  Dowden, 
following  Goedeke,  has  called  attention  to  the  employment 
of  the  pronouns  "  thou  "  and  "you"  in  the  various  parts 
of  this  series.  He  observes  : — "  What  I  would  call  attention 
to,  however,  as  exhibiting  something  like  order  and  pro- 
gress in  the  arrangement  of  1609,  is  this  :  that  in  the  first 
fifty  Sonnets  you  is  of  extremely  rare  occurrence ;  in  the 
second  fifty  you  and  thou  alternate  in  little  groups  of  Son- 
nets, thou  having  still  a  preponderance,  but  now  only  a 
slight  preponderance;  in  the  remaining  twenty-six  you 
becomes  the  ordinary  mode  of  address,  and  tliou  the  ex- 
ception. In  the  Sonnets  to  a  mistress,  thou  is  invariably 
employed.  A  few  Sonnets  of  the  first  series  have  '  my 
love,'  and  the  third  person  throughout."  Professor  Dowden 
justly  observes  that  it  is  difficult  or  impossible  always  to 
find  in  the  sense  the  reason  why  the  one  or  the  other  pro- 
noun is  employed.  The  choice  may  sometimes  "  be  deter- 
mined by  considerations  of  euphony."1  But,  as  a  general 
rule,  "thou  "  is  the  more  distant,  "  you"  the  more  familiar. 
It  is  in  accordance  with  this  that  "thou"  prevails  in  the 
more  distant  address  of  the  first  Sonnets,  and  "  you,"  after 
three  years'  acquaintance,  in  100  to  126. 

Though  the  use  of  these  pronouns  is  not  sufficient  by 

1  Introduction  to  Sonnets,  larger  ed.,  p.  25. 


2>f  vision  anfc  (Brouping.  151 

itself  to  mark  the  division  and  grouping,  yet  it  should  be 
taken  into  account  together  with  other  indications.  Thus 
with  1 7  the  exhortation  to  beget  offspring  terminates. 
The  address,  beginning  in  i  with  "  thou,"  had  become  more 
familiar  in  the  later  portion  of  the  seventeen  Sonnets.  But 
at  the  end  of  17  we  may  suppose  that,  with  the  change  of 
subject,  there  is  a  breach  of  continuity ;  and  it  is  in  accor- 
dance with  this  fact  that  "  thou  "  is  again  employed.  But 
still  it  would  not  be  quite  certain  whether  i  to  17  and  18 
to  26  were  sent  separately  to  Mr.  W.  H.  as  two  poetical 
epistles,  or  whether,  having  regard  to  the  matter  and  form 
of  26,  we  are  to  regard  the  first  twenty-six  Sonnets  together 
as  forming  a  single  epistle.  The  question  is  here  a  difficult 
one,  as  in  other  places.  Sonnet  26,  however,  obviously 
concludes  a  series,  whether  longer  or  shorter.  Between  1 7 
and  1 8  there  is,  as  just  stated,  a  discontinuity  of  thought ; 
but  connection  of  thought  does  not  necessarily  imply  that 
the  Sonnets  so  connected  were  transmitted  together.  From 
preserving  a  copy,  or  even  without  this,  the  poet's  thoughts 
may  have  reverted  from  time  to  time  to  the  subject  of  his 
last  poetical  epistle.  27  to  32  are  all  "  thou  "  Sonnets ;  and 
32  marks,  with  tolerable  certainty,  the  conclusion  of  a  group. 
Taking  into  account  the  couplet  with  which  38  ends,  33  to 
38  are  probably  to  be  regarded  as  a  distinct  group,  though 
just  possibly  39  should  be  added.  40  to  42  are  concerned 
with  the  same  subject  (the  intrigue  between  Shakespeare's 
friend  and  his  mistress),  and  would  form  a  natural  group. 
43  to  47,  speaking  of  Shakespeare's  absence  from  his 
friend,  may  have  formed  a  distinct  poetical  letter.  48  to 
51  maybe  similarly  grouped  together.  52  begins  a  "you" 
group,  extending  to  55.  In  56  to  58  the  poet  remonstrates 
with  his  friend  on  an  apparent  alienation  of  affection.  59 
and  60  may  be  placed  as  a  distinct  group  marked  off  by  its 
philosophical  character.  61  to  63  may  be  placed  together, 
as  also  64  to  68,  the  latter  group  characterised  by  deep 
melancholy;  but  in  this  part  of  the  series  the  grouping 
becomes  difficult.  69  and  70  easily  dissociate  themselves 


152  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

from  71.  71  to  74  treat  of  the  grave  and  the  passing 
bell.  75  to  77  must  be  placed  together,  as  78  begins  a 
new  subject,  which  at  most  had  only  been  just  hinted  at 
before.  78  to  87,  concerned  with  the  rival  poet,  form  a 
not  improbable  group,  ending  with  87  and  its  "Farewell." 
88  to  93,  or  88  to  94,  would  form  the  next  section ;  perhaps 
it  is  best  to  take  the  latter  view.  95  and  96  contain  a 
warning  and  rebuke,  and  are  very  clearly  marked  off  from 
97.  The  opinion  has  been  expressed  (supra,  p.  27  al.)  that 
there  was  a  breach  of  the  intimacy  between  Shakespeare 
and  his  friend,  extending  perhaps  from  the  November  of 
1599  till  about  the  May  of  1601.  Where,  in  relation 
to  this  period,  are  the  three  Sonnets  97,  98,  99  to  be 
placed?  Shakespeare  in  these  Sonnets  speaks  of  himself 
as  having  been  absent  from  his  friend  during  spring, 
summer,  and  autumn.  These  Sonnets  may  have  been 
written  in  the  autumn,  possibly  late  in  the  autumn  of  1600, 
and  transmitted  to  Herbert  without  evoking  a  reply.  His 
time  and  attention  were  probably  too  much  occupied  with 
various  matters.  But  if  such  was  the  fact  there  need 
scarcely  be  any  insuperable  difficulty  in  accounting  for  the 
language  of  100  and  following  Sonnets,  so  far  as  relates  to 
Shakespeare's  taking  upon  himself  the  blame  of  the  silence 
and  separation.  The  difference  of  social  rank  between  the 
poet  and  his  friend,  and  the  complimentary  nature  of 
much  in  these  poems,  should  always  be  kept  in  view. 
That,  previous  to  the  breach,1  Shakespeare  believed  his 
friend  was  becoming  estranged  from  him  is  sufficiently 
clear.  100  to  126  are,  in  accordance  with  what  has  been 
previously  said,  to  be  treated  as  a  single  poem  giving 
various  explanations  concerning  the  period  of  separation. 
Of  course,  brief  interruptions  may  have  occurred  during  the 
composition  of  the  poem ;  but  this  would  not  prevent  its 
forming  a  single  poetical  epistle,  deriving  its  unity  from 


1  See  also  some  remarks  on  the  separation  by  Mr.  T.  A.  Spalding, 
Gentleman's  Magazine,  March  1878,  p.  316. 


2>f vision  anD  Grouping.  153 

continued  reference  to  the  estrangement  or  separation,  and 
various  matters  connected  therewith.  The  exceptional  form 
of  Sonnet  126  is  certainly  in  accordance  with  the  supposi- 
tion that  this  Sonnet  was  intended  as  a  conclusion  to  the 
whole  series.  Causes  which  may  have  induced  Shakespeare 
to  bring  to  a  definite  conclusion  the  first  series  of  Sonnets 
have  been  already  adverted  to  (p.  66). 

With  regard  to  the  second  series  of  Sonnets,  the  division  and 
grouping  are  of  less  importance.  The  last  two  Sonnets,  153, 
1 54,  as  already  stated,  are  best  treated  as  a  separate  group. 

The  following  scheme  is  based,  to  some  extent,  on  that 
of  Dr.  Furnivall,  as  given  in  the  Leopold  Shakspere : — 

Sonnets. 

i  to  26.  Whether  these  Sonnets  were  or  were  not  transmitted 
together  as  a  single  poetical  epistle  is  not  quite 
certain.     There  is,  however,  an  obvious  division, 
(a.)  i  to  17.  Treat  of  the  beauty  of  Shakespeare's  friend. 
Being  thus  beautiful  he  ought  to  beget  offspring. 
"Thou,"  &c.,  exclusively  used  in  twelve  of  these 
Sonnets.     "You,"  &c.,  in  13  and  in  15  to  17. 
(6.)  18  to  26.  The  friend's  beauty  and  the  strength  of 
Shakespeare's  attachment.     "  Thou  "  prevails. 

27  to  32.  "  Thou "  Sonnets.  Some  or  all  of  these  Sonnets  are 
written  while  Shakespeare  is  away  from  his  friend. 
32  a  probable  termination. 

33  to  38.  The  friend  has  stolen  ("sweet  thief,"  35)  Shakespeare's 

mistress,  but  has   expressed  contrition,  and  the  ill 

deed  is  ransomed  by  tears.     38  marks  termination  of 

epistle  possibly. 

39.  May  stand  alone,  or  possibly  belong  to  preceding  group. 

40  to  42.  The  friend  has  Shakespeare's  mistress,  but  Shake- 
speare's love  for  his  friend  prevails. 

43  to  47.  A  distinct  letter  possibly  sent  by  Shakespeare  to  his 
friend,  while  absent. 

48  to  51.  A  group  to  a  certain  extent  similar.  Sonnets  34  to  51 
all  distinguished  by  "  thou." 

52  to  55.  Group  distinguished  by  "you."  Shakespeare's  love 
for  Ms  friend  in  absence.  Immortality  for  the  friend 
in  Shakespeare's  verse. 

56  to  58.  Shakespeare  remonstrates  with  his  friend  on  seeming 
estrangement. 


i54  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

Sonnets. 

59,  60.  Possess  a  peculiar  philosophical  character.  59  gives 
the  doctrine  of  the  cycles  hypothetically.  60  pictures 
the  lives  of  men  as  resembling  the  successive  waves 
of  the  sea. 

6 1  to  63.  The  poet  sleepless  through  love  :  Shakespeare's  self- 
love  is  love  for  his  friend,  his  second  self  :  Shake- 
speare waning.  Immortality  in  Shakespeare's  verse. 

64  to  68.  Sonnets  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of  melancholy. 

69,  70.  Shakespeare's  friend  has  associated  with  bad  company, 
though  the  censure  is  softened  in  70. 

7 1  to  74.  Shakespeare  discourses  of  his  own  death  and  of  his  deep 
love  for  his  friend. 

75  to  77.  Shakespeare's  verse  may  seem  monotonous  on  account 
of  his  constancy,  and  his  always  treating  of  the  same 
theme.  Use  to  which  the  friend  may  apply  mirror, 
dial,  and  book  for  manuscript. 

78  to  87.  Treat  of  a  rival-poet.  In  87  Shakespeare  bids  farewell 
to  his  friend.  81  seems  to  stand  apart. 

88  to  94.  The  friend  estranged,  or  Shakespeare  fancies  that  he 
is.  The  poet  suggests  in  94  that  his  friend  is  being 
corrupted  by  bad  company. 

95,  96.  Shakespeare  more  expressly  rebukes  and  warns  his 
friend. 

97,  to  99.  Sonnets  probably  composed  by  Shakespeare,  to  regain 

his  friend's  love,  but  without  apparent  success. 
100  to  126.  Best  regarded  as  a  single  poem  written  on  the  poet 
being  reconciled  to  his  friend  after  a  somewhat  pro- 
tracted separation.  The  poet  alleges  that  his  love  for 
his  friend  is  stronger  than  before  :  takes  on  himself 
the  blame  of  interruption  of  intimacy :  speaks  of  a 
scandal  from  which  he  was  suffering :  defends  himself 
from  the  charge  of  unfaithfulness  ;  and  in  126  gives 
L' Envoi,  and  concludes  the  first  series  of  Sonnets. 

The  second  series  is  divided  by  Furnivall  as  follows : — 
|  127  |  128  |  129  |  130  131,  132  |  133  to  136  |  137  to 
145  |  146  |  147,  148  |  149  to  152  .  Sonnets  129  and  146, 
however,  are  perhaps  best  regarded  as  having  an  indepen- 
dent character.  The  third  series  consists  only  of  the  final 
Sonnets,  153,  154. 

But  it  is  probably  impossible  to  construct  any  scheme  of 
division  and  grouping  which  shall  not  be  in  some,  or  perhaps 
many,  respects  doubtful. 


SONNETS,  WITH  NOTES. 


"With  this  key 
Shakespeare  unlocked  his  heart." 

—WORDSWORTH. 


ffirst  Series.  157 


FROM  fairest  creatures  we  desire  increase, 
That  thereby  beauty's  rose  might  never  die, 
But  as  the  riper  should  by  time  decease, 
His  tender  heir  might  bear  his  memory  : 
But  thou,  contracted  to  thine  own  bright  eyes, 
Feed'st  thy  light's  flame  with  self-substantial  fuel, 
Making  a  famine  where  abundance  lies, 
Thyself  thy  foe,  to  thy  sweet  self  too  cruel. 
Thou  that  art  now  the  world's  fresh  ornament, 
And  only  herald  to  the  gaudy  spring, 
Within  thine  own  bud  buriest  thy  content, 
And,  tender  churl,  mak'st  waste  in  niggarding. 
Pity  the  world,  or  else  this  glutton  be, 
To  eat  the  world's  due,  by  the  grave  and  thee. 


I.  Mr.  W.  H.  is  urged  by  the  poet  to  beget  offspring,  so  that  his 
beauty  may  be  perpetuated.  Neglecting  this  advice,  he  is  expend- 
ing his  vital  powers  on  himself,  depriving  the  world  of  its  due,  and 
giving  assistance  to  the  grave,  which  greedily  consumes  all. 

5  Contracted. — Not  having  given  extension  to  thyself  in  offspring.     Cf. 
ii.  5-7,  "  Then  being  asked  where  all  thy  beauty  lies,  ...   To  say  within 
thine  own  deep  sunken  eyes,"  &c.     Mr.  W.   H.'s1  "bright  eyes"  are 
regarded  as  the  central  point  or  focus  of  his  beauty.     Cf .  ix.  8,  ' '  By  chil- 
dren's eyes"  =  "  By  children's  features  and  appearance." 

6  Thy  light' s  flame. — An  expression  suggested  probably  by  the  "  bright 
eyes  "  mentioned  just  before.     Self -substantial. — Deriving  its  substance 
from  thyself. 

7  Where  abundance  lies. — That  is,  potentially. 

9-12  The  world's  fresh  ornament.,  herald  to  the  gaudy  spring,  thine  own 
bud,  and  tender  churl  are  expressions  suitable  in  the  case  of  a  youth  but 
just  eighteen. 

11  Thy  content. — What  thou  art  with  its  possibilities  or  potentialities. 

12  Churl. — Q.  "chorle."2     Moroseness  towards  mankind  is  supposed  to 
be  evinced  by  neglecting  to  provide  offspring.     Mak'st  waste,  &c. — Dost 
depopulate,  by  restraining  the  power  of  increase. 

14  The  world's  due  is  the  perpetuation  of  Mr.  W.  H.'s  beauty.  If  he 
fails  to  leave  children  behind  him,  he  will  co-operate  with  the  grave, 
destined  thus  to  consume  not  only  his  body,  but  to  cut  off  also  all  hope  of 
posterity.  But  it  depends  on  Mr.  W.  H.  himself  whether  the  grave  shall 
exert  its  full  power  ;  and  so  what  the  grave  consumes  Mr.  W.  H.  may  be 
regarded  as  himself  consuming,  like  a  glutton.  Cf.  Venus  and  Adonis, 
line  171,  "  By  law  of  nature  thou  art  bound  to  breed." 

1  It  is  convenient,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  to  use  in  these  notes  the 
"  Mr.  W.  H."  of  the  Dedication.  2  Q.  =  Quarto  of  1609. 


158  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


II. 

WHEN  forty  winters  shall  besiege  thy  brow, 
And  dig  deep  trenches  in  thy  beauty's  field, 
Thy  youth's  proud  livery,  so  gaz'd  on  now, 
Will  be  a  tatter'd  weed,  of  small  worth  held  : 
Then  being  ask'd  where  all  thy  beauty  lies, 
Where  all  the  treasure  of  thy  lusty  days  ; 
To  say,  within  thine  own  deep-sunken  eyes, 
Were  an  all-eating  shame,  and  thriftless  praise. 
How  much  more  praise  deserv'd  thy  beauty's  use, 
If  thou  could'st  answer  :  '  This  fair  child  of  mine 
Shall  sum  my  count,  and  make  my  old  excuse  ; ' 
Proving  his  beauty  by  succession  thine. 

This  were  to  be  new-made  when  thou  art  old, 
And  see  thy  blood  warm  when  thou  feel'st  it  cold. 


II.  The  general  subject  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  preceding 
Sonnet.  Here,  however,  Mr.  W.  H.  is  warned  of  the  coming  decline 
of  beauty,  and  of  the  inevitable  effects  of  advancing  age.  With 
these  in  view  he  is  advised  to  secure  the  renewal  of  his  beauty  in 
his  offspring. 

1  Forty  winters. — Here,  as  elsewhere  in  these  Sonnets,  the  indications 
of  age  are  supposed  to  make  their  appearance  somewhat  early  in  life.  In 
the  first  and  second  lines  the  "  forty  winters  "  are  spoken  of  as  conducting 
a  siege  against  the  body's  citadel,  the  "  brow." 

4  Tatter'd.—  The  Quarto  has  "totter'd,"  an  old  form  of  "tatter'd." 
Ci.  Hamlet,  Act  iii.  sc.  2,  line  u.  The  Folio  has  "teare  a  Passion  to 
tatters,"  but  the  Quarto  gives  "totters."  It  would  seem,  however,  that 
the  two  forms  must  have  represented  the  same  pronunciation  or  nearly 
so ;  a  tolerably  clear  proof  of  the  great  difference  between  Elizabethan 
pronunciation  and  that  of  our  own  day. 

6  Thy  lusty  days.  — That  is,  the  days  of  thy  prime.     Cf .  ' '  lusty  leaves, " 
v.  7. 

7  Within  thine  own  deep-sunken  eyes. — Cf.  i.  5,  "  Contracted  to  thine 
own  bright  eyes." 

8  An  all-eating  shame. — Shame  which  consumes  the  person  guilty  of  so 
shameful  conduct,  with  his  posterity.     Cf.  i.  13,  14.     Thriftless  praise. — 
The  context  seems  to  require  the  sense  "  a  reputation  for  thriftlessness." 

n>  la  Sum  my  count,  and  make  my  old  excuse,  &c. — The  world  is  sup- 
posed to  bring  a  charge  of  indebtedness  against  Mr.  W.  H.  on  the  ground 
of  his  decayed  and  vanished  beauty.  But  the  account  will  be  summed 
up,  balanced,  and  settled  by  his  son,  whose  youthful  beauty  will  furnish 
an  excuse  for  Mr.  W.  H.'s  oldness,  or,  perhaps,  will  furnish  the  old  and 
customary  excuse  by  proving  that  he  has  inherited  the  beauty  of  his 
father. 


3fir0t  Series,  159 


HI. 

LOOK  in  thy  glass,  and  tell  the  face  thou  viewest, 
Now  is  the  time  that  face  should  form  another  ; 
Whose  fresh  repair  if  now  thou  not  renewest, 
Thou  dost  beguile  the  world,  unbless  some  mother, 
For  where  is  she  so  fair,  whose  un-ear'd  womb 
Disdains  the  tillage  of  thy  husbandry  ? 
Or  who  is  he  so  fond,  will  be  the  tomb 
Of  his  self-love,  to  stop  posterity  ? 
Thou  art  thy  mother's  glass,  and  she  in  thee 
Calls  back  the  lovely  April  of  her  prime  : 
So  thou  through  windows  of  thine  age  shalt  see, 
Despite  of  wrinkles,  this  thy  golden  time. 
But  if  thou  live  remembered  not  to  be, 
Die  single,  and  thine  image  dies  with  thee. 


III.  The  same  subject  continued,  though  the  treatment  is  varied. 
Mr.  W.  H.  is  at  present  depriving  some  woman  of  a  mother's  joy. 
His  own  mother  sees  in  his  present  beauty  the  restoration  of  her 
former  loveliness  ;  and  in  like  manner,  if  he  marries,  he  may,  when 
wrinkled  with  age,  see  again  in  his  children  the  golden  time  of  his 
youth. 

3  fresh  repair. — Condition  of  healthful  beauty. 

4  Unbless. — Cf.  v.  4,  "  And  that  unfair  which  fairly  doth  excel,"  where 
"  unfair"  is  certainly  a  verb. 

5  Un-ear'd. — Cf.  Daniel,  Sonn.  xlii.  4,  "On  them  ploughs  have  ear'd." 
And  the  Dedication  to  Venus  and  Adonis  furnishes  another  example  : — 
"  I  shall  be  sorry  it  had  so  noble  a  godfather,  and  never  after  ear  so 
barren  a  land,  for  fear  it  yield  me  still  so  bad  a  harvest."    Of  the  meta- 
phor here  there  is,  of  course,  no  necessity  to  speak. 

8  Self-love. — Equivalent  apparently  to  self-satisfaction  :  "  Who  is  he  so 
entirely  contented  with  his  own  brief  life  as  to  care  nothing  for  that  con- 
tinuance of  it  which  posterity  affords?" 

9  Thou  art  thy  mother's  glass. — Cf.  Lucrece,  1758-9  : — 

"  Poor  broken  glass,  I  often  did  behold 
In  thy  sweet  semblance  my  old  age  new  born. " 

10  April. — In  accordance  with  other  indications  that  Mr.  W.  H.  was 
now  in  the  spring-time  of  life,   about   seventeen  or  eighteen ;  and,  as 
Professor  Minto  has  well  pointed  out,  lines  9,  10  are  entirely  suitable  to 
the  Countess  of  Pembroke. 

11  So  thou  through  windows,  &c. — Cf.  ii.  14,  "  And  see  thy  blood  warm 
when  thou  feel'st  it  cold." 

13  But  if  your  intention  is,  to  be  forgotten  in  time  to  come,  &c. 


i6o  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


IV. 

UNTHRIFTY  loveliness,  why  dost  thou  spend 
Upon  thyself  thy  beauty's  legacy  ? 
Nature's  bequest  gives  nothing,  but  doth  lend, 
And  being  frank,  she  lends  to  those  are  free. 
Then,  beauteous  niggard,  why  dost  thou  abuse 
The  bounteous  largess  given  thee  to  give  ? 
Profitless  usurer,  why  dost  thou  use 
So  great  a  sum  of  sums,  yet  canst  not  live  1 
For  having  traffick  with  thyself  alone, 
Thou  of  thyself  thy  sweet  self  dost  deceive. 
Then  how,  when  Nature  calls  thee  to  be  gone, 
What  acceptable  audit  canst  thou  leave  ? 

Thy  unus'd  beauty  must  be  tornb'd  with  thee, 
Which,  used,  lives  th'  executor  to  be. 


IV.  The  general  subject  is  the  same  as  before  ;  but  prominence 
is  here  given  to  the  unthrift  or  wastefulness  of  neglecting  to  provide 
posterity,  and  imagery  drawn  from  pecuniary  or  mercantile  trans- 
actions prevails. 

2  Thy  beauty's  legacy. — The  legacy  which  thy  beauty  should  bequeath. 

3  Nature's  bequest. — The  word  "bequest"  is  suggested  apparently  by 
the  "legacy"  of  line  2.     "  Bequest "  here  seems  equivalent  to  "trust." 
Cf.  King  John,  Act  v.  sc.  7,  line  104,  "I  do  bequeath  my  faithful  ser- 
vices," &c. 

4  Being  frank,  &c. — Nature,  being  "most  generous  and  free  from  all 
contriving,"  leaves  the  trust — which,  however,  is  now  spoken  of  as  a  loan — 
to  the  unfettered  disposal  of  the  recipient. 

6  Given  here  contradicts  in  verbal  form  only  "  Nature's  bequest  gives 
nothing  "  of  line  3.     What  is  "  given  thee  to  give  "  is  still  only  a  trust. 

7  Profitless  usurer. — To  beget  posterity  would  be  to  put  out  to  interest 
Nature's  gift  or  trust.     Using  this  for  himself  alone,  Mr.  W.  H.  is  a 
"  profitless  usurer." 

8  So  great  a  sum  of  sums. — Implying  apparently  the  possibility  of  a  very 
numerous  posterity.     Yet  canst  not  live,  that  is,  beyond  a  brief  period. 

9  For  having  traffick,  &c. — Being  concerned  only  with  thyself. 

10  Thou  of  thyself  thy  sweet  self  dost  deceive. — Dost  defraud  thyself  of 
perpetuated  existence. 

12  What  acceptable  audit,  &c. — How  can  Nature's  account  against  thee 
be  summed  and  settled  ?  Cf.  ii.  n,  12. 


Scries,  161 


V. 

THOSE  Hours,  that  with  gentle  work  did  frame 

The  lovely  gaze  where  every  eye  doth  dwell, 

Will  play  the  tyrants  to  the  very  same, 

And  that  unfair  which  fairly  doth  excel ; 

For  never-resting  Time  leads  Summer  on 

To  hideous  Winter,  and  confounds  him  there  ; 

Sap  check'd  with  frost,  and  lusty  leaves  quite  gone, 

Beauty  o'ersnow'd,  and  bareness  everywhere  : 

Then,  were  not  summer's  distillation  left, 

A  liquid  prisoner  pent  in  walls  of  glass, 

Beauty's  effect  with  beauty  were  bereft, 

Nor  it,  nor  no  remembrance  what  it  was. 

But  flowers  distill'd,  though  they  with  winter  meet, 
Leese  but  their  show  ;  their  substance  still  lives  sweet, 


V.  Has  the  same  general  subject  as  preceding  Sonnets.  The 
inexorable  progress  of  time  from  the  glory  of  life's  summer  to  the 
winter  of  old  age  is  treated  of.  But  the  sweet  essence  of  the  sum- 
mer flowers  is  preserved  when  a  beauteous  posterity  is  begotten. 

1  At  first  we  have  a  plurality  of  "Hours,"  for  which  is  substituted  in 
line  5  the  singular  "Time." 

2  Gaze. — Appearance. 

3  Will  play  the  tyrants. — Remorselessly  disfigure  and  destroy. 

4  Unfair. — Cf.  iii.  4.     Fairly  doth  excel. — Excels  in  fairness  or  beauty. 

6  Hideous  Winter. — An  expression  accordant  with  the  melancholy  and 
pessimistic  tone  so  often  heard  in  these  Sonnets.     Confounds. — Abases 
him,  bringing  down  his  power  and  glory. 

7  Lusty  leaves. — Leaves  of  his  time  of  strength  and  pride.     Cf.  ii.  4. 

9' 10  Cf.  Sidney's  Arcadia,  quoted  by  Massey  : — "  Have  you  ever  seen  a 
pure  rose-water  kept  in  a  crystal  glass  ?  How  fine  it  looks  !  how  sweet  it 
smells  while  the  beautiful  glass  imprisons  it ! "  On  the  supposition  that  Mr. 
W.  H.  was  William  Herbert,  it  is  easy  to  understand  how,  on  forming  the 
acquaintance,  Shakespeare  should  have  had  his  attention  directed  to,  or  his 
remembrance  freshened  of  what  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  Herbert's  uncle,  had 
written. 

11  Beauty's  effect.—  The  "effect"  here  is  the  scent  associated  with  the 
beautiful  form  of  the  rose.  Of  this  form  the  distilled  essence  serves  as  a 
memento.  With. — Together  with.  Bereft. — Taken  away,  destroyed. 

14  Leese. — An  old  form  equivalent  to  "  lose." 


162  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


VI. 

THEN  let  not  Winter's  ragged  hand  deface 
In  thee  thy  summer,  ere  thou  be  distill'd  : 
Make  sweet  some  vial ;  treasure  thou  some  place 
With  beauty's  treasure,  ere  it  be  self-kill'd.  * 

That  use  is  not  forbidden  usury, 
Which  happies  those  that  pay  the  willing  loan  ; 
That's  for  thyself  to  breed  another  thee, 
Or  ten  times  happier,  be  it  ten  for  one  ;  s 

Ten  times  thyself  were  happier  than  thou  art, 
If  ten  of  thine  ten  times  refigur'd  thee  : 
Then,  what  could  death  do  if  thou  shouldst  depart, 
Leaving  thee  living  in  posterity  1  12 

Be  not  self-will'd,  for  thou  art  much  too  fair 
To  be  Death's  conquest,  and  make  worms  thine  heir,  u 


VI.  Follows  in  close  connection  with  the  last  Sonnet.  Here, 
however,  the  desirableness  of  a  numerous  posterity  is  more  clearly 
expressed. 

1  Ragged. — Malone  remarks,  "  Ragged  was  often  used  as  an  opprobri- 
ous term  in  the  time  of  our  author."  But  it  would  be  perhaps  more 
correct  to  say  that  the  word  was  used  metaphorically  and  generally  of 
what  is  harsh  and  rough.  The  hand  of  Winter  may  be  spoken  of  as 
"ragged"  or  rough,  on  account  of  the  effect  produced  by  Winter,  the 
"  bareness  everywhere  "  of  v.  8. 

3  Vial,  of  course,  looks  back  to  the  previous  Sonnet.     Treasure  thou 
some  place.  —  Make  some  place  rich. 

4  Ere  it  be  self-kill'd,  that  is,  by  the  absence  of  posterity. 

5  That  use  is  not  forbidden  usury. — There  appears  to  be  in  this  and 
following  lines  some  confusion  between  the  creditor  and  debtor. 

6  Happies  those  that  pay  the  willing  loan. — Comparing  the  ninth  line, 
"Ten  times  thyself  were  happier  than  thou  art,"  it  would  seem  to  be  the 
children  who  are  happied,  that  is,  rendered  happy  ;  and  if  so,  it  must  be 
they  who  pay  the  "willing  loan."    But  there  is  pretty  evidently  some 
confusion  of  thought.     Or  possibly  the  payment  may  be  regarded  as  a 
joint  payment,  by  the  parent  and  children  together.     Of  course,  the  pay- 
ment is  made  to  Nature,  the  bounteous  donor  or  lender  of  Sonnet  iv. 

10  If  there  were,  an  image  of  thy  beauty  presented  by  each  of  ten 
children. 


jfirst  Series.  163 


VII. 

Lo,  in  the  orient  when  the  gracious  light 

Lifts  up  his  burning  head,  each  under  eye 

Doth  homage  to  his  new-appearing  sight, 

Serving  with  looks  his  sacred  majesty  ;  4 

And  having  climb'd  the  steep-up  heavenly  hill, 

Eesembling  strong  youth  in  his  middle  age, 

Yet  mortal  looks  adore  his  beauty  still, 

Attending  on  his  golden  pilgrimage  ;  s 

But  when  from  high-most  pitch,  with  weary  car, 

Like  feeble  age,  he  reeleth  from  the  day, 

The  eyes,  'fore  duteous,  now  converted  are 

From  his  low  tract,  and  look  another  way  :  12 

So  thou,  thyself  outgoing  in  thy  noon, 

Unlook'd  on  diest,  unless  thou  get  a  son.  14 


VII.  The  principal  subject  is  the  same ;  but  old  age  is  now 
represented,  not  by  "hideous  Winter,"  but  by  the  declining  sun, 
which  (according  to  this  Sonnet)  is  neglected,  or  regarded  with 
aversion,  as  in  its  course  it  verges  towards  the  horizon. 

1  The  gracious  light. — The  benignant,  or  beneficent,  light. 

2  Each  under  eye. — All  eyes  of  those  beneath. 

5  The  steep-up  heavenly  hill. — The  steep  ascent  of  the  firmament,  which, 
according  to  ancient  ideas,  was  convex  above  and  concave  beneath. 

10  Like  feeble  age  he  reeleth  from  the  day. — "  Eeeleth,"  worn  out  with 
fatigue,  as  he  passes  from  day  to  night.     So  in  Richard  III.,  Act  v.  sc.  3, 
line  19,  we  have  "the  weary  sun." 

11  Converted. — Turned  ;  that  is,  in  this  case,  turned  away. 

12  His  low  tract. — The  lower  portion  of  his  course.     "Tract"  must  be 
taken  as  equivalent  to  "track." 

13  Outgoing  in  thy  noon. — Passing  the  meridian  of  life,  and  declining 
like  the  sun.     To  suppose  that  the  poet  alludes  to  death  in  the  prime  of 
life  would  be  unsuitable  to  the  context. 


1 64  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


VIII. 

MUSICK  to  hear,  why  hear'st  thou  musick  sadly  ? 
Sweets  with  sweets  war  not,  joy  delights  in  joy. 
Why  lov'st  thou  that  which  thou  receiv'st  not  gladly  2 
Or  else  receiv'st  with  pleasure  thine  annoy  1 
If  the  true  concord  of  well-tuned  sounds, 
By  unions  married,  do  offend  thine  ear, 
They  do  but  sweetly  chide  thee,  who  confounds 
In  singleness  the  parts  that  thou  shouldst  bear. 
Mark  how  one  string,  sweet  husband  to  another, 
Strikes  each  in  each  by  mutual  ordering  ; 
Resembling  sire  and  child  and  happy  mother, 
"Who,  all  in  one,  one  pleasing  note  do  sing  : 

Whose  speechless  song,  being  many,  seeming  one, 
Sings  this  to  thee  :  '  Thou  single  wilt  prove  none.' 


VIII.  From  the  harmony  of  domestic  life  resembling  that  of 
music,  and  the  nothingness  of  him  who  remains  single  and  alone, 
an  argument  is  drawn  in  favour  of  marriage.  Cf.  Daiphantus  by  A. 

Sc.  (1604):— 

"  Music  is  only  sweet 

When  without  discord.     A  consort  makes  a  heaven. 
The  ear  is  ravished  when  true  voices  meet. 
Odds,  but  in  music,  never  makes  things  even, 
In  voices  difference  breeds  a  pleasant  ditty." 

The  writer  of  DaipTianius  may  have  seen  Sonn.  viii.  in  MS.,  or  the 
resemblance  may  be  accidental.  "  Consort "  here,  it  should  be  ob- 
served, is  an  old  form  equivalent  to  "  concert."  Among  the  British 
Museum  MSS.  is  an  example  of  Sonn.  viii.  with  slight  variations, 
probably  taken  from  a  MS.  copy  of  the  Sonnet  (Add.  MS.  15,226). 

1  Musick  to  hear. — Whose  voice  in  speaking  is  as  sweet  as  music.  Why 
hear'st  thou  musick  sadly  ?—  This  may  possibly  mean  that  Mr.  W.  H.  had 
no  liking  for  music. 

2-4  The  qualities  which  Mr.  W.  H.  possessed  ought  rather,  in  the  poet's 
view,  to  have  made  him  delight  in  music.  And  it  would  seem  that  he  was 
accustomed  to  attend  musical  performances,  though  disliking  them,  or 
professing  to  do  so.  But  is  it  not  possible  that  the  "music  heard  sadly" 
was  the  virginal-playing  of  Shakespeare's  dark  mistress  (cxxviii.)?  The 
sadness  may  thus  have  been  caused  by  the  impression  which  her  fascinat- 
ing endowments  had  already  produced  on  Mr.  W.  H.  This  view  would 
make  lines  3  and  4  intelligible. 


ffirst  Series.  165 


5,  6  Well-tuned  sounds,  By  unions  married. — Sounds  in  harmony.  Har- 
monious sounds  offend  thee,  because  thy  life  of  singleness  is  without 
harmony. 

9_i3  The  life  of  "sire  and  child  and  happy  mother"  is  a  "speechless 
song,"  without  words  or  sound,  a  musical  life,  resembling,  however, 
several  strings  which,  in  their  harmony,  seem  to  give  forth  but  one  note. 

14  Thou  single  wilt  prove  none. — Thou  canst  give  forth  no  harmony,  and 
must  eventually  cease  altogether.  But  compare  cxxxvi.  8, — "Among  a 
number  one  is  reckoned  none."  Cf.  also  Sidney's  Arcadia,  quoted  by 
Massey, — "Then  can  one  string  make  as  good  music  as  a  consort  ? "  consort 
being  used  formerly  for  concert.  Cf.  quotation  from  Daiphantus  above. 


166  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


IX. 

Is  it  for  fear  to  wet  a  widow's  eye, 
That  thou  consuiu'st  thyself  in  single  life  1 
All !  if  thou  issueless  shalt  hap  to  die, 
The  world  will  wail  thee,  like  a  makeless  wife  : 
The  world  will  be  thy  widow,  and  still  weep, 
That  thou  no  form  of  thee  hast  left  behind, 
When  every  private  widow  well  may  keep, 
By  children's  eyes,  her  husband's  shape  in  mind. 
Look,  what  an  unthrift  in  the  world  doth  spend, 
Shifts  but  his  place,  for  still  the  world  enjoys  it : 
But  beauty's  waste  hath  in  the  world  an  end, 
And  kept  unus'd,  the  user  so  destroys  it. 
No  love  toward  others  in  that  bosom  sits, 
That  on  himself  such  murderous  shame  commits. 


IX.  Mr.  W.  H.  should  not  shrink  from  marriage,  fearing  that  if 
he  marries  he  may  possibly  leave  a  widow  to  lament  his  decease  ; 
for  if  he  should  die  without  issue,  the  world  at  large  will  be  his 
widow,  and  will  sorely  weep  over  the  extinction  for  ever  of  his 
beauty.  It  behoves  him  to  regard  the  interests  of  the  world. 

4  Makeless. — Without  a  "make  ; "  that  is,  without  a  mate. 

8  By  children's  eyes. — Cf.  note  on  i.  5.     This  is  a  very  good  example 
of   "eyes"  being  used  for  features  and  appearance  in  general.     The 
' '  eyes  "  enable  the  widow  to  keep  in  mind  her  husband's  shape. , 

9  An  unthrift. — A  spendthrift. 
1°  His.— Its. 

11  Beauty's  waste. — The  waste  of  beauty  has  no  such  compensation  as 
the  waste  of  money  ;  since  it  is  brought  altogether  to  an  end. 

12  And  beauty,  unless  used  in  the  way  before  indicated,  is  wasted  and 
destroyed.     The  user. — He  who,  by  keeping  it  unused,  thus  misuses  it. 


jftrst  Series.  167 


FOR  shame  !  deny  tliat  thou  bear'st  love  to  any, 
Who  for  thyself  art  so  improvident. 
Grant  if  thou  wilt,  thou  art  belov'd  of  many, 
But  that  thou  none  lov'st,  is  most  evident ; 
For  thou  art  so  possess'd  with  murderous  hate, 
That  'gainst  thyself  thou  stick'st  not  to  conspire, 
Seeking  that  beauteous  roof  to  ruinate, 
Which  to  repair  should  be  thy  chief  desire. 
O  change  thy  thought  that  I  may  change  my  mind  ! 
Shall^hate  be  fairer  lodg'd  than  gentle  love  ? 
Be  as  thy  presence  is,  gracious  and  kind, 
Or  to  thyself,  at  least,  kind-hearted  prove  ; 
Make  thee  another  self,  for  love  of  me, 
That  beauty  still  may  live  in  thine  or  thee. 


X-.  This  Sonnet  enlarges  on  the  theme  introduced  in  the  conclud- 
ing lines  of  that  preceding, — that  he  who  does  not  beget  offspring 
must  be  influenced  by  deadly  hatred  towards  the  world  and  towards 
himself.  In  conclusion,  Mr.  W.  H.  is  urged  to  the  same  course  of 
action  as  before,  for  love  of  his  friend  the  poet. 

2  Unprovidcnt. — Reckless  of  the  future  for  thyself  as  for  the  world. 

7  That  beauteous  roof. — This,  it  would  seem,  is  to  be  understood  generally 
of  the  bodily  house.  To  ruinate. — Cf.  "To  ruinate  our  lives  and  lands," 
Arber's  English  Garner,  vol.  vii.  p.  52. 

9  That  I  may  change  my  mind. — That  I  may  not  form  so  unfavourable 
a  conclusion  with  regard  to  your  disposition. 

!3  The  words  "for  love  of  me"  would  seem  to  imply  that  Mr.  W.  H. 
had  already  evinced  a  warm  attachment  for  Shakespeare,  even  though 
the  intimacy  may  have  been  as  yet  but  brief. 

14  That  beauty  still  may  live  in  thine  or  thee.—Cf.  Venus  and  Adonis. 
lines  173,  174  :— 

' '  And  so  in  spite  of  death  thou  dost  survive, 
In  that  thy  likeness  still  is  left  alive." 


168  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XI. 

As  fast  as  tliou  shalt  wane,  so  fast  tliou  grow'st 
In  one  of  thine,  from  that  which  thou  departest ; 
And  that  fresh  blood  which  youngly  thou  bestow'st, 
Thou  may'st  call  thine,  when  thou  from  youth  convertest. 
Herein  lives  wisdom,  beauty,  and  increase  ; 
Without  this,  folly,  age,  and  cold  decay  : 
If  all  were  minded  so,  the  times  should  cease, 
And  threescore  years  would  make  the  world  away. 
Let  those  whom  Nature  hath  not  made  for  store, 
Harsh,  featureless,  and  rude,  barrenly  perish  : 
Look  whom  she  best  endow'd,  she  gave  the  more, 
Which  bounteous  gift  thou  shouldst  in  bounty  cherish  ; 
She  carv'd  thee  for  her  seal,  and  meant  thereby, 
Thou  shouldst  print  more,  nor  let  that  copy  die. 


XI.  By  begetting  children  excellences  are  preserved.  Nature 
intended  the  beautiful  to  discharge  the  parental  function. 

l>  2  As  fast  as  the  father  declines,  so  fast  in  his  child,  his  second  self, 
does  he  grow  towards,  or  in,  that  youthful  beauty  which  he  is  leaving 
behind — "from  that  which  thou  depart' st." 

3  Youngly. — In  all  the  period  of  youth. 

4  Convertest. — Changest  towards  age. 

7  If  all  were  minded  so,  that  is,  to  act  as  you  are  now  doing. 

8  Years. — Q.  has  "yeare." 

9  Not  made  for  store,  meaning  possibly,  not  to  be  stored  up  like  seed- 
corn  reserved  for  sowing.     At  any  rate  the  sense  will  be,  not  made  for 
reproduction.     Cf.  "As  many  to  the  vantage  as  would  store  the  world 
they  played  for,"  in  Othello,  Act  iv.  sc.  3,  lines  85,  86. 

11  Gave  the  more. — Gave  the  more  important  or  greater  gift,  the  function 
of  reproducing  their  kind.  Cf.  the  use  of  "more"  in  xxiii.  12, — "  More 
than  that  tongue  that  more  hath  more  express'd;"  and  especially  "this 
more,"  meaning  "  this  addition,"  in  xl.  4. 

14  Copy  may  be  taken  as  pretty  nearly  equivalent  to  "  design,"  soil,  of 
Nature. 


fffrst  Series.  169 


XII. 

WHEN  I  do  count  the  clock  that  tells  the  time, 
And  see  the  brave  day  sunk  in  hideous  night ; 
When  I  behold  the  violet  past  prime, 
And  sable  curls  all  silver'd  o'er  with  white  ; 
When  lofty  trees  I  see  barren  of  leaves, 
Which  erst  from  heat  did  canopy  the  herd, 
And  summer's  green  all  girded  up  in  sheaves, 
Borne  on  the  bier  with  white  and  bristly  beard  ; 
Then  of  thy  beauty  do  I  question  make, 
That  thou  among  the  wastes  of  Time  must  go, 
Since  sweets  and  beauties  do  themselves  forsake, 
And  die  as  fast  as  they  see  others  grow  ; 
And  nothing  'gainst  Time's  scythe  can  make  defence, 
Save  breed,  to  brave  him  when  he  takes  thee  hence. 


XII.  The  world  is  a  world  of  change  and  decay.  Against  Time's 
all-conquering  power  Mr.  W.  H.  can  make  a  successful  defence  only 
by  begetting  children  to  perpetuate  his  beauty. 

2  Hideous  night. — Cf.  note  on  "hideous  Winter,"  v.  6. 

4  All. — Q.  has  "or."  O'er. — Q.  has  "ore,"  which  might  possibly 
represent  " are  ;  "  but  "o'er "  seems  preferable. 

7>  8  The  pessimistic  tendency  which  emerges  in  the  expression  just 
mentioned  (lines  2  to  6)  becomes  still  more  apparent  when  harvest-home 
is  transmuted  into  a  funeral,  and  the  waggon  laden  with  ripened  corn 
becomes  a  bier  bearing  the  aged  dead.  Contrast  with  this,  "Thou 
shalt  come  to  [thy]  grave  in  a  full  age,  like  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in 
in  his  season,"  Job  v.  26,  A.  V. 

9  Question  make.— Feel  a  doubt  whether  it  will  not  be  that,  &c. 

10  The  wastes  of  Time. — The  things  devastated  and  destroyed  by  Time. 

11  Do  themselves  forsake. — Wane  and  disappear,  leaving  behind  their 
former  excellence. 

14  Save  breed,  to  brave  him.— "Except  children  whose  youth  may  set 
the  scythe  of  Time  at  defiance,"  Malone. 


1 70  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

XIII. 

0  THAT  you  were  yourself  !  but,  love,  you  are 
No  longer  yours,  than  you  yourself  here  live  : 
Against  this  coming  end  you  should  prepare, 
And  your  sweet  semblance  to  some  other  give.  4 

So  should  that  beauty  which  you  hold  in  lease 
Find  no  determination  :  then  you  were 
Yourself  again,  after  yourself 's  decease, 
When  your  sweet  issue  your  sweet  form  should  bear.     8 
Who  lets  so  fair  a  house  fall  to  decay, 
Which  husbandry  in  honour  might  uphold 
Against  the  stormy  gusts  of  winter's  day, 
And  barren  rage  of  death's  eternal  cold  ?  12 

0,  none  but  unthrifts  : — Dear  my  love,  you  know 
You  had  a  father  ;  let  your  son  say  so.  u 


XIII.  Would  that  Mr.  W.  H.  were  truly  master  of  himself,  truly 
his  own !  But  this  mastery  and  possession,  as  being,  like  all  other 
men,  subject  to  Death,  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  attain.  He 
may,  however,  live  on  in  his  children ;  and  he  is  advised  thus  to 
perpetuate  the  honour  of  his  house. 

1  Yourself. — The  Quarto  of  1609,  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the 
time,  gives  "  your  selfe  "  as  two  words.  This  allows  of  an  emphasis  being 
thrown  on  the  "your,"  which  seems  here  required  ;  the  sense  in  all  pro- 
bability being,  "0  that  you  were  truly  your  own  possession!"  Cf. 
"another  self,"  x.  13  ;  "next  self,"  cxxxiii.  6. 

5  Lease. — Mr.  W.  H.  is  a  leaseholder  of  his  comely  form,  not  a  freeholder. 

6  Determination. — In  accordance  with  common  legal  phraseology. 

7  Yourself.—  Q.  has"  You  selfe." 

8  Sweet  issue — sweet  form. — The  employment  of  "sweet,"  here  and  else- 
where in  these  Sonnets,  however  much  out  of  harmony  with  present  usage, 
was  in  accord  with  the  custom  of  the  times.     The  same  word,  for  example, 
is  used  of  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  (W.  H. )  by  John  Davies  of  Hereford 
in  his  Witters  Pilgrimage  : — "So  so  (sweete  Lord)  so  should  it  bee,"  &c. 

9  So  fair  a  house  must  be  referred  to  Mr.  W.  H.'s  ancestry,  not  to  the 
bodily  house  ("beauteous  roof"  of  x.  7).     The  words  might  be  very  well 
used  of  an  eldest  son  and  heir,  even  though  he  might  not  be  an  only  son. 

io_i2  Due  care  and  attention  might  preserve  the  house  against  the 
storms  of  winter,  the  cold  blasts  of  death. 

14  You  had  a  father. — In  accordance  with  the  general  drift  of  this  and 
preceding  Sonnets,  the  meaning  must  be,  not  that  Mr.  W.  H.'s  father  was 
dead,  but  that  he  should  do  as  his  father  did,  that  is,  beget  a  son.  Cf. 
especially  Merry  Wives,  Act  iii.  sc.  4,  line  36,  where  Shallow,  urging 
Slender  to  woo  Anne  Page  in  manly  fashion — to  do  as  his  father  did — 
says,  "  She's  coming,  to  her,  Coz.  0  boy,  thou  hadst  a  father,"  a  hint 
which,  however,  Slender  misunderstands.  Cf.  also  Merchant  of  Venice, 
Act  ii.  sc.  2,  lines  17  to  19,  where  Launcelot  says,  "  My  father  did  something 
smack,  ...  he  had  a  kind  of  taste,"  though  Gobbo  is  just  about  to  make 
his  appearance.  To  these  passages  my  attention  was  directed  by  the  Rev. 
W.  A.  Harrison.  Cf.  Introd.,  chap.  vii.  p.  50. 


ffirst  Series.  171 


XIV. 

NOT  from  the  stars  do  I  my  judgment  pluck  ; 
And  yet  methinks  I  have  astronomy, 
But  not  to  tell  of  good,  or  evil  luck, 
Of  plagues,  of  dearths,  or  season's  quality : 
Nor  can  I  fortune  to  brief  minutes  tell, 
Pointing  to  each  his  thunder,  rain,  and  wind, 
Or  say,  with  princes  if  it  shall  go  well, 
By  oft  predict  that  I  in  heaven  find : 
But  from  thine  eyes  my  knowledge  I  derive, 
And,  constant  stars,  in  them  I  read  such  art, 
As  truth  and  beauty  shall  together  thrive, 
If  from  thyself  to  store  thou  wouldst  convert : 
Or  else  of  thee  this  I  prognosticate, 
Thy  end  is  truth's  and  beauty's  doom  and  date. 


XIV.  The  poet  is  an  astrologer,  though  he  neither  consults  the 
stars  above,  nor  is  concerned  with  the  same  matters  as  common 
astrologers.  The  poet's  stars  are  the  bright  eyes  of  his  friend. 
From  these  he  can  predict  that,  unless  the  counsel  given  in  these 
Sonnets  is  followed,  both  truth  and  beauty  will  come  to  an  end  at 
his  friend's  death. 

1  Pluck.—  Derive,  take. 

2  Astronomy. — Here  equivalent  to  astrology,  as  we  now  use  the  latter 
word. 

5>  6  Fortune  to  brief  minutes  tell,  Pointing  to  each  his  thunder,  rain,  and 
wind. — Indicate,  concerning  different  kinds  of  weather,  the  exact  duration 
of  each. 

9,10  Thine  eyes— constant  stars. — The  reader  may  compare  Sidney's 
Astrophel  and  Stella,  xxvi.,  "  Astrologie  : " — 

"  Though  dustie  wits  doe  scorne  Astrologie, 
And  fooles  can  thinke  those  lampes  of  purest  light 

To  haue  for  no  cause  birthright  in  the  sky 
But  for  to  spangle  the  blacke  weeds  of  Night ; 

For  me  I  do  Nature  vnidle  know, 

Who  oft  foresee  my  after  following  race, 

By  only  those  two  starres  in  Stella's  face." 

10  /  read  such  art. — My  art  draws  such  inferences. 

n  12  If  from  thyself— thou  wouldst  convert. — If  thou  wouldst  change  thy 
aim  and  not  regard  merely  thyself.    Store.— Cf.  xi.  9,  and  note. 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XV. 

WHEN  I  consider  everything  that  grows 
Holds  in  perfection  but  a  little  moment, 
That  this  huge  stage  presenteth  nought  but  shows 
Whereon  the  stars  in  secret  influence  comment ; 
When  I  perceive  that  men  as  plants  increase, 
Cheered  and  check'd  even  by  the  self-same  sky ; 
Vaunt  in  their  youthful  sap,  at  height  decrease, 
And  wear  their  brave  state  out  of  memory  ; 
Then  the  conceit  of  this  inconstant  stay 
Sets  you  most  rich  in  youth  before  my  sight, 
Where  wasteful  Time  debateth  with  Decay, 
To  change  your  day  of  youth  to  sullied  night ; 
And,  all  in  war  with  Time,  for  love  of  you, 
As  he  takes  from  you,  I  engraft  you  new. 


XV.  Perfection  endures  but  a  brief  moment.  Whatever  the  earth 
produces  has  no  sooner  attained  maturity  than  it  tends  to  decay. 
The  poet,  mindful  that  his  friend  must  submit  to  the  universal  law, 
resists  the  encroachments  of  Time,  ever  "engrafting"  anew  his 
friend's  excellences,  transcribing  them  indelibly  into  an  enduring 
record.  Here  the  counsel  to  beget  offspring  is  wanting.  Probably, 
however,  xv.  and  xvi.  were  to  be  taken  together. 

3  This  huge  stage. — Cf.  As  You  Like  It.  Act  ii.  sc.  7,  lines  139 sqq.,  "All 
the  world's  a  stage,"  &c.  ;  Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  i.  sc.  i,  line  77 : — 

"  I  hold  the  world  but  as  the  world,  Gratiano, 
A  stage  where  every  man  must- play  a  part ;" 

and  Tempest,  Act  iv.  sc.  i,  lines  152-6  : — 

"  The  cloud-capp'd  towers,  the  gorgeous  palaces, 
The  solemn  temples,  the  great  globe  itself, 
Yea,  all  which  it  inherit,  shall  dissolve, 
And,  like  this  insubstantial  pageant  faded, 
Leave  not  a  rack  behind." 

4  Comment.  —  The  meaning  probably  is,  that  as  the  annotation  of  a 
commentator  runs  parallel  with  the  text,  so  the  influence  of  the  stars 
corresponds  with  the  course  of  things  in  the  world. 

6>  6  These  lines  would  seem  to  refer,  not  so  much  to  occult  astrological 
influence,  as  to  the  effect  produced  by  varying  seasons  and  weather. 

7  Vaunt. — Meaning  not  improbably   "mount  proudly  upward."     Cf. 
Troilus  and  Cressida,  Prologue,  line  27, — "  Leaps  o'er  the  vaunt  and  first- 
lings of  these  broils,"  where  "vaunt"  must  mean  the  beginning  and  early 
course. 

8  Wear. — Implying  a  gradual  transition  till  the  "brave  state" — state 
of  luxuriant  maturity — is  forgotten  and  "  out  of  memory." 

9  Conceit. — Thought,  contemplation. 


fftrst  Series.  173 


XVI. 

BUT  wherefore  do  not  you  a  mightier  way 

Make  war  upon  this  bloody  tyrant,  Time  ? 

And  fortify  yourself  in  your  decay 

"With  means  more  blessed  than  my  barren  rhyme  ?  4 

Now  stand  you  on  the  top  of  happy  hours  ; 

And  many  maiden  gardens,  yet  unset, 

With  virtuous  wish  would  bear  you  living  flowers, 

Much  liker  than  your  painted  counterfeit :  g 

So  should  the  lines  of  life  that  life  repair, 

Which  this  (Time's  pencil,  or  my  pupil  pen), 

Neither  in  inward  worth,  nor  outward  fair, 

Can  make  you  live  yourself  in  eyes  of  men.  12 

To  give  away  yourself,  keeps  yourself  still ; 

And  you  must  live,  drawn  by  your  own  sweet  skill,     u 


XVI.  But  Mr.  W.  H.,  in  his  children,  can  give  a  far  more  perfect 
record  of  his  excellences  than  the  poet  can  possibly  make  in  his 
Sonnets.  The  living  portrayal  which  may  thus  be  drawn  surpasses 
every  written  record,  and  the  "  counterfeit  painted  by  the  hand  of 
the  artist." 

2  This  bloody  tyrant,  Time. — Similarly  in  v.  3  the  Hours  are  spoken  of 
as  "  playing  the  tyrants." 

5  On  the  top  o/  happy  hours. — In  the  perfection  of  joyous  youth,  which 
can  last  but  a  brief  space. 

6  Maiden  gardens. — A  slight  variation  from  the  agricultural  imagery  of 
iii.  6. 

9  The  lines  of  life,  &c. — I  was  inclined  to  take  these  words  as  referring 
to  the  wrinkles  on  the  brow  of  advancing  life  (cf.  xix.  10),  and  to  suppose 
the  meaning  to  be,  that  declining  age  is  compensated  for  by  the  growing 
beauty  and  maturing  perfection  of  children.  But,  having  regard  to  the 
general  drift  of  the  Sonnet,  to  the  "  painted  counterfeit"  of  line  8,  and  to 
the  words  "  You  must  live,  drawn  by  your  own  sweet  skill"  (14),  I  now 
assent  to  the  interpretation  of  the  "lines  of  life"  as  children  in  whom 
Mr.  W.  H.  is  supposed  to  have  himself  portrayed  his  mental  and  bodily 
excellences. 

1°  Time's  pencil— Dr.  Furnivall  has  suggested  that  this  expression  is 
used  generally  of  such  written  records  of  the  time  as  may  refer  to  Mr.  W.  H. 
This  view  seems  to  me  correct ;  and  it  is  well  worthy  of  note  that  in  the 
Quarto,  which,  in  this  particular,  I  have  followed,  the  words  "Time's 
pencil  or  my  pupil  pen  "  are  bracketed  together.  The  record  of  "  Time's 
pencil "  would  thus  be  of  a  similar  kind  to  that  made  by  the  poet's  "pupil 
pen."  A  reason  may  also  thus  be  assigned  for  the  use  of  the  word  "pupil  " 
asimi '  '  J1  -  "  --  '  


record  or  chronicle  of  the  period.  This,  in  "this  (Time's  pencil,  or  my 
pupil  pen),"  may  be  taken  as  meaning  "any  written  record  of  this  kind," 
whether  by  "  Time's  pencil,"  &c. 


174  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XVII. 

WHO  will  believe  my  verse  in  time  to  come, 
If  it  were  fill'd  with  your  most  high  deserts  ? 
Though  yet  Heaven  knows  it  is  but  as  a  tomb 
Which  hides  your  life,  and  shows  not  half  your  parts. 
If  I  could  write  the  beauty  of  your  eyes, 
And  in  fresh  numbers  number  all  your  graces, 
The  age  to  come  would  say,  '  This  poet  lies, 
Such  heavenly  touches  ne'er  touch'd  earthly  faces.' 
So  should  my  papers,  yellowed  with  their  age, 
Be  scorn'd,  like  old  men  of  less  truth  than  tongue  ; 
And  your  true  rights  be  term'd  a  poet's  rage, 
And  stretched  metre  of  an  antique  song  : 

But  were  some  child  of  yours  alive  that  time, 
You  should  live  twice, — in  it,  and  in  my  rhyme. 


XVII.  The  poet's  record  is,  moreover,  open  to  two  objections ;  it 
is  very  imperfect,  and,  besides,  posterity  would  not  believe  a  full 
and  accurate  description  of  Mr.  W.  H.'s  beauty,  even  if  such  a  de- 
scription were  made.  But  the  living  record  is  open  to  no  such  objec- 
tions ;  and,  besides,  it  would  confer  an  immortality  additional  to  that 
given  by  the  poet's  verses. 

2  FiU'd.-q.  has  "fild." 

6  In  fresh  numbers. — Meaning  probably  "in  successive  new  poems," 
rather  than  "in  new  metres." 

11  A  poet's  rage. — The  product  of  poetical  enthusiasm. 

12  Stretched  metre. — Mere  inflated  words.     Q.  has  the  spelling  "miter." 


jfirst  Scries.  175 


XVIII. 

SHALL  I  compare  thee  to  a  summer's  day  ] 
Thou  art  more  lovely  and  more  temperate  : 
Kough  winds  do  shake  the  darling  buds  of  May, 
And  summer's  lease  hath  all  too  short  a  date  : 
Sometime  too  hot  the  eye  of  heaven  shines, 
And  often  is  his  gold  complexion  dimm'd  ; 
And  every  fair  from  fair  sometime  declines, 
By  chance,  or  nature's  changing  course,  untrimm'd 
But  thy  eternal  summer  shall  not  fade, 
Nor  lose  possession  of  that  fair  thou  ow'st ; 
Nor  shall  Death  brag  thou  wander'st  in  his  shade, 
When  in  eternal  lines  to  time  thou  grow'st  ; 
So  long  as  men  can  breathe,  or  eyes  can  see, 
So  long  lives  this,  and  this  gives  life  to  thee. 


XVIII.  If  the  poet  were  to  compare  his  friend  to  a  summer  day, 
the  comparison  would  be  a  depreciation  of  his  excellence.  And 
summer,  too,  must  fade  away ;  but  through  these  Sonnets  Mr.  W. 
H.  is  assured  of  immortality  so  long  as  the  race  of  men  endures. 
The  greatly  increased  power  to  confer  immortality  here  attributed 
to  the  poet's  verses  may  be  noted,  as  showing  not  improbably  that 
here  a  new  group  of  Sonnets  commences,  extending  to  xxvi. 

3  May. — "A  summer  month  ;  we  must  remember  that  May  in  Shak- 
spere's  time  ran  on  to  within  a  few  days  of  our  mid- June." — Dowden,  ad  loc. 

5  The  eye  of  heaven. — The  sun.     Cf.  xxxiii.  2. 

7  E  eery  fair  from  fair. — Everything  beautiful  from  beauty. 

a  Untrimm'd. — Its  beauty  marred  or  despoiled. 

10  That  fair  thou  ow'st. — That  beauty  thou  ownest. 

12  To  time  thou  grow' st. — Thy  fame  increasing  with  the  progress  of  time  : 
keeping  pace  with  time. 


*JS» 


176  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XIX. 

DEVOURING  Time,  blunt  thou  the  lion's  paws, 
And  make  the  earth  devour  her  own  sweet  brood  ; 
Pluck  the  keen  teeth  from  the  fierce  tiger's  jaws, 
And  burn  the  long-liv'd  phoenix  in  her  blood  ; 
Make  glad  and  sorry  seasons,  as  thou  fleet'st, 
And  do  whate'er  thou  wilt,  swift-footed  Time, 
To  the  wide  world,  and  all  her  fading  sweets  ; 
But  I  forbid  thee  one  most  heinous  crime  : 
O  carve  not  with  thy  hours  my  love's  fair  brow, 
Nor  draw  no  lines  there  with  thine  antique  pen  ; 
Him  in  thy  course  untainted  do  allow, 
For  beauty's  pattern  to  succeeding  men. 

Yet  do  thy  worst,  old  Time  :  despite  thy  wrong, 
My  love  shall  in  my  verse  ever  live  young. 


XIX.  Mr.  W.  H.'s  immortality  is  secured  by  the  poet's  verse 
against  the  possibility  of  being  impaired  by  the  utmost  power  of 
Time  to  destroy.  In  this  Sonnet  Time  is  first  implored  to  restrain 
his  power  ;  and  then  he  is  defied. 

2  The  earth  "  devours  "  what,  on  its  decay,  becomes  again  incorporated 
with  the  earth. 

3  Fierce  tiger's  jaws. — Q.  has  "yawes." 

4  "  '  Burned  in  her  blood  '  may  signify  '  burnt  alive.'  " — Steevens. 

10  Thine  antique  pen. — So  called,  apparently,  as  marking  age  on  the 
countenance.     In  the  previous  line  the  effects  of  age  are  "carved"  on 
the  brow. 

11  Untainted. — Without  being  faded  or  marred. 


ffirst  Series*  177 


XX. 

A  WOMAN'S  face  with  Nature's  own  hand  painted, 
Hast  thou,  the  master-mistress  of  my  passion  ; 
A  woman's  gentle  heart,  but  not  acquainted 
With  shifting  change,  as  is  false  women's  fashion  ; 
An  eye  more  bright  than  theirs,  less  false  in  rolling, 
Gilding  the  object  whereupon  it  gazeth  ; 
A  man  in  hue,  all  hues  in  his  controlling, 
Which  steals  men's  eyes,  and  women's  souls  amazeth. 
And  for  a  woman  wert  thou  first  created  ; 
Till  Nature,  as  she  wrought  thee,  fell  a-doting, 
And  by  addition  me  of  thee  defeated, 
By  adding  one  thing  to  my  purpose  nothing. 

But  since  she  prick'd  thee  out  for  women's  pleasure, 
Mine  be  thy  love,  and  thy  love's  use  their  treasure. 


XX.  The  poet's  friend  has  the  beauty  and  tenderness  of  a  woman, 
but  without  faults  which  are  common  in  women.  Evidence  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  poet's  "passion,"  if  such  were  needed,  is  given  by 
lines  II  to  14. 

2  Master-mistress. — An  expression  evidently  used  on  account  of  the 
poet's  dedicating  his  Sonnets  to  a  male  friend,  instead  of  the  mistress 
usually  addressed  by  the  sonnetteers. 

5  Less  false  in  rolling. — Cf.  cxxxix.  6  ;  cxl.  14. 

6  Gilding  the  object,  &c. — Like  the  sun.     Cf.  xxxiii.  1-4. 

7  A  man  in  hue,  all  hues. — The  word  "hue"  has  in  our  day  a  sense 
more  restricted  than  it  had  in  Shakespeare's  time,  when  it  could  be  em- 
ployed to  indicate  "form"  or  "appearance."    The  lines  from  Spenser, 
Fairy  Queen,  Bk.  v.  canto  ix. ,  have  been  quoted  :— 

"Then  gan  it  run  away  incontinent, 
Being  returned  to  his  former  hew." 

The  notion  that  "hues,"  as  printed  in  the  Quarto  "Hews,"  was  intended 
to  indicate  a  certain  Mr.  William  Hughes,  otherwise  unknown,  as  the  Mr. 
W.  H.  of  the  Dedication,  scarcely  needs  to  be  refuted.  Controlling. — 
Rendering  all  others  subordinate  ;  surpassing  them. 


178  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets. 

XXI. 

So  is  it  not  with  me  as  with  that  Muse, 

Stirr'd  by  a  painted  beauty  to  his  verse  ; 

Who  heaven  itself  for  ornament  doth  use, 

And  every  fair  with  his  fair  doth  rehearse  ;  4 

Making  a  couplement  of  proud  compare, 

"With  sun  and  moon,  with  earth  and  sea's  rich  gems, 

With  April's  first-born  flowers,  and  all  things  rare 

That  heaven's  air  in  this  huge  rondure  hems.  s 

0  let  me,  true  in  love,  but  truly  write, 

And  then  believe  me,  my  love  is  as  fair 

As  any  mother's  child,  though  not  so  bright 

As  those  gold  candles  fix'd  in  heaven's  air :  12 

Let  them  say  more  that  like  of  hearsay  well ; 

I  will  not  praise,  that  purpose  not  to  sell.  14 


XXI.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the  poet  to  flatter  his  friend,  or  to 
follow  the  example  of  other  poets,  who,  inspired  by  meretricious 
charms,  indulge  in  extravagant  comparisons.  There  is  none  born  of 
woman  more  beautiful  than  Mr.  W.  H.,  though,  in  its  brightness,  his 
beauty  is  not  comparable  to  that  of  the  stars,  whose  brightness  is 
of  a  different  nature. 

*>  2  The  muse  is  identified  with  the  poet  in  question.  As  to  the  words 
"painted  beauty,"  cf.  xx.  i.  Possibly  some  particular  poet  may  be  in- 
tended. 

4  Every  fair  with  his  fair,  &c. — Compares  everything  beautiful  with  the 
beauty  which  he  celebrates.     Cf.  xviii.  7. 

5  Couplement. — Represented  in  Q.  by  "  cooplement. "     Of  proud  com- 
pare.— Coupling,  in  his  exalted  and  inflated  comparisons,  the  beauty 
which  he  celebrates  with  objects  specified  in  the  three  following  lines. 

8  This  huge  rondure. — Possibly  the  vast  circumference  of  the  limiting 
horizon,  or  possibly  the  vault  of  heaven.  On  the  whole,  the  former  sense 
seems  the  more  probable. 

12  Gold  candles.     Cf.  Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  v.  sc.  i,  lines  58,  59  :— 

"  Look  how  the  floor  of  heaven 
Is  thick  inlaid  with  patines  of  bright  gold." 

13  That  like  of  hearsay  well. — Who  are  pleased  with  idle  and  extravagant 
talk.     The  "of,"  in  our  present  idiom,  would  be  redundant. 

14  /  will  not  praise,  &c. — I  will  not  indulge  in  extravagant  laudation,  as 
sellers  do,  wishing  to  part  with  what  they  praise.     Cf.  Passionate  Pil- 
grim, 19: — 

"  But  plainly  say  thou  lov'st  her  well, 
And  set  her  person  forth  to  sell." 

Also  Troilus  and  Cressida,  Act  iv.  sc.  i,  line  78,  "We'll  not  commend 
what  we  intend  to  sell."  Paris  here  speaks  ;  but  it  would  not  seem  that 
he  really  wanted  to  part  with  Helen.  If  he  did,  he  would  do  as  vendors 
do.  He  intends  to  sell  only  at  a  costly  price,  by  the  fortune  of  war. 


3ft rst  Series*  179 


XXII. 

MY  glass  shall  not  persuade  me  I  am  old, 
So  long  as  youth  and  thou  are  of  one  date  ; 
But  when  in  thee  time's  furrows  I  behold, 
Then  look  I  death  my  days  should  expiate. 
For  all  that  beauty  that  doth  cover  thee, 
Is  but  the  seemly  raiment  of  my  heart, 
Which  in  thy  breast  doth  live,  as  thine  in  me  ; 
How  can  I  then  be  elder  than  thou  art  ? 
O  therefore,  love,  be  of  thyself  so  wary, 
As  I  not  for  myself  but  for  thee  will ; 
Bearing  thy  heart,  which  I  will  keep  so  chary 
As  tender  nurse  her  babe  from  faring  ill. 

Presume  not  on  thy  heart  when  mine  is  slain  ; 

Thou  gav'st  me  thine,  not  to  give  back  again. 


XXII.  The  poet  can  see  some  traces  of  advancing  age  when  he 
looks  in  a  mirror ;  but  he  is  united  so  closely  to  his  friend,  that  he 
will  not  believe  that  he  is  himself  old,  while  his  friend  is  in  the 
bloom  of  youthful  beauty.  They  have  exchanged  hearts.  In  what 
is  said  of  the  poet's  heart  being  slain,  Professor  Dowden  sees  some 
indication  of  a  wrong  which  had  been  committed  by  the  poet's 
friend.  If  this  view  is  correct,  the  wrong  (the  nature  of  which  is  to 
come  out  afterwards)  must  have  been  committed,  it  would  seem, 
very  soon  after  the  commencement  of  the  friendship. 

4  Expiate.—  Bring  to  a  close,  finish. — Schmidt's  Lex.      Malone  com- 
pared King  Richard  III.,  Act  iii.  sc.  3,  line  23,  "  Make  haste  ;  the  hour 
of  death  is  expiate." 

5  All  the  beauty,  &c. — The  poet  and  his  friend  have  exchanged  hearts  ; 
and  so  the  poet's  heart  is  clothed  with  the  beautiful  form  of  his  friend. 

9  Be  of  thyself  so  wary. — Since  thou  hast  my  heart  in  thy  breast.  A 
gentle  hint,  possibly,  in  accordance  with  what  has  been  said  above. 

13  When  mine  is  stain. — Meaning,  possibly,  slain  by  thy  present  course 
of  conduct. 


i8o  Sbafcespeare'6  Sonnets. 


XXIII. 

As  an  imperfect  actor  on  the  stage, 
Who  with  his  fear  is  put  besides  his  part, 
Or  some  fierce  thing  replete  with  too  much  rage, 
Whose  strength's  abundance  weakens  his  own  heart ;       4 
So  I,  for  fear  of  trust,  forget  to  say 
The  perfect  ceremony  of  love's  rite, 
And  in  mine  own  love's  strength  seem  to  decay, 
O'ercharg'd  with  burthen  of  mine  own  love's  might.          s 
O  let  my  books  be  then  the  eloquence 
And  dumb  presagers  of  my  speaking  breast, 
Who  plead  for  love,  and  look  for  recompense, 
More  than  that  tongue  that  more  hath  more  express'd.     12 
O  learn  to  read  what  silent  love  hath  writ : 
To  hear  with  eyes  belongs  to  love's  fine  wit.  14 


XXIII.  Overcome  by  nervous  hesitancy  and  trepidation,  the  poet 
cannot  declare  all  his  love  for  his  friend.  His  Sonnets  must  speak 
for  him ;  but  his  love  is  greater  than  even  these  can  express.  This 
nervousness  was  probably  not  altogether  a  poet's  fiction. 

2  Put  besides  his  part. — We  now  use  the  phrase  "put  out." 
3>  4  Or  some  fierce  thing,  &c. — Or  some  fierce  animal  which  has  lost  self- 
control. 

5  It  seems  doubtful  whether  "for  fear  of  trust"  is  to  be  regarded  as 
meaning  "fearing  that  I  shall  not  be  trusted,"  or  "fearing  to  trust 
myself."     Dowden  takes  the  words  in  the  latter  sense.     I  prefer  the 
former. 

6  The  perfect  ceremony,  &c. — The  full  and  due  expression  of  love.     Bite. 
— Q.  "right." 

7.  8  Cf.  lines  3,  4. 

9  My  books. — It  has  been  supposed  that  the  Sonnets  were  sent  to  Mr. 
W.  H.  in  successive  written  books. 

10  Presagers.— Meaning  almost  "interpreters,"  but  also  implying  that 
the  poet's  love  had  not  yet  been  altered. 

11,  12  Who  plead,  &c. — Myself  who  plead  for  love,  and  a  recompense 
greater  (first  "more"  of  line  12)  than  "that  tongue"  (the  voice  of  my 
books)  hath  better  (third  "more ")  expressed  than  my  voice  could  do  that 
greater  love  and  recompense  (" that  more")  which  I  plead  for.  I  have 
here  adopted  an  interpretation  suggested  to  me  by  Mr.  G.  Bernard  Shaw. 
As  to  the  construction,  "my  speaking  breast,  who,"  &c.,  cf.  Coriolanus, 
Act  iv.  sc.  5,  line  84,  "Thou  hast  a  heart  of  wreak  in  thee  that  will 
revenge. " 

13,  14  Learn  to  read,  &c. — Learn  to  understand  the  full  meaning  of  the 
love  expressed  in  writing,  and  so  "  hear  with  eyes"  the  voice  of  the  silent 
tongue.  With  eyes. — Q.  "  wit  eies."  Wit. — Q.  "wiht." 


fffrst  Series.  181 


XXIV. 

MINE  eye  hath  play'd  the  painter,  and  hath  stell'd 
Thy  beauty's  form  in  table  of  my  heart ; 
My  body  is  the  frame  wherein  'tis  held, 
And  perspective  it  is  best  painter's  art. 
For  through  the  painter  must  you  see  his  skill, 
To  find  where  your  true  image  pictur'd  lies, 
Which  in  my  bosom's  shop  is  hanging  still, 
That  hath  his  windows  glazed  with  thine  eyes. 
Now  see  what  good  turns  eyes  for  eyes  have  done  ; 
Mine  eyes  have  drawn  thy  shape,  and  thine  for  me 
Are  windows  to  my  breast,  where-through  the  sun 
Delights  to  peep,  to  gaze  therein  on  thee  ; 
Yet  eyes  this  cunning  want  to  grace  their  art, 
They  draw  but  what  they  see,  know  not  the  heart 


XXIV.  Instead  of  the  figurative  exchange  of  hearts  in  xxii., 
the  poet's  breast  is  now  a  painter's  studio,  and  his  heart  a  tablet  on 
which  his  sight  has  portrayed  the  form  of  his  friend.  And  the 
poet  is  so  truthful  and  sincere  that  the  windows  of  his  breast  are 
the  eyes  of  his  friend,  to  whom  the  poet's  heart  is  thus  fully  revealed. 
The  concluding  couplet  would  seem  to  indicate  a  doubt  whether 
the  friend's  heart  has  been  revealed  with  equal  clearness. 

1  StelVd. — Q.  "steeld,"  the  form  of  which  maybe  right.  To  "steel" 
is  possibly,  as  I  think  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Harrison  suggested,  to  write  with 
a  steel  point  or  stylus  ;  and  so  the  word  may  come  to  have  a  more  general 
sense  of  portraying  or  depicting.  Cf.  however,  Lucrece,  1444,  "To  find 
a  face  where  all  distress  is  stell'd"  (Q.  "steld"),  meaning  evidently 
"portrayed"  or  "depicted."  We  cannot,  however,  infer  from  "held," 
line  3  in  this  Sonnet,  that  "stell'd"  is  the  true  form  in  line  i,  pronuncia- 
tion having  so  considerably  changed. 

8  The  frame. — That  is,  of  the  picture,  or  just  possibly  the  painting- 
frame,  or  easel.  Cf.  T.  Watson,  Teares  of  Fancic  (1593),  Sonnet  46  :— 

"  My  Mistris  seeing  her  faire  counterfet 
So  sweetelie  framed  in  my  bleeding  brest : 
On  it  her  fancie  shee  so  fermelie  set, 
Thinking  her  selfe  for  want  of  it  distrest." 

4  Perspective. — As  used  here,  the  meaning  of  the  word  appears  to  be 
"  capability  of  being  looked  through."  But  though  this  may  be  the  sense 
immediately  intended,-  yet  there  is  a  reference  also  to  the  ordinary  em- 
ployment of  the  word  in  relation  to  pictorial  art,  whether  with  respect 


1 82  Sbafeeepeare's  Sonnet*. 


to  the  representation  of  distance,  or  of  a  picture  so  designed  as  to  require 
to  be  looked  at  obliquely.     Cf.  Richard  II. ,  Act  ii.  sc.  2,  line  18  seq.: — 

"  Like  perspectives,  which,  rightly  gazed  upon, 
Show  nothing  but  confusion  ;  ey'd  awry 
Distinguish  form." 

5  Through  the  painter,  &c. — In  the  sense  mentioned  above.  But  there 
is  probably  an  allusion,  also,  to  the  general  necessity  of  taking  the  position 
occupied  by  an  artist  in  painting  a  picture,  so  as  to  see,  as  it  were,  with 
his  eyes. 

11  Are  windows— where-through  the  sun. — Notice  the  additional  proof 
of  sincerity.  Not  only  are  the  friend's  eyes  windows  to  the  poet's  breast, 
seeing  everything  within,  but  the  sun  himself  can  look  through. 

14  Know  not  the  heart. — Intimating  possibly  a  suspicion  in  accordance 
with  the  last  lines  of  xxii. 


ffirst  Series.  183 


XXV. 

LET  those  who  are  in  favour  with  their  stars, 
Of  public  honour  and  proud  titles  boast, 
Whilst  I,  whom  fortune  of  such  triumph  bars, 
Unlook'd  for  joy  in  that  I  honour  most. 
Great  princes'  favourites  their  fair  leaves  spread 
But  as  the  marigold  at  the  sun's  eye  ; 
And  in  themselves  their  pride  lies  buried, 
For  at  a  frown  they  in  their  glory  die. 
The  painful  warrior  famoused  for  worth, 
After  a  thousand  victories  once  foil'd, 
Is  from  the  book  of  honour  razed  quite, 
And  all  the  rest  forgot  for  which  he  toil'd  : 
Then  happy  I,  that  love  and  am  beloved, 
Where  I  may  not  remove,  nor  be  removed. 


XXV.  The  poet  contrasts  his  position  to  that  of  the  courtier 
whose  glory  depends  on  the  smile  or  frown  of  a  prince,  or  to  that  of 
the  soldier  whose  honour  and  repute  are  lost  through  one  defeat, 
after  even  a  thousand  victories.  But  the  love  between  himself  and 
his  friend  can  feel  no  such  reversal. 

3  Fortune  of  such  triumph  bars. — A  sentiment  to  be  expressed  after- 
wards more  fully.     Cf.  e.g.,  xxix.,  xxxvi.,  cxi. 

4  Unlook'd  for. — Disregarded  and  not  sought  for  to  receive  distinction. 

6  The  marigold. — Cf.  Lucrece,  397  seq. : — 

"  Her  eyes,  like  marigolds,  had  sheath'd  their  light, 
And,  canopied  in  darkness,  sweetly  lay 
Till  they  might  open  to  adorn  the  day." 

Schmidt  identifies  the  marigold  here  spoken  of  as  "the  flower  Calendula 
pluvialis." 

7  And  in  themselves. — Suddenly  all  display  of  glory  is  at  an  end,  and 
they  become,  as  it  were,  the  tomb  of  their  own  former  pride. 

9  Worth.— The  emendations  " fight "  and  "might "  have  been  proposed, 
or,  leaving  "worth  "  untouched,  it  has  been  suggested  that  "  quite  "  (line 
n)  should  be  changed  to  "forth." 


1 84  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XXVI. 

LORD  of  my  love,  to  whom  in  vassalage 

Thy  merit  hath  my  duty  strongly  knit, 

To  thee  I  send  this  written  ambassage, 

To  witness  duty,  not  to  show  my  wit.  4 

Duty  so  great,  which  wit  so  poor  as  mine 

May  make  seem  bare,  in  wanting  words  to  show  it : 

But  that  I  hope  some  good  conceit  of  thine 

In  thy  soul's  thought,  all  naked,  will  bestow  it :  8 

Till  whatsoever  star  that  guides  my  moving, 

Points  on  me  graciously  with  fair  aspect, 

And  puts  apparel  on  my  tattered  loving, 

To  show  me  worthy  of  thy  sweet  respect :  12 

Then  may  I  dare  to  boast  how  I  do  love  thee, 
Till  then,  not  show  my  head  where  thou  may'st  prove  me. 


XXVI.  Designed  pretty  evidently  to  conclude,  and  to  accompany, 
when  sent  to  Mr.  W.  H.,  either  i.  to  xxv.  or  xviii.  to  xxv.  There  is 
a  curious  and  interesting  resemblance  between  this  Sonnet  and  the 
dedication  to  Lucrece.  Drake's  argument  (Shakespeare  and  his  Times, 
1817),  that  this  resemblance  gives  evidence  that  it  is  Lord  South- 
ampton who  is  here  addressed  also,  is  certainly  not  conclusive.  We 
have,  however,  obviously  a  colouring  of  plausibility  given  to  the 
assertion  that  Mr.  W.  H.  was  a  person  of  somewhat  similarly  high 
station. 

1  Vassalage. — This  word,  like  what  is  said  in  the  sequel,  is  suited  to 
the  high  station  of  Mr.  W.  H. 

2  Strongly  knit. — Malone  compares  the  words  of  lago  in  Othello,  Act  i. 
sc.  3,  lines  335  seq.,  "  I  confess  me  knit  to  thy  deserving  with  cables  of 
perdurable  toughness  ;"  and  there  are  other  parallels. 

7> 8  The  poet  hopes  that,  when  received  into  his  friend's  understanding, 
"some  good  conceit"  on  the  part  of  his  friend  may  bestow  his  "all- 
naked  "  verse.  "  Bestow  "  here  seems  to  mean,  not  merely  "  lodge,"  but 
also  "equip"  and  "clothe,"  like  a  naked  wayfarer  received  as  a  guest. 
This  agrees  with  the  "  putting  apparel  on  my  tattered  loving  "  of  line  n. 

9  My  moving. — The  poet,  it  would  appear,  in  accordance  with  following 
Sonnets,  is  about  to  commence  a  journey,  probably  of  a  professional 
nature.  "  My"  must  not  be  conjecturally  changed  to  "  by."  He  hopes 
that  hereafter,  under  the  benign  influence  of  his  guiding-star,  he  may 
be  able  to  offer  something  more  worthy  of  acceptance. 

11  Tattered.— Q.  has  "tottered."    Cf.  ii.  4;  also  this  "worthless  poor 
totter'd  volume." — Kemp's  Nine  daies. 

12  Thy  su'cet  respect. — Q.  has  "  their  sweet  respect."    Respect. — Kegard, 


ffirst  Series.  185 


XXVII. 

WEARY  with  toil,  I  haste  me  to  my  bed, 
The  dear  repose  for  limbs  with  travel  tired  ; 
But  then  begins  a  journey  in  my  head, 
To  work  my  mind,  when  body's  work's  expired  : 
For  then  my  thoughts  (from  far  where  I  abide) 
Intend  a  zealous  pilgrimage  to  thee,' 
And  keep  my  drooping  eyelids  open  wide, 
Looking  on  darkness  which  the  blind  do  see  : 
Save  that  my  soul's  imaginary  sight 
Presents  thy  shadow  to  my  sightless  view, 
Which,  like  a  jewel  hung  in  ghastly  night, 
Makes  black  night  beauteous,  and  her  old  face  new. 
Lo,  thus,  by  day  my  limbs,  by  night  my  mind, 
For  thee,  and  for  myself,  no  quiet  find. 


XX VII.  The  poet  is  at  a  distance  from  his  friend  on  a  journey ; 
and  when  his  body  rests  at  night,  then  begins  a  mental  pilgrimage 
to  his  friend,  which  keeps  his  eyes  from  sleep.  The  night,  however, 
acquires  a  new  beauty,  when  he  sees  his  friend's  image  in  the 
darkness. 

4  To  work  my  mind.— To  set  my  mind  at  work ;  or,  my  mind  begins  to 
work. 

6  Intend. — Direct  onwards. 

7  My  drooping  eyelids. — My  eyelids,  which  otherwise  would  fain  close  in 
sleep. 

8  Which  the  blind  do  see. — Equally  with  those  whose  eyesight  is  not 
impaired. 

10  Thy. — Q.  gives  "their"  instead  of  "thy,"  probably  from  a  mis- 
understood abbreviation.  Shadow. — Image,  as  elsewhere. 

11>12  Like  a  jewel,  &c. — Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  i.  sc.  5,  lines  47,  48,  has 
been  compared  : — 

"  It  seems  she  hangs  upon  the  cheek  of  night 
Like  a  rich  jewel  in  an  vEthiop's  ear." 

13, 14  There  must  be  a  change  of  order  to  give  the  sense  ;  and  then  we 
have,  "  By  day,  my  limbs  for  myself ;  by  night,  my  mind  for  thee,  no 
quiet  find." 


1 86  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


XXVIII. 

How  can  I  then  return  in  happy  plight, 

That  am  debarr'd  the  benefit  of  rest  1 

When  day's  oppression  is  not  eas'd  by  night, 

But  day  by  night  and  night  by  day  oppress'd  1  4 

And  each,  though  enemies  to  cither's  reign, 

Do  in  consent  shake  hands  to  torture  me, 

The  one  by  toil,  the  other  to  complain 

How  far  I  toil,  still  farther  off  from  thee.  8 

I  tell  the  day,  to  please  him,  thou  art  bright, 

And  dost  him  grace  when  clouds  do  blot  the  heaven  : 

So  natter  I  the  swart-complexion'd  night ; 

When  sparkling  stars  twire  not,  thou  gild'st  the  even.         12 
But  day  doth  daily  draw  my  sorrows  longer, 
And  night  doth  nightly  make  griefs  length  seem  stronger.  14 


XXVIII.  The  poet  on  his  journey  is  going  farther  and  farther 
from  his  friend.  Grieving  for  the  temporary  separation,  and 
oppressed  both  by  day  and  night,  how  can  he  hope  to  return  in 
a  happy  and  prosperous  condition  ? 

!-4  As  to  the  "  oppression  "  here  spoken  of,  see  the  preceding  Sonnet, 
lines  i  to  7. 

"• 8  The  one  by  toil,  &c. — Day  inflicts  pain  by  the  toil  of  journeying, 
and  night  by  the  leisure  afforded  for  reflecting  how  much  farther  the 
poet  is  separated  from  his  friend  by  the  day's  journey. 

11  Swart. — Swarthy,  dark.     Cf.  Comedy  of  Errors,  Act  iii.  sc.  2,  line 
104,  "Swart,  like  my  shoe;"  and  Henry  VI.,  First  Part,  Act  i.  sc.  2, 
line  84,  "  And  whereas  I  was  black  and  swart  before." 

12  Twire. — To  peep,  and  so,  possibly,  to  twinkle,  both  peeping  and 
twinkling  being  intermittent.     Dowden  quotes,  "  I  saw  the  wench  that 
twired  and  twinkled  at  thee  the  other  day." — Beaumont  and  Fletcher, 
Woman  Pleased,  Act  iv.  sc.  i  ;  and  "  Which  maids  will  twire  at,  'tween 
their  fingers  thus." — Ben  Jonson,  Sad  Shepherd,  Act  ii.  sc.  i.     The  Rev. 
W.  A.  Harrison  observes,  "Two  meanings  of  'twire'  are  found  in  old 
writers,  (a)  that  of  '  chirp '  or  *  twitter,'  used  of  birds ;  (6)  that  given 
above,  '  to  peep  or  look  out  at  intervals,'  as  the  stars  twinkling ;  cf .  Isaiah 
(E.V.)  x.  14."    In  this  passage  of  Isaiah  the  Hebrew  word  metsaphtseph, 
translated  "  peeped,"  is  used  of  the  chirping  of  young  birds  in  the  nest : 
"And  there  was  none  that  moved  the  wing,  or  opened  the  mouth,  or 
peeped."     Gild'st. — Q.  "guil'st." 


fffrst  Series,  187 


XXIX. 

WHEN  in  disgrace  with  fortune  and  men's  eyes, 
I  all  alone  beweep  my  outcast  state, 
And  trouble  deaf  heaven  with  my  bootless  cries, 
And  look  upon  myself,  and  curse  my  fate,  4 

Wishing  me  like  to  one  more  rich  in  hope, 
Featur'd  like  him,  like  him  with  friends  possess'd, 
Desiring  this  man's  art,  and  that  man's  scope, 
With  what  I  most  enjoy  contented  least ;  8 

Yet  in  these  thoughts  myself  almost  despising, 
Haply  I  think  on  thee  ; — and  then  my  state, 
Like  to  the  lark  at  break  of  day  arising 
From  sullen  earth,  sings  hymns  at  heaven's  gate  ;  12 

For  thy  sweet  love  remember'd,  such  wealth  brings, 
That  then  I  scorn  to  change  my  state  with  kings.         14 


XXIX.  This  Sonnet,  and  those  following  as  far  as  xxxii.,  have 
been  regarded  as  written  in  the  same  period  of  absence  (so  Fur- 
nivall,  Leopold  ShaTcspere) ;  and  Dowden  takes  them  as  giving  the 
night-thoughts  previously  alluded  to  (xxviii.).  In  xxix.  the  poet 
reflects  on  his  lack  of  Fortune's  gifts,  and  his  "  outcast  state,"  so 
that  he  becomes  almost  despicable  in  his  own  eyes.  But  despon- 
dency changes  to  exultation  when  he  thinks  of  his  friend.  This 
Sonnet,  with  its  mention  of  Shakespeare's  "outcast  state,"  &c., 
would  be  very  suitable  to  the  supposition  that  he  was  on  a  provincial 
tour  as  an  actor.  Cf.  cxi. 

7  Art  here  can  scarcely  be  the  actor's  art,  but  rather  knowledge  or 
literary  skill.     Scope. — Probably  range  of  thought  and  power  of  expres- 
sion. 

8  On  this  line  Dowden  remarks,  "The  preceding  line  makes  it  not 
improbable  that  Shakspere  is  here  speaking  of  his  own  poems."     "  En- 
joy," it  would   seem,   must  be  taken  as  pretty  nearly  equivalent  to 
"possess." 

11>12  The  words  of  the  song  in  Cymbeline,  Act  ii.  sc.  3,  lines  21,  22,  have 
been  justly  compared : — 

"  Hark  !  hark  !  the  lark  at  heaven's  gate  sings, 
And  Phosbus  'gins  arise." 

13  Such  wealth. — Implying  perhaps  that  the  poet  had  been  thinking  of 
his  poverty.  Cf.  xxxvii.  and  cxi. 


Sbafcespearc's  Sonnets. 


xxx. 

WHEN  to  the  sessions  of  sweet  silent  thought 
Fsummon  up  remembrance  of  things  past, 
I  sigh  the  lack  of  many  a  thing  I  sought, 
And  with  old  woes  new  wail  my  dear  time's  waste :      4 
Then  can  I  drown  an  eye,  unus'd  to  flow, 
For  precious  friends  hid  in  death's  dateless  night, 
And  weep  afresh  love's  long-since  cancell'd  woe, 
And  moan  the  expense  of  many  a  vanish'd  sight.  8 

Then  can  I  grieve  at  grievances  fore-gone, 
And  heavily  from  woe  to  woe  tell  o'er 
The  sad  account  of  fore-bemoaned  moan, 
Which  I  new  pay  as  if  not  paid  before.  12 

But  if  the  while  I  think  on  thee,  dear  friend, 
All  losses  are  restor'd,  and  sorrows  end.  H 


XXX.  Eeflections  on  disappointments  and  bereavements,  which, 
however,  are  compensated  for  by  the  love  of  his  friend. 

1  Malone  compares  the  use  of  "session"  in  Othello,  Act  iii.  sc.  3,  line 
140. 

3  Regret  for  disappointed  hopes  and  expectations. 

4  My  dear  time's  waste. — The  things  or  persons  devastated  or  destroyed 
by  Time,  which  were  dear  to  me. 

6  Dateless. — Knowing  nothing  of  date  or  time ;  and  so  the  word  may 
be  used  for  endless. 

8  Moan  the  expense,   &c. — Moan  over   what  the  loss   of   "precious 
friends"  cost  me  in  sorrow.     Dowden  connects  this  line  with  n  and  12, 
the  paying  anew  "the  sad  account  of  fore-bemoaned  moan." 

9  Fore-gone. — Previously  endured. 


fffrst  Series*  189 


XXXI. 

THY  bosom  is  endeared  with  all  hearts, 
Which  I  by  lacking  have  supposed  dead  ; 
And  there  reigns  love  and  all  love's  loving  parts, 
And  all  those  friends  which  I  thought  buried. 
How  many  a  holy  and  obsequious  tear 
Hath  dear  religious  love  stolen  from  mine  eye, 
As  interest  of  the  dead,  which  now  appear 
But  things  remov'd,  that  hidden  in  thee  lie  ! 
Thou  art  the  grave  where  buried  love  doth  live, 
Hung  with  the  trophies  of  my  lovers  gone, 
Who  all  their  parts  of  me  to  thee  did  give  ; 
That  due  of  many  now  is  thine  alone  : 
Their  images  I  lov'd  I  view  in  thee, 
And  thou  (all  they)  hast  all  the  all  of  me. 


XXXI.  This  Sonnet  is  a  continuation  of  xxx.,  the  last  two  lines 
of  which  it  expands.  In  his  friend  the  poet  finds  again  all  those 
dear  to  him  whose  loss  he  had  lamented. 

1  Thy  bosom  is  endeared  to  me  by  its  having  within  it  all  hearts. 

2  There  they  are  alive,  though  they  had  been  regarded  as  dead. 

3  All  love's  loving  parts. — Alluding  to  the  varied  manifestations  of  affec- 
tion displayed  by  the  poet's  deceased  friends. 

5-  6  Describe  the  sacred  and  reverent  character  of  the  poet's  affection 
for  his  departed  friends.  Obsequious. — Dutiful;  cf.  "obsequious  sor- 
row."— Hamlet,  Act  i.  sc.  z,  line  92. 

7  As  interest  of  the  dead. — As  that  to  which  the  dead  had  a  rightful 
claim.     Cf.  "  interest  "  in  Ixxiv.  3. 

8  But  things  remov'd. — They  had  but  gone  to  take  up  their  abode  in 
his  friend's  breast.     Thee. — Q.  "there." 

9  Thou  art  the  grave,  &c. — The  imagery  is  suddenly  changed,  and  if  the 
poet's  deceased  friends  are  still  alive,  they  live,  as  it  were,  in  the  grave. 

10  Hung  with  the  trophies. — As  in  a  church  or  cathedral,  above  the 
tombs  of  the  dead. 

11  Represents  the  greatness  of  his  present  affection  as  comprising  all 
the  separate  parts  due  respectively  to  his  former  friends. 

14  Emphasises  12.  Thou  art  (all  they),  and  hast  all  the  all  of  me. 
Notice  the  strength  of  " all  the  all,"  instead  of  "all  their  parts  of  me." 


190  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XXXII. 

IF  thou  survive  my  well-contented  day, 

When  that  churl  Death  my  bones  with  dust  shall  cover, 

And  shalt  by  fortune  once  more  re-survey 

These  poor  rude  lines  of  thy  deceased  lover,  4 

Compare  them  with  the  bettering  of  the  time  ; 

And  though  they  be  outstripp'd  by  every  pen, 

Reserve  them  for  my  love,  not  for  their  rhyme, 

Exceeded  by  the  height  of  happier  men.  8 

O  then  vouchsafe  me  but  this  loving  thought : 

'  Had  my  friend's  muse  grown  with  this  growing  age, 

A  dearer  birth  than  this  his  love  had  brought, 

To  march  in  ranks  of  better  equipage :  12 

But  since  he  died,  and  poets  better  prove, 

Theirs  for  their  style  I'll  read,  his  for  his  love.'  u 


XXXII.  In  accordance  with  the  view  of  Furnivall  and  Dowden, 
this  Sonnet  is  probably  the  Envoy  to  the  series  xxvii-xxxii.  As  the 
poet  has  survived  many  of  his  former  friends  (of.  two  preceding 
Sonnets),  so  Mr.  W.  H.  may  survive  the  poet.  And  in  time  to  come 
there  may  be  a  general  improvement  of  poetical  style.  But  this 
improved  style  will  not  express  a  greater  intensity  of  affection.  Cf. 
however,  on  this  Sonnet,  Introd.,  chap.  vi.  §  i,  p.  36. 

1  My  well-contented  day.  — If  this  expression  implies  satisfaction  with 
the  world,  then  there  is  a  marked  difference  of  feeling  between  this 
Sonnet  and  others  following,  e.g.  Ixvi.    The  expression  "  well-contented  " 
may,  however,  be  understood  possibly  as  implying  that  the  poet  would, 
whenever  the  summons  to  depart  may  come,  desire  no  further  prolonga- 
tion of  a  life  which  was  not  to  be  coveted.    But,  in  the  case  of  poems  like 
these  Sonnets,  there  need  be  little  difficulty  in  admitting  a  variation  in 
the  feeling  expressed. 

2  That  churl  Death.— -Of.  Hamlet,  Act  v.  sc.  2,  lines  347,  348. 

"This  fell  sergeant,  Death, 
Is  strict  in  his  arrest." 

3  "And  if  perchance  thou  shalt  again  look  over." 

4  Lover. — An  expression  not  unsuitable  between  men  according  to  the 
fashion  of  the  time. 

7  Reserve  them. — Still  keep  them. 

8  Happier  men. — Poets  more  successful  in  thought  or  expression. 

11  A  dearer  birth. — A  more  valuable  poetical  product. 

12  To  march,  &c. — To  keep  pace  with  the  time  in  the  outward  garb 
and  adornment  of  literary  style.     As  to  the  allusion  here  to  certain  lines 
of  Marston's,  see  Introd.,  chap.  vi.  §  i. 


fftrst  Series.  191 


XXXIII. 

FULL  many  a  glorious  morning  have  I  seen 
Flatter  the  mountain-tops  with  sovereign  eye, 
Kissing  with  golden  face  the  meadows  green, 
Gilding  pale  streams  with  heavenly  alchymy  ;  4 

Anon  permit  the  basest  clouds  to  ride 
With  ugly  rack  on  his  celestial  face, 
And  from  the  forlorn  world  his  visage  hide, 
Stealing  unseen  to  west  with  this  disgrace  :  g 

Even  so  my  sun  one  early  morn  did  shine, 
With  all  triumphant  splendour  on  my  brow  ; 
But  out !  alack  !  he  was  but  one  hour  mine, 
The  region  cloud  hath  mask'd  him  from  me  now.  12 

Yet  him  for  this  my  love  no  whit  disdaineth  ; 

Suns  of  the  world  may  stain,  when  heaven's  sun  staineth.  14 


XXXIII.  Now,  we  may  suppose,  begins  another  series  of  Sonnets^ 
During  Shakespeare's  absence,  possibly,  Mr.  W.  H.  had  become 
unduly  intimate  with  the  poet's  female  friend,  the  dark  lady  of 
cxxvii.,  &c.  On  the  poet's  return  there  was  some  manifestation  of 
estrangement  on  the  part  of  Mr.  W.  H.  The  friendship,  previously, 
had  been  like  a  glorious  summer  morning,  but  now  the  sun's  face  is 
hidden  by  dense  storm-clouds.  Still  the  poet  will  not  renounce  his 
friend  in  despair.  The  sky  may  again  become  clear. 

4  Heavenly  alchymy. — Steevens  compares  King  John,  Act  iii.  sc.  i, 
lines  77,  78  :— 

"The  glorious  sun 
Stays  in  his  course,  and  plays  the  alchymist." 

6  With  ugly  rack. — "With  dark  threatening  masses  of  vapour.  Cf. 
Hamlet,  Act  ii.  sc.  2,  lines  505,  506  : — 

"  But,  as  we  often  see  against  the  storm, 
A  silence  in  the  heaven,  the  rack  stand  still." 

12  The  region  cloud. — The  cloud  in  the  airy  region  above.  But  it  has 
been  thought  that  the  word  "region  "  in  the  text  is  to  be  referred  to  the 
language  of  ancient  astrology  or  divination,  though  here  it  has  lost  that 
special  sense.  Cf.  Hamlet,  Act  ii.  sc.  2,  lines  508,  509  : — 

"Anon  the  dreadful  thunder 
Doth  rend  the  region. " 

As  to  the  general  sense,  cf.  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  Act  i.  sc.  3,  lines 

84-87  :— 

"Oh,  how  this  spring  of  love  resemble  th 
The  uncertain  glory  of  an  April  day, 
Which  now  shows  all  the  beauty  of  the  sun, 
And  by-and-by  a  cloud  takes  all  away." 


192  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XXXIV. 

WHY  didst  thou  promise  such  a  beauteous  day, 

And  make  me  travel  forth  without  my  cloak, 

To  let  base  clouds  o'ertake  me  in  my  way, 

Hiding  thy  bravery  in  their  rotten  smoke  ?  4 

JTis  not  enough  that  through  the  cloud  thou  break, 

To  dry  the  rain  on  my  storm-beaten  face, 

For  no  man  well  of  such  a  salve  can  speak 

That  heals  the  wound,  and  cures  not  the  disgrace  :  s 

Nor  can  thy  shame  give  physic  to  my  grief ; 

Though  thou  repent,  yet  I  have  still  the  loss  : 

The  offender's  sorrow  lends  but  weak  relief 

To  him  that  bears  the  strong  offence's  [cross].  12 

Ah,  but  those  tears  are  pearl  which  thy  love  sheds, 
And  they  are  rich,  and  ransom  all  ill  deeds.  14 


'  XXXIV.  Imagery  similar  to  that  of  the  last  Sonnet  is  used,  and 
the  poet  again  contrasts  the  dark  storm-clouds  with  the  promise  of 
the  early  morning.  The  sun,  however,  is  beginning  to  break  through 
the  clouds  ;  the  poet's  friend  shows  signs  of  penitence.  But  tears 
shed  after  the  offence  had  been  committed  could  give  no  adequate 
relief.  Still,  on  second  thoughts,  the  poet  pronounces  these  tears 
a  rich  treasure  and  a  full  satisfaction. 

3  Base  clouds. — The  clouds  are  "base"  on  account  of  their  dampness 
defacing  and  obscuring  the  glory  of  the  heavens.     Cf.  the  preceding 
Sonnet,  lines  5,  6,  and  note. 

4  Bravery. — Glory  and  splendour.     Rotten  smoke. — Meaning  possibly 
damp,  unwholesome  vapour.    Steevens  compares  "the  reek  o'  the  rotten 
fins." — Coriolanus,  Act  iii.  sc.  3,  line  121.    "  Rotten,"  however,  may  here 
mean  "loose,"  "wanting  in  coherence." 

6  To  dry  the  rain,  &c. — Continuing  the  imagery  of  the  last  Sonnet, 
according  to  which  the  poet  had  been  overtaken  by  a  storm. 

12  [Cross]. — Q.  has   "losse,"  which  may  possibly  have  remained  by 
oversight  on  a  revision  of  the  MS. 

13  Sheds.— Q.  "sheeds." 


jffrst  Scries.  193 


XXXV. 

No  more  be  griev'd  at  that  which  them  hast  done  : 
Koses  have  thorns,  and  silver  fountains  mud  ; 
Clouds  and  eclipses  stain  both  moon  and  sun, 
And  loathsome  canker  lives  in  sweetest  bud. 
All  men  make  faults,  and  even  I  in  this, 
Authorizing  thy  trespass  with  compare, 
Myself  corrupting,  salving  thy  amiss, 
Excusing  thy  sins  more  than  thy  sins  are. 
For  to  thy  sensual  fault  I  bring  in  sense, 
(Thy  adverse  party  is  thy  advocate) 
And  'gainst  myself  a  lawful  plea  commence  : 
Such  civil  war  is  in  my  love  and  hate, 

That  I  an  accessary  needs  must  be 

To  that  sweet  thief,  which  sourly  robs  from  me. 


XXXV.  The  poet  dissuades  his  friend  from  further  grief.  All 
men  are  imperfect,  and  imperfection  or  evil  is  associated  with  what 
is  beautiful  and  glorious.  The  poet  is  himself  in  fault,  making,  on 
behalf  of  his  friend,  such  excuses  as  would  be  justified  only  in  the 
case  of  a  greater  offence.  Though  wronged,  the  poet's  love  and 
esteem  compel  him  to  become  the  advocate  of  his  opponent  (and 
friend)  in  the  "civil  war"  (line  12),  that  is,  in  the  conflict  of  which 
the  poet  is  conscious  within. 

3  Stain. — Overshadow  and  darken.     Cf.  xxxiii.  14. 

6  Authorizing  thy  trespass  with  compare. — By  comparing  thy  fault  to 
the  "loathsome  canker" — the  worm  that  eats  up  the  blossom,  I  really 
give  the  fault  a  sanction  ("authorizing"  it) ;  for  it  sinks  into  insignifi- 
cance and  disappears  altogether  when  such  extravagant  comparison  is 
made. 

7  Myself  corrupting. — By  unduly  esteeming  the  offence  against  me,  I 
foster  an  excessive  sense  of  my  own  importance.    Salving  thy  amiss, — by 
the  comparisons  previously  mentioned. 

8  Q.  has  "their"  instead  of  "thy"  twice. 

9  Sense. — Probably  sense  of  thy  true  worth  and  consideration  of  the 
circumstances. 

10  Thy  adverse  party,  &c. — The  plaintiff  becomes  advocate  for  the 
defendant. 

11  A  lawful  plea. — A  plea  as  in  a  lawsuit. 

12  Lore  and  hate. — Hatred  on  account  of  the  wrong  inflicted  was  in 
antagonism  to  love  for  Mr.  "W.  H.'s  real  worth. 

13  Accessary, — as  Q.     Accessory  is  unsuitable. 

14  Sourly. — With  no  proper  display  of  kindly  feeling,  harshly.     Cf. 
xli.  8. 


194  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


XXXVI. 

LET  me  confess  that  we  two  must  be  twain, 
Although  our  undivided  loves  are  one  : 
So  shall  those  blots  that  do  with  me  remain, 
Without  thy  help,  by  me  be  borne  alone.  4 

In  our  two  loves  there  is  but  one  respect, 
Though  in  our  lives  a  separable  spite, 
Which  though  it  alter  not  love's  sole  effect, 
Yet  doth  it  steal  sweet  hours  from  love's  delight.  8 

I  may  not  evermore  acknowledge  thee, 
Lest  my  bewailed  guilt  should  do  thee  shame  ; 
Nor  thou  with  public  kindness  honour  me, 
Unless  thou  take  that  honour  from  thy  name  :  12 

But  do  not  so  ;  I  love  thee  in  such  sort, 
As  thou  being  mine,  mine  is  thy  good  report.  14 


XXXVI.  The  self-disparagement  of  the  last  Sonnet  becomes  more 
intense.  Instead  of  the  conduct  of  Mr.  W.  H.  rendering  him  un- 
worthy of  the  poet's  friendship,  it  is  the  poet's  "bewailed  guilt,"  the 
"  blots  "  on  his  character,  which  must  prevent  any  public  recognition 
of  the  acquaintance,  and  which  require  that  the  intimate  association 
should  be  dissevered.  In  extenuating  in  the  previous  Sonnet  Mr. 
W.  H.'s  offence,  the  poet  had  taken  into  account  his  superior  social 
standing.  Hence  what  here  follows.  Shakespeare  very  likely  felt 
that  the  concession  he  had  made  was  unsuitable  and  degrading. 

3  Those  blots. — We  ought  probably  to  understand  this  expression,  as 
well  as  the  "bewailed  guilt "  of  line  10,  not  of  moral  turpitude,  but  of 
the  professional  occupation  and  lower  social  standing  of  the  poet. 

5  But  one  respect. — Perfect  similarity. 

6  In  our  lives  a  separable  spite. — The  "  spite  "  of  Fortune  (xxxvii.  3) 
having  placed  us  in  such  diverse  social  circumstances  as  must  involve 
separation. 

7  Love's  sole  effect. — The  power  and  efficiency  of  love,  apart  from  exter- 
nal circumstances. 

8  Steal  sweet  hours,  &c. — On  account  of  the  expression  of  love  being 
hindered. 

i3,u  The  poet  dissuades  Mr.  W.  H.  from  publicly  recognising  the 
acquaintance,  so  that  his  social  consideration  may  not  be  thereby  com- 
promised. 


3Fir0t  Series.  195 


XXXVII. 

As  a  decrepit  father  takes  delight 

To  see  his  active  child  do  deeds  of  youth, 

So  I,  made  lame  by  Fortune's  dearest  spite, 

Take  all  my  comfort  of  thy  worth  and  truth ;  4 

For  whether  beauty,  birth,  or  wealth,  or  wit, 

Or  any  of  these  all,  or  all,  or  more, 

Intitled  in  thy  parts  do  crowned  sit, 

I  make  my  love  ingrafted  to  this  store  :  s 

So  then  I  am  not  lame,  poor,  nor  despised, 

Whilst  that  this  shadow  doth  such  substance  give, 

That  I  in  thy  abundance  am  sufficed, 

And  by  a  part  of  all  thy  glory  live.  12 

Look  what  is  best,  that  best  I  wish  in  thee  ; 

This  wish  I  have  ;  then  ten  times  happy  me  !  14 


XXXVII.  The  poet's  previous  self-disparagement  must  be  kept 
in  view  in  order  to  the  true  understanding  of  this  Sonnet.  The 
"blots"  and  "bewailed  guilt"  previously  spoken  of  here  pass  into 
an  imagined  decrepitude  and  lameness.  But  all  defect  is  compen- 
sated for  by  the  advantages  and  excellences  of  his  friend,  with 
whom  affection  closely  unites  him. 

3  Made  lame. — There  is  little  or  no  difficulty  about  this  lameness  being 
metaphorical,  as  may  be  seen  by  considering  the  connection  of  thought, 
and  comparing  the  following  passages,  to  which  my  attention  was  directed 
by  the  Kev.  "W.  A.  Harrison  : — "  Come,  lame  me  with  reasons  ;"  "Then 
there  were  two  cousins  laid  up ;  when  the  one  should  be  lamed  with 
reasons,  and  the  other  mad  without  any"  (As  You  Like  It,  Act  i.  sc.  3, 
lines  6-10) ;  "That  their  limbs  may  halt  as  lamely  as  their  manners" 
(Timon,  Act  iv.  sc.  i,  lines  24,  25).  Dearest  spite.— Cf.  "Would  I  had 
met  my  dearest  foe  in  heaven  "  (Hamlet,  Act  i,  sc.  2,  line  182). 

7  Intitled  in  thy  parts,  &c. — The  various  endowments  of  the  poet's 
friend  are  spoken  of  as  though  each  were  a  monarch  reigning  in  its  own 
domain  with  just  title.     The  word  crowned  describes  their  pre-eminence. 
Q.  reads  "their"  instead  of  "thy." 

8  Ingrafted. — So  closely  united  as  to  enable  the  poet,  in  imagination, 
to  share  in  his  friend's  advantages.     Cf.  line  12. 

10  This  shadow, — i.e.  of  the  imagination,  this  fancied  union. 


196  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


XXXVIII. 

How  can  my  muse  want  subject  to  invent, 
While  thou  dost  breathe,  that  pour'st  into  my  verse  • 
Thine  own  sweet  argument,  too  excellent 
For  every  vulgar  paper  to  rehearse "?  4 

0,  give  thy  self  the  thanks,  if  aught  in  me 
Worthy  perusal  stand  against  thy  sight ; 
For  who's  so  dumb  that  cannot  write  to  thee, 
When  thou  thyself  dost  give  invention  light  ?  8 

Be  thou  the  tenth  muse,  ten  times  more  in  worth 
Than  those  old  nine,  which  rhymers  invocate  ; 
And  he  that  calls  on  thee,  let  him  bring  forth 
Eternal  numbers  to  outlive  long  date.  12 

If  my  slight  muse  do  please  these  curious  days, 
The  pain  be  mine,  but  thine  shall  be  the  praise.  14 


XXXVIII.  This  Sonnet  may  be  regarded  as  bringing  to  a  close 
xxxiii-xxxviii :  see  especially  the  two  last  lines.  The  poet's  friend 
is  a  source  of  inspiration  far  surpassing  the  Nine  Muses  of  antiquity. 
It  is  thence  that  whatever  in  these  poems  is  worth  perusal  is  derived. 
If  they  gain  popularity,  the  praise  is  to  be  given  to  the  inspiring 
cause.  Cf.  lines  10-14  with  the  words  of  the  Dedication,  "To  the 
only  begetter  of  these  ensuing  Sonnets— all  happiness  and  that 
eternity  promised  by  our  ever-living  poet." 

3  Argument. — Subject-matter. 
6  Stand  against  thy  sight. — Endure  thy  sight. 

8  Dost  give  invention  light. — Dost  cause  the  power  of  imagining  and 
composing  to  exist. 

12  Eternal  numbers,  &c. — Poems  worthy  of  so  exalted  inspiration. 

13  Curious. — Critical  or  fastidious. 

14  Pain.— The  Kev.  W,  A.  Harrison  has  suggested  whether  this  word 
is  not  to  be  connected  with  the  "  bringing  forth  "  of  line  u.    Perhaps  so. 
The  idea  of  parturition  may  have  been  still  before  the  poet's  mind. 


ffttet  $erfe6.  197 


xxxix 

0  HOW  thy  worth  with  manners  may  I  sing, 
When  thou  art  all  the  better  part  of  me  ? 
What  can  mine  own  praise  to  mine  own  self  bring  ? 
And  what  is't  but  mine  own,  when  I  praise  thee  ?  4 

Even  for  this  let  us  divided  live, 
And  our  dear  love  lose  name  of  single  one, 
That  by  this  separation  I  may  give 

That  due  to  thee,  which  thou  deserv'st  alone.  8 

O  absence,  what  a  torment  would'st  thou  prove, 
Were  it  not  thy  sour  leisure  gave  sweet  leave 
To  entertain  the  time  with  thoughts  of  love, 
Which  time  and  thought  so  sweetly  doth  deceive,'  12 

And  that  thou  teachest  how  to  make  one  twain, 
By  praising  him  here,  who  doth  hence  remain.  14 


XXXIX.  This  Sonnet  may  possibly  stand  alone.  The  poet  is 
probably  again  absent  from  London  (1.  9)  on  a  professional  tour. 
He  is  so  closely  united  and  incorporated  with  his  friend  that  it  is 
scarcely  decorous  for  him  to  celebrate  the  friend's  praise.  In  so 
doing  he  is  but  praising  himself.  A  separation  is  desirable  that 
this  difficulty  may  be  removed.  But  the  time  of  absence  makes  his 
friend  "  twain ; "  though  absent  bodily,  he  is  present  with  the  poet 
in  imagination. 

10  Sour  leisure. — Sour  or  distasteful  on  account  of  its  cause,  absence 
from  his  friend. 
12  Doth.—Q.  "  dost. "     Malone  changed  "  dost "  into  "  doth." 


198  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XL. 

TAKE  all  my  loves,  my  love,  yea,  take  them  all ; 
What  hast  thou  then  more  than  thou  hadst  before 
No  love,  my  love,  that  thou  may'st  true  love  call ; 
All  mine  was  thine,  before  thou  hadst  this  more. 
Then  if  for  my  love  thou  my  love  receivest, 
I  cannot  blame  thee,  for  my  love  thou  usest ; 
But  yet  be  blam'd,  if  thou  thyself  deceivest 
By  wilful  taste  of  what  thyself  refusest. 
I  do  forgive  thy  robbery,  gentle  thief, 
Although  thou  steal  thee  all  my  poverty  ; 
And  yet  love  knows,  it  is  a  greater  grief 
To  bear  love's  wrong,  than  hate's  known  injury. 
Lascivious  grace,  in  whom  all  ill  well  shows, 
Kill  me  with  spites  ;  yet  we  must  not  be  foes. 


XL.  The  poet  hears,  it  may  be  assumed,  during  his  absence 
(of.  xli.  2),  that  the  liaison  between  Mr.  W.  H.  and  the  dark  lady 
is  resumed  or  continued.  But  the  poet  and  his  friend  being  so 
entirely  united  that  they  were  one  (xxxix.),  and  that  what  belonged 
to  the  one  belonged  to  the  other,  no  fraud  or  robbery  could  have 
been  committed.  Still  in  outward  form  there  seemed  a  robbery, 
which,  though  it  causes  pain  to  the  poet,  he  forgives.  The  offence 
is  even  becoming  and  suitable  to  his  young  friend  ;  and  the  friend- 
ship must  not  be  changed  into  enmity. 

4  This  more. — This  addition.     Cf.  note  on  xi.  n. 

5  "If  thou  for  my  love  (personal  affection)  receivest  my  love  (loved 
mistress)" — a  line  quite  suitable  to  the  idea  that  Shakespeare  was  away 
in  the  country  at  the  time. 

6  Still  playing  on  the  double  sense  of  "love." 

7  Thyself.— Q.  "this  selfe."    Deceivest.—  Mr.  W.  H.,  it  is  suggested, 
may  be  committing  a  fraud  on  himself. 

8  By  wilful  taste  of  what  thyself  refusest. — This  has  been  explained  of  Mr. 
"W.  H.'s  not  having  accepted  the  advice  of  i-xvii.     But  cf.  Introd.,  p.  47. 

10  All  my  poverty. — Instead  of  "all  my  wealth,"  and  implying  the 
scantiness  of  the  poet's  possessions. 


fffrst  Series*  199 


XLI. 

THOSE  pretty  wrongs  that  liberty  commits, 
When  I  am  sometime  absent  from  thy  heart, 
Thy  beauty  and  thy  years  full  well  befits, 
For  still  temptation  follows  where  thou  art.  4 

Gentle  thou  art,  and  therefore  to  be  won, 
Beauteous  thou  art,  therefore  to  be  assailed  ; 
And  when  a  woman  woos,  what  woman's  son 
Will  sourly  leave  her  till  she  have  prevailed  ]  8 

Ah  me  !  but  yet  thou  mightst  my  seat  forbear, 
And  chide  thy  beauty  and  thy  straying  youth, 
Who  lead  thee  in  their  riot  even  there 
Where  thou  art  forced  to  break  a  twofold  truth  ;  12 

Hers,  by  thy  beauty  tempting  her  to  thee, 
Thine,  by  thy  beauty  being  false  to  me.  14 


XLI.  The  poet  admits  that,  considering  the  youth  and  personal 
attractions  of  Mr.  W.  H.,  the  affair  was  not  after  all  so  very  un- 
reasonable and  unsuitable,  especially  when  the  lady  was  the  suitor, 
though,  during  Shakespeare's  absence  from  his  "seat,"  it  might 
have  been  regarded  as  sacred,  and  such  restraint  might  have  been 
observed  as  would  have  prevented  the  double  breach  of  faith — the 
faith  of  the  friend  and  the  faith  of  the  mistress. 

J>  2  In  accordance  with  what  has  been  previously  said,  it  may  be  sup- 
posed that  Mr.  "W.  H.  takes  this  "liberty"  while  Shakespeare  is  away. 
3  Befits. — As  to  the  grammatical  form  cf.  Introd.,  p.  32,  note. 
5  To  be  won.— But  in  cxliii.  9  Will  is  represented  as  "flying." 

8  Sourly. — Harshly,  morosely.     She  have. — Q.,  however,  "he  haue." 

9  Ah.— Q.  "  Aye."    My  seat.—Cf.  Othello,  Act  ii.  sc.  i,  lines  304, 305  :— 

"  For  that  I  do  suspect  the  lusty  Moor 
Hath  leap'd  into  my  seat." 

This  passage  from  Othello  was  compared  by  Boaden.  Malone  had  sub- 
stituted "  sweet "  for  "  seat."  "Dr.  Ingleby,"  quoted  by  Dowden,  "adds, 
as  a  parallel,  Lucrece,  412,  413 : — 

*  Who  [Tarquin],  like  a  foul  usurper,  went  about 
From  this  fair  throne  to  heave  the  owner  out.'  " 

10  Chide.— Restrain  the  influence  of. 


200  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


XLII. 

THAT  thou  hast  her,  it  is  not  all  my  grief, 

And  yet  it  may  be  said  I  lov'd  her  dearly  ; 

That  she  hath  thee,  is  of  my  wailing  chief, 

A  loss  in  love  that  touches  me  more  nearly. 

Loving  offenders,  thus  I  will  excuse  ye  : 

Thou  dost  love  her,  because  thou  know'st  I  love  her  ; 

And  for  my  sake  even  so  doth  she  abuse  me, 

Suffering  my  friend  for  my  sake  to  approve  her. 

If  I  lose  thee,  my  loss  is  my  love's  gain, 

And  losing  her,  my  friend  hath  found  that  loss  ; 

Both  find  each  other,  and  I  lose  both  twain, 

And  both  for  my  sake  lay  on  me  this  cross  : 

But  here's  the  joy  ;  my  friend  and  I  are  one  ; 

Sweet  flattery  !  then  she  loves  but  me  alone. 


XLII.  The  chief  cause  of  grief  to  the  poet  in  the  affair  is, 
not  that  he  has  lost  his  mistress,  but  that,  through  her,  he  has  lost 
his  friend.  Nevertheless  he  consoles  himself :  it  is  because  he  loves 
his  mistress  that  his  friend,  knowing  this,  loves  her,  and  because  he 
loves  his  friend  that  his  mistress  loves  him.  Both  do  what  they  do 
for  his  sake.  And  as  his  friend  is  altogether  identified  with  him, 
his  mistress  still  loves  him  alone.  At  least  the  poet  may  flatter 
himself  that  this  is  so. 

7  Abuse  me. — Treat  me  badly. 

9  My  love's  gain. — The  "love"  here  spoken  of  is  his  mistress. 


201 


XLIII. 

WHEN  most  I  wink,  then  do  mine  eyes  best  see, 

For  all  the  day  they  view  things  imrespected  : 

But  when  I  sleep,  in  dreams  they  look  on  thee, 

And  darkly  bright,  are  bright  in  dark  directed  ;  4 

Then  thou  whose  shadow  shadows  doth  make  bright, 

How  would  thy  shadow's  form  form  happy  show 

To  the  clear  day  with  thy  much  clearer  light, 

When  to  unseeing  eyes  thy  shade  shines  so  ?  s 

How  would  (I  say)  mine  eyes  be  blessed  made 

By  looking  on  thee  in  the  living  day, 

When  in  dead  night  thy  fair  imperfect  shade 

Through  heavy  sleep  on  sightless  eyes  doth  stay  1  12 

All  days  are  nights  to  see,  till  I  see*thee, 

And  nights,  bright  days,  when  dreams  do  show  thee  me.     u 


XLIII.  This  Sonnet  possibly  begins  a  new  group,  but  if  the  last 
four  Sonnets  were  written  while  the  poet  was  away  from  his  friend, 
the  absence  continues.  The  poet's  love  for  his  friend  transforms 
night  into  day  and  day  into  night.  Darkness  becomes  bright  when 
his  friend's  figure  is  seen  in  dreams,  a  figure  which  would  add  lustre 
to  the  clear  daylight.  How  much,  therefore,  does  he  long  to  see  his 
friend  again.  The  days  of  absence  are  dark  as  night. 

1  Wink. — Close  the  eyes  in  sleep.      Cf.  Tempest,  Act  ii.  sc.  i,  lines 
284,  285  :— 

"You,  doing  thus, 

To  the  perpetual  wink  for  aye  might  put 
This  ancient  morsel !  " 

2  Unrespected. — Without  paying  attention  to  them. 

4  Darkly  bright. — Bright,  though  not  seeing,  the  lids  being  closed. 
Bright  in  dark  directed. — Become  bright  through  the  vision  of  the  loved 
image,   when  the  eyes,  though  closed,  are  directed  in  the  darkness. 
No  other  sense  seems  practicable.     Cf.  xxvii.,  where  the  sleepless  eyes, 
open  by  night,  are  spoken  of. 

5  Whose  shadoiv  shadows  doth  make  bright : — 

"  "Which,  like  a  jewel  hung  in  ghastly  night, 
Makes  black  night  beauteous,  and  her  old  face  new  "  (xxvii.  n,  12). 

"Shadows"   may  represent  either  the  darkness  in   general,  or  other 
dream-images  (see  line  3). 

11  Thy. — Q.  "their."    Imperfect, — as  being  a  mere  insubstantial  image. 


202  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnet6. 


XLIV. 

IF  the  dull  substance  of  my  flesh  were  thought, 
Injurious  distance  should  not  stop  my  way  ; 
For  then,  despite  of  space,  I  would  be  brought 
From  limits  far  remote,  where  thou  dost  stay. 
No  matter  then,  although  my  foot  did  stand 
Upon  the  farthest  earth  remov'd  from  thee, 
For  nimble  thought  can  jump  both  sea  and  land, 
As  soon  as  think  the  place  where  he  would  be. 
But  ah  !  thought  kills  me,  that  I  am  not  thought, 
To  leap  large  lengths  of  miles  when  thou  art  gone, 
But  that,  so  much  of  earth  and  water  wrought, 
I  must  attend  time's  leisure  with  my  moan  ; 
Receiving  nought  by  elements  so  slow 
But  heavy  tears,  badges  of  cither's  woe  : 


XLIV.  The  poet  wishes  that  his  bodily  substance,  compounded  as 
it  is  so  much  of  earth  and  water,  could  be  transformed  into  thought, 
so  that  he  might  leap  over  the  long  miles  which  separate  him  from 
his  friend. 

2  Injurious. — Hostile,  as  presenting  an  impediment  to  intercourse. 

4  Limits  far  remote.— Implying  a  very  considerable  distance.  Where 
thou  dost  stay. — To  the  place  where  thou  dost  stay.  What  is  here  said, 
as  well  as  "when  thou  art  gone,"  cf.  line  10,  seems  to  imply  that  Mr. 
W.  H.  had  now  taken  a  journey.  Possibly  both  Shakespeare  and  Mr. 
W.  H.  may  have  been  away  from  London  at  the  same  time. 

9  The  thought  that  I  am  not  thought  kills  me. 

12  Time's  leisure. — The  opportunity  for  meeting  which  will  come  in  the 
course  of  time. 

is,  14  rpjjg  t(  gjow  eiementg  "  of  which  the  poet's  body  is  composed  enable 
him  only  to  weep.  His  friend  is  regarded  as  in  the  like  position.  Nought. 
— Q.  "naughts." 


fffrst  Series.  203 


XLV. 

THE  other  two,  slight  air  and  purging  fire, 
Are  both  with  thee,  wherever  I  abide  ; 
The  first  my  thought,  the  other  my  desire, 
These  present-absent  with  swift  motion  slide.  4 

For  when  these  quicker  elements  are  gone 
In  tender  embassy  of  love  to  thee, 
My  life  being  made  of  four,  with  two  alone, 
Sinks  down  to  death,  oppress'd  with  melancholy  ;  8 

Until  life's  composition  be  recured 
By  those  swift  messengers  return'd  from  thee, 
Who  even  but  now  come  back  again,  assured 
Of  thy  fair  health,  recounting  it  to  me  :  12 

This  told,  I  joy  ;  but  then  no  longer  glad, 
I  send  them  back  again,  and  straight  grow  sad.  i* 


XLV.  The  poet  had  spoken  of  earth  and  water  as  entering  into 
his  compositions.  He  had  omitted  the  other  elements,  air  and  fire. 
These  constituents  of  him,  the  one  as  thought,  the  other  as  desire, 
are  constantly  passing  to  and  fro  over  the  separating  distance, 
causing  sadness  and  joy  by  their  departure  and  return. 

i  Purging  fire. — The  purifying  influence  of  the  "refiner's  fire"  is  well 
known.  Here,  however,  the  idea  would  seem  to  be  that  of  swiftness  and 
impetuosity. 

9  Secured. — Restored. 

12  Thy.—q.  "their." 


*** 


204  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


XLVI. 

MINE  eye  and  heart  are  at  a  mortal  war, 

How  to  divide  the  conquest  of  thy  sight ; 

Mine  eye  my  heart  thy  picture's  sight  would  bar, 

My  heart  mine  eye  the  freedom  of  that  right.  4 

My  heart  doth  plead,  that  thou  in  him  dost  lie, 

(A  closet  never  pierc'd  with  crystal  eyes.) 

But  the  defendant  doth  that  plea  deny, 

And  says  in  him  thy  fair  appearance  lies.  8 

To  'cide  this  title  is  impannelled 

A  quest  of  thoughts,  all  tenants  to  the  heart ; 

And  by  their  verdict  is  determined 

The  clear  eye's  moiety,  and  the  dear  heart's  part :  12 

As  thus  ;  mine  eye's  due  is  thine  outward  part, 
And  my  heart's  right  thine  inward  love  of  heart.          14 


XLVI.  But  the  poet  has  another  source  of  pleasure  in  relation  to 
his  friend,  besides  his  image  seen  in  dreams  and  the  belief  that  he 
is  well  (see  xliii.,  xlv.).  He  possesses  his  friend's  picture.  But  does 
this  picture  give  a  truer  image  than  that  portrayed  in  the  heart 
(cf.  xxiv.)  ?  The  eye  (defendant)  and  heart  (plaintiff)  contest  the 
question.  The  decision  is  given  by  a  jury  of  thoughts,  to  the  effect 
that  the  eye  sees  in  the  picture  the  outward  form :  to  the  heart 
alone  it  belongs  to  discern  inward  and  true  affection. 

2  Which  shall  be  the  victor  as  having  a  true  vision  of  thee. 

3  Thy  pictures  sight  would  bar. — As  not  concerning  the  heart.     Thy. 
— Q.  "their." 

*> 5  The  heart  denies  that  the  eye  has  a  special  privilege  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  friend's  image.  The  image  is  rather  to  be  found  in  the  heart 
itself.  The  heart  seems  to  complain  of  the  external  picture  being  used. 
Of.  what  the  poet  says  about  the  "  table  book  "  which  he  had  given  away 
in  cxxii. 

7  Notice  the  remarkable  use  of  legal  expressions  in  this  and  following 
lines,  "defendant,"  "plea,"  "title,"  "quest,"  "tenants,"  "impannelled," 
"verdict,"  "moiety,"  "determined."     It  would  scarcely,  however,  be 
suitable  to  infer  from  evidence  of  this  kind  that  Shakespeare  had  been  a 
lawyer's  clerk,  or  had  been  otherwise  professionally  occupied  in  the  law. 

8  Thy.—Q.  "their." 

9  'Cide.— Q.  "side." 

10  The  jury  of  "tenants  to  the  heart"  seems  to  consist,  like  that  of  a 
"crowner's  quest,"  of  those  living  in  the  neighbourhood. 

12  The  dear  heart.— The  loving  heart. 

13'14  Thine  .  .  .  thine.— Q.  "their  .  .  .  their." 


fffrst  Series.  205 


XLVII. 

BETWIXT  mine  eye  and  heart  a  league  is  took, 

And  each  doth  good  turns  now  unto  the  other  : 

When  that  mine  eye  is  famished  for  a  look, 

Or  heart  in  love  with  sighs  himself  doth  smother,  4 

With  my  love's  picture  then  my  eye  doth  feast, 

And  to  the  painted  banquet  bids  my  heart : 

Another  time  mine  eye  is  my  heart's  guest, 

And  in  his  thoughts  of  love  doth  share  a  part :  & 

So,  either  by  thy  picture  or  my  love, 

Thyself  away  art  present  still  with  me  ; 

For  thou  not  farther  than  my  thoughts  canst  move, 

And  I  am  still  with  them,  and  they  with  thee  ;  12 

Or  if  they  sleep,  thy  picture  in  my  sight 

Awakes  my  heart  to  heart's  and  eye's  delight.  14 


XLVII.  The  dispute  described  in  xlvi.  is  decided,  and  the  poet's 
heart  and  eye  have  come  to  terms  of  agreement.  The  eye  allows 
the  heart  to  share  in  the  delight  occasioned  by  gazing  on  the 
friend's  picture,  or  the  heart  entertains  the  eye.  By  means  of  one 
or  both,  the  friend,  though  away,  is  present  with  the  poet.  But  if 
at  any  time  the  poet's  thoughts  are  otherwise  directed,  the  picture 
recalls  them. 

4  The  sighs  come  forth  from  the  heart  in  such  profusion  that  they  are 
said  to  "smother"  the  heart. 

7  Mine  eye  is  my  heart's  guest. — Meaning,  perhaps,  that  loving  thoughts 
bring  the  image  of  the  friend  before  the  eye. 

My  love.— The  poet's  love  causes  the  friend's  image  to  appear  in  the 
heart. 

11  Not.-Q.  "nor." 


206  Sbafcespeate'B  Sonnets, 


XLVIII. 

How  careful  was  I  when  I  took  my  way 

Each  trifle  under  truest  bars  to  thrust, 

That,  to  my  use,  it  might  unused  stay 

From  hands  of  falsehood,  in  sure  wards  of  trust !  4 

But  thou,  to  whom  my  jewels  trifles  are, 

Most  worthy  comfort,  now  my  greatest  grief, 

Thou,  best  of  dearest,  and  mine  only  care, 

Art  left  the  prey  of  every  vulgar  thief.  s 

Thee  have  I  not  lock'd  up  in  any  chest, 

Save  where  thou  art  not,  though  I  feel  thou  art, 

Within  the  gentle  closure  of  my  breast, 

From  whence  at  pleasure  thou  may'st  come  and  part ;     12 
And  even  thence  thou  wilt  be  stolen  I  fear, 
For  truth  proves  thievish  for  a  prize  so  dear.  u 


XLVIII.  Here  again  a  new  group  of  Sonnets  probably  begins. 
The  poet  appears  to  have  grounds  for  suspicion  that  an  attempt  is 
being  made  by  one  or  more  rivals  to  oust  him  from  the  love  and 
esteem  of  Mr.  W.  H.  Before  commencing  his  journey  all  his  valu- 
ables had  been  safely  locked  up.  But  his  most  precious  and  tempt- 
ing possession,  the  love  of  his  friend,  could  not  be  so  guarded.  It 
was  not  secure  even  within  his  breast. 

2  Truest  bars. — Most  trustworthy  locks,  bolts,  or  other  defences  of  the 
"  sure  wards  of  trust  "  of  line  4. 

4  Hands  of  falsehood. — Hands  of  the  fraudulent. 

5  Jewels  may  mean  valuable  possessions  of  any  kind,  without  implying 
that  Shakespeare  was  rich  in  precious  stones.     Of.  "  each  trifle  "  of  line  2. 

6  Greatest  grief. — On  account  of  the  suspicion  entertained. 

7  Best  of  dearest. — Of.  "most  most  loving,"  ex.  14. 


fffrst  Series,  207 


XLIX. 

AGAINST  that  time,  if  ever  that  time  come, 
When  I  shall  see  thee  frown  on  my  defects, 
Whenas  thy  love  hath  cast  his  utmost  sum, 
Call'd  to  that  audit  by  advis'd  respects  ; 
Against  that  time,  when  thou  shalt  strangely  pass, 
And  scarcely  greet  me  with  that  sun,  thine  eye, 
"When  love,  converted  from  the  thing  it  was, 
Shall  reasons  find  of  settled  gravity ; 
Against  that  time  do  I  insconce  me  here 
Within  the  knowledge  of  mine  own  desert, 
And  this  my  hand  against  myself  uprear, 
To  guard  the  lawful  reasons  on  thy  part : 

To  leave  poor  me  thou  hast  the  strength  of  laws, 
Since,  why  to  love,  I  can  allege  no  cause. 


XLIX.  The  previous  Sonnet  had  contemplated  the  possibility  of  a 
rival  superseding  the  poet  in  his  friend's  affections.  The  desertion 
which  would  then  ensue  would  imply,  however,  no  unjustifiable 
fickleness.  When  the  poet's  merits  and  faults  are  summed  up,  the 
faults  may  well  seem  to  preponderate.  He  can,  indeed,  find  in  him- 
self no  reason  why  he  should  be  loved. 

3  Whenas. — When  the  time  comes  that.     Hath  cast  his  utmost  sum. — 
Has  made  up  and  balanced  the  account. 

4  Advis'd  respects.—11  Reasons  of  settled  gravity"  (line  8),   "lawful 
reasons"  (12). 

10  Desert.— Q.  "desart  "  rhyming  with  "part." 

12  To  guard,  &c. — As  a  witness  of  the  justice  and  propriety  of  such 
a  course. 

13  The  strength  of  laws. — Perfect  legal  right  in  taking  this  course. 


208  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 


How  heavy  do  I  journey  on  the  way, 
When  what  I  seek,  my  weary  travel's  end, 
Doth  teach  that  ease  and  that  repose  to  say, 
*  Thus  far  the  miles  are  measured  from  thy  friend  ! ' 
The  beast  that  bears  me,  tired  with  my  woe, 
Plods  dully  on,  to  bear  that  weight  in  me, 
As  if  by  some  instinct  the  wretch  did  know 
His  rider  lov'd  not  speed,  being  made  from  thee  : 
The  bloody  spur  cannot  provoke  him  on 
That  sometimes  anger  thrusts  into  his  hide, 
Which  heavily  he  answers  with  a  groan, 
More  sharp  to  me  than  spurring  to  his  side  ; 
For  that  same  groan  doth  put  this  in  my  mind, 
My  grief  lies  onward,  and  my  joy  behind. 


L.  The  poet  finds  the  journey  which  he  is  taking  tedious  and 
wearisome.  The  ease  and  repose  looked  for  at  the  end  of  each  day's 
travel  are  lost  in  the  thought  that  every  stage  marks  so  many  miles 
farther  away  from  his  friend.  The  very  beast  on  which  he  rides 
sympathises  with  his  rider,  as  if  by  instinct,  and  plods  heavily  on, 
answering,  when  spurred,  with  a  groan,  a  groan  which  reminds  his 
rider  of  his  own  sorrow. 

3  That  ease  and  that  repose  to  say,  &c. — A  bold  metaphor,  to  make  the 
halting-station,  or  the  rest  obtained  there,  speak, 
e  Dully. -Q.  "duly." 


<> 
* 


Series.  209 


LI. 

THUS  can  my  love  excuse  the  slow  offence 
Of  my  dull  bearer,  when  from  thee  I  speed  : 
From  where  thou  art  why  should  I  haste  me  thence  ? 
Till  I  return,  of  posting  is  no  need. 
O,  what  excuse  will  my  poor  beast  then  find, 
When  swift  extremity  can  seem  but  slow  ? 
Then  should  I  spur,  though  mounted  on  the  wind  ; 
In  winged  speed  no  motion  shall  I  know  : 
Then  can  no  horse  with  my  desire  keep  pace  ; 
Therefore  Desire  (of  perfect  love  being  made) 
Shall  neigh,  no  dull  flesh,  in  his  fiery  race  ; 
But  love,  for  love,  thus  shall  excuse  my  jade  ; 
Since  from  thee  going  he  went  wilful  slow, 
Towards  thee  I'll  run,  and  give  him  leave  to  go. 


LI.  If,  to  the  poet,  journeying  away  from  his  friend  was  distaste- 
ful and  slow,  the  return  will  not  be  swift  enough,  even  though  he 
were  mounted  on  the  wind.  He  will  then  dispense  with  his  horse, 
and  run  or  fly  back,  riding  on  no  dull  flesh,  but  borne  on  the  wings 
of  Desire. 

1  Thus  can  my  love  excuse,  &c. — In  accordance  with  lines  3,  4. 

6  Sioift  extremity. — The  extreme  of  swiftness. 

8  In  winged  speed  no  motion  shall  I  know. — A  swift  gliding  motion  is 
imagined.  In  the  opinion  of  Mr.  G.  Bernard  Shaw,  the  word  "motion" 
is  used  in  the  sense  of  "progression,"  implying  that,  even  with  "winged 
speed,"  the  poet,  in  his  extreme  eagerness,  will  seem  to  make  no  advance 
towards  his  friend. 

10, 11  The  poet  apparently  conceives  of  himself  as  mounted  on  Desire, 
a  winged  fiery  steed,  which  neighs  with  ardour,  pursuing  his  impetuous 
course. 

12  Love,  for  love. — A  difficult  expression,  of  which,  perhaps,  neither  of 
the  following  interpretations  may  seem  quite  satisfactory  : — (i)  The  words 
"for  love"  may  be  taken  as  meaning  "from  love  to  the  poor  beast,"  the 
speed  required  by  the  poet's  love  for  his  friend  being  far  beyond  the 
powers  of  such  a  creature.  (2)  "For  love"  may  mean  "for  the  sake  of 
the  love  awaiting  me  on  my  return."  (3)  Dr.  Furnivall  has  made  the 
suggestion  that  the  "love"  first  spoken  of  is  Love  personified.  AVe  shall 
thus  have  "  Love,  on  account  of  my  affection,"  &c.  (4)  According  to  Mr. 
Shaw,  "for  love"  means  "on  account  of  the  love  shown  by  the  horse." 
This  love  will  have  been  shown  in  the  "plodding  dully  on"  of  1.  6. 
"Wilful"  of  line  13  must  then  signify  "purposely  on  account  of  affec- 
tion." I  incline  to  (4).  This  view  agrees  also  with  the  "  since  "  of  line  13. 

14  Give  him  leave  to  go. — Dismiss  him,  or,  let  him  go  at  his  pleasure. 


210  Sbafcespeate's  Sonnets. 


Lll. 

So  am  I  as  the  rich,  whose  blessed  key 
Can  bring  him  to  his  sweet  up-locked  treasure, 
The  which  he  will  not  every  hour  survey, 
For  blunting  the  fine  point  of  seldom  pleasure.  4 

Therefore  are  feasts  so  solemn  and  so  rare, 
Since  seldom  coming,  in  the  long  year  set, 
Like  stones  of  worth  they  thinly  placed  are, 
Or  captciin  jewels  in  the  carconet.  8 

So  is  the  time  that  keeps  you,  as  my  chest, 
Or  as  the  wardrobe  which  the  robe  doth  hide, 
To  make  some  special  instant  special  blest, 
By  new  unfolding  his  imprison'd  pride.  12 

Blessed  are  you,  whose  worthiness  gives  scope, 
Being  had,  to  triumph,  being  lack'd,  to  hope.  14 


LII.  The  return,  it  may  be  supposed,  has  now  taken  place.  The 
delight  which  the  poet  takes  in  his  friend's  society  is  so  great  that 
there  is  danger  lest  its  keenness  should  be  dulled  and  diminished  if 
it  were  too  frequently  indulged  in.  Festal  days,  on  account  of  their 
rarity,  are  more  highly  esteemed.  A  precious  jewel  in  the  casket, 
or  a  rich  garment  in  the  wardrobe,  gives  greater  joy  when  not  too 
often  seen.  So  should  it  be  with  his  friend's  society— to  be  prized 
triumphantly  when  present,  and  hoped  for  when  absent. 

4  For  blunting. — Lest  he  should  blunt. 

8  Captain  jewels  in  the  carconet. — The  principal  jewels  in  the  string 
constituting  the  necklace  or  carconet  (so  spelled  here  in  Q.). 

9  The  time  during  which  Mr.  W.  H.  is  away  is  like  the  casket  which 
keeps  a  jewel  from  view. 

12  His  imprison'd  pride. — The  splendid  garment,  the  pride  of  the 
wardrobe. 


fftrst  Series. 


LIII. 

WHAT  is  your  substance,  whereof  are  you  made, 
That  millions  of  strange  shadows  on  you  tend  ? 
Since  every  one  hath,  every  one,  one  shade, 
And  you,  but  one,  can  every  shadow  lend. 
Describe  Adonis,  and  the  counterfeit 
Is  poorly  imitated  after  you  ; 
On  Helen's  cheek  all  art  of  beauty  set, 
And  you  in  Grecian  tires  are  painted  new  : 
Speak  of  the  spring,  and  foizon  of  the  year  ; 
The  one  doth  shadow  of  your  beauty  show, 
The  other  as  your  bounty  doth  appear, 
And  you  in  every  blessed  shape  we  know. 
In  all  external  grace  you  have  some  part, 
But  you  like  none,  none  you,  for  constant  heart. 


LIII.  Ordinary  objects  have  each  but  one  shadow  or  one  image. 
But  the  beauties  and  excellences  of  Mr.  W.  H.  are  so  numerous  that 
he  is  reflected  millions  of  times.  His  image  is  to  be  discerned  in 
every  shape  of  beauty  and  grace ;  but  no  other  object  reflects  his 
fidelity. 

2  Strange  shadoivs.—Imsiges  of  other  persons  and  objects.      Shadows 
and  images  are  taken  as  identical.     Of.  cxiii.,  cxiv. 

3  Each  individually  has  one  shadow.      The  expression  in  the  text  is 
emphatic,  to  contrast  with  the  multitudinous  shadows  caused  by,  or 
connected  with,  the  single  Mr.  "W.  H.  (line  4). 

5  The  counterfeit. — The  description,  as  possibly  also  in  Hamlet  (Act  iii. 
sc.  4,  line  54),  "the  counterfeit  presentment  of  two  brothers." 

7  Depict  Helen  with  all  the  skill  of  pictorial  art. 

8  Grecian  tires. — Grecian  head-dress  propei'ly,  though  here  the  word 
"tires"  would  seem  to  be  used  more  generally.     Notice,  however,  from 
the   comparison  with  Helen,  the  feminine  character  of  Mr.   W.   H.'s 
youthful  beauty.     Cf.  xx. 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LIV. 

0  HOW  much  more  doth  beauty  beauteous  seem, 
By  that  sweet  ornament  which  truth  doth  give  ! 
The  rose  looks  fair,  but  fairer  we  it  deem 
For  that  sweet  odour  which  doth  in  it  live. 
The  canker-blooms  have  full  as  deep  a  dye, 
As  the  perfumed  tincture  of  the  roses, 
Hang  on  such  thorns,  and  play  as  wantonly 
When  summer's  breath  their  masked  buds  discloses  : 
But,  for  their  virtue  only  is  their  show, 
They  live  unwoo'd,  and  unrespected  fade  ; 
Die  to  themselves.     Sweet  roses  do  not  so  ; 
Of  their  sweet  deaths  are  sweetest  odours  made  : 
And  so  of  you,  beauteous  and  lovely  youth, 
When  that  shall  vade,  by  verse  distils  your  truth. 


LIV.  This  Sonnet  continues  and  expands  the  sentiment  of  liii.  14. 
Beauty  is  made  more  beautiful  by  inward  worth.  The  beauty  of 
the  rose  is  thus  enhanced  by  its  sweet  odour  from  within.  In  this 
it  excels  the  "  canker-blooms,"  which  no  one  prizes  either  when  they 
are  alive  or  after  they  have  faded.  But  roses,  fading  and  dying, 
yield  sweet  perfumes.  And  so,  when  the  beauty  of  Mr.  W.  H. 
passes  away,  his  truth  and  fidelity  will  be  preserved,  "  distilled  " 
in  the  poet's  verse. 

8  The  canker-blooms  hare  full  as  deep  a  dye.— If,  as  seems  to  be  the 
case,  the  "canker-bloom"  is  the  dog-rose,  then,  as  Steevens  remarks, 
there  is  an  inconsistency  in  the  statement  of  the  text,  since  the  dog-rose 
is  of  a  pale  colour,  and,  moreover,  is  not  entirely  without  odour. 

6  Perfumed  tincture  of  the  roses. — The  roses,  with  their  perfume  and 
colour.  "  Tincture "  is  equivalent  to  the  "dye  "  of  the  previous  line. 

11  Die  to  themselves, — The  "  canker  -bloom  s  "  die  neglected  and  unre- 
garded. 

14  Vade. — So  Q.  Dowden,  adopting  this  form,  refers  to  Passionate 
Pilgrim,  x.  i,  "Sweet  rose,  fair  flower,  untimely  pluck'd,  soon  vaded." 


tffret  Series.  213 


LV. 

NOT  marble,  nor  the  gilded  monument 

Of  princes,  shall  outlive  this  powerful  rhyme  ; 

But  you  shall  shine  more  bright  in  these  contents 

Than  unswept  stone,  besmeared  with  sluttish  time.  4 

When  wasteful  war  shall  statues  overturn, 

And  broils  root  out  the  work  of  masonry, 

Nor  Mars  his  sword  nor  war's  quick  fire  shall  burn 

The  living  record  of  your  memory.  8 

'Gainst  death  and  all  oblivious  enmity 

Shall  you  pace  forth  ;  your  praise  shall  still  find  room, 

Even  in  the  eyes  of  all  posterity 

That  wear  this  world  out  to  the  ending  doom.  12 

So  till  the  judgment  that  yourself  arise, 

You  live  in  this,  and  dwell  in  lovers'  eyes.  14 


LV.  This  Sonnet,  again,  links  itself  to  the  last  line  of  that  pre- 
ceding. Secured  by  the  poet's  verse,  his  friend's  fame  shall  outlast 
the  monuments  of  princes,  and  shine  more  brightly  than  the  inscrip- 
tions engraven  thereon.  Defying  the  powers  of  oblivion,  it  shall 
endure  so  long  as  the  world  lasts.  Cf.  Introd.,  chap.  iii.  §.  2. 

1  Monument. — So  Q.,  though  the  poet  may  possibly  have  written 
"monuments."  Malone  pointed  out  the  relation  of  this  Sonnet  to 
Horace's  "  Exegi  monumentum  aei-e  perennius,"&c. 

3  These  contents. — The  descriptions  and  eulogies  contained  in  these 
Sonnets. 

5  Wasteful.—  Devastating. 

7  Nor  Mars  his  sword  nor  war's  quick  fire  shall  burn. — "With  evident 
allusion  to  Meres's  Palladis  Tamia,  Part  II.,  fol.  282,  ed.  1598,  "Mars, 
ferrum,  flamma." 

9  All  oblivious  enmity.— Cf.  Meres,  loc.  cit.,  "Et  quanquam  adpulcher- 
rimum  hoc  opus  euertendum,  tres  illi  Dii  conspirabunt,  Cronus,  Vul- 
canus,  et  pater  ipse  gentis." 

10  Pace  forth. — Come  forth  in  public  view. 

14  Dwell  in  lovers'  eyes. — "Will  be  constantly  before  the  eyes  of  lovers, 
who  will  read  these  poems. 


2H  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LVI. 

SWEET  love,  renew  thy  force  ;  be  it  not  said, 

Thy  edge  should  blunter  be  than  appetite, 

Which  but  to-day  by  feeding  is  allay'd, 

To-morrow  sharpen'd  in  his  former  might :  4 

So,  love,  be  thou  :  although  to-day  thou  fill 

Thy  hungry  eyes,  even  till  they  wink  with  fulness, 

To-morrow  see  again,  and  do  not  kill 

The  spirit  of  love  with  a  perpetual  dulness.  s 

Let  this  sad  int'rim  like  the  ocean  be 

Which  parts  the  shore,  where  two  contracted-new 

Come  daily  to  the  banks,  that,  when  they  see 

Return  of  love,  more  blest  may  be  the  view  ;  12 

Or  call  it  winter,  which,  being  full  of  care, 

Makes  summer's  welcome  thrice  more  wish'd,  more  rare.  14 


LVI.  This  Sonnet  may  begin  another  group  comprising  Ivi.-lviii. 
The  poet  thinks  that  there  is  an  abatement  of  affection  on  the  part 
of  his  friend,  and  that,  on  both  sides,  there  is  some  danger  of  satiety 
and  "  perpetual  dulness."  He  does  not,  however,  despair  of  a  re- 
newal of  love  with  its  former  strength,  though,  for  the  present,  there 
is  a  "  sad  interim,"  an  anxious  winter.  Cf.  Introd.,  chap.  iii.  p.  21. 

2,  s,  4  The  appetite  for  food  is,  by  eating,  appeased  only  for  to-day.  To- 
morrow it  will  be  as  vigorous  as  ever. 

6  Wink  with  fulness. — Close  through  satiety. 

9-12  It  is  difficult  to  determine  precisely  the  conception  partially  ex- 
pressed in  these  lines.  I  would  suggest  whether  the  poet  did  not  imagine 
an  irruption  of  the  sea  on  land,  so  as  to  "part "  what  was  previously  con- 
tinuous. But,  through  persistence  of  the  wind  or  other  cause,  the  sea 
holds  for  a  time  its  conquest,  and  the  two  "contracted"  or  betrothed 
lovers  come  daily  to  the  "banks,"  expecting  that  the  sea  has  retired. 
But  in  line  12,  instead  of  speaking  of  the  return  of  the  sea,  the  poet  dis- 
misses his  simile,  and  speaks  of  the  "return  of  love."  The  words  "two 
contracted-ngtt? "  are  important  as  according  with  the  position  that,  when 
this  Sonnet  was  written,  Shakespeare's  friendship  with  Mr.  W.  H.  was 
still  new  and  the  commencement  of  it  was  recent. 

13  Or. — Q.    "As."      The  emendation   was  suggested   to   Malone   by 
Tyrwhitt. 

14  Makes  the  coming  of  summer  far  more  earnestly  desired,  prepares 
for  it  a  heartier  welcome,  and  causes  it  to  be  more  highly  prized. 


tfirst  Series.  215 


LVIL 

BEING  your  slave,  what  should  I  do  but  tend 
Upon  the  hours  and  times  of  your  desire  ? 
I  have  no  precious  time  at  all  to  spend, 
Nor  services  to  do,  till  you  require. 
Nor  dare  I  chide  the  world- without- end  hour, 
Whilst  I,  my  sovereign,  watch  the  clock  for  you, 
Nor  think  the  bitterness  of  absence  sour, 
When  you  have  bid  your  servant  once  adieu  ; 
Nor  dare  I  question  with  my  jealous  thought 
Where  you  may  be,  or  your  affairs  suppose, 
But,  like  a  sad  slave,  stay  and  think  of  nought, 
Save,  where  you  are  how  happy  you  make  those  : 
So  true  a  fool  is  love,  that  in  your  Will 
(Though  you  do  anything)  he  thinks  no  ill. 


LVII.  Dowden  justly  observes,  "  The  absence  spoken  of  in  this' 
Sonnet  seems  to  be  voluntary  absence  on  the  part  of  Shakspere's 
friend."  The  poet  rebuts  a  real  or  imaginary  imputation,  that 
Mr.  W.  H.  had  not  received  sufficiently  obsequious  attention.  The 
poet's  time  and  services  were  entirely  at  his  friend's  disposal.  It 
was  not  for  the  poet  to  dictate  whether  his  friend  should  be  present 
or  absent,  or  to  complain  of  being  long  kept  awaiting  his  coming. 

5  The  world-ivithout-end  hour. — "The  tedious  hour,  that  seems  as  if  it 
would  never  end.  So  in  Love's  Labour's  Lost  (Act  v.  sc.  ii.,  lines  798, 
799) : — 

'  A  time,  methinks,  too  short 
To  make  a  woi'ld-without-end  bargain  in  ; ' 

i.e.,  an  everlasting  bargain." — Malone. 

7  Sour. — As  elsewhere,  distasteful,  hard,  harsh. 

9  Nor  dare  I  entertain  the  question,  &c. 

13  Will. — I  have  retained  the  W.  of  Q.,  as  there  is  a  bare  possibility  of 
a  pun. 


216  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LVIII. 

THAT  God  forbid,  that  made  me  first  your  slave, 

I  should  in  thought  control  your  times  of  pleasure, 

Or  at  your  hand  th'  account  of  hours  to  crave, 

Being  your  vassal,  bound  to  stay  your  leisure  !  * 

O,  let  me  suifer  (being  at  your  beck) 

Th'  imprison'd  absence  of  your  liberty, 

And  patience,  tame  to  sufferance,  bide  each  check 

Without  accusing  you  of  injury.  a 

Be  where  you  list ;  your  charter  is  so  strong, 

That  you  yourself  may  privilege  your  time 

To  what  you  will,  to  you  it  doth  belong 

Yourself  to  pardon  of  self-doing  crime.  12 

I  am  to  wait,  though  waiting  so  be  hell ; 

Not  blame  your  pleasure,  be  it  ill  or  well.  u 


LVIII.  This  Sonnet  follows  closely  on  Ivii.  The  poet  still  speaks 
as  a  very  humble  servant  of  Mr.  W.  H.,  with  no  right  to  complain, 
whatever  suffering  may  be  inflicted.  We  may  recognise,  however, 
somewhat  of  irony,  as  in  the  previous  Sonnet,  where  he  speaks  of 
Mr.  W.  H.  as  "my  sovereign."  Here  we  may  note  also  the  expres- 
sions "your  slave"  (as  in  Ivii.,  line  11),  "your  vassal,"  "yourself  to 
pardon  of  self -doing  crime." 

6  Imprison'd  absence  of  your  liberty. — Dowden  explains,  "The  separa- 
tion from  you  which  is  proper  to  your  state  of  freedom,  but  which  to  me 
is  imprisonment.     Or  the  want  which  I,  a  prisoner,  suifer  of  such  liberty 
as  you  possess."    In  other  words,  Mr.  W.  H.'s  "liberty  to  absent" 
himself  from  Shakespeare  "  imprisoned  "  the  poet,  whose  eager  anxiety 
for  the  companionship  of  his  friend  met  with  an  impassable  "  check." 

7  Tame  to  sufferance. — Subdue  patience  into  suffering. 

10, 11  priviiege  yOUr  time  to  what  you  will. — It  is,  in  accordance  with 
"your  charter,"  your  privilege,  to  devote  your  time  to  what  you  please. 

13  Though  waiting  so  be  hell. — Cf.  cxx.  6,  "  Y'  have  passed  a  hell  of 
time,"  where  the  context  ("as  I  by  yours")  probably  looks  back  to  the 
events  with  which  this  Sonnet  is  concerned. 


*** 


3ftrst  Series.  217 


LIX. 

IF  there  be  nothing  new,  but  that  which  is 
Hath  been  before,  how  are  our  brains  beguil'd, 
Which,  labouring  for  invention,  bear  amiss 
The  second  burthen  of  a  former  child  ! 
O,  that  record  could  with  a  backward  look, 
Even  of  five  hundred  courses  of  the  sun, 
Show  me  your  image  in  some  antique  book, 
Since  mind  at  first  in  character  was  done  ! 
That  I  might  see  what  the  old  world  could  say 
To  this  composed  wonder  of  your  frame  ; 
Whether  we  are  mended,  or  whe'r  better  they, 
Or  whether  revolution  be  the  same. 
O  !  sure  I  am,  the  wits  of  former  days 
To  subjects  worse  have  given  admiring  praise. 


LIX.  Here  there  is  pretty  clearly  a  break  of  continuity.  The 
poet  brings  forward,  as  an  hypothesis,  the  ancient  doctrine  of  the 
cycles — that  there  is  nothing  really  new,  but  that  all  things  revolve 
again  and  again  in  the  same  order.  If  this  hypothesis  be  true,  the 
poet  would  like  to  see  an  ancient  book  with  the  description  of  his 
friend  as  he  had  previously  existed.  But  former  writers  had  occu- 
pied themselves  with  subjects  less  worthy.  Introd.,  chap.  xi.  p.  101. 

I  There.— Q.  "their." 

2-4  An  author  may  imagine  that  he  is  composing  a  new  book,  but,  ac- 
cording to  the  hypothesis  in  question,  he  is  only  repeating  his  former 
performance. 

5  Record. — History. 

8  Since  mind,  &c. — Since  thought  was  first  expressed  in  language. 

10  To  this  composed  wonder  of  your  frame. — To  your  bodily  structure, 
with  its  extraordinary  beauty. 

II  Whe'r.— Q.  has  "  where."     "Whe'r"  must  be  taken,  of  course,  as  a 
contraction  of  "whether." 


218  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


LX. 

LIKE  as  the  waves  make  towards  the  pebbled  shore, 
So  do  our  minutes  hasten  to  their  end  ; 
Each  changing  place  with  that  which  goes  before, 
In  sequent  toil  all  forwards  do  contend. 
Nativity,  once  in  the  main  of  light, 
Crawls  to  maturity,  wherewith  being  crown'd, 
Crooked  eclipses  'gainst  his  glory  fight, 
And  Time,  that  gave,  doth  now  his  gift  confound. 
Time  doth  transfix  the  flourish  set  on  youth, 
And  delves  the  parallels  in  beauty's  brow  ; 
Feeds  on  the  rarities  of  nature's  truth, 
And  nothing  stands  but  for  his  scythe  to  mow. 
And  yet,  to  times  in  hope,  my  verse  shall  stand, 
Praising  thy  worth,  despite  his  cruel  hand. 


LX.  This  Sonnet  is  in  connection  with  that  next  before.  It  is 
also  under  the  influence  of  the  melancholy  cast  of  thought  not  per- 
haps unnaturally  produced  by  the  theory  of  an  unvarying  and  inexor- 
able succession,  a  revolution  ever  the  same.  The  particulars  which 
make  up  human  life  succeed  one  another  in  unvarying  order  and 
with  unresting  onward  movement,  from  birth  to  maturity,  and 
from  maturity  to  decay  and  dissolution.  But  the  poet  anticipates 
greater  durability  for  his  verse,  and  consequently  for  the  fame  of  his 
friend.  Lix.  and  Ix.  probably  constitute  a  separate  group. 

5  The  main  of  light. — The  expanse  of  light ;  the  world  conceived  as 
though  a  wide  ocean  enlightened  by  the  rays  of  the  sun. 

6  Crawls  to  maturity. — Meaning,  probably,  not  merely  that  the  progress 
is  slow,  but  that  the  condition  of  mankind  is  abject.     Cf.  Hamlet,  Act 
iii.  sc.   i,  lines  129-131,  "What  should  such  fellows  as  I  do  crawliny 
between  earth  and  heaven  ?  " 

7  Crooked  eclipses. — Adverse  circumstances  and  conditions,  which  are 
"crooked,"  as  being  hostile  to  onward  progress,  changing  its  course,  or 
arresting  it. 

8  Doth  now  his  gift  confound. — Spoil  and  render  worthless  his  gift. 
Cf.  v.  6. 

9  Doth  transfix  the  flourish  set  on  youth. — Doth  kill  and  destroy  youth- 
ful beauty. 

11  Feeds  on,  &c. — Feeds  on  whatever  is  pre-eminently  excellent. 
Nature's  truth. — That  which  is  naturally  and  genuinely  beautiful  and 
excellent,  as  opposed  to  what  is  meretricious  and  artificial. 


fffrst  Series.  219 


LXI. 

Is  it  thy  will,  thy  image  should  keep  open 
My  heavy  eyelids  to  the  weary  night  ? 
Dost  thou  desire  my  slumbers  should  be  broken, 
While  shadows,  like  to  thee,  do  mock  my  sight  ? 
Is  it  thy  spirit  that  thou  send'st  from  thee 
So  far  from  home,  into  my  deeds  to  pry  ; 
To  find  out  shames  and  idle  hours  in  me, 
The  scope  and  tenor  of  thy  jealousy  1 
O  no  !  thy  love,  though  much,  is  not  so  great : 
It  is  my  love  that  keeps  mine  eye  awake  ; 
Mine  own  true  love  that  doth  my  rest  defeat, 
To  play  the  watchman  ever  for  thy  sake  : 

For  thee  watch  I,  whilst  thou  dost  wake  elsewhere 
From  me  far  off,  with  others  all  too  near. 


LXI.  Eepeats  the  sentiment  of  xxvii.  The  poet  cannot  sleep  for 
the  thought  of  his  friend.  Is  it  possible  that  the  images  appearing 
nightly  before  his  eyes  proceed  from  the  spirit  of  his  friend  which 
comes  to  him,  moved  by  love,  from  the  distant  place  where  is  his 
friend's  bodily  presence  ?  No  :  it  is  the  poet's  faithful  love  which 
prevents  his  rest ;  for  there  are  rivals  engaging  his  friend's  atten- 
tion. It  is  not  certain  whether  Shakespeare  or  Mr.  W.  H.  is  absent 
from  London. 

7-9  To  see  whether  Shakespeare  is  associating  with  persons  who  rival 
Mr.  "VV.  H.  in  his  estimation,  and  whether,  in  idle  hours,  he  is  guilty  of 
disgraceful  conduct.  But  no ;  the  love  of  Mr.  "VV.  H.  is  not  so  great  as 
to  make  him  jealous. 

11  Doth  my  rest  defeat.— CL  xx.  n,  "Me  of  thee  defeated. ' 


220  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXII. 

SIN  of  self-love  possessetli  all  mine  eye, 
And  all  my  soul,  and  all  my  every  part ; 
And  for  this  sin  there  is  no  remedy, 
It  is  so  grounded  inward  in  my  heart. 
Methinks  no  face  so  gracious  is  as  mine, 
No  shape  so  true,  no  truth  of  such  account, 
And  for  myself  mine  own  worth  do  define, 
As  I  all  other  in  all  worths  surmount. 
But  when  my  glass  shows  me  myself  indeed, 
Beated  and  chopp'd  with  tann'd  antiquity, 
Mine  own  self-love  quite  contrary  I  read, 
Self  so  self-loving  were  iniquity. 

3Tis  thee  (myself)  that  for  myself  I  praise, 
Painting  my  age  with  beauty  of  thy  days. 


LXII.  But  here  again,  as  in  xxxv.,  xxxvi.,  the  poet  proceeds  from 
imputations  cast  on  his  friend  to  introspection  and  self-accusation. 
He  is  saturated  and  thoroughly  possessed  by  self-esteem.  But  the 
sight  of  a  mirror  disabuses  him  of  an  overweening  estimate  of  his 
own  beauty.  Still,  incorporated  as  he  is  with  his  youthful  friend, 
he  may  still  paint  his  own  maturer  age  with  the  beauty  of  youth. 
That  indeed  is  what  he  has  been  doing  (cf.  xxii.). 

5  So  gracious. — Displaying  such  grace  or  beauty. 

6  No  symmetry  of  form  equally  perfect  and  admirable  with  mine. 

10  Beated  and  chopp'd  with    tann'd  antiquity. — Meaning,   probably, 
battered,  wrinkled,  and  darkened,  or  discoloured,  bronzed. 

11  The  poet  then  comes  to  a  totally  different  opinion  concerning  his 
self-love.     It  was  in  reality  love  of  thee  (13). 

13  It  would  be  "  iniquity  "  for  the  poet  to  admire  and  esteem  his  beauty 
after  the  revelation  made  by  the  mirror. 


3ft rst  Series,  221 


LXIII. 

AGAINST  my  love  shall  be,  as  I  am  now, 
With  Time's  injurious  hand  crush'd  and  o'erworn  ; 
When  hours  have  drain'd  his  blood,  and  fill'd  his  brow 
With  lines  and  wrinkles  ;  when  his  youthful  morn 
Hath  travell'd  on  to  age's  steepy  night ; 
And  all  those  beauties,  whereof  now  he's  king, 
Are  vanishing  or  vanish'd  out  of  sight, 
Stealing  away  the  treasure  of  his  spring  ; 
For  such  a  time  do  I  now  fortify 
Against  confounding  age's  cruel  knife, 
That  he  shall  never  cut  from  memory 
My  sweet  love's  beauty,  though  my  lover's  life. 
His  beauty  shall  in  these  black  lines  be  seen, 
And  they  shall  live,  and  he  in  them  still  green. 


LXIII.  Connected  with  Ixii.  The  poet's  beauty  is  suffering  from 
the  ravages  of  Time.  His  friend  must  also  decay  ;  but  these  Son- 
nets will  be  a  secure  defence  for  him  against  the  power  of  age, 
death,  and  oblivion. 

3  Fill'd.—  Q.  "fild." 

5  Hath  travell'd  on  to  age's  steepy  night. — Malone  compares  vii. : — 

"Having  climb'd  the  steep-up  heavenly  hill, 
Resembling  strong  youth  in  his  middle  age." 

Here  "age's  steepy  night"  is  the  decline  of  old  age  downward  to  the 
sunset  of  life  and  the  night  of  death. 

6  Whereof  now  he's  king. — In  which  he  supremely  excels. 

10  Confounding.— €f .  v.  6  ;  Ix.  8.  Age's  cruel  knife  may  be  taken  as 
pretty  nearly  equivalent  to  Time's  scythe. 


222  Sbafce$peare's  Sonnets, 


LXIY. 

WHEN  I  have  seen  by  Time's  fell  hand  defac'd 
The  rich -proud  cost  of  outworn  buried  age  ; 
When  sometime  lofty  towers  I  see  down-rased, 
And  brass  eternal,  slave  to  mortal  rage  ; 
When  I  have  seen  the  hungry  ocean  gain 
Advantage  on  the  kingdom  of  the  shore, 
And  the  firm  soil  win  of  the  wat'ry  main, 
Increasing  store  with  loss,  and  loss  with  store  ; 
When  I  have  seen  such  interchange  of  state, 
Or  state  itself  confounded  to  decay  ; 
Ruin  hath  taught  me  thus  to  ruminate — 
That  Time  will  come  and  take  my  love  away. 
This  thought  is  as  a  death,  which  cannot  choose 
But  weep  to  have  that  which  it  fears  to  lose. 


LXIV.  The  melancholy  train  of  thought  which  commenced  with 
lix.  still  continues.  All  things  are  mutable,  and  in  a  constant  state 
of  flux  and  reflux.  From  the  dominion  of  Time,  Change,  and  Decay 
none  can  hope  to  escape ;  a  thought  which  touches  the  poet  with 
sadness,  when  he  thinks  of  his  friend. 

2  The  sumptuous  buildings  or  other  appurtenances  of  a  generation  or  a 
people  which  has  decayed  and  passed  away,  and  which  is  now  buried  in 
the  dust. 

4  Mortal  rage. — Deadly,  destroying.  "Mortal  rage"  refers  to  the 
supreme  principle  of  Mutability  and  Decay. 

5-8  The  words  of  K.  Hen.  IV.,  Part  II.,  Act  iii.  sc.  i,  lines  45-51,  have 
been  justly  compared : — 

"  O  God,  that  one  might  read  the  book  of  fate, 
And  see  the  revolution  of  the  times 
Make  mountains  level,  and  the  continent, 
Weary  of  solid  firmness,  melt  itself 
Into  the  sea  !  and  other  times,  to  see 
The  beachy  girdle  of  the  ocean 
Too  wide  for  Neptune's  hips,"  &c.     (Cf.  Introd.,  chap.  xi.). 

The  following  lines  from  Tennyson's  In  Memoriam,  written,  probably,  to 
some  extent,  under  Shakespearian  influence,  may  also  be  given  : — 

"  There  rolls  the  deep  where  grew  the  tree, 
O  earth,  what  changes  hast  thou  seen  ! 
There  where  the  long  street  roars  hath  been 
The  stillness  of  the  central  sea. 


fftrst  Scries.  223 


"The  hills  are  shadows,  and  they  flow 

From  form  to  form,  and  nothing  stands  ; 
They  melt  like  mist,  the  solid  lands, 
Like  clouds  they  shape  themselves  and  go." 

8  Extending  its  own  domain  by  what  the  other  loses,  and  losing  by 
what  the  other  gains. 

10  State. — Magnificence,  though  in  the  previous  line  "state"  seems  to 
mean  "condition." 

13  This  thought  is  as  a  death. — Causing  anticipatively  the  pang  of 
separation. 


224  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXV. 

SINCE  brass,  nor  stone,  nor  earth,  nor  boundless  sea, 
But  sad  mortality  o'ersways  their  power, 
How  with  this  rage  shall  beauty  hold  a  plea, 
Whose  action  is  no  stronger  than  a  flower  ? 
0,  how  shall  summer's  honey  breath  hold  out 
Against  the  wrackful  siege  of  battering  days, 
When  rocks  impregnable  are  not  so  stout, 
Nor  gates  of  steel  so  strong,  but  Time  decays  ? 
O  fearful  meditation  !  where,  alack  ! 
Shall  Time's  best  jewel  from  Time's  chest  lie  hid  ? 
Or  what  strong  hand  can  hold  his  swift  foot  back  ? 
Or  who  his  spoil  of  beauty  can  forbid  ? 
O,  none,  unless  this  miracle  have  might, 
That  in  black  ink  my  love  may  still  shine  bright. 


LXV.  If  brass  and  stone,  earth  and  sea,  are  all  subject  to  decay, 
human  beauty,  which  is  frail  as  a  flower,  can  have  no  hope  of  per- 
manence, unless,  indeed,  it  can  attain  immortality  when  portrayed 
in  words  by  the  author's  pen. 

3  Mage  here  would  seem  to  be  determined  and  resistless  power.  Shall 
beauty  hold  a  plea. — Shall  beauty  attempt  to  maintain  its  position? 

5  Summer's  honey  breath.— The  sweet  breath  of  life's  summer. 

6  Wrackful. — In   accordance   with    Q.,  "  wrackfull,"   meaning    "de- 
structive."    Siege  of  battering  days. — "Siege  of  loving  terms,"  Romeo 
and  Juliet,  Act  i.  sc.  i,  line  218,  was  compared  by  Steevens.    Battering 
days. — The  determined  assault  of  Time. 

10  Time's  best  jewel, — i.e.,  the  poet's  friend.  Time's  chest  has  been  con- 
sidered with  probability  as  being,  like  Time's  wallet,  a  receptacle  of 
oblivion. 


3fir0t  Series.  225 


LXVI. 

TIR'D  with  all  these,  for  restful  death  I  cry, — 
As,  to  behold  desert  a  beggar  born, 
And  needy  nothing  trimm'd  in  jollity, 
And  purest  faith  unhappily  forsworn, 
And  gilded  honour  shamefully  misplaced, 
And  maiden  virtue  rudely  strumpeted, 
And  right  perfection  wrongfully  disgraced, 
And  strength  by  limping  sway  disabled, 
And  art  made  tongue-tied  by  authority, 
And  folly  (doctor-like)  controlling  skill, 
And  simple  truth  miscall'd  simplicity, 
And  captive  Good  attending  Captain  111 : 

Tir'd  with  all  these,  from  these  would  I  be  gone, 
Save  that,  to  die,  I  leave  my  love  alone. 


LXVI.  The  tone  of  melancholy,  which  has  been  previously  heard, 
especially  since  lix.,  now  attains  a  greater  intensity,  and  we  have  a 
pessimism  which  has  been  compared  to  that  of  Hamlet.  The  poet 
sees  in  the  world  and  the  arrangements  of  society  so  many  things 
abnormal  and  awry,  that,  in  his  weariness  and  loathing,  he  cries 
out  for  death,  though  unwilling  to  leave  his  friend. 

1  Tir'd  with  all  these,— i  e.,  such  things  as  those  which  follow. 

2  As. — As,  for  example.     Desert  a  beggar  born. — Real  merit  and  worth 
suffering  the  disqualification  of  an  abjectly  mean  origin,  and  restrained 
by  penury. 

3  This  line  probably  refers  to  what  is  commonly  described  as  "  keeping 
up  an  appearance." 

4  Unhappily  forsicorn. — Through  the  pressure   of  circumstances  (as 
seems  likely)  in  an  evil  world. 

5  Gilded  honour  shamefully  misplaced.— Ct.  Ecclesiastes  x.  5,  6,  "  There 
is  an  evil  which  I  have  seen  under  the  sua,  as  an  error  which  proceedeth 
from  the  ruler.     Folly  is  set  in  great  dignity,."  &c. 

6  Rudely. — Either  of  physical  force,  or  of  the  recklessness  of  slander  ; 
but  the  latter  sense  would  seem  to  agree  with  the  next  line. 

8  Strength  by  limping  sway  disabled. — Describes  the  injury  inflicted  by 
an  incompetent  and  feeble  government. 

9>1°  In  these  lines  there  seem  to  be  allusions  to  universities  and  their 
technical  phraseology.  This  view  accords  with  the  use  of  doctor-like,  and 
line  9  (where  art  will  denote  "learning")  may  be  taken  to  refer  to 
opinions  obnoxious  to  those  in  authority  being  forbidden  to  be  expressed 
and  published. 

12  This  is  a  climax.  Evil  is  a  victorious  captain,  with  Good  as  a  captive 
attending  to  grace  his  triumph.  ^ 


226  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


LXVII. 

AH,  wherefore  with  infection  should  he  live, 
And  with  his  presence  grace  impiety, 
That  sin  by  him  advantage  should  achieve, 
And  lace  itself  with  his  society  ? 
Why  should  false  painting  imitate  his  cheek, 
And  steal  dead  seeing  of  his  living  hue  ? 
Why  should  poor  beauty  indirectly  seek 
Koses  of  shadow,  since  his  rose  is  true  1 
Why  should  he  live  now  Nature  bankrupt  is, 
Beggared  of  blood  to  blush  through  lively  veins  ? 
For  she  hath  no  exchequer  now  but  his, 
And,  proud  of  many,  lives  upon  his  gains. 

O,  him  she  stores,  to  show  what  wealth  she  had, 
In  days  long  since,  before  these  last  so  bad. 


LXVII.  The  world  being  such  as  was  represented  in  the  last 
Sonnet,  the  excellences  of  the  poet's  friend  are  out  of  place.  Its 
atmosphere  is  charged  with  an  infecting  miasma.  The  friend's 
beauty  serves  as  an  extenuation  and  excuse  for  the  debasement  and 
decay  of  all  around.  The  only  reason  which  can  be  assigned  for 
his  presence  in  such  a  world  is,  that  he  is  Nature's  memorial  of  a 
golden  age  long  passed  away. 

3  That  sin  by  him  advantage,  &c. — His  presence  serving  as  a  veil  to 
conceal  corruption. 

4  Lace  itself  with  his  society. — "Lace"  may  here  mean  "embellish," 
though  in  passages  which  have  been  quoted  in  proof  the  sense  is  rather 
"diversify."    So  in  Rom.  and  JuL,  Act  iii.  sc.  5,  lines  7,  8, — 

"What  envious  streaks 
Do  lace  the  severing  clouds  in  yonder  east ; " 

and  Macbeth,  Act  ii.  sc.  3,  lines  117-119, — 

"  Here  lay  Duncan, 

His  silver  skin  laced  with  his  golden  blood  ; 
And  his  gashed  stabs  looked  like  a  breach  in  nature,"  &c. 

6  Dead  seeing. — "  Seeing  "  is  equivalent  to  "  appearance."   Cf.  v.  2,  "  The 
lovely  gaze  where  every  eye  doth  dwell."     The  "seeing"  is  "dead"  as 
not  being  the  result  of  healthy  vitality,  but  mere  imitation. 

7  Poor  beauty. — Beauty  indifferent  and  imperfect.   Indirectly. — By  arti- 
ficial means. 

8  Shadow. — Mere  external  appearance. 

12  Proud  of  many. — On  account  of  their  seeming  beauty,  which,  however, 
is  not  caused  by  "  blood  blushing  through  lively  veins." 


Series.  227 


LXV1II. 

THUS  is  his  cheek  the  map  of  days  outworn, 
When  beauty  liv'd  and  died  as  flowers  do  now, 
Before  these  bastard  signs  of  fair  were  borne, 
Or  durst  inhabit  on  a  living  brow  ; 
Before  the  golden  tresses  of  the  dead, 
The  right  of  sepulchres,  were  shorn  away, 
To  live  a  second  life  on  second  head  ; 
Ere  beauty's  dead  fleece  made  another  gay. 
In  him  those  holy  antique  hours  are  seen, 
Without  all  ornament,  itself,  and  true, 
Making  no  summer  of  another's  green, 
Robbing  no  old  to  dress  his  beauty  new  ; 
And  him  as  for  a  map  doth  Nature  store, 
To  show  false  Art  what  beauty  was  of  yore. 


LXVIII.  Enlarges  further  on  the  subject  of  the  last  Sonnet,  and 
in  addition  condemns  the  wearing  of  false  hair. 

1  The  map  of  days  outworn. — "This  pattern  of  the  worn-out  age," 
used  of  the  groom  in  Lucrece,  has  been  compared,  as  also  "  Thou  map  of 
honour"  in  King  Richard  II.,  Act  v.  sc.  i,  line  12. 

3  These  bastard  signs  of  fair. — This  mere  artificial  appearance  of  beauty. 
Bastard. — As  not  truly  derived  from  Nature. 

6  The  right  of  sepulchres. — Which  should  have  been  consigned  to  the 
sepulchre,  and  have  remained  there.  The  following  passage  from  the 
Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  iii.  sc.  2,  lines  92-96,  has  been  justly  compared  : — • 

"  So  are  those  crisped  snaky  golden  locks, 
Which  make  such  wanton  gambols  with  the  wind, 
Upon  supposed  fairness,  often  known 
To  be  the  dowry  of  a  second  head, 
The  skull  that  bred  them  in  the  sepulchre." 

8  Ere  beauty's  dead  fleece,  &c.,  appears  to  express  in  other  words  what 

had  been  already  said. 

10  Itself  would  seem  to  be  equivalent  to  "  nature  itself." 

12  Robbing  no  old,  &c. — These  words  and  the  two  lines  preceding  may 

be  taken  to  explain  the  "holy  "  of  line  9,  which  can  scarcely  be  used  of 

moral  purity.     See  the  Sonnet  following. 


228  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXIX. 

THOSE  parts  of  thee  that  the  world's  eye  doth  view, 
Want  nothing  that  the  thought  of  hearts  can  mend  : 
All  tongues  (the  voice  of  souls)  give  thee  that  due, 
Uttering  bare  truth,  even  so  as  foes  commend.  4 

Thy  outward  thus  with  outward  praise  is  crown'd  ; 
But  those  same  tongues  that  give  thee  so  thine  own, 
In  other  accents  do  this  praise  confound, 
By  seeing  farther  than  the  eye  hath  shown.  s 

They  look  into  the  beauty  of  thy  mind. 
And  that,  in  guess,  they  measure  by  thy  deeds  ; 
Then  (churls)  their  thoughts,  although  their  eyes  were  kind, 
To  thy  fair  flower  add  the  rank  smell  of  weeds  :  12 

But  why  thy  odour  matcheth  not  thy  show, 
The  solve  is  this, — that  thou  dost  common  grow.  14 


LXIX.  The  poet  asserts  that  his  friend's  beauty  is  perfect.  This 
all  cordially  admitted.  Nevertheless  it  was  alleged  that  his  friend's 
moral  character  was  not  conformable  to  his  outward  appearance. 
The  latter  was  a  "fair  flower,"  while  the  former  was  acquiring 
"the  rank  smell  of  weeds."  The  cause  of  this  was  a  want  of 
sufficient  care  with  regard  to  companions,  thus  allowing  too  great 
facility  of  access. 

4  Even  so  as  foes  commend. — Meaning,  apparently,  "for  in  like  manner 
even  foes  commend,  stinting  their  praise  as  much  as  possible." 

5  Thy.—Q.  has  "Their." 

7  Confound. — Abate  and  nullify. 

8  By  seeing  farther. — As  they  pretend. 

9  The  beauty  of  thy  mind. — Said  possibly  not  without  a  shade  of  irony. 

10  Thy  deeds. — As  to  the  general  nature  of  these  we  can  form  a  probable 
guess  from  what  had  occurred  with  regard  to  Shakespeare's  mistress.     Cf. 
xl.  at. 

11  Their  thoughts. — The  conclusions  they  formed. 

13  Odour,  of  course,  is  "  reputation." 

14  The  solve, — i.e.,  the  solution,  the  explanation.      Q.  has  "solve,"  but 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  emendation  "  solve  "  is  right. 


fftrst  Series.  229 


LXX. 

THAT  thou  art  blam'd  shall  not  be  thy  defect, 
For  slander's  mark  was  ever  yet  the  fair  ; 
The  ornament  of  beauty  is  suspect, 
A  crow  that  flies  in  heaven's  sweetest  air. 
So  thou  be  good,  slander  doth  but  approve 
Thy  worth  the  greater,  being  woo'd  of  time  : 
For  canker  vice  the  sweetest  buds  doth  love, 
And  thou  present'st  a  pure  unstained  prime. 
Thou  hast  pass'd  by  the  ambush  of  young  days, 
Either  not  assail'd,  or  victor  being  charg'd ; 
Yet  this  thy  praise  cannot  be  so  thy  praise, 
To  tie  up  envy,  evermore  enlarg'd  : 

If  some  suspect  of  ill  mask'd  not  thy  show, 

Then  thou  alone  kingdoms  of  hearts  should'st  owe. 


LXX.  After  the  hint  given  to  his  friend  in  the  preceding  Sonnet, 
the  poet  declares  that  the  allegations  referred  to  were  slanders,  the 
result  of  suspicion.  Slander  ever  fastens  on  the  purest  characters. 
His  friend's  prime  was  unstained,  such  an  affair  as  that  with  the 
poet's  mistress  not  being  regarded,  apparently,  as  involving  serious 
moral  blemish.  Moreover,  there  had  been  forgiveness  ;  and  the 
special  reference  here  may  be  to  some  charge  of  which  Mr.  W.  H. 
was  innocent.  But  (as  in  Ixxix.)  Shakespeare  can  scarcely  escape 
the  charge  of  adulation.  This  Sonnet  was  probably  intended  to 
mitigate  the  influence  of  what  had  been  said  in  Ixix. 

1  Blame  is  no  proof  of  blameworthiness. 

3  Suspicion  is  so  usually  associated  with  beauty  that  it  may  be  regarded 
as  its  wonted  ornament. 

5  So  thou  be  yood.—If  thou  be  good. 

6  Being  woo'd   of  time. — This   must   be   taken,   it   would   seem,    with 
"slander"   of   line   5.      The  sense  will   then  be  that   " slander  coming 
under  the  soothing  influence  of  time  will  show  thy  worth  to  be  greater  ; " 
or,  "  slander  will  turn  to  praise  in  course  of  time,  and  your  true  character 
will  shine  forth."     Thy  at  beginning  of  this  line  is  in  Q.  "Their." 

7  For  canker  vice,  &c. — This  line  has  been  illustrated  by  "  As  the  most 
forward  bud  is  eaten  by  the  canker  ere  it  blow,"  &c.,  Two  Gentlemen  of 
Verona,  Act  i.  sc.  i,  lines  45,  46.     But  the  "canker  vice"  of  our  text  is 
slander  or  envy. 

9  The  ambush,  of  young  days. — The  vices  to  which  youth  is  prone. 

10  Charg'd. — Attacked,  assailed. 

11, 12  Yet  this  praise  of  thine  cannot  have  such  efficacy  as  to  restrain 
envy,  which  is  ever  busy. 

13> 14  If  the  influence  of  thy  beauty  were  not  abated  by  evil  suspicion  all 
would  be  devoted  to  thee.  Owe. — Possess,  as  elsewhere. 


230  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXXI. 

No  longer  mourn  for  me  when  I  am  dead 
Than  you  shall  hear  the  surly  sullen  bell 
Give  warning  to  the  world  that  I  am  fled 
From  this  vile  world,  with  vilest  worms  to  dwell : 
Nay,  if  you  read  this  line,  remember  not 
The  hand  that  writ  it ;  for  I  love  you  so, 
That  I  in  your  sweet  thoughts  would  be  forgot, 
If  thinking  on  me  then  should  make  you  woe. 
O  if  (I  say)  you  look  upon  this  verse, 
When  I  perhaps  compounded  am  with  clay, 
Do  not  so  much  as  my  poor  name  rehearse  ; 
But  let  your  love  even  with  my  life  decay  : 

Lest  the  wise  world  should  look  into  your  moan, 
And  mock  you  with  me  after  I  am  gone. 


LXXI.  The  melancholy  train  of  thought,  interrupted  to  some  ex- 
tent by  the  last  two  Sonnets,  reappears.  As  Dowden  observes,  "  The 
world  in  this  Sonnet  is  the  'vile  world'  described  in  Ixvi."  In  the 
same  Sonnet  (Ixvi.)  the  poet  had  spoken  of  dying  and  leaving  his 
"  love  "  alone.  The  friend  is  now  implored  to  desist  from  mourning 
when  the  bell  ceases  to  toll.  The  poet's  love  for  him  is  so  deep  that 
he  would  not  wish  him  to  suffer  from  prolonged  grief.  Besides, 
ridicule  might  be  incurred  by  any  protracted  grief  for  a  person  so 
little  worthy  of  consideration. 

2  The  surly  sullen  bell. — The  tolling  bell  is  spoken  of  as  "surly"  and 
"  sullen,"  not  so  much,  perhaps,  with  reference  to  what  it  imports  as  to  the 
abrupt  suddenness  of  the  stroke,  and  the  want  of  that  musical  continuity 
which  characterises  chimes.  Comparison  has  been  made  of  the  "sullen 
bell"  "  knolling  a  departed  friend"  in  2  Henry  IV.,  Act  i.  sc.  i,  lines  102, 
103. 

4  Vilest.—  Q.  has  "vildest,"  according  to  the  old  form  "vild"  or 
" vilde"  for  "vile." 

10  When  I  perhaps  compounded  am  with  day. — Somewhat  similarly  has 
been  compared  2  Henry  IV.,  Act  iv.  sc.  5,  lines  116,  117  : — 

"  Only  compound  me  with  forgotten  dust ; 
Give  that  which  gave  thee  life  unto  the  worms." 


fftrst  Series.  231 


LXXII. 

O,  LEST  the  world  should  task  you  to  recite 
What  merit  lived  in  me,  that  you  should  love 
After  my  death, — dear  love,  forget  me  quite, 
For  you  in  me  can  nothing  worthy  prove  ; 
Unless  you  would  devise  some  virtuous  lie, 
To  do  more  for  me  than  mine  own  desert, 
And  hang  more  praise  upon  deceased  I 
Than  niggard  truth  would  willingly  impart ; 
O,  lest  your  true  love  may  seem  false  in  this, 
That  you  for  love  speak  well  of  me  untrue, 
My  name  be  buried  where  my  body  is, 
And  live  no  more  to  shame  nor  me  nor  you. 
For  I  am  shani'd  by  that  which  I  bring  forth, 
And  so  should  you,  to  love  things  nothing  worth. 


LXXII.  Continues  the  subject  of  the  preceding  Sonnet.  The 
poet  has  no  merits  worthy  of  deep  grief  or  prolonged  remembrance. 
He  feels  ashamed  of  his  productions  ;  and  his  friend  ought  to  have 
the  same  feeling. 

8  Than  niggard  truth. — Than  strict  truth. 

9>  10  Lest  your  true  love,  &c. — Lest  the  reality  of  your  love  for  me  should 
be  questioned  or  denied,  when  the  falsity  of  your  eulogies  has  been 
detected. 

10  Untrue. — Untruly. 

12  And  live  no  more,  &c. — Since  the  poet's  name  would  recall  the  poet's 
works. 


232  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXXIII. 

THAT  time  of  year  thou  may'st  in  me  behold 
When  yellow  leaves,  or  none,  or  few,  do  hang 
Upon  those  boughs  which  shake  against  the  cold, 
Bare  ruin'd  choirs,  where  late  the  sweet  birds  sang, 
In  me  thou  see'st  the  twilight  of  such  day, 
As  after  sunset  fadeth  in  the  west, 
Which  by-and-by  black  night  doth  take  away, 
Death's  second  self,  that  seals  up  all  in  rest. 
In  me  thou  see'st  the  glowing  of  such  fire, 
That  on  the  ashes  of  his  youth  doth  lie, 
As  the  death-bed  whereon  it  must  expire, 
Consum'd  with  that  which  it  was  nourish'd  by. 

This  thou  perceiv'st,  which  makes  thy  love  more  strong 
To  love  that  well  which  thou  must  leave  ere  long  : 


LXXIII.  The  poet  feels  that  his  age  is  declining.  If  life  is 
regarded  as  a  year,  its  autumn  is  present  with  him ;  if  as  a  day,  its 
evening  twilight ;  if  as  a  fire,  glowing  ashes  alone  remain.  Death 
will  soon  draw  the  curtain  of  night  over  all ;  but  his  friend's  love  is 
made  stronger  by  anticipations  of  this  approaching  end. 

3  Which  shake  against  the  cold. — Which  shake  as  the  cold  winds  of 
autumn  blow  upon  them. 

4  Bare  ruin'd  choirs. — The  trees  on  whose  branches  the  birds  sang 
during  spring  and  summer  are  compared  to  the  ruins  of  cathedral-choirs, 
where  once  were  heard  the  voices  of  the  choristers  and  the  pealing  notes 
of  the  organ.     Q.  has  "rn'wd  quiers." 

12  Consumed  with  that  which  it  was  nourish'd  by. — The  fire  and  fuel  pass 
away  together. 


ffftst  Series.  233 


LXXIV. 

BUT  be  contented  :  when  that  fell  arrest 
Without  all  bail  shall  carry  me  away, 
My  life  hath  in  this  line  some  interest, 
Which  for  memorial  still  with  thee  shall  stay. 
When  thou  reviewest  this,  thou  dost  review 
The  very  part  was  consecrate  to  thee. 
The  earth  can  have  but  earth,  which  is  his  due 
My  spirit  is  thine,  the  better  part  of  me  : 
So  then  thou  hast  but  lost  the  dregs  of  life, 
The  prey  of  worms,  my  body  being  dead  ; 
The  coward  conquest  of  a  wretch's  knife, 
Too  base  of  thee  to  be  remembered. 

The  worth  of  that,  is  that  which  it  contains, 
And  that  is  this,  and  this  with  thee  remains. 


LXXIV.  In  Ixxii.  the  poet  had  said  that  it  would  be  better  that 
both  he  and  his  works  should  be  forgotten,  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other  having  just  claim  to  immortality.-  He  now  reverts  to  the 
thought  that  his  verse  will  live  when  he  is  dead.  His  spirit  and 
life  are  there  treasured  up  for  "  a  life  beyond  life."  Death  can  only 
prey  on  "the  dregs  of  life." 

1  But  be  contented.— Looks  back  to  the  last  line  of  Ixxiii.     That  fell 
arrest. — Cf.  Hamlet,  Act  v.  sc.  2,  lines  347,  348  :- — 

' '  Had  I  but  time  (as  this  fell  serjeant  Death 
Is  strict  in  his  arrest),  0,  I  could  tell  you." 

"Fell"  means  "harsh,"  "inexorable." 

2  Without  all  bail.— Accepting  no  bail. 

3  My  living  powers  will  still  express  themselves  in  these  poems.    Interest. 
— Property.     Cf.  xxxi.  7. 

6  Cf.  Martial,  Ep.  vii.  84,  "  Certior  in  nostro  carmine  vultus  erit."  The 
language  of  our  text  is  stronger,  speaking  of  the  inner  man,  which  is 
thoroughly  identified  with  the  written  verse  (line  8). 

11  The  coward  conquest  of  a  wretch's  knife. — There  is  no  reason  what- 
ever for  supposing  from  this  line  that  Shakespeare  had  encountered  high- 
waymen or  assassins  to  whose  violence  he  had  succumbed,  and  who  had 
left  him  half-dead.  The  meaning  is,  that  what  of  him  had  not  been 
treasured  up  in  his  verse  was  mean  and  base,  liable  to  succumb  to  the 
assassin's  knife. 

13  The  worth  of  that.—Qi  the  body.     Is  that  which  it  contains,— i.e.,  the 
spirit  (line  8). 

14  And  that  is  this. — Identified  and  incorporated  with  my  verse. 


234  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


LXXV. 

So  are  you  to  my  thoughts,  as  food  to  life, 

Or  as  sweet-season'd  showers  are  to  the  ground  ; 

And  for  the  peace  of  you  I  hold  such  strife 

As  'twixt  a  miser  and  his  wealth  is  found  : 

Now  proud  as  an  enjoyer,  and  anon 

Doubting  the  filching  age  will  steal  his  treasure  ; 

Now  counting  best  to  be  with  you  alone, 

Then  better'd  that  the  world  may  see  my  pleasure 

Sometime,  all  full  with  feasting  on  your  sight, 

And  by-and-by  clean  starved  for  a  look  ; 

Possessing  or  pursuing  no  delight, 

Save  what  is  had  or  must  from  you  be  took. 

Thus  do  I  pine  and  surfeit  day  by  day, 

Or  gluttoning  on  all,  or  all  away. 


LXXV.  Descants  on  the  preciousness  of  the  treasure  which  the 
poet  finds  in  his  friend,  and  probably  gives  indication  of  a  rising  or 
growing  feeling  of  jealousy  with  regard  to  a  rival. 

2  Sweet-season'd  showers. — Showers  seasonable  and  refreshing. 

3  The  peace  of  you. — Perhaps  best  understood  as  meaning  "the  peace- 
able possession  of  you." 

6  Doubting  the  filching  age  will  steal  his  treasure. — "Perhaps  this  is 
the  first  allusion  to  the  poet,  Shakespeare's  rival,  in  his  friend's  favour." 

— DOWDEN. 

8  At  other  times  valuing  my  treasure  more  when  others  see  what  a  prize 

I  hold. 

10  Clean  starved  for  a  look. — Cf.  the  expression  still  used  "dean  gone." 
n_i4  The  poet  has  no  other  source  of  pleasure  than  that  to  be  found 

in  his  friend,  whose  presence  yields  the  most  intense  and  eagerly  enjoyed 

delight.     When  his  friend  is  absent  "all  is  away.'^ 


affrst  Series.  235 


LXXVI. 

WHY  is  my  verse  so  barren  of  new  pride  ? 

So  far  from  variation  or  quick  change  ? 

Why,  with  the  time,  do  I  not  glance  aside 

To  new-found  methods  and  to  compounds  strange  ?       4 

Why  write  I  still  all  one,  ever  the  same, 

And  keep  invention  in  a  noted  weed, 

That  every  word  doth  almost  tell  my  name, 

Showing  their  birth,  and  where  they  did  proceed  ?         8 

O  know,  sweet  love,  I  always  write  of  you, 

And  you  and  love  are  still  my  argument ; 

So  all  my  best  is  dressing  old  words  new, 

Spending  again  what  is  already  spent :  12 

For  as  the  sun  is  daily  new  and  old, 

So  is  my  love  still  telling  what  is  told.  14 


LXXVI.  May  be  regarded  as  an  answer  to  objections  which  the 
poet  imagined  as  made  against  his  Sonnets,  or  which  possibly 
had  been  really  made  by  a  rival,  that  they  contained  no  brilliant 
novelties,  and  that  their  mode  of  expression  displayed,  not  versa- 
tility, but  a  monotonous  repetition  which  proclaimed  the  author  in 
almost  every  word.  The  poet  does  not  deny  the  charge,  but  replies 
that  he  is  always  descanting  on  the  same  old  theme — his  friend, 
and  the  constant  affection  he  bears  towards  him. 

I  So  barren  of  new  pride. — So  destitute  of  novel  imagery,  diction,  &c. 
2_4  These  lines  may  allude  to  Shakespeare's  unwillingness  to  adopt 

the  mode  of  expression  and  the  poetical  form  employed  by  his  rivals. 

4  The  new-found  methods  and  the  compounds  strange  may  very  well 
refer  to  the  novel  compound  words  employed  by  Chapman  to  express 
Homeric  epithets.  In  the  Address  "  To  the  Understander  "  prefixed  to 
the  Shield  of  Achilles  (1598),  Chapman  defends  himself  against  the  charge 
of  introducing  new  words  without  propriety,  and  cites  the  example  of 
Chaucer.  Chapman's  critics  are  like  a  brood  of  frogs  from  a  ditch,  desir- 
ing "to  have  the  ceaseless  flowing  river  of  our  tongue  turned  into  their 
frog-pool." 

6  Keep  invention  in  a  noted  weed. — Express  and  clothe  my  thoughts  in 
the  same  familiar  dress. 

i  Tell.—  Q.  has  "fel." 

II  My  best  is  dressing  old  words  new. — Making  but  a  slight  difference  in 
the  expressions.     The  poet,  no  doubt,  means  thus  to  imply  the  constancy 
of  his  affection. 


236  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets* 

LXXVII. 

THY  glass  will  show  thee  how  thy  beauties  wear, 
Thy  dial  how  thy  precious  minutes  waste  ; 
The  vacant  leaves  thy  mind's  imprint  will  bear, 
And  of  this  book  this  learning  may'st  thou  taste. 
The  wrinkles  which  thy  glass  will  truly  show, 
Of  mouthed  graves  will  give  thee  memory  ; 
Thou  by  thy  dial's  shady  stealth  may'st  know 
Time's  thievish  progress  to  eternity. 
Look,  what  thy  memory  cannot  contain, 
Commit  to  these  waste  blanks,  and  thou  shalt  find 
Those  children  nurs'd,  deliver'd  from  thy  brain, 
To  take  a  new  acquaintance  of  thy  mind. 
These  offices,  so  oft  as  thou  wilt  look, 
Shall  profit  thee,  and  much  enrich  thy  book. 


LXXVII.  The  view  is  probably  correct  which  takes  this  and  the 
two  preceding  Sonnets  as  forming  a  distinct  group,  and  which  infers 
that  when  they  were  sent  to  Mr.  W.  H.  there  was  sent  with  them 
a  present  consisting  of  a  mirror,  a  sundial,  and  a  manuscript-book, 
each  of  these  being  in  some  sort  symbolical,  betokening  the  decay 
of  beauty,  the  never-resting  progress  of  time,  and  the  antidote  to 
both  time  and  decay  to  be  found  in  literary  composition. 

I  Wear.— Q.  "were." 

3  The  vacant  leaves. — That  is,  as  I  think,  the  whole  of  the  leaves  of  the 
manuscript-book.     I  do  not  feel  able  to  accept  the  view  of  Dowden  that 
Shakespeare  sent  to  Mr.  W.  H.  a  manuscript-book  partially  vacant,  as  an 
intimation  of  unwillingness  to  write  any  more  Sonnets,  on  account  of  the 
favour  shown  to  the  rival-poet. 

4  This  learning  may'st  thou  taste. — This  lesson  may'st  thou  derive. 

5_i2  The  lesson  is,  that  while  wrinkles  seen  in  the  mirror  foretoken 
the  approach  of  Death  and  the  shadow  stealing  round  the  dial,  the 
"thievish  progress  of  Time,"  security  against  oblivion  may  be  found  by 
committing  thought  to  writing. 

6  Mouthed  graves. — A  stronger  expression  than  the  "lines,"  "parallels," 
and  "trenches,"  which  had  been  previously  used  of  wrinkles  ;  and  this  is 
in  accordance  with  the  deeper  melancholy  of  these  later  Sonnets. 

10  Blanks.— I  have  adopted  the  emendation  of  Theobald.  Q.  has 
"  blacks,"  which  could  only  be  defended  on  the  supposition  of  a  note-book 
whose  leaves  were  prepared  with  some  black  substance.  Waste  will  equal 
the  "vacant  "  of  1.  3. 

II  Notice  that  literary  children,   "children  of  the  brain,"  have  taken 
the  place  of  the  natural  children  of  the  first  Sonnets.     This  is  in  accord 
with  the  deepened  melancholy. 

,12  To  take  a  new  acquaintance.— They  will  become  "objective,"  and 
objects  of  great  interest. 

13  These  offices. — "The  delivery  from  the  brain,"  and  "nursing"  or 
moulding  into  due  form  of  these  literary  children,  will,  as  often  as  you 
look  at  them  with  parental  care  and  affection,  &c. 


3ffrst  Series.  237 


LXXVIII. 

So  oft  have  I  invok'd  thee  for  my  Muse, 
And  found  such  fair  assistance  in  my  verse, 
As  every  alien  pen  hath  got  my  use, 
And  under  thee  their  poesy  disperse. 
Thine  eyes,  that  taught  the  dumb  on  high  to  sing, 
And  heavy  ignorance  aloft  to  fly, 
Have  added  feathers  to  the  learned's  wing, 
And  given  grace  a  double  majesty. 
Yet  be  most  proud  of  that  which  I  compile, 
Whose  influence  is  thine,  and  born  of  thee  : 
In  others'  works  thou  dost  but  mend  the  style, 
And  arts  with  thy  sweet  graces  graced  be  ; 
But  thou  art  all  my  art,  and  dost  advance 
As  high  as  learning  my  rude  ignorance. 


LXXVIII.  There  is  now  a  more  distinct  mention  of  the  rivalry 
previously  alluded  to.  Shakespeare,  however,  claims  special  regard 
from  his  friend  and  patron,  alleging  that,  destitute  of  learning,  his 
friend  alone  had  inspired  his  verses. 

3  As. — That.     It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  words  "  every  alien  pen  " 
require  us  to  suppose  that  Shakespeare  had  more  than  one  rival  in  the 
favour  of  Mr.  W.  H.     See  Ixxix.  4.     Got  my  use. — "Acquired  my  habit 
[of  writing  verse  to  you]." — DOWDEN. 

4  Under  thee. — Under  thy  auspices. 

7  The  learned's  wing. — To  the  wing  of  the  poet's  "learned "  rival.     The 
word  "  learned"  suits  very  well  the  Greek  scholar,  Chapman. 

8  A  double  majesty. — An  expression  quite  suitable  if  Shakespeare  has  in 
view  Chapman's  Homeric  translation. 

9  Compile. — Compose. 

10  Born  of  thee. — Q.  has  "borne,"  and  it  is  just  possible  that  this  may 
mean  "  supported  and  borne  aloft  by  thee."     But  cf.  Introd.,  p.  14. 

12, 13  Arts — art. — Maybe  understood  of  "learning."  Cf.  Ixvi.  9.  But 
there  is  reference  here  to  poetical  style. 


*** 


238  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXXIX. 

WHILST  I  alone  did  call  upon  thy  aid, 
My  verse  alone  had  all  thy  gentle  grace  ; 
But  now  my  gracious  numbers  are  decay'd, 
And  my  sick  Muse  doth  give  another  place. 
I  grant,  sweet  love,  thy  lovely  argument 
Deserves  the  travail  of  a  worthier  pen  ; 
Yet  what  of  thee  thy  poet  doth  invent, 
He  robs  thee  of,  and  pays  it  thee  again. 
He  lends  thee  virtue,  and  he  stole  that  word 
From  thy  behaviour  ;  beauty  doth  he  give, 
And  found  it  in  thy  cheek  ;  he  can  afford 
No  praise  to  thee  but  what  in  thee  doth  live. 
Then  thank  him  not  for  that  which  he  doth  say, 
Since  what  he  owes  thee  thou  thyself  dost  pay. 


LXXIX.  Mentions  more  expressly  a  single  rival,  to  whom,  it  is 
alleged,  Mr.  W.  H.  is  under  no  obligation  whatever,  while  Shake- 
speare's verse  meanwhile  suffers  ;  his  Muse  is  "sick." 

2  Thy  gentle  grace. — Thy  gentle  and  gracious  influence. 

5  Thy  lovely  argument. — The  subject  of  thy  beauty. 

7  Thy  poet— That  is,  the  rival  of  Shakespeare.  What  of  thee.—  What 
concerning  thee. 

8_io  Notice  the  derogatory  expressions  robs  and  stole.  Virtue — be- 
haviour. Of.  Ixx.,  especially  lines  8-10,  as  to  Mr.  W.  H.'s  "virtue." 


3ffr0t  Serfee.  239 


LXXX. 

0,  HOW  I  faint  when  I  of  you  do  write, 
Knowing  a  better  spirit  doth  use  your  name, 
And  in  the  praise  thereof  spends  all  his  might, 
To  make  me  tongue-tied,  speaking  of  your  fame  ! 
But  since  your  worth  (wide  as  the  ocean  is), 
The  humble  as  the  proudest  sail  doth  bear, 
My  saucy  bark,  inferior  far  to  his, 
On  your  broad  main  doth  wilfully  appear. 
Your  shallowest  help  will  hold  me  up  afloat, 
Whilst  he  upon  your  soundless  deep  doth  ride  ; 
Or,  being  wreck'd,  I  am  a  worthless  boat, 
He  of  tall  building,  and  of  goodly  pride  : 
Then  if  he  thrive,  and  I  be  cast  away, 
The  worst  was  this  ; — my  love  was  my  decay. 


LXXX.  Speaks  apparently  of  poems  composed  by  the  rival-poet 
in  praise  of  Mr.  W.  H.,  which  have  not  come  down  to  us.  Shake- 
speare and  his  rival  are  compared  to  two  vessels  floating  on  the 
broad  ocean  of  Mr.  W.  H.'s  patronage.  Shakespeare's  verse  is  but 
a  slight  and  worthless  boat  "saucily"  and  "wilfully"  presuming 
on  Mr.  W.  H.'s  favour.  But  his  rival  "rides  on  a  soundless  deep," 
a  ship  "  of  tall  building  and  of  goodly  pride ;  "  a  description  suit- 
able to  the  position  that  Shakespeare's  rival  was  George  Chapman. 
Contemplating  his  rival's  superior  powers,  which  are  all  engaged  in 
Mr.  W.  H.'s  praise,  Shakespeare  professes  to  lose  heart  and  "faint." 

2-4  The  "better  spirit,"  the  poet  of  supposed  superior  endowments, 
endeavours  by  the  superiority  of  his  verses,  to  stop  Shakespeare's  utterances. 
7  My  saucy  bark. — Cf.  Troilus  and  Cressida,  Act  i.  sc.  3,  Hues  35-45, 
and  Act  ii.  sc.  3,  end : — 

"The  sea  being  smooth, 
How  many  shallow  bauble  boats  dare  sail 
Upon  her  patient  breast,  making  their  way 
With  those  of  nobler  bulk  ! 
But  let  the  ruffian  Boreas  once  enrage 
The  gentle  Thetis,  and,  anon,  behold 
The  strong-ribb'd  bark  through  liquid  mountains  cut, 
Bounding  between  the  two  moist  elements, 
Like  Perseus'  horse  :  where's  then  the  saucy  boat, 
Whose  weak  untimber'd  sides  but  even  now 
Co-rivall'd  greatness  ?  either  to  harbour  fled, 
Or  made  a  toast  for  Neptune." 

"Let  Achilles  sleep: 

Light  boats  sail  swift,  though  greater  hulks  draw  deep." 
Inferior  far  to  his. — Self-depreciation  of  this  kind  is,  of  course,  not  to  be 
taken  too  literally. 

14  My  love  was  my  decay. — That  is,  the  cause  of  my  ruin,  by  impelling 
me  to  write  poems  in  your  praise,  and  bringing  bitter  disappointment. 


240  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXXXI. 

OB  I  shall  live  your  epitaph  to  make, 

Or  you  survive  when  I  in  earth  am  rotten  ; 

From  hence  your  memory  death  cannot  take, 

Although  in  me  each  part  will  be  forgotten. 

Your  name  from  hence  immortal  life  shall  have, 

Though  I,  once  gone,  to  all  the  world  must  die  : 

The  earth  can  yield  me  but  a  common  grave, 

When  you  entombed  in  men's  eyes  shall  lie. 

Your  monument  shall  be  my  gentle  verse, 

Which  eyes  not  yet  created  shall  o'er-read  ; 

And  tongues  to  be,  your  being  shall  rehearse, 

When  all  the  breathers  of  this  world  are  dead  ; 
You  still  shall  live  (such  virtue  hath  my  pen) 
Where  breath  most  breathes, — even  in  the  mouths  of  men. 


LXXXI.  Self -depreciation  here  takes  another  form.  Shakespeare 
himself  must  die  and  his  personality  be  forgotten.  Nevertheless 
his  verse  will  be  an  enduring  monument  to  his  friend,  whose  praises 
will  live  in  the  mouths  of  unborn  generations. 

3  From  hence. — From  these  poems. 

4  In  me  each  part. — Every  part  of  me. 

11  Your  being  shall  rehearse.—  Shall  tell  of  what  you  were. 

12  The  breathers  of  this  world. — This  present  generation. 

14  Where  breath  most  breathes. — Though  those  who  at  present  breathe 
must  die,  you  shall  still  live  in  the  intensity  of  life,  in  the  very  breath,  of 
those  who  are  yet  unborn. 


*t* 


3ffr0t  Series*  241 


LXXXII. 

I  GRANT  thou  wert  not  married  to  my  Muse, 
And  therefore  may'st  without  attaint  o'erlook 
The  dedicated  words  which  writers  use 
Of  their  fair  subject,  blessing  every  book. 
Thou  art  as  fair  in  knowledge  as  in  hue, 
Finding  thy  worth  a  limit  past  my  praise  ; 
And  therefore  art  enforc'd  to  seek  anew 
Some  fresher  stamp  of  the  time -bettering  days. 
And  do  so,  love  ;  yet  when  they  have  devis'd 
What  strained  touches  rhetorick  can  lend, 
Thou  truly  fair  wert  truly  sympathis'd 
In  true  plain  words,  by  thy  true-telling  friend  ; 
And  their  gross  painting  might  be  better  us'd 
Where  cheeks  need  blood  ;  in  thee  it  is  abus'd. 


LXXXII.  The  poet  admits  that  his  friend  could  plead  justifica- 
tion for  showing  some  countenance  to  his  rival.  Mr.  W.  H.  had 
never  promised  to  exclude  all  others  from  his  favour.  Moreover, 
his  merits  were  so  great  that  he  might  well  seek  the  aid  of  another 
poet  to  set  them  forth  more  fully.  But  there  was  thus  a  danger  of 
flattery.  Shakespeare  claims  the  merit  of  faithfulness  and  truth. 

I  Not  married  to  my  Muse. — Dowden  suggests,  "His  friend  had  per- 
haps alleged  in  playful  self-justification  that  he  had  not  married  Shak- 
spere's  Muse,  vowing  to  forsake  all  other,  and  keep  only  unto  her." 

3  Dedicated  words.— Taking  into  account  the  next  line,  which  speaks, 
apparently,  of  "blessing"  a  book  by  lines  in  praise  of  Mr.  W.  H.,  the 
"  fair  subject,"  there  is  possibly  reference  to  a  dedication  either  actual  or 
proposed. 

5  On  this  line  Professor  Dowden  says,  "  Shakspere  had  celebrated  his 
friend's  beauty  (hue) ;    perhaps   his  learned  rival   had   celebrated  the 
patron's  knowledge  ;  such  excellence  reached  '  a  limit  past  the  praise '  of 
Shakspere,  who  knew  small  Latin  and  less  Greek."     Subsequently,  in  the 
title  to  a  Sonnet  accompanying  his  translation  of  the   Iliad,  Chapman 
addressed  Pembroke  as  "  the  Learned  and  Most  Noble  Patron  of  Learning," 
and  the  Sonnet  celebrates  Pembroke's  "  god-like  learning." 

6  Finding  thy  worth. — If  the  view  just  given  of  the  last  line  be  accepted, 
then  "finding  thy  worth"  will  be  equivalent  to  "and  thus  findest  thy 
worth." 

8  Some  fresher  stamp,  &c. — Some  poet  whose  method  and  diction  are  in 
better  accord  with  the  more  advanced  ideas  of  the  times. 

10  The  verses  of  the  rival-poet  in  praise  of  Mr.  W.  H.  not  being  extant, 
it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  they  surpassed  those  of  Shakespeare  in 
flattery  and  inflated  praise,  the  "  strained  touches"  of  "  rhetorick." 

II  Sympathis'd.  —  Implying  that   Shakespeare's   verse   came   from   the 
heart.     Similarly  the  lines  in  Lucrece  which  have  been  ccmpared, — 

"True  sorrow  then  is  feelingly  suffic'd 
When  with  like  semblance  it  is  sympathis'd." 

Q 


242  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXXXIII. 

I  NEVER  saw  that  you  did  painting  need, 
And  therefore  to  your  fair  no  painting  set ; 
I  found,  or  thought  I  found,  you  did  exceed 
The  barren  tender  of  a  poet's  debt : 
And  therefore  have  I  slept  in  your  report, 
That  you  yourself,  being  extant,  well  might  show 
How  far  a  modern  quill  doth  come  too  short, 
Speaking  of  worth — what  worth  in  you  doth  grow  ! 
This  silence  for  my  sin  you  did  impute, 
Which  shall  be  most  my  glory,  being  dumb  ; 
For  I  impair  not  beauty  being  mute, 
When  others  would  give  life,  and  bring  a  tomb. 
There  lives  more  life  in  one  of  your  fair  eyes 
Than  both  your  poets  can  in  praise  devise. 


LXXXII.  In  close  connection  with  the  preceding  Sonnet. 
Shakespearean  his  verses,  had  allowed  Mr.  W.  H.'s  excellences  to 
speak  for  themselves,  despairing  of  rendering  them  adequately, 
and  fearing  lest  he  should  impair  them  by  eulogy.  He  had  been 
"  dumb  "  and  had  "  slept." 

2  Your  fair. — Your  beauty. 

4  The  barren  tender  of  a  poeCs  debt. — Whatever  a  poet  might  offer  to 
pay  in  the  way  of  praise  would  be  "barren,"  as  not  coming  up  to  your 
deserts. 

5  Therefore  have  I  slept  in  your  report. — So  that  you  might  speak 
therein  for  yourself,  or,  rather,  that  your  beauty  might  speak. 

6  Being  extant. — Being  present  in  person  to  manifest  your  beauty. 

7  A  modern  quill. — The  pen,  most  probably,  of  the   rival-poet,  the 
"fresher  stamp  of  the  time-bettering  days  "  of  Ixxxii.    To  take  "  modern  " 
in  the  sense  of  "trivial "  seems  to  me  unsatisfactory  both  in  this  place  and 
in  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  Act  v.  sc.  2,  lines  166,  167, — 

"  Immoment  toys,  things  of  such  dignity 
As  we  greet  modern  friends  withal." 

The  idea,  as  I  take  it,  is  that  Mr.  W.  H.  himself,  being  extant  in  Shake- 
speare's verse,  proved  how  unsuitable  and  injurious  was  the  "gross  paint- 
ing" of  his  rival. 

8  Grow. — This  word  may  possibly  mean  "doth  grow  as  a  poet  contem- 
plates, and  attempts  to  describe  your  worth,"  or  the  word  may  allude  to 
Mr.  W.  H.'s  still  immature  youth.     The  punctuation  I  have  given  is  per- 
haps, on  the  whole,  most  probable. 

9  Did  impute,—  Probably,  by  showing  favour  to  the  rival-poet. 

12  Bring  a  tomb. — Concealing  you  from  view  by  their  lavish  eulogies. 

14  Both  your  poets  may  be  taken  to  imply  that  Shakespeare  had  two 
rivals.  But  this  is  perhaps  doubtful.  More  probably  the  two  poets  are 
Shakespeare  and  his  rival. 


3f frst  Series. 


LXXXIV. 

WHO  is  it  that  says  most  ?  which  can  say  more 
Than  this  rich  praise, — that  you  alone  are  you  ? 
In  whose  confine  immured  is  the  store 
Which  should  example  where  your  equal  grew. 
Lean  penury  within  that  pen  doth  dwell, 
That  to  his  subject  lends  not  some  small  glory  ; 
But  he  that  writes  of  you,  if  he  can  tell 
That  you  are  you,  so  dignifies  his  story. 
Let  him  but  copy  what  in  you  is  writ, 
Not  making  worse  what  Nature  made  so  clear, 
And  such  a  counter-part  shall  fame  his  wit, 
Making  his  style  admired  everywhere. 

You  to  your  beauteous  blessings  add  a  curse, 

Being  fond  on  praise  which  makes  your  praises  worse. 


LXXXIV.  Still  in  close  continuation.  The  mere  description  of 
Mr.  W.  H.  is  by  far  the  highest  praise. 

I  Who  is  it  that  says  most  ? — Which  of  the  two,  the  describer,  or  the 
eulogist  ? 

3>4  In  whose  confine,  &c. — You  are  unparalleled:  you  yourself  furnish 
the  only  example  with  which  you  can  be  compared. 

8  So  dignifies. — With  a  full  stop  at  the  end  of  the  line,  as  in  Q.,  "so 
dignifies"  is  equivalent  to  "thus  dignifies,"  "thus  gives  the  greatest 
dignity  to." 

10  So  clear. — So  manifest,  and  of  such  shining  beauty. 

II  Such  a  counter-part. — A  description  answering  so  perfectly  to  the 
truth. 

13  Your  beauteous  blessings. — The  beauties   with   which   Nature  has 
blessed  you.     Add  a  curse, — by  accepting  poetical  eulogies. 

14  Being  fond  on  praise.— Being  fond  of  praise.     Which  makes  your 
praises. — By  which  "  your  praise,"  the  praise  due  to  you,  is  really  lessened 
and  deteriorated. 


244  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


LXXXV. 

MY  tongue-tied  Muse  in  manners  holds  her  still, 
While  comments  of  your  praise,  richly  compil'd, 
[Rehearse  thy]  character  with  golden  quill, 
And  precious  phrase  by  all  the  Muses  fil'd.  4 

I  think  good  thoughts,  while  others  write  good  words, 
And,  like  unlettered  clerk,  still  cry  '  Amen ' 
To  every  hymn  that  able  spirit  affords, 
In  polish'd  form  of  well-refined  pen.  8 

Hearing  you  prais'd,  I  say, '  Tis  so,  'tis  true,' 
And  to  the  most  of  praise  add  something  more  ; 
But  that  is  in  my  thought,  whose  love  to  you, 
Though  words  come  hindmost,  holds  his  rank  before.       12 
Then  others  for  the  breath  of  words  respect, 
Me  for  my  dumb  thoughts,  speaking  in  effect.  u 


LXXXV.  A  variation  on  the  same  general  theme  as  before. 
Shakespeare  is  silent,  while  the  rival-poet  eulogises  Mr.  W.  H.  with 
great  wealth  of  diction  and  metaphor.  By  his  silence,  Shakespeare 
merely  assents  to  the  truth  and  justness  of  the  praise.  In  thought, 
however,  he  would  add  thereto,  deeming  it  inadequate.  And  for  his 
"  dumb  thoughts  "  he  asks  the  consideration  of  his  friend. 

1  My  tongue-tied  Muse. — The  poet  might  be  regarded  as  "tongue-tied," 
because  his  thoughts  transcend  the  power  of  words  (cf.  lines  11-14).  In 
manners. — With  decorous  respect.  Notice,  however,  the  different  ex- 
planation of  the  silence  given  in  the  next  Sonnet  (lines  3,  13,  14). 

3  [Rehearse  thy]  character. — Q.  has  "Reserue  their  character,"  which 
is   unintelligible.     Probably  "their,"   as   elsewhere,    represents    "thy." 
"Rehearse,"  suggested  by  an  anonymous  critic,  is  not  an  improbable 
emendation.     With  the  spelling  "reherse,"  it  comes  near  to  "reserve." 
"  Character"  must  be  taken,  as  in  some  other  places,  to  denote  "face," 
"  appearance."     Cf.  Twelfth  Night,  Act  i.  so.  2,  lines  50,  51  : — 

"  I  will  believe  thou  hast  a  mind  that  suits 
With  this  thy  fair  and  outward  character" — 

a  very  good  example.     See  also  Coriolanus,  Act  ii.  sc.  i,  lines  70,  71, — 
"  What  harm  can  your  bisson  conspectuities  glean  out  of  this  character  ? " 

4  FiVd.— Polished  and  elaborated.     Cf.  line  8. 

6  Unlettered  clerk,  &c. — Fully  admitting  at  once  what  is  said. 

7  That  able  spirit. — That  great  poet,  though  there  is  possibly  an  allu- 
sion to  Chapman's  special  claim  to  inspiration. 

14  Speaking  in  effect.— Speaking  in  thought  and  purpose.  Cf.  xxiii.  and 
notes. 


fffrst  Series.  245 


LXXXVI. 

WAS  it  the  proud  full  sail  of  his  great  verse, 
Bound  for  the  prize  of  all-too-precious  you, 
That  did  my  ripe  thoughts  in  my  brain  inhearse, 
Making  their  tomb  the  womb  wherein  they  grew  ? 
Was  it  his  spirit,  by  spirits  taught  to  write 
Above  a  mortal  pitch,  that  struck  me  dead  ? 
No,  neither  he,  nor  his  compeers  by  night 
Giving  him  aid,  my  verse  astonished. 
He,  nor  that  affable  familiar  ghost 
Which  nightly  gulls  him  with  intelligence, 
As  victors,  of  my  silence  cannot  boast ; 
I  was  not  sick  of  any  fear  from  thence. 
But  when  your  countenance  fil'd  up  his  line, 
Then  lack'd  I  matter  ;  that  enfeebled  mine. 


LXXXVI.  The  poet  maintains  that  the  silence  which  he  had 
previously  mentioned  was  not  caused  by  dismay  at  the  achieve- 
ments of  his  rival,  nor  at  such  supernatural  or  other  aid  as  his 
rival  may  have  secured.  It  was  because  Mr.  W.  H.  had  given 
countenance  to  this  rival's  poetry  that  his  own  powers  had  fainted 
and  failed. 

1  The  proud  full  sail  of  his  great  verse. — Suiting  well  the  grand  fourteen- 
syllable  lines  of  Chapman's  Iliad,  as  pointed  out  by  Professor  Minto. 

3  Inhearse. — Entomb,  so  that  Shakespeare  could  say  nothing. 

5>  6  By  spirits  taught  to  icrite,  &,c. — Cf.  the  quotation  given  below,  line  9. 

7  His  compeers  by  night. — Cf.  Chapman's  Shadow  of  Night,  quoted  by 
Professor  Minto,  Characteristics  of  English  Poets,  p.  291 : — 

"  All  you  possessed  with  indepressed  spirits, 
Endued  with  nimble  and  aspiring  wits, 
Come  consecrate  with  me  to  sacred  Night 
Your  whole  endeavours  and  detest  the  light." 

9  Nor  Wat  affable  familiar  ghost,  &c. — Cf.  Dedication  to  Shadow  of 
Night,  also  quoted  by  Minto  : — 

"  Now  what  a  supererogation  in  wit  this  is,  to  think  Skill  so  mightily 
pierced  with  their  loves  that  she  should  prostitutely  show  them  her  secrets, 
when  she  will  scarcely  be  looked  upon  by  others  but  with  invocation, 
fasting,  watching,  yea,  not  without  having  drops  of  their  souls  like  a, 
heavenly  familiar." 

13  Fil'd.—U  is  perhaps  doubtful  whether  the  "fild"  of  Q.  should  be 
represented  by  "  til'd  "  or  "fill'd."    The  latter  would  suit  very  well  the 
"  lacking  matter"  of  line  14. 

14  Then  lack'd  I  matter. — Cf.  Troilus  and  Cressida,  Act  ii.  sc.  3,  lines 
103,  104, — "Then  will  Ajax  lack  matter,  if  he  have  lost  his  argument." 


246  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXXXVIL 

FAREWELL  !  thou  art  too  dear  for  my  possessing, 
And  like  enough  thou  know'st  thy  estimate  ; 
The  charter  of  thy  worth  gives  thee  releasing  ; 
My  bonds  in  thee  are  all  determinate. 
For  how  do  I  hold  thee  but  by  thy  granting  ? 
And  for  that  riches  where  is  my  deserving  ] 
The  cause  of  this  fair  gift  in  me  is  wanting, 
And  so  my  patent  back  again  is  swerving. 
Thyself  thou  gav'st,  thy  own  worth  then  not  knowing, 
Or  me,  to  whom  thou  gav'st  it,  else  mistaking  ; 
So  thy  great  gift,  upon  misprision  growing, 
Comes  home  again,  on  better  judgment  making. 
Thus  have  I  had  thee,  as  a  dream  doth  flatter, 
In  sleep  a  king,  but  waking,  no  such  matter. 


LXXXVIL  Shakespeare,  piqued  apparently  because  Mr.  W.  H. 
will  not  renounce  the  rival-poet,  utters  a  farewell.  Mr.  W.  H.'s 
favour  and  patronage  had  been  granted  only  during  pleasure ;  so 
that  there  was  no  ground  for  complaint  in  their  recall ;  but  the 
poet  is  as  one  awaking  from  a  dream.  This  "  farewell "  is  probably 
intended,  like  Ophelia's  return  of  Hamlet's  "  remembrances,"  to 
evoke  a  renewed  avowal  of  affection. 

'2  Thy  estimate. — The  value  at  which  thou  art  to  be  appraised. 

3  The  charter  of  thy  worth. — The  charter  by  which  thy  worth  was  ceded 
to  me. 

4  Determinate. — Cf.  xiii.  5,  6. 

6  That  riches. — Cf.  cette  richesse. 

6_i2  The  cause  of  the  release  and  revocation  is,  that  the  grant  had  been 
made  in  error.  Patent  in  line  8,  instead  of  "charter"  in  line  3. 

11  Upon  misprision  growing. — Upon  its  becoming  clear  that  you  had 
made  a  mistake.     Cf.  old  French  mesprison,  which  Cotgrave  explains  by 
"misprision,"  "error,"  &c. 

12  Comes  home  again. — Returns  to  you. 


fftrst  Series.  247 


LXXXVIII. 

WHEN  thou  shalt  be  dispos'd  to  set  me  light, 
And  place  my  merit  in  the  eye  of  Scorn, 
Upon  thy  side  against  myself  I'll  fight, 
And  prove  thee  virtuous,  though  thou  art  forsworn. 
With  mine  own  weakness  being  best  acquainted, 
Upon  thy  part  I  can  set  down  a  story 
Of  faults  conceal'd,  wherein  I  am  attainted  ; 
That  thou,  in  losing  me,  shalt  win  much  glory  ; 
And  I  by  this  will  be  a  gainer  too  ; 
For  bending  all  my  loving  thoughts  on  thee, 
The  injuries  that  to  myself  I  do, 
Doing  thee  vantage,  double-vantage  me. 
Such  is  my  love,  to  thee  I  so  belong, 
That  for  thy  right  myself  will  bear  all  wrong. 


LXXXVIII.  If  Mr.  W.  H.  is  disposed  to  break  off  the  acquaint- 
ance on  account  of  blemishes  and  faults  in  the  poet,  the  poet  will 
not  defend  or  extenuate,  but  will  enlarge  the  catalogue  of  his 
defects,  as  knowing  much  which  no  other  can  tell.  Thus,  for  the 
love  of  his  friend,  he  will  take  his  friend's  side  against  himself. 

1  Disposed. — Q.  has  the  misprint  "dispode." 

2  Place  my  merit  in  the  eye  of  Scorn. — Regard  me  with  scorn. 
4  Forsworn. — As  pledged  to  a  life-long  friendship. 

7  Of  faults  conceal'd,  &c. — Cf.  Hamlet,  "I  am  myself  indifferent  honest, 
but  yet  I  could  accuse  me  of  such  things,  that  it  were  better  my  mother 
had  not  borne  me,"  Act  iii.  sc.  i,  lines  123-126. 

8  Shalt.— Q.  has  "shall." 

12  Double-vantage  me. — The  poet,  it  would  seem,  claims  that  his  affec- 
tion to  his  friend  is  so  strong,  that,  whatever  satisfaction  his  friend  may 
find  in  setting  forth  his  faults,  this  satisfaction  will  be  doubled  to  himself. 


248  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets. 


LXXXIX. 

SAY  that  thou  didst  forsake  me  for  some  fault, 
And  I  will  comment  upon  that  offence  : 
Speak  of  my  lameness,  and  I  straight  will  halt ; 
Against  thy  reasons  making  no  defence. 
Thou  canst  not;  love,  disgrace  me  half  so  ill, 
To  set  a  form  upon  desired  change, 
As  I'll  myself  disgrace  :  knowing  thy  will, 
I  will  acquaintance  strangle,  and  look  strange  ; 
Be  absent  from  thy  walks  ;  and  in  my  tongue 
Thy  sweet  beloved  name  no  more  shall  dwell ; 
Lest  I  (too  much  profane)  should  do  it  wrong, 
And  haply  of  our  old  acquaintance  tell. 
For  thee,  against  myself  I'll  vow  debate, 
For  I  must  ne'er  love  him  whom  thou  dost  hate. 


LXXXIX.  In  close  continuation  of  the  preceding  Sonnet.  To 
serve  his  friend,  the  poet  will  not  only  magnify  his  own  faults,  but 
will  act  as  though  the  acquaintance  had  never  been  formed  ;  nay, 
he  will  hate  himself. 

2  Com m en t.— Expatiate  upon  the  fault,  and  so  magnify  it. 

3  Lameness. — Perhaps,  if  this  line  stood  alone,  it  might  be  thought  pos- 
sible that  Shakespeare  had  contracted  a  temporary  lameness.     But  we 
must  take  into  account  xxxvii.  3  and  context.     See  notes  there. 

6  To  set  a  form  upon  desired  change. — To  justify  before  the  world  the 
breach  of  acquaintance  which  thou  desirest. 

8  Strangle. — Notice  the  effort  apparently  implied  in  this  word.  Cf. 
Troilus  and  Cressida,  Act  iv.  sc.  4,  lines  39,  40 : — 

' '  Strangles  our  dear  vows 
Even  in  the  birth  of  our  own  labouring  breath." 

13  Debate.— Conflict,  hostility. 


fftrst  Scries.  249 


XC. 

THEN  hate  me  when  thou  wilt ;  if  ever,  now  ; 

Now,  while  the  world  is  bent  my  deeds  to  cross, 

Join  with  the  spite  of  Fortune,  make  me  bow, 

And  do  not  drop  in  for  an  after-loss  : 

Ah  !  do  not,  when  my  heart  hath  scap'd  this  sorrow, 

Come  in  the  rearward  of  a  conquer'd  woe  ; 

Give  not  a  windy  night  a  rainy  morrow, 

To  linger  out  a  purpos'd  overthrow. 

If  thou  wilt  leave  me,  do  not  leave  me  last, 

When  other  petty  griefs  have  done  their  spite, 

But  in  the  onset  come  ;  so  shall  I  taste 

At  first  the  very  worst  of  Fortune's  might ; 

And  other  strains  of  woe,  which  now  seem  woe, 
Compar'd  with  loss  of  thee  will  not  seem  so. 


XC.  The  poet  is  suffering  from  other  troubles  or  misfortunes, 
"  petty  griefs  "  and  "  strains  of  woe."  But  he  would  rather  feel  at 
once  the  full  force  of  what  Fortune  can  do.  If  his  friend  is  deter- 
mined to  break  off  the  acquaintance,  he  would  rather  that  this 
should  occur  immediately.  Probably  we  ought  to  read  between 
the  lines  an  appeal  for  Mr.  W.  H.  's  pity  and  sympathy. 

4_i2  Dr0p  in  for  an  after-loss,  &c. — Lengthen  out  my  troubles  by 
delay. 

6  Come  in  the  rearward  of  a  conquered  woe. — Malone  compared  the  use 
of  "rearward"  in  Much  Ado  about  Nothing,  Act  iv.  sc.  i,  lines  127-129  : — 
"  Thought  I  thy  spirit  were  stronger  than  thy  shames, 
Myself  would,  on  the  rearward  of  reproaches, 
Strike  at  thy  life." 

is,  14  jjay .  jf  yOU  withdraw  from  me  now,  my  present  troubles  will  be 
relieved  and  disappear,  swallowed  up  in  the  far  greater  grief  occasioned 
by  the  loss  of  you.  The  expression  "  strains  of  woe"  maybe  taken  as 
nearly  equivalent  to  "  kinds  of  woe,"  though  there  is  probably  added  the 
idea  of  extension  or  lengthening. 


250  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnet6. 


XCL 

SOME  glory  in  their  birth,  some  in  their  skill, 

Some  in  their  wealth,  some  in  their  body's  force  ; 

Some  in  their  garments,  though  new-fangled  ill ; 

Some  in  their  hawks  and  hounds,  some  in  their  horse  ;    4 

And  every  humour  hath  his  adjunct  pleasure, 

Wherein  it  finds  a  joy  above  the  rest ; 

But  these  particulars  are  not  my  measure, 

All  these  I  better  in  one  general  best.  8 

Thy  love  is  better  than  high  birth  to  me, 

Richer  than  wealth,  prouder  than  garments'  cost, 

Of  more  delight  than  hawks  or  horses  be  ; 

And  having  thee,  of  all  men's  pride  I  boast.  12 

Wretched  in  this  alone,  that  thou  may'st  take 
All  this  away,  and  me  most  wretched  make.  14 


XCI.  Other  men  have  various  objects  of  supreme  interest,  or 
advantages  in  which  they  take  pride  ;  but  the  poet  takes  pride  only 
in  his  friend.  The  possibility  of  losing  him  is  the  poet's  only  source 
of  anxiety  and  wretchedness. 

3  Though  new-fangled  ill.— However  unsuitable,  though  fashionable. 

7-8  But  these  particular  pursuits  and  objects  of  interest  do  not  concern 
me  or  apply  to  me.  I  have  one  object  of  interest  better  than  all  these,  to 
me  the  best,  yielding  as  much  delight  and  pride  as  all  the  rest  combined. 


4- 

c*v^> 

MX 


fffrst  Series.  251 


XCII. 

BUT  do  thy  worst  to  steal  thyself  away, 
For  term  of  life  thou  art  assured  mine  ; 
And  life  no  longer  than  thy  love  will  stay, 
For  it  depends  upon  that  love  of  thine. 
Then  need  I  not  to  fear  the  worst  of  wrongs, 
When  in  the  least  of  them  my  life  hath  end. 
I  see  a  better  state  to  me  belongs 
Than  that  which  on  thy  humour  doth  depend. 
Thou  canst  not  vex  me  with  inconstant  mind, 
Since  that  my  life  on  thy  revolt  doth  lie. 
0,  what  a  happy  title  do  I  find, 
Happy  to  have  thy  love,  happy  to  die  ! 

But  what's  so  blessed-fair  that  fears  no  blot  ? — 
Thou  may'st  be  false,  and  yet  I  know  it  not : 


XCII.  Closely  connected  with  the  preceding  Sonnet,  in  the  two 
last  lines  of  which  the  poet  speaks  of  his  having  only  one  cause  of 
wretchedness,  that  he  may  lose  his  friend.  Now  he  can  find  com- 
fort even  in  this  respect.  His  friend's  love  is  assured  to  him  for 
life ;  for  the  loss  of  that  love  will  involve  the  loss  of  life.  Still 
there  is  a  possibility  that  his  friend's  heart  may  be  alienated, 
though  an  outward  seeming  of  affection  may  be  continued. 

5_io  The  poet  cannot  fear  that  continued  wretchedness  which  he  had 
dreaded,  since  the  loss  of  his  friend's  affection  will  entail  immediately  the 
loss  of  life.  The  "  worst  of  wrongs  "  will  thus  be  the  continued  misery  of 
living  alienated.  The  "least  of  them"  will  allude  to  the  loss  of  his 
friend's  affection,  and  the  loss  of  life  is  so  closely  linked  therewith  that  the 
poet  will  feel  no  wretchedness.  This  is  the  "better  state"  which  fears 
no  continued  "vexation."  The  pain  caused  by  the  loss  of  the  friend's 
affection  is  the  "  least  of  wrongs  "  on  account  of  its  immediate  termination. 


252  Sbafeespearc's  Sonnets. 


XCIII. 

So  shall  I  live,  supposing  thou  art  true, 
Like  a  deceived  husband  ;  so  love's  face 
May  still  seem  love  to  me,  though  alter'd  new  ; 
Thy  looks  with  me,  thy  heart  in  other  place  : 
For  there  can  live  no  hatred  in  thine  eye, 
Therefore  in  that  I  cannot  know  thy  change. 
In  many's  looks  the  false  heart's  history 
Is  writ  in  moods  and  frowns  and  wrinkles  strange  ; 
But  Heaven  in  thy  creation  did  decree, 
That  in  thy  face  sweet  love  should  ever  dwell ; 
Whate'er  thy  thoughts  or  thy  heart's  workings  be, 
Thy  looks  should  nothing  thence  but  sweetness  tell. 
How  like  Eve's  apple  cloth  thy  beauty  grow, 
If  thy  sweet  virtue  answer  not  thy  show  ! 


XCIII.  The  supposition  contained  in  the  last  line  of  xcii.  is  here 
enlarged  upon.  The  poet's  friend  may  still  wear  the  semblance  of  love 
though  his  affection  has  been  tranferred  to  another ;  for  Nature  has 
so  moulded  his  face  that  it  must  ever  wear  the  appearance  of  love, 
however  changed  may  be  his  feelings. 

3  Thouoh  alter  d  new. — Though  changed  from  the  expression  of  real 
affection  to  its  mere  semblance. 

is,  H  ffow  Ufa  Eve's  apple,  &c. — The  reality  not  agreeing  with  appearance 
and  expectation. 


fffrst  Scries,  253 


XCIV. 

THEY  that  have  power  to  hurt  and  will  do  none, 
That  do  not  do  the  thing  they  most  do  show, 
Who,  moving  others,  are  themselves  as  stone, 
Unmoved,  cold,  and  to  temptation  slow  ; 
They  rightly  do  inherit  heaven's  graces, 
And  husband  nature's  riches  from  expense  ; 
They  are  the  lords  and  owners  of  their  faces, 
Others  but  stewards  of  their  excellence. 
The  summer's  flower  is  to  the  summer  sweet, 
Though  to  itself  it  only  live  and  die  ; 
But  if  that  flower  with  base  infection  meet, 
The  basest  weed  out-braves  his  dignity  ; 

For  sweetest  things  turn  sourest  by  their  deeds  ; 

Lilies  that  fester  smell  far  worse  than  weeds. 


XCIV.  The  poet,  in  the  preceding  Sonnet,  had  set  forth  the  pos- 
sibility of  his  friend  being  false  at  heart,  although  his  countenance 
should  give  no  indication  of  unfaithfulness.  But  the  ability  to 
restrain  the  expression  of  emotion,  and  not  to  publish  to  the  world 
by  changes  of  countenance  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  heart, 
may  be  regarded  as  a  virtue,  or  at  least  as  a  valuable  endowment. 
Persons  of  this  temperament  isolate  themselves,  it  is  true  ;  but  this 
does  not  destroy  their  virtue.  The  flower  is  still  sweet  whose 
sweetness  is  wasted  on  the  desert  air.  But  such  virtue  when  cor- 
rupted acquires  an  odour  far  ranker  than  that  of  undisguised  pro- 
fligacy or  unrestrained  passion. 

1  Have  power  to  hurt  and  will  do  none.—  Are  not  impetuous  and  passionate. 
2-8  Cf.  Hamlet,  Act  iii.  sc.  2,  lines  70-76, — 

"  Thou  hast  been 

As  one,  in  suffering  all,  that  suffers  nothing  ; 
A  man  that  Fortune's  buffets  and  rewards 
Has  ta'en  with  equal  thanks  ;  and  blest  are  those 
Whose  blood  and  judgment  are  so  well  commingled 
That  they  are  not  a  pipe  for  Fortune's  linger 
To  sound  what  stop  she  please." 

Shakespeare,  himself  perhaps  very  sensitive  and  quickly  moved,  may  have 
appreciated  too  highly  a  different  kind  of  character.  As  to  the  corrup- 
tion of  such  a  character  as  that  here  described,  compare  the  portraiture 
of  Angelo  in  Measure  for  Measure. 

6  They  do  not  expend  their  energies  in  passionate  outbursts. 

7  They  are  the  lords  and  owners  of  their  faces. — Not  giving  ready  expres- 
sion to  emotion. 

8  Others  but  stewards. — Passion  being  lord.  10  Cf.  liv.  u. 

14  Fester. — Corrupt.  Persons  of  the  character  in  question  are  colour- 
less ' '  lilies  "  rather  than  blushing  roses.  This  line  had  previously  appeared 
in  Edward  III.,  a  play  some  have  attributed  in  part  to  Shakespeare. 


254  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


XCV. 

How  sweet  and  lovely  dost  thou  make  tlie  shame 
Which,  like  a  canker  in  the  fragrant  rose, 
Doth  spot  the  beauty  of  thy  budding  name  ! 
O,  in  what  sweets  dost  thou  thy  sins  enclose  ! 
That  tongue  that  tells  the  story  of  thy  days, 
Making  lascivious  comments  on  thy  sport, 
Cannot  dispraise  but  in  a  kind  of  praise  ; 
Naming  thy  name  blesses  an  ill  report. 
O  what  a  mansion  have  those  vices  got, 
Which  for  their  habitation  chose  out  thee  ! 
Where  beauty's  veil  doth  cover  every  blot, 
And  all  things  turns  to  fair,  that  eyes  can  see  ! 

Take  heed,  dear  heart,  of  this  large  privilege  ; 

The  hardest  knife  ill-used  doth  lose  his  edge. 


XCV.  The  scandal  in  relation  to  his  friend,  which  the  poet  had 
previously  mentioned  and  treated  as  slander,  seems  (if  it  be  the 
same)  now  to  have  become  too  obviously  true  to  admit  of  being 
rebutted  or  extenuated.  But  Mr.  W.  H.'s  grace  and  beauty  adorn 
and  transfigure  even  his  vices.  Still  there  is  danger,  lest  the  con- 
sequence of  vicious  indulgence  should  be  felt  at  last. 

2  Canker. — A  worm  preying  upon  and  defacing  the  blossom. 

3  Thy  budding  name.— An  expression  which  seems  to  agree  very  well 
with  the  youth  of  William  Herbert,  now  about  nineteen. 

8  Naming  thy  name,  &c. — In  consequence  of  Mr.  W.  H.'s  well-known 
grace  and  attractiveness. 

12  Turns.— So  Q.  "turnes."  "Beauty's  veil  turns  all  things  to 
fair,"  &c. 

14  The  hardest  knife,  &c. — Alluding  to  the  result  of  excessive  indul- 
gence. 


fftrst  Series.  255 


XCVI. 

SOME  say,  thy  fault  is  youth,  some  wantonness  ; 
Some  say,  thy  grace  is  youth  and  gentle  sport ; 
Both  grace  and  faults  are  lov'd  of  more  and  less  : 
Thou  mak'st  faults  graces  that  to  thee  resort. 
As  on  the  finger  of  a  throned  queen 
The  basest  jewel  will  be  well  esteem'd  ; 
So  are  those  errors  that  in  thee  are  seen, 
To  truths  translated,  and  for  true  things  deem'd. 
How  many  lambs  might  the  stern  wolf  betray, 
If  like  a  lamb  he  could  his  looks  translate  ! 
How  many  gazers  might'st  thou  lead  away, 
If  thou  would'st  use  the  strength  of  all  thy  state  ! 
But  do  not  so  ;  I  love  thee  in  such  sort, 
As  thou  being  mine,  mine  is  thy  good  report. 


XCVI.  Enlarges  on  the  transfigurement  of  Mr.  W.  H.'s  vices,  and 
adverts  in  conclusion  to  the  dangerous  and  seductive  influence  of 
his  example.  Even  his  faults  are  loved  and  admired. 

IF  2  What  some  speak  of  as  thy  "  fault "  and  "  wantonness,"  others  de- 
scribe as  "grace"  and  "gentle  sport." 

3  Are  lov'd  of  more  and  less. — By  persons  of  all  sorts.  First  Part  of  King 
Henry  IV.,  Act  iv.  sc.  3,  line  68, 

"  The  more  and  less  came  in  with  cap  and  knee." 

7>8  So  are  those  errors — to  truths  translated. — So  are  those  vices  changed 
to  virtues. 

10  If  he  could  transform  his  appearance  into  that  of  a  lamb. 

12  The  strength  of  all  thy  state— All  the  power  of  thy  noble  beauty. 

is,  14  The  leading  many  others  astray  might  result  in  a  reputation  incur- 
ably bad.  These  lines  are  repeated  from  xxxvi. 


256  Sbafceepeare's  Sonnets. 


XCVII. 

How  like  a  winter  hath  my  absence  been 
From  thee,  the  pleasure  of  the  fleeting  year  ! 
What  freezings  have  I  felt,  what  dark  days  seen  ! 
What  old  December's  bareness  everywhere  ! 
And  yet  this  time  remov'd  was  summer's  time  ; 
The  teeming  autumn,  big  with  rich  increase, 
Bearing  the  wanton  burden  of  the  prime, 
Like  widowed  wombs  after  their  lord's  decease  : 
Yet  this  abundant  issue  seem'd  to  me 
But  hope  of  orphans,  and  unfather'd  fruit  : 
For  summer  and  his  pleasures  wait  on  thee, 
And,  thou  away,  the  very  birds  are  mute  ; 
Or,  if  they  sing,  'tis  with  so  dull  a  cheer, 
That  leaves  look  pale,  dreading  the  winter's  near. 


XCVII.  In  this  Sonnet,  which  evidently  commences  a  new  group, 
the  poet  states  that  he  has  been  away  from  his  friend  during  the 
summer  and  autumn,  seasons  which  had  seemed  to  him  cheerless  as 
winter.  The  Sonnet  was  written  apparently  either  in  the  autumn 
or  at  the  beginning  of  winter,  but  probably  the  former  (see  lines 
I3»  J4)- 

2  From  thee,— "  who  art  to  me  the  pleasure,"  &c. 
4  Old  Decembers  bareness.—  Cf.  v.  8. 

6_8  The  teeming  autumn,  &c. — Autumn  pregnant  with  the  fruits  pre- 
pared by  summer,  a  season  now  passed  away, 
9- 10  Like  the  hope  of  leaving  posthumous  offspring. 


fffrst  Series.  257 


XCVIII. 

FROM  you  have  I  been  absent  in  the  spring, 

When  proud-pied  April,  dress'd  in  all  his  trim, 

Hath  put  a  spirit  of  youth  in  everything, 

That  heavy  Saturn  laugh'd  and  leap'd  with  him.  4 

Yet  nor  the  lays  of  birds,  nor  the  sweet  smell 

Of  different  flowers  in  odour  and  in  hue, 

Could  make  me  any  summer's  story  tell, 

Or  from  their  proud  lap  pluck  them  where  they  grew  :     8 

Nor  did  I  wonder  at  the  lilies  white, 

Nor  praise  the  deep  vermilion  in  the  rose  ; 

They  were  but  sweet,  but  figures  of  delight, 

Drawn  after  you,  you  pattern  of  all  those.  12 

Yet  seem'd  it  winter  still,  and,  you  away, 
As  with  your  shadow  I  with  these  did  play  :  u 


XCVIII.  It  may  seem  doubtful  whether  this  Sonnet  is  to  be  re- 
garded as  intimating  that  the  poet  had  been  absent  from  his  friend 
during  the  spring  which  preceded  the  summer  and  autumn  men- 
tioned in  the  last  Sonnet.  But  this  was  probably  so,  and  to  the 
poet  it  seemed  winter  notwithstanding  the  song  of  birds  and  the 
odour  and  hue  of  flowers,  though  the  latter  reflected  the  beauty  of 
the  poet's  friend. 

2  Proud-pied. — "Gorgeously  variegated." — SCHMIDT. 
4  Heavy  Saturn  laugh'd,  &c. — Relaxing  for  the  time  his  moroseness 
and  melancholy. 

7  Any  summer's  story  tell. — Recount  any  gay  story  suited  to  the  bright- 
ness of  the  season. 

8  Their  proud  lap. — According  to  Schmidt  (and  no  other  view  seems 
probable),  "lap"  here  is  to  be  understood  of  the  place  where  the  flowers 
grew. 

10  The  deep  vermilion. — "  Vermilion  "  is  generally  used  now  to  denote 
a  red  different  from  that  of  the  rose. 

11, 12  They  were  but  semblances  of  you  both  in  form  and  sweetness.  I 
played  with  them  as  reflecting  your  image. 


258  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

XCIX. 

THE  forward  violet  thus  did  I  chide  : — 
Sweet  thief,  whence  didst  thou  steal  thy  sweet  that  smells, 
If  not  from  my  love's  breath  ?     The  purple  pride 
Which  on  thy  soft  cheek  for  complexion  dwells,  4 

In  my  love's  veins  thou  hast  too  grossly  dyed. 
The  lily  I  condemned  for  thy  hand, 
And  buds  of  marjoram  had  stolen  thy  hair  : 
The  roses  fearfully  on  thorns  did  stand,  s 

One  blushing  shame,  another  white  despair  ; 
A  third,  nor  red  nor  white,  had  stolen  of  both, 
And  to  his  robbery  had  annex'd  thy  breath  ; 
But  for  his  theft,  in  pride  of  all  his  growth  12 

A  vengeful  canker  eat  him  up  to  death. 
More  flowers  I  noted,  yet  I  none  could  see, 
But  sweet  or  colour  it  had  stolen  from  thee.  is 


XCIX.  Enlarges  further  on  what  had  been  said  in  the  last  four 
lines  of  the  preceding  Sonnet. 

This  Sonnet,  it  should  be  observed,  has  fifteen  lines. 

1  Forward. — Early. 

5  Too  grossly. — Too  manifestly. 

6  Condemned  for  having  taken  its  spotless  white  from  thy  hand. 

7  Buds  of  marjoram  had  stolen  thy  hair. — Dowden  supposes  that  Mr. 
W.  H.'s  hair  was  dark  auburn,  this  making  some  approach  to  "dark 

urple-red,"  the  colour  of  the  buds  of  marjoram  before  they  open. 
8_io  The   "fear,"   "shame,"   and   "despair"  are,  of  course,  poetical 
consequences  of  the  imaginary  "theft." 


jfirst  Series.  259 


C. 

WHERE  art  tliou,  Muse,  that  thou  forget'st  so  long 
To  speak  of  that  which  gives  thee  all  thy  might  ? 
Spend'st  thou  thy  fury  on  some  worthless  song, 
Darkening  thy  power,  to  lend  base  subjects  light  I 
Return,  forgetful  Muse,  and  straight  redeem 
In  gentle  numbers  time  so  idly  spent ; 
Sing  to  the  ear  that  doth  thy  lays  esteem, 
And  gives  thy  pen  both  skill  and  argument. 
Rise,  restive  Muse,,  my  love's  sweet  face  survey, 
If  Time  have  any  wrinkle  graven  there  ; 
If  any,  be  a  satire  to  decay, 
And  make  Time's  spoils  despised  everywhere. 

Give  my  love  fame  faster  than-  Time  wastes  life  ; 

So  thou  prevent'st  his  scythe  and  crooked  knife. 


C.  There  was  probably  an  interval  of  some  months  between  this 
and  the  last  Sonnet ;  and  very  likely  there  had  been  no  personal 
interview  between  the  poet  and  his  friend  for  a  still  longer  period 
(lines  9,  10).  The  poet  now  calls  upon  his  Muse  to  resume  her 
strains,  and,  in  defiance  of  Time,  to  celebrate  the  fame  of  his 
friend. 

5  Gives  thee  all  thy  might. — Cf.  Ixxviii.  13.  "Skill  and  argument "  (line 
8),  that  is  both  subject  and  skill  to  describe  and  celebrate. 

3  Thy  fury.  —  Cf.  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,   Act  v.    sc.   i,    lines 
12,  13,— 

"  The  poet's  eye,  in  a  fine  frenzy  rolling1, 
Doth  glance  from  heaven  to  earth,  from  earth  to  heaven,"  &c. 

4  Darkening  thy  power. — Through  the  un worthiness  of  the  subjects. 
There  may  be,  as  has  been  thought,  allusion  to  dramas  on  which  Shake- 
speare had  been  at  work.     But  of  course,  if  this  is  so,  the  language  here 
used  is  that  of  compliment. 

9  Restive. — Q.  "resty."  "  Restive  "  may  be  taken  here  as  equivalent 
to  "uneasy,"  "in  aimless  motion,"  "wandering."  Cf.  "truant  Muse," 
in  the  next  Sonnet.  Shakespeare's  Muse  had  not  been  at  rest,  lines  3,  4, 

11  Be  a  satire  to  decay. — Cause  decay  to  be  disregarded  and  contemned,, 
by  conferring  eternal  fame. 

14  Anticipating  his  agency,  and  rendering  it  abortive.  Time  is  here 
equipped  with  both  scythe  and  sickle. 


260  Sbafcespeare'6  Sonnets. 


CI. 

0  TRUANT  Muse,  what  shall  be  thy  amends, 
For  thy  neglect  of  truth  in  beauty  dy'd  ? 
Both  truth  and  beauty  on  my  love  depends  ; 
So  dost  thou  too,  and  therein  dignify'd. 
Make  answer,  Muse  :  wilt  thou  not  haply  say, 
'  Truth  needs  no  colour,  with  his  colour  fix'd  ; 
Beauty  no  pencil,  beauty's  truth  to  lay  ; 
But  best  is  best,  if  never  intermix'd  1 ' 
Because  he  needs  no  praise,  wilt  thou  be  dumb  ? 
Excuse  not  silence  so  ;  for  Jt  lies  in  thee 
To  make  him  much  outlive  a  gilded  tomb, 
And  to  be  prais'd  of  ages  yet  to  be/ 

Then  do  thy  office,  Muse  ;  I  teach  thee  how 
To  make  him  seem  long  hence  as  he  shows  now. 


CI.  The  Muse  is  rebuked  for  neglecting  the  poet's  friend.  But 
the  answer  is  suggested  that  the  friend  needs  no  eulogy.  Truth 
expresses  herself  in  the  colour  of  his  countenance,  and  true  beauty 
requires  no  pictorial  embellishment.  Description  and  adornment 
would  vitiate  and  adulterate  what  is  pre-eminently  excellent.  Still, 
the  Muse  must  not  decline  the  suggested  task ;  for  it  is  her  privi- 
lege to  confer  long-enduring  renown. 

3  Mr.  W.  H.  is  the  embodiment  of  both  truth  and  beauty  :  he  is  the 
standard  of  both. 

4  And  therein  dignify'd. — And  therein  thou  (my  Muse)  art  dignified. 

6  With  his  colour  fix' d. — His  colour  is  the  embodiment  of  truth. 

7  Beauty  speaks  for  itself,  requiring  the  aid  of  no  pencil  to  prove  by 
painting  the  fact  of  its  existence. 

8  External  praise  or  embellishment  will  be  injurious. 


tffrst  Series*  261 


CII. 

MY  love  is  strengthen'd,  though  more  weak  in  seeming  ; 

I  love  not  less,  though  less  the  show  appear  ; 

That  love  is  merchandis'd,  whose  rich  esteeming 

The  owner's  tongue  doth  publish  everywhere.  4 

Our  love  was  new,  and  then  but  in  the  spring, 

When  I  was  wont  to  greet  it  with  my  lays  ; 

As  Philomel  in  summer's  front  doth  sing, 

And  stops  his  pipe  in  growth  of  riper  days  :  s 

Not  that  the  summer  is  less  pleasant  now 

Than  when  her  mournful  hymns  did  hush  the  night, 

But  that  wild  music  burthens  every  bough, 

And  sweets  grown  common  lose  their  dear  delight.  12 

Therefore,  like  her,  I  sometime  hold  my  tongue, 
Because  I  would  not  dull  you  with  my  song.  u 


CII.  The  poet  excuses  his  previous  silence.  Love  has  increased 
in  strength,  even  though  declarations  and  utterances  of  love  have 
become  fewer.  Affection  becomes  vulgarised  by  too  frequent  pro- 
testations. Sonnets  following  each  other  in  rapid  succession  were 
suitable  at  the  commencement  of  the  friendship,  just  as  the  night- 
ingale fills  the  groves  with  her  music  on  the  approach  of  summer. 
And  the  poet  had  paused  in  his  song,  as  she  does  when  summer 
advances,  not  wishing  to  weary  his  friend. 

3  Merchandis'd. — Is  made  common,  passing  from  one  to  another.  Whose 
rich  esteeming. — The  great  value  in  which  he  holds  it. 

7  In  summer's  front.— In.  very  early  summer. 

8  His  pipe.— Bo  Q.,  though  in  line  10  we  have  "  her  mournefull  himns." 


262  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CHI. 

ALACK  !  what  poverty  my  Muse  brings  forth, 
That  having  such  a  scope  to  show  her  pride, 
The  argument,  all  bare,  is  of  more  worth 
Than  when  it  hath  my  added  praise  beside. 
O  blame  me  not  if  I  no  more  can  write  ! 
Look  in  your  glass,  and  there  appears  a  face 
That  over-goes  my  blunt  invention  quite, 
Dulling  my  lines,  and  doing  me  disgrace. 
Were  it  not  sinful  then,  striving  to  mend, 
To  mar  the  subject  that  before  was  well  1 
For  to  no  other  pass  my  verses  tend, 
Than  of  your  graces  and  your  gifts  to  tell  ; 

And  more,  much  more,  than  in  my  verse  can  sit, 
Your  own  glass  shows  you,  when  you  look  in  it. 


CIII.  In  the  previous  Sonnet  had  been  set  forth  the  thought  that 
poetical  eulogy  and  embellishment  can  add  nothing  to  perfect  truth 
and  beauty.  They  are  to  be  regarded  rather  as  injurious.  The 
thought  here  presented  is  essentially  the  same.  And  the  conclud- 
ing lines  furnish  an  excuse  for  the  poet's  previous  silence. 

1  What  poverty. — What  poor  compositions. 

2  To  show  her  pride. — To  display  the  powers  in  which  she  exults. 

3  The  argument. — The  subject,  i.e.,  the  excellences  of  Mr.  W.  H. 

7  Over-goes. — Transcends.     Blunt. — Dull  and  crass,  unable  to  deal  with 
a  subject  so  exalted. 

8  Dulling  my  lines,   &c. — Through  the   conscious  lack    of   adequate 
power. 

9- 10  Malone  quotes  from  King  Lear  (Act  i.  sc.  4,  line  369), — "Striving 
to  better,  oft  we  mar  what's  well." 

11  To  no  other  pass.— To  no  other  issue.  The  word  here  is  probably 
figurative,  the  metaphor  being  perhaps  derived  from  the  pass  in  fencing. 

13  Sit.— Be  comprised. 


*** 


fffrst  Series.  263 


CIY. 

To  me,  fair  friend,  you  never  can  be  old, 
For  as  you  were,  when  first  your  eye  I  ey'd, 
Such  seems  your  beauty  still.     Three  winters  cold 
Have  from  the  forest  shook  three  summers'  pride  ; 
Three  beauteous  springs  to  yellow  autumn  turn'd, 
In  process  of  the  seasons  have  I  seen, 
Three  April  perfumes  in  three  hot  Junes  burn'd, 
Since  first  I  saw  you  fresh  which  yet  are  green. 
Ah  !  yet  doth  beauty,  like  a  dial  hand, 
Steal  from  his  figure,  and  no  pace  perceiv'd  ; 
So  your  sweet  hue,  which  methinks  still  doth  stand, 
Hath  motion,  and  mine  eye  may  be  deceived. 
For  fear  of  which,  hear  this,  thou  age  unbred, 
Ere  you  were  born,  was  beauty's  summer  dead. 


CIV.  Before  writing  this  Sonnet  the  poet  had  evidently  again  seen 
his  friend.  Three  years  had  elapsed  since  the  commencement  of 
the  acquaintance.  That  interval  did  not  seem  to  have  impaired  in 
the  least  degree  the  beauty  of  the  poet's  friend.  Still  there  must 
have  been  change,  though  unperceived.  And  under  apprehension 
of  such  mutability  the  poet  proclaims  the  pre-eminence  of  his  friend's 
beauty  to  future  generations. 

1  You  never  can  be  old. — Since  your  beauty  seems  to  me  unchanging. 
Cf.  cviii.  13,  14. 

2  Your  eye  I  ey'd. — "Eye,"  it  would  seem,  must  here  be  taken  of  the 
face  generally.     Cf.  i.  5  ;  ix.  8,  and  Troilus  and  Cressida,  Act  v.  sc.  3,  line 
81, — "Look,  how  thou  diest !  look,  how  thine  eye  turns  pale  !  " 

3-7  A  not  improbable  inference  can  be  drawn  from  these  lines  as  to  the 
season  of  the  year  when  Shakespeare  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  W.  H. 
It  will  be  observed  that  the  spring  is  mentioned  twice,  and  from  this  fact 
it  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  first  interview  occurred  in  the  earlier  part 
of  the  year. 

9>  10  A  dial  hand  would  seem  to  be  the  hand  of  a  clock.  Steal  must  be 
taken,  apparently,  as  meaning  "glide  away,"  and  "his  figure"  of  any 
embodiment  of  beauty  ;  so  that  the  statement  in  these  two  lines  would 
seem  to  be  general,  preparatory  to  the  particular  statement  about  Mr.  W. 
H.  in  lines  n,  12.  But  there  may  be  a  play  on  the  two  senses  of  "figure," 
so  that  the  figure  on  the  dial  is  not  lost  sight  of,  even  with  regard  to  the 
gliding  away  of  beauty.  In  Ixxvii.  the  "dial's  shady  stealth"  seems 
to  point  to  a  sun-dial. 

11  Sweet  hue. — Cf.  xx.  7,  and  note. 


264  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 

cv. 

LET?  not  my  love  be  called  idolatry, 
N0r  my  beloved  as  an  idol  show, 
^ince  all  alike  my  songs  and  praises  be, 
To  one,  of  one,  still  such,  and  ever  so. 
/  Kind  is  my  love  to-day,  to-morrow  kind, 
/     Still  constant  in  a  wondrous  excellence  ; 
Therefore  my  verse  to  constancy  confin'd, 
One  thing  expressing,  leaves  out  difference. 
Fair,  kind,  and  true,  is  all  my  argument, 
Fair,  kind,  and  true,  varying  to  other  words ; 
And  in  this  change  is  my  invention  spent, 
Three  themes  in  one,  which  wondrous  scope  affords. 
Fair,  kind,  and  true,  have  often  liv'd  alone, 
Which  three,  till  now,  never  kept  seat  in  one. 


CV.  The  poet  defends  himself  against  the  possible  charge,  that 
he  idolised  his  friend,  by  ever  repeating  the  same  eulogies.  He  re- 
plies that  he  has  a  wide  theme  of  discourse,  since  there  is  in  his 
friend  a  threefold  excellence,  beauty,  kindness,  and  truth,  which 
never  before  were  to  be  found  united. 

1  Idolatry. — Dowden  quotes  W.  S.  Walker, — "  Because  the  continual 
repetition  of  the  same  praises  seemed  like  a  form  of  worship." 
'2  As  an  idol  show. — As  an  idol  exhibited  to  be  worshipped. 

8  Leaves  out  difference, — which,  in  the  particulars  referred  to,  is  not 
supposed  to  exist. 

9  Argument. — Subject,  as  frequently. 


ffirst  Settee,  265 


CVI. 

WHEN  in  the  chronicle  of  wasted  time 
I  see  descriptions  of  the  fairest  wights, 
And  beauty  making  beautiful  old  rhyme, 
In  praise  of  ladies  dead,  and  lovely  knights, 
Then  in  the  blazon  of  sweet  beauty's  best, 
Of  hand,  of  foot,  of  lip,  of  eye,  of  brow, 
I  see  their  antique  pen  would  have  express'd 
Even  such  a  beauty  as  you  master  now. 
So  all  their  praises  are  but  prophecies 
Of  this  our  time,  all  you  prefiguring  ; 
And,  for  they  look'd  but  with  divining  eyes, 
They  had  not  skill  enough  your  worth  to  sing  : 
For  we,  which  now  behold  these  present  days, 
Have  eyes  to  wonder,  but  lack  tongues  to  praise. 


CVI.  The  poet,  reviewing  the  history  of  the  past,  finds,  in  the 
descriptions  therein  contained  of  beauteous  ladies  and  "lovely 
knights,"  types  and  partial  prophetic  adumbrations  of  the  mar- 
vellous beauty  of  his  friend ;  which  is  felt  to  surpass  all  praise. 
Cf.  lix. 

1  Wasted  time. — Time  expended  and  past. 

2  The  fairest  wights. — The  most  beautiful  persons. 

3  Old  poems  still  resplendent  with  the  beauty  celebrated  therein,  or 
blazoned  forth. 

8  You  master  noiv. — You  now  possess  in  completeness. 

11  Divining  eyes. — Eyes  which  could  but  dimly  foresee  the  coming  reve- 
lation of  beauty  in  Mr.  W.  H. 

12  Skill.—  Q.  "still." 


266  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 

evil. 

NOT  mine  own  fears,  nor  the  prophetic  soul 
Of  the  wide  world,  dreaming  on  things  to  come, 
Can  yet  the  lease  of  my  true  love  control, 
Suppos'd  as  forfeit  to  a  confin'd  doom. 
The  mortal  moon  hath  her  eclipse  endur'd, 
And  the  sad  augurs  mock  their  own  presage  ; 
Incertainties  now  crown  themselves  assur'd, 
And  peace  proclaims  olives  of  endless  age. 
Now  with  the  drops  of  this  most  balmy  time 
My  love  looks  fresh,  and  Death  to  me  subscribes, 
Since  spite  of  him  I'll  live  in  this  poor  rhyme, 
While  he  insults  o'er  dull  and  speechless  tribes. 
And  thou  in  this  shalt  find  thy  monument, 
When  tyrants'  crests  and  tombs  of  brass  are  spent. 


CVII.  Just  before,  the  poet  had  spoken  of  history  as  a  prophecy 
of  his  friend.  The  idea  of  prophecy  is  continued,  but  it  takes  now 
a  different  turn  and  approximates  to  foreboding.  Neither  his  own 
fears  nor  the  general  forebodings  of  mankind  and  the  world-soul 
could  have  control  over  the  love  which  bound  him  to  his  friend, 
even  though  this  love  should  seem  to  have  a  limited  term,  like  a 
lease  about  to  be  forfeited.  Death  itself  is  subject  to  the  poet, 
whose  privilege  it  is  to  confer  immortality.  Cf .  Introd.  p.  22. 

l>  2  The  prophetic  soul  of  the  icide  world,  dreaming  on  things  to  come. — 
With  this  passage,  which  is  very  important  in  relation  to  Shakespeare's 
theology,  cf.  Richard  III.,  Act  ii.  sc.  3,  lines  41-44, — 

"  Before  the  days  of  change  still  is  it  so  ; 
By  a  divine  instinct  men's  minds  mistrust 
Ensuing  danger,  as  by  proof  we  see 
The  water  swell  before  a  boisterous  storm." 

Brierre  de  Boismont  says,  in  his  work  Des  Hallucinations,  ed.  1862,  p. 
43,  —  "  II  existe  dans  les  masses  populaires  un  instinct  politique  qui  leur 
fait  pressentir  les  catastrophes  des  societes,  comme  un  instinct  naturel  an- 
nonce  d'avance  aux  animaux  1'approche  des  bouleversements  physiques." 

5  The  mortal  moon. — Taken  by  Massey  and  Minto,  and  with  probable 
correctness,  as  denoting  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  but  the  eclipse  cannot  be  the 
Queen's  death.     The  emphasis  evidently  lies  on  the  word  "  endur'd,"  and 
it  would  rather  seem,  as  pointed  out  by  Dowden,  that  the  moon  has  passed 
through  her  eclipse,  and  is  again  shining.     With  better  reason,  therefore, 
the  reference  may  be  supposed  to  be  to  the  Rebellion  of  Essex. 

6  The  sad  augurs  will  thus  be  those  who  had  predicted  the  success  of 
this  attempt. 

8  Of  endless  age. — With  reference  to  the  future. 

9  This  most  balmy  time. — Written  probably  on  a  mild  spring  or  early 
summer  day,  with  genial  showers. 

12  Dull  and  speechless  tribes. — That  is,  of  the  common  dead. 
14  Crests. — Engraved  on  monumental  tablets. 


jfirst  Scries.  267 


CVIIL 

WHAT'S  in  the  brain  that  ink  may  character, 

Which  hath  not  figur'd  to  thee  my  true  spirit  ? 

What's  new  to  speak,  what  now  to  register, 

That  may  express  my  love,  or  thy  dear  merit  ?  4 

Nothing,  sweet  boy  ;  but  yet,  like  prayers  divine, 

I  must  each  day  say  o'er  the  very  same  ; 

Counting  no  old  thing  old,  thou  mine,  I  thine, 

Even  as  when  first  I  hallow'd  thy  fair  name.  8 

So  that  eternal  love  in  love's  fresh  case 

Weighs  not  the  dust  and  injury  of  age, 

Nor  gives  to  necessary  wrinkles  place, 

But  makes  antiquity  for  aye  his  page  ;  12 

Finding  the  first  conceit  of  love  there  bred, 
Where  time  and  outward  form  would  show  it  dead.      14 


CVIII.  In  expressing  his  love  to  his  friend  the  poet  had  already 
used  all  the  ideas  which  thought  could  devise,  and  all  the  expres- 
sions which  language  could  supply.  But,  notwithstanding  the  con- 
stant repetition,  the  poet  must  not  cease  from  his  strains.  Love  is 
eternal,  knowing  no  change  in  the  object  beloved. 

3  What  now  to  register. — So  Q.,  though  "now"  may  possibly  be  a  mis- 
print for  "new." 

5  Sweet  boy. — Notice  the  indication  of  youth,  though  the  expression 
might  be  suitably  employed  of  a  young  man  of  twenty-one,  retaining  his 
youthful  freshness.  Like  prayers  divine. — Like  prayers  to  the  Deity. 

9  In  love's  fresh  case. — Though  a  change  may  have  occurred  in  the 
appearance  of  the  beloved  one,  placing  the  lover  consequently  in  "  a  fresh 
case,"  a  new  position. 

10,  n  Love  does  not  regard  the  injuries  inflicted  by  age,  or  unavoidable 
wrinkles.  These  injuries  are  merely  external,  like  dust  on  the  surface. 

12  But  makes  antiquity  for  aye  his  page. — Ever  sets  before  him  the 
appearance  of  the  beloved  one  in  that  olden  time  when  the  attachment 
commenced. 

is,  H  Though  the  beauty  of  the  beloved  person  may  be  decayed,  yet 
imagination  conceives  of  it  as  it  was  at  first.  "The  first  conceit  of  love  " 
is  still  produced,  where,  to  the  ordinary  eye,  the  power  to  charm  is  gone. 


268  Sbafcespeate's  Sonnets. 


cix. 

0,  NEVER  say  that  I  was  false  of  heart, 
Though  absence  seem'd  my  flame  to  qualify  ! 
As  easy  might  I  from  myself  depart, 
As  from  my  soul  which  in  thy  breast  doth  lie  : 
That  is  my  home  of  love  :  if  I  have  rang'd, 
Like  him  that  travels,  I  return  again, 
Just  to  the  time,  not  with  the  time  exchang'd, — 
So  that  myself  bring  water  for  my  stain. 
Never  believe,  though  in  my  nature  reign'd 
All  frailties  that  besiege  all  kinds  of  blood, 
That  it  could  so  preposterously  be  stain'd, 
To  leave  for  nothing  all  thy  sum  of  good  ; 
For  nothing  this  wide  universe  I  call, 
Save  thou,  my  rose  ;  in  it  thou  art  my  all. 


CIX.  Rumours  had  probably  reached  Mr.  W.  H.  of  acquaintance 
which  the  poet  had  formed  or  patronage  which  he  had  sought 
during  the  previous  period  of  absence.  And  there  appears  to  have 
been  at  the  time  some  scandal  circulating  concerning  the  poet's 
conduct,  the  precise  nature  of  which  it  may  be  impossible  now 
to  determine.  The  poet  defends  himself  from  the  charge  of  un- 
faithfulness and  inconstancy.  And  whatever  might  be  his  faults 
and  frailties,  none  of  them  could  withdraw  his  affections  from  his 
friend,  in  comparison  with  whom  the  whole  universe  besides  seemed 
nothing. 

2  To  qualify. — To  temper,  to  moderate,  to  abate,  to  soften. — SCHMIDT. 

4  Which  in  thy  breast  doth  lie.—Cf.  xxiv. ,  al. 

6'7  Like  one  returning  from  his  travels  at  the  destined  time,  himself 
constant  and  his  affection  unaltered. 

8  I  wash  out  my  stain  (my  supposed  inconstancy)  by  my  return. 

n,  12  The  poet  could  not  possibly  contract  a  stain  so  deep  and  unnatural 
as  would  be  implied  in  deserting  Mr.  W.  H.  with  all  his  sum  of  excel- 
lences. 

13, 14  of  course)  ft  is  unnecessary  to  comment  on  a  eulogy  so  strained  and 
inflated. 


tffrst  Series.  269 


ex. 

ALAS  !  'tis  true,  I  have  gone  here  and  there, 

And  made  myself  a  motley  to  the  view, 

Goi-'d  mine  own  thoughts,  sold  cheap  what  is  most  dear, 

Made  old  offences  of  affections  new. 

Most  true  it  is,  that  I  have  look'd  on  truth 

Askance  and  strangely  ;  but  by  all  above, 

These  blenches  gave  my  heart  another  youth, 

And  worse  essays  prov'd  thee  my  best  of  love. 

Now  all  is  done  ;  have  what  shall  have  no  end  : 

Mine  appetite  I  never  more  will  grind 

On  newer  proof,  to  try  an  older  friend, 

A  God  in  love,  to  whom  I  am  confin'd. 

Then  give  me  welcome,  next  my  heaven  the  best, 
Even  to  thy  pure  and  most  most  loving  breast. 


CX.  Continues  the  subject  of  the  preceding  Sonnet.  The  poet 
confesses  that  he  had  been  in  error,  and  that  he  had  formed  new 
acquaintance.  But  thus  he  had  been  led  to  prize  still  more  highly 
his  "older  friend,"  Mr.  W.  H.  The  experience  he  thus  had  was 
sufficient,  and  he  was  determined  never  again  to  indulge  in  similar 
wandering. 

1  /  have  gone  here  and  there. — Alluding 'possibly  to  journeys  under- 
taken in  pursuit  of  his  theatrical  profession. 

2  And  made  myself  a  motley  to  the  view. — Whether  Shakespeare  had 
actually  played  the  part  of  a  fool  or  jester,  a  "motley"  (cf.  As  You  Like 
It,  Act  ii.  sc.  7,  line  i2sqq.),  is  perhaps  doubtful.     The  word  may  be  here 
used  figuratively,  in  accord  with  what  follows.     Shakespeare  may  have 
"played  the  fool  "  by  seeking  new  acquaintance. 

3  Gord  mine  oivn  thoughts. — Meaning  probably  "wounded  my  self- 
respect."     Sold  cheap,  &c. — Made  light  of  the  love  of  my  best  friend. 

4  Made  old  offences  of  affections  new. — Dowden  interprets,   "Entered 
into  new  friendships  and  loves,  which  were  transgressions  against  my  old 
love."     But  "  old  offences  "  may  possibly  be  "enduring  offences." 

5  Truth  here  maybe  pretty  nearly    equivalent  to   "virtue,"  though 
"  fidelity  "  is  a  not  improbable  meaning. 

6  Askance  and  strangely. — As  having  parted  acquaintance  therewith. 
Q.   "  Asconce  and  strangely." 

7  Blenches. — Aberrations.     Cf.  "  Sometimes  you  do  blench  from  this  to 
that,"  Measure  for  Measure,  Act  iv.  sc.  5,  line  3.     Gave  my  heart  another 
youth. — The  reaction  ensuing  restored  my  former  state  of  mind. 

8  Essays. — Attempts  at  making  new  friends. 

9  What  shall  have  no  end.— That  is,  my  love  for  you. 

10,  11  i  wju  not  repeat  the  experiment  (however  successful  it  may  have 
been  now)  of  trying  an  older  friend,  by  "grinding  my  appetite"  for  his 
love  through  the  failure  of  other  attempts  at  love  and  friendship. 

13  To  the  most  welcome  refuge  of  all,  next  to  heaven. 


270  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXI. 

0,  FOR  my  sake  do  you  with  Fortune  chide, 
The  guilty  goddess  of  my  harmful  deeds, 
That  did  not  better  for  my  life  provide, 
Than  public  means,  which  publick  manners  breeds. 
Thence  comes  it  that  my  name  receives  a  brand, 
And  almost  thence  my  nature  is  subdu'd 
To  what  it  works  in,  like  the  dyer's  hand  : 
Pity  me  then,  and  wish  I  were  renew'd  ; 
Whilst,  like  a  willing  patient,  I  will  drink 
Potions  of  eysell,  'gainst  my  strong  infection  ; 
No  bitterness  that  I  will  bitter  think, 
Nor  double  penance,  to  correct  correction. 
Pity  me  then,  dear  friend,  and  I  assure  ye, 
Even  that  your  pity  is  enough  to  cure  me. 


CXI.  The  allusions  in  this  Sonnet  to  Shakespeare's  profession  as 
an  actor  are  not  to  be  doubted.  To  this  cause  the  poet  attributes 
his  errors.  Poverty,  compelling  him  to  gain  a  livelihood  by  catering 
for  public  entertainment,  was  the  source  of  his  faults  and  of  the 
scandal  which  they  had  occasioned.  He  would  fain,  at  almost  any 
cost,  purify  himself  from  the  stain.  He  deserves  to  be  pitied  by 
his  friend,  rather  than  to  be  blamed. 

1  With.—  Q.  "wish." 

4  Publick  manners. — Implying  vulgar,  low,  and  probably  disreputable 
conduct. 

8  Renew' d. — Thoroughly  changed. 

10  Eysell. — Vinegar,  a  well-known  supposed  disinfectant.  But  here  the 
idea  is  of  a  medicine  to  arrest  and  neutralise  disease  and  corruption  within. 

12  To  correct  correction. — To  complete  and  perfect  the  correction  of  my 
conduct.  Similarly  we  say,  "To  make  assurance  doubly  sure." 

14  Implying  probably  that  the  cause  of  offence,  whatever  it  may  have 
been,  was  superficial,  and  not  deeply  seated  in  Shakespeare's  nature. 


ffirst  Series.  271 


CXII. 

YOUR  love  and  pity  doth  the  impression  fill 
Which  vulgar  scandal  stamp'd  upon  my  brow  ; 
For  what  care  I  who  calls  me  well  or  ill, 
So  you  o'er-green  my  bad,  my  good  allow  ? 
You  are  my  all-the-world,  and  I  must  strive 
To  know  my  shames  and  praises  from  your  tongue  ; 
None  else  to  me,  nor  I  to  none  alive, 
That  my  steel'd  sense  or  changes,  right  or  wrong. 
In  so  profound  abysm  I  throw  all  care 
Of  other's  voices,  that  my  adder's  sense 
To  critic  and  to  flatterer  stopped  are. 
Mark  how  with  my  neglect  I  do  dispense  : — 
You  are  so  strongly  in  my  purpose  bred, 
That,  all  the  world  besides,  methinks  y'  are  dead. 


CXII.  The  request  which  the  poet  had  made  for  his  friend's 
pity  is  supposed  to  have  been  complied  with.  Satisfied  in  this 
respect,  he  strongly  asserts  that  he  cares  nothing  what  others  may 
think  or  say  concerning  him. 

11  2  Showing  how  deeply  the  poet  felt  the  scandal :  it  was  as  if  he  had 
been  branded  on  the  forehead. 

4  O'er-green  my  bad. — Extenuate  what  is  evil,  kindly  screening  it  as  with 
leaves. 

6  To  recognise  you  as  the  only  judge  of  my  conduct. 

8  Steel'd. — Hardened.  Or  changes,  right  or  wrong. — "Either  to  what 
is  right,  or  to  what  is  wrong. " — STEEVENS. 

10  My  adder's  sense.— Alluding  to  the  adder's  alleged  deafness. 

13  Bred  may  be  taken  as  implying  incorporation  ;  and  thus  the  sense 
may  be  given,  "My  view  of  my  own  conduct  is  so  thoroughly  identified 
with  your  judgment ;  and  my  future  course  of  action  depends  so  exclu- 
sively on  you." 

14  The  poet  turns  and  addresses  the  world.     Cf.  civ.  13,  14.     Y'  are  is 
equivalent^  "you  are." 


272  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXIII. 

SINCE  I  left  you,  mine  eye  is  in  my  mind, 
And  that  which  governs  me  to  go  about 
Doth  part  his  function,  and  is  partly  blind, 
Seems  seeing,  but  effectually  is  out ; 
For  it  no  form  delivers  to  the  heart 
Of  bird,  of  flower,  or  shape,  which  it  doth  latch  : 
Of  his  quick  objects  hath  the  mind  no  part, 
Nor  his  own  vision  holds  what  it  doth  catch  ; 
For  if  it  see  the  rud'st  or  gentlest  sight, 
The  most  sweet  favour,  or  defornied'st  creature, 
The  mountain  or  the  sea,  the  day  or  night, 
The  crow,  or  dove,  it  shapes  them  to  your  feature. 
Incapable  of  more,  replete  with  you, 
My  most  true  mind  thus  maketh  mine  untrue. 


CXIII.  The  poet  asserts  that,  even  during  the  period  of  absence, 
his  heart  had  been  thoroughly  with  his  friend,  whom  he  had  seen  in 
everything  and  everywhere. 

1  Mine  eye  is  in  my  mind. — Cf.  xlvii.  7,  8, — 

"  Another  time  mine  eye  is  my  heart's  guest, 
And  in  his  thoughts  of  love  doth  share  a  part." 

z<  8  My  bodily  eye  is  partly  blind. 
4  Is  out — Is  out  of  order. 

6  Latch. — Keceive  and  hold.     Q.  has  "lack,"  a  reading  apparently  im- 
practicable.     Cf.  Macbeth,  Act  iv.  sc.  3,  lines  193-195,— "Words  that 
would  be  howl'd  out  in  the  desert  air,  where  hearing  should  not  latch 
them." 

7  His  quick  objects. — Objects  perceived  as  the  eye  quickly  moves. 

10  The  most  sweet  favour. — The  sweetest  outward  appearance.  Cf. 
cxxv.  5. 

14  Mine  untrue. — A  tempting  emendation  has  been  suggested — "mind 
untrue."  But  the  sense  required  would  rather  seem  to  be  that  the  mind 
makes  the  eyes  untrue.  It  is  not  easy  to  suppose  that  ' '  mine  "  was  origi- 
nally "m"  eyen,"  equivalent  to  "my  eyes,"  and  pronounced  as  one 
syllable.  It  is  perhaps,  on  the  whole,  best,  even  if  this  view  be  not  quite 
unobjectionable,  to  take  "untrue  "  as  a  substantive,  and  to  take  as  the 
meaning  that  the  poet's  mind,  true  to  his  friend,  causes  his  untruthful- 
ness  ;  causes  him  to  be  untruthful  to  the  actual  objects  around  him.  So 
Malone,  who  quotes  Measure  for  Measure  (Act  ii.  sc.  4,  line  170), — 

"Say  what  you  can,  my  false  outweighs  your  true." 


3First  Series.  273 


CXIV. 

OR  whether  doth  my  mind,  being  crown'd  with  you, 
Drink  up  the  monarch's  plague,  this  flattery  ? 
Or  whether  shall  I  say  mine  eye  saith  true, 
And  that  your  love  taught  it  this  alchymy, 
To  make  of  monsters  and  things  indigest, 
Such  cherubins  as  your  sweet  self  resemble, 
Creating  every  bad  a  perfect  best, 
As  fast  as  objects  to  his  beams  assemble  ? 
O,  'tis  the  first ;  'tis  flattery  in  my  seeing, 
And  my  great  mind  most  kingly  drinks  it  up  : 
Mine  eye  well  knows  what  with  his  gust  is  'greeing, 
And  to  his  palate  doth  prepare  the  cup  : 
If  it  be  poison'd,  'tis  the  lesser  sin 
That  mine  eye  loves  it,  and  doth  first  begin. 


CXIV.  In  the  joy  of  reconciliation  the  poet  imagines  himself  a 
monarch  crowned  with  his  friend's  love.  His  eye,  like  a  king's 
cup-bearer  desiring  to  please  his  master  and  humour  his  taste,  pre- 
sents only  the  image  of  his  friend.  Cf.  cxiii. 

2  This  flattery. — Thus  deceiving  itself,  by  fancying  that  to  be  real 
which  is  only  an  illusion,  like  a  monarch  drinking  in  the  false  flattery  of 
his  courtiers. 

3  Shall  I  say  that  the  cause  is  in  the  eye  rather  than  in  the  mind  1 
This  question  receives  virtually  an  affirmative  answer  in  line  9. 

6  What  is  said  in  this  line  might  suit  very  well  a  young  man  of  only 
twenty  or  twenty-one,  but  would  scarcely  agree  with  a  more  fully  de- 
veloped manhood. 

8  As  fast  as  objects  present  themselves  to  view. 

s'Tis  the  first.— The  mind,  whose  taste  ("gust")  the  yee  flatters, 
willingly  receives  the  false  image  prepared  by  the  eye. 

10  Cf .  line  i.  The  comparison  with  the  king  and  his  cup-bearer  is  still 
kept  in  view. 

14  Still  the  eye  is  a  willing  agent,  and,  like  a  cup-bearer,  tastes  first. 


274  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


cxv. 

THOSE  lines  that  I  before  have  writ  do  lie, 
Even  those  that  said  I  could  not  love  you  dearer  ; 
Yet  then  my  judgment  knew  no  reason  why 
My  most  full  flame  should  afterwards  burn  clearer. 
But  reckoning  time,  whose  million'd  accidents 
Creep  in  'twixt  vows,  and  change  decrees  of  kings, 
Tan  sacred  beauty,  blunt  the  sharp'st  intents, 
Divert  strong  minds  to  the  course  of  altering  thing*  : 
Alas  !  why,  fearing  of  Time's  tyranny, 
Might  I  not  then  say,  '  Now  I  love  you  best/ 
When  I  was  certain  o'er  incertainty, 
Crowning  the  present,  doubting  of  the  rest  ? 
Love  is  a  babe  ;  then  might  I  not  say  so, 
To  give  full  growth  to  that  which  still  doth  grow. 


CXV.  The  poet  retracts  what  he  had  previously  written  to  the 
effect  that  his  love  for  his  friend  was  then  as  intense  as  possible. 
His  affection  has  now  become  stronger  than  ever. 

5  Reckoning  time. — Taking  account  of  time  as  ever  changing  the  aspect 
and  course  of  things,  dulling  the  strongest  affection,  &c.  Schmidt  justly 
connects  the  "reckoning  "  with  the  "fearing  of  time's  tyranny  "  of  line  9. 
Million  d  accidents. — "  Millionfold,  innumerable."— SCHMIDT,  Lex.  The 
change  of  "  million'd  "to  "  million  "  would  injure  the  line. 

8  Divert  strong  minds  to  the  course  of  altering  things. — Firm  resolutions 
are  changed  by  a  change  of  circumstances.  Cf.  the  Player  King's  speech 
in  Hamlet,  Act  iii.  sc.  2,  lines  210,  211 — 

"  This  world  is  not  for  aye,  nor  'tis  not  strange, 
That  even  our  loves  should  with  our  fortunes  change,"  &c.  ; 

and  Troilus  and  Cressida,  Act  iv.  sc.  5,  end, — "Sweet  love  is  food  for 
Fortune's  tooth." 

11  O'er  incertainty. — Presuming  on  the  uncertainty  of  the  future. 

12  Croioning  the  present.— By  pronouncing  it  best. 

13  Love  is  a  babe. — Having  a  babe's  power  of  growth.     The  poet  may 
have  in  view  the  common  representations  of  Cupid  as  a  child.     Might  I 
not  say  so. — I  ought  not  to  have  said  so. 

14  To  give  full  growth.— To  suppose  to  be  fully  grown. 


fffrst  Series,  275 


CXVI. 

LET  me  not  to  the  marriage  of  true  minds 

Admit  impediments.     Love  is  not  love 

Which  alters  when  it  alteration  finds, 

Or  bends  with  the  remover  to  remove  : 

O  no  ;  it  is  an  ever-fixed  mark, 

That  looks  on  tempests,  and  is  never  shaken  ; 

It  is  the  star  to  every  wandering  bark, 

Whose  worth's  unknown,  although  his  height  be  taken. 

Love's  not  Time's  fool,  though  rosy  lips  and  cheeks 

Within  his  bending  sickle's  compass  come  ; 

Love  alters  not  with  his  brief  hours  and  weeks, 

But  bears  it  out  even  to  the  edge  of  doom. 

If  this  be  error,  and  upon  me  proved, 

I  never  writ,  nor  no  man  ever  loved. 


CXVI.  This  Sonnet,  which  easily  connects  itself  with  that  pre- 
ceding, celebrates  the  unfailing  constancy  of  true  love. 

2  Impediments. — The  "impediments"  here  spoken  of  seem  to  be  identi- 
cal with  the  "  altering  things  "  of  line  8  in  the  last  Sonnet.     The  poet 
cannot  admit  that  these  really  affect  and  weaken  true  love. 

3  When  it  alteration  finds  in  the  loved  object. 

4  Or  is  affected  by  absence. 

5-7  Love  is  like  a  lighthouse  unshaken  by  the  winds  and  waves,  and 
with  its  light  shining  over  the  waters,  like  a  star.  Others  suppose  that 
the  star  is  in  the  heavens. 

8  Height. — This  word,   I   suppose,  still   has   in  view  the   lighthouse. 
Dowden  remarks,  "Height,  it  should  be   observed,  was  used  by  Eliza- 
bethan writers  in  the  sense  of  value,  and  the  word  may  be  used  here  in  a 
double  sense,  altitude  (of  the  star)  and  value  (of  love),  '  love  whose  worth 
is  unknown,  however  it  may  be  valued.'  " 

9  Love's  not  Time's  fool. — Love  is  not  weakened  or  destroyed  by  the 
lapse  of  time  (line  n).     The  "  fool  of  Time  "  is  that  which  Time  can  do 
what  he  pleases  with.     "Rosy  lips  and  cheeks"  come  within  his  power, 
within  reach  of  his  curved  sickle.     Contrast  i  Hen.  IV.,  Act  v.  sc.  4, 
line  81, — "And  thought's  the  slave  of  life,  and  life  Time's  fool." 

12  Bears  it  out. — Endures.     The  edge  of  doom  may  be  taken  as  meaning 
"  the  very  end,  "  whether  of  life  or  of  the  world,  the  day  of  doom. 

13  Upon  me  proved. — Proved  in  my  case  by  my  ceasing  to  love. 

is,  14  The  description  of  love  I  have  given  is  as  true  as  that  I  have  put 
my  hand  to  paper  to  write,  &c. 


276  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXVII. 

ACCUSE  me  thus  ;  that  I  have  scanted  all 

Wherein  I  should  your  great  deserts  repay  ; 

Forgot  upon  your  dearest  love  to  call, 

Whereto  all  bonds  do  tie  me  day  by  day  ;  4 

That  I  have  frequent  been  with  unknown  minds, 

And  given  to  time  your  own  dear-purchas'd  right ; 

That  I  have  hoisted  sail  to  all  the  winds 

Which  should  transport  me  farthest  from  your  sight.         s 

Book  both  my  wilfulness  and  errors  down, 

And  on  just  proof,  surmise  accumulate, 

Bring  me  within  the  level  of  your  frown, 

But  shoot  not  at  me  in  your  wakened  hate  :  12 

Since  my  appeal  says,  I  did  strive  to  prove 
The  constancy  and  virtue  of  your  love.  14 


CXVII.  The  poet  admits  that  he  had  neglected  to  pay  due  regard 
to  his  friend,  and  had  allowed  new  companions  to  engross  too  much 
of  his  attention.  He  is  willing  that  his  friend  should  consider  his 
conduct  as  not  without  blame  ;  but  he  palliates  the  fault,  by  assert- 
ing that  he  wished  to  prove  the  reality  and  constancy  of  his  friend's 
affection. 

I  That  I  have  scanted  all. — That  I  have  been  negligent  in  all  particu- 
lars, &c. 

6  Given  to  time)  according  toDowden,  means,  "given  to  society,  to  the 
world,"  or  "  given  away  to  temporary  occasion  what  is  your  property,  and 
therefore  an  heirloom  for  eternity."    But  the  emendation  which  Staunton 
suggests,  "given  to  them,"  seems  not  improbable.     Your  o^vn  dear pur- 
chas'd  right. — Though  it  is  not  pleasant  to  attach  a  material  signification 
to  these  words,  yet,  taking  into  account  what  is  recorded  of  Lord  Pem- 
broke's liberality  towards  men  of  genius,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  there 
is  an  allusion  to  previous  presents. 

7  Hoisted  sail,  &c. — Availed  myself  of  every  occasion,  &c. 

9  My  wilfulness. — My  self-willed  and  unreasonable  conduct,  as  alluded 
to  in  previous  lines. 

10  The  meaning  may  be,  "Add  reasonable  conjecture  to  what  you  can 
prove. " 

II  Within  the  level  of  your  frown. — Within  the  scope  or  reach  of  your 
frown.     Malone  compares, — 

"  The  harlot  king 

Is  quite  beyond  my  arm  :  out  of  the  blank 
And  level  of  my  brain  "  ( Winter's  Tale,  Act  ii.  sc.  3,  lines  4-6). 


Series,  277 


CXVIII. 

LIKE  as,  to  make  our  appetites  more  keen, 
With  eager  compounds  we  our  palate  urge  : 
As,  to  prevent  our  maladies  unseen, 
We  sicken  to  shun  sickness,  when  we  purge  ; 
Even  so,  being  full  of  your  ne'er-cloying  sweetness, 
To  bitter  sauces  did  I  frame  my  feeding, 
And,  sick  of  welfare,  found  a  kind  of  meetness 
To  be  diseas'd,  ere  that  there  was  true  needing. 
Thus  policy  in  love,  to  anticipate 
The  ills  that  were  not,  grew  to  faults  assured, 
And  brought  to  medicine  a  healthful  state, 
Which,  rank  of  goodness,  would  by  ill  be  cured. 
But  thence  I  learn,  and  find  the  lesson  true, 
Drugs  poison  him  that  so  fell  sick  of  you. 


CXVIII.  The  poet  had  previously  (ex.)  spoken  of  "grinding  his 
appetite  "  during  the  period  of  absence.  He  now  changes  the 
figure.  He  had  been  taking  a  tonic  to  sharpen  his  appetite,  or  a 
prophylactic  medicine  to  prevent  disease.  But  he  had  learned  that 
the  expedient  he  had  resorted  to  was  premature  and  unnecessary, 
and  that  the  drugs  he  had  employed — that  is,  the  companions  and 
pursuits  which  had  engaged  his  time  and  attention — were,  under 
the  circumstances,  poisonous. 

2  Eager. — Sharp,  acid.  Cf.  Ham.,  Act  i.  sc.  5,  line  69, — "And  curd, 
like  eager  droppings  into  milk." 

4  Sicken  to  shun  sickness. — Make  ourselves  ill  with  drugs.     So  "To  be 
diseas'd,"  line  8. 

5  Netr  cloying. — Repels  the  supposition  that  he  had  been  really  satiated 
with  his  friend's  society.     So,  in  the  next  line  but  one,  "  sick  of  welfare," 
and  in  line  8,  "ere  that  there  was  true  needing." 

9' l?  The  policy  spoken  of  resulted  in  unquestionable  faults,  disorders  of 
moral  health. 

11  And  had  recourse  to  medicine,  though  in  a  state  of  health. 

12  Rank  of  goodness  may  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  "  sick  of  welfare" 
in  line  7. 

14  That  so  fell  sick. — Being  "  full  of  your  ne'er-cloying  sweetness." 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


cxix. 

WHAT  potions  have  I  drunk  of  Syren  tears, 
Distill'd  from  lymbecks  foul  as  hell  within, 
Applying  fears  to  hopes,  and  hopes  to  fears, 
Still  losing  when  I  saw  myself  to  win  ! 
What  wretched  errors  hath  my  heart  committed, 
Whilst  it  hath  thought  itself  so  blessed  never  ! 
How  have  mine  eyes  out  of  their  spheres  been  fitted, 
In  the  distraction  of  this  madding  fever ! 
0  benefit  of  ill  !  now  I  find  true 
That  better  is  by  evil  still  made  better  ; 
And  ruin'd  love,  when  it  is  built  anew, 
Grows  fairer  than  at  first,  more  strong,  far  greater. 
So  I  return  rebuk'd  to  my  content, 
And  gain  by  ills  thrice  more  than  I  have  spent. 


CXIX.  Manifestly  in  connection  with  what  precedes.  The  poet, 
it  would  seem,  had  been  deceived  and  ensnared  by  woman's  tears. 
Entangled  by  such  wiles,  he  had  committed  one  error  after  another, 
and  had  proved  the  truth  of  his  own  words  (cxxix.), — 

"  Mad  in  pursuit,  and  in  possession  so  ; 
Had,  having,  and  in  quest  to  have,  extreme  ; 
A  bliss  in  proof, — and  prov'd,  a  very  woe  ; 
Before,  a  joy  propos'd  ;  behind,  a  dream." 

The  details  alluded  to  seem  hopelessly  obscure  ;  but  it  is  probable 
that  we  are  here  brought  close  to  the  causes  of  the  scandal  to 
which  cxii.  and  cxxi.  relate.  In  the  end  the  poet  learned  to  prize 
more  highly  than  ever  before  the  love  of  his  friend. 

1  Drunk. — The  tears  had  influenced  him  so  thoroughly,  that  they  had 
been,  as  it  were,  imbibed. 

2  Lymbecks. — Alembics  or  stills.      Foul  as  hell  within. — Cf.  what  is 
said  of  the  poet's  dark  mistress  in  the  second  series  of  Sonnets, — "In 
nothing  art  thou  black,  save  in  thy  deeds"  (cxxxi.   13)  ;  "Who  art  as 
black  as  hell,  as  dark  as  night  "  (cxlvii.  14). 

3  Now  letting  fear  give  way  to  hope,  and  now  hope  to  fear. 

4  Still  losing,  &c. — Probably  on  account  of  the  unworthiness  of  the 
objects  won. 

7  fitted. — "  Worked  and  vexed  by  paroxysms." — SCHMIDT.  Comparison 
has  been  made  of  Pericles,  Act  ii.  so.  i,  line  58,  "If  it  be  a  day  fits  you," 
&c.  But  there  appears  to  be  in  our  passage  the  idea  of  strange  surprises. 

3  This  madding  fever. — Cf.  "  My  love  is  as  a  fever,"  &c.,  and, — 

"  Past  cure  I  am,  now  reason  is  past  cure, 
And  frantic  mad  with  evermore  unrest,"  &c.  (cxlvii.) 

10  That  better,  &c. — The  better  love  is  manifestly  the  love  to  his  friend. 
13  To  my  content. — With  a  feeling  of  contentment  and  satisfaction. 


ffirst  Series.  279 


cxx. 

THAT  you  were  once  unkind,  befriends  me  now, 
And  for  that  sorrow,  which  I  then  did  feel, 
Needs  must  I  under  my  transgression  bow, 
Unless  my  nerves  were  brass  or  hammered  steel. 
For  if  you  were  by  my  unkindness  shaken, 
As  I  by  yours,  y'  have  pass'd  a  hell  of  time  : 
And  I,  a  tyrant,  have  no  leisure  taken 
To  weigh  how  once  I  suffer'd  in  your  crime. 
O  that  our  night  of  woe  might  have  remembered 
My  deepest  sense,  how  hard  true  sorrow  hits, 
And  soon  to  you,  as  you  to  me  then  tendered 
The  humble  salve  which  wounded  bosoms  fits  ! 

But  that  your  trespass  now  becomes  a  fee  ; 

Mine  ransoms  yours  and  yours  must  ransom  me. 


CXX.  The  poet  urges  that  the  pain  he  had  once  suffered  from 
his  friend's  conduct  (cf.  xl.,  &c.)  should  be  taken  into  account  with 
respect  to  the  seeming  want  of  regard  which  he  had  displayed 
during  the  period  of  separation.  The  one  must  be  taken  as  a  set- 
off  against  the  other. 

3  Thinking  that  I  have  now  inflicted  on  you  similar  pain. 

4  Unless  my  nerves,  &c.— Unless  I  were  destitute  of  feeling. 

6  Y  have  pass'd  a  hell  of  time. — Cf.  "Though  waiting  so  be  hell" 
(Iviii.  13)  ;  and  Lucrece,  1287  and  1288  : — 

' '  And  that  deep  torture  may  be  call'd  a  Hell, 
When  more  is  felt  than  one  hath  power  to  tell." 

7>  8  And  I  a  tyrant,  &c. — I,  like  a  tyrant,  have  been  regardless  of  the 
pain  I  inflicted,  not  even  sparing  time  to  think  of  the  suffering  I  once 
endured. 

9>  10  Our  night  of  woe.  —  On  that  former  occasion.  The  expression  "  night 
of  woe"  may  be  metaphorical,  though  it  is,  of  course,  possible  that  refer- 
ence may  be  made  to  some  particular  night.  Miyht  have  remembered  my 
deepest  sense. — Might  have  caused  my  deepest  sense  to  remember. 

11  And  that  I  had  soon  tendered  to  you,  as  you  tendered  to  me  on  that 
former  occasion. 

12  The  humble  salve. — The  humble  apology.     Fits. — Suits. 

13  That  former  trespass  of  yours  against  me  has  become  something 
which  I  can  offer  as  a  payment  and  ransom  for  my  own  offence. 


280  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXXI. 

'Tis  better  to  be  vile,  than  vile  esteemed, 
When  not  to  be  receives  reproach  of  being, 
And  the  just  pleasure  lost,  which  is  so  deemed 
Not  by  our  feeling,  but  by  others'  seeing. 
For  why  should  others'  false  adulterate  eyes 
Give  salutation  to  my  sportive  blood  ? 
Or  on  my  frailties  why  are  frailer  spies, 
Which  in  their  wills  count  bad  what  I  think  good  1 
No ; — I  am  that  I  am  ;  and  they  that  level 
At  my  abuses,  reckon  up  their  own  : 
I  may  be  straight,  though  they  themselves  be  bevel  ; 
By  their  rank  thoughts  my  deeds  must  not  be  shown 
Unless  this  general  evil  they  maintain, — 
All  men  are  bad,  and  in  their  badness  reign. 


CXXI.  Separated  to  some  extent  from  what  precedes  and  from 
what  follows.  The  poet,  deeply  moved  at  the  scandal  circulated 
concerning  him,  asserts  that  an  evil  reputation  is  worse  than  actual 
vileness.  He  does  not  claim  to  be  blameless,  but  he  was  traduced 
by  persons  worse  than  himself,  who  were  therefore  unfit  to  criticise 
and  censure  his  conduct.  But  perhaps  they  would  deny  the  exist- 
ence of  distinctions  in  guilt  or  immorality,  asserting  that  all  men 
are  alike  corrupt,  exulting  and  triumphing  in  evil. 

2  When  he  who  is  not  vile  incurs  the  reproach  of  being  so. 

8- 4  And  the  just  pleasure, — that  is,  of  self-respect  or  of  an  approving 
conscience.  Which  is  so  deemed  looks  back  to  what  had  been  said  in  lines 
i  and  2  :  "When  the  character  which  is  not  vile  is  so  deemed,  looked  at 
by  the  eyes  of  others  ;  though  all  the  time  our  own  conscience  tells  us 
that  we  are  misjudged,  and  that  we  are  not  really  vile." 

5  Adulterate.  —Equivalent  to  ' '  adulterous. "    Or  in  a  more  general  sense, 
as  "  And  bastards  of  his  foul  adulterate  heart  "  (Lover's  Complaint,  line 

175)- 

6  Take  account  of  and  criticise  what  my  somewhat  warm  nature  may 
do  in  gay  or  less  restrained  moments. 

8  In  their  wills. — These  words  maybe  equivalent  not  merely  to   "in 
their    minds,"  but  with    the  added  notion   "in   accordance  with  their 
wishes  " — "they  would  like  to  make  me  out  bad." 

9  No; — /  am  that  Jam.— With  all  my  frailties,  but  yet  not  without 
something  of  good.     Level. — So  as  to  take  aim.    Of.  cxvii.  n. 

11  They  should  not  think  that  because  they  diverge  from  the  straight 
line  (of  rectitude)  I  must  necessarily  do  the  same. 

13  Their  rank  thoughts. — This,  as  well  as  preceding  expressions,  shows 
that  the  charge  brought  against  the  poet  involved  sensuality  in  some 
form  or  other. 


jfirst  Series.  281 


CXXII. 

THY  gift,  thy  tables,  are  within  my  brain 
Full  character'd  with  lasting  memory, 
Which  shall  above  that  idle  rank  remain, 
Beyond  all  date,  even  to  eternity  : 
Or  at  the  least  so  long  as  brain  and  heart 
Have  faculty  by  nature  to  subsist ; 
Till  each  to  ras'd  oblivion  yield  his  part 
Of  thee,  thy  record  never  can  be  miss'd. 
That  poor  retention  could  not  so  much  hold, 
Nor  need  I  tallies,  thy  dear  love  to  score  ; 
Therefore  to  give  them  from  me  was  I  bold, 
To  trust  those  tables  that  receive  thee  more  ; 
To  keep  an  adjunct  to  remember  thee, 
Were  to  import  forgetfulness  in  me. 


CXXII.  The  poet  had  received  from  his  friend  tablets  for  the 
registry  of  memoranda.  This  present  the  poet  had,  probably  during 
the  period  of  separation,  given  away  to  some  other  person — perhaps 
after  writing  xcix. ,  thinking  that  the  breach  was  final.  The  friend 
seems  to  have  heard  that  the  "  tables  "  had  been  thus  given  away. 
Shakespeare  now  defends  his  conduct.  To  have  kept  the  "  tables  " 
would  have  implied  that  he  could  not  trust  his  memory.  They 
were  superfluous.  The  record  of  his  friend  was  on  the  tables  of 
the  heart,  written  in  characters  never  to  be  effaced. 

1  The  record  of  thee,  instead  of  being  written  on  the  tables,  is  within 
my  brain. 

3  That  idle  rank. — "That  poor  dignity  (of  tables  written  upon  with 
pen  or  pencil)." — DOWDEN. 

9  That  poor  retention. — That  imperfect  way  of  keeping  facts  in  memory, 
and  of  recording  deep  affection. 

10  Tallies. — Schmidt  explains  the  word  tally  as  "a  stick  on  which 
notches  or  scores  are  cut  to  keep  accounts  by,"  and  he  refers  in  illustra- 
tion to  Henry  VI.,  Second  Part,  Act iv.  sc.  7,  line  39, — "Our  forefathers 
had  no  other  books  but  the  score  and  the  tally." 


282  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXXIII. 

No  !  Time,  thou  shall  not  boast  that  I  do  change  : 

Thy  pyramids  built  up  with  newer  might 

To  me  are  nothing  novel,  nothing  strange  ; 

They  are  but  dressings  of  a  former  sight.  4 

Our  dates  are  brief,  and  therefore  we  admire 

What  thou  dost  foist  upon  us  that  is  old  ; 

And  rather  make  them  born  to  our  desire, 

Than  think  that  we  before  have  heard  them  told.  8 

Thy  registers  and  thee  I  both  defy, 

Not  wondering  at  the  present  nor  the  past ; 

For  thy  records  and  what  we  see  do  lie, 

Made  more  or  less  by  thy  continual  haste  :  12 

This  I  do  vow,  and  this  shall  ever  be, 

I  will  be  true,  despite  thy  scythe  and  thee  :  14 


CXXIII.  In  this  Sonnet,  which  is  probably  to  be  connected  with 
that  next  before,  the  poet  reverts  to  the  doctrine  which  had  appeared 
previously,  in  lix.,  that  there  is  nothing  new,  but  that  all  things 
recur  in  unending  succession.  Things  grand  and  stupendous  which 
seem  to  be  new  are  not  really  such.  They  are  but  re-presentations, 
dressings-up  again,  of  what  we  have  seen  before,  though  the  sight 
may  have  passed  from  our  memory,  and  though  there  may  be  no 
historical  record.  The  power  of  Time,  thus  limited  to  bringing 
back  again  what  is  old,  the  poet  defies. 

2  Thy  pyramids. — To  be  understood  of  anything  grand  and  stupendous. 
Newer  might. — Power  lately  exercised. 

5  Dates. — Terms  of  existence.     Admire. — Wonder  at. 

7  And  rather  make  them  born  to  our  desire. — And  prefer  to  regard  them 
as  really  new,  just  "born."  Q.  "borne." 

11  What  we  see  do  lie. — By  pretending  to  be  new  when  not  really  so. 

12  Made  more  or  less  by  thy  continual  haste. — Thus  preventing  an  accu- 
rate register  from  being  kept. 

"  Scythe.— Q.  "syeth." 


fftrst  Series*  283 


CXXIV. 

IF  my  dear  love  were  but  the  child  of  state, 
It  might  for  Fortune's  bastard  be  unfather'd, 
As  subject  to  Time's  love,  or  to  Time's  hate, 
Weeds  among  weeds,  or  flowers  with  flowers  gather'd. 
No  ;  it  was  builded  far  from  accident ; 
It  suffers  not  in  smiling  pomp,  nor  falls 
Under  the  blow  of  thralled  discontent, 
Whereto  the  inviting  time  our  fashion  calls  : 
It  fears  not  policy,  that  heretick, 
Which  works  on  leases  of  short-numbered  hours, 
But  all  alone  stands  hugely  politick, 
That  it  nor  grows  with  heat,  nor  drowns  with  showers. 
To  this  I  witness  call  the  fools  of  Time, 
Which  die  for  goodness,  who  have  liv'd  for  crime. 


CXXIV.  Apparently  in  continuation.  The  poet  declares  that  his 
love  for  his  friend  is  not  subject  to  the  mutations  which  attend 
courtiers  and  state  affairs.  It  was  not  the  result  of  accident  or 
policy  ;  and  it  fears  not  the  scythe  of  Time. 

l>  2  If  my  love  were  the  child  of  state,  it  might  have  yielded  up  its  posi- 
tion in  relation  to  the  state  to  whatever  Fortune,  in  her  endless  changes, 
might  produce. 

3  As  subject  to  Time's  love  or  to  Time's  hate.—  That  is,  as  being  the 
"  fool  of  Time  "  (line  13). 

4  To  be  cut  down  by  the  scythe  of  Time  at  his  pleasure,  and  accordingly, 
as  hated  or  loved,  to  lie  a  weed  among  weeds,  or  a  flower  among  flowers. 

5  No  ;  it  u-as  builded,  &c. — Reverting  probably  to  the  pyramid  spoken 
of  in  the  last  Sonnet. 

6  Smiling  pomp. — Notice  that  the  idea  of  "  state  "  is  still  kept  in  view. 

7  Under  the  blow  of  thralled  discontent.     Alluding  pretty  evidently  to 
the  discontent  existing  after  the  death  of  Essex.     The  discontent  was 
"  thralled,"  as  being  kept  down  and  held  in  subjection. 

8  The  custom  and  usage  of  our  time  invites  to  such  discontent. 

9  That  heretick. — As  seeking  separately  its  own  interests. 

n>  l2  But  all  alone,  &c. — Here  again  we  have  the  pyramid  of  the  last 
Sonnet.  Politick  seems  here  equivalent  to  self -sufficing,  desiring  no  in- 
crease or  extension,  and  fearing  no  enemies,  like  a  well-ordered  city 
or  state.  Cf.  Much  Ado,  Act  v.  sc.  2,  lines  63,  64, — "  So  politic  a  state  of 
evil  that  they  will  not  admit  any  good  part  to  intermingle  with  them." 

la,  14  The  fools  of  Time,  &c. — Those  whom  Time  does  what  he  likes  with. 
They  "die  for  goodness,"  alluding  to  the  popular  repute  of  Essex  as  the 
"  good  Earl,"  notwithstanding  the  "  crimes  "  for  which  he  and  certain  of 
his  companions  were  executed.  Cf.  cxvi.  9. 


284  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


cxxv. 

WERE  't  aught  to  me  I  bore  the  canopy, 
With  my  extern  the  outward  honouring, 
Or  laid  great  bases  for  eternity, 
Which  proves  more  short  than  waste  or  ruining ; 
Have  I  not  seen  dwellers  on  form  and  favour 
Lose  all,  and  more,  by  paying  too  much  rent, 
For  compound  sweet  foregoing  simple  savour, 
Pitiful  thrivers,  in  their  gazing  spent  ? 
No  ; — let  me  be  obsequious  in  thy  heart, 
And  take  thou  my  oblation,  poor  but  free, 
Which  is  not  mix'd  with  seconds,  knows  no  art, 
But  mutual  render,  only  me  for  thee. 

Hence,  thou  subornM  informer  !  a  true  soul, 
When  most  impeach'd,  stands  least  in  thy  control. 


CXXV.  Closely  connected  with  what  goes  before.  The  poet, 
who  has  still  in  view  affairs  of  "  state,"  speaks  of  himself  as  having 
borne  a  "  canopy,"  and  as  having  laid  great  bases  for  an  "  eternity  " 
which  had  turned  out  to  be  of  the  briefest  duration.  But  the  ser- 
vices referred  to  had  been  purely  external,  outside  "  gazing ; "  as 
contrasted  with  that  devotion  of  heart  which  he  now  offers  to  his 
friend.  The  Sonnets  generally  from  c.  to  cxxvi.  may  be  regarded 
as  an  apology  or  defence  of  the  poet's  conduct ;  but  this  comes  out 
clearly  in  the  conclusion  of  the  one  before  us.  Cf.  Introd.  p.  32. 

1  Were  't  aught  to  me. — As  if  to  say,  "If  it  were  necessary  for  me  to 
defend  my  conduct. " 

J-4  It  is  natural  to  regard  as  figurative  the  "bearing  the  canopy." 
Such  must  be  the  case  with  the  "  laying  great  bases  for  eternity  ;"  and 
taking  the  last  lines  of  the  preceding  Sonnet  as  referring  to  Essex  and  his 
companions,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  there  is  here  an  allu- 
sion to  Shakespeare's  relations  with  Southampton.  We  may  thus  con- 
clude that  the  poet  asserts  his  relation  to  that  nobleman  to  have  been  a 
"bearing  the  canopy,"  an  "outward  honouring,"  a  "gazing"  on  his 
"extern,"  and  that  he  had  never  been  admitted  to  close  and  intimate 
friendship.  The  charge  of  fickleness  and  falsity  of  heart  is  thus 
answered. 

3  Or  laid  great  bases,  &c. — There  is  probably  still  some  thought  of  a 
pyramid  in  the  poet's  mind.  The  reference  is  probably  to  the  Dedica- 
tion to  the  Lucrece, — "The  love  I  dedicate  to  your  Lordship  is  without 
end,"  &c.  But  there  may  be  allusion  also  to  the  Venus  and  Adonis. 


3first  Series.  285 


4  Proves. — So  Q.  Notice  that  it  is  the  anticipated  "eternity"  which 
"  proves  more  short  "  than  ruin  and  destruction. 

*> 6  Persons  admitted  only  to  external  relations,  however  sedulous  in 
their  attentions,  may  lose  not  only  seeming  affection,  but  incur  still 
further  mischiefs. 

7  The  compound  sweet  alludes  to  external  relations  and  formal  etiquette  ; 
the  "  simple  savour  "  to  close  intimacy  and  heartfelt  love. 

8  Pitiful  thriven,  even  when  successful. 

9  In  thy  heart. — Not  "  to  thy  heart,"  which  would  have  been  more  dis- 
tant.    Schmidt  explains  "  obsequious  "  by  zealous,  officious,  devoted. 

10  Take  thou  my  oblation,  as  represented  by  these  Sonnets. 

11  Which  is  not  mix'd  with  seconds.  —Which  is  all  as  of  the  finest,  best 
flour,  in  accordance  perhaps  with  "oblation." 

12  But  mutual  render,  only  me  for  thee. — Alluding  probably  to  the  fic- 
tion of  an  exchange  of  hearts  (xxii. ,  xxiv.)  ;  so  that  the  manifestation  of 
love  which  the  friend  might  show  came  from  the  poet's  heart  in  the 
friend's  breast,  and  vice  versa. 

13  Hence,  thou  suborn'd  informer. — With  reference  probably  to   the 
person  or  persons  who  had  brought  charges  against  the  poet. 

14  Stands  least  in  thy  control. — Such  impeachment  causing  its  love  to 
be  stronger,  and  its  constancy  more  assured. 


286  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


cxxvi. 

0  THOU,  my  lovely  boy,  who  iii  thy  power 
Dost  hold  Time's  fickle  glass,  his  sickle  hour  ; 
Who  hast  by  waning  grown,  and  therein  show'st 
Thy  lovers  withering,  as  thy  sweet  self  grow'st ! 
If  Nature,  sovereign  mistress  over  wrack, 
As  thou  goest  onwards,  still  will  pluck  thee  back, 
She  keeps  thee  to  this  purpose,  that  her  skill 
May  Time  disgrace,  and  wretched  minutes  kill. 
Yet  fear  her,  O  thou  minion  of  her  pleasure  ; 
She  may  detain,  but  not  still  keep  her  treasure  : 
Her  audit,  though  delay'd,  answer'd  must  be, 
And  her  quietus  is  to  render  thee. 


CXXVI.  This  Sonnet  may  probably  have  been  designed,  not 
merely  as  an  Envoy  to  the  Sonnets  next  preceding,  or  to  Sonnets 
c.  to  cxxv.,  but  as  a  conclusion  to  the  whole  of  the  first  series. 
The  poet's  friend  is  warned  that  though  Nature  has  hitherto  pre- 
served his  beauty,  arid  successfully  resisted  Time  and  Decay,  yet 
that  she  has  but  a  limited  power,  and  that  she  must  by-and-by 
inevitably  surrender. 

1  My  lovely  boy. — It  appears  thus  implied  that  Mr.  W.  H.  is  still  a 
youth. 

2  Time's  fickle  glass.  —Time's  ever-shifting  and  changing  hour-glass. 
His  sickle  hour. — His  hour  which,  like  a  sickle,  cuts  off  all  things  beautiful. 
There  is,  of  course,  an  allusion  to  the  scythe  or  sickle  with  which  the  figure 
of  Time  is  represented  as  armed. 

3  Who  hast  by  waning  grown. — Whose  change  with  the  advance  of  time 
has  been  a  growth  in  beauty. 

4  Thy  lovers  ivithering. — As  men  commonly  decay  with  advancing  age. 
6  Wrack.—  Decay. 

6  Pluck  thee  back. — Pull  and  keep  thee  back,  so  as  to  be  still  in  youthful 
beauty. 

8  May  Time  disgrace. — His  agency  being  thwarted,  and  his  efforts  ren- 
dered ineffectual.      Wretched  minutes  kill. — The  "  minutes"  are  killed  or 
annihilated,  as  leaving  behind  them  no  trace  of  their  existence. 

9  Yet  fear  her. — Do  not  place  assured  confidence  in  her,  that  is,  in  Nature. 

10  Not  still  keep. — Not  keep  continually. 

11  She  must  render  her  account  at  last. 

12  Quietus  has  been  taken  as  a  technical  legal  term,  implying  an  acquit- 
tance or  discharge  of  obligation.    As  this  Sonnet  has  twelve  lines  only,  the 
printer  of  the  Quarto  seems  to  have  thought  that  two  lines  were  lacking, 
and  accordingly  placed  at  the  end  marks  of  parenthesis  thus  : — 


Seconfc  Series.  287 


CXXVII. 

IN  the  old  age  black  was  not  counted  fair, 
Or  if  it  were,  it  bore  not  beauty's  name  ; 
But  now  is  black  beauty's  successive  heir, 
And  beauty  slander'd  with  a  bastard  shame  :  4 

For  since  each  hand  hath  put  on  Nature's  power, 
Fairing  the  foul  with  Art's  false  borrow'd  face, 
Sweet  beauty  hath  no  name,  no  holy  bower, 
But  is  profan'd,  if  not  lives  in  disgrace.  sv 

Therefore  my  mistress'  eyes  are  raven  black, 
Her  eyes  so  suited  ;  and  they  mourners  seem 
At  such,  who  not  born  fair,  no  beauty  lack, 
Slandering  creation  with  a  false  esteem  :  12 

Yet  so  they  mourn,  becoming  of  their  woe, 
That  every  tongue  says,  beauty  should  look  so.  H 

CXXVII.  This  Sonnet  is  the  first  of  the  second  series,  a  series 
concerned  mainly  with  the  poet's  dark  mistress.  The  Sonnet  treats 
of  the  degeneracy  of  the  times  with  regard  to  beauty.  Black  hair 
and  a  dark  complexion  were  not  formerly  considered  beautiful. 
And,  besides,  artificial  beauty  had  usurped  the  place  of  Nature.  It 
was  suitable,  therefore,  after  all,  that  the  eyes  of  the  poet's  mis- 
tress should  be  black,  as  mourning  over  such  a  state  of  things  ;  and 
they  make  black  itself  beautiful.  This  Sonnet  should  be  compared 
with  the  passage  in  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  Act  iv.  sc.  3,  beginning,  "  Is 
ebony  like  her  ?  0  wood  divine." 

Compare  also  Sidney's  Astrophel  and  Stella  (vii.) : — 

"  When  Nature  made  her  chief e  worke,  Stella's  eyes, 
In  colour  blacke  why  wrapt  she  beames  so  bright  ? 

That  whereas  blacke  seemes  Beauties  contrary, 
She  even  in  blacke  doth  make  all  beauties  flow  ? 

She  minding  Love  should  be 

Placed  ever  there  gave  him  this  mourning  weede 
To  honor  all  their  deathes  who  for  her  bleed." 

3  Beauty's  successive  heir. — Has  gained  the  esteem  formerly  devoted  to 
beauty.     The  "  successive  heir  "  is  the  heir  who  succeeds,  and  obtains  the 
inheritance. 

4  And  beauty  slander'd  with  a  bastard  shame. — The  "bastard  shame" 
is  the  product  of  art.     Beauty  and  Nature  are  slandered  by  the  artificial 
asserting  in  effect  that  Art  is  better  than  Nature. 

5  Hath  put  on  Nature's  power. — It  being  Nature's  prerogative  to  give 
beauty. 

7  Natural  beauty  has  no  exclusive  name,  no  sanctuary  all  her  own.  Q. , 
"no  holy  boure." 

10  Suited. — The  sense  of  "clothed"  which  has  been  given  to  the  word 
here  is  questionable. 

12  Slandering  creation,  &c.— See  on  line  4. 


288  Sbafeespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXXVIII. 

How  oft,  when  thou,  my  music,  music  play'st, 
Upon  that  blessed  wood  whose  motion  sounds 
With  thy  sweet  fingers,  when  thou  gently  sway'st 
The  wiry  concord  that  mine  ear  confounds, 
Do  I  envy  those  jacks,  that  nimble  leap 
To  kiss  the  tender  inward  of  thy  hand, 
Whilst  my  poor  lips,  which  should  that  harvest  reap, 
At  the  wood's  boldness  by  thee  blushing  stand  ! 
To  be  so  tickled,  they  would  change  their  state 
And  situation  with  those  dancing  chips, 
O'er  whom  thy  fingers  walk  with  gentle  gait, 
Making  dead  wood  more  bless'd  than  living  lips. 
Since  saucy  jacks  so  happy  are  in  this, 
Give  them  thy  fingers,  me  thy  lips  to  kiss. 


CXXVIII.  The  poet's  mistress  was  skilled  in  playing  on  the 
virginal.  He  at  first  envies  the  jacks  of  the  instrument,  as  he  sees 
them  move  touched  by  her  hands ;  but  at  last  he  expresses  his 
willingness  that  they  should  kiss  her  fingers  ;  it  is  for  him,  as  her 
lover,  to  kiss  her  lips. 

I  My  music  must  be  taken  to  mean  "  as  charming  to  me  as  music,"  for 
it  appears  from  cxxx.  and  cxli.  that  her  voice  was  not  very  pleasing  to  the 
poet's  ears. 

s-  *  Sway'st  the  wiry  concord,  &c. — Controllest  the  harmony  proceeding 
from  the  wires,  a  harmony  which  holds  me  spell-bound. 

5  Jacks. — Corresponding,  though  not  in  technical  detail,  with  the  keys 
of  the  pianoforte. 

6  Tender  inward  of  thy  hand. — Notice  this  indication  of  higher  rank 
and  exemption  from  manual  toil. 

II  Thy.—Q.  "their."     Gait.—Q.  "gate." 
14  Thy  fingers. — Q.  "their  fingers." 


Second  Series.  289 


CXXIX. 

THE  expense  of  spirit  in  a  waste  of  shame 

Is  lust  in  action  ;  and  till  action,  lust 

Is  perjur'd,  murd'rous,  bloody,  full  of  blame, 

Savage,  extreme,  rude,  cruel,  not  to  trust ;  4 

Enjoy'd  no  sooner,  but  despised  straight ; 

Past  reason  hunted  ;  and  no  sooner  had, 

Past  reason  hated,  as  a  swallowed  bait, 

On  purpose  laid  to  make  the  taker  mad  :  8 

Mad  in  pursuit,  and  in  possession  so  ; 

Had,  having,  and  in  quest  to  have,  extreme ; 

A  bliss  in  proof, — and  prov'd,  a  very  woe  ; 

Before,  a  joy  propos'd  ;  behind,  a  dream  ;  12 

All  this  the  world  well  knows  ;  yet  none  knows  well 
To  shun  the  heaven  that  leads  men  to  this  hell.  u 


CXXIX.  The  subject  of  this  Sonnet  is  sexual  passion,  a  subject 
treated  in  a  pessimistic  manner.  With  eager  and  ungovernable 
recklessness  lust  pursues  an  object  which,  when  attained,  becomes 
"  a  dream,"  "  a  very  woe."  Yet  the  passion  has  such  supremacy  over 
mankind  that  none  can  resist  its  influence,  however  well  it  may  be 
known  that  the  object  pursued  is  not  merely  a  worthless  nothing, 
but  even  a  deadly  mischief.  The  matter  of  this  Sonnet  answers 
even  in  several  details  to  the  "  Allegory  "  painted  by  Bronzino,  now 
in  the  National  Gallery. 

*>  2  Lust  in  action  is  a  wasteful  and  shameful  expenditure  of  vital 
energy.  Cf.  "It  hath  been  observed  by  the  ancients  that  much  use  of 
Venus  doth  dim  the  sight.  .  .  .  The  cause  of  dimness  of  sight  ...  is  the 
expence  of  spirits,"  Bacon,  Nat.  Hist.  ;  Spedding's  Bacon,  vol.  ii.  pp. 
555-  556. 

8  Mad. — Q.  has  "made." 

11  Prov'd,  a. — Q.  has  "proud  and." 

12  A  dream. — Lucrece,  211,  212,  should  be  compared  : — 

"  What  win  I,  if  I  gain  the  thing  I  seek  ? 
A  dream,  a  breath,  a  froth  of  fleeting  joy." 

u-14".With  reference  to  these  lines,  Mr.  Shaw  has  directed  my  attention 
to  the  following  passage  in  Lodge's  Euphues  Golden  Legacie  (1590)  : — 

"  Ah,  Lorrell,  lad,  what  makes  thee  Herry  loue  ? 
A  sugred  harme,  a  poyson  full  of  pleasure, 
A  painted  shrine,  ful-fild  with  rotten  treasure, 
A  heaven  in  shew,  a  hell  to  them  that  proue." 

T 


290  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


cxxx. 

MY  mistress'  eyes  are  nothing  like  the  sun  ; 

Coral  is  far  more  red  than  her  lips  red  : 

If  snow  be  white,  why  then  her  breasts  are  dun  ; 

If  hairs  be  wires,  black  wires  grow  on  her  head. 

I  have  seen  roses  damask'd,  red  and  white, 

But  no  such  roses  see  I  in  her  cheeks  ; 

And  in  some  perfumes  is  there  more  delight 

Than  in  the  breath  that  from  my  mistress  reeks. 

I  love  to  hear  her  speak,  yet  well  I  know 

That  music  hath  a  far  more  pleasing  sound  ; 

I  grant  I  never  saw  a  goddess  go, — 

My  mistress,  when  she  walks,  treads  on  the  ground 
And  yet,  by  heaven,  I  think  my  love  as  rare 
As  any  she  bely'd  with  false  compare. 


CXXX.  Though  the  poet  knows  that  his  mistress  is  deficient  in 
the  several  particulars  which  make  up  beauty  and  attractiveness,  yet 
still  he  thinks  her  unsurpassed  by  any  woman,  however  extolled. 

2  Coral.—  Q.   "Currall." 

5  Roses  damask'd. — Damask  roses  are  roses  in  which  red  and  white  are 
intermingled.  As  to  the  form  "damask'd,"  compare  "million'd,"  cxv.  5. 

14  Any  she  bely'd  with  false  compare. — Any  woman  in  praising  whose 
beauty  the  poets  have  used  false  and  extravagant  similes.  Cf.  xxi. 


Second  Series,  291 


cxxxi. 

THOU  art  as  tyrannous,  so  as  thou  art, 
As  those  whose  beauties  proudly  make  them  cruel 
For  well  thou  know'st  to  my  dear  doting  heart 
Thou  art  the  fairest  and  most  precious  jewel. 
Yet,  in  good  faith,  some  say  that  thee  behold, 
Thy  face  hath  not  the  power  to  make  love  groan  : 
To  say  they  err,  I  dare  not  be  so  bold, 
Although  I  swear  it  to  myself  alone. 
And,  to  be  sure  that  is  not  false  I  swear, 
A  thousand  groans,  but  thinking  on  thy  face, 
One  on  another's  neck,  do  witness  bear 
Thy  black  is  fairest  in  my  judgment's  place. 
In  nothing  art  thou  black,  save  in  thy  deeds, 
And  thence  this  slander,  as  I  think,  proceeds. 


CXXXI.  The  poet's  mistress  is  as  proud  as  though  she  were  really 
beautiful.  Others,  indeed,  decry  her  charms  ;  but  when  they  deny 
her  beauty  they  must  be  looking  at  her  conduct,  which  is  indeed 
black.  So  far  as  the  poet  is  concerned,  the  strength  of  his  passion 
proclaims  his  estimate  of  her  beauty. 

6  Thy  face  hath  not  thepoiver  to  make  love  groan. — The  poet's  "  thousand 
groans  "  (line  10)  afford  an  answer,  though,  according  to  ordinary  standards 
of  beauty,  he  could  not  say  that  they  are  wrong  (line  7)  who  make  the 
assertion. 

13  In  nothing  art  thou  black,  save  in  thy  deeds. — Cf.  cxlvii.  14,  "  Who 
art  as  black  as  hell,  as  dark  as  night ;  "  and  cxlir.  4,  "  The  worser  spirit  a 
woman  colour'd  ill,"  &c. 


292  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXXXII. 

THINE  eyes  I  love,  and  they,  as  pitying  me, 
Knowing  thy  heart  torments  me  with  disdain, 
Have  put  on  black,  and  loving  mourners  be, 
Looking  with  pretty  ruth  upon  my  pain. 
And  truly  not  the  morning  sun  of  heaven 
Better  becomes  the  grey  cheeks  of  the  east, 
Nor  that  full  star  that  ushers  in  the  even, 
Doth  half  that  glory  to  the  sober  west, 
As  those  two  mourning  eyes  become  thy  face  : 
O,  let  it  then  as  well  beseem  thy  heart 
To  mourn  for  me,  since  mourning  doth  thee  grace, 
And  suit  thy  pity  like  in  every  part. 

Then  will  I  swear  beauty  her  self  is  black, 
And  all  they  foul  that  thy  complexion  lack. 


CXXXII.  It  was  his  mistress's  eyes  which  fascinated  the  poet, 
though  they  were  black  ;  and  he  fancies  that  their  blackness 
betokened  pity  for  the  torments  he  suffered  from  her  pride  and 
disdain.  And  so  becoming  did  they  seem  in  her  face  that  neither 
morning  sun  nor  evening  star  was  so  beautiful ;  and  they  made  her 
face  itself  the  type  of  beauty. 

2  Torments. — Q.  has  "torment;"  but  to  make  the  eyes  torment  is 
opposed  to  the  general  sense  and  aim  of  the  Sonnet. 

4  £uth.—Pity. 

9  Mourning  eyes. — Q.  has  "morning  eyes." 

12  Suit  thy  pity  like  in  every  part. — "Suit  "  must  here  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  "dress,"  "attire."  And  the  meaning  would  appear  to  be,  "Let 
every  part  of  thee,  and  not  merely  thy  eyes,  pity  me,  and  let  every  part 
wear  a  similar  garb  of  mourning." 


Second  Series,  293 


CXXXIII. 

BESHREW  that  heart  that  makes  my  heart  to  groan 

For  that  deep  wound  it  gives  my  friend  and  me  ! 

Is't  not  enough  to  torture  me  alone, 

But  slave  to  slavery  my  sweet' st  friend  must  be  ? 

Me  from  myself  thy  cruel  eye  hath  taken, 

And  my  next  self  thou  harder  hast  engross'd  ; 

Of  him,  myself,  and  thee,  I  am  forsaken  ; 

A  torment  thrice  threefold  thus  to  be  cross'd. 

Prison  my  heart  in  thy  steel  bosom's  ward, 

But  then  my  friend's  heart  let  my  poor  heart  bail ; 

Whoe'er  keeps  me,  let  my  heart  be  his  guard  ; 

Thou  canst  not  then  use  rigour  in  my  jail : 
And  yet  thou  wilt ;  for  I,  being  pent  in  thee, 
Perforce  am  thine,  and  all  that  is  in  me. 


CXXXIII.  The  poet  complains  that  his  mistress  has  enslaved, 
not  only  himself,  but  also  his  friend,  by  her  charms.  He  is  unable 
to  escape  from  the  enthralment,  and  cannot  bail  out  his  friend.  At 
the  same  time,  he  is  forsaken  by  his  friend,  his  mistress,  and  him- 
self. Cf.  xl.,  cxliv.  et  al. 

I  Beshrew. — "  Originally  a  mild,  indeed  very  mild,  form  of  imprecation." 
—SCHMIDT. 

5  Thy  cruel  eye. — Cf.  cxxxii.  i. 

6  And  thou  hast  taken  even  a  fuller  possession  of  my  friend. 

9  To  the  poet,  who  could  not  escape  from  the  fascinations  of  his  mistress, 
her  heart  and  bosom  were  like  a  prison  with  bars  of  steel. 

II  Whoe'er  keeps  me,  &c. — Wherever  I  may  be  imprisoned,  whether  in 
"  thy  steel  bosom's  ward"  or  elsewhere,  let  my  heart  be  my  friend's  bail, 
and  guard  him  from  such  durance. 

12  Meaning  possibly  that  rigorous  treatment  would  be  unsuitable  in  the 
case  of  one  imprisoned  as  a  bail  or  hostage  for  another. 

14  And  all  that  is  in  me. — Therefore  thou  hast  my  friend  with  whom  I 
am  united,  xxxix.  et  al. 


294  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


cxxxiv. 

So  now  I  have  confess'd  that  he  is  thine, 
And  I  myself  am  mortgaged  to  thy  will ; 
Myself  I'll  forfeit,  so  that  other  mine 
Thou  wilt  restore,  to  be  my  comfort  still : 
But  thou  wilt  not,  nor  he  will  not  be  free, 
For  thou  art  covetous,  and  he  is  kind  ; 
He  learn'd  but,  surety-like,  to  write  for  me, 
Under  that  bond  that  him  as  fast  doth  bind. 
The  statute  of  thy  beauty  thou  wilt  take, 
Thou  usurer,  that  put'st  forth  all  to  use, 
And  sue  a  friend,  came  debtor  for  my  sake  ; 
So  him  I  lose  through  my  unkind  abuse. 

Him  have  I  lost ;  thou  hast  both  him  and  me  ; 

He  pays  the  whole,  and  yet  I  am  not  free. 


CXXXIV.  The  subject  treated  of  is  still  the  same,  that  the  poet's 
mistress  has  in  her  power  both  the  poet  and  his  friend.  Here, 
however,  language  and  imagery  borrowed  from  legal  transactions 
are  more  freely  used  ;  and  it  is  the  friend  who  had  been  surety  for 
the  poet.  If  the  Sonnet  is  to  be  pressed,  the  friend  had  gone  to  the 
poet's  mistress  on  business  of  the  poet's. 

3  That  other  mine. — That  other  myself. 

9  The  statute  of  thy  beauty  thou  wilt  take.— "  Statute  has  here  its  legal 
signification,  that  of  a  security  or  obligation  for  money." — MALONB.    But 
the  word  is  here  used  figuratively.     This  is,  of  course,  obvious. 

10  Dost  exert  all  thy  powers  of  fascination,  like  a  usurer  putting  out  all 
his  property  to  interest. 

11  Though  coming  to  the  lady  as  a  representative  of  the  poet,  the  friend 
is  brought  under  her  influence. 

12  Unkind  abuse. — In  exposing  him  to  the  danger. 

14  He  pays  the  whole. — As  being  so  completely  held  captive. 


Second  Series.  295 


cxxxv. 

WHOEVER  hath  her  wish,  thou  hast  thy  Will, 
And  Will  to  boot,  and  Will  in  overplus  ; 
More  than  enough  am  I  that  vex  thee  still, 
To  thy  sweet  will  making  addition  thus. 
Wilt  thou,  whose  will  is  large  and  spacious, 
Not  once  vouchsafe  to  hide  my  will  in  thine  ? 
Shall  will  in  others  seem  right  gracious, 
And  in  my  will  no  fair  acceptance  shine  ? 
The  sea,  all  water,  yet  receives  rain  still, 
And  in  abundance  addeth  to  his  store  ; 
So  thou,  being  rich  in  Will,  add  to  thy  Will 
One  will  of  mine,  to  make  thy  large  Will  more. 

Let  no  unkind  no  fair  beseechers  kill ; 

Think  all  but  one,  and  me  in  that  one  Will. 


CXXXV.  The  special  characteristic  of  this  Sonnet,  as  compared 
with  those  preceding,  is  the  play  on  the  word  "  WilL"  The  dark 
lady  has  the  "Will"  of  the  poet's  friend,  meaning,  no  doubt, 
William  Herbert.  The  poet  asks  that  his  "  Will "  ( William  Shake- 
speare) may  be  added,  and  that  she  will  esteem  as  one  her  own 
will  and  the  "Wills"  of  her  two  admirers.  The  Sonnet  scarcely 
admits  of  further  analysis. 

An  exceedingly  interesting  parallel  to  this  and  following  Sonnets 
is  found  in  the  Dedication  by  John  Davies  to  his  "  Select  Second 
Husband  for  Sir  Thomas  Overbury's  Wife,  now  a  Matchless  Widow  " 
(1606).  And  it  is  specially  appropriate  as  being  addressed  to  "  Wil- 
liam Earle  of  Pembroke  :  " — 

"  Wit  and  my  Will  (deere  Lord)  were  late  at  strife, 
To  whom  this  Bridegroome  I  for  grace  might  send 
Who  Bride  was  erst  the  happiest  husbands  wife 
That  ere  was  haplesse  in  his  Friend,  and  End. 
Wit,  with  it  selfe,  and  with  my  Will,  did  warre, 
For  Will  (good- Will)  desir'd  it  might  be  YOU. 
But  Wit  found  fault  with  each  particular 
It  selfe  had  made  ;  sith  YOU  were  It  to  view,"  &c. 

(From  Grosart's  Chertsey  Worthies'  Library}. 

Comparison    may    also  be  made   of    the    lines   commencing  the 
Epigram  addressed  by  Davies  to  Shakespeare  : — 

"  Some  say,  good  Will  (which  I,  in  sport,  do  sing), 
Hadst  thou  not  plaid  some  kingly  parts  in  sport,"  &c. 


296  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


1  Will. — In  the  printing  of  this  word  I  here  follow  the  Quarto.    The 
•word  is,  of  course,  used  in  a  double  sense,  as  an  abbreviated  personal  name, 
and,  also,  of  the  lady's  will  as  distinguished  from  her  "  wish." 

2  Not  only  a  sufficiency  but  a  superfluity  of  "  Will." 
3- 4  The  poet  is  the  superfluity. 

5  Whose  will  is  large  and  spacious. — Whose  desires  are  so  ample. 

7>8  Shall  will  in  others,  &c. — It  is  doubtful  whether  in  this  and  the  next 
line  "  will  "  ought  not  to  be  taken  as  a  name.  "  Shall  will,  in  the  case  of 
others,  seem  quite  acceptable,  and  not  in  respect  of  my  will?" 

12  One  will  of  mine. — "Will  "  here  may  be  taken  as  representing  the 
poet's  desire  as  well  as  his  name. 

13  Dowden  suggests  that  this  line  should  be  printed, — 

"Let  no  unkind  ' No '  fair  beseechers  kill." 

I  am  inclined  to  accept  this  view,  with  the  exception  that  "  your  "  would 
seem  preferable  to  "fair."  But  I  have  not  ventured  to  introduce  this 
emendation  into  the  text. 


Second  Series.  297 


cxxxvi. 

IF  thy  soul  check  tliee  that  I  come  so  near, 
Swear  to  thy  blind  soul  that  I  was  thy  Will, 
And  will,  thy  soul  knows,  is  admitted  there  ; 
Thus  far  for  love,  my  love-suit,  sweet,  fulfil. 
Will  will  fulfil  the  treasure  of  thy  love, 
Ay,  fill  it  full  with  wills,  and  my  will  one, 
In  things  of  great  receipt  with  ease  we  prove 
Among  a  number  one  is  reckon'd  none. 
Then  in  the  number  let  me  pass  untold, 
Though  in  thy  store's  account  I  one  must  be  ; 
For  nothing  hold  me,  so  it  please  thee  hold 
That  nothing  me,  a  something  sweet  to  thee  : 
Make  but  my  name  thy  love,  and  love  that  still, 
And  then  thou  lov'st  me, — for  my  name  is  Will. 


CXXXVI.  In  connection  with  the  last  Sonnet,  and  still  playing 
on  the  word  "  will."  The  poet  sues  for  acceptance,  and  concludes 
by  asking  that  his  mistress  will  make  his  name  her  love,  and  so  love 
him,  his  name  being  "Will." 

J> 3  If  any  scruple  should  arise  as  to  the  nearness  of  access  "which  I  ask 
for,  it  may  be  overcome  by  admitting  me  as  thy  "  Will,"  the  word  being, 
of  course,  used  here  in  a  twofold  sense.  The  soul,  where  the  will  re- 
sides, is  conceived  of  as  "blind"  and  dark,  being  within  the  body  and 
destitute  of  eyes. 

5  FuyU.—Fi\\  up  to  the  full.     The  first  "Will "  is,  it  would  seem,  to  be 
taken  in  a  complex  sense,  denoting  all  the  "  Wills  "  concerned. 

6  Ay,  fill.—Q,.   has  "I  fill,"  "I,"  as  elsewhere,  being  equivalent  to 
"Ay." 

7  Receipt. — "  Capacity,  power  of  receiving  and  containing." — SCHMIDT. 

8  One  is  of  no  account  where  a  large  number  is  concerned. 

9> 10  Dowden  observes,  "  Lines  9,  10,  mean  '  You  need  not  count  me 
when  merely  counting  the  number  of  those  who  hold  you  dear,  but  when 
estimating  the  worth  of  your  possessions,  you  must  have  regard  to  me.' 
'  To  set  store  by  a  thing  or  person '  is  a  phrase  connected  with  the  mean- 
ing of  '  store '  in  this  passage." 

n-12  Make  me  of  no  account,  if  you  will,  but  still  love  me,  regard  me  as 
"  a  something  sweet  to  thee." 

is.  M  YOU  love  your  other  admirer  named  "  Will."  Love  the  name  alone, 
and  then  you  love  me,  for  my  name  is  Will. 


298  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXXXVII. 

THOU  blind  fool,  Love,  what  dost  thou  to  mine  eyes, 
That  they  behold,  and  see  not  what  they  see  ? 
They  know  what  beauty  is,  see  where  it  lies, 
Yet  what  the  best  is,  take  the  worst  to  be.  4 

If  eyes,  corrupt  by  over-partial  looks, 
Be  anchor'd  in  the  bay  where  all  men  ride, 
Why  of  eyes'  falsehood  hast  thou  forged  hooks, 
Whereto  the  judgment  of  my  heart  is  ty'd  ?  8 

Why  should  my  heart  think  that  a  several  plot, 
Which  my  heart  knows  the  wide  world's  common  place  ? 
Or  mine  eyes  seeing  this,  say  this  is  not, 
To  put  fair  truth  upon  so  foul  a  face  ?  12 

In  things  right  true  my  heart  and  eyes  have  erred, 
And  to  this  false  plague  are  they  now  transferred.  14 


CXXXVII.  The  poet  complains  that  he  is  deceived  by  his  eyes, 
so  that  he  loves,  as  beautiful,  a  woman  destitute  of  beauty  and  purity. 
His  heart  also  has  erred ;  and  both  heart  and  eyes  are  enthralled. 

4  They  take  a  face  which,  from  deficiency  of  beauty,  is  "worst,"  to  be 
"best,  "most  beautiful. 

5>  6  The  poet's  mistress  is  an  impure  woman,  as  appears  from  the  figura- 
tive language  of  line  6.  Corrupt  by  over-partial  looks. — Wanting  judicial 
fairness.  Anchor'd. — Steevens  compares, — 

"  Whilst  my  intention  (invention  ?),  hearing  not  my  tongue, 
Anchors  on  Isabel " 

( Measure  for  Measure,  Act  ii.  sc.  4,  lines  3,  4). 

7,  8  The  poet  complains  that  his  heart  is  held  fast  by  the  judgment  of 
his  misjudging  eyes. 

s  A  several  plot  has  been  aptly  explained  as  "an  enclosed  field,"  con- 
trasting with  "the  wide  world's  common  place"  of  line  10.  The  latter 
expression  is  equivalent  to  "  the  bay  where  all  men  ride."  Cf.  "  Others, 
not  affecting  marriage  at  all,  live,  as  they  say,  '  upon  the  Commons  ; '  unto 
whom  it  is  death  to  be  put  into  the  Several "  (Peacham's  Worth  of  a  Penny, 
in  Arber's  English  Garner,  vol.  vi.,  p.  261). 

13  The  "things  right  true  "  may  be  referred  to  the  true  character  of  the 
poet's  mistress,  about  which  there  could  be  no  mistake. 

14  False  plague. — Describing  the  baneful  effect  of  the  enthralment  by 
that  which  had  really  no  claim  to  be  regarded  as  beautiful  and  attractive. 


Second  Series.  299 


CXXXVIIL 

WHEN  my  love  swears  that  she  is  made  of  truth, 

I  do  believe  her,  though  I  know  she  lies  ; 

That  she  might  think  me  some  untutor'd  youth, 

Unlearned  in  the  world's  false  subtleties.  4 

Thus  vainly  thinking  that  she  thinks  me  young, 

Although  she  knows  my  days  are  past  the  best, 

Simply  I  credit  her  false-speaking  tongue  ; 

On  both  sides  thus  is  simple  truth  supprest.  8 

But  wherefore  says  she  not,  she  is  unjust  1 

And  wherefore  say  not  I,  that  I  am  old  ? 

0,  love's  best  habit  is  in  seeming  trust. 

And  age  in  love  loves  not  to  have  years  told  :  12 

Therefore  I  lie  with  her,  and  she  with  me, 
And  in  our  faults  by  lies  we  nattered  be.  14 


CXXXVIII.  The  poet  descants  on  the  mutual  untruthfulness  of 
himself  and  his  mistress,  he  desiring  that  she  may  think  him  young, 
and  she,  that  he  may  think  her  faithful. 

In  the  Passionate  Pilgrim,  dated  1599,  this  Sonnet  is  given  with 
several  variations : — 

my  Loue  sweares  that  she  is  made  of  truth, 
I  doe  beleeue  her  (though  I  know  she  lies) 

That  she  might  thinke  me  some  vntutor'd  youth, 

Vnskilfull  in  the  worlds  false  forgeries. 

Thus  vainly  thinking  that  she  thinkes  me  young, 

Although  I  know  my  yeares  be  past  the  best : 

I  smiling,  credite  her  false  speaking  toung, 

Outfacing  faults  in  Loue,  with  loues  ill  rest. 

But  wherefore  sayes  my  Loue  that  she  is  young  ? 

And  wherefore  say  not  I,  that  I  am  old  ? 

0,  Loues  best  habite  is  a  soothing  toung, 

And  Age  (in  Loue)  loues  not  to  haue  yeares  told. 
Therfore  He  lye  with  Loue,  and  Loue  with  me, 
Since  that  our  faults  in  Loue  thus  smother'd  be. 

As  to  the  differences  between  the  text  of  the  Sonnet  as  thus 
given  and  that  of  the  1609  edition,  see  Introd.,  p.  81  note,  and 
P-  135- 

2  /  do  believe  her. — Though  with  my  heart,  not  with  my  intellect. 
»  To  have.—  Q.  "t'have." 


300  Sbafcespeare'0  Sonnets. 


cxxxix. 

O,  CALL  not  me  to  justify  the  wrong, 

That  thy  unkindness  lays  upon  my  heart ; 

Wound  me  not  with  thine  eye,  but  with  thy  tongue 

Use  power  with  power,  and  slay  me  not  by  art.  * 

Tell  me  thou  lov'st  elsewhere  ;  but  in  my  sight, 

Dear  heart,  forbear  to  glance  thine  eye  aside. 

What  need'st  thou  wound  with  cunning,  when  thy  might 

Is  more  than  my  o'erpress'd  defence  can  'bide  ?  s 

Let  me  excuse  thee  :  ah  !  my  love  well  knows 

Her  pretty  looks  have  been  mine  enemies  ; 

And  therefore  from  my  face  she  turns  my  foes, 

That  they  elsewhere  might  dart  their  injuries  :  12 

Yet  do  not  so  ;  but  since  I  am  near  slain, 

Kill  me  outright  with  looks,  and  rid  my  pain.  u 


CXXXIX.  The  poet  complains  that,  even  in  his  presence,  his 
mistress  directs  her  regards  towards  other  admirers.  He  would 
rather  that  she  openly  declared  her  preference  for  others.  He  can- 
not justify  her  conduct :  still,  he  invents  the  excuse  that  she  knows 
what  injuries  her  looks  have  done  him,  and  therefore  directs  her 
eyes  elsewhere.  But,  whatever  the  consequences,  he  would  rather 
that  her  looks  were  directed  towards  himself. 

3  Wound  me  not  with  thine  eye. — That  is,  by  directing  it  towards 
others. 

3>  4  But  with  thy  tongue,  &c. — Do  not  artfully  glance  aside,  but  use  the 
power  of  thy  tongue  powerfully,  and  speak  out  frankly. 

8  My  o'erpressed  defence,  &c. — My  power  of  resistance  is  already  over- 
strained. 


Second  Scries.  301 


CXL. 

BE  wise  as  thou  art  cruel ;  do  not  press 

My  tongue-tied  patience  with  too  much  disdain  ; 

Lest  sorrow  lend  me  words,  and  words  express 

The  manner  of  my  pity-wanting  pain.  4 

If  I  might  teach  thee  wit,  better  it  were, 

Though  not  to  love,  yet,  love,  to  tell  me  so 

(As  testy  sick  men,  when  their  deaths  be  near, 

No  news  but  health  from  their  physicians  know  ;)  8 

For,  if  I  should  despair,  I  should  grow  mad, 

And  in  my  madness  might  speak  ill  of  thee  : 

Now  this  ill-wresting  world  is  grown  so  bad, 

Mad  slanderers  by  mad  ears  believed  be.  12 

That  I  may  not  be  so,  nor  thou  bely'd, 

Bear  thine  eyes  straight,  though  thy  proud  heart  go  wide,  u 


CXL.  The  poet,  still  complaining  that  the  eyes  of  his  mistress 
glance  aside,  implores  her  not  to  try  his  patience  too  much. 

2  My  tongue-tied  patience. — My  patience  hitherto  silent. 
4  My  pity-wanting  pain. — My  pain  on  which  you  bestow  no  pity. 
5-  6  If  I  might  suggest  such  conduct  as  would  be  wise,  it  would  be  better, 
even  if  you  do  not  love  me,  to  tell  me  that  you  do. 
8  No  news,  &c. — They  are  unwilling  to  hear  of  anything  but  recovery. 
11  Ill-wresting. — Putting  an  evil  construction  on  what  is  heard. 
14  Go  wide  from  fidelity,  and  in  search  of  admirers. 


302  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CXLI. 

IN  faith  I  do  not  love  thee  with  mine  eyes, 
For  they  in  thee  a  thousand  errors  note  ; 
But  'tis  my  heart  that  loves  what  they  despise, 
Who  in  despite  of  view  is  pleas'd  to  dote. 
Nor  are  mine  ears  with  thy  tongue's  tune  delighted  ; 
Nor  tender  feeling,  to  base  touches  prone, 
Nor  taste  nor  smell,  desire  to  be  invited 
To  any  sensual  feast  with  thee  alone  : 
But  my  five  wits,  nor  my  five  senses  can 
Dissuade  one  foolish  heart  from  serving  thee, 
Who  leaves  unsway'd  the  likeness  of  a  man, 
Thy  proud  heart's  slave  and  vassal  wretch  to  be  : 
Only  my  plague  thus  far  I  count  my  gain, 
That  she  that  makes  me  sin,  awards  me  pain. 


CXLI.  Neither  the  senses  nor  the  reason  of  the  poet  can  find 
anything  in  his  mistress  worthy  of  love.  Nevertheless  his  heart 
cannot  be  persuaded  to  abandon  her.  He  consoles  himself,  how- 
ever, with  the  thought  that  she  is  at  once  the  cause  of  his  sin  and 
his  suffering.  Cf.  cxxx. 

4  In  despite  of  view. — Although  my  eyes  can  see  nothing  attractive,  yet 
my  heart  "dotes." 

5  Tongue's  tune. — Cf.  cxxx.  9,  10. 

6  Base  touches. — Here  equivalent  to  amorous,  lascivious  touches. 

9  My  five  wits. — Malone  here  annotates,  "  'The  wits,'  Dr.  Johnson  ob- 
serves, '  seem  to  have  been  reckoned  five,  by  analogy  to  the  five  senses, 
or  the  five  inlets  of  ideas.  Wit  in  our  author's  time  was  the  general  term 
for  the  intellectual  power.'  From  Stephen  Hawes's  poem  called  Graunde 
Amour  and  La  Bell  Pucel,  1554,  ch.  24,  it  appears  that  the  five  wits  were 
'  common  wit,  imagination,  fantasy,  estimation,  and  memory.'  " 

11, 12  The  first  of  these  lines  is  difficult.  I  cannot  agree  with  Dowden's 
explanation,  "  My  heart  ceases  to  govern  me,  and  so  leaves  me  no  better 
than  the  likeness  of  a  man— a  man  without  heart— in  order  that  it  may 
become  slave  to  thy  proud  heart."  Rather  I  should  take  the  meaning  to 
be,  in  accordance  with  what  goes  before,  the  poet  is  entirely  governed  by 
his  heart,  which  still  does  not  sway  his  five  senses,  &c. ,  these  constituting 
together  "  the  likeness  of  a  man,"  that  is,  a  man  minus  the  heart. 

14  Pain. — This  word  implies,  no  doubt,  that  the  suffering  was  right  and 
fitting ;  but  there  seems  no  necessity  to  suppose  that  it  has  the  special 
sense  of  "penalty." 


Second  Series.  303 


CXLII. 

LOVE  is  my  sin,  and  thy  dear  virtue  hate, 
Hate  of  my  sin,  grounded  on  sinful  loving  : 
0,  but  with  mine  compare  thou  thine  own  state, 
And  thou  shalt  find  it  merits  not  reproving  ; 
Or,  if  it  do,  not  from  those  lips  of  thine, 
That  have  profan'd  their  scarlet  ornaments, 
And  seal'd  false  bonds  of  love  as  oft  as  mine  ; 
Robb'd  others'  beds'  revenues  of  their  rents. 
Be  it  lawful  I  love  thee,  as  thou  lov'st  those 
Whom  thine  eyes  woo  as  mine  importune  thee  : 
Root  pity  in  thy  heart,  that  when  it  grows, 
Thy  pity  may  deserve  to  pitied  be. 

If  thou  dost  seek  to  have  what  thou  dost  hide, 
By  self-example  may'st  thou  be  deny'd  ! 


CXLII.  The  poet  protests  against  the  reproofs  of  his  mistress. 
If  he  merits  reproof,  it  is  not  for  her  to  reprove.  She  should  rather 
pity  him,  if  she  expects  to  find  pity  for  herself. 

1  Thy  dear  virtue. — Thy  cherished  virtue.     The  lady,  perhaps,  is  re- 
garded as  without  virtue  in  the  ordinary  sense,  and  so  hatred  is  called  a 
"  virtue." 

2  Hate  of  my  sin. — Hatred  of  my  love  ;  of  me  whose  sin  is  "grounded  " 
on  loving  thee.     Cf.  clii.  i. 

7  Seal'd  false  bonds  of  love. — Mai  one  gives  several  illustrative  quota- 
tions, one  of  which  may  suffice  to  elucidate  the  meaning  here,  Measure 
for  Measure,  Act  iv.  sc.  i,  lines  1-4, — 

"  Take,  0  take  those  lips  away, 
That  so  sweetly  were  forsworn, — 
But  my  kisses  bring  again, 
Seals  of  love,  but  seal'd  in  vain." 

8  Eobb'd  others'  beds'  revenues,  &c. — Implying,  probably,  that  the  lady 
had  received  the  attentions  of  other  married  men. 

9  Let  it  be  lawful  for  me  to  love  thee,  &c.     Cf.  cxxxix. 

13>  14  If  thou  seekest  pity,  while  stifling  it  (supposing,  indeed,  that  thou 
at  all  possessest  pity),  may  your  own  example  be  followed,  and  may  you 
find  none  ! 


304  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


CXLIII. 

Lo,  as  a  careful  housewife  runs  to  catch 
One  of  her  feathered  creatures  broke  away, 
Sets  down  her  babe,  and  makes  all  swift  despatch 
In  pursuit  of  the  thing  she  would  have  stay  ; 
Whilst  her  neglected  child  holds  her  in  chace, 
Cries  to  catch  her  whose  busy  care  is  bent 
To  follow  that  which  flies  before  her  face, 
Not  prizing  her  poor  infant's  discontent ; 
So  run'st  thou  after  that  which  flies  from  thee, 
Whilst  I  thy  babe  chase  thee  afar  behind  ; 
But  if  thou  catch  thy  hope,  turn  back  to  me, 
And  play  the  mother's  part,  kiss  me,  be  kind  : 
So  will  I  pray  that  thou  may'st  have  thy  Will, 
If  thou  turn  back,  and  my  loud  crying  still. 


CXLIII.  Reverts  to  the  subject  of  the  two  admirers  of  the  dark 
lady.  Here  she  is  compared  to  a  housewife  pursuing  a  fowl,  while 
her  child  is  crying  after  her.  The  child  represents  the  poet,  and 
the  fugitive  bird,  his  friend.  The  poet  asks  that  if  his  friend  is 
caught,  his  own  crying  may  not  be  disregarded.  There  seems  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  the  persons  are  altogether  the  same  as  in 
cxxxiv.,  cxxxv.,  xl.,  al. 

8  Not  prizing, — Not  regarding. 

9  Run'st  thou  after. — Cf.  "  when  a  woman  woos,"  &c.,  xli.  7. 

13  Will. — Meaning  probably  her  purpose,  and  also  William  Herbert. 


Second  Series,  305 


CXLIV. 

Two  loves  I  have  of  comfort  and  despair, 
Which  like  two  spirits  do  suggest  me  still ; 
The  better  angel  is  a  man  right  fair, 
The  worser  spirit  a  woman,  colour'd  ill. 
To  win  me  soon  to  hell,  my  female  evil 
Tempteth  my  better  angel  from  my  side, 
And  would  corrupt  my  saint  to  be  a  devil, 
Wooing  his  purity  with  her  foul  pride. 
And  whether  that  my  angel  be  turn'd  fiend, 
Suspect  I  may,  yet  not  directly  tell ; 
But  being  both  from  me,  both  to  each  friend, 
I  guess  one  angel  in  another's  hell. 

Yet  this  shall  I  ne'er  know,  but  live  in  doubt, 
Till  my  bad  angel  fire  my  good  one  out. 


CXLIV.  The  lady  and  the  poet's  male  friend  (whose  beauty  was 
celebrated  in  the  first  series  of  Sonnets)  are  the  poet's  "two  loves," 
the  one  a  good,  the  other  an  evil,  angel.  He  suspects  they  are  to- 
gether, but  cannot,  for  the  present,  ascertain  the  truth.  This  is  the 
second  Sonnet  given  in  the  Passionate  Pilgrim  with  variations  : — 

'TWo  Loues  I  haue,  of  Comfort,  and  Despaire, 
That  like  two  Spirits,  do  suggest  me  still : 

My  better  Angell  is  a  Man  (right  faire) 

My  worser  spirite  a  Woman  (colour'd  ill). 

To  winne  me  soone  to  hell,  my  Female  euill 

Tempteth  my  better  Angell  from  my  side, 

And  would  corrupt  my  Saint  to  be  a  Diuell, 

Wooing  his  purity  with  her  faire  pride. 

And  whether  that  my  Angell  be  turnde  feend, 

Suspect  I  may  (yet  not  directly  tell : 

For  being  both  to  me  :  both,  to  each  friend, 

I  ghesse  one  Angell  in  anothers  hell : 

The  truth  I  shall  not  know,  but  Hue  in  doubt, 
Till  my  bad  Angell  fire  my  good  one  out. 

The  change  from  "my"  to  "the"  in  line  3;  from  "faire"  to 
"fowle"  in  8;  from  "The  truth  I  shall  not  know"  to  "Yet  this 
shall  I  nere  know,"  may  possibly  have  proceeded  from  revision.  In 
"from  my  side "  of  6  the  Passionate  Pilgrim  has  probably  preserved 
the  true  reading. 

1  Despair. — As  being  hopelessly  corrupt. 

2  Suggest. — Insinuate  temptation,  tempt,  as  not  infrequently  in  Shake- 
speare.    Compare  "To  suggest  thee  from  thy  master,"  All's  Well  that 
En  s  Well,  Act  iv.  sc.  5,  line  47. 

4  The  worser  spirit,  &c.  —As  to  the  resemblance  to  Drayton's  Idea,  22 
(1599  ed.),  see  Introd.,  p.  38.  Cf.  Loves  Labour's  Lost,  Act.  i.  sc.  2,  lines 
177,  178, — "  Love  is  a  devil :  there  is  no  evil  angel  but  Love." 

6  Side.—Q.  has  "sight." 

9  Fiend.—  Q.  "finde." 

U 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets, 


CXLV. 

THOSE  lips  that  Love's  own  hand  did  make 

Breath'd  forth  the  sound  that  said,  *  I  hate,' 

To  me  that  languish'd  for  her  sake  : 

But  when  she  saw  my  woeful  state,  4 

Straight  in  her  heart  did  mercy  come, 

Chiding  that  tongue,  that  ever  sweet 

Was  us'd  in  giving  gentle  doom  ; 

And  taught  it  thus  anew  to  greet :  s 

1 1  hate '  she  alter'd  with  an  end 

That  follow'd  it  as  gentle  day 

Doth  follow  night,  who  like  a  fiend 

From  heaven  to  Hell  is  flown  away.  12 

*  I  hate,'  from  hate  away  she  threw, 

And  sav'd  my  life,  saying — *  not  you.'  u 


CXLV.  The  poet  had  heard  his  mistress  say,  "I  hate."  When 
she  saw  the  effect  which  this  utterance  produced,  she  consoled  her 
lover  by  adding,  "  not  you."  This  is  the  only  Sonnet  in  the  book 
written  in  eight-syllable  metre.  Dowden  remarks  that  some  critics, 
partly  on  this  account,  and  "partly  because  the  rhymes  are  ill- 
managed,  reject  it  as  not  by  Shakspere." 

7  Was  us'd  in  giving  gentle  doom. — Had  been  used  in  pronouncing  the 
words  previously  mentioned,  the  "  doom  "  of  her  lover. 

8  Greet. — Schmidt  explains  "greet "  here  as  meaning  " to  speak  to  me." 
13  I  hate,  from  hate,  &c. — "  I  hate  "  ceased  to  import  hatred,  or  to  seem 

to  do  so. 


Second  Series.  307 


CXLVI. 

POOR  soul,  the  centre  of  my  sinful  earth, 
[Why  feed'st]  these  rebel  powers  that  thee  array  ? 
Why  dost  thou  pine  within,  and  suffer  dearth, 
Painting  thy  outward  walls  so  costly  gay  ? 
Why  so  large  cost,  having  so  short  a  lease, 
Dost  thou  upon  thy  fading  mansion  spend  ? 
Shall  worms,  inheritors  of  this  excess, 
Eat  up  thy  charge  ?     Is  this  thy  body's  end  ? 
Then,  soul,  live  thou  upon  thy  servant's  loss, 
And  let  that  pine  to  aggravate  thy  store  ; 
Buy  terms  divine  in  selling  hours  of  dross  ; 
Within  be  fed,  without  be  rich  no  more  : 

So  shalt  thou  feed  on  Death,  that  feeds  on  men, 
And,  Death  once  dead,  there's  no  more  dying  then. 


CXLVI.  In  this  Sonnet,  which  apparently  stands  alone,  the 
poet  reflects  on  the  folly  of  bestowing  excessive  care  on  the  body, 
the  soul's  outer  covering  and  ministering  servant.  In  conclusion, 
he  expresses  the  resolution  to  attain  immortality,  by  nourishing  the 
soul  at  the  body's  expense. 

1  The  centre  of  my  sinful  earth. — The  soul  is  here  spoken  of  as  a 
"centre,"  encompassed  by  "sinful  earth."     "Turn  back,  dull  earth,  and 
find  thy  centre  out,"  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  ii.  sc.  i,  line  2,  has  been  justly 
compared  ;  but  here  "centre  "  has  a  somewhat  different  meaning. 

2  [Why feed'st].  — " Feed'st"  is  used  in  i.  6.     In  Q.  the  first  three  lines 
of  this  Sonnet  stand  thus  : — 

"  Poore  soule  the  center  of  my  sinfull  earth, 
My  sinfull  earth  these  rebbell  powres  that  thee  array, 
Why  dost  thou  pine  within  and  suffer  dearth." 

It  is  manifest  that  the  second  line  as  thus  given  is  wrong,  but  how  it  is  to 
be  corrected  is  a  matter  concerning  which  the  opinions  of  critics  have 
very  greatly  varied.  The  general  scope  of  the  Sonnet  must  be  taken  into 
account.  The  principal  subject  is  manifestly  the  feeding  of  the  body  and 
soul ;  and  the  conclusion  come  to  is,  that  the  latter,  and  not  the  former, 
is  to  be  fed.  The  emendation,  "  Why  feed'st,"  is  thus  suitable.  More- 
over, the  "my"  of  the  first  line  and  the  "why"  commencing  alike  the 
second  and  third  lines  may  have  been  the  cause  of  confusion  and  error. 
Then,  too,  there  is  a  verse  of  Southwell's  "Content  and  Ritche  "  which 
Shakespeare  may  have  had  in  view  : — 


308  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


"  Spare  diett  is  my  fare, 

My  clothes  more  fitt  than  fine  ; 
I  knowe  I  feede  and  cloth  a  foe, 
That  pampred  would  repine  " 
(Grosart's  Reprint  in  Fuller  Worthies'  Library,  p.  74). 

These  rebel  poivers. — An  excellently  illustrative  passage  is  to  be  found  in 
Lucrece,  lines  719-723,  where  the  rebellion  of  Tarquin's  fleshly  lusts  is 
spoken  of : — 

"  His  soul's  fair  temple  is  defac'd, 
To  whose  weak  ruins  muster  troops  of  cares 
To  ask  the  spotted  princess  how  she  fares. 

She  says,  her  subjects  with  foul  insurrection 
Have  battered  down  her  consecrated  wall,"  &c. 

Array. — Clothe,  bedeck.  The  late  Dr.  Ingleby  maintained  "  that  '  array ' 
in  this  Sonnet  means  ill-treat  or  bring  into  evil  condition"  (Shakespeare: 
the  Man  and  the  Book,  Pt.  I.  p.  166).  But  the  context  seems  to  preclude 
this  meaning  here,  whatever  might  be  the  possible  sense  of  "array"  in 
another  connection. 

4  Painting,  &c. — A  slight  change  of  the  metaphor  involved  in  "array." 

8  Thy  charge. — What  has  cost  thee  so  much.     Cf.  Hamlet,  Act  v.  sc.  i, 

lines  99-101,  "  Did  these  bones  cost  no  more  the  breeding  but  to  play  at 

loggats  with  'em?"  and  Act  iv.  sc.  3,  lines  23,  24,  "  We  fat  all  creatures 

else  to  fat  us,  and  we  fat  ourselves  for  maggots." 

10  To  aggravate. — To  increase. 

11  To  be  understood  most  probably  of  immortal  renown,  which  is  to  be 
purchased  by  sacrificing  a  few  years  of  life  to  intent  study  and  enthusi- 
astic literary  work. 

is,  14  Feeding  on  thy  mortal  body  thou  wilt  feed  on  Death,  and  gain 
complete  victory  over  him  by  a  literary  immortality. 


f 


Second  Series.  309 


CXLVII. 

MY  love  is  as  a  fever,  longing  still 

For  that  which  longer  nurseth  the  disease  ; 

Feeding  on  that  which  doth  preserve  the  ill, 

Th'  uncertain  sickly  appetite  to  please. 

My  reason,  the  physician  to  my  love, 

Angry  that  his  prescriptions  are  not  kept, 

Hath  left  me,  and  I  desperate  now  approve 

Desire  is  death,  which  physic  did  except. 

Past  cure  I  am,  now  Keason  is  past  care, 

And  frantic  mad  with  evermore  unrest ; 

My  thoughts  and  my  discourse  as  mad  men's  are, 

At  random  from  the  truth  vainly  express'd  ; 

For  I  have  sworn  thee  fair,  and  thought  thee  bright 
Who  art  as  black  as  hell,  as  dark  as  night. 


CXLVII.  The  poet  cannot  subject  his  passion  to  the  sway  of 
reason.  It  has  gained  complete  mastery  over  him;  and  his 
thoughts  and  words  concerning  his  mistress  fly  far  away  from 
truth. 

4  My  reason,  the  physician  to  my  love. — "  Compare  The  Merry  Wives  of 
Windsor,  Act  ii.  sc.  i,  1.  5,  'Ask  me  no  reason  why  I  love  you  ;  for 
though  Love  use  Reason  for  his  physician  [so  Farmer  and  most  editors  ; 
precisian,  Folio],  he  admits  him  not  for  his  Counsellor.'  " 

7- 8  Now  approve  desire  is  death. — Now  recognise  the  truth  that  desire  is 
death.  Except. — "  To  object  to,  to  protest  against,  to  refuse." — SCHMIDT. 
The  antecedent  to  "which"  must  be  "desire,"  which  had  not  kept  the 
prescriptions  of  the  physician  Reason,  refusing  his  physic. 

9  Past  care. — Hopelessly  diseased,  so  that  care  is  useless.  Cf.  King 
Richard  II.,  Act.  ii.  sc.  3,  end,  "Things  past  redress  are  now  with  me 
past  care." 

14  Cf.  cxxxi.  12-14. 


3io  Sbafcegpeare's  Sonnets. 


CXLVIII. 

0  ME,  what  eyes  hath  Love  put  in  my  head, 
Which  have  no  correspondence  with  true  sight ! 
Or,  if  they  have,  where  is  my  judgment  fled, 
That  censures  falsely  what  they  see  aright  ? 
If  that  be  fair  whereon  my  false  eyes  dote, 
What  means  the  world  to  say  it  is  not  so  I 
If  it  be  not,  then  love  doth  well  denote 
Love's  eye  is  not  so  true  as  all  men's  :  no, 
How  can  it  ?     0  how  can  Love's  eye  be  true, 
That  is  so  vex'd  with  watching  and  with  tears  ? 
No  marvel  then  though  I  mistake  my  view  ; 
The  sun  itself  sees  not,  till  heaven  clears. 

O  cunning  Love  !  with  tears  thou  keep'st  me  blind, 
Lest  eyes  well  seeing  thy  foul  faults  should  find. 


CXLVIII.  The  poet  looks  upon  his  mistress  with  the  eyes  of 
love,  and  so  his  view  by  no  means  corresponds  with  that  of  the 
world.  Which  sees  truly  ?  The  poet  concludes  that  the  function 
of  his  eyes  has  become  disordered  by  watching  and  by  tears :  the 
sun  itself  cannot  see  through  rainy  clouds. 

4  Censures  falsely  what  they  see  aright. — Draws  false  conclusions  from 
the  true  image  which  the  eyes  have  transmitted. 

7> 8  Love  doth  well  denote  Love's  eye  is  not  so  true  as  all  men's :  no. — 
The  sense  may  be,  that  the  fact  of  a  man's  being  in  love  is  sufficient 
evidence  (sufficiently  "denotes")  that  he  cannot  see  aright.  The  colon 
before  "  no  "  is  in  Q. 

13  0  cunning  Love! — "Love"  here,  it  would  seem,  must  be  taken  in 
the  same  sense  as  in  the  first  line.  There  is  manifestly  some  distinction 
between  the  "  Love  "  here  spoken  of  and  the  "  Love  "  of  lines  8,  9,  whose 
eye  is  obstructed  by  tears. 


Second  Series.  311 


CXLIX. 

CANST  them,  O  cruel !  say  I  love  thee  not, 
When  I,  against  myself,  with  thee  partake  ? 
Do  I  not  think  on  thee,  when  I  forgot 
Am  of  myself,  all  tyrant,  for  thy  sake  ? 
Who  hateth  thee  that  I  do  call  my  friend  ] 
On  whom  frown'st  thou  that  I  do  fawn  upon  ] 
Nay,  if  thou  low'rst  on  me,  do  I  not  spend 
Eevenge  upon  myself  with  present  moan  ? 
What  merit  do  I  in  myself  respect, 
That  is  so  proud  thy  service  to  despise, 
When  all  my  best  doth  worship  thy  defect, 
Commanded  by  the  motion  of  thine  eyes  ] 

But,  love,  hate  on,  for  now  I  know  thy  mind  ; 

Those  that  can  see  thou  lov'st,  and  I  am  blind. 


CXLIX.  The  poet's  mistress  questions  his  love  for  her.  Against 
such  doubts  and  insinuations  he  protests  that  he  dotes  upon  her 
blindly ;  and  he  charges  her  with  directing  her  loving  regards 
towards  those  who  can  see,  that  is,  can  see  her  defects,  and  who, 
therefore,  view  her  with  indifference,  or  even  display  aversion. 

2  With  thee  partake.— Take  thy  part. 

3>  4  When  I  forgot  am  of  myself,  all  tyrant. — When  I  think  nothing  of 
myself,  am  reckless  of  my  own  interests,  and  thus  play  the  tyrant  towards 
myself.  Dowden,  however,  refers  "all  tyrant"  to  the  lady: — " All 
tyrant,  i.e.,  thou  complete  tyrant ; "  but  this  seems  harsh,  though  it  might 
agree  with  the  "cruel"  of  line  i.  The  view  I  have  given  appears  pre- 
ferable. 

5-9  The  poet  not  only  renounces  those  who  hate  his  mistress  and  those 
on  whom  she  frowns  ;  for  an  ill  look  from  her  causes  him  to  be  hostile  to 
himself. 

9,  10  The  poet  enforces  submission  on  any  feeling  of  pride  within  him 
which  rebels  against  the  service  of  the  lady  as  an  unworthy  person. 

11  My  best. — My  highest  powers.     Defect. — We  now  say  "  defects." 

12  Cf.  cxxxii.  and  cxxxix. 


312  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CL. 

0,  FROM  what  power  hast  them  this  powerful  might, 

With  insufficiency  my  heart  to  sway  ? 

To  make  me  give  the  lie  to  my  true  sight, 

And  swear  that  brightness  doth  not  grace  the  day  1 

Whence  hast  thou  this  becoming  of  things  ill, 

That  in  the  very  refuse  of  thy  deeds 

There  is  such  strength  and  warrantise  of  skill, 

That  in  my  mind,  thy  worst  all  best  exceeds  1 

Who  taught  thee  how  to  make  me  love  thee  more, 

The  more  I  hear  and  see  just  cause  of  hate  ? 

O,  though  I  love  what  others  do  abhor, 

With  others  thou  should'st  not  abhor  my  state  ; 

If  thy  unworthiness  rais'd  love  in  me, 

More  worthy  I  to  be  belov'd  of  thee. 


CL.  The  poet  expresses  his  wonder  that  a  woman  so  deficient  in 
attractions  can  exert  such  a  powerful  sway  over  him.  But  the  fact 
being  so,  there  was  the  stronger  reason  why  she  should  return  his 
affection. 

2  With  insufficiency. — With  defective  attractions,  or  deficient  in  attrac- 
tions. 

4  Implying,  If  the  day  is  bright  and  beautiful,  thou  certainly  art  not  so. 

5  How  is  it  that  thou  makest  plain  and  unsightly  features  and  unworthy 
actions  seem  so  becoming  ? 

6  The  very  refuse  of  thy  deeds. — The  worst  (line  8)  of  thy  actions. 

7  Such  strength  and  warrantise  of  skill. — Such  ability  and  evident 
cleverness.      "  Warrantise "    has    apparently    passed    to    the    sense    of 
"evidence." 


Secon&  Series,  313 


CLI. 

LOVE  is  too  young  to  know  what  conscience  is  ; 
Yet  who  knows  not,  conscience  is  born  of  love  ? 
Then,  gentle  cheater,  urge  not  my  amiss, 
Lest  guilty  of  my  faults  thy  sweet  self  prove. 
For  thou  betraying  me,  I  do  betray 
My  nobler  part  to  my  gross  body's  treason  ; 
My  soul  doth  tell  my  body  that  he  may 
Triumph  in  love  ;  flesh  stays  no  farther  reason, 
But  rising  at  thy  name,  doth  point  out  thee 
As  his  triumphant  prize.     Proud  of  this  pride, 
He  is  contented  thy  poor  drudge  to  be, 
To  stand  in  thy  affairs,  fall  by  thy  side. 
No  want  of  conscience  hold  it  that  I  call 
Her  '  love,'  for  whose  dear  love  I  rise  and  fall. 


CLI.  A  consciousness  of  where  fault  lies  is  apt  to  follow  after 
love.  There  was  danger,  therefore,  lest  the  poet's  mistress  should 
be  incriminated  as  the  cause  of  his  bringing  the  nobler  part  of  his 
nature  under  the  dominion  of  his  fleshly  lusts.  He  asks,  therefore, 
that  the  question  as  to  the  morality  of  his  conduct  shall  not  be 
raised. 

l' 2  Love  in  its  first  impetuousness  disregards  moral  considerations,  but 
reflection  and  remorse  follow  on  its  fruition. 

5>  6  For  thou  betraying  me,  &c. — The  "gentle  cheater"  betrays  or 
seduces  the  poet  into  sin  ;  and  so  he  becomes  guilty  of  treason  against 
the  nobler  part  of  his  nature. 

9  Thy  name.— See  note  on  line  14. 

10  Pride. — Proud  conquest,  alluding  most  likely  to  the  lady's  rank. 
In  his  triumphant  prize  there  is  probably  an  allusion  also  to  the  name 
"Fitton,"  the  fit  one. 

14  Rise  and  fall. — Rise  in  the  triumph  of  the  flesh,  and  fall  in  the 
subjugation  and  humiliation  of  the  soul.  It  has  been  thought  that  some 
lines  in  this  Sonnet  were  expressed  so  that  they  might  be  taken  sensu  male 
pudico  ;  but  whether  this  be  so  or  not  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  deter- 
mine, though,  as  the  lady  was  probably  Mrs.  Mary  Fitton,  it  is  not  very 
difficult  to  suggest  a  possible  play  on  the  name  in  two  ways.  As  to  the 
possible  play  on  "fit "  compare  Cymbeline,  Act  iv.  sc.  i,  "  For  'tis  said  '  a 
woman's  fitness  comes  by  fits.' " 


Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CLII. 

IN  loving  thee  thou  know'st  I  am  forsworn, 
But  thou  art  twice  forsworn  ;  to  me  love  swearing, 
In  act  thy  bed-vow  broke,  and  new  faith  torn, 
In  vowing  new  hate  after  new  love  bearing.  4 

But  why  of  two  oaths'  breach  do  I  accuse  thee, 
When  I  break  twenty  ?  I  am  perjur'd  most ; 
For  all  my  vows  are  oaths  but  to  misuse  thee, 
And  all  my  honest  faith  in  thee  is  lost  :  8 

For  I  have  sworn  deep  oaths  of  thy  deep  kindness, 
Oaths  of  thy  love,  thy  truth,  thy  constancy  ; 
And,  to  enlighten  thee,  gave  eyes  to  blindness, 
Or  made  them  swear  against  the  thing  they  see  ;  12 

For  I  have  sworn  thee  fair  :  more  perjur'd  I, 
To  swear,  against  the  truth,  so  foul  a  lie  !  14 


CLII.  The  poet  confesses  that  his  attachment  to  his  dark  mis- 
tress convicts  him  of  unfaithfulness.  She,  however,  has  been  not 
only  similarly  unfaithful,  but  unfaithful  anew  to  him.  Still,  he 
allows  that  he  is  the  more  untruthful ;  for,  corrupt  as  she  was,  he 
had  ascribed  to  her  excellent  virtues,  and,  in  defiance  of  truth,  had 
proclaimed  her  beautiful. 

I  Forsworn. — As  having  been  married  long  before. 

3  In  act. — In   reality.      This  is  a   very  important  qualification   with 
respect  to  Mrs.  Fitton  as  the  lady  referred  to.     She  may  have  alleged 
that  she  was  formally  and  legally  free  from  her  youthful  marriage,  pro- 
bably a  runaway  match,  without  the  consent  of  her  parents.     The  poet 
alleges  that  in  reality  she  had  broken  her  marriage- vow.     According  to 
modern  usage,  "  in  act  "  suggests  another  sense,  which  is  here  unsuitable, 
as  the  vow  was  broken  in  act,  when  swearing  love  to  the  poet.     Cf. 
Introd.,  p.  88. 

4  The  "  new  hate  "  and  "  new  love  "  are  obviously  towards  the  poet. 

7  To  misuse  thee. — To  treat  you  in  a  manner  entirely  different  from  that 
in  which  you  ought  to  be  treated. 

8  In  thee  is  lost. — As  being  incurably  depraved. 

10>11  Oaths  of  thy  deep  kindness,  &c.— Oaths  that  thou  wast  most  kind, 
loving,  and  faithful. 

II  To  enlighten  thee. — To  shed  lustre  on  thee. 

12  Them. — Eyes,  apparently. 

13  Perjur'd  I. — Q.  has  "perjurde  eye." 


Gbfrfc  Series.  315 


CLIII. 

CUPID  laid  by  his  brand,  and  fell  asleep  : 
A  maid  of  Dian's  this  advantage  found, 
And  his  love-kindling  fire  did  quickly  steep 
In  a  cold  valley-fountain  of  that  ground  ;  4 

Which  borrow'd  from  this  holy  fire  of  love 
A  dateless  lively  heat,  still  to  endure  ; 
And  grew  a  seething  bath,  which  yet  men  prove 
Against  strange  maladies  a  sovereign  cure.  s 

But  at  my  mistress'  eye  Love's  brand  new-fired, 
The  boy  for  trial  needs  would  touch  my  breast  ; 
I  sick  withal,  the  help  of  bath  desired, 
And  thither  hied,  a  sad  distemper'd  guest,  12 

But  found  no  cure  ;  the  bath  for  my  help  lies 
Where  Cupid  got  new  fire  ;  my  mistress'  eyes.          14 

CLIII.  This  and  the  following  Sonnet,  placed  as  they  are  at  the 
end,  are  best  regarded,  perhaps,  as  constituting  a  division  by  them- 
selves. Both  treat,  though  with  some  differences,  of  the  same  theme, 
that  "Love's  fire  heats  water;  water  cools  not  love."  The  dis- 
covery of  the  source  whence  the  fable  was  (though,  as  is  probable, 
indirectly)  derived  is  due  to  Herzberg  (Shakespeare  Jahrbuch,  vol. 
xiii.,  1878).  He  tracked  the  legend  to  a  poem  in  the  Anthology,  by 
Marianus,  written,  as  he  thinks  likely,  in  the  fifth  century  after 
Christ  :— 


TaS'  VTTO  ras  ir\a.Tavovs  aira\a}  Terpv/j-tvos 
evdev  "Epws,  vv/u,(j>ais  \afjLird5a  TrapBt/J-ev 
8'  a\\~/)\rj<Ti,  ri  /j.^\\ofJLev,  aWe  8e  r 

j>,  elirov,  6/xoO  trvp  KpaSL 
S'ws  £0Xe£e  /cat  vdara,  6epfj.bv 

maSes  \ovrpoxoevcriv  vSwp. 

"  Here,  under  the  plane-trees,  Love,  having  placed  his  torch  by  the 
Nymphs,  overpowered  by  gentle  slumber,  was  sleeping.  Then  said 
the  Nymphs  to  one  another,  '  Why  do  we  delay  ?  Would  that  we 
could  put  out,  together  with  this,  the  fire  in  the  heart  of  mortals  !  ' 
But  as  the  torch  inflamed  also  the  waters,  the  Love-nymphs  from 
thence  draw  warm  water  for  their  bath." 

The  Epigram  is  ix.  627  of  the  Palatine  Anthology.  This  and  the 
following  Sonnet  are  manifestly  based  upon  the  Epigram,  though 
neither  is  properly  a  translation  of  it. 

2  A  maid  of  Dian's.  —  Similarly  we  have  in  the  following  Sonnet  "many 
nymphs  that  vow'd  chaste  life  to  keep." 

6  Dateless.  —  Eternal.    Cf.  xxx.  6.    "  Heat  perpetual  "  in  the  next  Sonnet. 

8  Stranye.  —  Q.  has  "  strang,"  which  might  possibly  represent  "strong." 

11  Bath.  —  The  idea  of  a  reference  to  the  city  of  Bath  can  scarcely  seem 
very  probable,  whatever  may  be  true  as  to  Shakespeare's  fondness  for  puns. 

14  Eyes.—Q.  has  "eye." 


316  Sbafcespeare's  Sonnets. 


CLIV. 

THE  little  Love-god  lying  once  asleep, 
Laid  by  his  side  his  heart-inflaming  brand, 
Whilst  many  nymphs  that  vow'd  chaste  life  to  keep 
Came  tripping  by  ;  but  in  her  maiden  hand 
The  fairest  votary  took  up  that  fire 
Which  many  legions  of  true  hearts  had  warm'd  ; 
And  so  the  general  of  hot  desire 
Was,  sleeping,  by  a  virgin  hand  disarm'd. 
This  brand  she  quenched  in  a  cool  well  by, 
Which  from  love's  fire  took  heat  perpetual, 
Growing  a  bath  and  healthful  remedy 
For  men  diseas'd  ;  but  I,  my  mistress'  thrall, 
Came  there  for  cure,  and  this  by  that  I  prove, 
Love's  fire  heats  water,  water  cools  not  love. 


CLIV.  This  Sonnet  resembles  so  closely  that  preceding  that  no 
additional  introductory  remarks  seem  necessary. 

2  Laid  by  his  side,  &c. — Neither  here  nor  before  is  there  any  indication 
of  the  brand  being  brought  purposely  near  to  the  nymphs  (irap6e/j,ej>os). 

7  The  general. — The  chief  cause  and  promoter.  The  sense  is  somewhat 
different  in  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  v.  sc.  3,  line  219,  "And  then  will  I  be 
general  of  your  woes." 

12  Thrall.— Subject,  slaye. 


PRINTED  BY  BALLANTYNE,   HANSON  AND  CO 
EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON 


•ear 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PR  Shakespeare,  William 

2848  Sonnets 

A2T88 
cop.  2 


