N 


\SONA 


\ 


HIGHWAYS    AND    BYWAYS 
OF   THE    SOUTH 


jT^^^K-o 


In  Southern  Florida 


HIGHWAYS    AND    BYWAYS 


OF    THE    SOUTH 


\i 


WRITTEN    AND 
ILLUSTRATED    BY 

CLIFTON   JOHNSON 


Published  by  THE    MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

Neiv   York  McMIV 

LONDON:    MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,    LIMITED 


P.bpp.kpri 


> 


Copyright,  igo^, 

by  The  Macmillan  Company. 


Set  up  and  electrotyped. 
Published  October,  1904. 


THE  NEW  YORK 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

306 1 7  3 

ASTOR, LENOX  AND 
TILDEN   FOUNDATIONS. 

R  1 90>1  L 


Electrotyped 

and 

Printed 

at  the 

Norwood  Press, 

Norwood,  Muss. 


A  CONSIDERABLE  portion  of 
the  material  included  in  this 
volume  was  first  published 
in  Outings  The  Book/overs 
Magazi?iey  The  Pilgrim^ 
Woman''  s  Home  Companio?!^ 
The  Boston  Transcript y  The  ' 
Springfiehi  Republican,  The 
Interior,  and  in  The  Outlook. 


Contents 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

^v. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 


rrass 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast     . 

Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee  River 

A  County-seat  in  Alabama 

Among  the  Georgia  Crackers 

In  the  Tennessee  Mountains 

The  Birthplace  of  Lincoln 

A  Glimpse  of  Kentucky  Blue 

On  the  Banks  of  the  Ohio 

A  Virginia  Wonder 

The  Battlefield  of  Bull  Run 

John  Brown's  Town 

In  Cotton  Harvest  Time 

A  Quest  for  Tar  .  , 

Round  about  Old  Jamestown 

The  Niggers 


Page 
I 

75 
96 

121 

174 
191 

210 

228 

244 

265 

290 

3^3 


X 


vu 


List   of  Illustrations 


In  Southern  Florida 

A  Well 

Ancient  Spanish  Gateway  at  St.  Augustine 

Palmettoes  on  the  Indian  River  . 

A  Characteristic  Landscape 

A  Colored  Truck  Farmer  . 

A  Planter  ready  to  start  for  Market 

On  the  Borders  of  the  Everglades 

An  Indian  Dugout  .... 

Seminole  Indians  from  the  Everglades  . 

Grubbing  up  Palmetto  Scrub 

Picking  Oranges       .... 

Washing  in  the  Yard 

A  Successful  Search  for  Eggs 

Water  from  the  Village  Pump     . 

The  Colored  People's  Schoolhouse 

The  Jew's-harp       .... 

The  Bell-ringers 

A  Drink  from  the  Suwanee 

ix 


Frontispiece 


Facifig 
Facing 


Facing 


Page 
I 

3 

5 

7 
1 1 

15 

i8 

19 
21 

24 

26 

29 

35 
39 
43 
49 
56 

63 


List  of  Illustrations 


the  C 


Mosquitoes 

The  Court-house  Front 

A  Favorite  Loitering  Place 

Quiet  on  the  Town  Street 

A  Typical  Old-time  Mansion 

Repairing  a  Chair    . 

A  Discussion 

Keeping  the  Grass  out  of 

The  Negro  Cemetery 

An  Improvised  Hothouse 

A  Country  Mule  hitched 

At  Home 

A  Schoolroom  Corner 

A  Country  Store 

Bee  Gums 

A  Foot-bridge 

Working  in  the  Garden 

Hickory  Whistles     . 

Neighbors 

Returning  from  the  Hen-house 

A  Drink  at  the  Spring 

An  Old-time  Tavern 

A  Mountain  Mill     . 

In  an  Upland  Corn-field 

Evening  on  the  Porch 

Dipping  SnufF 

An  Inhabitant  of  the  Mountains 


on  a  Town  Street 


emetery 


Facing 


Faci/ig 


Facing 


Facing 


Facing 


Facing 
Facing 


Page 

70 

75 

77 

79 
82 

84 

86 

89 

91 
92 

95 
96 

98 

100 

104 

107 

1 10 

1 12 

115 
119 

121 

122 

125 

128 

138 


List  of  Illustrations 


XI 


Ploughing  among  the  Girdled  Chestnuts 

Pioneer  Homemakers 

A  Woodland  Schoolhouse 

The  Entrance  to  the  Mammoth  Cave 

Hodgensville  . 

The  Site  of  the  Lincoln  Cabin 

A  Pail  of  Water  from  the  Lincoln  Spring 

The  Fisherman 

A  Wounded  Crow  . 

On  the  Highway 

Weeding  a  Tobacco  Bed 

A  Blue-grass  Mansion 

An  Old  Toll-gate  House  on  the  Pikt 

A  Country  Storekeeper 

Rubbing  down  a  Trotter 

A  Village  Scene 

At  the  Back  Door 

An  Onion  Patch 

A  Ferrv  Steamer 

Corn-meal  Day 

Some  Farm  Buildings 

Going  Home  from  the  Spring 

A  Riverside  Team   . 

A  Schoolgirl  at  Home 

Rafts  on  a  Tributary 

The  Natural  Bridge 

Planting  Watermelons 


Facing 


Facing 
Facing 


Faci?ig 


Facing 


Facing 


Facing 


Page 

41 
42 

45 

47 
54 
56 

59 
64 

69 

70 

74 
76 

78 
80 

83 

84 

89 

91 
92 

95 
96 

98 

203 

206 

209 

210 

213 


Xll 


List  of  Illustrations 


Page 

A  Spring-house        ...... 

215 

A  Farmer's  Boy       .... 

217 

A  Load  of  Logs       .... 

219 

A  Sunny  Afternoon 

Facing 

220 

Splitting  out  Shingles  from  an  Oak 

222 

A  Home  Gateway  . 

223 

Companions   ..... 

Factfig 

224 

Stone  Bridge  over  Bull  Run 

228 

A  Huckster's  Team  on  the  Way  to  Washington 

231 

The  Spot  where  Stonewall  Jackson  was  Wounded  . 

233 

On  the  Battle-field  ...... 

234 

Feeding  the  Calf 

235 

A  Pitcher  of  Milk  . 

Facing 

237 

A  Ford 

239 

A  Negro's  Woodpile 

Facing 

242 

A  Doorstep  Maid    . 

244 

An  Old  Mill 

• 

247 

A  Question     . 

249 

A  Chat  on  the  Road 

Facing 

251 

A  Hillside  Highway 

253 

Some  Fun  in  a  Boat 

# 

257 

The  Church  Brown  attended       .           .           .           . 

258 

The  Meeting  of  the  Shenandoah  and  Potomac 

260 

Beside  the  Potomac            .           .           .           .           . 

Facing 

262 

October  in  South  Carolina           .          .          .          . 

265 

An  Ox  in  Harness  ...... 

269 

The  Plantation  Porch 

.          ■ 

■          « 

271 

List  of  Illustrations 


Xlll 


A  Rice  Mill  .... 

Digging  Peanuts 

Old-time  Plantation  Quarters 

A  Live-oak  draped  with  Moss     . 

Coming  Home  from  the  Post-office 

A  Pause  on  the  Road 

An  Advertisement    .  .  . 

Dipping  Tar  into  a  Barrel 

The  Burning  Tar-kiln 

The  Tar-burner's  CamD  . 

On  a  Trail     .... 

At  the  Back  Door    . 

The  Home  Woodpile 

Garden  Peppers 

The  Tower  of  Jamestown  Church 

Yorktown  Street 

The  Spot  where  Cornwallis  surrendered 

The  Beach  at  Yorktown    . 

Stacking  Cornstalks 

A  Rider  .... 

On  the  Road  Home 

The  James  River  opposite  the  Old  Settlemen 

A  Dwelling    .... 

A  Cotton  Picker  at  his  Cabin  Well 

An  Inventor  and  his  Street  Car  . 

Weighing  the  Day's  Picking 

Watering  the  Plants 


Facitig 


Facing 


Facing 
Facing 


Facing 


Facing 


Facing 


Facing 


Page 

274 
276 
279 
281 
285 
287 
290 

297 
298 

307 
309 

3»i 
313 
315 

317 
318 
320 

323 

325 

329 

330 

333 
338 

342 
346 


XIV 


List  of  Illustrations 


Page 

Reading          ..... 

.      349 

A  Squirrel  in  Sight  .... 

Facing     355 

A  Campmceting  Building 

.     357 

A  Negro  Schoolhouse 

•     359 

A  Farm  Cart            .... 

.     361 

Introductory    Note 

In  writing  the  present  volume  I  have  simply 
attempted  to  give  a  faithful  record  of  Impressions  in 
a  region  where  life  probably  has  a  more  picturesque 
interest  than  anywhere  else  In  our  country.  I,  how- 
ever, scarcely  touch  on  the  town  life,  or  the  progress 
of  manufacturing ;  nor  do  I  deal  with  the  South  as 
a  land  of  romance  and  sentiment,  the  home  of  beau- 
tiful women  and  chivalric  men  —  that  has  been  amply 
done  by  the  novelists.  My  rambling  has  been  in  the 
fields  and  woodlands,  my  stopping-places  in  the  little 
villages  and  scattered  farmhouses,  and  I  write  almost 
wholly  of  rustic  life  and  nature  as  I  saw  them  in  my 
desultory  journeyings. 

Clifton  Johnson. 
Hadley,  Mass. 


XV 


Highways   and    Byways   of  the 

South 


I 


SPRING    ON    THE    FLORIDA    COAST 


A  Well 


B 


IN  the  North,  though  the 
winter  frosts  had  relaxed 
their  fiercer  rigors,  the 
weather  was  still  raw  and  cold, 
the  woodlands  were  wholly 
leafless,  and  the  fields  sear 
and  brown.  But  when  I 
sailed  three  days  from  New 
York  southward  I  found 
myself  amid  blossoms  and 
abounding  green  foliage,  and 
the  air  was  full  of  kindly 
warmth.  How  delightful  it 
all  was !  —  as  if  I  had  by 
some  magic  skipped  entirely 
the  chilly  uncertainty  of  spring 
and  entered  at  once  into  the 
serenity  of  early  summer. 
I 


2  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

Yet  I  cannot  say  that  Florida  on  closer  acquaintance 
seemed  quite  worthy  of  its  name ;  for  if  you  would 
have  a  profusion  of  flowers,  you  must  nurse  and  coax 
them.  They  are  not  such  a  spontaneous  product  of 
the  climate  as  one  would  expect.  The  soil  is  too  poor, 
and  nowhere  did  the  blossoms  brighten  and  gladden 
the  earth  as  our  spring  flowers  do  in  the  North. 
Indeed,  the  aspect  of  the  country  is  for  the  most  part 
rather  monotonously  sober  —  an  unending,  sandy  level 
overspread  with  pine  woods,  and  a  low,  spiny  under- 
growth of  palmetto  scrub. 

After  leaving  Jacksonville,  where  I  had  disembarked, 
I  first  of  all  visited  St.  Augustine,  and  saw  its  ancient 
fort  and  massive  city  gateway.  The  fort  is  of  genuine 
mediaeval  type,  the  only  one  of  its  kind  in  America. 
Its  gray,  weatherworn  stones  proclaim  its  great  age,  the 
rooms  are  satisfactorily  gloomy  and  dungeon-like,  and 
you  can  trace  the  course  of  the  old  moat  round  about. 
Both  the  fort  and  the  gateway  date  back  to  the  time 
when  St.  Augustine  was  a  Spanish  walled  town.  The 
place  itself  has  one  or  two  curious  narrow  thorough- 
fares and  odd  survivals  of  bygone  architecture,  but  its 
prevailing  characteristics  are  those  of  a  fashionable 
pleasure  resort.  All  the  open  fields  on  the  outskirts 
have  been  taken  possession  of  by  the  golf-players. 
Once,  when  I  had  stopped  to  watch  a  game,  an  old 
colored  man  came  along  and  leaned  over  the  picket 
fence  near  me. 


Spring  on  the   Florida  Coast  3 

"  I    want    to    see    what    they   gwine   do,"    he    said. 
"  Good   gracious   alive !    see  whar   that   tall   man   sen' 


Ancient  Spanish  Gateway  at  St.  Augustine 

that  thar  liT  ball.     Well,  I  do  say  !      Now  he  gwine 
see  if  he  c'n  find  it.     Yes,  sah,  when  they  done  knock 


4  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

the  ball  once  they  foller  it  an'  knocks  it  some  mo'. 
I  look  at  that  game  as  much  as  one  hundred  time,  an' 
I  never  make  out  whar  de  fun  come  in.  I  ain'  never 
play  it  myself,  sah  ;  an'  yet  I  got  no  objection  to  it 
if  thar  ain'  no  betting.  That  my  remonstrance  to 
cairds.  If  yo'  play  cairds,  yo're  boun'  to  bet,  an' 
sooner  or  later  yo're  boun'  to  run  up  against  one  o' 
those  yere  men  what  can  play  any  caird  they  wants  to, 
an'  then  yo'  lose  your  money.  Cairds  ain'  a  good 
thing  —  no,  sah  —  an'  I  lets  'em  alone.  But  I've  seen 
cairds  played.  I've  been  up  all  night  mixin'  the  drinks 
for  white  gemmen,  an'  seein'  'em  play  vintil  six  or 
eight  o'clock  in  the  mornin'  —  yes,  sah  !  " 

From  St.  Augustine  I  journeyed  down  the  coast  as 
far  as  Miami,  and  in  all  this  long  distance  the  portion 
I  enjoyed  most  was  where  the  railway  skirted  close 
along  the  shores  of  the  Indian  River  —  not  really  a 
river  at  all,  but  a  narrow  strip  of  the  ocean  shut  off 
from  the  open  sea  by  a  series  of  islands  that  extend 
parallel  with  the  mainland  for  hundreds  of  miles.  On 
the  shores  here  I  caught  frequent  glimpses  of  long- 
legged  cranes  wading  in  the  shallows,  and  they  gave  a 
touch  of  undisturbed  wildness  to  the  scene  that  was 
very  pleasing.  A  bird  much  more  in  evidence  was  the 
buzzard.  I  constantly  saw  them  when  I  looked  from 
the  car  window,  soaring  on  their  airy  vigils.  If  there 
was  a  prospect  of  a  feast,  they  would  sometimes  con- 
gregate in   hundreds.      Word  seemed  to  be  promptly 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast 


Palmettoes  on  the  Indian  River 

passed  around  whenever  one  of  them  found  anything 
bad  to  eat,  and  all  the  friends  and  relatives  were  sure 
to  be  on  hand,  including  a  delegation  of  crows. 

To   a  very  great   extent   the  railroad  was   hemmed 
in  on  either  side  by  pine  and  palmetto  forest.      Pines 


6  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

were  the  predominant  trees  —  tall,  slender,  and  smooth 
columned  ;  but  in  places  there  were  many  palmettoes. 
The  latter  are  the  only  trees  of  the  palm  family  that 
are  indigenous  to  the  country,  and  while  not  accounted 
of  much  value  they  are  by  no  means  entirely  useless. 
The  trunks  are  occasionally  cut  into  lengths  for  fence 
posts,  and  have  sometimes  been  set  up  for  telegraph 
poles,  and  they  make  specially  good  wharf  piles,  as  the 
borers  do  not  attack  them  as  they  do  most  woods.  The 
tree's  vitality  is  concentrated  in  the  heart  of  the  crown- 
ing bunch  of  leaves.  Even  flames  that  scorch  off  the 
leafage  and  burn  the  trunk  half  through  are  only  a  tem- 
porary set-back.  If  the  central  bud  is  not  injured,  the 
tree  will  endure  almost  anything.  The  soft  enfold- 
ings  of  new  leaves  that  surround  this  bud  somewhat 
resemble  a  cabbage  in  quality,  whence  comes  one  of  the 
tree's  names- — cabbage  palm.  Now  and  then  there 
are  natives  who  eat  the  palmetto  cabbage,  and  they 
declare  it  to  be  very  palatable. 

Miami  is  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  railway  line,  well 
down  toward  the  point  of  the  peninsula.  1  found  the 
place  laid  out  in  right-angled  streets  on  a  grand  scale  ; 
and  long,  straight  avenues  were  cut  through  the  sub- 
urban forests  for  miles  around,  that  the  community 
might  grow  to  an  enormous  metropolis  if  fate  so  wills. 
However,  very  little  had  been  built  thus  far,  and  the 
untamed  woodland  straggled  into  the  very  heart  of  the 
hamlet.     Where  the  soil  was  poor,  the  trees  were  pines. 


Spring  on  the   Florida  Coast 


7 


They  grew  so  scatteringly  you  could  see  for  a  mile  or 
more  among  their  slender  stems,  and  yovi  seemed  to  be 
in  a  monotonous  park,  cleared  of  much  of  its  timber 


A  Characteristic  Landscape 

and  of  all  the  brush  save  the  lowly  palmetto  scrub.  In 
the  hollows  were  intervals  of  dark  rich  earth,  known 
as   "  hammock  land,"  that  supported  a  dense  growth 


8  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

of  banyans,  rubber  trees,  oaks,  and  other  hardwoods. 
The  crowded  trees  and  bushes  of  the  hammock  lands 
were  draped  with  innumerable  vines,  and  formed  real 
equatorial  jungles.  One  of  these  thickets  had  formerly 
covered  a  part  of  the  site  of  the  town,  and  I  was  told 
by  the  first  settlers  of  a  half-dozen  years  before  that 
they  could  only  get  through  it  by  crawling  on  their 
hands  and  knees.  Most  of  the  soil  in  and  about 
Miami  is  so  thin  as  to  be  scarcely  apparent,  and  the 
chalky  rock  which  makes  the  main  substance  of  the 
earth  is  almost  bare.  This  rock  is  much  used  for  road- 
making,  and  the  local  highways  are  commendably 
hard  and  smooth,  but  very  glaring  in  the  intense 
Southern  sunshine. 

One  of  my  walks  took  me  to  Cocoanut  Grove,  a  vil- 
lage of  about  twenty  houses,  six  miles  down  the  coast. 
The  buildings  were  scattered  along  on  a  low  slope  just 
back  from  the  shore  of  the  sea  —  slight  frame  structures 
that  had  sometime  been  painted  and  that  needed  paint- 
ing again.  They  were  not  beautiful,  and  they  were  not 
picturesque,  for  they  were  neither  snug  and  domestic 
nor  interestingly  dilapidated.  However,  it  was  a  delight 
to  see  the  varied  Southern  fruits  to  be  found  in  their 
orchards  and  gardens.  Strawberries  and  early  vege- 
tables were  already  maturing ;  here  and  there  were 
clumps  of  banana  plants  ;  and  orange,  lemon,  lime,  and 
olive  trees  abounded.  Many  of  these  trees  had  ripe 
fruit  hanging  on  them,  and  I   ate  one  of  the  oranges 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast  9 

plucked  fresh  from  the  bough  on  which  it  grew.  How 
solid  and  juicy  and  delicious  it  was  !  A  few  of  the  later 
orange  trees  were  full  of  odorous  white  blossoms,  but 
on  most  of  them  the  green  new  fruit  was  well  formed, 
and  there  was  often  ripe  fruit  on  the  sam.e  trees. 
Near  the  shore  was  a  scattering  of  palms,  —  cocoanut 
palms,  date  palms,  and  royal  palms,  —  and  in  one  spot 
grew  a  bunch  of  slender,  rattling  bamboos,  probably 
fifty  feet  high.  Yet  all  these  tropical  growths  are  im- 
portations, and  you  do  not  find  them  except  in  the 
neighborhood  of  habitations. 

I  saw  and  heard  a  good  deal  of  the  birds,  and  there 
were  numerous  butterflies  and  other  insects.  Some- 
times I  would  happen  on  a  little  brown  chameleon,  and 
once  I  surprised  a  snake  in  the  roadway  —  a  small, 
green  snake,  so  graceful  and  so  delicately  tinted  it 
seemed  the  work  of  a  master  jeweller.  In  the  pine 
woods  the  Bob  Whites  were  calling,  and  occasionally 
several  of  them  would  start  up  at  the  sound  of  my 
footsteps  and  go  skittering  away  with  their  noisy  wings 
in  great  fright.  It  was  evening  by  the  time  I  returned 
to  Miami,  and  the  whippoorwills  were  crying  about  the 
village  borders,  and  the  thin  cimeter  of  the  new  moon 
hung  on  the  western  horizon.  A  man  I  overtook,  and 
in  whose  company  I  continued  for  a  time,  called  my 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  moon  lay  exactly  level 
and  one  horn  was  as  high  as  the  other.  He  said 
according  to  the  Indians  this  level  moon  meant  rain. 


lo  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

They  believe  it  holds  water  in  that  position,  which 
will  have  to  come  out.  But  if  the  basin  of  the 
moon  is  tipped  up  sufficiently  to  allow  its  contents 
to  escape,  then  it  is  of  course  empty,  and  the  weather 
will  be  dry. 

I  had  been  somewhat  disturbed  on  my  walk  by 
sociably  inclined  mosquitoes,  and  would  have  been 
troubled  far  more  had  it  not  been  for  multitudes  of 
dragon-flies,  or  mosquito-hawks,  as  they  are  called  in 
Florida,  which  were  constantly  darting  about  and  doing 
their  best  to  devour  the  pests.  So  many  dragon-flies 
were  engaged  in  this  savage  industry  I  concluded  they 
must  keep  the  mosquitoes  pretty  well  subdued,  and 
was  quite  ready  to  accept  my  landlord's  statement  that 
very  few  mosquitoes  ever  invaded  Miami.  But  one 
of  the  men  sitting  in  the  hotel  office  overheard  the 
landlord,  and  said  sarcastically:  "  No,  they're  a  curiosity 
in  Miami.  You'll  find  plenty  of  'em,  though,  in  the 
next  town  up  the  coast  and  the  next  town  below." 

"  That's  so,"  added  another  man.  "  It's  the  same 
all  over  Florida  —  whatever  place  you  go  to  the 
people  '11  swear  they  don't  have  any  mosquitoes  there  ; 
yet  they'll  acknowledge  to  their  being  all  around." 

"  Fve  been  driving  sometimes,"  said  the  first  man, 
"  and  in  the  swampy  places  the  mosquitoes  would  light 
so  thick  on  my  horse  you  couldn't  'a'  told  what  color 
it  was  ;  and  Fve  been  at  farm-houses  to  dinner  where 
there'd  be  so  much  of  a   smudge  made  to  drive  the 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast 


II 


mosquitoes  out  that  I  couldn't  see  the  persons  sitting 
across  the  table  from  me.  I  don't  know  what  we'd 
do  without  smudges  during  August  and  September." 

How  do  you  make  a  smudge  ?  "  I  asked. 

It's  easy  done,"  was  the  reply.  "  You  only  need 
to  set  fire  to  some  rags  that  you  have  sprinkled  with 
a  little  water  so  they'll  burn  slow.  There's  times 
when  you'll  see  the  nigger  wenches  washing  clothes  in 


cc 


C( 


A  Colored  Truck  Farmer 


12  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

the  yards  and  a  line  of  smudge  around  'em  on  the 
ground." 

"  I've  heard,"  remarked  the  second  man,  "  that  over 
on  the  islands  they  have  to  put  overalls  on  their  mules 
to  protect  'em  from  the  mosquitoes." 

"Those  islands  are  terrible  places  for  mosquitoes," 
affirmed  the  landlord.  "  I've  known  the  farmers  there 
to  bring  their  hogs  and  chickens  over  to  the  mainland 
to  keep  the  mosquitoes  from  killing  'em  ;  and  when  a 
gang  of  men  is  at  work  there,  setting  out  pineapples, 
one  man  '11  walk  along  to  windward  carryin'  a  smudge." 

Another  member  of  the  company  took  up  the  sub- 
ject and  remarked  :  "  I  had  some  experience  in  a  place 
I  was  stopping  at  one  time.  The  mosquitoes  were 
bound  to  follow  a  person  everywhere,  and  I  had  a  nigger 
along  with  me,  and  when  I  was  goin'  in  to  the  hotel,  he'd 
take  a  palmetto  leaf  and  whisk  'em  all  off.  Then  he'd 
say,  *  Ready  ! '  and  throw  open  the  door  and  shout, 
'Jump!  '  and  in  I'd  go,  and  he'd  slam  the  door  after 
me.  Same  way  about  goin'  to  bed.  The  bed  had  a 
canopy  netting  over  it,  and  when  I  was  all  fixed,  my 
nigger'd  brush  me  off  and  say,  '  Ready  — jump  !'  and 
I'd  pop  under  the  mosquito  bars  as  lively  as  I  could,  so 
as  not  to  give  the  mosquitoes  any  chance  to  follow  me." 

"  Don't  be  afraid  to  tell  the  whole  truth  while  you 
are  about  it,  gentlemen,"  said  a  man  who  had  come  in 
a  few  minutes  previous.  "  Now  I've  had  my  cham- 
ber windows  so  covered  with  mosquitoes  that  not  a  ray 


Spring  on  the   Florida  Coast  13 

of  light  could  get  in,  and,  as  a  result,  I've  slept  through 
three  days,  thinking  all  the  time  it  was  night." 

"  I  suppose  every  creature  has  a  use,"  observed  the 
landlord  in  conclusion,  "but  Heaven  only  knows  what 
mosquitoes  were  made  for." 

The  most  interesting  of  my  excursions  while  at 
Miami  was  one  up  the  river  of  the  same  name  to  the 
Everglades.  The  distance  was  only  four  miles,  and 
there  were  boatmen  who  made  a  business  of  rowing 
those  who  wished  to  see  the  glades  up  and  back  at  so 
much  an  hour.  I  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  navigator 
named  Holt.  He  recommended  himself  to  me  by 
declaring  that  he  was  not  like  his  competitors.  "  The 
other  fellers  will  say  they  make  the  trip  an'  get  back  in 
an  hour  or  two,  but  they  can't  do  it.  They  want  you 
think  it  will  not  cost  much,  so  you  give  'em  the  job  ; 
an'  then  they  do  all  they  can  to  make  the  time  long. 
I  ain't  been  here  but  little  while,  and  I  tell  the  trut';  and 
so  the  others,  they  don't  like  me  much.  You  have  to 
look  out  aroun'  these  parts.  Your  best  frien'  '11  cheat 
you  in  Miami;  an'  I  reckon  the  rest  of  the  Florida 
people  will  do  about  the  same.  1  tell  you  they  are 
sharp  —  sharp  as  a  brier.  Every  man  got  a  scheme  to 
work  off  on  outsiders,  an'  there  mo'  money  sunk  in 
this  state  than  in  any  other  state  in  the  Union." 

The  Miami  is  a  small  tide-water  stream,  slow  flowing 
and  deep.  The  shores  were,  for  the  most  part,  lined 
with  a  thicket  of  mangrove    trees,  or  rather  bushes  ; 


14  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

for  they  grew  broad  Instead  of  high,  and  their  tangled 
branches  had  nearly  as  many  pendent  roots  as  they 
had  twigs.  At  frequent  intervals  along  the  banks 
were  posted  signs  —  cheap,  thin  boards,  each  proclaim- 
ing that, 

"  Billings's  shoes  are  silent  salesmen." 

One  could  not  help  feeling  that  Billings  merited 
severe  and  summary  punishment  for  profaning  nature 
on  this  quiet  waterway  with  such  an  array  of  noisy  signs 
about  his  silent  shoes. 

Back  of  the  fringe  of  mangroves  was  forest,  with  an 
occasional  opening  where  some  settler  had  started  a  farm. 
Opposite  each  farm  would  be  a  wharf  and  a  boat  or 
two,  and  the  river  was  evidently  the  chief  highway  of 
the  dwellers  on  its  shores.  I  came  along  just  in  time 
to  see  one  farmer  finish  loading  his  boat  with  produce 
to  take  down  to  the  town.  He  had  potatoes,  cab- 
bages, poultry  and  eggs,  tomatoes  and  several  bunches 
of  bananas  ;  and  the  boat  sank  almost  to  the  gunwales. 
He  was  a  bushy-bearded,  long-haired,  half-wild-looking 
individual,  but  his  conversation  was  marked  by  intel- 
ligence, and  even  a  touch  of  culture.  I  mentioned  this 
to  Holt  when  we  had  left  the  pioneer  behind.  "Yes," 
said  my  boatman,  "  but  you  can  find  better  talkers  than 
he  is  here.  You  ought  to  go  over  to  the  next  farm 
across  the  river.  The  man  there  —  he  talks  like  a 
minister  —  he  got  just  that  slang,  you  know.     My  talk 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast 


15 


is  not  good.  I  been  a  sailor  many  years,  and  the  sailors 
on  a  ship,  they  are  men  of  all  nations  piled  together, 
an'  pretty  rough,  an'  they  great  cursers.     I  got  so  use' 


iL  L.   ■  i.  ■*!..  ^ -     -    — ._    . 

A  Planter  ready  to  start  for  Market 

to  their  talk  I  couldn't  do  nothing  for  long  time  but 
curse  same  like  they  did.  That  didn't  suit  me.  I  am 
a  philosopher,  an'  my  feelin's  are  delicate  ;  an'  I  got 
thinkin'  of  it  mo'  an'  mo',  an'  1  stopped." 


1 6  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

My  philosophic  and  delicate  companion  pulled  along 
upstream  in  silence  for  a  while,  and  then  he  gave  me 
his  views  with  regard  to  the  "  niggers." 

"  I  have  no  use  for  'em,"  said  he.  "  They're  treach- 
erous. If  a  white  man  got  five  cents,  and  the  niggers 
have  a  good  chance,  they  murder  him  for  it.  Yes,  if 
they  get  a  poor  white  man  alone,  they  murder  him  for 
his  clothes.  They  come  to  your  face  fine  as  can  be,  but 
you  turn  your  back  an'  they  cut  your  throat ;  though, 
of  co'se,  there's  some  are  all  right.  1  got  heap  of  good 
idea,  I've  knocked  about  so  long,  an'  1  keep  away  from 
niggers.  They  have  a  nachul  stink,  you  know  ;  and  if 
you  stay  with  'em  all  the  time  it  apt  to  drive  you  crazy. 
They  smell  so  bad  you  throw  up  your  heart.  Did 
you  ever  hear  what  Billy  Bowlegs,  the  big  chief  of  the 
Seminoles,  says  about  niggers  ?  He  says  God  first 
made  the  Injun,  then  He  made  the  white  man,  then 
He  made  the  Injun's  dog,  and  then  He  made  the  nig- 
ger;  and  I  think  that  about  the  way  of  it.  You  laugh 
because  he  put  their  dog  before  the  nigger,  but  an 
Injun  dog  ain't  like  common  dogs.  Their  dogs  know 
something  an'  can  be  trusted.  Let  me  tell  you.  There 
was  an  Injun,  not  long  ago,  come  to  Miami,  and  he 
left  his  dog  to  take  care  of  his  things  down  by  the 
shore  of  the  river  while  he  was  in  the  town  two  days 
drunk.  It  was  just  a  common  yaller  dog.  I  was  with 
the  Injun  when  he  went  back  to  where  the  dog  was  ; 
an'  the  dog  was  half  starved,  but  it  hadn't  touched  a 


Spring  on  the   Florida  Coast  17 

thing,  though  there  was  crackers  and  meat  within  easy 
reach.'* 

The  day  was  one  of  warm  and  windless  quiet.  I 
could  see  fishes  swimming  lazily  in  the  water ;  once  a 
porpoise  made  a  playful  leap  close  beside  the  boat ; 
there  were  mud-turtles  sunning  themselves  on  snags 
by  the  banks,  and  they  v/ould  lift  up  inquisitive  heads 
at  our  approach  and  slide  off  with  a  gentle  plunk  into 
the  stream,  out  of  sight.  Grasshoppers  and  locusts  were 
humming  and  birds  were  singing.  The  most  notice- 
able songsters  were  the  mocking-birds.  "  That's  them," 
said  Holt.  "  I  can  tell  'em  because  they  sing  so  many 
different  tunes.  You  be  thinkin'  they  got  all  kind  of 
birds'  warble." 

The  stream  narrowed  as  we  went  on  until  it  became 
scarcely  wide  enough  for  Holt  to  use  his  oars.  Finally 
we  came  to  rapids  where  the  water  foamed  in  noisy 
shallows  down  a  rough  rocky  channel.  We  got  out, 
and  Holt  took  off  his  shoes,  rolled  up  his  trousers, 
and  thus  accoutred,  sometimes  on  shore,  sometimes 
wading,  he  tugged  the  boat  up  the  incline.  The  rise 
was  short,  for  the  Everglades  are  only  about  a  score  of 
feet  above  the  sea-level.  Soon  we  came  out  on  the 
marshes.  They  spread  away  in  a  broad,  sedge-grown 
level,  broken  here  and  there  with  wooded  knolls  and 
threaded  with  slender  streams.  We  could  have  gone 
on  a  hundred  miles  and  more  and  found  nothing  dif- 
ferent.    This  immense  tract  of  swamp  has  numerous 


1 8  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

outlets  on  both  sides  of  the  peninsula,  but  they  only 
carry  off  enough  water  to  keep  the  shallow  basin  from 
becoming  a  lake.  A  project  is  broached  for  draining 
the  Everglades  of  their  surplus  moisture  by  blasting 
the  channels  of  the  outlets  deeper.  Then  the  reclaimed 
land  would  be  sold  for  farm  purposes. 

On  the  scattered  swamp  islands  some  hundreds  of 
Seminole    Indians    make  their   homes.     "They   been 


■  »tlMlii;J,i!«* 


MMiB^iaU-' 


^.Tnl 


On  the  Borders  of  the  Everglades 

told  so  much  lie,"  Holt  explained,  "that  they  ain*t 
likin'  the  white  man  very  well  any  mo',  and  they  keep 
away  by  theirselves  in  the  Glades." 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast 


19 


The  Indians  often  visit  Miami;  and  after  I  returned 
to  the  town,  while   I    was   still    on   the   banks   of  the 


^r^i- 


An  Indian  Dugout 

river,  I  saw  two  of  their  canoes  coming  down  the 
stream  with  two  men  in  each.  The  canoes  were  dug- 
outs, yet  they  were  symmetrically  and  neatly  fashioned, 
and  were  much  better  craft  than  I  would  have  expected. 
Ordinarily  they  were  propelled  by  poling,  but  the  poles 
had  a  slight  paddle  blade  on  one  end  that  could  be 
used  when  necessary. 

Holt  had  assured  me  that,  "The  Indians  wear  any- 
thing at  all  —  they  don't  care  what,  if  it  is  only  fancy." 


20  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

He  was  right.  I  never  had  seen  human  creatures  more 
grotesque.  Their  brown  legs  and  shanks  were  entirely 
bare,  except  for  the  flaps  of  their  shirts ;  but  their 
upper  persons  were  considerably  adorned.  They  had 
neckerchiefs  and  w^atch  chains,  and  one  wore  a  soldier's 
coat  with  brass  buttons,  while  a  comrade  had  the  vest 
to  match.  Two  had  derby  hats,  one  a  straw  hat,  one 
a  cap.  The  motley  array  of  these  children  of  the 
forest  seemed  to  suggest  that  they  had  made  way  with 
a  party  of  white  enemies  and  divided  the  spoils. 

They  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  in  town  talking  with 
the  chaffing  inhabitants,  buying  a  few  supplies,  and 
perambulating  about  among  the  saloons.  Finally  they 
tottered  down  to  the  river,  and  in  the  palmetto  scrub 
under  the  pines,  made  a  fire  and  cooked  some  food. 
I  tried  to  talk  with  them  there,  but  they  had  few 
English  words  at  command,  and  the  interview  was  not 
very  satisfactory.  Their  eyes  were  bloodshot  with 
liquor,  and  the  eldest  of  them  lost  his  balance  and 
keeled  over  into  the  brush.  He  lay  for  a  while  in 
drunken  stupor,  and  then  sat  up  with  his  head  on  his 
breast.  The  others,  after  eating,  started  for  the  village 
to  secure  another  dram,  but  pretty  soon  one  of  them 
came  running  back  and  began  calling  to  the  seated 
Indian  :  "My  frien'  !      Come  here,  come  here  !  " 

Not  getting  any  response  he  went  and  helped  his 
companion  to  his  feet,  and  supported  him  on  his  way 
to  the  town.     They  were  a  melancholy  spectacle. 


Seminole  Indians   from  the   Everglades 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast  21 

When  such  parties  of  Indians  come  to  the  towns  of 
the  whites  one  of  their  number  always  stays  reasonably 
sober  to  guard  their  interests  ;  but  as  their  visits  usually 
extend  over  several  days,  and  the  Indians  take  turns  in 
doing  guard  duty,  every  brave  has  a  chance  "  to  get 
beastly  drunk  and  have  a  big  time."  At  Miami  they 
were  said  to  have  a  special  liking  for  an  illicit  brandy, 
the  vigor  of  which  was  attested  by  its  having  received 
the  title  of  "  Chain  lightning "  ;  but  as  a  rule  their 
favorite  liquors  are  corn  or  rye  whiskey.  They  do  not 
care  for  anything  milder. 

Whatever  their  failings,  the  Indians  are  absolutely 
trustworthy.  "  Sometimes  an  Injun  will  come  into 
the  hotel  here,"  my  landlord  informed  me,  "  and  he 
says,  '  Me  hungry.  Money,  me  no  got  'im  '  ;  and  he 
wants  a  dinner,  and  promises  to  pay  in  a  certain  number 
of  moons.  I  may  forget  all  about  it,  but  the  Injun 
don't.  When  the  time  comes,  he  pays.  The  only 
dishonest  Injun  I  ever  heard  of  was  one  that  stole 
two  hens  from  another  Injun  and  swapped  'em  for 
liquor;  but  he  was  found  out,  and  he  had  to  be  the 
slave  of  the  one  he  stole  from  for  about  half  a  year. 

"  They  cultivate  little  patches  of  land  on  the  Ever- 
glade knolls  and  raise  corn  and  pumpkins  and  such 
things.  When  the  corn  gets  ripe  enough  to  eat,  they 
have  a  green  corn  dance  that  lasts  a  whole  day  and 
night.  Some  Injuns  have  houses  eight  or  ten  feet 
square  made  of  boards  ;  but  most  have  just  palmetto 


22  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

shacks  —  huts  shaped  like  a  tent  with  a  pole  frame- 
work that  is  thatched  with  palmetto  leaves.  They  like 
to  move  to  new  quarters  often,  and  every  time  one  of 
'em  does  that  he  takes  the  whole  shootin'  ranch  with 
him  —  pigs,  chickens,  and  all.  They  bring  a  part  of  the 
things  they  raise  to  the  towns  and  dispose  of  'em  ;  but 
they  have  good  guns,  and  they  get  much  more  money 
out  of  their  hunting  than  they  do  out  of  their  farm 
produce.  Alligator  and  other  hides  fetch  'em  the  most, 
and  they  sell  some  venison  and  the  feathers  of  the  pink 
curlew,  bittern,  and  heron.  You'd  be  surprised  to  see 
the  things  they  buy.  Some  of  'em  invest  in  sewing- 
machines.  They  have  quite  a  likin'  for  railroad  con- 
ductor's caps,  and  they  get  the  storekeepers  to  order 
'em,  and  they  are  particular  to  have  the  word  con- 
ductor on,  and  the  gilt  bands. 

"  They  are  very  peaceful  among  themselves  and 
with  the  whites,  too.  I  know  one  of  'em  came  to  my 
house  before  I  kep'  a  hotel,  and  my  wife  was  there 
alone.  He  had  a  little  whiskey  in  him,  and  was  boun' 
to  talk,  and  she  was  kind  of  afraid  of  him.  She  was 
washin'  clothes,  and  some  of  'em  was  boilin'  in  the 
kittle.  By  and  by  she  picked  up  a  stick  to  lift  out  the 
clothes  from  the  boilin'  water  and  the  Injun  thought 
she  was  goin'  to  hit  him,  and  he  said,  '  Oh,  me  go  ! ' 
and  he  went.  That  was  Charlie  Cypress.  They're 
all  gettin'  to  have  white  names  that  they  fix  up  for 
themselves  —  like  Charlie   Cypress  and  John  Doctor 


Spring  on  the  Florida  Coast  23 

and  Billy  Stuart.  Billy  can  write  his  name,  only  the 
way  he  writes  it  is  '  Mr.  Billy  Mr.  Stuart.'  " 

On  leaving  Miami  I  journeyed  nearly  two  hundred 
miles  northward  and  stopped  at  a  village  in  the  centre 
of  the  orange-growing  country  bordering  the  Indian 
River.  I  found  lodging  while  there  in  a  private  house. 
The  yard  was  aglow  with  the  bloom  of  roses,  lilies, 
and  trumpet  flowers,  and  the  greatest  lack  of  the  house 
surroundings  was  turf.  In  this  land  of  sand  and  almost 
uninterrupted  summer  you  can  scarcely  find  a  respect- 
able bit  of  lawn  anywhere,  and  all  the  ornamental  shrubs 
and  the  blossoms  never  quite  succeed  in  banishing  the 
sense  of  barrenness.  Then,  too,  the  dwellings,with  their 
unsubstantial  foundations,  seem  incomplete  and  shabbily 
constructed.  Not  a  house  in  the  village  had  a  cellar. 
Some  were  on  pillars  of  brick,  but  most  on  wooden 
posts  or  blocks.  This  underpinning  tends  to  give 
way  or  settle  as  time  goes  on.  In  consequence,  plaster 
room-walls  would  crack,  and  sheathing  serves  instead. 

The  village  walks  were  shadowed  by  trees,  but  the 
trees  were  not  large,  and  the  streets  were  hot  and 
dusty.  The  main  thoroughfare,  on  which  my  lodging- 
place  fronted,  was  seldom  busy,  and  most  of  the  time 
was  wholly  vacant ;  yet  it  was  not  as  vacant  as  it 
would  be  later.  "  A  month  from  now,"  said  my  land- 
lady, "  when  the  Northern  people  whoVe  been  spend- 
ing the  winter  are  all  gone,  the  street  will  be  like  the 
cemetery  out  here  — just  so  lonely." 


24  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

That  was  putting  it  pretty  strong,  for  the  cemetery 
was  as  forlorn  a  spot  as  could  well  be  imagined.  It 
was  on  the  village  outskirts,  and  was  a  waste  of  sand 
and  brush.  Several  family  plots  had  been  enclosed  by 
fences  of  henyard  wire,  or  shaky  pickets,  but  the 
majority  of  the  graves  were  in  the  open.  A  few  had 
headstones.  The  rest  had  been  marked,  when  new- 
made,  by  bits  of  board  ;  but  wood  decays,  and  the  lowly 
movinds  had  been  soon  effaced  and  their  place  forgot- 
ten, so  that  often  when  a  fresh  grave  is  dug  some  old 
coffin  is  encountered.  My  landlady  started  Bermuda 
grass  on  her  plot.  It,  however,  grew  so  tall  and  thick 
she  rooted  it  all  out  and  restored  the  plot  to  its  origi- 
nal sand. 

In  the  woods  beyond  the  cemetery  grew  huckleber- 
ries and  the  wild  scuppernong  grapes.  The  grape-vines 
were  pointed  out  to  me  by  a  negro,  who  told  how  sweet 
and  good  the  fruit  was,  and  he  said  he  had  a  "  tame  " 
scuppernong  vine  in  his  garden  which  produced  even 
finer  fruit  than  the  wild  kind.  The  negro  homes 
formed  quite  a  settlement  huddled  in  a  hollow  beyond 
the  railroad.  The  surroundings  were  unkempt  and 
the  houses  small.  I  looked  into  one  ofthem.  It  was 
perhaps  twenty  feet  square  —  a  single  room  without 
sheathing  or  ceiling.  The  walls  were  papered  with 
Harper's  Bazars  and  some  great  gaudy  pictures  from 
a  Sunday-school  lesson-roll.  Most  of  the  furniture 
seemed  to  be  beds,  and  there  was  need  for  them.     The 


Grubbing  up  Palmetto  Scrub 


ryjJ  YORK 

;ARY 


TILD£N    FOUNDATIONS. 


Spring  on  the   Florida   Coast  25 

family  was  large,  and  so  are  nearly  all  colored  families. 
Indeed,  one  of  the  white  villagers  affirmed  that  it 
wasn't  possible  to  count  the  children  in  the  "  nigger- 
town  "  houses  —  "you  have  to  measure  'em  by  the 
bushel." 

The  cultivated  lands  of  the  region  lay  on  a  strip 
of  ridge  along  the  coast.  This  ridge  was  only  about 
a  half-mile  wide,  and  to  the  west  it  fell  away  into 
boggy  "prairies"  that  were  very  "sour"  and  subject 
to  floods  from  the  St.  Johns  River.  The  orange  trees 
were  practically  all  killed  off  in  the  freeze  of  1895, 
as  they  were  everywhere  in  the  state  except  at  the 
extreme  southern  end.  That  was  Florida's  great  dis- 
aster—  a  disaster  from  which  it  has  never  recovered. 
In  other  states  you  hear  constant  reference  to  the 
period  "  before  the  war,"  but  in  Florida  they  substitute 
the  phrase  "  before  the  freeze."  During  the  years 
immediately  preceding,  the  orange  industry  had  been 
greatly  developed,  the  orchards  were  fast  multiplying, 
and  an  immense  amount  of  capital  was  invested. 
Then  the  thermometer  dropped,  the  trees  were  blasted, 
and  the  Floridians'  dreams  of  wealth  received  a  doleful 
set-back. 

That  same  cold  winter  the  state  experienced  the  only 
snowstorm  that  has  occurred  within  the  remembrance 
of  the  oldest  inhabitant.  The  snow  fell  to  the  depth 
of  two  inches  one  night  in  all  the  northern  counties, 
and  the  people  opened  astonished  eyes  in  the  morning 


i6  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

to  find  a  white  world.     The  negroes  were  particularly 
impressed,  and  instances  are  reported  of  colored  chil- 


Picking  Oranges 

dren  who  looked  out  of  the   window  and   exclaimed, 
"  Somebody  done  scatter  flour  all  over  our  front  yard." 


Spring  on  the   Florida  Coast  27 

It  is  only  in  a  few  of  the  most  favorably  situated 
sections  that  orange  raising  has  been  resumed.  On 
the  Indian  River  the  people  were  just  beginning  to  get 
good  crops  again,  though  the  trees  were  still  small. 
Besides  oranges,  they  grow  all  kinds  of  early  vegetables, 
and  my  table  fare  was  every  day  made  attractive  with 
newly  maturing  delicacies  from  the  garden.  I  remem- 
ber once  some  very  fine  string  beans  were  served  which 
my  landlady  said  had  grown  so  long  that  when  she  was 
getting  them  ready  to  cook  she  "  had  to  break  them 
in  seven  or  eight  halves." 

My  landlady  had  come  from  New  York  State  in  her 
youth,  and  I  asked  if  she  did  not  sometime  intend  to 
return.  "  No,"  was  her  response,  "  my  husband  is  buried 
here,  and  no  money  could  hire  me  to  leave.  This  is 
an  expensive  place  to  live  —  why,  milk  is  fifteen  cents 
a  quart,  and  is  scarce  at  that,  and  all  other  rashions  cost 
high,  too  ;  but  it  looks  like  the  place  where  everything 
is  just  as  you'd  have  it  is  a  country  where  nobody 
show  their  nose  in  yet.  When  I  first  come  here  I 
didn't  s'pose  I'd  stay  a  year.  There  wa'n't  no  one 
aroun'  hardly  but  niggers  then,  and  they  was  a  shift- 
less lot,  and  spent  half  their  time  out  in  the  palmetto 
scrub  playing  cards.  I  didn't  dare  walk  nowhere  for 
fear  they'd  jump  out  of  the  scrub  and  take  my  head 
off  from  me.  But  they've  improved  —  and  the  cli- 
mate can't  be  beat." 

All   the   Florida   dwellers  were   ready   to   swear  by 


2  8  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

their  cHmate,  though  some  would  add  that  the  state 
could  boast  of  nothing  else,  and  often  they  expressed 
surprise  that  any  one  should  be  tempted  to  come  from 
other  regions  to  settle  and  try  to  make  a  living. 

While  I  was  staying  in  the  orange  district  my  favor- 
ite walks  were  along  the  sea.  A  roadway  bordered  by 
palmettoes  and  live-oaks  skirted  the  shore,  and  the 
oak  limbs  were  hung  with  great  fluffy  trailings  of 
Spanish  moss  that  swayed  softly  with  every  breeze. 
Some  of  these  pendants  were  at  least  ten  feet  long. 
One  of  the  spots  that  attracted  me  especially  was  a 
low  point  thrusting  well  out  into  the  bay,  on  which 
grew  a  thick  palmetto  grove.  I  could  never  pass  this 
grove  without  stopping.  Its  seclusion  was  delightful. 
The  shattered  wreck  of  a  little  sail-boat  lay  on  the 
beach,  and  the  columnar  tree  trunks  with  their  tufted 
tops,  and  the  heat  and  silence,  were  such  that  I  could 
easily  fancy  myself  a  Robinson  Crusoe  castaway. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  ocean  there  was  always  a 
breeze  as  the  day  advanced,  but  the  early  morning  was 
apt  to  be  perfectly  quiet,  and  then  the  glimmering 
sea  was  superlatively  beautiful.  The  warm,  clear  sun- 
light, the  mellow  haze  dimming  the  islands  across  the 
channel,  the  numerous  ducks  afloat  on  the  water,  the 
leaping  of  fish,  and  the  bird  songs  of  many  kinds  com- 
bined to  give  a  sentiment  as  charmingly  and  languor- 
ously tropical  as  can  be  experienced  anywhere  on  the 
mainland  of  our  national  domain. 


II 


WAY    DOWN    UPON    THE    SUWANEE    RIVER 


Washing  in  the  Yard 


I 


N  that  melodious 
and  touching 
song  of  Stephen 
Foster's  — "The  Old 
Folks  at  Home  "  — 
which  with  its  simple 
sweetness  and  the 
genuineness  of  its 
pathos  has  held  such 
wide  sway  for  more 
than  a  generation,  we 
get  the  impression 
that  the  country  bor- 
dering the  Suwanee 
is  a  Southern  para- 
dise. Not  that  you 
find  exactly  this  stated 
in  the  words,  but  the  longing  of  the  negro  singer  for 
his  old  home  seems  to  infer  as  much.  However,  as 
there  is  always  something  of  paradise  in  the  back-look 
to  a  happy  childhood,  whatever  the  environment  may 

29 


JO  Highways  and  Byways   of  the  South 

have  been,  I  suppose  it  was  to  be  expected  that  1 
should  find  this  Florida  river  in  the  reality  quite  dif- 
ferent from  my  preconceived  idea  of  it. 

At  the  time  I  saw  the  Suwanee,  in  April,  it  was 
sullen  and  rapid ;  it  had  high,  wooded  banks,  with 
considerable  palmetto  scrub  in  the  underbrush ;  and 
now  and  then  a  live-oak  heavily  bearded  with  moss 
reached  out  over  the  stream.  Pine  forest  covered 
much  of  the  surrounding  country,  but  this  gave  way 
to  cypress  in  the  swamps  and  to  hardwoods  along  the 
watercourses.  The  river  was  stained  with  the  washings 
of  a  recent  flood.  "There's  high  water  ev'y  big  rain 
we  have,"  one  of  the  natives  informed  me  ;  "  an'  I  tell 
you  this  hyar  river's  a  tiger  when  she  start  a-risin'. 
Sometimes  she  come  up  a  foot  an  hour." 

The  village  in  which  I  was  staying  was  mostly 
inhabited  by  negroes.  It  had  no  hotel,  and  occasional 
sojourners  were  accommodated  at  a  Mr.  Perky's, 
whose  weatherworn,  two-story  house  stood  not  far 
from  the  railway  station.  The  house  had  a  large  yard 
enclosed  by  a  picket  fence  somewhat  patched  and 
propped.  Very  little  grass  grew  in  the  yard,  and  the 
earth  was  a  good  deal  scratched  up  with  hen  holes. 
Just  inside  the  gate  on  either  side  of  the  board  walk 
that  led  up  to  the  porch  was  a  large  cedar  tree  ;  and 
between  the  cedars  and  the  house  three  or  four  orange 
trees  had  been  started,  but  the  frosts  had  nipped  them 
every  few  years,  compelling  them  each  time  to  begin 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  31 

again  from  the  roots,  so  that  they  never  got  to  be  more 
than  bushy  clumps. 

The  only  dwelling  in  the  hamlet  that  could  fairly 
be  called  commodious  and  comfortable  was  the  home 
of  Mr.  Tushers,  the  chief  business  man  of  the  region, 
and  owner  of  most  of  the  land.  Mr.  Tushers  had 
turpentine  works  and  a  sawmill,  and  he  was  postmaster 
and  the  proprietor  of  the  one  store.  His  house 
fronted  on  the  main  road.  Nearly  all  the  houses 
strung  along  this  highway  were  occupied  by  whites  ; 
but  on  the  alleys  and  byways  were  rows  of  negro 
cabins  —  small,  overcrowded,  and  shabby,  compared 
with  which  the  poorest  dwellings  of  the  whites  were 
cheerful.  An  occasional  cabin  was  shadowed  by  a  china- 
berry  tree,  at  that  season  full  of  sweet,  purple  bloom. 
As  a  rule,  however,  they  were  bare  to  sun  and  weather. 
Usually  there  was  a  tumbledown  porch  at  the  front. 
The  cabins  themselves  were  mere  shells,  with  glassless 
window  openings  closed  by  board  shutters.  Inside, 
the  rough  studding  of  the  walls  was  neither  hidden 
by  sheathing  nor  by  lath  and  plaster,  and  the  rooms 
were  very  sure  to  be  grimy  and  unkempt  and  gloomy. 
Primitive  fireplaces  were  still  depended  on  for  ordinary 
heating  purposes,  and  it  was  the  same  in  the  homes  ot 
the  whites.  "  Only  rich  people  "  could  afford  to  have 
stoves  throughout  the  house,  yet  even  the  poorest  of 
both  races  in  most  parts  of  the  South  contrive  to  have 
a  little  stove  for  cooking. 


32  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

Each  Suwanee  cabin  had  its  accompanying  garden 
patch,  rudely  fenced  to  keep  the  wandering  hogs  and 
cows  from  trespassing.  The  ground  had  been  partially 
planted,  and  the  collards,  beans,  etc.,  were  in  some 
instances  ready  for  hoeing.  The  rent  for  a  cabin  and 
garden  was  from  two  to  four  dollars  a  month.  Often 
the  cabin  dweller  rented  extra  ground,  on  which  he 
would  raise  such  crops  as  corn,  cotton,  rice,  sugar-cane, 
and  sweet  potatoes. 

Much  of  the  above  information  I  gathered  from 
Mr.  Perky  as  we  sat  together  on  his  "  po'ch."  Mr. 
Perky  had  been  a  soldier.  So  have  practically  all  the 
older  Southern  men.  But  my  landlord's  war  expe- 
riences had  not  been  at  all  thrilling,  or  else  the 
excitement  was  sapped  from  them  by  his  drawling, 
husky-voiced  telling  of  them.  I  did  not  gain  a  very 
high  opinion  of  his  patriotism.  "  I  was  in  the  war  from 
beginnin'  to  eend,"  he  said,  "  an'  I  use'  to  think  some- 
times about  desertin' ;  but  I  reckoned  a  deserter 
wouldn't  be  thought  much  of  at  home.  That's  whar 
I  was  mistaken.  The  deserters  had  a  chance  to  make 
money  after  they  got  back,  and  those  that  didn't 
desert  come  home  pore,  and  so  the  deserters  done 
showed  up  the  best  and  was  thought  the  most  of" 

He  seemed  to  be  haunted  by  a  melancholy  regret 
that  he  had  not  deserted.  He  was  a  tall,  lank,  cadav- 
erous-featured man,  and  not  very  energetic.  He  liked 
to  sit  on  his  porch,  and  I  think  most  Southern  people 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  ^^ 

have  the  same  liking.  It  seems  to  be  a  constitutional 
or  climatic  necessity.  At  any  rate,  ancestral  usage  from 
the  remote  past  has  put  on  the  custom  the  seal  of  its 
approval.  Mr.  Perky  would  spend  the  major  part  of 
a  day  on  his  "  po'ch,"  with  entire  ease  of  conscience. 
For  a  change  he  might  go  to  the  store  and  sit  on  the 
"  po'ch  "  there  an  hour  or  so,  or  to  the  railway  station 
to  see  a  train  come  in  and  depart.  Train  time  always 
found  a  waiting  group  of  loiterers  on  the  station  plat- 
form. Without  the  stimulus  of  this  mild  excitement 
the  sluggish  village  life  would  very  likely  have  come  to 
a  complete  stop.  It  was  an  especial  pleasure  to  the 
negroes.  "  If  thar  was  a  train  through  hyar  every  half- 
hour,  the  darkeys  'd  be  thar  to  see  it,"  declared  Mr. 
Perky's  daughter.  Nan.  "  They  stan'  thar  an'  look  an' 
look,  like  they  hadn't  never  seen  a  train  befo'.  The 
niggers  aroun'  hyar  are  curiosities,  they  certainly  are." 

Nan  was  the  village  belle.  I  had  caught  a  glimpse 
of  her  at  the  door  when  I  first  entered  the  gate  in  search 
of  lodging,  but  she  had  promptly  disappeared  to  im- 
prove her  raiment.  Now  she  had  come  out  again  to 
the  porch. 

"  This  is  a  right  pretty  day,"  said  she. 

I  assented. 

"Is  your  home  out  North?"  she  inquired;  but 
before  I  could  reply  she  caught  sight  of  two  little 
colored  boys  who  were  passing,  and  called  out,  "  Jerry  ! 
Abraham  !  " 


D 


34  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

The  bovs  stopped.     "  Yes,  ma'am,"  they  said. 

"  I  want  yo'." 

The  boys  hastened  into  the  yard,  and  she  continued  : 
"  I  reckon  thar's  some  aigs  under  the  house.  Yo'  go 
under  and  see." 

The  house  was  set  on  blocks  eighteen  or  twenty 
inches  from  the  ground  in  the  usual  Southern  way,  and 
in  the  seclusion  beneath  the  dwelling  the  hens  often 
made  their  nests.  "  Maw,  she  go  under  thar  sometimes 
and  crawl  aroun'  for  aigs,"  explained  Nan,  "  but  mostly 
we  get  these  hyar  boys  to  do  it.  That  Jerry  is  a  slick 
duck,  an'  he's  boun'  to  find  'em  if  thar  are  any." 

The  search  to-day  ended  in  the  boys  coming  forth 
with  their  hats  full.  They  counted  up  twenty-seven 
eggs  from  a  single  nest.  Miss  Perky  carried  the  eggs 
into  the  house  and  returned  with  a  plate  of  food  left 
over  from  dinner,  and  the  boys  seated  themselves  on 
the  back  steps  to  eat  it.  "  They'll  do  anything  if  you 
give  them  something  to  eat,"  she  said. 

Nan's  "  maw  "  came  out  as  the  boys  were  finishing, 
and  said  she  reckoned  the  nest  they  had  found  wasn't 
the  only  one  on  the  place.  That  seemed  quite  likely, 
for  the  hens  rambled  about  very  much  as  they  pleased. 
Boxes  had  been  nailed  up  against  the  smokehouse  for 
them  to  lay  in,  but  they  neglected  those  and  deposited 
their  eggs  beneath  the  buildings,  or  in  the  crotches  of 
a  big  tree  in  the  back  yard,  or  even  in  the  house  rooms, 
and  one  hen  liked  to  lay  up  under  the  roof  of  the  back 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee  River  ^S 

porch  where  some  missing  sheathing  boards  of  the 
ceihng  gave  access  to  several  dark  crannies. 

"  Abraham,"  said  Mrs.  Perky,  "  yo'  go  to  the  sta- 
tion and  ask  the  station-master  will  he  please  bring  his 
little  ladder  and  look  if  there  are  any  aigs  over  the 
po'ch  hyar,  if  he  can  spare  the  time." 

The  station-master  soon  appeared  with  his  little 
ladder,  made  a  leisurely  search,  and  went  back  to  his 
work.  Mrs.  Perky  had  meanwhile  set  the  colored 
boys  to  chopping  wood.     The  supply  ready  for  burn- 


,..u,..inii.nMmi>w!ni'"' 


vmmmf 


fhWWl—imiWiiiilitMl"'     uj>mj-iiiiil 


A  Successful  Search  for  Eggs 

ing  was  entirely  exhausted,  but  as  this  was  the  state  of 
things  about  thrice  daily,  there  was   no  undue  alarm. 


36  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

The  pile  of  uncut  wood  was  by  no  means  large.  It 
was  replenished  from  time  to  time,  when  the  need  grew 
insistent,  by  a  load  from  the  forest.  Mr.  Perky  com- 
plained that  he  had  to  go  nearly  two  miles  for  his  for- 
est wood,  and  said  it  was  "  gettin'  skace."  He  owned 
no  woodland  ;  but  dead  trees,  standing  or  fallen,  are 
common  property,  and  it  was  with  these  that  he  re- 
newed the  back  yard  pile.  To  reduce  the  wood  to 
proper  length  for  use,  an  axe  was  employed  —  never  a 
saw — and  it  was  customary  to  cut  just  enough  for  the 
immediate  wants  of  the  next  few  hours. 

The  colored  people  were  rather  less  forehanded  than 
the  whites  with  their  wood.  They  were  apt  to  "  tote  " 
it  in  from  the  forest  a  stick  at  a  time,  the  stick  being 
as  large  as  the  bearer  could  comfortably  shoulder. 
Probably  no  class  of  people  with  wood  for  the  taking 
suffer  as  the  negroes  do  in  winter.  They  simply  will 
not  get  enough  to  keep  themselves  warm,  and  their 
thin-walled  houses  are  far  from  easy  to  heat  in  really 
sharp  weather.  Many  a  chill  day,  were  you  to  look 
inside  their  huts,  you  would  find  only  a  little  handful 
of  fire  flickering  in  the  fireplace,  and  the  whole  family 
huddling  about  it,  shivering.  They  may  even  sleep 
around  the  fire.  On  cold  nights  they  help  themselves 
to  sticks  from  the  woodpiles  of  their  white  neighbors, 
and  sometimes  they  will  burn  a  board  of  the  cabin 
floor,  thrusting  an  end  into  the  fire  and  pushing  the 
rest  in  gradually  as  the  flames  eat  it  away. 


Way   down  upon   the  Suwanee   River  37 

Most  of  the  toting  of  wood  from  the  forest  for  the 
negro  cabins  falls  to  the  lot  of  the  women,  and  I  recall 
seeing  one  stout  old  negress,  who  lived  near  the 
Perkys,  bringing  in  wood  thus  a  number  of  times  every 
day.  She  did  her  own  chopping,  and  as  she  gained 
her  livelihood  by  taking  in  washing,  she  not  only  had 
to  chop  enough  for  her  indoor  fires,  but  also  for  an 
outdoor  fire  that  she  kept  burning  pretty  constantly. 
Washing  in  the  yard  is  almost  universal  in  the  South, 
and  neighboring  every  house  is  a  big  black  kettle  in 
which  water  is  heated.  The  colored  woman  of  whom 
I  have  spoken,  after  boiling  the  clothes  in  the  kettle, 
transferred  them  to  some  tubs  on  her  porch,  and 
later  hung  them  on  her  fence  to  dry.  While  she 
worked  she  smoked  a  long-stemmed  pipe.  She  was 
disposed  to  be  critical  of  her  wages,  and  mentioned 
doing  a  wash  for  a  white  family  of  eight  persons  for 
twenty-five  cents  a  week. 

After  Abraham  and  Jerry  had  hacked  away  at  the 
Perkys'  woodpile  for  a  half-hour  or  so  I  went  for  a 
walk  with  them.  Mrs.  Perky  had  rewarded  each  with 
a  chew  of  tobacco.  "  I  been  chewin'  'bacca  ever  since 
I  high  enough  to  know  it,"  confided  Jerry.  "  Us  likes 
It. 

I  made  some  derogatory  remark  about  the  habit,  and 
Abraham  asked  soberly,  "  Is  chewin'  against  the  law  in 
yo'  country,  mister  ?  " 

"Oh,  no!"  said  I. 


38  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  Well,  I  spec  smokin'  is,  ain't  it.  Cap.  ?  "  he  sug- 
gested. 

The  boys  often  addressed  me  by  this  miHtary 
abbreviation.  They  took  considerable  pride  in  being 
mv  companions,  and  were  incHned  to  be  abusive  to 
others  less  favored.  We  met  a  little  girl  they  called 
George-ann  with  a  pail  of  water  poised  on  her  head. 
She  intimated  to  Abraham  that  he  was  wanted  at 
home,  but  he  disdained  her.  "  The  idee ;  you  got  a 
bucket  o'  water  on  yo'  haid,  and  talkin'  to  me  !  " 

Just  then  his  mother  appeared  on  the  scene  and  his 
haughtiness  evaporated.  I  told  her  I  was  going  to  the 
woods,  and  that  I  would  be  glad  to  have  the  boys  go 
with  me. 

"  Sure  God  is  !  "  she  exclaimed.  "  I  doan'  see  what 
yo'  want  wid  dem  raggedy,  good-for-nothin'  boys. 
Dev  look  like  de  berry  debbil  !  " 

Their  appearance  was  not  at  all  suggestive  of  the 
Satanic  to  me,  and  I  found  them  interesting  and  enter- 
taining. They  kept  up  a  continual  chatter  that  con- 
sisted largely  of  bickering  disputes  between  themselves. 
They  seemed  to  enjoy  argument,  and  there  were  few 
subjects  that  did  not  yield  them  a  chance  to  differ. 
For  instance,  take  the  mosquitoes.  They  swarmed 
everywhere  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Suwanee.  You  could 
not  escape  them  in  the  forest,  or  in  the  village,  or  in 
the  homes,  and  they  put  in  twenty-four  hours  a  day 
persecuting   humanity.      Everybody   had   to   keep  up 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  39 


Water  from  the  Village  Pump 

a  constant  fight.  While  I  was  passing  one  of  the 
negro  cabins  with  the  boys  a  shutter  creaked  and  an 
aged  negress  poked  her  head  out  of  a  window  aper- 
ture.    She  said  the  mosquitoes  were  so  bad  she   had 


40  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

closed  her  house  up  tight  and  was  sitting  in  the 
dark. 

"  Look  at  de  skeeters  aroun'  me,"  remarked  Abra- 
ham. "  Dey  done  pester  me  so  I  wish  dey  all  git  in 
a  pile,  an'  den  I  could  cut  'em  up  wid  a  hatchet  or 
somepin'  !  " 

"  Dese  yere  skeeters  bite  anybody,"  Jerry  com- 
mented. 

"  Ehh,  uhh  !  "  grunted  Abraham  in  disapproval. 

"  Yes,  dey  will  !  " 

"  Ehh,  uhh  !  " 

"  Dey  will,  yo'  know  dey  will,  Abwaham." 

"  Will  dey  bite  de  Lord  ?  " 

"  No." 

"  Den  dey  won't  bite  anybody.*' 

"  But  de  Lord  doan'  walk  down  yere,"  was  Jerry's 
excuse.  "  Dey  cain't  meet  up  wid  de  Lord  to  bite 
him  if  he  doan'  walk  down  yere." 

The  boys  spoke  of  a  ball  there  was  to  be  in  the  vil- 
lage soon,  and  they  said  that  they  could  dance,  though 
Jerry  conceded  that  his  companion  was  the  more  ex- 
pert.    "  He  limber  and  he  a  good  dancer,"  said  Jerry. 

I  tried  to  get  Abraham  to  show  his  skill,  but  he 
would  only  go  through  a  few  steps  of  two  dances,  one 
of  which  he  called  "  Pop  Open,"  and  the  other  "  Pull 
the  Mule." 

The  sky  was  dull  and  threatening,  and  once  we 
heard    distant   thunder,  or,   as  the   boys  expressed  it. 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  41 

"  a  grass-wagon  rolling  over  a  bridge."  They  had 
a  good  many  imaginative  notions  of  that  sort.  Jerry 
took  particular  pains  to  point  out  to  Abraham  trees 
in  the  pine  woods  which  he  asserted  were  "  done  swole 
up  —  de  heart  is  daid  "  ;  and  he  called  attention  to 
the  ant  heaps  and  said  :  "  If  dose  red  ants  sting  you, 
dey  give  you  de  fever.  One  done  stung  me  on  dis 
yere  toe  nex'  de  big  toe,  an'  dat  toe  got  so  sore  I 
couldn't  hardly  walk." 

My  companions  were  quick  to  recognize  birds  and 
their  songs,  and  they  pointed  out  to  me  mocking- 
birds, sparrows,  "  loggerheads,"  thrushes,  redbirds, 
and  "  yallerhammers."  They  were  interested  in  the 
berry  bushes  we  passed,  and  spoke  with  especial  en- 
thusiasm of  "jew"  berries,  which  they  said  "got  ripe 
'bout  de  time  de  jew  fall  on  'em  a  liT." 

"  You  like  them,  do  you  ^  "   I  asked. 

"  No,  sah,"  Abraham  responded.  "  I  doan'  like 
'em,  I  loves  'em.  But  de  bes'  berry  is  de  sparkle 
berry  —  m-m,  ah,  ah,  o-o  !  And  yo'  c'n  make  wine 
out  of  sparkle  berries.      Is  you  ever  eat  dem  ^  " 

Scattered  all  through  the  woods  were  low,  delicate 
lilies,  nearly  white,  but  with  tinges  of  purple.  The 
boys  picked  some  of  these,  and  some  "  shame-brier," 
and  some  cowslips  which  they  called  buttercups,  and 
some  lupines  which  they  called  "popple,"  a  name  they 
explained  by  saying  that  the  pods  when  crushed 
would  go  "  pop-pop." 


42  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  We  pick  all  kind  of  flowers  when  school  keep," 
remarked  Jerry,  "  an'  we  tie  'em  up  aroun'  on  de 
schoolroom  walls,  and  dey  suttonly  do  look  han'some." 

"  Can  you  read  ?  "    I  inquired. 

"  I  read  liT  bit.  Dis  yere  boy  "  (indicating  Abra- 
ham) "he  c'n  read  a  lot.  Me  'n'  him  are  jus'  about  as 
ole,  but  he  been  to  school  de  mostest.  We  have 
school  four  month  ev'y  year.  De  las'  teacher  we  had 
was  name  Johnson.  He  was  a  ba-ad  man.  He 
sholy  was.  He  was  always  beatin'.  He  beat  you  if 
yo'  beat  one  of  de  gals  when  we  out  doors  playin' ; 
an'  it  doan'  make  no  dif'runce  if  de  gal  jump  on  yo* 
first.      He  was  a  ba-ad  man." 

On  our  way  back  we  called  at  the  schoolhouse.  It 
stood  lonely  in  the  thin  woods  on  the  outermost 
borders  of  the  village — a  brown,  rickety  barn  of  a 
structure  that  looked  utterly  uncared  for  and  aban- 
doned. I  could  have  wept  when  I  saw  its  melancholy 
interior  —  the  shaky  floor,  the  glassless  window  open- 
ings closed  by  board  shutters,  the  cracks  in  the  walls 
and  roof,  and  the  broken  benches  and  desks.  As  in 
the  negro  cabins,  there  was  no  plastering  or  sheathing 
or  ceiling.  In  one  corner  was  a  small  blackboard,  and 
near  this  a  rude  table  for  the  teacher,  that  was  fenced 
in  with  a  slight  railing.  Abraham  sat  on  the  teacher's 
table  and  dangled  his  heels.  Jerry  hunted  for  bits  of 
chalk  to  use  on  the  blackboard  and  walls.  Two  or 
three    smaller    children    wandered    in    while    we    were 


Way  down  upon   the  Suwanee  River  43 

there,  and  walked  about  very  quietly  until  one  of 
them  suddenly  disappeared  and  set  up  a  frightened 
yelling.  I  ran  to  learn  the  cause  of  the  trouble,  and 
found  the  youngster  had  stepped  on  a  broken  board 
and    fallen    halfway    through    the    floor.      We   rescued 


The  Colored  People's  Schoolhouse 

him,  and  Jerry  put  his  hands  over  the  little  fellow's 
mouth  and  hushed  his  outcries.  This  incident  only 
served  to  add  to  the  pathos  of  the  situation  —  such 
discomforts  and  so  few  advantages !  I  could  not 
fancy  that  the  children  who  attended  school  here 
could  gather  more  than  the  merest  crumbs  of  an 
education. 


44  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

Not  far  away,  in  the  brushy  borders  of  the  "  piney 
woods,"  was  the  negro  graveyard.  A  few  bits  of 
boards  were  set  up  at  the  head  and  foot  of  the  newest 
graves,  but  the  rest  were  wholly  unmarked,  and  time 
had  obliterated  all  signs  of  where  they  had  been.  As 
we  approached  we  saw  a  dog  among  the  graves  gnaw- 
ing a  bone,  and  the  effect  was  grewsome,  though  the 
bone  was  not  human. 

"  My  paw  buried  thar,"  said  Jerry,  and  then,  point- 
ing to  Abraham,  he  added,  "  Dis  boy  paw  ain*  buried 
yet. 

I  wondered,  as  I  turned  away,  whether  this  colored 
schoolhouse  and  graveyard  could  be  at  all  typical. 
Later  experience  leads  me  to  think  they  are  counter- 
parts of  what  would  be  found  in  a  great  many  com- 
munities. The  negroes  are  semi-outcasts.  They  get 
only  the  dregs.  But  then,  the  Southern  country  as  a 
whole  is  poor,  and  the  advantages  the  white  people 
can  provide  for  themselves  are  apt  to  be  very  meagre. 

When  1  returned  to  the  Perkys'  it  was  supper-time ; 
but  supper  was  not  ready.  The  smoke-house  key  was 
lost,  and  everybody  was  hunting  for  it — Mr.  Perky, 
Mrs.  Perky,  Nan,  and  Mr.  Swazey,  the  boarder.  They 
kept  on  ransacking  the  premises  until  Mrs.  Perky  sat 
down  exhausted,  and  said :  "  Well,  I  wouldn't  hunt  any 
more  if  I  was  never  to  eat  another  piece  of  meat  in  my 
life.  Mr.  Perky,  I  wish  yo'  would  buy  a  little  bacon 
at  the  store  —  enough  for  to-night.      It's  likely  I  c'n 


Way  down   upon  the  Suwanee   River  45 

find  the  key  to-morrow.  I  put  that  thar  key  on  the 
shelf  in  yon  closet  this  noon,  an'  I  shet  the  do'  an' 
lef  it  thar  and  ain'  teched  it  since,  an'  yet  hit's  gone 
clean  away.  Well,  I'm  plumb  tired  out  an'  nervous. 
Nan,  you'll  have  to  get  the  supper  ;  "  and  Mrs.  Perky 
took  another  dip  of  snuff. 

Mrs.  Perky  and  her  snuff  were  never  long  separated. 
She  kept  it  in  a  tin  spice  box  and  dipped  with  a  twig 
of  black-gum  six  or  eight  inches  long.  She  kept  a 
supply  of  these  little  twigs  on  hand.  When  in  use 
one  end  of  the  twig  was  chewed  into  a  brushy  swab. 
This  end  she  would  rub  about  in  the  snuff-box  and 
then  thrust  in  her  mouth  and  let  it  stay  there  with 
the  other  end  protruding.  She  did  very  little  masti- 
cating, the  process  consisting  chiefly  in  holding  the 
snuff  in  her  mouth  and  gently  absorbing  it. 

"  I  never  dipped  until  after  I  was  married,"  said  she, 
"  and  not  then  until  I  begun  to  have  dreadful  tooth- 
aches. Mr.  Perky's  folks  was  all  great  tobacco  worms, 
an'  they  tell  me  I  boun'  to  lose  all  my  teeth  if  I  don't 
dip  snuff.  So  I  learnt ;  and  now  when  I  get  worried 
up  over  something,  I  dip  many  a  time  when  1  don't 
know  it  or  think  anything  about  it." 

In  preparation  for  supper  we  men  folks  resorted  to 
the  back  porch  and  washed  our  hands  and  faces  in  a 
tin  basin  kept  there  on  a  shelf  which  extended  between 
two  of  the  porch  posts.  We  threw  the  waste  water 
out  into  the  yard.      Our  immediate  source  of  supply 


4-6  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

was  a  bucket  close  at  hand,  and  this  was  filled  as  occa- 
sion demanded  from  a  cistern  in  the  yard,  that  gathered 
the  drainage  of  the  roof  by  a  system  of  troughs. 

We  ate  in  a  rough  little  room  next  the  still  smaller 
and  rougher  "  cook  room."  Two  long  benches  flanked 
the  table  and  served  as  seats  for  the  Perkys  and  their 
boarder,  but  a  chair  was  set  at  the  head  of  the  table 
for  me.  We  had  bacon,  rice,  canned  tomatoes,  biscuit, 
corn  bread,  and  coffee  ;  and,  with  minor  variations,  this 
was  the  fare  at  every  meal.  The  corn  bread,  also 
called  hoe-cake,  was  a  soggy,  flat,  round  cake,  a  foot 
across  and  an  inch  thick,  baked  on  a  griddle.  There 
was  no  butter,  but  you  could  use  bacon  grease  on  the 
biscuit  and  corn  bread,  or  you  could  dip  on  the  stewed 
tomatoes.  Butter  was  always  scarce  in  the  winter  and 
early  spring. 

"You  see  the  cows  have  to  look  for  themselves  in 
winter,"  explained  Mr.  Perky,  "  and  they  are  obleege 
to  ramp  aroun'  right  smart  to  get  enough  to  live  on. 
We  got  too  many  cows  for  this  hyar  range,  anyway. 
In  the  spring  we  burn  the  old  grass  off"  all  through  the 
woods,  and  pretty  soon  the  new  grass  begin  to  come. 
It's  right  sweet,  and  the  cows  loves  it  dearly.  They 
do  better  then,  and  we  drive  'em  up  an'  milk  'em  and 
have  milk  and  butter  to  use  till  fall.  Some  people 
keep  up  two  or  three  cows  through  the  winter,  but  they 
only  feed  'em  corn  shucks  and  such  like,  and  the  little 
milk  they  give  don't  hardly  pay  for  foolin'  with  'em." 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  47 

The  skim  milk  not  consumed  bv  the  household  was 
fed  to  the  hogs  and  chickens.  Every  family  had  its 
herd  of  razorbacks,  often  fifty  or  seventy-five  of  them. 
During  the  day  they  roamed  the  woods,  and  all 
through  the  forest  I  saw  the  little  holes  they  had  torn 
in  their  search  for  roots  and  worms.  With  the  ap- 
proach of  evening  they  returned  to  the  house  gate  for 
a  feast  of  slops,  and  after  disposing  of  these  and  nosing 
about  the  vicinity  in  search  of  more  morsels,  the  bevy 
of  porkers  would  camp  down  in  a  bunch  near  the  house 
yard  fence  for  the  night.  These  native  black  razor- 
backs  seemed  to  be  quite  successful  in  picking  up  a 
woodland  livelihood,  but  they  never  succeeded  in  fill- 
ing out  their  lean  sides. 

"I  was  layin'  for  to  have  chicken  for  Sunday  dinner 
to-morrow,"  remarked  Nan. 

"  I  reckon  then  the  preacher's  goin'  to  be  hyar  to 
dinner,"  said  Mr.  Swazey. 

"  No,"  replied  Nan,  "he  ain't;  not  that  I've  heard 
of" 

"  A  preacher  don't  think  he's  treated  right  if  he 
goes  visitin',  an'  don't  get  chicken,"  was  Mr.  Swazey's 
comment. 

"  Yes,  preachers  shorely  do  love  chicken,"  said  Nan, 
"  and  so  do  I  ;  but  I  cain't  have  chicken  to-morrow. 
I  been  huntin'  all  roun'  befo'  supper  for  that  ole 
Betsey  hen,  an'  I  couldn't  find  her." 

"  What  hen  is  that .?  "  I  asked. 


48  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

**WhoP  The  ole  Betsey  hen?  Hit's  one  pa  got 
of  a  nigger  name  of  Betsey.  She  owed  him  a  quarter, 
an'  that  was  the  only  way  he  could  get  his  p'ly.  But 
that  hen  has  been  brought  up  with  niggers,  and  hit 
seem  like  she  boun'  to  run  away  to  get  with  them  all 
the  time.  I  got  tired  of  that,  an'  I'm  goin'  to  put  her 
in  the  pot.  I'll  take  her  head  off,  and  then  I  reckon 
she'll  stay  somewhar." 

"  Well,  don't  forget  to  fasten  up  the  henhouse  to- 
night," cautioned  Mrs.  Perky. 

"  What  do  you  fasten  it  for  ?  "  I  inquired. 

"  Hit's  the  only  way  to  have  any  chickens  when 
thar's  niggers  aroun',"  was  Mrs.  Perky's  response. 

"  God  pity  the  chicken  coop  the  niggers  get  into  at 
night,"  remarked  Mr.  Swazey,  fervently. 

"  Sometimes  they'll  put  a  grain  of  corn  on  a  fish- 
hook and  ketch  our  hens  in  the  daytime,"  said  Mrs. 
Perky.     "  I  tell  you  they're  shrewd." 

When  we  finished  eating  and  I  looked  out  of  the 
door  I  noticed  that  mosquito  fires  had  been  kindled  in 
many  of  the  village  yards  to  draw  the  insects  from  the 
dwellings.  While  I  was  watching  the  leaping  flames  of 
these  picturesque  little  bonfires  lighting  up  fitfully  the 
neighboring  house  walls,  I  heard  Nan  calling  excitedly  : 
"  Mr.  Swazey,  yo'  got  yo'  pistol  ?  Come  shoot  this 
dog!  He  been  a-stealin'  of  our  aigs  what  the  hens 
lay  under  the  house  !  " 

We  all  hastened  to  the  back  porch. 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  49 


-.Vjgiy> 


The  Jew's-harp 

"  I  don't  see  no  dog,"  said  Mr.  Swazey,  pistol  in 
hand,  peering  into  the  darkness.  "He  done  got  his 
aigs  an'  gone  with  'em." 

"  No,"  said  Nan,  "  that  he  is,  sneakin'  along  by  the 
fence." 


E 


50  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  Yo'  better  not  shoot  much  off  that  away,"  ob- 
served Mrs.  Perky.     "  Yo'll  hit  a  nigger." 

"Good  thing  if  I  did  —  thar's  too  many  of  'em," 
grumbled  Mr.  Swazey. 

Then  followed  a  sharp  report  and  a  flash  of  fire,  but 
we  saw  the  dog  leap  the  fence  and  disappear.  "  I 
couldn't  get  a  good  aim,"  was  Mr.  Swazey's  excuse. 
"  Hit  was  too  dark."  n 

"  I  know  what  I'm  a-goin'  to  do,"  Nan  said  decid- 
edly. "  I  been  pestered  with  them  nigger  dogs  eatin' 
our  aigs  long  enough.  I'm  goin'  to  the  store  an'  get 
some  Rough  on  Rats,  an'  poison  'em." 

"  That's  right,"  commented  Mr.  Swazey.  "  Don't 
yo'  remember  how  ole  man  Dustan  one  time  poison 
a  liver  an'  kill  mighty  nigh  all  the  dogs  aroun'  ?  " 

Nan  started  after  the  poison,  and  her  father  and 
mother  went  into  the  house.  "  Well,"  said  Mr. 
Swazey,  "  I  mus'  put  this  hyar  pistol  back  in  my 
room.  I  ain't  one  of  them  that  carry  a  gun  regular 
in  their  hip  pocket.  I  don't  believe  in  it.  Hit  makes 
too  much  devilment.  I  recollect  hearin'  a  preacher 
preach  wunst  on  that  subject,  an'  he  say  he  reckon 
thar  was  enough  pistols  right  thar  in  the  chu'ch  that 
minute  to  reach  clear  acrost  it,  if  they  was  to  lay  'em 
down  eend  to  eend,  and  I  s'pose  thar  was.  But 
carryin'  wepons  ain't  so  common  as  hit  use'  to  be. 
I  had  jus'  one  spell  of  it  myself  I  was  only  a  boy 
then,  an'  thar  was  a  man  work  with  me  what  pester  me 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee  River  51 

continual.  He  kep'  shootin'  his  mouth  off  till  I  was 
plumb  distracted,  an'  one  day  when  I  couldn't  stan* 
hit  no  longer  I  cussed  him  for  ev'ythin'  I  could  think 
of.  I  always  had  kep'  quiet  befo',  and  that  cussin' 
skeer  him.  He  tu'n  so  red  hit  look  like  if  you 
scratch  him  with  a  pin  he  'bleeged  to  bleed  to  death. 
I'd  been  carryin'  my  pistol  an'  projeckin'  for  to  kill 
that  man  so  long  I  make  up  my  min'  I  do  the  job  now 
ve'y  soon.  But  I  had  a  friend,  and  he  see  how  things 
was,  and  he  have  a  talk  with  the  man  ;  and  my  friend 
he  say  to  me  afterward  that  the  man  agree  thar  be  no 
mo'  trouble.  That  make  all  the  diffrunce  in  the  worl' 
to  me.  Hit  was  jus'  like  yo'  pick  up  this  house  an' 
set  it  off  of  me." 

At  the  close  of  Mr.  Swazey's  reminiscence  we  went 
indoors.  Nan  had  returned  with  a  supply  of  poison, 
and  was  preparing  for  business.  First  she  imprisoned 
the  cat.  "  She's  a  nachul  good  mouser,"  said  Nan, 
"  and  we  don't  want  to  lose  her ;  and  we  don't  want  to 
lose  Dunk  either,"  she  continued,  as  she  got  out  the 
clothes-line  and  fastened  it  around  the  neck  of  the 
family  dog. 

Dunk  was  a  big,  sober,  long-legged  hound,  and  he 
looked  ashamed  and  disconcerted.  "  This  hyar  dog 
ain't  never  been  tied  up  at  night  befo',"  explained  Miss 
Perky,  "  an'  he  don't  know  what  to  make  of  it.  Did 
yo'  ever  hear  the  sayin'  that  if  yo'  want  a  dog  that  ain't 
yourn  to  stay  with  you,  he'll  stay  if  you  cut  off  a  little 


52  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

hair  from  the  tip  end  of  his  tail  an'  put  it  under  your 
doorstep  ?  Another  way  to  keep  a  dog  that  ain't 
yourn  is  to  take  a  piece  of  meat  an'  rub  it  on  the 
bottom  of  his  foot." 

The  poisoned  meat  was  finally  put  out  in  the  yard, 
and  we  all  gathered  in  the  best  room.  This  room  had 
a  bed  in  it,  a  few  chairs,  a  small  table,  a  battered  bureau, 
and  a  sewing-machine.  There  was  no  carpet  and  there 
were  no  rugs.  The  sheathed  walls  had  been  papered, 
and  the  paper  had  cracked  from  ceiling  to  floor  at 
almost  every  joint  of  the  boards.  Several  hats  adorned 
the  walls,  and  a  number  of  unframed  pictures  were  fas- 
tened up  with  pins.  Three  of  these  pictures  were  big, 
gaudy  circus  posters,  and  another  a  plug  tobacco  adver- 
tisement. The  room  had  a  fireplace,  but  the  weather 
was  too  warm  for  a  fire,  and  the  opening  was  shut  from 
sight  by  a  fireboard  that  was  beautified  with  a  pasting 
of  colored  pictures.  Some  of  the  pictures  were  fashion 
plates,  some  of  them  gay  groups  of  turnips,  beets,  etc., 
from  seed  catalogues,  while  the  centrepiece  was  a  poster 
proclaiming  the  merits  of  a  "Home  Chill  Cure  —  never 
Fails." 

On  the  mantel  was  a  tall  clock.  "  I  bought  that 
twenty  years  ago,"  said  Mr.  Perky.  "  Hit's  an  eight 
day  clock ;  but  hit  don't  run  eight  days  now.  The 
spring  air  a-gettin'  played  out,  and  I'm  'bleeged  to 
wind  hit  twicet  a  week,  or  it  would  go  dead." 

Mrs.  Perky  took  down  from  the  mantel  some  photo- 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee  River  ^^ 

graphs,  and  told  me  all  about  each  person  represented. 
One  was  a  photograph  of  herself,  and  she  wanted  to 
know  if  I  thought  it  "  favored  any."  She  said  she  and 
Nan  had  ordered  three  enlargements  from  an  agent, 
and  were  going  to  have  them  framed.  Mr.  Perky 
remarked  that  he  didn't  see  what  they  wanted  to  buy 
so  many  pictures  for ;  but  his  wife  and  daughter 
promptly  retorted, "  No,  of  co'se  yo'  don't  care  nothin' 
at  all  how  the  house  looks." 

Mr.  Perky  was  glad  to  change  the  subject,  and  he 
got  up  and  rubbed  his  hands  and  face  with  some  spirits 
of  turpentine  from  a  bottle  on  the  bureau.  "  I'm  goin' 
to  see  if  that  won't  keep  these  hyar  mosquitoes  off,"  he 
explained.  "  I  c'n  keep  'em  off  by  smokin',  but  it's 
kind  o'  hard  to  keep  pullin'  at  yo'  pipe  all  the  time." 

"  Don't  yo'  reckon  these  bald-headed  fellers  has  to 
keep  their  hats  on,  when  the  mosquitoes  are  aroun' 
like  they  are  now,  so  they  won't  get  e't  up  by  'em  ^  " 
asked  Mr.  Swazey. 

"  They  bite  me  through  my  shoes,"  Nan  declared. 
"  I've  heard  tell  thar'll  come  a  hundred  for  every  one 
yo'  kill,"  she  continued,  "  an'  hit  look  like  to  me  that 
was  a  true  saying." 

"Well,"  said  Mr.  Perky,  "I  was  over  to  Skace- 
grease,  yesterday  was  a  week  ago,  and  they  said  the 
mosquitoes  was  so  numerous  thar  an'  they  killed  so 
many  they  had  to  haul  'em  off  in  wheelbarrows." 

"  I  wouldn't  be  surprise,"  commented   Mr.  Swazey. 


54  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  They  say  hit's  these  hyar  wiggletails  make  mosqui- 
toes, an'  yo'  know  thar's  a  big  swamp  over  near  Skace- 
grease  whar  the  water's  all  full  o'  them  wiggletails." 

Mr.  Perky  did  not  find  his  application  of  turpen- 
tine very  effective,  and  he  presently  resumed  smoking. 
Every  few  moments  he  would  spit  in  the  direction  of 
the  fireplace.  Mrs.  Perky  had  her  snuff  dip  protruding 
from  her  mouth,  and  she  also  had  a  surplus  of  saliva, 
but  disposed  of  it  behind  the  fireboard.  "  These  mos- 
quitoes make  me  wish  /  smoked  again,"  said  she.  "  I 
use'  to  smoke  equal  to  Mr.  Perky.  After  he  was 
through  with  his  ole  pipe  at  night  I'd  clean  it  out  and 
use  it  myself  But  I  give  that  up,  an'  I  only  smoke 
now  when  I  have  a  cold.  It  opens  up  your  head  to 
smoke  a  cheroot  when  yo'  have  a  bad  cold." 

"  I  wouldn't  smoke,"  Nan  afiirmed,  "  but  I  love  to 
see  an  ole  lady  settin'  'round  the  corner  smokin'." 

"  My  boys  smoke  cigarettes,"  mused  Mrs.  Perky. 
"  I've  tried  to  get  'em  to  use  pipes,  but  they  won't. 
They've  all  moved  away  now,  an'  it  leaves  us  right 
lonesome,  though  they  were  troubles,  too,  sometimes. 
Them  boys  would  rather  see  a  chicken-fight  than  eat 
when  they  was  hungrv,  and  they  were  forever  buyin' 
an'  swappin'  to  get  a  rooster  that'd  whip  all  the  other 
roosters.  I  didn't  like  to  have  our  roosters  fight, 
they'd  get  bunged  up  so,  and  once  when  the  boys 
brought  home  our  rooster  dead  I  could  'a'  whipped 
the  last  one  of 'em." 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee  River  55 

The  evening  sHpped  away,  and  retiring  time  came. 
I  quailed  a  little  when  I  entered  my  sleeping  room 
and  found  it  humming  full  of  mosquitoes  like  a  big 
beehive.  The  creatures  sang  and  bit  all  night,  nor 
could  I  contrive  any  scheme  to  get  away  from  them, 
short  of  suffocating  myself  with  the  bedclothes.  When 
I  came  downstairs  at  six  o'clock  the  next  morning  all 
the  family  were  stirring  except  Nan,  whose  mother 
was  at  the  young  lady's  chamber  door  urging  her  to 
come  forth  and  help  about  breakfast.  Nan  was  re- 
luctant. She  said  she  had  got  supper  the  night  before, 
and  so  didn't  think  she  ought  to  be  asked  to  help  with 
breakfast.  Mrs.  Perky  returned  to  the  cook  room. 
1  looked  out  on  the  yard  from  the  back  porch. 
"  Where  are  your  dead  dogs  P  "   I   inquired. 

"  I  reckon  Nan  didn't  put  that  thar  poison  out  early 
enough  las'  night,"  replied  Mrs.  Perky.  "  I  jus'  went 
out  to  take  it  in  an'  I  foun'  that  ole  Betsey  hen  a-gnawin' 
at  It. 

The  old  Betsey  hen  did  not  die  from  the  effects  of 
the  poison.  She  was  a  hardv,  adventurous  creature, 
and  when  we  were  disturbed  during  breakfast  by  a 
great  clatter  from  the  cook  room.  Nan  ran  out  and 
called  back  :  "  It's  that  ole  Betsev  hen.  A  little  mo' 
an'  she'd  have  laid  a  aig  in  the  frying  pan." 

I  spent  most  of  the  morning  on  the  front  porch. 
The  weather  was  hot  and  still,  like  a  windless  day  of 
our  Northern  midsummer.     The  sun  shone,  the  birds 


^6  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

sang,  the  flies  buzzed,  the  mosquitoes  hovered  about 
famiHarly,  the  cow  bells  gently  tinkled  in  the  forest, 
and  the  village  poultry  crowed  and  cackled.  Not  far 
away,  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  was  an  iron  pump, 
and  its  handle  was  never  long  idle.  Horses  were 
driven  up  to  drink  from  the  trough,  the  cows  came 
one  or  two  at  a  time,  and  the  hogs  visited  a  waste  pool 
that  formed  on  the  ground  below.  Many  a  bucketful 
for  home  use  was  carried  away  by  both  whites  and 
blacks,  and  every  little  while  some  colored  man  or 
youth  would  drink  by  putting  his  mouth  down  to  the 
spout,  or  perhaps  he  would  fill  his  felt  hat  and  drink 
from  that. 

On  my  walk,  the  day  before,  Jerry  and  Abraham 
had  pointed  out  to  me  the  colored  people's  "  chu'ch- 
house "  —  a  plain,  barnlike  structure  originally  put 
up  for  a  "  bar-room."  It  stood  in  the  woods  on  the 
river  bank,  and  the  stream  flowed  dark  and  swift  and 
deep  not  a  stone's  throw  away.  In  front,  suspended 
between  two  trees,  was  "  the  bell,"  —  a  great,  broken 
circular  saw.  On  one  of  the  two  trees  hung  a  short 
iron  bludgeon  which  served  as  a  clapper.  Some  man 
of  the  congregation  rang  the  bell  for  church,  and  the 
boys  rang  it  for  Sunday-school.  I  had  planned  to 
attend  service  at  this  colored  church-house ;  but  I 
listened  in  vain  for  the  bell,  and  when,  toward  noon, 
I  walked  down  to  the  river,  I  found  the  preaching  in 
full  progress. 


The  Bell-ringers 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  57 

The  interior  of  the  edifice  consisted  of  a  single,  big, 
bare  room  with  a  floor  of  unplaned  and  unmatched 
boards,  and  naught  overhead  but  the  roof,  through 
the  crevices  of  which  I  could  see  bits  of  sky.  The 
windows  had  disappeared,  but  heavy  wooden  shutters 
were  hinged  at  the  openings,  and  could  be  swung  back 
to  admit  the  light  when  the  room  was  in  use.  All 
the  seats,  including  one  behind  the  pulpit,  were 
benches,  some  of  them  broken,  and  most  of  them 
backless.  The  pulpit  was  on  a  low  platform.  It  was 
hardly  more  than  a  shelf  covered  with  cloth.  There 
were  two  preachers,  one  seated  on  the  platform  bench, 
the  other  exhorting.  Three  of  the  sisters  sat  along  the 
right  hand  wall  and  four  of  the  brethren  sat  along  the 
left  hand  wall,  and  that  was  the  congregation. 

The  exhorter  was  a  little  man  with  a  long  mustache. 
All  of  his  front  teeth  were  gone,  and  their  absence 
was  rather  impressive,  for  he  opened  his  mouth  very 
wide.  To  add  fervor  to  his  religious  eloquence,  he 
assumed  a  voice  so  hoarse  and  violent  that  his  words 
were  scarcely  distinguishable.  He  had  a  rhythmic  way 
of  expelling  four  or  five  words  in  an  explosive  shout, 
and  then  drawing  in  his  breath  with  a  sudden  rasping 
snort.  This  kind  of  delivery  he  continued  all  through, 
except  when  he  broke  into  a  wail,  or  sang  a  line  of  a 
hymn.  He  looked  and  acted  like  a  wild  man.  Strid- 
ing back  and  forth  across  the  platform,  he  waved  his 
arms  and  distorted  his  body.      Sometimes  he  crouched 


58  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

low  behind  the  pulpit  almost  out  of  sight.  Again  he 
leaned  far  back  and  addressed  God  in  heaven,  but 
always  in  tones  throbbing  with  hoarse  frenzy. 

The  chanted  medley  of  his  discourse  seemed  to  be 
a  kind  of  vision  —  a  vision  of  a  rich  man,  a  poor  man, 
a  lame  man,  a  bond  man,  etc.  "  1  see  a  ole  man  — 
snort  —  he  walk  wid  a  cane — snort — I  see  a  judg- 
ment day  —  snort  —  hit  make  no  difference  —  syiort  — 
rich  or  poor  —  snort  —  lame  or  blin'  —  snort  —  hit's 
God's  judgment  day  —  snort  —  dese  yere  ole  chu'ch 
hypocrites  —  snort  —  dey  git  deir  pay  —  snort  —  I  see 
a  liT  wheel  —  snort — hit's  a-turnin'  —  snort — I  see 
a  big  wheel  —  "  and  he  whirled  his  hands,  and  went  on 
to  explain  that  the  little  wheel  was  turning  inside  of 
the  big  wheel  ;  but  what  the  significance  of  the  wheels 
was  I  did  not  understand. 

The  audience  supplemented  the  preaching  with  an 
occasional  "  Amen,"  "  Glory  be,"  "  Yes,  indeed,"  and 
sometimes  by  the  humming  of  portions  of  hymns. 
The  main  theme  of  the  exhorter  was  man's  lost  and 
miserable  condition,  but  toward  the  close  the  strain 
became  joyously  ecstatic,  and  with  a  final,  "  I'm  goin' 
to  Jesus  now,"  he  sank  back  on  to  the  bench.  In- 
stantly the  other  preacher  was  up,  starting  a  negro 
melody,  "  David  bear  on  yo'  heart,"  in  which  every 
one  joined  vigorously.  The  rest  of  the  service  con- 
sisted of  one  or  two  short  addresses,  a  long  prayer,  and 
more  singing. 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  59 

All  the  time  the  worshippers  had  to  defend  them- 
selves from  the  swarming  mosquitoes.  Some  used 
palm-leaf  fans,  some  wafted  their  handkerchiefs,  and 
one  man  tied  his   handkerchief  over  his   head. 

Just  before  we  were  dismissed  the  preacher  of  the 
day  announced  that,  "  In  two  weeks  hit'll  be  com- 
munion, an'  we  got  to  do  somepin,  'caze  dar  ain'  no 
money  to  buy  de  wine  wid." 

Thus  urged,  two  of  the  colored  men  contributed  five 
cents  each,  and  I  handed  in  a  quarter.  My  munifi- 
cence was  apparently  unprecedented,  for  the  elder  who 
took  my  coin  offered  to  give  me  back  change. 

One  of  the  ministers  said  he  would  preach  there 
that  night  "at  early  candle  lightin',''  and  added,  "  Yo' 
needn't  make  no  great  blowout  about  it,  but  be  sho  to 
come." 

When  the  benediction  had  been  pronounced,  the 
oldest  of  the  sisters  broke  into  a  song  and  shook 
hands  with  the  other  women  and  the  preachers.  I 
mentioned  to  this  aged  sister  as  we  passed  out  that  I 
had  not  heard  the  bell  ring  that  morning  for  service. 

"  Dey  say  dey  knock  de  bell  twice,"  was  her  re- 
sponse, "  but  I  didn't  hear  it  no  mo'  dan  you  did, 
an'  I  lives  close  by  in  de  quarters." 

To  the  colored  people  their  huddle  of  cabins  was 
still  "  the  quarters,"  the  same  as  in  slave  times.  At 
the  dinner  table  that  noon  Mr.  Swazey  told  me  I 
ought  to  be  on  hand  when  the  niggers  had  a  revival. 


6o  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  Of  all  the  shoutin'  an'  rarin'  an'  tearin'  an'  cuttin' 
up,  they  have  it,"  said  he  ;  "  an'  thar's  meetin's  night 
an'  day  for  two  or  three  weeks." 

Our  Sunday  dinner  was  more  elaborate  than  our 
week-day  meals  ;  for  we  had  extras  in  the  shape  of  a 
platter  of  boiled  cabbage,  a  peach  pie,  a  loaf  of  cake, 
and  a  tumbler  of  tasteless  manufactured  jelly.  Mrs. 
Perky,  as  she  took  a  second  helping  of  cabbage  and 
dipped  the  pork  grease  over  her  hot  biscuit,  complained 
of  not  feeling  well,  and  said  her  health  hadn't  been  really 
good  in  a  long  time.  She  couldn't  understand  what 
the  matter  was. 

"  I  think  maw  need  a  change,"  observed  Nan. 
"  She  ought  to  go  on  one  of  these  hyar  railroad 
scurgions." 

"  Yo'  certainly  have  a  hearty  appetite.  Mis'  Perky," 
suggested  Mr.  Swazey. 

"  I'd  be  as  fat  as  a  mole  if  it  was  eatin'  made  a 
person  fat,"  the  lady  replied;  "but  my  stomach  ain't 
right.  I  been  takin'  diff'rent  kinds  o'  medicine,  an' 
they  don't  none  of  'em  holp  me.  Yesterday,  in  the 
store,  they  tol'  me  they  got  a  new  medicine  they  like 
me  to  try,  an'  I  reckon  I  will." 

After  the  dinner  things  had  been  cleared  away  we 
gathered  on  the  porch,  Mr.  Perky  and  Mr.  Swazey 
with  their  pipes  and  Mrs.  Perky  with  her  snufF  stick. 
Nan  had  put  on  her  sunbonnet  and  gone  down  to  the 
woods  by  the  river  with  a  knife  to  get  a  "  wad  "  of 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  6i 

sweet-gum.  She  returned  chewing,  and  when  her 
jaws  became  tired  she  stuck  the  gum  on  a  porch  post 
ready  for  future  use. 

Mrs.  Perky  gave  me  a  turkey  wing  with  which  to 
combat  the  mosquitoes.  "  Hit  'pears  to  me,"  said 
Mr.  Swazey,  "  that  thar  wing  belong  to  the  turkey  I 
shot  a  year  ago.  He  was  a  big  one,  I  tell  you  — 
weighed  sixteen  pound  dressed,  and  had  a  beard  ten 
inches  long." 

"  We  have  oodles  of  turkeys  and  other  wild  game 
in  these  hyar  woods,"  was  Mrs.  Perky's  comment. 
"  I  reckon  you'd  find  deer  within  five  or  six  mile." 

Just  then  a  short,  rotund,  elderly  man,  whom  my 
companions  addressed  as  "  Uncle  Rob,"  came  in  at 
the  gate.  He  was  a  man  of  many  excellencies,  Mr. 
Swazey  informed  me  in  an  aside,  "  though  he's  drunk 
enough  whiskey  to  run  the  Suwanee  River  a  mile. 
Thar  ain't  no  one  aroun'  hyar  drunk  mo'  whiskey 
than  Uncle  Rob,  unless  hit  is  the  alligator  boy." 

"Who  is  he?"  said  I. 

"  He's  a  white  man  about  my  age,"  Mr.  Swazey 
replied.  "  His  head  is  human,  but  the  rest  of  him 
some  resembles  a  'gator.  His  lower  half  ain't  fully 
developed,  and  they  say  he's  got  thirteen  ribs  on  one 
side  an'  only  four  on  the  other." 

Uncle  Rob  had  been  urged  to  have  a  chair,  but  he 
said  it  suited  him  better  to  sit  on  the  steps.  "  I  ain't 
comfortable  in  no  chair  't  ever  was  made,"  he  declared, 


62  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

and  then  turning  toward  Nan  he  continued,  "  Hit's 
been  a  long  time  since  I  set  down  an'  tol'  you  a  love 
story,  Nan." 

"  Ho  !  thar  ain't  no  chance  for  you.  Uncle  Rob," 
exclaimed  Mr.  Swazev.     "  Ole  man  Hill  been  aroun'." 

"Yes,"  said  Mrs.  Perky,  "that's  a  fact.  Ole  man 
Hill  lost  his  wife  less'n  a  year  ago,  but  he's  bought  a 
new  hat  an'  he  try  to  look  as  young  as  he  can,  an' 
he  been  aroun'  to  see  Nan." 

Thereupon  they  all  began  chaffing  Nan,  who  played 
at  shyness  and  tried  to  blush,  but  she  evidently  did 
not  find  the  subject  uninteresting.  Presently  Mrs. 
Perky  mentioned  that  the  day  before  she  and  several 
other  village  women  had  cleaned  the  schoolroom  in 
preparation  for  a  religious  service  to  be  held  that  after- 
noon. "  We  drug  the  stove  Into  the  closet  at  the 
back,"  said  she,  "and  when  we  got  through  our  work 
an'  all  the  dirt  an'  rubbish  was  out  of  the  room,  hit 
look  ve'y  well.  Yo'll  go  to  the  meetin'  to-day,  won't 
yo',  Uncle  Rob  ^  " 

"  I  don't  think  !  "  responded  that  Individual,  blowing 
his  nose  through  his  fingers.  "  I  ain't  no  Infidale, 
but  I  don't  take  any  stock  in  sky  pilots.  If  ever  the 
ole  boy  got  after  me  hit  was  one  night  I  slep'  with  a 
Methodis'  preacher.  I'd  keep  wakin'  up;  but  each 
and  ev'y  time  I  slep'  I  had  the  devil  with  me.  The 
preacher,  he  didn't  wake.  He  jus'  snored  right  along, 
an'  at  las'   I   got  up  an'  went  downstairs  an'  slep'   on 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  6^ 

the  floor.  The  preachers  understan'  how  to  talk  an' 
that's  all.  I  know  a  preacher  who's  the  worst  tyrant 
yo'  ever  see.  His  own  wife  is  skeered  of  him,  an'  she 
have  to  wait  on  him  like  she  was  his  servant.  Yo' 
ever  hear  of  a  preacher  payin'  any  board  ?  Yo'  ever 
hear  of  a  preacher  payin'  mo'n  half  fare  on  the  rail- 
road ^      No,   they   the  greates'  beggars    in    the   worl' ! 


A  Drink  from  the  Suwanee 


When  a  preacher  come  in  one  door  I  go  out  the  other. 
The  preachers  tell  how  hit's  mighty  few  ever  gets  to 
heaven,  an'  I  made  up  my  min'  long  time  ago  I  rather 
go  to  hell  with  a  good  jolly  crowd  than  go  to  heaven 
sneakin'  up  by  myself," 


64  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  I  declare  !  "  said  Mrs.  Perky,  "  I  boun'  to  make  a 
slip-up  on  it  ev'y  time  when  I  invite  Uncle  Rob  to 
go  to  chu'ch." 

"  Well,"  commented  her  husband,  "  I  wouldn't  go 
myself  if  we  was  to  have  the  preacher  we  had  las'  year. 
He  was  wild  as  a  rabbit." 

But  it  was  to  be  a  new  man,  and  when  the  little  bell 
in  the  cupola  of  the  white  folks'  schoolhouse  jingled, 
all  of  us  except  Uncle  Rob  went  in  that  direction. 
The  building  was  a  fairly  good  one,  but  in  poor  repair. 
The  schoolroom  seats  were  carpenter-made  settees. 
Several  battered  old  desks  were  pushed  out  of  the  way 
at  the  rear.  There  had  been  no  meetings  for  a  long 
time,  but  now  it  was  proposed  to  have  them  regularly, 
and,  after  some  desultory  visiting,  a  Sunday-school  was 
organized.  The  newly  elected  superintendent  —  an 
elderly  man  who  wore  a  starched  white  shirt,  but  had 
neglected  to  put  on  a  collar  and  necktie  —  made  a 
speech. 

"  I  appreciate  the  honor  you  have  done  me  in 
selectin'  me  for  yo'  leader,"  said  he;  "but  I'm  afeard 
you've  made  a  mistake.  I  ain't  an  eddicated  man,  and 
1  ain't  worthy  the  position,  but  I'll  do  my  bes',  an'  I 
want  yo'  all  to  take  holt  an'  help.  One  thing  special 
I  wish  you'd  do  is  each  an'  ev'y  one  to  bring  a  penny 
ev'y  Sunday.  A  penny  ain't  much — if  a  man  didn't 
have  but  one  penny  you'd  think  he  was  ve'y  near 
penniless.      But  I  tell  you  a  heap  of  pennies  makes  a 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee  River  6^ 

whole  big  pile,  an'  that's  what  we'll  have  if  ev'y  one 
does  their  duty.  Another  thing  —  we  got  to  buy 
some  literature  what  to  study  the  lessons  from,  an'  I 
shall  order  it  right  away,  but  hit  ain't  anyways  likely 
we  can  get  the  literature  inside  of  a  week,  so  I  ask 
ev'y  one  who  jines  to  have  a  verse  nex'  Sunday  that 
begins  with  A,  and  study  the  third  chapter  of  Matthew; 
and  now  I  reckon  I  better  give  the  bell  another  clap." 

He  stepped  to  the  bell-rope  which  dangled  down 
near  the  teacher's  platform,  gave  a  few  pulls,  and  after 
waiting  a  few  minutes  for  late  comers,  introduced 
the  preacher.  "  He's  got  a  farm  over  in  Hamilton 
County,"  said  the  superintendent,  "  and  he  has  to  work 
hard  for  a  livin'  all  the  week.  He  don't  git  no  pay 
for  his  preachin'  excep'  what  we  give,  an'  we  sholy  had 
ought  to  make  up  enough  for  to  pay  his  ferriage,  if 
nothin    mo  . 

The  preacher  had  come  in  his  buggy,  and  had  to 
cross  the  Suwanee  at  a  cost  of  twenty-five  cents  each 
way.  The  audience  numbered  about  sixty,  and  in- 
cluded several  babbling  babies.  Now  and  then  a  dog 
wandered  in  at  the  open  doors.  Outside  we  could  see 
a  few  of  the  village  cows  feeding  along  the  railway 
track.  Occasionally  some  one  among  the  worshippers 
would  spit  on  the  floor.  Those  who  tired  of  the  ser- 
vice left  when  they  felt  so  inclined,  and  by  the  close, 
a  good  many  of  the  small  boys  and  young  men  had 
gone. 


66  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

The  preacher  took  the  crucifixion  for  the  subject 
of  his  sermon.  "  Befo'  I  enter  out  on  the  discussion 
of  my  texV'  said  he,  "  I  wan'  to  say  that  I  went  off 
with  the  devil  an'  worked  for  him  with  all  my  might 
for  three  years.  I  know  what  it  is  to  serve  the  devil, 
an'  I  know  what  it  is  to  serve  the  Lord.  Now,  I 
wan'  to  tell  yo'  my  ideas  about  the  way  the  chu'ch 
take  the  Bible.  They  clean  twis'  the  sense  out  of  it. 
This  Bible  is  ve'y  bad  treated.  Yas,  it  is  !  Thar's 
a  lot  o'  ferrysees  to-day  jus'  as  thar  was  in  Chris' 
time.  They  make  a  great  display  of  religion  an'  their 
big  gif's,  but  all  that  ain't  of  no  account  if  they  have 
not  the  right  sperrit.  How  difFrent  do  you  think 
the  chu'ch  members  now  are  from  them  of  Chris'  day 
who  did  that  red-handed  murder  —  that  murder  of 
the  Son  of  God,  which,  when  he  die,  make  this  ole 
worl'  stagger  like  a  drunken  man  ? 

"  Le'  me  tell  you  somepin,  an'  I  want  yo'  to  particular 
pay  attention.  It's  somepin  I  never  heered,  but  I 
figgered  it  out  fo'  myself,  an'  this  is  what  it  is — there's 
pride  an'  riches  an'  power  in  the  chu'ch  now  jus'  the 
same  as  two  thousan'  years  ago,  an'  the  chu'ch  is  one 
o'  the  greates'  enemies  of  Chris'  to-day.  How  many 
chu'ch  members  to-day  yo'  reckon  are  rael  Christians  ? 
an'  how  many  of  l/iem  are  only  lukewarm  !  They  too 
satisfied  with  theirselves.  The  devil,  he  make  yo' 
think  yo'  clever  feller  an'  doin'  pretty  well ;  an'  he 
go  on  that  away  until  he  have  yo'  sho'  enough.      He 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  67 

air  gettin'  to  win  mo'  victories  to-day  than  the  Lord 
does.     Yo'  mus'n'  shet  yo'  eyes  to  that  thar. 

"  Now,  somebody  in  this  hyar  crowd,  when  they 
make  their  egsit  from  this  worl',  is  goin'  to  get  to 
heaven  an'  beat  ole  Satan  ;  but  it'll  be  because  they 
have  raely  got  Chris'  —  not  because  they  belong  to 
some  big  chu'ch.  I  wan'  to  tell  yo'  a  little  circum- 
stance. Thar  was  a  woman  —  an  ole  woman,  who 
got  children  an'  great-gran'children  ;  an'  the  time 
come  for  her  to  go  'cross  Jerdan,  an'  she  wade  in  up 
to  her  knees,  an'  she  get  frighten',  an'  she  turn  roun' 
an'  call  to  the  people  what  stan'in'  on  the  bank  an' 
say  she  been  a  chu'ch  member  almost  all  her  life.  *  But 
oh!'  she  cry,  'I'm  goin'  'cross  Jerdan  now  without 
Chris'  ! '  She  hadn't  raely  got  Chris'  in  all  them  years 
—  an'  that,  brothers  and  sisters,  show  us  wharin  we 
mus'  be  careful  !  " 

A  few  minutes  before  the  preacher  finished,  a  train 
sped  past  on  the  near  railroad,  and  when  we  came  out 
we  saw  a  crowd  gathering  a  short  distance  up  the  track. 
The  engine  had  hit  a  cow,  and,  as  Mr.  Swazey  re- 
marked, "  had  killed  it  dead  as  a  houn'."  There  lay 
the  mangled  body,  and  the  congregation  went  over 
and  viewed  it,  but  without  much  excitement.  Village 
cows  and  hogs  were  sacrificed  thus  too  often  for  that. 

"  I've  eaten  many  a  good  piece  of  steak  the  engine 
killed,"  said  Mr.  Perky,  when  we  were  once  more  on 
his  porch.     "  I  reckon  the  owners  '11  claim  that  was  a 


68  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

ve'y  fine  animal  when  they  go  to  get  the  railroad  to  pay 
for  her,  but  she  was  nothin'  but  an  ole  piney-woods 
cow.  A  Jersey  is  worth  any  two  of  her.  You  could 
mos'  see  through  her  she  was  so  poor,  an'  she  was 
ole  enough  to  vote  —  that  cow  was.  Co'se  the  meat 
can't  be  ve'y  good,  an'  yet  the  niggers  won't  leave 
enough  of  that  thar  critter  by  mornin'  to  fill  a  post 
hole." 

Not  far  away,  in  front  of  the  store,  a  group  of 
young  men  who  had  attended  the  meeting  at  the 
schoolhouse  began  singing  hymns.  One  of  them 
presently  came  over  to  the  Perkys'.  "  How's  yo' 
maw  ?  "  inquired  Mrs.  Perky,  and  she  asked  likewise 
about  the  health  of  the  other  members  of  his  family. 
Then  she  requested  him  to  have  the  group  of  young 
men  at  the  store  come  to  the  house  and  sing.  This 
they  did,  and  by  ransacking  the  dwelling,  upstairs  and 
down,  enough  seats  were  provided  for  them  in  the 
best  room.  There  they  sang  gospel  hymns  with  Mrs. 
and  Miss  Perky  for  an  hour. 

When  the  singers  had  dispersed  and  we  had  eaten 
supper,  we  gathered  in  the  best  room  for  the  evening. 
Nan  and  her  mother  got  out  their  Bibles,  and  pretty 
soon  the  former  announced,  "  I  done  got  my  verse  for 
nex'  Sunday." 

We  asked  her  what  it  was,  but  she  would  not  tell, 
and  her  mother  said  :  "  Yo'  awful  cheesey  with  it.  I 
been  lookin'  for  a  word.      Long  time  ago  our  superin- 


Way  down  upon  the  Suwanee   River  69 

tendent  want  us  to  find  a  word  in  the  Bible  that  had 
all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  it  buty",  an'  none  of 
the  letters  twicet.  I  was  young  folks  then,  an'  we  putt 
in  for  it  an'  read  our  Bibles  all  our  spare  time  for  three 
weeks.  We  had  a  hunt  for  that  word,  we  shore  did  ! 
We  would  read  till  eleven  or  twelve  o'clock  at  night, 
and  finally  we  found  it.  Seem  like  hit  was  in  Daniel 
or  some  book  close  aroun'  thar." 

The  sermon  of  the  day  was  discussed,  and  it  was 
agreed  to  have  been  a  very  good  one.  Mr.  Swazey  de- 
clared he  liked  especially  the  preacher's  comments  on 
church  hypocrisy.  "  For  instance,"  said  he,  "  thar's 
all  this  kissin'  the  sisters  in  the  chu'ch  do.  I  allow 
hit  air  plumb  deceptive.  Mis'  Perky,  yo'  don't  think 
all  yo'  pertends  to  of  them  you  kiss,  yo'  knows  yo' 
don't!  'Twas  Judas  betray  his  Master  with  a  kiss,  an' 
hit  seem  like  to  me  all  this  sisterin'  what  is  done  is 
some  patterned  after  Judas." 

Presently  the  conversation  drifted  into  a  discussion  of 
baptism.  Mr.  Perky  was  a  firm  believer  in  immersion, 
but  Mrs.  Perky  was  not.  "  My  mother  was  a  good 
Baptist  woman,"  said  she,  "an'  she  use  to  tell  thar 
wa'n't  any  power  in  the  world  could  change  her  in  her 
belief,  because  she  got  it  from  the  word  of  God.  She 
brought  me  up  to  her  way  of  thinkin',  and  I  jined  the 
Baptist  chu'ch.  I  remember  the  day.  It  was  raw  an' 
col',  an'  I  thought  I  ought  to  take  some  quinine  so  I 
not  be  sick.      But  maw,  she  say  she  wa'n't   goin'   to 


yo  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

give  me  any  quinine,  indeed.  She  say  the  weather 
don't  matter  —  the  Lord,  He  take  care  of  me,  an'  He 
never  would  let  no  one  get  sick  from  bein'  baptize. 
My  little  brother  went  to  the  baptizin',  an'  he  couldn't 
understan'  what  it  all  meant,  an'  he  study  on  it  after- 
wards until  he  say,  '  Well,  I  know  now  what  the 
preacher  said.  He  say,  "  I  baptize  thee,  my  sister,  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  in  the 
hole  she  goes  ;"  and  in  the  hole  she  did  go! '  Yes,  the 
preacher  putt  me  in  all  over,  an'  no  mistake.  But  I 
was  scandalous  badly  fooled  jining  the  Baptists,  and 
soon  as  I  realize  I  didn't  believe  in  immersion  I  jined 
the  Methodists." 

"  Yo'  belief  is  con-/r^-ry  to  the  Bible,"  affirmed  Mr. 
Perky.  "  The  Bible,  hit  say  '  buried  in  baptism.'  When 
people  air  goin'  to  be  buried  in  their  grave  yo'  wouldn't 
jus'  sprinkle  a  little  dirt  over  'em  an'  call  that  buryin'. 
No,  yo'  have  to  cover  'em  all  up,  or  they  smell  bad." 

"  Well,"  said  Mr.  Swazey,  "  if  the  Baptist  reason  for 
immersion  is  to  git  all  cover  up  so  they  not  smell  bad, 
I  believe  hit  a  good  thing.  But  I  reckon  we  can't 
always  be  shore  jus'  what  the  Bible  mean.  The 
baptism  yo'  pattern  after  was  in  the  river  Jerdan,  an' 
yet  some  pertends  to  say  that  the  river  Jerdan  is  only 
six  inches  deep,  so  yo'  couldn't  immerse  no  one  in  it, 
nohow." 

"  That  seem  mighty  unlikely,"  was  Mr.  Perky's 
comment. 


Mosquitoes 


Way  down  upon  the   Suwanee   River  71 

"I  don't  see  why,"  retorted  his  wife.  "  Yo'  ain't 
got  the  sense  that  God  give  to  geese,  Mr.  Perky. 
All  rivers  ain't  deep  like  ourn." 

"  Anyhow,"  said  Mr.  Perky,  "  yo'  can't  find  it  in 
the   Bible  where  they  po'   the  water  on." 

"I  don't  care,"  was  his  wife's  reply.  "  Yo'  may 
cut  my  throat  from  year  to  year,  but  I'll  never  believe 
in  immersion." 

There  was  silence  for  a  moment,  and  then  Mr. 
Swazey  remarked,  "  Yo'  so  certain.  Mis'  Perky,  yo' 
remin'  me  of  a  darkey  preacher  what  say  to  his  hearers, 
'  If  yo'  doan'  repent  yo'  sins  an'  believe,  yo'  go  to  hell 
jus'  as  sho'  as  I  kill  dis  fly  what  have  lit  on  de  pulpit.' 
Then  he  give  a  slap  with  his  hand,  but  the  fly  too 
quick  for  him.  '  Ehh  ! '  he  say,  '  I  miss  him,  but  yo' 
go  to  hell,  anyway  ! '  " 

"What  I  don't  like,"  Mr.  Perky  said,  "is  this 
hyar  custom  they  gittin'  to  have  of  pools  right  in  the 
chu'ch,  and  rubber  clothes  to  put  on.  Hit  don't  seem 
like  the  Bible." 

"  No,"  agreed  Mr.  Swazey,  "  hit  shore  don't.  If  I 
was  to  be  baptize  in  the  Baptis'  way,  I  would  want  to 
be  baptize  in  runnin'  water,  outdoors." 

"  Hit's  a  pore  way,  indoors  or  out,"  affirmed  Mrs. 
Perky,  "  and  this  hyar  immersion  ain't  agreeable  to 
think  of,  either.  I  know  a  young  lady  whose  parents 
are  Baptists,  but  who  say  she'll  never  jine  the  chu'ch 
if  she  got  to  be  splunged  or  soused." 


72  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  There's  hardly  any  one  ever  strangle  to  amount 
to  anything,"  said  Mr.  Perky,  and  he  tried  to  argue 
further ;  but  Mrs.  Perky  would  not  listen  to  him,  and 
broke  in  on  every  attempted  remark  of  his  with  such 
loud-voiced  opinions  of  her  own  that  he  subsided  in 
discouragement. 

Monday  morning  came,  and  the  village  labor  was 
resumed,  but  not  very  strenuously.  It  took  a  good 
while  to  get  over  the  Sabbath  inertia,  and  there  was 
even  more  than  the  usual  amount  of  loafing.  All  day 
long  a  tired  group  of  whites  and  blacks  lounged  on 
the  store  porch.  Sometimes  a  negro  would  carry 
his  guitar  to  the  store  and  sit  with  his  back  against  a 
porch  post  thrumming  the  strings  by  the  hour. 

Late  in  the  day  a  son-in-law  of  the  Perkys  arrived 
from  a  neighboring  hamlet,  and  asked  Mrs.  Perky  to 
come  and  see  about  doctoring  his  wife  and  little  girl, 
who  were  both  sick.  "  They  ain't  so  powerful  bad 
off,"  explained  Clarence,  "  but  I  want  yo'  to  see  'em." 

"  Everybody  come  for  maw  from  all  aroun'  when 
anything  air  the  matter,"  said  Nan.  "She  a  master 
han*  for  doctorin'.  She  know  all  about  medicines,  an' 
if  one  kind  don't  do  no  good,  she  give  another  kind. 
She  uses  quinine  an'  calomel  an'  rhuberb  an'  Jenkins's 
Vegetable  Pills,  an'  all  such  like  things  that  you  can 
buy  at  the  stores.  She  don't  believe,  if  yo'  feel  bad,  in 
waitin'  till  yo'  air  sick  abed.  We  had  such  bad  luck 
in  our  family  she  mo'  anxious  than  most.     She  had 


Way   down  upon  the   Suwanee   River  73 

twelve  children,  an'  there  only  six  now.  So  when  one 
of  us  grunts,  she  think  something  got  to  be  done  right 
then  an'  thar.  Hit  shorely  would  surprise  you  the 
way  she  fly  aroun'  when  she  hear  one  of  us  grunting." 

Mrs.  Perky  at  first  said  she  could  not  go,  but 
Clarence  would  have  to  travel  five  miles  farther  to 
find  a  doctor,  and  finally  she  packed  a  basket  and 
changed  her  gown,  took  a  fresh  dip  of  snuff,  and  went 
off  with  him. 

Of  all  I  saw  on  the  Suwanee,  the  thing  that  most 
recalled  the  sentiment  of  the  dialect  song  was  a  negro 
"  festival  and  dance."  Pay  day  at  the  turpentine  still 
came  every  fourth  week,  and  was  sure  to  be  followed 
by  a  celebration  in  some  village  home.  On  the  pay 
day  that  fell  within  the  period  of  my  visit  I  began  to 
see  young  colored  women  fluttering  about  in  fine  attire 
early  in  the  afternoon,  provoking  the  comment  from 
Miss  Perky  that,  "The  niggers  certainly  can  dress  — 
yes,  sir  !  "  and  there  was  a  constant  going  to  and  from 
a  certain  house  that  marked  it  as  the  one  where  the 
ball  was  to  take  place.  This  house  was  larger  than 
most  negro  dwellings,  and  had  been  originally  built  for 
white  occupancy.  It  had  a  hallway  and  several  rooms. 
The  bed  had  been  moved  out  of  the  largest  of  the 
rooms,  and  chairs  had  been  set  along  the  wall.  When 
I  looked  in  at  nine  o'clock  the  chairs  had  been  taken 
possession  of  by  the  elderly  people,  with  a  few  children 
and  even  babies  among  them.     John  Blue,  the  musical 


74  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

expert  of  the  hamlet,  was  picking  his  guitar,  and  the 
young  people  were  prancing  up  and  down  the  room  — 
the  maidens  in  gay,  yet  really  pretty  gowns  of  pink 
and  white,  but  the  men  in  very  ordinary  clothes,  and 
wearing  on  their  heads  disreputable  old  hats  and  caps. 
During  the  interlude  the  men  would  light  cigarettes  at 
the  kerosene  lamp  on  the  mantel,  and  the  atmosphere 
became  decidedly  sickening. 

The  feast  that  was  served  in  connection  with  the 
merrymaking  was  in  a  back  room,  to  which  one  had  to 
grope  along  the  dark  hall.  Here  was  a  table  spread 
with  chicken,  gingerbread,  jelly-cake,  etc.  An  old 
woman,  with  some  coins  knotted  in  her  handkerchief, 
had  charge  of  the  feast,  and  sold  the  things  as  they 
were  called  for  ;  and  there  was  an  ancient  darky  sitting 
close  by  with  a  basket  full  of  peanuts  which  he  had 
roasted  and  was  ready  to  part  with  at  five  cents  a  cup. 

The  lady  of  the  house  had  no  "rejections"  to  my 
staying  as  long  as  I  chose,  but  I  felt  I  was  an  outsider, 
and  presently  returned  to  my  lodging-place.  This 
was  near  enough  so  that  I  heard  the  jigging  of  feet  and 
the  lively  music  of  John  Blue's  guitar  until  the  party 
broke  up  about  midnight.  I  did  not  object  to  being 
kept  awake,  for  the  sounds  were  an  echo  of  the  song 
that  had  brought  me  to  the  Suwanee,  and  were  very 
suggestive  of  the  care-free  happiness  which  made  all 
the  world  seem  ,.    j     j  j 

'*sad  and  dreary. 
Far  from  the  old  folks  at  home.'* 


Ill 


A     COUNTY    SEAT    IN    ALABAMA 


T 


USKEGEE 

is  best  known 
as  the  home 
of  Booker  T.  Wash- 
ington's famous  negro 
school,  but  the  school 
is  on  the  village  out- 
skirts,  and  the  place 
has  a  well-defined 
character  of  its  own. 
It  is  a  typical  South- 
ern county  town,  and  is 
a  centre  for  the  coun- 
try population  from 
miles  around.  Thither 
the  people  flock  every 
market  day  for  news 
and  gossip,  for  buying  and  selling,  borrowing  and 
paying,  and  for  justice  and  law.  The  town  is  wide- 
streeted  and  placid,  with  a  broad  public  square  at  its 
heart,   bounded    about   by   brick   and  wooden   stores, 

75 


The  Court-house  Front 


76  Highways  and   Byways  of  the   South 

livery  stables,  law  offices,  etc.  These  structures  are 
one  and  two  stories  high,  and  are  pretty  sure  to  have 
projecting  from  their  fronts,  across  the  sidewalk,  an 
ample  board  roof  to  furnish  shade ;  and  between  the 
supports  of  the  roof,  on  the  outside  of  the  walk,  is 
usually  a  plank  seat.  The  walk  is  a  good  deal  encum- 
bered with  displays  of  various  goods,  and  here  and 
there  are  careless  huddles  of  empty  whiskey-barrels 
and  other  receptacles.  The  barrels  and  boxes,  in  com- 
mon with  the  plank  seats  and  sundry  doorsteps  and 
benches,  are  utilized  very  generally  by  loungers.  The 
populace  like  to  sit  and  consider,  and  they  like  to 
take  their  ease  when  talking  with  their  friends  ;  while 
it  occasionally  happens  that  a  darky  will  be  so  over- 
come by  weariness  or  eiimii  that  he  will  stretch  out 
on  one  of  the  larger  boxes  to  enjoy  a  nap.  A  more 
aristocratic  loitering-place  than  any  provided  by  chance 
or  intention  as  adjuncts  of  the  stores,  is  a  group  of 
chairs  at  the  rear  door  of  the  court-house.  Every 
pleasant  day  these  chairs  are  brought  out  into  the 
shadow  of  the  building  and  the  near  trees,  where  they 
are  occupied  by  some  of  the  village  worthies  for  pur- 
poses of  mild  contemplation  and  discussion. 

The  court-house  stands  in  the  centre  of  the  square, 
on  a  generous  grassy  oval  that  is  separated  from  the 
rutted  sandy  earth  of  the  rest  of  the  square  by  a  low 
fence.  The  building  is  a  solid,  but  rather  battered 
structure  of  brick,  with  quite  a  pleasing  air  of  sedate 


A  County  Seat  in  Alabama 


7 


77 


age.  On  the  lower  floor  are  the  county  offices,  and 
among  the  other  rooms  is  one  reserved  for  the  grand 
jury  —  a  most  rudely  furnished  apartment  with  a  small 
fireplace  and  a  deeply  sanded  floor.  This  sand  is,  I 
believe,  intended  to  ameliorate  the  unevenness  of  the 


A  Favorite  Loitering  Place 

original  floor  of  brick,  which  is  badly  worn,  but  it 
makes  the  room  look  as  if  it  had  been  prepared  for 
the  caging  of  wild  beasts. 

Upstairs  is  the  court-room  —  a  plain,  old-fashioned 
apartment,  heated  by  two  small  stoves.  Its  most 
noticeable  characteristic  is  its  odor  of  nicotine.  The 
Southern  men   are  famous  smokers  and  chewers,  and 


78  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

they  spit  copiously  and  emphatically  all  day  long.  If 
they  are  where  a  fireplace  or  stove  is  handy,  they  make 
that  their  target,  but  in  public  buildings  or  convey- 
ances they  drench  the  floors,  and  the  court-room  had 
been  thus  soaked  for  two  generations.  1  remember 
with  what  serious  though tfulness  and  regularity  the 
judge  expectorated  on  the  occasion  when  I  was  present. 
I  had  followed  a  squad  of  shackled  negroes  whom  I 
happened  to  see  conducted  to  the  hall  of  justice  from 
the  jail,  and  I  went  in  and  looked  on  until  their 
lawyer  —  a  young  white  man  —  was  well  started  in  his 
attempt  to  clear  them.  He  was  a  shouter,  and  he 
made  himself  heard  through  the  open  windows  all  over 
town.  I  tired  of  his  ranting,  and  came  away,  but  it 
was  explained  to  me  that  he  just  suited  the  negroes. 
They  had  a  feeling  that  a  plea  which  failed  to  be 
violent-voiced  and  accompanied  by  wild  gestures  wasn't 
worth  paying  for.  Sense  was  a  minor  consideration. 
"  The  louder  a  man  holler,  and  the  mo'  he  tear  aroun,' 
the  better  they  like  him.  They  think  he's  gettin'  thar 
then." 

The  business  square  on  which  the  court-house  looks 
out  from  its  environing  trees  with  serene  though  anti- 
quated dignity  is  usually  very  quiet.  The  town  life 
is  not  very  energetic.  A  good  many  of  the  stores 
get  along  without  sign-boards,  and  I  frequently  heard 
their  proprietors  whiling  away  their  leisure  in  the  re- 
cesses of  their  shops  with  a  guitar,  or  cornet,  or  fiddle. 


A  County   Seat  in  Alabama 


79 


Quiet  on  the  Town  Street 

They  had  plenty  of  time  to  visit  with  those  who 
wandered  in,  whether  to  trade  or  to  chat.  Saturday 
is,  however,  an  exception.  That  is  market  day,  and 
the  public  ways  and  hitching-places  are  then  crowded 
with  mules  and  horses,  many  of  them  merely  saddled, 
others  attached  to  vehicles  —  vehicles  that  are  occa- 
sionally modern,  but  ofttimes  are  otherwise,  and  that 
include  some  very  curious  makeshifts.  Ox  teams  are 
common,  and  once  in  a  while  a  negro  drives  a  single 
ox  harnessed  between  his  cart-shafts. 

I  often  lingered  on  the  square  and  talked  with  other 
lingerers.  One  day  an  ancient,  who  said  he  had  been 
a  preacher  in  his  younger  days,  started  a  conversation 


8o  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

by  voicing  the  opinion  that  it  was  "goin'  to  rain. 
The  sky's  cl'ar  overhead,  but  I  been  hearin'  these  old 
heavy  thunders  'way  off  yonder,  and  that  means  rain. 
Yesterday  morning  it  done  that  trick,  and  we  had  a 
right  smart  shower  befo'  night.  I  allow  it  would  be  a 
good  thing  for  the  crops  to  have  a  shower  like  that 
every  day  for  a  while." 

"  It's  mighty  cold  weather  for  this  time  of  year,"  re- 
marked a  tall  man  sitting  on  a  near  doorstep. 

"  That's  so,"  agreed  the  preacher,  "  and  I  been 
lookin'  it  up  in  my  almanac,  and  there  was  a  cold  spell, 
same  as  we  are  having,  put  down  for  near  about  this 
time.      1  tell  you  those  almanacs  hit  it  pretty  good." 

Just  then  a  colored  man  came  along.  A  conspicu- 
ous article  of  his  apparel  was  a  new  pair  of  overalls 
with  faded  patches  sewed  on  the  knees  and  seat.  The 
preacher  accosted  the  negro  and  commented  jocosely 
on  the  appearance  of  the  overalls,  but  the  negro  replied 
that  he  reckoned  it  saved  the  garment  more  to  patch 
it  before  it  wore  out  than  afterward. 

"  Like  enough,"  said  the  preacher,  and  then  he 
asked :  "  What's  that  I  hear  about  your  trickin'  your 
next  neighbor  with  a  conjure-bag  ?  " 

But  the  negro  disclaimed  all  knowledge  of  such  a 
proceeding,  and  as  to  the  conjure-bag,  he  affirmed, 
"  That  'ar's  somethin'  I  never  tote." 

"  Oh,  no,  of  co'se  not !  "  responded  the  preacher, 
sarcastically,    and     then,    turning     to    me,    he    added. 


A  County  Seat  in  Alabama  8i 

"  They  won't  own  to  it,  but  they're  plumb  full  of 
such  superstitions." 

"  I  doan'  believe  in  'em,"  said  the  negro. 

"  Yes,  you  do.  If  you  was  to  wake  up  and  find 
some  one  had  sprinkled  a  line  of  salt  aroun'  your 
doorstep,  and  put  a  little  bit  of  hair  inside  the  line  of 
salt,  you'd  think  there  was  bad  things  goin'  to  happen 
to  you.  I  know  you,  and  I  know  your  conjure- 
bags  —  them  little  bags  with  a  few  roots  and  things  in 


»  5) 

em. 


(C 


I  ricolict  a  circumstance,"  said  the  tall  man  on  the 
doorstep.  "  About  a  year  ago  a  few  of  us  thought 
we'd  have  some  fun  with  that  ole  nigger  that  lives  all 
alone  about  a  mile  beyond  the  depot.  We  went  one 
night  and  hitched  a  waxed  string  on  to  his  cabin,  and 
we'd  scrape  a  stick  across  the  string,  and  the  noise  it 
would  make  was  something  awful. 

"  The  nigger  he  pricked  up  his  ears  and  he  began 
to  look  aroun'  this  way  an'  that,  and  then  he  got  a  big 
club  and  sat  there  so  scared  it  nearly  took  the  curl  out 
of  his  hair.  Finally  he  went  to  prayin',  and  he  put 
up  a  hot  prayer,  too,  and  we  'most  killed  ourselves 
laughin'. 

"  The  nex'  day  I  met  him  and  I  asked  him  what 
was  the  matter  at  his  house  las'  night,  and  tol'  him  I 
was  goin'  pas'  an'  heard  him  prayin'  so  loud  it  made 
the  shingles  rattle  on  his  roof,  and  he  said :  '  De 
devil  done  come  to  my   place  las'   night,  an'   he  was 

G 


82  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

boun'  he  gwine  git  me,  an'  I  tried  ev'ythin'  to  git  quit 
of  him,  but  he  wouldn't  go  till  I  prayed  de  Lord, 
an'  den  I  heard  him  movin'  off  down  towards  de 
swamp.'  " 

"  Well,  he's  a  good  ole  nigger,"  commented  the 
preacher.  "He  never  had  any  education  and 
never  wanted  any.  You  take  some  of  these  young 
niggers  that  get  a  little  learnin'  and  thar  ain't  no  gittin' 
along  with  'em.  I'll  say  one  thing,  though,  for  this 
nigger  school  of  Washington's  hyar  —  they  won't  let 


-r-#.((  ^sapgjsr-sg^ 


A  Typical  Old-time  Mansion 

'em  be  too  uppity  thar.  I  know  a  young  nigger  was 
one  time  comin'  back  from  vacation,  and  the  train  was 
so  crowded  a  good  parcel  of  'em  had  to  stand,  and 
some  of  'em  ladies.     This  fellow  he  had  a  seat,  and  he 


A  County  Seat  In  Alabama  83 

said  he  wa'n't  goin'  to  give  it  up.  He'd  paid  his  fare 
and  he'd  just  as  much  right  to  sit  as  any  one." 

The  preacher  paused  in  his  story  and,  addressing 
himself  to  me,  remarked  :  "  That's  like  the  way  you 
do  in  the  North,  but  there  ain't  a  white  man  in  the 
South  would  sit  a  minute  while  a  lady  was  standin'. 
Well,  Booker  was  on  that  car  and  the  young  chap 
didn't  know  it,  and  Booker  heard  what  he  said  and 
ask  him,  '  Whar  are  you  goin'  ^ ' 

"And  the  young  fellow  says,  'To  the  school.' 

"  And  Booker  says,  '  No,  you  ain't.  We  don't 
want  your  sort  hyar.  You  can  turn  aroun'  and  go 
home.'  Yes,  Booker's  got  some  good  ideas,  if  he  is  a 
nigger." 

"  Thar's  Jake  Durkin  down  at  the  corner,"  remarked 
the  tall  man  on  the  doorstep.  "  He  ain't  been  in 
town  befo',  I  reckon,  since  his  horse  trade." 

"  What  was  the  trouble  ?  "  I  inquired. 

"  Why,  Tuskegee  is  a  great  place  for  tradin'  horses. 
They're  at  it  all  the  time  round  back  of  the  hotel. 
Jake's  young,  as  yo'  see,  but  he  thought  he  could  do 
as  well  as  the  nex'  man  in  the  horse  business,  an'  it 
was  time  he  had  a  try.  So  he  rode  into  town,  and 
the  horse  he  come  on  was  a  crackerjack  —  a  first-class 
good  horse,  right  in  his  prime.  Jake  he  went  to  the 
stable  of  one  of  our  experts  and  he  says,  '  I've  started 
out  to  do  some  horse-trading.  Now,'  he  says,  '  hyar's 
my  horse.    What  have  you  got  to  put  up  against  him  ^ ' 


84  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  ^  Oh,'  the  man  says,  '  I  don't  want  to  trade/ 
"  But  that  wouldn't  do.      It  only  made    Jake  mo* 
anxious,  and  he  kep'  urgin'  till  the  man  says,  '  Well, 


Repairing  a  Chair 

hyar's  a  good  horse,  and  I  don't  mind  tradin'  him  if  I 
can  get  my  price/ 

"  The  horse  looked  fine  in  the  stall,  though  he  was 
thirty  years  old  —  a  good  deal  older'n  Jake  was  —  and 
the  man  had  paid  about  fifteen  dollars  for  him. 

" '  Well,  how'll  yo'  trade  ? '  says  Jake. 

"*  Why,  I'll  give  you  five  dollars  to  boot.' 


A  County   Seat  in   Alabama  85 

"'I'll  tell  you  what  I'll  do,'  says  Jake;  'you  make 
it  ten  and  it's  a  go.' 

"  And  the  man  did,  and  Jake  changed  his  saddle  on 
to  the  new  horse  and  went  off,  feelin'  putty  well  satis- 
fied with  himself.  But  everybody  in  town  guyed  him. 
They  said  he  couldn't  get  home  with  such  a  horse, 
and  finally  it  kind  of  dawned  on  him  he'd  made  a 
mistake,  and  he  went  back  to  the  stables.  '  See  hyar,' 
he  says,  '  they're  all  a-tellin'  me  I  can't  get  home  with 
this  horse.' 

"  '  Well,  I  don't  care,'  says  the  man.  '  That's  noth- 
ing to  me.  It  makes  no  difF'rence  to  me  whether  yo' 
go  home  or  whar  yo'  go.' 

"'  But  I  traded  yo'  a  fine  young  horse,'  says  Jake. 

"  '  And  I  traded  yo'  a  fine  old  horse,'  says  the  man. 

" '  Well,  I  want  to  trade  back,"  says  Jake. 

"'  But  I  don't;   I'm  satisfied,'  says  the  man. 

"And  so  they  had  it  back  and  forth  until  the  man 
said  if  Jake  would  return  the  ten  dollars  he'd  give 
and  twenty  besides,  he'd  trade.  '  I  only  do  it  for 
one  thing,'  he  says  —  'because  yo're  young.  Yo've 
got  back  the  horse  now  yo'  had  in  the  first  place,  but 
it's  cost  yo'  twenty  dollars  for  bein'  so  confounded 
smart.'  " 

"  Jake's  father  was  a  good  judge  of  horse  flesh,"  ob- 
served the  preacher ;  "  but  the  war  didn't  leave  him 
any  horses  to  trade,  and  he  never  got  into  tradin' 
again." 


86  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  You  Northern  people  never  knew  what  war  was," 
said  the  tall  man,  turnhig  to  me  ;  "  and  we  didn't  have 
it  aroun'  hyar  at  its  worst.  We  never  see  any  Federals 
until  the  very  end.  Thetn  the  whole  army  done  gone 
through  hyar  —  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  of 'em.  I 
remember  just  how  they  went,  —  tromp,  tromp,  tromp, 
—  as  regular  as  the  tick  of  a  clock,  all  day  long.  They 
didn't  do  much  harm  except  to  take  all  our  horses  and 
mules  so  thar  wa'n't  a  huf  left. 

"  Befo'  the  war  we  had  hyar  the  finest  country  on 
God's  earth,  with  plenty  of  niggers  to  wait  on  us,  and 
everything  else.  The  niggers  was  well  took  care  of 
then,  too.  They  didn't  have  so  much  sickness  as 
they  do  now.  They  didn't  drink  so  much  bad  whiskey, 
an'  they  wa'n't  allowed  to  roam  all  about  at  night. 
Their  houses  was  kep'  tighter  and  they  was  given 
enough  bedclothes  to  keep  warm,  and  soon  as  they 
was  sick  they  had  the  doctor.  Once  in  a  while  one  of 
'em  'd  run  away  to  get  quit  of  bein'  sold  or  whipped  ; 
but  a  man  in  town  had  a  pack  of  track  houn's  special 
for  chasin'  niggers,  and  we'd  always  ketch  'em.  Some- 
times the  dogs  'd  mighty  nigh  eat  the  nigger  up.  If 
we  had  good  luck,  we'd  have  the  runaway  ketched  befo* 
he'd  been  in  the  woods  twentv-four  hours,  and  then 
again  we  might  not  get  him  for  two  or  three  months. 

"  I  was  tellin'  you  we  didn't  see  no  fightin'  hyar, 
but  what  we  did  see  was  all  the  business  stop,  and 
most  of  the  stores  closed.      Our  manufactured  supplies 


A  D 


ISCUSSION 


Tf 


Tii 


n 


A   County  Seat  in  Alabama  87 

was  cut  off,  and  we  took  to  weavin'  cloth  on  the  old 
hand  looms  ;  we  tanned  our  own  leather,  and  made  our 
own  shoes,  and  all  that.  It  was  like  settin'  up  a  new 
country.  During  the  last  two  years  thar  was  no 
coffee,  no  sugar,  and  no  tobacco,  and  it  got  to  be  a 
mighty  tight  time.  We  had  thousands  of  corn,  meat 
and  provisions,  and  plenty  of  money,  only  the  money 
wa'n't  worth  nothin'.  People  that  had  things  to  sell 
would  rather  have  their  goods  than  the  darn  stuff. 
I've  paid  two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  for  a  hat  and 
five  hundred  dollars  for  a  pair  of  boots.  Yes,  a  man 
could  bring  to  town  a  roll  of  money  as  large  round  as 
his  thigh  and  take  back  all  he  could  buy  with  it  in  an 
envelope.  After  Lee  surrendered  I  made  a  great  big 
fire  out  of  my  money  —  burned  up  fifteen  hundred  dol- 
lars. My  mother  had  over  ten  times  what  I  had,  and 
she  stowed  her  money  away  in  the  garret.  She's  dead 
now,  but  I  reckon  that  money's  in  the  garret  thar  yet." 

"  That  reminds  me,"  said  the  preacher,  rising,  "  I 
must  go  over  to  the  bank  and  see  about  a  loan  they 
was  goin*  to  make  me." 

The  president  of  the  bank  was  an  old  schoolmate 
of  his,  and  the  preacher  mentioned  with  pride  that,  as 
a  special  favor  to  him,  the  loan  was  to  be  at  ten  per 
cent.  Interest  rates  are  high  in  all  parts  of  the  South, 
and  in  many  sections  one  to  two  per  cent  a  month  is 
commonly  charged.  The  man  who  will  loan  at  ten 
per  cent  is  regarded  as  a  public  benefactor. 


88  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

The  principal  streets  radiating  from  the  Tuskegee 
town  square  are  broad  and  tree-Hned,  and  are  flanked 
by  fine  old  mansions,  some  in  serene  retirement  be- 
yond a  formal  garden,  some  approached  by  an  avenue 
of  great  trees.  Tuskegee  was  one  of  the  richest  towns 
in  the  state  "  befo'  the  war";  but,  while  the  vicinity 
was  never  fighting-ground,  the  conflict  left  it  devastated 
and  ruined,  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  Confederacy, 
so  that,  although  you  still  find  the  old-time  mansions 
and  the  ample  grounds,  they  are  not,  as  a  rule,  well 
kept  up,  and  some  are  far  gone  in  decay  and  dilapida- 
tion. The  dwellings  are  of  two  types  —  the  low  and 
spreading  with  wide  piazzas,  and  a  higher  and  more 
imposing  style  with  pillared  fronts  like  Greek  temples. 
On  warm  days  the  doors  are  thrown  wide  open  and 
you  can  see  straight  through  the  central  hall  which 
penetrates  and  ventilates  these  homes  of  the  sunny 
South  from  front  to  rear. 

Just  outside  of  the  village  is  the  white  folks'  ceme- 
tery, of  which  they  are  very  proud,  for  it  is  full  of 
monuments,  and  receives  constant  care  ;  but  to  me  it 
looked  like  a  desert  —  as  if  the  spot  was  blasted.  It 
is  a  wholly  grassless  waste  of  sand,  relieved  only  by 
clumps  of  flowering  shrubs  and  scattered  trees.  Roads 
and  paths  are  marked  by  bordering  lines  of  bricks  set 
up  on  edge  so  as  to  overlap  each  other  in  saw-toothed 
fishion,  and  family  plots  are  ordinarily  enclosed  either 
by  a  brick  wall   or,  more  likely,  by  a  forlorn-looking 


A  County   Seat  in  Alabama 


89 


Keeping  the  Grass  out  of  the  Cemetery 

wooden  fence.  An  old  negro  is  kept  busy  hoeing  up 
such  stray  spears  of  grass  and  sprou tings  of  weeds  as 
chance  to  start,  and  owners  of  plots  often  supplement 
his  labors  in  keeping  the  earth  befittingly  barren   by 


90  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

biingnig  rakes  and  brooms  and  giving  the  sand  above 
their  flimily  graves  a  thorough  scratching  and  brush- 
ing. Then  it  appears  beautiful  in  their  eyes.  Grass 
seems  to  them  unkempt. 

A  great  deal  of  money  has  been  spent  on  the  monu- 
ments, and  the  desire  to  emulate  others  in  funeral  dis- 
play has  plainly  resulted  in  expenses  far  beyond  the 
means  of  many  who  have  put  up  these  fine  stones. 
Very  few  of  them  date  back  more  than  thirty  or  forty 
years.  They  have  nearly  all  been  bought  in  the  period 
of  the  town's  poverty. 

The  negroes  have  a  separate  cemetery.  If  a  colored 
person  was  to  be  buried  among  the  whites,  the  latter 
would  all  rise  from  their  graves  in  indignation.  How 
they  tolerate  the  "  niggers "  in  heaven  is  a  mystery, 
unless  the  mansions  there  are  provided  with  kitchens 
and  stables.  But,  whatever  the  state  of  affairs  in 
heaven,  no  mixing  is  allowed  in  this  Tuskegee  burial- 
place,  and  the  negro  dead  are  interred  a  half-mile 
farther  on,  where  cultivated  fields  give  way  to  scrubby 
woodland.  In  a  humble  way  their  cemetery  is  a  copy 
of  that  of  the  whites.  Fences  have  been  built  around 
quite  a  number  of  family  plots,  and  the  ground  in 
some  cases  is  kept  free  from  greenery  by  occasional 
hoeings  and  sweepings.  Several  ot  the  graves  were 
marked  with  diminutive  slabs  of  marble  ;  others  had 
neatly  painted  white  boards  set  up;  but  most,  if 
marked    at   all,   had    only   bits    of  wood,   though    not 


A  County   Seat  in  Alabama 


9^ 


infrequently  the  graves  were  outlined  by  a  border  of 
bricks  or  bottles.  The  cemetery  was  not  enclosed,  and 
many  of  the  rude  fences  about  the  family  plots  were 
falling  to  wreck.      Its  pleasantest  features,  as   I  saw  it, 


The  Negro  Cemetery 

were  the  tufts  of  wild  violets  that  grew  plentifully  and 
two  black-gum  trees  all  ahum  with  honey-gathering 
bees. 

While  I  was  loitering  there  an  elderly  negro  came 
along  the  path  leading  through  the  brush  from  the 
town.  Over  his  shoulder  he  carried  a  spade,  under 
his  arm  a  box,  and  in  one  hand  a  piece  of  board.  He 
approached  me,  and  holding  out  the  piece  of  board, 
said :    "  Would  yo'   write    on    dis    yere   for   me.   Cap  ^ 


92  Highways  and   Byways  of  the   South 

When  I  war  young  I  war  dat  triflin'  I  learnt  every 
kind  of  divihnent,  but  I  didn't  learn  to  read  an'  write, 
an'  I  wish  yo'd  copyfy  de  name  on  dis  yere  box." 

The  box  was  a  coffin,  and  contained  the  body  of  a 
child.  It  was  a  slight  affiiir  obtained  at  a  grocer's,  and 
some  printing  on  the  end  in  red  and  black  showed  it 
had  originally  held  canned  tomatoes.  After  I  had 
copied  the  name  the  old  man  poked  around  con- 
sidering where  he  had  better  dig  the  grave.  He  soon 
selected  a  spot,  and  was  not  long  in  making  a  shallow 
trench  in  the  sandy  earth.  Then  he  put  in  the  coffin, 
shovelled  back  the  sand,  set  up  the  headboard  with  its 
pencilled  lettering,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  grave  stuck 
in  a  stick  he  picked  up  near  by.  That  done,  he  plod- 
ded off  toward  the  town,  and  the  melancholy  little 
funeral  was  ended. 

Off  on  another  road,  well  away  from  the  village,  is 
a  colored  folks'  camp-meeting  ground.  It  is  on  a 
hill-slope  with  a  thin  growth  of  woods  round  about, 
and  not  even  a  negro  house  in  sight.  Here  stands  a 
great,  low,  wide-spreading  shed  of  a  building,  open  on 
all  sides.  The  seats  for  the  worshippers  are  rough 
planks,  some  of  them  a  sawmill  product,  and  others 
hewed  out  with  axes,  and  very  thick  and  clumsy. 
The  pulpit  platform  and  furnishings  were  scarcely  less 
rude.  Just  outside  the  building  at  the  rear  was  what 
looked  like  a  sacrificial  altar.  It  was  a  slight  platform 
of  short  boards  supported  on  four  stakes  and  covered 


An  Improvised  Hothouse 


A   County   Seat  in  Alabama  93 

with  a  few  inches  of  earth  and  a  strcw'ng  of  coals.  No 
doubt  a  fire  was  built  on  it  nightly  to  light  the  approach 
to  the  evening  meetings.  At  a  little  remove  were 
several  ruinous  cabins.  They  had  bunks  in  them  and 
fireplaces,  and  would  be  repaired  at  camp-meeting  time 
to  serve  as  lodgings  for  those  who  came  from  a  dis- 
tance. The  annual  midsummer  meetings  are  very 
picturesque ;  yet  they  are  not  nearly  so  wild  and  bar- 
baric as  such  meetings  were  formerly,  and  decorous 
intelligence  is  everywhere  becoming  more  character- 
istic of  the  negro  religious  gatherings. 

I  returned  from  the  camp-grounds  by  a  field-path. 
On  the  dry  slopes  hugging  the  earth  grew  numerous 
spiny  cacti  of  the  prickly-pear  order,  and  they  were 
loaded  with  fruit.  Southern  children  sometimes  eat 
the  pears,  though  there  is  not  much  to  them  save  seeds 
and  a  tang  of  acidity.  The  woods  were  gay  with  the 
blooming  dogwood  which  one  might  easily  mistake  at 
a  little  distance  for  bushes  full  of  white  butterflies,  and 
there  were  pink  azaleas  and  hawthorn,  and  a  multitude 
of  lesser  blossoms,  while  along  the  fences  in  the  opens 
were  coral  honeysuckle,  blackberries,  and  wild  roses  all 
in  flower.  For  a  portion  of  the  way  I  followed  one 
of  the  brooks,  or  "  branches,"  as  the  smaller  streams 
are  called  in  the  South,  through  a  loosely  wooded  hol- 
low. On  the  hilltops  the  wind  blew  a  chilly  gale,  but 
here  the  air  was  quiet  and  tinged  with  springlike  warmth. 
Best  of  all,  I  came  on  a  "mocker"  in  full  song  —  a 


94  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

changing,  eloquent  song  with  many  surprises,  trills, 
whistles,  and  snatches  of  melody. 

I  left  the  hollow  not  far  from  Mr.  Washington's 
school,  and,  on  cHmbing  a  high  zigzag  fence,  startled  a 
young  negro  student  who  had  secretly  constructed  here 
an  amateur  hothouse.  He  had  taken  some  discarded 
windows  and  other  odds  and  ends  and  tinkered  up  a 
structure  three  or  four  feet  square  and  six  or  seven 
high,  that  was  quite  ingenious.  Pie  had  contrived  to 
keep  it  heated  with  a  cast-off  lamp  that  he  set  inside  an 
old  tin  pail  to  form  a  kind  of  furnace.  To  a  certain 
extent  this  hothouse  was  a  plaything,  yet  he  was  by  its 
means  doing  some  genuine  investigation  into  the  prin- 
ciples of  plant  growth  and  nurture.  He  was  perhaps 
making  more  of  his  school  opportunities  than  most ; 
but  the  students,  as  a  whole,  are  remarkably  earnest, 
and  are  intent  on  getting  all  the  good  they  can  out  of 
their  course.  I  doubt  if  there  is  a  white  school  in  our 
entire  country  where  the  mental  and  moral  atmosphere  is 
so  good.  The  students  are  not  merely  working  to  help 
themselves,  but  to  be  uplifters  of  their  race.  They 
are  obliged  to  subsist  on  the  plainest  fare,  to  learn 
order,  cleanliness,  industry,  and  promptness.  Small 
vices  are  not  tolerated,  nor  any  tendency  to  foppish 
display. 

The  school  is  an  inspiration,  and  the  master  spirit 
is  Booker  T.  Washington  —  a  man  who,  in  spite  of 
his  fame,  continues  unspoiled  ;  a  man  of  rare  simplicity 


A  County   Seat  in  Alabama 


95 


and  ability  and  hard  sense,  giving  his  Hfe  to  stem  the 
tide  of  ignorance  and  poverty  and  the  attendant  evils 
that  weigh  down  his  people.  One  does  not  have  to  be 
long  in  the  South  to  appreciate  the  immense  need  and 
importance  of  his  work. 


^-<i'-» 


^^2^C-~-^'/?  ■'!iL-  J-. 


A  Country  Mule  hitched  on  a  Town  Street 


IV 


AMONG    THE    GEORGIA    CRACKERS 


I 


WAS  at  Crick- 
boro,  a  typical 
small  village  in 
the  northern  part  of 
Georgia.  There  were 
perhaps  a  dozen 
houses  in  the  ham- 
let, and  others  were 
scattered  at  intervals 
along  the  country 
roads  of  the  vicinity. 
Most  of  them  were 
one  story  in  height, 
and  all  were  small. 
Some  of  the  poorer 
ones  had  only  board 
shutters  at  the  win- 
dow openings.  Nearly  all  the  barns  and  outbuildings 
were  of  logs,  and  occasionally  there  was  a  log  house. 
In  the  midst  of  the  village,  or  "settlement,"  as  it  was 
called,  were  four  or  five  little  stores.      They   had  no 

96 


At  Home 


Among  the   Georgia  Crackers  97 

show  windows,  and  were  as  simple  and  rustic  as  they 
well  could  be.  Sunrise  was  their  opening  time.  At 
noon  the  owners  locked  up  and  went  home  to  dinner, 
and  in  the  dusk  of  early  evening  they  closed  their 
establishments  for  the  night.  The  stores  seemed  rather 
numerous  for  so  diminutive  a  place,  and  much  of  the 
time  I  saw  the  lone  proprietor  of  each  sitting  in  the 
doorway,  as  if  he  was  a  monstrous  spider  with  net 
spread,  waiting  for  his  prey.  Every  store  was  sup- 
plied with  several  chairs,  and  these  were  seldom  with- 
out occupants  in  good  weather.  The  favorite  position 
was  just  outside  the  door,  where,  sociably  and  com- 
fortably, the  loiterers  could  observe  whatever  was 
going  on. 

Up  a  steep  hill  just  east  of  the  village  was  the  Bap- 
tist church  and  the  schoolhouse,  the  former  painted, 
the  latter  colored  only  by  the  sun  and  rain  ;  yet  the 
schoolhouse  was  a  good-sized  building,  as  it  had  need 
to  be,  to  accommodate  its  hundred  pupils.  School  be- 
gan in  November  and  closed  in  April,  and  was  in 
charge  of  a  man  teacher,  spoken  of  as  "the  professor," 
and  a  lady  assistant.  The  children  were  at  their  tasks 
for  seven  hours  daily,  or,  to  quote  my  landlady,  "  The 
school  takes  'em  up  at  eight  in  the  morning  and  turns 
'em  out  at  four  in  the  evening."  Most  of  the  chil- 
dren brought  their  dinners,  and  the  noon  hour  was 
known  as  "playtime."  There  was,  of  course,  a  recess 
in  each   session,  "  but   I   call   it  a  watering  time,"  said 


H 


98 


Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 


A  Schoolroom  Corner 

my  landlady,  "  because  they  spend  most  of  the  fifteen 
minutes  around  the  schoolhouse  well,  drinking." 

This  well  was  behind  the  school  building  under  a 
little  open  shed,  and  the  water  was  drawn  up  from 
the  depths  with  a  bucket  and  windlass. 

On  the  hill  close  by  the  church  was  the  cemetery. 
The  soil  was  full  of  stones,  and  whenever  a  new  grave 
was  dug  quite  a  heap  of  them  would  be  thrown  out, 
and  there  they  lay  until  the  persons  most  concerned 
found  it  convenient  to  cart  them  away  ;  "  and  that's  a 
good  long  time,"  was  my  landlady's  comment.  "  I 
should  think  the  ghostes  of  them  that  air  buried  would 
come  aroun'  an'  nudge  up  their  relatives  about  them 
stones." 


Among  the  Georgia  Crackers  99 

The  cemetery  was  unfenced,  but  this  condition  was 
to  be  remedied.  The  ladies  of  the  community  were 
making  a  quilt,  for  which  they  proposed  there  should 
be  a  raffle.  Certain  members  of  the  church  said  a 
raffle  was  no  better  than  gambling.  Others  deemed  it 
entirely  innocent,  and  argued  that  raffling,  or  methods 
equivalent,  were  employed  for  raising  funds  in  churches 
everywhere.  Anyway,  it  was  the  only  possibility  the 
quiltmakers  could  see  of  getting  enough  money  for  the 
fence,  and  they  were  hastening  to  finish  the  work  as 
soon  as  they  could. 

A  half-mile  up  the  road  from  the  village  was  a 
second  house  of  worship,  commonly  called  "  the  Hard- 
shell Church,"  or,  as  its  adherents  would  say,  "  the 
Old  Primitive  Baptist  Church."  They  believed  in 
doing  the  Lord's  work  as  the  spirit  moved,  and  they 
would  have  no  hireling  ministers.  To  be  sure,  they 
paid  their  preachers,  but  each  person  contributed  as 
his  conscience  dictated,  and  there  was  no  tax  or  com- 
pulsion. The  edifice  was  a  brown,  ramshackle  struc- 
ture without  turret  or  bell,  and  extremely  rough  inside 
and  out.  Until  recently  services  had  been  held  at  the 
Hardshell  Church  once  a  month,  but  the  itinerant 
preacher  had  lost  his  life  in  the  winter  while  crossing 
a  flooded  river.  "  He  and  another  man,"  said  my 
informant,  "  got  in  a  ferry  skiff  and  started  to  pull  hit 
over  to  the  other  side  of  the  river  by  holdin'  on  with 
their  hands   to  a  wire  rope   that  was  stretched  acrost. 


lOO         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

But  the  current  was  so  swift  hit  jerk  the  boat  out  from 
under  them.  One  man,  he  hung  on  to  the  wire  an* 
got  to  shore,  but  the  preacher,  he  was  drownded." 

At  the  church  in  the  village  they  had  Sunday-school 
every  Sabbath,  and  preaching  every  second  Sabbath. 
Sunday  afternoons  the  young  folks  to  the  number  of 
thirty  or  forty  were  accustomed  to  gather  for  "  a  sing  " 
in  one  of  the  houses,  and  once  a  vear  there  was  "  an 
all  day  sing"  at  the  church.  This  all  day  sing  drew 
together  the  people  for  ten  or  twelve  miles  around. 
They  came  on  foot,  on  saddle-horses,  and  in  all  sorts 
of  vehicles,  and  they  brought  feed  for  their  horses  and 
lunches  for  themselves,  and  each  one  who  owned  a 
copy  of  "  The  Old  Christian  Harmony"  brought  that 
to  sing  from.  Not  half  the  people  could  get  into  the 
church,  and  the  surplus  lingered  about  outside  and 
visited.  The  musical  exercises  of  the  occasion  were 
not  as  extended  as  one  would  fancy  from  the  expres- 
sion "an  all  day  sing."  The  program  was  —  Sunday- 
school  nine  to  ten  in  the  morning,  preaching  eleven 
to  twelve-thirty,  and  singing  from  two  to  four  in  the 
"evening."  This  word  "evening"  is  used  in  Georgia 
in  the  same  sense  that  we  in  the  North  use  "  after- 
noon," and  as  soon  as  supper  has  been  eaten  they  con- 
sider it  no  longer  evening,  but  "  night." 

Every  church  in  the  region  had  its  annual  all  day 
sing,  which  was  perhaps  the  greatest  pleasure  of  the 
year.     There  were,  however,  various  lesser  pleasures, 


A  Country  Store 


1 

i     • 

j^  _. 

TlLU^.-i 

."  w- 

.-M  L-  A 

tU 

,JS. 

Among  the   Georgia  Crackers  loi 

especially  in  winter.  Then  they  had  parties  with  an 
accompaniment  of  dancing,  if  girls  enough  were  pres- 
ent who  did  not  belong  to  the  church.  But  most  of 
the  young  women  joined  the  church  by  the  time  they 
were  fifteen  or  sixteen,  and  after  that  would  not  indulge 
in  so  doubtful  an  amusement. 

Yet  they  had  no  hesitation  in  taking  part  in  the 
games  of  "  Stealing  Partners,"  "  Twistification,"  and 
"Fancy  Four" — games  which  do  not  differ  much 
from  dancing,  except  in   name. 

"  The  way  we  play  'em  is  this,"  said  a  young 
fellow  who  enlightened  me  on  the  subject;  "there's 
music  to  all  of  'em,  and  while  the  fiddle's  a-goin'  we 
skip  aroun'  and  try  to  knock  with  the  music.  In 
Stealing  Partners,  we  all  have  partners  but  one  boy, 
and  he  pick  out  any  girl  he  want  and  swings.  That 
leave  another  boy  without  a  partner,  and  he  have  to 
pick  out  a  girl  and  swing  her,  and  so  on. 

"  For  Twistification  we  all  gets  in  line,  boys  on  one 
side,  girls  on  the  other,  with  room  for  a  couple  to 
march  up  between  us  in  dancing  step.  At  the  end  of 
the  line  they  swing  and  we  all  promenade.  Then  we 
form  the  line  and  start  again. 

"  Fancy  Four  is  a  good  deal  like  Twistification, 
only  two  couples  instead  of  one  do  the  dancing  and 
promenading.  Of  co'se  these  games  ain't  regular 
dancing.  That  wouldn't  be  allowed  at  most  houses. 
They're  Christian  dancing." 


102         Highways  and   Byways  of  the   South 

The  parties  at  which  these  games  are  played  are  quite 
apt  to  take  the  form  of  "  Pound  Suppers."  7^o  these 
the  girls  contributed  cake,  and  each  young  man  brought 
a  pound  of  candy,  or  apples,  or  oranges,  or  crackers, 
or  whatever  he  chose  to  furnish. 

Corn  and  cotton  were  the  principal  crops  of  the 
region,  and  the  fields  were  busy  with  workers  plough- 
ing, strewing  fertilizer,  and  getting  the  seeds  into  the 
ground.  I  he  corn  was  hand-planted,  and  much  of  it 
was  dropped  by  the  sunbonneted  women  walking  up 
and  down  the  furrows.  In  the  autumn  the  corn  ears 
were  picked  and  the  stalks  left  standing  in  the  fields 
until  spring.  I  recall  seeing  the  women  armed  with 
heavy  hoes  chopping  off  these  stalks  and  piling  them 
up  to  be  bound,  or  "toting"  them  to  the  borders  of 
the  fields  where  they  would  be  out  of  the  way.  In 
the  middle  of  one  such  field  lay  a  baby  wrapped  in  a 
blanket.  It  was  crying  lustily,  and  its  mother  was 
hacking  away  as  rapidly  as  she  could  so  as  to  get 
through   and  take  care  of  the  youngster. 

Bee-keeping  was  a  common  industry,  though  owing 
to  the  antiquated  way  in  which  the  bees  were  cared  for, 
very  little  honey  was  marketed.  One  Sunday  the  bees 
belonging  to  an  old  man  who  lived  across  the  road 
from  my  boarding-place  swarmed,  and  he  began  to 
ring  a  cow-bell.  It  was  a  beautiful  sunny  morning,  so 
calm  you  could  hear  all  sounds  for  miles  around  —  the 
bird  songs,  the  barking  of  dogs,  voices  in  the  village. 


Among  the   Georgia  Crackers  loj 

and  some  one  singing  in  the  woods  half  a  mile  away. 
Then  came  the  dinging  of  that  hideous  cow-bell,  and  I 
ran  across  the  wav  to  find  out  what  had  happened. 
The  garden  in  front  of  the  old  man's  house  was  over- 
hung by  a  shifting  cloud  of  noisy-winged  bees.  There 
was  serious  doubt  as  to  the  intentions  of  this  humming, 
whirHng  mass,  and  the  cow-bell  was  intended  to  bedizen 
the  bees'  minds  so  that  thev  would  settle  down  on  the 
garden  shrubbery  instead  of  fleeing  to  the  woods  as 
instinct  prompted  them  to   do. 

Presently  the  old  man  ceased  his  dolorous  ringing 
and  slipped  a  fly-netting  over  his  head,  and  gloves  on 
his  hands,  and  proceeded  to  investigate  closer.  The 
neighbors  hung  over  the  picket  fence  and  advised, 
though  sometimes  scattering  and  seeking  safety  at  a 
greater  distance  when  the  bees  came  too  close.  This 
running  away  seemed  to  me  rather  unnecessary,  and  I 
held  my  ground  until  a  bee  lit  on  the  tip  of  my  nose. 
Such  familiarity  on  the  part  of  the  armed  and  angry 
insect  was  too  much  for  my  equanimity,  and  I  could 
not  resist  the  impulse  to  dash  it  off.  That  was  a  fatal 
mistake,  and  the  bee  left  its  sting.  Oh,  how  it  hurt ! 
and  I  beat  an  inglorious  retreat,  and  did  not  return  to 
see  whether  the  old  man  lost  his  swarm  or  not. 

The  hives  in  which  the  bees  were  domiciled  were 
spoken  of  as  "  gums."  Usually  they  were  simply 
oblong,  upright  boxes  of  home  manufacture  ;  but  in 
earlier  times  sections  of  hollow  black-gum  trees  served 


I04         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

the  purpose  —  hence  the  name.  Black-gum  hives  can 
still  be  found,  and  I  saw  several  in  a  house  yard  about 
two   miles   from   the  settlement.      There  were   sixteen 


Bee  Gums 

hives  in  all  ranged  along  the  fence,  and  about  half  of 
them  were  genuine  gums. 

While  I  stood  near  the  gate  looking  at  the  gums,  a 
man   appeared  in   the  house  door  and  invited  me  to 


Among  the  Georgia  Crackers  105 

have  a  chair  on  the  porch.  The  courtesy  and  friendly 
cordiahty  of  the  Southern  people  were  always  a  marvel 
to  me.  The  stranger  is  at  once  made  welcome,  your 
entertainer's  home  is  yours  for  the  time  being,  and  the 
family  will  all  do  their  best  to  make  your  visit  agree- 
able to  you.  I  accepted  the  chair  proffered  me,  but  I 
begged  off  when  the  man  and  his  wife,  who  had  also 
come  out  on  the  porch,  suggested  I  should  go  inside 
and  play  on  their  organ.  They  told  me  a  large  pro- 
portion of  the  homes  in  the  vicinity  had  acquired 
organs  within  the  last  few  years,  and  that  certain 
members  of  each  household  had  learned  to  play  "  hymn 
tunes."  I  could  see  the  instrument  through  the  open 
door  with  the  enlarged  portrait  of  a'vbaby  in  its  coffin 
hung  over  it. 

From  the  porch  I  had  an  excellent  opportunity  to 
watch  the  bees.  The  air  was  vibrant  with  a  thousand 
wings  as  the  busy  insects  darted  off  to  the  blossoming 
orchards  and  woodlands,  or  came  home  with  their  sweet 
burdens.  The  log  hives  were  prepared  for  their 
tenants  by  the  lady  of  the  house,  the  chief  requisite 
being  an  absolutely  tight  top.  After  cleaning  out  the 
dead  centre  from  the  section  of  log,  she  nailed  a  board 
on  one  end  and  crowded  bits  of  cloth  under  the  edge 
with  a  knife.  Then  she  turned  the  gum  bottom  up- 
wards and  tested  it  by  pouring  in  water.  If  the  water 
did  not  leak  out  the  gum  was  all  right,  but  the  bees 
would  refuse  to  occupy  it  unless  the  top  was  perfectly 


io6         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

tight.  She  said  the  bees  Hked  the  log  hives  better  than 
the  board  hives,  and  did  better  in  them.  June  was 
the  "  bee-robbing  time,"  and  then  the  family  took  out 
what  honey  they  wanted  themselves  and  gave  away  a 
good  deal  to  neighbors  who  did  not  have  bees. 

When  I  concluded  my  visit  I  returned  to  the  settle- 
ment. Two  of  the  children  of  the  house  where  I  had 
been  calling  went  with  me.  The  older  one,  a  girl, 
carried  a  basket;  the  other,  a  boy,  carried  a  pail,  and 
in  these  receptacles  they  were  taking  butter  and  eggs 
to  one  of  the/  stores,  and  would  exchange  them  for 
groceries.  Nearly  all  the  small  marketing  of  this 
sort  is  done  by  the  women  and  children,  and  they 
are  very  apt  to  go  and  come  on  foot. 

We  had  to  pass  through  a  bit  of  woods,  and  in 
a  hollow  among  the  trees  we  crossed  a  little  stream, 
and  the  children  pointed  out  a  pool  and  said  :  "  That's 
the  baptizin'  hole.  That  thar's  whar  they  baptize  at 
the  Hardshell  Chu'ch,  an'  they  make  the  water  deep 
enough  by  damming  it  just  down  the  branch  a  little 
way.  The  las'  one  to  be  baptize  hyar  was  Becky 
Brock,  what  they  call   Sis   Brock." 

We  had  passed  over  the  stream  by  a  log  adjusted 
for  the  purpose.  Small  streams  were  numerous  in  the 
region,  but  whether  they  were  trickling  rills  or  creeks 
ten  or  fifteen  feet  broad,  no  means  were  provided  for 
crossing  them  save  these  log  foot-bridges.  The  log 
was  usually  hewed  off  flat  on  the  upper  side,  and  some 


Among  the   Georgia  Crackers 


107 


''■''^:^*xit.r'i'^^   •'"■ 


A  Foot-bridge 

of  the  longest  and  highest  footways  had  a  slight  railing 
nailed  on  one  side  of  the  logs.  Adjoining  the  bridge 
was  always  a  ford  where  saddle-horses  and  teams  waded 
through  ;  and  these  fords  served  very  well,  except  after 
storms,  when  passage  was  frequently  impossible  for 
several  hours. 

On  the  outskirts  of  the  village  I  one  day  stopped 
to  speak  with  an  elderly  man  working  with  three  boys 
and  a  pair  of  mules  in  a  wayside  cotton  field.  Mr. 
Shenton — that  was  his  name  —  was  doing  more  di- 
recting than  actual  working,  and  when  I  greeted  him 
he  desisted  from  his  labor  and  mounted  the  rail  fence 
to  visit  more  at  ease. 


io8         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  What's  land  worth  up  in  your  beat  ?  "  he  inquired. 

I  gave  him  an  estimate,  and  he  said  :  "  The  best  land 
we  got  hyar  won't  sell  for  more  than  fifteen  or  twenty 
dollars  an  acre,  except  some  slopes  suited  for  peaches  ; 
those  being  as  much  as  fifty  dollars  an  acre.  Won't 
you  come  over  to  the  house  an'  set  awhile?  I  ain't 
well,  an'  I  depen'  mos'ly  on  the  boys,  my  gran'sons, 
to  work  the  crops." 

At  the  house  we  found  his  wife  standing  in  the  door- 
way smoking  her  pipe;  and  beside  her  was  a  rosy- 
cheeked  little  granddaughter,  not  yet  three  years  of 
age,  with  a  snufF  dip  in  her  mouth.  I  had  seen  plenty 
of  women  with  snufF  sticks  protruding  from  their  lips, 
not  only  when  they  were  about  their  homes,  but  when 
they  were  walking  on  the  roads  and  riding  on  the 
trains.  I  had  not,  however,  previously  encountered 
so  youthful  a  snuff-taker.  There  were  tears  in  her 
eyes.  She  had  just  been  punished  for  tipping  over 
the  snuff-box. 

"  I  reckon  that  chile  use  ten  cents  of  snufF  a  week 
with  what  she  dip  an'  waste,  too,"  said  the  woman. 
"  Tobacco  do  cost.  The  person  what  don't  use  hit  at 
all  had  ought  to  get  rich.  Ellen,  Ellen  !  "  she  called, 
stepping  back  into  the  house  a  moment,  "  come  and 
take  cyar  of  this  baby;"  and  the  little  one's  mother 
came  out  on  the  porch  and  sat  down  with  the  child  in 
her  lap. 

"  l^his  baby  was  always  po'ly  until  las'  winter,"  Ellen 


Among  the   Georgia  Crackers  109 

explained,  "  an'  the  doctor  say  she  couldn't  live,  so  we 
let  her  have  what  she  want.  Hit  seem  like  she  crave 
for  tobacco,  an'  she  learn  to  dip  snuff  an'  she  learn  to 
chew.  Most  all  the  women  an'  girls  hyar  use  snuff. 
The  boys  an'  men  dip  some,  but  generally  they  jus' 
chew  an'  smoke.  The  boys  learn  to  chew  when  they 
air  little,  an'  they  keep  on  chewin'  till  they  air  settled 
married  men.  Then  they  begin  to  smoke  a  pipe. 
The  girls  learn  to  dip  snuff  when  they  go  to  school, 
though  hit  ain't  allowed  if  the  master  know  hit.  But 
the  smaller  girls  they  think  they  got  to  do  like  the 
big  girls,  an'  thar's  lots  o'  snuff-dippin'  at  recess  an' 
noontime,  when  the  teacher  don't  see  hit.  I  don't 
remember  how  ole  I  was  when  I  begun  to  use  tobacco, 
but  I  remember  hit  made  me  sick.  Paw  let  us  get  a 
chew  from  his  box  whenever  we  want  hit.  I  don't  chew 
none  now,  and  I  have  try  to  give  up  my  snuff,  but  hit 
seem  to  be  like  usin'  opium,  or  drinkin'  spirits — yo' 
cain't  stop." 

"  I've  heered  they  don't  use  snuff  out  North  the 
way  we  do  hyar,"  said  Mrs.  Shenton.  "  I  was  ridin' 
on  the  cyars  one  day  an'  two  Northern  women  set  in 
front  of  me  tellin'  how  awful  they  thought  hit  was  — 
our  snuff-dippin'  ;  but  while  those  two  women  talk 
they  swear  right  along  scandalous,  an'  I  allow  I  rather 
have  our  snuff-dippin'  than  to  swear  the  way  the 
Northern  women  do." 

The  afternoon  was  waning,  and  the  hens  were  flap- 


no         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

ping  up  to  their  roosting-place  in  the  Hmbs  of  a  cedar 
close  by  the  porch.  "  Well,  I  got  to  be  gettin'  at 
my  work,"  remarked  Mrs.  Shenton.  "  Hit's  a  right 
smart  of  a  job  to  take  cyar  of  this  house;  but  Ellen, 
she  do  most  of  the  work   now.      I   done  quit  it.      All 


Working  in  the  Garden 

our  eight  boys  an'  girls  gone  excep'  Ellen,  and  if  she 
leave,  too,  we'd  give  up  the  place  an'  go  travellin'  an' 
visitin'  about  among  our  children." 

When  I  bade  the  family  "  good-by  "  I  was  urged  to 
call  again  and  to  come  in  sometime  to  dinner.  This 
invitation  to  dinner  I  accepted  a  few  days  later.  I  was 
a  little  early,  and  Mr.  Shenton  was  out  in  the  field 
relaying  a  zigzag  fence  ;   but  his  wife  welcomed  me  to 


^ 


Among  the   Georgia  Crackers  1 1 1 

a  chair  on  the  porch  and  assured  me  he  would  be  in 
when  the  "  dinner  train  "  went  along.  It  seemed  that 
a  train  passed  about  twelve  o'clock  and  was  known  as 
the  dinner  train,  because  its  passing  was  a  signal  that 
eating  time  had  come.  As  soon  as  it  hove  in  sight 
every  one  in  the  fields  promptly  started   for  the  house. 

"The  ole  man  done  taken  a  likin'  to  you,"  Mrs. 
Shenton  informed  me,  "an'  he  want  to  talk  with  you. 
He  gettin'  childish,  now,  the  ole  man  is.  He  been 
sick  a  long  time,  an'  he  ain't  plough  a  furrow  in  twelve 
years.  His  trouble  is  asthma.  We  cain't  have  any 
flowers  in  the  house  on  account  of  hit,  an'  when  this 
hyar  little  fuzz  come  on  the  willers  he  cain't  sleep 
day  or  night.  The  time  he  begun  to  be  bad  that- 
away  he  went  to  a  doctor  what  was  a  specialist  in 
Chattanooga.  He  only  go  to  him  three  times,  but  the 
doctor  holp  him  lots,  an'  he  charge  him  fifty  dollars." 

"  Yes,"  said  Ellen,  looking  out  from  the  kitchen, 
"  we  pay  fifty  dollars,  and  when  we  ask  the  doctor  what 
the  medicine  was  and  the  receipt  of  hit,  so  we  could  get 
some  mo'  if  paw  need  hit,  he  wouldn't  tell ;  but  we 
think  paw  had  got  well,  and  the  doctor  have  him  sign  a 
letter  to  use  in  his  advertising,  saying  how  much  good 
he  done  him,  and  how  peart  he  was  feelin' ;  and  the 
doctor  say  if  paw  sick  again  he  doctor  him  free.  But 
I  reckon  he  forget  about  that.  He  move  away  to  St. 
Louis,  and  when  paw  get  worse  we  learn  the  new 
address  from  Mr.  Willard  down  hyar  at  Swamp  Creek, 


112         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

what  was  afflicted  with  his  eyes  and  was  doctorin*  with 
the  same  man  ;  and  the  doctor  write  he  make  paw  a 
very  low  rate  —  only  five  dollars  a  month,  in  advance; 
and  that  air  what  we  air  a-payin'  to  him  now.  Oh  ! 
we  done  spent  the  price  of  a  good  farm  doctorin'  in 
the  last  twelve  years/' 

Just  then  the  dinner  train  rumbled  past,  and  Mr. 
Shenton  came  hobbling  in  from  his  fencing,  and  the 
boys  soon  followed,  riding  on  the  mules.  We  had 
fresh  pork  for  dinner.  A  neighbor  "  had  killed  a 
shote  last  week  of  a  Saturday,"  and,  in  accord  with  the 
usual  custom  in  warm  weather,  had  shared  the  meat 
with  all  the  families  living  near.  Among  the 
other  eatables  on  the  table  were  "  water-creases  "  and 
"  roas'in'  years."  My  hosts  ate  the  former  cut  up 
with  onions  and  doused  with  hot  grease  and  vinegar. 
The  latter  was  green  corn  of  home  preserving  served 
in  the  kernel,  though  it  was  still  called  "roas'in'  years." 
The  butter  was  noticeable  because  of  its  whiteness. 
It  would  have  passed  very  well  for  lard  ;  "  but  we'll 
have  hit  yellow  as  gold,"  said  Mrs.  Shenton,  "  after  the 
cows  begin  to  get  the  new  grass  in  the  pastures." 

While  we  were  at  the  table  I  spoke  of  an  event  of 
importance  that  had  recently  been  discussed  in  every 
newspaper  in  the  country.  The  family  had  not  heard 
of  it.  Mr.  Shenton  said,  "  The  papers,  they  got  fill 
up  with  so  much  depredation  of  one  kind  an'  another 
1  stopped  a-takin'  of 'em." 


Hickory  Whistles 


Among  the  Georgia  Crackers  113 

After  we  had  eaten  and  adjourned  to  the  porch,  Mr. 
Shenton  made  some  mention  of  the  war,  and  said, 
"  Johnston  whipped  the  very  wax  out  of  Sherman 
right  over  hyar  about  three  mile." 

"  Our  place  was  right  atween  the  two  armies,"  added 
Mrs.  Shenton.  "  1  was  to  home,  and  I  had  our  little 
boy  with  me.  Some  of  the  bullets  come  right  through 
the  wooden  walls,  and  we  sat  in  the  fireplace  durin'  the 
fightin'.  The  soldiers  had  took  all  there  was  to  eat  in 
the  house.  They  didn't  leave  nary  a  thing,  cooked  or 
uncooked.  But  I  didn't  want  to  eat  that  day.  The 
little  boy,  he  got  hungry  and  begun  to  fret  toward  night, 
and  a  soldier  what  come  in  give  him  some  hard-tack." 

Mr.  Shenton  had  served  in  the  Confederate  army 
under  Bragg.  His  opinion  of  that  leader  was  not  very 
flattering.  "  Why  !  "  said  he,  "  if  Bragg  whipped  the 
fight,  he'd  run." 

"Wharmy  ole  man  suffered  the  worst  was  at  Vicks- 
burg,  when  Grant  had  'em  besieged  thar,"  affirmed  Mrs. 
Shenton. 

"  We  was  eatin'  mule  beef  toward  the  last,"  said  the 
veteran,  "  an'  1  know  I  paid  twenty-five  dollars  for  a 
biscuit.  Grant  no  need  to  have  been  so  long  about 
takin'  the  place,  but  he  seem  boun'  to  charge  in  jus* 
one  place,  an'  we  concentrate  our  men  thar,  an'  have 
the  advantage.  We  see  Grant,  every  time  when  he 
gettin'  ready  to  charge,  march  his  men  aroun'  to  some 
whiskey  barrels,  an'  every  man  drink  ;  an'  many  of  'em 
I 


114         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

so  drunk  when  the  fight  begin  they  couldn't  fire  a  gun. 
They  each  carry  a  Httle  flag,  and  some  run  way  up  to 
our  breastworks  and  stick  that  thar  Httle  flag  on  top, 
an'  then  we  reach  out  an'  get  those  soldiers  by  the 
collar  an'  drag  'em  in  an'  they  our  prisoners.  There 
was  always  terrible  slaughter  of  Grant's  men  ;  but  the 
North  could  git  as  many  more  as  hit  wanted.  Hit  had 
hits  own  men  and  hit  hired  men  from  Europe.  Lots 
of  'em  couldn't  speak  English  ;  and  lots  of  'em  that 
could  speak  English,  when  we  ask  'em,  '  What  are  you 
all  fightin'  we-uns  for?'  they'd  say,  'For  sixteen 
dollars  a  month.'  That  was  all  they  knowed  about 
hit." 

"  Of  them  that  went  to  the  war  from  aroun'  hyar, 
I  think  no  one  come  home  worse  off  than  Reuben 
/  Snell,"  remarked  Mrs.  Shenton. 

"  Yes,"  corroborated  her  husband,  "  his  mind  not 
been  quite  right  since." 

"  For  one  thing,"  Mrs.  Shenton  continued,  "  he 
won't  never  tech  no  money.  He  say  money  burn  him, 
an'  he  won't  shake  hands  with  no  one  who's  been  a- 
handling  of  it.  He  has  bad  spells,  an'  when  one  o' 
them  spells  come  on  he  begin  t  >  smell  gunpowder  an' 
to  feel  bad.  Then  he  call  on  God  to  help  him,  an'  he 
feel  better.  While  he  have  those  spells  he  preaches, 
though  I  never  did  hear  him  but  once.  That  time  he 
took  the  almanac,  and  he  say,  '  I'll  preach  a  big  un.' 
He  held  the  almanac  upside  down,  but    that    didn't 


Among  the   Georgia  Crackers 


115 


make  no  difference,  'cause  he  cain't  read  a  speck,  any- 
way, an'  he  say,  '  My  tex'  is  "  Broad  is  the  road  that 
lead  to  destruction"  '  ;   an'  he  preach  quite  a  sermon." 


Neighbors 

Reuben  Snell  lived  far  back  in  the  woods.  I  was 
passing  his  place  one  day,  and  1  stopped  for  a  drink  of 
water.  Reuben  himself  drew  some  fresh  from  the  well 
and  handed  me  a  gourd  full.  He  was  a  pallid,  peculiar- 
looking  man,  and  I  was  not  surprised  when  he  said:  "  I 
been  sick  an'  full  of  pains.  My  arm  is  thataway  I 
can't  wind  the  clock  steady.  I  wind  a  little  and  my 
arm  'bleedged  to  drap.  The  devil  he  'flicts  a  heap  of 
people  so  they  cain't  hardly  git  along." 


ii6         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

The  house  was  a  Httle  affair  of  two  rooms.  There 
was  a  loft  over  them,  but  it  was  too  low  for  any  use 
except  "  storing  ole  loose  plunder." 

Mrs.  Snell  sat  knitting  in  the  kitchen  doorway. 
"  Whar  do  you  live  out  when  you're  to  home  ?"  she 
asked. 

"  I  live  in  Massachusetts,"  I  replied. 

"  Oh,  in  Boston,"  she  commented.  All  through  the 
South  I  found  Boston  was  considered  the  equivalent  of 
Massachusetts,  if  not  of  all  New  England.  "  That's 
sort  o'  north  from  hyar,  ain't  it  ^  "  Mrs.  Snell  went 
on,  "  I  ain't  got  no  larnin',  an'  I  cain't  quite  place  it 
exact ;  but  hit's  a  good  piece  from  hyar,  I  reckon. 
Thar  was  a  man  come  to  the  settlement  last  year 
from  New  York  or  Injiana,  or  somewhere  way  back 
North." 

Mrs.  Snell  did  her  cooking  over  an  open  fire.  "  Me 
'n'  Reuben  like  biled  victuals  on  the  fireplace  the  best," 
she  explained  ;  "  and  Reuben,  since  he  been  like  he  is, 
and  not  got  his  mind  right,  he  won't  eat  corn  bread 
baked  on  the  stove.  I  bake  it  in  a  skillet  on  the  hearth. 
I  putt  my  bread  in  and  putt  on  the  led,  and  heap  coals 
and  ashes  on  the  led,  and  hit  bakes  nice." 

At  one  side  of  the  house  was  a  pile  of  thin,  narrow, 
oak  boards  about  three  feet  long,  such  as  are  substi- 
tuted very  commonly  in  the  rural  South  for  shingles. 
"  Reuben  did  'em,"  said  Mrs.  Snell,  "an'  they  ought 
to   be  on   the  ruf,   but  thar  ain't  enough   yet.      Hit's 


Among  the   Georgia -Crackers  117 

slow  work  for  him,  but  them  that's  used  to  hit  can  split 
out  a  right  chance  of  ruf  boards  directly." 

Near  by  was  an  orchard  of  apple  and  peach  trees. 
"  I  can  up  a  lot  of  the  peaches,  and  I  always  dry  some," 
Mrs.  Snell  informed  me. 

"  Peaches  are  powerful  good  for  hogs,"  remarked 
Reuben.  "  We  tote  in  great  loads  to  'em  and  the  hogs 
git  plumb  fat.  Our  hogs  use'  to  run  in  the  woods 
befo'  this  new  law  was  made,  an'  that  save  us  from 
havin'  to  feed  'em  a  heap.  Hit's  the  devil's  law  — 
this  law  agin  lettin'  your  hogs  run." 

"Do  they  have  many  niggers  in  the  country  whar 
you  was  raised  ?  "  asked  Mrs.  Snell.  "  Thar's  a  sight 
o'  niggers  down  hyar  ;  you're  right  thar  is  —  What 
was  that  noise  ?  " 

She  paused  in  her  knitting  and  listened. 

"  I  hear  a  kind  of  screeching  off  beyond  the 
orchard,"  said  I. 

"  Oh,  then  that's  the  Roberts  boys.  Mr.  Roberts 
got  a  house  over  yonder.  His  boys  they  always  a-hol- 
lerin'.  They  got  so  they  hoi'  their  ban's  together  an^ 
squeal  through  their  fingers  same  like  the  noise  of  a 
pig  squeal." 

I  mentioned  some  things  the  Shentons  had  told  me 
of  their  war  experiences,  and  Mrs.  Snell  said:  "The 
time  we  had  the  fightin'  right  aroun'  hyar,  my  home 
was  jus'  west  of  the  settlement  on  the  big  road,  an'  the 
noise  of  the  cannons  and  guns  mighty  near  deefened 


ii8         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

me.  The  soldiers  they  trampled  down  my  wheat 
which  was  headin'  out,  an'  I  had  a  young  calf,  an'  they 
killed  hit,  an'  I  had  two  yearlings,  an'  they  killed  those. 
Them  Northern  soldiers  they  jus'  robbed  people. 
They  tuk  every  knife  an'  fork  I  had,  an'  mos'  every- 
thing else  out  of  my  house.  1  had  a  nice  gyarden,  an' 
they  tore  off  the  palln's  an'  pulled  up  my  Ing-uns  an' 
potatoes.  I  had  a  cow,  an'  they  said  they  would  milk 
her;  and  I  said,  'No,  you  won't  —  she'll  hook  you  to 
death  ; '  and  she  would,  too.  If  they  hadn't  put  up 
stakes  all  aroun'  her  until  she  couldn't  hardly  stir.  1 
told  'em  I  hoped  to  God  they  might  roost  In  hell  for 
takin'  my  things,  and  they  said  If  I  didn't  shut  my 
mouth  they'd  shoot  me  down.  Well,  I  tell  you  hit's 
bad  —  war  Is  !  I  never  want  to  live  to  see  nary'  nother 
war  to  have  to  go  through  hit." 

Mrs.  Snell  now  rose  and  prepared  to  go  out  and 
give  her  chickens  their  evening  feed.  She  limped  and 
used  a  cane.  "  Hit's  my  foot,"  said  she.  "We  been 
havin'  bad  weather  hyar  till  lately.  Hit  sot  In  an' 
rained,  an'  rained,  an'  rained.  Hit's  tolerable  muddy 
when  hit  rains,  an'  I  slipped  In  the  mud  an'  give  my 
foot  a  sprain." 

As  she  picked  her  slow  way  across  the  yard,  I 
started  back  through  the  woods  to  the  settlement. 
The  trees  were  feathering  Into  leafage,  and  the  forest 
was  brightened  with  blossoming  shrubbery  —  dog- 
wood, honeysuckle,  "  ivory,"  and  redbud.     The  last 


Among  the  Georgia  Crackers 


119 


was  especially  conspicuous  —  every  bush  a  pink  cloud 
of  bloom.  When  I  came  Into  the  open,  I  found  Mr. 
Shenton's  grandsons  "  sprouting  In  the  new  ground," 


Returning  from  the  Hen-house 

that  Is,  cutting  brush  on  land  where  the  timber  had 
been  recently  cleared  off.  They  were  piling  up  the 
rubbish  and  burning  it.  Two  of  the  smaller  boys 
had  manufactured  hickory  whistles,  and  piped  on  those 


I20         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

more  than  they  sprouted.  Clearing  new  ground  was 
a  common  occupation  at  this  season  among  the 
farmers,  and  the  crackHng  brush  heaps  seemed  like 
altar  fires  of  spring  —  sacrificial  offerings  to  the  deities 
of  nature  to  secure  an  abundant  harvest.  Blue  smoke- 
drifts  arose  from  many  a  field,  and  the  whole  quiet 
evening  landscape  was  veiled  in  gauzy  haze. 


IN    THE    TENNESSEE    MOUNTAINS 


T 


HE  eastern 
portion  of 
Tennessee  is 
a  wilderness  of  forest 
and  tortuous  valleys 
and  rude  ridges,  and 
where  these  ridges  lift 
themselves  highest,  on 
the  extreme  borders 
of  the  state,  they  are 
known  as  the  Great 
Smoky  Mountains. 
Thither  1  journeyed 
and  found  a  stopping- 
place  at  a  large,  white, 
two-story  house  on 
Wolf  Creek.  The 
house  stood  beside  an 
old  highway  that  went 
A  Drink  at  the  Spring  through  the  mountain 

valleys  from  Tennessee  to  North  Carolina,  and  it  had 
been  a  tavern  previous  to  the  building  of  the  railroad. 

121 


122         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

In  those  old  days  the  thoroughfare  which  now  seemed 
so  quiet  was  enlivened  with  constant  traffic,  and  the 
dwellers  along  the  way  could  rarely  look  out  on  it  and 
not  see  some  passing  team  or  horseback  rider. 


An  Old-time  Tavern 

The  tavern  had  a  broad  porch  with  a  balcony  above, 
extending  nearly  its  whole  length,  and  there  was  a 
passage  through  the  middle  to  an  ornamental  garden 
in  the  rear,  where  were  flowers  and  paths  and  many 
quaintly  trimmed  clumps  of  boxwood.  At  a  little 
remove  were  several  ruinous  log  cabins  that  had  been 
the  slave  quarters  before  the  war.  The  valley  was 
narrow,  and  round  about  were  tumbled  hills,  and  be- 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains  123 

yond  the  hills  rose  rugged  mountain  ranges  bristling 
with  interminable  forest.  This  was  the  first  genuine 
mountain  country  I  had  seen  in  the  South,  and  I 
found  it  delightful. 

While  I  was  sojourning  here,  an  elderly  man  by  the 
name  of  Gliddon  was  one  day  present  at  dinner.  He 
was  an  old  friend  of  the  tavern  family,  and,  after  we 
had  eaten,  he  and  my  landlord  sat  a  long  time  visiting 
on  the  porch,  and  I  sat  with  them.  It  was  uncom- 
monly hot  out  in  the  sunshine,  and  the  cool  comfort 
of  the  porch  was  very  agreeable.  Two  young  collies 
were  frisking  about  the  yard  with  intervals  of  lolling 
in  the  shade.  A  colony  of  English  sparrows  twittered 
from  some  ivy-grown  tree  trunks  of  the  garden,  a 
peabody-bird  whistled  in  the  woodland,  and  Wolf 
Creek,  only  a  few  rods  distant,  tinkled  musically 
along  over  its  stone-strewn  course. 

My  companions  were  valley  folk,  though  living 
on  the  wilderness  borders.  But  the  wilderness  was 
nowhere  what  it  had  been  fifty  or  even  twenty-five 
years  ago.  "The  bears  used  to  carry  off  my  grand- 
father's hogs  right  here  on  this  place,"  said  my  land- 
lord. "Yes,  and  we've  had  wolves  and  panthers  in 
the  valley  within  twenty  years." 

Now  these  creatures  had  vanished,  and  the  invading 
sawmills  had  pushed  into  the  remotest  depths  of  the 
woodlands,  and  had  denuded  the  mountains  of  all  their 
finest  timber. 


124         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  Thar's  few  schools  and  no  facIHties  back  hyar  on 
the  Great  Smokies,"  observed  Mr.  GHddon,  "and 
yo'd  be  surprise'  how  ignorant  the  people  are  —  even 
the  preachers.  Why  !  some  of  those  preachers  don't 
know  a  letter  in  the  book  —  'twould  make  a  dog 
laugh  —  their  ignorance.  But  the  people  are  great 
ban's  for  religion,  and  it's  a  common  saying  they  got 
mo*  religion  an'  less  morals  than  yo'll  find  anywhere 
else  in  the  world.  Ain't  that  so,  Steve  ?  "  asked  Mr. 
Gliddon  in  conclusion,  turning  to  my  landlord. 

"  Yes,"  replied  Steve,  "  and  I  c'n  tell  you  a  story 
to  illustrate  it.  Over  on  Pigeon  River  thar's  a  man 
that  claim  he  been  dead  and  come  to  life.  He  say 
he  went  to  heaven  for  half  an  hour,  and  he  met  Christ 
there,  and  the  man,  he  tell  Christ  about  the  road  he 
had  come,  an'  how  lonesome  it  was,  and  he  ask  Christ 
if  that  was  raelly  the  road  to  heaven.  '  Hit  was  all 
grass-grown,'  he  say.  '  Hit  mus'  be  ve'y  few  ever  go 
to  heaven  if  that  the  road,'  he  say.  And  Christ  say, 
^  Yes,  that  the  road  to  heaven,  but  that  not  the  only 
road.     That  jus'  the  road  from  East  Tennessee.' 

"  To  my  thinkin',  though,"  Steve  continued,  "  the 
people  here  don't  begin  to  be  so  rough  as  I  jy  are 
over  the  line  in  North  Carolina;  and  the  women  there 
are  worse  than  the  men.  Lots  o'  those  North  Caro- 
lina women  will  take  a  man  an'  whack  him  all  about. 
They  awful  people  for  the  law  there,  too,  and  always 
suing.      I  never  did  see  the  like." 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains 


25 


A  Mountain  Mill 


"  Thar's  some  good  people  over  in  North  Carolina/' 
cornmented  Mr.  Gliddon,  "  but  thar  ain't  enough  of 
'em.  That's  puttin'  it  putty  strong,  perhaps,  an' 
I    don't  know  but   I   ought  to  say  what  Uncle  Ned 


126         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

Cooper  always  say  at  the  end  of  his  speak  at  prayer- 
meetin' :  '  Brethren,'  says  he,  '  if  I've  said  any  thin' 
amiss  to-day   I   hope  you  and   the    Lord   will   forgive 


me. 


"  Uncle  Ned  has  his  own  way  of  talking,"  observed 
Steve,  "  but  for  downright  queerness  of  talk  the  moun- 
tain folks  beat  all.  The  other  day  a  man  was  down 
here  after  the  doctor,  an'  he  say,  '  Doctor,  my  wife 
done  drap  dead.      I  want  yo'  to  come  an'  see  her.' 

"  And  the  doctor  say, '  If  she's  dead,  you  don't  want 
me,  you  want  the  coroner.' 

"  '  No,'  the  feller  says,  '  she  ain't  plumb  dead.  She 
only  drap  dead.'      He  meant  she'd  fainted." 

"  Some  o'  those  mountain  girls  look  almost  like  var- 
mints," said  Mr.  Gliddon,  "  and  I  don't  reckon  they've 
been  washed  in  their  lives  ;  but  you  educate  'em  an' 
give  'em  a  chance,  an'   they  come  out  fine  appearin' 


women." 


"  You  was  speakin'  of  a  yoke  of  steers  you  wanted 
to  sell,"  remarked  Steve,  after  a  pause.  "  Have  they 
been  broke  ?  " 

"  No.  Two  or  three  fellers  have  wanted  to  break 
'em,  but  I  was  afraid  they'd  break  their  necks.  I 
should  think  you  could  use  an  extry  yoke  of  critters 
to  advantage  if  yo're  goin'  to  work  that  stony  land 
up  the  creek  you  ploughed  lately.  What  you  calculate 
to  do  thar,  anyway  ?  " 

"  I'm  goin'  to  put  in  corn." 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains  127 

"  By  gosh  !  that  won't  do.  I'll  insure  I'll  carry  all 
the  corn  yo'll  raise  thar  on  my  back.  The  land's  too 
pore,  and  it's  too  stony.  1  reckon  your  bhicksmith's 
bill  for  keepin'  your  plough  sharp  while  you  was 
ploughin'  in  them  stones  must  've  amounted  to  mor'n 
the  corn  '11  be  worth." 

Steve's  wife  had  come  to  the  door.  "  That's  what 
I  think,"  she  declared.  "  That's  what  I  been  tellin' 
him." 

"  Well,  it's  no  use,"  Mr.  Gliddon  responded.  "  I 
know  Steve.  He's  strong-headed,  Steve  is,  and  vo' 
cain't  do  nothing  with  him.  But  he  won't  never  raise 
corn  again  on  that  land,  even  if  he  gets  a  good  crap 
this  fall.  It's  too  near  that  thar  place  up  thar  whar 
they  make  blockade  whiskey.  Those  moonshiners 
air  boun'  to  steal  every  year  of  corn  they  c'n  lay 
hands  on  within  five  mile  of  their  still,  no  matter  how 
honest  they  air.  I  found  out  whar  that  thar  still  is 
some  time  ago,  and  they  hadn't  any  objection,  because 
they  know  I'd  jus'  be  bus'  wide  open  befo'  I'd  tell." 

"  Blockade  whiskey  is  the  only  whiskey  made  that's 
fit  to  drink,"  said  Steve,  judicially.  "  It's  pure.  It 
ain't  pizen,  like  the  doctored  whiskey  that's  paid  the 
government  revenue." 

I  gathered  from  Mr.  Gliddon's  and  Steve's  conver- 
sation that  illicit  distilling  went  on  about  the  same  it  had 
for  many  years.  Comparatively  little  of  the  whiskey 
is  taken  out  of  the  mountains,  and  the  distillers  do  not 


128         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

find  its  production  very  profitable  under  present  con- 
ditions. They  continue  as  poor  as  ever,  yet  in  their 
view  the  manufacture  is  one  of  their  rights,  and  they 
will  persist  in  it.  Steve  affirmed  that  if  the  govern- 
ment would  spend  the  money  it  now  spends  ferreting 
out  the  moonshiners  for  education  in  the  same  region, 
it  would  accomplish  much  more  in  destroying  the 
business  than  it  does.      He  did  not  think  the  revenue 


In  an  Upland  Corn-field 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains  129 

officers  were  very  effective.  It  was  almost  impossible 
for  them  to  find  the  stills  unless  some  moonshiner 
betrayed  his  fellows,  and  frequently  the  officers  were 
more  intent  on  getting  profit  out  of  their  labors  than 
in  really  destroying  the  stills.  They  are  paid  a  certain 
sum  for  each  successful  foray,  and  "they  will  take  a 
hack  out  of  a  still  "  to  show  for  the  purpose  of  getting 
their  reward,  and  leave  the  still  in  shape  to  be  readily 
put  in  order  again.  After  a  while  they  make  another 
raid  on  the  same  still,  hack  out  a  piece  of  the  worm, 
and  secure  a  second  reward.  One  local  still  had  been 
broken  up  thus  five  times. 

"  If  I  ain't  mistaken,  I  heered  some  one  sayin'  that 
youngest  Beasley  was  married  yesterday,"  remarked 
Mr.  Gliddon,  changing  the  subject. 

"Yes,"  replied  Steve,  "married  Hannah  Hosford." 
"  Lor'  a  mercy  !  Did  she  take  him  ^  He's  plumb 
shiftless,  an'  thar  never  was  an  honest  Beasley  yet. 
She  knew  what  he  was,  too,  an'  had  all  the  chance  in 
the  world  to  get  shet  of  him.  Well,  women  jus'  will 
be  cheated.  It  was  two  of  them  Beasleys  killed  Widow 
Miffiin's  cow  years  ago,  when  I  was  squire.  They  had 
some  grudge  agin  the  widow,  an'  they  took  the  cow  an' 
tied  its  legs  together  an'  rolled  it  down  a  bluff  into  the 
river.  Thar  wa'n't  a  bone  in  its  body  but  what  was 
broke.  The  case  was  tried  before  me.  I  didn't  quite 
like  that,  because  the  Beasleys  had  always  voted  for  me 
an'  the  Mifflin's  had   always  voted  agin   me.      But  I 

K 


130         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

wouldn't  'a'  found  in  favor  of  my  best  brother  under 
the  circumstances,  an'  I  gave  the  widow  a  judgment 
for  twenty  dollars.  Later,  Dave  Beasley,  who  was  the 
worst  of  the  two  that  did  that  trick  with  the  widow's 
cow,  was  lodged  in  the  penitentiary  after  bein'  caught 
with  his  pockets  full  of  that  'ar  counterfeit  gold  that 
was  made  up  on  Big  Creek." 

"  Dave  was  a  bad  citizen,"  my  landlord  commented, 
"  and  Alf  Weems  is  another  of  the  same  sort." 

"  That's  so,"  echoed  Mr.  Gliddon.  "  Thar  ain't 
a  dangder  scoundrel  ever  trod  shoe-leather.  Yet  I  sort 
o'  like  him.  I  cain't  help  it.  He  ain't  no  coward. 
He'd  hit  ary  man  on  earth  that  went  contrary  to  him. 
I  ricolect  when  he  was  so  porehewa'n't  worth  a  nickel, 
but  he's  jus'  got  the  dough  now.  You  know  where  it 
come  from.  We  ain't  so  particular  about  honesty  as 
we  use'  to  be.  I  swear  to  goodness,  when  I  was  a  boy, 
if  a  man  was  ketched  stealin',  he  was  kicked  out  of  every 
decent  crowd." 

"  Wa'n't  it  Alps  father  that  Bill  Jackson  shot  in 
Arkansaw  ?  "   Steve  inquired. 

"  Yes,"  was  Mr.  Gliddon's  response,  and  then  he  told 
how  in  some  gambling  affair  twelve  men  had  assaulted 
Bill's  father  and  killed  him,  and  how  Bill  took  it  on 
himself  to  be  avenged,  and  at  last  he  succeeded  in 
killing  every  one  of  the  twelve,  even  following  and 
searching  out  one  in  "  Arkansaw  "  and  another  in 
Texas. 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains 


131 


This  episode  recalled  to  Steve  the  lawless  violence 
that  prevailed  in  war  time  and  the  years  immediately 


Evening  on  the  Porch 


following.     "  Everything  was  mixed  up  then,"  he  ex- 
plained.     "  Some  of  our  people  around  here  fought  on 


132         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

the  Union  side  and  some  on  the  Southern  side,  fami- 
lies were  divided,  and  the  feuds  growing  out  of  the  war 
made  trouble  for  a  long  time.  In  the  war  we  never 
knew  what  was  goin'  to  happen.  We'd  have  Union 
soldiers  stopping  at  our  house  in  the  morning  and  per- 
haps Rebels  at  night.  Then  there  was  a  guerilla  band 
made  their  headquarters  in  the  valley.  They  were  a 
wild  crowd.  Some  of  'em  had  deserted  from  the 
Rebels  and  served  with  the  Yankees,  and  when  that 
didn't  suit  'em,  they  had  deserted  again  and  become 
guerillas.  They  never  hesitated  to  attack  twice  their 
number,  and  they  were  constantly  capturing  Yankee 
scouting  parties.  There  was  as  many  as  twenty-five  of 
'em  at  first,  but  they  got  killed  off,  so  by  the  end  of  the 
war  only  about  half  a  dozen  of 'em  was  left." 

"  They  was  up  to  all  sorts  of  devilment,"  Mr.  Glid- 
don  affirmed,  "  an'  the  people  on  their  own  side  here 
didn't  like  'em  much  better  than  the  Yankees  did.  You 
remember  that  'ar  guerilla  named  Fowler,  an'  how  he 
was  at  the  blacksmith's  shop  one  day  when  Tom  Allen 
hollered  for  Lincoln  ^  Fowler  picked  up  a  piece  of 
iron  an'  hit  Tom,  an'  Tom  fell  down  dead.  I  was 
a  Rebel  an'  always  expect  to  be,  but  I  didn't  approve 
of  that.  It  was  a  cold-blooded  murder.  However, 
thar  wa'n't  nothin'  done  about  it,  an'  the  nex*  year 
Fowler  shot  in  among  some  girls  while  he  was  drunk. 
He  went  home,  an'  that  feller  Carleton  follered  him. 
Fowler  had  gone  up  to  the  gallery  an'  was  lyin'  asleep 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains  133 

in  a  hammock,  an'  Carleton  cHmbed  up  a  ladder  an* 
grab  Fowler  by  the  leg  an'  begun  a  jerkin'  of  him,  an' 
when  he  woke  up,  Carleton  killed  him.  Well,  he 
needed  killin'.  He  was  jus'  nachully  mean.  The 
other  guerillas  took  his  body  an'  had  a  funeral.  They 
tried  to  hold  kind  of  a  religious  service,  an'  when  they 
was  gathered  round  the  grave,  they  wanted  to  sing  a 
hymn,  but  it's  told  that  they  didn't  know  none,  so  they 
sang  their  favorite  war  song  :  — 

**  '  I'll  eat  when  I'm  hungry,  I'll  drink  when  I'm  dry. 
And  if  the  Yankees  don't  ketch  me  I'll  live  till  I  die.'  " 

The  next  day  succeeding  the  afternoon  that  I  spent 
on  the  old  tavern  porch  I  set  forth  up  the  creek  into 
the  mountains.  The  road  was  very  bad.  It  was  nar- 
row and  often  steep,  and  in  places  so  rough  and  stony 
as  to  seem  almost  impassible.  The  stream  should 
have  been  clear  and  there  should  have  been  speckled 
trout  in  its  pools ;  but  so  much  sawdust  had  been 
"  throwed  into  the  creek  by  the  sawmills  that  the  water 
was  right  sickly,"  and  the  fish  that  once  swarmed  had 
died  off.  The  choppers  had  cleared  the  slopes  on 
either  hand  pretty  thoroughly,  yet  a  good  many  trees 
had  been  left  in  the  more  inaccessible  depths  of  the 
gorge,  and  the  finest  of  them  were  a  delight  to  the  eyes, 
they  were  so  tall  and  stalwart  and  straight-stemmed. 
What  a  wonderful  architect  nature  is  in  fashioning  these 
pillars  for  her  forest  temples  ! 


134         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

One  mill  was  still  at  work  in  the  valley  —  a  rude, 
temporary  affair  environed  by  heaps  of  sawdust  and 
great  piles  of  freshly  sawed,  odorous  lumber ;  and  near 
by  was  a  cluster  of  shanties  occupied  by  the  help  and 
the  mule  teams.  As  I  went  on  I  began  to  find  some 
of  the  little  farms  of  the  natives.  The  houses  were 
low  structures  of  logs.  I  stopped  at  one  of  them.  It 
was  across  the  stream  from  the  road.  In  mid-creek  a 
log  was  lodged  and  served  as  a  support  for  a  plank 
extending  to  it  from  either  shore.  I  went  over  to  the 
dwelling  by  this  plank  footbridge.  Several  women  and 
children  were  sitting  out  in  front  and  the  entire  con- 
vention appeared  to  be  engaged  in  absorbing  nicotine 
from  their  snuff-dips.  They  were  very  cordial  and  a 
chair  was  vacated  for  me.  Less  promiscuous  rubbish 
than  is  usual  lay  about  the  place,  and  for  this  dearth 
apology  was  made  on  the  score  that  the  family  had 
only  moved  in  "  Sunday  was  a  week  ago."  They  had 
brought  their  goods  five  miles  over  the  mountain  on  a 
sled  shod  with  wooden  runners,  and  the  vehicle,  accord- 
ing to  the  matron  of  the  home  group,  had  slipped 
along  "  tolerable  well  on  smooth  groun'  ;  but  I  tell  you 
where  hit  was  rough  hit  jus'  went  bumpity  bump.  I 
brought  the  chickens  myself,"  she  continued.  "  I  took 
a  stout  cord  and  tied  'em  by  the  legs,  half  at  one  end 
of  the  cord  and  half  at  the  other  end,  and  so  balanced 
'em  over  my  shoulder." 

While  we   talked  a  number  of  pigs  were  industri- 


Dipping  Snuff 


The  NEW  YpRi^, 


'PUBj 


TILDEN  FOUNDATIONS. 


In  the  Tennessee  Mountains  135 

ously  rooting  close  by,  but  now  one  came  and  gave  an 
investigating  poke  to  the  dog  which  was  lying  stretched 
comfortably  beside  the  doorstep.  That  roused  the 
dog's  temper  and  there  was  an  uproar  of  growls  and 
squeals  and  shouts  of  "  Tige,  yo'  leave  that  pig  alone 
—  don't  be  so  smart !  " 

The  sky  had  been  growing  dull  and  threatening, 
and  when  I  resumed  my  journey,  the  slender  shut-in 
trail  among  the  great  trees  was  very  gloomy.  Soon 
the  road  began  to  climb  in  a  steep  zigzag  up  a  moun- 
tain side  and  for  miles  I  was  in  uninterrupted  forest 
and  met  not  a  soul ;  but  when  I  reached  the  uplands 
and  was  among  the  rolling  summits  of  the  Great 
Smokies,  there  were  habitations  once  more  and  occa- 
sional little  patches  of  cleared  land. 

The  mountain  cabin  in  which  I  found  shelter  was 
the  home  of  a  family  named  Hudnut.  It  was  fully 
twice  as  commodious  as  the  average  houses  of  the 
region  and  had  four  rooms  in  the  body  of  the  house, 
and  a  cook-room  in  a  semi-detached  ell.  Only  the  last 
was  supplied  with  windows  and  the  others  were  cavern- 
ously  dark.  The  living  room  had  an  enormous  fire- 
place, built  of  rough  stones  gathered  from  the  fields. 
Stones  of  the  same  sort  had  been  used  in  laying  the 
hearth  which  projected,  uneven  and  deeply  creviced, 
well  out  into  the  room.  The  log  walls  were  partially 
pasted  over  with  newspapers.  The  cook-room  was 
simply  a  smoke-blackened,  board-walled  shed.      In  a 


136         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

corner  was  a  little  stove  propped  up  on  blocks  and 
the  pipe  was  run  out  through  the  boarding.  Near  the 
stove  was  the  corn-meal  chest.  This  was  replenished 
"  wunst  a  week,"  for  the  mountain  families  like  to 
have  their  meal  fresh.  Some  carried  the  grist  on 
horseback,  some  on  steerback,  others,  on  their  own 
shoulders.  It  was  no  great  burden,  a  half  bushel 
being  usually  as  much  as  was  needed. 

The  life  of  the  mountain  people  was  very  primitive, 
and  a  large  proportion  of  their  needs  was  supplied  by 
their  own  fields  and  pastures.  Woolwheels  were  in 
common  use  for  spinning  stocking-yarn,  and  the  old 
hand-looms  were  still  operated  in  occasional  families 
for  the  production  of  homespun.  The  crops  raised 
were  corn,  Irish  and  sweet  potatoes  and  sorghum, 
with  perhaps  a  few  cabbages  and  other  of  the 
ordinary  garden  vegetables.  There  might  be  a  little 
surplus  in  some  of  these  crops  that  was  sold,  but  in 
the  main  the  people  depended  on  the  butter,  eggs, 
chickens,  and  turkeys  they  carried  to  the  valley  to 
obtain  the  few  store  goods  that  seemed  essential. 
Blackberries,  huckleberries,  and  raspberries  were  plenti- 
ful, and  the  women  picked  what  they  chose  to  use. 
They  could  have  marketed  great  quantities  had  their 
situation  been  less  remote. 

One  evening  as  I  was  sitting  down  with  the  Hud- 
nuts  to  supper  in  the  cook-room,  a  man  walked  in  with 
a  gun.     "  Howdy,  howdy,  Andy  —  howdy,  Mag,"  was 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains  137 

his  greeting  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hudnut,  and  he  was 
invited  to  draw  up  to  the  table  and  eat.  Before  he 
accepted  this  invitation,  he  took  from  his  pocket  a 
small  bottle  wrapped  in  paper  and  put  it  on  the  shelf. 
The  bottle  contained  sweet  oil,  and  he  had  walked 
twenty  miles  that  day  to  get  it.  I  soon  learned  that 
he  was  a  mountain  genius.  He  wandered  about  mak- 
ing his  home  with  this  family  or  that  wherever  night 
chanced  to  find  him,  he  helped  some  with  the  farm 
work,  he  shot  wild  game  with  his  gun,  and  he  found 
desultory  employment  as  a  physician.  His  specialty 
in  the  last  role  was  a  stomach  and  backache  medicine 
and  cures  for  rheumatism  and  dropsy,  all  of  his  own 
manufacture.  The  sweet  oil  was  an  ingredient  for  one 
of  these  medicines,  and  he  mentioned  also  using  "  mul- 
lein and  evergreen  biled  together  "  and  "  a  yearb  called 
golden  seal." 

"  I  golly,  I've  cyored  a  heap  with  them  medicines," 
the  doctor  declared.  "  I've  knowed  people  swole  up 
with  the  dropsy  till  they  mos'  ready  to  bu'st,  and  their 
minds  made  up  they  wa'n't  long  for  this  kentry,  and 
then  I've  cyored  'em." 

"  The  slickest  cyore  yo'  ever  did,"  remarked  Andy, 
"  was  of  *  Lish  '  Walford's  boy." 

"  Yes,"  acknowledged  the  doctor,  "  he  was  a  awful 
sick  chile  when  I  got  to  the  house,  and  he  was  too 
small  to  tell  what  the  matter  was  ;  but  I  made  out  the 
trouble  was  in  his  stomach,  and  I  ask  his  folks  a  few 


138         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

questions,  and  it  appear  he'd  been  playin'  with  the 
cat.  I  knew  then  right  off  he'd  been  swallerin'  some 
cat  hairs.  So  I  give  him  an  epidemic,  and  he  threw 
up,  and  in  a  Httle  while  he  was  well  as  ever.  You  was 
thar,  Mag,"  the  doctor  said,  turning  to  Mrs.  Hudnut. 
"  Wa'n't  that  the  way  of  it  ?  " 

"  He  was  sure  cyored,"  replied  Mag. 

At  length  the  doctor  glanced  toward  me  with  the 
inquiry,  "  Where  mought  you  have  come  from  ^  " 

*'  I'm  from  Massachusetts,"  I  responded. 

"  Massachusetts,"  repeated  Mag,  doubtfully ;  "  1 
'low  I'll  look  that  thar  up  on  the  map  sometime.  I'd 
like  to  see  jus'  whar  that  is." 

"  Is  it  near  Kansas  ?  "  asked  Andy. 

"  You  have  to  cross  a  part  of  the  ocean  to  get  to 
Kansas  from  Tennessee,  I  believe,"  said  Mag. 

"Thar  was  a  Massachusetts  man  hyar  year  befo' 
las',"  announced  the  doctor,  "  an'  he  say  hit  was  two 
thousan'  miles  from  hyar  to  thar ;  an'  he  say  they  had 
deep  snow  thar  six  months  in  the  year  ;  an'  he  say  a 
man  couldn't  marry  thar  unless  he  had  three  or  fo' 
hundred  dollars  and  a  house." 

"  Hit  seem  like  to  me,"  said  Andy,  "  yo'  not  find  it 
very  easy  going  home  thar's  so  many  roads  and  cross- 
roads. I'd  be  afeard  I'd  lose  the  way  and  never  git 
thar." 

"  The  farthest  I  ever  went  was  over  near  Ashville  in 
North  Carolina,"  the  doctor  remarked.     "  I  wanted  to 


An  Inhabitant  of  the  Mountains 


TPn: 

fr^.RK 

i 

i;Y 

/» J  ■ 

\    AND 

TILDt-N 

rUu.- 

tiJATIONS. 

In  the  Tennessee   Mountains  139 

see  the  house  Vanderbilt  got  over  thar  an'  I  started 
early  an'  I  walked  plumb  thar  agin  dark — ~  sixty-five 
mile.  That  thar  house  is  made  of  square  rocks,  all  as 
white  as  chalk." 

"  Thar's  some  people  hyar  been  good  long  jour- 
neys," said  Andy,  "  and  others  hain't.  Thar's  an  ole 
woman  at  the  nex'  house  up  the  road  was  raised  on 
t'other  side  of  Brushy  Mountains,  and  when  she  mar- 
ried she  moved  over  to  this  side  an'  ain't  been  any- 
whar  else." 

After  supper  we  went  into  the  living  room.  On 
one  of  the  beds  lay  the  baby.  "  Ah,  little  Joe,  little 
Joe,"  the  doctor  said  caressingly  ;  "  ain't  he  like  his 
daddy  ?  " 

On  the  other  bed  sat  a  sleepy  small  boy  about  four 
years  old,  and  when  his  mother  came  in  from  her  work 
in  the  cook-room,  she  slipped  off  his  trousers  and 
tucked  him  into  the  bedclothes.  Then  she  took  the 
baby  and  sat  down  beside  the  fireplace.  Two  or  three 
crickets  were  singing  on  the  hearth,  cheered  by  the 
warmth  of  the  flickering  fire.  Andy  lit  a  lamp,  but  it 
had  no  chimney,  and  did  not  burn  very  well.  He 
blew  out  the  light  and  pinched  off  the  charred  end  of 
the  wick  with  his  fingers.  Then  he  relit  it  and 
it  behaved  better,  though  it  still  flared  and  smoked 
some. 

In  the  course  of  our  conversation  the  doctor  men- 
tioned going  through  "  Scratchankle." 


140         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  What's  that  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  Hit's  the  name  of  a  holler  whar  the  chu'ch  is, 
about  two  mile  from  hyar." 

"  And  do  the  people  about  here  all  attend  church  at 
Scratchankle  ?  "  I  questioned. 

"  Yes,  everybody  that's  able.  Some  walk  an* 
some  go  on  their  horses.  Mag,  she  ride  thar  horse- 
back an'  so  do  lots  of  other  woman.  I  go,  too,  but 
the  preachin'  don't  suit  me.  The  only  place  I  ever 
beared  religion  an'  the  gospel  preached  in  their  purity 
was  at  the  Methodis'  chu'ch  over  to  Shelly  Rock 
five  or  six  year  ago.  Preacher  Brice  was  thar  an' 
he  knowed  how  to  talk,  an'  people  wep'  over  that 
sermon  an'  they  weep  over  hit  yet.  They  had  a  great 
rejoicin'  an'  they  prayed  an'  shouted  an*  eve'ythin' 
else  an'   thar  was  a  heap   o'   confessions  made." 

Bedtime  comes  early  among  the  mountaineers,  and 
we  did  not  linger  long  around  the  fire.  Rising-time 
also  comes  early,  and  in  the  first  gray  of  the  morning 
some  one  entered  my  apartment  and  got  a  gun.  When 
I  went  out  on  the  porch  a  half  hour  later,  Andy  and 
the  doctor  were  just  returning  from  the  woods  whither 
they  had  been  in  quest  of  some  wild  turkeys  they  had 
heard  gobbling.  The  turkeys  escaped  them,  but  they 
brought  in  a  gray  squirrel  they  had  shot.  Andy  said 
the  squirrels  and  turkeys  were  more  plentiful  than  any 
of  the  other  wild  "  varmints  "  of  the  mountains.  He 
mentioned  seeing  a  "  b'ar  "  the  previous  winter,  and  he 


In  the  Tennessee  Mountains 


141 


Ploughing  among  the  Girdled  Chestnuts 

had  recently  heard  the  cry  of  a  painter.  "  Hit's  Hke 
a  woman's  cry,"  said  he.  "  Yo'  hear  that  in  the  night 
an'  hit  '11  raise  the  ha'r  on  yore  head." 

The  doctor  amplified  the  list  of  game  by  adding 
"turkle  doves,  'possums,  and  whistlepigs."  The 
whistlepigs,  or  woodchucks  as  we  would  call  them  in  the 
North,  get  very  fat  in  the  autumn  feeding  on  chest- 
nuts. "  You  take  'em  that  time  of  year,"  explained 
the  doctor,  "  and  parbile  'em,  and  pour  off  the  water, 
and  then  salt  and  pepper  'em  and  bile  'em  agin,  and 
after  that  bake  'em  and  they're  all  right.  I  love  a 
parbiled  groundhog,  and  I've  e't  a  many  of  'em. 
Didn't  you   ever  eat  whistlepig  ?  " 


I42         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  I  got  to  go  up  over  the  mountain  to-day,"  said 
Andy,  "  to  git  some  roughness  "  —  that  is,  cow-fodder 
or  hay.  "  My  cattle  ain't  begun  to  Hve  yet,  and  they 
won't  begin  to  Hve  for  two  weeks.  The  season's  late 
and  my  roughness  is  clean  gone." 

I  found  it  was  a  common  complaint  in  the  moun- 
tains that  the  cattle  had  not  begun  to  live,  and  this 
state  of  affairs  would  continue  until  the  forest  buds 
got  a  good  start  and  the  cows  could  be  turned  out  in 
the  woods  to  browse.  As  yet  the  twigs  were  bare  of 
leafage,  and  the  swelling  buds  had  not  thrown  off  their 
scales.  The  only  trees  that  looked  really  springlike 
were  the  occasional  maples,  or  "  sugar  trees,"  as  they 
are  called.  These  had  tasselled  out  in  light  green 
bloom.  "  You  c'n  git  good  sugar  from  them  trees," 
Andy  informed  me.  "  We  made  twenty-five  pounds 
of  sugar-tree  sugar  this  year." 

Evergreens  were  almost  entirely  lacking  on  the 
heights,  and  the  predominant  trees  were  chestnuts  — 
enormous,  big-armed,  and  patriarchal  and  seemingly 
as  ancient  as  the  summits  on  which  they  grew.  I 
went  with  Andy  in  his  quest  for  roughness,  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  chestnut  woods  on  one  of  the  loftier 
slopes  we  stopped  to  speak  with  a  man  who  was 
getting  some  new  land  ready  for  the  plough.  The 
settler's  wife  and  little  girl  were  helping  him  by  pick- 
ing up  the  smaller  rubbish  while  he  rolled  the  logs 
out  of  the  way.      Most  of  the  trees  were  yet  stand- 


Pioneer  Homemakers 


IT".*:/       ;nKARY 


TlLDwN   (->->>-' 


:iO^-  I    '■^' 


In  the  Tennessee   Mountains  143 

ing ;  but  they  were  dead  and  bare,  for  they  had  been 
girdled. 

The  log-house  in  which  the  family  lived  had  been 
recently  built  and  close  by  it  was  the  hole,  still  unfilled, 
whence  had  been  dug  the  "  mud  "  used  to  daub  the 
chimney  and  fill  in  the  chinks  between  the  logs.  The 
outbuildings  were  only  half  finished  and  everything 
was  raw  and  new.  The  family  were  in  fact  genuine 
pioneers,  carving  out  a  home  in  the  wilderness  in  just 
the  same  way  as  had  the  earliest  settlers  of  colonial 
days. 

I  asked  if  the  little  girl  went  to  school,  and  the 
mother  replied  :  "  Yes,  and  she  was  the  least  one  of 
'em  all.  She's  only  five  year  old,  and  some  of  the 
big  ones  was  nineteen  or  twenty.  Hyar,  Mary,  git 
down  off  that  thar  stump  and  say  yore  speech  —  that 
one  yo'  spoke  at  the  exhibition,  last  day.  She's  mem- 
orized I  don't  know  how  many  speeches." 

So  the  little  girl  came  down  from  the  stump  and 
her  mother  pulled  off  the  child's  sunbonnet.  Then 
the  tot  stood  very  straight,  and  in  piping  monotone 
recited  the  jingling  verse  or  two  that  constituted  her 
"  speech." 

A  mile  farther  on,  in  a  swampy  hollow  by  the  road- 
side, was  the  schoolhouse  —  a  lonelv  forest  hut  with 
no  dwelling  near.  The  woods  around  had  been  much 
thinned  and  devastated  by  the  lumbermen,  and  the 
schoolhouse  had  been  originally  "putt  up  for  the  sawmill 


144         Highways  and   Byways   of  the  South 

hands  to  shack  in."  Its  predecessor,  which  was  of  logs, 
had  fallen  down  about  the  time  the  sawmill  finished  work 
in  the  vicinity,  and  this  little  building  was  left  vacant 
very  opportunely  and  was  promptly  taken  possession 
of  by  the  school.  The  structure  measured  twelve  by 
fourteen  feet,  and  the  eaves  were  barely  six  feet  from  the 
ground.  The  only  furnishings  were  a  tiny  blackboard 
and  a  few  plank  benches  that  had  a  pair  of  well-slanted 
legs  inserted  at  each  end.  For  heating  purposes  there 
was  a  rough  stone  fireplace,  but  the  walls  were  full  of 
cracks  and  some  of  the  boards  were  missing  altogether, 
so  that  the  fire  could  not  have  warmed  the  room  very 
effectively.  However,  school  did  not  keep  in  the 
winter.  The  single  yearly  term  was  four  months  long 
and  began  the  first  Monday  in  August.  The  last 
teacher  had  been  a  young  woman  from  Shelly  Rock. 
Her  salary  was  twenty  dollars  a  month  and  out  of 
this  she  paid  a  dollar  a  week  for  board.  I  thought 
she  probably  helped  with  the  housework  at  her  board- 
ing-place to  get  so  low  a  rate,  but  Andy  said,  "  No, 
all  she  done  was  her  own  washing  and  ironing  on 
Saturdays." 

She  brought  a  chair  from  home  for  her  personal  use 
at  the  schoolhouse,  the  building  not  being  provided 
with  any  such  luxury,  and  she  took  the  chair  back  with 
her  at  the  end  of  the  term.  The  last  day  had  been  a 
great  occasion,  and  the  mountain  folks  all  turned  out 
to  the  exhibition.       The  children    trimmed  the  room 


In  the  Tennessee  Mountains 


H5 


with  greenery  and  made  a  Httle  bower  in  one  corner 
and  carpeted  the  floor  in  that  corner  with  soft  moss. 
On  this  forest  carpet  they  stood  when  they  said  their 


A  Woodland  Schoolhouse 


speeches.  The  scholars  numbered  twenty-seven  and 
not  much  spare  space  was  left  in  the  shack  for  visitors, 
yet  some  contrived  to  squeeze  in  along  the  walls  and 


146         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

the  rest  peered  through  the  breaks  and  the  cracks. 
To  add  to  the  attraction  of  the  exercises  one  moun- 
taineer brought  his  fiddle  and  another  a  banjo  and 
"  played  some  nice  music." 

Of  all  I  saw  in  my  wanderings  among  the  Great 
Smokies  nothing  remains  more  vivid  than  the  remem- 
brance of  that  woodland  schoolhouse  and  of  the  last 
day  as  described  by  Andy  Hudnut.  How  picturesque 
that  gathering  in  and  about  the  little  building  must 
have  been,  and  how  strikingly  the  interest  manifested 
shows  the  charm  that  education  has  for  the  mountain 
people  ! 


VI 


THE    BIRTHPLACE    OF    LINCOLN 


o 


N  my  way  to 
the  Lincoln 
country  I 
stopped  at  a  dismal 
little  place  called 
Glasgow  Junction, 
and  went  thence  nine 
miles  out  into  the 
country  to  see  the 
Mammoth  Cave.  A 
branch  railway  con- 
nects the  main  line 
with  the  cave,  but 
while  I  was  at  the 
junction  station,  one 
of  the  local  inhab- 
itants accosted  me 
and  inveigled  me  into  hiring  a  team.  Having  made  a 
bargain  with  me,  he  went  off  to  his  house  to  hitch  up 
and  presently  appeared  with  a  dilapidated  buggy  and 
an  ancient  horse  garbed  in  a  patched  and  knotted  har- 

H7 


The  Entrance  to  the  Mammoth  Cave 


148         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

ness.  I  think  I  would  have  hesitated  to  trust  myself 
to  the  dubious  conveyance  had  I  known  how  full  of 
rocks  and  petrified  ruts  the  road  was  that  we  were  to 
travel.  The  Southern  custom  is  to  "work  the  roads" 
in  the  fdl,  and  the  tracks  cut  by  the  wagon  wheels  in 
the  winter  mud  are  retained  by  the  clay,  which  is  the 
most  common  soil,  all  through  the  summer. 

The  region  round  about  the  cave  is  hilly  ;  but  in- 
stead of  watercourses  and  ravines,  there  are  numerous 
rounded,  basinlike  hollows  known  as  sink-holes.  Often 
the  sink-holes  are  acres  in  extent.  The  turf  sweeps 
unbroken  to  the  bottom  of  the  basins,  and  the  rainfall 
drains  away  by  hidden  outlets  in  the  subterranean  lime- 
stone. Their  form  and  frequency  has  given  the  name 
of"  Goose-nest  land  "  to  that  part  of  Kentucky  where 
they  are  most  abundant.  Some  of  them  contain  a 
pool  of  water,  and  these  muddy  ponds,  though  small, 
are  frequently  deep,  and  many  of  them  are  never  dry. 
The  permanent  pools  have  fish  in  them,  and  my  driver 
pointed  out  one  in  which  he  reported  fish  to  have  been 
seen  as  large  as  a  man.  Besides  these  natural  pools 
there  were  many  artificial  basins  scooped  out  in  the 
farm  barnyards  to  serve  as  watering-places  for  stock, 
and  the  creatures  that  get  used  to  this  stagnant  liquid 
prefer  it  to  pure  running  water,  "even  if  it  do  git 
bilin'  hot  in  summer." 

The  houses  I  saw  along  our  way  were  mostly  log 
cabins  or   small   and  flimsy  frame  buildings,  and  the 


The   Birthplace  of   Lincohi  149 

land  was  poor  and  much  overgrown  with  brushy 
woods.  Once  a  gray  rabbit  skipped  down  the  road 
ahead  of  us,  and  then  leaped  lightly  aside  into  the 
bushes.  My  driver  pulled  up  his  horse  and  stepped 
cautiously  out.  He  whistled  enticingly  to  Bunny  who 
had  stopped  and  was  peering  at  us.  The  driver 
picked  up  a  stone  and  heaved  it  at  the  little  creature, 
and  the  rabbit  hastily  sought  cover. 

"  I  mos'  hit  him,"  ejaculated  my  companion;  "and 
I  have  killed  'em  thataway  —  I  shorely  have!  Well, 
I  don't  care.  They  not  much  good  this  time  o'  year. 
The  meat  too  dry.      Cold  weather,  it  is  best." 

My  driver  had  a  good  deal  to  say  concerning  the 
Mammoth  Cave.  He  told  of  its  river  and  eyeless 
fish;  of  its  five  levels,  the  highest  series  of  galleries 
being  three  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  the  lowest ; 
and  he  told  how  a  cool  current  of  air  flows  from  the 
cavern  in  summer,  and  how  the  chill  outside  air  of 
winter  is  drawn  inward.  The  cave  was  discovered 
about  one  hundred  years  ago  by  a  hunter,  who  entered 
it  to  secure  a  wounded  bear  which  had  there  found 
shelter;  but  of  course  the  hunter  learned  nothing  of 
the  cavern's  extent.  The  country  was  then  uninhab- 
ited. Later,  when  the  region  began  to  fill  up,  tradition 
says  that  the  cave  and  a  hundred  acres  of  land  were 
exchanged  for  a  pony.  The  next  sale  was  in  1830, 
when,  with  five  hundred  acres,  it  brought  ten  thousand 
dollars.     The  land  alone  was  perhaps  worth  a  dollar 


150         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

an  acre,  but  the  cave  had  already  begun  to  be  famous 
and  to  draw  visitors.  These  visitors  now  number 
about  six  thousand  a  year. 

"  There's  such  a  lot  of  'em,"  said  my  driver,  "  hit 
seem  like  every  one  git  to  see  It  befo'  this  ;  but  I 
s'pose  new  young  folks  keep  growin'  up,  an'  so  they 
keep  comin'.  We  only  know  the  cave  got  one  en- 
trance, but  they  say  an  ole  darkey  wunst  went  through 
hit  and  come  out  another  place  'leven  mile  away. 
The  people  what  own  the  cave  didn't  want  no  busi- 
ness done  except  at  the  ole  entrance,  and  they  bought 
off  the  nigger  not  to  tell  for  seven  hundred  dollars  ; 
and  he  never  did  tell,  and  now  he  dead  and  gone. 

"  Thar's  plenty  o'  folks  lived  round  hyar  all  their 
days,  an'  never  been  into  the  Mammoth  Cave.  We 
people  hyar  don't  think  so  much  of  goln'  Into  a  cave 
as  we  do  of  takin'  a  ride.  We  all  got  caves.  There's 
a  cave  on  every  farm,  and  sometimes  three  or  four. 
I  got  a  right  smart  little  cave  on  my  farm.  Hit's 
two  mile  long  and  maybe  longer.  I  ain't  seen  hit 
all  yit.  I  go  In  thar  wunst  in  a  while,  and  I  always 
have  to  be  careful  to  take  a  newspaper  with  me  an' 
tear  it  up  an'  drap  the  pieces  along,  so't  I  c'n  fin'  my 
way  back.  You  see  this  house  we're  passin',  and  that 
bunch  o'  bushes  nex'  the  gyardin.  Thar's  a  cave  in 
them  bushes.  They  started  to  dig  a  well  thar,  an'  the 
bottom  fell  out,  and  they  found  the  cave.  An  ole 
nigger  lives  in  that  house  alone  with  one  little  nigger 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincoln  151 

« 

boy.  He  kind  of  crippled,  and  las'  winter,  when  the 
weather  come  on  col',  he  couldn't  git  wood,  an'  he 
burned  up  two  cheers  and  a  basket." 

To  visit  the  Mammoth  Cave  you  must  apply  at  a 
big  hotel  near  the  entrance.  This  hotel  is  the  only 
building  in  the  vicinity.  It  is  a  low,  old-fashioned, 
rambling  structure  with  a  skirting  of  wide  verandas, 
and  all  around  is  the  forest.  The  path  to  the  cave 
leads  into  a  deep,  wooded  glen,  and  there  you  find  a 
gaping  hole  —  a  hole  that  would  ingulf  a  good-sized 
house.  The  path  continues  down  the  grassy  slope  of 
the  gentler  side  of  the  aperture,  and  then  a  low,  black 
passage  slants  at  a  slight  incline  down  into  the  earth. 

I  spent  several  hours  in  the  cave,  yet  I  cannot  say 
that  I  found  it  anywhere  inspiring  or  charming.  It 
was  stupendous  and  curious,  and  at  the  same  time 
grewsome  and  melancholy  and  colorless  —  everywhere 
those  dull  gray  Walls  stained  with  patches  of  black, 
while  underfoot  was  hard,  reddish  dirt  like  the  fine 
silt  of  a  river-bed,  and  a  strewing  of  broken  rock. 
In  places  my  guide  conducted  me  through  narrow 
crevices,  or  we  stooped  along  under  a  low-hanging 
roof,  or  loitered  in  lofty  galleries,  or  we  crossed 
wooden  bridges  spanning  yawning  chasms  and  "  bot- 
tomless "  pits.  These  pits,  however,  never  failed  to 
reveal  a  bottom  when  the  guide  tossed  down  a  bit  of 
flaming  cotton.  Most  of  the  cave  is  quite  dry.  The 
roof  is  too  good  to  allow  the  percolating  water  much 


152         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

chance  to  beautify  the  dull  passages  with  frescoings  of 
stahictites  and  vistas  of  fluted  columns.  What  inter- 
ested me  most  in  the  cave  was  its  connection  with  lite. 
For  instance,  there  were  bats  flitting  in  the  gloomy 
channel  at  the  entrance  and  clinging  to  the  walls  of  the 
near  galleries  by  thousands.  Here  they  hibernate,  but 
they  were  beginning  to  arouse  themselves  from  their 
long  sleep,  and  in  a  few  days  would  all  be  gone  to 
the  outer  world  for  the  summer.  Then  there  were 
numerous  remains  of  old  vats  and  wooden  piping  used 
in  1812  in  manufacturing  nitre  for  gunpowder  from  the 
cavern  earth,  the  process  consisting  of  leaching  the 
earth  with  water  to  dissolve  the  nitre  and  then  boiling 
down  the  resulting  solution.  You  can  even  see  in  the 
hard  dirt  the  old-time  cart  tracks  and  the  print  of  ox 
hoofs.  In  one  passage  are  two  or  three  substantially 
built  habitations  which  were  the  homes  for  five  months 
in  1842  of  thirteen  consumptives.  The  cave  tempera- 
ture is  always  just  fifty-four  degrees,  and  the  consump- 
tives hoped  the  unchanging  coolness  and  atmospheric 
quiet  would  be  beneficial.  What  a  forlorn  time  they 
must  have  had  in  that  noiseless,  gloomy  tomb  !  How 
depressing  the  unending  night !  (3ne  died  in  the  cave 
and  the  others  came  out  unhelped. 

The  cavern  walls  are  scratched  with  names,  and  the 
lower  ceilings  are  lettered  with  sooty  candle  smoke 
that  is  more  imperishable  here  than  the  deepest  chisel- 
ling in  rocks  exposed  to  the  open  air.      In  many  places 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincoln  i^j 

along  the  passages  are  cairns  of  stones,  one  for  every 
state  and  nation  and  fraternal  order,  and  for  every  large 
party  that  has  visited  the  place.  The  most  romantic 
of  the  rooms  was  one  containing  a  "bridal  altar  "  formed 
by  a  group  of  columns.  At  this  altar  a  dozen  or  more 
couples  have  been  married.  The  first  couple  chose 
this  place  because  the  young  woman  had  vowed  she 
"would  not  marry  any  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth." 

Once  my  guide  took  all  the  lights  and  left  me  in 
the  dense,  silent  darkness.  Such  a  void  I  had  never 
been  in,  and  he  was  gone  so  long  I  began  to  wonder 
what  I  could  do  if  he  failed  to  return.  It  would  be 
absolutely  hopeless  trying  to  find  one's  way  out  of 
that  black  labyrinth  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles. 
The  guide  had  gone  into  a  side  passage,  and  when  he 
reappeared  he  manipulated  his  light  so  as  to  simulate 
the  sunrise,  and  he  added  to  the  effect  by  imitating  the 
crowing  of  a  rooster  and  the  flapping  of  its  wings. 
This  and  much  else  was  odd  and  interesting ;  but 
nothing  I  saw  or  experienced  made  me  desire  to  pro- 
tract my  stay  in  those  dismal  depths,  and  1  was  not 
sorry  when  we  returned  to  the  upper  world  with  its 
life-giving  sunlight,  its  breezes  and  shifting  skies,  its 
flowers  and  green  foliage. 

Now  that  I  had  seen  the  great  cave  I  went  in  search 
of  the  birthplace  of  the  most  beloved  of  American 
presidents  —  Abraham  Lincoln.  He  began  life  about 
sixty  miles  south  of  Louisville   in   central   Kentucky. 


154         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

There,  near   Hodgensville,   his  father  bought   a  Httle 
farm    and   built  a   humble   cabin,   and   this   cabin   was 


Hodgensville 

the  future  president's  home  for  four  years.  Hodgens- 
ville is  the  county  seat,  but  it  is  not  much  of  a  place 
—  just  a  few  stores  and  shops  grouped  around  a  two- 
story  brick  court-house  that  adjoins  an  open  square 
of  hard-trodden  earth.  On  the  square  the  country 
people  hitch  their  horses  to  some  lines  of  railings  set 
up  there  for  the  purpose.  Possibly  a  third  of  the 
horses  are  attached  to  vehicles  and  the  rest  merely 
saddled.  Many  of  them  had  colts  tagging  about  them 
at  the  time  of  my  spring  visit,  and  the  rustic  look  of 
the  village  was  farther  emphasized  by  numerous  cows 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincohi  15^ 

* 

that  wandered  through  or  lingered  in  the  streets. 
Once  while  I  was  in  the  town  there  was  an  alarm  of 
fire.  I  heard  the  sudden  shouts,  and  then  the  clang- 
ing of  the  court-house  bell,  and  I  saw  wisps  of  smoke 
rising  through  the  roof  of  a  dwelling  that  stood  among 
the  village  stores.  The  public  ways  were  immediately 
full  of  people,  running  and  excited,  and  a  group  of  citi- 
zens appeared  from  somewhere  with  ladders  and  a 
hand  engine.  Everybody  who  could  caught  hold  of 
a  rope  attached  to  the  engine  and  rushed  the  machine 
with  great  clatter  and  tumult  over  to  a  well  in  the 
square.  Then  the  hose  was  hitched  on,  and  a  half- 
dozen  men  on  each  side  began  to  work  the  pumping- 
bars  up  and  down.  This  display  of  energy  was  too 
much  for  the  fire,  and  it  promptly  succumbed,  and  the 
engine  and  hose  were  left  for  the  boys  to  play  with 
the  rest  of  the  day. 

The  region  around  Hodgensville  is  one  of  broad, 
cultivated  fields  and  grazing  land,  intermitting  with 
patches  of  oak  and  hickory  forest.  Everywhere  are 
scattered  farm-houses,  and  the  older  ones  are  constructed 
of  logs.  The  spot  where  formerly  stood  the  Lincoln 
cabin  is  three  miles  from  the  town,  in  the  middle  of  a 
big  pasture.  A  rough  pole  has  been  set  up  to  mark 
the  site.  This  pole  is  at  the  top  of  a  slight  rise  with 
locust  thickets  near  by,  and  down  the  hill  is  what  is 
known  as  "The  Lincoln  Spring."  No  doubt  the  place 
for  the  dwelling  was  selected  with  a  view  to  being  con- 


156         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

venient  to  this  water-supply.  The  spnng  is  at  the 
bottom  of  a  sink-hole,  where  the  underlying  limestone 
has  given  way  and  left  a  ragged  chasm  about  a  dozen 
feet  deep.  The  break  exposes  an  outjutting  ledge  on 
one  side,  while  on  the  other  is  a  steep  slope  of  earth 


The  Site  of  the  Lincohi  Cabin 


and  shattered  stone.      Close  around   grow  numerous 
bushes  and   trailing  vines,  and  the  hollow  is  cast  in 


The  Birthplace  of  Lincoln  157 

pleasant  shadow  by  a  few  fine  trees.  How  many  times 
Lincoln's  mother  must  have  come  hither  to  fill  her 
water-palls,  and  how  often  the  little  boy  must  have 
toddled  down  to  this  cool  retreat,  and  dabbled  about 
and  played  with  the  ungainly  crawfish  that  inhabit  the 
spot ! 

While  I  was  sitting  beside  the  spring,  a  young  man 
came  from  his  work  In  a  neighboring  field  to  get  a 
drink,  and  he  called  my  attention  to  the  manner  in 
which  the  rivulet  trickled  from  a  crevice  in  the  ledge 
and  almost  immediately  disappeared  into  some  hidden 
passage  deeper  down.  "  I  reckon  thar's  a  cave  down 
under  hyar,"  said  he.  "  You'd  think  so,  if  you  was  to 
see  the  water  that  po's  in  hyar  sometimes.  Thar's 
quite  a  piece  o'  country  dreans  Into  this  hole.  When 
we  have  a  heavy  rain  a  regular  crick  comes  runnin'  in 
hyar,  and  the  hole  gets  plumb  full,  way  up  over  the 
rocks.  Then  thar's  a  big  whirlpool,  and  bubbles  and 
foam,  and  a  noise  like  thunder." 

The  spring  is  a  favorite  resort  for  warm-weather 
pleasure  parties  for  miles  around ;  but  occasional 
strangers  from  distant  states  also  make  pilgrimages 
to  this  lonely  Kentucky  pasture.  The  young  fellow 
whom  I  quoted  in  the  preceding  paragraph  often  met 
these  strangers,  for  his  father  rented  and  lived  on  the 
Lincoln  farm.  Their  arrival  was,  in  some  Instances, 
very  unexpected  and  untimely.  "  Thar  was  a  man 
last  fall,"  my  acquaintance  explained,  "  who  come  to 


158  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

the  house  after  it  was  dark.  He  was  from  Indiany,  and 
he  said  he'd  got  to  get  back  right  away.  That  evening 
was  his  only  chance  to  see  Lincohi's  birthplace,  he  said, 
so  I  took  him  down  hyar.  The  moon  was  shinin',  and 
he  looked  aroun',  and  he  noticed  how  this  clift  jut  out 
like  a  roof  and  that  you  could  almost  stand  under  it, 
and  he  ask,  '  Now,  don't  you  s'pose  the  Lincolns  lived 
under  this  clift  while  they  was  buildin'  their  house  ? '  " 
The  log  cabin  erected  by  Lincoln's  father  still  exists, 
but  it  has  not  occupied  its  original  site  for  a  long  time. 
From  the  pasture  it  was  moved  about  a  mile  toward 
Hodgensville,  and  rebuilt  on  a  bank  close  beside  the 
highway.  The  farmer  who  last  lived  in  it  told  me  he 
sold  it  to  a  Northern  man  for  enough  to  erect  himself 
a  good  frame  house,  and  he  thought  he  "  got  the  best 
of  the  bargain "  ;  for  it  was  a  poor  little  one-room 
affair,  badly  decayed,  and  worth  practically  nothing 
as  a  dwelling.  Now  it  is  a  wandering  show.  It  was 
one  of  the  attractions  at  the  Chicago  Exposition,  and 
has  been  at  several  other  great  fairs  ;  but  the  knoll 
near  the  spring  where  it  was  in  Lincoln's  babyhood 
is  the  place  for  it,  and  one  cannot  help  hoping  it  will 
return  and  be  permanently  located  there.  The  only 
reminders  of  it  still  to  be  found  on  the  spot  are  a  few 
stones  that  were  in  the  old  hearth,  and  some  fragments 
of  half-baked  clay  from  the  chimney.  Even  these  are 
likely  to  disappear  soon,  carried  off  bit  by  bit  by  pred- 
atory relic  hunters. 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincoln 


159 


A  Pail  of  Water  from  the  Lincoln  Spring 

From  the  spring  a  well-trodden  path  leads  away  far 
up  the  eastern  slope  to  the  present-day  Lincoln  farm- 
house, and  shortly  after  the  young  man  from  the  near 
field  had  gone  back  to  his  work,  two  little  girls  came 
down  the  path  with  a  pail  between  them  which  they 
were  going  to  fill  with  water.  They  said  their  names 
were  Ivory  Goldy  Burton  and  Vesty  Opal  Burton,  and 


i6o         Highways  and   Byways  of  the   South 

that  all  the  water  the  family  used  came  from  the  spring, 
except  what  fell  on  the  roof  and  was  caught  in  rain 
barrels  set  under  the  eaves  spouts.  I  returned  with 
them,  and  arranged  with  their  mother  to  become  a 
lodger  at  the  Lincoln  farmhouse. 

The  house  was  in  poor  repair,  the  roof  was  leaky, 
window  lights  were  gone,  and  the  floors  were  warped 
and  shaky.  The  walls  were  of  logs,  but  these  had  been 
long  ago  covered  from  sight  with  clapboards.  No 
outer  painting  had  ever  been  done,  and  the  clapboards 
were  extremely  weatherworn  and  loose.  In  the  yard 
were  various  rude  structures  put  up  for  the  hens,  geese, 
and  turkeys,  and  near  the  back  door  was  a  receptacle 
full  of  recently  leached  ashes,  and  a  kettle  of  new- 
made  soft  soap  that  was  awaiting  a  convenient  time  for 
transferring  it  to  the  dwelling. 

One  day  during  my  stay  it  rained.  Mr.  Burton 
rapped  on  my  door  at  early  dawn,  and  as  soon  as  I  was 
fairly  awake,  I  heard  the  steady  drive  of  the  storm  out- 
side. Heavy,  lowering  clouds  cast  a  pall  of  gloom 
over  the  earth,  and  we  ate  our  five-o'clock  breakfast 
by  lamplight.  That  done  I  sat  by  the  dining-room 
fireplace  and  whiled  the  hours  away. 

They  passed  very  agreeably  on  the  whole,  and  I 
caught  many  interesting  glimpses  of  home  life  on  a 
Kentucky  farm.  The  room  walls  were  stout  oak  logs 
chinked  with  clay  and  whitewashed.  They  were  orna- 
mented with  two  antique  lithographs  and  a  handsaw. 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincoln  i6i 

The  upper  sash  of  the  single  window  was  gone,  and 
the  blank  filled  by  nailing  on  pieces  of  boards.  In 
one  corner  of  the  apartment  was  a  bureau,  in  another 
a  double-barrel  shot-gun,  in  each  of  the  other  two  a  bed. 
Southern  families  are,  as  a  rule,  large,  and  in  the  average 
house  you  are  likely  to  find  a  bed  or  two  in  every  room, 
except  possibly  the  cook-room.  The  older  Burton 
children  had  flown  from  the  home  nest,  and  there  re- 
mained the  son  Jed,  and  the  two  little  girls  I  had  met 
at  the  spring,  and  two  other  girls  who  were  in  their 
teens. 

As  soon  as  we  finished  breakfast,  the  older  girls 
turned  back  the  white  table-cloth  enough  to  make 
space  for  a  pan  and  washed  the  dishes.  Then  they 
swept  the  floor  and  put  the  house  to  rights,  and  after- 
ward one  of  them  produced  some  fancy  work  and 
seated  herself  next  the  window.  She  was  making  a 
rug.  The  foundation  was  a  guano  bag  and  the  super- 
structure was  of  rags,  too  short  for  carpet  rags,  and  too 
small  for  use  in  a  patchwork  quilt.  These  fragments 
she  drew  through  the  bagging  and  left  the  ends  stick- 
ing up.  Vesty  Opal,  barefooted  and  tousled,  dreamily 
knelt  for  a  half  hour  on  the  hearth  and  poked  the  fire 
with  the  tongs.  At  the  back  of  the  fireplace  were 
smouldering  logs,  but  in  front  was  a  brisk  blaze  lend- 
ing a  ray  of  cheer  to  the  gloomy  room.  Ivory  Goldy 
did  not  get  up  to  breakfast.  She  lay  sleeping  in  one 
of  the  dining-room   beds.      When  she  finally  crawled 

M 


1 62  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

forth,  she  made  out  a  meal  of  such  things  as  she  could 
lay  her  hands  on,  and  presently  she  and  Vesty  Opal 
each  procured  an  ear  of  corn,  shelled  their  laps  full,  and 
played  "  Hully-gully."  Ivory  Goldy  would  take  up 
a  few  kernels,  close  her  fingers  over  them,  hold  out 
her  hand,  and  say  "  Hully-gully." 

"  Handful,"  says  Vesty  Opal. 

"  How  many  ?  "  asks  Ivory  Goldy. 

Vesty  Opal  guesses,  and  if  right,  gets  the  corn.  If 
she  overestimates,  she  has  to  make  up  to  the  quantity 
named.  If  she  underestimates,  she  gets  what  is  over 
the  number  guessed.  They  played  until  they  were 
tired,  and  then  threw  the  corn  out  of  the  door  to  the 
chickens  which  had  congregated  in  a  narrow,  covered 
passage  between  the  dining  room  and  cook-room. 

Mrs.  Burton,  who  had  been  in  the  cook-room  work- 
ing and  singing  hymns,  now  returned  to  the  dining 
room.  She  brought  with  her  from  the  passageway  a 
"crazy  chicken"  and  wrapped  it  up  in  an  apron,  and 
put  it  on  the  bureau  in  the  hope  that  warmth  and  quiet 
would  restore  it  to  sanity.  "  The  air  is  right  chilly," 
she  remarked.  "  I  reckon  this  must  be  the  dogwood 
winter.  We  always  have  a  cold  spell  when  the  dog- 
wood is  in  blossom,  and  that's  what  we  call  it.  Then, 
later,  when  the  blackberries  are  in  blossom,  we  have 
another  cold  spell  what  we  call  the  blackberry  winter." 

"  This  tciin  '11  make  the  water  high  at  the  fords," 
said  the  daughter  with  the  fancy  work. 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincoln  163 

There  were  few  bridges  in  the  region  and  the  fords 
were  treacherous  whenever  the  streams  were  flooded. 
"  Our  little  creeks  are  up  in  a  hurry,"  Mrs.  Burton 
explained.  "  I'll  never  forget  an  accident  that  hap- 
pened over  on  the  Rolling  Fork.  There  was  a  man 
had  come  with  his  family  from  a  good  distance,  and  he 
was  going  to  visit  his  father  who  lived  on  the  Rolling 
Fork,  eight  miles  from  hyar  just  across  the  ford.  The 
children  hadn't  never  seen  their  grandpaw,  and  their 
father  was  a-takin'  'em  in  a  one-horse  surrey.  It  had 
been  rainin',  and  before  he  come  to  the  ford  he  ask  a 
man  if  the  water  was  up,  and  the  man  say  *  No.'  But 
the  water  was  up  ;  and  he  drove  right  in,  and  his 
horse  and  all  his  family  was  drownded.  He  was  the 
only  one  got  out ;  and  the  next  day  they  found  the 
bodies  of  the  children  and  buried  'em." 

About  the  middle  of  the  morning  Mr.  Burton  and 
Jed  came  in  from  the  barn  where  they  had  been 
shucking  some  corn  and  shelling  it  by  hand  to  take 
to  mill.  A  dog  slunk  in  with  the  men  and  lay  down 
on  the  hearth  to  enjoy  the  heat.  "  I  wish  it  would 
quit  raining,"  Mr.  Burton  observed.  "  I  want  to 
finish  breaking  ground." 

"  I  cain't  hardly  hold  pappy,  he  so  anxious  to  get 
started  fishing,"  affirmed  Jed. 

"  Yes,"  corroborated  Mrs.  Burton,  "  he's  the 
smartest  lazy  man  I  ever  see  —  workin'  hisself  to 
death  to  get  to  go  a-fishin'.      He  an'  our  nex'  neigh- 


164         Highways   and   Byways   of  the   South 

bor,  they  boun*  to  make  a  fishin'  trip  together  every 
spring.  Soon  as  plantin's  done,  they  drive  away  off 
across  country  into  the  woods  and  camp  a  whole 
week." 

"  Pappy  has  a  big  time  then,  shore !  "  Jed  com- 
mented. 

"  Harry  Vetts  was  shootin'  suckers  Thursday,  as 
they  come  over  the  riffle  just  below  the  mill,"  said 
Mr.  Burton,  "and  he  was  gettin*  lots  of 'em,  too." 

"  Did  Harry  say  anything  about  tradin'  horses  ?  " 
inquired  Jed. 

"  He  tol'  me  he  traded  six  times  in  one  day  when 
he  was  in  Hodgensville  las'  week,  and  brought  back  the 
same  horse  he  started  with,  but  he  didn't  say  whether 
he  got  any  profit  out  of  his  deals." 

"  Harry  wants  to  make  money  without  work," 
declared  Mrs.  Burton  ;  "  and  he  wants  to  make  it  by 
the  armful,  and  he'll  never  do  it.  Ever'body  aroun' 
hyar  like  to  trade  horses.  They  do  for  a  fact.  But 
Harry,  he's  the  greatest  feller  at  it  of  all." 

"  Well,  you  cain't  make  much  just  farmin',"  said 
Mr.  Burton,  "  and  there's  gettin'  to  be  more  renters 
and  less  owners  every  year." 

"  I  reckon  the  Dudley  boys  make  enough,"  Mrs. 
Burton  suggested ;  "  but  then,  see  how  they  live. 
There's  four  of  'em,  and  they're  all  single  and  it's 
likely  they  always  will  be,  for  the  youngest  one  is 
over  fifty.     They  work  harder  than  any  renter  and  go 


The  Fisherman 


r^ 


THE  NEW  YORK 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


AS  *  U  r\ .    L  -_  .  .  *^  ,\     .     :  [  i 
TiLDEN    FOUNDATIONS. 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincoln  165 

worse  lookin',  and  they  deny  themselves  ever'  privilege 
on  earth  excep'  that  of  hoarding  up  money." 

"  If  it  cl'ars  off,  I'll  plant  the  rest  of  those  potatoes 
in  the  garden,  Mis'  Tilly,"  remarked  Mr.  Burton  to 
his  wife.  "  Mis'  Tilly  "  was  a  pet  condensation  of  Mrs. 
Matilda.      She,  in  turn,  was  apt  to  call  him  "  Billy." 

"  No,"  said  she,  "  you'll  have  to  wait  till  nex'  week. 
The  moon  ain't  right  now.  I'm  a  great  hand  to  gar- 
den in  the  moon,"  she  added,  turning  to  me.  "  Things 
that  grow  under  ground  like  potatoes  and  carrots  want 
to  be  planted  in  the  dark  of  the  moon  ;  and  things 
like  beans  and  peas,  that  grow  above  ground,  want  to 
be  planted  in  the  light  of  the  moon.  You  can  start 
potatoes  side  by  side,  some  planted  in  the  dark  of 
the  moon  and  some  in  the  light  of  the  moon,  and 
those  planted  in  the  dark  of  the  moon  will  be  the  best 
ever'  time.  You  know,  too,  how  'tis  with  meat.  Take 
and  boil  meat  that  was  killed  in  the  rise  of  the  moon 
—  it  don't  matter  when,  if  it's  only  killed  before  the 
moon  fulls,  and  that  meat  will  be  plump  as  can  be  ; 
but  you  boil  meat  killed  in  the  old  of  the  moon,  and  it 
will  all  shrivel  up  and  there  won't  be  none  of  it.  I'm 
not  superstitious  at  all,  but  that  is  the  case." 

"  You  said  you  wanted  to  go  to  town  to-morrow. 
Mis'  Tilly,  didn't  you  ?  "  asked  Mr.  Burton.  "  How 
you  want  to  go  ?  " 

"I'll  go  horseback,  Billy,"  was  her  reply,  "though 
it  ain't  the  style,  I  know." 


1 66         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  The  women  aroun'  hyar  are  gettin'  to  thhik  they 
cain't  ride  horseback  no  more,"  declared  Jed. 

"  Well,  I  stopped  for  a  long  time  myself,"  said  his 
mother,  "  but  last  Christmas  was  a  year  ago,  my  father 
was  took  sick,  and  the  easiest  way  to  go  to  him  was 
horseback.  He  lived  seven  mile  from  hvar  and  I 
went  two  or  three  times  a  week  and  that  seem  to  be 
what  I  needed.      My  health  improve  at  once." 

"It  shorely  done  Mammy  good  goin'  to  see  Grand- 
pap  on  horseback,"  remarked  Jed. 

"  Twenty-five  years  ago  nearly  ever'one  went  horse- 
back," Mrs.  Burton  continued.  "  But  lots  of  things 
were  different  then.  Why,  we  wove  our  own  jeans 
and  flannels  and  blankets  and  coverlids,  and  I  often 
think  how  all  the  ole  ladies  use'  to  wear  caps.  I  re- 
member just  what  Grandmaw's  was  like.  She  wouldn't 
'a'  been  Grandmaw  without  her  cap." 

"  In  my  day  of  raisin',"  added  Mr.  Burton,  "  my 
mother  made  all  her  own  can'les  —  made  'em  in  tin 
moulds;  and  we'd  thrash  our  wheat  by  makin'  a  floor 
in  the  open  and  spreadin'  the  bundles  on  that,  and  then 
we  children  would  get  on  the  horses  and  ride  round 
and  round  over  the  wheat  and  tread  out  the  grain." 

Mrs.  Burton  now  went  to  the  cook-room  to  begin 
preparations  for  dinner.  The  cook-room  was  a  kind 
of  shed  annex.  Its  floor  was  partly  of  loose  boards, 
partly  of  rough  earth.  Water  had  trickled  in  from 
outside   here  and   there,   and    Mrs.    Burton   had   been 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincohi  167 

obliged  to  move  the  flour  barrel.  The  wind  was  blow- 
ing and  it  created  quite  a  breeze  as  it  drew  through 
the  many  holes  and  cracks  of  the  walls.  Whenever 
the  door  was  left  open  the  hens  walked  in,  but  they 
were  shooed  out  more  or  less  promptly.  The  house- 
wife mixed  up  some  biscuit,  put  a  few  slices  of  ham  on 
the  spider,  and  at  eleven  o'clock  we  had  dinner.  Corn 
bread  is  a  staple  in  the  bill  of  fare  of  most  Kentucky 
families  —  so  much  so  indeed  that  the  country  people 
of  the  state  are  often  nicknamed  "  corn-crackers." 
The  average  household  considers  wheat  a  luxury,  and 
biscuit  appear  only  on  Sundays  and  special  occasions  ; 
but  the  Burtons  did  not  care  for  corn  bread.  They  ate 
biscuit  three  times  a  day  the  year  through,  and  they 
disposed  of  several  batches  to  a  meal.  The  biscuit 
were  always  served  piping  hot,  for  while  one  panful 
was  being  eaten,  another  was  in  the  oven. 

Early  in  the  afternoon  the  rain  ceased  and  the  clouds 
lifted  and  let  faint  rays  of  sunlight  through.  Jed 
hitched  up,  and  I  went  with  him  to  mill.  On  the 
route  we  passed  a  house  in  which  my  companion  said 
a  woman  had  recently  died.  "  She  was  a  large,  fine- 
lookin'  woman,"  he  explained,  "  but  she  died,  and  we 
never  did  know  the  straight  of  it  no  way  what  was  the 
matter  with  her,  till  the  doctor  told  that  her  lungs  was 
just  gorged  with  snuff,  and  nothin'  in  the  world  killed 
her  but  that  and  the  arsenic  she'd  e't  to  make  her  eyes 
bright.      I'd  rather  'a'  been  her,  though,  than  a  woman 


1 68         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

on  the  Hodgensville  road  that  uses  opium.  She*s  kind 
o'  dazed  all  the  time." 

Presently  we  came  to  the  "  Lincoln  Spring  School- 
house,"  a  gray,  battered  little  structure  in  the  woods. 
It  looked  as  if  it  had  withstood  the  changing  weather 
of  a  century,  and  there  was  talk  of  putting  up  a  new 
one,  but  the  prospect  of  doing  so  was  not  very  roseate, 
for  opinion  in  the  "  deestrick  "  was  deadlocked  as  to 
where  the  new  building  ought  to  be  located.  Jed  said 
each  family  with  children  attending  school  was  sup- 
posed to  contribute  annually  a  load  of  wood,  but  some 
never  brought  their  load  and  others  were  slow  about  it, 
so  there  had  been  occasions  when  the  supply  at  the 
schoolhouse  gave  out  entirely.  In  that  case  the  master 
had  certain  of  the  scholars  go  into  the  surrounding 
woods  and  drag  out  brush,  and  then  an  axe  was  borrowed 
and  they  cut  the  brush  into  stove  length. 

The  mill  to  which  we  journeyed  was  an  ancient 
wooden  structure  erected  about  the  time  the  Lincoln 
family  moved  away.  The  preceding  mill  stood  close 
by,  and  one  of  its  millstones  served  as  a  doorstep  at  the 
front  entrance  of  the  house  occupied  by  the  Burtons. 
This  stone  that  helped  grind  the  corn  for  little  Abe's 
corn  bread  is  one  of  the  few  Lincoln  relics  still  pre- 
served on  the  historic  farm. 

I  was  at  the  Burton's  over  Sunday  and  was  awak- 
ened on  the  morning  of  that  day  by  a  hammering  in 
the   yard.      When   I   went   out    I    found    Mr.   Burton 


The  Birthplace  of  Lincoln 


169 


tinkering  the  back  gate  and  his  wife  superintending. 
"  The  ox  is  in  the  ditch,"  said  she,  referring  to  the 
New  Testament  excuse  for  Sabbath  work  where  the  need 
is  great,  "  and  Billy  must  mend  this  gate  if  it  is  Sunday. 
It  was  broken  yesterday,  and  I  couldn't  sleep  last  night 


A  Wounded  Crow 

for  thinkin'  the  hogs  might  come  in  and  turn  over  my 
kittle  of  soft  soap.  But  I  s'pose  I'd  slep'  better  if  it 
hadn't  been  for  a  screech-owl  that  I  could  hear  some- 
where out  in  the  pasture.  A  screech-owl  always  make 
me  feel  cur'ous.  They  ain't  as  bad,  though,  as  whip- 
poorwills.  Sometimes  a  whippoorwill  come  and  sit  on 
the  house,  and  it  holler  there  for  hours  and  cluck  ever' 


170         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

time  it  holler.  That  worry  me  so  I  could  kill  'em  all 
if  I  had  'em  in  a  sack." 

"  Are  you  going  to  church  to-day  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  1  been  layin'  for  to  go,"  was  her  response,  "  but 
there's  a  party  comin'  to  Lincoln  Spring,  and  we  got  to 
stay  and  see  they  don't  do  no  damage.  I'm  willin' 
people  should  come  if  they  are  quiet  and  behave  them- 
selves, but  I  don't  like  them  to  come  on  Sunday  to 
cavort  the  way  some  of 'em  do." 

I  walked  to  church  alone,  a  distance  of  two  miles. 
The  building  was  a  plain,  spireless  structure  of  brick 
in  a  patch  of  woodland.  Sunday  school,  which  pre- 
ceded the  church  service,  was  just  being  called  to 
order  when  I  arrived.  There  were  less  than  twenty- 
five  of  us  and  we  gathered  in  a  corner  and  went 
through  the  lesson  very  perfunctorily.  The  only  de- 
viation from  the  beaten  track  consisted  in  an  opinion 
expressed  by  our  teacher  that  the  Northern  Baptist 
church  was  on  "  sandy  ground,  but  the  old  Southern 
Baptist  church  "  said  he,  warmly,  "  is  on  the  solid  rock 
yet.  We  don't  want  any  of  those  Northern  new- 
fangled ideas,"  and  he  stepped  aside  to  the  pulpit  plat- 
form where,  on  a  stool,  was  a  pail  of  water.  Our  leader 
took  a  drink  from  a  tin  dipper  and  returned  to  his 
labors.  A  collection  was  taken  up  amounting  to 
eighteen  cents.  I  had  contributed  a  nickel  and  thus 
swelled  the  amount  to  an  unusual  size.  Apparently 
no  one  was  expected  to  give  more  than  a  penny,  for  I 


On  the    Highway 


Ti-{i-": 

^^^/■>V  YORK 

Df 

'ARY 

TiLw^ 

-£NQX   AND 
iM    f-OUNDATlONS. 

The  Birthplace  of  Lincoln  171 

noticed  that  our  leader,  after  dropping  a  five-cent  piece 
In  the  box,  took  out  four  cents  In  change. 

We  had  a  few  minutes'  Intermission  at  the  close  of 
Sunday  school.  Teams  and  saddle-horses  were  now 
arriving  from  all  directions  and  were  being  hitched  to 
trees  and  low-drooping  branches  In  the  woods  about 
the  church.  When  service  began,  the  edifice  was  well 
filled,  and  as  the  people  continued  to  come  for  an  hour, 
it  was  crowded  by  the  time  we  were  through.  We  had 
prayers  by  the  preacher  and  by  elders  of  the  congrega- 
tion, we  had  singing  led  by  a  man  whose  voice 
rose  above  the  grumbling  undertone  of  the  other 
men's  voices  and  the  gentle  murmur  of  the  sopranos 
like  a  mountain  peak  among  little  hills,  and  we  had  a 
vigorous  old-fashioned  sermon  that  included  a  denun- 
ciation of  "  revelry  and  tripping  the  fantastic  toe."  I 
could  hear  the  horses  whinnying  and  stamping  outside 
and  the  soft  cooing  of  turtle  doves,  the  chirruping  songs 
of  cardinal  birds,  and  the  tapping  of  a  woodpecker. 

On  the  women's  side  of  the  room  gum  chewing 
was  prevalent ;  on  the  men's  side  tobacco  chewing.  I 
have  heard  of  a  Southern  church  where  signs  were 
displayed  :  — 

USE    THE    CUSPIDORS 
DO    NOT    SPIT    ON    THE    FLOOR 

But  in  this  Kentucky  church  there  were  neither 
signs  nor  cuspidors,  and  the  men  kept  the  dust  laid 


172         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

both  between  the  seats  and  in  the  aisles.  At  the  close 
of  the  benediction  they  all  gave  a  final  spit,  reached  for 
their  hats,  and  went  out  into  the  spring  sunshine  where 
many  of  them  lit  cigars  or  cigarettes  and  puffed  them 
while  visiting  around  the  church  steps.  The  crowd 
was  slow  in  dispersing,  and  the  social  intercourse  fol- 
lowing the  service  was  evidently  as  refreshing  as  the 
service  itself  to  most  of  the  worshippers. 

I  returned  to  the  Burtons',  and  after  dinner  the  fam- 
ily gathered  in  the  best  room.  Jed  got  out  his  guitar 
and  fingered  it  meditatively.  "  Every  kid  boun'  "o 
have  a  guitar  nowadays,"  remarked  Jed's  father. 

I  mentioned  that  some  of  the  women  at  the  church 
wore  sunbonnets.  "  Yes,"  said  Mrs.  Burton — "  black 
cashmere,  most  likely,  and  they're  very  good,  only  they 
smother  a  body  up  too  much  in  the  heat  of  summer." 

Mrs.  Burton  inquired  about  the  sermon,  and  this  led 
to  her  telling  me  of"  a  grand  revival  "  in  a  little  town 
where  she  had  lived  formerly.  "  They  closed  busi- 
ness down  for  two  weeks  and  had  continuous  services 
day  and  night.  I  was  a  Methodis'  then,  but  I  go  the 
Baptis'  church  hyar." 

"  Yo're  kind  o'  like  Ole  Man  Spriggs  for  changin' 
churches,  Mammy,"  said  Jed. 

"  No,  I  ain't,"  she  retorted.  "  Ole  Man  Spriggs 
have  belonged  to  pretty  nigh  ever'  church  in  this  coun- 
try, and  now  he's  flung  out  and  don't  belong  to  none. 
He  joined  the  Dunkards  last  of  all.      They  believe  in 


The   Birthplace  of  Lincoln  173 

baptizin'  three  times  face  downwards.  He  got  along 
very  well  with  'em  till  he  had  a  hog  got  crippled  on 
Sunday.  He  wa'n't  goin'  to  see  that  hog  wasted  if 
it  was  Sunday,  and  he  got  hot  water  ready  and  killed 
the  hog  and  dressed  it.  They  dealt  with  him  in  the 
Dunkard  church  for  that  not  overly  long  ago,  and  he 
pulled  out." 

When  my  stay  on  the  Lincoln  farm  came  to  an  end, 
Jed  took  me  to  Hodgensville  in  his  buggy.  There 
had  been  rain  earlier  in  the  day,  and  the  red  clay  mud 
in  the  road  was  something  frightful.  If  a  person 
walked,  it  gathered  on  his  shoes  in  great  retarding 
clods.  Nor  was  there  any  pleasure  in  riding,  progress 
was  so  slow  and  laborious.  The  town  was  crowded, 
for  on  days  not  suited  to  farm  work  the  men  from  ten 
miles  around  congregate  there  to  trade  and  talk  and 
loaf.  That  evening  a  fight  occurred  on  one  of  the  town 
byways  between  a  white  man  and  a  negro.  The  com- 
batants were  separated,  but  none  too  soon  according  to 
the  white  man.  "  I  was  jus'  fixin'  for  to  cut  the  nig- 
ger's throat  when  they  pulled  me  off,"  said  he.  When  I 
asked  how  the  trouble  began,  I  was  told  "  the  nigger  was 
sassy  "  ;  and  it  was  generally  conceded  that  any  "  nigger 
who  was  sassy  "  and  had  his  throat  cut  in  retribution 
met  his  just  deserts.  Some  months  previous  a  negro 
had  been  taken  from  the  jail  and  hung  to  the  outside 
court-house  stairs,  and  this  lynching  took  place  only 
three  miles  from  the  birthplace  of  Abraham  Lincoln! 


VII 


THE    BLUE-GRASS    COUNTRY 


N 


O  other  sec- 
tion of  the 
South  is  so 
famed  for  its  fertiHty 
and  high  state  of 
cultivation  as  the  Blue- 
grass  region  of  Ken- 
tucky. I  had  always 
heard  of  it  and  had 
long  wished  to  see  it 

—  this  land  flowing 
with   milk  and  honey 

—  and  I  journeyed 
thither  with  eager  an- 
ticipation. I  left  the 
railroad  at  Lexington 
and  at  once  started  on 

a  long  walk  out  into  the  rural  district  surrounding. 
It  was  a  real  satisfaction  to  see  the  great  smooth  fields, 
and  the  abounding  herds  and  flocks  feeding  on  the 
succulent   sward.      The  grazing   lands   that   had  been 

174 


Weeding  a  Tobacco  Bed 


The  Blue-grass  Country  175 

long  undisturbed  by  the  plough  were  particularly  charm- 
ing. On  these  grew  the  thick  and  velvety  blue-grass. 
How  the  grass  gets  its  name  was  not  apparent  at  the 
season  of  my  visit,  but  during  fruiting  the  blue  hue  of 
its  seed  vessels  is  a  conspicuous  feature.  Kentucky 
has  not  by  any  means  a  sole  claim  to  the  blue-grass. 
Few  grasses  are  more  widely  distributed,  but  in  the 
Kentucky  district  known  especially  as  the  blue-grass 
domain,  it  attains  a  singularly  luxuriant  growth.  This 
domain  covers  a  territory  as  large  as  the  state  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, and  the  limits  are  quite  sharply  defined. 
Its  peculiar  characteristics  are  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
underlying  rocks  are  limestone  of  a  very  ancient  era, 
and  their  rapid  decay  keeps  the  soil  constantly  enriched. 
No  amount  of  cultivation,  even  without  fertilizing, 
seems  to  exhaust  it,  and  for  pasturage  the  region  is 
unequalled  either  in  America  or  in  Europe. 

The  Blue-grass  country  is  to  a  notable  degree  a  land 
of  rural  homes.  The  people  love  the  soil  and  prize 
the  feeling  of  personal  worth  and  importance  that 
arises  from  the  possession  of  a  generous  estate  and  a 
sense  of  lordship  over  all  they  survey.  Practically 
every  man  of  note  in  all  Kentucky's  history  has  been 
of  rustic  origin,  and  there  never  has  been  a  time  when 
the  farmers  have  not  been  a  controlling  element  of  the 
population.  Even  now,  more  are  engaged  in  agricul- 
ture than  in  all  other  pursuits  combined.  With  a 
population  of  some  two  millions,  the  state's  only  good- 


176         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

sized  city  is  Louisville  on  the  Ohio  borders.  Of  the 
hundreds  of  towns  and  villages  scattered  through  the 
interior  scarcely  any  exceed  five  thousand  inhabitants, 


A  Blue-grass  Mansion 

and  most  of  them  are  wholly  dependent  for  their 
meagre  sustenance  on  the  surrounding  farm  folk. 
The  towns  are  themselves  pastoral.  The  cultivated 
fields,  the  meadows,  and  the  woodlands  approach  to 
their  very  borders,  rustic  vehicles  abound  un  their 
streets,  and  the  farmers  are  more  in  evidence  than  the 
townsmen. 

The  homes  of  the  Blue-grass  aristocracy  resemble 
very  closely  the  ancestral  mansions  of  the  English 
gentry.     They  are  large  and  dignified  and  set  far  back 


The  Blue-grass  Country  177 

from  the  highway  in  parks  dotted  with  ancient  trees  — 
mostly  gnarled  and  sturdy  oaks  or  walnuts.  These 
mansions  are  not  occasional.  They  are  omnipresent, 
and  everywhere  you  go  there  is  evidence  of  a  well- 
to-do  existence.  You  find  a  constant  repetition  of 
wood  and  field,  meadow  and  lawn,  a  lazy  stream,  an 
artificial  pond,  orchard  and  hedgerow,  a  tobacco  barn, 
a  race-track,  browsing  sheep,  horses  and  cattle,  and, 
half  hidden  by  groves  and  shrubbery,  the  attractive 
and  substantial  houses. 

A  typical  Kentucky  mansion  of  the  better  class  is 
Henry  Clay's  old  home,  "  Ashland,"  on  the  outskirts 
of  Lexington.  I  passed  it  as  I  walked  out  from  the 
town.  It  is  an  ample  structure  of  brick  and  was  built 
by  the  statesman  in  1809.  From  that  time  till  he  died 
in  1852  it  was  to  him  a  beloved  retreat  from  the  cares 
and  fatigues  of  his  strenuous  public  life. 

I  followed  "  the  pike."  For  miles  it  kept  on  up  and 
down  the  rolling  hills  as  straight  as  an  arrow.  Until 
recently  it  had  been  a  toll  road,  and  the  antiquated 
little  toll-gate  houses  still  remained.  I  began  to  weary 
after  a  time  of  trudging  that  hard,  unswerving  road, 
and  to  wish  some  person  driving  in  the  direction  I 
had  taken  would  offer  me  a  ride  ;  but  every  one  passed 
on  unheeding  till  a  colored  man  came  jogging  along  in 
a  market  wagon  drawn  by  a  mule.  He  pulled  up 
with  a  friendly  invitation  to  occupy  the  seat  with  him, 
and   I   gladly  accepted.      He  was  on  his  way  to  a  farm 


N 


lyS         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

he  rented  a  mile  or  two  beyond,  and  when  he  turned 
in  at  the  farm-house  gate,  I  went  on  alone  again. 

Presently  I  came  to  a  cluster  of  three  little  stores. 
Another  well-travelled  road  joined  the  pike  here,  and 
had  the  effect  of  making  the  spot  a  centre  of  commerce. 
Yet  no  village  gathered  about  the  stores  and  they 
looked  rather  forlorn  and  unnecessary.  The  proprie- 
tors apparently  had  unlimited  leisure,  and  I  stopped 
and  had  a  chat  with  one  of  them.  When  I  prepared 
to  resume  my  tramping,  he  suggested  that  I  ought  to 
see  an  old  church  on  a  near  hill.      It  had  been  built 


An  Old  Toll-gate  House  on  the  Pike 

over  a  century.  "  1  been  goin'  to  that  chu'ch  most 
eighty  years,"  said  the  storekeeper,  "and  my  mother 
was  among  the  first  to  be  baptized  in  it.     The  preacher 


The  Blue-grass  Country  179 

that  baptized  her  was  a  man  by  the  name  of  Ferris. 
He  lived  to  be  a  very  old  man  and  I  remember  talkin' 
to  him  not  long  befo'  he  died,  an'  he  said, '  I've  baptized 
over  seventeen  hundred  persons,  and  your  mother  was 
the  best  woman  I  ever  baptized.'  That  was  a  big 
word  for  a  preacher,  and  he  told  it  to  me  settin'  in  his 
own  porch." 

I  went  up  to  look  at  the  church.  It  was  of  stone, 
a  plain  little  building  of  evident  age  with  a  diminutive 
yard  about  it  protected  by  palings.  In  a  large  adjoin- 
ing field  was  the  cemetery  covering  perhaps  an  acre. 
The  scattered  headstones  were  leaning  and  broken  — 
and  no  wonder,  for  they  were  not  in  any  way  shut  off 
from  the  rest  of  the  field,  and  the  grazing  horses  and 
cows  wandered  among  the  graves  at  will.  The  dead 
of  the  community  had  been  interred  here  since  the 
earliest  days  of  the  region's  settlement,  and  it  was  still 
used  as  a  burial  spot. 

Evening  was  approaching  when  I  returned  to  the 
highway,  and  I  began  to  inquire  for  a  lodging-place. 
I  tried  five  houses,  and  on  one  plea  or  another  was 
refused  at  all.  There  was  no  hotel  within  many  miles. 
I  even  considered  going  back  on  the  pike  and  seeking 
the  home  of  the  friendly  negro  who  had  given  me  a 
ride  ;  but  I  tried  once  more.  The  woman  who  re- 
sponded this  time  to  my  rap  at  the  door  said  she  had 
never  turned  any  one  away,  but  that  I  could  get  better 
accommodations  elsewhere.     I  told  her  something  of 


i8o         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

my  experiences,  and  she  was  indignant  that  a  stranger 
should  not  everywhere  find  a  prompt  welcome.  "  Did 
you  try  that  house  ?  "  she  asked,  pointing  to  a  residence 
back  in  a  grove  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road. 

"  Yes,"  I  replied. 

"  Well,  I  wouldn't  'a'  thought  it  of  'em,"  was  her 
comment.  "  They're  shoutin'  Methodists  —  that's  what 
they  are,  but  hit  don't  seem  like  they  live  up  to  their 
religion.  They  got  a  nice  place  thar.  Hit  ain't  much 
like  what  we  got  hyar.  This  house  was  pitched  up 
with  pitchforks  ;"  saying  which  she  ushered  me  in  at 
the  front  door  to  the  best  room. 

There  the  housewife  left  me  while  she  resumed  her 
work  in  some  other  part  of  the  dwelling.  I  sat  down 
in  the  doorway  and  looked  out  on  the  barren,  treeless 
surroundings.  A  considerable  portion  of  the  yard  was 
hard-trodden  earth  strewn  with  broken  brick,  chips, 
rusted  tinware,  and  decaying  vegetables.  Near  the  rear 
of  the  house  a  dilapidated  old  man  was  cutting  up 
brush  for  fire-wood,  and  talking  to  himself.  The  room 
ro  which  I  had  been  consigned  was  carpeted,  and  it  had 
an  ornate,  marble-topped  table  with  a  bureau,  wash- 
stand,  and  bed  to  match.  Lace  curtains  were  hung  at 
the  windows,  and  one's  comfort  was  enhanced  by 
several  excellent  chairs.  But  the  walls  failed  to  corre- 
spond to  the  elegance  of  the  furniture.  When  the 
house  was  "  pitched  up  with  pitchforks,"  unplaned 
boards  had  been  nailed  on  the  outer  side  of  the  frame- 


A  Country  Storekeeper 


SOK  AND 
'  nDATIONS. 


The  Blue-grass  Country  i8i 

work,  and  then  the  structure  had  been  clapboarded 
and  work  stopped.  Nothing  whatever  had  been  done 
to  the  inner  walls  except  that  the  unplaned  boards 
were  partially  hidden  by  a  pasting  of  daily  newspapers 
and  agricultural  weeklies.  This  wall  covering  formed 
a  curious  motley  of  reading  matter  and  advertisements 
of  patent  medicines,  fertilizers,  etc.  It  had  rained  the 
night  before  and  water  had  leaked  in  copiously  around 
the  windows.  To  catch  the  drip  several  pitchers, 
bowls,  and  pails  had  been  set  on  the  floor  next  the 
wall  and  these   had   not  yet   been  removed. 

I  lingered  in  the  doorway  until  the  sun  had  set  and 
the  dusk  was  becoming  darkness.  The  meadow-larks 
that  had  been  sighing  in  the  fields  as  long  as  daylight 
lasted  were  silent ;  the  red-headed  woodpeckers  I  had 
seen  in  great  numbers  earlier  had  ceased  their  chirping 
and  their  clattering  drum-beats  on  the  dead  limbs, 
and  the  air  was  filled  with  the  guttural  murmur  of  the 
toads.  A  big  turkey  gobbler  fluttered  up  to  the  peak 
of  a  shed  at  the  rear  of  the  premises  and  established 
himself  there  for  the  night.  At  length  my  landlady 
came  and  lit  the  best-room  lamp,  and  then  led  the  way 
to  the  kitchen  where  we  had  supper.  After  we  finished 
eating,  the  man  of  the  house  got  out  a  great  jack- 
knife,  leaned  back  in  his  chair,  and  picked  his  teeth. 
That  done  he  went  with  me  to  the  best  room  and 
visited.  He  was  a  person  of  considerable  intelligence, 
but    mumbling    in  speech  and  given  to  frequent  and 


1 82         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

fearful  yawns.  He  seemed  to  feel  that  it  was  his  duty 
to  entertain  me,  and  though  the  talk  was  arduous,  he 
performed  it  with  conscientious  thoroughness.  From 
first  to  last  the  people  of  the  house  did  all  they  could 
to  make  me  comfortable  and  my  stay  agreeable,  and 
when  breakfast  was  concluded  the  next  morning  and 
I  asked  how  much  I  owed,  my  landlady  was  reluctant 
to  take  any  pay  whatever.  Still,  I  did  not  wish  to 
impose  on  her  generous  hospitality,  and  I  handed  her 
a  half  dollar  and  a  quarter.  That  seemed  to  her 
entirely  too  much  and  she  returned  the  larger  coin. 
It  was  a  beautiful  morning.  The  sky  was  softly 
blue  with  scattered  cloud  puffs  afloat  on  its  cerulean 
depths,  the  sunshine  was  gently  warm,  and  the  grass 
fields  were  laden  with  dew.  Kentucky  is  famous  for 
its  horses,  and  a  large  business  is  done  in  rearing  them 
for  the  Northern  market.  No  industry  of  the  country- 
side has  a  more  vivacious  interest,  and  I  spent  much 
of  the  morning  visiting  one  of  the  minor  stock-farms. 
Several  colored  men  and  boys  were  kept  busy  all 
the  time  feeding,  cleaning,  exercising,  and  training  the 
horses.  The  creatures  were  given  the  best  of  care, 
and  each  had  a  good-sized  room  to  itself  in  the  barns. 
The  floor  of  the  room  was  strewn  with  straw,  the  walls 
were  whitewashed,  and  there  was  a  window  which  must 
be  promptly  opened  if  the  stall  became  too  warm  and 
as  promptly  shut  when  it  became  too  cool.  Every- 
thing was  very  neat  and  sweet,  and  the  horses  were 


The   Blue-grass   Country 


183 


rather  sHcker  than  their  attendants.  One  of  the  latter 
wore  a  white  advertising  cap  labelled,  in  large  letters, 
"compressed  yeast."      I  loitered  a  long  time  watch- 


!»»'.^>X 


■■Mi-'  k**"^.' 


Rubbing  down  a  Trotter 

ing  the  compressed-yeast  boy  and  another  little  fellow, 
who  looked  to  be  about  ten  years  old,  canter  over  the 
turf  among  the  trees  on  the  mettlesome  ponies,  giving 
them  their  morning  exercise. 

One  day  I  walked  into  a  place  called  Athens  —  a 
village  with  a  look  of  antiquity  that  suggested  close 
relationship  with  the  Grecian  city  of  like  name.  It 
was  a  battered,  decayed  little  hamlet  gathered  about  a 


184         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

few  shops  and  stores.  Various  village  vehicles  stood 
by  the  roadside  of  the  narrow  chief  street,  some 
wrecked  past  use,  and  others  apparently  left  there  for 
lack  of  shed  room.  Groups  of  loafers  gathered  wher- 
ever they  could  find  convenient  sitting-places  in  the 
shade,  and  the  storekeepers  established  themselves  in 
chairs  tilted  against  the  front  of  their  emporiums  and 
only  went  inside  when  a  stray  customer  appeared. 


A  Village  Scene 

I  made  a  purchase  at  one  of  the  stores  and  then 
continued  my  walk,  but  I  had  not  gone  far  when  I 
was  overtaken  by  a  young  man  on  horseback.  He 
proved  to  be  the  man  at  whose  store  I  had    traded, 


The  Blue-grass  Country  185 

and  the  sole  object  of  his  ride  was  to  have  a  talk  with 
me.  He  had  followed  me  at  a  gallop,  but  as  he  came 
abreast,  he  slowed  down  and  called  out,  "  How  de  do?" 
For  several  miles  he  kept  in  my  company.  He  said 
he  was  not  very  busy.  "  This  is  the  poorest  country 
on  God's  earth  for  trade,"  he  affirmed.  "  I'll  tell  you 
for  why.  There's  too  few  people  and  too  many  stores 
—  dag-goned  if  there  ain't.  Sometimes  I  think  I'll 
sell  out,  lock,  stock,  and  barrel  [that  is,  he  would  sell 
everything  as  completely  as  if  he  sold  his  gun  —  lock, 
stock,  and  barrel].  But  I  cain't  quite  make  up  my 
mind  to  it. 

"  I  s'pose  you'd  heard  of  yfthens  before  you  come 
thar  to-day.  Yes,  I  s'pose  every  one's  heard  of  y^thens, 
Kentucky.  It  ain't  a  bad  place  —  dag-goned  if  it  is. 
It's  better'n  any  dag-goned  city  that  ever  was.  Now, 
I  cain't  stay  in  a  big  place  like  Lexington  more  than 
half  a  day.  Then  I  got  to  get  out  or  die.  The  heat 
and  the  smells  and  the  hard  pavements  drive  me  crazy, 
dag-goned  if  they  don't.  I  think  about  all  thar  is  in 
Lexington  is  noise.  I'm  dag-goned  glad  I  don't  have 
to  work  in  such  a  place.      I  don't  like  it  a  little  bit. 

"  What  a  dag-goned  lot  of  these  red-headed  wood- 
peckers there  are  !  You  can  always  plant  your  corn 
when  they  come,  or  anything  else.  The  winter's 
generally  broke  then,  and  you  c'n  calculate  there  won't 
be  no  more  frost. 

"  That  rain  we  had  the  other  night  putt  the  ground 


1 86         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

in  good  fix  to  plough.  The  field  over  the  fence 
yonder  is  hemp.  We  raise  a  heap  of  hemp  hyar  when 
the  price  ain't  too  dag-goned  low.  The  next  field  is 
blue-grass.  Two  years  ago  that  field  was  sowed  to 
blue-grass  and  clover,  and  the  blue-grass  has  done  eat 
the  clover  out  a'ready.  See,  it  kivers  the  ground. 
It's  the  purest  grass  in  the  world,  I  reckon,  and  comes 
nearer  to  bein'  corn,  oats,  and  hay  all  in  one  than  any- 
thing that  grows  out  of  the  ground." 

We  passed  a  negro  by  the  wayside,  breaking  stone 
for  use  on  the  road.  "  That's  a  good  job  for  him," 
said  my  friend.  "  He's  paid  so  much  a  yard,  and  he'll 
earn  a  dollar  a  day  and  not  half  work.  He  wouldn't 
be  paid  but  seventy-five  cents  at  regular  wages.  We 
got  a  very  good  class  of  niggers  aroun'  hyar,  but  they 
naturally  will  steal.  Befo'  the  war  the  niggers  was 
worked  very  hard  and  fed  very  poor,  and  after  they'd 
got  through  a  day  their  first  thought  was  to  steal  some- 
thing to  eat.  They  ain't  never  got  over  that  —  dag- 
goned  if  they  have.  Did  you  ever  have  a  nigger  work 
for  you?  Well,  he  has  about  two  ideas  —  to  beat  you 
out  of  all  the  time  he  can  and  then  to  get  his  money  ; 
and  if  you  don't  pay  prompt,  even  if  it  ain't  more'n 
five  cents,  he'll  wear  out  a  pair  of  shoes  chasin'  you  to 
get  it.  But  if  he  owes  you,  he'll  wear  out  a  pair  of 
shoes  walkin'  aroun'  you  to  keep  out  of  your  way  — 
dag-goned  if  he  won't." 

Thus   the   equestrian   enlightened   me   as   we    went 


The   Blue-grass   Country  187 

along,  and  I  was  a  willing  listener,  though  I  grew 
rather  weary  of  his  dag-goning.  Once  he  stopped  his 
horse  to  accost  a  child  in  a  home  gateway.  "  Go  get 
your  hair  brushed  so  you'll  look  like  you  was  human," 
he  commanded,  and  the  frightened  youngster  hastened 
to  shelter.  "  Did  you  ever  see  such  a  dag-goned- 
looking  kid?"   he  inquired,  addressing  himself  to  me. 

My  companion  finally  turned  back,  but  I  did  not 
go  far  alone  before  I  was  joined  by  a  small  boy  who 
was  hunting  for  his  cows.  They  were  in  the  habit  of 
feeding  by  the  roadside,  and  were  as  likely  to  have 
wandered  in  the  direction  I  was  going  as  any  other, 
and  the  boy  walked  along  with  me  for  two  or  three 
miles.  Then  he  concluded  he  must  search  elsewhere. 
Near  where  he  left  me,  on  a  little  hill,  had  been  a 
rude  fort  in  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century 
known  as  Bryan's  Station,  and  here  had  been  fought 
a  famous  battle  with  the  Indians. 

Most  of  the  Indians  with  whom  the  Kentucky 
pioneers  contended  were  from  north  of  the  Ohio, 
for  Kentucky  itself  had  very  few  savage  dwellers. 
The  last  raid  that  the  Indians  made  in  force  culmi- 
nated early  one  August  morning  of  1782  in  the 
attempt  to  capture  Bryan's  Station,  which  consisted 
of  about  forty  cabins  surrounded  by  a  stout  palisade. 
The  assailants  numbered  six  hundred.  Only  fifty 
men  were  available  for  the  defence,  and  they  were  in 
no   condition   to   offer  an  effective  resistance.     Their 


1 88         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

palisades  needed  repairs  and  the  fort  was  destitute  of 
water ;  but  they  at  once  prepared  for  the  combat,  and 
two  mounted  messengers  broke  through  the  Indian 
Hnes  to  alarm  the  other  stations  and  bring  reenforce- 
ments.  Then  the  women  were  told  that  the  safety 
of  the  garrison  demanded  that  they  bring  a  supply  of 
water  from  the  spring  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  outside 
the  fort.  The  women  bravely  accepted  the  situation, 
went  in  a  body  to  the  spring,  filled  their  pails,  and 
had  the  good  fortune  to  return  unharmed.  Shortly 
afterward  the  Indians  charged  on  the  fort,  but  the 
attack  was  repulsed  and  the  Indians  lost  heavily. 

Meanwhile  the  messengers  had  alarmed  the  Lex- 
ington garrison,  and  a  considerable  party,  some  mounted 
and  some  on  foot,  hastened  to  the  relief  of  the  belea- 
guered Station.  The  Indians  laid  in  ambush  for  them 
where  the  narrow  road  was  bordered  on  one  side  by 
high  corn  and  on  the  other  by  a  dense  wood.  The 
whites  fell  into  the  trap,  but  the  horsemen  spurred 
on,  and  their  speed  and  the  cloud  of  dust  they  raised 
carried  them  safely  past  the  flying  bullets  of  the 
excited  savages.  The  footmen,  who  were  creeping 
through  the  corn-field  to  the  fort,  started  to  go  to  the 
aid  of  the  horsemen  when  they  heard  the  Indians 
firing  on  them,  and  were  scattered  by  the  tenfold  force 
of  the  enemy,  and  six  of  them  were  killed. 

On  the  second  night  of  the  siege  the  leader  of  the 
Indians  approached  the  fort  in  the  sheltering  darkness. 


At  the  Back  Door 


The   Blue-grass   Country  189 

and  from  behind  a  stump  hailed  the  garrison  and 
demanded  its  surrender.  One  of  the  defenders  called 
back  that  if  the  "  Indian  gang  of  murderers  "  remained 
twenty-four  hours  longer  before  the  fort,  their  scalps 
would  be  found  drying  on  the  roofs  of  the  white 
settlers'   cabins. 

The  chief  knew  that  the  pioneers  from  far  and  near 
would  soon  be  flocking  to  the  aid  of  the  garrison,  and 
he  concluded  to  withdraw  his  forces.  Daylight  dis- 
closed the  Indian  camp  deserted.  Their  fires  were 
still  burning  brightly,  and  several  pieces  of  meat  were 
on  the  roasting-sticks,  showing  that  the  foe  had  just 
gone.  Detachments  of  men  from  other  stations  now 
began  to  arrive,  and  among  their  leaders  was  the 
renowned  Daniel  Boone.  With  very  little  delay  a 
party  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  started  in  pursuit  of 
the  Indians,  and  no  sooner  did  they  come  up  with  the 
retreating  raiders  than  they  made  a  foolhardy  and  dis- 
astrous attack.  Nearly  half  of  the  whites  were  killed, 
and  the  rest  were  dispersed  and  found  their  way  to 
their  homes  by  circuitous  routes  through  the  wilder- 
ness. Boone's  son  Israel  was  mortally  wounded,  and 
the  father,  after  bearing  the  son  beyond  the  field  of 
struggle,  watched  beside  him  in  the  forest  until  he 
died. 

Not  far  from  the  site  of  the  old  fort  at  Bryan's 
Station  I  found  lodging  in  a  farm-house.  The  dwell- 
ing was  very  different  from  the  one  in  which   I   spent 


190         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

my  first  night  in  the  blue-grass  country.  This  was  a 
fine  old  mansion,  low  and  spreading,  with  a  line  of 
humble  structures  behind  it  that  had  formerly  been 
slave  quarters.  I  recall  with  especial  pleasure  looking 
from  the  front  porch,  after  my  hard  day's  tramping,  out 
on  the  grassy,  generous  yard  set  full  of  trees,  —  locusts, 
poplars,  maples,  pines,  cedars,  etc.,  —  forty-two  varieties 
of  them  I  was  told  in  that  one  yard.  A  squad  of 
blackbirds  clucked  and  squeaked  up  amidst  the  foliage, 
a  cat-bird  mewed,  and  a  robin  was  carolling,  and  there 
were  swallows  coursing  through  the  air  in  swift,  twitter- 
ing flight.  As  I  sat  on  the  porch,  whiling  away  the 
mild  spring  evening  with  these  sights  and  sounds 
around,  I  felt  that  few  spots  on  earth  had  been  en- 
dowed by  nature  with  such  home  charms  as  the  Blue- 
grass  country  of  Kentucky. 


VIII 


ON    THE    BANKS    OF    THE    OHIO 


I 


WAS     in    West 

Virginia  at  a  vil- 
lage close  beside 
the  great  river.  The 
day  was  warm  and 
hazy,  and  the  distant 
hills  faded  in  delicate 
tints  of  blue  into  the 
sky.  Both  the  scene 
and  the  weather  were 
conducive  to  loiter- 
ing, and  I  spent  all  of 
one  morning  on  the 
river  bank.  Nothing 
impressed  me  more 
than  the  long  and 
steep  descent  from  the 
level  of  the  surrounding  country  to  the  level  of  the 
water.  I  had  never  seen  a  stream  bordered  by  alluvial 
banks  of  such  extraordinary  height.  Here  and  there 
patches  of  bushes  grew  on  the  declivities,  but  for  the 

191 


An  Onion  Patch 


192         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

most  part  the  surface  was  strewn  with  stones,  or  cov- 
ered with  deposits  of  mud  and  sand.  A  line  of  drift 
rubbish  showed  how  high  the  last  flood  had  been. 
Evidently  the  banks  had  been  filled  nearly  to  the 
brim,  and  the  river  must  then  have  been  a  frightful 
torrent,  immense  in  depth  and  breadth  and  sinister 
power.  Now,  low  down  in  the  bottom  of  the  channel, 
and  stained  a  reddish  yellow  with  soil  washings,  it 
looked  like  an  artificial  drainage  canal. 


A  Ferry  Steamer 

A  stern-wheel  ferry  steamer  plied  across  the  river 
every  few  minutes  to  a  village  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  stream,  and  a  little  above  the  landing  on  the  West 
Virginia  side  were  two  men  in  a  rowboat  setting  fish- 


On  the   Banks  of  the   Ohio  19J 

lines.  Residents  on  the  river  banks  do  a  good  deal 
of  desultory  fishing,  and  I  constantly  observed  men 
and  boys,  both  on  shore  and  in  boats,  trying  with 
baited  hooks  to  entice  the  finny  folk  from  the  water. 
Once  I  saw  a  boy  haul  out  a  "  mud  cat"  that  weighed 
six  or  seven  pounds  —  a  veritable  monster  of  the  deep 
with  its  big,  flat  head  and  its  "  horns."  All  the  fisher- 
men and  loafers  who  chanced  to  be  near  came  to  see 
the  prize,  for  it  was  not  every  day  a  fish  of  this  size 
was  captured,  and  the  hero  of  the  exploit  proudly 
exhibited  his  catch,  and  told  over  and  over  again  just 
how  he  pulled  it  in.  The  only  derogatory  remark  I 
heard  was  from  a  man  who  said  he  didn't  think 
"  slick "  fish  like  mud  cats  and  eels  were  very  good 
eating.  "  I  like  scaly  fish  like  perch  a  good  sight 
better,"   he  declared. 

The  most  persistent  of  the  river  fishermen  are  the 
"  shanty  boat "  dwellers.  A  shanty  boat  is  a  scow 
fitted  up  as  a  house-boat,  and  aflxDrding  shelter  for  a 
family.  Such  families  have  no  other  homes  and  are 
a  species  of  river  gypsies.  They  catch  fish  both  to  eat 
and  to  sell,  and  they  have  a  number  of  other  make- 
shifts for  earning  a  living ;  and  whenever  honest  re- 
sources do  not  satisfy  them,  they  fall  back  on  stealing. 
They  visit  hen-houses,  rob  stores,  and  pick  up  a  little 
of  everything.  In  fact  the  shanty  boats  are  considered 
to  shelter  "  the  worst  thieves  there  are,"  and  a  great 
many  of  the  residents  alongshore  live  in  "  absolute 
o 


194         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

horror "  of  these  river  pirates.  They  avoid  getting 
Into  trouble  with  the  shanty-boat  people,  and  hesitate 
to  accuse  them  of  crime  even  on  the  best  of  evidence, 
for  fear  the  outlaws  will  retaliate  and  burn  their  accus- 
ers' buildings  or  wreak  vengeance  in  some  other  form. 
It  is  never  easy  to  fasten  their  ill-doing  on  them  or  to 
arrest  them,  because  they  can  shift  their  habitations  so 
readily  and  transfer  themselves  from  one  state  to  an- 
other by  merely  crossing  the  river.  I  was  told  that 
among  themselves  they  lived  practically  outside  the 
pale  of  the  law,  and  in  support  of  this  assertion  my 
informant  said  :  "  Three  years  ago  a  shanty  boat  was 
hitched  to  the  shore  close  by  where  I  live,  and  one 
night  while  it  was  there,  I  heard  a  woman's  shrieks, 
and  her  cries  kep'  growin'  fainter  and  fainter  until  they 
stopped.  I  haven't  a  doubt  that  woman  was  choked 
to  death.  All  they  had  to  do  afterward  was  to  tie  a 
stone  to  the  body  and  throw  it  in  the  river,  and  no 
one  would  be  the  wiser." 

The  villages  and  farm-houses  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  river  had  the  aspect  of  keeping  abreast 
with  modern  civilization,  but  no  sooner  did  I  leave 
this  narrow  valley  strip  than  I  was  in  a  region  so 
much  more  recently  subdued  and  so  much  less  in 
touch  with  the  world  outside,  that  I  seemed  trans- 
ported fifty  or  seventy-five  years  into  the  past.  Here 
were  hills  and  crooked  glens  and  rough  woodland, 
and  the  people  had  the  characteristics  of  mountaineers. 


ynr-   :.'--^rr  V'QRK 


1      y^,  T  r 


Av     ■  'ND 

TILDEN    FOUNDATIONS. 


Corn-meal  Day 


On  the  Banks  of  the  Ohio  195 

One  of  the  excursions  I  made  into  the  uplands  was 
on  a  Saturday.  The  final  day  of  the  week  is  corn- 
meal  day,  and  I  met  no  end  of  men  on  their  wav  to 
mill,  sorr»e  on  horseback  with  a  bag  behind  them, 
some  on  foot  with  the  grist  balanced  on  a  shoulder. 
They  were  all  sociably  inclined  and  greeted  me  with, 
"  Howdy,"  and  occasionally  a  man  stopped  to  learn 
my  business,  and  among  other  things  would  ask, 
"Where  do  you  hold  forth  when  you  are  to  home?" 
Once  I  came  across  a  two-horse  load  of  oak  railway 
ties  that  had  met  disaster  in  a  mud-hole.  The  driver 
was  a  boy.  He  had  thrown  off  half  the  ties  and  ex- 
tricated  the  wagon,  and  was  now  endeavoring  to  reload. 
The  task  looked  to  be  beyond  his  strength,  and  I  went 
to  his  assistance.  When  we  finished  he  said,  "  Paw's 
not  got  his  breaking  up  done  yit,  and  he  say  to  git 
back  this  mornin'  so  he  could  plough  this  afternoon. 
'Pears  like  I  couldn't  'a'  done  hit  it  yo'  hadn't  'a' 
holped  me." 

Some  of  the  valleys  up  which  I  wandered  were  very 
pretty,  particularly  when  I  got  away  from  the  out- 
reach of  the  Ohio  floods.  Every  year,  with  the 
departure  of  winter,  the  roily,  swollen  waters  not  only 
fill  the  main  channel  but  set  far  back  in  all  the  tribu- 
tary hollows.  They  leave  a  deep  deposit  of  mud, 
and  the  mud  of  the  latest  overflow  had  not  yet  been 
hidden  by  summer  verdure.  It  was  still  spring,  and 
I  heard  the   bob-whites  announcing  their  presence  in 


196         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

the  woods,  and  the  gentle  crooning  of  the  turtle-doves, 
and  a  thousand  other  bird  songs.  Blossoms,  too,  were 
plentiful,  the  dark  red  papaw  blooms  being  especially 
conspicuous  on  the  roadside  bushes. 


Some  Farm  Buildings 

The  houses  among  the  hills  were  small  and  poor. 
Often  they  were  of  logs.  Round  about  each  dwelling 
was  likely  to  be  a  huddle  of  nondescript  sheds  and 
shacks  for  the  shelter  of  the  stock  and  crops,  and  not 
much  care  was  shown  as  to  appearances  ;  yet  now  and 
then  a  house-yard  had  been  securely  fenced  against  the 
marauding  domestic  animals,  and  grass  and  fruit  trees 
had  been  encouraged,  so  that  the  home  was  quite  at- 
tractive.    Very  little  paint  was  used  on  the  buildings, 


On   the   Banks  of  the  Ohio  197 

and  most  of  that  little  must  be  credited  to  the  adver- 
tising enterprise  of  rival  merchants  in  neighboring 
towns.  The  handiwork  of  the  sign  painters  was  very 
rude,  and  it  was  often  ungrammatical.  A  curious  and 
startling  result  was  obtained  by  one  of  these  advertise- 
ments, through  careless  spacing  between  words  and 
letters  and  a  lack  of  punctuation.  It  covered  all  one  side 
of  a  small  barn,  and  was  intended  to  advertise  clothing, 
but  an  S  belonging  to  the  second  word  got  astray,  and 
the  mammoth  letters  informed  the  public  that 

ALL    MEN    SWEAR 
^^-— ^AT    SAM    GORDONS. 

A  common  adjunct  of  the  homes  was  a  toy  house 
on  a  pole  for  the  box  martins  to  live  in.  These  birds 
are  encouraged,  not  simply  for  the  pleasure  of  the 
people  who  provide  the  shelters,  but  because  the 
martins  are  sworn  enemies  of  the  hawks,  and  give 
effective  police  protection  to  the  chickens.  Water 
was,  of  course,  plentiful  in  the  hills,  though  the  dwell- 
ings were  seldom  amply  and  conveniently  supplied  with 
it.  Some  had  cisterns  that  stored  the  roof  water,  but 
this  supply  gave  out  in  dry  spells,  and  it  was  apt  to  be 
discolored  and  to  taste  of  the  wood  over  which  it  had 
flowed.  Some  families  depended  on  springs,  frequently 
at  quite  a  distance,  and  brought  the  water  a  pailful  at  a 
time.     I  saw  one  girl  lugging  along  such  a  burden  who 


198         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

had  to  go  for  it  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  climb  a  rocky  hill, 
and  crawl  under  a  barbed-wire  fence. 


Going  Home  from  the  Spring 

The  half-wild  glens  I  explored  had  an  attraction 
distinctly  their  own,  but  it  was  the  Ohio  and  its  nearest 
borderlands  that  interested  me  most.  One  sultry  after- 
noon, while   following  the   highway  across   a   meadow 


On  the  Banks  of  the  Ohio  199 

level  near  the  river,  I  was  overtaken  by  a  shower.  The 
valley  had  been  full  of  fog  early,  and  all  the  morning 
a  light  mist  permeated  the  air  and  dulled  the  sunshine. 
But  by  noon  this  mist  had  burned  off,  and  the  day  was 
very  hot  until  mid-afternoon,  when  gloomy  clouds 
began  to  unfold  in  the  west.  They  drifted  upward 
and  blotted  out  the  sun,  and  spread  a  leaden  twilight 
over  the  landscape.  The  lightning  flickered  along  the 
horizon,  and  I  heard  the  distant  rumble  of  thunder. 
Presently  the  first  big  drops  of  rain  were  pelting  down, 
and  I  ran  on  and  escaped  the  heaviest  of  the  downpour 
by  seeking  refuge  in  a  little  store  at  Jones's  Landing. 
For  half  an  hour  the  rain  drenched  the  earth,  and  the 
cloudland  artillery  crashed,  and  the  lightning  rended 
the  skies  with  savage  lines  of  fire. 

The  store  was  a  gray,  unpainted,  wooden  structure 
one  story  high.  It  had  a  rude  porch  across  the  front, 
where  the  local  citizens  liked  to  linger  to  do  their  vis- 
iting and  thinking.  Commodities  of  all  sorts  were 
crowded  inside  —  groceries,  dry-goods,  men's  clothing, 
hardware,  drugs,  and  I  know  not  what.  There  was  no 
other  public  building  at  the  Landing,  and  only  two 
dwellings  were  at  all  near.  Indeed,  Jones's  Landing 
was  simply  a  very  minor  steamer  and  ferry  landing. 
Certain  of  the  lesser  steamers  stopped  at  such  times  as 
there  was  occasion,  and  took  on  or  let  off  passengers 
by  a  long  gang-plank  shoved  out  from  the  bow  to  the 
wharfless  shore.     A  rough  road  slanted  down  the  bank. 


200         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

and  where  it  began  to  descend  was  a  bell  suspended  on 
a  pole.  When  you  wanted  to  cross  the  river,  you  rang 
the  bell  as  a  signal  to  the  ferryman,  who  lived  on  the 
opposite  shore.  He  took  foot-passengers  over  in  a 
skiff,  and  he  conveyed  teams  on  a  scow,  which  he 
towed  with  his  rowboat. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  Landing  was  a  stretch  of  rich 
meadow  laid  off  in  large  fields  of  grass,  grain,  and 
corn,  and  the  houses  here  were  generally  those  of  the 
descendants  of  the  early  settlers.  They  were  of  ample 
size,  and  pleasantly  surrounded  with  old  orchards  and 
thrifty  gardens.  It  was  in  one  of  these  houses  I  found 
lodging  after  the  shower.  A  fleshy,  elderly  woman 
had  come  to  the  door  in  response  to  my  knock,  and 
when  she  learned  what  I  wanted,  she  regarded  me 
sharply  through  her  spectacles  and  said,  "  You  ain't 
that  man  what  was  around  here  a  while  ago,  be  you  ?  " 

I  assured  her  I  had  never  been  at  Jones's  Landing 
before. 

"  Well,  I  rather  think  he  was  more  red-complected 
than  you  be,"  she  continued.  "  He  wanted  something 
to  eat.  It  was  a  Tuesday,  and  he  said  he  hadn't  eaten 
anything  since  Sunday  but  two  raw  potatoes  ;  and  it's 
likelv  he  stole  those.  I  asked  him  if  he  was  willing  to 
work  for  his  victuals,  and  he  said  he  was.  So  I  told 
him  he  could  cut  up  some  wood  and  then  I'd  feed  him. 
I  got  him  the  axe,  and  he  cut  one  stick  off,  and  then 
he  raised  up  and  rubbed  his  stomach.     After  that  he 


On  the   Banks  of  the   Ohio  201 

gave  a  few  more  blows,  and  raised  up  and  rubbed  his 
stomach  some  more ;  and  I  said  to  my  daughter : 
'That  man's  a-sufFering.  Get  him  a  lunch;'  and  we 
laid  the  lunch  out  on  a  block,  and  he  never  cut  any 
more  wood.    He  picked  up  the  lunch,  and  walked  off." 

At  the  conclusion  of  this  narrative  about  the  red- 
complected  fraud  who  got  his  lunch  so  easily,  I  was 
made  welcome.  Pretty  soon  we  had  supper,  and  when 
we  finished  and  the  dishes  were  done,  my  landlady 
seated  herself  by  an  open  window  in  the  sitting  room, 
puffing  her  pipe  and  occasionally  spitting  out  into  the 
yard.  "  I  smoke  after  every  meal,"  she  informed  me, 
"  and  forty  other  times  in  the  day  when  I  get  worried  ; 
and  I  can  remember  the  time  when  nearly  all  the  women 
in  the  country  smoked." 

While  she  spoke,  a  great  blundering  beetle  flew  in 
and  I  caught  it.  "  This  must  be  a  June  bug,"  I 
suggested. 

"Oh,  Lor'  no!"  was  the  response.  "June  bugs 
are  green.  M-m-m  —  h-m-m  !  I  know  them.  The 
children  ketches  'em  and  ties  strings  to  their  legs  to 
hear  'em  sizz  every  time  they  giv^e  'em  a  pull.  What 
time  is  it  by  your  watch  ?  " 

"  Half-past  six,"  I  replied. 

"  I  thougrht  that  was  about  it.  You  see  it's  after 
seven  by  our  clock.  I  always  keep  our  time  fast. 
That's  the  only  way  to  get  things  done.  If  you  go  on 
the  gallop,  it  seems  to  hurry  up  everybody." 


202         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

I  made  some  remark  about  the  clouds  looking  as  if 
the  weather  was  still  doubtful,  and  she  said  :  "  I  don't 
believe  I've  seen  it  rain  as  it  did  this  afternoon  since 
1884.  It  was  a  terrible  bad  storm  while  it  lasted.  I 
was  talkin'  before  supper  with  one  of  the  neighbors 
who'd  just  come  home  on  the  train  from  down  the 
river,  and  he  said  the  lightning  knocked  a  house  all  to 
pieces  in  Portsmouth  and  killed  a  man  in  Ironton  ; 
but  he  didn't  hear  of  its  doin'  any  particular  damage 
in  other  places  except  for  scaring  the  people." 

"  What  about  the  storm  in  i  884  ?  "  I  inquired. 

"  That  was  when  we  had  the  big  flood.  There 
hadn't  been  such  a  flood  since  the  white  people  took 
possession  of  this  valley.  It  was  the  last  part  of  Feb- 
ruarv,  and  for  several  days  the  rain  fell  in  torrents.  The 
water  come  in  on  our  floors  on  a  Saturday  night  at  one 
o'clock.  We'd  all  gone  to  bed  early.  I  got  up  once 
and  looked  out,  but  it  was  dark  and  I  thought  the 
water  wa'n't  any  nearer  the  house  than  it  was  in  the 
early  evening.  By  and  by  seem  like  something  told 
me  to  get  up  again  ;  and  this  time  the  moon  came  from 
behind  a  cloud  and  I  could  see  the  water  had  got  in 
the  yard  ;  and  I  cried  out,  '  Oh,  mercy,  get  up  quick, 
Paw  ! '  and  he  was  out  of  bed  in  no  time  and  he  ran 
downstairs  and  rang  the  bell  that  we  have  hung  on 
the  porch  to  call  the  men  to  their  meals.  That  woke 
everybody  in  the  house  and  brought  some  men  from 
the  neighbors,  and  we  got  the  things  out  of  the  cellar, 


On   the   Banks  of  the  Ohio 


203 


and  then  we  took  up  our  carpets.  We  had  a  big  ex- 
tension table  in  this  room,  and  we  piled  the  chairs  and 
the  carpets  and  a  trunk  full  of  things  on  it.  We 
thought  the  water'd  never  get  up  to  'em,  but  it  kep' 
risin'  till  Wednesday,  and  then  it  was  over  the  mantle- 


A  Riverside  Team  ^ 

piece.  The  river  was  full  of  drift  of  every  description 
—  bridges  and  houses  and  fences,  hay-stacks  and  straw- 
stacks  —  and  it  was  just  awful.  Our  barn  is  a  little  higher 
than  the  house;  but  the  water  come  in  there,  too,  and 
Monday  we  waded  our  horses  and  cows  away  to  dry 


204         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

land  farther  back.  It  was  the  middle  of  June  before 
our  cellar  dried  out,  and  our  doors  was  all  swelled  so 
they  wouldn't  shut  for  months.  With  all  the  other 
damage,  the  steamers  did  a  lot  of  hurt.  They'd  come 
along  close  to  shore  to  keep  out  of  the  current,  and 
the  big  waves  from  'em  would  rock  the  flooded  hou'jes 
and  do  'em  more  harm  than  the  water  had.  That 
made  the  people  mad,  and  some  would  shoot  into  the 
steamers  to  warn  'em  off.  It  reminded  me  of  war 
times." 

"Why,"  said  I,  "was  there  fighting  here  in  the 
war: 

"  No,  but  there  was  raiding.  We  had  a  store-boat 
on  the  river  then,  and  it  was  full  of  goods,  and  we  used 
to  peddle  from  it.  We  thought  the  goods  was  safer 
afloat  than  on  shore,  and  when  we'd  hear  of  a  squad  of 
Rebel  soldiers  anywhere  near,  we'd  get  off  across  the 
river  in  the  store-boat  and  live  in  it  for  a  while.  One 
time  we  swam  our  horses  across  the  river  to  save  'em 
from  raiders.  Another  time  my  little  girl  was  standin' 
at  the  window  and  she  call  to  me,  '  Maw,  the  whole 
place  is  covered  with  soldiers ! '  and  I  looked  out  and 
see  thirteen  Rebel  bushwhackers  on  their  horses  right 
in  our  yard.  They'd  jumped  the  fences  and  there  they 
were.  I  ran  out  the  back  door  down  to  the  house-boat, 
but  they  followed  me  and  stopped  me  on  the  shore, 
and  I  had  to  stand  there  with  a  gun  levelled  at  me 
while  they  robbed  our  store.     They  carried  off  as  much 


On   the   Banks  of  the   Ohio  205 

as  they  could  get  on  their  horses,  —  ahiiost  a  thousand 
dollars'  worth,  —  and  what  they  couldn't  take  they 
strewed  around  and  stamped  on.  We  had  a  big 
Union  flag,  and  they  fastened  one  end  of  that  around 
the  neck  of  the  leader's  horse  and  rode  away  with  it 
trailing  in  the  mud.  No,  'tain't  funny  to  live  where 
there's  war  goin'  on." 

My  landlady  was  over  eighty  years  old  and  her 
memory  carried  her  back  to  very  primitive  times. 
Her  father  was  one  of  the  earliest  settlers  of  the  region. 
"He  and  his  two  brothers  and  three  sisters  and  their 
paw  and  maw  come  from  Providence,  Rhode  Island," 
said  she,  "  and  several  other  families  with  'em.  They 
travelled  to  Pittsburg  in  wagons,  and  then  they  got  a 
flatboat  and  floated  down  on  that  with  their  animals 
and  goods  to  where  Marietta  is  now,  and  my  Uncle 
Oliver  helped  cut  the  first  tree  that  was  cut  there. 
They  stayed  at  Marietta  till  the  Indians  were  driven 
out,  and  then  they  come  down  here.  That  was  in 
1808.  They  built  a  log  cabin;  but  a  few  years  later 
when  they  got  better  fixed,  they  put  up  a  two-story, 
hewed-log  house.  There  was  only  scattered  families 
here  then.  Each  one  would  make  a  little  opening  on 
the  river  bank  and  start  a  farm.  It  was  all  wilderness 
and  the  valley  was  overgrown  with  heavy  forest.  Many 
a  fine  tree  five  and  six  feet  through  has  been  cut  on  this 
place  since  /  can  remember.  Oh,  my  goodness  !  I 
guess  there  never  was  any  finer  timber.      Some  people 


2o6         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

just  cut  it  and  rolled  it  up  and  burned  it  to  get  it  out  of 
their  way  so  they'd  have  the  land  clear  for  raising  crops. 
Others  saved  anything  that  would  split,  and  chopped  it 
into  cord  wood  and  sold  it  to  the  steamers. 

"  They  had  to  depend  pretty  much  on  themselves 
then  for  what  they  had.  Father  learned  to  tan  buck- 
skin, and  he  learned  to  make  shoes  and  bedsteads  and 
chairs.  Every  farmer  kept  sheep,  and  there  was  spin- 
ning-wheels and  a  loom  in  every  house  till  long  after 
the  time  I  was  married.  In  the  fall,  father  was  in  the 
habit  of  building  a  boat  and  loading  it  with  potatoes 
and  apples  and  other  produce  and  taking  his  load 
down  the  river  to  sell.  Sometimes  he'd  go  as  far  as 
New  Orleans.  He'd  dispose  of  his  produce  and 
then  of  his  boat,  and  after  that  he'd  buy  sugar  and 
coffee  and  whatever  we  needed  and  come  back  on  a 
steamer. 

"  The  country  was  full  of  wild  game  then.  I've 
seen  a  deer  swim  the  'Hio  River  myself,  and  I've  seen 
wild  pigeons  light  on  one  of  our  big  oak  trees  so  thick 
they'd  break  the  limbs.  There  was  ten  gangs  of  wild 
geese  then  to  one  we  have  now.  Even  if  a  man  was 
only  goin'  to  his  next  neighbor's,  he'd  take  his  gun  and 
shot-pouch  along,  and  he  was  more'n  likely  to  bring 
back  some  game.  You  could  always  have  deer  meat 
or  b'ar  meat  if  you  wanted  to  take  the  trouble  to  go 
out  and  shoot  it.  Once  when  father  was  away  a  b'ar 
come  and  burst  open  the  kitchen  door  in  the  night, 


t 


b.  -' 


A  Schoolgirl  at  Home 


THE  MEW  YORK 


^  ■ 


TILDEN    FOUr;DATIO.'.S. 


On  the  Banks  of  the  Ohio  207 

and  the  dogs  got  after  the  b'ar  and  chased  it  through 
the  house  and  out  again.  There  was  panthers  and 
wolves,  too,  and  we  had  to  watch  to  see  that  our  cattle 
and  hogs  wa'n't  killed  and  carried  off. 

"  About  the  time  my  father  come  of  age  he  fought 
in  the  Indian  wars.  He  was  at  Sandusky  when  Tecum- 
seh  was  killed.  Yes,  he  saw  Tecumseh  shot,  and  he 
always  said  the  histories  didn't  tell  the  truth  about 
how  he  died.  Tecumseh  was  shot  by  a  young  boy, 
and  father  was  only  a  few  feet  from  that  boy  when  he 
fired  his  gun.  The  soldiers  got  hold  of  Tecumseh's 
body,  and  they  took  his  hide  off  and  used  it  for  razor 
strops.  But  they  never  made  any  great  talk  about 
doing  that,  because  it  was  a  punishable  offence. 

"  I  reckon  there's  been  a  big  Indian  battle  some 
time  right  on  our  old  farm.  I've  picked  up  many 
an  arrowhead  and  tomahawk  and  flints  when  I  been 
a-trottin'  after  my  paw  as  he  was  ploughin'  or  hoein'  in 
the  fields. 

"  It  was  in  18 14,  after  he  come  back  from  fightin' 
Tecumseh,  that  he  married.  My  mother's  name  was 
May  Fuller.  She  lived  at  the  next  farm  down  the 
river.  He  got  to  have  a  liking  for  her,  and  he  asked 
her  would  she  marry  him.  She  was  only  fourteen, 
and  she  says  :  'I'm  too  young.  You'll  have  to  ask 
my  pappy ; '  and  her  pappy,  when  father  had  a  talk 
with  him,  said  the  same  about  her  being  too  young, 
but  he  was  willing  to  have  him  call  on  her.     Things 


2o8  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

might  have  been  all  right  if  it  hadn't  been  that  May 
had  a  stepmother,  who  said  May  shouldn't  have  any- 
thing to  do  with  father,  and  she'd  whip  her  if  she  even 
spoke  to  him.  But  May  did  speak  to  him,  and  her 
stepmother  found  out  about  it,  and  said  she'd  whip  her 
the  next  morning.  Mother  never'd  been  whipped, 
and  she  lay  awake  all  night,  and  very  early,  when  the 
first  birds  began  to  twitter,  she  throwed  her  shoes  out 
the  window  and  crept  downstairs  and  stole  away  into 
the  woods.  She'd  rather  the  b'ars  would  eat  her  up 
than  be  whipped.  Her  folks  was  a-hunting  for  her 
all  day  and  couldn't  find  her,  though  she  was  in  among 
some  grapevines  near  enough  to  the  road  so  she  saw 
her  father  go  along  looking  for  her,  and  her  little 
brother  with  him  crying.  Her  father  come  to  our 
house,  and  grandpaw  try  to  get  him  to  agree  not  to 
punish  May  if  she  come  back,  but  he  said,  '  I  shan't 
say  what  I  will  do  to  her,  now,  when  I  get  my  hands 
on  her.' 

"  He  thought  we  were  a-hiding  of  her,  but  we 
didn't  know  nothing  where  she  was  till  she  come 
around  to  the  house  that  night  after  dark.  For  quite 
a  while  she  was  kept  at  father's  house  nights  and  hid 
in  the  fields  daytimes.  Her  pappy  had  two  men  keep 
a  watch  on  the  house,  but  they  was  more  in  sympathy 
with  her  than  him,  and  they  never  could  see  anything 
suspicious.  Father  said  he  thought  he  and  mother 
better  get  married  and  done  with  it,  and  mother  said 


On  the   Banks  of  the  Ohio 


209 


she  was  wilHng  to  leave  the  decidhig  with  her  older 
brother  Stephen.  *  Whatever  Stephen  says,  I'll  do,' 
she  said.  So  they  had  Stephen  come  and  told  him 
how  things  were,  and  he  put  his  hand  in  his  pocket 
and  took  out  a  handful  of  change  and  gave  to  her,  and 
said,  '  Here,  May,  go  ahead  !  ' 

"  Then  she  and  father  got  in  a  canoe  and  went 
down  to  Portsmouth,  sixty  miles.  It  was  required 
them  times  to  have  their  marriage  intentions  advertised 
from  the  pulpit  by  a  minister  of  the  gospel  for  ten 
days.  But  after  that  they  was  married,  and  then  they 
paddled  home.  Grandpaw  Fuller  never  could  forgive 
that  runaway  wedding  for  a  long  time,  but  he  did 
finally,  and  he  got  to  think  more  of  father  than  any 
son-in-law  he  had." 


Rafts  on  a  Tributary 


IX 


A    VIRGINIA    WONDER 


The  Natural  Bridge 


I 


T  was  evening  at 
the  little  railway 
station  nearest 
the  Natural  Bridge.  I 
had  just  arrived,  and  I 
wanted  to  find  a  lodg- 
ing-place. "  Thar's  a 
big  hotel  three  mile 
from  hyar  up  at  the 
Bridge,"  said  a  man 
to  whom  I  appealed  ; 
"  but  if  you  don't 
want  to  go  so  fur, 
thar's  a  widow  woman 
takes  boarders  hyar 
in  the  village  and  I 
reckon  she'd  take  you. 
She  lives  in  that  thar 
little  brown  house  up 

the  road  whar  you  see  that  thar  man  out  in  front  with 

a  horse  and  buggy." 

210 


A  Virginia  Wonder  211 

I  turned  my  footsteps  thither.  The  man  with  the 
horse  and  buggy  was  trying  to  make  a  sale  of  his 
outfit  to  the  widow.  "  You  c'n  ride  spang  up  to  a 
railroad  engine,"  said  he,  "with  this  hyar  horse  and 
shake  hands  with  the  engineer.  He  don't  mind  no 
more  about  an  engine  than  he  does  about  a  gate-post," 
and  the  man  went  on  to  list  the  horse's  other  virtues, 
—  apparently  it  had  all  there  were  and  no  faults,  — 
"and  I'll  sell  you  the  whole  rig,  horse,  harness, 
hv.ggy,  blanket,  and  whip,  for  one  hundred  and  fifteen 
dollars." 

If  he  told  the  truth  in  regard  to  the  horse,  the  offer 
was  equal  to  any  twenty-nine  cent  bargain  ever  exploited 
in  a  department  store,  but  the  widow  would  not 
decide  until  she  had  consulted  her  relatives.  When 
the  man  left  I  had  no  trouble  in  arranging  for  lodging, 
and  while  the  evening  light  waned  I  sat  on  the  house 
porch  in  company  with  the  widow's  son,  a  near-sighted 
little  boy  who  was  assiduously  reading  Rollins's  "  An- 
cient History."  Reading,  either  for  pleasure  or 
instruction,  is  not  indulged  in  nearly  so  generally  in 
the  South  as  in  the  North,  and  this  boy  conning  that 
dry  old  history  was  something  unique. 

Scarcely  a  stone's  throw  distant  was  the  river  James, 
here  only  a  few  rods  broad  ;  and  not  many  miles  dis- 
tant, along  the  eastern  borders  of  the  valley,  rose  the 
Blue  Ridge  Mountains,  lofty  and  serene.  The  great 
azure  ranges  rolled  up  into  the  eastern  sky  quite  as 


212         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

enticingly  the  next  morning,  and  the  valley  openings 
in  among  them  seemed  to  offer  such  easy  access  to  a 
closer  acquaintance  with  the  wooded  heights  that  I 
could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  at  once  pay  them  a 
visit.  I  crossed  the  river  and  the  intervening  low- 
lands and  entered  a  wide,  half-timbered  glen.  There 
were  occasional  farm-houses,  and  there  were  occasional 
cultivated  fields,  though  these  fields  were  usually  so 
strewn  with  stones  you  had  to  keep  a  sharp  lookout 
to  discern  the  soil.  The  farmers  were  scratching  around 
with  ploughs,  harrows,  and  hoes,  getting  their  corn  into 
the  ground,  and  I  noted  one  field  where  some  boys 
were  planting  an  acre  of  watermelons. 

It  was  an  ideal  spring  day.  The  sky  was  delicately 
blue,  with  here  and  there  a  fluffy  cloud  adrift  on  it;  a 
soft  breeze  kept  the  new  foliage  in  a  constant  ripple  ; 
the  air  was  full  of  warmth  and  was  vibrant  with  the 
twitter  of  birds  and  the  buzzing  of  flies  and  bees. 
Flowers  twinkled  amid  the  greenery,  and  sometimes 
an  azalea  bush  made  a  pink  mass  of  perfume,  while 
everywhere  were  abounding  dogwood  blossoms  look- 
ing like  big  snowflakes  that  had  just  floated  down  into 
the  woodland. 

A  stream  coursed  through  the  glen,  and  at  short 
intervals  where  the  road  encountered  it  were  rocky 
fords  with  an  accompanying  log  spanning  the  current 
for  the  convenience  of  pedestrians.  The  creek  had 
no  sawmills  or  other  manufacturing  establishments  on 


A  Virginia  Wonder 


213 


Planting  Watermelons 

it,  and  its  waters  were  uncommonly  clear.  The  farther 
I  went  the  more  charmingly  pelucid  it  became,  and 
its  music  as  it  rustled  along  over  the  stones  was  a 
genuine  forest  melody.  I  liked  to  pause  and  watch  it, 
and  I  was  allured  to  drink  from  its  cool  rock  pools 
eyery  time  I  crossed  it.  But  perhaps  the  finest  water 
I  had  on  the  trip  was  from  a  little  spring  near  the 
"Anderson  State  House." 


214         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

I  did  not  understand,  when  this  mansion  was  first 
mentioned,  why  there  should  be  a  state-house  in 
so  secluded  and  sparsely  settled  a  mountain  valley. 
However,  I  finally  made  out  that  it  was  simply  the 
old  family  residence  on  the  Anderson  estate.  The 
house  was  large  and  comfortable  looking.  It  was  in  a 
Httle  grove  with  numerous  log  outbuildings  in  the 
rear,  and,  at  some  remove  a  group  of  rude  log  dwellings 
much  decayed  and  battered,  that  before  the  war  had 
been  slave  quarters.  In  a  ravine  in  front  of  the  man- 
sion was  an  emerald-bordered  rivulet.  A  foot-path 
led  thither  to  a  small  log  spring-house  built  directly 
over  the  brook;  and  if  you  looked  through  the  crev- 
ices between  the  logs,  you  saw  earthen  crocks  and 
jars  set  in  the  running  stream.  I  could  not  help 
fancying  that  the  farm  milk,  cream,  and  butter  con- 
tained in  these  receptacles  must  be  superlatively  sweet 
and  appetizing ;  for  was  not  nature  herself  taking  care 
of  them  ?  Here,  too,  was  kept  the  upright,  wooden 
churn,  and  on  a  few  boards  laid  down  on  the  stones 
before  the  door  the  churning  and  butter-making  were 
done.  Spring-houses  are  common  in  the  South  and 
give  the  country  one  of  its  most  idyllic  touches. 

I  drank  from  a  dipping-place  hollowed  out  in  the 
stream  close  beside  the  tiny  log  structure,  and  thus 
frightened  half  a  dozen  timid  minnows  that  made  their 
home  in  the  pool.  Just  as  I  was  rising  from  the 
refreshing  draught  a  barefooted  little  girl  came  tripping 


A  Virginia  Wonder 


215 


down  the  path.     She  gave  a  startled  glance  at  me  from 
the  depths  of  her  sunbonnet  and  ran  back.     Then  her 


A  Spring-house 

father  appeared  and  urged  me  to  accompany  him  to 
the  home  porch,  but  I  preferred  to  sit  and  visit  with 
him  in  the  shadow  of  the  spring-house. 


2i6         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  It  was  on  my  farm,"  said  he,  "  that  the  first  settler 
of  the  valley  built  his  cabin.  His  name  was  Arnold. 
That  was  way  back  in  Indian  times  and  he  made  his 
livin'  by  hunting.  One  time  when  he  was  gone  a  few 
days  to  sell  his  hides  another  feller  come  up  the  valley. 
He  had  stoled  him  a  girl,  and  wanted  to  get  her  away 
from  where  he'd  be  followed  ;  and  he  found  Arnold's 
cabin  and  went  in  and  made  himself  to  home.  By  and 
by  Arnold  come  back  bringin'  a  runlet  of  whiskey  on 
his  shoulder,  and  he  and  the  fellow  that  was  at  his 
cabin  made  friends,  and  the  end  of  it  was  that  Arnold 
give  him  the  kag  of  whiskey  for  the  girl.  Arnold  and 
this  wife  he  bought  with  his  whiskey  lived  in  the  valley 
the  rest  of  their  days,  and  there's  many  of  their  de- 
scendants in  the  country  yet. 

"  I'm  glad  I  met  up  with  you-all,"  remarked  my 
host,  cordially,  when  I  rose  to  go,  and  he  expressed 
regret  that  I  could  not  stay  longer. 

Like  all  Southern  people,  he  had  infinite  leisure. 
The  opinion  is  inherited  from  slavery  times  that  lei- 
sure is  a  natural  right  of  the  white  man  and  that  work 
belongs  to  the  "  niggers."  The  situation  was  once  ex- 
plained to  me  thus  :  "  No,  we  don't  hustle  after  the 
dollar  the  way  you  Yankees  do.  The  Southern  man 
with  enough  money  in  his  pocket  to  live  in  a  manner 
befitting  his  station  this  month,  and  with  fair  prospects 
of  more  for  next  month,  will  not  worry  or  exert  him- 
self because  of  possible  emergencies  in  the  dim  future." 


A  Virginia  Wonder 


217 


I  kept  on  and  on  until  the  zigzagging  rail  fences  that 
had  bordered  the  road  ceased,  and  I  was  ascending 
a  mountain  in  almost  uninterrupted  woodland.  Here 
was  still  an  occasional  little  house  with  a  fenced-in 
garden    patch    and   an    adjoining  field    or  two.     The 


A  Farmer's  Boy 


21 8         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

cows  roamed  free  and  browsed  on  the  low  forest  leaf- 
age. Now  and  then  I  would  see  one  of  them  picking 
about  in  the  underbrush,  and  I  constantly  heard  the 
dull  tink,  tink,  of  the  bells  fastened  to  their  necks. 

Noon  came  and  the  sun  looked  down  into  the  forest 
depths  and  made  the  air  along  the  ribbon  of  roadway 
palpitate  with  heat.  It  was  doubly  warm  climbing, 
and  after  a  time  I  concluded  to  turn  back.  I  was 
getting  hungry,  and  when  I  presently  approached  a 
small  frame  house  and  noted  the  chimney  smoking 
suggestively,  I  clambered  over  the  fence  and  rapped  at 
the  door.  Around  a  table,  inside,  were  a  man  and 
woman  and  a  dozen  children,  more  or  less,  eating 
dinner.  Several  of  the  lesser  youngsters  hastened  to 
poke  their  heads  out  and  have  a  look  at  me.  They 
were  so  begrimed  and  ragged,  they  seemed  more 
heathen  than  civilized ;  but  the  mother  hustled  them 
into  a  back  room  and  set  a  chair  out  on  the  porch  for 
me,  and  when  the  children  reappeared  their  faces  shone 
fresh  from  a  scrubbing. 

The  man  of  the  house  kept  me  company  while  the 
ham,  hot  biscuit,  and  coffee  were  being  prepared. 
There  were  mountains  near  at  hand  which  we  could 
see  over  the  tops  of  the  trees  surrounding  the  little 
clearing.  "  That  thar,"  said  the  farmer,  pointing  to 
one  of  the  heights,  "  is  Panther  Knob  on  the  Wildcat 
Mountain  ;  and  do  you  see  that  bare,  stony  place  on 
it  ?     They  call  that  '  The  Devil's  Marble  Yard.'  " 


A  Virginia  Wonder 


219 


A  Load  of  Logs 

Not  far  from  where  we  sat  was  a  row  of  beehives  on 
the  sunny  side  of  a  log  shed.  "  Is  this  a  good  place 
for  honey-making,  with  the  woods  all  around  ? "  I 
inquired. 

"Oh,  yes,  sir,"  replied  my  companion,  "  thar's  al- 
ways a  crop  of  some  kind  of  flowers  hyar  until  frost 
comes ;  and  we  have  a  heavy  honey  dew  hyar  the  first 
part  of  the  summer  like,  that  on  some  trees  is  just  the 
natural  drops  of  honey.  The  bees  get  all  they  can 
carry  of  that  dew  till  it  dries  off  about  eleven  o'clock." 


220         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

The  children  had  gathered  about  to  listen,  but  now 
the  smallest  one  raised  the  cry  of  "  Scorpion  !  "  He 
had  found  a  gray  lizard  with  a  blue  tail  crawling  up 
the  house  weather-boards,  and  he  and  the  others  all 
grabbed  sticks  and  would  have  killed  it  had  I  not 
taken  its  part.  The  older  members  of  the  family,  as 
well  as  the  younger,  called  it  a  scorpion  and  considered 
it  "  a  powerful  pizenous  varmint." 

Down  the  road  a  short  distance,  in  a  brushy  field, 
was  a  log  schoolhouse  about  sixteen  feet  square. 
There  were  thirty-four  children  in  the  district  of 
school  age,  and  the  building  must  have  been  badly 
crowded  when  school  was  in  session,  but  it  was  in 
fairly  good  condition,  and  harmonized  very  well  with 
the  woodland  scenery  and  the  rugged  blue  mountains 
that  loomed  on  every  side.  Some  of  the  scholars 
continued  in  school  until  they  were  twenty-one,  and 
they  were  allowed  to  go  even  after  that  age  on  pay- 
ment of  a  dollar  a  month.  This  charge,  however,  was 
practically  prohibitive.  I  asked  the  man  at  the  house 
where  I  had  stopped  if  the  older  pupils  did  not  make 
trouble  for  the  teachers. 

"  No,  sir,"  was  his  response,  "  it's  only  the  little 
fellers  that  are  mean  and  devilish.  When  a  boy  gets 
to  be  fifteen  or  over,  he's  ashamed  to  misbehave  thata- 
way." 

I  ate  dinner  in  the  cook-room  —  a  diminutive, 
barren  apartment  with  just  about  space  enough  to  ac- 


A  Sunny  Afternoon 


AND 


TiLDEN  FOUNDATIONS. 


A  Virginia  Wonder  221 

commodate  the  stove  and  a  small  table.  The  table 
was  very  shaky  in  the  legs,  and  wabbled  alarmingly 
every  time  I  attempted  to  cut  my  meat,  and  it  no 
doubt  performed  a  veritable  St.  Vitus's  dance  when  the 
whole  family  were  eating  around  it.  The  day  was 
warm  and  the  atmosphere  in  the  little  cook-room  fairly 
sizzled.  The  stove  was  right  at  my  elbow,  and  I  was 
glad  to  escape  to  the  outer  air  as  soon  as  possible. 

I  arrived  at  my  starting-place  in  the  early  evening, 
and  the  following  morning  I  was  off  for  the  Natural 
Bridge.  The  route  was  not  unlike  that  I  had  trav- 
ersed up  Arnold's  Valley — sometimes  bordered  by 
farm  fields,  but  for  the  most  part  through  lonely 
woodland.  Halfway  there  I  overtook  two  bright  little 
colored  girls,  and  for  a  time  walked  along  in  their 
company.  One  of  them  carried  a  black  hand-bag,  and 
when  we  got  acquainted,  she  confided  that  she  was 
collecting  money  for  the  church.  She  took  out  a  dirty 
card  with  figures  around  the  edge  —  rows  of  ones, 
fives,  and  tens.  Whenever  a  contribution  was  secured, 
a  figure  corresponding  to  the  amount  was  crossed  off 
with  a  lead  pencil.  I  noticed  that  the  pencil  had  been 
used  most  on  the  one-cent  rows. 

We  had  not  gone  far  when  the  girls  pointed  out  an 
elderly  negro  in  a  field  on  the  edge  of  the  woods  and 
said  he  was  their  grandfather.  He  was  splitting  out 
roofing,  and  I  went  over  to  see  how  the  work  was 
done.     He  had  cut  down  an  oak  tree  that  he  thought 


22  2  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 


Splitting  out  Shingles  from  an  Oak 

would  be  straight-grained,  sawed  it  into  three-foot 
lengths,  and  was  now  riving  these  blocks  into  thin 
boards  which  he  later  reduced  to  a  more  even  thick- 
ness on  a  rude  shaving-horse.      I  sat  down  and  we  had 


A  Virginia  Wonder 


223 


a  talk.  He  told  me  he  had  a  little  farm  of  thirty  or 
forty  acres,  and  I  asked  if  he  knew  of  other  colored 
people  who  owned  their  places.  He  paused  in  his 
work,  shut  one  eye,  and  counted   twenty-two  persons 


A  Home  Gateway 


224         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

within  a  mile  who  had  acquired  such  farms.  "  They 
didn't  all  get  'em  fo*  de  right  price,  though,"  said  he. 
"  Hit  seem  like  ev'y  one  want  to  gouge  yo'  dese  days. 
But  I  doan'  let  'em  gouge  me.  I'm  a  little  too  ole 
in  de  haid.      I  done  learnt  a  whole  parcel." 

His  children  were  all  grown  up.  "  I  raised  'em  on 
honest  bread,"  he  explained,  "  an'  dar  ain'  never  one 
of  'em  given  me  no  trouble.  Dey  make  me  proud. 
I  ain'  a  shoutin'  man,  —  an'  I'm  a  Baptis',  too,  —  but 
dey  make  me  so  proud  I  could  jus'  shout  way  over  de 
highest  hill  you  c'n  see.  De  children  are  scattered 
now,  an'  I  got  one  daughter  in  New  York,  an'  hit's  so 
long  since  I  have  hearn  from  her  I  reckon  she  mought 
be  daid." 

Later,  when  I  resumed  the  road,  I  fell  in  with 
another  local  resident,  this  time  a  white  man  who  had 
been  an  officer  in  the  Confederate  army.  I  repeated 
what  the  colored  man  had  said  about  the  prevalence 
of  "  gouging." 

"  Well,"  he  commented,  "  there's  some  queer  things 
in  the  South.  You  take  the  people  in  the  mountains 
over  in  West  Virginia  and  Kentucky  —  they're  good 
enough  until  yo'  do  something  they  don't  like  and 
then  they're  terrible,  and  yo'  got  to  look  out  or  you'll 
get  shot.  The  Virginians  are  different,  and  I  always 
thought  befo'  the  war  they  couldn't  be  equalled  any- 
where ;  but  they  been  deiterating.  They  ain't  what 
they  used  to  be.     A  man  would  despise  to  do  any- 


r- 


Companions 


ASTl' 


^'LD-^  -...UAriOf 


A  Virginia  Wonder  225 

thing  mean  or  underhand  then.  They  were  honorable 
and  trustworthy  and  generous  to  a  fault ;  but  now,  as 
the  nigger  was  tellin'  you,  you  got  to  look  out  for  'em 
or  they'll  gouge  you." 

The  rude,  country  road  I  was  following  at  length 
conducted  me  to  a  group  of  hotels  and  dwellings,  and 
there  I  turned  aside  from  the  highway  and  descended 
a  steep  path  shadowed  by  fine  trees  into  a  deep  valley. 
Here  was  a  brawling  stream,  and  just  around  a  turn 
loomed  the  bridge  close  at  hand,  two  hundred  and 
fifteen  feet  high,  ninety  in  span,  and  one  hundred 
broad.  Its  immensity  quite  took  my  breath  away. 
Nothing  one  has  read  or  imagined  can  wholly  prepare 
the  visitor  for  this  herculean  span  of  rock  across  that 
abysmal  chasm.  Viewed  from  below  it  seems  lifted 
into  the  very  sky.  Trees  and  bushes  grow  on  its  top 
as  on  a  mountain  summit,  and  the  swallows  dart  under 
it  so  far  above  the  spectator  as  to  make  the  arch  appear 
like  another  firmament.  The  grace  and  regularity  of 
the  bridge  suggest  human  handiwork,  but  doubtless 
in  ages  past  the  stream  hollowed  out  a  cavern  in  the 
valley,  the  roof  of  which  all  fell  in  long,  long  ago  save 
for  this  sturdy  fragment. 

Another  interesting  impression  of  the  bridge  is 
obtained  by  climbing  out  of  the  glen  and  following 
the  country  road  across  the  arch.  The  road  is  fenced 
and  is  bordered  by  trees  and  bushes,  and  without 
investigation   you  would  never  suspect  but  that    you 

Q 


226         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

were  on  solid  earth.  Indeed,  it  is  related  that  an 
army  passed  along  this  road  during  the  Civil  War, 
and  not  a  man  of  the  thousands  in  the  command 
realized  at  the  time  that  he  was  crossing  the  famous 
Natural  Bridge. 

The  bridge  began  to  acquire  notoriety  in  colonial 
days,  and  George  Washington  visited  it  on  one  of  his 
youthful  surveying  trips.  We  are  told  that  he  is 
the  only  person  ever  known  to  throw  a  stone  from 
the  bottom  of  the  bridge  to  the  top.  Where  the 
stream  flows  under  the  arch,  he  carved  his  name  on  the 
precipitous  rock  wall  twenty-five  feet  from  the  base 
and  there  you  can  see  it  even  now.  Apparently  he 
took  considerable  pains  to  make  his  inscription  so 
high  up  that  no  one  would  place  a  name  above  it. 
But,  if  so,  he  labored  in  vain,  for  many  a  man  since 
has  made  the  hazardous  scramble  and  put  himself 
on  record  above  Washington's  twenty -five-foot  limit. 
The  most  remarkable  exploit  in  this  line  was  that  of 
a  young  man  who,  early  in  the  last  century,  after  out- 
rivalling  all  his  predecessors  in  the  height  to  which 
he  attained,  found  he  was  placed  in  such  a  situation 
that  it  was  impossible  to  descend. 

To  quote  from  an  account  written  at  the  time : 
"  There  was  no  house  near  whence  his  companions 
could  get  assistance.  He  could  not  long  remain  in 
that  condition,  and  his  friends  looked  upon  him  as 
already   dead,   expecting    every   moment    to    see    him 


A  Virginia  Wonder  227 

precipitated    upon    the    rocks    below    and    dashed    to 
pieces. 

"  Not  so  with  himself.  He  determined  to  ascend. 
Accordingly  he  plied  his  knife,  cutting  places  for  his 
hands  and  feet  in  the  soft  limestone  and  gradually 
ascended  with  great  labor.  His  companions  stood  at 
the  top  of  the  rock  exhorting  and  encouraging  him. 
He  cut  his  way  not  far  from  two  hundred  and  fifty 
feet  from  the  water,  in  a  course  almost  perpendicular; 
and  in  a  little  less  than  two  hours  his  anxious  com- 
panions reached  him  a  pole  from  the  top  and  drew 
him  up.  They  received  him  with  shouts  of  joy;  but 
he  himself  immediately  fainted,  and  it  was  some  time 
before  he  could  be  recovered." 


X 


THE    BATTLE-FIELD    OF    BULL    RUN 


(( 


H 


AVE  a  ride?" 
I  had  started 
on  a  six-mile 
walk  from  Manassas, 
or  Manassah,  as  it  is 
called  locally,  to  the 
historic  battle  -  field, 
and  a  carriage  driven 
by  a  young  man  had 
overtaken  me.  The 
carriage  stopped  and  I 
climbed  in.  At  my 
companion's  feet  in 
the  bottom  of  the  ve- 
hicle was  a  square 
black  valise,  and  he 
informed  me  that  he 
was  making  a  raid  on 
the  South  with  a  Yankee  patent  medicine.  I  could 
not  help  thinking  that  the  patent  medicine  would 
probably  prove  more  deadly  than  the  Northern  bullets 
had  in  the  late  war. 

228 


Stone  Bridge  over  Bull  Run 


The  Battle-field  of  Bull  Run  229 

The  country  round  about  dipped  and  rose  in  slight 
ravines  and  low  hills,  with  open  fields  and  patches  of 
woodland  following  each  other  interminably.  Houses 
were  few  and  far  between.  Most  of  them  were  set  well 
back  from  the  highway,  at  the  end  of  a  lane  to  which 
you  gained  entrance  from  the  main  road  by  a  big 
wooden  gate.  The  lane  was  sometimes  bordered  by 
trees,  but  was  seldom  fenced.  It  led  more  or  less 
directly  through  a  great  field  that  was  perhaps  under 
cultivation,  yet  oftenest  was  a  pasture  for  horses  and 
cattle.  Barns  were  small  and  unsubstantial,  and  fre- 
quently a  few  makeshift  hovels  sufliced  instead.  Many 
farmers  kept  their  cows  and  horses  in  long,  rude  sheds, 
eight  or  ten  feet  high,  with  sides  of  rails  and  poles,  and 
the  top  piled  over  with  straw.  There  was  no  pretence 
that  the  roof  was  rain-proof,  and  the  structures  looked 
as  if  they  had  been  contrived  by  some  primitive  race 
of  savages. 

The  soil  was  a  red  clay,  and  the  roads  were  the 
color  of  brick.  They  ran  very  straight  for  the  most 
part ;  but  they  were  rutted  and  rough,  and  I  got  well 
shaken  while  I  was  being  taken  by  the  patent  medicine 
man,  and  of  course  he  fared  the  same.  "  I  feel  like  a 
kernel  of  corn  in  a  popper,"  said  he,  "and  I'm  afraid 
these  jolts  will  drive  my  spinal  column  up  through  my 


cranium." 


He  stopped  his  horse  once,  when  we  met  a  native, 
and  made  some  derogatory  remark  about  the  road,  but 


230         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

the  native  assured  us  that  it  was  very  good  compared 
with  its  winter  condition.  "  There's  mud  then,  shore," 
was  his  comment,  "and  it  sticks  closer  than  a  brother; 
and  it's  so  deep  your  horse  can't  hardly  get  along  even 
without  a  load.  I  reckon  the  mud  always  has  a  bottom, 
but  in  winter  it  seem  like  there  was  spots  where  the 
bottom  was  too  far  down  to  find." 

Of  all  the  roads  that  I  became  acquainted  with  in 
this  region,  the  worst  was  the  Warrenton  Pike  right 
on  the  battle-field.  At  some  remote  period  a  vast 
amount  of  stone  had  been  dumped  on  it,  and  this  stone 
had  become  more  or  less  mixed  with  the  red  clay. 
The  road  may  have  been  fairly  good  in  that  long-gone 
summer  when  the  Federal  troopers  marched  out  on  it 
from  Washington  ;  but,  if  so,  I  should  judge  that  during 
the  battle  the  cannon-balls  and  bursting  shells  had  shot 
it  all  to  pieces  and  that  it  had  never  been  repaired 
since  —  yet  it  is  an  important  highway.  I  saw  a  huck- 
ster's team  toiling  over  it  going  to  the  capital,  thirty 
miles  distant.  The  wagon  was  a  big  covered  cart 
loaded  with  crates  of  live  fowls,  boxes  of  eggs,  and 
other  produce.  It  was  drawn  by  four  horses  and 
came  twenty  miles  or  more  from  Rappahannock  County, 
a  county  without  railroads.  How  it  did  sway  and  jar! 
I  pitied  the  chickens,  and  fancied  the  eggs  must  become 
omelets  by  the  time  they  reached  the  journey's  end. 

I  think  many  casual  students  of  history  have  the 
impression  that  the  battle-field  took  its  name  from  the 


The  Battle-field  of  Bull  Run 


231 


disorderly    haste   with  which    the    Northern    soldiers 
departed  after  the  fight,  but  in  reality  the  name  comes 


A  Huckster's  Team  on  the  Way  to  Washington 

from  that  of  a  mild,  muddy  little  river  near  which  the 
engagement  was  fought.  At  the  beginning  of  the  con- 
flict the  Confederate  lines  extended  along  the  western 
branch  of  Bull  Run  for  seven  miles.  The  left  flank 
was  in  the  vicinity  of  a  stone  bridge  on  the  Warrenton 
Pike,  and  there,  soon  after  sunrise,  on  a  scorching  July 
day  of  1 86 1,  the  battle  opened.  No  very  vigorous 
attempt  was  made,  however,  to  force  a  passage  of  the 
stream  at  this  point,  and  the  main  body  of  Federals 
made  a  long  detour  and  crossed  unopposed.  When 
these  troops  arrived  on  the  field  the  struggle  began  in 


232  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

earnest  and  the  Confederates  were  forced  back  for 
about  a  mile  across  a  shallow  valley.  But  on  the  far 
side  of  the  valley  they  formed  along  the  crest  of  a  slope, 
and  the  Union  troops  assailed  them  in  vain.  "  Look 
at  Jackson's  brigade  !  "  said  the  Southern  General  Bee 
in  the  crisis  of  the  battle,  pointing  to  the  troops  that 
were  bearing  the  brunt  of  the  attacks.  "  It  stands 
there  like  a  stone  wall ;  "  and  thus  originated  the  name 
which  later  became  inseparable  from  the  brigade's 
famous  commander. 

Again  and  again  the  Federal  regiments  charged  up 
the  exposed  slope,  but  a  frontal  attack  on  that  grounc 
was  doomed.  The  assailants  were  cut  to  pieces  every 
time,  and  when,  about  the  middle  of  the  afternoon, 
the  Confederates  were  reenforced  and  charged  in  their 
turn,  the  Union  forces  gave  way.  They  retreated 
grudgingly, contesting  thegrounduntil  they  were  beyond 
Bull  Run.  Two  miles  farther  on  was  another  little  river 
—  Cub  Run  by  name  —  and  on  the  turnpike  between  the 
two  streams  were  many  army  wagons.  Here,  too,  were 
numerous  carriages  that  had  brought  out  the  gentry  of 
Washington  to  see  the  Northern  soldiers  "  thrash  the 
Rebs."  Near  Cub  Run,  several  steep-sided  ridges 
ran  athwart  the  turnpike,  and  the  road  was  so  extremely 
rough  it  might  well  make  trouble  even  if  there  was 
no  excitement.  As  soon  as  the  drivers  and  onlookers 
along  the  turnpike  became  aware  that  the  Federals 
were  failing  to  give  the  Rebs  their  thrashing,  the  wagons 


The  Battle-field  of  Bull   Run 


^3?> 


and  carriages  turned  about  in  all  haste  to  seek  safety, 
and  things  grew  chaotic.  Then  a  Confederate  battery 
began  dropping  shells  into  the  huddle  of  teams  and 
the  wildest  confusion  ensued.  Every  man  looked  out 
for  himself,  wagons  were  overturned,  horses  cut  loose, 
the  road  was  blocked,  and  the  retreat  of  the  army 
became  a  panic-stricken  rout. 

One  man  I  met  at  Bull  Run  had  been  a  Union 
soldier.  In  explanation  of  this  first  great  Northern 
defeat  he  had  a  theory  which  I  thought  very  interest- 
ing.    "  At    the    time    the    war    broke  out,"    said    he, 


The  Spot  where  Stonewall  Jackson  was  Wounded 


"guns  were  in    much   commoner    use    in    the    South 
than  in  the  North,  and  familiarity  with  weapons  has  a 


234  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

great  deal  to  do  with  making  troops  effective  in  battle. 
The  Southern  men,  too,  were  more  accustomed  to  the 
saddle,  and  so,  as  a  whole,  they  had  better  cavalry. 
But  they  never  at  any  time  had  better  soldiers  than 
the  men  from  our  newer  states.  I'm  not  saying  those 
from  the  older  states  had  less  natural  courage  than 
those  from  the  frontiers  ;  only  that  they  in  the  begin- 
ning were  at  a  disadvantage  in  the  matter  of  shooting 
and  rough  living.  About  all  the  Confederate  veterans 
I've  talked  with  have  the  idea  one  of  their  men  was 
equal    to    three    or    four    of  ours ;  but    after   making 


.  .  f-trp- 


On  the  Battle-field 


allowance  for  the  advantage  of  being  on  the  defensive 
and  in  their  home  country,  they  didn't  average  a  bit 
better'n  we  did  after  our  men  got  trained. '* 


The   Battle-field  of  Bull   Run 


^3S 


The  Bull  Run  losses  in  killed  and  wounded  were 
two  or  three  thousand  on    a  side  —  not  nearly  what 


Feeding  the  Calf 

they  were  in  many  other  battles  of  the  war,  but  few 
conflicts  were  so  momentous  in  their  results.  The 
victory  gave  the  Southern  cause  backbone  and 
brought  to  its  aid  thousands  of  waverers.  Had  the 
South  suffered  a  decisive  defeat,  armed  opposition  to 
the  government  might  have  crumbled  entirely  away. 
Three  or  four  houses   still  exist  on  the  battle-field 


2^6         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

that  were  there  during  the  fight.  Notable  among 
these  Is  a  large  stone  house  beside  the  Pike  that  was 
used  as  a  hospital  by  both  armies.  Another  is  a 
log  dwelling  occupied  in  war  time  by  a  family  named 
Matthew.  I  got  acquainted  on  the  road  with  one  of 
the  present  occupants  of  the  Matthew  house,  and  at 
parting  he  invited  me  to  call  on  him.  "  Come  in  at 
meal-time,  or  any  time,  suh,"  said  he,  with  true  South- 
ern cordiality. 

This  invitation  I  found  it  convenient  to  accept  a 
day  or  two  later,  and  I  shared  the  family  dinner,  pay- 
ment for  which  was  absolutely  refused.  "  We  don't 
never  charge  nothing  to  nobody,"  said  my  hostess. 
The  dinner  was  an  excellent  one  of  the  humbler  South- 
ern type  and  I  enjoyed  it,  save  that  the  milk  and 
butter  tasted  too  emphatically  of  the  wild  onions  that 
grew  on  the  cows'  grazing  ground. 

I  asked  my  entertainers  if  they  ever  picked  up  relics 
on  the  battle-field,  and  one  of  the  boys  brought  forth 
a  pan  full  of  bullets,  brass  buttons,  and  other  rubbish. 
Sometimes  the  plough  turned  them  out,  sometimes  the 
field  streams  formed  by  heavy  rains  washed  them  into 
sight.  Certain  bullets  of  peculiar  shape  they  said  were 
poisoned,  but  they  could  give  me  no  authority  for 
this  belief.  They  occasionally  found  bones,  and  they 
told  me  that  in  a  brier  patch  in  one  of  the  fields  was 
quite  a  pile  of  them  thrown  together  around  a  stake. 

My  hostess  had  been  a  little  girl  in  war  days.    "We 


THE  NEW  YORK 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


ASTUF^    LENOX   AND 
TILDEN   FOUNDATIONS. 


3*^, 


•: 


^^SM:^ 


mt> 


IL,. 


A  Pitcher  of  Milk 


The  Battle-field  of  Bull  Run  237 

lived  at  Thoroughfare  Gap,"  she  said,  "  and  the  sol- 
diers was  goin'  back  and  forth  there  all  the  time.  We 
was  very  well  treated  usually,  but  I  reckon  we  got 
along  better  than  most.  The  troubles  that  people  tell 
about  was  mainly  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  laws 
wa'n't  very  well  enforced  and  everybody  got  to  sellin' 
whiskey.  So  it  was  easy  for  the  soldiers  to  get  drunk, 
and  then  you  wouldn't  know  what  they'd  do.  For  a 
long  time  we  had  some  Union  troops  camped  jus'  out- 
side my  mother's  fence.  We  was  for  the  South,  but 
they  never  done  us  no  harm,  and  often  they'd  come 
in  and  talk  very  friendly  with  mother,  and  with  father, 
too,  who  was  an  invalid  and  couldn't  get  around  much. 

"  We  had  four  or  five  cows,  and  the  cows  had  to 
feed  right  on  the  soldiers  camping-ground.  I  used  to 
go  after  the  cows  every  night,  and  a  good  many  times 
the  soldiers  would  help  me  get  'em.  I  was  a  little  shy 
of  the  soldiers  at  first,  but  I  got  over  that  pretty  soon. 
Maw,  she'd  always  have  drinkin'  water  ready  for  'em, 
and  when  they  were  marching  past,  she'd  tell  me  to 
carry  it  out  to  'em.  Sometimes  she'd  do  cooking  for 
'em.  She  say  they  were  away  from  their  mother  and 
she  couldn't  be  rough  to  'em.  She  never  make  no 
charge  for  what  she  do,  but  they  was  boun'  to  pay, 
and  if  she  wouldn't  take  nothing,  they'd  give  money 
to  us  children. 

"  One  time  some  of  Mosby's  rebel  cavalry  made  a 
raid  up  that  way.     They  cleaned  out  Mawmaw's  meat 


238  Highways  and   Byways  of  the   South 

house  —  stole  all  there  was  In  It  —  and  she  told  *em, 
^  The  Northern  men  treat  me  a  heap  better'n  you-all 
do.'  Oh,  she  had  a  powerful  talk  with  'em.  They 
took  everything  they  had  any  use  for  wherever  they 
were.  I  remember  they  had  their  horses  hitched  down 
the  road,  and  father  and  my  brother  Tom  went  to 
look  at  the  critters,  and  Tom,  he  took  particular  notice 
of  one,  and  he  said:  'Pap,  I  know  this  horse.  It's 
got  a  glass  eye.  It's  Aunt  Betsey's  horse;'  and  It 
was.  Mosby's  men  had  stolen  It,  but  we  didn't  dare 
try  to  get  it  or  make  any  fuss. 

"  I  lived  at  Thoroughfare  Gap  until  I  growed  up 
and  ran  away  to  Washington  to  get  married.  Then 
I  come  hyar." 

In  all  this  section  of  the  South  running  away  to  get 
married  was  accounted  rather  the  nicest  method  for  a 
young  couple  to  become  man  and  wife,  and  the  easiest 
way  to  have  a  wedding  trip.  A  railroad  conductor  on 
the  line  that  traverses  the  Shenandoah  Valley  told  me 
his  train  carried  on  an  average  three  runaway  couples 
a  day.  "You  c'n  always  tell  a  wedding  couple  —  you 
bet  you  can,"  said  he.  "They  think  It  Is  something 
big  to  get  away  from  home  to  marry.  Hagarstown  is 
their  popular  resort  on  my  line.  One  minister  there 
has  been  marrying  five  hundred  a  year  right  along, 
and  that's  a  devil  of  a  mess  of  them.  His  usual  fees 
are  from  twenty-five  cents  to  five  dollars.  He  won't 
take  anything  less  than  a  quarter,  and  he's   turned  a 


The  Battle-field  of  Bull   Run 


^39 


many  of  'em  down  because  they  hadn't  that  quarter. 
I  know  of  one  couple  that  went  up  to  Hagarstown 
and  got  married,  and  then  didn't  have  money  to  take 
'em  both  home.  It  was  seventy  miles,  and  she  went 
along  alone  on  the  regular  train  and  he  beat  his  way 
back  on  a  freight." 

The  last  forenoon  that  I  spent  on  the  battle-field  a 
shower  overtook  me,  and  I  made  haste  to  the  nearest 
shelter.  This  proved  to  be  a  house  that  in  ante- 
bellum days  was  the  dwelling  of  a  negro,  "  Ole  Jim 
Robinson."  He  was  free  himself,  but  he  married  a 
slave,  and  therefore  his  children  were  all  born  into 
bondage.     Two  of  them   he  bought.     The   house  at 


A  Ford 


240         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

the  tune  of  the  war  was  a  small  log  cabin.  It  has 
been  added  to  since,  but  the  older  portion  is  practi- 
cally what  it  was,  and  there  are  numerous  bullet-holes 
in  the  weather-boarding.  Some  of  the  trees,  too,  in 
the  yard  still  bear  the  scars  of  battle.  Ole  Jim  Rob- 
inson's son  now  lives  in  the  house  and  cares  for  the 
little  farm  that  goes  with  it.  He  came  in  out  of  the 
rain  soon  after  I  did  and  reported  that  he  had  seen 
the  tracks  of  a  'possum  on  the  borders  of  the  corn-field 
where  he  had  been  "  harr'in'." 

"  Is  you  ?  "  said  his  wife.  "  Well,  yo'  let  him  alone. 
Doan'  yo'  bring  no  possum  into  dis  house." 

"  Mother  won't  eat  'possum,"  explained  the  man. 
"  She  say  dey  look  too  easy.  Yo'  know  when  dey 
git  ketched  hit  always  seem  like  dey  laughin'  an' 
dev  lie  still  an'  make  believe  dey  daid  —  an'  when  dey 
think  yo'  left  'em  dey  creep  off  jus'  as  mean  !  We 
hunt  'em  in  de  night  an'  tree  'em  wid  a  dog.  If 
de  possum  git  in  a  small  tree,  we  knock  him  out,  an' 
if  de  tree  is  large,  we  sometimes  cut  it  down  an* 
sometimes  climb  up  it.  We  mos'  gener'ly  ketch  de 
'possum  alive.  He'll  bite  yo'  if  he  can,  an'  we  tote 
him  home  by  puttin'  his  tail  in  a  split  stick  dat  pinch 
it  tight  an'  keep  him  remind  dat  he  is  ketched.  We 
carry  de  stick  over  our  shoulder,  an'  when  we  git 
home,  v/e  put  him  under  a  tub  to  stay  till  nex'  day." 

I  was  in  the  family  living  room — a  cluttered  kitchen 
with   broken    and  grimy  plastering,  and,  conspicuous 


The   Battle-field  of  Bull   Run  241 

among  its  humble  furnishings,  a  bed  and  two  tables 
beneath  which  was  a  medley  of  pots,  kettles,  boxes, 
and  odds  and  ends.  A  fireplace  served  to  do  all  the 
cooking,  for  the  Robinsons  had  no  stove.  At  one 
side  of  it  was  a  pile  of  wood  and  chips  and  on  the 
other  side  a  basket  covered  with  a  bag — the  tempo- 
rary quarters  of  a  brood  of  young  ducks.  Two  clocks 
stood  on  the  mantle  with  a  lantern  between  them. 
One  clock  did  not  go  and  the  other  was  far  from  cor- 
rect. "  In  slavery  times  we  never  had  no  clocks," 
said  the  woman,  "  so  I  never  learnt  to  take  care  of 
'em,  an'  I  doan'  have  anything  to  do  wid  'em  now. 
My  ole  man,  he  doan'  tend  to  'em  very  good  either, 
an'  sometimes  dey'll  be  unwound  three  or  four  days." 

In  one  corner  was  a  bureau,  and  on  top  was  the 
family  library  consisting  of  a  Bible  and  a  recent  sub- 
scription-book life  of  Queen  Victoria.  I  asked  the 
woman  if  she  had  read  the  latter,  and  she  replied 
jocosely  :  "  Good  gracious  of  Father  !  I  cain't  read. 
What  talkin'  about !  I  never  went  to  school  an'  I 
doan'  know  nothin'  much.  I  been  workin'  in  de 
cotton  patch  nearly  all  mv  life  either  hyar  or  down  in 
Georgy.  I  was  raised  hvar,  but  after  I  marry,  I  an' 
my  ole  man  was  sol'  an'  took  down  in  Georgy." 

"  Where  were  you  in  Georgia  ?  "   I  inquired. 

"  Well,  dat  gets  me.  'Deed,  I  cain't  tell  yo'  to 
save  my  life.  I  done  forgot,  but  hit  was  a  right  smart 
step   from  hyar.      My  master  dar  was    a  good  man. 


242         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

but  his  wife  was  a  rattlesnake.  Sho's  you  born  she 
was  !  She  said  I'd  been  sp'iled,  an'  so  I  got  my  back 
whipped.'* 

The  shower  which  had  interrupted  my  rambling  was 
soon  over,  but  it  was  then  noon  and  I  was  hungry.  I 
asked  Mrs.  Robinson  if  she  could  get  dinner  for  me. 
I  was  quite  ready  to  eat  whatever  her  larder  afforded, 
and  she  hustled  around  in  preparation,  and  two  little 
boys,  Jimmy  and  Albert,  her  grandsons,  helped.  She 
adjusted  the  smouldering  sticks  in  the  fireplace  and 
had  Jimmy  fan  the  embers  into  a  blaze  with  a  turkey 
wing.  "  Albert,"  said  she,  pointing  to  the  chips,  "  yo' 
put  on  dat  trash  dar.  Make  has',  or  the  kittle  won't 
boil  till  night.  God  knows  it  won't.  Dis  gemmen's 
hungry.  Well,  I  do  think  in  my  soul  yo'  won't  hurry 
to  save  no  one's  life.  Now  bring  in  some  brush  from 
the  yaird." 

She  mixed  up  a  pan  of  batter  and  went  to  the  door 
to  see  why  Albert  had  not  returned.  The  wind  had 
blown  down  a  big  limb  from  a  cherry  tree  near  the 
house  during  the  previous  night,  and  the  youngster 
was  breaking  off  dead  twigs  for  the  fire  and  at  the 
same  time  eating  green  cherries.  "Albert,  yo'  come 
hyar  !  "  she  exclaimed  severely.  "  If  yo'  don't,  I'll 
half  kill   yo'." 

The  boy  approached  reluctantly,  and  she  knocked 
from  his  hands  the  cherries  that  he  still  retained,  "  I 
reckon  I'll  have  to  be  po'in'  the  medicine  into  you  all 


A  Negro's  Woodpile 


THE  NE\'^  '"-'RkI 


ASTOn,   LENuX    ~  ,.. 
TILDEN   FOUNDATIONS. 


The  Battle-field  of  Bull   Run  243 

de  time  if  you  doan'  leave  dem  cherries  alone,"  said 
she. 

Meanwhile  the  fire  had  been  getting  low  for  lack  of 
fuel,  and  she  went  out  herself  to  see  about  the  where- 
withal for  its  replenishing.  The  woodpile  was  reduced 
to  one  long,  tough  stick  ;  but  she  chopped  off  an  end 
and  scraped  up  a  few  chips  and  presently  had  the  fire 
briskly  blazing.  Then  she  took  a  spade  minus  a 
handle  that  served  as  a  fire  shovel  and  poked  some 
coals  out  on  the  hearth.  Over  the  coals  she  set  a 
long-legged  griddle  which  she  had  Jimmy  wipe  off 
and  grease.  He  seemed  to  be  expert  at  this  task,  and 
I  hinted  that  he  could  probably  do  the  cooking  for  the 
whole  family  if  necessary. 

Jimmy  giggled,  and  his  grandmother  said  reprov- 
ingly:  "  Wha'  yo'  laughin'  at?  I'll  take  sompin'  and 
knock  yo'  down.  If  I  'pen'  on  you  fo'  a  cook,  I 
reckon  I'd  pe'ish." 

At  length  the  "  flam  cakes  "  were  fried,  the  tea  was 
ready,  and  she  had  Jimmy  crawl  under  the  bed  and  ex- 
hume some  knives,  forks,  and  spoons  from  a  box. 
These  he  handed  up  one  at  a  time,  and  she  wiped 
each  in  turn  and  placed  it  on  the  table.  She  also 
provided  a  remnant  of  cold  ham,  and  a  little  white 
sugar  in  a  broken  bowl.  Yet  the  meal,  though  rude 
and  long  delayed,  was  not  unpalatable,  and  my  visit 
in  that  negro  home  was  one  of  the  most  interesting  of 
my  experiences  on  the  battle-field. 


XI 


JOHN    BROWN  S    TOWN 


H 


A  RPE  R'S 
FERRY  is 

the  most  pic- 
turesque village  I  have 
seen  in  America.  The 
surrounding  scenery  is 
beautiful  and  impres- 
sive —  steep,  wooded 
mountains,  cliffs,  and 
tangled  hills,  and  the 
Shenandoah  and  Po- 
tomac rivers  flowing 
through  the  valley 
depths.  In  the  angle, 
where  the  two  rivers 
unite,  stands  the  town, 

built  tier  on  tier  along 

A  Doorstep  Maid  i.u       i    „         c  u         *. 

^  the  slopes  or  an  abrupt 

and  lofty  hill.     Some  of  the  buildings  are  many  stories 

high  on  the  lower  side.     They  are  usually  of  brick  or 

stone,  and  have  frequent  dormer  windows  in  the  roofs, 

244 


John  Brown's  Town  245 

Immense  chimneys,  and  quaint  piazzas  and  porches.  I 
was  constantly  reminded  of  ancient  Edinburgh,  and 
I  do  not  know  where  else  I  could  go  either  South  or 
North  to  get  such  a  flavor  of  trans-Atlantic  archi- 
tecture and  venerableness. 

Evidently  the  village  was  formerly  more  populous  ; 
for  vacant,  half-ruinous  structures  are  common,  and 
windowless,  staring  walls  are  not  lacking.  The  streets 
ire  narrow  and  rough,  the  walks  of  uneven  slabs  of 
tone.  A  Catholic  church  perched  on  a  blufi-'  above 
the  hamlet  does  much  to  give  the  place  distinction.  It 
has  a  tall  spire  surmounted  by  a  golden  cross,  and 
wherever  you  go  you  see  this  church  looming  sky- 
ward. The  chief  approach  to  it  Is  by  irregular  terraces 
of  steps  cut  in  the  solid  rock,  and  these  steps  climb 
upward  between  various  old  houses  and  shanties  and 
shabby  garden  fences. 

I  arrived  at  Harper's  Ferry  in  the  evening,  and  was 
no  sooner  off  the  train  than  I  was  accosted  by  a  ragged, 
barefooted  little  boy,  who  said  his  name  was  Benjamin 
Harrison  Butts.  He  wanted  to  guide  me  to  a  lodging- 
place.  His  recommendations  of  the  particular  house 
he  would  have  me  patronize  were  very  ardent  —  the 
rooms,  the  food,  and  the  woman  who  kept  it  were  all 
superlative,  and  I  allowed  him  to  take  me  In  charge. 
The  house  proved  to  be  an  antiquated  structure  with 
extremely  thick  stone  walls,  on  a  narrow  street,  neigh- 
boring a  number  of  similar  dwellings. 


246         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

I  thought  the  village  quite  rural  and  domestic  when 
I  awoke  the  next  morning,  for  although  there  was  a 
rumble  of  wheels  on  the  rough  town  ways,  I  at  the 
same  time  heard  roosters  crowing,  and  the  twitter  of 
swallows  as  they  darted  above  the  housetops,  and  the 
daybreak  carols  of  other  birds.  Just  before  going 
downstairs  to  breakfast  I  looked  out  of  my  window 
and  saw  the  proprietor  of  a  shop  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  street  seated  in  front  of  his  place  of  business 
with  a  little  rifle  across  his  knees.  He  was  watching 
for  rats,  and  this  was  his  chief  employment  the  day 
through.  He  had  sprinkled  some  corn  on  the  walk 
to  entice  his  game  from  beneath  the  building,  and 
whenever  a  rat  came  in  sight,  he  crouched  stealthily 
forward,  took  careful  aim,  and  banged  away.  I  did 
not  see  any  other  hunters  among  the  village  tradesmen, 
but  they  all  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  in  front  of  their 
emporiums  idling  at  their  ease,  absorbing  tobacco,  and 
talking  with  such  loiterers  as  chose  to  stop.  Some  of 
their  shops  were  very  curious  little  affairs  and  had  old- 
fashioned  show  windows  that  were  nightly  protected 
against  intruders  by  folding  wooden  shutters. 

Benjamin  Harrison  Butts  waylaid  me  while  I  was 
making  my  first  tour  of  the  town,  and  nothing  would 
do  but  he  must  show  me  around.  In  his  opinion  one 
of  the  chief  attractions  of  the  vicinity  was  "John 
Brown's  Cave,"  and  we  went  two  miles  up  the  river 
and  found  a  low  tunnel-like  aperture  running  back  into 


John   Brown's  Town 


247 


An  Old  Mill 

a  cliff  beside  the  railway.  There  is  a  tradition  that 
Brown  lived  in  the  cave  for  a  time  ;  but  he  probably 
never  knew  of  it,  though  it  is  not  by  any  means  insig- 
nificant, and  has  a  length  of  a  mile  or  more,  and 
expands  here  and  there  into  considerable  chambers. 

Not  far  beyond  the  cave,  in  a  half-wooded  hollow, 
through  which  courses  a  swift  little  tributary  of  the 
Potomac,  stands  an  ancient  grist-mill.     It  is  a  good- 


248         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

sized  stone  structure,  with  a  slow-revolving  overshot 
wheel  on  one  side.  Close  by,  just  above  a  ford,  was  a 
footbridge,  one  plank  broad,  and  here  two  boys  were 
paddling  about  in  the  water.  An  older  sister  was  with 
them.  She  was  planning  to  go  fishing,  for  she  had  a 
hoe  and  was  digging  in  likely  spots  alongshore  for 
worms  to  use  as  bait.  Meanwhile  the  boys  were  busy 
with  a  small  tin  can  into  which  they  hoped  to  inveigle 
some  innocent  minnows.  Benjamin  Harrison  Butts 
was  interested  in  their  wiles  with  the  tin  can,  and  went 
and  advised  with  them.  He  was  a  fisherman  himself, 
and  had  several  hooks  stuck  through  the  lapel  of  his 
coat  ready  for  instant  use  when  the  occasion  demanded. 
He  became  so  absorbed  that  he  was  reluctant  to  go 
farther  with  me,  and  I  left  him  behind.  His  excuse 
for  staying  was  that  he  did  not  feel  well.  He  thought 
the  weather  was  unusually  warm  for  the  month  of 
May.  "  When  the  sun  is  so  hot  this  time  of  year," 
said  he,  "it  gives  you  the  spring  fever  —  the  *  hardly 
able '  fever.". 

On  my  way  back  I  stopped  at  a  schoolhouse  for 
colored  children.  It  was  decidedly  better  than  the 
average  of  buildings  devoted  to  negro  child  education, 
and  was  quite  presentable,  though  some  of  the  window- 
panes  were  broken  and  the  holes  stopped  with  papers 
and  rags.  The  interior  was  fairly  good,  too ;  the  seats 
were  modern,  and  on  the  walls  were  a  number  of  maps 
and  unframed  pictures.     The  master  was  an  Intelligent 


John  Brown's  Town 


249 


and  well-educated  young  man,  and  I  thought  he  was 
doing  excellent  work.  He  had  a  kindly  way  with  the 
children,  and  yet  I  noticed  a  savage-looking  strap 
hanging   conveniently   near  his  desk.      During  recita- 


A  Question 


250         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

tlons  the  children  ordinarily  remained  in  their  seats 
and  rose  when  they  were  called  on  by  the  master ;  but 
for  spelling  they  stood  in  a  straggling  semicircle  around 
the  platform.  They  did  a  good  deal  of  wriggling  dur- 
ing the  spelling,  even  turned  their  backs  to  the  teacher, 
or  rested  one  foot  on  the  platform,  or  retired  a  few 
paces  and  leaned  against  a  desk ;  and  one  boy  went 
clear  to  the  rear  of  the  room  and  spit  out  of  the  door 
and  leisurely  returned.  But  the  children  were  amiable 
and  bright,  and  they  acquitted  themselves  on  the  whole 
very  creditably. 

The  great  event  in  the  history  of  Harper's  Ferry 
was  John  Brown's  raid,  in  the  autumn  of  1 859.  Every 
one  in  town  knows  the  story  of  it,  and  many  person- 
ally experienced  its  terror.  A  monument  near  the 
railway  station  marks  the  place  where  formerly  was 
"John  Brown's  Fort,"  as  the  small  brick  fire-engine 
house  came  to  be  called  in  which  he  made  his  final 
defence.  The  raid  was  a  thunderbolt  out  of  a  clear 
sky.  To  quote  a  citizen  with  whom  I  talked  in  his 
home  kitchen,  "  We  were  as  much  surprised  as  you 
would  be  if  I  was  to  pick  up  that  tea-kettle  there  on 
the  stove  and  throw  it  at  your  head." 

The  town  was  at  that  time  a  place  of  five  thousand 
inhabitants,  and  its  chief  industry  was  the  manufacture 
of  arms  in  a  government  armory.  Brown,  with  his 
companions,  some  months  preceding  their  foray,  rented 
a  farm  five  miles  distant  on  the  Maryland  side  of  the 


THE  NEW  YORK 

Pi •  ■  :.:brary 


1 


ASTUh,   LiNOX   AND 
TILD£N  FOUNDATIONS. 


A  Chat  on  the  Road 


John   Brown's  Town  251 

Potomac.  It  lay  in  a  seeluded  woodland  hollow  among 
the  high  hills,  and  their  home  was  a  two-story  log  house 
no  longer  standing.  The  region,  however,  is  much 
the  same  as  it  was  then,  though  the  cultivated  area  and 
number  of  families  has  somewhat  increased.  Another 
building  which  figured  in  the  raid  was  a  small  log 
schoolhouse  about  a  mile  back  from  the  river.  It's 
site  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  a  man  who  lived  close 
by.  He  was  just  coming  out  of  his  home  gate,  and 
I  was  returning  from  a  visit  to  the  farm  Brown  had 
rented.  "  Thar's  whar  it  stood,"  said  he,  "  right  over 
the  fence  near  that  brook  you  see  yonder.  Brown 
intentioned  to  make  it  a  depot  of  arms,  and  three  of 
his  men  got  in  thar  endurin'  the  night  of  the  raid  and 
filled  it  up  with  pikes  and  rifles,  and  when  the  school- 
master come  they  made  him  prisoner  and  drove  away 
the  scholars.  John  Smith  —  that  was  what  Brown 
called  himself — and  the  rest  of  'em  had  been  aroun' 
hyar  most  of  the  summer.  They  attended  chu'ch  right 
smart,  and  they  were  all  nice  gentlemen.  Ever'body, 
pretty  much,  liked  'em,  and  we  had  no  i-dea  about 
their  havin'  an  insurrection.  I  used  to  meet  Brown  on 
the  road  now  and  then.  I  ricolect  I  met  him  over  to 
SnufFtown  one  day.  That's  a  place  got  its  name  when 
thar  wa'n't  only  three  or  four  families  livin'  thar,  and 
they  all  chewed  snuff.  People  hyar  have  all  called  it 
Snufftown  ever  since,  though  the  name  in  writin'  is 
Elk  Ridge. 


252  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  This  place  whar  I  Hve  is  Pleasant  Grove,  but  it 
use'  to  be  called  Mosquitoesville.  I  don't  know  why. 
Thar  ain't  no  mosquitoes  hyar.  You  have  to  have 
stagnated  water  to  raise  mosquitoes,  and  we  only  got 
running  brooks. 

"  Wal,  about  this  Brown  affair  —  I  was  a-workin' 
with  some  other  men  a  few  miles  up  the  river  at  the 
time  the  trouble  broke  loose,  and  the  first  what  we  see 
that  was  queer  was  the  trains  standin'  on  the  railway. 
Brown  had  stopped  'em  and  thar  they  stood  —  a  long 
line  of  'em  whistlin'  and  snortin',  and  we  thought  the 
bridge  had  broke  down  or  something.  Then  a  man 
come  along  and  said  John  Smith  was  thar  at  Harper's 
Ferry  killing  men,  women,  and  children.  But  he 
didn't  know  what  he  was  a-doin'  it  for  ;  nor  nobody 
didn't  have  the  least  notion  what  it  all  meant  at  first. 
They  couldn't  tell  head  nor  tail  of  it. 

"  Of  co'se  we  wanted  to  find  out  what  was  goin'  on, 
and  we  broke  off  work  and  went  down  to  the  town.  I 
allowed  it  was  rather  riskv,  but  I  soon  see  Brown  didn't 
molest  nobody  exceptin'  those  that  carried  weapons,  or 
that  was  jukin'  round  whar  they  had  no  business.  He 
gobbled  up  quite  a  number  of  men  and  put  'em  in  the 
ingin'  house,  and  he  kep'  'em  thar  until  the  soldiers 
come  and  made  him  a  prisoner.  They  didn't  do  that 
without  a  heap  of  fightin',  and  the  way  they  captured 
the  ingin'  house  was  to  get  a  great  long  ladder,  which 
they  butted  agin  the  door  a  few  times  and  busted  it  in." 


John  Brown's  Town 


^S3 


At  the  close  of  these  reminiscences   the  man  said 
that  when  we  met  he  had  been  on  his  way  to  look  at 


A  Hillside  Highway 

a  field  he  had  planted    to   potatoes.     "They're  just 
comin'  up,"  he  explained,  "and  the  bugs  are  a-gettin' 


254         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

after  'em.  Them  bugs  are  a  kind  of  beetle  that's 
shaped  a  good  deal  like  a  terrapin,  only  they  are 
smaller  and  their  shell  is  striped  black  and  yellow. 
They  don't  eat  the  vines  much,  but  they  lay  eggs,  and 
the  grubs  that  hatch  from  those  eggs  are  terrible. 
Why  !  I've  seen  vines  all  e't  bare  by  'em.  The 
beetles  crawl  down  under  the  lumps  of  dirt  in  the 
heat  of  the  day,  and  if  you  go  along  then  with  a  stick 
and  poke  over  the  nubs  of  earth  around  the  vines,  you 
c'n  find  'em  and  pinch  off  their  heads.  I  don't  see 
'em  all,  though,  and  I  don't  know  but  they're  goin'  to 
get  the  best  of  me.  I  got  a  pest  on  my  peach  trees, 
too.  The  worms  are  so  bad  on  'em  I've  about  con- 
cluded to  give  up  raisin'  peaches.  Some  sprays  their 
trees,  but  it  don't  do  no  good.  Thar  ain't  much  use 
for  a  man  to  work  agin  Providence. 

"  I'm  glad  I  met  up  with  you,"  the  man  remarked 
when  we  parted,  and  then  he  continued  up  the  road 
and  I  went  on  down  —  down  the  same  road  that  John 
Brown's  little  band  had  gone  on  that  eventful  Sunday 
night  in  October,  1859. 

What  I  learned  of  Brown  at  Harper's  Ferry  con- 
sisted of  fragmentary  bits  of  gossip,  but  the  whole 
story  of  his  life  is  intensely  interesting  and  dramatic. 
He  was  born  at  Torrington,  Connecticut,  in  the  year 
1800,  but  the  family  moved  to  Ohio  while  he  was 
still  a  child,  and  in  that  then  rough  frontier  country 
he   grew   to  manhood.       His    father  taught    him    the 


John  Brown's  Town  2^^ 

tanner's  trade,  but  he  was  restless  and  visionary  and 
that  calHng  was  soon  abandoned.  He  tried  surveying, 
studied  for  the  ministry,  farmed  for  a  time,  speculated 
in  real  estate,  dealt  in  cattle,  undertook  sheep-raising, 
became  a  wool-factor,  and  finally  attempted  to  establish 
a  colony  of  free  negroes  in  the  Adirondacks.  In  noth- 
ing did  he  attain  more  than  a  temporary  success,  but  he 
was  not  the  less  ardent  to  enter  on  some  new  scheme 
when  the  spirit  moved.  He  went  to  Kansas  in  1854,  with 
money  and  arms  contributed  in  the  North,  to  contest 
the  control  of  the  state  with  the  upholders  of  slavery. 

Meanwhile  he  had  been  twice  married  and  nineteen 
children  had  been  born  to  him.  In  Kansas  he  became 
the  head  of  a  band  of  adventurers  including  several  of 
his  sons,  and  he  did  ardent  work  for  the  cause  he  had 
espoused,  though  this  was  often  foolhardy,  and  some 
of  his  acts  were  scarcely  less  atrocious  than  those  of 
the  lawless  guerillas  he  combated.  He  was  a  man  of 
great  courage  and  honesty,  with  a  strong  will  and  un- 
usual physical  energy,  but  oversanguine  and  fanatical 
and  rude.  In  his  way  he  was  deeply  religious  ;  he 
knew  the  Bible  thoroughly  and  he  thought  that  angels 
guided  him.  His  manner  was  impressive,  his  words 
blunt  and  dogmatic.  In  appearance  he  was  tall  and 
slender;  in  dress  half  deacon  and  half  soldier.  His 
hair  was  thick  and  bushy,  his  face  smooth-shaven  until 
his  last  years,  when  he  wore  a  full  beard.  This  beard 
on  the  day  of  the  raid  is  described  as  hanging  in  snowy 


256         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

waves  to  his  breast,  making  his  aquiline  features  seem 
singularly  wild. 

By  1857  affairs  in  Kansas  became  more  orderly, 
and  Brown's  thoughts  were  soon  evolving  new  plans 
in  the  cause  of  freedom.  These  plans  continued  vague 
and  illogical  to  the  last.  Their  essential  purpose  was 
to  start  a  slave  insurrection  somewhere  in  the  Virginia 
mountains.  Then  he  thought  enthusiasts  would  join 
him  from  the  North,  and  fugitive  slaves  flock  to  his 
assistance  from  the  South.  He  would  take  advantage 
of  the  natural  strongholds  of  the  mountains  and  evade 
such  attacks  as  he  could  not  overcome ;  he  would  raid 
the  adjacent  plantations  for  supplies.  A  struggle  of 
this  sort,  he  argued,  could  be  indefinitely  prolonged, 
and  its  success  would  result  in  the  wiping  out  of  slav- 
ery by  law.  If,  at  the  worst,  the  project  failed,  he 
would  retreat  with  his  followers  through  the  free  states 
to  Canada.  He  proposed  to  put  rifles  and  revolvers 
into  the  hands  of  all  his  adherents  who  were  capable 
of  using  such  weapons,  while  those  unused  to  firearms 
would  be  furnished  with  pikes.  Brown  made  his  plans 
known  to  a  little  company  of  New  England  abolition- 
ists, and  while  they  considered  the  scheme  both  unwise 
and  doomed  to  failure,  they  felt  they  could  not  desert 
Brown  who  plainly  would  not  be  turned  from  the 
course  on  which  he  had  determined.  They  therefore 
furnished  him  money  ;  he  bought  guns  and  ammuni- 
tion, and  had  a  thousand  pikes  manufactured. 


John  Brown*s  Town 


257 


Some  Fun  in  a  Boat 


Now  he  concluded  to  start  operations  by  captunng 
the  United  States  armory  and  arsenal  at  Harper's 
Ferry.  This  would  be  a  great  help  in  equipping  the 
numerous  sympathizers  he  expected  would  promptly 


258         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

come  to  his  aid.  In  order  to  study  the  situation  at 
close  range  and  thus  gain  knowledge  to  enable  him 
to  operate  with  precision  when  the  proper  time  came, 
he  rented  the  Kennedy  farm  five  miles  from  Harper's 
Ferry,  on  the  Maryland  side  of  the  Potomac,  and 
made  that  his  headquarters.  Here  he  and  his  little 
band  lived  for  several  months,  secretly  getting  together 
arms  and  ammunition,  blankets,  tents,  and  other  neces- 


,r.,  >,S^.,i    ^1 


r-r.a- ■^■■■■'v  ii~ 


Al* 


r4ii  *■  -mrt:    »<f- 


•*<-~^«*ft:^i* 


The  Church  Brown  attended 


saries  for  a  campaign.  Their  rather  eccentric  actions 
seem  to  have  aroused  no  suspicion  among  the  neigh- 
bors. They  made  some  pretence  of  innocent  occupa- 
tion, and  occasionally  went  poking  about  the  mountain 
sides  with  picks  and  spades,  excavating  a  little  here  and 
there  to  convey  the  impression  that  they  were  pros- 


John  Brown's  Town  259 

pecting  for  minerals.  This  was  readily  accepted  as 
their  real  purpose,  for  it  was  in  accord  with  the  general 
belief  that  the  wild  crags  ot  the  vicinity  sheltered 
precious  ores  of  fabulous  value,  and  that  discovery  and 
development  only  awaited  the  eye  of  science  and  the 
hand  of  industry. 

About  eight  o'clock  on  Sunday  evening,  October 
16,  1859,  Brown's  little  company,  with  a  one-horse 
wagon  containing  a  few  pikes  and  other  implements, 
started  for  Harper's  Ferry,  which  they  reached  two 
hours  later.  The  entire  force  consisted  of  twenty-two 
men,  but  three  of  them  did  not  cross  the  river.  Five 
of  the  remaining  nineteen  were  negroes,  and  it  is  a 
curious  fact  that  while  all  the  whites  had  been  accorded 
offices  in  the  provisional  government  Brown  had 
planned,  the  blacks  continued  plain  citizens  and 
privates. 

The  raiders  took  possession  of  the  bridge  across  the 
Potomac  and  of  the  bridge,  close  by,  that  spanned  the 
Shenandoah  a  few  rods  back  from  where  it  joins 
the  larger  stream.  Brown  soon  was  master  of  the 
armory,  the  arsenal,  and  the  rifle  factory,  and  had 
captured  the  watchmen.  Then  he  sent  six  of  his  fol- 
lowers a  few  miles  out  into  the  country  to  bring 
in  certain  of  the  prominent  slaveholders  with  their 
slaves.  The  mission  was  successfully  accomplished, 
and  the  slaveholders  were  imprisoned  in  the  armory. 
The  blacks  were  armed  with  pikes,  but  proved  entirely 


260         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

inefficient,  and  no  doubt  were  a  good  deal  befogged  as 
to  what  was  expected  of  them,  and  indeed  as  to  the 
meaning  of  the  strange  events  of  the  night  in  general. 


The  Meeting  of  the  Rivers 

A  four-horse  farm  wagon  had  been  confiscated  on 
the  foray  among  the  plantations,  and  Brown  ordered 
a  detachment  to  take  this  wagon  to  the  house  that  had 
been  his  home  over  in  Maryland,  and  bring  a  load 
of  pikes  and  rifles  down  to  a  schoolhouse  not  far  from 
the  river  on  the  other  side,  and  there  store  them.  In 
the  town  itself  a  train  had  been  held  three  hours  before 
it  was  allowed  to  proceed,  a  negro  had  been  shot  by 
Brown's  men,  and  all  citizens  who  wandered  into  prox- 
imity with  the  invaders  were  being  taken  in  charge  as 


John  Brown's  Town  261 

fast  as  they  came.  By  daybreak  Brown  had  with  Kim 
in  the  armory  prisoners  to  the  number  of  forty  or 
fifty.  Thus  far  everything  had  been  done  so  quietly 
that  the  townspeople  had  no  comprehension  of  the 
nature  and  extent  of  the  trouble,  and  practically  all 
save  those  who  had  been  made  prisoners  slept  on  as 
usual.  Even  when  the  negro  was  shot  the  town  was 
not  aroused. 

How  strange  a  coincidence  that  the  first  person 
killed  by  these  would-be  freers  of  the  slaves  should 
be  a  colored  man  !  He  had  gone  to  the  bridge  to 
speak  with  the  night  watchman  posted  there,  but  the 
watchman  had  been  taken  prisoner.  When  Brown's 
men  confronted  the  newcomer  with  their  guns  and 
commanded  him  to  halt,  he  was  frightened  and  took  to 
his  heels,  and  they  stopped  him  with  a  bullet.  Several 
persons  living  near  the  bridge  heard  the  sound  of  the 
firing,  and  some  of  them  got  up  and  looked  out  of 
their  windows  to  learn  the  cause.  It  was  densely  dark, 
they  could  see  nothing  suspicious,  and  there  was  no 
more  noise.  They  therefore  returned  to  their  beds 
with  the  thought  that  the  disturbance  was  the  result 
of  midnight  revellers  shooting  off  their  pistols  in 
sport. 

When  Monday  dawned  and  the  armory  bell  failed 
to  ring  at  the  customary  time  and  the  citizens  dis- 
covered what  had  happened,  the  more  adventurous  got 
out  their  guns  and,  from  such  points  of   vantage  as 


262         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

they  could  select,  began  a  desultory  fusillade  on  the 
raiders.  They  proceeded,  however,  with  caution,  for 
all  sorts  of  wild  rumors  and  exaggerations  were  rife, 
and  they  at  first  imagined  the  insurgents  were  a  con- 
siderable force.  The  equipment  of  the  citizens  for 
warfare  was  but  slender.  The  stores  and  the  arsenal 
were  in  Brown's  possession,  and  for  some  time  the 
only  weapons  they  had  to  oppose  him  were  a  few 
squirrel  guns  and  fowling-pieces.  Such,  too,  was  the 
scarcity  of  ammunition  that  they  were  soon  melting 
household  pewter  and  moulding  it  into  bullets  for  the 
occasion. 

Brown  had  ordered  that  no  life  should  be  taken 
when  it  could  be  avoided,  and  during  the  fighting  he 
often  restrained  his  men  from  firing  on  unarmed  citi- 
zens. Monday  morning  he  tried  to  effect  an  armistice 
to  save  bloodshed,  but  this  was  refused,  and  from 
that  moment  his  situation  was  hopeless.  He  was  in 
a  trap.  His  men  were  scattered  in  four  or  five  parties, 
without  means  of  mutual  support  or  communication, 
and  they  had  no  supplies  of  either  provisions  or  am- 
munition. By  Monday  noon  all  those  in  the  detach- 
ment at  the  rifle  works,  a  mile  from  the  armory  up  the 
Shenandoah,  had  been  driven  out,  killed,  or  captured. 
The  other  squads  joined  their  leader  in  the  armory, 
and  as  the  prospect  grew  more  desperate  they  took 
refuge  in  the  little  fire-engine  house  near  the  railway, 
carrying  with  them  ten  selected  prisoners.     Shots  were 


Beside  the  Potomac 


'tHF  K^VV  YORK 

PU,  ...        3RARY 


ASTOR.   LENOX    AND 
TILDLN    FOUNDATIONS.      I 


John   Brown's  Town  263 

constantly  being  exchanged  with  their  assailants,  who 
were  all  the  time  becoming  more  numerous.  The 
whole  country  was  aroused,  military  companies  were 
arriving,  and  at  length  Brown  parleyed  for  leave  to 
retire  across  the  river  on  condition  that  he  gave  up  his 
prisoners.  Again  he  was  refused.  Night  came.  It 
had  rained  a  little  all  day,  and  the  atmosphere  was  raw 
and  cold.  Now  a  clouded,  moonless  sky  overhung 
the  scene  of  conflict.  The  firing  had  ceased  and  the 
engine  house  was  shrouded  in  total  darkness.  That 
evening  eighty  marines  from  the  Washington  Navy 
Yard  reached  Harper's  Ferry.  They  were  under  the 
command  of  Colonel  Robert  E.  Lee,  who  later  was 
the  chief  leader  of  the  Confederate  armies.  Early  the 
next  morning  he  summoned  Brown  to  surrender,  and 
not  getting  a  satisfactory  response,  ordered  his  men  to 
charge.  The  engine-house  doors  were  soon  battered 
down,  there  was  a  short,  sharp  action,  and  the  affair 
was  ended.  Brown  was  severely  wounded,  two  of  his 
sons  lay  dead  or  dying,  and  all  the  party  who  were  in 
the  engine  house  were  made  prisoners.  Of  the  total 
force  of  twenty-two  men  who  engaged  in  the  raid,  five 
escaped,  ten  were  killed,  and  seven  were  hanged.  Five 
of  the  townspeople  lost  their  lives  and  eight  were 
wounded,  and  one  of  the  marines  was  killed. 

Brown  was  tried  for  treason,  conspiracy,  and  mur- 
der. He  acknowledged  his  acts  with  frankness,  de- 
fended  himself  with   evident   sincerity,  and   bore    his 


264         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

wounds  and  met  his  fate  with  admirable  fortitude.  He 
had  aroused  bitter  animosity  against  himself,  but  his 
stoical  courage  won  the  applause  even  of  his  enemies. 
John  Brown  died,  but  however  mistaken  and  repre- 
hensible his  course  may  have  been,  "  his  soul  went 
marching  on."  To  quote  the  eloquent  words  of  Fred- 
erick Douglass  :  "  Until  this  blow  was  struck,  the  pros- 
pect for  freedom  was  dim,  shadowy,  and  uncertain. 
The  irrepressible  conflict  was  one  of  words,  votes,  and 
compromises.  When  John  Brown  stretched  forth  his 
arm  the  sky  was  cleared  —  the  time  for  compromise 
was  gone  —  the  armed  hosts  of  freedom  stood  face  to 
face  over  the  chasm  of  a  broken  Union,  and  the  clash 
of  arms  was  at  hand." 


XII 


THE  COTTON  PATCH  IN  HARVEST  TIME 


w 


HEREVER 

in  the  South 
you  find  cul- 
tivated fields,  you  are 
very  sure  to  find  cot- 
ton. If  we  except  a 
few  limited  districts, 
there  is  scarcely  a  farm 
large  or  small  but  that 
devotes  a  part  of  the 
land,  and  usually  a 
large  part,  to  this  crop. 
Thus,  when  I  wanted 
to  see  cotton-picking 
in  progress,  I  had  only 
to  go  South  in  the 
early  autumn  and  stop 
off  at  almost  any  point  I  pleased.  I  selected  a  place 
in  South  Carolina  a  hundred  miles  more  or  less  from 
Charleston.  This  place  proved,  on  acquaintance,  to 
be  a  scattered,  raw,  half-wild  little  town. 

265 


October  in  South  Carolina 


266         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

The  hamlet  had  two  hotels,  and  I  was  told  that  no 
matter  which  one  1  went  to  I  would  wish  I  had  gone 
to  the  other.  I  do  not  know  just  how  literally  the 
statement  was  intended,  but  certainly  a  half  day  at  the 
Eagle  House  convinced  me  I  should  have  patronized 
its  rival.  It  was  battered,  dingy,  and  disreputable, 
the  food  was  poor,  and  the  talk  I  heard  in  the  office 
had  more  swear  words  to  the  sentence  than  I  would 
have  thought  it  possible  to  interpolate.  A  leading 
character  in  the  office  was  a  man  known  as  "  Pinky 
Simmons."  Another  was  an  elderly  resident  of  the 
hotel  who  was  a  good  deal  of  an  invalid.  Much  of 
the  time  he  was  groaning  and  wishing  for  morphine. 
The  others  said  that  when  he  slept  after  he  had  been 
drinking  he  "  saw  the  blue  monkeys,"  and  the  old 
man  himself  related  how  he  had  been  disturbed  the 
night  previous  by  a  colt  that  sat  on  the  foot-board  of 
his  bed  and  gibed  at  him  —  whereat  the  company  all 
laughed  heartily.  I  learned  that  the  frequenters  of 
the  hotel  had  the  reputation  of  being  professional 
gamblers,  with  Pinky  Simmons  as  the  leading  spirit, 
and  that  certain  rooms  were  reserved  for  the  use  of  the 
elite  of  the  region,  and  could  only  be  entered  by  such 
as  the  landlord  knew  could  be  trusted.  At  any  rate 
the  conversation  which  came  to  my  ears  was  very 
largely  concerned  with  gaming,  and  I  heard  mention  of 
playing  poker  all  night,  and  of  the  increasing  excite- 
ment and  increasing  stakes  as  the   hours  slipped  away. 


The  Cotton  Patch  in   Harvest  Time         267 

and  of  one  individual  who  "  had  a  big  roll  on  "  — 
more  than  a  thousand  dollars  — and  lost  it  all,  leaving 
him  "  with  not  enough  money  to  get  out  of  town." 

The  surrounding  country  gave  ample  opportunities 
for  seeing  the  cotton  harvest.  I  did  not  have  to  go 
far  from  the  village  before  I  began  to  find  the  cotton 
patches,  varying  from  those  containing  an  acre  or  two 
neighboring  a  negro  cabin,  up  to  fields  of  a  hundred 
acres  on  some  large  plantations.  The  number  of  pickers 
in  the  different  fields  varied  likewise.  There  might  be 
only  a  single  person  picking,  or  there  might  be  a  scat- 
tered score  or  more.  The  crops  were  good,  bad,  and 
indifferent  —  mostly  depending  on  the  care  bestowed 
and  the  fertilizing.  "  That's  a  nigger's  cotton,"  said  a 
man  to  me  when  I  asked  him  about  some  earth-hugging 
little  stuff  that  had  not  attained  one  fourth  the  normal 
growth.  The  really  good  crops  grew  waist  high,  and 
the  plants  were  snowflaked  all  over  with  the  bursting 
bolls.     Such  fields  were  a  sight  to  rejoice  the  eyes. 

The  district  also  devoted  a  good  deal  of  attention 
to  tobacco  raising,  and  every  plantation  had  several 
square  little  "  barns "  in  which  the  crop  was  cured. 
Each  barn  had  a  shed  roof  projecting  from  the  front, 
and  under  this  roof  were  openings  into  two  brick  ovens. 
When  a  barn  was  filled,  slow  fires  were  kindled  in  the 
ovens  and  kept  burning  three  days  and  nights,  and 
then  the  tobacco  was  ready  for  stripping,  packing  in 
hogsheads,  and  shipping  to  market. 


268         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

In  my  rambling  I  followed  the  "  big  roads  "  and 
the  side  ways  and  even  the  "  nigger  paths  "  until  I 
became  pretty  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  region  ; 
and  then  I  resumed  my  railway  journey  and  went  on 
to  another  place  that  I  fancied  would  be  attractive 
from  its  situation  on  the  map.  I  was  a  Httle  dis- 
appointed on  alighting  from  the  train  to  see  nothing 
save  a  rude  station  and  two  small  stores  with  forest  all 
about.  The  only  white  man  who  lived  near  was  the 
station  master,  and  when  I  observed  more  closely,  I 
found  he  had  a  humble  abode  attached  to  the  station 
at  the  rear.  I  could  get  lodging  with  him,  I  was  told, 
but  it  was  dangerous.  I  did  not  understand  —  he 
looked  mild  and  amiable  enough. 

What  1  had  to  fear,  however,  was  malaria.  A  mile 
or  two  away  was  the  marshy  Cooper  River,  and  the 
station  was  on  the  alluvial  lowlands.  A  vcy  few 
nights  spent  on  these  lowlands  would  result  in  serious 
and  possibly  fatal  illness.  Yet  the  station  master  had 
lived  there  twenty-five  years.  He  seemed  to  be  fever 
proof,  and  he  thought  the  rest  of  the  whites  were  super- 
stitious on  the  subject.  None  of  them  would  stay  a 
night  in  the  low  country  except  in  cold  weather,  and 
even  the  keepers  of  the  two  little  stores  had  their 
houses  on  the  pinelands  three  or  four  miles  distant. 
Thither  1  went,  too. 

I  started  to  walk,  but  was  soon  overtaken  by  a 
negro  driving  an  ox-cart,  and  I  rode  with  him  as  far  as 


The  Cotton  Patch  In  Harvest  Thne 


269 


he  went.      He  had  a  single  ox  harnessed  like  a  horse 
and   hitched   between  the  cart  shafts.     The  ox  wore  a 


An  Ox  in  Harness 

bridle,  had  a  bit  in  its  mouth,  and  was  guided  with  rope 
reins.  The  negro  kept  gadding  on  the  beast  with  the 
rope  ends  and  we  progressed  at  a  brisk,  jerky  walk. 
My  companion  had  only  lived  in  this  section  a  year. 
He  had  bought  a  piece  of  forest,  built  a  cabin,  cleared 
up  a  patch  of  "  new  groun'  "  by  grubbing  out  the 
underbrush  and  "deadening"  the  big  trees,  and  he 
had  raised  a  crop  of  corn.  Next  year  he  would  plant 
a  portion  of  the  land  to  cotton.  He  liked  the  region, 
but  complained,  "  I  have  de  country  fever  bad,  an*  I 
expec'  I'll  keep  on  havin'  it  until  I  git  climantized." 


270         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

We  passed  a  number  of  negro  houses  with  their 
little  clearings,  and  we  met  several  groups  of  colored 
women  and  children  returning  from  work  in  some 
white  man's  cotton  patch,  carrying  their  empty  pick- 
ing-bags over  their  shoulders.  One  or  two  of  the 
girls  had  found  a  few  strips  of  bark  in  the  wayside 
woods,  and  were  taking  the  bark  along,  poised  on 
their  heads,  for  the  cabin  fires. 

My  ox-cart  ride  came  to  an  end  presently,  and  I 
trudged  on  alone.  By  the  time  I  reached  the  pine- 
Irmds  the  night  shadows  were  beginning  to  thicken. 
1  had  imagined  I  should  find  a  village,  but  aft.r  some 
exploring  I  discovered  there  were  only  half  a  dozen 
houses  in  all,  and  these  were  mostly  out  of  sight  of 
each  other,  set  hit  or  miss  in  the  thin  pine  woods  and 
linked  together  only  by  faint  paths  and  byways. 
Where  two  roads  met  was  a  tinv  church,  but  it  stood 
as  isolated  and  lonely  amid  the  trees  as  did  the  houses. 
At  one  of  these  houses  I  found  lodging  —  and  how 
good  it  was  to  be  welcomed  out  of  the  strange  forest 
glooms  into  that  friendly  family  circle  to  share  its 
light  and  shelter  and  food  ! 

Adjoining  the  house  was  a  smaller  building  known 
as  the  lodge,  and  in  that  1  spent  the  night.  Its 
interior  resembled  a  barn,  for  it  was  a  single  apartment 
with  timbers  exposed,  and  open  above  to  the  roof 
The  walls  were  whitewashed,  and  the  apartment  was 
roughly    furnished    for    a    combination    chamber    and 


The  Cotton  Patch  in  Harvest  Time 


271 


schoolroom.  My  sleep  was  intermittent.  I  did  not 
mind  the  blur  of  insect  minstrelsy  that  filled  the  air, 
but  I  was  disturbed  by  a  cow  lowing  somewhere  near, 
by  the  barking  of  dogs,  by  a  horse  stamping  and  snort- 
ing in  the  yard,  by  a  man  who  late  in  the  night  went 
yo-ho-ing  and  whistling  along  the  road  and  wakened 
all  the  woodland  echoes,  and  by  a  mysterious  ticking 
in  the  shingles  of  the  roof — was  it  death  watches  ? 


The  Plantation  Porch 

Shortly  after  daylight  a  little  negro  boy  walked  in 
at  my  door  —  the  doors  were  not  made  to  lock  —  and 
announced,  "  Mr.  Lemair  say  dey  have  breakfas'  seven 
o'clock,  sah."  Then  he  stepped  behind  a  calico  screen 
and  filled  a  bath-tub  with  water  and  departed. 


272         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

It  still  lacked  something  of  the  hour  named  when  I 
came  forth  from  the  lodge,  and  I  spent  the  intervening 
time  rambling  about  the  premises.  My  host's  house 
was  a  broad,  low  building,  painted  white.  A  wide 
porch  extended  the  full  length  of  the  south  side. 
The  home  yard  included  several  acres  and  was  fenced 
with  high  palings.  Far  back  toward  the  rear  of  the 
yard  was  a  little  barn,  a  shed  for  the  hens,  and  a  negro 
cabin  occupied  by  a  family  that  did  the  work  at  the 
big  house. 

The  morning  was  sunny  and  quiet.  The  atmos- 
phere was  dim  with  a  gauzy  mist,  the  grass  and  leaves 
wet  and  shining  with  dew.  I  could  hear  the  clatter  of  a 
woodpecker,  the  cawing  of  crows,  and  the  steady  tinkle 
of  a  cow-bell.  After  breakfast  one  of  the  girls  of  the 
family  mounted  her  horse  and  galloped  to  the  post- 
office  at  the  railway  station  for  the  mail ;  and  about 
the  same  time  Mr.  Lemair  prepared  to  leave  for  his 
rice  plantation  on  the  Cooper  River,  seven  miles  dis- 
tant. The  task  of  hitching  his  horse  to  a  buggy  fell 
to  a  negro  boy,  Hezekiah  —  "  Hezekiah,  de  prophet 
from  de  Bible  ;  dat's  his  rael  first  name,"  his  mother 
was  wont  to  say  when  questioned  on  the  subject.  Mr. 
Lemair  was  soon  on  the  road,  and  he  would  not  return 
until  dusk.  In  this  manner  he  went  back  and  forth 
every  week  day  for  six  months.  He  had  a  mansion 
down  by  the  river,  but  did  not  dare  live  in  it  between 
the  dates  of  May   10  and   November  10  on  account 


The  Cotton   Patch  In   Harvest  Time         273 

of  the  fever.  To  show  how  genuine  was  the  necessity 
for  this  annual  flight  from  the  lowlands,  he  related  that 
a  few  years  previous  a  Northern  enthusiast  had  bought 
some  thousands  of  acres  in  the  malarial  district  and 
advertised  his  intention  to  establish  a  model  New  Eng- 
land communitv.  The  man  was  told  the  climate  would 
prove  fatal,  but  he  utterly  discredited  the  statement, 
built  fourteen  miles  of  railroad  to  connect  with  a  main 
line,  and  began  importing  settlers  and  selling  land  at 
forty  dollars  an  acre  that  was  worth  two  dollars  an  acre. 
The  boom  was  of  short  duration,  the  colonists  sickened, 
many  died,  and  the  whole  enterprise  was  abandoned. 

I  spent  the  day  in  or  near  the  pinelands.  Not  far 
from  Mr.  Lemair's  was  a  twelve-acre  cotton  patch  in 
one  of  the  forest  clearings,  where  a  few  negro  girls  were 
picking.  Each  of  them  had  come  furnished  with  a 
bag  which  she  suspended  from  her  shoulders  to  receive 
the  cotton  as  she  plucked  it  from  the  boll.  Each  picker 
had  also  a  blanket  or  something  of  the  sort  spread  in 
a  convenient  place,  and  on  this  from  time  to  time  was 
emptied  the  contents  of  the  bag.  When  the  day's 
work  was  done,  the  picker  gathered  the  blanket  up 
about  the  cotton  and  knotted  the  ends.  Then  all  the 
parcels  were  taken  in  a  cart  or  on  the  pickers'  heads  to 
the  weighing  place  on  the  borders  of  the  field  and  later 
to  the  barn. 

Not  much  was  doing  in  the  cotton  patch  on  this  par- 
ticular morning,  for  it  was  Saturday  and  colored  help 


274         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

is  always  difficult  to  get  on  that  day.  They  have  a 
habit  of  reserving  the  final  day  of  the  week  for  work 
on  their  own  little  places.  To  one  of  these  negro 
homes  I  presently  wandered.  Its  surroundings  were 
unusually  neat.  The  hard-beaten  earth  in  front  of  the 
house,  and  the  path  that  led  to  the  road,  were  swept 
very  clean,  and  vines  and  shrubbery  grew  about  the 
porch.  A  woman,  a  young  girl,  and  a  boy  came  to 
the  door  and  greeted  me.  They  were  very  intelligent, 
with  a  pleasing  air  of  good  breeding.  The  woman 
was  anxious  I  should  have  no  mistaken  impression  of 
them.  "  I  was  brought  up  in  the  house  among 
quality,"  she  explained,  "  and  I  learned  manners  and 
got  some  education.  I'm  not  like  mos'  of  the  slavery 
negroes  of  my  age.  They  don't  know  the  letter  A 
from  the  side  of  a  barn  ;  but  that's  not  their  fault. 
Education  wasn't  much  believed  in  for  them,  and  if  a 
slave  was  found  with  a  book  in  his  hands,  the  book 
was  taken  away  and  burned. 

"  My  ole  man,  he  was  a  field-worker.  He's  a  good 
man,  but  he's  rough  an'  low  down.  I'm  shore  mar- 
ried to  him  though,  and  I  got  to  make  the  bes'  of  a 
bad  bargain.  While  he's  workin'  he  won't  never  wear 
a  hat,  and  yo'  cain't  hardly  make  him  put  on  any 
clothes  only  those  that  're  patched.  He  look  like  a 
different  man  when  he's  dressed  up,  but  he  let  his  bes' 
clothes  hang  in  the  house  all  the  time." 

The  woman's  feeling  of  aristocracy  showed  in  her 


A  Rice  Mill 


JiLDLH   POUND  AT  IONS. 


The  Cotton  Patch  in  Harvest  Time         275 

work  as  well  as  in  her  talk.  Certain  plebeian  tasks 
she  would  not  do  at  all,  and  others  she  would  not  do 
in  the  customary  way.  She  picked  cotton  in  a  basket, 
while  every  one  else  picked  it  in  a  bag,  and  she  never 
would  use  the  rice  mill  or  the  rice  fanner.  When  the 
rice  had  to  be  pounded  and  cleaned,  her  daughter  did 
it.  This  work  was  done  at  the  rear  of  the  house 
where  there  was  a  section  of  a  log  about  three  feet 
long  with  one  end  scooped  out  into  a  bowl-like  hollow. 
Into  this  mortar  or  "  rice  mill  "  the  rice  was  put,  and 
then  was  crushed  with  a  wooden  pestle.  That  done, 
it  was  transferred  to  a  shallow  basket  called  the  "  rice 
fanner"  and  shaken  free  of  hulls.  The  rice  sheaves 
were  stored  in  a  barn  about  six  feet  square  along  with 
the  cow  peas  and  "  blade  fodder "  —  the  last  being 
bundles  of  corn  leaves  pulled  off  while  green  from 
the  stalks  standing  in  the  field.  Adjoining  the  barn 
was  a  pig-pen  of  rails  that  barely  allowed  the  porker 
room  to  turn  around,  and  beside  the  pig-pen  was  a 
cart  of  aboriginal  pattern  with  wheels  made  of  solid 
disks  of  wood  sawed  off  the  end  of  a  large  log. 

The  family  raised  cotton  and  corn  as  their  chief 
crops,  but  I  noticed  they  also  had  considerable  patches 
of  sweet  potatoes  and  peanuts.  Each  peanut  vine 
spread  out  in  a  close  network  over  a  circle  three  feet 
in  diameter.  Some  of  the  vines  had  been  pulled  and 
turned  roots  upward  to  allow  the  peanuts  that  clung  to 
them  to  ripen  and  dry.      Later  these  nuts  would  be 


276         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 


Digging  Peanuts 

picked  off  and  those  that  remained  in  the  ground  dug. 
The  crows  like  peanuts  and  had  been  making  regular 
raids  on  the  patch.  "  And  while  they  were  getting 
the  peanuts,"  said  the  woman,  "  one  ole  fello.w  stay  up 
in  the  top  of  that  daid  tree  there,  and,  soon  as  he  see 
anybody  cominV  Awk  ! '  he  cry,  and  away  they  all  go. 
But  now  we  made  this  scarecrow  yo'  see  hyar.     We 


The  Cotton  Patch  in  Harvest  Time         277 

jus'  set  up  a  stake  an*  put  a  hat  on  top,  an'  to  make 
the  rest  of  the  man,  we  fasten  together  these  New  York 
Sunday  papers  my  son  in  Brooklyn  send  us  ;  an'  since 
that  the  crows  come  an'  set  on  that  daid  tree  an'  have 
their  powwows,  but  they  doan'  dare  come  no  nearer. 
Yo'  see  this  stick  out  at  one  side  ?  That  is  his  gun, 
and  this  piece  of  paper  hung  on  it  by  a  string  is  his 
shot-pouch.  Yes,  those  Sunday  papers  from  New 
York  make  the  bes'  scarecrow  what  ever  there  was." 

Ruthie  and  John,  the  woman's  children,  were  bright 
and  attractive,  and  they  were  gentle  and  polite,  not 
only  to  me  but  to  each  other.  Their  mother  had 
taught  them  to  read  and  write.  "I've  tried  my  en- 
deavor to  give  them  a  start,"  said  she,  "  and  yo'  can 
ask  ary  one  yo'  please  about  the  capitals  of  the  states, 
or  to  spell,  or  yo'  can  write  a  sum  on  the  groun'  an' 
see  them  do  it." 

So  I  questioned  them  a  little  and  I  scratched  a  few 
figures  in  the  dirt  for  them  to  add.  They  did  the 
adding  accurately  though  not  quickly,  and  then  I 
tried  them  with  3  X  24.  They  bent  over  this  problem 
and  studied  on  it  a  long  time.  They  could  multiply 
3x4  and  3x2,  but  were  uncertain  how  to  combine 
the  results,  yet  they  finally  succeeded. 

The  boy  had  an  inventive  tendency,  and  he  had 
made  a  number  of  curious  contrivances  out  of  odds 
and  ends  he  had  gathered.  One  of  them  he  called  a 
"  steam   hoop,"   another    "  a    street  car."     The  latter 


278         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

was  a  small  cart  with  a  box  fastened  on  it  upside  down 
and  on  top  of  the  box  was  an  old  ink-bottle  fitted  with 
a  discarded  lamp-burner  and  filled  with  kerosene.  He 
would  light  up  evenings  and  run  the  thing  about  the 
yard.  It  was  very  crude,  but  for  a  boy  of  ten  who 
had  so  little  to  do  with,  it  was  very  creditable. 

While  I  was  looking  at  the  boy's  handiwork,  a  hat- 
less  and  patched  old  man  came  in  from  the  field,  and  I 
knew  he  must  be  the  woman's  husband.  He  sat  down 
on  the  porch,  and  in  a  chat  I  had  with  him  he  gave  me 
his  impressions  of  freedom  as  compared  with  slavery. 

"  It  was  like  dis,"  he  explained.  "  We  wa'n't  all 
equally  please'  to  be  made  free.  Yo'  take  de  kerridge 
drivers  an'  house  servants  an'  sech  —  dey  had  an  easy 
time  in  slavery,  an'  dey  was  ve'y  sorry  to  have  free- 
dom break  up  deir  kingdom.  When  dey  free,  dey 
have  to  go  to  work  for  a  livin',  an'  be  no  better  off 
dan  de  rest  of  us.  But  de  people  what  work  in  de 
sun  an'  de  rain  in  de  cotton-fiel',  dey  were  all  glad ; 
an'  yet  I  seen  some  good  times  in  slavery.  You  could 
get  thoo  your  day's  task  by  two  or  th'ee  o'clock,  an' 
if  you  was  smart,  your  master'd  give  you  a  piece  er 
groun'  to  plant  for  yo'self.  We  each  had  jus'  so 
much  rashions  ev'y  week,  an'  it  was  enough  ;  but  now 
dar's  a  whole  bunch  er  colored  folks  earn  so  little 
dey  have  to  live  off  er  scraps.  I  done  so  well  I  was 
made  head  hand ;  but  when  I  was  seventeen,  master 
wanted  to  whip  me,  an'  I  run  away  to  de  woods,  an* 


The  Cotton   Patch  in   Harvest  Time 


279 


I  was  in  de  woods  six  weeks.  I'd  come  home  nights 
to  git  food,  an'  some  er  de  boys  would  bring  me  bread, 
so  I  had  plenty  to  eat. 

"  I  made  a  camp  way  back  in  de  swamp,  an'  I 
hadn't  been  gone  long  till  one  day  a  white  man  name 
er  Cy  Lucas  fin'  me  while  I  was  cookin'  my  dinner. 
I  heard  the  bushes  crackin',  an'  dar  he  was  befo'  I 
could  git  hid. 

"  '  What  you  doin'  hyar  ? '   he  say. 

" '  I  run  away,*  says  I  ;  an'  I  tell  him  how  it  was. 


Old-time  Plantation  Quarters 

" '  I  reckon  I  ought  to  kerry  yo'  home,'  he  says. 
"  He  was   a   neighbor   of  my    people,  an'   him   an' 
dem    wa'n't    ve'y    good    friends,    an'    I    say,  '  Dey're 


28o         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

always  abusin*  you,  an'  dey  won't  thank  you  for't 
if  you  do  take  me  home.' 

"  So  he  said,  *  Well,  doan'  you  steal  nothin'  off'n 
my  plantation  —  take  it  off'n  yo'  own,  an'  I'll  let 
you  be.* 

"  Anudder  time  two  white  men  see  me  while  I  was 
walkin'  in  de  swamp  huntin'  fo'  a  pig  to  steal,  an' 
dey  know  me  an'  holler,  'You'll  be  ketched  tereckly  !' 

"  I  run,  an'  dey  went  off  an'  come  back  wid  a  dog 
an'  a  gun.  Yo'  ought  to  hear  me  cussin'  den  ;  but 
I  had  a  club,  an'  I  was  boun'  to  fight  until  I  die.  I 
squat  behin'  a  fence,  an'  de  dog  come  runnin'  after 
me  an'  jump  de  fence,  an'  he  no  sooner  done  dat  dan 
—  blap  !  —  I  hit  him  wid  de  club,  an'  de  dog  squeal 
an'  git  away  from  dar  as  fas'  as  he  can,  an'  de  men 
couldn't  git  dat  dog  to  foller  me  any  mo'.  But  dat 
didn't  stop  de  men.  Dey  kep'  after  me  until  it  got 
dark;  an'  dey  hadn't  no  light  an'  dey  los'  deirselves, 
an'  was  knockin'  aroun'  de  swamp  all  night.  I  knowed 
de  way  though,  an'  I  put  out  for  camp  an'  went  to 
sleep.  My  master,  he  offer  twenty-five  dollars  reward 
for  me,  an'  after  a  while  as  many  as  a  dozen  men 
come  out  an'  make  a  hunt  for  me,  an'  I  couldn't  git 
away  from  'em.  Dey  took  me  home  an'  I  was  whipped. 
Dat  taught  me  a  lesson.  1  never  give  no  mo'  trouble, 
an'  if  dey  jus'  praise  me,  I  work  myse'f  to  death.  I 
reckon  dar's  some  now  dat  a  whippia'  would  do  'em 
good.      Dey  git  as  sassy  as  a  cow  fly  widout  it.      But 


The  Cotton  Patch  in  Harvest  Time         281 

it's  better  dat  de  whippin's  an*  slavery  are  all  gone. 
I  like  to  think  of  what  de  Bible  says,  dat  '  De  day 
will  come  when  ev'y  tub  shall  set  on  its  own  bottom.' 
We're  all  free,  an'  dat  day  has  come." 


A  Live-oak  draped  with  Moss 

Toward  evening  I  returned  to  Mr.  Lemair's,  and 
the  next  morning  I  walked  four  miles  to  the  nearest 
colored  church,  a  rickety  little  building  with  a  tiny 
cupola  on  top.  As  I  approached  the  church  I  met 
a  negro  and  asked  when  there  was  to  be  service. 

"  Right  after  de  baptizin',  sah,"  said  he.  "  De  can- 
didate done  gone  along  de  road  jus'  now,  an'  I  spec' 
dey  baptize  about  ten  or  'leven  o'clock." 


2  82         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

It  was  after  eleven  already,  so  I  hurried  and  pres- 
ently overtook  the  baptismal  party  waiting  near  some 
negro  cabins  for  the  minister.  The  candidate  was 
a  young  woman  dressed  all  in  white,  even  to  the 
turban  on  her  head.  She  looked  very  solemn  and 
scared.  With  her  were  two  or  three  women  relatives, 
carrying  baskets  and  bundles.  They  said  the  baptiz- 
ing was  to  be  right  down  the  big  road  in  the  creek, 
and  1  went  on.  I  could  see  a  ragged,  fluttering  figure 
not  far  ahead  —  a  barefooted  negro  in  a  linen  duster. 
I  followed  him  for  a  mile,  and  then  came  to  the  creek. 
It  was  spanned  by  a  little  wooden  bridge,  below  which 
the  stream  deepened  into  the  pool  that  was  to  be  used 
for  the  day's  ceremony.  The  negro  had  stopped  on 
the  bridge  and  taken  off  his  duster,  exposing  a  blue 
blouse  and  dilapidated  trousers.  He  said  he  was  "an 
old-style  Baptist."  "  Th'ee  year  ago,"  he  continued, 
"  we  had  nine  head  baptize  into  our  chu'ch,  an'  no  mo' 
since  till  dis  one  to-day.  We  got  about  thirty  or 
thirty-five  head  in  de  chu'ch  in  all,  an'  dey  each  pay 
ten  cent  a  month  to  suppo't  de  preacher.  De  two 
deacons  collect  de  money  at  de  chu'ch  ev'y  Sunday. 
De  preacher  have  th'ee  chu'ches,  an'  when  he  ain' 
hyar,  we  have  a  local  preacher  by  name  of  Joe  Saws. 
He  ain'  git  nothin'  fo'  his  preachin'." 

Now  a  little  group  was  approaching  from  up  the  road, 
with  a  big,  burly,  white-robed  preacher  in  advance  ejacu- 
lating at  intervals,  "  Glory  be  to  God  "  and  other  similar 


The  Cotton   Patch  in   Harvest  Time         283 

sentiments.  He  had  a  bushy  gray  beard,  and  he  wore 
spectacles  poised  on  the  tip  of  his  nose  and  looked 
very  patriarchal.  In  one  hand  he  carried  a  Bible  and 
hymn-book,  in  the  other  hand  he  held  over  his  head 
an  umbrella,  for  the  sun  shone  clear  and  hot.  The 
candidate  also  walked  beneath  an  umbrella  —  a  big 
brown  umbrella  with  a  black  patch  on  it. 

"  That's  an  ugly  place,"  said  the  preacher,  glancing 
disapprovingly  at  the  pool. 

The  water  in  the  stream  was  nearly  stagnant,  and  its 
color  was  an  earthy  brown.  The  lofty  green  woods 
rose  around  and  a  light  wind  fluttered  in  the  leafage. 
The  ragged  man  who  had  been  my  companion  on  the 
bridge  took  a  pole  and  waded  into  the  pool,  prodding 
here  and  there  to  show  its  depth,  which  was  about 
three  feet.  Then  he  came  out  and  stood  at  the  water's 
edge  bareheaded,  with  the  pole  in  his  hand.  The 
others  gathered  on  the  bank  where  was  a  little  grassy 
open  space,  and  the  men  hung  their  hats  on  the  bushes. 
The  service  began  with  a  hymn  sung  with  melodious 
fervor,  and  then  followed  a  long,  vociferous  sermon. 
Meanwhile  the  group  grew  until,  toward  the  close, 
fully  thirty  were  present.  The  later  arrivals  all  came 
running  and  sweating,  fearful  they  would  miss  the  cere- 
mony. Most  of  them  collected  around  the  preacher, 
others  on  the  bridge.  Some  sat  down  as  the  sermon 
lengthened. 

The  preacher  told  the  story  of  John   the   Baptist, 


284         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

and  he  showed  beyond  shadow  of  doubt  that  immer- 
sion was  the  only  true  baptism,  "  and  if  yo'  say  that 
is  not  a  fac',  burn  yo'  Bibles  !  "  he  shouted.  "  Christ 
was  a  Baptist,"  he  went  on,  "  and  so  we  shall  be  judged 
by  a  Baptist,  and  we  shall  be  welcomed  by  a  Baptist 
in  heaven  —  those  of  us  that  go  there." 

Because  the  candidate  was  feminine  it  seemed  ap- 
propriate that  he  should  refer  to  the  miracle  of  woman's 
creation.  "  Jewels,"  said  he,  "  are  found  in  the  gar- 
bage and  in  the  ice  chest ;  yes,  diamonds  are  very  often 
found  in  the  rubbish,  but  not  so  Eve.  She  was  the 
climax  of  God's  work  —  the  finest  and  most  beautiful 
of  all  the  things  He  had  made.  She  was  created,  not 
from  common  dirt,  but  from  a  crooked  rib  taken  out 
of  the  side  of  Adam.  She  was  in  no  way  ordinary. 
She  was  an  extract,  —  like  cosmetics  or  perfumery 
which  you  ladies  know  about,  —  something  better  and 
mo'  concentrated  than  the  usual.  There's  a  difference 
in  things.  There's  great,  there's  grand,  and  there's 
greatest.  The  creation  of  the  world  was  great,  the 
creation  of  Adam  was  grand,  but  the  creation  of  Eve 
was  greatest." 

After  the  sermon  came  a  prayer,  then  some  ques- 
tions to  the  candidate  about  her  faith,  the  genuineness 
of  her  repentance  and  good  intentions  for  the  future, 
and  lastly  the  company  sang  a  verse  of  a  hymn,  "Jesus, 
my  all,  to  heaven  is  gone,"  while  the  preacher  de- 
scended to  the  pool.      The  man  with  the  pole  walked 


Coming  Home  from  the  Post-office 


The  Cotton  Patch  in  Harvest  Time         285 

out  and  prodded  around  and  stirred  up  the  mud,  and 
then  helped  the  candidate  down  the  bank  and  stood  by 
to  assist  in  the  baptism.  The  preacher  slipped  his  fin- 
gers down  inside  of  the  candidate's  collar  and  got  a 
good  grip,  and  things  looked  desperate.  The  hearts 
of  the  watchers  on  the  bridge  and  bank  beat  faster  and 
the  interest  was  tense.  With  a  few  words  of  invocation 
the  preacher,  aided  by  the  ragged  blue-bloused  man, 
ducked  the  unhappy  candidate  backward  under  the 
brown  water.  They  quickly  restored  her  to  her  feet, 
and  she,  dripping  and  gasping,  rested  her  head  on  the 
broad  breast  of  the  preacher.  A  bed-quilt  was  handed 
down  from  the  bank  and  wrapped  about  her,  and  she 
was  assisted  up  out  of  the  water,  and  several  of  the 
women  conducted  her  away  into  the  seclusion  of  the 
woods  to  change  her  attire. 

One  afternoon  during  my  stay  at  Mr.  Lemair's,  I 
roamed  as  far  as  his  plantation  on  the  river.  My 
route  took  me  past  the  railway  station,  and  I  stopped 
to  speak  with  the  malaria-proof  agent.  He  was  on 
his  house  porch  looking  through  a  tattered  Webster's 
Spelling-book.  "  I  found  it  among  some  old  papers 
and  things  this  morning,"  said  he.  "  I  hadn't  seen  it 
for  a  good  many  years.  That  '  old  blue-back  '  learnt 
me  most  of  what  I  know.  It's  the  best  book  ever 
was  made.  All  our  great  men  were  brought  up  on  it. 
We  used  to  have  nothin'  but  that  in  the  first  years  of 
our  schoolin',  an'  we  studied  it  thor'ly  till  we  knowed 


2  86         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

it.  Then  we'd  have  a  reader  and  other  books  ;  but, 
now,  dog  gone  if  the  children  don't  have  readin'  books 
befo'  they  learn  their  letters ;  and  I  can't  tell  how 
many  lessons  they  say  in  a  day,  but  it's  too  many." 

I  asked  where  the  children  of  the  region  attended 
school,  and  he  replied  that  the  white  people  were  too 
few  and  scattering  to  have  a  school,  and  the  well-to-do 
hired  a  governess.  The  colored  children  went  to 
school  a  little  way  down  the  road.  The  building  was 
put  up  by  a  local  negro  society  known  as  "  The  Spir- 
itual Union  Association."  This  society,  the  like  of 
which  under  one  name  or  another  was  to  be  found  in 
many  communities,  had  over  sixty  members  and  in- 
cluded both  men  and  women.  They  met  regularly 
once  a  month  on  Sunday  evening,  and  at  every  meet- 
ing each  member  paid  in  twenty-five  cents.  If  a 
member  was  sick,  he  received  a  dollar  and  a  half  a 
week,  and  in  case  of  death  the  relatives  received  ten 
dollars. 

I  looked  into  the  schoolhouse  when  I  resumed  my 
walk.  It  was  about  fourteen  by  sixteen  feet,  built  of 
logs  with  a  stick  and  clay  chimney  at  one  end.  There 
were  no  desks  inside,  and  the  scholars  sat  on  a  double 
row  of  seats,  each  seat  simply  an  unplaned  board  long 
enough  to  accommodate  half  a  dozen  children.  A 
small  table  and  two  chairs  completed  the  furnishings. 
Overhead  was  a  ceiling  of  loose  boards  laid  on  some 
sagging  joists.      I   could  barely  stand  upright  without 


The  Cotton  Patch  in   Harvest  Time 


287 


hitting  the  boards,  and  to  pass  beneath  the  joists  I  had 
to  stoop.  Into  this  dingy  httle  room  forty  children 
crowded,  and  it  was  even  more  closely  packed  when  the 
Spiritual  Union  Association  met. 

The  road  to  the  river  led  through  the  woods  for  a 
large  portion  of  the  distance.  The  tall  trees  were 
many  of  them  draped  with  moss,  there  was  a  multitude 
of  sweet  and  delicate  blossoms,  autumn  berries  were 
abundant,  and  the  foliage  and  tangled  vines  grew  with 
a  rankness  unknown  in  the  North.  Nor  does  the 
North  ever  hear  such  concerts  of  thronging  insects,  all 
busy  with  their  musical  saws  and  files  and  castanets. 
Now  and  then  I  would  meet  one  of  those  long-faced 
caricatures   of  a  hog  known  as  a  razorback,  or  some 


A  Pause  on  the  Road 


288         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

cattle  with  ears  mutilated  to  indicate  their  ownership, 
and  at  intervals  the  road  would  be  obstructed  by  a 
gate. 

Mr.  Lemair's  plantation  home  was  a  large  and  im- 
posing colonial  mansion  of  brick,  standing  amid  some 
enormous  live-oaks,  on  a  knoll  that  commanded  a  fine 
view  of  the  broad  marshlands  along  the  river.  On 
these  marshes  the  rice  was  raised,  and  the  planter  had 
to  keep  up  nine  miles  of  levees.  The  land  was 
ploughed  with  mules  wearing  broad  shoes  of  wood  on 
their  hoofs  to  keep  them  from  sinking  into  the  mire. 
August  was  the  harvest  month,  and  then  the  rice-fields 
were  thronged  with  workers  who  came  from  twenty 
miles  around.  The  reaping  was  done  with  sickles,  and 
the  rice  had  to  be  carried  by  hand  to  the  embankments 
where  it  was  loaded  on  carts.  Often  the  negroes  had 
to  work  in  mud  up  to  their  knees.  They  were  con- 
sidered immune  to  malaria.  To  a  white  man  such 
labor  would  soon  have  proved  fatal. 

All  day  Mr.  Lemair  rides  about  in  the  saddle 
superintending  the  work  on  the  big  plantation.  I  did 
not  see  him  while  I  was  there,  and  toward  evening  I 
started  on  my  return  walk  to  the  pinelands.  I  was 
directed  to  a  shorter  route  than  the  one  by  which  I 
had  come.  It  was  a  forest  byway  —  a  narrow,  weedy, 
little-used  road  with  mud-holes  here  and  there,  and 
patches  of  corduroy  in  the  wetter  hollows.  Once  I 
made  a  mistake  and  went  a  mile  or  two  out  of  the 


The  Cotton  Patch  in  Harvest  Time         289 

way,  and  by  the  time  I  was  back  on  the  right  road  the 
sun  had  set  and  the  darkness  of  the  woodland  depths 
I  had  to  traverse  was  getting  dense.  Low  in  the 
paling  western  sky  hung  the  thin  new  moon,  but  its 
light  was  too  faint  to  be  of  much  help,  and  1  had  more 
and  more  difficulty  in  avoiding  mud  and  pools,  and  I 
was  confused  by  the  branching  paths  and  sideways. 
At  last  I  came  to  a  negro  hut.  In  front  of  it  was  a 
fire  under  a  kettle  and  over  the  kettle  a  colored  woman 
was  stooping,  preparing  the  evening  meal.  "  Yo'  take 
the  nex'  turn  to  the  right,"  she  said  in  response  to  my 
questions  about  the  route,  "and  go  down  across  the 
water  slush,  and  pretty  soon  yo'U  see  a  light.  That  is 
Mr.  Lemair's  house." 

I  did  faithfully  as  she  bade,  took  the  turn,  crossed  a 
shallow  stream,  and  saw  shining  through  the  tall  tree 
trunks  the  planter's  home  light  sending  its  cheering 
rays  out  into  the  black  mysterious  woods. 


u 


XIII 


A    QUEST    FOR    TAR 


^KfCiihlVO'  AMI) 

5)(SUiKKiji;oH(;i5 


,v,-^^m'  ■,:■ 


SOUTH    CAR- 
OLINIAN  who 

was  one  day  en- 
lightening me  on  the  hab- 
its of  the  countryside 
mentioned  that  the  people 
of  his  state  were  often 
nicknamed  "  sandlappers." 
"  They  call  us  that,"  he 
explained,  "  because  sand 
is  so  powerful  plenty  ;  and 
up  in  North  Carolina  they 
call  the  folks  '  tar-heels,* 
because  they  use'  to  make 
so  much  tar  thar.  Yo' 
couldn't  step  aroun'  much 
without  gettin'  into  some 
of  the  blame'  stuff.  I 
know  how  it  was.  I  use' 
to  live  thar,  an'  I  ricolect 
when  I  was  a  hobedehoy  boy  my  ole  man,  jus'  after 
dark  one  night,  got  his  foot  into  a  bucket  o'  tar  that 

290 


-■■.■■  .-(.sill*: 

An  Advertisement 


A  Quest  for  Tar  291 

happen'  to  be  set  near  the  house  door.  The  weather 
was  col'  an'  the  tar  was  stiff,  an'  it  took  two  men  to 
pull  that  thar  tar  off'n  the  ole  man's  foot." 

"  Where  would  I  go  to  see  tar-making  now  ?  "  I 
asked. 

"  Wal,  I  cain't  rightly  tell.  Thar  ain't  nigh  as  many 
pine  trees  as  thar  use'  to  be,  an'  coal  tar  has  took  the 
place  of  the  ole-fashion  pitch-pine  tar.  But  if  you'd 
find  them  makin'  tar  anywhar,  it  would  be  up  aroun' 
Fayetteville." 

So  I  journeyed  to  Fayetteville,  for  I  very  much  wished 
to  see  something  of  this  primitive  woodland  industry, 
the  fascination  of  which  I  had  felt  ever  since  I  read 
about  the  process  in  my  school  geography.  Fayette- 
ville was  formerly  a  place  of  considerable  importance. 
It  is  on  the  banks  of  the  Cape  Fear  River  at  the  head 
of  steamboat  navigation,  and  before  the  war  it  was  the 
market  town  for  all  the  northwestern  section  of  the 
state.  Several  plank  roads  radiated  from  it,  and  an  im- 
mense wagon  trade  came  to  the  town  on  these  roads 
from  scores  of  miles  about.  The  zenith  of  its  prosper- 
ity was  reached  in  war  time.  The  arms  that  supplied 
the  Confederacy  were  manufactured  there  ;  and  nine 
cotton  mills  were  operating  in  or  near  the  town  when 
Sherman's  army  swept  through  the  region  in  1865. 
The  Union  forces  left  the  mills  and  government  works 
smoking  ruins,  and  from  this  blow  the  place  has  never 
recovered. 


igi         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

I  would  have  Hked  to  step  off  the  train  into  some 
of  the  traditional  tar  drippings,  but  I  could  discern 
no  hints  of  tar  on  the  depot  platform,  nor  indeed  any- 
where in  the  town.  However,  I  was  told  that  while 
Fayetteville  itself  no  longer  handled  tar,  I  would  not 
have  to  go  many  miles  out  into  the  woods  to  find  the 
tar-burning  still  going  on,  and  I  was  recommended 
to  a  place  called  Spout  Springs  that  I  could  easily 
reach  by  railroad.  When  I  went  thither,  I  found  that 
the  vernal  suggestions  of  the  name  were  deceptive. 
It  was  one  of  the  forlornest  spots  I  have  seen  in  the 
South.  As  for  its  springs,  it  has  few  enough  of  any 
kind  and  none  that  spout,  though  there  is  a  legend 
that  certain  of  them  once  had  that  habit.  The  village 
consisted  of  a  half-dozen  houses  of  the  poorest  sort  and 
a  single  rude,  dingy  store.  To  me  the  impression  was 
wholly  dubious,  and  I  was  surprised  to  find  tacked  up 
on  the  store  porch  among  other  notices  a  lead-pencil 
announcement  from  the  registrar  of  voters  appointing 
a  day  for  an  official  visit  to  the  community,  in  which 
he  declared  it  was  "  the  greatest  pleasure  of  his  life  to 
come  to  Spout  Springs."  What  phenomenal  polite- 
ness ! 

Near  the  station  was  a  great  concourse  of  tar 
barrels,  some  full  and  some  empty,  and  I  concluded 
there  was  nothing  more  to  do  except  to  go  a  short  way 
back  in  the  woods  to  see  the  whole  process  of  convert- 
ing pine  trees  into  tar.      I  went  into  the  store  to  get 


A  Quest  for  Tar 


293 


directions.     The  "  sto'keeper,"  a  puclcered  little  man 
with  a  piping  voice,  said  that  just  where  I  would  find  a 


Dipping  Tar  into  a  Barrel 

tar-kiln  at  that  time  he  was  uncertain,  and  he  referred 
to  some  of  the  loiterers  in  the  store.     They  talked  the 


294         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

matter  over  and  decided  the  nearest  kiln  was  one  being 
burned  seven  miles  distant  by  a  negro  named  Brinkley. 

It  was  already  past  midday  and  I  tried  to  hire  a 
team,  but  no  team  was  to  be  had  on  short  notice  at 
Spout  Springs,  and  I  determined  to  walk.  Fortu- 
nately a  little  darky  boy  of  the  Brinkley  family  chanced 
to  be  in  the  store,  and  my  advisers  turned  me  over  to 
him  as  a  guide.  I  surely  would  never  have  found  the 
way  alone. 

Beside  the  railroad  adjoining  the  station  were  some 
mountainous  piles  of  sawdust  and  the  rotting  fragments 
of  a  big  sawmill.  This  mill  had  laid  waste  all  the 
country  around,  and  what  had  been  a  noble  pine  forest 
was  now  a  brushy  wilderness  growing  up  to  scrub-oak. 
The  tall  trees  were  gone,  and  the  road  that  the  boy 
and  I  travelled  was  wholly  exposed  to  the  hot  sunshine. 
Churlie,  my  guide,  spoke  of  this  road  as  "  the  great  big 
road."  It  had  been  a  plank  road  years  before,  and  the 
sto'keeper  had  told  me  that  in  his  youth  "  hit  run 
from  a  hundred  mile  up  the  kentry  straight  to  Fayette- 
ville,  and  you'd  see  over  one  hundred  and  fifty  wagons 
pass  in  a  day."  There  were  no  indications  that  more 
than  two  or  three  teams  a  day  dragged  through  its 
sands  now.  We  followed  it  up  and  down  the  low  hills 
for  nearly  four  miles.  At  long  intervals  the  scrub-oak 
gave  way  to  a  few  fields  composing  a  poor  little  farm. 
How  any  one  could  make  a  living  in  that  remote  forest 
country  was  a  mystery. 


A  yuest  for  Tar  295 

At  length  we  turned  off  into  the  woodland  desolation, 
continuing  our  way  by  minor  roads  and  paths.  Round 
about  were  stumps  and  scanty  bushes  and  thin  grasses. 
Here  and  there  rose  a  charred  tree  trunk,  and  the 
ground  was  strewn  with  black  fragments.  The  re- 
sponsibility for  these  conditions  did  not  rest  wholly 
with  the  sawmill.  The  doom  of  the  region  was  pro- 
nounced when  the  turpentine  gatherers  came  into  the 
forest.  In  tapping  a  pine  for  turpentine  the  axemen 
cut  two  cuplike  hollows  —  boxes  they  are  called  —  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  tree  near  the  base.  Into  these 
boxes  the  pitch  drips  from  the  wounds,  and  each  wound 
is  kept  fresh  for  several  years  by  constant  clippings 
from  the  bark  above  the  original  cut  until  the  gash 
extends  nearly  a  dozen  feet  up  the  trunk  and  most  of 
the  resin  in  the  tree  has  been  drained  away.  Then 
comes  the  sawmill,  and  the  trees  are  felled  and  con- 
verted into  lumber.  It  is  not  very  good  lumber  in 
the  opinion  of  the  natives.  The  vitality  has  been 
taken  from  it  in  getting  the  turpentine.  As  the  Spout 
Springs  sto'keeper  expressed  it :  "  The  wood  is  half 
dead,  and  it  won't  last.  You  want  to  have  the  pitch 
in  your  boards  and  then  they'll  be  with  you."  After 
the  sawmill  finishes,  the  tar  burners  cut  the  little  pines 
that  have  been  left,  fires  run  through  the  ragged  rem- 
nants of  the  forest,  and  the  devastation  looks  as  if  it 
was  complete  for  all  time  to  come.  The  land  is  then 
almost  valueless.      Six  or  eight  square  miles  of  it  around 


296         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

Spout  Springs  had  recently  been  bought  by  an  EngHsh- 
man  —  "jus'  a  young  strap  of  a  fellow"  —  who  was 
going  to  turn  it  into  a  game  preserve.  He  paid  about 
a  dollar  an  acre. 

The  boy  and  I  went  on  and  on  ;  and  though  the 
paths  we  followed  became  more  and  more  attenuated 
until  they  ceased  altogether,  my  guide  kept  swinging 
along  and  never  hesitated.  Yet  he  confessed  to  a  fear 
of  snakes,  and  he  pointed  out  a  white  flower  he  called 
snake-bite  which  he  said  he  would  rub  on  if  one  of  the 
creatures  bit  him,  and  that  would  take  out  the  poison. 
Charlie  was  a  model  of  docility  and  cheerfulness,  and 
was  very  good  company.  He  was  of  course  barefooted, 
and  his  garments  were  wonderfully  patched  both  behind 
and  before.  He  had  no  coat,  but  wore  a  vest  of  his 
father's  that  flapped  loosely  about  him. 

Finally  we  saw  smoke  rising  on  ahead,  and  we  passed 
over  one  more  ridge  and  there  on  the  slope  just  below 
was  a  burning  kiln.  No  one  was  near,  and  only  the 
crackle  of  the  flames  disturbed  the  silence.  The  kiln 
was  a  broad,  heavy  cairn,  seemingly  of  dirt,  for  it  is 
requisite  that  the  fire  shall  be  kept  well  smothered  and 
only  allowed  to  burn  outwardly  in  one  thin  rim.  To 
begin  with,  a  shallow  basin  twenty  feet  across  is  dug 
with  a  slight  slant  from  the  edge  to  the  centre  —  a 
kind  of  big  frying-pan  to  receive  the  pine  "  light'ood." 
The  wood  is  cut  about  ten  feet  long  and  split  up  small 
enough  so  that  none  of  the  sticks  exceeds  a  thickness 


A  Ouest  for  Tar 


297 


The  Burning  Tar-kiln 

of  three  or  four  inches.  It  Is  piled  horizontally  in  a 
circle,  care  being  taken  to  preserve  a  gentle  dip  from 
the  outside  inward.  When  completed  the  pile  is  from 
eight  to  twelve  feet  high.  A  rough  fence  is  now  built 
around  it,  having  a  foot  of  space  between  the  fencing 
and  the  lightwood,  and  this  space  is  filled  in  with  earth, 
and  earth  is  thrown  up  to  cover  the  top.  In  obtaining 
the  dirt  a  great  ragged  ditch  is  excavated  at  the  base  of 
the  kiln.  When  the  fire  is  started,  the  tar  flows  to  the 
centre  of  the  kiln  and  thence  runs  out  by  an  under- 
ground trough  into  a  square  hole  dug  for  the  purpose. 
From  the  hole  it  is  dipped  up  into  barrels.  A  fair- 
sized  kiln  will  fill  eight  barrels. 


298         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

I  had  not  been  long  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Brinkley 
kiln  when  a  young  negro  came  up  the  hill  through 
the  woods.  Two  dogs  were  at  his  heels  and  he  car- 
ried a  gun.  He  was  the  tar  burner,  and  after  we  had 
spoken  together,  he  took  his  spade  and  began  to  heave 
dirt  up  on  the  kiln  to  smother  the  flames  that  were 
breaking  forth  too  vigorously.  The  fire  had  to  be 
watched  day  and  night  during  the  whole  period  of 
burning,  which  lasted  about  a  week.  The  negro  had 
a  rude  shack  near  by  —  an  open-sided  afi^air  made  of  a 
few  boards.  He  prepared  his  own  meals  and  did  his 
cooking  over  a  little  fire  on  the  ground  in  front  of 
his  hut. 

When  we  started  to  return,  the  tar  burner  picked 
up  his  gun  and  went  with  us  as  far  as  the  next  hollow. 
This  hollow  was  grown  up  to  hardwood,  and  enough 
trees  had  been  spared  to  make  the  spot  quite  attrac- 
tive. A  brook  meandered  through  the  glen,  and  there 
were  cool  shadows  and  green  grass  and  flowers.  I 
was  not  disposed  to  hasten,  and  as  I  stood  talking  with 
the  tar  burner,  I  happened  to  ask  him  something 
about  "  Brer  Rabbit."  I  repeated  several  incidents 
in  the  life  of  that  celebrated  character  which  I  had 
heard  elsewhere.  The  tales  vary  in  different  locali- 
ties, and  my  companion  was  soon  relating  his  own 
versions  of  them.  The  boy,  meanwhile,  sat  down  on 
a  fallen  tree  trunk,  listening  intently  and  never  failing 
at  the  humorous  points  to  explode  with  spontaneous 


The  Tar-burner's  Camp 


'  "n — U'-jg^.^M 


"RF^ 


I 


ASTOt,  D 

TILD£N  f-OONDATIGNS. 


A  Quest  for  Tar  299 

laughter  and  a  display  of  white  teeth.  Three  of  the 
stories  I  give  below.  The  first  will  recall  to  the 
reader  the  Uncle  Remus  story  with  the  same  plot, 
yet  it  is  unlike  that  famous  tale  in  many  particulars, 
and  it  has  a  flavor  peculiar  to  the  narrator's  own 
occupation. 

BRER    wolf's    little    TAR    MAN 

One  time  Brer  Wolf  tell  Brer  Rabbit  he  gwine  dig 
a  well,  an'  he  say,  "  Brer  Rabbit,  yo'  tu'n  in  an'  he'p 
me  dig  dis  yere  well,  an'  den  we  share  de  water 
togedder." 

But  Brer  Rabbit  say,  "  No,  I  doan'  wan'  to  dig  no 
well." 

"  What  yo'  do  fo'  water  den  ?  "   Brer  Wolf  ask. 

"  I  get  up  in  de  mawnin'  an'  drink  de  jew  off  de 
grass,"  Brer  Rabbit  say. 

So  Brer  Wolf  dig  his  well,  an'  Brer  Rabbit  drink 
de  jew  off  de  grass  until  dar  come  a  time  when  dar 
wa'n't  no  jew.  It  was  a  ve'y  dry  spell  an'  de  rain 
didn't  fall  an'  kep'  on  not  fallin'  till  mighty  nigh  all 
de  springs  an'  branches  an'  cricks  was  plumb  dried 
up,  an'  de  creeturs  couldn't  hardly  find  water  enough 
to  keep  from  perishin'. 

Brer  Wolf  mo'  lucky  dan  mos'.  De  water  in  his 
well  git  ve'y  low,  but  it  ain't  never  quite  dry  up. 
Den  Brer  Rabbit  got  to  slippin'  aroun'  to  Brer  Wolf's 
ev'y  night  an'  Brer  Wolf  find  his  water  gone  and  gone 


300         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

—  ev'y  mornin'  hit  all  drawn  out.  But  he  see  Brer 
Rabbit's  tracks  aroun'  his  well,  an'  he  study  to  fix  a 
plan  for  to  ketch  him.  So  he  think  he  make  him  up 
a  liT  tar  man,  an'  he  take  some  rags  an'  twis'  an'  tie 
'em  up  into  de  likeness  er  a  li'T  man,  an'  daub  de 
whole  over  wid  some  er  dis  yere  pine  tar  which  is 
de  stickinest  stuff  on  de  face  er  de  yearth.  He  made 
de  li'l'  tar  man.  Brer  Wolf  did,  an'  den  he  set  it  up 
by  de  well  an'  hung  de  go'd  on  it. 

Dat  night,  jus'  fo'  day.  Brer  Rabbit  come  aroun' 
same  as  usual  an'  he  see  de  li'l'  man  an'  he  stop  an' 
say,  "  Good  mawnin',  Mr.  Man." 

But  de  li'l'  tar  man  doan'  say  nothin',  an'  Brer  Rab- 
bit say  again,  "  Good  mawnin',  Mr.  Man." 

But  de  li'l'  tar  man  doan'  speak,  an'  Brer  Rabbit,  he 
say,  "  Give  me  de  go'd,  please  suh." 

De  li'l'  tar  man  jus'  stan'  dar  an'  keep  his  mouth 
shet,  an'  Brer  Rabbit  shout,  "  I  say,  give  me  de  go'd 
or  I'll  hit  yo'  tereckly." 

De  li'l'  tar  man  doan'  'spond,  an'  Brer  Rabbit 
hauled  away  an'  struck  him  side  er  his  haid,  an'  Brer 
Rabbit's  fist  stuck. 

"Hoc!  Yo'  think  yo'  hoi'  me?"  Brer  Rabbit 
say.  "  Yo'  take  keer !  I  got  anudder  ba-ad  hand 
yere,"  an'  he  struck  de  li'l'  tar  man  wid  dat,  an'  dat 
stuck. 

"  What  mean,  holdin'  me  ? "  Brer  Rabbit  cry. 
"  Yo'   tu'n  me  loose   or  I    hit  yo'   wid   dis  foot." 


A  Quest  for  Tar  toi 

Den  he  lose  de  use  er  one  er  his  feet.  "  Lord  ! 
what  mean  actui'  dis-away  ?  "  he  holler.  "  Yo'  done 
got  to  do  dif'rent,  or  I  hit  yo'  wid  my  udder  foot. 
Yo'  better  let  go.      I  kill  several  men  wid  dat  foot." 

Blip  !  he  hit,  an'  de  foot  stuck  same  like  de  udder. 
"  Hey  !  yo'  think  yo'  hoi'  me  ?  "  says  he.  "  I  got  a 
tail.     Ef  I  hit  yo'  wid  dat  'ar  tail  I  cut  yo'  clean  in  two." 

De  liT  tar  man  helt  fast  an'  doan'  say  nothin' ;  an' 
Brer  Rabbit  git  his  tail  stuck.  "  Lord,  Lord  !  "  he 
say,  "  yo'  de  wors'  man  what  ever  I  see.  Tu'n  me 
loose  or  I  butt  you  wid  my  haid  ;  "  an'  he  butted 
an*  got  his  haid  stuck,  an'  he  make  de  mos'  awful 
racket  a-bitin',  knockin',  and  kickin'  till  Brer  Wolf 
come  out  in  de  mornin'  an'  found  him  dar. 

"  Oh !  you  de  man  what  steal  my  water,"  Brer 
Wolf  say.  "  I  teach  yo'  a  lesson,  now.  I  gwine  eat 
yo'  up,  Brer  Rabbit;  but  first  I  gwine  give  yo'  de 
greates'  whippin'  yo'  ever  had  in  all  yo'  days." 

So  Brer  Wolf  tie  Brer  Rabbit  to  a  big  tree  an'  go 
off  in  de  woods  for  to  cut  some  switches  to  beat  him 
wid.  He  hadn't  been  gone  mo'  dan  two  minutes 
when  Brer  B'ar  come  along  de  road.  He  see 
Brer  Rabbit  tie  to  de  tree,  an'  he  say,  "  What  de  mat- 
ter, Brer  Rabbit.^     What  yo'  doin'  dar  .^  " 

"  I'm  a-waitin'  for  somepin  to  eat,"  Brer  Rabbit 
say. 

"  What  yo'  gwine  eat  ?  "  Brer  B'ar  ask. 

"  De  folks  what  tie  me  hyar  say  dey  gwine  make  me 


302  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

eat  a  whole  pig,  two  hams,  an'  ten  loaves  er  bread," 
says  Brer  Rabbit. 

Brer  B'ar  was  hungry,  an'  he  say,  "  Dat  about 
suit  me.  Brer  Rabbit,  but  yo'  too  small  for  so  much." 

"  Dat  de  trouble,"  says  Brer  Rabbit,  "  an'  if  yo' 
wan'  to  do  de  eatin',  yo'  can  take  my  place.  Brer  B'ar," 
says  he. 

Brer  B'ar  reply  he  willin',  an'  he  untie  Brer  Rabbit, 
an'  den  Brer  Rabbit  tie  Brer  B'ar  to  de  tree  an'  went 
off  home.  Co'se  Brer  B'ar  git  de  lickin'  ;  but  Brer 
Rabbit  ain'  care.  He  always  playin'  de  ole  scratch 
wid  de  udder  creeturs,  an'  he  de  smartes'  er  de  whole 
lot.  Brer  Wolf,  he  de  mos'  prosperous,  an'  Brer 
Rabbit  always  sneakin'  aroun'  an'  stealin'  from  him 
an'  trickin'  him.  Time  an'  again  he  get  right  into 
Brer  Wolf's  kitchen  when  Brer  Wolf  step  to  de 
gyarden  or  de  spring-house,  an'  he  scoop  de  peas  out'n 
de  pot  whar  dey  cookin'  over  de  fire  an'  eat  'em  an' 
den  fill  de  pot  up  wid  rocks.  Brer  Wolf,  he  forever 
sayin'  he  fix  him,  but  he  cain't  never  fix  Brer  Rabbit 
'case  Brer  Rabbit  too  smart  a  man  fo'  him. 


THE    FROG,    THE    MOUSE,    AND    THE    HAWK 

De  frog  an'  de  mouse,  dey  use'  to  be  two  good 
frien's ;  an'  ev'y  day  de  frog  come  to  Brer  Mouse* 
house  an'  take  dinner  an'  spen'  long  time.  But  Brer 
Mouse  ain'  never  been  to  see   Brer  Frog;  an'  things 


A  Quest  for  Tar  303 

went  on  dat-away  till  bimeby  Brer  Frog  say,  "  Brer 
Mouse,  I  been  comin'  yere  right  along  since  I  doan' 
know  when,  an'  now  I  want  yo'  to  go  wid  me  to  my 
house  an'  make  me  a  visit." 

Brer  Mouse  say  he  be  glad  to  go,  "  But,  yo'  live 
in  de  bottom  er  de  crick,  Brer  Frog,"  says  he.  "  How 
I  gwine  to  git  down  dar  ^  "  says  he. 

"  Oh,  Fll  take  yo',"  Brer  Frog  say,  "  Fll  take  yo'. 
All  yo'  need  do  is  jus'  to  git  a  string  an'  tie  one  er 
yo'  behime  legs  to  one  er  mine,  an'  I'll  take  yo' 
straight  dar,"  says  Brer  Frog,  "  an'  we'll  stay  all  day 
an'  have  dinner  an'  come  back  in  de  evenin',"  says 
Brer  Frog. 

Brer  Mouse  agree,  an'  he  git  a  string  an'  dey  walk 
along  to  de  bank  er  de  crick.  Den  Brer  Mouse  tie 
one  er  his  behime  legs  to  one  er  Brer  Frog's  behime 
legs,  an'  Brer  Frog  he  jump  into  de  crick.  Dat  pull 
Brer  Mouse  into  de  crick,  too  ;  but  de  string  was  tie 
long  an'  de  water  wa'n'  deep,  an'  when  Brer  Frog  git 
to  de  bottom.  Brer  Mouse  was  a-swimmin'  aroun'  on 
de  top. 

'Bout  dat  time  Brer  Hawk  happen  along,  an'  he 
see  Brer  Mouse  a-swimmin',  an'  he  flew  down  to  fin' 
out  what  de  matter.  "  I  reckon  dat  mouse  make  me  a 
good  dinner,"  says  Brer  Hawk. 

So  he  pick  up  Brer  Mouse,  an'  co'se  he  git  Brer 
Frog  at  de  udder  end  er  de  string  what  was  hitch  to 
Brer  Mouse'  leg. 


304         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

Brer  Frog  doan'  like  dat,  an'  he  begin  to  holler : 
"  Hoi'  on,  Brer  Hawk  !  Hoi'  on  !  Yo'  let  me  go. 
Hit's  Brer  Mouse  yo'  want." 

But  Brer  Hawk  say,  "  Dat  all  right,  Brer  Frog. 
Doan'  waste  yo'  bref.  I  likes  mice,  but  I  likes  frogs 
still  better;  "an'  he  kep'  on  a-flyin'  an'  carried  'em  off 
into  de  woods  an'  dar  he  e't  de  both  er  'em. 


HOW   THE    MUD-TURTLE    CAME    TO    LIVE    IN    THE    WATER 

One  day,  long,  long  time  ago,  de  duck  an'  de  turkle 
was  a-talkin'  togedder  on  de  bank  er  de  river ;  an' 
dey  git  ve'y  frien'ly,  an'  bimeby  de  duck  say,  "  My 
dinner  all  ready  'cross  de  river.  Brer  Turkle,  an'  I 
be  much  please'  if  yo'  come  wid  me  an'  dine,  suh  !  " 

An'  de  turkle  say,  "  I  bleedged  to  yo'.  Brer  Duck, 
but  how  I  git  over  de  river  ?  I  cain't  fly,  needer  can 
I  swim  ;"  for  in  dem  days  de  turkle  always  live  on  de 
Ian'. 

Den  de  Duck  say  :  "  Dat  make  no  dif 'runce.  Brer 
Turkle.  Yo'  jus'  hoi'  onto  my  feet  an'  I  fly  'cross 
wid  you." 

So  de  turkle  say  he  will,  an'  he  take  hoi'  an'  de  duck 
go  flap,  flap,  takin'  de  turkle  along  wid  him.  But  de 
duck,  he  ain't  raelly  want  de  turkle  to  his  dinner,  an' 
he  wait  till  he  git  to  de  middle  er  de  river,  an'  den  he 
give  hisse'f  a  shake  an'  drap  de  turkle  splash  into  de 
water,  an'  de  turkle  done  been  in  de  water  ever  since. 


A  Quest  for  Tar 


305 


"  My  mother  say  dey  not  tell  dese  stories  so  much 
now  as  in  de  ole  times  befo'  de  wah.  In  dose  days 
de  chillen  thought  dey  was  de  best  stories  in  de  worl' 
an'  reckoned  'em  equal  to  Santa  Claus  an'  Christmas. 
De  chillen  was  always  ready  to  listen,  she  say,  an'  yo' 
won't  fin'  any  pusson,  white  or  black,  what  been 
raised  in  de  Souf  but  know  all  'bout  Brer  Rabbit  an' 
de  udder  creeturs." 


On  a  Trail 


When  the  little  colored  boy  and  I  left  the  pleasant 
hollow  where  we  had  been  lingering,  listening  to  the 
stories   of  the   tar-kiln  burner,   the  afternoon  was   far 


3o6         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

spent  and  the  air  was  growing  cool.  Our  entertainer 
tramped  away  with  his  gun  and  dogs  back  to  his  tar 
works,  and  we  went  in  the  opposite  direction  across  the 
woodland  ruins  to  the  main  road.  Shortly  after  we 
reached  that  sandy  thoroughfare,  the  boy  turned  aside 
to  go  to  his  home  and  I  continued  on  alone.  Once  I 
paused  long  enough  to  pull  off  a  pocketful  of  fruit 
from  the  drooping  branches  of  a  persimmon  tree. 
These  trees  were  plentiful.  They  were  rather  slender 
and  graceful  and  attained  a  height  of  about  twenty 
feet.  The  ripe  yellow  fruit  with  its  slight  flush  of  red 
looked  like  small  smooth  tomatoes.  Unless  perfectly 
ripe  the  persimmons  pucker  the  mouth,  or,  to  use  the 
Southern  expression,  "  They  are  rough  and  tongue- 
tie  you."  But  at  their  best  they  are  sweet  and  luscious 
and  melt  in  the  mouth  — all  except  the  several  big  flat 
seeds  that  make  up  fully  half  their  bulk.  We  have  no 
wild  fruit  in  our  Northern  woods  to  compare  with  them. 
Some  people  make  "  persimmon  puddin'  "  which  was 
described  to  me  as  "splendid,"  but  the  commonest 
delicacy  produced  from  the  fruit  is  persimmon  beer. 
If  this  beverage  is  as  good  as  people  say,  it  must  be 
fit  for  the  gods. 

I  toiled  on  through  the  sand,  munching  my  per- 
simmons, and  the  sun  went  down  and  the  dusky 
evening  brooded  over  the  scrubby  forest.  Just  as 
the  darkness  was  getting  dense,  I  reached  Spout 
Springs  and  sought  one  of  the  little  houses  beside  the 


At  the  Back  Door 


A  Quest  for  Tar  307 

railroad  track  and  engaged  lodging  of  an  elderly 
woman  who  was  chewing  a  snuff  stick.  The  man  of 
the  house  was  at  the  well  in  the  back  yard  drawing  up 
a  pail  of  water  on  the  creaking  windlass.  That  done 
he  went  to  find  "  the  fattening  hogs,"  and  afterwards 
he  sat  down  indoors  to  wait  for  the  cows  to  return 
from  their  day's  grazing  in  the  woods.  They  always 
came,  but  they  took  their  own  time  about  it  and  the 
milking  was  often  much  belated.  "  Hit  air  plumb 
discouragin'  the  way  those  cows  act,"  affirmed  the 
man.  "  Sometime  I  think  Til  git  shet  of  cows  and 
not  raise  no  mo'  while  I  stay  hyar." 

"  This  ain't  much  of  a  place  to  live  in  since  the 
sawmill  got  through,"  was  the  wife's  comment,  "  an' 
we're  gittin'  ole.  Hit's  all  I  can  do  to  walk  about, 
and  I  don't  go  anywhar  from  home  unless  Tm 
hauled." 

The  grizzled  old  man  now  rose  stiffly  and  picked 
up  his  milk-pail.  "  I  hear  the  cows,"  he  said,  and 
went  out  into  the  night. 

I  was  sitting  in  the  kitchen,  a  rough  shedlike  room 
lighted  by  a  dim  kerosene  lamp.  In  one  corner  was  a 
little  stove.  The  walls  were  lined  with  cupboards  and 
shelves.  Numerous  parcels  and  pails  were  suspended 
from  the  rafters  by  strings  to  keep  them  from  the  rats 
and  ants  ;  and  to  thwart  this  latter  class  of  invaders 
the  table  legs  were  set  in  tin  cans  filled  with  water. 
"  Them  red  ants  are  the  meanest  little  things  you  ever 


3o8         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

met  up  with,"  declared  my  landlady.  "  Sometimes  in 
the  mornin'  I  find  a  regular  path  of  'em  goin*  and 
comin'  cl'ar  across  the  floor.  They're  so  small  I  caln't 
see  'em  unless  thar's  a  right  smart  of  'em  together." 

Several  brooms  were  scattered  about  the  kitchen,  all 
of  them  of  home  manufacture.  The  biggest  one  was 
a  "  scouring  broom "  made  of  a  five-foot  stick  of 
hickory.  At  one  end  the  stick  had  been  whittled 
down  in  shavings  that  were  not  quite  severed  from  it, 
and  then  these  hangings  were  tied  about  with  a  string 
to  keep  them  in  a  bunch  that  could  be  used  effec- 
tively. The  rest  of  the  stick  was  reduced  to  a  con- 
venient-sized handle.  Another  broom  was  a  shuck 
broom  made  of  corn  husks  fastened  to  the  end  of  a 
stick ;  and  there  were  several  grass  brooms  consisting 
simply  of  bunches  of  long,  straight  grass  stems.  The 
brooms  were  needed,  for  the  floors  were  kept  con- 
stantly gritty  with  sand  tracked  in  from  the  turfless 
yard. 

Presently  the  man  returned  from  milking  and  we 
had  supper.  For  dessert  I  was  introduced  to  a  scup- 
pernong  pie.  It  was  the  first  grape  pie  I  had  ever 
eaten.  "  I  made  hit  with  hulls  and  all,"  said  the  house- 
wife, "  and  there's  considerable  sourness  in  the  hulls, 
so   yo'   may   like   hit  mo'   sweeter." 

I  did  not  become  enamoured  with  the  pie  either  as 
it  was  or  "mo'  sweeter."  I  liked  the  uncooked  grapes 
better.     They  are  a  light  green  in  color  and  have  a 


A  Quest  for  Tar 


309 


pleasant,  mild  flavor.      My  landlady  was  enthusiastic 
over  the  muscadines,  a  wild  black    grape  that  grows 


The  Home  Woodpile 

on  the  edges  of  swamps  and  old  fields  ;  but  it  was  as 
yet  too  early  for  them.  "They  are  not  sweet  good 
until  after  the  frost  bites  'em,"  she  explained. 

When  we  had  finished  supper  and  the  dishes  were 
cleared  away,  we  went  into  the  main  part  of  the  house. 


3IO         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

Here  a  brisk  open  fire  was  burning,  filling  the  room 
with  cheery  light.  I  drew  a  chair  up  to  the  hearth  and 
picked  off  the  cockle  burrs  and  Spanish  needles  and 
beggar  lice  I  had  collected  during  my  day's  tramping, 
while  my  landlady  brought  out  a  bed-quilt  and  began 
working  on  it.  "  I'm  makin'  this  for  my  baby  boy," 
said  she.  "  He  was  married  last  June.  You  see  hit's 
pleated  all  over.  We  call  hit  the  pineapple  pattern. 
Hit's  right  pretty,  I  think." 

The  fire  died  down  low  from  time  to  time,  and  I 
could  feel  the  night  gloom  and  outer  chill  creeping 
into  the  room.  Then  some  pine  sticks  were  added, 
and  the  crackling  flames  leaped  again  and  sent  out 
their  grateful  heat  and  light.  The  man  told  me  all 
about  the  mysteries  of  tar  making,  and  he  expressed 
great  contempt  for  coal  tar.  It  had  few  of  the  virtues 
of  the  pitchy  product  of  the  pine  trees.  This  pine  tar 
was  medicinal,  too.  It  was  an  excellent  salve  for  a 
sore  or  wound,  "and  hit's  powerful  healthy  to  put  a 
little  tar  in  a  cup  and  drink  it  with  water." 

The  family  retired  early,  and  it  did  not  seem  as  if  I 
had  been  asleep  long  before  I  heard  the  old  man  mov- 
ing about  in  the  next  room.  "  A  chicken  woke  me 
a-squallin',"  the  man  said  when  I  came  forth  a  little 
later,  "an'  I  didn't  know  but  one  o'  these  hyar  niggers 
workin'  on  the  railroad  was  robbin'  our  hen-roost." 

The  alarm  had  proved  to  be  a  false  one,  but  as  the 
darkness  of  night  had  begun  to  pale  before  the  coming 


A  Guest  for  Tar 


311 


day,  it  was  nearly  rising  time  anyway  and  the  man 
started  his  morning's  work  —  that  is,  he  fed  his  stock, 
milked  the  cows,  and  hacked  away  for  a  while  at  a  pile 
of  charred  pine  and  crooked  sticks  of  black-jack  in  a 
corner  of  the  yard.  When  I  stepped  outdoors,  I  found 
my  landlady  in  the  garden  picking  some  peppers.     "  I 


I.. 

Garden  Peppers 


3T2         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

don't  know  how  I'd  keep  house  without  peppers,"  said 
she,  caressing  the  green  plants.  Then  she  pointed  out 
to  me  the  patches  of  collards,  sweet  potatoes,  string 
beans,  or  snaps  as  she  called  them,  and  a  row  of  tall 
okra  stalks  growing  beside  the  straight  path  that  led 
down  the  centre  of  the  garden.  Finally  she  called  my 
attention  to  a  great,  coarse,  wide-branching  weed  near 
the  fence.  "  That  thar's  jimson,"  she  informed  me, 
"and  hit's  about  the  worst  weed  pest  we  have." 

I  went  for  a  walk,  after  breakfast,  and  I  tried  to 
make  up  my  mind  to  stay  at  Spout  Springs  a  few  days 
longer,  but  its  desolation  was  too  pronounced,  and  by 
evening  I  had  returned  to  Fayetteville. 


XIV 


ROUND    ABOUT    OLD    JAMESTOWN 


The  Tower  of  Jamestown  Church 


m 


HE  entire  re- 
.  gioi^  ii'i  James- 
-^  town's  vicinity 
is  rich  in  historic 
charm.  Here  occurred 
many  stirring  events 
in  Colonial  days;  here, 
less  than  twenty  miles 
apart,  were  three  of 
the  most  notable 
towns  of  that  period, 
Jamestown,  Williams- 
burg, and  Yorktown, 
and  the  district  was  a 
sceneof  conflict  in  two 
great  wars.  When  I 
debated  what  place  I 


should  see  first  in  this  famous  neighborhood,  I  decided 
it  should  be  Yorktown,  and  one  October  morning  I 
walked  thither  from  the  nearest  railway  station,  a  dis- 
tance of  six  miles.    The  road  led  across  a  monotonous, 

313 


314         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

half-wooded  country  that  did  not  presage  much  attrac- 
tion for  my  journey's  goal ;  but  I  was  happily  dis- 
appointed. Yorktown  is  a  village  to  fall  in  love  with, 
—  such  a  quaint,  gentle  old  place,  such  venerable 
houses  and  great  gnarled  trees,  and  such  a  picturesque 
upheaval  of  grass-grown  earthworks  girding  it  about. 
Moreover  it  stands  on  a  bluff  gashed  with  frequent 
narrow  ravines  leading  down  to  the  shores  of  a  broad 
inlet  of  the  sea,  and  the  views  from  these  wild  little 
glens,  whether  you  look  off  across  the  water  or  back 
toward  the  village  are  unfailingly  piquant  and  pleasing. 

Before  the  Revolution,  Yorktown  was  the  chief  port 
of  Virginia,  and  several  vessels  loaded  with  tobacco 
were  every  year  despatched  thence  across  the  Atlantic. 
But  for  more  than  a  century  the  population  has  been 
gradually  dwindling  until  now  it  aggregates  only  two 
hundred  and  thirty  eight,  and  three-fourths  of  this 
small  number  are   negroes. 

On  the  farther  edge  of  the  village  stands  an  impos- 
ing national  monument  commemorating  the  surrender 
of  Cornwallis.  The  monument  was  finished  com- 
paratively recently;  for  though  its  erection  was  in  pur- 
suance of  a  resolution  of  Congress  adopted  October  29, 
178 1,  ten  days  after  the  surrender,  actual  work  was  not 
begun  on  it  until  about  one  hundred  years  later.  The 
memorial  is  fenced  in  by  rude  wooden  palings  that  are 
half  broken  away  so  that  the  wandering  cattle  feed  at 
the  very  foot  of  the  lofty  marble  column.      Indeed,  as 


Round  about  Old  Jamestown 


3^5 


Yorktown  Street 

I  walked  around  the  shaft,  I  nearly  fell  over  a  calmly 
ruminating  cow  lying  in  its  shadow.  Not  far  away  is 
a  fragment  of  an  embankment  that  is  pointed  out  as 
belonging  to  the  time  of  the  famous  siege,  and  this  is 
all  that  is  left  of  the  British  fortifications.  The  other 
earthworks  upheaving  in  great  grassy  ridges  around 
the  village  belong  to  the  Civil  War.  They  are  very 
peaceful  now  and  are  much  overgrown  with  a  low 
aromatic  herb  from  which  one's  footfalls  set  free  pun- 
gent and  agreeable  odors. 

The  siege  of  Yorktown  was  not  of  long  duration. 
The  British  were  cooped  up  there  scarcely  two  months, 
and   the   bonds    were    not   at  all    tightly   drawn    until 


3i6         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

toward  the  end.  The  bombardment  lasted  only  eight 
days,  but  it  was  at  close  quarters  and  wrought  great 
havoc.  All  the  town  buildings  were  more  or  less 
damaged,  and  the  house  which  was  at  first  Cornwallis's 
headquarters  was  battered  to  pieces.  He  removed  to 
the  handsome  brick  Nelson  mansion,  still  standing 
and  still  bearing  the  marks  of  the  besiegers'  cannon- 
balls.  Tradition  relates  that,  as  the  perils  of  the 
bombardment  increased,  this  house,  too,  was  aban- 
doned, and  the  commander  sought  a  cave  under  the 
bluff.  He  had  the  cave  lined  with  green  baize,  con- 
veyed to  it  a  few  necessities,  and  there  he  lived  and 
held  his  councils  with  the  other  army  officers.  The 
appearance  of  the  town  after  the  surrender  was  one  of 
dire  confusion,  the  earth  all  uptorn  by  the  plunging 
cannon-balls,  rich  furniture  and  costly  books  strewn 
about  the  streets,  and  bodies  of  men  and  carcasses  of 
horses  scattered  in  every  direction.  Evidently  it  must 
have  been  exceedingly  difficult  to  find  a  spot  where 
a  person  would  be  safe  from  the  searching  fire  of  the 
allied  batteries  and  the  French  fleet.  ; 

The  surrender  took  place  among  the  fields  about  a 
mile  distant,  and  the  locality  is  marked  by  a  curious 
symbolic  shaft  erected  by  a  patriotic  private  citizen. 
The  shaft  is  of  imported  EngUsh  brick  cemented  with 
German  mortar,  the  former  signifying  the  British  and 
the  latter  the  Hessian  components  of  the  captured 
army,  and  the  whole  Is  made  emblematic  of  war  by  a 


Round  about  Old  Jamestown 


317 


coat  of  red  paint.  It  stands  beside  a  little  lane  a  few 
rods  off  the  main  road.  Close  by  is  a  national  ceme- 
tery where  sleep  some  hundreds  of  Union  soldiers  who 
died  on  the  battle-fields  or  in  the  camps  of  the  vicinity. 
They  have  a  parklike  enclosure  to  themselves,  with  a 
massive  wall  of  brick  about  it.     Within  the  enclosure 


The  Spot  where  Cornvvallis  surrendered 

the  turf  is  like  a  lawn,  the  trees  are  kept  trimmed, 
and  the  care  is  constant.  The  man  in  charge  took 
great  pride  in  the  appearance  of  the  cemetery,  and  he 
waxed  very  wroth  in  telling  me  of  the  depredations 
of  certain  beetles  that  clipped  off  twigs  of  his  trees. 
He  was  a  German  who  had  never  succeeded  in  fully 
mastering  our  language.    "  Dose  bugs,  dey  haf  pinchers 


3i8         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

and  saws  on  deir  heads,"  he  explained,  "  and  dey  cut 
off  Hnibs  big  as  my  finger,  and  I  haf  all  der  time  every 
day  to  keep  pickin'  dose  branches  up." 

We  were  standing  just  inside  the  gate  near  a  pump 
that  adjoined  the  caretaker's  tidy  stone  cottage.  The 
man  stepped  to  the  pump  and  filled  a  cup  with  water, 
but  paused  as  he  was  conveying  it  to  his  mouth  to 
say  :  "  Some  beoples  not  like  to  drink  dis  water.  Dey 
fill  der  cup  and  dey  look  mit  deir  eyes  at  der  graves 
so  many  here,  and  dey  drow  der  water  away.  But 
dose  old  fellows  not  drouble  der  water  none.  Dey 
been  bury  too  long,  and  dis  water  not  come  from  der 
ground  nohow.  It  come  out  of  a  cistern  dat  fill  from 
der  roof.  Der  taste  would  be  better  from  der  ground. 
One  man  near  here  has  an  artesian  well  —  ah!  dot  is 
der  water.  It  is  more  light  as  cork  and  you  can  drink 
of  it  two  or  dree  gallons  at  der  same  time  and  it  will 
not  hurt  you." 

On  my  way  from  Yorktown  back  to  the  railroad  I 
was  overtaken  by  a  colored  boy  in  a  buggy  driving  a 
horse  that  looked  as  historic  as  anything  I  had  seen 
that  day.  I  was  getting  footsore  and  I  begged  a  ride. 
The  boy  stopped  his  steed  and  I  climbed  in.  "  Go 
on,  hoss  !  "  said  my  driver,  and  we  got  into  halting 
motion.  "  She  go  kind  er  twitchy  because  dere's  one 
er  dese  yere  hoss-flies  bodderin'  aroun',"  he  apolo- 
gized. "  But  I'll  fix  him  ;  "  and  he  watched  his  oppor- 
tunity until  the  big  fly  lit  on  the  horse's  flank.     Then 


The  Beach  at  Yorktown 


PU,  -. 


:^  1 


ASTOh.   LuWuX   AND 
TILDEN   F0UNDAT10N8, 


Round  about  Old  Jamestown  319 

the  boy  leaned  over  the  dashboard  and  made  a  sudden 
slap  and  the  fly  was  annihilated. 

<  The  boy  was  from  Yorktown  and  I  asked  him 
what  the  big  shade  trees  were  I  had  seen  along  the 
village  street.  He  hesitated.  "  Yo'  ask  me  too  quick, 
boss,"  he  said  ;  but  after  meditating  he  told  me  they 
were  mulberries. 

"  And  what  is  this  tree  we  are  passing  now  ?  "  I 
inquired. 

He  replied  that  it  was  a  chinquapin.  It  looked  a 
good  deal  like  a  birch,  though  the  trunk  was  not  so 
handsomely  mottled,  nor  the  limbs  so  sinuous.  The 
ground  beneath  was  sprinkled  with  burrs  and  nuts. 
These  might  have  come  off  a  chestnut  tree,  except 
that  the  burrs  grew  in  larger  and  snugger  clusters,  and 
the  nuts  instead  of  being  flat  sided  were  little  brown 
cones.  The  boy  said  the  nuts  were  good  to  eat  either 
raw  or  boiled,  and  that  the  children  often  strung  them 
and  used  them  for  bracelets. 

Among  the  bushes  in  the  roadside  tangles  I  was 
surprised  to  see  clumps  of  real  English  holly  and  furze 
and  broom.  My  driver  called  the  broom  "  Indian 
sage,"  and  said  it  was  medicinal.  "  Yo'  can  make  a 
tea  out  of  it  dat's  as  good  as  ox  gall  for  heart  disease," 
he  aflirmed. 

The  fields  were  turning  sear  and  the  autumn  plough- 
ing was  being  done.  The  corn  was  cut  —  all  of  it  that 
would  be  cut.     Some  farmers  put  the  entire  stalks  up 


320         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

in  shocks,  but  it  was  more  customary  to  cut  off  the 
tops  just  above  the  ears,  and  stack  these  tops.  After 
they  had  dried  in  the  shock  for  about  two  weeks,  they 


Stacking  Cornstalks 

were  carted  to  the  barn,  or  perhaps  were  packed  in  a 
snug  conical  pile  around  a  pole  in  the  farmyard.      The 


Round  about  0]d  Jamestown  321 

smaller  farmers  not  only  harvested  the  tops  of  the 
stalks,  but  they  picked  off  the  leaves  on  the  portion 
of  the  stalks  left  standing.  As  soon  as  the  picker  had 
gathered  an  armful  of  the  leaves,  he  tied  them  in  a 
compact  bunch  which  he  hung  on  a  stalk  to  cure,  and 
in  a  few  days  the  "blade  fodder"  was  ready  for  stor- 
age. The  leaves  of  sorghum,  or  "  molasses  corn  "  as 
my  driver  called  it,  were  also  saved  for  cattle  feed,  and 
the  stalks  stripped  bare,  leaving  only  the  brown  tufts 
of  seed  at  the  top. 

That  night  I  stayed  at  the  ancient  town  of  Williams- 
burg, a  most  interesting  place,  built  around  a  large, 
grassy  square.  Here  and  there  a  sedate  colonial  house 
has  survived,  and  best  of  all  is  the  old  brick  parish 
church  with  the  graves  of  the  early  inhabitants  cluster- 
ing under  the  pine  trees  in  the  churchyard.  At  the 
head  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  Street,  the  town's 
broad  chief  thoroughfare,  is  the  historic  William  and 
Mary  College,  and  at  the  other  end  of  the  street  for- 
merly stood  the  House  of  Burgesses. 

Jamestown  is  eight  miles  distant.  I  was  advised 
that  the  only  way  to  get  there  was  to  "  hire  a  rig,"  but 
I  preferred  to  walk.  It  proved  to  be  a  very  toilsome 
expedition.  The  weather  of  the  previous  evening  had 
been  threatening,  and  from  the  hotel  piazza  I  had 
watched  a  thunderstorm  that  wandered  along  the  hori- 
zon, and  flashed  and  rumbled,  and  lifted  a  gloomy 
cloud  mass  well  up  toward  the  zenith.      Later  the  wind 

Y 


322         Highways  and   Byways   of  the   South 

rose  and  thrashed  the  trees,  and  rain  fell  in  frequent 
showers  all  night.  In  the  morning  the  sun  gradually 
vanquished  the  clouds,  but  the  mud  and  shallow  pools 
of  the  roadway  made  walking  far  from  easy.  How- 
ever, there  were  long  sandy  stretches  which  were  fairly 
firm.  I  followed  the  "  main  travelled  road  "  ;  for  the 
route  to  Jamestown  is  kept  well  worn  by  the  constant 
coming  and  going  of  visitors,  and  the  other  roads  were 
mere  trails  by  comparison.  It  was  a  lonely  road  wend- 
ing much  of  the  way  through  dense  woods,  and  it  was 
full  of  wild  and  primitive  suggestions.  Now  and  then 
there  were  houses  and  poor  little  clearings.  In  several 
instances  the  houses  were  deserted.  I  stopped  at 
one  such  and  was  sitting  to  rest  on  the  curb  of  the 
dooryard  well  when  I  was  startled  to  see  a  large  snake 
looking  up  at  me  from  halfway  down  the  well.  The 
snake  had  adjusted  itself  on  the  edge  of  a  board  that 
had  lodged  there,  and  apparently  was  a  prisoner  in 
some  danger  of  slipping  off  the  narrow  perch  into  the 
water  below,  and  with  no  chance  of  climbing  up  the 
perpendicular  walls  of  the  well. 

Jamestown  is  on  an  island  of  about  sixteen  hundred 
acres,  three-fourths  of  which  are  arable.  It  is  sep- 
arated from  the  mainland  by  a  creek  a  few  rods 
across  that  is  spanned  by  a  rude  bridge.  Along  the 
shores  of  the  creek  are  salt  marshes  overgrown  with 
rank  grasses  and  weeds,  and  beyond  the  marshes 
are   pleasant  open  fields  variegated  with   oak  and  pine 


Round  about  Old  Jamestown 


3'^3 


woodland.  In  a  little  grove  at  the  west  end  of  the 
island  is  what  is  lett  of  old  Jamestown  —  a  few  graves 
and  a  ruinous  church  tower  close  by  the  shore  of  the 


A  Rider 


broad  river  James.  Not  far  from  the  church  are  the 
heavy  earthworks  of  a  fort.  The  fort,  however,  was  not 
erected  by  the  pioneers,  but  was  one  of  the  outlying  de- 
fences of  Richmond,  thrown  up  during  the  Civil  War. 


324         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

The  founders  of  Jamestown  arrived  on  the  Virginia 
shores  in  the  month  of  May,  after  a  rough  winter  voy- 
age that  began  December  19,  1606;  and  their  senti- 
ments, as  expressed  by  Captain  John  Smith,  were  that 
"  heaven  and  earth  never  agreed  better  to  frame  a  place 
for  man's  habitation."  There  were  only  one  hundred 
and  forty-four  persons  in  the  entire  company,  thirty- 
nine  of  whom  were  the  sailors  who  manned  the  three 
vessels.  About  half  the  others  were  classed  as  "  gentle- 
men," and  the  rest  as  tradesmen  and  mechanics.  It  is 
supposed  that  they  landed  at  the  lower  end  of  James- 
town island,  or  peninsula  as  it  was  then,  and  there  they 
built  the  first  houses,  but  they  moved  within  a  few 
years  to  where  the  ruins  of  the  town  now  are.  The 
land  as  they  found  it  was  no  doubt  grown  up  to  a  great 
pine  forest.  Just  why  they  chose  to  settle  here  is  un- 
certain, unless  because  the  narrow  peninsula  afforded 
some  protection  from  savage  foes.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  newcomers  were  less  intent  on  making  homes  in 
the  wilderness  than  they  were  on  finding  gold.  In- 
deed, the  search  for  gold  at  first  engaged  the  entire 
attention  of  many  of  them,  and  they  even  loaded  one 
of  their  ships  with  ordinary  earth  under  the  mistaken 
impression  that  it  contained  the  precious  metal.  Pres- 
ently their  food  gave  out,  the  Indians  harassed  them, 
and  they  fell  ill  with  fever.  In  four  months  over  fifty 
of  them  had  died,  and  but  for  Captain  John  Smith 
they  would  all  have  gone  back  to  England.      Captain 


Ti.  f^-  -■■'OX   AND  I 

TILDcW   FOUNDATIONS. 


On  the  Road  Home 


Round  about  Old  Jamestown  325 

Smith  found  his  fellows  a  very  troublesome  responsi- 
bility. Few  of  them  were  industrious  or  energetic. 
Some  were  pardoned  criminals.  But  Smith  was  a 
leader  with  ability  to  rule.  He  punished  idleness  with 
starvation,  and  to  cure  profane  swearing  he  had  a  daily 
account  kept  of  a  man's  oaths  ;  and  at  night,  as  a  pen- 
alty for  each  oath,  he  poured  a  can  of  cold  water  down 
the  offender's  sleeve.  Captain  Smith  wrote  to  the  cor- 
poration in  England  which  had  fitted  out  the  colony, 
"  When  you  send  again,  I  entreat  you  rather  send 
thirty  carpenters,  husbandmen,  gardeners,  fishermen, 
blacksmiths,  and  diggers-up  of  the  roots,  well  provided, 
than  a  thousand  of  such  as  we  have." 

With  regard  to  the  first  buildings  they  erected.  Smith 
says  :  "  We  did  hang  an  awning  (which  is  an  old  sail) 
to  three  or  four  trees,  to  shadow  us  from  the  sun  ;  our 
walls  were  rails  of  wood  ;  our  seats  unhewed  trees,  till 
we  cut  planks  ;  our  pulpit  a  bar  of  wood  nailed  to  two 
neighboring  trees.  In  foul  weather  we  shifted  into  an 
old  rotten  tent,  for  we  had  few  better.  This  was  our 
church  till  we  built  a  homely  thing  like  a  barn,  set 
upon  crochets,  covered  with  rafts,  sedge,  and  earth,  as 
were  also  the  walls.  The  best  of  our  houses  were  ot 
like  curiosity,  but,  for  the  most  part,  far  worse  w^ork- 
manship  that  could  neither  well  defend  wind  nor  rain." 

In  1638  a  much  more  substantial  church  was  built 
than  the  makeshifts  that  had  preceded  it.  The  walls 
were  of  brick   brought  across   the  Atlantic,  and   the 


326         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

tower  of  the  church  has  endured  even  to  the  present. 
The  edifice  itself  continued  in  use  until  WilHamsburg, 
on  account  of  its  superior  healthfuhiess,  supplanted 
Jamestown  as  the  capital  of  the  colony  in  1699.  This 
change  was  a  fatal  blow  to  Jamestown,  and  the  place 
was  soon  almost  abandoned.  It  never  had  been  more 
than  a  village.  We  know  that  in  1625  there  were 
twenty-two  dwellings,  a  church,  a  store,  three  ware- 
houses, a  guard-house,  and,  outside  the  town,  two  block- 
houses—  one  to  guard  the  isthmus,  the  other  to  prevent 
the  Indians  from  swimming  across  the  back  water  that 
separated  the  peninsula  from  the  mainland.  The 
population  was  then  two  hundred  and  twenty-one,  and 
in  the  palmiest  days  of  the  village  the  inhabitants  did 
not  exceed  three  hundred. 

The  brick  church  tower  is  the  only  surviving  rem- 
nant of  the  old  settlement  that  is  at  all  conspicuous. 
It  is  eighteen  feet  square,  and  its  massive  walls  are  a 
yard  thick.  The  church  was  not  only  a  house  of  wor- 
ship but  a  fortress  of  defence,  and  the  upper  portion 
of  the  tower  is  pierced  with  loopholes  —  narrow  slits 
outside,  but  widening  inward  so  that  guns  could  be 
aimed  with  freedom  from  them,  and  yet  expose  the 
gunners  very  little.  A  rough  barnlike  structure  has 
been  built  to  cover  and  protect  the  foundations  of  the 
body  of  the  church,  and  a  few  relics  are  displayed  in- 
side. The  floor  of  the  church  contains  a  number  of 
graves,  and  other  graves  gather  around  outside  with 


Round  about  Old  Jamestown  327 

massive  tombstones  a  good  deal  broken  by  stress  of 
time  and  weather,  and  by  the  vandal  sightseers.  But 
the  sightseers  will  do  their  ghoulish  work  no  more,  for 
the  place  is  now  in  the  care  of  an  historical  association 
and  has  been  surrounded  by  a  high  wire-meshed  fence 
suggesting  at  first  glance  that  here  is  some  vernal  hen- 
yard.  A  custodian  is  at  hand  to  admit  visitors  and 
answer  questions,  and  volunteer  such  information  and 
opinions  as  occur  to  him. 

"  You  remind  me  of  another  Massachusetts  man," 
said  he,  glancing  at  my  name  after  I  had  written  it  in 
the  register.  "He  was  hyar  some  years  ago,  and  he 
was  drunk  when  he  come  and  drunker  still  when  he 
went  away.  We  were  fixin'  things  jus'  then  and  not 
allowin'  any  one  inside  the  church.  But  he  was  bound 
he  was  goin'  in.  He  said  he'd  come  to  write  it  up, 
and  how  could  he  write  it  up,  he  said,  if  he  didn't  go 
in?  I  tol'  him  I  didn't  know  —  that  was  none  of  my 
business  ;  my  business  was  to  keep  him  out.  And  I 
kep'  him  out,  and  finally  he  went  away  ;  but  I  kind  o' 
reckon  he  wrote  it  up  all  the  same." 

The  custodian  pointed  out  various  quaint  epitaphs 
on  the  old  stones,  and  called  especial  attention  to  this 
one :  — 

Here  lyeth 

William   Sherwood 

A  Great  Sinner 

Waiting  for  a  Joyful  Resurrection. 


328         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

"  That's  the  first  sinner's  grave  I  ever  see,"  said  my 
guide.  "  I've  read  a  good  many  gravestones,  but  I've 
never  found  any  but  saints  buried  in  other  graves." 

When  I  finished  looking  at  the  church  and  its  sur- 
roundings, the  guide  took  me  out  of  the  grove  to  a 
grassy  level  which  he  affirmed  was  the  "  Courting 
Green  "  or"  Kissing  Meadow,"  where  was  auctioned  in 
the  year  16 19  the  shipload  of  "  respectable  maidens  for 
wives  to  the  planters."  He  also  pointed  out  the  spot 
where  were  sold  that  same  year  the  twenty  "  negars  " 
brought  thither  by  a  Dutch  man-of-war.  This  was 
the  beginning  of  negro  slavery  in  the  United  States. 

The  river  opposite  Jamestown  is  three  miles  wide, 
and  from  upstream  its  course  is  a  straight  sweep  of  seven 
miles.  Thus  the  current  and  the  waves  have  easy  oppor- 
tunity to  eat  into  the  alluvial  banks  of  the  island,  and 
have  already  swallowed  up  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
land  where  stood  the  village.  The  water  covers  many 
remnants  of  the  colonial  hamlet,  and  when  the  current 
runs  clear,  the  stones  and  bricks  of  the  ancient  house 
foundations  and  walls  can  be  seen  on  the  river  bottom. 
The  danger  which  the  river  threatens  to  old  James- 
town has  long  been  realized,  and  in  1901  the  govern- 
ment completed  a  masonry  breakwater  that,  so  fir  as 
it  goes,  affiDrds  a  lasting  protection  from  the  stealthy 
erosion  of  the  current,  and  from  the  fierce  waves  that 
the  winter  storm-winds  drive  against  the  shores  ;  but 
there  is  need  of  as  much  more  work  to  assure  the  safety 


Round  about  Old  Jamestown 


329 


of  the  spot,  and  preserve  the  historic  church  tower  and 
the  graves  around  it  to  the  multitudes  who,  in  years  to 
come,  will  wish  to  visit  the  site  of  the  first  permanent 
EngHsh  settlement  in  America  —  the  cradle  of  the 
nation. 


5-  ^^    :^-^^  .  jj,;,j^ 


The  James  River  opposite  the  Old  Settlement 


XV 


THE    NIGGERS 


A  Dwelling 


AS  soon  as  the 
traveller  on 
his  way  south 
passes  Washington  the 
black  man  becomes  a 
large  and  vital  part  of 
the  population,  and  an 
ever  present  problem. 
You  now  find  the  in- 
terior of  the  better 
railway  carriages  pla- 
carded with  the  word 
WHITE,  and  the 
poorer  ones  with  the 
word  COLORED, 
and  the  negroes  must 
keep    entirely   to    the 


latter  whether  they  wish  to  or  not.  What  you  see  on 
the  railroad  is  characteristic  of  the  whole  social  structure 
of  the  Southern  states.  The  negro  occupies  a  posi- 
tion of  servility  and  inferiority,  and  he  is  constantly 

330 


The  Niggers  331 

reminded  of  the  fact  by  restrictions  when  traveUing,  by 
discriminating  laws,  and  by  the  habitual  attitude  of  his 
white  neighbors.  The  sentiment  of  the  dominant 
race  is  clearly  indicated  by  the  universal  use  of  the 
term  "nigger"  when  a  white  person  speaks  of  a  black 
person.  "Nigger"  is  recognized  as  opprobrious.  It 
is  like  calling  an  Irishman  a  "  paddy/'  or  a  farmer  a 
"  hayseed."  It  is  equivalent  to  a  kick,  yet  there  is 
a  superstition  that  it  is  not  only  the  negro's  due,  but 
that  it  is  necessary  to  administer  these  verbal  kicks  in 
order  to  avoid  any  possibility  of  his  forgetting  his  in- 
feriority. Besides,  it  is  affirmed  that  the  negroes  will 
not  work  unless  one  is  rough  and  vigorous  with  them. 
I  was  told  that  if  I  w^anted  a  thing  done  I  must  say, 
"  *  Come  here,  nigger ! '  Why,  if  you  was  to  say, 
'  Come  here,  Mr.  Jones,'  they  wouldn't  do  nothin'  for 
you." 

"  A  nigger  is  all  right  in  his  place,"  say  the  whites, 
but  add  emphatically  that  his  place  is  very  lowly 
and  that  he  must  not  step  out  of  it.  If  he  fails  to 
keep  to  "  his  place  "  of  his  own  volition,  they  will  go 
to  any  length  of  force  or  subterfuge  to  compel  him  to 
do  so. 

One  of  the  few  times  in  the  South  when  I  heard  a 
black  person  called  "  colored  "  was  at  a  private  house 
where  I  lodged  in  Florida.  A  little  girl  came  in  and 
said  to  her  grandmother,  "There's  a  colored  lady  out 
on  the  porch  wants  to  speak  to  you." 


^2^         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  Colored  lady  !  "  commented  the  grandmother, 
derisively.     "Colored  lady!     Say  'that  nigger'!" 

As  she  viewed  things,  her  granddaughter  had  been 
using  fancy  and  inappropriate  language.  Probably 
the  child  had  learned  the  nonsense  from  the  Northern 
people  who  frequented  the  region  in  the  winter. 

At  a  town  where  I  stopped  in  an  adjoining  state 
there  had  been  a  great  commotion  some  time  before 
over  a  negro  named  Richard  Foster.  The  negro 
wrote  a  polite  letter  to  a  local  merchant  from  whom 
he  was  in  the  habit  of  buying  supplies,  requesting  the 
merchant  to  call  him  "  Mr.  Foster  "  instead  of  simply 
"  Dick."  Foster  was  a  man  of  intelligence  and  edu- 
cation, and  he  expressed  himself  with  entire  courtesy, 
but  the  merchant  was  virtuously  indignant  at  the 
nigger's  assumption  that  he  or  any  other  man  with 
a  black  skin  had  a  right  to  the  prefix  of  Mr.  The 
letter  was  passed  around  among  the  business  men  of 
the  town,  and  swearing  and  heated  denunciation  were 
general.  Such  impudence  could  not  be  borne,  and 
they  got  ready  their  guns. 

Meantime  the  colored  man  had  learned  that  trouble 
was  brewing,  and  he  wrote  another  letter  "  twice  as 
long  as  the  first,"  apologizing  for  his  indiscretion. 
"It  was  a  beautiful  letter,"  his  persecutors  acknowl- 
edged in  relating  the  incident,  but  it  did  no  good,  and 
they  continued  their  martial  preparations  to  teach  the 
nigger   the  racial  proprieties.     There   is    no    knowing 


A  Cotton  Picker  at  his  Cabin  Well 


The   Niggers  333 

how  serious  the  consequences  might  have  been  had 
he  not  concluded  it  was  wisest  to  slip  away.  Friends 
sent  his  wife  and  goods  after  him  and  that  region 
knew  him  no  more,  and  the  threatened  invasion  of  the 
white  man's  rights  was  squelched. 

"  I  know,"  said  my  informant,  "  Dick  was  a  smart 
nigger,  but  he  was  no  better  than  any  other  nigger. 
You  Northern  people  don't  understand  this  matter. 
If  you  would  come  down  here  and  hve  six  months, 
you'd  see  it  just  as  we  do." 

Their  view  is  that  a  negro  must  constantly  in  word 
and  action  acknowledge  the  whites'  superiority.  He 
must  be  respectful  to  them  on  all  occasions,  while  it  is 
optional  with  them  whether  they  shall  be  respectful  in 

return. 

The  negroes  in  expressing  opinions  about  the  whites 
were  comparatively  gentle  and  considerate.  The  sharp- 
est statement  I  heard  was  from  a  New  York  colored 
man  who  was  visiting  his  old  home  near  Savannah. 
He  said  that  business  in  the  South  was  almost  entirely 
developed  by  Northern  capital.  "  They  don't  know 
enough  down  hyar  to  make  money  or  anything  else. 
All  they  know  how  to  do  is  to  shoot  niggers.  They've 
had  a  bad  feeling  toward  the  colored  people  ever  since 
this  last  civilized  war  between  the  Norf  and  the  Souf. 
They  don't  like  'em  and  yit  they  cain't  git  along  with- 
out 'em." 

The   way  in  which    this   negro  applied  a  mistaken 


334         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

adjective  to  the  war  is  characteristic  of  the  racial  rehsh 
for  impressive  words  and  resounding  sentences.  They 
make  a  specialty  of  politeness  on  social  occasions,  and 
often  affect  very  superior  manners  on  the  casual  meet- 
ing of  acquaintances.  Sometimes  in  an  exaltation  of 
courtesy  they  look  from  above  down  on  the  whites,  and 
you  may  hear  them  speak  of  "  Dat  colored  lady  what 
workin'  for  dat  white  woman,"  and  "  Dat  colored  gem- 
men  what  workin'  for  dat  white  man." 

In  many  sections  of  the  South  the  blacks  form  the 
major  part  of  the  population,  and  it  is  only  in  the 
mountains  that  they  are  scarce.  The  mountaineers  do 
not  choose  to  have  colored  neighbors,  and  there  is  a 
more  or  less  well-defined  dead-line  which  the  negro 
crosses  to  the  uplands  at  his  peril.  "  We  bust  mighty 
nigh  every  nigger  that  comes  through  hyar,"  they 
explained  to  me  in  the  Great  Smokies. 

This  sort  of  strenuosity  is  due  to  the  fact  that  in  the 
mountains  most  of  the  inhabitants  are  accustomed  to 
do  their  own  work  on  their  own  places,  and  they  prefer 
to  have  their  region  in  all  respects  a  white  man's 
country. 

One  effect  of  the  prevalence  of  the  negro  in  the 
South  is  to  make  it  a  land  of  cabins.  To  be  sure  the 
poor  whites  help  materially  to  swell  the  number  of 
humble  dwellings  of  this  class,  but  in  the  main  they 
are  the  homes  of  the  blacks.  You  see  them  scattered 
in  groups  or  singly  over  the  face  of  the  country  in  the 


The  Niggers  ^^^ 

rural  districts,  and  you  see  them  huddling  on  the  bor- 
ders of  every  city  —  shabby  and  unpalnted,  all  about 
the  same  size,  and  most  of  them  barren  and  depress- 
ing. The  rustic  cabins  often  gather  near  the  "  big 
house "  just  as  they  did  before  the  war,  sometimes 
flanking  it  with  a  line  on  either  side,  sometimes  only 
on  one  side  in  a  double  row,  sometimes  built  along  the 
road  that  turns  in  to  the  plantation  from  the  main 
highway. 

It  is  an  aphorism  that  you  can  tell  a  "  nigger's  place  " 
by  Its  dirt  and  dilapidation.  Poverty,  ignorance,  and 
lack  of  pride  or  ambition  are  general  among  the  colored 
people.  They  simply  exist,  and  the  amenities  of  life 
are  nearly  altogether  disregarded.  However,  those 
who  own  homes  are  very  apt  to  make  improvements 
and  to  take  at  least  rudimentary  care  of  their  premises. 

The  commonest  type  of  the  rustic  cabin  consists  of 
one  room  within  the  main  walls  and  a  shed-room 
attachment.  At  one  end  of  the  house,  outside.  Is  a 
big  chimney,  sometimes  of  brick,  sometimes  of  clay- 
daubed  sticks  laid  up  cob-house  fashion.  Log  cabins 
are  numerous  and  are  still  built,  but  they  are  not  very 
lasting  and  need  a  good  deal  of  repairing  and  are  gradu- 
ally becoming  obsolete.  Double  cabins  are  occasionally 
seen,  though  they  are  not  always  occupied  by  two 
families.  Two  households  under  the  same  roof  are 
bound  to  quarrel,  and  the  arrangement  Is  not  satisfac- 
tory.    They  quickly  forget  their  disputes,  and  may  be 


33 6         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

on  intimate  terms  within  an  hour  of  a  genuine  row, 
yet  things  are  constantly  occurring  where  one  party  or 
the  other  thinks  its  rights  are  infringed  on. 

The  main  room  of  a  negro  cabin  is  certain  to  have 
an  open  fireplace,  and  the  leaping  flames  on  chilly 
evenings  fill  the  apartment  with  cheerful  light.  Two 
beds  and  a  trundle-bed  are  likely  to  be  included  in  the 
room  furnishings,  and  if  these  do  not  suffice  for  sleep- 
ing accommodations,  some  of  the  family  bunk  on  the 
floor.  The  ventilation  is  poor,  the  cabin  is  usually 
crowded,  and  it  smells  of  eating  and  sleeping.  The 
only  advantage  the  negroes  have  over  the  dwellers  in 
the  worst  tenements  of  our  cities  is  that  they  spend 
most  of  their  lives  outside  their  hovels  in  the  open 
fields. 

"  A  nigger  always  has  a  dog,  a  poor  nigger  has  two, 
and  a  desperately  poor  nigger  has  half  a  dozen." 

Hounds  and  coon  dogs  are  preferred,  but  any  sort  of 
a  cur  is  acceptable.  The  dogs  sleep  in  the  house  with 
the  rest  of  the  family,  and  they  steal  not  a  little  of  the 
household  food.  They  are  kicked  and  cuffed  and 
abused,  yet  a  dog  prefers  a  colored  master  to  a  white 
one. 

The  number  of  places  owned  by  the  blacks  is  com- 
paratively small,  though  slowly  increasing.  "  Down 
in  the  district  where  I  live,"  said  a  planter  from 
southern  Alabama  with  whom  I  became  acquainted, 
"  there  are  probably  ten  thousand  niggers,  and  I  don't 


The  Niggers  337 

know  more  than  a  dozen  that  own  their  homes  and 
have  made  any  success  in  getting  ahead.  The  niggers 
on  my  plantation  work  the  land  to  shares,  and  that's 
the  way  generally.  I  furnish  every  family  a  house  and 
twenty  acres  or  so  of  land,  and  I  furnish  'em  tools  and 
a  mule.  The  mule  and  the  nigger,  you  know,  was  made 
the  same  day,  and  they're  just  suited  to  each  other. 
The  mule  is  rough  and  so  is  the  nigger.  A  nigger 
can't  work  a  horse  to  advantage,  but  he'll  control  a 
mule  better'n  a  white  man  can. 

"  At  the  end  of  the  season  my  tenants  turn  over 
the  cotton  they've  raised  to  me  to  sell.  They  reckon 
I  can  get  more  for  it  than  they  can.  When  I've 
disposed  of  it,  I  go  to  the  bank  for  the  money. 
Sometimes  the  cashier  '11  start  to  pass  me  out  bills,  and 
I'll  say :  '  No,  no,  that  won't  do.  Give  me  silver.' 
The  niggers  have  no  use  for  bills,  nor  for  gold.  The 
paper  don't  seem  like  real  money  to  'em,  and  the 
gold  looks  too  small.  So  I  have  to  get  'em  silver. 
What  they  don't  use  right  away  they  bury  or  hide 
somewhere  in  their  cabins.  There  ain't  many  niggers 
that'll  trust  a  bank,  and  silver  dollars  are  the  things 
for  hoarding  because  they  won't  burn  or  mould  or  get 
carried  away  by  rats.  The  town  niggers  have  the  same 
/-dea  —  no  paper  money  for  them  —  and  a  contractor 
who  employs  a  right  smart  of  'em  has  to  get  a  whole 
cart-load  of  silver  to  settle  with  the  help  on  pay- 
day." 


338         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 


.^mamm^sms- 


An  Inventor  and  his  Street  Car 


The  renters  require  constant  watching,  urging,  and 
instruction.  Land  let  to  them  on  the  half-crop  system 
is  sure  to  deteriorate  if  they  are  left  to  do  their  own 
managing.  Much  of  it  is  extremely  light  and  sandy 
and  washes  badly  unless  the  slopes  are  carefully  ter- 
raced.    To  break  the  flow  of  water  in  rains,  low,  turfed 


The   Niggers  339 

ridges  are  made  at  short  intervals.  The  ridges  must  be 
perfectly  horizontal,  and  they  require  frequent  mending. 
If  neglected,  the  fields  get  gashed  with  deep  ravines 
and  become  sterile  to  the  last  degree ;  but  they 
improve  rapidly  with  proper  care  and  continuous  fer- 
tilization. Commercial  fertilizer  is  beginning  to  be  a 
good  deal  used  by  the  negroes.  This  is  due  to  the 
efforts  of  the  landowners,  who  are  obliged  to  demon- 
strate its  power  before  the  blacks  will  believe  in  it,  for 
the  renters  are  ordinarily  too  ignorant  to  understand 
how  a  small  quantity  of  such  stuff  can  have  any  appre- 
ciable effect. 

In  many  sections  it  is  still  a  common  custom  to  do 
almost  no  fertilizing,  but  to  keep  taking  crops  off  the 
fields  until  the  dwindling  harvests  threaten  to  reach  the 
vanishing  point.  Then  pines  are  allowed  to  grow,  and 
in  the  course  of  fifteen  or  twenty  years  the  old  fields 
become  "  new  land,"  the  pines  are  cut  off,  and  the  soil, 
with  fertility  somewhat  restored,  is  again  cultivated. 

A  well-to-do  Carolina  planter  who  talked  with  me 
about  the  characteristics  of  the  soil  accounted  for  his 
own  prosperity  by  saying  that  he  kept  many  cattle  and 
let  his  land  rest  frequently  and  regularly  by  turning  it 
into  pasturage.  He  had  seven  or  eight  thousand  acres, 
yet  he  oversaw  in  detail  all  his  renters'  labor.  They 
had  to  go  to  work  promptly  each  day  and  keep  faith- 
fully to  their  tasks,  and  they  were  obliged  to  plant  and 
harvest  at  the  proper  time  and  in  the  right  way.     "  I 


340         Highways  and   Byways  of  the   South 

have  to  push  'em  right  hard,"  he  declared.  "  Hit's 
the  only  way  to  get  the  boolk  of  'em  to  do  things  as 
they  ought  to  be  done — these  young  niggers  are  so 
triflin'  like." 

While  the  crops  were  growing,  he  furnished  the 
negroes  with  supplies,  and  he  did  not  allow  them  to 
buy  so  much  of  him  but  that  when  the  crops  were 
sold  each  family  would  have  some  money  coming  to 
it.  "  The  niggers  ain't  contented  if  they  have  nothing 
to  show  for  their  year's  labor,"  he  explained,  "  and 
when  that  happens,  they're  likely  to  move  off  to  some 
other  place.  But  treat  'em  as  I  do,  and  your  niggers  '11 
stay  with  you  for  years." 

As  a  rule  the  negroes  move  a  good  deal  from  plan- 
tation to  plantation.  They  like  to  try  a  new  place, 
thinking  they  may  be  better  suited  with  a  different  land- 
lord or  that  they  may  find  a  farm  which  will  produce 
more  with  less  labor.  Another  reason  for  moving  is 
their  gregariousness.  They  prefer  to  dwell  in  colo- 
nies, and  will  rarely  remain  long  on  a  small  plantation, 
while  on  estates  that  have  fifteen  or  twenty  families 
the  changes  are  few. 

The  habit  of  living  on  futures  is  very  common 
among  the  country  negroes.  A  part  of  the  prospec- 
tive crop  belongs  to  the  landlord  for  rent,  and  the  bal- 
ance of  it  is  mortgaged  to  supply  the  daily  needs  of 
the  household.  Sometimes  the  landlord  handles  the 
entire  business,  but  oftener  the  mortgage  goes   to   the 


The  Niggers  341 

keeper  of  a  general  store,  or  to  a  bank  which  furnishes 
seven  to  fifteen  dollars  monthly  until  the  crops  are 
marketed. 

Interest  is  from  one  to  two  per  cent  a  month,  and 
what  is  bought  at  the  stores  on  credit  costs  from  one- 
third  to  one-half  more  than  it  would  for  cash.  Mer- 
chants who  lack  capital  to  sell  on  long  credits  are  said 
to  do  a  "  chinquapin  business,"  and  they  look  with 
envy  on  their  more  fortunate  competitors  with  the  big 
per  cents  rolling  in.  The  storekeeper  who  gets  a  fore- 
handed grip  on  a  nigger's  crop  leaves  very  little  — 
"cleans  him  up,"  as  the  saying  is.  In  fact,  the  negro 
is  apt  to  think  he  is  doing  pretty  well  if  at  settlement 
he  can  pay  his  debts  and  come  out  even.  I  was 
informed  in  Florida  that  as  a  business  proposition  the 
crop-mortgage  system  was  better  than  slavery.  Some 
of  the  old-time  plantations  in  the  northwestern  part 
of  the  state  bring  in  more  money  now  than  they  did 
before  the  war.  The  niggers  work  them  just  the 
same,  and  the  white  men  get  all  the  niggers  make 
without  the  responsibility  of  caring  for  the  black 
workers.  A  popular  negro  couplet  sets  forth  the 
industrial  situation  thus  :  — 

"Naught's  a  naught,  figger*s  a  figger  — 
All  for  the  white  man  and  none  for  the  nigger." 

Cotton  is  the  negro's  money  crop.  The  minor 
products,  such  as  corn,  beans,  cabbages,  and  potatoes, 


342         Highways  and   Byways   of  the  South 

are  in  the  main  consumed  by  the  family,  and  if  there 
is  a  surplus,  it  is  exchanged  for  other  needs  at  the 
stores.  In  the  middle  South,  where  wages  are  com- 
paratively low,  negro  men  working  out  by  the  day  get 
forty  or  fifty  cents  and  the  women  somewhat  less. 
They  earn  most  in  cotton-picking  time  when  the  pay 
is  so  much  for  every  hundred  pounds  gathered.  They 
often  realize  then  from  seventy-five  cents  to  a  dollar  a 
day.  "  If  they  could  earn  that  the  year  around,  they'd 
get  all  the  money  there  is  in  the  country,"  was  one 
man's  comment.  The  picking  continues  from  early  in 
September  till  nearly  November,  with  an  aftermath  of 
gleaning  that  is  not  completed  for  a  month  or  two  longer. 


Weighing  the  Day's  Picking 


The  Niggers  343 

As  a  whole  the  negro  workers  are  docile  and  easily 
controlled,  which  is  by  no  means  always  true  of  white 
workers.  In  many  respects  employers  prefer  blacks 
to  whites  whether  in  general  industry  or  in  the  house- 
hold. "  If  I  have  white  help  in  my  kitchen,"  said 
one  woman,  "  I  feel  as  if  I'd  got  to  work  with 
them  and  be  careful  what  I  asked  them  to  do  ;  but 
I  have  no  hesitation  in  ordering  a  nigger  just  as  I 
please,  and  never  think  of  needing  to  do  anything 
myself." 

A  Charleston  man  said  to  me  that  he  wished  the 
negroes  could  all  be  deported,  but  such  a  wish  is 
unusual.  The  ruling  sentiment  was  voiced  by  a 
planter  who  declared  :  "  Deport  them  and  the  South 
would  be  ruined.  We  must  have  their  labor,  and 
wherever  the  niggers  go,  I  go  too.  l{  I  had  to  work 
my  land  with  whites,  I'd  quit.  I  couldn't  manage  or 
depend  on  them." 

Whatever  antipathies  the  South  has  with  regard  to 
the  negro,  it  still  wants  him  as  a  worker.  They  are 
the  bedrock  of  its  economic  life.  "  If  to-day  they 
were  all  to  take  ship  for  Africa,  who  would  chop  the 
wood  to-morrow  morning  ^  Who  would  make  the 
fire,  who  cook  the  breakfast,  who  serve  it,  who  would 
dress  the  baby,  who  would  hitch  up  the  horse,  ply  the 
hoe,  and  guide  the  plough  ?  "  In  short,  no  organized 
movement  of  negroes  out  of  the  South  will  be  per- 
mitted.     In    1889,  when  a  negro  exodus  was  started 


344         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

to  Kansas,  many  of  those  who  began  the  journey 
were  obhged  to  turn  back  because  the  boats  ard 
trains  were  stopped  by  armed  men,  and  several 
Southern  states  at  once  passed  laws  calculated  to 
seriously  discourage  any  one  who  was  inclined  to  in- 
duce emigration. 

With  few  exceptions  the  colored  people  are  very 
easy-going,  and  even  lazy.  Their  ideals  are  unde- 
veloped ;  and  animal  comfort  of  a  rude  sort,  a  meagre 
outfit  of  cheap  finery,  and  plenty  of  leisure  are  about 
all  they  care  for.  "They'll  work  till  they  get  a  little 
ahead  and  then  stop  and  loaf,"  I  was  informed.  "  A 
nigger  is  like  a  Chinaman.  He  can  live  on  most 
nothing.  He  don't  wear  but  few  clothes,  and  the  pay 
for  one  day's  work  will  keep  him  a  week.  He  don't 
worry  any  about  how  he's  goin'  to  get  along  by  and 
by.  If  he's  got  enough  for  the  present,  he's  as  happy 
as  a  dead  pig  in  the  sunshine.  You  know  the  words 
of  the  Bible  —  ^  Suflicient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil 
thereof,'  and  '  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow.' 
Well,  the  niggers  fulfil  those  sayings  to  the  letter, 
dog  gone  if  they  don't ;  and  I  ain't  objecting  very 
seriously  to  their  improvidence  either.  It  keeps  up 
our  supply  of  cheap  labor." 

The  most  shining  example  of  shiftlessness  I  encoun- 
tered was  a  young  colored  man  lingering  about  a 
Tennessee  railway  station.  He  wore  overalls,  had  a 
handkerchief  knotted  around  his  neck,  and  an  old  hat 


The  Niggers  345 

slouched  on  the  side  of  his  head,  and  evidently 
intended  to  work  sometime.  Meanwhile  he  was 
smoking  cigarettes  and  was  getting  rid  of  his  money 
by  patronizing  a  penny-in-the-slot  weighing-machine. 
When  I  first  noticed  him,  he  was  on  the  platform  of 
the  machine  and  had  just  parted  with  his  penny.  The 
weighing  done,  he  sauntered  across  the  room  and 
gazed  out  of  the  window ;  but  he  soon  returned  to 
the  slot  machine  and  considered  it  thoughtfully. 
"  Boss,"  said  he,  turning  to  me,  "  I  cain't  read. 
Would  yo'  mind  tellin'  me  what  I  weigh  on  dis 
yere  r 

I  was  quite  willing  and  he  deposited  a  second  penny, 
and  after  I  told  him  the  number  of  pounds,  he  resumed 
his  loafing  with  evident  satisfaction  ;  but  presently  a 
colored  friend  of  his  came  in  and  he  weighed  himself 
a  third  time,  and  the  friend  stood  by  to  report  the 
result.  He  was  still  in  the  station  when  I  left,  and  for 
aught  I  know  he  continued  to  invest  in  that  fascinating 
machine  until  his  money  was  exhausted. 

A  reckless  expenditure  of  cash  in  hand  is  a  marked 
tendency  of  the  race,  and  I  recall  it  was  mentioned  to 
me  in  one  village  where  I  was  stopping  that,  "  If  the 
nigger  women  see  a  white  woman  go  past  with  a  new- 
style  dress  on,  they  must  get  one  just  the  same  if  they 
die  for  it.  They're  bound  to  be  as  like  white  folks  as 
they  can.  Then  there's  watermelons.  The  niggers 
will    go    hungry    to    buy  a   watermelon.     They   can't 


346  Highways  and   Byways   of  the  South 

resist  'em,  and  they  will  buy  'em  the  very  first  of  the 
season  when  they  are  most  expensive." 

To  the  credit  of  the  negroes  it  can  be  said  that  con- 
sidering their  poverty  and  lack  of  thrift  few  have  to  be 
publicly  supported.  They  assiduously  avoid  the  poor- 
house  and  can  usually  supply  their  scanty  needs  to  the 
very  end.  Of  course  a  few  have  habits  of  saving,  buy 
their  places,  and  hide  away  a  gradually  growing  accumu- 
lation of  silver.  If  this  sum  amounts  to  as  much  as  a 
hundred  dollars,  the  lucky  capitalist  is  regarded  by  his 
fellows  as  a  millionnaire.  In  the  towns  many  little 
stores  are  owned  by  negroes,  the  majority,  perhaps, 
with    only  about    a    wheelbarrow    load  of  stock,   but 

.  .  .  ■   !> 

Others  that  in  size  and  equipment  are  all  that  could  be 
asked.  The  better  ones  are  often  patronized  by  whites 
as  well  as  blacks. 

I  was  everywhere  informed  that  the  young  negroes 
were  less  to  be  trusted  than  the  older  ones  who  started 
life  as  slaves.  No  doubt  this  is  true  of  a  portion  of 
them,  and  naturally  the  servility  the  white  man  likes 
has  become  less  common.  The  negro  youth  will  no 
longer  cheerfully  spend  half  a  day  doing  a  white  man's 
small  jobs  for  a  ham  bone  or  a  drink  of  whiskey.  I 
have  a  vivid  remembrance  of  the  anger  of  a  Virginia  1 
when  a  young  colored  woman  did  not  accept  '  1 
proper  meekness  some  advice  he  gave  her.  She  WrS 
at  the  back  door  of  the  hotel  trying  to  sharpen  a  stic*': 
with   an   axe.      "You   blankety-blanked    nigger,"    said^^ 


Watering  the  Plants 


The  Niggers  347 

he,  "  that's  no  way  to  do  !  You'll  cut  your  cussed 
hand   off." 

Of  course  a  girl  with  any  spirit  would  rather  cut 
her  hand  off  than  take  advice  so  sulphurously  flavored. 
But  he  could  not  comprehend  her  view,  and  he  came 
in  much  perturbed-  "  That  flabbergasted  nigger  '11  cut 
her  hand  off,  sure  !  "  he  declared,  "  and  blamed  if  I 
don't  hope  she  will  !  You  used  to  could  tell  a  nigger 
something  and  they'd  listen  to  you,  but  that  time's  gone 
by.  She  as  much  as  said  she  knew  more  than  I  did, 
and  I'd  rather  be  called  the  meanest  name  there  is  than 
have  a  nigger  tell  me  that." 

The  negroes  enter  into  their  pleasures  with  zest  and 
simple-hearted  enjoyment.  The  young  men  take  par- 
ticular delight  in  balls  and  "  treatin'  the  ladies."  Even- 
ing visiting  is  common,  and  employers  say  that  "  you 
can  work  a  nigger  hard  all  day  and  he'll  be  walking  off 
afterwards  to  some  of  the  other  cabins  and  be  out  till 
midnight."  It  is  this  propensity  which  in  part  accounts 
for  the  numerous  paths  through  fields  and  woodlands 
which  network  the  country.  Such  paths  are  a  sign  of 
a  pastoral,  primitive  people,  and  they  never  fail  to  be 
beautiful  to  the  eyes  and  suggestive  to  the  imagination. 
It  is  by  these  paths  that  the  news  travels,  and  you  can 
depend  on  the  negroes  knowing  promptly  all  that  is 
going  on  within  a  radius  of  fifteen  miles. 

Many  negroes  are  addicted  to  petty  gambling.  A 
game  called  "  craps,"  that  is  played  with  dice,  is  their 


34^         Highways  and   Byways   of  the  South 

favorite  for  the  purpose.  Some  blacks  carry  razors 
and  brass  knuckles,  "  and  a  heap  of  'em  have  pistols, 
too,"  I  was  told.  The  possession  of  such  articles  of 
offence  and  defence  is  apt  to  make  the  individual  thus 
armed  swaggeringly  brave,  and  sends  many  a  negro  to 
the  penitentiary  who  would  otherwise  be  free.  The 
blacks  contribute  very  largely  to  the  jail  population, 
and  always  far  outnumber  the  whites  in  the  chain-gangs. 
To  me  the  chain-gangs  of  criminal  laborers  with  their 
striped  clothing  and  encumbered  legs  looked  strangely 
mediaeval.  Most  of  the  prisoners,  however,  seemed 
well  fed  and  hearty  and  not  unhappy,  and  they  cer- 
tainly appeared  far  less  grim  and  dangerous  than  the 
guards  armed  with  double-barrel  guns  who  stood  by 
watching  them. 

The  town  negro  is  often  a  chronic  loafer,  thoroughly 
vicious  and  ready  to  commit  any  crime,  while  the  country 
negro  as  a  whole  is  declared  to  be  law-abiding  and  truth- 
ful, though  this  statement  is  qualified  with  the  comment 
that  he  has  an  inclination  to  commit  small  thefts.  He 
appropriates  an  occasional  bushel  of  corn  and  other 
farm  produce  when  opportunity  offers ;  and  house 
servants  take  minor  articles  of  apparel  that  appeal  to 
their  love  of  dress.  "It  is  nigger  nature  to  steal  that- 
away  and  1  expect  it,"  said  one  planter  to  me.  "  They 
don't  usually  take  anything  but  what  they  can  conceal, 
but  sometimes  they'll  tote  off  a  yearling  or  a  shoat." 

A   good   many  planters  when  they  detect  a   negro 


The   Niggers 


349 


stealing  give  him  the  choice  between  arrest  and  a 
strapping,  and  the  culprit  is  pretty  sure  to  choose  the 
strapping.      One  man  with  whom  I  talked  thought  the 


Reading 

fault  was  largely  with  the  employers.  "  If  you  show 
a  nigger  that  you  are  always  suspecting  him,"  said  he, 
"and  have  no  confidence  in  his  honesty,  he  will  most 


350         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

likely  be  what  you  think  he  is ;  while  if  you  trusted 
him,  he'd  be  all  right." 

A  grewsome  sentiment  is  imparted  to  the  South  by 
the  great  number  of  places  where  some  hastily  judged 
victim  has  come  to  his  death  by  shooting,  hanging,  or 
burning.  The  land  is  stained  from  end  to  end  with 
blood  shed  by  lawless  hands.  Unquestionably  there 
are  negroes  who  are  to  be  feared,  and  they  are  a  good 
deal  of  a  nightmare  to  the  Southern  household.  The 
whites  all  have  guns  in  their  houses  ready  for  black 
depredators,  and  the  fact  that  a  man  has  no  one  at 
home  but  his  wife  and  children  is  promptly  accepted 
as  a  sufficient  excuse  for  his  not  doing  jury  duty.  Very 
little  provocation  is  required  from  a  negro  to  make  a 
white  man  get  out  his  gun,  and  bullets  and  lynch  law 
are  not  by  any  means  reserved  for  the  more  serious 
crimes. 

An  incident,  which  I  heard  from  both  the  whites 
and  blacks  concerned,  and  which  illuminates  the  possi- 
bilities of  the  situation  quite  clearly,  was  this  :  A  white 
evangelist  was  holding  meetings  at  a  colored  church, 
and  was  staying  at  the  house  of  a  negro  named  Terry. 
He  talked  very  pointedly  about  his  hearers'  sins,  and 
in  doing  so  chanced  to  raise  the  ire  of  one  of  the 
women,  whose  relations  with  a  prominent  local  white 
man  were  a  source  of  scandal.  She  reported  the 
preacher's  remarks  to  this  white  man,  who  also  took 
offence,  and  then  the  youthful  aristocracy  of  the  place 


The  Niggers  351 

united  in  charging  that  the  evangelist  was  "stirring 
the  niggers  all  up."  They  felt  they  must  put  a  stop 
to  such  doings,  and  they  got  out  their  guns,  hired 
hacks,  and  went  in  impressive  force  and  style  to  the 
home  of  the  negro,  Terry.  He  was  absent,  but  the 
evangelist  was  found,  and  they  ordered  him  to  leave 
the  town  within  half  an  hour.  He  tried  to  parley  with 
them,  whereat  they  became  increasingly  angry,  and 
compelled  him  to  start  at  once.  Next  they  searched 
for  Terry,  and  came  across  him  talking  with  a  white 
neighbor  at  the  latter's  gate.  They  felt  he  needed  to 
be  taught  a  lesson,  and  with  their  bullets  laid  him  low, 
and,  incidentally,  wounded  the  white  neighbor.  While 
they  were  about  it,  they  concluded  they  ought  to  give 
the  community  a  thorough  housecleaning,  and  decided 
they  would  get  rid  of  Terry's  son,  who  had  a  store  in 
the  town.  That  night  they  put  a  notice  on  the  door 
of  young  Terry's  place  of  business  warning  him  to  get 
out  of  the  region.  Young  Terry  was  doing  well  with 
his  store,  and  it  was  everything  to  him.  He  concluded 
to  die  in  its  defence,  and  he  bought  two  revolvers  and 
let  it  be  known  that,  while  he  expected  death,  he  pro- 
posed to  do  some  shooting  first.  His  courage  had  a 
salutary  effect,  and  the  lynchers  decided,  on  cooler 
thought,  to  let  him  alone. 

The  intolerance  with  which  the  negro  is  regarded  is 
a  natural  outcome  of  the  former  relations  of  master  and 
slave ;   but  it  is  depressing  to  find  that,  in  all  the  years 


^^2         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

since  the  war,  so  little  progress  has  been  made.  Men 
of  intelligence  will  soberly  argue  with  you  that  niggers 
are  not  wholly  human,  that  they  are  more  akin  to  beasts, 
and  should  be  dealt  with  accordingly.  "  If  anything 
would  make  me  kill  my  children,"  declared  one  woman, 
"  it  would  be  the  possibility  that  niggers  might  some- 
time eat  at  the  same  table  and  associate  with  them  as 
equals.  That's  the  way  we  feel  about  it,  and  you 
might  as  well  root  up  that  big  tree  in  front  of  the 
house  and  stand  it  the  other  way  up  and  expect  it  to 
grow  as  to  think  we  can  feel  any  different." 

I  was  solemnly  assured  that  for  a  Southern  white 
man  to  invite  a  negro,  however  notable  and  however 
accomplished,  into  his  house  as  his  guest,  would  mean 
that  white  man's  social  ruin.  "  It's  like  this,"  one 
informant  remarked,  "equality  ain't  safe.  Now  I've 
got  a  servant  that  was  raised  with  me.  He  loves  me 
and  I  love  him.  He'd  do  anything  for  me,  and  I've 
remembered  him  in  my  will.  But  if  I  was  to  take 
him  into  my  family  and  treat  him  like  a  white  man, 
he'd  murder  me  in  three  days.  They  always  do  jus' 
thataway  when  you  go  to  favoring  'em. 

"  And  yet  the  President  of  the  United  States  has 
had  a  nigger  to  dine  with  him  !  The  South  never  got 
a  worse  shock  than  that.  Up  to  then  we'd  thought 
a  heap  of  Roosevelt  down  hyar.  Why,  we'd  named 
all  our  dogs  after  him  and  members  of  his  family;  but 
we've  changed  those  dogs'  names  since  that  dinner." 


The  Niggers  ^53 

In  one  town  I  heard  a  tale  of  a  colored  army-officer 
who  attempted  to  attend  a  white  folks'  church  and  sit 
in  a  pew  among  his  white-skinned  brethren.  To  them 
this  was  intolerable.  They  compelled  him  to  get  out, 
and  "  he  barely  escaped  the  worst  scouring  he  ever 
had  in  his  life." 

In  another  town  the  old-time  residents  had  been 
sadly  shocked  by  the  undecorous  way  the  Northern 
people  who  frequented  the  place  had  of  consorting  with 
certain  educated  negroes  of  the  vicinity.  They  would 
ride  together,  and  a  white  man  had  been  seen  to  sit  in 
the  carriage  and  hold  the  horse  while  three  "  niggers  " 
got  out  and  went  into  the  store  to  trade.  "  Why  !  " 
said  my  informants,  "  a  white  woman  and  a  nigger  on 
a  rainy  day  will  even  walk  under  the  same  umbrella." 
This  was  thought  to  be  disgusting  and  disgraceful,  and 
there  was  talk  of  passing  a  city  ordinance  making  such 
things  punishable  by  fines  and  imprisonment. 

I  do  not  wish  to  infer  that  sympathy  is  entirely  lack- 
ing between  Southern  whites  and  blacks.  In  most 
ways  there  is  no  friction,  and  as  a  rule  the  whites  are 
considerate  and  kindly.  They  help  generously  any 
reputable  negro  in  misfortune,  they  contribute  as  a 
matter  of  course  when  a  subscription  paper  goes  around 
for  the  benefit  of  the  colored  church,  and  they  will  tell 
you,  "  There's  a  heap  o'  good  niggers,"  though  taking 
care  to  add,  "  and  there's  a  lot  o'  darn-fool  niggers, 
too."      They  remember  with  gratitude  that  during  the 


2  A 


354         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

war  the  negroes  behaved  admirably.  The  white  men 
were  all  in  the  army,  and  the  women  and  children  were 
left  at  home  defenceless;  yet  nearly  all  the  blacks 
stayed  on  the  plantations  and  continued  to  do  their  ac- 
customed work.  "  Had  they  been  whites,  they  would 
have  had  a  carnival  of  murder  and  robbery  and  gone 
away." 

The  most  distressing  experience  the  South  has  ever 
had  with  the  blacks  was  directly  after  the  war,  when 
they  were  given  the  same  rights  to  vote  that  the  whites 
had,  in  spite  of  their  ignorance  and  their  long  past  of 
slavery.  For  a  time  there  was  chaos.  "The  niggers 
were  turned  loose  just  like  a  herd  of  cattle,"  an  Ala- 
bamian  enlightened  me.  "  There  never  was  a  more 
fatal  mistake.  Not  one  in  a  thousand  knew  beef  from 
a  side  of  sole  leather.  We've  got  an  ole  nigger  still 
living  in  this  town  who  come  clost  to  getting  into  the 
United  States  Senate,  and  he's  only  a  common  brick 
mason.  I  bet  he  couldn't  tell  in  three  guesses  how 
much  seven  and  six  is." 

The  situation  was  intolerable,  and  the  whites  felt 
they  must,  by  fair  means  or  foul,  disfranchise  the  blacks. 
One  of  the  most  charming  gentlemen  I  met  averred 
frankly  that  he  had  himself  cast  thirty  ballots  in  one 
election.  He  acknowledged  that  this  kind  of  fraud 
created  a  general  lawless  irresponsibility,  but  he  would 
do  the  same  thing  again  under  the  same  circumstances. 

It  is  the  common  opinion  of  the  whites   that   the 


JiHENEW  YORK 

iPlJ -Y 


TiLDf 


^■X    AND 
I'ATIONS 


J 


A  Squirrel  in  Sight 


The  Niggers  355 

negroes  make  their  religion  a  fetich  of  barbaric  super- 
stition. "  They  pretend  to  care  a  heap  for  it,"  I  was 
told,  "  and  no  matter  what  sort  of  lives  they  lead,  they 
join  the  chu'ch  because  then  they  reckon  the  devil 
cain't  get  them.  The  religion  of  most  of  'em  is  about 
like  that  of  the  nigger  at  one  of  their  conferences  that 
rose  and  got  up  and  said  he  reckoned  he'd  broken 
every  one  of  the  commandments  since  they  met  last, 
but  thanked  God  he  hadn't  lost  his  faith.  The  preach- 
ers are  terribly  ignorant,  and  they  look  on  the  Bible 
just  as  we  do  on  the  history  of  the  United  States,  and 
take  everything  in  it  perfectly  literal.  Often  they  got 
no  morals  worth  mentioning,  but  that  don't  hinder 
their  preaching  if  they  can  talk  glib  and  got  big  voices. 
A  nigger  has  to  have  some  ginger  in  his  religion. 
When  I  was  young,  I  used  to  go  to  a  nigger  chu'ch 
once  in  a  while  out  of  curiosity,  and  the  service  wouldn't 
git  fur  along  before  the  worshippers  would  be  singin' 
and  swayin'.  Then  they'd  begin  to  rar'  so't  the  most 
excited  ones'd  have  to  be  held,  and  pretty  soon  the 
whole  darn  thing  would  get  to  shoutin'.  When  they 
called  up  the  mourners,  they'd  jus'  tear  the  house  all 
to  pieces.  It  was  like  a  lot  of  horses  kicking  in  a 
stable.  You  could  hear  'em  a  mile.  And  I've  seen 
their  preacher  git  up  on  the  pulpit  on  all  fours  and 
sway  and  pitch  and  whoop  and  holler  like  he  was 
crazy  ;  but  that's  the  kind  of  preaching  the  average 
ole  country  nigger  enjoys. 


2^6         Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South 

"  To  show  you  how  ignorant  the  niggers  are  In 
their  rehgion  —  there  was  a  balloon  ascension  a  while 
ago  at  Mobile,  and  a  man  went  up  dressed  all  in  circus 
colors  and  spangles.  The  balloon  came  down  a  few 
miles  out  of  the  city  near  the  cabin  of  a  gray-haired 
nigger  about  eighty-nine  years  old.  The  nigger,  he 
run  out  to  the  man,  and  seein'  him  so  fancy  dressed, 
he  thought  he'd  come  straight  from  heaven,  and  he 
says,  '  Howdy,  Mas'r  Jesus,  how's  yo'  pa  ? '  " 

The  opinion  that  religion  possessed  no  charm  for 
the  negroes  unless  they  can  demonstrate  their  fervor 
in  shouting  and  acrobatic  earnestness  finds  plenty  of 
confirmation  in  real  life,  yet  I  have  attended  services 
that  were  admirably  decorous,  and  where  the  eloquent 
good  sense  of  the  preacher  compared  favorably  with 
anything  I  heard  from  the  pulpits  of  the  whites. 

The  character  and  learning  of  their  ministers  is 
doubtless  quite  open  to  criticism.  They  are  often 
blind  leaders  of  the  blind,  and  the  impulse  which 
takes  them  into  the  pulpit  is  frequently  not  unlike 
that  of  the  brother  who  got  his  "call"  while  he  was  at 
his  farm  work.  Said  he,  "  Dis  cotton  field's  mighty 
hot,  an'  I  believe,  afore  Gawd,  I'm  called  to  preach  ! " 
yet  this  sort  of  thing  is  growing  less  common. 

The  negro  churches  are  on  the  village  outskirts,  or 
off  still  farther  on  some  poor  spot  that  has  no  value 
for  other  purposes.  I  heard  of  one  colored  congrega- 
tion which  aspired   to  build  on  a  desirable  site  in  the 


The  Niggers 


357 


middle  of  the  village  ;  but  the  whites  threatened  that  if 
that  was  done,  the  church  would  be  burned  within  two 
days  after  it  was  finished,  and  the  project  was  aban- 
doned.    The  country  churches  are  nearly  always  dis- 


""^ 


■r-r   -|-^ 


A  Campmeeting  Building 

mal  little  structures  with  leaky  roofs,  broken  windows, 
uncertain  foundations,  and  other  marks  of  careless 
poverty.  Many  of  the  preachers  have  two  or  three 
churches  in  their  charge  at  which  they  preach  in  turn. 
A  pastor's  entire  salary  is  very  likely  not  over  one 
hundred  dollars,  and  he  usually  has  a  small  farm  to 
help  eke  out  a  livelihood. 

"  The  niggers  believe  in  schoolin',"  I  was  told. 
"  Yes,  they're  all  anxious  to  get  an  education,  and  they 
have  good  memories  and  do  first  rate  if  they  take  hold 


2SS  Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

right ;  but  It  is  apt  to  make  'em  above  workin'.  The 
kind  of  school  that  teaches  'em  trades  is  perhaps  the 
best,  but  they  soon  get  tired  of  the  trade  they've 
learned  and  try  something  else  they  think  they'll  like 
better.  There's  one  thing,  though,  where  they  come 
out  ahead  o'  the  white  man  every  time.  They  got  a 
natural  gift  o'  speech.  You  take  a  lot  o'  white  men 
in  a  public  meetin',  and  there  ain't  one  In  a  dozen 
could  stand  up  an'  tell  his  name  and  how  far  he  lived 
from  town.  But  get  five  thousand  niggers  together, 
and  you  can  call  on  any  one  of  'em  to  speak  on  any 
subject  you  please,  and  he'll  jump  right  up  and  talk 
without  thinkin'." 

The  schools  for  whites  and  blacks  are  all  separate. 
The  presence  of  a  single  nigger  in  a  white  school  would 
bring  it  to  an  end,  and  the  possibility  of  the  two  races 
attending  the  same  school  Is  not  to  be  Imagined.  The 
rancor  which  some  of  the  Southern  whites  feel  with 
regard  to  negro  education  Is  Incomprehensible,  as,  for 
instance,  that  of  an  Intelligent  business  man  who  said 
of  an  important  colored  school  that  the  Institution 
ought  to  be  blown  up  with  dynamite  and  the  prin- 
cipal run  out  of  the  state.  He  declared  he  hoped 
to  live  to  see  the  day  when  these  virtuous  objects 
would  be  accomplished,  and  the  blacks  given  to 
understand  that  ignorance  and  plodding  labor  and 
complete  white  domination  were  their  destiny  for  all 
time. 


The  Niggers 


359 


A  Negro  Schoolhouse 

One  story  told  for  my  benefit  was  that  "  There  was 
a  Georgia  nigger  who  had  been  sent  to  the  peniten- 
tiary, and  the  governor  of  the  state  give  him  his  choice 
between  bein'  set  free  and  goin'  to  Massachusetts,  and 
he  said  he  rather  go  back  to  the  penitentiary." 

The  joke  perhaps  travesties  Massachusetts,  yet  our 
treatment  of  the  negroes  is  scarcely  angelic.  We  have 
the  same  feeling  of  superiority  that  exists  in  the  South. 
This  is  characteristic  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  in  its 
relation  with  all  other  races,  and  very  likely  the  North 
would  discriminate  against  the  blacks  more  if  they  were 
with  us  in  greater  numbers.  Nor  is  the  Southern  an- 
tipathy without  any  reasonable  foundation.     A  colored 


360         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

preacher  recently  declared  :  "  The  only  way  to  get  rid 
of  the  *  Jim  Crow  '  car  is  to  get  rid  of  the  '  Jim  Crow  ' 
negro.  If  I  could  use  two  hundred  thousand  bars  of 
soap  on  the  unwashed  negroes  that  travel  on  trains 
and  hang  around  depots,  I  would  solve  the  negro 
problem  about  twenty  per  cent." 

The  wisest  advisers  of  the  blacks  think  they  will 
gain  far  less  by  clamor  for  their  rights  than  by  work- 
ing quietly  and  steadily  for  better  homes,  f  ir  better 
and  more  general  education,  and  for  the  ownership  of 
property.  By  character  and  accomplishment  they  will 
surely  win  the  respect  of  the  whites  and  a  worthy  place 
in  the  country's  civilization.  To  what  development 
they  may  ultimately  attain  is  uncertain.  They  have 
originality,  inventiveness,  and  a  real  talent  for  music, 
but  primarily  they  have  strong  bodies,  and  their  im- 
mediate future  is  industrial. 

Social  equality,  the  bugbear  about  which  one  hears 
so  much  in  the  South,  does  not  exist  between  the 
whites  and  blacks  in  any  section  of  the  United 
States.  An  ignorant  negro  is  not  welcomed  into  a 
refined  Northern  family,  and  there  are  sure  to  be  some 
reserves  in  the  case  of  any  negro,  whatsoever  his  attain- 
ments. Racial  differences,  independent  of  color,  keep 
the  whites  and  blacks  apart,  for  it  is  the  racial  tendency 
to  flock  together.  These  differences  are  of  nature's 
making,  and  there  is  no  discredit  in  recognizing  them. 
Every  race  needs   to   be  self-reliant,  and  the   negroes 


The  Niggers 


361 


must  build  up  a  worthy  social  life  within  their  own 
ranks.  Each  success  they  gain  in  this  direction  de- 
serves applause,  and  it  is  an  encouraging  fact  that  caste 
is  developing  among  them.  They  no  longer  associate 
indiscriminately.  Those  of  the  rougher,  coarser  class 
find  barriers  put  up  between  them  and  their  betters 
which  can  only  be  removed  by  their  own  improve- 
ment, and  this  has  a  decided  moral  uplift. 


A  Farm  Cart 


It  is  often  claimed  by  Southern  men  that  the  negroes 
were  better  off  as  slaves  than  they  are  now,  with  regard 
to  physical  comfort  and  all  essential  needs,  but  this 
view  finds  no  indorsement  among  the  negroes  them- 


362         Highways  and   Byways  of  the  South 

selves  ;  and  even  the  whites  are  all  agreed  that  for  the 
owners  and  the  South  itself  slavery  was  a  curse.  "  We 
never  realized  it,"  explained  a  Virginian,  "  but  slavery 
was  a  great  incubus.  If  the  old  conditions  had  con- 
tinued, business  could  never  have  developed,  few  rail- 
roads would  have  been  built,  and  we'd  still  be  riding 
around  in  our  chariots  drawn  by  eight  horses,  and 
thinking  our  manner  of  life  was  superior  to  any  other 
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  We  were  ready  to  fight  for 
slavery  then,  and  we'd  have  kept  on  fighting  till  this 
day  if  our  resources  hadn't  been  totally  exhausted 
sooner.  But  now,  if  slavery  could  be  restored  by  vote, 
it  wouldn't  get  one  supporter  in  a  thousand  !  " 


New  England  and  its  Neighbors 

By  CLIFTON   JOHNSON 

A  Companion  Volume  to  "  Highways  and  Byways  of  the  South  " 

With  over  loo  Illustrations  by  the  Author 
Cloth.    Crown  8vo.    Gilt  top.    $2.00  net;  postage,  20  cents 


**  Mr.  Johnson  is  a  keen  observer  ;  he  knows  how  to  describe  the 
scenes  he  visits  and  the  people  he  meets.  The  student  of  American 
hfe  outside  of  urban  boundaries  could  not  ask  for  a  better  guide." 

—  Brooklyfi  Eagle. 

"A  book  that  ranks  with  the  best  in  the  author's  long  list  of 
entertaining  and  picturesque  works.  Every  phase  ot  the  New 
Englander's  existence  is  touched,  and  one  feels  he  is  listening  to  a 
sympathetic  interpreter  of  things.  Mr.  Johnson's  literary  style  is 
direct,  and  his  word-pictures  vivid.  The  result  is  a  book  that  will 
doubtless  give  long  delight."  — Deliver  Republicati. 

**  A  simple,  natural,  rambling  record  of  rural  Yankeedom,  pictur- 
ing to  the  very  life  the  ways  and  habits,  the  conversation,  the 
whimsicalities,  of  the  people  of  the  smaller  villages  and  farmhouses 
of  the  northeastern  portion  of  the  United  States.  And  the  illustra- 
tions carry  out  the  spirit  of  the  text  perfectly." 

—  New  York  Commercial  Advertiser, 

**  There  is  a  broad  impressionism  about  Mr.  Clifton  Johnson's 
'  New  England  and  its  Neighbors '  compared  with  which  the  man- 
ner of  the  majority  of  books  about  outdoor  hfe  is  like  niggling  in  a 
back  yard.  The  descriptions  are  admirable.  The  book  is  full  of 
quiet  humor,  and  the  portraits  of  individual  characters  are  so  lifelike 
that  to  have  read  of  them  is  to  have  met  and  talked  with  them." 

—  Pall  Mall  Gazette^  London. 


THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 

66  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York 


OTHER  BOOKS  BY  CLIFTON  JOHNSON 

AMONG  ENGLISH  HEDGEROWS 

With  an  Introduction  by  Hamilton  W.  Mabie,  and  over 
100  Illustrations.        $2.25 

'*The  book  deserves  to  succeed,  not  only  in  America,  but  in  the 
country  which  it  so  lovingly  depicts. ' '  —  The  Spectator y  London. 

**The  chief  charm  of  Mr.  Johnson's  work  lies  in  the  enchanting 
simplicity  with  which  he  records  the  manners  and  customs  of  the 
country."  —  The  Nation. 


ALONG  FRENCH  BYWAYS 

Fully  Illustrated.        $2.25 


t( 


Gives  a  singularly  faithful  and  complete  and  well-balanced  idea 
of  the  French  peasantry  and  French  rural  life,  manners,  and  cus- 
toms." —  Bosto7i  Herald. 

**  We  follow  our  guide  with  deepening  interest  to  the  end  of  his 
tour.      His  pictures  are  charming  and  so  is  the  whole  book." 

—  Londo7i  Quarterly  Review. 


.     THE  ISLE  OF  THE  SHAMROCK 

Fully  Illustrated.        $2.00  net;    postage,  15  cents 

**  A  most  interesting  book,  fuir;of  lively  sketches  and  anecdotes." 

—  Londoti  Daily  News. 

**  One  of  the  most  informing  books  about  Ireland  and  the  condi- 
tions of  the  Irish  folk  in  the  country  and  small  towns  that  has  been 
published  in  a  long  time."  —  Brooklyfi  Eagle. 


THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 

66  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York 


THE  LAND  OF  HEATHER 

Fully  Illustrated.        $2.00  net;   postage,  15  cents 


*'  Mr.  Johnson  is  a  keen  observer  and  has  the  literary  gift  of  apt 
expression  in  a  marked  degree." 

—  Dundee  (Scotland)  Advertiser. 

**  Not  only  Scotchmen,  but  every  student  of  human  nature  will  be 
pleased  with  this  entertaining  book.  It  describes  typical  people  and 
scenes  with  much  sympathy  and  appreciation." 

—  Brooklyn  Standard  Union. 


Old-time  Schools  and  School-books 

With  234  Illustrations.        $2.00  net ;  postage,  20  cents 

**A  storehouse  of  delightfully  quaint  reprints  of  texts  and  cuts, 
and  a  mine  of  information  concerning  educational  beginnings  in  this 
country."  — The  Outlook. 

**  Mr.  Johnson  has  made  a  most  entertaining  volume.  Few 
professionally  humorous  books  contain  so  much  that  is  genuinely 
funny."  —  Providence  Journal. 


Edited  by  CLIFTON  JOHNSON  for  School  and  Home  Reading 

DON  QUIXOTE 

Illustrated  by  Cruikshank.        75  cents 

**  An  admirable  piece  of  editing  has  been  done  by  Clifton  John- 
son. He  has  omitted  the  obnoxious  portions  and  many  of  the 
unpleasant  details  which  made  the  original  objectionable.  The 
result  is  a  pleasant,  readable  story,  in  every  way  wholesome  and 
attractive."  —  The  Chautauquan. 


THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 

66  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York 


THE  NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 
REFERENCE  DEPARTMENT 

This  book  is 
tak 

1 

under  no  circumstances  to  be 
en  from  the  Building 

--^     If 

\im?i'  I 

0G>'V'.7 

FEB  1 2  191 

r 

a  AY  0  ^m 

I 

•-*  -  f 

f^) 

form    iiti 

1 

I . 


.57? 


/  .     ■  ,  '  '  . 


