\v> 


A\ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 


\  in  2011  with  funding  from 
X^University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/liturgicalyear10gu 


THE 


LITURGICAL    YEAR. 


THE    TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


* 


01 

THE 

HTUEGIOAL  YEAK. 

BY   THE 

YEKT  KEY.  DOM  PROSPER  GUERANGER, 

ABBOT    OF    SOLESMES. 

FIKST  VOLUME  OF  THE  CONTINUATION. 


^imiMth  front  t\t  ^rint^» 

BY   THE 

REV.  DOM   LAURENCE   SHEPHERD, 

MONK   OK   THE    ENOLISH-BENEDICTiyC   CONGBEGATION. 


THE    TIME    AFTEE    PENTECOST. 

VOL.  L 


DUBLIN : 
JAMES  DUFFY  awd  SONS,  15,  WELLINGTON  QUAY ; 

AND 

Li,  Paternoster  Row,  London. 
1879. 


3o,  3  7^ 


TO 

TEE  EIGHT  EEV.  E.  P.  BTJECHALL, 

PRESIDENT-GENERAL 

OF   THE 

ENGLISH-BENEDICTINE  CONGREGATION, 

AND 

ABBOT  OF  WESTMINSTER, 


%\u  Mmt 


IS    RESP'-CTFULLY    INSCRIBED, 
IN    MEMORY   OF 

THE    SILVER    JUBILEE 

BY 

THE  TRMSLATOE. 


St.  Mary's  Abbey,  Stanbrook, 
Worcester,  a.d.  1879. 


CONTENTS. 


i 


TIME  AFTEE  PENTECOST. 

PAGE 

Preface,  .....         ix 

Chap.  I. — The   History  or   the  Time   after 

Pentecost,        ...  1 

Chap.        II. — The  Mystery  of  the  Time  after 

Pentecost,       ...  4 

Chap.  III. — Practice  for  the  Time  after  Pen- 
tecost, ...  9 

Chap.       TV. — Morning  and  Night  Prayers  for 

the  Time  after  Pentecost,        .  13 

Chap.         V. — On  hearing  Mass,  during  the  Time 

after  Pentecost,  .  .         30 

Chap.       VI. — On  Holy  Communion,  during  the 

Time  after  Pentecost,  .         65 

Chap.  VII. — On  the  Offices  of  Tierce^  Sext,  and 
None,  during  the  Time  after 
Pentecost,       .  .  .74 

Chap.  VIII. — On  the  Office  of  Vespers  for  Sun- 
days and  Feasts,  during  the 
Time  after  Pentecost,  .         88 

Chap.       IX. —  On  the  Office  of  Compline,  during 

the  Time  after  Pentecost,        .         99 


Feast  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity, 
Tierce, 

Mass, 
Sext, 
None, 
Vespers, 


108 
121 
122 
130 
131 
132 


Till 


CONTE>'TS, 


Monday  after  Trinity  Sunday,     . 

Tuesday  after  Trinity  Sunday, 

"Wednesday  after  Trinity  Sunday, 

First  Vespers  of  the  Feast  of   Corpus 
Christi,  .... 


PACK 

150 
167 
183 

198 


The  Feast  of  Corpus  Christi, 

203 

Matins, 

217 

Lauds, 

254 

Tierce, 

268 

Mass, 

273 

Procession, 

286 

Sext,      . 

292 

None, 

293 

Second  Vespers, 

294 

Friday  within  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi, 

307 

Saturday  within  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi,  . 

323 

Sunday  within  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi, 

341 

Mass, 

353 

Vespers, 

363 

Monday  within  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi, 

.       367 

Tuesday  within  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi, 

.       386 

Wednesday  within  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi 

,       402 

Thursday,  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi, 

sus. 

.       420 

The  Feast  of  the  Sacred  Heart  of  Je 

.       436 

Mass, 

.       456 

Third  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 


46: 


PREFACE. 


With  this  Volume,  we  have  opened  to  us  the  second 
part  of  the  Liturgical  Year,  and  we  begin  the  long 
period  of  the  Time  after  Pentecost.    It  treats  upon 
the  Feasts  of  the  most  holy  Trinity y  of  Corpus  Christie 
and  of  the  Sacred  JSeart  of  Jesus.     These  three 
Feasts  require  to  be  explained  apart.     Their  days 
date  with  dependance  on  Easter ;  and  yet,  they  are 
detached,  if  we  consider  their  object,  from  the  Move- 
able Cycle,  whose  aim  is  to  bring  before  us,  each 
year,    the    successive,    and,   so  to    speak,    historic 
memories  of  our  Lord's  Mysteries.     They  come  close 
upon  the  sublime  drama,  which  has,  by  the  gradual 
presenting  to  us  the  facts  of  our  Eedeemer's  History, 
shown  us  the  divine  economy  of  the  Redemption ; 
they  come  immediately  after,  and  give  us  a  deep  and 
dogmatic  teaching ;  a  teaching  which  is  a  marvellous 
synthesis,   taking  in  the  whole  body  of  Christian 
doctrine. 

The  Holy  Ghost  has  come  down  upon  the  earth,  in 
order  to  sanctify  it.  Faith  being  the  one  basis  of  all 
sanctification,  and  the  source  of  love,  it  was  Faith 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  would  make  the  starting-point 


X  PREFACE. 

of  his  divine  workings  in  the  soul.  To  this  end,  he 
inspires  the  Church,  whicli  lias  sprung  up  into  life 
under  the  influence  of  liis  impetuous  breathing,  to 
propose  at  once  to  the  Faithful  that  doctrinal  sum- 
mary, wMch  is  comprised  in  the  three  Feasts  imme- 
diately coming  after  Pentecost.  The  Volumes 
following  this  will  show  us  the  Holy  Spirit  con- 
tinuing his  work,  and,  on  the  solid  foundations  of 
the  Faith  he  established  at  the  outset,  building  the 
entire  superstructure  of  the  Christian  virtues. 

This  was  the  idea  which  the  Author  of  the  Litur- 
gical Year  was  busy  developing  in  the  second  part 
of  his  work,  when  death  came  upon  him  ;  and  the 
pen  that  had  begun  this  Volume,  was  put,  by 
obedience  into  hiSy  who  now  comes  before  the  Faith- 
ful, begging  their  prayers  upon  the  arduous  task  he 
has  undertaken,  of  continuing  the  not  quite  finished 
work  of  his  beloved  Father  and  Master.  Yes,  we 
beg  of  them  to  beseech  our  Lord,  that  he  himself  will 
vouchsafe  to  bring  to  a  successful  termination  an 
undertaking  that  was  begun  for  his  honour  and 
glorj^,  and  has  already  produced  so  much  fruit  in  the 
souls  of  men. 

Br.  L.  F.,  O.S.B. 

SoLESMES,  May  10,  1879. 


THE  TIME  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  FIRST. 

THE   HISTORY   OF   THE   TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  Solemnity  of  Pentecost  and  its  Octave  are  over, 
and  the  progress  of  the  Liturgical  Year  introduces 
us  into  a  new  period,  which  is  altogether  different 
from  those  we  have  hitherto  spent.  From  the  very 
beginning  of  Advent,  which  is  the  prelude  to  the 
Christmas  festival,  right  up  to  the  anniversary  of  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  have  witnessed  the 
entire  series  of  the  Mysteries  of  our  Redemption ; 
all  have  been  unfolded  to  us.  The  sequel  of  Seasons 
and  Feasts  made  up  a  sublime  drama,  which  absorbed 
our  very  existence ;  we  have  but  just  come  from  the 
final  celebration,  which  was  the  consummation  of  the 
whole.  And  yet,  we  have  got  through  but  one  half 
of  the  year.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  period  we 
have  still  to  live  is  devoid  of  its  own  special  mysteries ; 
but,  instead  of  keeping  up  our  attention  by  the  cease- 
less interest  of  one  plan  hurrying  on  its  completion, 
the  sacred  Liturgy  is  about  to  put  before  us  an 
almost  unbroken  succession  of  varied  episodes,  of 
which  some  are  brilliant  with  glory,  and  others 
exquisite  in  loveliness,  but  each  one  of  them  bringing 
its  special  tribute  towards  either  the  development  of 
the  dogmas  of  faith,  or  the  furtherance  of  the  Chris- 
tian life.     That  year's  Cycle  will  thus  be  filled  up  ;  it 

VOL.  X,  B 


2  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

will  disappear ;  a  new  one  will  take  its  place,  bring- 
ing before  us  the  same  divine  facts,  and  pouring  forth 
the  same  graces  on  Christ's  mystical  body. 

This  section  of  the  Liturgical  Year,  which  com- 
prises a  little  more  or  a  little  less  than  six  months, 
according  as  Easter  is  early  or  late,  has  always  had 
the  character  it  holds  at  present.  But,  although  it 
only  admits  detached  solemnities  and  Feasts,  the 
influence  of  the  fnoveable  portion  of  the  Cycle  is 
still  observable.  It  may  have  as  many  as  twenty- 
eight,  or  as  few  as  twenty-three  weeks.  This  varia- 
tion depends  not  only  upon  the  Easter  Feast,  which 
may  occur  on  any  of  the  days  between  the  22nd 
of  March  and  25th  of  April,  inclusively ;  but,  also, 
on  the  date  of  the  first  Sunday  of  Advent,  the  open- 
ing of  a  new  Ecclesiastical  Year,  and  which  is  always 
the  Sunday  nearest  the  Kalends  of  December. 

In  the  Roman  Liturgy,  the  Sundays  of  this  series 
go  under  the  name  of  Sundaf/s  after  Pentecost.     As 
we  shall  show  in  the  next  Chapter,  that  title  is  the 
most  suitable  that  could  have  been  given,  and  is  found 
in  the  oldest  Sacramentaries  and  Antiphonaries  ;   but 
it   was   not   universally   adopted  by  even  all   those 
Churches  which  followed  the  Roman  Rite  ;  in  progress 
of  time,  however,  that  title  was  the  general  one.     To 
mention  some  of  the  previous  early  names : — in  the 
Cofnes  of  Alcuin,  which  takes  us  back  to  the  8th 
Century,   we  find  the  first  section  of  these  Sundays 
called  Sundays  after  Pentecost;  the  second  is  named 
Weeks  after  the  Feast  of  the  Apostles  (post  Natalc 
Apostolorum)  ;  the  third  goes  under  the  title  of  Weelis 
after  Saint  Laurence  (post  Sancti  Laurentii) ;  the  fourth 
has  the  appellation  of  Weeks  of  the  Seventh  Month 
(September) ;  and,  lastly,  the  fifth  is  termed  Weeks 
after  Saint  Michael  (post  Sancti  Anc/eliJ ,  and  lasts  till 
Advent.     As  late  as  the  16th  Century,  many  Missals 
of  the  "Western  Churches  gave  us  these  several  sec- 
tions of  the  Time  after  Pentecost,  but  some  of  the  titles 


HISTORY   OF   THE   TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST.  d 

varied  according  to  the  special  Saints  honoured  in  the 
respective  dioceses,  and  which  were  taken  as  the 
date-marks  of  this  period  of  the  Year.  The  Roman 
Missal,  published  by  order  of  Saint  Pius  the  Fifth, 
has  gradually  been  adopted  in  all  our  Latin  Churches, 
and  has  restored  the  ancient  denomination  to  the 
Ecclesiastical  Season  we  have  just  entered  upon  ;  so 
that  the  only  name  under  which  it  is  now  known 
amongst  us  is,  The  Time  after  Pentecost  (post  Pen- 
tecosten.J 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


CHAPTEE  THE  SECOND. 

THE   MYSTERY   OF   THE   TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

That  we  may  thoroughly  understand  the  meaning 
and  influence  of  the  Season  of  the  Liturgical  Year 
upon  which  we  have  now  entered,  it  is  requisite  for 
us  to  grasp  the  entire  sequel  of  mysteries,  which  holy 
Church  has  celebrated  in  our  presence  and  company ; 
we  have  witnessed  her  Services,  and  we  have  shared 
in  them.  The  celebration  of  those  mysteries  was  not 
an  empty  pageant,  acted  for  the  sake  of  being  looked 
at.  Each  one  of  them  brought  with  it  a  special 
grace,  which  produced  in  our  souls  the  reality  sig- 
nified by  the  Eites  of  the  Liturgy.  At  Christmas, 
Christ  was  born  within  us ;  at  Passiontide,  He  passed 
on  and  into  us  his  sufi'erings  and  atonements ;  at 
Easter,  he  communicated  to  us  his  glorious,  his  un- 
trammelled life ;  in  his  Ascension,  he  drew  us  after 
him,  and  this  even  to  heaven's  summit ;  in  a  word,  as 
the  Apostle  expresses  all  this  working,  Christ  was 
formed  in  us.^ 

But,  in  order  to  give  solidity  and  permanence  to 
the  image  of  Christ  formed  within  us,  it  was  necessary 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  come,  that  so  he  might 
increase  our  light,  and  enkindle  a  fire  within  us  that 
should  never  be  quenched.  This  divine  Paraclete 
came  down  from  heaven  ;  he  gave  himself  to  us  ;  he 
wishes  to  take  up  his  abode  within  us,  and  take  our 
life  of  regeneration  entirely  into  his  own  hands. 
Now,  it  is  during  the  period  called,  by  the  Liturgy, 
Tlie  Time  after  Pentecost,  that  there  is  signified  and 
expressed  this  regenerated  life,  which  is  to  be  spent 

1  Gal.  iv.  19. 


MYSTERY   OF    THE    TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST.  O 

on  the  model  of  Christ's,  and  under  the  direction  of 
his  Spirit. 

Two  objects  here  offer  themselves  to  our  considera- 
tion :  the  Church  and  the  Christian  soul.  As  to  holy 
Church,  the  Bride  of  Christ,  filled  as  she  is  with  the 
Paraclete  Spirit,  who  has  poured  himself  forth  upon 
her,  and,  from  that  time  forward,  is  her  animating 
principle, — she  is  advancing  onwards  in  her  militant 
career,  and  will  do  so  till  the  second  Coming  of  her 
heavenly  Spouse.  She  has  within  her  the  gifts  of 
Truth  and  Holiness.  Endowed  with  Infallibility  of 
Faith,  and  Authority  to  govern,  she  feeds  Christ's 
flock,  sometimes  enjoying  liberty  and  peace,  some- 
times going  through  persecutions  and  trials.  Her 
divine  Spouse  abides  with  her,  by  his  grace  and  the 
effi-cacy  of  his  promises,  even  to  the  end  of  time ;  she 
is  in  possession  of  all  the  favours  he  has  bestowed 
upon  her ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  with  her,  and 
in  her,  for  ever.  All  this  is  expressed  by  this  present 
portion  of  the  Liturgical  Year.  It  is  one  wherein  we 
shall  not  meet  with  any  of  those  great  events  which 
prepared  and  consummated  the  divine  work ;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  is  a  season  when  holy  Church  reaps 
the  fruits  of  that  holiness  and  doctrine,  which  those 
ineffable  mysteries  have  already  produced,  and  will 
continue  to  produce,  during  the  course  of  ages.  It  is 
during  this  same  season,  that  we  shall  meet  with  the 
preparation  for,  and,  in  due  time,  the  fulfilment  of, 
those  final  events  which  will  transform  our  Mother's 
militant  life  on  earth  into  the  triumphant  one  in 
heaven.  As  far,  then,  as  regards  holy  Church,  this 
is  the  meaning  of  the  portion  of  the  Cycle  we  are 
commencing. 

As  to  the  faithful  soul,  whose  life  is  but  a  compen- 
dium of  that  of  the  Church,  her  progress,  during  the 
period  which  is  opened  to  her  after  the  Pentecos- 
tal Feasts,  should  be  in  keeping  with  that  of  our  com- 
mon Mother.     The  soul  should  live  and  act  according 


b  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

to  that  Jesus,  who  has  united  himself  with  her  by  the 
mysteries  she  has  gone  through ;  she  should  be 
governed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  she  has  received. 
The  sublime  episodes,  peculiar  to  this  second  portion 
of  the  year,  will  give  her  an  increase  of  light  and 
life.  She  will  put  unity  into  these  rays,  which, 
though  scattered  in  various  directions,  emanate  from 
one  common  centre :  and,  advancing  from  brightness  to 
brightness,^  she  will  aspire  to  being  consummated 
in  him  whom  she  now  knows  so  well,  and  whom  death 
will  enable  her  to  possess  as  her  own.  Should  it  not 
be  the  will  of  God,  however,  to  take  her  as  yet  to 
himself,  she  will  begin  a  fresh  year,  and  live,  over 
again,  those  mysteries  which  she  has  already  enjoyed 
in  the  foregoing  first  half  of  the  Liturgical  Cycle, 
after  which,  she  will  find  herself,  once  more,  in  the 
season  that  is  under  the  direction  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  till  at  last,  her  God  will  summon  her  from 
this  world,  on  the  day  and  at  the  hour  which  he  has 
appointed  from  all  eternity. 

Between  the  Church,  then,  and  the  Soul,  during 
the  time  intervening  from  the  descent  of  the  divine 
Paraclete  to  the  consummation,  there  is  this  differ- 
ence,— that  the  Church  goes  through  it  but  once, 
whereas  the  Christian  soul  repeats  it  each  year.  "With 
this  exception,  the  analogy  is  perfect.  It  is  our  duty, 
therefore,  to  thank  God  for  his  providing  thus  for  our 
weakness,  by  means  of  the  sacred  Liturgy,  whereby 
he  successively  renews  within  us  those  helps,  which 
enable  us  to  attain  the  glorious  end  of  our  creation. 

Holy  Church  has  so  arranged  the  order  for  reading 
the  Books  of  Scripture  during  the  present  period,  as 
to  express  the  work  then  accomplished,  both  in  the 
Church  herself,  and  in  the  Christian  soul.  For  the 
interval  between  Pentecost,  and  the  commencement 
of  August,  she  gives  us  the  Four  Books  of  Kings. 

1 II  Cor.  iii.  18. 


MASTERY    OF   THE   TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST.  7 

They  are  a  prophetic  epitome  of  the  Church's  history. 
They  descrihe  how  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  founded 
by  David,  who  is  the  type  of  Christ  victorious  over 
his  enemies,  and  by  Solomon,  the  king  of  peace,  who 
builds  a  temple  in  honour  of  Jehovah.  During  the 
centuries  comprised  in  the  history  given  in  those 
Books,  there  is  a  perpetual  struggle  between  good  and 
evil.  There  are  great  and  saintly  kings,  such  as  Asa, 
Ezechias,  and  Josias ;  there  are  wicked  ones,  like 
Manasses.  A  schism  breaks  out  in  Samaria ;  infidel 
nations  league  together  against  the  City  of  God.  The 
holy  people,  continually  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  the 
Prophets,  give  themselves  up  to  the  worship  of  false 
gods,  and  to  the  vices  of  the  heathen  ;  till,  at  length, 
the  justice  of  God  destroys  both  Temple  and  City  of  the 
faithless  Jerusalem :  it  is  an  image  of  the  destruction 
of  this  world,  when  Faith  shall  be  so  rare,  as  that  the 
Son  of  Man,  at  his  second  Coming,  shall  scarce  find  a 
vestige  of  it  remaining. 

^^  During  the  month  of  August,  we  read  the  Scqnential 
Books, — so  called,  because  they  contain  the  teachings 
of  Divine  Wisdom.  This  Wisdom  is  the  Word  of 
God,  who  is  manifested  unto  men  through  the  teach- 
ings of  the  Church,  which,  because  of  the  assistance 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  permanently  abiding  within  her,  is 
infallible  in  the  truth. 

Supernatural  truth  produces  holiness,  which  cannot 
exist,  nor  produce  fruit,  where  truth  is  not.  In  order 
to  express  the  union  there  is  between  these  two,  the 
Church  reads  to  us,  during  the  month  of  September, 
the  Books  called  Hagiographic ;  these  are,  Tobias, 
Judith,  Esther,  and  Job,  and  they  show  Wisdom  in 
action. 

At  the  end  of  the  world,  the  Church  will  have  to 
go  through  combats  of  unusual  fierceness.  To  keep 
us  on  the  watch,  she  reads  to  us,  during  the  month 
of  October,  the  Book  of  Machabees ;  for  there  we  have 
described  to  us  the  noble- heartedness  of  those  defenders 


s 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


of  the  Law  of  God,  and  for  which  they  gloriously 
die ;  it  will  he  the  same  at  the  last  days,  when  power 
will  be  given  to  the  Beasf,  to  make  war  icith  the  Saints, 
and  to  overcome  them} 

The  month  of  November  gives  us  the  reading  of  the 
Prophets  :  the  judgments  of  God  impending  upon  a 
world  which  he  is  compelled  to  punish  by  destruction, 
are  there  announced  to  us.  First  of  all,  we  have  the 
terrible  Ezechiel ;  then  Daniel,  who  sees  empire 
succeeding  empire,  till  the  end  of  all  time ;  and, 
finally,  the  Minor  Frophets,  who,  for  the  most  part, 
foretell  the  divine  chastisements,  though  the  latest 
among  them  proclaim,  at  the  same  time,  the  near 
approach  of  the  Son  of  God. 

Such  is  the  Mystery  of  this  portion  of  the  Liturgical 
Cycle,  which  is  called  The  Time  after  Pentecost.  It 
includes  also  the  use  of  green  Vestments ;  for  that 
colour  expresses  the  hope  of  the  Bn^e,  who  knows 
that  she  has  been  intrusted,  by  her  Spouse,  to  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  that  he  will  lead  her  safe  to  the  end 
of  her  pilgrimage.  St.  John  says  all  this  in  those  few 
words  of  his  Apocalypse :  The^_Sjnrit  and  the  Bride 
say  :  Come  !  ^ 

^  Apoc.  xiii.  7.  *  Apoc.  xxii.  17. 


PRACTICE    FOR   THE    TIME   AFTER    PENTECOST.  9 


CHAPTER  THE  THIRD. 

PRACTICE   FOR  THE   TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  object  which  holy  Church  has  in  view  by  her 
Liturgical  Year,  is  the  leading  the  Christian  soul  to 
union  with  Christ,  and  this  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  This 
object  is  the  one  which  God  himself  has  in  giving  us 
his  own  Son,  to  be  our  Mediator,  our  Teacher,  and 
Redeemer,  and  in  sending  us  the  Holy  Ghost  to  abide 
among  us.  It  is  to  this  end  that  is  directed  all  that 
aggregate  of  Rites  and  Prayers,  which  we  have  hitherto 
explained :  they  are  not  a  mere  commemoration  of  the 
mysteries  achieved  for  our  salvation  by  the  divine 
goodness,  but  they  bring  with  them  the  graces  cor- 
responding to  each  of  those  mysteries ;  that  thus  we 
may  come,  as  the  Apostle  expresses  it,  to  the  age  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ} 

As  we  have  elsewhere  explained,  our  sharing  in  the 
mysteries  of  Christ,  which  are  celebrated  in  the  Litur- 
gical Year,  produces  in  the  Christian  what  is  called, 
in  Mystic  Theology,  the  Illuminative  Life,  in  which, 
the  soul  gains  continually  more  and  more  of  the  light 
of  the  Incarnate  Word,  who,  by  his  examples  and 
teachings,  renovates  each  one  of  her  faculties,  and 
imparts  to  her  the  habit  of  seeing  all  things  from 
God's  point  of  view.  This  is  a  preparation  which 
disposes  her  for  union  with  God,  not  merely  in  an 
imperfect  manner,  and  one  that  is  more  or  less  incon- 
stant, but  in  an  intimate  and  permanent  way,  which 
is  called  the  Unitive  Life.  The  production  of  this 
Life  is  the  special  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  has 
been  sent  into  this  world  that  he  may  maintain  each 

lEpKiv.  13. 


10  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

one  of  our  souls  in  the  possession  of  Christ,  and  may 
bring  to  perfection  the  love  whereby  the  creature  is 
united  with  its  God. 

In  this  state,  in  this  Unitivo  Life,  the  soul  is  made 
to  relish,  and  assimilate  into  herself,  all  that  substan- 
tial and  nourishing  food  which  is  presented  to  her 
so  abundantly  during  The  Time  after  Pentecost. 
The  mysteries  of  the  Trinity  and  of  the  Blessed  Sacra- 
ment, the  mercy  and  power  of  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  the 
glories  of  Mary  and  her  influence  upon  the  Church 
and  souls, — all  these  are  manifested  to  the  soul  with 
more  clearness  than  ever,  and  produce  within  her 
effects  not  previously  experienced.  In  the  Feasts  of 
the  Saints,  which  are  so  varied  and  so  grand  during 
this  portion  of  the  year,  she  feels  more  and  more 
intimately  the  bond  which  unites  her  to  them  in 
Christ,  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  eternal  hap- 
piness of  Heaven,  which  is  to  follow  the  trials  of  this 
mortal  life,  is  revealed  to  her  bv  the  Feast  of  all 
Saints ;  she  gains  clearer  notions  of  that  mysterious 
bliss,  which  consists  in  light  and  love.  Having  be- 
come more  closely  united  to  Holy  Church,  which  is 
the  Bride  of  her  dear  Lord,  she  follows  her  in  ?11  the 
stages  of  her  earthly  existence,  she  takes  a  share  in 
her  sufferings,  she  exults  in  her  triumphs  ;  she  sees, 
and  yet  is  not  daunted  at  seeing,  this  world  tending 
to  its  decline,  for  she  knows  that  the  Lord  is  nigh  at 
hand.  As  to  what  regards  herself,  she  is  not  dismayed 
at  feeling  that  her  exterior  life  is  slowly  giving  way, 
and  that  the  wall  which  stands  between  her  and  the 
changeless  sight  and  possession  of  the  sovereign  Good 
is  gradually  falling  to  decay  ;  for,  it  is  not  in  this 
world  that  she  lives,  and  her  heart  has  long  been 
where  her  treasure  is.^ 

Thus  enlightened,  thus  attracted,  thus  established 
by  the  incorporation  into  herself  of  the  mysteries, 

i  St.  Matth.  vi.  21. 


PRACTICE   FOR  THE   TIME   AFTER  PEKTECOST.       11 

wherewitli  the  sacred  Liturgy  has  nourished  her,  as 
also  by  the  gifts  poured  into  her  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  soul  yields  herself  up,  and  without  any  effort,  to 
the  impulse  of  the  divine  Mover.  Virtue  has  become 
all  the  more  easy  to  her,  as  she  aspires,  it  would 
almost  seem,  naturally,  to  what  is  most  perfect; 
sacrifices,  which  used,  formerly,  to  terrify,  now 
delight  her ;  she  makes  use  of  this  world,  as  though 
she  used  it  not,^  for  all  true  realities,  as  far  as  she  is 
concerned,  exist  beyond  this  world ;  in  a  word,  she 
longs  all  the  more  ardently  after  the  eternal  posses- 
sion of  the  object  she  loves,  as  she  has  been  realising 
even  in  this  life,  what  the  Apostle  describes,  where 
he  speaks  of  a  creature's  being  ojie  spirit  with  the 
Lordy^  by  being  united  to  him  in  heart. 

Such  is  the  result  ordinarily  produced  in  the  soul, 
by  the  sweet  and  healthy  influence  of  the  sacred 
Liturgy.  But  if  it  seem  to  us,  that,  although  we 
have  followed  it  in  its  several  seasons,  we  have  not, 
as  yet,  reached  the  state  of  detachment  and  expecta- 
tion just  described,  and  that  the  life  of  Christ  has  not, 
so  far,  absorbed  our  own  individual  life  into  itself, — 
let  us  be  on  our  guard  against  discouragement  on 
that  account.  The  Cycle  of  the  Liturgy,  with  its 
rays  of  light  and  grace  for  the  soul,  is  not  a  pheno- 
menon that  occurs  only  once  in  the  heaven  of  holy 
Church  ;  it  returns  each  Year.  Such  is  the  merciful 
design  of  that  God,  ivho  hath  so  loved  the  tvorld,  as  to 
give  it  his  Only  Begotten  Son;^  of  that  God,  tvho 
came  not  to  judge  the  worlds  hut  that  the  world  may  be 
saved  by  him.  *  Such,  we  say,  is  the  Design  of  God  ; 
and  holy  Church  is  but  carrying  out  that  design,  by 
putting  within  our  reach  the  most  powerful  of  all 
means  for  leading  man  to  his  God,  and  uniting  him 
to  his  sovereign  Good  ;  she  thus  testifies  the  earnest- 
ness of  her  maternal  solicitude.     The  Christian  who 

1  1  Cor.  vii.  31.         2  j^^^^  y^^  17^        3  gt.  jolm,  iii.  16. 
4  jiid.  iii.  17. 


12  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

has  not  been  led  to  the  term  we  have  been  describing 
by  the  first  half  of  the  Cycle,  will  still  meet,  in  this 
second,  with  important  aids  for  the  expansion  of  his 
faith  and  the  growth  of  his  love.  The  Holy  Ghost, 
who  reigns,  in  a  special  manner,  over  this  portion  of 
the  Year,  will  not  fail  to  influence  his  mind  and 
heart ;  and,  when  a  fresh  Cycle  commences,  the  work, 
thus  begun  by  grace,  has  a  new  chance  for  receiving 
that  completeness,  which  had  been  retarded  by  the 
weakness  of  human  nature. 


MORNING   AND   NIGHT   PRAYERS.  IB- 


CHAPTER  THE  FOURTH. 

MORNING   AND   NIGHT   PRAYERS   FOR  THE    TIME   AFTER 

PENTECOST. 

During  this  second  part  of  the  Year,  the  Christian, 
on  waking  in  the  morning,  will  unite  himself  with 
holy  Church,  who,  every  day,  in  her  Office  of  Lauds, 
hails  the  return  of  light,  making  use  of  these  words 
of  the  Royal  Prophet : 

O  God,  my  God,  unto  thee  Deus,  Deus  meus,  ad  te 
do  I  watch  at  break  of  day.         de  luce  vigilo. 

He  will  profoundly  adore  the  divine  Majesty;  and, 
thanking  his  sovereign  Lord,  who  has  protected  him 
whilst  involved  in  the  darkness  of  night,  he  will 
proffer  him  his  service  for  the  whole  day  which  is 
now  commencing :  he  will  wish  to  spend  it  in  love 
and  obedience,  as  behoves  one  whom  Christ  has 
united  to  himself  by  his  mysteries,  and  whom  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  willing  to  guide  and  govern.  The 
time  for  Morning  Prayer  being  come,  he  may  give 
expression  to  the  sentiments  which  should  then  ani- 
mate his  soul,  by  using  these  formulas  of  the 
Church : — 

MORNING   PRAYERS. 

First,  praise  and  adoration  of  the  Most  Holy 
Trinity ; 

y.  Let  us  bless  the  Father,  y.  Benedicamus  Patrem 
and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  et  Filium,  ciun  Sancto  Spi- 
Ghost.  ritu. 


14  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Bt.  Laudemus    et    super-         gt.  Let  us  praise  him  and 

exaltemus  eum  in  seecula.  extol  him  above  all,  for  ever. 

f.  Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,         T.  Glory  be  to  the  Father, 

et  Spiritui  Sancto.  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the 

Holy  Ghost. 

Be.  Sicut  erat  in  principio,         Bt.  As  it  was  in  the  beo^- 

et   nunc   et   semper,    et    in  ning,   is  now,  and  ever  shall 

saecula  saeculorum.     Amen,  be,  world  without  end.  Amen. 

Then,  praise  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ : 

T.  Adoramus  te,  Christe,  t.  "We  adore  thee,  O  Christ, 

et  benedicimus  tibi ;  and  bless  thee  ; 

gt.  Quia  per  sanctam  cm-  gt.  Because,    by    thy    holy 

cem  tuam  redemisti  mun-  Cross,  thou  hast  redeemed  the 

dum.  world. 

Thirdly,  invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost : 

Yeni,  Sancte  Spiritus,  re-  Come,  0  Holy  Spirit,  fill  the 

pie  tuorum  corda  fidelium,  hearts  of  thy  faithful,  and  en- 

et  tui  amoris  in  eis  ignem  kindle  within  them  the  fire  of 

accende.  thy  love. 

After  these  fundamental  acts  of  religion,  recite  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  uniting  your  intentions  with  those 
which  your  Saviour  had  when  he  gave  it  to  you. 
First,  then,  raise  up  your  thoughts  and  desires  to  the 
interests  of  his  glory,  whilst  you  say  the  first  three 
petitions ;  and  in  the  last  four,  humhly  put  before 
him  the  favours  you  yourself  stand  in  need  of : 

THE    lord's    PRAYER. 

Pater  noster,    qui    es    in  Our  Father,  who  art  in  hea- 

coelis,    sanctificetur    nomen  ven,  hallowed  be  thy  name ; 

tuum ;      adveniat     regnum  thy  kingdom  come  ;  thy  will 

tuum ;  fiat  voluntas  tua,  si-  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in 

cut  in  coelo  et  in  terra.  heaven. 

Panem  nostrum  quotidia-  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 

num  da  nobis  hodie  ;  et  di-  bread,     and    forgive    us    our 

mitte   nobis   debita  nostra,  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them 

sicut  et  nos  dimittimus  de-  that     trespass     against     us ; 

bitoribus  nostris ;  et  ne  nos  and  lead  us  not  into  tempta- 

inducas  in  tentationem  ;  sed  tion  ;  but  deliver  us  from  evil, 

libera  nos  a  malo.     Amen.  Amen. 


MORNING    PRAYERS.  15 

Then,  address  our  Blessed  Lady,  using,  for  this 
purpose,  the  words  of  the  Angelical  Salutation. 
Whilst  saying  it,  think  of  the  share  she  took  in  the 
mysteries,  whereby  we  have  been  saved,  and  united 
to  God.  Think,  too,  of  the  immense  power  given  to 
her  by  her  divine  Son,  and  of  the  maternal  love  she 
bears  for  us  mortals. 

THE    ANGELICAL    SALUTATION. 

Hail  Mary,  full   of   grace  :  Ave  Maria,  gratia  plena ; 

the  Lord  is  with  thee ;  blessed  Doininus  tecum ;  benedicta 

art  thou  among  women,  and  tu  in  mulieribus,    et  bene- 

blessed  is  the    fruit    of    thy  dictus    fructus  ventris   tui, 

womb,  Jesus.  Jesus. 

Holy  Mary,  Mother  of  God,  Sancta  Maria,  mater  Dei, 

pray  for  us  sinners,  now,  and  ora  pro  nobis  peccatoribus, 

at.   the    hour   of    our    death,  nunc  et  in  hora  mortis  nos- 

Amen.  tree.     Amen. 

After  this,  you  should  recite  the  Creed,  that  is,  the 
Symbol  of  Faith.  It  contains  the  dogmas  we  are  to 
believe,  and  which  we  have  seen,  in  such  living 
reality,  by  means  of  the  Liturgy  which  has  celebrated 
them,  each  in  its  turn.  Faith  is  the  first  bond  which 
unites  us  to  God.  It  is  Faith  that  gives  us  to  know 
him,  and  reveals  to  us  the  object  of  our  hope  and  our 
love.  Our  Faith  should  be  dearer  to  us  than  our 
life,  and  we  should  be  ever  praying  for  its  increase. 

THE    apostles'    CREED. 

I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Credo  in  Deum,    Patrem 

Almighty,  Creator  of  heaven  omnipotentem,      creatorem 

and  earth.  coeli  et  terrse. 

And,   in  Jesus   Christ,    his  Et    in    Jesum    Christum 

only  Son  our  Lord,  who  was  Filium  ejus  unicum,  Domi- 

conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  num.  nostrum :  qui  concep- 

bom    of    the    Virgin    Mary;  tus  est   de  Spiritu   Sancto, 

suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  natus     ex    Maria    Virgine, 

was  crucified,  dead,  and  buri-  passus   sub   Pontio    PSato, 

ed;  he  descended  into  hell,  the  crucifixus,  mortuus  et  sepul- 

third  day  he  arose  again  from  tus  :    descendit   ad  inferos. 


16 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


tertia  die  resurrcxit  a  mor- 
tuis :  ascendit  ad  coelos,  se- 
det  ad  dexteram  Dei  Patris 
omnipotentis :  inde  venturus 
est  judicare  vivos  et  mor- 
tuos. 

Credo  in  Spiritum  Sanc- 
tuin,  sanctain  Ecclesiam 
Catholicam,  Sanctonmi 

communionem,  reniissioneni 
peccatoiTim,  camis  resurrec- 
tionem,  vitam  setemam. 
Amen. 


the  dead ;  he  ascended  into 
heaven,  sitteth  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  the  Father  Al- 
mighty ;  from  thence  he  shall 
come  to  judge  the  living  and 
the  dead. 

I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
the  Holy  Catholic  Church  ;  the 
communion  of  Saints,  the  for- 
giveness of  sins,  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body,  and  life 
everlasting.     Amen. 


After  having  thus  made  the  Profession  of  your 
Faith,  unite  with  Holy  Church,  who  hails,  each 
morning,  the  rising  of  the  day-star,  who  is  her  Jesus, 
who  is  the  Light  of  the  World j^  and  the  Sun  of 
Justice.  To  this  end,  you  may  recite  the  following 
beautiful  Hymn,  composed  by  St.  Ambrose  : 


HYMX. 


Splendor  Patemae  gloriae, 
De  luce  lucem  profercns, 
Lux  lucis,  et  fons  luminis, 
Diem  dies  illuminans. 


Yerusque  sol  illabere, 
Micans  nitore  perpeti : 
Jubarque  Sancti  Spiritus 
Infunde  nostris  sensibus. 


Totis  vocemus  et  Patrem, 
Patrcm  perennis  gloriae, 
Patrem  potentis  gratiae, 
Culpam  releget  lubricam. 


Confirmet  actus  strenuos, 
Dentes  retundat  invidi : 


O  Brightness  of  the  Father's 
glorv !  bringins:  Light  fioiu 
the  ^Light !  Thou  Light  of 
Light,  and  Fount  of  Light, 
and  Day  that  illuminest  the 
day  : 

O  thou  true  Sun !  pour  forth 
thy  rays  on  us,  shining  upon 
us  -vWth  unfading  splendour ! 
O  Eadiance  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  thou  infused  into  our  senses 
and  powers. 

Give  us,  also,  to  invoke  the 
Father, — the  Father  of  eternal 
glorj',  the  Father  of  mighty 
grace, — that  he  would  drive 
from  us  sin  and  its  allure- 
ments. 

May  he  give  energy  to  oui* 
deeds  and  strengthen  them ; 


1  St.  John  viii.  12. 


MORNING   PRAYERS. 


17 


may  he  break  the  teeth  of  the 
envious  serpent ;  may  he  sup- 
port us  when  we  rudely  fall, 
and  give  us  the  grace  to  act. 

May  he  govern  and  rule  our 
mind,  in  a  chaste  and  faithful 
body;  may  our  faith  be  fer- 
vent in  warmth,  void  of  the 
poisons  of  error. 

May  Christ  be  our  food,  and 
Faith  our  drink ;  may  we,  in 
gladness,  quaff  the  sober  in- 
ebriation of  the  Spiiit. 

May  this  day  be  one  of  joy ; 
modesty  its  dawn.  Faith  its 
noon ;  and  no  night  to  dim 
the  mind. 

The  aurora  is  swift  advanc- 
ing; O  may  the  full  Aurora 
come,  the  whole  Son  in  the 
Father,  and  the  whole  Father 
in  his  Word ! 

To  God  the  Father,  and  to 
his  Only  Son,  and  to  the  Para- 
clete Spirit,  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever. 

Amen. 


Casus  secundet  asperos, 
Donet  gerendi  gratiam. 


Mentem  gubemet  et  re- 
gat, 
Casto,  fideli  corpore ; 
Fides  calore  ferveat, 
Fraudis  venena  nesciat. 

Christusque  nobis  sit  ci- 
bus, 
Potusque  noster  sit  fides  : 
Lseti  libamus  sobriam 
Ebrietatem  Spiritus. 

Lsetus  dies  hie  transeat, 
Pudor  sit  ut  diluculum. 
Fides  velut  meridies, 
Crepusculum  mens  nesciat. 

Aurora  cursus  provehit, 
Aurora  totus  prodeat, 
In  Patre  totus  Filius, 
Et  totus  in  Yerbo  Pater. 

Deo  Patri  sit  gloria, 
Ejusque  soli  Filio, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito, 
Et  nunc,  et  in  perpetuum. 

Amen. 


After  having  tlius  paid  your  homage  to  your  divine 
Mediator,  next  make  an  humble  confession  of  your 
sins,  reciting,  for  this  purpose,  the  general  formula 
made  use  of  by  the  Church. 


THE   CONFESSION    OF    SINS. 


I  confess  to  Almighty  God, 
to  blessed  Mary  ever  Vii-gin, 
to  blessed  Michael  the  Arch- 
angel, to  blessed  John  Baptist, 
to  the  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paul,  and  to  aU  the  Saints, 
that  I  have  sinned  exceedingly 
in  thought,  word,  and  deed; 

VOL.    X. 


Confiteor  Deo  omnipo- 
tenti,  beatsD  Marise  semper 
Virgini,  beato  Michaeli 
Archangelo,  beato  Joanni 
Baptistse,  Sanctis  Apostolis 
Petro  et  Paulo,  et  omnibus 
Sanctis,  quia  peccavi  nimis, 
cogitatione,  verbo  et  opeie : 

C 


18  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

mea  culpa,  mea  culpa,  mea  through  my  fault,  thi'ough  my 

maxima  culpa.  fault,  through  my  most  griev- 
ous fault. 

Ideo  precor  beatam  Ma-  Therefore     I    beseech     the 

nam  semper  Virginem,  bea-  blessed     Mary     ever    Virgin, 

turn  Michaelem  Archange-  blessed  Michael  the  Archangel, 

lum,  beatum  Joannem  Bap-  blessed  John  Baptist,  the  holy 

tistam,     sanctos    Apostolos  Apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  and 

Petruni  et  Pauluui,  et  omnes  all  the  Saints,  to  pray  to  oui- 

Sanctos,    orare   pro   me   ad  Lord  God  for  me. 
Dominum  Deum  nostrum. 

Misereatur    nostri   omni-  May   Ahuighty    God    have 

potens    Deus,    et     diniissis  mercy   on   us,    and,    our   sins 

peccatis    nostris,    perducat  being   forgiven,   bring  us   to 

nos     ad     vitam     a?temam.  life  everiasting.     Amen. 
Amen. 

Indulgentiam,   absolutio-  May  the  Almighty  and  mer- 

nem  et  remissionem  pecca-  ciful   Lord   grant  us  pardon, 

torum     nostronim     tribuat  absolution,    and   remission  of 

nobis  omnipoterws  et  miseri-  our  sins.     Amen, 
cors  Dominus.     Amen. 

This  is  the  proper  time  for  making  your  Meditation, 
as,  no  doubt,  you  practise  this  holy  exercise.  It  may 
be  the  case,  with  some  souls,  that  their  assiduous 
application  to  the  mysteries  of  the  Holy  Liturgy  has 
produced  upon  them,  this  among  other  effects, — that 
it  has  opened  to  them  the  way  of  Prayer  properly  so 
called.  Let,  then,  each  one  commune  with  God, 
under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  During  this 
long  period,  which  never  lasts  less  than  six  months, 
the  Christian  is  free  to  choose  the  subject  of  his  com- 
munings with  God,  for  he  has  been  enlightened,  as  to 
all  things,  by  the  words  and  works  of  his  Lord,  who 
came  down  from  heaven  to  earth  that  he  might  teach 
us  all  truth.  So  that,  whether  he  stay  to  ponder 
over  the  mysteries  which  have  been  revealed  to  him, 
according  to  the  attraction  which  he  feels  for  them  ; 
or  fix  his  attention  upon  the  perfections  of  that  divine 
Model,  in  whom  there  are,  so  resplendently,  all  the 
marks  of  the  Second  Adam  come  down  from  heaven  ;  ^ 

'  1   Cor.  XV.  17. 


MORNING    PRAYERS.  1  i) 

or  our  Lord  point  out  to  him  those  miseries  and  im- 
perfections which  are  in  hira,  and  keep  him  still  so 
far  from  his  Model ;  all  will  tend  to  enlighten  him, 
to  inflame  him,  and  to  unite  him  with  his  God. 
When  a  soul  is  continually  being  influenced  by  her 
contact  with  the  Church  through  the  Liturgy,  it  is 
impossible  for  the  spirit  of  Prayer  not  to  grow  within 
her,  and,  either  imperceptibly,  or  suddenly,  produce 
in  her  a  transformation  into  Him  who,  being  God, 
has  united  himself  to  our  nature,  in  order  that, 
through  him,  ive  might  be  united  with  God. 

Your  Meditation  or  Prayer  ended,  or  deferred,  on 
account  of  your  not  having  leisure  to  make  it  at  this 
hour  of  the  morning,  you  will  next  address  this 
prayer  to  God,  begging  him  to  grant  you  the  grace  to 
avoid,  during  this  day,  every  kind  of  sin,  and  to  per- 
form all  manner  of  good  works.  Say,  then,  this 
prayer  of  the  Church,  for  her. prayers  are  the  best : 

y.  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer,         V".  Domine,    exaucli    ora- 

tionem  ineam, 
gt.  And    let    my   cry   come         Ijf.  Et  clamor  mens  ad  te 
unto  thee.  veniat. 

LET  TJS  PEAY.  OREMUS. 

Almighty  Lord  and  God,  Domine,  Deus  omnipo- 
who  hast  brought  us  to  the  tens,  qui  ad  principium  hu- 
beginning  of  this  day,  let  thy  jus  diei  nos  pervenire  fecis- 
powerful  grace  so  conduct  us  ti,  tua  nos  hodie  salva  vir- 
thi'ough  it,  that  we  may  not  tute,  ut  in  hac  die  ad  nul- 
fall  into  any  sin  ;  but  that  all  lum  declinemus  peccatum ; 
our  thoughts,  words,  and  ac-  sed  semper  ad  tuam  justi- 
tions  may  be  regulated  ac-  tiam  faciendam  nostra  pro- 
cording  to  the  rules  of  thy  cedant  eloquia,  dirigantui- 
heavenly  justice,  and  tend  to  cogitationes  et  opera.  Per 
the  observance  of  thy  law.  Dominum  nostrum  Jesum 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Christum  Filium  tuum,  qui 
Lord.     Amen.  tecum  vivit  et  regnat  in  uni- 

tate  Spiritus  sancti  Deus, 
per  omnia  saecula  sseculo- 
rum.     Amen. 


20 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


During  the  day,  you  would  do  well  to  use  the  in- 
structions and  prayers,  which  you  will  find  in  these 
volumes,  both  for  the  Proper  of  the  Time,  and  the 
Proper  of  the  Saints.  In  the  Evening,  you  may  use 
the  following  prayers. 


NIGHT  PRAYERS. 

After  having  made  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  adore  that 
Sovereign  Lord,  who  now  offers  you  repose  after  the 
labours  of  the  day.  Beg  his  protection  on  these  hours 
of  sleep  and  night  ;  and,  to  this  end,  you  may  recite 
this  beautiful  hymn  of  St.  Ambrose,  which  was  so 
great  a  favourite  with  St.  Augustine,  his  disciple.^ 


HYMN. 


Deus,  Creator  omnium 
Polique  rector,  vestiens 
Diem  decoro  liuuine, 
Koctem  sopoiis  gratia, 

Artus  solutos  ut  quies 
Eeddat  laboris  usui, 
Mentesque  fessas  allevet, 
Luctusque  solvat  anxios ; 


Grates,  peracto  jam  die, 
Et  noetis  exortu,  preccs, 
Voti  reos  ut  adjuves, 
Hym^num    canentes,    solvi- 
mus. 

Te  cordis  ima  conch i ant, 
Te  vox  sonora  concroptt, 
Te  diligat  castus  amor, 
Te  mens  adoret  sobria. 


O  God,  Creator  of  all  thingsj. 
and  Euler  of  the  heavens,  'tis 
thou  that  clothed  day  with 
beautiful  Hght,  and  night  with 
the  boon  of  sleep. 

'Tis  sleep  that  restores  our 
wearied  limbs  to  the  toil  of 
work.  Sleep  gives  repose  to 
the  mind  when  tired,  and 
takes  away  the  anxious-mak- 
ing grief. 

The  day  is  spent,  and  night 
is  come ;  we  oflfer  thee  our 
thanks  and  prayers,  singing 
our  hymn,  that  thou  mayst 
help  us,  thy  servants. 

May  our  inmost  heart  sing 
thy  praise,  and  tuneful  voices 
sound  forth  thy  name ;  may 
our  chaste  affection  love,  and 
our  sober  mind  adore,  tht^e. 


*  Confessions,  Bk.  ix.  ch.  12. 


NIGHT   PRAYERS. 


21 


And  when  the  night's  deep 
gloom  shall  shut  out  the  day, 
may  our  faith  know  nought  of 
darkness,  and  the  very  night 
be  day  by  faith. 

Let  not  our  soul,  but  only 
sin  feel  sleep ;  let  faith  keep 
us  chaste,  and,  by  its  refresh- 
ing power,  check  the  vapours 
of  sleep. 

May  our  heart's  deepest  self, 
unshackled  by  the  allurements 
of  sense,  dream  of  thee :  nor 
let  the  fear  of  the  enemy, 
whose  envy  is  ever  la;)dng 
snares,  disturb  us  when  at 
rest. 

Let  our  prayer  ascend  to 
Christ,  and  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Spirit  of  that  Christ 
and  Father:  O  Trinity,  one 
in  essence,  and  all-powerful, 
be  merciful  to  us,  who  pray  to 
thee. 

Amen. 


Ut,   cum  profunda  clau- 
serit 
Diem  caligo  noctium, 
Fides  tenebras  nesciat 
Et  nox  fide  reluceat. 

Dormire  mentem  ne  sinas, 
Dormire  culpa  noverit ; 
Castos  fides  refrigerans 
Somni  vaporem  temperet. 

Exuta  sensu  lubrico 
Te  cordis  alta  somnient ; 
Xec  hostis  invidi  dolo 
Pavor  quietos  suscitet. 


Christum  rogemus  et  Pa- 
trem, 
Christi  Patrisque  Spirituni 
Unum,  potens  per  omnia, 
Fove  precantes,  Trinitas. 


Amen. 


After  this  Hymn,  say  the  Our  Father^  Hail  Mary, 
and  the  Apostles'  Creed,  as  in  the  Morning. 

Then  make  the  Examination  of  Conscience,  going 
over  in  your  mind  all  the  faults  committed  during  the 
day.  Think,  and  humble  yourself  at  the  thought, 
how  sin  makes  us  degenerate  from  the  divine  adop- 
tion. Then  make  a  resolution  to  avoid  sin  for  the 
time  to  come,  to  do  penance  for  it,  and  to  shun  the 
occasions  which  might  again  lead  you  into  it. 

Having  concluded  the  Examination  of  Conscience, 
recite  the  Confiteor  (or  /  confess)  with  heartfelt  con- 
trition ;  and  then  give  expression  to  your  sorrow  by 
the  following  Act,  which  we  have  taken  from  the 
Venerable  Cardinal  Bellarmine's  Catechism. 

ACT   OF    CONTRITIOX. 

O  my  God,  I  am  exceedingly  grieved  for  having  offended 
thee  ;  and,  with  my  whole  heart,  I  repent  for  the  sins  I  have 


22  TIME    AFTKR    PEXTEroST. 

committed  :  I  hate,  and  abhor  them,  above  every  other  evil, 
not  onlv  because,  by  so  sinning,  I  have  lost  Heaven  and 
deserve'Hell,  but  still  more  because  I  have  offended  thee,  O 
infinite  Goodness,  who  art  worthy  to  be  loved  above  all 
things.  I  most  firmly  resolve,  by  the  assistance  of  thy 
grace,  never  more  to  offend  thee  for  the  time  to  come,  and 
to  avoid  those  occasions  which  might  lead  me  into  sin. 

You  may  then  add  the  Acts  of  Faith,  Hope,  and 
Charity,  to  the  recitation  of  which  Pope  Benedict  the 
Fourteenth  has  granted  an  Indulgence  of  seven  years 
and  seven  quarantines  for  each  time. 

ACT    OF    FAITH. 

O  my  God,  I  firmly  believe  whatsoever  the  Holy  Catholic 
Apostolic  Eoman  Church  requires  me  to  believe :  I  believ.- 
it,  because  thou  hast  revealed  it  to  her,  thou  who  art  th. 
very  Truth. 

ACT   OF    HOPE. 

O  my  God,  knowing  thine  almighty  power,  and  thine  infi- 
nite goodness  and  mercy,  I  hope  in  thee  that,  by  the  merits 
of  the  Passion  and  Death  of  our  Sa\-iour  Jesus  Christ,  thou 
wilt  grant  me  eternal  life,  which  thou  hast  promised  to  all 
such  as  shall  do  the  works  of  a  good  Christian ;  and  these  I 
resolve  to  do,  with  the  help  of  thy  grace. 

ACT'    OF    CHAKITY. 


O  my  God,  I  love  thee  with  my  whole  heart  and  above  all 
things,  because  thou  art  the  Sovereign  Good :  I  would  rather 
lose  all  things  than  offend  thee.  For  thy  love  also,  I  love, 
and  desire  to  love,  my  neighbour  as  myself. 


Then  say  to  our  Blessed  Lady,  the  following  solemn 
Anthem,  which  the  Church  says,  in  her  honour,  till 
Advent. 


KIGHT    PRAYERS. 


23 


ANTHEM    TO    THE    BLESSED    VIRGl>s\ 


Hail,  Holy  Queen,  Mother 
of  Mercy;  our  Life,  our  Sweet- 
ness, and  our  Hope,  all  hail ! 

To  thee  we  cry,  poor  ba- 
nished children  of  Eve ; 

To  thee  we  send  up  our 
sighs,  weeping  and  mourning 
in  this  vale  of  tears. 

Turn,  then,  most  gracious 
Advocate,  thine  eyes  of  mercy 
towards  us ; 

And,  after  this  our  exile, 
show  unto  us  the  blessed  Fruit 
of  thy  womb,  Jesus  ; 

O  merciful,  O  kind,  O  sweet 
Virgin  Mary ! 

y.  Pray  for  us,  O  holy  Mo- 
ther of  God, 

gt.  That  we  may  be  made 
worthy  of  the  promises  of 
Christ. 


Salve,  Regina,  Mater  nii- 
sericordise ;  vita,  dulcedo, 
et  spes  nostra,  salve. 

Ad  te  clamamus,  exsules 
filii  Hevse ; 

Ad  te  suspiramus,  gemen- 
tes  et  flentes  in  hac  lacry- 
niarum  valle. 

Eia  ergo,  advocata  nos- 
tra, illos  tuos  misericordes 
oculos  ad  nos  converte. 

Et  Jesum,  benedictum 
fructum  ventris  tui,  nobis 
post  hoc  exsilium  ostende  ; 

O  clemens,  o  pia,  o  dulcis 
Virgo  Maria  ! 

^.  Ora  pro  nobis,  sancta 
Dei  Genitrix, 

gt.  Ut  digni  efficiamur 
promissionibus  Christi. 


LET   ITS   PRAY. 

O  almighty  and  everlasting 
God,  who,  by  the  co-operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  didst  pre- 
pare the  body  and  soul  of 
Mary,  glorious  Virgin  and 
Mother,  to  become  the  worthy 
habitation  of  thy  Son  ;  grant 
that  we  may  be  delivered  from 
present  evils,  and  from  ever- 
lasting death  by  Her  gracious 
intercession,  in  whose  comme- 
moration we  rejoice.  Through 
the  same  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


OREMTJS. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,  qui  gloriosse  Virginis 
matris  Marise  corpus  et  ani- 
mam,  ut  dignum  Filii  tui 
habitaculum  effici  merere- 
tur,  Spiritu  sancto  coope- 
rante,  prseparasti :  da,  ut 
cujus  commemoratione  Ise- 
tamur,  ejus  pia  intercessione 
ab  instantibus  malis,  et  a 
morte  perpetua  liberemur. 
Per  eumdem  Christum  Do- 
minum  nostrum.     Amen. 


You  would  do  well  to  add  the  Litany  of  our  Lady. 
An  Indulgence  of  three  hundred  days,  for  each  time 
it  is  recited,  has  heen  granted  by  the  Church. 


24 


TIME    AFTER    PENTEWST. 


THE   LITANY   OF   THE    BLESSED    VIRGIN. 


Kyrie,  eloison. 

Ckriste,  eleison. 

Kyrie,  eleisou. 

Christe,  audi  nos. 

Cliriste,  exaudi  nos. 

Pater  de  ccelis,  Deus,  mise- 
rere nobis. 

Fili,  Eedemptor  mundi, 
Deus,  miserere  nobis. 

Spiritus  Sancte,  Deus,  mise- 
rere nobis. 

Sancta  Trinitas,  unus  Deus, 
miserere  nobis. 

Sancta  Maria,  ora  pro  nobis. 

Sancta  Dei  Genitiix,  ora,  etc. 

Sancta  Virgo  vii-ginum, 

Mater  Christi, 

Mater  divinfe  gratiae, 

Mater  purissima. 

Mater  castissima, 

Mater  inviolata, 

Mater  intemerata, 

Mater  amabilis. 

Mater  admii*abilis. 

Mater  Creatoris, 

Mater  Salvatoris, 

Virgo  prudentissima, 

Virgo  veneranda, 

Virgo  praedicandu, 

Virgo  potens, 

Virgo  clemens, 

Virgo  fidelis, 

Speculum  justiti«e, 

Sedes  sapientite, 

Causa  nostra}  laetitijc, 

Vas  spirituale, 

Vas  honorabUe, 

Vas  insigne  devotionis, 

Rosa  mystica, 

Turris  Davidica, 

Turris  ebumea, 

Domus  aurea, 

Fcederis  area, . 


Lord,  have  mercy  on  us. 
Christ,  have  mercy  on  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us. 
Christ,  hear  us. 
Christ,  graciously  hear  us. 
God,    the   Father  of  heaven, 

have  mercy  on  us. 
God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the 

world,  have  mercy  on  us. 
God  the    Holy   Ghost,    havo 

mercy  on  us. 
Holy  Ti-inity,   one  God,  have 

mercy  on  us. 
Holy  Marj^,  pray  for  us. 
Holy  Mother  of  God,  pray,  etc. 
Holy  Virgin  of  virgins. 
Mother  of  Chiist, 
Mother  of  divine  grace, 
Mother  most  pm-e, 
Mother  most  chaste, 
Mother  inviolate. 
Mother  undefiled, 
Mother  most  amiable, 
Mother  most  admirable, 
Mother  of  our  Creator, 
Mother  of  our  Redeemer, 
Virgin  most  prudent, 
Viigin  most  venerable, 
Virgin  most  reno^^^led, 
Virgin  most  powerful, 
Virgin  most  merciful, 
Virgin  most  faithful, 
Mirror  of  justice, 
Seat  of  wisdom, 
Cause  of  our  joy, 
Spiritual  vessel, 
Vessel  of  honour, 
Vessel  of  singular  di'Vot:on, 
Mystical  Rose, 
Tower  of  David, 
Tower  of  ivory, 
House  of  gold, 
Ark  of  the  covenant. 


NIGHT    PRAYERS. 


25 


Gate  of  heaven, 

Morning  star, 

Health  of  the  weak, 

Refuge  of  sinners, 

Comforter  of  the  afflicted, 

Help  of  Christians, 

Queen  of  Angels, 

Queen  of  Patriarchs, 

Queen  of  Prophets, 

Queen  of  Apostles, 

Queen  of  Martyrs, 

Queen  of  Confessors, 

Queen  of  Virgins, 

Queen  of  all  Saints, 

Queen  conceived  without  ori- 
ginal sin, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 
away  the  sins  of  the  world, 
spare  us,  O  Lord. 

O  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 
away  the  sins  of  the  world, 
graciously  hear  us,  O  Lord. 

0  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest  • 
away  the  sins  of  the  world, 
have  mercy  on  us. 

Christ,  hear  us. 

Christ,  graciously  hear  us. 
y.  Pray    for    us,    O    Holy 

Mother  of  God, 

gr.  That  we   may  be  made 

worthy    of    the    promises    of 

Christ. 


Janua  coeli, 
Stella  matutina, 
Salus  infirmorum, 
Refugium  peccatorum, 
Consolatrix  afflictorum, 
Auxilium  Christianorum, 
Regina  Angelorum, 
Regina  Patriarcharum, 
Regina  Prophetarum, 
Regina  Apostolorum, 
Regina  Martyrum, 
Regina  Confessorum, 
Regina  Virginum, 
Regina  Sanctorum  omniiim, 
Regina  sine  labe  concepta. 

Agnus  Dei,   qui  tolHs  pec- 

cata  mundi,  parce  nobis, 

Domine. 
Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis   pec- 

cata  mundi,  exaudi  nos, 

Dom.ine. 
Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pec- 

cata      mundi,       miserere 

nobis. 
Christe,  audi  nos. 
Christe,  exaudi  nos. 

^\  Ora  pro  nobis,   sancta 
Dei  Genitrix, 

gt.  Ut     digni     efficiamur 
promissionibus  Christi. 


LET  XTS  PRAY. 

Grant,  O  Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  thy  servants 
may  enjoy  constant  health  of 
body  and  mind  :  and  by  the 
glorious  intercession  of  Blessed 
Mary,  ever  Virgin,  be  deli- 
vered from  all  present  afflic- 
tion, and  come  to  that  joy 
which  is  eternal.  Through 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


OEEMUS. 

Concede  nos  famulos  tuos, 
qusesumus,  Domine  Deus, 
perpetua  mentis  et  corporis 
sanitate  gaudere :  et  glo- 
riosa  beatse  Marise  semper 
virginis  intercessione,  a  prse- 
senti  liberari  tristitia,  et 
seterna  perfrui  Isetitia.  Per 
Christum  Dominum  nos- 
trum.    Amen. 


Here  invoke  tlie  Holy  Angels,  whose  protection  is, 


26 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECO>;T. 


indeed,  always  so  much  needed  by  us,  but  never  so 
much  as  during  the  hours  of  night.  Say  vrith.  the 
Church  : 


Sancti  Angcli  custodes 
nostri,  defendite  nos  iii  prffi- 
lio,  ut  non  pereamus  in  tre- 
mendo  judicio. 

y.  Angelis  suis  Deus  man- 
davit  de  te, 

^.  Utcustodiant  te  in  om- 
nibus viis  tuis. 


Holy  Ansrcls,  our  loving 
Guardians,  defend  us  in  the 
hour  of  battle,  that  we  may 
not  be  lost  at  the  dreadful 
judgment. 

t.  God  hath  given  his  An- 
gels charge  of  thee, 

gt.  That  they  may  guard 
thee  in  all  thy  ways. 


OREMrs. 

Deus,  qui  ineffabili  provi- 
dentia  sanctos  Angolos  tuos 
ad  nostram  custodiam  mit- 
tere  dignaris :  largire  sup- 
plicibus  tuis,  et  eorum  sem- 
per protectione  defendi,  et 
feteraa  societate  gaudere. 
Per  Christum  Dominum 
nostrum.     Amen. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

O  God,  who  in  thy  wonder- 
ful providence  hast  been  pleas- 
ed to  appoint  thy  holy  Angels 
for  our  guardians  :  mercifully 
hear  our  prayers,  and  grant 
we  may  rest  seciu*e  under  thoiv 
protection,  and  enjoy  their 
fellowship  in  heaven,  for  ever. 
Through  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


Then  beg  the  assistance  of  the  Saints  by  the  follow- 
ing antiphon  and  prayer  of  the  Church  : 


AxT.  Sancti  Dei  omnes, 
intercedere  dignemini  pro 
nostra  omniumque  salute. 


AxT.  All  ye  Saints,  vouch- 
safe to  intercede  for  us  and 
for  all  men,  that  we  may  be 
saved. 


And  here  you  may  add  a  special  mention  of  the 
Saints  to  whom  you  boar  a  particular  devotion,  either 
as  vour  Patrons 'or  otherwise  ;  as  also  of  those  whose 
Fe'ast  is  kept  in  the  Church  that  day,  or  at  least  who 
have  been  commemorated  in  the  Divine  Office. 

This  done,  remember  the  necessities  of  the  Church 
Suffering ;  and  beg  of  God  that  he  will  give  to  the 


NIGHT   PRAYERS. 


27 


souls  in  Purgatory  a  place  of  refreshment,  light,  and 
peace.     For  this  intention  recite  the  usual  prayers  : 

PSALM    129. 


night :    let   Israel 


From  the  depths  I  have 
cried  to  thee,  O  Lord :  Lord, 
hear  my  voice. 

Let  thine  ears  be  attentive 
to  the  voice  of  my  supplica- 
tion. 

If  thou  wilt  observe  iniqui- 
ties, O  Lord  :  Lord,  who  shall 
endure  it  ? 

For  with  thee  there  is  mer- 
ciful forgiveness  :  and  by  rea- 
son of  thy  law,  I  have  waited 
for  thee,  O  Lord. 

My  soul  hath  relied  on  his 
word  :  my  soul  hath  hoped  in 
the  Lord. 

From    the    morning-watch 
even   until 
hope  in  the  Lord 

Because  with  the  Lord  there 
is  mercy :  and  with  him  plen- 
tiful redemption. 

And  he  shall  redeem  Israel 
from  all  his  iniquities. 

Eternal  rest  give  to  them, 
O  Lord. 

And  let  perpetual  light 
shine  upon  them. 

y.  From  the  gate  of  hell, 

Bt.  Deliver  their  souls,  0 
Lord,. 

y.  May  they  rest  in  peace. 

Bt.  Amen. 

y.  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer. 

gt.  And  let  my  cry  come 
unto  thee. 


De  profundis  clamavi  ad 
te,  Domine  :  Domine,  exau- 
di  vocem  meam. 

Fiant  aures  tuse  intenden- 
tes  :  in  vocem  deprecationis 
mese. 

Si  iniquitates  observave- 
ris,  Domine  :  Domine,  quis 
sustinebit  ? 

Quia  apud  te  propitiatio 
est :  et  propter  legem  tuam 
sustinui  te,  Domine. 

Sustinuit  anima  mea  in 
verbo  ejus  :  speravit  anima 
mea  in  Domino. 

A  custodia  matutina  usque 
ad  noctem  :  speret  Israel  in 
Domino. 

Quia  apud  Dominum  mi- 
sericordia  :  et  copiosa  apud 
eum  redemptio. 

Et  ipse  redimet  Israel :  ex 
omnibus  iniquitatibus  ejus. 

Requiem  setemam  dona 
eis,  Domine. 

Et  lux  perpetua  luceat 
eis. 

y.  A  porta  inferi, 

gt.  Erue,  Domine,  animas 
eorum. 

y.  Eequiescant  ia  pace. 

Bt.  Amen. 

y.  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam, 

gt.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 
veniat. 


LET  ITS  PEAY. 


O  God,  the  Creator  and  Re- 
deemer of  all  the  faithful,  give 


OREMTJS. 

Fidelium    Deus    omnium 
Conditor  et  Redemptor,  ani- 


28 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


mabus  famulonuu  famula- 
rumque  tuanim,  rcmissio- 
nem  cunctonini  tribue  pec- 
catonim:  ut  indulgentiam, 
quam  semper  optavenint, 
piis  supplicationibus  conse- 
quantur.  Qui  vivis  et  reg- 
nas  in  saeciila  saeculonim. 
Amen. 


to  the  souls  of  thy  servants 
departed  the  remission  of  all 
their  sins:  that  through  the 
help  of  pious  supplications, 
they  may  obtain  the  pardon 
they  have  always  desired. 
TVTio  livest  and  reignest  for 
ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Here  make  a  special  memento  of  such  of  the  Faith- 
ful departed  as  have  a  particular  claim  upon  your 
charity  ;  after  which,  ask  of  God  to  give  you  his 
assistance,  whereby  you  may  pass  the  night  free  from 
danger.  Say  then,  still  keeping  to  the  words  of  the 
Church  : 


AsT.  Salva  nos,  Domine, 
vigilantes,  custodi  nos  dor- 
niientes :  ut  vigilemus  cum 
Christo,  et  requiescamus  in 
pace. 

V.  Dignare,  Domine,  noc- 
te  ista, 

gt.  Sine  peccato  nos  cus- 
todire. 

^.  Miserere  nostri,  Do- 
mine, 

^.  Miserere  nostri. 

'^.  Fiat  niisericordia  tua, 
Domine,  super  nos, 

Be.  Quemadmodum  spe- 
ravimus  in  te. 

X.  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam, 

^.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 
veniat. 


Ant.  Save  us,  0  Lord,  whilst 
awake,  and  watch  us  as  we 
sleep;  that  we  may  watch 
with  Christ,  and  rest  in  peace. 

y.  Vouchsafe,  O  Lord,  this 
night. 

gt.  To  keep  us  without  sin. 

t.  Have  mercy  on  us,  O 
Lord, 

gt.  Have  mercy  on  us. 

y.  Let  thy  mercy,  O  Lord, 
be  upon  us. 

Bt.  As  we  have  hoped  in 
thee. 

y .  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer, 

5t.  And  let  my  cry  como 
unto  thee. 


OREMUS. 

Visita,  quajsumus,  Do- 
mine, habitationem  istam, 
et  omnes  insidias  inimici  ab 
ea  longe  repelle :  Angeli  tui 
sancti   habitent  in   ea,   qui 


LET   us   PRAY. 

Visit,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  this  house  and  family, 
and  drive  from  it  all  snares  of 
the  enemy ;  let  thy  holy  An- 
gels dwell  herein,    who   may 


NIGHT   PKAYERS. 


29 


keep  us  in  peace,  and  may  thy 
blessing  be  always  upon  us. 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  thy  Son,  who  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee,  in 
the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
God,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 


nos  in  pace  custodiant,  et 
benedictio  tua  sit  super  nos 
semper.  Per  Dominum  nos- 
trum Jesum  Christum,  Fi- 
liiim  tuum,  qui  tecum  vivit 
et  regnat  in  unitate  Spiritus 
sancti  Deus,  per  omnia  sae- 
cula  sseculorum.     Amen. 


And  finally,  as  a  close  to  the  day,  you  may  recite 
those  words,  which  were  the  last  uttered,  hy  our 
Eedeemer,  on  the  Cross.  The  Church  offers  them  to 
God,  each  day,  at  Compline. 

Into  thy  hands,  '0  Lord,  I         In  manus  tuas,  Domine, 
commend  my  soul.  commendo  spiritum  meum. 


30  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  FIFTH. 

ON    HEARING    M.\SS    DURING    IHE    TIME    AFTER 
PENIECOST. 

Of  all  the  good  acts  wherewith  a  Christian  can  sanc- 
tify his  day,  there  is  not  one  which  hears  comparison 
with  that  of  assisting  at  the  holy  Sacrifice  of  Mass. 
It  is  in  that  Sacrifice,  which  is  the  supreme  act  of 
Religion,  that  are  centred  all  the  homage  due  from 
man  to  his  Creator ;  and  it  is,  also,  from  the  same 
Sacrifice,  that  God  pours  out  upon  his  creature  Man 
every  sort  of  blessing,  and  profusely.  The  very  Son 
of  God  is  reaUy  present  there  ;  there  he  is  offered  up 
to  his  Father,  and  the  offering  is  always  well- 
pleasing  ;  and  they  who  assist  at  this  di^'ine  immola- 
tion, with  faith  and  love,  receive  into  their  souls 
graces  of  a  far  richer  kind  than  are  given  by  ordinary 
means. 

The  assistance  at  Mass,  if  completed  by  the  real 
participating  with  the  divine  Victim,  unites  man  to 
God  in  an  ineffable  way,  by  the  renovation  of  his 
whole  being,  for  it  produces  an  intimate  communion 
between  him  and  the  Word  Incarnate.  But  if  the 
Christian,  who  is  assisting  at  the  holy  Sacrifice,  goes 
no  further  than  the  uniting  his  intentions  with  those 
of  the  divine  Victim,  even  so,  his  mere  presence  at  so 
great  an  Act  includfs  a  true  participation  in  the 
supreme  worship  offered,  by  this  earth  of  ours,  to  the 
Majesty  of  God,  in  Christ,  and  by  Christ.  So,  too, 
he  solemnly  consecrates  to  God,  by  that  same  holy 
Act,  the  day  he  has  just  begun. 

We  have  devoted  the  days  within  the  Octave  of 
Corpus  Christi  to  the  giving  our  Readers  the  fullest 


MASS.  31 

instruction  regarding  the  holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass. 
As  to  the  dispositions  wherewith  they  should  assist  at 
it,  they  are  given  in  the  present  Chapter,  in  which  we 
explain  briefly,  and  yet,  as  we  believe,  completely, 
the  meaning  of  each  ceremony  and  expression. 
Whilst  thus  endeavouring  to  initiate  the  Faithful 
into  these  sublime  mysteries,  we  have  not  given  them 
a  bare  and  indiscreet  translation  of  the  sacred  for- 
mulse,  but  have  taken,  what  seemed  to  us  so  much 
better  a  plan,  of  suggesting  such  Acts  as  will  enable 
those,  who  hear  Mass,  to  enter  into  the  ceremonies 
and  spirit  of  the  Church  and  the  Priest.  The  con- 
clusion to  be  drawn  from  this  is  one  of  great  impor- 
tance :  it  is,  that,  in  order  to  derive  solid  profit  from 
the  assisting  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice,  the  Faithful  must 
attentively  follow  all  that  is  being  done  at  the  Altar, 
and  not  stand  aloof,  as  it  were,  by  reading  Books 
which  are  filled  wdth  devotions  of  a  private  and  un- 
seasonable character. 

On  the  Sundays,  if  the  Mass,  at  which  the  Faith- 
ful assist,  be  the  Parochial,  or,  as  it  is  often  called, 
the  Public  Mass,  two  solemn  rites  precede  it,  and 
they  are  full  of  instruction  and  blessing  : — the 
Asperges,  or  sprinkling  of  the  Holy  Water,  and  the 
FrGcession. 

During  the  Asperges,  you  should  unite  with  the 
intentions  w^hich  the  Church  has  in  this  ceremony,  so 
venerable  by  its  antiquity  : — you  should  pray  for  that 
purity  of  heart,  which  is  needed  for  w^orthily  assisting 
at  the  Mysteries,  wherein  God  himself  becomes 
present,  and  unites  heaven  and  earth  so  closely 
together. 

A>TIPHON    OF    THE    ASPERGES. 

Asperges  me,  Domine,  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  me  with 
hyssopo,  et  mundabor :  la-  hyssop,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall 
vabis  me,  et  super  niveni  be  cleansed ;  thou  shalt  wash 
dealbabor.  me,  and  I  shall  be  made  whiter 

than  snow. 


I 


32 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Ps.  Have  mercj'^  on  me,  O 
God,  according  to  thy  great 
mercy : 

y.  Glory,  etc. 

Ant.  Thou  shalt  sprinkle 
me,  etc. 

f.  Show  us,  O  Lord,  thy 
mercy. 

Bt.  And  grant  us  thy  salva- 
tion. 

y.  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer. 


my   cry   come 


Bi.  And   let 
unto  thee. 

y.  The  Lord  be  -with  you ; 
Bt.  And  -with  thy  spirit. 

LET   US   PRAY. 

Graciously  hear  us,  O  holy 
Lord,  Father  Almighty,  Eter- 
nal God  :  and  vouchsafe  to  send 
thy  holy  Angel  from  heaven, 
who  may  keep,  cherish,  pro- 
tect, visit,  and  defend  all  who 
are  assembled  in  this  place. 
Through  Christ  our  Lord. 

Bt.  Amen. 


Fs.  Miserere  mei,  Deus, 
secundum  magnam  mise- 
ricordiam  tuam. 

y.  Gloria  Patri,  etc. 

AxT.  Asperges  me,  etc. 

y.  Ostende  nobis,  Domine, 
misericordiam  tuam ; 

Bt.  Et  salutare  tuum  da 
nobis. 

V.  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam ; 

Bt.  Et  clamor  mens  ad  te 
veniat. 

y.  Dominus  vobiscum  ; 

Bt.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

OREMUS. 

Exaudi  nos,  Domine  sanc- 
te,  Pater  omnipotens  a?teme 
Deus  :  et  mittere  digneris 
sanctum  Angelum  tuum  de 
coelis,  qui  custodiat,  foveat, 
protegat,  visitet,  atque  de- 
fendat,  omnes  habitantes  in 
hoc  habitaculo.  Per  Chris- 
tum Dominum  nostrum. 

Bt.  Amen. 


The  procession,  which,  in  many  Churches,  imme- 
diately precedes  a  Solemn  Mass,  is  a  prelude  to  the 
great  Act  which  is  about  to  be  accomplished.  It 
originated  from  the  practice  used  in  Monasteries,  of 
going  through  the  Cloisters,  every  Sunday,  whilst 
chanting  certain  appointed  E-esponsories  ;  and  during 
which,  the  Hebdomadarian  went  through  all  the  Con- 
ventual Places,  blessing  each  of  them.  The  practice 
is  still  in  use. 

But  see.  Christians  !  the  Sacrifice  begins !  The 
Priest  is  at  the  foot  of  the  Altar  ;  God  is  attentive, 
the  Angels  are  in  adoration,  the  whole  Church  is 
united  with  the  Priest,  whose  priesthood  and  action 
are  those  of  the  great  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ.  Let 
us  make  the  sign  of  the  Cross  with  him. 


THE    ORDINARY    OF   THE  MASS. 


33 


THE  OEDINARY  OF  THE  MASS. 


In  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 

I  miite  myself,  O  my  God, 
with  thy  holy  Church,  who 
thrills  with  joy  at  the  approach 
of  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son,  who 
is  the  true  Altar. 

Like  her,  I,  also,  beseech 
thee  to  defend  me  against  the 
mahce  of  the  enemies  of  my 
salvation. 

It  is  in  thee  I  have  put  my 
hope  ;  yet  do  I  feel  sad  and 
troubled  at  being  in  the  midst 
of  the  snares  which  are  set  for 
me. 

Let  me,  then,  see  him  who 
is  the  light  and  the  t?nith  ;  it  is 
he  will  open  the  way  to  thy 
holy  mount,  to  thy  heavenly 
tabernacle. 

He  is  the  Mediator,  and  the 
living  Altar ;  I  will  draw  nigh 
to  him,  and  be  filled  with  joy. 

Having  seen  him,  I  will 
sing  in  my  gladness.  Be  not 
sad,  O  my  soul !  why  wouldst 
thou  be  longer  troubled  ? 

Hope  in  Him,  who  will 
soon  show  himself  unto  thee, 
as  thy  Saviour,  and  thy  God. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost : 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

VOL.    X. 


In  nomine  Patris,  et  Filii, 
et  Spiritus  Sancti.     Amen. 

y .  Introibo  ad  altare  Dei : 
Bt.  Ad  Deum  qui  Isetificat 
juventutem  meam. 


Judica  me,  Deus,  et  dis- 
ceme  causam  meam  -de 
gente  non  sancta :  ab  ho- 
mine  iniquo  et  doloso  erue 
me. 

Quia  tu  es,  Deus,  fortitudo 
mea  :  quare  me  repulisti  ? 
et  quare  tristis  incedo,  dum 
afiligit  me  inimicus  ? 

Emitte  lucem  tuam  et  ve- 
ritatem  tuam :  ipsa  me  de- 
duxerunt  et  adduxerunt  in 
niontem  sanctum  tuum,  et 
in  tabemacula  tua. 

Et  introibo  ad  altare  Dei  : 
ad  Deum  qui  laetificat  ju- 
ventutem meam. 

Confitebor  tibi  in  cithara, 
Deus,  Deus  mens :  quare 
tristis  es  anima  mea  ?  et 
quare  conturbas  me  ? 

Spera  in  Deo,  quoniam 
adhuc  confitebor  illi :  salu- 
tare  vultus  mei,  et  Deus 
mens. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Spiritui  sancto  : 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et 
nunc  et  semper,  et  in  ssecular 
saeculorum.     Amen. 

D 


M 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECX)ST. 


f.  Introibo  ad  altarc  Dei : 
gt.  Ad  Deurn  qui  la;tificat 
juventutem  nieam. 

f.  Adjutorium  nostrum  in 
nomine  Domini. 

gt.  Qui  fecit  ccelum  et  ter- 

ram. 


I  am  going  to  the  altar  of 
God;  there  I  shall  feel  the 
presence  of  Him  who  desires 
to  give  me  a  new  life. 

This  my  hope  comes  not  to 
me  as  thinking  that  I  have 
any  merits ;  but  because  of 
the  all-powerful  help  of  my 
Creator. 


The  thought  of  his  being  about  to  appear  before  his 
God,  excites,  in  the  soul  of  the  Priest,  a  lively  senti- 
ment of  compunction.  He  cannot  go  further  in  the 
holy  Sacrifice  without  confessing,  and  publicly,  that 
he  is  a  sinner,  and  deserves  not  the  grace  he  is  about 
to  receive.  Listen,  with  respect,  to  this  confession  of 
God's  Minister,  and  earnestly  ask  our  Lord  to  shoys^ 
mercy  to  him ;  for  the  Priest  is  your  Father ;  he  is 
answerable  for  your  salvation,  for  which  he  every  day 
risks  his  own.  When  he  has  finished,  unite  with  the 
Servers,  or  the  Sacred  Ministers,  in  this  prayer  : 

Misereaturtuiomnipotens  May    Almighty   God    have 

Deus,    et   dimissis    peccatis  mercy  on  thee,  and,  forgivmg 

tuis,  perducat  te  ad  vitam  thy  sins,  bring  thee  to  ever- 

setemam.  lasting  life. 

The  Priest   having    answered  Amen,  make   your 
Confession,  staying  with  a  contrite  spirit : 


Confiteor  Deo  omnipo- 
tenti,  beatse  MarieB  semper 
V  irgini,  beato  Michaeli  Ar- 
changelOjbeatoJoanni  Bap- 
tists, Sanctis  Apostolis  Petro 
et  Paulo,  omnibus  Sanctis, 
et  tibi,  Pater,  quia  peccavi 
nimis  cogitatione,  verbo  ct 
opere,  mea  culpa,  mea  culpa, 
mca  maxima  culpa.  Idco 
precor  beatam  Mariam  sem- 
per Virginem,  beatum 
Michaelem      Archangelum, 


I  confess  to  Almighty  God, 
to  blessed  Mary  ever  Virgin, 
to  blessed  Michael  the  Arch- 
angel, to  blessed  John  Baptist, 
to  the  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paul,  to  all  the  Saints,  and  to 
thee,  Father,  that  I  have 
sinned  cxccedinglyin  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  through  my 
fault,  through  my  fault, 
through  my  most  grievous 
fault.  Therefore  I  beseech  the 
blessed    Mary    ever    Virgin, 


THE    ORDINARY   OF  THE   MASS. 


35 


blessed  Michael  the  Arch- 
angel, blessed  John  Baptist, 
the  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paid,  and  all  the  Saints,  and 
thee,  Father,  to  pray  to  our 
Lord  for  me. 


beatmn  Joannem  Baptis- 
tam,  sanctos  Apostolos 
Petrum  et  Paulum,  omnes 
Sanctos,  et  te.  Pater,  orare 
pro  me  ad  Dominum  Deum 
nostrum. 


Receive,  with  gratitude,  the  paternal  wish  of  the 
Priest,  who  says  to  you : 


May  Almighty  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  you,  and,  forgiving 
your  sins,  bring  you  to  ever- 
lasting life. 

Bt.  Amen. 

May  the  Almighty  and  mer- 
ciful Lord  grant  us  pardon, 
absolution,  and  remission  of 
our  sins. 

5t.  Amen. 


Misereatur  vestri  omnipo- 
tens  Deus,  et  dimissis  pecca- 
tis  vestris,  perducat  vos  ad 
vitam  setemam. 

gt.  Amen. 

Indulgentiam,  absolutio- 
nem,  et  remissionem  pecca- 
torum  nostrorum,  tribuat 
nobis  omnipotens  et  miseri- 
cors  Dominus. 

gt.  Amen. 


Invoke  the  divine  assistance,  that  you  may  approach 
to  Jesus  Christ : 


f.  O  God,  it  needs  but  one 
look  of  thine,  to  give  us  life  ! 

Bt.  And  thy  people  shall 
rejoice  in  thee ! 

f.  Show  us,  O  Lord,  thy 
mercy, 

Bt.  And  give  us  the  Saviour, 
thou  art  preparing  to  give  us. 

y.   0  Lord,  hear  my  prayer, 

B^.  And  let  my  cry  come 
unto  thee. 


y.  Deus,  tu  conversus  vi- 
vificabis  nos. 

gt.  Et  plebs  tua  Isetabitur 
in  te. 

y.  Ostende  nobis  Domi- 
ne  misericordiam  tuam, 

g:.  Et  Salutare  tuum  da 
nobis. 

y.  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  me  am, 

gt.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 
veniat. 


The  Priest  here  leaves  you  and    ascends   to  the 
altar  ;  but  first  he  salutes  you : 

T.  The  Lord  be  "with  you.  ^.  Dominus  vobiscum. 

Answer  him  with  reverence : 

gt.  And  with  thy  spirit.  gt.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 


36 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


He  ascends  the  steps,  and  comes  to  the  Holy  of 
Holies.  Ask,  both  for  him  and  yourself,  deliverance 
from  sin : 


OREMXJS. 

Aufer  a  nobis,  quaesninus, 
Domine,  iniquitates  nostras; 
ut  ad  Sancta  Sanctorum  pu- 
rls niereaniur  mentibus  in- 
tro'ire.  Per  Christum  Domi- 
num  nostrum.     Amen. 


LET  TJS  PRAY. 

Take  from  our  hearts,  O 
Lord,  all  those  sins,  which 
make  us  unworthy  to  appear 
in  thy  presence.  We  ask  this 
of  thee,  by  thy  divine  Son,  our 
Lord. 


When  the  Priest  kisses  the  altar,  out  of  reverence 
for  the  relics  of  the  Martyrs  which  are  there,  say : 


Oramus  te,  Domine,  per 
merita  sanctorum  tuorum 
quorum  reliquiae  hie  sunt 
et  omnium  sanctorum,  ut 
indulgere  digneris  omnia 
peccata  mea.     Amen. 


Generous  soldiers  of  Jesus 
Christ,  who  have  mingled  your 
own  blood  ^vith  his,  intercede 
for  us,  that  our  sins  may  be 
forgiven  :  that  so  we  may,  like 
you,  approach  unto  God. 


If  it  be  a  High  Mass  at  which  you  are  assisting, 
the  Priest  censes  the  Altar  in  a  most  solemn  manner  ; 
and  this  white  cloud,  which  you  see  ascending  from 
every  part  of  the  Altar,  signifies  the  prayer  of  the 
Church,  who  addresses  herself  to  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
which  this  Divine  Mediator  then  causes  to  ascend, 
united  with  his  own,  to  the  throne  of  the  majesty 
of  his  Fafher. 

The  Priest  then  says  the  Introit.  It  is  a  solemn 
opening-anthem,  in  which  the  Church,  at  the  very 
commencement  of  the  Holy  Sacrifice,  gives  expression 
to  the  sentiments  which  fill  her  heart. 

It  is  followed  by  nine  exclamations,  which  are  even 
more  earnest  still, — for  they  ask  for  mcrcij.  In  ad- 
dressing them  to  God,  the  Church  unites  herself  with 
the  nine  choirs  of  Angels,  who  are  standing  around 
the  altar  of  Heaven, — one  and  the  same  with  this, 
before  which  you  are  kneeling. 


THE    ORDINARY    OF  THE   MASS. 


37 


TO    THE    FATHER. 


Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 


Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 


TO   THE   SON. 


Christ,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Christ,'  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Christ,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 


Christe,  ele'ison, 
Christe,  eleison. 
Christe,  eleison. 


TO    THE    HOLY    GHOST. 


Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 


Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 


Then,  mingling  his  voice  with  that  of  the  heavenly- 
host,  the  Priest  intones  the  sublime  Canticle  of  Beth- 
lehem, which  announces  glory  to  God,  and  peace  to 
men.  Instructed  by  the  revelations  of  God,  the  Church 
continues,  in  her  own  words,  the  Hymn  of  the  Angels. 


THE    ANGELIC    HYMN. 


Glory  be  to  God  on  high  ; 

AND,  on  earth,  peace  TO  MEN 
OF  good  will. 

We  praise  thee :  we  bless 
thee  :  we  adore  thee  :  we  glo- 
rify thee  :  we  give  thee  thanks 
for  thy  great  glory. 

O  Lord  God,  Heavenly  King, 
God  the  Father  Almighty. 

O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Only  Begotten  Son. 

O  Lord  God,  Lamb  of  God, 
Son  of  the  Father. 

Who  takest  away  the  sins 
of  the  world,  have  mercy  on 
us. 


Gloria  in  excelsis  Deo, 

ET  in  TERRA  PAX  HOMINIBUS 
BON^  VOLUNTATIS. 

Laudamus  te  :  benedici- 
mus  te  :  adoremus  te  :  glo- 
rificamus  te  :  gratias  aginius 
tibi  propter  magnam  glo- 
riam  tuam. 

Domine  Deus,  Rex  coeles- 
tis,  Deus  Pater  omnipotens. 

Domine,  Fili  unigenite, 
Jesu  Christe. 

Domine  Deus,  Agnus  Dei, 
Filius  Patris. 

Qui  toUis  peccata  mundi, 
miserere  nobis. 


38  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Qui  tollis  peccata  mundi,  "V\Tio  takest  away  the  sins  of 
suscipe  deprecationem  nos-  the  world,  receive  our  humble 
tram.  prayer. 

Qui  sedes  ad  dexteram  "VMio  sittest  at  the  right 
Patris,  miserere  nobis.  hand    of    the    Father,    have 

mercy  on  us. 

Quoniam  tu  solus  Sanctus,  For  thou  alone  art  holy, 
tu  solus  Dominus,  tu  solus  thou  alone  art  Lord,  thou 
Altissimus,  Jesu  Christe,  alone,  O  Jesus  Christ,  together 
cum  Sancto  Spiritu,  in.  glo-  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  art  most 
ria  Dei  Patris.     Amen.  high,  in  the  glory  of  God  the 

Father.     Amen. 


The  Priest  then  turns  towards  the  people,  and  again 
salutes  them,  as  it  were  to  make  sure  of  their  pious 
attention  to  the  suhlime  act,  for  which  all  this  is  but 
the  preparation. 

Then  follows  the  Colled,  or  Prayer,  in  which  the 
Church  formally  expresses  to  the  divine  Majesty  the 
especial  intentions  she  has  in  the  Mass  which  is  being 
celebrated.  You  may  unite  in  this  Prayer,  by  recit- 
ing, with  the  Priest,  the  Collects  which  you  will  find 
in  their  proper  places ;  but,  on  no  account,  omit  to 
join,  with  the  Server  of  the  Mass,  in  answering 
AiJien. 

After  this,  comes  the  Epistle,  which  is,  generally, 
a  portion  of  one  or  other  of  the  Epistles  of  the  Apostles, 
or  a  passage  from  some  Book  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Whilst  it  is  being  read,  give  thanks  to  that  God,  who 
not  satisfied  with  having  spoken  to  us,  at  sundry 
times,  by  his  Messengers,  deigned,  at  last,  to  speak 
unto  us  by  his  well-beloved  Son.^ 

The  Gradual  is  a  formula  of  prayer,  intermediate 
between  the  Epistle  and  the  Gospel.  Most  frequently, 
it  again  brings  before  us  the  sentiments  already  ex- 
pressed in  the  Introit.  Read  it  devoutly,  that  so  you 
may  the  more  and  more  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the 
mystery  proposed  to  you  this  day,  by  the  Church. 

1  Heb.  i.  2. 


THE   ORDINARY    OF  THE  MASS.  39 

The  song  of  praise,  the  Alleluia,  is  next  heard.  Let 
us,  whilst  it  is  being  said,  unite  with  the  holy  Angels, 
who  are,  for  all  eternity,  making  heaven  resound  with 
that  song,  which  we  on  earth  are  permitted  to 
attempt. 

The  time  is  now  come  for  the  Gospel  to  be  read. 
The  Gospel  is  the  written  word  ;  our  hearing  it  will 
prepare  us  for  the  Word,  who  is  our  Victim  and  our 
Food. 

If  it  be  a  High  Mass,  the  Deacon  prepares,  mean- 
while, to  fulfil  his  noble  office, — that  of  announcing 
the  Good  Tidings  of  salvation.  He  prays  God  to 
cleanse  his  heart  and  lips.  Then,  kneeling  before  the 
Priest,  he  asks  a  blessing  ;  and,  having  received  it, 
at  once  goes  to  the  place  where  he  is  to  sing  the 
Gospel. 

As  a  preparation  for  worthily  hearing  it,  you  may 
thus  pray,  together  with  both  Priest  and  Deacon  : 

Alas  !  these  ears  of  mine  are  Munda  cor  meuin,  ac  la- 

but  too  often  defiled  with  the  bia  mea,  omnipotens  Deus, 

world's   vain   words :    cleanse  qui   labia   Isaise    Prophetse 

them,  O  Lord,  that  so  I  may  calculo     mundasti     ignito  : 

hear  the  words  of  eternal  life,  it  a   me   tua    grata   misera- 

and  treasure  them  in  my  heart,  tione  dignare  mundare,  ut 

Through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  sanctum  Evangelium  tuum 

Amen.  digne      valeam      nuntiare. 

Per     Christum     Dominum. 

nostrum.     Amen. 

Grant  to  thy  ministers  thy  Dominus  sit  in  corde  meo, 

grace,   that   they  may  faith-  et  in  labiis  meis  :  ut  digne 

fully  explain  thy  law ;  that  so  et   competenter   annuntiem 

all,    both   pastors    and   flock,  Evangelium  suum. 
may  be   united  to    thee    for 
ever.     Amen. 

You  will  stand  during  the  Gospel,  out  of  respect  for 
the  divine  Word,  and  as  though  you  were  awaiting 
the  orders  of  your  divine  Master.  At  the  commence- 
ment, make  the  sign  of  the  Cross  on  your  forehead, 
lips,  and  breast ;  and  then  listen  to  every  word  of  the 


40 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Priest  or  Deacon.  Let  your  heart  be  ready  and 
obedient.  Whilst  my  beloved  was  speahng,  says  the 
Bride  in  the  Canticle,  iny  soul  melted  tcithin  me}  If 
you  have  not  such  love  as  this,  have,  at  least,  the 
humble  submission  of  Samuel,  and  say  :  Speak ^  Lord  ! 
thy  servant  heareth? 

After  the  Gospel,  if  the  Priest  says  the  Symbol  of 
Faith,  the  Credo,  you  will  say  it  with  him.  Faith 
is  that  grand  gift  of  God,  without  which  we  cannot 
please  him.  It  is  Faith  that  makes  us  see  the  Light 
uhich  shineth  in  darkness,  and  which  the  darkness  of 
unbelief  did  not  comprehend.  Let  us,  then,  say  with 
the  Catholic  Church,  our  Mother  : 


THE    NICENE    CREED. 


Credo  in  unum  Deum  Pa- 
trein  omnipotent  em,  facto - 
rem  coeli  et  terrye,  visibilinm 
omnium  et  invisibilium. 

Et  in  unum  Dominum 
Jesum  Christum,  Filium 
Dei  unigenitum.  Et  ex  Pa- 
tre  natiun  ante  omnia 
saecula.  Deum  de  Deo,  lu- 
men de  lumine,  Deum  ve- 
rum  de  Deo  vero.  Genitum, 
non  factum,  consubstantia- 
lem  Patri :  per  quern  om- 
nia facta  sunt.  Qui  propter 
nos  homines  et  propter  nos- 
tram  salutem,  descendit  de 
coelis.  Et  incamatus  est  de 
Spiritu  Sancto  ex  Maria 
Virgine :  et  homo  rAcrus 
EST.  Crucifixus  etiam  pro 
nobis  subPontio  Pilato,pas- 
sus  et  sepultus  est.  Et 
resurrexit  tcrtia  die,  secun- 
dum Scripturas,  et  ascendit 
in  coelum:  sedet  ad  dexte- 


I  believe  in  one  God,  the 
Father  Almighty,  maker  of 
heaven  and  earth,  and  of  all 
things  visible  and  invisible. 

And  in  one  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  only  begotten  Soiji 
of  God.  And  bom  of  the 
Father,  before  all  ages;  God 
of  God,  light  of  light;  true 
God  of  true  God.  Begotten, 
not  made ;  consubstantial  to 
the  Father,  by  whom  all  things 
were  made.  Who,  for  us  men 
and  for  our  salvation,  came 
doA\Ti  from  heaven.  And  be- 
came incarnate  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary; 
AXD  WAS  M-AJ)E  MAX.  He  was 
crucified  also  for  us,'  under 
Pontius  Pilate,  suffered,  and 
was  buried.  And  the  third 
day  he  rose  again,  according 
to  the  Scriptures.  And 
ascended  into  heaven ;  sitteth 
at    the    right    hand    of    the 


^  Cant.  V.  6. 


2  1  Kings,  iii,  10. 


THE    ORDINARY    OF  THE  MASS.  41 

Father.     And  he   is  to  come  ram  Patris.    Etiteruraven- 

again  with  glory,  to  judge  the  turus  est  judicare  vivos  et 

living  and  the  dead  ;  of  whose  mortuos  :   cujus   regni  non 

kingdom    there    shall  be    no  erit  finis, 
end. 

And  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Et  in  Spiritum  Sanctum, 
Lord  and  Giver  of  life,  who  Dominum  et  vivificantem  : 
proceedeth  from  the  Father  qui  ex  Patre  Filioque  pro- 
and  the  Son.  Who,  together  cedit.  Qui  cum  Patre  et 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  Filio  simul  adoratur,  et  con- 
is  adored  and  glorified  ;  who  glorificatur :  qui  locutus  est 
spoke  by  the  Prophets.  And  per  Prophetas.  Et  unam. 
One,  Holy,  Catholic,  and  Sanctam,  Catholicam  et 
Apostolic  Church.  I  confess  Apostolicam  Ecclesiam. 
one  Baptism  for  the  remission  Confiteor  unum  Baptisma 
of  sins.  And  I  expect  the  re-  in  remissionem  peccatorum. 
surrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  Et  exspecto  resurrectionem 
life  of  the  world  to  come,  mortuorum,  et  vitam  ven- 
Amen.  turi  saeculi.     Amen. 

The  Priest  and  the  people  should  now  have  their 
hearts  ready :  it  is  time  to  prepare  the  oflFering  itself. 
And  here  we  come  to  the  second  part  of  the  Holy 
Mass ;  it  is  called  the  Oblation,  and  immediately 
follows  that  which  was  named  the  3Iass  of  the  Cate- 
chumens, on  account  of  its  being,  formerly,  the  only 
part  at  which  the  candidates  for  Baptism  had  permis- 
sion to  be  present. 

See  then,  dear  Christians  !  Bread  and  Wine  are 
about  to  be  oflPered  unto  God,  as  being  the  noblest  of 
inanimate  creatures,  since  they  are  intended  to  serve 
as  the  nourishment  of  man ;  and  yet  that  is  but  a 
poor  material  image  of  what  they  are  destined  to 
become  in  our  Christian  Sacrifice.  Their  substances 
will  soon  be  changed  into  the  very  flesh  and  blood  of 
Christ  our  Lord  and  our  God  ;  and  of  themselves 
nothing  will  remain  but  the  appearances.  Happy 
creatures  !  thus  to  yield  up  their  own  being,  that  God 
may  take  its  place.  We,  too,  are  to  undergo  a  like 
transformation,  when,  as  the  Apostle  expresses  it,  that 
ichich  is  mortal,  icill  he  swallowed  up  by  life}     IJntil 

^  2  Cor.  V.  4. 


42 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


that  happy  change  shall  be  realised,  let  us  offer  our. 
selves  to  God,  as  often  as  we  see  the  Bread  and  "Wine 
presented  to  him  in  the  Holy  Sacrifice ;  and  let  us 
glorify  Him,  who,  by  assuming  our  human  nature, 
has  made  us  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.^ 

The  Priest  again  turns  to  the  people,  greeting  them 
with  the  usual  salutation,  as  though  he  would  warn 
them  to  redouble  their  attention.  Let  us  read  the 
Offertory  with  him  ;  and  when  he  offers  the  Host  to 
God,  let  us  unite  with  him,  and  say : 


Suscipe,  sancte  Pater  om- 
nipotens,  aeteme  Deus,  banc 
immaculatani  hostiam ,  quam 
ego  indignus  famulus  tuus 
offero  tibi  Deo  meo  vivo  et 
vero,  pro  innumerabilibus 
peceatis  et  offensionibus  et 
negligentiis  meis,  et  pro 
omnibus  circumsfantibus, 
sed  et  pro  omnibus  fidelibus 
christianis  %'i\'is  atque  de- 
funetis  :  ut  mibi  et  illis  pro- 
ficiat  ad  salutem  in  vitam 
SBtemam.     Amen. 


All  that  we  have,  O  Lord, 
comes  from  thee,  and  belongs 
to  thee ;  it  is  just,  therefore, 
that  we  return  it  unto  thee, 
But,  how  wonderful  art  thou 
in  the  inventions  of  thy  im- 
mense love  !  This  Bread 
which  we  are  offering  to  thee, 
is  to  give  place,  in  a  few  mo- 
ments, to  the  sacred  Body  of 
Jesus.  We  beseech  thee,  re- 
ceive, together  with  this  obla- 
tion, our  hearts,  which  long 
to  live  by  thee,  and  to  cease 
to  live  their  own  life  of  self. 


When  the  Priest  puts  the  Wine  into  the  Chalice, 
and  then  mingles  with  it  a  drop  of  water,  let  your 
thoughts  turn  to  the  divine  mystery  of  the  Incarna- 
tion, which  is  the  source  of  our  hope  and  salvation  ; 
and  say  : 


Deus,  qui  humanae  sub- 
stantive dignitatem  mirabi- 
liter  condidisti,  et  mii'abi- 
lius  reformasti  :  da  nobis 
per  hujus  aqua?  et  vini  mys- 
terium,  ejus  divinitatis  esse 
consortes,  qui  humanitatis 
nostraB    fieri    dignatus    est 


O  Lord  Jesus,  who  art  the 
true  Vine,  and  whose  Blood, 
like  a  generous  wine,  has  been 
poured  forth  under  the  pres- 
sure of  the  Cross  !  thou  hast 
deigned  to  unite  thy  divine 
nature  to  our  weak  himianity, 
which  is  signified  by  this  drop 


'  2  St.  Pet.  L  4. 


THE    ORDINARY   OF  THE  MASS. 


43 


of  water.  O  come,  and  make 
us  partakers  of  thy  divinity, 
by  showing  thyself  to  us  in 
thy  sweet  and  wondrous  visit. 


particeps,  Jesus  Christus ; 
Filius  tuus  Dominus  noster ; 
Qui  tecum  vivit  et  regnat  in 
unitate  Spiritus  Sancti  Deus, 
per  omnia  saecula  sseculo- 
rum.     Amen. 


The  Priest  then  offers  the  niixture  of  Wine  and 
Water,  beseeching  God  to  graciously  accept  this 
oblation,  which  is  so  soon  to  be  changed  into  the 
reality,  of  which  it  is  now  but  the  figure.  Mean- 
while, say,  in  union  with  the  Priest : 


Graciously  accept  these 
gifts,  O  Sovereign  Creator  of 
all  things.  Let  them  be  fitted 
for  the  divine  transformation, 
which  will  make  them,  from 
being  mere  offerings  of  created 
things,  the  instrument  of  the 
world's  salvation. 


Offerimus,  tibi,  Domine, 
calicem  salutaris,  tuam  de- 
precantes  clementiam  :  ut  in 
conspectu  divines  Majestatis 
tuse,  pro  nostra  et  totius 
mundi  salute,  cum  odore 
suavitatis  ascendat.    Amen. 


After  having  thus  held  up  the  sacred  gifts  towards 
heaven,  the  Priest  bows  down  :  let  us,  also,  humble 
ourselves,  and  say : 

Though  daring,  as  we  do, 
to  approach  thy  altar,  O  Lord, 
we  cannot  forget  that  we  are 
sinners.  Have  mercy  on  us  : 
and  delay  not  to  send  us  thy 
Son,  who  is  our  saving  Host. 


In  spiritu  humilitatis,  et 
in  animo  contrito  suscipia- 
mur  a  te,  Domine  :  et  sic  fiat 
sacrificium  nostrum  in  con- 
spectu  tuo  hodie,  ut  placeat 
tibi,  Domine  Deus. 


Let  US  next  invoke  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  opera- 
tion is  about  to  produce  on  the  altar  the  presence  of 
the  Son  of  God,  as  it  did  in  the  womb  of  the  Blessed 
Yirgin  Mary,  in  the  divine  mystery  of  the  Incarna- 
tion: 


Come,  O  Divine  Spirit,  make 
fruitful  the  offering  which  is 
upon  the  altar,  and  produce 
in  our  hearts  Him  whom  they 
desire. 


Yeni,  Sanctificator  onmi- 
potens,  seteme  Deus,  et  be- 
nedic  hoc  sacrificium  tuo 
sancto  nomini  praeparatum. 


44  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

If  it  be  a  High  Mass,  the  Priest,  before  proceeding 
further  with  the  Sacrifice,  takes  the  thurible  a  second 
time.  He  first  censes  the  Bread  and  Wine,  which 
have  been  just  ofi'ered,  and  then  the  altar  itself; 
hereby  inviting  the  Faithful  to  make  their  prayer, 
which  is  signified  by  the  fragrant  incense,  more  and 
more  fervent,  the  nearer  the  solemn  moment  ap- 
proaches. St.  John  tells  us,  that  the  incense  he 
beheld  burning  on  the  Altar  in  heaven  is  made  up  of 
the  prayers  of  the  Saints  ;  let  us  take  a  share  in  those 
prayers,  and  with  all  the  ardour  of  holy  desires. 

But  the  thought  of  his  own  un worthiness  becomes 
more  intense  than  ever  in  the  heart  of  the  Priest. 
The  public  confession  made,  by  him,  at  the  foot  of 
the  altar,  does  not  satisfy  the  earnestness  of  his  com- 
punction. He  would  now,  at  the  altar  itself,  express 
before  the  people,  in  the  language  of  a  solemn  rite, 
how  far  he  knows  himself  to  be  from  that  spotless 
sanctity,  wherewith  he  should  approach  unto  God. 
He  washes  his  hands.  Our  hands  signify  our  works  ; 
and  the  Priest,  though,  by  his  priesthood,  he  bear  the 
ofiice  of  Jesus  Christ,  is,  by  his  icorhs,  but  man. 
Seeing  your  Father  thus  humble  himself,  do  you, 
also,  make  an  act  of  humility,  and  say  with  him  these 
verses  of  the  Psalm  : 

Psalm  25. 

Lavabo   inter  innocentes  I,  too,  would  wash  my  hands, 

nianus  meas  :  et  circumdabo  O  Lord,  and  become  like  unto 

altare  tuum,  Domine.  them  that  are  innocent ;  that 

Ut  audiam  voccm  laudis  ;  so  I  may  be  worthy  to    ap- 

et  enarrem  imiversa  mira-  proach  thine  altar,  and  hear 

bilia  tua.  thy  sacred  Canticles  ;  and  then 

Domine,    dilexi    decorem  go  and  proclaim  to  the  world 

domus  tute,  et  locum  habi-  the  wonders  of  thy  goodness, 

tationis  glorice  tuae.  I  love  the  beauty  of  thy  House, 

Ne    perdas    cum    impiis,  which  thou  art  about  to  make 

Deus,    animam    meam,    et  the  dwelling-place  of  thy  glory, 

cum  viris  sanguinum  vitam  Leave  me  not,  O  God,  in  the 

meam.  midst  of  them  that  are  ene- 


THE    ORDINARY    OF  THE  MASS. 


45 


mies  both  to  thee  and  me. 
Thy  mercy  having  separated 
me  from  them,  I  entered  once 
more  on  the  path  of  innocence, 
because  restored  to  thy  grace ; 
but  have  pity  on  my  weak- 
ness still;  redeem  me  yet 
more,  O  thou  who  hast  so  mer- 
cifully brought  me  back  to  the 
right  path.  In  the  midst  of 
these  thy  faithful  people,  I 
give  thee  thanks.  Glory  be  to 
the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  holy  Ghost ;  as  it 
was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be,  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 


In  quorum  manibus  ini- 
quitates  sunt :  dexteraeorum 
repleta  est  muneribus. 

Ego  autem  in  innocentia 
mea  ingressus  sum  :  redime 
me,  et  miserere  mei. 

Pes  mens  stetit  in  directo : 
in  ecclesiis  benedicam  te, 
Domine. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Spiritui  Sancto. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et 
nunc  et  semper,  et  in  ssecula 
sseculorum.     Amen. 


The  Priest,  taking  encouragement,  from  the  act  of 
humility  he  has  just  made,  returns  to  the  middle  of 
the  altar,  and,  full  of  respectful  awe,  hows  down, 
hegging  God  to  receive  graciously  the  Sacrifice  which 
is  about  to  be  offered  to  him,  and  expresses  the  in- 
tentions for  which  it  is  offered.     Let  us  do  the  same. 


O  Holy  Trinity,  graciously 
accept  the  Sacrifice  we  have 
begun.  We  offer  it  in  remem- 
brance of  the  Passion,  Resur- 
rection, and  Ascension  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Permit 
thy  Church  to  join,  with  this 
intention,  that  of  honouring 
the  ever  glorious  Virgin  Mary, 
the  blessed  Baptist  John,  the 
holy  Apostles  Peter  and  Paul, 
the  Martyrs  whose  relics  lie 
here  under  our  altar  awaiting 
their  resurrection,  and  the 
Saints  whose  memory  we  this 
day  celebrate.  Increase  the 
glory  they  are  enjoying ;  and 
receive  the  prayers  they  ad- 
dress to  thee  for  us. 


Suscipe,  sancta  Trinitas, 
hanc  oblationem,  quam  tibi 
offerimus  ob  memoriamPas- 
sionis,  Resurrectionis,  et 
Ascensionis  Jesu  Christi  Do- 
mini nostri,  et  in  honorem 
beatsB  Marise  semper  Virgi- 
nis,  et  beati  Joannis  Baptis- 
tae,  et  sanctorum  Apostolo- 
rum  Petri  et  Pauli,  et  isto- 
rum,  et  omnium  Sanctorum : 
ut  illis  proficiat  ad  honorem, 
nobis  autem  ad  salutem  :  ut 
illi  pro  nobis  intercedere 
dignentur  in  coelis,  quorum 
memoriam  agimus  in  terris. 
Per  eumdem  Christum  Do- 
minum  nostrum.    Amen. 


The  Priest  again  turns  to  the  people  ;  it  is  for  the 


46  TIME    AFTER    rENTECOST. 

last  time  before  the  sacred  Mysteries  are  accomplished. 
He  feels  anxious  to  excite  the  fervour  of  the  people. 
Neither  does  the  thought  of  his  own  unworthiness 
leave  him ;  and,  before  entering  the  cloud  with  the 
Lord,  he  seeks  support  in  the  prayers  of  his  brethren 
present.     He  says  to  them  : 

Orate,  fratres :  ut  meum  Brethren  I    pray    that    my 

ac  vestnim  sacrificium  ac-  Sacrifice,  which  is  yours  also, 

ceptabile   fiat   apud    Deum  may  be  acceptable  unto  God, 

Patrem  omnipotentem.  our  Almighty  Father. 

Scarcely  has  he  uttered  the  first  words,  than  he 
turns  again  to  the  altar ;  and  you  will  see  his  face  no 
more,  until  our  Lord  himself  shall  have  come  down 
from  Heaven  upon  that  same  Altar.  Assure  the  Priest 
that  he  has  your  prayers,  and  say  to  him  : 

Suscipiat  Dominus  sacri-         May  our  Lord  accept   this 

ficium  de  manibus  tuis,  ad  Sacrifice  at  thy  hands,  to  the 

laudem  et  gloriam  nominis  praise  and  glory  of  his  name, 

sui,    ad   utilitatem    quoque  and  for  our  benefit  and  that 

nostram  totiusque  EcclesiaB  of  his  holy  Church  through- 

suae  sanctae.  out  the  world. 

Here  the  Priest  recites  the  prayers  called  the 
Secrets ;  in  which  he  presents  the  petition  of  the 
whole  Church  for  God's  acceptance  of  the  Sacrifice  ; 
and  then  immediately  begins  to  fulfil  that  great  duty 
of  religion, — T/iatiksgiving.  So  far,  he  has  adored 
God,  and  has  sued  for  mercy ;  he  has  still  to  give 
thanks  for  the  blessings  bestowed  on  us  by  the  bounty 
of  our  heavenly  Father,  the  chief  of  which  is  the 
having  sent  us  his  own  Son.  The  blessing  of  a  new 
visit  from  this  divine  Word  is  just  upon  us ;  and  in 
expectation  of  it,  and  in  the  name  of  the  whole 
Church,  the  Priest  is  about  to  give  expression  to  the 
gratitude  of  all  mankind.  In  order  to  excite  the 
Faithful  to  that  intensity  of  gratitude,  which  is  due 
to  God  for  all  his  gifts,  he  interrupts  his  own  and 


THE    ORDINARY    OF   THE  MASS.  47 

their  silent  and  mysterious  prayer  by  terminating  it 
aloud,  saying  : 

For  ever  and  ever !  Per  omnia  ssecula  ssecu- 

lorum ! 

In  the  same  feeling  answer  your  Amen  !    Then 
he  continues : 

^.  The  Lord  be  with  yon.  y.  Dominus  vobiscum. 

gt.  And  with  thy  spirit.  gt.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

^.  Lift  up  your  hearts  !  y.  Sursum  corda  ! 

Let  your  response  he  sincere  ; 

5[.  We  have  them  fixed  on        g:.  Habemus    ad   Domi- 
God.  num. 

And,  when  he  adds  : 

K.  Let  us  give  thanks  to  the        f.  Gratias  agamus  Domi- 
Lord  our  God.  no  Deo  nostro. 

Answer  him  with  all  the  earnestness  of  your  soul  : 
Bt.  It  is  meet  and  just.  B'-  Dignumet  justum  est. 


Then  the  Priest 


THE    PREFACE. 

It  is  truly  meet  and  just,  Vere   dignum   et  justum 

right  and  available  to  salva-  est,  aequum  et  salutare,  nos 

tion,  that  we  should  always,  tibi  semper  et  ubiqu«  gra- 

and  in  all  places,  give  thanks  tias  agere  :  Domine  Sancte, 

to  thee,  O  Holy  Lord,  Father  Pater    omnipotens,    asteme 

Almighty,      Eternal      God  ;  Deus  ;  per  Christum  Domi- 

through  Chi'ist  our  Lord ;  by  num  nostrum.      Per   quem 

whom  the  Angels  praise  thy  majestatem   tuam    laudant 

majesty,      the      Dominations  Angeli,  adorant  Dominatio- 

adore  it,  the   Powers  tremble  nes,    tremunt     Potestates ; 


48 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Coeli  coelonimque  Virtutcs, 
ac  beata  Seraphim,  socia 
exsultatione  concclobraiit. 
Cum  qmbus  et  nostras  vo- 
ces, ut  admitti  jubeas  de- 
precamur,  supplici  confes- 
sione  dicentes. 


before  it ;  the  Heavens  and  the 
heavenly  Virtues,  and  the 
blessed  Seraphim,  with  com- 
mon jubilee,  glorify  it.  To- 
gether with  whom,  we  beseech 
thee  that  we  may  be  admitted 
to  join  our  humble  voices, 
saj-ing : 


Here  unite  with  the  Priest,  who,  on  his  part,  unites 
himself  with  the  blessed  Spirits,  in  giving  thanks  to 
God  for  the  unspeakable  Gift :  bow  down  and  say : 


Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Sanctus 
Dominus  Deus  sabaoth  I 

Pleni  sunt  coeli  et  terra 
gloria  tua. 

Hosanna  in  excclsis  I 

Benedictus  qiu  venit  in 
nomine  Domini. 

Hosanna  in  excelsis ! 


Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God 
of  hosts ! 

Heaven  and  earth  are  full 
of  thy  glory. 

Hosanna  in  the  highest ! 

Blessed  be  the  Saviour  who 
is  coming  to  us  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  who  sends  him. 

Hosanna  be  to  him  in  the 
highest  I 


After  these  words  commences  the  Canon, — that 
mysterious  prayer,  in  the  midst  of  which  heaven  bows 
down  to  earth,  and  God  descends  unto  us.  The  voice 
of  the  Priest  is  no  longer  heard  ;  yea,  even  at  the 
altar,  all  is  silence.  It  was  thus,  says  the  Book  of 
Wisdom,  in  ihe  quiet  of  silence,  and  while  the  night 
teas  in  the  micht  of  her  course,  that  the  Ahnighty  Word 
came  down  from  his  royal  throne.'^  Let  a  profound 
respect  stay  all  distractions,  and  keep  our  senses  in 
submission  to  the  soul.  Let  us  respectfully  fix  our 
eyes  on  what  the  Priest  does  in  the  Holy  Place. 

THE    CANON    OF    THE    MASS. 

In  this  mysterious  colloquy  with  the  great  God  of 
heaven  and  earth,  the  first  prayer  of  the  sacrificing 
Priest  is  for  the  Catholic  Church,  his  and  our  Mother. 


1  Wisd.  xviii.  14,  15. 


THE   ORDINARY   OF    THE   MASS. 


49 


0  God,  who  manifestest 
thyself  unto  us  by  means  of 
the  mysteries  which  thou  hast 
intrusted  to  thy  holy  Church, 
our  Mother ;  we  beseech  thee, 
by  the  merits  of  this  sacrifice, 
that  thou  wouldst  remove  all 
those  hindrances  which  oppose 
her  during  her  pilgrimage  in 
this  world.  Give  her  peace 
and  unity.  Do  thou  thyself 
guide  our  Holy  Father  the 
Pope,  thy  Vicar  on  earth. 
Direct  thou  our  Bishop,  who 
is  our  sacred  link  of  unity ; 
and  watch  overall  the  orthodox 
children  of  the  Catholic  Apos- 
tolic Eoman  Church. 


Te  igitur,  clemcntissime 
Pater,  per  Jesum  Christum 
Fnium  tuum  Dominum  nos- 
trum supplices  rogamus  ac 
petimus,  uti  accepta  habeas, 
et  benedicas  haec  dona,  hsec 
munera,  hsec  sancta  sacri- 
ficia  illibata ;  in  primis  quae 
tibi  offerimus  pro  Ecclesia 
tua  sancta  Catholica ;  quam 
pacificare,  custodire,  adu- 
nare,  et  regere  digneris  toto 
orbe  terrarum,  una  cum  fa- 
mulo  tuo  Papa  nostro  N.  et 
Antistite  nostro  N. ,  et  omni- 
bus orthodoxis,  atque  catho- 
licae  et  apostolicse  fidei  cul- 
toribus. 


Here  pray,  together  with  the  Priest,  for  those  whose 
interests  should  be  dearest  to  you. 


Permit  me,  O  God,  to  inter- 
cede with  thee  for  special  bles- 
sing upon  such  of  thy  servants, 
for  whom  thou  knowest  that 
I  have  a  special  obligation  to 
pray :  *  *  *  Apply  to  them  the 
fruits  of  this  divine  Sacrifice, 
which  is  offered  unto  thee  in 
the  name  of  all  mankind. 
Visit  them  by  thy  grace,  par- 
don them  their  sins,  grant 
them  the  blessings  of  this 
present  life  and  of  that  which 
is  eternal. 


Memento,  Domine,  famu- 
lorum  famularumque  tua- 
rum  N.  et  N.,  et  omnium 
circumstantium,  quorum  tibi 
fides  cognita  est,  et  nota 
devotio :  pro  quibus  tibi  offe- 
rimus, vel  qui  tibi  offerunt 
hoc  sacrificium  laudis  pro  se 
suisque  omnibus,  pro  re- 
demptione  animarum  sua- 
rum,  pro  spe  salutis  et  in- 
columitatis  suae ;  tibique 
reddunt  vota  sua  seterno 
Deo  vivo  et  vero. 


Here  let  us  commemorate  the  Saints  :  they  are  that 
portion  of  the  Body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which 
is  called  the  Church  Triumj^hanf. 


But  the  offering  of  this 
Sacrifice,  O  my  God,  does  not 
unite  us  with  those  only  of 
our  brethren  who  are  still  in 


VOL.  X. 


Communicantes,  et  me- 
moriam  venerantes,  in  pri- 
mis gloriosae  semper  Virginis 
Mariae,    Genitricis    Dei    et 

E 


50 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Domini  nostri  Jesii  Christi  : 
sed  et  beatonim  Apostolo- 
rmn  ac  Martyrum  tuorum, 
Petri  et  Pauli,  Andreae,  Ja- 
cobi,  Joannis,  Thomae,  Ja- 
cobi,  Pliilippi,  Bartholomjei, 
Matthaei,  Simonis  et  Thad- 
dsei:   Lini,    Cleti,    demen- 
tis, Xysti,  Coraelii,  Cypria- 
ni,    Laurentii,   Chrj-sogoni, 
Joannis  et  Pauli,  Cosmee  et 
Damiani,  et  omnium  sanc- 
tonmi  tuorum  :  quorum  me- 
ntis precibusque   concedas, 
Tit  in  omnibus  protectionis 
tu8e  muniamur  auxilio.    Per 
eumdem  Christum  Dominum 
nostrum.     Amen. 


this  transient  life  of  trial:  it 
brings  us  closer  to  those  also, 
who  are  already  in  possession 
of   heaven.      Therefore  it   is, 
that  we  wish  to  honour,  by  it, 
the   memory  of  the    glorious 
and    ever    Yirgin    Mary,    of 
whom  Jesus  was  bom  to  us ; 
of    the   Apostles,    Confessors, 
Yirgias,  and  of  all  the  Saints ; 
that  they  may  assist  us,  by 
their  powerful  intercession,  to 
be  worthy  of  this  thy  visit, 
and  of  contemplating  thee,  as 
themselves    now    do,   in    the 
mansion  of  thy  glory. 


The  Priest,  wlio  up  to  this  time  had  been  praying 
with  his  hands  extended,  now  joins  them,  and  holds 
them  over  the  Bread  and  Wine,  as  the  High  Priest 
of  the  Old  Law  was  wont  to  do  over  the  figurative 
victim :  he  thus  expresses  his  intention  of  bringing 
these  gifts  more  closely  under  the  notice  of  the  Divine 
-2  %  Majesty,  and  of  marking  them  as  the  material  offer- 
^  ing  whereby  we  profess  our  dependence,  and  which,  m 
a  few  instants,  is  to  yield  its  place  to  the  living  Host, 
upon  whom  are  laid  all  our  iniquities. 

Vouchsafe,  O  God,  to  accept 
the  offei-ing,  which  this  thine 
assembled  family  presents  to 
thee  as  the  homage  of  its  most 
happy  servitude.  In  return, 
give  us  peace,  save  us  from 
thy  -wT-ath,  and  number  us 
among  thine  elect,  through 
Him  who  is  coming  to  us, — 
thy  Son,  our  Saviour  ! 

Yea,  Lord,  this  is  the  mo- 
ment when  this  bread  is  to 
become  his  sacred  Body,  which 


Hanc  igitur  oblationem 
servitutis  nostra?,  sed  et 
cunctae  familife  tuse,  quae- 
sumus,  Domine,  ut  placatus 
accipias :  diesque  nostros  in 
tua  pace  disponas,  atque 
ab  setema  damnatione  nos 
eripi,  et  in  electorum  tuo- 
nmi  jubeas  grege  nmnc- 
rari.  Per  Christimi  Domi- 
num nostrum.     Amen. 

Quam  oblationem  tu,Deus, 
in  omnibus,  qusesumus,  be- 
nedictam,    adscriptam,    ra- 


THE    ORDINARY    OF    THE    MASS.  51 

is  our  food ;   and  this  wine  is  tarn,  rationabilem,  accepta- 

to  be  changed  into  his  Blood,  bilemque    facere     digneris  : 

which  is  our  drink.    Ah  !  delay  ut  nobis  Corpus  et  Sanguis 

no  longer,  but  bring  us  into  fiat     dilectissimi     Filii     tui 

the   presence    of    this    divine  Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi. 
Son,  our  Saviour ! 

And  here  the  Priest  ceases  to  act  as  man  ;  he  now 
becomes  more  than  a  mere  minister  of  the  Church. 
His  word  becomes  that  of  Jesus  Christ,  with  its  power 
and  efficacy.  Prostrate  yourself  in  profound  adora- 
tion, for  the  Emmanuel,  that  is,  God  ivith  us,  is  coming 
upon  our  altar. 

What,  0  God  of  heaven  and  Qui  pridie  quana  patere- 
earth,  my  Jesus,  the  long  ex-  tur,  accepit  panem  in  sanc- 
pected  Messias  !  what  else  can  tas  ac  venerabiles  manus 
I  do,  at  this  solemn  moment,  suas :  et  elevatis  oculis  in 
but  adore  thee  in  silence,  as  coelum,  ad  te  Deum  Patrem 
my  sovereign  Master,  and  suum  omnipotentem,  tibi 
open  to  thee  my  whole  heart, '  gratias  agens,  benedixit, 
as  to  its  dearest  King  ?  Come,  fregit,  deditque  discipulis 
then,  O  Lord  Jesus,  come  !  suis,    dicens :     Accipite,    et 

manducate    ex   hoc   omnes. 

Hoc     EST     ENiM    Corpus 

METJM. 

The  Divine  Lamb  is  now  lying  on  our  Altar  ! 
Glory  and  love  be  to  him  for  ever  !  But,  he  is  come 
that  he  may  be  immolated.  Hence  the  Priest,  who 
is  the  minister  of  the  designs  of  the  ]Most  High, 
immediately  pronounces,  over  the  Chalice,  the  sacred 
words  which  follow,  which  will  produce  the  great 
mystical  immolation,  by  the  separation  of  the  Victim's 
Body  and  Blood.  After  those  words,  the  substances 
of  both  bread  and  wine  have  ceased  to  exist ;  the 
species  alone  are  left,  veiling,  as  it  were  the  Body  and 
Blood  of  our  Redeemer,  lest  fear  should  keep  us  from 
a  mystery,  which  God  gives  us  for  the  very  purpose 
of  infusing  confidence  into  our  hearts.  Whilst  the 
Priest  is  pronouncing  those  words,  let  us   assoc^atQ^^ 


Assirtitn+ 


tr\'%^ 


52 


TIME   AFTER   PENTE(X)ST. 


ourselves  to  the  Angels,  who  tremblingly  gaze  upon 
this  deepest  wonder. 

O  Precious  Blood!  thou  price 
of  my  salvation !  I  adore  thee ! 
"Wash  away  iny  sins,  and  make 
me  whiter  than  snow.  O  Lamb 
ever  slain,  yet  ever  living,  thou 
comest  to  take  away  the  sins 
of  the  world!  Come,  also,  and 
reign  in  me  by  thy  power,  and 
by  thy  love. 


Simili  modo  postquam 
coenatum  est,  accipiens  ct 
himc  prseclanmi  Calicem  in 
sanctas  ac  venerabiles  ma- 
nus  suas  :  item  tibi  gratias 
agens,  benedixit,  deditque 
discipulis  suis  dicens :  Acci- 
pite  et  bibite  ex  eo  oumes. 

HiC  EST  EXIM  CaLIX  S-AJX- 
GTJTN'IS  MEI,  XOTI  ET  iETER- 
XI  TEST-^JMEXTI  :  MYSTERIUil 
FIDEI  :  QUI  PEO  TOBIS  ET 
PEG  MEXTIS  EFEEXDETUR  IX 
EEMISSIOXEil    PECCATOEU^I. 

Hsec  quotiescumque  feceri- 
tis,  in  mei  niemoriam  facie - 
tis. 

The  Priest  is  now  face  to  face  with  God.  He 
again  raises  his  hands  towards  heaven,  and  tells  our 
heavenly  Father,  that  the  oblation,  now  on  the  altar, 
is  no  longer  an  earthly  material  offering,  but  the 
Body  and  Blood,  the  whole  Person,  of  his  divine 
Son. 


Unde  et  memores,  Domi- 
ne,  nos  servi  tui,  sed  et 
plebs  tua  sancta,  ejusdem 
Christi  filii  tui  Domini  nos- 
tri  tam  beataePassionis,  ncc- 
non  et  ab  inferis  Resurrec- 
tionis,  sed  et  in  coelos  glo- 
riosae  Ascensionis :  ofteri- 
mus  prasclarae  Majestati  tuae 
de  tuis  donis  ac  datis,  Hos- 
tiani  puram,  Hostiam  sanc- 
tam,Hostiam  immaculatam : 
Panem  sanctum  vitae  leter- 
nae,  et  Calicem  salutis  per- 
petuae. 

Supra  quae  propitio  ac  se- 
reno  vultu  respicere  dignc- 


Father  of  infinite  holiness  ! 
the  Host  so  long  expected  is 
here  before  thee.  Behold  this 
thine  eternal  Son,  who  suffered 
a  bitter  Passion,  rose  again 
with  glory  from  the  grave, 
and  ascended  triumphantly 
into  heaven.  He  is  thy  Son  ; 
but  he  is  also  our  Host,  Host 
pure  and  spotless, — our  Meat 
and  Drink  of  everlasting  life. 


Heretofore,  thou  accept edst 
the  sacrifice  of  the  innocent 


THE   ORDINARY   OF   THE   MASS. 


53 


ris  :  et  accepta  habere,  sicuti 
accepta  habere  dignatus  es 
munera  pueri  tui  justi  Abel, 
et  sacrificium  Patriarchae 
nostri  Abrahse,  et  quod  tibi 
obtulit  summus  Sacerdos 
tuus  Melchisedech,  sanctum 
sacrificium,  im.m.aculatam. 
hostiam. 


lambs  offered  unto  thee  by- 
Abel  ;  and  the  sacrifice  which 
Abraham  made  thee  of  his 
son  Isaac,  who,  though  immo- 
lated, yet  lived;  and,  lastly, 
the  sacrifice,  which  Melchise- 
dech presented  to  thee,  of  bread 
and  mne.  Receive  our  Sacri- 
fice, which  surpasses  all  those 
others  :  it  is  the  Lamb,  of 
whom  all  others  could  be  but 
figures  ;  it  is  the  undying  Vic- 
tim ;  it  is  the  Body  of  thy  Son, 
who  is  the  Bread  of  Life,  and 
his  Blood,  which,  whilst  a 
drink  of  immortality  for  us,  is 
a  tribute  adequate  to  thy 
glory. 


The  Priest  bows  down  to  the  altar,  and  kisses  it  as 
the  throne  of  love,  on  which  is  throned  the  Saviour 
of  men. 


But,  O  God  of  mfinite 
power !  these  sacred  gifts  are 
not  only  on  this  altar  here 
below ;  they  are,  also,  on  that 
sublime  Altar  in  heaven^,  which 
is  before  the  throne  of  thy 
divine  Majesty.  These  two 
Altars  are  one  and  the  same, 
on  which  is  accomplished  the 
great  mystery  of  thy  glory  and 
our  salvation.  Vouchsafe  to 
make  us  partakers  of  the  Body 
and  Blood  of  the  august  Vic- 
tim, from  whom  flow  every 
grace  and  blessing. 


Supplices  te  rogamus,  om- 
nipotens  Deus,  jube  hsec 
perferri  per  manus  sancti 
Angeli  tui  in  sublime  Altare 
tuum,  in  conspectu  divinse 
Majestatistuse  :  utquotquot 
ex  hac  altaris  participatione, 
sacrosanctum  Filii  tui  Cor- 
pus et  Sanguinem  sumpse- 
rimus,  omni  benedictione 
coelesti  et  gratia  repleamur. 
Per  eumdem  Christum  Do- 
minum  nostrum.     Amen. 


Nor  is  the  moment  less  favourable  for  our  making 
supplication  for  the  Church  Suffering.  Let  us,  there- 
fore, ask  the  divine  Liberator,  who  has  come  down 
among  us,  that  he  mercifully  visit,  by  a  ray  of  his 
consoling  light,  the  dark  abode  of  Purgatory ;  and 
permit  his  Blood  to  flow,  as  a  stream  of  mercy's  dew, 


54 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


v  ..^  ih\^  nnr  altar  and  refresli  tlie  panting  captives 
Sel'L^tuslrly  Expressly  for  those  a.ong  them, 
who  have  a  claim  upon  our  suffrages. 


Dear  Jesus  I  let  the  happi- 
ness of  this  thy  visit   extend 
to  every  portion  of  thy  Chiirch. 
Thy  face  gladdens  the  elect,  in 
the  holy  City ;  even  our  mortal 
eyes  can  see  thee  beneath  the 
veil  of   our  delighted  faith  ; 
ah!    hide    not    thyself    from 
those  brethren  of   ours,    who 
are  imprisoned  in  the  abode 
of  expiation.    Be  thou  refresh- 
ment to  them  in  their  flames, 
lic^ht  in  their   darkness,   and 
p?ace  in  their  agonies  of  tor- 
ment. 

This  duty  of  charity  fulfilled,  let  us  pray  for  our- 
sell^^ttrs,  alas  l^nd  who  profi^^^^ 
visit  which  our  Saviour  pays  us.     Let  us,  to^etiier 
with  the  Priest,  strike  our  breast,  saying. 


Memento  etiam,  Domme, 
famulorum  famularumque 
tuarum  X.  et  K.,  q^.J^^.^ 
pnecessenmt  cum  signo  hdei, 
et  dormiimt  in  somno  pacis. 
Ipsis,  Domine,  et  omnibus 
in  Christo  quiescentibus, 
locum  refrigerii,  lucis  et 
pacis,  ut  indulgeas,  depre- 
camur.  Per  eumdem  Chiis- 
tum  Dominum  nostrum. 
Amen. 


Nobis   quoque  peccaton- 
bus  famulis  tuis,  de  multi- 
tudine    miserationum    tua- 
rum    sperantibus,     partem 
aliquam   et   societatem  do- 
nare  digneris  cum  tuis  Sanc- 
tis Apostolis  et  Martj-nbus ; 
cum      Joanne,      Stcphano, 
Matthia,  Bamaba,  Ignatio, 
Alexandro,  Marcellino,  Pe- 
tro,     FeUcitate,     Perpetua, 
Agatha,  Lucia,  Agnete,  Oc- 
•ilia,  Anastasia,  et  omnibus 
Sanctis  tuis  ;   intra  quorum 
nos  consortium,    non   esti- 
mator   meriti,     sed    veniae, 
Qua3sumus,  largitor  admitte : 
per      Christum      Dominum 
nostrum.     Per    quem    haec 
omnia,      Domine,      semper 


Alas  I  we  are  poor  sinners, 
O  God  of  aU  sanctity  !  yet  do 
we  hope   that  thine    mfimte 
mercy  vnh  grant  us  to  share 
thv  kingdom ;  not,  indeed,  by 
reason   of   our  works,   which 
deserve  little  else  than  pumsh- 
ment,— but    because    of    the 
merits  of  this  Sacrifice,  which 
we    are    offering    unto    thee. 
Remember,  too,  the  merits  of 
thv  holy  Apostles,  of  thy  holy 
Mart>T^,  of  thy  holy  Virgins, 
and  of  all  thy  Saints.     Grant 
us,  by  their  intercession,  grace 
in  this  world,  and  glory  eter- 
nal in  the  next :  which  we  ask 
of  thee,  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus   Christ,  thy  Son. 
It  is  by  him  thou  bestowest 


THE    ORDINARY    OF    THE    MASS.  55 

upon  us  thy  blessings  of  life  bona  creas,  sanctificas,  vi- 
and sanctification ;  and,  by  vificas,  benedicis,  et  prse- 
him  also,  with  him,  and  in  stas  nobis ;  per  ipsum,  et 
him,  in  the  unity  of  the  Holy  cum  ipso  et  in  ipso,  est  tibi 
Ghost,  may  honour  and  glory  Deo  Patri  omnipotenti,  in 
be  to  thee  !  unitate  Spiritus  Sancti,  om- 

nis  honor  et  gloria. 

Whilst  saying  tlie  last  of  these  words,  the  Priest 
has  taken  up  the  sacred  Host,  which  was  upon  the 
altar ;  he  has  held  it  over  the  chalice  :  thus  re-uniting 
the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  divine  Yictim,  in  order  to 
show  that  he  is  now  immortal.  Then  raising  up  both 
Chalice  and  Host,  he  offers  to  God  the  noblest  and 
most  perfect  homage  which  the  divine  Majesty  could 
receive. 

This  sublime  and  mysterious  rite  ends  the  Canon. 
The  silence  of  the  Mysteries  is  interrupted.  The 
Priest  concludes  his  long  prayers,  by  saying  aloud, 
and  so  giving  the  Faithful  the  opportunity  of  expres- 
sing their  desire  that  his  supplications  be  granted  : 

For  ever  and  ever !  Per  omnia  ssecula  saeculo- 

rum. 

Answer  him  with  faith,  and  in  a  sentiment  of  union 
with  your  holy  Mother,  the  Church  : 

Amen !  I  believe  the  mys-  Amen, 
tary  which  has  just  been  ac- 
comphshed.  I  unite  myself 
to  the  offering,  which  has  been 
made,  and  to  the  petitions  of 
the  Church. 

It  is  time  now  to  recite  the  Praijer,  taught  us  by 
our  Saviour  himself.  Let  it  ascend  up  to  heaven 
together  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  Body  and  Blood 
of  Jesus  Christ.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  than 
heard,  when  he  himself  who  drew  it  up  for  us,  is  in 
our  very   hands  now   whilst  we  say  it?     As   this 


56  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Prayer  belongs  in  common  to  all  God's  children,  the 
Priest  recites  it  aloud,  and  begins  by  inviting  us  all 
to  join  in  it ;  he  says : 

OREMUS.  LET  US  PRAY. 

Prseceptis  salutaribus  mo-  Having  been  taught  by  a 
niti,  et  di^'ina  institutione  saving  precept,  and  follo\\Tng 
formati,  audemus  dicere :         the  form  given  us  by  divine 

instruction,  we  thus  presume 

to  speak: 

THE   lord's   PR.VYER. 

Pater  noster,    qui    es    in  Our,  Father,    who    art    in 

coelis  :    Sanctificetur  nomen  heaven, hallowed  be  thy  name; 

tuum :     Adveniat     regnum  thy  kingdom  come ;   thy  will 

tuum:    Fiat  voluntas   tua,  be  done   on  earth  as  it  is  in 

sicut  in  coelo   et  in   terra,  heaven.      Give  us,   this   day, 

Panem    nostrum    quotidia-  our  daily  Bread ;   and  forgive 

num  da  nobis  hodie  :  Et  di-  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  for- 

mitte  nobis   debita  nostra,  give  them  that  trespass  against 

sicut  et  nos  dimittimus  de-  us  ;  and  lead  us  not  into  temp- 

bitoribus  nostris  :  Et  ne  nos  tation ; 
inducas  in  tentationem. 

Let  US  answer  with  deep  feeling  of  our  misery  : 
Sed  libera  nos  a  malo.  But  deliver  us  from  evil. 

The  Priest  falls,  once  more,  into  the  silence  of  the 
holy  Mysteries.  His  first  word  is  an  aflfectionate 
Amen  to  your  last  petition — deliver  us  from  evil — on 
which  he  forms  his  own  next  prayer :  and,  could  he 
pray  for  anything  more  needed  ?  JEvil  surrounds  us 
everywhere  ;  and  the  Lamb  on  our  altar  has  been 
sent  to  expiate  it,  and  deliver  us  from  it. 

Libera    nos,     quaesumus,  How  many,  O  Lord,  are  the 

Domine,  ab  omnibus  malis,  evils  which  beset  us  !      Evils 

pncteritis,    pra?sentibus     et  past,    which   are   the   wounds 

futuris  :  et  intercedente  bea-  left  on  the  soul  by  her  sins, 

ta  et  gloriosa  semper  Virgi-  and    strengthen    her    wicked 


THE   ORDINARY   OF   THE    MASS. 


57 


propensities.  Evils  present, 
that  is,  the  sins  now,  at  this 
very  time,  upon  our  soul ;  the 
weakness  of  this  poor  soul;  and 
the  temptations  which  molest 
her.  There  are,  also,  future 
evils,  that  is,  the  chastisement 
which  our  sins  deserve  from 
the  hand  of  thy  justice.  In 
presence  of  this  Host  of  our 
Salvation,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  to  deliver  us  from  all 
these  evils,  and  to  accept  in 
our  favour  the  intercession  of 
Mary  the  Mother  of  Jesus,  of 
thy  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paul  and  Andrew :  Liberate 
us,  break  our  chains,  give  us 
peace :  through  Jesus  Christ, 
thy  Son,  who  with  thee,  liveth 
and  reigneth  God. 


The  Priest  is  anxious  to  announce  the  Peace,  which 
he  has  asked  and  obtained ;  he  therefore  finishes  his 
prayer  aloud,  saying : 


ne  Dei  Genitrice  Maria,  cum 
beatis  Apostolis  tuis  Petro 
et  Paulo,  atque  Andrea,  et 
omnibus  Sanctis,  da  propi- 
tius  pacem  in  diebus  nos- 
tris :  ut  ope  misericordise 
tu8e  adjuti,  et  a  peccato 
simus  semper  liberi,  et  ab 
omni  perturbatione  secuii. 
Per  eumdem  Dominum  nos- 
trum Jesum  Christum  Fi- 
lium  tuum,  qui  tecum  vivit 
et  regnat  in  unitate  Spiritus 
Sancti  Deus. 


"World  without  end. 
Bt.  Amen. 


Per  omnia  saecula  ssbcuIo- 
rum. 

gt.  Amen. 


Then  he  says : 

May  the  peace  of  our  Lord  Pax  Domini  sit  semper 
be  ever  with  you.  vobiscum. 

To  this  paternal  wish,  reply  : 

B^.  And  with  thy  spirit.  gt.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

The  Mystery  is  drawing  to  a  close ;  God  is  about 
to  be  united  with  man,  and  man  with  God,  by  means 
of  Communion.  But  first,  an  imposing  and  sublime 
rite  takes  place  at  the  altar.     So  far,  the  Priest  has 


58  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

announced  the  Death  of  Jesus  ;  it  is  time  to  proclaim 
his  Resurrection.  To  this  end,  he  reverently  breaks 
the  sacred  Host ;  and  having  divided  it  into  three 
parts,  he  puts  one  into  the  ChaKce,  thus  re-uniting 
the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  immortal  Victim.  Do 
you  adore,  and  say  : 

Haec  commixtio  et  conse-  Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Saviour 
cratio  Corporis  et  Sanguinis  of  the  world !  who  didst,  in 
Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi,  thy  Passion,  permit  thy  pre- 
fiat  accipientibus  nobis  in  cious  Blood  to  be  separated 
vitam  aetemam.     Amen.  from  thy  sacred  Body,  after- 

wards   uniting     them     again 
together  by  thy  divine  power ! 

Offer  now  your  prayer  to  the  ever-living  Lamb, 
whom  St.  John  saw,  on  the  Altar  of  Heaven,  standing, 
though  slain  :  ^  say  to  this  your  Lord  and  King,  who 
has  taken  upon  himself  all  our  iniquities,  in  order  to 
wash  them  away  by  his  Blood  : 

Agnus     Dei,     qui     tollis  Lamb  of  God,  who   takest 

peccata     mundi,     miserere  away  the  sins  of  the  world, 

nobis.  have  mercy  on  us  ! 

Agnus     Dei,     qui    tollis  Lamb  of   God,  who  takest 

peccata     mundi,      miserere  away  the  sins   of  the  world, 

nobis.  have  mercy  on  us  ! 

Agnus     Dei,     qui    tollis  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 

peccata  mundi,  dona  nobis  away  the  sins  of  the  world, 

pacem.  give  us  Peace  ! 

Peace  is  the  grand  object  of  our  Saviour's  coming 
into  the  world :  he  is  the  Prince  of  Peace.^  The 
divine  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  ought  therefore  to 
be  the  mystery  of  PeacCy  and  the  bond  of  Catholic 
Unity ;  for,  as  the  Apostle  says,  all  ice  who  partake 
of  one  Bread,  are  all  one  Bread  and  one  Body.^  It 
is  on  this  account  that  the  Priest,  now  that  he  is  on 
the  point  of  receiving,  in  Communion,  the  Sacred 
Host,  prays  that  fraternal  Peace  may  be  preserved 

1  Apoc.  V.  6.  -  Is.  ix.  6.  ^  1  Cor,  x.  17. 


THE   ORDINARY   OF   THE   MASS. 


59 


in  the  Churcli,  and  more  especially  in  this  portion  of 
it,  which  is  assembled  around  the  altar.  Pray  with 
him,  and  for  the  same  blessing  : 


Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
saidst  to  thine  Apostles,  ' '  my 
peace  I  leave  with  you,  my 
peace  I  give  unto  you : "  regard 
not  my  sins,  but  the  faith  of 
thy  Church,  and  grant  her 
that  peace  and  unity  which  is 
according  to  thy  ^vlll.  "VYho 
livest  and  reignest  God,  for 
ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Domine  Jesu  Christe,  qui 
dixisti  Apostolis  tuis  :  Pa- 
cem  relinquo  vobis  :  pacem 
meam  do  vobis  :  ne  respi- 
cias  peccata  mea,  sed  fidem 
Ecclesise  tuae :  eamque  se- 
cundum voluntatem  tuam 
pacilicare  et  coadunare  dig- 
neris.  Qui  vivis  et  regnas 
Deus,  per  omnia  saecula  sae- 
culorum.     Amen. 


If  it  be  a  High  Mass,  the  Priest  here  gives  the 
kiss  of  peace  to  the  Deacon,  who  gives  it  to  the  Sub- 
deacon,  and  he  to  the  Choir.  During  this  ceremony, 
you  should  excite  within  yourself  feelings  of  Christian 
charity,  and  pardon  your  enemies,  if  you  have  any. 
Then  continue  to  pray  with  the  Priest ; 


Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of 
the  hving  God,  who  according 
to  the  will  of  the  Father, 
through  the  co-operation  of 
the  JHoly  Ghost,  hast,  by  thy 
death,  given  life  to  the  world; 
dehver  me,  by  this  thy  most 
sacred  Body  and  Blood,  from 
all  mine  iniquities,  and  from 
all  evils ;  and  make  me  always 
adhere  to  thy  commandments, 
and  never  suffer  me  to  be 
separated  from  thee,  who  with 
the  same  God  the  Father  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  livest  and 
reignest  God  for  ever  and 
ever.     Amen. 


Domine  Jesu  Christe,  Fili 
Dei  vivi,  qui  ex  voluntate 
Patris,  cooperante  Spiritu 
Sancto,  per  mortem  tuam 
mundum  vivificasti :  libera 
me  per  hoc  sacrosanctum 
Corpus,  etSanguinemtuum, 
ab  omnibus  inquitatibus 
meis,  et  universis  malis,  et 
f ac  me  tuis  semper  inhserere 
mandatis,  et  a  te  nunquam 
separari  permittas.  Qui  cum 
eodem  Deo  Patre  et  Spiritu 
Sancto  vivis  et  regnas,  Deus, 
in  saecula  saculorum.  Amen. 


If  you  are  going  to  Communion  at  this  Mass,  say 
the  following  Prayer ;  otherwise,  prepare  yourself  for 
a  Spiritual  Communion : 

Let  not  the  participation  of        Perceptio    Corporis    tui, 


60  TIME   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

Doniine  Jesu  Christe,  quod  thy  Body,  O  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 

ego  indignus  sumere   prae-  which    I,    though   unworthy, 

sumo,    non   niihi  proveniat  presume  to  receive,  turn  to  my 

in  judicium  et   condemna-  judgment  and  condemnation ; 

tionem  :  sed  pro  tua  pietate  but  through  thy  mercy,  may 

prosit  niihi  ad  tutamentiun  it  be  a  safeguard  and  remedy 

mentis    et   corporis,    et    ad  both   tq^.  my  soul   and  body, 

medelam  percipiendam.  Qui  Who,  with  God  the  Father,  in 

vivis   et    regnas    cum    Deo  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

Patre,   in    imitate   Spiritus  livest  and  reignest   God,  for 

Sancti,    Deus,     per     omnia  ever  and  ever.     Amen, 
ssecula  sseculorum.     Amen. 

When  the  Priest  takes  the  Host  into  his  hands, 
in  order  to  his  receiving  it  in  Communion,  say : 

Panem     ccelestem     acci-        Come,  my  dear  Jesus,  come ! 
piam,     et    nomen     Domini 
invocabo. 

When  he  strikes  his  breast,  confessing  his  un- 
worthiness,  say  thrice,  with  him,  these  words,  and  in 
the  same  dispositions  as  the  Centurion  of  the  Gospel, 
who  first  used  them  : 

Domine,  non  sum  dignus  Lord  I  I  am  not  worthy  that 
ut  intres  sub  tectum  meum  :  thou  enter  under  my  roof ;  say 
sed  tantum  die  verbo,  et  it,  only,  w4th  one  word  of 
sanabitur  anima  mea.  thine,  and  my  soul  shall  be 

healed. 

Whilst  the  Priest  is  receiving  the  sacred  Host,  if 
you  also  are  to  communicate,  profoundly  adore  your 
God,  who  is  ready  to  take  up  his  abode  within  you  ; 
and  again  say  to  him  with  the  Bride :  Come,  Lord 
Jesus /^ 

But  should  you  not  intend  to  receive  sacramentally, 
make  here  a  Spiritual  Communion.  Adore  Jesus 
Christ,  who  thus  visits  your  soul  by  his  grace,  and 
say  to  him  : 

Corpus     Domini      nostri        I  give   thee,   O  Jesus,   this 

'  Apoc,  xxii.  20. 


1 


THE    ORDINARY    OF   THE   MASS.  61 

heart  of  mine,  tliat  thou  may-  Jesu  Christi  custodiat  ani- 
est  dwell  in  it,  and  do  with  me  mam  meam  in  vitam  seter- 
what  thou  wilt.  nam.     Amen. 

Then  the  Priest  takes  the  Chalice,  in  thanksgiving, 
and  says : 

What  return  shall  I  make  Quid  retribuam   Domino 

to   the  Lord  for  all  he  hath  pro  omnibus  quae  retiibuit 

oHLven  to  me  ?     I  will  take  the  mihi  ?      Calicem     salutaris 

Chalice  of  salvation,  and  will  aocipiam,  et  nomen  Domini 

call  upon  the    name   of    the  inrocabo.    Laudans  invoca- 

Lord.      Praising,    I   will  call  bo  Dominum,  et  ab  inimicis 

upon  the  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  meis  salvus  ero. 
saved  from  mine  enemies. 

But  if  you  are  to  make  a  Sacramental  Communion, 
you  should,  at  this  moment  of  the  Priest's  receiving 
the  precious  Blood,  again  adore  the  God  who  is 
coming  to  you,  and  keep  to  your  prayer  :  Come^  Lord 
Jesus,  come  I 

If  you  are  going  to  communicate  only  spiritually, 
again  adore  your  divine  Master,  and  say  to  him  : 

I  unite  myself  to  thee,  my  Sanguis     Domini     nostri 

beloved  Jesus !  do  thou  unite  Jesu  Christi  custodiat  ani- 

thyself  to  me  !   and  never  let  mam  meam  in  vitam  seter- 

us  be  separated !  nam.     Amen. 

It  is  here  that  you  must  approach  to  the  altar,  if 
you  are  going  to  Communion.  The  dispositions  suit- 
able for  Holy  Communion,  during  the  Time  after 
Pentecost,  are  given  in  the  next  Chapter. 

The  Communion  being  finished,  and  whilst  the 
Priest  is  purifying  the  Chalice  the  first  time,  say  : 

Thou  hast  visited  me,  O  God,  Quod      ore     sumpsimus, 

in  these  days  of  my  pilgrim-  Domine,  pura  mente  capia- 

age ;  give  me  grace  to  treasure  mus ;   et  de  munere  tempo - 

up  the  fruits  of  this  visit,  and  rali    fiat    nobis    remedium 

to  make  it  tell  upon  my  eter-  sempitemum. 
nity. 


52  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Whilst  the   Priest   is   purifying  the   Chalice    the 
second  time,  say  : 

Corpus     tuum,    Domine,  Be  thou  for  ever  hlessedO 

quod    sumpsi,    et    Sanguis,  my  Saviour,    for  having   ad- 

^uem  pota?i,  adh^reat  vis-  mitted  me  to  the  sacred  mys- 

ceribus  meis:   et  praesta  ut  tery  of  thy  Body  and  Blood, 

in  me  non  remaneat  sccle-  May  my  heart  and  senses  pre- 

rum  macula,  qucm  pura  et  serve,  by  thy  graje  the  punty 

S^cta     refecemnt      Sacra-  thou  hast  imparted  to  them, 

men  a.  Quiviviset  regnasin  and  I  be  thus   rendered  less 

Sas^culorum.     Amen,  unworthy  of  thy  divme  visit. 

The  Priest,  having  read  the  Anthem,  called  the 
Communion,  which  is  the  first  part  of  his  Thanks- 
giving for  the  favour  just  received  from  God,  whereby 
he  has  renewed  his  divine  presence  among  us,--turns 
to  the  people,  greeting  them  with  the  ^sual  salu- 
tation ;  and  then  recites  the  Prayers,  called  the 
Postcommunion,  which  are  the  continuation  of  the 
Thanksgiving.  You  will  join  him  here  also,  and 
thank  God  for  the  unspeakahle  gift  he  has  just 
lavished  upon  you,  of  admitting  you  to  the  celebration 
and  participation  of  mysteries  so  divme. 

As  soon  as  these  Praj^ers  have  been  recited,  the 
Priest  again  turns  to  the  people;  and  full  ot  joy  at 
the  immense  favour  he  and  they  have  been  receiving, 
he  says : 

Dominus  vobiscum.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Answer  him : 
Et  cmn  spiritu  tuo.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon,  or,  (if  it  be  not  a  High  Mass,)  the 
Priest  himself,  then  says ; 

^,      -,.  .  Go,  the  Mass  is  finished. 

Ite,  Missa  est.  ^  '  ^^  ^  ^^^^ 

gi.  Deo  gratias.  *>• 


THE   ORDINARY   OF   THE   MASS. 


63 


The  Priest  makes  a  last  Prayer,  before  giving  you 
his  blessing ;  pray  with  him : 


Eternal  thanks  be  to  thee, 
O  adorable  Trinity,  for  the 
mercy  thou  hast  showed  to 
me,  in  permitting  me  to  assist 
at  this  divine  Sacrifice.  Par- 
don me  the  negligence  and 
coldness  wherewith  I  have 
received  so  great  a  favour  ; 
and  deign  to  confirm  the  Bles- 
sing, which  thy  Minister  is 
about  to  give  me  in  thy  Name. 


Placeat  tibi,  sancta  Trini- 
tas,  obsequium  servitutis 
meae,  et  praesta  ut  sacrifi- 
cium,  quod  oculis  tuse  Ma- 
jestatis  indignus  obtuli,  tibi 
sit  acceptabile,  mihique,  et 
omnibus  pro  quibus  illud 
obtuli,  sit  te  miserante, 
propitiabile.  Per  Christum 
Dominum  nostrum.    Amen. 


The  Priest  raises  his  hand,  and  blesses  you  thus  : 


May  the  Almighty  God, 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
bless  you ! 

gt.  Amen. 


Benedicat  vos  omnipotens 
Deus,  Pater,  et  Filius,  et 
Spiritus  Sanctus. 

gt.  Amen. 


He  then  concludes  the  Mass,  by  reading  the  first 
fourteen  verses  of  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  John, 
which  tell  us  of  the  eternity  of  the  Word,  and  of  the 
mercy  which  led  him  to  take  upon  himself  our  flesh, 
and  to  dwell  among  us.  Pray  that  you  may  be  of  the 
number  of  those  who  received  him,  when  he  came  unto 
his  oivn  people,  and  who,  thereby,  were  made  Sons  of 
God. 


^.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 
5t.  And  with  thy  spirit. 


^.  Dominus  vobiscum. 
gt.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 


THE    LAST   GOSPEL. 


The  beginning   of    the   Holy 
Gospel  according  to  John. 

Ch.  L 

In  the  beginning  was  the 
"Word,  and  the  Word  was  with 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God. 


Initium     sancti     Evangelii 
secundum  Joannem. 

Cap,  I. 

In  principio  erat  Yerbum, 
et  Verbum  erat  apud  Deum 
et  Deus  erat  Verbum.     Hoc 


64 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


erat  in  principio  apud  Douni. 
Omnia  per  ipsum  facta  sunt ; 
C't  sine  ipso  factum  est  nihil. 
Quod  factum  est,  in  ipso 
vita  erat,  et  vita  erat  lux 
hominum,  et  lux  in  tenebris 
lucet,  et  tenebrae  earn  non 
comprehenderunt.  Fuit  ho- 
mo missus  a  Deo,  cui  nomen 
erat  Joannes.  Hie  venit  in 
testimonium,  ut  testimo- 
nium perhiberet  de  lumine, 
ut  omnes  crederent  per 
ilium.  Non  erat  ille  lux, 
sed  ut  testimonium  perhi- 
beret de  lumine.  Erat  lux 
vera,  quae  illuminat  omnem 
hominem  venientem  in  hunc 
mundum.  In  mundo  erat, 
et  mundus  per  ipsum  factus 
est,  et  mundus  eum  non  cog- 
novit. In  propria  venit,  et 
sui  eum  non  recepenmt. 
Quotquot  autem  recepcrunt 
eum,  dedit  eis  potestatem 
filios  Dei  fieri,  his  qui  cre- 
dunt  in  nomine  ejus :  qui 
non  ex  sanguinibus,  neque 
ex  volimtate  camis,  neque 
ex  voluntate  viri,  sed  ex  Deo 
nati  sunt.  Et  Verbtim 
CAEO  FACTUM  EST,  et  habi- 
tavit  in  nobis :  et  vidimus 
gloriam  ejus,  gloriam  quasi 
Unigeniti  a  Patre,  plenum 
gratiae  et  veritatis. 

Bt.  Deo  gratias. 


The  same  was  in  the  beginning 
Avith  God.  All  things  were 
made  by  him,  and  without  him 
was  made  nothing  that  was 
made.  In  him  was  life,  and 
the  life  was  the  light  of  men  : 
and  the  light  shineth  in  the 
darkness,  and  the  darkness  did 
not  comprehend  it.  There  was 
a  man  sent  from  God,  whose 
name  was  John.  This  man 
came  for  a  witness,  to  give 
testimony  of  the  light,  that  all 
men  might  believe  through 
him.  He  was  not  the  light, 
but  was  to  give  testimony  of 
the  light.  That  was  the  true 
light  which  enlighteneth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  this 
world.  He  was  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made  by 
him,  and  the  world  knew  him 
not.  He  came  unto  his  o\vn, 
and  his  own  received  him  not. 
But  as  many  as  received  him, 
to  them  he  gave  power  to  be 
made  the  sons  of  God;  to  them 
that  believe  in  his  name,  who 
arc  bom,  not  of  blood,  nor  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the 
will  of  man,  but  of  God.  And 
THE  Word  was  M-vde  flesh, 
and  dwelt  among  us  ;  and  we 
saw  his  glory,  as  it  were  the 
glory  of  the  Only-Begotten 
of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and 
truth. 

1^.  Thanks  be  to  God. 


BEFORE   COMMUNION.  65 


CHAPTER  THE  SIXTH. 

ON   HOLY   COMMUNION,    DURING   THE   TIME   AFTER 
PENTECOST. 

If,  in  the  early  stages  of  tlie  Liturgical  Year,  in 
Advent,  at  Christmas,  and  during  the  periods  of  Sep- 
tuagesima  and  Lent,  when  there  was  question  of 
nothing  beyond  a  preparation  for  the  divine  Mysteries 
which  wrought  our  salvation, — if,  in  the  name  of 
holy  Church,  we  then  invited  the  Faithful  to  have 
recourse  to  the  Sacrament  of  our  Lord's  Body,  as 
being  the  heavenly  nourishment  that  would  support 
them  in  the  glorious  career  on  which  they  had 
entered :  now,  that  the  work  is  done,  that  they  have 
risen  again  with  their  Redeemer,  that  they  have 
followed  him,  by  their  desires  and  their  hopes,  even 
to  the  very  summit  of  heaven ;  now,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  come  down  upon  this  earth,  that  he  might 
complete  within  them  the  work  of  their  union  with 
God  ; — surely,  nothing  could  profit  them  more,  than 
that  they  nourish  themselves,  and  even  more  fre- 
quently than  before,  with  the  Bread  of  Life,  which 
came  from  heaven,  that  he  might  give  Life  to  the 
world.  ^ 

From  our  first  entrance  into  the  new  season,  which 
we  are  now  passing  through,  holy  Church  has,  by  the 
great  Feast  of  Corpus  Christiy  brought  us  face  to  face 
with  the  august  Mystery,  which  is  both  the  Sacrifice 
whereby  God  receives  the  honour  due  to  him,  and  the 
Sacrament  containing  within  itself  the  nourishment 
of  our  souls.     We  have  now  a  clearer  understanding 

3  St.  John,  vi.  41,  52. 
VOL.  X.  F 


6(5  TIME   AllER   PENTECOST. 

of  the  unspeakable  gift,  .vhich  our  Saviour  vouch- 
safed to  bestow  upon  us,  the  night  before  his  Passion. 
We  now  see  more  plainly  the  nature  and  greatness 
of  the  homage  which  earth  gives  to  its  Creator,  by 
the  ceaseless^offering  of  the  holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass 
We  now  know,  so  much  better  than  formerly,  what 
that  deifying  relation  is,  which  is  made  to  exist  be- 
tween God  and  the  soul,  by  means  of  the  participa- 
tTon  of  the  Sacred  Host.    The  Holj- Ghost  has  shed 
his  light  upon  all  these  truths ;  he  has  opened  out  to 
us  the  very  depths  of  the  mystery  shown  to  us  from 
the  outset,  the  mystery,  that  is,  of  the  Emmanuel  or 
God  with  us.     Now   that  we  are  so  fully  initiated 
into  the  whole  of  God's  woA,  we  the  better  under- 
stand that  great  text  of  the  Gospel,  which  says :  The 
Word  teas  made  Flesh,  and  dwelt  among  m.   _  We 
erasp  the  meaning  more  completely  ;  we  can  give  it 
I  more  literal,  and  equally  faithful,  trans  ation,  and 
say.  the  Word  was  made  Flesh,  and  took  up  h,s  dwelling 

'"luAishas  increased  in  the  Christian  the  desire 
of  assisting  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice     He  says  to  himse  f 
as  did  the  Patriarch  of  old:  "  Trnlg  the  Lord  ,s  m 
this  plaee,  and  I  knew  it  not  r  my  faith  was  sound 
but  I  did  not  perceive,  as  I  do  now  the  immensity  of 
what  our   Lord  did  at  his  Last   Supper.       In     he 
same  way,  having  now  a  clearer  knowledge  of  the 
union,  which  is  brought  about,  even  in  this  present 
world  between  God  and  the  soul  that  is  nourished 
with  the  Uving  Bread,  whereby  that  soul  is  trans- 
formed into  it!  Creator.-having  this  clearer  know- 
ledge, the  Christian  longs  more  ardently  than  ever 
for  the  enjoyment  of  that  Lord,  who    even  during 
this  mortal  life,  gives  us,  by  means  of  the  Luchan=tie 
Bread,  not  only  a  foretaste,  but  the  very  reahty.ot 
that  which  awaits  us  in  heaven.     ^^  e   may  truly 

1  St.  Jolin  i.  14.  '  Gen.  Mviii  16. 


BEFORE   COMMUNION.  67 

assert,  that  the  keeping  up  of  that  state,  which  we 
have  already  described  in  the  Third  Chapter,  and 
which  is  the  state  both  of  the  Church  herself  and 
of  the  faithful  soul,  during  this  period  of  the  Liturgical 
Year,  is  the  joint  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  abides 
within  us,  and  of  the  Eucharistic  gift,  in  which  the 
Son  of  God  ceases  not  to  act  for  the  preservation, 
increase,  and  development  of  the  divine  life,  which 
he  came  to  bring  us,  and  of  which  he  thus  speaks : 
I  am  come  J  that  they  may  have  life^  and  may  have  it 
^more  ahundantly} 

We  will  here,  as  in  the  preceding  Yolumes,  give 
Acts  which  may  serve  as  preparation  for  holy  Com- 
munion during  this  Season  of  the  Year.  There  are 
souls  that  feel  the  want  of  some  such  assistance  as 
this ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  we  will  add  a  form  of 
Thanksgiving  for  after  Communion. 

BEFORE  COMMIINIO:^'. 

ACT    OF    FAITH. 

Now  that  I  am  about  to  unite  myself  to  thee  in  the  mystery 
of  thy  love,  I  must  first  profess  that  I  believe  it  to  be  truly 
thyself,  O  my  God,  thy  body,  thy  soul,  thy  divinity,  that 
thou  art  going  to  give  me.  The  first  duty  thou  askest  of 
me,  now  that  thou  art  coming  to  me,  is  the  act  of  my  Faith 
in  this  deep  mystery ;  I  make  it ;  and  my  understanding  is 
happy  at  thus  bowing  itself  down  before  thy  sovereign  word. 
Thou,  O  Jesus,  art  the  Truth ;  and  when  presenting  to  thy 
disciples  the  bread  changed  into  thy  Body,  thou  saidst  to 
them :  This  is  my  Body!  I  believe  thy  word ;  I  adore  the 
living  Bread,  come  down  from  heaven  to  give  life  to  the  world. 
The  jgrace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  thou  hast  sent  me, 
enables  me  to  rehsh  this  marvel  of  thy  all-powerful  love. 
This  love  of  thine  was  not  satisfied  with  uniting  thee  to  the 
human  nature,  which  thou  assumedst  in  Mary's  womb ;  it 
would,  moreover,  prex3are  for  each  one  of  us,  by  means  of  the 
heavenly  food  of  thy   sacred  flesh,   a  real  and  mysterious 

^  St.  John,  y.  10. 


63  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

union  with  thee,  which  none  but  thou  could  have 
planned,  none  but  thou  could  have  achieved.  For  its 
accomplishment,  thou  first  demandedst,  as  thou  hadst  all 
ri^ht  to  do,  that  we  should  have  an  unlimited  confidence 
in°the  truth  of  thy  word.  'VNTien  thou  wast  upon  the  Cross, 
thy  divinity  was  veiled  from  view ;  in  the  sacred  Host,  thy 
very  humanity  is  hid  from  our  eyes ;  but,  I  believe,  O  my 
God,  both  thy  divinity  and  humanity  present  under  the 
cloud  which  shrouds  them  from  all  mortal  sight.  I  have 
been  taught  by  thine  Apostle,  O  Light  inaccessible,  that  it 
is  by  faith  alone  that  we  can  approach  thee,  whilst  we 
are  in  this  present  life.  I  beheve,  then,  O  Lord!  but  help 
thou  mine  unbelief. 

ACT    OF    HUMILITY. 

Taught,  as  I  have  been,  by  thy  words,  O  my  God,  I  know 
and  with  a  certainty  which  my  reason  and  my  senses  could 
never  have  given  me,  that,  in  a  few  moments,  I  shall  be  in 
closest  union  with  thine  infinite  Majesty.     Thou  hast  said  it : 
He  that  eateth  my  Flesh,  ahideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him!     My 
whole  being  thrills  at  these  words.     I,  a  sinner,   all  marked 
with  the  sores  of   my  iniquities,    and   still  fighting    with 
passions  but  half  subdued,  I  am  to  abide  in  thee!     And  thou, 
that  art  infinite  Being  and  infinite  Holiness,  thou  art  commg 
to  abide  in  me,  in  me  who  am  but  nothingness  and  sin  I     At 
such  a  tiding  as  this,  what  else  can  I,  than  cry  out,  with 
the  Centurion  of  thy  Gospel:  Lord!  I  am  not  worthy  that 
thou  shovJdst  enter  vnder  my  roof!    And  yet,  I  hear  thee 
saying,  also,  these  other  words :    Unless  ye  eat  the  Flesh  of  the 
Son  of  Man,  ye  shall  not  have  life  in  you.      This  life  I  would 
have,  O  Jesus  !     And  didst  thou  not  come,   didst  thou  not 
work  all  thy  mysteries,  in  order  that  we  might  have  life,  and 
more  and  more  of  that  life  ?     I  have  no  desire  to  shun  it. 
What,  then,  can  I  do,   but  take  shelter  in   the  depths  of 
humilitv,  think  of  mine  own  vileness,  be  mindful  of  the  fuel 
of  sin  that  exists  within  me,  and  acknowledge  the  infinite 
distance  there  is  between  myself  and  thee,  O  my  Redeemer 
and  my  Judge  ?    I   know  that  then  thou  wilt  have  pity 
on  my  miserJ^  and  wilt  say  but  one  ivord,  and  my  soul  shall 
be  healed.     Say,  I  beseech  thee,  that  n-ord,  which  is  to  com- 
fort my  heart.     Till  thou  sayst  it,  I  dare  not  raise  up  mme 
eyes  towards  thine  altar  ;  I  can  but  tremble  at  the  approach 
of  that  moment,  when  a  poor  creature,  like  myself,  is  to  be 
united  with  its  Creator,  from  whose  eyes  nought  is  hid,  and 
who  judges  even  our  justices. 


BEFORE    COMMUNION.  69 


ACT   OF   CONTRITION. 


Ever  since  tliat  day  whereon  thy  Spirit,  0  Lord,  came 
down  upon  us,  in  order  that  he  might  the  more  deeply 
impiint  upon  our  souls  the  divine  mysteries  thou  wroughtest, 
from  thy  merciful  Incarnation  to  thy  glorious  Ascension, 
thou  vouchsafest  to  invite  me  more  frequently  to  thy  table. 
And  I  have  learned,  too,  since  that  same  coming,  better  than 
I  knew  before,  how  it  behoves  me  to  prepare  myself,  with 
all  possible  diligence,  for  each  of  thy  visits.  I  have  been  re- 
newing my  faith,  by  accepting,  with  increased  ardour,  the 
truth  of  thy  presence  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.  As  I 
see  thy  dread  Majesty  advancing  towards  me,  I  have  pro- 
fessed, and  with  sincere  humility,  my  utter  nothingness,  for 
I  have  acknowledged  my  extreme  unworthiness  ; — but  all 
this  does  not  put  me  at  rest.  There  is  something  beyond  all 
this  : — it  is,  that  I  am  a  sinner ;  I  have  offended  Thee ;  I  have 
rebelled  against  thee ;  I  have  turned  thy  very  benefits  into 
occasions  of  outrage  against  thee ;  to  say  it  in  all  its  enormity, 
I  have  caused  thy  death  upon  the  Cross  !  The  Holy  Ghost, 
having  vouchsafed  to  give  me  light,  has  taught  me  the 
malice  of  sin ;  he  has  given  me  to  understand,  more  fully 
than  formerly,  how  detestable  have  been  my  audacity  and 
ingratitude.  I  have  had  revealed  to  me,  by  the  grand 
Mysteries  of  the  first  portion  of  the  Year,  how  much  I 
cost  thee  on  that  Day,  whereon  Justice  and  Mercy  united  in 
the  Sacrifice  which  saved  mankind.  The  more  thou  hast 
heaped  thy  favours  on  me,  O  Lord,  the  more  keenly  do  I 
feel  the  injury  of  my  sins ;  and  I  beseech  thee  to  bestow  on 
me  the  signal  grace,  the  grace  which  will  ensure  every  other, — ■ 
of  keeping  up  within  me  the  spirit  of  compunction  and 
penance.  I  offer  to  thee,  O  my  God,  at  this  hour  when  thou 
art  about  to  give  thyself  to  me,  I  offer  to  thee  the  expression 
of  my  sorrow  ;  and  from  my  deepest  soul,  I  say  to  thee  those 
words  of  the  Publican :  Have  mercy  on  me,  0  God,  for  lam  a 
Sinner  ! 

ACT   OF   LOVE. 

And  now,  O  my  Lord,  permit  me  to  turn  my  thoughts 
upon  the  happiness  of  a  soul,  to  whom  thou  givest  thyseK 
in  the  Sacrament  of  thy  love  !  As  to  that  familiarity,  into 
which  thine  ineffable  goodness  leads  some  souls,  who  ap- 
proach thee  without  reflecting  upon  the  greatness  of  thy 
majesty,  oh!  I  shudder  at  such  impertinence;  and  yet,  I 
long  to  be  united  with  thee ;  and,  im.til  thou  art  come  into 


70  TIME    AFTER   PENTECXDST. 

me,  my  soul  panteth  after  thee.  Thy  Mysteries,  "which  I 
have  been  celebrating  with  thy  Church,  have  enkindled 
w^ithin  me  a  fire  which  nothing  can  quench, — a  fire  to  which 
thy  divine  Spirit  delights  to  be  ever  adding  heat.  Thy 
delight,  so  thou  hast  told  us,  is  to  he  with  the  children  of  men  ; 
and  is  it  not  true,  also,  that  with  such  of  the  children  of  men 
as  know  thee,  thy  love  is  the  very  nourishment  on  which 
their  own  hearts  five  ?  In  order  to  maintain  them  in  this 
love  which  is  their  life,  thou  hast  made  thyself  present  in 
the  sacred  Host ;  thou  givest  them  to  live  in  thee,  just  as 
thou  livest  in  them,  as  often  as  they  eat  of  this  Living 
Bread,  which  hath  come  down  from  heaven.  This  Charity , 
this  Love,  ichich  hath  heeu  poured  forth  into  our  hearts  hy  the 
J  My  Ghost,  is  nourished  at  thy  holy  Table,  O  Lord  I  and 
there  is  it  increased ;  for  it  is  in  the  divine  Sacrament,  which 
thou  institutedst  the  night  before  thy  Passion,  that  we  are 
united  to  thee.  Love  tends  to  be  united  A\'ith  the  object  it 
loves ;  therefore  do  I,  in  spite  of  all  the  conviction  of  my 
unworthiness,  long  for  the  blissful  moment  of  thy  coming 
into  me.  Everything  that  thou  hast  done,  my  Lord,  has  been 
done  to  make  me  love  thee  ?  Thou  hast  loved  me  first ;  who 
will  blame  me,  that  my  heart  hmigers  iorthee  /  Thou  hadst  pity, 
one  day,  on  the  people  who  had  followed  thee  into  the  desert. 
I  have  compassion,  thou  saidst,  on  this  multitude;  and  then, 
straightway,  thou  gavest  them  to  eat  as  much  as  they  would. 
Ah  !  Lord,  my  poor  ]ieart  and  flesh,  lou'j  after  thee  ;  and  thou 
alone  canst  satisfy  the  hunger  which  gnaws  me,  for  thou  art 
the  Sovereign  Good,  thou  art  true  Life ;  and  it  was  that  I 
might  enjoy  that  Sovereign  Good,  and  live  that  heavenly 
Life,  that  thou  createdst  nie.  There  was  a  time,  when  this 
heart  of  mine  was  dull ;  darkness  was  upon  me,  and  I  coidd 
not  see  the  light ;  but  now  that  thy  Mysteries  have  en- 
lightened and  regenerated  me,  I  sigh  after  thee  with  all  the 
earnestness  of  my  soul.  Come,  then.  Lord  Jesus  !  Withhold 
thyself  no  longer  from  my  soul,  that  awaits  thy  visit ! 

AFTER  COM^UXION. 

ACT   OF    ADORATION. 

Thy  presence  within  mo,  0  Lord,  is  joy  and  sweetness  to 
me  ;  and  yet,  before  indulging  in  the  delight  it  brings,  I 
feel  impelled  to  prostrate  my  entire  being  before  thy  Sovereign 
Majesty.  I  must,  I  will,  first  adore  thee,  for  thou  art  the 
great  God  of  heaven  and  earth.  Thou  standest  in  no  need 
of  me,  and  yet  thou  comest  down  to  this  my  nothingness. 


AFTER   COMMUNION.  71 

Where,  then,  shall  I  begin,  if  it  be  not  in  humbling  myself 
profoundly  before  thee,  and  acknowledging  that  thou  art 
Lord,  the  Only  Begotten  and  Consubstantial  Son  of  the 
Father ;  that  thou  art  He  by  whom  all  things  were  made, 
the  Eternal,  the  Infinite,  and  the  supreme  Judge  of  the 
living  and  the  dead.  Thy  Seraphim,  who  see  thee  in  thy 
unveiled  majesty,  and  drink  their  fill  of  everlasting  happiness 
from  thy  divine  essence,  these  glorious  Spirits,  as  thy 
Prophet  tells  us,  cover  their  faces  with  their  wings ;  they 
tremble  before  thee,  as  the  Church  tells  us  ;  and  yet,  whilst 
trembling  in  thy  presence,  their  love  is  as  ardent  and  as 
tender  as  though  they  were  nothing  but  love.  I  would 
follow  their  example,  O  my  God  ;  I  would  offer  thee,  at  this 
moment,  the  creature's  first  duty  to  its  Creator, — adoration. 
Thou  art  so  nigh  to  me,  at  this  happy  moment,  that  my 
being  feels  renovated  and  almost  lost  in  thine ;  how  then 
can  I  be  otherwise  than  overwhelmed  by  the  weight  of  thy 
glory  ?  Yes,  I  do  adore  thee,  O  Eternal,  Infinite,  Immense, 
All-powerful  I  before  whom  all  created  beings  are  as  though 
they  were  not.  I  confess,  before  thee,  my  own  nothingness  ; 
I  acknowledge  thine  absolute  dominion  over  me,  and  over 
everything  which  thy  power  and  goodness  have  produced  in 
creation.  King  of  ages  !  Immortal  and  Invisible  in  thine 
essence  I  Glory  be  to  thee  I  Accept  this  first  homage  of  a 
soul  to  which  thy  love  has  deigned  to  unite  thee. 

ACT    OF    THANKSGIVING. 

There  is  another  homage  which  I  owe  thee,  O  my  God  ! — 
it  is  gratitude.  Thou  often  invitest  me  to  partake  of  the 
divine  gift,  wherewith  thou,  before  leaving  this  earth,  didst 
enrich  us.  But,  wo  to  me,  if,  because  I  can  easily  and  often 
have  it,  I  value  so  much  the  less  its  greatness  !  Wretched 
familiarity,  which  blunts  the  sentiment  of  gratitude,  and 
deadens  faith,  and  takes  all  ardour  from  love ;  may  thy 
grace,  O  Lord,  preserve  me  from  its  vile  influence.  For 
thousands  of  years,  the  human  race  was  in  expectation  of 
the  favour,  which  thou  hast  just  been  bestowing  upon  me. 
Abraham,  the  father  of  believers ;  Moses,  thy  much  loved 
friend  ;  David,  the  inspired  chanter  of  thy  mysteries  ;  none 
of  these  received  thee  :  and  this  Bread  of  Angels  has  come 
down  from  heaven  for  rae  .'  Oh  I  unheard  of  goodness  of  a 
God  incorporating  himself  with  his  creature  !  Who  is  there 
that  could  measure  its  length  and  breadth,  or  scan  its  height, 
or  fathom  its  dejith  ?  These  expressions  of  thine  Apostle, 
regarding  the  mystery  just  given  to  me,  teach  me  what  is 
the  value  of  the  wondrous  gift  thou  hast  bestowed  upon 


72  TIME    AFl'ER   PENTKCOST. 

mankiiid.  With  what  humble  and  lively  gratitude,  then, 
should  it  not  be  received  I  Thou  hast  not  been  deterred, 
either  by  my  nothingness,  or  the  coldness  of  my  feelings,  or 
my  infidelities ;  be  thou  blessed,  then,  my  Lord,  for  that 
out  of  thy  desire  to  give  thyself  to  me,  thou  hast  overstepped 
every  limit,  and  removed  every  obstacle.  I  give  thee  thanks 
for  this,  and  for  every  Communion  thou  hast  hitherto 
so  graciously  given  me.  Deign  to  enlighten  me  more  and 
more,  as  to  the  magnificence  of  thy  gift ;  deign  to  cherish 
within  me  the  sentiment  of  love  ;  that  thus  my  longings  for 
thy  visit  may  be  increased ;  and  that  I  may  know  how  to 
honour,  as  I  ought,  thy  presence  within  me,  and  that  I  may 
never  dare  to  approach  thee  out  of  custom,  or  without  my 
conscience  assuring  me  that  I  am  bringing  with  me  the 
profound  respect  due  to  thee. 

ACT   OF   LOVE. 

Now  will  I  rest  me  in  thee,  O  my  Sovereign  Good,  that 
hast  come  down  to  me,  and  entered  into  me,  in  order  to 
content  the  desires  of  my  heart  by  thy  presence.  A  few 
moments  ago,  I  was  longing  after  thee ;  and  now  that 
longing  has  been  satisfied.  "WTiat  is  there  on  this  earth  that 
I  could  now  desire  ?  The  very  happiness  of  heaven,  is  it  not 
the  possessing  thee  ?  and  thou,  my  Lord,  assurest  me,  that  he, 
who  eats  thy  sacred  Flesh,  ahideth  in  thee,  and  thou  in  him. 
The  union,  then,  to  which  love  aspires,  is  now  consummated. 
This  happy  moment  of  thy  presence  within  me  unites  thy 
sovereign  majesty  to  my  lowliness  ;  thou  livest  in  me,  and 
I  live  in  thee.  Divine  charity  has  conquered  every  diffi- 
culty ;  and  the  life,  which  now  circulates  through  my  being, 
is  not  the  life  of  time,  but  of  eternity.  I  at  once  profit  of  it, 
to  assure  thee,  O  Lord,  that  thou  hast  my  love.  Thy  pre- 
sence within  me  lasts  but  a  short  time ;  in  a  few  moments, 
there  will  be  but  the  grace  left  by  the  visit  thou  art  now 
paying  me.  At  present,  I  can  say  in  all  truth  :  /  have  found 
Him,  luhom  my  soul  Joveth.  Accept,  then,  O  Lord,  the 
homage  of  my  heart,  and  all  its  affections.  Make  this  heart 
faithful  and  ardent  in  the  love  of  thee  ;  for  Jove  is  the  end  of 
the  whole  Law  ;  and  when  thou  vouchsafest  to  incorporate 
thyself  -v^-ith  us  by  means  of  the  Bread  of  Life,  thine  aim  is 
to  strengthen  and  increase  Charity  within  us.  May  this 
contact  with  thee,  O  Lord,  destroy  that  love  of  myself,  which, 
hitherto,  has  so  often  stifled,  or  at  least,  retarded,  the  love 
which  is  due  to  thee.  Let  my  heart  become  more  and  more 
purified ;  may  its  affections  be  set  free  from,  and  raised 
above,  created  objects,  and  centre  in  the  unity  of  thy  love, 
which  includes  all,  and  is  enough  for  all. 


AFTER    COMMUNION.  73 


ACT   OF    OBLATION. 

When  I  thus  assure  thee  of  my  love,  0  my  God,  I  hear 
within  me  a  voice  telling  me,  that,  henceforth,  the  rule  of 
my  conduct  must  be — thy  good-pleasiu'e.  Then  only  shall 
I  know  that  my  protestations  are  sincere,  when  I  give  up 
mine  own  will,  to  follow  thine  in  all  things.  Thou  wilt  not 
only  require  me  to  keep  from  all  sin,  but  thou  wouldst  have 
me  resolutely  walk  in  the  path  of  humility, — humility  which 
repels  pride,  thy  chief  enemy.  Thou  commandest  me  to 
keep  my  senses  under  restraint,  lest  the  weakness  of  the 
flesh  should  get  the  mastery  over  my  spirit,  which  is  prompt, 
but  fickle.  In  order  to  make  surer  of  a  soul  that  is  dear  to 
thee,  thou  often  sendest  it  trials ;  for  thou  hast  said,  that 
whosoever  ambitious  to  follow  thee,  must  make  up  his  ndnd 
to  carry  the  Cross.  Thou  hast  warned  thy  disciples,  that  they 
must  be  on  their  guard  agaiust  the  world  and  its  maxims, 
or  that  they  would  perish  together  with  the  world.  These 
are  the  conditions  which  thou  layest  on  them  that  would 
enlist  under  thy  banner,  dear  Jesus  !  Eenovated  as  I  have 
been  by  thy  precious  visit,  I  offer  myself  to  thee  as  one  quite 
resolved  to  fulfil  every  duty  of  thy  service.  Give  me  thine 
aid,  O  my  Lord,  and  King  !  Thy  sacramental  presence, 
which  is  soon  to  quit  me,  will  leave  me  an  increase  of  thy 
grace.  Increase  my  faith,  and  my  docility  to  the  teachings 
of  thy  holy  Chui'ch,  from  whose  hands  I  have  just  received 
thee.  Give  me  to  use  this  Avorld,  as  though  I  did  not  use 
it ;  give  me  to  live,  at  once,  by  desire,  in  that  abode  where  I 
hope  to  enjoy  thee,  and  without  shadow  or  veil,  for  all 
eternity. 

O  Mary,  Queen  of  heaven !  watch  over  me  thy  humble 
servant,  whom  the  blessed  Son  of  thy  chaste  womb  htis 
vouchsafed  to  nourish  with  his  adorable  Flesh,  and  which 
he  received  from  thee.  Present  him  the  oblation  I  now 
make  him  of  myself,  in  return  for  the  unspeakable  gift  he 
has  just  been  bestowing  upon  me. — Holy  Angels  !  bless  and 
protect  this  poor  child  of  earth,  who  has  been  feasting  on 
that  very  Bread,  whereon  you  feed  in  heaven. — All  ye  Saints 
of  God !  who,  when  in  this  world,  did  eat  of  the  heavenly 
Bread  of  the  Christian  pilgrim,  pray  and  obtain  for  me,  that 
It  may  keep  with  me  to  the  end  of  my  journey  through  this 
life,  and  may  lead  me  to  Him,  who  ceases  not  to  be  the 
nourishment  of  his  elect,  when  in  glory.     Amen. 


74  TI>rE   AFTER   rE>*TECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  SEVENTH. 

ON   THE   OFFICES   OF    TIERCE,    SEXT,    AND   NONE, 
DURING   THE   TIME   AFTER    FKNTKOOST. 

The  limits  we  have  been  obliged  to  observe  in  this 
work,  do  not  allow  us  to  give  the  text  of  all  the 
Offices  of  the  Church ;  we  have  confined  ourselves 
to  those  at  which  the  Faithful  generally  assist,  and 
which,  for  that  reason,  are  celebrated  with  more 
solemnity.  To  Vespers  and  Complin,  which  it  was 
impossible  to  omit,  we  have  added  for  this  Volume, 
the  Hours  of  Tierce,  Sext,  and  None,  that  the 
Faithful  mav  be  able  to  follow  them,  in  those 
Churches  where  they  are  said  or  sung. 

The  liturgical  form  of  these  Hours  is  the  same  tor 
all  three  After  the  invocation  of  the  divine  aid, 
there  are  sung  a  Hymn  and  three  divisions  of  the 
118th  Psalm  These  are  followed  by  a  short  Wesson 
called  the  Capitnhun ;  by  a  Responsory  called  the 
Brief  Response,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  ordinary 
ones,  which  are  longer ;  and  finally,  by  a  Collect 
which  is  the  summary  of  the  desires  and  petitions  ot 
the  Church,  for  the  special  Feast  she  is  keeping.       ^ 

The  118th  Psalm,  which,  as  we  have  just  said,  is 
used  for  these  Hours,  and  is  every  day  recited  by  the 
Church,  is  regarded  as  the  canticle  of  prayer  by  excel- 
lence The  Prophet  addresses  himself,  all  through 
it,  to  the  Incarnate  Word,  who  is,  at  once,  both 
divine  Laic  and  Lawgiver.  It  is  not  difficult  to 
appreciate  the  special  beauty  of  this  P^^/"^;  ^^,^ 
adapt  it  to  the  Mysteries  of  each  day  of  the  Church  s 
celebrations.  It  lends  itself  to  every  phase  of  every 
Feast    and  seems  as  though  it  were  just  made  to 


TIERCE. 


75 


express  the  sentiment  that  is  uppermost  in  the 
heart.  Liturgical  prayer  is  the  manna  of  our  desert, 
which  suits  itself  to  the  taste  of  each  one  eating  it. 


TIERCE. 


^.  Incline  unto  mine  aid,  0 
God. 

B:.  O  Lord,  make  haste  to 
help  me. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
is  now,  and  ever  shall  be, 
Avorld  without  end.  Amen. 
Alleluia. 


^.  Deus  in  adjutorium 
meum  intende. 

gt.  Domine,  ad  adjuvan- 
dum  me  festina. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Sj)iritui  sancto ; 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et 
nunc  et  semper,  et  in  sae- 
cula  sseculorum.  Amen.  Al- 
leluia. 


HYMN. 


(Composed  by  St.  Ambrose.) 


0  Holy  Spirit,  one  substance 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
vouchsafe,  at  this  hour,  to  de- 
scend upon  us  without  delay, 
and  penetrate  into  our  hearts. 

May  our  mouth,  our  tongue, 
our  mind,  our  senses,  our 
strength,  publish  thy  praise ; 
may  the  fire  of  charity  be 
kindled,  and  its  ardour  in- 
flame our  brethren. 

Hear  us,  most  merciful 
Father !  and  thou,  the  Son, 
equal  to  the  Father !  and  thou 
the  Spiiit,  the  Comforter  ! 
reigning  God  for  ever.    Amen. 


Nunc  Sancte  nobis  Spiri- 

tus, 
Unum  Patri  cum  Filio, 
Dignare  promptus  ingeri, 
Nostro  refusus  pectori. 
Os,  lingua,  mens,  sensus, 

vigor, 
Confessionem  personent, 
Flammescat   igne    charitas, 
Accendat  ardor  proximos. 

Prsesta,    Pater    piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito, 
Eegnans  per  omne  sseculum. 

Amen. 


Division  of  Psalm  118. 


Set  before  me,  for  a  law, 
the  way  of  thy  justifications, 
O  Lord:  and  I  will  always 
seek  after  it. 


Legem  pone  mihi,  Do- 
mine, viam  justificationum 
tuarum :  *  et  exquiram  earn 
semper. 


76 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Da  mihi  intellectum,  et 
scnitabor  legem  tuam  :  *  et 
custodiam  illam  in  toto  cor- 
de  meo. 

Deduc  me  in  scmitam 
mandatorum  tuorum :  *  quia 
ipsam  volui. 

Inclina  cor  meum  in  tes- 
timonia  tua :  *  et  non  in 
avaritiam. 

Averte  ocnlos  nieos  ne  vi- 
deant  vanitatem :  *  in  via 
tua  vivifica  me. 

Statue  servo  tuo  eloquium 
tuum  :  *  in  timore  tuo. 

Amputa  opprobrium  meum 
quod  suspicatus  sum :  *  quia 
judicia  tua  jucunda. 

Ecce  concupivi  mandata 
tua  :  *  in  aequitate  tua  vivi- 
fica me. 

Et  veniat  super  me  mise- 
ricordia  tua,  Domine:  *  Sa- 
lutare  tuum,  secundum  elo- 
quium tuum. 

Et  respondebo  exprobran- 
tibus  mihi  verbum  :  *  quia 
speravi  in  sermonibus  tuis. 

Et  ne  auferas  de  ore  moo 
verbum  veritatis  usquequa- 
que  :  *  quia  in  judiciis  tuis 
supersperavi. 

Et  custodiam  legem  tuam 
semper  :  *  in  saeculum  et  in 
saeculum  saeculi. 

Et  ambulabam  in  latitu- 
dine :  *  quia  mandata  tua 
exquisivi. 

Et  loquebar  de  testimoniis 
tuis  in  conspectu  regum  :  * 
et  non  confundebar. 

Et  meditabar  in  mandatis 
tuis  :  *  quae  dilexi. 

Et  levavi  manus  meas  ad 
mandata  tua,  quae  dilexi :  * 


Give  me  understanding,  and 
I  will  search  thy  law :  and  I 
will  keep  it  with  my  whole 
heart. 

Lead  me  into  the  path  of 
thy  commandments  :  for  this 
same  I  have  desired. 

Incline  my  heart  unto  thy 
testimonies,  and  not  to  cove- 
tousness. 

Turn  away  mine  eyes,  that 
they  may  not  behold  vanity : 
quicken  me  in  thy  way. 

Establish  thy  word  to  thy 
servant,  in  thy  fear. 

Turn  away  my  reproach, 
which  I  have  apprehended  : 
for  thy  judgments  are  delight- 
ful. 

Behold,  I  have  longed  after 
thy  precepts :  quicken  me  in 
thy  justice. 

And  let  thy  mercy,  also, 
come  upon  me,  O  Lord:  thy 
salvation,  according  to  thy 
word. 

And  I  will  answer  tlie  ene- 
mies of  my  soul  who  reproach 
me  in  anything,  that  I  have 
trusted  in  thy  words. 

And  take  not  thou  the  word 
of  truth  utterly  out  of  my 
mouth  :  for  in  thy  words  I 
have  hoped  exceedingly. 

And  I  'svill  always  keep  thy 
law,  for  ever  and  ever. 

And  I  walked  at  large,  and 
joyoushj,  because  I  have  sought 
after  thy  commandments. 

And  I  spoke  of  thy  testi- 
monies before  kings :  and  I 
was  not  ashamed. 

And  I  meditated  on  thy  com- 
mandments, which  I  loved. 

And  I  lifted  up  my  hands  to 
thy  commandments,  which  I 


TIERCE. 


77 


loved :  and  I  was  exercised  in 
thy  justifications. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 

Be  thou  mindful  of  thy  word 
to  thy  servant,  in  which  thou 
hast  given  me  hope. 

This  hath  comforted  me  in 
my  humiliation :  because  thy 
word  hath  enlivened  me. 

The  proud  did  iniquitously 
altogether  :  but  I  declined  not 
from  thy  law. 

I  remembered,  O  Lord,  thy 
judgments  of  old  :  and  I  was 
comforted. 

A  fainting  hath  taken  hold 
of  me,  because  of  the  wicked 
that  forsake  thy  law. 

Thy  justifications  were  the 
subject  of  my  song,  in  the 
place  of  my  pHgrimage. 

In  the  night  I  have  remem- 
bered thy  name,  O  Lord  :  and 
have  kept  thy  law. 

This  happened  to  me  because 
I  sought  after  thy  justifica- 
tions. 

0  Lord,  my  portion,  I  have 
said  I  would  keep  thy  law. 

1  entreated  thy  face  with  all 
my  heart :  have  mercy  on  me 
according  to  thy  word. 

I  have  thought  on  my  ways : 
and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy 
testimonies. 

I  am  ready,  and  am  not 
troubled  :  that  I  may  keep  thy 
commandments. 

The  cords  of  the  wicked 
have  encompassed  me :  but  I 
have  not  forgotten  thy  law. 

I  rose  at  midnight  to  give 
praise  to  thee,  for  the  judg- 
ments of  thy  justification. 

I   am  a  partaker  with   all 


et  exercebarin  justificationi- 
bus  tuis. 

Gloria  Patri. 

Memor  esto  verbi  tui  ser- 
vo tuo  :  *  in  quo  mihi  spem 
dedisti. 

Haec  me  consolata  est  in 
humilitate  mea :  *  quia  elo- 
quium  tuum  vivificavit  me. 
Superbi  inique  agebant 
usquequaque  :  *  a  lege  au- 
tem  tua  non  declinavi. 

Memor  fui  judiciorumtuo- 
rum  a  saeculo,  Domine :  * 
et  consolatus  sum. 

Defectio  tenuit  me  :  *  pro 
peccatoribus  derelinquenti- 
bus  legem  tuam. 

Cantabiles  mihi  erant  jus- 
tificationes  tuse :  *  in  loco 
peregrinationis  meae. 
■  Memor  fui  nocte  nominis 
tui,  Domine  :  *  et  custodivi 
legem  tuam. 

Hgec  facta  est  mihi  :  *  quia 
justificationes  tuas  exqui- 
sivi. 

Portio  mea,  Domine  :  * 
dixi  custodire  legem  tuam. 

Deprecatus  sum  faciem 
tuam  in  toto  corde  meo  :  * 
miserere  mei  secundum  elo- 
quium  tuum. 

Cogitavi  vias  meas  :  *  et 
converti  pedes  meos  in  tes- 
timonia  tua. 

Paratus  sum,  et  non  sum 
turbatus  :  *  ut  custodiam 
mandata  tua. 

Funes  peccatorum  cir- 
cumplexi  sunt  me  :  *  et  le- 
legem  tuam  non  sum  oblitus. 
Media  nocte  surgebam  ad 
confitendum  tibi  :  *  super 
judicia  justificationis  tuse. 
Particeps   ego    sum   om- 


78 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


nium  timentiuin  te :  *  et  cus- 
todientium  mandata  tua. 

Misericordia  tua,  Doini- 
ne,  plena  est  terra:  *  jus- 
tificationes  tuas  doce  me. 

Gloria  Patri. 

Bonitatem  fecisti  cum  ser- 
vo tuo,  Domine:  *  secun- 
dum, verbimi  tuum. 

Bonitatem  et  disciplinam, 
et  scientiam  doce  me  :  *  quia 
mandatis  tuis  credidi. 

Priusquam  humiliarer  ego 
deliqui  :  *  propterea  elo- 
quium  tuum  custodivi. 

Bonus  es  tu :  *  et  in  boni- 
tate  tua  doce  me  justilica- 
tiones  tuas. 

Multiplicata  est  super  me 
iniquitas  superbomm ;  *  ego 
autem  in  toto  corde  meo 
scrutabor  mandata  tua. 

Coagulatum  est  sicut  lac 
cor  eorum  :  ♦  ego  vero  legem 
tuam  meditatus  sum. 

Bonum  mibi  quia  humi- 
liasti  me  :  ♦  ut  discam  justi- 
ficationes  tuas. 

Bonum  mihi  lex  oris  tm : 
*  super  millia  auri  et  ar- 
genti. 

Manus  tuse  fecerunt  me, 
et  plasmaverunt  me :  *  da 
inihi  intellectum,  et  discam 
mandata  tua. 

Qui  timcnt  te,  videbunt 
me  et  Isetabuntur:  •  quia 
in  verba  tua  supersperavi. 

Cognovi,  Domino,  quia 
Bequitas  judicia  tua,  ♦  et  m 
veritate  tua  humiliasti  me. 


them  that  fear  thee,  and  that 
keep  thy  commandments. 

The  earth,  O  Lord,  is  full 
of  thy  mercy:  teach  me  thy 
justifications. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 

Thou  hast  done  well  with 
thy  servant,  O  Lord,  according 
to  thy  word. 

Teach    me     goodness,    and 
discipline,     and    knowledge  : 
for  I  have  believed  thy  com- 
mandments. 1 
Before    I   was  humbled,    I       I 
offended:  therefore,  now  that       ] 
I  am  enJUjhttntd,  have  I  kept        ' 
thy  word. 

Thou  art  good  :  and,  in  thy 
goodness,  teach  me  thy  jus- 
tifications. 

The  iniquity  of  the  proud 
hath  been  multiplied  over  me : 
but  I  will  seek  thy  command- 
ments with  my  whole  heart. 

Their  heart  is  curdled  like 
milk :  but  I  have  meditated  on 
thy  law. 

It  is  good  for  me  that  thou  ■ 
hast  humbled  me,  that  I  may  \ 
learn  thy  justifications. 

Thy  wordy  which  is  the  law 
of  thy  mouth,  0  heavenly 
Father,  is  good  to  me  above 
thousands  of  gold  and  silver. 

Thy  hands  have  made  mo, 
and  formed  me:  give  me  un- 
derstanding, and  I  will  learn 
thy  commandments. 

They  that  fear  thee,  shall 
see  me  and  be  glad :  because  I 
have  greatly  hoped  in  thy 
words. 

I  know,  0  Lord,  that  thy 
judgments  are  equity :  and  in 
thy  truth  thou  hast  humbled 
me. 


SEXT. 


79 


Oil !  let  thy  mercy  be  for  my 
consolation,  according  to  thy 
word  imto  thy  servant. 

Let  thy  tender  mercies  come 
unto  me,  and  I  shall  live  :  for 
thy  law  is  my  meditation. 

Let  the  proud  be  ashamed, 
because  they  have  done  un- 
justly towards  me  :  but  I  will 
be  employed  in  thy  command- 
ments. 

Let  them  that  fear  thee  turn 
to  me :  and  they  that  know 
thy  testimonies. 

Let  my  heart  be  undefiled 
in  thy  justifications,  that  I 
may  not  be  confounded  on  the 
day  when  thou  comest  to  Judge 
me. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 


Fiat  misericordia  tua  ut 
consoletur  me  :  *  secundum 
eloquium  tuum  servo  tuo. 

Veniat  mihi  miseratio- 
nes  tuse,  et  vivam :  *  quia 
lex  tua  meditatio  mea  est. 

Confundantur  superbi, 
quia  injuste  iniquitatem 
fecerunt  in  me  :  *  ego  au- 
tem  exercebor  in  mandatis 
tuis. 

Convertantur  mihi  timen- 
tes  te :  *  et  qui  noverunt 
testimonia  tua. 

Fiat  cor  meum  immacu- 
latum  in  justificationibus 
tuis,*  ut  non  confundar. 


Gloria  Patri. 


The  Antiphon,  Capitulum,  Brief  Responsory,  Yer- 
sicle  and  Prayer  which  complete  the  Office  of  Tierce^ 
are  given,  in  their  proper  place,  on  the  Feasts  which 
are  being  kept. 


SEXT. 


^.  Incline  unto  mine  aid,  0 
God. 

B^.  0  Lord,  make  haste  to 
help  me. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 


f.  Deus  in  adjutorium 
meum  intende. 

&.  Domine,  ad  adjuvan- 
dum  me  festina. 

Gloria  Patri. 


HYMN. 


(Composed  hy  St.  Ambrose.) 
O  powerful  ruler,  God,  the        Rector  potens,  verax  Deus, 


very  truth,  who  regulatest  the 
vicissitudes  of  all  things,  thou 
lightest  up  the  morn  with 
splendour,  and  the  noon  with 
fiery  glow. 


Qui  temperas  rerum   vices, 
Splendore  mane  illuminas, 
Et  ignibus  meridiem. 


80 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Exstingue  flammaslitium ; 
Aufer  calorem  noxiiim, 
Confer  salutcm  corponim, 
Veramque  pacem  cordium. 

Praesta,  Pater  piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice, 
Cum  Spiritu  paraclito. 
Regnans  per  omne  saeculum. 

Amen. 


Quench  the  flames  of  dis- 
pute ;  remove  noxious  lieat  ; 
give  us  health  of  body,  and 
true  peace  of  heart. 

Hear  us,  most  merciful 
Father !  and  thou,  the  Son, 
equal  to  the  Father  !  and  thou, 
the  Spirit,  the  Comforter  ! 
reigning,  God  for  ever.  Amen. 


Division  of  Psalm  118. 


Defecit  in  Salutare  tuum 
anima  mea  :  *  et  in  verbum 
tuum  supersperavi. 

Defecenmt  oculi  moi  in 
oloquium  tuum :  *  dicentes  : 
Quando  consolaberis  me  ? 

Quia  f  actus  sum  sicut  uter 
in  pruina:  *  justificationes 
tuas  non  sum  oblitus. 

Quot  sunt  dies  servi  tui :  * 
quando  facies  de  persequen- 
tibus  me  judicium  ? 

Narravei-unt  niihi  iniqui 
f  abulationes :  *  scd  non  ut 
lex  tua. 

Omnia  mandata  tua  Veri- 
tas :  *  iniquc  persecuti  sunt 
me ;  adjuva  me. 

Paulo  mmus  consumma- 
verunt  me  in  terra:  *  ego 
autem  non  dcreliqui  man- 
data  tua. 

Secundum  misericordiam 
tuani  vivifica  me :  *  ct  cus- 
todian! tostimonia  oris  tui. 

In  ji}t(>nium,  Domiiie  :  * 
verbum  tuum  permanet  in 
coelo. 

In  gencrationcm  ct  go- 
ncrationem  Veritas  tua  :  * 
fundastiterram  et  permanet. 


My  soul  hath  fainted  after 
thy  Salvation,  {the  Saviour 
vhom  thou  promiseiht  me) :  and 
in  thy  word  I  have  very  much 
hoped. 

Mine  eyes  have  failed  for 
thy  word,  saj-ing  :  WTien  wilt 
thou  comfort  me  ? 

For  I  am  become  like  a  bottle 
in  the  frost :  I  have  not  for- 
gotten thy  justifications. 

/  sa  id  :  How  many  are  the 
days  of  thy  servant?  When 
wilt  thou  execute  judgment 
on  them  that  persecute  me  ? 

The  wicked  have  told  me 
fables :  but  not  as  thy  law. 

All  thy  statutes  are  truth  : 
they  have  persecuted  me  un- 
justly, do  thou  help  me. 

They  had  almost  made  an 
end  of  me  upon  earth :  but  I 
have  not  forsaken  thy  com- 
mandments. 

Quicken  thou  me  according 
to  thy  mercy  :  and  I  shall  keep 
the  testimonies  of  thy  mouth. 

For  ever,  O  Lord,  thy  word 
standeth  firm  in  heaven. 

Thy  truth  unto  all  genera- 
tions :  thou  hast  founded  the 
earth   and  it  continueth. 


SEXT. 


81 


By  thine  ordinance  the  day 
goeth  on :  for  all  things  serve 
thee. 

Unless  thy  law  had  been  my 
meditation  :  I  had  then  per- 
haps perished  in  my  abjec- 
tion. 

Thy  justifications  I  will 
never  forget :  for  by  them  thou 
hast  given  me  life. 

I  am  thine,  save  thou  me  : 
for  I  have  sought  thy  justifi- 
cations. 

The  wicked  have  waited  for 
me  to  destroy  me  :  but  I  have 
understood  thy  testimonies. 

I  have  seen  an  end  of  all 
perfection :  thy  commandment 
is  exceeding  broad. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 

0  how  have  I  loved  thy  law, 
0  Lord :  it  is  my  meditation 
all  the  day. 

Through  thy  commandment, 
thou  hast  made  me  wiser  than 
mine  enemies  :  for  it  is  ever 
with  me. 

1  have  understood  more  than 
all  my  teachers :  because  thy 
testimonies  are  my  meditation. 

I  have  had  understanding 
above  ancients  :  because  I  have 
sought  thy  commandments. 

I  have  restrained  my  feet 
from  every  evil  way  :  that  I 
may  keep  thy  words. 

I  have  not  declined  from  thy 
judgments,  because  thou  hast 
set  me  a  law. 

How  sweet  are  thy  words  to 
my  palate :  more  than  honey 
to  my  mouth. 

By  thy  commandments,  I 
have  had  understanding:  there- 
fore have  I  hated  every  way  of 
iniquity. 

VOL.  X. 


Ordinatione  tua  perseve- 
rat  dies  :  *  quoniam  omnia 
serviunt  tibi. 

Nisi  quod  lex  tua  medita- 
tio  mea  est :  *  tunc  forte  pe- 
riissem  in  humilitate  mea. 

In  seternum  non  oblivis- 
car  justificationes  tuas :  * 
quia  in  ipsis  vivificasti  me. 

Tuus  sum  ego,  salvum  me 
fac  :  *  quoniam  justificatio- 
nes tuas  exquisivi. 

Me  exspectaverunt  pecca- 
tores  ut  perderent  me :  * 
testimonia  tua  intellexi. 

Omnis  consummationis 
vidi  finem :  *  latum  man- 
datum  tuum  nimis. 

Gloria  Patri. 

.  Quomodo  dilexi  legem 
tuam,  Domine  :  *  tota  die 
meditatio  mea  est. 

Super  inimicos  jneos  pru- 
dentem  me  fecisti  mandato 
tuo :  *  quia  in  setemum 
mihi  est. 

Super  omnes  docentes  me 
intellexi :  *  quia  testimonia 
tua  meditatio  mea  est. 

Super   senes   intellexi  : 
quia  mandata  tua  qusesivi. 

Ab  omni  via  mala  prohi- 
bui  pedes  meos  :  *  ut  custo- 
diam  verba  tua. 

A  judiciis  tuis  non  decli- 
navi  :  *  quia  tu  legem  posu- 
isti  mihi. 

Quam  dulcia  faucibus 
meis  eloquia  tua :  *  super 
mel  ori  meo. 

A  mandatis  tuis  intel- 
lexi :  *  propterea  odivi  om- 
nem  viam  iniquitatis. 


G 


82 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Luccrna  pcdibus  mcis  ver- 
bmntuuni:*  et  lumen  se- 

mitis  meis.  _ 

Juravi,etstatm:»custo- 

dire  judicia  justitise  tuae. 

HumiHatus  sum  usque- 
quaquc,  Dominc :  *  vivi- 
fica  me   secundum  verbum 

tuum.  .  , 

Toluntaria  ons  mei  bene- 
placita  fac,  Domine :  et 
judicia  tua  doce  me. 

Anima  mea  in  manibus 
meis  semper:  *  et  legem 
tuam  non  sum  oblitus. 

Posuerunt  peccatores  la- 
queum  mibi  :  *  et  de  manda- 
tis  tuis  non  erravi.    , 

Ha?reditate  acqmsivitesti- 
monia  tua  in  setemum:  * 
quia   exsultatio   cordis  mei 

sunt.  J  - 

Inclinavi  cor  mcum  ad  la- 

ciendas   justificationcs   tuas 

in  setemum  :  *  propter  retn- 

butionem. 
Gloria  Patri. 

Iniquos  odio  babui :  *  et 
legem  tuam  dilexi. 

Adjutoret  susceptor  mens 
es  tu  :  *  et  in  verbimi  tuimi 
supersperavi.  ,    ^ 

Dcclinate  a  me,  mahgni : 

et   scrutabor   mandata  Dei 

mei.  . 

Suscipe  me  secundum  elo- 
quium  tuum,  et  ^nvam:  * 
et  non  conf  undas  me  ab  cx- 
spectatione  mea. 

Adjuva  me,  et  salvus  ero  : 
*  et  mcditabor  in  justifica- 
tionibus  tuis  semper. 

Sprcv-isti  omnes  disceden- 
tes  a  judiciis  tuis:  *  quia 


Thy  word  is  a  lamp  unto 
my  feet,  and  a  ligbt  to  my 
paths. 

I  have  sworn  and  am  deter- 
mined, to  keep  the  judgments 
of  thy  justice. 

I  have  been  humbled,  0 
Lord,  exceedingly  :  quicken 
thou  me,  according  unto  thy 
word. 

The  free  offerings  of  my 
mouth  make  acceptable,  O 
Lord  :  and  teach  me  thy  judg- 
ments. 

My  soul  is  continually  in 
my  hands:  and  I  have  not 
forgotten  thy  law. 

Sinners  have  laid  a  snare 
for  me :  but  I  have  not  erred 
from  thy  precepts. 

I  have  purchased  thy  testi- 
monies for  an  inheritance  for 
evet :  because  they  are  the  joy 
of  my  heart. 

I  have  inclined  my  heart  to 
do  thy  justifications  for  ever, 
for  the  reward. 


Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 

I  have  hated  the  unjust :  and 
have  loved  thy  law. 

Thou  art  my  helper  and  my 
protector :  and  in  thy  word  I 
have  greatly  hoped. 

Depart  from  me,  ye  malig- 
nant:  and  I  -vstU  search  the 
commandments  of  my  God. 

Uphold  me  according  to  thy 
word,  and  I  shall  live:  and  let 
me  not  be  confoimded  in  my 
expectation. 

Help  me,  and  I  shall  be 
saved  :  and  I  ynH  meditate  al- 
ways on  thy  justifications. 

Thou  hast  despised  all  them 
that  fall  off  from   thy  judg- 


NONE. 


83 


ments;  for  their  thought  is 
unjust. 

I  have  accounted  all  the 
sinners  of  the  earth  prevari- 
cators :  therefore  have  I  loved 
thy  testimonies. 

Pierce  thou  my  flesh  with 
thy  fear :  for  I  am  afraid  of 
thy  judgments. 

I  have  done  judgment  and 
justice :  give  me  not  up  to 
them  that  slander  me. 

Uphold  thy  servant  unto 
good :  let  not  the  proud  calum- 
niate me. 

Mine  eyes  have  fainted  after 
thy  salvation  :  and  for  the 
word  of  thy  justice. 

Deal  with  thy  servant  ac- 
cording to  thy  mercy :  and 
teach  me  thy  justifications. 

I  am  thy  servant :  give  me 
understanding,  that  I  may 
know  thy  testimonies. 

It  is  time,  O  Lord,  to  do : 
they  have  dissipated  thy  law. 

Therefore  have  I  loved  thy 
commandments,  above  gold 
and  the  topaz. 

Therefore  was  I  directed  to 
all  thy  commandments :  I  have 
hated  all  wicked  ways. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 


injusta  cogitatio  eorum. 

Praevaricantes  reputavi 
omnes  peccatores  terrse :  * 
ideo  dilexi  testimonia  tua. 

Confige  timore  tuo  cames 
meas  :  *  a  judiciis  enim  tuis 
timui. 

Feci  judicium  et  justi- 
tiam  :  *  non  tradas  me  ca- 
lumniantibus  me. 

Suscipe  servum  tuum  in 
bonum  :  *  non  calumnientur 
me  superbi. 

Oculi  mei  deec  erunt  in 
Salutare  tuum  :  *  et  in  elo- 
quium  justitiae  tuae. 

Fac  cum  servo  tuo  secun- 
dum   misericordiam    tuam  : 

*  et  justificationes  tuas  doce 
me. 

Servus  tuus  sum  ego  :  * 
da  mihi  intellectum,  ut  sciam 
testimonia  tua. 

Tempus  faciendi,  Domi- 
ne :  *  dissipaverunt  legem 
tuam. 

Ideo  dilexi  mandata  tua  : 

*  super  aurum  et  topazion. 

Propterea  ad  omnia  man- 
data  tua  dirigebar:  *  om- 
nem  viam  iniquam  odio 
habui. 

Gloria  Patri. 


The  Antiphon,  Capitulum,  Response,  Brief,  Yersicle 
and  Prayer,  which  complete  the  Office  of  Sext,  are 
given  on  the  respective  Feasts. 


NONE. 


y.  Incline  unto  mine  aid,  etc. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 


y.  Deus,inadjutorium,  efc. 
Gloria  Patri. 


84 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


HYMN. 


Eeniiu  Deus  tenax  vigor, 
Immotus  in  te  pemianens, 
Lucis  dinmaB  tempora 
Successibus  determinans. 

Largire  lumen  vespere, 
Quo  vita  nusquam  decidat ; 
Sed  prremium  mortis  sacra3 
Perennis  instet  gloria. 

Praesta,  Pater  piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito, 
Regnans  per  omne  sseculimi. 

Amen. 


O  God,  thou  power  that 
holdest  all  things,  abiding  im- 
movable in  thyself,  thou  de- 
t^miinest,  by  their  changes 
the  seasons  of  the  days. 

Grant  us  light  at  the  even- 
ing of  our  time,  whereby  life 
may  nowhere  droop  I  but  may 
eternal  glory  soon  be  the  re- 
compense of  a  holy  death. 

Hear  us,  most  merciful 
Father  I  'and  thou  the  Son 
equal  to  the  Father  I  and  thou 
the  Spirit,  the  Comforter  I 
reigning  God  for  ever. 

Amen. 


Division  of  Psalm  118. 


Mirabilia  t^stimoniatua :  * 
ideo  scrutata  est  ea  anima 
mea. 

Declaratio  sermonum  tuo- 
rum  illuminat :  *  et  intel- 
lectum  dat  parvulis. 

Os  meum  aperui,  et  at- 
traxi  spiritum  :  *  quia  man- 
data  tua  desiderabam. 

Aspice  in  me,  et  miserere 
mei:  *  secundum  judicium 
dUigentium  nomen  tuiun. 

Gressus  nicos  dirige  se- 
cundum eloquium  tuum :  * 
et  non  dominetur  mei  omnis 
injustitia. 

Rcdime  me  a  calumniis 
hominum :  *  ut  custodiam 
mandata  tua. 

Faciem  tuam  illumina  su- 
per servum  tuum  :  *  et  doce 
me  justiiicationes  tuas. 


Thy  testimonies  are  wonder- 
ful :  therefore  my  soul  hath 
sought  them. 

The  declaration  of  thy  words 
giveth  light :  and  giveth  un- 
derstanding to  little  ones. 

I  opened  my  mouth,  and 
panted :  because  I  longed  for 
thy  conmiandments. 

Look  thou  upon  me,  and 
have  mercy  on  me,  according 
to  the  judgment  of  them  that 
love  thy  name. 

Direct  my  steps  according 
to  thy  word  :  and  let  no 
iniquity  have  dominion  over 
me. 

Redeem  me  from  the  ca- 
lumnies of  men  :  that  I  may 
keep  thy  commandments. 

Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon 
thy  servant  :  and  teach  me 
thy  justifications. 


NONE. 


85 


Mine  eyes  have  sent  fortli 
springs  of  water  :  because  they 
have  not  kept  thy  law. 

Thou  art  just,  O  Lord,  and 
thy  judgment  is  right. 

Thou  hast  commanded  jus- 
tice thy  testimonies  :  and  thy 
truth  exceedingly. 

My  zeal  hath  made  me  pine 
away  :  because  mine  enemies 
forgot  thy  words. 

Thy  Word  is  exceedingly 
refined  :  and  thy  servant  hath 
loved  It. 

I  am  very  young  and  de- 
spised ;  but  I  forget  not  thy 
justifications. 

Thy  justice  is  justice  for 
ever :  and  thy  law  is  the  truth. 

Trouble  and  anguish  have 
found  me ;  thy  commandments 
are  my  meditation. 

Thy  testimonies  are  justice 
for  ever  :  give  me  understand- 
ing, and  I  shall  live. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 

I  cried  with  my  whole  heart, 
hear  me,  O  Lord :  I  will  seek 
thy  justifications. 

I  cried  unto  thee,  save  me  : 
that  I  may  keep  thy  com- 
mandments. 

I  prevented  the  dawning  of 
the  day,  and  cried  :  because 
in  thy  words  I  very  much 
hoped. 

Mine  eyes  unto  thee  have 
prevented  the  morning:  that 
I  might  meditate  on  thy 
words. 

Hear  thou  my  voice,  O  Lord, 
according  to  thy  mercy  :  and 
quicken  me,  according  to  thy 
judgment. 


Exitus  aquarum  deduxe- 
runt  oculi  mei  :  *  quia  non 
custodierunt  legem  tuam. 

Justus  es,  Domine :  *  et 
rectum  judicium  tuum. 

Mandasti  justitiam  testi- 
monia  tua  :  *  et  veritatem 
tuam  nimis. 

Tabescere  me  fecit  zelus 
meus :  *  quia  obUti  sunt 
verba  tua  inimici  mei. 

Ignitum  Eloquium  tuum 
vehementer  :  *  et  servus  tuus 
dilexit  illud. 

Adolescentulus  sum  ego 
et  contemptus  :  *  justifica- 
tiones  tuas  non  sum  oblitus. 

Justitia  tua,  justitia  in 
seternum :  *  et  lex  tua  Veri- 
tas. 

Tribulatio  et  angustia  in- 
venerunt  me  :  *  mandata  tua 
meditatio  mea  est. 

JEquitas  testimonia  tua 
in  seternum :  *  intellectum 
da  mihi,  et  vivam. 

Gloria  Patri. 

Clamavi  in  toto  corde 
meo,  exaudi  me,  Domine:* 
justificationes  tuas  requi- 
ram. 

Clamavi  ad  te,  salvum 
me  f ac  :  *  ut  custodiam  man- 
data  tua. 

Praeveni  in  maturitate,  et 
clamavi :  *  quia  in  verba 
tua  supersperavi. 

Prsevenerunt  oculi  mei  ad 
te  diluculo  :  *  ut  meditarer 
eloquia  tua. 

Vocem  meam  audi  secun- 
dum misericordiam  tuam, 
Domine  :  *  et  secundum  ju- 
dicium tuum  vivifica  me. 


86 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Apprbpinquavenint  perse- 
qucntes  me  iniquitati :  *  a 
lege  autem  tua  longe  facti 
sunt. 

Prope  es  tu,  Domine  :  *  et 
omnes  vise  tuae  Veritas. 

Initio  cognovi  de  testimo- 
niis  tuis  :  *  quia  in  aetemum 
fundasti  ea. 

Tide  humilitatem  meam, 
et  eripe  me :  *  quia  legem 
tuam  non  sum  oblitus. 

Judica  judicium  meum, 
et  redime  me  :  *  propter  elo- 
quiiim  tuum  vivifica  me. 

Longe  a  peccatoribus  sa- 
lus:  *  quia  justificationes 
tuas  non  exquisierunt. 

Misericordiae  tuae  mtdtae, 
Domine  :  *  secundum  judi- 
cium tuum  vivifica  me. 

Multi  qui  persequuntur 
me,  et  tribulant  me :  *  a 
testimoniis  tuis  non  decli- 
navi. 

Yidi  praevaricantes,  et  ta- 
bescebam :  *  quia  eloquia 
tua  non  custodienint. 

Tide  quoniam  mandata 
tua  dilexi,  Domine :  *  in 
misericordia  tua  vivifica 
me. 

Principium  verborum  tuo- 
rum  Veritas  :  ♦  in  aetemum 
omnia  judicia  justitiae  tuae. 

Gloria  Patri. 

Principes  persecuti  sunt 
me  gratis  :  *  et  a  verbis  tuis 
f ormidavit  cor  meum. 

Laetabor  ego  super  elo- 
quia tua :  *  sicut  qui  invenit 
spolia  multa. 

Iniquitatc'm  odio  habui, 
et  abominatus  sum :  *  legem 
autem  tuam  dilexi. 


They  that  persecute  me  have 
drawn  nigh  to  iniquity  :  but 
they  have  gone  far  off  from 
thy  law. 

Thou  art  near,  0  Lord  :  and 
all  thy  ways  are  truth. 

I  have  known,  from  the  be- 
ginning, concerning  thy  tes- 
timonies :  that  thou  hast 
founded  them  for  ever. 

See  my  humiliation,  and 
deliver  me  :  for  I  have  not 
forgotten  thy  law. 

Judge  my  judgment,  and 
redeem  me  :  quicken  thou  me, 
for  thy  word's  sake. 

Salvation  is  far  from  sinners; 
because  they  have  not  sought 
thy  justifications. 

Many,  O  Lord,  are  thy  mer- 
cies ;  quicken  me,  according  to 
thy  judgment. 

Many  are  they  that  perse- 
cute me,  and  afflict  me  :  but  I 
have  not  declined  from  thy 
testimonies. 

I  beheld  the  transgressors, 
and  I  pined  away ;  because 
they  kept  not  thy  words. 

Behold  I  I  have  loved  thy 
commandments,  O  Lord  : 
quicken  me  thou,  in  thy 
mercy. 

The  beginning  of  thy  word 
is  truth  :  all  the  judgments  of 
thy  justice  are  for  ever. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 

Princes  have  persecuted  me, 
without  cause  :  and  my  heart 
hath  been  in  awe  of  thy  words. 

I  will  rejoice  at  thy  words, 
as  one  that  hath  found  great 
spoil. 

I  have  hated  and  abhorred 
iniquity  ;  but  I  have  loved  thy 
law. 


NONE. 


87 


Seven  times  a  day  I  have 
given  praise  unto  thee,  for  the 
judgments  of  thy  justice. 

Much  peace  have  they  that 
love  thy  law,  and  to  them 
there  is  no  stumbling-block. 

I  looked  for  thy  salvation, 
0  Lord  ;  and  I  loved  thy  com- 
mandments. 

My  soul  hath  kept  thy  tes- 
timonies, and  hath  loved  them 
exceedingly. 

I  have  kept  thy  command- 
ments and  thy  testimonies  ; 
because  all  my  ways  are  in 
thy  sight. 

Let  my  supplication,  O 
Lord,  come  near  in  thy  sight : 
give  me  understanding  accord- 
ing to  thy  word. 

Let  my  request  come  in 
before  thee ;  deliver  thou  me 
according  to  thy  word. 

My  lips  shall  utter  a  hymn, 
when  thou  shalt  teach  me  thy 
justifications. 

My  tongue  shall  pronounce 
thy  word  :  because  all  thy 
commandments  are  justice. 

Let  thy  hand  be  with  me,  to 
save  me  ;  for  I  have  ohosen 
thy  precepts. 

I  have  longed  for  thy  Sal- 
vation, O  Lord ;  and  thy  law 
is  my  meditation. 

My  soul  shall  live,  and  shall 
praise  thee  ;  and  thy  judg- 
ments shall  help  me. 

I  have  gone  astray  like  a 
sheep  that  is  lost  :  seek  thy 
servant,  because  I  have  not 
forgotten  thy  commandments. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  etc. 

The  Antiphon,  Capitulum,  Eesponse,  Brief,  Yer- 
sicle  and  Prayer,  which  complete  the  Office  of  None, 
are  given  on  the  respective  Feasts. 


Septies  in  die  laudem 
dixi  tibi:  *  super  judicia 
justitise  tuae. 

Pax  multa  diligentibus 
legem  tuam :  *  et  non  est 
illis  scandalum. 

Exspectabam  Salutare 
tuum,  Domine  :  *  et  man- 
data  tua  dilexi. 

Custodivit  anima  mea  tes- 
timonia  tua  :  *  et  dilexit  ea 
vehementer. 

Servavi  mandata  tua,  et 
testimonia  tua :  *  quia  omnes 
viae  mese  in  conspectu  tuo. 

Appropinquet  deprecatio 
mea  in  conspectu  tuo,  Do- 
mine :  *  juxta  eloquium 
tuum  da  mihi  intellectum. 

Intret  postulatio  mea  in 
conspectu  tuo,  *  secundum, 
eloquium  tuum  eripe  me. 

Eructabunt  labia  mea 
hymnum  :  *  cum  docueris 
me  justificationes  tuas. 

Pronuntiabit  lingua  mea 
eloquium  tuum  :  *  quia 
omnia  mandata  tua  aequitas. 

Fiat  manus  tua,  ut  salvet 
me  :  *  quoniam  mandata 
tua  elegi. 

Concupivi  Salutare  tuum, 
Domine  :  *  et  lex  tua  medita- 
tio  mea  est. 

Vivet  anima  mea,  et  lau- 
dabit  te  :  *  et  judicia  tua 
adjuvabunt  me. 

Erravi  sicut  ovis  quae  pe- 
riit  :  *  quaere  servum  tuum, 
quia  mandata  tua  non  sum 
oblitus. 

Gloria  Patri. 


88  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST*. 


CHAPTER  THE  EIGHTH. 

ON    THE    OFFICE    OF    VESPERS   FOR   SUNDAY  AND  FEASTS, 
DURING    THE   TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  Office  of  Yespers,  or  Even  Song,  consists  firstly 
of  the  five  following  Psalms.  For  certain  Feasts,  one 
or  other  of  these  Psalms  are  changed  for  others,  which 
are  more  appropriate  to  the  day  ;  but  those  we  now 
give,  are  the  ones  for  Sunday's  Vespers. 

After  the  Pater  and  Ave  have  been  said  in  secret, 
the  Church  commences  this  Hour  with  her  favourite 
supplication : 

>''.  Deus,    in    adjutorium  ^.  IncHne  unto  mine  aid,  O 

meum  intende.  God. 

gt.  Domine,  ad  adjuvan-  gt.  O  Lord,  make  haste  to 

dum  me  festina.  help  me. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 

Spiritui  Sancto ;  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 

Ghost. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et  As  it  was  in  the  beginning, 

nunc  et  semper,  et  in  ssecu-  is    now,    and    ever   shall    be, 

la  saeculorum.    Amen.  Alle-  world   without   end.      Amen, 

luia.  Alleluia. 

Ant.  Dixit  Dominus.  AxT.  The  Lord  said. 

The  first  Psalm  is  a  prophecy  of  the  future  glories 
of  the  Messias.  The  Son  of  David  shall  sit  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  heavenly  Father.  He  is  King;  he 
is  Priest ;  he  is  the  Son  of  Man,  and  Son  of  God. 
His  enemies  will  attack  him,  but  he  will  crush  them. 
He  will  be  humbled ;  but  this  voluntary  humiliation 
will  lead  him  to  highest  glory. 


SUNDAY  S   VESPERS. 


89 


Psalm  109. 


The  Lord  said  to  my  Lord, 
7iis  Son  :  Sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand,  and  reign  ivith  me. 

Until,  on  the  day  of  thy  last 
coming,  I  make  thy  enemies 
thy  footstool. 

0  Christ  !  the  Lord,  thy 
Father,  will  send  forth  the 
sceptre  of  thy  power  out  of 
Sion  :  from  thence  rule  thou  in 
the  midst  of  thy  enemies. 

With  thee  is  the  principality 
in  the  day  of  thy  strength,  in 
the  brightness  of  the  Saints  : 
For  the  Father  hath  said  to 
thee :  From  the  womb  before 
the  day-star  I  begot  thee. 

The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and 
he  will  not  repent  :  he  hath 
said,  speaking  of  thee,  the  God- 
Man  :  Thou  art  a  Priest  for 
ever,  according  to  the  order  of 
Melchisedech. 

Therefore,  0  Father,  the 
Lord  thy  Son  is  at  thy  right 
hand  :  he  hath  broken  kings 
in  the  day  of  his  wrath. 

He  shall  also  judge  among 
nations  :  in  that  terrible  coming, 
he  shall  fill  the  ruins  of  the 
world :  he  shall  crush  the  heads 
in  the  land  of  many. 

He  cometh  now  in  humility  ; 
he  shall  drink,  in  the  way,  of 
the  torrent  of  sufferings  :  there- 
fore, shall  he  lift  up  the  head. 

AiSTT.  Tho  Lord  said  to  my 
Lord,  sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand. 

Ant.  Faithful. 


Dixit  Dominus  Domino 
meo  :  *  Sede  a  dextris  meis. 

Donee  ponam  inimicos 
tuos  :  *  scabellum  pedum 
tuorum. 

Virgam  virtutis  tuse  emit- 
tet  Dominus  ex  Sion  :  *  do- 
minare  in  medio  inimicorum 
tuorum. 

Tecum  principium  in  die 
virtutis  tuae  in  splendoribus 
Sanctorum  :  *  ex  utero  ante 
luciferum  genui  te. 


Juravit  Dominus,  et  non 
.poenitebit  eum  :  *  Tu  es  Sa- 
cerdos  in  setemum  secun- 
dum ordinem  Melchisedech. 


Dominus  a  dextris  tuis  :  * 
confregit  in  die  irse  suae  re- 
ges. 

Judicabit  in  nationibus, 
implebit  ruinas  :  *  conquas- 
sabit  capita  in  terra  multo- 
rum. 

De  torrente  in  via  bibet :  * 
propterea  exaltabit  caput. 


Ant.  Dixit  Dominus  Do- 
mino meo,  sede  a  dextris 
meis. 

Ant.  Fidelia. 


The  following  Psalm  commemorates  tlie  mercies  of 


90 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


God  to  his  people, — the  promised  Covenant^ — the 
Redemptioiiy — his  Fidelity  to  his  word.  But  it  also 
tells  us,  that  the  Name  of  the  Lord  is  terrible  because 
it  is  holy  ;  and  concludes  by  admonishing  us,  that  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  tcisdom. 

Psalm  110. 


Confitebor  tibi,  Domine, 
in  toto  corde  meo  :  *  in  con- 
cilio  justormn  et  congrega- 
tione. 

Magna  opera  Domini :  * 
exquisita  in  omnes  volun- 
tatis ejus. 

Confessio  et  magnificentia 
opus  ejus  :  *  et  justitia  ejus 
nianet  in  saeculum  saeculi. 

Memoriam  fecit  mirabi- 
lium  suonim,  misericors  et 
niiserator  Doininus  :  *  es- 
cam  dedit  timentibus  se. 


Memor  erit  in  saeculum 
testamenti  sui  :  *  virtutem 
operum  suonim  annuntia- 
bit  populo  suo. 

Ut  det  illis  haereditatem 
gentium  :  *  opera  manuum 
ejus  Veritas  et  judicium. 

Fidelia  omnia  mandata 
ejus,  confirmata  in  saeculum 
saeculi  :  *  facta  in  veritate 
et  equitate. 

Redemptionem  misit  po- 
pulo suo  :  *  mandavit  in 
aetemum  testamentum  suum. 

Sanctum  et  tcrribile  No- 
men  ejus  :  *  initium  sapien- 
tiae  timor  Domini. 

Intellectus  bonus  omnibus 


I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord 
with  my  whole  heart :  in  the 
counsel  of  the  just,  and  in  the 
congregation. 

Great  are  the  works  of  the 
Lord  :  sought  out  according 
to  all  his  wills. 

His  work  is  praise  and  mag- 
nificence :  and  his  justice 
continueth  for  ever  and  ever. 

He  hath  made  a  remem- 
brance of  his  wonderful  works, 
being  a  merciful  and  gracious 
Lord  :  he  is  the  Bread  of  life, 
he  hath  given  food  to  them 
that  fear  him. 

He  will  be  mindful  for  ever 
of  his  covenant  with  men  :  he 
will  show  forth  to  his  people 
the  power  of  his  works. 

That  he  may  give  to  his 
Church  the  inheritance  of  the 
Gentiles  :  the  works  of  his 
hands  are  truth  and  judgment. 

All  his  commandments  are 
faithful,  confirmed  for  ever 
and  ever  :  made  in  truth  and 
equity. 

He  hath  sent  redemption  to 
his  people  ;  he  hath  thereby 
commanded  his  covenant  for 
ever. 

Holy  and  terrible  is  his 
name  :  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is 
the  beginning  of  wisdom. 

A    good   understanding   to 


SUNDAY  S    VESPERS. 


91 


all  that  do  it  :  his  praise  con- 
tinueth  for  ever  and  ever. 

Ant.  Faithful  are  all  his 
commandments  ;  confirmed 
for  ever  and  ever. 

Ant.  In  his  commandments. 


facientibus  eum  :  *  laudatio 
ejus  manet  in  sseculum  sse- 
culi. 

Ant.  Fidelia  omnia  man- 
data  ejus  ;  confirmata  in  sse- 
culum saeculi. 

Ant.  In  mandatis. 


The  next  Psalm  sings  the  happiness  of  the  just 
mauy  and  his  hopes  on  the  day  of  his  Lord's  coming. 
It  tells  us,  likewise,  of  the  confusion  of  the  sinner 
who  shall  have  despised  the  mysteries  of  God's  love 
towards  mankind. 


Psalm  111. 


Blessed  is  the  man  that 
feareth  the  Lord  :  he  shall  de- 
light exceedingly  in  his  com- 
mandments. 

His  seed  shall  be  mighty 
upon  earth  :  the  generation 
of  the  righteous  shall  be 
blessed. 

Glory  and  wealth  shall  be  in 
his  house  :  and  his  justice  re- 
maineth  for  ever  and  ever. 

To  the  righteous  a  light  is 
risen  up  in  darkness  :  tliat  light 
is  the  Lord,  who  is  merciful, 
and  compassionate,  and  just. 

Acceptable  is  the  man  that 
showeth  mercy  and  lendeth ; 
he  shall  order  his  very  words 
with  judgment  :  because  he 
shall  not  be  moved  for  ever. 

The  just  shall  be  in  ever- 
lasting remembrance  :  he  shall 
not  fear  the  evil  hearing. 

His  heart  is  ready  to  hope 
in  the  Lord ;  his  heart  is 
strengthened  :  he  shall  not  be 
moved  until  he  look  over  his 
enemies. 


Beatus  vir  qui  timet  Do- 
minum  :  *  in  mandatis  ejus 
volet  nimis. 

Potens  in  terra  erit  semen 
ejus  :  *  generatio  rectorum 
benedicetur. 

Gloria  et  divitiae  in  domo 
ejus  :  *  et  justitia  ejus  ma- 
net in  sseculum  sseciili. 

Exortum  est  in  tenebris 
lumen  rectis  :  *  misericors, 
et  miserator,  et  Justus. 

Jucundus  homo,  qui  mi- 
seretur  et  commodat,  dis- 
ponet  sermones  suos  in  ju- 
dicio  :  *  quia  in  setemum 
non  commovebitur. 

In  memoria  setema  erit 
Justus  :  *  ab  auditione  mala 
non  timebit. 

Paratum  cor  ejus  sperare 
in  Domino,  confirmatum  est 
cor  ejus  :  *  non  commove- 
bitur donee  despiciat  inimi- 
,  cos  suos. 


92 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Dispersit,  dedit  pauperi- 
bus ;  justitia  ejus  manet  in 
saeculmn  saeculi  :  *  comu 
ejus  exaltabitur  in  gloria. 

Peccator  videbit,  et  iras- 
cetur,  dentibus  suis  fremet 
et  tabescet  :  *  desiderium 
peccatorum  peribit. 

AxT.  In  mandatis  ejus 
cupit  niniis. 

AxT.  Sit  nomen  Domini. 


He  hath  distributed,  he  hath 
given  to  the  poor  ;  his  justice 
remaineth  for  ever  and  ever: 
his  horn  shall  be  exalted  in 
glory. 

The  wicked  shall  see,  and 
shall  be  angry :  he  shall  gnash 
with  his  t€cth,  and  pine  away  : 
the  desire  of  the  wicked  shall 
perish. 

AxT.  In  his  commandments 
he  delighted  exceedingly. 

AxT.  May  the  name  of  the 
Lord. 


The  Psalm,  Laudafe,  pucri,  is  a  Canticle  of  praise 
to  the  Lord,  who,  from  his  high  heaven,  has  taken 
pity  on  the  human  race,  and  has  vouchsafed  to  honour 
it  by  the  Incarnation  of  his  own  Son. 


Psalm  112. 


Laudate,  pueri,  Domi- 
nimi  :  *  laudate  Xomcn  Do- 
mini. 

Sit  Nomen  Domini  bene- 
dictum  :  *  ex  hoc  nunc,  et 
usque  in  sseculum. 

A  solis  ortu  usque  ad  oc- 
casum  :  *  laudabile  Nomen 
Domini. 

Excclsus  super  omnes  gcn- 
tcs  Dominus  .  *  et  super  coe- 
los  gloria  ejus. 

Quis  sicut  Dominus  Deus 
noster  qui  in  altis  habitat :  * 
et  humilia  respicit  in  coelo 
et  in  terra  ? 

Suscitans  a  terra  ino- 
pem  :  ♦  et  de  stercore  eri- 
gens  pauperem  : 

Ut  collocet  eum  cum  prin- 
cipibus  :  cum  principibus 
populi  sui. 


Praise  the  Lord,  ye  children ; 
praise  ye  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord  ;  from  henceforth  now 
and  for  ever. 

From  the  rising  of  the  sun 
unto  the  going  down  of  the 
same,  the  name  of  the  Lord  is 
worthy  of  praise 

The  ~      ■ 
nations  :  and  his  glory  above 
the  heavens. 

"Who  is  as  the  Lord  our  God, 
who  dwelleth  on  high  :  and 
looketh  down  on  the  low 
things  in  heaven  and  in 
earth  ? 

Raising  up  the  needy  from 
the  earth  :  and  lifting  up  the 
poor  out  of  the  dunghill. 

That  he  may  place  him  with 
princes  :  with  the  princes  of 
,  his  people. 


i 


Lord  is  high  above  all 


SUNDAY  S   VESPERS. 


93 


Wlao     maketh      a     barren        Qui  habitare  facit   steri- 


woman  to  dwell  in  a  house, 
the  joyful  mother  of  children. 

Ant.  May  the  name  of  the 
Lord  be  for  ever  blessed. 

Ant.  We  that  live. 


lem  in  domo  :  *  matrem 
filiorum  Isetantem. 

Ant.  Sit  nomen  Domini 
benedictum  in  ssecula. 

Ant.  Nos  qui  vivimus. 


The  fifth  Psalm,  In  exitti,  recounts  the  prodigies 
witnessed  under  the  ancient  Covenant :  they  were 
figures f  whose  realities  were  to  he  accomplished  in  the 
mission  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  came  to  deliver  Israel 
from  Egypt,  emancipate  the  Gentiles  from  their 
idolatry,  and  pour  out  a  blessing  on  every  man  who 
would  consent  to  fear  and  love  the  Lord. 


Psalm  113. 


When  Israel  went  out  of 
Egypt,  the  house  of  Jacob 
from  a  barbarous  people. 

Judea  was  made  his  sanc- 
tuary, Israel  his  dominion. 

The  sea  saw  and  fled ;  Jor- 
dan was  turned  back. 

The  mountains  skipped  like 
rams  :  and  the  hills  like  the 
lambs  of  the  flock. 

What  ailed  thee,  O  thou  sea, 
that  thou  didst  flee  :  and  thou, 
O  Jordan,  that  thou  wast 
turned  back  ? 

Ye  mountains,  that  ye 
skipped  like  rams  :  and  ye  hills 
like  lambs  of  the  flock  ? 

At  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
the  earth  was  moved,  at  the 
presence  of  the  God  of  Jacob. 

Who  turned  the  rock  into 
pools  of  water,  and  the  stony 
hills  into  fountains  of  waters. 

Not  to  us,  O  Lord,  not  to 


In  exitu  Israel  de  Mgy^- 
tb  :  *  domus  Jacob  de  po- 
pulo  barbaro  : 

Facta  est  Judaea  sanctifi- 
catio  ejus  :  *  Israel  potestas 
ejus. 

Mare  vidit,  et  fugit  :  * 
Jordanis  conversus  est  re- 
trorsum. 

Montes  exsultaverunt  ut 
arietes  :  *  et  colles  sicut  agni 
ovium. 

Quid  est  tibi,  mare,  quod 
fugisti  :  *  et  tu,  Jordanis, 
quia  conversus  es  retror- 
sum  ? 

Montes  exsultastis  sicut 
arietes  :  *  et  colles,  sicut 
agni  ovium  ? 

A  facie  Domini  mota  est 
terra  :  *  a  facie  Dei  Jacob. 

Qui  convertit  petram  in 
stagna  aquarum  :  *  et  ru- 
pem  in  fontes  aquarum. 

Non  nobis,  Domine,  non 


94 


TIMK    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


nobis  :  ♦  sed  Noinini  tnio  da 
gloriam. 

Super  misericordia  tua,  et 
veritate  tua  :  •  nequando 
dicant  gentes  :  TJbi  est  Deus 
eonim  ? 

Deus  autem  noster  in  cce- 
lo  :  *  omnia  qusecumque  vo- 
luit  fecit. 

Simulacra  gentium  argen- 
tum  et  aurum  :  *  opera 
manuum  hominum. 

Os  habent,  et  non  loquen- 
tur  :  *  oculos  habent,  et  non 
videbunt. 

Aures  habent,  et  non  au- 
dient  :  *  nares  habent,  et 
non  odorabunt. 

Manus  habent  et  non  pal- 
pabunt,  pedes  habent  et  non 
ambulabunt  :  *  non  clama- 
bunt  in  gutture  suo. 

Similes  illis  fiant  qui  fa- 
eiunt  ea :  *  et  omnes  qui 
confidunt  in  eis. 

Domus  Israel  speravit  in 
Domino  :  *  adjutor  eorum, 
et  protector  eorum  est. 

Domus  Aaron  speravit  in 
Domino  :  *  adjutor  eorum 
et  protector  eorum  est. 

Qui  timent  Doiuinum, 
speraverunt  in  Domino  :  * 
adjutor  eorum,  et  protec- 
tor eorum  est. 

Dominus  memor  fuit  nos- 
tri :  *  et  benedixit  nobis. 

Benedixit  domui  Israel  :  * 
benedixit  domui  Aaron. 

Benedixit  omnibus  qui  ti- 
ment Dominum  :  *  pusillis 
cum  majoribus. 

Adjiciat  Dominus  super 
vos  :  *  super  vos,  et  super 
filios  vestros. 


us  :  but  to  thy  Name  give 
glory. 

For  thy  mercy,  and  for  thy 
truth's  sake  :  lest  the  Gentiles 
should  say :  Where  is  their 
God? 

But  our  God  is  in  heaven  : 
he  hath  done  all  things  what- 
soever he  would. 

The  idols  of  the  Gentiles  are 
silver  and  gold  :  the  works  of 
the  hands  of  men. 

They  have  mouths,  and 
speak  not  :  they  have  eyes, 
and  see  not. 

They  have  ears,  and  hear 
not  :  they  have  noses,  and 
smell  not. 

They  have  hands,  and  feel 
not :  they  have  feet,  and  walk 
not :  neither  shall  they  cry  out 
through  their  throat. 

Let  them  that  make  them 
become  like  unto  them  :  and 
all  such  as  trust  in  them. 

The  house  of  Israel  hath 
hoped  in  the  Lord  :  he  is  their 
helper  and  their  protector. 

The  house  of  Aaron  hath 
hoped  in  the  Lord  :  he  is  their 
helper  and  their  protector. 

They  that  feared  the  Lord 
have  hoped  in  the  Lord:  he 
is  their  helper  and  their  pro- 
tector. 

The  Lord  hath  been  mind- 
ful of  us,  and  hath  blessed 
us. 

He  hath  blessed  the  house 
of  Israel :  he  hath  blessed  the 
house  of  Aaron. 

He  hath  blessed  all  that  fear 
the  Lord,  both  little  and 
great. 

May  the  Lord  add  blessings 
upon  you  :  upon  you,  and  upon 
your  children. 


SUNDAY  S   VESPERS. 


95 


Blessed  be  you  of  tte  Lord, 
who  m{ide  heaven  and  earth. 

The  heaven  of  heaven  is  the 
Lord's  :  but  the  earth  he  has 
given  to  the  children  of 
men. 

The  dead  shall  not  praise 
thee,  O  Lord :  nor  any  of  them 
that  go  down  to  hell. 

But  we  that  live  bless  the 
Lord  :  from  this  time  now  and 
for  ever. 

Ant.  We  that  live  bless  the 
Lord. 


Benedicti  vos  a  Domino  : 
qui  fecit  coelum  et  terram. 

Coelum  coeli  Domino  :  * 
terram  autem  dedit  filiis 
hominum. 

Non  mortui  laudabunt 
te,  Domine  :  *  neque  omnes 
qui  descendunt  in  infer- 
num. 

Sed  nos  qui  vivimus,  be- 
nedicimus  Domino  :  *  ex  hoc 
nunc  et  usque  in  saeculum. 

Ant.  Nos  qui  vivimus,  be- 
nedicimus  Domino. 


After  these  five  Psalms,  a  short  Lesson  from  the 
holy  Scriptures  is  read.  It  is  called  Capituhim,  he- 
cause  it  is  always  very  short.  The  ones  for  the 
several  Festivals  are  given  in  the  Proper  of  each. 
We  here  give  the  Capitulum  common  to  the  Sunday. 


CAPITULUM. 


('2  Cor.  i.J 


Blessed  be  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Father  of  mercies, 
and  the  God  of  all  consolation, 
who  comforteth  us  in  all  our 
tribulations. 

Bt.  Thanks  be  to  God. 


Benedictus  Deus  et  Pater 
Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi, 
Pater  misericordiarum  et 
Deus  totius  consolationis, 
qui  consolatur  nos  in  omni 
tribulatione  nostra. 

gt.  Deo  gratias. 


Then  follows  the  Hymn.  We  here  give  the  one 
for  Sundays.  It  was  composed  by  St.  Gregory  the 
Great.  It  sings  of  Creation,  and  celebrates  the  praises 
of  that  portion  of  it  which  was  called  forth  on  this 
first  day, — the  Light. 


96 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECX)ST. 


HYMN.* 


Lucis  Creator  optime, 
Lucem  dienim  proferens : 
Primordiis  lucis  novae, 
Mundi  parans  originem. 


Qui  mane  junctum  vesperi 
Diem  vocari  praecipis : 
Ulabitur  tetrum  chaos, 
Audi  preces  cum  fletibus. 

Ne  mens  gravata  crimine, 
Yitae  sit  exsul  munere  : 
Dum  nil  perenne  cogitat, 
Seseque  culpis  illigat. 

Coeleste  pulset  intimum, 
Vitale  tollat  praemium : 
Vitemus  omne  noxium, 
Purgemus  omne  pessimum. 


Praesta  Pater  piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito 
Regnans  per  omne  saeculum. 

Amen. 


O  infinitely  good  Creator  of 
the  Light !  by  thee  was  pro- 
duced the  Light  of  day,  pro- 
viding thus  the  world's  begin- 
ning with  the  beginning  of  the 
new-made  Light. 

Thou  biddest  us  call  the 
time  from  mom  till  eve,  Daif  ; 
this  Day  is  over  ;  dark  Night 
comes  on, — oh  !  hear  our  tear- 
ful prayers.  ' 

Let  not  our  soul,  weighed 
down  by  crime,  mis-spend  thy 
gift  of  life  :  and,  forgetting 
what  is  eternal,  be  earth-tied 
by  her  sins. 

Oh  !  may  we  strive  to  enter 
our  heavenly  home,  and  bear 
away  the  prize  of  life  :  may  we 
shun  what  would  injure  us, 
and  cleanse  our  soul  from  her 
defilements. 

Most  merciful  Father  I  and 
thou,  his  Only  Begotten  Son, 
co-equal  with  him,  reigning 
for  ever,  %\ath  the  Holy  Para- 
clete !  grant  this  our  prayer. 

Amen. 


»  According  to  the  Monastic  Rite,  it  is  as  follows  — 
Bt.  breve.     Quara  magnificata 


sunt,    *    Opera    tua    Domino. 
Quam. 

^.  Omnia  in  Sapientia  fecis- 
ti  *  Opera.  Gloria  Patri,  etc. 
Quam. 

Lucis  Creator  optime, 
Lucem  dierum  proferens ; 
Primordiis  lucis  novae, 
Mundi  parans  originem. 

Qui  mane  junctum  vesperi 
Diem  vocari  praecipis, 
Tetrum  chaos  iJlabitur, 
Audi  preces  cum  fletibus. 


Ne  mens  crravata  crimine, 
Vitte  sit  exsul  munere, 
Dum  nil  perenne  cogitat, 
Seseque  culpis  illigat. 

Coolorum  pulsat  intimum, 
Vitale  tollat  prajmium  : 
Vitemus  omne  noxium, 
Purgemug  omne  pessimum. 

Praesta,  Pater  piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice 
Cum  iSpiritu  Paraclito 
Regnans  per  omne  sasculum. 

Amen. 


SUNDAY  S   VESPERS. 


97 


The  Versicle  which  follows  the  Ilj-mn,  and  which 
we  here  give,  is  that  of  the  Sunday :  those  for  the 
Feasts  are  given  in  their  proper  places. 

f.  May  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  ^.  Dirigatur,  Domine, 
ascend  oratio  mea. 

gt.  Like  incense  in  thy  sight.         gt.  Sicut  incensum  in  con- 

spectu  tuo. 

Then  is  said  the  Magnificat  Antiphon,  which  is  to 
be  found  in  the  Proper.  After  this,  the  Church 
sings  the  Canticle  of  Mary,  the  Magnificat^  in  which 
are  celebrated  the  Divine  Maternity,  and  all  its  con- 
sequent blessings.  This  exquisitely  sweet  Canticle  is 
an  essential  part  of  the  Oifice  of  Vespers.  It  is  the 
evening  incense,  just  as  the  Canticle  Benedict  us  ^  at 
Lauds,  is  that  of  the  morning. 


OUR    LADY  S    CANTICLE. 

{St,  LuUe,  i.) 


My  soul  doth  magnify  the 
Lord; 


)ra; 

And  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced 

God  my  Saviour. 


m. 


Because  he  hath  regarded 
the  hum.ility  of  his  handmaid : 
for,  behold,  from  henceforth, 
all  generations  shall  call  me 
Blessed. 

Because  he  that  is  mighty 
hath  done  great  things  to  me  : 
and  holy  is  his  name. 

And  his  mercy  is  from  gene- 
ration unto  generation,  to 
them  that  fear  him. 

He  hath  showed  might  in 
his  arm :  he  hath  scattered  the 
proud  in  the  conceit  of  their 
heart. 

He  hath  put  down  the 
mighty  from  their  seat  :  and 
hath  exalted  the  humble. 

VOL.    X. 


Magnificat :  *  anima  mea 
Dommum ; 

Et  exsultavit  spiritus 
meus  :  *  in  Deo  Salutari 
meo. 

Quiarespexit  humilitatem 
ancillae  suae  :  *  ecce  enim  ex 
hoc  beatam  me  dicent  om- 
nes  generationes. 

Quia  fecit  mihi  magna  qui 

potens  est  :  *  et  sanctum 
Nomen  ejus. 

Et  misericordia  ejus  a 
progenie  in  progenies  :  *  ti- 
mentibus  eum. 

Fecit  potentiam  in  brachio 
suo  :  *  dispersit  sujDerbos 
mente  cordis  sui. 

Deposuit  potentes  de  se- 
de  :  *  et  exaltavit  humiles. 

H 


98 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Esurientes  implevit  bonis : 
*  et  divites  dimisit  inanes. 

Suscepit  Israel  piieniin. 
suum  :  *  recordatus  miseri- 
cordiae  suae, 

Sicut  locutus  est  ad  pa- 
tres  nostros  :  *  Abraham  et 
semini  ejus  in  ssecula. 


He  hath  filled  the  hungry 
with  good  things :  and  the  rich 
he  hath  sent  empty  away. 

He  hath  received  Israel  his 
servant,  being  mindful  of  his 
mercy, 

As  he  spoke  to  our  fathers, 
to  Abraham,  and  to  his  seed 
for  ever. 


The  Magnificat  Antiplion  is  then  repeated.  The 
Prayer,  or  Collect,  is  given  in  the  Proper  of  dach 
Feast  and  Sunday. 


y.  Benedicamus  Domino. 

Bt.  Deo  gratias. 

y.  Fidelium  animse  per 
misericordiam  Dei  requies- 
cant  in  pace, 

?:.  Amen. 


f.  Let  us  bless  the  Lord. 

Bt.  Thanks  be  to  God. 

^.  May  the  souls  of  the 
Faithful  departed,  through  the 
mercy  of  God,  rest  in  peace. 

gt.  Amen. 


COMPLINE. 


99 


CHAPTEE  THE  NINTH. 


ON   THE   OFFICE    OF   COMPLINE,    DURING  THE  TIME 
AFTER    PENTECOST. 

This  Office,  whicli  concludes  the  day,  commences  by 
a  warning  of  the  dangers  of  the  night :  then,  imme- 
diately follows  the  public  Confession  of  our  sins,  as  a 
powerful  means  of  propitiating  the  divine  justice,  and 
obtaining  God's  help,  now  that  we  are  going  to  spend 
so  many  hours  in  the  unconscious,  and,  therefore, 
dangerous  state  of  sleep,  which  is,  also,  such  an  image 
of  death . 

The  Lector,  addressing  the  Priest,  says  to  him : 

Pray,  Father,  give  thy  bles- 
sing. 


^.  Jube,  Domine  benedi- 
cere. 


The  Priest  answers  : 


May  the  Almighty  Lord 
gi'ant  us  a  quiet  night  and  a 
perfect  end. 

Bt.  Amen. 


Noctem  quietam,  et  fi- 
nem  perfectum.  concedat  no- 
bis Dominus  omnipotens. 

5i.  Amen. 


The  Lector  then  reads  these  words,  from  the  first 
Epistle  of  St.  Peter : 


Brethren,  be  sober  and 
watch  :  for  your  adversary  the 
devil  goes  about  like  a  roaring 
lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  de- 
vour :  resist  him,  being  strong 
in  faith.  But  thou,  O  Lord, 
have  mercy  on  us. 


Fratres:  sobrii  estote  et 
vigilate  :  quia  adversarius 
vester  diabolus,  tamquam 
leo  rugiens  circuit  quserens 
quem  devoret  :  cui  resistite 
fortes  in  fide.  Tu  autem, 
Domine,  miserere  nobis. 


The  Choir  answers  : 
gi.  Thanks  be  to  God.  gt.  Deo  gratias. 


100  TIME    AFTER   TENTECOST. 

Then,  the  Priest : 

V.  Adiutorium  nostrum  in        f.    ^^,  ^^^P,''     ""     ^^"^ 
nomine  Domini.  Name  of  the  Lord. 

The  Choir : 
R.  Qui  fecit  caelum  et  ter-        B^.  AVho  hath  maxie  heaven 
ram.  ^^^  ^^^^• 

Then  the  Lord's  Prayer  is  recited  in  secret ;  after 
which,  the  Priest  says  the  Confitcor,  and  when  he  has 
finished,  the  Choir  repeats  it. 

The  Priest,  having  pronounced  the  general  form  ot 
absolution,  says: 

f,  Converte    nos,    Deus,         ^^  Convert   us,  O  God  our 

't  mTe^iramtuama     'T^  turn  away  thine  a.- 
1  •  ger  from  us. 

V    Deus    in    adjutorium        t.  Incline  unto    mine  aid,   • 

TD^^^S^t-ad  adiuvan-    ""  t%  Lord,  make  haste  to 
dum  me  festina.  help  me. 

Gloria  Patri.  Glory,  etc. 

AXT.  Miserere.  Ant.  Have  mercy. 

The  ^rs^  Psalm  expresses  the  confidence  with  which 
the  just  man  sleeps  in  peace ;  but  the  wicked  know  not 
what  calm  rest  is. 

Psalm  4. 

Cum  invocarem  cxaudivit  When  I  called   upon    him 

mo  Dcus  justiti^  mo^  :  *  in  the  God  of  my  justice  heard 

Mbu^ltione  dilatasti  mihi.  me :  when  I  was  m  distress, 

thou  hast  enlarged  me. 

Miserere  mei :  *  ct  cxaudi  Have   mercy   on  me  :    and 

orationom  mcam.  hear  my  prayer. 

Fr hominum,  usquoquo  O  ye  sons  o   men   hojv  lon,^ 

oravi  corde  '^  *  ut  quid  dili-  will  ye  be  dull  of  heart?  wh> 

Itirvanftatem,  et\u«ritis  do   ye  love  vamty,  and  seek 

mendacium?  after  lymg  ? 


COMPLINE. 


101 


Know  ye,  also,  that  the 
Lord  hath  made  his  Holy  One 
wonderful:  the  Lord  will  hear 
me,  when  I  shall  cry  unto  him. 

Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not : 
the  things  ye  say  in  your 
hearts,  be  sorry  for  them  upon 
your  beds. 

Offer  up  the  sacrifice  of  jus- 
tice, and  trust  in  the  Lord  : 
many  say.  Who  showeth  us 
good  things  ? 

The  light  of  thy  counte- 
nance, O  Lord,  is  signed  upon 
us:  thou  hast  given  gladness 
in  my  heart. 

By  the  fruit  of  their  corn, 
their  wine,  and  oil,  they  are 
multiplied. 

In  peace,  in  the  self-same, 
I  will  sleep,  and  I  will  rest. 

For  thou,  O  Lord,  singularly 
hast  settled  me  in  hope. 


Et  scitote  quoniam  mii-i- 
ficavit  Dominus  sanctum 
suum  :  *  Dominus  exaudiet 
me,  cum  clamavero  ad  eum. 

Irascimini,  et  nolite  pec- 
care  :  *  quae  dicitis  in  cordi- 
cus  vestris,  in  cubilibus  ves- 
tris  compungimini. 

Sacrificate  sacrificium  jus- 
titiae,  et  sperate  in  Domino  : 
*  multi  dicunt :  Quis  ostendit 
nobis  bona  ? 

Signatum  est  super  nos 
lumen  vultus  tui,  Domine  :  * 
dedisti  Isetitiam  in  corde 
meo. 

A  fructu  frumenti,  vini  et 
olei  sui  :  *  multiplicati  sunt. 

In  pace  in  idipsum :  *  dor- 
miam  et  requiescam. 

Quoniam  tu,  Domine,  sin- 
gulariter  in  spe  :  *  consti- 
tuisti  me. 


The  Church,  has  introduced  here  the  first  six 
Yerses  of  the  30th  Psalm,  because  they  contain  the 
prayer  which  our  Saviour  made,  when  dying :  Into 
thy  handSf  0  Lord,  I  commend  my  Spirit ! — words  so 
beautifully  appropriate  in  this  Office  of  the  close  of 
day. 


Psalm  30. 


In  thee,  0  Lord,  have  I 
hoped,  let  me  never  be  con- 
founded :  deliver  me  in  thy 
justice. 

Bow  down  thine  ear  unto 
me :  make  haste  to  deliver  me. 

Be  thou  unto  me  a  God,  a 
protector,  and  a  house  of  re- 
fuge, to  save  me. 

For  thou  art  my  strength, 


In  te,  Domine,  speravi, 
non  confundar  in  aeternum  : 
*  in  justitia  tua  libera  me. 

Inclina  ad  me  aurem 
tuam :  *  accelera  ut  eruas  me. 

Esto  mihi  in  Deum  pro- 
tectorem,  et  in  domum  re- 
fugii  :  *  ut  salvum  me  facias. 

Quoniam  fortitude  mea, 


102 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


et  refugium  meum  es  tu  : 
•  et  propter  Nomen  tuum 
deduces  me,  et  enutries  me. 

Educes  me  de  laqueo  hoc, 
quern  absconderunt  mihi  :  * 
quoniam  tu  es  protector 
meus. 

In  manus  tuas  commen- 
do  spiritum  meum  :  *  re- 
demisti  me,  Domine,  Deus 
veritatis. 


and  my  refuge :  and  for  thy 
Name's  sake,  thou  wilt  lead 
me,  and  nourish. 

Thou  -wilt  bring  me  out  of 
this  snare,  which  they  have 
hidden  for  me  :  for  thou  art 
my  protector. 

Into  thy  hands,  I  commend 
my  spirit :  thou  hast  redeemed 
me,  O  Lord,  the  God  of  truth. 


The  third  Psalm,  gives  the  motives  of  the  just 
man's  confidence,  even  during  the  dangers  of  the  night. 
There  is  no  stiare  neglected  by  the  demons ;  but  the 
good  Angels  watch  over  us,  with  brotherly  solicitude. 
Then,  we  have  God  himself  speaking,  and  promising 
to  send  us  a  Saviour. 


Psalm  90. 


Qui  habitat  in  adjutorio 
Altissimi  :  *  in  protectione 
Dei  coeli  commorabitur. 

Dicet  Domino  :  Susceptor 
meus  es  tu,  et  refugium 
meum,  *  Deus  meus,  spe- 
rabo  in  eum. 

Quoniam  ipse  liberavit 
me  de  laqueo  venantium  :  * 
et  a  verbo  aspero. 

Scapulis  suis  obumbrabit 
tibi  :  *  et  sub  pennis  ejus 
sperabis. 

Scuto  circumdabit  te  Ve- 
ritas ejus  :  *  non  timebis  a 
timore  noctumo. 

A  sagitta  volante  in  die, 
a  negotio  perambulante  in 
tenebris  :  *  ab  incursu,  et 
daemonio  meridiano. 

Cadent  a  latere  tuo  mille, 


He  that  dwelleth  in  the  aid 
of  the  Most  High,  shall  abide 
under  the  protection  of  the 
God  of  heaven. 

He  shall  say  unto  the  Lord : 
Thou  art  my  protector,  and 
my  refuge  :  my  God,  in  hint 
will  I  trust. 

For  he  hath  delivered  me 
from  the  snare  of  the  hunters : 
and  from  the  sharp  word. 

He  will  overshadow  thee 
^vith  his  shoulders  :  and  under 
his  ^^'ings  thou  shalt  trust. 

His  truth  shall  compass  thee 
with  a  shield :  thou  shalt  not 
be  afraid  of  the  terror  of  the 
night. 

Of  the  arrow  that  flieth  in 
the  day  :  of  the  business  that 
walketh  about  in  the  dark :  of 
invasion,  or  of  the  noonday 
devil. 

A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy 


COMPLINE. 


103 


side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy 
right  :  but  it  shall  not  come 
nigh  thee. 

But  thou  shalt  consider  with 
thine  eyes  :  and  shalt  see  the 
reward  of  the  wicked. 

Because  thou  hast  said  : 
Thou,  O  Lord,  art  my  hope  : 
Thou  hast  made  the  Most  High 
thy  refuge. 

There  shall  no  evil  come 
unto  thee,  nor  shall  the  scourge 
come  near  thy  dwelling. 

For  he  hath  given  his  Angels 
charge  over  thee  :  to  keep  thee 
in  all  thy  ways. 

In  their  hands  they  shall 
bear  thee  up  :  lest  thou  dash 
thy  foot  against  a  stone. 

Thou  shalt  walk  upon  the 
asp  and  basilisk  :  and  thou 
shalt  trample  under  foot  the 
lion  and  the  dragon. 

God  luill  say  of  thee  :  Be- 
cause he  hoped  in  me,  I  will 
deliver  him  :  I  will  protect 
him,  because  he  hath  known 
my  name. 

He  will  cry  unto  me,  and  I 
will  hear  him  :  I  am  with  him 
in  tribulation,  I  will  deliver 
him,  and  I  will  glorify  him. 

I  will  fill  him  with  length 
of  days  :  and  I  will  show  him 
my  salvation. 


et  decem  millia  a  dextris 
tuis  :  *  ad  te  autem  non 
'appropinquabit. 

Verumtamen  oculis  tuis 
considerabis  :  *  et  retribu- 
tionem  peccatorum  videbis. 

Quoniam  tu  es,  Domine, 
spes  mea  :  *  Altissim.um  po- 
suisti  refugium  tuum. 

Non  accedet  ad  te  ma- 
lum :  *  et  flageUum  non 
appropinquabit  tabemacu- 
lo  tuo. 

Quoniam  Angelis  suis 
mandavit  de  te ;  *  ut  custo- 
diant  te  in  omnibus  viis  tuis. 

In  manibus  portabunt 
te  :  *  ne  forte  offendas  ad 
lapidem  pedem  tuum. 

Super  aspidem  et  basilis- 
cum  ambulabis  :  *  et  con- 
'  culcabis  leonem  et  draco- 
nem. 

Quoniam  in  me  speravit, 
liberabo  eum  :  *  protegam 
eum,  quoniam  cognovit  No- 
men  meum.. 

Clamabit  ad  me,  et  ego 
exaudiam  eum  :  *  cum  ipso 
sum  in  tribulatione,  eripiam 
eum,  et  glorificabo  eum. 

Longitudine  dierum  re- 
plebo  eum  :  *  et  ostendam. 
illi  Salutare  meum. 


The  fourth  Psalm  invites  the  Servants  of  God  to 
persevere,  with  fervour,  in  the  prayers  they  offer 
during  the  Night.  The  Faithful  should  say  this 
Psalm  in  a  spirit  of  gratitude  to  God,  for  his  raising 
up,  in  the  Church,  adorers  of  his  holy  name,  whose 
grand  vocation  is  to  lift  up  their  hands,  day  and  night, 
for  the  safety  of  Israel.  On  such  prayers,  depend  the 
happiness  and  destinies  of  the  world. 


104 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Psalm  133. 


Ecce  nunc  benedicite  Do- 
minum  :  *  omnes  servi  Do- 
mini. 

Qui  statis  in  domo  Do- 
mini :  *  in  atriis  domus 
Dei  nostri. 

In  noctibus  extollite  ma- 
nus  vestras  in  sancta  :  *  et 
benedicite  Dominum. 

Benedicat  te  Dominus  ex 
Sion  :  *  qui  fecit  coelum  et 
terram. 

AxT.  Miserere  mihi,  Do- 
mine,  et  exaudi  orationeni 
meani. 


Behold  I  now  bless  ye  the 
Lord,  all  ye  servants  of  the 
Lord. 

WTio  stand  in  the  house  of 
the  Lord,  in  the  courts  of  the 
house  of  our  God. 

Li  the  nights,  lift  up  your 
hands  to  the  holy  places,  and 
bless  ye  the  Lord. 

Say  to  Israel :  May  the  Lord, 
out  of  Sion,  bless  thee,  he  that 
made  heaven  and  earth. 

AxT.  Have  mercy  on  me,  O 
Lord,  and  hear  my  prayer. 


HYMN.* 


Te  lucis  ante  terminum, 
Eerum  Creator,  poscimus, 
Ut  pro  tua  dementia. 
Sis  praesul  et  custodia. 

Procul  recedant  somnia, 
Et  noctium  phantasmata ; 
Hostemque  nostrum    com- 

prime, 
Ne  polluantur  corpora. 

Praesta,  Pater  piissimc, 
Patrique  compar  Unice, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito 
Regnans  per  omne  saeculum. 

Amen. 


Before  the  closing  of  the 
light,  we  beseech  thee.  Creator 
of  all  things  !  that,  in  thy 
clemency,  thou  be  our  protec- 
tor and  our  guard. 

May  the  dreams  and  phan- 
toms of  night  depart  far  from 
us ;  and  do  thou  repress  oui- 
enemy,  lest  our  bodies  be  pro- 
faned. 

Most  merciful  Father !  and 
thou,  his  Only  Begotten  Son, 
co-equal  with  him  !  reigning 
for  ever,  with  the  Holy  Para- 
clete !  grant  this  our  prayer. 

Amen. 


»  According  to  the  Monastic  Rite,  as  follows : — 


Te  lucis  ante  terminum, 
Eerum  Creator,  poscimus, 
Ut  solita  dementia 
Sis  praesul  ad  custodiam. 

Procul  recedant  somnia 
Et  noctium  phantasmata ; 


Hostemque  nostrum  comprime, 
Ne  poUuantiu"  corpora. 

Pra?sta  Pater  omnipotens, 
Per  Jesum  Christum  Dominum, 
Qui  tecum  in  perpetuum 
Regnat  cum  Sancto  Spiritu. 


eOMPLINE. 


105 


CAPITULUM. 

(JeremiaSy  xivj 


But  thou  art  in  us,  O  Lord, 
and  thy  holy  Name  hath  been 
invoked  upon  us  :  forsake  us 
not,  O  Lord,  our  God. 

5t.  Into  thy  hands,  O  Lord :  * 
I  commend  my  Spirit.  Into 
thy  hands. 

y .  Thou  hast  redeemed  us,  O 
Lord  God  of  truth.  *  I  com- 
mend. 

Glory.  Into  thy  hands. 

^.  Preserve  us,  O  Lord,  as 
the  apple  of  thine  eye. 

gt.  Protect  us,  under  the 
shadow  of  thy  wings. 

The  Canticle  of  the  venerable  Simeon, — who, 
whilst  holding  the  divine  Infant  in  his  arms,  pro- 
claimed him  to  be  the  Light  of  the  Gentiles^  and  then 
slept  the  sleep  of  the  just, — is  admirably  appropriate 
to  the  Of&ce  of  Compline.  Holy  Church  blesses 
God  for  having  dispelled  the  darkness  of  night  by  the 
rising  of  the  Sun  of  Justice  ;  it  is  for  love  of  him, 
that  she  toils  the  whole  day  through,  and  rests  during 
the  night,  saying  :  /  skepy  hut  my  heart  watcheth} 


Tu  autem  in  nobis  es.  Do- 
mine,  et  Nomen  sanctum 
tuum  invocatum  est  super 
nos  :  ne  derelinquas  nos, 
Domine,  Deus  noster. 

gt.  In  manus  tuas,  Domi- 
ne :  *  Commendo  spiritum 
meum.     In  manus  tuas. 

f.  Eedemisti  nos,  Domine 
Deus  veritatis.  *  Commendo. 

Gloria.  In  manus  tuas. 

'f.  Custodi  nos,  Domine, 
ut  pupillam  oculi. 

g:.  Sub  umbra  alarum 
tuarum  protege  nos. 


CANTICLE   OF   SIMEON. 

(St.  Lukey  a.) 


Now  dost  thou  dismiss  thy 
servant,  O  Lord,  according  to 
thy  word,  in  peace. 

Because  mine  eyes  have  seen 
thy  Salvation, 

Which  thou  hast  prepared  ; 
before  the  face  of  all  peoples. 

A  light  to  the  revelation  of 


Nunc  dimittis  servum 
tuum,  Domine  :  *  secundum 
verbum  tuum  in  pace. 

Quia  viderunt  oculi  mei :  * 
Salutare  tuum. 

Quod  parasti  :  *  ante  fa- 
ciem  omnium  populorum. 

Lumen   ad    revelationem 


'  Cant.  V.  2. 


106 


TIME    AI-TER    PENTECOST. 


Gentium  :  *  et  gloriam  plc- 
bis  tuae  Israel. 
Gloria. 

Ant.  Salva  nos,  Doniine, 
vigilantes  ;  custodi  nos  dor- 
mientes,  ut  vigilemus  cum 
Christo,  et  requiescamus  in 
pace. 

OREMUS. 

Yisita,  qusesumus,  Domi- 
ue,  habitationem  istam,  et 
omnes  insidias  inimici  ab  ea 
longe  repelle  :  Angeli  tui 
sancti  habitent  in  ea,  qui 
nos  in  pace  custodiant :  et 
benedictio  tua  sit  super  nos 
semper.  Per  Dominum  nos- 
trum Jesum  Christum  Fi- 
lium  tuum,  qui  tecum  vivit 
et  regnat  in  unitate  Spiritus 
sancti  Deus,  per  omnia  sae- 
cula  saeculorum.     B^.  Amen. 

y.  Dominus  vobiscum. 

gt.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

y.  Benedicamus  Domino. 

Bt.  Deo  gratias. 

Benedicat  et  custodiat  nos 
omnipotens  et  misericors 
Dominus,  Pater  et  Filius,  et 
Spiritus  Sanctus. 

Bt.  Amen. 


the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of 
thy  people  Israel. 
Glory,  etc. 

Ant.  Save  us,  O  Lord,  whilst 
awake,  and  watch  us,  as  we 
sleep  ;  that  we  may  watch 
with  Christ,  and  rest  in  peace. 


LET  lis  PRAY. 

Visit,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  this  house  and  family, 
and  drive  from  it  all  snares  of 
the  enemy :  let  thy  holy  Angels 
dwell  herein,  who  may  keep 
us  in  peace,  and  may  thy  bles- 
sing be  always  upon  us. 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  thy  Son,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee,  in  the 
im^ity  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  God, 
world  without  end.  gt.  Amen. 

y.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 

B^.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

y.  Let  us  bless  the  Lord. 

Bi.  Thanks  be  to  God. 

May  the  almighty  and  mer- 
ciful Lord,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  bless  and  preserve 
us. 

Bt.  Amen. 


ANTHEM    TO   THE    BLESSED    VIRGIN. 


Salve,  Regina,  mater  mi- 
sericordiae. 

Vita,  dulcedo,  et  spes  nos- 
tra, salve. 

Ad  te  clamamus,  exsules 
filii  Evae. 

Ad  te  suspiramus,  gemen- 
tes  et  flentes  in  hac  lacrj-- 
marum  valle. 

Eia,  ergo   advocata  nos- 


Hail,  holy  Queen,  Mother  of 
mercy. 

Our  Life,  our  Sweetness, 
and  our  Hope,  all  hail ! 

To  thee  we  cry,  poor 
banished  children  of  Eve  ; 

To  thee  we  send  up  our 
sighs,  weeping  and  mourning 
in  this  vale  of  tears. 

Turn,  then,  most  gracious 


COMPIJNE. 


107 


Advocate  !  thine  eyes  of  mercy 
towards  us ; 

And,  after  this  our  exile, 
show  unto  us  the  blessed  Fruit 
of  thy  womb,  Jesus  ; 

O  merciful, 

Okind, 

O  sweet  Virgin  Mary  ! 

^.  Pray  for  us,  O  holy 
Mother  of  God, 

gt.  That  we  may  be  made 
worthy  of  the  promises  of 
Christ. 


tra,  illos  tuos  misericordes 
oculos  ad  nos  converte ; 

Et  Jesum  benedictum 
fructum  ventris  tui,  nobis 
post  hoc  exilium  ostende; 

O  clemens, 

O  pia, 

O  dulcis  Virgo  Maria. 

y.  Ora  pro  nobis,  sancta 
Dei  Genitrix, 

gt.  Utdigniefficiamurpro- 
missionibus  Christi. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

O  almighty  and  everlasting 
God,  who,  by  the  co-operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  didst  pre- 
pare the  body  and  soul  of 
Mary,  glorious  Virgin  and 
Mother,  to  become  the  worthy 
habitation  of  thy  Son  :  grant 
that  we  may  be  delivered 
from  present  evils,  and  from 
everlasting  death,  by  Her 
gracious  intercession,  in  whose 
commemoration  we  rejoice. 
Through  the  same  Christ  our 
Lord.     gt.  Amen. 

y .  May  the  divine  assistance 
remain  always  with  us. 

gt.  Amen.* 


OEEMUS. 

Omnipotens  sempiteme 
Deus,  qui  gloriosse  virginis 
matris  Marise  corpus  et  ani- 
mam,  ut  dignum  Filii  tui 
habitaculum  effici  merere- 
tur,  Spiritu  sancto  coope- 
rante,  prseparasti  :  da  ut 
cujus  commemoratione  Ise- 
tamur,  ejus  pia  intercessione 
ab  instantibus  malis  et  a 
morte  perpetua  liberemur. 
Per  eumdem  Christum  Do- 
minum  nostrum,    gt.  Amen. 

^.  Divinum  auxilium  ma- 
neat  semper  nobiscum. 
gt.  Amen. 


Then,  in  secret,  Pater^  Ave,  and  Credo  ;  page  14. 


*  In  the  Monastic  Rite,  this  Response  is  as  follows  :  — 

gt.  And  with  our  absent  Bre-         gt.  Et  cum  fratribus  nostris 
thren.    Amen.  absentibus.     Amen. 


108  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


FEAST 

OF  THE  MOST  HOLY  TRINITY. 

On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  Holy  Apostles  received, 
as  we  have  seen,  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  In 
accordance  with  the  injunction  of  their  divine 
Master/  they  will  soon  start  on  their  mission  of 
teaching  all  nations,  and  baptising  men  in  the  name 
of  the  Holy  Trinity.  It  was  but  right,  then,  that 
the  solemnity  which  is  intended  to  honour  the  mystery 
of  One  God  in  Three  Persons,  should  immediately 
follow  that  of  Pentecost,  with  which  it  has  a 
mysterious  connection.  And  yet,  it  was  not  till  after 
many  centuries,  that  it  was  inserted  in  the  Cycle  of 
the  Liturgical  Year,  whose  completion  is  the  work  of 
successive  ages. 

Every  homage  paid  to  God  by  the  Church's  Liturgy 
has  the  Holy  Trinity  as  its  object.  Time,  as  well  as 
eternity,  belongs  to  the  Trinity.  The  Trinity  is  the 
scope  of  all  ReHgion.  Every  day,  every  hour, 
belono:s  to  It.  The  Feasts  instituted  in  memorv  of  the 
mysteries  of  our  Redemption  centre  m  It.  The  Feasts 
of  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  the  Saints  are  but  so  many 
means  for  leading  us  to  the  praise  of  the  God  who  is 
One  in  essence,  and  Three  in  Persons.  The  Sunday's 
OflB.ce,  in  a  very  special  way,  gives  us,  each  week,  a 
most  explicit  expression  of  adoration  and  worship  of 
this  mystery,  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  others, 
and  the  source  of  all  grace. 

This  explains  to  us,  how  it  was  that  the  Church 
was  so  long  in  instituting  a  special  Feast  in  honour 
of  the  Holy  Trinity.     The  ordinary  motive  for  the 

»  St.  Matth.  xxviii.  19. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  109 

institution  of  Feasts  did  not  exist  in  this  instance.  A 
Feast  is  the  memorial  of  some  fact  which  took  place 
at  some  certain  time,  and  of  which  it  is  well  to  per- 
petuate the  remembrance  and  influence.  How  could 
this  be  applied  to  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  ?  It 
was  from  all  eternity,  it  was  before  any  created  being 
existed,  that  God  liveth  and  reigneth,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost.  If  a  Feast  in  honour  of  that 
Mystery  were  to  be  instituted,  it  could  only  be  by 
the  fixing  some  one  day  in  the  Year,  whereon  the 
Faithful  would  assemble  for  the  offering  a  more  than 
usually  solemn  tribute  of  worship  to  the  Mystery  of 
Unity  and  Trinity  in  the  one  same  divine  Nature. 

The  idea  of  such  a  Feast  was  first  conceived  by 
some  of  those  pious  and  recollected  souls,  who  are 
favoured  from  on  high  with  a  sort  of  presentiment  of 
the  things  which  the  Holy  Ghost  will  achieve,  at 
a  future  period,  in  the  Church.  So  far  back  as  the 
8th  Century,  the  learned  monk,  Alcuin,  had  had  the 
happy  thought  of  composing  a  Mass  in  honour  of  the 
mystery  of  the  blessed  Trinity.  It  would  seem  that 
he  was  prompted  to  this  by  the  Apostle  of  Germany, 
Saint  Boniface.  That  this  composition  is  a  beautiful 
one,  no  one  will  doubt  that  knows,  from  Alcuin's 
writings,  how  full  its  author  was  of  the  spirit  of 
sacred  Liturgy  ;  but,  after  all,  it  was  only  a  votive 
Mass,  a  mere  help  to  private  devotion,  which  no  one 
ever  thought  would  lead  to  the  institution  of  a 
Feast.  This  Mass,  however,  became  a  great  favourite, 
and  was  gradually  circulated  through  the  several 
Churches  ;  for  instance,  it  was  approved  of  for  Ger- 
many, by  the  Council  of  Selingenstadt,  held  in  1022. 

In  that  11th  Century,  however,  a  Feast  properly  so 
called  of  Holy  Trinity  had  been  introduced  into  one 
of  the  Churches  of  Belgium, — the  very  same  that  was 
to  have  the  honour,  later  on,  of  procuring  to  the 
Church's  Calendar  one  of  the  richest  of  its  Solemni- 
ties.    Stephen,  Bishop  of  Liege,  solemnly  instituted 


I  10  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

the  Feast  of  Holy  Trinity  for  his  Church,  in  920,  and 
had  an  entire  Office  composed  in  honour  of  the 
mystery.  The  Church's  law,  which  now  reserves  to 
the  Holy  See  the  institution  of  any  new  Feast,  was 
not  then  in  existence  ;  and  Riquier,  Stephen's  succes- 
sor in  the  See  of  Liege,  kept  up  what  his  predecessor 
had  hegun. 

The  Feast  became  gradually  adopted.  The  Bene- 
dictine Order  took  it  up  from  the  very  first.  We 
find,  for  instance,  in  the  early  part  of  the  llth 
Century,  that  Berno,  the  Abbot  of  Reichnaw,  was 
doing  all  he  could  to  propagate  it.  At  Cluny,  also, 
the  Feast  was  established  at  the  commencement  of 
the  same  Century,  as  we  learn  from  the  Ordinarium 
of  that  celebrated  Monastery,  drawn  up  in  1091,  and 
where  we  find  mention  of  Holy  Trinity  day  as  having 
been  instituted  long  before. 

Under  the  pontificate  of  Alexander  the  Second, 
who  reigned  from  1061  to  1073,  the  Church  of  Rome, 
which  has  frequently  sanctioned  the  usages  of  parti- 
cular Churches,  by  herself  adopting  them,  was  led  to 
pass  judgment  upon  this  new  institution.  In  one  of 
liis  Decretals,  the  Pontiff  mentions  that  the  Feast  was 
then  kept  in  many  places ;  but  that  the  Church  at 
Rome  had  not  adopted  it,  and  for  this  reason, — that, 
the  adorable  Trinity  is,  every  day  of  the  year, 
unceasingly  invoked  by  the  repetition  of  the  words : 
Gloria  Patrif  et  Filio,  et  Spiriiui  Sancto;  as,  likewise, 
by  several  other  formulas  expressive  of  praise.^ 

Meanwhile,  the  Feast  went  on  gaining  ground,  as 
we  gather  from  the  Micrologns;  and,  in  the  early 
part  of  the  12th  Century,  we  have  the  learned  Abbot 
Rupert,  who  may  justly  be  styled  a  Doctor  in  litur- 
gical science,  explaining  the  appropriateness  of  that 
Feast's  institution  in  these  words :  **  Having  cele- 
'*  brated  the  solemnity  of  the  coming  of  the  Holy 

*  De  feriis.  Cap.  Quoniam.    This  Decretal  has  been  erroneously 
attributed  to  Alexander  the  Third. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  Ill 

"  Ghost,  we,  at  once,  on  the  Sunday  next  following, 
*'  sing  the  glory  of  the  Holy  Trinity  ;  and  rightly  is 
^'  this  arrangement  ordained,  for,  after  the  coming  of 
'*  that  same  Holy  Spirit,  the  faith  in,  and  confession 
''  of,  the  name  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  im- 
"  mediately  began  to  be  preached,  and  believed,  and 
"  celebrated  in  Baptism."  ^ 

In  our  own  country,  it  was  the  glorious  Martyr,  St. 
Thomas  of  Canterbury,  that  established  the  Feast  of 
Holy  Trinity.  He  introduced  it  in  his  Archdiocese, 
in  the  year  1162,  in  memory  of  his  having  been  con- 
secrated Bishop  on  the  first  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
As  regards  France,  we  find  a  Council  of  Aries,  held 
in  1260,  under  the  presidency  of  Archbishop  Floren- 
tinus,  solemnly  decreeing,  in  its  sixth  canon,  the 
Feast  of  Holy  Trinity  to  be  observed  with  an  Octave. 
The  Cistercian  Order,  which  was  spread  throughout 
Europe,  had  ordered  it  to  be  celebrated  in  all  its 
Houses,  as  far  back  as  the  year  1230.  Durandus,  in 
his  Rationale,  gives  us  grounds  for  concluding  that, 
during  the  13th  Century,  the  majority  of  the  Latin 
Churches  kept  this  Feast.  Of  these  Churches,  there 
were  some  that  celebrated  it,  not  on  the  first,  but  on 
the  last  Sunday,  after  Pentecost ;  others  kept  it 
twice, — once  on  the  Sunday  next  following  the  Pen- 
tecost Solemnity,  and,  a  second  time,  on  the  Sunday 
immediately  preceding  Advent. 

It  was  evident,  from  all  this,  that  the  Apostolic  See 
would,  finally,  give  its  sanction  to  a  practice,  whose 
universal  adoption  was  being  prompted  by  Christian 
instinct.  John  the  Twenty-second,  who  sat  in  the 
Chair  of  St.  Peter  as  early  as  the  year  1334,  com- 
pleted the  work  by  a  Decree,  wherein  the  Church  of 
Eome  accepted  the  Feast  of  Holy  Trinity,  and 
extended  its  observance  to  all  Churches. 

As  to  the  motive  which  induced  the  Church,  led, 

^  Be  divinis  Officiis.  Lib.  xi.  Cap.  1. 


112  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

as  she  is,  in  all  things,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  fix  one 
special  day,  in  the  Year,  for  the  offering  a  solemn 
homage  to  the  blessed  Trinity,  whereas  all  our 
adorations,  all  our  acts  of  thanksgiving,  all  our  peti- 
tions, are  ever  being  presented  to  It, — such  motive  is 
to  be  found  in  the  change  which  was  being  introduced, 
at  that  period,  into  the  liturgical  Calendar.  Up  to 
about  the  year  1000,  the  Feasts  of  Saints  marked  on 
the  general  Calendar,  and  universally  kept,  were  very 
few.  From  that  time,  they  began  to  be  more  nume- 
rous ;  and  there  was  evidence  that  their  number 
would  go  on  increasing.  The  time  would  come,  when 
the  Sunday's  Office,  which  is  specially  consecrated  to 
the  blessed  Trinity,  must  make  way  for  that  of  the 
Saints,  as  often  as  one  of  their  Feasts  occurred  on  a 
Sunday.  As  a  sort  of  compensation  for  this  celebra- 
tion of  the  memory  of  God's  Servants  on  the  very  day 
which  was  sacred  to  the  Holy  Trinity,  it  was 
considered  right,  that  once,  at  least,  in  the  course  of 
the  Year,  a  Sunday  should  be  set  apart  for  the  ex- 
clusive and  direct  expression  of  the  worship  which 
the  Church  pays  to  the  great  God,  who  has  vouchsafed 
to  reveal  himself  to  mankind  in  his  ineffable  Unity 
and  in  his  eternal  Trinity. 

The  very  essence  of  the  Christian  Faith  consists  in 
the  knowledge  and  adoration  of  One  God  in  Three 
Persons.  This  is  the  Mystery  whence  all  others  flow. 
Our  Faith  centres  in  this  as  in  the  master-truth  of  all 
it  knows  in  this  life,  and  as  the  infinite  object  whose 
vision  is  to  form  our  eternal  happiness ;  and  yet,  we 
only  know  it,  because  it  has  pleased  God  to  reveal 
himself  thus  to  our  lowly  intelligence,  which,  after 
all,  can  never  fathom  the  infinite  perfections  of  that 
God,  who  necessarily  inhahitcth  light  inaccessible} 
Human  reason  may,  of  itself,  come  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  existence  of  God  as  Creator  of  all  beings ;  it 

'  1  Tim.,  vi.  16. 


TRINITY    SUNDAY.  113 

may,  by  its  own  innate  power,  form  to  itself  an  idea 
of  his  perfections  by  the  study  of  his  works ;  but  the 
knowledge  of  God's  intimate  being  can  only  come  to 
us  by  means  of  his  own  gracious  revelation. 

It  was  God's  good-pleasure  to  make  known  to  us 
his  essence,  in  order  to  bring  us  into  closer  union  with 
himself,  and  to  prepare  us,  in  some  way,  for  that  face- 
to-face  vision  of  himself  which  he  intends  giving  us 
in  eternity  :  but  his  revelation  is  gradual ;  he  takes 
mankind  from  brightness  unto  brightness,  fitting  it 
for  the  full  knowledge  and  adoration  of  Unity  in 
Trinity,  and  Trinity  in  Unity.  During  the  period 
preceding  the  Incarnation  of  the  eternal  Word,  God 
seems  intent  on  inculcating  the  idea  of  his  Unity,  for 
polytheism  was  the  infectious  error  of  mankind ;  and 
every  notion  of  there  being  a  spiritual  and  sole  cause 
of  all  things  would  have  been  effaced  on  earth,  had 
not  the  infinite  goodness  of  that  God  watched  over 
its  preservation. 

Not  that  the  Old  Testament  Books  were  altogether 
silent  on  the  Three  Divine  Persons,  whose  ineffable 
relations  are  eternal ;  only,  the  mysterious  passages, 
which  spoke  of  them,  were  not  understood  by  the 
people  at  large  ;  whereas,  in  the  Christian  Church,  a 
child  of  seven  will  answer  them  that  ask  him,  that, 
in  God,  the  Three  Divine  Persons  have  but  one  and 
the  same  nature,  but  one  and  the  same  Divinity. 
When  the  Book  of  Genesis  tells  us,  that  God  spoke 
in  the  plural,  and  said :  Let  Us  make  man  to  our  im,age 
and  likencsSy^  the  Jew  bows  down  and  believes,  but  he 
understands  not  the  sacred  text ;  the  Christian,  on  the 
contrary,  who  has  been  enlightened  by  the  complete 
revelation  of  God,  sees,  under  this  expression,  the 
Three  Persons  acting  together  in  the  formation  of 
Man  ;  the  light  of  Faith  developes  the  great  truth  to 
him,  and  tells  him  that,  within  himself,  there  is  a 

1  Gen,  i.  26. 

VOL.  X.  I 


114  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

likeness  to  the  blessed  Three  in  One.  Power,  Under- 
standing, and  Will,  are  three  faculties  within  him, 
and  yet  he  himself  is  but  one  being. 

In  the  Books  of  Proverbs,  Wisdom,  and  Ecclesias- 
ticus,  Solomon  speaks,  in  sublime  language,  of  him 
who  is  eternal  Wisdom  ;  he  tells  us,  and  he  uses  every 
variety  of  grandest  expression  to  tell  us,  of  the  di\dne 
essence  of  this  Wisdom,  and  of  his  being  a  distinct 
Person  in  the  Godhead ; — but,  how  few  among  the 
people  of  Israel  could  see  through  the  veil  ?  Isaias 
heard  the  voice  of  the  Seraphim,  as  they  stood  around 
God's  throne ;  he  heard  them  singing,  in  alternate 
choirs,  and  with  a  joy  intense  because  eternal,  this 
hymn  :  Holy!  Holy!  Holy  !  is  the  Lord!^  but  who 
will  explain  to  men  this  triple  Sanctus,  of  which  the 
echo  is  heard  here  below,  when  we  mortals  give 
praise  to  our  Creator?  So,  again,  in  the  Psalms, 
and  the  prophetic  Books,  a  flash  of  light  will  break 
suddenly  upon  us  ;  a  brightness  of  some  mysterious 
Three  will  dazzle  us  ;  but,  it  passes  away,  and 
obscurity  returns  seemingly  all  the  more  palpable ; 
we  have  but  the  sentiment  of  the  divine  Unity 
deeply  impressed  on  our  inmost  soul,  and  we  adore 
the  Incomprehensible,  the  Sovereign  Being. 

The  world  had  to  wait  for  the  fulness  of  time  to  be 
completed ;  and  then,  God  would  send,  into  this 
world,  his  Only  Son,  Begotten  of  him  from  all  eternity. 
This  his  most  merciful  purpose  has  been  carried  out, 
and  the  Word  made  Flesh  hath  dwelt  among  us.'  By 
seeing  his  glory,  the  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of 
the  Father,-^  we  have  come  to  know  that,  in  God, 
there  is  Father  and  Son.  The  Son's  Mission  to  our 
earth,  by  the  very  revelation  it  gave  us  of  himself, 
taught  us  that  God  is,  eternally.  Father,  for  what- 
soever is  in  God  is  eternal.  But  for  this  merciful 
revelation,  which  is  an  anticipation  of  the  light  await- 

1  Is.  vi.  3.  2  St.  John,  i.  14.  -  Jbid. 


TRINITY    SUNDAY.  115 

ing  us  in  the  next  life,  our  knowledge  of  God  would 
have  been  too  imperfect.  It  was  fitting,  that  there 
should  be  some  proportion,  between  the  light  of 
Faith,  and  that  of  the  Yision  reserved  for  the  future  ; 
it  was  not  enough  for  man  to  know  that  God  is  One. 

So  that,  we  now  know  the  Father,  from  whom 
comes,  as  the  Apostle  tells  us,  all paternitij ^  even  on 
earth. ^  We  know  him  not  only  as  the  creative  power, 
which  has  produced  every  being  outside  himself;  but, 
guided  as  it  is  by  Faith,  our  souFs  eye  respectfully 
penetrates  into  the  very  essence  of  the  Godhead,  and 
there  beholds  the  Father  begetting  a  Son  like  unto 
himself.  But,  in  order  to  teach  us  the  Mystery,  that 
Son  came  down  upon  our  earth.  Himself  has  told  us 
expressly,  that  no  one  hioiceth  the  Father,  hut  the  Son, 
and  he  to  ichom  it  shall  please  the  Son  to  reveal  him? 
Glory,  then,  be  to  the  Son,  who  has  vouchsafed  to 
show  us  the  Father !  and  glory  to  the  Father,  whom 
the  Son  hath  revealed  unto  us  ! 

The  intimate  knowledge  of  God  has  come  to  us  by 
the  Son,  whom  the  Father,  in  his  love,  has  given  to 
us.^  And  this  Son  of  God,  who  in  order  to  raise  up 
our  minds  even  to  his  own  Divine  Nature,  has  clad 
himself,  by  his  Incarnation,  with  our  Human  Nature, 
has  taught  us  that  he  and  his  Father  are  one  ;  * — 
that  they  are  one  and  the  same  Essence,  in  distinction 
of  Persons.  One  begets  ;  the  other  is  begotten  ;  the 
One  is  named  Power  ;  the  Other,  Wisdom,  or  Intel- 
ligence. The  Power  cannot  be  without  the  Intelli- 
gence, nor  the  Intelligence  without  the  Power,  in  the 
sovereignly  perfect  Being  :  but,  both  the  One,  and 
the  Other  produce  a  Third  term. 

The  Son,  who  had  been  sent  by  the  Father,  had 
ascended  into  heaven,  with  the  Human  Nature  which 
he  had  united  to  himself  for  all  future  eternity ;   and, 


1  Eph.  iii.  15.  2  gt.  Mattli.  xi.  27. 

3  St.  John,  iii.  16.  «  St.  John,  xvii.  22. 


116  TIME    AFTER   PENTECXDST. 

lo  !  the  Father  and  the  Sen  send  into  this  world,  the 
Spirit  who  proceeds  from  them  hoth.  It  was  a  new 
Gift,  and  it  taught  man  that  the  Lord  God  was  in 
Three  Persons.  The  Spirit,  the  eternal  link  of  the 
first  Two,  is  Will,  he  is  Love,  in  the  divine  Essence. 
In  God,  then,  is  the  fulness  of  Being,  without  begin- 
ning, without  succession,  without  increase, — for  there 
is  nothing  which  he  has  not.  In  these  Three  eternal 
terms  of  his  uncreated  Substance,  is  the  Act,  pure  and 
infinite. 

The  sacred  Liturgy,  whose  object  is  the  glorification 
of  God  and  the  commemoration  of  his  works,  follows, 
each  year,  the  sublime  phases  of  these  manifestations, 
whereby  the  Sovereign  Lord  has  made  known  his 
whole  self  to  mortals.  Under  the  sombre  colours  of 
Advent,  we  commemorated  the  period  of  expectation, 
during  which  the  radiant  Triangle  sent  forth  but  few 
of  its  rays  to  mankind.  The  world,  during  those  four 
thousand  years,  was  praying  heaven  for  a  Liberator, 
a  Messiah  ;  and  it  was  God's  own  Son  that  was  to  be 
this  Liberator,  this  Messiah.  That  we  might  have 
the  full  knowledge  of  the  prophecies  which  foretold 
him,  it  was  necessary  that  he  himself  should  actually 
come  : — a  Child  was  born  unto  us,^  and  then  we  had 
the  key  to  the  Scriptures.  When  we  adored  that  Son, 
we  adored  also  the  Father,  who  sent  him  to  us  in  the 
Flesh,  and  to  whom  he  is  consubstantial.  This  Word 
of  Life,  whom  we  have  seen,  whom  we  have  heard, 
whom  our  hands  have  handled-  in  the  Humanity 
which  he  deigned  to  assume,  has  proved  himself  to  be 
truly  a  Person,  a  Person  distinct  from  the  Father,  for 
One  sends,  and  the  Other  is  sent.  In  this  second 
Divine  Person,  we  have  found  our  Mediator,  who  has 
re-united  the  creation  to  its  Creator ;  we  have  found 
the  Redeemer  of  our  sins,  the  Light  of  our  souls,  the 
Spouse  we  had  so  long  desired. 

IIa\'ing  passed  through   the   mysteries  which  he 

1  Is.  ix.6.  2  1  St.  John,  i.  1. 


TRINITY    SUNDAY.  117 

Mmself  wrought,  we  next  celebrated  the  descent  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  had  been  announced  as  coming 
to  perfect  the  work  of  the  Sou  of  God.  We  adored 
him,  and  acknowledged  him  to  be  distinct  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  who  had  sent  him  to  us,  with 
the  mission  of  abiding  with  us.^  He  manifested  him- 
self by  divine  operations  which  are  especially  his 
own,  and  were  the  object  of  his  coming.  He  is  the 
soul  of  the  Church  ;  he  keeps  her  in  the  truth  taught 
her  by  the  Son.  He  is  the  source,  the  principle,  of 
the  sanctification  of  our  souls  ;  and,  in  them  he 
wishes  to  make  his  dwelling.  In  a  word,  the 
mystery  of  the  Trinity  has  become  to  us,  not  only  a 
dogma  made  known  to  our  mind  by  Revelation,  but, 
moreover,  a  practical  truth  given  to  us  by  the  unheard 
of  munificence  of  the  Three  Divine  Persons ;  the 
Father,  who  has  adopted  us  ;  the  Son,  whose  brethren 
and  joint- heirs  we  are  ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
governs  us,  and  dwells  within  us. 

Let  us,  then,  begin  this  Day,  by  giving  glory  to 
the  One  Grod  in  Three  Persons.  For  this  end,  we 
will  unite  with  holy  Church,  who,  in  her  OflB.ce  of 
Prime,  recites  on  this  Solemnity,  as,  also,  on  every 
Sunday  not  taken  up  by  a  Feast,  the  magnificent 
Symbol,  known  as  the  Athanasian  Creed.  It  gives 
us,  in  a  summary  of  much  majesty  and  precision, 
the  doctrine  of  the  holy  Doctor,  Saint  Athanasius,  re- 
garding the  mysteries  of  the  Triuity  and  Incarnation.^ 

1  St.  Jokn,  xiv.  16. 

^  *'  It  is  a  psalm  or  hymn,  of  praise,  of  confession,  and  of  pro- 
'*  found,  self-prostrating  homage,  parallel  to  the  Canticles  of  the 
"  elect  in  heaven.  It  appeals  to  the  imagination  quite  as  much  as 
"  to  the  intellect.  It  is  the  war-song  of  faith,  with  which  we 
"  warn  first  ourselves,  then  each  other,  and  then  all  those  who  are 
"within  its  hearing,  and  the  hearing  of  the  Truth,  who  our  God 
"  is,  and  how  we  must  worship  Him,  and  how  vast  our  responsibi- 
"lity  will  be  if  we  know  what  to  believe,  and  yet  believe  not. 
"  It  is 

"  The  Psalm  that  gathers  in  one  glorious  lay 

**  All  chants  that  e'er  from  heaven  to  earth  found  way ; 


118 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


THE    ATH  AN  ASIAN    CREED. 


Quicumque  vnlt  salvus 
esse,  ante  omnia  opus  est  ut 
teneat  Catholicani  fidem. 

Quam  nisi  quisque  inte- 
gram  inviolatamque  serva- 
verit,  absque  dubio  in  aeter- 
num  peribit. 

Fides  autem  Catholica 
haec  est,  ut  unum  Deum  in 
Trinitate,  et  Trinitatem  in 
Unitate  veneremur ; 

Neque  confundentes  per- 
sonas,  neque  substantiam 
separantes. 

Alia  est  enim  persona 
Patris,  alia  Filii,  alia  Spiri- 
tus  sancti. 

Sed  Patris,  et  Filii,  et 
Spiritus  sancti  una  est  divi- 
nitas,  aequalis  gloria,  coae- 
tema  majestas. 

Qualis  Pater,  talis  Filius, 
talis  Spiritus  sanctus. 

Increatus  Pater,  increatus 
Filius,  increatus  Spiritus 
sanctus. 

Immensus  Pater,  imrnen- 
sus  Filius,  immensus  Spiri- 
tus sanctus. 

^temus  Pater,  astemus 
Filius,  aetemus  Spiritus 
sanctus. 


TNliosoever  would  be  saved, 
before  all  things  it  is  necessary 
that  he  hold  the  Catholic 
faith. 

TNTiich  faith,  except  every 
one  doth  keep  entire,  and  un- 
violated,  without  doubt  he 
shall  perish  everlastingly. 

Now  the  Catholic  faith  is 
this  :  that  we  worship  one 
God  in  Trinity,  and  Trinity  in 
Unity ; 

Neither  confounding  the 
persons,  nor  dividing  the  sub- 
stance. 

For  one  is  the  person  of  the 
Father,  another  of  the  Son, 
and  another  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

But  the  Godhead  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  all  one, 
the  glory  equal,  the  majesty 
co-eternal. 

Such  as  the  Father  is,  such 
is  the  Son,  such  is  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

The  Father  is  uncreated,  the 
Son  is  uncreated,  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  uncreated. 

The  Father  is  incomprehen- 
sible, the  Son  is  incomprehen- 
sible, the  Holy  Ghost  is  incom- 
prehensible. 

The  Father  is  eternal,  the 
Son  is  eternal,  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  eternal. 


**  Creed  of  the  Saints,  and  Anthem  of  the  Blest, 
**  And  calm-breathed  warning  of  the  kindliest  love, 
*'  That  ever  heaved  a  wakeful  mother's  breast. 

*'  For  myself,  I  have  ever  felt  it  as  the  most  simple  and  sublime,  the 
"  most  devotional  formulary  to  which  Christianity  has  given  birth, 
*'  more  so  even  than  the  J'eni  Creator  and  the  Te  Deum.''^  (Dr. 
Newman;  Grammar  of  Assent ,  page  129.)     [Note  added  by  Tr.J 


TRINITX    SUNDAY. 


119 


And  yet  they  are  not  three 
eternals,  but  one  eternal. 

As  also  they  are  not  three 
uncreateds,  nor  three  incom- 
prehensibles,  but  one  un- 
created, and  one  incompre- 
hensible. 

In  like  manner  the  Father 
is  almighty,  the  Son  is  al- 
mighty, the  Holy  Ghost  is 
almighty. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three 
almighties,  but  one  almighty. 

So,  the  Father  is  God,  the 
Son  is  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
God. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three 
Gods,  but  one  God. 

So,  the  Father  is  Lord,  the 
Son  is  Lord,  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  Lord. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three 
Lords,  but  one  Lord. 

For,  as  we  are  compelled, 
by  the  Christian  truth,  to 
acknowledge  each  person,  by 
himself,  to  be  God  and  Lord : 
so,  are  we  forbidden,  by  the 
Catholic  religion,  to  say,  there 
are  three  Gods,  or  three  Lords. 

The  Father  is  made  of  no 
one,  neither  created,  nor  be- 
gotten. 

The  Son  is  from  the  Father 
alone  ;  not  made,  nor  created, 
but  begotten. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son;  not  made, 
nor  created,  nor  begotten,  but 
proceeding. 

There  is,  then,  one  Father, 
not  three  Fathers ;  one  Son, 
not  three  Sons  ;  one  Holy 
Ghost,  not  three  Holy  Ghosts. 


Et  tamen  non  tres  aetemi, 
sed  unus  aetemus. 

Sicut  non  tres  increati, 
nee  tres  immensi,  sed  unus 
increatus,  et  unus  immen- 
sus. 

Similiter  omnipotens  Pa- 
ter, omnipotens  Filius,  om- 
nipotens Spiritus  sanctus. 

Et  tamen  non  tres  omni- 
potentes,  sed  unus  omni- 
potens. 

Ita  Deus  Pater,  Deus  Fi- 
lius, Deus  Spiritus  sanctus. 

Et  tamen  non  tres  Dii, 
sed  unus  est  Deus. 

Ita  Dominus  Pater,  Do- 
minus  Filius,  Dominus  Spi- 
ritus sanctus. 

•  Et  tamen  non  tres  Do- 
mini, sed  unus  est  Domi- 
nus. 

Quia  sicut  singillatim 
unamquamque  personam 
Deum  ac  Dominum  confi- 
teri  Christiana  veritate 
compellimur:  ita  tres  Decs 
aut  Dominos  dicere,  Catho- 
lica  religione  prohibemur. 

Pater  a  nullo  est  factus, 
nee  creatus,  nee  genitus. 

Filius  a  Patre  solo  est : 
non  factus,  nee  creatus,  sed 
genitus. 

Spiritus  sanctus  a  Patre 
et  Filio,  non  factus,  nee 
creatus,  nee  genitus,  sed 
procedens. 

Unus  ergo  Pater,  non  tres 
Patres  ;  unus.  Filius,  non 
tres  Filii  :  unus  Spiritus 
sanctus,  non  tres  Spiritus 
sancti. 


120 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Et  in  hac  Trinitate  nihil 
prius  aut  posterius,  nihil 
ma  jus  aut  minus  :  sed  tot;T) 
tres  personae  coaetemae  sibi 
sunt,  et  coaequales. 

Ita  ut  per  omnia,  sieut  jam 
supra  dictum  est,  et  Unitas 
in  Trinitate,  et  Trinitas  in 
Unitate  veneranda  sit. 

Qui  vult  ergo  salvus  esse  : 
•ita  de  Trinitate  sentiat. 

Sed  necessarium  est  ad 
eetemam  salutem:  ut  Incar- 
nationem  quoque  Domini 
nostri  Jesu  Christi  iideliter 
credat. 

Est  ergo  fides  recta,  ut 
credamus  et  confiteamur  : 
quia  Dominus  noster  Jesus 
Christus  Dei  Filius,  Deus  et 
homo  est. 

Deus  est  ex  substantia 
Patris  ante  saecula  genitus  : 
et  homo  est  ex  substantia 
matris  in  saeculo  natus. 

Perfectus  Deus,  perfectus 
homo  :  ex  anima  rationali, 
et  humana  came  subsistens. 

JEqualis  Patri  secundum 
divinitatem  :  minor  Patre 
secundum  humanitatem. 

Qui  licet  Deus  sit,  et  ho- 
mo :  non  duo  tamen,  sed 
unus  est  Christus. 

Unus  autem  non  conver- 
sione  divinitatis  in  camem, 
sed  assumptione  humani- 
tatis  in  Deum. 

Unus  omnino,  non  confu- 
sione  substantise,  sed  imi- 
tate personae. 

Nam  sicut  anima  rationa- 
lis  et  caro  unus  est  homo, 


And  in  this  Trinity,  there  is 
nothing  before  or  after,  nothing 
greater  or  less  ;  but  the  whole 
three  Persons  are  co-eternal 
to  one  another,  and  co-equal. 

So  that,  in  all  things,  as 
hath  been  already  said  above, 
the  Unity  is  to  be  worshipped 
in  Trinity,  and  the  Trinity  in 
Unity. 

He,  therefore,  that  would 
be  saved,  must  thus  think  of 
the  Trinity. 

Furthermore,  it  is  necessary 
to  everlasting  salvation,  that 
he  also  believe  rightly  the  In- 
carnation of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

Now  the  right  faith  is,  that 
we  beUeve  and  confess,  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son 
of  God,  is  both  God  and  Man. 

He  is  God,  of  the  substance 
of  his  Father,  begotten  before 
the  world ;  and  he  is  Man,  of 
the  substance  of  his  Mother, 
bom  in  the  world. 

Perfect  God,  perfect  Man  : 
subsisting  of  a  rational  soul, 
and  human  flesh. 

Equal  to  the  Father  accord- 
ing to  his  Godhead  :  lesser 
than  the  Father,  according  to 
his  Manhood. 

Who  although  he  be  both 
God  and  Man,  yet  he  is  not 
two,  but  one,  Christ. 

One,  not  by  the  conversion 
of  the  Godhead  into  flesh,  but 
by  the  taking  of  the  Manhood 
unto  God. 

One  altogether,  not  by  con- 
fusion of  substance,  but  by 
unity  of  person. 

For,  as  the  rational  soul  and 
the  flesh  is  one  man,  so,  God 


TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


121 


and  Man  is  one  Christ. 

"Who  suffered  for  our  salva- 
tion ;  descended  into  hell;  rose 
again,  the  third  day,  from  the 
dead. 

He  ascended  into  heaven ; 
he  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  the  Father  Almighty; 
from  thence  he  shall  come  to 
judge  the  living  and  the  dead. 

At  whose  coming,  all  men 
shall  rise  again,  with  their 
bodies ;  and  shall  give  an  ac- 
count of  their  own  works. 

And  they  that  have  done 
good,  shall  go  into  life  ever- 
lasting; and  they  that  have 
done  evil,  into  everlasting  fire. 

This  is  the  Catholic  faith  : 
which  except  every  man  be- 
lieve faithfully  and  stedfastly, 
he  cannot  be  saved. 


ita  Deus  et  homo  unus  est 
Christus. 

Qui  passus  est  pro  salute 
nostra,  descendit  ad  inferos, 
tertia  die  resurrexit  a  mor- 
tuis. 

Ascendit  ad  coelos,  sedet 
ad  dexteram  Dei  Patris  om- 
nipotentis  :  inde  venturus 
est  judicare  vivos  et  mor- 
tuos. 

Ad  cujus  adventum  omnes 
homines  resurgere  habent 
cum  corporibus  suis,  et  red- 
dituri  sunt  de  f actis  propriis 
rationem. 

Et  qui  bona  egerunt, 
ibunt  in  vitam  setemam  ; 
qui  vero  mala,  in  ignem 
setemum. 

Haec  est  fides  Catholica : 
quam  nisi  quisque  fideliter, 
firmiterque  crediderit,  salvus 
esse  non  poterit. 


TIERCE. 


AxT.  Praise  and  perpetual 
glory  be  to  God,  Father,  and 
Son,  together  with  the  holy 
Paraclete,  for  ever  and  ever. 


Ant.  Laus  et  perennis 
gloria  Deo  Patri,  et  Filio, 
sancto  simul  Paraclito,  in 
sseculorum  ssecula. 


CAPITULUM. 


(Rom.  -si.) 


O  the  depth  of  the  riches  of 
the  wisdom  and  of  the  know- 
ledge of  God  :  how  incompre- 
hensible are  his  judgments, 
and  how  unsearchable  his 
ways  ! 

gt.  hreve. — Let  us  bless  the 
Father,  and  the  Son,  *  With 
the  Holy  Ghost.   Let  us  bless. 


O  altitudo  divitiarum  sa- 
pientiae  et  scientiae  Dei  : 
quam  incomprehensibilia 
sunt  judicia  ejus,  et  inves- 
tigabiles  vise  ejus  ! 

&.  hreve.  —  Benedicamus 
Patrem  et  Filium,  *  Cum 
sancto  Spiritu.  Benedica- 
mus. 


122  TIME   AFTER   PENTECXDST. 

y.  Laudemus  et  super-  ^.  Let  us  praise  and  exalt 
exaltemus  eum  in  saecula.*  him  above  all  for  ever.  «  With 
Cum  sancto  Spiritu.  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Gloria  Patri.      Benedica-  Glory.  Let  us  bless, 
mus. 

^.  Benedictus  es,  Domine,  y.  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord, 

in  firmamento  coeli ;  in  the  firmament  of  heaven  ; 

Bt.  Et  laudabilis,  et  glo-  Bt.  And   worthy   of   praise, 

riosus  in  saecula.  and  glorious  for  ever. 

The  Prayer  is  the  Collect  of  the  Mass,  page  123. 

MASS. 

Although  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass  is  always  cele- 
brated in  honour  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  yet,  for  this 
day,  the  Church,  in  her  chants,  prayers,  and  lessons, 
honours,  in  a  more  express  manner,  the  great  Mys- 
tery, which  is  the  foundation  of  our  christian  faith. 
A  commemoration  is,  however,  made  of  the  first 
Sunday  after  Pentecost,  in  order  not  to  interrupt  the 
arrangement  of  the  Liturgy.  The  colour  used,  by 
the  Church,  on  this  feast  of  Trinity,  is  white,  as  a 
sign  of  joy,  as,  also,  to  express  the  simplicity  and 
purity  of  the  divine  essence. 

The  Introit  is  not  taken  from  holy  Scripture.  It 
is  a  formula  of  glorification  in  keeping  with  the 
Feast,  and  speaks  of  the  blessed  Trinity  as  the  divine 
source  of  the  mercies  bestowed  on  mankind. 

INTROIT. 

Benedicta  sit  sancta  Tri-  Blessed  be  the  holy  Trinity, 

nitas,  atque  indivisa  Unitas  :  and  undivided  Unity  :  we  will 

confitebimur   ei,    quia   fecit  praise  it,  because  it  hath  shovsoi 

nobiscum         misericordiam  its  mercy  unto  us. 
8uam. 

Fs.  Domine  Dominus  nos-  Ps.  O  Lord,  our  Lord,  how 

ter,    quam    adjnirabile    est  wonderful  is  thy  Name  in  the 

Nomen   tuum    in    universa  whole   earth,      y.  Glory,    etc. 

terra  !       y.    Gloria     Patri.  Blessed. 
Benedicta  sit. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


123 


In  the  Collect,  holy  Church  asks  for  us  firmness  in 
the  faith,  whereby  we  confess  Unity  and  Trinity  in 
God.  Faith  is  the  first  condition  required  for  salva- 
tion ;  it  is  the  first  link  in  our  union  with  God.  It 
is  with  this  Faith  that  we  shall  conquer  our  enemies, 
and  overcome  all  obstacles. 


COLLECT. 


O  almighty  and  everlasting 
God,  who  hast  granted  thy 
servants,  in  the  confession  of 
the  true  faith,  to  acknowledge 
the  glory  of  an  eternal  Trinity, 
and,  in  the  power  of  majesty, 
to  adore  an  Unity  :  we  beseech 
thee  that,  by  the  strength  of 
this  faith,  we  may  be  defended 
from  all  adversity.  Through, 
etc. 


Omnipotens  sempiteme 
Deus,  qui  dedisti  famulis 
tuis  in  conf  essione  verse  fidei, 
setemse  Trinitatis  gloriam 
agnoscere,  et  in  potentia 
majestatis  adorare  Unita- 
tem,  quaesumus,  ut  ejusdem 
fidei  firmitate,  ab  omnibus 
semper  muniamur  adversis. 
Per  Dominum. 


COMMEMORATION    OF   THE   FIRST   SUNDAY    AFTER 
PENTECOST. 


O  God,  the  strength  of  such 
as  hope  in  thee  :  mercifully 
hear  us  calling  on  thee  :  and 
since  mortal  weakness  can  do 
nothing  without  thee,  grant 
us  the  assistance  of  thy  grace; 
that,  in  observing  thy  com- 
mandments, we  may  please 
thee,  both  in  will  and  action. 
Through,  etc. 


Deus  in  te  sperantium  f  or- 
titudo,  adesto  propitius  in- 
vocationibus  nostris :  et  quia 
sine  te  nihil  potest  mortalis 
infirmitas,  prsesta  auxilium 
gratisetuae,  ut  inexsequendis 
mandatis  tuis,  et  voluntate 
tibi  et  actione  placeamus. 
Per  Dominum. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson    of  the    Epistle    of 
Saint    Paul  to   the    Romans. 

Ch.  XL 

O  the  depth  of  the  riches  of 
the  wisdom  and  of  the  know- 


Lectio     Epistolse      beati 
Pauli  ApostoU  ad  Eomanos. 

Cap.  XI. 

O  altitudo  divitiarum  sa- 
pientise    et    scientiae    Dei : 


124  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

quam       incomprehcnsibilia  ledge  of  God !     How  incom- 

sunt  judicia  ejus,  et  invos-  prehensible  arehis  judsnuents, 

tigabiles   viae    ejus  I      Quis  and     how     unsearchable     his 

enim  cognovit  sensum  Do-  ways  I     For  who  hath  known 

mini  ?  aut  quis  consiliarius  the  mind   of   the   Lord  ?     Or 

ejus   fuit  ?    aut  quis    prior  who  hath  been  his  counsellor? 

dedit  illi,  et  retribuetur  ei  ?  Or  who  had  first  given  to  him, 

Quoniam    ex   ipso,    et    per  and  recompense  shall  be  made 

ipsum,  et  in  ipso  sunt  om-  him  ?      For   of   him,    and   by 

nia  :  ipsi  honor  et  gloria  in  him,  and  in  him,  are  all  things : 

saecula.     Amen.  to    him   be    glory    for    ever. 

Amen. 

"We  cannot  fix  our  thoughts  upon  the  diviiie  Judg- 
ments and  waysy  without  feeling  a  sort  of  bewilder- 
ment. The  eternal  and  infinite  dazzle  our  weak 
reason  ;  and  yet  this  same  reason  of  ours  acknowledges 
and  confesses  them.  Now,  if  even  the  ways  of  God 
with  his  creatures  surpass  our  understanding,  how  can 
we  pretend  to  discover,  of  ourselves,  the  inmost  nature 
of  this  sovereign  Being  ?  And  yet,  in  this  in-created 
essence,  we  do  distinguish  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  from  each  other,  and  we  glorify 
them.  This  comes  from  the  Father's  having  revealed 
himself,  by  sending  us  his  Son,  the  object  of  his  eternal 
delight ;  it  comes  from  the  Son's  showing  us  his  own 
Personality,  by  taking  our  Flesh,  which  the  Father 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not ;  it  comes  from  the  Holy 
Ghost's  being  sent  by  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and 
his  fulfilling  the  Mission  he  received  from  them. 
Our  mortal  eye  respectfully  gazes  upon  these  divine 
depths  of  truth,  and  our  heart  is  touched  at  the 
thought,  that  it  is  through  his  benefits  to  us  that 
he  has  given  us  to  know  him,  and  that  our  know- 
ledge of  what  he  is,  came  through  what  he  gave  us. 
Let  us  lovingly  prize  this  Faith,  and  confidently 
wait  for  that  happy  moment,  when  it  will  make  way 
for  the  eternal  vision  of  that  which  we  have  believed 
here  below. 

The  Gradual  and  Alleluia-YevsQ^  are  full  of  joy 


TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


125 


and  admiration,  at  the  presence  of  that  sovereign 
majesty,  who  has  vouchsafed  to  send  forth  his  rays 
into  the  darkness  of  our  minds. 


GRADUAL. 


Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord, 
who  beholdest  the  deep,  and 
sittest  on  the  Cherubim. 

y.  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord, 
in  the  firmament  of  heaven, 
and  worthy  of  praise  for  ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord, 
the  God  of  our  Fathers,  and 
worthy  of  praise  for  ever. 
Alleluia. 


Benedictus  es,  Domine, 
qui  intueris  abyssos,  et  sedes 
super  cherubim. 

y.  Benedictus  es,  Domine, 
in  firmamento  coeli,  et  lau- 
dabilis  in  saecula. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Benedictus  es,  Domine, 
Deus  patrum  nostrorum,  et 
laudabilis  in  saecula.  Alle- 
luia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  Holy  Gospel 


according  to  Matthew. 


Ch.  XXVII. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  said  to 
his  disciples  :  All  power  is 
given  to  me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth.  Going,  therefore,  teach 
all  nations  :  baptising  them  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  :  teaching  them  to  ob- 
serve all  things  whatsoever  I 
have  commanded  you.  And 
behold !  I  am  with  you  all 
days,  even  to  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  world. 


.  Sequentia    sancti    Evan- 
gelii  secundum  Mattheeum. 

Cap.  XXVII. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Dixit 
Jesus  discipulis  suis  :  Data 
est  mihi  omnis  potestas  in 
ccelo  et  in  terra.  Euntes  ergo 
docete  omnes  gentes  :  bap- 
tizantes  eos  in  nomine  Pa- 
tris,  et  Filii,  et  ^piritus 
sancti :  docentes  eos  servare 
omnia  qusecumque  mandavi 
vobis.  Et  ecce  ego  vobiscum 
sum  omnibus  diebus,  usque 
ad  consummationem  sseculi. 


The  mystery  of  the  hlessed  Trinity,  which  was 
taught  us  by  the  mission  of  the  Son  of  Grod  into  this 
world,  and  by  the  promise  of  a  speedy  sending  the 
Holy  Spirit,  is  announced  to  men  by  these  solemn 
words,  uttered  by  Jesus  just  before  his  ascension  into 
heaven.    He  had  said:  He  that  shall  believe,  and  shall 


126  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

he  baptised,  shall  he  saved  ;^  but  he  adds,  that  Baptism 
is  to  be  given  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Henceforward  man 
must  not  only  confess  the  unity  of  God,  by  abjuring 
a  plurality  of  gods,  but  he  must,  also,  adore  a  Trinity 
of  Persons  in  Unity  of  Essence.  The  great  secret  of 
heaven  is  now  a  truth  which  is  published  through  the 
whole  world. 

But,  whilst  humbly  confessing  the  God  whom  we 
have  been  taught  to  know  as  he  is  in  himself,  we 
must,  likewise,  pay  a  tribute  of  eternal  gratitude  to 
the  ever  glorious  Trinity.  Not  only  has  It  vouch- 
safed to  impress  Its  di\4ne  image  on  our  soul,  by 
making  her  to  Its  own  likeness  ;  but,  in  the  super- 
natural order.  It  has  taken  possession  of  our  being, 
and  raised  it  to  an  incalculable  pitch  of  greatness. 
The  Father  has  adopted  us  in  his  Son  become  Incar- 
nate ;  the  Word  illumines  our  minds  with  his  light ; 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  chosen  us  for  his  dwelling :  and 
this  it  is  that  is  expressed  by  the  form  of  holy  Bap- 
tism. By  those  words  pronounced  over  us,  together 
with  the  pouring  out  of  the  water,  the  whole  Trinity 
took  possession  of  Its  creature.  We  call  this  sublime 
marvel  to  mind  as  often  as  we  invoke  the  Three 
divine  Persons,  making  upon  ourselves,  at  the  same 
time,  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  When  our  mortal 
remains  are  carried  into  the  house  of  God,  there  to 
receive  the  last  blessings  and  farewell  of  the  Church 
on  earth,  the  Priest  will  beseech  the  Lord  *'  not  to 
enter  into  judgment  with  his  servant ;  "  and  in  order 
to  draw  down  the  divine  mercy  upon  this  Christian, 
who  has  gone  to  his  eternity,  he  will  say  to  the 
Sovereign  Judge,  that  this  member  of  the  human 
family  "  was  marked,  whilst  in  this  life,  with  the 
sign  of  the  Holy  Trinity."  Let  us  respect  this  divine 
impress  which  Ave  bear  upon  us  ;  it  is  to  be  eternal ; 

1  St.  Mark,  xvi.,  16. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  127 

hell  itself  will  not  be  able  to  blot  it  out.  Let  it, 
then,  be  our  hope,  our  dearest  title  ;  and  let  us  live 
for  the  glory  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost.     Amen ! 

In  the  Offertory  the  Church  begins  the  immediate 
preparation  of  the  Sacrifice,  by  invoking  on  the  obla- 
tion the  Name  of  the  Three  Persons,  and  again  pro- 
claiming the  mercy  of  God. 

OFFERTORY. 

Blessed  be  God  the  Father,         Benedictus  sit  Deus  Pater, 

and  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of  nnigenitusque     Dei    Filius, 

God,  likewise  the  Holy  Ghost :  sanctus     quoque     Spiritus  : 

for  he  hath  shown  his  mercy  quia    fecit  nobiscum    raise - 

unto  us.  ricordiam  suam. 

In  the  Secret,  holy  Church  asks,  that  the  homage 
we  are  making,  in  this  Sacrifice,  of  ourselves  to  the 
sacred  Trinity,  may  be  presented  to  It  not  to-day 
only,  but  may  become  eternal  by  our  being  admitted 
into  heaven,  where  we  shall  contemplate,  and  with- 
out a  veil,  the  glorious  mystery  of  God,  One  in  Three 
Persons. 

SECRET. 

Sanctify,  we  beseech  thee,  Sanctifica,  quaesumus  Do- 

O  Lord,  our  God,  by  the  invo-  mine  Deus  noster,   per   tui 

cation  of  thy  holy  IS'ame,  the  sancti    Nominis    invocatio- 

victim  of  this  oblation  :  and,  nem   hujus  oblationis   hos- 

by    it,    make    us   an    eternal  tiam :  et  per  eam  nosmetip- 

offering  to  thee.  Through,  etc.  .  sos  tibi  perfice  munus  seter- 

num.     Per  Dominum. 

COMMEMORATION    OF    THE    FIRST   SUNDAY   AFTER 
PENTECOST. 

Mercifully  receive,  we  be-  Hostias  nostras,  quaesu- 
seech  thee,  0  Lord,  the  sacri-  mus  Domine,  tibi  dicatas 
fice  we  offer  thee  :  and  grant  placatus  assume  :  et  ad  per- 
that  it  may  be  a  continual  petuum  nobis  tribue  prove - 
help  to  us.     Through,  etc.  nire  subsidium.     Per  Domi- 

num. 


128 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Then  follows  the  Preface;  it  is  proper  for  this 
Feast,  and  for  all  Sundays,  throughout  the  Year, 
which  have  no  other  assigned  to  them. 


PREFACE. 


Vere  dignuin  et  justum 
est,  sequum  et  salutare,  nos 
tibi  semper,  et  ubique  gratias 
agere,  Domine  sancte.  Pater 
omnipotens,  seteme  Deus. 
Qui  cum  unigenito  Filio  tuo 
et  Spiritu  Sancto,  unus  es 
Deus,  unus  es  Dominus:  non 
in  unius  singularitate  Per^ 
sonae,  sed  in  unius  Trinitate 
substantia .  Quod  enim  de 
tua  gloria,  revelante  te, 
credimus,  hoc  de  Filio  tuo, 
hoc  de  Spiritu  Sancto,  sine 
differentia  discretionis  senti- 
mus.  Ut  in  confessione 
verae,  sempitemseque  Deita- 
tis,  et  in  Personis  proprietas, 
et  in  essentia  unitas,  et  in 
M{;j  estate  adoretur  sequali- 
tas.  Quam  laudant  Angeli 
atque  Archangeli,  Cherubim 
quoque  ac  Seraphim ;  qui 
non  cessant  clamare  quotidie, 
una  voce  dicentes,  Sanctus, 
etc. 


It  is  truly  meet  and  just, 
right  and  available  to  salva- 
tion, that  we  should  always, 
and  in  all  places,  give  thanks 
to  thee,  O  Holy  Lord,  Father 
Almighty,  eternal  God.  Who 
together  with  thy  only  begot- 
ten Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
art  one  God,  and  one  Lord  : 
not  in  a  singularity  of  one 
Person,  but  in  a  Trinity  of 
one  substance.  For  what  we 
believe  of  thy  glory,  as  thou 
hast  revealed,  the  same  w^e  be- 
lieve of  thy  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  without  any  dif- 
ference or  distinction.  So  that 
in  the  confession  of  the  true 
and  eternal  Deity,  we  adore  a 
distinction  in  the  Persons,  an 
unity  in  the  essence,  and  an 
equality  in  the  Majesty. 
Whom  the  Angels  and  Arch- 
angels, the  Cherubim  also  and 
Seraphim  praise,  and  cease  not 
daily  to  crj"  out  with  one  voice, 
saying.  Holy,  etc. 

In  the  Communion-Anthem,  the  Church  continues 
her  praise  of  the  mercy  of  the  great  God,  who  has 
made  use  of  his  own  blessings  upon  us,  in  order  to 
enlighten  and  instruct  us  regarding  his  incomprehen- 
sible Nature. 

COMMUNION. 


Benedicimus  Deum  coeli, 
et  coram  omnibus  vivcnti- 
bus  confitcbimur  ei  :  quia 
fecit  nobiscum  misericor- 
diam  suam. 


We  bless  the  God  of  heaven, 
and  we  will  praise  him  in  the 
sight  of  all  the  li\4ng,  because 
he  hath  shown  us  his  mercy. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


129 


Two  things  are  needed  for  our  reaching  God  :  the 
light  of  Faith,  which  gives  our  understanding  to 
know  him ;  and  the  divine  Food,  which  unites  us  to 
him.  In  the  Postcommunion,  holy  Church  prays 
that  we  may  have  both  ;  and  be  thus  brought  to  that 
union,  which  is  the  happy  end  of  our  creation. 


POSTCOMMUNION. 


May  the  receiving  of  this 
Sacrament,  O  Lord  our  God, 
avail  us  to  the  salvation  of  body 
and  soul  :  together  with  the 
confession  of  an  everlasting 
holy  Trinity,  and  of  the  undi- 
vided Unity  thereof.  Through, 
etc. 


Proficiat  nobis  ad  salutem 
corporis  et  animse,  Domine 
Deus  noster,  hujus  Sacra- 
menti  susceptio :  et  sempi- 
temse  sanctse  Trinitatis, 
ejusdemque  individuae  Uni- 
tatis  confessio.  Per  Domi- 
nuni. 


COMMEMORATION    OF   THE   FIRST    SUNDAY   AFTER 
PENTECOST. 


Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  that  the  great  sacrifice, 
we  have  partaken  of,  may 
avail  us  unto  salvation,  and 
make  us  never  cease  praising 
thee.     Through,  etc. 


Tantis,  Domine,  repleti 
muneribus,  prsesta,  qusesu- 
mus :  ut  et  salutaria  dona 
capiamus,  et  a  tua  numquam 
laude  cessemus.  Per  Domi- 
num. 


The  Last  Gospel  is  that  of  the  first  Sunday  after 
Pentecost ;  it  is  read,  by  the  Priest,  instead  of  that  of 
St.  John. 

Sequentia    sancti    Evan- 
gelii  secundum  Lucam. 

Cap.  YI. 

In    illo    tempore  :    Dixit 

Jesus  discipulis  suis  :  Estote 
misericordes,  sicut  et  Pater 
vester  misericors  est.  Nolite 
judicare,  et  non  judicabi- 
niini  :  nolite  condemnare, 
et  non  condemnabimini. 
Dimittite  et  dimittemini. 
Date  et  dabitur  vobis :  men- 

K 


Sequel  of  the  Holy  Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ch.  VI. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  said  to 
his  disciples  :  Be  ye  merciful, 
as  your  Father  also  is  merciful. 
Judge  not,  and  you  shall  not 
be  judged.  Condemn  not, 
and  you  shall  not  be  con- 
demned. Forgive,  and  you 
shall  be  forgiven.  Give,  and 
it  shall  be  given  to  you ;  good 

VOL.    X. 


130 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


finram  bonam,  et  confertam, 
et  coagitatam,  et  superefflu- 
entem  dabunt  in  sinimi  ves- 
trum.  Eadem  quippe  men- 
sura,  qua  niensi  fneritis, 
remetietiir  vobis.  Dicebat 
autem  illis  et  similitudinem : 
Numquid  potest  csecus  cae- 
cum ducere  ?  nonne  ambo  in 
foveam  cadunt  ?  Xon  est 
discipulus  super  magistrum : 
perfectus  autem  omnis  erit, 
si  sit  sicut  magister  ejus. 
Quid  autem  vides  festucam 
in  oculo  fratris  tui,  trabem 
autem,  quae  in  oculo  tuo  est, 
non  consideras  ?  Aut  quo- 
modo  potes  dicere  fratri  tuo  : 
Frater,  sine,  ejiciam  festu- 
cam de  oculo  tuo :  ipse  in 
oculo  tuo  trabem  non  xi- 
dens  ?  Hvpocrita,  ejice  pri- 
mum  trabem  de  oculo  tuo  : 
et  tunc  perspicies  ut  educas 
festucam  de  oculo  fratris 
tui. 

Be.  Deo  gratias. 


measure  and  pressed  down 
and  shaken  together  and  run- 
ning over  shall  be  given  unto 
your  bosom.  For  with  the 
same  measure  that  you  shall 
mete  withal,  it  shall  be  mea- 
sured to  you  again.  And  he 
spoke  also  to  them  a  similitude : 
Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind  ? 
do  they  not  both  fall  into  the 
ditch  r  The  disciple  is  not 
above  his  master  :  but  every 
one  shall  be  perfect,  if  he  be  as 
his  master.  And  why  seest 
thou  the  mote  in  thy  brother's 
eye ;  but  the  beam  that  is  in 
thy  own  eye  thou  considerest 
not  ?  or  how  canst  thou  say 
to  thy  brother :  Brother,  let 
me  pull  the  mote  out  of  thy 
eye,  when  thou  thyself  seest 
not  the  beam  in  thy  own  eye  ? 
Hypocrite,  cast  first  the  beam 
out  of  thine  own  eye,  and  then 
thou  shalt  see  clearly  to  take 
out  the  mote  from  thy  brother's 
eye. 

&.  Thanks  be  to  God. 


SEXT. 


Ajnt.  Gloria  laudis  resonet 
in  ore  omnium,  Patri,  Geni- 
taeque  ProH,  Spiritui  sancto 
pariter  resultet  laude  per- 
enni. 


AxT.  Let  the  glory  of  praise 
sound  in  everj'  mouth,  to  the 
Father,  and  to  the  Son  begot- 
ten of  him;  to  the  Holy  Ghost, 
also,  let  perpetual  praise  be 
given. 


CAPITULUM. 

(2  Cor.  XIII.) 

Gratia  Domini  nostri  Jesu        The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

Christ,  and  the  charity  of  God, 
and  the  communication  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all. 
Amen. 


Christi,  et  charitas  Dei,  ot 
communicatio  sancti  Spiri- 
tus  sit  cum  omnibus  vobis. 
Amen. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


131 


Bt.  hreve. — Blessed  art  thou, 
O  Lord,  *  In  the  firmament  of 
heaven.  Blessed. 

'^.  And  worthy  of  praise, 
and  glorious  for  ever.  *  In  the 
firmament.     Glory.     Blessed. 

y.  By  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
the  heavens  were  established. 

gt.  And  all  the  power  of 
them,  by  the  spirit  of  his 
mouth. 


Bt.  hreve. — Benedictus  es, 
Domine,  *  In  firmamento 
coeli.     Benedictus. 

^.  Etlaudabilis  et  glorio- 
sus  in  saecula.  *  In  firma- 
mento. Gloria.    Benedictus. 

y.  Verbo  Domini  cceli 
firmati  sunt. 

gt.  Et  spiritu  oris  ejus 
omnis  virtus  eorum. 


The  Prayer  is  the  Collect  of  the  Mass  ;  page  123. 


NONE. 


Ant.  From  whom  are  all 
things,  by  whom  all  things,  in 
whom  all  things, — to  him  be 
glory  for  ever. 


Ainr.  Ex  quo  omnia,  per 
quem  omnia,  in  quo  omnia  : 
ipsi  gloria  in  ssecula. 


CAPITULUM. 


(1  St.  John,  V.) 


There  are  three  who  give 
testimony  in  heaven  ;  the  Fa- 
ther, the  Word,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost;  and  these  three  are 
one. 

gf.  hreve. — By  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  *  The  heavens  were 
established.  By  the  word. 

f.  And  all  the  power  of 
them,  by  the  spirit  of  his 
mouth.  *  The  heavens.  Glory. 
By  the  word. 

^.  May  the  name  of  the 
Lord  be  blessed, 

gt.  From  henceforth,  now, 
.and  for  ever. 


Tres  sunt,  qui  testimonium 
dant  in  ccelo,  Pater,  Ver- 
bum,  et  Spiritus  sanctus ;  et 
hi  tres  unum  sunt. 

Bt.  hreve. — Yerbo Domini,* 
Coeli  firmati  sunt.     Verbo. 

y.  Et  spiritu  oris  ejus 
omnis  virtus  eorum.  *  Coeli. 
Gloria.     Verbo. 

y.  Sit  nomen  Domini  be- 
nedictum, 

Bt.  Ex  hoc  nunc  et  usque 
in  sseculum. 


The  Prayer  is  the  Collect  of  the  Mass,  page  123. 


132  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


VESPERS. 

Ant.  Gloria  tibi,  Trinitas  AxT.  Glory  be  to  thee,  O 

eequalis,  una  Deltas,  et  ante  equal  Trinity,  one  Deity,  both 

omnia  saecula,  et  nunc  et  in  before  all  ages,  and  now,  and 

perpetuum.  for  ever. 

Ps.  Dixit  Dominus,  jmf/e  89. 

Ant.    Laus    et    perennis        AxT.  Praise   and  perpetual 

gloria  Deo,  Patri,  et  Filio,  glory  be  to  God,  Father,  and 

sancto    siniul   ParacHto,    in  Son,  together  with  the  Holy 

saeculorum  saecula.  Paraclete,  for  ever  and  ever. 

Ps.  Confitebor  tibi,  page  90. 

Ant.  Gloria  laudis  resonet  Ant.  Let  the  glory  of  praise 
in  ore  omnium  Patri,  geni-  sound  in  every  mouth,  to  the 
taeque  Proli ;  Spiritui  sancto  Father,  and  to  the  Son  be- 
l^ariter  resultet  laude  per-  gotten  of  him;  to  the  Holy 
enni.  Ghost ,  also ,  let  perpetual  praise 

be  given. 

Ps.  Beatus  vir,  page  91. 

AxT.    Laus    Deo    Patri,  Axt.  Let  praise    be   given 

parilique  Proli,  et  tibi  sane-  to  God  the  Father,  and  to  his 

te  studio  perenni   Spiritus,  equal  Son  ;   and  may  our  lips 

nostro  resonet  ab  ore  onme  celebrate  thee  unceasingly,  O 

per  aevum.  Holy  Spirit,  for  all  ages. 

Ps.  Laud  ate  pueri,  page  92. 

Ajo".  Ex  quo  omnia,  per  Ajn'T.  From  whom  are  all 
quem  omnia,  in  quo  omnia  :  things,  by  whom  all  things,  in 
ipsi  gloria  in  saecula.  whom  all  things, — to  him  be 

glory  for  ever. 

Ps.  In  exitu  Israel,  page  93. 

CAPITULUM. 

{Rom.  xi .) 

0  altitudo  divitiarum  sa-  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  of 
pientiae  et  scientisB  Dei  :  the  wisdom  and  of  the  know- 
quam  incomprehensibilia  ledge  of  God  :  how  incompre- 
sunt  judicia  ejus,  et  iiives-  hensible  are  his  judgments, 
tigabiles  viae  ejus !  and     how    imsearchable    his 

ways ! 


TRINITY    SUNDAY. 


133 


HYMN* 


Now  is  the  burning  sun  re- 
treating ;  do  thou,  O  everlast- 
ing Unity,  O  blessed  Trinity, 
our  Light,  pour  forth  love 
into  our  hearts. 

It  is  to  thee  we  pray,  at 
mom  and  eve,  in  our  songs  of 
praise  :  grant  us,  thy  suppli- 
ants, that  we  may  praise  thee 
in  the  company  of  the  citizens 
of  heaven. 

To  thee,  O  God,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost !  may  glory 
be,  as  it  hath  ever  been,  for 
ever  and  for  endless  ages. 
Amen. 

^.  Blessed  art  thou,  0  Lord, 
in  the  firmament  of  heaven ; 

gt.  And  worthy  of  praise, 
and  glorious  for  ever. 


Jam  sol  recedit  igneus, 
Tu  lux  perennis  Unitas, 
Nostris,  beata  Trinitas, 
Infunde  amorem  cordibus. 

Te  mane  laudum  carmine, 
Te  deprecamur  vespere ; 
Digneris  ut  te  supplices 
Laudemus  inter  CoeHtes. 


Patri  simulque  Filio, 
Tibique  sancte  Spiritus, 
Sicut  fuit,  sit  jugiter 
Sseclum  per  omne  gloria. 

Amen. 

y.  Benedictus  es,  Domine, 
in  fijmamento  coeli ; 

Bi.  Et  laudabilis  et  glorio- 
sus  in  ssecula. 


ANTiPHON  OF  THE  Magnificat. 


Thee  God  the  Father  unbe- 
gotten,  thee  the  Only  Begotten 
Son,  thee  the  Holy  Ghost  the 
Comforter,  holy  and  undivided 
Trinity,  with  all  our  heart  and 
mouth,  we  confess,  praise,  and 
bless  :  to  thee  be  glory  for 
ever. 


Te  Deum  Patrem  ingeni- 
tum,  te  Filium  unigenitum, 
te  Spiritum  sanctum  Para- 
clitum,  sanctam  et  indivi- 
duam  Trinitatem,  toto  corde 
et  ore  confitemur,  laudamus, 
atque  benedicimus  :  tibi 
gloria  in  ssecula. 


*  In  the  Monastic  Bite,  it  is  given  thus,  and  is  preceded  by  a 
Responsory  : — 


5^.  breve. — Benedicatnus 
Patrem,  et  Fihum,  *  Cum 
Sancto  Spiritu.     Benedicamus. 

f.  Laudemus  et  superexalte- 
mus  eum  in  saecula.  Cum. 
Gloria  Patri,  etc.  Benedicamus. 

0  Lux  beata  Trinitas, 
Et  principaUs  Unitas, 
Jam  sol  recedit  igneus, 
Infunde  lumen  cordibus. 


Te  mane  laudum  carmine, 
Te  deprecemur  vespere ; 
Te  nostra  supplex  gloria 
Per  cuncta  laudet  seecula. 

Deo  Patri  sit  gloria, 
Ej  usque  soU  Filio, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito 
Et  nunc  et  in  perpetuum. 

Amen. 


134 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


0REMU3. 

Omnipotens  sempiteme 
Deus,  qui  dedisti  famulis 
tuis  in  confessione  verse 
fidei  aetemaB  Trinitatis  glo- 
riam  agnoscere,  et  in  po- 
tontia  majestatis  adorare 
Unitatem  ;  quaesumus  ut 
ejusdem  fidei  firmitate,  ab 
omnibus  semper  muniamur 
adversis.     Per  Dominum. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

O  Almighty  and  everlasting 
God,  who  hast  granted  thy 
servants,  in  the  confession  of 
the  true  faith,  to  acknowledge 
the  glory  of  an  eternal  Trinity, 
and,  in  the  power  of  majesty, 
to  adore  an  unity  :  we  beseech 
thee  that,  by  the  strength  of 
this  faith,  we  may  be  defended 
from  all  adversity.  Through, 
etc. 


COMMEMORATION   OF   THE   SuNDAY. 


Ant.  Nolite  judicare,  ut 
non  judicemini :  in  quo  enim 
judicio  judicaveritis  judica- 
bimini,  dicit  Dominus. 

>".  Dirigatur,  Domine, 
oratio  mea, 

Be.  Sicut  LQcensum  in  con- 
spectu  tuo. 

OREMUS. 

Deus  in  te  sperantium 
fortitudo,  adesto  propitius 
invocationibus  nostris  :  et 
quia  sine  te  nihil  potest 
mortalis  iafirmitas,  prsesta 
auxilium  gratice  tuoe,  ut  in 
exsequendis  mandatis  tuis, 
ct  voluntate  tibi  et  actione 
placeamus.     Per  Dominum. 


Ant.  Judge  not,  that  ye  bo 
not  judged  :  for,  with  what 
judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall 
be  judged,  saith  the  Lord. 

y.  Let  my  prayer,  O  Lord, 
be  directed, 

Bt.  As  incense  in  thy  sight. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

0  God,  the  strength  of  such 
as  hope  in  thee  :  mercifully 
hear  us  calling  on  thee  :  and, 
since  mortal  weakness  can  do 
nothing  without  thee,  grant 
us  the  assistance  of  thy  grace ; 
that,  in  observing  thy  com- 
mandments, we  may  please 
thee,  both  in  will  and  action. 
Through,  etc. 


The  Middle  Ages  have  left  us  several  Sequences 
for  the  Feast  of  the  blessed  Trinity.  They  are  much 
overladen  with  metaphysical  terms,  and,  for  the  most 
part,  have  but  little  melody  or  poetry  in  them.  They 
give  us  the  language  of  the  Schools,  with  so  much 
roughness,  that  they  would  scarcely  find  any  readers 
now- a- days  to  relish  them.  There  is  one,  however — 
the  one  composed  by  Adam  of  Saint  Victor — which 


TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


135 


we  here  insert,  as  it  maintains,  even  in  its  scholastic 
phraseology,  all  the  majesty  and  melody  which  char- 
acterise the  compositions  of  that  great  Poet. 


SEQUENCE. 


Confessing  the  divine  Unity, 
we  venerate  the  Trinity  with 
one  and  the  same  worship ; 
we  acknowledge  three  Persons, 
differing  from  each  other  by 
a  personal  difference. 

They  have  their  names  from 
their  relations,  for  they  are 
substantially  one,  and  not 
three  principles.  "When  speak- 
ing of  them  as  Three,  thou 
must  remember,  that  their 
Nature  is  one,  and  that  their 
Essence  is  not  threefold. 

Their  being,  and  power,  and 
will,  and  knowledge,  all  are 
simple  :  the  power  of  one  is 
not  less  than  that  of  two,  or 
of  three,  Persons. 


Father,  Son,  Holy  Spirit, 
one  God  :  and  yet  have  they 
certain  things  proper.  One 
power,  one  deity,  one  splen- 
dour, one  light  :  what  one 
hath,  another  hath. 


The  Son  is  equal  to  the 
Father;  neither  is  that  equality 
destroyed  by  the  personal  dis- 
tinction existingbetween  them. 
Equal  to  the  Father  and  the 
Son  is  the  Spiritual  Bond,  who 
proceedeth  from  both. 

Man's  reason  cannot  com- 
prehend these  three  Persons, 


Profitentes  Unitatem 
Veneremur  Trinitatem 

Pari  reverentia, 
Tres  personas  asserentes 
Personali  differentes 

A  se  differentia. 

Haec  dicuntur  relative, 
Quum  sint  unum  substan- 
tive, 

Non  tria  principia. 
Sive  dicas  tres  vel  tria. 
Simplex  tamen  est  usia, 

Non  triplex  essentia. 

Simplex  esse,  simplex  posse, 
Simplex  velle,  simplex  nosse, 

Cuncta  simplicia. 
Non  unius  quam  duarum 
Sive  trium  personarum 

Minor  efficacia. 

Pater',       Proles,       sacrum 

Flamen, 
Deus  unus  :  sed  hi  tamen 

Habent  qusedam  propria. 
Una  virtus,  unum  numen, 
Unus   splendor,    unum    lu- 
men. 
Hoc  una  quod  alia. 

Patri  Proles  est  sequalis, 
Nee  hoc  tollit  personalis 

Amborum  distinctio. 
Patri  compar  FiKoque, 
Spiritalis  ab  utroque 

Procedit  connexio. 


Non  humana  ratione 
Capi  possunt  hse  personae. 


136 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Nec  hanim  discretio. 
Non  hie  ordo  temporalis, 
Non  hie  situs,  aut  loealis 

Renun  circumscriptio. 

Nil  in  Deo  propter  Deum, 
Nulla  eausa  praetor  eum 

Qui  eausat  eausalia. 
Effeetiva  vol  formalis 
Causa  Deus,  et  finalis, 

Sed  numquam,  materia. 

Digne  loqui  de  personis 
Yim  transcendit  rationis, 

Excedit  ingenia. 
Quid    sit    gigni   quid   pro- 
cessus, 
Me  neseire  sum  professus  : 

Sed  fide  non  dubia. 

Qui  sic  credit,  ne  festinet, 
Et  a  via  non  declinet 

Insolerter  regia. 
Servet  fidem,  forraet  mores, 
Nec  declinet  ad  errores 

Quos  damnat  Ecclesia. 


Nos  in  fide  gloriemur, 
Nos  in  una  modulomur, 

Fidei  constantia : 
Trinse  sit  laus  Unitati, 
Sit  et  simplae  Trinitati 

Coaetema  gloria ! 

Amen. 


nor  their  distinction.  In  this 
mystery,  there  is  no  order  of 
time,  no  position  of  place,  no 
boundaries  of  space. 

There  is  nought  ia  God  but 
God;  and,  besides  him,  there 
is  no  cause  that  causeth  things 
produced.  God  is  cause,  ef- 
fective, and  formal,  and  final; 
but  never  cause  material. 

It  is  beyond  the  power  of 
reason  or  genius  to  speak 
worthily  of  the  three  Persons. 
I  confess  that  I  know  not  what 
divine  Generation  and  Proces- 
sion are  ;  and  yet  do  I  believe 
them  with  undoubting  faith. 

Let  him  who  thus  believes, 
have  patience ;  and  not  im- 
prudently stray  from  the  royal 
path.  Let  him  keep  his  faith, 
correct  his  manners,  and  go 
not  over  to  those  errors  which 
the  Church  condemns. 

Let  us  glory  in  our  faith ; 
lot  us  sing  our  hymns,  in  the 
constancy  of  one  same  faith  ; 
be  praise  to  the  trinal  Unity, 
and  co-eternal  glory  to  the 
simple  Trinity ! 

Amen. 


0  indivisible  Unity  !  0  Trinity  distinct  in  one 
only  Nature  !  Infinite  God,  who  hast  revealed  thy- 
self unto  men !  graciously  bear  with  us,  whilst  we 
dare  to  make  our  adorations  before  thee,  and  pour 
forth  our  heart's  thanksgiving,  feeling  ourselves  over- 
whelmed by  the  brightness  of  thy  majesty.  0  Unity 
divine  !  0  divine  Trinity !  we  have  not,  as  yet,  seen 
thee  ;  but  we  know  that  thou  art,  for  thou  hast 
vouchsafed  to  reveal  thyself  unto  us.     This  earth, 


TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


137 


whereon  we  are  living,  has  the  mystery  distinctly 
proclaimed  to  it,  every  day  of  its  existence, — that 
same  august  mystery,  whose  vision  is  the  source  of 
the  happiness  enjoyed  by  the  Blessed,  who  are  glori- 
fied, and  are  united  with  thee  in  closest  union.  The 
human  race  had  to  wait  long  ages,  before  the  divine 
formula  was  fully  revealed ; — happy  we,  who  live  in 
its  full  possession,  and  can,  and  do,  delightedly  pro- 
claim Unity  and  Trinity  in  thine  infinite  Essence  ! 
There  was  a  time,  when  an  inspired  writer  spoke  an 
allusion  to  this  grandest  of  truths ;  but  his  words 
flashed  across  the  mind  of  his  hearers,  as  lightning 
traverses  a  cloud,  and  then  leaves  it  darker  than 
before.  I  have  not  learned  Wisdom,  said  he,  and  have 
not  hnoicn  the  science  of  saints.  Who  hath  ascended 
up  into  heaven^  and  descended^  Who  hath  held  the 
wind  (the  storm)  in  his  hands  ?  Who  hath  bound  up 
the  waters  together,  as  in  a  garment  ?  Who  hath 
raised  up  all  the  borders  of  the  earth  ?  What  is  his 
name  /  and  ivhat  is  the  name  of  his  Son,  if  thou 
hnowest?  ^ 

Thanks  to  thine  unbounded  mercy,  0  Lord  God ! 
we  now  know  thy  name.  Thou  art  called  the  Father ; 
and  he  whom  thou  begettest  from  all  eternity  is 
named  the  Word  and  Wisdom.  •  We  know,  too,  that 
from  the  Eather  and  the  Son,  proceeds  the  Spirit  of 
love.  The  Son,  clad  in  our  flesh,  has  dwelt  on  this 
earth,  and  lived  amongst  men  ;  then  came  down  the 
Spirit,  and  abides  for  ever  with  us,  till  the  destinies 
of  the  human  race  are  accomplished  here  below. 
Therefore  is  it,  that  we  dare  to  confess  the  Unity  and 
the  Trinity ;  for  we  have  heard  the  divine  testimony, 
and  have  believed ;  and,  having  believed,  we  have  spoken, 
with  all  certainty.^  Accept,  then,  this  our  confession, 
0  Lord,  as  thou  didst  that  of  thy  brave  virgin  and 
martyr,  Cecilia,  who,  when  the  executioner  had  thrice 

1  Prov.  XXX.  3,  4.  2  pg_  ^xv.  10  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  13. 


138  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

struck  her  neck  with  the  sword,  and  her  noble  blood 
flowed  in  streams  from  her  wound,  expressed  her 
faith,  as  she  breathed  forth  her  soul,  and  confessed, 
by  the  position  of  her  hands,  the  Unity  of  thy  Nature, 
and  the  Trinity  of  thy  Persons. 

The  hymn  of  thy  Seraphim  has  been  heard  here 
on  earth :  Holy,  Soly,  Holy,  the  Lord  God  of  hosts!  ' 
We  are  but  mortals ;  we  are  not  Prophets,  as  was 
Isaias ;  and  yet  have  we  a  happiness  which  he  had 
not ; — we  can  repeat  the  song  of  those  blessed  Spirits, 
with  fulness  of  knowledge,  and  can  say  unto  thee 
"  Holy  is  the  Father,  Holy  is  the  Son,  Holy  is  the 
"  Spirit !  "  Those  same  Seraphim  flew  with  two  of 
their  wings  ;  with  two,  they  hid  their  face  ;  and  with 
two,  they  covered  their  feet.  So  is  it  with  us: 
strengthened,  as  we  are,  by  the  divine  Spirit,  who 
has  been  given  to  us,  we  strive  to  lighten  the  heavy 
weight  of  our  frail  mortality,  and  raise  it  aloft  on  the 
wings  of  desire  ;  we  hide  our  sins  by  repentance ;  and, 
veiling  the  weakness  of  our  intellectual  vision  beneath 
the  cloud  of  Faith,  we  receive  the  light  which  is  in- 
fused into  our  souls.  Docile  to  the  revealed  word, 
we  submit  to  its  teachings  ;  and  it  imparts  to  us,  not 
merely  a  distinct,  but  even  an  enlightened  knowledge 
of  that  Mystery,  which  is  the  source  and  centre  of  all 
others.  The  Angels  and  Saints  in  heaven  contem- 
plate it  with  that  inexpressible  reserve,  which  the 
Prophet  describes  by  saying,  that  they  hide  their  face 
with  their  wings.  "We  poor  mortals  have  not,  and 
cannot  have,  the  sight  of  the  great  truth ;  but  we 
have  the  knowledge  of  it  ;  and  this  knowledge 
enlightens  our  path,  and  keeps  us  firm  in  the  truth. 
We  have  a  dread  of  presuming  to  be  searchers  of  thy 
majesty,  lest  we  should  be  overwhelmed  by  glory ;  -  but, 
humbly  treasuring  up  what  heaven  has  vouchsafed  to 
reveal  to  us  of  its  secrets,  we  dare  thus  to  address  thee: 

1  Is.  vi.  3.  2  Pi-ov.  XXV.  27. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  139 

Glory  be  to  thee,  0  divine  Essence,  that  art  but 
one  !     Thou  art  pure  Act ;  thou  art  Being,  necessary, 
infinite,    undivided,   independent,    perfect    from    all 
eternity,  peaceful,  and  sovereignly  happy.     In  thee 
we  acknowledge,  together  with  the  inviolable  Unity, 
which  is  the  source  of  all  thy  perfections,  Three  Per- 
sons distinctly  subsistent ;  but,  in  their  production  and 
distinction,  the  one  same  Nature  is  common  to  all ; 
so   that  the   personal  subsistence   which  constitutes 
them,  and  distinguishes  them  one  from  the   other, 
causes   no    inequality  between    them.      0    infinite 
blessedness  in  this  life  of  the  Three  Persons  !   they 
contemplate  in  themselves  the  ineffable  perfections 
of  the  Essence  which  unites  them  together,  and  the 
attribute   of    each    of   the    Three,   which    divinely 
animates  the  JS^ature  that  nought  can  limit  or  dis- 
turb !     0  wonder  of  that  infinite  Essence,  when  it 
deigns  to  act  outside  itself,  by  creating  beings  in  its 
power   and  its  goodness!  the  Three   Persons    work 
then  together ;  so  that  the  one  which  acts  in  a  way 
which  is  his  special  attribute,  does  so  in  virtue  of  a 
will  common  to  all.     May  a  special  love  be  given  to 
that  divine  Person  who,  in  the  act  which  is  common 
to  the  Three,  deigns  to  reveal  himself  thus  markedly 
to  us  creatures ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  may  thanks 
be  given  to  the  other  Two,  who  unite,  in  one  same 
will,  with  the  Person  who  vouchsafes  to  honour  us 
with  that  special  manifestation  of  himself ! 

Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Father,  thou.  Ancient  of  days  /^ 
Thou  art  unborn,  without  beginning,  but  communi- 
cating, essentially  and  necessarily,  to  the  Son  and  to 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  godhead  which  dwells  in  thee  I 
Thou  art  God,  and  thou  art  Father.  He  who  knows 
thee  as  God,  and  knows  thee  not  as  Father,  does  not 
know  thee  as  thou  art.     Thou  producest,  thou  beget- 

^  Dan.  vii.  9. 


140  TIME   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

test, — but  it  is  within  thine  own  bosom  that  thou 
generatest ;  for  nought  is  God,  which  is  outside  thy- 
self. Thou  art  being,  thou  art  power ;  but  thou  hast 
never  been  without  a  Son.  Thou  speakest  to  thyself 
all  thou  art  thyself ;  thou  explainest  thyself ;  and  the 
fruit  of  the  fecundity  of  thy  thought,  which  is  equal 
to  thyself,  is  a  second  Person  coming  forth  from  thee : 
it  is  thy  Son,  thy  Word,  thine  uncreated  Word. 
Once  didst  thou  utter  this  Word ;  and  thy  Word  is 
eternal  as  thou  thyself  art,  and  as  is  thy  thought,  of 
which  that  Word  is  the  infinite  expression.  Like 
the  sun  which  is  visible  to  our  eyes,  and  which  has 
never  existed,  but  what  its  own  brightness  has  existed 
with  it ;  this  brightness  is  by  the  sun,  it  is  with  the 
sun ;  it  emanates  from  it  without  lessening  it,  and  it 
never  exists  as  something  independent  of  its  source. 
Bear,  0  Father,  with  this  weakness  of  our  under- 
standing, which  borrows  from  the  beings  thou  hast 
created  an  image  whereto  to  compare  thee.  And  so, 
again,  if  we  study  ourselves,  whom  thou  hast  created 
to  thine  own  likeness,  we  find  that  a  thought  of  our 
own,  that  it  may  be  something  distinct  from  our 
mind,  has  need  of  a  term,  a  word,  to  fix  and  express 
it. 

0  Father  !  we  have  been  brought  to  know  thee  by 
that  Son  whom  thou  eternally  begettest,  and  who 
has  vouchsafed  to  reveal  himself  to  us.  He  has 
taught  us,  that  thou  art  Father,  and  himself  Son  ; 
and  that,  nevertheless,  thou  art  one  with  him.^ 
When  one  of  his  Apostles  said  to  him:  Lord!  show 
us  the  Father  !  he  answered  him :  He  that  seeth  me, 
seeth  the  Father."^  0  Unity  of  the  divine  Nature, 
whereby  the  Son,  though  distinct  from  the  Father, 
is  not  less  than  what  the  Father  is !  0  delight  of 
the  Father  in  the  Son,  by  whom  he  has  the  know- 

1  St.  John,  X.  30.  2  jiid,  xiv.  8,  9. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  141 

ledge  of  himself !  deliglit  of  intimate  love,  of  which 
he  spoke  to  his  creature  man,  on  the  banks  of  Jordan, 
and  on  the  top  of  Thabor  !  ^ 

0  Father  !  we  adore  thee,  but  we  also  love  thee  ; 
for,  a  Father  should  be  loved  by  his  children,  and  we 
are  thy  children.  It  is  an  Apostle  that  teaches  us 
that  all  paternity  proceeds  from  thee,  not  in  heaven 
alone,  but  on  earth  too.^  'No  one  is  Father,  no  one 
has  paternal  authority,  be  it  in  a  family,  or  in  the 
State,  or  in  the  Church,  but  by  thee,  and  in  thee,  and 
in  imitation  of  thee.  Nay  more  ; — thou  wouldst  have 
us  not  only  be  called,  but  really  and  truly  be  thy 
Sgizs,^  not,  indeed,  by  generation,  as  is  thine  Only 
Begotten  Son,  but  by  an  adoption,  which  makes  us 
joint-heirs  with  him.*  This  divine  Son  of  thine, 
speaking  of  thee,  says :  /  honour  my  Father ;  ^  we, 
also,  honour  thee,  0  sovereign  Father,  Father  of 
infinite  majesty !  and,  until  eternity  dawn  upon  us, 
we  glorify  thee  now  from  the  depths  of  our  misery 
and  exile,  uniting  our  humble  praise  with  that  which 
is  presented  to  thee  by  the  Angels,  and  by  the  Blessed 
ones,  who  are  of  the  same  human  family  as  ourselves. 
May  thy  fatherly  eye  protect  us,  may  it  graciously 
find  pleasure  in  us  thy  children,  whom,  as  we  hope, 
thou  hast  foreseen,  whom  thou  hast  chosen,  whom 
thou  hast  called  to  the  faith,  and  who  presume,  with 
the  Apostle,  to  call  thee  the  Father  of  mercies  and  the 
God  of  all  consolation.^ 

Glory  be  to  thee,  0  Son,  0  Word,  0  Wisdom,  of 
the  Father  !  Thou  emanatest  from  his  divine 
essence.  He  gave  thee  birth  before  the  day-star ; "' 
and  he  said  to  thee  :  This  day  have  I  begotten  thee ;  ^ 
and  that  Day,  which  has  neither  eve  nor  morrow,  is 


1  St.  Matth.  iii.  17 ;  2  St.  Pet.  i.  17.  ^  St.  John,  viii.  49. 

2  Eph.  iii.  15.  ^  2  Cor.  i.  3. 

3  1  St.  John,  iii.  1.  "^  Ps.  cix.  3. 
*  Eom.  viii.  17.  ^  Ibid.  ii.  7. 


142  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

eternity.  Thou  art  Son,  and  Only  Son ;  and  this 
name  expresses  one  same  nature  with  him  who  begets 
thee  ;  it  excludes  creation,  and  shows  thee  to  be  con- 
substantial  with  the  Father,  from  whom  thou  comest 
forth,  perfectly  like  him  in  all  things.  And  thou 
comest  forth  from  the  Father,  without  coming  out  of 
the  divine  essence,  being  co-eternal  with  thy  source ; 
for,  in  God,  there  is  nothing  new,  nothing  temporal. 
Thy  Sonship  is  not  a  dependency ;  for  the  Father 
cannot  be  without  the  Son,  no  more  than  the  Son  can 
be  without  the  Father.  If  it  be  a  glory  in  the  Father 
to  produce  the  Son,  it  is  no  less  a  glory  in  the  Son  to 
be  the  exhaustive  term  to  the  generative  power  of 
the  Father. 

0  Son  of  God  !  thou  art  the  Word  of  the  Father. 
Uncreated  "Word  !  thou  art  as  intimately  in  him,  as 
is  his  thought ;  and  his  thought  is  his  being.     It  is 
in  thee  that   this  his  being  expresses   itself,  in  its 
whole  infiniteness  ;  it  is  in  thee  that  he  knows  him- 
self.    Thou  art  the  spiritual  fruit  produced  by  the 
divine  intellect  of  the  Father  ;  the  expression  of  all 
that  he  is,  whether  he  keep  thee  mysteriously  in  his 
bosotn,^  or  produce  thee  outside  himself.     What  lan- 
guage can  we  make  use  of,  in  order  to  describe  thee, 
and  thy  glories,  0  Son  of  God  !     The  Holy  Ghost 
has   vouchsafed  to   come   to  our  assistance,  in   the 
writings  which  he  has  inspired :   and  it  is  with  the 
very  expressions  he  has  suggested,  that  we  presume 
thus  to  address  thee  :  Thou  art  the  brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory  ;  thou  art  the  figure  of  his  substance. - 
Thou   art   the    brightness    of  eternal  light,   and  (he 
imsjwtted  mirror   of  God's   fnajestt/,   and  the  image 
that   reflects   his   eternal  goodness.^      We   presume, 
likewise,  to  say  to  thee,  what  we  are  taught  by  tlie 
holy  Church  assembled  at  Nicea  :  Thou  art  "  God  of 
"  God ;   Light  of  Light ;   true  God  of  true  God." 
• 

»  St.  John,  i.  18.  =  Heb.  i.  3.  '  Wisd.  vii.  26. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  143 

And  we  add,  with  the  Fathers  and  Doctors  :  "  Thou 
"  art  the  torch  eternally  lit  by  the  eternal  torch. 
"  Thy  Light  lessens  nought  of  that  which  commu- 
"  nicates  Itself  to  thee  ;  neither  is  thy  Light  inferior, 
*'  in  aught,  to  that  from  which  it  is  produced." 

But  when  this  inejBPable  fecundity  which  gives  an 
eternal  Son  to  the  Father,  and,  to  the  Father  and 
Son  a  third  term,  willed  to  manifest  Itself  outside  the 
divine  essence  ;  and,  not  having  again  the  power  to 
produce  what  is  equal  to  Itself,  it  deigned  to  call 
forth,  from  nothingness,  intellectual  and  rational 
nature,  as  being  the  nearest  approach  to  its  author, 
and  material  nature,  as  being  the  least  removed  from 
nothingness, — then,  O  Only-Begotten  Son  of  God  ! 
the  intimate  production  of  thy  Person  in  the  Father's 
bosom  revealed  itself  by  Creation.  It  is  the  Father 
who  made  all  things  ;  but,  it  was  in  Wisdom,  that  is, 
in  thee,  that  he  made  alV  This  mission  of  working, 
which  thou  receivedst  from  the  Father,  is  a  conse- 
quence of  the  eternal  generation,  whereby  he  produces 
thee  from  himself.  Thou  camest  forth  from  thy 
mysterious  rest ;  and  creatures,  visible  and  invisible, 
came  forth,  at  thy  bidding,  out  of  nothing.  Acting 
in  closest  union  with  the  Father,  thou  pouredst  out 
upon  the  worlds  thou  createdst  somewhat  of  that 
beauty  and  harmony,  of  which  thou  art  the  image  in 
the  divine  essence.  And  yet,  thy  mission  was  not  at 
an  end  when  creation  was  completed.  Angels  and 
Men,  who  were  intellectual  and  free  beings,  were 
destined  for  the  eternal  vision  and  possession  of  God. 
The  mere  natural  order  could  not  suffice  for  these 
two  classes  of  thy  creatures ;  a  supernatural  way  had 
to  be  prepared  for  them,  whereby  they  might  be 
brought  to  their  last  end.  Thou,  0  Only- Begotten 
Son  of  God !  art  this  "Way.  By  thyself  assuming 
human  nature,  thou  unitedst  thyself  to  thine   own 

1  Ps.  ciii.  24 


1 


14-i  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

work,  thou  raisedst  Angel  and  Man  up  to  God,  and, 
by  thy  Human  Nature,  thou  showedst  thyself  as  the 
supreme  type  of  the  Creation,  which  the  Father  had 
ejQfected  by  thee.  0  unspeakable  mystery  !  thou  art 
the  uncreated  Word,  and,  at  the  same  time,  thou  art 
the  First-born  of  every  creature;'^  not,  indeed,  to  appear, 
until  thy  time  should  come ;  and  yet  preceding,  in  the 
divine  mind  and  intention,  all  created  beings,  all  of 
which  were  to  be  created,  in  order  that  they  might  be 
thy  subjects. 

The  human  race,  though  destined  to  possess  thee, 
in   its  midst,   as  its   divine  intermediator,   rebelled 
against  its  God  by  sin,  and,  by  sin,  was  plunged  into 
the  abyss  of  death.     Who  could  raise  it  up  again  ? 
who  could  restore  it  to  the  sublime  destiny  it  had 
forfeited  ?     Thou  alone,  0  Only-Begotten  Son  of  the 
Father  !     It  was  what  we  never  could  have  hoped 
for;  but  this   God  so   loved  the  world,  as  to  give  his 
Only-Begotten  Son,'  to  be  not  only  the  Mediator,  but 
the  Redeemer,  too,  of  us  all.     Thou,  our  First-born, 
askedst  thy  Father  to  restore  thine  inheritance  unto 
thee;  ^  thou  hadst  to  purchase  back  this  inheritance. 
Then  did  the  Father  intrust  thee  with  the  mission  of 
Saviour  to  our  lost  race.     Thy  Blood,  shed  upon  the 
Cross,  was  our  ransom ;  and,  by  it,  we  were  bom 
again   to   God,   and  restored  to  our  lost  privileges. 
Therefore,  0  Son  of  God  !  we,  thy  redeemed,  glory  in 
calling  thee  Our  Lord. 

Having  thus  delivered  us  from  death,  and  cleansed 
us  from  sin,  thou  vouchsafedst  to  restore  us  to  all  the 
grand  things  we  had  lost ;  for,  henceforth,  thou  art 
our  Head,  and  we  are  thy  members ;  thou  art  King, 
and  we  thy  happy  subjects;  thou  art  SiiErHERD,  and 
we  the  sheep  of  thy  one  fold  ;  thou  art  Spouse,  and 
the  Church,  our  Mother,  is  thy  Bride ;  thou  art  the 
living  Bread  come  down  from  heaven,  and  we  are 

1  Coloss.  i.  15.  2  St.  John,  iii.  16.  ^  pg.  ^y.  5. 


TRINITY    SUNDAY.  145 

thy  guests.  0  Son  of  God !  0  Emmanuel !  0  Son 
of  Man  !  blessed  be  the  Father  that  sent  thee  ;  but 
blessed,  also,  be  thou,  who  didst  fulfil  the  mission  he 
gave  thee,  and  hast  been  pleased  to  say,  that  thy 
delight  is  to  be  with  the  children  of  men  !  ^ 

Glory  be  to  thee,  0  Holy  Spirit,  who  eternally 
emanatest  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  unity 
of  the  divine  substance  !  The  eternal  Act,  whereby 
the  Father  knows  himself,  produces  the  Son,  who  is 
the  infinite  image  of  the  Father ;  the  Father  is  full 
of  love  for  this  brightness  which  eternally  proceeds 
from  himself;  and  the  Son,  contemplating  the  source 
whence  he  for  ever  comes,  conceives  for  this  source  a 
love  as  great  as  that  wherewith  himself  is  loved. 
What  language  could  describe  this  mutual  ardour  and 
aspiration,  which  is  the  attraction  and  tendency  of  one 
Person  to  Another  in  the  eternally  immovable 
Essence !  Thou  art  this  Love,  0  divine  Spirit,  that 
proceedest  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  as  from  one 
same  principle  ;  thou  art  distinct  from  Both,  and  yet 
art  the  bond  that  unites  them  in  the  ineflPable  delights 
of  the  Godhead ;  thou  art  living  Love,  personal  Love, 
proceeding  from  the  Father  by  the  Son,  the  final 
term  which  completes  the  divine  Nature,  and  eternally 
perfects  the  Trinity.  In  the  inaccessible  bosom  of 
the  great  God,  thy  Personality  comes  to  thee  both 
from  the  Father,  of  whom  thou  art  the  expression  by 
a  second  production,^  and  from  the  Son,  who,  receiving 
of  the  Father,  gives  thee  of  his  own  ;  ^  for  the  infinite 
Love  which  unites  them  is  of  Both  Persons,  and  not 
of  one  alone.  The  Father  was  never  without  the  Son, 
and  the  Son  never  without  the  Father  ;  so,  likewise, 
the  Father  and  Son  have  never  been  without  thee,  0 
Holy  Spirit !  Eternally  have  they  loved ;  and  thou 
art  the  infinite  Love  which  exists  between  them,  and 
to   which   they   communicate  their  Godhead.     Thy 

1  Prov.  viii.  31.         2  g^.  John,  xv.  26.         s  j^j^_  ^vi.  14,  15. 

VOL.  X.  L 


146  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

Procession  from  Both  exhausts  the  productive  power 
of  the  increated  Essence  ;  and  thus  are  the  divine 
Persons  Three  in  number ;  all  that  is  outside  Them, 
is  created  being. 

In  the  divine  Essence,  there  is  not  only  Power  and 
Intelligence,  but,  also,  and  necessarily,  there  is  Will, 
from  which  action  follows.  Will  and  Love  are  one 
and  the  same  thing ;  and  thou,  0  divine  Spirit,  art 
this  Will,  this  Love.  When  the  glorious  Trinity 
works  outside  itself,  the  act  conceived  by  the  Father, 
and  expressed  by  the  Son,  is  accomplished  by  thee. 
By  thee,  likewise,  the  Love,  which  the  Father  and 
Son  have  for  each  other,  and  which  is  personised  in 
thee,  is  extended  to  beings  which  are  to  be  created. 
It  is  by  his  Word  that  the  Father  knows  them  ;  it  is 
by  thee,  0  divine  Love,  O  Holy  Spirit,  that  he  loves 
them  ;  and  thus,  all  creation  proceeds  from  the  divine 
goodness. 

Emanating,  as  thou  dost,  from  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  thou  art  sent,  by  Both,  to  us  creatures  ;  and  yet 
so  as  not  to  lose  thereby  the  equality  thou  hast,  from 
all  eternity,  with  Them.  The  Son,  when  sent  by  the 
Father,  clad  himself,  once  for  ever,  with  our  human 
nature  ;  and  his  Person,  by  the  works  which  are 
peculiarly  his  own,  is  shown  to  us  as  distinct  from 
that  of  the  Father.  So,  likewise,  0  Holy  Spirit !  we 
recognise  thee  as  distinct  from  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  by  thy  coming  down  to  fulfil  in  our  regard,  the 
Mission  given  to  thee  by  Both.  It  was  thou  that 
inspiredst  the  Prophets ;  ^  thou  that  overshadowedst 
Mary  in  the  divine  Incarnation  ; "  thou  that  restedst 
on  the  flower  of  Jesse  ;^  thou  that  leadedst  Jesus  into 
the  desert ;  ^  thou  that  didst  glorify  him  by  miracles.^ 
The  Church,  his  Bride,  receives  thee,  and  thou 
teachest  her  all  truth,^  and  thou  abidest  in  her,  as  her 

1  2  St.  Pet.  i.  21.  *  St.  Luke,  iv.  1. 

2  tft.  Luke,  i.  35.  ^  St.  Matth.  xii.  28. 
3l8.  xi.  2.                                          6  St.  John,  xW.  13. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  147 

devoted  friend,  even  to  tlie  very  end  of  time.^  Our 
souls  are  signed  with  thy  seal,'"^  and  thou  quickenest 
them  with  supernatural  life  ;  ^  thou  dwellest  even  in 
our  bodies,  making  them  thy  temple ;  ^  in  a  word, 
thou  art  to  us  the  Gift  of  God,^  and  the  fountain 
springing  up  even  into  life  everlasting.^  ^lay 
special  thanks  be  given  to  thee,  0  Holy  Spirit,  for 
the  special  works  thou  accomplishest  in  our  favour  ! 

And  now,  having  adored  each  of  the  divine  Persons, 
and  blessed  each  for  the  favours  he  has  bestowed  upon 
this  world,  we  again  dare  to  fix  our  unworthy  gaze 
upon  that  Trinity  of  Majesty  which  exists  in  the 
Unity  of  the  divine  Essence.  0  Sovereign  Lord !  we 
again  confess  what  thou  hast  taught  us ;  but  we  confess 
it  in  the  words  of  thy  servant  Augustine  :  *'  They 
"  are  not  more  than  Three :  One  that  loveth  him  who 
"  is  from  him  ;  and  One  that  loveth  him  from  whom 
"he  is  ;  and  One  who  is  that  very  Love/'  ^  But  we 
have  still  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  pay  for  that  unspeak- 
able favour  of  thine,  whereby,  0  blessed  Trinity, 
thou  hast  vouchsafed  to  mark  us  with  the  image  of 
thyself.  Having  resolved,  from  all  eternity,  to  admit 
us  mio  fellowship  with  thyself,^  thou  hast  prepared  us 
for  it,  according  to  a  type  taken  from  thine  own 
divine  !N^ature.^  There  are  three  powers  in  our  one 
soul;  this  tells  us  that  it  was  thou  gavest  us  our 
existence ;  and  yet  this  likeness  to  thyself,  which  is 
the  glory  of  our  natural  being,  was  but  a  preparation 
for  further  purposes  of  thy  generous  love  towards  us. 
After  having  bestowed  upon  us  this  natural  being,  it 
pleased  thee  to   decree,    0   sacred   Trinity,    that  a 


1  St.  John,  xiv.  16.  M  Cor.  vi.  19. 

2  Eph.  i.  13;  iv.  30.  °  Hymn,  Veni  Creator. 

3  Gal.  V.  25.  6  St.  John,  iv.  U ;  vii.  38,  39. 

'  Non  amplius  quam  tria  sunt :  unus  diligens  eum  qui  de  illo  est, 
et  unus  diligens  eum  de  quo  est,  et  ipsa  dilectio.  S.  AugustinuSy 
De  Trinitate,  lib.  vi.  cap.  7. 

8  1  St.  John,  i.  3.  ^  Gen.  i.  27. 


148  •  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

supernatural  one  should  also  be  imparted  to  us. 
When  the  fulness  of  time  had  come,  the  Father  sends 
us  his  Son ;  and  this  uncreated  Word  brings  light  to 
our  understanding :  the  Father  and  the  Son  send  us 
the  Spirit ;  and  the  Spirit  brings  love  to  our  will : 
and  the  Father,  who  cannot  be  sent,  comes  of  him- 
self, and  gives  himself  to  our  soul,  giving  her  a  power 
beyond  her  own  strength.  It  is  in  holy  Baptism,  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  that  is  produced,  in  the  Christian,  this  work 
of  the  Three  divine  Persons,  which  is  so  admirably  in 
keeping  with  the  faculties  of  our  soul;  and  these 
faculties  are  but  an  outline  of  the  masterpiece, 
which  the  supernatural  action  of  God  can  alone 
complete. 

Blessed  union  !  whereby  God  is  in  man,  and  man 
is  in  God  !  Union  that  brings  us  to  adoption  by  the 
Father,  to  brotherhood  with  the  Son,  to  our  eternal 
inheritance  !  But,  how  has  this  indwelling  of  God  in 
his  creature  been  formed  ?  Gratuitously,  by  God's 
eternal  love.  And,  how  long  will  it  last?  For  ever, 
unless  man  himself  refuse  to  give  love  for  love.  Mortal 
sin  admitted  into  the  soul,  the  divine  indwelling  is  at 
an  end  :  the  very  moment  that  sanctifying  grace  is 
lost,  the  Three  divine  Persons  who  had  taken  up  their 
abode  in  that  soul,^  and  were  united  with  her,  abandon 
her  ;  God  would  be  no  longer  in  her,  save  by  his  im- 
mensity, but  the  soul  would  not  possess  him  as  she 
did  before.  Then  would  Satan  set  up  again  his 
wretched  kingdom  within  her,  the  kingdom  of  his  vile 
trinity,  Concupiscence  of  the  fleshy  concupiscence  of  the 
eyes,  and  pride  of  life.-  Wo  to  the  man,  who  would 
dare  to  defy  his  God  by  such  rebellion,  and  put  evil 
in  the  place  of  infinite  good  !  Hell  and  eternal  tor- 
ments are  the  consequences  of  the  creature's  contempt 
of  his  Creator.     God  is  a  jealous  God  ;  if  we  drive 

1  St.  John,  xiv.  23.  ^  2  St.  John,  ii.  16. 


TRINITY   SUNDAY.  149 

him  from   the   dwelling  of  our  souls,  the  deep  abyss 
must  be  our  everlasting  abode. 

But  is  this  rupture  beyond  the  hope  of  reconcilia- 
tion? Yes,  as  far  as  sinful  man's  power  is  concerned; 
for  he  can  never,  of  himself,  recover  his  position  with 
the  blessed  Trinity,  which  God's  gratuitous  bounty 
had  prepared,  and  his  incomprehensible  goodness 
achieved.  But,  as  the  Church  teaches  us,  in  her 
Liturgy,^  God  never  shows  his  power  more,  than  when 
he  has  pity  on  a  sinner  and  pardons  him ;  it  is  this 
powerful  mercy  of  God  which  can  work  the  prodigy 
of  a  reconciliation ;  and  he  really  does  work  it,  as 
often  as  a  sinner  is  converted.  When  the  august 
Trinity  deigns  to  return  into  the  soul  of  repentant 
man,  the  Angels  and  Saints  in  heaven  are  filled  with 
joy,  as  the  Gospel  assures  us ;  -  for  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost  have  testified  their  love,  and  sought 
their  glory,  by  making  him  just,  who  had  been  a 
sinner ;  by  coming  again  to  dwell  in  this  lost  sheep  ; 
in  this  prodigal,  who  had,  but  a  few  days  before,  been 
tending  swine ;  in  this  thief  who,  but  just  now,  had 
been  insulting  on  the  Cross,  together  with  his  fellow 
culprit,  the  innocent  Crucified. 

Adoration,  then,  and  love,  be  to  thee,  0  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  0  perfect  Trinity,  that  hast 
vouchsafed  to  reveal  thyself  to  mankind ;  0  eternal  and 
infinite  Unity,  that  hast  delivered  our  forefathers  from 
the  yoke  of  their  false  gods !  Glory  be  to  thee,  as  it 
was  in  the  beginning,  before  any  creature  existed ;  as 
it  is  now,  at  this  very  time,  whilst  we  are  living  in 
the  hope  of  that  true  life,  which  consists  in  seeing 
thee  face-to-face  ;  and  as  it  shall  for  ever  he,  in  those 
everlasting  ages,  when  a  blissful  eternity  shall  have 
united  us  in  the  bosom  of  thine  infinite  Majesty. 
Amen. 

^  Collect  for  the  lOth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
2  St.  Luke,  XV.  10. 


150  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


MONDAY 
AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY. 

Having,  by  his  divine  light,  added  fresh  appreciation 
towards  the  sovereign  mystery  of  the  august  Trinity, 
the  Holy  Ghost  next  leads  the  Church  to  contem- 
plate that  other  marvel,  which  concentrates  in  itself 
all  the  works  of  the  Incarnate  Word,  and  leads  us, 
even  in  this  present  life,  to  union  with  God.  The 
mystery  of  the  Holy  Eucharist  is  going  to  be  brought 
before  us  in  all  its  magnificence  ;  it  behoves  us,  there- 
fore, to  prepare  the  eyes  of  our  soul  for  the  worthy 
reception  of  the  light  which  is  so  soon  to  dawn  upon 
us.  As  during  the  whole  year,  we  have  never  lost 
sight  of  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  and  all  our 
worship  has  unceasingly  been  offered  to  the  Three 
divine  Persons  ;  so,  in  like  manner,  the  blessed 
Eucharist  has  uninterruptedly  accompanied  us 
throughout  the  whole  period  of  the  Liturgical  Year, 
either  as  the  means  for  our  paying  our  homage  to 
the  infinite  Majesty  of  God,  or  as  the  nourishment 
which  sustains  the  supernatural  life.  Though  we 
knew  and  loved  these  two  ineffable  mysteries  before, 
yet  the  graces  of  Pentecost  have  added  much  to  both 
our  knowledge  and  our  love  ;  yesterday,  the  mystery 
of  the  Trinity  beamed  upon  us  with  a  greater  clear- 
ness than  ever ;  and  now  we  are  close  upon  the 
solemnity,  which  is  to  show  us  the  holy  Eucharist 
with  an  increase  of  light  and  joy  to  our  faith. 

The  blessed  Trinity  is,  as  we  have  already  shown, 
the  essential  object  of  all  religion  ;  it  is  the  centre  to 
which  all  our  homage  converges  ;  and  this,  even 
when  we  do  not  seem  to  make  it  our  direct  intention. 


I 


MONDAY    AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  151 

Now,  the  holy  Eucharist  is  the  hest  of  all  the  means 
whereby  we  can  give  to  the  Three  divine  Persons  the 
worship  we  owe  Them  ;  it  is,  moreover,  the  bond 
whereby  earth  is  united  with  heaven.  It  is  easy, 
therefore,  to  understand  how  it  was  that  holy  Church 
so  long  deferred  the  institution  of  the  two  festivals 
immediately  following  AYhitsuntide.  All  the  mys- 
teries we  have  celebrated  up  to  this  time,  were 
contained  in  the  august  Sacrament,  which  is  the 
memorial,  and,  so  to  say,  the  compendium  of  the 
wonderful  things  wrought,  in  our  favour,  by  our 
Eedeemer.^  It  was  the  reality  of  Christ's  presence 
under  the  sacramental  species  that  enabled  us  to 
recognise,  in  the  sacred  Host,  at  Christmas,  the  Child 
that  was  born  unto  us,  in  Passiontide  the  Victim  who 
redeemed  us,  and,  at  Easter,  the  glorious  conqueror 
of  death.  We  could  not  celebrate  all  those  admirable 
Mysteries  without  the  aid  of  the  perpetual  Sacrifice ; 
neither  could  that  Sacrifice  be  offered  up,  without  its 
renewing  and  repeating  them. 

It  was  the  same  with  the  Feasts  of  our  Blessed 
Lady  and  the  Saints, — they  kept  us  in  the  continual 
contemplation  of  the  holy  Sacrament.  When  we 
honoured  Mar}^  on  the  solemnities  of  the  Immaculate 
Conception,  the  Purification,  or  the  Annunciation,  we 
were  honouring  Her  who  had,  from  her  own  sub- 
stance, given  that  Body  and  Blood  which  was  then 
offered  upon  our  altars.  As  to  the  Apostles  and  the 
Martyrs,  whose  memories  we  solemnised,  whence  had 
they  the  strength  to  suffer  so  much  and  so  bravely  for 
the  faith,  but  from  the  sacred  banquet  which  we  then 
celebrated,  and  which  gives  courage  and  constancy  to 
them  that  partake  of  it  ?  The  Confessors  and  Vir- 
gins, as  their  Feasts  came  round,  seemed  to  us  as  so 
many  lovely  flowers  in  the  garden  of  the  Church, 
and  that  garden  itself  all  fruitful  with  wheat  and 

1  Ps.  ex.  4. 


152  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

clusters  of  grapes,  because  of  the  fertility  given  by 
Him,  who  is  called,  in  the  Scriptures,  both  Wheat 
and  Wine} 

Putting  together  all  the  means  within  our  reach 
for  honouring  these  blessed  citizens  of  the  heavenly 
court,  we  have  chanted  the  grand  Psalms  of  David, 
and  hymns,  and  canticles,  with  all  the  varied 
formulas  of  the  Liturgj^ ; — but  nothing  that  we  could 
do  towards  celebrating  their  praise  could  be  compared 
to  the  holy  Sacrifice  offered  to  the  divine  Majesty. 
It  is  in  that  Sacrifice,  that  we  entered  into  direct 
communication  with  them,  according  to  the  energetic 
term  used  bv  the  Church  in  the  Canon  of  the  Mass, 
{communicantes).  The  blessed  in  heaven  are  ever 
adoring  the  most  holy  Trinity  by  and  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord  :  and  it  is  bv  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass  that 
we  were  united  with  them  in  the  one  same  centre, 
and  that  we  mingled  our  homage  with  theirs  ;  hence, 
they  received  an  increase  of  glory  and  happiness. 
So,  then,  the  holy  Eucharist,  both  as  Sacrifice  and 
Sacrament,  has  always  been  prominently  before  us. 
If  we  are  now  going  to  devote  several  days  to  a  more 
attentive  consideration  of  its  magnificence  and  power; 
if  we  are  now  going  to  make  more  earnest  efforts  to 
taste  more  fully  its  heavenly  sweetness ;  it  is  not  a 
something  fresh,  which  attracts  our  special  notice  and 
devotion  for  a  season,  and  will  then  give  way  for 
something  else  :  no  ;  the  Eucharist  is  that  element 
prepared  for  us  by  the  love  of  our  Hedeemer,  of  which 
we  must  always  avail  ourselves  in  order  that  we  may 
enter  into  direct  communication  with  our  God,  and 
pay  him  the  debt  not  only  of  our  worship,  but  also  of 
our  love. 


And  yet,  the  time  would  come  when  the  Holy 

1  Zach.  Lx.  17. 


MO^'DAY   AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  153 

Ghost,  who  governs  the  Church,  would  inspire  her 
with  the  thought  of  instituting  a  special  solemnity  in 
honour  of  that  august  mystery,  in  which  all  others 
are  included.  There  is  a  sacred  element,  which  gives 
a  meaning  to  every  feast  that  occurs  during  the  Year, 
and  graces  it  with  the  beauty  of  its  own  divine 
splendour ; — that  sacred  element  is  the  most  holy 
Eucharist,  and  itself  had  a  right  to  a  solemn  festival, 
in  keeping  with  the  dignity  of  its  divine  object. 

But  that  festive  exaltation  of  the  divine  Host,  and 
those  triumphant  Processions  so  deservedly  dear  to 
the  present  generation  of  Christians,  were  not  prac- 
ticable in  the  ages  of  the  early  Persecutions.  And 
when  those  rough  times  had  passed  away,  and  the 
courageous  Martyrs  had  won  victory  for  the  Church, 
those  same  modes  of  honouring  the  Eucharist  would 
not  have  suited  the  spirit  and  form  of  the  primitive 
liturgical  observances,  which  were  kept  up  for  ages 
following.  Neither  were  they  needed  for  the  main- 
tenance of  the  lively  faith  of  those  times ;  they  would 
have  been  superfluous  for  a  period  such  as  that  was, 
when  the  solemnity  of  the  Sacrifice  itself,  and  the 
share  the  people  at  large  took  in  the  sacred  Mysteries, 
and  the  uninterrupted  homage  of  liturgical  chants 
sustained  by  the  crowds  of  Faithful  adorers  around 
the  Altar,  gave  praise  and  glory  to  God,  secured 
correctness  of  faith,  and  fostered  in  the  people  a 
superabundance  of  supernatural  life,  which  is  not  to 
be  found  now-a-days.  The  divine  Memorial  produced 
its  fruits  ;  the  intentions  our  Lord  had  in  instituting 
the  Eucharist  were  realised ;  and  the  remembrance 
of  that  institution,  which  used  then  to  be  solemnised 
as  we  now  celebrate  Mass  on  Maundy  Thursday, 
was  deeply  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the  Faithful. 

This  state  of  things  lasted  till  the  beginning  of  the 
13th  Century,  when,  as  the  Church  expresses  it,  a 
certain  coldness  took  possession  of  the  world  ;  ^    faith 

^  Collect  for  the  Feast  of  the  Sticmata  of  St.  Francis. 


154  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

grew  weak,  and  the  vigorous  piety  whicli  characterised 
the  christians  of  the  previous  ages  became  exceedingly 
rare.  There  were  grand  exceptions,  here  and  there, 
of  individual  saintliness;  but  there  was  an  unmistak- 
able falling  off  amidst  people  at  large,  and  the  falling 
o^"  was  progressive ;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  there 
was  danger  that  the  Myster}^  which  by  its  very  nature 
is  the  Mystenj  of  Faifh^  would  suffer,  in  a  special 
manner,  from  that  coldness,  that  indifference,  of  the 
new  generation.  Even  at  that  period,  hell  had  been 
at  work,  stirring  up  sacrilegious  teachers  here  and 
there,  who  dared  to  throw  doubts  upon  the  dogma  of 
the  Real  Presence  ;  fortunatel}',  the  people  easily 
took  alarm,  and,  as  a  general  rule,  were  too  strong 
in  the  old  faith  to  be  led  astray.  The  Pastors,  too, 
of  the  Church  were  alive  to  the  danger, — for  there 
were  souls  who  allowed  themselves  to  be  deceived. 

Scotus  Erigena  had  formulated  the  sacramentarian 
heresy  :  he  had  taught  that  the  Eucharist  "  was  but 
"  a  sign,  a  figure  of  spiritual  union  with  Jesus,  of 
"  which  the  intellect  alone  could  be  cognizant.'*  His 
teaching  made  little  impression ;  it  was  regarded  as 
mere  pedantry,  and  was  too  novel  to  make  head 
against  catholic  tradition,  such  as  was  to  be  found 
exposed  in  the  learned  writings  of  Paschasius  Padbert, 
Abbot  of  Corbie.  The  sophistry  of  Scotus  was  revived, 
in  the  11th  Century,  by  Berengarius ;  but  although 
its  new  promoter  was  more  crafty  and  conceited  than 
its  originator,  and  did  greater  and  more  lasting  mis- 
chief, yet  it  died  with  him.  The  time  for  hell  to  play 
havoc  with  such  direct  attacks  as  these  had  not  yet 
come ;  they  were  laid  aside  for  others  of  a  more 
covert  kind.  That  hotbed  of  heresies,  the  empire  of 
Byzantium,  fostered  the  almost  extinct  germ  of 
Manicheism ;  the  teaching  of  that  sect  regarding  the 
flesh, — that  it  is  the  work  of  the  evil  principle, — was 
subversive  of  the  dogma  of  the  Eucharist.  Whilst 
Berengarius  was  trying  to  bring  himself  into  notice 


MONDAY    AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  155 

by  the  noisy,  but  ineffectual,  broachings  of  his  errors, 
Thrace  and  Bulgaria  were  quietly  sending  their 
teachers  into  the  West.  Lombardy,  the  Marches,  and 
Tuscany,  became  infected ;  so  did  Austria,  in  several 
places,  and  almost  all  at  one  and  the  same  time  ;  so, 
too,  did  three  cities  of  France, — Orleans,  Toulouse,  and 
Arras.  Forcible  measures  for  repressing  the  evil 
were  used ;  but  it  was  one  which  knew  how  to  grow 
strong  by  retreat.  Taking  the  South  of  France  for 
the  basis  of  its  operations,  the  foul  heresy  silentl)^ 
organised  its  strength  during  the  whole  of  the  12th 
Century.  So  great  was  the  progress  it  made  thus  un- 
perceived,  that  when  it  came  publicly  before  the  world, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  13th  Century,  it  had  an  army 
ready  for  the  maintenance  of  its  impious  doctrines. 
Torrents  of  blood  had  to  be  shed  in  order  to  subdue 
it,  and  deprive  it  of  its  strongholds ;  and  for  years 
after  the  defeat  of  the  armed  insurrection,  the  Inqui- 
sition had  to  exercise  active  watchfulness  in  the  pro- 
vinces that  had  been  tainted  by  the  Albigensian 
contagion. 

Simon  of  Montfort  was  the  avenger  of  the  Catholic 
faith.  But,  whilst  the  victorious  arm  of  the  Chris- 
tian hero  was  dealing  a  death-blow  to  heresy,  God 
was  preparing  for  his  Son,  who  had  been  so  unworthily 
outraged  by  the  sectarians,  in  the  Sacrament  of  his 
love,  a  triumph  of  a  more  peaceful  kind,  and  a  more 
perfect  reparation.  It  was  in  the  year  1208,  that  an 
humble  Religious  of  the  Congregation  of  the  Hos- 
pitallers, by  name  the  Blessed  Juliana  of  Mont- 
Cornillon,  near  Liege,  had  a  mysterious  vision,  in 
which  she  beheld  the  moon  at  its  full,  but  having  a 
hollow  on  its  disc.  In  spite  of  all  her  efforts  to 
divert  herself  from  what  she  was  afraid  was  an  illu- 
sion, the  same  vision  appeared  before  her,  as  often  as 
she  set  herself  to  pray.  After  two  years  of  such 
efforts  and  earnest  supplications,  it  was  revealed 
to  her,  that  the  moon  signified  the  Church  as  it  then 


15G  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

was;  and  that  hollow  she  observed  on  its  disc  ex- 
pressed the  want  of  one  more  solemnity  in  the 
Liturgical  Year ; — a  want  which  God  willed  should 
be  supplied  by  the  introduction  of  a  feast,  to  be  kept 
annually  in  honour  of  the  institution  of  the  blessed 
Eucharist ;  the  solemn  commemoration  made  of  the 
Last  Supper,  on  Maundy  Thursday,  was  no  longer 
sufficient  for  the  children  of  the  Church,  shaken  as 
they  had  been  by  the  influences  of  heresy  ;  it  was  not 
sufficient  even  for  the  Church  herself,  who,  on  that 
Thursday,  has  her  attention  divided  by  the  important 
functions  of  the  day,  and  is  wholly  taken  up,  a  few 
hours  later,  by  the  sad  mysteries  of  the  great  Friday. 
At  the  same  time  that  Juliana  received  this  commu- 
nication, she  was  also  commanded  to  set  to  work  and 
make  known  to  the  world,  what  she  had  been  told 
was  the  divine  will.  Twenty  years,  however,  passed, 
before  the  humble  and  timid  virgin  could  bring 
herself  to  put  her  person  thus  forward.  She,  at  length, 
mentioned  the  subject  to  a  Canon  of  Saint  Martin's 
of  Liege,  named  John  of  Lausanne,  whom  she  much 
respected  for  his  great  holiness  of  life ;  and  she 
besought  him  to  confer  with  men  of  theological  learn- 
ing on  the  subject  of  the  mission  confided  to  her. 
All  agreed,  that  not  only  there  was  no  reason  why 
such  a  Feast  should  not  be  instituted,  but,  moreover, 
that  it  would  be  a  means  for  procuring  much  glory  to 
God,  and  great  good  to  souls.  Encouraged  by  this 
decision,  the  saintly  Juliana  got  a  proper  Office 
composed,  and  approved,  for  the  future  Festival ;  it 
begins  with  the  words :  Animarum  cibus,  and  a  few 
portions  are  still  extant. 

The  Church  of  Liege,  to  which  the  universal 
Church  owes  the  yesterday's  solemnity  of  the  Blessed 
Trinity,  was  predestined  to  have  the  honour  of  origi- 
nating the  Feast  of  Corpus  Christi.  It  was  a  happy 
day,  when,  in  the  year  1246,  after  so  many  delays 
and  difficulties,  the  then  Bishop  of  Liege,  Eobort  de 


MONDAY   AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  157 

Tor6te,  published  a  synodical  decree,  that  each  year, 
on  the  Thursday  after  Trinity  Sunday,  there  should 
be  observed  in  all  the  Churches  of  his  Diocese,  with 
rest  from  servile  work,  and  with  the  preparation  of 
fasting  on  the  eve,  a  solemn  Feast  in  honour  of  the 
Blessed  Sacrament. 

But  the  mission  of  the  Blessed  Juliana  was  far 
from  being  at  an  end  ;  she  had  to  be  punished  for 
having  so  long  deferred  it.  The  Bishop  died ;  and 
the  decree  he  had  issued  would  have  long  been  a  dead 
letter,  had  there  not  been  one,  the  only  one.  Church 
of  the  Diocese,  whose  Clergy  were  determined  to 
carry  the  decree  into  execution :  these  were  the  Canons 
of  Saint  Martin- au-Mont.  Though  there  was  no 
authority,  during  the  vacancy,  that  cared  to  enforce 
the  observance,  yet,  in  the  year  1247,  the  Feast  of 
Corpus  Christi  was  kept  in  that  privileged  Church. 
Robert's  successor,  Henry  de  Gueldre,  a  warrior  and 
grandee,  took  no  interest  in  what  his  predecessor  had 
had  so  much  at  heart.  Hugh  de  Saint  Cher,  Cardinal 
of  Saint  Sabina,  and  Legate  in  Germany,  having  gone 
to  Liege  with  a  view  to  remedy  the  disorders  to  which 
the  new  episcopal  government  had  given  rise,  heard 
mention  of  the  decree  of  the  late  Bishop  Robert,  and 
of  the  new  Feast.  The  Cardinal  had,  formerly,  been 
Prior  and  Provincial  in  theOrder  of  St.  Dominic;  and 
was  one  of  the  theologians  who,  having  been  consulted 
by  John  de  Lausanne,  had  favoured  the  project.  He 
was  of  the  same  mind  when  Legate  ;  and  claimed  the 
honour  of  keeping  the  Feast  himself,  and  singing 
Mass  with  much  solemnity.  JSTot  satisfied  with  that, 
he  issued  a  Circular,  dated  December  29, 1253,  which 
he  addressed  to  the  Archbishops,  Bishops,  Abbots, 
and  Faithful  of  the  territory  of  his  legation  ;  and,  in 
that  document,  he  confirmed  the  decree  of  the  Bishop 
of  Liege,  and  extended  it  to  all  the  country  over 
which  he  was  Legate,  granting  one  hundred  days' 
indulgence  to  all  who,  contrite,  and  after  confession  of 


158  TIME   AFTER   PEXTEOOST. 

their  sins,  should,  on  the  Feast  itself,  or  during  its 
Octave,  devoutly  visit  a  Church  in  which  the  Office  of 
Corpus  C/iristi  was  being  celebrated.  In  the  year 
following,  the  Cardinal  of  Saint  George  in  Velabro, 
who  had  succeeded  as  Legate,  confirmed  and  renewed 
the  ordinances  made  by  the  Cardinal  of  Saint  Sabina. 
These  reiterated  decrees,  however,  failed  to  removt 
the  wide-spread  indifference.  A  terrible  blow  had 
been  given,  by  the  proposed  Feast,  to  the  powers  of 
hell,  and  Satan  excited  every  possible  opposition  to  it. 
As  soon  as  the  Legates  had  taken  their  departure, 
several  local  Superiors,  men  of  note  and  authority, 
published  their  own  ordinances  in  opposition  to  what 
had  been  already  given.  In  1258,  the  year  of  the 
Blessed  Juliana's  death,  there  was  still  but  the  single 
Church  of  Saint  Martin  that  would  celebrate  tht 
Feast,  which  it  was  her  mission  to  spread  throughout 
the  entire  world.  But  she  left  the  continuation  of  her 
work  to  a  holy  Eecluse,  of  the  name  of  Eve,  to  whom 
she  had  confided  her  secrets. 

On  the  29th  day  of  August,  1261,  James  Pantaleou 
ascended  the  papal  throne,  under  the  name  of  Urban 
the  Fourth.  He  owed  his  election  to  this  dignity  t 
his  great  personal  merits,  for,  by  birth,^  he  haa 
nothing  to  recommend  him.  He  had  been  Arch- 
deacon of  Liege  ;  and  there  had  met  with  the  Blessed 
Juliana,  and  had  approved  her  work.  In  this  hi^ 
exaltation  to  the  papacy.  Eve  thought  she  had  an 
indication  of  God's  providence.  She  induced  the 
Bisihop,  Henry  de  Gueldre,  to  send  his  written  con- 
gratulations to  the  new  Pontiff,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  to  entreat  him  to  confirm,  by  his  own  approba- 
tion, the  Feast  which  had  been  instituted  by  Robert 
de  Torote.  About  that  same  time,  several  super- 
natural events  had  attracted  public  attention,  and  in 
particular,   the   prodigy   at   Bolsena,    near   Orvieto, 

^  Troyes,  in  France,  was  his  native  town. 


MONDAY   AFTER   TRIKITY   SUNDAY.  ]  59 

wtere  tlie  papal  court  happened  to  be  then  residing, — 
the  prodigy  of  a  corporal  having  been  stained  with 
blood  by  a  miraculous  Host.     These  events  seemed 
as  though  providentially  permitted,  in  order  to  rouse 
Urban's  attention,  and  to  confirm  him  in  the  holy 
zeal  he  had  formerly  evinced  for  the  glory  of  the 
Blessed    Sacrament.       St.    Thomas    of    Aquin    was 
appointed  to  compose,  according  to  the  Roman  rite, 
the  Office  for  the  Feast ;  which  Office  was  to  be  sub- 
stituted for  the  one  prepared  by  the  Blessed  Juliana, 
and  which  she  had  adapted  to  the  ancient  liturgy  of 
France.     The  Bull  Transiturus  was  published  soon 
after ;  it  made  known  to  the  Church  the  Pope's  inten- 
tions.    Urban  there  mentions  the  revelations  which 
had  come  to  his  knowledge  before  his  election ;  and 
declares,  that,  in  virtue  of  his  apostolic  authority,  and 
for  the  confounding  of  heresy,  and  for  the  increase  of 
the  true  faith,  he  institutes  a  special  Solemnity  in 
honour  of  the  divine  Memorial  left,  by  Christ,  to  his 
Church.     The  day  there  fixed  for  the  Feast  is  the 
fifth  Feria  (that  is,  the  Thursday,)  after  the  Octave  of 
Fentecost ;  for  the  Papal  document  does  not  mention, 
as  the  decree  of  the  Bishop  of  Liege  had  done,  the 
Feast  of  the  Blessed  Trinity,  which  had  not  yet  been 
received  into  the  calendar  of  the  Church  of  Pome. 
In  imitation  of  what  had  been  done  by  Hugh  de 
Saint  Cher,  the  Pontiff  granted  a  hundred  days'  in- 
dulgence to  all  the  Faithful,  who,  being  contrite,  and 
having  confessed  their  sins,  should  assist  at  Mass,  or 
Matins,  at  first  or  second  Yespers,  of  the  Feast ;  and 
for  assisting  at  Prime,  Tierce,  Sext,  None,  and  Com- 
plin, forty  days  for  each  of  those  Hours.     He,  also, 
granted  a  hundred  days,  for  each  day  within  the 
Octave,  to  those  who  should  assist,  on  any  such  day, 
at  the  Mass  and  the   entire   Office.     Though  thus 
entering  into  all  these  details,  there  is  not  an  allusion 
to  the  Procession,  for  it  was  not  introduced  till  the 
following  Century. 


160  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

All  now  seemed  settled ;  and  yet,  owing  to  the 
troubles  which  were  then  so  rife  in  Italy  and  the 
Empire,  the  Bull  of  Urban  the  Fourth  was  forgotten, 
and  remained  a  dead  letter.  Forty  years  and  more 
elapsed  before  it  was  again  promulgated  and  confirmed 
by  Pope  Clement  the  Fifth,  at  the  Council  of  Yienne. 
John  the  Twenty- second  gave  it  the  force  of  a  settled 
law,  by  inserting  it  in  the  Clementines,  about  the 
year  1318  ;  and  he  had  thus  the  honour  of  putting 
the  finishing  hand  to  the  great  work,  which  had  taken 
upwards  of  a  century  for  its  completion. 

The  Feast  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  or,  as  it  is 
commonly  called,  Corpus  Christi,  began  a  new  phase 
in  the  Catholic  worship  of  the  Holy  Eucharist.  But, 
in  order  to  understand  this,  we  must  go  more 
thoroughly  into  the  question  of  Eucharistic  worship, 
as  practised  in  the  previous  ages  of  the  Church  :  the 
inquiry  is  one  of  importance  for  the  full  appreciation 
of  the  great  Feast,  for  which  we  must  now  be  pre- 
paring our  souls.  No  preparation,  so  it  seems  to  us, 
could  be  more  to  the  point,  than  the  devoting  the  two 
next  days  to  a  faithful  and  compendious  study  of 
the  chief  features  iu  the  history  of  the  Blessed 
Eucharist. 

It  belongs  to  thee,  0  holy  Spirit,  to  teach  us  the 
history  of  so  great  a  Mystery.  Scarcely  has  thy  reign 
begun  upon  the  earth,  when,  faithful  to  thy  divine 
mission  of  glorifying  our  Emmanuel,^  who  has 
ascended  into  heaven,  thou  at  once  raisest  our  eyes 
and  hearts  up  to  that  best  gift  of  his  love,  whereby 
we  still  possess  him  under  the  eucharistic  veil.  During 
those  long  ages  of  the  expectation  of  nations,  it  was 
thou  didst  bring  the  "Word  before  mankind  ;  thou 
spakcst  of  him  in  the  Scriptures,  thou  proclaimedst 
him  by  the  Prophets.-  0  thou  that  art  the  Gift  of 
the  Most  High  !  ^  thou  art,  also,  infinite  Love ;  and,  it 

'  St.  John,  xvi.  14.     -  2  St.  Pet.  i.  19-21.     ^  Hymn  for  Pentecost. 


MONDAY    AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  161 

is  through  thee,  as  such,  that  are  wrought  all  the 
manifestations  which  God  vouchsafes  to  make  to  us 
his  creatures.  It  was  thou  that  broughtest  this  divine 
Person,  the  Word,  into  the  womb  of  the  immaculate 
Virgin  Mary,  there  to  clothe  him  with  sinless  flesh, 
and  so  make  him  our  Brother  and  our  Saviour.  And 
now  that  he  has  ascended  to  his  Father  and  our 
Father,^  depriving  us  of  the  sight  of  his  human 
nature,  all  beauteous  with  its  perfections  and  charms ; 
now  that  we  have  to  go  through  this  vale  of  tears, 
deprived  of  his  visible  company ; — he  has  sent  thee 
unto  us ;  ^  and  thou  art  come,  0  divine  Spirit,  as  our 
Consoler.  But  the  consolation  thou  bringest  us,  dear 
Paraclete !  is.  ever  the  same  ; — it  is  the  faithful 
remembrance  of  our  Jesus  ;^  yea,  more,  it  is  his  divine 
Presence,  perpetuated  by  thee  in  the  Sacrament  of 
Love.  We  had  been  already  told  that  this  would  be 
so ;  that  thou  wouldst  not  speak  of  thyself,*  or  for 
thyself ;  but  that  thou  wouldst  come  to  give  testimony 
of  the  Emmanuel,^  continue  his  work,  and  produce 
his  divine  likeness  in  each  one  of  us. 

How  admirable  is  this  thy  fulfilment  of  thy  sublime 
mission,  which  is  all  for  the  glory  of  Jesus  !  0  divine 
Spirit,  Guardian  of  the  Word  in  the  Church  !  it  is  far 
beyond  our  power  to  describe  how  great  is  thy  vigilance 
over  the  word  of  teaching,  brought  by  the  Saviour  to 
this  earth  of  ours,  a  teaching  which  is  the  true  ex- 
pression of  himself,  and  which,  coming,  as  he  himself 
does,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Father,  is  the  nourishment 
of  his  Bride  here  below.^  But  with  what  infinite  re- 
spect and  vigilance,  0  holy  Spirit,  dost  thou  not  pre- 
side over  the  august  Sacrament,  wherein  is  present,  with 
all  the  reality  of  his  adorable  Flesh,  that  same  Incar- 
nate Word,  who,  from  the  very  first  of  creation,  was 
the  centre  and  object  of  all  thy  dealings  with  creatures  I. 

1  St.  John,  XX.  17.  *  St.  John,  xvi.  13, 

2  St.  Luke,   xxiv.  49,  ^  /^^^^  ^v.  26. 

3  St.  John,  xiv.  26.  e  St.  Matth.  iv. 

VOL.  X.  M 


162  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

It  is  by  the  mystery  whicli  is  produced  by  thine  om- 
nipotence, that  the  exiled  Bride  recovers  her  Spouse  ; 
it  is  by  thee  that  she  traverses  the  long  ages  of  time, 
holding  and  prizing  her  infinite  treasure ;  it  is  by  thee 
that  she,  with  such  superhuman  wisdom,  puts  it  to 
profit,  by  so  arranging,  so  modifying  her  discipline,  yea, 
her  very  life,  as  to  secure  in  each  age  of  time 
the  greatest  possible  faith,  respect,  and  love  towards 
the  Divine  Eucharist.  If  she  anxiously  hide  It 
from  the  profane  men  that  would  only  turn  their  know- 
ledge into  blasphemy  ;  or  if  she  lavish  upon  It  all  that 
Liturgy  can  give  of  pomp  and  magnificence ;  or  if, 
-again,  she  bring  It  forth  from  her  sacred  temples,  and 
triumphantly  carrylt  in  processions  through  the  crowded 
streets  of  cities,  or  the  green  lanes  of  the  quiet  country, 
it  is  thou,  0  divine  Spirit,  that  inspirest  her  with  what 
is  best ;  it  is  thj'  divine  foresight  that  suggests  to  her 
what  is  the  surest  means  for  gaining,  in  each  respec- 
tive period  and  age,  the  most  of  honour  and  love  for 
that  Jesus  of  hers,  who  is  ever  present  in  the  Sacred 
Host,  and  who  deigns  to  let  his  love  be  delighted  with 
being  thus  among  the  children  of  men.^ 

"Vouchsafe,  0  Holy  Ghost,  to  aid  us  in  our  con- 
templations of  this  sacred  Mystery.  Enlighten  our 
understandings,  inflame  our  hearts,  during  these  hours 
of  preparation  for  its  Feast.  Give  to  our  souls  the 
knowledge  of  that  Jesus,  who  is  coming  to  us  beneath 
the  Sacramental  veil. 

May  this  holy  Mystery  be  to  us,  during  this  last 
portion  of  the  year  and  its  liturgy,  our  Bread  to  sup- 
port us  on  the  journey  we  have  still  to  make  through 
the  desert,  before  we  can  reach  the  mount  of  God ;  ^  we 
have  yet  a  great  way  to  go,  and  a  way  so  diflferent  from 
the  one  we  have  already  passed  through,  when  we  had 
the  company  of  our  Jesus  in  the  Mysteries  he  was 
working  for  our  salvation.  Be  thou,  0  holy  Spirit, 
our  guide  in  those  paths,  which  the  Church,  under 

^  Prov.  viii.  31.  ^  3  King?,  xix. 


I 


MONDAY  AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  163 

thy  direction,  is  courageously  traversing,  and  is,  every 
day,  approaching  nearer  to  the  end  of  her  pilgrimage 
here  below.  Yet,  scarcely  have  we  entered  on  this 
second  portion  of  our  Year,  than  thou,  divine  Spirit ! 
bringest  us  to  the  banquet  prepared  by  divine  Wisdom,^ 
where  the  pilgrim  gets  the  strength  he  needs  for  his 
journey.  We  will  tvalk  on,  then,  in  the  strength  of 
this  heavenly  food ;  ^  and  when  our  course  is  run,  we 
will,  with  the  same  Bread  to  support  us,  cry  out, 
with  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride,  that  our  Lord  Jesus 
may  come  ^  to  us,  at  that  last  hour,  and  admit  us  into 
his  eternal  kingdom. 


In  honour  of  the  adorable  Sacrament,  and  in  me- 
mory of  the  Blessed  Juliana,  to  whom  the  Church 
owes  the  Feast  she  is  about  to  celebrate,  we  will  offer 
our  Readers,  to-day  and  during  the  Octave,  the  main 
portions,  which  are  still  extant,  of  the  Offi.ce  which 
bears  her  name.  It  will  be  interesting  to  them  to 
hear  how  this  Office  was  drawn  up ;  we  give  the 
details  as  supplied  to  us  by  the  Bollandists,  in  the 
Life  written  of  her  by  one  of  her  contemporaries. 

Juliana,  then,  began  to  ask  herself  whom  she  should 
get  to  compose  the  Ofiice  of  the  great  Feast.  She  knew 
of  no  clever  man,  nor  any  holy  priest,  who  seemed  to 
her  fitted  for  the  work ;  so,  trusting  solely  to  divine 
"Wisdom,  she  made  up  her  mind  to  select  a  young 
brother  of  the  Hospital,  named  John,*  whose  inno- 
cent life  had  been  revealed  to  her  by  God.  John 
refused  the  work,  declaring  that  it  far  exceeded  his 
powers  or  learning  ;  he  begged  her  to  excuse  him,  as 
he  was  but  an  ignorant  man.  Juliana  knew  all  that ; 
but  she  also  knew,  that  divine  Wisdom,  whose  work 

^  Wisd.  ix.  2  3  Kings,  xix.  8.  '  Apoc.  xxii.  17. 

*  We  must  not  confound  him  with  John  de  Lausanne,  of  whom 
we  have  previously  spoken. 


164  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

she  was  furtliering,  could  speak  admirable  things 
through  an  unlearned  man  ;  she  kept  to  her  purpose  ; 
and  John,  unable  to  resist  the  entreaties  and  influence 
of  Juliana,  began  his  labours.  She  prayed,  and  he 
wrote  ;  and  with  the  efi'orts  of  the  two  united,  the 
work  progressed  in  a  way  that  surprised  the  young 
Brother.  He  attributed  all,  and  he  was  not  far 
wrong,  to  Juliana's  prayers.  When  he  had  got  any 
considerable  portion  of  the  composition  ready,  he  gave 
it  to  her,  saying  :  "  This,  Sister,  is  what  heaven  sends 
"  thee  :  read  it,  and  examine  whether  I  have  put 
"  down  anything,  either  in  the  chant,  or  the  words, 
"  which  needs  correction."  She  would  then  take  it ; 
and,  by  the  wonderful  infused  wisdom  which  she  pos- 
sessed, would  examine,  and,  where  needed,  correct ; 
but  with  so  much  prudence  and  judgment,  that  not 
even  the  most  expert  critics  could  find  anything  to 
change.  And  thus,  by  the  wondrous  help  of  God, 
was  completed  the  whole  Office  of  the  new  Feast.3 

The  Antiphons  we  here  subjoin  were  taken,  by  the 
Bollandists,^  from  a  very  ancient  Directoriuin  of  the 
Church  of  Saint- Martin-au-Mont.  They  are  the 
Antiphons  assigned  for  the  Bencdictus  and  Magnificat 
of  each  day  within  the  Octave. 

ANTIPHONS. 

Animarum  cibus  Dei  Sa-  The   Wisdom    of  God,    the 

pientia    nobis    camem    as-  food  of  souls,  hath  offered  to 

sumptam  proposuit  in  edu-  us,  for  our  nourishment,  the 

Hum,  ut    per    cibum   hujus  Flesh  he  had  assumed  to  him- 

pietatis  invitaret  ad  gustum  self ;  that,  by  this  food  of  his 

divinitatis.  love,  he  might  lead  us  to  taste 

of  what  is  divine. 

Discipulis     competentem  Leaving  to   his  Disciples  a 

conscribens  hereditatem,  sui  worthy  inheritance,  he  urged 

'  Vita  B.  Juhana},  ah  auctore  coaBVO  descripta ;  lib.  ii.  cap.  2. 
Act.  SS.  ad  diem  btam  Aprilis. 
5  Ibid,  in  Append. 


MONDAY   AFTER   TRINITY   SUNDAY. 


165 


them  to  be  mindful  of  himself, 
saying :  do  this  in  memory  of 
me. 

Christ  gave  his  whole  self 
to  us  as  our  food  ;  that  as  he, 
whom  we  taste  with  our  heart, 
divinely  refreshes  us,  so  he, 
whom  we  receive  with  our 
mouth,  might  refresh  us  by  his 
human  nature ; 

And  thus  it  is,  that  he  gives 
us  to  pass  from  things  visible 
to  invisible,  from  temporal  to 
eternal,  from  earthly  to 
heavenly,  from  human  to 
divine. 

Man  hath  eaten  of  the  Bread 
of  Angels ;  so  that  we  who, 
according  to  the  soul,  receive 
the  food  of  the  godhead,  may 
take,  according  to  the  flesh, 
the  food  of  Christ's  humanity : 
for,  as  the  rational  soul  and 
the  flesh  is  one  man,  so  God 
and  Man  is  one  Christ. 

O  Bread  of  Life  !  O  Bread 
of  Angels  !  Jesus  Christ,  true 
life  of  the  world  !  who  ever 
feedest  us,  and  never  failest  in 
thyself !  heal  us  of  all  our 
weakness  ;  that  being  re- 
freshed on  earth  by  thee  as 
our  viaticum,  we  may  feed  on 
thee,  to  our  fill,  in  eternity. 

Daily  doth  Christ  wash  us 
in  his  Blood,  for  daily  is  re^- 
newed  the  remembrance  of 
his  sacred  Passion. 

His  Blood  is  not  shed  by  the 
hands  of  faithless  men,  which 
would  be  to  their  destruction  ; 
but  daily  is  it  received,  and 
sweetly,  and  to  their  salva- 
tion, by  the  Faithful. 

Once  did  Christ,  true  God 
and  true  Man,  hang  upon  the 
Cross,  and  offer  himself  to  the 


memoriam  commendavit  in- 
quiens  :  Hoc  facite  in  mei 
commemorationem. 

Totum  Christus  se  nobis 
exhibet  in  cibum,  ut  sicut 
divinitus  nos  reficit  quern 
corde  gustamus,  ita  nos 
humanitus  reficiat  quem  ore 
manducamus ; 

Et  sic  de  visibilibus  ad 
invisibilia,  de  temporalibus 
ad  setema,  de  terrenis  ad 
coelestia,  de  humanis  ad  di- 
vina  nos  transferat. 

Panem  angelorum  man- 
ducavit  homo,  ut  qui  secun- 
dum animum  cibum  divini- 
tatis  accipimus,  secundum 
carnem  cibum  humanitatis 
sumamus  :  quia  sicut  anima 
rationalis  et  caro  unus  est 
homo,  ita  Deus  et  homo 
unus  est  Christus. 

Panis  vitse,  panis  angelo- 
rum, Jesu  Christe  vera 
mundi  vita  ;  qui  semper  nos 
reficis,  in  te  nunquam  defi- 
cis,  nos  ab  omni  sana  lan- 
guore,  ut  te  nostro  viatico 
in  terra  recreati,  te  ore 
plenissimo  manducemus  in 
aeternum. 

Suo  Christus  sanguine 
nos  lavat  quotidie,  cum 
ejus  beatae  passionis  quoti- 
die memoria  renovatur. 

Sanguis  ejus  non  infide- 
lium  manibus  ad  ipsoruni 
pemiciem  funditur  ;  sed 
quotidie  fidelium  suavi  ore 
sumitur  ad  salutem. 

Verus  Deus,  verus  homo 
semel  in  cruce  pependit,  se 
Patri  redemptionis  hostiam 


166 


TIME    AFTER   PENTE(X)ST. 


eflBLcacem  offerens  :  semper 
tamen  invisibiliter  est  in 
mysterio,  non  passus  sed 
quasi  pati  repraesentatus. 

Dominus  Jesus  Christus 
sine  vulnere  quotidie  sacri- 
ficatus,  mortalibus  in  terra 
prsestitit  ccelesti  fungi  nii- 
nisterio. 

Haec  igitur  singularis  vic- 
tima  Christi  mortis  est  re- 
cordatio,  scelerum  nostro- 
rum  expurgatio,  eunctorum 
fidelium  devotio,  et  setemse 
vitse  adeptio. 


Father,  as  an  effectual  victim 
of  redemption ;  yet  is  he  ever 
invisibly  present  in  the 
Mystery,  not  suffering,  but 
represented  as  suffering. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
is  daily  sacrificed,  but  without 
a  wound,  grants  to  mortals  on 
earth  to  fulfil  a  heavenly 
ministry. 

This  incomparable  Victim 
is,  then,  the  remembrance  of 
Christ's  death,  the  cleansing 
away  of  our  crimes,  the  devo- 
tion of  all  the  Faithful,  and 
the  pledge  of  life  eternal. 


I 


TUESDAY    AFTER   TRINITY   SUNDAY.  167 


TUESDAY 


AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY. 


The  history  of  the  blessed  Eucharist  is  one  with  that 
of  the  Church  herself :  the  liturgical  usages,  which 
have  varied  in  the  celebration  of  the  most  august  of 
all  the  Sacraments,  have  followed  the  great  social 
phases  of  the  Christian  world.  This  was  a  necessity  ; 
for  the  Eucharist  is  the  vital  centre,  here  below, 
whither  everything  in  the  Church  converges  ;  it  is 
the  inner  bond  which  unites  together  that  society  of 
which  Christ  is  the  head,  the  society  whereby  he  is 
to  reign  over  the  nations,  which  are  to  be  his  inheri- 
tance.^ Union  with  Peter,  the  Yicar  of  Christ,  must 
always  be  the  indispensable  condition,  the  external 
mark,  of  the  union  of  the  members  with  the  invisible 
Head ;  but,  supported,  in  an  ineffable  manner,  on  the 
Rock  which  bears  the  Church,  the  divine  Mystery, 
wherein  Christ  gives  himself  to  each  one  of  his  ser- 
vants, must  ever  be  the  essential  mystery  of  union ; 
and,  as  such,  the  centre,  and  the  bond,  of  the  great 
Catholic  communion.  Let  us,  to-day,  get  a  clear 
notion  of  this  fundamental  truth,  on  which  was 
based  the  very  formation  of  the  Church  at  her  com- 
mencement ;  and  let  us  consider  the  influence  it  ex- 
ercised on  the  forms  of  eucharistic  worship  during 
the  first  twelve  centuries.  To-morrow,  we  will  con- 
tinue the  subject,  by  examining  how  subsequent  loss 
of  fervour,  and  heresy,  and  social  degeneracy,  in- 
duced the  Church  to  gradually  modify  these  forms, 
which,  after  all,  are  but  accidental ;  they  were  admir- 

1  Ps.  ii.  8. 


168  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

ably  adapted  to  the  favoured  times  they  had  served, 
but  would  scarcely  suit  the  changed  circumstances 
and  requirements  of  later  generations  of  the  Church's 
children. 

It  was  on  the  eve  of  his  Passion  that  our  Lord 
instituted  the  great  Memorial,  which  was  to  per- 
petuate, in  all  places,  the  one  Sacrifice,  whereby  are 
perfected,  for  ever,  they  that  are  sanctified}  The  Cross 
was  "the  Altar  of  the  world,"  as  St.  Leo  calls  it;- 
and  on  that  Cross,  says  the  same  holy  Doctor,  was 
made,  a  few  hours  after  the  Last  Supper,  "  the  obla- 
tion of  the  whole  human  nature  ;"^  for  the  whole 
human  race  was  united  with  this  last  act  of  infinite 
adoration  and  reparation,  offered,  by  its  Head,  to  the 
supreme  Majesty  of  God.  The  Church,  issuing,  as 
she  did,  with  the  Blood  and  Water  from  the  side  of 
her  Saviour,  was  then  but  in  her  infancy ;  and  the 
Mystery  of  divine  union,  which  Jesus  had  come  upon 
the  earth  to  produce,  by  himself  uniting  to  the  Father, 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  members  of  his  mystical  body, — 
this  union  was  not  to  have  its  immediate  realisation 
for  each  separate  member,  except  by  its  successive 
application  to  each  one,  as  his  time  came.  This  was 
the  object  of  the  sublime  institution  of  the'  Eucharist 
at  the  Last  Supper.  It  was  a  New  Testament,  which 
gave  to  the  future  Church  the  possession  of  the  Mys- 
tery, whereby  each  generation,  linked  on  to  its  pre- 
decessors by  the  unity  of  the  one  same  Sacrifice,  would 
find  itself  in  union  with  the  Word  Incarnate  ;  and, 
in  that  union,  would  have  the  tie  which  mutually 
binds  his  members  together,  and  the  unity  of  his 
mystical  body. 

Immediately  after  instituting  this  new  Passover, 
Jesus  said  to  his  Disciples  :  A  new  conunandment  1 
give  nnto  you  :  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have 
loved  you  :  and,  by  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are 

'  Heb.  X.  14.         -  Serm.  viii.  de  Fass.        '  Ibid.  iv.  de  Pass. 


TUESDAY    AFTER    TRINITY    SUNDAY.  169 

my  disciples}  This  was  the  first  injunction  given  to 
his  disciples,  by  Jesus,  after  giving  himself  to  them 
in  the  Eucharist ;  this  love  of,  and  union  with,  each 
other,  was  to  be  the  mark  of  the  Covenant,  which  he 
then,  through  his  Apostles,  contracted  with  all  them 
who  were  to  believe  in  him  through  the  word  of  their 
preaching.^  His  very  first  prayer,  after  that  first  giv- 
ing his  Body  and  Blood  under  the  eucharistic  species, 
is  for  that  same  union, — the  union  of  his  Faithful, 
one  with  another  ;  a  union,  admirable  as  is  the  Mys- 
tery which  produces  and  maintains  it ;  a  union  so 
intimate,  that  its  model  is  the  union  existing  between 
Jesus  and  his  Eternal  Father  :  May  they  all  be  one, 
as  tliou,  Father,  in  me,  and  I  in  thee ;  that  they  may 
be  made  perfect  in  one, — one,  as  tve  also  are  o?ie.^ 

Under  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Church 
understood,  from  the  very  first,  the  intentions  of  her 
divine  Master.  The  three  thousand,  who  were  con- 
verted on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  are  described,  in  the 
Acts,  as  persevering  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Apostles,  in 
the  communication  of  the  brealdng  of  bread,  and  in 
prayers^  And  so  great  is  the  power  of  union  derived 
from  their  all  partaking  of  the  heavenly  Bread,  that 
they  were  remarked  by  the  Jews  as  a  class  of  men 
forming  a  society  distinct  from  every  other,  which 
won  the  esteem  of  all  that  beheld  them,  and  drew 
others  daily  to  join  them.^ 

A  few  years  later,  and  the  Church,  led  on  by  the 
same  Holy  Spirit,  passed  beyond  the  narrow  limits 
of  Judea,  and  carried  her  treasures  to  the  Gentiles. 
It  was  a  world  of  corruption,  where  all  was  discord 
between  man  and  man,  and  where  the  only  remedy 
to  the  outrages  of  individual  egotism  was  the  tyranny 
of  a  Caesar ;  and  it  was  into  such  a  world  that  the 


^  St.  John,  xiii.  34,  35.  *  Acts,  ii,  42. 

2  Ibid.  xvii.  20.  5  j^j^^  47^ 

3  Ibid.  21-23. 


170  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

Cliristians  came,  and  showed  it,  from  east  to  west,  the 
marvel  of  a  new  people,  which,  by  the  sole  influence 
of  its  virtues,  recruited  its  members  from  every  class 
of  society,  and  from  every  clime,  and  was  stronger 
and  more  united  than  any  nation  that  had  ever  ap- 
peared on  earth.  The  Pagans  were  in  admiration  at 
this  strange  and  inexplicable  novelty  ;  without  know- 
ing what  they  were  doing,  without  troubling  them- 
selves with  any  further  inquiry,  they  bore  testimony 
to  the  perfection  wherewith  these  Christians  fulfilled 
the  dying  wishes  of  their  Founder  ;  they  thus  spoke 
of  them  :  "  See  how  they  love  one  another  !" 

It  was,  indeed,  a  mystery ;  but  the  Faithful,  the 
Initiated,  understood  it ;  for  it  had  been  thus  ex- 
plained to  them  by  the  Apostle  :  We,  being  manyy  are 
one  breads  one  body,  all  that  partake  of  one  Bread} 

This  text  is  admirably  commented  by  St.  Augustine 
in  a  sermon  he  preached  to  the  Neophytes,  a  few 
hours  after  their  Baptism :  **  I  remember,"  says  he, 
"  the  promise  I  made,  of  explaining  to  you,  who  have 
"  been  baptised,  the  mystery  of  the  Lord's  Table, 
"  which  you  now  see,  and  of  which  you  were  made 
"partakers  in  the  night  just  past.  .  .  That  Bread 
"  which  you  see  on  the  Altar,  that  Bread  which  has 
"  been  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God,  is  the  Body  of 
"  Christ :  that  Chalice,  or,  rather,  what  that  Chalice 
"  contains,  which  has  been  sanctified  by  the  word  of 
"  God,  is  the  Blood  of  Christ.  By  these  did  Christ 
"  our  Lord  will  to  give  us  his  Body  and  his  Blood, 
"  which  he  shed  for  us,  unto  the  remission  of  our 
"  sins.  If  you  have  properly  received  them,  you  are 
"  what  you  have  received,  for  the. Apostle  says  :  We, 
**  being  many,  are  one  bread,  one  body.  Yes,  it  was 
"  thus  that  he  expounded  the  sacrament  of  the  Table 
"  of  the  Lord  :  We,  being  many,  are  one  bread,  one 
"  body.     "We  are,  by  this  Bread,  instructed  how  we 

'  1  Cor.  X.  17. 


TUESDAY   AFTER   TRINITY   SUNDAY.  171 

'*  are  to  love  unity.     Was  this  Bread  made  out  of 
*'  one  grain  ?     Were  there  not  many  grains  of  wheat  ? 
*'  But,  before  they  came  to  be  bread,  they  were  sepa- 
"  rated  one  from  the  other  ;  they  became  joined  by 
**  means  of  water,  and  by  a  certain  bruising :    for, 
"  unless  the  wheat  be  ground,  and  be  moistened  with 
"  water,  it  could  never  take  the  form  we  call  bread. 
"  It  was  the  same  with  you,  until  you  were,  so  to 
"  say,  ground  by  the  humiliation  of  fasting,  and  by 
*'  the  sacrament  of  exorcism.     Baptism    and   water 
"  came  to  you ;   you  were  moistened,   that   so   you 
*'  might  come  to  the  state  of  bread.     But,  even  so, 
"  there  is  no  bread  without  fire.     What,  then,  does 
**  fire  signify  ?     It  is  the  Chrism  ;  for  the  oil  which 
**  makes    our   fire   is    the    sacrament    of    the   Holy 
"  Ghost.    .    .    .    The  Holy  Ghost,  therefore,  comes  ; 
"  after  water,  comes  fire  ;  and  you  are  made  Bread, 
"which  is  the  Body  of  Christ.    .    .  .  Christ  willed 
"  that  we  should  be  his  Sacrifice, — the  Sacrifice  of 
"  God.  .  .  Great,  very  great,  are  these  mysteries  !  .  .  . 
"  Do  you  so  receive  them,  as  to  take  care  that  you 
"  have  unity  in  your  hearts."^     "  Be  one,  by  your 
"  loving  one  another,  by  holding  one  faith,  one  hope, 
"  and  undivided  charity.     When  the  heretics  receive 
"this  Bread,  they  receive  testimony  against  them- 
"  selves  ;   for   they   are   seeking  to    make   division, 
"whereas  this  Bread  is  the  sign  of  unity."^      The 
Scripture,  speaking  of  the  first  Christians,  says,  that 
they  had  hut  one  heart  and  one  soul ;  ^  and  it  is  the 
unity  which  is  signified  by  the  Wine  in  the  Holy 
Mysteries;   "For,"  continues   St.   Augustine,    "the 
"wine  was  once  in  so  many  bunches  of  grapes;  but 
"  now  it  is  ail  one,  one  in  the  sweetness  of  the  chalice, 
"  for  it  has  gone  through  the  crushing  of  the  wine- 


*  Serm.  ccxxvii.    In  die  Paschae.     Ad  Infantes,  de  Sacramentis, 
'  Ibid,  ccxxix.  Fer.  ii.  Paschae,  de  Sacramentis  Jidelium, 

*  Acts,  iv.  32. 


172  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

*' press.  So  you,  after  those  fastings,  and  labours, 
*'  and  humility,  and  contrition,  have  come,  in  the 
"  name  of  Christ,  to  the  Chalice  of  the  Lord  ;  and 
"  you  are  there  on  that  Table,  and  there  in  that 
"  Chalice.  You  are  there  together  with  us,  for  we 
*'  have  eaten  together,  and  drunk  together,  and  that 
"  because  we  live  together.^  Thus  did  Christ  our 
"  Lord,"  (by  the  AVine  made  one  out  of  many  grapes) 
'*  signify  us,  and  wished  us  to  be  one  with  him,  and,  by 
"  his  Table,  consecrated  the  mystery  of  our  peace  and 
*'  unity.''  - 

These  admirable  expressions  of  St.  Augustine  are 
but  the  substance  of  the  doctrine  regarding  the  holy 
Eucharist,  held  by  the  Church  in  the  4th  Century. 
They  give  us  the  very  essence  of  that  doctrine,  in  all 
its  fulness  and  in  all  the  clearness  of  its  literal  truth ; 
no  other  could  have  been  given  to  Neophytes,  who, 
up  to  that  time,  had  been  kept  in  complete  ignorance 
of  the  august  Mysteries,  of  which  they  were  hence- 
forth to  partake  :— as  to  the  discipline  of  that  secresy, 
we  shall  have  to  speak  of  it  a  little  further  on.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Eucharist  here  laid  down  by  the  great 
Bishop  of  Hippo,  is  identical  with  that  given  by  all 
the  Fathers.  In  Gaul,  St.  Hilary  of  Poitiers,^  and 
St.  Cesarius  of  Aries  ;*  in  Italy,  St.  Gaudentius  of 
Brescia  :  *  at  Autioch  and  Constantinople,  St.  John 
Chrysostom  f  at  Alexandria,  St.  Cyril ;' — all  had  the 
same  way  of  putting  this  dogma  of  faith  before  their 
people.  Christ  is  not  divided :  the  Head  and  the 
members,  the  Word  and  his  Church  are  inseparably 
one  in  the  unity  of  the  mystery  instituted  for  the 
very  purpose  of  producing  that  unity.  And  this 
unanimous  teaching  of  the  Fathers,  who  lived  in  the 
golden  age  of  Christian  eloquence,  was  reproduced  by 
Paschasius  Radbert,  in  the  yth  Century,^  by  Rupert 

^  Serin,  ccxxix. 

2  Jbid.  cclxxii.     In  die  Pentecost.     Ad  Infantes,  de  SacrametUit. 

^  Lib.  viii.  de  Trinit.  ^  In  ep.  i.,  ad  Cor.  Horn.  xxiv. 

*  Horn.  vii.  "  Lib.  x.  in  Jnhan. 

^  Serm.  ii.  ad  Neoph.  **  De  corp.  et  satiy.  Domini.^  cap.  x. 


TUESDAY    AFTER    TRINITY    SUNDAY.  173 

in  the  12th/  and  by  William  of  Auvergne  in  the 
beginning  of  the  13th. ^ 

It  would  be  too  long  to  give  the  names,  and,  still 
more,  to  quote  passages,  in  testimony  of  how  all  the 
Churches,  for  the  first  twelve  Centuries,  looked  upon 
the  holy  Eucharist  in  this  same  way, — that  is,  as 
instituted  for  the  purpose  of  union.  If  we  follow 
this  traditional  teaching  back  to  the  apostolic  source 
whence  it  originated,  we  shall  find  St.  Cyprian,  in 
the  age  of  Persecution,  speaking  to  his  people  upon 
the  union  between  the  divine  Head  and  his  members, 
which  is  the  necessary  result  of  the  holy  Sacrament ; 
he  shows  this,  not  only  by  the  nature  of  bread  and 
wine,  the  essential  elements  for  the  consecration  of 
the  mysteries,  but,  likewise,  by  the  mingling  of  water 
with  the  wine,  in  the  eucharistic  cup  :  the  water,  he 
says,  signifies  the  faithful  people  ;  the  wine  denotes 
the  Blood  of  Christ ;  their  union  in  the  chalice — 
union  necessary  for  the  integrity  of  the  Sacrifice — 
union  the  most  complete  and  inseparable — expresses 
the  indissoluble  alliance  between  '  Christ  and  his 
Church,  which  consummates  the  Sacrament.^  The 
same  St.  Cyprian  shows  that  the  Unity  of  the  Church 
by  the  Chair  of  Peter,  which  is  the  subject  of  one  of 
his  finest  treatises,  is  divinely  established  on  the  sacred 
Mysteries ;  he  speaks  enthusiastically  of  the  multi- 
tude of  believers,  the  Christian  unanimity,  being  held 
together,  in  the  bonds  of  a  firm  and  indivisible  charity, 
by  the  Sacrifice  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.*  Christ  in 
his  Sacrament,  and  Christ  in  his  Vicar,  is,  in  reality, 
but  the  one  same  Rock  tbat  bears  the  building  which 
is  erected  upon  it ;  the  one  sole  Head,  visible  in  his 
representative,  his  Yicar,  and  invisible  in  his  own 
substance,  in  the  Sacrament. 

This   sentiment   of  union,   as   the  result    of    the 


'  De  div.  Of.,  lib.  ii.,  c.  2.  3  £^^  i^{\{^ 

^  De  Sacrament,  Euchar.  cap.  iv.  *  Jbxd.  Ixxri. 


174  TIMK    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

Eucharist,  was  rooted  in  the  soul  of  the  early  Church ; 
her  very  mission  was  to  bring  about  the  union  of  all 
the  children  of  God,  that  were  dispersed  ihrou^oMi  the 
world ;  ^    and,    when   the   violence   of  her    enemies 
obliged  her  to  provide  her  children  with  some  secret 
sign,  whereby  they  might  recognise  each  other,  and 
not  be  recognised  by  pagans  or  persecutors  or  blas- 
phemers, she  gave  them  the  mysterious  icthus,  thq 
FISH,  which  was  the  sacred  symbol  of  the  Eucharist. 
The  letters   which   form   the   greek   word    for   fishy 
(icthus,)  are  the  initials  of  a  formula  in  the  same 
language,  which  gives  this  sentence :  Jesus  Christy 
Son  of  God,  Saviour.     The  Fish  is  shown  to-  us,  in 
the  Book  of  Tobias,-  as  a  figure  of  Christ,  who  is  the 
food  of  the  wayfarer ;    casts   out  the  devil  by   his 
virtues ;  and  gives  light  to  the  world,  grown  old  in 
iniquity.     Again  :  it  is  not  without  a  prophetic  and 
mysterious  purpose,  that   the   fish   is  mentioned  in 
Genesis,  as  being  blessed  by  the  Creator,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  world,  just  as  man  himself  was.^ 
It  goes  with  the  bread  which  is  miraculously  multi- 
plied in  the  Gospel,  when  our  Lord  prefigures  the 
marvels  of  the  Eucharist.     It  is  brought  again  to  our 
notice,  after  the   Resurrection ;  it  is  found  lying  on 
hot  coals,  and  is  ofi'ered  by  Jesus,  together  with  bread, 
as  a  repast  to  seven  of  his  disciples,  on  the  banks  of 
lake  Tiberias.''     Now,  what  is  this  Fish  ?  this  Bread? 
The  Fathers   answer :  Christ  is  the  Bread  of  that 
mysterious  repast ;  he  is  the  Fish  taken  from  living 
water,  and  is  roasted  on  the  altar  of  the  Cross  by  the 
fire  of  his  love,  and  feeds  the  Disciples  on  his  own 
substance,  and  ofi'ers  himself  to  the  entire  world  as 
the  true  icthus.*     No  wonder,  then,  that  we    find 
this   sacred  symbol   on  almost  everything   that  the 

1  St.  John,  xi.  52.  2  job.  vi. 

3  Gen.  i.  22,  28.  ■*  St.  John,  xxi.  9. 

5  St.  P.iulin.   V.-p.  xiii ;  St.  Aup:.  Confess,  xiii.    23 ;  St.  Ambr. 
Hymn.     Pasch.  ;  Prosp.  Alrican.  J)e  promission. 


TUESDAY   AFTER  TRINITY   SUNDAY.  175 

Christians  of  the  first  three  centuries  possessed ;  on 
precious  stones,  rings,  lamps,  inscriptions,  paintings, 
there  was  the  Fish,  in  some  shape  or  other.  It  was 
the  watchword,  the  tessera  of  the  Christians,  in  those 
days  of  persecution.  An  inscription  of  the  2nd 
Century,  discovered,  in  modern  times,  at  Autun,  thus 
speaks  of  the  Christians  :  "  This  divine  race  of  the 
"  heavenly  icthus,  this  nohle  hearted  race,  receive 
*'  from  the  Saviour  of  the  Saints,  the  nourishment 
**  which  is  sweet  as  honey,  and  drink  long  draughts 
"  of  the  divine  fount,  holding  icthus  in  their 
*'  hands."  ^  A  holy  Bishop  of  Asia  Minor,  of  that 
same  early  period,  by  name  Abercius  of  Hierapolis, 
who  was  divinely  led  into  various  lands,  everywhere 
recognises  the  disciples  of  Christ  by  the  holy  Fish, 
which  makes  all,  however  separated  by  distance,  to 
be  one.  *'  I  have,"  says  he,  shortly  before  the  close 
of  his  life  of  travel,  "  I  have  seen  Rome  ;  I  have  be- 
"  held  the  queen  city,  in  her  robes  and  sandals  of 
"  gold ;  I  have  made  acquaintance  with  the  people 
"  decked  with  bright  rings.  I  have  visited  the 
"  country  of  Syria,  and  all  her  cities.  Passing  the 
"  Euphrates,  I  have  seen  Nisibis ;  and  all  people  in 
**  the  East  were  in  union  with  me,  for  we  all  formed 
"  but  one  body ;  everywhere,  faith  presented  to  all, 
"  and  gave,  as  nourishment,  to  all,  the  glorious  and 
"  holy  ICTHUS,  which  came  from  the  only  fount,  and 
"  was  taken  by  the  most  pure  Yirgin.'*  ^ 

This,  then,  was  the  bond  of  that  mighty  union 
between  Christians,  which  was  such  a  puzzle  to  the 
pagan  world ;  and  the  more  the  real  cause  of  that 
unity  was  kept  concealed  from  its  eyes,  so  much  the 
more  violent  was  the  fury  wherewith  it  attacked  the 
Church.  Our  Lord  had  said  :  Gwe  not  that  ivhich  is 
holy  to  dogs  ;  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine.^ 

^  Inscript.  iSugustod.  Spicileg.  solesm.  i. 

2  Titul.  Abercii.  Spicileg.  solesm.  hi. 

3  St.  Matth.  vii.  6. 


176  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

These  words  contained,  in  principle,  the  discipline  | 
of  secrecy,  which  was  observed  in  the  Church  till 
the  conversion  of  the  Western  world  was  completed. 
The  holiness  of  the  Sacraments,  the  sublimity  of  the 
Christian  doctrines,  necessitated  an  extreme  reserve 
on  the  part  of  the  Faithful,  living,  as  they  had  to  do, 
amidst  people,  whose  moral  degradation  and  brutal 
corruption  rendered  them  what  our  Saviour  had  told  | 
us  men  would  sometimes  make  themselves.  But 
there  was  nothing,  which  it  was  so  imperative  to  hide 
from  the  stare  and  sacrilege  of  pagans,  as  the  most 
holy  Eucharist, — that  "  great  pearl  of  the  sacred  ; 
*'  Body  of  the  Lamb,"  as  Tenantius  Fortunatus  calls 
it.^  It  was  this  that  gave  rise  to  the  essential  distinc- 
tion, into  two  classes,  of  a  Christian  assembly  when 
met  for  divine  worship  ;  there  were  the  initiated,  and 
the  uninitiated,  the  Faithful  and  the  Catechumens. 
The  distinction  began  with  the  apostolic  age,  and  was 
kept  up  till  the  8th  Century.  A  few  weeks  before 
the  solemn  administration  of  Baptism,  there  took 
place,  as  we  have  elsewhere  explained,*  the  giving,  or, 
as  it  was  termed,  the  Tradition  of  the  Symbol,  to  the 
future  members  of  the  Church ;  but  the  eucharistic 
mystery,  the  arcanum  by  excellence,  was,  even  then,  J 
kept  back  from  the  fortunate  candidates  for  holy  Bap-  " 
tism.  This  explains  the  varied  precautional  expres- 
sions, the  reticence,  the  studied  obscurity  of 
phraseology,  used  by  the  Fathers  in  their  discourse.^ 
to  their  flock,  and  this  for  years  after  the  times  ot 
Constantine  and  Theodosius.  The  Catechumens  were 
admitted  whilst  the  holy  Scriptures  were  being  read^  | 
or  whilst  the  Psalms  were  being  chanted;  but,  as 
soon  as  the  Bishop  had  given  his  discourse  on  the 
portion  which  had  been  read,  either  of  the  Gospel  or 
other  passages  of  the  sacred  Volume,  these  Catechu-  jj 

1  Vcnant.  Fortnn,  lib.  ii.  earm.  2o. 

2  Volume  for  "  Lent ;  "  Wednesday  of  the  ith  Week,  p.  35G. 


TUESDAY   AFTER   TRINITY   SUNDAY.  177 

mens  were  dismissed  by  the  Deacon  ;  and  this  missa, 
or  missioy  gave  its  name  to  that  first  portion  of  the 
Liturgy  ;  it  was  called  "  Mass  of  the  Catechumens  ;  " 
just  as  the  second  part,  which  was  from  the  oblation 
to  the  final  dismissal,  was  called  the  "  Mass  of  the 
Faithful/' 

And  yet,  this  same  holy  Mother  Church,  which 
kept  so  jealous  an  eye  to  her  treasure,  as  not  to  let 
it  be  fully  known,  except  to  her  true  children,  made 
such  by  Baptism, — with  what  delight  did  she  not,  at 
the  feasts  of  Easter  and  Pentecost,  reveal  to  her  new- 
born children,  as  soon  as  they  came  from  the  font,  the 
ineff'able  secret  hitherto  kept  in  her  heart  as  Bride, 
the  full  mystery  of  the  icthus  !  Incorporated  to 
Christ  by  the  saving  waters,  enrolled  in  his  army, 
and  marked  with  the  sign  of  his  soldiers  by  the 
anointing  received  from  the  Bishop, — with  what 
maternal  fondness  did  she  not  lead  them,  from  the 
Baptistery  first,  and  then  from  the  Chrismarium 
to  the  hallowed  precinct  of  the  Mysteries  insti- 
tuted by  the  Word  Incarnate  !  Yes,  it  was  there 
that  Jesus,  their  Head,  was  awaiting  his  new  mem- 
bers, that  he  might  draw  all  the  more  closely  the 
bonds  which  already  knit  them  to  his  mystic  Body, 
and  unite  them  to  himself  in  the  infinite  homage  of 
that  one  great  Sacrifice,  which  himself  was  off'ering 
to  the  Eternal  Father. 

This  wondrous  unity  of  the  Eucharistic  Sacrifice, 
which,  in  its  ever  the  same  one  oblation,  included 
both  Head  and  Members ;  this  unity  of  Sacrifice 
which  kept  alive  and  strengthened  the  union  of  each 
Christian  community  and  of  the  whole  Church,  was 
admirably  expressed  by  the  magnificent  forms  of  the 
primitive  Liturgy.  After  the  Catechumens  had  been 
dismissed,  and  the  unworthy  expelled,  all  the  Faith- 
fal,  without  exception,  from  the  Emperor  and  his 
Court,  down  to  the  poorest  cottager,  whether  man  or 
woman,    advanced    towards    the    Altar,    each    one 

TOL.  X.  N 


178  TIMK    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

offering  their  share  of  bread  and  wine  for  the  sacred 
Mysteries.  Themselves  a  kingly  priesthood^  as  St. 
Peter  calls  them,^  a  living  victim  figured  by  the  gifts 
they  brought,  they  assisted,  standing,  at  the  immola- 
tion of  the  divine  Victim,  whose  members  they  truly 
were  ;  then,  united  in  the  kiss  of  peace,  the  external 
sign  of  their  union  of  heart,  they  received  in  their 
hands,  and  still  standing,  the  sacred  Body,  their 
spiritual  nourishment ;  the  Deacons  offered  them  the 
Chalice,  and  they  drank  of  the  precious  Blood.  Even 
babes,  in  their  mothers'  arms,  were  eager  for  the 
divine  drink,  and  received  some  drops,  at  least,  into 
their  innocent  mouths.  The  sick  who  could  not 
leave  their  rooms,  and  prisoners,  were  not  deprived 
of  being  united,  with  their  brethren,  in  the  sacred 
banauet ;  they  received  the  precious  Gifts  at  the 
hands  of  ministers,  who  were  sent  to  them,  for  the 
purpose,  by  the  Bishop.  The  Anchorets  in  their 
deserts.  Christians  living  in  the  country,  and  all  such 
as  could  not  be  present  at  the  next  assembly,  took 
the  Body  of  our  Lord  with  them,  that  thus  they 
might  not,  because  of  distance,  be  deprived  of  uniting 
at  the  coming  celebration  of  the  Mysteries  of  salva- 
tion. Those  were  ages  when  Christian  unity  was  con- 
tinually being  attacked  by  persecution,  schism,  and 
heresy,  all  three  at  once ;  and  the  Church,  to  coun- 
teract the  danger,  had  no  hesitation  in  facilitating, 
by  every  lawful  means,  the  use  and  application  of 
the  venerable  Sacrament,  which  is  the  sign  of  unity, 
and  the  innermost  centre,  and  the  strongest  tie,  of 
the  Christian  community. 

It  was  from  the  same  principle  of  unity,  that, 
although,  in  each  city,  there  were  generally  several 
churches,  or  centres,  for  the  assemblies  of  the  Faith- 
ful,  and  a  greater  or  less  number  of  Clergy,  yet,  all 
the  Faithful  and  Clergy  came  together,  for  the  collecty 

1  1  St.  Pet.  ii.  9. 


TUESDAY  AFTER   TRINITY   SUNDAY.  179 

or  synaxisj  into  some  one  place,  fixed  upon  by  the 
Bishop.  "  Where  the  Bishop  shall  show  himself," 
says  St.  Ignatius  of  Antioch,  "  there  let  the  multi- 
'  tude  be ;  just  as,  where  Christ  Jesus  is,  there  is 
'the  catholic  Church.  It  is  not  lawful,  either  to 
'  baptise,  or  to  celebrate  the  agape  "  (the  Eucharist) 
'  without  the  Bishop.^  Do  all  of  you  assemble,  for 
'  prayer,  in  the  one  same  place ;  let  there  be  unity 
'  of  common  prayer,  unity  of  mind,  unity  of  hope.  .  . 
'  Do  all  of  you  come  together,  as  though  you  were  one 
'  man,  into  the  temple  of  God,  as  to  one  altar,  as  to 
'  one  Christ  Jesus,  the  great  high-priest  of  the 
'  unborn  God.^  Let  us  enjoy  the  one  Eucharist ; 
'  for  one  is  the  Flesh  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  and  one 
'  his  Blood  which  was  shed  for  us ;  one  also  is  the 
'  Bread  which  was  broken  to  us  all,  and  one  the  Cup 
'  which  was  distributed  to  all ;  one  altar  to  the 
'  whole  Church,  and  one  Bishop,  surrounded  by  the 
'  Preshyterium  and  the  Deacons."^ 

The  Preshyterium  was  the  college  of  Priests  of  each 
city ;  they  kept  near  the  Bishop,  were  his  council, 
and  celebrated  the  sacred  functions  together  with 
him.  It  would  seem,  that,  at  the  beginning,  they 
were  twelve  in  number,  the  closer  to  represent  the 
Apostles ;  but,  in  the  great  cities,  that  number 
was  soon  doubled.  We  find  that,  towards  the 
close  of  the  first  century,  there  were,  in  Rome,  five 
and  twenty  Priests,  who  were,  respectively,  set  over 
twenty- five  Titles,  that  is.  Churches,  of  the  metro- 
polis. The  Pontiff  took  first  one,  and  then  another, 
of  these  Titles,  for  the  celebration  of  the  Mysteries. 
The  twenty-four  Priests  of  the  other  Titles  united 
with  the  Pontiff  in  the  solemnity  of  one  and  the 
same  Sacrifice,  and  concelebrated  at  one  and  the 
same  Altar.  In  their  respective  places,  the  seven 
Deacons,  and  all  the  inferior  clerics,  each  according 

*  Ad  Smym.  viii.  -  Ad  Magnes.  vii.  ^  j^^  Philadelph.  iv. 


^gO  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

to  tis  rank,  co-operated  in  the  thrice  holy  Mysteries. 
We  have  already  seen  the  active  part,  taken  in  the 
same,  by  the  faithful  People.  /•  -d  t™^c 

It  was  the  very  time  when  the  Eagle  of  Patmos, 
St.  John  the  EvangeUst,  was  being  favoured  with  his 
inspiration  and  vision  of  the  gorgeous  ntual  of  heaven^ 
He  beheld  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  yet  standing  in 
the  midst  of  the  four  and  twenty  Elders  who  were 
seated  on  thrones  encircHng  the  tbrone  of  (^od,— 
which  is  also  the  throne  of  the  Eternal  High  Pnest. 
Clad  in  white  garments,  and  wearing  golden  crowns 
these  four  and  twenty  Elders  held  harps  in   then 
hands,  and  golden   vials  full    of  odours    M   are 
L   ;rayers%f   Saints.       Then    eame    the^ven 
Spirits,  who  were  before  the  throne  of  God,  like  so 
Zuy  burning  lamps ;  and  then,  thousands  of  thou 
sandl  of  Angels,  who  were  round  about  tbe  Throne 
sin-in-  praise  to  the  Sacrifice   and  triumph  of  the 
Lamb",  and  then,  every  creature,  which  is  in  heaven, 
anTon  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  a. 
are  in  the  sea,  aU  cried  out,  giving  benediction   and 
honour    and  glory,  and  power,-to  him  that  liveth 
for   ever   and%vl;.>     TUs   admii;able  vision   repre- 
sented  the  fulness  and  unity  of  the  Sacrifice,  which 
was  offered  once,  but  to  last  for  ever,  and  was  offered 
bv  him  who  is  the  Head  of  all  created  beings.     The 
CWc^  on  earth,  the  exiled  Bride  of  that  Jesus,  did 
£  best,  when  offering  that  same  Sacrifice,  to  repeat 
the  Sime  ritual  of  heaven.     And  as,  in  heaven, 
te  d^v^ne  Lamb,  the  eternal  High  Pnest,  drew  after 
him  the  celestial  hierarchy,  so  likewise,  on  earth,  all 
the  Churches  came  round  the  officiating  Pontiff,  and 
united  with   him    in   the    holy  Sacrifice,    each  one 
according  to  the  sacred  Order  he  held. 

It  was  impossible  for  the  universal  Church,  subjec 
as  she  ^  toX  conditions  of  place  and  time,  to  meet 


1  Apoc.  iv,  V. 


TUESDAY  AFTER  TRINITY  SII^^DAY.       181 

here  below,  at  one  Altar  ;  but  tbe  unity  of  the  Sacri- 
fice, whicb  was  every  where  offered  was,  like  the 
unity  of  the  Church  herself,  expressed  by  the  mutual 
transmission,  between  the  various  Bishops,  of  the 
sacred  species  that  had  been  consecrated  by  them ; 
and  these,  each  one  put  into  the  chalice  from  which 
they  received  the  precious  Blood.  St.  Ireneus,^  who 
lived  in  the  2nd  Century,  tells  us  that  the  supreme 
Hierarch,  the  Pontiff  of  Eome,  used  to  send  these 
sacred  gifts,  not  only  to  Churches  in  the  West,  but 
even  into  Asia,  as  emblems  of  the  unity  existing 
between  the  Churches  there,  and  the  Church,  the 
Mistress  and  Mother  of  all  others.  So,  too,  when 
the  number  of  the  Faithful  became  so  great  as  to 
induce  the  Church  to  allow  individual  Priests  to  cele- 
brate alone  the  holy  Mysteries,  the  Priests  of  the  town 
where  a  Bishop  resided,  never  thought  of  exercising 
this  isolated  function,  until  they  had  received,  from 
the  Bishop,  a  fragment  of  the  bread  he  had  conse- 
crated, and  which  they  mingled  with  their  own  Sacri- 
fice. It  was  the  fermentumy  the  sacred  leaven  of 
catholic  Communion. 


As  an  appropriate  conclusion  to  the  above  subject, 
we  append  the  following  beautiful  liturgical  formula, 
taken  from  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,'^  a  writing, 
which,  as  we  now  have  it  in  its  entirety,  has  been 
admitted  by  critics  as  a  work  of  the  3rd  Century. 

THANKSGIVING    FOR   THE    MYSTERIES. 

We  give  thanks  unto  thee,  O  Gratias  agimus  tibi,  Pater 

Father,  for  the  life  thou  hast  noster,      pro      vita      quam 

manifested  unto  us  by  thy  Son  manifestasti   nobis   per  Je- 

Jesus;    by  whom,   thou  hast  sum  Filiumtuum;  per  quern 

both  created  all  things,   and  tum     omnia     creasti,     turn 

providest  for  all ;   whom  thou  universis    provides  ;    qupm 


^  Ap.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccles.  Ub.  v.  cap.  14.  2  jj^^  yij,  cap.  25. 


I 


182 


TIME    AJrTER   PENTECOST. 


et  misisti,  ut  ad  salutom 
nostram  homo  fieret  ;  quern 
etiam  pennisisti  pati  ct 
mori  ;  queiu  et  resuscitans 
glorificare  voluisti,  et  sedere 
fecisti  ad  dexteram  tuam  ; 
per  quern  et  promisisti  no- 
bis resurrectionem  mor- 
tuoruiu. 

Tu,  D  online  oninipotens, 
Deus'  seteme  :  quemadmo- 
dum  hoc  erat  dispersum,  et 
quum  fuit  congregatum, 
factus  est  unus  panis,  ita 
congrega  Ecclesiam  tuam  a 
finibus    terrse     in    regnum 

tuum. 

Adhuc  gratias  agunus, 
Pater  noster,  pro  preboso 
sanguine  Jesu  Christi  effuso 
nostra  causa ;  et  pro  pretioso 
corpore  :  cujus  et  haec  anti- 
typa  celebramus,  quum  ipse 
nobis  constituent  mortem 
illius  annmitiare  :  pcnpsum 
enim  tibi  gloria  in  ssecula. 


Amen. 


also  sendedst,  that,  for  our  sa  - 
vation,  he  might  be  made 
Man;  whom  thou  also  per- 
mittedst  to  suffer  and  to  die ; 
whom  also,  raising  1^ .  ]^P 
again,  thou  willedst  to  glon^, 
and  madest  him  to  sit  at  thy 
right  hand;  by  whom  also  thou 
didst  promise  us  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead. 

O  almighty  Lord,  eternal 
God  !  as  this  {element),  which 
was  once  disunited,  bemg 
united,  hath  become  one 
Bread,  so  do  thou  assemble 
together  thy  Church,  from  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  mto  thy 
kingdom. 

^\e  also  give  thanks  to  thee, 
our  Father,  for  the  precious 
Blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which 
was  shed  for  our  sake;  and 
for  his  precious  Body;  ofwhicn 
we  are  now  celebrating  the 
antitj-pes  {the  Mysttries);  Jov 
he  himseHdid  appomtthat  wo 
should  announce  his  death; 
for,  by  him,  is  glory  {gneu) 
to  thee  for  ever. 
Amen. 


WEDNESDAY   AFTER   TRINITY   SUNDAY.  183 


WEDNESDAY 

AFTER    TRINU'Y    SUNDAY. 

We  have  not,  as  yet,  reached  the  Feast  of  the 
divine  Memorial;  not  until  the  morrow,  shall  we 
have  it  in  all  its  splendour.  But,  this  evening,  at 
first  Yespers,  the  Church  will  begin  her  acclamations 
to  the  Eternal  Priest ;  and,  although  the  Sovereign 
Pontiffs  have  not  ordained  that  a  Yigil,  properly  so 
called,  shall  precede  the  Feast  of  Corpus  Christie  yet 
have  they  granted  indulgences^  to  a  voluntary  fast 
practised  on  this  its  eve.  Let  us  now  resume  the 
history  of  the  Church's  worship  of  the  great  mystery. 
We  have  already  seen  how  the  unity  of  the  Church 
is  based  upon  the  Eucharist.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
in  that  Sacrament,  is  the  corner-stone,  upon  which 
rises,  in  the  harmony  of  its  several  parts,  the  temple 
of  living  stones,  built  to  the  glory  of  God.^  Jesus  is 
the  High  Priest^  ordained  for  men,  himself  being  Man,^ 
that  he  may  present  to  God  the  homage  of  his  Brethren, 
by  offering  to  his  and  their  Father,  a  Sacrifice  in  the 
name  of  all.  And,  although  this  homage  of  regen- 
erate mankind, — this  Sacrifice,  which  is  the  highest 
expression  of  that  homage, — owes  its  whole  worth  to 
the  infinite  dignity  of  him  who  is  the  Head  of  the 
Church, — yet,  the  Sacrifice  is  only  complete,  when 
there  is  the  union  of  the  Members  with  the  Head. 
The  Head  must  have  the  Body.     The  Church  is,  as 

^  Two  hundred  days,  for  the  fast,  or  for  any  other  good  work 
substituted  for  the  same,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Confessor. 

2  Eph.  ii.  21. 

3  Heb.  V.  1. 


184  TIME    AITER   PENTECOST. 

the  Apostle  tells  us,  the  fulness,  the  completion,  of 
Him  who  is  filled  in  all  ;^  the  Church  perfects  the 
Sacrifice,  as  an  integral  portion  of  the  Victim  who  is 
offered  upon  the  Altar.  What  is  true  of  the  Church, 
is  true,  likewise,  of  each  one  of  us,  who  are  Members 
of  Christ ;  and  we  are  really  his  Members,  provided 
we  be  united,  in  the  great  Action  of  the  Sacrifice,  by 
that  intimate  union  which  makes  one  Body  of  many 
Members. 

Herein  consists  the  social  influence  of  the  Eucharist. 
The  human  family  had  been  broken  up  by  sin ;  it 
regains  its  lost  unity  by  the  Blood  of  the  Lamb  ; 
and  the  original  intention,  which  God  had  in  creating 
the  world,  is  fulfilled.  After  all  other  beings,  there 
came  forth,  out  of  nothing,  the  creature  man  ;  he  was 
to  give  a  voice  of  praise  to  the  whole  of  creation ;  for, 
his  own  twofold  nature,  material  and  spiritual,  made 
him  the  compendium  of  all  other  creatures.  When 
he  was  restored  by  redemption,  he  regained  his  posi- 
tion in  the  glorious  choir  of  beings.  The  Eucharisty 
the  TlianJxsgivinijy  the  praise  by  excellence,  is  the 
sweet  produce  of  the  human  race.  The  Eucharist, — 
that  grand  hymn  of  divine  Wisdom  sung  to  the  King 
of  ages, — ascends  from  this  earth  of  ours,  blending  the 
two  harmonies  into  one  :  the  ineffable  harmony  of 
the  eternal  Canticle, — that  is,  the  Word  in  the 
Father's  bosom, — and  the  harmony  of  the  new  Can- 
ticle, which  is  repeated  by  the  choir  of  creatures,  to 
the  glory  of  their  Creator. 

The  Ages  of  Faith  lived  on  this  grand  truth  ;  they 
thoroughly  understood  the  priceless  worth  of  the  gift 
bestowed  by  the  Man-God  upon  his  Church.  Ap- 
preciating the  honour  thence  accruing  to  our  earth, 
they  felt  themselves  bound  to  respond  to  it,  in  the 
name  of  all  creatures,  by  giving  to  the  celebration 
of  the  sacred  Mystery  everything  that  ritual  could 

1  Eph.  i.  22,  23. 


WEDNESDAY    AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  185 

impart  of  grandeur  and  solemnity.  The  Liturgy,  for 
the  Christians  of  those  times,  was  exactly  what  is 
implied  by  the  word :  it  was  the  public  function,  the 
social  act,  by  excellence  ;  and,  as  such,  it  claimed 
every  sort  of  external  pomp  ;  and  the  presence  of  the 
whole  people  round  the  Altar  was  looked  upon  as  a 
matter  of  course.  As  to  the  lawfulness  of  what  are 
called  Private  Masses,  it  would  be  easy  to  prove,  by 
most  authentic  facts  of  history,  that  what  the  Ca- 
tholic Church  teaches  regarding  them,  was  her  teach- 
ing from  the  very  commencement ;  and  yet,  practi- 
cally, and  as  a  general  rule,  the  richness  of  cere- 
monial, the  enthusiasm  of  sacred  chant,  the  magni- 
ficence of  sacred  rites,  were,  for  a  long  period,  re- 
garded as  inseparable  from  the  offering  up  of  the 
Holy  Sacrifice. 

The  solemnities  of  divine  service  as  celebrated  in  any 
Catholic  Cathedral,  on  the  greatest  Feast  in  the  Year, 
is  but  a  feeble  image  of  the  magnificent  forms  of  the 
ancient  Liturgies,  such  as  we  described  them  yester- 
day. The  Church  herself,  whose  desires  for  what  is 
most  perfect  never  vary,  ever  evinces  a  marked  predi- 
lection for  the  remnants  she  has  been  able  to  keep 
up  of  her  ancient  forms  of  worship  ;  but,  as  far  as 
the  generality  of  her  people  is  concerned,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  of  the  existence  of  a  growing  feeling  of 
indiff'erence  for  the  external  pomp  wherewith  the 
holy  Sacrifice  is  so  deservedly  accompanied ;  what- 
ever demonstrations  of  Christian  piety  still  exist,  are 
directed  elsewhere.  The  cultns  of  the  divine  pre- 
sence in  the  Eucharist  as  developed  in  these  our  own 
times,  is  certainly  a  blow  to  the  heresy  which  denies 
that  Presence;  it  is,  too,  a  joy  to  every  Catholic  who 
loves  God ;  but,  care  must  be  taken,  lest  a  move- 
ment, which  is  so  profitable  to  individual  souls,  and 
so  redounding  to  the  glory  of  the  holy  Sacrament, 
should  be  turned,  by  the  craft  of  the  enemy,  against 
the  Eucharist  itself.     Now,  this  might  easily  be  the 


186  TIME   AFTER   PENTECX)ST. 

case,  if,  in  consequence  of  such  devotion  being  ill- 
regulatd,  the  very  primary  object  of  the  euchansho 
dogma,  which  is  Sacrifice,— were  permitted  to  lose  its 
place,  either  in  the  appreciation,  or  in  the  practical 
religion,  of  the  Faithful.  . 

In   the  admirable  connexion  existing  throughout 
the  whole  body  of  Christian  revelation,  there  can  be  no 
such  thing  as  one  dogma  becoming  a  danger  to  another. 
Every  new  truth,  or  every  truth  presented  under  a 
new  aspect,  is  a  progress  in  the  Church,  and  an  ac- 
quisition  for  her  children.     But  the  progress  is  then 
only  a  true  one,  when,  in  its  apphcation,  the  new 
truth,  or  its  new  aspect,  is  not   treated  with   such 
prominence,  as  to  throw  a  more  important  truth  mto 
the  shade.     Surely,  no  family  would  ever  count  that 
gain  of  new  property  to  be  a  boon,  which  would  jeo- 
pardise or  lessen  the  rich  patrimony  which  past  ageb 
had  secured.     The  principle  is  a  self-evident  one  ;  and 
must  be  borne  in  mind,  when  studying  the  difterent 
phases  of  the  history  of  any  human  society,  and  espe- 
cially when  the  History  of  the  Church  is  m  quest'om  I 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  ever  urgmg  the  Church  to  what 
sh5hest,?s  incessantly  adorning  her  for  the  eterna 
nuptials,  and  is   decking  her  brow  with  a  gradual 
increase  of  light,-yet  is  it  but  too  often  the  ca.e, 
that  the  human  element  of  which  she  partakes  through 
her  members,  her  children,  makes  its  weight  tel   upon 
the  Bride  of  Christ.     When  that  happens,  she  re- 
doubles her  maternal  solicitude  for  these  her  childien  , 
they  are  too  delicate  to  live  on  the  summits,  and  bear 
the  bracing  atmosphere  to  which  their  foretathers  were 
accustomed.     She  herself  continues  her  aspirations 
after  what  is  most  perfect,  and  approaches  gradual  y 
nearer  to  heaven  ;  but,  for  the  sake  of  her  weakly 
chUdren,  she  quits  the  mountain  paths  she  loved  to 
tread  in  better  times,  for  those  paths  kept  her  closer 
to  her  divine  Spouse  ;  she  comes  lower  down,  she  is 
content  to  lose  something  of  her  external  charms,  she 


WEDJ^ESDAY   AFTER   TKl^'lTY   SUNDAY.  187 

stoops, — that  she  may  the  better  reach  the  children 
she  has  to  save.  This  her  condescension  is  admirable; 
but  it  certainly  gives  no  right  to  the  children,  who 
live  in  these  less  healthy  times,  to  think  themselves 
better  than  their  forefathers.  Is  a  sick  man  better 
than  the  one  who  is  in  health,  because  the  food,  which 
is  indispensable  for  keeping  up  the  little  strength  he 
has,  is  given  to  him  under  new  forms,  and  such  as 
will  suit  his  debilitated  frame  ? 

Because,  in  these  our  days,  a  certain  increase  of 
devotion  towards  the  divine  Host,  who  dwells  in  our 
tabernacles,  has  been  observed  in  some  souls,  and  the 
external  demonstration  of  this  devotion  is  under  a 
new  form,  it  has  been  asserted,  that  "  no  age  ever 
"  equalled  our  own  in  the  cultus  of  the  Most  Holy 
"  Sacrament ! "    And  because  of  this  holy  enthusiasm, 
our  19th  Century,  which,  with  its  restless  activity, 
has  opened  out  so  many  new  methods  of  devotion, 
has  been  called,  by  a  certain  writer,  "  the  great  age 
"  of  the  Eucharist !  "     Would  to  God  these  assertions 
were  correct !  for  it  is  quite  true,  and  history  is  rich 
in  bearing  testimony  to  the  fact,   "  that  an  age  is 
"  more   or  less   glorious,   according   to   its  devotion 
"  towards  the  adorable  Eucharist.""     Eut  it  is  no  less 
true,  that  if  the  different  Centuries  be  compared  with 
each  other  for  devotion  towards  the  Sacrament  of 
Love, — which,  at  all  times,  is  the  very  life  of  the 
Church, — there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  that  ought 
to  be  counted  as  the  golden  age,  in  which  our  Lord's 
intentions  in  instituting  the  divine  Mystery  were  the 
best  understood  and  carried  out,  and  not  that  wherein 
individual  devotion  was  busiest. 

Now,  leaving  aside,  for  the  present,  all  principles 
connected  with  dogma,  and  which  will  find  their  place 
more  appropriately  a  few  days  later, — we  have  history 
to  bear  witness  to  this  fact,  that,  so  long  as  the 
western  nations  kept  up  their  faith  and  fervour,  the 
Church,  who  is  the  faithful  and  sure  interpreter  of 


188  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

her   Jesus'  intentions,  maintained  the  discipline  ob- 
served in  the  worship  practised  towards  the  Eucharist 
during  the  early  ages.     After  her  twofold  victory  over 
the  pagan  persecutions  and  the  obstinate  dogmatism 
of  the  Emperors  of  Byzantium,  the  Church,  the  noble 
depositarian  of  the  New  Testament,  was  in  possession 
of  a  freedom  greater  than  she  has  had  at  any  other 
period ;  her  children,  too,  made  it  their  perfection  to 
follow  her  every  wish.     Thus  free  to  act  as  she  knew 
was  best,  and  sure  to  be  obeyed,  she  kept  to  the  way 
of  eucharistic  worship,  which  her  Martyrs  had  fol- 
lowed, and  her  Doctors  had  so  enthusiastically  de- 
veloped in   their   writings :    that   is,    she   took   the 
energies  of  the  new  children  she  had  received  by  the 
conversion  of  barbarian  nations,  and  centred  them  in 
the  Sacrifice,  that  is,  in  the  holy  fatigues  of  solemn 
Mass,   and  the  Canonical  Hours,  which   are  but  a 
natural  irradiation  of  the  Sacrifice. 

Nothing,  in  those  times,  was  more  catholic, — 
nothing  less  individual  and  private, — than  the  eu- 
charistic worship  thus  based  on  the  social  character 
which  pertains  to  the  Sacrifice.  It  was  the  upper- 
most idea  even  in  such  of  the  Faithful  as,  through 
sickness  or  other  personal  reasons,  were  obliged  to 
communicate,  of  the  universal  Victim,  separatedly 
from  the  rest  of  the  people.  It  was  the  one  leading 
thought,  which  made  them  turn  their  hearts  and 
their  adorations  towards  the  gilded  dove,  or  the  ivory 
tower,  in  which  were  conserved,  under  the  mysterious 
integrity  of  the  Sacrament,  the  precious  remnants  of 
the  Sacrifice. 

Faith  in  the  real  presence,  a  faith  quite  as  ani- 
mated and  deep  as  any  that  can  be  witnessed  in  our 
own  times,  was  the  soul  of  the  whole  Liturgy ;  it  was 
the  basis  of  the  entire  system  of  the  Church's  rites 
and  ceremonies,  all  of  which  are  unmeaning,  if  you 
take  away  the  catholic  dogma  of  the  Eucharist.  This 
dogma  was  admitted  by  all  the  children  of  the  Church 


WEDJ^ESDAY    AFTER  TRINITY    SUNDAY.  189 

as  a  principle  beyond  discussion ;  it  was  their  dearest 
treasure ;  it  was  a  truth,  which  was  both  foundation- 
stone  and  roofing  of  the  House  built  amongst  men  by 
Eternal  Wisdom.  To  a  superficial  observer  it  might 
seem  as  though  the  Faithful  of  those  early  ages  were 
less  intent  upon  it  than  we  now  are  :  but  is  it  not 
always  the  case,  that  the  rock  which  supports  the 
edifice,  and  the  timber  which  roofs  it,  call  for  less 
solicitude  when  the  building  is  under  no  risk,  either 
from  the  indifi'erence  of  its  inmates,  or  from  the 
attacks  of  enemies  outside  ? 

The  Church  herself  cannot  grow  decrepit ;  but  it  is 
a  law  in  history,  that,  even  within  her  fold,  and  in 
spite  of  the  vitality  she  imparts  to  nations,  no  society 
ever  maintains  itself  long  at  its  highest  pitch  of 
perfection.  Men  are  like  stars  in  this,  that  their 
apogee  marks  the  period  of  their  decline ;  they  only 
seem  to  mount  on  high,  that  they  may  speedily 
descend  :  and,  after  the  fullest  vigour  of  age,  we 
gradually  approach  the  impotency  of  the  old  man. 
So  was  it  to  be  with  Christendom  itself,  with  that 
grand  confederation  which  had  been  established,  by 
the  Church,  in  the  strong  unity  of  unfeigned  charity, 
and  of  faith  unalloyed  by  error.  The  Crusades  were, 
for  a  second  time,  rousing  the  world  to  holy  enter- 
prise ;  the  preaching  of  St.  Bernard  was  stirring 
mankind  to  zeal  for  the  cause  of  God.  The  impulse 
was  so  immense,  that  it  seemed  as  though  the  event 
marked  the  culminating  point  of  Christ's  reign  upon 
earth,  and  secured  perpetuity  to  the  power  of  the 
Church.  And  yet,  that  was  the  very  period,  when 
old  signs  of  decay  returned,  and  with  fresh  intensity. 
The  heroic  Pontiff,  St.  Gregory  the  Seventh,  had 
stemmed  the  evil  for  a  considerable  time  ;  but,  at  the 
period  we  speak  of,  a  relapse  set  in,  and  advanced 
with  its  work  of  ravage,  till  it  brought  about  the 
great  revolt  of  the  15th  Century,  and  the  general 
apostacy  of  nations. 


190  TIME    AFTER    PENTF.COST. 

The  celebrated  prophetess  of  the  Middle  Ages,  St. 
Hildegard,  was  then  scanning,  with  her  eagle  eye, 
the   miseries   of  her   own   day,  and   the   still  more 
sombre   threatenings  of  the   future.     She   that  was 
used  to  write  the  messages  of  God  to  Pontiffs  and 
Kings,  penned   these  words  in  a  Letter  to  Werner 
and   his   brother    Priests    of    Kircheim, — they    had 
written  to  Hildegard,  and  solicited  her  reply :  "  It 
''  was  whilst  Ij^ng  for  a  long  time  on  a  bed  of  sick- 
''ness,   in   the  year  of  the  Lord's  Incarnation,  one 
"  thousand   one   hundred    and  seventy,  that  I  saw, 
"wakeful  both  in  body  and  mind,  a  most  beautiful 
*'  image,  having  a  woman's  appearance :  she  was  all 
"  perfect  in  her  suavity,  and  most  dear  in  the  charms 
"  of  her  beaut}^,  which  was  such,  as  that  the  human 
''  mind  could  in  no  wise  comprehend  it.     Her  stature 
"  was  so  great,  that  it  reached  from  earth  even  up  to 
"  heaven.      Her   face,  too,  beamed   "^dth   exceeding 
"  brightness,  and  her  eye  was  fixed  on  heaven.     She 
"  was  clad  in  a  spotless  garment,  made  of  white  silk. 
"  The  mantle  which  covered  her,  was  adorned  with  most 
"precious  stones,  of  emerald,  sapphire,  and  likewise 
"  of  beads  and  pearls.     The  shoes  on  her  feet  were 
"  of  onyx.     But  her  face  was  covered  with  dust,  and 
"  her  garment  was  rent  on  the  right  side,  and  her 
"  mantle  had  lost  its  elegant  beauty,  and  her  shoes 
*^  were  dimmed.     And  she,  with  a  loud  and  plaintive 
"  voice,  cried  out  towards  the  high  heavens :  *  Hearken, 
"  *  0  heaven,  that  my  face  is  defiled !     And  wail,  0 
" '  earth,   that  my  garment  is  rent !      And  thou,  0 
■"  *  abyss,    tremble,    because   my  shoes    are   dimmed. 
*'^  Foxes  have  holeSy  and  birds  of  the  air  nests  ;^  but  I 
"  '  have  not  helper  or  comforter,  nor  staff  whereon  to 
"  '  lean,  and  whereby  to  have  support.'    ...    *  They 
"  'that  should  have  adorned  me  in  every  way,  have, 
"  *  in  all  these  things,  abandoned  me.     For  it  is  they 

>  St.  Matth.  viii.  20. 


WED>'ESDAY    AFTER   TRINITY    SUKDAY.  191 

*' '  that  besmear  my  face,  by  dragging  the  Body  and 
"  *  Blood  of  my  Spouse  into  the  great  uncleanness  of 
'*  'the  impurity  of  their  living,  and  the  great  filth  of 
*^  *  their  fornications  and  adulteries;  and  by  buying  and 
*'  '  selling  holy  things,  defiling  them,  as  a  child  would 
"  'be,  were  he  put  down  in  mire  before  swine.  .  .  . 
''  '  The  wounds  of  Christ  my  Spouse  are  contami- 
''nated/  .  .  .  Princes  and  a  headlong  people  will 
''  rush  upon  j^ou,  0  Priests !  They  will  cast  you 
*'  forth,  and  put  you  to  flight,  and  will  take  your 
"  riches  away  from  you.  .  .  .  They  will  say : 
"  *  Let  us  cast  out  from  the  Church  these  adulterers, 
''  '  and  extortioners,  and  men  that  are  full  of  all 
"  '  wickedness  !'  And  in  doing  this,  they  will  have 
"it,  that  they  do  a  service  unto  God,  because  they 
"  say,  that  it  is  by  you  that  the  Church  is  de- 
*'  filed.  .  .  .  By  God's  permission,  many  nations 
*•  will  begin  to  rage  against  you  in  their  judgments, 
"  and  many  people  will  devise  vain  things  concern- 
"  ing  you,  for  they  will  count  as  nought  your  priestly 
"  office  and  your  consecration.  Kings  of  the  earth 
"will  assist  these  in  your  overthrow,  and  they  will 
"  thirst  after  the  earthly  things  {you  possess)  ;  and 
"  the  Princes  in  whose  dominions  you  live,  shall  make 
"  a  convention  in  this  one  plan, — that  they  may  drive 
"  you  out  of  their  territories,  because  you,  by  your 
**  most  wicked  deeds,  have  driven  away  the  innocent 
"  Lamb  from  your  midst.  And  I  heard  a  voice  from 
**  heaven,  saying  :   '  This  image  is  the  Church  !'  "^ 

What  a  fearful  description  of  the  evils  brought 
upon  the  Church  in  the  12th  Century !  What  a 
prophecy  of  its  far  ofi"  results !  These  miseries  were 
in  keeping  with  the  way  in  which  the  august  Mystery 
of  the  Altar  was  treated.  It  has  always  been  so. 
The  disorders  of  the  sanctuary  necessarily  brought 
about  relaxation  in  the  people.     They  grew  wearied 

1  Ep.  lii. 


192  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

of  receiving  tlie  heavenly  food  from  hands  that  were, 
hut  too  often,  unworth}^  ones.  The  guests  at  the 
hanquet  of  divine  Wisdom  became  rare,  so  rare,  indeed, 
that,  in  the  year  1215,  a  General  Council,  the  4th  of 
Lateran,  passed  the  well-known  law,  which  obliges, 
under  the  severest  penalties,  the  Faithful  of  both 
sexes  to  receive  Communion  at  least  once  in  the 
Year.  The  evil  became  so  great,  that  the  legislation 
of  Councils  and  the  genius  of  Innocent  the  Third, 
the  last  of  the  great  Popes  of  the  Middle  Ages,  would 
not  have  sufficed  to  arrest  it,  had  not  God  given  to 
his  Church  the  two  Saints,  Dominic  and  Francis  : 
they  reclaimed  the  Priesthood,  and,  for  a  time,  brought 
back  the  people  to  the  practice  of  Christian  piety. 
But,  the  ancient  forms  of  the  Liturgy  had  perished 
during  the  interval  of  the  crisis. 

The  oblation  in  common,  which  supposed  that  aU 
communicated  in  the  divine  Victim,  had  given  place 
to  private  foundations,  and  to  honoraries  or  stipen- 
dium ;  in  themselves,  they  were  quite  lawful,  but 
they  had  been  so  considerably  increased  by  the  intro- 
duction of  the  mendicant  Orders,  that  a  change  in 
the  Liturgy  was  the  consequence.  Private  Masses,  for 
special  intentions,  were  multiplied,  in  order  to  satisfy 
obligations  which  had  been  contracted  with  individual 
donors ;  and,  by  a  necessary  consequence,  the  im- 
posing rite  of  concelebration,  maintained  in  Rome 
till  the  13th  Century,  entirely  disappeared  in  the 
Western  Church.  The  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass  was  no 
longer  brought  before  the  Faithful  with  the  majestic 
ceremonial  which,  in  former  times,  had  secured  to  it 
a  preponderance  over  the  whole  religion  and  life  of 
the  Christian  people.  The  holy  Eucharist  soon  began 
to  be  given  out  of  the  time  of  Mass,  and  for  reasons 
which  were  not  always  serious  ones.  More  than  one 
scholastic  theologian  encouraged  the  practice.  If 
this  scholastic  had  not  true  learning  on  his  side,  he 
had  his  sharp  definitions  and  categorical  divisions  ; 


WEDNESDAY   AFTER   TRINITY   SUNDAY.  193 

and  Communion  seemed  to  become,  in  the  minds  of 
some  men,  a  something  distinct  by  itself  in  the  insti- 
tution of  the  Eucharist.  This  was  a  forerunner  of  what 
we  so  often  find  practised  in  our  own  times  : — Com- 
munions made  isolatedly  and  furtively  on  principle, 
that  is,  in  accordance  with  an  ideal  of  spirituality, 
which  has  a  dread  of  a  crowd,  and  a  repugnance  to 
the  excitement  of  the  Church's  ceremonies ! 

The  notion,  then,  of  the  Sacrifice,  which  includes 
the  chief  motive  of  the  Presence  of  the  Incarnate 
"Word  in  the  Eucharist,  was  no  longer  brought  before 
the  people  with  the  emphatic  pre-eminence  of  former 
ages.  As  a  counter  result  of  this,  the  truth  of  this 
Presence  of  our  God,  under  the  eucharistic  species, 
gained  an  ascendancy  over  the  soul  in  a  more  exclu- 
sive, and,  therefore,  in  a  more  impressive  and  direct 
way.  It  was  at  this  period,  that,  out  of  a  spirit  of 
holy  fear,  and  from  a  feeling  of  respect,  a  feeling 
which  can  never  be  too  great, — several  ancient  usages 
began  to  be  discontinued.  Usages  which  were  estab- 
lished, at  first,  with  a  view  the  better  to  realise  or 
express  the  application  of  the  Sacrifice,  were  after- 
wards suppressed,  as  exposing  the  sacred  species  to 
involuntary  irreverence.  It  was  thus  that  the  custom 
of  giving  the  chalice  to  the  laity,  and  communion  to 
infants,  fell  into  desuetude. 

An  immense  ritual  change  then  was  brought  about. 
The  Church  accepted  it,  although  she  was  aware  of 
its  being,  in  more  than  one  point,  a  degeneracy  as 
compared  with  former  ages.  The  time  had  come, 
when  the  grand  social  forms  of  the  Liturgy,  requiring, 
as  they  did,  the  strong  union  of  Christian  nations  for 
the  basis,  would  be  but  unrealities.  The  jealous 
mistrust  of  States  against  the  Church, — that  is, 
against  the  power  which  was  the  sole  bond  of  mutual 
union  between  the  several  nations, — was  ever  on  the 
increase,  and  only  waited  for  an  occasion  to  break 

VOL.  X.  O 


194  TIME   AFTER   PEN-TECOST. 

out  into  open  hostility.  Diplomacy  became  a  system 
of  rupture  between  one  country  and  another,  just  as 
the  Church  had  been  the  framer  and  maintainer  of 
their  union. 

If  the  evil  from  within  was  thus  great,  still  greater 
were  the  dangers  to  which  the  Faithful  were  exposed 
by  the  onslaughts  of  heresy.     And  yet,  it  is  precisely 
in  such  a  time  as  this,  that  is  most  •manifested  the 
superhuman  prudence  of  the  Church.     In  defence  of 
that  which  is  the  essential  element  of  her  existence 
here    below, — in     defence,    that   is    of    Faith, — she 
formed  a  rampart  out  of  the  very  ruins  caused  by  the 
liturgical  revolution  she  had  been  compelled  to  accept ; 
she  sanctioned  with  her  authority  what  was  worthy 
of  sanction,   and  thereby  controlled  the  movement. 
She  took  advantage  of  the  increase  of  devotion  to  the 
Real  Presence,  which  the  movement  had  excited;  she 
gave  a  fresh  direction  to  her  Liturgy,  by  substituting 
a   ceaseless  expression    of  the  dogma,   for  the    less 
precise,  though  not  less  complete,   and  far  grander, 
forms  of  the  earlier  period.     It  was  a  reply  to  heresy, 
all   the   stronger,  because   of  its  being  more  direct. 
We  have  already  seen  how,  in  consequence  of  the 
covert  attacks  of  false  doctrine,  there  was  an  evident 
reason  felt,  in  the   13th  Century,   for  instituting  a 
special   Feast   in   honour  of  the  Eucharist,   as  the 
Mystery  of  Faith.     That  reason  became  sheer  neces- 
sity, at  the  approach,  foreseen  by  God  alone,  of  the 
bold  triumph  of  the  sacramentarian  heresy.     It  was 
necessary  to  forestall  the  attack ;  and,  by  so  doing, 
to   render   the  coming   assault   less   hurtful   to   the 
christian  world,  and  less  injurious  to  that  Lord,  who 
is  present  in  the  Sacrament  of  his  love.     The  means 
for  efficaciously  realising   these  two  ends  was,    the 
development    of    exterior     devotion     to    the    Real 
Presence  ;  the  Church  would  thus  proclaim  her  un- 
shaken faith  in  the  dogma,  and  the  adorable  Sacra- 


WEDNESDAY    AFTER    TRINITY    SUNDAY.  195 

ment  would  receive,  by  the  renewed  fervour  of 
faithful  souls,  a  compensation  for  the  indifference  and 
insults  of  others. 

Established  throughout  the  world  by  the  authority 
of  the  Roman  Pontiffs,  the  Feast  of  Corpus  Christi 
was,  therefore,  both  in  itself  and  in  its  developments, 
as  we  were  observing  yesterday,  the  commencement 
of  a  new  phase  in  the  Catholic  worship  of  the  holy 
Eucharist.  Once  the  Feast  was  instituted,  there 
followed  Processions,  Benedictions,  Forty- Hours, 
Expositions,  Watchings  in  adoration  ;  each  of  which 
was  an  additional  affirmation  of  the  Church's  belief 
in  the  Peal  Presence  ;  the  piety  of  her  children  was 
re-enkindled ;  and  to  that  Lord  who,  for  our  sakes, 
dwells  under  the  sacramental  species,  there  was 
offered  that  tribute  of  homage  which  is  so  justly  his 
due. 

0  Holy  Church,  our  Mother,  thou  Bride  of  the 
Son  of  God,  those  times  are  past  when  thou  couldst 
produce  on  this  earth,  a  likeness  to  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  Free  to  follow  the  inspirations  of  thy 
heart  as  Bride,  our  ancestors  witnessed  thy  arranging 
the  great  Sacrifice  with  the  gorgeous  ceremonial, 
which  gave  them  an  insight  into  the  grandeurs  of  the 
mystery  they  saw  thus  celebrated.  That  royal  mag- 
nificence of  ritual  would  be  too  much  for  such  times 
as  these  we  live  in.  The  nations  of  the  earth  have 
let  themselves  be  misled :  for  the  glory  they  once 
enjoyed,  when  thou  gavest  them  unity  with  each 
other  through  the  unity  of  the  sacred  Mysteries,  is 
now  exchanged  for  the  dishonour  and  misery  of 
alliance  with  the  old  enemy.  Whilst  thou,  with 
nothing  to  fear,  and  strong  in  the  consciousness  of  thy 
rights  and  thy  influence  for  good,  wast  beautifying,  in 
peace,  the  garden  of  thy  Spouse ;  whilst  thou  wast 
rejoicing  in  the  sweet  fragrance  of  that  garden,  and 
in  the  fruits  of  the  mystic  vine  ;  a  strange  noise  was 


196  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOSl'. 

heard,  the  noise  of  the  chariots  of  Aminadah^  driven 
by  the  hands  of  thine  own  children  turned  traitors.^ 
It  would  have  been  but  a  just  punishment,  hadst 
thou  then  left  this  ungrateful  earth,  and  gone  to  thy 
divine  Spouse  in  heaven  above.  But,  0  loving 
Sulamitess,  with  all  this  increase  of  the  evils  of  thine 
exile,  thou  gavest  ear  to  the  cries  of  them  who  willed 
to  be  ever  thy  faithful  children ;  and  thou  remainedst 
for  us,  dear  Mother,  that  we  might  receive  thy  teach- 
ings, and  thence  derive  light  and  life. 

We  know  it :  instead  of  the  peaceful  grandeurs 
which  thou,  beautiful  Queen,  didst  once  display  when 
thy  sovereignty  was  undisputed ;  instead  of  choirs  of 
exultation  and  triumph  resounding  in  thy  courts,  we 
are  to  see  thee,  henceforth,  as  a  warrior,  and  thy 
hymns  are  to  be  the  songs  of  the  camp  i"^  but,  hoic 
beautiful  are  thy  steps  in  the  armour  of  thy  pilgrim- 
age, 0  thou  daughter  of  the  King  !  Thou  art  terrible 
as  an  army  set  in  array  ;  but  thou  art,  too,  all  sweet 
and  comely,  when,  laying  aside  the  robe  of  gold  and 
all  the  richly  varied  clothing  which  decked  thee 
standing  at  the  right  hand  of  the  King's  throne,  thou 
girdest  thyself,  like  him,  with  the  sword,  and  piercest 
the  hearts  of  his  enemies  with  the  arrows  of  thy 
truth  and  zeal.^ 

Turning  our  thoughts,  for  a  moment,  to  the  Greek 
Church,  how  different  is  the  spectacle  !  She  is 
motionless  from  the  sterility  that  is  in  a  branch 
severed  from  the  trunk.  She  retains,  like  so  many 
withered  leaves,  the  ancient  forms  of  her  liturgy, 
which  has  indeed  an  imposing  unity,  but  it  is  the 
unity  of  schism.  The  very  Heresy,  which  here,  in 
our  own  country,  celebrates  its  unmeaning  Supper  in 
the  Cathedrals  built  by  our  forefathers, — is  it  more 
out  of  place,  than  the  lifeless  Schism  of  the  East, 
which  so  scrupulously  keeps  up  the  ancient  forms, 
which  are  its  condemnation,  and  makes  a  parade  of 

'  Cant.  ^^.  11,  12.         =  Ibid.  vii.  L  2.         ^  pg  xliv.6. 


WEDNESDAY   AFTER    TRINITY    SUNDAY.  197 

Yestments  which  sit  so  awkwardly  on  rebels  ?  What 
life  can  the  members  of  such  a  Church  derive  from 
these  dead  forms  of  worship  ? 

No :  she  alone  is  Mother,  who  knows  how  to  meet 
the  wants  of  her  children,  for  her  affection  tells  her 
not  to  give  to  delicate  ones  the  food  that  suits  the 
strong.  She  alone  is  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb,  who 
has  the  instinctive  talent  of  making,  in  each  period 
of  time,  the  most  of  the  treasure  of  her  Spouse,  the 
priceless  Pearl  he  has  committed  to  her  care  ;  and  to 
this  end,  she  hesitates  not  to  modify,  if  need  be,  her 
dearest  practices,  her  most  cherished  schemes  for  good  ; 
yea,  and  changes  the  delights  and  grandeurs  of  her 
queenly  supremacy  for  the  hard  work  of  battling  with 
the  enemy  of  her  Lord  and  her  children. 

We  recognise  thee,  0  Bride  of  Christ,  by  this 
mark,  that  thou  now  lispest  with  us  who  are  weak, 
thou  that,  heretofore,  didst .  sing  so  divinely  with  the 
strong;  and  that  thou,  who  so  long  enjoyedst  the 
peace  and  company  of  thy  Spouse,  art  as  ready  and 
as  powerful  to  meet  and  vanquish  his  enemies,  now 
that  they  are  filling  his  world.  Thus  struggling, 
thus  labouring,  and,  in  both,  misunderstood, — mis- 
understood and  blamed  by  an  ever-increasing  number 
of  ungrateful  children, — thou  wilt  not  abandon  them, 
but  remainest,  that  thou  mayst  carry  to  the  last  of 
the  elect  the  sacred  Host,  which  is  to  unite  him  with 
the  great  Sacrifice.  Affectionate  and  generous 
Mother !  we  will  follow  thee  in  thy  militant  career ; 
through  the  laborious  passes  of  the  steep  road  which 
leads  thee  to  thy  eternal  rest ;  we  will  follow  thee, 
because  thou  bearest  with  thee  the  treasure  of  the 
world.  The  bolder  the  attacks  of  heresy,  and  the 
more  insulting  the  neglect  or  blasphemies  of  ungrate- 
ful children, — the  louder  shall  be  the  professions  of  our 
faith,  the  humbler  our  adorations,  the  warmer  and 
truer  the  demonstrations  of  our  love  towards  the 
sacred  Host. 


198  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


FIEST  VESPERS 

OF    THE    FEAST    OF    CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

We  have,  at  last,  reached  the  great  Feast,  which, 
since  Monday,  has  kept  our  minds  attentive.  Our 
earth  is  preparing  to  acknowledge,  by  the  homage  of 
a  solemn  triumph,  the  presence  of  Christ,  its  Priest 
and  King,  in  the  sacred  Host.  Everywhere  are  the 
Faithful  busy  preparing  the  triumph,  which  is  to  be 
given  to  it  to-morrow.  These  preparations  are  in- 
spired by  faith  and  love ;  and,  whilst  they  are  pro- 
gressing, the  Church  is  ushering  in  the  great  Feast 
by  the  celebration  of  First  Yespers.  Tuning  her  harp 
to  the  sublime  antiphons  of  the  Angelic  Doctor,  St. 
Thomas,  she  proclaims,  in  a  chant  which  is  worthy  of 
the  words,  that  her  Jesus  is  the  eternal  Priest  accord- 
ing to  the  order  of  Melchisedechf  and  that  the  divine 
banquet,  he  has  prepared,  brings  the  children  of  the 
Church  around  the  table  of  the  Lord,  like  so  many 
young  olive  plants. 

The  limits  we  have  been  obliged  to  observe  in  this 
work,  would  require  us  to  exclude  all  those  portions 
of  the  Office  for  the  present  Feast,  at  which  the 
Faithful  generally  do  not  assist.  But  as  this  Office, 
which  was  composed  by  St.  Thomas  of  Aquin,  is  one 
of  exceptional  beauty,  we  have  resolved  to  give  it  in 
its  entirety.  The  magnificence  of  these  Hymns,  and 
Psalms,  and  Antiphons,  and  Responsories, — all  of 
which  are  teeming  with  genuine  Catholic  spirit, — 
will  furnish  the  Faithful  with  the  best  materials  for 
contemplation,  whereby  to  enlighten  their  minds  and 
inflame  their  hearts,  during  the  whole  Octave.  On 
each  of  the  days  of  this  week,  they  will  be  eager  to 
adore  that  beautiful  King  of  glory,  who  is  going  to 


WEDNESDAY   AFTER   TRINITY    SUNDAY.  199 

hold  his  court  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  with  no 
other  veil  between  himself  and  them,  than  the  light 
cloud  of  the  sacramental  species.  During  these  happy 
hours,  which  love  is  ingenious  enough  to  steal  from  one's 
ordinary  occupations,  let  the  Faithful  prefer  to  take, 
wherewith  to  give  utterance  to  their  sentiments,  the 
formulas  which  the  Church  herself  uses,  when  singing 
to  her  Spouse,  in  the  sacred  banquet  of  his  love  :  not 
only  will  they  there  find  the  poetry,  doctrine  and 
gracefulness  of  diction,  which  the  Bride  ever  has  at 
her  command,  when  she  addresses  her  Beloved  Jesus  ; 
but  they  will  soon  learn,  by  experience,  that,  like  the 
divine  food  itself,  those  approved  and  sanctified  for- 
mulas suit  every  soul ;  for  these  formulas  of  the 
Church  adapt  themselves  to  the  several  dispositions 
and  degrees  of  spiritual  advancement,  and  thus 
become,  to  each  one  of  her  children,  the  fittest  and 
warmest  expression  of  every  want  and  desire. 

The  First  Yespers  of  the  Feast  of  Corpus  Christi 
are  exactly  the  same  as  the  Second,  with  the  single 
exception  of  the  Magnificat  Antiphon.  By  this  An- 
tiphon,  0  quam  suavis,  the  Church  declares  to  us,  her 
children,  how  great  is  the  'sweetness  of  our  Lord,  and 
that  it  is  manifested  to  us  by  the  sweetness  of  the 
eucharistic  Bread;  but  she  also  tells  us  who  they  are 
that  taste  this  sweetness,  and  derive  from  it  the  fruits 
of  salvation, — they  are  the  souls  that  are  led  to  the 
divine  banquet  by  the  spiritual  hunger  of  an  humble 
and  ardent  desire.  With  such  sentiments,  let  us,  with 
the  immaculate  Mary,  magnify  the  Lord,  who  exalteth 
the  humble,  and  putteth  down  the  mighty,  the  proud. 
It  is  to  the  humblest  of  the  daughters  of  Adam,  that 
we  are  indebted  for  the  Bread  of  heaven ;  it  was 
formed,  in  her  chaste  womb,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  as 
we  shall  explain  further  on ;  but,  let  us,  thus  early, 
rejoice  in  the  thought,  that  the  Feast  of  Corpus  Christi 
leads  us  to  Mary,  and  bids  us  give  her  the  tribute  of 
our  gratitude. 


200 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


ANTirilOX    OF    TRE    MAGNIFICAT. 


O  quam  suavis  est,  Do- 
mine,  Spiritus  tuus  !  qui  ut 
dulcediiicm  tuam  ia  filios 
demonstrares,  pane  suavis- 
simo  de  coelo  praestito  esu- 
rientes  reples  bonis,  fasti- 
diosos  divites  dimittens 
inanes. 


O  how  sweet,  O  Lord,  is  thy 
Spirit ;  for  that  thou  mightest 
show  the  sweetness  thou 
bearest  for  thy  children,  thou, 
with  a  Bread  most  sweet  given 
from  heaven,  fiUest  the  hxingry 
with  good  things,  sending 
.  away  empty  the  haughty  rich. 


COLLECT. 


Deus,  qui  nobis  sub  Sa- 
cramento mirabili  passionis 
tuse  memoriam  reliquisti, 
tribue,  quaesumus,  ita  nos 
Corporis  et  Sanguinis  tui 
sacra  mysteria  venerari,  ut 
redemptionis  tuse  fructum 
in  nobis  jugiter  sentiamus. 
Qui  vivis. 


O  God,  who,  under  the  won- 
derful Sacrament,  hast  left  us 
a  memorial  of  thy  Passion  : 
grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  so 
to  reverence  the  sacred  mys- 
teries of  thy  Body  and  Blood, 
that,  ia  our  souls,  we  may 
always  feel  the  fruit  of  thy 
Redemption.     Who  livest,  etc 


The  Octave  of  Corpus  Chrlsti  has  its  privileges  ;  the 
only  Octaves  which  have  greater,  are  the  three  of  the 
Epiphanv,  Easter,  and  Pentecost.  It  does  not  admit 
transferred  Feasts :  and  as  to  the  semi-double  Feasts, 
which  may  occur  on  the  Calendar,  during  these  eight 
days,  they  are  deferred  till  after  the  Octave.  Double 
Feasts  are  kept;  but,  no  matter  what  may  be  the 
solemnitv,  a  commemoration  of  Corpus  Christ i  is  made 
on  each  at  Mass,  Lauds,  and  Vespers.  Our  solemnity 
also  tells  upon  all  the  Hymns  of  the  several  Feasts 
which  may  be  kept  during  this  Octave  ;  for,  if  the 
metre  admit  it,  they  conclude  with  the  following 
doxology,  which  is  the  one  used  at  Compline  and  the 
Little  Hours  of  to-morrow's  Office  :  ^ 

»  In  the  Monastic  Rite,  it  is  as  follows  : 
Gloria  tibi  Domine, 
Qui  natus  es  de  Virgine, 
Cum  Patre  et  Sancto  Spiritu, 
In  sempiterua  saecula.     Amen. 


WEDNESDAY   AFTER  TRINITV    SUNDAY.             201 

Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Jesus,  Jesu  tibi  sit  gloria, 

that  wast  bom  of  the  Virgin  !  Qui  natus  es  de  Virgine, 

and  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Cum  Patre  et  almo  Spiritu, 

Holy   Spirit,    for    everlasting  In  senipitema  saecula. 
ages. 

Amen.  Amen. 


This  continually  repeated  mention  of  virginal  fe- 
cundity, during  the  feast  in  honour  of  the  Eucharist, 
is  an  affectionate  homage  paid  to  the  Virgin- Mother. 
The  Church  is  mindful  that  the  ''first  blasphemy  against 
"  the  dogma  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  consisted 
"  in  the  denying, — that  the  eucharistic  Body  of  Christ 
"was  the  one  born  of  Mary."^  Seeing,  too,  that  the 
later  heretics,  who  denied  the  Real  Presence,  have 
constantly  insulted  the  Mother  of  that  Jesus  who 
resides  in  the  Holy  Sacrament,  the  Church  united 
them  together  in  one  and  the  same  formula  of  con- 
fession and  praise,  when  standing  before  the  sacred 
Host.  Those  early  and  brave  witnesses  of  the  Faith, 
Saints  Ignatius  and  Irenseus,  did  the  like  ;  for,  as  St. 
•  Augustine  says :  "  Christ  took  flesh  from  Mary's 
"  flesh  ;  and  it  is  that  very  flesh  that  he  gave  us  to 
"  eat,  for  our  salvation  ;  and  we  adore  it  as  the  foot- 
"  stool  of  his  feet.'*     {Fs.  xcviii.  5).^ 


At  this  evening  hour,  when  holy  Church  is  pro- 
claiming the  adorable  Sacrament,  let  us  be  imbued 
with  these  same  sentiments,  and  offer  our  love  to  the 
sacred  Host,  which,  in  a  few  hours,  is  to  be  receiving 
our  joyous  adorations.  We  may,  for  this  purpose, 
make  use  of  the  following  formula,  which  has  been 
such  a  favourite,  in  so  many  of  our  Churches,  ever 

*  Mgr.  Pie,  Bishop  of  Poitiers.     Homily   given  at  Issoudun, 
Sept.  8,  1869. 
2  Enarrat.  in  Psalm  xcviii.  9. 


202 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECv)ST. 


since  the  14tli  Century.  It  used,  formerly,  to  be 
sung,  in  Germany  and  France,  during  the  Elevation, 
as  an  appropriate  termination  to  the  trisagion  ;  for, 
as  we  find  in  the  best  manuscripts,  this  piece  concluded 
with  the  same  words  as  the  Sanctns, — in  excehis.  This 
kind  of  liturgical  composition  went  under  the  name 
of  Tropes,  and  were  much  loved  by  the  Faithful  of 
the  Middle- Ages ;  it  is  from  them  that  were  after- 
wards suggested  our  Prose  or  Sequence, 


Ave,  verum   corpus   natum 

de  Maria  Virgine, 
Vere    passum,    iminolatum 

in  cruce  pro  honiine, 


Hail  I  true  Body,  bom  of 
the  Virgin  Mary ; 

It  truly  suffered,  and  •was 
immolated  on  the  Cross,  for 


man. 


Cujus      latus      perforatum 
fluxit  aqua  et  sanguine  : 

Esto     nobis     praegustatum 
mortis  in  examine. 


O  Jesu  dulcis ! 

O  Jesu  pie ! 

O  Jesu,  Fili  Manse  ! 


His  side  was  pierced,  and 
streamed  with  Water  and 
Blood. 

Be  thou  our  foretaste  (of 
heaven)  when  we  are  strug- 
gling with  death  ! 

O  sweet  Jesus ! 

O  good  Jesus  I 

O  Jesus,  Son  of  Mary ! 


CORPUS   CHRIST!.  203 


THE    FEAST 

OF  COEPUS  CHEISTI. 

Let   us    adore    Christ,    tlie  Christum  regem  adoremus 

King,  who  ruleth  the  nations;  dominantem  gentibus,  qui se 

who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to  manducantibus  dat  spiritus 

them  that  eat  him.  pinguedinem. 

A  GREAT  solemnity  lias  this  day  risen  upon  our  earth  : 
a  Feast  both,  to  God  and  men  :  for  it  is  the  Feast  of 
Christ  the  Mediator,  who  is  present  in  the  sacred 
Host,  that  Grod  may  be  given  to  man,  and  man  to 
Grod.  Divine  union, — yes,-  such  is  the  dignity  to 
which  man  is  permitted  to  aspire  ;  and,  to  this  aspi- 
ration, God  has  responded,  even  here  below,  by  an 
invention  which  is  all  of  heaven.  It  is  to  day  that 
man  celebrates  this  marvel  of  God's  goodness. 

And  yet,  against  both  the  Feast  and  its  divine 
object,  there  has  been  made  the  old-fashioned  objec- 
tion :  Hoiv  can  these  things  be  done  ?  ^  It  really  does 
seem,  as  though  reason  has  a  right  to  find  fault  with 
what  looks  like  senseless  pretensions  of  man's  heart. 

Every  living  being  thirsts  after  happiness  ;  and 
yet,  and  because  of  that,  it  only  aspires  after  the  good 
of  which  it  is  capable  ;  for  it  is  the  necessary  con- 
dition of  happiness,  that,  in  order  to  its  existence, 
there  must  be  the  full  contentment  of  the  creature's 
desire.  Hence,  in  that  great  act  of  creation,  which 
the  Scripture  so  sublimely  calls  his  playing  in  the 
loorld^  when,  with  his  almighty  power,  he  prepared 
the  heavens,  and  enclosed  the  depths,  and  balanced 

1  St.  John,  iii.  9  ;  vi.  53.  2  Pj-qv.  viii.  30,  31. 


204  CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

the  foundations  of  the  earth/  we  are  told  that  Divine 
Wisdom  secured  the  harmony  of  the  universe  hy 
giving  to  each  creature,  according  to  its  degree  in 
the  scale  of  being,  an  end  adequate  to  its  powers;  he 
thus  measured  the  wants,  the  instinct,  the  appetite 
(that  is,  the  desire)  of  each  creature,  according  to  its 
respective  nature;  so  that  it  would  never  have  crav- 
ings, which  its  faculties  were  insufficient  to  satisfy. 
In  obedience,  then,  to  this  law,  was  not  man,  too, 
obliged  to  confine,  within  the  limits  of  his  finite 
nature,  his  desires  for  the  good  and  the  beautiful, 
that  is,  his  searching  after  God,  which  is  a  necessity 
with  every  intelligent  and  free  being?  Otherwise, 
would  it  not  be,  that,  for  certain  beings,  their  happi- 
ness would  have  to  be  in  objects,  which  must  ever  be 
out  of  the  reach  of  their  natural  faculties  ? 

Great  as  the  anomaly  would  appear,  yet  does  it 
exist ;  true  psychology,  that  is,  the  true  science  of 
the  human  mind,  bears  testimony  to  this  desire  for 
the  infinite.  Like  every  living  creature  around  him, 
man  thirsts  for  happiness  ;  and  yet,  he  is  the  only 
JJ^^^J^^  creature  on  earth  that  feels  within  itself  longings  for 
5*»py  what  is  immensely  beyond  its  capacity.  Whilst  docile 
^''MiJ  to  the  lord  placed  over  them  by  the  Creator,  the 
irrational  creatures  are  quite  satisfied  with  what  they 
find  in  this  world  ;  they  render  to  man  their  several 
services,  and  their  own  desires  are  all  fully  gratified 
by  what  is  within  their  reach  :  it  is  not  so  with  Man ; 
he  can  find  nothing  in  this  his  earthly  dwelling,  which 
can  satiate  his  irresistible  longings  for  a  something, 
which  this  earth  cannot  give,  and  which  time  cannot 
produce  ; — for  that  something  is — the  infinite.  God 
himself,  when  revealing  himself  to  man  through  the 
works  he  has  created,  that  is,  when  showing  himself 
to  man  in  a  way  which  his  natural  powers  can  take 
in ;  God,  when  giving  man  to  know  him  as  the  First 

1  Prov.  viii.  27,  29. 


CORPUS    CHRISTI.  205 

Cause,  as  Last  End  of  all  creatures,  as  unlimited 
perfection,  as  infinite  beauty,  as  sovereign  goodness, 
as  the  object  wbicb  can  content  both  our  understand- 
ing and  our  will, — no,  not  even  God  himself,  thus 
known  and  thus  enjoyed,  could  satisfy  man.  This 
being,  made  out  of  nothing,  wishes  to  possess  the 
Infinite  in  his  own  substance  ;  he  longs  after  the 
sight  of  the  face,  he  ambitions  to  enjoy  the  life,  of 
his  Lord  and  God.  The  earth  seems  to  him  but  a 
trackless  desert,  where  he  can  find  no  water  that  can 
quench  his  thirst.  From  early  dawn  of  each  weari- 
some day,  his  soul  is  at  once  on  the  watch,  pining 
for  that  God  who  alone  can  quell  his  desires;  yea, 
his  very  flesh,  too,  has  its  thrilling  expectations  for 
that  beautiful  Infinite  One.^  Let  us  listen  to  the 
Psalmist,  who  speaks  for  us  all :  As  the  hart  panfeth 
after  the  fountains  of  ivater,  so  my  soul  panteth  after 
thee,  0  God!  My  soul  hath  thirsted  after  the  strong , 
living,  God :  lohen  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  the 
face  of  God  ?  My  tears  have  been  my  bread,  day  and 
night,  ichilst  it  is  said  to  7ne  daily :  "  Where  is  thy 
God  .^"  These  things  I  remembered,  and  poured  out 
my  soul  in  me:  for  I  shall  go  over  into  the  place  of 
the  wonderful  tabernacle,  even  to  the  house  of  God. 
With  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  the  noise  of  one  that 
is  feasting.  Why  art  thou  sad,  0  my  soul  ?  and  why 
dost  thou  trouble  me  ?  Hope  in  God,  for  I  will  still 
give  praise  unto  him  :  the  salvation  of  my  countenance, 
and  my  God} 

If  reason  is  to  be  the  judge  of  such  sentiments  as 
these,  they  are  but  wild  enthusiasm  and  silly  preten- 
sions. Why  talk  of  the  sight  of  God,  of  the  life  of 
God,  of  a  banquet  wherein  God  himself  is  to  be  the 
repast  ?  Surely,  these  are  things  far  too  sublime  for 
man,  or  any  created  nature,  to  reach.  Between  the 
wisher  and  the  object  longed  for,  there  is  an  abyss, — the 

1  Ps.  Ixii.  2  ij,i^^  xH. 


206  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

abyss  of  disproportion,  which  exists  between  nothing- 
ness and  being.  Creation,  all  powerful  as  it  is,  does 
not,  in  itself,  imply  the  filling  up  of  that  abyss.  If 
the  disproportion  could  ever  cease  to  be  an  obstacle 
to  the  union  aspired  to,  it  would  be  by  God  himself 
going  that  whole  length,  and  then  imparting  some- 
thing of  his  own  divine  energies  to  the  creature  that 
had  once  been  nothing.  But,  what  is  there  in  man, 
to  induce  the  Infinite  Being,  whose  magnificence  is 
above  the  heavens,  to  stoop  so  low  as  that  ?  This  is 
the  language  of  reason. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  who  was  it  that  made  the 
heart  of  man  so  great  and  so  ambitious,  that  no 
creature  can  fill  it ;  how  comes  it,  that  whilst  the 
heavens  show  forth  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firma- 
ment declare th  how  full  of  wisdom  and  power  is 
every  work  of  his  hands,^  how  comes  it,  we  ask,  that 
in  man,  alone,  there  is  no  proportion,  no  order  ? 
Could  it  be,  that  the  great  Creator  has  ordered  all 
things,  excepting  man  alone,  with  measure,  and  num- 
ber, and  weight  ?  -  That  one  creature,  who  is  the 
master-piece  of  the  whole  creation  ;  that  creature, 
for  whom  all  the  rest  was  intended,  as  for  its  king ;  is 
he  to  be  the  only  one  that  is  a  failure,  and  to  live  as  M 
a  perpetual  proclaimer  that  his  Maker  could  not,  or 
would  not,  be  wise,  when  he  made  Man  ?  Far  from 
us  be  such  a  blasphemy  !  God  is  loce,  says  St.  John  ; ' 
and  love  is  the  knot  which  mere  human  philosophy 
can  never  loosen,  and  therefore  must  ever  leave  un- 
solved the  problem  of  man's  desire  for  the  Infinite. 

Yes,  God  is  charity ;  God  is  love.  The  wonder,  in 
all  this  question,  is  not  ok?'  loving  and  longing  for 
God,  but  that  he  should  have  first  loved  us.*  God  is 
love ;  and  love  must  have  union  ;  and  union  makes 
the  united  like  one  another.     Oh !  the  riches  of  the 


1  Ps.  xviii.  2.  M  St.  John,  iv.  8. 

3  Wisd.  xi.  21.  *  Ibuf.iv.  10. 


f 


CORPUS   CHRISTI.  207 

Divine  Nature,  wherein  are  infinite  Power,  and  "Wis- 
dom, and  Love  !  These  three  constitute,  by  their 
divine  relations,  that  blessed  Trinity,  which  has  been 
the  light  and  joy  of  our  souls,  ever  since  that  bright 
Sunday's  Feast,  which  we  kept  in  its  honour.  Oh ! 
the  depth  of  the  divine  counsels,  wherein  that  which 
is  willed  by  boundless  Love  finds,  in  infinite  Wisdom, 
how  to  fulfil  in  work  what  will  be  to  the  glory  of 
Omnipotence ! 

Glory  be  to  thee,  0  holy  Spirit  I     Thy  reign  over 
the  Church  has  but  just  begun  this  Year  of  grace, 
and  thou  art  giving  us  light  whereby  to  understand 
the  divine  decrees.     The  day  of  thy  Pentecost  brought 
us  a  new  Law,  a  Law  where  all  is  brightness  ;  and  it 
was  given  to  us  in  place  of  that  Old  one  of  shadows 
and  types.     The  pedagogue^  who  schooled  the  infant 
world  for  the  knowledge  of  truth,  has  been  dismissed ; 
light  has  shone  upon  us  through  the  preaching  of  the 
Apostles  ;  and  the  children  of  light,  set  free,  knowing 
God   and  known  by  him,  are  daily  leaving  behind 
them  the  weak  and  needy  elements  of  early  child- 
hood.^    Scarcely,  0  divine  Spirit !  was  completed  the- 
triumphant  Octave,  wherein  the  Church  celebrated 
thy  Coming  and  her  own  birth,  which  that  Coming 
brought,  when  all  eager  for   the  fulfilment  of  thy 
Mission  of  bringing  to  the  Bride's  mind  the  things 
taught  her  by  her  Spouse,^  thou  showedst  her  the 
divine  and  radiant  mystery  of  the  Trinity,  that  not 
only   her   Faith  might  acknowledge,    but   that  her 
adoration  and  her  praise  might  also  worship  it ;  and 
she  and  her  children  find  their  happiness  in  its  con- 
templation and  love.      But,  that  first  of  the  great 
mysteries  of  our  faith,  the  unsearchable  dogma  of  the 
Trinity,  does   not  represent  the  whole    richness   of 
Christian  revelation  ;  thou,  0  blessed  Spirit,  hastenest 

1  Gal.  iii.  5,  24,  25  ;   iv.  9.  2  gt,  j^hn,  xiv.  26. 


208  CX)RPUS   CHRISTI. 

to  complete  our  instruction,  and  widen  tlie  horizon  of 
our  faith. 

The  knowledge  thou  hast  given  us  of  the  essence 
and  the  life  of  the  Godhead,  was  to  be  followed  and 
completed  by  that  of  his  external  works,  and  the 
relations  which  this  God  has  vouchsafed  to  establish 
between  himself  and  us.  In  this  very  week  when  we 
begin,  under  thy  direction,  to  contemplate  the  pre- 
cious gifts  left  us  by  our  Jesus  when  he  ascended  on 
high  ;  ^  on  this  first  Thursday,  which  reminds  us  of  that 
holiest  of  all  Thursdays, — our  Lord's  Supper, — thou, 
O  di\ane  Spirit,  bringest  before  our  delighted  vision 
the  admirable  Sacrament,  which  is  the  compendium 
of  the  works  of  God,  one  in  Essence  and  three  in 
Persons  ;  the  adorable  Eucharist,  which  is  the  divine 
metnoridl'^-  of  the  wonderful  things  achieved  by  the 
united  operation  of  Omnipotence,  Wisdom,  and  Love. 
The  most  holy  Eucharist  contains  within  itself  the 
whole  plan  of  God,  with  reference  to  this  world  of 
ours  ;  it  shows  how  all  previous  ages  have  been 
gradually  developing  the  divine  intentions,  which 
were  formed  by  infinite  love,  and,  by  that  same  love, 
carried  out  to  the  oid,^  yea,  to  the  furthest  extremity 
here  below,  that  is,  to  Itself;  for  the  Eucharist  is  the 
crowning  of  all  the  antecedent  acts  done  by  God  in 
favour  of  his  creatures ;  the  Eucharist  implies  them 
all ;  it  explains  all. 

Man's  aspirations  for  union  with  God, — aspirations, 
which  are  above  his  own  nature,  and  yet  so  interwoven 
with  it,  as  to  form  one  inseparable  life, — these  strange 
longings  can  have  but  one  possible  cause,  and  it  is  God 
himself — God  who  is  the  author  of  that  being  called 
Ma7i.  Kone  but  God  has  formed  the  immense  capa- 
ciousness of  man's  heart ;  and  none  but  God  is  willing 
or  able  to  fill  it.  Every  act  of  the  divine  will,  whether 
outside  himself  or  in,  is  pure  love,  and  is  referred  to 

^  Ps.  Ixvri.  19.  ^  Ibid.  ex.  4.  ^  St.  John,  xiii.  1. 


CORPUS   CHRISTI.  209 

that  Person  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  who  is  the  Third  ; 
and  who,  by  the  mode  of  his  Procession,  is  substantial 
and  infinite  love.  Just  as  the  Almighty  Father  sees 
all  things,  before  they  exist  in  themselves,  in  his  only 
"Word,  who  is  the  term  of  the  divine  intelligence, — 
so,  likewise,  that  those  same  things  may  exist  in 
themselves,  the  same  Almighty  Father  tvishes  them, 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  to  the  divine  will  what  the 
Word  is  to  the  infinite  intelligence.  The  Spirit  of 
Love,  who  is  the  final  term  to  the  fecundity  of  Persons 
in  the  divine  essence,  is,  in  God,  the  first  beginning 
of  the  exterior  works  produced  by  God.  In  their 
execution,  those  exterior  works  are  common  to  the 
Three  Persons,  but  they  are  attributed  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  inasmuch  as  he,  being  the  Spirit  of  Love, 
solicits  the  Godhead  to  act  outside  Itself.  He  is  the 
Love  who,  with  its  divine  weight  and  influence  of 
love,  sways  the  Blessed  Trinity  to  the  external  act  of 
creation  ;  infinite  Being  leans,  as  it  were,  towards  the 
deep  abyss  of  nothingness,  and  out  of  that  abyss, 
creates.  The  Holy  Spirit  opens  the  divine  counsel, 
and  says  :  Let  us  make  man  to  our  image  and  likeness!^ 
Then  God  creates  man  to  his  own  image ;  he  creates 
him  to  the  image  of  God,^  taking  his  own  Word  as 
the  model  to  which  he  worked  ;  for  that  Word  is  the 
sovereign  archetype,  according  to  which  is  formed 
the  more  or  less  perfect  essence  of  each  created  being. 
Like  him  then,  to  whose  image  he  was  made,  Man 
was  endowed  with  understanding  and  free-will.  As 
such,  he  would  govern  the  whole  inferior  creation, 
and  make  it  serve  the  purposes  of  its  Creator,  that  is, 
he  would  turn  it  into  a  homage  of  praise  and  glory  to 
its  God  ;  and  though  that  homage  would  be  finite, 
yet  would  it  be  the  best  of  .which  it  was  capable. 
This  is  what  is  called  the  natural  order ;  it  is  an 
immense  world  of  perfect  harmonies  ;  and,  had  it  ever 

1  Gen.  i.  26.  «  Ibid.  27. 

VOL.  X.  P 


■ 


210  CORPUS   CHKISTl. 

existed" without  any  further  perfection  than  its  own 
natural  one,  it  would  have  been  a  master-piece  of 
God's  goodness  ;  and  yet,  it  would  have  been  far 
from  realising  the  designs  of  the  Spirit  of  Love. 

With  all  the  spontaneity  of  a  will  which  was  free 
not  to  act,  and  was  as  infinite  as  any  other  of  the 
divine  perfections,  the  Holy  Spirit  wills  that  Man 
should,  after  this  present  life,  be  a  partaker  of  the 
very  life  of  God,  by  the  face-to-face  vision  of  the 
divine  essence ;  nay,  the  present  life  of  the  children 
of  Adam  here,  on  this  earth,  is  to  put  on,  by  antici- 
pation, the  dignity  of  that  higher  life  ;  and  this  so 
literally,  that  the  future  one  in  heaven  is  to  be  but 
the  direct  sequel,  the  consequent  outgrowth,  of  the 
one  led  here  below.  And  how  is  man,  so  poor  a 
creature  in  himself,  to  maintain  so  high  a  standing  ? 
how  is  he  to  satisfy  the  cravings  thus  created  within 
his  heart  ?  Fear  not :  the  Holy  Ghost  has  a  work  of 
his  own,  and  he  does  it  simultaneously  with  the  act 
of  creation  ;  for  the  Three  Persons  infuse  into  their 
creature,  Man,  the  image  of  their  own  divine  attii- 
butes  ;  and,  upon  his  fiuite  and  limited  powers,  graft, 
so  to  say,  the  powers  of  the  divine  nature.  This 
being  made  for  an  end  which  is  above  created  nature  ; 
these  energies  superadded  to  man's  natural  powers, 
transforming,  yet  not  destroying,  them,  and  enabling 
the  possessor  to  attain  the  end  unto  which  God  calls 
him  ; — is  called  the  supernatural  order,  in  contradis- 
tinction to  that  lower  one,  which  would  have  been 
the  order  of  nature,  had  not  God,  in  his  infinite  good- 
ness, thus  elevated  man  above  his  own  mere  state  as 
man,  and  that  from  the  very  first  of  his  coming  into 
existence.  Man  will  retain  all  those  elements  of  the 
natural  order,  which  are  essentials  to  his  human 
nature  ;  and,  with  those  essential  elements,  the  func- 
tions proper  to  each :  but,  there  is  a  principle,  that, 
in  every  series,  tliat  should  give  the  specific  character 
to  the  aggregate  which    was  the  end   proposed   by 


CORPUS   CHIUSTI.  211 

the  ruling  mind.  Now,  the  last  end  of  Man  was 
never  other  in  the  mind  of  his  Creator  than  a  super- 
natural one ;  and,  consequently,  the  natural  order, 
properly  so  called,  never  existed  independently  of,  or 
separatedly  from,  the  supernatural. 

There  has  been  a  proud  school  of  philosophy,  called 
♦"  free  and  independent,"  which  professed  to  admit  no 
truths  except  natural  ones,  and  practise  no  other  virtues 
than  such  as  were  merely  human  :  but,  such  theories 
cannot  hold.  The  disciples  of  godless  and  secular 
education,  by  the  errors  and  crimes  into  which  their 
unaided  nature  periodically  leads  them,  demonstrate, 
almost  as  forcibly  as  the  eminent  sanctity  of  souls 
which  have  been  faithful  to  grace,  that  mere  nature, 
or  mere  natural  goodness,  never  was,  and  never  can 
he,  a  permanent  and  normal  state  for  man  to  live  in. 
And  even  granting  that  he  could  so  live,  yet  man 
has  no  right  to  reduce  himself  to  a  less  exalted 
position,  than  the  one  intended  for  him  by  his  Maker. 
"  By  assigning  us  a  supernatural  vocation,  God  testi- 
"  fied  the  love  he  bore  us  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  he 
"  acted  as  Lord,  and  evinced  his  authority  over  us. 
'*  The  favour  he  bestowed  upon  us,  has  created  a 
"  duty  corresponding.  Men  have  a  saying,  and  a 
"  true  one  :  *  He  that  hath  nobility,  hath  obligations: ' 
"  and  the  principle  holds  with  regard  to  the  super- 
"  natural  nobility,  which  it  has  pleased  Grod  to  confer 
*'  upon  us."  ^ 

It  is  a  nobility  which  surpasses  every  other ;  it  makes 
man  not  only  an  image  of  God,  but  like  unto  him  I  ^ 
Between  God, — the  Infinite,  the  Eternal — and  Man, 
who  but  a  while  back,  was  nothing,  and  ever  must  be 
a  creature, — friendship  and  love  are  henceforth  to  be 
possible  : — such  is  the  purpose  of  the  capabilities,  and 
powers,  and  the  life,  bestowed  on  the  human  creature 
by  the  Spirit  of  Love.     So,  then,  those  longings  for 

*  Mgr.  Pie,  Bishop  of  Poitiers.    First  Synodical  Instruction  oa 
the  Chief  Errors  of  our  times,  viii.  ^  Qen.  i.  26. 


212  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

his  God,  those  thrillings  of  his  very  flesh,  of  which 
we  were  just  now  rcadiug  the  inspired  deseiiption  hy 
the  Psalmist,^ — they  are  not  the  outpourings  of  foolish 
enthusiasm !  That  thirsting  after  God,  the  strong, 
the  living  God  ;  that  hungering  for  the  feast  of  divine 
union  ; — no,  they  are  not  empty  ravings.-  Made 
partaker  of  the  divine  nature,^  as  St.  Peter  so  strongly 
words  the  mystery,  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  if  man 
be  conscious  of  it,  and  lets  himself  be  drawn,  by 
the  uncreated  flame,  into  the  very  central  Fire  it 
came  from  to  him  ?  The  Holy  Spirit,  too,  is  present 
in  his  creature,  and  is  witness  of  what  himself  has 
produced  there  ;  he  joins  his  own  testimonies  to  that 
of  our  own  conscience,  and  tells  our  spirit  that  we 
are  truly,  what  we  feel  ourselves  to  be, — the  sons  of 
God.**  It  is  the  same  Holy  Spirit,  who,  secreting 
himself  in  the  innermost  centre  of  our  being,  that  he 
may  foster  and  complete  his  work  of  love, — yes,  it  is 
that  same  Spirit,  who,  at  one  time,  opens  to  our  soul's 
eye,  by  some  sudden  flash  of  light,  the  future  glory  that 
awaits  us,  and  then  inspires  us  with  a  sentiment  of 
anticipated  triumph ;  ^  and  then,  at  another  time,  he 
breathes  into  us  those  unspeakable  moanings,''  those 
songs  of  the  exile,  whose  voice  is  choked  with  the 
hot  tears  of  love,  for  that  his  union  with  his  God  seems 
so  long  deferred.  There  are,  too,  certain  delicious 
hymns,  which  coming  from  the  very  depths  of  souls 
wounded  with  divine  love,  make  their  way  up  to  the 
throne  of  God ;  and  the  music  is  so  sweet  to  him, 
that  it  almost  looks  as  though  it  had  been  victorious, 
and  had  won  the  union  !  Such  music  of  such  souls 
does  really  win  ;  if  not  the  eternal  union, — for  that 
could  not  be  during  this  life  of  pilgrimage,  and  trials, 
and  tears, — still  it  wins  wonderful  unions  here  below, 
which  human  language  has  not  the  power  to  describe. 

^  Ps.  Ixii.  *  Rom.  viii.  16. 

2  Ibid.  xli.  5  Eph.  i.  17,  18 ;  Rom.  v.  2. 

3  St.  Pet.  i.  4.  «  Rom.  viii.  26. 


CORPUS   CHRISTI.  213 

In  this  mysterious  song  between  the  Divine  Spirit 
and  man's  soul,  we  are  told  by  the  Apostle,  that  He, 
who  searcheth  hearts,  hioweth  ivhat  the  Spirit  desireth, 
because  he  asketh  for  the  saints  according  to  God} 
What  a  desire  must  not  that  be,  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
desireth  !  It  is  as  powerful  as  the  God  who  desires 
it.  It  is  a  desire,  new,  indeed,  inasmuch  as  it  is  in 
the  heart  of  man,  but  eternal,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the 
desire  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  Procession  is  before 
all  ages.  In  response  to  this  desire  of  the  Spirit,  the 
great  God,  from  the  infinite  depths  of  his  eternity, 
resolved  to  manifest  himself  in  time,  and  unite  him- 
self, to  man,  whilst  yet  a  wayfarer ;  he  resolved 
thus  to  manifest  and  unite  himself,  not  in  his 
own  Person,  but  in  his  Son,  who  is  the  bright- 
ness of  his  own  glory,  and  the  true  figure  of  his 
own  substance.2  God  so  loved  the  world,=^  as  to 
give  it  his  own  Word, — ^that  divine  Wisdom,  who, 
from  the  bosom  of  his  Father,  had  devoted  himself  to 
our  humau  nature.  That  bosom  of  the  Father  was 
imaged  by  what  the  Scripture  calls  Abraham's  bosom, 
where,  under  the  ancient  covenant,  were  assembled 
all  the  souls  of  the  just,  as  in  the  place  where  they 
were  to  rest  till  the  way  into  the  Holy  of  Holies 
should  be  opened  for  the  elect.*  Now,  it  was  from 
this  bosom  of  his  eternal  Father,  which  the  Psalmist 
calls  the  bride- chamber,^  that  the  Bridegroom  came 
forth  at  the  appointed  time,  leaving  his  heavenly 
abode,  and  coming  down  into  this  poor  earth,  to 
seek  his  Bride  ;  that,  when  he  had  made  her  his  own, 
he  might  lead  her  back  with  himself  into  his  kingdom, 
where  he  would  celebrate  the  eternal  nuptials.  This 
is  the  triumphant  procession  of  the  Bridegroom  in 
all  his  beauty ;  ^  a  procession,  whereof  the  Prophet 
Micheas,  when  speaking  of  his  passing  through  Beth- 

1  Rom.  viii.  27.  *  Heb.  ix.  8. 

2  Heb.  i.  3.  s  pg^  ^viii.  6. 
2  St.  John,  iii.  16.  ^  Ibid.  xliv.  5. 


214  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

lehem,  says,  that  Ins  going  forth  is  from  the  days  of 
eternity.^  Yes,  truly, /ro77i  the  days  of  eternity;  for 
as  we  are  taught  by  the  sublime  principles  of  Catholic 
theology,  the  connexion  between  the  eternal  proces- 
sion of  the  divine  Persons  and  the  temporal  tnission, 
is  so  intimate,  that  one  same  eternity  unites  the  two 
together  in  God  :  eternally,  the  Trinity  has  beheld 
the  ineffable  birth  of  the  Only  Begotten  Son  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father  ;  eternally,  with  the  same  look, 
it  has  beheld  him  coming,  as  Spouse,  from  that  same 
Father's  bosom. 

If  we  now  come  to  compare  the  eternal  decrees  of 
God  one  with  the  other,  it  is  not  difficult  to  recognise 
which  of  them  holds  the  chief  place,  and,  as  such, 
comes  first  in  the  divine  intention  of  creation.  God 
the  Father  has  made  all  things  with  a  view  to  this 
union  of  human  nature  with  his  Son ; — union  so  close, 
that,  for  one  individual  member  of  that  nature,  it  was 
to  go  so  far  as  a  personal  identification  with  the  Only 
Begotten  of  the  Father.  So  universal,  too,  was  the 
union  to  be,  that  all  the  members  were  to  partake  of 
it,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  ;  not  one  single  in- 
dividual of  the  race  was  to  be  excluded,  except 
through  his  own  fault,  from  the  divine  nuptials  with 
eternal  Wisdom,  which  was  made  visible  in  a  Man, 
the  most  beautiful  above  all  the  children  of  men.^ 
For,  as  the  Apostle  says,  God,  icho  heretofore  com- 
'}nanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  himself 
shiiied  in  our  hearts,  giving  them  the  light  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  glory  of  God,  in,  and  by,  the  face  of  Christ 
Jesus.^  So  that  the  mystery  of  the  Marriage-Feast 
is,  in  all  truth,  the  mystery  of  the  world ;  and  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  well  likened  to  a  King,  who 
made  a  Marriage  for  his  Son.* 

But,  where  is  the  meeting  between  the  King's  Son 


J  Mich.  V.  2.  »  2  Cor.  iv.  6. 

2  Ts.  xliv.  3.  *  St.  Matth.  xxiL  1-14. 


CORPUS    CHRISTI.  215 

and  Ms  Betrotlied  to  take  place  ?  Where  is  this 
mysterious  union  to  be  completed  ?  Who  is  there  to 
tell  us  what  is  the  dowry  of  the  Bride,  the  pledge  of 
the  alliance  ?  Is  it  known  who  is  the  Master  who 
provides  the  nuptial  banquet,  and  what  sorts  of  food 
will  be  served  to  the  guests  ?  The  answer  to  these 
questions  is  given  this  very  day,  throughout  the 
earth  ;  it  is  given  with  loud  triumphant  joy.  There 
can  be  no  mistake  ;  it  is  evident  from  the  sublime 
message,  which  earth  and  heaven  re-echo,  that  He 
who  is  come  is  the  Divine  Word.  He  is  adorable 
Wisdom,  and  is  come  forth  from  his  royal  abode  to 
utter  his  voice  in  our  very  streets,  and  cry  out  at  the 
head  of  multitudes,  and  speak  his  words  in  the  entrance 
of  city-gates  ;^  he  stands  on  the  top  of  the  highest 
places  by  the  way,  in  the  midst  of  the  paths,  and 
makes  himself  heard  by  the  sons  of  men.^  He  bids 
his  servants  go  to  the  tower  and  the  city  walls,  with 
this  his  message  :  Come  I  eat  my  Bread,  and  drink 
the  Wine  ivhich  I  have  mingled  for  you ;  for  Wisdom 
hath  built  herself  a  House,  supported  on  seve7i  pillars  ; 
there  she  hath  slain  her  victims,  mingled  her  wine,  and 
set  forth  her  table -^  all  things  are  ready ;  come  to  the 
marriage/^ 

0  Wisdom,  that  camest  forth  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Most  High,  reaching  from  end  to  end,  disposing 
all  things  with  strength  and  sweetness !  ^  we  besought 
thee,  in  the  season  of  Advent,  to  come  unto  Bethle- 
hem, "  the  house  of  Bread  ;"  thou  wast  the  long  Ex- 
pected of  our  hearts.  The  day  of  the  glorious  Epi- 
phany showed  us  the  mystery  of  the  Nuptials,  and 
manifested  to  us  the  Bridegroom ;  the  Bride  was  got 
ready  in  the  waters  of  the  Jordan  ;  we  commemorated 
the  Magi,  who,  with  their  gifts,  hastened  to  the  royal 
nuptials,   where    the    guests   were    regaled   with    a 

»  Prov.  i.  20,  2] .  *  St.  Matth.  xxii.  4. 

*  Ibid.  viii.  1-4.  ^  Prima  ex  Ant.  maj.  Adventus. 

3  Ibid.  ix.  1-5. 


216  CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

miraculous  wine.^  But  the  Water  which,  to  make 
up  for  the  deficiency  of  a  bad  tree,  was  changed  into 
wine,  was  a  prophetic  figure  of  future  mysteries. 
The  Vine,  the  true  Vine,  of  which  we  are  the 
Branches,"  has  yielded  its  sweet-smelling  flowers, 
and  its  fruits  of  honour  and  riches.^  Wheat  hath 
abounded  in  our  valleys,  and  they  shall  sing  a  hymn 
of  praise ;  *  for  this  strength  of  the  earth  shall  cover 
the  mountain-tops,  and  its  fruit  shall  go  up  beyond 
Libanus.^ 

O  Wisdom,  thou  noble  queen,  whose  divine  per- 
fections enamour,  from  early  childhood,  hearts  that 
are  taken  with  true  beauty !  "^  the  day  of  the  true 
Marriage-feast  is  come.  Thou  art  a  mother  full  of 
honour,  and  a  young  Bride  in  thy  charms,  and  thou 
comest  to  nourish  us  with  the  bread  of  life,  and  give 
us  to  drink  of  a  cup  of  salvation.'  Thy  fruit  is  better 
than  gold  ;  and  thy  blossoms,  than  choicest  silver.- 
They  that  eat  thee,  shall  still  hunger  after  thee ; 
and  they  that  drink  thee,  shall  again  thirst  for  thee  ;* 
for  thy  conversation  hath  no  bitterness^  nor  thy  com- 
pany any  tediousness,  but  Joy  and  gladness,^^  and  riches, 
and  gtory,  and  virtues.^^ 

During  the  days  of  this  great  Solemnity,  when  thou 
art  seated  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  and  placest  thy  throne 
in  the  holy  assembly,  we  would  fain  take  each  mystery 
of  this  thy  divine  banquet,  and  ponder  over  its  marvels, 
and  then  publish  them,  yea,  go  to  choir  with  thee, 
O  beautiful  Wisdom,  and  sing  thy  praise  in  the  pre- 
sence of  thy  Angels,  who  wiJl  be  there  adoring  the 
Sacred  Host !  ^^  Do  thou  vouchsafe  to  open  our  Hps, 
and  fill  us  with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  0  divine  Wisdom  1 


*  Ant.  Epiph.  ad  Benedittus.  '  Ecclus.  xv.  2,  3. 
2  St.  John,  XV.  5,  ^  Prov,  viii.  19. 

'  Ecclus.  xxiv.  2r,  '  Ecclus.  xxiv.  29. 

*  Ps.  Ixiv.  14.  JO  Wisd.  viii.  16. 
*3  Ibid.  Ixxi.  16.  "  Prov.  viii.  18. 

*  Wisd.  viii.  2.  ^^  Ecclus.  xxiv.  1-7. 


MATINS. 


217 


that  so  our  praise  may  be  worthy  of  its  theme,  and,  as 
thou  hast  promised  in  thy  Scriptures,  may  it  abound, 
may  it  be  full  to  overflowing,  in  the  mouths  of  thy 
faithful  worshippers  !  ^ 


MATINS. 

The  Night  Office  for  this  Festival  has  a  special 
interest  of  its  own  :  it  is  the  memory  of  that  holy 
night  when,  as  the  Church  expresses  it,  faith  shows 
us  our  Lord  presiding,  for  the  last  time,  at  the 
figurative  Pasch,  and  following  up  the  feast  of  the 
typical  Lamb  with  the  banquet  of  his  own  Body. 
For  the  reasons  specified  yesterday,  we  give  the 
entire  of  to-day's  Office. 

In  order  to  induce  the  Faithful  to  prefer  the  prayers 
of  the  Liturgy  to  all  others,  we  would  remind  them 
that  the  Sovereign  Pontiffs  have  solemnly  opened  the 
treasures  of  the  Church  in  favour  of  such  as,  being 
contrite,  and  having  confessed  their  sins,  shall  assist 
at  any  of  the  Canonical  Hours,  either  on  the  day  of 
the  Feast,  or  during  its  Octave.  Pope  Martin  the  Fifth, 
by  his  Constitution  Ineffahile  Sacramentuniy  which 
allows  this  Feast  and  Octave  to  be  celebrated,  with 
the  ringing  of  bells  and  solemnity,  even  in  places 
which  are  under  an  interdict,  confirmed  and  added  to 
the  Indulgences  granted,  by  Urban  the  Fourth,  in 
the  Bull  Transiturns.  Finally,  Pope  Eugenius  the 
Fourth,  mentioning  the  acts  of  those  two  Pontiffs,^ 
doubled  the  Indulgences  granted  by  them.  These  In- 
dulgences are  as  follows  :  two  hundred  days  are  granted 
for  fasting  on  the  eve,  or  for  any  good  work  substituted 
for  the  fast,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Confessor  :  on  the 

^  Ecclus.  XV.  5-10.  2  Const.  Excellentissimum, 


218 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


day  of  the  Feast,  four  hundred  days  for  assisting 
at  first  Vespers,  Matins,  Mass,  or  second  Vespers  : 
two  hundred  days  for  holy  Communion,  over  and 
above  those  granted  for  assisting  at  Mass  :  a  hundred 
and  sixty  days  for  each  of  the  Hours  of  Prime,  Tierce, 
Sext,  None,  and  Compline :  two  hundred  days  for  the 
Procession,  on  the  day  of  the  Feast  itself,  or  during 
the  Octave :  two  hundred  days,  likewise,  for  assisting 
at  Vespers,  Matins,  or  Mass,  during  the  Octave,  and 
eighty  days  for  each  of  the  other  Hours. 

After  the  Pater ,  Ave,  and  Credo,  have  been  said 
secretly,  the  Church  commences  her  Office  by  her 
usual  Matin  supplication  : 


T'  Domine,  labia  niea 
aperies. 

gt.  Et  OS  mourn  annun- 
tiabit  laudcni  tuam. 

y^.  Deus,  in  adjutorium 
meuin  intends. 

gt.  Domine,  ad  adjuvan- 
dum  me  festina. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Spiritui  Sancto. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et 
nunc  et  semper,  et  in  SiBcnla 
saeculonim.     Amen. 

Alleluia. 


S'  O  Lord  I  thou  wilt  open 
my  lips, 

gi.  And  my  mouth  shall  de- 
clare thy  praise. 

K.  Incline  unto  mine  aid,  O 
God! 

gt.  O  Lord !  make  haste  to 
help  me. 

y.  Glory  be  to  the  Father, 
and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the 
Holy  Ghost : 

R.  As  it  was  in  the  begin- 1 
ning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall] 
bo,  world  without  end.  Amen.j 
Alleluia. 


Then   follows,    with    its    glad   refrain,     ChristumX 
Regem,  the  Invitatory  Psalm,  whereby  the  Church  in- 
vites her  children,  every  night,  to  come  and  adore  the] 
Lord.     On  this  Feast,  she,  as  Bride,  addressing  hersel 
to  us  as  the  faithful  subjects  and  courtiers  of  the  Kin^ 
of  glory,  invites  us  to  pay  our  homage  to  Him,  whose] 
goodness  towards  us  is  all  the  more  telling,  because  of 
his  infinite  majesty. 


MATINS. 


219 


INVITATORI 


Let  us  adore  Christ,  the 
King,  who  ruleth  the  nations : 
Who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit 
to  them  that  eat  him. 


Christum  regem  adore- 
mus  dominantem  gentibus  : 
*  Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem. 


Psalm  94. 


Come,  let  us  praise  the  Lord 
with  joy  ;  let  us  joyfully  sing 
to  God  our  Saviour  ;  let  us 
come  before  his  presence  with 
thanksgiving,  and  make  a  joy- 
ful noise  to  him  Avith  psalms./.- 

Let  us  adore  Christ,  the 
King,  who  ruleth  the  nations : 
Who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to 
them  that  eat  him. 

For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God, 
and  a  great  King  above  all 
gods ;  he  will  not  reject  his 
people  ;  for  in  his  hand  are  all 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  the 
heights  of  the  mountains  are 
his. 

"SYho  giveth  fatness  of  spirit 
to  them  that  eat  him. 

For  the  sea  is  his,  and  he 
made  it,  and  his  hands  formed 
the  dry  land  :  come,  let  us 
adore,  and  fall  down,  and  weep 
before  the  Lord  that  made  us  ; 
for  he  is  the  Lord  our  God ; 
and  we  are  the  people,  and 
the  sheep  of  his  pasture. 


Let  us  adore  Christ,  the 
King,  who  ruleth  the  nations  : 
Who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to 
them  that  eat  him. 


Yenite,  exsultemus  Domi- 
no, jubilemus  Deo  Salutari 
nostro  :  praeoccupemus  fa- 
ciem  ejus  in  confessione,  et 
in  psalmis  jubilemus  ei. 

Christum  regem  adore- 
mus  dominantem  gentibus  : 
*  Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem. 

Quoniam  Deus  magnus 
Dominus,  et  Rex  magnus 
super  omnes  deos  :  quoniam 
non  repellet  Dominus  ple- 
bem  suam,  quia  in  manu 
ejus  sunt  omnes  fines  terrae, 
et  altitudines  montium  ipse 
conspicit.  '  ■'■    ''-'-'' 

Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem.  a 

Quoniam  ipsius  est  mare,,  ify^'**'^ 
et  ipse  fecit  illud,  et  aridam*^^;^ 
fundaverunf  manus  ejus  : 
venite,  adoremus,  et  proci- 
damus  ante  Deum  :  plore- 
mus  coram  Domino,  qui 
fecit  nos,  quia  ipse  est  Do- 
minus Deus  noster  :  nos 
autem  populus  ejus,  et  oves 
pascuae  ejus. 

Christum ,  regem  adore- 
mus dominantem  gentibus  : 
*  Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem. 


lL^' 


220 


CORPUS   CHRTSTI. 


Hodie  si  vocem  ejus  au- 
^ieritis,  nolite  obduraro 
^■^f^*"^  *(^  corda  vestra,  sicut  in  exa- 
cerbatione  secundum  diem 
tentationis  in  deserto  :  ubi 
tentaverunt  me  patrcs  ves- 
tri,  probaverunt,^e^  vide- 
nint  opera  mea. 

Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem. 

Quadraginta  annisiproxi- 
mus  fui  generationi  huic,'e^ 
dixi  :  Semper  hi  errant 
corde  :  ipsi  vero  non  cogno- 
verunt  vias  meas,  quibus "; 
juravi  in  ira  mea,  si  introi- 
bunt  in  requiem  meam.        y 

Christum  regem  adore- 
mus  dominantem  gentibus : 

*  Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Spiritvii  Sancto  :  Sicut  erat 
in  principio,  et  nunc,  et 
semper,  et  in  saecula  saecu- 
lorum.     Amen. 

Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem. 

Christum  regem  adore - 
mus  dominantem  gentibus : 

*  Qui  se  manducantibus  dat 
spiritus  pinguedinem. 


To-day,  if  ye  shall  hear  hi^ 
voice,  harden  not  your  heart--, 
as  in  the  provocation  accord- 
ing to  the  day  of  temptation 
in  the  wilderness  :  where  your 
fathers  tempted  me  ;  they 
proved  me,  and  saw  my 
works. 

Who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit 
to  them  that  eat  him. 

Forty  years  was  I  nigh  unto 
this  generation,  and  I  said  : 
These  always  err  in  heart  : 
and  these  men  have  not  knowi 
my  ways  :  so,  I'  swore  in  m} 
wrath,  that  they  shall  not 
enter  into  my  rest. 

Let  us  adore  Christ,  the 
King,  who  ruleth  the  nations  : 
TVTio  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to 
them  that  eat  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost  :  As  it  was  in  the  begin- 
ning, is  now,  and  ever  shall 
be,  world  without  end,  Amen. 

"Who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit 
to  them  that,  eat  him. 

Let  us  adore  Christ,  the 
King,  who  ruleth  the  nations  : 
Who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to 
them  that  eat  him. 


After  the  Invitatory,  in  which  we  have  commemo- 
rated the  transfer  of  Christ's_kingdom  to  the  Gentiles, 
the  Church  intones  the  triumphant  Hymn,  which,  in 
its  noble  verses,  recounts  the  Last  Supper,  and  cele- 
brates the  wonderful  favours  bestowed  upon  men,  that 
glorious  Night. 


MATINS. 


221 


HYMN. 


Let  our  joys  blend  with  this 
sacred  Solemnity  :  and  let 
our  praises  resound  from  our 
inmost  heart  ;  let  old  things 
give  way ;  let  all  be  new,  both 
hearts,  and  words,  and 
works  ! 

We  are  celebrating  that 
night's  Last  Supper,  when,  as 
faith  tells,  Christ  gtive  to  his 
brethren,  the  Lamb  and  un- 
leavened bread,  as  the  law, 
given  to  the  ancient  fathers, 
prescribed. 

After  giving  them  the  figu- 
rative Lamb,  and  when  the 
repast  was  over,  we  confess 
with  faith,  that  our  Lord,  with 
his  own  hands,  gave  his  Body 
to  his  disciples  :  and  so  gave 
It,  that  the  entire  was  given 
to  all,  and  the  entii'e  to  each. 

They  were  frail,  and  he  gave 
them  his  Body  as  food  :  they 
were  sad,  and  he  gave  them 
his  Blood,  for  their  diink ; 
saying  :  Take  the  Cup  I  de- 
liver unto  you !  Do  ye  all 
drink  thereof ! 

Thus  did  he  institute  this 
Sacrifice,  whose  ministry  he 
willed  should  be  intrusted  to 
Priests  alone  ;  who  were  so  to 
partake  of  it  themselves,  as  to 
give  it  to  others. 


The  Bread  of  Angels  becomes 
the  Bread  of  men  ;  the  Bread 
of  heaven  puts  an  end  to  the 
types  ;  O  wonderful  thing  ! 
he  that  is  poor,  and  servant, 
and  lowly,  eateth  the  Lord ! 


Sacris     solemniis    juncta 
sint  gaudia, 
Et  ex  preecordiissonent  prse- 

conia : 
Eecedant  vetera,  nova  sint 
omnia, 
Corda,  voces,  et  opera. 
Noctis  recolitur  coena  no-  - 

vissima,  '"^  "" '    "    ''  •  --^  -     '  t  y 
QuaChristuscredituragrmm.  ,  J^ 

et  azyma     ?'*'   f^>^-t^<l  UU^ 
Dedisse  fratribus,  juxta  le- 
gitima 
Priscis  indulta  patribus. 
Post  agnum  typicum,  ex- 
pletis  epulis. 
Corpus   Dominicum    datum 

discipulis, 
Sic    totum    omnibus,    quod 
totum  singulis. 
Ejus  fatemur  manibus. 

Dedit  fragilibus  Corporis, 
ferculum, 
Dedit  et  tristibus  Sanguinis 

poculum, 
Dicens  :  Accipite  quod  trado 
vasculum, 
Omnes  ex  eo  bibite. 
Sic  sacrificium  istud  ins- 
tituit, 
Cujus  officium  committi  vo- 

luit 
Sobs  Presbyteris,  quibus  sic 
congruit 
Ut  sumant,  et  dent  ce- 
teris. 
Panis  Angelicus  fit  panis 
hominum ; 
Dat   panis    coeHcus    figuris 

terminum ; 
0   res    mirabiLis    manducat 
Dominum 
Pauper,  servus,  et  hu- 
m  ill's. 


222 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Te,   Trina,  Deltas,    Una- 
que,  poscimus, 
Sic   nos   tu  visita,  sicut  te 

colimus  : 
Per  tuas   semitus   due  nos 
quo  tendimus, 
Ad  lucem  quam   inha- 
bitas. 
Amen. 


We  beseech  thee,  0  Triune 
Deity,  do  thou  so  visit  us,  as 
we  worship  thee  ;  lead  us  by 
thy  ways  to  the  term  we  aiiii 
at, — to  the  light,  wherein  thou 
dwellest. 


Amen. 


I 


These  preludes  made,  we  begin  the  solemn  Office 
of  the  night,  which  is  divided  into  three  Vigils  or 
I^octurns. 


THE    FIRST   NOCTURN. 

Christ  is  the  Just  Man  by  excellence  ;  he  is  the  tree^ 
which  brings  forth  its  fruit  in  due  season,  the  fruit, 
that  is,  of  salvation,  which  the  Lord  gave  us  to  taste 
at  the  time  of  his  death.  The  first  Psalm  offers  us 
this  beautiful  symbolism,  which  the  Fathers  have  so 
often  dwelt  upon  in  their  writings. 


A^'T.  Fructum  salutifo- 
rum  gustandum  dedit  Do- 
minus  mortis  suae  tempore. 


AxT.  The  Lord  gave  us  to 
tast«  of  the  fruit  of  salvation, 
at  the  time  of  his  death. 


Psalm  1. 


Beatus  vir,  qui  non  abiit 
in  consilio  impiorum,  et  in 
via  pcccatonim  non  stetit,* 
et  LQ  cathedra  pestilentiae 
non  scdit: 

Sed  in  lege  Domini  volun- 
tas ejus,  »  et  LQ  lege  ejus 
meditabitur  die  ac  nocte. 

Et  erit  tanquam  lignum, 
quod  plantatum  est  secus 
decursus  aquarum,  »  quod 
fructum  suum  dabit  in  tem- 
pore suo. 


Blessed  is  the  man  who  hath 
not  walked  in  the  coimsel  of 
the  ungodly,  nor  stood  in  the 
way  of  sinners,  nor  sat  in  the 
chair  of  pestilence. 

But  his  "W'ill  is  in  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  and  on  his  law  he 
shall  meditate  day  and  night. 

And  he  shall  be  like  a  tree, 
which  is  planted  near  the  run- 
ning waters,  which  shall  bring 
forth  its  fruit  in  due  season. 


MATINS. 


223 


And  his  leaf  shall  not  fall 
off  :  and  all  whatsoever  ho 
shall  do  shall  prosper. 

Not  so  the  wicked,  not  so  : 
but  like  the  dust,  which  the 
wind  driveth  from  the  face  of 
the  earth. 

Therefore  the  wicked  shall 
not  rise  again  in  judgment  : 
nor  sinners  in  the  council  of 
the  just. 

For  the  Lord  knoweth  the 
way  of  the  just  :  and  the  way 
of  the  wicked  shall  perish. 

Ant.  The  Lord  gave  us  to 
taste  of  the  fruit  of  salvation, 
at  the  time  of  his  death. 


Et  folium  ej  us  non  defluet : 
*  et  omnia  quaecumque  fa- 
ciet  prosperabuntur. 

Non  sic  impii,  non  sic  :  * 
sed  tanquam  pulvis,  quern 
projicit  ventus  a  facie  ter- 
ras. 

Ideo  non  resurgent  impii 
in  judicio  :*  neque  pecca- 
tores  in  copcilio  justorum. 

Quoniam  novit  Dominus 
viam  justorum  :  *  et  iter 
impiorum  peribit. 

Ant.  Fructum  salutife- 
rum  gustandum  dedit  Domi- 
nus mortis  suae  tempore. 


The  second  Psalm  of  this  ]N[octurn  tells  us  of  the 
peace  and  abundance  enjoyed  by  the  man  who  puts 
his  confidence  in  the  God  of  justice.  Corn,  loine,  and 
oil  are  the  riches  of  God's  house  :  it  is  mainly  by 
these  three  elements,  that  the  Church  confers  a  daily 
increase  of  holiness  in  them  that  have  become  her 
children  by  the  water  of  baptism.  What,  indeed,  has 
she,  to  be  compared  with  the  heautifid  Corn  of  the 
elect  J  and  Wine  that  produceth  virgins  9  ^ 

Ant.  The   Faithful,   multi-         Ant.  A  f ructu  f rumenti  et 

plied  by  the  fruit  of  Com  and  vini  multiplicati  fideles,  in 

Wine,   rest  in    the    peace   of  pace  Christi  requiescunt. 
Christ. 

Psalm  4. 


"When  I  called  upon  him,  the 
God  of  my  justice  heard  me  : 
when  I  was  in  distress,  thou 
hast  enlarged  me. 

Have  mercy  on  me  :  and 
hear  my  prayer. 


Cum  invocarem  exaudivit 
me  Deus  justitiae  meae  :  *  in 
tribulatione  dilatasti  mihi. 

Miserere  mei  :  *  et  exaudi 
orationem  meam. 


1  Zach.  ix.  17. 


■ 


224 


CORPUS   CHRISTI 


Filii  hominum,  usquequo 
gra\T.  corde  ?  *  ut  quid  dlli- 
gitis  vanitatem,  et  quaeritis 
mendacium  ? 

Et  scitote  quoniam  mirifi- 
cavit  Doininus  sanctum  su- 
um  :  *  Dominus  exaudiet 
me,  cum  clamavero  ad  eum. 

IrascimLUii,  et  nolite  pec- 
care  :  *  quae  dicitis  in  cordi- 
bus  vestris,  in  cubilibus  ves- 
tris  compungimini. 

Sacrificate  sacrificium  jus- 
titiae,  et  sperate  in  Domino  : 

*  multi  dicunt  :  Quis  osten- 
dit  nobis  bona  ? 

Signatum  est  super  nos 
lumen  vultus  tui,  Domine  : 

*  dedisti  laetitiam  in  corde 
meo. 

A   fructu 
et  olei  sui 
sunt. 

In  pace  in  idipsum :  »  dor- 
miam  et  requiescam. 

Quoniam  tu,  Domine,  sin- 
gulariter  in  spe  :  *  consti- 
tuisti  me. 

AxT.  A  fructu  f rumenti  et 
villi  multijilicati  fideles  in 
pace  Christi  requiescunt. 


f  rumenti,    vini 
*  multiplicati 


O  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long 
will  ye  be  dull  of  heart  ?  why 
do  ye  love  vanity,  and  seek 
after  lying  ? 

Know  ye  also  that  the  Lord 
hath  made  his  holy  one  won- 
derful :  the  Lord  will  hear  me, 
when  I  shall  cry  unto  him. 

Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not  : 
the  things  ye  say  in  your 
hearts,  be  sorry  for  them  on 
your  beds. 

Offer  up  the  sacrifice  of  jus- 
tice, and  trust  in  the  Lord : 
many  say,  "\Mio  showeth  us 
good  things  ? 

The  light  of  thy  counte- 
nance, O  Lord,  is  signed  upon 
us :  thou  hast  given  gladness 
in  my  heart. 

By  the  fruit  of  their  com, 
their  wine,  and  oil,  they  are 
multiplied. 

In  peace,  in  the  self-same, 
I  will  sleep  and  I  will  rest. 

For  thou,  O  Lord,  singularly 
hast  settled  me  in  hope. 

AxT.  The  Faithful,  multi- 
plied by  the  fruit  of  Com  and 
Wine,  rest  in  the  peace  of 
Christ. 


"We  liave  already  seen  how  the  holy  Eucharist  was 
the  bond  of  union  between  the  Faithful,  and  the 
■centre  of  Catholic  communion.  "What  the  Sacrifice 
of  the  New  Testament  is  for  us  Christians,  from  a 
social  point  of  view,  that  same  were  the  mosaic  sacri- 
fices, heretofore,  for  the  Jews,  although  in  a  manner 
wholly  external  and  figurative.  The  following  Anti- 
phon  tells  us  the  reason  of  the  Church's  selecting  the 
Psalm  she  has  done  for  the  third  one  of  this  Nocturn  : 
it  was,  that  she  might  remind  us  of  her  own  supe- 
riority, in  this  respect,  over  the  rejected  Synagogue. 


MATINS. 


225 


The  Lord  himself  is  the  glorious  portion  of  her  in- 
heritance ^  and  the  cup  of  her  joy. 


Ant.  TheLord  hath  brought 
us  together,  by  the  communioii 
of  the  cup,  wherein  God  him- 
self is  received;  not  by  the 
blood  of  calves. 


Ant.  Communione  calicis 
quo  Deus  ipse  sumitur,  non 
vitulorum.  sanguine,  con- 
gregavit  nos  Dominus. 


PsALM  15, 


Preserve  me,  O  Lord,  for  I 
have  put  my  trust  in  thee  :  I 
have  said  to  the  Lord,  thou 
art  my  God,  for  thou  hast  no 
need  of  my  goods. 

To  the  Saints,  who  are  in 
his  land,  he  hath  made  won- 
derful all  my  desires  in  them. 

Their  infirmities  were  mul- 
tiplied :  afterwards  they  made 
haste. 

I  will  not  gather  together 
their  meetings  for  blood-offer- 
ings :  nor  will  I  be  mindful  of 
their  names  by  my  lips. 

The  Lord  is  the  portion  of 
mine  inheritance  and  of  my 
cup :  it  is  thou  that  wilt  restore 
mine  inheritance  to  me. 

The  lines  have  fallen  unto 
me  in  goodly  places  :  for  mine 
inheritance  is  goodly  unto  me. 

I  will  bless  the  Lord,  who 
hath  given  me  understanding  : 
moreover,  my  reins  also  have 
corrected  me  even  till  night. 

I  set  the  Lord  always  in  my 
sight :  for  he  is  at  my  right 
hand,  that  I  be  not  moved. 

Therefore  my  heart  hath 
been    glad,    and    my   tongue 

VOL.  X. 


Conserva  me,  Domine, 
quoniam  speravi  in  te  :  * 
dixi  Domino,  Deus  meus  es 
tu,  quoniam  bonorum  meo- 
rum  non  eges. 

Sanctis,  qui  sunt  in  terra 
ejus  :  *  mirificavit  omnes 
voluntates  meas  in  eis. 

Multiplicatse  sunt  infirmi- 
tates  eorum  :  *  postea  acce- 
leraverunt. 

Non  congregabo  conven- 
ticula  eorum  de  sanguinibus : 
*  nee  memor  ero  nominuni 
eorum  per  labia  mea. 

Dominus  pars  hsereditatis 
mese,  et  calicis  mei  :  *  tu  es 
qui  restitues  hsereditateni 
meam  mihi. 

Funes  ceciderunt  mihi  in 
prseclaris  :  *  etenim  hsere- 
ditas  mea  prasclara  est 
mihi. 

Benedicam  Dominum,  qui 
tribuit  mihi  intellectum  :  * 
insuper  et  usque  ad  noctem 
increpuerunt  me  renes  mei. 

Providebam  Dominum  in 
conspectu  meo  semper  :  * 
quoniam  a  dextris  est  mihi, 
ne  commovear. 

Propter  hoc  laetatum  est 
cor  meum,  et  exsultavit  lin- 

Q 


226 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


gua  mea  :  *  insuper  et  caro 
mea  rcqiiiescct  in  spe. 

Quoniam  non  derelinques 
animam  nieam  in  inferno  :  * 
nee  dabis  Sanctum  tuum 
videre  corruptionem. 

Notas  mihi  fecisti  vias  vi- 
tae,  adimplebis  me  laetitia 
cum  vulto  tuo  :  *  delectatio- 
nes  in  dextera  tua  usque  in 
finem. 

AxT.  Communione  calicis 
quo  Deus  ipse  suniitur,  non 
vitulorum  sanguine,  congre- 
gavit  nos  Dominus. 

T.  Panem  coeli  dedit  'eis, 
alleluia. 

gt.  Panem  angelorum 
manducavit  homo,  alleluia. 


hath  rejoiced :  moreover,  my 
flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope. 

Because  thou  wilt  not  leave 
my  soul  in  hell :  nor  wilt  thou 
give  thy  Holy  One  to  see  cor- 
ruption. 

Thou  hast  made  known  to 
me  the  ways  of  life,  thou  shalt 
fill  me  with  joy  with  thy 
countenance  :  at  thy  right 
hand,  are  delights  even  to  the 
end. 

A2sT.  The  Lord  hath  brought 
us  together,  by  the  communion 
of  the  cup,  wherein  God  him- 
self is  received ;  not  by  the 
blood  of  calves. 

y.  He  hath  given  them  the 
Bread  of  heaven,  alleluia. 

Bt.  Man  hath  eaten  the 
Bread  of  Angels,  alleluia. 


The  Priest  begins  the  first  two  words  of  the  Lord's 
Prayer : 


Pater  noster. 


Our  Father. 


The  rest  is  said  in  silence,  as  far  as  the  last  two 
petitions ;  the  Priest  then  says  aloud  : 

>".  Et  ne  nos  inducas    in        >".  And    lead    us   not    into 
tentationem.  t€mptation. 

The  Choir  answers  : 
gt.  S3d  libera  nos  a  malo.         B^.  But  deHvcr  us  from  evil. 


Then  the  Priest  : 

Exauli,      Domlnc      Jesu        Graciously    hear,    O    Lord 
Christe,     preces     scrvonun    Jesus  Christ,  the   prayers   of 


MATINS.  227 

thy  servants,  and  have  mercy  tuorum,    et  miserere  nobis, 

upon  us  :  who,  with  the  Father  qui   cum   Patre    et    Spiritu 

and   the    Holy   Ghost,   livest  Sancto   vivis   et   regnas   in 

and  reignest  for  ever  and  ever,  saecula  sseculorum. 

The  Choir  answers  :  A  men. 

Then  one  of  the  Choir  rising,  turns  towards  the 
Priest,  and  bowing  down,  says  : 

Pray,  Father,  give  thy  bles-        Jube,     Domne,      benedi- 
sing.  cere. 

Then  the  Priest  : 

May    the     Eternal    Father  Benedictione  perpetua  be- 

bless  us  with   an   everlasting  nedicat  nos  Pater  cetemus. 
blessing. 

gt.  Amen.  ?£.  Amen. 


The  first  ISTocturn  Lessons  are  taken  from  one  of 
St.  PauFs  Epistles.  After  chiding  the  Faithful  of 
Corinth  for  their  having  allowed  abuses  to  creep  into 
their  religious  meetings,  the  Apostle  recounts  the 
institution  of  the  blessed  Eucharist :  he  tells  them 
the  dispositions  they  should  bring  with  them  to  the 
holy  Table,  and  speaks  of  the  grievous  crime  com- 
mitted by  him  who  approaches  unworthily. 

Our  readers  will  observe  how  admirably  the  Pe- 
sponsories  are  composed  of  passages  from  both  Old 
and  New  Testament  Books ;  they  are  thus  brought 
side  by  side,  the  more  clearly  to  show  the  harmony 
between  the  Law,  the  Prophets,  and  the  Gospel,  on 
the  mystery  of  the  Eucharist.  The  Office  of  the 
Blessed  Sacrament  is  thus  enriched  with  the  chief 
prophecies  and  figures  which  had  foretold  the  adorable 
Presence,  and  had  kept  the  just  men  of  the  former 
Covenant  in  expectation  of  the  promise,  which  is  now 
our  Peality. 


228 


CORPUS   CHRIMI. 


First  Lesson. 


De  Epistola  prima  B. 
Pauli  Apostoliad  Corinthios. 

Cap.  XL 

Convenientibus  vobis  in 
tumm,  jam  non  est  Domi- 
nicam  coenam.  manducare. 
TTnusquiusque  enim  suam 
coenam  praesnmit  ad  man- 
ducandum.  Et  alius  quidem 
esurit,  alius  autem  ebrius 
est.  Numquid  domos  non 
habetis  ad  manducandum 
et  bibendum  ?  aut  Eccle- 
siam  Dei  contemnitis,  et 
confunditis  eos,  qui  non 
habent  ?  Quid  dicam  vobis  'f 
Laudo  vos  ?  In  hoc  non 
laudo. 

5t.  Immolabit  hoedum 
multitude  filiorum  Israel  ad 
vesperam  Paschae.  *  Et 
edent  cames,  et  azymos 
panes. 

>".  Pascba  nostrum  im- 
molatus  est  Christus  :  ita- 
que  epulemur  in  azj-mis 
sinceritatis  et  veritatis.  * 
Et  edent. 

Benedictio.  Unigenitus 
Dei  Filius  nos  benedicere  et 
adjuvare  dignetur. 

gt.  Amen. 


From  the  first  Epistle  of 
Saint  Paul  the  Apostle  to  the 
Corinthians. 

Ch.  XI. 

TMien  ye  come  together  into 
one  place,  it  is  not  now  to  eat 
the  Lord's  Supper,  [your  meet- 
ings are  not  worthy  of  the 
mystery  ye  celebrate.)  For 
everyone  taketh  before  his  own 
supper  to  eat.  And  one,  in- 
deed, is  hungry,  and  another 
is  drunk.  What  I  have  ye  not 
houses  to  eat  and  to  drink  in? 
or  despise  ye  the  Church  of 
God,  and  put  them  to  shame 
that  have  not  ?  What  shall  I 
say  unto  you  ?  Do  I  praise 
you  ?  In  this  I  praise  you  not. 

Vk.  The  multitude  of  the 
children  of  Israel  shall  sacrifice 
a  kid,  at  the  evening  of  the 
Pasch.  *  And  they  shall  eat 
fiesh,  and  unleavened  cakes. 

y.  Christ  our  Pasch  is  sacri- 
ficed :  therefore  let  us  feast 
with  the  unleavened  bread  of 
sincerity  and  truth.  *  And 
they  shall  eat. 

Blessing.  May  the  Only  Be- 
gotten Son  of  God  vouchsafe 
to  bless  and  help  us. 

gt.  Amen. 


Second  Lesson. 


Ego  enim  accepi  a  Do- 
mino, quod  et  tradidi  vobis, 
quoniam  Dominus  Jesus  in 
qua  nocte  tradebatur,  acce- 
pit  panem,  et  gratias  agens 


For  I  have  received  of  the 
Lord,  that  which  also  I  de- 
livered unto  you,  that  the  Lord 
Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which 
he  was  betrayed,  took  bread, 


MATINS. 


229 


and  giving  thanks,  broke,  and 
said  :  Take  ye  and  eat :  this  is 
my  Body,  which  shall  be  de- 
livered for  you  :  this  do  for  the 
commemoration  of  me.  In 
like  manner,  also,  the  chalice, 
after  he  had  supped,  saying : 
This  chalice  is  the  new  testa- 
ment in  my  blood  :  this  do  ye, 
as  often  as  ye  shall  drink,  for 
the  commemoration  of  me. 
For,  as  often  as  ye  shall  eat 
this  bread,  and  drink  the 
chalice,  ye  shall  show  the 
death  of  the  Lord,  until  he 
come. 

gt.  Ye  shall  eat  flesh,  and 
shall  have  your  fill  of  bread  :  * 
This  is  the  Bread,  which  the 
Lord  hath  giveii  you,  that  ye 
might  eat  it. 

y.  Moses  gave  you  not 
bread  from  heaven ;  but  my 
Father  giveth  you  the  true 
Bread  from  heaven.*    This  is. 

Blessing.  May  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  enlighten 
our  senses  and  our  hearts. 

^.  Amen. 


fregit,  et  dixit  :  Accipite  et 
manducate  :  hoc  est  corpus 
meum,  quod  pro  vobis  tra- 
detur  :  hoc  facite  in  meam 
commemorationem.  Simili- 
ter et  calicem,  postquam 
coenavit,  dicens  :  Hie  calix 
novum  testamentum  est  in 
meo  sanguine.  Hoc  facite, 
quotiescumque  bibetis,  in 
meam  commemorationem. 
Quotiescumque  enim  man- 
ducabitis  panem  hunc,  et 
calicem  bibetis,  mortem 
Domini  annuntiabitis  donee 
veniat. 

gt.  Comedetis  carnes,  et 
saturabimini  panibus  :  * 
Iste  est  panis,  quem  dedit 
vobis  Dominus  ad  vescen- 
dum. 

f.  Non  Moyses  dedit  vo- 
bis panem  de  coelo,  sed  Pa- 
ter mens  dat  vobis  panem 
de  ccelo  verum.  *  Iste  est 
panis. 

Benedictio.  Spiritus 
Sancti  gratia  illuminet  sen- 
sus  et  corda  nostra. 

gt.  Amen. 


Third  Lesson. 


Therefore,  whosoever  shall 
eat  this  bread,  or  drink  the 
chalice  of  the  Lord,  unwor- 
thily, shall  be  guilty  of  the 
body  and  blood  of  the  Lord. 
But  let  a  man  prove  himself : 
and  so  let  him  eat  of  that 
bread,  and  drink  of  the  chalice. 
For  he  that  eateth  and  drink- 
eth  unworthily,  eateth  and 
drinketh  judgment  to  himself, 
not  discerning  the  body  of 
the  Lord.     Therefore  are  there 


Itaque  quicumque  man- 
ducaverit  panem  hunc,  vel 
biberit  calicem  Domini  in- 
digne,  reus  erit  corporis  et 
sanguinis  Domini.  Probet 
autem  seipsum  homo  :  et 
sic  de  pane  illo  edal,  et 
de  calice  bibat.  Qui  enim 
manducat  et  bibit  indigne, 
judicium  sibi  manducat  et 
bibit,  non  dijudicans  cor- 
pus Domini.  Ideo  inter  vos 
multi  infirmi  et  imbecilles, 


230 


CORPUS   CHKIS1 1. 


et  donniimt  multi.  Quod 
si  nosmetipsos  judicare- 
mus,  non  utique  judicare- 
mur.  Duin  judicamur  au- 
tem,  a  Domino  corripimur, 
ut  non  cum  hoc  mundo 
damnemur. 

5t.  Eespexit  Elias  ad  ca- 
put suum  subcinericiuni 
panem,  qui  surgens  comedit 
et  bibit  :  *  Et  ambulavit  in 
fortitudine  cibi  illius  usque 
ad  niontem  Dei. 

^.  Si  quis  manducaTerit 
ex  hoc  pane,  vivet  in  aeter- 
num.  *  Et  ambulavit.  Glo- 
ria. *  Et  ambulavit. 


many  infirm  and  weak  among 
you,  and  many  sleep.  But  if 
we  would  judge  ourselves,  we 
should  not  be  judged.  But 
whilst  we  are  judged,  we  are 
chastised  by  the  Lord,  that  we 
be  not  condemned  with  this 
world. 

Bt.  Elias  beheld  at  his  head 
a  hearth-cake ;  who,  rising, 
eat,  and  drank  :  *  And  he 
walked,  in  the  strength  of 
that  food,  unto  the  mount  of 
God. 

^.  If  any  man  shall  eat  of 
this  Bread,  he  shall  live  for 
ever.  *  And  he  walked. 
Glory.     *  And  he  walked. 


THE    SECOND   NOCTURN. 

The  fourth  Psalm  of  our  ^latins  speaks  of  the  all- 
powerful  efficacy  of  the  Christian  Sacrifice.  The 
Lord's  protection  and  help  in  the  battles  of  this  life ; 
joy^  exaltation,  abundance  ; — all  are  assured  to  the 
man  ^Yho  will  but  have  recourse  to  it.  For  the 
Victim  is  Christ,  with  which  no  other  can  compare 
for  perfection ;  it  is  a  whole-burnt  offering,  whose 
sweet  odour  ascends,  from  our  earthly  altar,  to 
heaven's  sanctuary,  and  thence  brings  down  the  sal- 
vation of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High.  It  is  to 
Christ  himself,  that  the  Psalmist  here  makes  his 
prayer  for  victory. 

Ant.  Memor  sit  Dominus  Ant.  May     the    Lord    be 

sacrificii    nostri,    et     holo-  mindful  of  our  sacrifice,  and 

caustum     nostrum     pingue  our  whole  burnt-offering  bo 

fiat.  made  fat. 


MATINS. 


231 


Psalm  19. 


I 


May  the  Lord  hear  thee  in 
the  day  of  tribulation  :  may 
the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob 
protect  thee. 

May  he  send  thee  help  from 
the  sanctuary  :  and  defend 
thee  out  of  Sion. 

May  he  be  mindful  of  all 
thy  sacrifices  :  and  may  thy 
"whole  burnt-offering  be  made 
fat. 

May  he  give  thee  according 
to  thine  own  heart  :  and  con- 
firm all  thy  coimsels. 

We  will  rejoice  in  thy  sal- 
vation :  and  in  the  name  of 
our  God  we  shall  be  exalted. 

May  the  Lord  fulfil  all  thy 
petitions  :  now  have  I  known, 
that  the  Lord  hath  saved  his 
anointed. 

He  will  hear  him  from  his 
holy  heaven  :  the  salvation  of 
his  right  hand  is  in  powers. 

Some  trust  in  chariots,  and 
some  in  horses  :  but  we  will 
call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord  oiir  God. 

They  are  bound,  and  have 
fallen  :  but  we  are  risen,  and 
are  set  upright. 

O  Lord  !  save  the  king  :  and 
hear  us  in  the  day  that  we 
shall  call  upon  thee. 

Ant.  May  the  Lord  be  mind- 
ful of  our  sacrifice  and  our 
whole  biimt-offering  be  made 
fat. 


Exaudiat  te  Dominus  in 
die  tribulationis  :  *  prote- 
gat  te  nomen  Dei  Jacob. 

Mittat  tibi  auxilium  de 
sancto  :  *  et  de  Sion  tuea- 
tur  te. 

Memor  sit  omnis  sacrifi- 
cii  tui  :  *  et  holocaustum 
tuum  pingue  fiat. 

Tribuat  tibi  secundum 
cor  tuum  :  *  et  omne  con- 
silium tuum  confirmet. 

Laetabimur  in  salutari 
tuo  :  *  et  in  nomine  Dei 
nostri  magnificabiuiur. 

Impleat  Dominus  omnes 
petitionis  tuas  :  *  nunc 
cognovi  quoniam  salvum 
fecit  Dominus  Christum 
suum. 

Exaudiet  ilium  de  coelo 
sancto  suo  :  *  in  potentati- 
bus  salus  dexterse  ejus. 

Hi  in  curribus,  et  hi  in 
equis  :  *  nos  autem  in  nomi- 
ne Domini  Dei  nostri  invo- 
cabimus. 

Ipsi  obligati  sunt,  et  ce- 
ciderunt  :  *  nos  autem  sur- 
reximus  et  erecti  sumus. 

Domine,  salvum  fac  re- 
gem,  *  et  exaudi  nos  in  die 
qua  invocaverimus  te. 

AxT.  Memor  sit  Dominus 
sacrificii  nostri,  et  holocaus- 
tum nostrum  pingue  fiat. 


The  soul  that  follows  her  Lord  wants  for  nothing. 


232 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


Happy  sheep  !  its  Shepherd's  crook  leads  it  to  such 
rich  pastures  !  to  such  refreshing  water  springs  !  Let 
us  join  the  saintly  servant  of  God,  and  sing  the 
praises  of  the  Chalice  ivhich  inehriateth^  and  of  the 
Table  prepared  for  him  against  all  enemies ;  when 
lie  leaves  that  Table,  he  goes  forth  like  a  lion  breath- 
ing fire;  he  has  been  made  an  object  of  terror  to  the 
devil.^ 

AxT.  Paratur  nobis  men-  AxT.  The  Lord's  Table  is 
sa  Domini  adversus  omnes  prepared  before  us,  against  all 
qui  tribulant  nos.  them  that  afflict  us. 


Psalm  22. 


Dominus  regit  me,  et  ni- 
hil mihi  deerit  :  *  in  loco 
pascuae  ibi  me  collocavit. 

Super  aquam  refectionis 
cducavit  me  :  *  animam 
meam  convertit. 

Dedux.it  me  super  semitas 
justitiae,  ♦  propter  nomen 
suum. 

Nam  etsi  ambulavero  in 
medio  umbrae  mortis,  non 
timebo  mala  :  *  quoniam  tu 
mecum  es. 

Virga  tua,  et  baculus 
tuus  :  *  ipsa  me  consolata 
sunt. 

Parasti  in  conspectu  moo 
mensam,  *  adversus  eos 
qui  tribulant  me. 

Impinguasti  in  oleo  ca- 
put meum  :  *  et  calix  mens 
inebrians  quam  praeclarus 
est! 

Et  misericordia  tua  sub- 
sequetur  me  *  omnibus  die- 
bus  vitae  mesB. 


The  Lord  ruleth  me,  and  I 
shall  want  nothing  :  he  hath 
set  mo  in  a  place  of  pasture. 

He  hath  brought  me  up  on 
the  water  of  refreshment  :  he 
hath  converted  my  soul. 

Ho  hath  led  mo  on  the  paths 
of  justice,  for  his  own  name's 
sake. 

For  though  I  should  walk 
in  the  midst  of  the  shadow  of 
death,  I  will  fear  no  evils  :  for 
thou  art  with  me. 

Thy  rod  and  thy  staflP,  they 
have  comforted  me. 

Thou  hast  prepared  a  table 
before  mo,  against  thom  that 
afflict  me. 

Thou  hast  anointed  my  head 
with  oil  :  and  my  chalice, 
which  inebriate th  me,  how 
goodly  is  it ! 

And  thy  mercy  will  follow 
me,  all  the  days  of  my  life. 


'  St.  John  Chrj'^sos.     In  Joan, 


M\TTNS. 


233 


And  that  I  may  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  unto  length 
of  days. 

Ant.  The  Lord's  Table  is 
l^repared  before  us,  against  all 
them  that  afflict  us. 


Et  ut  inhabitem  in  domo 
Domini,  *  in  longitudinem 
dierum. 

Ant.  Paratur  nobis  men- 
sa  Domini  adversus  omnes 
qui  tribulant  nos. 


The  sixth  Psalm  of  these  Matins  was  inspired  into 
David's  soul,  when  he  was  obliged  to  keep  far  off 
from  the  tabernacle  and  the  holy  ark,  because  of 
Saul's  angry  persecution,  which  necessitated  his  hiding 
in  the  mountains  near  the  Jordan.  It  is  the  beautiful 
canticle  already  cited  by  us,  as  so  strongly  expressing 
man's  thirst,  even  in  this  mortal  life,  after  his  God. 
The  mere  recollection  of  the  feasting,  which  awaits 
him  in  the  iconderful  tabernacle  in  the  House  of  God, 
comforts  him  amidst  his  troubles,  and  rouses  his  hope. 
Let  us  get  the  spirit  of  this  celestial  poetry  into  us  ; 
it  will  kindle  within  us  the  flame  of  love. 


Ant.  Let  them  that  feast 
at  the  Table  of  the  Lord,  make 
the  voice  of  joy  resound. 


Ant.  Invoceexsultationis 
resonent  epulantes  in  men- 
sa  Domini. 


Psalm  41. 


As  the  hart  panteth  after 
the  fountains  of  water  :  so  my 
soul  panteth  after  thee,  O  God. 

My  soul  hath  thirsted  after 
the  strong  living  God  :  when 
shall  I  come  and  appear  before 
the  face  of  God  ? 

My  tears  have  been  my 
bread,  day  and  night  :  whilst 
it  is  said  to  me  daily :  Where 
is  thy  God  ? 

These  things  I  remembered, 
and  poured  out  my  soul  in 
me  :  for  I  shall  go  over  into 
the  place  of  the  wonderful 
tabernacle,  even  to  the  house 
of  God : 


Quemadmodum  desiderat 
cervus  ad  fontes  aquarum  : 

*  ita  desiderat  anima  niea 
ad  te,  Deus. 

Sitivit  anima  mea  ad 
Deum  fortem  vivum  :  * 
quando  veniam  et  apparebo 
ante  faciem  Dei  ? 

Fuerunt  mihi  lacrymae 
mese  panes  die  ac  nocte  :  * 
dum  dicitur  mihi  quotidie  : 
Ubi  est  Deus  tuus  P 

Haec  recordatus  sum,  et 
elfudi  in  me  animam  meam : 

*  quoniam  transibo  in  lo- 
cum tabemaculi  admirabi- 
lis,  usque  ad  domum  Dei  : 


23  i 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


n  voce  exsultationis,  et 
confessionis  :  *  sonus  cpu- 
lantis. 

Quare  tristis  es,  anima 
mea  :  •  et  quare  contui-bas 
me? 

Spera  in  Deo,  quoniam 
adhuc  confitebor  illi  :  *  sa- 
lutare  vultus  niei,  et  Deus 
meus. 

Ad  nicipsum  aniina  mea 
conturbata  est  :  *  propterea 
memor  ero  tui  de  terra 
Jordanis,  et  Hermomim  a 
monte  luodico. 

Abyssus  abyssum  invo- 
cat,  *  in  voce  cataractarmn 
tuanini. 

Omnia  excelsa  tua,  et 
fluctus  tui  *  super  me  tran- 
sierunt. 

In  die  mandavit  Dominus 
misericordiam  suam,  *  et 
nocte  canticum  ejus. 

Apud  me  oratio  Deo  vitae 
meae,  *  dicam  Deo  :  Sus- 
ceptor  meus  es. 

Quare  oblitus  es  mei  ?  * 
et  quare  contristatus  ince- 
do,  dum  affligit  me  inimicus  ? 

Dum  confiinguntur  ossa 
mea;  *  exprobraverunt  mihi 
qui  tribulant  me  inimici 
mei. 

Dum  dicunt  mihi  per  sin- 
gulos  dies  :  Ubi  est  Deus 
tuus  ?  *  Quare  tristis  es, 
anima  mea?  et  quare  con- 
turbas  me  ? 

Spera  in  Deo,  quoniam 
adhuc  confitebor  illi  :  *  sa- 
lutarc  vultus  mei,  et  Deus 
meus. 

Ant.  In  voce  exsultationis 
resonent  cpulantes  in  men- 
sa  Domini. 


"With  the  voice  of  joy,  and 
praise  :  the  noise  of  one  feast- 
ing. 

"WTiy  art  thou  sad,  O  my 
soul  ?  and  why  dost  thou 
trouble  me  ? 

Hope  in  God,  for  I  will  still 
give  praise  to  him  :  the  salva- 
tion of  my  countenance,  and 
my  God. 

My  soul  is  troubled  within 
myself  :  therefore  will  I  re- 
member thee  from  the  land  of 
Jordan,  and  Hermoniim  from 
the  little  hill. 

Deep  calleth  on  deep,  at  the 
noise  of  thy  flood-gates. 

All  thy  heights  and  thy  bil- 
lows have  passed  over  me. 

In  the  daytime,  the  Lord 
hath  commanded  his  mercy  : 
and  a  canticle  to  him,  in  the 
night. 

With  me  is  prayer  to  the 
God  of  my  life,  I  will  say  to 
God  :  Thou  art  my  support. 

"Why  hast  thou  forgotten  me  ? 
and  who  go  I  mourning,  whilst 
mine  enemy  afilicteth  me  ? 

Whilst  my  bones  are  broken, 
mine  enemies,  who  trouble  mo, 
have  reproached  me. 

"Whilst  they  say  unto  mo, 
day  by  day  :  "Wliere  is  thy 
God  ?  "Why  art  thou  cast 
downi,  O  my  soul  ?  and  why 
dost  thou  disquiet  me  ? 

Hope  thou  in  God,  for  I  will 
still  give  praise  unto  him  :  the 
salvation  of  my  countenance, 
and  my  God. 

Ant.  Let  them  that  feast  at 
the  Table  of  the  Lord,  make 
the  voice  of  joy  resound. 


MATINS.  235 

y.  He  hath  fed  them  with  y.  Cibavit    eos    ex  adipe 

the  fat  of  wheat,  alleluia.  frumenti,  alleluia. 

Bt.  And    filled    them    with  gt.  Et  de  petra,  melle  sa- 

honey  out  of  the  rock,  alleluia,  turavit  eos,  alleluia. 

Our  Father.  Pater  noster. 

After  the  Pater  noster,  which  is  said  as  prescribed 
above,  in  the  first  ]^octurn,  the  Priest  says  : 

May  his  goodness  and  mercy         Ipsius  pietas  et  misericor- 

help  us,  who,  with  the  Father  dia   nos    adjuvet,    qui   cum 

and   the    Holy   Ghost,    liveth  Patre  et  Spiritu  Sancto  vivit 

and  reigneth  for  ever  and  ever,  et  regnat  in  ssecula  sseculo- 

§t.  Amen.  rum.     gt.  Amen. 

The  Angelic  Doctor  is  made  to  provide  us  with  the 
second  Nocturn  Lessons :  his  own  words  are  going  to 
be  read  to  us,  words  which  will  aid  our  faith  to  enter 
into  the  science  of  the  divine  Sacrament,  *'  as  far  as  it 
"  can  be  understood  by  man  whilst  on  the  way,  and 
"  humanly  be  defined.^'  These  were  the  words  of 
our  Lord,  when  approving  the  doctrine  of  Thomas,  on 
the  Sacrame7it  of  the  Body}  Three  cities,  Paris, 
Naples,  and  Orvieto, — had  the  honour  of  being,  each 
in  its  turn,  the  scene  of  these  manifestations  of  Christ 
to  his  faithful  servant,  the  Angelic  Doctor.  There  is 
still  venerated  in  the  Church  of  St.  Dominic,  at 
Orvieto,  the  Crucifix,  by  which  our  Lord  spoke,  when 
giving  his  divine  approval  to  the  Ofiice  we  are 
actually  celebrating.  Let  us,  then,  listen,  with 
veneration,  to  the  following  passage,  which  the 
Church  has  selected  from  one  of  the  Saint's  Treatises. 
As  to  its  scholastic  phraseology,  let  us  remember, 
that,  although,  in  itself,  it  is  not  learning,  yet  it  was 
the  war- dress  wherewith  our  forefathers  of  the  13th 
Century  deemed  it  necessary  to  accoutre  Theology, 
when  she  had  to  come  to  close  argument  with  dry 
logicians. 

^  Act  SS.  ad  diem  7  Martii ;  cap.  ix.  53. 


236 


CORPUS   CHRTSTl. 


Bexedictio.  Dcus   Pat«r  Blessixg.  May    God     the 

omnipotens  sit  nobis  propi-  Father  Almighty  be  propitious 

tius  et  clemens.  and  merciful  unto  us. 

R.  Amen.  Bt.  Amen. 


Fourth  Lesson. 


Sermo    Sancti    Thomae 
Aquinatis. 

Immensa  divinae  largita- 
tis  beneficia,  exhibita  po- 
pulo  Christian©,  insestimabi- 
lem  eiconfenint  dignitatem. 
Xeque  enim  est,  aut  fuit 
aliquando  tam  grandis  na- 
tio,  quae  habeat  decs  appro- 
pinquantes  sibi,  sicut  adest 
nobis  Deus  noster.  Unigeni- 
tus  siquidem  Dei  Filius,  suae 
divinitatis  volens  nos  esse 
participes,  naturam  nos- 
tram  assumpsit,  ut  homines 
deos  faceret,  factus  homo. 
Et  hoc  insuper  quod  de 
nostro  assumpsit,  totum 
nobis  contulit  ad  salutem. 
Corpus  namque  suum  pro 
nostra  reconciliatione  in 
ara  cnicis  hostiam  obtulit 
Deo  Patri :  sanguinem  sumn 
fudit  in  pretium  simul  et 
lavacrum  :  ut  redempti  a 
niiserabili  servitute,  a  pec- 
catis  omnibus  mundaremur. 
Ut  autem  tanti  beneficii  ju- 
gis  in  nobis  maneret  memo- 
ria,  corpus  suum  in  cibum, 
et  sanguinem  suum  in  po- 
tum,  sub  specie  panis  et 
vini  sumendum,  fidelibus 
dereliquit. 


gtt.  Ccenantibus  illis,  ac- 
cepit  Jesus  panem,  et  be- 
nedixit,  ac  fregit,  deditque 


Sermon   of   Saint  Thomas  of 
Aquin. 

The  immeasurable  blessings 
of  divine  bounty,  which  have 
been  shown  upon  the  Chris- 
tian people,  confer  an  inesti- 
mable dignity  upon  it.  For 
neither  is  there,  nor  ever  was 
there,  any  nation  so  great, 
that  hath  gods  so  nigh  them, 
as  our  God  is  present  with  us. 
For  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of 
God,  wishing  that  we  should 
be  partakers  of  his  divinity, 
assumed  our  nature,  and  was 
made  Man,  that  he  might 
make  men  gods.  And,  more- 
over, he  conferred  upon  us, 
unto  salvation,  the  whole  of 
that  which  he  assumed  of  ours. 
For  he  offered  to  God  his 
Father,  for  our  reconciliation, 
his  own  Body,  as  a  victim,  on 
the  altar  of  the  Cross  :  he  shed 
his  Blood,  that  it  might  be 
our  ransom  and  our  laver  to 
cleanse  us  :  that  being  re- 
deemed from  a  miserable 
slavery,  we  might  be  cleansed 
from  all  sins.  But  that  the 
remembrance  of  so  great  a 
benefit  might  abide  in  us,  he 
left  to  the  Faithful,  under  the 
species  of  bread  and  TS'ine,  his 
Body  for  food,  and  his  Blood 
for  drink. 

Bt.  Whilst  they  were  at  sup- 
per, Jesus  took  bread,  and 
blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave 


MATINS. 


237 


to  his  disciples,  and  saith :  * 
Take  ye,  and  eat :  This  is  my 
Body. 

f.  The  men  of  my  taber- 
nacle said:  Who  can  give  us 
of  his  Flesh,  that  we  may  be 
mied?     *  Take  ye. 

Blessus'G.  May  Christ  grant 
unto  us  the  joys  of  eternal 
Hfe. 

gt.  Amen. 


discipulis  suis,  et  ait :  *  Ac- 
cipite  et  comedite  :  Hoc  est 
corpus  meum. 

y.  Dixerunt  viri  tabema- 
culi  mei  :  Quis  det  de  car- 
nibus  ejus,  ut  saturemur  ? 
*  Accipite. 

Benedictio.  Christus 
perpetuae  det  nobis  gaudia 
vitae. 

gt.  Amen. 


Fifth  Lesson. 


O  precious  and  wonderful 
banquet !  health- giving,  and 
replete  with  every  sweetness  ! 
For  what  can  possibly  be  more 
precious  than  this  banquet  ? 
wherein,  not  the  flesh  of  calves 
and  goats,  as  heretofore  in  the 
Law,  but  Christ,  very  God,  is 
put  before  us,  that  we  may 
take  him.  What  more  won- 
derful than  this  sacrament  ? 
for,  in  it,  bread  and  wine  are 
substantially  changed  into  the 
Body  and  Blood  of  Christ ;  and, 
therefore,  Christ,  perfect  God 
and  Man,  is  contained  under 
the  species  of  a  little  bread 
and  wine.  He  is,  therefore, 
eaten  by  the  Faithful,  but 
not  lacerated  :  nay,  when  the 
Sacrament  is  divided,  he  re- 
mains whole,  under  each  par- 
ticle of  the  division.  But,  the 
accidents  subsist,  in  the  same, 
without  a  subject,  in  order 
that  there  may  be  room  for 
faith,  inasmuch  as  the  visible 
is  invisibly  taken,  being  hid 
under  a  species  not  its  own ; 
and  the  senses  are  kept  free 
from  deception,  for  they  judge 
of  accidents  {ivhich  are  tlieonly 
things)  known  by  them. 


O  pretiosum  et  admiran- 
dum  convivium,  salutife- 
rum,  et  omni  suavitate  re- 
pletum !  Quid  enim  hoc 
convivio  pretiosius  esse 
potest  ?  in  quo  non  carnes 
vitulorum  et  hircorum,  ut 
olim  in  lege,  sed  nobis  Chris- 
tus sumendus  proponitur 
verus  Deus.  Quid  hoc  Sa- 
.  cramento  mirabilius  ?  in 
ipso  namque  panis  et  vi- 
num  in  Christi  Corpus  et 
Sanguinem  substantialiter 
convertuntur,  ideoque  Chris- 
tus Deus,  et  homo  perfec- 
tus  sub  modici  panis  et 
vini  specie  continetur.  Man- 
ducatur  itaque  a  fidelibus, 
sed  minime  laceratur :  quin- 
imo,  diviso  Sacramento, 
sub  qualibet  divisionis  par- 
ticula  integer  perseverat. 
Accidentia  autem  sine  sub- 
jecto  in  eodem  subsistuntut 
fides  locum  habeat,  duni 
visibile  invisibiliter,  sumitur 
ahena  specie  occultatum  : 
et  sensus  a  deceptione  red- 
dantur  immunes,  qui  de  ac- 
cidentibus  judicant  sibi  no- 
tis. 


238 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


Bi.  Acccpit  Jesus  calicem, 
postquam  coenavit,  dicens  : 
Hie  calix  novum  testanien- 
tum  est  in  nieo  sanguine  :  * 
Hoc  facite  in  meani  coni- 
niemorationem . 

^.  Memoria  memor  ero, 
et  tabescet  in  me  anima 
mea.  *  Hoc  facite. 


Ignem   sui 


Bexedictio 
amoris    accendat    Deus 
cordibus  nostris. 

§[.  Amen. 


m 


Bt.  Jesus  took  the  cup,  after 
he  had  supped,  saying :  This 
Chalice  is  the  new  testament 
in  my  blood :  *  Do  ye  this  for 
the  commemoration  of  me. 


y.  Remembering,  I  will  re- 
member, and  my  soul  shall 
languish  within  me.  ♦  Do  ye 
this. 

Blessing.  May  God  en- 
kindle within  our  hearts  the 
fire  of  his  love. 

Bt.  Amen. 


Sixth  Lesson. 


IS'ullum  etiam  sacramen- 
tuni  est  isto  salubrius,  quo 
purgantur  peccata,  virtutes 
uugentur,  et  mens  omnium 
spiritualium  charismatum 
abundantia  impinguatur. 
Offertur  in  Ecclesia  pro  vi- 
vis  et  mortuis  :  ut  omnibus 
prosit,  quod  est  pro  salute 
omnium  institutum.  Suavi- 
tatem  denique  hujus  Sacra- 
menti  nuUus  exprimere 
sufficit,  per  quod  spiritua- 
ls dulcedo  in  suo  fonte 
gustatur  :  et  recolitur  me- 
moria illius,  quam  in  sua 
passione  Christus  monstra- 
vit  excellentissimae  charita- 
tis.  Unde  ut  arctius  hujus 
charitatis  immensitas  fide- 
lium  cordibus  infigeretur,  in 
ultima  coena,  quando  Pascha 
cum  discipulis  celebrato, 
transitunis  erat  de  hoc  mun- 
do  ad  Patrem,  hoc  Sacra- 
mentum  instituit,  tanquam 
passionis  suae  memoriale  pe- 
renne,  figurarum  veterum 
impletivum,       miraculorum 


Again,  there  is  no  sacrament 
more  health-giving  than  this, 
in  which  sins  are  wiped  away, 
virtues  are  increased,  and  the 
mind  is  made  rich  with  the 
abundance  of  all  spiritual 
gifts.  It  is  offered,  in  the 
Church,  for  the  living  and  the 
dead;  that  what  was  instituted 
for  the  salvation  of  all,  may 
profit  all.  Finally,  no  one 
can  adequately  express  the 
sweetness  of  this  Sacrament, 
by  which,  spiritual  sweetness 
is  tasted  in  its  very  source  : 
and  remembrance  is  solemnly 
made  of  that  most  perfect 
charity  evinced  by  Christ  in 
his  Passion.  "WTierefore,  in 
order  that  the  immensity  of 
this  charity  might  the  more 
deeply  be  impressed  on  the 
hearts  of  the  Faithful,  it  was 
at  the  last  Supper, — when, 
having  celebrated  the  Pasch 
with  his  disciples,  he  was 
about  to  pass  out  of  this  world 
unto  his  Father, — that  he  in- 
stituted this  Sacrament,  and 


MATINS. 


239 


left  it  as  the  perpetual 
memorial  of  his  Passion,  the 
fulfilment  of  the  ancient 
figures,  the  greatest  of  the 
miracles  done  by  him,  and  the 
special  consolation  to  them  that 
were  to  be  sad  because  of  his 
absence. 

gt.  I  am  the  Bread  of  life  : 
your  fathers  did  eat  manna  in 
the  desert,  and  are  dead  :  * 
This  is  Bread  coming  down 
from  heaven  ;  that  if  any  man 
eat  thereof,  he  may  not  die. 

^.  I  am  the  living  Bread, 
that  came  down  from  heaven ; 
if  any  man  shall  eat  of  this 
Bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever. 
*  This  is  Bread.  Glory.  *This 
is  Bread. 


ab  ipso  factorum  maximum, 
et  de  sua-contristatis  absen- 
tia solatium  singulare  reli- 
quit. 


gt.  Ego  sum  panis  vitae  : 
patres  vestri  manducave- 
runt  manna  in  deserto,  et 
mortui  sunt  :  *  Hie  est  pa- 
nis de  coelo  descendens  :  ut 
si  quis  ex  ipso  manducet, 
non  moriatur. 

y.  Ego  sum  panis  vivns, 
qui  de  coelo  descendi  :  si 
quis  manducaverit  ex  hoc 
pane,  vivet  in  seternum.  * 
Hie  est.  Gloria.  *  Hie 
est. 


THE    THIKD    NOCTUKN. 

The  seventh  Psalm  of  these  Matins  is  a  sequel  to 
the  one  immediately  preceding  it  in  the  Psaltery. 
The  two  are  inspired  by  the  same  trying  circum- 
stances ;  there  is  the  same  idea  running  through 
both  ;  and  several  of  the  expressions  arc  identical. 
We  have  the  cry  of  the  poor  soul  when,  being 
harassed  by  her  enemy,  she  is  longing  for  her  God ; 
she  has  the  wish  and  the  confidence  of,  at  last,  seeing 
the  holy  mount,  and  that  altar  of  God,  where  God 
gives  himself  in  the  person  of  the  Incarnate  Word, 
of  that  Christ,  who  comes  for  the  purpose  of  restoring 
their  t/oiith  to  his  happy  adorers  and  guests. 

Ant.  I  will  go  in  to  the  altar  Ant.  Introibo  ad  altare 
of  God  :  I  will  take  the  Christ,  Dei  :  sumam  Christum  qui 
who  reneweth  my  youth.  renovat  juventutem  meam. 


240 


CX)RPUS   CHRISTI. 


Psalm  42. 


Judica  me,  Deus,  et  dis- 
ceme  causam  meani  de 
gente  non  sancta  :  *  ab  ho- 
niine  iniquo  et  doloso  eruo 
me. 

Quia  tu  es,  Deus  fortitude 
mea  :  *  quare  me  repulisti, 
et  quare  tristis  incedo,  dum 
affligit  me  inimicus  ? 

Emitte  lucem  tuam,  et 
veritatem  tuam  :  *  ipsa  me 
deduxerunt,  et  adduxorunt 
in  montem  sanctum  tuuin, 
et  in  tabemacula  tua. 

Et  introibo  ad  altare 
Dei  :  *  ad  Deum,  qui  laetifi- 
cat  juventutem  meam. 

Confitebor  tibi  in  citbara 
Deus,  Deus  mens  :  *  quare 
tristis  es,  anima  mea,  et 
quare  conturbas  me  ? 

Spera  in  Deo,  quoniam 
adhuc  confitebor  illi  :  *  sa- 
lutare  vultus  mei,  et  Deus 
mens. 

AXT.  Introibo  ad  altare 
Dei  :  sumam  Christum  qui 
renovat  juventutem  meam. 


Judge  me,  O  God,  and  dis- 
tinguish my  cause  from  the 
nation  that  is  not  holy  :  deliver 
me  from  the  unjust  and  deceit- 
ful man. 

For  thou  art,  God,  my 
strength  :  why  hast  thou  cast 
me  off  ?  and  why  do  I  go  sor- 
rowful, whilst  the  enemy 
afflicteth  me  ? 

Send  forth  thy  light,  and 
thy  truth  :  they  have  conduc- 
ted me,  and  brought  me  imto 
thy  holy  hill,  and  into  thy 
tabernacles. 

And  I  will  go  in  to  the  altar 
of  God  :  to  God,  who  giveth 
joy  to  my  youth. 

To  thee,  O  God,  my  God,  I 
Avill  give  praise  upon  the  harp  : 
why  art  thou  sad,  O  my  soul  ? 
and  why  dost  thou  disquiet 
me? 

Hope  in  God,  for  I  will  still 
give  praise  imto  him  :  the  sal- 
vation of  my  countenance,  and 
my  God. 

AxT.  I  will  go  in  to  the 
altar  of  God  :  I  will  take  the 
Christ,  who  reneweth  my 
youth. 


The  eighth.  Psalm  celebrates,  with  enthusiasm,  the 
sovereign  goodness  of  the  God  of  Jacob.  He  had,  by 
numberless  prodigies,  worked  the  deliverance  of  his 
people.  Open  thy  mouth,  he  said,  and  I  will  fi  Hit ;  and 
he,  this  day,  keeps  his  word,  notwithstanding  the  fre- 
quent sad  frowardness  of  his  unworthy  children.  He 
feeds  them  with  the  fat  of  wheat ;  lie  fills  thcni  with  honey 
out  of  the. rock ;  that  is  to  say,  he  gives  them  to  taste 


J^IATINS. 


241 


the  ineffable  sweetness  of  Christ,  who  is  the  wheat  of 
the  elect  and  the  rock  of  the  desert} 


Ant.  The  Lord  hath  fed  us 
■with  the  fat  of  wheat ;  and 
hath  filled  us  with  honey  out 
of  the  rock. 


Ant.  Cibavit  nos  Donii- 
nus  ex  adipe  frumenti  :  ot 
de  petra,  melle  saturavit 
nos. 


Psalm  80. 


Rejoice  unto  God,  our 
helper :  sing  aloud  to  the  God 
of  Jacob. 

Take  a  psalm,  and  bring 
hither  the  timbrel  :  the 
pleasant  psaltery  with  the 
harp. 

Blow  up  the  trumpet  on  the 
new  moon,  on  the  noted  day 
of  your  solemnity. 

For  it  is  a  commandment  in 
Israel,  and  a  judgment  to  the 
God  of  Jacob. 

He  ordained  it  for  a  testi- 
mony in  Joseph,  when  he 
came  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
he  heard  a  tongue  which  he 
knew  not. 

He  removed  his  back  from 
the  burdens,  his  hands  had 
served  in  baskets. 

Thou  calledst  upon  me  in 
afl3iction,  and  I  delivered  thee  : 
I  heard  thee  in  the  secret  place 
of  tempest :  I  proved  thee  at 
the  waters  of  contradiction. 

Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I 
will  testify  to  thee  :  O  Israel, 
if  thou  wilt  hearken  unto  me, 
there  shall  be  no  new  god  in 
thee  :  neither  shalt  thou  adore 
a  strange  god. 

For  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God, 


Exsultate  Deo  adjutori 
nostro  :  *  jubilate  Deo  Ja- 
cob. 

Sumite  psalmum,  et  date 
tympanum,  *  psalterium 
jucundum  cum  cithara. 

Buccinate  in  Neomenia 
tuba,  *  in  insigni  die  so- 
lemnitatis  vestrse. 

Quia  prseceptum  in  Israel 
est  :  *  et  judicium  Deo 
Jacob. 

Testimonium  in  Joseph 
posuit  illud,  cum  exiret  de 
terra  ^gypti  :  *  linguam 
quam  non  noverat,  audivit. 

Divertit  ab  oneribus  dor- 
sum ejus  :  *  manus  ejus  in 
cophino  servierunt. 

In  tribulatione  invocasti 
me,  et  liberavi  te  :  *  exaudi- 
vi  te  in  abscondito  tempes- 
tatis  :  probavi  te  apud 
aquam  contradictionis. 

Audi,  populus  mens,  ct 
contestabor  te  :  *  Israel,  si 
audieris  me,  non  erit  in  te 
deus  recens,  neque  adorabis 
deum  alienum. 

Ego  enim  sum  Dominus 


1  Zach.  ix.  17  ;  1  Cor.  x.  4. 


VOL.  X. 


31 


242 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


Deus  tuus,  qui  eduxi  te  de 
terra  -S^gypti  :  *  dilata  os 
tuum,  et  implebo  illud. 

Et  non  audivit  populus 
meus  vocem  meam  :  *  et 
Israel  non  intendit  mihi. 

Et  dimisi  eos  secundum 
desideria  cordis  eorum,  * 
ibunt  in  adinventionibus 
suis. 

Si  populus  meus  audisset 
me  :  Israel  si  in  viis  meis 
ambulasset : 

Pro  nihilo  forsitan  inimi- 
cos  eorum  humiliassem  :  * 
et  super  tribulantes  eos  mi- 
sissem  manum  meam. 

Inimici  Domini  mentiti 
sunt  ei  :  *  et  erit  tempus 
eorum  in  saecula. 

Et  cibavit  eos  ex  adipe 
frumenti  :  *  et  de  petra, 
melle  saturavit  eos. 

A:xT.  Cibavit  nos  Domi- 
nus  ex  adipe  frumenti  :  et 
de  petra,  melle  saturavit 
nos. 


who  brought  thee  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt  :  open  thy 
mouth  wide,  and  I  wtlU  fill  it. 

But  my  people  heard  not 
my  voice :  and  Israel  hearkened 
not  to  me. 

So  I  let  them  go  according 
to  the  desires  of  their  heart  : 
they  shall  walk  in  their  own 
inventions. 

If  my  people  had  heard  me  : 
if  Israel  had  walked  in  my 
ways  : 

I  should  soon  have  humbled 
their  enemies  :  and  laid  my 
hand  on  them  that  troubled 
them. 

The  enemies  of  the  Lord 
have  lied  to  him  :  and  their 
time  shall  be  for  ever. 

And  he  fed  them  with  the 
fat  of  wheat  :  and  filled  them 
with  honey  out  of  the  rock. 

AxT.  The  Lord  hath  fed  us 
with  the  fat  of  wheat ;  and 
hath  filled  us  with  honey  out 
of  the  rock. 


Christ  is  that  living  God,  who  makes  my  heart  and 
my  flesh  rejoice.  Let  us  take  this  next  Psalm,  aud 
sing  the  praises  of  the  oUars  of  the  Lord  of  hosts^ 
our  King  and  our  God.  Those  a/tars  are  a  house  for 
the  sparrowj  and  a  nest  for  the  turtle-dove.  Happy 
they  who  dwell  in  those  lovely  tabernacles  ! 


Ant.  Ex  altari  tuo,  Do- 
mine,  Christum  sumimus, 
in  quem  cor  et  caro  nostra 
oxsultant. 


AxT.  We  have  taken  Christ 
from  thine  altar,  O  Lord;  in 
whom  our  heart  and  flesh 
rejoice. 


MATINS. 


243 


Psalm  83. 


How  lovely  are  tliy  taber- 
nacles, O  Lord  of  hosts  !  my 
soul  longeth  and  fainteth  for 
the  courts  of  the  Lord. 

My  heart  and  my  flesh  have 
rejoiced  in  the  living  God. 

For  the  sparrow  hath  found 
herself  a  house,  and  the  turtle 
a  nest  for  herself,  where  she 
may  lay  her  young  ones. 

Thy  altars,  O  Lord  of  hosts, 
my  King,  and  my  God  ! 

Blessed  are  they  that  dwell 
in  thy  house,  O  Lord !  they 
shall  praise  thee  for  ever  and 
ever. 

Blessed  is  the  man  whose 
help  is  from  thee  :  in  his  heart,  . 
he  hath  disposed  to  ascend 
by  steps,  in  the  vale  of  tears, 
in  the  place  which  he  hath 
set. 

For  the  lawgiver  shall  give 
a  blessing,  they  shall  go  from 
virtue  to  virtue  :  the  God  of 
gods  shall  be  seen  in  Sion. 

0  Lord,  God  of  hosts  !  hear 
my  prayer  :  give  ear,  O  God 
of  Jacob ! 

Behold,  O  God !  our  protec- 
tor :  and  look  on  the  face  of 
thy  Christ. 

For  better  is  one  day,  in  thy 
courts,  above  thousands. 

1  have  chosen  to  be  an  ab- 
ject in  the  house  of  my  God, 
rather  than  to  dwell  in  the 
tabernacles  of  sinners. 

For  God  loveth  mercy  and 


Quam  dilecta  tabemacula 
tua,  Domine  virtutum  !  * 
concupiscit  et  deficit  anima 
mea  in  atria  Domini. 

Cor  meum  et  caro  mea  * 
exsultaverunt  in  Deum  vi- 
vum. 

Etenim  passer  invenit 
sibi  domum  :  *  et  turtur 
nidum  sibi,  ubi  ponat  pullos 
suos. 

Altaria  tua,  Domine  vii-- 
tutum  :  *  Rex  meus,  et  Deus 
mens. 

Beati,  qui  habitant  in 
domo  tua,  Domine  :  *  in 
saecula  saeculorum  lauda- 
bunt  te. 

Beatus  vir,  cujus  est  auxi- 
lium  abs  te  :  *  ascensiones 
in  corde  suo  disposuit,  in 
valle  lacrimarum,  in  loco 
quem  posuit. 

Etenim  benedictionem 
dabit  legislator,  ibunt  de 
virtute  in  virtutem  :  *  vide- 
bitur  Deus  deorum  in  Sion 

Domine,  Deus  virtutum, 
exaudi  orationem  meam  :  * 
auribus  percipe,  Deus  Ja- 
cob. 

Protector  noster  aspice, 
Deus  :  *  et  respice  in  fa- 
ciem  Christi  tui. 

Quia  melior  est  dies  una 
in  atriis  tuis  *  super  millia. 

Elegi  abjectus  esse  in 
domo  Dei  mei  :  *  magis 
quam  habitare  in  tabema- 
culis  peccatorum. 

Quia     misericordiam     et 


244 


CORPUS    CHKISTI. 


voritatem  diligit  Deus  :  * 
eratiam  et  gloriam  dabit 
Dominus. 

Non  privabit  bonis  eos, 
qui  ambulant  in  innocentia  : 
*  Domine  virtutum,  beatus 
homo  qui  sperat  in  te. 

AxT.  Ex  altari  tuo,  Do- 
mine, Cliristum  sumimus,  in 
quern  cor  et  caro  nostra 
exsultont. 

y.  Educas  panem  de  ter- 
ra, alleluia. 

gt.  Et  vinum  laetificet  cor 
hominis,  alleluia. 

Pater  noster. 


truth    :    the   Lord 
grace  and  glory. 


will 


give 


He  wtII  not  deprive  of  good 
things  them  that  walk  in 
innocence  :  O  Lord  of  hosts  I 
blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth 
in  thee. 

AxT.  We  have  taken  Christ 
from  thine  altar,  O  Lord  ;  in 
whom  our  heart  and  flesh 
rejoice. 

>"".  Bring  forth  bread  out  of 
the  earth,  alleluia. 

gt.  And  may  wine  cheer  the 
heart  of  man,  alleluia. 

Our  Father. 


After  the  Pater  nosfer,  which  is  said  as  in  the  first 
two  Nocturns,  the  Priest  says  : 

A     vinculis     peccatorum  May  the  Almighty  and  mer- 

nostrorum  absolvat  nos  om-  ciful  Lord  deliver  us  from  the 

nipot^ns  et   misericors  Do-  chains  of  our  sins.     B^.  Amen, 
minus,     gt.  Amen. 


Here  is  read  the  first  sentence  of  the  Gospel  of  the 
Mass  of  this  Feast ;  and  the  interpretation  of  it,  as 
given  by  St.  Augustine,  is  immediately  added.  The 
holy  Doctor  dwells  particularly  on  the  unity  which 
our  Lord  intended  to  produce  among  his  followers  by 
the  august  Sacrament.  He  shows  the  necessity  of  the 
interior  dispositions  required  for  receiving  this  Sacra- 
ment with  fruit ;  and  lays  special  stress  on  this  one 
efi'ect, — that  it  is  to  make  man  live  for  Christ,  just 
as  He  lives  for  his  Father. 


Benedictio.  Evangelica 
lectio  sit  nobis  salus  et  pro- 
tectio.     8t.  Amen. 


BLESsrxG.  May  the  reading 
of  the  Gospel  bring  us  salva- 
tion and  protection.    IJ.  Amen. 


MATINS. 


245 


7th  Lesson. 


Lesson  from  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  John. 

Ch.   VI. 

At  that  time,  Jesus  said  to 
the  multitude  of  the  Jews  : 
My  flesh  is  meat  indeed  :  and 
my  blood  is  drink  indeed. 
And  the  rest. 

Homily  of  Saint  Augustine, 
Bishop. 

Seeing,  that  men  desire  this, 
by  the  food  and  drink  they 
take,  that  they  mjiy  suffer 
neither  hunger  nor  thirst, — 
this  result  is  not  gained  by 
any  other  than  this  food  and 
drmk,  which  makes  them  im- 
mortal and  incorruptible  who 
take  it ;  that  is,  the  very  fel- 
lowship of  the  saints,  where 
there  is  peace,  and  full  and 
perfect  unity.  For, — as  also 
men  of  God,  who  preceded  us, 
understood  this  subject, — it 
was  for  that  purpose  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  commended 
his  Body  and  Blood  in  such 
things  as  are  brought,  from 
being  many,  into  one.  For 
the  first  of  these  is  made  into 
one,  out  of  several  grains ;  and 
the  second  flows  into  one,  out 
of  several  berries.  He  now, 
at  last,  explains  how  that  is 
effected  which  he  is  speaking  : 
and  what  it  is  to  eat  his  Body, 
and  drink  his  Blood. 

Bt.  He  that  eateth  my  flesh, 
and  drinketh  my  blood, 
*  Abideth  in* me,  and  I  in 
him. 


Lectio  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Johannem. 

Cap.   VI. 

In  illo  tempore.  Dixit  Je- 
sus turbis  Judseorum  :  Caro 
mea,  vere  est  cibus  :  et 
sanguis  mens,  vere  est  po- 
tus.     Et  reliqua. 

Homilia  sancti  Augustini, 
Episcopi. 

Cum  cibo  et  potu  id  appe- 
tant  homines,  ut  neque  esu- 
riant,  neque  sitiant,  hoc  ve- 
raciter  non  prsestat,  nisi 
iste  cibus  et  potus,  qui  eos, 
a  quibus  sumitur,  immorta- 
les  et  incorruptibiles  facit  : 
id  est,  societas  ipsa  sancto- 
rum :  ubi  pax  erit,  et  unitas 
plena  atque  perf ecta.  Prop- 
terea  quippe,  sicut  etiam 
ante  nos  hoc  intellexerunt 
homines  Dei,  Dominusnoster 
Jesus  Christus  Corpus  et 
Sanguinem  suum  in  eis  re- 
bus commendavit,  quae  ad 
unum  aliquid  rediguntur  ex 
multis.  Namque  aliud  in 
unum  ex  multis  granis  con- 
ficitur  :  aliud  in  unum  ex 
multis  acinis  confluit.  De- 
nique  jam  exponit  quomodo 
id  fiat,  quod  loquitur  :  et 
quid  sit  manducare  Corpus^ 
ejus,  et  Sanguinem  bibere. 


gt.  Qui  manducat  meam 
camera  et  bibit  meum  san- 
guinem, *  Li  me  manet,  et 
ego  in  60. 


246 


CORPUS   CHRTSTI. 


y.  Non  est  alia  natio  tani 
gi-andis,  quae  habeat  deos 
appropinquantes  sibi,  sicut 
Deus  noster  adest  nobis.  * 
In  me. 

Benedictio.  Divinum 
auxilium  maneat  semper 
nobiscuin.     1^.  Ainen. 


y.  There  is  no  other  nation 
so  great,  that  hath  its  gods  so 
nigh  unto  it,  as  our  God  is 
present  with  us.     *  Abideth. 

Blessing.  May  the  divine 
assistance  remain  always  with 
us.     1^.  Amen. 


8th  Lesson. 


Qui  nianducat  camem 
nieam,  et  bibit  meum  san- 
guinem,  in  me  manet,  et 
ego  in  illo.  Hoc  est  ergo 
manducare  illam  escam,  et 
ilium  bibere  potum,  in 
Christo  manere,  et  ilium, 
manentem  in  se  habere.  Ac 
per  hoc,  qui  non  manet  in 
Christo,  et  in  quo  non  ma- 
net Christus,  procul  dubio 
noc  nianducat  spiritaliter 
camem  ejus,  nee  bibit  ejus 
sanguinem,  licet  camaliter 
et  visibiliter  premat  dcnti- 
bus  sacramentum  Corporis 
et  Sanguinis  Christi  :  sed 
magis  tantae  rei  sacramen- 
tum ad  judicium  sibi  man- 
ducat  et  bibit,  quia  immun- 
dus  praesumpsit  ad  Christi 
accedere  sacramenta,  quae 
aliquis  non  digne  sumit,  ni- 
si qui  mundus  est  :  de  qui- 
bus  dicitur  :  Beati  mundo 
corde,  quoniam  ipsi  Deum 
videbunt. 

5i.  Misit  me  vivens  Pater, 
et  ego  vivo  propter  Pa- 
trem  :  •  Et  qui  manducat 
me  vivet  propter  me. 

y.  Cibavit  ilium  Dominus 
pane  vitae  et  intellcctus.  * 
Et  qui  manducat.  Gloria. 
•  Et  qui  manducat. 


He  that  eateth  my  Fleshy  and 
drinketh  my  Blood,  nhideth  in 
me,  and  I  in  him.  This,  then, 
it  is  to  eat  that  meat,  and 
drink  that  drink, — to  abide 
in  Christ,  and  have  Him 
abiding  in  one's  self.  And, 
therefore,  he  that  abideth  not 
in  Christ,  and  in  whom  Christ 
doth  not  abide,  certainly  does 
not  spiritually  either  eat  his 
Flesh,  or  drmk  his  Blood, 
although  he  may,  carnally  and 
visibly,  press  the  sacrament  of 
Christ's  Body  and  Blood  with 
his  teeth  :  but  rather,  he  eateth 
and  drinketh  the  sacrament  of 
so  great  a  thing  to  his  own 
judgment,  seeing,  that  he, 
imclean  as  he  is,  had  presumed 
to  approach  Christ's  sacra- 
ments, which  no  one  worthily 
receives,  unless  he  be  clean : 
of  whom  it  is  said  :  Blessed  are 
the  clean  of  heart,  for  they  shall 
see  God. 

&.  The  living  Father  hath 
sent  me,  and  I  live  by  the 
Father  :  *  So,  he  that  eateth 
me,  shall  live  by  me. 

T.  The  Lord  hath  fed  him 
with  the  bread  of  life  and 
understanding.  *  And  he. 
Glory.     *  And  he. 


MATINS. 


247 


Blessing.  May  the  King  of 
Angels  lead  us  to  the  fellow- 
ship of  heavenly  citizens. 
Bt.  Amen. 


Benedictio.  Ad  societa- 
tem  civium  supemorum 
perducat  nos  Rex  Angelo- 
rum.     gt.  Amen. 


9rH  Lesson. 


As,  says  he,  the  living  Father 
hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  hy  the 
Father ;  so,  he  that  eateth  me, 
the  same  also  shall  live  by  me. 
It  is  as  though  he  should  say : 
*'  That  I  should  live  by  the 
**  Father,  (that  is,  should  refer 
*'  my  life  to  him  as  to  one 
"  greater,)  it  was  done  by  that 
*'  emptying  of  myself,  in  which 
*'  he  sent  me.  But  that  anyone 
*'  live  by  me,  it  is  done  by  that 
*'  participation  whereby  he 
*'  eateth  me.  I,  therefore, 
*' being  brought  low,  live  by 
*'  the  Father  ;  man,  being 
*'  raised  up,  liveth  by  me." 
But  if  the  words,  /  live  by  the 
Father,  are  taken  in  this 
sense, — that  the  Son  is  of  the 
Father,  not  the  Father  of  the 
Son, — they  must  be  so  taken 
without  lessening  the  equality 
{between  Father  and  Son).  And 
yet,  we  are  not  to  take  those 
words.  So  he  that  eateth  me,  the 
same  shall  live  by  me,  as  mean- 
ing equality  between  Christ 
and  ourselves  :  {they  do  not 
mean  that, )  but  they  show  the . 
grace  {bestowed  by  him  in  his 
ojfice)  of  Mediator. 


Sicut,  inquit,  misit  me 
vivens  Pater,  et  ego  vivo 
propter  Patrem  :  et  qui 
manducat  me,  et  ipse  vivet 
propter  me.  Ac  si  diceret  : 
Ut  ego  vivam  propter  Pa- 
trem, id  est,  ad  ilium  tam- 
quam  ad  majorem  referam 
vitam  meam,  exinanitio  mea 
fecit,  in  qua  me  misit.  Ut 
autem  quisquam  vivat  prop, 
ter  me,  participatio  facit- 
qua  manducat  me.  Ego  ita- 
que  humiliatus  vivo  prop- 
ter Patrem  :  ille  erectus  vi- 
vit  propter  me.  Si  autem 
ita  dictum  est,  vivo  propter 
Patrem,  quia  ipse  de  illo,  non 
ille  de  ipso  est :  sine  detri- 
mento  sequalitatis  dictum 
est.  Nee  tamen  dicendo,  et 
qui  manducat  me,  et  ipse 
vivet  propter  me  :  eamdem 
suam  et  nostram  sequalita- 
tem  significavit,  sed  gratiam 
mediatoris  ostendit. 


248 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


HYMN    OF    THANKSGIVING. 


Te  Deum  laudamus  :  *  te 
Dominmn  confitemur. 

Te  aetemum  patrem  ;  * 
omnis  terra  veneratur. 

Tibi  onines  Angeli ;  *  tibi 
cceli,  et  universae  Potesta- 
tes, 

Tibi  Cherubim  et  Sera- 
phim :  *  incessabili  voce 
proclamant : 

Sanctus, 

Sanctus, 

Sanctus,  *  Doniinus  Deus 
Sabaoth ! 

Pleni  sunt  coeli  et  terra  * 
majestatis  glorias  tuae. 

Te  gloriosus  *  Apostolo- 
nim  chorus, 

Te  Prophetarum  *  lauda- 
bilis  numerus, 

Te  Martyrum  candidatus 

♦  laudat  exercitus. 

Te  per  orbem  terrarum  * 
sancta  confitetur  Ecclesia  : 

Patrem  *  immensae  ma- 
jestatis ; 

Yenerandum  tuum  ve- 
rum,  *  et  unicum  Filium  ; 

Sanctum  quoque  *  Para- 
clitum  Spiritum. 

Tu  Eex  gloriae,  *  Christe. 

Tu  Patris  *  sempitemus 
es  Filius. 

Tu  ad  liberandum  suscep- 
turus  hominem,  *  non  hor- 
niisti  Virginis  utenim. 

Tu  devicto  mortis  aculeo  : 

*  apeniisti  credentibus  reg- 


We  praise  thee,  O  God !  we 
acknowledge  thee  to  be  our 
Lord. 

Thee,  the  Father  everlast- 
ing, all  the  earth  doth  worship. 

To  thee  the  Angels,  to  thee 
the  heavens,  and  all  the 
Powers, 

To  thee  the  Cherubim,  and 
Seraphim,  cry  out  without 
ceasing : 

Hoiv : 
HoiV: 

HolV:  Lord  God  of  Sa- 
baoth ] 

Full  are  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  of  the  majesty  of  thy 
glory. 

Thee  the  glorious  choir  of 
the  Apostles, 

Thee  the  laudable  company 
of  the  Prophets, 

Thee  the  white-robed  army 
of  Martyrs,  doth  praise. 

Thee  the  holy  Church, 
throughout  the  world,  doth 
acknowledge : 

The  Father  of  incomprehen- 
sible majesty, 

Thy  adorable,  true,  and  only 
Son, 

And  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
Paraclete. 

Thou,  O  Christ,  art  the  Iving 
of  glory. 

Thou  art  the  everlasting  Son 
of  the  Father. 

Thou,  being  to  take  upon 
thee  to  deliver  man,  didst  not 
disdain  the  Virgin's  womb. 

Thou  having  overcome  the 
sting  of  death,  hast  opened  to 


MATINS. 


24^ 


believers      the     kingdom     of  na  coelorum. 
heaven. 

Thou   sittest    at    the   right  Tu  ad  dexteram  Dei  se- 

hand  of  God,  in  the  glory  of  des  *  in  gloria  Patris. 
the  Father. 

Thee  we  believe  to  be  the  Judex  crederis  *  esse  ven- 

Judge  to  come.  turus. 


All  hneel  at  the  following  Verse  : 


We  beseech  thee,  therefore, 
to  help  thy  servants,  whom 
thou  hast  redeemed  with  thy 
precious  Blood. 

Make  them  to  be  numbered 
with  thy  saints  in  eternal 
glory. 

O  Lord,  save  thy  people,  and 
bless  thine  inheritance. 

And  govern  them,  and  exalt 
them  for  ever. 

Every  day  we  magnify  thee. 

And  we  praise  thy  Name 
for  ever  and  ever. 

Vouchsafe,  O  Lord,  to  keep 
us,  this  day,  without  sin. 

Have  mercy  on  us,  O  Lord, 
have  mercy  on  us. 

Let  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  be 
upon  us,  as  we  have  put  our 
trust  in  thee. 

In  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  put 
my  trust :  let  me  not  be  con- 
founded for  ever. 


Te  ergo  quaesumus,  tuis 
famulis  subveni,  *  quos  pre- 
tioso  sanguine  redemisti. 

-Sterna  fac  cum  Sanctis 
tuis  *  in  gloria  numerari. 

Salvum  fac  populum 
tuum,  Domine,  *  et  benedic 
haereditati  tuse. 

Et  rege  eos,  *  et  extoUe 
illos  usque  in  aetemum. 

Per  singulos  dies,  *  bene- 
dicimus  te. 

Et  laudamus  nomen  tuum 
in  saeculum,  *  et  in  sseculum 
sseculi. 

Dig-nare,  Domine,  die  is- 
to  *  sine  peccato  nos  custo- 
dire. 

Miserere  nostri,  Domine ; 
*  miserere  nostri. 

Fiat  misericordia  tua, 
Domine,  super  nos,  *  quem- 
admodum  speravimus  in  te. 

In  te,  Domine,  speravi ;  * 
non  confundar  in  aetemum. 


The  three  Yigils  of  the  Night  are  over.  The 
Church  has  kept  watch  for  her  Spouse  ;  and,  to  be- 
guile the  hours,  which  seemed  to  go  so  slowly  on,  she 
has  been  singing  the  praises  of  her  Beloved,  and 
beseeching  him,  with   most   ardent  prayers,  to  come 


250  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

quickly.  Blessed  Mother  Churcli !  For,  blessed  are 
they  whom,  when  the  Lord  returneth  from  the  nuptials, 
he  shall  fi}id  watching,  ready  to  open  to  him  at  his 
lirst  knocking.  He  will  gird  himself,  as  our  Jesus 
says  in  the  Gospel,  and  will  make  them  sit  down  to 
meat ;  and,  passing,  will  minister  unto  them  ;  and,  if 
]:e  shall  come  in  the  second  watch,  or  come  in  the  third 
watch,  and  find  them  so,  blessed  are  those  servants  !  ^ 
These  divisions,  called  "Nocturus,"  which  are  so 
long  a  portion  of  the  Divine  Office,  yet  are  indepen- 
dent of  the  seven  Canonical  Hours  of  the  day,  have 
been  interpreted  as  signifying  those  long  ages,  when 
the  human  race,  sitting  as  it  was  in  darkness,  and  a 
prey  to  the  anger  of  God,  was  asking  the  Mediator  to 
come,  who  was  to  justify  the  world  by  his  Blood,'^  and 
bring  back  the  light,  by  restoring  that  peace  with 
heaven,  which  had  been  broken  by  original  sin. 
Equally  with  the  prayers  of  the  Patriarchs  and  the 
desires  of  the  Prophets,  there  were  the  Church  and  all 
the  just,  whose  supplications  were  being  heard  in  an- 
ticipation, and  were  shortening  the  time  when  the 
Messias  was  to  come,  and,  therefore  were  hastening 
the  day  when  was  to  be  offered  the  great  Sacrifice, 
whereby  sin  was  to  have  an  end,  the  justice  of  God  be 
made  manifest,  and  the  covenant  with  many  be  con- 
firmed, ^ 

But,  the  Church  awaits  her  Spouse  every  day  still. 
It  is  true,  he  came  but  once  to  die  ;  but  he  comes 
down  every  day  from  heaven,  in  order  to  enrich  his 
Bride,  in  the  act  of  the  daily  Sacrifice ;  wherein  a 
ceaseless  application  is  made  of  the  merits  of  the 
Sacrifice  of  the  Cross,  which  was  offered  up  once  for 
all,  and  for  all  future  ages.  This  daily  visit  of  her 
Jesus  is  the  one  hour  to  which  the  Church  directs  all 
she  does ;  it  divides  her  days  into  two  parts,  one  of 
desire,  the  other  of  thanksgiving.     She  gives  expres- 

>  St.  Luke,  xii.  36-38.         *  Rom.  v.  9.        »  Dan.  ix.  24,  27. 


MATINS.  251 

sion,  seven  times  each  day,  to  the  feelings  of  her 
heart ;  and  to  this  her  sacrifice  of  praise,  which  is  the 
joyful  outcoming  of  the  eucharistic  Sacrifice,  she 
invites  her  children.  It  was  from  the  Royal  Prophet 
that  she  learnt  this,^  as  also  the  setiinff  singers  before 
the  A  Itar,  and  making  sweet  melody  by  their  voices? 

For,  as  soon  as  David  had  brought  the  Ark  into 
Jerusalem,  with  all  the  solemnity  recorded  in  Scrip- 
ture, and  had  completed  the  sacrifices,  he  appointed 
a  choir  of  levites  to  minister  before  it,  and  to  glorify 
and  praise  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  in  the  name  of 
all  the  people.^  Later  on,  when,  full  of  days,  he 
crowned  on  Sion  that  son  of  his,  who  was  to  have 
the  happiness,  which  had  been  denied  to  himself,  of 
building  the  Temple  of  Jehovah,*  he  put  into 
Solomon's  hands  the  plans  of  the  great  building, 
which  was  to  substitute  stability  for  the  tent-like 
structure  of  the  days  of  desert  life.  David  fiimself 
drew  up  the  permanent  arrangement  which  was  to 
regulate  divine  worship  as  required  by  the  new  order 
of  things.^  To  the  four-and-twenty  priestly  families, 
who  were  appointed  to  take  their  turns,  week  by 
week  (or,  in  our  own  way  of  expressing  it,  to  be  heb' 
domadarians)  in  the  offering  of  the  sacrifices,  there 
were  added,  as  a  natural  complement,  four  thousand 
singers  or  psalmists,^  who  were  likewise  divided  into 
four-and-twenty  sets ;  they  were  to  keep  up  an 
unbroken  ministry  of  prophecy  or  praise,  under  the 
direction  of  Asaph,  Heman,  and  Idithun,  and  receive 
lessons  from  two  hundred  and  eighty-eight,  who,  as 
being  skilled  in  the  science  of  sacred  chant,  and  in 
giving  praise  with  harp,  psaltery,  and  cymbal,  taught 
the  song  of  the  Lord  to  their  brethren.'  Praise,  or 
choral  chanting,   was  prophecy  in   those   days,  just 

^  Ps.  cxviii.  164.  5  i  Paralip.  xxviii.  II,  13. 

^  Ecclus.  xlvii.  11.  6  Ibid,  xxiii.  5. 

2  1   Paialip.  xvi.  2,  4,  37,  41.  '  Ibid.  xxv.  1-7. 
*  Ibid,  xxiii.  1. 


252  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

as  now,  in  the  Xew  Testament,  it  is  confession,  that 
is,  celebration  ;  they  sang  in  hope,  as  we  sing  in  faith  ; 
but  the  object  of  all  these  chants,  both  theirs  and 
ours,  was  and  is  the  same,  that  is,  Christ  our  Lord  ; 
and  hence,  so  many  of  the  sacred  formulas  of  Israel 
have  become  those  of  our  Mother  the  Church. 

David  was  the  perfect  type  of  Christ.  As  such,  he 
"would  not  merely  provide  the  people  with  the  words 
of  their  chants,  by  giving  them  his  inspired  Psalms, 
but  he  takes  his  place  among  the  very  levites,  clad, 
like  them,  with  a  robe  of  fine  linen,  and  directing 
their  songs,  on  that  great  day  of  the  carrying  the  Ark 
into  the  holy  city.^  ''  0  most  excellent  precentor  !  " 
says  the  devout  and  learned  Abbot  Rupert :  "  he 
"  leads  the  sacred  choirs,  and  dances  before  the  Ark 
**  of  the  Lord's  covenant.  0  King !  0  Prince  of 
"  sacred  rites  !  what  means  this  excessi^^e  enthusiasm 
"  of  one  so  noble  as  thou  ?  Observe,  how  he,  who  is 
"  not  of  the  priestly  race,  commands  the  priests, 
"  and  gives  his  orders  to  the  levites,  that  they  be 
**  sanctified  ;  he  appoints  the  chanters  ;  he  selects  who 
"  are  to  sing  mysteries,  and  who  the  song  of  victory 
*^ for  the  octave;  he  arranges  them  that  are  to  blow 
"  the  trumpets,  them  that  are  to  strike  the  horns,  and 
"  them  that  are  to  sound  harps,  or  cymbals,  or 
"  psalteries,  or  organs.  In  all  these  things,  he 
"  foresaw  his  Son,  (Christ  our  Lord)  ;  he  ventured 
"  upon  an  office,  which  he  knew  was  to  belong  to  this 
"  his  Son ;  for  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  was  a  figure 
"  of  the  human  nature  to  be  assumed  by  him,  since  it 
**  contained  the  manna  of  the  Word,  and  the  tables 
"  of  the  Testament,  and  the  rod,  of  priestly  and  kingly 
"  power.  It  is  for  this  reason,  that  our  David,  after 
"  he  had  destroyed  the  kingdom  of  death,  as  the 
*'  other  David  had  destroyed  that  of  Saul,  carries  the 
"  Ark  of  the  Covenant  into  Jerusalem,  and  sets  it  in 

^  1  Taralip.  xv.  27. 


MATINS.  253 

"  the  heavenly  tabernacle,  which  himself  had  pre- 
"  pared.  The  Church  seeing  this,  she,  like  the 
"  former  people,  excites  herself  to  sing  with  her 
"  David.  The  whole  multitude,  therefore,  of  the 
*'  sons  of  Jacob  sing  harmoniously  ;  and  David  him- 
''  self  plays  the  harp  in  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  for, 
"  whatsoever  Israel  sings,  she  learns  it  from  David, 
*'  her  master,  her  precentor,  who,  with  the  finger  of 
"  God,  strikes  the  harps  of  our  hearts.  It  is  David 
"  that  rouses  the  souls  of  men,  so  that  they  give  forth 
''  sounds  of  bodily  harmony,  at  one  time  low,  at 
"  another  high,  or  grandly ;  and  under  the  dictate  of 
"  one  same  faith,  the  immense  body  of  the  Church, 
"  spread  as  she  is  throughout  all  nations,  sings, 
*'  everywhere,  a  chant,  which  is  varied,  yet  one,  and 
*'  she  sings  it  to  her  Head,  who  is  Christ,  and  it 
"  sounds  sweetly  in  his  ear.'^  ^ 

Eut  the  dawn  of  our  Feast  is  upon  us.  Turning 
towards  the  East,  the  Church  knows,  through  the 
twilight,  that  her  Spouse  is  preparing  to  visit  her. 
She  is  all  joy  at  this  hour,  when  the  king  of  day  is 
about  to  shine  on  our  earth ;  she  has  her  solemn 
Office  of  Lauds,  full  of  gladness  and  praise,  as  its 
name  indicates ;  and,  in  this  Office,  she  invites  earth, 
and  sea,  and  firmament,  to  sing  canticles  which  are 
worthy  of  our  Jesus,  who  is  the  true  Sun,  for  he  is 
rising  upon  us,  and,  as  the  Psalmist  tells  us,  is  him- 
self rejoicing,  as  a  giant,^  to  come  to  the  Altar  of 
Sacrifice. 


1  Rupert.     Be  Dlv.  Off.  lib,  1,  cap,  17. 
-  Ps.  xviii.  6. 


25i 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


LAUDS. 


y.  Deus,  in  adjutorium 
meuiu  intende. 

g[.  Domine,  ad  adjuvan- 
dum  me  festina. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Spiritui  Sancto ; 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et 
nunc,  et  semper,  et  in  sae- 
cula  saeculorum.  Amen. 
Alleluia. 


y.  Incline  unto  my  aid,  O 
God. 

IJt.  O  Lord,  make  haste  to 
help  me. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
is  now,  and  ever  shall  be, 
world  without  end.  Amen. 
Alleluia. 


The  first  Psalm  of  Lauds  shows  us,  in  all  his  power 
and  infinite  greatness,  the  Lord,  the  ICing  of  nations, 
hidden  in  the  sacred  Host.  By  the  ever-living 
Sacrifice,  he  estallis/ies,  he  strengthens,  the  tcorld, 
notwithstanding  all  there  is  to  iiiove  and  disturb  it. 
The  voice  of  the  deep  sea  is  tconderful ;  but  far  more 
so,  in  the  high  heaven,  is  the  voice  of  the  divine 
Yictim.  Infinite  Wisdom  hears  testimony  to  it  on 
this  day,  for  it  is  Wisdom  that  hath  built  the  House, 
and  set  forth  the  table,  for  the  great  Sacrifice.  Let 
us  lead  lives  worthy,  by  their  holiness,  of  this  House, 
whose  priceless  treasure  is  proclaimed  this  day  by 
Wisdom. 


AxT.  Sapientia  aDdificavit  Ant.  Wisdom  hath  built 
sibi  domum,  uiiscuit  vinum,  himself  a  house,  mingled  his 
et  posuit  mensam,  alleluia.      wine,  and  set  forth  his  table, 

alleluia. 


LAUDS. 


255 


Psalm  92. 


The  Lord  hath  reigned,  he 
is  clothed  with  beauty  :  the 
Lord  is  clothed  with  strength, 
and  hath  girded  himself. 

For,  hy  his  Sacrifice,  he  hath 
established  the  world,  which 
shall  not  be  moved. 

Thy  throne,  0  Divine  Wis- 
dom !  is  prepared  from  old  : 
thou  art  everlasting. 

The  floods  have  Hfted  up,  O 
Lord !  the  floods  have  lifted 
up  their  voice. 

The  floods  have  lifted  up 
their  waves,  with  the  noise  of 
many  waters. 

Wonderful  are  the  surges  of 
the  sea  :  wonderful  is  the  Lord 
on  high. 

Thy  testimonies,  0  Wisdom  ! 
are  become  exceedingly  credi- 
ble :  holiness  becometh  thy 
House,  O  Lord,  unto  length 
of  days. 

AxT.  TVisdom  hath  built 
himself  a  house,  mingled  his 
wine,  and  set  forth  his  table, 
alleluia. 


qui  non  commo- 


Dominus  regnavit,  deco- 
rem  indutus  est  :  *  indutus 
est  Dominus  fortitudinem 
et  praecinxit  se. 

Etenim    firmavit     orbem 
terrae  :   * 
vebitur. 

Paratasedes  tua  ex  tunc  :  * 
a  sseculo  tu  es. 

Elevaverunt  flumina.  Do- 
mine  :  *  elevaverunt  flumina 
vocem  suam. 

Elevaverunt  flumina  fluc- 
tus  suos  :  *  a  vocibus  aqua- 
rum  multarum. 

Mirabiles  elationes  maris : 
*  mirabilis  in  altis  Domi- 
nus. 

Testimonia  tua  credibilia 
iacta  sunt  nimis  :  *  domum 
tuam  decet  sanctitudo.  Do- 
mine,  in  longitudinem  die- 
rum. 

Ajstt.  Sapientia  aedificavit 
sibi  domum,  miscuit  vinum 
et  posuit  mensam,  alleluia. 


The  following  Psalm  invites  all  the  inhabitants  of 
earth  to  enter  into  the  house  of  Divine  Wisdom,  there 
to  celebrate,  in  a  becoming  manner,  the  sweet  presence 
of  Her,  whose  delight  it  is  to  be  thus  dwelling  among 
the  children  of  men ;  and  yet,  this  very  Wisdom  is 
the  Lord  of  glory — the  God  who  made  ns  ;  we  are  ]ih 
people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  exquisite  pasture  ;  let  us 
proclaim  his  love  with  gladness  and  gratitude. 


Ajjt.  Thou  hast  nourished 
thy  people  with  the  Bread  of 
Angels  ;  and  hast  granted 
them  Bread  from  heaven,  al- 
leluia. 


Ant.  Angelorum  esca  nu- 
trivisti  populum  tuum,  et 
panem  de  coelo  praestitisti 
eis,  alleluia. 


256 


CORPUS   CHRISTl. 


Psalm  99. 


Sing  joyfully  unto  God,  all 
the  earth  !  serve  ye  the  Lord 
with  gladness. 

Come  in  before  his  Presence, 
with  exceeding  great  joy. 

Know  ye,  that  the  Lord  is 
God  :  he  made  us,  and  not  we 
ourselves. 

We  are  his  people,  and  the 
sheep  of  his  pasture ;  go  ye 
into  his  gates,  with  praise  : 
into  his  courts,  with  hjTuns, 
and  give  glory  unto  him. 

Praise  ye  his  name,  for  the 
Lord  is  sweet ;  his  mercy  en- 
dureth  for  ever  :  and  his  truth, 
to  generation  and  generation. 


AxT.  Thou  hast  nourished 
thy  people  with  the  Bread  of 
Angels ;  and  hast  granted  them 
Bread  from  heaven,  alleluia. 


Jubilate  Deo  omnis  terra, 
*  servite  Domino  in  laetitia. 

Litroite  in  conspectu 
ejus  :  •  in  exsultatione. 

Scitote  quoniam  Dominus 
ipse  est  Deus  :  *  ipse  fecit 
nos.  et  non  ipsi  nos. 

Populus  ejus,  et  oves  pas- 
cuae  ejus,  introite  portas 
ejus  in  confessione  :  *  atria 
ejus  in  hymnis,  confitemini 
illi. 

Laudate  nomen  ejus,  quo- 
niam suavis  est  Dominus  ; 
in  setemum  misericordia 
ejus  :  *  et  usque  in  genera- 
tionem  et  generationem 
Veritas  ejus. 

AxT.  Angelorum  esca 
nutrivisti  populum  tuum, 
et  panem  de  ccelo  prsestitis- 
ti  eis,  alleluia. 


The  two  following  Psalms,  which  the  Church 
joins  together,  are  the  prayer  of  the  faithful  soul  at 
break  of  da)/.  She  has  been  awakened  by  the  thirst 
for  her  God ;  she  longs  for  the  Bread  of  Life,  which 
is  to  fill  her  with  marrow  a){d  fatness,  that  is,  with 
the  very  substance  of  Christ,  with  what  makes  even 
kings  delighted.  She  is  overwhelmed  with  joy  at  the 
thought,  that,  to-day,  the  object  of  her  love  is  to 
receive  a  public  triumph,  which  will,  for  at  least  a 
few  hours,  turn  this  earth — desert,  trackless,  and  dry, 
as  it  is,  into  a  temple,  where  he  will  receive  such 
solemn  homage!  All  over  this  world,  men  are  going 
to  unite  in  one  common  feeling  of  adoration,  joy,  and 
praise  :  nations  will  gratefully  honour  the  divine 
Fruit,  which  this  our  earth  hath  yielded. 

Ant.  The  Bread  of  Christ  is  AxT.  Pinguis  est  panis 
fat,  and  it  shall  yield  dainties  Christi,  et  praebebit  delicias 
to  kings,  alleluia.  regibus,  alleluia. 


LAUDS. 


257 


Psalm  62. 


O  God,  my  God,  to  thee  do 
I  watch  at  break  of  day. 

For  thee  my  soul  hath 
thirsted,  for  thee  my  flesh, 
oh  !  how  many  ways. 

In  a  desert  land,  and  where 
there  is  no  way,  and  no  water  : 
so,  in  the  Sanctuary,  have  I 
come  before  thee,  to  see  thy 
power  and  thy  glory. 

For  thy  mercy  is  better 
than  Hves  :  thee  my  lips  shall 
praise. 

Thus  will  I  bless  thee  all 
my  life  long  :  and,  in  thy 
name,  I  will  lift  up  my  hands. 

Let  my  soul  be  filled,  as 
with  marrow  and  fatness,  with 
thee,  0  Bread  of  Life  !  and  my 
mouth  shall  praise  thee  with 
joyful  lips. 

If  I  have  remembered  thee 
upon  my  bed,  I  will  meditate 
upon  thee  in  the  morning  : 
because  thou  hast  been  my 
helper. 

And  I  will  rejoice  under i;he 
covert  of  thy  wings  ;  my  soul 
hath  stuck  close  to  thee  :  thy 
right  hand  hath  received  me. 

But  they  have  sought  my 
Bovl  in  vain;  they  shall  go 
into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth  :  they  shall  be  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  the  sword, 
they  shall  be  the  portion  of 
foxes. 

The  just  man,  thus  delivered, 
shall,  as  a  king,  rejoice  in 
God ;  all  they  shall  be  praised 
who  swear  in  Him  :  because 
the  mouth  is  stopped  of  them 
that  speak  wicked  things. 

VOL.  X. 


Deus,  Deus  meus  :  *  ad 
te  de  luce  vigilo. 

Sitivit  in  te  anima  mea  :  * 
quam  multipHciter  tibi  caro 
mea. 

In  terra  deserta,  et  invia, 
et  inaquosa  :  *  sic  in  sancto 
apparui  tibi,  ut  viderem 
virtutem  tuam  et  gloriaui 
tuam. 

Quoniam  melior  est  mise- 
ricordia  tua  super  vitas  :  * 
labia  mea  laudabunt  te. 

Sic  benedicam  te  in  vita 
mea  :  *  et  in  nomine  tuo  le- 
vabo  manus  meas. 

Sicut  adipe  et  pinguedine 
repleatur  anima  mea  :  *  et 
labiis  exsultationis  laudabit 
OS  meum. 

Si  memor  fui  tui  super 
stratum  meum,  in  matuti- 
nis  meditabor  in  te  :  *  quia 
fuisti  adjutor  meus. 

Et  in  velamento  alarum 
tuarum  exsultabo,  adhaesit 
anima  mea  post  te  :  *  me 
suscepit  dextera  tua. 

Ipsi  vero  in  vanum  quas- 
sierunt  am' mam  meam,  in- 
troibunt  in  inferiora  terrse  : 
*  tradentur  in  manus  gladii, 
partes  vulpium  erunt. 


Eex  vero  laetabiturinDeo, 
laudabuntur  omnes  qui  ju- 
rant  in  eo  :  *  quia  obstruc- 
tum  est  OS  loquentium  ini- 
qua. 


S 


258 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Psalm  66. 


nostri, 
;  ♦iUu- 


Deus    misereatur 
«t    benedicat   nobis 
minet  vultum    suuin    super 
nos,  et  misereatur  nostri. 


Ut 


cognoscamus  in  terra 
viam  tuam  :  *  in  omnibus 
gentibus  Salutare  tuum. 

Confiteantur  tibi  populi, 
Deus  :  *  confiteantur  tibi 
populi  omnes. 

Lsetentur  et  exsultent 
gentes  :  *  quoniam  judicas 
populos  in  aequitate,  et  gen- 
tes in  terra  dirigis. 

Confiteantur  tibi  populi, 
Deus,  confiteantur  tibi  po- 
puli omnes  :  *  terra  dedit 
fructum  suum. 

Benedicat  nos  Deus,  Deus 
noster,  benedicat  nos  Deus:  * 
et  metuant  eum  omnes  fines 
terrse. 

A2sT.  Pinguis  est  panis 
Cbristi,  et  pr^ebebit  delicias 
regibus,  alleluia. 


May  God  have  mercy  on  us, 
and  bless  us ;  may  he  cause 
the  light  of  his  countenance 
to  shine  upon  us,  and  may  he 
have  mercy  on  us. 

That  we  may  know  thy  way 
upon  earth,  0  Emmanuel  !  thy 
Salvation  in  all  nations. 

Let  people  confess  unto 
thee,  O  God !  let  all  people 
give  praise  unto  thee. 

Let  the  nations  be  glad  and 
rejoice  :  for  thou  judgest  the 
people  with  justice,  and 
directest  the  nations  upon 
earth. 

Let  the  people,  O  God,  con- 
fess unto  thee  :  let  all  the 
people  give  praise  unto  thee  : 
the  earth  hath  -vielded  her 
Fruit. 

May  God,  our  God,  bless 
us,  may  God  bless  us  :  and  all 
the  ends  of  the  earth  fear 
him. 

A>'T.  The  Bread  of  Christ 
is  fat,  and  it  shall  yield 
dainties  to  kings,  alleluia. 


The  Canticle,  in  wLicli  the  Three  Children,  in  the 
fiery  Furnace  of  Babylon,  bade  all  God's  creatures  to: 
hless  his  name,  comes,  to-day,  lending  a  voice  to  allj 
nature,  and  inviting  the  Avhole  of  God's  icorl^s  to 
praise  their  Maker.  How  just  it  is,  that  heaven  and] 
earth  should  unite  in  paying  homage  to  Him,  who,} 
by  the  great  Sacrifice,  which  is  daily  renewed  by  the] 
offering  made  of  it  by  the  Priests  of  the  Church,  has] 
re- established  all  things,  that  are  in  heaven  and  on\ 
earth  !  ^ 


^  Eph.  i.  10. 


I.AUJ)S. 


259 


Ant.  Holy  Priests  offer  in- 
cense and  Breads  unto  God, 
alleluia. 


Ant.  Sacerdotes  sancti 
incensum  et  panes  offerunt 
Deo,  alleluia. 


CANTICLE    OF    THE   THREE    CHILDREN. 


{Dan.  iil.) 


AH  ye  works  of  the  Lord, 
bless  the  Lord  :  praise  and 
exalt  him  above  all  for  ever. 

O  ye  Angels  of  the  Lord, 
bless  the  Lord :  O  ye  heavens, 
bless  the  Lord. 

O  all  ye  waters,  that  are 
above  the  heavens,  bless  the 
Lord  :  O  all  ye  powers  of  the 
Lord,  bless  the  Lord. 

O  ye  sun  and  moon,  bless 
the  Lord :  O  ye  stars  of  heaven, 
bless  the  Lord. 

O  every  shower  and  dew, 
bless  ye  the  Lord  :  O  all  ye 
spirits  of  God,  bless  the  Lord. 

O  ye  fire  and  heat,  bless  the 
Lord  :  O  ye  cold  and  heat, 
bless  the  Lord. 

O  ye  dews  and  hoar  frosts, 
bless  the  Lord  :  O  ye  frost  and 
cold,  bless  the  Lord. 

O  ye  ice  and  snow,  bless 
the  Lord  :  O  ye  nights  and 
days,  bless  the  Lord. 

O  ye  light  and  darkness, 
bless  the  Lord  :  O  ye  light- 
nings and  clouds,  bless  the 
Lord. 

Oh  !  let  the  earth  bless  the 
Lord  :  let  it  praise  and  exalt 
him  above  all  for  ever. 

O  ye  mountains  and  hills, 
bless  the  Lord  :  O  all  ye 
things  that  spring  up  in  the 
earth,  bless  the  Lord. 


Benedicite  omnia  opera 
Domini  Domino  :  *  laudate 
et  superexaltate  eum  in  sse- 
cula. 

Benedicite  Angeli  Domini 
Domino  :  *  benedicite  coeh 
Domino. 

Benedicite  aquae  omnes 
quae  super  coelos  sunt.  Do- 
mino :  *  benedicite  omnes, 
virtutes  Domini  Domino. 

Benedicite  sol  et  luna  Do- 
mino :  *  benedicite  stellse 
coeli  Domino. 

Benedicite  omnis  imber 
et  ros  Domino  :  *  benedicite 
omnes  spiritus  Dei  Domino. 

Benedicite  ignis  et  sestus 
Domino  :  *  benedicitefrigus 
et  aestus  Domino. 

Benedicite  rores  et  pruina 
Domino  :  *  benedicite  gelu 
et  frigus  Domino. 

Benedicite  glacies  et  nives 
Domino  :  *  benedicite  noc- 
tes  et  dies  Domino. 

Benedicite  lux  et  tenebrae 
Domino  :  *  benedicite  ful- 
gura  et  nubes  Domino. 

Benedicat  terra  Domi- 
num  :  *  laudet  et  superexal- 
tet  eum  in  saecula. 

Benedicite  montes  et  col- 
ics Domino  :  *  benedicite 
universa  germinantia  in 
terra  Domino, 


260 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Benedicite  fontes  Domino: 
*  benedicite  maria  et  flu- 
mina  Domino. 

Benedicite  cete,  et  omnia 
quae  moventnr  in  aqnis  Do- 
mino :  •  benedicite  omnes 
volucres  ca?li  Domino. 

Benedicite  omnes  bestiae, 
et  pecora  Domino  :  *  bene- 
dicite filiihominum  Domino. 

Benedicat  Israel  Domi- 
num  :  *  laudet  et  suporexal- 
tet  eiim  in  ssecula. 

Benedicite  sacerdotes  Do- 
mini Domino  :  *  benedicite 
servi  Domini  Domino. 

Benedicite  spiritus  et  ani- 
mae  justonim  Domino  :  * 
benedicite  Sancti  et  humiles 
corde  Domino. 

Benedicite  Anania,  Aza- 
ria,  Misael  Domino  :  *  lau- 
date  et  superexaltate  eum 
in  saecula. 

Benedicamus  Patrem  et 
Filium  cum  sancto  Spiritu  ; 
♦  laudemus,  et  superexalte- 
mus  eum  in  saecula. 

Benedictus  es,  Domine,  in 
fimiamento  cceli  :  et  lau- 
dabilis  et  gloriosus,  et  su- 
perexaltus  in  saecula. 

AxT.  Sacerdotes  sancti 
incensum  et  panes  offerunt 
Deo,  alleluia. 


O  ye  fountains,  bless  the 
Lord  :  O  ye  seas  and  rivers, 
bless  the  Lord. 

O  ye  whales,  and  all  that 
move  in  the  waters,  bless  the 
Lord  :  O  all  ye  fowls  of  the 
air,  bless  the  Lord. 

O  all  ye  beasts  and  cattle, 
bless  the  Lord  :  O  ye  sons  of 
men,  bless  the  Lord. 

Oh  !  let  Israel  bless  the 
Lord  :  let  them  praise  and 
exalt  him  above  all  for  ever. 

O  ye  Priests  of  the  Lord, 
bless  the  Lord  :  O  ye  servants 
of  the  Lord,  bless  the  Lord. 

O  ye  spirits  and  souls  of  the 
just,  bless  the  Lord  :  O  ye 
holy  and  humble  of  heart, 
bless  the  Lord. 

O  Ananias,  Azarias,  Misael, 
bless  ye  the  Lord  :  praise  and 
exalt  him  above  all  for  ever. 

Let  us  bless  the  Father,  and 
the  Son,  with  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
let  us  praise  and  exalt  him 
above  aU  for  ever. 

Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord, 
in  the  firmament  of  heaven  : 
and  worthy  of  praise,  and 
glorious,  and  exalted  above 
all,  for  ever. 

AxT.  Holy  Priests  offer  in- 
cense and  Breads  unto  God, 
alleluia. 


The  last  three  Psalms  of  Lauds,  which  the  Church 
unites  under  one  Antiphon,  are  also  the  last  of  the 
Psaltery.  They  sing  the  praise  of  the  Lord,  and  urge 
all  creatures  to  bless  his  holy  name.  The  first  of  the 
three  has  a  great  resemblance  with  the  Canticle  of  the 
Three  Children  ;  the  second  invites  the  Saints  to  sing 
to  that  Lord  who  has  glorified  them,  and,  by  the  sacred 
Host,  has  given  them  to  partake  of  his  own  happiness 


LAUDS. 


261 


and  power ;  the  third  calls  on  everything  that  can 
breathe  forth  Music,  to  come,  this  day,  and  honour 
the  Grod  who  is  present  with  us  by  the  Eucharist,  and 
give  him  their  sweetest  melodies. 

Ant.  To  him  that  conquer-  Ant.  Vincenti  dabo  man- 
€th,  I  will  give  hidden  manna,  na  absconditum  et  nomen 
and  a  new  name,  alleluia.  novum,  alleluia. 


PsALM    148. 


Praise  ye  the  Lord  from  the 
heavens  :  praise  ye  him  in  the 
high  places. 

Praise  ye  him,  all  his 
Angels  :  praise  ye  him,  all  his 
hosts. 

Praise  ye  him,  O  sun  and 
moon  :  praise  ye  him,  all  ye 
stars  and  light. 

Praise  him,  ye  heaven  of 
heavens  :  and  let  all  the 
waters,  that  are  above  the 
heavens,  praise  the  Name  of 
the  Lord. 

For  he  spoke,  and  they  were 
made  :  he  commanded,  and 
they  were  created. 

He  hath  established  them 
for  ever,  and  for  ages  of  ages  : 
he  hath  made  a  decree,  and  it 
shall  not  pass  away. 

Praise  the  Lord  from  the 
earth,  ye  dragons  and  all  ye 
deeps. 

Fire,  hail,  snow,  ice,  stormy 
winds,  which  fulfil  his  word. 

Mountains  and  all  hills  ; 
fruitful  trees,    and  all  cedars. 

Beasts  and  all  cattle ;  ser- 
pents and  feathered  fowls. 

Kings  of  the  earth,  and  all 
people ;  princes,  and  all  judges 
of  the  earth. 


Laudate  Dominum  de 
coelis  :  *  laudate  eum  in  ex- 
celsis. 

Laudate  eum,  omnes  An- 
geli  ejus  :  *  laudate  eum, 
omnes  virtutes  ejus. 

Laudate  eum,  sol  et  lu- 
na  :  *  laudate  eum,  omnes 
stellae  et  lumen. 

Laudate  eum,  cceli  coe- 
lorum  :  *  et  aquae  omnes 
.quae  super  coelos  sunt, 
laudent  Nomen  Domini. 

Quia  ipse  dixit,  et  facta 
sunt  :  *  ipse  mandavit,  et 
creata  sunt. 

Statuit  ea  in  setemum,  et 
in  sseculum  seeculi  :  *  prae- 
ceptum  posuit,  et  non  prae- 
teribit. 

Laudate  Dominum  de 
terra  :  *  dracones  et  omnes 
abyssi. 

Ignis,  grando,  nix,  gla- 
cies,  spiritus  procellarum  :  * 
quae  faciunt  verbum  ejus. 

Montes  et  omnes  colles  : 
*  ligna  fructifera,  et  omnes 
cedri. 

Bestiae  et  universa  pe- 
cora  :  *  serpentes  et  volu- 
cres  pennatae. 

Eeges  terrae  et  omnes  po- 
puli  :  *  principes,  et  omnes 
judices  terrae. 


262 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


Juvenes,  et  virgines,  se- 
nes  cum  junioribus,  laudent 
Nomen  Domini  :  *  quia 
exaltatum  est  Nomen  ejus 
solius. 

Confessio  ejus  super  cce- 
lum  et  terram  :  et  exalta- 
vit  comu  populi  sui. 

Hymnus  omnibus  Sanctis 
ejus  :  *  filiis  Israel,  populo 
appropinquanti  sibi. 


Young  men,  and  maidens;  let 
the  old  with  the  younger, 
praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord  : 
for  his  Name  alone  is  exalted. 

His  praise  is  above  heaven 
and  earth  :  and  he  hath  ex- 
alted the  horn  [the  power)  of 
his  people. 

A  hymn  to  all  his  Saints  : 
to  the  children  of  Israel,  a 
people  approaching  unto  him. 


Psalm  149. 


Cantate  Domino  canticum 
novum  :  *  laus  ejus  in  Ec- 
clesia  Sanctorum. 

Lsetetur  Israel  in  eo,  qui 
fecit  eum  :  *  et  filii  Sion 
exsultent  in  rege  suo. 

Laudent  Nomen  ejus  in 
choro  :  *  in  tympano  et 
psalterio  psallant  ei. 

Quia  bencplacitmn  est 
Domino  in  populo  suo  :  * 
et  exaltabit  mansuetos  in 
salutem. 

Exsultabunt  sancti  in  glo- 
ria :  *  Isetabuntur  in  cubi- 
Hbus  suis. 

Exaltationes  Dei  in  gut- 
ture  eorum  :  *  et  gladii  an- 
cipites  in  manibus  eorum. 

Ad  faciendam  vindictam 
in  nationibus  :  *  increpa- 
tiones  in  populis. 

Ad  alligandos  regcs  eo- 
rum in  compodibus  :  *  et 
nobiles  eorum  in  manicis 
ferreis. 

Ut  faciant  in  eis  judicium 
conscriptum  :  *  gloria  haec 
est  omnibus  Sanctis  ejus. 


Sing  ye  to  the  Lord  a  new 
canticle  :  let  his  praise  be  in 
the  Church  of  the  Saints. 

Let  the  neiu  Israel  rejoice  in 
him  that  made  him  :  and  let 
the  children  of  Sion  be  joyful 
in  their  King. 

Let  them  praise  his  Name 
in  choir :  let  them  sing  to  him 
with  the  timbrel  and  the 
psaltery. 

For  the  Lord  is  well  pleased 
with  his  people  :  and  the  meek 
he  will  exalt  unto  salvation. 

The  Saints  shall  rejoice  in 
glory  :  they  shaU  be  joyful  in 
their  beds. 

The  high  praises  of  God 
shall  be  in  their  mouth  :  and 
two-edged  swords  in  their 
hands. 

To  execute  vengeance  upon 
the  nations  :  chastisements 
among  the  people; 

To  bind  their  kings  with 
fetters  :  and  their  nobles  with 
manacles  of  iron ; 

To  execute  upon  them  the 
judgment  that  is  written  : 
this  glory  is  to  aU  his  Saints. 


LAUDS. 


263 


Psalm  150. 


Praise  ye  the  Lord  in  his 
holy  places  :  praise  ye  him,  in 
the  firmament  of  his  power. 

Praise  ye  him  for  his  mighty 
acts  :  praise  ye  him  according 
to  the  multitude  of  his  great- 
ness. 

Praise  him  with  sound  of 
trumpet  :  praise  him  with 
psaltery  and  harp. 

Praise  him  with  timbrel  and 
choir  :  praise  him  with  strings 
and  organ; 

Praise  him  on  high  sound- 
ing cymbals,  praise  him  on 
cymbals  of  joy  :  let  every 
spirit  praise  the  Lord. 

A]S"T.  To  him  that  conquer- 
eth,  I  will  give  hidden  manna, 
and  a  new  name,  alleluia. 


Laudato  Dominum  in 
Sanctis  ejus  :  *  laudate  eum 
in  firmamento  virtutis  ejus. 

Laudate  eum  in  virtuti- 
bus  ejus  :  *  laudate  eum  s.i- 
cundum  multitudinem  mag- 
nitudinis  ejus. 

Laudate  eum  in  sono  tu- 
bse  :  *  laudate  eum  in  psal- 
terio  et  cithara. 

Laudate  eum  in  tympano 
et  choro  :  *  laudate  eum  in 
chordis  et  organo. 

Laudate  eum  in  cymbali  > 
bene  sonantibus,  laudat3 
eum  in  cymbalis  jubilatio- 
nis  :  *  omnis  spiritus  laudet 
Dominum. 

Ant.  Vincentidabo  manna 
absconditum,  et  nomen  no- 
vum, alleluia. 


The  following  Capitulum  is  taken  from  tlie  first 
Epistle  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians.  We  have 
already  had  it,  with  what  precedes  and  continues  it, 
in  the  first  Nocturn  Lessons. 


CAPITULUM. 


(1  Cor.  xi.) 


Brethren,  for  I  have  received 
of  the  Lord  that  which  also  I 
delivered  unto  you,  that  the 
Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  he  was  betrayed,  took 
bread,  and,  giving  thanks, 
broke,  and  said  :  Take  ye  and 
eat  :  this  is  my  Body,  which 
shall  be  delivered  for  you  : 
this  do  for  the  commemoration 
of  me. 


Fratres,  ego  enim  accepi 
a  Domino  quod  et  tradidi 
vobis,  quoniam  Dominus  Je- 
sus in  qua  nocte  tradebatur, 
accepit  panem,  et  gratias 
agens,  fregit,  et  dixit  :  Ac- 
cipite,  et  manducate  ;  hoc 
est  corpus  meum,  quod  pro 
vobis  tradetur  :  hoc  facite 
in  meam  commemoratio- 
nem. 


264 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


The  Hymn  is  celebrated  for  its  fourth  strophe, 
"which,  in  its  graceful  brevity,  resumes  the  mystery  of 
our  Jesus,  who  is  our  companion,  food,  ransom,  and 
recompense.  Let  us  sing  it,  with  gratitude,  confi- 
dence, and  love. 


HYMN.' 


Verbum    supemmn    pro- 
diens, 
Nee  Patris  linquens  dexte- 

ram, 
Ad  opus  suum  exiens, 
Veriit  ad  vitae  vesperam. 

In  mortem  a  discipulo, 
Suis  tradendus  aemulis, 
Prius  in  vitae  ferculo 
Se  tradidit  discipulis. 

Quibus  sub  bina  specie 
Camem  dedit  et  sanguinem : 
I't  duplicis  substantias 
Totum  cibaret  hominem. 

Se  nascens  dedit  socium, 
Convescens  in  edulium, 
Se  moriens  in  pretium, 
Se  regnans  dat  in  praemium. 

O  salutaris  Hostia, 
Quae  coeli  pandis  ostium : 
Bella  premunt  hostilia, 
Da  robur  fer  auxilium. 

Uni,  trinoque  Domino 
Sit  sempitema  gloria  : 
Qui  vitam  sine  termino 
Nobis  donet  in  patria. 

Amen. 


connng 
his 


The   divine  Word 
forth,    yet    leaving    not 
Father's     right    hand,    went 
do   his   work ;    and 
the   evening  of    his 


forth   to 

reached 

Hfe. 

"VVTien  about  to  be  given 
over,  by  a  disciple,  to  his 
enemies,  he  first  gave  himself 
to  his  disciples,  in  the  food  of 
Ufe. 

He  gave  them  his  Flesh  and 
his  Blood  under  the  twofold 
species,  that  he  might  thus 
feed  man,  who  is  of  a  twofold 
nature. 

He  was  bom,  and  became 
our  companion ;  he  eat  with 
us,  and  became  our  food ;  he 
died,  and  became  our  ransom ; 
he  reigns,  and  is  our  reward. 

O  sa\Tiig  Host,  that  openest 
heaven's  gate  !  we  are  pressed 
by  wars  and  foes  ;  O  give  us 
strength  and  aid ! 

May  everlasting  glory  be  to 
the  Triune  God  I  and  may  he 
give  to  us  Kfe  without  end,  in 
our  country  above  ! 

Amen. 


*  In  the  Monastic  Breviary,  it  is  preceded  by  this  Response 
Urcve  : 

Bt.  brev. — Panem  cceli  dedit  eis,  *  Alleluia,  alleluia.  X^.  Panem 
Angelorum  manducavit  homo.  *  Alleluia.  Gloria  Patri.  Panem 
coeli. 


LAUDS. 


265 


y.  He  hath  placed  peace  in 
thy  borders,  alleluia. 

IJ.  And  filleth  thee  with  the 
fat  of  com,  alleluia. 


y.  Posuit  fines  tuos  pa- 
cem,  alleluia. 

gt.  Et  adipe  frumenti  sa- 
tiat  te,  alleluia. 


The  Canticle  of  Zachary  is  now  sung:  it  is  the 
Church's  daily  welcome  of  the  rising  Sun.  It  celebrates 
the  coming  of  Jesus  to  his  creatures ;  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promises  made  by  God ;  and  the  apparition 
of  the  Divine  Orient  in  the  midst  of  our  darkness. 

Ant.  I  am  the  hving  Bread,  Ant.  Ego  sum  panis  vi- 

that    am    come    down    from  vus,  qui  de  ccelo  descendi; 

heaven ;  if  any  man  shall  eat  si  quis  manducaverit  ex  hoc 

of  this  Bread,  he  shall  hve  for  pane,  vivet  in  geternum,  al- 

ever,  alleluia.  leluia. 


CANTICLE    OF    ZACHAKY. 


(aS^.  JLuke^  i.) 


Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel :  because  he  hath  visited 
and  wrought  the  redemption 
of  his  people. 

And  hath  raised  up  an  horn 
of  Salvation  to  us,  in  the 
house  of  David  his  servant. 

As  he  spoke  by  the  mouth 
of  his  holy  Prophets,  who  are 
from  the  beginning. 

Salvation  from  our  enemies, 
and  from  the  hand  of  all  that 
hate  us. 

To  perform  mercy  to  our 
fathers,  and  to  remember  his 
holy  testament. 

The  oath  which  he  swore  to 
Abraham,  our  father ;  that  he 
would  grant  to  us. 

That  being  delivered  from 
the  hand  of  our  enemies,  we 
may  serve  him  without  fear. 


Benedictus  DominusDeus 
Israel  :  *  quia  visitavit,  et 
fecit  redemptionem  plebis 
suae. 

Et  erexit  cornu  Salutis 
nobis  :  *  in  domo  David 
pueri  sui. 

Sicut  locutus  est  per  os 
Sanctorum  :  *  qui  a  sseculo 
sunt  Prophetarum  ejus. 

Salutem  ex  inimicis  nos- 
tris  :  *  et  de  manu  omnium 
qui  oderunt  nos. 

Ad  faciendam  misericor- 
diam  cum  patribus  nostris  : 
*  et  memorari  testamenti  sui 
sancti. 

Jusjurandum  quod  jura- 
vit  ad  Abraham  patrem 
nostrum  :  *  daturum  se 
nobis. 

Ut  sine  timore  de  manu 
inimicorum  nostrorum  hbe- 
rati  :  *  serviamus  illi. 


266 


CORPUS   CHRISTl. 


In  sanctitate  et  justitia 
coram  ipso  :  *  omnibus  die- 
bus  nostris. 

Et  tu,  puer,  Propbota  Al- 
tissimi  vocaberis  :  *  praeibis 
enim  ante  faciem  Domini 
parare  vias  ejus. 

Ad  dandam  scientiam  sa- 
lutis  plebi  ejus  :  *  in  remis- 
sionem  peccatorum  eorum. 

Per  viscera  misericordiae 
Dei  nostri  :  *  in  quibus  visi- 
tavit  nos  Oriens  ex  alto. 

Illuminare  his,  qui  in  te- 
nebris  et  in  umbra  mortis 
sedent  :  *  ad  dirigendos  pe- 
des nostros  in  viam  pacis. 

Ant.  Ego  sum  panis  vivris 
qui  de  coelo  descendi ;  si  quis 
manducaverit  ex  hoc  pane, 
vivet  in  setemum,  alleluia. 


In     holiness     and     justico 
before  him,  all  our  days. 

And  thou,  child,  Precursor 
of  the  Emmanuel,  shalt  be 
caUed  the  Prophet  of  the  Most 
High  :  for  thou  shalt  go  be- 
fore the  face  of  the  Lord,  to 
prepare  his  ways. 

To  give  unto  his  people  the 
knowledge  of  salvation,  unto 
the  remission  of  their  sins. 

Through  the  bowels  of  the 
mercy  of  our  God,  in  which 
the  Orient  from  on  high  hath 

visited  us ;  ,    .     -i. 

To  enlighten  them  that  sit 
in  darkness,  and  in  the  shadow 
of  death;  to  direct  our  feet 
into  the  way  of  peace. 

Ant.  I  am  the  living  Bread, 
that  am  come  down  from 
heaven ;  if  any  man  shall  eat 
of  this  Bread,  he  shall  live  for 
ever,  alleluia. 


COLLECT. 
Deus    qui  nobis  sub  Sa-         O  God,  who,  under  the  won- 
cramenWirabiH  passionis     derful  Sacrament  hast  Mt  us 
tujB    memoriam    rehquisti  :     a   memorial  of  thy/a^ssion  • 


tribue,  quaesumus,  ita  nos 
Corporis  et  Sanguinis  tui 
sacra  mysteria  venerari,  ut 
redemptionis  tuae  fructum 
in  nobis  jugiter  sentiamus. 
Qui  vivis  et  regnas.     Amen. 


grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  so 
to  reverence  the  sacred  mys- 
teries of  thy  Body  and  Blood,     J 
that,    in   our   souls,    wo   may     1 
always  feel  the  fruit  of   thy 
i  vivis  et  regnas.     Amen.     Redemption.     Who  Hvest,  dc.     . 

The  sun  has  risen  in  his  splendour,  whilst  the 
sweet  chants  of  the  Sanctuary  have  been  gree  ing  the 
comiiiK  of  the  Divine  Orient.  The  appointed  minis- 
ters of  the  sacred  psalmody  have  been  giving  in  the 
name  of  the  whole  world,  the  solemn  tribute  of  Lauds 
to  God  the  Creator  and  Redeemer  ;  and  now  that  the 
kins  of  day  is  up,  we  behold  a  very  busy  scene  out- 
sSe^he  precincts  of  the  holy  place  ;  the  children  of 


LAUDS.  267 

men  are  all  intent  on  a  work,  in  which  neither  the 
desire  of  lucre,  nor  the  thirst  after  pleasure,  have  any 
share.  Tidings  of  salvation  have  been  heard  ;  the 
voice  of  rejoicing  is  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  just ;  ^ — 
"God  is  preparing  a  visit  to  his  creatures;  Emmanuel, 
who  is  present  in  the  sacred  Host,  is  about  to  go  forth 
from  his  Sanctuar}^ ;  he  is  coming  into  your  cities  and 
your  fields,  to  hold  his  court  in  your  green  forests  ;  ^ 
the  Lord  God  hath  shone  upon  you,  he  hath  appointed 
this  solemn  day ;  prepare  his  throne,  with  shady 
houghs,  and  cover  the  way  to  the  horn  of  the  Altar 
with  flowers  !  '^^ 

This  announcement  has  excited  a  holy  enthusiasm 
in  the  souls  of  men.  For  several  previous  days, 
many  a  faithful  heart  has  had  something  of  the  feel- 
ings which  animated  David,  when  he  vowed  his  vow 
to  the  God  of  Jacob :  *'  I  will  not  enter  into  the 
tabernacle  of  my  house,  I  will  not  go  up  into  the 
bed  wherein  I  lie,  I  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine 
eyes,  or  rest  to  my  temples,  until  I  find  out  a  place 
for  the  Lord,  and  a  tabernacle  for  the  God  of  Jacob.''* 
0  beautiful  reposoirs !  resting  places  ^  where  are  to 
stand  the  feet  of  the  King  of  Peace  !  short-lived  but 
exquisite  designs  !  the  produce  of  that  sacred  poetry 
which  comes  from  the  supernatural  love  of  the 
Christian, — we  see  them,  to-day,  everywhere,  save, 
alas !  where  cold  heresy  has  come  to  keep  man  from 
being  too  earnest  in  his  worship  of  his  Saviour  !  On 
every  Catholic  heart,  even  on  those  who,  at  all  other 
times,  seem  to  be  out  of  the  influence  of  grace,  the 
Mystery  of  Faith  makes  its  power  tell ;  and  many  a 
wife,  and  daughter,  and  sister,  who  have  seen  the 
other  Feasts  of  the  Year  of  Grace  pass  by,  and  pro- 
duce no  eff'ect  on  those  who  are  dear  to  them,  and  are 
out  of  the  Church, — on  this  bright  summer  morniog 

^  Ps.  cxvii.  15.  4  Ps.  cxxxi.  3-5. 

2  Ibid,  cxxxi.  6.  -5  Ibid.  7. 

2  Ibid,  cxvii.  27. 


268  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

have  beheld  them  all  busy  in  preparing  decorations  for 
the  triumphant  Procession  of  the  Emmanuel,  (whom 
they  have  so  long  neglected  to  receive,)  and  spending 
themselves  in  getting  the  best  of  everything  they  can 
give,  or  procure,  for  the  God  who  is  so  soon  to  pass 
by  that  way,  and,  passing,  will  give  these  dear  ones  the 
blessing  of  a  conversion  !  It  is  the  wakening  up  of  the 
Faith  of  their  baptism  ;  it  is  the  grace  of  the  Sacra- 
ment of  love  working  at  a  distance  ;  a  grace  of  a 
reminder  of  other  and  happier  days,  of  first  Commu- 
nion perhaps  ;  and  when  Jesus  passes  through  the 
€rowd,  he  will  look  at  them,  and  tJtey  shall  remember, 
and  shall  be  converted  to  the  Lord} 

It  is  such  a  morning !  Heaven  is  all  gladness ; 
earth  is  doing  its  best  to  be  perfect ;  the  mighty  sea 
is  to  look,  here  and  there,  on  some  Procession  of  the 
holy  Sacrament,  and,  seeing,  will  praise  its  Lord  with 
the  voice  of  its  wonderful  surges.  The  fields  and  all 
things  that  are  in  them,  flowers,  trees,  branches, 
fragrance,  all  are  rejoicing  before  the  face  of  the  -Lord, 
because  he  cometh,  not,  indeed,  to  judge  this  world  of 
ours  with  justice,-  but  to  visit  us  with  exceeding  great 
love ! 

It  is  very  hard  to  be  indifferent  whilst  everything 
around  us  is  so  excited  at  the  near  approach  of  our 
God.  Let  us,  if  we  can  take  no  other  share  in  pre- 
paring for  the  Procession,  be  full  of  love  for  that 
most  dear  King  who  is  coming,  not  only  to  receive 
our  homage,  which  is  so  justly  his  due,  but,  moreover, 
to  load  us  with  blessings. 


TIERCE. 

All  is  now  ready  for  the  triumph  of  our  Emmanuel. 
Whilst  the  Church-Bells  are  convoking  the  Faithful 
to  come  to  the  great  Sacrifice,  for  that  now  all  things 

1  Ps.  xxi.  28.  2pg,  xcii.  4;  xcv.  11-13. 


TIERCE.  269 

are  ready,^  we  offer  our  readers  a  page  which  will 
interest  them  :  it  is  the  last  ever  written  for  this 
Liturgical  Year,  from  which  they  have  been  deriving 
so  much  instruction  during  all  the  past  months.  Our 
much  loved  Father  is  drawing  a  plan  of  the  Feast ; 
and  we  give  it,  almost  exactly  as  we  found  it  amongst 
his  notes. 

"  The  grand  Feast  has,  at  length,  dawned  upon 
'*  us ;  and  everything  is  speaking  of  the  triumph  of 
"  faith  and  love.  During  the  feast  of  the  Ascension, 
"  when  commenting  those  words  of  our  Lord :  It  is 
"  expedient  to  you  that  1  go^  we  were  saying,  that  the 
"  withdrawal  of  the  visible  presence  of  the  Man- God 
"  from  the  eyes  of  men  on  earth,  would  bring  among 
"  them,  by  the  vivid  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  a 
"  plenitude  of  light  and  a  warmth  of  love  which  they 
"  had  not  had  for  their  Jesus,  during  his  mortal  career 
"  among  them ;  the  only  creature,  that  had  rendered 
"  to  him,  in  her  single  self,  the  whole  of  those 
"  duties  which  the  Church  afterwards  paid  him,  was 
"  Mary,  who  was  all  illumined  with  faith. 

"  In  his  exquisite  hymn,  Adoro  te  devote,  St.  Thomas 
"  of  Aquin  says :  On  the  Cross  it  tvas  the  Divinity 
^' alone  that  was  hid;  but  here  the  Humanity,  too,  is 
"  hid ; — and  yet,  on  no  day  of  the  Year  is  the  Church 
"  more  triumphant,  or  more  demonstrative,  than  she 
"  is  upon  this  Feast.  Heaven  is  all  radiant ;  our 
"  earth  has  clad  herself  with  her  best,  that  she  may 
*'  do  homage  to  Him,  who  has  said  :  /  am  the  Flower 
"  of  the  fields,  and  the  Lily  of  the  valleys.^  Holy 
"  (Jhurch  is  not  satisfied  with  having  prepared  a 
"  throne  whereon,  during  the  whole  of  this  Octave, 
"  the  sacred  Host  is  to  receive  the  adorations  of  the 
"  Faithful :  she  has  decreed,  that  these  days  of  solemn 
"  and  loving  exposition  be  preceded  by  the  pageant 
"  of  a  triumph.     Not  satisfied,  to-day,  with  elevating 

3  St.  Matth.  xxii.  4.  ^  ^i.  John,  xvi.  7.         ■  ^  Cant.  ii.  1. 


270  CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

"  the  Bread  of  Life,  immediately  after  tlie  words  of 
"  Consecration :  she  will  carry  It  beyond  the  precincts 
**  of  her  churches,  amidst  clouds  of  incense,  and  on 
"  paths  strewed  with  flowers ;  and  her  children,  on 
*'  bended  knee,  will  adore,  under  heaven's  vaulted 
"  canopy,  Him  who  is  their  King  and  their  God. 

"  Those  joys,  which  each  separate  solemnity  of  the 
'*  Year  brought  us,  seem  to  come  back  upon  us,  all  of 
"  them  at  once,  to-day.  The  Royal  Prophet  had 
"  foretold  this,  when  he  said  :  He  (the  Lord)  hath 
"  ?nade  a  remembrance  (a  memorial)  of  his  wonderful 
"  works: — he  hath  given  Food  to  them,  that  fear  him.^ 
"  Holy  Church  is  filled  with  enthusiasm,  holding  in 
*'  her  arms  that  divine  Spouse,  who  said  :  Lo  !  1  am 
*'  icith  you  all  days,  even  to  the  consummation  of  the 
"  loorld.^  Nothing  could  be  more  formal ;  and  the 
"  promise  has  been  faithfully  kept.  It  is  true,  we 
*'  beheld  Him  ascending  from  Mount  Olivet  ;  he 
"  went  up  into  heaven,  and  there  he  sitteth  at  his 
"  Father's  right  hand  :  but,  ever  since  the  memorable 
*'  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  took  posses- 
"  sion  of  the  Church,  the  sacred  mystery  of  the 
**  Supper  has  been  celebrated,  in  virtue  of  those 
''  words  spoken  by  Jesus :  Do  this  in  remembrance  of 
*'  me ;  and  from  that  day  forward,  the  human  race 
"  has  never  been  deprived  of  the  presence  of  its  Head 
"  and  its  Eedeemer. 

*'  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  holy  Mother  Church, 
*'  possessing,  as  she  does,  the  Word,  the  Son  of  God, 
"  is  suddenly  filled  with  wisdom.  The  sacramental 
"  species,  it  is  true,  are  there  shrouding  the  Mystery ; 
"  but  they  are  only  existing  for  the  purpose  of  leading 
''  into  the  invisible " 

These  are  the  last  words  written  for  this  work  by 
our  venerated  Abbot :  they  are  followed  by  the  indi- 
cation  of  several  passages  from   the   works  of  St. 

^  Vs.  ex.  4,  5.  *  St.  Matth.  xxviii.  20. 


TIERCE.  271 

Augustine,  bearing  on  the  union  between  the  Word 
and  man,  between  divine  Wisdoin  and  our  humanity, 
in  the  sacred  Mysteries.     Our  beloved  Father  was 
just  on  the  point  of  developing  these  outlines  of  the 
ineffable  mystery  of  the  Marriage-Feast  in  the  eucha- 
ristic   banquet,   when   death   came   upon   him,    and 
deprived  us  of  a  teaching,  which  we  had  all  been  so 
long  and  so  impatiently  expecting.     The  continuators 
of  his  Liturgical  Year,  have  made  these  his  words 
their  guide  during  the  whole  Octave  of  this  Feast. 
Our  readers  will  pardon  us,  his  children,  for  thus 
respecting  the  wishes  of  such  a  teacher.     'No  doubt, 
the  theme  he  left  them  to  finish,  and  the  plan  on 
which  he  intended  to  treat  it,  are  very  sublime  ;  but 
they  hesitated  not  to  take  both  up,  the  more  so  as 
their  own  weakness  would  be  less  felt  now,  after  the 
nine  previous  volumes,  and  the  foregoing  pages  of 
this,  have  prepared  the  faithful  soul  for  solid  and 
choice  instruction  on  the  mysteries  of  our  holy  Faith. 
There   has   been    a   progressive    formation    of    the 
Christian, — commencing  with  the  subdued   light  of 
Advent,  and  leading  up  to  the  brilliant  radiance  of  Pen- 
tecost ;  and  all  this  must  necessarily  fit  him  for  the 
sublime  truths  we  are  still  to  put  before  him,  and 
which,  of  course,  we  ourselves  are  but  taking  from 
the  Scriptures  and  the  Fathers.     Such  was  the  plan 
proposed,   such  was   the   hope  entertained,  by   the 
Author  of  this  work,  when  he  wrote  the  following 
lines  in  the  Christmas  Volume  : 

^'  In  the  mystery  of  Christmas  and  its  forty  days, 
"  the  Light  is  given  to  us,  so  to  speak,  softened  down ; 
"  our  weakness  required  that  it  should  be  so.  It  is, 
"  indeed,  the  Divine  Word,  the  Wisdom  of  the 
"  Father,  that  we  are  invited  to  know  and  imitate ; 
"  but  this  Word,  this  Wisdom,  are  shown  us  under 
"  the  appearance  of  a  Child.  .  .  .  JSTow,  every 
"  soul  that  has  been  admitted  to  Bethlehem,  that  is 
"  to   say,  into   the   House  of  Breads  and  has  been 


272  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

"  united  with  him  who  is  the  Light  of  the  Worlds — 

"  that  soul  no  longer  walks  in  darkness 

"  The  Light  has  shone  upon  us,  and  we  are  resolved 
"  to  keep  up  the  Light,  nay,  to  cherish  its  growth 
"  within  us,  in  proportion  as  the  Liturgical  Year 
"  unfolds  its  successive  seasons  of  mysteries  and 
"  graces.  God  grant  that  we  may  reflect  in  our 
"  souls  the  Church's  progressive  development  of  this 
"  di\'ine  Light ;  and  be  led,  by  its  brightness,  to  that 
"  Union,  which  crowns  both  the  Year  of  the  Church, 
"  and  the  faithful  soul  which  has  spent  the  Year 
"  under  the  Church's  guidance  !  "  ^ 

And  now,  after  these  few  words  of  necessary 
digression,  we  resume  the  explanation  of  the  Liturgy 
for  this  Feast. 


TIERCE. 

The  Hymn  and  Psalms  are  given  in  page  75. 

Ant.  Angelomm  esca  Axt.  Thou  hast  nourished 
nutrivisti  populum  tuum,  thy  people  with  the  Bread  of 
et  panem  de  coelo  praDstitisti  Angels  ;  and  hast  granted 
eis,  alleluia.  them     Bread    from    heaven, 

alleluia. 

CAPITULUM. 

(1  Cor.  xi.) 

Fratres,  ego  enim  accopi  Brethren,  for  I  have  received 

a  Domino  quod  et  tradidi  of  the  Lord  that  which  also  I 

vobis,     quoniam     Dominus  delivered  unto  you,  that  the 

Jesus  in  qua  nocte  tradeba-  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  "night  in 

tur,  accepit  panem,  et  gra-  which  he  was  betrayed,  took 

tias  agens,  fregit  et  dixit  :  bread,    and    giving     thanks, 

Accipite  et  manducate  ;  hoc  broke,  and  said :  Take  ye  and 

est  corpus  meum,  quod  pro  eat :  this  is  my  body,  which 

^  The  Volume  for  Chrktmas,  chap.  3rd,  pp.  22,  23. 


MASS.  273 

shall  be  delivered  for  you  :  vobis  tradetur :  hoc  f acite  in 

thisdo,  for  the  commemoration  meam  commemorationem. 
of  me. 

Bt.    Brev.    He    hath     given  &•  Brev,  Panem  coeli  de- 

them  the   bread  of  heaven  *  dit  eis,  *  Alleluia,  alleluia. 

Alleluia,    alleluia.       He  hath  Panem. 
given. 

f.  Man     hath    eaten     the  f.    Panem        angelorum 

bread  of  Angels.    *   Alleluia,  manducavit homo.* Alleluia, 

alleluia.  alleluia. 

Glory.     He  hath  given.  Gloria  Patri.  Panem. 

y.  He  hath  fed  them  with  f.  Cibavit  illos  ex  adipe 

the  fat  of  wheat,  alleluia.  frumenti,  alleluia. 

gt.  And    hath    filled    them  gt.  Et  de  petra,  melle  sa- 

with  honey,  out  of  the  rock,  turavit  eos,  alleluia, 
alleluia. 

The  Prayer  is  the  Collect  of  the  Mass,  page  274. 


MASS. 

The  Procession,  which  immediately  precedes  Mass 
on  other  Feasts,  is,  to-day,  deferred  till  after  the 
offering  of  the  great  Sacrifice.  In  this  Procession, 
our  Jesus  is  to  preside  in  person :  we  must,  therefore, 
wait  until  the  sacred  Action,  (so  our  Fathers  call 
the  Mass,)  has  bowed  down  to  us  the  heavens  where  he 
resides.^  He  will  soon  he  shrouded  beneath  the 
mysterious  cloud.  He  is  coming,  that  he  may 
nourish  his  elect  with  the/ai  ofwheat,  of  that  Wheat 
which  has  fallen  on  our  earth,'^  and  is  to  be  multiplied 
by  being  mystically  immolated  on  the  countless 
Altars  of  this  earth.  He  is  coming,  to-day,  that  he 
may  receive  a  triumph  at  the  hand  of  his  people,  and 
hear  the  songs  we  shall  so  joyously  sing  to  the  God 

1  Ps.  xvii.  10.  2  St.  John,  xii.  24,  25. 

VOL.  X.  T 


274 


CORPUS   CHRIST! . 


of  Jacob.  These  are  the  ideas  expressed  by  the 
Introit,  wherewith  the  Church  opens  her  chants 
during  the  holy  Sacrifice ;  it  is  taken  from  the  80th 
Psalm,  which  is  so  very  sublime,  and  forms  one  of 
those  already  recited  in  the  Matins  of  this  Feast. 


INTROIT. 


Cibavit  eos  ex  adipe  fni- 
menti,  alleluia  :  et  de  petra, 
melle  saturavit  eos,  alleluia, 
alleluia,  alleluia. 

P«.  Exsultate  Deo  adju- 
tori  nostro  :  Jubilate  Deo 
Jacob.  >".  Gloria  Patri.  Ci- 
bavit eos. 


He  fed  them  with  the  fat  of 
wheat,  alleluia  :  and  filled 
them  with  honey  out  of  the 
rock,  alleluia,  alleluia,  alle- 
luia. 

Ps.  Rejoice  unto  God,  our 
helper  :  sing  joyfuUy  unto 
the  God  of  Jacob,  y.  Glory, 
etc.    He  fed  them. 


In  the  Collect,  the  Church  reminds  us  of  the  inten- 
tion our  Lord  had  in  instituting,  on  the  eve  of  his 
Passion,  the  Sacrament  of  love  : — it  was  to  be  a 
perpetual  inemorial  of  the  Passion ,  which  he  was 
then  going  to  sufi'er.  Our  Mother  prays,  that  being 
thus  imbued  with  the  spirit  which  leads  her  to  pay 
honour  to  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  we  may 
obtain  the  blessings  which  were  purchased  for  us  by 
his  Sacrifice. 


COLLECT. 


Deus  qui  nobis  sub  Sacra- 
mento mirabili  passionis 
tuae  memoriam  reliquisti  : 
tribue,  quaesumus ;  ita  nos 
Corporis  et  Sanguinis  tui 
sacra  mysteria  venerari,  ut 
redemptionis  tuae  fructum 
in  nobis  jugiter  sentiamus. 
Qui  vivis. 


O  God,  who,  under  the 
wonderful  Sacrament,  hast 
left  us  a  memorial  of  thy 
Passion  :  grant  us,  we  beseech 
thee,  so  to  reverence  the  sacred 
mysteries  of  thy  Body  and 
Blood,  that,  in  our  souls,  we 
may  always  feel  the  fruit  of 
thy  Eedemption.  "VVTio  livest, 
etc. 


MASS. 


275 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  Lectio  Epistolae  Beati 
Saint  Paul  the  Apostle  to  the  PauliApostoliad  Corinthios. 
Corinthians. 


L  Ch.  XL 

Brethren,  for  I  have  received 
of  the  Lord  that  which  also  I 
delivered  unto  you,  that  the 
Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  he  was  betrayed,  took 
bread,  and  giving  thanks, 
broke,  and  said  :  Take  ye  and 
eat  :  this  is  my  body  which 
shall  be  delivered  for  you  : 
this  do  for  the  commemora- 
tion of  me.  In  like  manner, 
also,  the  chalice,  after  he  had 
supped,  saying:  This  chalice 
is  the  new  testament  in  my 
blood  :  this  do  ye,  as  often  as 
ye  shall  drink,  for  the  com- 
memoration of  me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  shall  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  the  chalice,  ye  shall 
show  the  death  of  the  Lord, 
until  he  come.  Therefore, 
whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread, 
or  drink  the  chalice  of  the 
Lord  unworthily,  shall  be 
guilty  of  the  body  and  of  the 
blood  of  the  Lord.  But,  let  a 
man  prove  himself  :  and  so  let 
him  eat  of  that  bread,  and 
drink  of  the  chalice.  For  he 
that  eateth  and  drinketh  un- 
worthily, eateth  and  drinketh 
judgment  unto  himself,  not 
discerning  the  body  of  the 
Lord. 


L  Cap.  XL 

Fratres,  ego  enim  accepi  a 
Domino  quod  et  tradidi  vo- 
bis,  quoniamDominus  Jesus, 
in  qua  nocte  tradebatur,  ac- 
cepitpanem,  etgratiasagens 
fregit  et  dixit  :  Accipite  et 
manducate  :  hoc  est  corpus 
meum,  quod  pro  vobis  tra- 
detur  :  hoc  facite  in  meam 
commemorationem.  Simili- 
ter et  calicem,  postquam 
coenavit,  dicens  :  Hie  calix 
novum  testamentum  est  in 
meo  sanguine  :  hoc  facite 
quotiescumque  bibetis,  in 
meam  commemorationem. 
Quotiescumque  enim  man- 
ducabitis  panem  hunc,  et 
calicem  bibetis  :  mortem 
Domini  annuntiabitis  donee 
veniat.  Itaque  quicumque 
manducaverit  panem  hunc, 
vel  biberit  calicem  Domini 
indigne  :  reus  erit  corporis 
et  sanguinis  Domini.  Probe t 
autem  seipsum  homo  :  et 
sic  de  pane  illo  edat,  et  de 
calico  bibat.  Qui  enim  man- 
ducat  et  bibit  indigne,  judi- 
cium sibi  manducat  et  bibit : 
non  dijudicans  corpus  Do-^ 
mini. 


The  holy  Eucliarist,  both  as  Sacrifice  and  Sacra- 
ment, is  the  very  centre  of  the  Christian  religion  j 


276  CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

and,  therefore,  our  Lord  would  have  a  fourfold  testi- 
mony to  be  given,  in  the  inspired  writings,  to  its 
Institution.  Besides  the  account  given  by  Saints 
Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  we  have  also  that  of 
St.  Paul,  which  has  just  been  read  to  us,  and  which 
he  received  from  the  lips  of  Jesus  himself,  who 
vouchsafed  to  appear  to  him,  after  his  Conversion, 
and  instruct  him. 

St.  Paul  lays  particular  stress  on  the  power  given 
by  our  Lord  to  his  disciples,  of  renewing  the 
act  which  he  himself  had  just  been  doing.  He  tells 
us,  what  the  Evangelists  had  not  explicitly  men- 
tioned that  as  often  as  a  Priest  consecrates  the  Body 
and  Blood  of  Christ,  he  shows  {he  announces,)  the 
Death  of  the  Lord :  and,  by  that  expression,  tells  us, 
that  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Cross,  and  that  of  our  Altars, 
is  one  and  the  same.  It  is,  likewise,  by  the  immo- 
lation of  our  Redeemer  on  the  Cross,  that  the  Flesh 
of  this  Lamb  of  God  is  trul(/  meat,  and  his  Blood 
trull/  drink,  as  we  shall  be  told,  in  a  few  moments, 
by  the  Gospel.  Let  not  the  Christian,  therefore, 
forget  it,  not  even  on  this  day  of  festive  tiiumph. 
The  Church  insists  on  the  same  truth  in  her  Collect 
of  this  Feast :  it  is  the  teaching  which  she  keeps 
repeating,  through  this  formula,  throughout  the 
entire  Octave  :  and  her  object  in  this  is  to  impress 
vividly,  on  the  minds  of  her  children,  this,  the  last 
and  earnest  injunction  of  our  Jesus:  As  often  as  ye 
shall  drink  of  this  cup  of  the  new  Testament,  do  it  for 
the  commemoration  of  me  !  The  selection  she  makes  of 
this  passage  of  St.  Paul  for  the  Epistle,  should  impress 
the  Christian  with  this  truth, — that  the  divine  Flesh 
which  feeds  his  soul,  was  prepared  on  Calvary ;  and 
that,  although  the  Lamb  of  God  is  now  living  and 
impassible,  he  became  our  food,  our  nourishment,  by 
the  cruel  death  which  he  endured.  The  sinner,  who 
has  made  his  peace  with  God,  will  partake  of  this 
sacred   Body   with   deep    compunction,    reproaching 


MASS.  277 

Mmself  for  having  shed  its  Blood  by  his  sins :  the 
just  man  will  approach  the  holy  Table  with  humility, 
remembering  how  he,  too,  has  had  but  too  great  a 
share  in  causing  the  innocent  Lamb  to  suffer ;  and, 
that  if  he  be  at  present  in  the  state  of  grace,  he  owes 
it  to  the  Blood  of  the  Victim,  whose  Flesh  is  about 
to  be  given  to  him  for  his  nourishment. 

But  let  us  dread,  and  dread  above  all  things,  the 
sacrilegious  daring,  spoken  against,  in  such  strong 
language,  by  our  Apostle, — and  which,  by  a  mon- 
strous contradiction,  would  attempt  to  put  again  to 
death  Him  who  is  the  Author  of  Life ;  and  this 
attempt  to  be  made  in  the  very  banquet,  which  was 
procured  for  us  men  by  the  precious  Blood  of  this 
Saviour  !  Let  a  man  prove  himself ^  says  the  Apostle  ; 
and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  breads  and  drink  of  the 
chalice.  This  proving  one's  self  is  sacramental  con- 
fession, which  must  be  made  by  him  who  feels 
himself  guilty  of  a  grievous  sin,  which  has  never 
before  been  confessed.  How  sorry  soever  he  may  be 
for  it,  were  he  even  reconciled  to  God  by  an  act  of 
perfect  contrition,  the  injunction  of  the  Apostle, 
interpreted  by  the  custom  of  the  Church  and  the 
decisions  of  her  Councils,^  forbids  his  approaching  the 
holy  Table,  until  he  has  submitted  his  sin  to  the 
power  of  the  Keys. 

The  Gradual  and  Alleluia- Yerse  are  a  further 
instance  of  the  parallelism  between  the  two  Testa- 
ments, which  we  have  already  noticed  in  the  com- 
position of  the  Matin  Eesponsories.  The  Psalmist 
extols  the  bounty  of  that  God,  to  whom  every  living 
creature  looks  for  its  food  ;  and  our  Jesus  offers  him- 
self to  us,  as  we  have  it  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  as  our 
truest  nourishment. 

^  Cone.  Trid.  Sees.  xiv.  cap.  iv. 


278 


CORPUS   GHRISl'I. 


GRADUAl.. 


Oculi  omnium  in  te  spe- 
rant,  Dom.iiie  :  et  tu  das  illis 
escam  in  tempore  oppor- 
tuno. 

V.  Aperistumanunituam, 
et  imples  omne  animal  be- 
nedictione. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Caromeavereestcibus, 
et  sanguis  mens  vere  est 
potus  ;  qui  manducat  meam 
camem,  et  bibit  meum  san- 
guinem,  in  me  manet,  et 
eso  in  eo. 


The  eyes  of  all  hope  in  thee, 
O  Lord :  and  thou  givest  them 
food  in  due  season. 

^.  Thou  openest  thy  hand, 
and  fillest  with  thy  blessing 
every  living  creature. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

^.  My  flesh  is  truly  meat, 
and  my  blood  is  truly  drink  ; 
he  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and 
drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in 
me,  and  I  in  him. 


Then  follows  the  Sequence, — tliat  well-known  com- 
position of  the  Angelical  Doctor.  The  Church,  the 
true  Sion,  expresses  her  enthusiasm,  and  love,  for  the 
living  and  life-giving  Bread,  in  words  which,  at  first 
sight,  would  seem  too  precise  and  scholastic,  to  com- 
port the  poetry  of  form  and  sentiment.  The  Euchar- 
istic  mystery  is  here  developed  with  that  concision 
and  solemnity  for  which  St.  Thomas  had  such  a  won- 
derful talent.  The  words  are  accompanied  by  a 
chant  which  is  worthy  of  them ;  and  the  two  together 
excite  in  the  Christian  soul  the  sentiments  of  un- 
earthly joy,  which  are  so  peculiar  to  this  Feast  of 
the  Sacrament  of  Love. 


SEQUENCE. 


Lauda   Sion   Salvatorcm, 
Lauda  ducem  et  pastorem 
In  hymnis  et  canticis. 

Quantum  potes,    tantum 
aude : 
Quia  major  omni  laude, 
Nee  laudare  sufficis. 


Praise  thy  Saviour,  O  Sion ! 
praise  thy  guide  and  shepherd, 
in  hymns  and  canticles. 

As  much  as  thou  hast 
power,  so  also  dare ;  for  he  is 
above  all  praise,  nor  canst 
thou  praise  him  enough. 


MASS. 


279 


This  day,  there  is  given  to  us 
a  special  theme  of  praise, — the 
living  and  life-giving  Bread, 

Which,  as  our  faith  assures 
us,  was  given  to  the  Twelve 
brethren,  as  they  sat  at  the 
Table  of  the  holy  Supper. 

Let  our  praise  be  full,  let  it 
be  sweet;  let  our  soul's  jubilee 
be  joyous,  let  it  be  beautiful ; 

For  we  are  celebrating  that 
great  day,  whereon  is  com- 
memorated the  first  institution 
of  this  Table. 

In  this  Table  of  the  new 
King,  the  new  Pasch  of  the 
new  Law  puts  an  end  to  the 
old  Passover. 

Newness  puts  the  old  to 
flight,  and  so  does  truth  the 
shadow ;  the  light  drives  night 
away. 

What  Christ  did  at  that 
Supper,  that  he  said  was  to  be 
done  in  remembrance  of  him. 

Taught  by  his  sacred  insti- 
tutions, we  consecrate  the 
Bread  and  Wine  into  the  vic- 
tim of  salvation. 

This  is  the  dogma  given  to 
Christians, — that  bread  passes 
into  flesh,  and  wine  into  blood. 

What  thou  understandest 
not,  what  thou  seest  not, — 
that  let  a  generous  faith  con- 
firm thee  in,  beyond  nature's 
course. 

Under  the  different  spe- 
cies,— which  are  signs  not 
things, — there  hidden  lie 
things  of  infinite  worth. 

The  Flesh  is  food,  the  Blood 
is  drink ;  yet  Christ  is  whole, 
under  each  species. 

He  is  not  cut  by  the  re- 


Laudis  thema  specialis, 
Panis  vivus  et  vitalis 
Hodie  proponitur. 

Quem    in     sacra9    mensa 
coense, 
Turbse  fratrum  duodenae  A'^/ :^J^ 
Datum  non  ambigitur.  yjf\  i^  i*i  XA 

Sit  laus~plena,  sit  sonora, 
Sit  jucunda,  sit  decora 
Mentis  jubilatio  ; 

Dies  enim  solemnis  agitur, 
In  qua  mensse  prima  reco- 

Htur 
Hujus  institutio. 

In  hac  mensa  novi  Regis, 
Novum  Pascha  novae  legis, 
Phase  vetus  terminat. 

Vetustatem  novitas, 
Umbram  fugat  Veritas, 
Noctem  lux  eliminat. 

Quod  in   coena    Christus 
gessit. 
Faciendum  hoc  expressit 
In  sui  memoriam. 

Docti  sacris  institutis, 
Panem,  viniim  in  salutis 
Consecramus  hostiam. 

Dogma  datur  Christianis, 
Quod  in  camem  transit  pa- 
nis, 
Et  vinum  in  sanguinem. 
Quod    non    capis,     quod 
non  vides, 
Animosa  firmat  fides, 
Praeter  renim  ordinem. 

Sub  diversis  speciebus, 
Signis  tantum  et  non  rebus, 
Latent  res  eximise. 

Carocibus,  sanguis  potus ; 
Manet  tamen  Christus  totus 
Sub  utraque  specie. 

A  sumente  non  concisus, 


280 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Non  confractus,  non  divisus, 
Integer  acciptur. 

Siinit  unus,  sumunt  mille : 
Quantum  isti,  tantum  ille  : 
Nee  sumptus  consumitur. 


Sumunt  boni ,  sumunt  mali : 
Sorte  tamen  inaequali, 
Vitae  vel  interitus. 

Mors  est  malis,  vita  bonis  : 
Vide  paris  sumptionis 
Quam  sit  dispar  exitus. 

Fracto     demum     Sacra- 
mento, 
Ne  vacilles,  sed  memento, 
J  Tantum  esse  sub  fragmento, 

^JT^Qnantum  toto  tegitur. 
^^'^^'    Nulla  rei  fit  scissura, 
^_^        Signi  tantum  fit  f ractura : 
,X~j,       Qua  nee  status,  nee  statiira 

Ecce  panis  Angelorum, 
Factus  cibus  viatorum  : 
Vere  panis  filiorum, 
Non  mittendus  canibus. 

In  figuris  praesignatur, 
Cum  Isaac  immolatur : 
Agnus  Paschse  deputatur, 
Datur  manna  patribus. 

Bone  Pastor,  panis  vere, 
Jesu  nostri  miserere  : 
Tu  nos  pasce,  nos  tuere  : 
Tu  nos  bona  fac  videre 
In  terra  viventium. 

Tu  qui  cuncta  scis  et  vales, 
Qui  nos  pascis  hie  mortales  : 
Tuos  ibi  commensales, 
Cobffiredes  et  sodales, 
Fac  sanctorum  civium. 


Amen.  Alleluia. 


ceiver,  nor  broken,  nor  divi- 
ded :  he  is  taken  whole. 

He  is  received  by  one,  he  is 
received  by  a  thousand;  the 
one  receives  as  much  as  all ; 
nor  is  He  consumed,  who  is 
received. 

The  good  receive,  the  bad 
receive, — but  with  the  differ- 
ence of  life  or  death. 

'Tis  death  to  the  bad,  'tis 
life  to  the  good  :  lo  !  how  un- 
like is  the  effect  of  the  one 
like  receiving. 

And  when  the  Sacrament  is 
broken,  waver  not !  but  re- 
member, that  there  is  as  much 
under  each  fragment,  as  is  hid 
under  the  whole. 

Of  the  substance  that  is 
there,  there  is  no  division  ;  it 
is  but  the  sign  that  is  broken ; 
and  He  who  is  the  Signified, 
is  not  thereby  diminished, 
either  as  to  state  or  stature. 

Lo  !  the  Bread  of  Angels  is 
made  the  food  of  pilgrims ; 
verily,  it  is  the  Bread  of  the 
children,  not  to  be  cast  to  dogs. 

It  is  foreshown  in  figures, — 
when  Isaac  is  slain,  when  the 
Paschal  Lamb  is  prescribed, 
when  Manna  is  given  to  our 
fathers. 

O  good  Shepherd  !  true 
Bread  !  Jesus  !  have  mercy 
upon  us  :  feed  us,  defend  us  : 
give  us  to  see  good  things  in 
the  land  of  the  living. 

O  thou,  who  knowest  and 
canst  do  all  things,  who  feed- 
est  us  mortals  here  below, 
make  us  to  be  thy  companions 
in  the  banquet  yonder  above, 
and  thy  joint-heirs,  and  fel- 
low-citizens with  the  Saints ! 

Amen.     Alleluia. 


'iJ^^HJ^ 


MASS- 


281 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel        vSequentia  sancti  Evange- 
accordiug  to  John.  lii  secundum  Johannem. 


Ch.  VL 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  said  to 
the  multitude  of  the  Jews  : 
My  flesh  is  meat  indeed  :  and 
my  blood  is  drink  indeed.  He 
that  eateth  my  flesh  and  drink- 
eth  my  blood,  abideth  in  me, 
and  I  in  him.  As  the  living 
Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I 
Hve  by  the  Father ;  so,  he  that 
eateth  me,  the  same,  also, 
shall  live  by  me.  This  is  the 
bread  that  came  down  from 
heaven.  Not  as  your  fathers 
did  eat  manna  and  are  dead. 
He  that  eateth  this  bread, 
shall  live  for  ever. 


Cap.  VI, 

In  illo  tempore  :  Dixit  Je- 
sus turbis  Judaeorum  :  Caro 
mea  vere  est  cibus  :  et  san- 
guis mens  vere  est  potus. 
Qui  manducat  meam  car- 
nem  et  bibit  meum  sangui- 
nem,  in  me  manet,  et  ego 
in  illo.  Sicut  misit  me  vivens 
Pater,  et  ego  vivo  propter 
Patrem  :  et  qui  manducat 
me,  et  ipse  vivet  propter 
me.  Hie  est  panis,  qui  de 
coelo  descendit.  Non  sicut 
manducaverunt  patres  ves- 
tri  manna,  et  mortui  sunt. 
Qui  manducat  hunc  panem, 
vivet  in  setemum. 


The  beloved  Disciple  could  not  remain  silent  on  tlie 
Mystery  of  Love.  But,  at  the  time  when  he  wrote 
his  Gospel,  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist  had  been 
sufficiently  recorded  by  the  three  Evangelists  who  had 
preceded  him,  as  also  by  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles. 
Instead,  therefore,  of  repeating  what  these  had 
written,  he  completed  it,  by  relating  the  solemn 
promise  made  by  Jesus,  on  the  banks  of  Lake  Tiberias, 
a  year  before  the  Last  Supper. 

He  was  surrounded  by  the  thousands,  who  were  in 
admiration  at  his  having  miraculously  multiplied  the 
loaves  and  fishes :  Jesus  takes  the  opportunity  of 
telling  them,  that  he  himself  is  the  true  bread  come 
down  from  heaven,  and  which,  unlike  the  manna 
given  to  their  fathers  by  Moses,  could  preserve 
man  from  death.    Life  is  the  best  of  all  gifts,  as  death 


282  CORPUS   CIIRISTI. 

is  the  worst  of  evils.     Life  exists  in  God  as  in  its 
source ;  ^  he  alone  can  give  it  to  whom  he  pleases, 
and  restore  it  to  him  who  has  lost  it.     Man,  who 
was  created  in  grace,  lost  his  life,  when  he  sinned, 
and  incurred  death.     But  God  so  loved  the  world,  as 
to  send  it,  lost  as  it  was,  his  Son,"  with  the  mission  of 
restoring  man  to  life.     True  God  of  true  God,  Light 
of  Light,  the  Only  Begotten  Son  is,  likewise,  true 
Life  of  true  Life,  hy  nature  :    and,  as  the  Father 
enlightens  them  that  are  in  darkness,  by  this  Son, 
who  is  his  Light,  so,  likewise,  he  gives  life  to  them 
that  are  dead,  and  he  gives  it  to  them  in  this  same 
Son  of  his,  who  is  his  living  Image.^     The  Word  of 
God,  then,  came  amongst  men,  that  they  might  have 
life,  and  abundant  life.^     And  whereas  it  is  the  pro- 
perty of  food  to  increase  and  maintain  life,  therefore 
did  he  become   our  Food,  our  living  and  life-giving 
Food,  which  has  come  down  from  heaven  ;  partaking 
of  the  life  eternal  which  he  has  in  his  Father's  bosom, 
the  Flesh  of  the  Word  communicates  this  same  life 
to  them  that  eat  It.     That,  (as  St.  Cyril  of  Alexan- 
dria observes,)  which,  of  its  own  nature,  is  corruptible, 
cannot  be  brought  to  life  in  any  other  way,  than  by 
its  corporal  union  with  the  body  of  him  who  is  life 
by  nature  :  now,  just  as  two  pieces  of  wax  melted 
together  by  the  fire  make  but  one,   so  are  we  and 
Christ  made   one  by  our  partaking  of  his  Body  and 
Blood.     This  life,    therefore,    which   resides   in  the 
Flesh  of  the  Word,  made  ours  within  us,  shall  be 
no  more  overcome  by  death  ;  on  the  day  appointed, 
this  life  will  throw  ojff  the  chains  of  the  old  enemy, 
and  will  triumph  over  corruption  in  these  our  bodies, 
making   them   immortal.^     Hence   it    is,    that    the 


»  Ps.  XXXV.  10. 

2  St.  John,  iii.  16. 

3  St.  Cyril  of  Alex.  In  Johan,  lib.  iv.  cap.  3. 

♦  St.  John,  X.  10. 

*  St.  Cyril  of  Alex.  //*  Johan,  lib.  x.  cap.  2. 


I 


MASS.  283 

Churcli,  witL.  her  delicate  feelings  both  as  Bride  and 
Mother,  selects  from  this  same  passage  of  St.  John, 
her  Gospel  for  the  daily  Mass  of  the  Dead ;  thus 
drying  up  the  tears  of  the  living  who  are  mourning 
over  their  departed  friends,  and  consoling  them  by 
bringing  them  into  the  presence  of  the  holy  Host, 
which  is  the  source  of  true  life,  and  the  centre  of  all 
our  hopes. 

Thus  was  it  to  be,  that  not  only  the  soul  was  to  be 
renewed  by  her  contact  with  the  Word,  but  even  the 
body,  earthly  and  material  as  it  is,  was  to  share,  in 
its  way,  of  what  our  Saviour  called  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth}  "They,"  as  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  has 
so  beautifully  said,  "who  have  been  led,  by  an 
"  enemy's  craft,  to  take  poison,  neutralise,  by  some 
"  other  potion,  the  power  which  would  cause  death ; 
"  and  as  was  the  deadly,  so  likewise  the  curative  must 
"  be  taken  into  the  very  bowels  of  the  sufferer ;  that 
"  so  the  efficacy  of  that  which  brings  relief  may  per- 
"  meate  through  the  whole  body.  Thus  we,  having 
"  tasted  that  which  ruined  our  nature,  require  a 
*'  something  which  will  restore  and  put  to  right  that 
"  which  was  disordered  ;  and  that,  when  this  salutary 
"  medicine  shall  be  within  us,  it  may,  as  an  antidote, 
"  drive  out  the  mischief  of  the  poison,  which  had 
"  previously  been  taken  into  the  body.  And  what  is 
"  this  (salutary  medicine)  ?  No  other  than  that 
"  Body,  which  had  both  been  shown  to  be  stronger 
"  than  death,  and  was  the  beginning  of  our  life.  For, 
"  says  the  Apostle,  as  a  little  leaven  makes  the  whole 
"  paste  to  be  like  itself,  so,  likewise,  that  Body,  which 
*'  God  had  willed  should  be  put  to  death,  when  it  is 
"  within  ourSy  transmutes  and  transfers  it  wholly  to 
**  Itself.  .  .  Now,  the  only  way  whereby  a  sub- 
**  stance  may  be  thus  got  into  the  body,  is  by  its  being 
"  taken  as  food  and  drink."  ^ 

1  St.  Jolm,  vi.  64. 

2  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa.  Orat.  Catech.,  cap.  37. 


284  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

The  Offertory  is  taken  from  those  words  of  Leviticus 
(xxi,  6,)  wherein  God  commands  the  Priests  of  the 
ancient  covenant  to  be  holy,  because  of  their  having 
to  offer  incense  and  loaves  of  proposition  to  him,  as 
figures  of  something  to  be  at  another  time.  As  much 
as  the  priesthood  of  the  New  Testament  is  superior  to 
•this  ministry  of  the  figurative  Law,  so  much  should 
the  hands  of  Aaron  be  surpassed  in  holiness  by  those 
that  have  to  offer,  to  God  the  Father,  the  true  Bread 
of  heaven,  which  is  the  incense  of  infinite  fragrance. 

OFFERTORY. 

Sacerdotes  Domini  incen-  The  priests  of  the  Lord 
sum  et  panes  offerunt  Deo  :  offer  unto  God  incense  and 
et  ideo  sancti  enint  Deo  suo,  loaves  :  and,  therefore,  shall 
et  non  poUuentnomen  ejus,  they  be  holy  to  their  God, 
alleluia.  and  shall  not  defile  his  name, 

alleluia. 

In  the  Secret,  the  Priest  prays  that  there  may 
be,  in  the  Church,  that  unifi/  and  peace ,  which  are 
the  special  grace  of  the  holy  Sacrament,  as  the 
Fathers  teach  us.  The  very  bread  and  wine,  which 
are  offered,  express  this :  the  bread  is  made  up  out 
of  many  grains,  and  the  wine  out  of  many  berries. 

The  Preface,  both  for  the  Feast  and  the  Octave,  is 
that  of  Christmas  :  we  are  thus  reminded  of  the  close 
connexion  which  exists  between  the  two  mysteries  of 
the  Birth  of  Christ  and  the  Eucharist.  It  was  in 
Bethlehem,  the  house  of  Bread,  that  Jesus,  the  Bread 
of  Life,  came  down  from  heaven,  through  the  Virgin, 
his  ever  blessed  Mother. 

SECRET. 

Ecclesia)  tuse,  quaesumus        Mercifully  grant  thy  Church, 

Domine,    unitatis   et    pacis  O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  the 

propitius     dona     concede  :  gifts  of  unity  and  peace,  which 

quae  sub  oblatis  muneribus  are  mystically  represented  in 

mystice   designantur.      Per  these  offerings.    Through,  etc, 
Doniinum. 


MASS. 


285 


PREFACE. 


It  is  truly  meet  and  just, 
right  and  available  to  salva- 
tion, that  we  should  always, 
and  in  all  places,  give  thanks 
to  thee,  O  holy  Lord,  Father 
Almighty,  eternal  God  ;  for 
that,  by  the  mystery  of  the 
Incarnate  "Word,  a  new  ray  of 
thy  glory  has  appeared  to  the 
eyes  of  our  soul :  so  that,  while 
we  behold  God  visibly,  we 
may  be  carried  by  him  to  the 
love  of  things  invisible  :  and, 
therefore,  with  the  Angels  and 
Archangels,  with  the  Thrones 
and  Dominations,  and  with  all 
the  heavenly  host,  we  sing  a 
hymn  to  thy  glory,  saying 
unceasingly. 


Yere  dignum  et  justum 
est,  eequum  et  salutare,  nos 
tibi  semper  et  ubique  gra- 
tias  agere  :  Domine  sancte, 
Pater  omnipotens,  seterne 
Deus  ;  quia  per  incamati 
Verbi  mysterium,  nova 
mentis  nostrae  oculis  lux 
tuse  claritatis  infulsit  :  ut 
dum  visibiliter  Deum  cog- 
no  scimus,  per  hunc  in  in- 
visibilium  amorem  rapia- 
mur  :  et  ideo  cum  Angelis 
et  Archangelis,  cum  Thronis 
et  Dominationibus,  cumque 
omni  militia  coelestis  exer- 
citus  hymnum  gloriae  tuae 
canimus,  sine  fine  dicentes. 


Faithful  to  her  Lord's  injunction,  which  she  brought 
before  us  in  the  Epistle,  the  Church  reminds  her 
children,  in  the  Communion-Anthem,  that  they 
announce  the  Death  of  Christ,  when  they  receive  his 
Body  ;  and  that  consequently,  they  should  tremble 
at  the  very  thought  of  an  unworthy  Communion. 


COMMUNION. 


As  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this 
bread,  and  drink  the  chalice, 
ye  shall  show  the  death  of  the 
Lord,  until  he  come  :  whoso- 
ever, therefore,  shall  eat  this 
bread,  or  drink  the  chalice  of 
the  Lord  unworthily,  shall  be 
guilty  of  the  body  and  of  the 
blood  of  the  Lord,  alleluia. 


Quotiescumque  manduca- 
bitis  panem  hunc,  et  caHcem 
bibetis,  mortem  Domini  an- 
nuntiabitis,  donee  veniat  : 
itaque  quicumque  manduca- 
verit  panem,  vel  biberit  ca- 
licem  Domini  indigne,  reus 
erit  corporis  et  sanguinis 
Domini,  alleluia. 


The  Church  concludes  the  Mysteries  by  praying 


286 


CORPUS   CHllISTI. 


that  there  he  granted  that  eternal  and  unveiled  union 
with  the  divine  Word,  of  which  she  has  a  pledge  and 
figure  in  the  partaking,  here  below,  of  the  real  sub- 
stance of  his  Body  and  Blood,  under  the  veil  of 
Faith. 


POST- COMMUNION . 


Fac  nos,  quaBSumus  Domi- 
ne,  divinitatis  tuae  sempi- 
tema  fruitione  repleri  : 
quam  pretiosi  Corporis  et 
Sanguinis  tui  temporalis 
perceptio  praefigurat.  Qui 
vivis. 


Grant  us,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  everlasting  pos- 
session of  thyself  :  as  a  pledsje 
of  which,  we  have  received  thy 
Body  and  Blood.  Who  livest, 
etc. 


THE  PEOCESSIOX. 

"Who  is  this  who  comes  up,  embalming  the  desert  of 
the  world  with  her  clouds  of  incense  and  myrrh,  and 
perfumes  unnumbered  ?  The  Bride  has  awakened  of 
her  own  accord,  to-day.  Full  of  desire  to  please 
him,  and  very  lovely,  the  Church  is  standing  round 
the  golden  litter,  whereon  is  throned  her  Spouse  in 
his  glory.  Near  him  are  drawn  up  the  valiant  ones 
of  Israel, — the  priests  and  levites  of  the  Lord  who 
are  strong  even  with  God.  Go  forth,  ye  daughters  of 
Sion !  fix  your  gaze  on  the  true  Solomon,  so  beautiful 
in  the  diadem,  wherewith  his  mother  crowned  him  on 
the  day  of  his  espousals,  the  day  of  the  joy  of  his 
heart !  ^  That  diadem  is  the  Flesh  received  by  the 
divine  Word,  from  the  Virgin  Mother,  when  he  took 
our  human  nature  for  his  Bride.^  By  this  most  per- 
fect of  Bodies,  by  this  sacred  Flesh,  there  is  every 


*  Cant.  iii.  5-11. 


^  St.  Grcff.  Ma;?,  in  Cant. 


PROCESSION.  287 

day  continued,  in  the  Eucharistic  banquet,  the  inef- 
fable mystery  of  the  marriage  between  man  and 
eternal  Wisdom.  For  our  true  Solomon,  then,  each 
day  is  the  day  of  the  jorj  of  his  heart ,  the  day  of 
nuptial  rejoicing  :  could  anything  be  more  just  than 
that  once  in  the  Year,  holy  Church  should  give  full 
freedom  to  the  transports  of  the  love  she  has  for  her 
divine  Spouse,  who  resides  with  her  in  the  Sacrament 
of  Love,  although  in  a  hidden  manner  ?  It  is  on  this 
account,  that,  in  to-day's  JNFass,  the  Priest  has  con- 
secrated two  Hosts  ;  and  that  after  having  received 
one  of  these  in  communion,  he  has  placed  the 
other  in  the  glittering  Ostensorium,  which  is  to  be 
carried  in  his  trembling  hands,  beneath  a  canopy, 
whilst  hymns  of  triumphant  joy  are  being  sung,  and 
the  Faithful,  in  prostrate  adoration,  are  being  blessed 
by  their  Jesus,  who  thus  comes  amongst  them. 

This  solemn  homage  to  the  sacred  Host  is,  as  we 
have  already  said,  a  later  institution  than  the  Feast 
itself  of  Corpus  Christi.  Pope  Urban  the  Fourth 
does  not  speak  of  it  in  his  Bull  of  the  Institution,  in 
1264.  Twenty-two  years  later,  Durandus  of  Mende 
wrote  his  Rational  of  Divine  Offices,  in  which  he 
several  times  mentions  the  Processions  which  were 
then  in  use ;  but  he  has  not  a  word  upon  that  of 
Corpus  Christi.  On  the  other  hand,  Martin  the 
Fifth,  and  Eugenius  the  Fourth,  in  their  Constitutions, 
which  we  have  already  quoted  (May  26,  1429,  May 
26,  1433),  plainly  show  that  it  was  then  in  use,  for 
they  grant  Indulgences  to  them  that  are  present  at 
it.  Donatus  Bossius,  of  Milan,  tells  us,  in  his 
Chronicle,  that  on  Thursday,  the  24th  of  May,  1404, 
"  there  was  carried,  for  the  first  time  solemnly,  the 
"  Body  of  Christ  in  the  streets  of  Padua,  ivhich  has 
"  since  become  the  customy  Some  writers  have  con- 
cluded from  these  words,  that  the  Procession  of 
Corpus  Christi  was  not  in  use  before  that  date,  and 
that  it  first  originated  at  Padua ;  but  the  words  of 


288  CORPUS   CHRISTl. 

Bossius  scarcely  justify  such  an  inference,  and  the 
words  he  uses  may  be  understood  of  a  local  custom. 

Indeed,  we  find  mention  made  of  this  Procession, 

in  a  Manuscript  of  the  Church  of  Chartres,  in  1330; 

in  an  Act  of  the  Chapter  of  Tournai,  in  1325  ;  in  a 

Council  of  Paris,  in  1323 ;  and  in  one  held  at  Sens, 

in  1320.     Indulgences  are   granted,    by    these   two 

Councils,  to  those  who  observe  abstinence  and  fasting 

on  the  vigil  of  Corpus   Christ i,  and  they  add  these 

words  :  "  As  to  the  solemn  Procession  made  on  the 

"  Thursday's    Feast,    when   the   holy   Sacrament  is 

"  carried,  seeing  that  it  appears  to  have  been  intro- 

"  duced  in  these,  our  times,  by  a  sort  of  inspiration, — 

"  we  prescribe  nothing    at    present,    and   leave   all 

"  concerning   it  to   the   devotion  of  the  clergy  and 

"people."^     So  that  the  initiative  to  the  institution 

of  to-day's  Procession,  seems  to  have  been  made  by 

the  devotion  of  the  Faithful ;  and  that  this  admirable 

completion  given  to  our  Feast,  began  in  France,  and, 

thence,    was    adopted  in   all   the   Churches   of    the 

West. 

There  is  groucd  for  supposing,  that  at  first  the 
sacred  Host  was  not  carried  in  these  Processions  as 
it  is  now;  it  was  veiled  over,  or  inclosed  in  a  sort  of 
rich  shrine.  Even  so  far  back  as  the  1 1th  Century, 
it  had  been  the  custom,  in  some  places,  to  carry  It 
in  this  way,  during  the  Processions  of  Palm  Sunday 
and  Easter  Sunday  morning.  We  have  elsewhere 
spoken  of  these  devotional  practices,  which,  however, 
were  not  so  much  for  the  direct  purpose  of  honouring 
the  Blessed  Sacrament,  as  for  that  of  bringing  more 
forward  the  mystery  of  those  solemnities.^  Be  this 
as  it  may,  the  use  of  ostensoria,  or  monstrcmces,  as 
they  are  termed  in  a  Council  held  in  1452,  at  Cologne, 
soon  followed  the  institution  of  the  new  Procession. 

'  Labbe. 

2  Passiontide  and   Holy  Week,  p.  199 ;  Paschal  Time,   vol.   i. 
page  138,  etc. 


PROCESSION.  289 

They  were  made,  at  first,  in  shape  like  little  towers. 
In  a  Manuscript  Missal,  dated  1374,  the  letter  D, 
which  is  the  first  of  the  Collect  for  the  feast  of  Corpus 
Christi,  gives  us  a  miniature  illumination,  represent- 
ing a  Bishop,  accompanied  by  two  acolytes,  who  is 
carrying  the  Host  in  a  golden  tower,  which  has  four 
openings.  But  Catholic  piety  soon  began  to  ofi'er  to  its 
Lord,  all  the  exterior  honour  it  could ;  to  that  Lord 
who  hides  himself  and  his  glory  in  the  Mystery  of 
Love  ;  and  to  the  Sun  of  Justice  thus  shrouded,  it 
suggested  the  compensation,  poor  though  it  must 
necessarily  be,  of  a  crystal  sphere,  surrounded  by 
rays  of  gold,  or  of  other  precious  material,  and  of 
exposing  the  sacred  Host  within  it.  Not  to  mention 
other,  and  more  ancient  records,  we  find  a  very  marked 
instance  of  the  rapidity  wherewith  this  use  of  the 
Monstrance  was  adopted :  it  occurs  in  a  Gradual  of 
the  period  of  Louis  the  Twelfth  (1498-1515)  ;  the 
initial  letter  of  the  Introit  for  Corpus  Christi  has 
within  it  a  sun  or  sphere,  like  those  in  present  use ; 
it  is  being  carried  on  the  shoulders  of  two  figures 
vested  in  copes,  who  are  followed  by  the  King,  and 
several  Cardinals  and  Prelates.^ 

And  yet,  the  Protestant  heresy,  which  was  then 
beginning,  gave  the  name  of  novelty,  superstition, 
and  idolatry,  to  these  natural  developments  of  Catholic 
worship,  prompted,  as  they  were,  by  faith  and  love. 
The  Council  of  Trent  pronounced  anathema  upon  these 
calumnies;  and,  in  a  Chapter  apart,^  showed  how 
rightly  the  Church  had  acted  in  countenancing  these 
practices.  The  words  of  the  Council  are  as  follows  : 
*'The  holy  Council  declares,  that  there  has  been 
*'  most  piously  and  religiously  introduced  into  God*s 
**  Church  the  practice,  that  each  year,  on  a  certain 
*'  special  feast,  the  august  and  venerable  Sacrament 
*'  should  be  honoured  with  singular  veneration  and 

^  Thiers.     De  I'exposit.  du  S.  Sacr.,  liv.  ii.  cli.  2.  > 

^  Sess.  xiii.  cap.  v.  and  Can.  vi. 
VOL.  X.  U 


290  CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

''  solemnity,  and  that  It  should  be  reverently  and 
''  with  every  honour  carried  in  processions  through 
*•'  the  public  roads  and  places.  For  it  is  most  just 
"  that  certain  holidays  should  be  appointed,  whereon 
"  all  Christians  should,  with  special  and  unusual 
"  demonstrations,  evince  their  gratitude  and  mindful- 
"  ness  towards  their  common  Lord  and  Redeemer, 
''  for  this  so  unspeakable  and  truly  divine  favour,  in 
"  which  is  represented  his  victory  and  triumph  over 
''  death.  And  it  was  also  necessary,  that  thus  in- 
"  vincible  truth  should  triumph  over  lying  and  heresy  ; 
"'  that  her  enemies,  seeing  all  that  splendour,  and 
"  being  in  the  midst  of  such  great  joy  of  the  whole 
"  Church,  should  either  grow  wearied  and  acknowledge 
**  their  being  beaten  and  broken,  or,  being  ashamed 
*'  and  confounded,  should  be  converted." 

But  to  us  Catholics,  faithful  adorers  of  the 
Sacrament  of  Love,  "  O  the  joy  of  the  immense 
*'  glory  the  Church  is  sending  up  to  God  this  hour  : 
^'  verily  !  as  if  the  world  was  all  uufallen  still !  We 
"  think,  and,  as  we  think,  the  thoughts  are  like  so 
"  many  successive  tide-waves  filling  our  whole 
*'  souls  with  the  fulness  of  delight,  of  all  the 
"  thousands  of  Masses  which  are  being  said  or  sung 
*'  the  whole  world  over,  and  all  rising  with  one  note 
"of  blissful  acclamation,  from  grateful  creatures,  to 
"the  Majesty  of  our  merciful  Creator.  How  many 
"  glorious  Processions,  with  the  sun  upon  their 
"  banners,  are  now  winding  their  way  round  the 
"  squares  of  mighty  cities,  through  the  flower- strewn 
"streets  of  Christian  villages,  through  the  antique 
"  cloisters  of  the  glorious  cathedral,  or  through  the 
"  grounds  of  the  devout  seminary,  where  the  various 
"  colours  of  the  faces,  and  the  different  languages  of 
"  the  people  are  only  so  many  fresh  tokens  of  the 
"  unity  of  that  faith,  which  they  are  all  exultingly 
"  professing  in  the  single  voice  of  the  magnificent 
"  ritual  of  Rome  !     Upon  how  many  altars  of  various 


PROCESSION.  291 

"  architecture,  amid  sweet  flowers  and  starry  lights, 
"  amid  clouds  of  humble  incense,  and  the  tumult  of 
"  thrilling  song,  before  thousands  of  prostrate  wor- 
*'  shippers,  is  the  Blessed  Sacrament  raised  for  ex- 
**  position,  or  taken  down  for  benediction  !     And  how 
"  many  blessed  acts  of  faith  and  love,  of  triumph  and 
^*  of  reparation,  do  not  each  of  these  things  surely 
"  represent !      The  world  over,  the  summer  air   is 
"  filled  with  the  voice  of  song.      The  gardens  are 
"  shorn  of  their  fairest  blossoms,  to  be  flung  beneath 
"  the  feet  of  the  Sacramental  God.     The  steeples  are 
"  reeling   with  the  clang  of  bells ;   the  cannon  are 
"  booming  in   the    gorges   of   the   Andes   and    the 
"  Appenines  ;  the  ships  of  the  harbours  are  painting 
"  the  bays  of  the  sea  with  their  show  of  gaudy  flags  ; 
"  the  pomp  of  royal  or  republican  armies  salutes  the 
"  King  of  kings.     The  Pope  on  his  throne,  and  the 
"  school-girl    in   her   village,    cloistered    nuns,    and 
"  sequestered  hermits,  bishops   and   dignitaries  and 
"preachers,  emperors  and  kings  and  princes,  all  are 
"engrossed    to-day   with    the    Blessed    Sacrament. 
"  Cities  are  illuminated ;  the  dwellings  of  men  are 
"  alive  with  exultation.     Joy  so  abounds  that  men 
"  rejoice  they  know  not  why,  and  their  joy  overflows 
"  on  sad  hearts,  and  on  the  poor,  and  the  imprisoned, 
"  and  the  wandering,   and   the   orphaned,   and   the 
"home-sick  exiles.     All  the  millions  of  souls  that 
"  belong  to  the  royal  family  and  spiritual  lineage  of 
"St.  Peter  are  to-day  engaged  more  or  less  with  the 
"Blessed  Sacrament  :    so   that  the   whole   Church 
"Militant  is  thrilling  with  glad  emotion,  like  the 
"tremulous  rocking  of  the  mighty  sea.     Sin  seems 
"  forgotten ;  tears  even  are  of  rapture  rather  than  of 
"  penance.     It  is  like  the  soul's  first  day  in  heaven  ; 
"or   as  if  earth   itself  were   passing  into   heaven, 
"  as  it  well  might  do,  for  sheer  joy  of  the  Blessed 
"  Sacrament.'^  ^ 

^  Father  Faber  :   The  Blessed  Sacrameut,  p.  19-21. 


292  CX)RPUS   CHRISTI. 

There  are  sung,  during  the  Procession,  the  Hymns 
of  to-day's  Office,  the  Lauda  Siou,  the  Te  Deum,  and, 
if  time  permit,  the  Benedictus^  Magnificat,  or  other 
liturgical  pieces,  which  are  in  keeping  with  the  spirit 
of  the  Feast,  such  as  the  Hymns  for  the  Ascension,  as 
specified  in  the  Ritual.  Having  returned  to  the 
Church,  the  function  concludes,  as  at  other  Bene- 
dictions, with  the  Tantum  ergo,  the  Yersicle  and  Col- 
lect of  the  Blessed  Sacrament.  But,  after  the 
Blessing  has  been  given,  the  Deacon  does  not  put  the 
sacred  Host  into  the  Tabernacle,  but  on  the  Throne 
prepared  for  it,  and  round  which,  for  eight  days^ 
the  Faithful  will  be  keeping  a  devout  and  adoring 
watch. 


SEXT. 

The  Hymn  and  Psalms  are  given  in  page  79. 

Ant.  Pinguis  est  panis  AxT.  The  Bread  of  Christ  is 
Christi,  et  praebebit  delicias  fat,  and  it  shall  yield  dainties 
regibus,  alleluia.  to  kings,  alleluia. 


CAPITULUM. 

(1  Cor.  xi.) 

Quoties      cumque      enim        As  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this 
manducabitis  panem  tunc,     bread,  and  drink  the  chalice, 
et  calicem  bibetis,  mortem    ye  shall  show  the  death,  of  the 
Domini  annuntiabitis,  donee    Lord,  until  he  come, 
veniat. 

Bt.  hreve. — He  hath  fed  them  gi.  hreve. — Cibavit  illos  ex 
with  the  fat  of  Wheat,  *  Alle-  adipe  fnmienti,  *  Alleluia, 
luia,  alleluia.     He  hath  fed.        alleluia.     Cibavit. 

^.  And  hath  filled  them  ^.  Et  de  petra,  melle 
with  honey  out  of  the  rock.  *  saturaviteos.*  Alleluia,  alle- 
Alleluia,  alleluia.  luia. 

Glory.     He  hath  fed.  Gloria  Patri.     Cibavit. 


NONE. 


293 


^.  Bring  bread  out  of  the  y.  Educaspanem  de  terra, 

earth,  alleluia.  alleluia. 

Bt.  And  may  wine  cheer  the  gt.  Et  vinum  laetificet  cor 

heart  of  man,  alleluia.  hominis,  alleluia. 

The  Prayer  is  the  Collect  of  the  Mass,  page  274. 


NONE. 

The  Hymn  and  Psalms  are  given  in  page  83. 

Ant.  To    him    that     over-  Ant.  Yincenti  dabo  man- 

cometh,  I  will  give  a  hidden  na   absconditum   et  nomen 

manna,  and  a  new  name,  alle-  novum,  alleluia. 
luia. 


CAPITULUM. 


(1  Cor.  xi.) 


Whosoever  shall  eat  this 
bread,  or  drink  the  chalice  of 
the  Lord  unworthily,  shall  be 
guilty  of  the  body  and  of  the 
blood  of  the  Lord. 

gt.  hreve. — Bring  bread  out 
of  the  earth,  *  Alleluia,  alle- 
luia.    Bring. 

y.  And  may  wine  cheer  the 
heart  of  man.  *  Alleluia, 
alleluia. 

Glory.     Bring. 

f.  He  hath  placed  peace  ia 
thy  borders,  alleluia. 

gt.  And  hath  fOled  thee  with 
the  fat  of  com,  alleluia. 


Quicumque  manducaverit 
panem  hunc,  vel  biberit 
calicem  Domini  indigne,  reus 
erit  corporis  et  sanguinis 
Domini. 

gi.  hreve> — Educas  panem 
de  terra.  *  Alleluia,  alleluia. 
Educas. 

^.  Et  vinum  laetificet  cor 
homiois.  *  Alleluia,  alleluia. 

Gloria  Patri.  Educas. 

^.  Posuit  fines  tuos  pa- 
cem,  alleluia. 

gt.  Et  adipe  frumenti  sa- 
tiat  te,  alleluia. 


The  Prayer  is  the  Collect  of  the  Mass,  page  274. 


294 


CORrUS   CHRISTI. 


SECOND  VESPERS. 

In  the  Office  of  Vespers  or  Even -Song,  the  Church 
chants,  and  in  presence  of  the  adorable  Sacrament 
exposed  on  the  Throne,  the  wonders  of  this  great 
day. 

The  first  Psalm  is  on  the  glories  of  Christ,  our 
Iligh  Priest :  TJie  Lord  hath  sicoru :  he  is  a  Priest  for 
erer,  according  to  the  order  of  Melchisedech,  Like 
this  king  of  justice  and  peace,  Christ  selected  bread 
and  winei  as  the  materials  of  his  Sacrifice  :  but  under 
these  appearances,  was  hidden  the  oblation  which, 
in  all  things,  was  worthy  both  of  the  eternal  Priest 
who  offered  it,  and  of  the  Father,  who  had  begot  him 
before  the  day-star. 


AxT.  Sacerdos  in  aoter- 
num  Christus  Dominus  se- 
cundum ordineni  Melchise- 
dech, panem  et  vinum  ob- 
tulit. 


AxT.  Christ  the  Lord,  being 
a  Priest  for  ever,  according  to 
the  order  of  Melchisedech, 
oflFered  bread  and  wine. 


Psalm  109. 


Dixit  Dominus  Domino 
meo  :  *  Sede  a  dextris  meis. 

Donee  ponam  inimicos 
tuos  :  *  scabellum  pedum 
tuorum. 

Tirgam  viri;utis  tuae  emit- 
tet  Dominus  ex  Sion  :  ♦  do- 
luinare  in  medio  inimico- 
rum  tuorum. 

Tecum  principium  in  die 
virtutis  tuse  in  splendoribus 
Fanctorum  :  «  ex  utero  ante 
luciferum  genui  te. 


The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord, 
his  Son  :  Sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand,  and  reign  ivith  me. 

Until,  071  the  day  of  thy  last 
Coming,  I  make  thine  enemies 
thy  footstool. 

0  Christ  !  the  Lord,  thy 
Father  "will  send  forth  the 
sceptre  of  thy  power,  out  of 
Sion  :  from  thence  rule  thou  in 
the  midst  of  thine  enemies. 

"With  thee  is  the  principality 
in  the  day  of  thy  strength,  in 
the  brightness  of  the  saints  : 
for  the  Father  hath  said  to  thee  : 
From  the  womb  before  the 
day-star  I  begot  thee. 


SECOND   VESPERS. 


295 


The  Lord  hath,  sworn,  and 
he  will  not  repent  :  he  hath 
said,  speaking  of  thee  the  God- 
Man,  Thou  art  ti  Priest  for 
ever,  aCv  ording  to  the  order  of 
Melchisedech. 

Therefore,  0  Father,  the 
Lord,  thy  So7i,  is  at  thy  right 
hand:  he  hath  broken  kings 
in  the  day  of  his  wrath. 

He  shall  also  judge  among 
nations  :  he  shall  fill  the  ruins 
of  the  luorld  :  he  shall  crush 
the  heads  in  the  land  of  many. 

He  shall  drink,  in  the  way, 
of  the  torrent  of  sufferings  : 
therefore-  shall  he  lift  up  the 
head. 

Ant.  Christ  the  Lord,  being 
a  Priest  for  evex',  according  to 
the  order  of  Melchisedech, 
offered  bread  and  wine. 


Juravit  Dominus,  et  non 
poenitebit  eum  :  *  Tu  es 
Sacerdos  in  setemum  se- 
cundum ordinem  Melchise- 
dech. 

Dominus  a  dextris  tuis  :  * 
confregit  in  die  irse  suae  re- 
ges. 

Judicabit  in  nationibus, 
implebit  ruinas  :  *  conquas- 
sabit  capita  in  terra  multo- 
rum. 

De  torrente  in  via  bibet :  * 
propterea  exaltabit  caput. 


AxT.  Sacerdos  in  aeter- 
num  Christus  Dominus  se- 
cundum ordinem  Melchise- 
dech, panem  et  vinum  ob- 
tulit. 


The  Bread  and  Wine  of  tlie  Sacrifice  pointed  to  a 
banquet :  this  banquet  is  commemorated  in  the  follow- 
ing Psalm,  which  speaks  of  there  being  a  great 
memorial,  made  by  our  Grod,  of  all  the  wonders  he 
has  done  for  us  creatures.  This  memorial  is  Christ's 
giving  himself,  as  food,  to  all  them  that  fear  him. 
May  his  praise  endure^  then,  for  ever  ! 


AxT.  The  merciful  Lord 
hath  given  food  unto  them 
that  fear  him,  as  a  memorial 
of  his  wonderful  works. 


AxT.  Miserator  Dominus 
escam  dedit  timentibus  se, 
in  memoriam  suorum  mira- 
bilimn. 


Psalm  110. 


I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord, 
with  my  whole  heart  :  in  the 
counsel  of  the  just,  and  in  the 
congregation. 


Confitebor  tibi,  Domme, 
in  toto  corde  meo  :  *  in  con- 
cilio  justorum  et  congrega- 
tione. 


296 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Magna  opera  Domini  :  * 
exquisita  in  omnes  volun- 
tates  ejus. 

Conf essio  et  magnificentia 
opus  ejus  :  *  et  justitia  ejus 
manet  in  sreculuni  saeculi. 

Memoriam  fecit  mirabi- 
liuni  suorum,  niisericors  et 
miserator  Dominus  :  *  es- 
cam  dedit  timentibus  se. 


Memor  erit  in  saeculum 
testamenti  sui  :  *  virtutem 
operuni  suorum  annuntiabit 
populo  suo. 

Ut  det  illis  haereditatem 
gentium  :  *  opera  manuuiu 
ejus  Veritas  et  judicium. 

Fidelia  omnia  mandata 
ejus,  confirmata  in  Sfeculum 
saeculi  :  *  facta  in  veritate 
et  aequitate. 

Eedemptionem  niisit  po- 

*    man  davit 

testamentum 


pulo  suo  : 
in  getemum 
8uum. 

Sanctum  et  terribile  Xo- 
men  ejus  :  *  initiiim  sapien- 
tiae  timor  Domini. 

Intellectus  bonus  omnibus 
facientibus  eum  :  *  laudatio 
ejus  manet  in  saBCulum  ssc- 
culi. 

Ant.  Miserator  Dominus 
escam  dedit  timentibus  sc, 
in  memoriam  suorum  mira- 
bilium. 


Great  are  the  works  of  the 
Lord  :  sought  out  according 
to  all  his  wills. 

His  work  is  praise  and  mag- 
nificence :  and  his  justice  con- 
tinueth  for  ever  and  ever. 

He  hath  made  a  MEMORL\L 
of  his  wonderful  works,  being 
a  merciful  and  gracious  L#ord : 
and,  being  the  Bread  of  Life, 
he  hath  given  food  to  them, 
that  fear  him. 

He  will  be  mindful,  for  ever, 
of  his  covenant  luith  men  :  this 
is  the  time  tvhen  he  will  show 
forth  to  his  people  the  power 
of  his  works. 

That  he  may  give  them,  {his 
Church,)  the  inheritance  of 
the  Gentiles  :  the  works  of  his 
hand  are  truth  and  judgment. 

All  his  commandments  are 
faithful,  confirmed  for  ever 
and  ever  :  made  in  truth  and 
equity. 

He  hath  sent  Redemption 
to  his  people  :  he  hath,  thereby/, 
commanded  his  covenant  for 
ever. 

Holy  and  terrible  is  his 
Name  :  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is 
the  beginning  of  wisdom. 

A  good  understanding  to 
all  that  do  it  :  his  praise  con- 
tinueth  for  ever  and  ever. 

Ant.  The  merciful  Lord 
hath  given  food  unto  them 
that  fear  him,  as  a  memorial 
of  his  wonderful  works. 


The  Eucharist,  which  is  the  compendium  of  all 
God's  favours,  is,  at  the  sametime,  the  most  perfect 
act  of  thanksgiving,  and  the  only  adequate  one,  which 
we  can  offer  to  his  divine  Majesty.     If,  then,  having 


SECOND   VESPERS. 


297 


come  to  the  close  of  this  day,  and  filled  with  emotion 
at  the  sight  of  the  wonders  of  God's  goodness  towards 
us,  we  cry  out  with  the  Psalmist :  TFhat  shall  I 
render  unto  the  Lord  for  cdl  the  things  that  he  hath 
rendered  to  me  ?  let  us  answer,  with  the  same  Prophet, 
in  the  words  of  this  third  Psalm :  I  will  take  the 
chalice  of  salvation;  I  will  sacrifice  the  sacrifice  of 
praise. 

Ant.  I  will  take  the  Chalice  Ant.  Calicem  salutaris 
of  salvation,  and  will  sacrifice  accipiam,  et  sacrificabo  hos- 
the  Host  of  praise.  tiam  laudis. 

Psalm  115. 


I  have  believed,  therefore 
have  I  spoken  :  but  I  have 
been  humbled  exceedingly. 

I  said  in  my  excess  :  Every 
man  is  a  liar. 

What  shall  I  render  unto 
the  Lord,  for  all  the  things 
that  he  hath  rendered  to  me  ? 

I  will  take  the  chaKce  of 
salvation :  and  I  will  call  upon 
the  Name  of  the  Lord. 

I  will  pay  my  vows  to  the 
Lord  before  all  his  people  : 
precious  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints. 

0  Lord,  for  I  am  thy  ser- 
vant :  I  am  thy  servant,  and 
the  son  of  thy  handmaid. 

Thou  hast  broken  my  bonds : 
I  will  sacrifice  unto  thee  the 
sacrifice  of  praise,  and  I  will 
call  upon  the  Name  of  the 
Lord. 

1  will  pay  my  vows  to  the 
Lord  in  the  sight  of  all  his 
people  :  in  the  courts  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  in  the 
midst  of  thee,  O  Jerusalem. 


Credidi,  propter  quod  lo- 
cutus  sum  :  *  ego  autem  hu- 
miliatus  sum  nimis. 

Ego  dixi  in  excessu  meo  : 

*  Omnis  homo  mendax. 
Quid  retribuam  Domino  : 

*  pro    omnibus  quao   retri- 
buit  mihi  ? 

Calicem  salutaris  acci- 
piam :  *  et  nomen  Domini 
invocabo. 

Yota  mea  Domino  red- 
dam  coram  omni  populo 
ejus  :  *  pretiosa  in  conspec- 
tu  Domini  mors  sancto- 
rum ejus. 

O  Domine,  quia  ego  ser- 
vus  tuus,  *  ego  servus  tuus, 
et  filius  ancillae  tua). 

Dirupisti  vincula  mea  :  * 
tibi  sacrificabo  hostiam  lau- 
dis, et  nomen  Domini  invo- 
cabo. 


mea  Domino    red- 

in    conspectu     omnis 

*  in  atriis  do- 

in  medio  tui 


Vota 
dam 

populi  ejus 
mus  Domini, 
Jerusalem. 


298 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Ant.  Calicem  salutaris  Axr.  I  will  take  the  Chalice 
accipiam,  et  sacrificabo  hos-  of  salvation,  and  will  sacrifice 
tiam  laudis.  the  Host  of  praise. 


The  following  Psalm,  proclaims,  with  holy  enthu- 
siasm, the  loveliness  of  the  sight  offered  this  day  by 
our  earth.  Happiness  and  holiness  seemed,  this 
morning,  to  have  taken  possession  of  the  world.  The 
oil  of  gladness  flowed  from  Christ,  the  Head,  upon 
all  his  members.  The  Church  thrills  with  gladness 
at  seeing,  round  about  the  holy  Table,  her  children,  like 
so  many  young  olive  plants,  ready  to  bring  forth  fruits 
of  grace  and  sanctification.  May  it  be  so  !  May  this 
day  be  a  new  era  for  Sion,  in  abundance  of  all  good 
things,  and  in  the  strengthening  of  peace  in  the  holy 
City! 


AxT.  Sicut  novellfi)  oliva- 
mm,  Ecclesiae  filii  sint  in 
circuitu  mensae  Domini. 


Ant.  May  the  children  of 
the  Church  be  around  the 
Table  of  the  Lord,  as  young 
olive  plants. 


PsALM    127. 


Beati  omnes  qui  timent 
Dominum,  *  qui  ambulant 
in  viis  ejus. 

Labores  manuuni  tuarum 
quia  manducabis  :  *  beatus 
es,  et  bene  tibi  erit. 

Uxor  tua  sicut  vitis  abun- 
dans,  *  in  lateribus  domus 
tuae. 

Filii  tui  sicut  novelise 
olivarum  ,  *  in  circuitu 
mensae  tuae. 

Ecce  sic  benedicetur 
homo  *  qui  timet  Dominum. 

Benedicat  tibi  Dominus 
ex  Sion  :  *  et  videas  bona 


Blessed  are  all  they  that 
fear  the  Lord ;  that  walk  in 
his  ways. 

For  thou  shalt  eat  the  la- 
bours of  thy  hands  :  blessed 
art  thou,  and  it  shall  be  well 
with  thee. 

Thy  wife  as  a  fruitful  vine, 
on  the  sides  of  thy  house. 

Thy  children  as  olive  plants, 
round  about  thy  table. 

Behold !  thus  shall  the  man 
be  blessed,  that  feareth  the 
Lord. 

May  the  Lord  bless  thee  out 
of  Sion:  and  mayst  thou  see 


SECOND   VESPERS. 


299 


the  good  things  of  Jerusalem, 
all  the  days  of  thy  Kfe. 

And  mayst  thou  see  thy 
children's  children,  peace  upon 
Israel. 

Ant.  May  the  children  of 
the  Church  be  around  the 
Table  of  the  Lord,  as  young 
olive  plants. 


Jerusalem  omnibus  diebus 
vitae. 

Et  videas  filios  filiorum 
tuorum,  *  pacem  super 
Israel. 

Ant.  Sicut  novelise  oli- 
varum,  Ecclesiae  filii  sint  in 
circuitu  mensse  Domini. 


Glory  be  to  God  !  and  Peace  unto  men  !  Thus  sang 
the  Angels  when  the  Bread  of  heaven  came  to  Beth- 
lehem. "VVe  have  already  seen,  and  we  will  return, 
during  the  days  of  this  Octave,  to  see,  that  these  are 
the  two  grand  results  of  the  Eucharist.  In  this  fifth 
Psalm  of  Vespers,  the  Church  invites  us  to  sing  the 
praises  of  that  peace,  which  by  the  grace  of  her  Jesus, 
reigns  in  her  borders,  strengthens  the  bolts  of  her  gates, 
and  fills,  with  blessing,  her  children  that  are  within  her. 
But  it  is  the  divine  nourishment,  it  is  the  Wheat  of 
heaven's  own  making,  that  produces  this  admirable 
peace,  by  its  uniting  all  the  members  to  Christ,  in  the 
unity  of  one  Body. 


Ant.  The  Lord,  who  put- 
teth  peace  in  the  borders  of 
the  Church,  filleth  us  with  the 
fat  of  "Wheat. 


Ant.  Qui  pacem  ponit 
fines  Ecclesiae,  frumenti 
adipe  satiat  nos  Dominus. 


Psalm  147. 


Praise  the  Lord,  0  Jerusa- 
lem !  praise  thy  God,  O  Sion  ! 

Because  he  hath  strength- 
ened the  bolts  of  thy  gates  : 
he  hath  blessed  thy  children 
within  thee. 

Who  hath  placed  peace  in 
thy  borders  :  and  filleth  thee 
with  the  fat  of  corn,  that  is, 
Jesus,  the  Bread  of  Life. 


Lauda  Jerusalem  Domi- 
num  :  *  lauda  Deum  tuum 
Sion. 

Quoniam  confortavit  se- 
ras  portarum  tuarum  :  * 
benedixit  filiis  tuis  in  te. 

Qui  posuit  fines  tuos  pa- 
cem :  *  et  adipe  frumenti 
satiat  te. 


300 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Qui  emittit  eloquium 
suum  terras  :  »  velociter 
currit  Sermo  ejus. 

Qui  dat  nivem  sicut  la- 
nam  :  *  nebulam  sicut  cine- 
rem  spargit. 

Mittit  crystallum  suam. 
sicut  buccellas  :  *  ante  fa- 
ciem  frigoris  ejus  quis  sus- 
tinebit  ? 

Eniittet  Verbum  suum,  et 
liquef  aciet  ea  :  *  flabit  Spi- 
ritus  ejus,  et  fluent  aquae. 

Qui  annuntiat  Yerbum 
suum  Jacob  :  *  justitias,  et 
judicia  sua  Israel. 

Non  fecit  taliter  omni 
nationi  :  *  et  judicia  sua 
non  manifestavit  eis. 

AxT.  Qui  pacem  ponit 
fines  Ecclesiae,  frumenti 
adipe  satiat  nos  Dominus. 


Who  sendeth  forth  his 
speech  to  the  earth :  his  Word 
runneth  swiftly. 

Who  giveth  snow  like  wool : 
scattereth  mists  like  ashes. 

He  sendeth  his  crystal  like 
morsels  :  who  shall  stand  be- 
fore the  face  of  his  cold  ? 

He  shall  send  out  his  Word, 
and  shall  melt  them  :  his  wind, 
his  Hohj  Spirit,  shall  blow,  and 
the  waters  shall  run. 

Who  declareth  his  Word 
unto  Jacob  :  his  justices  and 
his  judgments  unto  Israel. 

He  hath  not  done  in  like 
manner  to  every  nation  :  and 
his  judgments  he  hath  not 
made  manifest  to  them. 

AxT.  The  Lord,  who  putteth 
peace  in  the  borders  of  the 
Church,  filleth  us  with  the  fat 
of  AVheat. 


The  Capitulum  gives  us  once  more  the  words  of  the 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  It  is  a  joy  to  hear  him  thus 
bearing  his  testimony  to  the  institution  of  the  Sacra- 
ment of  Love,  and  repeating  to  us  the  parting  request 
of  our  Jesus:  Do  this  in  commemoration  of  Me  ! 


CAPITULUM. 


(1  Cor.  xi.) 


Fratres,  ego  enim  accepi 
a  Domino  quod  et  tradidi 
vobis,  quoniam  Dominus 
Jesus  in  qua  noctc  tradeba- 
tur,  accepit  panem,  et  gra- 
tias  agens,  fregit  et  dixit  : 
Accipite  et  manducate  ;  hoc 


Brethren,  for  I  have  received 
of  the  Lord  that  which  also  I 
delivered  unto  you,  that  the 
Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  he  was  betrayed,  took 
bread,  and  giving  thanks, 
broke,  and  said :  Take  ye  and 


SECOND   VESPERS. 


301 


eat  :  this  is  my  body,  which  est  corpus  meum,  quod  pro 

shall  be  delivered   for  you  :  vobis   tradetur  :  hoc  facite 

this  do  for  the  commemoration  in    meam     commemoratio- 

of  me.  nem. 

The  Hymn,  whicli  then  follows,  gives  us  the  whole 
doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  in  a  sublime  and  concise 
wording.  It  is  the  one  chosen  by  the  Church  for 
singing  the  praise  of  the  adorable  Sacrament :  and  its 
last  two  strophes  are  the  ones  she  prescribes  for  the 
Rite  of  Benediction,  throughout  the  Year. 


HYMN.* 


Sing,  O  my  tongue,  the 
mystery  of  the  glorious  Body, 
and  precious  Blood  which  was 
shed  as  the  world's  ransom,  by 
Him  who  is  the  fruit  of  Mary's 
generous  womb,  Him  the  King 
of  nations. 

Given  unto  us,  and  bom  for 
us  from  the  purest  of  Virgins, 
he  lived  in  this  our  world, 
casting  the  seed  of  the  word  ; 
and  closing  the  days  of  his 
sojourn  here,  by  a  way  full 
of  marvel. 

On  the  night  of  the  Last 
Supper,  he  sat  at  table  with 
his  brethren ;  and  having  fully 
observed  the  Law  as  to  its 
legal  repast,  he  gave  himself, 
with  his  own  hands,  as  food  to 
the  assembled  Twelve. 

The  Word  made  Flesh, 
makes,  by  a  word,  that  true 
bread   should  become    Flesh, 


Pange,  lingua,  gloriosi 
Corporis  mysterium, 
Sanguinisque  pretiosi, 
Quem  in  mundi  pretium, 
Fructus  ventris  generosi, 
Eex  effudit  gentium. 

Nobis  datus,  nobis  natus 
Ex  intacta  Yirgine, 
Et  in  mundo  conversatus, 
Sparso  verbi  semine, 
Sui  moras  incolatus 
Miro  clausit  ordine. 

In  supremae  nocte  coense 
Recumbens  cum  fratribus, 
Observata  lege  plene 
Cibis  in  legalibus, 
Cibum  turbse  duodensB 
Se  dat  suis  manibus. 

Verbum  caro,  panem  va- 
rum 
Verbo  camem  efficit : 


*  In  the  Monastic  Breviary,  it  is  preceded  by  this  Eesponsory  : 

Bt.  breve. — Cibavit  illos  ex  adipe  frumenti.  *  Alleluia,  alleluia. 
Cibavit.  y.  Et  de  petra,  melle  saturavit  eos.  *  Alleluia.  Gloria. 
Cibavit. 


302 


CORPUS    CHRISTI. 


Fitque  sanguis  Christi  me- 

rum : 
Et  si  sensus  deficit, 
Ad  firmandum  cor  sincerum 
Sola  fides  sufficit. 

Tantum   ergo   Sacramen- 
tum 
Veneroniur  cemui  : 
Et  antiqumn  documentum 
Novo  cedat  ritui  : 
Prsestet  fides  supplementum 
Sensuum  defectui. 

Genitori,  Genitoque 
Laus  et  jubilatio, 
Salus,  honor,  virtus  quoque 
Sit  et  benedictio : 
Procedenti  ab  utroque 
Compar  sit  laudatio. 

Amen. 

^.  Panem  de  coelo  praesti- 
tisti  eis,  alleluia. 

gt.  Omne  delectamentum 
in  se  habentem,  alleluia. 


and  wine  the  Blood  of  Christ ; 
and  though  our  sense  may  fail, 
Faith  of  itself  is  enough  to  as- 
sure an  upright  heart. 

Then  let  us,  prostrate,  adore 
so  great  a  Sacrament  :  and  let 
the  ancient  law  give  place  to 
the  new  rite  :  let  Faith  supply 
the  senses'  deficiency. 


To  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
be  praise  and  jubilation,  sal- 
vation, honour,  power  and 
benediction  :  to  Him  that  pro- 
ceedeth  from  Both,  be  there 
equal  praise  ! 

Amen. 

y.  Thou  hast  given  them 
bread  from  heaven,  alleluia. 

gj.  Having  in  it  all  that  is 
delicious,  alleluia. 


The  Antiphon  which,  accompanies  the  Canticle  of 
Our  Lady,  is  a  fervent  exclamation  of  admiration  for 
the  sacred  banquet  of  divine  union,  and  for  the  living 
memorial  of  Jesus'  sufferings  :  it  is  here  that  man's 
soul  is  filed  with  grace^  and  his  very  hody  receives 
the  pledge  of  future  glory.  The  phrase  is  not  com- 
pleted :  the  Church  seems  unable  to  finish  these  last 
words  of  her  love  of  all  that  she  has  received  by 
the  Eucharist ;  but  the  gift  is  too  great  for  humau 
words  ! 


ANTIPHON    OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Ant.  O  sacrum  convi- 
vium,  in  quo  Christus  su- 
mitur  :  recolitur  memoria 
passionis  ejus  :  mens  im- 
pletur  gratia  :  et  futurae 
gloriee  nobis  pignus  datur, 
alleluia. 


Ant.  O  sacred  banquet, 
wherein  Christ  is  received  ; 
the  memorial  of  his  Passion  is 
celebrated  ;  the  mind  is  filled 
with  grace  ;  and  a  pledge  of 
future  glory  is  given  unto  us, 
alleluia. 


SECOND    VESPERS. 


30^5 


OUR    LADY  S   CA]S'TICLE. 


My  soul  doth  magnify  tlie 
Lord  ; 

And  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced 
God  my  Saviour. 


in 


Because  he  hath  regarded 
the  humility  of  his  handmaid : 
for,  behold,  from  henceforth 
all  generations  shall  call  me 
Blessed. 

Because  he  that  is  mighty 
hath  done  great  things  unto 
me  ;  and  holy  is  his  Name. 

And  his  mercy  is  from  gene- 
ration unto  generation,  to 
them  that  fear  him. 

He  hath  showed  might  in 
his  arm  :  he  hath  scattered  the 
proud  in  the  conceit  of  their 
heart. 

He  hath  put  down  the 
mighty  from  their  seat  :  and 
hath  exalted  the  humble. 

He  hath  filled  the  hungry 
with  good  things  :  and  the 
rich  he  hath  sent  empty  away. 

He  hath  received  Israel  his 
servant,  being  mindful  of  his 
mercy. 

Ashe  spake  unto  our  fathers, 
to  Abraham  and  to  his  seed 
for  ever. 

Ant.  O  sacred  banquet, 
wherein  Christ  is  received  ; 
the  memorial  of  his  Passion  is 
celebrated  ;  the  mind  is  filled 
with  grace  ;  and  a  pledge  of 
future  glory  is  given  unto  us, 
alleluia. 


Magnificat  :  *  anima  mea 
Dominum  ; 

Et      exsultavit      spiritus 
Deo    Salutari 


mens 


m 


meo. 

Quia  respexit  humilitatem 
ancillee  suae  :  *  ecce  enim  ex 
hoc  beatam  me  dicent  om- 
nes  generationes. 

Qma  fecit  mihi  magna  qui 
potens  est  :  *  et  sanctum 
Nomen  ejus. 

Et  misericordia  ejus  a 
progenie  in  progenies  :  *  ti- 
mentibus  eum. 

Fecit  potentiam  in  bra- 
chio  suo  :  *  dispersit  super- 
bos  mente  cordis  sui. 

Deposuit  potentes  de  se- 
de  :  *  et  exaltavit  humiles. 

Esurientes  implevit bonis : 
*  et  divites  dimisit  inanes. 

Suscepit  Israel  puerum 
suum  :  *  recordatus  miseri- 
cordise  suae. 

Sicut  locutus  est  ad  pa- 
tres  nostros  :  *  Abraham  et 
semini  ejus  in  saecula. 

Ant.  O  sacrum  convi- 
vium,  in  quo  Christus  sumi- 
tur  :  recoUtur  memoria  pas- 
sionis  ejus  :  mens  impletur 
gratia  :  et  f  uturae  glorise  no- 
bis pignus  datur,  alleluia. 


304 


a)RPUS   CHRISTl. 


COLLECT. 


Deus,  qui  nobis  sub  Sa- 
cramento mirabili  passionis 
tuae  memoriam  reliquisti  : 
tribue,    quaesumus,    ita  nos 


O  God,  who,  under  the  won- 
derful Sacrament,  hast  left  us 
a  memorial  of  thy  Passion  : 
grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  so 


Corporis    et    Sanguinis   tui  to  reverence  the  sacred  mys- 

sacra  mysteria  venerari,  ut  teries  of  thy  Body  and  Blood, 

redemptionis   tuae    fructum  that,    in   our   souls,    we   may 

in  nobis  jugiter  sentiamus.  always  feel   the  fruit  of   thy 

Qui  vivis.  Redemption.     Who  livest,  etc. 


At  the  close  of  this  great  Feast,  which  is  conse- 
crated, by  the  Latin  Church,  to  the  honour  of  the 
sacred  Host,  we  will  listen  to  the  Greek  Church,  who, 
in  the  following  passages,  expresses  the  same  faith 
regarding  the  Blessed  Sacrament.  These  quotations 
are  used  during  and  after  the  Communion,  in  the 
Liturgy^  or  Mass^  called  "  St.  John  Chrysostom's." 


BEFORE    COMMUNION. 


Credo,  Domine,  et  con- 
fiteor  quod  tu  es  Christus 
Filius  Dei  viventis,  qui  ve- 
nisti  in  mundum  ad  salvan- 
dos  peccatores,  quorum  pri- 
mus ego  sum, 

Ccenae  tuae  mysticae  ho- 
diae  communicantem  me  sus- 
cipe.  Non  enim  inimicis  tuis 
mysterium  dicam,  nee  os- 
culum  tibi  dabo  velut  Judas, 
sed  ut  latro  tibi  confiteor  : 
memento  moi,  Domine,  in 
regno  tuo. 

Domine,  non  sum  dig- 
nus  ut  sub  sordidum  tec- 
tum animaemeae  ingrediaris: 
sed  quemadmodum   digna- 


I  believe,  O  Lord,  and  con- 
fess, that  thou  art  Christ,  Son 
of  the  living  God,  who  camest 
into  this  world  to  save  sinners, 
of  whom  I  am  the  first. 

Eeceive  me,  communicating, 
this  day,  in  thy  mystic  Supper. 
For  I  M-ill  not  speak  of  thy 
Myst^rj-  to  thine  enemies,  nor, 
like  Judas,  give  thee  a  kiss, 
but,  like  the  thief,  confess  to 
thee:  Remember  me,  O  Lord,  in 
thil  kingdom  ! 

Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that 
thou  enter  imder  the  filthy 
roof  of  my  soul  :  but,  as  thou 
deignedst  to  repose  in  the  cave 


AFTER   COMMUNION. 


305 


and  manger  of  brute  beasts ; 
and,  in  the  bouse  of  Simon 
the  Leper,  receive  a  sinner 
like  myself,  when  sbe  ap- 
proached thee  :  deign,  also, 
to  enter  into  the  crib  of  my 
senseless  soul,  and  into  my 
defiled,  dead,  and  leprous  body. 
And,  as  thou  disdainedst  not 
the  unclean  mouth  of  the  sin- 
ner, who  kissed  thy  most  pure 
feet ; — so,  O  my  Lord  God, 
disdain  not  me,  a  sinner.  But, 
good  and  merciful  as  thou  art, 
vouchsafe  to  make  me  a  par- 
taker of  thy  most  holy  Body 
and  Blood. 


O  my  God  !  forgive,  pardon, 
remit  me  whatsoever  sins  I 
have,  either  knowingly,  or 
through  ignorance,  committed 
either  by  word  or  deed.  Par- 
don me  them  all,  for  that 
thou  art  good  and  merciful ; 
by  the  intercessions  of  thy 
most  pure  and  ever  vii-gia 
Mother,  keep  me  from  con- 
demnation, that  I  may  re- 
ceive thy  precious  and  imma- 
culate Body  unto  the  cure  of 
soul  and  body.  For  thine  is 
the  kingdom,  and  power,  and 
glory,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  now  and  always,  and 
for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


tus  es  in  spelunca  et  prae- 
sepio  brutorum  recumbere, 
et  in  domo  Simonis  Leprosi, 
etiam  simileni  mei  meretri- 
cem  ad  te  accedentem  sus- 
cepisti  :  ipse  quoque  dignare 
in  prsesepe  animae  meae  ra- 
tionis  expertis  et  in  coin- 
quinatum  meum  corpus 
mortuum  et  leprosum  in- 
gredi  :  et  sicut  non  abhor- 
ruisti  OS  sordidum  meretri- 
cis  illibatos  pedes  tuos  os- 
culantis,  ita,  Domine  Deus 
mens,  ne  a  me  etiam  pecca- 
tore  abhorrueris.  Sed  tan- 
quam  bonus  et  clemens, 
dignare  me  participem  effici 
sanctissimi  tui  Corporis  et 
Sanguinis. 

Deus  mens,  condona,  re- 
laxa,  remitte  mihi  delicta 
mea  qusecumque  sciens,  vel 
per  ignorantiam,  vel  verbo 
vel  opere  patravi.  Indulge 
mihi  cuncta  ut  bonus  et  cle- 
mens ;  intercessionibus  in- 
temeratse  tuae  et  semper 
virguiis  Matris,  incondem- 
natura  me  custodi,  ut  su- 
mam  pretiosum  et  imma- 
culatum  Corpus  tuum  ad 
medelam  animae  et  corporis. 
Quoniam  tuum  est  regnum, 
et  virtus,  et  gloria  :  Patris, 
et  Filii,  et  Spiritus  sancti  : 
nim^c  et  semper,  et  in  saecula 
saeculorum.     Amen. 


AFTER   COMMUNION. 


"SN'e  give  thee  thanks,  O 
kind  Lord,  thou  benefactor  of 
our  souls,  for  that  on  this  pre- 
sent day,  also,  thou  hast  made 
us  worthy   of    thy   heavenly 


Gratias  agimus  tibi,  be- 
nigne  Domine,  benefactor 
animarum  nostrarum,  quod 
etiam;  praesenti  die  dignos 
fecisti    nos   coelestium   tuo- 


VOL.  X. 


306 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


rum  et  immortalium  myste- 
rionim.  Viam  nostram  di- 
rige,  confinna  nos  in  timore 
tuo,  custodi  vitam  nostram, 
fac  securos  gressus  nostros : 
precibus  et  intercessione  glo- 
riosae  Deiparse,  et  semper 
virginis  MariaB,  et  omnium 
sanctorum. 

Diac.  Recti  participes  ef- 
fecti  divinorum,  sanctorum, 
illibatorum,  immortalium, 
supercoelestium,  et  vivifico- 
rum  mysteriorum,  digne 
gratias  agamus  Domino. 

Clior.  Domine,  miserere. 

Diac.  Suscipe,  salva,  mi- 
serere, et  conserva  nos,  Deus, 
tua  gratia. 

Chor.  Domine,  miserere. 

Diac.  Diem  omnem  per- 
fectum,  sanctum,  pacili- 
cum,  et  a  peccato  immu- 
nem  postulantes,  nos  ipsos, 
et  invicem,  et  omnem  vitam 
nostram  Christo  Deo  com- 
mendemus. 

Chor.  Tibi,  Domine. 

Sacerdos,  excJamando.  Quo- 
niam  tu  es  sanctificatio  nos- 
tra, ettibigloriamrefeiTQius, 
Patri,  et  Filio,  et  sancto 
Spiritui,  nunc  et  semper,  et 
in  saecula  saeculorum. 

Chor.  Amen. 


and  immortal  Mysteries.  Di- 
rect thou  our  ways,  strengthen 
us  in  thy  fear,  guard  our  life, 
make  safe  our  steps;  by  the 
prayers  and  intercession  of 
the  glorious  Mother  of  God, 
and  ever  virgin  Mary,  and  of 
all  the  Saints. 

The  Deacon  :  Let  us  who, 
being  just,  have  been  made 
partakers  of  the  divine,  holy, 
spotless,  immortal,  super- 
celestial  and  life-giving  Mys- 
teries, let  us  worthily  give 
thanks  unto  the  Lord. 

The  Choir :  O  Lord,  have 
mercy. 

The  Deacon  :  Receive,  save, 
have  mercy  upon,  and  preserve 
us,  O  God,  by  thy  grace. 

The  Choir :  O  Lord,  have 
mercy. 

The  Deacon :  Let  us  pray, 
that  every  day  of  ours  may 
be  perfect,  holy,  peaceful,  and 
free  from  sin  ;  and  let  us  com- 
mend ourselves,  and  one  ano- 
ther, and  our  whole  life,  unto 
Christ,  our  God. 

The  Choir :  Unto  thee,  O 
Lord! 

The  Priest,  lifting  up  his 
voice  :  For  thou  art  our  sanc- 
tiiication,  and  to  thee  we  give 
glory,  Father,  and  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  now  and  always, 
and  for  all  ages. 

The  Choir:  Amen. 


FRIDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  307 


FRIDAY 

WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CRRISTI. 

Let    us    adore    Christ,  the  Christum  regem  adoremus 

King,  who  ruleth  the  nations  :  dominantem   gentibus,    qui 

who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to  se  manducantibus  dat  spiri- 

them  that  eat  him.  tus  pinguedinem. 

God  has  satisfied  the  intense  desires  of  man's  heart 
The   house  of  the  marriage-feast,  built    by   divine 
Wisdom  on  the  top  of  mountains,  has  had  flowing 
unto  it  all  the  nations  of  earth.^  Yesterday,  the  whole 
Catholic  world  was  animated  with  sentiments  of  love 
towards  the  adorable  Sacrament ;  and  the  people  said 
to  each  other,  in  a  holy  transport  of  gratitude :  Come  ! 
let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the 
house  of  the  God  of  Jacob.     Yesterday,  the  hud  of  the 
Lord  was  seen  by  us  all  in  magnificence  and  glory  ;  ^ 
this  divine  Bud,  this  rich  ear  of  corn  that  has  sprung 
up  from   our   earth,    was   carried   in  triumph,    and 
excited  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Faithful,  making  them 
rejoice  before  It,  as  they  that  rejoice  in  the  harvest.^ 
It  was  a  heavenly  harvest,  that  had  been  the  expec- 
tation of  nations.     It  was  the  precious  ear  of  corn, 
despised  indeed  by  Israel,  but  gleaned  by  Ruth,  the 
stranger,  in  the  field  of  the  true  Booz,  in  Bethlehem. 
It  was  for  this  day  of  the  great  meeting  of  nations, 
foretold  by  Isaias,  that  the  Lord  had  kept  reserved 
on  the  mountain  the  feast  on  a  victim  such  as  had 
never  been  seen  before,  a  feast  of  wine,  the  richest 
and  purest/     The  poor  have  eaten  at  this  banquet^ 

J  Is.  ii.  2.  3  Is,  ix.  3. 

2  Ibid.  iv.  2.  *  Ibid.  xxv.  6. 


308  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

and  they  have  given  fervent  praise  to  their  God ;  the 

rich  have  eaten,  and  have  fallen  down  in  adoration  ; 

and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,  prostrate  in  his  sacred 

Presence,   have  recognised,  that  he  who  thus  gave 

them  to  feast,  was  Christ  their  King.^  This,  they  said, 

is   our    God,    ice   have   waited  for    him  i"^    we   have 

patiently  waited  for  him;  he  was^/ie  desire  of  our  soul; 

we   desired  him   in  the   night,  and,  in  the  morning 

early ^  our  first  thoughts  were  upon  him ;  he  is  the 

Lord,  and  his  remembrance  could  not  be  efi'aced,  not 

evep  through  the  long  ages  of  expectation.^    Thou,  0 

Lord,  art  my  God,  I  will  exalt  thee,  and  give  glory  to 

thy  oiame,  for  thou  hast  done  ivonderful  things;  thy 

designs  of  old,  faithful  f  faithfully  hast  thou  fulfilled 

thy  eternal  decrees."^ 

These  expressions  of  love  on  the  part  of  the  human 
race  were  but  a  feeble  echo  to  the  infinite  love  which 
God  vouchsafed  to  have  for  his  creature,  man.  The 
divine  Spirit,  who  has  achieved  the  wonderful  union 
between  the  children  of  Adam  and  eternal  Wisdom, 
shows  us,  everywhere  in  the  Scriptures,  that  this 
"Wisdom  was  impatient  of  delay,  that  he  was  taking 
each  obstacle,  as  it  came,  and  removing  it,  and  was 
preparing,  in  countless  ways,  for  the  Marriage  Feast 
so  much  longed  for. 

We  will  devote  these  first  two  days  of  the  Octave 
to  the  considering  the  leading  features  in  the  history 
of  this  eucharistic  preparation ;  we  shall  be  well 
repaid,  by  the  additional  light  which  these  truths 
will  reflect  upon  the  dogma  itself.  We  are  going  to 
review  the  loving  ways,  whereby  eternal  Wisdom 
sought,  for  so  many  long  ages,  to  bring  about  his  own 
union  with  ourselves.  As  a  matter  of  course,  we 
clothe  these  truths  in  Scripture  language,  for  the 
Scriptures  are  our  guide  in  this  research  ;  it  is  they 


'  Ps.  xxi.  27-30.  »  Is.  xxvi.  8,  9. 

'  Is.  XXV.  9.  *  Ibid.  XXV.  1. 


FRIDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  309 

that  tell  us  the  workings  of  the  divine  intentions  in 
our  regard.  How,  then,  do  the  Scriptures  speak  of 
these,  before  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation  was 
actually  accomplished  ? 

The  second  Person  of  the  adorable  Trinity  is  there 
brought  before  us  under  the  name  of  Wisdom ;  until 
such  time  as  her  union  with  man  being  accomplished 
in  the  most  perfect  degree  possible,  that  is,  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  this  is  the  name  under  which  he 
passes  in  the  Scriptures,  a  name  which  gives  him  the 
appearance  of  a  Bride.  But,  once  the  mystery  of 
perfect  union  achieved,  another  name  is  given  him, 
the  name  of  Spouse,  or  Bridegroom.  His  other  name 
of  Wisdom  seems  almost  forgotten ;  and  yet,  in  the 
ages  of  lively  faith,  it  was  not  so  ;  the  people  of 
those  days  were  too  full  of  the  Scriptures,  to  forget 
it.  Thus  we  find  the  first  Christian  Emperor  dedi- 
cating, to  this  ruler  and  centre  of  his  every  thought, 
the  trophy  of  his  victory  over  paganism,  and  that  of 
the  triumph  of  the  Martyrs  :  all  burning  with  love  for 
the  Wisdom  of  God,  says  Eusebius,^  Constantino  con- 
secrated the  ancient  Byzantium,  which  he  called  by 
his  own  name,  to  the  God  of  the  Martyrs ;  ^  and 
dedicated  to  Eternal  Wisdom  the  grandest  structure 
of  this  new  Rome,  Saint  Sophia,  which,  for  many 
ages,  was  the  finest  Christian  Church  in  the  world. 
Like  our  forefathers  in  the  faith,  let  us,  too,  honour 
divine  Wisdom,  and  gratefully  think  upon  the  love 
which  urged  him,  from  all  eternity,  to  unite  himself 
to  man ! 

It  is  this  love  that  explains  that  mysterious  joy, 
which,  as  the  Scripture  tells  us,  he  had  at  the  begin- 
ning of  Time,  when  this  world  of  ours  was  being 
gradually  developed  in  all  the  beauty  of  its  fresh 
creation ;  for  sin  had  not  then  come  in,  to  break  the 
harmony  of  this  work  of  the  Most  High.     At  each 

'  Be  Vita  Constant,  lib.  iii.  cap.  48.  ^  Ibid, 


310  CORrUS   CHRISTI. 

additional  manifestation  of  creative  power,  "Wisdom 
takes  delight,  and  by  his  delight,  adds  a  new 
charm  to  this  the  future  scene  of  the  divine  marvels, 
planned  as  those  had  been  by  his  love.  This  "Wis- 
dom is  delighted  at  the  omnipotence  which  produces 
Creation  ;  he  flay^  every  day,  as  the  Creation  goes 
on,  yes,  he  plays  in  this  world,  for,  each  progress  in 
its  formation  brings  Man  nearer, — Man,  whose  palace 
itis ;  and  his  delights  are  to  be  with  the  children  of  men.^ 

Incomprehensible  love!  It  precedes,  though  it 
foresees,  sin  ;  and,  though  foreseeing  it,  loves  not  the 
less !  It  has  its  divine  delights  to  be  with  us,  and  we 
have  attractions  for  it,  in  spite  of  all  the  bitterness 
caused  by  the  sight  of  our  future  black  ingratitude ! 
The  Fall  of  man  will,  as  one  of  its  terrific  conse- 
quences, modify,  much  and  cruelly,  the  earthly 
existence,  which  "Wisdom  is  to  have  upon  our  earth. 
But,  in  order  that  we  may  the  more  easily  under- 
stand, and  more  fully  appreciate,  how  immense  must 
that  love  be,  which  could  be  proof  against  such 
obstacles,  let  us  turn  our  thoughts,  to-day,  to  the 
course  that  these  loving  intentions  would  have  taken, 
had  man  persevered  in  the  state  of  innocence. 
Although  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  written  as  they  have 
been  for  the  benefit  of  fallen  man,  suppose  that  state, 
and  are  ever  telling  us  of  the  mystery  of  the  restora- 
tion of  the  sinful  world, — yet  do  they  make  frequent 
allusions  to  God's  original  intention  ;  and  with  these 
to  guide  us,  it  is  not  difficult  to  mark  out  the  leading 
features  of  the  primitive  plan. 

"W^isdom,  speaking  of  herself,  says  :  The  Lord  pos- 
sessed me,  in  the  beginning  of  his  luaysr  Is  she  not 
the  first  of  all  creatures  ?  ^  not,  of  course,  as  to  that 
divine  form  of  which  the  Apostle  speaks,  and  by 
which  "Wisdom  is  equal  to  God,*  but  in  that  human 


^  Prov.  viii.  30,  31.  '  Ecclus.i.  4. 

'  Ibid.  viii.  22.  *  Philipp.  ii.  6. 


FRIDAY    A\^THIN   THE   OCTAVE.  311 

existence,  which  she  has  selected,  in  preference  to  all 
other  possible  natures,  for  the  one  whereby  to  unite 
herself  with  finite  being.  That  selection  was  one  of 
an  unlimited  and  most  gratuitous  love  ;  it  made  the 
type  and  law  of  entire  creation  to  be  One  who  would 
be  so  closely  resembling  us  human  beings, — and  what 
an  honour !  We  are  told  in  holy  Writ,  that  the  most 
high  and  almighty  Creator  created  Wisdom  before  all 
thing Sy  and  created  her  in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and,  that 
taking  her  as  his  type,  and  number,  and  measure,  he 
poured  her  out  upon  all  his  works,  and  upon  all  flesh} 
When  the  fulness  of  the  appointed  time  came,  this  Wis- 
dom herself  was  to  come,  giving  to  all  creation,  of  which 
she  was  the  head  and  centre,  its  purpose  and  mean- 
ing :  she  was  to  blend  and  unite  with  the  infinite 
homage,  which  resulted  from  her  own  divine  person- 
ality, the  homage  of  every  existing  creature  ;  and  thus 
give  perfection  to  the  external  glory  of  the  Father  by 
her  own  adoration,  which  was  to  be  eternal  and 
infinite.  Once  this  happy  time  is  come,  and  there 
will  appear  that  human  nature,  chosen  by  divine 
Wisdom,  from  the  beginning,  to  be  his  created  form, — 
to  be  the  instrument  of  that  homage  to  the  Father, 
which,  as  we  were  just  saying,  will  be  perfect  and 
divine,  because  of  the  personal  union  of  this  created 
nature  with  the  Nature  of  God  the  Son.  Eternal 
Wisdom  will  thus  be  one  with  the  Son  of  the  purest 
of  Virgins ;  the  nuptial-song  will  be  taken  up  by  all 
creatures,  both  in  earth  and  heaven  ;  and  through 
this  Son  of  Man,  who  will  then  be  called  the  Spouse, 
Wisdom  will  continue,  to  the  end  of  time,  in  the  soul 
of  every  individual  of  the  human  race,  (that  is,  of 
every  soul  that  does  not  refuse  the  honour,)  the 
inefi'able  mystery  of  his  divine  marriage  with  our 
nature. 

He  wishes,  then,  to  unite  himself  with  each  one  of 

1  Ecclus.  i.  4,  8-10. 


312  CX)KPrS   CHRISTI. 

US ;  but  what  means  will  he  adopt  for  this  deifying 
union  ?  Of  all  the  Sacraments,  which  our  Lord 
might  have  instituted  after  his  Incarnation,  in  the 
supposition  of  man's  not  forfeiting  his  state  of  inno- 
cence,— there  is  not  one,  says  Suarez,  which  has  so 
many  probabilities  on  its  side,  as  the  Eucharist ;  there 
is  not  one  which,  in  itself,  is  so  desirable,  and  is  more 
independent  on  sin ;  for  the  notion  of  expiation, 
which,  in  our  present  state,  lingers  about  It,  as  the 
memorial  of  our  Jesus'  Passion,  may  be  prescinded 
from,  without  affecting  the  essence  of  the  Sacrament, — 
that  essence  being,  the  Real  Presence  of  our  Lord, 
and  the  close  union  whereby  he  unites  us  to  himself.^ 
It  is  the  same  with  the  Eucharist  as  a  Sacrifice :  the 
primary  notion  of  Sacrifice,  as  we  shall  see  further 
on,  does  not  absolutely  include  the  idea  of  sin.  So 
that,  when  Christ,  as  the  head  of  the  human  family, 
comes  into  this  world,  to  offer  up  a  Sacrifice,  in  the 
name  of  us  all,  that  Sacrifice  will  be  one  which  is 
worthy  of  his  Father  and  himself.  Spouse  as  he  is, 
and,  by  virtue  of  the  divine  unction.  Priest,  too  ;  it  is 
by  the  Eucharist,  as  a  Sacrifice,  that  he  will  act  in 
this  twofold  character,  for  by  that  Sacrifice,  he 
brings  the  human  race  into  union  with  himself  by  the 
embrace  of  the  sacred  Mysteries  ;  and,  when  he  has 
divinised  it  by  union  with  himself,  making  it  one  body 
with  himself,  of  which  he  is  the  ECead,  he  offers  it  to 
his  Eternal  Father. 

But,  for  the  coming  of  the  Spouse,  the  Bridegroom, 
there  must  be  a  numerous  retinue,  to  do  him  honour 
and  tell  his  praises,  when  the  day  arrives  for  his 
entrance  into  the  banquet-hall ;  and  from  now  till] 
the  time  when  earth,  being  peopled  enough,  shall 
have  ready  for  her  King-Priest  a  court  thatis  worthy^ 
of  him,  so  many  ages  are  to  intervene  I  ^Vhat  will  he,- 
that  is,  what  will  Wisdom  be  doing  in  the  interval 

'  Dc  Sacra VI.  Disp,  iii.  sect.  3. 


FRTT)AY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  313 

We  have  already  seen  how,  in  the  early  days  of 
creation,  he  flayed  before  his  Father,  and  was  all 
transported  with  delight.  But,  when  the  work  was 
done,  the  Creator  withdrew  into  the  repose  and  rest 
of  the  seventh  day.  Seated  on  his  Father's  right 
hand,  in  the  splendours  of  the  Saints,  will  Wisdom 
wait  inactive  for  that  day  to  come,  when  he,  who  has 
begotten  him  before  the  day-star,  and  has  betrothed 
him  to  human  nature,  shall  send  him  down  to  this 
earth,  there  to  consummate  the  alliance,  for  which  he 
has  been  eternally  longing  ?  The  sacred  Scriptures 
give  a  very  different  description  of  him,  during  the 
time  preceding  his  actual  coming.  They  tell  us,  that 
Wisdom  is  so  active,  though  so  gentle,  that  He  is 
more  active  than  all  active  things,  and  was  everywhere, 
and  put  himself  in  every  place,  and  in  the  Prophets, 
so  that  he  was  easily  found  by  them  that  wanted  to 
find  him  ;  he  even  anticipated  their  research,  and 
was  more  ready  to  show  himself,  than  they  could 
possibly  be  to  find  him.  If  any  soul  was  intent,  like 
some  early  riser,  to  find  him,  he  soon  met  such  a 
seeker ;  nay,  himself  went  about  seeking  for  such  as 
were  worthy  of  him,  and,  when  he  met  them,  in  the 
ways,  here  or  there  in  this  wide  world,  this  beautiful 
Wisdom  would  show  himself  to  them  with  all  the 
cheerfulness  of  earnestness.  Thus  do  the  Scriptures 
describe  Wisdom  as  engaged  during  the  ages  preceding 
his  Incarnation  ;  he  does  not,  as  yet,  quit  the  throne 
of  glory  on  which  he  sitteth,  lighting  up  all  heaven 
with  his  beauty, — but  he  is  preparing  the  day  of  his 
Marriage,  and  that  by  impressing  it  on  man's  mind 
and  notice  in  every  possible  way ;  he  meets  him  at 
every  turn,  to  speak  of  it,  to  tell  him  of  how  he,  Wisdom, 
loves  him;  he  selects  certain  symbols,  whereby  to 
show  the  generations  then  living  a  picture  of  the 
wondrous  mysteries  he  intended  to  achieve  when  the 
time  came.  Let  us  take  one  of  these  symbols  for  our 
lesson  to-day,  that  we,  too,  may  lose  not  a  particle  of 


314  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

what  our  Jesus  lias  ever  done  to  make  himself  known. 
But  before  we  go  further,  let  us  listen  to  the  Scripture 
character  drawn  of  this  beautiful  Wisdom  :  He  is  the 
brightness  of  eternal  light,  and  the  unspotted  mirror  of 
God's  majesty,  and  the  image  of  his  goodness ;  holy, 
one,  manifold,  subtle,  eloquent,  active,  uridefiled,  sure, 
sweet,  loving  that  which  is  good,  quick,  ichich  nothing 
hindereth,  beneficent,  gentlcy  kind,  steadfast,  assured, 
secure,  having  all  power,  overseeing  all  things,  and 
containing  all  spijnts,  intelligible,  pure,  subtile  f^  And 
now  to  a  choice  symbol,  chosen  by  our  Jesus,  whereby 
he  spoke  of  himself,  before  he  came  to  the  Nuptials. 

The  Lord  God,  says  Scripture,  had  planted  a 
paradise  of  pleasure  from  the  beginning,  wherein  he 
intended  to  place  Man,  whom  he  was  not  to  create 
till  the  sixth  day.  In  the  midst  of  this  paradise,  there 
grew  a  tree  of  singular  beauty;  it  was  a  tree  to  which 
God  had  attached  a  ^reat  mvsterv,  and  its  name  was 
the  Tree  of  Life.  A  river,  with  four  streams,  watered 
this  garden  of  delights ; '  and  this  river  was  shown, 
later  on,  to  St.  John,  as  a  river  of  water  of  life,  clear 
as  crystal,  proceeding  from  the  throne  of  God  and  the 
Lamb.^  This  twofold  symbol  of  the  Tree  and  the 
River  bear  no  allusion  to  future  sin  ;  they  had  been 
put  in  Paradise,  the  abode  of  innocence,  before  man 
himself ;  and,  therefore,  are  portions  of  the  primitive 
plan  of  God ;  and,  therefore,  in  themselves,  signify 
nothing,  and  symbolise  nothing,  but  what  has 
reference,  first  and  foremost,  to  the  state  of  innocence. 
!Xow,  an  ancient  writer,  published  under  the  name  of 
St.  Ambrose,  says,  "  the  Tree  of  Life  in  the  midst  of 
"  Paradise,  is  Christ  in  the  midst  of  his  Church."  * 
"  So  then,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  Christ  was  the  Tree 
**  of  Life ;  neither  would  God  have  man  to  live  in 
"  Paradise,  without  his  having  mysteries  of  things 

»  Wisd.  vii.  22-26;  vi.  13-17  ;  ix.  4,  10. 

2  Gen.  ii.  8-10.  ^  Apoc.  xxii.  1. 

*  Append.  Ambros.  In  Apocalyp$.  c.  ii.  v.  7. 


FRIDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  ol5 

"  spiritual  presented  to  him  under   corporal  forms. 
"  In  the  other  trees,  therefore,  he  had  food ;  but  in 
*'  that  one  (of  Life),  he  had  a  sacred  symbol  {sacra- 
"  mentum).     And  what  was  it  that  is  symbolised,  but 
*'  Wisdom  ?  of  which  it  is  said,  She  is  a  Tree  of  Life 
*'  to  them  that  lay  hold  on  her}     .     .     For  it  is  right 
*'  to  give  to  Christ,  the  name  of  a  thing  which  had 
*'  been  previously  made,  that  it  should  signify  him."  ^ 
St.   Hilary,  too,  bears  testimony  to  this  same  tradi- 
tional interpretation.     After  quoting  the  same  text 
from  Proverbs,  he  says  :   "  Wisdom,  which  is  Christ, 
^  is  called  the  Tree  of  Life,  because,  as  we  are  taught 
'  by  the  authority  of  the  Prophets,  on  account  of  its 
'  being  a  symbol  (sacramentum)  of  his  future  Incar- 
^  nation    and   Passion.     .     .     Our   Lord  compared 
'  himself  to  a   Tree,  when  he  said  :  .  .  ,  .  A  Tree 
''  is  known  by  its  fruit.     .     .     This  Tree,  then,  is 
'  living ;  yea,    not  living  only,  but  rational  also,  for 
'  it  gives  its  fruit  when  it  wills,  {and,  as  the  Psalm 
'  says),  in  its  own  time.     .     .     .     And  what  is  that 
'  time  ?     That  of  which  the  Apostle  speaks,  when  he 
'  says,  that  God  might  make  known  u7ito  us  the  mystery 
'  of  his  will,  according  to  his  good  pleasure  which  he 
'  had  purposed  in  him,   in    the  dispensation   of  the 
^fulness  of  times:  .  .  .  the  dispensation  of  the  fruit, 
'  then,  is  reserved  for  i\iQ  fulness  of  times. '"  ^     But 
what  is  to  be  the  Fruit  of  this  Tree, — the  leaves  of 
which  fall  not  off,*  and  are  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations,^ — what  is  to  be  the  Fruit,  but  divine  Wisdom, 
in  his  own  very  self  and  substance  ?     In  his  divine 
form,  he  is  the   food  of  the  Angels  too  ;  but  he  is  to 
be  that  of  man  in  his  two  Natures,  that  thus,  by  his 
Flesh,  reaching  man's  soul,  he  may  fill  that  soul  with 
his  divinity,  as  it  was  beautifully  expressed  in  the 
Office  composed  by  Blessed  Juliana.^ 

1  Prov.  iii.  18.  *  Ps.  i.  3. 

2  De  Genes,  ad  Litt.  lib.  viii.  '  Apoc.  xxii.  2. 

3  Tract,  in  F^alm,  1,9-10.  «  Page  164. 


316  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

Thus,  therefore,  divine  Wisdom,  our  Jesus,  had 
preceded  man  in  Paradise  :  Adam  was  not  yet  there, 
but  Wisdom  was ;  for  his  love  made  him  hasten 
thither,  and  take  up  his  abode  there,  ready  to  receive 
man  on  his  arrival, — receive  him  in  that  Tree  of 
Life,  which,  together  with  the  Most  High,  he,  as  the 
Wisdom  wherein  the  Creator  formed  all  his  works, 
had  planted  in  the  garden  of  delights}  Speaking  of 
this  Tree,  the  Bride  of  the  Canticle  said  :  As  the 
apple-tree  among  the  barren  trees  of  the  woodSy  so  is 
my  Beloved  among  the  sons  of  the  rest  of  men  ;  /  sat 
down  under  his  shadoiv  ichom  I'desired,  and  his  fruit 
was  sweet  to  my  palate.'  This  sweet  Fruit  of  the  Tree 
of  Life  was  a  figure  of  the  Eucharist. 

But,  how  is  this  ?  we  were  yesterday  invited  by 
Wisdom  to  eat  Bread  in  his  house,  and  not  Fruit  in 
his  garden.  What  means  this  change  of  language  ? 
It  is  because  man  has  brought  about  an  immense 
change  of  purpose  :  in  his  pride,  he  has  eaten  of  a 
fruit  which  was  not  good,  a  fruit  which  was  forbidden, 
and  has  ruined  him  for  his  taking  it ;  he  has  been 
driven  from  the  garden  of  delights  ;  Cherubim  and  a 
flaming  sword  have  been  placed,  to  keep  the  way  of 
the  Tree  of  Life.  Instead  of  fruits  of  Paradise,  the 
food  of  man  is,  henceforth,  to  be  bread,  bread  which 
costs  toil  and  sweat,  bread  which  means  grinding 
under  a  millstone,  and  burning  in  fire.  Such  is  the 
sentence  passed  on  man  by  a  justly  angered  God.^ 
But,  alas  !  this  most  just  condemnation  is  to  go  far 
beyond  the  guilty  one  ;  it  will  strike  man,  but  it  will 
strike  divine  Wisdom,  too, — Wisdom  who  has  given 
himself  to  man  to  be  his  food  and  companion.  In 
the  immensity  of  his  love,  Wisdom  will  not  abandon 
this  fallen  nature  of  man  ;  he  will,  that  he  may  save 
it,  take  upon  himself  all  the  consequences  of  the  Fall, 
and,  like  fallen  man,  become  passible  and  mortal. 

1  Wisd.  viii.  4.  =  Cant,  ii   3.  '  Gen.  iii.  19. 


FRIDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  317 

The  marriage-feast  is  not  to  be  in  Eden,  as  was  first 
intended.  Poor  Eden !  she  had  been  so  exquisitely- 
prepared  for  that  feast ;  she  had  her  fragrant  fields 
of  loveliest  emerald,  and  her  fruit  which  was  so  fair 
to  behold,  and  so  pleasant  to  eat  of,^  and  so  immor- 
talising with  a  youth  that  was  to  last  for  ever  !  To 
reach  man,  now  that  he  is  fallen,  eternal  Wisdom 
must  make  his  way  through  the  briars  and  thickets 
of  his  new  abode.  The  Marriage-Feast  will  be  kept 
in  a  house,  which  it  has  cost  him  infinite  pains  to 
build  to  himself,  as  a  cover  against  the  miseries  of  the 
land  of  exile.  And  as  to  the  food  served  for  the 
banquet,  it  is  not  to  be  the  fruit  spontaneously  yielded 
by  the  Tree  of  Life  ;  it  is  to  be  the  divine  Wheat, 
ground  by  suffering,  and  baked  on  the  altar  of  the 
Cross. 


All  history  culminates  in  the  Sacrifice  of  our  Lord, 
and  all  creation  converges  to  it,  as  to  its  centre.  The 
reason  of  this  is,  that,  in  the  creation  and  government 
of  the  world,  God  seeks  his  own  glory,  as  the  last  end 
for  which  he  does  all  his  works.  Now,  the  Sacrifice 
offered  by  the  Incarnate  Word  alone  gives  to  Grod 
the  infinite  glory  due  to  his  sovereign  majesty.  The 
Christians  of  the  first  ages  of  the  Church  thoroughly 
understood  all  this.  It  was  the  idea  on  which  was 
composed  the  fine  Preface  given  in  the  Liturgy  under 
the  name  of  St.  James',  in  the  8th  Book  of  the  Apos- 
tolic Constitutions.  We  wish  we  could  give  our 
readers  the  whole  of  this  Liturgy :  we  intend,  how- 
ever, to  quote,  during  the  days  of  this  Octave,  some 
of  the  most  striking  passages. 

1  Gen.  ii.  9. 


318 


CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


CONSTITUTIO    JACOB  I. 


Vere  dignum  et  justiim 
est  ante  omnia  laudare  te 
venini  Deum,  ex  quo  omnis 
paternitas  in  coelo  et  in  terra 
nominatur,  solum  ingeni- 
tum,  omnis  boni  largitorem. 
Tu  enim  es  primus  natura, 
et  lex  existendi,  ac  omnem 
numerum  superans. 


Qui  omnia  ex  nihilo  in 
renim  naturam  protulisti 
per  iinigenitum  FOium 
tuum  :  ipsum  vero  ante 
omnia  saecula  genuisti  abs- 
que intermedio  Yerbum 
Deum,  Sapientiam  viven- 
tem,  primogenitum  omnis 
creaturae,  Angelum  magni 
consilii  tui,  pontificem 
tuimi,  regemautemetdomi- 
num  omnis  naturae  quae  in- 
telligi  ac  sentiri  potest.  Tu 
namque,  Deus  aeteme,cuncta 
per  ipsum  condidisti,  et  per 
ipsum  cimcta  dignaris  con- 
venienti  providentia  ;  per 
quem  enim  ut  essent  donasti, 
per  eumdem  etiam  ut  bene 
essent  dedisti. 

Deus  et  Pater  unigemti 
Filii  tui,  per  eum  ante  omnia 
fecisti  clienibinos  et  sera- 
phinos,  exercitus,  virtutes 
et  potestates,  principatus  et 
thronos,  archangelos  et  an- 
gelos. 

Atque  post  haec  omnia, 
per  eum  fabricasti  hunc  qui 
apparet  mundum,  cuncta- 
que  quae  in  eo  sunt.     Nam 


It  is  truly  right  and  just, 
that,  before  all  things,  we 
should  give  praise  to  thee, 
who  art  true  God,  from  whom 
all  paternity  in  heaven  and 
earth  is  named,  who  art  the 
only  unbegotten,  the  giver  of 
every  good  thing.  For  thou 
art  first  by  nature,  and  the 
law  of  existence,  and  surpas- 
sing all  number. 

Thou  it  was  that  broughtest 
all  things,  out  of  nothing, 
into  the  nature  of  things,  by 
thine  Only  Begotten  Son :  but 
Him  thou  begottest  before  all 
a^es,  without  an  instrument, 
God  the  Word,  living  Wis- 
dom, the  first-born  of  every 
creature,  the  Angel  of  thy 
great  counsel,  thy  Priest,  the 
King,  also,  and  Lord  of  every 
nature  that  can  be  understood 
or  felt.  For  thou,  eternal 
God!  createdst  all  things  by 
him,  and,  by  him,  thou  vouch- 
safest  a  suitable  providence  to 
all  things  ;  for,  by  whom  thou 
gavest  things  to  be,  by  the 
same  thou  gavest  them  well- 
being. 

O  God  and  Father  of  thy 
Only  Begotten  Son  !  by  Him, 
thou  madest,  before  all  things, 
the  cherubim  and  seraphim, 
the  hosts,  the  virtues  and 
powers,  the  principalities  and 
thrones,  the  archangels  and 
angels. 

And,  after  all  these,  thou 
madest,  by  him,  this  visible 
world,  and  all  that  is  in  it. 
For  thou  art  He  that  stretch- 


FRIDAY    WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE. 


319 


edst  out  the  heavens  as  a  tent, 
and  settedst  the  earth  upon 
nothing,  by  thine  only  will; 
that  madest  night  and  day; 
that,  in  the  heavens,  placedst 
the  sun  to  rule  the  day,  and 
the  moon  to  rule  the  night, 
and  inscribedst  a  choir  of  stars 
in  heaven  unto  the  praise  of 
thy  magnificence;  thou  divi- 
dedst  the  grea^se  a  from  the 
land,  replenishing  the  one 
with  animals  little  and  great, 
and  filling  the  other  with 
creatures,  both  tame  and  wild, 
crowning  it  with  herbs,  beau- 
tifying it  with  flowers,  enrich- 
ing it  with  seeds. 

Neither  only  createdst  thou 
the  world  by  Christ,  but  in 
him,  also,  thou  madest  man 
citizen  of  the  world,  ap- 
pointing him  the  world  of 
the  world,  or  the  ornament 
of  the  ornament.  For  thou 
saidst  unto  thy  "Wisdom  : 
"  Let  us  make  man  to  our 
'*  image  and  likeness  ;  and  let 
"  them  have  dominion  over 
"  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and 
*'  the  fowls  of  the  air."  Where- 
fore, also,  thou  madest  him  of 
an  immortal  soul  and  a  body 
liable  to  dissolution ;  and  thou 
gavest  him,  in  his  soul,  ra- 
tional judgment,  and  discern- 
ment between  right  and  wrong; 
and  in  his  body,  five  senses, 
and  progressive  motion. 

For  thou,  O  almighty  God, 
plantedst,  by  Christ,  in  Eden, 
at  the  East,  a  paradise, 
adorned  with  every  sort  of 
plant  fit  for  food,  and,  into 
it,  as  a  well  provisioned  house, 
thou  didst  lead  man,  to  whom, 
when  thou  createdst  him,  thou 


tu  es  qui  coelum  ut  pellem 
extendisti,  et  terram  supra 
nihilum  collocasti  sola  vo- 
luntate  ;  qui  noctem  ac  diem 
fabricatus  es  ;  qui  in  coelo 
solem  posuisti  ad  dominium 
diei,  et  lunam  ad  dominium 
noctis,  atque  chorum  stel- 
larum  in  coelo  delineasti  in 
laudem  magnificentise  tuse ; 
qui  mare  magnum  a  terra 
separasti,  et  illud  quidem 
animalibus  parvis  ac  magnis 
refersisti,  hanc  autem  cicu- 
ribus  ac  indomitis  replevisti, 
herbis  coronasti,  floribus 
decorasti,  seminibus  ditasti. 

Neque  solum  per  Chris- 
tum condidisti  mundum, 
sed  et  in  ipso  mundi  civem 
iominem  efFecisti,  ac  eum 
mundi  mundum,  seu  omatus 
omatum  constituisti.  Dix- 
isti  enim  Sapientise  tuge  : 
' '  Faciamus  hominem  ad  ini- 
"  aginem  nostram,  et  ad 
"  similitudinem  :  et  domi- 
' '  nentur  piscibus  maris  et 
"  volatilibus  coeli."  Ideo- 
que  fecisti  eum  ex  anima 
immortali  et  corpore  dissi- 
pabili  ;  et  dedisti  ei,  in  ani- 
ma quidem  rationalem  diju- 
dicationem,  justi  ac  injusti 
discretionem  ;  in  corpore 
autem  donasti  quinquertium 
sensuum  atque  motum  pro- 
gressivum. 

Tu  namque,  Deus  omni- 
potens,  per  Christum  in 
Edene  ad  Orientem  plantasti 
paradisum  omni  genere 
esculentarum  plantarum 
omatum,  et  in  eum  tanquam 
in  opiparam  domum  in- 
duxisti    hominem  ;     quem. 


320 


(X)RPUS   CHRIST!. 


cuin  efficeres,  lege  natural! 
ac  insita  donasti,  quo  intus 
ac  ex  se  haberet  cognitionis 
Dei  seinina.  Introducens 
autem  eum  in  paradisuni 
deliciarum,  potestatem  qiii- 
deni  omnium  ad  participan- 
dum  concessisti,  unius  vero 
solius  gustatum  in  spem 
luelioruui  rerum  inter- 
dixisti,  ut  si  mandatum  cus- 
todirot,  illius  servati  merce- 
dem  ferret  immortalitatem. 


Cum  autem  mandatum 
neglexit,  et,  fraude  serpen- 
tis  mulierisque  consilio,  gus- 
tavit  prohibitum  fructum  ; 
ex  paradiso  quidem  juste 
ilium  expulisti,  bonitate 
vero  tua  funditus  pereun- 
tem  non  despexisti ;  sed  qui 
ei  subjeceras  creaturam, 
dedisti  ut  suis  sudoribus  ac 
laboribus  sibi  pararet  vic- 
tum,  te  omnia  producente, 
augente  ac  maturante  :  at- 
que  eum  brevi  somno  affec- 
tum, per  jusjurandum  ad 
regenerationem  vocasti  ; 
decreto  mortis  soluto, 
vitam  ex  resurrectione  pro- 
misisti. 


gavest  a  natural  and  in- 
nate law,  to  the  end  that  he 
might  have  within  and  of 
himself  the  seeds  of  the  know- 
ledge of  God.  And  when  in- 
troducing him  into  the  para- 
dise of  delights,  thou  grant- 
edst  him  leave  to  partake  of  all 
things  save  one,  whereof,  to 
give  him  the  hope  of  better 
things,  thou  forbadest  him  to 
taste,  that,  if  he  kept  that 
commandment,  he  might  re- 
ceive immortality,  as  the  re- 
compense of  his  observance. 

But  when  he  neglected  the 
commandment, and,  by  the  ser- 
pent's guile,  and  the  woman's 
counsel,  tasted  the  forbidden 
fruit,  thou  drovest  him  from 
paradise,  justly  indeed,  yet, 
in  thy  goodness,  thou  des- 
pisedst  him  not,  though  ut- 
terly ruined  ;  but,  ha^-ing 
previously  subjected  creation 
unto  hiin,  thou  grantedst  him 
to  procure  food  by  his  own 
sweat  and  labour,  though  it 
was  thou  by  whom  all  things 
are  produced,  increase  and 
ripen.  And  when  he  had 
slept  the  short  sleep  {of  deaf h)^ 
thou  by  an  oath,  calledst  him 
to  a  new  birth;  and,  loosening 
the  decree  of  death,  thou  pro- 
misedst  him  life,  after  the  re- 
surrection. 


"We  will  close  this  day  with  the  several  Hymns, 
composed  under  the  directionof  Blessed  Juliana;  they 
were  used  for  each  of  the  Little  Hours  of  the  Office, 
which  preceded  that  of  St.  Thomas.  It  was  a  custom 
of  the  Church  of  Liege  to  vary  the  Hymns,  at  these 
Hours,  according  to  the  different  Seasons  and  Feasts. 


FRIDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE. 


321 


AT   PRIME. 


Great  God  of  mercy  !  who, 
for  the  salvation  of  souls, 
grantest  us  the  remedy  of  a 
food  that  comes  from  heaven. 

Direct  thou  our  manners, 
and  life,  and  works  ;  and  give 
us  speedily  to  spend  our  life 
with  the  blessed  citizens  of 
heaven. 


Summe  Deus  clementise, 
Qui  ob  salutem  mentium 
Coelestis  alimonise 
Nobis  praestas  remedium ; 

Mores,  vitam  et  opera 
E,ege  momentis  omnibus, 
Et  beatis  accelera 
Vitam  dare  cum  civibus. 


AT   TIERCE. 


Shrouded  with  a  sacred  veil, 
the  mystery  of  love  feeds  our 
souls  with  a  sweetness,  which 
contents  even  them  that  are  in 
heaven. 

With  the  blessed  in  heaven, 
then  let  us  have  one  same 
joy, — for,  to  them  he  gave 
himself,  and  us  he  did  not 
leave. 


Sacro  tecta  velamine 
Pietatis  mysteria 
Mentes  pascunt  dulcedine, 
Qua  satiant  coelestia. 

Sit  ergo  cum  coelestibus, 
Nobis  commune  gaudium, 
Illis  quod  sese  prsestitit. 
Nobis  quod  se  non  abstulit. 


AT    SEXT. 


O  brightness  of  supernal 
light,  O  Sacrifice  of  praise ! 
grant  us  the  banquet  of  thy 
divinity,  after  this  of  thy 
Flesh. 

It  was  for  this,  that,  filled 
with  reproach,  thou  wast 
nailed  to  the  cross,  and  derided 
with  scoffs,  wast  made  to  suffer 
a  cruel  death. 


Splendor  superni  luminis, 
Laudisque  Sacriticium, 
Coenam  tui  da  numinis 
Tuae  carnis  post  prandium. 

Saturatus  opprobriis 
Ad  hoc  cruci  configeris, 
Et  irrisus  ludibriis 
Crudeli  morte  plecteris. 


AT   NONE. 


O  thou,  that  art  the  eternal 
glory  of  heaven,  the   blessed 


VOL.  X. 


sterna  coeli  gloria. 
Lux  beata  credentium, 

Y 


322 


CORPL'S   CHRISTI. 


Redemptionis  hostia, 
Tuaruin  pastas  ovium ; 

Hujus  cultu  memorisB 
Dirae  mortis  supplicio 
Nos  de  lacu  miseriae 
Educ,  qui  clamas :  Sitio. 

Praesta,  Pater,  perFilium, 
Praesta,   per   almum  Spiri- 

tum  : 
Quibus  hoc  das  edulimn 
Prospenim  serves  exitnm. 

Amen. 


light  of  believers,  the  victim 
of  redemption,  and  the  pasture 
of  thy  sheep ! 

By  our  worship  of  this  me- 
morial of  thy  cruel  death,  lead 
us  from  the  abyss  of  misery, 
O  thou  that  criest :  I  thirst. 

Grant,  O  Father,  through 
thy  Son,  grant  through  the 
Spirit  of  love,  that  we,  to 
whom  thou  givest  such  nourish- 
ment as  this,  may  be  brought 
by  thee  to  a  prosperous  end. 

Amen. 


SATURDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVK.  323 


SATURDAY 

WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE    OF    CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

Let   us   adore    Christ,    the  Christum  regem  adoremus 

King,  who  ruleth  the  nations  :  dominantem    gentibus,    qui 

who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to  se  manducantibus  dat  spiri- 

them  that  eat  him.  tus  pinguedinem. 

Man  has  been  cast  forth  from  Eden,  and  is  gone 
into  the  dreary  land  of  his  exile.  He  has  nothing 
left  him  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  but  the  recollection  that 
it  was  once  his.  It  remains  in  the  happy  land  where 
it  was  first  planted  ;  how  could  it  go  after  the  sinner 
man,  now  that  he  is  banished  into  the  vale  of  tears  ? 
No !  it  remains  in  Paradise ;  far  from  the  abode  of 
suffering,  and  out  of  mortals'  sight,  it  continues  in  all 
its  loveliness,  bearing  testimony  to  the  primitive  inten- 
tions of  God,  which  were  peace,  innocence,  and  love. 
The  day  will  come,  when  we  shall  see  it  again,  for  it 
is  to  be  one  of  the  charms  of  the  new  earth,  into 
which  our  Lord  will  lead  his  chosen  people  on  the 
day  of  the  great  Pasch,  and  the  restoration  of  all 
things.^  Happy  day  !  after  which,  as  the  Apostle 
tells  us,  every  creature  longeth,  bowed  down  as  it  now 
is,  and  made  subject,  by  reason  of  a  fault  which  was 
not  its  own,  to  the  inconstancy  of  ceaseless  change. 
Man,  who,  against  the  creature's  will,  subjected  it  to 
the  servitude  of  corruption,  that  same  man  keeps  up 
within  it  the  hope,  that  the  time  of  deliverance  being 
come,  it,  too,  will  partake,  in  its  own  way,  of  the 
glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.^  The  glory 
of  the  new  Paradise  will  be  greater  than  that  of  the 

1  Apoc.  xxii.  2.  2  B,oiii.  viii.  19-22, 


324  CORPUS   CHRISTl. 

one  of  old  ;  for,  it  is  not  under  the  veil  of  symbols,  or 
in  a  passing  way,  that  the  deifying  union  is  to  be 
fulfilled,  but  divine  Wisdom  will  give  himself,  and  for 
ever,  and  without  veil,  to  man,  and  in  an  eternal 
embrace. 

And  yet,  this  union,  whose  permanent  enjoyment  is 
to  make  the  eternal  bliss  of  heaven,  is  to  be  contracted 
even  now,  and  on  this  very  earth  of  ours ;  for  it  is 
the  economy  of  the  divine  plan,  that,  in  all  things, 
the  future  life  should  have  its  roots  in  the  present 
one,  and  should  be  but  the  revelation,  in  the  light  of 
glory,  of  the  ineflPable  realities  formed  here  by  grace. 
What,  then,  after  the  Fall,  will  be  the  conditions  of 
the  alliance,  from  which  eternal  Wisdom  has  not  been 
turned  by  the  sin  committed  by  his  creature  Man  ? 

0  the  depth  of  the  riches  of  this  Wisdom  of  God !  ^ 
His  love  is  strong  as  death,^  and,  even  after  man's 
disloyalty,  will  be  infinitely  admirable  in  its  delicate 
ways  of  gaining  its  object.  There  is  to  be  nothing 
unbecoming  in  the  alliance  he  is  bent  on !  He  will 
admit  no  compromise  with  the  depravity  which  has 
befallen  our  now  sinful  race  !  His  mercy  is  infinite  ; 
and,  through  that,  he  has  pardoned  the  offence,  the 
moment  the  offender  expressed  his  sorrow ;  but  the 
pardon  is  not  one  which  was  to  mean  no  compensation, 
no  expiation,  on  man's  side;  that  would  have  ill-suited 
the  dignity  of  such  a  Spouse  as  he.  And  since  sinful 
man  cannot  offer  an  adequate  expiation,  he,  Wisdom, 
undertakes  to  pay  the  culprit's  whole  debt,  and  give 
him  back  the  holiness  he  has  forfeited  ;  this  done,  he 
will  take  our  human  nature,  and  espouse  her  to  him- 
self, as  his  much  loved  Bride.  /  will  espouse  thee  unto 
mCy  in  justice  and  judymenty  says  this  God  to  man,  by 
his  prophet  Osee.^ 

And  he  adds  :  I  will  espouse  thee  unto  me  in  faith,*" 


*Rom.  xi.  33.  'Osee,  ii.  19. 

*-Cant.  viii.  6.  *  Ibid.  20. 


SATURDAY   WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE.  325 

For,  just  as  the  entrance  of  divine  Wisdom  into  this 
world,  which  he  comes  to  save  from  pride  by  humility, 
is  to  be  without  exterior  parade  or  glory,  so,  likewise, 
the  divine  union  is  to  be  accomplished  in  the  mystery 
of  the  sacred  species  of  the  nuptial  banquet,  and  these 
species  will  offer  nought  to  view  but  the  appearance 
of  bread  and  wine,  such  as  one  could  find  on  any 
table.  But,  Faith  will  see  through  that  veil ;  and 
the  unspeakable  dignity  conferred  on  the  children  of 
men,  by  this  heavenly  food,  will  reflect  its  brightness 
on  the  whole  creation. 

The  whole  world  of  creatures,  each  in  its  own  way, 
was  in  expectation  of  this  marvellous  manifestation, 
which  was  to  be  made  upon  the  sons  of  God,^  by  the 
union  to  be  contracted  between  Wisdom  and  Man. 
The  Prophet  thus  speaks  of  this  universal  expectation : 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  Iwill  hear,  saith 
the  Lord,  1  will  hear  the  heavens  ;  a7id  they  shall  hear 
the  earth  ;  and  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the 
wine,  and  the  oil;  and  these  shall  hear  Jezrahel.^ 
Jezrahel  means  "  the  seed,  or  race,  of  God."  God 
will  give  to  man,  through  corn  and  wine,  the  substance 
to  be  offered  in  the  mysteries ;  and,  through  oil,  the 
priesthood,  which  is  to  transform  them  into  the 
marriage-dowry,  in  the  very  action  of  the  Sacrifice. 
It  is  to  be  by  the  Sacrifice,  and  by  Blood,  that  this 
alliance  of  justice  and  love  is  to  be  contracted. 

We  read  in  Scripture,  that  Moses  was  one  day 
traversing  the  desert ;  he  had  on  him  a  legal  trans- 
gression ;  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  met  him,  and  was 
about  to  slay  him,  when  Sephora,  the  wife  of  this 
future  leader  of  Israel,  averted  the  divine  vengeance 
by  the  rough  and  speedy  circumcision  of  her  son, 
Eliezer :  then  marking  with  his  blood  the  feet  of  the 
guilty  one,  she  said  to  him :  A  Spouse  of  blood  art 
thou  to  me  I  ^    Thus,  and  with  far  greater  truth,  could 

1  Rom.  viii.  19.         2   Qaee,  ii.  21-22.        s  Exod.  iv.  24-26. 


326  cx)Rrus  aiRisTi. 

divine  Wisdom  say  to  the  human  race  ;  for  he  is  not 
to  save,  he  is  not  to  be  united  with  man,  except  by 
the  Blood  of  this  Son  of  Man,  who  is  one  in  person 
with  that  same  Wisdom. 

Nay,  far  from  lessening,  this  very  sight  of  man's 
misery  has  increased  the  ardour  of  his  love.  Later 
on,  this  Man-God  will  say  :  I  have  a  baptism,  where- 
with  I  am  to  he  baptised:  and  how  am  I  straitened 
until  it  be  accomplished  !  ^  It  was  the  same  from  the 
very  first :  no  sooner  has  expiation  been  shown  as  the 
royal  way,  whereby  humanity  is  to  be  restored  to  him, 
and  again  made  worthy  of  him,  by  the  shedding  of 
divine  Blood, — Wisdom  has  ever  had  that  thought 
before  Him.  He  is  impatient  for  the  great  immola- 
tion of  Calvary ;  and  until  its  time  is  come,  he  will 
suggest  to  his  people  rites  and  sacrifices  figurative  of 
that  one  Sacrifice,  and  of  the  banquet  of  the  adorable 
Victim,  the  Marriage-Feast. 

His  garden,  the  place  of  his  delight,  is  no  longer 
Paradise ;  it  is  this  parched  earth  of  ours,  where 
man  has  now,  more  than  ever,  need  of  being  loved 
of  God.  Ye  Cherubim,  whom  God  has  stationed  to 
guard  the  Tree  of  Life,  'tis  well  that  sinful  man  be 
kept  from  approaching  it ;  But  the  flaming  sword  ye 
hold  in  your  hands,  will  not  prevent  divine  Wisdom 
from  leaving  Paradise,  and  joining  our  human  race 
here  in  its  banishment.  He  was  not  only  the  Tree, 
but  he  is,  likewise,  the  River  of  Life.  Speaking  of 
himself,  he  says,  in  the  Book  of  Ecclesiasticus :  Z, 
like  a  brook  out  of  a  River  of  a  mighty  water  ^  as  though 
I  were  but  a  mere  channel  of  a  River,  1  came  out  of 
Paradise.  J  said:  ^^  1  will  water  my  garden  of  plants, 
"  and  I  will  water  abundantly  the  fruits  of  my  meadow'^ 
And  behold!  my  brook  became  a  great  River,  and  my 
River  became  like  a  sea  ;  for  I  make  doctrine  to  shine 
forth  unto  all,  as  the  morning  light,  and  I  will  declare 

J  St.  Luke,  xii.  60. 


SATURDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  327 

it  afar  off,  yea,  even  to  the  most  distant  ages.  I  will 
penetrate  to  all  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  and  loill 
visit  all  that  sleep,  and  will  enlighten  all  that  hope  in 
the  Lord} 

This  living  Light,  which  from  early  morning,  en- 
lightens the  whole  earth  with  divine  Wisdom,  is  the 
varied  teaching  of  prophecies  and  figures,  which  were 
given  by  God  through  the  course  of  ages,  and,  from 
the  very  moment  of  man's  creation,  put  the  shadow 
of  the  Messias  upon  the  whole  universe.  By  means 
of  this  manifold  teaching.  Wisdom  conveyeth  himself, 
through  nations,  into  holy  souls  ;  ^  rouses  man  up, 
when  discouragement  makes  him  slumber  ;  ^  cherishes 
his  hopes,  and  bids  him  hope,  by  looking  at  the  future. 
Those  bloody  sacrifices,  which  were  prescribed  imme- 
diately after  man's  departure  from  Eden,  as  the  ritual 
expression  of  his  early  worship  of  Gfod,  will  be  offered 
up  by  all  after  generations  ;  •  and,  even  when  idolatry 
shall  have  led  mankind  into  the  abyss  of  every 
crime,  those  sacrifices  will  raise  up  their  voice,  and 
keep  up  the  prophecy  which  they  are  intended  to 
proclaim, — the  prophecy  of  a  Victim,  who  will  be  one 
of  infinite  worth.  The  stream  of  primitive  traditions 
will,  as  it  flows  through  time  and  space,  get  impreg- 
nated with  foreign  elements,  and  transmit  many  a 
worthless  or  even  dangerous  material ;  still,  it  is 
through  the  rite  of  Sacrifice,  observed  as  it  is  by  the 
whole  world,  that  the  desire  and  expectation  of  Christ 
will  be  maintained  among  all  nations.*  Satan,  that 
old  serpent  thief,  may  succeed  in  inducing  men  to 
build  altars  to  himself,  and,  on  those  altars,  offer  him 
sacrifice,  which  is  due  to  God  alone ;  but  he  cannot 
stifle  the  voice  of  truth  which  accompanies  every 
sacrifice,  the  voice  which  teaches  that  an  innocent  and 
pure  victim  may  be  substituted  in  place  of  guilty  man, 


^  Ecclus.  xxiv.  41-45.  ^  Ps.  cxviii.  28. 

2  Wisd.  vii.  27.  ^  Gen.  xlix.  10;  Agg.  ii.  8. 


328  CORPUS   CHKISII. 

and  work  his  expiation.  This  will  arouse  the  notion 
of  the  promised  [Mediator  in  many  a  soul  that  had  got 
bewildered  amidst  the  orgies  of  this  satanic  worship  ; 
and  here,  again,  the  very  sight  of  the  serpent  was 
made  to  be  the  care  of  them  he  had  stung,  and  became 
the  sign  and  ensign  of  the  son  of  Jesse.^  0  root  of 
'  Jesse  !  root  of  the  ^Wisdom  of  the  Most  High  !  who 
is  there  that  can  understand  the  depth  of  his  counsels, 
or  penetrate  the  devices  ol  his  immense  love  ?  * 
Verily,  thou  art  more  beautiful  than  any  light  of 
day ;  for  that  light  yields,  when  night  comes  on ; 
whereas  thou,  0  Wisdom,  art  overcome  by  no  evil,  be 
it  as  black  as  sin  !  ^ 

All  those  ancient  Sacrifices  were  powerless  to  pro- 
duce grace ;  their  very  multiplicity  proved  their 
inability  to  do  so  ;  *  but  what  they  could  and  did 
effect  was  the  keeping  alive  in  mankind  the  remem- 
brance of  the  Fall,  and  the  expectation  of  a  Redeemer  ; 
they  were,  likewise,  the  basis  of  those  supernatural 
acts,  which  are  requisite  for  man's  justification  and 
salvation.  But,  besides  their  representing  the  re- 
demptive element,  which  the  Fall  of  man  has  intro- 
duced into  the  plan  of  God,  these  bloody  Sacrifices 
express,  also,  the  union  of  that  God  with  his  creature, 
which  was  the  primary  and  chief  object  of  creation. 
That  union  was  to  be  efiected  in  the  banquet  pre- 
pared by  Wisdom,  the  eucharistic  banquet,  wherein 
he,  W^isdom,  the  Son  of  God,  was  to  be  received  by 
man,  and  thus  united  with  him.  Yes,  this  sublime 
mystery  was  also  expressed  by  those  figurative  Sacri- 
fices, wherein  the  people  partook  of  the  victims 
offered  :  for,  in  the  Eucharist,  the  Victim  is  Man- 
God,  offered  to  God,  and  eaten  of  by  man  ;  the  Deity 
is  appeased  by  the  Blood  of  the  divine  Lamb,  and 
mankind  is  restored,  because  nourished  by  his  Flesh, 


»  Num.  xxi.  6-9  ;  Is.  xi.  10.  »  Wisd.  vii.  29,  30. 

2  Ecclus.  i.  6.  *  Heb.  x.  1-4. 


SATURDAY   WITIIIN   THE    OCTAVE.  329 

which  thus  feeds  him  to  a  new  and  a  divine  life. 
Such  was  the  general  law  ohserved  by  all  nations, 
when  offering  Sacrifice  :  the  portion  intended  for  God 
was  consumed  by  fire,  and  this  was  a  transmitting  it 
to  heaven ;  but,  another  portion  of  the  same  victim 
was  taken  and  eaten  by  the  people  :  and  all  this  sig- 
nified that  there  was  communion  between  Heaven 
and  Earth,  and  that  the  receivers  were  all  made  one, 
because  they  all  partook  of  the  same  sacred  food. 
How  admirably  are  thus  grouped  together  all  the 
mysteries  of  God's  goodness  towards  his  creature 
man  !  And^what  a  prophecy  this  was  !  It  was  un- 
ceasing, for  it  was  proclaimed  each  time  a  sacrifice 
was  offered  up,  and  there  were  thousands  every  day. 
It  was  in  these,  that  the  divine  Lamb,  whom  they 
foretold,  was  slain  from  the  very  beginning  of  the 
world  ;  ^  his  Blood,  in  all  those  early  ages,  was 
applied,  through  hope  and-  faith,  upon  the  souls  of 
men,  and  cleansed  them  from  their  sins ;  and  the 
mysterious  ritual,  with  its  inspired  code  of  prescrip- 
tions, was  keeping  man  on  the  alert,  and  preparing 
him  for  the  banquet  of  the  Nuptials  of  the  Lamb.^ 
Then,  let  Wisdom  extol  his  own  triumph  !  It  is  He 
that  made,  that  in  the  heavens  there  should  rise  a 
light  which  never  fails,  and  covers  the  whole  earth 
as  with  a  cloud ;  he  alone  has  compassed  the  circuit 
of  heaven,  has  penetrated  into  the  bottom  of  the 
deep,  has  traversed  the  waves  of  the  sea,  and  has 
stood  in  all  the  earth,  and  in  every  people,  as  the 
Xing  of  all,  holding  the  chief  rule,  and  vanquishing, 
strongly  and  sweetly,  the  hearts  of  all,  both  high  and 
low.^ 

Meanwhile,  the  time  of  banishment  is  running  on ; 
the  long  period  of  expectation  is  more  than  half 
over.  The  nearer  the  realisation  of  the  promised 
Alliance  comes,  the  more   ardent  are  the  longings 

1  Apoc.  xiii.  8.  2  j^^-^^  ^ix.  7-9.  ^  Ecclus.  xxiv.  6-11. 


330  CORPUS   CHRISTl. 

of  chosen  souls.  As  to  our  Jesus  himself,  that  is, 
Wisdom,  he  seems  to  desire  a  preparation  of  a  more 
telling  kind  than  any  of  these  others  that  have  pre- 
ceded. He  will  turn  his  attention  to  the  very  spot 
where  he  is  to  dwell  on  this  earth.  And  where  is 
that  ?  His  Father,  the  Creator  of  all  things, — that 
Father,  whose  every  word  is  fulfilled  by  his  Son, — 
has  a  chosen  people ;  and  among  these  he  would  have 
his  Son  be  nationalised,  if  we  may  reverently  use 
such  a  word.  He  said  to  him  :  Let  thy  dwelling  he 
in  Jacob,  and  thine  inheritance  in  Israel !  ^  In 
obedience  to  this  his  Father's  will,  he  establishes 
himself  in  Sion,  he  takes  his  rest  in  the  holy  City, 
and  fixes  his  power  in  Jerusalem.^  Jerusalem  !  it  is 
the  City  of  Peace,  and  is  to  be  the  scene  of  such 
stupendous  mysteries !  It  was  here,  that  Isaac,  the 
child  of  promise,  had  come  carrying  on  his  shoulders 
the  wood  for  his  self-sacrifice ;  here  his  father  is 
about  to  slay  him,  when  a  ram  is  mysteriously  sub- 
stituted ;  and  the  Mount  of  the  one  true  Sacrifice  is 
thus  selected.  It  was  here,  also,  that  there  then 
lived  a  King-Priest,  who  bore  the  likeness  of  the  Son 
of  God  ;  ^  it  was  Melchisedech  ;  and,  when  Abraham, 
the  father  of  believers,  came  to  him,  this  Melchisedech 
ofi'ered  what  was  to  be  the  sacrifice  of  the  Alliance  to 
come  ;  he  offered  a  sacrifice  of  bread  and  wine  ;  and 
thereby  showed  to  Abraham,  who  saw  into  the 
future,  the  day  of  Christ,  his  Son.* 

It  is  at  the  very  period,  when  the  world,  at  large, 
has  fallen  into  idolatry,  and  offered  to  false  gods  the 
homage  of  its  sacrifices,  that  divine  Wisdom  leads,  into 
this  chosen  dwelling-place,  the  people  of  whom  he  is 
to  be  born  as  Man ;  it  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  com- 
mand :  Let  thy  dwelling  he  in  Jacob!  let  thine  inheri- 
tance he  in  Uracil     In  this  one  people,  Wisdom  will 


^  Ecclus,  xxiv.  12,  13.  ^  Hob.  \\x.  3. 

2  Ibid.,  16,  *  St.  John,  viii.  56. 


SATURDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  331 

maintain  his  Father's  claims,  and  keep  alive  and  pure 
the  light  of  the  expectation  of  nations.  He  delivers 
it,  at  the  cost  of  countless  prodigies,  from  the  Egyptian 
bondage.^  The  feast  of  the  Paschal  Lamb,  slain  the 
same  day  on  which,  at  a  future  time,  is  to  be  cele- 
brated the  true  Supper  of  the  Lord,  and  the  immolation 
of  the  Lamb, — the  feast  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  is  the 
signal  of  the  deliverance,  and  the  triumphant  march, 
through  the  waters  of  a  sea,  to  the  Mount,  where  is 
to  be  contracted,  through  the  blood  of  victims,  the 
union  between  God  and  the  house  of  Jacob :  the 
chosen  people  becomes  the  Bride  of  God,^  the  priestly 
kingdom,  and  the  holy  nation.^  Figure,  in  all  things, 
of  God's  true  people  traversing  the  desert  of  this 
world,  Israel  drinks  of  the  waters  which  come  from 
the  Rock,  and  the  Rock  is  Christ  /  a  bread,  rained 
down  daily  from  heaven,  strengthens  him  amidst  the 
fatigues  of  journey  and  battle  ;  and  this  bread  of 
Angels,  as  the  Scripture  terms  it,  took  the  taste  of 
anything  the  eater  wished  it  to  have.^  God  himself 
dwells  with  Israel,  under  his  tents.  He  has  had  a 
tabernacle  made  for  him,  on  the  plan  of  one  shown 
by  God  on  the  mount ;  and,  in  front  of  this  tabernacle, 
there  is  an  altar,  on  which  a  chosen  family,  conse- 
crated by  oil  of  unction,  may  alone  offer,  under  the 
direction  of  a  high-priest,  the  manifold  legal  sacri- 
fices, each  of  which  points  to  some  excellency  or  other 
of  the  one  great  Sacrifice  of  the  future.  From  this 
altar  on  which  burns  a  fire  that  is  never  quenched, 
there  goes  up  to  heaven  without  interruption,  the 
smoke  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  victims  slain. 
They  are  a  supplication  for  the  coming  of  that  saving 
Host,  which  is  to  put  an  end  to  these  hecatombs. 
There  are,  also,  offerings  of  flour  and  wine ;  they  are 


1  Wisd.  X.  15.  M  Cor.  X.  4,  II. 

2  Ezech.  xvi. ;  Osee,  ii.,  etc.  *  Wisd.  xvi.  20-29. 
2  Exod.  xix.  6. 


332  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

the  necessary  accompaniment  of  holocausts  and  peace- 
offerings  ;  they  pretigure  the  august  Memorial  which 
is  to  keep  up  and  perfect  the  divine  Sacrifice  of  the 
Cross,  by  an  unbloody  application  of  it.  There  is,  in 
these  early  days,  a  sacrifice  which  goes  under  the 
name  of  a  memorial ;  it  is  an  offering  by  itself,  con- 
sisting of  fine  flour,  and  unleavened  loaves  and  wafers.^ 
Then,  there  are  the  proposition  loaves ;  they  are  kept 
within  the  veil,  as  the  most  holy  of  the  sacrifices,  as 
being  a  perpetual  memorial  of  sacrifice  and  covenant ;' 
and,  what  a  mysterious,  yet  unmistakeable,  figure  is 
all  this  of  the  future  eucharistic  Presence,  kept  up  in 
the  Church  under  the  sacred  species,  even  when  the 
celebration  of  the  mysteries  is  over  ? 

As  there  is  but  one  altar  in  Jacob,  which,  by  its 
oneness,  points  towards  Him  who,  at  a  future  time,  is 
to  be  both  victim  and  altar  ;  so,  there  is  but  one 
place,  the  tabernacle  and  its  surroundings,  and,  later 
on,  the  temple  and  holy  city,  where  it  is  lawful  to 
celebrate  those  sacred  banquets  of  communion,  which, 
according  to  universal  custom,  close  the  sacrifice  in 
which  they  are  offered.  The  last  time  that  Closes  had 
his  people  assembled  around  him,  in  the  plains  of 
the  Jordan,  he  thus  spoke  to  them :  Beware  lest  thou 
ofer  thy  holocaust  in  every  place  that  thou  shalt  see. 
In  the  place  which  the  Loi'd  your  God  shall  choose, 
that  his  name  may  be  therein^  thither  shidl ye  bring 
your  holocausts^  and  victims,  and  tithes,  and  the  first- 
fruits  of  your  hands.  There  shall  ye  feast  before  the 
Lord  your  God,  ye  and  your  sons  and  your  daughters, 
your  men-servants  and  maid- servants,  and  the  Levite 
that  dwelleth  in  your  cities  ;  and  thou  shall  rejoice,  and 
he  refreshed,  before  the  Lord  thy  God,  in  alt  things, 
whereunto  thou  shalt  put  thy  hand.^ 

The  material  prosperity  promised  to  the  Jewish 
people,  as  a  reward  of  his  faithfully  observing  the 

1  Lev.  ii.  2,  9.  »  Ihid.,  xxiv.  7-9.  »  Deut.  xii.  7,  1  M3. 


SATURDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  333 

numerous  figurative  prescriptions  of  the  law  of  Sinai, 
was  itself  but  a  figure  of  the  spiritual  blessings  which 
were  to  transform  the  soul,  and  prepare  it  for  the  com- 
ing of  Divine  Wisdom  in  the  flesh.  But,  Israel  is  slow 
to  raise  himself  above  material  things.  He  easily  falls 
a  prey  to  all  the  scandals  he  witnesses  among  the 
Gentiles.  Severe  punishments  teach  him  that  he  is 
not  safe,  except  in  his  keeping  the  law  given  to  him ; 
he  keeps  it,  that  is,  he  keeps  the  letter  of  the  ritual  JDre- 
cepts  with  scrupulous  exactitude,  but  sees  nothing  of 
their  chief  meaning,  which  is  the  Redeemer  to  come, 
and  the  spiritual  dispositions  which  those  outward 
observances  were  intended  to  prompt.  God  is  con- 
tinually warning  him  by  the  Prophets,  and  seeking  to 
reclaim  him  to  the  spirit  of  his  divine  institutions. 
Thus,  in  the  Psalms,  he  remonstrates  with  him,  but, 
with  such  paternal  aff'eotion,  that  one  can  scarcely  sus- 
pect a  complaint,  though  there  is  a  most  bitter  one  : 
Hear,  0  my  people!  and  1  ivill  speak:  0  Israel!  and 
I  will  testify  unto  thee.  I  am  God,  thy  God,  I  will 
not  reprove  thee  for  thy  sacrifices ;  and  thy  hurnt-offer- 
ings  are  always  in  my  sight.  I  will  not  take  calves  out 
of  thy  house,  nor  he-goats  out  of  thy  flocks  ;  for  all  the 
beasts  of  the  wood  are  mine,  the  cattle  on  the  hills,  and 
the  oxen.  ]  know  all  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  witlime 
is  the  beauty  of  the  field.  If  1  should  he  hungry,  I  tvoidd 
7iot  tell  thee ;  for  the  world  is  mine,  and  the  fulness 
thereof.  Shall  I  eat  the  flesh  of  bullocks  ?  or  shall  I 
drink  the  blood  of  goats?  Offer  urito  God  the  sacrifi.ce 
of  praise,  and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the  Most  High!  .  .  , 
The  sacrifice  of  praise  shall  glorify  me ;  and  there  is  the 
way  by  which  I  will  show  him  the  salvation  of  God, — 
show  him,  that  is,  my  Christ,  who  is  the  Saviour  signi- 
fied by  all  these  sacrifices  !^  Later  on,  however,  to 
this  people,  stifi"  necked  as  it  is,  and  uncircumcised  in 
heart  and  ears,^  which  has  gone  deeper  and  deeper  into 

1  Ps.  xlix.  7-14,  23.  2  ^cts,  vii.  51. 


334  CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

outward  formalism,  and  knows  no  other  virtue  or  per- 
fection, God  speaks  in  strong  language,  expressing  his 
disgust  for  sacrifices,  which  they  have  robbed  of  the 
only  worth  they  possessed  in  his  sight,  that  is,  their 
prophetic  sense.  To  what  purpose  do  ye  offer  me  the 
multitude  of  your  victims,  says  he  by  the  Prophet 
Isaias,  /  am  full ;  I  desire  not  holocausts  of  rams, 
and  fat  of  failings,  and  blood  of  calves,  and  lambs,  and 
buck- goats.  When  ye  came  to  appear  before  me,  who 
required  these  things  at  your  hands,  that  ye  should  ivalk, 
(defiling),  772y  courts  /  Off'er  sacrifice  no  fnore  in  vain  - 
your  incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me  !^  But  these 
warnings  are  not  heeded  ;  pride  increases  in  the  carnal 
Jew,  in  proportion  to  his  narrow  heart  and  views.  He 
dreams  of  a  Messias  who  is  to  be  an  earthly  conqueror. 
As  to  the  true  Messias,  whose  divine  characteristics  are 
foretold  by  the  victims  ofi'ered  in  sacrifice,  this  Jew 
will  deny  him,  for  he  finds  Jesus  too  closely  resembling 
those  poor  victims,  by  his  sufi"erings  and  meekness. 

Then  comes  the  last  of  the  Prophets,  Malachias. 
He  turns  to  the  Gentiles  :  they  have  been  less  favoured 
than  Israel,  but  they  have  kept  up  the  expectation  of 
a  Saviour,  and,  when  he  comes,  will  lovingly  receive 
him.  Malachias  announces  the  final  abrogation  of  a 
worship  which  had  been  so  perverted,  and  the  substi-  \ 
tution  of  a  divine  memorial,  which  shall  be  the  same 
in  all  places,  and  shall  make  all  people  one,  by  their 
all  partaking  of  the  great  Sacrifice  to  come :  /  have  no 
pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  to  the  priests 
of  Israel;  /  icill  not  receive  a  gift  of  your  hand ;  for, 
from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  to  the  going  down,  j?iy 
name  is  great  among  the  Gentiles,  and  in  every  place 
there  is  sacrifice,  and  there  is  ofi'ered  tmio  my  name  a 
clean  oblation ^ 

The  fulness  of  time  is  come ;  then,  bless  God,  0  ye 
Gentiles  I    Make  the  voice  of  his  praise  to  be  heard  / 

»  Is.  i.  1 1-13.  2  Malach.  i.  10,  11.  ^  Ps.  Ixv.  8. 


SATURDAY    WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE.  335 

Too  long,  life  has  been  to  you  but  the  empty  dream  of 
night.  You  hungered  after  the  fruit  of  life ;  you 
thirsted  for  living  water.  But,  like  the  hungry  man 
who  dreams  of  a  sumptuous  repast,  yet  never  satisfies 
the  hunger  which  gnaws  him ;  like  the  thirsty  man 
who  dreams  that  he  drinks,  yet,  on  waking,  is  tor- 
mented with  the  same  burning  thirst,  and  finds  his  soul 
still  empty  ; — so  was  the  multitude  of  your  erring 
people.^  Yet,  now,  behold  !  The  standard  of  Jesse 
appears  on  the  mountain,  and  rallies  them  around  it. 
Ye  Gentiles,  that  once  were  strangers,  feed  now  to 
your  heart's  content,  in  the  deserts  turned  into  fruit- 
fulness  l^  The  Water  from  the  rock  flows  plentifully 
through  your  once  parched  lands.  The  glory  of 
Libanus,  the  beauty  of  Carmel  and  Saron,  adorn  your 
hills,  and  refresh  your  lonely  plains ;  your  wilderness 
shall  rejoice,  and  flourish  like  the  lily.^  Rain  shall  be 
given  to  your  seed  ;  and  the' bread  of  the  corn  of  your 
land  shall  be  delicious.*  ^Tis  just  it  should  be  so  ;  for, 
shall  the  labourer  plough  all  day  long  ?  Shall  he  be 
ever  opening  and  harrowing  his  ground  ?  JS^o  ;  the 
time  comes  when,  having  made  smooth  the  surface  of 
his  field,  he  sows  and  scatters  his  seeds,  and  puts  wheat 
in  the  rows  he  has  marked.  Such  is  the  providence 
shown  to  the  Gentiles  by  the  Lord  God  of  hosts ;  and, 
thereby,  he  evinces  both  the  sureness  of  his  divine 
counsels,  and  the  magnificence  of  his  justice.^ 

No :  eternal  AVisdom  had  not  given  up  the  myste- 
rious designs  of  his  love.  He  kept  close  to  the  fallen 
human  race,  even  when  he  severely  chastised  it.  He 
owed  it  to  himself  to  put  guilty  man  to  the  test,  so  to 
make  him  feel,  before  raising  him  up,  how  deep  had 
been  his  fall.  It  was  on  this  account  that  he  permit- 
ted him   to  be   overtaken  by  night,  and  fear,   and 


'  l8.xxix.  7,  8.  *  Is.  XXX.  23. 

2  Ibid.  V.  17.  5  Ibid,  xxviii.  24,  29. 

^Ibid.  XXXV.  1,  7. 


336  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

anguish  ;  he  himself  sends  him  sufferings,  in  order 
that,  having  thus  brought  him  to  sound  the  frightful 
depth  of  his  misery,  he  might  trust  Himself  to  the  safe 
welcome  and  keeping  of  his  creature's  humility.  This 
done,  he  would  raise  him  up  by  repentance,  and 
strengthen  him  with  hope,  and,  joyously  meeting  him, 
disclose  to  him  again  his  divine  charms,  and  enrich 
him  with  the  treasures  which  are  in  the  keeping  of 
his  love.^ 

This  is  Saturday ;  let  us  turn  to  Mary,  who  was 
made,  for  us  Gentiles,  the  Seat  of  Wisdom.     It  was 
in  her  chaste  womb  that  was  wrought  the  mystery  of 
mercy,  which  had  been    the  expectation  of  all  the 
long  ages  past.     It  was  her  most  pure  blood  which 
provided  the  substance  of  that  spotless  Body,  where- 
with the  most  beautiful  of  the  sons  of  men  contracted 
the  indissoluble   alliance  of  our  nature  with  eternal 
Wisdom.     Mary's  soul  is   enraptured  at  seeing  the 
ineffable  mystery  of  these  divine  nuptials  effected  in 
her    chaste   womb.     She  is    that   enclosed    Garden, 
where,  more  delightedly  than  in  the  early  days  of  the 
universe,  Wisdom  enjoys  light  and  love  ;  the  flowery 
couch  of  the  Canticle,^  perfumed,  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
with  the  sweetest  fragrance  ;  the  glorious  tabernacle, 
incomparably  more  holy  than  that  of  Moses.     It  is 
within   her,  under  the  immaculate  veil   of  her  flesh, 
that,  by  the  unspeakable  embrace  of  the  two  natures 
in  the  unity  of  God's   Only  Begotten  Son,  the  Holy 
Ghost  pours  forth  the   unction,   which    makes   him 
Spouse,    and,    at    the    sametime,    Priest    for    ever 
according  to  the  order  of  Melchisedech. 

Let  man,  then,  be  of  good  courage  ;  the  Bread  of 
heaven,  the  Bread  of  the  covenant,  is  at  last  come 
down  upon  our  earth  ;  and  although  nine  months 
must  pass  before  the  great  night  comes,  when  he  is 
to  be  made  visible  to  us  all  in  Bethlehem,  yet,  even 

1  Ecclus.  iv.  18,  21.  -       2  Cant.  i.  15. 


SATURDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 


337 


now,  the  High  Priest  is  at  his  work  in  this  his  holy 
temple.  Sacrifice  and  oblation  thou  wouldest  not,  says 
he  to  his  eternal  Father  ;  hut  a  Body  thou  hast  fitted 
unto  me.  Holocausts  for  sin  did  not  please  thee.  Then 
said  I :  "  Behold  I  come  ;  in  the  head  of  the  hook  it  is 
"  written  of  me, — that  I  should  do  thy  will,  0  God!^^^ 
We  will  close,  to-day,  our  selections  from  the  Office 
of  the  Blessed  Juliana,  hy  the  following  Hymn  ;  it  is 
assigned  to  Compline  in  the  ancient  books  of  the 
Church  of  St.  Martin-au-Mont. 

HYMN    FOR    COMPLINE. 


Christ  is  truly  our  meat, 
Christ  is  truly  our  drink  ;  the 
Flesh  of  Christ  is  truly  our 
meat,  the  Blood  of  Christ  is 
truly  our  drink. 

The  true  Flesh,  which  he 
took  from  the  Virgin,  is  what 
we  eat ;  the  true  Blood,  which 
he  shed  for  man,  is  what  we 
drink. 

In  this  banquet,  the  Word 
made  Flesh  is  truly  eaten ;  it 
is  on  him  that  our  worship 
rests,  and  by  him  that  we 
enter  heaven. 

This  Bread,  which  is  all  full 
of  sweetness  and  grace,  is  the 
King  of  eternal  glory,  that 
was  carried  in  the  Virgin's 
womb. 

Let  us  feed  on  the  richness 
of  Angels'  Bread ;  that  we 
may  find  delight  in^the  sweet- 
ness of  a  viaticum  so  full  of 
m.ercy. 

O  thou  heavenly  banquet ! 
O  glory  of  the  redeemed  !  O 
repose  of  the  humble  !  grant 
us  eternal  joys. 


Christus  noster  vere  cibus, 
Christus  noster  vere  potus,  • 
Caro  Christi  vere  cibus, 
Sanguis  Christi  vere  potus. 

Vera  caro  quam  sumimus, 
Quam  assumpsit  de  Virgine : 
Verus   sanguis    quern   bibi- 

mus, 
Quem  effudit  pro  homine. 

Vere  tali  convivio, 
Verbum  caro  comeditur ; 
Per  quod  viget  Religio, 
Per  quod  coelumingredimur, 

Panis  iste  dulcedinis 
Totus  plenus,  et  gratise 
Alvo  gestatus  Virginis, 
Eex  est  setemse  glorise. 

Hujus  panis  angelici 
Saginemur  pinguedine ; 
Ut  tam  pii  viatici 
Delectemur  dulcedine. 

O  coeleste  convivium ! 
O  redemptorum  gloria  I 
O  requies  humilium  I 
-Sterna  confer  gaudia. 


1  Heb.  X.  5,  7. 


VOL.  X. 


Z 


338 


CORPUS   CHKISTI. 


Prsesta  Pater  per  Filium, 
Praesta  per  almum  Spiritum ; 
Quibus  hoc  das  edulium, 
Prosperum  serves  exitum. 


Amen. 


Grant,  O  Father,  through 
thy  Son,  grant,  through  the 
Spirit  of  love,  that  we,  to 
whom  thou  givest  such 
nourishment  as  this,  may  be 
brought  by  thee  to  a  pros- 
perous end. 

Amen. 


"We  will  continue  our  selections  from  the  magni- 
ficent Preface  given  in  the  Liturgy  of  the  8th  Book 
of  the  Apostolic  Constitutions, 


COXSTITUTIO   JACOBI. 


Neque  hoc  solum  ;  verum 
etiam  et  posteris  ejus,  a  te 
in  multitudinem  innumera- 
bilem  effusis,  eos  qui  tibi 
adhaeserunt  glorificasti,  eos 
vero  qui  a  te  defecerunt 
punivisti ;  admisso  quidem 
Abelis  sacrificio  ut  innocen- 
tis,  fratricidi  autem  Caini 
munere  ut  detestandi  fasti- 
dito. 

Tu  enim  es  opifex  homi- 
num,  vitre  largitor,  indigen- 
ti{«  expletor  ;  legum  dator, 
Basque  servantium  remune- 
rator,  trarsgredientium  vin- 
dex.  Qui  diluvium  mundo 
propter  impie  viventium 
multitudinem  intulisti,  et  eo 
ex  dilu-vio  in  area  cripuisti 
cum  octo  animabus  justum 
Noam,  finem  quidem  eorum 
qui  praeterierant,  origin  eiu 
vero  successurorum.  Qui 
horrendum  ignem  adversus 
Sodomitanam  pcntapolim 
concitasti,  ac  sanctum  Lo- 
tum  ex  incendio  eruisti. 


And  not  this  only ;  but, 
when  thou  hadst  increased  the 
posterity  of  man  to  an  innu- 
merable multitude,  thou  glo- 
rifiedst  them  that  kept  faith- 
ful to  thee,  but  punishedst 
them  that  fell  off;  accepting 
the  sacrifice  of  Abel,  because 
he  was  innocent,  rejecting  the 
gifts  of  the  fratricide  Cain, 
because  he  was  abominable. 

For  thou  art  the  maker  of 
mankind,  the  giver  of  life,  the 
supplier  of  indigence  ;  the 
giver  of  laws,  and  the  re- 
warder  of  such  as  keep  them, 
the  avenger  of  them  that 
transgress.  'Twas  thou  didst 
bring  a  deluge  upon  the  world, 
because  of  the  multitude  of  the 
ungodly  ;  from  which  deluge, 
thou,  by  the  ark  deliveredst 
the  just  Noe,  w^th  eight  souls, 
Noe  who  was  the  end  of  the 
foregoing  generations,  but  the 
source  of  them  that  were  to 
follow.  'Twas  thou  that  kin- 
dledst  a  fearful  fire  against  the 
five  cities  of  Sodom,  and 
snat^'hedst  holy  Lot  from  the 
burning. 


SATURDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 


339 


'Twas  thou  deliveredst 
Abraham  from  the  impiety 
of  his  forefathers,  and  mad  est 
him  the  heir  of  the  world,  and 
showedst  him  thy  Christ. 
'Twas  thou  appointedst  Mel- 
chisedech  to  be  high-priest  of 
thy  divine  worship  ;  thou  that 
madest  Isaac  the  son  of  the 
promise ;  thou  that  broughtest 
Jacob  into  Egypt. 

Thou,  Lord,  didst  not  aban- 
don the  Hebrews,  when  they 
were  oppressed  by  the  Egyp- 
tians, on  account  of  the  pro- 
mises made  to  their  fathers. 
And  when  men  had  corrupted 
the  natural  law,  and  had,  at 
one  time,  looked  on  creation 
as  the  effect  of  chance,  and,  at 
another,  had  honoured  it  more 
than  it  deserved,  thou  per- 
mittedst  them  not  to  be  led 
astray  by  error,  yea,  thou 
raisedst  up  thy  holy  servant 
Moses,  giving,  through  him, 
the  written  law,  as  an  aid  to 
the  natural ;  thou  showedst 
that  creatures  are  thy  work, 
and  tookest  away  the  error  of 
plurality  of  gods. 

'Twas  thou  didst  adorn 
Aaron  and  his  posterity  with 
the  priestly  honour ;  that  pun- 
ishedst  the  Hebrews,  when 
they  sinned,  receiving  them, 
when  they  repented ;  that  in- 
flictedst  the  ten  plagues  on 
the  Egyptians;  that  carriedst 
the  Israelites  across  the  di- 
vided sea ;  that  drownedst  the 
Egyptians,  who  pursued  them. 
'Twas  thou  madest  the  bitter 
water  become  sweet,  by  the 
wood  ;  that  broughtest  water 
out  of  the  hard  rock  ;  that 
rainedst  manna  from  heaven ; 


Tu  es  qui  Abrahamum  li- 
berasti  avita  impietate,  et 
mundi  haeredem  consti- 
tuisti,  ipsique  Christum 
tuum  apparere  fecisti.  Qui 
Melchisedecum  pontificem 
divini  cultus  designasti.  Qui 
Isaacum  effecisti  lilium  pro- 
missionis.  Qui  Jacobum  ad 
^gyptum  introduxisti. 

Tu,  Domine,  Hebrseos  ab 
iEgyptiis  oppressos ,  ob 
promissa  patribus  eorum 
facta,  non  neglexisti.  Cum- 
que  homines  legem  natura- 
lem  corrupissent,  et  creatu- 
ram  modo  fortuitam  arbi- 
trarentur,  modo  plusquam 
oportet  honorarent  ;  non 
sivisti  errore  duci  ;  quin 
potius  edito  sancto  famulo 
tuo  Moyse,  per  eum  legem 
scriptam  in  adjutorium.  na- 
turalis  tribuisti;  et  creaturas 
ostendisti  opus  tuum  esse, 
errorem  vero  de  multitu- 
dine  deorum  exterminasti. 


Aaron  et  posteros  ejus 
honore  sacerdotali  deco- 
rasti.  Hebrseos,  cum  pec- 
carent,  castigasti ;  cum 
reverterentur,  suscepisti. 
^gyptios  decem  plagisultus 
es  ;  mari  diviso  trajecisti 
Israelitas ;  insecutos  ^gyp- 
tios  delevisti  submersione. 
Ligno  amaram  aquam  dul- 
cescere  fecisti ;  ex  petra  dura 
aquam  profudisti ;  e  coelo 
mannam  depluisti ;  praebu- 
isti  ex  aere  escam,  ortygo- 
metram  :  constituisti  nocte 
columnam  ignis  ad  illustra- 


340 


a)Rprs  CHRisii. 


tionem,  et  die  columnam 
nubis  ad  umbraculum  in 
aestu.  Per  Jesum  ducem  a 
te  declaratum  septem  gentes 
evertisti,  Jordanem  diru- 
pisti,  fluvios  Ethan  siccasti, 
muros  prostravisti  absque 
macliinis. 


Pro  omnibus  tibi  gloria, 
iJomine  omnipotens. 

Te  adorant  inniimerabi- 
lescopiie  angelorum,  archan- 
gelorum,  tlironorura,  domi- 
nationum,  principatuuiu, 
potestatum,  virtutum  et 
cherubini,  item  serapliini, 
senis  alis,  binis  quidem  ve- 
lantes  pedes  suos,  binis  vero 
capita,  et  duabus  aliis  vo- 
lantes,  ac  dicentes  una  cum 
mille  millibus  archangelo- 
rum  et  denis  millibus  denuni 
millium  angelorum,  indesi- 
nenter  ac  sine  vocis  inter- 
missione  clamantibus : 

Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Sanctus 
Dominus  Sabaoth  :  pleni 
sunt  coeli  et  terra  gloria 
ejus  :  Benedictus  in  ssecula. 

Amen. 


that  grantedst  quails  to  come 
from  the  air,  as  food ;  that 
appointedst  a  pillar  of  fire,  by 
night,  to  give  light,  and  a 
pillar  of  a  cloud,  by  day,  to 
overshadow  them  from  heat. 
By  Josue,  proclaimed  by  thee 
as  leader,  thou  didst  overthrow 
the  seven  nations ;  thou  di- 
videdst  the  Jordan,  driedst  up 
the  rivers  of  Ethan,  and  over- 
tumedst  the  walls,  without 
instruments. 

Glory  be  to  thee,  O  al- 
mighty Lord,  for  all  these 
things  ! 

Thee  do  adore  the  innumer- 
able hosts  of  angels,  archan- 
gels, thrones,  dominations, 
principalities,  powers,  virtues, 
and  cherubim  ;  the  seraphim, 
also,  with  their  six  wings, 
with  two  covering  their  feet, 
vriih  two  their  heads,  and  with 
two  fljTug,  and  saj-ing,  with 
thousand  thousands  of  arch- 
angels, and  ten  thousand  times 
ten  thousand  angels,  inces- 
santly, and,  with  uniutemip- 
ted  voices,  crying  out : 

Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  the  Lord 
of  hosts  :  heaven  and  earih 
are  full  of  his  glory:  be  he 
blessed  for  ever ! 

Amen. 


SUNDAY  WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  341 


SUNDAY 

WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE    OF    CORPUS    CHKISTI. 

Let    us    adore   Christ,    the  Christum    regem    adore- 

King,  who  ruleth  the  uatioiis :  mus  dominantem  gentibus, 

who  giveth  fatness  of  spii'it  to  qui   se   manducantibus    dat 

them  that  eat  him.  spiritus  pinguedinem. 

The  Desired  of  all  nations/  the  Angel  of  the  testa- 
ment whom  Israel  longs  for/  has  come  down  from 
heaven.  Wisdom  is  come  among  us.  Who,  asks 
the  Prophet,  shall  go.  up  into  heaven,  to  take  Wis- 
dom, and  bring  him  down  from  the  clouds  ?  Who 
shall  pass  over  the  sea,  and  bring  him  from  distant 
lands,  him,  the  treasure  more  precious  than  the  purest 
gold?  Israel  has  forsaken  the  fountain  of  Wisdom. 
He  has  not  even  been  heard  of  in  the  land  of 
Chanaan ;  he  has  not  been  seen  in  Idumea.  The 
children  of ,  Agar,  the  princes  of  the  nations,  the 
philosophers  of  earthly  wisdom,  the  ingenious  inven- 
tors, the  searchers  after  science,  the  hoarders  of  riches, 
and  makers  of  strength  and  beauty,  which  do  but 
cheat  the  beholder, — all  these  have  not  known  the 
ways  of  Wisdom,  they  have  not  understood  his  paths.^ 
But,  lo !  the  Son  promised  to  David  has  sate  upon 
his  throne  of  glory  ;  he  is  the  source  of  Wisdom  ;  the 
four  rivers  of  paradise  have  derived  all  their  waters 
from  Him.  His  thoughts  are  more  vast  than  the 
sea,  and  his  counsels  more  deep  than  the  great  ocean.* 
He  is  come  to  fulfil  the  mysterious  design  of  the 
divine  and  sovereign  will, — that  is,  to  re-establish y 


*  Agg.  ii.  8.  '  Baruch,  iii.  12-b8. 

2  Malach.  iii.  1.  *  Ecclus.  xxiv.  34-o9. 


3i2  bUNDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCIAVE. 

by  uniting  all  things  in  himself,  all  that  are  in 
heaven  and  on  earth. ^  He  is  truly  Mediator,  for  he 
is,  himself,  both  God  and  Man  ;  and  being  also  High 
Priest,  he  is  the  bond  of  that  holy  religion,  which 
fastens  on  all  things  to  the  Creator,  in  the  unity  of 
one  same  homage.  His  Sacrifice  is  the  master-piece 
of  the  divine  Wisdom  :  it  is  by  that  Sacrifice,  that, 
embracing  all  created  beings  in  the  immensity  of  the 
love,  whose  impatient  ardour  has  been  the  subject  of 
our  past  considerations,  he  makes  the  whole  world 
become  one  sublime  holocaust  to  his  Father's  glory. 
Let  us,  then,  proceed  to  consider  him  in  this  immola- 
tion of  his  victim  ;  let  us  reverently  watch  him  setting 
forth  his  table.^  The  Eucharist  has  been  instituted 
for  the  very  purpose  of  ceaselessly  applying,  here  on 
earth,  the  reality  of  Christ's  Sacrifice.  To-day, 
therefore,  we  will  turn  our  thoughts  upon  this  Sacri- 
fice, as  it  is  in  its  own  self ;  this  will  enable  us  the 
better  to  understand  how  it  is  continued  in  the 
Church. 

God  has  a  right  to  his  creature's  homage.  If 
earthly  kings  and  lords  may  claim  from  their  vassals 
this  recognition  of  their  sovereignty, — the  sovereign 
dominion  of  the  great  and  first  Being,  the  first  cause 
and  last  end  of  all  things,  demands  it,  on  an  infinitely 
just  title,  from  beings  called  forth  from  nothing  by 
his  almighty  goodness.  And,  just  as  by  the  rent  or 
service  which  accompanies  it,  the  homage  of  vassals 
implies,  together  with  the  avowal  of  their  submission, 
the  real,  the  effective  declaration  that  it  is  from  their 
liege-lord  that  they  hold  their  property  and  rights ; 
so  the  act,  wliereby  the  creature,  as  such,  subjects 
himself  to  his  Creator,  should  adequately  manifest,  hy 
and  of  itself,  that  he  acknowledges  him  as  the  Lord  of 
all  things,  and  the  author  of  life.  Moreover,  if,  by 
the  infringement  of  his  commands,  he  has  deserved 

»  Eph.  i.  10.  «  Prov.  ix.  2. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE.  343 

death,  and  only  lives  because  of  the  infinite  mercy  of 
this  his  sovereign  Lord, — then,  his  act  of  homage  or 
fealty  will  not  be  complete,  unless  it  also  express  an 
avowal  of  his  guilt,  and  the  justice  of  the  punishment. 
Such  is  the  true  notion  of  Sacrifice^  so  called,  because 
it  sets  apart  from  the  rest  of  similar  beings,  and 
makes  sacred,  the  offering  whereby  it  is  expressed  : 
for  spirits  purely  immaterial,  the  offering  or  oblation 
will  be  interior  and  exclusively  spiritual ;  but,  as 
regards  man,  this  oblation  must  be  spiritual,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  material,  for,  being  composed  of  a 
soul  and  a  body,  he  owes  homage  to  his  God  for 
both. 

Sacrifice  may  not  be  offered  but  to  the  one  true 
God,  for  it  is  the  effective  acknowledgment  of  the 
Creator's  sovereign  dominion,  and  of  that  glory  which 
belongs  to  him,  and  which  he  will  not  make  over  to 
another.^  It  is  essential  to  religion,  be  the  state  that 
of  innocence  or  of  fall ;  for  religion,  the  queen  of 
moral  virtues,  whose  object  is  the  worship  due  to  God, 
necessarily  demands  Sacrifice,  as  its  own  adequate 
exercise  and  expression.  Eden  would  have  witnessed 
this  Sacrifice  offered  by  unfallen  man  ;  it  would  have 
been  one  of  adoration  and  thanksgiving ;  its  material 
portion  would  have  been  that  garden's  richest  fruits, 
those  symbols  of  the  divine  fruit,  promised  by  the 
tree  of  life ;  sin  would  not  have  put  its  own  sad 
stamp  on  such  Sacrifice,  and  blood  would  not  have 
been  required.  But  man  fell ;  and,  then.  Sacrifice 
became  the  only  means  of  propitiation,  and  the  neces- 
sary centre  of  religion,  in  this  land  of  exile.  Until 
Luther's  time,  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  held  and 
lived  up  to  this  truth ;  and  when  the  so-called 
Reformers  excluded  Sacrifice  from  religion,  they  took 
away  its  very  basis.  Nor  is  the  duty  of  Sacrifice 
limited  to  man's  earthly  existence  ;  no  :  the  creature 

^  Is.  xlviii.  11. 


344  SUNDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

when  in  heaven,  and  in  the  state  of  glory,  must  still 
offer  Sacrifice  to  his  Creator ;  for  he  has  as  much, 
and  even  more,  obligation,  when  he  is  in  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Vision,  as  when  he  lived  amid  the  shadows 
of  Faith,  to  offer  to  the  God  who  has  crowned  him, 
the  homage  of  those  gifts  received. 

It  is  by  Sacrifice  that  God  attains  the  end  he  had 
in  view  by  creation,  that  is,  his  own  glory.^  But,  in 
order  that  there  should  go  up  from  this  universe  a 
homage  in  keeping  with  the  magnificence  of  its 
Maker,  there  was  needed  some  one  leader  or  head, 
who  should  represent  all  creation  in  his  one  person  ; 
and  then,  using  it  as  his  own  property,  should  offer 
it,  in  all  its  integrity,  together  with  himself,  to  the 
Lord  God.  There  was  something  better  than  this  ; 
and  it  is  just  what  God  has'done  :  by  giving  his  own 
Son,  clad  in  our  nature,  to  be  the  Head  of  creation, 
he  obtains  an  infinite  return  of  glory ;  for  the  homage 
of  this  inferior  nature  assumes  the  dignity  of  the 
Person  offering  it;  and  the  honour  thus  paid  becomes 
truly  worthy  of  the  supreme  Majesty.  And,  as  a 
banker  knows  how  to  draw  golden  interest  from  even 
the  least  sum  intrusted  to  his  keeping,  so  our  God 
has,  from  a  world  made  out  of  nothing,  produced  a 
fruit  of  infinite  worth. 

Yes,  truly  marvellous  finish  to  his  work  of  creation! 
The  immense  glory  rendered  to  the  Father  by  the 
"Word  Incarnate,  has  brought  God  and  the  creature 
nearer  to  each  other;  it  tells  upon  the  world,  by  filling 
up  its  hateful  depths  of  misery  with  grace,  grace 
abundant  and  rich ;  and,  thereby,  the  distance 
between  God  and  us  does  not  exclude  the  union  for 
which  he  first  made  us.  The  Sacrifice  of  the  Son 
of  Man  becomes  the  basis  and  cause  of  the  super- 
natural order,  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  Christ 
was  the  first  and  chief  object  of  the  decree  of  creation; 

^  Prov.  xvi.  4. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 


345 


and,  therefore,  it  was  for  him,  and  upon  him  as  type, 
and  in  harmony  with  the  qualities  of  the  nature,  that 
he  was,  at  a  given  future  time,  to  assume  to  himself, — 
that,  at  the  Father's  bidding,  there  came  forth,  out 
of  nothing,  the  various  grades  of  being,  spiritual  and 
material,  all  of  which  were  intended  to  form  the 
palace  and  court  of  the  future  God-Man.  It  was  the 
same,  also,  in  the  order  of  grace, — this  God-Man,  who 
is  to  be  the  most  Beautiful  among  the  children  of  men, 
is,  in  all  truth,  the  "\Yell- Beloved.  The  Spirit  of 
love,  as  a  precious  and  fragrant  ointment,  will  flow 
from  this  one  Well-Beloved,  from  this  dear  Head, 
upon  all  his  Members,  yea,  and  even  to  the  lowest 
skirt  of  his  garment,^  generously  communicating  true 
life,  supernatural  being,  to  those  whom  Christ  shall 
have  graciously  called  to  a  participation  of  his  own 
divine  substance,  in  the  banquet  of  love.  For,  the 
Head  will  lead  on  his  Members ;  these  will  unite  to 
Ms,  their  own  homage,  which,  being  in  itself  too  poor 
to  be  offered  to  God's  infinite  Majesty,  will, — by  their 
incorporation  with  the  Incarnate  Word,  in  the  act  of 
his  Sacrifice, — put  on  the  dignity  of  Christ  himself. 

It  is  on  this  account,  as  we  have  already  noticed, 
and  cannot  too  strongly  urge,  that  one  should  inveigh 
against  the  narrow-minded  individualism  which  is 
now  so  much  the  fashion,  of  attaching  more  importance 
to  the  practices  of  private  devotion,  than  to  the 
solemnity  of  those  great  acts  of  the  Liturgy,  which 
form  the  very  essence  of  religion.  Thus,  as  we  were 
just  saying,  it  is  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  God- Man,  that 
the  entire  creation  is  consummated  in  unity,  and  that 
true  social  life  is  founded  upon  God.  God  is  one  in 
his  essence  ;  the  inefi'able  harmony  of  the  Three  Divine 
Persons  does  but  bring  out  more  clearly,  by  its  sublime 
fecundity,  this  infinite  Unity.  The  creature,  on  the 
contrary,  is  multiplicity ;  and  the  division,  resulting 

1  Ps.  cxxxii.  2. 


346  SUNDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

from  Adam's  fall,  has  strongly  emphasised  this  mark 
of  finite  and  borrowed  being.  And  yet,  having 
come  forth  from  God's  hands,  it  must  return  thither, 
it  must,  that  is,  procure  his  glory ;  and  this  it  cannot 
do,  save  on  the  condition  of  there  being  removed  that 
unhappy  division,  which  separates  it  from  both  God 
and  its  fellow- creatures ;  its  very  multiplicity  must 
reproduce,  as  it  tends  towards  its  Maker,  an  image  of 
the  fruitful  harmony  of  the  Three  Divine  Persons. 
That  they  J  also,  may  he  one  in  iis,  as  we  also  are  one  :^ 
there  is  the  grand  revelation  of  God's  intentions, 
when  he  produced  creatures ;  and  the  revelation  is 
made  to  us  by  the  Angel  of  the  great  Counsel,  who  is 
come  upon  this  earth,  that  he  might  carry  out  the 
divine  plan.  Now,  what  is  it  that  brings  all  the 
several  elements  of  the  social  body  into  oneness,  by 
bringing  them  back  to  their  Creator  ?  It  is  religion. 
And  what  is  the  fundamental  act  of  religion  ?  Sacri- 
fice. Sacrifice  is  both  the  means  and  scope  of  this 
magnificent  unification  in  Christ ;  its  perfect  realisa- 
tion will  mark  the  consummation  of  the  eternal  king- 
dom of  the  Father,  who  will  have  become,  through 
his  Christ,  all  in  all." 

But,  this  royalty  of  endless  ages,  which  is  to  be 
procured  for  the  Father  by  Christ's  reign  here  below,' 
has  enemies,  and  they  must  be  subdued.  The  prin- 
cipalities, and  powers,  and  virtues,  of  Satan's  king- 
dom are  leagued  against  it.  They  were  jealous  of 
Man,  the  image  of  God's  own  likeness ;  and  that  envy 
made  them  turn  their  attacks  upon  man ;  they  led 
him  to  disobedience,  and  disobedience  brought  death 
into  the  world.*  By  man,  now  become  its  slave,  sin 
took  occasion,  by  every  one  of  God's  commandments, 
to  insult  that  God.^     Far  from  studpng  how  to  ofi'er 


1  St.  John,  xvii.  21,  22.  *  Wisd.  ii.  23,  34. 

2  1  Cor.  XV.  24-28.  ^  Horn.  vii.  11. 
>  Ibid.  24,  25. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  347 

to  its  Maker  the  homage  due  to  him,  the  human  race 
seemed  hent  on  intensifying  the  poverty  of  its  original 
nothingness,  by  adding  to  it  the  baseness  of  every  sort 
of  defilement.  So  that,  before  being  capable  of  accep- 
tableness  with  the  Father,  the  future  members  of 
Christ  have  need  of  a  Sacrifice  of  propitiation  and 
acquittance.  Their  Christ  will  himself  have  to  live 
the  expiatory  life,  which  comports  a  sinner ;  he  will 
have  to  suff'er  their  suff'erings,  and  die  the  death}  Yes, 
death  was  the  penalty  threatened,  from  the  very  com- 
mencement, as  sanction  of  God's  commandment ;  it 
was  the  severest  penalty  the  transgressor  could  possibly 
pay,  and  yet  was  not  adequate  to  the  ofience  ofi'ered, 
by  the  transgression,  to  the  infinite  Majesty  of  God, 
unless  a  Divine  Person,  taking  upon  himself  the  ter- 
rible responsibility  of  this  infinite  debt,  were  to  un- 
dergo himself  the  punishment  due  upon  man,  and,  by 
so  doing,  restore  man  to  innocence. 

Oh !  then,  let  our  High  Priest  come  forth  ;  let  the 
divine  Head  of  our  human  race  and  world  show 
himself !  Because  he  hath  loved  justice,  and  hated 
iniquity,  therefore  hath  God  anointed  him  with  the  oil 
of  gladness,  above  his  fellows,^  his  brethren.  He  was 
Christ  by  the  priesthood  destined  to  be  his  from  the 
very  bosom  of  his  Father,  and  confirmed  by  a  solemn 
oath;^  he  is  Jesus,  too,  for  the  sacrifice  he  is  about  to 
ofi'er  will  save  his  people  from  their  sin  :*  Jesus-Christy 
then,  is  to  be,  for  ever,  the  name  of  the  eternal  Priest. 
What  power  and  what  love  are  there  not  in  his  Sacri- 
fice !  Priest  and  Victim  at  one  and  the  same  time, 
he  swallows  death,  in  order  to  destroy  it,  and,  by  that 
very  act,  crushes  sin  by  his  own  innocent  flesh  suffer- 
ing its  penalty  ;  he  satisfies,  even  to  the  last  farthing, 
yea,  and  far  beyond  it,  the  justice  of  his  Father ;  he 
takes  the  decree  that  was  against  us,  nails  it  to  the 


1  Gen.  ii.  17.  "  Ps.  cix.  4. 

2  Ps.  xliv.  8.  4  St.  Matth.  i.  21. 


348  SUNDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

n    eo    ar^A    Wots   out   the  liand-writing  ;  and  then, 
fel^Ai^^oPJi^^^'^^  and  powers  of  Aou  tyra^ 

Redeemer  he  cau  rise,  together  wUh  h™    f  om    he 

'*'<<The  word  comes  forward,"  says  St  Amhrose, 
»  in  the  robes  of  the  High  P-est,  which  Mosesde- 
"  ™ibed ;'  he  is  clad  with  the  ,^orld  m  its  magmh 

"Sclosely  to  himself.^     Speaking  of  h.mse  ,  he  said 
'•^Tliflbe  lifted  up/ron^t,>e  ^"rtl.^.f.^ra^^U 

"  lee^'  How  so  ?     Because,"  answers  St.  fug^stin.^ 

,  r.  1        ;;   Id   T>  ^  Dcfusa  soDCuli,  xvi. 

Coloss^^n.Uj^lS.  6  St.  John,  xii.  32. 

2  Horn.  VI.  4-iy.  ,         ^^.^  3 

3  Coloss.  ill.  3.  3  ^        t.  in  rs.  bdv. 


SUNDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  349 

house  loith  hurnt- offerings ;  I  will  pay  thee  my  vows, 
which  my  lips  have  uttered.  And  my  mouth  hath 
spoken,  ivhen  1  icas  in  trouble :  I  icill  offer  up  to  thee 
holocausts  full  of  marrow,  with  the  incense  of  rams  ;  / 
loill  offer  to  thee  bullocks,  with  goats} 

What  is  this  day,  whereon  our  High  Priest  was  in 
ti'ouble  9  It  is  that  of  which  the  Apostle  speaks,  when 
he  tells  us,  that,  with  a  strong  cry  and  tears,  he  offered 
up  prayers  and  supplications  to  Him,  (his  Father), 
who  was  ahle  to  save  him  from  death.^  But,  why 
does  this  Jesus  mention  rams  and  bullocks  and  goats, — 
those  offerings  hecome  useless  and  rejected  of  God  ? 
Did  he  not  himself  say,  when  he  came  into  our  world  : 
Sacrifice  and,  oblation  thou  ivouldst  not ;  hut  a  Body 
thou  hast  fitted  unto  me  ?^  Yea,  truly  :  and  it  is  this 
Body  of  Christ,  says  St.  Augustine,  which  is  here 
shown  to  us,  in  this  Psalm  ;  he  presents  his  Body,  as 
the  offering  he  voivs  to  his  Father ;  the  rams  are  the 
leaders  of  the  Church.^  Hear  my  prayer,  continues 
the  Psalmist,  prophesying  of  our  High  Priest, — 0 
hear  my  prayer  .*  all  Flesh  shall  come  unto  thee.  Princes 
and  people  of  all  nations,  children,  young  men  and 
old,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  Greeks,  E-omans,  Barbarians, 
— all  are  on  the  Wood,  and  are  the  victim  vowed  to 
the  Father.  It  is  with  all  these,  and  in  their  name, 
and  for  their  sakes,  in  the  entirety  and  unity  of  his 
Body,  that  Christ  said  to  his  Father  :  I  will  go  into 
thy  house  with  hurnt- offerings ;  send  thy  Fire,  the  fire 
of  thy  Spirit,  the  divine  flame  of  me.  Eternal  Wisdom ; 
let  it  burn  and  wholly  burn  this  Body  which  I  have 
taken  to  myself ;  let  it  be  a  holocaust,  that  is,  let  it  be 
all  thine,  0  Father ! ' 

Come,  then,  0  ye  children  of  God !  bring  unto  the 
Lord  the  offspring  of  rams.^    The  voice  of  the  Lord 


1  Ps.  Ixv.  13-15.  *  Enarrat.  in  Ps.  Ixv. 

^  Heb.  V.  7.  ^  St.  Aug.  passim  in  Psalraos. 

3  Ibid.  X.  6,  6.  .   ^  Ps.  xxviii.  1. 


350  SUNDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE. 

has  been  heard  in  its  power  ;  he  bids  the  flame  of  Fire 
come  down  upon  the  mount ;  the  Holocaust  is  already- 
burning,  and,  from  Calvary,  the  fire  will  spread  through- 
out the  world.     The  divine  Fire  pursues  its  work,  each 
succeeding  generation ;  it  absorbs  into  itself  each  of 
the  members  of  the  great  Victim,  that  is,  each  one  of 
the  Faithful ;  it  devours  sin  ;  it  burns  out  the  dross  of 
vice ;  it  purifies,  even  in  the  dust  of  the  grave,  the 
flesh  that  has  once  been  sanctified  by  the  touch  of 
Christ,  in  the  sacred  Mystery.     It  is  a  true  fire  of 
Heaven  ;  it  is  the  uncreated  flame  ;  it  destroys  nought 
but  evil ;  it  sends,  indeed,  sufi'ering  and  death  among 
men,  but  it  is  only  that  it  may  deliver  them  from  the 
wreck  and  ruin  of  the  Fall,  and,  by  expiation,  remake 
the  whole  human  race.     The  day  will  come  when  this 
Fire  of  the  great  Sacrifice,  having  drawn  into  itself 
the  last  member  of  Christ's  mystical  body,  the  very 
flesh  itself  of  the  elect  will  re- appear  all  spiritual  and 
glorified  ;  and  this  wonderful  transformation  of  the 
victim  will  make  it  a  sacrifice  truly  worthy  of  the  Lord 
God,  and  an  assertion,  far  stronger  than  was  its  de- 
struction by  death,  of  the  sovereign  power  and  domi- 
nion of  Him  who  is  the  Author  of  Life.     Then  will 
the  complete  body  of  the  Word  Incarnate  ascend,  like 
purest   incense,  from  the  holy  mount   whereon  the 
Church  had  fixed  her  tent  here  below,  and  make  its 
way  even  to  the  Altar  of  heaven ;  it  will  be  the  eternal 
aliment  of  the  divine  flame,  the  immense  holocaust,  in 
which  "the  city  of  the  redeemed,  the  people  of  the 
"  saints,  will  be  off'ered  to  God,  as  the  universal  sacri- 
"  fice,  by  the  great  High  Priest,  who  ofi'ered  himself 
**  for  us,  in  his  Passion,  in  the  form  of  a  servant  and 
"  slave,  that  we  might  be  the  body  of  so  great  a 
"Head."' 

In  this  "universal  Sacrifice,"  as  we  have  just  heard 
St.  Augustine  calling  it,  in  this  Sacrifice  of  adoration 

1  St.  Aug.  Be  civit.  Dei,  x.  6. 


SUKDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  351 

and  thanksgiving,  wherein  expiation  will  no  longer  have 
part,  the  very  spirits  of  the  angelic  hosts  will  be  in- 
cluded ;  for  they,  too,  are  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Lord, 
making  up,  together  with  ourselves,  the  one  only  City 
of  God,  of  which  the  Psalm  sings.^  St.  Cyril,  of  Alex- 
andria, thus  speaks  on  the  Angels  forming  part  of  the 
*'  universal  Sacrifice  "  :  "  We  have  all  received  of  the 
^\fiilness  of  Christ,  as  St.  John  tells  us  ;  for  every  crea- 
"  ture,  not  only  visible  but  invisible,  also,  receives  of 
"  Christ;  for  the  Angels  and  Archangels,  and  the  spirits 
"  that  are  above  these,  and,  finally,  the  very  Cherubim, 
"  are  sanctified  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  otherwise  than 
*^  by  Christ  alone.  So  that  He  (Christ)  is  the  Altar, 
"  He  is  the  Incense,  He  is  the  High  Priest,  just  as  He 
"  is  the  blood  of  the  cleansing  away  of  sins."  ^ 

Having,  therefore,  as  our  great  High  Priest,  Jesus 
the  Son  of  God,  who,  by  one  oblation,  hath  perfected 
for  ever  the  holy  City, — let  us  hold  fast  the  teaching 
of  this  glorious  faith.^  As  the  high  priest  of  old, 
went,  on  the  day  of  Atonement,  himself  alone,  into 
the  Holy  of  Holies,  holding  in  his  hands  the  blood  of 
propitiation, — so  our  High  Priest,  Jesus,  having  pur- 
chased eternal  redemption  for  us,  has  withdrawn  him- 
self, for  a  time,  from  our  sight.*  Minister  of  the  true 
sanctuary  and  tabernacle,  set  up  by  God  himself,^  we 
have  seen  this  Jesus  of  ours  entering,  by  his  trium- 
phant Ascension,  beyond  the  veil ;  and  that  veil  is 
still  down,  hiding  God's  sovereign  Majesty  from  our 
view.  There,  in  the  sanctuary  of  heaven,  is  he  cele- 
brating, and  with  unbroken  unity,  the  rite  of  his 
Sacrifice,  presenting  thereby,  to  his  Father,  in  the 
human  nature  which  he  has  assumed,  and  which  is 
now  marked  with  the  bright  stigmata  of  his  Passion, 
the  august  Victim,  whose  immolation  here  on  earth 
called  for  the  consummation  in  heaven.     Meanwhile, 

1  St.  Ang.Dechnt.7;  andinPs.  Ixxxvi.      *  Heb.  ix.  12,  24. 

2  De  adorat.  in  spir.  et  ver.,  lib.  ix.  ^  Ibid.  viii.  2. 
3Heb.iv.  14  ;x.  14. 


352  SUNDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

as,  heretofore,  the  people  of  Israel  awaited  the  high 
priest's  return  out  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  so,  too,  we 
Christians  here  below,  keep  close  to  our  Priest,,,  and 
are  ever  at  prayer  round  the  Altar  which  is  in  the 
outer  court.  "It  is  the  day  of  Atonement,"  says 
Origen,  "  and  it  lasts  till  the  setting  sun,  that  is,  till 
"  the  world  comes  to  an  end.  We  stand  nigh  the 
*'  door,  awaiting  our  High  Priest  who  is  within  the 
"  Holy  of  Holies,  praying,  not  for  the  sins  of  all,  but 
"for  the  sins  of  them  that  are  awaiting  him.  .  .  . 
"  There  were  two  portions  of  the  holy  place,  as  we 
"  are  told  by  Scripture:  one  was  visible,  and  accessible 
"  to  all  the  priests  ;  but  the  other  was  invisible,  and 
"  no  one  might  enter  into  it,  save  only  the  High 
"  Priest,  and,  whilst  he  was  there,  the  rest  stood 
"  outside  ;  I  believe,  that,  by  this  first  portion,  is  to  be 
"  understood  the  Church  wherein  we  now  are,  whilst 
"  in  the  flesh  ;  in  this  portion,  priests  are  ministering 
"  at  the  altar  of  holocausts,  which  is  fed  by  that  fire 
"  of  which  our  Jesus  speaks,  saying  :  /  came  to  cast  /ire 
"  on  the  earthy  and  1  will  it  to  be  enkindled.  .  .  It 
"  is  there,  in  that  first  portion,  that  the  High  Priest 
''  ofi"ers  the  victim ;  and  it  is  thence,  also,  that  he 
''  goes  forth,  in  order  to  enter  into  the  inner  veil,  the 
"  second  portion,  which  is  heaven  itself,  and  the 
"  throne  of  God.  But,  take  notice  of  the  wonderful 
"  order  of  the  mysteries  :  tbe  fire  which  he  takes 
*'  with  him  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  he  takes  from 
"  the  altar  of  that  first  portion ;  and  the  incense,  he 
"  takes  it  from  that  same  portion  ;  yea,  and  the  vest- 
"  ments  wherewith  he  is  robed,  he  received  them  in 
"  that  same  place."^ 

Nor  is  that  all :  even  after  his  departure,  the  fire 
of  the  Sacrifice  is  not  extinguished  in  the  outer  court ; 
and  the  victim  of  Atonement,  whose  Blood  gives  him 
admission  into  the  most  holy  sanctuary,  continues  to 
burn,  and  be  ofi'ered  on  our  outer  Altar. 

"-  In  Levit.  Horn.  ix. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN  THE   OCTAVE.  353 


MASS. 

This  Sunday  within  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi 
is  the  second  after  Pentecost.  The  Introit  is  taken 
from  the  17th  Psalm,  which  sings  the  praises  of  the 
God,  who  protects  his  people,  and  delivers  them  from 
their  enemies.  Let  us  lovingly  extol  this  God,  who 
is  our  support  and  our  refuge, 

IKTROIT. 

The  Lord  hatli  become  my  Factus  est  Dominus  pro- 
protector,  and  set  me  at  large  :  tector  meus,  et  eduxit  me 
lie  hath  saved  me,  because  he  in  latitudinem  :  salvum  me 
loved  me.  fecit,  quoniam  voluit  me. 

Ps.  I  will  love  thee,  O  Lord,  Ps.  Diligam  te,   Domine, 

my  strength  :  the  Lord  is  my  virtus  mea  :  Dominus  firma- 

support,   my  refuge,  and  my  mentum  meum,  et  refugium 

deliverer.      Glory,    etc.      The  meum,    et   liberator   meus. 

Lord,  etc.  Gloria  Patri.     Factus  est. 

In  the  Collect,  the  Church  prays  for  us,  that  we 
may  have  love  and  fear  of  God's  holy  name.  Yes, 
the  fear  here  spoken  of,  the  fear  which  children  have 
for  their  father,  does  not  exclude  love ;  on  the  con- 
trary, it  strengthens  love,  by  guarding  it  against  the 
negligence  and  oversights,  into  which  certain  souls  arc 
led  by  a  false  familiarity. 

COLLECT. 

Grant  us,  O  Lord,  both  a  Sancti  nominis  tui.  Do- 
constant  love  and  fear  of  thy  mine,  timorem  pariter  et 
hcly  Name  :  since  thou  never  amorem  fac  nos  habere  per- 
withdrawest  thy  protection  petuum  :  quia  nunquam  tua 
from  those  whom  thou  solidly  gubernatione  destituis  quos 
groundest  in  thy  love,  in  soliditate  tuae  dilectionis 
Through,  etc,  instituis.      Per    Dominum. 

VOL.  X.  2  A 


354 


MASS. 


CX)MMEM0RATION    OF    CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Deus  qui  nobis  sub  Sacra- 
mento mirabili  passionis 
tuae  memoriam  reliquisti  : 
tribue,  quaesumus ;  ita  nos 
Corporis  et  Sanguinis  tui 
sacra  mysteria  venerari,  ut 
redemptionis  tuae  fructum 
LQ  nobis  jugiter  sentiamus. 
Qui  vivis. 


O  God,  who,  under  the 
•wonderful  Sacrament,  hast 
left  us  a  memorial  of  thy 
Passion  :  grant  us,  we  beseech 
thee,  so  to  reverence  the  sacred 
mysteries  of  thy  Body  and 
Blood,  that,  in  our  souls,  we 
may  always  feel  the  fruit  of 
thy  Redemption.  Who  livest, 
etc. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati  Jo- 
hannis  Apostoli. 

1  Cap.  Ill, 

Charissimi,  nolite  mirari, 
si  odit  vos  mundus.  Nos 
scimus  quoniam  translati 
sumus  de  morto  ad  vitam, 
quoniam  diligimus  fratres. 
Qui  non  diligit,  manet  in 
morte :  omnis  qui  odit  fra- 
trem  suum,  homicida  est. 
Et  scitis  quoniam  omnis  ho- 
micida non  habet  vitam 
setemam  in  semetipso  ma- 
nentem.  In  hoc  cognovi- 
mus  charitatem  Dei,  quo- 
niam ille  animam  suam  pro 
nobis  posuit  :  et  nos  debe- 
mus  pro  fratribus  animas 
poncre.  Qui  habuerit  sub- 
stantiam  hujus  mundi,  et 
viderit  fratrem  suum  neces- 
sitatem  habere,  et  clauserit 
viscera  sua  ab  co  :  quomodo 
charitas  Dei  manet  in  eo  ? 
Filioli  mei,  non  diligamus 
verbo,  neque  lingua,  sed 
opere  et  veritate. 


Lesson    of    the    Epistle   of 
Saint  John  the  Apostle. 

1  Ch.  III. 

Dearly  beloved,  wonder  not 
if  the  world  hate  you.  Wt 
know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because 
we  love  the  brethren.  He 
that  loveth  not,  abideth  in 
death.  Whosoever  hateth  his 
brother,  is  a  murderer.  And 
ye  know  that  no  murderer 
hath  eternal  life  abiding  in 
himself.  In  this  we  have 
known  the  charity  of  God, 
because  he  hath  laid  down  his 
life  for  us :  and  we  ought  to 
lay  do\NTi  our  lives  for  the 
brethren.  He  that  hath  the 
substance  of  this  world,  and 
shall  see  his  brother  in  need, 
aud  shut  up  his  bowels  from 
him :  how  doth  the  charity  of 
God  abide  in  him  ?  My  little 
children,  let  us  not  love  in 
word,  nor  in  tongue,  but  ini 
deed  and  in  truth. 


SUNDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  355 

These  impressive  words  of  the  Beloved  Disciple 
could  not  have  a  more  appropriate  occasion  for  their 
being  addressed  to  the  faithful,  than  this  joyous 
Octave.  God's  love  for  us  is  both  the  model  and 
motive  of  that  which  we  owe  to  our  fellow-men ;  the 
divine  charity  is  the  type  of  ours.  I  have  given  you 
an  example,  says  our  Lord,  that,  as  I  have  done  unto 
you,  BO  ye  may  also  do^.  If,  then,  he  has  gone  so  far 
as  to  lay  down  his  life  for  us,  we,  also,  should  be  ready, 
if  occasion  so  required,  to  lay  down  ours,  in  order  to 
procure  our  neighbour's  salvation;  and  still  more 
ready  to  help  him,  to  the  best  of  our  power,  when  he 
is  in  need  ;  we  should  love,  not  in  word,  or  in  tongue, 
but  in  deed,  and  in  truth. 

Now  the  divine  memorial,  which  is  shining  on  us 
in  all  its  splendour,  what  else  is  it,  than  an  eloquent 
demonstration  of  infinite  love  ?  A  living  remem- 
brance, and  abiding  representation  of  that  Death  of 
our  Lord,  upon  which  the  Apostle  bases  his  argu- 
ment. 

Hence  it  was,  that  our  Divine  Master  deferred  his 
promulgation  of  the  law  of  fraternal  love,  which  he  came 
upon  our  earth  to  establish,  till  he  instituted  the  holy 
Sacrament,  which  was  to  give  the  strongest  support  to 
the  observance  of  that  law.  No  sooner  has  he  effected 
the  august  mystery,  no  sooner  has  he  given  himself  to 
mankind  under  the  sacred  species,  than  he  exclaims  : 
A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you, — and  this  is  my 
commandment: — that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have 
loved  you?  Truly,  the  commandment  was  a  new  one, 
considering  that  the  world,  to  which  it  was  given,  had 
egotism  as  its  leading  law.  This  new  commandment 
was  to  be  the  distinctive  mark  of  all  Christ's  Disciples,^ 
and,  as  one  of  the  shrewd  observers  of  these  early 
pagan  times  says,  consign  them  to  the  hatred  of  the 


1  St.  John,  xiii.  15.  2  xbid.  xiii.  34  ;  xv.  12. 

3  St.  John,  xiii.  35. 


356  MASS. 

human  race^^  whicli  was  in  open  violation  of  this  law 
of  love.  It  was  in  answer  to  the  hostile  reception 
given  by  the  then  world  to  the  new  progeny,  that 
is,  to  the  Chnstians,  that  St.  John  thus  speaks,  in  the 
Epistle  of  this  Sunday  :  Wonder  not,  dearly  beloved,  if 
the  u'orld  hate  you.  We,  yes  ^VE,  knoic,  that  we  have 
passed  from  death  to  life,  because  we  love  our  brethren. 
He  that  loveth  not,  abideth  in  death. 

The  union  of  the  members  with  each  other,  through 
their  divine  Head,  is  the  condition  on  which  the  exis- 
tence of  the  Christian  religion  is  based.  The  Eucharist 
is  the  vigorous  nourishment  of  this  union ;  it  is  the 
strong  bond  of  Christ's  mystical  body,  which,  thereby, 
maketh  increase  in  charity?  Charity,  therefore,  and 
peace,  and  concord,  are,  together  with  the  love  of  God 
himself,  the  best  proof  that  our  reception  of  holy  Com- 
munion is  not  turning  to  our  condemnation,  and  the 
most  needful  of  all  preparations  for  our  participation 
in  the  sacred  Mysteries.  It  is  the  meaning  of  that  in- 
junction of  our  Lord  :  //  thou  art  offering  thy  gift  at 
the  altar,  and  there  thou  remember  that  thy  brother  hath 
anything  against  thee,  leave  there  thine  offering  before 
the  altar,  and  go  first  to  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother  ; 
and  then  coming,  thou  shalt  offer  thy  gift.^ 

The  Gradual,  which  is  taken  from  the  Psalms,  gives 
thanks  to  God  for  the  protection  he  has  accorded  us 
in  the  past ;  and  prays  for  its  continuation,  seeing  that 
our  enemies  are  as  unrelenting  as  ever. 

GRADUAL. 

Ad  Dominum  cum  tribu-  In  my  troubles,  I  cried  unto 

larer  clama\4,   et  exaudivit  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me. 
me. 

y.  Domine,  libera  animam  f.  O  Lord  deliver  my  soid 
meam  a  labiis  iniquis  et  a  from  wicked  lips  and  a  deceit- 
lingua  dolosa.  ful  tongue. 

Alleluia,  alleluia.  Alleluia,  alleluia. 

^  Tacitus,  Ann.  xv.  *  Eph.  iv.  16.  »  St.  Matth.  v.  23,  24. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE. 


357 


y.  O  Lord  my  God,  in  thee 
have  I  put  my  trust :  save  me 
from  those  that  persecute  me, 
and  rescue  me.     Alleluia. 


^.  Domine  Deus  mens,  in 
te  speravi :  salvum  me  fac  ex 
omnibus  persequentibus  me, 
et  libera  me.     Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ch.  XIV, 

At  that  time,  Jesus   spoke 
this  parable  to  the  Pharisees  : 
A  certain  man  made  a  great 
supper,    and    invited     many. 
And  he  sent  his  servant,  at  the 
hour  of  supper,  to  say  to  them 
that  were  invited,  that  they 
should    come,    for    now     all 
things  are  ready.     And  they 
began  all  at  once  to  make  ex- 
cuse.    The  first  said  unto  him : 
I   have   bought   a   farm,  and 
must  needs  go  out  and  see  it : 
I  pray  thee,  hold  me  excused. 
And    another    said :    I    have 
bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  and 
I  go  to  try  them  :  I  pray  thee, 
hold  me  excused.  And  another 
said:   I  have  married  a  wife, 
and  therefore  I  cannot  come. 
And  the    servant    returning, 
told  these  things  to  his  lord. 
Then  the  master  of  the  house, 
being   angry,    said    unto    his 
servant :   go  out  quickly  into 
the  streets  and  lanes   of  the 
city ;  and  bring  in  hither  the 
poor,  and  the  feeble,  and  the 
blind,  and  the  lame.     And  the 
servant  said  :  Lord,  it  is  done 
as  thou  hast  commanded,  and 
yet  there  is  room.     And  the 
lord  said  unto  the  servant :  Go 


Sequentia    sancti    Evan- 
gelii  secundum  Lucam. 

Cap,  XIV. 

In    illo    tempore  :    Dixit 
Jesus  Pharisaeis  parabolam 
banc :    Homo   quidam  fecit 
coenam  magnam,  et  vocavit 
multos.      Et  misit   servum 
suum  hora  coense  dicere  invi- 
tatis  ut  venirent,  quia  jiim 
parata     sunt     omnia.       Et 
coeperunt  simul  omnes  ex- 
cusare.      Primus    dixit   ei  : 
Villam     emi,      et     necesse 
habeo  exire,  et  videre  illam : 
rogo  te,  habe  me  excusatum. 
Et  alter  dixit :    Juga  bourn 
emi  quinque,  et  eo  probare 
ilia :   rogo  te,  habe  me  ex- 
cusatum.     Et   alius   dixit  : 
Uxorem  duxi,  et  ideo  non 
possum  venire.    Et  reversus 
servus    nuntiavit    hsec    do- 
mino suo.     Tunc  iratus  pa- 
terfamilias, dixit  servo  suo : 
Exi  cito  in  plateas,  et  vicos 
civitatis  :    et    pauperes,    ac 
debiles,  et  caecos,  et  claudos 
introduc  hue.    Et  ait  servus : 
Domine,  factum  est  ut  im- 
perasti,  et  adhuc  locus  est. 
Et  ait  dominus  servo  :   Exi 
in  vias  et  sepes  :  et  compelle 
intrare,  ut  impleatur  domus 
mea.      Dico    autem    vobis, 
quod  nemo  virorum  illorum, 


358 


MASS. 


qui    vocati    stuit,    gustabit    out   into  the  highways,    and 
ccenam  meam.  hedges ;  and  compel  them  to 

come  in,  that  my  house  may 
be  filled.  But  I  say  iinto  you, 
that  none  of  those  men  that 
were  invited,  shall  taste  of  my 
supper. 

The  Gospel  just  read  was  appointed  for  this  Sun- 
day long  before  the  institution  of  the  Corpus  Christi 
feast,  as  we  learn  from  the  Capitulary  of  Gospels,  pub- 
lished by  Blessed  Thomasi,  upon  manuscripts  much 
earlier  than  the  13th  Century.^  The  Holy  Spirit,  who 
guides  the  Church  in  her  arrangement  of  the  Liturgy, 
was  thus  anticipating  and  completing  the  instructions 
suited  for  the  future  grand  Solemnity. 

The  parable  here  spoken  by  Jesus  at  the  table  of 
one  of  the  leading  Pharisees/  was  again  used  by  him, 
when  he  spoke  so  strongly  in  the  Temple,  a  few  days 
previous  to  his  Passion  and  Death.  And  what  is  this 
Supper,  to  which  many  are  invited, — what  is  this 
Marriage-Feast, — but  that  which  eternal  Wisdom 
has  been  getting  ready,  from  the  very  beginning  of 
the  world  ?  Nothing  could  exceed  the  magnificence 
of  these  preparations  ;  there  was  a  splendid  banquet- 
hall,  built  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,^  and  supported 
by  seven  pillars  *  of  mysterious  beauty  ;  there  were 
the  choicest  meats, — purest  bread,  and  mne  the  most 
delicious, — served  up  to  the  King's  table.  It  was 
with  his  own  hands,  that  the  Wisdom  of  the  Father 
pressed  the  rich  cluster  of  Cyprus  grape  into  the  cup  ; ' 
It  was  He  ground  down  the  wheat,  that  had  sprung 
np,  without  having  been  sown,  from  a  soil  holy  beyond 
description  ;  it  was  He  that  immolated  the  Victim.* 
Israel,  the  Father's  chosen  people,"  was  the  fortunate 

»  0pp.  t.  V.  p.  429.  «  Cant.  i.  13. 

2  St.  Luke,  xiv.  1.  «  Prov.  ix.  2. 

3  Is.  ii.  2.  '  Ecclus.  xxiv.  13. 
*  Prov.  ix.  1. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  359 

guest  invited  by  the  loving  kindness  of  the  Master, 
that  is,  Wisdom,  that  is,  the  Son  of  the  Father ;  he 
had  sent  messengers  without  end  to  the  children  of 
Jacob.  As  we  read  in  the  Gospel :  The  Wisdom  of 
God  said:  **  /  will  send  unto  them  prophets  and  apos- 
tles.^ ''  But  this  favoured  people,  this  loved  one,  as  the 
Book  of  Deuteronomy  says,  grew  fat,  and  kicked,  that 
is,  it  abused  the  gifts  bestowed  on  it ;  it  seemed  to 
study  how  to  provoke  the  anger  of  God  its  Saviour, 
by  despising  his  invitations,  and  going  their  ways.^ 
This  daughter  of  Sion,  in  her  adulterous  pride,  pre- 
ferred the  biU  of  divorce  to  the  Marriage-feast ;  ^ 
Jerusalem  rejected  the  heavenly  messengers,  and 
killed  the  prophets,*  and  crucified  the  Spouse 
himself. 

But,  even  so,  eternal  Wisdom  still  offers  the  first 
place  at  the  Supper  to  the  ungrateful  children  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob ;  he  does  so,  because 
of  those  saintly  fathers  of  theirs.  Yes,  it  is  to  the 
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,  that  are  first  sent  the 
Apostles.^  "  What  delicate  attention  ! "  may  we  justly 
exclaim  with  St.   John  Chrysostom.      "  Before   his 

*  Crucifixion,  Christ  calls  the  Jews ;  he  does  the  same 
'  after  it,  he  goes  on  inviting  them.  Instead  of 
'  crushing  them  with  a  terrible  chastisement,-  as  it 

*  seemed  most  just  he  should  do,  he  invites  them  to 

*  a  Marriage ;  he  loads  them  with  honours.     But 

*  they  that  have  slain  his  prophets,  and  murdered 
'even  Him, — these  same,  invited  so  pressingly  by 
'  such  a  Spouse,  urged  so  lovingly  to  go  to  the  Wed- 

*  ding,  and  that  by  the  very  Victim  of  their  own 
'  making, — these  same,  I  say,  pay  no  regard  to  the 
'  invitation,  and  give,  as  an  excuse,  their  yoke  of 
'  oxen,  and  their  wives,  and  their  estates!''^    Soon, 


1  St.  Luke,  xi.  49.  *  St.  Matth.  xxiii.  34-37. 

2  Deut.  xxxii.  15.  ^  Ibid.  x.  6  ;  Acts  xiii.  46. 

2  Is.  1. 1.  6  Freely  from  Horn.  69,  in  Mattk 


360  MASS. 

these  Priests,  these  Scribes,  these  hypocrite  Pharisees, 
will  persecute  and  slay  the  Apostles  also  ;  and  the 
Servant  of  our  parable  will  find  none  in  Jerusalem, 
whom  he  can  induce  to  come  to  the  Master's  Supper, 
except  the  poor,  and  little,  and  sickly  ones,  of  the 
roads  and  by-lanes,  with  whom  there  is  no  ambition, 
or  avarice,  or  pleasure,  to  keep  them  from  the  divine 
banquet. 

Then  will  be  realised  the  vocation  of  the  Gen- 
tiles,— that  great  mystery  of  a  new  people  being 
substituted  for  the  former  one,  in  the  covenant  with 
Jehovah.  *'  The  Marriage  of  my  Son  is,  indeed, 
"  ready,'*  will  God  the  Father  say  to  his  servants  ; 
"  but  they  that  were  invitedy  icere  not  icorthy.  Go  ye, 
*'  therefore :  abandon  the  wicked  city  that  hath  not 
"  known  her  time,  and  my  visit !  go  ye  into  the  high- 
**  ways,  and  hedges,  and  countries  of  the  Gentiles  ;  and^ 
"  as  many  as  ye  shall  find,  call  ye  to  the  Marriage  !  "  ^ 

0  ye  Gentiles!  praise  the  Lord  for  his  mercy f^ 
You  have  been  invited,  without  any  merits  of  your 
own,  to  a  feast  that  was  prepared  for  another  people ; 
take  heed,  lest  you  incur  the  reproach  given  to  the 
intended  guests,  who  were  excluded  from  the  promises 
made  to  their  fathers.  0  thou  lame  one,  and  blind, 
that  hast  been  called  from  the  by-path  of  thy  sin  and 
misery,  hasten  to  the  holy  table!  But,  then,  take 
care,  out  of  respect'to  Him  who  calls  thee,  to  put  off 
the  rags  of  thy  former  life ;  and  quickly  put  on  the 
wedding-garment !  The  invitation  given  thee  has 
made  a  queen  of  thy  soul ;  *^  give  her,  then,  the  pur- 
"ple  robe  and  diadem,  and  set  her  on  a  throne  I 
"  Think  of  the  Marriage  thou  art  invited  to  attend, — 
''  the  Marriage  of  God !  Oh  !  the  soul  that  goes  to 
**  it,  should  be  clad  and  decked  with  a  garment  richer 
"  than  all  the  garments  of  earth !  "  ^ 


1  St.  Matth.  xxii.  8-14  ;  St.  Luke,  xix.  44. 

^  liom.  x\.  9.  3  from  St.  John  Chrys.  ubi  supra. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE.  361 

Like  the  Gradual,  the  Offertory  is  an  earnest 
prayer  for  God's  help ;  it  is  his  mercy  that  encourages 
the  soul  to  make  this  prayer. 

OFFERTORY. 

Turn  to  me,  O  Lord,  and  Domine,  convertere,  et 
deliver  my  soul:  O  save  me,  eripe  animam  meam.  :  sal- 
for  tliy  mercy's  sake.  vum  me  fac  propter  miseri- 

cordiam  tuam. 

In  the  Secret,  the  Church  prays  for  the  twofold 
effect  of  the  holy  Sacrament,  in  the  transformation  of 
man's  soul :  purification  from  the  remnants  left  by 
sin,  and  progress  in  the  works  which  lead  to  life  ever- 
lasting. 

SECRET. 

May  this   Sacrifice,  offered        Oblatio  nos,  Domine,  tuo 

to  thy   Name,    purify  us,    O  Nomini  dicanda  purificet  : 

Lord  :    and  make    us,    every  et  de  die  in  diem  ad  coeles- 

day,  advance  towards  a  hea-  tis  vitse  transferat  actionem, 

venly  life.     Through,  etc.  Per  Dominum. 


COMMEMORATION    OF   CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

Mercifully  grant  thy  Church,  Ecclesise  tuae,  quaesumus, 
O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  the  Domine,  unitatis  et  pacis 
gifts  of  unity  and  peace,  which  propitius  dona  concede  : 
are  mystically  represented  in  quae  sub  oblatis  muneribus 
these  offerings.     Through,  etc.    mystice    designantur.     Per 

Dominum. 

During  the  Communion,  holy  Church  enriched  as 
she  is  with  heavenly  favours,  pours  forth  her  gratitude 
towards  Him,  who,  though  the  Most  High  God,  is, 
also,  her  Spouse,  and  loads  her  with  exquisite  gifts. 


362 


MASS. 


COMMUNION. 


Cantabo  Domino,  qui 
bona  tribuit  mibi,  et  psal- 
1am  nomini  Domini  altis- 
simi. 


I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord, 
who  hath  bestowed  good 
things  on  me,  and  I  will  sing 
a  psalm  to  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  the  Most  High. 


Let  US  pray  with  tlie  Churcb,  in  the  Postcommu- 
nion,  that  our  frequent  participation  in  these  sacred 
Mysteries  may  not  be  fruitless  in  our  souls,  but  may 
efect^  with  increased  assurance,  the  whole  work  of 
our  salvation. 


POST-COMMUNION. 

Sumptis  muneribus  sacris  Having  received,  0  Lord, 
quaesumus,  Domiae,  ut  cmn  this  sacred  oblation,  grant, 
freqentatione  mysterii,  cres-  that  by  frequenting  these 
cat  nostras  salutis  effectus.  mysteries,  the  work  of  our 
Per  Christum.  salvation        may       increase. 

Through,  etc* 


COMMEMORATION    OF    CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


Fac  nos,  quaesumus.  Do- 
mine,  divinitatis  tuae  sem- 
pitema  fruitione  repleri  : 
quam  pretiosi  Corporis  et 
Sanguinis  tui  temporalis 
porceptio  praefigurat.  Qui 
vivis. 


Grant  us,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  everlasting 
possession  of  thyself  :  as  a 
pledge  of  which,  we  have 
received  thy  Body  and  Blood. 
Who  livest,  etc. 


SUNDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE. 


363 


VESPEES. 

The  Yespers  for  this  Sunday  within  the  Octave  of 
Corpus  Christi,  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Feast 
itself  {'page  294),  excepting  what  follows : 

CAPITULUM. 

(1  St.  John  J  iii.) 


Dearly  beloved,  -wonder  not 
if  the  world  hate  you.  We 
know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because 
we  love  the  brethren. 

y.  He  hath  fed  them  with 
the  fat  of  corn,  alleluia. 

Be.  And  hath  filled  them 
with  honey  from  the  rock, 
alleluia. 


Charissimi,  nolite  mirari, 
si  odit  vos  mundus.  Nos 
scimus  quoniam  translati 
sumus  de  morte  ad  vitam, 
quoniam  diligimus   fratres. 

y.  Cibavit  illos  ex  adipe 
frumenti,  alleluia. 

5t.  Et  de  petra,  melle  sa- 
turavit  eos,  alleluia. 


ANTIPHON   OF    THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Ant.  Go  out  quickly  into 
the  streets  and  lanes  of  the 
city ;  and  compel  the  poor  and 
the  feeble,  the  blind  and  the 
lame,  to  come  in,  that  my 
house  may  be  filled,  alleluia. 

LET  TJS  PRAY. 

Grant  us,  O  Lord,  both  a 
constant  love  and  fear  of  thy 
holy  Name  :  since  thou  never 
withdrawest  thy  protection 
from  those  whom  thou  solidly 
groundest  in  thy  love. 
Through,  etc. 

COMMEMORATION 

Ant.  O  sacred  banquet, 
wherein  Christ  is  received  ; 
the  memorial  of  his  Passion  is 
celebrated  ;  the  mind  is  filled 


Ant.  Exi  cito  in  plateas 
et  vicos  civitatis  :  et  pau- 
peres  ac  debiles,  caecos 
et  claudos,  compelle  intrare, 
ut  impleatur  domus  mea, 
alleluia. 

OEEMTJS. 

Sancti  Nominis  tui.  Do- 
mine,  timorem  pariter  et 
amorem  fac  nos  habere  per- 
petuum  :  quia  nunquam  tua 
gubernatione  destituis,  quos 
in  soliditate  tuse  dilectionis 
instituis.     Per  Dominum. 

OF   THE   OCTAVE. 

Ant.  O  sacrum  convi- 
vium,  in  quo  Christus  sumi- 
tur  :  recolitur  memoria  pas- 
sionis  ejus  :  mens  impletur 


364 


SUNDAY   WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE. 


gratia :  et  futurop  gloriae  no- 
bis pignus  datur,  alleluia. 

y.  Panem  de  ccelo  praes- 
titisti  eis,  alleluia. 

gt.  Omne  delectamcntum 
in  se  habentem,  alleluia. 

OREiTcrs. 

Deus,  qui  nobis  sub  Sa- 
cramento niirabili  passionis 
tu8B  memoriam  reUquisti  : 
tribue,  quaesumus,  ita  nos 
Corporis  et  Sanguinis  tui 
sacra  mysteria  venerari,  ut 
redemptionis  tuae  fruetum 
in  nobis  jugiter  sentiamus. 
Qui  vivis. 


•with  grace  ;  and  a  pledge  of 
future  glory  is  given  unto  us, 
alleluia. 

f.  Thou  hast  given  them 
bread  from  heaven,  alleluia. 

Bt.  Having  in  it  all  that  is 
delicious,  alleluia. 

LET  us  PRAY. 

O  God,  who,  under  the  won- 
derful Sacrament,  hast  left  us 
a  memorial  of  thy  Passion  : 
grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  so 
to  reverence  the  sacred  mys- 
teries of  thy  Body  and  Blood, 
that,  in  our  soiils,  we  may 
always  feel  the  fruit  of  thy 
Eedemption.     Who  livest,  etc. 


The  Liturgy  given  in  the  Apostolic  Constitutions, 
under  the  name  of  St.  James,  thus  continues,  after 
the  Trisagion  ;  it  is  the  Bishop  who  is  speaking  : 


CONSTITUTIO   JACOBI. 


Sanctus  enim  vere  es  ac 
sanctissimus,  altissimus,  et 
superexaltatus  in  saecula. 
Sanctus  quoque  unigenitus 
tuus  Filius,  Dominus  noster 
et  Deus,  Jesus  Christus. 

Qui  ad  omnia  tibi  Deo  suo 
et  Patri,  tum  in  varia 
creatione,  tirni  in  providen- 
tia  convenienti  ministrans, 
non  despexit  genus  huma- 
num  quod  peribat  :  sed 
post  naturalem  legem,  post 
legalem  admonitionom, 

post  propheticas  reprchen- 
eiones  ;  cum  legem  natura- 
lom  una  cum  lego  posita 
violarent,  atque  e  memoria 
abjicerent  diluvium,  confla- 


For  truly  art  thou  holy,  and 
most  holy,  most  high  and  ex- 
alted above  all  for  ever.  Holy, 
also,  is  thine  Only  Begotten 
Son,  our  Lord  and  God,  Jesus 
Christ. 

Who,  in  all  things,  minis- 
tered to  thee  his  God  and 
Father,  both  in  thy  manifold 
creation,  and  in  thy  suitable 
providence,  not  despising  the 
human  race,  that  had  perished. 
But,  after  the  law  of  nature, 
after  the  admonition  of  tho 
law  (of  Sinai),  after  tho 
chidings  of  the  Prophets, — 
violating  both  the  natural  and 
positive  law,  forgetting  the 
deluge,  the  burning  of  Sodom, 


SUKDAY  WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE, 


365 


the  plagues  of  Egypt,  and  the 
extermination  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Palestine,  itself  was 
on  the  verge  of  total  destruc- 
tion :  he,  thy  Son,  willed, 
by  thy  consent,  to  become 
Man,  who  was  man's  Creator ; 
be  under  the  law,  who  was 
the  giver  of  the  law;  be  the 
victim,  who  was  Priest ;  be  the 
sheep,  he  who  was  Shepherd. 
He  also  appeased  thee,  his 
God  and  Father,  and  recon- 
ciled thee  with  the  world, 
being  made  of  a  Virgin,  be- 
came flesh,  God  the  Word,  the 
Son  Beloved,  the  first  born  of 
every  creature,  and  was,  ac- 
cording to  the  prophecies  fore- 
told by  him  of  himself,  sprung 
from  the  seed  of  David  and 
Abraham,  and  of  the  tribe  of 
Juda. 

He  was  made  in  the  Virgin's 
womb,  who  was  the  Maker  of 
all  men  that  are  begotten  ;  He 
becameFlesh,  who  was  without 
flesh  ;  He  that  was  bom  when 
time  was  not,  was  born  in  time. 
Helived  inholiness,  and  taught 
the  truth  ;  he  drove  every 
sickness  and  disease  from  men ; 
wrought  signs  and  wonders 
among  the  people.  He  took 
food,  drink,  and  sleep,  who 
feeds  all  the  needy  with 
nourishment,  and  fills  every 
living  creature  with  blessing. 
He  made  known  his  Name  to 
them  that  knew  it  not ;  he  put 
ignorance  to  flight ;  he  raised 
up  charity ;  he  fulfilled  thy 
will ;  he  finished  the  work 
thou  gavest  him  to  do.  And 
when  he  had  brought  all  these 
things  to  a  happy  issue,  he 
was  betrayed  by  the  man  who 


grationem  Sodomiticam, 
plagas  JEgyptiis  et  csedes 
Palaestinis  illatas,  cumque 
illico  perituri  essent  omnes ; 
ex  sententia  tua  ipse  elegit, 
creator  hominis  homo  fieri, 
legislator  sub  legibus,  ponti- 
fex  hostia,  pastor  ovis  ;  et 
te  suum  Deum  ac  Patrem 
placavit  atque  mundo  re- 
conciliavit,  factus  ex  virgi- 
ne,  factus  in  carne,  Deus 
Verbum,  dilectus  Filius, 
primogenitus  omnis  crea- 
turae,  et  secundum  prophe- 
tias  ab  ipso  de  se  praedic- 
tus  ortus  ex  semine  Davidis 
et  Abrahami  ac  de  tribu 
Judse. 


Et  factus  est  in  utero 
Virginis,  formator  omnium 
qui  gignuntur  ;  incamatus 
est,  qui  camis  expers  ;  qui 
sine  tempore  genitus,  in 
tempore  natus  est ;  sancte 
vixit,  et  legitime  docuit ; 
omnem  morbum  et  omnem 
infirmitatem  ab  hominibus 
expulit ;  signa  et  prodigia 
in  populo  edidit  :  cibum, 
potum,  somnum  cepit  is  qui 
cunctos  alimento  indigentes 
nutrit  omneque  animal  im- 
plet  beneplacito  :  manifes- 
tavit  Nomen  tuum  iis  qui 
illud  ignorabant  ;  fugavit 
ignorantiam;  pietatem  ex- 
suscitavit;  voluntatem  tuam 
implevit :  opus  quod  ei  de- 
disti  consummavit  :  atque 
his  omnibus  feliciter  gestis, 
per  proditionem  illius  qui 
malitisB    morbo    languebat, 


366 


SUNDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 


comprehensTis  est  manibus 
flagitiosorum  pontificmu  et 
populi  iniqui  ;  a  quibus 
multa  passus  est,  et  omnem 
ignominiain  sustinuit,  per- 
missu  tuo. 


Traditus  est  Pilato  prae- 
gidi  ;  judicatus  est,  Judex  ; 
condemnatus  est,  Salvator ; 
cnici  affixus  est,  qui  pati 
non  potest  ;  mortuus  est, 
natura  immortalis ;  sepultus 
est,  vitae  effector ;  ut  illos 
propter  quos  advenerat  a 
passione  solveret  et  a  morte 
eriperet,  ut  diaboli  vincula 
rumperet  illiusque  ex  falla- 
cia  llberaret  homines. 


Resurrexit  e  mortuis  ter- 
tia  die :  quadraginta  diebus 
commoratus  cum  discipulis, 
assumptus  est  in  ccelos  ;  et 
ad  dexteram  assidet  tibi, 
Deo  ac  Patri  suo. 

Itaque  memores  passionis 
ejus  et  mortis,  et  a  mortuis 
resurrectionis,  atque  in  cae- 
lum reditus ;  necnon  secundi 
adventus  quem  idem  factu- 
rus  est,  in  quo  cum  gloria 
et  potestate  veniet  judicare 
vivos  et  mortuos,  et  red- 
dere  singulis  juxta  opera 
eorum  :  tibi  regi  ac  Deo 
panem  bunc  et  calicem  bunc 
offerimus,  secundum  con- 
stitutionem  ejus,  gratias  tibi 
per  eum  agentes. 


■was  sick  -with  the  disease  of 
wickedness,  and  [thus  betrayed) 
was  seized  by  the  hands  of 
wicked  priests  and  iniquitous 
people,  from  whom,  by  thy 
permission,  he  suffered  many 
things,  and  every  kind  of 
insult. 

He  was  delivered  up  to  the 
governor,  Pilate  ;  He,  the 
Judge,  was  judged  ;  7?e,  the  Sa- 
viour, was  condemned;  he  that 
could  not  suffer,  was  nailed  to 
the  Cross ;  he,  that  by  nature 
was  immortal,  died ;  he,  the 
giver  of  life,  was  buried ;  that 
he  might  loose  them,  for  whose 
sakes  he  had  come,  from  suf- 
fering and  death,  that  he 
might  break  the  bonds  made 
by  the  devil,  and  deliver  men 
from  his  deceit. 

He  rose  again,  the  third 
day,  from  the  dead  ;  abode 
forty  days  with  his  disciples  ; 
was  taken  up  into  heaven,  and 
sits  at  the  right  hand  of  thee, 
his  God  and  Father. 

We,  therefore,  calling  to 
mind  his  Passion  and  Death, 
and  his  Resurrection  from  the 
dead,  and  his  Return  to  hea- 
ven ;  of  his  second  coming,  also, 
which  he  is  to  make,  in  which 
he  ^vill  come,  with  glory  and 
power,  to  judge  the  living  and 
the  dead,  and  render  to  each 
one  according  to  his  works : 
to  thee,  King  and  God,  we 
offer  this  Bread  and  this 
Chalice,  according  to  his  ap- 
pointment, giving  thanks  un- 
to thee,  through  Him. 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  f367 


MONDAY. 

WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE    OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

Let    us   adore    Christ,   the  Christum    regem    adore- 

Bling,  who  ruleth  the  nations :  mus  dominantem  gentibus, 

who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to  qui   se   manducantibus  dat 

them  that  eat  him.  spiritus  pinguedinem. 

Tlie  Lord  hath  sivorn,  and  he  will  not  repent  him  of 
his  oath  :  he  hath  sworn  :  "  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever, 
"  according  to  the  order  of.  Melchisedech  P^^  Thus  did 
the  sons  of  Levi  sing,  to  the  expected  Messias,  in  one  of 
the  loveliest  of  their  Psalms'.  This  noble  and  privi- 
leged family,  this  corona  fratrum,  standing,  in  all  its 
glory,  around  the  altar,  whence  there  daily  ascended 
the  smoke  of  the  victims  burned  on  it, — this  commu- 
nity of  brethren  celebrated,  on  the  sacred  harp,  the 
Priesthood  of  the  good  things  to  come,  and  announced 
their  own  being  set  aside.  Shadow  and  figure  as  it 
was,  their  own  priesthood  was  to  disappear,  when  the 
brightness  of  the  divine  realities  of  Calvary  came. 
They  were  indebted  to  the  infidelity  of  the  nations, 
for  their  being  called  to  perpetuate  the  worship  of  the 
true  God,  in  his  one  single  Temple ;  but  this  preca- 
rious honour  would  cease,  when  the  reconciliation  of 
the  world  took  place.  Being  son  of  Juda,  through 
David,  the  High  Priest  Christ  receives  nought  of  Aaron. 
When  the  inspired  Psalmist  sings  a  hymn  in  honour 
of  our  Jesus'  Priesthood,  he  goes  back,  in  thought,  to 
the  ages  beyond  Moses  ;  he  passes  the  time  of  the 
twelve  Patriarchs  and  their  father  Israel ;  and  there, 
in  the  distant  past,  he  meets  with  the  type  of  a  Priest- 

^  Ps.  cix.  4. 


368  MONDAY    WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE. 

hood,  which  is  to  have  no  limits,  either  of  place  or 
time :  it  is  Melchisedech.  Melchisedech  receives, 
through  Abraham,  the  homage  of  Abraham's  son, 
Levi ;  the  priest  of  the  uncircumcised  nations  gives  a 
blessing  to  the  venerable  holder  of  the  promise  ;  and 
this  mighty  blessing,  which  is  extended  to  the  patriarch's 
entire  race,  derives  its  efficacy  from  a  mysterious 
sacrifice  : — the  peaceful  oflFering  of  bread  and  wine  to 
the  Most  High.i 

The  priesthood  of  the  King  of  justice  and  peace,  not 
only  precedes  that  of  Aaron  as  to  time,  but  it  is  also 
to  outlive  it.  And  observe,  it  is  at  the  very  time  when 
God  was  making  a  covenant  with  one  single  race,  and, 
thereby,  seemed  to  be  turning  away  from  all  other 
nations,  and  was  establishing  the  priestly  order,  to  their 
exclusion, — it  is  precisely  then,  that  the  King-Priest 
of  Salem,  who  has  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end 
of  life,^  suddenly  comes  before  us  as  the  imposing 
image  of  our  Eternal  Priest,  who  offers  the  divine 
Memorial,  which  is  to  perpetuate  the  great  Sacrifice 
on  the  earth,  and  for  ever  take  the  place  of  the  bloody 
sacrifices  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation. 

The  Sacrifice  of  the  Cross  lasts  all  ages  of  time,  and 
fills  eternity.  And  yet,  as  to  time,  it  was  the  offering 
of  one  single  day ;  and  as  to  place,  it  was  made  but  on 
one  spot.  It  matters  not :  in  every  place,  in  every  age, 
man  must  have  the  sacrifice  ceaselessly  offered  up  in 
his  presence  ;  he  must  have  its  offering  renewed  daily 
in  his  midst.  As  we  have  already  seen,  sacrifice  is 
the  centre  of  the  whole  of  religion  ;  and  man  cannot 
dispense  with  religion,  for  it  unites  him  to  God  as  the 
sovereign  Lord,  and  constitutes  the  primary  bond  of 
social  life.  As,  then,  to  satisfy  the  imperious  neces- 
sity, which  showed  itself  from  the  very  beginning  of 
the  world,  divine  Wisdom  appointed  those  figurative 
offerings,    which    foretold  the   one  great    Sacrifice, 

'  Gen.  xiv.  18-20.  2  Heb.  vii.  3. 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  369 

and  from  which  they  derived  what  merit  soever  they 
possessed  ;  so,  in  like  manner,  once  the  oblation  of 
the  great  Victim  made,  it  is  again  to  supply  the  de- 
mands of  mankind,  and  provide  the  world  with  a  per- 
manent Sacrifice ;  it  is  to  be  a  Memorial,  and  not  a 
Figure ;  it  destroys  not  the  unity  of  the  Sacrifice  of 
the  Cross  ;  and  it  applies  the  fruits  of  that  one  Sacri- 
fice to  each  member  of  each  future  generation. 

We  will  not  here  describe  the  Lord's  Supper,  and 
the  institution  of  that  new  Priesthood,  which  is  as 
far  above  its  predecessor  as  the  promises  it  holds 
are  more  glorious,  and  the  covenant,  of  which  it 
forms  the  basis,  ^  is  more  divine.  We  have  had  all  the 
details  of  that  marvellous  history  related  to  us  on 
Maundy-Thursday.  It  was  on  that  day, — that  day 
expected  from  all  eternity ;  it  was  at  that  hour,  [cum 
facta  esset  Hora),^  that  Hour  so  long  put  off,  that 
divine  Wisdom  sat  down  to  the  supper  and  banquet 
of  the  JN^ew  Covenant ;  he  sat  doivn,  having  with  him 
the  Twelve  Apostles,  who  represented  mankind.  Put- 
ting an  end  to  figures  by  a  final  immolation  of  the 
Paschal  Lamb,  Jesus  exclaimed  :  With  desire  (that  is, 
with  immense  desire),  I  have  desired  to  eat  this  Pasch 
ivith  you!^  The  Man-God  thus  eased  his  sacred  Heart, 
which  had  so  long  waited  for  this  Hour ;  he  had  so 
loved  it !  and  it  is  now  come  !  Then,  forestalling  the 
Jews,  he  immolates  his  victim, — the  divine  Lamb, 
signified  by  Abel,  foretold  by  Isaias,  shown  by  John 
the  Precursor;*  and,  by  a  miraculous  anticipation,, 
there  is  already  in  the  holy  chalice  the  Blood  which, 
in  a  few  hours  hence,  is  to  be  flowing  on  Calvary  ; 
already  his  divine  hand  presents  to  the  disciples  the 
bread  now  changed  into  his  Body,  which  has  become 
the  ransom  of  the  world  :  Take,  says  this  Jesus,  take 
ye  and  eat :  this  is  my  Body,  which  shall  be  delivered 


^  Heb.  viii.  6.  *  St.  Luke,  xxii.  15. 

2  St.  Luke,  xxii.  14.  *  St.  Greg.,  Moral,  xxix.  31, 

VOL.  X.  2  B 


370  MONDAY    WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE. 

for  you  !  Take  and  drink  this  Chalice,  ichich  is  the 
new  testament  in  my  Blood!  This  do  ye  for  the  com- 
memoration of  me ' '  that  is,  "  As  I  am  now  anticipa- 
**  ting,  for  your  sakes,  the  death  I  am  to  suffer  on  the 
"  morrow,  so  you,  when  I  have  left  this  world,  do  this 
"  same  for  the  commemoration  of  me.^* 

The  covenant,  the  alliance,  is  now  made.  The  New 
Testament  is  declared,  and,  like  its  predecessor,  is 
sealed  by  Blood.  If,  as  yet,  it  be  of  no  force,  save  in 
prevision  of  the  Testator's  real  death,-  the  reason  is, 
because  this  Jesus,  who  is  the  Victim  of  the  divdne 
vengeance  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world,  has 
made  a  solemn  covenant  with  his  eternal  Father,^ 
that  this  universal  redemption  is  not  to  be  effected  but 
by  the  morrow's  cruel  work.  He  has  made  himself  the 
Head  of  guilty  mankind  ;  he  has  made  himself  respon- 
sible to  God  for  the  crimes  of  his  own  race  ;  for  the 
destruction  of  sin,  therefore,  he  willingly  submits  to  the 
stern  laws  of  expiation,  and,  by  the  torments  he 
undergoes,  reveals  to  the  world  how  immense  are  the 
claims  of  eternal  justice.*  Notwithstanding  all  this, 
the  earth,  from  that  very  Thursday  night,  is  in  pos- 
session of  the  Chalice  which  is  to  announce  the  Saviour's 
death  until  he  come^  by  communicating^  to  each  mem- 
ber of  the  human  family  Christ's  real  and  true  Blood, 
shed  for  our  sins.'  And,  surely,  it  was  most  fitting, 
that  our  adorable  High  Priest  himself,  and  without 
allthatdisplayof  outward  violence, —  which,  a  few  hours 
later,  is  to  disconcert  the  whole  Apostolic  college, — 
should  offer  himself,  with  his  own  hands,  as  a  true 
Sacrifice  to  his  Father ;  he  would  thus  evince  how 
spontaneous  was  his  death,^  and  do  away  with  our 
ever  having  such  a  thought  as  thatthe  treachery,  or 


1 1  Cor,  xi.  24,  25.  »  1  Cor.  xi.  26. 

2Hcb.  ix.  16-18.  ^Ibid.x.  16. 

'  Ibid.  xii.  2.  '  St.  Luke,  xxii.  20. 

*  Kom.,  iii.  25,  26.  »  St.  John,  x.  18. 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  371 

violence,  or  crime,  of  a  handful  of  men,  could  be  the 
origin  and  cause  of  the  whole  world's  salvation.  ^ 

It  is  on  this  account,  that,  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  his 
Father,^  and  giving  thanks,  he  says,  and  in  the 
present,  (as  the  Greek  text  gives  the  words)  ;  This  is 
my  Body,  which  is  given  for  you ;  this  is  my  Bloody 
which  IS  shed  for  you.^  These  words, — which  he  be- 
queaths, and  with  all  their  efficacy  of  power,  to  the 
representatives  of  his  Priesthood, — really  produce 
what  they  express.  They  not  only  change  the  bread 
and  wine  into  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ ;  but,  as 
a  mystical  sword,  they  truly  separate  under  the  two- 
fold species,  and,  as  far  as  their  own  power  is 
concerned,  they  offer  separately  to  the  Father,  the 
Body  and  Blood  of  our  Lord,  which  are,  indeed, 
united,  but  they  are  so.  by  the  omnipotent  will  of  the 
infinite  Majesty  of  God,  who  was  abundantly  and 
eternally  satisfied  by  the  offering  made  on  Calvary. 
As  often,  then,  as  the  words  of  Consecration,  which 
may  be  likened  to  those  which  drew  the  world  out  of 
nothing,  are  pronounced  over  wheaten  bread  and  wine 
of  the  grape,  by  the  mouth  of  a  Priest, — no  matter 
how  long  may  be  the  time,  or  how  distant  the  place, 
from  the  Sacrifice  offered  on  Calvary, — that  same 
moment,  the  august  Victim,  our  Jesus,  is  then  and 
there  really  present.  It  was  one  and  the  same  Vic- 
tim both  at  the  Last  Supper,  and  on  the  Cross,  and 
It  continues  the  same  in  the  oblation  made  to  the 
Father,  now,  and  to  the  end  of  time,  and  in  all 
places,  by  the  One  High  Priest,  Christ  our  Lord,  who 
borrows,  and  makes  them  his  own,  the  hands  and 
voice  of  the  Priests  of  his  Church,  who  have  been 
chosen  and  consecrated,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  this 
dread  Ministry. 

Oh  !  how  great  will  not  these  men  be,  who  have 

*  St.  Greg.  Nyss.  Orat  i.  in  Ch\  restirr.         2  Canon  Miss, 
s  St.  Luke,  xxii.  19,  20. 


372  MONDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE. 

been  taken  from  among  the  rest  of  men,  by  the  im- 
position of  hands  !  New  Christs,  that  is,  new 
anointed  Priests,  identified,  by  their  ministry,  with 
the  Son  of  Mary,  they  are  the  privileged  members  of 
divine  "Wisdom  ;  they  are  closely  united,  by  love,  with 
the  power  which  he  himself  has ;  they  are  the  com- 
panions of  this  Jesus  in  the  doing  that  grand  work 
which  he.  Wisdom,  is  ever  doing  throughout  all 
ages :  that  is,  the  immolation  of  the  great  Victiiriy 
and  the  mingling  of  the  Chalice,^  wherein  our 
humanity,  blended  with  its  Head  in  the  unity  of  the 
one  same  Sacrifice,  derives  also  love  for  both  its  God 
and  its  fellow-members,  and  is  made  to  be  partaker 
of  the  divine  nature,  as  St.  Peter  words  the  mystery 
of  union.  ^ 

Praise,  then,  and  glory  be  to  our  Jesus,  the  sove- 
reign High  Priest,  for  these  noble  sons  of  the  human 
race  !  they  are  a  marvel  to  heaven,  and  the  pride  of 
our  earth !  Surrounded  by  them,  as  is  the  palm-tree 
with  its  victory- speaking  palms,  or  the  cedar  with  its 
incorruptible  branches,^  this  divine  Pontiff  of  ours 
comes  forward,  like  the  olive-tree  budding  forth  its 
young  plants,  in  which  he  puts,  and  with  such  an 
overfiowingness,  dignity,  power,  and  holiness.*  And 
as  the  cyprus-tree,  that  rears  itself  on  high,^  hides  its 
vigorous  trunk  beneath  the  forest  of  its  ever-green 
branches, — so,  hiding  his  own  direct  action,  and,  as 
it  were,  retreating  behind  the  countless  Priests  on 
earth,  who  derive  all  their  power  and  unction  from 
Him,  our  true  High  Priest  draws  them  all  to  unity 
with  his  own  adorable  Self. 

On  that  night  ever-blessed,  that  night  of  the 
divine  Supper,  when,  as  he  said,  the  hour  had  come 
for  the  Father  and  Son  to  glorify  one  the  other ; "  it 


1  Prov.  ix.  2.  *  Ecclus.  L  11. 

»  2  St.  Pet.  i.  4.  5  /^^, 

'Ecclus.  1.  13,  14.  6  St.  John,  xvii.  1. 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  373 

was  just  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  ascending  the 
blood-stained  steps  of  the  altar  of  the  Cross,  where 
was  to  be  consummated  the  perfection  of  glory  ;  ^  yes, 
it  was  then,  and  thus  early,  that  he  manifested  the 
power  of  his  own  divine  Priesthood.  Under  the 
likeness  and  name  of  Simon,  Son  of  Onias,  who  did 
such  great  things  for  the  Temple,  and  saved  his 
people  from  destruction  ;  ^  we  have  our  Jesus,  whose 
praises  are  inspired  and  celebrated  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  in  that  last  of  the  Books  descriptive  of  eter- 
nal Wisdom, — Ecclesiasticus.  It  is  into  the,  as  yet, 
feeble  hands  of  his  Apostles,  whom  he  vouchsafes  to 
call  his  friends,^  and  his  Brethreiiy'^  that  our  Lord 
intrusts  the  oblation,  which  was  to  immortalise,  and 
so,  in  a  manner,  extend  his  Sacrifice  to  the  King  of 
Ages.  His  divine  hands  are  stretched  out,  offering, 
as  a  libation,  the  blood  of  the  grape  :  he  pours  it  forth 
at  the  very  foot  of  the  altar,  which  is  already  being 
put  up ;  and  the  fragrance  of  that  offering  makes  its 
way  to  the  Most  High  Prince.  Our  High  Priest  saw 
into  the  future ;  he  heard  the  songs  of  triumph  which 
would  hymn  the  praises  of  the  divine  Memorial ;  he 
heard  the  sacred  Psalmody,  which  would  fill  the 
great  House,  the  Church,  with  ceaseless  and  sweet 
harmony,  around  the  Tabernacle  of  his  Presence  ;  he 
saw  millions  prostrate  in  the  adoration  of  Him,  the 
Lord  their  God,  and  paying  to  the  Almighty  their 
now  perfect  homage.  Then  did  he  rise  from  the  table 
of  the  Supper ;  he  went  out  in  his  strength  and  his 
love,^  that  he  might,  for  a  whole  long  day,  stretch 
forth  his  hands  in  presence  of  the  crowd  of  unbeliev- 
ing and  hostile  children  of  Israel ;  ^  he  renewed  his 
oblation,  consummated  his  Sacrifice  by  his  Blood,  for, 
by  the  Cross,  he  wished  to  show  the  power  of  Grod."^ 

1  Ecclus.  1.  11,  12.  5  St.  John,  xiv.  3U 

2  Ibid.  1.  1-5.  «  Is.  Ixv.  2. 

3  St.  John,  XV.  15.  "^  Ecclus.  1.  15-23. 
*  Ibid.  XX.  17. 


374  MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE. 

"  The  evening  Sacrifice,  which  was  the  Passion  of 
*^  Christ,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  became,  in  his  Resur- 
"  rection,  the  oblation  of  the  morning."  ^  It  was  a  Sacri- 
fice, whose  mysterious  transformation  was  signified, 
under  the  Law,  by  the  solemnly  presenting  to  the  Lord 
of  a  sheaf  oi  the  first-fruits  of  the  wheat-harvest ;  the 
presentation  was  to  be  made  on  the  third  day  following 
the  sla%'inf!r  of  the  Paschal  Lamb."  But  the  time  for 
oflPering  the  very  bread  itself,  the  true  wheat  and  food 
of  souls,  was  not  as  yet  come  ;  and  the  law  subjoined 
as  follows  :  Ye  shall  count,  therefore,  from  the  morrow 
after  the  Sabbath,  icherein  ye  offered  the  sheaf  of  the  first- 
fruits,  seven  full  weeks,  even  unto  the  morrow  after  the 
seventh  week  be  expired,  thai  is  to  say,  fifty  days:  and 
then  ye  shall  offer  a  new  Sacrifice  unto  the  Lord: — two 
loaves  of  fi-our, — the  first-fruits  of  the  Lord.^ 

Fifty  days  were  to  transpire,  in  the  Xew  Covenant, 
before  the  divine  agent  came,  who  alone  could  trans- 
form these  gifts,  this  Bread  and  Wine.  Pentecost,  the 
glorious  Pentecost,  arose  at  last ;  and  the  creating 
Spirit  came  with  a  mighty  wind.  The  flesh  of  the 
Word,  and  the  divine  Blood,  which  he  formed  at  the 
very  onset,  and  are  still  in  his  keeping,  awaited,  for 
their  being  re-produced  in  the  sacred  Mysteries,  the 
incommunicable  operation  of  Him  whose  glorious 
master-piece  they  are.  *'  It  was  by  Him  who  is  eternal 
"  Fire,  that  is,  by  the  Spirit,"  says  the  Abbot  Rupert, 
^*  that  Mary  conceived ;  it  was  by  him  that  J  esus 
"  off'ered  himself,  a  living  Victim,  to  the  living  God  ; 
"  and  it  is  by  the  same  Fire  that  he  now  bums  on  our 
"  altars,  for  it  is  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
"  that  the  Bread  is  changed  into  his  Body."*  So,  too, 
St.  Denis  the  Areopagite,  the  great  disciple  of  the 
Apostle  St.  Paul,  teaches  us,^  that   our   Jesus,  the 


'  In  Psalm,  cxl.  *  Rupert  in  Exod.  lit*,  ii.  c.  10. 

'  Lev.  xxiii.  10,  11,        ^  Dq  Eccl.  Hier.  cap.  v.  3.  sec-  a 
*  Ibid.  15-17. 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  375 

supreme  Hierarcli,  wlien  lie  called  his  disciples  to 
share  in  his  sovereign  priesthood, — although,  as  God, 
he  was  the  author  of  all  consecration,  yet  did  he  leave 
the  consummation  of  their  priesthood  to  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  and  he  bade  his  Apostles  not  to  depart  from 
Jerusalem,  but  there  wait  for  the  promise  of  the 
Father,  that  is,  for  their  being  baptised  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  a  few  days  later  on/ 

"The  Priest,'^  says  St.  John  Chrysostom,  "comes 
"  forth,  carrying,  not  fire,  as  under  the  Law,  but  the 
"  Holy  Ghost.'^^  "  It  is  a  man  who  appears  before 
"  us,  but  it  is  God  who  works."  ^  How  shall  this  be 
done,  said  Mary  to  the  Angel,  for  I  know  7iot  man. 
Gabriel  answers  her  :  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon 
thee,  and  the  poiver  of  the  Most  High  shall  overshadow 
thee}  "  And  thou  now  askest  me,'^  says  St.  John 
Damascene  to  an  inquirer,-  "'How  do  the  bread  and 
'  *  wine  and  water  become  the  Body  and  Blood  of 

*  *  Christ  ?  '     I  answer  thee  :  The  Holy  Ghost  over- 
'  shadows  the  Church,   and  achieves   this-  Mystery, 

*  which  is  beyond  all  word  and  all  imagination."  ^ 

Therefore  it  is,  that,  as  St.  Fulgentius  observes,  "the 
'  Church  cannot  have  any  better  reason  for  praying 
'  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  than  for  the  conse- 
*cration  of  the  Sacrifice,  wherein,  as  under  the 
'  shadow  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Yirgin's  womb,  the 
'  Wisdom  of  the  Father  united  himself  with  the  Man 
'  chosen  by  him  for  the  divine  espousal,  so  the  Church 
'  herself  is  united,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  Christ,  as  a 

*  bride  is  to  her  spouse,  or  the  body  to  its  head."  ^ 
It  is  on  account  of  all  this,  that  the  hour  of  Tierce, 
{our  hour  of  nine  o'clock,)  the  hour  wherein  the  divine 
Paraclete  came  into  this  world,  is  the  one  set  apart, 
by  the  Church,  on  each  of  her  Festivals,   for   the 


1  Acts,  i.  4,  5.  *  St.  Luke,  i.  34,  35. 

*  De  Sacred,  lib.  iii.  c.  4.  ^  Be  fid.  orthod.  lib.  iv.  c.  13. 

'  Tom.  V.  serm.  38.  ^  Ad  Monim.  lib.  ii.  c.  10. 


376  MONDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAYE. 

solemn  celebration  of  the  great  Sacrifice,  OYer  wliicli 
this  Blessed  Spirit  presides  in  the  omnipotence  of  his 
operation. 

O  holy  hour  of  Tierce  !  0  sacred  Nine  o'  Clock,  as 
men  call  that  third  hour  !  it  is  then  that  the  Bride, 
the  Church  of  Christ,  feels  an  alle^'iation  of  her  exile ; 
for,  though  still  on  earth,  she  gives  to  her  God  a 
homage  that  is  worthy  of  him,  and  receives  back  from 
him  every  grace  wherewith  to  bless  her  dear  children. 
In  this  sense,  the  Mass  is  her  fortune,  her  dower ;  it 
belongs  to  her  to  regulate  its  celebration,  to  prescribe 
the  formulas  and  the  ceremonies,  and  to  receive  its 
fruits.  The  Priest  is  her  minister :  she  prays ;  he 
immolates  the  Victim,  and  gives  her  prayer  an  infinite 
power.  The  indelible  character  of  the  Priesthood, 
stamped  by  God  himself  on  the  Priest's  soul,  makes 
him  the  exclusive  depositary  of  the  marvellous,  the 
divine,  power,  and  gives  to  the  Sacrifice,  ofiered  by 
his  hands,  a  validity  which  no  human  power  can 
control ;  but  he  may  not,  licitly  and  lairfidli/,  make 
the  oblation,  save  in  and  with  the  Church. 

This  mutual  dependence,  this  union  which  confounds 
not,  of  the  Priest  and  the  Church,  in  the  Sacred 
Mysteries,  was  deeply  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the 
early  Christians.  In  the  cemetery  of  Saint  Callixtus, 
— that  central  point  of  the  Poman  cemeteries,  and  the 
one  set  apart  for  the  burial  of  the  Bishops  of  the 
Mother-Church  during  the  entire  3rd  Century, — 
there  is  a  whole  series  of  paintings,  going  back  as  far 
as  the  beginning  of  the  Catacomb  itself.  These  were 
a  symbolic  teaching  of  the  initiated  how  the  dogma  of 
the  Eucharist  was  instituted  by  our  Lord,  as  basis 
of  the  religion,  whereof  the  Popes,  who  were  buried 
there,  in  the  papal  cr}"pt,  had  been  the  faithful 
guardians.  The  repast  of  the  seven  disciples,  for 
whom,  during  their  mysterious  fishing,  Jesus  himself 
has  been  preparing  bread  and  a  fish  roasted  on  hot 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  377 

coals/  is  painted  in  one  of  tlie  rooms,  on  the  centre  of 
the  wall  facing  the  entrance-door.  On  either  side  of 
this  central  subject,  there  are  two  other  smaller  ones: 
one  is  the  sacrifice  of  Abraham,  with  its  well-known 
meaning ;  the  other  represents  a  non-historic  scene, 
which,  however,  evidently  forms  a  counterpart  with 
the  one  on  the  other  side  ;  it  speaks  of  the  Sacrifice 
of  the  Christian  Church;  and  symbolism  so  thoroughly 
hides  the  secret  of  the  Mysteries  from  the  profane, 
that  we  may  expect  the  symbolism  to  be  deep  in  pro- 
portion. On  a  table  lies  a  loaf,  whose  meaning  is 
made  plain  enough  by  the  fish,  the  eucharistic  icthus, 
being  placed  near  it.  On  the  spectator's  right  hand 
is  an  aged  female  ;  she  is  standing,  with  her  arms 
stretched  out  as  an  Ora7itp,j  and  is  offering  up  her 
prayer  to  heaven  ;  on  the  left  is  the  figure  of  a  young 
man  ;  he  wears  a  simple  pallium ^  which  was  the  usual 
garb  of  the  Christian  cleric  in  the  2nd  Century ; 
with  an  air  of  authority,  he  is  holding  his  open  hands 
over  the  table  and  its  gifts.  We  know  the  meaning 
of  all  this  ;  it  is  the  Church,  who  is  united,  in  the 
consecration,  with  the  Priest,  her  minister  and  her 
son.^ 

With  what  fidelity  does  not  this  queen,  who  is  in 
mourning  for  her  Spouse,  carry  out  the  Testament, 
which  left  her,  in  the  Sacrifice,  the  eternal  and  un- 
dying remembrance  of  his  Death, — ^and  he  gave  her 
that  Testament  at  his  Last  Supper !  Whilst  he  gives 
his  whole  Self  to  her  in  the  mystery  of  love,  she  is 
forcibly  reminded,  by  the  state  of  immolation  in 
which  she  sees  Him,  that  she  is  not  to  be  taken  up 
so  much  with  the  joy  this  sweet  presence  of  his 
causes  her,  as  with  the  duty  of  completing  and  con- 
tinuing his  work,  by  immolating  herself  together  with 
Him.     Under  the  Altar,  where  she  and  her  Jesus 


^  St.  John,  xxi.  8. 

^  De  liossi,  Horn.  soti.  torn.  ii. 


378  MONDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

meet,  she,  the  valiant  woman^  has  laid  the  relics  of 
her  Martyrs,  for  she  is  aware  that  the  Passion  of  her 
Lord  demands,  from  her  children,  who  are  his  mem- 
bers, a  something  which  will  fill  up  what  is  wanting 
of  his  siifferings."^  She  was  produced  from  his  open 
Side,  when  on  his  Cross,  and  she  was  espoused  to  him 
in  Death  ;  that  first  embrace,  which,  from  her  very- 
birth,  put  her  Spouse's  Bleeding  Body  into  her  arms, 
has  communicated  to  the  soul  of  this  second  Eve  the 
same  inebriation  of  devotedness  and  love,  which  sent 
the  heavenly  Adam  into  his  deep  sleep  on  Calvary. 

To  this  Church,  then,  to  this  Mother  of  the  living, 
the  immense  human  family  runs  with  all  its  manifold 
miseries,  and  countless  wants.  She  makes  good  use 
of  the  treasure  confided  to  her ;  that  treasure  is  the 
Mass,  and  it  supplies  every  necessity  ;  and,  by  that 
same,  she  is  enabled  to  fulfil  all  her  duties,  both  as 
Bride  and  Mother.  Each  day  identifying  herself,  more 
and  more,  with  the  universal  Victim,  who  imparts  to 
her  Sacrifice  his  own  infinite  worth,  the  Church  adores 
God's  sovereign  Majesty,  gives  him  thanks  for  his 
favours,  sues  for  the  pardon  of  the  past  and 
present  sins  of  her  children,  and  asks  for  them 
the  bestowal  of  blessings  temporal  and  eternal.  The 
precious  Blood  of  her  Jesus  flows  from  her  Altar 
upon  the  suffering  souls  in  Purgatory,  assuages  their 
fire  of  expiation,  or  leads  them  to  the  place  of  re- 
freshment, light  and  peace.^ 

So  great  is  the  power  of  the  Sacrifice  offered  in  the 
Church,  that,  of  itself,  and  (as  far  as  the  principal 
effect  is  concerned,)  independently  of  the  merits  of 
the  Priest  or  the  people  present,  it  fulfils  those  four 
ends,  whose  realisation  includes  the  sum  total  of 
religion, — that  is.  Adoration,  Thanksgiving,  Propitia- 
tion, and  Impetration  ; — yes  independently  of  the 
merits  of  the  human  Priest, — for  it  is  the  Victim, 

1  Trov.  xxxi.  10.  ^  Coloss.  i,  24.  '  Can.  Miss. 


MONDAY   '^^aTHlN   THE   OCTAVE.  379 

which  gives  this  Sacrifice  its  worth  ;  and  the  Yictiia 
on  our  Altars  is  the  Same  that  was  on  Calvary  ;  it  is 
a  Victim  equal  to  the  Father,  who  offers  himself,  as 
he  did  on  the  cross,  for  these  same  ends,  and  in  one 
same  Oblation.  The  Creator  of  space  and  time  is  not 
bound  to  observe  their  laws,  and  he  has  proved  his 
divine  independence  in  this  mystery.  ''  Just  as  though 
offered  in  many  places,  it  is  one  and  the  same  Body, 
and  not  several  bodies,''  says  St.  John  Chrysostom, 
"so  is  it  with  the  unity  of  the  Sacrifice,  though  offered 
in  different  ages."  ^  Between  the  Altar  and  the  Cross, 
there  is  but  the  difference  of  the  manner  of  the  offering. 
Bloody  on  the  Cross,  unbloody  on  the  Altar,  the  offer- 
ing is  one,  ^  notwithstanding  this  diversity  of  mode. 
The  immolation  of  the  august  Victim  on  the  Cross 
was  a  visible  one,  for  it  was  amidst  all  the  cruel  horrors 
which  slew  Him  ;  but  the  violence  of  the  executioners 
concealed  the  Sacrifice  offered  to  God,  by  the  Incar- 
nate Word,  in  the  spontaneity  of  his  generous  love. 
At  our  Altar,  the  immolation  is  not  visible ;  but  the 
religious  worship  of  the  Sacrifice  is  as  patent  as  the 
noon -day  brightness,  and  as  splendid  in  its  glorious 
ritual.  Upon  the  earth,  which  on  that  terrible  Friday, 
had  drunk  the  stream  of  its  shedding,  the  precious 
Blood  left  the  malediction  of  deicide  ;  but  the  chalice  of 
salvation  held  by  the  Church's  hand  sheds  benediction 
throughout  our  planet. 

O  glorious  condition  of  this  Earth  of  ours,  from 
whose  surface,  the  Lamb  that  is  slain,  who  is  now 
receiving,  on  the  Throne  of  God,  the  homage  due  to 
his  triumph,^  is  presenting,  each  day,  in  his  state  of 
infinite  lowliness  as  Man,  total  satisfaction  to  his 
Father  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  a  glory  adequate 
to  the  perfections  of  the  divine  Majesty  !  The  Angels 


1  In  Bp.  ad  Eeb.  Horn.  17.  '  Heb.  x.  U. 

'  Apoc.  V.  6,  12. 


380  MONDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE. 

are  in  admiration  as  they  look  down  upon  this  our 
globe,  mere  speck  as  it  is  amidst  the  bright  heavenly- 
spheres,  and  yet  so  loved,  from  the  very  onset,  by 
eternal  Wisdom  ;  they  surround,  trembling  the  while, 
this  Altar  on  earth,  so  closely  resembling,  so  one  with 
theirs  in  heaven,  that,  on  the  two,  the  one  same 
High  Priest  pays  homage  to  the  one  same  God 
in  the  one  same  infinite  Offering.  Hell  from  its 
deepest  depths,  trembles  at  it ;  and,  raging  as  it  does 
against  God,  and  vowing  vengeance  against  man, 
there  is  no  object  so  hateful  to  it  as  this  Sacrifice. 
What  untiring  efforts  has  not  Satan  been  making,  what 
artful  designs  has  he  not  planned,  in  order  to  make 
this  much-detested  Sacrifice  cease  !  And,  alas  !  there 
has  been,  even  in  the  very  heart  of  Christendom,  some 
partial  success  to  those  efforts  and  designs, — there  has 
been  the  protestant  heresy,  which  has  destroyed 
thousands  of  our  Altars,  especially  in  our  own  dear 
fatherland, — and  there  is  still  the  spirit  of  Revolution, 
which  is  spreading  as  our  modern  times  grow  older, 
and  whose  avowed  aim  is  to  shut  up  our  Churches, 
and  do  away  with  the  Priests  who  offer  sacrifice ! 

So  it  is :  and,  therefore,  our  world,  which  hereto- 
fore used  to  be  set  right  again  after  the  storms  that 
swept  its  surface,  now  complains  that  the  impending 
ruin  is  an  universal  one,  and  one  wherein  there  is  no 
strength,  save  in  the  very  chastisements  sent  by  God. 
It  vainly  busies  itself  with  its  plans  of  safety,  and,  at 
each  turn,  feels  that  the  human  legislation  it  would 
trust  to,  is  but  an  arm  of  human  folly  stretched  out 
to  support  a  decrepit  age  of  proud  weakness.  The 
Blood  of  the  Lamb,  once  the  world's  power,  no  longer 
flows  upon  it  with  its  former  plenty.  And  yet  the 
world  goes  on  ;  it  does  so,  because  of  that  same  Sacri- 
fice, which,  though  despised,  and,  in  many  lands  totally 
suspended,  is  still  offered  in  thousands  of  happy  spots 
on  earth  ;   and,  on  the  world  icill  go,  for  the  time  yet 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE. 


381 


to  come,  until,  in  a  final  access  of  mad  frenzy,  it  shall 
have  put  the  last  Priest  to  death,  and  taken  away 
from  every  Altar  here  below,  the  eternal  Sacrifice.^ 

The  incalculable  influence  of  the  Eucharistic  Sacri- 
fice, and  its  unlimited  power,  are  brought  forward  in 
the  following  beautiful  formula,  which  is  a  continua- 
tion of  what  we  have  already  taken  from  the  Apostolic 
Constitutions. 


CONSTI'l'UTIO   JACOBI. 


"We  beseech  thee  that  thou 
mercifully  look  down  upon 
these  gifts,  thou,  O  God,  who 
standest  in  need  of  none  of 
our  things  ;  and  be  thou  well- 
pleased  in  them,  for  the  hon- 
our of  thy  Christ ;  send  down 
upon  this  sacrifice  thy  Spirit, 
he  that  was  witness  of  the 
Lord  Jesus'  sufferings  ;  in 
order  that  they  who  are  par- 
takers of  his  (Body  and  Blood) 
may  be  strengthened  unto 
piety,  may  obtain  the  remis- 
sion of  their  sins,  may  be  de- 
livered from  the  devil  and  his 
deceit,  may  be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  may  be  made 
worthy  of  thy  Christ,  and  may 
obtain  life  everlasting,  by  thy 
being  reconciled  to  them,  O 
almighty  Lord. 

"We  further  pray  thee,  O 
Lord,  for  thy  holy  Church, 
which  is  spread  from  one  end 
of  the  world  to  the  other, 
which  thou  hast  purchased  by 
the  precious  Blood  of  thy 
Christ :  preserve  it  unshaken 
and    free     from     disturbance 


Poscimus  te  ut  super  haec 
dona  placate  respicias,  tu 
qui  nullius  indiges  Deus,  et 
beneplaceas  in  eis  ad  hono- 
rem  Christi  tui,  atque  supra 
hoc  sacrificium  mittas  sanc- 
tum tuum  Spiritum,  testem 
passionum  Domini  Jesu  : 
ut  participes  illius  ad  pie- 
tatem  confirmentur,  remis- 
sionem  peccatorum  conse- 
quantur,  diabolo  ej  usque 
errore  liberentur,  Spiritu 
sancto  repleantur,  digni 
Christo  tuo  fiant,  vitam  sem- 
pitemam  impetrent,  te  illis 
reconciliato,  Domine  omni- 
potens. 


Adhuc  oramus  te,  Domi- 
ne, pro  sancta  Ecclesia  tua, 
quae  a  finibus  ad  fines  ex- 
tenditur,  quam  acquisisti 
pretioso  sanguine  Christi 
tui  :  ut  eam  inconcussam 
ac  minime  fluctuantem  con- 
serves usque  in  saeculi  con- 


^Dan.  xi.  31. 


382 


MONDAY   WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE. 


summationem  !  item  pro 
universo  episcopatu  recte 
verbum  veritatis  tractante 
ac  distribuente,  pro  omni 
presbyterio,  pro  diaconis, 
ac  universo  clero  :  ut  oranes 
sapientiam  a  te  donates 
Spiritu  sancto  impleas. 

Adhuc  rogamus  te,  Domi- 
ne,  pro  rege  et  iis  qui  in 
sublimitate  sunt  et  pro 
cuncto  exercitu,  ut  res 
nostrae  in  pace  versentur  ; 
quo  totuin  vitae  nostrsB 
tempus  in  quiete  et  Concor- 
dia trajicientes,  te  per  Je- 
sum  Christum  spem  nostram 
gloria  afficiamus. 

Adhuc  offerimus  tibi  pro 
omnibus  Sanctis  qui  a  sae- 
culo  placuerunt  tibi,  pa- 
triarchis,  prophetis,  justis, 
apostolis,  martyribus,  con- 
fessoribus,  episcopis,  pres- 
byteris,  diaconis,  subdiaco- 
nis,  lectoribus,  cantoribus, 
virginibus,  viduis,  laicis  et 
omnibus  quorum  tu  nosti 
nomina. 

Adhuc  offerimus  tibi  pro 
populo  hoc  :  ut  eum  in  lau- 
dem  Christi  tui  exhibeas 
regale  sacerdotium,  gentem 
sanctam  ;  pro  iis  qui  in 
virginitate  et  castitate  vi- 
vunt  ;  pro  viduis  Ecclesiae  ; 
pro  iis  qui  in  nuptiis  hones- 
tis  degunt  ;  pro  infantibus 
plebis  tuae  :  uti  nostrum 
neminem  rejiciendum  ha- 
beas. 

Adhuc  poscimus  te  pro 
urbe  hac  et  habitantibus  in 
ea  ;  pro  SBgrotis,  pro  dura 
servitute  afllictis,  pro  exsu- 


until  the  consummation  of 
time ;  we  also  pray  for  the 
whole  episcopacy  which  rightly 
treats  and  distributes  the  word 
of  truth  ;  for  the  whole  pres- 
bytery, for  deacons,  and  the 
entire  clergy ;  that,  having 
enriched  them  all  with  "Wis- 
dom, thou  mayst  fill  them 
with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

"We  further  pray  thee,  O 
Lord,  for  the  king  and  them 
that  are  in  authority,  and  for 
the  whole  army,  that  all  our 
affairs  may  be  in  peace ;  that, 
thereby,  spending  the  whole 
time  of  our  life  in  quietness 
and  concord,  we  may  glorify 
thee,  through  him  who  is  our 
hope,  Christ  Jesus. 

"We  further  offer  thee  (this 
Sacrifice)  for  all  the  saints  who 
have  been  pleasing  to  thee 
from  the  beginning  :  patri- 
archs, prophets,  righteous, 
apostles,  martjTS,  confessors, 
bishops,  priests,  deacons,  sub- 
deacons,  lectors,  chanters,  vir- 
gins, widows,  laity,  and  all 
whose  names  are  known  to 
thee. 

"We  further  offer  it  to  thee 
for  this  people,  that  thou  wilt 
make  them,  to  the  praise  of 
thy  Christ,  a  kingly  priest- 
hood and  a  holy  nation;  for 
them  that  live  in  virginity  and 
chastity  ;  for  the  Church's 
widows ;  for  them  that  live  in 
honourable  wedlock  ;  for  the 
infants  of  thy  people :  that 
thou  mayst  not  cast  any  one 
of  us  away. 

"SVe  further  beseech  thee 
for  this  city  and  its  inhabi- 
tants ;  for  the  sick ;  for  them 
that  are  in  cruel  servitude ; 


MONDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 


383 


for  them  that  are  in  banish- 
ment; for  them  that  are  in 
prison  ;  for  them  that  are 
travelling  by  sea  or  land  :  that 
thou  be  their  supporter,  thou 
the  helper  and  defender  of  all. 
We  further  beseech  thee  for 
them  that  hate  and  persecute 
us  for  thy  name's  sake ;  for 
them  that  are  without,  and 
are  astray  :  that  thou  lead 
them  to  wiiat  is  good,  and 
appease  their  fury. 

We  further  also  beseech 
thee  for  the  Church's  catechu- 
mens, and  for  the  possessed 
by  satan,  and  for  our  brethren 
the  penitents :  that  thou  mayst 
perfect  the  first  in  faith, 
cleanse  the  second  from  the 
attacks  of  the  wicked  one,  and 
accept  the  penance  of  the 
third,  pardoning  both  them 
and  us  the  offences  committed 
by  us. 

We  offer  it  to  thee,  likewise, 
for  favourable  weather  and 
abundant  crops  :  that  ever  re- 
ceiving the  good  things  thou 
bestowest,  we  may  cease  not 
to  praise  thee,  who  givest 
food  to  all  flesh. 

We  also  beseech  thee  for 
them  that  are  absent  for  a 
just  cause  :  that  thus,  being 
maintained  in  holiness  by  thee, 
thou  mayst  unite  us  all,  im- 
moveable, blameless,  and 
without  reproach,  in  the  king- 
dom of  thy  Christ,  who  is  the 
God  of  every  creature  both 
sensible  and  intellectual,  and 
is  also  our  king. 

For  to  thee  be  all  glory, 
worship,  thanksgiving,  hon- 
our, adoration.  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,    now,   and 


libus,  pro  proscriptis,  pro 
navigantibus  et  iter  facien- 
tibus  :  ut  sis  auxiliator,  om- 
nium adjutor  ac  defensor. 


Adhuc  rogamus  te  pro  iis 
qui  oderunt  nos  et  propter 
nomen  tuum  nos  perse- 
quuntur,  pro  iis  qui  foris 
sunt  ac  errant  :  ut  adducas 
eos  ad  bonum,  et  furorem 
eorum  mitiges. 

Adhuc  rogamus  te  et  pro 
Ecclesise  catechumenis,  et 
pro  iis  qui  ab  adversario 
jactantur,  et  pro  poeniten- 
tiam  agentibus  fratribus 
nostris  :  ut  primos  quidem 
perficias  in  fide,  alteros  vero 
mundes  a  vexatione  mali, 
tertiorum  autem  poeniten- 
tiam  suscipias,  condones- 
que  cum  iis  tum  nobis  quae 
delinquimus. 

Offerimus  quoque  tibi  pro 
aeris  temperatura  et  frugum 
ubertate  :  ut  indesinenter 
bona  a  te  collata  percipien- 
tes,  assidue  laudemus  te  qui 
das  escam  omni  carni. 

Etiam  rogamus  te  pro  iis 
qui  ob  causam  probabilem 
absentes  sunt  :  ut  omnes 
nos  in  pietate  conservatos 
a  te,  in  Christi  tui,  Dei  uni- 
versse  naturae  sub  sensum 
et  intelligentiam  cadentis, 
regisque  nostri  regno  con- 
greges,  immutabiles,  incul- 
patos,  irreprehensos. 

Quoniam  tibi  omnis  glo- 
ria, veneratio,  gratiarum 
actio,  honor,  adoratio  : 
Patri,  et  Filio,   et    Spiritui 


384 


MONDAY    WITHIN    THE   OCFAVE. 


sancto,  nunc,  et  semper,  et 
in  infinita  ac  sempitema 
saecula  sseculorum. 

Atque  omnis jiopulis  Amen 
respondeat. 


ever,  and  for  endless  everlast- 
ing ages. 

And  Jet  all  the  people  answer  : 
Amen. 


We  have  taken  the  following  fine  Sequence  from 
Daniel's  Thesaurus  Hymnologicus.  Unlike  so  many 
other  liturgical  pieces  composed,  in  the  14th  and  loth 
Centuries,  in  honour  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  we 
find  in  it  somewhat  of  the  soul  and  spirit  of  the  great 
Christian  poets  of  earlier  times. 


DE    S.  SACRAMf:NTO. 


Infra  Sept  u  ages  imam  et  Quadragesimam. 


De  supema  Hierarcliia, 
Yera  descendit  Sophia 

In  uterum  Virgiois  : 
Optatus  Dux  in  hac  via 
Venit  natus  de  Maria, 

Esse  portans  hominis. 

Magnae  Matris  magnus  Na- 
tus, 
Modo  miro  mundo  natus, 

Mundi  tollit  crimina  : 
Aufert  morbos,  dat  salutem, 
Ante  suos  fert  virtuteni, 

Hostis  fugans  aguiina. 

Zelator  mirabilis, 
EfFectus  passibilis, 

In  cruce  damnatur : 
Legislator  veteris 
Legis  plagis  asperis 

Pro  nobis  plagatur. 
Agnus  in  Cruce  levatus, 
Et  pro  nobis  immolatus. 

Fit  salutis  hostia  : 
Vitse  nostrse  reparator, 
Et  virtutum  restaurator, 

Coeli  pandit  ostia. 


True  Sophia,  true  "Wisdom, 
came  down,  from  the  hierarchy 
of  heaven,  into  the  Virgin's 
womb :  our  long-desired  Guide 
in  this  life,  came,  bom  of 
Mary,  having^  the  nature  of 
Man. 

Noble  Son  of  noble  Mother, 
bom  into  this  world  in  a  won- 
derful manner,  he  takes  that 
world's  sins  away  :  he  expels 
disease,  bestows  health,  leads 
on  his  people  with  power,  and 
puts  the  hostUe  ranks  to 
flight. 

He  that  is  wonderful  in  his 
love,  having  become  passible, 
is  condemned  to  the  Cross : 
he  that  is  the  giver  of  the  Old 
Law  is,  for  our  sakes,  wounded 
with  cruel  wounds. 

The  Lamb  being  lifted  up 
on  the  Cross,  and  immolated 
for  us,  is  made  the  Victim  of 
salvation  :  the  repairer  of  our 
life,  the  restorer  of  all  virtues, 
opens  heaven's  gates. 


MONDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 


385 


At  the  great  Supper,  lie 
first  declares  his  mysteries, 
knowing  well  what  awaited 
him.  Taking  bread,  he  blesses 
it ;  TliiSy  he  says,  is  my  Body : 
he  it  a  remembrance  of  me  ! 

The  wine  in  the  cup  which 
he  presents,  is  blessed  by  him, 
who  is  Son  of  God  ;  and  when 
blessed,  it  becomes  the  Blood 
of  the  Word  made  Flesh. 


Sacramenta  dictat  prius, 
Coena  magna,  bene  scius 

Quae  jam  erant  obvia  : 
Prsebens  panem  benedicit  ; 
Hoc  est  corpus  meum,  dicit ; 

Sit  mei  memoria. 
Data  benedictio 
Fit  a  Dei  FiHo 

Yini  propinati ; 
Et  cum  benedicitur, 
Tunc  sanguis  efficitur 

Verbi  incamati. 


To  God  alone  are  these 
things  understood  ;  we  are  to 
believe  and  worship  them, 
without  prying  into  their 
depths  :  let  the  just  man  alone 
approach  to  receive  them, 
who  is  of  simple  faith :  if  thou 
art  cloaked  in  vice,  approach 
not ! 

Take  heed,  thou  Judas  !  for 
thou  wilt  find  thy  condemna- 
tion !  Thou,  O  Peter,  take 
and  find  salvation !  This  is 
the  food  of  Believers.  At  this 
Table,  the  just  man  is  clad 
with  armour;  but  the  guilty 
one  is  stripped,  and  is  made  a 
prey  to  the  foes. 

These,  O  Christ,  are  thy 
marvellous  works  :  O  save  us, 
who  receive  them,  from  an 
angry  judgment.  Adorn  us 
with  the  garb  of  grace  !  De- 
fend us  from  punishment.  O 
thou  restorer  of  salvation  !  O 
heavenly  Physician  !  make  us 
worthy  of  the  food  thou  givest 
us ! 


Deo  nota  sunt  hsec  soli : 
Credi  debent  atque  coli, 

Amoto  scrutinio  : 
Justus  tantum  expers  doli 
Sumat  ilia  : — ssd  tu  noU 

Involute  vitio. 


Cave,  Juda,  ne  damneris  : 
Petre,  sume  ut  salveris  : 

Cibus  est  fidelium : 
Ad  cujus  mensam  armatur 
Justus,  reus  et  nudatur, 

Prseda  factus  hostium. 


Tua,  Christe,  sunt  haec 

mira; 
Serva  sumentes  ab  ira 

Judicii : 
Oma  nos  veste  gratise, 
Defende  nos  a  facie 

Supplicii. 
Eeparator  salvifice, 
Dignos  cibo  nos  effice 

Medecine  coelice. 


VOL.  X. 


2  0 


386  TUESDAY   >V1THIN    THE   OCTAVE. 


TUESDAY 

WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE   OF    CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

Christum  regem  adoremus  Let   us   adore    Christ,    the 

dominantem    gentibus,    qui  King,  who  ruleth  the  nations  : 

se  manducantibus  dat  spiii-  who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to 

tus  pinguedinem.  them  that  eat  him. 

Wisdom  prosecutes  the  fulfilment  of  the  divine  plan 
framed  before  all  ages.  His  union,  or,  to  use  the 
scriptural  expression,  his  marriagey  \Nith  human  nature, 
in  the  womb  of  his  Yirgin-Mother,  has  shown  his 
love  ;  and  Jesus,  that  Son  of  Man,  who  never  had  any 
personality  but  the  TVord  Himself,  immolated  on  the 
Cross,  in  a  daily  renewed  Sacrifice,  oficrs  an  infinite 
glory  to  the  Eternal  Father.  But  the  august  Victim, 
who  comes  down  upon  earth  at  the  word  of  the  Priest, 
does  not  return  to  heaven  amidst  some  sacred  flame, 
like  that  which  used  to  consume  the  ancient  holocausts. 
Immoveable  and  passive  as  are  the  elements,  whose 
substance  has  been  changed  into  His,  by  the  marvellous 
power  of  the  sacrifice, — He,  Jesus,  remains  at  the 
Altar  under  the  appearance  of  Bread  and  "Wine,  for 
such  they  seem  to  be  to  the  eyes  and  the  other  senses: — 
this  is  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  the  outward  sensible 
sign  of  a  mysterious  banquet. 

**  0  Sacrament  of  Sacraments  !  ^  0  most  divine  and 
'*holy  Sacrament !  lifting  up  the  veil  of  the  symbolic 
'*  mysteries  which  surround  thee,  show  thyself  to  us 
'*inthy  perfection,  and  fill  our  mental  vision  with 
**  thine  incomparable  and  pure  light !"  ^  Thus,  in  his 
inimitable  style,  speaks  the  interpreter  of  the  divine 

1  S.  Dion.  J)«  Eccl  hier.  c.  iii.  1 .        =  S.  Dion.  I.e.  3,  $  2. 


TUESDAY    WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE.  387 

-^hierarchieSy  the  Eagle  of  Athens,  when,  having  ex- 
plained the  holy  ceremonies  of  the  Sacrifice,  he  soars 
aloft  in  the  consecration  of  the  architypesy  or  prin- 
ciples, of  the  sacred  rites,  which  he  has  just  been 
describing.  Let  us  follow,  as  far  as  may  be,  the 
sublime  philosophy  of  our  Christian  Plato,  who  has 
given  a  sort  of  consecration  to  the  language  and 
formulas  of  pagan  wisdom,  by  making  them  the  recep- 
tacles and  teachers  of  Christian  dogma  ;'  and,  like 
St.  Paul,  has  made  every  height  of  science  obey  and 
subserve  the  mysteries  of  Christ.  ^ 

The  Priest,  then,  has  just  pronounced  the  words 
of  Consecration,  and  the  tremendous  Mysteries  are 
there  on  the  altar  :  he  shows  them,  veiled  under  the 
sacramental  species.  The  host,  after  being  concealed 
for  a  few  moments,  is  held  up  before  the  adoring 
multitude ;  it  was  one,  and,  now,  he  divides  it  into 
several  portions :  he  presents  to  all  the  faithful  the 
one  same  Chalice ;  he  mystically  multiplies  and  dis- 
tributes UNITY  ;  and  thus  completes  the  Sacrifice. 
For  the  simple  and  hidden  Unity  of  the  Word,  by 
uniting,  by  espousing,  to  himself  the  whole  nature  of 
man,  came  forth  from  the  bosom  of  his  Father  into 
this  visible,  this  many-creatured  world  of  the  senses ; 
and,  conforming  himself  to  this  multiplicity,  without^ 
in  any  way,  changing  his  own  oneness,  uniting  our 
lowliness  with  his  own  dignity,  uniting  our  life  with 
his  own,  uniting  us  as  his  members  to  himself  as  our 
Head,  he  would  have  us  all  be  one  with  himself :  ^  so, 
the  divine  Sacrament,  which  in  its  own  essence,  is 
one,  and  simple,  and  indi\4sible,  lovingly  multiplies 
itself,  under  the  exterior  symbol  of  the  species ;  in 
order  that,  returning  from  the  multiplicity  of  the 
receivers  into  the  unity  which  is  its  own  principle,  it 
will  bring  into  Unity  them  that  received  it  in  holy 
dispositions.^ 


1  2  Cor.  X.  5.  2  g.  Dion,  I.e.  §  xii.  xiii 

3  S.  Dion.  I.e.  \  3. 


388  TUESDAY   AVITHIN   THE   OCTAVE. 

The  name  of  Etcharist  is  the  most  suitable  ;  foit 
Eucharist  signifies  ihanhsgiving ;  and  this  Sacrament 
holds  within  it,  Him  who  is  the  object  of  all  praise, 
and  all  the  heavenly  gifts  he  has  bestowed  upon  us. 
It  is  the  admirable  summary  of  all  the  divine  opera- 
tions which  God  has  achieved  for  man  :  it  is  the  stay 
of  our  life  ;  it  gives  back  to  our  souls  the  divine 
image,  and  that  upon  the  model  of  an  architype,  which 
is  eternal  beauty ;  it  leads  us,  by  admirable  ascen- 
sions, into  a  path  which,  naturally,  we  could  never 
have  entered ;  by  it,  are  repaired  the  ruins  of  the 
original  fall ;  by  it,  we  cease  to  be  poor  ;  it  takes  our 
whole  being,  gives  its  whole  self  to  us,  and,  thereby, 
makes  us  partakers  of  God  himself  and  all  his  gifts.^ 

"  It  is  on  this  account,'*  continues  St.  Denis,  "  that 
"  what  is  common  to  all  the  Sacraments,  is  attributed, 
"  by  excellence,  to  this  one  ;  and  hence  it  is,  by  a 
*^  special  name,  called  Communion  and  Synaxis.  For 
"  albeit  every  Sacrament  be  such  as  gathereth  our 
"  lives,  divided  asunder  as  they  are  many  ways,  into 
"  that  one  state  whereby  we  are  joined  to  God,  and 
"  by  a  godlike  bringing  together  of  things  which  stand 
"  apart,  brings  these  our  lives  into  communion  and 
"  union  with  Him  who  is  one  ;  yet,  to  the  reception 
"  of  those  sacred  symbols,  there  is  given  consum- 
"  mation,  by  the  divine  and  perfective  gifts  of  this 
"  one  Sacrament.  For  there  is  no  function  performed 
"  by  the  sacred  minister,  to  which  the  most  di"s^ne 
"  Eucharist  does  not  succeed,  bringing  with  it  the 
*'  completion  of  conjunction  with  the  one  God,  and 
"  conferring  on  the  receiver  {of  that  previous  Sacra- 
"  menf)  the  communion  with  God  by  the  gift  of  the 
**  consummating  Mysteries  (of  the  Eucharist).  So, 
**  then,  if  the  other  Sacraments,  not  giving  what  they 
**  do  not  possess,  remain,  so  to  say,  incomplete,  not 
"  able  to  achieve  perfect  union  between  us  and  the 
**  ONE  God  ;  if  their  aim  is  to  prepare  the  receiver  to 

»  S.  Dion.  I.e.  §.  7. 


TUESDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  389 

"  become  partaker  of  the  more  excellent  Mysteries  of 
**  God ;  it  was  with  all  reason  and  justice  that  the 
'*  wisdom  of  the  hierarchs  gave  it  this  name  of  Com- 
'^  munion  or  Synaxis,  which  is  grounded  on  the  truth 
'^  of  what  it  contains."  ^ 

"  0  Sacrament  of  love  !  "  cries  out  St.  Augustine : 
'^0  sign  of  Unity!  0  bond  of  charity!"^  The 
unitive  power  of  the  Eucharist  produces,  as  St.  Denis 
so  sublimely  teaches,  the  union  between  God  and  his 
creature  ;  but  St.  Augustine  dwells  on  it  as  peacefully 
forming  Christ's  mystical  body ;  and  so  preparing  it 
for  the  eternal  sacrifice,  and  for  the  universal  and 
perfect  communion  in  heaven.  .  This  is  the  leading 
idea,  which  inspires  the  holy  Bishop  of  Hippo  with 
those  magnificent  passages,  which  we  have  already 
put,  at  least  in  part,  before  our  readers.  Though 
others  of  the  Holy  Fathers  and  Doctors  are  very  fine 
when  treating  upon  the  Eucharist,  yet  we  have  kept 
to  St.  Augustine  more  closely  than  to  the  rest ;  and 
in  so  doing,  we  were  but  following  the  example  set 
us  by  the  Church  herself,  who  finds  her  own  teach- 
ings, regarding  the  Blessed  Eucharist,  so  faithfully 
expressed  by  his  words,  that,  up  to  this  Tuesday,  she 
has  taken  him,  in  the  beautiful  Homilies  of  her 
Matins  during  the  Octave,  as  her  exclusive  preacher. 

He  was  telling  us,  eight  days  back,  and  he  was  but 
giving  us  the  echo  of  all  tradition,  that  the  Holy 
Eucharist  is  the  centre  and  bond  of  the  great  Catholic 
communion,  in  this  land  of  exile.  On  the  very  Feast 
itself  of  Corpus  Christi,  he  completes  his  teaching, 
when  commenting  the  passage  for  the  day's  Gospel ; 
the  Church  took  his  commentary,  making  it  the 
official  explanation  of  her  Gospel.  The  holy  Doctor 
then  told  us,  that  the  words  of  our  Saviour,  when 
announcing  his  intention  to  institute  the  Mystery  of 
love,  included  not  only  the  earth,  but  heaven  itself  ; 

^  S.  Dion.  I.e.  §.  1.  2  In  Johan.  Tract,  xxvi.  13. 


390  TUESDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE. 

they  signified  tlie  whole  body  of  Christ's  Church.  / 
am  the  living  bread,  ichich  came  down  from  heaveru 
If  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever ; 
and  the  bread  that  I  will  give,  is  my  flesh  for  the  life 
of  the  world ;  for  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my 
blood  is  drink  indeed.^  This  meat,  this  drink,  which 
he  promises  to  give  us,  is,  truly  and  primarily,  his 
own  veritable  Flesh,  and  the  very  Blood  which  flows 
in  his  veins  ;  it  is  the  very  Victim  slain  on  the  Cross  : 
but,  as  a  consequence  of  this,  it  is  also  the  Church, 
which  is  established  upon  his  own,  his  own  real  sub- 
stance, and  is  immolated  with  him,  as  one  same 
victim  with  himself,  in  one  and  the  same  Sacrifice  : 
*'  It  is  the  holy  Church,'*  says  St.  Augustine,  "  the 
"  Church  of  all  Christ's  members,  the  predestined  and 
"  the  called,  and  the  justified,  and  the  glorified  .  .  . 
**  Seeing  that  men  desire  this,  by  the  food  and  drink 
"  they  take,  that  they  may  sufi'er  neither  hunger  nor 
"  thirst, — this  result  is  not  gained  by  any  other  than 
"  this  food  and  drink,  which  makes  them  immortal 
"  and  incorruptible  who  take  it, — that  is,  the  very 
*•  fellowship  of  the  Saints,  where  there  is  peace,  and 
"  full  and  perfect  unity."  ^  It  is  a  banquet  of  in- 
effable sweetness  and  plenty,  wherein  each  of  the 
elect  is  a  partaker  of  the  whole  body,  and  gives  it,  by 
the  very  fact  of  his  own  participation,  increase  and 
completeness. 

This  was  the  eternal  Passover  spoken  of  by  our 
Redeemer,  when  he  put  an  end  to  the  figurative  one 
by  the  reahty,  veiled  though  it  was,  of  the  Sacrament. 
/  say  unto  you,  that,  from  this  time  forward,  I  will  not 
eat  it  again,  till  it  be  fulfilled,  (that  is,  till  jt  be  com- 
pleted,) in  the  kingdom  of  God ;  ^  I  will  not  drink  from 
henceforth  of  this  fruit  of  the  vine,  until  that  day  uhen 


1  St.  John,  vi.  51,52,  56. 

^  III  Johan.  Tract,  xxvi.  15,  17. 

'  St.  liuke.  xxii.  16. 


TUESDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  391 

1  shall  drink  it  with  you,  new  (as  it  then  will  be,)  in  the 
Kingdom  of  my  Father}  Oh  !  that  day,  that  endless 
day,  that  day  of  light  and  vision  whereof  David 
sang !  On  that  day,  throwing  aside  all  the  veils  that 
are  now  shrouding  him  from  our  eyes,  and  himself 
the  first  to  be  inebriated  with  love  in  that  divine  ban- 
quet, eternal  Wisdom,  with  an  embrace  uniting  both 
Head  and  members  together,  will  give  man  to  drink 
of  the  torrent  of  his  own  divine  pleasures,  and  of  that 
fount  of  life  which  himself  has  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father.^  Christ,  our  Head,  has  long  since  ascended 
beyond  the  clouds  ;  the  Church,  flowing  with  delights, 
and  leaning  upon  her  Beloved,  is  continually  going 
up,  after  him,  from  this  desert-land  ;  ^  one  or  another 
of  his  members,  our  brethren,  is  every  moment  going 
in,  to  complete  the  number  of  guests  at  the  heavenly 
and  eternal  and  new  Passover  ;  and,  as  each  one  goes 
in,  our  Jesus  says  :  This  noiv  is  bone  of  my  bones,  and 
Jiesh  of  my  flesh  ;  *  for  all  these  are  then  united  to  him 
as  the  bride  to  her  Spouse,  for  they  are  but  one  body. 
It  is  the  Eucharist  which  has  produced  this  marvellous 
capability  of  perfect  union  between  the  members  and 
their  divine  Head.  This  union  will  not  be  manifested 
till  the  day  of  glory  :  but  it  is  here  below,  under  the 
shade  and  cloud  of  faith,  that  the  Eucharist  is  thus 
transforming  the  elect  into  Christ,  that  is,  into  eternal 
union  with  him,  so  as  to  make  one  Body. 

He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood, 
abideth  in  me,  and  1  in  him!'  "  This,  then,  it  is,"  says 
St.  Augustine,  '*  to  eat  that  meat,  and  drink  that 
"drink: — to  abide  in  Christ,  and  have  him  abiding 
"  in  one's  self."  ^  "  The  sign  that  a  man  has  eaten 
"  and  drunk  (of  this  Sacrament)  is  the  abiding  in 
"  and  the  being  abided  in,  the  dwelling  in  and  the 


1  St.  Matth,  xxvi.  29.  *  Gen.  ii.  23. 

2  Ps.  XXXV.  8-10.  5  St.  John,  vi.  57. 

2  Cant.  viii.  5.  ^  In  Johan.  Tract,  xxvi.  18. 


S92  TUESDAY    AVIIHIN    IHE    OCTAVE. 

"  being  dwelt  in.'*  ^  Yes,  this  is  the  very  nature  of 
the  Eucharistic  banquet,  this  banquet  of  mutual 
abiding ;  a  banquet  at  which  man  cannot  worthily 
eat  of  the  Bread  of  Life  without  his  becoming,  and 
that  gradually  more  and  more,  the  bread  of  Christ, 
that  one  bread  spoken  of  by  the  Apostle,^  which  is 
kneaded  up  by  the  Church  in  the  holy  Mysteries,  that 
it  may  become  one  with  the  sacred  Flesh  of  Christ, 
as  St.  John  Chrysostom  so  forcibly  expresses  it,^  and 
give,  as  St.  Augustine  says,  growth  and  strength  in 
unity  to  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.*  *'  I  am  the 
"  wheat  of  Christ,"  said  the  holy  martyr,  Ignatius  of 
Antioch  ;  "  may  I  be  ground  by  the  teeth  of  the  wild 
''beasts,  that  I  may  be  found  to  be  the  pure  bread  of 
"  Christ,  *  *  *  to  be  offered  in  sacrifice  to  God."  ' 
This  same  thought  of  the  great  martyr  of  the  early 
ages  was  taken  up,  and  enlarged  upon,  in  the  8th 
Centurj^,  by  the  monk  St.  Beatus  and  his  disciple 
Heterius  :  they  are  sending  to  Elipandus,  Archbishop 
of  Toledo,  their  reply  to  the  ^N'estorians  of  Spain ; 
and,  in  the  first  portion  of  it,  they  thus  speak  of  the 
treatment  the  Faithful  receive  from  these  Heretics  :  ^ 
*'  They  are  our  persecutors:  but,  by  persecuting  us,  they 
"  are  but  shaking  the  wheat  out  of  the  straw  ;  when 
"  they  torture  us,  they  are  but  separating  the  dregs 
"  from  the  wine.  We  ought  to  go  down  on  our 
"  knees,  and  pray  for  them  that  thus  make  us  become 
*'  the  food  of  God.  As  wine,  when  it  has  come  forth 
"  from  the  press,  is  put  into  the  Chalice,  so  is  it  with 
"  you :  after  those  fastings,  after  those  fatigues,  and 
''  humiliations,  and  crushings,  you  now  are  come  into 
"  the  Lord's  cup,  in  Christ's  name.  You  are  bread 
*'  upon  his  table ;  you  are  wine  in  his  goblet.  "We 
"  are  all  one  and  the  same  together ;  for  there  is  but 
*'  the  one  Chalice,  in  which  we  all  are,  because  there 

1  In  Johan.  Tract,  xxvii.  1.  *  Serm.  67,  137. 

2  iCor.  X.  17.  ^  Ad  Bom. 

•  Bom.  xlvi.  in  Johav.  *  Ad  Elipand.  lib.  i.  72. 


TUESDAY    WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE.  393 

"  is  but  the  one  Passion  and  Death  of  Christ,  where- 
"  by  we  have  all  been  redeemed.  We  all  drink 
"  together,  though  we  do  not  live  together.  A  heretic 
"  seeks  to  separate ;  this  is  his  effort,  to  tear  asunder, 
"  not  to  piece  ;  to  break,  not  to  join.  He  separates 
"  the  Word  from  the  Flesh.  He  separates  the  Head 
"  from  the  body,  by  saying  that  the  Head  is  by  itself, 
"  and  the  body  by  itself.  Unfortunate  man !  he 
"  knows  not,  how  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  Church  ;  ^ 
"  and  that  the  Church  is  conjoined  to  that  Head ; 
"  and  that  that  is  the  whole  Christ,  that  is  Head  and 
"  body.  Heretics  are  not  food  for  the  Lord ;  for  it 
"  was  not  of  them,  that  he  said  :  My  meat  is,  to  do  the 
'^  will  of  Him  that  sent  me,  that  1  may  perfect  his 
"  work  ;  ^  and  that  tvork  consists  in  his  making  one 
"  bread  out  of  many  grains,  that  is,  out  of  many 
"  souls,  the  making  one  soul,  one  in  one  charity,  one 
"  faith,  and  one  hope.  For  if  the  souls  which  he 
*'  makes  one  by  one  faith  were  not  the  food  of  God, 
'*  he  would  not  have  said  of  the  countries  white  and 
"  ready  for  the  harvest,  but  which  at  that  time  were 
"  not  visible  to  the  disciples  :  I  have  meat  to  eat,  which 
"  ye  know  not !  ^'  ^ 

He  hungered  after  this  food,  and,  oh  !  with  what 
hunger !  He  longed,  he  thirsted,  for  that  banquet  of 
his  Last  Supper,  wherein  He,  the  omnipotent  guest, 
gives  himself  as  food  to  man,  and  would  make  the 
whole  of  humanity  his  own  food.  "  As  the  fire  devours 
"  the  wood  that  is  thrown  into  the  furnace,  so  our 
'^  Redeemer  eats  and  assimilates  to  himself,  at  this 
'^  sacred  table,  the  whole  body  of  holy  Church ;  he 
''makes  it  his  own,  and  thus  it  gains  strength  and 
"  grows."  *  So  spoke  William  of  Paris,  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  13th  Century;  and  he  was  but  repeating 
what  St.  Leo  the  Great  and  St.  Augustine  had  taught, 


1  1  Cor.  xi.  3 ;  Ephes.  v.  23.  3  gt.  jolm,  iv.  32. 

^  St.  John,  iv.  34.  *  De  Sacrum.  Eucli.  c.  4. 


394  TUESDAY   "VVITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

ages  before,  saying,  "  The  participating  of  the  Body 
'*  and  Blood  of  Christ  has  this  as  its  chief  work, — to 
"  change  us  into  Him,"  ^  "  and  in  such  wise,  as  that 
"  being  made  his  body,  and  having  become  his  mem- 
*'bers,  we  may  he  what  we  receive'-'^  (ut  in  id  quod 
^' sumiinns  tra7iseamus,  ut  simus  quod  accipimus") 

Eternal  Wisdom  had  all  the  children  of  men  in 
view,  when  he  assumed  human  flesh.  If  the  unity, 
which  marks  all  the  works  of  God,  seemed  to  require 
that  he  should  unite  himself  to  one  only  in  the  same 
hypostasis  or  Person, — that  same  law  of  unity  was,  so 
to  say,  a  promoter  of  his  loving  design  to  make  this 
Man- God  the  Head  of  a  mystical  body,  in  which  each 
of  the  elect  was  to  be  united  to  Christ.  The  economy 
of  the  Incarnation  is  described  to  us  by  the  holy 
Fathers  of  the  Church  in  this  way, — that  the  great 
mystery  is  not  quite  completed,  until,  by  the  Eucharist, 
the  Head  joins  to  himself  his  members,  and  is  united 
to  the  body,  which  he  is  to  animate  and  govern.  "  It 
"  is  on  this  account, "  says  Paschasius  Radbert, ' 
"  that  he  so  rejoiced  at  the  Supper,  and  gives  thanks 
''  to  God,  his  Father,  for  that  his  desires  are,  at  last, 
"fulfilled.  He  desired,  before  he  suffered,^  to  eat  the 
''  true  Passover  ;  in  order  that,  when  the  hour  came 
''  for  him  to  deliver  himself  up  as  the  price  of  our  ran- 
"  som,  we  might  already  be  in  him  as  one  body.  And 
"  thus,  we  had  to  be  crucified,  and  buried,  and  rise 
"again,  together  with  him."^ 

The  union  between  the  Head  and  the  members  pro- 
duced by  the  Eucharist  is  so  close,  that,  taking  the 
words  of  our  Saviour,  who  compares  it  to  the  union 
which  exists  between  the  Father  and  Himself,^  St. 
Hilary  and  St.  Cyril  of  Alexandria  adduce  it  as  an 
argument,  the  one  to  defend  the  consubstantiality  of 


^  S.  Leo,  Scnn.  14, 2)«  Fast.  *  St.  Luke,  xxii.  16. 

*  St.  Aug.  Serm.  57.  *  Rom.  vi. 

'  Ep.  ad  Frudey.  ^  St.  John,  xviL  21. 


TUESDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  395 

the  Word/  against  the  Arlans ;  and  the  other  to  prove 
against  the  Nestorians,  the  union,  real  and  physical, 
and  not  merely  one  of  influence  or  affection,  which 
unites  the  Word  and  human  nature  in  the  Incarna- 
tion.^ One,  by  nature,  with  his  Father,  one,  in 
Christ,  with  the  flesh  he  assumed.  Eternal  Wisdom 
makes  us,  through  that  flesh,  one  with  himself,  in  the 
Father. 

But,  already,  by  anticipation,  the  Holy  Ghost,  that 
Bond  eternal,  had  brought  the  elect  into  unity.  He 
the  divine  indweller  of  the  children  of  God,  He  the 
sanctifying,  the-  indivisible  Spirit,  assembles  the  sons  of 
Adam  in  the  unity  of  his  own  spirit  of  grace.  "  As 
"  the  power  of  Christ's  flesh  makes  one  body  ^  of  all 
"  nations,"  says  St.  Cyril,*  "  so  the  Holy  Spirit  makes 
"  all  spirits  one ;  and  yet,  hereby,  neither  spirits  nor 
"  bodies  are  confounded ;  as  the  Apostle  said  :  One 
'^  body,  and  one  spirit,  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  who 
''  is  above  all,  and  in  us  all.''  ^  Still,  in  the  marvellous 
union  of  creatures  brought  about,  to  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  by  the  Spirit  of  Father  and  Son, — it  is  to  the 
Son,  as  Incarnate  Word,  that  is,  as  eternal  Wisdom, 
who  is  taken  with  love  for  the  children  of  men,^ — it  is 
to  Him^  that  belongs  this  immense  work  of  union,  which 
so  gloriously  terminates  in,  which  so  stupendously 
leads  up  to,  the  divine  espousals  with  human  nature. 

So  it  is,  too,  with  ourselves  ;  we  are  just  at  the  close 
of  this  Mystery  of  love,  which  we  have  been  contem-  ' 
plating,  though  too  briefly,  in  the  most  dear  company 
of  divine  Wisdom ;  we  are  to  spend  the  two  days,  still 
remaining  of  our  Octave,  in  considerations  which  are 
less  exclusively  on  the  dogma  of  the  Blessed  Eucha- 
rist ;  and  we  now  find  ourselves  returning  to  the  thought 
which  was  our  starting-point.     God  is  love,  as  we 


^  De  Trinit.  lib.  viii.  *  In  Johan.  uhi  supra, 

2  In  Johan.  lib.  x.  -5  Eph.  iv.  4.  6. 

^  Epb.  iii.  6.  ^  Trov.  viii.  31. 


396  TUESDAY    WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE. 

were  then  saying ;  and  love  demands  union  ;  and  union 
must  make  the  united  alike/  Now  this  resemblance 
between  God  and  man  could  not  be  realised,  save  by 
man's  being  raised  to  what  St.  Peter  calls  a  participation 
of  the  divine  nature  ;  ^  now  this  is  the  special  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  he  effects  it  by  grace,  which  is 
the  result  of  his  own  personal  indwelling  ^  in  the  soul 
he  has  sanctified ;  like  the  unction  of  purest  oil,  he 
penetrates  the  inmost  recesses,  and  the  very  substance, 
of  that  happy  soul.  It  was  thus  he  acted  in  Christ ; 
he  inundated,  with  his  divine  plenitude,  the  human 
nature  assumed  by  the  TTord,  in  the  womb  of  the 
Virgin- Mother,  when  Eternal  Wisdom  united  himself 
with  that  nature  which,  though  inferior  and  created, 
was,  from  that  moment,  holy  and  perfect  in  the  Holy 
Spirit.  He,  the  Spirit,  acts  proportionately,  in  the 
same  way  with  the  Church  ;  she  is  the  holy  City,  and 
he  prepares  her  for  the  feast  of  the  nuptials  of  the 
Lamb  ;  she  is  the  Bride  of  Christ,  and  he  gives  her  to 
be  clothed  with  robes  all  glittering  and  white,  which 
are  the  virtues  of  the  Saints/  When  he  has  made  her 
one  by  baptism,  and  strengthened  her  in  holiness  by 
the  second  of  the  Sacraments,  he  has  but  to  lead  her 
to  her  Spouse,  sajing  with  her  that  come'  of  the  Sacred 
Mysteries,  which  are  to  complete  his  work,  and  unite 
together  the  Bride  and  the  Spouse.  Thus  the  children 
of  the  Bride,  being  made  one  with  Christ,  one  body 
with  him,  are  made  partakers  of  her  own  nuptials  with 
eternal  Wisdom.  If,  then,  we  have  all  been  baptised 
in  the  one  only  Spirit,  it  was,  as  the  Apostle  teaches 
us,  that  we  might  all  form  that  one  body,  in  which 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  bondsmen  and  free,  are  not  indivi- 
duals set  off  against  each  other  by  their  personal 
differences, — they  are  members  of  Christ,  and  have  all 


'  Pago  206.  *  Apoc.  xix.  7-9. 

'  St.  Pet.  i.  4.  *  Apoc.  xatii.  17. 

»  1  Cor.  iii.  16. 


TUESDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVK.  397 

been  made  to  drink,  in  the  one  same  holy  Spirit/  the 
divine  "Word,  whose  sacred  Flesh  is  given  to  us  in  the 
mystery  of  salvation. 

St.  Peter,  in  his  first  Epistle,  speaks  of  our  taking 
the  holy  Eucharist  as  though  it  were,  not  only  food, 
but  milk  for  babes.  He  says,  speaking  to  the  early 
Christians,  and,  through  them,  to  us  also:  As  new- 
born babes,  desire  ye  the  rational  milk,'^  he  means  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  is  evident  from  the  context. 
Clement  of  Alexandria  thus  quotes  the  passage:  As 
neiv-born  babes,  desire  ye  the  word  !  Yes,  it  is  the 
"Word,  the  Milk  of  those  who  are  converted  and  be- 
come little  children,^  who  are  born  again  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  *  it  prepares  them  for  the  solid  food  of  the 
eternal  feast,  that  is,  for  the  "Word  unveiled.  It  is  a 
delicious  food,  sweet  as  grace,  strengthening  as  life, 
pure  as  is  the  light.  It  is  that  heavenly  dew  which 
fell  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father  into  the  womb  of  the 
Virgin-Mother  ;  and  this  same,  the  "Word  Incarnate, 
gives  himself  to  the  Church,  for  she,  too,  is  "V^irgin  and 
Mother.  Pure  as  a  virgin,  and  affectionate  as  a  mother, 
she  invites  her  children  to  come,  and  she  feeds  them 
on  this  rational  milk,  this  "Word,  this  most  beautiful 
one  among  the  sons  of  men  ;  she  gives  her  little  ones 
the  body  of  Christ,  and  strengthens  them  with  the 
"Word  of  the  Father.  Oh  !  let  us  run  to  this  blessed 
Mother  of  ours,  and  drink  of  that  Word,  who  turns  all 
our  evils  away  from  us,  making  us  forget,  by  correct- 
ing, them.^  The  mother's  breast  is  everything  to  her 
child, — life,  joy,  its  whole  world.  With  what  eager- 
ness it  throws  itself  on  its  treasure,  as  St.  John  Chry- 
sostom  was  saying  in  the  Office  of  yesterday ;  ^  with 
what  ardour  it  kisses  the  fount  of  all  its  blessings ! 
And  yet,  a  mother's  milk  is  but  an  image  of  the  One 


'  1  Cor.  xii.  13.  "  St.  John,  iii.  5. 

2  I  St.  Pet.  ii.  2.  5  Freely  from  Clem.  Alex.  Posdag.  i.  6. 

'  St.  Matth.  xviii.  3.         ^  Horn.  60,  ad  Fop.  Antioch. 


398  TUESDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

I  am  speaking  of.  That  other  ceases,  when  the  first 
few  months  are  gone  ;  but  the  one  /  partake  of  is  an 
exhaustless  spring  ;  it  forms  me  into  the  perfect  man, 
making  me  reach  the  age  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.* 

All  these  sublime  teachings  were  like  household 
words  to  the  early  Christians  ;  and  we  cannot  be  sur- 
prised, therefore,  that  one  of  the  favourite  symbols  of 
the  holy  Eucharist  was  milk.  St.  Perpetua  relates,- 
that,  on  the  evening  before  she  and  her  companions 
were  to  suffer  martyrdom,  Pastor  put  a  delicious 
milk  ifito  her  mouth :  the  details  she  gives  of  that 
touching  scene,  show  us  that  she  is  speaking  of 
the  Blessed  Sacrament.  Among  the  paintings  in  the 
Catacombs,  we  not  unfrequently  find  this  emblem, 
beautifully  eloquent  in  its  varied  accompaniments. 
Sometimes,  it  is  a  vase  of  milk,  held  in  Pastor's  hand,^ 
or  lying  by  his  side  ;  ^  sometimes,  it  is  that  same  vase 
resting  on  a  hillock,  and  the  sheep  are  respectfully 
keeping  guard  over  it ; '"  sometimes,  it  is  the  Lamb  of 
God,  the  Pastor  of  pastors,  who  is  holding  it  hanging 
on  his  shepherd's  crook  ;  ^  but  all  this  means  and  con- 
veys the  same  mystery.  In  one  of  these  paintings, 
however,  the  teaching  is  almost  palpable  : '  the  precious 
vase  of  Milk  is  placed  on  the  back  of  the  Lamb,  who 
is  holding  the  palm-branch  of  his  triumph  over  death, 
though  it  cost  him  his  Blood ;  the  vase  is  thus  incor- 
porated, so  to  say,  with  him,  and  has  a  nimbus  round 
it,  as  holding  within  it  the  divine  Word,  the  food  of 
the  Angels,*  and  yet,  by  the  workings  of  love,  adapted 
to  suit  our  human  weakness. 

For,  as  St.  Augustine  so  admirably  explains  this 
doctrine,  "  Man  does  not  live  on  one  food,  and  Angel 
'*  on  another  :  truth,  divine  Wisdom,  is  the  one  food 


'  Eph.  iv.  13.  ^  Via  Appia.  De  Rossi,  i.  tav.  12. 

2  Ruinait,  Act.  sine.  p.  ST.  *  Via  Ardeatina,  Bosio,  249. 

'  r»V/^;j9ia.DERossi,i.tav.x.l6.  '  Via  Lavicaiia,  Bosio,  363. 
*  Via  Nomcntana,  Bosio,  455.        *  Wisd.  rvi.  20. 


TUESDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  399 

**  of  every  intelligence.^  The  Angels,  the  Powers, 
'*  the  heavenly  spirits,  feed  on  it ;  they  eat  of  it ;  they 
**  grow  upon  it,  and  yet  the  mysterious  food  lessens 
"  not.^  In  the  beginning  icas  the  Word,  and  the  Word 
"  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God :  ^  take  it,  if 
''  you  can  ;  eat  it ;  it  is  food.  Perhaps,  you  will  say 
''  to  me  :  *  Oh !  yes,  it  is  verily  food  ;  but  I — I  am  a 
"  *  babe ;  what  I  must  have  is  milk  ;  else  I  cannot 
"  ^  reach  that  Word  you  tell  me  of.'  Well !  since  it 
"  is  milk  you  require,  and  yet  there  is  no  other  food 
"  for  you  save  this  of  heaven  (the  Word),  he  will  pass 
"  through  the  flesh,  that  he  may  thus  be  brought 
"  within  reach  of  your  lips,^  for  food  does  not  become 
"  milk,  except  by  its  passing  through  flesh.  It  is 
"  thus  a  mother  does.  What  the  mother  eats  is  what 
"  her  child  drinks ;  but  the  little  one  not  being,  as 
"  yet,  strong  enough  to  take  the  bread  as  it  is,  the 
"  mother  eats  it,  and  then  gives  it  to  her  child  under 
"  a  form  that  very  sweetly  suits  the  babe.^  He  does 
"  not  receive  the  food  such  as  it  lay  upon  the  table, 
"  but  after  it  has  passed  through  the  flesh,  and  so 
"  made  suitable  to  the  child.^  Therefore  ivas  the 
"  Word  made  Flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  ;'^  and  man 
"  hath  eaten,  thus,  the  bread  of  Angels.^  Eternal 
"  Wisdom  came  down  even  to  us,  by  the  Flesh  and 
'*  Blood  of  Him  that  was  our  Saviour ;  he  came  as 
"  milk,  which  was  full  of  all  blessing  to  us."  ^  Oh  ! 
truly,  the  Bride  may  well  say  to  the  Spouse :  Thy 
breasts  are  better  than  wine^^  He,  beautiful  Wisdom, 
has  carried  out  his  loving  design.  From  the  first 
outset,  right  up  to  the  attainment  of  his  purpose,  there 
have  been  numberless  obstacles ;  but  he  has  mas- 
tered them  all,  and  with  a  power  to  which  one  thing 
alone  can  be  compared, — his  matchless  sweetness.^^ 

^  In  Psalm,  cxxxiv.  '^  St.  John,  i.  14 

2  In  Fsalm.  xxxiii.  ^  Ps.  Ixxvii.  25. 

^  St.  John,  i.  1.  ^  In  Ps.  xxx.  etcxxxiv.  Confess,  vii.  18. 

'  Ps.  cxix.  '°  Cant.  i.  1. 

*  In  Psalm,  xxxiii.  ^^  Wisd.  viii.  1. 

^  In  P  aim.  xxx. 


400 


TUESDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE. 


The  Antiphonary  of  the  celebrated  monastery  of 
Benchor,  in  Ireland,  published  by  Muratori,  and 
which  was  drawn  up  not  later  than  the  7th  Century, 
gives  us  the  following  Hymn,  which  is,  at  once,  dig- 
nified and  simple : 


HYMN. 


Quando  communicarent  Sacerdotes. 


Sancti,  venite, 
Chxisti  corpus  sumite, 
Sanctum  bibentes 
Quo  redempti  sanguinem. 

Salvati  Christi 
Corpore  et  sanguine, 
A  quo  refecti 
Laudes  dicamus  Deo. 

Dator  salutis, 
Christus  Filius  Deo 
Mundum  servavit 
Per  crucem  et  sanguinem. 

Pro  universis 
Immolatus  Dominus, 
Ipse  sacerdos 
Extitit  et  hostia. 

Lege  praeceptum 
Immolari  hostias, 
Qua  adumbrantur 
Divina  mysteria. 

Lucis  indultor 
Et  Salvator  omnium 
Praeclaram  Sanctis 
Largitus  est  gratiam. 

Accedant  omnes 
Pura  mente  creduli, 
Sumant  aetemam 
Salutis  custodiam. 

Sanctorum  custos 
Rector  quoque  Dominus, 
Vitam  perennem 
Largitur  credentibus. 

Ccelestem  panem 
Dat  esurientibus, 
De  fonte  vivo 
Prsebet  sitientibus. 


Come,  ye  just,  take  Christ's 
Body,  and  drink  tbe  sacred 
Blood,  whereby  ye  were 
redeemed. 

By  Christ's  Body  and  Blood 
we  were  saved ;  by  the  same 
being  fed,  let  us  sing  our 
praises  to  God. 

Christ,  the  Son,  the  giver  of 
salvation,  saved  the  world  to 
God  his  Father,  by  his  Cross 
and  Blood. 

This  Lord,  who  was  slain 
for  all,  was  himself  both  Priest 
and  Victim. 

It  was  commanded  in  the 
Law,  that  victims  should  be 
slain  ;  hereby  were  fore- 
shadowed our  divine  Mysteries. 

He  that  gives  the  light,  and 
is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  has 
given  to  the  just  a  splendid 
favour. 

Let  all  the  Faithful  approach 
with  pure  minds,  and  receive 
the  eternal  pledge  of  salvation. 

The  Lord,  who  is  keeper  and 
ruler  of  the  saints,  grants  life 
everlasting  to  them  that  be- 
lieve. 

To  the  hungry,  he  gives 
bread  from  heaven  ;  to  the 
thirsty,  he  gives  a  drink  from 
the  living  fount. 


TUESDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE. 


401 


He,  Christ  our  Lord,  Alpha 
and  Omega,  he  is  coming,  who 
is  to  come  to  judge  mankind. 


Alpha  et  Omega 
Ipse  Christus  Doniinus, 
Venit  venturus 
Judicare  homines. 


Our  readers,  after  this  cliarniiiigly  simple  appeal, 
which  was  so  long  heard  in  Erin,  will  be  interested, 
too,  by  the  following  lyric  Antiphon,  which,  formerly, 
was  used  in  the  Church  of  Gaul.  It  was  sung  at  the 
moment  of  Communion,  on  days  of  great  solemnity, 
as  an  invitation  calling  the  Faithful  to  a  participa- 
tion in  the  Immortal  Mystery. 


Come,  0  ye  people  !  receive 
the  sacred  and  immortal  mys- 
tery, and  the  libation  prepared 
for  you. 

Let  us  approach  with  fear 
and  faith,  holding  out  clean 
hands  ;  let  us  take,  in  commu- 
nion, the  price  of  our  repent- 
ance ;  for  it  was  for  our  sakes 
that  the  Lamb  was  offered  as 
a  sacrifice  to  God  the  Father. 

Him  alone  let  us  adore,  him 
let  us  glorify  :  and,  with  the 
Angels,  sing  :  Alleluia  ! 


Venite,  populi,  ad  sacrum 
et  immortale  mysterium,  et 
libamen  agendum. 

Cum  timore  et  fide  acce- 
damus  manibus  mundis, 
poenitentise  munus  commu- 
nicemus,  quoniam  propter 
nos  Agnus  Dei  Patris  sacri- 
ficium  propositum  est. 

Ipsum  solum  adoremus, 
ipsum  glorificemus  :  cum 
Angelis  clamantes :  Alleluia. 


TOI,   X. 


21> 


402  WEDNESDAY   \MTH1N   THE   OCTAVE. 


WEDNESDAY 

WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE    OF    CORPUS    CHRISTI. 

Let    us   adore    Christ,    the  Christum    regem    adore- 

King,  who  ruleth  the  nations :  mus  dominantem  gentibus, 

who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to  qui   se   manducantibus  dat 

them  that  eat  him.  spiritus  pinguedinem. 

My  days  are  vanished  like  smoTie,  and  my  hones  aregroicn 
dry  like  fuel  for  the  fire  :  I  am  smitten  as  grass,  and 
my  heart  is  withered  :  because  I  forgot  to  cat  my  bread. 
Thus  sadly  speaks  the  hundred  and  first  Psalm,  whose 
title  is:  Prayer  of  the  poor  man,  trhen  he  was  anxious, 
and  poured  out  his  supplication  before  the  Lord.^  And 
who  is  this  pfoor  man  ?  It  is  Adam  ;  it  is  the  whole 
human  race,  the  inheritor  of  Adam's  miseries.  God 
had  given  him  his  divine  law,  as  his  food  ;  as  the  bread 
of  his  soul,  he  had  given  him  the  Word  of  God.  In- 
stigated by  the  old  serpent,  and  led  on  by  the  woman, 
Adam  took  the  forbidden  fruit ;  he  forgot  the  Word. 
Deservedly  has  he  been  blighted  as  the  grass  of  the 
field:  deservedly  has  his  heart  been  withered;  for  he 
has  despised  the  fruit  of  life,  he  has  drunk  poison,  he 
has  preferred  to  eat  ashes, ^  rather  than  the  nourish- 
ment that  was  made  for  him. 

But,  lo  !  there  appeareth  the  true  bread  of  heaven, 
He,  in  whose  Flesh  thou  mayest,  if  thou  wilt,  find  the 
Word  thou  hadst  forgotten.  Cry  out,  from  the  depths 
of  thy  poverty,  to  heaven  ;  regain  thy  former  plenty. 
Eat !  for  thou  art  member  of  Him  who  hath  said  :  / 
am  the  tiring  Bread,  icJiich  came  down  from  heaven? 
Thou  hadst  forgotten  to  eat  thy  bread ;  but,  now  that 

»  Ps.  ci.  1,4.  2  Ibid.  cL  10.  »  St.  John,  vi.  5 1 . 


WEDNESDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE.  403 

Christ  is  crucified,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  ke- 
MEMBER  ;  and  shall  he  converted  unto  the  Lord}  Poor 
icithered  grass  !  thy  flesh^  shall  flourish  again,  hecause 
of  the  Saviour's  Blood ;  ^  it  shall  become,  as  St.  Bernard 
tells  thee,  like  that  holy  herb  of  the  virgin  field,  that 
lies  in  the  crib  for  thy  sake.'' 

Bird  of  the  desert  !  bird  of  the  night,  that  sattest 
moaning  on  the  heap  of  ruins,  thy  loneliness  was 
scofied  at  by  the  enemy  that  had  scared  thee.  But 
the  Lord  God,  thy  Redeemer,  hath  broken  the  captive's 
chains.  Peoples  and  kings,  gathered  together  in  Sion, 
declare  his  name  in  unity.  It  is  their  proclamation  of 
his  victory,  the  declaration  of  his  greatness  and  his 
strength.^  ''  Jerusalem,  then,"  says  St.  Augustine, 
"  Jerusalem,  our  mother,  having  come  back  from  exile, 
"  and  surrounded  by  her  many  children,  ansivereth  him, 
"  her  God,  in  unity.  That  God  is  one ;  the  Church  is 
"  unity ;  unity  alone  can  give  response  to  the  God  who 
"  is  One.^^  ^  And  Jesus,  who  is  at  the  head,  and  is  the 
head,  of  this  triumphant  unity,  which  overthrows  the 
kingdom  of  Babylonish  discord  and  disunion,  gives 
himself  this  response  to  his  Father  :  In  the  midst  of  the 
Church,  will  I  praise  thee ;  in  the  sight  of  a  great 
Church,  I  ivill  pay  my  voics,  I  will  offer  the  victim 
which  is  to  save  them ;  and  the  poor  shall  eaf  and 
shall  he  filled;  and  their  hearts,  which  before  were 
parched  up,  shall  become  freshened  unto  life,  and  shall 
live  for  ever  and  ever.'^ 

Praise  and  glory  be  to  this  Christ,  the  Saviour,  who 
thus,  by  his  Flesh  offered  up  in  Sacrifice,  restores  to 
us  the  bread  of  life  and  understanding  !  **  0  Body  of 
Jesus !  most  august  temple  built  by  eternal  Wisdom 
to  himself  !  It  is  from  his  Side,'^  opened  by  a  spear, 
that   comes   the   sacred  stream,    which    brings   the 

1  Ps.  xxi.  28.  6  jn  Psalm,  ci. 

2  Is.  xl.  6-8.  7  Ps.  xxi.  23-27. 
2  St.  Aug.  in  Ps.  ci.                               ^  Ecclus.  xv.  3. 

*  St.  Bernard,  ad  mil.  tempi,  vi.  ^  Ezechiel,  xlvii   2 

«Ps.  ci.  24. 


404  AVEDNESDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

"Word  to  our  parched  lips.  He  hath  visited  the 
earth,  and  inebriated  it ;  he  hath  prepared  their  food 
for  the  children  of  men.  But  the  cup  he  proffers,  is 
a  chalice  of  Sacrifice  ;  the  table  he  sets  up,  is  an 
Altar:  for  so  is  the  preparation  of  the  food  he  gives.  ^ 
It  is  a  Victim  who  gives  us  his  own  Flesh  to  eat,  and 
his  own  Blood  to  drink  ;  so  that  Immolation,  Sacrifice, 
is  the  direct  and  necessary  preparation  of  the  banquet 
he  puts  before  his  guests. 

Yea,  are  not  they  themselves  Christ's  food  at  that 
sacred  table  ?  He  gives  himself,  but  he  intends  to  have 
these  his  guests  in  return,  and  make  them  all  his  own. 
We  are  those  guests  ;  and  what  other  preparation  can 
we  make,  but  that  which  he  goes  through, — Sacrifice  ? 
Such,  such  must  be  the  preparation  !     Ita  est  prcepa- 
ratio  ejus  !     Observe,  how,  when  Wisdom  is  shown  us, 
in  Scripture,  as  setting  forth  the  table,  and  inviting 
the  little  ones  to  eat  His  Bread  and  drink  His  Wine, 
he  does  not  slay  one,  but  many  victims :  He  hath  slain 
his  victims  !  ^  After  his  Incarnation,  he  uses  the  same 
language ;  he  sends  his  messengers,  he  invites  us  to 
the  marriage-feast,  saying:  I  have  prepared  the  feast ; 
my  beeves  and  failings  are  slain^  my  Victims  are  ready; 
come  !  for  all  things  are  ready  !  ^     What  means  this, 
but  that,  for  the  very  members  of  Christ, — who  are  the 
Victims  fattened,  as  our  Invitatory  expresses  it,  with 
the  fatness  of  the  Spiint, — the  true  immediate  prepara- 
tion for  the  sacred  banquet  is  immolation, — that  is, 
Sacrifice, — that  is,  the  Mass, —  celebrated,  or  assisted 
at,  in  most  perfect  possible  union  with  the  great,  the 
principal,  Victim.     Quoniamy  ita  est  Fra>paratio  ejus! 
Christians !  you   have   been  brought  around    the 
one  same  Table,  by  the  same  love,  the  same  thirst, 
which  you  have  all  for  the  strong  living  God  ;  *  under- 
stand this  well,  then :  he  will  give  himself  to  you  the 
more  completely  and  intimately,  in  proportion  as  the 


1  Ps.  Ixiv.  10.  '  St.  Matth.  xxii.  4. 

'  Prov.  ix.  2-6.  *  Ps.  xli.  3. 


WEDNESDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  405 

same  Sacrifice,  which  gives  him  to  you,  shall  have 
made  you  become  the  food  of  his  own  longing  love. 
The  hour  of  the  Sacrifice  is  that,  wherein  the  Bride 
finds  her  well  Beloved  under  the  tree  of  the  Cross, 
takes  him  as  a  bunch  of  myrrh,  and  puts  him  next 
her  heart :  ^  it  is  the  hour  wherein  the  King  takes 
her  into  his  divine  stores,  and  gives  her  to  partake  of 
the  vine  of  Engaddi,  after  he  has  pressed  out  the  pre- 
cious drink  in  the  wine-press  of  his  love.^  And  for 
Him,  the  Spouse,  what  is  this  same  hour  ?  It  is  one 
of  harvest,  one  of  vintage.  It  is  then  that  the  south- 
wind,  the  Holy  Spirit  who  produces  the  sacred 
Mysteries,  breathes  upon  the  Bride,  who  is  the  garden 
of  Christ,  and  fills  her  with  the  fragrance  of  grace  ;  ^ 
the  Divine  Spouse  then  comes  down  into  this  his 
garden,  that  he  may  eat  of  the  fruits  of  his  trees,  and 
gather  the  myrrh  and  spices  that  grow  there,  and 
drink  the  wine  for  which  he  so  thirsted,  as  that  it 
drew  him  down  from  heaven  ;  ^  it  is  the  love  which 
we  can  so  richly  and  warmly  give  him,^  and  he  so 
loves  our  love,  as  to  deign  to  call  it  the  best  of  wiiie, 
worthy  for  the  Beloved  to  drink,  and  for  his  divine 
lips  to  relish  and  enjoy. ^ 

Then,  let  the  soul  prepare  herself  for  the  banquet 
of  her  Beloved,  by  the  means  of  that  same  which  he 
expects  from  her.  Let  her  rise,  early  in  the  morning, 
with  this  thought  upon  her,  as  he  himself  does.''  Let 
her  go  down  to  the  garden,®  to  see  if  the  flowers  be  in 
order,  and  the  lilies,  he  loves  so  much,  be  fresh ;  ^  let 
her  go  forth  into  the  field,  and  gather  for  him  fruits, 
both  new  and  old ;  ^^  let  her  examine  the  vineyard 
which  the  Spouse  values  so  highly,  as  to  reserve  the 
vintage  to  himself;  ^^  let  her  see  if  the  vineyard  be  in 

iCant.  i.  12.  '  Cant.vii.  12. 

2  Ibid.  i.  3,  15  ;  ii.  3,  4.  8  j^j^.  ^i  10. 

^  Ibid.  iy.  16.  ^  Ibid.  ii.  16. 

*  Ibid.  V.  1.  10  Ji,id.  vii.  11,  13. 

^Ibid.v.6.  ^^  Ibid.  via.  ]\,] 2. 

^  Ibid.  vii.  9. 


406  ■s\t;i)nesday  within  the  octave. 

flower,  and  if  the  flowers  be  ready  to  bring  forth  fruit,  ^ 
and  give  promise  of  those  fragrant  clusters  which  are 
so  much  sought  after  by  her  Lord.^  Then,  finally, 
let  her  repair  with  him  into  her  mother's  house,  the 
holy  Church,  and  there,  in  the  Sacrifice,  receive  from 
Jesus  the  precious  lessons  of  how  to  love  God,^  and, 
like  a  new  Esther,  give,  in  her  turn,  to  her  Assuerus, 
that  generous  wine,  which  induces  the  King  to  lend 
her  his  own  power,  grant  her  requests,  and  destroy 
her  enemies."*  The  Psalmist  tells  us,  in  his  bold 
language  of  inspiration,  that  there  is  an  inebriation 
on  God's  part,  and  that  he  is  then  terrible  to  the 
powers  of  hell ;  ^  but  there  is  mention  made  also,  in 
the  sacred  volume,  of  a  cup  of  choice  wine  presented 
by  the  Bride,  in  her  mother's  house,  to  the  Spouse,^ 
— it  is  the  wine  he  himself  has  left  to  his  Church,  that 
mother  of  ours  !  For  this  purpose,  wishing  to  profi'er 
to  her  Spouse  the  wine  which  gladdens,  and  the  bread 
which  pleases  his  heart, '  the  Bride  takes  him  and 
leads  him  to  that  house  of  her  mother,  ®  yea,  into  that 
blessed  spot  where  she  first  received  the  life  of  grace 
and  truth.  ^ 

There,  in  that  sanctuary  of  love,  Rebecca,  the 
mother  of  the  two  people  that  are  hostile  one  to  the 
other,^°  prepares  for  her  Spouse  Isaac  the  food  he 
loves  so  much,^^  and  is  to  induce  him  to  impart  his 
blessing  upon  his  favourite  child.  Esau  is  a  type  of 
the  stiff-necked  and  carnal  Jew,  who  despises  the 
Church,  and  heeds  not  the  spirit  of  the  promises  ;  he 
dwells  at  a  distance  from  home ;  he  is  in  pursuit  of 
wild  beasts,  and  they  are  an  image  of  his  own  fierce 
instincts.  Jacob,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  peaceful  man, 
and  keeps  with  his  mother  at  home,  ^^  and  gives  a 


1  Cant.vii.  12.  '  Ps.  ciii.  U. 

2  Ibid.  vii.  7,  8.  8  Cant.  viii.  2. 
"  Ibid.  viii.  2.  ^  Ibid.  iii.  4. 

*  Esth.  V.  4-8 ;  vii.  \-\X  ^"  Gen.  xxv.  23. 

«  Ps.  Ixxvii.  66,  66.  ''  Ibid,  xxvii.  H. 

«  Cant.  viii.  2.  i'  Ibid.  xxv.  27. 


WEDNESDAY  WITHIN   THE   OCTAVF.  407 

helping  hand  to  the  valiant  woman,  who,  with  faith, 
carries  out  the  designs  of  heaven.  Kebecca  robes  him 
in  Esau's  garments,  the  precious  garments  of  the  first- 
born, which  are  in  the  mother's  keeping  ;  they  are 
the  insignia  of  priesthood ;  and  when  Jacob  is  vested 
in  them,  he  takes  two  kids  from  the  flock,  and  im- 
molates them.  These,  as  the  Fathers  tell  us,  are  an 
image,  both  of  the  meekness  of  Christ,  ^  and  of  the 
two  peoples,  Jew  and  Gentile,  which,  by  being  made 
one  in  his  Blood,'^  are  become  the  food  of  God.^  But 
it  is  Eebecca  who  guides  Jacob  in  all  he  does ;  she 
receives  from  him  the  victim  he  has  slain,  and  of  it 
makes  the  food  so  loved  by  her  Spouse  :  in  this,  she 
represents  the  Church,  who,  in  the  holy  Sacrifice, 
directs  the  Priest  and  unites  the  people,  and  so 
prepares  for  her  Lord  the  food  she  knows  is  so  dear 
to  him.'* 

The  same  great  teaching  had  been  given  even 
earlier  than  this,  and  with  as  much  clearness.  It 
was  under  the  oak  of  Mambre,  and  in  the  days  of 
tent- life.  Abraham,  the  father  of  believers,  there  re- 
ceived three  guests  ;  they  represented  the  mystery  of 
the  holy  Trinity.  In  the  name  of  his  countless  chil- 
dren, he  ofi'ers  to  the  three  mysterious  guests  a  repast, 
which  is  so  full  of  symbolism,  as  it  is  described  to  us 
in  the  sacred  volume.^  Penetrating  into  the  mystery 
of  Three  in  One,  Abraham  thus  speaks  to  his  three 
guests  as  though  they  w^ere  one :  Lord !  if  I  have 
thus  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  pass  not  away  from 
thy  servant.  He  then  presses  them  to  take  food  ;  and 
they  readily  consent.  Then,  Abraham  made  haste 
into  the  tent  to  Sara,  and  said  unto  her  :  Make  haste  ! 
temper  together  three  measures  of  flour,  and  make  cakes 
iqjon  the  hearth/    He  is  full  of  considerateness,  says 


*  S.  Ambr.  De  Jacob  et  vit.  beat.,  lib.  ii.  c.  2. 
*Epb.  ii.  14-16. 

'  Comm.  in  Gen.,  lib.  ii.  ap.  Euch. 

*  Gren.  xxvii.  ^  Ibid,  xviii.  1-9 


408  WEDNESDAY    WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 

St.  Ambrose ;  lie  cannot  think  of  depriving  his  wife 
of  a  share  in  the  work  of  religion  he  has  in  hand  ;  he 
would  have  her  join  him  in  all  things  ;  she  is  a  type 
of  the  Church.  Let  man  then  hasten  and  kill  the 
fatted  calf,  in  figure  of  the  Lord's  Passion  ;  ^  the 
woman's  part  is  to  prepare  man  himself,  and  make 
him  the  food  of  God ;  for  the  three  measures  of  flour, 
taken  by  Sara,  signify  the  threefold  posterity  of  Noe, 
which  forms  the  three  races  of  the  human  family. 2 
They  are  again  mentioned,  and  with  the  same  im- 
port in  the  Gospel ;  ^  and  the  woman,  the  Church, 
again  appears,  making  the  bread  of  heavenly  wheat 
out  of  them  ;  '^  it  is  the  Bread  which  is  the  Body  of 
Christ;  it  is  eaten  by  man  in  the  Eucharistic  banquet ; 
and  thus  Christ  and  man  become  the  food  of  God  and 
the  joy  of  the  holy  Trinity. 

Oh !  exclaims  St.  Ambrose,  how  happy  that  man 
who  thus  becomes  sweet  food  to  divine  "Wisdom !  ^ 
But  this  holy  zeal,  this  earnestness  of  faith,  this  fer- 
vour of  devotion,  which,  as  the  same  saint  says, 
should  transform  us  spiritually  into  a  nourishment 
which  will  give  pleasure  to  God^, — where  are  we  to  get 
them,  if  not  from  the  Church,  whose  special  work  it 
is  to  provide  us  with  all  this  in  the  sacred  mysteries  ? 
And  this  preparation,  both  for  the  Head  and  his 
members,  being  the  Sacrifice, — could  the  Christian  do 
better  than  let  himself  be  led,  in  all  simplicity,  by 
this  Mother  of  the  living?  She  will  lead  him  to 
God  by  her  sacred  Liturgy.  Surely,  he  may  un- 
reservedly commit  his  spiritual  direction  to  this  holy 
Mother  Church,  seeing  that  our  Lord  himself  has  left 
everything  to  her,  in  what  regards  the  administration 
of  this  Sacrament  of  his  love  ;  she  is  to  regulate  the 
ceremonies,  the  solemnity,  the  preparations,  every- 
thing, in  a  word,  which  is   to  accompany  the  great 

'  Am"br.  De  Abr.  lib.  i.,  c.  5.  '  In  Psalm,  cxviii.  Serm.  18. 

*  Ap.  Euch.  Comm.  in  Gen.  lib.  ii.         *  Ibid. 
3  Miitth.  xiii.  33. 

*  Johan.  xii.,  24,  Ap.  Ambr.  Serm.  13. 


WEDNESDAY   WITHIN   THE   OCTAVE.  409 

Sacrifice,  of  which  Communion  is  to  be  the  comple- 
tion and  the  issue. 

The  whole  of  this  Feast,  which  we  have  been  cele- 
brating during  these  eight  days,  tells  us  very  elo- 
quently, that  Communion  is  not  a  work  of  private 
devotion.  Private  devotion  is  not  an  adequate  pre- 
paration for  man's  receiving  this  visit  from  his  Lord, — 
a  visit,  whose  scope  is  to  bring  us  closer  and  closer 
into  union  with  Christ  our  Head,  and  all  his  mem- 
bers, who,  in  the  immolation  of  the  one  universal 
Sacrifice,  are  all  made  one  grand  offering  to  the  glory 
of  the  Father.  For  a  soul  that  longs  to  be  united  to 
her  Lord,  and  gain  that  full  Catholic  point  of  view, 
which  is  the  one  intended  by  God, — the  by  far 
surest  means  is,  to  have  a  clear  understanding  of 
what  the  sacred  function  is,  and  to  follow,  atten- 
tively, the  holy  ceremonies  and  formulas,  as  far  as 
they  come  within  the  reach  of  the  Faithful.  Let 
not  that  soul  be  afraid  of  having  her  recollection  in- 
terfered with,  or  her  love  cooled,  by  taking  the  way 
of  the  Church  for  her  own.  She  is  quite  right  in 
being  desirous  to  approach  the  holy  table  in  the  right 
dispositions ;  then,  let  her  do  as  the  Church  does. 
She  will  be  all  the  more  pleasing  to  that  Jesus  who 
is  coming  to  her,  she  will  be  all  the  better  prepared 
for  the  union  with  him,  as  a  member  of  his  mystical 
Body  the  Church,  the  more  she  is  a  faithful  child 
of  that  Church;  and  if  she  be  that,  if  she  be  a 
disciple  of  that  great  school,  if  she  live  under  the 
mighty  influence  of  the  divine  Liturgy,  she  will  never 
think  of  making  it  a  preparation  for  holy  Communion 
that  she  should  shut  her  eyes  and  ears  to  what  the 
Church  does  during  the  great  Sacrifice ;  no,  all  that  is 
but  unconscious  egotism  and  narrow  individualism,  the 
ordinary  result  of  private  methods. 

The  Apostles  and  their  immediate  disciples,  the 
authorised  founders  of  the  Liturgies  of  the  first  Age  of 
the  Church,  had  no  fears  about  their  lessening  the 
devotion   of  the  early  Christian,  by  the  magnificent 


410  WEDNESDAY   WITHIN   THE    OCTA^'^. 

and  gorgeous  ceremonial,  which  they  made  inseparable 
from  a  participation  in  the  sacred  Mysteries.     So  was 
it,  also,  with  our  ancestors,  the  Martyrs ;  when  ob- 
liged, by  persecution,  to  shelter  in  the  catacombs,  they 
had  the  Mass  celebrated  there,  with  a  solemnity  such  as 
we,  now-a-days,  never  witness.  Thus  was  it  in  the  case 
of  St.  Xystus  the  Second,  the  Pope  of  St.  Laurence  ; 
when  he  was  martyred,  he  was  seated  on  his  throne  in 
one  of  those  glorious  hiding-places;  the  Sacrifice  of  the 
Mass  was  being  offered  up,  and  the  Pontiff,  in  apos- 
tolic  majesty,    was    surrounded    by   the    numerous 
ministers  officiating  in  the  holy  function  ;  they  feared 
not  to  brave  imperial  edicts  and  persecutions,  provided 
they  could  but  keep  up  the  solemnity  of  the  Christian 
rites,  for  these  gave  the  Faithful  to  partake,  in  one 
same  banquet,  of  the  Bread  of  the  strong,  which  united 
them  all  together,  and  gave  each  partaker  courage. 
So,  too,  when  the  Church  gained   freedom  by  her 
triumph  ;   she  continued   these  solemn  rites  of  her 
Sacrifice,  she  added  to  their  solemnity :  the  gold  and 
blaze  of  her  basilicas  were  faithful  and  joyous  perpe- 
tuators  of  what  had  been  so  loved  from  the  very  com- 
mencement, and  so  bravely  practised  in  the  crypts  of 
her  cemeteries.     The  Fathers  and  holy  Doctors  of  the 
Church,  the  Saints  of  the  great  times  of  her  indepen- 
dence, all  made  this  the  habitual  preparation  for  their 
receiving  the  blessed  Sacrament, — the  magnificence  of 
the  Liturgy,  and  the  solemnity  of  the  holy  Sacrifice, 
at  which  all  the  people  assisted,   and  all  took  that 
active  participation  in  it,  which  we  have  already  de- 
scribed.^    And  yet,  we  never  hear  that  this  obligatory 
crowded  assistance,  this  exterior  pomp,  this  sustained 
attention  to  the  sacred  ceremonies,  ever  impeded  their 
fervour,  or  kept  our  Lord  from  having  Saints  among 
his  people.     We  never  find  anything  to  indicate  that 
their  appreciation  of  divine  things  was  thereby  dulled, 
or  that  their  saintliness  got  impaired  by  it,  or  that 

»  Page  177. 


WEDNESDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  411 

society, — of  which  they  were  the  guides,  respected  and 
obeyed, — was  kept  in  a  state  of  backwardness,  or  un- 
fitted to  bear  comparison,  in  anything  worth  com- 
parison, with  our  own  times.  But,  perhaps,  the 
Church  of  those  ages  would  have  shown  more  wisdom, 
and  more  spirituality,  had  she  left  these  sons  and 
daughters  of  hers  all  to  themselves,  to  take  their  own 
meditations  in  silence  and  solitude  ?  The  thought 
would  be  a  very  untrue,  not  to  say,  a  most  impertinent 
one.  Certainly,  such  an  idea  had  not  yet  made  way 
in  the  13th,  l4th,  or  15th  Centuries,  when  faith  and 
genius  built  those  glorious  Cathedrals,  which  are  still 
the  pride  of  our  Europe  ;  and  they  were  built,  that 
the  ceremonies  of  religious  worship  might  have  a  more 
worthy  development,  and  attract  more  abundant  wit- 
nesses, and  produce  holiness  in  the  children  of  the 
Church,  who  then  preferred  her  ways  to  any  others. 

But, — may  not  these  times  of  ours  be  happier  ones 
for  piety  ?  May  not  the  time  have  come,  when,  being 
made  independent  of  the  senses  by  improved  systems 
of  asceticism  scarcely  dreamt  of  in  those  earlier  ages, 
the  human  soul,  when  it  would  go  to  God,  has  no 
further  need  of  those  exterior  helps  which  were  all 
very  well  for  centuries  when  Augustine,  or  Leo  the 
Great,  or  Hildegarde,  or  Bernard,  lived,  but  are  quite 
unnecessary  for  a  generation  so  highly  spiritual  as 
our  own  ?  The  fruits  of  a  tree  must  decide  whether 
it  be  a  good  or  a  poor  one.i^  One  should  examine 
if  there  have  been  satisfactory  results  from  the 
abandoning  the  paths  marked  out  by  the  Church,  and 
so  zealously  kept  to  by  our  Fathers  in  the  Faith. 

The  16th  Century  was  made  to  witness  hell  triumph- 
ing over  the  ruins  of  Altars  in  all  the  northern  coun- 
tries of  Europe,  especially  in  our  own  England.  The 
long  interruption  of  liturgical  solemnity  brought  with 
it,  amongst  many  of  the  Faithful  of  these  later  times, 
a  lowering,  and,  with  some,  a  total  ignorance,  of  what 

»  St.  Luke,  vi.  44. 


412  WEDNESDAY   WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE. 

the  Mass,  as  a  Sacrifice,  is.  The  great  mystery  of  the 
Eucharist  seemed,  to  certain  pious  souls,  to  be  nothing 
else  than  our  Lord's  presence,  who  abides  among  us 
for  the  purpose  of  receiving  our  private  Visits,  and  of 
himself  occasionally  coming  to  be  our  Guest  in  Holy 
Communion.  That  was  all  that  was  meant  by  the 
Eucharist,  as  far  as  the  practical  knowledge  of  these 
people  went  !  As  to  that  part  of  the  Eucharistic 
mystery,  which  consists  in  our  Lord's  being  mystically 
immolated  by  the  wonderful  words  of  the  Consecra- 
tion,— and,  thereby,  expiating  for  the  sins  of  men, 
paying  to  his  eternal  Father,  in  our  name,  the  great 
debts  of  adoration  and  thanksgiving ; — as  to  his, 
thereby,  daily  receiving  the  fervent  supplications  of 
our  Mother,  the  Church,  and,  because  of  her  suppliant 
worship  in  union  with  his  own  Sacrifice,  his  warding 
off  from  this  poor  world  the  chastisements  it  deserves  ; 
in  other  words,  as  to  the  Mass,  it  says  much  less  to 
the  heart  of  these  good  people,  than  does  Exposition, 
or  Benediction,  or  Forty-Hours,  or  even  a  mere  Visit 
to  the  Blessed  Sacrament  made  very  privately  and 
very  quietly.  For  them,  Mass  is  but  a  preliminary 
condition  for  having  something  else  which  they  look 
■  forward  to  ;  Mass,  in  their  minds,  is  but  a  means  for 
producing  the  Real  Presence.  On  this  account, 
though  the  Church  has  formally  discountenanced  the 
practice  of  having  the  Blessed  Sacrament  exposed 
during  a  low  Mass,  the  Christians,  of  whom  we  are 
speaking,  would  far  prefer  being  present  at  such  a 
Mass,  than  at  one  where  the  Church's  wishes  are 
respected ;  and  their  reason  is,  that  the  Exposition 
gives  them  all  they  want,  and  all  they  expect  from  the 
Mass.  As  for  High  Mass,  (unless  it  happened  to  be 
one  with  Exposition,)  they  would  rather  not  go  to  it,  for 
it  is  a  distraction  to  them  !  Sometimes,  however,  they 
will  go  to  a  solemn  Mass  ;  but,  as  to  the  powerful  in- 
fluence for  good,  which  the  heavenly  agency  of  the 
Liturgy  would  exercise  upon  them,  if  they  would  but 
allow  it, — they  have  evidently  no  notion  of  such  a 


WEDNESDAY  WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE.  413 

fact,  for  you  will  see  them  giving  all  their  attention  to 
some  book  they  have  brought  with  them,  and  out  of 
which  they  are  taking  reflections,  which  though  quite 
correct  in  themselves,  have  no  relation  to  the  great 
Sacrifice  at  which  they  are  assisting.  The  Elevation- 
Bell  tells  them  nothing  but  this, — that  our  Lord  has 
descended  upon  the  Altar  ;  they,  of  course,  adore  ;  but 
they  never  think  of  uniting  themselves  with  the  divine 
Victim,  or  of  ofi'ering  themselves,  together  with  the 
Church,  for  the  sublime  intentions  which  she  expresses 
in  her  Liturgy  of  each  Feast  or  Season.  If  they  intend 
to  go  to  Communion  on  that  day,  they  will  perhaps 
lay  aside,  for  some  moments  previous  to  approaching 
the  rails,  the  prayer-book  which  they  had  been  using, 
that  they  may  sweetly  occupy  themselves  with  the 
sentiments  excited  by  its  reading.  And  thus  are  they 
occupied  up  to  the  moment  when,  having  been  admitted 
to  the  Sacrament  of  Unity,  our  Lord  must  seek  in  the 
distant  grace  of  their  Baptism,  rather  than  in  their 
sentiments  and  thoughts  of  the  moment,  that  indis- 
pensable quality  of  Member  of  the  Church,  which 
Communion  demands  of  us  above  every  other,  and 
which  it  is  intended  to  confirm  within  us. 

Is  it,  then,  to  be  wondered  at,  that,  with  very  many 
souls,  Religion,  whose  true  basis  is  Sacrifice,  rests  on 
little  besides  a  vague  sentimentality  ?  This  gradually 
effaces  the  fundamental  notions  of  God's  dominion^ 
and  sovereign  justice ;  of  worship,  reparation,  service 
and  homage,  which  are  our  first  duties  towards  our 
Maker.  Whence  comes  there,  in  so  many  Christians 
who  are  in  the  habit  of  going  to  the  Sacraments,  that 
weakness  of  faith,  that  total  absence  of  the  practical 
notion  of  the  Church,  which  made  itself  so  painfully 
felt  to  our  Bishops  at  the  time  of  the  Council  ?  It  is, 
because,  together  with  the  grandeur  of  the  Liturgy,  to 
which  they  are  total  strangers,  public  Worship  has 
lost  its  social  character ;  Communion,  consequently, 
has  lost  its  full  meaning;  and  leaves  such  of  its  receivers 
in  their  state  of  contented  isolation,  for  it  is  not,  as 


414  WEDNESDAY    AVITHIX    THE    OCTAVB. 

far  as  they  are  concerned,  the  bond  of  unity,  through 
Christ  the  Head,  with  the  whole  Body,  ^vhereof  they 
were  made  members  by  Baptism.  To  say  nothing  of 
those  nominal  Catholics,  with  whom  the  word  Church 
seems  to  be  a  term  one  meets  with  in  history,  but 
which  has  no  present  objective  existence, — are  there 
many  even  among  those  who  are  frequent,  or  daily, 
communicants,  who  understand  this  axiom  of  St. 
Augustine  :  "  The  Eucharist  is  our  dailf/  Bread,  for 
**  the  virtue  it  implies  is  txity  ;  and  unity  of  the 
"  members  in  a  body,  is  the  health  of  that  body,  and 
"  the  health  of  each  member  ?  ^ 

Twice  before,  had  two  sons  of  St.  Benedict  taken  up 
the  defence  of  the  adorable  Sacrament  against  its 
adversaries ;  ^  and,  in  the  13th  Century,  there  came 
forward,  in  the  same  cause,  a  monk  of  Cluny,  by  name 
Algerus :  he  composed  a  volume  worthy  of  its  two  pre- 
decessors ;  and  though  its  dogmatic  character  excludes 
everything  approaching  to  hyperbole,  yet  we  find  this 
same  truth  expressed  thus  forcibly  :  "  The  Myster}'  of 
"  Christ's  true  Flesh  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  is  a 
*'  profit  to  them  only  who,  in  the  same  Sacrament,  re- 
"  ceive  also  the  mystery  of  his  members,  that  is,  union 
"  with  the  entire  body,  which  is  the  Church  ;  because, 
"  just  as  the  head  has  no  vital  influence,  when  sepa- 
'^  rated  from  the  body,  so  Christ  confers  life  upon  no 
"  man,  without  there  be  unity  of  the  body  of  the 
"  Church :  for,  as  Christ  is  inseparable  from  his 
"  mystical  body,  so  he  is  never  received,  in  his  Sacra- 
"  ment,  save  in  his  entirety,  that  is,  as  incorporated 
"  with  us,  by  the  mystery  of  his  and  our  union."  ^ 

The  doctrine  here  expressed  is  very  profound.  It 
enables  us  to  appreciate  the  magnificence  of  such  a 
sight  as  was  to  be  seen,  in  former  times,  of  the  whole 


*  St.  Aug.  Scrm.  57,  137. 

2  Paschasius  liadbert  and  our  Lanfranc,  against  Scotua  Erigenes, 
and  Bcrengarius. 

'  De  Sacrum.  Corp.  et  Sang.  Dom.,  lib.  i.  c.  3. 


WEDNESDAY    WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE.  415 

assembly  of  the  Faithful  concluding  the  solemnity  of 
the  Sacrifice  by  all  communicating  on  the  divine 
Victim.  This  unanimous  meeting  at  the  holy  table 
of  all  them  that  had  been  made  members  of  the 
Church  by  Baptism,  is  a  sight  which  we  cannot  expect 
to  behold  in  an  age  like  our  own,  which  is  so  full  of 
immorality,  infidelity,  and  cowardly  human  respect. 
And  those  of  the  Church's  children,  whose  fervent 
assiduity  at  the  divine  banquet  is  a  consolation  to  her 
amidst  the  general  neglect, — even  they  cannot  always 
wait  for  the  late  hour  of  High  Mass,  though  it  would 
bring  them  closer  into  the  spirit  of  the  mystery  of 
Communion,  and  would  be  more  in  accordance  with 
the  desires  of  the  Church.  They  are  generally 
prevented  from  such  a  practice  by  their  delicate  health, 
or  by  other  obstacles,  which  are,  no  doubt,  very  diffi- 
cult to  be  removed ;  and  our  loving  Mother,  the 
Church,  is  quite  aware  of  the  moral  impossibility  of 
anything  like  a  general  return  to  the  ancient  practice. 
Still,  we  cannot  forbear  regretting  the  difficulty,  and 
envying  those  happy  times,  when  each  of  the  Faith- 
ful partook  sacramentally  of  the  Sacrifice,  which  was 
celebrated  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  congregation.^ 
Yet,  she  does  not  press  her  wishes  in  this  regard, 
except  for  the  sacred  Ministers,  who  are  assistants  at 
the  Sacrifice  ;  and,  even  for  them,  she  does  not  pre- 
scribe it  as  an  express  command :  *'  Let  them  know," 
she  says,  in  her  Council  of  Trent,  *'  that  it  is 
''  extremely  becoming,  that,  at  least,  on  Sundays  and 
'*  solemn  Feasts,  they  should  receive  holy  Communion 
"  at  the  Altar  where  they  give  their  ministry."  2  The 
Fathers  of  the  same  Council  thus  admirably  express 
the  traditional  teaching,  which  we  have  been  putting 
before  our  readers. 

"  The  holy  Council,  with  fatherly  afi'ection,  admo- 
"  nishes,  exhorts,  begs  and  implores,  by  the  bowels  of 


*  Cone.  Trid.,  Sessio.  xxii.  de  ISacrif.  Miss.  c.  6. 
^  Sess.  xxiii.  de  Eeform.  c.  13. 


416 


WEDNESDAY    ^VITH1N    THE    OCTA^'E. 


the  mercy  of  our  God,  that  all  and  each  of  those  who 
bear  the  name  of  Christians,  will,  at  length,  be 
united  to  each  other  in  this  sign  of  unity,  in  this 
bond  of  charity,  in  this  symbol  of  concord.  Let 
them  be  mindful  of  the  infinite  majesty,  and  the 
wonderful  love,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave 
his  beloved  Kfe  as  the  price  of  our  salvation,  and 
his  Flesh  as  our  food.  Let  them  believe  and  vene- 
rate these  sacred  mysteries  of  his  Body  and  Blood 
with  such  constancy  and  resoluteness,  with  such 
devotion  of  soul,  and  love,  and  worship,  as  that  they 
may  frequently  receive  that  supersubstantial  Bread. 
May  it  be  to  them  their  true  life,  and  the  perpe- 
tual health  of  their  soul !  And  being  strengthened 
by  its  strength,  may  the}^  go  through  the  journey 
of  this  miserable  life,  and  reach  their  heavenly 
country,  where  they  may  eat,  unveiled,  that  same 
Bread  of  the  Angels,  which  the}^  now  receive  under 
the  sacred  veils^'  (of  the  sacramental  species).^ 


The  Church  of  Armenia  chants,  even  to  this  day, 
at  the  time  of  Communion,  an  admirable  canticle ^ 
which  is  of  the  same  character  as  the  short,  but  sub- 
lime invitation  to  the  sacred  Table,  which  we  gave 
yesterday  from  the  ancient  Church  of  Gaul. 


DUM    COMMUNICAKT   QUI    DIGNI   SUKT. 

Chorus  modiilatur  hoc  Canticum, 
Mater  fidei,  sacer  coetus        O  Mother  of  Faith,  sacred 


Sponsorum, 
Et  thalamus  sublimis  ! 
iJomus  Sponsi  immortalis 
Qui   te   exonia\it  iu   seter- 


num 


assembly  and  sublime  nuptial 
couch  of  the  marriage-feast ! 
O  House  of  the  immortal 
Spouse,  adorned  by  him  with 
everlasting  beauty ! 


^  Sess.  xiii.  de  Euch.  c.  8. 


WEDNESDAY   WITHIN    THE    OCTAVE. 


417 


TliOTi  art  the  wonderful 
second  heaven,  whose  majesty 
is  from  glory  to  glory  !  Thou, 
as  light  produces  light,  bring- 
est  us  forth,  by  the  font,  which 
gives  us  to  thee  thy  children. 

Thou  art  distributing  the 
Bread  that  purifies  ;  thou  art 
giving  us  to  drink  what 
thou  possessest, — the  adorable 
Blood;  thou  art  drawing  us 
to  that  uncreated  supernal 
order  of  thino:s  divine. 


O  come,  ye  children  of  the 
new  Sion,  approach  with 
holiness  your  Lord  !  Yea, 
taste  and  see,  that  our  Lord, 
the  God  of  armies,  is  sweet. 

That  Sion  of  old  divided  the 
waters  of  Jordan,  thou  break- 
est  up  the  sea  of  sins ;  she  of 
old  had  Josue  as  her  leader ; 
thou,  Jesus,  consubstantial 
with  the  Father. 

The  lofty  altar,  too,  was  an 
ancient  figure  of  thee :  it  broke 
down  the  gates  of  adamant ; 
thou  those  of  hell,  even  to  its 
foundations. 

This  is  the  Body  of  Christ, 
this  the  Chalice  of  the  Blood 
of  the  New  Testament.  The 
hidden  Sacrament  is  shown  to 
us,  and  herein  God  is  seen  by 
us. 


This  is  Christ  the  Word, 
Q-od,  who  is  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father  :  and 
he  is  sacrificed  in  our  presence, 
5Kad  takes  away  the  sins  of  the 
VTorld. 

VOL.  X. 


Intelligibilium 


Tu   es   secundum  Coelum. 

mirabile 
De   gloria  in   gloriam    ex- 

celsum. 
Ad  instar  lucis  nos  parturis 
Per  filiale  baptisterium. 
Panemistum  purificanteni 

distribuis. 
Das     ad     bibendum     san- 

guinem   tuum  tremen- 

dum, 
Trahis   ad   supemum   ordi- 

nera 

non      fac- 
tum. 

Yenite,  filii  novae  Sion, 
Accedite  ad  Dominum  nos- 
trum cum  sanctitate. 
Gustate  sed  et  videte 
Quia    suavis    est    Dominus 

Deus  noster  virtutum. 
Ilia  divisit  Jordanem, 
Tu  mare  peccatorum  mun- 

di; 
Ilia  magTium  ducem  habuit 

Josue, 
Tu  Jesum  Patri  consubstan- 

tialem. 
Antiqua  figura  tibi  etiam 

similis, 
Altare  supereminens. 
Ilia   confregit  portas    ada- 

mantinas, 
Tu  infemi  a  fundamentis. 
Panis     hie     est     corpus 

Christi, 
Hie    calix    sanguinis    Novi 

Testament!. 
Occultum  sacramentum  no- 
bis manifestatur, 
Deus  in  hoc  a  nobis  vide- 

tur. 
Hie  est  Christus  Yerbum 

Deus 
Qui     ad     dexteram    Patris 

sedet, 
Et  hie  sacrificatur  inter  nos, 
Tollit  peccata  mundi, 
2E 


418 


WEDNESDAY    WITHIN   THE    OCTAVE. 


Die  qui  benedictus  est  in 

aetemum 
Una  cum  Patre  et  Spiritu, 
Nunc  et  magis  in  futunim 
Et  sine  fine  semper  in  sm- 

cula. 


It  is  he  who  is  blessed  for 
ever,  together  with  the  Father 
and  the  Spirit,  now  and 
ever  more  for  time  to  come, 
and,  without  end,  for  ever- 
lasting ages. 


Let  US  once  more  borrow  from  the  Liturgy  of  the 
Apostolic  Constitutions  (Book  8th).  The  following 
formula  of  Thanksgiving  after  Communion  will  tell 
us  what  is  the  spirit  of  the  Church,  and  what  she 
would  have  us  do  at  that  precious  time.  We  find 
what  she  is  intent  upon, — she  is  all  taken  up  with  the 
great  interests  of  Jesus,  her  Spouse.  In  this  ecstasy 
of  her  love,  in  this  moment  of  her  intimate  union  with 
her  God,  she  strives  to  keep  her  children  from  having 
narrow-minded  thoughts,  and  intentions  which  look 
to  nothing  beyond  one's  self,  the  result  of  private 
devotion,  so  unseasonable  for  such  grand  acts  of  the 
Christian  life  as  are  the  Sacrifice  of  Mass  and  Com- 
munion in  the  universal  Viciiin,  as  we  have  heard  the 
Fathers  expressing  it.  Scarcely,  then,  have  the  sacred 
species  been  distributed,  than  the  Deacon  cries  out : 
Surgamus  Let  us  rise !  Thereupon,  all  stand  up, 
and  unite  in  this  prayer,  which  is  read  by  the 
Bishop : 


INVOCATIO    POST   COMMUKIONEM. 


Domine  Deus  omnipotens. 
Pater  Christi  tui,  benedicti 
Filii ;  exauditor  eorum  qui 
recte  invocant  te,  cognitor 
precum  etiam  eorum  qui 
tacent :  gratias  agimus  tibi, 
quod  nos  dignos  censuisti 
qui  participaremus  sancta 
tua  mysteria,  quae  praebuisti 
nobis  ad  plenam  eorum 
quoB  bene  cognovimus  pcr- 
suasionem,     ad     custodiam 


O  Lord  God  almighty. 
Father  of  thy  Christ,  thy 
blessed  Son  !  who  graciously 
hearest  them  that  call  upon 
thee  in  uprightness,  who 
knowest  the  prayers  of  them 
even  who  are  silent ;  we  thank 
thee,  for  that  thou  hast  deemed 
us  worthy  to  partake  of  thy 
sacred  mysteries  :  thou  hast 
given  to  us,  for  the  fully 
strengthening     ua    in    those 


WEDNESDAY   WITHIN    THE   OCTAVE. 


419 


tMngs  whicli  we  have  so  well 
known,  for  the  preservation 
of  piety,  and  for  the  forgive- 
ness of  our  sins  ;  for  the  name 
of  thy  Christ  has  been  invoked 
upon  us,  and  we  have  been 
joined  to  thee. 

O  thou  that  hast  separated 
us  from  communion  with  the 
ungodly,  unite  us  with  them 
that  are  consecrated  to  thee ; 
strengthen  us  in  the  truth,  by 
the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 
teach  us  the  things  we  know 
not ;  supply  our  deficiencies  ; 
confirm  us  in  the  truths  we 
already  know. 

Preserve  thy  priests  blame- 
less in  thy  service.  Keep 
kings  in  peace  ;  magistrates 
in  justice  ;  the  air  salubrious  ; 
the  fruits  in  abundance;  the 
world  in  thine  almighty  pro- 
vidence. Pacify  nations  that 
are  waging  war.  Convert 
them  that  are  astray.  Sanc- 
tify thy  people  ;  preserve 
thy  virgins ;  keep  in  fidelity 
them  that  are  in  wedlock ; 
strengthen  the  chaste  ;  lead 
little  ones  to  mature  age ;  con- 
firm the  newly  initiated ;  teach 
the  catechumens,  and  make 
them  worthy  of  initiation ; 
and  gather  us  all  together 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord : 

"With  whom,  together  with 
thee,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  be 
glory,  and  honour,  and  adora- 
tion for  ever.     Amen. 


pietatis,  ad  remissionem 
delictorum;  quoniamnomen 
Christi  tui  invocatum  est 
super  nos,  et  tibi  adjuncti 
sumus. 


Qui  segregasti  nos  ab 
impiorum  communione, 
aduna  cum  lis  qui  tibi  sunt 
consecrati,  firma  nos  in 
veritate  per  sancti  Spiritus 
adventum,  quae  ignoramus 
revela,  quae  deficiunt  sup- 
ple, quae  novimus  corro- 
bora. 

Sacerdotesinculpatos  con- 
serva  in  cultu  tuo.  Reges 
tuere  in  pace;  magistratus 
in  justitia ;  aerem  in  tem- 
perie  ;  fruges  in  ubertate  ; 
mundum  in  omnipotente 
providentia.  Gentes  bellico- 
sas  seda.  Errantes  converte. 
Populum  tuum  sanctifica ; 
virgines  conserva  ;  conju- 
ges  custodi  in  fide ;  castos 
robora;  infantes  ad  matu- 
ram  setatem  perdue ;  nuper 
initiatos  firma  ;  catechu- 
menos  erudi,  ac  dignos  ini- 
tiatione  redde  ;  nosque  om- 
nes  congrega  in  regnum 
coelorum,  in  Christo  Jesu 
Domino  nostro : 

Cum  quo  tibi  gloria,  honor, 
ac  veneratio,  et  sancto  Spi- 
ritui  in  saecula.     Amen. 


420         THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS  CHRISTI. 


THUESDAY, 

THE   OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

Let    us   adore  Christ,    the  Christmii    regem.    adore- 

King,  who  ruleth  the  nations :  mus  dominantem  gentibus, 

who  giveth  fatness  of  spirit  to  qui   se   manducantibus    dat 

them  that  eat  him.  spiritus  pinguedinem. 

The  bright  Octave,  consecrated  to  the  glory  of  the 
Blessed  Sacrament,  closes  to-day ;  and,  although  we 
began  the  subject  three  days  before  the  Feast  itself, 
we  have  been  able  to  do  little  more  than  slightly 
touch  upon  the  sublime  subject  proposed  for  our  con- 
sideration and  love  by  the  Church.  The  Memorial 
left  us  by  our  Lord  of  all  his  wondrous  mercies  ^  far 
exceeds  the  measure  of  our  poor  thoughts ;  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  infinite  love,  which  God  bears  to  his 
own  2  creatures,  is  far  beyond  any  possibility  of  ours 
to  make  it  a  return  such  as  it  would  deserve,  and 
very  far  beyond  the  capabilities  of  human  words  to 
express. 

Eternal  Wisdom  was,  even  from  his  Father's  bosom, 
betrothed  to  human  nature  ;  he  came  down  into  this 
world,  which  sin  had  marred,  and  there  he  found  man, 
who  had  become  the  slave  of  sin  ;  ^  he  assumed  this 
nature  ;  he  became  man  ;  he  was  thus  able  to  make 
a  Sacrifice,  which  gives  infinite  glory,  and  full  satis- 
faction, to  God ;  and,  by  that  same,  he  perfected  his 
union  with  his  creature,  by  means,  that  is,  of  a  divine 
banquet,  at  which,  as  food  and  drink,  he  himself  is 
served,  for  he  is  the  divine  Victim,*  immolated  on  the 
Cross,  and  at  our  Altars. 

»  P8.  ex.  4.  'Heb.  ii.  14,  15. 

'  St.  John,  xiii.  1.  ♦  Prov.  ix.  2. 


THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI.         421 

0  Man  !  0  child  of  Adam,  that  wast  formed  of 
earthy  slime,^  what  art  thou,  that  thou  shouldst  be 
remembered  in  the  court  of  heaven?^  Thou  desired 
one  of  the  everlasting  hills, ^ — (for  we  may  apply  this 
name  even  to  thee,) — what  hast  thou  done,  that  thou 
shouldst  thus  be  glorified  ?  '*  Yet,  doubt  it  not,  thou 
hast  had  all  these  favours.  "  Let  not  my  few  weak 
"  words  stagger  thee,"  cries  out  St.  Cyril,  the  brave 
defender  at  Ephesus,  of  the  sacred  nuptials,  of  which 
the  Eucharist  is,  what  the  Fathers  call,^  the  glorious 
extension, — ''heed  not  my  unworthiness,  but  listen  to 

*  the  voice,  respect  the  authority  of  them  that  have 
*gone  before  us,  and  have  preached  these   truths. 

*  They  were  not  men  of  the  common  sort,  they  were 
'  not  men  undeserving  of  notice,  who  went  about,  like 

*  hired  criers,  to  proclaim  these  things  on  the  high- 

*  roads  ;  no,  they  were  such  men  as  the  great  Solo- 
'  mon,  who  was  sent  as  the  herald  of  the  King  of 
'  kings  ;  he  sat  on  his  high  throne,  and  proclaimed  the 
'  mysteries  of  the  Most  High ;  he  was  clad  in  scarlet 
'  robes,  and  wore  a  diadem  on  his  brow,  and  he  was 

*  the  one  to  publish  the  mandate  of  the  God  who  makes 

*  and  unmakes  kings."  ^ 

Christians !  ye  people  of  kings  ! '  who  are  to  have 
crowns  and  thrones  yonder  in  heaven,^ — it  is  to  you 
this  Solomon  speaks.  Your  dignity  is  great.  Listen 
to  this  herald  of  God  ;  learn  whence  comes  your  great- 
ness, and  live  up  to  it.  Hearken,  ye  kings,  and  under- 
stand I  Give  ear,  ye  kings !  To  you  are  these  my 
icords.  If  ye  love  your  thrones  and  your  sceptres,  love 
Wisdom,  that  ye  may  reign  for  ever.^  1  preferred  this 
Wisdom  before  kingdoms  and  thrones ;  I  loved  him 
above  all  treasures,  and  health,  and  beauty,  and  chose 


^  Gen.  ii.  7.  ^  Horn.  div.  x.  in  Myst.  coen. 

*  Ps.  viii.  5.  ■^  fcjt.  Matth.  xxv,  34. 
3  Gen.  xlix.  26.  «  Apoc.  v.  9,  10. 

*  Job,  vii.  17.  »  Wisd.  vi.  2,  3,  10,  22. 
5  Page  394. 


422         THURSDAY,   OCTAVE    OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

to  have  him  instead  of  light}  What  this  Wisdom  is^ 
and  what  his  origin,  I  will  declare,  and  J  icill  not  hide 
from  you  the  mysteries  of  God  ;  but  will  seek  Wisdom 
out  from  the  beginning  of  his  birth,  and  bring  the  know- 
ledge of  him  to  light,  and  will  not  pass  over  the  truth.^ 

1  have  learned  him  without  guile,  and  I  communicate 
him  to  you  without  envy?  Receive,  therefore,  instruc- 
tion by  my  words,  and  it  shall  be  profitable  unto  you.* 

Would  to  God,  that  we  had  been  able  to  tell  the 
wonderful  mystery  we  have  been  celebrating  !  *  Divine 
Wisdom  himself  has  been  pressing  us,  during  all  these 
days,  to  study  the  excellencies  of  that  sacred  Bread, 
which  yields  delight  to  the  kings,  his  guests !  ^  The 
Church  has  kept  close  to  the  throne  of  her  Jesus,  that 
cloud  in  which  he  dwells  out  of  love  for  us.'  She  is 
full  of  love  for  him  ;  he  has  given  her  unity  by  the 
Sacrament  of  union ;  and  she,  like  a  strong  compact 
city,  summons  her  tribes  of  Israel,^  the  holy  nation, 
the  people  of  the  redeemed,  the  chosen  race  of  the 
priests  and  kings,'  to  come  together  again  on  this 
octave-day,  that  they  may  testify  their  faith,  and  sing 
their  love,  and  be  grateful  for  the  peace  which,  by  the 
holy  Eucharist,  is  secured  to  them,  and  for  the  abun- 
dance of  grace  and  blessing  it  gives  to  us  her  children.^** 
These  days  of  universal  joy  and  festivity  around  the 
holy  Host  were  revealed,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  the 
son  of  Sirach  ;  and  the  vision  made  him  exclaim  :  Wis- 
dam  shall  praise  her  own  self,  and  shall  be  honoured  in 
God,  and  shall  glory  in  the  midst  of  her  people,  and 
shall  open  her  mouth  in  the  churches  of  the  Most  Highy 
and  shall  glorify  herself  in  the  sight  of  his  power. 
And  in  the  midst  of  her  own  people,  she  shall  be  exalted, 
and  shall  be  admired  in  (he  holy  assembly.     And  m  the 

^  Wisd.  vii.  8-10.  «  Gen.xlix.  20.Ct  Ant. Z&mlaudin die Feiti. 

2  Ibid.  vi.  24  ;  vii.  15.  '  Ecclus.  x:xiv.  7. 

2  Ibid.  vii.  13.  8  Pa.  cxxi.  3,  4. 
*  Ibid.  vi.  25-27.  »  1  St.  Pet.  ii.  9. 
6  Ibid.  vii.  15.  1°  Ps.  cxxi.  4-8. 


THURSDAY,   OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI.         423 

multitude  of  the  elect,  she  shall  have  praise,  and  among 
the  blessed  (of  the  Father)  she  shall  be  blessed.^ 

Blessed  the  man,  continues  the  inspired  writer,  still 
speaking  in  the  future,  that  shall  dwell  in  Wisdom ! 
Blessed  the  man  that  consider eth  her  waijs  in  his  heart, 
and  hath  understanding  in  her  secrets,  ivho  goeth  after 
her  as  one  that  traceth,  and  prepareih  for  her  snares  of 
love  ;  ^  who  looketh  in  at  her  windows,  and  hearkeneth  at 
her  door!  Blessed  is  he  that  lodgeth  near  her  house, 
and,  fastening  a  pin  in  her  loalls,  shall  set  up  his  tent 
nigh  unto  her,  where  good  things  shall  rest  in  his  lodg- 
ing for  ever.  He  shall  set  his  children  under  her  shelter, 
and  shall  lodge  under  her  branches.  He  shall  be  pro- 
tected, under  her  covering,  from  the  heat,  and  shall  rest 
in  her  glory. ^ 

O  House  of  God,  House  of  the  feasting  of  kings  ^ 
filled  with  the  fragrance  of  sweetest  incense  !  ^  better 
is  one  day  in  thy  precincts,  than  a  thousand  elsewhere. 
It  is  a  joy  to  my  soul  to  think  of  days  spent  there  !  ® 
The  poor  bird  that  once  was  lonely,  and  sat  moaning 
on  a  roof  that  could  never  give  her  rest,^  here,  in  the 
House  of  God,  finds  all  she  wants.     The  turtle-dove, 
having  found,  at  the  Altar  of  her  Lord,  a  nest  for  her 
young  ones,^  has  no  further  solicitude.     In  the  secret 
of  that  little  cloud,  far  from  the  conflicts  and  distur- 
bances of  the  world,  and  where  there  is  no  contradic- 
tion of  tongues, — there,   from   early   dawn,  eternal 
Wisdom  is  pouring  out  upon  souls  the  multitude  of  his 
light  and  sweetness ;  ^    there,   each  of   the  Church's 
hours,  choirs  will  be  singing  psalms  and  canticles  of 
praise  and  joy,  around  the  tabernacle, ^°  wherein  resides 
the  Lamb  who,  though  slain,  is  ever  living,  ^^  beautiful 
on  his  throne  of  love,  the  God  of  gods  in  our  Sion.^^ 


1  Ecclus.  xxiv.  1-4,  '  Ps.  ci.  8. 

-  Juxta  grcBc.  ®  Ibid.  Ixxxiii.  4. 

'  Ecclus.  xiv.  22-27.  ^  Ibid.  xxx.  20,  21. 

*  Ps.  xli.  5.  ^^  Ibid.  xxvi.  6. 

*  Ecclus.  xxiv.  20,  21.  ^^  Apoc.  v.  6. 

«  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  2,  11.  12  pg  Ixxxiii.  8. 


424         THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

O  ye  children  of  men,  Sons  of  the  Most  High,  the 
Psalmist  may  well  give  you  the  name  of  gods,^  for  jou 
are  so  closely  united  with  God  ;  you  receive  Him  into 
such  intimacy  with  your  own  selves  ;  you  feast  upon 
the  Lamb,  and  divine  Wisdom  is  within  you  by  that 
communion.  It  is  by  the  same  Lamb,  that  he  abides 
among  you ! 

Truly,  he  abides  among  us  ;  our  earth  has  received 
the  mystery  of  the  Marriage-Feast,  of  the  divine 
Espousals  with  human  nature,  and  she  ever  possesses 
the  Lord  her  God,  dwelling  with  her  in  the  Eucharist. 
O  thou  gladness  of  morning !  ^  0  heavenly  wine 
that  bringeth  forth  virgins  ■!  ^  the  happy  moments 
"wherein  the  beauty  of  that  Jesus  of  ours,  whose  full 
vision  is  the  joy  of  the  Angels,  gives  Itself,  under  the 
sacramental  veil,  to  our  souls, — 0  happy  moments  ! 
you  leave  behind  you  something  more  than  a  joyous 
recollection.  The  Altar  of  Sacrifice,  and  the  House 
of  the  great  Banquet, — they  both  continue  as  the 
throne  ever  occupied  by  our  King ;  they  are  the 
earthly  abode  of  that  Wisdom,  who,  though  he  is 
seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  in  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Saints,  and  is  loved  by  the  Lord  of  all 
things,'*  yet  has  he  not  changed  towards  us  poor 
children  of  men  ;  he  still  delights  to  be  with  us,  and 
keep  up  his  loved  union  with  us  ;  and,  as  he  tells  us 
he  did  at  the  beginning,  so  he  does  still,  he  loves  this 
world  of  ours,  and,  to  use  his  own  word,  he  still 
plays  with  it.^  On  the  throne  of  his  tabernacle,  he, 
beautiful  Wisdom,  receives  the  adorations  of  them 
that  rule  this  world,  for  it  is  from  him  they  have  their 
crowns  and  sceptres  ;  and,  when  they  have  wisdom, 
it  is  from  Him  they  have  it,  and  they  asked  him  for 
it,  on  bended  knees. ^  On  that  same  throne,  he  hears 
and  grants  the  prayer  of  those  little  ones,  little  by 


J  Ps.  Ixxxi.  8.  *  Wisd.  viii.  3  ;  Ps.  cLx.  3. 

«  Ihid.  xxix.  6.  *  Prov.  viii.  31. 

*Zacli.  ix.  17.  ^  Ibid.  xiv.  16. 


THURSDAY,    OCTAVE    OF    CORPUS    CHRISTI.  425 

humility  and  simplicity  of  heart,  whom  he  so  sweetly 
presses  to  go  to  him  ;  ^  they  are  attracted  to  him  by 
his  divine  loveliness  and  riches  ;  ^  and  they  go  to  him, 
that  he  may  teach  them  how  to  love  him,  and  fill 
their  treasures  to  the  brim.^ 

Glory  be  to  the  Lamb,  whose  Sacrifice  has  given  us 
this  wondrous  Presence  in  the  Blessed  Sacrament !  To 
him  be  power,  and  divinity,  and  wisdom,  and  strength, 
and  honour,  and  glory,  and  benediction,  for  ever  and 
ever !  ^  By  his  lovely  light, ^  let  us,  as  a  close  to  this 
day  and  the  Octave,  respectfully  contemplate  what 
this  inefi'able  permanence  is,  which  thus  secures  to  us, 
and  in  its  fulness,  and  to  the  end  of  time,  the  great 
Mystery  of  Faith. 

How  difi'erent  is  the  divine  Lamb  of  the  true 
Passover,  from  that  ancient  one  of  the  Jewish  people, 
which  we  now  so  well  understand  !  ^  In  prescribing 
the  rites  to  be  observed  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  figura- 
tive Paschal  Lamb,  and  which  was  to  be  eaten  but 
once  a  year,  Moses  laid  down  this  strict  injunction: 
"  ISeither  shall  there  remain  anything  of  it  until 
"  morning,'^ '  nothing  was  to  be  left,  all  was  to  be  con- 
sumed !  Let  us  listen,  now,  to  an  Apostle  of  the 
New  Law :  it  is  Andrew,  brother  to  Peter :  he  is 
speaking  to  a  Roman  Proconsul,  and,  through  him,  to 
all  the  Gentiles  :  "  Every  day,  I  offer  up  to  the 
"  almighty  God,  who  is  one  and  true,  not  the  flesh  of 
"  oxen,  nor  the  blood  of  goats,  but  the  spotless  Lamb, 
"  upon  the  Altar  ;  of  whose  Flesh  the  whole  multi- 
"  tude  of  the  people  eat ;  and  the  Lamb  that  is 
*'  sacrificed,  remains  whole  and  living.*'  ^ 

""  How  can  that  be  ?"  asks  the  Proconsul.  "  Be- 
*'  come  a  disciple  of  mine,  and  thou  shalt  learn,"  replies 
Andrew.     But,  that  could  not  be  :  the  representative 

*  Prov.  ix.4;  St.  Mark,  x.  U.       =  Apoc.  xxi.  23. 

"^  Ecclus.  xxiv.  26.  ^  Paschal  Time,  vol.  1,  p.  201. 

'  Prov.  viii.  21.  '  Exod.  xii.  10. 

*  Apoc.  V.  12.  8  Pass.  S.  Andr.  ap.  Lipom. 


426         THURSDAY,  OCTAVE    OF    CX)RPrS   CHRISTI. 

of  the  pagan  world  was  officially  appointed  to  per- 
secute the  crucified  Jesus  in  his  members ;  and,  as 
to  the  sublime  dogma  he  had  just  heard,  and  which 
was  the  very  basis  of  the  religion  proscribed  by  the 
State,  he  had  but  one  way  of  dealing  with  it  and  its 
preacher, — laugh  at  it,  and  haag  Andrew  on  the 
cross.  The  Apostle  thus  sealed  his  testimony  by  his 
death,  leaving  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  had  inspired 
him  with  the  words  he  had  spoken,^  the  future  vic- 
tory which  that  teaching  was  to  win.  His  brother- 
Apostles,  who  had  been  his  fellow-guests  at  the  Last 
Supper,  also  laid  down  their  lives  for  Jesus  and  his 
doctrines  ;  and,  by  that  sacrifice  of  themselves,  they 
made  themselves  food  to  the  same  dear  Lord.  So 
did  Andrew.  He  followed  the  counsel  of  the  Wise 
Man:  When  thou  shall  sit  to  eat  icith  a  Prince^  con- 
sider diligently  what  is  set  before  thy  face ,  and  lay  this 
to  thy  hearty  and  know  that  it  hehoveth  thee  to  give  a 
like  feasting  to  the  Prince ^  Having,  therefore,  been 
fed  with  Jesus*  Cross  in  the  banquet  of  his  Body  at 
the  Last  Supper,  as  St.  Augustine  expresses  it,^ 
Andrew  made  a  right  noble  return. 

And  so  was  it  with  the  other  Martyrs,  who  came 
after  him  : — the  joy  they  showed,  in  the  midst  of  their 
tortures,  kept  up  the  proof  of  the  power  that  exists 
in  the  precious  Wine  and  heavenly  Bread,  which 
can  thus  gladden  man's  heart  and  make  it  brave.* 
The  time  would  come,  when  the  demonstration  of  the 
Mystery  of  Faith,  so  sublimely  expressed  by  the 
Apostle  St.  Andrew,  would  convince  the  world ;  not, 
indeed,  by  the  force  of  argument,  or  by  the  clever 
sequel  of  learned  deductions, — but  by  the  world  itself 
becoming  transformed,  from  paganism  to  Christianity. 
That  transformation  was  an  impossibility,  as  far  as 
the  world's  own  misery  and  power  were  concerned ; 

»  St.  Matth.  X.  20.  »  In  Fs.  c. 

'  Prov.  xxiii.  1  {et  j'uxta  f/rac.)  2.  Ps.  ciii.  15. 


THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF    CORPUS   CHRTSTI.        427 

and  yet,  it  was  an  undeniable  fact ;  and  it  was  tlie 
result  of  an  irresistible  influence ;  and  the  influence 
was  that  of  the  divine  leaven,  which  in  the  language 
of  the  Gospel,  was  put  into  the  whole  measure  of 
flour  at  the  Last  Supper.  From  south  to  north,  from 
east  to  west,  everywhere  throughout  the  globe,  the 
children  of  the  Church  now  sing  these  words,  which 
are  but  St.  Andrew's  expression  that  has  triumphed 
over  the  world,  won  its  faith,  and  is  set  to  rhythm 
and  music  :  "  Christ's  Flesh  is  food,  and  his  Blood 
"  is  drink  ;  yet  is  he  whole,  under  each  species.  He 
"  is  not  cut  by  the  receiver,  nor  broken,  nor  divided  : 
"  he  is  taken  whole.  He  is  received  by  one,  he  is 
"  received  by  a  thousand ;  the  one  receives  as  much 
"  as  all ;  nor  is  He  consumed,  who  is  received.  And 
"  when  the  Sacrament  is  broken,  waver  not !  but  re- 
"  member,  that  there  is  as  much  under  each  frag- 
"  ment,  as  is  hid  under  the  whole.  Of  the  substance 
"  that  is  there,  there  is  no  division ;  it  is  but  the  sign 
'*  that  is  broken ;  and  He  who  is  the  Signified, 
"  is  not  thereby  diminished,  either  as  to  state  or 
"  stature."  ' 

The  Church's  doctrine  is  this  :  that  "  under  each 
"  species,  and  under  each  part  of  each  species, 
"  there  is  contained,  truly,  really,  and  substantially, 
*'  the  Body,  and  the  Blood,  together  with  the 
''  Soul  and  Divinity,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
"  and,  therefore,  the  whole  Christ."  2  Of  them- 
selves, it  is  true,  the  words  of  Consecration  in  the 
Sacrifice,  do  but  produce  what  they  signify ;  and, 
therefore,  exclusively  and  isolatedly,  under  the  two- 
fold species,  produce  the  Body  and  the  Blood ;  but 
our  Risen  Lord,  who  liveth  now  for  ever,  remains 
indivisible.  As  the  Apostle  teaches  us,  Christ,  rising 
again  from  the  dead,  dieth  now  no  more;  for,  in. 
that  he  died  to  sin  (that  is,  because  of  our  si7i),  he  died 

*  Sequen.  Lauda  Sion.  ^  Cone.  Trid.  Sess.  xiii.  can.  1,  3. 


428         THURSDAY,  OCTA^^    OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

once;  but,  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth  unto  God.^ 
Therefore,  wheresoever,  in  virtue  of  the  words  of  con- 
secration, there  is  the  most  holy  Body  or  the  Blood 
of  our  Redeemer,  there,  also,  by  an  essential  and 
necessary  concomitance,  is  there  the  whole  entire 
sacred  Humanity,  united  with  the  Word. 

And  here,  for  the  sake  of  greater  precision,  we  are 
going  to  adopt  the  scholastic  phraseology.  And 
firstly,  the  change  of  bread  into  the  Body,  and  of  wine 
into  the  Blood,  is  one  of  substance  into  substance ; 
but  in  this  miraculous  change,  very  appropriately,  on 
that  account,  called  frans-substantiatioji,  the  accidents 
or  modes  of  the  two  terms  of  the  change  are,  in  no 
ways,  altered  or  destroyed.  So  that,  being  deprived 
of  their  natural  siihject,  or  support,  the  species,  or 
appearances,  of  bread  and  wine  are  immediately  sus- 
tained by  God's  omnipotence,  and  they  produce  and 
receive  the  same  impressions  as  they  would  do  if  they 
were  joined  to  their  own  proper  substances.  They 
are  the  sacramental  sign ;  and  although  they  do  not 
inform  the  Body  of  Christ,  that  is,  do  not  give  It 
their  own  qualities  or  properties,  yet  they  determine 
and  maintain  Its  presence,  so  long  as  these  species 
are  not  essentially  modified.  As  regards  the  Body 
of  our  Lord, — which,  in  Its  own  true  substance,  is 
substituted  for  the  substance  alone  of  bread  and  wine, — 
It  is  withdrawn,  by  the  sacred  formula,  from  those 
mysterious  laws  of  extension,  which  are  so  far  from 
being  thoroughly  understood  by  human  science  ;  It 
is  whole  under  the  whole  species,  and  whole  under 
each  sensible  portion  of  the  species,  and,  in  this, 
It  resembles  spiritual  substances,  such  as,  for 
instance,  the  soul  of  man,  which  is  whole  in  his  whole 
body,  and  whole  in  each  member  of  the  same.  Such, 
then,  is  the  mystery  of  the  sacramental  state:  whilst 
present  to  us  under  the  dimensions  of  the  host,  and 

*  Kom.  vi.  9,  10.  '  Cone.  Trid.  Sess.  xiii.  can.  3. 


THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPIS   CHRISTI.         429 

not  beyond  them,  by  reason  of  his  substance  being 
independent  of  our  known  laws  of  extension,  Christ 
our  Lord  abides  in  himself  precisely  what  he  is  in 
heaven.  As  St.  Thomas  of  Aquin  expresses  it :  "The 
"  Body  of  Christ,  in  the  Sacrament,  retains  all  Its 
"  accidents,  as  a  necessary  consequence ;  and  its  several 
''  parts  are  just  as  they  are  in  his  sacred  Body, 
'^  although  they  are  not  subject  to  the  conditions  of 
"  external  space."  ^ 

The  very  notion  of  Sacrifice  required  this  passive 
appearance  ;  in  the  same  way  as  the  idea  of  a  banquety 
in  which  he  is  received,  determined  what  were  to 
be  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  sacramental  elements 
selected  by  our  divine  Lord.  Of  course,  when  we 
behold  the  sacred  Host,  we  must  banish  every  such  . 
thought  as  bondage,  or  actual  suffering,  or  laborious 
virtues,  on  the  part  of  the  divine  Guest  who  dwells 
under  the  sacred  species  :  under  this  external  passive- 
ness  or  apparent  death,  there  abound  life,  and  love, 
and  beauty  of  the  Lamb,  who  has  vanquished  death, — 
of  Jesus,  that  is, — of  Him,  who  is  the  Immortal  King 
of  ages. 

He  resides  under  the  white  Host,  with  all  his  power 
and  brightness,  the  most  beautiful  of  the  children  of 
men  ;  ^  he  has  all  those  admirable  proportions,  and  all 
the  perfect  finish  of  those  divine  members,  which  were 
formed  from  the  flesh  of  the  most  beautiful  of  the 
daughters  of  Adam,  and  the  purest  of  Yirgins.  Let 
us  venerate,  with  all  the  respect  we  are  capable  of, 
those  feet,  which  were  watered  by  the  tears  of  the  re- 
pentant Magdalene,  and  dried  with  her  hair,^  and 
embalmed  with  the  sweetest  ointment,  beforehand,  as 
our  Jesus  emphasises  her  act,  when  he  praised  it ;  * 
those  feet  of  our  merciful  Redeemer,  more  beautiful 


*  P.  3.0,.  Ixxvi.,  a.  4;  Sant.  lib.  iv.  dist.  10,  art.  2. 

>  Ps.  xliv.  3.  ^  St.  Luke,  vii.  37.  *  St.  Mark,  xiv.  8. 


430         THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

than  the  feet  of  them  who  come  to  tell  us  of  his  having 
come  among  us  ;  ^  they  are  bright,  beyond  the  bright- 
ness of  fine  brass  when  in  a  burning  furnace.  ^  Let  us 
send  our  reverential  kisses,  beyond  the  veil,  to  those 
hands,  which  are  spotless,  and  consecrated  for  the  office 
of  High  Priest  ;^  those  hands,  which  worked  at  the  wood 
in  Joseph's  shop  ;  those  hands,  which  scattered  bles- 
sings and  miracles  throughout  the  land  of  Israel ;  they 
are  there,  under  that  Host,  just  as  the  Bride  of  the 
Canticle  saw  and  described  them, bright  as  gold,  formed 
to  the  model  of  perfection,  and  full  of  something  ex- 
tremely precious,  which  she  called  hyacinths,^  and 
which  perhaps  signify  those  wounds  of  which  the 
prophet  speaks,  saying,  that  horns  are  in  his  hands, 
and  there  is  his  strength  hid.^  Would  that  we  might 
look  beneath  the  little  cloud  which  hides  from  us  that 
divine  head,  the  admiration  of  the  Angels, — that  face, 
once  disfigured,  and  bufi'eted,  and  covered  all  over 
with  reproaches,  out  of  love  for  us,^  but  now  resplen- 
dant  as  the  sun  when  he  shineth  in  his  power  !  ^  0 
mouth  of  our  Jesus,  thou  instrument  of  the  "Word, 
whose  voice  is  as  the  sound  of  many  waters,^  and 
whose  breathing  is  death  to  the  wicked  !  ^  O  lips, 
which  our  Scriptures  tell  us,  are  as  lilies  dropping 
choice  myrrh  !  ^°  And  you,  0  eyes,  which  shed  tears 
over  Lazarus,^ ^  and  now  are  lighting  up  with  your 
brightness  ^2  the  abode  of  the  Saints  !  Oh  !  that  we 
might  see  all,  see  thee  thyself,  Jesus,  beneath  the  mys- 
tery and  the  veil !  But,  no  !  the  mystery  and  veil 
may  not  be  removed ;  and  surer  are  we,  than  if  our 
eyes  were  the  witnesses,  that  thou,  0  Beloved  of  our 


'  Is.  lii.  7.  '  Apoc.  i.  16. 

2  Apoc.  i.  16.  f*  lOid.  i.  15. 

'  Lev.  xxi.  10.  ^  Is.  xi.  4. 

*Cant.  V.  14.  •"  Cant.  v.  13. 

'  Hab.  iii.  4.  "  St.  John,  xi.  36. 

•  Lament,  iii.^30.  "  Apoc.  i.  14. 


THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI.         431 

hearts !  that  thou  art  behind  our  wall,  looking  at  us 
through  the  lattices  ;  ^  and  this  is  enough  to  make  us 
adore  thee.  Verily,  the  sweetest  test  to  which  thou 
couldst  put  our  love,  was  that  we  should  have  faith  in 
this  mystery  of  the  adorable  Sacrament ! 

O  precious  Blood,  thou  price  of  our  ransom,  shed  pro- 
fusely on  this  earth,  but  now  again  within  the  Sacred 
veins  of  Jesus  !  thou  art  now,  as  during  his  years  here 
below,  diffusing  thy  life-giving  qualities  to  his  divine 
members,  under  the  action  of  that  sacred  Heart,  which 
we  are  so  solemnly  to  honour  to-morrow  !  Most  holy 
soul  of  Jesus,  present  in  the  Sacrament  as  form  sub- 
stantial 2  of  that  most  perfect  Body,  which,  through 
thee,  is  the  ever-living  Body  of  the  Man-God, — thou 
possessest  within  thee  all  the  treasures  of  eternal  Wis- 
dom !  ^  thou  hadst  the  office  intrusted  to  thee,  of 
putting  into  a  varied  and  sensible  language,  the  inef- 
fable beauty  of  that  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  who  was 
taken  with  love  for  the  children  of  men,  and  desired, 
by  a  manifestation  which  they  could  understand,  to 
secure  their  love  to  himself !  Every  word,  every  step, 
of  Jesus,  every  mystery  of  his  public  or  hidden  life, 
was  a  gradual  revelation,  to  us  men,  of  that  divine 
brightness.  Truly,  as  we  have  it  in  the  Gospel,  this 
Wisdom,  like  the  grace  that  was  within  him,  advanced 
in  his  manifestation  to  the  creatures,  whose  love  he 
had  come  down  from  heaven  to  win.'*  When,  at 
length,  he  had  achieved  all  his  work, — given  us  his 
teachings,  and  examples,  and  mysteries,  those  mar- 
vellous manifestations  of  his  own  infinite  perfections, — 
he  gave  them  perpetuity,  that  so  all  ages  to  come 
might  possess  them  and  benefit  by  them ;  he  fixed 
them,  so  to  say,  in  the  Sacrament  of  love,  that  abiding 
source  of  grace  and  light  to  men,  that  living  Memorial, 
wherein  divine  love  is  ever  ready  to  bestow  upon  us 

*  Cant.  ii.  9.  '  Coloss.  ii.  3. 

*  Concil.  Vienn.  *  St.  Luke,  ii.  52, 


432         THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 

the  graces  of  the  wonderful  works  he  has  wrought  by 
his  Incarnation.  "  The  Flesh,  the  Blood  of  Christ, 
"  is  the  Word  made  manifest,"  says  St.  Basil ;  "  it  is 
"  Wisdom  made  visible  by  the  Incarnation  and  by  all 
"  that  mystery  of  his  life  in  the  flesh,  whereby  he  un- 
*^  folds  to  us,  all  moral  perfection,  and  all  the  beautiful, 
"  both  natural  and  divine.  It  is  that  which  is  tbe 
"  food  of  our  soul,  and  which  is  preparing  her,  even  in 
"this  world,  for  the  contemplation  of  the  divine 
'^realities."' 


The  solemn  Exposition,  during  which  the  Blessed 
Sacrament  has  been  receiving  our  most  fervent  homage 
of  adoration  and  love,  is  concluded,  as  it  began,  with 
a  Procession.  As  soon  as  the  Vespers  are  over,  (and 
they  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Feast,  2'^^9^  ^9^). 
the  Deacon  takes  the  Monstrance  from  the  throne,  and 
gives  it  to  the  Priest.  The  sacred  Host  is,  once  more, 
carried  outside  the  Church,  with  the  same  holy  cere- 
monies, and  chants,  and  joyous  worship  of  the  Faithful. 
Again,  It  has  all  nature  doing  homage  to  its  Creator;  It 
sanctifies  every  place  through  which  It  is  carried, 
drives  away  the  hostile  power  which,  as  the  Apostle 
tells  us,  seeks  to  infest  this  air,^  blesses  our  streets  and 
our  country  lanes,  and  imparts  to  our  fields  a  pledge 
of  rich  harvest.  It  is  then  brought  back  to  the  Church, 
not  to  leave  the  hallowed  precincts  again,  save  for  the 
sake  of  the  dying,  to  strengthen  them  for  their  last 
long  journey,  or  lor  the  sick,  that  it  may  be  adminis- 
tered to  them,  since  they  are  not  able  to  go  to  their 
Lord.  The  Benediction  is  then  given  to  the  adoring 
assembly,  and  the  Sacred  Ilost  is  replaced  in  the 
Tabernacle. 

Whilst  these  sentiments  of  faith  and  love  are  so 

1  Epist.  viii.  '  Eph.  ii.  2;  vi.  12. 


THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


433 


active  within  us,  let  us  give  them  expression,  by  the 
beautiful  hymn,  Adoro  te  devote  :  it  was  composed  by 
the  Angelical  Doctor,  St.  Thomas  of  Aquin ;  and  it  is 
hard  to  say  which  of  the  two  predominates  in  these 
verses, — the  theological  science  of  the  Saint,  or  his 
humble  and  glowing  love. 

But,  when  the  Tabernacle-door  closes  upon  our 
Jesus  in  his  holy  Sacrament,  our  hearts  will  still  con- 
tinue with  him.  This  octave  always  brings  with  it 
such  an  increase  of  light  regarding  the  great  Mystery  ? 
It  has  been  so,  this  year.  More  than  ever,  for  the 
future,  will  we  reverence  and  love  the  Banquet  which 
is,  and  produces,  all  that  we  have  been  considering 
during  these  days  :  we  know  so  much  better  now,  than 
formerly,  the  perfections  of  eternal  Wisdom,  who  has 
given  himself  to  us  in  the  Eucharist ;  we  will  let  him 
guide  us  into  all'  grace  and  truth. 


RHYTHMUS    S.    THO:\L^. 


I  devoutly  adore  thee,  O 
hidden  Deity,  who  truly  liest 
concealed  under  these  forms  : 
to  thee  my  whole  heart  sub- 
jects itself,  because  it  finds  it- 
self quite  lost  in  contemplating 
thee. 

Sight,  feeling,  taste,  tell  us 
not  of  thy  presence  ;  but  the 
hearing  alone  may  be  safely 
believed.  I  believe  whatso- 
ever the  Son  of  God  has 
spoken  ;  nothing  is  more  true, 
than  this  word  of  truth  : 

Upon  the  Cross  the  divinity 
alone  was  concealed  ;  but  here 
the  humanity  also  lies  hid  : 
but  I  believe  and  confess  them 
both,  and  ask  for  what  the 
penitent  thief  asked. 


VOL.  X. 


Adoro     te     devote,     latens 

Deitas, 
Quae  sub  his  figuris  vere  la- 

titas  : 
Tibi    se  4Cor  meum    totum 

subjicit, 
Quia  te  contemplans  totum 

deficit. 
Visus,     tactus,     gustus     in 

te  fallitur, 
Sed   auditu   solo   tuto   cre- 

ditur. 
Credo    quidquid    dixit  Dei 

Filius, 
Nil      hoc     verbo     veritatis 

verius  : 
In     cruce    latebat     sola 

Deitas, 
At  hie  latet  simul  et  huma- 

nitas ; 
Ambo  tamen  credens  atque 

confitens, 
Peto  quod  petivit  latro  pce- 

nitens. 

2F 


434         THURSDAY,    OCTAVE   OF   CORPL'S   CHRISTI. 


Plagas ,     sicut    Thomas , 

non  intueor, 
Deum  tamen  meiun  te  confi- 

teor. 
Fac  me  tibi   semper  magis 

credere, 
In  te  spem  habere,  te  dili- 

gere. 
O  memoriale  mortis  Do- 
mini, 
Panis    vivus,    vitam    praes- 

tans  homini  : 
Prsesta    meae    menti  ,de   te 

vivere, 
Et     te    illi    semper     dulce 

sapere. 
Pie  Pelicane  Jesu  Domine, 
Me  immimdum  mimda  tuo 

sanguine, 
Cujus     una     stilla     salvum 

facere 
Totum     mundum    quit    ab 

onini  scelere. 
Jesu,  quem  velatum  nunc 

aspicio, 
Oro    fiat    illud     quod    tam 

sitio  : 
TJt  te  revelata  cemens  facie 
Visu  sim  beatus  tuse  gloriae. 

Amen. 


I  see  not  the  wounds,  as 
Thomas  did  ;  yet  do  I  confess 
thee  to  be  juy  God.  Oh !  grant 
that  I  may  ever  believe  in 
thee,  more  and  more,  and  put 
my  hope  in  thee,  and  love 
thee. 

O  memorial  of  my  Lord's 
death  !  O  living  Bread,  that 
givest  life  to  man !  Grant, 
that  my  soul  may  ever  live  on 
thee,  and  may  ever  relish  thy 
sweetness. 


O  loving  Pelican ;  Jesu 
Lord  I  cleanse  me,  an  unclean 
sinner,  with  thy  Blood,  one 
drop  whereof  could  save  the 
whole  world  from  aU  its  guilt. 


0  Jesus,  whom  I  now  see 
beneath  a  veil !  I  beseech 
thee,  let  that  be  done,  for 
which  I  do  so  thirst  :  that  I 
may  see  thine  unveiled  face, 
and  be  happy  in  the  vision  of 
thy  glory. 

Amen. 


The  devout  Ratpert,  monk  of  St.  Gall,  friend  of 
Notker,  and,  like  him,  a  writer  of  liturgical  composi- 
tions, shall  provide  us  with  an  appropriate  conclusion 
to  this  our  Octave  of  Corpus  Cliristi,  in  the  following] 
devout  hymn,  which  he  composed  for  the  Faithful  of 
his  own  times, — the  9th  Century. 


AD    EUCHARISTIAM    SUMENDAM. 


Laudcs,  Omnipotens,  fcri- 
mus  tibi,  dona  colcntes 
Corporis  immensi,  Sangui- 
nis atque  tui. 

Tangimus  ecce  tuam,  Eec- 


"We  offer  thee  our  praises,  Oj 
Almighty  Lord,  honouring  the 
gifts  bestowed  upon  us  of  the] 
adorable  Body  and  Blood. 

Lo  I  we  are  approaching  thy ' 


THURSDAY,    OCTAVE    OF    CORPUS    CHRISTI.  435 


table,  O  most  holy  Guide ! 
have  mercy  on  us  thy  servants, 
though  unworthy  ones. 

Here  is  repeated :  We  offer 
thee. 

Have  mercy,  O  loving  Lord ! 
compassionately  forgive  us  our 
sins  :  That  our  approaching 
these  triumphant  sacred  My- 
steries may  be  to  our  profit. 

Here  is  repeated :  Bestowed 
upon  us. 

May  there  descend  upon  us, 
from  the  high  heavens,  the 
holy  Angel,  who  will  lovingly 
cleanse  both  our  body  and 
soul. 

We  offer  thee. 

May  this  powerful  remedy 
lead  us  to  the  heavenly  abode, 
giving  us  meanwhile,  here  on 
earth,  the  restoring  power 

Bestowed  upon  us. 

O  merciful  Lord  !  look  down 
upon  us  frail  ones,  who  are 
honouring  thy  Majesty ;  O 
best  of  shepherds,  protect  us 
thy  sheep,  now  feeding  on  it  I 

We  offer  thee. 

Protect  them  whom  thou 
refreshest,  lest  the  enemy  may 
crush  us  ;  for  ever  strengthen 
us  by  the  gift 

Bestowed  upon  us. 

For  we  are  im.worthy  that 
thou  shouldst  honour  us  with 
such  a  gift  : 

Do  thou,  in  thine  ov.ti 
mercy,  O  King,  rule  thine 
own  soldiers  ! 

We  offer  thee. 

O  Almighty  Father,  in  thy 
clemency,  grant  us  our  prayer, 
together  with  Christ  and  the 
all-powerful  Spirit,  the  perfect 
Three  and  One  giver  of  the 
gifts 

Bestowed  upon  us. 


tor    sanctissime,    men- 

sam  : 
Tu  licet  indignis  propitiare 

tuis  : 
Here  is  repeated  :  Laudes, 

Omnipotens. 
Propitiare    pius,    peccata 

absolve  benignus  : 
Prosit    ut    invictis    appro- 

piare  sacris 

Here  is  repeated :  Corporis 

immensi. 
Angelus  sethereis  sanctus 

descendat  ab  astris, 
Purificans  corpus,  cor  pari- 

terque  pius. 

Laudes,  Omnipotens. 
Haec  medicina  potens  coeli 
nos  ducat  in  arces, 
Interea  terris  dans  medica- 

men  opis 
Corporis  immensi. 

Quod     colimus     fragiles, 
respice  clemens, 
Summeque    pascentes    pro- 
tege Pastor  oves. 

Laudes'',  Omnipotens. 
Protege      quas      recreas, 

hostis  ne  proterat  illas, 
Consolidans   dono   nos  sine 

fine  tuo 
Corporis  immensi. 
Nam  sumus  indigni  quos 

omes  munere  tali  : 

Tu  pietate   tua,   Eex,  rege 
castra  tua. 

Laudes,  Omnipotens. 
Hoc,    Pater    omnipotens, 
cum  Christo  perfice,  cle- 
mens, 
Spiritus  atque  potens,  trinus 
et  unus  apex 

Corporis  immensi. 


436        FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED   HEART  OF   JESUS. 


FRIDAY 

AFTER   THE   OCTAVE  OF  CORPUS   CHRISTI. 


THE  FEAST  OF  THE  SACRED  HEAET  OF  JESUS. 

A  NEW  ray  of  light  shines  to-day  in  the  heaven  of  holy 
Church,  and  its  light  brings  warmth.  The  divine 
Master  given  to  us  by  our  Redeemer,  that  is,  the 
Paraclete  Spirit,  who  has  come  down  into  this  world, 
continues  his  teachings  to  us,  in  the  sacred  Liturgy. 
The  earliest  of  these  his  divine  teachings  was  the 
mystery  of  the  Trinity  ;  and  we  have  worshipped  the 
Blessed  Three :  we  have  been  taught  who  God  is,  we 
know  him  in  his  own  nature,  we  have  been  admitted, 
by  faith,  into  the  sanctuary  of  the  infinite  Essence. 
Then,  this  Spirit,  the  inighty  icuid  of  Pentecost,' 
opened  to  our  souls  new  aspects  of  the  truth,  which  it 
is  his  mission  to  make  the  world  remember  ;  -  and  hisi 
revelation  left  us  prostrate  before  the  sacred  Host,  the! 
Memorial  which  God  himself  has  left  us  of  all  his! 
wonderful  works.^  To-day,  it  is  the  sacred  Heart  oi 
the  Word  made  flesh  that  this  Holy  Spirit  puts 
before  us,  that  we  may  know  and  love  and  adore  it. 

There  is  a  mysterious  connexion  between  these  three 
Feasts,  of  Trinity,  Corpus  Christi,  and  the  Sacred 
Heart.  The  aim  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  all  three,  is 
this, — to  initiate  us  more  and  more  into  that  knowledge 
of  God  by  faith,  which  is  to  fit  us  for  the  face-to-face 
Vision  in  heaven.  We  have  already  seen  how  God, 
being  made  known  to  us,  by  the  first,  in  himself,  mani- 

1  Acte,  ii.  2.  '  St.  John,  xiv.  26.  '  Ps.  ex.  3. 


FEAST   OF   THE    SACRED    HEART   OF   JESUS.        437 

fests  himself  to  us,  by  the  second,  in  his  outward 
works, — for  the  holy  Eucharist  is  the  memorial,  here 
below,  in  which  he  has  brought  together,  and  with  all 
possible  perfection,  all  those  his  wondrous  works.  But, 
by  what  law  can  we  pass,  so  rapidly,  so  almost 
abruptly,  from  one  Feast,  which  is  all  directly  regard- 
ing God,  to  another,  which  celebrates  his  works,  done 
by  him  to  and  for  us  ?  Then  again :  how  came  the 
divine  thought,  how  came,  that  is,  eternal  Wisdom, 
from  the  infinite  repose  of  the  eternally  blessed  Trinity, 
to  the  external  activity  of  a  love  for  us  poor  creatures, 
which  has  produced  what  we  call  the  Mysteries  of  our 
Redemption  ?  The  Heart  of  the  Man- God  is  the  solu- 
tion of  these  difficulties  ;  it  answers  all  such  questions, 
and  explains  to  us  the  whole  divine  plan. 

"We  knew  that  the  sovereign  happiness  which  is  in 
God,  we  knew  that  the  life  eternal  communicated  from 
the  Father  to  the  Son,  and  from  these  two  to  the 
Holy  Ghost,  in  light  and  love, — was  to  be  given  by  the 
will  of  these  Three  Divine  Persons,  to  created  beings  ; 
not  only  to  those  which  were  purely  spiritual,  but, 
likewise,  to  that  creature  whose  nature  is  the  union  of 
spirit  and  matter,  that  is,  to  Man.  We  are  of  this 
lower  nature ;  and  a  pledge  of  this  life  eternal  was 
given  to  us  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist.  It  is 
by  the  Eucharist  that  Man,  who  has  already  been 
made  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature  ^  by  the  grace  of 
the  sanctifying  Spirit,  is  united  to  the  divine  Word, 
and  is  made  a  true  member  of  this  Only  Begotten  Son 
of  the  Father.  Yes  :  though  it  hath  not  yet  appeared 
what  ive  shall  be,  says  St.  John,  still  we  are  7iow  the 
sons  of  God ;  we  know,  that  when  he  shall  appear^  we 
shall  be  like  to  him^  for  we  are  called  to  live,  as  the 
Word  himself  does,  in  the  society  of  that  eternal 
Father  of  his,  for  ever  and  ever.^ 

But  the  infinite  love  of  the  sacred  Trinity,  which 
thus  called  us  frail  creatures  to  a  participation  in  its 

'  2  St.  Pet.  i.  4.  M  St.  John,  iii.  2.  '  1  St.  John,  i.  3. 


438         FEAST    OF    THE    SACRED    HEART   OF    JESUS. 

own  blessed  life,  would  accomplish  this  merciful  design 
by  the  help  and  means  of  another  love,  a  love  more  like 
what  we  ourselves  can  feel ;  that  is,  the  created  love 
of  a  human  soul,  evinced  by  the  beatings  of  a  Heart  of 
flesh  like  our  own.     The  Angel  of  the  great  Counsel, 
who  is  sent  to  make  known  to  the  world  the  merciful 
designs  of  the  Ancient  of  days,  took  to  himself,  in 
order  to  fulfil  his  divine  mission,  a  created,  a  human 
form ;  and  this  would  enable  men  to  see  with  their 
eyes,  yea,  and  even  touch  with  their  hands,  the  Word 
of  life,  that  life  eternal  which  icas  with  the  Father^  but 
appeared  eve?i  unto  ns.^     This  human  nature,  which 
the  Son  of  God  took  into  personal  union  with  himself, 
from  the  womb  of  the  Virgin- Mother,  was  the  docile  in- 
strument of  infinite  love,  but  it  was  not  absorbed  into, 
or  lost  in,  the  Godhead  ;  it  retained  its  own  substance, 
its  special  faculties,  its  distinct  will,  which  Will  ruled, 
under  the  influence  of  the  divine  Word,  the  acts  and 
movements  of  his  most  holy  Soul  and  adorable  Body. 
From  the  very  first  instant  of  its  existence,  the  human 
Soul  of  Christ  was  inundated,  more  directly  than  was. 
any  other  creature,  with  that  true  light  of  the  Word,! 
which  enlighteneth  every  man  who  cometh  into  thiA 
world  ;  "^  it  enjoyed  the  face-to-face  vision  of  the  divine] 
essence  ;  and,  therefore,  took  in,  at  a  single  glance,] 
the  absolute  beauty  of  the  sovereign  Being,  and  th( 
wisdom  of  the  divine  decree,  which  called  finite  beings] 
into  a  participation  of  infinite  bliss.     It  understood  its] 
sublime  mission,  and  conceived  an  immense  love  for^ 
man  and  for  God.     This  love  began  simultaneously  j 
with  life,  and  filled  not  only  his  soul,  but  impressed,  ii 
its  own  way,  the  Body  too, — the  Body  which  wj 
formed  from  the  substance  of  the  Virgin- Mother,  b] 
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     The  effect  of  hisl 
love  told,  consequently,  upon  his  Heart  of  true  human' 
flesh ;  it  set  in  motion  those  beatings,  which  made  th( 
Blood  of  redemption  circulate  in  his  sacred  veins. 

'  1  St.  John,  i.  *J.  «  St.  John,  i.  9. 


FEAST   OF    THE    SACRED    HEART    OF    JESUS.       439 

For,  it  was  not  with  him  as  with  other  men,  the 
pulsations  of  whose  hearts  are,  at  first,  the  consequence 
of  nothing  but  the  vital  power  which  is  in  the  human 
frame  ;  and,  later  on,  when  age  has  awakened  reason 
into  act,  the  ideas  so  produced  will  produce  physical 
impressions  on  us,  which  will,  now  and  then,  quicken, 
or  dull,  the  throbbings  of  these  our  hearts.  With  the 
Man- God  it  was  not  so  :  his  Heart,  from  the  very  first 
moment  of  its  life,  responded,  that  is,  throbbed,  to  the 
law  of  his  soul's  love,  whose  power  to  act  upon  his 
human  Heart  was  as  incessant,  and  as  intense,  as  is 
the  power  of  organic  vitality, — a  love  as  burning  at 
the  first  instant  of  the  Incarnation,  as  it  is  this  very 
hour  in  heaven.  For  the  human  love  which  the  In- 
carnate "Word  had,  resulting  as  it  did  from  his  intel- 
lectual knowledge  of  God  and  his  creatures,  was  as 
perfect  as  that  knowledge,  and,  therefore,  as  incapable 
of  all  progress ;  though,  being  our  Brother,  and  our 
model  in  all  things,  he,  day  by  day,  made  more 
manifest  to  us  the  exquisite  sensibility  of  his  divine 
Heart. 

At  the  period  of  Jesus'  coming  upon  this  earth,  man 
had  forgotten  how  to  love,  for  he  had  forgotten  what 
true  beauty  was.  His  heart  of  flesh  seemed  to  him  as 
a  sort  of  excuse  for  his  false  love  of  false  goods  :  his 
heart  was  but  an  outlet,  whereby  his  soul  could  stray 
from  heavenly  things  to  the  husks  of  earth,  there  to 
waste  his  power  and  his  substance.^  To  this  material 
world,  which  the  soul  of  man  was  intended  to  make 
subserve  its  Maker's  glory, — to  this  world,  which,  by 
a  sad  perversion,  kept  man's  soul  a  slave  to  his  senses 
and  passions, — the  Holy  Ghost  sent  a  marvellous 
power,  which,  like  a  resistless  lever,  would  replace 
the  world  in  its  right  position  : — it  was  the  sacred 
Heart  of  Jesus ;  a  Heart  of  flesh,  like  that  of  other 
human  beings,  from  whose  created  throbbings  there 
would  ascend  to  the  eternal  Father  an  expression  of 

1  St.  Luke,  XV.  13. 


440        FEAST   OF   THE    SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS. 

love,  whicli  would  be  a  homage  infinitely  pleasing  to 
the  infinite  Majesty,  because  there  was  in  that  love  of 
that  human  Heart  the  dignity  of  its  union  with  the 
"Word.  It  is  a  harp  of  sweetest  melody,  that  is  ever 
vibrating  under  the  touch  of  the  Spirit  of  Love  ;  it 
gathers  up  into  its  own  music  the  music  of  all  crea- 
tion, whose  imperfections  it  corrects,  and  supplies  its 
deficiencies,  and  tunes  all  discordant  voices  into  unity, 
and  so  ofiers  to  the  glorious  Trinity  a  hymn  of  perfect 
praise.  The  Trinity  finds  its  delight  in  this  Heart. 
It  is  the  one  only  organum,  as  St.  Gertrude  calls  it,^ 
the  one  only  instrument  which  finds  acceptance  with 
the  Most  High.  Through  it  must  pass  all  the 
inflamed  praises  of  the  burning  Seraphim, .  just  as 
must  do  the  humble  homage  paid  to  its  God  by  inani- 
mate creation.  By  it  alone  are  to  come  upon  this 
world  the  favours  of  heaven.  It  is  the  mystic  ladder 
between  man  and  God,  the  channel  of  all  graces,  the 
way  whereby  man  ascends  to  God  and  God  descends 
to  man. 

The  Holy  Ghost,  whose  master-piece  it  is,  has 
made  it  a  living  image  of  himself;  for  although,  in 
the  inefi'able  relations  of  the  divine  Persons,  he  is  not 
the  source  of  love,  he  is  its  substantial  expression,  or, 
in  theological  language,  the  term ;  it  is  he  who 
inclines  the  holy  Trinity  to  those  works  outside  itself, 
which  first  produce  creatures,  and  then,  having  given 
them  being,  (and  to  some,  life,)  he  {the  Holy  Spirit) 
pours  out  upon  them  all  the  effusion  of  their  Creator's 
love  for  them.  -And  so  is  it  with  the  love  which  the 
Man-God  has  for  God  and  Man, —  its  direct  and,  so  to 
say,  material  expression  is  the  throbbing  it  produces 
upon  his  sacred  Heart;  and  again,  it  is  by  that  Heart, 
that,  like  the  Water  and  Blood  which  came  from  his 
wounded  Side,  he  pours  out  upon  the  world  a  stream 
of  redemption  and  grace,  which  is  to  be  followed  by 
the  still  richer  one  of  glory. 

^  Legatvs  divina  pUtatis  ;  lib.  ii.  c.  23  ;  lib.  iii.  c.  25. 


FEAST   OF    THE   SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS.       441 

One  of  the  soldiers,  as  the  Gospel  tells  us,  opened 
Jesus'  Side  with  a  spear,  and,  immediately,  there  came 
out  blood  and  waters  We  must  keep  before  us  this 
text  and  the  fact  it  relates,  for  they  give  us  the  true 
meaning  of  the  Feast  we  are  celebrating.  The 
importance  of  the  event  here  related  is  strongly- 
intimated,  by  the  earnest  and  solemn  way  in  which 
St.  John  follows  up  his  narration.  After  the  words 
just  quoted,  he  adds  :  And  he  that  saw  it,  hath  given 
testimony  of  it,  and  his  testimony  is  true.  And  he 
knoweth  that  he  saith  t7nie,  that  ye  also  may  believe;  for 
these  things  were  done,  that  the  Scripture  might  be  ful- 
filled.'^ Here  the  Gospel  refers  us  to  the  testimony  of 
the  Prophet  Zacharias,  who,  after  predicting  the 
Spirit  of  grace  being  poured  out  upon  the  house  of 
David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,^  says  :  Tliey 
shall  look  upon  Him  whom  they  pierced.^ 

And,  when  they  look  upon  his  side  thus  pierced, 
what  will  they  see  there,  but  that  great  truth  which 
is  the  summary  of  all  Scripture — of  all  history : — 
God  so  loved  the  woidd,  as  to  give  it  his  Only  Begotten 
Son  ;  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him,  may  not  perish, 
but  may  have  eternal  life.^  This  grand  truth  was, 
during  the  ages  of  expectation,  veiled  under  types  and 
figures  ;  it  could  be  deciphered  by  but  few,  and,  even 
then,  only  obscurely ;  but  it  was  made  known  with 
all  possible  clearness  on  that  eventful  day,  when,  on 
Jordan's  banks,^  the  whole  sacred  Trinity  manifested 
who  was  the  Elect,  the  Chosen  One,  of  the  Father, — 
the  Son  in  whom  he  was  so  well  pleased.''  Yes,  it 
was  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of  Mary  :  but,  there 
was  another  revelation,  of  deepest  interest  to  us, 
which  had  still  to  be  made :  it  was, — how,  and  in 
what  way,  would  the  eternal  life  brought  by  this  Jesus 


1  St.  John,  xix.  34.  ^  St.  John,  iii.  16. 

2  Ihid.  xix.  35,  36.  «  St.  Luke,  iu.  21,  22. 
»Zach.  xii.  10.  '  Is.  xlii.  1. 

*  Ihid.,  as  quoted  by  St.  John,  xix.  37. 


412        FEAST   OF    THE    SACRED    HEAHT    OF    JESUS. 

into  the  world,  pass  from  him  into  each  one  of  us  ? 
This  second  revelation  was  made  to  us,  when  the 
soldier's  spear  opened  the  divine  source,  and  there 
flowed  from  it  that  Water  and  Blood,  which,  as  the 
Scripture  tells  us,  completed  the  testimony  of  the 
Blessed  Three.  There  are  three,  says  St.  John,  who 
give  testimony  in  heaven :  the  Father,  the  Word,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost :  and  these  Three  are  One.  And  there 
are  three  that  give  testimony  on  earth :  the  Spirit,  and 
the  Water,  and  the  Blood:  and  these  three  are  one, 
that  is,  they  are  one,  because  they  concur  in  giving 
the  one  same  testimony.  And,  this,  continues  St. 
John,  is  the  testimony : — that  God  hath  given  to  us 
eternal  life,  and  that  this  life  is  in  his  Son}  These 
words  contain  a  very  profound  mystery  ;  but  we  have 
their  explanation  in  to-day's  Feast,  which  shows  us 
how  it  is  through  the  Heart  of  the  Man- God  that  the 
divine  work  is  achieved,  and  how,  through  that  same 
Heart,  the  plan,  which  was  conceived,  from  all 
eternity,  by  the  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  has  been 
realised. 

To  communicate  his  own  happiness  to  creatures,  by 
making  them,  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  partakers  of 
his  own  divine  nature,"  and  members  of  his  beloved 
Son, — this  was  the  merciful  design  of  the  Father ;  and 
all  the  works  of  the  Trinity,  outside  itself,  tend  to  the 
accomplishment  of  that  same.  When  the  fulness  of 
time  had  come,  there  appeared  upon  our  earth  He  that 
came  by  ivater  and  blood,  Jesus  Christ, — not  by  water 
only,  but  by  water  and  blood.  The  Spirit,  who,  toge- 
ther with  the  Father  and  the  Son  has  already,  on  the 
banks  of  Jordan,  given  his  testimony,  gives  it  here 
again,  for  St.  John  continues:  And  it  is  the  Spirit 
which  testijieth,  that  Christ  is  the  truth  ;^  and  that  he 
spoke  the  truth  when  he  said  of  himself,  that  he  is 
Life.^    Yes,  the  Spirit,  as  the  Gospel  teaches  us,' 

»  St.  John,  V.  7,  8,  11.  *  St.  John.  v.  26. 

2  St.  Pet.  i.  4.  '  Ibid.  vii.  37-39. 

»  1  St.  John,  V.  6. 


FEAST   OF    THE    SACRED    HEART    OF    JESUS.  443 

comes  forth  with  the  water  from  the  fountains  of  the 
Saviour,^  and  makes  us  worthy  of  the  precious  Blood, 
which  flows  together  with  the  water.     Then  does  man- 
kind, thus  born  again  of  water  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
become  entitled  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  ^ 
and  the  Church,  thus  made  ready  for  her  Spouse  in 
those  same  waters  of  Baptism,  is  united  to  the  Incar- 
nate Word  in  the  Blood  of  the  sacred  Mysteries.  We, 
being  members  of  that  holy  Church,  have  had  the 
same  union  with  Christ ;  ive  are  hone  of  his  hones,  and 
flesh  of  his  flesh ;  ^  we  have  received  the  power  to  be 
made   adopted   Sons  of  God,*  and   sharers,   for   all 
eternity,  of  the  divine  life,  which  He,  the  Son  by 
nature,  has  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father. 

On,  then,  thou  Jew  !  though  ignorant  of  the  nup- 
tials of  the  Lamb,  give,  the  signal  of  their  being  accom- 
plished. Lead  the  Spouse  to  the  nuptial  bed  of  the 
Cross  ;  he  will  lay  himself  down  on  that  most  precious 
Wood,  which  his  mother,  the  Synagogue,  has  made  to 
be  his  couch  ;  she  prepared  it  for  him,  on  the  eve  of 
the  day  of  his  alliance,  when,  from  his  sacred  Heart, 
there  is  to  come  forth  his  Bride,  together  with  the 
Water,  which  cleanses  her,  and  the  Blood,  which  is 
to  be  her  dower.  It  was  for  the  sake  of  this  Bride, 
that  he  left  his  Father,  and  the  bright  home  of  his 
heavenly  Jerusalem  ;  he  ran,  as  a  giant,  in  the  way 
of  his  intense  love  ;  he  thirsted,  and  the  thirst  of  the 
desire  gave  him  no  rest.  The  scorching  wind  of 
suffering  which  dried  up  his  bones,  was  less  active 
than  the  fire  which  burned  in  his  Heart,  and  made  its 
beatings  send  forth,  in  the  agony  in  the  Garden,  the 
Blood  which,  on  the  morrow,  was  to  be  spent  for  the 
redemption  of  his  Bride.  He  has  reached  Calvary,  it 
is  the  end  of  his  journey ;  he  dies  ;  he  sleeps,  with  his 
burning  thirst  upon  him.  But  the  Bride,  who  is 
formed  for  him  during  this  his  mysterious  sleep,  will 

1  Is.  xii.  3.  3  Oen  jj^  23 ;  Eph.  v.  30. 

^  St.  John,  iii.  5.  ''  St.  John,  i.  12. 


444        FEAST    OF    THE    SACRED    HEART   OF   JESUS. 

soon  rouse  him  from  it.  That  Heart,  from  which  she 
was  born,  has  broken,  that  she  might  come  forth ; 
broken,  it  ceased  it  beat,  and  the  grand  hymn  which, 
through  it,  had  been  so  long  ascending  from  earth  to 
heaven,  was  interrupted,  and  creation  was  dismayed 
at  the  interruption.  Now  that  the  world  has  been 
redeemed,  man  should  sing  more  than  ever  the  canticle 
of  his  gratitude  ;  and  the  strings  of  the  harp  are 
broken  !  Who  will  restore  them  ?  Who  will  rewaken 
in  the  Heart  of  our  Jesus  the  music  of  its  divine 
throbbings  ? 

The  new-born  Church,  his  Bride,  is  standing  near 
that  opened  side  of  her  Jesus ;  in  the  intensity  of  her 
first  joy,  she  thus  sings  to  God  the  Father :  /  will 
praise  thee,  0  Lord,  among  the  people,  and  I  ivill  sing 
unto  thee  among  the  nations.  Then,  to  her  Jesus : 
Arise,  thou,  my  glory  1  my  psaltery,  my  harp,  arise  ! 
And  he  arose  in  the  early  morning  of  the  great  Sunday  ; 
his  sacred  Heart  resumed  its  melody,  and,  with  it,  sent 
up  to  heaven  the  music  of  holy  Church,  for  the  Heart 
of  the  Spouse  belongs  to  his  Bride,  and  they  are  now 
two  in  one  flesh.- 

Christ  being  now  in  possession  of  her  who  has  wounded 
his  Heart,^  he  gives  her,  in  return,  full  power  over 
that  sacred  Heart  of  his,  from  which  she  has  issued. 
There  lies  the  secret  of  all  the  Church's  power.  In 
the  relations  existing  between  husband  and  wife,  which 
were  created  by  God,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
and  (as  the  Apostle  assures  us),  in  view  of  this  great 
mystery  of  Christ  and  the  Church,* — man  is  the 
head,^  and  the  woman  may  not  domineer  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  family.  Has  the  woman,  then,  no  power  ? 
She  ha§  power,  and  a  great  power, — she  must  address 
herself  to  her  husband's  heart,  and  gain  all  by  love. 
K  Adam,  our  first  father,  sinned,  it  was  because  Eve 
used,  and  for  evil,  her  influence  over  his  heart,  by 

'  Ps.  cvii.  1-4.  *  Eph.  v.  32. 

2  Gen.  ii.  24  ;  Eph.  v.  31.  M  Cor.  xi.  3. 

»  Cant.  iv.  9. 


FEAST    OF    THE    SACRED    HEAKT    OF   JESUS.        445 

misleading  him,  and  us  in  him  ; — Jesus  saves  us,  be- 
cause the  Church  has  won  his  Heart ;  and  that  human 
Heart  could  not  be  won,  without  the  divinity  also 
being  moved  to  mercy.  And  here  we  have  the  doc- 
trine of  devotion  to  the  sacred  Heart  of  Jesus,  as  far 
as  regards  the  principle  upon  which  it  rests.  In  this 
its  primary  and  essential  notion,  the  devotion  is  as 
old  as  the  Church  herself,  for  it  rests  on  this  truth, 
which  has  been  recognised  in  every  age, — that  Christ 
is  the  Spouse,  and  the  Church  is  his  Bride. 

The  Fathers  and  holy  Doctors  of  the  early  Ages 
had  no  other  way,  than  the  one  we  have  been  putting 
before  our  readers,  when  expounding  the  mystery  of 
the  Church's  having  been  formed  from  Jesus'  side; 
and  the  words  they  used, — though  always  marked 
by  that  reserve  which  was  called  for  by  so  many  of 
their  hearers  being  as  yet  uninitiated, — were  taken 
as  the  text  for  the  sublime  and  fearless  developments 
of  later  Ages.  "  The  initiated,"  says  St.  John  Chry- 
sostom,  *'  know  the  mystery  of  the  Saviour's  foun- 
"  tains  ;  from  those,  that  is,  from  the  Blood  and  the 
"  Water,  the  Church  was  formed  ;  from  those  same, 
''  came  our  Mysteries  ;  so  that,  when  thou  approachest 
"  the  dread  chalice,  thou  must  come  up  to  it,  as 
'^  though  thou  wert  about  to  drink  of  that  very  Side 
*;  of  Christ."  '  "  The  Evangelist,"  says  St.  Augus- 
tine, *'  made  use  of  a  word  which  has  a  special 
"  import,  when  he  said,— the  soldier  opened  Jesus' 
''  Side  witJi  a  sjjear :  he  did  not  say,  struck  the  Side, 
'"■  or  wounded  the  Side,  or  anything  else  like  that ;  but 
"  he  said,  he  opened  Jesus'  Side.  He  opened  it ;  for 
"  that  Side  was  like  the  door  of  life  ;  and  when  it  was 
"  opened,  the  Sacraments  {the  Mysteries)  of  the  Church 
*'  came  through  it.  .  .  .  This  was  predicted  by  that 
"  door  which  JSToe  was  commanded  to  make  in  the 
"  side  of  the  Ark,  through  which  were  to  go  those 
"  living  creatures  which  were  not  to  be  destroyed  by 

^  In  Johan.  Horn.  Ixxxiv.  5. 


446        FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED    HEART   OF   JESUS. 

"  the  deluge ;    and  all  these  things  were  a  figure  of 
"  the  Church."  ' 

Enter  thou  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the  pity^ 
says  Tsaias ;  and  what  means  this,  but  ** enter  into  the 
*'  Side  of  thy  Lord  ?  "  as  the  expression  is  interpreted, 
in  the   13th  Century,  by  Guerric,  a  disciple  of  St. 
Bernard,  and  Abbot  of  Igny.^     St.  Bernard  himself 
thus  comments  the  verses   13  and  14  of  the  second 
Chapter  of  the  Canticle:  ^^ Come,  mij  dove,  in  the  clifts. 
**  of  the  rock,  in  the  hollow  places  of  the  wall :  *    0 
"  beautiful  clifts  of  the  rock,  wherein  the  dove  takes 
**  safe  shelter,  and  fearlessly  looks  at  the  hawk  that 
"  hovers   about !     .     .     .      And   what   may   I   see 
"  through  that  opening  ?     The  iron  hath  pierced  his 
'•  soul,  and  his  Heart  hath  come  near;  so  that,  through 
'■  the  clift,  the  mystery  of  his  Heart  is  made  visible, 
'■  that  great  mystery  of  love,  those  bowels  of  the 
*'  mercy  of  our  God.    .    .    .     What  else  art  thou,  0 
''  Lord,  but  treasures  of  love,  but  riches  of  goodness  ? 
"  .    .    .     I  will  make  my  way  to  those  full  store- 
"  cellars.     I  will  take  the  Prophet's  advice,  and  will 
"  leave  the  cities ;  I  will  dwell  in  the  Rock,  and  be 
'•  like  the  dove  that  maketh  her  nest  in  the  mouth  of  the 
"  hole  in  the  highest  place  J'     Sheltered  there,  like  as 
"  Moses  was  in  the  hole  of  the  Rock,^  I  will  see  my 
''  Lord,  as  he  passes  by." '     In  the  next  century,  we 
have  the  Seraphic  Doctor,  St.  Bonaventure,  telling  us 
in  his  own  beautiful  style,  how  the  new  Eve  was  born 
from  the  Side  of  Christ,  when  in  his  sleep  ;  and  how 
the  spear  of  Saul  was  thrown  at  David,  and  struck 
the  wall,^  as  though  it  would  make  its  way  into  Him, 
of  whom  David  was  but  a  type,  that  is,  into  Christ,  who 
is  the  Rock,^  the  mountain- cave  where  are  salubriou; 
springs,  the  shelter  where  doves  build  their  nests.' 


10 


1  In  Jofian.TTdict. cxx.  2.  ^  Exod.  xxxiii.  22. 

*  Is.  ii.   10.  '  S.  Bern.  Lt  Cant.  Scrm.  Ixi. 
'  In  Dom.  Fsalm.  Serm.iv.  ^  1  Kings,  xviii.  lU,  11. 

*  Cant.  ii.  13   14.  'J  Cor.  x.  4. 

*  Jerein.  xlviii.  28.  "  Lignum  vita: 


FEAST   OF   THE    SACRED   HEAET   OF   JESUS.        447 

Our  readers  will  not  expect  us  to  do  more  than  give 
them  this  general  view  of  the  great  mystery,  and  tell 
them  how  the  holy  Doctors  of  the  Church  spoke  of  it. 
As  far  as  St.  Bernard  and  St.  Bonaventure  are  con- 
cerned, the  devotion  to  the  mystery  of  Christ's  side 
opened  on  the  Cross,  is  but  a  part  of  that  which  they 
would  have  us  show  to  the  other  wounds  of  our  Re- 
deemer. The  sacred  Heart,  as  the  expression  of  Jesus' 
love,  is  not  treated  of,  in  their  writings,  with  the  ex- 
plicitness  wherewith  the  Church  would  afterwards 
put  it  before  us.  For  this  end,  our  Lord  himself 
selected  certain  privileged  souls,  through  whose 
instrumentality,  he  would  bring  the  Christian  world 
to  a  fuller  appreciation  of  the  consequences  which  are 
involved  in  the  principles  admitted  by  the  whole 
Church. 

It  was  on  the  27th  of  January,  in  the  year  1281, 
in  the  Benedictine  Monastery  of  Helfta,  near  Eisleben, 
in  Saxony,  that  our  Divine  Lord  first  revealed  these 
ineffable  secrets  to  one  of  the  Community  of  that 
House,  whose  name  was  Gertrude.  "  She  was  then 
twenty  years  of  age.  The  Spirit  of  God  came 
upon  her,  and  gave  her  her  mission.  She  saw,  she 
heard,  she  was  permitted  to  touch,  and  what  is  more, 
she  drank  of,  that  chalice  of  the  sacred  Heart,  which 
inebriates  the  elect.  She  drank  of  it,  even  whilst  in 
this  vale  of  bitterness  ;  and  what  she  herself  so  richly 
received,  she  imparted  to  others,  who  showed  them- 
selves desirous  to  listen.  St.  Gertrude's  mission  was 
to  make  known  the  share  and  action  of  the  sacred 
Heart  in  the  economy  of  God's  glory  and  the  sanctifi- 
cation  of  souls  ;  and,  in  this  respect,  we  cannot  separate 
her  from  her  companion,  St.  Mechtilde. 

"  On  this  special  doctrine  regarding  the  heart  of  the 
Man-God,  St.  Gertrude  and  St.  Mechtilde  hold  a  very 
prominent  position  among  all  the  Saints  and  mystical 
writers  of  the  Church.  In  saying  this,  we  do  not 
except  even  the  Saints  of  these  later  ages,  by  whom  our 
Lord  brought  about  the  public,  the  official,  worship. 


448        FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED    HEART   OF   JESUS. 

which  is  now  given  to  his  sacred  Heart ;  these  Saints 
have  spread  the  devotion,  now  shown  to  it,  through- 
out the  whole  Church ; — but  they  have  not  spoken 
of  the  mysteries  it  contains  within  it,  with  that  set 
purpose,  that  precision,  that  loveliness,  which  we  find 
in  the  *  Revelations  *  of  the  two  Saints,  Gertrude  and 
Mechtilde. 

"  It  was  the  Beloved  Disciple,  who  had  rested  his 
head  upon  Jesus'  breast,  at  the  Supper,  and  perhaps 
heard  the  beatings  of  the  sacred  Heart, —  the  Dis- 
ciple who,  when  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  had 
seen  that  Heart  pierced  with  the  soldier's  spear, — 
yes,  it  was  he  who  announced  to  Gertrude  its  future 
glorification.  She  asked  him  how  it  was  that  he  had  not 
spoken,  in  his  writings  in  the  New  Testament,  of  what 
he  had  experienced  when  he  reclined  upon  Jesus' 
gacred  Heart :  he  thus  replied  :  *  My  mission  was  to 
write,  for  the  Church  which  was  still  young,  a  single 
word  of  the  uncreated  Word  of  God  the  Father, — 
that  uncreated  Word,  concerning  which  the  intellect 
of  the  whole  human  race  might  be  ever  receiving 
abundant  truth,  from  now  till  the  end  of  the  world, 
and  yet  it  would  never  be  fully  comprehended.  As 
to  the  sweet  eloquence  of  those  throbbings  of  his 
Heart,  it  is  reserved  for  the  time  when  the  world  has 
grown  old,  and  has  become  cold  in  God's  love, — that 
it  may  regain  favour  by  the  hearing  such  revelation." 
{Tlie  Legate  of  Divine  Love.     Bk.  iv.  ch.  4.) 

*'  Gertrude  was  chosen  as  the  instrument  of  that 
revelation ;  and  what  she  has  told  us,  is  exquisitely 
beautiful.  At  one  time,  the  divine  Heart  is  shown  to 
her  as  a  treasure,  which  holds  all  riches  within  it ;  at 
another,  it  is  a  harp  played  upon  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  the  music  which  comes  from  it  gladdens  the 
Blessed  Trinity,  and  all  the  heavenly  court.  It  is  a 
plenteous  spring,  whose  stream  bears  refreshment  to 
the  souls  in  Purgatory,  strength  and  every  other  grace 
to  them  that  are  still  struggling  on  this  earth,  and 
delights  which  inebriate  the  blessed  in  the  heavenly 


FEAST   OF   THE    SACRED    HEART    OF    JESUS.        449 

Jerusalem.  It  is  a  golden  thurible,  whence  there 
ascend  as  many  different  sorts  of  fragrant  incense,  as 
there  are  different  races  of  men,  for  all  of  whom  our 
Redeemer  died  upon  the  Cross.  It  is  an  altar,  upon 
which  the  Faithful  lay  their  offerings,  the  elect  their 
homage,  the  Angels  their  worship,  and  the  eternal 
High  Priest  offers  himself  as  a  Sacrifice.  It  is  a  lamp 
suspended  between  heaven  and  earth.  It  is  a  chalice 
out  of  which  the  Saints,  but  not  the  Angels,  drink, 
though  these  latter  receive  from  it  delights  of  varied 
kinds.  It  was  in  this  Heart,  that  was  formed  and 
composed  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Pater  noster  ;  that 
Prayer  was  the  fruit  of  Jesus'  Heart.  By  that  same 
sacred  Heart,  are  supplied  all  the  negligences  and 
deficiencies  which  are  found  in  the  honour  we  pay  to 
God,  and  his  Blessed  Mother  and  Saints.  The  Heart 
of  Jesus  makes  itself  as  our  servant,  and  our  bond,  in 
fulfilment  of  all  the  obligations  incumbent  on  us ;  in 
it  alone,  do  our  actions  derive  that  perfection,  that 
worth,  which  makes  them  acceptable  in  the  eyes  of 
the  divine  Majesty ;  and  every  grace,  which  flows  from 
heaven  to  earth,  passes  through  that  same  Heart. 
When  our  life  is  at  its  close,  that  Heart  is  the  peace- 
ful abode,  the  holy  sanctuary,  ready  to  receive  our 
souls  as  soon  as  they  have  departed  from  this  world ; 
and  having  received  them,  it  keeps  them  in  itself  for 
all  eternity,  and  beatifies  them  with  every  delight  !"^ 

By  thus  revealing  to  Gertrude  the  admirable  mys- 
teries of  divine  love,  included  in  the  doctrine  which 
attaches  to  the  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus,  the  Holy  Spirit 
was,  so  to  say,  forestalling  the  workings  of  hell,  which, 
two  centuries  later  on,  were  to  find  their  prime  mover 
in  that  same  spot.  Luther  was  born  at  Eisleben,  in 
the  year  1483.     He  was  the  apostle,  after  being  the 


^  Preface  to  the  Revelations  of  St.  Gertrude^  translated  into  French, 
from  the  new  Latin  Edition,  published  by  the  Benedictine  Fathers 
of  Solesmes. 

VOL.  X.  2  G 


450        FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS. 

inventor,  of  theories  the  very  opposite  of  what  the 
Sacred  Heart  reveals.  Instead  of  the  merciful  God, 
as  known  and  loved  in  the  previous  ages,  Luther 
would  have  the  world  believe  him  to  be  the  direct 
author  of  sin  and  damnation,  who  creates  the  sinner 
for  crime  and  eternal  torments,  and  for  the  mere  pur- 
pose of  showing  that  he  could  do  anything,  even 
injustice  !  Calvin  followed  ;  he  took  up  the  blasphe- 
mous doctrines  of  the  German  apostate,  and  rivetted 
the  protestant  principles  by  his  own  gloomy  and 
merciless  logic.  By  these  two  men,  the  tail  of  the 
dragon  dragged  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven.' 
In  the  17th  Century,  the  old  enemy  put  on  hypocrisy, 
in  the  shape  of  Jansenism  ;  changing  the  names  of 
things,  but  leaving  the  things  unchanged,  he  tried  to 
get  into  the  very  centre  of  the  Church,  and  there  pass 
off  his  impious  doctrines ;  and  Jansenism,  which, 
under  the  pretext  of  safeguarding  the  rights  of  God's 
sovereign  dominion,  aimed  at  making  men  forget  that 
he  was  a  God  of  mercy, — Jansenism  was  a  favourable 
system,  wherewith  the  enemy  might  propagate  his  so- 
called  Rcjormatlon,  That  God  who  so  loved  the  icorld!* 
beheld  mankind  discouraged  or  terrified,  and  behaving 
as  though  in  heaven  there  was  no  such  thing  as  mercy, 
still  less,  love.  This  earth  of  ours  was  to  be  made  to 
see,  that  its  Creator  had  loved  it  with  affectionate 
love  ;  that  he  had  taken  a  Heart  of  flesh  in  order  to 
bring  that  infinite  love  within  man's  reach  and  sight ; 
that  he  made  that  human  Heart,  which  he  had  assumed, 
do  its  work,  that  is,  beat  and  throb  from  love,  just  as 
ours  do,  for  he  had  become  one  of  ourselves,  and,  as 
the  Prophet  words  it,  had  taken  the  cords  of  Adam  ;^ 
that  Heart  felt  the  thrill  of  joy  when  duty-doing  made 
us  joyous ;  it  felt  a  weight  and  pang  when  it  saw  our 
sorrows  ;  it  was  gladsome  when  it  found  that,  here 
and  there,  there  would  be  souls  to  love  him  in  return. 

»  Apoc.  xii.  4.  •  St.  John,  iii.  IP.  »  Osee,  xi.  4. 


FEAST  OF   THE   SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUb'.        451 

How  were  men  to  be  told  all  this  ?  Who  would  be 
chosen  to  fulfil  the  prophecy  made  by  Gertrude  the 
Great  ?  Who  would  come  forth,  like  another  Paul  or 
John,  and  teach  to  the  world,  now  grown  old,  the 
language  of  the  divine  throbbings  of  Jesus'  Heart  ? 

There  were  then  living  many  men  noted  for  their 
learning  and  eloquence ;  but  they  would  not  suit 
the  purpose  of  God.  God,  who  loves  to  choose  the 
weak  (and  often  it  is,  that  he  may  confound  the 
strong)/  had  selected  for  the  manifesting  of  the  mys- 
stery  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  a  servant  of  his,  of  whose 
existence  the  world  knew  not ; — it  was  a  Religious 
woman,  who  lived  in  a  monastery  which  had  nothing 
about  it  to  attract  notice.  As,  in  the  13th  Century, 
he  had  passed  by  the  learned  men,  and  even  the  great 
Saints,  who  were  then  living,  and  selected  the  Blessed 
Juliana  of  Liege  as  the  instrument  which  was  to  bring 
about  the  institution  of  the  Corpus  Christi  Feast, — so 
in  this  present  case  :  he  would  have  his  own  sacred 
Heart  be  glorified  in  his  Church  by  a  solemn  Festival ; 
and  he  imparts  and  intrusts  his  wish  to  the  humble 
Yisitandine  of  Paray-le-Monial,  now  known  and 
venerated,  throughout  the  world,  under  the  name  of 
Blessed  Margaret- Mary.  The  mission  thus  divinely 
given  to  her,  was  to  bring  forward  the  treasure,  which 
had  been  revealed  to  St.  Gertrude,  and  which,  all  the 
long  interval,  had  been  known  to  only  a  few  privileged 
souls.  Sister  Margaret- Mary  was  to  publish  the 
secret  to  the  whole  world,  and  make  the  privilege 
cease,  by  telling  every  one  how  to  possess  it.  Through 
this  apparently  inadequate  instrument,  the  Sacred 
Heart  of  Jesus  was  a  heavenly  reaction  ojBPered  to  the 
world  against  the  chillness  which  had  settled  on  its 
old  age  :  it  became  a  touching  appeal  to  all  faithful 
souls  that  they  would  make  reparation  for  all  the  con- 
tempt, and  slight,  and  coldness,  and  sins,  wherewith 

'  1  Cor.  i.  27. 


452        FEAST   OF   THE    SACRED    HEART    OF   JESUS. 

our  age  treats  the  love  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ 
Jesus. 

''  I  was  praying  before  the  Blessed  Sacrament  on 
one  of  the  days  during  the  Octave  "  {of  Corpus  Christi, 
June,   1675,)   says   the   Blessed   Margaret,    "and  I 
received  from  my  God  exceeding  great  graces  of  his 
love.     And,  feeling  a  desire  to  make  some  return,  and 
give  him  love  for  love,  he  said  to  me  :  '  Thou  canst 
not  make  me  a  greater,  than  by  doing  that  which  I 
have  so  often  asked  of  thee.*     He  then  showed  me 
his  divine  Heart,    and  said :    *  Behold   this  Heart, 
which   has   so   loved   men,    as   that   it   has    spared 
nothing,  even  to  the  exhausting  and  wearing  itself 
out,  in  order  to  show  them  its  love  ;  and,  instead  of 
acknowledgment,  I  receive,  from  the  greater  number, 
nothing  but  ingratitude,  by  their   irreverences  and 
sacrileges,  and  by  the  coldness  and  contempt  where- 
with they  treat  me,  in  this  Sacrament  of  love.     But 
what  is  still  more  deeply  felt  by  me  is,  that  they  are 
hearts  which  are  consecrated  to  me,  which  thus  treat 
me.     It  is  on  this  account,  that  I  make  this  demand 
of  thee,— that  the  first  Friday  after  the  Octave  of  the 
Blessed  Sacrament  be  devoted  to  a  special  Feast  in 
honour  of  my  Heart;  that  thou  wilt  go  to  Communion 
on  that  day  ;  and  give  it  a  reparation  of  honour  by  an 
act  of  amendment,  to  repair  the  insults  it  has  received 
during  the  time  of  its  being  exposed  on  the  Altar. 
I  promise  thee,  also,  that  my  Heart  will  dilate  itself, 
that  it  may  pour  forth,  with  abundance,  the  influences 
of  its  divine  love  upon  those  who  shall  thus  honour  it, 
and  shall  do  their  best  to  have  such  honour  paid  to 
it.'**^ 

By  thus  calling  his  servant  to  be  the  instrument  of 
the  glorification  of  his  Sacred  Heart,  our  Lord  made 
her  a  sign  of  contradiction ;  just  as  he  himself  had 
been.*    It  took   more  than   ten  years   for  Blessed 

1  Vie  de  la  BienheurcusCt  tcrite  par  elle-memc. 
»  St.  Luke,  ii.  34. 


FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS.        453 

Margaret  to  get  the  better,  by  dint  of  patience 
and  humility,  of  the  suspicions  wherewith  she  was 
treated  by  the  little  world  around  her,  and  of 
the  harsh  conduct  of  the  Sisters  who  lived  with 
with  her  in  the  same  Monastery,  and  of  trials  of  every 
sort.  At  last,  on  the  21st  of  June,  in  the  year  1686, 
the  Friday  after  the  Octave  of  Corpus  Christi,  she 
had  the  consolation  of  seeing  the  whole  Community 
of  Paray-le-Mouial  kneeling  before  a  picture,  which 
represented  the  Heart  of  Jesus  as  pierced  with  a 
spear;  it  was  the  Heart  by  itself;  it  was  encircled 
with  flames,  and  a  crown  of  thorns,  with  the  Cross 
above  it,  and  the  three  Nails.  That  same  year,  there 
was  begun,  in  the  Monastery,  the  building  of  a  Chapel 
in  honour  of  the  Sacred  Heart;  and  Blessed  Margaret 
had  the  happiness  of  seeing  it  finished  and  blessed. 
She  died  shortly  afterwards,  in  the  year  1690.  But 
all  this  was  a  very  humble  beginning  :  where  was  the 
institution  of  a  Feast,  properly  so  called  ?  and  where 
its  solemn  celebration  throughout  the  Church  ? 

So  far  back  as  the  year  1674,  our  Lord  had,  in  his 
own  mysterious  way,  brought  Margaret-Mary  to  form 
the  acquaintance  of  one  of  the  most  saintly  Religious 
of  the  Society  of  Jesus  then  living, — it  was  Father  De 
la  Colombiere.  He  recognised  the  workings  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  this  his  servant,  and  became  the  devoted 
apostle  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  first  of  all  at  Paray-le- 
Monial,  and,  then,  later  on,  in  our  own  country  of 
England,  where  he  was  imprisoned  by  the  heretics  of 
those  times,  and  merited  the  glorious  title  of  Confessor 
of  the  Faith.  This  fervent  disciple  of  the  Heart  of 
Jesus  died  in  the  year  1682,  worn  out  by  his  labours 
and  sujfferings  ;  but  the  Society,  in  a  body,  inherited 
his  zeal  for  the  propagation  of  devotion  to  the  Sacred 
Heart.  At  once,  numerous  confraternities  began  to 
be  formed,  and  everywhere  there  began  to  be  built 
Chapels,  in  honour  of  that  same  Heart.  Hell  was 
angry  at  this  great  preaching  of  God's  love.     The 


454        FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED    HEART   OF   JESUS. 

Jansensists  were  furious  at  this  sudden  proclamation, 
at  this  apparition^  as  St.  Paul  would  say,  of  the  good- 
ness and  ]dnd)iess  of  God  our  Saviour  ;  ^  and  the  men 
who  were  proclaiming  it,  were  aiming  at  restoring 
hope  to  souls,  in  which  they,  the  Jansenists,  had 
sowed  despondency.  The  big  world  must  interfere ; 
and  it  began  by  talking  of  innovations,  of  scandals,  of 
even  idolatry ;  at  all  events,  this  new  devotion  was, 
to  put  it  mildly,  a  revolting  dissecting  of  the  sacred 
Body  of  Christ !  Erudite  pamphlets  were  published, 
some  theological,  some  physiological,  to  prove  that  the 
Church  should  forbid  the  subject !  Indecent  engrav- 
ings were  circulated,  and  witticisms,  such  as  indigna- 
tion can  make,  were  made,  in  order  to  bring  ridicule 
upon  those  for  whom  the  world  had  coined  the  name 
of  CordicolcEf  or  Heart- Worshippers.^ 

1  Tit.  iii.  4. 

2  In  the  year  1720,  the  City  of  Marseilles  was  visited  by  a 
plague.  It  had  been  brought  by  a  vessel  that  had  come  from 
Syria.  As  many  as  a  thou^^and  a  day  fell  victims  to  the  scourge. 
The  Parliament,  which  was  mainly  composed  of  Jansenists,  had,  of 
course,  fled;  and  there  was  nothing  being  done  to  ttay  the  con- 
tagion from  spreading.  The  then  Bishop,  Monsigneur  de  Belzunce, 
assembled  such  of  his  priests  as  had  been  spared  ;  and,  standing  in 
the  avenue,  which  is  now  called  by  his  name,  he  solemnly  conse- 
crated his  Diocese  to  the  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus.  At  once,  the 
plague  abated,  and  gradually  disai)pcared.  Two  years  later, 
however,  it  again  showed  itself,  and  threatened  to  repeat  its  fierce 
onslaught;  but  it  was  arrested  in  consequence  of  the  City  Magis- 
trates binding  themselves  and  their  successors  for  all  future  ai/es.  by 
a  vow,  to  the  solemn  acts  of  public  worship,  which,  up  to  this 
present  day,  have  proved  a  protection  and  glory  to  the  City  of  St. 
Lazarus. 

These  events  were  noised  throughout  the  world,  and  were  the 
occasion  of  the  Feast  of  the  Sacred  Heart  being  kept,  not  only,  as 
hitherto,  in  the  Monasteries  of  the  Visitation  Order,  but  in  several 
Dioceses  of  France. 

That  noble,  but  tried,  kingdom,  is  now  erecting  a  national 
monument  in  honour  of  the  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus  ;  it  is  the 
splendid  Church  which  is  now  being  built  on  l\loiitniartre,  near 
Paris.  May  that  loving  Heart  of  our  Lord  blcf-s  liis  devoted 
France,  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Church  !  Like  the  Church,  she 
is  under  terrible  trials;  and  as  they  are  companions  in  affliction, 
may  they,  through  the  mercy  of  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  be  soon  united 
in  prosperity,  and  work  together  for  the  happiness  of  the  world  ! 


FEAST    OF    THK    SACRED    HEART    OF    JESUS.        455 

But,  human  wisdom,  or  human  prejudice,  or  even 
human  ridicule,  cannot  withstand  God's  purposes.  He 
wished  that  human  hearts  should  be  led  to  love,  and 
therefore  worship,  the  Sacred  Heart  of  their  Redeemer  ; 
and  he  inspired  his  Church  to  receive  the  devotion, 
which  would  save  so  many  souls,  though  the  world 
might  not  take  heaven's  view.  The  Apostolic  See  had 
witnessed  all  this  ;  and,  at  last,  gave  its  formal  sanc- 
tion. Rome  had  frequently  granted  Indulgences  in 
favour  of  the  devotions  privately  practised  towards  the 
Sacred  Heart ;  she  had  published  innumerable  Briefs 
for  the  establishment  of  local  Confraternities,  under 
that  title ;  and,  in  the  year  1765,  in  accordance  with 
the  request  made  by  the  Bishops  of  Poland  and  the 
Arch- Confraternity  of  the  Sacred  Heart  at  Rome, 
Pope  Clement  the  Thirteenth  issued  the  first  pontifical 
decree  in  favour  of  the  Feast  of  the  Heart  of  Jesus, 
and  approved  of  a  Mass  and  Ofiice,  which  had  been 
drawn  up  for  that  Feast.  The  same  favour  was 
gradually  accorded  to  other  Churches,  until,  at  length, 
on  the  23rd  of  August,  1856,  Pope  Pius  the  Ninth,  of 
glorious  memory,  at  the  instance  of  all  the  Bishops  of 
France,  issued  the  Decree  for  the  inserting  the  Feast 
of  the  Sacred  Heart  on  the  Calendar,  and  making 
obligatory  its  celebration  by  the  universal  Church. 

The  glorification  of  the  Heart  of  Jesus  called  for 
that  of  its  humble  handmaid.  On  the  18th  of  Sep- 
tember, 1864,  the  Beatification  of  Margaret-Mary  was 
solemnly  proclaimed  by  the  same  Sovereign  Pontiff, 
who  had  put  the  last  finish  to  the  work  she  had  begun, 
and  given  it  the  definitive  sanction  of  the  Apostolic 
See. 

From  that  time  forward,  the  knowledge  and  love  of 
the  Sacred  Heart  have  made  greater  progress,  than 
they  had  done  during  the  whole  two  previous  centuries. 
In  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  we  have  heard  of  Com- 
munities, Religious  Orders,  and  whole  Dioceses,  conse- 
crating themselves  to  this  source  of  every  grace,  this 


456 


MASS. 


sole  refuge  of  the  Church  in  these  sad  times.  There 
have  been  pilgrimages  made  of  thousands,  from  every 
country,  to  the  favoured  sanctuary  of  Paray-le-Monial, 
where  it  pleased  the  Divine  Heart  to  first  manifest 
itself,  in  its  visible  form,  to  us  mortals. 

We  now  put  before  our  readers  the  Mass,  which 
has  been  approved  of  for  our  Feast. 


MASS. 

In  the  liturgy  of  this  Feast,  there  is  scarcely  any 
mention  made  of  the  Heart  of  Flesh  assumed  by  our 
Saviour.  When,  in  the  last  century,  there  was  ques- 
tion of  approving  a  Mass  and  Office  in  honour  of  the 
Sacred  Heart,  the  Jansenists,  who  had  zealous 
partisans  even  in  Rome,  excited  so  much  opposition, 
that  the  Apostolic  See  did  not  deem  it  prudent  to 
speak  openly,  at  that  early  period,  on  the  points 
which  some  so  angrily  disputed.  It,  however, 
readily  granted,  both  to  Portugal  and  the  Republic  of 
Venice,  an  Office,  in  which  the  Heart  of  Jesus j  victim 
of  love,  and  pierced  with  a  spear,  was  ofi'ered  to  the 
adorations  of  the  Faithful.  But,  in  the  Mass  and 
Office  which  Rome  afterwards  gave  for  the  general 
use,  she,  out  of  a  motive  of  prudence,  kept  to  the 
glorification  of  our  Redeemer's  love,  of  which  it  could 
not  reasonably  be  denied  that  his  Heart  of  Flesh  was 
the  true  and  direct  symbol. 

Thus,  the  Introit,  which  is  taken  from  Jeremias, 
extols  the  infinite  mercies  of  him,  whose  heart  has  not 
cast  ofi"  the  children  of  men. 

INTROIT. 

Miserebitur  secundum  He  will  have  mercy  accord- 
multitudinem  miscrationum  ing  to  the  multitude  of  hi» 
suanmi :    non    eiiim   humi-     mercies :    for     he    hath     not 


FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS.        457 


willingly  afflicted,  nor  cast  off 
the  children  of  men  :  the  Lord 
is  good  to  them  that  hope  in 
him,  to  the  soul  that  seeketh 
him,  alleluia,  alleluia. 

Fs.  The  mercies  of  the  Lord 
I  will  sing  for  ever  :  to  gene- 
ration and  generation. 

f.  Glory,  etc.  He  will  have 
mercy. 


liavit  ex  corde  suo,  et  abje- 
cit  filioa  hominum :  bonus 
est  Dominus  sperantibus  in 
eum,  animse  quserenti 
ilium,  alleluia,  alleluia. 

Fs.  Misericordias  Domini 
in  ff)temum  cantabo :  in 
generationem  et  genera - 
tionem. 

f.  Gloria  Patri.  Mise- 
rabitur. 


The  Churcb,  deeply  moved  with  gratitude  for  the 
immense  blessings  brought  to  her  by  the  Sacred 
Heart,  prays,  in  her  Collect,  that  her  children  may 
have  the  grace  to  appreciate  those  divine  benefits,  and 
receive,  with  holy^o?/,  the  fruits  they  are  intended  to 
produce. 


COLLECT. 


Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
almighty  God,  that  we,  who 
glory  in  the  most  sacred 
Heart  of  thy  beloved  Son,  and 
celebrate  the  singular  benefits 
of  his  love  towards  us,  may 
rejoice  both  in  their  accom- 
plishment, and  in  the  fruit 
they  produce.     Through,  etc. 


Concede,  qusesumus  om- 
nipotens  Deus  :  ut,  qui  in 
sanctissimo  dilecti  Filii 
tui  Corde  gloriantes,  prse- 
cipua  in  nos  charitatis  ejus 
beneficia  recolimus,  eorum 
pariter  et  actu  delectemur 
et  fructu.     Per  eumdem. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  from  the  Prophet 
Isaias. 

Ch.  XII. 

I  will  give  thanks  to  thee, 
O  Lord,  for  thou  wast  angry 
with  me ;  thy  wrath  is  turned 
away,  and  thou  hast  comforted 
me.  Behold,  God  is  my 
Saviour  ;  I  will  deal  confi- 
dently, and  vpill  not  fear  :  be- 


Lectio    Isaise    Prophetse. 

Cap.  XII. 

Confitebor  tibi,  Domine, 
quoniam  iratus  es  mihi : 
conversus  est  furor  tuus,  et 
consolatus  es  me.  Ecce  Deus 
Salvator  mens,  fiducialiter 
agam,  et  iion  timebo  :  quia 
fortitudo  mea,  et  laus  mea 


458 


MASS. 


Dominus,  et  factiis  est  milii 
in  salutem.  Haurietis  aquas 
in  gaudio  de  f ontibus  Salva- 
toris,  et  dicetis  in  die  ilia  : 
Confitemini  Domino,  et 
invocate  Nomen  ejus  :  me- 
nientote  quoniam  excelsum 
est  Noinen  ejus.  Cantate 
Domino  quoniam  magnifice 
fecit  :  annuntiate  hoc  in 
universa  terra.  Exsulta,  et 
lauda,  habitatio  Sion  :  quia 
magnus  in  medio  tui  Sanc- 
tus  Israel. 


cause  the  Lord  is  my  strength, 
and  my  praise,  and  he  is  be- 
come my  salvation.  Ye  shall 
draw  waters,  with  joy,  out  of 
the  Saviour's  fountains,  and 
ye  shall  say,  in  that  day  : 
Praise  ye  the  Lord,  and  call 
upon  his  Name  :  remember 
that  his  Name  is  high.  Sing 
ye  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath 
done  great  things  :  show  this 
forth,  in  all  the  earth.  Rejoice, 
and  praise,  O  thou  habitation 
of  Sion  :  for  great  is  he,  that 
is  in  the  midst  of  thee,  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel. 


My  people  have  done  two  eviLs,  said  God,  in  the 
ancient  Covenant :  thei/  have  forsaken  me,  tJie  fountain 
of  living  water,  and  have  digged  to  themselves  cisterns, 
broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  ivater}  How  wonderful 
is  this  complaint  !  it  is  made  by  infinite  love,  on 
seeing  his  proffered  benefits  refused.  And  what  is 
still  more  wonderful,  the  God  who  is  thus  slighted  by 
his  ungrateful  children,  who  pretend  to  find  their 
happiness  in  something  which  is  not  Himself, 
overlooks  the  insult,  to  consult  for  the  remedying  of 
their  misery.  He  is  touched  at  seeing  these  poor 
mistaken  children  trying  to  get  their  burning  thirst 
quenched  by  created  things,  whereas  He  alone  can 
quench  it.  Material  goods,  and  outward  beauty,  have 
misled  them,  and  made  them  slaves  to  their  sensual 
appetites :  their  soul,  which  was  created  for  infinite 
good,  has  thought  it  might  find  its  rest  in  those  feeble 
and  flittering  reflections  of  the  sovereign  beauty, — 
reflections  and  images  which  were  intended  to  lead 
them  to  the  divine  reality.  How  lead  back  to  the 
living  fountain  the  poor  creature  who  has  been  made 
a  dupe  of  the  mirage  of  the  desert,  and  is  rushing  on 


*  Jerem.  ii.  13. 


FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED   HEAllT   OF   JESUS.        459 

deeper  and  deeper  into  the  scorching  sands  ?  O 
Israel !  sing  praise  to  thy  Lord  !  And  thou,  Sion, 
bless  thy  God  for  his  infinite  mercy  towards  thee  ! 
Water  has  sprung  forth  from  the  Rock  which  thou 
hast  met  in  the  wilderness,  where  the  madness  of  thy 
guilty  fever  kept  thee  a  wanderer.  On  the  very  steep 
which  was  urging  thee  to  flesh,  thou  hast  met  thy 
Jesus  ;  he  has  made  himself  thy  companion  on  the 
way  of  this  earth's  life  ;  he  is  God,  but  he  has  been 
made  Flesh,  that  so,  for  thy  soul's  good,  he  might 
draw  thee  as  the  Prophet  foretold,  loith  the  cords  of 
Adam,^  that  is,  by  the  love  and  loveliness  of  that 
Heart  of  his  own  sacred  Flesh,  lead  thee  to  the 
object  which  was  to  satisfy  thine  own  heart,  and  for 
which  thou  wast  created.  Thus  made  captive  to  the 
Infinite  by  the  bands  of  this  love  which  Jesus  showed 
thee,^  thou  hast  found  thyself  within  reach  of  the 
fountain  of  water,  ivhich  springeth  up  into  life  ever- 
lasting : ^  and  thy  joy  at  finding  thy  Saviours  foun- 
tains has  made  thee  loathe  the  muddy  water  of  the 
broken  cisterns  of  old.  Thy  thirst  keeps  on,  but  the 
water  is  ever  there  for  thee  to  drink  in  as  deeply  as 
thou  wiliest :  thou  hast  the  Sacred  Heart,  which  was 
opened  for  thee  by  the  soldier's  spear.  Thirst,  and 
drink,  and  both  for  ever  ! 

The  immense  love  which  fills  the  Heart  of  the 
Man- God,  and  has  led  him  to  undergo  unparalleled 
sufferings  in  order  to  save  us ;  the  meekness  and 
humility  of  that  divine  Heart,  which  he  himself  would 
have  us  take  as  the  chief  characteristic  of  his  whole 
life  ; — these  are  the  mysteries  proposed  by  the  Gradual 
and  Alleluia- Yerse,  that  we  may  know  them,  and  let 
them  influence  our  conduct. 


^  Osce,  xi.  4.  2  jfji^^  3  g^^  John,  iv. 


460 


MASS. 


GRADUAL. 


O  vos  omnes,  qui  transi- 
tis  per  viam,  attend! te,  et 
videte,  si  est  dolor  sicut 
dolor  meus. 

y.  Cum  dilexisset  suos, 
qui  erant  in  mundo,  in  finem 
dilexit  eos. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Discite  a  me,  quia 
mitis  sum  et  humilis  corde  : 
et  invenietis  requiem  anima- 
bus  vestris.  Alleluia. 


O  all  ye  that  pass  by  the  way, 
attend  and  see  if  there  be  any 
sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow. 

y.  Having  loved  his  own, 
who  were  in  the  world,  he 
loved  them  unto  the  end. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Learn  of  me,  because  I 
am  meek  and  humble  of  heart : 
and  ye  shall  find  rest  to  your 
souls.  Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia    sancti    Evan- 
gelii  secundum  Johannem. 

Cap.  XIX. 
In  illo  tempore  :  Judaei 
(quoniam  Parasceve  erat)  ut 
non  remanerent  incruce  cor- 
pora Sabbato  (erat  enim 
magnus  dies  ille  Sabbati) 
rogaverunt  Pilatum  ut  fran- 
gerentur  eorum  crura,  et 
toUerentur.  Yenerunt  ergo 
milites  :  et  primi  quid  em 
fregerunt  crura,  et  alterius, 
qui  crucifixus  est  cum  eo. 
Ad  Jesum  autem  cum  venis- 
sent,  ut  viderunt  eum  jam 
mortuum,  non  fregerunt 
ojus  crura  ;  sed  unus  militum 
lancea  latus  ejus  aperuit,  et 
continuo  exivit  sanguis  et 
aqua.  Et  qui  vidit  testimo- 
nium perhibuit :  et  verum  est 
testimonium  ejus. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  John. 

Ch.  XIX, 
At  that  time :  The  Jews, 
(because  it  was  the  Parasceve), 
that  the  bodies  might  not  re- 
main upon  the  cross  on  the 
Sabbath-day,  (for  that  was  a 
great  Sabbath-day),  besought 
Pilate  that  their  legs  might 
be  broken,  and  that  they  might 
be  taken  away.  The  soldiers, 
therefore,  came  :  and  they 
broke  the  legs  of  the  first,  and 
of  the  other  that  was  crucified 
with  him.  But,  after  they 
were  come  to  Jesus,  when  they 
saw  that  he  was  already  dead, 
they  did  not  break  his  legs ; 
but  one  of  the  soldiers,  with  a 
spear,  opened  his  side,  and, 
immediately,  there  came  out 
blood  and  water.  And  he 
that  saw  it,  hath  given  testi- 
mony :  and  his  testimony  is 
true. 


We   have   already   explained  this  passage  of  St. 


FEAST   OF   THE    SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS.        461 

John's  Gospel ;  and,  in  doing  so,  we  brought  it  into 
juxtaposition  with  certain  texts  from  the  first  Epistle 
of  the  same  Apostle,  which  throw  such  light  on  what 
the  Gospel  relates  regarding  the  opening  of  Jesus' 
Side.  Let  us  imitate  our  Mother,  the  Church,  who 
hears  these  mysterious  words  with  such  profound 
attention.  This  Gospel  tells  us  of  the  beautiful  path 
by  which  she  first  came.  Yes,  she  was  born  from 
the  Heart  of  the  Man-God.  It  seems  to  us,  — now 
that  we  know  what  we  do, — that  she  could  not  have 
had  any  other  beginning  than  this  ;  for  she  is  the 
work,  by  excellence,  of  his  love  ;  and  it  is  for  this  his 
Bride,  that  he  has  accomplished  all  his  other  works. 
Eve  was  taken  from  Adam's  side,  and  it  was  done 
as  a  figure  of  a  future  mystery ;  but,  for  that  very 
reason  of  its  being  a  type  and  prediction,  no  trace  was 
to  be  left  of  the  fact  itself. '  But  in  the  mysterious 
fulfilment  of  the  figure,  that  is,  in  the  Side  of  our 
Jesus  being  opened,  that  his  Bride,  the  Church,  might 
come  forth,  the  trace  was  to  remain  for  ever.  As 
often  as  she  looks  at  this  wound,  she  is  reminded  of 
her  glorious  origin ;  and  that  open  Side  is  like  a 
ceaseless  telling  her,  that  she  has  but  to  go  to  that 
Sacred  Heart,  and  there  she  will  find  everything  she 
needs  for  her  children. 

The  Offertory  is  taken  from  the  102nd  Psalm,  that 
magnificent  hymn  of  love  and  gratitude,  which  extols 
the  numberless  favours  and  infinite  mercies  of  God. 

OFFERTORY. 

Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul  :  Benedic,  anima  mea,  Do- 

and  never  forget  all  he  hath  mino    :     et    noli     oblivisci 

done  for  thee  :  who  satisfieth  omnes   retributiones   ejus  : 

thy  desire  with  good  things,  qui  replet  in  bonis  deside- 

alleluia.  rimn  tuum,  alleluia. 

Let  us,  in  the  Secret,  unite  with  the  Church  in 


462 


MASS. 


imploring  of  our  Lord  to  enkindle  within  our  souls 
the  flames  of  his  holy  love,  that  thus  our  hearts  may 
be  in  unison  with  that  of  our  great  High  Priest,  who 
ofi'ers  a  Sacrifice,  which  is  both  his  own  and  ours. 

After  the  Secret,  follows  the  Preface  ;  it  is  that  of 
the  holy  Cross.  Our  Jesus  was  still  attached  to  the 
sacred  Wood,  when  his  Heart  was  pierced  and  opened. 
The  choice  of  such  a  Preface  was  an  act  of  reverential 
love  paid,  by  our  holy  Mother,  to  the  glorious 
instrument,  which  gave  her  life  by  working  her 
redemption. 

SECRET. 


Tuere  nos,  Domine,  tua 
tibi  holocausta  offerentes  : 
ad  quag  ut  ferventius  corda 
nostra  praeparentur,  flam- 
mis  adure  tuae  divinsB  clia- 
ritatis.     Qiii  vivis. 


Defend  us,  O  Lord,  who 
offer  to  thee  thy  holocaust : 
and,  that  our  hearts  may  be 
more  fervently  prepared  for  it, 
enkindle  within  them  the 
flames  of  thy  divine  charity. 
Who  livest,  etc. 


PREFACE. 


Vere  dignum  et  justum 
est,  sequum  et  salutare,  nos 
tibi  semper,  et  ubique  gra- 
tias  agere,  Domine  sancte, 
Pater  omuipotens,  seteme 
Deus  :  qui  salutem  humani 
generis  in  ligno  crucis  con- 
stituisti :  ut  imde  mors 
oriebatur,  inde  vita  resur- 
geret  :  et  qui  in  ligno  vin- 
cebat,  in  ligno  quoque  vin- 
ceretur  :  per  Christum  Do- 
minum  nostrum.  Per  qucm 
majestatem  tuam  laudant 
Angeli,  adorant  Dominatio- 
nes,  tremunt  Potestates. 
Coeli,  coelorumque  ^^rtu- 
tes,  ac  beata  Seraphim, 
socia   exsultatione   concole- 


.  It  is  truly' meet  and  just, 
right  and  available  to  salva- 
tion, that  we  should,  always 
and  in  all  places,  give  thanks 
to  thee,  O  holy  Lord,  Father 
almighty,  eternal  God  :  who 
hast  appointed,  that  the  sal- 
vation of  mankind  should  be 
wrought  on  the  wood  of  th*^ 
Cross:  that,  from  whence  death 
came,  thence  life  might  arise  : 
and,  that  he,  who  overcame 
by  the  tree,  might  also,  by  the 
Tree,  be  overcome :  through 
Christ  our  Lord.  By  whom 
the  Angels  praise  thy  majesty, 
the  Dominations  adore  it,  the 
Powers  tremble  before  it.  The 
Heavens    and     the    heavenly 


FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS.        463 

Virtues,  and  the  blessed  Sera-  brant.     Cum  quibus  et  nos- 

phiin,   with   common  jubilee,  tras  voces,  ut  admitti  jubeas 

glorify    it.       Together    with  deprecamur,    supplici   con- 

whom,  we  beseech  thee,  that  fessione   dicentes :   Sanctus, 

we  may  be  admitted  to  join  Sanctus,  Sanctus,  etc. 
our    humble   voices,    saying : 
Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  etc. 

In  order  to  excite  in  her  children,  sentiments  of 
reparation  to  the  Sacred  Heart,  which  is  so  much  in 
the  spirit  of  this  Feast,  the  Church,  at  the  moment 
of  Communion,  reminds  them  how  their  Jesus  was 
ahandoned,  when  in  the  midst  of  the  sufferings,  which 
he  endured  out  of  love  for  us. 


COMMUNION. 

My    Heart    hath    expected  Improperium  exspectavit 

reproach  and  misery  :    and  I  cor   meum,  et  miseriam  :   et 

looked    for    one,    that   would  sustmui  qui    simul  contris- 

grieve  together  with  me,  but  taretur,  et  non  fuit :   et   qui 

there  was  none :    and  for  one  consolaretur,  et  non  inveni. 

that  would  comfort  me,  and  I  alleluia, 
found  none,  alleluia. 

The  Church  who  has  just  heen  so  closely  united 
with  her  Spouse  in  these  sacred  Mysteries,  is  ahle  to 
understand,  all  the  more  fully,  the  lessons  given  to 
her  hy  the  Sacred  Heart.  She  prays  that  her 
children  may  increase  in  true  humility,  may  ahhor 
the  pride  which  is  so  rife  in  this  fallen  world,  and 
prove  themselves  to  he  the  disciples  of  Him,  who  was 
meek  and  humble  of  Heart. 


POSTCOMMUNION. 

Being    fed    with     peaceful  Pacificis  pasti  deliciis,  et 

delights,  and  life-giving  Sacra-  salutaribus  Sacramentis,  te 

ments,  we  suppliantly  beseech  supplices  exoramus,  Domine 

thee,   O  Lord  our   God,  that  Deus    noster :  ut  qui  mitis 


464        FEAST   OF   THE   SACRED   HEART   OF   JESUS. 

es  et  huinilis  corde,  nos  a  thou,  who  art  meek  and  hum- 
vitionim  labe  purgatos,  ble  of  Heart,  wouldst  make  us 
propensius  facias  a  super-  to  be  clean  from  the  stain  of 
bis  saeculi  vanitatibus  abhor-  every  vice,  and  more  stead- 
rere.     Qui  vivis.  fastly    to    abhor    the    proud 

vanities  of  the  world.     Who 

livest,  etc. 

We  here  give  the  three  Hymns  of  this  Feast ;  they 
are  full  of  beauty  and  sublime  teaching. 


' 


HYMN    FOR   VESPERS. 


Auctor  beate  saeculi, 
Christe      Redemptor      om- 
nium. 
Lumen  Patris  de  lumine 
Deusque  verus  de  Deo. 

Amor  coegit  te  tuus 
Mortale  corpus  sumere, 
Ut  novus  Adam  redderes. 
Quod  vetus  ille  abstulerat  : 

Ille  amor  almus  artifex 
Teirae,    marisque     et    side- 
rum. 
Errata  patrum  miserans, 
Et  nostra  rumpens  vincula. 

Non  corde  discedat  tuo 
Vis  ilia  amoris  inclyti  : 
Hoc  fonte  gentes  hauriant 
Remissionis  gratiam. 


Percussum     ad    hoc    est 
lancea, 
Passumque  ad  hoc  est  vul- 

nera, 
Ut  nos  lavarct  sordibus 
Unda  fluente  et  sanguine. 

Decus  parenti  ct  Filio, 
Sanctoque  sit  Spiritui, 
Quibus  potestas,  glona, 
Regnumque    in    omne     est 
sajculum. 
Amen. 


O  blessed  Creator  of  this 
world,  Christ,  Redeemer  of  all 
men,  Light  of  the  Father's 
Light,  and  true  God  of  God  ! 


It  was  thy  love  compelled 
thee  to  assume  a  mortal  body, 
that  thou,  the  New  Adam, 
mightest  restore,  what  the  Old 
one  had  taken  from  us. 

That  gracious  love,  which 
had  created  this  earth,  and  sea, 
and  stars,  had  pity  on  the  sins 
of  our  first  Parents,  and  broke 
our  chains. 

Let  not  the  vehemence  of 
thine  admirable  love  depart 
from  thy  Heart  ;  and  let  all 
nations  come  to  this  Fount, 
and  thence  draw  the  grace  of 
pardon. 

For  this  was  it  struck  by  the 
spear,  for  this  it  suffered  the 
wounds,  that  it  might  cleanse 
us  from  our  defilements,  by 
the  Water  and  Blood  which 
flowed  from  it. 

Be  honour  to  the  Father, 
and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the 
Holy  Ghost !  To  whom  are 
power,  glory,  and  the  King- 
dom, for  aU  ages  ! 

Amen. 


FEAST   OF   THE    SACRED    HEART   OF    JESUS.         465 


HYMN    FOR    MATIN 6. 


O  see !  how  the  haughty  and 
savage  host  of  our  sins  has 
wounded  the  innocent  Heart 
of  our  God,  who  deserved  far 
other  treatment ! 

It  is  our  sins  that  direct  the 
spear  of  the  soldier  who 
brandishes  it ;  and  deadly  sin 
it  is,  that  sharpens  the  steel  of 
the  cruel  lance. 

From  this  wounded  Heart, 
is  born  the  Church,  the  Bride 
of  Christ  :  this  opened  Side  is 
the  door  put,  for  the  salvation 
of  his  people,  in  the  side  of  the 
Ark. 

From  this  there  flows  a 
perennial  grace,  like  a  seven- 
fold stream  ;  that  there,  in  the 
Blood  of  the  Lamb,  we  may 
wash  our  sullied  robes. 

It  is  a  crying  shame  if  we 
repeat  our  sins,  which  wound 
that  Blessed  heart ;  no ;  let  us 
strive  to  put  within  our  hearts 
the  flames  which  burn  round 
His,  and  are  the  symbols  of 
its  love. 

Give  us  this  grace,  O  Jesus ! 
give  it  us,  thou,  O  Father!  and 
thou,  O  Holy  Spirit!  To 
whom  are  power,  glory,  and 
the  Kingdom,  for  all  ages  ! 

Amen. 


En  ut  superba  criminum 
Et  saeva  nostrorum  cohors 
Cor  sauciavit  innocens 
Merentis  baud  tale  Dei. 

Vibrantis  hastam  militis 
Peccata  nostra  dirigunt, 
Ferrumque  dirse  cuspidis 
Mortale  crimen  acuit. 

Ex  corde  scisso  Ecclesia 
Christo  jugata  nascitur  : 
Hoc  ostium  arcae  in  latere 

est 
Genti  ad  salutem  positum. 

Ex  hoc  perennis  gratia, 
Ceu  septiformis  fluvius ; 
Stolas  ut  illic  sordidas 
Lavemus  Agni  in  sanguine. 

Turpe   est  redire  ad  cri- 
mina, 
Quae  cor  beatum  lacerent ; 
Sed  aemulemur  cordibus 
Flammas  amoris  indices. 


Hoc,  Christe,  nobis,  hoc, 
Pater, 
Hoc,  sancte,  dona,  Spiritus, 
Quibus  potestas,  gloria, 
Eegnumque    in    omne    est 
saeculum. 
Amen. 


HYMN    FOR   LAUDS. 


O  Heart !  thou  ark  holding 
within  thee  the  Law,  not  of 
the  old  bondage,  but  of  grace, 
and  of  pardon,  and  of  mercy. 


VOL.   X. 


Cor  area  legem  continens, 
Non  servitutis  veteris, 
Sed  gratiae,  sed  veniae, 
Sed  et  misericordiae. 

2H 


466      FEAST    OF   THE    SACRED    HEART   OF   JESUS. 


Cor  sanctuarium  novi 
Intemeratmn  foederis, 
Templum  vetusto  sanctius, 
Velumque  scissuni  utilius. 


Te  vulneratum  charitas 
Ictu  patent!  volnit, 
Amoris  invisibilis 
Ut  veneremur  vulnera. 


Hoc  sub  amoris  symbolo 
Passus  cruenta  et  mystica, 
ITtrumque  sacrificium 
Christus  sacerdos  obtulit. 

Quis  non  amantem  reda- 
mct  ? 
Quis  non  redemptus  diligat, 
Et  corde  in  isto  seligat 
-Sltema  tabemacnla  ? 


Decus  Parenti  et  Filio, 
Sanctoque  sit  Spiidtui, 
Quibus  potestas,  gloria, 
Eognunique    in    omne    est 
saeculum. 

Amen. 


O  Heari;  !  Thou  spotless 
Sanctuary  of  the  New  Cove- 
nant !  Thou  Temple,  holier 
than  the  one  of  old !  Thou 
Veil,  that  wast  torn,  but  by  a 
tearing  of  such  greater  boon 
to  us  ! 

It  was  thy  love  that  would 
have  thy  Heari;  wounded  with  i 
this  open  Wound,  that  we 
might  see  (through  it)  the 
wounds  of  thine  unseen  love, 
and  venerate  them. 

Under  this  symbol  of  love. 
Christ,  our  High  Priest,  having:: 
suffered  both  cruelly  and 
mystically,  offered  the  twofold 
Sacrifice. 

"VVho  would  not  love  tht 
Saviour  who  loves  him  ?  Who 
would  not  love  Him,  by  whom 
he  has  been  redeemed  ?  "VMi 
would  not  wish  to  take  up  hi- 
abode  for  ever  in  this  hi^ 
Jesus'  Heart. 

Be  honour  to   the  Father, 
and  to  the   Son,  and  to  th' 
Holy   Ghost !    To   whom   ar. 
power,  glory,  and  the   King- 
dom, for  all  ages ! 

Amen. 


THIRD    SU:NDAY   AFTER    PENTECOST.  467 


THE  THIED  SUNDAY  AFTEH  PENTECOST. 


MASS. 

The  faithful  soul  lias  witnessed,  througli  tlie  sacred 
Liturgy,  the  close  of  the  mysteries  of  our  Redemption, 
which  were  wrought,  in  succession,  by  our  Jesus,  and 
applied  to  us,  one  after  the  other,  by  his  Church,  in 
her  divine  worship  of  them.  The  Holy  Grhost  has 
been  sent,  by  the  Father  and  Son,  and  he  has  lovingly 
and  graciously  come,  to  continue  amongst  us  the  work 
of  the  Incarnate  Word.  He,  the  Spirit  of  the  Father 
and  Son,  is  come  to  support  the  Christian  in  this 
second  portion  of  both  time  and  season  ;  it  is,  as  far  as 
the  Year  of  Grace  is  concerned,  the  second  portion  of 
that  Year ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  rule  it ;  and  he 
does  so  by  bringing  before  us  gradually,  we  might  say, 
week  by  week  of  this  Time  after  Pentecost^  the  fulness 
of  the  -Christian  life,  as  we  received  it  from  our  Re- 
deemer, who  has  now  ascended  into  heaven,  and  thence 
has  sent  us  this  beautiful  Paraclete,  to  form  within  us 
that  life,  to  its  full  development.  Amongst  other  gifts 
he  gives  us  for  the  purpose,  he  shows  us  how  to  pray. 
Prayer,  as  our  Jesus  told  us,  must  be  continual ;  we 
must  be  always  pi^aying,  and  not  faint  or  fail.^  And 
yet,  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for^^  nor  how 
we  should  pray,  so  as  to  obtain.  This  is  quite  true  ; 
but  He,  the  Holy  Spirit,  knows  it  all ;  and  comes  to 
us,  helping  our  infirmity^  yea,  and  himself  asking  for 
us,  with  unspeakable  groanings.^     In  the  Introit  and 

1  St.  Luke,  xviii.  1.  3  Eom.  viii.  26.  »  jj^^^ 


468 


MASS. 


the  whole  Mass  for  this  Sunday,  we  are  taught  that 
Prayer  must  have,  amongst  its  other  requisite  quali- 
ties, that  of  humble  repentance  for  our  past  sins,  and 
of  confidence  in  God's  infinite  mercy. 

This  is  the  Third  Sunday  after  Pentecost ;  it  is 
the  first  which  has  no  rubrical  connexion  with  the 
great  Feasts  we  have  been  solemnising  ;  it  is  a  Sun- 
day with  all  the  simplicity  of  the  Office  of  the  Time. 

INTROIT. 


Eespice  in  me,  et  mise- 
rere mei,  Domine,  quoniain 
unicus  ct  pauper  sum  ego  : 
vide  humilitatem.  meam,  et 
laborem.  meum  :  et  dimitte 
omnia  peccata  mea,  Deus 
meus. 

Ps.  Ad  te,  Domine,  levari 
animam  meam  :  Deus  meus, 
in  te  confido,  non  erubes- 
cam.  Gloria  Patri.  Eesjiice. 


Look  thou  upon  me,  and 
have  mercy  on  me,  O  Lord, 
for  I  am  alone  and  poor  ;  see 
my  abjection  and  my  labour  : 
and  forgive  me  all  my  sins,  O 
my  God. 

Ps.  To  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I 
lifted  up  my  soul  :  in  thee,  O 
my  God,  I  place  my  trust,  let 
me  not  be  ashamed.  Glory, 
etc.     Look  thou. 


COLT-ECT. 


Protector  in  te  speran- 
tium,  Deus,  sine  quo  nihil 
est  validum,  nihil  sanc- 
tum :  multiplica  super  nos 
misericordiam  tuam ;  ut, 
te  rectore,  te  duce,  sic 
transeamus  per  bona  tem- 
poralia,  ut  non  andttamus 
8Btema.  Per  Dominum. 


O  God,  the  protector  of  those 
who  hope  in  thee  !  "without 
whose  aid,  nothing  is  strong, 
nothing  holy  :  increase  thy 
mercy  towards  us  ;  that  under 
thy  direction  and  conduct,  we 
may  so  pass  through  the  bles- 
sings of  this  life,  as  not  to  lose 
those  which  are  eternal. 
Through,  etc. 


SECOND  COLLECT. 


A  cunctis  nos  qusesumus, 
Domine,  mentis  et  corporis 
defende  periculis  :  et  inter- 
cedente    beats   et   gloriosa 


Preserve  us,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  from  all  dangers  of 
soul  and  body  :  and,  by  the 
intercession  of  the  glorious  and 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


469 


blessed  Mary,  the  ever  Vir- 
gin-Mother of  God,  of  Bless- 
ed Joseph,  of  the  Blessed 
Apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  of 
Blessed  N.  {here  is  'mentioned 
the  Titular  Saint  of  the  Church), 
and  of  all  the  Saints,  grant  us, 
in  thy  mercy,  health  and  peace ; 
that,  all  adversities  and  errors 
being  removed,  thy  Church 
may  serve  thee  with  undis- 
turbed liberty. 


semper  Virgine  Dei  Geni- 
trice  Maria,  cum  beato 
Joseph,  cumque  beatis 
Apostolis  tuis  Petro  et  Paulo, 
atque  beato  N.  et  omnibus 
Sanctis,  salutem  nobis  tri- 
bue  benignus  et  pacem  ;  ut 
destructis  adversitatibus  et 
erroribus  universis,  Eccle- 
sia  tua  secura  tibi  serviat 
libertate. 


The  third  Collect  is  left  to  the  Priest's  own  choice. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Peter  the  Apostle. 

1  Ch.  V. 
Dearly  beloved :  be  ye 
humbled  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God,  that  he  may 
exalt  you  in  the  time  of  visita- 
tion. Casting  all  your  care 
upon  him,  for  he  hath  care  of 
you.  Be  sober  and  watch  : 
because  your  adversary  the 
devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  goeth 
about,  seeking  whom  he  may 
devour  :  whom  resist  ye,  strong 
in  faith  ;  knowing  that  the 
same  affliction  befals  your 
brethren  who  are  in  the  world. 
But  the  God  of  all  grace,  who 
hath  called  us  into  his  eternal 
glory  in  Christ  Jesus,  after  ye 
have  suffered  a  little,  will  him- 
self perfect  you,  and  con- 
firm and  stablish  you.  To  him 
be  glory  and  empire  for  ever 
and  ever.     Amen, 


Lectio,     Epistolae     beati 
Petri  ApostoH. 

1  Cap.  V. 
Charissimi,  humiliamini 
sub  potenti  manu  Dei,  ut 
vos  exaltet  in  tempore  visi- 
tationis  :  omnem  sollicitu- 
dinem  vestram  projicientes 
in  eum,  quoniam  ipsi  cura 
est  de  vobis.  Sobrii  estote, 
et  vigilate :  quia  adversarius 
vester  diabolus  tanquam  leo 
rugiens  circuit,  quaerens 
quem  devoret  :  cui  resistite 
fortes  in  fide :  scientes 
eamdem  passionem  ei,  quae 
in  mundo  est,  vestrse  fra- 
temitati  fieri.  Deus  autem 
omnis  gratise,  qui  vocavit 
nos  in  setemam  suam  glo- 
riam  in  Christo  Jesu,  modi- 
cum passes  ipse  perficiet, 
confirmabit,  solidabitque. 
Ipsi  gloria,  et  imperium  in 
ssecula  saeculorum.     Amen. 


The  miseries  of  this  present  life  are  the  test  to  which 


470  MASS. 

God  puts  his  soldiers  ;  lie  passes  judgment  upon  them, 
and  classifies  them,  according  to  the  degree  of  courage 
they  have  shown.  Therefore  is  it,  that  we  all  have 
our  share  of  sufi'ering.  The  combat  has  commenced. 
God  is  looking  on,  watching  how  each  of  us  comports 
himself.  The  day  is  not  far  ofi",  when  the  Judge  will 
pass  sentence  on  the  merits  of  each  combatant,  and 
award  to  each  one  the  recompense  he  has  won.  Com- 
bat, 7iow;  peace  and  rest  and  a  crown,  theii.  Happy 
they  who,  during  these  days  of  probation,  have  recog- 
nised the  mighty  hand  of  God  in  all  the  trials  they 
have  had,  and  have  humbled  themselves  under  its  pre- 
sure,  lovingly  and  confidingly  !  Against  such  Chris- 
tians, who  have  been  strong  in  faiths  the  roaring  lion 
has  not  been  able  to  prevail.  They  were  sober,  they 
were  watchfid,  during  this  their  pilgrimage.  They 
were  fully  convinced  of  this,  that  every  one  has  to 
suffer  in  the  present  life  ;  they  therefore  never  sighed 
and  moaned,  as  though  they  were  the  only  sufferers  ; 
they  did  not  assume  the  attitude  of  victims,  and  call 
it  Resignation  /  but  they  took  each  trial  as  it  came, 
and,  without  talking  to  every  one  about  it,  they  quietly 
and  joyously  united  it  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ. 
0  true  Christians !  you  will  be  joyous  for  all 
eternity,  when  there  will  be  made  the  manifestation 
of  that  eternal  glory  in  Christ  Jesus,  which  he  wall 
pass  on  to  them,  that  they  may  share  it  with  him  for 
ever! 

The  Gradual  keeps  up  the  same  strain ; — it  en- 
courages the  faithful  soul  to  confidence.  Let  him  cast 
all  his  care  upon  his  heavenly  Father;  has 'he  not 
always  graciously  heard  him  in  all  his  troubles  and 
necessities  ?  As  to  enemies,  let  him  cast  away  the 
thought ;  God  w411  think  of  that,  and,  if  it  so  please 
him,  will  avenge  the  soul  they  persecuted. 


THIRD    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


471 


GRADUAL. 


Cast  thy  care  upon  tlie  Lord : 
and  he  shall  sustain  thee. 

y.  When  I  cried  out  to  the 
Lord,  he  graciously  heard  my 
voice  against  those  who  were 
coming  upon  me. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

^.  God  is  a  just  judge, 
strong  and  patient;  is  he  angry 
every  day  ?     Alleluia. 


Jacta  cogitatum  tuum  in 
Domino  :  et  ipse  te  enutriet. 

y.  Dum  clamarem  ad  Do- 
minum,  exaudivit  vocem. 
meam  ab  his  qui  appropin- 
quant  mihi. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

f.  Deus  judex  Justus, 
fortis  et  patiens,  numquid 
irascitur  per  singulos  dies  ? 
Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
ajcording  to  Luke. 

Ch.  XV, 

At  that  time  :  the  publicans 
and  sinners  drew  near  unto  him 
to  hear  him.  And  the  Phari- 
sees and  Scribes  murmured, 
saying :  This  man  receiveth 
sinners  and  eateth  with  them. 
And  he  spoke  to  them  this 
parable,  saying  :  What  man  of 
you  that  hath  a  hundred  sheep, 
and  if  he  shall  lose  one  of 
them,  doth  he  not  leave  the 
ninety-nine  in  the  desert,  and 
go  after  that  which  was  lost 
until  he  find  it  ?  And  when 
he  hath  found  it,  lay  it  upon 
his  shoulders  rejoicing :  and 
coming  home  call  together  his 
friends  and  neighbours,  say- 
ing to  them :  Rejoice  with  me, 
because  I  have  found  my  sheep 
that  was  lost  ?  I  say  to  you, 
that  even  so  there  shall  be  joy 
in  heaven  upon  one  sinner  that 
doth  penance,  more  than  upon 


.  Sequentia    sancti    Evan- 
gelii  secundum  Lucam. 

Cap.  XV. 

In  illo  tempore,  erant 
appropinquantes  ad  Jesum 
publicani,  et  peccatores,  ut 
audirent  ilium.  Et  murmu- 
rabant  Pharisaei,  et  Scribae, 
dicentes  :  Quia  hie  pecca- 
tores recipit,  et  manducat 
cum  illis.  Et  ait  ad  illos 
parabolam  istam,  dicens  : 
Quis  ex  vobis  homo,  qui 
habet  centum  oves  :  et  si 
perdiderit  unam  ex  illis, 
nonne  dimittit  nonaginta 
novem  in  deserto,  et  vadit 
ad  illam,  quae  perierat,  do- 
nee inveniat  eam  ?  et  cum 
invenerit  eam,  imponit  in 
humeros  sues  gaudens :  et 
veniens  do  mum,  convo- 
cat  amicos,  et  vicinos,  di- 
cens illis  :  Congratulamini 
mihi  quia  inveni  ovem  meam 
quae  perierat  I  Dico  vobis 
quod   ita    gaudium   erit   in 


472 


MASS. 


coelo  super  uno  peccatore 
pcenitentiam  agente,  quam 
super  nonaginta  noveni  jus- 
tis,  qui  non  indigent  poeni- 
tentia.  Aut  quae  mulierha- 
bens  drachmas  decern,  si 
perdiderit  drachmam  unam, 
nonne  accendit  lucemani, 
et  everrit  domum,  et  qua^rit 
diligenter  donee  inveniat  ? 
Et  cum  invenerit,  convocat 
amicas  et  vicinas,  dicens  : 
Congratulamini  mild  quia 
inveni  drachmam,  quam 
perdideram  !  Ita  dico 
vobis,  gaudium  erit  coram 
Angelis  Dei  super  uno  pec- 
catore pcenitentiam  agente. 


niuety-nine  just  who  need  not 
penance.  Or  what  woman 
having  ten  groats  :  if  she  lose 
one  groat,  doth  not  light  a 
candle,  and  sweep  the  house, 
and  seek  diligently  until  she 
find  it  ?  And  when  she  hath 
found  it,  call  together  her 
friends  and  neighbours,  say- 
ing :  Rejoice  with  me,  because 
I  have  found  the  groat  which 
I  had  lost  ?  So  I  say  to  you, 
there  shall  be  joy  before  the 
angels  of  God  upon  one  sinner 
doLQg  penance. 


TKis  parable  of  the  Sheep  that  is  carried  back  to  the 
fold  on  the  Shepherd's  shoulders  was  a  favourite  one 
with  the  early  Christians  ;  and  they  made  representa- 
tions of  it  at  almost  every  turn.  The  same  is  put  before 
us  in  to-day's  Gospel,  that  our  confidence  may  be 
strengthened  in  God's  infinite  mercy.  It  reminds  us, 
in  its  own  beautiful  way,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  ;  whom 
we  contemplated,  a  few  weeks  back,  ascending  trium- 
phantly into  heaven,  carrying  thither,  in  his  arms,  the 
lost  human  family,  which  he  had  won  back  from  Satan 
and  death  and  sin.     For,  as  St.  Ambrose  says,  "  who 

*  is  the  Shepherd  of  our  parable  ?  It  is  Christ,  who 
'  carries  thee,  poor  man,  in  his  own  Body,  and  has 
'  taken  all  thy  sins  upon  himself.  The  Sheep  is  one, 
'  not  by  number,  but  by  its  kind.  Rich  Shepherd 
'  this,  of  whose  flock,  all  we  human  beings  form  but  the 
'  hundredth  part !  for  he  has  the  Angels,  and  Arch- 
'  angels,  and  Dominations,  and  Powers,  and  Thrones, 
'  and  all  the  rest, — all  those  other  countless  flocks, 

*  whom  he  has  left  yonder  up  the  mountain,  that  he 
'  might  run  after  the  one  Sheep  he  had  lost.'*  * 


'  St.  Amh.  in  Zucam,  vii. 


THIRD   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST.  473 

But  it  is  from  St.  Gregory  the  Great  that  the 
Church,  in  her  Matins  of  this  Sunday,  took  the  Com- 
mentary of  this  Gospel.  And,  in  the  sequel  of  that 
Homily,  the  holy  Doctor  gives  us  the  explanation  of 
the  Parable  of  the  Woman  and  the  ten  Groats. 
*'  He/'  says  St.  Gregory,  "  that  is  signified  by  the 
*'  Shepherd,  is  also  meant  by  the  Woman.  Jesus  is 
"  God ;  he  is  the  Wisdom  of  God.  And  because  good 
'^  coin  must  bear  the  image  of  the  king  upon  it,  there- 
'*  fore  was  it  that  the  Woman  lost  her  groat,  when 
*'  Man,  who  had  been  created  after  God's  image, 
"  strayed  from  that  image  by  committing  sin.  But, 
"  the  Woman  lights  a  lamp  ;  the  Wisdom  of  God  hath 
"  appeared  in  human  flesh.  A  lamp  is  a  light  which 
''  burns  in  a  vessel  of  clay  ;  and  Light  in  a  vessel  of 
*'  clay,  is  the  Divinity  in  our  .flesh.  It  is  of  the  vessel 
*'  of  his  Body,  that  this  Wisdom  says  :  My  strength  is 
"  dried  up  like  a  potsherd}  For,  just  as  clay  is  made 
*'  hard  by  fire,  so  His  strength  was  dried  up  like  a 
^^  potsherd,  because  it  has  strengthened  unto  the  glory 
^'  of  his  resurrection,  in  the  crucible  of  suflPe rings,  the 

^'  Flesh  which  it  (Wisdom)  had  assumed 

''  Having  found  the  groat  she  had  lost,  the  Woman 
"  calleth  together  her  friends  and  neighbours,  saying  : 
^''Rejoice  with  me  f  because  I  have  found  the  groat 
"  which  I  had  lost.'  Who  are  these  friends  and  neigh- 
"  bours,  if  not  the  heavenly  Spirits,  who  are  so  near  to 
*'  divine  Wisdom,  by  the  favours  they  enjoy  of  the 
"  ceaseless  vision  ?  But,  we  must  not,  meanwhile, 
^'  neglect  to  examine  why  this  Woman,  who  represents 
"  divine  Wisdom,  is  described  as  having  ten  groats,  one 
"  of  which  she  loses,  then  looks  for,  and  again  finds 
"  it  ?  We  must  know,  then,  that  God  made  both 
*•  Angels  and  Men,  that  they  might  know  him  ;  and 
"  that  having  made  both  immortal,  they  were  both 
*'  made  to  the  image  of  God.     The  Woman,  then,  had 

iPs.xxi.  16. 


474 


MASS. 


''ten  groats,  because  there  are  nine  orders  of  Angels, 
*'  and  Man,  who  is  to  fill  up  the  number  of  the  elect, 
'*  is  the  tenth  groat ;  he  was  lost  by  his  sin,  but  was 
"  found  again,  because  Eternal  Wisdom  restored  him, 
"  by  lighting  the  lamp,  that  is,  by  assuming  his  flesh, 
'*  and,  through  that,  working  wonderful  works,  which 
'^  led  to  his  recovery."  ^ 

The  Offertory  is  an  outpouring  of  gratitude  and  love 
for  the  God  who  dwelleth  in  Sion ;  he  does  not  abandon 
them  that  seek  Jam;  he  does  not  forget  the ^oor  man's 
prayer, 

OFFERTORY. 


Sperent  in  te  omnes,  qui 
noverunt  Nomen  tuum,  Do- 
mine  :  quoniam  non  dere- 
linquis  quaerentes  te  :  psal- 
lite  Domino,  qui  habitat  in 
Sion,  quoniam  non  est  obli- 
tus  orationem  pauperum. 


Let  them  trust  in  thee,  O 
Lord,  who  know  thy  name  : 
for  thou  hast  not  forsaken 
them  that  seek  thee.  Sing  ye 
to  the  Lord  who  dwelleth  in 
Sion :  for  that  he  hath  not 
forgotten  the  prayer  of  the 
poor. 


SECRET. 


Eespice,  Domine,  munera 
supplicantis  Ecclesise :  et 
saluti  credcntium  perpetua 
sanctificatione  sumenda 

concede.     Per  Dominum. 


Look  down,  O  Lord,  on  the 
offerings  of  thy  suppliant 
Church  ;  and  grant  that  thy 
faithful  may  always  worthily 
partake  thereof  in  order  to 
their  salvation.    Through,  etc. 


SECOND  SECRET. 


Exaudi  nos  DeusSalutaris 
noster :  ut  per  hujus  Sacra- 
menti  virtutem,  a  cunctis 
nos  mentis  et  corporis  hos- 
tibus  tuearis,  gratiam  tri- 
buens  in  preesenti,  et  glo- 
riam.  in  futuro. 


Graciously  hear  us,  O  God 
our  Saviour :  that  by  virtue  of 
this  sacrament,  thou  mayest 
defend  us  from  all  enemies,  of 
both  soul  and  body  :  grant  us 
grace  in  this  life,  and  glory  in 
the  next. 


The  third  Secret  is  left  to  the  Priest's  own  choice. 

^  S.  Greg.  Homil.  xxxiv.  iti  Evangelia. 


i 

i 


THIRD   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST.  475 

The  Preface  is  that  appointed  for  all  Sundays  du- 
ring the  year,  for  which  no  proper  one  is  fixed,  either 
of  the  Time,  or  for  a  Feast.     It  is  given  in  page  128. 

The  Communion- Anthem  recalls  to  our  minds,  and 
with  much  appropriateness,  the  merciful  teaching  of 
to-day's  Gospel,  now  that  Eternal  Wisdom  has  re- 
gained full  possession  of  the  last  groat,  by  means  of 
the  sacred  Banquet,  which  He  Himself  had  given  to 
the  repentant  prodigal. 

COMMUNION. 

I  say  to  you:  there  is  joy  Dico  vobis  :  gaudium  est 
among  the  Angels  of  God  over  Angelis  Dei  super  uno  pec- 
one  sinner  doing  penance.  catore  poenitentiam  agente. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

May  thy  sacred  mysteries,  Sancta  tua  nos,  Domine, 

O   Lord,   which  we  have  re-  sumpta  vivificent  :  et  mise- 

ceived,     give    us    life ;      and  ricordiee  sempitemse  prsepa- 

cleansing   us   from    our   sins,  rent  expiatos.     Per  Domi- 

make  us  worthy  of  thy  eternal  num. 
mercy.  Through,  etc. 

SECOND  POSTCOMMUNION. 

May  the    oblation   of   this  Mundet  et   muniat    nos, 

divine  Sacrament,  we  beseech  qusesumus,    Domine,  divini 

thee,  O  Lord,  both  cleanse  and  Sacramenti  munus  oblatum, 

defend  us  ;    and  by    the   in-  ■  et  intercedente   beata  Vir- 

tercession    of    Blessed  Mary,  gine  Dei   Genitrice   Maria, 

the   Virgin-Mother   of     God,  cum  beato  Joseph,  cumque 

of    Blessed    Joseph,    of    the  beatis  ApostoHs   tuis  Petro 

Blessed    Apostles    Peter   and  et  Paulo,  atque  beato  N.  et 

Paul,  of  Blessed  N.  and  of  all  omnibus  Sanctis,  a  cunctis 

the   Saints,    free  us  from  all  nos  reddat  et   perversitati- 

sin,  and  deliver  us   from  all  bus  expiatos,    et  adversita- 

adversity.  tibus  expedites. 

The  third  Postcommunion  is  left  to  the  Priest's 
own  choice. 


37(i 


662:17 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTKCOSr. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  H}Tiin  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  88-  98. 

ANTIPHON  OF  THE  MAGNIFICAT. 


Quae  mulier  habens  drach- 
mas decern,  et  si  perdide- 
rit  drachmam  unam,  nonne 
acccndit  lucemam,  et  ever- 
rit  domum,  et  quaerit  di- 
ligenter  donee  inveniat  ? 


What  woman,  having  ten 
groats,  if  she  lose  one  groat, 
doth  not  light  a  lamp,  and 
sweep  the  house,  and  seek 
diligently  until  she  find  it  ? 


OREMUS. 

Protector  in  te  speran- 
tium  Deus,  sine  quo  nihil 
est  validum,  nihil  sanctum  : 
multiplica  super  nos  mise- 
ricordiam  tuam  ;  ut,  te  rec- 
tore,  te  duce,  sic  transea- 
mus  per  bona  temporaHa,  ut 
non  amittamus  setema. 
Per  Dominum. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

O  God,  the  protector  of  those 
who   hope   in  thee !    withouL 
whose  aid,  nothing  is  strongB 
nothing    holy :   increase    th^ 
mercy  towards  us  ;  that  under 
thy  direction  and  conduct,  we 
may    so    pass     through     the 
blessings  of  this  life,  as  not  to 
lose  those  which  are  eternal 
Through,  etc. 


END  OF  FlPvST  VOLUME  OF  TIME  AFTER  PENTKCOST, 


i 


y . 


/ 


BX  1970  .G8313  1858  v. 10  IMS 
Gueranger.  Prosper. 
Liturgical  year    2nd  ed.   ~ 


PONnticAL,  iNsrfiTunrir 

OF;     MEDIAEVAL    STUDIE€ 
tO'^ONTO     5-     C*NAOi| 


