Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/liturgicalyear11gu 


£3&^*.  /^^^^' 


THE 

LITURGICAL  YEAR. 


THE  TIME  AFTEK  PENTECOST. 


THE 

LITURGICAL  YEAR. 

BY    THE 

YERY  REV.  DOM  PROSPER  GUERANGER, 

ABBOT   OF    SOLESMES. 


SECOND  VOLUME  OF  THE  CONTINUATION. 

ftrmtslateb  from  %  dreittfr, 

BY  THE 

REV.  DOM  LAURENCE  SHEPHERD, 

MONK  OF  THE  ENGLISH   BENEDICTINE   CONGREGATION. 

THE  TIME  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

VOL.  II. 


DUBLIN : 
JAMES  DUFFY  and  SONS,   15  WELLINGTON  QUAY  ; 

AND 

1  Paternoster  Row,  London. 
1883. 


/; 


36,  ZZ? 


DUBLIN  : 

|lnnteb   bg  €bmunb  $5nrk£  anb   to., 

61   &  62  GREAT  STRAND  STREET. 


PEEFACE. 


The  second  volume  of  the  Continuation  now  presented 
to  the  Faithful  concludes  the  Liturgical  Year,  at 
least  in  that  portion  which  is  called  the  Proper  of  the 
Time.  The  Feast  of  Easter,  owing  to  its  having  an 
entire  month's  range  for  the  variation  of  its  day, 
changes,  each  year,  the  position  of  the  Sundays  after 
Pentecost,  by  the  same  number  of  days;  so  that  it  is 
utterly  impossible  to  put  anything  like  a  concurrence 
between  these  Sundays  and  the  Proper  of  Saints. 

We  intend,  therefore,  to  give  the  Feast  of  Saints, 
occurring  between  June  and  December,  in  a  separate 
Volume ;  for  whose  completion  we  venture  to  ask 
the  prayers  of  our  readers.  It  is  to  their  prayers  that 
we  attribute  the  blessing,  which  God  has  given  to 
this  work ;  these  alone  have  given  us  courage  and 
confidence  in  the  task  imposed  upon  us. 

Whilst  thus  thanking  them,  we  think  it  right  to 


VI  PREFACE. 

tell  them  how  we  now,  more  than  ever,  stand  in  need 
of  their  assistance.  We  are  exiled  from  our  Monas- 
tery by  the  men  who  have  assumed  the  reins  of 
government;  they  have  thought  fit  to  discover  a 
social  danger  in  the  life  and  labours  of  Monks  who 
celebrate  the  divine  mysteries  of  the  year,  and  spend 
their  time  in  endeavouring  to  sanctify  their  own 
souls  and  those  of  others  :  in  all  this,  our  rulers  have 
seen  such  peril  for  our  country,  that  they  have  vio- 
lently torn  us  from  our  cells  and  our  choir.  Thanks 
to  a  generous  hospitality  accorded  us  by  friends,  we 
are  enabled  to  write  these  lines  from  Solesmes,  but 
not  from  our  dear  Abbey,  where  resides  alone,  in 
his  tomb,  under  the  shadow  of  his  own  loved  Library 
and  Church,  the  venerated  Author  of  the  Liturgical 
Year. 


CONTENTS. 


TIME  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


TAGK 


Preface,  .....  v 

Chap.  I. — The   History  of    the   Time   after 

Pentecost,       ...  1 

Chap.        II.— The  Mystery  of  the  Time   after 

Pentecost,        ...  4 

Chap.  III. — Practice  for  the  Time  after  Pen- 
tecost,        .  .  .  .9 

Chap.        IY. — Morning  and  Night  Prayers  for 

the  Time  after  Pentecost,   .  .  13 

Chap.  Y. — On  hearing  Mass,  during  the  Time 

after  Pentecost,       .  .  .30 

Chap.        YI. — On  Holy  Communion,  during  the 

Time  after  Pentecost,  .  .         65 

Chap.      YII. — On  the  Office  of  Yespers,  during 

the  Time  after  Pentecost,    .  .         74 

Chap.     YIII. — On  the  Office  of  Compline,  during 

the  Time  after  Pentecost,    .  .         85 


Dissertation  on  the   spirit   and   action   of   the 

Prober  of  the  Time,  after  Pentecost,  .         95 

Summary. — How  splendid  the  opening  of  the 
Pentecostal  season ;  95  : — the  reign  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  95  ; — begins  with  three  grand  Festivals  ; 
95. — The  supernatural  is  on  us  in  all  its  pleni- 
tude j  95. — How  was  it,  that  Jesus  did  not  en- 
lighten the  world  so  fully  as  did  the  Holy  Ghost; 
96. — At  Last  Supper,  he  beseeches  his  Father  to 
send  the  Holy  Spirit ;  97. — Teaching  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  essentially  interior  ;  therefore,  efficacious  ; 
98. —Disciples    could    not    bear  the  fulness  of 


Vlll  CONTENTS. 

Truth,  until  the  Holy  Ghost  had  descended  upon 
them;  98.— The  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
realisation  of  Truth  by  sanctification,  rather  than 
its  proclamation. — His  School  is  effective  ;  99. — 
Holy  Ghost's  work  is  the  infusing  into  us  the 
Incarnate  Word ;  99. — Jesus's  visible  presence 
substituted  by  a  manifestation  of  a  superior 
order  ;  he  produces  that  manifestation  through 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  99.— The  Holy  Ghost,  by  the 
Yearly  application  to  us  of  the  mysteries  of  the 
Incarnate  Word,  forms  Jesus  within  us  ;  100. — 
The  Liturgy  of  the  Church's  Year  up  to  the  Time 
after  Pentecost,  has  been  a  gradual  leading  up  to 
union  ;  101. — The  Church  was  formed  from  the 
Gentile  world,  which  was  to  be  transformed  into 
the  Daughter  of  the  eternal  Father,  and  Bride  of 
his  Son  ;  101. — This  required  her  consent,  and 
her  labour  ;  102. — This  labour  includes  the  two 
ways,  Purgative  and  Illuminative ;  the  Liturgy 
leads  us  through  them  from  Advent  till  Ascen- 
sion ;  102. — There  is,  also,  a  Unitive  Way  ; — we 
pass  through  it  during  the  Time  after  Pentecost; 
103. — The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  achiever  of  Union 
between  Jesus  and  Church ;  103. — The  Unitive 
Way  begins  with  Pentecost,  and  goes  on  till  Ad- 
vent ;  103. — The  Unitive  Way  essential  to  the 
Church  ; — it  is  her  privilege;  104. — She  alone  has 
the  secret ;  104. — If  Christian  would  enjoy  it,  he 
must  live  the  Church's  life;  104. — On  the  extra- 
ordinary favours  sometimes  produced  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  in  the  Unitive  Way  ;  104. — What  is 
the  essential  Union  produced  by  the  Holy  Ghost; 
105. — It  is  divine  Love;  105. — Every  Christian  is 
called  to  it;  106. — A  soul  taught  by  Faith  alone, 
may,  in  a  certain  way,  surpass  the  favoured  ones, 
spoken  of  above;  106. — On  what  depends  the 
degree  of  Union;  106. — God  sometimes  withholds 
his  extraordinary  favours  from  his  most  devoted 
servants; — they  may  be  higher,  hereafter,  in  hea- 
ven, than  those  who  were  more  highly  favoured 
whilst  on  earth :  107. — The  Union  between  Christ 
and  his  Churcn  produced  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is 
represented  by  this  long  period,  called  The  Time 
after  PenUcost;  107. — The  Church,  through  her 
Liturgy  of  this  Season,  enables  her  children  to 
receive  the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  she  offers 


CONTENTS.  IX 

TAGB 

them  the  Unitive  "Way  ;  all  of  us  should  keep 
close  to  the  Church;  107. — The  Church  alone  is 
safe,  in  divine  things;  107.— St.  Teresa,  how 
proud  of  her  title  of  "  Daughter  of  the  Church ;" 
107. — The  Church's  grief,  at  seeing  countless 
numbers  of  men  disdaining  their  vocation,  which 
is  divine  Union;  108. — Her  children  by  Baptism; 
if  they  would  but  follow  her  sublime  Liturgy,  she 
would  lead  them  to  Union;  108. — The  Church  her- 
self, by  her  Liturgy,  is  our  model:  it  is  Faith  alone 
thatunites  her  to  her  Jesus;  she  loves  him,  without 
seeing  him;  108. — The  Apostolic  teachings  regard- 
ing her  Jesus  and  his  Mysteries ;  on  these  she 
lives;  and  her  ceaseless  Liturgy  is  the  ceaseless 
expression  of  how  she  lives,  and  the  whole  Year 
round,  on  what  her  Faith  alone  tells  her  is  her 
Jesus,  and  his  riches,  and  his  Mysteries  ;  109. — 
Her  celebrations  of  those  magnificences  are 
those  magnificences  made  her  realities  ;  109. — It 
is  the  Holy  Ghost  who  achieves  that  exquisite 
Union  between  Christ  and  his  Church  :  it  is  the 
very  meaning  of  the  Liturgy  of  the  Time  after  Pen- 
tecost;  110- — No  wonder  that  this  lastseasonof  the 
Liturgical  Year  is  as  long  as,  or  longer  than  all  the 
others  put  together,  which  we  have  passed  through, 
from  Advent  to  Ascension  ;  110. — This  Time 
after  Pentecost  is  the  longest,  because  it  has  for 
its  object  the  real  life  of  the  Church  during  her 
sojourn  here  below  ;  110. — This  season  is  the  one 
wherein  Jesus  wins  the  end,  towards  which  all 
his  labours  were  done,— that  is,  Union  of  the 
members  with  himself  their  Head,  by  the  action 
of  the  Holy  Ghost;  110- — The  seed  of  the  Word 
has  been  sown  during  the  years  of  his  life  and 
mysteries  on  earth  (which  are  all  yearly  repeated 
by  the  Liturgy  from  Advent  to  Ascension)  ;  and 
now,  the  Time  after  Pentecost  is  that  Seed's  fruit- 
making  Time;  110. — Love  is  now  in  its  full 
Season  of  working  its  power  ;  it  shows  itself  by 
Prayer,  by  Suffering,  and  by  Action  ; — Action  is 
an  imperative  result  of  Love;  110. — The  dangers 
of  false  Quietude,  which  holds  that  all  the  grand 
proofs  of  Love  are  a  distraction;  110. — The  Time 
after  Pentecost  represents  our  whole  life  being 
spent  in  actions  done  out  of  love  for  Jesus,  which 
the  Holy  Ghost,  through  Mother  Church,  is  ever 


CONTENTS. 

forming  within  the  Christian,  who  is  faithful  to 
the  Church  ;  111. — Because  of  all  this,  the  Time 
after  Pentecost  is  the  longest  season  of  the  Litur- 
gical Year  ;  111. — Moreover,  this  latter  portion 
of  the  Liturgical  Year  teaches  us,  that  all  the 
labours  of  the  Church  tend  to  one  result ;  and 
that  one  result  is  religion  (worship  of  God) ; 
and  religion  characterises  every  degree  made 
towards  divine  Union;  111. — The  Church's  being 
united  to  her  Jesus,  necessitated  her  making 
religion  (worship)  the  very  essence  of  her  exist- 
ence ;  111. — The  magnificent  celebrations  of  her 
Liturgy  ;  joined  with  the  integrity  of  her  Faith, 
distinguish  her  as  the  True  Bride  of  Christ ; 
112. — Hence  the  Temple  of  God  is  the  Church's 
Home,  112. — There  is  a  whole  army  of  Children 
of  the  Church,  who  are  called  religious,  because 
they  are  so  filled  with  their  Mother's  spirit  of 
Worship  (religion,)  that  they  have  left  all 
things  else,  in  order  to  join  her,  hour  by  hour,  in 
giving  Praise,  with  her,  to  the  divine  Spouse  ; 
113. — The  world  cannot  understand  religious  ; 
must  persecute  them,  but  these  religious  are  one 
of  the  most  unmistakeable  manifestations  of  the 
Church's  Union  with  Jesus ;  no  human  power  can 
ever  suspend  such  manifestation;  113. — The 
Church, by  beingBride  of  Christ,  is  one  Body  with 
him  ;  that  Body  exists  solely  for  the  purpose  of 
being  offered  in  sacrifice  of  complete  homage  to  the 
Father; — and  the  Church  fulfils  all  this,  fully  and 
unreservedly,  in  those  whose  whole  being  is 
absorbed  (by  the  Vows  they  make,  and  the  sub- 
lime consecration  given  to  them  by  the  Church,) 
into  the  religion,  and  perfect  oblation,  of  the 
Eternal  High  Priest  ;  113.— Though  all  Chris- 
tians do  not  lead  the  Life  of  Religion,  such  as  is 
led  in  the  Religious  State,  yet  are  they  all  called 
upon,  if  they  would  enter  heaven,  to  attain  to 
such  a  degree  of  Union,  as  will  really  make  of 
them  true  Members  of  Christ ;— and  that  Union, 
even  supposing  it  in  its  lowest  degree,  unites 
them  to  the  Man-God,  Victim  and  Priest,  whose 
Oblation  is  the  highest  worship  of  the  Most 
High  God:— it  is  RELIGION;  114— Baptism 
begins  this  Union ; — and  the  unction  of  the 
Chrism  given  to  the  Baptised,  the  moment  alter 


CONTENTS.  il 

FA61 

Baptism,  attests  their  kingly  priesthood,  which 
gives  them  a  share  in  the  Oblation  (the  Religion) 
of  the  High  Priest  Jesus  ; — that  Christening  im- 
plies their  share  in  the  Religion  (i.  e.  the 
sackifice)  of  Christ  •  114. — Their  one  purpose 
of  life  and  death  is  the  same  as  that  of  Christ, 
namely,  the  immolating  themselves  to  God's 
glory  ;  114. — Moreover,  the  Baptised,  the 
Christened,  are  living  stones  of  the  Temple  built, 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  on  the  Corner  Stone,  Jesus  ; 
115. — Being  Temple,  there  must  be  the  Liturgy  ; 
115. — It  is  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost  into  us, 
which  makes  us  be  sanctuaries  of  the  Divinity 
116. — Justly,  then,  the  Feast  of  Trinity  Sunday 
came  immediately  after  Pentecost ;  116. — Feast 
of  Corpus  Christi  followed  that  of  Trinity  ; — and 
that  told  the  Church,  the  Bride,  that  the  glorifica- 
tion of  God,  One  in  Three  Persons,  was  the  fruit 
of  the  divine  Nuptial  Banquet ; — it  told  us,  that 
our  Jesus  would  not  give  himself  to  us,  except 
in  the  stupendous  action  of  the  Sacrifice,  which 
consummates  the  glory  of  the  Trinity;  117. — 
The  sublime  text  regarding  Jesus's  sanctifying 
himself,  that  we  might  be  sanctified;  117. — And, 
as  Sacrifice  thus  consummates  all  sanctity 
(holiness)  in  the  Head  and  in  the  Members,  it 
alone,  also,  consummates  the  Union  of  Christ 
and  his  Church  ;  118. — Therefore,  the  Mass  is  so 
exclusively  prominent  during  the  whole  of  the 
Time  after  Pentecost ; — it  is  the  Season  of  divine 
Union ;  and  the  Mount  of  Sacrifice  is  the 
Church's  Station;  118. — The  official  place  of 
Union  is  Calvary,  our  Altar ;  119. — what  this 
present  Volume  aims  at,  in  its  comments  ;  119 — 
Why  our  commentaries  on  the  Epistles  and 
Gospels  are  so  detailed  ;  120. 


THE    SUNDAYS   AFTER   PENTECOST 

from  the  4th  to  the  24th. 
The  4th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .  .121 

Epistle.  {Rom.  viii.)  How  is  it,  that  all 
created  nature  is  in  bondage,  on  account  of  man's 
sin  ; — how  it  longs  for  its  restoration,  which  is  to 
be  when  man's  Deliverance  is  completed. 


Xll  CONTENTS. 

PAGB 

Gospel. — (St.    Luke,  v.)     On  the  mysteries 
contained  in  the  two  miraculous  fishings  men- 
tioned by  the  Evangelists. — On  Schism. 
The  5th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .138 

Epistle. — (1  St.  Pet.  iii.)  Jesus  came  amongst 
us  to  constitute  a  glorious  City,  wherein  his 
Eternal  Father  might  be  worthily  praised  and 
loved. — We  are  the  living  stones  of  the  Temple 
of  God  ; — hence,  necessity  of  Union  between  the 
members  of  the  Church. — Love  for  each  other. — 
Vision  of  Hernias'  tower. 

Gospel. — (St.  Matth,  v.)  How  the  Law  had 
got  corrupted  by  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees. — It 
is  only  the  New  Law  that  deals  with  sins  of 
thought. — Jewish  casuistry,  how  narrow. — Jesus 
came  to  teach  us  the  whole  Truth. — What  was 
the  Tribunal  of  Judgment ;  of  Council. 
The  6th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .156 

Epistle. — (Rom.  vi.)  St.  Paul,  finding  Israel 
obstinate,  turns  to  us  Gentiles.— The  Epistles  for 
the  remainder  of  these  Post- Pentecostal  Sundays 
are  all  taken  from  those  of  St.  Paul,  and  in  the 
order  given  them  in  Bible. — How  tender  should 
be  our  devotion  to  St.  Paul. — What  the  Church 
is  in  St.  Paul's  estimation. — What  is  the 
Christian  life  in  the  same  Apostle's  idea. 

Gospel— 0$.  Mark  viii.)  The  feeding  4000 
in  the  desert.  Jesus,  having  cured  the  Ha?mor- 
rhoissa,  the  Gentile,  now  feeds  her. — St.  Ambrose 
on  the  5  and  7  loaves. — On  the  deep  teaching 
involved  in  the  circumstance  of  the  Desert. 
The  7th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .178 

Epistle. — (Rom.  vi.)  Further  development 
on  the  essence  of  Christian  life. — Jesus's  Death 
and  Burial  produced  in  us  by  our  Baptism. — Let 
us  serve  justice,  now,  with  as  much  earnestness 
as  we  once  served  sin  ;  true  conversion  does  not 
change  our  energy  of  character ;  children  of  world 
set  us  a  lesson  here. — St.  Augustine  on  Jacob's 
working  for  Rachel. 

Gospel. — (St.  Matth.  vii.)  Beware  of  false 
Prophets  1 — Israel  is  a  voluntary  prey,  loving  to 
be  deceived. — Seeks  Christ  in  every  upstart,  be- 
cause he  would  not  have  the  true  One. — He  is 
drawing  the  Romans  to  his  destruction. — The 
true  Church  is  safely  on  the  rock  of  Rome. — The 


CONTENTS.  Xlll 

PAOR 

guarantee  for  every  individual,  as  well  as  for  the 
Church  at  large,  is  firm  Faith. — As  the  Saints  of 
old,  so  now,  we  must  have  our  faith  tried;  heresy- 
is  always  to  be  found  busy. — The  keeping  close 
to  the  Church,  keeps  us  from  false  prophets. 

The  8th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .198 

Intkoduction. — Farewell  to  Jerusalem  by  the 
Little  Flock,  just  before  Eoman  siege. — How 
beautiful  was  Jerusalem  at  that  time  ! — What  a 
pang  to  leave  the  lovely  City  for  ever  !  Mary  had 
lived  in  yon  Temple;  Jesus  had  so  often  visited 
it ! — The  strange  voices  heard,  and  the  Eastern 
Gate  opening  of  itself. 

Epistle. — {Rom.  viii.)  "We  are  debtors,  not  to 
the  flesh,  but  to  the  Spirit: — the  fecundity  of  the 
Church ;  the  Spirit  works,  unitedly  with  the  Church . 
— The  missioners  of  the  Church  to  particular 
congregations. — Terrible  trial  when  these  mission- 
ers sow  shrivelled  seeds  of  minced  truths  !— Even 
then,  the  Church's  Liturgy  comes  with  its  mighty 
power  to  souls. — How  admirably  a  christian 
would  be  instructed  that  studied  his  missal ! — 
Epitome  of  the  last  few  Sundays'  rich  teaching. — 
The  leading  idea  of  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the 
Romans. — How  terrible  the  lot  of  the  Jews,  who 
held  to  their  Law,  but  rejected  Him  who  gave 
the  Law. 

Gospel. — (St.  Luke,  xvi.)  The  unjust  Steward. 
— Jesus  is  the  rich  Lord ;  everything  belongs  to 
Him. — He  divides  his  goods ;  the  eternal,  he 
makes  entirely  over  to  us  ;  not  so  the  temporal. 
— The  proper  use  of  temporal  goods. — How  St. 
Jerome  applies  this  parable  to  the  Synagogue. 

The  9th  Sunday,  ...  .       222 

J  esus's  weeping  over  Jerusalem. — Events  which 
preceded  the  destruction  of  the  City. 

Epistle. — (1  Cor.  x.)  The  misery  of  the  Jew- 
ish infidelity  to  Grace,  a  lesson  to  us  Gentiles. — 
God  is  faithful,  never  suffering  us  to  be  tempted 
beyond  our  strength. — It  was  unbelief  ruined 
Jews  ;  we  must  cultivate  vigorous  Faith. — Our 
sins  would  exceed  those  of  Israel. 

Gospel.— (St  Luke,  xix.)  The  time  of  thy 
Visitation  ! — Destruction  of  Jerusalem  ;  its 
history  and  lessons.     Description  and  teaching. 


XIV  CONTENTS. 


Titi* 


The  10th  Sunday  .  .  .  :       257 

Epistle. — (1  Cor.  xii.)  On  the  manifold  miracu- 
lous workings  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  early 
beginnings  of  the  Church. — On  Graces  gratuitously 
given,  and  those  which  make  the  receiver  pleasing 
to  God  ;  their  difference. — Miraculous  gifts  now- 
a-days  : — how  we  are  to  appreciate  them. 

Gospel. — (St  Luke,  xviii.)  The  Publican  and 
Pharisee. — Ven.  Bede's  explanation;  the  Pharisee 
in  the  Jewish  people ;  the  Publican,  the  Gentile. 
— How  appropriately  the  lesson  on  Humility  fol- 
lows the  history  of  Destruction  of  Jerusalem  ! — 
Humility  grows,  as  man  approaches  nigher  to 
God. — How  men  debase  themselves  by  Pride. — 
It  is  the  Little  Children  alone  that  enter  the 
kingdom. — Humility  is  intensest  in,  heaven. 

The  11th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .280 

Epistle. — (1  Cor.  xv.)  St.  Paul  here  continues 
the  subject  of  Humility,  calling  himself  the  least 
of  the  Apostles. — The  greatest  Saint  has  need  to 
think  of  his  past  sins. — St.  Augustine's  book  of 
Confessions  is  a  model. — Humility  makes  us 
grateful  for  graces  received. 

Gospel. — (St.  Mark,  vii.)  The  Deaf  and 
Dumb  man. — This  miraculous  cure  is  full  of 
mystery. — The  administration  of  Baptism  repeats 
these  mysterious  circumstances. — Exquisite 
teaching. — One  detail  of  this  cure  reminds  God's 
servants  how  they  should  seek  to  be  unknown. 

The  12th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .297 

Epistle. — (2  Cor.  iii.)  How  the  glory  of  the 
Old  Ministration  is  surpassed  by  that  of  the  New. 
— Each  member  of  Christ  may  gain  all  the  glory 
he  chooses  to  gain. — Worldlings  are  senseless  in 
seeking  glory  in  temporal  things. — What  a  fund 
of  instruction  we  should  acquire  each  Year  by 
reading  the  whole  chapter  of  Scripture  from 
which  the  Liturgy  extracts  her  Epistles  and 
Gospels. — The  glory  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation 
described  ; — what  we  are  taught  by  the  veil  worn 
by  Moses. — How  splendid  is  the  glory  of  each  of 
the  Faithful  under  the  New  Covenant. 

Gospel.— (St.  Luke,  x.)  The  Good  Samaritan. 
— Continuation  of  the  comparison  of  the  Two 
Testaments. — Who  are  the  Kings  who  desired  to 


CONTENTS.  XV 

PAGK 

see  what  we  now  see. — How  immensely  grand 
these  sights  are. — A  word  on  the  stupendous 
heights  of  illumination  to  which  God  raises  some 
faithful  souls. — And  yet,  the  greatest  proof  of 
fidelity  is, — the  keeping  the  Commandments,  all 
of  which  are  comprised  in  Love. — What  is  meant 
by  Neighbour  ;  and  how  Jesus  shows  it  to  us  by 
the  parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan. 
The  13th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .317 

Epistle. — (Gal.  iii.)  On  the  spiritual  progeny 
of  Abraham. — He  is  Father  of  ns  Gentiles. — We, 
in  his  Seed,  Christ,  are  his  children. — On  the 
weakness  of  the  Old  Law  for  man's  justification. 

Gospel. — (St  Luke,  xvii.)  The  ten  lepers. — 
The  nine  ungrateful  represent  Jewish  people — 
the  one  grateful,  a  Samaritan,  an  image  of  the 
Christian  people. — Why  the  Liturgy  of  this 
season  dwells  so  much  on  the  two  Testaments. — 
The  spirituality  which  ignores  the  Liturgical 
life. — On  the  Incarnation  as  the  great  historic 
fact. — How  such  considerations  practically  bear 
on  the  Unitive  Life, — The  superiority  of  power 
in  the  Christian  Priesthood  over  that  of  Aaron. 
The  14th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .337 

Epistle. — (Gal.  v.  Walk  in  the  spirit,  &c.) 
What  the  Spirit  effects  in  the  children  of  men. — 
His  twelve  Fruits. — Comparison  with  what  flesh 
and  blood  could  produce. — What  we  are  to  do 
for  the  subduing  of  our  Flesh  ; — she  is  always 
ready  to  rebel ; — we  have  all  to  combat  her. — 
Necessity  of  corporal  mortification  ; — what  that 
demands  ; — admirable  teaching  of  St.  Francis  of 
Sales  regarding  it. —Mortified  people  are  the 
most  affable  of  men  ; — the  most  cheerful  are 
often  the  busiest  in  bodily  mortification. — 
Necessity  of  following  Jesus  to  the  Cross,  and 
with  it ; — the  Church  urges  each  of  us  to  complete 
the  sufferings  of  Christ  by  our  own. — How  sub- 
lime an  honour,  our  being  permitted  thus  to  put 
our  lips  to  Jesus's  Chalice  ! — it  is  like  the  seal  of 
authenticity  put  on  Union  with  Him. — The 
Mount  of  Myrrh ;  Myrrh  is  the  favourite  per- 
fume gathered  in  the  Garden  of  the  Word.— We 
are,  as  Christians,  members  of  a  Head  that  is 
Crowned  with  Thorns. 

Gosper. — (St.  Matth.  vi.  This  Sunday  is  called 

VOL.  XI. 


XVI  CONTESTS. 

PA  UK 

The  Two  Masters.)  The  triple  Concupiscence  ; 
— the  third,  (of  the  eyes)  is  the^  object  of  this 
Gospel. — The  mission  of  the  rich  man  in  the 
New  Law. — His  glory  and  merit  when  he  uses 
Mammon  for  God. — Evil  of  riches,  when  abused. 
— Avarice,  how  strong  ; — its  30  pieces  of  silver ! 
— has  committed  the  greatest  crime  that  ever 
was, — and  the  sinner  was  an  Apostle,  Bishop, 
Priest ! — Gospel  condemns  an  exaggerated  solici- 
tude, it  makes  sad  havoc  with  Christian  Life  ; — 
the  unitive  way  never  had  earthly  solicitude  to 
tread  it. — Every  Christian,  be  he  a  Religious  or  a 
layman,  is  bound  to  cultivate  detachment  from 
riches 
The  15th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .355 

Epistle. — (Gal.  v.  and  vi.  If  we  live  in  the 
Spirit,  &c)  Even  when  we  have  subdued  the 
flesh,  active  vigilance  still  requisite. — What  mad- 
ness to  be  proud  of  the  mortifications  we  have 
used  ! —  St.  Paul  calls  it,  solving  in  the  flesh. — 
Confidence  in  God,  when  vain-glory  dictates  it- 
A  mark  of  our  having  divine  Union,  is  indulgence 
for  the  faults  of  our  neighbour. — The  mysterious 
application  made  by  St.  John  of  the  words : 
Abideth  in  Me,  and  I  in  him. 

Gospel. — (St.  Luke,  vii.)  Jesus  went  into  a 
city  called  Nairn,  dhc.)  Application  of  this  Gospel 
to  the  season  of  Lent. — Its  application  in  these 
days  of  Pentecost ;  the  Church  wreeps  for  her 
child,  (each  sinner,)  who  has  relapsed  since 
Easter. — St.  Laurence  Justinian  on  the  Church's 
grief  at  seeing  her  child's  relapse. — We  should 
imitate  our  mother,  and  co-operate  with  her. 
The  16th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .368 

Epistle. — (Ejih.  iii.  I  pray  ye  not  to  faint 
at  my  tribulations  for  you,  &c.)  The  enthusiasm 
of  David's  soul  is  in  Paul's,  now  that  he  is  Nero's 
prisoner. — Why  it  is  that  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians  is  so  dear  to  the  Church  during  this 
Season. — Immense  grace  of  knowing  the  grand 
dimensions  of  God's  dwelling  in  a  Christian  ; — 
not  one  is  excluded  from  so  sublime  a  vocation; 
— if  only  we  were  faithful  to  the  mysteries  an- 
nually celebrated  by  Church ! ! — The  Holy  Spirit 
of  Mercy  will  supply  the  deficiencies  of  our  past 
months,  if  even  now,  in  this  close  of  the  Year, 


CONTENTS.  XV11 

PAGK 

we  be  earnest. — Supernatural  horizons  opened  to 
all  earnest  christian?,  i.e.  to  all  who  are  not 
animal  men. — God's  eternal  designs  upon  us  ; — 
and  how  all  are  love. — The  Incarnate  Word  the 
great  singer  of  the  New  Canticle ; — we  are  to  sing 
with  him. — This  is  the  mystery  of  divine  Union. 
Gospel. — {St.  Luke,  xiv.  The  man  that  had 
dropsy  ;  healing  on  the  Sabbath ;  Friend,  go  up 
higher.)  The  Wedding ;  we  are  all  invited  to  it; 
Jesus,  Bridegroom  ;  Church,  Bride.  —  Divine 
Union,  when  real,  absorbs  all  man's  being  ;  it  is 
so  with  created  nuptials. — There  must  be  no 
competition  permitted  ;  —  no  rivals  ;  —  how 
patiently  our  Jesus  waits  for  our  giving  in ! — 
In  her  Liturgy  of  last  few  Sundays,  Church  has 
warned  us  against  the  triple  concupiscence,  for 
these  would  be  vile  competitors  for  our  hearts; — 
she  now  comes  to  the  direct  aim  she  has  had  ever 
since  feast  of  Pentecost. — A  relapse  is  always 
dreaded  by  the  Church,  for  even  her  most  fer- 
vent children; — a  spiritual  dropsy  may  supervene. 
— It  is  Humility  that  is  the  safest  guarantee.— 
The  last  place. — Contempt  for  others  sure  sign 
of  false  spirituality. 

The  17th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .384 

Epistle. — {Eph.  iv.  I... beseech  you,  that  ye 
walk  worthy  of  your  vocation,  <&c.)  What  is  the 
Vocation,  the  call,  of  God. — What  is  the  condi- 
tion required  for  our  living  up  to  such  Vocation. 
— The  Bond  of  peace  is  created  by  the  Holy 
Spirit. — Dissensions,  &c .,  prevent  this  Bond; — St. 
John  Chrysostom's  comparison  of  fire  and  dry  and 
damp  wood. — The  oneness  of  our  Vocation  should 
unite  us  in  charity  ; — though  Charity,  because  of 
original  sin,  always  calls  for  effort. — In  heaven 
alone,  effortless  perfect  charity,  and  why. — The 
music  of  heaven  because  of  perfect  union. — The 
meaning  of  the  Church's  addition  at  the  end  of 
this  Epistle. 

Gospel. — {St.  Matth.  xxii.  "  The  Love  of 
God.")  Jesus  permits  devil  to  tempt  him,  that 
we  might  be  taught. — Permits  Pharisees  also. — 
Wicked  always  trying  to  find  Church  tripping. — 
Church's  utterances  are  always  triumphs. — How 
Jesus  confounds  the  Pharasaic  tempters  ;  — 
the  two  commandments ; — first  not  observed,  if 


XV111  CONTENTS. 


l'AOB 


second  is  broken. — He  asks  the  tempters  about 
the  Dixit  Dominus. — If  we  love  Jesus,  we  fulfil 
the  two  commandments. — Jesus  our  all  ; — the 
Eternal  Father's  love  is  always  "Jesus;" — God 
only  loves  men,  because  they  are,  or  may  be- 
come, members  of  his  Christ. — Our  charity  is 
the  same,  i.e.  what  we  love  in  selves  or  in  others, 
is  the  Word. — Why  we  must  exclude  no  one 
(but  the  reprobate)  from  our  charity. — The  link 
between  two  profound  expressions  of  St.  Paul 
about  the  end  of  the  law; — our  moral  and  dogma 
are  the  Man-God; — he  is  our  faith  and  our  love. 
— St.  Augustine's  hcereamus  Uni,fruamur  Uno, 
permaneamus  TJnum. 
The  18th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .407 

Epistle. — (1  Cor.  i.)  The  thought  of  the 
Last  Judgment,  which  is  approaching,  is  con- 
tinually before  our  Mother,  now  that  our  Year  is 
closing. — The  love  of  the  Bride,  the  Church,  is 
one  that  includes  vehement  desire  for  her  Jesus. 
— Why  he  would  not  tell  her  how  long  she  was 
to  be  in  exile. — This  explains  the  pleasure  the 
Apostles  take  in  speaking  of  the  approaching 
Coming. — Miracles  will  increase  as  that  Coming 
draws  nigher  ; — witness  Lourdes! — Modern  in- 
credulity.— What  we  now  need; — especially  in 
our  Pastors. 

Gospel. — (St.  Matth.  ix.  The  Paralytic,  carry- 
ing his  bed.)  Our  Priests  are  to  us  what  Moses 
was  to  Israelites; — Offertory  for  to-day,  why  it 
speaks  of  Moses. — Our  Gospel  instructs  us  upon 
the  prerogative  of  our  Priests,  forgiving  sins,  and 
healing  souls. — This  Gospel  always  most  dear  to 
Church; — Catacombs  abound  with  frescoes  of 
Paralytic. — Heretics  always  found  to  deny  the 
priestly  power  of  forgiving  sin. — Jesus's  miracle 
is  repeated  by  the  Church. — How  grateful  we 
should  be  for  the  Sacrament  of  Penance. 
The  19th  Sunday,  .  .  .  .438 

Epistle. — (Eph.  iv.  Be  renewed  in  the  Spirit 
of  your  mind  ;  dec.)  What  is  holiness,  in  God  ; 
what  it  is,  in  man. — How  we  are  sanctified  in 
Truth,  through  the  Incarnate  Word. — To  whom 
does  the  Son  of  Man  communicate  the  life  and 
truth  of  divine  Union. — What  the  Apostle  means 
by  the  new  man  ;  and  justice:   and  holiness  of 


CONTENTS.  XIX 

VAGR 

truth: — join  this  to  the  text  of  the  17th  Sunday, 
Be  careful  to  keep  Unity, — and  we  have  a  com- 
pendium of  all  the  rules  of  the  ascetic  and 
mystic  life. — Be  angry  and  sin  not ;  even  holy 
anger  must  be  soon  calmed  down  ;  else,  we  give 
place  and  scope  to  the  devil  to  interfere  with 
Unity. — Egotism  is  sign  of  devil's  ruling  us  ; 
devotedness  for  others,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
with  us. — How,  according  to  St.  Basil,  it  is  by 
this  Unity  alone  that  the  benefits  of  the  Incar- 
nation are  manifested  to  the  world. 

Gospel. — ( St.  Matth.  xxii,)  The  Invited  to 
the  marriage-feast  of  the  King's  Son.)  This  is 
the  second  time  we  have  the  parable,  which  speaks 
of  divine  Union. — This  second  shows  us  how  the 
light  has  been  added  to,  during  these  Sundays. — 
The  King's  Son  enters  the  guest-hall,  to  see  if  all 
have  the  wedding-garment  on  ; — they  have  had 
time  to  mend  their  robes. — How  solicitous  the 
Church  is,  during  these  closing  Sundays,  to  make 
us  thoroughly  understand  the  mystery  of  divine 
Union. — St.  Gregory's  Homily. 

The  20th  Sunday  ....       438 

Epistle.—  (Eph.  v.  See,  how  ye  walk  circum- 
spectly, etc.)  The  final  consummation  of  divine 
union  will  infuriate  the  devil  tenfold. — They  who 
live,  when  world  is  drawing  nigh  its  close,  must 
be  very  circumspect  regarding  minimising  com- 
promises of  liberal  Catholics. — Concession  and 
cowardly  shrinkings. — Diminution  of  revealed 
truth  is  always  folly. — Adaptation  of  Gospel 
principles  to  our  19th  or  20th  centuries,  is  a 
fashion  most  unwise. — The  honest  simplicity  of 
the  sacred  proverb,  is  our  best  policy. — Fidelity 
to  Jesus  means  fidelity  to  Truth. — To  truly  serve 
our  world,  we  must  staunchly  give  it  unminced 
Truth. — Jesus  redeemed,  (he  purchased,)  Time  for 
us,  that  we  might  spend  it  all  in  asserting  the 
whole  Truth; — time  well-spent  is  only  when  Truth 
is  kept  boldly  true  ;  we  must  be  Michaels,  with 
"  None  like  truth  !"— Our  forefathers  called  these 
last  weeks  of  Pentecost,  holy  angel  weeks  ! — 
St.  Michael  our  great  leader  in  these  liberal  times. 
— A  single  voice  crying  "  Who  is  like  God  and 
Truth?"  will  always  have  tremendous  power. — 


XX  CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


Spiritual  festivity,  how  it  puts  the  worldly  ones 
into  the  shade. 

Gospel. — {St.  John,  iv.  "  The  Ruler  of  Caphar- 
naum.")  The  world  is  drawing  to  its  close,  like 
our  ecclesiastical  Year. — What  Capharnaum  im- 
plies.— Our  spiritual  fathers  pray  for  us. — Jesus 
was  at  Cana.  —Pastors  should  imitate  the  Church 
in  her  zeal  and  patience; — she  prays  for  the  end 
to  be  deferred  (pro  mora  finis). — Tertullian's  other 
words. — Our  prayer  for  the  world's  salvation  must 
be  strong  in  faith. — Worldlings  are  inexcusable, 
yet  must  we  pray  that  they  may  enter  the  Nup- 
tial Feast  of  the  Lamb. — Jesus's  example  of 
shedding  his  Blood  for  even  obstinate  sinners; — 
we,  too,  must  pray  for  the  enemies  of  the  Church. 
— Let  us  avoid  the  faulty  faith  of  the  Ruler. 

The  21st  Sunday  .  .  .  .454 

Epistle. — (Eph.Vi.  Be  strengthened  in  the  Lord 
etc.)  Early  beginnings  of  divine  Union, Idelicious; — 
law  of  Deuteronomy;— but  short.— Normal  state 
is— battling. — God's  name  of  Hosts; — Jesus  de- 
scribed as  a  Warrior  ; — therefore,  Bride  is  martial. 
— What  is  the  Evil  Day. — The  armour  of  Jesus 
is  put  on  his  Bride. — How  Faith  is  the  generic 
name  of  all  the  great  armour. — How  it  is,  we  puny 
soldiers  can  make  head  against  the  mighty  fallen 
spirits. — The  Revealed  Word  of  God  is  the 
soldier's  great  shield. — Devil's  horror  of  one  that 
passionately  loves  the  word  of  God. — One  word, 
michael,  how  grand  ! 

Gospel. — (St.  Matt,  xviii.  Have  patience  with 
me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  all.)  The  Dies  iroe  how 
appropriate  for  this  close  of  Year. — God's  readi- 
ness to  pardon  ; — but  we  must  equally  be  ready 
for  last  reckoning. — We  are  the  insolvent  debtor. 
— Our  debt  to  divine  justice  supposes  eternal 
punishment. — God's  forgiveness  demands  mine  ; 
— St.  Augustine's  words  on  that ; — St.  Chrysos- 
tom. — Our  unfortunate  seven,  times  a  day. — Going 
to  rest  with  bitter  feelings  against  our  neigh- 
bour.— A  son  or  daughter  of  God  must  be  like 
Him,  in  pardoning. 

The  22nd  Sunday,  .  .  .  .472 

Epistle. — (Philip,  i.  We  are  confident  .  .  , 
that  he  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you,  will 


CONTENTS.  XXI 

PAQK 

perfect  it,  &c.)  The  Last  Day  is  here  called  the 
Day  of  Christ  Jesus. — The  Apostle  has  reached 
that  point  of  love,  that  sufferings  increase  it,  more 
than  sweet  caresses  of  God  would.— Sublime  in- 
difference, how  far  off  stoical  spirituality  ! — The 
Apostle  longs  to  see  his  dear  Philippians  ready 
for  the  Eternal  Nuptials. — How  it  is,  that  Charity 
goes  along  with  Faith  ; — strange  love  that,  which 
seems  afraid  of  development  of  the  truth  ! — How 
Liberalism  kills  Charity. — Early  Christians  had 
a  passion  for  Truth  ; — the  first  three  centuries 
were  the  combat  of  Truth  against  Error,  and  both 
were  determinedly  out-spoken.—  Now-a-  days, 
liberal  Catholics  pretend  that  Error  has  its  rights ! 
— but  the  children  of  light  (Eph.  v.  8.)  admit  no 
mincing. — St.  Chrysostom's  "  stars  brightest  in 
darkest  nights  ;" — and  St.  Augustine's,  that  they 
keep  to  the  path  marked  for  them  by  God,  with- 
out heeding  the  earth's  vapours  and  storms. 

Gospel. — (St.  Matth.  xxii.)  Give  to  Caesar, 
dec.  How  strongly  our  Mother  the  Church  urges 
us,  during  these  last  Sundays  of  her  Year,  to  not 
diminish  the  Truth. — The  effort  made  to  ensnare 
Jesus  in  his  speech  on  a  political  question  ; — 
his  divine  answer  forms  the  Church's  politics. — 
The  same,  was  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles. — 
What  is  the  origin  of  all  authority  among  men  ; — 
it  is  from  God. — Human  laws  are  great,  if  they  be 
in  harmony  with  those  of  God  ; — there  is  no  law, 
when  man  commands  injustice. 

The  23rd  Sunday,  .  .  .  48G 

Epistle. — (Philip,  iii.)  Be  followers  of  me,  &c.) 
Why  St.  Clement  is  mentioned  here. — The  Holy 
Ghost  allows  heretics  to  have  the  Scripture ; — but, 
he  has  reserved  Tradition  to  the  true  Church. — 
Holiness  is  Tradition  in  its  fullest  meaning. — The 
Church  is  a  Temple  built  to  God's  glory,  by  living 
stones  j — the  plan  is  that  of  Christ,  who  is  the 
divine  Architect. — On  studying  the  lives  of 
Saints  ; — on  imitating  good  people  with  whom  we 
should  be  united. — Effect  of  living  with  devout 
servants  of  God. 

Gospel. — (St.  Matth.  ix.  The  Euler's  young 
daughter  ;  the  issue  of  blood  healed.)  These  two 
represent,  respectively,  the  Synagogue  and  the 


XX11  CONTENTS. 

l'ACil 

Church. — How  the  past  makes  us  be  in  admir- 
ation of  the  ways  of  divine  Wisdom. — World 
deranged  by  sin  ; — the  chosen  people,  the  Jews  ; 
— the  Gentiles  ; — the  .Redeemer  sent,  so  he  said, 
only  to  the  last  sheep  of  Israel. — The  Jews,  as  a 
nation,  not  faithful  to  the  Messiah  ;  its  religion, 
though  so  beautiful  in  itself,  and  its  law,  not 
understood  when  Jesus  came  on  earth. — Then 
came  the  Gentiles,  and,  from  last,  became  the 
first. — Israel  is  to  be  converted  at  last :  the 
daughter  of  Sion  is  now  asleep  ;  Jesus  will  take 
her  by  the  hand ;  she  will  rise !  and  then,  the 
Last  Judgment  ! 

The  24th  and  last  Sunday,  .  .  .501 

Epistle. — (Cohss.  i.  We  cease  not  to  pray  for 
you,  &c.  Giving  thanks,  &c.)  Thanksgiving  and 
Prayer,  the  summary  of  the  Liturgical  Cycle. — 
The  labours  of  St.  Paul  to  make  us  all  perfect. — 
Our  experience  of  the  action  of  the  Church,  each 
Year. — Immense  influence  of  a  Year's  Liturgy,  on 
the  soul. — Our  hopes  for  the  new  Year  which  is 
coming. — We  cannot  stand  still,  during  this 
mortal  life. — Next  Year,  an  increase  of  Light ; 
closer  Union  ;  nearer  to  the  Vision  Beatific  ! 

Gospel.— (St.  Matth.  xxiv.    The  Last  Judg- 
ment.)    A    Prayer,   addressed  to    the    divine 
Judge. 
The  3rd  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany,  .  .  .515 

The  4th  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany,  .  .  .      520 

The  5th  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany,  .  .  .      524 

The  6th  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany,    ,  .  .      529 


THE  TIME  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  FIRST. 

THE    HISTORY   OF    THE    TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  Solemnity  of  Pentecost  and  its  Octave  are  over, 
and  the  progress  of  the  Liturgical  Year  introduces 
us  into  a  new  period,  which  is  altogether  different 
from  those  we  have  hitherto  spent.  From  the  very 
beginning  of  Advent,  which  is  the  prelude  to  the 
Christmas  festival,  right  up  to  the  anniversary  of  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  have  witnessed  the 
entire  series  of  the  Mysteries  of  our  Redemption ; 
all  have  been  unfolded  to  us.  The  sequel  of  Seasons 
and  Feasts  made  up  a  sublime  drama,  which  absorbed 
our  very  existence ;  we  have  but  just  come  from  the 
final  celebration,  which  was  the  consummation  of  the 
whole.  And  yet,  we  have  got  through  but  one  half 
of  the  year.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  period  we 
have  still  to  live  is  devoid  of  its  own  special  mysteries  : 
but,  instead  of  keeping  up  our  attention  by  the  cease- 
less interest  of  one  plan  hurrying  on  its  completion, 
the  sacred  Liturgy  is  about  to  put  before  us  an 
almost  unbroken  succession  of  varied  episodes,  of 
which  some  are  brilliant  with  glory,  and  others 
exquisite  in  loveliness,  but  each  one  of  them  bringing 
its  special  tribute  towards  either  the  development  of 
the  dogmas  of  faith,  or  the  furtherance  of  the  Chris- 
tian life.     That  year's  Cycle  will  thus  be  filled  up ;  it 

PENT  :   VOL.  XI.  jj 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


will  disappear  ;  a  new  one  will  take  its  place,  bring- 
ing before  us  the  same  divine  facts,  and  pouring  forth 
the  same  graces  on  Christ's  mystical  body. 

This  section  of  the  Liturgical  Year,  which  com- 
prises a  little  more  or  a  little  less  than  six  months, 
according  as  Easter  is  early  or  late,  has  always  had 
the  character  it  holds  at  present.  But,  although  it 
only  admits  detached  solemnities  and  Feasts,  the 
influence  of  the  moveable  portion  of  the  Cycle  is 
still  observable.  It  may  have  as  many  as  twenty- 
eight,  or  as  few  as  twenty-three  weeks.  This  varia- 
tion depends  not  only  upon  the  Easter  Feast,  which 
may  occur  on  any  of  the  days  between  the  22nd 
of  March  and  25th  of  April,  inclusively  ;  but,  also, 
on  the  date  of  the  first  Sunday  of  Advent,  the  open- 
ing of  a  new  ecclesiastical  year,  and  which  is  always 
the  Sunday  nearest  the  Kalends  of  December. 

In  the  Roman  Liturgy,  the  Sundays  of  this  series 
go  under  the  name  of  Sundays  after  Pentecost.  As 
we  shall  show  in  the  next  Chapter,  that  title  is  the 
most  suitable  that  could  have  been  given,  and  is  found 
in  the  oldest  Sacramentaries  and  Antiphonaries :  but 
it  was  not  universally  adopted  by  even  all  those 
Churches  which  followed  the  Roman  Rite ;  in  progress 
of  time,  however,  that  title  was  the  general  one.  To 
mention  some  of  the  previous  early  names  : — in  the 
Comes  of  Alcuin,  which  takes  us  back  to  the  8th 
Century,  we  find  the  first  section  of  these  Sundays 
called  Sundays  after  Pentecost ;  the  second  is  named 
Weeks  after  the  Feast  of  the  Apostles  (post  Natale 
Apostolorum) ;  the  third  goes  under  the  title  of  Weeks 
after  Saint  Laurence  (post  Sancti  Laurentii);  the  fourth 
has  the  appellation  of  Weeks  of  the  Seventh  Month 
(September) ;  and,  lastly,  the  fifth  is  termed  Weeks 
after  Saint  Michael  (post  Sancti  Angeli),  and  lasts  till 
Advent.  As  late  as  the  16th  Century,  many  Missals 
of  the  Western  Churches  gave  us  these  several  sec- 
tions of  the  Time  after  Pentecost,  but  some  of  the  titles 


HISTORY    OF    THE    TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST.  3 

varied  according  to  the  special  Saints  honoured  in  the 
respective  dioceses,  and  which  were  taken  as  the 
date- marks  of  this  period  of  the  Year.  The  Roman 
Missal,  published  by  order  of  Saint  Pius  the  Fifth, 
has  gradually  been  adopted  in  all  our  Latin  Churches, 
and  has  restored  the  ancient  denomination  to  the 
Ecclesiastical  Season  we  have  just  entered  upon  ;  so 
that  the  only  name  under  which  it  is  now  known 
amongst  us  is,  The  Time  after  Pentecost  (post  Pen- 
tecosten.) 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  SECOND. 

THE    MYSTERY    OF    THE    TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

That  we  may  thoroughly  understand  the  meaning 
and  influence  of  the  Season  of  the  Liturgical  Year 
upon  which  we  have  now  entered,  it  is  requisite  for 
us  to  grasp  the  entire  sequel  of  mysteries,  which  holy 
Church  has  celebrated  in  our  presence  and  company  ; 
we  have  witnessed  her  Services,  and  we  have  shared 
in  them.  The  celebration  of  those  mysteries  was  not 
an  empty  pageant,  acted  for  the  sake  of  being  looked 
at.  Each  one  of  them  brought  with  it  a  special 
grace,  which  produced  in  our  souls  the  reality  sig- 
nified by  the  Rites  of  the  Liturgy.  At  Christmas, 
Christ  was  born  within  us  ;  at  Passiontide,  He  passed 
on  and  into  us  his  sufferings  and  atonements;  at 
Easter,  he  communicated  to  us  his  glorious,  his  un- 
trammelled life ;  in  his  Ascension,  he  drew  us  after 
him,  and  this  even  to  heaven's  summit ;  in  a  word,  as 
the  Apostle  expresses  all  this  working,  "  Christ  was 
formed  in  us,"  l 

But,  in  order  to  give  solidity  and  permanence  to 
the  image  of  Christ  formed  within  us,  it  was  necessary 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  come,  that  so  he  might 
increase  our  light,  and  enkindle  a  fire  within  us  that 
should  never  be  quenched.  This  divine  Paraclete 
came  down  from  heaven  ;  he  gave  himself  to  us;  he 
wishes  to  take  up  his  abode  within  us,  and  take  our 
life  of  regeneration  entirely  into  his  own  hands. 
Now,  it  is  during  the  period  called,  by  the  Liturgy, 
The  time  after  Pentecost,  that  there  is  signified  and 
expressed  this  regenerated  life,  which  is  to  be  spent 

1  Gal.  iv.  19. 


MYSTERY    OF    THE    TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST.  O 

on  the  model  of  Christ's,  and  under  the  direction  of 
his  Spirit. 

Two  o ejects  here  offer  themselves  to  our  considera- 
tion :  the  Church  and  the  Christian  soul.  As  to  holy 
Church,  the  Bride  of  Christ,  filled  as  she  is  with  the 
Paraclete  Spirit,  who  has  poured  himself  forth  upon 
her,  and,  from  that  time  forward,  is  her  animating 
principle, — she  is  advancing  onwards  in  her  militant 
career,  and  will  do  so  till  the  second  Coming  of  her 
heavenly  Spouse.  She  has  within  her  the  gifts  of 
Truth  and  Holiness.  Endowed  with  Infallibility  of 
Faith  and  Authority  to  govern,  she  feeds  Christ's 
flock,  sometimes  enjoying  liberty  and  peace,  some- 
times going  through  persecutions  and  trials.  Her 
divine  Spouse  abides  with  her,  by  his  grace  and  the 
efficacy  of  his  promises,  even  to  the  end  of  time  ;  she 
is  in  possession  of  all  the  favours  he  has  bestowed 
upon  her ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  with  her,  and 
in  her,  for  ever.  AH  this  is  expressed  by  this  present 
portion  of  the  Liturgical  Year.  It  is  one  wherein  we 
shall  not  meet  with  any  of  those  great  events  which 
prepared,  and  consummated  the  divine  work  ;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  is  a  season  when  holy  Church  reaps 
the  fruits  of  that  holiness  and  doctrine,  which  those 
ineffable  mysteries  have  already  produced,  and  will 
continue  to  produce,  during  the  course  of  ages.  It  is 
during  this  same  season,  that  we  shall  meet  with  the 
preparation  for,  and,  in  due  time,  the  fulfilment  of, 
those  final  events  which  will  transform  our  Mother's 
militant  life  on  earth  into  the  triumphant  one  in 
heaven.  As  far,  then,  as  regards  holy  Church,  this 
is  the  meaning  of  the  portion  of  the  Cycle  we  are 
commencing. 

As  to  the  faithful  soul,  whose  life  is  but  a  compen- 
dium of  that  of  the  Church,  her  progress,  during  the 
period  which  is  opened  to  her  after  the  Pentecos- 
tal feasts,  should  be  in  keeping  with  that  of  our  com- 
mon Mother.     The  soul  should  live  and  act  according 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


to  that  Jesus,  who  has  united  himself  with  her  by  the 
mysteries  she  has  gone  through ;  she  should  be 
governed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  she  has  received. 
The  sublime  episodes,  peculiar  to  this  second  portion 
of  the  year,  will  give  her  an  increase  of  light  and 
life.  She  will  put  unity  into  these  rays,  which, 
though  scattered  in  various  directions,  emanate  from 
one  common  centre  :  and,  advancing  from  brightness  to 
brightness,1  she  will  aspire  to  being  consummated 
in  him  whom  she  now  knows  so  well,  and  whom  death 
will  enable  her  to  possess  as  her  own.  Should  it  not 
be  the  will  of  God,  however,  to  take  her  as  yet  to 
himself,  she  will  begin  a  fresh  year,  and  live  over 
again  those  mysteries  which  she  has  already  enjoyed 
in  the  foregoing  first  halves  of  the  Liturgical  Cycle, 
after  which,  she  will  find  herself,  once  more,  in  the 
season  that  is  under  the  direction  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  till  at  last,  her  God  will  summon  her  from 
this  world,  on  the  day  and  at  the  hour  which  he  has 
appointed  from  all  eternity. 

Between  the  Church,  then,  and  the  Soul,  during 
the  time  intervening  from  the  descent  of  the  divine 
Paraclete  to  the  consummation,  there  is  this  differ- 
ence— that  the  Church  goes  through  it  but  once, 
whereas  the  Christian  soul  repeats  it  each  year.  With 
this  exception,  the  analogy  is  perfect.  It  is  our  duty, 
therefore,  to  thank  God  for  his  providing  thus  for  our 
weakness,  by  means  of  the  sacred  Liturgy,  whereby 
he  successively  renews  within  us  those  helps,  which 
enable  us  to  attain  the  glorious  end  of  our  creation. 

Holy  Church  has  so  arranged  the  order  for  reading 
the  Books  of  Scripture  during  the  present  period,  as 
to  express  the  work  then  accomplished,  both  in  the 
Church  herself,  and  in  the  Christian  soul.  For  the 
interval  between  Pentecost  and  the  commencement 
of  August,  she  gives  us  the  Four  Books  of  Kings. 

1  II  Cor.  iii.  18. 


MYSTERY   OF    THE   TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST.  7 

They  are  a  prophetic  epitome  of  the  Church's  history. 
They  describe  how  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  founded 
by  David,  who  is  the  type  of  Christ  victorious  over 
his  enemies,  and  by  Solomon,  the  king  of  peace,  who 
builds  a  temple  in  honour  of  Jehovah.  During  the 
centuries  comprised  in  the  history  given  in  those 
Books,  there  is  a  perpetual  struggle  between  good  and 
evil.  There  are  great  and  saintly  kings,  such  as  Asa, 
Ezechias,  and  Josias;  there  are  wicked  ones,  like 
Hanasses.  A  schism  breaks  out  in  Samaria  ;  infidel 
nations  league  together  against  the  City  of  God.  The 
holy  people,  continually  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  the 
Prophets,  give  themselves  up  to  the  worship  of  false 
gods,  and  to  the  vices  of  the  heathen  ;  till,  at  length, 
the  justice  of  God  destroys  both  Temple  and  City  of  the 
faithless  Jerusalem :  it  is  an  image  of  the  destruction 
of  this  world,  when  Faith  shall  be  so  rare,  as  that  the 
Son  of  Man,  at  his  second  Coming,  shall  scarce  find  a 
vestige  of  it  remaining. 

During  the  month  of  August,  we  read  the  Sapiential 
Books, — so  called,  because  they  contain  the  teachings 
of  Divine  Wisdom.  This  Wisdom  is  the  Word  of 
God,  who  is  manifested  unto  men  through  the  teach- 
ings of  the  Church,  which,  because  of  the  assistance 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  permanently  abiding  within  her,  is 
infallible  in  the  truth. 

Supernatural  truth  produces  holiness,  which  cannot 
exist,  nor  produce  fruit,  where  truth  is  not.  In  order 
to  express  the  union  there  is  between  these  two,  the 
Church  reads  to  us,  during  the  month  of  September, 
the  Books  called  Hagiographic  ;  these  are,  Tobias, 
Judith,  Esther,  and  Job,  and  they  show  Wisdom  in 
action. 

At  the  end  of  the  world,  the  Church  will  have  to 
go  through  combats  of  unusual  fierceness.  To  keep 
us  on  the  watch,  she  reads  to  us,  during  the  month 
of  October,  the  Book  of  Machabees ;  for  there  we  have 
described  to  us  the  noble-heartedness  of  those  defenders 


8  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

of  the  Law  of  God,  and  for  which  they  gloriously 
die ;  it  will  be  the  same  at  the  last  days,  when  power 
will  be  given  to  the  Beast,  to  make  war  with  the  Saints, 
and  to  overcome  them} 

The  month  of  November  gives  us  the  reading  of  the 
Prophets:  the  judgments  of  God  impending  upon  a 
world  which  he  is  compelled  to  punish  by  destruction, 
are  there  announced  to  us.  First  of  all,  we  have  the 
terrible  Ezechiel;  then  Daniel,  who  sees  empire 
succeeding  empire,  till  the  end  of  all  time ;  and, 
finally,  the  Minor  Prophets,  who  for  the  most  part, 
foretell  the  divine  chastisements,  though  the  latest 
among  them  proclaim,  at  the  same  time,  the  near 
approach  of  the  Son  of  God. 

Such  is  the  Mystery  of  this  portion  of  the  Liturgical 
Cycle,  which  is  called  The  Time  after  Pentecost.  It 
includes  also  the  use  of  green  Yestments ;  for  that 
colour  expresses  the  hope  of  the  Bride,  who  knows 
that  she  has  been  intrusted,  by  her  Spouse,  to  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  that  he  will  lead  her  safe  to  the  end 
of  her  pilgrimage.  St.  John  says  all  this  in  those  few 
words  of  his  Apocalypse  :  The  Spirit  and  the  Bride 
say :  Come  !  2 

1  Apoc.  xiii.  7.  *  Apoc.  xxii.  17. 


1MIACTICE    FOR    THE    TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  THIRD. 

PRACTICE   FOR   THE   TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  object  which  holy  Church  has  in  view  by  her 
Liturgical  Year  is  the  leading  the  christian  soul  to 
union  with  Christ,  and  this  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  This 
object  is  the  one  which  God  himself  has  in  giving  us 
his  own  Sod,  to  be  our  Mediator,  our  Teacher,  and 
Redeemer,  and  in  sending  us  the  Holy  Ghost  to  abide 
among  us.  It  is  to  this  end  that  is  directed  all  that 
aggregate  of  Rites  and  Prayers  which  we  have  hitherto 
explained:  they  are  not  a  mere  commemoration  of  the 
mysteries  achieved  for  our  salvation  by  the  divine 
goodness,  but  they  bring  with  them  the  graces  cor- 
responding to  each  of  those  mysteries,  that  thus  we 
may  come,  as  the  Apostle  expresses  it,  to  the  age  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ} 

As  we  have  elsewhere  explained,  our  sharing  in  the 
mysteries  of  Christ,  which  are  celebrated  in  the  Litur- 
gical Year,  produces  in  the  Christian  what  is  called 
in  Mystic  Theology,  the  Illuminative  Life,  in  which 
the  soul  gains  continually  more  and  more  of  the  light 
of  the  Incarnate  Word,  who,  by  his  examples  and 
teachings,  renovates  each  one  of  her  faculties,  and 
imparts  to  her  the  habit  of  seeing  all  things  from 
God's  point  of  view.  This  is  a  preparation  which 
disposes  her  for  union  with  God,  not  merely  in  an 
imperfect  manner,  and  one  that  is  more  or  less  incon- 
stant, but  in  an  intimate  and  permanent  way,  which 
is  called  the  Unitive  Life.  The  production  of  this 
Life  is  the  special  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  has 
been  sent  into  this  world  that  he  may  maintain  each 

1  Eph.  iv.  13. 


10  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

one  of  our  souls  in  the  possession  of  Christ,  and  may- 
bring  to  perfection  the  love  whereby  the  creature  is 
united  with  its  God. 

In  this  state,  in  this  Unitive  Life,  the  soul  is  made 
to  relish,  and  assimilate  into  herself,  all  that  substan- 
tial and  nourishing  food  which  is  presented  to  her 
so  abundantly  during  the  Time  after  Pentecost. 
The  mysteries  of  the  Trinity  and  of  the  Blessed  Sacra- 
ment, the  mercy  and  power  of  the  Heart  of  Jesus,  the 
glories  of  Mary  and  her  influence  upon  the  Church 
and  souls — all  these  are  manifested  to  the  soul  with 
more  clearness  than  ever,  and  produce  within  her 
effects  not  previously  experienced.  In  the  Feasts  of 
the  Saints,  which  are  so  varied  and  so  grand  during 
this  portion  of  the  year,  she  feels  more  and  more 
intimately  the  bond  which  unites  her  to  them  in 
Christ,  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  eternal  hap- 
piness of  Heaven,  which  is  to  follow  the  trials  of  this 
mortal  life,  is  revealed  to  her  by  the  Feast  of  all 
Saints  ;  she  gains  clearer  notions  of  that  mysterious 
bliss,  which  consists  in  light  and  love.  Having  be- 
come more  closely  united  to  Holy  Church,  which  is 
the  Bride  of  her  dear  Lord,  she  follows  her  in  all  the 
stages  of  her  earthly  existence,  she  takes  a  share  in 
her  sufferings,  she  exults  in  her  triumphs ;  she  sees, 
and  yet  is  not  daunted  at  seeing,  this  world  tending 
to  its  decline,  for  she  knows  that  the  Lord  is  nigh  at 
hand.  As  to  what  regards  herself,  she  is  not  dismayed 
at  feeling  that  her  exterior  life  is  slowly  giving  way, 
and  that  the  wall  which  stands  between  her  and  the 
changeless  sight  and  possession  of  the  sovereign  Good 
is  gradually  falling  to  decay ;  for,  it  is  not  in  this 
world  that  she  lives,  and  her  heart  has  long  been 
where  her  treasure  is.1 

Thus  enlightened,  thus  attracted,  thus  established 
by  the  incorporation  into  herself  of  the  mysteries, 

1  St.  Matth.  vi.  21. 


PRACTICE    FOR   THE   TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST.       11 

wherewith  the  sacred  Liturgy  has  nourished  her,  as 
also  by  the  gifts  poured  into  her  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  soul  "yields  herself  up,  and  without  any  effort,  to 
the  impulse  of  the  divine  Mover.  Virtue  has  become 
all  the  more  easy  to  her,  as  she  aspires,  it  would 
almost  seem,  naturally,  to  what  is  most  perfect ; 
sacrifices,  which  used,  formerly,  to  terrify,  now 
delight  her ;  she  makes  use  of  this  world,  as  though 
she  used  it  not,1  for  all  true  realities,  as  far  as  she  is 
concerned,  exist  beyond  this  world ;  in  a  word,  she 
lougs  all  the  more  ardently  after  the  eternal  posses- 
sion of  the  object  she  loves,  as  she  has  been  realising 
even  in  this  life,  what  the  Apostle  describes,  where 
he  speaks  of  a  creature's  being  one  spirit  with  the 
Lord2  by  being  united  to  him  in  heart. 

Such  is  the  result  ordinarily  produced  in  the  soul 
by  the  sweet  and  healthy  influence  of  the  sacred 
Liturgy.  But  if  it  seem  to  us,  that,  although  we 
have  followed  it  in  its  several  seasons,  we  have  not, 
as  yet,  reached  the  state  of  detachment  and  expecta- 
tion just  described,  and  that  the  life  of  Christ  has  not, 
so  far,  absorbed  our  own  individual  life  into  itself, — 
let  us  be  on  our  guard  against  discouragement  on 
that  account.  The  Cycle  of  the  Liturgy,  with  its 
rays  of  light  and  grace  for  the  soul,  is  not  a  pheno- 
menon that  occurs  only  once  in  the  heavens  of  holy 
Church  ;  it  returns  each  Year.  Such  is  the  merciful 
design  of  that  God,  who  hath  so  loved  the  world,  as  to 
give  it  his  Only  Begotten  Son ; 3  of  that  God,  who 
came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  that  the  world  may  be 
saved  by  him.4.  Such,  we  say,  is  the  Design  of  God  ; 
and  holy  Church  is  but  carrying  out  that  design  by 
putting  within  our  reach  the  most  powerful  of  all 
means  for  leading  man  to  his  God,  and  uniting  him 
to  his  sovereign  Good  ;  she  thus  testifies  the  earnest- 
ness of  her  maternal  solicitude.     The  Christian  who 

1  1  Cor.  vii.  31.  2  Ibid.  vi.  17.  3  St.  John,  iii.  16. 

4  St.  John,  iii.  17. 


12  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

has  not  been  led  to  the  term  we  have  been  describing 
by  the  first  half  of  the  Cycle,  will  still  meet,  in  this 
second,  with  important  aids  for  the  expansion  of  his 
faith  and  the  growth  of  his  love.  The  Holy  Ghost, 
who  reigns,  in  a  special  manner,  over  this  portion  of 
the  Year,  will  not  fail  to  influence  his  mind  and 
heart ;  and,  when  a  fresh  Cycle  commences,  the  work 
thus  begun  by  grace  has  a  new  chance  for  receiving 
that  completeness,  which  had  been  retarded  by  the 
weakness  of  human  nature. 


MORNING    AND    NIGHT   PRAYERS.  13 


CHAPTER  THE  FOURTH. 

MORNING    AND   NIGHT   PRAYERS   FOR    THE   TIME    AFTER 

PENTECOST. 

During  this  second  part  of  the  Year,  the  Christian, 
on  waking  in  the  morning,  will  unite  himself  with 
holy  Church,  who,  every  day,  in  her  Office  of  Lauds, 
hails  the  return  of  light,  making  use  of  these  words 
of  the  Royal  Prophet : 

O  God,  my  God,  unto  thee  Deus,  Deus  meus,  ad  te 
do  I  watch  at  break  of  day.  de  luce  vigilo. 

He  will  profoundly  adore  the  Divine  Majesty ;  and, 
thanking  his  sovereign  Lord,  who  has  protected  him 
whilst  involved  in  the  darkness  of  night,  he  will 
proffer  him  his  service  for  the  whole  day  which  is 
now  commencing :  he  will  wish  to  spend  it  in  love 
and  obedience,  as  behoves  one  whom  Christ  has 
united  to  himself  by  his  mysteries,  and  whom  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  willing  to  guide  and  govern.  The 
time  for  Morning  Prayer  being  come,  he  may  give 
expression  to  the  sentiments  which  should  then  ani- 
mate his  soul,  by  using  these  formulas  of  the 
Church : — 

MORNING   PRAYERS. 

First,  praise  and  adoration  of  the  Most  Holy 
Trinity : 

$".  Let  us  bless  the  Father,  $".  Benedicamus  Patrem 
and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  et  Filium,  cum  SanctoSpi- 
Ghost.  ritu. 


14  TIMB    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

1$.  Laudemus  et  super-  1$.  Let  us  praise  him  and 

exaltemus  eum  in  saecula.  extol  him  above  all,  for  ever. 

f.  Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  tf.  Glory  be  to  the  Father, 

et  Spiritui  Sancto.  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  Holy- 
Ghost. 

3$.  Sicut  erat  in  principio,  B-  As  it  was  in  the  begin- 

et  nunc  et  semper,  et  in  ning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall 

saecula  saeculorum.   Amen,  be,  world  without  end.  Amen. 

Then,  praise  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ : 

ft.  Adoramus  te,  Christe,  ft.  We  adore  thee,  0  Christ, 

et  benedicimus  tibi;  and  bless  thee; 

1$.  Quia  per  sanctam  cru-  1$.  Because,    by    thy    holy 

cem  tuam  redemisti  mun-  Cross,  thou  hast  redeemed  the 

dum .  world. 

Thirdly,  invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost : 

Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus,  re-  Come,  0  Holy  Spirit,  fill  the 

pie  tuorum  corda  fidelium,  hearts  of  thy  faithful,  and  en- 

et  tui  amoris  in  eis  ignem  kindle  within  them  the  fire  of 

accende.  thy  love. 


After  these  fundamental  acts  of  religion,  recite  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  uniting  your  intentions  with  those 
which  your  Saviour  had  when  he  gave  it  to  you. 
First,  then,  raise  up  your  thoughts  and  desires  to  the 
interests  of  his  glory,  whilst  you  say  the  first  three 
petitions ;  and  in  the  last  four,  humbly  put  before 
him  the  favours  you  yourself  stand  in  need  of : 

THE  LORD'S  PRAYER. 

Pater  noster,  qui  es  in  Our  Father,  who  art  in  hea- 

ccelis,  sanctificetur  nomen  ven,  hallowed  be  thy  name; 

tuum;    adveniat    regnum  thy  kingdom  come;  thy  will 

tuum;  fiat  voluntas  tua  si-  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in 

cut  in  ccelo  et  in  terra.  heaven. 

Pan  em  nostrum  quotidi-  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 

anum  da  nobis  hodie;etdi-  bread,    and    forgive    us  our 

mitte  nobis  debita  nostra,  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them 

sicut  et  nos  dimittimus  de-  that     trespass     against     us; 

bitoribusnostris;  et  ne  nos  and  lead  us  not  into  tempta- 

inducasintentationem;  sed  tion;  but  deliver  us  from  evil, 

libera  nos  a  malo.  Amen.  Amen. 


MORNING   PRAYERS. 


15 


Then,  address  our  Blessed  Lady,  using  for  this, 
the  words  of  the  Angelical  Salutation.  Whilst  saying 
it,  think  of  the  share  she  took  in  the  mysteries, 
whereby  we  have  been  saved,  and  united  to  God. 
Think,  too,  of  the  immense  power  given  to  her  by  her 
divine  Son,  and  of  the  maternal  love  she  bears  for  us 
mortals. 

THE   ANGELICAL   SALUTATION. 


Hail  Mary,  full  of  grace : 
the  Lord  is  with  thee;  blessed 
art  thou  among  women,  and 
blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy 
womb,  Jesus. 

Holy  Mary,  Mother  of  God, 
pray  for  us  sinners,  now,  and 
at  the  hour  of  our  death. 
Amen. 


Ave  Maria,  gratia  plena; 
Dominus  tecum;  benedicta 
tu  in  mulieribus,  et  bene- 
dictus  fructus  ventris  tui, 
Jesus. 

Sancta  Maria,  mater  Dei, 
ora  pro  nobis  peccatoribus, 
nunc  et  in  hora  mortis  nos- 
trse.    Amen. 


After  this  you  should  recite  the  Creed,  that  is  the 
Symbol  of  Faith.  It  contains  the  dogmas  we  are  to 
believe,  and  which  we  have  seen,  in  such  living 
reality,  by  means  of  the  Liturgy  which  has  celebrated 
them,  each  in  its  turn.  Faith  is  the  first  bond  which 
unites  us  to  God.  It  is  Faith  that  gives  us  to  know 
him,  and  reveals  to  us  the  object  of  our  hope  and  our 
love.  Our  Faith  should  be  dearer  to  us  than  our 
life,  and  we  should  be  ever  praying  for  its  increase. 


THE    APOSTLES     CREED. 


I  believe  in  God  the  Father 
Almighty,  Creator  of  heaven 
and  earth. 

And,  in  Jesus  Christ,  his 
only  Son  our  Lord,  who  was 
conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
born  of  the  Virgin  Mary; 
suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate, 
was  crucified,  dead,  and  buri- 
ed; he  descended  into  hell,  the 
third  day  he  rose  again  from 


Credo  in  Deum,  Patrem 
omnipotentem,  creatorem 
cceli  et  terrae. 

Et  inJesum  Christum 
Filium  ejus  unicum,  Domi- 
num  nostrum  :  qui  concep- 
tus  est  de  Spiritu  Sancto, 
natus  ex  Maria  Virgine) 
passus  sub  Pontio  Pilato' 
crucifi  xus,  mortuus  et  sepul- 
tus:  descendit  ad  inferos, 


16 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


tertia  die  resurrexit  a  mor- 
tuis:  ascendit  ad  coelos,  se- 
det  ad  dexteram  Dei  Patris 
omnipotentis:  inde  ventu- 
rus  est  judicare  vivos  et 
mortuos. 

Credo  in  Spiritum  Sanc- 
tum, sanctam  Ecclesiam 
Catholicam,  Sanctorum 
communionem,  remission- 
em  peccatorum,  carnis  re- 
surrectionem,  vitam  aeter- 
11am.    Amen. 


the  dead  ;  he  ascended  into 
heaven,  sitteth  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  the  Father  Al- 
mighty; from  thence  he  shall 
come  to  judge  the  living  and 
the  dead. 

I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost; 
the  Holy  Catholic  Church;  the 
communion  of  Saints,  the  for- 
giveness of  sins,  the  resurrec- 
of  the  body,  and  life  ever- 
everlasting.    Amen. 


After  having  thus  made  the  Profession  of  your 
Faith,  unite  with  Holy  Church,  who  hails,  each 
morning,  the  rising  of  the  day-star,  who  is  her  Jesus, 
who  is  the  Light  of  the  World?  and  the  Sun  of 
Justice.  To  this  end,  you  may  recite  the  following 
beautiful  Hymn,  composed  by  St.  Ambrose: 


HYMN. 


Splendor  Paternse  glorias, 
De  luce  lucem  proferens, 
Lux  lucis,  et  fons  luminis, 
Diem  dies  illuminans. 


Verusque  sol  illabere, 
Micans  nitore  perpeti: 
Jubarque  Sancti  Spiritus 
Inf  unde  nostris  sensibus. 


Yotisvocemuset  Patrem, 
Patrem  perennis  glorias, 
Patrem  potcntis  gratia?, 
Culpain  releget  lubricam. 


Confirmet  actus  strenuos, 
Dentes  retundat  invidi: 


0  Brightness  of  the  Father's 
glory !  bringing  Light  from 
the  Light!  Thou  Light  of 
Light,  and  Fount  of  Light, 
and  Day  that  illuminest  the 
day  ! 

0  thou  true  Son  !  pour  forth 
thy  rays  on  us,  shining  upon 
us  with  unfading  splendour  ! 
0  Radiance  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  thou  infused  into  our  senses 
and  powers. 

Give  us,  also,  to  invoke  the 
Father, — the  Father  of  eternal 
glory,  the  Father  of  mighty 
grace, — that  he  would  drive 
from  us  sin  and  its  allure- 
ments. 

May  he  give  energy  to  our 
deeds  and  strengthen  them  ; 


1  St.  John,  viii.  12. 


MORNING    PRAYERS. 


17 


may  he  break  the  teeth  of  the 
envious  serpent;  may  he  sup- 
port us  when  we  rudely  fall, 
and  give  us  the  grace  to  act. 

May  he  govern  and  rule  our 
mind,  in  a  chaste  and  faithful 
body;  may  our  faith  be  fer- 
vent in  warmth,  void  of  the 
poisons  of  error. 

May  Christ  be  our  food,  and 
Faith  our  drink;  may  we  in 
gladness,  quaff  the  sober  in- 
ebriation of  the  Spirit. 

May  this  day  be  one  of  joy; 
modesty  its  dawn,  Faith  its 
noon;  and  no  night  to  dim 
the  mind. 

The  aurora  is  swift  advanc- 
ing; 0  may  the  full  Aurora 
come,  the  whole  Son  in  the 
Father,  and  the  whole  Father 
in  his  Word  ! 

To  God  the  Father,  and  to 
his  Only  Son,  and  to  the  Para- 
clete Spirit,  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever. 

Amen. 


Casus  secundet  asperos, 
Donet  gerendi  gratiam. 


Mentem  gubernet  et  re- 
gat, 
Casto,  fideli  corpore; 
Fides  calore  ferveat, 
Fraudis  venena  nesciat. 

Christusque  nobis  sit  ci- 
bus, 
Potusque  noster  sit  fides: 
Laeti  libamus  sobriam 
Ebrietatem  Spiritus. 

Laetus  dies  hie  transeat,. 
Pudor  sit  ut  diluculum, 
Fides  velut  meridies, 
Crepusculum  mens  nesciat. 

Aurora  cursus  provehit, 
Aurora  totus  prodeat, 
In  Patre  totus  Filius, 
Et  totus  in  Verbo  Pater. 

Deo  Patri  sit  gloria, 
Ej  usque  soli  Filio, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito, 
Et  nunc,  et  in  perpetuum. 

Amen. 


After  having  thus  paid  your  homage  to  your  divine 
Mediator,  next  make  an  humble  confession  of  your 
sins,  reciting,  for  this  purpose,  the  general  formula 
made  use  of  by  the  Church. 


THE    CONFESSION    OF    SINS. 


I  confess  to  Almighty  God, 
to  blessed  Mary  ever  Virgin, 
to  blessed  Michael  the  Arch- 
angel, to  blessed  John  Baptist, 
to  the  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paul,  and  to  all  the  Saints, 
that  I  have  sinned  exceedingly 
in  thought  word,  and  deed; 

PENT  :   VOL.  XI. 


Confiteor  Deo  omnipo- 
tent^, beatae  Marias  semper 
Virgini,  beato  Michaeli 
Archangelo,  beato  Joanni 
Baptistae,  Sanctis  Apostolis 
Petro  et  Paulo,  et  omnibus 
Sanctis,  quia  peccavi  nimis, 
cogitatione,  verbo  et  opere: 
C 


18  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

mea  culpa,  mea  culpa,  mea  through  my  fault,  through  my 

maxima  culpa.  fault,  through  my  most  griev- 
ous fault. 

Ideo  precor  beatam  Ma-  Therefore    I    beseech    the 

riam  semper  Virgin  em,  bea-  blessed     Mary    ever    Virgin, 

turn  Michael  em  Archange-  blessed  Michael  the  Archangel, 

lum,beatum  Joannem  Bap-  blessed  John  Baptist,  the  holy 

tistam,   sanctos  Apostolos  Apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  and 

PetrumetPaulum,etomnes  all  the  Saints,  to  pray  to  our 

Sanctos,  orare  pro  me  ad  Lord  God  for  me. 
Dominum  Deum  nostrum. 

Misereatur  nostri  omni-  May  Almighty  God    have 

potens  Deus,   et    dimissis  mercy  on  us,   and,   our  sins 

peccatis  nostris,  perducat  being   forgiven,  bring  us  to 

nos    ad    vitam    seternam.  life  everlasting.    Amen. 
Amen. 

Indulgentiam,  absolutio-  May  the  Almighty  and  mer- 

nem  et  remissionem  pecca-  ciful  Lord  grant  us  pardon, 

torum    nostrorum  tribuat  absolution,  and  remission  of 

nobis  omnipotens  et  miseri-  our  sins.  Amen, 
cors  Dominus.  Amen. 

This  is  the  proper  time  for  making  your  Meditation, 
as,  no  doubt,  you  practise  this  holy  exercise.  It  may 
be  the  case,  with  some  souls,  that  their  assiduous 
application  to  the  mysteries  of  the  Holy  Liturgy  has 
produced  upon  them,  this  among  other  effects, — that 
it  has  opened  to  them  the  way  of  Prayer,  properly  so 
called.  Let,  then,  each  one  commune  with  God, 
under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  During  this 
long  period,  which  never  lasts  less  than  six  months, 
the  Christian  is  free  to  choose  the  subject  of  his  com- 
munings with  God,  for  he  has  been  enlightened  as  to 
all  things,  by  the  words  and  works  of  his  Lord,  who 
came  down  from  heaven  to  earth  that  he  might  teach 
us  all  truth.  So  that,  whether  ,he  stay  to  ponder 
over  the  mysteries  which  have  been  revealed  to  him, 
according  to  the  attraction  which  he  feels  for  them  ; 
or  fix  his  attention  upon  the  perfections  of  that  divine 
Model,  in  whom  there  are,  so  resplendently,  all  the 
marks  of  the  Second  Adam  come  down  from  heaven  ; 

1  1  Cor.  xv.  47. 


MORNING  PRAYERS. 


19 


or  our  Lord  point  out  to  him  those  miseries  and  im- 
perfections which  are  in  him,  and  keep  him  still  so 
far  from  his  Model ;  all  will  tend  to  enlighten  him, 
to  inflame  him,  and  to  unite  him  with  his  God. 
When  a  soul  is  continually  heing  influenced  by  her 
contact  with  the  Church  through  the  Liturgy,  it  is 
impossible  for  the  spirit  of  Prayer  not  to  grow  within 
her,  and,  either  imperceptibly,  or  suddenly,  produce 
in  her  a  transformation  into  Him  who,  being  God, 
has  united  himself  to  our  nature,  in  order  that, 
through  him,  ice  might  be  united  with  God. 

Your  Meditation  or  Prayer  ended,  or  deferred,  on 
account  of  your  not  having  leisure  to  make  it  at  this 
hour  of  the  morning,  you  will  next  address  this 
prayer  to  God,  begging  him  to  grant  you  the  grace  to 
avoid,  during  this  day,  every  kind  of  sin,  and  to  per- 
form all  manner  of  good  works.  Say,  then,  this 
prayer  of  the  Church,  for  her  prayers  are  the  best : 

$\  0  Lord,  hear  my  prayer,         $".  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 

tionein  meam, 
B-  And   let  my  cry  come  1$.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 

unto  thee.  veniat. 


LET   US  PRAY. 

Almighty  Lord  and  God, 
who  hast  brought  us  to  the 
beginning  of  this  day,  let  thy 
powerful  grace  so  conduct  us 
through  it,  that  we  may  not 
fall  into  any  sin  ;  but  that  all 
our  thoughts,  wrords,  and  ac- 
tions may  be  regulated  ac- 
cording to  the  rules  of  thy 
heavenly  justice,  aud  tend  to 
the  observance  of  thy  law. 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.    Amen. 


OREMUS. 

Domine,  Deus  omnipo- 
tens,  qui  ad  principium  hu- 
jus  diei  nos  pervenire  fecis- 
ti,  tua  nos  hodie  salva  vir- 
tute,  ut  in  hac  die  ad  nul- 
lum declinemus  peccatum; 
sed  semper  ad  tuam  justi- 
tiam  faciendam  nostra  pro- 
cedant  eloquia,  dirigantur 
cogitationes  et  opera.  Per 
Dominum  nostrum  Jesum 
Christum  Filium  tuum,  qui 
tecum  vivit  et  regnat  in  uni- 
tate  Spiritus  sancti  Deus, 
per  omnia  ssecula  saeculo- 
rum.    Amen. 


20 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


During  the  day,  you  would  do  well  to  use  the  in 
structions  and  prayers,  which  you  will  find  in  these 
volumes,  hoth  for  the  Proper  of  the  Time,  and  the 
Proper  of  the  Saints.     In  the  Evening,  you  may  use 
the  following  prayers. 


NIGHT  PRAYERS. 


After  having  made  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  adore  that 
Sovereign  Lord,  who  now  offers  you  repose  after  the 
labours  of  the  day.  Beg  his  protection  on  these  hours 
of  sleep  and  night ;  and,  to  this  end,  you  may  recite 
this  beautiful  hymn  of  St.  Ambrose,  which  was  so 
great  a  favourite  with  St.  Augustine,  his  disciple.1 


hymn. 


Deus,  Creator  omnium 
Polique  rector,  vestiens 
Diem  decoro  lumine, 
Noctem  soporis  gratia, 

Artus  solutos  ut  quies 
Reddat  laboris  usui, 
Mentesque  fessas  alleyet, 
Luctusque  solvat  anxios; 


Grates,  peracto  jam  die, 
Et  noctis  exortu,  preces, 
Voti  reos  ut  adjuves, 
Hymnum  canentes,  solvi- 
mus. 

Te  cordis  ima  concinant, 
Te  vox  sonora  concrepet, 
Te  diligat  castus  amor, 
Te  mens  adoret  sobria. 


0  God,  Creator  of  all  things, 
and  Ruler  of  the  heavens,  'tis 
thou  that  clothed  day  with 
beautiful  light,  and  night  with 
the  boon  of  sleep. 

;Tis  sleep  that  restores  our 
wearied  limbs  to  the  toil  of 
work.  Sleep  gives  repose  to 
the  mind  when  tired,  and 
takes  away  the  anxious-mak- 
ing grief. 

The  day  is  spent,  and  night 
is  come  ;  we  offer  thee  our 
thanks  and  prayers,  singing 
our  hymn,  that  thou  mayst 
help  us,  thy  servants. 

May  our  inmost  heart  sing 
thy  praise,  and  tuneful  voices 
sound  forth  thy  name ;  may 
our  chaste  affection  love,  and 
our  sober  mind,  adore  thee. 


1  Confessions,  Bk.  ix.  ch.  12. 


NIGHT    PRAYERS. 


21 


Ut,  cum  profunda  clau- 
serit 
Diem  caligo  noctium, 
Fides  tenebras  nesciat 
Et  nox  fide  reluceat. 

Dormire  mentem  ne  sinas, 
Dormire  culpa  noverit; 
Castos  fides  refrigerans 
Sornni  vaporem  temperet. 

Exuta  sensu  lubrico 
Te  cordis  alta  somnient; 
Nee  hostis  invidi  dolo 
Pavor  quietos  suscitet. 


Christum  rogemus  et  Pa- 
trem, 
Christi  Patrisque  Spiritum : 
Unum,  potens  per  omnia, 
Fove  precantes,  Trinitas. 


And  when  the  night's  deep 
gloom  shall  shut  out  the  day, 
may  our  faith  know  nought  of 
darkness,  and  the  very  night 
be  day  by  faith. 

Let  not  our  soul,  but  only 
sin  feel  sleep  ;  let  faith  keep 
us  chaste,  and,  by  its  refresh- 
ing power,  check  the  vapours 
of  sleep. 

May  our  heart's  deepest  self, 
unschakled  by  the  allurements 
of  sense,  dream  of  thee:  nor 
let  the  fear  of  the  enemy, 
whose  envy  is  ever  laying 
snares,  disturb  us  when  at 
rest. 

Let  our  prayer  ascend  to 
Christ,  and  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Spirit  of  that  Christ 
and  Father:  O  Trinity,  one 
in  essence,  and  all-powerful, 
be  merciful  to  us,  who  pray  to 
thee. 

Amen.  Amen. 

After  this  Hymn,  say  the  Our  Father,  Hail  Alary, 
and  the  Apostles   Creed,  as  in  tbe  Morning. 

Then  make  the  Examination  of  Conscience,  going 
over  in  your  mind  all  the  faults  committed  during  the 
day.  Think,  and  humble  yourself  at  the  thought, 
how  sin  makes  us  degenerate  from  the  divine  adop- 
tion. Then  make  a  resolution  to  avoid  sin  for  the 
time  to  come,  to  do  penance  for  it,  and  to  shun  the 
occasions  which  might  again  lead  you  into  it. 

Having  concluded  the  Examination  of  Conscience, 
recite  the  Confiteor  (or  1  confess)  with  heartfelt  con- 
trition ;  and  then  give  expression  to  your  sorrow  by 
the  following  Act,  which  we  have  taken  from  the 
Venerable  Cardinal  Bellarmine's  Catechism. 

ACT    OF    CONTRITION. 

0  my  God,  I  am  exceedingly  grieved  for  having  offended 
thee;  and,  with  my  whole  heart,  I  repent  for  the  sins  I  have 


22  TIME    AFTER   TENTECOST. 

committed:  I  bate,  and  abhor  them,  above  every  other  evil, 
not  only  because,  by  so  sinning,  I  have  lost  Heaven,  and 
deserve  Hell,  but  still  more  because  I  have  offended  thee,  O 
infinite  Goodness,  who  art  worthy  to  be  loved  above  all 
things.  I  most  firmly  resolve,  by  the  assistance  of  thy 
grace,  never  more  to  offend  thee  for  the  time  to  come,  and 
to  avoid  those  occasions  which  might  lead  me  into  sin. 


You  may  then  add  the  Acts  of  Faith,  Hope,  and 
Charity,  to  the  recitation  of  which  Pope  Benedict  the 
Fourteenth  has  granted  an  Indulgence  of  seven  years 
and  seven  quarantines  for  each  time. 

ACT   OF   FAITH. 

0  my  God,  I  firmly  believe  whatsoever  the  Holy  Catholic 
Apostolic  Koman  Church  requires  me  to  believe:  I  believe 
it,  because  thou  ha»t  revealed  it  to  her,  thou  who  art  the 
very  Truth. 

ACT   OF   HOPE. 

O  my  God,  knowing  thine  almighty  power,  and  thine  infi- 
nite goodness  and  mercy,  I  hope  in  thee  that,  by  the  merits 
of  the  Passion  and  Death  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  thou 
wilt  grant  me  eternal  life,  which  thou  hast  promised  to  all 
such  as  shall  do  the  works  of  a  good  Christian;  and  these  I 
resolve  to  do,  with  the  help  of  thy  grace. 


ACT    OF    CHARITY. 

O  my  God  I  love  thee  with  my  whole  heart  and  above  all 
things,  because  thou  art  the  Sovereign  Good:  I  would  rather 
lose  all  things  than  offend  thee.  For  thy  love  also,  I  love, 
and  desire  to  love,  my  neighbour  as  myself. 

Then  say  to  our  Blessed  Lady,  the  following  solemn 
Anthem,  which  the  Church  says,  in  her  honour,  till 
Advent. 


NIGHT    PRAYS  US. 


23 


,    ANTHEM   TO    THE    BLESSED    VIRGIN. 


Hail,  Holy  Queen,  Mother 
of  Mercy ;  our  Life,  our  Sweet- 
ness, and  our  Hope,  all  hail  ! 

To  thee  we  cry,  poor  ba- 
nished children  of  Eve  ; 

To  thee  we  send  up  our 
sighs,  weeping  and  mourning 
in  this  vale  of  tears. 

Turn,  then,  most  gracious 
Advocate,  thine  eyes  of  mercy 
towards  us ; 

And,  after  this  our  exile, 
show  unto  us  the  blessed  Fruit 
of  thy  womb,  Jesus  ; 

O  merciful,  0  kind,  0  sweet 
Virgin  Mary  ! 

^.  Pray  for  us,  0  holy  Mo- 
ther of  God, 

1$.  That  we  may  be  made 
worthy  of  the  promises  of 
Christ. 


Salve,  Regina,  Mater  mi- 
sericordiae  ;  vita,  dulcedo, 
et  spes  nostra,  salve. 

Ad  te  clamamus,  exsules 
filii  Hevae ; 

Ad  te  suspiramus,gemen- 
tes  et  flentes  in  hac  lacry- 
marum  valle. 

Eia  ergo,  advocata  nos- 
tra, illos  tuos  misericordes 
oculos  ad  nos  converte. 

Et  Jesum,  benedictum 
fructum  ventris  tui,  nobis 
post  hoc  exsilium  ostende; 

O  clemens,  o  pia,  o  dulcis 
Virgo  Maria  ! 

$".  Ora  pro  nobis,  sancta 
Dei  Genitrix, 

1$.  Ut  digni  efficiamur 
promissionibus  Christi.   • 


LET   US   PRAY. 

O  almighty  and  everlasting 
God,  who,  by  the  co-operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  didst  pre- 
pare the  body  and  soul  of 
Mary,  glorious  Virgin  and 
Mother,  to  become  the  worthy 
habitation  of  thy  Son  ;  grant 
that  we  may  be  delivered  from 
present  evils,  and  from  ever- 
lasting death  by  Her  gracious 
intercession,  in  whose  comme- 
moration we  rejoice.  Through 
the  same  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


OREMUS. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,  qui  gloriosae  Virginis 
matris  Mariae  corpus  etani- 
mam,  ut  dignum  Filii  tui 
habitaculum  effici  merere- 
tur,  Spiritu  sancto  coope- 
rante,  praeparasti :  da,  ut 
cujus  commemoratione  lae- 
tamur,  ejus  pia  interces- 
sione  ab  instantibus  malis, 
et  a  morte  perpetua  libere- 
mur.  Per  eumdem  Chris- 
tum Dominum  nostrum. 
Amen. 


You  would  do  well  to  add  the  Litany  of  our  Lady. 
An  indulgence  of  three  hundred  days,  for  each  time 
it  is  recited,  has  been  granted  by  the  Church. 


24 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE    LITANY    OF    THE    BLESSED   VIRGIN, 


Kyrie,  eleison. 

Christe,  eleison. 

Kyrie,  eleison. 

Christe,  audi  nos. 

Christe,  exaudi  nos. 

Pater  de  ccelis,  Deus,  mise- 
rere nobis. 

Fili,  Redemptor  mundi, 
Deus,  miserere  nobis. 

Spiritus  Sancte,  Deus,mise- 
rere  nobis. 

Sancta  Trinitas,  unusDeus, 
miserere  nobis, 

Sancta  Maria,  ora  pro  nobis, 

Sancta  Dei  Genitrix,ora,e£c. 

Sancta  Virgo  virginum, 

Mater  Christi, 

Mater  divinae  gratiae, 

Mater  purissima, 

Mater  castissima, 

Mater  inviolata, 

Mater  intemerata, 

Mater  amabilis, 

Mater  admirabilis, 

Mater  Creatoris, 

Mater  Salvatoris, 

Virgo  prudentissima, 

Virgo  veneranda, 

Virgo  praedicanda, 

Virgo  potens, 

Virgo  clemens, 

Virgo  fidelis, 

Speculum  justitiae, 

Sedes  sapientiae, 

Causa  nostrae  laetitiae, 

Vas  spirituale, 

Vas  honorabile, 

Vas  insigne  devotionis, 

Rosa  mystica, 

Turris  Davidica, 

Turris  eburnea, 

Domus  aurea, 

Foederis  area, 


Lord,  have  mercy  on  us. 
Christ,  have  mercy  on  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us. 
Christ,  hear  us. 
Christ,  graciously  hear  us. 
God,  the  Father  of  heaven, 

have  mercy  on  us. 
God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the 

world,  have  mercy  on  us. 
God  the   Holy  Ghost,  have 

mercy  on  us. 
Holy  Trinity,  one  God,  have 

mercy  on  us. 
Holy  Mary,  pray  for  us. 
Holy  Mother  of  God,  pray,  etc. 
Holy  Virgin  of  virgins, 
Mother  of  Christ, 
Mother  of  divine  grace, 
Mother  most  pure, 
Mother  most  chaste, 
Mother  inviolate, 
Mother  undefiled, 
Mother  most  amiable, 
Mother  most  admirable, 
Mother  of  our  Creator, 
Mother  of  our  Redeemer, 
Virgin  most  prudent, 
Virgin  most  venerable, 
Virgin  most  renowned, 
Virgin  most  powerful, 
Virgin  most  merciful, 
Virgin  most  faithful, 
Mirror  of  justice, 
Seat  of  wisdom, 
Cause  of  our  joy. 
Spiritual  vessel, 
Vessel  of  honour, 
Vessel  of  singular  devotion, 
Mystical  rose, 
Tower  of  David, 
Tower  of  Ivory, 
House  of  Gold, 
Ark  of  the  covenant, 


NIGHT   PRAYERS. 


25 


Gate  of  heaven, 

Morning  star, 

Health  of  the  weak, 

Refuge  of  sinners, 

Comforter  of  the  afflicted, 

Help  of  Christians, 

Queen  of  Angels, 

Queen  of  Patriarchs, 

Queen  of  Prophets, 

Queen  of  Apostles, 

Queen  of  Martyrs, 

Queen  of  Confessors, 

Queen  of  Virgins, 

Queen  of  all  Saints, 

Queen  conceived  without  ori- 
ginal sin, 

0  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 
away  the  sins  of  the  world, 
spare  us,  0  Lord. 

O  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 
away  the  sins  of  the  world, 
graciously  hear  us,  O  Lord. 

O  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 
away  the  sins  of  the^world, 
have  mercy  on  us. 

Christ,  hear  us. 

Christ,  graciously  hear  us. 
$".  Pray   for    us,   O    Holy 

Mother  of  God, 
1$.  That  we  may  be  made 

worthy   of    the    promises   of 

Christ. 


Janua  coeli, 
Stella  matutina, 
Salus  infirmorum, 
Refugium  peccatorum, 
Consolatrix  afflictorum, 
Auxilium  Christianorum, 
Regina  Angelorum, 
Regina  Patriarcharum, 
Regina  Prophetarum, 
Regina  Apostolorum, 
Regina  Martyrum, 
Regina  Confessorum, 
Regina  Virginum, 
Regina  Sanctorum  omnium 
Regina  sine  labe  concepta, 

Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pec- 

cata  mundi,  parce  nobis, 

Domine. 
Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pec- 

cata  mundi,  exaudi  nos, 

Domine. 
Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pec- 

cata     mundi,     miserere 

nobis. 
Christe,  audi  nos. 
Christe,  exaudi  nos. 

$".  Ora  pro  nobis,  sancta 
Dei  Genitrix, 

1$.  Ut  digni   efficiamur 
promissionibus  Christi. 


LET   US   PRAY. 

Grant,  0  Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  thy  servants 
may  enjoy  constant  health  of 
body  and  mind:  and  by  the 
glorious  intercession  of  Blessed 
Mary,  ever  Virgin,  be  deli- 
vered from  all  present  afflic- 
tion, and  come  to  that  joy 
which  is  eternal.  Through 
Christ  our  Lord.    Amen. 


OREMUS. 

Concede  nos  famulostuos, 
quaesumus,  Domine  Deus, 
perpetua  mentis  et  corporis 
sanitate  gaudere:  et  glo- 
riosa  beatae  Mariae  semper 
virginis  intercessione,a  praa- 
senti  liberari  tristitia,  et 
aeterna  perf rui  laetitia.  Per 
Christum  Dominum  nos- 
trum.   Amen. 


Here  invoke  the  Holy  Angels,  whose  protection  is, 


26 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


indeed,  always  so  much  needed  by  us,  but  never  so 
much  as  during  the  hours  of  night.  Say  with  the 
Church : 


Sancti  Angeli  custodes 
nostri,  defendite  nos  in  prse- 
lio,  ut  non  pereanius  in  tre- 
mendo  judicio. 

y.  Angelis  suis  Deus  man- 
davit  de  te, 

1$.  Ut  custodiant  te  in 
omnibus  viis  tuis. 

or  em  us. 

Deus,  qui  ineffabili  provi- 
dentia  sanctos  Angelostuos 
ad  nostram  custodiam  mit- 
tere  dignaris:  largire  sup- 
plicibus  tuis,  et  eorum  sem- 
per protectione  defendi,  et 
aeterna  societate  gaudere. 
Per  Christum  Dominum 
nostrum.    Amen. 


Holy  Angels,  our  loving 
Guardians,  defend  us  in  the 
hour  of  battle,  that  we  may 
not  be  lost  at  the  dreadful 
judgment. 

$".  God  hath  given  his  An- 
gels charge  of  thee, 

1$.  That  they  may  guard 
thee  in  all  thy  ways. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

0  God,  who  in  thy  wonder- 
ful providence  hast  been  pleas- 
ed to  appoint  thy  holy  Angels 
for  our  guardians:  mercifully 
hear  our  prayers,  and  grant 
we  may  rest  secure  under  their 
protection,  and  enjoy  their 
fellowship  in  heaven,  for  ever. 
Through  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


Then  beg  the  assistance  of  the  Saints  by  the  follow- 
ing antiphon  and  prayer  of  the  Church  : 


Ant,  Sancti  Dei  omnes, 
intercedere  dignemini  pro 
nostra  omniumque  salute. 


Ant.  All  ye  Saints,  vouch- 
safe to  intercede  for  us  and 
for  all  men  that  we  may  be 
saved. 


And  here  you  may  add  a  special  mention  of  the 
Saints  to  whom  you  bear  a  particular  devotion,  either 
as  your  Patrons  or  otherwise ;  as  also  of  those  whose 
Feast  is  kept  in  the  Church  that  day,  or  at  least  who 
have  been  commemorated  in  the  Divine  Office. 

This  done,  remember  the  necessities  of  the  Church 
Suffering ;  and  beg  of  God  that  he  will  give  to  the 


NIGHT    PRAYERS. 


27 


souls  in  Purgatory  a  place  of  refreshment,  light,  and 
peace.     For  this  intention  recite  the  usual  prayers : 

psalm  129. 


From  the  depths  I  have 
cried  to  thee,  O  Lord:  Lord, 
hear  my  voice. 

Let  thine  ears  be  attentive 
to  the  voice  of  my  supplica- 
tion. 

If  thou  wilt  observe  iniqui- 
ties, 0  Lord:  Lord,  who  shall 
endure  it  1 

For  with  thee  there  is  mer- 
ciful forgiveness:  and  by  rea- 
son of  thy  law,  I  have  waited 
for  thee,  O  Lord. 

My  soul  hath  relied  on  his 
word :  my  soul  hath  hoped  in 
the  Lord. 

From  the  morning-watch 
even  until  night:  let  Israel 
hope  in  the  Lord. 

Because  with  the  Lord  there 
is  mercy:  and  with  him  plen- 
tiful redemption. 

And  he  shall  redeem  Israel 
from  all  his  iniquities. 

Eternal  rest  give  to  them, 
0  Lord. 

And  let  perpetual  light 
shine  upon  them. 

$".  From  the  gate  of  hell, 

1$.  Deliver  their  souls,  0 
Lord. 

$".  May  they  rest  in  peace. 

1$.  Amen. 

$".  0  Lord,  hear  my  prayer. 

1$.  And  let  my  cry  come 
unto  thee. 


De  profundis  clamavi  ad 
te,  Domine:  Domine,  exau- 
di  vocem  meam. 

Fiant  aures  tuae  inten- 
dentes:  in  vocem  depreca- 
tionis  meae. 

Si  iniquitates  observave- 
ris,  Domine:  Domine,  quis 
sustinebit  1 

Quia  apud  te  propitiatio 
est :  et  propter  legem  tuam 
sustinui  te,  Domine. 

Sustinuit  anima  mea  in 
verbo  ejus:  speravit  anima 
mea  in  Domino. 
Acustodiamatutinausque 
ad  noctem :  speret  Israel  in 
Domino. 

Quia  apud  Dominum  mi- 
sericordia:  et  copiosa  apud 
eum  redemptio. 

Et  ipse  redimet  Israel :  ex 
omnibus  iniquitatibus  ejus. 

Requiem  seternam  dona 
eis,  Domine. 

Et  lux  perpetua  luceat 
eis. 

$".  A  porta  inferi, 

1$.  Erue,Domine,animas 
eorum. 

$\  Requiescant  in  pace. 

1$.  Amen. 

$".  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam, 

1$.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 
veniat. 


LET  US   PRAY. 


0  God,  the  Creator  and  Re- 
deemer of  all  the  faithful,  give 


oremtjs. 

Fidelium  Deus  omnium 
ConditoretRedemptor  ani- 


28 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


mabus  famulomm  famula- 
rumque  tuarum,  remissio- 
nem  cunctorum  tribue  pec- 
catorum:  ut  indulgentiam, 
quam  semper  optaverunt, 
piis  supplicationibus  conse- 
quantur.  Qui  vivis  et  reg- 
nas  in  saecula  sseculorum. 
Amen. 


to  the  souls  of  thy  servants 
departed  the  remission  of  all 
their  sins:  that  through  the 
help  of  pious  supplications, 
they  may  obtain  the  pardon 
they  have  always  desired. 
Who  livest  and  reignest  for 
ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


Here  make  a  special  memento  of  such  of  the  Faith- 
ful departed  as  have  a  particular  claim  upon  your 
charity ;  after  which,  ask  of  God  to  give  you  his 
assistance,  whereby  you  may  pass  the  night  free  from 
danger.  Say  then,  still  keeping  to  the  words  of  the 
Church : 


Ant.  Salva  nos,  Domine, 
vigilantes,  custodi  nos  dor- 
mientes:  ut  vigilemus  cum 
Christo,  et  requiescamus  in 
pace. 

$\  Dignare,  Domine.  noc- 
te  ista, 

]$.  Sine  peccato  nos  cus- 
todire. 

"fr.  Miserere  nostri,  Do- 
mine. 

~5$.  Miserere  nostri. 

y.  Fiat  misericordia  tua, 
Domine,  super  nos, 

1$.  Quemadmodum  spe- 
ravimus  in  te. 

$",  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam, 

1$.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 
veniat. 


Ant.  Save  us,  0  Lord,  whilst 
awake,  and  watch  us  as  we 
sleep;  that  we  may  watch 
with  Christ,  and  rest  in  peace. 

"ft.  Vouchsafe,  0  Lord,  this 
night. 
I£.  To  keep  us  without  sin. 

$".  Have  mercy  on  us,  O 
Lord, 

1$.  Have  mercy  on  us. 

$".  Let  thy  mercy,  0  Lord, 
be  upon  us. 

1$.  As  we  have  hoped  in 
thee. 

$".  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer, 

1$.  And  let  my  cry  come 
unto  thee. 


OHEHUS. 

Visita,  quaesumus,  Do- 
mine, habitationem  istam, 
et  omnesinsidiasinimici  ab 
ea  longe  repelle:  Angeli  tui 
sancti  habitent  in  ea,  qui 


LET  US  PRAT. 


Visit,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  this  house  and  family, 
and  drive  from  it  all  snares  of 
the  enemy;  let  thy  holy  An- 
gels dwell  herein,  who  may 


NIGHT    PRAYERS. 


29 


keep  us  in  peace,  and  may  thy 
blessing  be  always  upon  us. 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  thy  Son,  who  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee,  in 
the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
God,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 


nos  in  pace  custodiant,  et 
benedictio  tua  sit  super  nos 
semper.  Per Dominum  nos- 
trum Jesum  Christum,  Fi- 
lium  tuum,  qui  tecum  vivit 
etregnat  inunitate  Spiritus 
sancti  Deus,  per  omnia  sae- 
cula  sseculorum.    Amen. 


And  finally,  as  a  close  to  the  day,  you  may  recite 
those  words,  which  were  the  last  uttered,  by  our 
Redeemer,  on  the  Cross.  The  Church  offers  them  to 
God,  each  day,  at  Compline. 


Into  thy  hands,  0  Lord,  I         In  manus  tuas,  Domine, 
commend  my  soul.  commendo  spiritum  meum. 


30  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  FIFTH. 

ON    HEARING    MASS    DURING   THE   TIME    AFTER 
PENTECOST. 

Of  all  the  good  acts  wherewith  a  Christian  can  sanc- 
tify his  day,  there  is  not  one  which  bears  comparison 
with  that  of  assisting  at  the  holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass. 
It  is  in  that  Sacrifice,  which  is  the  supreme  act  of 
Religion,  that  are  centred  all  the  homage  due  from 
man  to  his  Creator ;  and  it  is,  also,  from  the  same 
Sacrifice,  that  God  pours  out  upon  his  creature  Man 
every  sort  of  blessing,  and  profusely.  The  very  Son 
of  God  is  really  present  there  ;  there  he  is  offered  up 
to  his  Father,  and  the  offering  is  always  well- 
pleasing  ;  and  they  who  assist  at  this  divine  immola- 
tion, with  faith  and  love,  receive  into  their  souls 
graces  of  a  far  richer  kind  than  are  given  by  ordinary 
means. 

The  assistance  at  Mass,  if  completed  by  the  real 
participating  with  the  divine  Victim,  unites  man  to 
God  in  an  ineffable  way,  by  the  renovation  of  his 
whole  being,  for  it  produces  an  intimate  communion 
between  him  and  the  Word  Incarnate.  But  if  the 
Christian,  who  is  assisting  at  the  holy  Sacrifice,  goes 
no  further  than  the  uniting  his  intentions  with  those 
of  the  divine  Yictim,  even  so,  his  mere  presence  at  so 
great  an  Act  includes  a  true  participation  in  the 
supreme  worship  offered,  by  this  earth  of  ours,  to  the 
Majesty  of  God,  in  Christ,  and  by  Christ.  So,  too, 
he  solemnly  consecrates  to  God,  by  that  same  holy 
Act,  the  day  he  has  just  begun. 

We  have  devoted  the  days  within  the  Octave  of 
Corpus  Christ  i  to  the  giving  our  Readers  the  fullest 


MASS.  31 

instruction  regarding  the  holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass. 
As  to  the  dispositions  wherewith  they  should  assist  at 
it,  they  are  given  in  the  present  Chapter,  in  which  we 
explain  briefly,  and  yet,  as  we  believe,  completely, 
the  meaning  of  each  ceremony  and  expression. 
Whilst  thus  endeavouring  to  initiate  the  Faithful 
into  these  sublime  mysteries,  we  have  not  given  them 
a  bare  and  indiscreet  translation  of  the  sacred  for- 
mulae, but  have  taken,  what  seemed  to  us  so  much 
better  a  plan,  of  suggesting  such  Acts  as  will  enable 
those,  who  hear  Mass,  to  enter  into  the  ceremonies 
and  spirit  of  the  Church  and  the  Priest.  The  con- 
clusion to  be  drawn  from  this  is  one  of  great  impor- 
tance: it  is,  that,  in  order  to  derive  solid  profit  from 
the  assisting  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice,  the  Faithful  must 
attentively  follow  all  that  is  b:ing  done  at  the  Altar, 
and  not  stand  aloof,  as  it  were,  by  reading  Books 
which  are  filled  with  devotions  of  a  private  and  un- 
seasonable character. 

On  the  Sundays,  if  the  Mass,  at  which  the  Faith- 
ful assist,  be  the  Parochial,  or,  as  it  is  often  called, 
the  Public  Mass,  two  solemn  rites  precede  it,  and 
they  are  full  of  instruction  and  blessing : — the 
Asperges,  or  sprinkling  of  the  Holy  Water,  and  the 
Procession. 

During  the  Asperges,  you  should  unite  with  the 
intentions  which  the  Church  has  in  this  ceremony,  so 
venerable  by  its  antiquity  : — you  should  pray  for  that 
purity  of  heart,  which  is  needed  for  worthily  assisting 
at  the  Mysteries,  wherein  God  himself  becomes 
present,  and  unites  heaven  and  earth  so  closely 
together. 

ANTIPHON   OF   THE   ASPERGES. 

Asperges  me,  Domine,  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  me  with 
hyssopo,  et  mundabor:  la-  hyssop,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall 
vabis  me,  et  super  nivem  be  cleansed;  thou  shalt  wash 
dealbabor.  me,  and  I  shall  be  made  whiter 

than  snow. 


32 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Ps.  Have  mercy  on  me,  O 
God,  according  to  thy  great 
mercy: 

ft.  Glory,  etc. 

Ant.  Thou  shalt  sprinkle 
me.  etc. 

ft.  Show  us,  O  Lord,  thy 
mercy. 

1$.  And  grant|us  thy  salva- 
tion. 

ft.  O  Lord  hear  my  prayer. 

]$.  And  let  my  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

ft.  The  Lord  be  with  you; 
1$.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

Graciously  hear  us,  0  holy- 
Lord,  Father  Almighty,  Eter- 
nal God:  and  vouchsafe  to  send 
thy  holy  Angel  from  heaven, 
who  may  keep,  cherish,  pro- 
tect, visit,  and  defend  all  who 
are  assembled  in  this  place. 
Through  Christ  our  Lord. 


Ps.  Miserere  mei,  Deus, 
secundum  magnam  mise- 
ricordiam  tuam. 

ft.  Gloria  Patri,  etc. 

Ant.  Asperges  me,  etc. 

"ft".  Ostende  nobis,  Domine, 
misericordiam  tuam; 

1$.  Et  salutare  tuum  da 
nobis. 

ft.  Domine.  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam; 

R.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 
veniat. 

ft.  Dominus  vobiscum; 

B:.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

OREMUS. 

Exaudi  nos,  Domine  sanc- 
te,  Pater  ommpotensseterne 
Deus:  et  mittere  digneris 
sanctum  Angelum  tuum  de 
ccelis,  qui  custodiat,  f  oveat, 
protegat,  visitet,  atque  "de- 
fendat,omneshabitantes  in 
hoc  habitaculo.  Per  Chris- 
tum Dominum  nostrum. 

Br.  Amen. 


1$.  Amen. 

The  procession,  which,  in  many  Churches,  imme- 
diately precedes  a  Solemn  Mass,  is  a  prelude  to  the 
great  Act  which  is  about  to  be  accomplished.  It 
originated  from  the  practice  used  in  Monasteries,  of 
going  through  the  Cloisters,  every  Sunday,  whilst 
chanting  certain  appointed  Responsories ;  and  during 
which,  the  Hebdomadarian  went  through  all  the  Con- 
ventual Places,  blessing  each,  of  them.  The  practice 
is  still  in  use. 

But  see,  Christians !  the  Sacrifice  begins !  The 
Priest  is  at  the  foot  of  the  Altar ;  God  is  attentive, 
the  Angels  are  in  adoration,  the  whole  Church  is 
united  with  the  Priest,  whose  priesthood  and  action 
are  those  of  the  great  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ.  Let 
us  make  the  sign  of  the  Cross  with  Jiim. 


THE   ORDINARY  OF    THE    MASS. 


33 


THE  ORDINARY  OF  THE  MASS. 


In  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.    Amen. 

I  unite  myself,  O  my  God, 
with  thy  holy  Church,  who 
thrills  with  joy  at  the  approach 
of  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son,  who 
is  the  true  Altar. 

Like  her,  I,  also,  beseech 
thee  to  defend  me  against  the 
malice  of  the  enemies  of  my 
salvation. 

It  is  in  thee  I  have  put  my 
hope;  yet  do  I  feel  sad  and 
troubled  at  being  in  the  midst 
of  the  snares  which  are  set  for 
me. 

Let  me,  then,  see  him  who 
is  the  light  and  the  truth-,  it  is 
he  will  open  the  way  to  thy 
holy  mount,  to  thy  heavenly 
tabernacle. 

He  is  the  Mediator,  and  the 
living  Altar;  I  will  draw  nigh 
to  him,  and  be  filled  with  joy. 

Having  seen  him,  I  will 
sing  in  my  gladness.  Be  not 
sad,  O  my  soul !  why  wouldst 
thou  be  longer  troubled  1 

Hope  in  Him,  who  will 
soon  show  himself  unto  thee, 
as  thy  Saviour,  and  thy  God. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost: 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

VOL.   XI. 


In  nomine Patris,et  Filii 
et  Spiritus  Sancti.    Amen. 

y.  Introibo  ad  altare  Dei: 
1$.  Ad  Deum  qui  lsetificat 
juventutem  meam. 


Judica  me,  Deus,  et  dis- 
cerne  causam  meam  de 
gente  non  sancta:  ab  ho- 
rn ine  iniquo  et  doloso  erue 
me. 

Quia  tu  es,  Deus,  fortitu- 
do  mea:  quare  me  repulisti'? 
et  quare  tristis  incedo,  dum 
affligit  me  inimicus  1 

Emitte  lucemtuam  et  ve- 
ritatem  tuam:  ipsa  me  de- 
duxerunt  et  adduxerunt  in 
montem  sanctum  tuum,  et 
in  tabernacula  tua. 

Et  introibo  ad  altare  Dei: 
ad  Deum  qui  lastificat  ju- 
ventutem meam. 

Conhtebor  tibi  in  cithara, 
Deus,  Deus  meus:  quare 
tristis  es  anima  mea"?  et 
quare  conturbas  me  ? 

Spera  in  Deo,  quoniam 
adhuc  confitebor  illi:  salu- 
tare  vultus  mei,  et  Deus 
meus. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Spiritui  sancto : 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et 
nuncet  semper,  et  inssecula 
saeculorum.    Amen. 


D 


34 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


ft.  Introibo  ad  altare  Dei: 
1$.  Ad  Deum  qui  laetificat 
juventutem  nieam. 


ft.  Adjutorium  nostrum 
in  nomine  Domini. 

J^.  Qui  fecit  ccelum  et 
terrain. 


I  am  going  to  the  altar  of 
God;  there  I  shall  feel  the 
presence  of  Him  who  desires 
to  give  me  a  new  life. 

This  my  hope  comes  not  to 
me  as  thinking  that  I  have 
any  merits;  but  because  of 
the  all-powerful  help  of  my 
Creator. 


The  thought  of  his  being  about  to  appear  before  his 
God,  excites,  in  the  soul  of  the  Priest,  a  lively  senti- 
ment of  compunction.  He  cannot  go  further  in  the 
holy  Sacrifice  without  confessing,  and  publicly,  that 
he  is  a  sinner,  and  deserves  not  the  grace  he  is  about 
to  receive.  Listen,  with  respect,  to  this  confession  of 
God's  Minister,  and  earnestly  ask  our  Lord  to  show 
mercy  to  him  ;  for  the  Priest  is  your  Father  ;  he  is 
answerable  for  your  salvation,  for  which  he  every  day 
risks  his  own.  When  he  has  finished,  unite  with  the 
Servers,  or  the  Sacred  Ministers,  in  this  prayer : 


Misereatur  tui  omnipotens 
Deus,  et  dimissis  peccatis 
tuis,  perducat  te  ad  vitam 
seternam. 


May  Almighty  God  have 
mercy  on  thee,  and,  forgiving 
thy  sins,  bring  thee  to  ever- 
lasting life. 


The   Priest   having  answered  Amen,   make   your 
Confession,  saying  with  a  contrite  spirit : 


Confiteor  Deo  omnipo- 
tent^, beatae  Marias  semper 
Virgini,  beato  Michaeli  Ar- 
changelo,  beato  Joanni  Bap- 
tists, Sanctis  Apostolis 
Petro  et  Paulo,  omnibus 
Sanctis,  et  tibi,  Pater,  quia 
peccavi  nimis  cogitatione, 
verbo  et  opere,  mea  culpa, 
mea  culpa,  mea  maxima 
culpa.  Ideo  precor  beatam 
Mariam  semper  Virginem, 
beatum  Michaelem  Arch- 


I  confess  to  Almighty  God, 
to  blessed  Mary  ever  Virgin, 
to  blessed  Michael  the  Arch- 
angel, to  blessed  John  Baptist, 
to  the  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paul,  to  all  the  Saints,  and  to 
thee,  Father,  that  I  have 
sinned  exceedingly  in  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  through  my 
fault,  through  my  fault, 
through  my  most  grievous 
fault.  Therefore  I  beseech  the 
blessed    Mary    ever    "Virgin, 


THE    ORDINARY    OF   THE    MASS. 


35 


blessed  Michael  the  Arch- 
angel, blessed  John  Baptist, 
the  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paul,  and  all  the  Saints,  and 
thee,  Father,  to  pray  to  our 
Lord  for  me. 


angelum,  beatum  Joannem 
Baptistam,  sanctos  Aposto- 
los  Petrum  et  Paulum,  om- 
nes  Sanctos,  et  te,  Pater, 
orare  pro  me  ad  Dominum 
Deum  nostrum. 


Receive,  with  gratitude,  the  paternal  wish  of  the 
Priest,  who  says  to  you  : 

May  Almighty  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  you,  and,  forgiving 
your  sins,  bring  you  to  ever- 
lasting life. 

1$,  Amen. 

May  the  Almighty  and  mer- 
ciful Lord  grant  us  pardon, 
absolution,  and  remission  of 
our  sins. 

1$.  Amen, 


Misereatur  vestri  omni- 
potens  Deus,  et  dimissis 
peccatis  vestris,  perducat 
vos  ad  vitam  aeternam. 

1$.  Amen. 

Indulgentiam,  absolutio- 
nem,  et  remissionem  pecca- 
torum  nostrorum,  tribuat 
nobis omnipotenset  miseri- 
cors  Dominus. 

I£.  Amen. 


Invoke  the  divine  assistance,  that  you  may  approach 
to  Jesus  Christ : 


$\  O  God,  it  needs  but  one 
look  of  thine,  to  give  us  life  ! 

1$.  And  thy  people  shall 
rejoice  in  thee  ! 

$".  Show  us,  O  Lord,  thy 
mercy, 

1$.  And  give  us  the  Saviour, 
thou  art  preparing  to  give  us. 

$\  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer, 

1$.  And  let  my  cry  come 
unto  thee. 


ft.  Deus,tu  conversus  vi- 
vificabis  nos. 

&.  Et  plebs  tua  laetabitur 
in  te. 

ft.  Ostende  nobis  Domi- 
ne  misericordiam  tuam, 

&.  Et  Salutare  tuum  da 
nobis. 

ft.  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam, 

£.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  te 
veniat. 


The  Priest  here  leaves  you  and  ascends  to  the 
altar ;  but  first  he  salutes  you : 

ft.  The  Lord  be  with  you.  ft.  Dominus  vobiscum. 

Answer  him  with  reverence : 
1$.  And  with  thy  spirit.  B=.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 


36  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

He  ascends  the  steps,  and  comes  to  the  Holy  of 
Holies.  Ask,  both  for  him  and  yourself,  deliverance 
from  sin  : 

OKEMUS.  LET  US  PKAY. 

Aufer  a  nobis,  qusesumus,  Take  from  our   hearts,  O 

Domine,    iniquitates   nos-  Lord,  all    those  sins,  which 

tras;  ut  ad  Saneta  Sancto-  make  us  unworthy  to  appear 

rumpurismereamurmenti-  in  thy  presence.     We  ask  this 

bus  in  troire,  Per  Christum  of  thee,  by  thy  divine  Son,  our 

Dominum  nostrum.  Amen.  Lord. 

When  the  Priest  kisses  the  altar,  out  of  reverence 
for  the  relics  of  the  Martyrs  which  are  there,  say  : 

Oramus  te,  Domine,  per  Generous  soldiers  of  Jesus 

merita  sanctorum  tuorum  Christ,  who  have  mingled  your 

quorum  reliquiae  hie  sunt  own  blood  with  his,  intercede 

et  omnium  sanctorum,  ut  for  us,  that  our  sins  may  be 

indulgere   digneris   omnia  forgiven:  that  so  we  may,  like 

peccata  mea.    Amen.  you,  approach  unto  God. 

If  it  be  a  High  Mass  at  which  you  are  assisting, 
the  Priest  censes  the  Altar  in  a  most  solemn  manner  ; 
and  this  white  cloud,  which  you  see  ascending  from 
every  part  of  the  Altar,  signifies  the  prayer  of  the 
Church,  who  addresses  herself  to  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
which  this  Divine  Mediator  then  causes  to  ascend, 
united  with  his  own,  to  the  throne  of  the  majesty 
of  his  Father. 

The  Priest  then  says  the  Introit.  It  is  a  solemn 
opening- anthem,  in  which  the  Church,  at  the  very 
commencement  of  the  Holy  Sacrifice,  gives  expression 
to  the  sentiments  which  fill  her  heart. 

It  is  followed  by  nine  exclamations,  which  are  even 
more  earnest  still, — for  they  ask  for  mercy.  In  ad- 
dressing them  to  God,  the  Church  unites  herself  with 
the  nine  choirs  of  Angels,  who  are  standing  around 
the  altar  of  Heaven, — one  and  the  same  with  this, 
before  which  you  are  kneeling. 


THE    ORDINARY   OF    THE   MASS. 


37 


TO   THE    FATHER. 


Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 


Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 


TO   THE    SON. 


Christ,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Christ,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Christ,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 


Christe,  eleison. 
Christe,  eleison. 
Christe,  eleison. 


TO   THE    HOLY   GHOST. 


Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  !  . 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 


Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 
Kyrie,  eleison. 


Then,  mingling  his  voice  with,  that  of  the  heavenly 
host,  the  Priest  intones  the  sublime  Canticle  of  Beth- 
lehem, which  announces  glory  to  God,  and  peace  to 
men.  Instructed  by  the  revelations  of  God,  the  Church 
continues,  in  her  own  words,  the  Hymn  of  the  Angels. 


THE   ANGELIC   HYMN. 


Glory  be  to  God  on  high; 
and,  on  earth, peace  to  men 
of  good  will. 

We  praise  thee:  we  bless 
thee:  we  adore  thee:  we  glo- 
rify thee:  we  give  thee  thanks 
for  thy  great  glory, 

0  Lord  God,  Heavenly  King, 
God  the  Father  Almighty. 

O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Only  Begotten  Son. 

O  Lord  God,  Lamb  of  God, 
Son  of  the  Father. 

Who  takest  away  the  sins 
of  the  world,  have  mercy  on 
us. 


Gloria  in  excelsis  Deo, 
et  interrapaxhomnibus 
bonjs  voluntatis. 

Laudamns  te:  benedici- 
mus  te:  adoramus  te:  glo- 
rificamus  te:  gratias  agimus 
tibi  propter  magnam  glo- 
riam  tuam. 

Domine  Deus,  Rex  cceles- 
tis,  Deus  Pater  omnipotens. 

Domine,  Fili  unigenite, 
Jesu  Christe. 

Domine  Deus,  Agnus  Dei, 
Filius  Patris. 

Qui  tollis  peccata  mundi, 
miserere  nobis. 


38  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Qui  tollis  peccata  mundi,  Who  takest  away  the  sins  of 

suscipe  deprecationem  nos-  the  world,  receive  our  humble 
tram.  prayer. 

Qui  sedes  ad  dexteram         Who  sittest   at    the    right 
Patris,  miserere  nobis.  hand    of    the    Father,    have 

mercy  on  us. 
Quoniamtu  solus  Sanctus,  For   thou  alone  art    holy, 

tu  solus  Dominus,  tu  solus  thou  alone  art  Lord,  thou 
Altissimus,  Jesu  Christe,  alone,  O  Jesus  Christ, together 
cum  Sancto  Spiritu,  in  glo-  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  art  most 
ria  Dei  Patris.    Amen.  high,  in  the  glory  of  God  the 

Father.    Amen. 


The  Priest  then  turns  towards  the  people,  and  again 
salutes  them,  as  it  were  to  make  sure  of  their  pious 
attention  to  the  sublime  act,  for  which  all  this  is  but 
the  preparation. 

Then  follows  the  Collect,  or  Prayer,  in  which  the 
Church  formally  expresses  to  the  divine  Majesty  the 
especial  intentions  she  has  in  the  Mass  which  is  being 
celebrated.  You  may  unite  in  this  Prayer,  by  recit- 
ing, with  the  Priest,  the  Collects  which  you  will  find 
in  their  proper  places ;  but,  on  no  account,  omit  to 
join,  with  the  Server  of  the  Mass,  in  answering 
Amen, 

After  this,  comes  the  Epistle,  which  is,  generally, 
a  portion  of  one  or  other  of  the  Epistles  of  the  Apostles, 
or  a  passage  from  some  Book  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Whilst  it  is  being  read,  give  thanks  to  that  God,  who 
not  satisfied  with  having  spoken  to  us,  at  sundry 
times,  by  his  Messengers,  deigned,  at  last,  to  speak 
unto  us  by  his  well-beloved  Son.1 

The  Gradual  is  a  formula  of  prayer,  intermediate 
between  the  Epistle  and  the  Gospel.  Most  frequently, 
it  again  brings  before  us  the  sentiments  already  ex- 
pressed in  the  Introit.  Read  it  devoutly,  that  so  you 
may  the  more  and  more  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the 
mystery  proposed  to  you  this  day,  by  the  Church. 

]  Heb.  i.  2. 


THE    ORDINARY   OF   THE   MASS.  39 

The  song  of  praise,  trie  Alleluia,  is  next  heard.  Let 
us,  whilst  it  is  being  said,  unite  with  the  holy  Angels, 
who  are,  for  all  eternity,  making  heaven  resound  with 
that  song,  which  we  on  earth  are  permitted  to 
attempt. 

The  time  is  now  come  for  the  Gospel  to  be  read, 
The  Gospel  is  the  written  word  ;  our  hearing  it  will 
prepare  us  for  the  Word,  who  is  our  Victim  and  our 
Food. 

If  it  be  a  High  Mass,  the  Deacon  prepares,  mean- 
while, to  fulfil  his  noble  office, — that  of  announcing 
the  Good  Tidings  of  salvation.  He  prays  God  to 
cleanse  his  heart  and  lips.  Then,  kneeling  before  the 
Priest,  he  asks  a  blessing ;  and,  having  received  it, 
at  once  goes  to  the  place  where  he  is  to  sing  the 
Gospeh 

As  a  preparation  for  worthily  hearing  it,  you  may 
thus  pray,  together  with  both  Priest  and  Deacon : 

Alas !  these  ears  of  mine  are  Munda  cor  meuni,  ac  la- 

but  too  often  defiled  with  the  bia  mea,  omnipotens  Deus, 

world's  vain  words:    cleanse  qui  labia  Isaiae  Prophetae 

them,  0  Lord,  that  so  I  may  calculo    mundasti   ignito  : 

hear  the  words  of  eternal  life,  ita  me  tua  grata  misera- 

and  treasure  them  in  my  heart.  tione  dignare  mundare,  ut 

Through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  sanctum  Evangelium  tuurn 

Amen.  digne     valeam     nuntiare. 

Per   Christum    Dominum 
nostrum.    Amen. 

Grant  to  thy  ministers  thy  Dominus  sit  in  corde  meo, 

grace,  that    they  may  faith-  et  in  labiis  meis:  ut  digne 

fully  explain  thy  law;  that  so  et  competenter  annuntiem 

all,   both  pastors  and    flock,  Evangelium  suum  : 
may  be    united  to  thee   for 
ever.    Amen. 

You  will  stand  during  the  Gospel,  out  of  respect  for 
the  divine  Word,  and  as  though  you  were  awaiting 
the  orders  of  your  divine  Master.  At  the  commence- 
ment, make  the  sign  of  the  Cross  on  your  forehead, 
lips,  and  breast ;  and  then  listen  to  every  word  of  the 


40 


TIME    AFTER   PEN'IECOST. 


Priest  or  Deacon.  Let  your  heart  be  ready  and 
obedient.  Wliilst  my  beloved  was  speaking,  says  the 
Bride  in  the  Canticle,  my  soul  melted  within  me.1  If 
you  have  not  such  love  as  this,  have,  at  least,  the 
humble  submission  of  Samuel,  and  say :  Speak,  Lord  ! 
thy  servant  heareth.2 

After  the  Gospel,  if  the  Priest  says  the  Symbol  of 
Faith,  the  Credo,  you  will  say  it  with  him.  Faith 
is  that  grand  gift  of  God,  without  which  we  cannot 
please  him.  It  is  Faith  that  makes  us  see  the  Light 
tuhich  shinetli  in  darkness,  and  which  the  darkness  of 
unbelief  did  not  comprehend.  Let  us,  then,  say  with 
the  Catholic  Church,  our  Mother : 


THE    NICENE    CREED. 


Credo  in  unumDeumPa- 
trem  omnipotentem,  facto- 
rem  coeli  et  terrse,  visibili- 
um  omnium  etinvisibilium. 

Et  in  unum  Dominum 
Jesum  Christum,  Filium 
Dei  unigenitum.  Et  ex  Pa- 
tre  natum  ante  omnia 
saecula.  Deum  de  Deo,  lu- 
men de  lumine,  Deum  ve- 
rum  de  Deo  vero.  Genitum, 
non  factum,  consubstantia- 
lem  Patri:  Per  quern  om- 
nia facta  sunt.  Qui  propter 
nos  homines  et  propter  nos- 
tram  salutem,  descendit  de 
ccelis.  Et  incarnatus  est  de 
Spiritu  Sancto  ex  Maria 
Virgine:  et  homo  factus 
est.  Crucifixus  etiam  pro 
nobis  sub  Pontio  Pilato,  pas- 
sus  et  sepultus  est.  Et 
resurrexit  tertia  die,  secun- 
dum Scripturas,  etascendit 
in  coelum:  sedet  ad  dexte- 

1  Ctn  ic.  v.  6. 


I  believe  in  one  God,  the 
Father  Almighty,  maker  of 
heaven  and  earth,  and  of  all 
things  visible  and  invisible. 

And  in  one  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  only  begotten  Son 
of  God.  And  born  of  the 
Father,  before  all  ages;  God 
of  God,  light  of  light ;  true 
God  of  true  God.  Begotten, 
not  made;  consubstantial  to 
the  Father,  by  whom  all  things 
were  made.  Who,  for  us  men 
and  for  our  salvation,  came 
down  from  heaven.  And  be- 
came incarnate  by  the  Holy 
Ghost   of    the  Virgin   Mary; 

AND  WAS  MADE  MAN.    He  was 

crucified  also  for  us,  under 
Pontius  Pilate,  suffered,  and 
was  buried.  And  the  third 
day  he  rose  again,  according 
to  the  Scriptures.  And 
ascended  into  heaven;  sitte th- 
at   the    right    hand    of    the 

2  1  Kings,  iii.  10. 


1  un  ic.  v.  0.  '  1  Kings,  in.  io. 

ASSUMPTION  COTXF.GE 

SCMOI   \S  I  K.S'  LIBRARY 
WINDSOR,  ONTARIO 


THE    ORDINARY    OF    THE    MASS.  41 

Father.     And  he  is  to  come  ramPatris.  Et  iterum  ven- 

again  with  glory,  to  judge  the  turus  est  judicare  vivos  et 

living  and  the  dead ;  of  whose  mortuos:  cujus  regni  non 

kingdom  there  shall    be    no  erit  finis, 
end. 

And  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Et  in  Spiritum  Sanctum, 
Lord  and  Giver  of  life,  who  Dominum  et  vivificantem: 
proceedeth  from  the  Father  qui  ex  Patre  Filioque  pro- 
and  the  Son.  Who,  together  cedit.  Qui  cum  Patre  et 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  Filio  simuladoratur,  et  con- 
is  adored  and  glorified;  who  glorificatur:  quilocutus  est 
spoke  by  the  Prophets.  And  per  Prophetas.  Et  unam, 
One,  Holy,  Catholic,  and  Sanctam,  Catholicam  et 
Apostolic  Church.  I  confess  Apostolicam  Ecclesiam. 
one  Baptism  for  the  remission  Confiteor  unum  Baptisma 
of  sins.  And  I  expect  the  re-  inremissionempeccatorum. 
surrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  Et  exspecto  resurrection  em 
life  of  the  world  to  come,  mortuorum,  et  vitam  ven- 
Amen.  turi  sseculi.     Amen. 

The  Priest  and  the  people  should  now  have  their 
hearts  ready  :  it  is  time  to  prepare  the  offering  itself. 
And  here  we  come  to  the  second  part  of  the  Holy 
Mass ;  it  is  called  the  Oblation,  and  immediately 
follows  that  which  was  named  the  Mass  of  the  Cate- 
chumens, on  account  of  its  being,  formerly,  the  only 
part  at  which  the  candidates  for  Baptism  had  permis- 
sion to  be  present. 

See  then,  dear  Christians  !  Bread  and  Wine  are 
about  to  be  offered  unto  God,  as  being  the  noblest  of 
inanimate  creatures,  since  they  are  intended  to  serve 
as  the  nourishment  of  man ;  and  yet  that  is  but  a 
poor  material  image  of  what  they  are  destined  to 
become  in  our  Christian  Sacrifice.  Their  substances 
will  soon  be  changed  into  the  very  flesh  and  blood  of 
Christ  our  Lord  and  our  God  ;  and  of  themselves 
nothing  will  remain  but  the  appearances.  Happy 
creatures !  thus  to  yield  up  their  own  being,  that  God 
may  take  its  place.  We,  too,  are  to  undergo  a  like 
transformation,  when,  as  the  Apostle  expresses  it,  that 
which  is  mortal,  will  be  sivallowcd  up  by  life.1     Until 

1  2  Cor.  v.  4, 


42 


TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


that  happy  change  shall  be  realised,  let  us  offer  our- 
selves to  God,  as  often  as  we  see  the  Bread  and  Wine 
presented  to  him  in  the  Holy  Sacrifice ;  and  let  us 
glorify  Him,  who,  by  assuming  our  human  nature, 
has  made  us  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.1 

The  Priest  again  turns  to  the  people,  greeting  them 
with  the  usual  salutation,  as  though  he  would  warn 
them  to  redouble  their  attention.  Let  us  read  the 
Offertory  with  him ;  and  when  he  offers  the  Host  to 
God,  let  us  unite  with  him,  and  say: 


Suscipe,sancte  Pater  om- 
nipoteus,  seterneDeus,  banc 
immaculatam  hostiam, 
quam  ego  indignus  famulus 
tuus  offero  tibi  Deo  meo  vi- 
vo et  vero,  pro  innumera- 
bilibuspeccatisetoffension- 
ibus  et  negligentiis  meis,  et 
pro  omnibus  circumstanti- 
bus,  sed  et  pro  omnibus 
fidelibus  christianis  vivis 
atque  defunctis  :  ut  mihi 
et  illis  proficiat  ad  salutem 
in  vitam  seternam.    Amen. 


All  that  we  have,  0  Lord, 
comes  from  thee,  and  belongs 
to  thee;  it  is  just,  therefore, 
that  we  return  it  unto  thee. 
But,  how  wonderful  art  thou 
in  the  inventions  of  thy  im- 
mense love !  This  Bread 
which  we  are  offering  to  thee, 
is  to  give  place,  in  a  few  mo- 
ments, to  the  sacred  Body  of 
Jesus.  We  beseech  thee,  re- 
ceive, together  with  this  obla- 
tion, our  hearts,  which  long 
to  live  by  thee,  and  to  cease 
to  live  their  own  life  of  self. 


"When  the  Priest  puts  the  Wine  into  the  Chalice, 
and  then  mingles  with  it  a  drop  of  water,  let  your 
thoughts  turn  to  the  divine  mystery  of  the  Incarna- 
tion, which  is  the  source  of  our  hope  and  salvation  ; 
and  say : 


Deus,  qui  humanse  sub- 
stantias dignitatem  mirabi- 
liter  condidisti,  et  mirabi- 
lius  reformasti  :  da  nobis 
per  hnjus  aquae  et  vini  mys- 
terium,  ejus  divinitatis  esse 
consortes,  qui  humanitatis 
nostras   fieri  dignatus    est 

1  2  St. 


0  Lord  Jesus,  who  art  the 
true  Vine,  and  whose  Blood, 
like  a  generous  wine,  has  been 
poured  forth  under  the  pres- 
sure of  the  Cross !  thou  hast 
deigned  to  unite  thy  divine 
nature  to  our  weak  humanity, 
which  is  signified  by  this  drop 

ret.  i.  4. 


THE    ORDINARY   OF    THE    MASS. 


43 


of  water.  O  come,  and  make 
us  partakers  of  thy  divinity, 
by  showing  thyself  to  us  in 
thy  sweet  and  wondrous  visit. 


particeps,  Jesus  Christus ; 
Filius  tuus  Dominus  noster ; 
Qui  tecum  vivit  et  regnat 
in  unitate  Spiritus  Sancti 
Deus,  per  omnia  saecula 
sseculorum.    Amen. 


The  Priest  then  offers  the  mixture  of  Wine  and 
Water,  beseeching  God  to  graciously  accept  this 
oblation,  which  is  so  soon  to  be  changed  into  the 
reality,  of  which  it  is  now  but  the  figure.  Mean- 
while, say,  in  union  with  the  Priest : 


Graciously  accept  these 
gifts,  O  Sovereign  Creator  of 
all  things.  Let  them  be  fitted 
for  the  divine  transformation, 
which  will  make  them,  from 
being  mere  offerings  of  created 
things,  the  instrument  of  the 
world's  salvation. 


Offerimus,  tibi,  Domine, 
calicem  salutaris,  tuam  de- 
precantes  clementiam :  ut  in 
conspectu  divinse  Majesta- 
tis  tuae,  pro  nostra  et  totius 
mundi  salute,  cum  odore 
suavitatis  ascendat.  Amen. 


After  having  thus  held  up  the  sacred  gifts  towards 
heaven,  the  Priest  bows  down :  let  us,  also,  humble 
ourselves,  and  say  : 


Though  daring,  as  we  do, 
to  approach  thy  altar,  0  Lord, 
we  cannot  forget  that  we  are 
sinners.  Have  mercy  on  us  : 
and  delay  not  to  send  us  thy 
Son,  who  is  our  saving  Host. 


In  spiritu  humilitatis,  et 
in  animo  contrito  suscipia- 
mur  a  te, Domine:  et  sic  fiat 
sacrificium  nostrum  in  con- 
spectu tuo  hodie,  ut  placeat 
tibi,  Domine  Deus. 


Let  us  next  invoke  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  opera- 
tion is  about  to  produce  on  the  altar  the  presence  of 
the  Son  of  God,  as  it  did  in  the  womb  of  the  Blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  in  the  divine  mystery  of  the  Incarna- 
tion: 


Come,  O  Divine  Spirit,  make 
fruitful  the  offering  which  is 
upon  the  altar,  and  produce 
in  our  hearts  Him  whom  they 
desire. 


Veni,  Sanctificator  omni- 
potens,  aeterne  Deus,  et  be- 
nedic  hoc  sacrificium  tuo 
sancto  noniinipraeparatuni . 


44  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

If  it  be  a  High  Mass,  the  Priest,  before  proceeding 
further  with  the  Sacrifice,  takes  the  thurible  a  second 
time.  He  first  censes  the  Bread  and  Wine,  which 
have  been  just  offered,  and  then  the  altar  itself; 
hereby  inviting  the  Faithful  to  make  their  prayer, 
which  is  signified  by  the  fragrant  incense,  more  and 
more  fervent,  the  nearer  the  solemn  moment  ap- 
proaches. St.  John  tells  us,  that  the  incense  he 
beheld  burning  on  the  Altar  in  heaven  is  made  up  of 
the  Prayers  of  the  Saints  ;  let  us  take  a  share  in  those 
prayers,  and  with  all  the  ardour  of  holy  desires. 

But  the  thought  of  his  own  unworthiness  becomes 
more  intense  than  ever  in  the  heart  of  the  Priest. 
The  public  confession  made,  by  him,  at  the  foot  of 
the  altar,  does  not  satisfy  the  earnestness  of  his  com- 
punction. He  would  now,  at  the  altar  itself,  express 
before  the  people,  in  the  language  of  a  solemn  rite, 
how  far  he  knows  himself  to  be  from  that  spotless 
sanctity,  wherewith  he  should  approach  unto  God. 
He  washes  his  hands.  Our  hands  signify  our  works  ; 
and  the  Priest,  though,  by  his  priesthood,  he  bear  the 
office  of  Jesus  Christ,  is,  by  his  tvorks,  but  man. 
Seeing  your  Father  thus  humble  himself,  do  you, 
also,  make  an  act  of  humility,  and  say  with  him  these 
verses  of  the  Psalm  : 

Psalm  25. 

Lavabo  inter  innocentes  I,  too,  would  wash  my  hands, 

maims meas:  etcircumdabo  O  Lord,  and  become  like  unto 

altare  tuum,  Domine.  them  that  are  innocent;  that 

Ut  audiam  vocem  laudis;  so   I  may  be  worthy  to  ap- 

et  enarrem  universa  mira-  proach  thine  altar,  and  hear 

bilia  tua.  thy  sacred  Canticles;  and  then 

Domine,  dilexi  decorem  go  and  proclaim  to  the  world 

domus  tuae,  et  locum  habi-  the  wonders  of  thy  goodness, 

tationis  gloria3  tuae.  I  love  the  beauty  of  thy  House, 

Ne  perdas  cum   impiis,  which  thou  art  about  to  make 

Deus,   anirnam    meam,    et  the  dwelling-place  of  thy  glory, 

cum  virissanguinum  vitam  Leave  me  not,  O  God,  in  the 

meam.  midst  of  them  that  are  ene- 


THE    ORDINARY    OF    THE    MASS. 


45 


mies  both  to  thee  and  me. 
Thy  mercy  having  separated 
me  from  them,  I  entered  once 
more  on  the  path  of  innocence, 
because  restored  to  thy  grace; 
but  have  pity  on  my  weak- 
ness still  ;  redeem  me  yet 
more,  O  thou  who  hast  so  mer- 
cifully brought  me  back  to  the 
right  path.  In  the  midst  of 
these  thy  faithful  people,  I 
give  thee  thanks.  Glory  be  to 
the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost;  as  it 
was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be,  world  with- 
out end.    Amen. 

The  Priest,  taking  encouragement,  from  the  act  of 
humility  he  has  just  made,  returns  to  the  middle  of 
the  altar,  and,  full  of  respectful  awe,  bows  down, 
begging  God  to  receive  graciously  the  Sacrifice  which 
is  about  to  be  offered  to  him,  and  expresses  the  in- 
tentions for  which  it  is  offered.     Let  us  do  the  same. 


In  quorum  manibus  ini- 
quitates  sunt:  dextera  eo- 
rum  repleta  est  muneribus. 

Ego  autem  in  innocentia 
mea  ingressus  sum:  redime 
me,  et  miserere  mei. 

Pesmeusstetit  indirecto: 
in  ecclesiis  benedicam  te, 
Domine. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et 
Spiritui  Sancto. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et 
nunc  et  semper,  et  in  ssecula 
saBculorum.     Amen. 


O  Holy  Trinity,  graciously 
accept  the  Sacrifice  we  have 
begun .  We  offer  it  in  remem- 
brance of  the  Passion,  Resur- 
rection, and  Ascension  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Permit 
thy  Church  to  join,  with  this 
intention,  that  of  honouring 
the  ever  glorious  Virgin  Mary, 
the  blessed  Baptist  John,  the 
holy  Apostles  Peter  and  Paul, 
the  Martyrs  whose  relics  lie 
here  under  our  altar  awaiting 
their  resurrection,  and  the 
Saints  whose  memory  we  this 
day  celebrate.  Increase  the 
glory  they  are  enjoying;  and 
receive  the  prayers  they  ad- 
dress to  thee  for  us. 


Suscipe,  sancta  Trinitas, 
hanc  oblationem,  quam  tibi 
offerimus  ob  memoriam  Pas- 
sionis,  Resurrectionis,  et 
AscensionisJesuChristiDo- 
mini  nostri,  et  in  honorem 
beatae  Mariae  semper  Virgi- 
nis,et  beati  Joannis  Baptis- 
tae,  et  sanctorum  Apostolo- 
rum  Petri  et  Pauli,  et  isto- 
rum,  et  omnium  Sancto- 
rum: ut  illis  proficiat  ad 
honorem,  nobis  autem  ad 
salutem:  ut  illi  pro  nobis 
intercedere  dignentur  in 
ccelis,  quorum  memoriam 
agimus  in  terris.  Per  eum- 
dem  Christum  Dominum 
nostrum.     Amen. 


The  Priest  again  turns  to  the  people  ;  it  is  for  the 


46  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

last  time  before  the  sacred  Mysteries  are  accomplished. 
He  feels  anxious  to  excite  the  fervour  of  the  people. 
Neither  does  the  thought  of  his  own  unworthiness 
leave  him  ;  and,  before  entering  the  cloud  with  the 
Lord,  he  seeks  support  in  the  prayers  of  his  brethren 
present.     He  says  to  them : 

Orate,  fratres:  ut  meum         Brethren  !    pray    that    rny 

ac  vestrum  sacrificium  ac-  Sacrifice,  which  is  yours  also, 

ceptabile  fiat  apud  Deum  may  be  acceptable  unto  God, 

Patreni  omnipotentem.  our  Almighty  Father. 

Scarcely  has  he  uttered  the  first  words,  than  he 
turns  again  to  the  altar ;  and  you  will  see  his  face  no 
more,  until  our  Lord  himself  shall  have  come  down 
from  Heaven  upon  that  same  Altar.  Assure  the  Priest 
that  he  has  your  prayers,  and  say  to  him  : 

Suscipiat  Dominus  sacri-  May  our  Lord  accept  this 

ficium  de  manibus  tuis,  ad  Sacrifice    at    thy    hands,    to 

laudem  et  gloriam  nominis  the  praise  and  glory  of  his 

sui,  ad  utilitatem  quoque  name,  and  for  our  benefit  and 

nostram  totiusque  Ecclesise  that     of    his    holy    Church 

suae  sanctae.  throughout  the  world. 

Here  the  Priest  recites  the  prayers  called  the 
Secrets;  in  which  he  presents  the  petition  of  the 
whole  Church  for  God's  acceptance  of  the  Sacrifice ; 
and  then  immediately  begins  to  fulfil  that  great  duty 
of  religion, — Thanksgiving.  So  far,  he  has  adored 
God,  and  has  sued  for  mercy ;  he  has  still  to  give 
thanks  for  the  blessings  bestowed  on  us  by  the  bounty 
of  our  heavenly  Father,  the  chief  of  which  is  the 
having  sent  us  his  own  Son.  The  blessing  of  a  new 
visit  from  this  divine  Word  is  just  upon  us  ;  and  in 
expectation  of  it,  and  in  the  name  of  the  whole 
Church,  the  Priest  is  about  to  give  expression  to  the 
gratitude  of  all  mankind.  In  order  to  excite  the 
Faithful  to  that  intensity  of  gratitude,  which  is  due 
to  God  for  all  his  gifts,  he  interrupts  his  own  and 


THE    ORDINARY    OF    THE    MASS.  47 

their  silent  and  mysterious  prayer  by  terminating  it 
aloud,  saying: 

For  ever  and  ever  !  Per  omnia  ssecula  ssecu- 

lorum  ! 

In  the  same  feeling  answer  your  Amen  !     Then 
he  continues : 

$\  The  Lord  be  with  you.  $".  Dominus  vobiscum. 

1$.  And  with  thy  spirit.  1$.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

y.  Lift  up  your  hearts  !  ^f.  Sursum  corda  ! 

Let  your  response  be  sincere : 

1$.  We  have  them  fixed  on         I£.  Habemus  ad  Domi- 
God.  num. 

And,  when  he  adds : 

~ft.  Let  us  give  thanks  to  the         $".  Gratias  aganiusDomi- 
Lord  our  God.  no  Deo  nostro. 

Answer  him  with  all  the  earnestness  of  your  soul : 

1$.  It  is  meet  and  just.  1$.  Dignumqet  justum  est. 

Then  the  Priest : 

.  THE   PREFACE. 

It  is  truly  meet  and  just,  Vere  dignum  et  justum 

right  and  available  to  salva-  est,  aequum  et  salutare,  nos 

tion,  that  we  should  always,  tibi  semper  et  ubique  gra- 

and  in  all  places,  give  thanks  tias  agere:  Domine  Sanete, 

to  thee,  O  Holy  Lord,  Father  Pater  omnipotens,  seterne 

Almighty,      Eternal      God  ;  Deus;  per  Christum  Domi- 

through  Christ  our  Lord;  by  num  nostrum.    Per  quern 

whom  the  Angels  praise  thy  majestatem  tuam  laudant 

majesty,     the      Dominations  Angeli,adorantDominatio- 

adore  it,  the  Powers  tremble  nes,  ttremunt    Potestates; 


48  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Cceli  ccelorumque  Virtutes,  before  it ;  the  Heavens  and  the 

ac  beata   Seraphim,  socia  heavenly    Virtues,    and    the 

exsultatione   concelebrant.  blessed  Seraphim,  with  com- 

Cum  quibus  et  nostras  vo-  mon  jubilee,  glorify  it.     To- 

ces,  nt  admitti  jubeas  de-  gether  with  whom,  we  beseech 

precamur,  supplici  confes-  thee  that  we  may  be  admitted 

sione  dicentes:  to   join   our  humble    voices, 

saying : 

Here  unite  with  the  Priest,  who,  on  his  part,  unites 
himself  with  the  blessed  Spirits,  in  giving  thanks  to 
God  for  the  unspeakable  Gift :  bow  down  and  say  : 

Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Sanctus  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God 
Dominus  Deus  sabaotk  !  of  hosts  ! 

Pleni  sunt  coeli  et  terra  Heaven  and  earth  are  full 

gloria  tua.  of  thy  glory. 

Hosanna  in  excelsis  !  Hosanna  in  the  highest  ! 

Benedictus  qui  venit  in  Blessed  be  the  Saviour  who 

nomine  Domini.  is  coming  to  us  in  the  name  of 

the  Lord  who  sends  him. 

Hosanna  in  excelsis  !  Hosanna  be  to  him  in  the 

highest ! 

After  these  words  commences  the  Canon, — that 
mysterious  prayer,  in  the  midst  of  which  heaven  bows 
down  to  earth,  and  God  descends  unto  us.  The  voice 
of  the  Priest  is  no  longer  heard  ;  yea,  even  at  the 
altar,  all  is  silence.  It  was  thus,  says  the  Book  of 
Wisdom,  in  the  quiet  of  silence,  and  while  the  night 
teas  in  the  midst  of  her  course,  that  the  Almighty  Word 
came  down  from  his  royal  throne.1  Let  a  profound 
respect  stay  all  distractions,  and  keep  our  senses  in 
submission  to  the  soul.  Let  us  respectfully  fix  our 
eyes  on  what  the  Priest  does  in  the  Holy  place. 

THE    CANON    OF   THE    MASS. 

In  this  mysterious  colloquy  with  the  great  God  of 
heaven  and  earth,  the  first  prayer  of  the  sacrificing 
Priest  is  for  the  Catholic  Church,  his  and  our  Mother. 

1  Wisd.  xviii.  14,  15. 


THE   ORDINARY   OF   THE    MASS. 


49 


O  God,  who  manifestest 
thyself  unto  us  by  means  of 
the  mysteries  which  thou  hast 
intrusted  to  thy  holy  Church, 
our  Mother  ;  we  beseech  thee, 
by  the  merits  of  this  sacrifice, 
that  thou  wouldst  remove  all 
those  hindrances  which  oppose 
her  during  her  pilgrimage  in 
this  world.  Give  her  peace 
and  unity.  Do  thou  thyself 
guide  our  Holy  Father  the 
Pope,  thy  Vicar  on  earth. 
Direct  thou  our  Bishop,  who 
is  our  sacred  link  of  unity  ; 
and  watch  over  all  the  ortho- 
dox children  of  the  Catholic 
Apostolic  Roman  Church. 


Te  igitur,  clementissime 
Pater,  per  Jesum  Christum 
Filium  tuumDominum  nos- 
trum supplices  rogamus  ac 
petimus,  uti  accepta  habeas, 
et  benedicas  haec  dona,  haec 
munera,  haec  sancta  sacri- 
ficia  illibata;  in  primis  quae 
tibi  offerimus  pro  Ecclesia 
tua  sancta  Catholica;  quam 
pacificare,  custodire,  adu- 
nare,  et  regere  digneris  toto 
orbe  terrarum,  una  cum  fa- 
mulo  tuo  Papa  nostro  N.  et 
Antistite  nostro  N.,et  omni- 
bus orthodoxis,atque  catho- 
licae  et  apostolicae  fidei  cul- 
toribus. 


Here  pray,  together  with  the  Priest,  for  those  whose 
interests  should  be  dearest  to  you. 


Permit  me,  O  God,  to  inter- 
cede with  thee  for  special  bles- 
sing upon  such  of  thy  servants, 
for  whom  thou  knowest  that 
I  have  a  special  obligation  to 
pray :  *  *  *  Apply  to  them  the 
fruits  of  this  divine  Sacrifice, 
which  is  offered  unto  thee  in 
the  name  of  all  mankind. 
Visit  them  by  thy  grace,  par- 
don them  their  sins,  grant 
them  the  blessings  of  this 
present  life  and  of  that  which 
is  eternal. 


Memento,Domine,  f  amu- 
lorum  famularumque  tua- 
rum  N.  et  N.,  et  omnium 
circumstantium,  quorum 
tibi  fides  cognita  est,etnota 
devotio :  pro  quibus  tibi  offe- 
rimus, vel  qui  tibi  offerunt 
hoc  sacrificiumlaudis  pro  se 
suisque  omnibus,  pro  re- 
demptione  animarum  sua- 
rum,  pro  spe  salutis  et  in- 
columitatis  suae ;  tibique 
reddunt  vota  sua  aeterno 
Deo  vivo  et  vero. 


Here  let  us  commemorate  the  Saints :  they  are  that 
portion  of  the  Body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which 
is  called  the  Church  Triumphant. 


But  the  offering  of  this 
Sacrifice,  O  my  God,  does  not 
unite  us  with  those  only  of 
our  brethren  who  are  still  in 

VOL.  XI. 


Communicantes,  et  me- 
moriam  venerantes,  in  pri- 
mis gloriosse  semper  Virgi- 
nis  Mariae,  Genitricis  Dei  et 
E 


Ov, 


J>  U  <S 


50 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


this  transient  life  of  trial :  it 
brings  us  closer  to  those  also, 
who  are  already  in  possession 
of  heaven.  Therefore  it  is, 
that  we  wish  to  honour,  by  it, 
the  memory  of  the  glorious 
and  ever  Virgin  Mary,  of 
whom  Jesus  was  born  to  us  ; 
of  the  Apostles,  Confessors, 
Virgins,  and  of  all  the  Saints; 
that  they  may  assist  us,  by 
their  powerful  intercession,  to 
be  worthy  of  this  thy  visit, 
and  of  contemplating  thee,  as 
themselves  now  do,  in  the 
mansion  of  thy  glory. 


Domini  nostri  JesuChristi: 
sed  et  beatorum  Apostolo- 
rum  ac  Martyrum  tuorum, 
Petri  et  Pauli,  Andrea?,  Ja- 
cobi,  Joannis,  Thomse,  Ja- 
cobi,Philippi,Bartholoma3i, 
Matthsei,  Simonis  et  Thad- 
dsei :  Lini,  Cleti,  demen- 
tis, Xysti,  Cornelii,  Cypria- 
ni,  Laurentii,  Chrysogom, 
Joannis  et  Pauli.  Cosmse  et 
Darniani,  et  omnium  sanc- 
torum tuorum:  quorum  me- 
ntis precibusque  concedas, 
nt  in  omnibus  protections 
tuasmuniamur  auxilio.  Per 
eumdem  Christum  Domi- 
num  nostrum.    Amen. 

The  Priest,  wlio  up  to  this  time,  had  been  praying 
with  his  hands  extended,  now  joins  them,  and  holds 
them  over  the  Bread  and  Wine,  as  the  High  Priest 
of  the  Old  Law  was  wont  to  do  over  the  figurative 
victim :  he  thus  expresses  his  intention  of  bringing 
these  gifts  more  closely  under  the  notice  of  the  Divine 
Majesty,  and  of  marking  them  as  the  material  offer- 
ing whereby  we  profess  our  dependence,  and  which,  in 
a  few  instants,  is  to  yield  its  place  to  the  living  Host, 
upon  whom  are  laid  all  our  iniquities. 


Hanc  igitur  oblationem 
servitutis  nostra?,  sed  et 
cunctse  familiar  tuse,  quoa- 
sumus,  Domine,ut  placatus 
accipias:  diesque  nostros  in 
tua  pace  disponas,  atque 
ab  aeterna  damnatione  nos 
eripi,  et  in  electorum  tuo- 
rum jubeas  grege  nume- 
rari.  Per  Christum  Domi- 
num  nostrum.    Amen. 

Quam  oblationem  tu, 
Deus,  in  omnibus,  quassu- 
mus,  benedictam,  adscrip- 


Vouchsafe,  O  God,  to  accept 
the  offering,  which  this  thine 
assembled  family  presents  to 
thee  as  the  homage  of  its  most 
happy  servitude.  In  return, 
give  us  peace,  save  us  from 
thy  wrath,  and  number  us 
among  thine  elect,  through 
Him  who  is  coming  to  us, — 
thy  Son,  our  Saviour  I 

Yea,  Lord,  this  is  the  mo- 
ment when  this  bread  is  to 
become  his  sacred  Body,  which 


THE    ORDINARY    OF   THE   MASS. 


51 


is  our  food ;  and  this  wine  is 
to  be  changed  into  his  blood, 
which  is  our  drink.  Ah !  delay- 
no  longer,  but  bring  us  into 
the  presence  of  this  divine 
Son,  our  Saviour ! 


tam,  ratam,  rationabilem, 
acceptabilemque  facere 
digneris:  ut  nobis  Corpus 
et  Sanguis  fiat  dilectissirai 
Filii  tui  Domini  nostri 
Jesu  Christi. 


And  here  the  Priest  ceases  to  act  as  man  ;  he  now 
becomes  more  than  a  mere  minister  of  the  Church. 
His  word  becomes  that  of  Jesus  Christ,  with  its  power 
and  efficacy.  Prostrate  yourself  in  profound  adora- 
tion, for  the  Emmanuel,  that  is,  God  with  us,  is  coming 
upon  our  altar. 


What,  O  God  of  heaven  and 
earth,  my  Jesus,  the  long-ex- 
pected Messias !  what  else  can 
I  do,  at  this  solemn  moment, 
but  adore  thee  in  silence,  as 
my  sovereign  Master,  and 
open  to  thee  my  whole  heart, 
as  to  its  dearest  King  1  Come, 
then,  O  Lord  Jesus,  come  ! 


Qui  pridie  quam  patere- 
tur,  accepit  panem  in  sanc- 
tas  ac  venerabiles  manus 
suas  :  et  elevatis  oculis  in 
coelum,ad  te  Deum  Patrem 
suum  omnipotentem,  tibi 
gratias  agens,  benedixit, 
fregit,  declitque  discipulis 
suis,  dicens  :  Accipite,  et 
manducate  ex  hoc  omnes. 
Hoc   est   enim    Corpus 

MEUM. 


The  Divine  Lamb  is  now  lying  on  our  Altar  ! 
Glory  and  love  be  to  him  for  ever  !  But,  he  is  come 
that  he  may  be  immolated.  Hence  the  Priest,  who 
is  the  minister  of  the  designs  of  the  Most  High, 
immediately  pronounces,  over  the  Chalice,  the  sacred 
words  which  follow,  which  will  produce  the  great 
mystical  immolation,  by  the  separation  of  the  Victim's 
Body  and  Blood.  After  those  words,  the  substances 
of  both  bread  and  wine  have  ceased  to  exist ;  the 
species  alone  are  left,  veiling,  as  it  were  the  Bod^-and 
Blood  of  our  Redeemer,  lest  fear  should  keepers  frpm 
a  mystery,  which  God  gives  us  for  the  vary  ^krpose'  <^*. 
of  infusing  confidence  into  our  hearts,  /wjiilst  the 
Priest  is  pronouncing  those  words,  let  //iSSLassociate 


Asstftmrttmt 


52 


TIME    AFTER   TENTECOST. 


ourselves  to  the  Angels,  who  tremblingly  gaze  upon 
this  deepest  wonder. 


O  Precious  Blood!  thou  price 
of  my  salvation !  I  adore  thee! 
Wash  away  my  sins,  and  make 
me  whiter  than  snow,  O  Lamb 
ever  slain,  yet  ever  living,  thou 
comest  to  take  away  the  sins 
of  the  world !  Come,  also,  and 
reign  in  me  by  thy  power,  and 
by  thy  love. 


Simili  modo  postquam 
coenatum  est,  accipiens  et 
huncpraeclarumCalicem  in 
sanctas  ac  venerabiles  ma- 
nus  suas :  item  tibi  gratias 
agens,  benedixit,  deditque 
discipulis  suis  dicens:  Acci- 
pite  et  bibite  ex  eo  omnes. 

HlC  EST  ENIM  CALIX  SAN- 
GUINIS MEI,  NOVI  ET  MTEH- 
NI  TESTAMENTI  :  MYSTE- 
RIUM  FIDEI :  QUI  PRO  VOBIS 
ET  PRO  MULTIS  EFFUNDE- 
TUR         IN        REMISSIONEM 

peccatorum.  Haec  quoti- 
escumque  faceritis,  in  mei 
memoriam  facietis. 

The  Priest  is  now  face  to  face  with  God.  He 
again  raises  his  hands  towards  heaven,  and  tells  our 
heavenly  Father,  that  the  oblation,  now  on  the  altar, 
is  no  longer  an  earthly  material  offering,  but  the 
Body  and  Blood,  the  whole  Person,  of  his  divine 
Son. 


Unde  et  memores,  Domi- 
ne,  nos  servi  tui,  sed  et 
plebs  tua  sancta,  ejusdem 
Ohristi  filii  tui  Domini  nos- 
tri  tarn  beatae  Passionis,nec 
non  et  ab  inferis  Resurree- 
tionis,  sed  et  in  ccelos  glo- 
riosae  Ascensionis  :  offeri- 
muspraeclaraeMajestatituae 
de  tuis  donis  ac  datis,  Hos- 
tiam  puram,  Hostiam  sanc- 
tam,  Hostiam  immacula- 
tam  :  Panem  sanctum  vitae 
aeternae,  et  Calicem  salutis 
perpetuae. 

Supra  quae  propitioac  se- 
reno  vultu  respicere  digne- 


Father  of  infinite  holiness  ! 
the  Host  so  long  expected  is 
here  before  thee.  Behold  this 
thine  eternal  Son,  who  suffered 
a  bitter  Passion,  rose  again 
with  glory  from  the  grave, 
and  ascended  triumphantly 
into  heaven.  He  is  thy  Son; 
but  he  is  also  our  Host,  Host 
pure  and  spotless, — our  Meat 
and  Drink  of  everlasting  life. 


Heretofore,  thou  acceptedst 
the  sacrifice  of  the  innocent 


THE    ORDINARY   OF    THE    MASS. 


53 


ris :  et  accepta  habere,sicuti 
accepta  habere  dignatus  es 
munerapueri  tuijusti  Abel, 
et  sacrificium  Patriarch se 
nostri  Abrahse,et  quod  tibi 
obtulit  summus  Sacerdos 
tuusMelchisedech,  sanctum 
sacrificium,  immaculatam 
hostiam. 


lambs  offered  unto  thee  by- 
Abel  ;  and  the  sacrifice  which 
Abraham  made  thee  of  his 
son  Isaac,  who,  though  immo- 
lated, yet  lived  ;  and,  lastly, 
the  sacrifice,  which  Melchise- 
dech  presented  to  thee,of  bread 
and  wine.  Receive  our  Sacri- 
fice, which  surpasses  all  those 
others  :  it  is  the  Lamb,  of 
whom  all  others  could  be  but 
figures  ;  it  is  the  undying  Vic- 
tim; it  is  the  Body  of  thy  Son, 
who  is  the  Bread  of  Life,  and 
his  Blood,  which,  whilst  a 
drink  of  immortality  for  us,  is 
a  tribute  adequate  to  thy 
glory. 

The  Priest  bows  down  to  the  altar,  and  kisses  it  as 
the  throne  of  love,  on  which  is  throned  the  Saviour 
of  men. 


But,  O  God  of  infinite 
power  !  these  sacred  gifts  are 
not  only  on  this  altar  here 
below  ;  they  are,  also,  on  that 
sublime  Altar  in  i:eaven,which 
is  before  the  throne  of  thy 
divine  Majesty.  These  two 
Altars  are  one  and  the  same, 
on  which  is  accomplished  the 
great  mystery  of  thy  glory  and 
our  salvation.  Vouchsafe  to 
make  us  partakers  of  the  Body 
and  Blood  of  the  august  Vic- 
tim, from  whom  flow  every 
grace  and  blessing. 


Supplices  te  rogamus, 
omnipotens  Deus,  jube  hsec 
perferri  per  manus  sancti 
Angelituiin  sublime  Altare 
tuuni,  in  conspectu  divinae 
Majestatis  tuee:  ut  quot- 
quot  ex  hac  altaris  partici- 
patione,  sacrosanctum  Filii 
tui  Corpus  et  Sanguinem 
sumpserimus,  omni  bene- 
dictione  ccelesti  et  gratia 
repleamur.  Per  eumdem 
Christum  Dominum  nos- 
trum.   Amen. 


Nor  is  the  moment  less  favourable  for  our  making 
supplication  for  the  Church  Suffering.  Let  us,  there- 
fore, ask  the  divine  Liberator,  who  has  come  down 
among  us,  that  he  mercifully  visit,  by  a  ray  of  his 
consoling  light,  the  dark  abode  of  Purgatory;  and 
permit  his  Blood  to  flow,  as  a  stream  of  mercy's  dew, 


54 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


from  this  our  altar,  and  refresh  the  panting  captives 
there.  Let  ns  pray  expressly  for  those  among  them, 
who  have  a  claim  upon  our  suffrages. 

Dear  Jesus  !  let  the  happi- 
ness of  this  thy  visit  extend 
to  every  portion  of  thy  Church. 
Thy  face  gladdens  the  elect,  in 
the  holy  City;  even  our  mortal 
eyes  can  see  thee  beneath  the 
veil  of  our  delighted  faith  ; 
ah!  hide  not  thyself  from 
those  Brethren  of  ours,  who 
are  imprisoned  in  the  abode  of 
expiation.  Be  thou  refresh- 
ment to  them  in  their  flames, 
light  in  their  darkness,  and 
peace  in  their  agonies  of  tor- 
ment. 


Memento  etiam,Domine, 
famulorum  famularumque 
tuarum  N.  et  N.,  qui  nos 
prsecesserunt  cum  signo 
ficlei,  et  dormiunt  in  somno 
pacis.  Ipsis,  Domine,  et 
omnibus  in  Christo  quies- 
centibus,  locum  refrigerii, 
lucis  et  pacis,  ut  indulgeas, 
deprecamur.  Per  eumdem 
Christum  Dominum  nos- 
trum.   Amen. 


This  duty  of  charity  fulfilled,  let  us  pray  for  our- 
selves,— sinners,  alas !  and  who  profit  so  little  by  the 
visit  which  our  Saviour  pays  us.  Let  us,  together 
with  the  Priest,  strike  our  breast,  saying : 


Nobis  quoque  peccatori- 
bus  famulis  tuis,  de  multi- 
tudine  miserationum  tua- 
rum sperantibus,  partem 
aliquam  et  societatem  do- 
naredigneriscum  tuis  Sanc- 
tis Apostolis  et  Marty  ribus; 
cum;  Joanne,  Stephano, 
Mathia,  Barnaba,  Ignatio, 
Alexandre,  Marcellino,  Pe- 
tro,  Felicitate,  Perpetua, 
Agatha,  Lucia,  Agnete,  Cse- 
cilia,  Anastasia,  et  omnibus 
Sanctis  tuis;  intra  quorum 
nos  consortium,  non  sesti- 
mator  meriti,  sed  venia?, 
qusesumus,  largitor  admit- 
te:  per  Christum  Dominum 
nostrum.  Per  quern  haec 
omnia,     Domine,    semper 


Alas  !  we  are  poor  sinners, 
O  God  of  all  sanctity  !  yet  do 
we  hope  that  thine  infinite 
mercy  will  grant  us  to  share 
thy  kingdom  ;  not,  indeed,  by 
reason  of  our  works,  which 
deserve  little  else  than  punish- 
ment,— but  because  of  the 
merits  of  this  Sacrifice,  which 
we  are  offering  unto  thee. 
Remember,  too,  the  merits  of 
thy  holy  Apostles,  of  thy  holy 
Martyrs,  of  thy  holy  Virgins, 
and  of  all  thy  Saints.  Grant 
us,  by  their  intercession,  grace 
in  this  world,  and  glory  eter- 
nal in  the  next :  which  we  ask 
of  thee,  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  thy  Son. 
It  is  by  him  thou  bestowest 


THE   ORDINARY   OF   THE    MASS.  55 

upon  us  thy  blessings  of  life  bona  creas,  sanctificas,  vi- 
and sanctification  ;  and,  by  vificas,  benedicis,  et  prae- 
hini  also,  with  him,  and  in  stas  nobis ;  per  ipsam,  et 
him,  in  the  unity  of  the  Holy  cum  ipso  et  in  ipso,  esttibi 
Ghost,  may  honour  and  glory  Deo  Patri  omnipotenti,  in 
be  to  thee !  unitate  Spiritus  Sancti,  om- 

nis  honor  et  gloria. 

Whilst  saying  the  last  of  these  words,  the  Priest 
has  taken  up  the  sacred  Host,  which  was  upon  the 
altar  ;  he  has  held  it  over  the  chalice :  thus  re-uniting 
the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  divine  Victim,  in  order  to 
show  that  he  is  now  immortal.  Then  raising  up  both 
Chalice  and  Host,  he  offers  to  God  the  noblest  and 
most  perfect  homage,  which  the  divine  Majesty  could 
receive. 

This  sublime  and  mysterious  rite  ends  the  Canon. 
The  silence  of  the  Mysteries  is  interrupted.  The 
Priest  concludes  his  long  prayers,  by  saying  aloud, 
and  so  giving  the  Faithful  the  opportunity  of  expres- 
sing their  desire  that  his  supplications  be  granted : 

For  ever  and  ever  !  Per  omnia  sseculasseculo- 

rum. 

Answer  him  with  faith,  and  in  a  sentiment  of  union 
with  your  holy  Mother,  the  Church : 

Amen  !    I  believe  the  mys-  Amen, 

tery  which  has  just  been  ac- 
complished. I  unite  myself 
to  the  offering,  which  has  been 
made,  and  to  the  petitions  of 
the  Church. 

It  is  time  now  to  recite  the  Prayer,  taught  us  by 
our  Saviour  himself.  Let  it  ascend  up  to  heaven 
together  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  Body  and  Blood 
of  Jesus  Christ.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  than 
heard,  when  he  himself  who  drew  it  up  for  us,  is  in 
our  very  hands  now  whilst  we   say  it?      As  this 


56 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Prayer  belongs  in  common  to  all  God's  children,  the 
Priest  recites  it  aloud,  and  begins  by  inviting  us  all 
to  join  in  it ;  he  says : 


okemus. 

Praeceptis  salutaribus 
moniti,  et  divina  institu- 
tione  formati,  audemus 
dicere : 


LET  US  PRAY. 


Having  been  taught  by  a 
saving  precept,  and  following 
the  form  given  us  by  divine 
instruction,  we  thus  presume 
to  speak  : 


THE    LORDS   PRAYER. 


Pater  noster,  qui  es  in 
ccelis:  Sanctificetur  nomen 
tuum  :  Adveniat  regnum 
tuum  :  Fiat  voluntas  tua, 
sicut  in  ccelo  et  in  terra. 
Panem  nostrum  quotidia- 
num  da  nobis  hodie :  Et  di- 
mitte  nobis  debita  nostra, 
sicut  et  nos  dimittimus  de- 
bitoribus  nostris :  et  ne  nos 
znducas  in  tentationem. 


Our  Father,  who  art  in 
heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name  • 
thy  kingdom  come  ;  thy  will 
be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in 
heaven.  Give  us,  this  day, 
our  daily  Bread  ;  and  forgive 
us  our  trespasses,  as  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against 
us  ;  and  lead  us  not  into  temp- 
tation ; 


Let  us  answer  with  deep  feeling  of  our  misery  : 


Sed  libera  nos  a  male 


But  deliver  us  from  evil. 


The  Priest  falls,  once  more,  into  the  silence  of  the 
holy  Mysteries.  His  first  word  is  an  affectionate 
Amen  to  your  last  petition — deliver  us  from  evil — on 
"which  he  forms  his  own  next  prayer:  and,  could  he 
pray  for  anything  more  needed  ?  Evil  surrounds  us 
everywhere ;  and  the  Lamb  on  our  altar  has  been 
sent  to  expiate  it,  and  deliver  us  from  it. 


Libera  nos,  qusesumus, 
Domine,  ab  omnibus  malis, 
prseteritis,  prajsentibus  et 
luturis :  etintercedentebea- 
ta  et  gloriosa  semper  Virgi- 


How  many,  0  Lord,  are  the 
evils,  which  beset  us  !  Evils 
2>ast,  which  are  the  wounds 
lett  on  the  soul  by  her  sins, 
and    strengthen    her   wicked 


THE    ORDINARY   OF   THE    MASS. 


57 


propensities.  Evils  present, 
that  is,  the  sins  now,  at  this 
very  time,  upon  our  soul;  the 
weakness  of  thispoor  soul;  and 
the  temptations  which  molest 
her.  There  are,  also,  future 
evils,  that  is,  the  chastisement 
which  our  sins  deserve  from 
the  hand  of  thy  justice.  In 
presence  of  this  Host  of  our 
Salvation,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  to  deliver  us  from  all 
these  evils,  and  to  accept  in 
our  favour  the  intercession  of 
Mary  the  Mother  of  Jesus  of 
thy  holy  Apostles  Peter  and 
Paul  and  Andrew:  Liberate 
us,  break  our  chains,  give  us 
peace:  through  Jesus  Christ, 
thy  Son,  who  with  thee,  liveth 
and  reigneth  God. 


The  Priest  is  anxious  to  announce  the  Peace,  which 
he  has  asked  and  obtained  ;  he  therefore  finishes  his 
prayer  aloud,  saying : 


ne  Dei  Genitrice  Maria,  cum 
beatis  Apostolis  tuis  Petro 
et  Paulo,  atque  Andrea,  et 
omnibus  Sanctis,  da  propi- 
tius  pacem  in  diebus  nos- 
tris:  ut  ope  misericordiae 
tuse  adjuti,  et  a  peccato 
simus  semper  liberi,  et  ab 
omni  perturbatione  securi. 
Per  eumdem  Dominum 
nostrum  Jesum  Christum 
Filium  tuum,  Qui  tecum 
vivit  et  regnat  in  unitate 
Spiritus  Sancti  Deus. 


"World  without  end. 
1$.  Amen. 


Per  omnia  specula  saBculo- 
rum. 

I£.  Amen. 


Then  he  says : 

May  the  peace  of  our  Lord         Pax  Domini  sit  semper 
be  ever  with  you.  vobiscum. 

To  this  paternal  wish,  reply : 
1$.  And  with  thy  spirit.  ]$.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

The  Mystery  is  drawing  to  a  close ;  God  is  about 
to  be  united  with  man,  and  man  with  God,  by  means 
of  Communion.  But  first,  an  imposing  and  sublime 
rite  takes  place  at  the  altar.     So  far,  the  Priest  has 


58  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

announced  the  Death  of  Jesus  ;  it  is  time  to  proclaim 
his  Resurrection.  To  this  end,  he  reverently  creaks 
the  sacred  Host ;  and  having  divided  it  into  three 
parts,  he  puts  one  into  the  Chalice,  thus  re- uniting 
the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  immortal  Yictim.  Do 
you  adore,  and  say : 

Haec  commixtio  et  conse-  Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Saviour 
cratio  Corporis  et  Sanguinis  of  the  world  !  who  didst,  in 
Domini  nostri  JesuChristi,  thy  Passion,  permit  thy  pre- 
fiat  accipientibus  nobis  in  cious  Blood  to  be  separated 
vitam  aeternam.    Amen.  from  thy  sacred  Body,  after- 

wards   uniting    them    again 
together  by  thy  divine  power  ! 

Offer  now  your  prayer  to  the  ever-living  Lamb, 
whom  St.  John  saw,  on  the  Altar  of  Heaven,  standing 
though  slain  . l  say  to  this  your  Lord  and  King,  who 
has  taken  upon  himself  all  our  iniquities,  in  order  to 
wash  them  away  by  his  Blood  : 

Agnus    Dei,    qui    tollis  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 

peccata    mundi,    miserere  away  the  sins  of  the  world, 

nobis.  have  mercy  on  us  ! 

Agnus    Dei,    qui    tollis  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 

peccata    mundi,    miserere  away  the  sins  of  the  world, 

nobis.  have  mercy  on  us  ! 

Agnus   Dei,    qui    tollis  Lamb  of  God,  who  takest 

peccata  mundi,  dona  nobis  away  the  sins  of  the  world, 

pacem.  give  us  Peace  ! 

Peace  is  the  grand  object  of  our  Saviour's  coming 
into  the  world :  he  is  the  Prince  of  Peace."  The 
divine  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  ought  therefore  to 
be  the  mystery  of  Peace,  and  the  bond  of  Catholic 
Unity ;  for,  as  the  Apostle  says,  all  tee  who  partake 
of  one  Bread,  are  all  one  Bread  and  one  Body.3  It 
is  on  this  account  that  the  Priest,  now  that  he  is  on 
the  point  of  receiving,  in  Communion,  the  Sacred 
Host,  prays  that  fraternal  Peace  may  be  preserved 

1  Apoc.  v.  6.  *  Is.  ix.  6.  3  1  Cor.  x.  17. 


THE   ORDINARY   OF   THE    MASS. 


59 


in  the  Church,  and  more  especially  in  this  portion  of 
it,  which  is  assembled  around  the  altar.  Pray  with 
him,  and  for  the  same  blessing. 


Domine  Jesu  Christe,  qui 
dixisti  Apostolis  tuis:  Pa- 
cem  relinquo  vobis:  pacem 
meam  do  vobis:  ne  respi- 
cias  peccata  mea,  sed  fidem 
Ecclesiae  tuse:  eamque  se- 
cundum voluntatem  tuain 
pacificare  et  coadunare  dig- 
neris.  Qui  vivis  et  regnas 
Deus,  per  omnia  ssecula  sse- 
culorum.    Amen. 

If  it  be  a  High  Mass,  the  Priest  here  gives  the 
kiss  of  peace  to  the  Deacon,  who  gives  it  to  the  Sub- 
deacon,  and  he  to  the  Choir.  During  this  ceremony, 
you  should  excite  within  yourself  feelings  of  Christian 
charity,  and  pardon  your  enemies,  if  you  have  any. 
Then  continue  to  pray  with  the  Priest : 


Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
saidst  to  thine  Apostles,  "  my 
peace  I  leave  with  you,  my 
peace  I  give  unto  you:"  regard 
not  my  sins,  but  the  faith  of 
thy  Church,  and  grant  her 
that  peace  and  unity  which  is 
according  to  thy  will.  Who 
livest  and  reignest  God,  for 
ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of 
the  living  God,  who  according 
to  the  will  of  the  Father, 
through  the  co-operation  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  hast,  by  thy 
death,  given  life  to  the  world; 
deliver  me,  by  this  thy  most 
sacred  Body  and  Blood,  from 
all  mine  iniquities,  and  from 
all  evils;  and  make  me  always 
adhere  to  thy  commandments, 
and  never  suffer  me  to  be 
separated  from  thee,  who  with 
the  same  God  the  Father  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  livest  and 
reignest  God  for  ever  and 
ever.    Amen. 

If  you  are  going  to  Communion  at  this  Mass,  say 
the  following  Prayer  ;  otherwise,  prepare  yourself  for 
a  Spiritual  Communion : 

Let  not  the  participation  of         Perceptio   Corporis   tui, 


Domini  Jesu  Christe, 
Fili  Dei  vivi,  qui  ex  volun- 
tate  Patris,  cooperante 
Spiritu  Sancto,  per  mortem 
tuam  mundum  vivificasti: 
libera  meper  hocsacrosanc- 
tum  Corpus,  et  Sanguinem 
tuum,  ab  omnibus  iniquita- 
tibus  meis,  et  universis 
malis,  et  f  ac  me  tuis  semper 
inhserere  mandatis,  et  a  te 
nunquam  separari  permit- 
tas.  Qui  cum  eodem  Deo 
Patre  et  Spiritu  Sancto 
vivis  et  regnas,  Deus,  in 
saecula  sseculorum.  Amen. 


60  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Domine  Jesu  Christe,  quod  thy  Body,  0  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 

ego  indignus  sumere  prae-  which    I    though    unworthy, 

sumo,  non  mihi  proveniat  presume  to  receive,  turn  to  my 

in  judicium  et  condemna-  judgment  and  condemnation; 

tionem:  sed  pro  tuapietate  but  through  thy  mercy,  may 

prosit  mihi  ad  tutamentum  it  be  a  safeguard  and  remedy 

mentis  et  corporis,  et  ad  both  to  my  soul  and  body, 

medelam       percipiendam.  Who,  with  God  the  Father,  in 

Quiviviset  regnascumDeo  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

Patre,  in  unitate  Spiritus  livest  and  reignest  God,  for 

Sancti,   Deus,  per    omnia  ever  and  ever.    Amen, 
saecula  sasculorum.    Amen. 

When  the  Priest  takes  the  Host  into  his  hands, 
in  order  to  his  receiving  it  in  Communion,  say  : 

Panem    ccelestem    acci-  Come,  my  dear  Jesus,  come ! 

piam,   et    nomen    Domini 
invocabo. 

When  he  strikes  his  breast,  confessing  his  un- 
worthiness,  say  thrice,  with  him,  these  words,  and  in 
the  same  dispositions  as  the  Centurion  of  the  Gospel, 
who  first  used  them  : 

Domine,  non  sum  dignus  Lord  !  I  am  not  worthy  that 
ut  intres  sub  tectum  meum :  thou  enter  under  my  roof;  say 
sed  tantum  die  verbo,  et  it,  only,  with  one  word  of 
sanabitur  anima  mea.  thine,  and  my  soul  shall  be 

healed. 

Whilst  the  Priest  is  receiving  the  sacred  Host,  if 
you  also  are  to  communicate,  profoundly  adore  your 
God,  who  is  ready  to  take  up  his  abode  within  you ; 
and  again  say  to  him  with  the  Bride :  Come,  Lord 
Jesus  ! l 

But  should  you  not  intend  to  receive  sacramentally, 
make  here  a  Spiritual  Communion.  Adore  Jesus 
Christ,  who  thus  visits  your  soul  by  his  grace,  and 
say  to  him : 

Corpus    Domini    nostri         I  give  thee,  0  Jesus,  this 
1  Apoc.  xxii.  20. 


THE    ORDINARY   OF   THE    MASS.  61 

heart  of  mine,  that  thou  may-  Jesu  Christe  custodiat  airi- 
est dwell  in  it,  and  do  with  me  mam  meain  in  vitam  seter- 
what  thou  wilt.  nam.    Amen. 

Then  the  Priest  takes  the  Chalice,  in  thanksgiving, 
and  says : 

What  return  shall  I  make         Quid  retribuam  Domino 

to   the  Lord  for  all  he  hath  pro  omnibus  quae  retribuit 

given  to  me  1    I  will  take  the  mihi  ]      Calicem  salutaris 

Chalice  of  salvation,  and  will  accipiam,et  nomen  Domini 

call  upon  the   name   of   the  invocabo.  Laudans  invoca- 

Lord.     Praising,  I  will   call  bo  Dominum,  et  ab  inimicis 

upon  the  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  meis  salvus  ero. 
saved  from  mine  enemies. 

But  if  you  are  to  make  a  Sacramental  Communion, 
you  should,  at  this  moment  of  the  Priest's  receiving 
the  precious  Blood,  again  adore  the  God  who  is 
coming  to  you,  and  keep  to  your  prayer  :  Come,  Lord 
Jesus,  Come  ! 

If  you  are  going  to  communicate  only  spiritually, 
again  adore  your  divine  Master,  and  say  to  him : 

I  unite  myself  to  thee,  my  Sanguis    Domini   nostri 

beloved  Jesus  !  do  thou  unite  Jesu  (Jhristi  custodiat  ani- 

thyself  to  me  !  and  never  let  mam  meam  in  vitam  seter- 

us  be  separated  i  nam.    Amen. 

It  is  here  that  you  must  approach  to  the  altar,  if 
you  are  going  to  Communion.  The  dispositions  suit- 
able for  Holy  Communion,  during  the  Time  after 
Pentecost,  are  given  in  the  next  Chapter. 

The  Communion  being  finished,  and  whilst  the 
Priest  is  purifying  the  Chalice  the  first  time,  say : 

Thou  hast  visited  me,  O  God,  Quod    ore    sumpsimus, 

in  these  days  of  my  pilgrim-  Domine,  pura  mente  capia- 

age;  give  me  grace  to  treasure  mus;  et  de  munere  tempo- 

up  the  fruits  of  this  visit,  and  rali    fiat  nobis  remedium 

to  make  it  tell  upon  my  eter-  sempiternum. 
nity. 


62  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Whilst  the  Priest  is  purifying  the  Chalice  the 
second  time,  say : 

Corpus  tuum,  Domine,  Be  thou  for  ever  blessed,  O 

quod  sumpsi,  et  Sanguis,  my  Saviour,  for  having  ad- 

quem  iwtavi,  adhsereat  vis-  mitted  me  to  the  sacred  mys- 

ceribus  meis:  et  prsesta  ut  tery  of  thy  Body  and  Blood, 

in  me  non  remaneat  scele-  May  my  heart  and  senses  pre- 

rum  macula  quern  pura  et  serve,  by  thy  grace,  the  purity 

sancta    refecerunt    Sacra-  thou  hast  imparted  to  them, 

menta.  Quivivisetregnasin  and  I  be  thus  rendered  less 

ssecula  sseculorum.    Amen.  unworthy  of  thy  divine  visit. 

The  Priest,  having  read  the  Anthem,  called  the 
Communion,  which  is  the  first  part  of  his  Thanks- 
giving for  the  favour  just  received  from  God,  whereby 
he  has  renewed  his  divine  presence  among  us, — turns 
to  the  people,  greeting  them  with  the  usual  salu- 
tation ;  and  then  recites  the  Prayers,  called  the 
Tost  communion,  which  are  the  continuation  of  the 
Thanksgiving.  You  will  join  him  here  also,  and 
thank  God  for  the  unspeakable  gift  he  has  just 
lavished  upon  you,  of  admitting  you  to  the  celebra- 
tion and  participation  of  mysteries  so  divine. 

As  soon  as  these  Prayers  have  been  recited,  the 
Priest  turns  again  to  the  people :  and,  full  of  joy  at 
the  immense  favour  he  and  they  have  been  receiving, 
he  says : 

Dominus  vobiscum.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Answer  him  : 

Et  cum  spiritu  tuo.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon,  or,  (if  it  be  not  a  High  Mass,)  the 
Priest  himself,  then  says  : 

Ite  Missa  est.  Go,  the  Mass  is  finished. 

1$.  Deo  gratias.  3$.  Thanks  be  to  God. 


THE   ORDINARY   OF    THE    MASS.  63 

The  Priest  makes  a  last  Prayer,  before  giving  you 
his  blessing  ;  pray  with  him  : 

Eternal  thanks  be  to  thee,  Placeattibi,sanctaTrini- 

O  adorable   Trinity,  for  the  tas,   obsequium    servitutis 

mercy  thou  hast  showed  to  meae,  et  prsesta  ut  sacrifi- 

me,  in  permitting  me  to  assist  cium,  quod  oculis  tuse  Ma- 

at  this  divine  Sacrifice.     Par-  jestatisindignusobtuli,tibi 

don   me  the  negligence  and  sit  acceptabile,  mihique,  et 

coldness    wherewith    I    have  omnibus  pro  quibus  illud 

received  so  great   a  favour ;  obtuli,    sit    te    miserante, 

and  deign  to  confirm  the  Bles-  propitiabile.  Per  Christum 

sing,  which   thy  Minister  is  Dominum  nostrum.  Amen, 
about  to  give  me  in  thy  Name. 

The  Priest  raises  his  hand,  and  blesses  you  thus  : 

May    the    Almighty    God,  Benedicatvosomnipotens 

Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  Deus,  Pater,  et  Filius,  et 

bless  you  !  Spiritus  Sanctus. 

1$.  Amen.  I£.  Amen. 

He  then  concludes  the  Mass,  by  reading  the  first 
fourteen  verses  of  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  John, 
which  tell  us  of  the  eternity  of  the  Word,  and  of  the 
mercy  which  led  him  to  take  upon  himself  our  flesh, 
and  to  dwell  among  us.  Pray  that  you  may  be  of  the 
number  of  those  who  received  him,  when  he  came  unto 
his  own  people,  and  who,  thereby,  were  made  Sons  of 
God. 

$".  The  Lord  be  with  you.  $".  Dominus  vobiscum. 

1$.  And  with  thy  spirit.  1$.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

THE   LAST   GOSPEL. 

The  beginning  of  the  Holy      Initium    sancti    Evangelii 
Gospel  according  to  John.  secundum  Joannem. 

Ch.  I.  Cap,  I% 

In  the  beginning  was  the  In  principio  erat  Verbum, 
Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  et  Verbum  erat  apud  Deum 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God.      et  Deus  erat  Verbum.  Hoc 


64 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


eratinprincipioapudDeum. 
Omnia  per  ipsum  facta 
sunt;  et  sine  ipso  factum 
est  nihil.  Quod  factum  est, 
in  ipso  vita  erat,  et  vita  erat 
lux  hominum,  et  lux  in 
tenebris  lucet,  et  tenebrse 
earn  non  comprehenderunt. 
Fuit  homo  missus  a  Deo, 
cui  nomen  erat  Joannes. 
Hie  venit  in  testimonium, 
ut  testimonium  perhiberet 
de  lumine,  ut  omnes  cre- 
derent  per  ilium.  Non 
erat  ille  lux,  sed  ut  testi- 
monium perhiberet  de  lu- 
mine. Erat  lux  vera,  quae 
illuminat  omnem  hominem 
venientem  in  hunc  mun- 
dum.  In  mundo  erat,  et 
mundus  per  ipsum  factus 
est,  et  mundus  eum  non  cog- 
novit. In  propria  venit,  et 
sui  eum  non  receperunt. 
Quotquotautemreceperunt 
eum,  dedit  eis  potestatem 
filios  Dei  fieri,  his  qui  cre- 
dunt  in  nomine  ejus:  qui 
non  ex  sanguinibus,  neque 
ex  voluntate  carnis,  neque 
ex  voluntate  viri,  sed  ex 
Deo  nati  sunt.  EtVerbum 
caro  factum  est,  et  habi- 
tavit  in  nobis:  et  vidimus 
gloriam  ejus,  gloriam  quasi 
Unigeniti  a  Patre,  plenum 
gratise  et  veritatis. 
1$.  Deo  gratias. 


The  same  was  in  the  beginning 
with  God.  All  things  were 
made  by  him,  and  without  him 
was  made  nothing  that  was 
made.  In  him  was  life,  and 
the  life  was  the  light  of  men: 
and  the  light  shineth  in  the 
darkness,  and  the  darkness  did 
not  comprehend  it.  There  was 
a  man  sent  from  God,  whose 
name  was  John.  This  man 
came  for  a  witness,  to  give 
testimony  of  the  light,  that  all 
men  might  believe  through, 
him.  He  was  not  the  light, 
but  was  to  give  testimony  of 
the  light.  That  was  the  true 
light  which  enlighteneth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  this 
world.  He  was  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made  by 
him,  and  the  world  knew  him 
not.  He  came  unto  his  own, 
and  his  own  received  him  not. 
But  as  many  as  received  him, 
to  them  he  gave  power  to  be 
made  the  sons  of  God;  to  them 
that  believe  in  his  name,  who 
are  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the 
will  of  man,  but  of  God.  And 
the  Word  was  made  flesh, 
and  dwelt  among  us;  and  we 
saw  his  glory,  as  it  were  the 
glory  of  the  Only-Begotten 
of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and 
truth. 
1$.  Thanks  be  to  God. 


BEFORE    COMMUNION.  65 


CHAPTER  THE  SIXTH. 

ON    HOLY   COMMUNION,    DURING   THE   TIME   AFTER 

PENTECOST. 

If,  in  the  early  stages  of  the  Liturgical  year,  in 
Advent,  at  Christmas,  and  during  the  periods  of  Sep- 
tuagesima  and  Lent,  when  there  was  question  of 
nothing  heyond  a  preparation  for  the  divine  Mysteries 
which  wrought  our  salvation, — if,  in  the  name  of 
holy  Church,  we  then  invited  the  Faithful  to  have 
recourse  to  the  Sacrament  of  our  Lord's  Body,  as 
being  the  heavenly  nourishment  that  would  support 
them  in  the  glorious  career  on  which  they  had 
entered :  now,  that  the  work  is  done,  that  they  have 
risen  again  with  their  Redeemer,  that  they  have 
followed  him,  by  their  desires  arid  their  hopes,  even 
to  the  very  summit  of  heaven ;  now,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  come  down  upon  this  earth,  that  he  might 
complete  within  them  the  work  of  their  union  with 
God ; — surely,  nothing  could  profit  them  more,  than 
that  they  nourish  themselves,  and  even  more  fre- 
quently than  before,  with  the  Bread  of  Life,  which 
came  from  heaven,  that  he  might  give  Life  to  the 
world.1 

From  our  first  entrance  into  the  new  season,  which 
we  are  now  passing  through,  holy  Church  has,  by  the 
great  Feast  of  Corpus  Chrhti,  brought  us  face  to  face 
with  the  august  Mystery,  which  is  both  the  Sacrifice 
whereby  God  receives  the  honour  due  to  him,  and  the 
Sacrament  containing  within  itself  the  nourishment 
of  our  souls.    We  have  now  a  clearer  understanding 

1  St.  John,  vi.  41,  52. 
VOL.  xi.  F 


66  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

of  the  unspeakable  gift,  which  our  Saviour  vouch- 
safed to  bestow  upon  us,  the  night  before  his  Passion. 
"We  now  see  more  plainly  the  nature  and  greatness 
of  the  homage  which  earth  gives  to  its  Creator,  by 
the  ceaseless  offering  of  the  holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass. 
"We  now  know,  so  much  better  than  formerly,  what 
that  deifying  relation  is,  which  is  made  to  exist  be- 
tween God  and  the  soul,  by  means  of  the  participa- 
tion of  the  Sacred  Host.  The  Holy  Ghost  has  shed 
his  light  upon  all  these  truths  ;  he  has  opened  out  to 
us  the  very  depths  of  the  mystery  shown  to  us  from 
the  outset,  the  mystery,  that  is,  of  the  Emmanuel,  or 
God  with  us.  Now  that  we  are  so  fully  initiated 
into  the  whole  of  God's  work,  we  the  better  under- 
stand that  great  text  of  the  Gospel,  which  says :  The 
Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us.1  We 
grasp  the  meaning  more  completely ;  we  can  give  it 
a  more  literal,  and  equally  faithful,  translation,  and 
say :  the  Word  was  made  Flesh,  and  took  up  his  dwelling 
within  us. 

All  this  has  increased  in  the  Christian  the  desire 
of  assisting  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice.  He  says  to  himself, 
as  did  the  Patriarch  of  old  :  "  Truly,  the  Lord  is  in 
this  place ,  and  I  knew  it  not  ;2  my  faith  was  sound, 
but  I  did  not  perceive,  as  I  do  now,  the  immensity  of 
what  our  Lord  did  at  his  Last  Supper."  In  the 
same  way,  having  now  a  clearer  knowledge  of  the 
union,  which  is  brought  about,  even  in  this  present 
world,  between  God  and  the  soul  that  is  nourished 
with  the  living  Bread,  whereby  that  soul  is  trans- 
formed into  its  Creator, — having  this  clearer  know- 
ledge, the  Christian  longs  more  ardently  than  ever 
for  the  enjoyment  of  that  Lord,  who,  even  during 
this  mortal  life,  gives  us,  by  means  of  the  Eucharistic 
Bread,  not  only  a  fore-taste,  but  the  very  reality,  of 
that  which  awaits   us   in   heaven.     "We   may  truly 

'St.  John,  i.  14  *  Gen.  xxviii,  16. 


BEFORE   COMMUNION.  67 

assert,  that  the  keeping  up  of  that  state,  which  we 
have  already  described  in  the  Third  Chapter,  and 
which  is  the  state  both  of  the  Church  herself  and 
of  the  faithful  soul,  during  this  period  of  the  Liturgical 
Year,  is  ihe  joint  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  abides 
within  us,  and  of  the  Eucharistic  gift,  in  which  the 
Son  of  God  ceases  not  to  act  for  the  preservation, 
increase,  and  development  of  the  divine  life,  which 
he  came  to  bring  us,  and  of  which  he  thus  speaks : 
/  am  come,  that  they  may  have  life,  and  may  have  it 
more  abundantly.1 

We  will  here,  as  in  the  preceding  Volumes,  give 
Acts  which  may  serve  as  preparation  for  holy  Com- 
munion during  this  Season  of  the  Year.  There  are 
souls  that  feel  the  want  of  some  such  assistance  as 
this ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  we  will  add  a  form  of 
Thanksgiving  for  after  Communion. 


BEFORE  COMMOTION. 


ACT   OF  FAITH. 

Now  that  I  am  about  to  unite  myself  to  thee  in  the  mystery 
of  thy  love,  I  must  first  profess  that  I  believe  it  to  be  truly 
thyself,  O  my  God,  thy  body,  thy  soul,  thy  divinity,  that 
thou  art  going  to  give  me.  The  first  duty  thou  askest  of 
me,  now  that  thou  art  coming  to  me,  is  the  act  of  my  Faith 
in  this  deep  mystery;  I  make  it;  and  my  understanding  is 
happy  at  thus  bowing  itself  down  before  thy  sovereign  word. 
Thou,  0  Jesus,  art  the  Truth;  and  when  presenting  to  thy 
disciples  the  bread  changed  into  thy  Body,  thou  saidst  to 
them:  This  is  my  Body!  I  believe  thy  word;  I  adore  the 
living  Bread,  come  down  from  heaven  to  give  life  to  the  world. 
The  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  thou  hast  sent  me, 
enables  me  to  relish  this  marvel  of  thy  all-powerful  love. 
This  love  of  thine  was  not  satisfied  with  uniting  thee  to  the 
human  nature,  which  thou  assumedst  in  Mary's  womb;  it 
would,  moreover,  prepare  for  each  one  of  us,  by  means  of  the 
heavenly  food  of  thy  sacred  flesh,  a  real  and  mysterious 

1  St.  John,  x.  10. 


68  TIME   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

union  with  thee,  which  none  but  thou  could  have 
planned,  none  but  thou  could  have  achieved.  For  its 
accomplishment,  thou  first  demandedst,  as  thou  hadst  all 
right  to  do,  that  we  should  have  an  unlimited  confidence 
in  the  truth  of  thy  word.  When  thou  wast  upon  the  Cross, 
thy  divinity  was  veiled  from  view:  in  the  sacred  Host,  thy 
very  humanity  is  hid  from  our  eyes;  but,  I  believe,  O  my 
God,  both  thy  divinity  and  humanity  present  under  the 
cloud  which  shrouds  them  from  all  mortal  sight.  I  have 
been  taught  by  thine  Apostle,  O  Light  inaccessible,  that  it 
is  by  faith  alone  that  we  can  approach  thee,  whilst  we 
are  in  this  present  life.  I  believe,  then,  O  Lord  !  but  help 
thou  mine  unbelief. 


ACT   OF   HUMILITY. 

Taught,  as  I  have  been,  by  thy  words,  O  my  God,  I  know, 
and  with  a  certainty  which  my  reason  and  my  senses  could 
never  have  given  me,  that,  in  a  few  moments,  I  shall  be  in 
closest  union  with  thine  infinite  Majesty.  Thou  hast  said  it: 
He  that  eateth  my  Flesh,  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him!  My 
whole  being  thrills  at  these  words.  I,  a  sinner,  all  marked 
with  the  sores  of  my  iniquities,  and  still  fighting  with 
passions  but  half  subdued,  I  am  to  abide  in  thee!  And  thou, 
that  art  infinite  Being  and  infinite  Holiness,  thou  art  coming 
to  abide  in  me,  in  me  who  am  but  nothingness  and  sin!  At 
such  a  tiding  as  this,  what  else  can  I,  than  cry  out,  with 
the  Centurion  of  thy  Gospel :  Lord!  I  am  not  worthy  tliat 
thou  shouldst  enter  under  my  roof!  And  yet,  I  hear  thee 
saying,  also,  these  other  words:  Unless  ye  eat  the  Flesh  of  the 
Son  of  Man,  ye  shall  not  have  life  in  you.  This  life  I  would 
have,  O  Jesus !  And  didst  thou  not  come,  didst  thou  not 
work  all  thy  mysteries,  in  order  that  we  might  have  life,  and 
more  and  more  of  that  life  ?  I  have  no  desire  to  shun  it. 
What,  then,  can  I  do,  but  take  shelter  in  the  depths  of 
humility,  think  of  mine  own  vileness,  be  mindful  of  the  fuel 
of  sin  that  exists  within  me,  and  acknowledge  the  infinite 
distance  there  is  between  myself  and  thee,  0  my  Redeemer 
and  my  Judge  ?  I  know  that  then  thou  wilt  have  pity 
on  my  misery,  and  wilt  s&yfiut  one  word,  and  my  soul  shall 
be  healed.  Say,  I  beseech  thee,  that  word,  which  is  to  com- 
fort my  heart.  Till  thou  sayst  it,  I  dare  not  raise  up  mine 
eyes  towards  thine  altar ;  I  can  but  tremble  at  the  approach 
of  that  moment,  when  a  poor  creature,  like  myself,  is  to  be 
united  with  its  Creator,  from  whose  eyes  nought  is  hid,  and 
who  judges  even  our  justices. 


BEFORE   COMMUNION.  69 


ACT  OF   CONTRITION. 

Ever  since  that  day  whereon  thy  Spirit,  O  Lord,  came 
down  upon  us,  in  order  that  he  might  the  more  deeply 
imprint  upon  our  souls  the  divine  mysteries  thou  wroughtest, 
from  thy  merciful  Incarnation  to  thy  glorious  Ascension, 
thou  vouchsafest  to  invite  me  more  frequently  to  thy  table. 
And  I  have  learned,  too,  since  that  same  coming,  better  than 
I  knew  before,  how  it  behoves  me  to  prepare  myself,  with 
all  possible  diligence,  for  each  of  thy  visits.  I  have  been  re- 
newing my  faith,  by  accepting,  with  increased  ardour,  the 
truth  of  thy  presence  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.  As  I 
see  thy  dread  Majesty  advancing  towards  me,  I  have  pro- 
fessed, and  with  sincere  humility,  my  utter  nothingness,  for 
I  have  acknowledged  my  extreme  unworthiness; — but  all 
this  does  not  put  me  at  rest.  There  is  something  beyond  all 
this: — it  is,  that  I  am  a  sinner;  I  have  offended  thee;  I  have 
rebelled  against  thee;  I  have  turned  thy  very  benefits  into 
occasions  of  outrage  against  thee;  to  say  it  in  all  its  enormity, 
I  have  caused  thy  death  upon  the  Cross  !  The  Holy  Ghost, 
having  vouchsafed  to  give  me  light,  has  taught  me  the 
malice  of  sin;  he  has  given  me  to  understand,  more  fully 
than  formerly,  how  detestable  have  been  my  audacity  and 
ingratitude.  I  have  had  revealed  to  me,  by  the  grand 
Mysteries  of  the  first  portion  of  the  Year,  how  much  I 
cost  thee  on  that  Day,  whereon  Justice  and  Mercy  united  in 
the  Sacrifice  which  saved  mankind.  The  more  thou  hast 
heaped  thy  favours  on  me,  O  Lord,  the  more  keenly  do  I 
feel  the  injury  of  my  sins;  and  I  beseech  thee  to  bestow  on 
me  the  signal  grace,  the  grace  which  will  ensure  every  other, 
of  keeping  up  within  me  the  spirit  of  compunction  and 
penance.  I  offer  to  thee,  O  my  God,  at  this  hour  when  thou 
art  about  to  give  thyself  to  me,  I  offer  to  thee  the  expression 
of  my  sorrow;  and  from  my  deepest  soul,  I  say  to  thee  those 
words  of  the  Publican;  Have  mercy  on  me,  0  God,  for  I  am  a, 
JSinner. 

ACT   OF   LOVE. 

And  now,  O  my  Lord,  permit  me  to  turn  my  thoughts 
upon  the  happiness  of  a  soul,  to  whom  thou  givest  thyself 
in  the  Sacrament  of  thy  love  !  As  to  that  familiarity,  into 
which  thine  ineffable  goodness  leads  some  souls,  who  ap- 
proach thee  without  reflecting  upon  the  greatness  of  thy 
majesty,  oh !  I  shudder  at  such  impertinence;  and  yet,  I 
long  to  be  united  with  thee;  and,  until  thou  art  come  into 


70  TIME   AFTER   TENTECOST. 

me,  my  soul  panteth  after  thee.    Thy  mysteries  which  I 
have  been   celebrating  with  thy  Church,  have  enkindled 
within  me  a  fire  which  nothing  can  quench, — a  fire  to  which 
thy  divine  Spirit  delights  to  be   ever  adding  heat.     Thy 
delight,  so  thou  hast  told  us,  is  to  be  with  the  children  of  men; 
and  is  it  not  true,  also,  that  with  such  of  the  children  of  men 
as  know  thee,  thy  love  is  the  very  nourishment  on  which 
their  own  hearts  live  1    In  order  to  maintain  them  in  this 
love  which  is  their  life,  thou  hast  made  thyself  present  in 
the  sacred  Host;  thou  givest  them  to  live  in  thee,  just  as 
thou  livest  in  them,  as  often  as  they  eat  of  this  Living 
Bread,  which  hath  come  down  from  heaven.    This  Charity, 
this  Love,  which  hath  been  poured  forth  into  our  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  nourished  at  thy  holy  Table,  0  Lord !  and 
there  is  it  increased;  for  it  is  in  the  divine  Sacrament,  which 
thou  institutedst  the  night  before  thy  Paision,  that  we  are 
united  to  thee.    Love  tends  to  be  united  with  the  object  it 
loves;  therefore  do  I,  in  spite  of  all  the  conviction  of  my 
unworthiness,  long  for  the  blissful  moment  of  thy  coming 
into  me.    Everything  that  thou  hast  done,  my  Lord,  has  been 
done  to  make  me  love  thee  ?    Thou  hast  loved  me  first;  who 
will  blame  me,  that  my  heart  hungers  for  tf/iee?  Thou  hadst  pity, 
one  day,  on  the  people  who  had  followed  thee  into  the  desert. 
I  have  compassion,  thou  saidst,  on  this  multitude;  and  then, 
straightway,  thou  gavest  them  to  eat  as  much  as  they  would. 
Ah  !  Lord,  my  poor  heart  and  flesh,  long  after  thee;  and  thou 
alone  canst  satisfy  the  hunger  which  gnaws  me,  for  thou  art 
the  Sovereign  Good,  thou  art  true  Life;  and  it  was  that  I 
might  enjoy  that  Sovereign  Good,  and  live  that  heavenly 
Life,  that  thou  createdst  me.    Th^re  was  a  time,  when  this 
heart  of  mine  was  dull;  darkness  was  upon  me,  and  I  could 
not  see  the  light;  but  now  that  thy  Mysteries  have  en- 
lightened and  regenerated  me,  I  sigh  after  thee  with  all  the 
earnestness  of  my  soul.     Come,  then,  Lord  Jesus!    Withhold 
thyself  no  longer  from  my  soul,  that  awaits  thy  visit ! 

AFTER  COMMUNION. 

ACT   OF   ADORATION. 

Thy  presence  within  me,  O  Lord,  is  joy  and  sweetness  to 
me;  and  yet,  before  indulging  in  the  delight  it  brings,  I 
feel  impelled  to  prostrate  my  entire  being  before  thy  Sovereign 
Majesty.  I  must,  I  will,  first  adore  thee,  for  thou  art  the 
great  God  of  heaven  and  earth.  Thou  standest  in  no  need 
of  me,  and  yet  thou  comest^down  to  this  my  nothingness. 


AFTER   COMMUNION.  71 

Where,  then,  shall  I  begin,  if  it  be  not  in  humbling  myself 
profoundly  before  thee,  and  acknowledging  that  thou  art 
Lord,  the  Only  Begotten  and  Consubstantial  Son  of  the 
Father;  that  thou  art  He  by  whom  all  things  were  made, 
the  Eternal,  the  Infinite,  and  the  supreme  Judge  of  the 
living  and  the  dead.  Thy  Seraphim,  who  see  thee  in  thy 
unveiled  majesty,  and  drink  their  fill  of  everlasting  happiness 
from  thy  divine  essence,  these  glorious  Spirits,  as  thy 
Prophet  tells  us,  cover  their  faces  with  their  wings;  they 
tremble  before  thee,  as  the  Church  tells  us ;  and  yet,  whilst 
trembling  in  thy  presence,  their  love  is  as  ardent  and  as 
tender  as  though  they  were  nothing  but  love.  I  would 
follow  their  example,  O  my  God;  I  would  offer  thee,  at  this 
moment,  the  creature's  first  duty  to  its  Creator, — adoration. 
Thou  art  so  nigh  to  me,  at  this  happy  moment,  that  my 
being  feels  renovated  and  almost  lost  in  thine;  how  then 
can  I  be  otherwise  than  overwhelmed  by  the  weight  of  thy 
glory  1  Yes,  I  do  adore  thee,  O  eternal,  Infinite,  Immense, 
All-powerful !  before  whom  all  created  beings  are  as  though 
they  were  not.  I  confess,  before  thee,  my  own  nothingness; 
I  acknowledge  thine  absolute  dominion  over  me,  and  over 
everything  which  thy  power  and  goodness  have  produced  in 
creation.  King  of  ages!  Immortal  and  Invisible  in  thine 
essence!  Glory  be  to  thee!  Accept  this  first  homage  of  a 
soul  to  which  thy  love  has  deigned  to  unite  thee. 

ACT   OF   THANKSGIVING. 

There  is  another  homage  which  I  owe  to  thee,  O  my  God! — 
it  is  gratitude.  Thou  often  invitest  me  to  partake  of  the 
divine  gift,  wherewith  thou,  before  leaving  this  earth,  didst 
enrich  us.  But,  wo  to  me,  if,  because  I  can  easily  and  often 
have  it,  I  value  so  much  the  less  its  greatness  !  Wretched 
familiarity,  which  blunts  the  sentiment  of  gratitude,  and 
deadens  faith,  and  takes  all  ardour  from  love;  may  thy 
grace,  O  Lord,  preserve  me  from  its  vile  influence.  For 
thousands  of  years,  the  human  race  was  in  expectation  of 
the  favour,  which  thou  hast  just  been  bestowing  upon  me. 
Abraham,  the  father  of  believers;  Moses,  thy  much  loved 
friend;  David,  the  inspired  chanter  of  thy  mysteries;  none 
of  these  received  thee:  and  this  Bread  of  Angels  has  come 
down  from  heaven  for  me!  Oh!  unheard  of  goodness  of  a 
God  incorporating  himself  with  his  creature!  Who  is  there 
that  could  measure  its  length  and  breadth,  or  scan  its  height, 
or  fathom  its  depth  ?  These  expressions  of  thine  Apostle, 
regarding  the  mystery  just  given  to  me,  teach  me  what  is 
the  value  of  the  wondrous  gift  thou  hast  bestowed  upon 


72  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

mankind.  With  what  humble  and  lively  gratitude,  then, 
should  it  not  be  received!  Thou  hast  not  been  deterred, 
either  by  my  nothingness,  or  the  coldness  of  my  feelings,  or 
my  infidelities;  be  thou  blessed,  then,  my  Lord,  for  that 
out  of  thy  desire  to  give  thyself  to  me,  thou  hast  overstepped 
every  limit,  and  removed  every  obstacle.  I  give  thee  thanks 
for  this,  and  for  every  Communion  thou  hast  hitherto 
so  graciously  given  me.  Deign  to  enlighten  me  more  and 
more,  as  to  the  magnificence  of  thy  gift;  deign  to  cherish 
within  me  the  sentiment  of  love;  that  thus  my  longings  for 
thy  visit  may  be  increased;  and  that  I  may  know  how  to 
honour,  as  I  ought,  thy  presence  within  me,  and  that  I  may 
never  dare  to  approach  thee  out  of  custom,  or  without  my 
conscience  assuring  me  that  I  am  bringing  with  me  the 
profound  respect  due  to  thee . 

ACT    OF    LOVE. 

Now,  will  I  rest  me  in  thee,  O  my  Sovereign  Good,  that 
hast  come  down  to  me,  and  entered  into  me,  in  order  to 
content  the  desires  of  my  heart  by  thy  presence.  A  few 
moments  ago,  I  was  longing  after  thee;  and  now  that 
longing  has  been  satisfied.  What  is  there  on  this  earth  that 
I  could  now  desire  1  The  very  happiness  of  heaven,  is  it  not 
the  possessing  thee?  and  thou,  my  Lord,  assurest  me,  that  he, 
who  eats  thy.sacred  Flesh,  abideth  in  thee,  and  thou  in  him. 
The  union,  then,  to  which  love  aspires,  is  now  consummated. 
This  happy  moment  of  thy  presence  within  me  unites  thy 
sovereign  majesty  to  my  lowliness;  thou  livest  in  me,  and 
I  live  in  thee.  Divine  charity  has  conquered  every  diffi- 
culty; and  the  life,  which  now  circulates  through  my  being, 
is  not  the  life  of  time,  but  of  eternity.  I  at  once  profit  of  it, 
to  assure  thee,  O  Lord,  that  thou  hast  my  love.  Thy  pre- 
sence within  me  lasts  but  a  short  time;  in  a  few  moments, 
there  will  be  but  the  grace  left  by  the  visit  thou  art  now 
paying  me.  At  present,  I  can  say  in  all  truth:  /  have  found 
Him  whom  my  soul  loveth.  Accept,  then,  O  Lord,  the 
homage  of  my  heart,  and  all  its  affections.  Make  this  heart 
faithful  and  ardent  in  the  love  of  thee;  for  love  is  the  end  of 
the  whole  Law;  and  when  thou  vouchsafest  to  incorporate 
thyself  with  us  by  means  of  the  Bread  of  Life,  thine  aim  ia 
to  strengthen  and  increase  Charity  within  us.  May  this 
contact  with  thee,  O  Lord,  destroy  that  love  of  myself,  which, 
hitherto,  has  so  often  stifled,  or  at  least,  retarded,  the  love 
which  is  due  to  thee.  Let  my  heart  become  more  and  more 
purified;  may  its  affections  be  set  free  from,  and  raised 
above,  created  objects,  and  centre  in  the  unity  of  thy  love, 
which  includes  all,  and  is  enough  for  all. 


AFTER   COMMUNION.  73 


ACT   OF   OBLATION. 

When  I  thus  assure  thee  of  my  love,  O  my  God,  I  hear 
within  me  a  voice  telling  me,  that,  henceforth,  the  rule  of 
my  conduct  must  be — thy  good  pleasure.  Then  only  shall 
I  know  that  my  protestations  are  sincere,  when  I  give  up 
mine  own  will,  to  follow  thine  in  all  things.  Thou  wilt  not 
only  require  me  to  keep  from  all  sin,  but  thou  wouldst  have 
me  resolutely  walk  in  the  path  of  humility, — humility  which 
repels  pride,  thy  chief  enemy.  Thou  commandest  me  to 
keep  my  senses  under  restraint,  lest  the  weakness  of  the 
flesh  should  get  the  mastery  over  my  spirit,  which  is  prompt, 
but  fickle.  In  order  to  make  sure  of  a  soul  that  is  dear  to 
thee,  thou  often  sendest  it  trials  ;  for  thou  hast  said,  that 
whosoever  ambitions  to  follow  thee,  must  make  up  his  mind 
to  carry  the  Cross.  Thou  hast  warned  thy  disciples,  that 
they  must  be  on  their  guard  against  the  world  and  its 
maxims,  or  that  they  would  perish  together  with  the  world. 
These  are  the  conditions  which  thou  layest  on  them  that 
would  enlist  under  thy  banner,  dear  Jesus  !  Renovated  as 
I  have  been  by  thy  precious  visit,  I  offer  myself  to  thee  as 
one  quite  resolved  to  fulfil  every  duty  of  thy  service.  Give 
me  thine  aid,  O  my  Lord,  and  King !  Thy  sacramental 
presence,  which  is  soon  to  quit  me,  will  leave  me  an  increase 
of  thy  grace.  Increase  my  faith,  and  my  docility  to  the 
teachings  of  thy  holy  Church,  from  whose  hands  I  have 
just  received  thee.  Give  me  to  use  this  world,  as  though  I 
did  not  use  it ;  give  me  to  live,  at  once,  by  desire,  in  that 
abode  where  I  hope  to  enjoy  thee,  and  without  shadow  or 
veil,  for  all  eternity. 

O  Mary,  Queen  of  heaven !  watch  over  me  thy  humble 
servant,  whom  the  blessed  Son  of  thy  chaste  womb  has 
vouchsafed  to  nourish  with  his  adorable  Flesh,  and  which 
he  received  from  thee.  Present  him  the  oblation  I  now 
make  him  of  myself,  in  return  for  the  unspeakable  gift  he 
has  just  been  bestowing  upon  me. — Holy  Angels  !  bless  and 
protect  this  poor  child  of  earth,  who  has  been  feasting  on 
that  very  Bread,  whereon  you  feed  in  heaven. — All  ye  Saints 
of  God  !  who,  when  in  this  world,  did  eat  of  the  heavenly 
Bread  of  the  Christian  pilgrim,  pray  and  obtain  for  me,  that 
it  may  keep  with  me  to  the  end  of  my  journey  through  this 
life,  and  may  lead  me  to  him,  who  ceases  not  to  be  the 
nourishment  of  his  elect,  when  in  glory.    Amen. 


74  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


CHAPTER  THE  SEVENTH. 

ON   THE   OFFICE   OF   VESPERS   FOR  SUNDAY   AND  FEASTS, 
DURING   THE    TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  Office  of  Vespers,  or  Even  Song,  consists  firstly 
of  the  five  following  Psalms.  For  certain  Feasts,  one 
or  other  of  these  Psalms  are  changed  for  others,  which 
are  more  appropriate  to  the  day  ;  but  those  we  now 
give,  are  the  ones  for  Sunday's  Vespers. 

After  the  Pater  and  Ave  have  been  said  in  secret, 
the  Church  commences  this  Hour  with  her  favourite 
supplication  : 

"ft.  Deus,  in  adjutorium  ft.  Incline  unto  mine  aid 

meum  intende.  O  God. 

3$.  Domine,  ad  adjuvan-  1$.  0  Lord,  make  haste  to 

dum  me  festina.  help  me. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio,  et  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 

Spiritui  Sancto  ;  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 

Ghost. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  et  As  it  was  in  the  beginning, 

nunc  et  semper,  et  in  saecu-  is  now,  and    ever  shall   be, 

la  saeculorum.  Amen.  Alle-  world  without  end.    Amen, 

luia.  Alleluia. 

Ant.  Dixit  Dominus.  Ant.  The  Lord  said. 

The  first  Psalm  is  a  prophecy  of  the  future  glories 
of  the  Messias.  The  Son  of  David  shall  sit  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  heavenly  Father.  He  is  King;  he 
is  Priest ;  he  is  the  Son  of  Man,  and  the  Son  of  God. 
His  enemies  will  attack  him,  but  he  will  crush  them. 
He  will  be  humbled  ;  but  this  voluntary  humiliation 
will  lead  him  to  highest  glory. 


SUNDAY  S   VESPERS. 


75 


Psalm  109. 


The  Lord  said  to  my  Lord, 
his  Son  :  Sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand,  and  reign  with  me. 

Until,  on  the  day  of  thy  last 
coming,  I  make  thy  enemies 
thy  footstool. 

0  Christ!  the  Lord,  thy 
Father,  will  send  forth  the 
sceptre  of  thy  power  out  of 
Sion  '.from  thence  rule  thou  in 
the  midst  of  thy  enemies. 

With  thee  is  the  principality 
in  the  day  of  thy  strength,  in 
the  brightness  of  the  Saints  : 
For  the  Father  hath  said  to 
thee :  From  the  womb  before 
the  day-star  I  begot  thee. 

The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and 
he  will  not  repent :  he  hath 
said,  speaking  of  thee,  the  God- 
Man :  Thou  art  a  Priest  for 
ever,  according  to  the  order  of 
Melchisedech. 

Therefore,  0  Father,  the 
Lord  thy  Son  is  at  thy  right 
hand  :  he  hath  broken  kings 
in  the  day  of  his  wrath. 

He  shall  also  judge  among 
nations:  in  that  terrible  coining, 
he  shall  fill  the  ruins  of  the 
world:  he  shall  ^rush  the  heads 
in  the  land  of  many. 

He  cometh  now  in  humility; 
he  shall  drink,  in  the  way,  of 
the  torrent  of  sufferings:  there- 
fore, shall  he  lift  up  the  head. 

Ant.  The  Lord  said  to  my 
Lord,  sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand. 

Ant.  Faithful. 


Dixit  Dominus  Domino 
meo :  *  Sede  a  dextris  meis. 

Donee  ponam  inimicos 
tuos  :  *  scabellum  pedum 
tuorum. 

Virgam  virtutis  tuse  emit- 
tet  Dominus  ex  Sion :  *  do- 
minare  in  medio  inimi- 
corum  tuorum. 

Tecum  principium  in  die 
virtutis  tuse  in  splendoribus 
Sanctorum :  *  ex  utero  ante 
luciferum  genui  te. 

Juravit  Dominus,  et  non 
pcenitebit  eum :  *  Tu  es  Sa- 
cerdos  in  seternum  secun- 
dum ordinemMelchisedech. 


Dominus  a  dextris  tuis  :* 
conf regit  in  die  irae  suse  re- 
ges. 

Judicabit  in  nationibus, 
implebit  ruinas :  *conquas- 
sabit  capita  in  terra  multo- 
rum. 

De  torrente  inviabibet  :* 
propterea  exaltabit  caput. 

Ant.  Dixit  Dominue  Do- 
mino meo,  sede  a  dextris 
meis. 

Ant.  Fidelia. 


The  following  Psalm  commemorates  the  mercies  of 


76 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


God  to  his  people, — the  promised  Covenant, — the 
Redemption, — his  Fidelity  to  his  word.  But  it  also 
tells  us,  that  the  Name  of  the  Lord  is  terrible  because 
it  is  holy  ;  and  concludes  by  admonishing  us,  that  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. 

Psalm  110. 


Confitebor  tibi,  Domine, 
in  toto  corde  meo :  *  in  con- 
cilio  justorum  et  congrega- 
tione. 

Magna  opera  Domini :  * 
exquisita  in  omnes  volun- 
tates  ejus. 

Confessio  etmagnificentia 
opus  ejus  :*  et  justitiaejus 
manet  in  sseculum  saeculi. 

Memoriam  fecit  mirabi- 
lium  suorum,  misericors  et 
miserator  Dominus  :  *  es- 
cam  dedit  timentibus  se. 

Memor  erit  in  sseculum 
testamenti  sui :  *  virtutem 
operum  suorum  annuntia- 
bit  populo  suo. 


Ut  det  illis  hsereditatem 
gentium  :  *  opera  manuum 
ejus  Veritas  et  judicium. 

Fidelia  omnia  mandata 
ejus,  confirmatain  sseculum 
saeculi  :  *  facta  in  veritate 
et  equitate. 

Redemptionem  misit  po- 
pulo suo  :  *  mandavit  in 
aeternum  testamentum 
suum. 

Sanctum  et  terribile  No- 
men  ejus:  *  initium  sapien- 
tise  tiinor  Domini. 

Intellectus  bonus  omni- 


I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord, 
with  my  whole  heart  :  in  the 
counsel  of  the  just,  and  in  the 
congregation. 

Great  are  the  works  of  the 
Lord  :  sought  out  according 
to  all  his  wills. 

His  work  is  praise  and  mag- 
nificence :  and  his  justice 
continueth  for  ever  and  ever. 

He  hath  made  a  remem- 
brance of  his  wonderful  works, 
being  a  merciful  and  gracious 
Lord  :  he  is  the  Bread  of  life, 
he  hath  given  food  to  them 
that  fear  him. 

He  will  be  mindful  for  ever 
of  his  covenant  with  men :  ht 
will  show  forth  to  his  people 
the  power  of  his  works. 

That  he  may  give  to  his 
Church  the  inheritance  of  the 
Gentiles  :  the  works  of  his 
hands  are  truth  and  judgment. 

All  his  commandments  are 
faithful,  confirmed  for  ever 
and  ever  :  made  in  truth  and 
equity. 

He  hath  sent  redemption  to 
his  people  :  he  hath  thereby 
commanded  his  covenant  for 
ever. 

Holy  and  terrible  is  his 
name  :  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is 
the  beginning  of  wisdom. 

A  good   understanding  to 


SUNDAY  S    VESPERS. 


77 


all  that  do  it:  his  praise  con- 
tinueth  for  ever  and  ever. 

Ant.  Faithful  are  all  his 
commandments  ;  confirmed 
for  ever  and  ever. 

Ant.  In  his  commandments. 


bus  facientibus  eum :  *  lau- 
datio  ej  us  manet  in  saeculum 
saeculi. 

Ant.  Fidelia  omnia  man- 
data  ejus;  confirmata  in 
saeculum  saeculi. 

Ant.  In  mandatis. 


The  next  Psalm  sings  the  happiness  of  the  just 
man,  and  his  hopes  on  the  day  of  his  Lord's  coming 
It  tells  us,  likewise,  of  the  confusion  of  the  sinner 
who  shall  have  despised  the  mysteries  of  God's  love 
towards  mankind. 


Psalm  111. 


Blessed  is  the  man  that 
f eareth  the  Lord :  he  shall  de- 
light exceedingly  in  his  com- 
mandments. 

His  seed  shall  be  mighty 
upon  earth:  the  generation 
of  the  righteous  shall  be 
blessed. 

Glory  and  wealth  shall  be  in 
his  house:  and  his  justice  re- 
maineth  for  ever  and  ever. 

To  the  righteous  a  light  is 
risen  up  in  darkness:  that  light 
is  the  Lord,  who  is  merciful, 
and  compassionate,  and  just. 

Acceptable  is  the  man  that 
showeth  mercy  and  lendeth; 
he  shall  order  his  very  words 
with  judgment:  because  he 
shall  not  be  moved  for  ever. 

The  just  shall  be  in  ever- 
lasting remembrance:  he  shall 
not  fear  the  evil  hearing. 

His  heart  is  ready  to  hope 
in  the  Lord;  his  heart  is 
strengthened:  he  shall  not  be 
moved  until  he  look  over  his 
enemies. 


Beatus  vir  qui  timet  Do- 
minum:  *in  mandatis  ejus 
volet  nimis. 

Potens  in  terra  erit  semen 
ejus:  *  generatio  rectorum 
benedicetur. 

Gloria  et  divitiae  in  domo 
ejus:  *  et  justitia  ejus  ma- 
net in  saeculum  saeculi. 

Exortum  est  in  tenebris 
lumen  rectis:  *  misericors, 
et  miserator,  et  Justus. 

Jucundus  homo,  qui  mi- 
seretur  et  commodat,  dis- 
ponet  sermones  suos  in  ju- 
dicio:  *  quia  in  aeternum 
non  commovebitur. 

In  memoria  aeterna  erit 
Justus:  *  abauditione  mala 
non  timebit. 

Paratum  cor  ejus  sperare 
in  Domino,  confirmatum 
est  cor  ejus:  *  non  com- 
movebitur donee  despiciat 
inimicos  suos. 


78 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Dispersit,  dedit  pauperi- 
bus;  justitia  ejus  manet  in 
saecuium  sseculi:  *  cornu 
ejus  exaltabitur  in  gloria. 

Peccator  videbit,  et  iras- 
cetur,  dentibus  suis  fremet 
et  tabescet:  *  desiderium 
peccatorum  peribit. 

Ant.  In  mandatis  ejus 
cupit  nimis. 
Ant.  Sit  nomen  Domini. 


He  hath  distributed,  he  hath 
given  to  the  poor;  his  justice 
remaineth  for  ever  and  ever: 
his  horn  shall  be  exalted  in 
glory. 

The  wicked  shall  see,  and 
shall  be  angry:  he  shall  gnash 
with  his  teeth,  and  pine  away; 
the  desire  of  the  wicked  shall 
perish. 

Ant.  In  his  commandments 
he  delighted  exceedingly. 

Ant.  May  the  name  of  the 
Lord. 


The  Psalm,  Laudate,  pueri,  is  a  Canticle  of  praise 
to  the  Lord,  who,  from  his  high  heaven,  has  taken 
pity  on  the  human  race,  and  has  vouchsafed  to  honour 
it  by  the  Incarnation  of  his  own  Son. 

Psalm  112. 


Laudate,  pueri,  Domi- 
num:  *  laudate  Nomen 
Domini. 

Sit  Nomen  Domini  bene- 
dictum:  *  ex  hoc  nunc,  et 
usque  in  saecuium. 

A  solis  ortu  usque  ad  oc- 
casum :  *  laudabile  Nomen 
Domini. 

Excelsus  super  omnes 
gentes  Dominus:  *  et  su- 
per ccelos  gloria  ejus. 

Quissicut  Dominus  Deus 
noster  qui  in  altis  habitat:* 
et  humilia  respicit  in  ccelo 
et  in  terra  1 

Suscitans  a  terra  ino- 
pem :  *  et  de  stercore  eri- 
gens  pauperem: 

Ut    collocet    eum  cum 

Erincipibus :  cum  principi- 
us  populi  sui. 


Praise  the  Lord,  ye  children ; 
praise  ye  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord  ;  from  henceforth  now 
and  for  ever. 

From  the  rising  of  the  sun 
unto  the  going  down  of  the 
same,  the  name  of  the  Lord  is 
worthy  or  praise. 

The  Lord  is  high  above  all 
nations:  and  his  glory  above 
the  heavens. 

Who  is  as  the  Lord,  our  God, 
who  dwelleth  on  high  :  and 
looketh  down  on  the  low 
things  in  heaven  and  in 
earth  1 

liaising  up  the  needy  from 
the  earth:  and  lifting  up  the 
poor  out  of  the  dunghill. 

That  he  may  place  him  with 

Erinces:  with  the  princes  of 
is  people. 


SUNDAY  S   VESPERS. 


79 


Who  maketh  a  barren 
woman  to  dwell  in  a  house, 
the  joyful  mother  of  children. 

Ant,  May  the  name  of  the 
Lord  be  for  ever  blessed. 

Ant.  We  that  live. 


Qui  habitare  facit  steri- 
lem  in  domo  :  *  matrem 
filiorum  laetantem. 

Ant.  Sit  nomen  Domini 
benedictum  in  saecula. 

Ant.  Nos  qui  vivimus. 


The  fifth  Psalm,  In  exitu,  recounts  the  prodigies 
witnessed  under  the  ancient  Covenant  :  they  were 
figures ,  whose  realities  were  to  be  accomplished  in  the 
mission  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  came  to  deliver  Israel 
from  Egypt,  emancipate  the  Gentiles  from  their 
idolatry,  and  pour  out  a  blessing  on  every  man  who 
would  consent  to  fear  and  love  the  Lord. 


Psalm  113. 


When  Israel  went  out  of 
Egypt,  the  house  of  Jacob 
from  a  barbarous  people. 

Judea  was  made  his  sanc- 
tuary, Israel  his  dominion. 

The  sea  saw  and  fled ;  Jor- 
dan was  turned  back. 

The  mountains  skipped  like 
rams  :  and  the  hills  like  the 
lambs  of  the  flocks. 

What  ailed  thee,  0  thou  sea, 
that  thou  didst  flee :  and  thou, 
O  Jordan,  that  thou  wast 
turned  back  % 

Ye  mountains,  that  ye 
skipped  like  rams :  and  ye  hills 
like  lambs  of  the  flock  ? 

At  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
the  earth  was  moved,  at  the 
presence  of  the  God  of  Jacob. 

Who  turned  the  rock  into 
pools  of  water,  and  the  stony 
hills  into  fountains  of  water. 

Not  to  us,  O  Lord,  not  to 


In  exitu  Israel  de  iEgyp- 
to  :  *  domus  Jacob  de  po- 
pulo  barbaro  : 

Facta  est  Judea  sanctifl- 
catio  ejus :  *  Israel  potestas 
ejus. 

Mare  vidit,  et  fugit :  * 
Jordanis  conversus  est  re- 
trorsum. 

Montes  exsultaverunt  ut 
arietes :  *  et  colles  sicut  agni 
ovium. 

Quid  est  tibi,  mare,  quod 
fugisti  :  *  et  tu,  Jordanis, 
quia  conversus  es  retror- 
sum  % 

Montes  exsultastis  sicut 
arietes  :  *  et  colles,  sicut 
agni  ovium  ? 

A  facie  Domini  mota  est 
terra  :  *  a  facie  Dei  Jacob. 

Qui  convertit  petram  in 
stagna  aquarum  :  *  et  ru- 
pem  in  fontes  aquarum. 

Non  nobis,  Domine,  non 


80 


TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


nobis  :  *  sed  Nomini  tu  da 
gloriam. 

Super  misericordia  tua, 
et  veritate  tua :  *  nequando 
dicant  gentes  :  Ubi  est 
Deus  eorum  1 

Deus  autem  noster  in  cce- 
lo  :  *  omnia  qusecumque 
voluit  fecit. 

Simulacra  gentium  ar- 
gentum  et  aurum  :  *  opera 
manuum  hominum. 

Os  habent,  et  non  loquen- 
tur :  *  oculos  habent,  et  non 
videbunt. 

Aures  habent,  et  non  au- 
dient  :  *  nares  habent,  et 
non  odorabunt. 

Manus  habent  etnon  pal- 
pabunt,pedeshabent  etnon 
ambulabunt  :  *  non  clama- 
bunt  in  gutture  suo. 

Similes  illis  fiant  qui  fa- 
ciunt  ea  :  *  et  omnes  qui 
confidunt  in  eis. 

Domus  Israel  speravit  in 
Domino  :  *  adjutor  eorum, 
et  protector  eorum  est.  . 

Domus  Aaron  speravit  in 
Domino  :  *  adjutor  eorum, 
et  protector  eorum  est. 

Qui  timent  Dominum, 
speraverunt  in  Domino  :  * 
adjutor  eorum,  et  protec- 
tor eorum  est. 

Dominus  memor  f  uit  nos- 
tri :  *  et  benedixit  nobis. 

Benedixitdomui  Israel:  * 
benedixit  domui  Aaron. 

Benedixit  omnibus  qui  ti- 
ment Dominum  :  *  pusillis 
cum  majoribus, 

Adjiciat  Dominus  super 
vos  :  *  super  vos,  et  super 
filios  vestros. 


us  :    but  to  thy  Name  give 
glory. 

For  thy  mercy,  and  for  thy 
truth's  sake  :  lest  the  Gentiles 
should  say  :  Where  is  their 
God? 

But  our  God  is  in  heaven  : 
he  hath  done  all  things  what- 
soever he  would. 

The  idols  of  the  Gentiles  are 
silver  and  gold  :  the  works  of 
the  hands  of  men. 

They  have  mouths,  and 
speak  not  :  they  have  eyes, 
and  see  not. 

They  have  ears,  and  hear 
not  :  they  have  noses,  and 
smell  not. 

They  have  hands,  and  feel 
not  :  they  have  feet,  and  walk 
not :  neither  shall  they  cry  out 
through  their  throat. 

Let  them  that  make  them 
become  like  unto  them  :  and 
all  such  as  trust  in  them. 

The  house  of  Israel  hath 
hoped  in  the  Lord :  he  is  their 
helper  and  their  protector. 

The  house  of  Aaron  hath 
hoped  in  the  Lord  :  he  is  their 
helper  and  their  protector. 

They  that  feared  the  Lord 
have  hoped  in  the  Lord  :  he 
is  their  helper  and  their  pro- 
tector. 

The  Lord  hath  been  mind- 
ful of  us,  and  hath  blessed 
us. 

He  hath  blessed  the  house 
of  Israel :  he  hath  blessed  the 
house  of  Aaron. 

He  hath  blessed  all  that  fear 
the  Lord,  both  little  and 
great. 

May  the  Lord  add  blessings 
upon  you :  upon  you,  and  upon 
your  children. 


SUNDAY  S  VESPERS. 


81 


Blessed  be  you  of  the  Lord, 
who  made  heaven  and  earth. 

The  heaven  of  heaven  is  the 
Lord's  :  but  the  earth  he  has 
given  to  the  children  of 
men. 

The  dead  shall  not  praise 
thee,  0  Lord  :  nor  any  of  them 
that  go  down  to  hell. 

But  we  that  live  bless  the 
Lord  :  from  this  time  now  and 
for  ever. 

Ant.  We  that  live  bless  the 
Lord. 


Benedictivos  a  Domino: 
qui  fecit  ccelum  et  terram. 

Ccelum  cceli  Domino  :  * 
terram  autem  dedit  filiis 
hominum. 

Non  mortui  laudabunt 
te,  Domine :  *  neque  omnes 
qui  descendunt  in  infer- 
num. 

Sed  nos  qui  vivimus,  be- 
nedicimus  Domino :  *  ex  hoc 
nunc  et  usque  in  saeculum. 

Ant.  Nos  qui  vivimus, 
benedicimus  Domino. 


After  these  five  Psalms,  a  short  Lesson  from  the 
holy  Scriptures  is  read.  It  is  called  Capitulum,  be- 
cause it  is  always  very  short.  The  ones  for  the 
several  Festivals  are  given  in  the  Proper  of  each. 
We  here  give  the  Capitulum  common  to  the  Sunday. 


CAPITULUM. 


(2  Cor.  I) 


Blessed  be  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Father  of  mercies, 
and  the  God  of  all  consolation, 
who  comforteth  us  in  all  our 
tribulations. 

&.  Thanks  be  to  God. 


BenedictusDeus  et  Pater 
Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi, 
Pater  misericordiarum  let 
Deus  totius  consolationis, 
qui  consolatur  nos  in  omni 
tribulatione  nostra. 

&  Deo  gratias. 


Then  follows  the  Hymn.  We  here  give  the  one 
for  Sundays.  It  was  composed  by  St.  Gregory  the 
Great.  It  sings  of  Creation,  and  celebrates  the  praises 
of  that  portion  of  it  which  was  called  forth  on  this 
first  day, — the  Light. 


VOL.  XI. 


G 


82 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


HYMN.* 


Lucis  Creator  optime, 
Lucem  dierum  proferens  : 
Primordiis  lucis  novae, 
Mundi  parans  originem. 


Qui  mane  junctum  vesperi 
Diem  vocari  prsecipis  : 
Illabitur  tetrum  chaos, 
Audi  preces  cum  fletibus. 

Ne  mens  gravata  crimine, 
Vitae  sit  exsul  munere  : 
Dum  nil  perenne  cogitat, 
Seseque  culpis  illigat. 

Coeleste  pulsit  intimum, 
Vitale  tollat  praemium  : 
Vitemus  omne  noxium, 
Purgemus  omne  pessimum. 

Praesta  Pater  piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito 
Regnans  per  omne  saecu- 

lum. 

Amen. 


O  infinitely  good  Creator  of 
the  Light !  by  thee  was  pro- 
duced the  Light  of  day,  pro- 
viding thus  the  world's  begin- 
ning with  the  beginning  of 
the  new-made  Light. 

Thou  biddest  us  call  the 
time  from  morn  till  eve,  Day ; 
this  Day  is  over  ;  dark  Night 
comes  on, — oh  !  hear  our  tear- 
ful prayers. 

Let  not  our  soul,  weighed 
down  by  crime,  mis-spend  thy 
gift  of  life  :  and,  forgetting 
what  is  eternal,  be  earth-tied 
by  her  sins. 

Oh  !  may  we  strive  to  enter 
our  heavenly  home,  and  bear 
away  the  prize  of  life:  may 
we  shun  what  would  injure 
us,  and  cleanse  our  soul  from 
her  defilements. 

Most  merciful  Father !  and 
thou,  his  Only  Begotten  Son, 
co-equal  with  him,  reigning 
for  ever,  with  the  Holy  Para- 
clete !  grant  this  our  prayer. 

Amen. 


*  According  to  the  Monastic 

&.  breve.  Quam  magnificata 
«unt  *  Opera  tua  Domine. 
Quam. 

V.  Omnia  in  Sapientia  f  ecis- 
ti  *  Opera.  Gloria  Patri,  etc. 
Quam. 

Lucis  Creator  optime, 
Lucem  dierum  proferens  ; 
Primordiis  lucis  novae, 
Mundi  parans  originem. 

Qui  maue  junctum  vesperi 
Diem  vocari  pra3cipis, 
Tetrum  chaos  illabitur, 
Audi  preces  cum  fletibus. 


Rite,  it  is  as  follows  : — 

Ne  mens  gravata  crimine, 
Vitae  sit  exsul  munere. 
Dum  nil  perenne  cogitat, 
Seseque  culpis  illigat. 


Coelorum  pulsat  intimum, 
Vitale  tollat  praemium  : 
Vitemus  omne  noxium, 
Purgemus  omne  pessimum. 

Praesta,  Pater  piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito 
Regnans  per  omne  saeculum. 

Amen. 


Sunday's  vespers.  83 

The  Versicle  which,  follows  the  Hymn,  and  which 
we  here  give,  is  that  of  the  Sunday  :  those  for  the 
Feasts  are  given  in  their  proper  places. 

y.  May  my  prayer,  0  Lord,  %  Dirigatur,  Domine, 
ascend  oratio  mea. 

1$.  Like  incense  in  thy  sight.  1$.    Sicut   incensum   in 

conspectu  tuo. 

Then  is  said  the  Magnificat  Antiphon,  which  is  to 
be  found  in  the  Proper.  After  this,  the  Church 
sings  the  Canticle  of  Mary,  the  Magnificat,  in  which 
are  celebrated  the  Divine  Maternity,  and  all  its  con- 
sequent blessings.  This  exquisitely  sweet  Canticle  is 
an  essential  part  of  the  Office  of  Vespers.  It  is  the 
evening  incense,  just  as  the  Canticle  Benedidus,  at 
Lauds,  is  that  of  the  morning. 

our  lady's  canticle. 
(St.  Luke,  i.) 

My  soul  doth  magnify  the  Magnificat:  *animamea 

Lord;  Dominum; 

And  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  Et    exsultavit    spiritus 

in  God  my  Saviour.  meus:  *  in  Deo  Salutari 

meo. 

Because  he  hath  regarded  Quiarespexithumilitatem 

the  humility  of  his  handmaid:  ancillse  suae:  *  ecce  enim  ex 

for,  behold,  from  henceforth,  hoc  beatam  me  dicent  om- 

all  generations  shall  call  me  nes  generationes. 
Blessed. 

Because  he  that  is  mighty  Quia  fecit  mihi  magna 

hath  done  great  things  to  me:  quipotens  est:  *  et  sanctum 

and  holy  is  his  name.  Nomen  ejus. 

And  his  mercy  is  from  gene-  Et  misericordia  ejus  a 

ration    unto    generation,    to  progenie  in  progenies  :  *  ti- 

them  that  fear  him.  mentibus  eum. 

He  hath  showed  might  in  Fecit  potentiam  in  brachio 

his  arm :  he  hath  scattered  the  suo:  *  dispersit  superbos 

Eroud  in  the  conceit  of  their  mente  cordis  sui. 
eart. 

He   hath    put    down    the  Deposuit  potentes  de  se- 

mighty  from  their  seat:  and  de:  *  et  exaltavit  humiles. 
hath  exalted  the  humble. 


81 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Esurientesimplevit  bonis : 
*  et  divites  dimisit  inanes. 

Suscepit  Israel  puerum 
suum :  *  recordatus  miseri- 
cordiss  suae, 

Sicut  locutus  est  ad  pa- 
tres  nostros:  *  Abraham  et 
semini  ejus  in  ssecula. 


He  hath  filled  the  hungry 
with  good  things:  and  the  rich 
he  hath  sent  empty  away. 

He  hath  received  Israel  his 
servant,  being  mindful  of  his 
mercy. 

As  he  spoke  to  our  fathers, 
to  Abraham,  and  to  his  seed 
for  ever. 


The  Magnificat  Antiphon  is  then  repeated.  The 
Prayer,  or  Collect,  is  given  in  the  Proper  of  each 
Feast  and  Sunday. 


ft.  Benedicamus  Domino. 

1$.  Deo  gratias. 

ft.  Fidelium  animse  per 
misericordiam  Dei  requies- 
cant  in  pace. 

1$.  Amen. 


ft.  Let  us  bless  the  Lord. 

3>.  Thanks  be  to  God. 

ft.  May  the  souls  of  the 
Faithful  departed,  through  the 
mercy  of  God,  rest  in  peace. 

1$.  Amen. 


COMPLINE.  85 


CHAPTER  THE  EIGHTH. 

ON   THE   OFFICE    OF    COMPLINE,    DURING   THE    TIME 
AFTER   PENTECOST. 

This  Office,  which  concludes  the  day,  commences  by 
a  warning  of  the  dangers  of  the  night :  then,  imme- 
diately follows  the  public  Confession  of  our  sins,  as  a 
powerful  means  of  propitiating  the  divine  justice,  and 
obtaining  God's  help,  now  that  we  are  going  to  spend 
so  many  hours  in  the  unconscious,  and  therefore, 
dangerous  state  of  sleep,  which  is,  also,  such  an  image 
of  death. 

The  Lector,  addressing  the  Priest,  says  to  him : 

i  Pray,  Father,  give  thy  bles-         "ft.  Jube,  Domine  benedi- 
sing.  cere. 

The  Priest  answers : 

May  the  Almighty  Lord  Noctem  quietam,  et  fi- 
granfc  us  a  quiet  night  and  a  nemperfectumconcedat no- 
perfect  end-  bis  Dominus  omnipotens. 

1$.  Amen.  I£.  Amen. 

The  Lector  then  reads  these  words,  from  the  first 
Epistle  of  St.  Peter : 

Brethren,     be     sober    and  Fratres  :  Sobrii  estote  et 

watch  :  for  your  adversary  the  vigilate  :  quia  adversarius 

devil  goes  about  like  a  roaring  vester  diabolus,  tamquam 

lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  de-  leo  rugiens  circuit  quserens 

your:  resist  him,  being  strong  quern  devoret:  cui  resistite 

in  faith.    But  thou,  O  Lord,  fortes  in  fide.    Tu  autem, 

have  mercy  on  us.  Domine,  miserere  nobis. 

The  Choir  answers : 
1$.  Thanks  be  to  God.  1$.  Deo  gratias. 


86 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Then  the  Priest  : 

ft.  Adjutorium  nostrum         ft.  Our  help  is  in  the  Name 
in  nomine  Domini.  of  the  Lord. 


The  Choir : 


1$.  Qui  fecit  ccelum  et 
terram. 


1$.  Who  hath  made  heaven 
and  earth. 


Then  the  Lord's  Prayer  is  recited  in  secret ;  after 
which,  the  Priest  says  the  Confiteor,  and  when  he 
has  finished,  the  Choir  repeats  it. 

The  Priest,  having  pronounced  the  general  form  of 
absolution,  says : 


ft.  Converte  nos,  Deus, 
Salutaris  noster. 

J$.  Et  averte  iram  tuam 
a  nobis. 

ft.  Deus,  in  adjutorium 
meum  intende. 

1$.  Domine,  ad  adjuvan- 
dum  me  festina. 

Gloria  Patri. 

Ant.  Miserere. 


ft.  Convert  us,  O  God  our 
Saviour. 

1$.  And  turn  away  thine 
auger  from  us. 

ft.  Incline  unto  mine  aid, 
OGod. 

1$.  O  Lord,  make  haste  to 
help  me. 

Glory,  etc. 

Ant.  Have  mercy. 


The  first  Psalm  expresses  the  confidence  with  which 
the  just  man  sleeps  in  peace ;  but  the  wicked  know  not 
what  calm  rest  is. 


Psalm  4. 


Cum  invocarem  exaudi  vit 
me  Deus  justitise  mese:  *  in 
tribulatione  dilatasti  mihi. 

Miserere  mei :  *  et  exaudi 
orationem  meam. 

Filii  hominum,usquequo 
gravi  corde?  *  ut  quid  dili- 
gitis  vanitatem,  et  quseritis 
mendacium  1 


When  I  called  upon  him, 
the  God  of  my  justice  heard 
me  :  when  I  was  in  distress, 
thou  hast  enlarged  me. 

Have  mercy  on  me :  and 
hear  my  prayer. 

O  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long 
will  ye  be  dull  of  heart  1  why 
do  ye  love  vanity,  and  seek 
after  lying  1 


COMPLINE. 


87 


Know  ye,  also,  that  the 
Lord  hath  made  his  Holy  One 
wonderful :  the  Lord  will  hear 
me,  when  I  shall  cry  unto  him. 

Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not : 
the  things  ye  say  in  your 
hearts,  be  sorry  for  them  upon 
your  beds. 

Offer  up  the  sacrifice  of  jus- 
tice, and  trust  in  the  Lord  : 
many  say,  Who  showeth  us 
good  things  1 

The  light  of  thy  counte- 
nance, O  Lord,  is  signed  upon 
us  :  thou  hast  given  gladness 
in  my  heart. 

By  the  fruit  of  their  corn, 
their  wine,  and  oil,  they  are 
multiplied. 

In  peace,  in  the  self-same, 
I  will  sleep,  and  I  will  rest. 

For  thou,  O  Lord,  singularly 
hast  settled  me  in  hope. 


Et  scitote  quoniam  miri- 
ficavit  Dominus  sanctum 
suum :  *  Dominus  exaudiet 
me,  cum  clamavero  ad  eum. 

Irascimini,  et  nolite  pec- 
care  :  *  quae  dicitis  in  cordi- 
cus  vestris,  in  cubilibus  ves- 
tris  compungimini. 

Sacrificate  sacrificium 
justitia3,et  sperate  in  Domi- 
no :  *  multi  dicunt :  Quis 
ostendit  nobis  bona  1 

Signatum  est  super  nos 
lumen  vultus  tui,Domine:* 
dedisti  lastitiam  in  corde 
meo. 

A  f  ructu  f  rumenti,  vini  et 
olei  sui:  *  multiplicati  sunt. 

In  pace  in  idipsum :  *  dor- 
miam  et  requiescam. 

Quoniam  tu,Domine,sin- 
gulariter  in  spe  :  *  consti- 
tuisti  me. 


The  Church  has  introduced  here  the  first  six 
Verses  of  the  30th  Psalm,  because  they  contain  the 
prayer  which  our  Saviour  made,  when  dying :  Into 
thy  hands,  0  Lord,  I  commend  my  Spirit  ! — words  so 
beautifully  appropriate  in  this  Office  of  the  close  of 
day. 

Psalm  30. 


In  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I 
hoped,  let  me  never  be  con- 
founded :  deliver  me  in  thy 
justice. 

Bow  down  thine  ear  unto 
me:  make  haste  to  deliver  me. 

Be  thou  unto  me  a  God,  a 
protector,  and  a  house  of  re- 
fuge, to  save  me. 

For  thou  art  my  strength, 


In  te,  Domine,  speravi, 
non  confundarinseternum: 
*  in  justitia  tua  libera  me. 

Inclina  ad  me  aurem 
tuam :  *accelera  ut  eruas  me. 

Esto  mihi  in  Deum  pro- 
tectorem,  et  in  domum  ref  u- 
gii  :  *  ut  salvum  me  facias. 

Quoniam  fortitudo  mea, 


S8 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


et  refugium  meum  es  tu  : 
*  et  propter  nomen  tuum 
deduces  me,  et  enutries  me. 

Educes  me  delaqueo  hoc, 
quern  absconderunt  mihi:  * 
quoniam  tu  es  protector 
meus. 

In  maims  tuas  commen- 
do  spiritum  meum  :  *  re- 
demisti  me,  Domine,  Deus 
veritatis. 


and  my  refuge  :  and  for  thy 
Name's  sake,  thou  wilt  lead 
me,  and  nourish. 

Thou  wilt  bring  me  out  of 
this  snare,  which  they  have 
hidden  for  me  :  for  thou  art 
my  protector. 

Into  thy  hands,  I  commend 
my  spirit :  thou  hast  redeemed 
me,  0  Lord,  the  God  of  truth. 


The  third  Psalm  gives  the  motives  of  the  just 
man's  confidence,  even  during  the  dangers  of  the  night. 
There  is  no  snare  neglected  by  the  demons  ;  but  the 
good  Angels  watch  over  us,  with  brotherly  solicitude. 
Then,  we  have  God  himself  speaking,  and  promising 
to  send  us  a  Saviour. 


Psalm  90. 


Qui  habitat  in  adjutorio 
Altissimi :  *  in  protectione 
Dei  cceli  commorabitur. 

Dicet  Domino :  Susceptor 
meus  es  tu,  et  refugium 
meum,*  Deus  meus,  spe- 
rabo  in  eum. 

Quoniam  ipse  liberavit 
me  de  laqueo  venantium  :  * 
et  a  verbo  aspero. 

Scapulissuis  obumbrabit 
tibi :  *  et  sub  pennis  ejus 
sperabis. 

Scuto  circumdabit  te  Ve- 
ritas ejus  *  non  timebis  a 
timore  nocturno. 

A  sagitta  volante  in  die, 
a  negotio  perambulante  in 
tenebris  :  ab  incursu,  et 
dsemonio  meridiano. 

Cadent  a  latere  tuo  mille, 


He  that  dwelleth  in  the  aid 
of  the  Most  High,  shall  abide 
under  the  protection  of  the 
God  of  heaven. 

He  shall  say  unto  the  Lord: 
Thou  art  my  protector,  and 
my  refuge  :  my  God,  in  him 
will  I  trust. 

For  he  hath  delivered  me 
from  the  snare  of  the  hunters: 
and  from  the  sharp  word. 

He  will  overshadow  thee 
with  his  shoulders  :  and  under 
his  wings  thou  shalt  trust. 

His  truth  shall  compass  thee 
with  a  shield :  thou  shalt  not 
be  afraid  of  the  terror  of  the 
night. 

Of  the  arrow  that  flieth  in 
the  day  :  of  the  business  that 
walketh  about  in  the  dark :  of 
invasion,  or  of  the  noonday 
devil. 

A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy 


CDMPLINE. 


89 


side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy 
right :  but  it  shall  not  come 
nigh  thee. 

But  thou  shalt  consider  with 
thine  eyes  :  and  shalt  see  the 
reward  of  the  wicked. 

Because  thou  hast  said : 
Thou,  O  Lord,  art  my  hope  : 
Thou  hast  made  the  Most 
High  thy  refuge. 

There  shall  no  evil  come 
unto  thee,  nor  shall  the  scourge 
come  near  thy  dwelling. 

For  he  hath  given  his  Angels 
charge  over  thee :  to  keep  thee 
in  all  thy  ways. 

In  their  hands  they  shall 
bear  thee  up  :  lest  thou  dash 
thy  foot  against  a  stone. 

Thou  shalt  walk  upon  the 
asp  and  basilisk :  and  thou 
shalt  trample  under  foot  the 
lion  and  the  dragon. 

God  will  say  of  thee :  Be- 
cause he  hoped  in  me,  I  will 
deliver  him  :  I  will  protect 
him,  because  he  hath  known 
my  name. 

He  will  cry  unto  me,  and  I 
will  hear  him :  I  am  with  him 
in  tribulation,  I  will  deliver 
him,  and  I  will  glorify  him. 

I  will  fill  him  with  length 
of  days  :  and  I  will  show  him 
my  salvation. 

The  fourth  Psalm  invites  the  Servants  of  God  to 
persevere,  with  fervour,  in  the  prayers  they  offer 
during  the  Night  The  Faithful  should  say  this 
Psalm  in  a  spirit  of  gratitude  to  God,  for  his  raising 
up,  in  the  Church,  adorers  of  his  holy  name,  whose 
grand  vocation  is  to  lift  up  their  hands,  day  and  night, 
for  the  safety  of  Israel.  On  such  prayers,  depend  the 
happiness  and  destinies  of  the  world. 


et  decern  millia  a  dextris 
tuis  :  *  ad  te  autem  non 
appropinquabit. 

Verumtamen  oculis  tuis 
considerabis  :  *  et  retribu- 
tionem  peccatorumvidebis. 

Quoniam  tu  es,  Domine, 
spes  mea :  *  Altissimum  po- 
suisti  refugium  tuum. 

Non  accedet  ad  te  ma- 
lum :  *  et  flagellum  non 
appropinquabit  tabernacu- 
lo  tuo. 

Quoniam  Angelis  suis 
mandavit  de  te :  *  ut  custodi- 
ant  te  in  omnibus  viis  tuis. 

In  manibus  portabunt 
te  :  *  ne  forte  offendas  ad 
lapidem  pedem  tuum. 

Super  aspidem  et  basilis- 
cum  ambulabis  :  *  et  con- 
culcabis  leonem  et  draco- 
nem. 

Quoniam  in  me  speravit, 
liberabo  eum  :  *  protegam 
eum,  quoniam  cognovit  No- 
men  meum. 

Clamabit  ad  me,  et  ego 
exaudiam  eum :  *  cum  ipso 
sum  in  tribulatione,  eripiam 
eum,  et  glorificabo  eum. 

Longitudine  dierum  re- 
plebo  eum  :  *  et  ostendam 
illi  Salutare  meum. 


90 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Psalm  133. 


Ecce  nunc  benedi cite  Do- 
minum :  *  omnes  servi  Do- 
mini. 

Qui  statis  in  domo  Do- 
mini :  *  in  atriis  domus 
Dei  nostri. 

In  noctibus  extollite  ma- 
ims vestras  in  sancta  :  *  et 
benedicite  Dominum. 

Benedicat  te  Dominus  ex 
Si  on  :  *  qui  fecit  ccelum  et 
terram. 

Ant.  Miserere  mihi,  Do- 
mine,  et  exaudi  orationem 
meam. 


Behold !  now  bless  ye  the 
Lord,  all  ye  servants  of  the 
Lord. 

Who  stand  in  the  house  of 
the  Lord,  in  the  courts  of  the 
house  of  our  God. 

In  the  nights,  lift  up  your 
hands  to  the  holy  places,  and 
bless  ye  the  Lord. 

Say  to  Israel:  May  theLord, 
out  of  Sion,  bless  thee,  he  that 
made  heaven  and  earth. 

Ant.  Have  mercy  on  me,  O 
Lord,  and  hear  my  prayer. 


HYMN/ 


Te  lucis  ante  terminum, 
Rerum  Creator,  poscimus, 
Ut  pro  tua  dementia, 
Sis  praesul  et  custodia. 

Procul  recedant  somnia, 
Et  noctium  phantasmata  ; 
Hostemque  nostrum  corn- 
prime, 
Ne  polluantur  corpora. 

Prsesta,  Pater  piissime, 
Patrique  compar  Unice, 
Cum  Spiritu  Paraclito 
Regnansper  omne  saeculum. 

Amen. 


Before  the  closing  of  the 
light,  we  beseech  thee,  Creator 
of  all  things  !  that,  in  thy 
clemency,  thou  be  our  protec- 
tor and  our  guard. 

May  the  dreams  and  phan- 
toms of  night  depart  far  from 
us  ;  and  do  thou  repress  our 
enemy,  lest  our  bodies  be  pro- 
faned. 

Most  merciful  Father  !  and 
thou,  his  Only  Begotten  Son, 
co-equal  with  him  !  reigning 
for  ever,  with  the  Holy  Para^ 
clete  !  grant  this  our  prayer. 

Amen. 


*  According  to  the  Monastic  Rite,  as  follows  :- 


Te  lucis  ante  terminum, 
Rerum  Creator,  posciinus, 
Ut  solita  dementia 
Sis  prsesul  ad  custodiam. 

Procul  recedant  somuia 
Et  noctium  phantasmata ; 


Hostemque  nostrum  comprime, 
Ne  polluantur  corpora. 

Prsesta  Pater  omnipotens, 
Per  Jesum  Christum  Dominum, 
Qui  tecum  in  perpetuum 
Regnat  cum  Sancto  Spiritu. 

Amen. 


COMPLINE. 


91 


CAPITULUM. 


(Jeremias,  xiv.) 


But  thou  art  in  us,  O  Lord, 
and  thy  holy  Name  hath  been 
invoked  upon  us :  forsake  us 
not,  O  Lord,  our  God. 

&.  Into  thy  hands,  O  Lord  :* 
I  commend  my  Spirit.  Into 
thy  hands. 

$\  Thou  hast  redeemed  us,  O 
Lord  God  of  truth.  *  I  com- 
mend. 

Glory.  Into  thy  hands. 

y.  Preserve  us,  O  Lord,  as 
the  apple  of  thine  eye. 

1$.  Protect  us,  under  the 
shadow  of  thy  wings. 


Tu  autem  in  nobis  es,  Do- 
mine,  et  Nomen  sanctum 
tuum  invocatum  est  super 
nos  :  ne  derelinquas  nos, 
Domine,  Deus  noster. 

£.  In  manus  tuas,  Domi- 
ne :  *  Commendo  spiritum 
meum.    In  manus  tuas. 

'ff.  Redemisti  nos,  Domi- 
ne Deus  Veritas.  *  Com- 
mendo. 

Gloria.  In  manus  tuas. 

$".  Custodi  nos,  Domine, 
ut  pupillam  oculi. 

1$.  Sub  umbra  alarum 
tuarum  protege  nos. 


The  Canticle  of  the  venerable  Simeon, — who, 
whilst  holding  the  divine  Infant  in  his  arms,  pro- 
claimed him  to  be  the  Light  of  the  Gentiles,  and  then 
slept  the  sleep  of  the  just, — is  admirably  appropriate 
to  the  Office  of  Compline.  Holy  Church  blesses  God 
for  having  dispelled  the  darkness  of  night  by  the 
rising  of  the  Son  of  Justice ;  it  is  for  love  of  him, 
that  she  toils  the  whole  day  through,  and  rests  during 
the  night,  saying :  I  sleep,  but  my  heart  watcheth} 


CANTICLE   OF    SIMEON. 


(St.  Luke,  ii.) 
Now  dost  thou  dismiss  thy         Nunc   dimittis    servum 


servant,  O  Lord,  according  to 
thy  word,  in  peace. 

Because  mine  eyes  have  seen 
thy  Salvation, 

Which  thou  hast  prepared  ; 
before  the  face  of  all  peoples. 

A  light  to  the  revelation  of 


tuum,  Domine:  *  secundum 
verbum  tuum  in  pace. 

Quia  viderunt  oculi  mei : 
*  Salutare  tuum. 

Quod  parasti :  *  ante  fa- 
ciem  omnium  populorum. 

Lumen  ad  revelationem 


1  Cantic.  v.  2. 


92 


TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


Gentium  :  *  et  gloriam  ple- 
bis  tuse  Israel. 
Gloria. 

Ant.  Salva  nos,  Domine, 
vigilantes;  custodi  nos  dor- 
mientes,  ut  vigilemus  cum 
Christo,  et  requiescamus  in 
pace. 

OREMUS. 

Visita,qusesumus,  Domi- 
ne, habitationem  istam,  et 
omnesinsidias  inimici  ab  ea 
longe  repelle  :  Angeli  tui 
sancti  habitent  in  ea,  qui 
nos  in  pace  custodiant :  et 
benedictio  tua  sit  super  nos 
semper.  Per  Dominum  nos- 
trum Jesum  Christum  Fi- 
lium  tuum,  qui  tecum  vivit 
etregnatinunitate  Spiritus 
sancti  Deus,  per  omnia  sae- 
cula  saeculorum.  ]$.  Amen. 

^.  Dominus  vobiscum. 

3$.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

^.  Benedicamus  Domino. 

&.  Deo  gratias. 

Benedicat  et  custodiat  nos 
omnipotens  et  misericors 
Dominus,  Pater  et  Filius, 
et  Spiritus  Sanctus. 

&.  Amen. 


the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of 
thy  people  Israel. 
Glory,  etc. 

Ant.  Save  us,  0  Lord,whilst 
awake,  and  watch  us,  as  we 
sleep,  that  we  may  watch  with 
Christ,  snd  rest  in  peace. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

Visit,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  this  house  and  family, 
and  drive  from  it  all  snares  of 
the  enemy:  let  thy  holy  Angels 
dwell  herein,  who  may  keep 
us  in  peace,  and  may  thy  bles- 
sing be  always  upon  us. 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  thy  Son,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee,  in  the 
unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  God, 
world  without  end.  1$.  Amen. 

$".  The  Lord  be  with  you. 

1$.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

$.  Let  us  bless  the  Lord- 

1$.  Thanks  be  to  God. 

May  the  almighty  and  mer- 
ciful Lord,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  bless  and  preserve 
us. 

1$.  Amen. 


ANTHEM   TO   THE    BLESSED    VIRGIN. 


Salve,  Regina,  mater  mi- 
sericordiae. 

Vita,dulcedo,et  spes  nos- 
tra, salve. 

Ad  te  clamamus,  exsules 
filii  Evae. 

Ad  te  suspiramus,  gem  en  - 
tes  et  flentes  in  hac  lacry- 
marum  valle. 

Eia,  ergo  advocata  nos- 


Hail,  holy  Queen,  Mother  of 
mercy. 

Our  Life,  our  Sweetness, 
and  our  Hope,  all  hail  ! 

To  thee  we  cry,  poor 
banished  children  of  Eve  ; 

To  thee  we  send  up  our 
sighs,  weeping  and  mourning 
in  this  vale  of  tears. 

Turn,  then,  most  gracious 


COMPLINE. 


93 


Advocate!  thine  eyes  of  mercy 
towards  us; 

And,  after  this  our  exile, 
show  unto  us  the  blessed  Fruit 
of  thy  womb,  Jesus; 

O  merciful, 

O  kind, 

O  sweet  Virgin  Mary  ! 

ft.  Pray  for  us,  O  holy 
Mother  of  God, 

1$.  That  we  may  be  made 
worthy  of  the  promises  of 
Christ. 


tra,  illos  tuos  misericordes 
oculos  ad  nos  converte; 

Et  Jesum  benedictum 
fructum  ventris  tui,  nobis 
post  hoc  exilium  ostende; 

O  clemens, 

O  pia, 

O  dulcis  Virgo  Maria. 

ft-  Ora  pro  nobis,  sancta 
Dei  Genitrix, 

1$.  Ut  digni  efficiamur 
promissionibus  Christi. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

O  almighty  and  everlasting 
God,  who,  by  the  co-operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  didst  pre- 
pare the  body  and  soul  of 
Mary,  glorious  Virgin  and 
Mother,  to  become  the  worthy 
habitation  of  thy  Son:  grant 
that  we  may  be  delivered 
from  present  evils,  and  from 
everlasting  death,  by  tier 
gracious  intercession,  in  whose 
commemoration  we  rejoice. 
Through  the  same  Christ  our 
Lord.     1$.  Amen. 

ft.  May  the  divine  assistance 
remain  always  with  us. 

1$.  Amen.* 


OREMUS. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,  qui  gloriosae  virginis 
matris  Marise  corpus  et  ani- 
mam,  ut  dignum  Filii  tui 
habitaculum  effici  merere- 
tur,  Spiritu  sancto  coope- 
rante,  praeparasti:  da  ut 
cujus  commemoratione  lae- 
tamur,  ejus  pia  interces- 
sione  ab  instantibus  malis 
et  a  morte  perpetua  libere- 
mur.  Per  eumdem  Chris- 
tum Dominum  nostrum. 
1$.  Amen. 

ft.  Divinumauxiliumma- 
neat  semper  nobiscum. 

E.  Amen. 


Then,  in  secret  Pater,  Ave,  and  Credo;  page  14. 
*  In  the  Monastic  Rite,  this  Response  is  as  follows  : — 


B.  And  with  our.  absent  Bre- 
thren.   Amen. 


R.  Et  cum  fratribus  nostris 
absentibus.    Amen. 


PROPER   OF   THE   TIME.  95 


PROPER  OF  THE  TIME. 

The   Liturgical   Season,  over  which  presides  the 
Spirit  of  sanctification  and  love,  has  commenced  its 
career  amidst  the  brightness  of  a  light  which  is  new, 
both  for  the  Church  and  the  christian  soul.     The 
weak  eye  of  our  intellect,  veiled  by  the  protecting 
cover  of  faith,  has  ventured  to  gaze  on  the  deep  things 
of  God  j1  in  the  midst  of  the  eternal  relations  which 
make  up  the  holy  Trinity,  we  have  been  enabled  to 
discern   those    sublime   links   which    exist  between 
each  of  the  Divine  Persons  and  man,  nothingness 
though  he  be  by  his  own  origin.     Then,  too,  we  have 
been  given  to  know  Him  who  is  Eternal  Wisdom ; 
this  Wisdom  is  the  Incarnate  Word  ;  and  the  time  for 
man's  coming  to  know  that  Wisdom  was  the  Feast 
of  the  Eucharist ;  it  was  through  the  revelation  then 
made  known  to  him  of  the  divine  love  for  mankind, 
that  man  understood  why  it  was  that  the  world  had 
been  created.     Beyond  these  grand  teachings  given  to 
us  by  the  bright  Festivals,  first  of  Trinity  Sunday, 
and  then  of  Corpus  Christi,  we  had  the  Sacred  Heart 
of  Jesus  repeating  to  us,  and  summing  up  in  itself,  all 
these  mysteries ;  that  Divine  Heart  was  revealed  to 
us  as  the  source  of  supernatural  life,  as  the  organ  of 
praise,  as  the  centre  where  the  love  of  God  for  man, 
and  the  love  of  man  for  God,  were  united.     All  this 
has  filled  the  whole  earth  with  the  magnificence  of  the 
supernatural  order. 

It  was  with  these  three  bright  mysteries,  as  cele- 
brated by  the  Church  immediately  after  Pentecost 
.Sunday,  that  the  reign  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  begun 
for  us  this  Year  of  Grace.     Our  Emmanuel  himself, 

1  1  Cor.  ii.  10. 


96  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

during  the  years  of  his  sojourn  upon  our  earth,  had 
not  shed  such  light  as  this  upon  us.  True,  our 
Emmanuel  was  himself  the  Light  ;x  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  far  from  revealing  to  us  any  new  dogmas,  did 
but  remind  the  world2  of  the  truths  taught  it  by  Him 
who  is  ever  the  true  Master  and  Teacher  of  his  Church.3 
How  then,  is  it,  that  the  light  becomes  doubly  strong 
immediately  that  this  Jesus  of  ours  leaves  us?  How 
comes  it,  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  was  not  to  speak 
of  himself,4  no  sooner  descends  upon  us,  than  we  are 
enabled  to  see  the  heavenly  mysteries  with  such 
intensified  clearness?  Let  us  master  the  lesson 
involved  in  all  this. 

Yes,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  to  speak  of  himself,  and 
yet  he  teaches  divinely.5  It  is  from  the  Word  that  he 
receives  what  he  tells  to  this  earth  of  ours  ;6  he  hearkens 
to  that  Word,  and  will  say  the  same  things  himself,7 
but  he  will  say  them  in  his  own  way. 

The  Eternal  Word  is  the  one  only  word ;  it  had 
spoken  from  the  very  commencement  of  creation ;  its 
varied  utterances  had  filled  the  whole  earth ;  its  di- 
vine teaching  had  been  heard,  day  telling  it  unto  day, 
and  night  unto  night.8  And  yet,  this  almighty  voice9 
of  Wisdom,  which  peiietrateth  into  the  bottom  of  the 
deep,10  was  but  too  frequently  allowed  to  speak 
unnoticed.  The  light  shone  in  the  darkness,  but  the 
darkness  would  not  be  removed,11  as  the  Church  re- 
minded us  during  the  Season  of  Advent,  when  the 
four  weeks  of  those  wintry  and  dark  days  told  us  how 
man,  for  four  thousand  years,  had  abased  the  very 
light  of  his  reason,  by  making  it  serve  to  put  out  the 
light  of  the  divine  "Word  which  God  had  been  giving 
him.12     During  all  this  long  period,  the  Word  had 

1  St.  John,  viii.  12.  *  St.  John,  xvi.  13.       9  Ps.  xviii.  3. 

2  Ibid.  xiv.  26.  8  Ibid.  9  Wisd.  xviii.  15. 

3  Ibid.  xiii.  13.— St.  Matth.  6  Ibid,  14.  10  Ecclus.  xxiv.  8. 
xxiii.  8-10;  xxviii.  19,  20.    7  Ibid.  13.  ll  St.  John,  i.  5. 

12  Rom.  i.  18-23. 


PROPER   OF   THE   TIME.  97 

sought,  though  in  vain,  to  put  the  imprint  of  himself 
upon  the  successive  generations  ;l  that  period  trans- 
pired, and  he  came  down  upon  earth,  there  to  take  up 
his  abode,  and  converse  with  men,2  and,  with  his  own 
lips,  to  give  to  the  world  the  unreserved3  heavenly 
message  of  light  and  truth.     The  children  of  Adam 
heard  with  their  own  ears,  and  saw  with  their  own 
eyes,  and  touched  with  their  very  hands,  the  word  of 
life,4  the  Word  made  Flesh.5     And  yet,  even  with  all 
this  condescension  and  intimacy,  even  the  very  men 
who  enjoyed  most  of  his  presence, — those  men  who 
were  selected  to  become  the  messengers  of  his  word,6 — 
who  were  to  be  his  heralds  and  his  witnesses  to  the 
nations,7  even  they  failed  to  take  in  the  light  of  that 
kingdom  of  God,  which  shone  so  strongly,  so  directly, 
upon  them.8     Yes,  even  for  these  future  sowers  of  the 
Word  in  the  souls  of  men,9  our  Emmanuel,  during  his 
mortal  life  among  them  was  always  a  hidden  God;10 
he  was   a   Word   not   understood   by  them.11      He 
lovingly  complains  of  all  this,  when  wishing  them 
farewell  at  the  Last  Supper  !12     But,  if  we  rightly 
appreciate  that  complaint,  it  was  not  so  much  a  re- 
proach made  to  his  Disciples,  as  an  earnest  prayer 
offered  to  his  Father,13  beseeching  him  to  send  down 
that  creating  Spirit,14  who  alone  could  transform  those 
hearts,  rid  them  of  their  innate  weakness,  and  "  fill " 
them,  as  the  Church  expresses  it,15  "  with  the  warmth 
of  the  Word." 

For,  there  is  the  secret  of  success, — the  incom- 
parable teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  love.  How  universal 
and  how  grand  soever  was  the  manifestation  of  him- 
self, offered  to  the  minds  of  men  by  the  Word ; 16  how 


1  Heb.  i.  1,  2  ;  xi.  3.  6  St.  Luke,  i.  2.  «  St.  Luke,  xviii.  34. 

2  Baruch,  iii.  38.  7  Acts,  i.  8.  I3   St.  John,  xiv.    9. 

3  St.  John,  xv.  15.  8  St.  Luke,  viii.  10.  :3  Ibid.  16. 

*  1  St.  John,  i.  1.  9  Ibid.  11.  "  Ps.  ciii.  30. 

5  St.  John,  i.  14.  10  Is.  xlv.  15.  15  Hymn  for  Matins 

16  St.  John,  i.  9.                      of  Whit-Sunday. 

VOL.  XI.  H 


9"8  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

intimate  and  familiar  soever  were  the  conversations 
of  our  Emmanuel  with  those  whom  he  had  graciously 
selected  as  his  Friends,1 — yet,  in  both  cases,  the 
truth  made  no  way  beyond  the  outside ;  the  Teaching 
went  no  further  than  the  exterior  ;  like  the  material 
sun,  the  reflection  of  the  eternal  Light  was  but  on 
the  surface,  it  did  not  penetrate  into  the  depths  of 
men's  souls.  The  Holy  Ghost,  on  the  contrary,  like 
an  impetuous  stream,2  flowed  into  man's  heart,  bring- 
ing with  himself,  into  the  inmost  recesses  of  the 
creature,  substantial  and  living  Truth.  The  Man- 
God  had  foretold  this  to  his  disciples.  He  had  said 
to  them:  "  These  things  which  I  have  spoken  untoyou, 
"  whilst  abiding  with  you,  the  Paraclete  will  teach  them 
"  all  to  you  more  efficaciously,3  for  he  will  not  only 
"  abide  with  you  ;  but  shall  he  in  you.4  The  truths 
"  which  you  could  not  bear  noiv,  you  shall  have  from 
"  Him  ;  He  will  lead  you  into  the  whole  truth."5 

It  is  the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  act,  rather 
than  to  speak.  He  is,  so  to  say,  less  intent  on  pro- 
claiming the  truth,  than  on  the  realising  it,  by  sanc- 
tification,  in  the  Church  and  in  the  soul.  "  The 
Spirit,"  says  St.  Cyril  of  Alexandria,6  "  has  a  marvel- 
"  lous  school  of  his  own  in  the  Saints  :  he  does  more 
"  than  speak  ;  he  produces  knowledge  by  an  efficient 
"  demonstration,  that  is,  he  passes  on  to  the  creature 
"  what  belongs  to  God ;  he  makes  us  partakers  of 
"the  divine  nature."7  Not  only,  therefore,  does  he 
purify  the  senses,  and  cleanse  the  interior  eye  from 
its  imperfections ;  but,  moreover,  in  virtue  of  that 
sanctifying  action,  which  is  his  special  attribute,  he 
establishes,  in  the  very  midst  of  the  regenerated 
creature,8  that  kingdom  of  God  whose  hidden  excel- 
lencies were  declared  °  by  Jesus  to  the  as  yet  ignorant 

1  St.  John,  xv.  15.      6  Ibid.   xvi.   12,   13,     7  1  St.  Pet.  i.  4. 

2  Ps.  xlv.  5.  jiixta  gra>c.  6  St.  Luke,  xvii,  21. 
8  St.  John,  xiv.  25.    6  Iu  Johan.  Lib.  x.  et    9  St.  John,  i,  IS. 

4  J  bid.  17.  xi.,  passim. 


PROPER   OF    THE   TIME.  99 

fishermen  of  Galilee.  No  sooner  has  the  Holy  Ghost 
done  this  his  work  in  the  soul,  than  all  doubt,  all 
gross  ignorance  and  error,  are  at  an  end.  The  only 
obscurity  left  is  that  of  Faith,  which,  as  yet,  sees  not, 
but  knows,1  and  possesses,2  by  the  Spirit,  the  gifts  of 
God.  Man  thus  renewed,  comprehendsy  as  the 
Apostle  assures  us,  zuhat  is  the  breadth,  and  length, 
and  height,  and  depth,  of  the  teachings  of  our 
Emmanuel ; 3  for  it  is  Christ  himself  who,  through 
the  Paraclete,  dwells  in  our  hearts,  and  fills  them 
with  the  fulness  of  God.4 

St.  Cyril  admirably  developes  all  this,  in  the  Treatise 
we  have  already  quoted.  Amongst  other  things,  he 
says,  that  as  the  sweet  fragrance  of  a  flower  which 
makes  itself  felt  to  our  senses,  seems  to  be  doing 
nothing  else  but  telling  us  about  the  flower  itself, — 
so  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  he  leads  us  to  the  plenitude 
of  Truth,  does  nothing  else  than  infuse  into  us  the 
mystery  of  Christ.  The  silent  operation  of  the 
Paraclete  is  ever  revealing  to  our  mind,  and  applying 
to  our  soul,  the  power  and  hidden  mysteries  of  the 
Incarnation.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth  ; 5  but  what 
is  the  Truth,  but  Christ  himself,6  who,  in  his  person 
and  his  perfections  dwells,  through  the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  holy  souls?  The  Incarnate  Word,  in  his  visible 
presence,  has  been  taken  from  among  us  ;  we  are  no 
more  to  see  him,  during  our  sojourn  here ; 7  but  all 
this  is  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  manifest  himself 
to  our  souls, — it  is  the  manifestation  the  best  be- 
coming a  God.  When,  therefore,  our  Lord  tells  us,» 
and  when  his  Apostles  repeat  the  announcement,9 
that  he  is  going  to  teach  us  all  things  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  we  must  not  suppose  that  he  is  hereby  intend- 
ing to  pass  us  on  to  some  other  Master  than  himself. 


1  1  Cor.  ii.  12.  *  Ibid.  7  2  Cor.  v.  16. 

2  2  St.  Pet.  i.  4.  6  St.  John,  xiv.  17.        8  St.  John,  xiv.  26. 

3  Eph.  iii.  16-19.        6  Ibid.  6.  •  Eph.  i.  17;  iii.  16. 


100  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

No ;  according  to  the  promise  he  made  us,1  he  dwells 
in  pure  souls;  he  reveals  himself  to  them  in  an  un- 
speakable manner ;  he,  as  their  Head,  directs  them 
in  all  their  ways  ;  only,  he  does  all  this  by  his  Spirit. 
For  the  Spirit  is  the  author  of  sanctification  ;  and 
what  is  this  Sanctification  but  the  transformation  of 
a  creature  into  the  Image  of  Him  who  saith  unto 
us  :  Be  ye  holy,  because  I  the  Lord  your  God  am  holy?2 
Now  the  Image  of  God,  the  one  perfect  and  beautiful 
Image, — the  divine  Seal  which  impresses  on  our 
souls  a  likeness  of  the  Father's  face,3 — this  Image, 
this  Seal,  is  the  Eternal  Son  of  that  Father.  He  is 
the  Word  of  his  Father ;  and  that  Word,  in  his 
sacred  Humanity,  sanctified  himself,4  together  with 
us,  and  for  us,  by  annointing,  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  temple  of  his  Body.5  With  and  by  that  Spirit, 
he  transforms  us,  from  brightness  unto  brightness,  on 
the  type  and  model  of  his  sacred  Humanity  ;6  he  is 
born  again  and  grows  in  each  of  us,7  by  the  incor- 
poration of  the  mysteries  of  his  deifying  Life.8 

Christians !  you  were  made  sad,  a  few  days  back, 
on  hearing  of  the  speedy  departure  of  your  Jesus;9 
learn,  now,  that  your  sadness  must  give  place  to  joy, 
for  this  Emmanuel  of  ours,  though  he  has  ascended 
up  into  heaven,  has  not  left  our  earth.  Jesus  Christ 
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  the  same  for  ever}0  He  is 
the  one  sole  object  of  the  Father's  good-pleasure  ; u 
he  is  the  one  sole  worthy  instrument  of  God's  glory  ; 
and  being  this,  he  centres  into  his  own  unity  the 
divine  plan  for  the  sanctification  of  the  elect.  So  far, 
then,  is  the  glorious  Pentecost  from  being  the  separ- 
ating us  from  Jesus  our  divine  exemplar  and  guide, 


1  St.  John,  xiv.  21.      4  St.  John,  xvii.  19.      6  2  Cor.  iii.  18. 

2  Lev.  xix.  2.  5  Ibid.  ii.  21.  7  Gal.  iv.  19. 
s  Ps.  iv.  7. 

8  S.  Cyril  Alex.    In  Johan.  lib.  i,  ix,  x,  xi ;  De  Trinit.  Dial,  iv,  v ; 

et  alibi  passim. 

9  St.  John,  xvi.  6.        10  Heb.  xiii.  8.  "  St.  Matth.  xvii.  5. 


PROPER   OF   THE   TIME.  101 

by  means  of  the  Coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, — the 
very  contrary  is  the  result ;  for  the  Paraclete  only 
came  upon  this  earth,  in  order  that  he  might  make 
all  the  closer  the  union  between  the  Head  and  the 
Members  ;  he  came,  that  he  might,  by  Faith  and 
Love,  make  us  one  with  him,  who  "  Alone  is  Holy," 
as  he  "  alone  is  Lord,"  and  "  alone  Most  High," 
together  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  for 
ever  and  ever ! 1 

Now,  let  us  think  on  what  the  Church's  Liturgy  is 
with  regard  to  all  this.  We  have  passed  one  half 
of  the  Church's  year ;  we  have  had,  from  Advent, 
up  to  this  present  day,  all  those  several  Seasons,  or 
Times,  which  we  have  celebrated  with  her;  and 
what  have  they  all  been  but  so  many  ascensions  (as 
the  Psalmist  calls  them,2)  so  many  steps,  gradually 
leading  up  to  that  summit  of  perfect  justice,  where 
the  holiness  of  Christ's  Church  has  been  consummated 
in  union.  Though  an  humble  daughter  of  earth, 
yet  did  the  Son  of  God,  even  from  the  day  of  eter- 
nity,3 love  and  desire  her  beauty.4  This  does  not 
mean,  that  any  single  individual  of  the  fallen  human 
family,  which  had  to  form  the  Members  of  this  Bride 
of  Jesus,  could  ever,  of  himself,  contribute  to  the 
Church  a  loveliness  in  any  way  worthy  of  the  King, — 
but  it  means,  that  the  King  himself,  Jesus,  the  Sun 
of  Justice,5  who  had  gratuitously  set  his  heart  on 
this  his  chosen  one,  had  resolved  to  deck  her  brow 
with  his  own  charms.  It  was  by  this  his  own 
anticipated  gratuity,  that  he  found  in  her  that  sub- 
lime perfection  of  likeness  to  the  heavenly  Father, 6 
which,  being  the  essential  beauty  of  the  Word  him- 
self,7 was,  for  that  very  reason  to  constitute  the 
sanctity  of  the  favoured  race,  that  his  merciful  love 


1  The  Hymn  Gloria  in    3  Jerem.  xxxi.  3.         6  St.  Matth.  v.  48. 
excelsis.  4  Ps.  xliv.  12.  7  Wisd.  vii.  26. 

2  Ps.  lxxxiii.  6.  5  Malack.  iv.  2. 


102  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

had  called  to  himself  from  the  desert  mountains  of 
the  Gentiles.1  Thus  was  to  be  fully  verified  that 
saying  of  the  Apostle,  that  the  Spouse  is  the  image 
and  glory  of  God,  but  the  Bride  is  the  glory  of  the 
Sjjouse,2  and  that  both  of  them  are  one,  because  they 
both  harmonise  in  the  one  same  divine  plan.3 

Yes,  the  Gentile  world,  the  barren^  woman  despised 
by  the  Synagogue,  the  black  inhabitant  of  the  parched 
deserts  of  Ethiopia,5 — she  is,  one  day,  to  be  trans- 
formed, by  grace,  into  the  true  daughter  of  the 
Father,  and  become  the  Bride  of  his  Son.  Such  an 
adoption,  and  such  a  Nuptial  Union,  would  depend, 
in  part,  on  the  consent  of  the  chosen  one ;  and  not 
only  her  consent  would  be  required,  but  she  would 
also  have  to  do  something  towards  her  winning  her 
honours,  by  labouring  for  them.  The  Liturgy  expresses 
and  achieves  all  this.  First  of  all,  there  was  the 
Season  of  Advent ;  it  was  a  Time  of  expectation  and 
struggle  ;  it  corresponded  to  what  is  called  the  pur- 
gative way  ;  the  Son  of  God  was  then  cleansing  the 
human  race  from  its  defilements ;  he  was  removing 
out  of  her  way  the  obstacles  which  kept  her  down. 
Then  followed  those  rich  Seasons  of  the  Church,  in 
which  Jesus,  the  Divine  Spouse,  offered  himself  to 
mankind  as  their  Model,6  and  Light,7  and  Guide,8  all 
for  the  purpose  of  bringing  them  up  to  the  divine 
ideal  which  they  were  to  reproduce  in  their  own 
living.  It  is  called  the  illuminative  way.  During 
those  mystic  Seasons,  Jesus  showed  himself  to  his 
Church  by  again  treading  the  royal  way'3  of  his 
mysteries.  He  dreio  her  after  him  in  the  fragrance 
of  his  footsteps,10  from  Bethlehem  to  the  Jordan  ;  from 
Mount  Quarantine  to  the  Cross  on  Calvary's  top, 
and  thence  to  the  glorious  Sepulchre.     In  each  stag© 

1  Cantic.  iv.  8.  5  Cantic.  i.  4,  5  ;  iv.  8  Ibid. 

3  1  Cor.  xi.  7.  8  ;  Soph.  iii.  10.  9  Num.  xxi.  22. 

3  Ibid.  11.  6  Exod.  xxv.  40.  10  Cantic.  i,  3. 

4  1  Kings,  ii.  5.  7  St.  Johu,  viii.  12. 


PROPER   OF   THE   TIME.  103 

of  his  life's  mysteries,  lie  so  deeply  imprinted  on  the 
Church  the  divine  likeness  of  his  Sacred  Humanity, 
that  she  stood  before  him  as  the  new  Eve,  taken  out 
of  the  il/im-God,  and  formed  of  his  substance.1  The 
Lord  God,  the  Eternal  Father  is  rejoiced  that  the 
new  Adam  is  no  longer  alone ;  he  "has  found  the  helper 
like  unto  himself  which  neither  earth  nor  heaven  had 
been  able  to  give  Him.2  The  first  Adam  did  not  so 
ardently  love  her  whom  he  declared  to  be  flesh  of  his 
flesh,  as  the  Word  did  that  glorious  Church,  his  Bride, 
who  hath  neither  spot  nor  wrinkle,  but  is  all  beautiful 
with  his  holiness  upon  her.3  She  has  no  life  of  her 
own  ;  the  only  life  she  can  henceforth  possibly  live 
is  the  life  of  her  divine  Spouse.4  That  Life  has  been 
worked  into  her  by  the  stupendous  power  of  the 
Mysteries  celebrated  by  her  in  the  previous  Seasons 
of  the  divine  Liturgy  ; — let  Pentecost  come,  let  the 
breath  of  the  sanctifying  Spirit  make  itself  felt  upon 
her,  and  Jesus  and  his  Church  will  be  one  spirit,5  one 
body.6  The  departure  of  the  Man- God  in  his  trium- 
phant Ascension,7  was  not  an  abandonment  of  his 
Church.  On  the  contrary :  desirous  to  accomplish 
the  mystery  of  divine  Union  with  her,  which  had 
been  so  long  in  preparation,  he  returned  as  the 
Psalmist  expresses  it,  on  the  wings  of  the  ivinds,8  to 
that  sanctuary  of  the  Godhead  where,  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  there  proceeds  the  Third  Per- 
son, the  Spirit  of  love.  Yes,  he  had  ascended  into 
heaven,  that  he  might  send  this  Spirit  upon  the 
children  of  men,  and  send  him  directly  from  his 
eternal  source.9 

That  Spirit  came  down  ;  the  annals  of  holy  Church 
then  began  their  course  on  earth,  for  it  was  then 
alone,  thanks  to  the  permanent  and  intimate  Union  of 


1  Gen.  ii.  23.  4  1  Cor.  xi.  8,  9.  7  Cantic.  viii.  14. 

2  Ibid.  18-20.  6  Ibid.  vi.  17.  8  Ps.  ciii.  3. 

'  Eph.  v.  25-27.  6  Eph.  i.  23.  9  St.  John,  xvi.  7. 


104  THE    TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

which  this  Holy  Spirit  is  the  cause,  that  she  could 
begin  to  receive,  from  her  divine  Head  Jesus,  move- 
ment and  life.  Were  the  Union  transient,  were  it  to 
fail  for  a  single  instant,  the  incomparable  Bride  of 
the  Son  of  God  would  be  separated  from  that  Spouse 
of  hers  ;  and  thus  forfeiting  the  principle  and  reason 
of  her  existence,  she  would  cease  to  be.  From  all 
this,  it  follows  that  not  only  the  Purgative  and  the 
Illuminative  Ways  were  needed  as  preparations,  and 
were  provided  by  the  Liturgy  from  Advent  till  the 
Ascension  inclusively, — but  over  and  above  this,  and 
as  the  sequel  to  this,  the  Unitive  Way  was  essential 
to  the  Church,  and  is  achieved  by  the  Holy  Ghost's 
guiding  her  through  it,  in  what  is  called  the  Time 
after  Pentecost.  That  highest  Way,  the  Unitive,  is 
not  only  essential  to  the  Church,  but  it  belongs  to  her 
alone,  for  it  is  her  privilege  and  her  secret,  as  Bride 
of  the  Incarnate  Word.  Consequently,  it  is  only  by 
the  Christian's  uniting  himself  with  the  Church, — it  is 
only  by  his  being  a  member  of  this  one1  Bride  of  Christ 
Jesus, — that  he  can,  by  thus  hiding  himself  tvith 
Christ  in  God,'  reach  those  high  degrees  of  divine 
charity,  where  Jesus  so  masters  the  powers  of  mortal 
man,  that,  even  here  below,  they  derive  from  Him 
their  whole  movement  and  life.3  And  again,  there 
is  not  a  single  one  among  the  baptised,  who,  by  the 
mere  fact  of  his  being  thereby  incorporated  in  the 
Church  of  Christ,  may  not  be  led  to  a  greater  or 
lesser  degree  of  that  inner  life  of  Union.  As  to  the 
fact  of  there  being  few  who  enjoy  the  privilege  offered 
them,  it  comes  from  the  fault  of  the  majority's  incon- 
stant or  feeble  correspondence  with  grace. 

And  here,  we  are  not  expressly  speaking  of  those 
exceptional  favours,  which  form  the  special  object  of 
mystic  theology.  Favours  of  that  kind  produce 
those   extraordinary   states,    which    are   of    heaven, 

1  Cantic.  vi.  8.  2  Coloss.  iii.  3.  3  Gal.  ii.  20. 


PROPER    OF    THE    TIME.  105 

rather  than  of  earth.  In  such  states,  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  not  merely  treating  the  favoured  souls  as  the 
Scripture  describes,  where  it  speaks  of  the  eagle 
enticing  its  young  ones  to  fly  to  the  mountain- top,1 — 
He  seems  impatient  of  the  tedious  exile ;  suddenly 
carries  off  the  astonished  and  passive  soul,  and  leads 
her,  through  unknown  paths,  right  up  to  the  throne 
of  God.  There,  standing  on  the  shore  of  the  crystal 
sea  of  light  which  inundates  the  Blessed,3  she  is 
ravished  with  the  music  of  heaven.3  At  times,  there 
is  something  more  exquisite  than  that,  granted  to 
such  a  privileged  soul ;  God  takes  her  to  himself,  and 
speaks  to  her  mysterious  words,  and  ineffable  secrets ; 
and,  when  she  returns  to  herself,  she  is  all  inebriated 
with  love,  and  impressed  with  the  divine  communi- 
cations wherewith  she  has  been  intrusted,  and  which 
human  language  is  too  poor  to  hold  or  utter.4  By 
far  the  noblest  and  sublimest  pages  of  the  Church's 
history  are  those  which  relate  the  lives  of  the  Saints; 
and  they  abound  with  instances  of  favours  like  these ; 
they  manifest  to  us  creatures,  that  the  great  Creator 
is  Master  to  prove,  when  it  pleases  him,  the  indepen- 
dence and  the  power  of  his  love.  And  yet,  he  has 
not  promised  any  mortal  such  marvellous  favours  as 
these.  Though  they  are  not  so  rare  as  the  world 
supposes,  they  are,  nevertheless,  beyond  and  above 
the  normal  and  ordinary  development  of  the  Chris- 
tian Life. 

Whilst  thus  recognising  these  extraordinary  results 
of  Union  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  some  few 
of  the  Church's  children,  let  us  reverently  pass  them 
by,  to  speak  on  that  perfection  which  constitutes  the 
very  essence  of  the  Unitive  Way.  What,  then,  is 
that  perfection  ?  It  is  divine  charity,  reigning  as 
master  in  the  soul  of  one  that  has  been   baptised. 

1  Deut.  xxxii.  11.  3  Ibid.  xv.  2. 

2  Apoc.  iv.  6.  *  2  Cor.  xii.  4. 


106  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Let  us  recal  to  mind,  how,  in  the  presence  of  the 
crowds  that  had  come  together  to  hear  his  words,1  our 
Lord  Jesus  proclaimed,  from  the  Mount,  the  super- 
natural vocation  of  all  to  perfection2  and  holiness.3  Did 
he  not  distinctly  tell  us,  hy  that,  that  the  way  which  leads 
to  divine  Union,  understood  in  this  its  true  meaning, 
was  open  to  all  ?  for  it  is  divine  Union,  thus  under- 
stood, that  alone  produces  perfect  holiness.  Sex,  or 
age,  or  condition,  are  not  obstacles  to  this  divine  Union, 
provided  the  soul  in  question  is  really  desirous  of 
developing  the  heavenly  germ  that  is  in  her,4  and  is 
faithful  to  grace.  There  is  no  Christian,  who,  if  thus 
rightly  disposed,  may  not  ascend  from  the  lower 
degrees,  where  hope  and  fear  are  in  the  ascendency, 
and  reach  the  perfect  love  of  God.  And  what  is  this, 
but  Union  ?  What  is  it,  but  an  assimilation  with 
Him,  whom  our  faith  tells  us  should  be,  now,  at  once, 
even  in  this  life,  the  One  object  of  our  desires  and 
thoughts  ?  If  such  a  soul  as  that  be  taught,  by  Faith 
alone,  the  glorious  relations  which  grace  is  meant  to 
produce  between  her  and  her  God, — those  relations, 
though  not  perhaps  felt  and  relished  as  is  the  case  in 
those  mysterious  communications  of  which  we  were 
just  now  speaking,  are  none  the  less  real,  and  may 
even  be  more  substantially  intimate,  than  those  others. 
The  higher  or  lower  degree  of  divine  Union  does  not 
depend  on  the  various  and  always  incomplete  mani- 
festations, which  God  may  vouchsafe  to  grant  a  soul 
in  this  world ;  no,  it  results  from  the  more  or  less  per- 
fect, and  constant  unification  of  the  soul  with  the 
divine  will ;  and  this  is  brought  about  by  the  progres- 
sive possession  of  justice,  and  by  the  exercise  of  the 
christian  virtues.  Thus  God  sometimes  withholds 
those  mystical  favours  from  his  most  faithful  and 
dearest  servants ;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  a 
generous  soul,  that  has  never  trodden  any  but  the 

1  St.  Matth.  iv.  25.  *  Rom.  i.  7. 

2  Ibid.  v.  48.  *  Heb.  iii.  14. 


PROPER   OF   THE   TIME.  107 

ordinary  paths,  and  yet  may  be  found  dearer  to  the 
heart  of  the  Man-God,  in  the  next  world,  than  many 
others  who,  in  the  days  of  their  mortal  life,  may  have 
been  considered  as  his  special  favourites,  by  reason  of 
the  exceptional  favours  bestowed  upon  them. 

As  to  these,  then,  whose  Union  with  Christ  is  that 
of  devoted  love  kept  up  by  Faith,  alone, — they  have 
all  the  greater  need  of  keeping  close  to  the  Church, 
from  the  very  fact  of  their  not  enjoying  the  direct 
light  and  caresses  of  their  Lord.  Let  them  go  on 
courageously,  taking  comfort  from  the  thought,  that 
if  the  Way  they  are  pursuing  is  more  fatiguing,  it  is 
also  more  secure.  The  Church,  alone  has  had  the 
promise  made  to  her  of  not  going  wrong  whilst 
journeying  along  the  paths,  where  precipices  abound, 
and  on  which  the  spirit  of  darkness  is  ever  busily 
setting  snares.  Let  us,  then,  keep  hold  of  our  Mother's 
hand,  as  we  proceed  in  the  Unitive  Way  of  this  Time 
after  Pentecost ;  for,  many  a  soul  has  been  allured  into 
misery  by  the  deceitful  appearance  of  a  spirituality, 
which  promised  things  far  above  the  common.  Wo 
to  the  soul,  that  pretends  to  extraordinary  results  of 
divine  Union  by  systems  which  alienate  her  from  the 
Church !  She  talks  of  having  special  lights  from 
heaven,  whereas  she  is  but  the  dupe  of  Satan  who  can 
put  on  the  appearance  of  a  bright  angel.1  Let  her 
retrace  her  steps,  and  recover  the  beaten  path ;  let  her 
return  to  her  Mother ;  let  her  learn  from  the  seraphic 
St.  Teresa,  that  the  essential  condition  of  a  Christian's 
winning  favours  from  Christ  is  the  being  a  true 
Daughter  of  the  Churchy — a  title  so  dear  to  the  Saint, 
that,  when  on  the  point  of  death,  she  made  it  the  sub- 
ject of  her  warmest  thanks  to  God.2 

If  our  holy  Mother  the  Church  has  sometimes  to 
lament  over  souls,  that  would  have  been  models  of 
generosity  had  they  but  followed  her  guidance,  but 

1  2  Cor.  xi.  13-15.  2  Ribera,  lib.  iii.  c.  15. 


108  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

who,  allowing  themselves  to  be  led  astray,  as  Eve 
was  by  the  serpent,  have  taken  false  views,  and  fallen 
from  the  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ,1 — what  a  much 
more  frequent  cause  of  her  grief  is  the  sight  of  those 
countless  Christians  who  utterly  disdain  the  divine 
call  to  Union  ?  some  from  tepidity,  some  from  sloth, 
some  from  false  humility  ?  and  all  saying,  that  the 
low  standard  of  Christian  life  which  they  take,  is  all 
that  God  has  any  right  to  expect  from  them  !     Grod 
has  put  into  the  Church's  heart  those  two  deepest  and 
strongest   affections  which  he  has  created, — he  has 
given  her  the  tenderness  of  a  Mother  and  the  vehe- 
ment love  of  a  Bride.     Imagine,  then,  what  must  be 
her  zeal,  and  how  intense  her  desire,  to  win  over  the 
whole  world  to  her  Jesus,  and  teach  them  how  to  at- 
tain Union  with  him !     Like  St.  Paul,  she  is  jealous 
with  divine  jealousy,2  as  she  thinks  of  all  those  millions 
of  Christians,  who  undervalue  the  sublime  vocation  to 
which  they  are  all  created  ;  on  those  children  of  hers 
whom  she  cannot  induce  to  rise  above  earthly  goods, 
and  yet  these  Christians  are  her  own   members   by 
Baptism  !     She  grieves  at  seeing  how  her  Jesus  is 
treated  by  the  indifference  or  the  half-hearted  love  of 
these  sluggish  members,  who  yet  make  up  some  part 
of  that  Body,  which  she  was  told  to  -present  as   a 
chaste  virgin  to  Christ. 

0  holy  Church  of  Christ,  thou  art  a  model  for  thy 
children  !  Thou  art  the  valiant  Woman  of  the 
Scripture,  for  it  is  thy  Faith  alone  that  keeps  up  thy 
Union  with  thy  Divine  Spouse  ;  and  this  glorious 
Lamp  of  thine  shall  not  be  put  out,  dark  as  is  the 
night  of  the  world.4  Like  ourselves,  thou  hast  to  love 
without  seeing.5  It  is  now  ten  days  since  our  Em- 
manuel disappeared  in  a  cloud  ;8  he  has  sent  from 
heaven  the  Spirit,  who  was  to  animate  the  Bride  he 


1  2  Cor.  xi.  13.  *  Ibid.  5  1  St.  Pet.  i.  S. 

2  Ibid.  2.  *  Prov.  xxxi.  10-31.    6  Acts,  i.  9. 


PROPER   OF    THE    TIME.  109 

had  formed  for  himself  j1  he  would  have  the  Spirit  of 
Love,  who  proceeds  from  him,  he  the  soul  of  this  flesh 
of  his  flesh.2  Love  became  thy  life,  0  Church  of 
Jesus  !  and  yet,  He,  towards  whom  thou  wast  irresis- 
tibly drawn,  withdrew  himself  from  thy  sight.  In 
place  of  the  Beloved  One,  they  were  mortal  men, 
commissioned  by  Him  to  receive  thee  at  thy  Birth, 
who  had  to  transmit  to  thee  the  Testament  of  his 
Alliance,  and  the  dowry  of  the  Blood  which  had  re- 
deemed thee,3  and  all  the  priceless  pledges  of  Divine 
Union.  These  Apostles,  these  Messengers  of  thy 
Spouse,  who  had  been  eye-witnesses  of  his  works, — yet, 
at  the  time,  understood  them  so  imperfectly; — his  chosen 
Friends  who  had,  at  first,  no  idea  of  his  heavenly  de- 
signs,— with  what  humble  devotedness,  with  what 
enthusiastic  fidelity,  now  that  they  have  been  en- 
lightened and  inflamed  by  the  same  Holy  Ghost,  do 
they  not  impart  to  thee  all  the  exquisite  secrets  in- 
trusted to  them  by  Jesus,  and  tell  thee  all  about  the  most 
beautiful  among  the  sons  of  men  !4  Dear  Church,  not 
a  single  word  of  theirs  escaped  thee.  The  sacred 
pageantry  of  thy  Liturgy,  wherewith  thou  each  Year 
celebratest  the  Mysteries  achieved  by  the  Man- God, 
is  proof  enough  of  how  thou  hast  made  the  memories 
of  thy  Spouse  become  the  very  life  thou  livest.  But, 
thanks  to  the  omnipotent  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  ever  dwells  within  thee,  the  life  here  below  is  not 
merely  the  charm  of  the  remembered  magnificences 
of  thy  Jesus'  Mysteries ;  those  magnificences,  by  thy 
celebration  of  them,  become  thy  realities,  for  it  is  not 
in  name  only  that  thou  art  Spouse  of  the  Jesus  who 
worked  all  those  Mysteries.  The  Holy  Ghost,  by  thy 
inspired  Liturgy,  puts  into  thy  possession  the  whole 
dower  of  thy  Spouse's  Works.  Beautiful  land  !  where 
the  Seed,  the  Word  of  the  Father,  is  all  thickly 
sown  !     The  whole  oi  that  land  belongeth  to  the  Lord  I5 

1  GeD.  ii.  7.  3  Eph.  v.  25.— 1  Pet.         4  Ps.  xliv.  3. 

2  Ibid.  23.  i.  18,  19.  5  Ps.  xxiii.  1. 


110  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Land  of  beaut}7,  thy  ceaseless  fertility,  which  all  these 
ages  have  not  impaired,  is  evidence  enough  that  thy 
Beloved,  though  he  has  fled  away  to  the  everlasting 
hills,  is  still  thy  Sun  of  Justice,  and  that  even  from 
behind  the  cloud  where  he  is  hid,  he  darts  straight 
upon  thee  his  life-giving  rays.1 

It  is  this  permanent  fact  of  the  Union  between 
Christ  and  his  Church, — it  is  the  fruit-bearing  exis- 
tence of  his  Bride  throughout  all  ages, — that  the  holy 
Liturgy  signifies  by  the  long  months  of  the  Time  after 
Pentecost.  No  wonder  that  this  last  season  of  the 
Liturgical  Year  is  as  long,  and  frequently  longer, 
than  all  the  others  put  together ;  because,  it  has  for 
its  object,  first,  the  real  life  of  the  Church  which  she 
is  living,  and  will  live,  till  the  end  of  time,  and 
secondly,  that  reign  of  love  which  is  intended  to  ab- 
sorb the  whole  life  of  every  Christian  during  his 
sojourn  on  earth.  It  is  in  this  Season  of  the  Time 
after  Pentecost  that  Jesus  wins  the  end  towards  which 
all  his  previous  labours  and  Mysteries  had  been 
directed,  that  is,  the  Union  of  Members  with  himself 
their  Head, — Union  which  is  to  be  produced  by  the 
persevering  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  by  this 
longest  Season  that  Incarnate  Wisdom  gets  fuller 
possession  of  mankind,  and  produces  in  them  more 
abundant  fruits  for  his  eternal  Father.  It  is  the 
Season  when  the  seed  of  the  Word,  which  had  been 
so  unstintedly  sown  by  the  previous  Mysteries,  is  now 
producing,  perhaps  a  hundred  fold.  Love  is  in  its 
fullest  Season,  and  makes  its  power  tell,  in  the  souls 
of  the  Faithful,  by  Prayer,  and  Suffering,  and  Action. 
Yes,  that  third  result,  A  ction,  is  imperative;  for  there 
is  nothing  so  impossible  for  genuine  love,  as  false 
quietude.  Such  absurd  pretence  of  habitual  reposing 
in  God  without   working   for   him,  is   a  dangerous 

1  Ps.  lxxxv.  5,  3  1  Cor.  vi.  15-17.       6  St.  Luke,  viii.  8. 

2  St.  Matt.  xxii.  36-40.     *  Ecclus.  xxiv.  26. 


PROPER   OF    THE    TIMES.  Ill 

system,  for,  under  the  pretext  of  letting  nothing  he  in 
the  soul  hut  Love,  the  powers  of  the  soul  get  clogged  ; 
the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  paralyzed  ;  and,  sooner 
or  later,  it  will  seem  to  a  soul  who  adopts  such  a 
spirituality,  that  the  exercise  of  the  most  indispensable 
virtues  is  a  distraction,  and,  therefore,  an  imperfec- 
tion. Perfect  love,  when  it  enters  a  soul,  rules  all 
her  faculties ;  that  is  quite  true  ;  but  far  from  crush- 
ing, or  even  indiscretely  using  them,  it  makes  each 
one  of  them  more  vigorous,  and  each  one  tends  to 
make  love  itself  more  intense.  Because  of  all  this, 
therefore,  the  Time  after  Pentecost  is  the  longest 
Season  of  the  Liturgical  Year;  and  the  Church, 
during  that  most  precious  Time,  will  be  filling  her 
children  with  this  manifold  doctrine,  which  is  included 
in  the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  governing  us 
in  the  Unitive  Way,  and  is  gradnally  forming  in  each 
of  us  the  perfect  man,  even  unto  the  measure  of  Christ 
himself.1 

Moreover,  this  latter  portion  of  the  Liturgical  Year 
teaches  us,  that,  from  the  very  fact  of  the  Holy 
Ghost's  leading  the  Church  to  divine  Union,  all  her 
labours  tend  to  one  result :  that  one  result  is  religion, 
or  Worship  of  God.  The  Liturgy  is  the  worthy  and 
official  expression  of  the  Church's  Worship  of  God ; 
and  happy  we,  who  have  made  that  Liturgy  our 
guide  in  the  Ways  which  lead  to  God  !  As  it  is  with 
the  Church  herself,  so  must  it  be  with  us  her  children, 
— the  virtue  of  religion  characterises  every  degree 
made  towards  divine  Union. 

As  where  charity  rules  the  seven  great  Virtues, 
there  supernatural  movement  and  life  is  most  vigor- 
ous,— so,  when  all  the  acts  of  virtue,  prompted  by 
love,  have  the  glory  of  God  for  their  aim,  (and  this 
is  religion,)  there  is  the  most  unequivocal  proof  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  worked  Union  in  that  soul ;  the 

1  Eph.  iv.  13-15. 


112  TIME    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

degree  is  in  proportion  with  the  degree  wherein  the 
soul  is  advanced  in  Religion.  Religion  was  the  life 
of  Jesus  upon  earth  j1  and  it  is  so  noiv,  for  he  is  the 
eternal  High  Priest,  ever  offering  Sacrifice  to  the 
Trinity.  So,  then,  if  we  have  attained  to  any  degree 
of  true  "Union  with  Him,  wrought  in  us  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  we  must  have  a  corresponding  degree  of  reli- 
gion within  us.  The  Apostle  tells  us,  that  he  who  is 
Joined  to  the  Lord,  is  one  spirit  with  him.2  We  repeat 
it :  the  seeking  to  give  glory  to  the  Blessed  Trinity, 
is  the  characteristic  feature  of  a  soul's  being  united 
with  Christ  Jesus. 

The  Church's  being  united  to  Him  necessitated  her 
making  religion  (or,  what  is  the  same, —  Worship,) 
be  the  very  essence  of  her  existence.  The  magnificent 
celebrations  of  her  Liturgy,  joined  with  the  perfect 
integrity  of  her  Faith,  will  ever  distinguish  her, 
amidst  the  countless  sects  that  lay  claim  to  truth, 
as  the  True  Bride  of,  and  the  truly  United  to,  Jesus. 
Hence,  the  Temple, — where  God  is  most  solemnly 
worshipped  by  the  adorable  Sacrifice  and  its  accom- 
paniment, its  preparation,  its  sequel,  of  the  choral 
service  of  Divine  Office, — the  Temple  consecrated  to 
God  is  the  Church's  home.  If  she  leave  it  for  a 
time,  it  is  only  to  bring  back  with  her  more  and  more 
worshippers.  It  is  there  that  she  convenes  her 
children  to  join  her  in  celebrating  the  mysteries 
wrought  by  our  Lord,  or  in  honouring  his  Blessed 
Mother,  or  the  Angels,  or  the  Saints.  It  is  there 
she  becomes  the  joyful  Mother  of  children  to  her 
Spouse ;  there  she  blesses  them  with  the  gifts,  and 
enlightens  them  with  the  truth,  imparted  to  her  by 
that  same  Lord  of  hers.  And  as  she  made  his  House 
be  their  happiest  dwelling  during  their  life,  so,  after 
their  death,  she  would  (if  men  did  not  interfere  with 
her  wishes)  have  them  rest  in  peace  under  the  shadow 
of  those  consecrated  walls. 

1  1  Cor.  xv.  28.  -  Ibid.  vi.  17. 


PROPER   OF    THE    TIME.  113 

Among  the  souls  whom  God  has  intrusted  to  the 
Church's  care,  there  are  some  who  are  so  taken  with, 
admiration  at  her  ceaseless  voice  of  praise,  breathing 
forth  all  over  the  world  her  adoring  love  of  her 
Spouse's  works  and  mysteries  and  perfections,1 — that 
they  aspire  to  do  in  like  manner,  and  keep  uninter- 
rupted company  with  their  Mother,  who  is  ever  in 
search  of  the  Beloved  ;2  they  will  do  as  she  does, 
that  is,  have  hut  one  thought,  and  one  occupation, 
and  one  ambition, — divine  Union  and  a  life  of  per- 
fection. The  Mother  gives  them  a  hearty  welcome ; 
she  admits  them  into  her  closest  intimacy  ;  she  gladly 
and  unreservedly  imparts  to  them  all  her  own  secrets 
of  how  best  to  please,  and  how  soonest  find,  their 
same  beautiful  Lord.  And  because  they  are  thus 
filled  with  her  spirit,  the  spirit  of  religion,  she  dis- 
tinguishes them  from  all  the  rest  of  her  Sons  and 
Daughters  by  the  grand  title  of  religious.  The 
world  cannot  understand  them.3  The  life  they  lead 
is  such  a  puzzle  to  them  that  live  a  life  of  very 
different  occupations,4  that  it  creates  a  habit  of  irri- 
tation against  these  men  and  women  who  thus  live 
religion.  The  irritation  makes  them  watchful  to 
discover  imperfections  ;  or  it  makes  them  ingenious 
in  putting  forward  theories  about  the  Religious  State 
which  would  minimise  its  excellence ;  or  it  will  make 
them  pull  down  Monasteries,  and  disband  the  Monks 
and  Nuns  who  live  there  wasting  (!)  their  lives  in  the 
worship  of  God,  in  religion  towards  him  !  All  this 
is  quite  natural.  But  these  religious  are  one  of  the 
most  unmistakeable  manifestations  of  the  Church's 
Union  with  Christ;  and,  for  that  very  reason,  no 
human  power  can  deprive  her  of  that  manifestation. 
She,  by  being  Bride  of  Christ,  is  one  Body  with 
him  ;5  that  Body  exists  only6  for  the  purpose  of  being 

1  Cantic.  iii.l;  v.  8-16.    3 1  Cor.  ii.  14.  5  Gen.  ii.  24. 

2  Ibid.  17.  4- Cantic.  iii.  2-4.         6  Heb.  x.  5-14. 

VOL.  XI.  I 


114  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

offered  in  Sacrifice  of  complete  homage  to  the  Eternal 
Father  ;  and  the  Church  fulfils  all  this  fully  and  un- 
reservedly in  those  whose  whole  being,  by  the  Vows 
they  make,  and  the  sublime  consecration  given  to 
them  by  the  Church,  is  absorbed  into  the  religion 
and  perfect  oblation  of  Christ  Jesus  the  Eternal  High 
Priest. 

Though  all  Christians  do  not,  and  can  not,  lead 
the  life  of  religion  in  the  perfect  and  untramelled 
way  that  we  have  been  just  describing,  yet  are  they 
all  called  upon,  if  they  would  enter  heaven,  to  attain 
to  such  a  degree  of  Union  with  Christ,  as  will  make 
them  his  true  and  real  Members.  Now,  that  Union, 
even  supposing  it  to  be  the  lowest  degree,  unites 
them  to  the  Man- God,  who  is  Victim  and  Priest,  and 
whose  Cblation  is  the  highest  worship  that  can  be 
given  to  the  Most  High  God.  It  is  religion.  The 
Apostle  teaches  us,  that  this  Union  with  the  Incarnate 
Word  is  absolutely  requisite  for  salvation.1  That 
Union  began  when  we  were  baptised,  when,  as  the 
same  Apostle  says,  we  not  only  put  on  Christ*  but 
we  were  ingrafted  into  Him  as  the  great  Immolated, 
which  the  sacred  text  expresses  by  the  words  in  the 
likeness  of  his  Death?  The  unction  of  the  Chrism, 
given  to  us  the  moment  after  Baptism,  attests  the 
existence,  in  all  the  Baptised,  of  the  Kingly  priest- 
hood,* which  gives  them  a  share  in  the  Oblation  (the 
religion)  of  the  High  Priest,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

These  truths  form  the  basis  of  the  moral  teaching 
contained  in  the  Epistles  of  Saints  Peter  and  Paul. 
.For  them,  as  the  purest  and  sublimest  teaching, — 
the  science  of  Christian  life  is  summed  up,  as  might 
be  expected,  in  our  seeking  God's  glory  ;5  in  religion 
and  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Head,  passed  on  to  his 
Members  ;  so  that,  his  worship  becomes  shared  in  by 

1  Rom.  viii.  29,  30.        3  Ibid.  5.  5  1  Cor.  x.  31. 

2  Ibid.  vi.  3.  *  1  St.  Pet.  ii.  2-9. 


PROPER    OF    THE    TIME.  115 

them.  Let  us  again  think  on  the  meaning  of  that 
anointing  in  Baptism,  which  gives  to  every  Christian 
the  impress  of  the  Great  High  Priest  Jesus :  it 
implies  the  share  Christians  have  in  the  sacrifice, 
the  religion  of  Christ ;  it  enables  them  to  transform 
into  a  sharing  in  Christ's  eternal  Holocaust  all 
their  victories  over  sin,  and  all  their  Sacrifices,  and 
all  their  virtuous  acts,  here  on  earth.  So  that  the 
newly-baptised  Christian  who  is  just  born  to  the 
supernatural  life,  could  say,  as  Christ  did  on  his  first 
coming  into  this  world, — that  he  had  received  his 
Body  only  for  the  one  purpose  of  immolating  it  to 
God's  glory.1  The  Christian  is  told  by  St.  Paul, 
that  he,  too,  must  present  his  body  a  living  sacrifice, 
as  a  service,  a  worship,  due  unto  God.2  Rendered, 
as  he  thus  is,  a  sharer  in  the  Priesthood  of  the  Man- 
God,  he  must  remember  what  is  the  purpose  of  that 
participated  honour  :  it  is,  as  St.  Peter  shows  him, 
that  he  make  his  good  works  be  so  many  spiritual  sacri- 
fices offered  unto  God  by  Jesus  Christ,  and,  therefore, 
acceptable.3 

Those  same  two  Apostles  teach  us  that  we  Chris- 
tians are,  also,  living  stones  4  of  the  Temple  built  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  corner-stone.5  Nay,  that  we 
ourselves  are  Temples;6  and,  as  such,  we  should 
resemble  our  Lord,  in  this,  as  in  all  other  things ; 
now  He,  in  his  sacred  Humanity,  was  the  sanctuary 
of  the  adorable  Trinity.8  A  Temple  should  be  what 
its  name  implies ; 9  therefore,  adoration,  prayer, 
praise,  and  the  great  Sacrifice  above  all,  should  be 
uppermost  in  our  thoughts,  and  should  tell  upon  our 
whole  conduct.  If  religion  be  not  the  very  atmos- 
phere of  ourselves,  who  are  God's  Temples,  the  divine 
Majesty  who  dwells  in  them  would  be  justly  displeased. 

1  Heb.  x.  5.  5  Eph.  ii.  20,  21.  9  St.    Benedict,    H. 

2  Rom.  xii.  1.  6  Ibid.  22.  Rule,  ch.  52. 

3  1  St.  Pet.  ii.  5.  7  Heb.  ii.  17.  10  1  Cor.  iii.  16. 

4  Ibid.  4,  5.  8  St.  John,  ii.  21. 


116  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

But.  what  is  it  makes  us  sanctuaries  of  the  Divinity? 
It  is  the  coming  into  us  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  What 
puts  upon  us  the  sublime  obligation  of  glorifying  and 
carrying  God  in  our  bodies,1  is  the  reign  of  the 
Paraclete  within  us.  If  any  one  love  me,  said  our 
Lord,  my  Father  will  love  him,  (that  is  to  say,  "  will 
"give  him  that  Holy  Spirit  who  is  Love)  ;2  and  we 
will  come  unto  him  and  will  make  our  abode  ivith  him.3 
The  promise  was  formal ;  it  was  fulfilled  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost.  The  Holy  Spirit,  "proceeding  from 
"  the  Throne," 4  filled  with  the  divine  stream,5  which 
flows,  together  with  him,  from  the  sacred  heart  of 
Jesus,  filled,  I  say,  the  Baptistery  where  the  Church, 
in  the  person  of  the  three  thousand  neophytes,7  was 
awaitiDg  her  own  birth.  The  three  divine  Persons  came 
down  upon  that  first  baptismal  font;  and,  whilst  the 
water  was  yet  moist  on  these  first  converts  of  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  there  descended  upon  them  what  the  sacred 
Liturgy  enthusiastically  terms,  "  an  inundating  grace 
"  of  the  Deity."  9  Blind  and  poor  as  they  were 
before,  they  then  were  enriched  with  light  and  love. 
Not  only  was  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  made  known 
to  the  world ;  but,  by  the  all- efficacious  formula  of 
holy  Baptism,  the  Trinity  took  up  its  abode  in  those 
regenerated  creatures,  making  them  all  and  each,  as 
St.  Augustine  says,  its  true  Temple.10 

Nothing,  therefore,  could  be  more  natural,  than  for 
the  Feast  of  the  Holy  Trinity  to  be  placed  imme- 
diately after  that  of  the  glorious  Pentecost.  No 
sooner  would  the  Church,  wakening  into  life,  feel 
within  her  the  divine  indwelling,  than  she  would 
prostrate  herself  in  grateful  adoration  before  that 
thrice-holy  God,  who  thus  deigned  to  fill  her  with 

1  1  Cor.  vi.  20.  5  Ps.  Ixiv.  10.  9  Resp.   of    5th   For. 

2  1  St.  John,  iv.  12, 13.  G  St.  John,   xix.   34  ;      aft.  Pent. 

3  Sr.  John,  xiv.  23.  iii.  5 ;  vii.  37-39.       10  St.  Aug.  Epist.  187. 

4  Resp.    of  2nd   Fer.  7  Acts,  ii.  41.  alias  57. 

aft.  Pent.  8  St.  Matth.  iii.  16, 17. 


PROPER   OF    THE    TIME.  117 

his  infinite  Majesty.  Later  on,  she  would  be  led  to 
enricb  ber  Year  with  a  Festival,  whose  doctrinal 
light  and  teaching  would  so  admirably  harmonise 
with  the  rest  of  her  Liturgy. 

If  that  Festival  of  Trinity  rightly  followed  Pente- 
cost, it,  with  equal  appropriateness,  preceded  the  one 
of  Corpus  Christi, — for  the  manifestation  of  the  Three 
divine  Persons,  and  the  creature's  acknowledgment 
of  the  homage  it  owes  to  the  adorable  Unity,  really 
preceded  the  Union,  in  the  Sacrament  of  Love,  be- 
tween Christ  and  his  Church.  The  Feast  of  the 
Eucharist  would,  from  the  very  fact  of  its  following 
that  of  Trinity,  tell  the  Bride  that  the  glorification  of 
God,  One  in  Three  Persons,  was  to  be  the  fruit  justly 
expected  from  the  divine  Nuptials.  The  children  of 
the  Church,  invited  so  high  up  by  divine  Wisdom, 
though  from  no  merits  of  their  own,  would  now  clearly 
understand,  why  it  was  that  our  Lord  did  not  wish  to 
give  himself  to  his  servants,  except  in  the  very  celebra- 
tion of  that  Sacrifice,  which  gives  infinite  glory  to  the 
Blessed  Trinity.  The  Union  which  was  to  exist  be- 
tween the  Church  and  her  divine  Spouse  was  to  be 
on  this  condition, — that  the  holiness  of  the  Son  of 
Man  was  to  be  communicated  to  that  Church,  whom 
he  chose  for  his  Bride.  Let  us  give  respectful  atten- 
tion to  certain  most  mysterious  words  recorded  by  the 
Evangelist  as  having  been  addressed  by  Jesus  to  his 
Father.  Father,  said  he,  sanctify  in  the  Truth,  them 
whom  thou  gavest  me ;  sanctify  litem  in  the  Truth,  which 
is  thy  Word;  for  it  is  for  them  that  I  do  sanctify  my- 
self that  they,  also,  may  be  sanctified  in  the  Truth.1 
What  means  this  ?  that  Jesus,  who  is  sanctity  itself,2 
and  is  the  source  of  sanctity  to  all  creatures,  should 
speak  of  sanctifying  Himself  ?  The  Fathers  of  the 
Church3  explain  it  as  being  the  consecration  of  the 

1  St.  John,  xvii.  17,  19.         2  Ps.  xv.  10 ;  St.  Mark,  i.  24. 
3  Among  others,  St.  Cyril,  in  Johan,  lib.  x.  c.  10. 


118  TIME   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Sacrifice,  by  which  Jesus,  who  is  the  great  High  Priest, 
gives  to  God,  in  the  name  of  the  whole  world,  the 
infinite  homage  which  is  due  to  infinite  Majesty.  In 
human  language,  as  also  in  the  inspired  Scriptures,1 
Justice  and  Sanctity  are  one  and  the  same.  If,  then, 
infinite  Sanctity  is  one  with  infinite  Justice,  is  not  the 
essentially  sanctified  and  sanctifying  Act,  that  Sacrifice 
of  the  Son  of  Man,  which  so  loudly  proclaims,  and  so 
amply,  yea  so  infinitely,  satisfies  The  right  of  God, 
the  eternal  Right,  whence  all  other  Rights  derive  their 
existence,  the  Right  which  is  the  origin  of  all  justice  ? 
Sacrifice,  then,  thus  sanctifying  the  Head3  and  the 
Members,4  is  also  the  consummation  of  Union  between 
Christ  and  his  Church.  With  this  before  us,  we  shall 
have  no  difficulty  in  understanding,  how  it  is  that  the 
Holy  Sacrifice,  in  its  imposing  and  simple  unity, 
should  be  the  very  centre  and  soul  of  a  Season,  which 
signifies,  and  celebrates,  and  gives  ever  new  perfection 
to,  that  divine  union.  We  must  not  expect  to  find,  in 
the  series  of  the  Sundays  after  Pentecost,  that  con- 
nexion of  dramatic  design,  that  interesting  gradation, 
working  up  to  some  fixed  Day  of  a  Mystery,  as  was 
the  case  in  the  preceding  periods  of  the  Liturgical 
Year.  In  those  other  Seasons,  the  Church  was  in 
search  of  her  divine  Spouse  ;  she  was  appioaching 
closer  to  him  by  the  gradual  celebration  of  his  several 
mysteries,  each  celebration  did  its  glorious  share  in  the 
work  of  incorporating  her  with  him ;  till  at  length, 
being  all  transformed  into  him,  there  was  nothing  to 
prevent  the  longed-for  Union.  True,  it  was  precisely 
then,  that  the  Man-God  hid  himself  from  her  view, 
and  seemed  to  be  leaving  her  for  further  probation ; 
but,  that  was  the  very  time  when  he  sent  the  Holy 
Ghost  upon  the  earth ;  and  he,  the  Spirit,  revealed  to 
the  Church  the  sense  of  the  word  spoken  by  the 
Divine  Spouse  in  the  Canticle :  Till  the  day  break,  and 

1  Acts,  iii.  14.  3  Heb.  ii.  10. 

2  Rom.  iii.  26.  4  Ibid.  x.  14. 


PROPER   OF   THE   TIME.  119 

the  shadows  retire,  1  ivill  go  to  the  Mount  of  myrrh, 
and  to  the  Hill  of  frankincense? 

Right  well  has  the  Church  taken  all  in.  She  has 
fixed  her  abode  on  the  Mount  of  Sacrifice ;  and  there 
has  she  mingled  the  myrrh  of  her  sufferings,  and  the 
frankincense  of  her  worship,  with  the  homage  paid  to 
the  Trinity  by  the  great  High  Priest,  her  Jesus.  It 
is  there  that  the  fulness  of  Christ  is  filled2  by  her  par- 
taking of  it;  there  she  receives,  day  by  day,  an  in- 
crease of  fruitfulness.  Having  there  found  Him  whom 
her  soul  loved  so  ardently,  she  holds  him  fast,3  and 
will  never  leave  the  happy  place  he  had  fixed  for  the 
meeting.  The  day  will  come,  when  she  is  to  flee  with 
Him4  to  the  mountains,  where  the  flowers  of  heaven 
blend  their  fragrance  with  that  of  the  eternal  Holo- 
caust ;  but,  even  now,  love  predominates  and  triumphs ; 
for,  though  the  bright  land  of  heaven  seems  so  far 
away,  yet  from  the  Hills  of  her  exile,  where  the  Man- 
God  continues  his  Sacrifice,  the  Church  may,  in  all 
truth,  say  to  her  divine  Spouse :  My  Beloved  is  mine, 
and  1  am  his,  till  the  Day  break,  and  the  shadoivs  re- 
tire.5 

We  thought  it  a  necessity  to  offer  these  considera- 
tions to  our  Header,  in  order  to  give  him  a  clearer 
idea  of  the  importance  of  this  Liturgical  Season,  and 
enable  him  to  thoroughly  understand  its  spirit.  We 
may  now  resume  our  explanation  of  the  Liturgy  for 
this  Time  after  Pentecost;  our  last  Volume  ended  with 
the  Third  Sunday.  The  work  of  sanctification  carried 
on  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  souls  of  men,  and  his 
ceaseless  operations  in  the  Church  at  large,  would 
have  provided  us  with  abundant  matter  of  instruc- 
tion for  each  day  of  each  of  these  twenty-four  weeks. 
The  Liturgy  itself  would  have  suggested  admirable 

1  Cantic.  iv.  6.  2  Eph.  i.  23.  *  Cantic.  iii.  4. 

4  Cantic.  ii.  16,  17. 


120  TIME    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

daily  reflections,  for  we  could  have  taken  them  from 
the  Epistles  and  Gospels  which,  for  a  long  time,  were 
assigned  to  nearly  every  feria  of  this  portion  of  the 
Year.  But  this  would  have  obliged  us  to  make  our 
Volume  as  large  again  as  it  is.  We  shall,  therefore, 
confine  ourselves  to  an  explanation  of  the  Mass  for 
each  Sunday.  The  present  usage  of  the  Latin 
Church  sets  us  the  example ;  for,  dating  from  the 
16th  Century,  she  prescribes,  as  a  general  rule,  that 
should  a  feria,  on  which  a  saint's  feast  is  kept,  occur 
during  the  week,  the  Sunday's  Mass  is  to  be  simply 
repeated.  In  order  to  supply  the  Faithful  with 
suitable  reflections  for  each  of  the  weeks  after  Pente- 
cost, we  have  taken  the  suggestion  thus  offered  by 
the  practice  and  rubrics  of  the  Church  for  this  holy 
Season,  and  have  made  our  commentary  on  the 
several  portions  of  the  Sunday's  Liturgy  somewhat 
longer  than  will  be  found  in  the  previous  Yolumes 
of  the  Work. 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.      121 


THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Thk  fourth  Sunday  after  Pentecost  was  called,  for 
a  long  period,  in  the  West,  the  Sunday  of  Mercy y 
because,  formerly,  there  was  read  upon  it  the  pas- 
sage from  St.  Luke,  beginning  with  the  words : 
"Be  merciful,  as  your  Father  is  merciful."  But, 
this  Gospel  having  been  since  assigned  to  the  Mass 
of  the  first  Sunday  after  Pentecost,  the  Gospel  of  the 
fifth  Sunday  was  made  that  of  the  fourth  ;  the  Gospel 
of  the  sixth  became  that  of  the  fifth ;  and  so  on,  up 
to  the  twenty-third.  The  change  we  speak  of  was, 
however,  not  introduced  into  many  Churches  till  a 
very  late  period ; :  and  it  was  not  universally  received 
till  the  16th  Century. 

Whilst  the  Gospels  were  thus  brought  forward  a 
week, — in  almost  the  whole  series  of  these  Sundays, 
the  Epistles,  Prayers,  and  the  other  sung  portions  of 
the  ancient  Masses,  were,  with  a  few  exceptions,  left 
as  originally  drawn  up.  The  connection,  which  the 
liturgists  of  the  11th,  12  th,  and  13th  centuries  had 
fancied  they  found  between  the  Gospel  and  the  rest 
of  the  Liturgy  for  these  Sundays,  was  broken.  Thus 
the  Church  spared  not  those  favourite  views  of 
explanations  which  were  at  times  far-fetched ;  and 
yet  she  did  not  intend,  by  that,  to  condemn  those 
writers,  nor  to  discourage  her  children  from  perusing 
their  treatises,  for,  as  the  holy  reflections  they  con- 
tained were  frequently  suggested  by  the  authority  of 

1  Cf.  cum  Missali  hodierno  Bern.  Aug.  De  offic.  Mis.  cap.  v; 
Microlog.  De  eccl.  obs.  cap.  lxi ;  Honor.  Augustod.  Gemma 
aniime,  1.  iv;  Rupert.  De  div.  off.  1.  xii.  Durand.  1.  vi ;  etc. 


122  TIME    AFTER   PEXTECOST. 

the  ancient  Liturgies,  such  reading  would  edify  and 
instruct.  "We  are  quite  at  liberty,  then,  to  turn  their 
labours  to  profit ;  let  us  only  keep  this  continually 
before  us, — that  the  chief  connection  existing  between 
the  several  portions  of  the  proper  of  each  Mass  for 
the  Sundays  after  Pentecost  consists  in  the  unity  of 
the  Sacrifice  itself. 

In  the  Greek  Church,  there  is  even  less  pretention 
to  anything  approaching  methodical  arrangement  in 
the  Liturgy  of  these  Sundays.  On  the  morrow  of 
Pentecost,  they  begin  the  reading  of  the  Gospel  of  St. 
Matthew,  and  continue  it,  chapter  after  chapter,  up 
to  the  feast  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  holy  Cross,  in 
September.  St.  Luke  follows  St.  Matthew,  and  is 
read  in  the  same  way.  The  weeks  and  Sundays  of 
this  Season  are  simply  named  according  to  the  Gospel 
of  each  day  ;  or  they  take  the  name  of  the  Evangelist 
whose  text  is  being  read  :  thus,  our  first  Sunday  after 
Pentecost  is  called  by  them  the  first  Sunday  of  St. 
Mattheiv  ;  the  one  we  are  now  keeping  is  their  fourth 
of  St.  Matthew. 

In  a  former  volume,1  we  have  spoken  of  the  im- 
portance of  the  Eighth  day,  as  the  Christian  substitute 
for  the  Seventh  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  and  as  the 
holy  Day  of  the  new  people  of  God.  u  The  Syna- 
"  gogue,  by  God's  command,  kept  holy  the  Saturday, 
"  or  the  Sabbath, — and  this,  in  honour  of  God's 
"  resting  after  the  six  days  of  the  creation  ;  but  the 
"  Church,  the  Bride  of  Jesus,  is  commanded  to  honour 
"  the  Work  of  her  Spouse.  She  allows  the  Saturday 
'*  to  pass, — it  is  the  day  of  her  Lord's  rest  in  the 
"  Sepulchre :  but,  now  that  she  is  illumined  with  the 
n  brightness  of  the  Resurrection,  she  devotes  to  the 
"  contemplation  of  his  Work  the  first  day  of  the  week, 

1  Paschal  Time  :  p.  18. 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.     123 

"  the  Sunday  :  it  is  the  day  of  Light,  for  on  it  he 
"  called  forth  material  Light  (which  was  the  first 
"  manifestation  of  order  amidst  chaos  ;)  and,  on  the 
°  same  day,  He  that  is  the  Brightness  of  the  Father/ 
"  and  the  Light  of  the  world?  rose  from  the  darkness 
"  of  the  Tomb." 

So  important,  indeed,  is  the  Sunday's  liturgy, 
which,  every  week,  is  intrusted  to  honour  such  pro- 
found mysteries, — that,  for  a  long  time,  the  Roman 
Pontiffs  kept  down  the  number  of  Feasts  which  were 
above  the  rank  of  semi-doubles  ;  that  thus  the  Sunday, 
which  is  a  semi- double,  might  not  be  disturbed.  It 
was  not  till  the  second  half  of  the  17th  Centurv,  that 
this  discipline  of  reserve  was  relaxed.  Then  it  was, 
that  it  had  to  give  way,  in  order  thereby  to  meet  the 
attacks,  made  by  the  Protestants  and  their  allies  the 
Jansenists,  against  the  cidt  of  the  Saints.  Need  was 
of  reminding  the  Faithful,  that  the  honour  paid  to  the 
servants  of  God  detracts  not  from  the  glory  of  their 
Master  ;  that  the  cult  of  the  Saints,  the  Members  of 
Christ,  is  but  the  consequence  and  development  of 
that  which  is  due  to  Christ  their  Head.  The  Church 
owed  it  to  her  Spouse  to  make  a  protest  against  the 
narrow  views  of  these  innovators,  who  were  really 
aiming  at  lessening  the  glory  of  the  Incarnation,  by 
thus  denying  its  grandest  consequences.  It  was, 
therefore,  by  a  special  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
that  the  Apostolic  See  then  permitted  several  feasts, 
both  old  and  new,  to  be  ranked  as  of  a  double  rite. 
To  strengthen  the  solemn  condemnation  she  had  pro- 
nounced against  the  heretics  of  that  period,  she  wisely 
adopted  the  course  of,  from  time  to  time,  allowing  the 
Feasts  of  Saints  to  be  kept  on  Sundays,  although 
these  latter  were  considered  as  being  especially  re- 
served for  the  celebration  of  the  leading  mysteries  of 
our  Catholic  faith,  and  for  the  obligatory  attendance 
of  the  people. 

1  Heb.  i.  3.  2  St.  John,  viii.  12. 


124  TIME    AFTEtt   PENTECOST. 

The  Sunday,  or  Dominical,  Liturgy  was  not,  how- 
ever, altogether  displaced  hy  the  celebration  of  any 
particular  feast  on  the  Lord's  Day ;  for,  no  matter 
how  solemn  soever  that  feast,  falling  on  a  Sunday, 
may  he,  a  commemoration  must  always  he  made  of 
the  Sunday,  hy  adding  its  Prayers  to  those  of  the 
occurring  Feast,  and  by  reading  its  proper  Gospel, 
instead  of  that  of  St.  John,  at  the  end  of  Mass. 
Neither  let  us  forget,  that  after  the  assisting  at  the 
solemn  Mass  and  the  Canonical  Hours,  one  of  the 
best  means  for  observing  the  precept  of  keeping  holy 
the  sabbath-day  is  our  own  private  meditation  upon  the 
Epistle  and  Gospel  appointed  by  the  Church  for  each 
Sunday. 

MASS. 

The  Church,  on  the  morrow  of  Trinity-Sunday, 
began  the  reading  of  the  Books  of  Kings  in  her  night- 
office.  On  this  very  night  preceding  our  Sunday,  she 
entered  on  the  admirable  history  of  David's  triumph 
over  Goliath,  the  Philistine  giant.  Now,  who  is  the 
Church's  true  David,  but  that  divine  Leader  who,  for 
these  eighteen-hundred  years,  has  been  marshalling 
the  army  of  the  Saints  to  victory  ?  Is  not  she  her- 
self the  King's  daughter,1  who  was  promised  to  Him 
who  should  win  the  battle  against  Satan  ?  That 
battle  was  won  on  Calvary,  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
he  saved  the  true  Israel,  and  avenged  the  insult 
offered  to  the  God  of  hosts.  Filled  with  the  senti- 
ments breathed  into  her  by  this  episode  of  sacred 
history,  the  Church,  the  Bride,  borrows  the  words  of 
David,2  wherewith  to  celebrate  the  noble  exploits  of 
her  Spouse,  and  to  tell  the  confidence  which  she  has 
in  him,  in  consequence  of  his  triumph.  It  is  her 
Introit. 


1  1  Kings,  xvii.  25-27.  2  Ps.  xxvi. 


MASS. 


125 


INTROIT. 


The  Lord  is  my  light  and 
my  salvation,  whom  shall  I 
fear  1  The  Lord  is  the  pro- 
tector of  my  life,  of  whom  shall 
I  be  afraid  ]  My  enemies  that 
trouble  me  have  themselves 
been  weakened,  and  have  fal- 
len. 

Ps.  If  armies  in  camp 
should  stand  together  against 
me,  my  heart  shall  not  fear. 
Glory,  &c.  The  Lord. 


Dominus  illuminatio  mea 
et  salus  mea,  quern  timebo  1 
Dominus  defensor  vitse 
meae,  a  quo  trepidabo  1  Qui 
tribulant  me  inimici  mei, 
ipsi  infirmati  sunt  et  ceci- 
derunt. , 

Ps.  Si  consistant  adver- 
sum  me  castra,  non  time- 
bit  cor  meum.  Gloria  Patri. 
Dominus. 


Notwithstanding  her  confidence  in  heaven's  help- 
ing her  in  times  of  trial,  yet  does  the  Church  ever 
pray  to  the  Most  High,  that  he  would  bless  the 
world  with  peace.  If,  when  the  battle  comes,  the 
Bride  thrills  at  the  thought,  that  she  will  then  have 
the  chance  of  proving  her  devoted  love,  yet,  as 
Mother,  she  trembles  when  she  thinks  that  many  of 
her  children,  who  would  have  been  saved  had  the 
times  been  peaceful,  will  perish  because  of  days 
of  trouble  overtaking  them.  Let  us  pray  with  her 
in  the  Collect. 


COLLECT. 


Grant  us,  we  beseech  thee, 
O  Lord,  that,  by  thy  provi- 
dence, the  events  of  this  world 
may  be  peacefully  arranged 
for  us,  and  that  thy  Church 
may  be  gladdened  by  being 
permitted  to  serve  thee 
with  peaceful  devotedness. 
Through,  &c. 


Da  nobis,  qusesumus  Do- 
mine,  ut  et  mundi  cursus 
pacifice  nobis  tuo  ordine 
dirigatur  :  et  ecclesia  tua 
tranquilla  devotione  laete- 
tur.     Per  Dominum. 


SECOND   COLLECT. 


Preserve  us,  0  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  from  all  dangers  of 
soul  and  body  :  and,  by  the 
intercession  of    the   glorious 


A  cunctis  nos  qusesumus, 
Domine,  mentis  et  corporis 
def ende  periculis  :  et  inter- 
cedente   beata  et  gloriosa 


126 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


semper  Virgine  Dei  Geni- 
trice  Maria,  cum  beato 
Joseph,  cumque  beatis 
Apostolis  tuis  Petro  et 
Paulo,  atque  beato  N.  et 
omnibus  Sanctis,  _  salutem 
nobis  tribue  benignus  et 
pacem  ;  ut  destructis  ad- 
versitatibus  et  erroribus 
universis,  Ecclesia  tua  se- 
cura  tibi  serviat  libertate. 

The  third  Collect  is  left 


and  blessed  Mary,  the  ever 
Virgin-Mother  of  God,  of  bles- 
sed Joseph,  of  the  Blessed 
Apostles,  Peter  and  Paul,  of 
Blessed  N.  {here  is  mentioned 
the  Titular  Saint  of  the 
Church),  and  of  all  the  Saints, 
grant  us,  in  thy  mercy,  health 
and  peace ;  that,  all  adversities 
and  errors  being  removed,  thy 
Church  may  serve  thee  with 
undisturbed  liberty. 

to  the  Priest's  own  choice. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolse  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Romanos. 

Cap.  viii. 

Fratres,Existimo  quod  non 
sunt  condignce  passiones 
hujus  temporis  ad  futuram 
gloriam,  quae  revelabitur 
in  nobis.  Nam  exspectatio 
creaturae  revelationem  filio- 
rumDeiexspectat.  Vanitati 
enim  creatura  subjecta  est 
non  volens,sed  propter  eum 
qui  subjecit  earn  in  spe  : 
quia  et  ipsa  creatura  liber- 
abitur  a  servitute  corrup- 
tionis  in  libertatem  glorise 
filiorum  Dei.  Scimus  enim 
quod  omnis  creatura  in- 
gemiscit,  et  parturit  usque 
adhuc.  Non  solum  autem 
ilia,  sed  et  nos  ipsi  primi- 
tias  Spiritus  habentes,  et 
ipsi  intra  nos  gemimus, 
adoptionem  filiorum  Dei  ex- 
spectantes,  redemptionem 
corporis  nostri  :  in  Christo 
Jesu  Domino  nostro. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Romans. 

Ch.  viii. 

Brethren  :  I  reckon  that  the 
sufferings  of  this  time  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with 
the  glory  to  come,  that  shall 
be  revealed  to  us.  For  the 
expectation  of  the  creature 
waiteth  for  the  revelation  of 
the  sons  of  God.  For  the 
creature  was  made  subject  to 
vanity,  not  willingly,  but  by 
reason  of  him  that  made  it 
subject,  in  hope  :  because  the 
creature  also  itself  shall  be 
delivered  from  the  servitude 
of  corruption,  into  the  liberty 
of  the  glory  of  the  children  of 
God.  For  we  know  that  every 
creature  groaneth,  and  tra- 
vaileth  in  pain  even  till  now. 
And  not  only  it,  but  ourselves 
also,  who  have  the  first  fruits 
of  the  Spirit,  even  we  our- 
selves groan  within  ourselves, 
waiting  for  the  adoption  of 
the  sons  of  God,  the  redemp- 
tion of  our  body  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord. 


MASS.  127 

The  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  the  grace  and 
virtues,  which  He  has  put  into  our  souls,  as  the 
earnest  of  salvation  and  the  germ  of  future  glory. 
Our  faith  confirms  our  possession  of  these  divine 
pledges  ;  and  regenerate  human  nature,  even  amidst 
all  the  trials  of  this  life,  is  consoled  at  the  very- 
thought  of  the  noble  destiny  to  which  it  is  called. 
Satan  may  use  his  fiercest  efforts  to  regain  his  lost 
ground ;  and  the  soul  may  have  many  and  frequent 
battles  to  fight  for  the  holding  what  was  once 
under  the  dominion  of  the  enemy;  but  Christian 
hope  is  an  armour  of  heaven's  own  making.  Hope 
enter eth  in  even  within  the  veil;1  and  then  she  comes 
telling  the  combatant  about  the  disproportion,  here 
mentionod  by  the  Apostle,  between  the  fatigues  of 
the  march  here  below,  and  the  bliss  which  is  to 
reward  our  fidelity  in  the  happy  land  above.  He 
has  the  promises  of  God,  and  the  marvellous  dealings 
of  the  Paraclete  in  his  regard,  both  in  the  past  and 
now, — all  justifying  his  expectations  of  the  future 
glory  that  shall  then  be  revealed,  be  realised,  in  him. 
The  very  earth  he  dwells  on,  which  now  so  often 
tyrannises  over  him  and  deceives  his  senses, — yes, 
this  very  earth  urges  him  to  fix  his  heart  on  some- 
thing far  better  than  herself ;  she  even  seems  to  share 
in  his  hopes.  St.  Paul  tells  us  so,  in  our  to-day's 
Epistle:  the  wild  upheavings,  the  restless  changes 
of  material  creation,  are  so  many  voices  clamouring 
for  the  destruction  of  sin,  and  for  the  final  and  total 
triumph  over  the  corruption  which  followed  sin. 
The  present  condition  of  this  world,  therefore,  fur- 
nishes a  special  and  most  telling  motive,  inviting 
us  to  the  holy  virtue  of  hope.  Only  they  can  find 
anything  strange  in  such  teaching,  who  have  no  idea 
of  how  man's  being  raised  up  to  the  supernatural 
order  was,  from  the  beginning,  a  real  ennobling  of 
the  world  which  was  made  for  man's  service.     Men 

JHeb.  vi.  19. 


128      FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

of  this  stamp  have  each  their  own  way  of  explain- 
ing God's  creation ;  but  the  truth  which   explains 
everything  both  on  earth  and  in  heaven, — the  divine 
axiom,  which  is  the  principle  and  reason  of  every  thing 
that   has  been  made, — is   this  :  that   God,   who,  of 
necessity,  does  everything  for  his  own  glory,  has,  of 
his  own  free  choice,  appointed  that  the  perfection  of 
this  his  glory  shall  consist  in  the  triumph  of  his  love, 
by  the  ineffable  mystery  of  divine  union  realised  in 
his  creature.     To  bring  this  divine  union  about  is, 
consequently,  by  God's  gracious  will,  not  only  the  one 
sole  end, — but,  moreover,  is   the   one  only  law,  the 
vital  and  constitutive  law,   of  creation.     When  the 
Spirit  moved  over  chaos,    he   adapted  the   informal 
matter  to  the  designs  of  infinite  love.     Thereby,  the 
various  elements,  and  the   countless   atoms,    of  the 
world  that  was  in   preparation,  really  derived  from 
this  infinite  love  the  principle  of  their  future  develop- 
ment and  power  ;  they  received  it  as  their  one  single 
mission  to  co-operate,  each  in  its  own  way,  with  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  that  is,  co-operate  in  leading  man,  the 
creature  chosen  by  Eternal  Wisdom,  to  the  proposed 
glorious  end, — union  with  God.     Sin  broke   the   al- 
liance ;  and  would  have  destroyed  the  world,  from  the 
very  fact  of  sin's  taking  from  it  the  purpose  of  its 
existence, — had  it  not  been  for  the  incomprehensible 
patience  of  the  God  it  outraged,   and  the  marvellous 
renovations  of  the  original  plan  achieved  by  the  Spirit 
of  love.     A  violent  state, — the  state  of  struggle  and 
expiation  has  now  been  substituted  for  what,  in  the 
primal  design  of  the  Creator,  was  to  be  the  effortless 
advance  of  the  king  of  creation  to  his  grand  destiny, 
the  spontaneous  growth  of,  what  some  one  has  called 
man,  the  god  in  the  bud.     Divine  union  is  still  offered 
to  the  world, — but,  at  what  a  cost  of  trouble  and  travail! 
We  may  still  enjoy  the   eternal  music  of  triumph, 
and  all  the  joys  of  the  divine  nuptial  banquet ;  but  oh  ! 
what  a  long  prelude  of  sighs  and  sobs  must  precede  ! 


MASS.  129 

Men,  who  recognise  no  other  law  than  that  of  the 
ilesh,  may  be  as  deaf  and  as  indifferent,  as  they  please, 
to  the  teachings  of  positive  revelation, — but  mere 
matter  will  go  on  ever  condemning  their  materialism  ; 
nature,  which  they  pretend  to  acknowledge  as  their 
only  authority,  will  continue  to  preach  the  super- 
natural with  her  thousand  mouths,  and  will  preach  it 
in  every  nook  of  the  earth ;  and  creation,  disturbed 
though  it  be,  and  turned  astray  by  the  Fall  of  Adam, 
will  still  keep  proclaiming,  all  the  louder  because  it 
is  in  suffering, — that  the  fallen  king,  whom  it  was 
intended  to  serve,  has  a  destiny  far  beyond  all  finite 
things.  0  ye  mysterious  sufferings  of  creatures,  which 
the  Apostle  here  calls  your  groanings,  may  we  not 
name  you,  as  one  of  the  poets  did,  and  speak  of  you 
as  the  tears  of  things  P  Truly,  you  are  like  the  soul 
of  music  of  this  land  of  trial ;  we  have  but  to  listen 
to  your  sweet  plaintive  sounds,  and  let  you  speak  your 
eloquence,  and  you  lead  us  to  Him  who  is  the  source 
of  all  beauty  and  love.  The  pagan  world  heard  your 
voice  ;  but  its  philosophers  would  have  it  that  you 
meant  pantheism ! — The  Holy  Ghost  had  not  yet 
begun  his  reign.  He  alone  could  explain  to  us  the 
strange  language  of  nature,  and  her  vehement  aspira- 
tions,— all  of  which  had  been  put  into  her  by  himself. 
All  is  now  made  clear  to  us  :  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
hath  filled  the  whole  earth;2  the  divine  Witness  who 
giveth  us  assurance  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God,3  has 
carried  his  precious  testimony  to  the  furthest  limits 
of  creation,  for  all  creation  thrills  with  expectancy, 
impatient  to  see  the  coming  of  that  glorious  day  which 
is  to  be  the  revelation  of  the  glory  that  belongs  to 
these  sons  of  God.  It  is  on  their  account  that  they, 
too,  have  had,  to  suffer ;  together  with  them  they 
shall  be  set  free,  and  shall  share  in  the  brightness  of 
their  coronation- day.     St.  John  Chrysostom  compares 

1  Virg.  JEn.  I.  462.  2  Wisd.  i.  7.  3  Rom.  vii.  16. 

VOL.  XI.  K 


130      FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  FENTECOST. 

the  earth  to  "  the  nurse  who  has  brought  up  the 
"  king's  son  ;  when  he  succeeds  to  his  father's  king- 
"  dom,  she,  too,  is  made  all  the  better  off.  .  .  . 
"  It  is  much  the  same  with  all  men ; — when  a  son  of 
"  theirs  is  to  appear  in  the  splendour  of  some  new 
1 '  dignity,  they  let  his  very  servants  wear  richer  suits. 
"  So  will  God  vest  in  incorruption  every  creature, 
"when  the  day  of  the  deliverance  and  glory  of  his 
41  children  shall  come."1 

The  Gradual  tells  us  how  the  prayers  of  Christians, 
though  they  are  far  from  being  free  from  sin,  ascend 
up  to  God.  They  feel  that  they  are  unworthy  of  his 
assistance,  and  yet,  for  his  own  glory's  sake,  they  sue 
him  to  have  compassion  on  them.  Poor  though  they 
be,  they  are  his  soldiers  ;  their  cause  is  His.  The 
Alleluia- Yerse  shows  us  the  Church,  though  here 
below  she  be  poor  and  persecuted,  sending  up  her 
prayer  of  confidence  to  the  throne  of  her  Spouse,  the 
most  just  Judge. 

GRADUAL. 

Propitius  esto,  Domine,  Be  merciful,  O  Lord,  to  our 

peccatis  nostris,  nequando  offences,  that  the  Gentiles  may 

dicant  gentes  :  ubi  est  Deus  never  say  :  Where  now  is  their 

eorum  ?  God  ? 

ft.  Adjuva  nos,  Deus  sa-  ft.    Help  us,  O  Lord,  our 

lutaris  noster  :    et  propter  Saviour,  and,  for  the  honour 

honorem  nominis  tui,  Do-  of   thy  name,   deliver  us,  O 

mine,  libera  nos.  Lord. 

Alleluia,  alleluia.  Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Deus,  qui  sedes  super  ft.  O  God,  who  sittest  on 

thronum,  et  judicas  requi-  thy  throne,  and  judgest  justly, 

tatem,  esto  refugium  pau-  be  a  refuge  to  the  poor  in 

perumintribulatione.Alle-  distress.    Alleluia, 
luia. 

1  In  Ep.  ad  Rom.  Hom.  xiv.  5. 


MASS. 


131 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel    of  the    Holy  Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ck  v. 

At  that  time,  it  came  to  pass, 
that  when  the  multitude  pres- 
sed upon  him  to  hear  the  word 
of  God,  he  stood  by  the  lake  of 
Genesareth.    And  he  saw  two 
ships  standing  by  the  lake  ; 
but  the  fishermen  were  gone 
out  of  them  and  were  washing 
their  nets.    And  going  up  into 
one    of    the   ships  that  was 
Simon's,  he    desired  him  to 
draw  back  a  little  from  the 
land.    And  sitting  he  taught 
the  multitudes  out  of  the  ship . 
Now  when  he  had  ceased  to 
speak,  he    said    to    Simon : 
Launch  out  into  the  deep,  and 
let    down    your    nets  for    a 
draught.    And  Simon,  answer- 
ing, said  to  him  :   Master,  we 
have  laboured  all  the  night, 
and  have  taken  nothing  ;  but 
at  thy  word,  I  will  let  down 
the  net.    And  when  they  had 
done  this,  they  enclosed  a  very 
great  multitude  of  fishes,  and 
their    net  broke.    And  they 
beckoned    to    their  partners 
that  were  in  the  other  ship, 
that  they  should  come  and  help 
them.    And  they  came   and 
filled  both  the  ships,  so  that 
they     were    almost    sinking. 
Which  when  Simon  Peter  saw, 
he  fell  down  at  Jesus's  knees, 
saying  :   Depart  from  me,  for 
I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord. 
For  he  was  wholly  astonished, 
and  all  that  were  with  him,  at 
the  draught  of  the  fishes  which 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Lucam. 

Cap.  v. 

In  illo  tempore  :    Cum 
turbaa  irruerent  in  Jesum, 
ut  audirent  verbum  Dei,  et 
ipse  stabat  secus  stagnum 
Genezareth.   Et  vidit  duas 
naves  stantes  secus    stag- 
num:    piscatores     autem 
descenderant,  et  lavabant 
retia.      Ascendens    autem 
unamnavim,quae  eratSimo- 
nis,  rogavit    eum   a  terra 
reducere  pusillum.    Et  se- 
dens,  docebat  de  navicula 
turbas.    Ut  cessavit  autem 
loqui,  dixit  ad  Simonem 
Due  in  altum,  et  laxate  re- 
tia vestra  in  capturam.   Et 
respondens    Simon,    dixit 
illi :  Praeceptor,  per  totam 
noctem     laborantes,   nihil 
cepimus  :  in  verbo   autem 
tuo  laxabo  rete.    Et  cum 
hoc  fecissent,  concluserunt 
piscium  multitudinem  co- 
piosam ;  rumpebatur  autem 
rete  eorum.     Et  annuerunt 
sociis,  qui  erant  in  alia  na- 
vi,  ut  venirent,  et  adjuva- 
rent  eos.    Et  venerunt,  et 
impleverunt  ambas    navi- 
culas,  ita  ut  pene  merge- 
rentur.  Quod  cum  viderent 
Simon  Petrus,  procidit  ad 
genua  Jesu,  dicens  :  Exi  a 
me,   quia    homo    peccator 
sum,  Domine.  Stupor  enim 
circumdederat  eum,  et  om- 
nes  qui  cum  illo   erant,   in 
captura  piscium  quam  ce- 
perant :  similiter  autem  Ja- 


132  FOURTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

cobum  et  Johannem,  filios  they  had  taken.    And  so  were 

Zebedsei,   qui    erant   socii  also  James  and  John  the  sons 

Siinonis.     Et  ait  ad  Simo-  of  Zebedee,  who  were  Simon's 

nem  Jesus  :  Noli  timere:  ex  partners.    And  Jesus  saith  to 

hoc  jam  homines  eris  ca-  Simon  :  Fear  not ;  from  hence- 

piens.  Et  subductis  ad  ter-  forth  thou  shalt  catch  men. 

ram  navibus,  relictis  omni-  And    having    brought    their 

bus  secuti  sunt  eum.  ships  to  land,  leaving  all  things 

they  followed  him. 

The  prophecy  and  promise  made  by  Jesus  to  Simon 
the  son  of  John  is  now  fulfilled.  We  were  in  amaze- 
ment, on  the  day  when  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down, 
at  the  success  which  attended  Peter's  first  fishing  for 
men ;  he  cast  in  his  nets,  and  it  was  the  choicest  of 
the  sons  of  Israel  that  he  took,  and  offered  them  to 
the  Lord  Jesus.  But  the  bark  of  Peter  was  not  to 
be  long  confined  within  Jewish  waters.  Insignificant 
as  it  seems  to  human  views,  the  ship  is  now  sailing 
on  the  high  seas ;  it  rides  on  the  deep  waters,  which 
are,  so  St.  John  tells  us,  peoples  and  nations.1  The 
boisterous  wind,  the  surging  billows,  the  storm,  no 
longer  terrifies  the  boat-man  of  Lake  Tiberias  ;  for 
he  knows  that  he  has  on  board  Him  who  is  the 
Master  of  the  waves,  Him,  that  is,  who  has  given  the 
deep  as  a  garment  to  clothe  the  earth.2  Endued  with 
power  from  on  high,3  Peter  has  cast  his  net,  the 
apostolic  preaching,  all  over  the  great  Ocean  ;  for  it 
is  large  as  is  the  world,  and  is  to  bring  the  sons  of 
the  great  fishf  the  divine  Icthus,5  to  the  eternal 
shore.  Grand  indeed  is  the  work  assigned  to  Peter. 
Though  fellow-labourers  have  been  joined  to  him  in 
his  divine  enterprise,  yet  does  he  preside  over  them 
all  as  their  undisputed  head,  as  master  of  the  ship 
where  Jesus  commands  in  person  and  directs  all  the 
operations  to  be  done  for  the  world's  salvation.  Our 
to-day's  Gospel  very  opportunely  prepares  us  for  and 

1  Apoc.  xvii.  15.         '  St.  Luke,  xxiv.  49.      6  Inscript.  Augustod. 

2  Ps.  ciii.  6.  4  Titul.  S.  Abercii. 


MASS.  133 

sums  up  the  teachings  included  in  the  Feast  of  the 
Prince  of  the  Apostles,  which  always  comes  close  on 
the  fourth  Sunday  after  Pentecost.  For  that  very 
reason,  we  leave  for  the  Feast  the  detailed  enumera- 
tion of  the  glories  inherent  in  the  Vicar  of  Christ ; 
and  limit  ourselves,  for  the  present,  to  the  considera- 
tion of  the  other  mysteries  contained  in  the  text 
before  us. 

The  Evangelists  have  left  us  the  account  of  two 
miraculous  fishings  made  by  the  Apostles  in  presence 
of  their  divine  Lord  : — one  of  these  is  related  by  St. 
Luke,  and  the  Church  proposes  it  to  our  considera- 
tions for  this  Sunday ;  the  other,  with  its  exquisite 
symbolism,  was  put  before  us  by  the  Beloved  Dis- 
ciple, on  Easter  Wednesday.  The  former  of  these, 
which  took  place  whilst  our  Lord  was  still  in  the 
days  of  his  mortal  life,  merely  describes  that  the  net 
was  cast  into  the  water  just  as  it  served  the  fisher- 
men's purpose ;  that  it  broke  with  the  multitude  of 
the  draught,  but  no  notice  is  taken,  by  the  Evangelist, 
as  to  either  the  number  or  kind  of  the  fish ;  in  the 
second,  it  is  our  Risen  Lord  who  tells  the  fishermen, 
his  disciples,  that  it  is  to  be  on  the  right  side  of  their 
boat  that  the  net  must  be  let  down  ;  it  catches,  and 
without  breaking,  a  hundred- and-fifty  great  fishes; 
these  are  brought  to  the  shore  where  Jesus  was  wait- 
ing for  them,  that  he  might  join  them  with  the 
mysterious  bread  and  fish  that  he  himself  had  already 
got  ready  for  his  labourers.1  The  Fathers  are 
unanimous  in  the  interpretation  of  these  two  fishings, 
— they  represent  the  Church  ;  first  of  all,  the  Church 
as  she  now  is,  and  next,  as  she  is  to  be  in  eternity. 
As  she  now  is,  the  Church  is  the  multitude,  without 
distinction  between  good  and  bad ;  but  afterwards, 
that  is,  after  the  resurrection,  the  good  alone  will 
compose  the  Church,  and  their  number  will  be  for 
ever  fixed.     The  kingdom  of  heaven,  says  our  Lord, 

1  St.  John,  xxi.  1-13. 


134  FOURTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

is  like  to  a  net  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathering  together 
of  all  hind  of  fishes  ;  which,  when  it  was  filled,  they 
dretv  out,  they  chose  out  the  good  into  vessels,  but  the 
bad  they  cast  forth.l 

To  speak  with  St.  Augustine,  the  fishers  of  men 
have  cast  forth  their  nets ;  they  have  taken  the  mul- 
titude of  Christians  which  we  see  in  wonderment; 
they  have  filled  the  two  ships  with  them,  the  two 
peoples,  Jew  and  Gentile.  But  what  is  this  we  are 
told  ?  The  multitude  weighs  down  the  ships,  even 
to  the  risk  of  sinking  them ;  it  is  what  we  witness 
now, — the  pressing  and  mingled  crowd  of  the  Baptised 
is  a  burden  to  the  Church.  Many  Christians  there 
are  who  live  badly ;  they  are  a  trouble  to,  and  keep 
back,  the  good.  Worse  than  these,  there  are  those 
who  tear  the  nets  by  their  schisms  or  their  heresies  ; 
they  are  fish  which  are  impatient  of  the  yoke  of 
unity,  and  will  not  come  to  the  banquet  of  Christ ; 
they  are  pleased  with  themselves.  Under  pretext 
that  they  cannot  live  with  the  bad,  they  break  the 
net  which  kept  them  in  the  apostolic  tracl^  and  they 
die  far  off  the  shore.  In  how  many  countries  have 
they  not  thus  broken  the  great  net  of  salvation  ? 
The  Donatists  in  Africa,  the  Arians  in  Egypt,  Mon- 
tanus  in  Phrygia,  Manes  in  Persia ;  and  since  their 
times,  how  many  others  have  excelled  in  the  work  of 
rupture  !  Let  us  not  imitate  their  folly.  If  grace 
have  made  us  holy,  let  us  be  patient  with  the  bad, 
whilst  living  in  this  world's  waters.  Let  the  sight  of 
them  drive  us  neither  to  live  as  they  do,  nor  to  leave 
the  Church.  The  shore  is  not  far  off,  where  those  on 
the  right,  or  the  good,  will  alone  be  permitted  to  land, 
and  from  which  the  wicked  will  be  repulsed,  and  cast 
into  the  abyss.2 

In  the  Offertory,  the  Christian  army  sues  for  that 
1  St.  Matth.  xiii,  47,  48         -  S.  Aug.  Serm.  248-252,  passim. 


MASS.  135 

light  of  faith,  which  alone  can  make  it  sure  of  victory ; 
and  this,  because  it  tells  where  the  enemy  is,  and 
what  are  his  plans.  For  a  servant  of  God  who  is 
thus  enlightened,  night  has  no  dangers ;  the  bright- 
ness of  heaven's  beams  keeps  off  from  his  eyes  that 
fatal  sleep  which  implies  defeat  and  death. 

OFFERTORY. 

Enlighten  mine  eyes,  that  I  Illumina  oculos  meos,ne 
may  never  sleep  in  death  ;  lest  unquam  obdormiam  in 
the  enemy  should  ever  say  :  I  morte  :  nequando  dicat  in- 
have  prevailed  over  him.  imicus  meus;  Prsevalui  ad- 

versus  eum, 

The  gifts  offered  on  the  altar  for  the  all- mighty 
transformation  of  the  Sacrifice,  are  a  figure  of  the 
Faithful  themselves.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the 
Church  prays,  in  the  Secret,  that  our  Lord  would 
draw  to  himself  our  rebel  wills,  and  change  them,  as 
he  is  about  to  do  with  these  gifts.  Let  us  remember, 
that  of  all  the  Fish  that  were  in  the  mysterious  net, 
those  only,  as  the  Fathers  tell  us,  will  be  the  elect 
of  the  eternal  shores  who  H  live  in  such  wise  as  to 
"  deserve  to  be  introduced,  by  the  fishermen  of  the 
"  Church,  to  the  banquet  of  Christ  Jesus."1 

SECRET. 

Keceive  our    offerings,   we  Oblationibus       nostris, 

beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  and  be  quaesumus  Domine,placare 

appeased  thereby  ;  and  merci-  susceptis  :  et  ad  te  nostras 

fully  compel  our  rebel  wills  to  etiam     rebelles     compelle 

yield    unto    thee.     Through,  propitius  voluntates.    Per 

etc.  Dominum, 

SECOND    SECRET. 

Graciously  hear  us,  O  God,  Exaudi  nos,  Deus  Salu- 

our  Saviour  ;  that,  by  virtue  of  taris  noster;  ut  per  hujus 

this  sacrament,  thou  mayest  Sacramenti     virtutem,    a 

defend  us  from  all  enemies,  of  cunctis  nos  mentis  etcorpor- 

both  soul  and  body  ;  grant  us  is  hostibus  tuearis,  gratiam 

grace  in  this  life,  and  glory  in  tribuens    in    prsesenti,    et 

the  next.  gloriam  in  future 
1  Bruno  Ast.    Expos,  in  Gen.  c.  I. 


136      FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

The  third  Secret  is  left  to  the  Priest's  own  choice. 

That  God  who  enabled  David's  weakness  to  triumph 
over  the  giant  Philistine,  gives  himself  to  us  in  the 
sacred  Mysteries.  Let  us  sing  the  Psalm,  from  which 
the  Communion- Anthem  is  taken  :  let  us  sing  these 
few  words  in  praise  of  his  merciful  power,  which 
makes  itself  become  ours  by  means  of  this  adorable 
Sacrament. 

COMMUNION. 

Dominus    firmamentum  The  Lord  is  my  support,  and 

meum,  et  refugium  meura,  my  refuge,  and  my  deliverer  : 

et  liberator  meus  ;    Deus  my  God  is  my  helper, 
meus,  adjutormeus. 

St.  Augustine1  gives  the  name  of  Sacrament  of 
Hope  to  the  divine  mystery  wherein  the  Church  daily 
proclaims  and  restores,  here  below,  her  social  union. 
The  real  union,  though  at  present  it  be  veiled,  of  the 
Head  and  Members  in  the  banquet  of  eternal 
Wisdom,  is  a  pledge  of  the'future  glories  of  regenerate 
humanity,  far  exceeding  that  restless  expectation  of 
creation,  of  which  the  Apostle  spoke  to  us  in  to-day's 
Epistle.  Let  us  pray,  in  the  Postcommunion,  that 
our  defilements  may  be  removed,  and  may  not  impede 
this  holy  Sacrament  from  producing  its  full  effect  in 
us ; — for  such  is  its  virtue,  that  it  is  able  to  lead  us 
to  the  consummate  perfection  of  salvation. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

Mysteria  nos,  Domine,  May  the  mysteries  we  have 
quaesumus,  sumpta  purifi-  received  both  purify  and  de- 
cent, et  suo  munere  tuean-  fend  us,  by  the  gift  they  be- 
tur.  Per  Dominum.  stow.    Through,  etc. 

1  Contra  Faustum.  L.  xii.  20. 


MASS. 


137 


SECOND   FOST-COMMUNION. 


May  the  oblation  of  this 
divine  Sacrament,  we  beseech 
thee,  O  Lord,  botli  cleanse  and 
defend  us;  and  by  the  inter- 
cession of  Blessed  Mary,  the 
Virgin-Mother  of  God,  of 
Blessed  Joseph,  of  the  Bles- 
sed Apostles  Peter  and  Paul, 
of  Blessed  N.  and  of  all  the 
Saints,  free  us  from  all  sin, 
and  deliver  us  from  all  ad- 
versity. 


Mundet  et  muniat  nos 
qusesumus,  Domine,  divini 
Sacramenti  munus  obla- 
tum,  et  intercedente  beata 
Virgine  Dei  Genetrice 
Maria,  cum  beato  Joseph, 
cumque  beatis  Apostolis 
tuis  Petro  et  Paulo,  atque 
beato  N.  et  omnibus  Sanc- 
tis, a  cunctis  nos  reddat  et 
perversitatibus  expiatos,  et 
adversitatibus  expeditos. 


The  third  Post- communion  is  left  to  the  Priest's 
own  choice. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON    OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Master,  we  have  laboured 
all  night,  and  have  taken 
nothing ;  but  at  thy  word,  I 
will  let  down  the  net. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

Grant  us,  we  beseech  thee, 
O  Lord,  that,  by  thy  provi- 
dence, the  events  of  this  world 
may  be  peacefully  arranged 
for  us,  and  that  thy  Church 
may  be  gladdened  by  being 
permitted  to  serve  Thee  with 
peaceful  devotedness. 
Through,  etc. 


Praeceptor,  per  totam 
noctem  laborantes  nihil 
cepimus;  in  verbo  autem 
tuo  laxabo  rete. 

OREMTJS. 

Danobis,qu8esumus,  Do- 
mine, ut  et  mundi  cursus 
pacifice  nobis  tuo  ordine 
dirigatur,  et  Ecclesia  tua 
tranquilla  devotione  laste- 
tur.    Per  Dominum. 


138  FIFTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


This  Sunday,  which,  with  the  Greeks,  is  called  the 
fifth  of  Saint  Matthew,  was  known  by  the  Latins  as 
the  Sunday  of  the  Fishing  ;  such  was  its  name  up  to 
the  time  when  the  Church  had  transferred  to  the 
previous  Sunday  the  Gospel  which  suggested  that 
title.  The  week  which  it  commences  is,  in  some 
ancient  lectionaries,  called  the  first  after  the  Feast  of 
the  Apostles  or  of  St.  Peter  ;  in  others,  it  is  the  second 
or  third  after  the  same  feast ;  these,  and  other  similar 
varieties  of  names,  which  it  is  no  rare  thing  to  find  in 
the  liturgical  books  of  the  Middle  Ages,  originated  in 
Easters  being  kept  sooner  or  later  in  the  years  when 
those  books  were  written. 

The  Church  began  last  night  the  reading  of  the 
second  book  of  Kings  ;  it  opens  with  the  description 
of  Saul's  sad  end  and  David's  accession  to  the  throne 
of  Israel.  The  exaltation  of  Jesse's  son  is  the  climax 
to  the  prophetic  life  of  the  ancient  people.  In  David, 
God  had  found  his  faithful  servant,1  and  he  resolved 
to  exhibit  him  to  the  world  as  the  most  perfect  figure 
of  the  future  Messiah.  A  solemn  promise  of  Jehovah 
assured  the  new  monarch  as  to  the  future  of  his  race ; 
his  throne  was  to  be  everlasting,2  for,  at  some  future 
day,  it  was  to  be  the  throne  of  Him  who  should  be 
called  the  Son  of  the  Most  High,  though,  at  the  same 
time,  he  was  to  be  Son  of  David.3 

But,  whilst  the  Tribe  of  Juda  was  hailing  in  Hebron 
the  King  elected  by  the  Lord,  there  were  dark  clouds 
on  the  horizon.     In  her  Vespers   of  yesterday,  the 

}  Ps.  lxxxviii.  21.  2  Ibid,  lxxxviii.  36-38  3  St.  Luke,  i.  32. 


MASS.  139 

Church  sang,  as  one  of  her  finest  Antiphons,  the 
funeral  ode  which  inspiration  dictated  to  David,  when 
he  saw  the  regal  crown  that  had  been  picked  up  from 
the  dust  and  gore  of  the  battle-field,  whereon  had 
fallen  the  princes  of  Israel :  Ye  mountains  of  Gelboe, 
let  neither  dew  nor  rain  come  upon  you,  for  there  ivas 
cast  away  the  shield  of  the  valiant,  the  shield  of  Saul, 
as  though  he  had  not  been  anointed  with  oil !  How  are 
the  valiant  fallen  in  battle  /  Jonathan  slain  on  the 
high  places!  Saul  and  Jonathan  exceeding  lovely  and 
comely  in  their  life  ;  even  in  death  they  were  not  divided.1 
The  proximity  of  the  great  solemnity  of  the  Apostles, 
June  the  29th,  to  the  Saturday  when  this  Antiphon 
is  sung,  has  suggested  to  the  Church  to  apply  its  last 
words  to  Saints  Peter  and  Paul,  during  the  octave  of 
their  Feast :  "  Glorious  Princes  of  the  earth  I  as  they 
"  loved  each  other  in  their  life,  so  even  in  their  death 
"  they  were  not  divided  !  "2  Like  the  Hebrew  people 
at  this  period  of  their  history,  our  christian  armies 
have  often  had  to  hail  their  kings,  almost  in  the 
same  breath  that  said  the  requiem  over  their  prede- 
cessors. 


MASS. 

As  on  last  Sunday,  so  again  to-day,  the  Church 
seems  to  unite  together  the  readings  of  the  previous 
night  and  the  solemn  entrance  of  the  Sacrifice.  The 
Introit  for  this  fifth  Sunday,  is  taken  from  Psalm  the 
26th,  which  was  composed  by  David  on  occasion  of 
his  coronation  in  Hebron.  It  expresses  the  humble 
confidence  of  him  who  has  nothing  here  below  to  trust 
in  ;  and  yet  he  has  the  Lord,  as  his  light  and  salvation. 
In  the  events  just  referred  to,  nothing  less  than  a 
blind  faith  in  God's  promises  could  have  kept  up  the 
courage  of  the  young  shepherd  of  Bethlehem,  and 

1  2  Kings,  i.  21,  23,  25.         2  Ant.  Oct.  Apost.  ad  Benedictus. 


140  FIFTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

nothing  less  could  have  inspired  the  people  who  had 
made  him  their  king.  But  we  must  see  beyond  this  ; 
we  must  understand  that  the  kingship  of  Jesse's  son 
and  his  descendants,  in  the  ancient  Jerusalem,  re- 
presents, for  our  Mother  the  Church,  a  grander  royalty, 
and  a  more  lasting  dynasty, — the  kingship  of  Christ 
and  the  dynasty  of  the  Sovereign  Pontiffs. 

INTROIT. 

Exaudi,  Domine,  vocem  Hear,   O   Lord,  my  voice, 

meam  qua  clamavi  ad  te:  with  which  I  have   cried  to 

adjutor  meus  esto,  ne  dere-  thee:  be  thou  my  helper:  for- 

linquas me, neque  despicias  sake  me  not:  do  not  thou  de- 

me,  Deus  salutaris  meus.  spise  me,  O  God,  my  Saviour  ! 

Ps.  Dominus  illuminatio  Ps.  The  Lord  is  my  light 

mea,  et  salus  mea  ;  quern  and  my  salvation  ;  whom  shall 

timebo?  I  fear1? 

~ff.  Gloria  Patri.  Exaudi.  Glory,  etc.    Hear. 

The  blessings  promised  to  David  as  a  recompense 
for  his  combats,  were  but  a  poor  figure  of  those 
which  await,  in  heaven,  the  vanquishers  of  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  They  are  to  be  king  for 
ever  ;  on  their  thrones,  they  are  to  enjoy  the  fulness 
of  those  inebriating  and  heavenly  delights,  some 
drops  of  which  are  permitted  by  the  divine  Spouse 
to  be  tasted,  here  below,  by  souls  that  are  faithful  to 
him.  Let  us,  therefore,  love  him  who  thus  recom- 
penses our  love ;  and  since,  of  ourselves,  we  can  do 
nothing,  let  us,  through  the  Spouse,  ask  the  giver  of 
every  best  gift,1  to  bestow  on  us  the  perfection  of 
divine  charity. 

COLLECT. 

Deus,    qui    diligentibus  O  God,  who  hast  prepared 

te  bona  invisibilia  pnepa-  invisible  good  things  for  them 

rasti:infundecordibusnos-  that  love  thee  :    pour  forth 

tris  tui  amoris  affectum ;  ut  into  our  hearts  an  affectionate 

1  St.  James,  i.  17. 


MASS. 


141 


love  for  thee  :    that,  loving  te  in  omnibus,   et    super 

thee,  in  all  things,  and  above  omnia   diligentes,  promis- 

all  things,  we  may  come  to  siones  tuas,  qua3  omne  de- 

the    enjoyment  of    thy  pro-  siderium  superant,  conse- 

mises,  which  surpass  all  that  quamur.     Per  Dominum. 
we  could  desire .  Through,  etc. 

The  other  Collects,  as  given  above,  in  the  Mass  of 
the  fourth  Sunday,  'page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Peter  the  Apostle. 

1  Ch.  Hi. 

Dearly  Beloved  :  Be  ye  all 
of  one  mind,  having  compas- 
sion one  of  another,  being 
lovers  of  the  brotherhood, 
merciful,  modest,  humble:  not 
rendering  evil  for  evil,  or  rail- 
ing for  railing,  but,  contrari- 
wise, blessing  :  for  unto  this 
ye  are  called,  that  ye  may 
inherit  a  blessing.  For,  he 
that  will  love  life,  and  see 
good  days,  let  him  refrain  his 
tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips 
that  they  speak  no  guile.  Let 
him  decline  from  evil,  and  do 
good :  let  him  seek  after  peace, 
and  pursue  it :  because  the 
eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  the 
just,  and  his  ears  unto  their 
prayers  ;  but  the  countenance 
of  the  Lord  against  them  that 
do  evil  things.  And  who  is 
he  that  can  hurt  you,  if  ye  be 
jealous  of  good*?  But  if  also 
ye  suffer  any  thing  for  justice 
sake,  blessed  are  ye.  And  be 
not  afraid  of  their  fear,  and 
be  not  troubled.  But  sanctify 
the  Lord  Christ  in  your  hearts. 


Lectio  EpistolaB  beati  Petri 
Apostoli. 

1  Cap.  Hi. 

Charissimi,  Omnes  una- 
nimes  in  oratione  estote, 
compatientes,  fraternitatis 
amatores,  misericordes,  mo- 
desti,  humiles:  non  redden- 
tes  malum  pro  malo,  nee 
maledictum  pro  maledicto, 
sed  e  contrario  benedicen- 
tes:  quia  in  hoc  vocati  estis, 
ut  benedictionem  heredi- 
tate  possideatis.  Qui  enim 
vult  vitam  diligere,  et  dies 
videre  bonos,  coerceat  lin- 
guam  suam  a  malo,  et  labia 
ejus  ne  loquantur  dolum. 
Declinet  a  malo,  et  faciat 
bonum  :  inquirat  pacem,  et 
sequatur  earn.  Quia  oculi 
Domini  super  justos,  et  au- 
res  ejus  in  preces  eorum  : 
vultus  autem  Domini  super 
facientes  mala.  Et  quis  est 
qui  vobis  noceat,  si  boni 
aemulatores  fueritis1?  Sed 
et  si  quid  patimini  propter 
justitiam,  beati.  Timorem 
autem  eorum  ne  timueritis, 
et  non  conturbemini.  Do- 
minum autem  Christum 
sanctificate  in  cordibus  ves- 
tris. 


142  FIFTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  Gospel  of  Sunday  last  showed  us  the  Apostles 
hard  at  work  drawing  from  the  waters  the  living 
stones  wherewith  Jesus  is  to  build  his  Church. 
To-day,  it  is  the  head,  the  one  who  presides  over  the 
mysterious  fishing,  it  is  Simon  the  Son  of  John,  who, 
in  our  Epistle,  addresses  himself  to  those  various 
elements  which  are  to  make  up  the  holy  city ;  they 
are  sacred  materials  all  brought  together  from  the 
deep  abyss,  that,  henceforward,  they  may  glitter  as 
so  many  bright  pearls,  with  the  marvellous  light  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  upon  them.1  The  Son  of  God  came 
down  from  heaven  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  found 
on  earth,  a  glorious  city,  in  which  God  himself  might 
delight  to  dwell ; 2  he  came,  that  he  might  build  for 
his  Father  a  temple  of  matchless  beauty,  where 
praise  and  love,  ceaselessly  sounding  from  the  very 
stones  which  form  its  walls,  might  worthily  proclaim 
that  it  possessed  the  sanctuary  of  the  great  Sacrifice.3 
He  himself  made  himself  to  be  the  Foundation  of 
the  thrice  holy  structure,  wherein  was  to  burn  the 
eternal  holocaust.4  He  communicated  this  character 
of  Foundation  of  the  new  temple  to  Simon  his  Vicar  ;5 
and  by  giving  him  the  name  of  Peter  or  Rock,  on 
which  he  built  his  Church,  he  as  good  as  told  all 
future  generations,  what  was  the  one  aim  of  all  his 
divine  labours, — to  build,  that  is,  here  on  earth,  a 
Temple  worthy  of  his  eternal  Father.  Let  us,  with 
respectful  gratitude,  receive  from  this  Vicar  of  the 
Man- God  the  practical  lessons  which  are  involved 
in  this  master- truth.  And,  as  we  are  just  now  in 
the  period  of  the  Year  when  the  Calendar  brings  the 
Prince  of  the  Apostles  into  such  welcome  prominence, 
let  us  be  led  by  the  Church  nearer  and  nearer  to  this 
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  our  souls.6 

Union  of  true  charity,  concord  and  peace,  which 

1  St.  Pet.  ii.  9.  3  1  St.  Pet.  ii.  4,  5.       6  St.  Matth.  xvi.  18. 

3  Apoc.  xxi.  2,  3.        *  Ibid.  G,  7.  6  1  St.  Pet.  ii.  25. 


MASS.  143 

must,  at  every  cost,  be  kept  up  as  the  condition  for 
their  being  happy  both  now  and  for  ever, — such  is 
the  substance  of  the  instructions  addressed  by  Simon, 
now  Peter,  to  those  other  chosen  stones,  which  rest 
upon  him,  and  constitute  that  august  Temple  to  be 
presented  by  the  Son  of  Man  to  the  glory  of  the 
Most  High.  Do  not  the  solidity  and  duration  of  even 
earth's  palaces  depend  on  the  degree  of  union 
between  the  materials  used  in  their  structure?  Again, 
— it  is  union  which  gives  strength  and  beauty  to 
all  the  parts  of  this  immense  universe ;  let  there  be 
a  cessation  in  that  mutual  attraction  which  combines 
them  together  in  one  harmonious  whole, — let  there 
be  a  suspension  of  that  cohesion  which  holds  their 
atoms  together, — and  we  shall  have  but  an  agglom- 
eration of  a  vile  impalpable  something  scarcely  worth 
the  name  of  dust.  The  Creator  hath  made  peace  in 
his  high  places ; l  so  that  he  asks  :  Who  can  make 
the  harmony  of  heaven  to  sleep  P  And  yet,  as  the 
earth,  in  its  present  condition,  is  to  have  an  end,  so, 
too,  the  heavens  are  to  pass  away  as  some  worn-out 
garment.8  What,  then,  will  be  the  cause  of  the 
stability, — what  the  cement  which  is  to  hold  together, 
— the  House  prepared  for  God  to  dwell  in,  which, 
when  all  else  has  crumbled  into  change,  is  to  be  ever 
the  same  ?  And  that  dwelling  is  the  Church  ;  the 
dwelling  of  the  adorable  Trinity,  up  to  whose  throne 
there  is  to  be  ascending,  for  all  eternity,  the  fragrance 
which  exhales  from  her  Jesus,  her  Spouse. 

Here  again,  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit  who  must  explain 
to  us  the  mystery  of  this  union,  which  makes  up  the 
holy  city,4  and  whose  duration  is  to  last  as  long  as 
eternity  itself.  The  charity  which  is  poured  forth 
into  our  hearts  the  moment  of  our  Baptism,  is  an 
emanation  of  the  very  love  that  reigns  in  the  bosom 
of  the  blessed  Trinity ;  for  the  workings  of  the  Holy 

1  Job.  xxv.  2.      2  Ibid,  xxxviii.  37.      3  Ps.  ci.  26-28.      4  Ps.  exxi.  3. 


144  FIFTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Spirit  in  the  Saints  have  this  for  their  aim, — to  make 
them  enter  into  a  participation  in  the  divine  energies. 
Having  become  the  life  of  the  regenerate  soul,  the 
divine  Fire  penetrates  her  whole  being  with  God,  and 
communicates,  to  her  created  and  finite  love,  the 
direction  and  the  power  of  the  Flame  that  is  ever- 
lasting and  divine.  So  that,  henceforward,  the  Chris- 
tian must  love  as  God  loves ;  his  charity  is  then  only 
what  it  should  be,  when  it  takes  in  everything  that 
God  loves.  Now,  such  is  the  ineffable  friendship 
established,  by  the  supernatural  order,  between  God 
and  his  intellectual  creatures,  that  he  vouchsafes  to 
love  them  with  the  love  wherewith  he  loves  himself; 
and,  therefore,  our  charity  should  include  and  embrace, 
not  only  God  himself,  but,  moreover,  all  those  beings 
whom  he  has  called  to  share,  if  they  will,  in  his  own 
infinite  happiness.  This  will  give  us  to  understand 
the  grandeur  and  incomparable  power  of  the  union, 
in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  established  the  Church. 
"We  are  not  surprised  that  its  bonds  should  be  stronger 
than  death,  and  its  cohesion  be  proof  against  all  the 
power  of  Hell;1  for  the  cement,  which  joins  the 
living  stones  of  its  walls  together,  partakes  of  the 
strength  of  God  himself,  and  imitates  the  stability  of 
his  eternal  love.  The  Church  is  truly  that  Tower 
which  was  built  on  the  waters,  which  was  shown  to 
Hermas  ;  it  was  formed  of  brightly  polished  stones,  so 
closely  joined  one  to  the  other,  that  the  eye  could  not 
perceive  the  joints.2 

But  let  us  also  understand  the  importance  and  the 
necessity  of  mutual  union  for  all  Christians :  there 
must  be,  among  them,  that  love  of  the  brotherhood, 
which  is  so  frequently,  and  so  strongly,  recommended 
by  the  Apostles,  the  co-operators  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
building  up  of  the  Church.  The  keeping  aloof  from 
schism  and  heresy,  of  whose  terrible  consequences  we 

1  Cantic.  viii.  6.  2  Herm.  Past.  1.  i.  Visio  iii.  2. 


MASS.  145 

were  told  in  last  Sunday's  Gospel ; — the  repression  of 
hatred  and  jealousy, — no,  these  are  not  enough  for 
the  making  us  become  useful  members  of  the  Church 
of  Christ :  we  must,  moreover,  have  a  charity  which  is 
effective,  and  devoted,  and  persevering,  and  brings  all 
souls  and  hearts  into  true  union  and  harmony;  a 
charity,  which,  to  be  worthy  of  the  name,  must  be 
warm-hearted  and  generous,  for  it  must  make  us  see 
God  in  our  fellow-men,  and  that  will  bring  us  to  look 
upon  their  happiness  or  misfortunes  as  though  they 
were  our  own.  We  must  have  none  of  that  phleg- 
matic egotism  which  finds  satisfaction  in  never  putting 
itself  out  of  the  way  for  any  body ;  hateful  as  such  a 
temperament  is,  it  is  far  from  being  a  rare  one ;  it 
holds  this  peculiar  view  about  charity, — that  the  best 
way  of  observing  it,  is  to  have  a  complete  indifference 
for  those  who  live  with  us !  With  souls  of  this  stamp, 
it  is  evident  they  are  not  bedded  in  the  divine  cement : 
you  could  never  get  them  to  be  part  of  the  holy  struc- 
ture :  the  heavenly  Builder  is  compelled  to  reject  them 
as  unfit,  or  leave  them  to  lie,  around  the  walls,  a 
heap  of  unemployed  material,  which  refused  all 
adaptation,  and  all  being  shaped,  to  the  general  plan. 
Still,  if  the  building  get  finished  before  they  have  made 
up  their  minds  not  to  be  rubbish,  wo  to  them !  When 
it  is  too  late,  they  will  open  their  eyes,  and  understand 
that  Charity  is  one ;  so  that,  he  does  not  love  God, 
who  does  not  love  his  neighbour,1  and  he  who  does 
not  love,  abideth  in  death.2  Let  us,  therefore,  as  St. 
John  counsels  us,  measure  the  perfection  of  our  love 
for  God  by  the  love  we  have  for  our  neighbours  :3  then 
only,  shall  we  have  God  abiding  within  us;4  then 
only, shall  we  be  enabled  to  enjoy  the  unspeakable  mys- 
teries of  divine  union  with  Him,  who  only  unites 
himself  with  his  elect,  in  order  to  make  both  them 
and  himself  one  glorious  temple  to  the  glory  of  his 
Father. 

1  St.  John,  iv.  21.         2  Ibid.  iii.  14.  3  Ibid.  iv.  12.  4  Ibid. 

VOL.  xi.  L 


146 


FIFTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


The  Gradual,  recurring  to  the  ideas  which  inspired 
the  Introit,  implores  the  divine  protection  in  favour 
of  the  people,  who  have  the  Lord's  Anointed  as  their 
King.  The  Alleluia- Versicle  proclaims  his  victories, 
and  the  salvation  which  he  "brought  to  this  our  earth. 


GRADUAL. 


Protector  noster  aspice, 
Deus :  et  respice  super 
servos  tuos. 

~ft.  Domine  Deus  virtu- 
tum,  exaudi  preces  servo- 
rum  tuorum. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$".  Domine,  in  virtute  tua 
laetabitur  rex:  et  super  sa- 
lutare  tuum  exsultabit  ve- 
hementer.  Alleluia. 


Look  down,  0  God,  our  pro- 
tector; and  look  down  upon 
thy  servants. 

$".  O  Lord  God  of  hosts, 
graciously  hear  the  prayers  of 
thy  servants. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

"ff.  O  Lord,  in  thy  might 
shall  the  king  rejoice:  and,  in 
thy  salvation,  shall  he  exult 
exceedingly.  Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthseum. 

Cap.  v. 

In  illo  tempore :  Dixit 
Jesus  discipulis  suis  :  Nisi 
abundaverit  justitia  vestra 
plusquam  Scribarum  et 
Pharisa?orum,non  intrabitis 
in  regnum  ccelorum.  Au- 
distis  quia  dictum  est  anti- 
quis  :  Non  occides  :  qui 
autem  occiderit,  reus  erit 
judicio.  Ego  autem  dico  vo- 
bis  :  quia  omnis,  qui  iras- 
citur  fratri  suo,  reus  erit 
judicio  Qui  autem  dixerit 
fratri  suo,  raca  :  reus  erit 
concilio.  Qui  autem  dixe- 
rit, fatue  :  reus  erit  ge- 
henna3  ignis.  Si  ergo  offers 
munus  tuum  ad  altare,  et 
ibi  recordatus  fueris  quia 
frater  tuus  habet  aliquid 
adversum  te  :  relinque  ibi 


Sequel    of  the    holy    Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  v. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  said  to 
his  disciples  :  Unless  your 
justice  exceed  that  of  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall 
not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  Ye  have  heard  that 
it  was  said  to  them  of  old  : 
Thou  shalt  not  kill.  And  who- 
soever shall  kill,  shall  be  in 
danger  of  the  judgment.  But 
I  say  to  you,  that  whosoever 
is  angry  with  his  brother,  shall 
be  in  danger  of  the  judgment. 
And  whosoever  shall  say  to 
his  brother,  Raca,  shall  be  in 
danger  of  the  council.  And 
whosoever  shall  say,  Thou 
fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of 
hell  fire.  Therefore,  if  thou 
bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and 
there  shalt  remember  that  thy 


MASS.  147 

brother  hath  any  thing  against  munus  tuuni  ante  altare,  et 

thee  ;  leave  there  thy  gift  be-  vade  prius  reconciliari  fra- 

fore  the  altar,  and  go  first  to  tri   tuo  :  et  tunc  veniens 

be  reconciled  to  thy  brother  :  offeres  munus  tuum. 
and  then  come,  and  offer  thy 
gift. 

The  last  days  of  the  ancient  Jerusalem  are  fast 
drawing  to  their  close.  In  less  than  a  month,  the 
frightful  ruin  of  the  City,  that  knew  not  the  time  of 
her  Lord's  visitation,1  will  have  been  witnessed  by  us. 
It  is  on  the  ninth  Sunday  after  Pentecost,  during 
these  months  of  July  and  August  when  the  armies  of 
Vespasian  beheld  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  that 
the  sacred  Liturgy  commemorates  the  fulfilment  of 
our  Redeemer's  prophecies.  During  the  years  which 
intervened,  the  ancient  Temple  is  still  there,  with  its 
inner  doors  closed  against  all  Gentiles.  It  gives  out, 
that,  as  of  old,  so  now,  it  holds  the  Divinity  beneath 
the  veils  of  the  old  Testament,  screening  off,  even  from 
the  children  of  Israel,  its  impenetrable  Holy  of 
Holies.  And  yet,  the  five  weeks  we  have  had  since 
Pentecost,  have  shown  us  how  gloriously  the  Church 
has  been  begun  on  mount  Sion.  There,  fronting  the 
Temple  of  the  restricted  and  imperfect  covenant  of 
Sinai,  the  Holy  Spirit  has  founded  the  Church, 
making  her  the  place  where  all  the  nations  of  earth 
are  to  meet  in  gladness  ;2  she  is  the  city  of  the  great 
King,  where  all  men  shall  henceforth  live  in  the 
Knowledge  of  God  ;3  and,  from  the  very  first  moment 
of  her  existence,  she  has  been  showing  herself  to  us 
as  the  abode  where  Eternal  Wisdom  has  made  it  his 
delight  to  dwell  ;4  she  has  proved  herself  to  be  the 
true  Holy  of  Holies,  wherein  God  and  we  are  to  be 
brought  into  union. 

The  law  of  fear  and  bondage5  is,  therefore,  for  ever 
abrogated  by  the  law  of  love.     A  lingering  remnant 

1  St.  Luke,  xix.  44.  ?  Jerem.  xxxi.  34.  5  Rom.  viii.  15. 

2  Ps.  xlvii.  3.  4  Prov.  viii.  31 ;  ix.  1. 


148  FIFTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

of  regard  for  the  once  approved  institution,  which  was 
the  depositary  of  divine  revelations,1  permits  the  first 
generation  of  Jewish  converts  to  observe,  if  it  so 
pleases  them,  the  practices  of  their  forefathers ;  but 
the  permission  is  to  cease  with  the  Temple,  whose 
approaching  destruction  is  to  bury  the  Synagogue  for 
ever.  And  even  now,  before  that  period  of  destruction, 
the  prescriptions  of  the  Mosaic  law  are  insufficient  to 
justify  the  sons  of  Jacob  before  God.  The  ritual 
ordinances,  whose  aim  was  the  keeping  up  the  expecta- 
tion of  the  future  Sacrifice  by  a  ceremonial  code  of 
figurative  representations, — have  become  useless,  now 
that  the  mysteries  they  foreshadowed  have  been 
accomplished.  The  very  commandments  of  the 
Decalogue, — those  necessary  commandments,  which 
belong  to  all  times  and  can  never  undergo  change, 
because  they  pertain  to  the  essence  of  the  ties  existing 
between  creatures  and  their  Creator, — yes,  even  these 
holy  commandments  have  acquired  such  additional 
splendour  from  the  teachings  of  Jesus,  the  Sun  of  all 
justice,  that  man's  conscience  now  finds  in  them  an 
almost  immeasurable  increase  of  moral  responsibility 
and  loveliness. 

Independently  of  the  positive  precept  concerning 
the  fruit  of  the  "  Tree  of  Knowledge,"  man  had 
received  from  God,  whilst  yet  in  Eden,  the  knowledge 
of  those  eternal  laws — they  were  written  in  the  life 
there  bestowed  upon  him.  From  that  moment 
forward,  he  would  have  to  cease  being  a  man  before 
he  could  entirely  divest  himself,  or  lose,  that  infused 
knowledge ;  for  it  had  been  given  to  him  as  part  of 
his  being,  as  the  natural  law  of  his  practical  judg- 
ments, and  was  thus,  to  a  certain  extent,  identified 
with  his  reason.  But  man's  Eeason  having,  by  the 
Fall,  become  greatly  obscured,  his  soul  had  no  longer 
the  full  and  clear  notion,  it  previously  had,  of  the 

JRom.  iii.  2, 


MASS.  149 

moral  obligations  resulting  from  his  own  nature  as 
man.  His  Will,  too,  was  a  sufferer  by  the  same 
Fall, — it  got  depraved ;  it  used  the  original  weak- 
ness of  Reason  as  an  excuse  for  its  own  malice  ;  and 
that  malice  did  but  make  thicker  the  darkness  which 
covered  its  own  excesses.  Voluntary  or  heedless 
victims  of  error,  the  Gentiles  were  seen  adapting  their 
conduct  to  false  maxims,  which  were,  at  times,  so 
contrary  to  the  first  principles  of  morality,  that  we 
who  have  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  faith  can  scarcely 
believe  that  men  could  ever  be  so  wicked  as  history 
tells  us  they  were.  Even  the  descendants  of  the 
Patriarchs,  though  singularly  preserved  through  the 
benediction  given  by  God  to  their  fathers,  were  far 
from  being  as  free  as  we  should  have  expected  them 
to  be  from  the  general  corruption.  When  Moses, 
sent  as  he  was  by  God,  formed  them  into  a  nation, 
whose  constitution  was  fidelity  to  that  written  law 
which  was  to  restore  the  law  of  nature, — several 
points  had  to  be  left  unmentioned,  which,  according 
to  our  Lord's  expression,  the  hardness  of  Jewish  hearts 
would  never  have  taken  in.  After  Moses'  death,  self- 
constituted  teachers  and  peculiar  sects  rose  up  in  the 
nation,  and,  by  dint  of  absurd  traditions  and  false 
interpretations,  corrupted  the  spirit,  yea,  at  times  the 
very  letter,  of  the  law  of  Sinai. 

The  Jews  looked  upon  the  Law  of  God  as  the 
Magna  Charta  of  their  nation ;  as  such,  it  was  put 
under  the  protection  of  the  civil  power;  various 
tribunals  with  more  or  less  of  executive  authority 
according  to  the  importance  of  the  cases  that  had 
respectively  to  be  brought  before  them, — were  to  pass 
sentence  on  the  infractions  committed,  or  the  crimes 
perpetrated,  against  it.  But, — with  the  single  excep- 
tion of  the  sacred  tribunal  established  under  the  law 
of  grace,  wherein  God  himself  acts  and  speaks  in  the 
person  of  the  Priest, — every  judgment  passed  by  men, 
be  their  authority  ever  so  imposing,  can  only  deal 


150  FIFTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

with  exterior  facts :  so  that  Moses,  in  the  legislative 
code  he  had  drawn  up,  assigned  no  penalty  for  interior 
sins.  These,  however  grievous  they  may  be,  are 
essentially  beyond  both  the  appreciation  and  cogni- 
zance of  society  and  the  human  powers  which  govern 
it.  Even  now  under  the  New  Law,  the  Church  does 
not  inflict  her  censures  on  interior  faults,  unless  they 
be  made  manifest  by  some  act  which  comes  under 
the  senses ;  just  as  Moses  had  done,  who,  whilst 
acknowledging  the  culpability  of  criminal  thoughts 
or  desires,  yet  left  to  God's  judgment  what  He  alone 
can  know. 

But  whilst  now-a-days,  there  is  not  a  Christian 
child  who  does  not  know  that  a  wicked  thought  or 
desire  is  unlawful, — it  was  not  so  with  the  mass  of 
the  Hebrew  people.  The  Prophets  were  ever  striving 
to  get  this  privileged  but  grovelling  race  to  raise  their 
thoughts  above  this  present  life  ;  and  even  supposing 
that  much  to  be  gained,  there  still  remained  the  nar- 
row-minded Jewish  notion,  that  beyond  the  divinely 
inspired  principles  of  its  political  constitution,  and 
the  outward  form  of  its  legislation,  there  was  nothing 
worthy  of  their  attention;  they  would  have  scouted 
the  idea  that  there  was  a  spiritual  reality,  of  far 
greater  and  deeper  importance,  underlying  the  exter- 
nal code.  We  see  all  this  strongly  marked  by  what 
took  place  shortly  after  the  return  from  captivity; 
the  last  prophets  had  disappeared,  and  free  scope  was 
given  to  doctrinal  systems  which  fostered  short- 
sighted theories.  The  Jewish  casuists  were  not  slow 
in  drawing  up  their  famous  formula,  that  all  moral 
goodness  was  guaranteed  to  him  that  had  received 
circumcision  !  St.  Paul,  later  on,  told  them  how  such 
a  principle  was  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Gentiles, 
leading  them  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God.1  Accord- 
ing to  the  moral  theology  of  those  Hebrew  doctors, 

1  Rom.  ii.  24. 


MASS.  151 

conscience  meant  only  what  the  tribunal  of  public 
justice  issued  as  its  decisions  :  the  obligations  of  the 
interior  tribunal  of  a  man's  conscience  were  to  be 
restricted  to  the  rules  followed  by  the  assize-courts. 
The  result  of  such  teaching  soon  showed  itself :  the 
only  thing  people  need  care  for  was  what  was  seen  by 
men ;  if  the  fault  were  not  one  that  human  eyes 
could  judge  of,  you  were  not  to  trouble  about  it.  The 
Gospel  is  filled  with  the  woes  uttered  by  our  Lord 
against  these  blind  guides,  who  taught  the  souls  they 
professed  to  direct,  how  best  to  smother  law  and  jus- 
tice and  love  under  the  outward  cover  of  the  letter. 
This  Jesus  of  ours  never  loses  an  opportunity  of 
denouncing,  and  castigating,  and  holding  up  to  exe- 
cration, those  hypocrites  of  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who 
took  such  pains  to  be  ever  cleaning  the  outside  of  the 
dish,  but,  within,  were  full  of  impurity,  and  murder, 
and  rapine.1 

The  divine  Word  who  had  come  down  from  heaven 
to  sanctify  men  in  truth,  (that  is,  to  sanctify  them  in 
himself),2  had  to  make  this  his  first  care, — to  restore 
what  time  had  tarnished,  to  restore  all  the  original 
brightness  to  the  changeless  principles  of  justice  and 
right,  which  rest  in  Him  as  in  their  centre.  No 
sooner  had  he  called  disciples  around  him,  and 
chosen  twelve  out  of  their  number  as  Apostles,  than 
he  began,  with  all  possible  solemnity,  his  divine  work 
of  moral  restoration.  The  passage  from  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,  which  the  Church  has  selected  for  the 
Gospel  of  this  fifth  Sunday,  follows  immediately  after 
his  declaring,  that  he  had  come,  not  to  find  fault 
with,  or  destroy  the  Law,3  but  to  restore  it  to  its 
true  meaning,  of  which  the  Scribes  had  deprived  it ; 
yea,  he  had  come  that  he  might  give  it  all  the  fulness, 
which  the  very  co-temporaries  of  Moses  were  too  hard 

1  St.  Matth.  xxii.,  etc.    2  St.  John,  xvii.  17, 19.     3  St.  Matth.  v.  17. 


152  FIFTH    SUNDAY    AFTEK    TENTECOST. 

to  take  in.  One  should  read  the  whole  chapter  of 
St.  Matthew  from  which  our  Gospel  is  taken ;  the 
explanations  we  have  been  giving  will  make  it  easily 
understood. 

In  the  few  lines  put  before  us  to-day  by  the  Church, 
our  Lord  tells  us  not  to  make  human  tribunals  the 
standard  of  the  justice  needed  for  our  entering  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  Jewish  law  brought  a 
man  who  was  guilty  of  murder  before  the  criminal 
court  of  judgment ;  and  He,  the  Master  and  author 
of  the  Law,  declares  to  us,  that  anger,  which  is  the 
first  step  leading  to  murder,  even  though  it  lurk  in 
the  deepest  recesses  of  the  conscience,  may  bring 
death  to  the  soul;  and  thus  really  incur,  in  the 
spiritual  order,  the  capital  punishment  which  human 
tribunals  reserve  to  actual  murder.  If,  without  going 
so  far  as  to  strike  the  offender,  our  anger  should  vent 
itself  in  insulting  language,  such  as  icorthless  wretch 
(which,  in  Syriac,  is  Baca,)  the  sin  becomes  so  serious, 
that,  weighed  in  the  balance  of  its  real  guilt  as  known 
by  God,  it  would  be  a  case,  not  of  the  ordinary 
criminal  jurisdiction,  but  of  the  highest  council  of  the 
nation.  If  the  angry  man  pass  from  insulting  to 
injurious  language,  there  is  no  human  tribunal  which, 
be  it  as  severe  as  it  can  be  in  its  verdict,  can  give  us 
an  idea  of  the  enormity  of  the  sin  committed.  But 
the  authority  of  the  sovereign  Judge  is  not,  like  that 
of  a  human  magistrate,  confined  within  certain  limits  ; 
when  fraternal  charity  is  outraged,  there  is  an  aven- 
ger who  will  demand  justice  beyond  the  grave.  Such 
is  the  importance  of  holy  charity,  which  God  demands 
should  unite  all  men  together  !  And  so  directly 
opposed  to  God's  design  is  the  sin,  which,  in  whatever 
degree,  endangers  or  troubles  the  union  of  the  living 
stones  of  the  temple,  which  has  to  be  built  up  in 
concord  and  love  here  below,  to  the  glory  of  the  un- 
divided and  tranquil  Trinity ! 


MASS.  153 

The  longer  it  lives,  the  better  does  the  chosen 
people  appreciate  and  understand  its  happiness  in 
having  chosen  real  and  solid  goods  for  its  inheritance. 
With  its  royal  model,  David,  it  sings,  in  the  Offertory 
the  heavenly  favours,  and  the  uninterrupted  presence 
of  the  God  who  has  vouchsafed  to  make  himself  its 
support. 

OFFERTORY. 

I  will  bless  the  Lord,  who  BenedicamDominumqui 
hath  given  me  understanding:  tribuit  mihi  intellectum  : 
I  set  God  always  in  my  sight :  providebam  Deum  in  cons- 
for  he  is  at  my  right  hand,  pectu  meo  semper  :  quo- 
that  I  be  not  moved.  mam  a  dextris  est  mihi,  ne 

commovear. 

In  the  Secret,  let  us  beseech  God  graciously  to 
receive  the  offering  of  our  hearts,  as  he  used  to  receive 
the  offerings  made  to  him  by  the  people  of  old.  But 
if  we  would  have  this  prayer  of  ours  to  be  heard,  we 
must  remember  the  command  given  to  us  at  the 
close  of  to-day's  Gospel: — God  will  not  accept  the 
hearts  of  those  who  are  not,  at  least  as  far  as  lies  in 
their  power,  in  peace  with  all  men. 

SECRET. 

Be  appeased,  O  Lord,  by  Propitiare,  Domine,  sup- 

our  humble  prayers  :  and  mer-  plicationibus  nostris  :     et 

cifully  receive  these  offerings  has  oblationes  famulorum 

of  thy  servants  :    that  what  famularumque  tuarum  be- 

each  hath  offered  to  the  honour  nignus   assume,   ut,   quod 

of  thy  name,  may  avail  to  the  singuli  obtulerunt  ad  hono- 

salvation    of    all.      Through,  rem  nominis  tui,   cunctis 

etc*  proficiat  ad  salutem.    Per 

Dominum. 

The  other  Secrets  as  in  page  135. 

The  consoling  presence  of  God,  gratefully  acknow- 
ledged in  the  Offertory  Anthem,  was  not  the  furthest 


154  FIFTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

condescension  which  God  could  bestow  on  his  faith- 
ful ones.  Won  over  by  his  infinite  love  in  the 
ineffable  union  of  the  sacred  Mysteries,  his  people 
desire  nothing,  and  ask  for  nothing,  but  that  they 
may  be  permitted  to  fix  their  eternal  abode  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord. 

COMMUNION. 

♦Unam  petii  a  Domino,  One  thing  I  have  asked  of 

banc  requiram  :  ut  inhabi-  the  Lord  ;  this  will  I  seek 
tem  in  domo  Domini  omni-  after  ;  that  I  may  dwell  in  the 
bus  diebus  vitse  meae.  house  of   the  Lord,   all    the 

days  of  my  life. 

The  effects  of  the  sacred  Mysteries  are  manifold : 
they  cleanse  the  deepest  recesses  of  our  soul,  and 
protect  us  externally,  by  enabling  us  to  shun  the 
snares  laid  for  us  along  the  path  of  life. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

Quoscoelesti,Domine,do-  Grant,  O  Lord,  we  beseech 

no  satiasti,  prsesta  qusesu-  thee,  that  we  whom  thou  hast 

mus  :  ut  a  nostris  munde-  fed  with  this  heavenly  gift, 

mur  occultis,  et  ab  hostium  may  be   cleansed    from    our 

liberemur    insidiis.       Per  hidden    sins,    and    delivered 

Dominum.  from  the  snares  of  our  ene- 
mies.   Through,  etc. 

The  other  Postcommunions  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Yersicle,  as  in 
pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON    OF   THE    MAGNIFICAT. 

Si  offers  munus  tuum  ad  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the 
altare,  et  recordatus  fueris  altar,  and  shalt  remember  that 
quia  frater  tuus  habet  ali-      thy    brother    hath    anything 


MASS. 


155 


against  thee,  leave  there  thy 
gift  before  the  altar,  and  go 
first  and  be  reconciled  to  thy 
brother;  and,  then  coming, 
thou  shalt  offer  thy  gift. 
Alleluia. 


quid  adversus  te,  relinque 
ibimunus  tuumante  altare, 
et  vade  prius  reconciliari 
fratri  tuo,  et  tunc  veniens 
offeres  munus  tuum.  Alle- 
luia. 


LET   US   PRAY. 

O  God,  who  hast  prepared 
invisible  good  things  for  them 
that  love  thee  :  pour  forth 
into  our  hearts  an  affectionate 
love  for  thee  :  that,  loving 
thee,  in  all  things,  and  above 
all  things,  we  may  come  to 
the  enjoyment  of  thy  pro- 
mises, which  surpass  all  that 
we  could  desire.  Through,  etc. 


OREMUS. 

Deus  qui  diligentibus  te 
bona  invisibiliapraeparasti, 
infundecordibus  nostristui 
amoris  affectum,  ut  te  in 
omnibus,  et  super  omnia 
diligentes,  promissiones 
tuas  quae  omne  desiderium 
superant,  consequamur. 
Per  Dominum. 


156  SIXTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE  SIXTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

The  Office  for  the  sixth  Sunday  after  Pentecost, 
which  began  yesterday  evening,  reminded  us,  in  its 
Magnificat  Antiphon,  of  a  repentance  which  has  never 
had  an  equal.  David,  the  royal  prophet,  the  con- 
queror of  Goliath,  himself  conquered  by  sensuality, 
and  from  adulterer  become  a  murderer,  at  last  felt 
the  crushing  weight  of  his  double  crime,  and  ex- 
claimed :  I  do  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  take  away  the 
iniquity  of  thy  servant,  for  I  have  done  foolishly  !  "I 
"  have  acted  as  a  fool  I"1 

Sin  is  always  &  folly,  and  a  weakness,  no  matter  of 
what  kind  it  may  be,  or  who  he  be  that  commits 
it.  The  rebel  angel,  or  fallen  man,  may,  in  their 
pride,  make  efforts  to  persuade  themselves  that,  when 
they  sinned,  they  did  not  act  as  fools,  and  were  not 
weak  ;  but  all  their  efforts  are  vain  ;  sin  must  ever 
have  this  disgrace  upon  it,  that  it  is  folly  and  weak- 
ness, for  it  is  a  revolt  against  God,  a  contempt  for  his 
law,  a  mad  act  of  the  creature,  who,  being  made  by 
his  Creator  to  attain  infinite  happiness  and  glory, 
prefers  to  debase  himself  by  turning  towards  nothing- 
ness, and  then  falls  even  lower  than  the  nothingness 
from  which  he  was  taken.  It  is,  however,  a  folly 
that  is  voluntary,  and  a  weakness  that  has  no  excuse; 
for,  although  the  creature  have  nothing  of  his  own 
but  darkness  and  misery,  yet  his  infinitely  merciful 

1  Paralip.  xxi.  8. 


MASS.  157 

Creator,  by  means  of  his  grace,  which  is  never  want- 
ing, puts,  within  that  creature's  reach,  divine  strength 
and  light. 

It  is  so  with  even  the  sinner  that  has  been  the 
least  liberally  gifted, — he  has  no   reason  that  can 
justify  his  offences :   but   when   he  that   sins,  is   a 
creature  who  has  been  laden  with  God's  gifts,  and, 
by  his  divine  generosity,  raised  higher  than  others  in 
the  order  of  grace, — oh !  then,  the  offence  he  com- 
mits against  his  benefactor  is  an  irjjury  that  has  no 
name.     Let  this  be  remembered  by  those  who,  like 
David,  could  say,  that  their  God  has  multiplied  his 
magnificence  over  them.1     They  may,  perhaps,  have 
been  led  by  him  into  high  paths  which  are  reserved 
for  the  favoured  few,  and  may,  perhaps,  have  reached 
the  heights  of  divine  union :  yet  must  they  be  on 
their  guard ;  no  one  who  has  still  to  carry  with  him 
the  burden  of  a  mortal  body  of  flesh,  is  safe,  unless 
by  exercising  a  ceaseless  vigilance.     On  the  moun- 
tains, as  on  the  plains  and  the  valleys,  at  all  times 
and  in  all  places,  a  fall  is  possible ;  but  when  it  is 
on  those  lofty  peaks  which,  in  this  land  of  exile, 
seem  bordering  on  heaven,  and  but  one  step  from  the 
entrance  into  the  powers  of  the  Lord,2 — what  a  terrific 
fall,  when  the  foot  slips  there !     The  yawning  pre- 
cipices, which  that  soul  had  avoided  on  her  ascent 
now  are  all  open  to  ingulf  her ;  abyss  after  abyss  of 
crime,  she  rushes  into  them,  and  with  a  violence  of 
passion  that  terrifies  even  them  that  have  long  been 
nothing  but  wickedness. 

Poor  fallen  soul !  pride,  like  that  of  Satan,  will 
now  try  to  keep  her  obstinately  fixed  in  her  crimes  : 
but,  from  the  depths  into  which  she  has  fallen,  let 
her,  like  David,  send  forth  the  cry  of  humility ;  let 
her  lament  her  abominations ;  let  her  not  be  afraid 

*Ps.  hex.  21.  2  Ibid,  16. 


158  SIXTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

to  look  up,  through  her  tears,  at  those  glorious  heights 
which  were  once  her  abode, — an  anticipated  heaven. 
Without  further  delay,  let  her  imitate  the  royal 
penitent,  and  say  with  him :  /  have  sinned  against 
the  Lord  I  and  she  will  hear  the  same  answer  that 
he  did :  The  Lord  hath  taken  away  thy  sin ;  thou 
shalt  not  die;  l  and  as  with  David,  so  also  with  her, 
God  may  still  do  grand  things  in  her.  David,  when 
innocent,  was  a  faithful  image  of  Christ,  who  was 
the  object  of  the  love  of  both  heaven  and  earth; 
David,  sinner,  but  penitent,  was  still  the  figure  of 
the  Man- God,  as  laden  with  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world,  and  bearing  on  his  single  self  the  merciful  and 
just  vengeance  of  his  offended  Father. 

In  tbe  Mass  of  this  Sunday,  which  they  call  the 
sixth  of  Saint  Matthew,  the  Greeks  read  the  account 
of  the  cure  of  the  paralytic,  which  is  related  in  the 
9th  Chapter  of  that  Evangelist.  The  preceding 
chapter,  with  its  episode  of  the  centurion  and  the  two 
possessed,  had  furnished  them  with  the  Gospels  for 
their  fourth  and  fifth  Sundays. 


MASS. 

It  is  difficult  to  see  what  connection  there  is  be- 
tween the  Mass  and  the  Office  of  this  Sunday,  at  least 
such  as  we  now  have  them.  Honorius  of  Autun 
and  Durandus  applied2  the  Introit,  and  the  other 
sung  portions  which  follow,  to  the  inauguration  of 
Solomon's  reign.  At  the  period  when  those  two 
writers  lived,  the  Scripture  Lessons  for  this  Sunday 
were  taken  from  the  first  pages  of  the  second  book  of 
Paralipomenon,  where  we  have  the  account  of  the 
glorious  early  days  of  David's  son.  But,  since  that 
time,  it  has  been  the  Church's   practice   to   continue 

1  2  Kings,  xii.  13.  2  The  12th  and  13th  Centuries. 


MASS.  159 

the  reading  of  the  four  books  ofKings  up  to  the  month 
of  August,  omitting  altogether  the  two  books  of  Parali- 
pomenon,  which  were  but  a  practical  repetition  of  the 
events  already  related  in  previous  Lessons.  So  that  the 
connection  suggested  by  the  two  writers  just  men- 
tioned has  no  foundation  in  the  actual  arrangement 
of  to-day's  liturgy.  We  must,  therefore,  be  satisfied 
with  taking  from  the  Introit  the  teaching  of  what  it 
is  that  constitutes  the  Christian's  courage, — his  faith 
in  God's  power  which  is  always  ready  to  help  him, 
and  the  conviction  of  his  own  nothingness,  which 
keeps  him  from  all  presumption. 

INTKOIT. 

The  Lord  is  the  strength  of  Dominus  fortitudo  plebis 
his  people,  and  the  protector  suae,  et  protector  saluta- 
of  the  salvation  of  his  Christ :  rium  Christi  sui  est :  sal- 
save,  0  Lord,  thy  people,  and  vum  fac  populum  tuum, 
bless  thine  inheritance,  and  Domine,  et  benedic  hsere- 
govern  them  for  ever.  ditati  tuae,  et  rege  eos  us- 

Ps.  To  thee,  0  Lord,  will  I  que  in  saeculum. 

cry  out :  O  my  God,  be  not  Ps.  Ad  te,  Domine,  cla- 

silent,   refuse  not  to  answer  mabo;  Deusmeus,  nesileas 

me,  lest  I  become   like   those  a  me,  nequando  taceas  a 

who    descend    into    the    pit.  me,  et  assimilabor  descen- 

Glory,  etc.    The  Lord.  dentibusinlacum.    Gloria 

Patri.   Dominus. 

The  Collect  gives  us  an  admirable  summing  up  of 
the  strong,  yet  sweet,  action  of  grace  upon  the  whole 
course  of  Christian  life.  It  has  evidently  been  sug- 
gested by  those  words  of  St.  James :  Every  best  gift, 
and  every  perfect  gift,  is  from  above,  coming  down 
from  the  Father  of  lights.1 

COLLECT. 

0  God  of  all  power,  to  whom  Deus  virtutum,  cujus  est 

belongs    whatsoever  is  best :  totum  quod  est  optimum  : 

implant  in  our  hearts  the  love  insere    pectoribus    nostris 

of  thy  name,  and  grant  us  an  amorem   tui    nominis,    et 

1  St.  James,  i.  17. 


160 


SIXTH   SUNDAY    AFTER  PENTECOST. 


prsesta  in  nobis  religionis 
augmentum  :  ut  quae  sunt 
bona,  nutrias,  ac  pietatis 
studio,  quae  sunt  nutrita, 
custodias.    Per  Dominum. 


increase  of  religion  :  that  thou 
mayst  nourish  what  is  good  in 
us,  and,  whilst  we  make  en- 
deavours after  virtue,  mayst 
guard  the  things  thus  nour- 
ished.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati  Pauli 
Apostoliad  Romanos. 


Cap.  vi. 

Fratres,  Quicumque  bap- 
tizati  sumus  in  Christo  Jesu, 
in  morte  ipsius  baptizati 
sumus.  Consepulti  enim 
sumus  cum  illo  per  baptis- 
mum  in  mortem  :  ut  quo- 
modo  Christus  surrexit  a 
mortuis  per  gloriam  Patris, 
ita  et  nos  in  novitate  vitse 
ambulemus.  Si  enim  com- 
plantati  facti  sumus  simili- 
tudini  mortis  ejus,  simul  et 
resurrectionis  erimus.  Hoc 
scientes,  quia  vetus  homo 
noster  simul  crucifixus  est, 
ut  destruatur  corpus  pec- 
cati,  et  ultra  non  servia- 
mus  peccato.  Qui  enim 
mortuus  est,  j  ustificatus  est 
a  peccato.  Si  autem  mortui 
sumus  cum  Christo,  credi- 
mus  quia  simul  etiam  vive- 
mus  cum  Christo  :  scientes 
quod  Christus  resurgens  ex 
mortuis,  jam  non  moritur, 
mors  illi  ultra  non  domina- 
bitur.  Quod  enim  mortuus 
est  peccato,  mortuus  est 
semel  :  quod  autem  vivit, 
vivit  Deo.  Ita  et  vos  existi- 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  the  Apostle  to  the 
Romans. 

Ch.  vi. 

Brethren  :  all  we  who  are 
baptised  in  Christ  Jesus,  are 
baptised  in  his  death.  For 
we  are  buried  together  with 
him  by  baptism  unto  death  : 
that  as  Christ  is  risen  from  the 
dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  so  we  also  may  walk 
in  newness  of  life.  For  if  we 
have  been  planted  together  in 
the  likeness  of  his  death,  we 
shall  also  be  in  the  likeness  of 
his  resurrection.  Knowing 
this,  that  our  old  man  is  cruci- 
fied with  him,  that  the  body 
of  sin  may  be  destroyed,  and 
that  we  may  serve  sin  no 
longer.  For  he  that  is  dead, 
is  justified  from  sin.  Now  if 
we  be  dead  with  Christ,  we 
believe  that  we  shall  live  also 
together  with  Christ.  Knowing 
that  Christ,  rising  again  from 
the  dead,  dieth  now  no  more, 
death  shall  no  more  have  do- 
minion over  him.  For  in  that 
he  died  to  sin,  he  died  once  : 
but  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth 
unto  God.  So  do  ye  also 
reckon  yourselves  to  be  dead 


MASS.  1G1 

indeed  to  sin.  but  alive  to  God      mate,  vos  mortuos  quidem 
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  essepeccato,viventesautem 

DeoinCliristo  Jesu  Domino 

nostro. 

The  Masses  of  the  Sundays  after  Pentecost,  have, 
so  far,  given  us  but  once  a  passage  from  St  Paul's 
Epistles.  It  has  been  to  Sts.  Peter  and  John  that 
the  preference  has  been  hitherto  given  of  addressing 
the  Faithful  at  the  commencement  of  the  sacred 
Mysteries.  It  may  be,  that  the  Church,  during  these 
weeks,  which  represent  the  early  days  of  the  apostolic 
preaching,  has  intended  by  this  to  show  us  the  dis- 
ciple of  faith  and  the  disciple  of  love  as  being  the  two 
most  prominent  in  the  first  promulgation  of  the  new 
Covenant,  which  was  committed,  at  the  onset,  to  the 
Jewish  people.  At  that  time,  Paul  was  but  Saul  the 
persecutor,  and  was  putting  himself  forward  as  the 
most  rabid  opponent  of  that  Gospel,  which,  later  on, 
he  would  so  zealously  carry  to  the  furthest  parts  of 
the  earth.  If  his  subsequent  conversion  made  him 
become  an  ardent  and  enlightened  apostle  even  to  the 
Jews,  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  house  of  Jacob 
was  not  the  mission  that  was  to  be  specially  the  one 
of  his  apostolate.1  After  publicly  announcing  his 
faith  in  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  ;  after  confounding  the 
synagogue  by  the  weight  of  his  testimony,2  he  waited 
in  silence  for  the  termination  of  the  period  accorded 
to  Juda  for  the  acceptance  of  the  covenant;  he  with- 
drew into  privacy,3  waiting  for  the  Yicar  of  the  Man- 
God,  the  Head  of  the  apostolic  college,  to  give  the 
signal  for  the  vocation  of  the  Gentiles,  and  open,  in 
person,  the  door  of  the  Church  to  these  new  children 
of  Abraham.4 

But,  Israel  has  too  long  abused  God's  patience ; 
the  day  of  the  ungrateful  Jerusalem's  repudiation  is 
approaching,5  and  the  divine  Spouse,  after   all   this 

1  Gal.  ii.  9.  3Gal.  i.  17-22.  5  Ip.  1.  I. 

3  Acts,  ix.  20,  22.         4  Acts,  x. 

VOL.    XI.  M 


162  SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

long  forbearance  with  his  once  chosen,  but  now  faith- 
less Bride,  the  Synagogue, — has  gone  to  the  Gentile 
nations.  Now  is  the  time  for  the  Doctor  of  the 
Gentiles  to  speak ;  he  will  go  on  speaking  and  preach- 
ing to  them,  to  his  dying  day  ;  he  will  not  cease  pro- 
claiming the  word  to  them,  until  he  has  brought  them 
back,  and  lifted  them  up  to  God,  and  consolidated 
them  in  faith  and  love.  He  will  not  rest,  until  he 
has  led  this  once  poor  despised  gentile  world  to  the 
nuptial  union  with  Christ,1  yes,  to  the  full  fecundity 
of  that  divine  union,  of  which,  on  the  24th  and  last 
Sunday  after  Pentecost,  we  shall  hear  him  thus 
speaking  :  We  cease  not  to  pray  for  you,  and  to  beg 
that  ye  may  be  filled  ivith  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  in 
all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding ;  that  ye  may 
walk  worthy  of  God,  in  all  things  pleasing  him  ;  being 
fruitful  in  every  good  work.  *  *  *  *  Giving  thanks 
to  God  the  Father,  who  hath  made  us  worthy  to  be 
partakers  of  the  lot  of  the  Saints  in  light,  *  *  *  *  and 
hath  translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  his  beloved  Son.2 
It  is  to  the  Romans  that  are  addressed  to-day's 
inspired  instructions  of  the  great  Apostle.  For  the 
reading  of  these  admirable  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  the 
Church,  during  the  Sundays  after  Pentecost,  will 
follow  the  order  in  which  they  stand  in  the  canon  of 
Scripture  :  the  epistle  to  the  Romans,  the  two  to  the 
Corinthians,  then  those  to  the  Galatians,  Ephesians, 
Philippians,  andColossians,  will  be  read  to  us  in  their 
turns.  They  make  up  the  sublimest  correspondence 
that  was  ever  written, — a  correspondence  where  we 
find  Paul's  whole  soul,  giving  us  both  precept  and 
example  how  best  we  may  love  our  Lord :  I  beseech 
you,  so  he  speaks  to  his  Corinthians,  be  ye  followers  of 
me,  as  I  also  am  of  Christ? 


1  2  Cor.  xi.  2. 

2  Coloss.i.  9-13.  Epistle  for  the  24th  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
3 1  Cor.  iv.  16;  xi.  1  ;  Philip,  iii.  17  ;  1  Thess.  i.  6. 


MASS.  163 

Indeed,  the  Gospel,1  the  kingdom  of  God,2  the 
Christian  life,  is  not  an  affair  of  mere  words.  Nothing 
is  less  speculative  than  the  science  of  salvation.  Nothing 
makes  it  penetrate  so  deep  in  the  souls  of  men,  as  the 
holy  life  of  him  that  teaches  it.  It  is  for  this  reason, 
that  the  Christian  world  counts  him  alone  as  Apostle 
or  Teacher,  who,  in  his  one  person,  holds  the  double 
teaching  of  doctrine  and  works.  Thus,  Jesus,  the 
Prince  of  Pastors?  manifested  eternal  truth  to  men, 
not  alone  by  the  words  uttered  by  his  divine  lips,  but 
likewise,  by  the  works  he  did  during  his  life  on  earth. 
So,  too,  the  Apostle,  having  become  a  pattern  of  the 
flock?  shows  us  all,  in  his  own  person,  what  marvellous 
progress  a  faithful  soul  may  make  under  the  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Spirit  of  sanctification. 

Let  us,  then,  be  attentive  to  every  word  that  comes 
from  this  mouth,  ever  open  to  speak  to  the  whole  earth;5 
but,  at  the  same  time,  let  us  fix  the  eyes  of  our  soul  on 
the  works  achieved  by  our  Apostle,  and  let  us  walk  in  his 
footsteps.6  He  lives  in  his  Epistles ;  he  abides  and 
continues  with  us  all,  as  he  himself  assures  us,  for  the 
furtherance  and  joy  of  our  faith.7 

Nor  is  this  all.  If  we  value,  as  we  ought,  the 
example  and  the  teaching  of  this  father  of  the  gentiles,8 
we  must  not  forget  his  labours,  and  sufferings,  and 
solicitudes,  and  the  intense  love  he  bore  towards  all 
those  who  never  had  seen,  or  were  to  see,  his  face  in 
the  flesh.9  Let  us  make  him  the  return  of  dilating  our 
hearts  with  affectionate  admiration  of  him.  Let  us 
love,  not  only  the  light,  but  him  also  who  brings  it  to 
us ;  yea,  and  all  them  that,  like  him,  have  been  getting 
for  us  the  exquisite  brightness  from  the  treasures  of 
God  the  Father  and  his  Christ.     It  is  the  recommen- 


1  1  Thess.  i.  5.  *  1  St.  Pet.  v.  3.  7  Ibid.  i.  25,  26. 

*  1  Cor.  iv.  20.  5  2  Cor.  vi.  11.  6  1  Cor.  iv.  14,  15. 

3 1  St.  Pet.  v.  4.  6  Philip,  hi.  17.  9  Coloss.  ii.  1-5. 


164  SIXTH    SUMDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

dation  made  so  feelingly  by  St.  Paul  himself;1  it  is 
the  intention  willed  by  God  Himself,  by  the  fact  of 
his  confiding  to  men  like  ourselves  the  charge  of 
sharing  with  Him  the  imparting  this  heavenly  light 
to  us.  Eternal  Wisdom  does  not  show  herself  directly 
here  below ;  she  is  hid,  with  all  her  treasures,  in  the 
Man-God  ;2  she  reveals  herself  by  Him,3  and  by  the 
Church,4  which  is  the  mystical  body  of  that  Man-  God,5 
and  by  the  chosen  members  of  that  Church,  the 
Apostles.6  We  cannot  either  love  or  know  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  save  by  and  in  Him ;?  but  we  cannot 
love  or  understand  Jesus,  unless  we  love  and  under- 
stand his  Church.8  Now,  in  this  Church, — the 
glorious  aggregate  of  the  elect  both  of  heaven  and 
earth, — we  should  especially  love  and  venerate  those 
wTho  are,  in  a  special  manner,  associated  with  our 
Lord's  sacred  humanity  in  making  the  divine  Word 
manifest, — that  Word,  who  is  the  one  centre  of  our 
thoughts,  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come. 

According  to  this  standard,  who  was  there  that 
had  a  stronger  claim,  than  Paul,  to  the  veneration, 
gratitude,  and  love,  of  the  Faithful  ?  Who  of  the 
Prophets  and  holy  Apostles  went  deeper  into  the 
mystery  of  Christ?9  Who  was  there  like  him,  in 
revealing  to  the  world  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Christ  Jesus  ?10  Was 
there  ever  a  more  perfect  teacher,  or  a  more  eloquent 
interpreter,  of  the  life  of  union, — we  mean  of  that 
marvellous  union  which  brings  regenerated  humanity 
into  the  embrace  of  God,  union  which  continues  and 
repeats  the  life  of  the  Word  Incarnate  in  each  Chris- 
tian ?  To  him,  the  last  and  least  of  the  saints,  (as 
he  humbly  calls  himself,)  was  given  the  grace  of  pro- 
claiming to  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of 

1  2  Cor.  vi.  ll-\'}.  4  Eph.  iii.  10.  8  St.  John,  xv.   14  ; 

Heb.  xiii.  7  b  Ibid.  i.  23.  St.  Luke,  x.  1(5. 

*  Coloss.  ii.  3.  6  1  Cor.  ii.  6,  7.  9  Eph.  iii.  4,  5. 

3  1  Cor.  i.  24.  7  Ibid.  8.  10  2  Cor.  iv,  6. 


MASS.  165 

Christ ;  to  him  was  confided  the  mission  of  teaching 
to  all  nations  the  mystery  of  creation, — mystery,  hid- 
den so  long  in  God,  as  the  secret  to  be,  at  some  distant 
day,  revealed  to  men,  and  would  show  them  what  was 
the  one  only  meaning  of  the  world's  history, — the 
mystery,  that  is,  of  the  manifestation,  through  the 
Church,  of  the  infinite  Wisdom  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord.1 

For,  as  the  Church  is  neither  more  nor  less  than 
the  body  and  mystical  complement  of  the  Man- 
God, — so,  in  St.  Paul's  mind,  the  formation  and 
growth  of  the  Church  are  but  the  sequel  of  the  In- 
carnation ;  they  are  but  the  continued  development 
of  the  mystery  shown  to  the  angelic  hosts,  when  this 
Word  Incarnate  made  himself  visible  to  them  in  the 
Crib  at  Bethlehem.  After  the  Incarnation,  God  was 
the  better  known  of  his  Angels ;  though  ever  the  self- 
same in  his  own  unchanging  essence,  yet,  to  them,  he 
appeared  grander  and  more  magnificent  in  the  bril- 
liant reflection  of  his  infinite  perfections,  as  seen  in 
the  Flesh  of  his  Word.  So,  too,  although  no  increase 
in  them  was  possible,  and  their  plenitude  was  their 
fixed  measure, — yet,  the  created  perfection  and  holi- 
ness of  the  Man-God  have  their  fuller  and  clearer 
revelation,  in  proportion  as  the  marvels  of  perfection 
and  holiness,  whicli  dwell  in  Him,  as  in  their  source, 
are  multiplied  in  the  world. 

Starting  from  Him,  flowing  ever  from  His  fulness,2 
the  stream  of  grace  and  truth3  ceaslessly  laves  each 
member  of  the  body  of  the  Church.  Principle  of 
spiritual  growth,  mysterious  sap,  it  has  its  divinely 
appointed  channels  :  and  these  unite  the  Church  more 
closely  to  her  Head,  than  the  nerves  and  vessels, 
which  convey  movement  and  life  to  the  extremities  of 
our  body,  unite  its  several  parts  to  the  head  which 
directs  and  governs  the  whole  frame.  But,  just  as  in 
the  human  body,  the  life  of  the  head  and  of  the 
1  Eph.  iii.  8-11.  -  St.  John,  i.  16.  3  Ibid.  14. 


166  SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

members  is  one,  giving  to  each  of  them  the  proportion 
and  harmony  which  go  to  make  up  the  perfect  man, 
so,  in  the  Church,  there  is  but  one  life, — the  life  of 
the  Man-God,  of  Christ  the  head,  forming  his  mystical 
Body,  and  perfecting,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  its  several 
members.1  The  time  will  come,  when  this  perfection 
will  have  attained  its  full  development ;  then  will 
human  nature,  united  with  its  divine  Head  in  the 
measure  and  beauty  of  the  perfect  age  due  to  Christ, 
appear  on  the  throne  of  the  Word,2  an  object  of 
admiration  to  the  Angels,  and  of  delight  to  the  most 
holy  Trinity.  Meanwhile,  Christ  is  being  completed 
in  all  things  and  in  all  men  ;3  as  heretofore  at  Naza- 
reth, Jesus  is  still  growing  ;4  and  these  his  advancings 
are  gradual  fresh  manifestations  of  the  beauty  of 
infinite  Wisdom.5 

The  holiness,  the  sufferings,  and,  then,  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  Jesus, — in  a  word,  his  life  continued  in 
his  members,6  this  is  St.  PauPs  notion  of  the  Christian 
life  :  a  notion  most  simple  and  sublime,  which,  in  the 
Apostle's  mind,  resumes  the  whole  commencement, 
progress  and  consummation  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
of  love  in  every  soul  that  is  sanctified.  We  shall 
find  him,  later  on,  developing  this  practical  truth,  of 
which  the  Epistle  read  to  us  to-day  merely  gives  the 
leading  principle.  After  all,  what  is  Baptism,  that 
first  step  made  on  the  road  which  leads  to  heaven, — 
what  else  is  it  but  the  neophyte's  incorporation  with 
the  Man-God,  who  died  once  unto  sin,  that  he 
might  for  ever  live  in  God  his  Father  ?  On 
Holy  Saturday,7  after  having  assisted  at  the 
blessing  of  the  font,  we  had  read  to  us  a  similar 
passage  from  another  Epistle  of  St.  Paul/  which  put 


1  Eph.  iv.  12-16.  3  Ibid.  i.  23.  5  Ibid.  52. 

2  Ibid.  ii.  6.  *  St.  Luke,  ii.  40.  6  2  Cor.  iv.  10,  11. 

,  Our  Volume  for  Passioutidc  and  Holy  Week,  page  624. 
8  Coloss.  iii.  1-4  ;  (the  Epist.  for  Holy  Saturday.) 


MASS.  167 

before  us  the  divine  realities  achieved  beneath  the 
mysterious  waters.  Holy  Church  returns  to  the  same 
teaching  to-day,  in  order  that  she  may  recal  to  our 
minds  this  great  principle  of  the  commencement  of 
the  christian  life,  and  make  it  the  basis  of  the  instruc- 
tions she  is  here  going  to  give  us.  If  the  very  first 
effect  of  the  sanctification  of  one  who,  by  Baptism,  is 
buried  together  with  Christ,  be  the  making  him  a  new 
man,  the  creating  him  afresh  in  this  Man-God,1  the 
ingrafting  his  new  life  upon  the  life  of  Jesus  whereby 
to  bring  forth  new  fruits, — we  cannot  wonder  at  the 
Apostle's  unwillingness  to  give  us  any  other  rule  for 
our  contemplation  or  our  practice,  than  the  study  and 
imitation  of  this  divine  model.  There,  and  there  only, 
is  man's  perfection,2  there  is  his  happiness  :3  as,  then, 
ye  have  received  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  the 
Lord,  walk  ye  in  him;4,  for,  as  many  of  you  as 
have  been  baptised  in  Christ,  have  put  on  Christ.5 
Our  Apostle  emphatically  tells  us,  that  he  knoweth 
nothing,  and  will  preach  nothing,  but  Jesus.6  If  we 
be  of  St  Paul's  school,  adopting,  as  we  shall  then  do, 
the  sentiments  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  making 
them  our  own,7  we  shall  become  other  Christs,  or, 
rather,  one  only  Christ  with  the  Man- God,  by  the 
sameness  of  thoughts  and  virtues,  under  the  impulse 
of  the  same  sanctifying  Spirit. 

Between  the  two  lessons  of  Epistle  and  Gospel,  the 
Gradual  and  Alleluia- Yerse  come  urging  us  to  make 
that  humble  and  confiding  prayer,  which  should  ever 
be  ascending  to  God  from  the  christian  soul. 

GRADUAL. 

Turn  to  us  a  little,  0  Lord,  Convertere,  Domine,  ali- 
and  be  appeased  with  thy  quantulum,  et  deprecare 
servants.  super  servos  tuos. 

1  Eph.  ii.  10.         3  Ibid.  ii.  10.        5  Gal.  ill.  27.         7  Philip,  ii.  5. 
*  Coloss.  i.  28.        4  Ibid.  6.  6  1  Cor.  ii.  2. 


168 


SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


"ft.  Domine,refugiumf  ac- 
tus es  nobis,  a  generatione 
et  progenie. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$".  In  te,  Domine,  spera- 
vi,  non  confundar  in  aeter- 
num  :  in  justitia  tua  libera 
me  et  eripe  me  :  inclina  ad 
me  aurem  tuam  :  accelera, 
ut  eripias  me.    Alleluia. 


*fT.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  been 
our  refuge,  from  generation  to 
generation. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

'ff.  In  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I 
put  my  trust,  let  me  never  be 
confounded  :  save  me  by  thy 
justice,  and  rescue  me:  bend 
thine  ear  unto  me  :  make 
haste  to  save  me.    Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Marcum. 

Cap.  viii. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Quum 
turbamulta  esset  cum  Jesu, 
nee  haberent  quod  mandu- 
carent,  convocatis  discipu- 
lis,  ait  illis  :  Misereor  super 
turbam  :  quia  ecce  jam  tri- 
duo  sustinent  me,  nee  ha- 
bent  quod  manducent :  et 
si  dimisero  eos  jejunos  in 
domum  suam,  deficient  in 
via  :  quidam  enim  ex  eis  de 
longe  venerunt.  Et  respon- 
derunt  ei  discipuli  sui : 
Unde  illos  quis  poterit  Lie 
saturare  panibus  in  solitu- 
dine1?  Et  interrogavit  eos  : 
Quot  panes  habetis  1  Qui 
dixerunt :  Septem.  Et  prse- 
cepit  turbae  discumbere  su- 
per terram.  Et  accipiens 
septem  panes,  gratias  agens 
f regit,  et  dabat  discipulis 
suis  utapponerent,  et  appo- 
sueruntturbao.  Ethabebant 
pisciculos  paucos  :  et  ipsos 
benedixit,  et  jussit  apponi. 
Etmanducaverunt,  et  satu- 
rati  sunt,  et  sustulerunt 
quod  superaverat  de  frag- 


Sequel    of  the    holy  Gospel 
according  to  Mark. 

Ch.  viii. 

At  that  time  :  When  there 
was  a  great  multitude  with 
Jesus,  and  had  nothing  to  eat, 
calling  his  disciples  together, 
he  saith  to  tliein  :  I  have  com- 

Eassion  on  the  multitude,  for 
ehold  they  have  now  been 
with  me  three  days,  and  have 
nothing  to  eat ;  and  if  I  send 
them  away  fasting  to  their 
own  home,  they  will  faint  in 
the  way  :  for  some  of  them 
came  afar  off.  And  his  dis- 
ciples answered  him  :  From 
whence  can  any  one  fill  them 
here  with  bread  in  the  wilder- 
ness %  And  he  asked  them : 
How  many  loaves  have  ye  % 
Who  said  :  Seven.  And  he 
commanded  the  people  to  sit 
down  on  the  ground  ;  and 
taking  the  seven  loaves,  giving 
thanks  he  broke,  and  gave  to 
his  disciples  for  to  set  before 
them,  and  they  set  them  be- 
fore the  people.  And  they 
had  a  few  little  fishes  ;  and  he 
blessed  them,  and  commanded 
them  to  be  set  before  them. 


MASS.  169 

And  they  did  cat  and  were      mentis,     septem     sportas. 
filled,  and  they  took  up  that      Erant  autem  qui  manduca- 
which  was   left   of  the  frag-      verant,  quasi^  quatuor  niil- 
ments,   seven    baskets.    And      lia  :  et  dimisit  eos. 
they  that  had  eaten  were  about 
four  thousand  :  and  he  sent 
them  away. 

The  interpretation  of  the  sacred  text  is  given  to  us 
by  St.  Ambrose,  in  his  Homily  which  has  been  chosen 
for  this  Sunday.  We  shall  there  find  the  same  vein 
of  thought  as  is  suggested  by  the  whole  tenor  of  the 
Liturgy  assigned  for  this  portion  of  the  Year.  The 
holy  Doctor  thus  begins :  "  After  the  woman,  who 
"is  the  type  of  the  Church,  has  been  cured  of  the 
"  flow  of  blood, — and  after  the  Apostles  have  received 
"their  commission  to  preach  the  Gospel, — the 
"  nourishment  of  heavenly  grace  is  imparted."  He 
had  just  been  asking,  a  few  lines  previous,  what 
this  signified  ;  and  his  answer  was  :  "  The  Old  Law 
"  had  been  insufficient  to  feed  the  hungry  hearts  of 
"  the  nations ;  so,  the  Gospel  food  was  given  to 
"  them."1 

We  were  observing  this  day  week,  that  the  Law  of 
Sinai',  because  of  its  iveakness,2  had  made  way  for 
the  Testament  of  the  universal  covenant.  And  yet, 
it  is  from  Sion  itself  that  the  Law  of  Grace  has  issued ; 
here  again,  it  is  Jerusalem  that  is  the  first  to  whom 
the  word  of  the  Lord  is  spoken.3  But  the  bearers  of 
the  Good  Tidings  have  been  rejected  by  the  obdurate 
and  jealous  Jews;  they,  therefore,  turn  to  the 
Gentiles,4  and  shake  off  Jerusalem's  dust  from  their 
feet.  That  dust,  howTever,  is  to  be  an  accusing 
testimony  ;5  it  is  soon  to  be  turned  into  a  rain 
showering  down  on  the  proud  city  a  more  terrible 
vengeance  than  was  that  of  fire,  which  once  fell  on 
Sodom  and  Gomorrha.6  The  superiority  of  Juda  over 
the  rest  of  the  human  race,  had  lasted  for  ages  ;  but 

1  S.  Arnbr.  in  Luc.  lib.  vi.  69.     *  Is.  ii.  3.  5  St.  Luke,  ix.  5. 

2  Heb.  vii.  18,  19.  4  Acts,  xiii.  46.  6  St.  Matth.  x.  15. 


170  SIXTH   SUXPAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

now,  all  that  ancient  privilege  of  Israel,  and  all  his 
rights  of  primogeniture,  are  gone ;  the  primacy  has 
followed  Simon  Peter  to  the  west ;  and  the  crown  of 
Sion,  which  is  fallen  from  off  her  guilty  head,1  now 
glitters,  and  will  so  for  ever,  on  the  consecrated  brow 
of  the  queen  of  nations. 

Like  the  poor  woman  of  the  Gospel  who  had  spent 
all  her  substance  over  useless  remedies,  the  Gentile 
world  had  grown  weaker  and  weaker  by  the  effects 
of  original  and  subsequent  sins  ;  she  had  put  herself 
under  the  treatment  of  false  teachers,  who  gradually 
reduced  her  to  the  loss  of  that  law  and  gifts  of  nature, 
which,  as  St.  Ambrose  expresses  it,  had  been  her 
"  vital  patrimony."2  At  length  the  day  came  for  her 
hearing  of  the  arrival  of  the  heavenly  Physician  : 
she,  at  once,  roused  herself ;  the  consciousness  of  her 
miserable  condition  urged  her  on  ;  her  faith  got  the 
upper  hand  of  her  human  respect,  and  brought  her  to 
the  presence  of  the  Incarnate  Word ;  her  humble 
confidence,  which  so  strongly  contrasted  with  the 
insulting  arrogance  of  the  Synagogue,  lead  her  into 
contact  with  Christ,  and  she  touched  him  ;  virtue 
went  forth  from  him,3  cured  her  original  wound,  and, 
at  once,  restored  to  her  all  the  strength  she  had  lost 
by  her  long  period  of  languor. 

Having  thus  cured  human  nature,  our  Lord  bids 
her  cease  her  fast  which  had  lasted  for  ages ;  he 
gives  her  the  excellent  nourishment  she  required.  St. 
Ambrose,  whose  comment  we  are  following,  compares 
the  miraculous  repast  mentioned  in  to-day's  Gospel 
with  the  other  multiplication  of  loaves  brought  before 
us  on  the  fourth  Sunday  of  Lent ;  and  he  remarks, 
how,  both  in  spiritual  nourishment,  and  in  that  which 
refreshes  the  body,  there  are  various  degrees  of  excel- 
lence. The  Bridegroom  does  not  ordinarily  serve  up 
the  choicest  wine,  he  does  not  produce  the  daintiest 

1  Lament,  v.  1G.  2  In  Luc.  vi.  56.  3  St.  Luke,  viii.  46 


MASS.  171 

dishes,  at  the  beginning  of  the  banquet  he  has  pre- 
pared for  his  dear  ones.1  Besides,  there  are  many 
souls  here  below  who  are  incapable  of  rising,  beyond 
a  certain  limit,  towards  the  divine  and  substantial 
Light  which  is  the  nourishment  of  the  spirit.  To 
these,  therefore,  and  they  are  the  majority,  and  are 
represented  by  the  five  thousand  men  who  were 
present  at  the  first  miraculous  multiplication,  the  five 
loaves  of  inferior  quality2  are  an  appropriate  food, 
and  one  that,  by  its  very  number,  is  in  keeping  with 
the  five  senses,  which,  more  or  less,  have  dominion 
over  the  multitude.  But,  as  for  the  privileged 
favourites  of  grace, — as  for  those  men  who  are  not 
distracted  by  the  cares  of  this  present  life,  who  scorn 
to  use  its  permitted  pleasures,  and  who,  even  whilst 
in  the  flesh,  make  God  the  only  king  of  their  soul, 
— for  these,  and  for  these  only,  the  Bridegroom  re- 
serves the  pure  wheat  of  the  seven  loaves,  which,  by 
their  number,  express  the  plenitude  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  mysteries  in  abundance. 

"  Although  they  are  in  the  world,"  says  St.  Am- 
brose, "  yet  these  men,  to  whom  is  given  the  nourish- 
"  ment  of  mystical  rest,  are  not  of  the  world."3  In 
the  beginning,  God  was,  for  six  days,  giving  to  the 
universe  he  had  created  its  perfection  and  beauty ; 
he  consecrated  the  seventh  to  the  enjoyment  of  his 
works.4  Seven  is  the  number  of  the  divine  rest ;  it 
was  also  to  be  that  of  the  fruitful  rest  of  the  Son 
of  God, — the  perfecting  souls  in  that  peace  which 
makes  love  secure,  and  is  the  source  of  the  invincible 
power  of  the  Bride,  as  mentioned  in  the  Canticle.5  It 
is  for  this  reason,  that  the  Man- God,  when  proclaim- 
ing on  the  mount  the  Beatitudes  of  the  law  of  love, 
attributed  the  seventh  to  the  peace-makers,  or  peace- 


*  St.  John,  ii.  10.  4  Gen.  ii.  1-3. 

2  Hordeacei :  St.  John,  vi.  9.  5  Cantic.  viii.  10. 

3  In  Luc.  vi.  80. 


172  SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

able?  as  deserving  to  be  called,  by  excellence,  the 
Sons  of  God.2  It  is  in  them  alone,  that  is  fully 
developed  the  germ  of  divine  sonship,3  which  is  put 
into  the  soul  at  Baptism.  Thanks  to  the  silence  to 
which  the  passions  have  been  reduced,  their  spirit, 
now  master  of  the  flesh,  and  itself  subject  to  God,  is 
a  stranger  to  those  inward  storms,  those  sudden 
changes,  and  even  those  inequalities  of  temperature, 
which  are  all  unfavourable  to  the  growth  of  the  pre- 
cious seed  ;4  warmed  by  the  Sun  of  Justice  in  an 
atmosphere  which  is  ever  serene  and  unclouded,  there 
is  no  obstacle  to  its  coming  up,  there  is  no  ill-shapen 
growth;  absorbing  all  the  human  moisture  of  this 
earth  wherein  it  is  set,  assimilating  the  very  earth 
itself,  it  soon  leaves  nothing  else  to  be  seen  in  these 
men  but  the  divine,  for  they  have  become,  in  the 
eyes  of  the  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  a  most  faithful 
image  of  his  first-born  Son.5 

"Rightly  then,"  continues  St.  Ambrose,  "the  seventh 
"  Beatitude  is  that  of  the  peaceful ;  to  them  belong 
"  the  seven  baskets  of  the  crumbs  that  were  over  and 
"  above.  This  bread  of  the  Sabbath,  this  sanctified 
"bread,  this  bread  of  rest, — yes,  it  is  something 
"  great ;  and  I  even  venture  to  say,  that  if,  after  thou 
"  hast  eaten  of  the  five  loaves,  thou  shalt  have  eaten 
"  also  of  the  seven,  thou  hast  no  bread  on  earth  that 
(t  thou  canst  look  forward  to."6 

But,  take  notice  of  the  condition  specified  in  our 
Gospel,  as  necessary  for  those  who  aspire  to  such 
nourishment  as  that.  "It  is  not,"  says  the  Saint, 
"  to  lazy  people,  nor  to  them  that  live  in  cities,  nor 
"  to  them  that  are  great  in  worldly  honours,  but  to 
"  them  that  seek  Christ  in  the  desert,  that  is  given 
"  the  heavenly  nourishment :  they  only  who  hunger 


1  St.  Ambr.  in  Luc.      3  Heb.  iii.  14.  5  Rom.  viii.  29. 

vi.  80.  i  1  St.  John,  iii.  9.      c  In  Luc.  ibid, 

1  St.  Matth.  ii.  9. 


MASS.  173 

u  after  it,  are  received  by  Christ  into  a  participation 
"  of  the  Word  and  of  God's  kingdom."1  The  more  in- 
tense their  hunger,  the  more  they  long  for  their  divine 
object  and  for  no  other,  the  more  will  the  heavenly  food 
strengthen  them  with  light  and  love,  the  more  will 
it  satiate  them  with  delight. 

All  the  truth,  all  the  goodness,  all  the  beauty  of 
created  things,  are  incapable  of  satisfying  any  single 
soul ;  it  must  have  God  ;  and  so  long  as  man  does 
not  understand  this,  everything  that  his  senses  and 
his  reason  can  provide  him  with  of  good  or  true,  far 
from  its  being  able  to  satiate  him,  is  ordinarily  no- 
thing more  than  a  something  which  distracts  him 
from  the  one  object  that  can  make  him  the  happy 
being  he  was  created  to  be, — a  mere  something  that 
becomes  a  hindrance  to  his  living  the  true  life  which 
God  willed  him  to  attain.  Observe  how  our  Lord 
waits  for  all  their  human  schemes  to  fail,  and  then 
he  will  be  their  helper,  if  they  will  but  permit  him. 
The  men  of  our  to-day's  Gospel  are  not  afraid  to 
abide  with  him  in  the  desert,  and  put  up  with  the 
consequent  privations  of  meat  and  drink ;  their  faith 
is  greater  than  that  of  their  brethren  who  have  pre- 
ferred to  remain  in  their  home  in  the  cities,  and  has 
raised  them  so  much  the  higher  in  the  order  of  grace ; 
for  that  very  reason,  our  Lord  would  not  allow  them 
to  admit  anything  of  a  nature  to  interfere  with  the 
divine  food  he  prepares  for  their  souls. 

Such  is  the  importance  of  this  entire  self-abnega- 
tion for  souls  that  aim  at  the  highest  perfection  of 
Christian  life,  such,  too,  the  difficulty  which  even  the 
bravest  find  of  reaching  that  total  self-abnegation  by 
their  own  efforts,  that  we  see  our  Lord  himself  acting 
directly  upon  the  souls  of  his  saints,  in  order  to  create 
in  them  that  desert,  that  spiritual  vacuum,  whose 
very  appearance  makes  poor  nature  tremble,  and  yet 

1  In  Luc  vi.  69. 


174  SIXTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

which  is  so  indispensable  for  the  reception  of  his  gifts. 
Struggling,  like  another  Jacob  with  God,1  under  the 
effort  of  this  unsparing  purification,  the  creature  feels 
herself  to  be  undergoing  a  sort  of  indescribable  mar- 
tyrdom. She  has  become  the  favoured  object  of 
J  esus'  research ;  and,  as  He  intends  to  give  himself 
unreservedly  to  her,  so  He  insists  on  her  becoming 
entirely  His.  It  is  with  a  view  to  this,  that  he,  in 
the  delicate  dealings  of  his  mercy,  subdues  and  breaks 
her,  in  order  that  he  may  detach  her  from  creatures 
and  from  herself.  The  piercing  eye  of  the  Word 
perceives  every  least  crease  or  fold  of  her  spiritual 
being ;  his  grace  carries  its  jealous  work  right  down 
to  the  division  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  reaches  to  the 
very  joints  and  marrow,  scrutinising  and  unmercifully 
probing  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.2  As 
the  Prophet  describes  the  refiner  of  the  silver  and 
gold,  which  is  to  form  the  king's  crown  and  sceptre,3 
so  our  divine  Lord :  he  shall  sit,  refining  and  cleansing, 
in  the  crucible,  this  soul  so  dear  to  him,  that  he 
wishes  to  wear  her  as  one  of  the  precious  jewels  of 
his  everlasting  diadem.  Nothing  could  exceed  his 
zeal  in  this  work,  which,  in  his  eyes,  is  grander  far 
than  the  creation  of  a  thousand  worlds.  He  watches, 
he  fans,  the  flame  of  the  furnace,  and  he  himself  is 
called  a  consuming  fire.4"  When  the  senses  have  no 
more  vile  vapours  to  emit ;  when  the  dross  of  the 
spirit,  which  is  the  last  to  yield,  has  got  detached  from 
the  gold,  then  does  the  divine  purifier  show  it,  with 
complacency,  to  the  gaze  of  men  and  angels ;  its  lustre 
is  all  he  would  have  it  be ;  so  he  may  safely  produce 
on  it  a  faithful  image  of  himself. 

When  the  Jewish  people  were  led  forth  by  Moses 
from  Egypt,  they  said :  The  Lord  God  hath  called  us ; 
we  will  go  three  days1  journey  into  the  wilderness,  to 
sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  our  God?     In  like  manner, 

1  Gen.  xxxii.  24.  3  Malach.  iii.  3.  5  Exod.  iii.  18. 

2  Heb.  iv.  12,  13.  *  Deut.  iv.  24. 


MASS.  175 

the  disciples  of  Jesus  have  retired  into  the  wilder- 
ness, as  our  to-day's  Gospel  tells  us ;  and,  after  three 
days,  they  have  been  fed  with  a  miraculous  bread, 
which  foretold  the  victim  of  the  great  Sacrifice,  of 
which  the  Hebrew  one  was  a  figure.  In  a  few 
moments,  both  the  bread  and  the  figure  are  to  make 
way,  on  the  altar  before  which  we  are  standing,  for 
the  highest  possible  realities.  Let  us,  then,  go  forth 
from  the  land  of  bondage  of  our  sins  ;  and  since  our 
Lord's  merciful  invitation  comes  to  us  so  repeatedly, 
let  our  souls  get  the  habit  of  keeping  away  from  the 
frivolities  of  earth,  and  from  worldly  thoughts.  And 
now  as  we  sing  the  Offertory- anthem,  let  us  beseech 
our  Lord  that  he  may  graciously  give  us  strength  to 
advance  further  into  that  interior  desert,  where  he  is 
always  the  most  inclined  to  hear  us,  and  where  he  is 
most  liberal  with  his  graces. 

OFFERTORY. 

Perfect  thou  my  goings  in  Perfice  gressus  meos  in 

thy  paths,  that  my  footsteps  semitistuis,utnonmovean- 

be  not  moved  :  incline  thine  tur  vestigia  mea  :  inclina 

ear  unto  me,  and  graciously  auremtuam,etexaudi verba 

hear  my  words:   show  forth  mea:  mirifica misericordias 

thy  wonderful  mercies,  0  thou  tuas,  qui  salvos  facis  spe- 

that  savest  them,  who  trust  rantes  in  te,  Domine. 
in  thee,  O  Lord. 

The  efficacy  of  our  prayers  depends  on  this, — that 
the  object  of  those  prayers  be  prompted  and  animated 
hy  faith.  The  Church  has  just  been  receiving  her 
children's  offerings  for  the  Sacrifice ;  she  now  asks, 
in  the  Secret,  that  we  may  all  be  endowed  with  faith. 

SECRET. 

Be  appeased,  0  Lord,  by  our  Propitiare,  Domine,  sup- 
humble  prayers,  and  merci-  plicationibus  nostris,  et  has 
fully  receive  the  offerings  of  populituioblationesbenig- 
thy  people  :    and,   that   the  nus  assume  :  et  ut  nulliua 


17G  SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

sit  irritum  votum,  nullius  vows  and    prayers    of    none 

vacua  postulatio,  prsesta ;  may  be  in  vain,  grant,  that 

ut  quod  fideliter  petimus,  we    may    effectually    obtain, 

efficaciter       consequamur.  what  we  ask  with  faith. 
Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Secrets  as  in  'page  135. 

We  were  just  admiring  the  work  of  purification, 
achieved  by  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant  in  his  chosen 
souls.  The  Prophet  Malachy,  who  spoke  to  us  about 
this  mystery  of  refining  the  elect,  tells  us,  in  the 
next  verse,  why  all  this  is  done  ;  his  words  give  us 
an  explanation  of  the  Communion- anthem  we  are 
now  going  to  chant :  And  the  sacrifice  of  Juda  and 
of  Jerusalem  shall  please  the  Lord,  as  in  the  days  of 
old,  and  in  the  ancient  years.1 

COMMUNION. 

Circuibo,  et  immolabo  in  I  will  go  up,  and  sacrifice, 

tabernaculo  ejus   hostiam  in    his    temple,   a  victim   of 

jubilationis  :     cantabo    et  praise  :  I  will  sing,  and  repeat 

psalmum  dicam  Domino.  a  psalm  to  the  Lord. 


The  sacred  Mysteries  are  the  true  fire  that  purifies : 
they  entirely  cleanse  from  the  remnants  of  sin  every 
Christian  that  allows  their  divine  heat  to  tell  upon 
him  ;  they  also  strengthen  him  in  the  path  of  perfec- 
tion. Let  us,  then,  unite  with  the  Church  in  this 
prayer : 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

Kepleti  sumus,  Doniine,  We  have  been  filled,  0  Lord, 

muneribustuis:tribuequa>  with  thy  gifts  ;  grant,  we  be- 
sumus;  uteorumet  munde-  seech  thee,  that  we  may  be 
mur  effectu,  et  muniamur  cleansed  by  their  efficacy,  and 
auxilio.     Per  Dominum.  strengthened    by    their    aid. 

Through,  etc. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 

1  Malach.  iii.  4. 


MASS. 


177 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON   OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


I  have  compassion  on  the 
multitude,  for  behold  !  they 
have  now  been  with  me  three 
days,  and  have  nothing  to 
eat ;  and,  if  I  send  them  away 
fasting,  they  will  faint  in  the 
way.    Alleluia. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

O  God  of  all  power,  to  whom 
belongs  whatsoever  is  best : 
implant  in  our  hearts  the  love 
of  thy  name,  and  grant  us  an 
increase  of  religion  :  that  thou 
mayst  nourish  what  is  good 
in  us,  and,  whilst  we  make 
endeavours  after  virtue,  mayst 
guard  the  things  thus  nour- 
ished.    Through,  etc. 


Misereor  super  turbam, 
quia  ecce  jam  triduo  susti- 
nent  me,  nee  habent  quod 
manducent,  et  si  dimisero 
eos  jejunos,  deficient  in  via. 
Alleluia. 


OKEMUS. 

Deus  virtutum,  cujus  est 
totum  quod  est  optimum, 
insere  pectoribus  nostris 
amorem  tui  nominis,  et 
praesta  in  nobis  religionis 
augmentum,  ut  quae  sunt 
bona  nutrias,  ac  pietatis 
studio,  quae  sunt  nutrita, 
custodias.    Per  Dominum. 


i 


VOL.  XI. 


X 


178  SEVENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


THE  SEVENTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER    PENTECOST. 


The  Dominical  cycle  of  the  Time  after  Pentecost 
completes  to-day  its  first  seven.  Previous  to  the 
general  adoption  of  the  changes  introduced  into  the 
Sunday  Gospels  for  this  portion  of  the  Year,  the 
Gospel  of  the  multiplication  of  the  seven  loaves  gave 
its  name  to  the  seventh  Sunday  ;  and  the  mystery  it 
contains  is  still  evident  in  more  than  one  section  of 
to-day's  liturgy. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  this  mystery  was  that  of 
the  consummation  of  the  perfect  in  the  repose  or  rest 
of  God  himself;  it  was  the  fruitful  peace  of  the  divine 
union.  Nothing,  then,  could  be  more  fitting,  than 
that  Solomon,  who  is  the  Peaceful  by  excellence,  the 
sacred  and  authorised  chanter  of  the  nuptial  Canticle, 
should  have  been  selected  to  come  forward,  on  this 
day,  to  speak  the  praises  of  infinite  Wisdom,  and 
reveal  her  ways  to  the  children  of  men.  When  Easter 
is  kept  as  late  in  April  as  it  is  possible,  the  seventh 
Sunday  after  Pentecost  is  the  first  of  the  month  of 
August ;  and  the  Church  then  begins,  in  her  night 
Office,  the  lessons  from  the  Sapiential  Books.  Other- 
wise, she  continues  the  historic  scriptures,  and  that, 
some  years,  for  five  weeks  more  ; — but,  even  in  that 
case,  Eternal  Wisdom  maintains  her  rights  to  this 
Sunday,  which  the  number  of  Seven  had  already  made 
hers  in  so  special  a  way.  For,  when  we  cannot  have 
the  inspired  instructions  of  Proverbs,  we  have 
Solomon's  own  example  preaching  to  us  in  the  third 
book  of  Kings ;  we  find  him  preferring  "Wisdom  to 


MASS.  179 

all  other  treasures,  and,  on  the  throne  of  his  father 
David,  making  her  sit  there  with  him  as  his  inspirer 
and  most  noble  Bride. 

St.  Jerome  who  has  been  appointed  by  the  Church 
herself  as  the  interpreter  of  to-day's  scripture-lessons,1 
tells  us  that  David,  at  the  close  of  his  life  of  wars  and 
troubles,  knew,  as  well  as  Solomon,  the  loveliness  of 
this  incomparable  Bride  of  the  Peaceful ;  the  chill  of 
his  age  was  remedied  by  her  caresses,  whose  very 
contact  is  purity. 

"  0  that  this  Wisdom  may  be  mine,"  exclaims  the 
fervent  solitary  of  Bethlehem ;  "  may  she  embrace 
"  me,  and  abide  with  me.  She  never  grows  old. 
"She  is  ever  the  purest  of  virgins;  fruitful,  yet  ever 
"  immaculate.  I  think  the  Apostle  meant  her,  when 
H  he  speaks  of  a  something  that  can  make  us  fervent 
11  in  spirit:  So  again,  when  our  Lord  tells  us,  in  the 
"  Gospel,  that,  at  the  end  of  the  world,  the  charity  of 
"  many  will  grow  cold* — I  believe  it  will  be,  because 
"  Wisdom  will  then  grow  rare."4 

The  history  of  the  two  blind  men,  as  related  in  the 
9th  Chapter  of  St.  Matthew,  is  the  subject  of  to-day's 
Gospel,  in  the  Greek  Church. 

MASS. 
The  Church,  leaving  the  Synagogue  in  its  cities 
which  are  to  perish,  has  followed  Jesus  into  the 
wilderness.  Whilst  the  children  of  the  kingdom?  are 
assisting  at,  without  seeing  it,  this  transmigration 
which  is  to  be  so  fatal  to  them, — the  Root  of  Jesse, 
now  become  the  standard  of  nations,6  is  rallying  the 
people,  and  marshals  them,  by  thousands,  on  towards 
the  Church.  From  East  and  West,  from  North  and 
South,  they  are  pouring  in,  sitting  down  to  the 
banquet  of  the  kingdom,7  in  company  with  Abraham 

1  In  II  Nocturno,  ex  Epist.  ad  Nepotianum. 
1  Rom.  xii.  11.  *  Ep.  ad  Nepot.  4.       6  Is.  xi.  10. 

8  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  12.     6  St.  Matth.  viii.  12.  7  St.  Matth.  viii.  11. 


180 


SEVENTH    SUNDAY  AFTER   PENTECOST. 


and  Isaac  and  Jacob.     Here  is  our  Introit;  let  us 
mingle  our  voices  with  these  their  glad  chants. 


INTROIT. 


Omnes  gentes,  plaudite 
manibus  :  jubilate  Deo  in 
voce  exsultationis. 

Ps.  Quoniam  Dominus  ex- 
celsus,  terribilis :  Eex  mag- 
nus  super  omnem  terrain. 
Gloria  Patri.  Omnes  gentes. 


Clap  your  hands,  all  ye 
Gentiles !  Shout  unto  God 
with  the  voice  of  joy. 

Ps.  For,  the  Lord  is  most 
high ;  he  is  terrible  :  he  is  the 
great  King  over  all  the  earth. 
Glory,  etc.    Clap. 


All  the  opposition  that  men  are  capable  of,  can 
never  prevent  divine  Wisdom  from  compassing  her 
ends.  The  Jewish  people  deny  their  King ;  but  the 
Gentiles  come  forward,  and  proclaim  the  Son  of 
David.  As  we  were  just  now  singing  in  the  Introit, 
his  kingdom  is  extended  the  whole  world  over.  In 
the  Collect,  the  Church  asks  that  all  evils  may  be 
removed,  and  that  an  abundance  of  blessings  may 
consolidate  in  peace  the  power  of  the  true  Solomon. 


COLLECT. 


Deus,  cujus  providentia 
in  sui  dispositione  non  fal- 
litur  :  te  supplices  exora- 
mus,  ut  noxia  cuncta  sub- 
moveas,  et  omnia  nobis 
profutura  concedas.  Per 
Dominum. 


O  God,  whose  providence 
is  never  deceived  in  what  it 
appoint eth :  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee  to  remove  whatever 
may  be  hurtful,  and  to  grant 
us  all  that  will  profit  us. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects  as  in  "page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistoloebeati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Komanos. 

Cap.  vi. 

Fratres,  Humanum  dico 
propter  infirmitatem  carnis 
vestrae :  sicut  enim  exhi- 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Komans. 

Ch.  vi. 

Brethren  :  I  speak  a  human 
thing,  because  of  the  infirmity 
of  your  flesh  :  for  as  ye  have 


MASS. 


181 


yielded  your  members  to  serve 
uncleanness  and  iniquity  unto 
iniquity  ;  so  now  yield  your 
members  to  serve  justice,  unto 
sanctification.  For  when  ye 
were  the  servants  of  sin,  ye 
were  free  from  justice.  What 
fruit  therefore  had  ye  then  in 
those  things  of  which  ye  are 
now  ashamed1?  For  the  end 
of  them  is  death.  But  now 
being  made  free  from  sin,  and 
become  servants  to  God,  ye 
have  your  fruit  unto  sanctifi- 
cation, and  the  end  life  ever- 
lasting. For  the  wages  of  sin 
is  death ;  but  the  grace  of 
God,  life  everlasting  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord. 


buistis  membra  vestra  ser- 
vire  immunditise  et  iniqui- 
tati  ad  iniquitatem ;  ita  nunc 
exhibete  membra  vestra 
servire  justitise  in  sancti- 
ficationem.  Cum  enimservi 
essetis  peccati,  liberi  f  uistis 
justitiae.  Quern  ergo  fruc- 
tum  habuistis  tunc  in  illis, 
in  quibusnunc  erubescitis] 
Nam  finis  illorum  mors  est. 
Nunc  vero  liberati  a  pec- 
cato,  servi  autem  facti  Deo, 
habetis  fructum  vestrum  in 
sanctificationem,  finem 
vero  vitam  eeternam.  Sti- 
pendia  enim  peccati,  mors. 
Gratia  autem  Dei,  vita 
seterna  :  in  Christo  Jesu 
Domino  nostro. 


Reckon  that  ye  are  dead  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto 
God,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord!1  The  Apostle  of 
the  Gentiles  enters  to-day  into  the  development  of 
this  leading  formula  of  the  Christian  life.  The 
Epistle  of  last  Sunday  aimed  exclusively  at  putting 
it  in  language  that  could  not  be  misunderstood ;  it 
showed  us,  that  it  expresses  what  is  meant  by  that 
Baptism  which,  when  we  are  immersed  in  the  water, 
unites  us  to  Christ. 

There,  as  in  a  sepulchre,  the  death  of  Jesus  becomes 
ours,  and  delivers  us  from  sin.  Sold  under  sin 2  by 
our  First  Parents  even  before  we  had  seen  the  day, 
and  branded  with  its  infamous  stigma, — our  whole 
life  belonged  to  the  cruel  tyrant ;  he  is  a  master  who 
is  never  satisfied  with  our  service ;  he  is  a  merciless 
exactor;  there  is  scarce  an  hour,  that  he  does  not 
make  us  feel  his  power  over  the  members  of  our 
body ;  he  does  not  allow  us  to  forget  that  our  body 
is  his  slave.     But,  if  the  life  of  a  slave  is  under  his 


^oro.  vi.  11. 


2  Ibid.  vii.  14. 


182  SEVENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

master's  control,  death  comes  at  last  and  sets  the 
soul  free ;  and  as  to  the  body,  the  oppressor  can 
claim  nothing,  once  it  is  buried.1  JSTow,  it  was  on 
the  Cross  of  the  Man- God,  on  the  Cross  of  that 
Jesus  who,  as  the  Apostle  so  strongly  expresses  it, 
was  made  sin 2  because  of  our  sins, — it  was  on  that 
Cross,  that  guilty  human  nature  was  considered,  by 
God's  merciful  justice,  to  have  become  what  its 
divine  and  innocent  Head  was.  The  old  man,  that 
was  the  issue  of  Adam  the  sinner,  has  been  crucified ; 
he  has  died  in  Christ ;  the  slave  by  birth,  affranchised 
by  this  happy  death,  has  had  buried  under  the  waters 
of  Baptism  the  body  of  sin,  which  carried  in  its 
flesh  the  mark  of  its  slavery. 

The  body  of  sin  was  indeed  our  flesh  ;  not  that 
innocent  flesh  which  originally  came  all  pure  from 
its  Creator's  hands, — but  the  flesh,  which,  generation 
after  generation,  was  defiled  by  the  transmission  of 
a  disgraceful  inheritance.  In  Baptism,  which  the 
Apostle  calls  the  mysterious  sepulchre,  the  sacred 
stream  has  not  only  washed  away  the  defilement  of 
this  degraded  body,  but  it  has  also  set  it  free  from 
those  members  of  sin,  which  are  the  evil  passions. 
These  passions  were  powers  of  iniquity,  that  is, 
powers  which  deformed,  and  turned  into  uncleanness, 
those  faculties  and  organs  wherewith  God  had 
endowed  us,  that  we  might  fulfil  all  justice,  unto 
sanctification.3  At  that  moment  of  our  Baptism,  the 
strong-armed  tyrant  forfeited  his  possession  of  us;4 
that  Baptism  was  a  death,  which  set  his  slave  free. 
Sin  being  thus  destroyed,  the  head  of  triple  concu- 
piscence has  been  severed,  and  the  monster  may  writhe 
as  he  can ;  aided  by  grace,  man  thus  liberated,  may 
always  prevent,  if  he  wishes,  the  coils  of  the  serpent 
from  again  being  joined  with  their  head. 

Yes,  this  is  the  manifold,  yet  single,  work  of  holy 

1  Job,  iii.  18.  8  Colons,  iii.  5-9. 

2  2  Cor.  v.  21.  *  St.  Luke,  xi.  21. 


MASS.  183 

Baptism:  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  and  by  its 
own  power,  it  extirpates  sin,  and  annihilates  all  its 
rights  over  us ;  but,  once  this  is  achieved,  man  must 
co-operate  with  the  grace  of  the  sacrament ;  that  is, 
he  must  keep  watch  over  his  treacherous  inclinations 
to  sin,  which  comes  to  life  again  by  the  slightest 
encouragement ;  he  must  be  ever  keeping  up  the 
work  which  his  baptism-day  began,  that  is,  he  must 
be  ever  cutting  down  the  vile  and  noxious  weeds 
which  are  ever  cropping  up.  First,  then,  there  is 
the  death  of  sin,  which,  in  its  complete  and  sudden 
defeat  of  the  old  enemy,  is  the  result  of  God's  divine 
operation  ;  but  all  this  is  to  be  followed  up  by  a 
work  which  belongs  to  the  affranchised  slave  to  do, — 
the  life-long  work  of  mortification  of  the  spirit  and 
the  senses.  It  is  the  virtue  of  the  first  sacrament 
which  is  still  telling  on  the  Christian  in  this  work  of 
two- fold  mortification;  in  his  mortification,  the  sacra- 
ment is  still  pushing  on  its  ceaseless  work  of  ven- 
geance against  sin.  Holy  Baptism,  having,  of  itself 
alone,  operated  in  the  wretched  slave  of  sin  what 
God  alone  could  empower  it  to  achieve, — summons 
man,  now  that  his  chains  have  fallen,  to  join  her  in 
the  glorious  work  of  maintaining  his  liberty ;  she 
invites  him  to  share  with  her  the  honour  of  the 
divine  victory  over  Satan  and  his  works. 

The  keeping  down  the  flesh  will  be  again  brought 
before  us,  next  Sunday,  as  the  true  indicator  of 
liberty  on  this  earth,  and  as  the  authentication  of  our 
being  truly  children  of  God.  As  the  Apostle  says : 
Let  not  sin  reign  in  your  mortal  body,  so  as  to  obey 
the  lusts  thereof.  Neither  yield  ye  your  members  as 
instruments  of  iniquity  unto  sin  ;  but  present  yourselves 
to  God  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead,  and  your 
members  as  instruments  of  justice  unto  God.  For 
sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you :  for  ye  are  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace.  Know  ye  not,  that  to 
whom  ye  yield  yourselves  servants  to  obey,  his  servants 


184  SEVENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

are  ye  whom  ye  obey,  ivJiether  it  be  of  sin  unto  death, 
or  of  obedience  unto  justice.  But  thanks  be  to  God, 
that  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin  ;  .  .  .  but  being  freed 
from  sin,  we  have  been  made  servants  of  justice.1 

And  shall  we  do  less  for  Justice,  than  is  being  done 
everywhere  in  favour  of  our  enemy,  Sin  ?  Surely, 
justice  deserves  that  we  should  make  greater  efforts 
in  her  service,  than  for  that  odious  tyrant  who  requites 
his  slaves  with  nothing  but  shame  and  death.  And 
yet,  0  admirable  condescension  of  God  to  our  weak- 
ness ! — we  have  St.  Paul  telling  us  in  to-day's  Epistle, 
in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Ghost, — we  shall  be  saints, 
we  shall  attain  eternal  life,2  if  we  will  but  serve  justice 
with  as  much  earnestness  as  we  once  served  unclean- 
ness  and  iniquity. 

Let  us  humble  ourselves  at  hearing  such  words  ;  let 
us  be  honest,  and  we  shall  feel  that  they  contain  a 
reproach.  For  many  of  us,  we  might  ask  :  What  has 
become  of  that  intense  ardour,  wherewith  we  once 
used  to  follow  after  sin  ?  To  say,  that  we  have  con- 
verted our  ways,  would  be  no  answer ;  for,  a  conversion 
does  not  paralyse  our  faculties ;  it  enlists  our  natural 
energy  in  God's  service,  it  even  intensifies  it  by  the 
very  fact  of  its  now  being  employed  as  originally 
intended  ;  at  all  events,  conversion  does  not  lessen  the 
activity  which  was  in  us  before  our  conversion ;  it 
would  be  an  insult  to  grace  to  accuse  it  of  diminishing 
in  us  the  gifts  of  God. 

What  lessons,  then,  may  we  not  learn,  by  seeing 
how  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  honour,  interest,  or  plea- 
sure, are  the  votaries  of  the  world !  What  earnest- 
ness, what  toil,  what  perseverance,  what  frequent 
sufferings,  what  abnegation  at  every  turn,  what  mis- 
placed heroism, — and  all  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying 
the  seven  heads  of  the  beast,  and  tasting  a  few  drops 
of  the  poisoned  cup  of  Babylon  !3  There  are  many 
souls  in  hell,  who  have  gone  through  more  fatigue 

'  Rom.  vi.  12-18.  2  Ibid.  19-23.  3  Apoc.  xvii.  7- 


MASS.  185 

and  pain  to  procure  their  damnation,  than  even  the 
martyrs  endured  for  Christ ;  and  even  with  all  that, 
never  attaining  the  object  they  sought  to  obtain  in 
this  world !  so  true  is  it,  that  the  fools  who  are  the 
most  subservient  to  Satan's  wishes,  do  not  always  suc- 
ceed in  enjoying,  not  even  for  a  single  day,  the  vile 
rewards  he  promises  his  slaves. 

Justice  treats  her  followers  in  a  very  different  way ; 
she  does  not  degrade,  she  does  not  deceive  them  that 
keep  her.  She  blesses  them  with  peace  of  mind  at 
every  step  they  take  in  duty- doing ;  she  is  ever  en- 
riching their  treasure  of  merit ;  she  leads  them  safely 
to  the  perfection  of  love.  The  life  of  union  divine 
then  grows,  almost  spontaneously,  on  that  high  ground 
of  Justice  ;  it  rests  on  Justice,  as  a  flower  does  on  its 
stem.  He  that  possesseth  Justice,  says  the  Scripture, 
shall  lay  hold  on  Wisdom :  he  shall  find  delights  in 
that  divine  Wisdom,  which  surpasses  all  that  earth 
could  procure.1 

Would  it,  then,  be  fair  to  hesitate  about  going 
through  those  toils  which  procure  heaven  for  us,  and 
are  a  preparation  made  here  on  earth  for  the  glories 
which  are  to  be  revealed  in  us  in  our  eternal  home  ? 
The  present  life,  how  long  soever  it  may  be,  seems 
but  momentary  to  a  faithful  soul ;  she  is  glad  to  give 
this  proof  of  the  love  she  bears  to  Him  she  longs  for. 
"  Jacob,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  gave  his  twice  seven 
"  years  of  service2  for  the  sake  of  Rachel,  whose  name, 

'  they  tell  us,  signifies,  vision  of  the  Beginning,  that 
"  is,  of  the  Word,  that  is,  of  the  Wisdom  which  shows 
"  us  God.     Every  virtuous  man  on  earth  loves  this 

'  Wisdom ;  it  is  for  her  he  works  and  suffers,  by 
"serving  Justice.  What  he,  like  Jacob,  aims  at  by 
"his  labours,  is,  not  the  fatigue  for  its  own  sake,  but 

'  the  possession  of  that  which  the  fatigue  is  to  bring 
"him,  namely,  the  fair  Rachel,  that  is  to  say,  rest  in 

1  Ecclus.  xv.  1-8.  2Gen.  xxir.  18-30. 


186  SEVENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

"  the  Word,  in  whom  we  have  the  vision  of  the  Be- 
"  ginning.  Is  there  any  true  servant  of  God  who 
"  can  have  any  other  thought,  when  he  is  under  the 
"  influence  of  grace  ?  Once  converted,  what  is  it 
"  that  man  wishes  for  ?  What  are  his  thoughts  on  ? 
u  What  has  he  in  his  heart  ?  What  is  it  that  he 
"  thus  passionately  loves  and  desires  ?  It  is  the 
"  knowledge  of  Wisdom.  Of  course,  man  would,  if 
"  he  could,  avoid  all  fatigue  and  suffering,  and  come 
"  straight  to  the  delights  which  he  knows  are  in  the 
"  exquisitely  heautiful  and  perfect  Wisdom  ;  but  that 
w  cannot  be  in  the  land  of  the  dying.  If  thou  desire 
"  Wisdom,  keep  justice  ;  and  God  will  give  he?*  unto 
f*  thee.1  Justice  here,  means  the  commandments  ;  and 
"the  commandments  prescribe  works  of  Justice,  of 
"  that  Justice  which  comes  of  Faith  ;  and  Faith  lives 
"  amidst  the  uncertainty  of  temptations  ;  that  by 
"  piously  believing  what  it  does  not  as  yet  under- 
"  stand,  it  may  merit  the  happiness  of  understanding. 
"  We  are  not,  therefore,  to  find  fault  with  the 
"  ardour  of  those,  who  are  possessed  by  the  desire  to 
"  possess  Truth  in  its  unveiled  loveliness  ;  what  we 
"  must  do,  is  to  put  order  in  their  love,  by  telling 
"  them  to  begin  with  faith,  and  strive,  by  the  exercise 
"  of  good  deeds,  to  arrive  at  the  bliss  they  long  for. 
"  Do  thou  love  and  desire,  at  the  very  onset,  and 
"  above  all  things,  this  object  which  is  so  worthy  of 
"  thy  possession ;  but,  let  the  ardour  which  burns 
"  within  thee  show  itself,  first  of  all,  by  its  leading 
"  thee  to  cheerfully  endure  the  fatigues  of  the  road 
"which  leads  to  the  prize,  towards  which  thy  love 
"  is  all  directed.  Yea,  and  when  thou  hast  got  up 
"  to  it,  remember,  thou  wilt  never  enjoy  beautiful 
"Truth  in  this  life,  without  having,  all  the  same 
"  happy  while,  to  be  still  cultivating  laborious  Jus- 
"  tice.     How  comprehensive  and  pure  soever,  may 

1  Ecclus.  i.  33. 


MASS. 


187 


"  be  the  sight  granted  to  mortal  men  of  the  Cn- 
"  changeable  Good;  the  corruptible  body  is  a  load  upon 
u  the  soul,  and  the  earthly  habitation  presseth  down  the 
"  mind  that  museth  upon  many  things.1  One,  then,  is  that 
"  to  which  we  must  tend  ;  but  many  are  the  things 
"  we  are  to  bear  for  that  one's  sake."3 


In  the  Gradual,  the  Church  keeps  up  the  thought 
which  pervades  this  seventh  Sunday ;  she  invites  her 
sons  to  come  and  receive  from  her  the  knowledge  of 
the  Fear  of  the  Lord  ;  for  the  Fear  of  the  Lord  is  the 
beginning  of  Wisdom.3  The  Alleluia- Yerse  again 
calls  upon  the  Gentiles,  the  heirs  of  Jacob,  to  cele- 
brate in  gladness,  the  gift  of  God. 


GRADUAL. 


Come,  children,  hearken  un- 
to me:  I  will  teach  you  the 
fear  of  the  Lord. 

ft.  Come  ye  unto  him,  and 
be  enlightened;  and  your  faces 
shall  not  be  confounded. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Clap  your  hands,  all  ye 
Gentiles !  shout  unto  God, 
with  the  voice  of  joy.  Alle- 
luia. 


Venite,  filii,  audite  me  : 
timorem  Domini  docebo 
vos. 

ft.  Accedite  ad  eum,  et 
illuminamini:  etfaciesves- 
tise  non  confundentur. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Omnes  gentes,  plau- 
dite  manibus:  jubilate  Deo 
in  voce  exsultationis.  Alle- 
luia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel    of    the    holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  vii. 

At  that  time:  Jesus  said  to 
his  disciples:  Beware  of  false 
prophets,  who  come  to  you  in 
the  clothing  of  sheep,  but  in- 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthseum 

Gap.  vii. 

In  illo  tempore  :  dixit 
Jesusdiscipulissuis:  Atten- 
dee a  falsis  prophetis,  qui 
veniunt  ad  vos  in  vestimen- 


1  Wisd.  ix.  15. 
3  Ps.  ex.  10. 


2  St.  Augustine  Contra  Faust,  xxii.  50-58 
(freely  epitomised.) 


188 


SEVENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


tis  ovium,  intrinsecus  au- 
tem  sunt  lupi  rapaces:  a 
fructibus  eorum  cognosce- 
tis  eos.  Numquid  colligunt 
de  spinis  uvas,  aut  de  tri- 
bulis  ficus  1  Sic  omnis  ar- 
bor bona  fructus  bonos 
facit :  mala  autem  arbor 
malos  fructus  facit.  Non 
potest  arbor  bona  malos 
fructus  facere :  neque  arbor 
mala  bonos  fructus  facere. 
Omnis  arbor,  quae  non  facit 
fructum  bonum,  excidetur, 
et  in  ignem  mittetur.  Igi- 
tur  ex  fructibus  eorum  cog- 
noscetis  eos.  Non  omnis, 
qui  dicit  mihi :  Domine, 
Domine,  intrabit  in  regnum 
ccelorum:  sed  qui  facit  vo- 
luntatem  Patris  mei,  qui  in 
ccelis  est,  ipse  intrabit  in 
regnum  ccelorum. 


wardly  they  are  ravening 
wolves.  By  their  fruits  ye 
shall  know  them.  Do  men 
gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or 
figs  of  thistles  1  Even  so 
every  good  tree  bringeth  forth 
good  fruit,  and  the  evil  tree 
bringeth  forth  evil  fruit.  A 
good  tree  cannot  bring  forth 
evil  fruit,  neither  can  an  evil 
tree  bring  forth  good  fruit. 
Every  tree  that  bringeth  not 
forth  good  fruit,  shall  be  cut 
down,  and  shall  be  cast  into 
the  fire.  Wherefore  by  their 
fruits  ye  shall  know  them. 
Not  every  one  that  saith, 
Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but 
he  that  doth  the  will  of  my 
Father  who  is  in  heaven,  he 
shall  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven. 


By  rejecting  the  Gospel,  the  Jewish  people  have 
refused  the  light.  Whilst  the  Sun  of  Justice,  hailed 
with  delight  by  the  Gentiles,  is  lighting  up,  in  all 
splendour,  the  land,  that  was  once  in  the  shadow  of 
death,1 — a  black  night  is  covering  the  heretofore 
blessed  country  of  the  Patriarchs,  and  darkness  is 
every  hour  thickening  in  Jerusalem.  By  the  blind- 
ness which  is  leading  her  to  destruction,  the  syna- 
gogue is  verifying  our  Lord's  words :  He  that  walketh 
in  darkness,  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth.2 

False  Prophets  and  false  christs  abound  in  Israel,3 
ever  since  the  true  Messiah,  whom  the  Prophets  fore- 
told, has  been  ignored,  and  treated  by  his  own  people4 
as  the  Prophets  themselves  had  been.5  His  witnesses, 
the  Apostles,  have  vainly  tried  to  induce  Juda  to  re- 


1  Is.  ix.  2. 

8  St.  John,  xii.  35. 
5  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  24. 


4  St.  John,  i.  11. 

5  St.  Matth.  xxiii.  29-32. 


MASS.  189 

tract  the  fatal  denial  made  in  the  pretorium.  And 
yet,  Juda  knows  better  than  all  the  world  beside,  that 
the  times  are  accomplished ;  for,  has  not  the  sceptre 
fallen  from  his  hands  P1  And  Juda,  who  disdainfully 
disowns  the  spiritual  royalty  of  the  Saviour  of  men, 
is  going  on  with  his  ceaseless  expectation  and  search 
of  the  christ  of  his  own  imagining, — a  messiah  who 
will  restore  to. him  the  power  he  has  lost.  The  Jewish 
doctors  have  not  as  yet  invented  the  sentence  of 
Talmud,  whereby  they  hoped  to  stifle  the  unpleasant 
prophecies  which  give  them  the  lie :  "  Cursed  be  he, 
that  calculates  the  times  of  the  coming  of  Messiah  !"2 
What,  then,  must  be  the  feelings  of  a  people,  which 
has  for  ages  been  living  in  the  expectation  of  an  event 
the  most  important  that  could  be, — now  that  it  sees 
the  time  specified  by  prophecy  to  be  fast  expiring !  so 
that  they  are  compelled,  either  to  disavow  the  past, 
or  acknowledge,  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross  which  it  has 
set  up,  its  most  sinful  error. 

A  strange  anxiety  has  seized  on  the  nation  of  dei- 
cides.  The  spirit  of  madness  governs  her  determina- 
tions. In  the  scare  of  her  feverish  excitement, 
which  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  calm  and  re- 
signed expectation  of  her  ancient  Patriarchs, — she 
takes  every  rebel  for  a  Christ.  She,  that  would  not 
have  the  Son  of  David,  hails  every  upstart  as  her 
Messiah,  and  follows  every  adventurer  that  sets  up 
the  cry  of  war  against  Home,  or  that  cheats  her  with 
the  promise  of  making  her  country  independent. 
With  such  materials,  Judea  is  soon  turned  into  a 
kingdom  of  anarchy  and  confusion.  The  very  sanc- 
tuary of  the  Temple  is  made  the  scene  of  party- 
quarrels  and  bloodshed.  The  Daughter  of  Sion  follows 
her  false- christs  into  the  desert  ;3  there  organises  riot ; 
and  returns  to  the  holy  City,  filling  it  with  highway- 
men, or  with  assassins  imported  from  the  wilderness. 
1  Gen.  xlix.  10.      2  Tract.  Sanhedr.  c.  x.      3  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  26. 


190  SEVENTH    SUNDAT    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Long  before  these  events,  Ezechiel  had  thus  spoken: 
Wo  to  the  foolish  prophets  that  see  nothing !  Thy 
prophets,  0  Israel,  were  like  foxes  in  the  deserts  !l 
And  Isaias  had  thus  prophesied  :  Therefore,  the  Lord 
shall  have  no  joy  in  their  young  men  ;  neither  shall  he 
have  mercy  on  their  fatherless  and  widows ;  for  every 
one  is  a  hypocrite  and  wicked,  and  every  mouth  hath 
spoken  folly. 

The  time  is  close  at  hand  :  the  hour  is  come,  when 
they  that  are  in  Judea  must  flee  to  the  mountains,3  as 
our  Lord  had  said.  The  Christians  of  Jerusalem 
■will,  as  history  records,  soon  be  leaving  the  doomed 
City,  under  the  guidance  of  Simeon,  their  Bishop.4 
With  them,  departs  Sion's  last  hope ;  God  is  about  to 
avenge  his  Christ.  Already  has  the  signal  of  destruc- 
tion been  heard, — the  whistle,  as  the  Prophet  Isaias 
had  foretold,5  has  been  heard  from  beyond  the  seas ; 
and,  as  Balaam  had  seen  it  in  vision,  they  are  coming 
in  galleys  from  Italy,  to  lay  waste  to  the  Hebrews* 
The  Leader,  announced  by  Daniel,  is  approaching 
towards  the  once  Land  of  Promise  ;  the  appointed  deso- 
lation and  ruin  shall  remain  there  even  after  the  end 
of  the  ivar.7 

Let  us  leave  the  Jews  to  hurry  on  their  own  ruin ; 
let  us  return  to  the  Church,  which,  at  the  same  time, 
is  rising  up,  so  grand  and  so  beautiful,  on  the  corner- 
stone that  had  been  rejected  by  the  synagogue8.  Be- 
cause of  the  absence  of  this  Stone,  which  the  builders 
of  Sion  had  not  the  wisdom  to  recognise  as  the  basis 
indispensably  necessary  to  their  City, — Jerusalem  falls 
in  Judea,  but  re-appears,  more  than  ever  beauteous, 
on  the  hills,9  whether  Cephas,10  Prince  of  the  Apostles, 
has  carried  her  everlasting  Foundation.  Set  firmly 
on   the  divine  Rock,  she  shall  no  longer  fear  the 

!  Ezech.  xiii.  1-8.  4EusKB.Hist.eccl.iii.5.7  Dan.  ix.  26,  27. 

*  Is.  ix.  17.  *  Is.  v.  26.  8  Ps.  cxvii.  22. 

3  St;  Matth.  xxiv.  16.  6  Num.  xxiv.  24.  •  Is.  ii.  2. 

10  St.  John,  i.42. 


MASS.  191 

violence  of  the  billows  and  winds,  when  they  storm 
against  her  walls.1  False  prophets,  and  all  the 
workers  of  lies,  who  had  so  successfully  sapped  the 
walls  of  the  ancient,  will  not  leave  the  new  Jerusalem 
in  peace ;  for  our  Lord  had  plainly  said,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  scandals  should  come  ;2  and  the  Apostle, 
speaking  of  heresy,  (that  greatest  of  all  scandals,) 
said :  There  must  be  heresies  in  order  that  they  who 
are  approved,  may  he  made  manifest? 

Indeed,  for  each  individual  Christian,  as  for  the 
Church  at  large,  the  security  of  the  spiritual  building 
depends  primarily  on  the  firmness  of  the  foundation, 
which  is  Faith.  The  Holy  Ghost  will  not  build  on  a 
foundation  that  is  unsound  or  unsafe.  When,  espe- 
cially, he  is  to  lead  a  soul  to  the  higher  degrees  of 
divine  union,  he  exacts  from  her,  as  the  first  condition, 
that  her  Faith,  too,  be  above  the  average, — a  Faith, 
that  is,  with  heroism  enough  to  fight  successfully 
those  battles,  which  brace  the  soul,  and  so  render  her 
worthy  of  light  and  love.  In  every  stage  of  the 
Christian  life,  however,  it  is  Faith  that  provides  love 
with  its  enduring  and  substantial4  nourishment ;  it  is 
Faith  that  gives  to  the  virtues  their  supernatural 
motives,  and  makes  them  fit  to  form  a  worthy  court 
for  their  queen,  Charity.  A  soul's  development  never 
goes  beyond  the  measure  of  her  Faith.  The  capacious- 
ness of  Faith,  and  its  ever  growing  plenitude,  and  its 
certified  conformity  with  truth, — these  are  the 
guarantee  of  the  progress  which  will  be  made  by  a 
just  man  ;  whereas  all  such  holiness  as  affects  to  be 
guided  by  a  Faith  which  is  cramped  or  false,  is  holi- 
ness of  a  very  dubious  kind,  and  one  that  is  exposed 
to  most  fearful  illusions. 

It  was,  therefore,  a  good  and  a  wholesome  thing 
that  Faith  should  be  put  to  the  test,  for  it  grows 
brighter  and  stronger  under  trial.     St.  Paul,  in  his 

1  St.  Matth.  vii.  24-27.       3  Ibid,  xviii.  7.         s  1  Cor.  xi.  19. 

4  Heb.  xi.  1. 


192  SEVENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,1  is  enthusiastic  in  his  praise 
of  the  triumphs  won  by  the  Faith  of  our  forefathers. 
Could  there  be  denied  to  the  new  Covenant  those 
glorious  combats,  which  constituted  the  eternal 
merit  and  honour  of  the  Saints  who  lived  in  the 
period  of  expectation  and  figures?  It  is  by  their 
victorious  Faith  in  the  word  of  the  promise,  that  all 
those  worthy  ancestors  of  the  Christian  people 
merited  to  have  God  himself  as  their  praise-giver.2 
For  us,  who  joyously  have  possession  of  that  Messias, 
who,  to  them  was  but  the  object  of  their  heroic  hope, 
our  trial  cannot  be  like  theirs, — the  trial  of  expecta- 
tion. This  is  quite  true ;  and  yet,  heresy,  which  is 
the  offspring  of  man's  pride  and  hell's  malice, — 
heresy  and  its  manifold  outcomings,  which  are  ever 
producing  the  diminution  of  truth  in  this  world  of 
ours,3 — yes,  it  is  through  these,  that  we  shall  win 
merit  by  our  possession  of  what  they  beheld  and 
saluted  only  afar  off}  Man  is  ever  trying  to  intrude 
his  foolish  ideas  into  the  truths  of  divine  revelation  ; 
and,  as  to  the  prince  of  this  world,5  he  will  do  all  in 
his  power  to  encourage  these  audacious  attempts  at 
corrupting  the  purity  of  the  Word.  But  Wisdom, 
who  is  never  overcome,6  will  turn  all  these  impious 
efforts  into  an  occasion  of  glorious  victories  for  her 
children.  Here  we  have  the  reason  why  God  per- 
mitted, from  the  very  commencement  of  the  Church's 
existence,  and  still  permits,  that  sects  should  be  con- 
tinually springing  up.  It  is  in  the  battle-field  against 
error,  that  the  Church  brings  forth  the  armour  of 
God,7  and  shows  herself  all  brilliant  with  that  abso- 
lute truth,  which  is  the  brightness  of  the  Word,  her 
Spouse ; 8  it  is  by  the  personal  triumph  over  the 
spirit  of  lying,  and  by  the  spontaneous  adhesion  to 


1  Heb.  xi.  4-40.  4  Heb.  xi.  13.  f  Eph.  vi.  11-17. 

2  Ibid.  2.  39.  5  St.  John,  xvi.  11;        8  Heb.  i.  3. 

3  Ps.  xi.  2.  6  Wisd.  vii.  30. 


MASS.  193 

the  teachings  of  Christ  and  his  Church,  that  the 
Christian  shows  himself  to  be  a  true  child  of  light? 
and  becomes  himself  a  light  to  the  world.2 

The  combat  is  not  without  its  dangers  for  the 
Christian  who  would  hold,  in  all  its  integrity,  the 
Faith  of  his  mother  the  Church.  The  tricks  of  the 
enemy,  his  studied  and  obstinate  hypocrisy,  the 
crafty  skill  wherewith  he  tries  to  stir  up  in  the  soul, 
almost  without  her  knowing  it,  a  score  of  little 
weaknesses  of  hers  which  more  or  less  favour  error, 
— all  this  frequently  ends  in  injuring  the  light,  not 
perhaps  in  extinguishing  it  altogether,  but  in  robbing 
it  of  some  of  its  brilliancy.  And  yet,  they  who  live 
on  the  teachings  given  us  in  our  to-day's  Gospel,  are 
sure  to  come  off  with  the  victory.  Let  us  meditate 
upon  them  with  gratitude  and  love ;  for  it  is  by  such 
teachings,  that  eternal  Wisdom  grants  us  what  we 
so  ardently  ask  of  him,  when,  in  Advent,  we  thus 
beseech  him:  Come,  and  teach  us  the  way  of  prudence  /' 
Prudence,  the  friend  of  a  wise  man,4  guardian  of  his 
treasures,  and  his  surest  defence,  has  no  greater 
peril  from  which  to  keep  him,  than  shipwreck  con- 
cerning the  Faith ; 5  if  Faith  be  lost,  all  is  lost.  No 
price  is  too  great  to  give 6  for  that  Prudence  of  the 
serpent,  which,  in  a  disciple  of  Christ,  goes  so  admir- 
ably with  the  simplicity  of  the  dove.7  If  we  are 
happy  enough  to  possess  Prudence,  we  shall  readily 
distinguish  between  those  false  teachers  whom  we 
must  shun,  and  those  we  must  hearken  to, — between 
the  falsifiers  of  the  Word,  and  his  faithful  inter- 
preters. 

By  their  fruits  shall  ye  know  them,  says  our 
Gospel,  and  history  confirms  the  words  of  our 
Redeemer.  Under  the  sheep1  s  clothing,  which  they 
wear  that  they  may  deceive  simple  souls,  the  apostles 

1  St.  John,  xii.  36.     3  First  of  the  Great    4  Prov.  vii.  4. 

2  St.  Matth.  v.  14.  Antiphons.  5  1  Tim.  i.  19. 

6  Prov.  iii.  13-19.  7  St.  Matth.  x.  16. 

vol.  xi.  O 


194  SEVENTH   SUNDAY   AETER  PENTECOST. 

of  falsehood  ever  betray  a  stench,  of  death.  The 
artful  language  they  use,1  and  the  flatteries  they 
utter  for  gain's  sake?  cannot  hide  the  hollowness  of 
their  works.3  They  separate  themselves  from  the  flock 
of  Christ,4  and  flee  from  the  light ;  for,  as  the  Apostle 
says,  all  things  that  are  reproved,  or  deserve  to  be  so, 
are  made  manifest  by  the  light ; 5  and  as  to  the  things 
that  are  done  by  them  in  secret,  it  is  a  shame  even  to 
speak  of  them.6  Therefore,  be  ye  not  partakers  with 
them?  The  useless  or  rotten  fruits  of  darkness,  and 
the  trees  of  Autumn,  tivice  dead,9,  which  bear  such 
fruits  on  their  withered  branches, — both  of  them 
shall  be  cast  into  the  fire.  If  you  yourselves  were 
heretofore  darkness,  now  that  you  have  become  light 
in  the  Lord  by  Baptism,  or  by  a  sincere  conversion, 
show  yourselves  to  be  so,  and  produce  the  fruits  of 
light,  in  all  goodness,  and  justice,  and  truth.9  On 
this  condition  alone,  can  you  hope  to  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  call  yourselves  disciples  of 
that  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  who,  on  this  seventh 
Sunday,  asks  us  to  give  him  our  love. 

St.  James  the  Apostle  almost  seems  to  be  giving  a 
commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  this  seventh  Sunday, 
where  he  says:  Can  the  fig-tree,  my  Brethren,  bear 
grapes^  or  the  vine,  fgs?  So  neither  can  the  salt 
water  yield  siveet.  Who  is  a  wise  man  and  endued 
with  ivisdom  among  you  ?  let  him,  by  a  good  conversa- 
tion, (that  is,  by  his  good  conduct),  shew  his  work  in 
the  meekness  of  Wisdom.  .  .  .  For  there  is  a  wisdom 
which  is  bitter,  and  misleads  others  ;  it  descendeth 
not  from  above,  but  is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish  .... 
But  the  Wisdom,  which  is  from  above,  first  indeed  is 
chaste,  then  peaceable,  modest,  easy  to  be  persuaded, 
consenting  to  the  good  (and  always  sides  with  them,) 


1  Eph.  v.  6.  4  St.  Jude,  19.  7  Ibid.  7. 

2  St.  Jude,  16.  6  Eph.  v.  13.  8  St.  Jude,  12. 

3  Eph.  v.  11.  6  Ibid.  12.  9  Eph.,  v.  89. 


MASS.  195 

full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  judging  (the 
conduct  of  others,)  without  dissimulation.  And  the 
fruit  of  justice  is  sown  in  peace  to  them  that  make 
peace.1 

The  Offertory  Anthem  has  been  selected,  according 
to  Honorius  of  Autun,2  in  allusion  to  the  sacrifice  of 
the  thousand  victims  which  were  offered  at  Gabaon 
by  Solomon,  in  the  early  days  of  his  reign  ;  when  the 
sacrifice  was  ended,  he  was  bid  ask,  what  he  would 
have  God  give  to  him:  he  desired  and  obtained 
Wisdom,  with  the  addition  of  riches  and  glory,  for 
which  he  had  not  asked.3  It  depends  upon  us,  that 
the  Sacrifice  which  is  here  ready  to  be  offered  up, 
should  be  equally,  and  even  more,  accepted  of  God, 
for  it  is  Incarnate  Wisdom  that  is  being  offered  to 
the  Most  High  God ;  he  desires  to  obtain  for  us  all 
the  gifts  of  his  Eternal  Father, — and  give  Himself 
also  to  us. 

OFFERTORY. 

As  in  holocausts  of  rams  Sicut  in  holocaustis  arie- 
and  bullocks,  and  as  in  turn,  et  taurorutn,  et  sicut 
thousands  of  fat  sheep,  so  let  in  millibus  agnorum  pin- 
our  Sacrifice  be  made  in  thy  guium :  sic  fiat  sacrificium 
sight  this  day,  that  it  may  nostrum  in  conspectu  tuo 
please  thee  :  for  there  is  no  hodie,  ut  placeat  tibi : 
confusion  to  them  that  trust  quia  non  est  confusio  con- 
in  thee.  fidentibus  in  te,  Domine. 

Another  circumstance  which  confirms  what  we 
have  said  regarding  the  mysterious  character  of  this 
seventh  Sunday,  as  to  its  being  especially  sacred  to 
eternal  Wisdom, — is  the  fact,  that  the  Yerse  of 
Scripture,  which  formerly  used  to  be  joined  to  the 
present  Offertory- anthem,4  is  the  same  as  that  which, 
in  the  Roman    Pontifical,   opens    the  magnificent 

1  St.  James,  iii.  11-18.        3  3  Kings,  iii.— 2  Paralip.  i. 

2  Gemma  anim.  iv.  57.       4  Antiph.  Gregor.  ap.  Thomasi,  v. 


196  SEVENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

ceremony  of  the  Consecration  of  Virgins :  Arid  now 
we  follow  thee  with  all  our  heart,  and  we  fear  thee, 
and  seek  thy  face  l  put  us  not  to  confusion,  but  deal 
with  us  according  to  thy  meekness,  and  according  to 
the  multitude  of  thy  mercies  Z1  After  being  a  third 
time  called  by  the  Bishop,  the  affianced  of  the  divine 
Spouse  advance,  (singing  these  words,)  to  the  Altar, 
where  they  are  to  be  espoused  to  Him. 

The  Secret  speaks  to  God  of  how  the  multiplied 
variety  of  the  ancient  sacrifices,  such  as  those 
mentioned  in  the  Offertory,  were  all  made  one  in 
the  oblation  of  our  Christian  Sacrifice. 

SECEET. 

Deus,  qui  legalium  diffe-  0  God,  who,  in  one  perfect 

rentiam   hostiaruin  unius  Sacrifice,  hast  united  all  the 

sacrificiiperfectionesanxis-  various  sacrifices  of  the  Law, 

ti :  accipe  sacrificium  a  de-  accept,    from     thy    devoted 

votis  tibi  famulis,  et  pari  servants,  this  Sacrifice,    and 

benedictione,  sicut  munera  sanctify  it  by  a  blessing  like 

Abel,  sanctinca  :  ut,  quod  to  that  thou  gavest  to  Abel's 

singuli  obtulerunt  ad  Ma-  offerings  ;  that  what  each  hath 

jestatistuae  honorem, cunc-  offered  to  thy  divine  Majesty, 

tis  proficiant  ad  salutem.  may  avail  to  the  salvation  of 

Per  Dominum.  all.    Through,  etc. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135, 

The  Communion,  says  Honorius  of  Autun,  gives 
us  the  prayer  of  Solomon,  who  asks  Wisdom  of  God, 
and  obtains  it.2  If  any  of  you,  says  St.  James,  want 
Wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men 
abundantly,  and  upbraideth  not :  and  it  shall  be  given 
him.3 

COMMUNION. 

Inclina  aurem  tuam,  ac-  Bow  down  thine  ear  unto 

celera  ut  eripias  me.  me.    Make   haste  to  deliver 

me ! 

1  Dan.  iii.  40-42.        2  Honorius,  ubi  supra.         3  St.  James,  i.  5. 


MASS. 


197 


Original  Sin  has  vitiated  man  to  such  a  degree, — 
he  is  so  far  from  divine  union,  at  his  first  coming 
into  this  life, — that,  of  himself,  he  can  neither  cleanse 
the  defilement  that  is  on  him,  nor  enter  on  the  path 
which  leads  to  God.  It  is  requisite  that  our  God,  as 
a  generous  and  patient  physician,  take  our  cure  into 
his  own  hand ;  and,  even  when  the  cure  is  effected, 
should  support  and  guide  us.  Let  us  then,  in  the 
Postcommunion,  say  with  the  Church : 

POSTCOMMUNION. 


Grant,  O  Lord,  that  the 
healing  efficacy  of  these  thy 
mysteries  may,  through  thy 
mercy,  free  us  from  all  our 
sins,  and  bring  us  to  the 
practice  of  what  is  right. 
Through,  etc. 


Tua  nos,  Domine,  medi- 
cinalis  operatio  et  a  nostris 
perversitatibus  clementer 
expediat,  et  ad  ea  quae  sunt 
recta,  perducat.  Per  Do- 
minum . 


The  other  Postcommunion,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON   OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


A  good  tree  cannot  bring 
forth  evil  fruit,  nor  the  evil 
tree  bring  forth  good  fruit : 
every  tree,  that  bringeth  not 
forth  good  fruit,  shall  be  cut 
down,  and  shall  be  cast  into 
the  fire.    Alleluia. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

O  God,  whose  providence  is 
never  deceived  in  what  it 
appointeth:  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee  to  remove  whatever 
may  be  hurtful,  and  to  grant 
us  all  that  will  profit  us. — 
Through,  etc. 


Non  potest  arbor  bona 
fructus  malos  facere,  nee 
arbor  mala  fructus  bonos 
facere  :  omnis  arbor  quse 
non  facit  fructum  bonum, 
excidetur,  et  in  ignem  mit- 
tetur.    Alleluia. 

OREMUS. 

Deus,  cujus  providentia 
in  sui  dispositione  non  f al- 
litur,  te  supplices  exora- 
mus  ut  noxia  cuncta  sub- 
moveas,  et  omnia  nobis 
profutura  concedas.  Per 
Dominum. 


198  EIGHTH    SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 


THE    EIGHTH    SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

In  the  Middle-Ages,  this  Sunday  was  called,  the 
sixth  and  last  Sunday  after  the  Natalis  of  the  Apostles 
(that  is,  the  Feast  of  St.  Peter ;)  it  was,  indeed,  the 
last,  for  the  years  when  Easter  had  been  kept  as  late 
in  April  as  was  possible ;  but,  it  was  only  the  first 
after  that  Feast  of  St.  Peter,  when  Easter  imme- 
diately followed  the  spring  equinox. 

We  have  already  noticed  the  variable  character  of 
this  last  portion  of  the  liturgical  cycle,  which  was 
the  result  of  Easter's  being  kept  on  a  different  day 
each  year ;  and  that,  in  consequence  of  this  variation, 
this  week  might  be  either  the  second  of  the  reading 
from  the  Sapiential  Books,  or,  what  was  of  more 
frequent  occurrence,  the  Books  of  Kings  were  still 
providing  the  Lessons  for  the  divine  Office.  In  this 
latter  case,  it  is  the  ancient  Temple  raised  by  Solomon, 
the  King  of  Peace,  to  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  that 
engages  the  Church's  attention  to-day.  We  shall 
find,  that  the  portions  of  the  Mass,  which  are  chanted 
on  this  Sunday,  are  closely  connected  with  the  Les- 
sons read  in  last  night's  Office. 

Let  us,  then,  turn  our  reverential  thoughts  once 
more  to  this  splendid  monument  of  the  ancient  Cove- 
nant. The  Church  is  now  going  through  that  month, 
which  immediately  preceded  the  events  so  moment- 
ous to  Jerusalem ;  she  would  do  honour,  to-day,  to 
the  glorious  and  divine  past  which  prepared  her  own 
present.  Let  us,  like  her,  enter  into  the  feelings  of 
the  first  Christians,  who  were  Juda's  own  children ; 


MASS.  199 

they  had  been  told  of  the  impending  destruction  fore- 
told by  the  Prophets ;  and  an  order  from  God  bade 
them  depart  from  Jerusalem.  What  a  solemn 
moment  that  was,  when  the  little  flock  of  the  elect, — 
the  only  ones  in  whom  was  kept  up  the  faith  of 
Abraham  and  the  knowledge  of  the  destinies  of  the 
Hebrew  people, — had  just  begun  their  emigration, 
and  looked  back  on  the  city  of  their  fathers,  to  take 
a  last  farewell !  They  took  the  road  to  the  east ;  it 
led  towards  the  Jordan,  beyond  which,  God  had 
provided  a  refuge  for  the  remnant  of  Israel?.  They 
halted  on  the  incline  of  Mount  Olivet,  whence  they 
had  a  full  view  of  Jerusalem  ;  in  a  few  moments, 
that  hill  would  be  between  them  and  the  City.  Not 
quite  forty  years  before,  the  Man- God  had  sate  him- 
self down  on  that  same  spot,2  taking  his  own  last 
look  at  the  City  and  her  Temple.  Jerusalem  was 
seen,  in  all  her  magnificence,  from  this  portion  of  the 
Mount,  which  afterwards  would  be  visited  and  vene- 
rated by  our  Christian  pilgrims.  The  City  had  long 
since  recovered  from  its  ruins ;  and  had,  at  the  time 
we  are  speaking  of,  been  enlarged  by  the  princes  of 
the  Herodian  family,  so  favourably  looked  on  by  the 
Romans.  Never,  in  any  previous  period  of  her  his- 
tory, had  Jerusalem  been  so  perfect  and  so  beautiful, 
as  she  then  was,  when  our  fugitives  were  gazing  upon 
her.  There  was  not,  as  yet,  the  slightest  outward 
indication  that  she  was  the  City  accursed  of  God. 
There,  as  a  queen  in  her  strength  and  power,  she 
was  throned  amidst  the  mountains  of  which  the 
Psalmist  had  sung  ;3  her  towers4  and  palaces  seemed 
as  though  they  were  her  crown.  Within  the  triple  inclo- 
sure  of  the  walls  built  by  her  latest  kings,  she  enchased 
those  three  hills,  the  grandest,  not  only  of  Judea,  but 
of  the  whole  world  :  first,  there  was  Sion,  with  her 


1  Is.  x.  20-23.  3  Ps.  cxxiv.  2. 

2  St.  Mark,  xiii.  1-3.  4  Ps.  cxxi.  7. 


200  EIGHTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

unparalleled  memories ;  then,  Golgotha,  that  had 
not  yet  been  honoured  with  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and 
which,  nevertheless,  was  even  then  attracting  to  her- 
self the  Roman  legions,  who  were  to  wreak  vengeance 
on  this  guilty  land  ;  and  lastly,  Moriah,  the  sacred 
mount  of  the  old  world,  on  whose  summit  was  raised 
that  unrivalled  Temple,  which  gave  Jerusalem  to  be 
the  queen  of  all  the  Cities  of  the  East,  for,  as  such, 
even  the  Gentiles  acknowledged  her.1 

"  At  sun- rise,  when,  in  the  distance,  there  appeared 
the  sanctuary,  towering  upwards  of  a  hundred  cubits 
above  the  two  rows  of  porticos  which  formed  its 
double  enclosure ;  when  the  sun  cast  his  morning 
rays  on  that  facade  of  gold  and  white  marble ;  when 
there  glittered  the  thousand  gilded  spires  which 
mounted  from  its  roof; — it  seemed,  says  Josephus, 
that  it  was  a  hill  capped  with  snow,  which  gradually 
shone,  and  reddened,  with  the  morning  beams.  The 
eye  was  dazzled,  the  soul  was  amazed,  religion  was 
roused  within  the  beholder,  and  even  the  pagans  fell 
down  prostrate/'2  Yes,  when  the  Pagan  came  hither, 
either  for  conquest  or  for  curiosity, — if  he  ever  return- 
ed, it  was  as  a  pilgrim.  Full  of  holy  sentiments,  he 
ascended  the  hill ;  and,  having  reached  the  summit, 
he  entered,  by  the  golden  gate,  into  the  gorgeous 
galleries,  which  formed  the  outward  inclosure  of  the 
Temple.  In  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles,  he  met  with 
men  from  every  country ;  his  soul  was  struck  by 
the  holiness  of  a  place,  where  he  felt  that  there  were 
preserved,  in  all  purity,  the  ancient  religious  tradi- 
tions of  the  human  race ;  and,  he  being  profane, 
stood  afar  off,  assisting  at  the  celebrations  of  the 
Hebrew  worship,  such  as  God  had  commanded  it  to 
be,  that  is,  with  all  the  magnificence  of  a  divine 
ritual.     The  white  column  of  smoke  from  the  burning 


1  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  v.  15. 

a  Josephus,  De  bell.  v.  5,  translated  by  Champagny. 


MASS.  201 

victims  rose  up  before  him  as  earth's  homage  to  God, 
its  creator  and  saviour ;  from  the  inner  courts,  there 
fell  on  his  ear  the  harmony  of  the  sacred  chants, 
carrying  as  they  did  to  heaven,  both  the  ardent 
prayer  of  those  ages  of  expectation,  and  the  inspired 
expression  of  the  world's  hope ;  and  when,  from  the 
midst  of  the  levite  choirs  and  the  countless  priests 
who  were  busy  in  their  ministry  of  sacrifice  and 
praise,  the  High  Priest,  with  his  golden  crown  on 
his  head,  came  forth  holding  the  censer  in  his  hand, 
and  entering,  himself  alone,  within  the  mysterious 
veil  which  curtained  off  the  Holy  of  Holies, — the 
stranger,  though  he  had  but  a  glimpse  of  all  those 
splendid  symbols  of  religion,  yet  confessed  himself  over- 
powered, and  acknowledged  the  incomparable  great- 
ness of  that  invisible  Deity,  whose  majesty  made  all 
the  vain  idols  of  the  Gentiles  seem  to  him  paltry  and 
foolish  pretences.  The  princes  of  Asia,  and  the 
greatest  kings  considered  it  an  honour  to  be  per- 
mitted to  contribute,  both  by  personal  gifts  of  their 
own  making,  and  by  sums  taken  from  the  national 
treasuries,  towards  defraying  the  expenses  of  the 
holy  place.1  The  Roman  Generals,  and  the  Caesars 
themselves,  kept  up  the  traditions  of  Cyrus2  and 
Alexander3  in  this  respect.  Augustus  ordered  that, 
every  day,  a  bull  and  two  lambs  should  be  presented, 
in  his  name,  to  the  Jewish  priests,  and  be  immolated 
on  Jehovah's  altar,  for  the  well-being  of  the  empire  ;4 
his  successors  insisted  on  the  practice  being  con- 
tinued ;  and  Josephus  tells  us  that  the  beginning  of 
the  war  was  attributable  to  the  sacrificers  refusing 
any  longer  to  accept  the  imperial  offerings.5 

But,  if  the  majesty  of  the  Temple  thus  impressed 
the  very  pagans  right  up  to  its  last  days,  there  were 
reasons  for  an  intensity  of  veneration  and  love  on 

1  Mach.  iii.  2,  3.         3  Jos.  Aiitiq.  xi.  5.         5  Jos.  De  bell.  ii.  17. 
z  l.Eadr.  vi.  7.  4  Philo.  Legat. 


202  EIGHTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

the  part  of  a  faithful  Jew,  which  he  alone  could 
realise.  He  was  the  inheritor  of  the  submissive  faith 
of  the  Patriarchs  ;  as  such,  he  was  well  aware  that 
the  prophetic  privileges  of  his  fatherland  were  but 
an  announcement  to  the  whole  world,  that  it  was  one 
day  to  be  blessed  with  the  more  real  and  lasting 
benefits  of  which  he,  the  Jew,  possessed  but  a  figure  ; 
he  quite  understood,  that  the  hour  had  come  when 
the  children  of  God  would  not  confine  their  worship 
within  the  narrow  limits  of  one  mountain  or  one 
city  j1  he  knew  that  God's  true  temple  was  then 
actually  being  built  up  on  every  hill  of  the  Gentile 
world;3  and  that,  in  its  immensity,  it  took  in  all 
those  countries  of  the  earth,  into  which  the  Blood 
that  flowed  first  from  Calvary  had  won  its  way. 
And  yet,  we  can  easily  understand  what  a  sharp 
pang  of  anguish  thrilled  through  his  patriot  heart, 
now  that  God  was  about  to  consummate,  before  the 
astonished  universe,  the  terrible  consumption  3  of  the 
ungrateful  people,  whom  he  had  chosen  for  his  por- 
tion, his  inheritance.4  Who  is  there,  that  would  not 
share  in  the  grief  of  these  holy  ones  of  Jacob,  few  in 
number  as  the  ears  of  corn  gathered  by  the  gleaner,5 
and  now  bidding  an  eternal  farewell  to  that  holy, 
but  now  accursed,  City  ?  These  true  Israelites  might 
well  weep ;  they  were  leaving  for  ever,  leaving  to 
devastation  and  ruin,  their  homes,  their  country, 
and,  dearest  of  all,  that  Temple,  which,  for  ages,  had 
sanctified  the  glory  of  Israel,  and  gave  Juda  the 
right  and  title  to  be  the  noblest  of  the  nations  of 
the  earth.6 

There  was  something  even  beyond  all  this  :  it  was, 
that  their  dear  Jerusalem  had  been  the  scene  of  the 
grandest  mysteries  of  the  law  of  grace.  Was  it  not 
m  yonder  Temple,  that,  as  the  Prophets  expressed 

1  St.  John,  iv.  21,  23.    3  Ibid.  x.  23.  5  Is.  xvii.  5. 

2  Is.  ii.  2.  4  L>eut.  xxxii.  9.  6  Deut.  iv.  6-S. 


MASS.  203 

it,  God  had  manifested  the  Angel  of  the  Testament* 
and  given  Peace  f  The  honour  of  that  Temple  is  no 
longer  the  exclusive  right  of  an  isolated  people  ;  for 
the  Desired  of  all  nations,2  hy  his  going  into  it,  has 
brought  it  a  grander  glory,  than  all  the  ages  of 
expectation  and  prophecy  have  imparted.3  It  was 
under  the  shadow  of  those  walls,  that  Mary, — she 
that  was  to  be  the  future  Seat  of  Wisdom  Eternal, 
— prepared  within  her  soul  and  body  a  more  august 
sanctuary  for  the  divine  "Word,  than  was  that,  whose 
cedared  and  golden  wainscoting  made  it  so  exquisite 
a  shelter  for  the  infant  maiden.  Yes,  it  was  there 
that,  when  but  three  years  old,  Mary  joyously 
mounted  up  the  fifteen  steps  which  separated  the 
Court  of  women  from  the  Eastern-Gate,  offering  to 
God  the  pure  homage  of  her  immaculate  heart. 
Here,  then,  on  the  summit  of  Moriah,  began,  in  the 
person  of  their  Queen,  the  long  line  of  consecrated 
virgins,  who,  to  the  end  of  time,  will  come  offering, 
after  Her,  their  love  to  the  King.4  There,  also,  the 
new  Priesthood  found  its  type  and  model  in  the 
divine  Mother's  presenting,  in  that  holy  Temple,  the 
world's  Victim,  Jesus,  the  new-born  Child  of  her 
chaste  womb.  In  that  same  dwelling,  made  by  the 
hands  of  men  ;  in  those  halls  where  sate  the  Doctors, 
Eternal  Wisdom,  too,  seated  himself  under  the  form 
of  a  child  of  twelve,  instructing  the  very  Teachers  of 
the  Law  by  his  sublime  questions  and  divine  answers.5 
Every  one  of  those  Courts  had  seen  the  Word 
Incarnate  giving  forth  treasures  of  goodness,  power, 
and  heavenly  doctrine.  One  of  those  porticos  was 
the  favourite  one  where  Jesus  used  to  walk,6  and 
the  infant  Church  made  it  the  place  of  its  early 
assemblies.7 

Truly,  then,  this  Temple  is  holy  with  a  holiness 

1  Malach.  iii.  1.  3  /jyf  8)  io.  5  St.  Luke,  ii.  46,  47. 

2  Agg.  ii.  10.  4  Ps.  xliv.  ]5,  16.       6  St.  John,  x.  23. 

7  Acts,  iii.  11;  v.  12. 


204  EIGHTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


possessed  by  no  other  spot  on  earth ;  it  is  holy  for 
the  Jew  of  Sinai ;  it  is  holy  for  the  Christian,  be  he 
Jew  or  Gentile,  for  here  he  finds  that  the  Law  ends, 
because  here  are  verified  all  its  figures.1  With  good 
reason,  did  our  Mother  the  Church,  in  her  Office  for 
this  night,  repeat  the  words  which  were  spoken  by 
God  to  Solomon :  /  have  sanctified  this  House 
which  thou  hast  built,  to  put  my  name  there  for 
ever  ;  and  mine  eyes  and  my  heart  shall  be  always 
there.2 

How,  then,  is  it  that  dark  forebodings  are  come 
terrifying  the  watchmen  of  the  Holy  Mount  ? 
Strange  apparitions,  fearful  noises,  have  deprived 
the  sacred  edifice  of  that  calm  and  peace  which 
become  the  House  of  the  Lord.  At  the  feast  of 
Pentecost,  the  priests,  who  were  fulfilling  their 
ministry,  have  heard  in  the  Holy  place  a  commotion 
like  that  of  a  mighty  multitude,  and  many  voices 
crying  out  together :  "  Let  us  go  hence ! "  On 
another  occasion,  at  mid-night,  the  heavy  brazen 
gate  which  closed  the  sanctuary  on  the  eastern  side, 
and  which  took  twenty  men  to  move  it,  has  opened 
of  itself.3  0  Temple,  0  Temple,  let  us  say  it,  with 
them  that  witnessed  these  threatening  prodigies,4 
why  art  thou  thus  troubled?  why  workest  thou  thine 
own  destruction  ?  Alas  !  we  know  what  awaits 
thee !  The  Prophet  Zacharias  foretold  it,  when  he 
said :  Open  $iy  gates,  0  Libanus,  and  let  fire  devour 
thy  cedars  !5 

God, — has  he  forgotten  his  promises  of  infinite  good- 
ness ?  No :  but  let  us  think  upon  the  terrible  and 
just  warning,  which  he  added  to  the  promise  he  made 
to  Solomon,  when  he  had  finished  building  the  Temple: 
But  if  ye  and  your  children,  revolting  shall  turn  away 
from  following  me,  and  will  not  keep  my  command- 
ments and  my  ceremonies  which  1  have  set  before  you, 

1  Rom.  x.  4.  «,  3  Kings,  ix.  3.  3  Jos.Debell  vi,5. 

4  Talmud,  as  quoted  by  Sepp,  2nd  p.  vi.  22.  6  Zach.  xi.  1. 


MASS.  205 

1  will  take  aioay  Israel  from  the  face  of  the  land,  which 
I  have  given  them ;  and  the  Temple  which  I  have  sanc- 
tified to  my  name,  1  will  cast  out  of  my  sight ;  and 
Israel  shall  be  a  proverb,  and  a  by-word  among  all 
people.  And  this  house  shall  be  made  an  example  of; 
every  one  that  shall  pass  by  it,  shall  be  astonished,  and 
shall  hiss,  and  say  •*  "  Why  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  to 
this  land,  and  to  this  house  ?" 

O  Christian  soul !  thou,  that  by  the  grace  of  God, 
art  become  a  temple2  more  magnificent,  more  beloved 
in  his  eyes,  than  that  of  Jerusalem,  take  a  lesson  from 
these  divine  chastisements ;  and  reflect  on  the  words 
of  the  Most  High,  as  recorded  by  Ezechiel :  The  Jus- 
tice of  the  just  shall  not  deliver  him,  in  what  day  soever 
he  shall  sin.  .  .  .  Yea,  if  I  shall  say  to  the  just,  that 
he  shall  surely  live,  and  he,  trusting  in  his  justice, 
commit  iniquity, — all  his  justices  shall  be  forgotten,  and,, 
in  his  iniquity,  which  he  hath  committed,  in  the  same 
shall  he  die.3 

With  the  Greeks,  the  multiplication  of  the  five 
loaves  and  two  fishes,  is  the  subject  of  the  Gospel  for 
this  Sunday :  they  count  it,  the  eighth  of  Saint  Matthew. 

MASS. 

The  Introit  speaks  of  the  glory  of  the  ancient 
Temple,  and  of  the  holy  mount.  But  greater  far  is  the 
splendour  of  the  Church,  which  is  now  carrying  the 
name  and  praise  of  the  Most  High  even  to  the  end  of 
the  earth,  far  more  efficiently,  than  had  done  that 
temple  which  was  but  a  figure  of  our  Mother  the 
Church. 

INTROIT. 

We  have  received  thy  mercy,  Suscepimus,  Deus  miser- 

0  God,  in  the  midst  of  thy      icordiam  tuam    in   medio 
temple:  according  to  thy  name      templi  tui;  secundum  no- 

3  Kings,  ix.  6-8.  8  1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17. 

3  Ezech.  xxxiii.  12,  13 


206 


EIGHTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


men  tuum,  ita  et  laus  tua 
in  fines  terras :  justitia plena 
est  dextra  tua. 

Ps.  Magnus  Dominus,  et 
laudabilis  nimis:  in  civitate 
Dei  nostri,  in  monte  sancto 
ejus.  Gloria  Patri.  Sus- 
cepimus. 


so  also  is  thy  praise,  unto  the 
ends  of  the  earth:  thy  right 
hand  is  full  of  justice. 

Ps.  Great  is  the  Lord,  and 
exceedingly  to  be  praised:  in 
the  city  of  our  God,  on  his 
holy  mountain.  Glory,  etc 
We  have  received. 


Not  only  are  we  incapable,  of  ourselves,  of  doing 
any  good  work,  but,  without  the  help  of  grace,  we 
cannot  even  have  a  thought  of  supernatural  good. 
Now,  the  surest  means  for  obtaining  the  help,  that  is 
so  needed  by  us,  is  to  acknowledge  humbly  before 
God  that  we  depend  entirely  upon  him ;  it  is  what 
the  Church  does  in  the  Collect. 


COLLECT. 


Largire  nobis,  quaesumus 
Domine,  semper  spiritum 
cogitandi  qua?  recta  sunt, 
propitius  et  agendi :  ut,  qui 
sine  te  esse  non  possumus, 
secundum  te  vivere  valea- 
mus.  Per  Dominum. 


Grant  us,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  spirit  of  always 
thinking  what  is  right;  and 
grant  us  mercifully  the  spirit 
of  doing  it:  that  we,  who  can- 
not subsist  without  thee,  may 
live  according  to  thee. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati 
Pauli  Apostoli  ad  Roman- 
os. 

Cap.  viii. 

Fratres,  Debitores  su- 
musnon  carni,ut  secundum 
carnem  vivamus.  Si  enim 
secundum  carnem  vixeritis, 
moriemini :  si  autem  spi- 
ritu  facta  carnis  mortifica- 
veritis,  vivetis.  Quicum- 
que  enim  Spiritu  Dei  agun- 
tur,  ii  sunt  nlii  Dei.    Non 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the  Ro- 
mans. 

Ch.  viii. 

Brethren:  We  are  debtors, 
not  to  the  flesh,  to  live  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh.  For  if  ye 
live  according  to  the  flesh,  ye 
shall  die:  but  if  by  the  Spirit 
ye  mortify  the  deeds  of  the 
flesh,  ye  shall  live.  For  who- 
soever are  led  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God. 


MASS.  207 

For  ye  have  not  received  the  enim  accepistis  spiritum 
spirit  of  bondage  again  in  fear:  servitutis  iterum  in  timore, 
but  ye  have  received  the  spirit  sed  accepistis  spiritum 
of  adoption  of  sons,  whereby  adoptionis  h'liorum,  in  quo 
we  cry:  Abba,  (Father.)  For  clamamus:  Abba  (Pater), 
the  Spirit  himself  giveth  tes-  Ipse ,  enim  Spiritus  testi- 
timony  to  our  spirit,  that  we  monium  reddit  spiritui 
are  the  sons  of  God.  And  if  nostro,  quod  sumus  filii 
sons,  heirs  also:  heirs  indeed  Dei.  Si  autem  filii, et  here- 
of God,  and  joint  heirs  with  des:  hasredes  quidem  Dei, 
Christ.  cohseredes  autem  Christi. 

The  Apostle  and  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles  here  goes 
on,  forming  to  the  Christian  life  the  new  recruits, 
whom  his  own  voice  and  that  of  his  fellow- apostles, 
dispersed  as  they  are  throughout  the  world,  are  every 
day  leading,  by  hundreds,  to  the  fount  of  salvation. 
Although  the  Church  is  all  attention  to  the  events 
which  are  preparing  for  Judea,  yet  is  she  full  of 
maternal  solicitude  for  the  great  work  of  the  training 
those  children  whom  she  has  given  to  her  divine 
Spouse.  Whilst  Israel  is  obstinate  in  his  fatal  re- 
fusal to  accept  the  Messiah,  another  family  is  growing 
up  in  his  place  ;  and,  by  its  docility,  richly  repays  our 
Lord  for  all  the  rebellion  and  slights  offered  him  by  the 
children  he  had  first  made  his  chosen  ones.  They 
were  the  ancient  people,  and  are  jealous  of  others 
being  now  called  to  the  same  privilege.  The  contra- 
dictions of  which  Christ  complains  in  the  Psalm,1  are 
anything  but  over ;  and  yet,  thanks  to  the  Church, 
the  Man- God  is  already  the  Head  of  the  Gentiles. 

Admirable  is  the  fruitfulness  of  the  Bride ;  for, 
wonderful  is  the  power  of  sanctification  which  she  is 
using  all  through  the  world  of  various  nations. 
Scarcely  has  she  sprung  into  her  beauteous  existence, 
than  she  offers  to  her  Lord  and  her  King  a  new 
empire,  consolidated  in  unity  of  love;  she  presents 
him  with  a  generation  that  is  all  pure  in  the  in- 
telligence and  practice  of  every  virtue.  It  is  quite 
true,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  acts  directly  on  the  souls 

1  Ps.  xvii.  44-46. 


208  EIGHTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOT. 

of  the  newly  baptised  ;  but  there  is  a  something  else 
to  be  considered  in  the  divine  plan.  It  is  this  :  the 
Word  having  been  made  flesh,  and  having  taken  to 
himself  a  Bride  (which  is  the  visible  Church,  on  earth,) 
whom  he  has  made  his  associate  in  the  work  of  man's 
salvation, — he  has  willed,  that  the  invisible  operation 
of  the  divine  Spirit,  who  proceeds  from  him  (the 
Word,)  shall  not  be  in  its  normal  state,  unless  there 
be  added  to  it  the  extrinsic  co-operation  and  interven- 
tion of  this  his  Bride.  Not  only  is  the  Church  the 
depositary  of  those  all-potent  formulas  and  mysterious 
rites  which  change  man's  heart  into  a  new  soil, 
cleansing  it  from  thorns  and  weeds,  making  it  able 
to  produce  a  hundred-fold, — but  she  also  sows  the 
seed  of  the  divine  husbandman  into  that  same  soil,1 
by  her  countless  modes  of  teaching  the  Truth.  To 
the  Holy  Ghost,  indeed,  a  magnificent  share  is  due 
of  that  fecundity  and  that  social  life  of  the  Church  ; 
still,  her  portion  of  work  is  exquisite ;  it  deals  with 
the  elect  taken  as  individuals,  and  consists  especially 
in  getting  them  to  profit  of  the  divine  energies  of  the 
Sacraments  which  she  administers,  and  in  developing 
the  germs  of  salvation  which  her  teaching  plants  in 
their  souls. 

How  important,  then,  and  sublime  will  ever  be 
that  mission  which  is  confided  to  those  men  who  are 
set  over  particular  churches,  as  teachers  or  directors 
of  souls ;  they  represent,  to  these  isolated  congrega- 
tions, the  common  Mother  of  all  the  Faithful,  for,  in 
her  name,  they  really  provide  for  the  Holy  Spirit 
those  elements  upon  whom  he  is  to  make  his  all- 
powerful  action  felt.  For  that  very  same  reason,  wo 
to  those  times  when  the  dispensers  of  the  divine  word, 
having  themselves  nought  but  halved  or  false  princi- 
ples, give  but  weak  shrivelled  seed  to  the  souls 
intrusted  to  them  !  The  Holy  Ghost  is  not  bound  to 
supply  their  insufficiency;  ordinarily  speaking,  he 
1  St.  Luke,  viii.  11. 


MASS.  209 

will  not  supply  it,  for  such  is  not  the  way  established 
by  Christ  for  the  sanctification  of  the  members  of  his 
Church. 

The  common  Mother,  however,  has  a  supplementary 
aid  for  such  of  her  children  as  may  be  thus  treated, — 
it  is  her  Liturgy.     There  they  will  find,  not  only  the 
holy   Sacrifice   which   will   support  them,    and   the 
graces  of  the  Sacrament  of  love  which  will  nourish 
spiritual  life  within  them, — but,  moreover,  the  surest 
rule  of  conduct,  and  the  sublimest  teachings  of  every 
virtue.     Such  souls  as  these  have  perhaps  got  the 
idea  that  the  poor  subjective  system  they  have  made 
for  themselves  is  the  royal  road  to  perfection ;  but, 
if  they  be  of  an  earnest  good  will,  desirous  to  find  the 
best  way,  God  will,  some  happy  day,  lead  them  to 
find,  and,  finding,  to   appreciate,  the  inexhaustible 
and  divinely  given  treasures  of  the  Church's  Liturgy; 
possessing  and  enriching  themselves  with  these,  they 
will  soon  put  aside  what  the  Prophet  Isaias  terms, — 
bread  without  strength,  and  water  without  power.1 
The  same  Prophet  would  thus   urge  them   in   the 
Church's  name,  to  what  is  best :  All  ye  that  thirst, 
come  to  the  waters  !   And  ye  that  have  no  money, 
make  haste,  buy,  and  eat.     Come  ye  !  buy  ivine  and 
milk,  without  money,  and  without  any  price.    Why 
spend  ye  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and 
your  labour  for  that  which  cloth  not  satisfy  you  ? 
Hearken  diligently  to  me,  and  eat  that  which  is 
good,  and  your  soul  shall  be  delighted  in  fatness ! 2 
And,  truly,  there  is  a  fact  which  should  rouse,  both 
to  attention  and  gratitude,  any  christian  who  longs  to 
be  enlightened  as  to   the  best  way  of  getting  to 
heaven :  this  fact  is,  that  the  Church  herself  has 
made  a  selection,  for  our  reading,  from  the  treasury 
of  the  Scriptures,  and,  in  her  Missal,  which  she  puts 
into  our  hands,  she  has  inserted  practical  teachings 

1  Is.  hi.  1  ;  xxx.  20.        2  Ibid.  lv.  1,  2. 
VOL.  xi.  P 


210  EIGHTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

from  the  same  divine  Books,  which  she  knew  were 
best  suited  to  the  wants  of  her  children.  A  christian, 
who  is  humbly  and  devoutly  assiduous  in  the  study 
of  this  admirable  book  of  the  Liturgy,  will  abound  in 
spiritual  knowledge.  His  guide  will  say  to  him,  and 
with  a  well-grounded  assurance :  This  is  the  ivay  ! 
walk  in  it !  And  go  not  aside,  neither  to  the  right, 
nor  to  the  left  tl  We  have  no  need  to  wonder  at  all 
this  ;  for,  in  the  guidance  of  souls,  the  Church  is  far 
superior  to  the  most  learned  Doctors  and  to  the 
greatest  Saints, — all  of  whom  were  humble  disciples 
in  her  school. 

Let  us  put  together  the  few  lines  which  have  been 
read  to  us  as  the  Epistles  of  the  last  three  Sundays, 
and  were  taken  from  that  written  by  St.  Paul  to  the 
Romans :  and,  to  say  nothing  of  their  infallible  truth 
as  being  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  could  we  have 
had  any  exposition  of  the  principles  of  revealed 
morality  which  could  have  been  compared  to  it  ? 
Clearness,  simplicity  of  diction,  earnest  vehemence  of 
exhortation, — all  are  perfect  in  these  few  words ;  and 
yet,  they  are  but  the  outward  expression  of  the 
sublimest  truths  of  christian  dogma.  Let  us  make 
the  barest  possible  summary  of  what  these  three 
Epistles  have  taught  us ;  and  we  shall  see  how  grand 
they  are.  Christ  Jesus,  foundation  of  man's  salva- 
tion ; — his  death  and  burial  made,  in  Baptism,  the 
regeneration  of  man  ; — his  Life  in  God,  the  model  of 
our  own ; — the  disgrace  of  our  enslaved  bodies, 
removed; — the  sanctifying  fruitfulness  of  every  virtue 
substituted  in  our  members  for  the  poisonous  roots  of 
all  vices ; — and,  on  this  very  Sunday,  the  pre-eminence 
of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh  ;  the  duties  incumbent  on 
our  spirit,  if  she  is  to  maintain  her  superiority  ;  what 
man  must  do,  if  he  would  preserve  the  liberty  be- 

1  Is.  xxx.  20. 


MASS.  211 

stowed  on  him  by  the  Spirit  of  love,  and  prove 
himself  to  be,  what  he  really  is,  a  son  of  God  and 
joint-heir  of  Christ.  Yes,  these  are  the  splendid 
realities,  which  are  henceforth  to  light  up  in  us  the 
lavj  of  the  spirit  of  life,  (that  is,  the  law  of  the  life 
we  are  to  live  by  the  Spirit,)  in  Christ  Jesus ; l  these 
are  the  axioms  of  the  science  of  salvation  now  taught 
to  the  whole  world,  which  are  to  be  substituted  for 
both  the  weaknesses  of  the  Jewish  law  and  the  empty 
ethics  of  philosophers. 

For,  the  leading  idea  which  pervades  the  whole  of 
this  sublime  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  is  this :  man, 
unaided  by  grace,  is  incapable  of  producing  perfect 
justice  and  absolute  good.  Experience  has  proved  it, 
St.  Paul  teaches  it,  the  Fathers  will,  later  on, 
unanimously  assert  it,  and  the  Church,  in  her  Councils, 
will  define  it.  True,  by  the  mere  powers  of  his  fallen 
nature,  man  may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  some 
truths,  and  to  the  practise  of  some  virtues;  but, 
without  grace,  he  can  never  know,  and  still  less 
observe,  the  precepts  of  even  the  natural  law,  if  you 
take  them  as  a  whole. 

From  Jesus,  then,  from  Jesus,  alone  comes  all  jus- 
tice ;  not  only  supernatural  justice,  which  supposes 
the  infusion  of  sanctifying  grace  in  the  sinner's  soul, 
is  wholly  from  Him;  but  even  that  natural  justice, 
of  which  men  are  so  proud,  and  which  they  say  is 
quite  enough  without  anything  else, — even  that  soon 
leaves  one  who  does  not  cling  to  Christ  by  faith  and 
love.  Our  modern  world  has  a  pompous  phrase  about 
"  the  independence  of  the  human  mind ;"  let  them, 
who  pretend  to  acknowledge  no  other  goodness  but 
that,  go  on  with  their  boasting  of  being  moral  and 
honest  men  ;  but,  as  to  us  Christians,  we  believe  what 
our  mother  the  Church  teaches  us ;  and,  agreeably 
to   such  teaching,  we  believe,  that   "a  moral  and 

1  Rom.  viii.  2. 


212  EIGHTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

honest  man,"  that  is  to  say,  a  man  who  lives  up  to 
all  the  duties  which  nature  puts  upon  him,  can  only 
be  that,  here  below,  by  a  special  aid  of  our  Redeemer 
and  Saviour,  Christ  Jesus.  With  St.  Paul,  there- 
fore, let  us  be  proud  of  the  Gospel  ;l  for,  as  he  calls 
it,  it  is  the  power  of  God,  not  only  to  justify  the  un- 
godly,2 but,  also,  to  enrich  souls,  that  thirst  after  what 
is  right,  with  an  active  and  perfect  justice.  The  just 
man,  says  the  same  Apostle,  liveth  by  faith ;  and 
according  to  the  growth  of  his  faith,  so  is  his  growth 
in  justice.3  Without  faith  in  Christ,  the  pretension 
to  reach  perfection  in  good,  by  one's  own  self  and 
works,  produces  nothing  but  the  stagnation  of  pride 
and  the  wrath  of  God.* 

The  Jews  are  a  proof  of  it.  Proud  of  their  Law, 
which  gave  them  light  greater  than  that  enjoyed  by 
the  Gentiles,5  and  wishing  to  make  their  whole 
virtue  consist  in  their  having  possession  of  that  Law, 
— they  have  rejected  Him  who  was  the  end  of  the  Law, 
and  the  source  of  all  holiness  ;6  they  have  refused  to 
accept  the  Christ,  who,  not  only  delivered  them  from 
their  previous  misery,7  but  also  brought  them  the 
knowledge  of  what  would  save  them,  and  the  strength 
to  fulfil  it  ;8  they  have  continued  in  their  iniquity, 
adding  sin  upon  sin  to  that  contracted  from  their 
First  Parents,  and  thus  treasuring  up  wrath  against 
the  day  of  wrath.9  Now  is  being  fulfilled  the  pre- 
diction of  Isaias,  whose  words  might  very  appro- 
priately have  been  used  by  the  faithful  few  of  Israel, 
whom  we  have  been  to-day  looking  at  when  they 
were  fleeing  from  Jerusalem :  Except  the  Lord  of 
hosts  had  left  us  seed,  we  should  have  been  as  Sodom, 
and  we  should  have  been  like  to  Gomorrha.10 

What>  then,  shall  we  say  ?  asks  the  Apostle  j11  and 

1  Rom.  i.  16.  6  Ibid.  ii.  17-20.  »  Ibid.  ii.  5. 

2  Ibid.  iv.  5.  6  Ibid.  x.  3,  4.  10  Is.  i.  9. 

3  Ibid.  i.  17.  7  Ibid.  iii.  25.  "  Rom.  ix.  30-33. 
*  Ibid.  18.  *  Ibid.  viii.  3,  4. 


MASS.  213 

he  answers  his  own  question  thus :  That  the  Gentiles, 
who  followed  not  after  justice,  have  attained  to  jus- 
tice, (that  is)  the  justice  that  comes  from  faith.  But 
Israel,  by  folloicing  after  the  law  of  justice,  is  not 
come  unto  the  laiv  of  justice.  Why  so  ?  Because 
they  sought  it,  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were  of  works; 
for  they  stumbled  at  the  stumbling-stone,  as  it  is 
ivritten  :  "  Behold !  I  lay  inSion  a  stumbling-stone 
and  a  rock  of  scandal ;  and  whosoever  believeth  in 
Him,  shall  not  be  confounded."1 

The  Gradual  seems  to  express  the  sentiments  of  the 
Jewish  converts,  who  had  to  depart  from  their  cities  ; 
they  might  thus  have  besought  God,  that  he,  hence- 
forth, would  be  their  protector  and  a  place  of  refuge 
where  they  might  be  safe.  The  Alleluia- Yersicle 
again  sings  of  the  glory  that  was  once  given  to  the 
Lord  in  Jerusalem,  especially  on  the  holy  mountain 
where  his  Temple  was  built. 

GRADUAL. 

Be  thou  unto  me  a  God,  a  Esto  mihi  in  Deum  pro- 
protector,  and  a  place  of  re-  tectorem,  et  in  locum  rem- 
fuge  to  save  me.  gii,  ut  salvum  me  facias. 

^.  O  God,  in  thee  have  I  $".  Deus,  in  te  speravi  : 

hoped  ;  let  me,  O  Lord,  never  Domine,  non  confundar  in 

be  confounded.  aeternuni. 

Alleluia,  alleluia.  Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$".  Great  is  the  Lord,  and  $".  Magnus  Dominus,  et 

exceedingly  to  be  praised  in  laudabilis  valde  in  civitate 

the  city  of  our  God,  on  his  Dei  nostri,  in  monte  sancto 

holy  mountain.    Alleluia.  ejus.    Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. 

Sequel    of  the    Holy  Gospel      Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
according  to  Luke.  secundum  Lucam. 

Ch.  xvi.  Cap.  xvi. 

At  that  time:  Jesus  spoke  In  illo  tempore  :    Dixit 

to  his  disciples  this  parable:  Jesus  discipulis  suis  para- 
There  was  a  certain  rich  man      bolamhanc:  Homoquidam 

1Is.  viii.  14;  xxviii.  16. 


214 


EIGHTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


who  had  a  steward:  and  the 
same  was  accused  unto  him, 
that  he  had  wasted  his  goods. 
And  he  called  him,  and  said 
to  him:  How  is  it  that  I  hear 
this  of  thee  ?  give  an  account 
of  thy  stewardship:  for  now 
thou  canst  be  steward  no 
longer.  And  the  steward  said 
within  himself:  What  shall  I 
do,  because  my  lord  taketh 
away  from  me  the  steward- 
ship 1  To  dig  I  am  not  able  ; 
to  beg  I  am  ashamed.  I  know 
what  I  will  do,  that  when  I 
shall  be  removed  from  the 
stewardship,  they  may  receive 
me  into  their  houses.  There- 
fore, calling  together  every 
one  of  his  lord's  debtors,  he 
said  to  the  first:  How  much 
dost  thou  owe  my  lord  ]  But 
he  said:  A  hundred  barrels  of 
oil.  And  he  said  to  him :  Take 
thy  bill  and  sit  down  quickly, 
and  write  fifty.  Then  he  said 
to  another:  And  how  much 
dost  thou  owe  ?  Who  said  : 
A  hundred  quarters  of  wheat. 
He  said  to  him:  Take  thy  bill 
and  write  eighty.  And  the 
lord  commended  the  unjust 
steward,  forasmuch  as  he  had 
done  wisely  :  for  the  children 
of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their 
generation,  than  the  children 
of  light.  And  I  say  to  you: 
Make  unto  you  friends  of  the 
mammon  of  iniquity,  that 
when  ye  shall  fail,  they  may 
receive  you  into  everlasting 
dwellings. 

The  several  parts  of  the  parable  here  proposed  to 
us,  are  easy  to  be  understood,  and  convey  a  deep 
teaching.     God  alone  is  rich  by  nature,  for  to  Him 


erat  dives,  qui  habebat  vil- 
licum :  et  hie  diffamatus  est 
apud  ilium  quasi  dissipas- 
set  bona  ipsius.  Et  voca- 
vit  ilium,  et  ait  illi:  Quid 
hoc  audio  de  te1?  Redde 
rationem  villicationis  tua3: 
jam  enim  non  poteris  villi- 
care.  Ait  autem  villicus 
intra  se :  Quid  f aciam,  quia 
dominus  meus  aufert  a  me 
villicationem  1  Fodere  non 
valeo,  mendicare  erubesco. 
Scio  quid  faciam,  ut,  cum 
amotus  fuero  a  villicatione, 
recipiant  me  in  domos  suas. 
Convocatis  itaque  singulis 
debitoribus  domini  sui,  di- 
cebat  primo:  Quantum  de- 
bes  domino  meo  ?  At  ille 
dixit:  Centum  cados  olei. 
Dixitque  illi :  Accipe  cau- 
tionem  tuam :  et  sede  cito, 
scribe  quinquaginta.  De- 
inde  alii  dixit :  Tu  vero 
quantum  debes  1  Qui  ait : 
Centum  coros  tritici.  Ait 
ilii:  Accipe  litteras  tuas, 
et  scribe  octoginta.  Et 
laudavit  dominus  villicum 
iniquitatis,  quia  prudenter 
fecisset :  quia  filii  hnjus 
saeculi  prudentiores  filiis 
lucis  in  generatione  sua 
sunt.  Et  ego  vobis  dico  : 
Facite  vobis  amicos  de 
mammona  iniquitatis :  ut, 
cum  defeceritis,  recipiant 
vos  in  aeterna  tabernacula. 


MASS.  215 

alone  belongs  the  direct  and  absolute  dominion  over 
all  things  :  they  are  his,  because  he  made  them.1 
But,  by  sending  his  Son  into  the  world  under  a 
created  form,  he,  by  this  temporal  mission,  appointed 
him  Heir  to  all  the  works  of  his  hands,2  just  as  truly 
as  he  already  was  owner  of  the  riches  of  the  divine 
nature  because  of  his  eternal  generation.  The  rich 
man,  then,  of  our  Gospel  is  Jesus,  who,  in  his  sacred 
Humanity,  united  to  the  Word,  is  heir  of  all  things? 
and,  as  such,  all  things  of  the  Most  High  God,  created 
or  uncreated,  finite  or  infinite,  belong  to  him.  To 
him  belong  the  heavens  which  proclaim  his  glory,4 
and  which,  as  long  as  they  last,5  clothe  him  with  their 
garment  of  light  ;6  to  him  the  ocean,  whose  surges  are 
but  a  voice  that  speaks  his  praise,7  and  hushes  the 
fury  of  its  tempests  when  he  bids  it  be  still  ;8  to  him 
the  earth,  which  gladly  offers  him  the  homage  of  all 
its  fullness.9  The  grass  and  flowers  of  the  meadows, 
the  varied  fruits,  the  fertile  loveliness  of  the  fields,1.0 
the  birds  of  the  air  and  the  fishes  which  inhabit  the 
rivers,  or  that  sport  in  the  paths  of  the  sea,11  the  huge 
oxen  as  well  as  the  tiniest  insect  that  lives, — the  wild 
beasts  of  forest  or  mountain12  all  are  his,  all  are  subject 
to  his  rule.  Silver,  too,  is  his,  and  gold  is  his  ;13  and 
man,  too,  is  his,  and  would  have  been  eternally  his  ser- 
vant, had  not  this  Jesus  mercifully  vouchsafed  to  divinise 
him,  and  make  hima  partaker  of  his  own  eternal  happi- 
ness and  riches. 

Instead  of  our  being  his  slaves  or  servants,  he 
would  have  us  be  his  Brothers ;  and,  when  he  re- 
turned from  this  world  to  his  Father,  whom  he  had 
also  made  to  be  ours  by  the  grace  he  had  infused  into 
us,14  he  sent  us  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  should  bear 

1  Ps.xxiii.2 ;  lxxxviii.  5  Ps.  ci.  27.  10  Ps.  xlix.  11. 

12.  e  Ps#  ciii.  2.  ii  ps.  viii.  9. 

2  Ps.  viii.  6-8.  7  Ps.  cxii.  4.  12  Ps.  xlix.  9,  10. 

3  Heb.  i.  2  ;  ii.  8.  8  St.  Mark,  iv.  39,  40.  13  Agg.  ii.  9. 

4  Ps.  xviii.  2,  6.  9  Ps.  xxiii.  1.  14  St.  John,  xx.  17. 


216  EIGHTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

testimony  to  us  that  we  are  the  Sons  of  God,1  and 
be  to  us  the  pledge  of  our  sacred  inheritance, — 
heaven.2  0  ineffable  riches  of  the  world  to  come ! 
0  inheritance  the  fullest  that  ever  was  !  Our  Jesus 
himself  is  all  joy  at  the  sight  of  it,  and,  in  the  Psalm 
of  his  Resurrection,  he  gives  expression  to  that  joy. 
We,  his  members  and  joint-heirs,  have  a  right  to 
repeat  those  words  after  him,  and  say:  The  lines 
are  fallen  unto  me  in  goodly  places ;  for  my  in- 
heritance is  goodly  to  me  !  for  the  Lord  himself  is 
my  portion !  I  will  bless  him  for  his  having  given 
me  to  understand  my  happiness  ! 3 

But,  in  order  that  we  may  attain  to  those  eternal 
riches,  there  is  a  condition  imposed  on  us : — we 
must  turn  to  profit  the  visible  domain  of  Christ; 
we  must  see  that  it  is  used  in  his  service.  The 
future  rewards  we  are  to  have  in  heaven  depend 
upon  the  more  or  less  fidelity  wherewith  we  have 
employed  our  share  of  these  inferior  good  things,  for 
they  are  intrusted  to  us,  to  each  of  us  in  the  measure 
which  seemed  good  in  God's  eyes.  What  a  divine 
agreement  has  been  drawn  up  for  us !  What  perfect 
adjustment  between  justice  and  love !  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  has  divided  his  property  into  two  por- 
tions; he  gives  the  eternal  portion  unreservedly  to 
us ;  it  is  the  only  one  that  is  truly  great,  the  only 
one  that  is  capable  of  contenting  our  infinite  longings. 
As  to  the  other  portion,  which,  in  itself,  would  not  be 
worthy  of  the  attention  of  beings  that  are  made  for 
the  contemplation  of  the  divine  essence,  he  could  not 
think  of  allowing  us  to  set  our  hearts  on  it,  neither 
will  he  permit  us  to  have  absolute  dominion  over  it. 
The  real  possession  of  temporal  goods  belongs, 
therefore,  to  Him  alone ;  the  ownership  of  earthly 
riches,  which  he  permits  to  the  future  joint-heirs  of 
his  own  blissful  eternity,  is   subject  to  numberless 

1  Rom.  viii.  16.  2  Eph.  i.  14.  *  Ps.  xv.  5-7. 


MASS.  217 

restrictions  during  their  life-time,  and,  at  their  death, 
exhibits  its  essentially  precarious  tenure,  by  its  not 
being  able  to  follow  its  owner  beyond  the  grave. 

For  the  fool,  as  well  as  for  the  wise  man,  the  day  will 
come  when  his  soul  will  be  required  of  him;1  and 
when  the  rich  man,  as  well  as  the  poor,  will  be 
brought  before  his  Maker,  exactly  as  he  was  on  the 
day  of  his  first  entrance  into  the  world,2  and  it  will 
be  said  to  him  :  Give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship  I 
At  that  dread  hour,  the  rule  observed  for  the  judg- 
ment will  be  that  which  our  Lord  revealed  to  us 
during  his  mortal  life :  Unto  whomsoever  much  is 
given,  of  him  much  shall  be  required ;  and  to  whom 
they  have  committed  much,  of  him  they  ivill  demand 
the  more?  Wo,  at  that  hour,  to  the  servant  who 
has  comported  himself,  as  though  he  were  the  abso- 
lute master !  wo  to  the  steward  who,  disregarding  the 
trust  assigned  to  him,  has  done  just  what  his  own 
whim  suggested  with  the  goods  of  which  he  was 
only  the  dispenser  !4  When  that  the  light  of  eter- 
nity shall  be  upon  him,  he  will  understand  the  error 
of  his  foolish  pride.  He  will  see  the  shameful  injus- 
tice of  a  life,  which  the  world,  perhaps,  thought  a  very 
decent  one,  but  which  was  spent  without  the  slightest 
regard  to  the  intentions  for  which  God  gave  him  the 
riches,  which  were  his  boast.  He  will  then  be 
entirely  deprived  of  them  all ;  neither  will  it  be  then 
in  his  power  to  make  a  better  use  of  them  for  the 
future,  that  is,  a  use  more  in  accordance  with  the 
designs  of  God.  If  he  might,  at  least,  make  some 
restitution  for  the  goods  he  has  abused !  if  he  might 
sue  for  aid  from  those  with  whom  he  lived  upon 
earth !  But,  no !  when  time  is  over,  labour  is  over 
too.  He  has  nothing  to  show  for  all  his  riches ;  he 
is  powerless;  and  when  he  goes  before  that  dread 
tribunal,  where  every  man  is  afraid  that  he  cannot 

1  St.  Luke,  xii.  20.    2  Job,  i.  21.     3  St.  Luke,  xii.  48.    4  Ibid.  42. 


218  EIGHTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

put  his  own  accounts  right, — "whom  can  he  get  to 
help  him?1 

Happy,  therefore,  if  now  that  time  is  still  granted 
him,  he  would  allow  the  thousand  calls  of  God2  to 
awaken  him  from  his  false  conscience !  Happy,  if, 
like  the  steward  mentioned  in  our  Gospel,  he  would 
profit  of  the  days  he  has  still  to  live,  and  would  say 
to  himself  those  words  of  Joh :  What  shall  I  do, 
when  God  shall  rise  to  judge  ?  And,  tuhen  he  shall 
examine,  what  shall  I  answer  him  ? 3 

This  very  Judge,  whom  he  so  rightly  fears,  now 
most  mercifully  points  out  to  him  how  he  may 
escape  the  punishment  due  to  his  past  mal-adminis- 
tration.  Let  him  imitate  the  prudence  of  the  unjust 
steward,  and  he  will  have  praise  for  it  from  his  Lord : 
not  only,  like  him,  because  of  his  prudence,  but 
because,  by  his  thus  spending  over  God's  servants 
the  riches  that  were  intrusted  to  his  care,  far  from 
thereby  robbing  his  divine  Master,  he  acts  in  strict 
accordance  with  his  wishes.  Who  thinhest  thou,  asks 
our  Lord,  is  the  faithful  and  ivise  steward,  whom  his 
Lord  setteth  over  his  family,  to  give  them,  in  due  time, 
their  measure  of  ivheat*  and  oil?5  Alms,  whether 
corporal  or  spiritual,  secure  us  powerful  friends  for 
that  awful  day  of  our  death  and  judgment.  It  is  to 
the  poor,  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  belongs ;  6  so  that, 
if  we  spend  the  riches  of  this  present  life  in  solacing 
the  sufferings  of  those  poor  ones,  now  that  they  are 
living  here  below, — afterwards,  they  will  not  fail  to 
make  us  a  return,  fey  receiving  us  into  their  future 
homes, — the  everlasting  dwellings  of  heaven. 

Such  is  the  immediate  and  obvious  meaning  of  the 
parable  given  to  us  to-day.  But,  if  we  would  go 
further, — if  we  would  understand  the  whole  inten- 
tion of  the  Church  in  her   choice   of  the   present 

1  St.  Matth.  xxv.  9.    3  Job,  xxxi.  14  5  2  Esdr.  v.  11. 

*  Ps.  xciv.  8.  4  St.  Luke,  xii.  42.       6  St.  Matth.  v.  3. 


MASS.  219 

Gospel,  we  must  listen  to  St.  Jerome,  whose  homily, 
for  last  night's  Office,  is  put  before  us  as  the  official 
interpretation  of  the  sacred  text.  Let  us,  first,  listen 
to  the  words  of  Scripture  which  the  Saint  quotes, — 
they  immediately  follow  those  of  our  Gospel :  He 
that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  is  faithful 
also  in  that  which  is  greater ;  and  he  that  is  unjust 
in  that  which  is  little,  is  unjust  also  in  that  which 
is  greater.  If,  then,  ye  have  not  been  faithful  in 
the  unjust  mammon,  ivho  will  trust  you  with  that 
which  is  the  true  ?  l  These  words,  says  St.  Jerome, 
were  said  in  the  presence  of  the  scribes  and  pharisees ; 
they  felt  that  the  parable  was  intended  for  them  ; 
and  they  derided  the  divine  preacher.  The  one  that 
was  unjust  in  that  which  is  little,  is  the  jealous  Jew, 
who,  in  the  limited  possession  of  the  present  life, 
refuses  to  his  fellow- men  the  use  of  those  goods 
which  were  created  for  all.  If,  then,  you  avaricious 
Scribes  are  convicted  of  mal-administration  in  the 
management  of  temporal  riches,  how  can  you  expect 
to  have  confided  to  you  the  true,  the  eternal,  riches 
of  the  divine  word,  and  the  teaching  of  the  Gentiles  ?2 
Terrible  question,  which  our  Lord  leaves  thus  un- 
answered; let  these  unjust  Steivards,  the  depositaries 
of  the  figurative  Law,  deride  Jesus  as  much  as  they 
please,  and  pretend  that  his  question  does  not  refer 
to  them ;  but,  they  will  soon  be  giving  the  true 
answer : — the  answer  will  be, — the  ruin  of  Jerusalem. 

Meanwhile,  the  little  humble  flock  of  the  elect  of 
Juda, — leaving  these  hard- hearted  men  to  the  ven- 
geance which  their  proud  madness  is  hurrying  on, — 
is  continuing  its  journey,  knowing  that  the  promises 
of  Sion  belong  to  it.  The  Offertory- Anthem  is  the 
expression  of  their  faith  and  their  hope. 

1  St.  Luke,  xvi.  10-14.        s  S.  Hieron.  Ep.  ad  Algasiam,  cap.  vi. 


220 


EIGHTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


OFFERTORY. 


Populum  humilem  sal- 
vum  facies,  Domine,  et 
oculos  superborum  humi- 
liabis  :  quoniam  quis  Deus 
praeter  te,  Domine  1 


Thou  wilt  save  the  humble 
people,  O  Lord  !  and  thou 
wilt  humble  the  eyes  of  the 
proud  :  for,  who  is  God  be- 
sides thee,  O  Lord  1 


It  is  from  God  that  we  receive  the  gifts,  which  he 
deigns  to  accept  at  our  hands ;  and  yet,  the  sacred 
mysteries,  which  are  about  to  transform  our  Oblation, 
do,  none  the  less,  obtain  for  us,  by  his  grace,  the 
sanctification  of  our  present  life,  and  the  joys  of 
eternity. 

SECRET. 


Suscipe,  quaesumus  Do- 
mine, munera  quae  tibi  de 
tua  largitate  deferimus:  ut 
haec  sacrosancta  myste- 
ria,  gratiae  tuae  operante 
virtute,  et  praesentis  vitae 
nos  conversatione  sanctifi- 
cent,  et  ad  gaudia  sempi- 
terna  perducant.  Per  Do- 
minum. 


Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  the  offerings  we  bring, 
which  are  the  gifts  of  thine 
own  bounty:  that  these  most 
holy  Mysteries  may,  by  the 
power  of  thy  grace,  make  our 
conduct  in  this  life  holy,  and 
bring  us  to  those  joys  that  will 
never  end.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

The  hope  which  man  has  in  his  God  could  never 
disappoint  him ;  what  stronger  pledge  could  he  wish 
for,  than  the  sweetness  of  the  divine  banquet  which  he 
is  now  enjoying  ? 


Gustate,  et  videte,  quo- 
niam suavis  est  Dominus: 
beatus  vir,  qui  sperat  in 
eo. 


COMMUNION. 

Taste  and  see,  that  the  Lord 
is  sweet  !  blessed  is  the  man 
that  putteth  his  trust  in  him. 


The  heavenly  nourishment,  we  have  now  received, 
has  power  to  renew  both  our  souls  and  bodies :  let  us 


VESPERS. 


221 


make  ourselves  worthy  of  experiencing  the  fulness  of 
its  effects. 


POSTCOMMUNION. 


May  this  heavenly  mystery, 
O  Lord,  renew  us  both  in  soul 
and  body;  that  we  may  find  in 
ourselves  the  effects  of  what 
we  celebrate.    Through,  etc. 


Sit  nobis,  Domine,  repa- 
ratio  mentis  et  corporis 
cceleste  mysterium  :  ut  cu- 
jus  exsequimur  cultum,  sen- 
tiamus  effectum.    Per  Do- 


mmum. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,   Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON   OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


What  shall  I  do,  because  my 
lord  taketh  away  from  me  the 
stewardship  %  To  dig  I  am 
not  able;  to  beg  I  am  ashamed. 
I  know  what  I  will  do,  that, 
when  I  shall  be  removed  from 
the  stewardship,  they  may  re- 
ceive me  into  their  houses. 


Quid  faciam,  quia  domi- 
nus  meus  aufert  a  me  villi- 
cationem  1  Fodere  non  va- 
leo,  mendicare  erubesco. 
Scio  quid  faciam,  ut  cum 
amotus  fuero  a  villicatione, 
recipiant  me  in  domos  suas. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

Grant  us,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  spirit  of  always 
thinking  what  is  right;  and 
grant  us,  mercifully  the  spirit 
of  doing  it:  that  we,  who  can- 
not subsist  without  thee,  may 
live  according  to  thee. 
Through,  etc. 


OEEMUS. 

Largire  nobis,  quagsumus, 
Domine,  semper  spiritum 
cogitandi  quae  recta  sunt, 
propitius  et  agendi,  ut  qui 
sine  te  esse  non  possumus, 
secundum  te  vivere  valea- 
mus.    Per  Dominum. 


222 


NINTH   SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


THE  NINTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 


■0- 


The  lamentation  over  Jerusalem's  woes  is,  in  the 
Western  Church,  the  subject  of  to-day's  Gospel ;  and 
it  gave  its  name  to  this  ninth  Sunday  after  Pentecost, 
at  least,  among  the  Latins.  We  have  already  ob- 
served, that  it  is  easy  to  find,  even  in  the  Liturgy  as 
it  now  stands,  traces  of  how  the  early  Church  was 
all  attention  to  the  approaching  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecies  against  Jerusalem, — that  ungrateful  City, 
upon  which  our  Jesus  heaped  his  earliest  favours. 
The  last  limit  put  by  mercy  upon  justice,  has,  at 
length,  been  passed.  Our  Lord,  speaking  of  the  ruin 
of  Sion  and  its  Temple,  had  foretold,  that  the  genera- 
tion, that  was  listening  to  his  words,  should  not  pass, 
until  what  he  announced  should  be  fulfilled.1  The 
almost  forty  years  accorded  to  Juda,  that  he  might 
avert  the  divine  wrath,  have  had  no  other  effect  than 
to  harden  the  people  of  deicides  in  their  determination 
of  not  accepting  Christ  as  the  Messiah.  As  a  torrent, 
which,  having  been  long  pent  back,  rushes  along  all 
the  fiercer  when  the  embankment  breaks, — vengeance 
at  length  burst  on  the  ancient  Israel ;  it  was  in  the 
year  70  that  was  executed  the  sentence  himself  had 
passed,  when  delivering  up  his  King  and  God  to  the 
Gentiles,2  he  cried  out :  His  blood  be  upon  us  and  upon 
our  children  /3 

Even  as  early  as  the  year  67,  Rome  irritated  by 

>  St.  Luke,  xxi.  32.  2  St.  Matth.  xx.  19. 

3  Ibid,  xxvii.  25. 


mass.  223 

the  senseless  insolence  of  the  Jews,  had  deputed 
Flavius  Vespasian  to  avenge  the  insult.  The  fact  of 
this  new  General  being  scarcely  known  was,  in  reality 
the  strongest  reason  for  Nero's  approving  of  his  nom- 
ination :  but,  to  the  hitherto  obscure  family  of  this 
soldier,  God  reserved  the  empire,  as  a  reward  for  the 
service  done  to  divine  justice  by  this  Flavius  and  his 
son  Titus.  Later  on,  Titus  will  see  and  acknowledge 
it,1 — that  it  is  not  Home,  but  God  himself,  who  con- 
ducts the  war  and  commands  the  legions.  Moses,  ages 
before,  had  seen  the  nation,  whose  tongue  Israel  could 
not  understand,  rushing,  like  an  eagle,  upon  his  chosen 
people  and  punishing  them  for  their  sins.2  But  no 
sooner  has  the  Roman  eagle  reached  the  land  where  he 
is  to  work  the  vengeance,  than  he  finds  himself 
visibly  checked  by  a  superior  power  ;  and  his  spirit  of 
rapine  is  held  back,  or  urged  on,  just  precisely  as  the 
prophets  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  had  spoken  it  was  to  be. 
The  piercing  eye  of  that  eagle,  as  eager  to  obey  as  it 
was  to  fight,  almost  seemed  to  be  scrutinising  the 
Scriptures.  It  was  actually  there,  that  he  found  the 
order  of  the  day  for  the  terrible  years  of  the  cam- 
paign.3 

As  an  illustration  of  this,  we  may  mention  what 
happened  in  the  year  66.  The  army  of  Syria,  under 
the  leadership  of  Cestius  Gallus,  had  encamped  under 
the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  Our  Lord  intended  this  to 
be  nothing  more,  in  His  plan,  than  a  warning  to  his 
faithful  ones,  which  he  had  promised  them  when  fore- 
telling the  events  that  were  to  happen.  He  had  said : 
When  ye  shall  hear  of  wars,  and  seditions,  and  rumours 
of  tears,  be  not  terrified ;  these  things  must  first  come  to 
pass  ;  but  the  end  is  not  yet  presently}  But,  when  ye 
shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed  about  with  an  army, 
then  know,  that  the  desolation  thereof  is  at  hand.5  The 
Jews  had  been,  for  years,  angering  Rome  by  their 

1  Jos.  De  bell.  vi.  9.  2  Deut.  xxviii.  49.      3  St.  Luke,  xxi.  22. 

*  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  6 ;  St.  Luke,  xxi.  9.  5  Ibid.  20,  21. 


224  NINTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

revolts ;  but  she  bore  with  it  all,  if  not  patiently,  con- 
temptuously ;  but  when,  in  one  of  these  seditionst 
roman  blood  had  been  spilt,  then  she  was  provoked, 
and  sent  her  legions.  Her  army,  however,  had  first 
of  all  to  furnish  Jesus'  disciples  with  a  sign  j1  he  had 
promised  them  that  this  sign  should  consist  in  her 
compassing  Jerusalem,  then  withdrawing  for  a  time ; 
— this  would  give  the  Christians  an  opportunity  of 
quitting  the  accursed  city.  The  Roman  proconsul 
had  his  troops  stationed  so  near  to  Jerusalem,  that  it 
seemed  as  though  he  had  but  to  give  the  word  of  com- 
mand, and  the  war  would  be  over ;  instead  of  that, 
he  gave  the  strange  order  to  retreat,  and  throw  up  the 
victory  which  be  mighthave  for  the  wishing  it.2  Cestius 
Gallus  seemed  to  men  to  have  lost  his  senses  ;  but  no, 
he  was  following,  without  being  aware  of  it,  the  com- 
mands of  heaven ;  Jesus  had  promised  an  escape  to 
his  loved  ones  ;  he  fulfilled  his  promise  by  this  unwit- 
ting instrument. 

Yespasian  himself  had  scarcely  started  for  Judea, 
when  he  met  with  one  of  those  divine  adjournments 
which  all  the  roman  tactics  were  several  times  power- 
less to  resist ;  the  hour  marked  for  them  to  act  had 
not  come,  so  they  must  wait,  however  reluctantly. 
The  pre-ordained  counsel  of  the  Most  High  decreed 
that  before  all  these  things*  which  men  were  to  bring 
about, — before  the  already  broken  sceptre  of  the 
ancient  alliance4  should  have  entirely  disappeared  in 
the  flames  enkindled  by  the  Jews  themselves,5 — the 
establishment  of  the  New  Testament  was  to  be  solidly 
set  up  among  the  Gentiles,  and  be  solemnly  confirmed 
by  the  blood  of  the  Apostles,  its  witnesses.6  It  was 
on  the  29th  of  June,  in  the  year  67,  that  Peter  and 
Paul  suffered  martyrdom  in  the  City  of  Pome ;  that 


i  St.  Mark,  xiii.  4.  4  Zach.  xi.  10. 

2  Jos.  De  beilo  jud.  ii.  19.  5  Is.  1.  11. 

3  St.  Luke,  xxi.  12.  6  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  9;  St.  Mark,  xiii.  10. 


mass.  225 

Rome  was  thus  made  the  Mother- Church,  and  the 
reign  of  the  Messiah,  whom  Israel  rejected,  was 
promulgated  to  the  whole  world,  and  with  an  evidence 
which  only  the  voluntarily  blind  could  resist.  Though 
Vespasian  had  opened  the  campaign  against  Judea  in 
the  spring  of  that  year  67,  yet  he  had  to  wait  for  the 
glorious  confession  of  these  two  Princes  of  the  Apostles; 
that  triumph  secured,  the  impatient  legions  might 
rush  to  victory  as  soon  as  they  pleased.  For  forty- 
seven  long  days,  they  had  been  kept,  by  some  power, 
staring  at  the  citadel  of  Jotapata,  which  it  was  so 
easy  for  them  to  take,  and  which  would  make  them 
masters  of  Galilee ;  the  29th  of  June  had  had  its 
apostolic  triumph  in  Rome ; — Vespasian  was  then  at 
liberty  to  do  what  he  so  long  wished  to  do,  and,  on 
that  29th  of  June,  he  did  it, — he  took  Jotapata. 

Forty-thousand  dead,  strewed  on  the  steeps  of  the 
hill,  and  heaped  up  as  high  as  the  walls,  showed  the 
Romans  what  desperate  resistance  they  were  to 
expect  from  Jewish  fanaticism.  Of  all  the  male 
defenders  or  inhabitants  of  Jotapata,  only  two 
survived ;  one  of  these  was  Josephus,  a  chief  leader 
in  the  Jewish  forces,  and  historian  of  these  cruel  wars. 
The  women  and  children  were  spared.1  But,  some 
short  time  later  on,  another  fortress,  Gamala,  was 
attacked ;  it  overhung  a  chasm.  When  one  half  of 
the  besieged  had  been  slain,  and  it  was  evident  that 
further  resistance  was  impossible, — the  survivors, 
assembling  together  the  women  and  children,  threw 
them  and  themselves  down  the  rock,  and  five- 
thousand  was  their  number.  "When  the  legions  stood 
looking  around,  at  the  close  of  that  day's  work,  they 
could  see  but  a  desert  and  death.2 

In  every  part  of  the  unhappy  Galilee,  blood  was 
flowing  in  torrents,  and  the  flames  of  burning  villages 
lighted  up  the  horizon.     It  was  hard  to  recognise 

1  Jos.  De  bello  jud.  iii.  7.  2  Ibid.  iv.  1. 

VOL.   XI.  Q 


22G      NINTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

this  as  the  land  where  Jesus  had  spent  the  years  of 
his  childhood ;  or  as  the  scene  of  his  first  miracles, 
and  of  those  teachings  of  His,  which  were  ever 
borrowing  some  exquisite  parable  or  other  from  the 
sight  of  the  pretty  hills  and  fertile  vales  of  that  then 
favoured  country.  The  arm  of  God  was  now  pressing 
with  all  its  weight  on  this  land  of  Zabulon  and 
Nephtali,  on  which,  first,  so  brightly  shone  the  light 
of  salvation,1  as  we  sang  on  Christmas  Night.  So 
again  this  time,  it  was  the  first  to  be  visited  by  God. 
But  these  were  unhappy  times ;  and  the  visit  was  no 
longer  that  of  the  divine  Orient  opening  out  to  the 
world  the  paths  of  peace.2  He  was  hid  behind  the 
tempest,3  and  darted  the  fiery  arrows  of  destruction 
on  the  ungrateful  country  that  had  refused  to  welcome 
him  in  the  weakness  of  human  flesh,  which  nothing 
but  his  mercy  had  led  him  to  assume.  They  cried 
out,  on  the  day  of  my  vengeance,  (says  this  rejected 
King  of  Israel,)  but  there  was  none  to  save  them ; 
they  cried  to  me  their  Lord,  but  I  heard  them  not : 
and  I  will  break  them  as  small  as  dust,  and  scatter 
them  before  the  wind ;  I  will  bring  them  to  nought, 
like  the  dirt  in  the  streets.5 

Terrible  lesson,  all  this  !  The  Church  learned  it, 
and  never  forgot  it : — the  lesson,  that  no  blessing,  no 
past  holiness,  is,  of  itself,  a  guarantee  that  the  place 
thus  favoured  will  not  afterwards  draw  down  on  itself 
desecration  and  destruction !  She  saw,  and  trembled 
as  she  saw,  these  events  of  the  first  age  of  her  history. 
She  beheld  violence  and  every  sort  of  crime  profaning 
the  paths  that  had  been  trodden  by  the  feet  of  her 
adorable  Master,  and  the  hills  where  he  had  passed 
whole  nights  in  prayer  and  praise  to  his  Eternal 
Father.  She  one  day  witnessed  even  the  pure  waters 
of  the  Lake  of  Genesareth  fearfully  polluted;  those 


1  Is.  ix.  1,  2.        2  St.  Luke,  7S,  79.         3  Ps.  xvii.  12. 
5  Vs.  xvii.  42,  43. 


mass.  227 

waters  that  had  so  oft  reflected  the  features  of  her 
divine  Spouse,  as  when  he  walked  on  their  glassy 
surface,  or  sat  in  Peter's  bark  superintending  those 
mystery-meaning  fishings  of  his  Apostles.  The  event 
we  here  allude  to  was  that  of  six  thousand  Jewish 
insurgents, — hemmed  in  between  God's  wrath  and 
their  Roman  pursuers, — reddening  with  their  blood 
this  Sea  of  Tiberias,  where  once  Jesus  had  spoken  to 
the  storm  and  quelled  it:1  their  livid  carcasses  were 
thrown  back  by  the  waves  on  the  shore  where  our 
Lord  had  uttered  wo  to  the  cities  that  had  witnessed 
his  miracles,  and  yet  were  not  converted.2 

And  souls,  too,  on  whom  God  heaps  his  choicest 
favours,  inviting  them  thereby  to  a  closer  union  with 
himself, — they,  too,  have  a  lesson  to  learn  from  all 
this.  Wo  to  them,  if,  through  indifference  or  sloth, 
they  neglect  to  correspond  with  their  graces  !  Wo  to 
them,  if  they  imitate  the  cities  on  the  Lake  of  Galilee, 
by  greedily  accepting  the  honour  done  them,  but 
never  producing  the  fruits  of  holiness  which  should 
follow  such  signal  and  frequent  gifts  of  heaven.  The 
Prophet  Amos  couples  these  forgetful  careless  souls 
with  the  cities  which  our  Lord  had  treated  with  such 
partiality,  and  which  yet  remained  apathetic  and 
worldly;  and  he  tells  us  what  this  slighted  Benefactor 
will  say  to  both  :  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  !  therefore  ivill  I  visit  upon 
you  all  your  iniquities !  Shall  two  walk  together, 
except  they  be  agreed  P 

As  to  Israel,  the  highly-favoured  above  all  people, 
but  who  would  not  agree  with  the  Jesus  that  so  loved 
him, — he  was  visited  with  chastisements  exactly 
corresponding  to  his  crimes.  In  the  spring  of  the 
year  68,  an  officer  under  Vespasian  scoured  the  left 
banks  of  the  Jordan,  driving  the  terrified  Israelites 

1  Jos.  De  bello.  iii.  9.     2  St.  Matth.  xi.  20,  21.    3  Amos,  iii.  2,  3. 


228  NINTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

before  him.1  They  fled  in  thousands  towards  Jericho, 
where  they  hoped  to  find  refuge ;  but  the  river  had 
so  flooded  the  country  round  the  city,  that  entrance 
was  impossible;  the  wretched  fugitives  were  overtaken 
and  slain  by  the  roman  troops  which  came  up.  The 
Ark  of  the  Covenant  had  once  opened  there  a 
miraculous  passage  to  the  Tribes  of  Israel ;  but  even 
had  it  been  there  now,  how  was  it  to  protect  such 
unworthy  descendants  of  the  Patriarchs, — descendants, 
that  is,  who  broke  the  Covenant  made  by  God  with 
the  sons  of  Jacob  ?  A  frightful  massacre,  a  merciless 
mowing  down  of  human  beings,  followed ;  and,  at 
what  a  place !  the  very  place  where,  forty  years  be- 
fore, St.  John  the  Baptist  had  seen  the  axe  laid  to 
the  root  of  the  tree,  and  foretold  the  wrath  to  come 
upon  this  brood  of  vipers,  who  called  themselves 
children  of  Abraham,  and  would  not  do  penance.2  A 
countless  multitude  drowned  themselves  in  the  Jordan; 
that  is,  they  found  death  in  the  very  stream  to  which 
our  Saviour  had  imparted  sanctification  by  his  own 
being  baptised  in  it,  and  which  was  endued  by  Him 
with  the  power  to  give  life  to  the  world.  But,  Israel 
had  chosen  the  kingdom  of  the  prince  of  this  world, 
in  preference  to  that  of  the  divine  giver  of  life.3 
The  number  of  those  who  perished  in  that  holy  stream 
was  so  great,  that  the  heap  of  their  dead  bodies  made 
it  impossible  for  vessels  to  sail  in  the  river ;  and  this 
fearful  obstacle  continued,  until  such  time  as  the 
current  had  swept  the  corpses  down  to  the  Dead  Sea, 
and  scattered  far  into  that  dismal  lake  of  malediction 
that  hideous  jetsam  of  the  Synagogue.  Had  not  our 
Lord  said,  that  Sodom's  guilt  was  less  than  theirs  ?4 
Rome  and  her  legions  were  masters,  in  the  north, 
of  Galilee  and  Samaria ;  in  the  East  and  "West,  of 
the  banks  of  the  Jordan  and  of  the  Mediterranean 


1  Jos.  De  bello.  iv.  7.  3  St.  John,  xix.  15. 

2  St.  Matth.  iii.  5-12.  *  St.  Luke,  x.  12. 


mass.  229 

coast ;  and  the  conquest  of  Idumaea  completed  the 
circle  of  iron  and  fire  that  was  to  shut  Jerusalem  in. 
Roman  garrisons  held  Emmaus,  Jericho,  and  all  the 
fortified  positions  round  the  Jewish  capital.  Having, 
as  God's  instrument,  chastised  so  many  other  un- 
grateful cities,  Yespasian  was  preparing  to  lay  siege 
to  the  most  guilty  of  all,  when  Nero's  fall,  and  the 
events  which  followed  it,  drew  the  attention,  both  of 
himself  and  the  whole  world,  from  Judea. 

The  last  years  of  the  tyrant  had  witnessed  frequent 
"  earthquakes  in  divers  places,"1  and  "  plagues,"2  and 
"  signs  in  the  heavens  ;"3  but,  when  he  died,  there 
came  risings  of  nation  against  nation,  and  king- 
dom against  kingdom.*  The  entire  West  was  in 
arms;  and  the  East  herself  was  attracted  towards 
Rome  by  the  immense  political  commotion  of  the 
year  69.  From  the  heights  of  Atlas  to  the  Euxine 
Sea,  and  from  the  Humber  to  the  Nile,  provinces  and 
people  were  each  striving  for  the  mastery.  Galba, 
Otho,  Vitellius,  Yespasian, — each  proclaimed  Emperor 
by  their  respective  armies, — sent  their  rival  legions 
from  Britain  and  the  Rhine,  from  Illyria  and  the 
Danube  ;  they  met  at  Bedriac  for  mutual  slaughter. 
In  one  thing  alone  they  that  survived  were  unanimous, 
— friends  or  foes,  all  must  lay  Italy  waste.  Rome 
was  taken  by  the  Romans  ;  whilst  on  the  undefended 
frontiers,  appeared  Suavians,  Sarmatians,  and  Dacians. 
The  Capitol  and  Jupiter's  temple  in  flames  excited 
the  Gauls  to  declare  their  independence,  and  Yelleda 
to  stir  up  Germany  to  revolt.  The  old  world  was 
gradually  disappearing  beneath  the  universal  anarchy 
and  war. 

Circumstances,  then,  suddenly  seemed  favourable 
to  Jerusalem ;  they  gave  her  a  fresh  invitation  to 

1  Senec.  Natnr.  Quaest.  vi.  1  ;  Tac.  An.  xiv.  27 ;  xt.  22. 

2  Senec.  Ibid.  27  ;  Tac.  Ibid.  xvi.  13  ;  Suet,  in  Ner.  39. 
*  Tac.  Hist.  v.  13  ;  Jos.  De  bell.  vi.  5. 

4  St.  Luke,  xxi.  10,  11. 


230  NINTH   SUNDAY    AFTEK   PENTECOST. 

atone  for  her  crimes  ;  but,  as  we  shall  see  when  com- 
menting this  Sunday's  Gospel,  she  made  no  other 
use  of  them,  than  to  multiply  her  sins,  and  treat 
herself  with  greater  cruelty  than  the  Romans  would 
have  done. 

In  the  Mass  of  this  Sunday,  which  is  their  ninth 
of  Saint  Matthew,  the  Greeks  read  the  episode  of 
Jesus'  walking  upon  the  waters. 

MASS. 

Israel  had  made  himself  the  enemy  to  the  Church  ; 
and  God,  as  he  had  warned  him,1  punishes  and  dis- 
perses his  children.  The  Church  takes  occasion, 
from  the  fulfilment  of  the  divine  judgments,  to  pro- 
fess the  humble  confidence  she  has  in  her  Spouse's 
aid. 

INTROIT 

Ecce  Dens  adjuvat  me,  Behold  !  God  is  my  helper 

et  D< -minus  susceptor  est  and  the  Lord  is  the  support 

animae  mcse:  averte  mala  of  my  soul:  turn  out  the  evils 

inimicis  meis,  etin  veritate  upon  mine  enemies,  and  cut 

tua  dispcrde  illos,  protec-  them  off  in  thy  truth,  0  Lord, 

tor1  mens,  Domine.  my  protector. 

Ps.  Deus  in  nomine  tuo  Ps.  0  God,  in  thy  name  save 

salvum  me  fac:  et  in  vir-  me:  and,  in  thy  strength,  de- 

tute  tua  libera  me.  Gloria  liver  me.  Glory,  etc.  Behold. 
Patri.    Ecce. 

The  Jews  cry  to  heaven,  and  the  ears  of  God  are 
deaf  to  their  supplications,  because  they  asked  for 
what  was  displeasing  to  him.  In  her  Collect,  the 
Church  prays  that  it  may  never  be  thus  with  her 
children. 

COLLECT. 

Pateant  anres  misericor-  May  the  ears  of  thy  mercy, 

diae  tuas,  Domine,  precibus  0  Lord,  be  opened  to  the 
supplicantium ;  et  ut  peten-      prayers  of  thy  supplianta:  and, 

1  Deut.  xxviii.  15-G8. 


MASS. 


231 


that  thou  may  est  grant  to  thy 
petitioners  the  things  they  de- 
sire, make  them  to  ask  those 
that  are  agreeable  to  thee. 
Through,  etc. 

The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


tibus  desiderata  concedas, 
fac  eos,  quas  tibi  sunt  pla- 
cita,  postulare.  Per  Domi- 
num. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Corinthians. 

1  Ch.  x. 

Brethren :  Let  us  not  covet 
evil  things,  as  they  also  covet- 
ed. Neither  become  ye  idola- 
ters, as  some  of  them:  as  it  is 
written:  The  people  sat  down 
to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up 
to  play.  Neither  let  us  com- 
mit fornication,  as  some  of 
them  committed  fornication, 
and  there  fell  in  one  day, 
three- and- twenty  thousand. 
Neither  let  us  tempt  Christ: 
as  some  of  them  tempted,  and 
perished  by  the  serpents. 
Neither  do  ye  murmur :  as 
some  of  them  murmured,  and 
were  destroyed  by  the  des- 
troyer. Now,  all  these  things 
happened  to  them  in  figure: 
and  they  are  written  for  our 
correction,  upon  whom  the 
ends  of  the  world  are  come. 
Wherefore  let  him  that  think- 
eth  himself  to  stand,  take  heed 
lest  he  fall.  Let  no  tempta- 
tion take  hold  on  you,  but  such 
as  is  human.  And  God  is 
faithful,  who  will  not  suffer 
you  to  be  tempted  above  that 
which  ye  are  able;  but  will 
make  also  with  temptation 
issue,  that  ye  may  be  able  to 
bear  it. 


Lectio  Epistola?  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Corinthios. 

1  Cap.  x. 

Fratres:  Nonsimuscon- 
cupiscentes  malorum,  sicut 
et  illi  concupierunt.  Neque 
idololatrse  efficiamini  sicut 
quidam  ex  ipsis:  quemad- 
modumscriptumest:  Stetit 
populus  manducare,  et  bi- 
bere,  et  surrexerunt  ludere. 
Neque  fornicemur,  sicut 
quidam  ex  ipsis  fornicati 
sunt,  et  ceciderunt  una  die 
viginti  tria  millia.  Neque 
tentemus  Christum,  sicut 
quidam  eorumtentaverunt, 
et  a  serpentibus  perierunt. 
Neque  murmuraveritis,  si- 
cut quidam  eorummurmu- 
raverant,  et  perierunt  ab 
exterminatore.  Hsec  autem 
omnia  in  figura  continge- 
bant  illis:  scripta  sunt  au- 
tem ad  correptionem  nos- 
tram,  in  quos  fines  saeculo- 
rum  devenerunt.  Itaque 
qui  se  existimat  stare,  vi- 
cleat  ne  cadat.  Tentatio  vos 
non  apprehendat,  nisi  hu- 
mana  :  fidelis  autem  Deus 
est,  qui  non  patietur  vos 
tentari  supra  id,  quod  po- 
testis,  sed  faciet  etiam  cum 
tentatione  proventum,  ut 
possitis  sustinere. 


4 .3  3: 


232 


NINTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


/  have  great  sadness,  cries  out  the  Apostle  of  the 
Gentiles,  as  he  thought  of  the  malediction  which  was 
about  to  fall  on  the  Jews :  Continual  sorrow  have  1 
in  my  heart;  for  I  wished  myself  to  be  an  anathema 
from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  uho  are  my  kinsmen 
according  to  the  flesh  ;  who  are  Israelites,  to  whom 
belongeth  the  adoption  of  children, — and  the  glory, 
— and  the  covenant, — and  the  giving  of  the  Law, — 
and  the  service  (the  worship  of  God,  prescribed  by 
himself,) — and  the  promises  ;  whose  are  the  Fathers, 
and  of  whom  is  Christ  according  to  the  flesh,  who  is 
over  all  things,  God  blessed  for  ever  I1  But  now, 
they  are  gone  astray  by  their  own  fault;  they  see 
nothing;  they  understand  nothing.2  The  royal  ban- 
quet of  the  Scriptures,  on  which  their  Fathers  feasted,3 
is  now  turned  by  them  into  an  occasion  of  error ; 
they  have  made  those  Scriptures  a  snare  for  their 
own  destruction  ;  darkness  covers  their  understand- 
ing, and  chastisement  for  all  future  ages  is  their  own 
making.4 

Gentiles  !  you  that  have  been  substituted  for  those 
broken  branches,  and  are  grafted  on  the  stem  of  the 
Covenant!5  learn  a  lesson  from  their  fall.  God,  who 
has  shown  you  so  much  and  so  great  gratuity  of 
mercy,  and  that  at  the  very  time  he  was  inflicting 
upon  them  the  chastisements  they  so  richly  merited, 
— no,  this  good  God,  will  not  allow  his  loving  designs 
upon  you  to  be  frustrated  against  your  own  will.  If 
you  are  faithful  to  the  call  of  his  grace,  he  will  be 
faithful  to  you,  and  preserve  you  from  temptations 
which  you  could  not  resist ;  or,  he  will  so  watch  the 
combat,  that  his  divine  help  will  make  your  soul  rise 
superior  to  the  trial ;  and  thus  in  every  temptation 
you  will  find,  not  defeat,  but  the  merit  of  a  victory, 
all  the  more  glorious,  as  it  seemed  so  much  above 


1  Rom.  ix.  2-5. 
2Is.vi.  9;  St.  Matth. 
xiii.  14.  15. 


3  Ibid.  iv.  4. 

*  Pa.  Ixviii.  23,  24. 

6  Rom.  xi.  17. 


mass.  233 

the  power  of  human  strength  to  bear.  And  yet, 
never  forget,  that  the  same  causes,  which  brought 
about  the  destruction  of  the  Jews,  would  also  lead 
you  to  ruin.  They  fell,  because  of  their  unbelief;1 
you,  who  once  had  no  faith,  and  yet  God  showed 
mercy  to  you,2 — it  is  by  faith  that  you  now  are  what 
you  are.  Be  not,  therefore,  high-minded  with  self- 
complacency  ;  but  remember,  how  that  God,  who 
broke  off  the  natural  branches  from  the  glorious  tree, 
will  not  spare  you,  if  you  cease  to  be  faithful ;  and 
whilst  you  do  well  to  admire  his  mercy,  you  do  not 
wisely,  if  you  forget  his  inexorable  justice.3 

Well,  therefore,  does  our  Mother  the  Church 
instruct  us  in  to-day's  Epistle,  as  to  the  lamentable 
antecedents  of  the  Jewish  deicides  ;  she  tells  us  of 
that  list  of  sins  and  chastisements,  which  gradually 
led  on  to  the  final  crime  and  total  ruin  of  the  apos- 
tate nation.  We  who  live  in  what  the  Church  calls 
the  "  evening  of  the  world,"4  have  this  great  advan- 
tage,— that  we  can  profit  by  what  the  past  ages  have 
experienced.  The  Holy  Spirit  had  no  other  end  in 
view,  when  he  would  have  the  history  of  the  ancient 
people  written, — he  would  have  the  future  ages 
there  learn  lessons  of  salvation  :  by  the  various 
episodes  of  that  history,  which  form  so  many  groups 
of  prophetic  events,  he  would  show  us  the  economy 
of  God's  providence,  in  his  government  of  the  world 
and  his  Church.  Founded,  as  she  has  been,  by  her 
Divine  Spouse,  in  immutable  truth,  and  maintained 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  unfailing  and  ever  increasing 
holiness,  the  Church  has  nothing  to  fear  of  that 
which  happened  to  the  Synagogue, — we  mean,  of 
that  total  wreck  which  the  Liturgy  brings  forward 
for  our  consideration  to-day  :  no,  the  ruin  of  the  Jews 
is  a  prophetic  image  of  the  destruction  of  the  world  5 

1  Rom.  xi.  20.  3  Ibid.  20-22.  5  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  3. 

2  Ibid.  30.  4HymnforAdv.Vesp. 


234      NINTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

(which  will  have  rejected  the  Church) — not  of  the 
Church  herself,  who  will  then  ascend  to  her  Lord, 
perfected,  as  she  will  then  he,  in  love  and  holiness, 
by  the  trials  endured  in  those  latter  days.1  But  the 
assurance  of  salvation,  granted  to  the  Bride  of  the 
Son  of  God,  does  not  extend  to  her  children,  taken 
either  individually  or  collectively,  that  is,  men  and 
nations.  On  each  one  of  us,  it  is  incumbent  that  we 
meditate  on  the  sad  fate  which  hefel  Jerusalem  ;  as 
also  on  what  happened,  ages  before,  to  those  ances- 
tors of  the  Jewish  people, — that  scarce  one  of  those 
who  were  living  when  Moses  led  them  out  of  Egypt, 
lived  to  enter  into  the  Promised  Land. 

And  yet,  as  the  Apostle  argues,  they  were  all 
journeying  in  the  path  of  life,  protected  by  the 
mysterious  cloud,  beneath  which  Divine  Wisdom 
shaded  them  by  day,  and  served  them  as  a  pillar  of 
fire  by  night.2  Led  on  by  Moses, — who  was  a  type 
of  the  future  divine  Head  of  the  Christian  people, — 
they  had  all  passed  through  the  sea.  All  of  them 
thus  baptised  in  that  symbolic  cloud  and  in  those 
saving  waters  which  had  ingulfed  their  foes,  just  as 
the  water  of  the  Christian  font  destroys  the  sins  of 
them  that  are  washed  in  it, — all  of  them  were  fed 
by  the  same  spiritual  food,  and  all  drank  at  the  same 
holy  source  which  issued  from  the  rock,  which  was 
Christ.  Yet,  were  there  very  few,  out  of  all  those 
thousands,  with  whom  God  was  pleased.3  But  how 
much  more  grievous  would  the  sins  of  Christians  be, 
who  are  blessed  with  the  resplendent  and  solid 
realities  of  the  Law  of  Grace,  than  were  the  evil 
desires,  and  idolatry,  and  fornication,  and  murmur- 
ings  of  the  Israelites,  who  had  but  the  figures  and 
foreshadowings  of  our  privileges  ? 

The  fervent  expression  of  praise,  given  to  our  good 
God  in   the  words  which  now  follow,  is  a  solace  to 

1  Apoc.  xxii.  17.  2  Wisd.  x.  17.  3  1  Cor.  x.  1-6. 


MASS. 


235 


our  hearts,  which  are  grieved  at  the  sight  of  the  in- 
gratitude of  the  Jewish  people  and  the  chastisements 
that  ingratitude  drew  down  upon  them.  How  sad 
soever  may  be  the  day,  the  Church  never  neglects 
her  tribute  of  praise  to  the  divine  Majesty ;  for  no 
event  can  happen  here  below,  that  can  make  the 
Bride  forget  the  infinite  perfections  of  her  Spouse,  or 
keep  her  from  extolling  his  magnificence.  We  have 
all  this  in  the  Gradual.  The  Alleluia- Verse  is  plain- 
tive and  suppliant ;  it  well  suits  to-day's  recollections. 


GRADUAL. 


0  Lord,  our  Lord,  how  won- 
derful is  thy  name  over  the 
whole  earth  ! 

ft-  For  thy  majesty  is  above 
the  heavens. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Rescue  me,  O  my  God, 
from  mine  enemies:  and,  from 
them  that  rise  up  against  me, 
deliver  me.    Alleluia. 


Domine,  Deus  noster, 
quara  admirabile  est  no- 
men  tuum  in  universa 
terra ! 

ft.  Quoniam  elevata  est 
magnificentia  tua  super 
coelos. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Eripe  me  de  inimicis 
meis,  Deus  meus:  et  ab 
insurgentibus  in  me  libera 
me.    Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel    of  the    holy  Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ch.  xix. 

At  that  time  :  When  he 
drew  near  Jerusalem,  seeing 
the  city,  he  wept  over  it,  say- 
ing: If  thou  also  hadst  known 
and  that  in  this  thy  day,  the 
things  that  are  to  thy  peace: 
but  now  they  are  hidden  from 
thy  eyes.  For  the  days  shall 
come  upon  thee:  and  thy  ene- 
mies shall  cast  a  trench  about 
thee,  and  compass  thee  round, 
and  straiten  thee  on  every  side, 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Lucam. 

Cap  xix. 

In  illo  tempore :  Cum 
appropinquaret  Jesus  Jeru- 
salem, videns  civitatem, 
flevit  super  ill  am,  dicens: 
Quia  si  cognovisses  et  tu, 
et  quidem  in  hac  die  tua, 
quae  ad  pacem  tibi,  nunc  au- 
tem  abscondita  suntab  ocu- 
lis  tuis.  Quia  venient  dies 
in  te:  et  circumdabunt  te 
inimici  tui  vallo,  et  circum- 
dabunt te:    et   coangusta- 


236 


NINTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   TENTECOST. 


bunt  te  undique:  et  ad  ter- 
rain prosternent  te,  et  filios 
tuos,  qui  in  te  sunt,  et  non 
relinquent  in  te  lapidem  su- 
per lapidem:  eo  quod  non 
cogno  veris  tempus  visitatio- 
nis  tuse.  Et  ingressus  in 
templum,coepit  ej  icere  ven- 
dentes  in  illo,  et  ementes, 
dicens  illis:  Scriptum  est: 
Quia  domus  mea  domus 
orationis  est.  Vos  autem 
fecistis  illam  speluncam 
latronum.  Et  erat  docens 
quotidie  in  templo. 


and  beat  thee  flat  to  the  ground, 
and  thy  children  who  are  in 
thee:  and  they  shall  not  leave 
in  thee  a  stone  upon  a  stone: 
because  thou  hast  not  known 
the  time  of  thy  visitation. 
And  entering  into  the  temple, 
he  began  to  cast  out  them 
that  sold  therein,  and  them 
that  bought.  Saying  to  them: 
It  is  written:  My  house  is  the 
house  of  prayer:  but  ye  have 
made  it  a  den  of  thieves.  And 
he  was  teachiug  daily  in  the 
temple.  *\  t  ' 

The  passage  just  read  to  us  from  the  holy  Gospel 
takes  us  back  to  the  day  of  our  Lord's  triumphant 
entry  into  Jerusalem.  This  triumph,  which  God  the 
Father  willed  should  be  offered  to  his  Son  before  the 
commencement  of  his  Passion,  was  not,  as  we  well 
know,  anything  of  a  recognition  of  the  Messiah  made 
by  the  Synagogue.  Neither  the  meek  gentle  manners 
of  this  King,  who  came  to  the  daughter  of  Sion  seated 
on  an  ass  j1  nor  his  merciful  severity  upon  the  pro- 
faners  of  the  Temple ;  nor  his  farewell  teachings  in 
his  Father's  House, — could  open  the  eyes  of  men 
who  were  determined  to  keep  them  shut  against  the 
light  of  salvation  and  peace.  Not  even  the  tears  of 
the  Son  of  Man,  then,  could  stay  God's  vengeance  ; 
there  is  a  time  for  justice,  and  the  Jews  were  re- 
solved it  should  come  to  them. 

How  loudly  had  not  the  Prophets  spoken  to  them, 
in  God's  name  !  Wo  to  the  provoking  and  redeemed 
City !  She  hath  not  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  her 
God.  Her  princes  are  in  the  midst  of  her  as  roaring 
lions;  her  judges  are  evening  wolves;  her  prophets  are 
senseless, — men  without  faith  ;  her  priests  have  defiled 
the  sanctuary;    they  have  acted  unjustly  against  the 


1  Zach.  ix.  9. 


mass.  237 

law  (they  have  violated  it).1  Crush  the  City  as  in  a 
mortar!2  Go  through  the  City,  and  strike!  let  not 
your  eye  spare,  nor  be  ye  moved  to  pity !  Utterly 
destroy  old  and  young,  maidens,  children,  and  women, 
— yea,  destroy  all  that  are  not  marked  upon  their  fore- 
heads with  thau  !  And  begin  ye  at  my  sanctuary  ; 
slay  the  priests,  and  the  ancients ;  defile  the  House 
(my  Temple),  and  fill  its  courts  with  the  bodies  of  the 
slain  /3 

Alas !  precedence  in  chastisement  was  richly  due 
to  those  princes  of  the  people,  who  had  had  precedence 
in  crime ;  it  was  due  to  those  priests  and  ancients, 
who  had  decreed  the  death  of  the  Just  One,  and 
driven  the   multitude   to   cry   out:    Crucify   Him!* 
Jealous  of  the  miracles  of  the  Man-God,  they  said  in 
their  perfidious  hypocrisy  :  If  tee  let  him  alone,  (doing 
all  these  miracles,)  all  men  will  believe  in  him,  and  the 
Romans  will  come  and  take  away  our  City  and  nation.* 
God  has  turned  their  impious  diplomacy  against  them. 
But,  as  far  as  they  themselves  are  concerned,  they 
will  have  their  way, — not  one  of  them  will  see  the 
Romans ;  for,  before  the  arrival  of  the  legions,  John 
of  Gischala,  and  Simon  the  son  of  Gioras  will  have 
annihilated  this  deicidal  aristocracy,  hated  both  of 
heaven  and  earth.     When,  after   the  war  is  over, 
Titus  shall  enter  into  Rome,  these  two  brigand-chiefs, 
and  prime-movers  of  the  war,  shall  adorn  his  triumph ; 
they  shall  be  the  substitutes  of  the  nobles  of  Juda 
before  the  conqueror's  chariot.     Two  bandits,  repre- 
sentatives of  Jerusalem,  in  the  streets  of  Rome,  her 
rival !  what  a  divine  retaliation  for  the  two  thieves, 
which  the  Synagogue  gave  as  an  escort  to  its  King 
on  the  Dolorous  Way,  and  made  them  his  crucified 
fellows  on  Calvary ! — But,  let  us  resume  the  sequel 
of  events,  and  give  them  as  briefly  as  the  subject 
permits. 

1  Soph.  iii.  1-4  ;  i.  9.     3  Ezech.  ix.  4-7.  5  St.  John,  xi.  47-53. 

2  Ibid.  11.  4  St.  Matth.  xxvii.  20 


238  NINTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

After  the  rupture  with  Borne,  and  the  retreat  of 
Cestius  Gallus,  the  government  of  Jerusalem  had  been 
intrusted  to  the  high-priest  Ananus,1  brother-in-law 
to  Caiphas,  and  last  of  the  five  sons  of  the  high- priest 
Annas,  who  succeeded  each  other  in  the  office  of  high- 
priest.  By  a  visible  dispensation  of  God's  justice, 
the  family,  the  guiltiest  of  all  in  the  crime  of  the  Cru- 
cifixion, found  itself  at  the  head  of  the  nation  when 
the  fatal  hour  came  :  it  was  impossible,  with  this,  to 
mistake  the  meaning  of  God's  vengeance  upon  his 
people.  Independently  of  the  enormous  crime,  whose 
responsibility  rested  on  his  race,  Ananus  had  a  per- 
sonal sin  to  atone  for, — the  death  of  St.  James  the 
Less,  who  had  been  martyred,  by  his  orders,  in  the 
year  62.  Rationalist  or  Saducee  like  his  kin,  he 
deplored  the  war,  and  would  have  been  glad  to  have 
seen  peace  restored  ;2  but  he  could  not  shirk  the  obli- 
gation his  office  obliged  him  to,  of  organising  the 
defence.  Ruler  most  unworthy,  yet  ruler  he  was  ; 
and  therefore,  as  the  Prophet  Isaias  expresses  it,  this 
whole  ruin  was  under  his  hand,* — it  was  all  under 
his  management ; — necessarily,  it  would,  when  it 
came,  fall  on  him  and  crush  him. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  fanatics,  who  had  insti- 
gated the  rebellion,  and  got  the  name  of  "  Zealots," 
became  dissatisfied  with  the  way  in  which  Ananus 
was  managing  affairs  :  so,  they  revolted  against  him, 
and  put  to  death  the  most  illustrious  men  of  the  City. 
Re-enforced  by  all  the  enthusiasts  of  other  towns,  and 
by  the  highway-robbers  who  were  daily  flocking  to 
Jerusalem, — they  made  themselves  masters  of  the 
Temple.  Out  of  hatred  for  the  ancient  priestly 
families,  they  changed  the  order  of  offering  sacrifice. 
They  put  the  office  of  high-priest  on  a  peasant,  who 
happened  to  be  a  descendant  of  Aaron's  family,  but 
was  so  unfitted  for  the  dignity,  that  he  did  not  even 
know  what  was  meant  by  a  priest.4 
1  Jos. debell.ii.  20etseq.  2lbid.iv.5.  3Is.  iii.6.  4Jos.  Debell.iv.3. 


MASS.  239 

About  this  same  time,  the  wreck  of  the  Galilean 
bands,  headed  by  John  of  Gischala,  occasioned  the 
first  defeats,  and  excited  the  people  to  exasperation ; 
they  made  common  cause  with  the  rebels,  and  increased 
their  fury  against  all  whom  they  suspected  of  an  in- 
clination to  treat  with  Rome.  The  Zealots  were  hard 
pressed  by  the  troops  of  Ananus,  and  had  already 
been  forced  back  into  the  inner  Temple ;  on  the  advice 
of  John  of  Gischala,  they  called  the  wild  Idumean 
herdsmen  to  come  to  their  aid.  These  fierce  auxiliaries 
came  on  Jerusalem  in  the  thick  of  a  storm  that  was 
raging  during  the  night ;  they  found  the  watchmen 
asleep,  and  put  them  to  death.  The  very  earth,  says 
Joseph  us,  had  shook  at  their  approach;  and,  on  the 
evening  before  their  arrival,  had  been  heard  to  moan.1 
Up  to  the  morning,  amidst  violent  wind  and  rain  and 
lightning,  howling  themselves  as  if  to  add  to  the  din 
of  the  tempest,  amidst  the  shouts  of  the  wounded,  and 
the  screams  of  women, — they  pitilessly  murdered 
every  one  they  met.  When,  at  length,  day-light 
appeared,  it  revealed  the  horrors  of  the  previous  night ; 
eight  thousand  five  hundred  dead  bodies  were  lying 
on  the  ground,  and  the  blood  was  running  in  streams 
all  round  the  Temple.  The  corpse  of  'Ananus,  after 
being  insulted,  stripped,  trodden  on,  was  given  as 
food  to  the  dogs.  The  following  days,  twelve  thou- 
sand men,  in  the  vigour  of  health,  and  picked  out  of 
the  most  distinguished  families,  were  also  put  to 
death  by  the  Idumeans,  either  by  torture  or  by  other 
means.  As  soon  as  they  had  left,  the  Zealots  became 
masters  of  the  City,  and  were  guilty  of  cruelties  even 
greater  than  those  exercised  by  the  Idumeans.  All 
those,  whose  independent  character,  or  influence,  or 
noble  birth,  excited  suspicions,  were  at  once  mas- 
sacred, nor  were  their  friends  or  relatives  allowed  to 
bury,  or  mourn  over,  them.  The  lower  classes,  the 
poor,  and  the  unknown,  were  the  only  ones  to  escape 
with  their  lives. 

1  Jos.  De  bell.  iv.  4. 


240  NINTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  justice  of  God  overtook  the  princes  of  Juda.1 
Their  blood,  mingled  with  the  dust, — their  unburied 
bodies,  lying  as  dung  upon  the  streets,2 — would  all 
this  remind  Sion  of  those  prophecies  which  had 
foretold  these  days  of  tribulation  and  anguish,  these 
days  of  bitterness  for  the  mighty  and  the  strong?3 
The  christians  of  Jerusalem,  who  were  then  shelter- 
ing beyond  the  Jordan,  would  remember,  if  no  one 
else  did,  the  inspired  words  which  their  Bishop,  St. 
James,  had  written,  eight  years  before,  to  the  twelve 
tribes  who  were  dispersed  throughout  the  world:4 
Go  to !  now,  ye  rich  men  !  weep  and  howl  for  your 
miseries  that  shall  come  upon  you  !  Your  riches  are 
putrifiecl ;  your  treasure  is  a  store  of  wrath.  Ye 
have  feasted;  but  your  feasts  have  but  nourished  you 
for  the  day  of  slaughter.  Ye  have  condemned,  and 
put  to  death  the  just  one,  and  he  resisteth  you  not 
*  *  *  But  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  near.6 
It  was  truly  the  Lord,  who  was  avenging  his  own 
cause ; fi  and  Vespasian  was  well  aware  of  it,  when 
he  thus  answered  those  who  urged  him  to  take 
advantage  of  all  these  troubles,  and  attack  the  city : 
"  God  is  a  better  general  than  I :  let  us  leave  him  to 
"  deliver  up  the  Jews  to  the  Romans  without  any 
"  trouble  on  our  side,  and  give  us  victory  without  our 
"  incurring  any  risk.7 

Jerusalem  was  then  but  in  the  beginning  of  her 
woes,  and  her  civil  strifes.  The  ambitious  character 
of  John  of  Gischala  did  not  allow  him  to  be  long  at 
peace  with  the  Zealots.  He  separated  himself  from 
them  ;  and  to  the  Galileans,  who  supported  his  cause, 
he  gave  permission  to  do  whatsoever  they  pleased. 
To  pillage  and  murder,  were  added  the  frightful 
excesses  of  that  half  idolatrous  race,  which,  in  the 


1  Is.  iii.  14.  3  Ibid.  14-16  ;  Ezcch.  xxiv.  3-5.    5  Ibid.  v.  1-8. 

3  Soph.  i.  8,  17.     4  St.  James,  i.  1.  Jerera.  v.  5,  9. 

7  Jos.  De  bello.  iv.  6. 


MASS.  241 

days  of  the  Assyrian  Kings,  had  been  substituted  for 
the  tribes  of  Israel  ;l  it  had  borrowed  from  Judaism 
little  better  than  a  mass  of  superstition,  which  it 
mingled  with  the  customs  and  vices  of  its  prede- 
cessors. Then  was  the  daughter  of  Sion  compelled  to 
witness  and  endure  the  abominations,  wherewith  the 
Prophets  of  the  Most  High  had  threatened  her. 
Humbled  and  indignant,  the  unhappy  City  would 
fain  have  shaken  off  the  yoke.2 

In   those,  days,  a  celebrated   brigand  was  laying 
Idumea  waste;  towns  and  villages  were  destroyed, 
houses  were  pulled  down  or  burnt ;  and,  according 
to  the  prophecy  of  Abdias,3  he  was  ransacking  Edom 
through  and  through,  right  to  the  very  core.     His 
name  was  Simon,  son  of  Gioras,  what  with  slaves, 
criminals,  outlaws,  and  malcontents  of  every  party, 
he  had   got  together  upwards   of  twenty  thousand 
well  armed  men,  not  counting  other  forty  thousand  who 
followed  him.    This  was  the  strange  Messiah,  on  whom 
Jerusalem  cast   her  eyes  for  help  in   her  trouble  ! 
A  deputation,  headed  by  a  high-priest,  waited  on 
this   son   of    Gioras,    begging    him    to   accept    the 
sovereignty.     He  deigned  to  consent  to  their  wishes ! 
Proud  and  haughty,  says  Josephus,4  he  graciously 
allowed  Sion  to  offer  him  her  suppliant  homage.    He 
was  led  into  the  city  of  David,  amidst  the  enthusiastic 
acclamations    of  the   people,   who  hailed   as    their 
protector  and  saviour  Simon  the  murderer,  Simon 
the  brigand  !  0  Jesus,  Son  of  David  and  Son  of  God, 
how  art  thou  not  avenged  by  all  this !  They  wished 
it  to  be ;  they  themselves  had  passed  the  sentence  : 
Not  Him,  but  Barabbas  !5  The  choice  of  the  children 
was  in  keeping  with  the  preference  entertained  by 
their  fathers.     Bar   Gioras, — worthy  descendant  of 
Barabbas, — once  he  was  master  of  the  City,  treated 

1  4  Kings,  xv.  29  ;  xvii.  6,  18,  23-41.       *  Abdias,  5,  6. 
*  Jos.  De  bell.  iv.  7,  9.  *  Ubi  supra. 

6  St.  JohD,  xviii.  40. 

VOL.  xi.  R 


242  NINTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

alike,  both  them  that  had  invited  him  and  them  that 
he  had  been  invited  to  reduce  to  order, — that  is,  he 
treated  them  all  as  enemies.  Day  and  night  was 
the  massacre  kept  up  by  his  savage  horde,  until  every 
man  of  worth  or  credit  in  Jerusalem  was  made  away 
with.1 

Meanwhile,  the  Galileans,  driven  back  from  Sion 
and  the  lower  town  by  the  new-comers,  had  retreated 
to  the  Temple,  of  which  they  occupied  the  first 
inclosure.  The  Zealots  had  grown  more  than  ever 
discontented  with  John  of  Gischala,  and  made  the 
inner  Temple  their  fortified  place  of  refuge.  They 
were  less  numerous  than  the  two  other  parties,  but 
their  position  was  far  preferable,  for  it  was  on  the 
very  summit  of  the  holy  mount.  Then,  too,  they  had 
provisions  in  abundance,  seeing  that  all  the  first 
fruits  and  offerings  made  to  the  Temple  were  under 
their  absolute  control.  They  passed  their  time  in 
feasting  and  drunken  re  veilings.  Little  cared  they 
for  the  stones  hurled  by  the  Galilean  captapults  ;  nor 
were  they  in  the  least  troubled,  at  finding  that  these 
huge  missiles  struck  the  priests  when  at  the  altar, 
thus  mingling  the  blood  of  the  sacrificers  with  that 
of  the  victims,  and  strewing  the  sacred  courts  with 
the  bodies  of  dead  or  dying.  Sacrilege  and  drunken- 
ness,— such  was  the  end  of  those  descendants  of  the 
austere  Pharisees ! 2  Here  again, — Jesus,  their 
crucified  victim,  was  avenged. 

Whilst  the  abomination  of  desolation,  foretold  by 
Daniel,  was  standing  in  the  Holy  Place,3  John  of 
Gischala  saw  that  the  Zealots  were  too  stupified  by 
their  feastings  to  cause  him  any  further  alarm ;  he 
fell  on  the  City,  like  a  bird  of  prey,  there  to  find  the 
necessary  provisions ;  and  out  of  hatred  for  Simon, 
he  destroyed  by  fire  all  he  could  not  carry  away. 
Simon,  instead  of  quenching  the  fire,  extended  it  in 

1  Jos.  De  bell.  vii.  8.        2  Jos.  Ibid.  v.  1.     8  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  15. 


mass.  243 

every  part  where  John  was  likely  to  pass ;  hoping, 
by  this  means,  to  deprive  the  Galileans  of  all  further 
victualling.  Immense  stores  of  corn  and  other 
provisions  had  been  amassed  by  the  Jewish  leaders, 
as  a  necessary  resource  in  case  of  a  future  siege  : — 
but  all  were  now  destroyed  by  these  two  men,  who 
were  greater  enemies  to  their  country,  than  the 
Romans  themselves.  Thus  was  spent  the  year  69 ; 
a  year  of  respite  which  Rome, — torn  as  she  was  by 
factions  of  her  own, — was  compelled  to  allow,  and 
which  might  have  been  of  such  incalculable  benefit 
to  the  Jews.1 

"With  the  exception  of  armed  troops,  there  were  no 
other  inhabitants  in  Jerusalem  but  women  and  old 
men.  The  Passover  of  70  was  drawing  near,  and  it 
produced  a  sort  of  truce  among  the  several  parties. 
The  city  began  to  be  again  crowded,  and  with  a 
population  far  exceeding  the  ordinary  number.  The 
Romans  had  pillaged  the  Jewish  provinces ;  Sion  had 
been  even  more  cruelly  treated,  and  by  her  own 
children :  and  yet,  in  this  year  70,  there  assembled, 
within  this  city  of  final  vengeance,  as  though  it  were 
the  whole  nation,  and  that  from  every  quarter  of  the 
globe.2  It  had  been  the  same  at  the  time  of  our 
Jesus'  crucifixion ; — the  whole  Jewish  people  seemed 
as  though  it  insisted  on  witnessing  the  consummation 
of  the  deicide ;  when  over,  the  Apostles  besought 
them  to  confess  their  having  been  accomplices  in  the 
crime  of  Calvary, — but  the  preaching  was  fruitless ; 
then  there  had  been  the  terrific  lesson  of  recent 
events, — and  that  too,  was  unable  to  open  their  eyes. 
As  it  was  in  the  days  of  that  Pasch,  so  salutary  to 
mankind,  but  so  fatal  to  Juda ;  and,  as  it  was  at  the 
subsequent  Pentecost, — so  now,  there  were  Jews 
congregated  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven?  not, 
indeed,  to  hear  an  Apostle  preaching  to  them  to  do 

1  Jos.  ubi  supra.  2  Jos.  De  bell.  vi.  9.  3  Acts,  ii.  5. 


244  :nisth  stjkday  aftek  pentecost. 

penance,1  but  to  undergo  that  which.  Moses  had  fore- 
told, and  St.  Peter  had  recalled  to  their  memory, — 
the  extermination  of  all  such,  as  should  refuse  to 
hearken  to  the  Messiah  of  the  Lord.2 

As  the  Man-God  had  said,  the  terrible  day  came 
suddenly,  and  as  a  snare,  upon  this  immense  assem- 
blage of  people.3  The  empire  was  in  the  hands  of 
Yespasian  ;  the  prosperous  fortune  of  Rome  was 
re-established  on  the  whole  of  the  frontiers ;  and 
Titus  had  just  reached  Cesarea,  with  orders  to  put 
an  end  to  the  eastern  question.  He  sent  word  to  the 
legions,  then  in  Judea,  to  effect,  from  the  respective 
points  they  occupied,  a  joint  concentration  towards 
the  capital.  "When  the  tenth  legion,  marched  from 
Jericho  and  was  seen  encamped  on  Mount  Olivet, — 
that  is,  on  the  very  place  where  Jesus  wept  as  he 
looked  on  Jerusalem,  and  foretold  the  siege  which 
was  to  be  its  ruin, — the  unexpected  arrival  of  the 
Romans  alarmed  the  pilgrims,  and  made  them  busy 
themselves  with  preparations  for  a  battle,  rather 
than  for  the  solemnization  of  thePasch.  The  several 
parties  agreed  to  forget,  at  least  for  a  day,  their  own 
animosities,  and  unite  all  their  forces  together ;  they 
made  two  desperate  sallies,  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
lodging the  enemy  from  the  Mount ;  but,  each  time, 
they  were  repelled.4 

The  Pasch  which  is  about  to  be  celebrated  is,  as 
ever,  and  now  more  than  ever,  the  passover  of  the 
Lord ;  but  the  Lord  is  no  longer  leading  the  sons  of 
Jacob  to  their  deliverance  by  it.  Juda  has  made 
himself  the  enemy  of  the  Lamb,  whose  blood  should 
be  the  sign  of  the  redeemed  of  the  Pasch.  Whilst 
the  blood  of  this  divine  Lamb  is  enriching  the  whole 
earth, — whilst  the  light  of  the  vanquisher  of  death  is 
illumining  the  whole  world, — Juda  is  there,  obstin- 
ately keeping  to   his  figures   and  shadows.      More 

1  Acts,  ii.  38.  3  St.  Luke,  xxi.  34,  35. 

2  Ibid.  iii.  22,  23.  4  Jos.  De  bell.  v.  2. 


mass.  245 

stiff-necked  than  the  Egyptian,  and  more  guilty  than 
Pharaoh,  he  would,  if  he  could,  hold  the  true  Israel 
in  the  trammels  of  his  own  slavish  law,  just  as  he 
once  vainly  tried  to  make  the  true  Son  of  God  an 
everlasting  prisoner  in  the  Tomb.  As  to  Jesus,  he 
has,  years  ago,  set  himself  free;  and  now,  more  ter- 
rible than  he  was  in  Mesraiim,  he  is  passing  over,  as 
the  avenger  both  of  himself  and  his  Church.  The 
Pasch, — the  feast  of  feasts,  whose  memory  is  every 
Sunday  brought  back  to  us, — is  now  about  to  receive 
its  final  completion.  On  the  Tuesday  of  our  Easter, 
we  were  saying:  "How  terrible  will  be  the  Passage 
"  of  the  Lord  over  Jerusalem,  when  the  sword  of  the 
"  Roman  Legions  shall  destroy  a  whole  people  !"  l 

Wo  to  thee,  0  Ariel f  Ariel,  the  city  which  David, 
took — the  City  where  God  had  his  Temple  and  Altar. 
— Thy  years  are  passed ;  thy  solemnities  are  at  an 
end  !2  Take  away  from  me  the  tumult  of  thy 
songs  !  Psalms,  in  thy  mouth,  have  lost  all  their 
meaning.  I  will  not  hear  the  canticles  of  thy  harp* 
The  song  of  lamentation  is  heard  in  Israel,  for  his 
house  is  fallen.4  In  every  street  there  shall  be 
wailing ;  and  in  all  places,  they  shall  say : 
Wo!  Wo!" 

This  prophetic  cry  of  Wo, — this  most  gloomy  fore- 
boding that  all  the  threats  uttered  in  Scripture 
against  Jerusalem  are  on  the  point  of  being  fulfilled, 
— was  forced  upon  the  inhabitants'  ears.  Ever  since 
the  feast  of  Tabernacles  of  the  year  G2,  an  unknown 
peasant, — the  husbandman,  as  the  prophet  Amos 
called  him,  a  man  skilful  in  lamentation,6 — has 
been  ceaselessly  pacing  the  streets  of  the  wretched 
City,  crying  out  day  and  night:  "  A  voice  from  the 
"  East,  a  voice  from  the  West,  a  voice  from  the  four 
"  winds,  a  voice  against  Jerusalem   and   the  Holy 


1  See  our  first  Vol.  of  "  Paschal  Time,"  p.  226. 
1  Is.  xxix.  1.       3  Amos,  v.  23.       4  Ibid.  1.       5  Ibid.  16.       6  Ibid. 


246  NINTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

fC  House,  a  voice  against  bridegrooms  and  the  brides, 
"  a  voice  against  all  this  people !  "  Tried,  ques- 
tioned, scourged  even  till  his  flesh  was  torn  to  pieces 
and  his  bones  laid  bare, — nothing  could  prevent  him 
from  continuing  his  most  unwelcome  work.  On  the 
festival  days  above  all,  this  precursor  of  the  ven- 
geance of  the  Son  of  Man,  redoubled  the  energy  of 
his  plaintive  enthusiasm,  which  gave  a  superhuman 
emphasis  to  his  cry  of  Wo.  To  every  word  of  kind- 
ness or  reproach,  to  every  act  of  charity  or  cruelty, 
he  gave  neither  thanks  nor  plaints,  but  went  on  with 
the  same  ditty  and  words  :  "  Wo  !  Wo  !  to  Jerusa- 
lem ! "  And  thus  he  continued  for  seven  years  and 
five  months,  without  his  voice  being  altered  by  weak- 
ness or  hoarseness.  During  the  early  days  of  the 
siege  he  was  seen  by  the  Romans  running  to  and 
fro  along  the  walls,  shouting:  "Wo  to  the  City! 
"  Wo  to  the  people  !  Wo  to  the  Holy  House  !"  At 
length,  he  added  :  "  Wo  !  wo  to  me !  "  Immediately 
a  stone,  thrown  from  one  of  the  engines,  smote  him, 
and  he  died  on  the  spot.1 

Jerusalem  has  drunk  the  cup  of  madness,  and 
nothing  seems  to  impress  her  ;  she  is  drunk  with  the 
cup  of  God's  wrath ;  yea,  she  has  drained  it  to  the 
dregs.2  What  a  terrific  day,  this  last  celebration  of 
the  Jewish  Pasch !  The  historian  Josephus  tells  us 
what  it  is, — sacrilegious,  bloody,  and  noisy  with  the 
shouts,  which  even  the  enemy  could  hear,  of  the 
strife  of  the  dissentient  factions,  for  all  are  revived. 
Taking  advantage  of  the  gates  being  opened  to  the 
pilgrims,  some  Galileans,  disguised,  get  into  the  inner 
Temple;  where,  throwing  aside  their  cloaks,  and 
displaying  their  weapons,  they  attack  the  crowd  that 
stands  round  the  altar.  They  beat  and  murder; 
then,  trampling  on  the  dying  and  the  dead,  they 
drive  the  people  outside  the  courts.     Meanwhile,  the 

1  Jos.  De  bell.  vi.  5.  2  Is.  xxix.  9-14 ;  li.  17. 


mass.  247 

Zealots  who  were  taken  unawares,  rushed,  in  dismay, 
iuto  the  subterranean  caverns  of  the  Temple.1  What 
a  Pasch !  What  a  Feast !  worthy,  indeed,  of  God's 
hatred  and  rejection.2  Unhappy  feasters,  that  have 
come  from  the  ends  of  the  world  to  this  solemnity  ! 
how  is  it  that  they  forget  to  apply  the  words  of  the 
prophet  ?  Wo  to  them  that  desire  the  day  of  the 
Lord!  To  what  end  is  it  for  you?  This  day  of  the 
Lord  is  darkness  and  not  light.  You  shall  be  as  a 
man  who,  fleeing  from  the  face  of  a  lion,  and  a  bear 
should  meet  him;  or,  as  one  that  entering  into  the 
house,  and,  icJien  he  leaneth  ivith  his  hand  upon  the 
wall,  a  serpent  should  bite  him?  Terrible  prophecy  ! 
how  strangely  is  it  not  verified  : — the  Romans  are 
yonder  in  their  camps  ;  Simon  is  in  the  City ;  John 
of  Gischala  is  in  the  Temple,  its  sole  master ! 

As  in  the  days  of  Jeremias,  so  now  :  the  sword 
and  famine, — it  is  hard  to  say,  which  is  the  busier 
to  make  this  multitude  its  prey ; 4  for,  owing  to  the 
previous  depredations,  famine  had  made  itself  felt 
from  the  beginning  of  the  siege.     Each  day  adds  to 
its  intensity,  and  urges  on  the  savage  instincts  of  the 
armed  ruffians  to  attack  all  who  are  not  of  their 
party.     It  is  not  hatred  only  that  now  fills  Sion  with 
murder ;   to  rob,  or  to  get  something  to  keep  one 
from  starvation,  these  are  additional  motives  to  make 
such   men   grudge   each   other's   existence.      Under 
plea  that  they  were  conspirators,  Simon  and  John 
had  the  rich  summoned  to  their  respective  tribunals  ; 
and   then,    adding    insult    to    injustice,   these    two 
wretches,   who,   in   the  intervals    between   fighting 
against   the   Romans,    are    carrying   on   their   own 
deadly  feud, — these  two  judges,  having  first  seized 
the  property  of  their  victims,  send  them  to  the  second 
bar,5  under  pretence  that  they  wished  to  show  each 

1  Jos.  De  bell.  v.  3.        3  Ibid.  18,  19.  5  Jos  De  bell.  v.  10. 

2  Amos,  v.  21.  4  Jerem.  xiv.  18. 


248  NINTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

other  a  mutual  kindly  feeling ;  giving  the  one  who 
has  nothing  to  steal,  the  option  of  condemning  to 
death.  It  is  scarcely  forty  years  ago,  that  in  these 
very  streets, — through  which  the  Jewish  aristocracy 
is  being  ignominiously  dragged  from  Simon  to  John, 
and  from  John  to  Simon, — there  was  another  Victim 
who,  amidst  the  approving  ridicule  of  the  leaders  of 
the  nation,  was  made  the  pledge  of  a  mock  recon- 
ciliation, and,  with  a  fool's  uniform  put  on  Him,  was 
sent  back  from  Herod  to  Pilate,  there  to  await 
judgment! 1 

Whilst  these  tyrants  were  thus  living  on  the 
public  distress,  there  were  hundreds  of  starved 
creatures,  whom  hunger  drove  to  go  forth,  by  night, 
into  the  fields,  and  there  try  to  find  some  wild  herbs. 
If  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  these, 
unwilling  to  be  burdened  with  such  prisoners,  had 
them  crucified  within  sight  of  the  walls.  Five  hun- 
dred and  upwards  were  thus  captured  each  day ;  and, 
oh !  what  a  fearful  detail,  but  how  loud  in  its 
significance ! — all  this  was  done,  with  Calvary  opposite  ! 
and,  as  Josephus  tells  us,  there  was  not  room  enough 
to  plant  the  crosses,  nor  wood  enough  for  making 
them.2 

Titus  had  flattered  himself  that  the  taking  of 
Jerusalem  would  be  an  affair  of  a  few  days.  He,  of 
course,  disregarded  the  prophecies  which  declared 
that  the  deicide  City  was  to  be  compassed  round  with 
a  trench;  and  preferred  to  use  negotiations  and  a 
series  of  assaults,  rather  than  be  detained  by  the 
tedious  operation  of  a  blockade.  But,  he  was,  of 
course,  mistaken ;  his  messengers  received,  in  answer 
to  their  parleys  of  peace,  nothing  but  insults  and 
arrows ;  and,  as  to  assaults,  all  the  bravery  of  his 
legions  was  powerless  against  the  fortresses  where 
the  factions   were    protected.      Two    months    thus 

1  St.  Luke,  xxiii.  7-12.  2  Jos.  De  bell.  v.  11. 


mass.  249 

passed  away  in  useless  attempts;  all  that  the  Homans 
had  possession  of,  was  the  lower  town,  which  the 
Jewish  contesting  parties  had  already  reduced  to 
ruins;  but  Sion  and  Moriah, — these  still  held  up 
their  heads  in  defiance  against  the  determined  in- 
vaders. There  was  nothing,  then,  to  do,  but  make 
up  their  minds  to  defer  Rome  and  her  pleasures  to 
some  later  season,1  and  encircle  Jerusalem  with  that 
terrible  trench,  which  the  Gospel  had  said  must  be 
cast  about  her.  The  literal  following  out  of  the  plan 
traced  by  God  got  the  better  of  Titus'  impatience. 
He  set  his  legions  to  the  work ;  they  must  change 
their  manual  labour,  and,  instead  of  bows  and 
arrows,  they  must  handle  pickaxe  and  spade.  To 
have  seen  them  at  work,  one  would  have  said  they 
were  thinking  of  Jesus'  words,  for  they  were  fulfilling 
them  as  though  they  were  the  most  devoted  of  his 
servants ;  Josephus  would  have  it,  that  they  were 
animated  by  a  divine  influence.2  In  the  brief  space 
of  three  days,  they  completed  an  earth- wall  measur- 
ing a  little  over  five  miles  round, — a  work,  which 
would,  ordinarily,  have  occupied  several  months. 
God  had  thus  spoken  by  the  prophet  Isaias  :  i"  will 
make  a  trench  about  Ariel;  and  it  shall  be  in  sorrow 
and  mourning  ;  and  it  shall  be  to  me  as  akiel.  I  will 
make  a  circle  round  about  thee  (0  Jerusalem),  and 
will  cast  np  a  rampart  against  thee,  and  raise  up  bul- 
warks to  besiege  thee.3  Truly,  Jerusalem  was  thus 
made  as  an  Ariel  to  Jehovah,  that  is,  one  immense 
altar  of  countless  victims. 

The  famine,  by  this  time,  was  intensely  increased ; 
for  every  exit  into  the  fields  was  now  closed  against 
the  unfortunate  creatures,  who,  till  then,  had  been 
able  to  eke  out  their  miserable  existence  by  picking 
up,  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  a  few  seeds  or  roots.* 

1  Tac.  Hist.  t.  11.  3  Is.  xxix.  2,  3. 

2  Jos.  De  bell.  v.  12.  *  Lament,  v.  9,  10. 


250  NINTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

A  bushel  of  wheat  was  sold  for  a  talent  (about  240 
pounds  sterling).  Those  who  could  afford  it,  gave 
their  costliest  treasures  for  a  morsel  of  bread  ;  but, 
as  to  those  who  had  nothing  to  give,  they  must  drag 
the  sewers,  in  the  hope  of  rinding  food.  The  vilest 
rubbish  was  devoured  with  avidity.  Filth,  too  foul 
to  have  a  name,  was  hidden  as  though  it  were  a 
treasure,  for  which  husband  quarrelled  with  his  wife, 
and  mothers  grudged  it  their  children.2  The  factions 
had,  thus  far,  laughed  at  the  people's  starvation; 
but  they  soon  began  themselves  to  feel  the  gnawings 
of  famine;  and  then,  they  furiously  attacked  those 
who  were  reported  as  having  something  to  eat.  If 
a  man  were  sinking,  he  was  said  to  be  feigning  the 
weakness  of  death,  in  order  to  prevent  search  being 
made  for  his  victuals  ;  if  he  had  just  strength  enough 
to  walk  a  few  steps,  it  was  taken  as  an  indication 
that  he  had  some  hidden  eatables  about  him.  All 
were  savagely  tortured  to  make  them  own  the  imputed 
crime  of  having  something  yet  to  live  on.  Like 
famished  dogs, — it  is  the  expression  used  both  by 
the  historian  and  the  Psalmist,3 — they  ran  wildly 
through  the  city,  knocking  down  the  doors  of  the 
suspected,  ferreting  in  every  nook  and  hole,  and 
returning  two  or  three  times  within  the  hour.  A 
savoury  smell  was,  one  day,  perceived  coming  from 
a  house,  which  had  been  thus  frequently  visited ; 
this  was  more  than  enough  for  a  further  search.  In 
they  rushed  ;  a  woman  was  there  ;  they  threaten  her 
with  death,  unless  she  at  once  declares  where  is  her 
feast :  "  It  is  my  son,"  she  replied  ;  "  there  are  the 
remnants !  "  The  woman  was  Mary,  daughter  of 
Eleazar ;  once  rich,  and  of  a  noble  family,  she,  mad- 
dened by  hunger,  had  murdered  her  infant  child,  and 
had  fed  on  his  flesh.4 

1  Lament,  i.  11.      2  Deut.  xxviii.  56,  57  ;  Jos.  De  bell.  v.  10-12. 

3  Jos.  Ibid.  vi.  3  ;  Ps.  lviii.  7,  15,  16. 

4  Jos.  Ibid. ;  Deut.  xxviii.  53-56. 


MASS. 


251 


All  these  horrors  failed  to  subdue  the  ferocious 
obstinacy  of  John  of  Gischala  and  Simon  son  of 
Gioras.  In  spite,  however,  of  their  precautions,  and 
their  cruelties  towards  those  who  were  suspected  of 
meditating  an  escape,  there  were,  every  day,  scores 
who,  by  throwing  themselves  down  the  walls,  were 
able  to  reach  the  Koman  camp.  Deeply  moved  at 
the  sight  of  so  much  misery,  Titus  received  them 
kindly,  and  gave  them  their  liberty.  But,  adds 
Josephus,  "  God  had  condemned  the  whole  of  this 
"people,  and  turned  the  very  means  of  safety  into 
"  occasion  of  destruction."1  Many  of  these  poor  fugi- 
tives were  so  exhausted,  on  reaching  the  camp,  that 
they  died  on  taking  the  food  which  had  been  too  long 
denied  them.  A  still  greater  number  fell  victims  to 
the  Arabs  and  Syrians,  who  followed  the  Eoman 
army  ;  for,  a  report  having  been  circulated,  that  some 
of  the  Jews  had  swallowed  their  gold  before  leaving 
Jerusalem,  in  order  the  more  effectually  to  hide  it, 
these  wild  auxiliaries,  strangers  to  the  discipline  of 
the  legions,  and  born  enemies  of  the  Jewish  people, 
ensnared  the  unfortunate  fugitives,  and  cut  them  into 
pieces,  hoping  to  find  what  would  satisfy  their  mons- 
trous avarice.  During  one  single  night,  there  were 
two  thousand  found  lying  thus  embowelled.2  How 
all  this  forces  us  to  think  of  the  death  of  Judas,3  and 
of  the  punishment  of  his  deicidal  betrayal !  And,  had 
not  all  this  people  imitated  that  traitorous  apostle  ? 
He,  the  Iscariot,  had  delivered  up  the  Son  of  Man  to 
the  chief  priests  and  leaders  of  the  Jews ;  the  Jews 
delivered  Him  up  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  the  Prophet 
Zacharias  makes  them  all  share  in  the  responsibility 
of  that  infamous  barter,  wherewith  began  the  sacred 
Passion  of  our  sweet  Jesus.4 

In  the  City,  the  ravages  of  the  famine  were  beyond 

1  Jos.  De  bell.  v.  13.  3  Acts,  i.  18, 

2  Jos.  J  bid.  *  Zach.  xi.  12,  13. 


252  NINTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

all  imagination.  Josephus  speaking  of  them,  uses, 
without  being  aware  of  it,  the  very  expression  of  our 
Redeemer:  "In  no  time,  did  any  other  city  ever 
"  suffer  such  miseries."1  In  the  space  of  a  few  months 
there  were  counted  six  hundred  thousand  dead  ;  and 
to  these,  burial,  of  one  sort  or  other,  was  given ;  as 
to  the  rest,  they  could  not  be  numbered,  for  the  sur- 
vivors had  not  the  strength  needed  for  burying  them, 
and  they  were  left  to  rot  in  the  houses  or  streets. 

Meanwhile,  on  the  12th  of  July,  a  greater  trial 
than  all  this  befel  Jerusalem  and  the  whole  Jewish 
people: — for  want  of  victims,  the  continual  sacrifice 
was  taken  away,  as  in  the  days  of  Antiochus  ;2  but, 
this  time,  it  was  for  ever.  It  was  the  end, — the 
openly  declared  end  of  Mosaism  and  its  worship,  to 
be  henceforth  replaced,  and  without  dispute,  by  the 
Sacrifice  of  the  law  of  love, — the  end,  with  but  the 
brief  interval  of  a  siege  and  a  war,  which  had  then 
no  other  object  to  achieve,  and,  therefore,  no  further 
reason  for  its  continuance.  An  immense  grief, — a 
grief  that  admitted  no  compensation, — seized  the 
hearts  of  the  Jewish  people,  who,  up  to  the  very  last, 
had  lived  on  the  empty  hope  fostered  by  the  false 
prophets.3 

The  fool-hardy  obstinacy  of  Simon  and  John  re- 
jected, even  then,  the  proposals  of  Titus, — that  he 
would  spare  both  City  and  Temple.  Hostilities  were, 
therefore,  resumed, — implacably  and  pitilessly  re- 
sumed. But,  the  Jewish  soldiers  had  not  energy 
enough  to  keep  pace  with  the  fanaticism  of  their 
leaders ;  worn  out  by  famine,  they  had  not  the  un- 
flinching resistance  needed  for  repelling  the  sustained 
assaults  of  the  Romans.  Already,  the  Tower  of  An- 
tonia,  which  commanded  the  Temple,  was  in  the 
power  of  the  enemy,  and  each  day,  he   was  seen 


1  Jos.  De  bell.  v.  10;  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  21. 

3  Dan.  viii.  11-13.  3  Jos.  De  bell.  vi.  5. 


mass.  253 

closing  in  nearer  to  the  sacred  edifice.  Its  defenders 
resolved  on  one  last  effort;  roused  by  the  greatness 
of  their  misfortune,  they  rushed  through  the  vale  of 
Cedron,  and  made  a  desperate  charge  on  the  post  of 
Mount  Olivet,  [t  looked  as  though,  for  these  final 
engagements,  the  instinct  of  God's  vengeance,  which 
weighed  upon  them,  was  leading  them  to  this  place 
of  prophecy,  where  the  Son  of  Man  had  wept  over 
Jerusalem,  and  where,  as  we  have  already  said,  the 
first  battle  was  fought.  Repelled,  and  in  despair, 
they  returned  back  to  the  City,  which  they  were 
never  again  to  leave ;  then,  with  their  own  hands, 
setting  fire  to  the  outer  porticos  of  the  Temple,  they 
gave  the  first  inclosure  over  to  the  Romans. 

Titus,  however,  was  desirous,  above  all  things,  to 
save  the  Temple  ;  "  but,"  as  Josephus  observes, 
"  God  had,  for  certain,  long  ago  doomed  it  to  the  fire; 
«  *  *  *  *  although  the  flames  took  their  rise  from 
"  the  Jews  themselves,  and  were  occasioned  by  them, 
"  when  that  fatal  day  was  come."1  It  was  the  4th  of 
August,  in  the  year  70,  a  Sabbath-day,  and  the  anni- 
versary of  the  first  destruction  of  the  holy  place  under 
Nabuchodonosor.  The  guards  of  the  Temple,  ex- 
asperated by  suffering,  stupified  by  hunger,  attacked 
the  soldiers,  who,  by  Titus'  orders,  were  quenching 
the  fire  that  had  been  some  days  burning  at  the  outer 
portion  of  the  building.  They  were  soon  beaten  back 
into  the  Temple,  and,  this  time,  they  were  not  the 
only  ones  to  enter.  Whilst  they  were  falling  by 
hundreds  beneath  the  sword  of  the  Eomans,  now  un- 
expectedly made  masters  of  the  inner  inclosure, — one 
of  the  soldiers,  forgetting  the  orders  given  by  Titus, 
but,  as  Josephus  puts  it,  urged  on  by  a  divine  power,2, 
seizes  a  firebrand,  and  hurls  it,  through  a  window, 
into  one  of  the  rooms  adjoining  the  sanctuary.  The 
flame  bursts  forth,  and  spreads  ;  the  efforts  of  Titus 

1  Jos.  Ibid.  4.  2  Ibid. 


254  NINTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

to  stay  it  are  useless.  Simon's  soldiers  on  Mount 
Sion  see  it  rising  up  towards  the  sky.  At  this  fear- 
ful spectacle,  the  famished  and  wounded,  turning 
towards  the  falling  Temple,  forget  all  their  sufferings. 
From  these  thousands  of  dying  Jews,  all  of  them 
possessed  with  the  one  same  grief,  there  arises  a  loud 
scream  of  despair,  which  blending  with  the  shouts  of 
the  pagan  soldiers,  is  heard  even  on  the  mountains 
of  Perea,  beyond  the  Jordan  and  the  Dead  Sea. 
Mount  Moriah,  on  fire,  seems  as  though  its  very 
foundations  were  burning,  and  blood  is  flowing  enough 
to  quench  the  flames.  The  number  of  the  slain  is  so 
great,  that  the  ground  could  not  be  seen,  and  the 
soldiers,  as  they  marched,  had  to  trample  on  the 
dead.  The  Priests  who  have  mounted  on  the  roof  of 
their  Temple, — women  and  children  crouching  by 
thousands  in  its  galleries, — all  perish  in  the  flames, 
with  the  treasures  of  the  sanctuary.1 

John  of  Gischala,  gathering  together  his  few  re- 
maining followers,  had  escaped  between  the  enemy's 
battalions,  and  had  joined  Simon  in  the  high  portion 
of  the  city.  The  contest  continued  for  a  few  weeks 
longer,  but  it  was  the  effort  of  a  last  agony.  On  the 
1st  of  September,  Sion  was  taken,  plundered  and 
burnt  like  Moriah  and  the  lower  town.  The  predic- 
tion of  to-day's  Gospel  was  fulfilled.  Jerusalem, — 
beaten  flat  to  the  ground,  and  the  children  that  were  in 
her, — is  but  a  mass  of  smoking  ruins.  Eleven  hun- 
dred thousand  men  had  perished  during  the  siege. 
Of  the  ninety-seven  thousand  that  had  been  taken 
prisoners  during  the  whole  war,  seven  hundred  were 
picked  out  as  fit  to  grace  the  conqueror's  triumph  ; 
the  remainder,  (that  is  those  who  were  over  seventeen 
years  of  age,)  were  sent  to  the  mines,  or  reserved  for 
the  amphitheatre ;  the  others  supplied  the  slave- 
markets  of  the  empire  for  some  length  of  time.2 

1  Jos.  Ibid.  5.  2  Ibid.  9. 


MASS. 


255 


In  the  Offertory  of  to-day's  Mass,  the  Church  de- 
lights in  the  thought  that  her  children,  aided  by  the 
grace  of  her  divine  Spouse,  are  all  care  to  keep  the 
commandments  (the  justices)  of  their  Lord.  It  is 
this  obedience  of  theirs  which  renders  those  judgmen ts 
a  joy  and  a  sweetness  to  them,  whereas,  for  the 
synagogue,  they  were  so  fearful. 

OFFERTORY. 

The  justices  of  the  Lord  are  Justitise  Domini  rectal, 

right,    rejoicing   hearts;  and  lastificantes  corda,  et  judi- 

his  precepts  are  sweeter  than  cia  ejus  dulciora  super  mel 

honey  and  the  honey- comb  ;  et  favum  ;  nam  at  servus 

and  therefore  doth  thy  servant  tuus  custodit  ea. 
observe  them. 

The  Secret  is  a  prayer,  that  God  would  grant  us 
children  of  the  Church  the  grace  of  assisting  worthily 
at  the  holy  Sacrifice,  which  really  renews,  each  time 
it  is  offered,  the  work  of  our  salvation. 

SECRET. 

Grant  us,  O  Lord,  we  be-  Concede  nobis  quaesumus 
seech  thee,  frequently  and  Domine,  hasc  digne  fre- 
worthily  to  celebrate  these  quentare  mysteria:  quia, 
mysteries  :  for,  as  many  times  quoties  hujus  hostise  com- 
as this  commemorative  sacri-  memoratiocelebratur,opus 
fice  is  celebrated,  so  often  is  nostras  redemptionis  exer- 
the  work  of  our  redemption  cetur.  Per  Dominum. 
performed.    Through,  etc. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

The  Communion  Anthem  expresses  the  mystery  of 
divine  Union,  which  is  realised  in  the  Sacrament 
just  received. 

COMMUNION. 

He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and  Qui  manducatmeamcar- 

drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in  nem,  et  bibit  meum  sangui- 

me,  and  I  in  him,  saith  the  nem,  in  me  manet,  et  ego 

Lord.  in  eo,  dicit  Dominus. 


25Q 


NINTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


The  sanctifieation  of  each,  individual  member  of 
the  Church,  and  the  unity  of  the  social  body,  are  the 
two  fruits  of  these  sacred  Mysteries :  the  Church,  in 
her  Postcommunion,  asks  them  of  God. 


POSTCOMMUNION. 


Tui  nobis,  quaesumus  Do- 
mine,  commimio  sacramen- 
ti  et  purificationem  confe- 
rat,  et  tribuat  unitatem. 
Per  Dominum. 


May  the  participation  of 
this  thy  sacrament,  0  Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  both  purify 
us,  and  unite  us.  Through, 
etc. 


The  other  Postcommunion,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTLPHON    OF    THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Scriptum  est  enim:  Quia 
domus  mea  domus  orationis 
est  cunctis  gentibus:  vos 
autem  f  ecistis  illam  spelun- 
camlatronum:  eteratquo- 
tidie  docens  in  templo. 

OREMUS. 

Pateant  aures  misericor- 
diae  tuae,  Domine,  precibus 
supplicantium,  et  ut  peten- 
tibus  desiderata  concedas, 
fac  eos,  quae  tibi  sunt  pla- 
cita,  postulare.  Pi  r  Domi- 
num. 


For  it  is  written  :  My  house 
is  the  house  of  prayer,  unto 
all  nations  :  but  ye  have  made 
it  a  den  of  thieves.  And  he 
was  teaching  daily  in  the  tem- 
ple. 

LET  US   PRAY. 

May  the  ears  of  thy  mercy, 
O  Lord,  be  opened  to  the 
prayers  of  thy  suppliants:  and, 
that  thou  mayest  grant  to  thy 
petitioners  the  things  they  de- 
sire, make  them  to  ask  those 
that  are  agreeable  to  thee. 
Through,  etc. 


TENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST.  257 


THE    TENTH    SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  has  closed  that  portion 
of  the  prophetic  Scriptures  which  were  hased  on  the 
institutions  and  history  of  the  figurative  period.  The 
Altar  of  the  true  God,  built  by  Solomon  on  the  sum- 
mit of  Moriah,  was  the  authenticated  evidence  of  the 
true  religion,  to  those  who  were  then  living  under 
the  Law  of  expectation.  Even  after  the  promulga- 
tion of  the  New  Testament,  the  continued  existence 
of  that  Altar,  (the  only  one  heretofore  recognised  by 
the  Most  High  as  his  own,1)  was  some  sort  of  an 
excuse  for  such  of  the  Jews  as  were  obstinate  in 
clinging  to  the  old  order  of  things.  That  excuse  was 
taken  away,  when  the  Temple  was  so  destroyed,  as 
that  not  a  stone  was  left  on  stone  ;  and  the  blindest 
partisans  of  the  Mosaic  system  were  compelled  to 
acknowledge  the  total  abrogation  of  a  religion,  which 
was  reduced  by  God  himself  to  the  impossibility  of 
ever  offering  those  sacrifices  which  were  essential  to 
its  existence. 

The  considerateness  wherewith  the  Church  had,  so 
far,  treated  the  Synagogue,  would,  henceforward,  be 
unmeaning.  As  the  beautiful  queen  and  bride,  she 
is  now  at  full  liberty  to  show  herself  to  all  nations, 
subdue  their  wild  instincts  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
unify  them  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  put  them,  by  faith 
into  the  substantial,  though  not  visible,3  possession  of 
those  eternal  realities,  which  had  been  foreshadowed 
by  the  Law  of  types  and  figures. 

1  Deut.  xii.  13,  14.  2  Heb.  xi.  1. 

vol.  xi.  S 


258      TENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  TENTECOST. 

The  New  Sacrifice,  which  is  no  other  than  that  of 
the  Cross  and  of  Eternity,  is  now,  more  than  ever, 
evidently  the  one  sole  centre,  where  her  life  is  fixed 
in  God  with  Christ  her  Spouse,1  and  from  which  she 
derives  her  energy  in  labouring  for  the  conversion 
and  sanctification  of  all  future  generations  of  men. 
The  Church,  now  more  than  ever  fruitful,  is  more 
than  ever  receiving  of  that  life  of  Union,  which 
is  the  cause  of  her  admirable  fecundity. 

We  cannot,  therefore,  be  surprised,  that  the  sacred 
Liturgy,  which  is  the  outward  expression  of  the 
Bride's  inner  life,  will  now  more  than  ever  reflect 
this  closeness  of  her  Union  with  God.  In  the  fifteen 
weeks  we  have  still  to  spend  of  this  Time  after  Pente- 
cost, there  is  no  such  thing  as  gradation,  no  con- 
nection, in  the  Proper  of  the  Sundays'  Masses.  Even 
in  the  Lessons  of  the  Night-Office,  dating  from 
August, — the  historic  Books  have  been  replaced  by 
those  which  are  called  the  Sapiential,  and  which,  in 
due  time,  will  be  followed  by  the  Books  of  Job, 
Tobias,  Judith  and  Esther  ;  and,  here  again,  there  is 
no  connection,  further  than  that  of  sanctity  in  pre- 
cept or  in  example.  So  far,  we  have  found  more  or 
less  of  oneness  of  idea  between  the  Lessons  of  the 
Office  and  the  Proper  of  the  Mass ;  but,  beginning 
with  this  tenth  Sunday,  these  are  independent  of  each 
other. 

Henceforward,  therefore,  we  must  limit  our  com- 
mentary to  the  Proper  of  each  Sunday's  Mass ;  and 
in  doing  this,  we  shall  be  respectfully  taking  the 
teachings  which  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  divideth  as  hi 
willethf  gives  us,  unitedly  with  the  Church,  in  eacl 
portion  of  each  Sunday's  Liturgy.  Each  Epistle  am 
Gospel,  especially  ;  and,  then,  each  Introit  and  Collect, 
each  Gradual  and  Offertory,  each  Secret,  Communion 
and  Postcommunion,  each  of  these  will  be  a  precious  and 

1  Colore,  iii.  3.  2  1  Cor.  xii.  11. 


TENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  TENTECOST.       259 

exquisitely  varied  instruction.     We  shall  see  all  this 
in  the  Epistle  of  this  tenth  Sunday. 

The  fall  of  Jerusalem, — that  great  event,  which 
told  men  how  the  prophecies  were  going  to  he  glori- 
ously fulfilled,  now  that  the  Jewish  opposition  was 
so  completely  removed, — yes,  the  event  we  were  com- 
memorating last  Sunda}r,  is  one  more  and  solemn 
proclamation  of  the  reign  of  the  Holy  Ghost  through- 
out the  entire  earth ;  for,  as  we  said  of  Him,  at  the 
grand  Pentecost  solemnity,  He  hath  filled  the  ivhole 
world.1  We  have  much  to  learn  from  the  tone  our 
holy  Mother  the  Church  puts  in  the  Liturgy  of  these 
remaining  fifteen  Pentecostal  Sundays.  In  the  ad- 
mirable teachings  she  is  now  going  to  give  to  her 
children,  there  is  no  logical  arrangement  or  sequel. 
She  is  as  intent  as  ever  on  leading  souls  to  holiness 
and  perfection  ;  yet,  it  is  not  by  following  a  method 
of  any  sort,  hut  by  her  applying  to  us  the  united 
power  of  the  divine  Sacrifice  and  the  word  of  the 
Scripture,  to  which  she  sweetly  adds  her  own; 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Love  breatheth  upon  it  all, 
just  ivhere  he  willeth,  and  when  he  willeth.2 

This  Sunday  is,  some  years,  the  second  of  the 
dominical  series  which  opened  with  the  feast  of  Saint 
Laurence,  and  took  its  name  (of  Post  Sancti  Laurentii) 
from  the  solemnity  of  the  great  Deacon-Martyr.  It 
is,  also,  sometimes  called  the  Sunday  of  Humility,  or, 
of  the  Pharisee  and  Publican,  because  of  the  Gospel 
of  the  day.  The  Greeks  count  it  as  the  tenth  of  Saint 
Matthew,  and  they  read  on  it  the  episode  of  the 
Lunatic,  which  is  given  in  the  17th  Chapter  of  that 
Evangelist. 

1  Wisd.  i.  7.  2  St.  John,  iii.  8. 


260  TENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


MASS. 

The  humble  and  suppliant  confidence,  which  the 
Church  reposes  in  the  help  given  her  by  her  Jesus, 
will  ever  preserve  her  from  those  terrible  humiliations 
wherewith  were  punished  the  persecuting  jealousy 
and  pride  of  the  Synagogue.  She  exhorts  her  chil- 
dren to  imitate  her  when  they  are  in  trouble ;  like 
her,  they  must  let  their  prayers  and  supplications  be 
ever  sounding  in  God's  ear. 

INTROIT. 

Cum  clamarem  ad  Do-  When  I  cried  out,  the  Lord 

minum,  exaudivit    vocem  heard  my  complaint  against 

meam,  ab  his  qui  appropin-  them  that  were  coming  against 

quant  mihi:  et  humiliavit  me;  and  he  that  was  before 

eos,  qui  est  ante  ssecula,  et  all  ages,  and  abideth  for  ever, 

manet  in  seternum  :  jacta  humbled  them:  cast  thy  care 

cogitatumtuum  in  Domino,  on  the  Lord,  and  he  will  feed 

et  ipse  te  enutriet.  thee. 

Ps.  Exaudi,  Deus,oratio-  Ps.  Hear,  0  God,  my  prayer, 

nem  meam,  et  ne  despex-  and  despise  not  my  petition: 

eris  deprecationem  meam:  look  down  upon  me,  and  hear 

intende  mihi,  et  exaudi  me.  me.  Glory,  etc.  When  I  cried. 
Gloria  Patri.    Cum  clama- 
rem. 

Ever  deeply  impressed  by  the  remembrance  of  the 
fearful,  though  most  just,  chastisements  of  the  Jewish 
people, — the  Church  reminds  God,  that  the  marvels 
of  his  pardon  and  mercy  are  still  stronger  manifesta- 
tions of  his  omnipotence ;  she,  therefore,  in  her  Collect, 
prays  for  an  abundant  effusion  of  this  mercy  upon  the 
Christian  people  who  are  here  assembled.  But  what 
grandeur,  what  sublimity, — especially  in  the  times 
immediately  following  Jerusalem's  ruin, — is  there  not 
in  the  Church's  attitude,  when,  in  reply  to  the 
account  given  her  by  her  Spouse  of  the  severest 
justice  ever  shoivn  by  his  Eternal  Father,  she,  Bride 
and  Mother,  has  confidence  and  courage  enough,  to 
begin  with  such  words  as  these  :  Dens  ! — qui  omnipo- 


MASS. 


261 


tentiam    tuam    tarcexdo,    maxime,    et    miseraxdo 
manifextas ! 

COLLECT. 


O  God,  who  chiefly  mani- 
festest  thine  omnipotence  by 
pardoning  and  having  mercy: 
increase  thy  mercy  upon  us; 
that,  hastening  to  the  things 
thou  hast  promised,  thoumayst 
make  us  partakers  of  heavenly 
goods.    Through,  etc. 


Deus,  qui  omnipotentiam 
tuam  parcendo  maxime  et 
miserando  manifestas : 
multiplica  super  nos  mis- 
ericordiam  tuam;  ut  adtua 
promissa  currentes,  coeles- 
tium  bonorum  facias  esse 
consortes.  Per  Dominum. 


The  other  Collects  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the  Cor- 
inthians. 

1  Ch.  xii. 

Brethren :  Ye  know  that 
when  ye  were  heathens,  ye 
went  to  dumb  idols,  according 
as  ye  were  led.  Wherefore  I 
give  you  to  understand,  that 
no  man,  speaking  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  saith  anathema  to 
Jesus.  And  no  man  can  say 
the  Lord  Jesus,  but  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Now  there  are 
diversities  of  graces,  but  the 
same  spirit.  And  there  are 
diversities  of  ministries,  but 
the  same  Lord.  And  there 
are  diversities  of  operations, 
but  the  same  God  who  work- 
eth  all  in  all.  And  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Spirit  is  given 
to  every  man  unto  profit.  To 
one  indeed,  by  the  Spirit,  is 
given  the  word  of  wisdom ;  and 
to  another,  the  word  of  know- 
ledge, according  to  the  same 
spirit;  to  another,  faith  in  the 
same  spirit ;  to  another,  the 
grace  of  healing  in  one 
spirit ;  to  another,  the  work- 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati 
Pauli  Apostoli  ad  Corin- 
thios. 

1  Cap.  xii. 

Fratres,  Scitis  quoniam 
cum  Gentes  essetis,  ad  si- 
mulacra muta  prout  d'jce- 
bamini  euntes.  Ideo  notum 
vobis  facio,  quod  nemo  in 
Spiritu  Dei  loquens,  dicit 
anathema  Jesu.  Et  nemo 
potest  dicere,  Dominus  Je- 
sus, nisi  in  Spiritu  sancto. 
Divisiones  vero  gratiarum 
sunt,  idem  autem  Spiritus. 
Et  divisiones  ministratio- 
num  sunt,  idem  autem  Do- 
minus. Et  divisiones  opera- 
tionum  sunt,  idem  vero 
Deus,  qui  operatur  omnia 
in  omnibus.  Unicuique  au- 
tem datur  manifestatio  Spi; 
ritus  ad  utilitatem.  Alii 
quidem  per  Spiritum  datur 
sermosapientiae:  alii  autem 
sermo  scientiae  secundum 
eumdem  Spiritum  :  alteri 
fides  in  eodem  Spiritu:  alii 
gratia  sanitatum  in  uno 
Spiritu:  alii  operatio  yirtu- 
tum,  alii  prophetia,  alii  dis- 


l*L? 


262       TENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

cretio  spirituum,  alii  genera  ing  of  miracles;  to  another, 
linguarum,  alii  interpreta-  prophecy  ;  to  another,  the  dis- 
tiosermonum.  Hsecautem  cerning  of  spirits;  to  another, 
omnia  operatur  unus  atque  divers  kinds  of  tongues  ;  to 
idemSpiritus,dividenssin-  another,  interpretation  of 
gulis  prout  vult.  speeches.      But   in  all  these 

things,  one  and  the  same  Spirit 
worketh,  dividing  to  every- 
one according  as  he  will. 

The  Synagogue  has  been  rejected,  has  been  cast  out; 
and,  by  that,  the  Churcb  is  declared  as  the  exclusive 
heir  of  the  promises.1  She  is  now  sole  depositary  of 
God's  gifts ;  and  she  leads  her  children  to  St  Paul, 
that  he  may  put  before  them  the  principles  which 
should  guide  them  in  the  appreciation  and  use  of 
those  gifts.  The  reading  of  our  Epistle  shows  us,  that 
it  is  speaking  of  those  absolutely  gratuitous  favours, 
which,  at  the  first  commencement  of  the  Church, 
were,  more  or  less,  enjoyed  by  every  christian  assem- 
bly ;  and,  since  then,  are  imparted  to  a  few  privileged 
souls,  which,  generally  speaking,  though  not  neces- 
sarily, are  being  guided  in  the  extraordinary  paths  of 
mystic  Theology.  If,  in  the  immense  majority  of 
God's  faithful  servants,  we  do  not  meet  with  these 
infused  graces  ofj>^oj)hecy,  of  supernatural  knoivleclge 
of  the  gift  of  tongues,  or  of  miracles  properly  so 
called,  yet  the  Lives  of  the  tSai?its  are  always  the 
common  patrimony  of  the  children  of  the  Church ; 
and,  therefore,  they  should  not  neglect  to  provide 
themselves  with  the  lights  needed  for  understanding 
and  profiting  by  a  reading,  which  is  so  important  and 
so  interesting.  In  this  season  of  the  Liturgical  Year, 
— which  is  so  specially  devoted  to  the  celebration  of  the 
mysteries  of  divine  Union, — it  is  very  necessary  to  have 
certain  clear  ideas,  without  which,  we  should  be  in  danger 
of  confounding  what,  in  this  higher  christian  life,  is  the 
interior  perfection  of  the  soul  and  her  real  holiness, 
with   those   exterior,  and  intermittent,   and  varied, 

1  Gal.  iv.  30. 


mass.  263 

phenomena,  which  are  but  the  radiation  of  the  Spirit 
of  love,  who  is  Master  to  display  his  own  operations 
in  his  own  divine  way. 

These  are  the  motives  which  induced  the  Church 
to  select,  for  to-day,  this  passage  from  the  Epistle  of 
St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians.  If  we  would  fully  enter 
into  her  design,  we  must  not  limit  our  attention  to 
the  few  lines  we  have  just  been  reading  ;  the  end  of 
the  chapter  from  which  they  are  taken,  as  likewise 
the  two  subsequent  chapters,  are  all  one  and  the  same 
piece  of  teaching,  and  must  not  be  separated  one  from 
the  other.1  In  this  important  passage,  besides  the 
summary  of  the  principles  which  are  unchangeable, 
we  have,  also,  an  instructive  account  of  what  the 
Church's  assemblies  were  in  those  early  times,  when 
the  omnipotence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  everywhere 
opened  and  made  to  flow  in  abundance  the  double 
spring  of  miracle  and  holiness. 

The  rapid  conquest  of  the  world,  which,  from  the 
very  commencement  was  to  give  evidence  to  the 
catholicity  of  the  Church,  required  a  large  effusion 
of  power  from  on  high ;  and,  in  order  that  the  pro- 
mulgation of  the  New  Testament  might  be  made 
authoritatively  among  men,  it  was  necessary  that  God 
should  give  it  all  possible  solemnity  and  authenticity  ; 
and  this  he  did,  by  accompanying  it  with  signs  and 
wonders,  of  which  He  alone  could  be  the  author. 
Hence,  in  those  early  days,  the  Holy  Ghost  took  not 
possession  of  a  soul  by  Baptism,  without  giving  an 
external  sign  of  His  presence  in  that  new  christian, — 
without,  that  is,  one  of  those  manifestations  which  the 
Apostle  here  enumerates.  Thus  the  Witness  of  the 
Word,3  fulfilled  the  twofold  mission  he  had  received: 
— he  sanctified  in  truth  the  faithful  of  Christ,3  and 
he  will  convince  of  sin  the  world  which  would  not 
receive  the  word  of  the  heralds  of  the  Gospel.4 

1  1  Cor.  xii,  xiii,  xiv.         3  Ibid.  xvii.  17. 

2  St.  John,  xv.  26.  4  Ibid.  xvi.  8-11  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  22,  24,  25. 


264  TENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

St.  Paul1  mentions  three  proofs  which  were  held 
out  to  the  world  as  a  sure  guarantee  of  the  divinity  of 
Christ:  these  were,  his  Resurrection  from  the  grave, 
the  holiness  of  those  who  became  his  disciples,  and, 
thirdly,  the  innumerable  miracles  which  accompanied 
thepreaching  of  the  Apostles,  and  the  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles.  As  to  the  first  of  these  proofs,  we  shall  have 
it  proposed  to  our  consideration  next  Sunday.  Passing 
then,  to  the  second, — the  law  given  to  the  world  by 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  was  abundantly  proved  to  be  of 
divine  origin,  by  the  admirable  change  of  this  earth, 
of  which,  when  he  was  born  in  it  for  our  salvation, 
we  might  say  in  the  language  of  the  Scripture,  all 
flesh  had  corrupted  its  way.2  For  men  that  knew  how 
to  use  their  reasoning  powers,  no  demonstration  could 
be  plainer  or  more  cogent  than  this,  which  showed, 
that,  from  the  sinks  of  corruption,  there  were  every- 
where coming  forth  harvests  worthy  of  heaven,  and 
that  men,  who  had  degraded  themselves  to  the  level 
of  the  brute  by  the  indulgence  of  their  evil  passions, 
were  now  changed  into  angels  of  earth,  by  their 
saintly  morals  and  heavenly  aspirations.  To  change 
the  odour  of  death  into  the  good  odour  of  Christ,3  that 
is,  to  live  his  life  as  did  the  Christians, — was  it  not  a 
revealing  God  to  men,  by  showing  that  the  very  life 
of  God  was  lived  by  men  in  human  flesh  P4 

But,  for  men  who  seem  incapable  of  reasoning, — 
for  men  who  cannot  see  beyond  the  present,  nor 
raise  themselves  above  the  senses, — for  so  many  beings 
who  have  become  brutalised,  who,  in  virtue  which 
scorns  to  share  in  their  debaucheries,  see  nothing  but 
a  something  to  stare  at  and  blaspheme,5 — for  all  these 
the  Holy  Spirit  had  prepared  a  demonstration  which 
was  tangible,  and  visible,  and  which  all  could  take 
in, — it  was  that  exuberance  of  supernatural  gifts, 
which  were  actively  at   work  in  every  place  where 

1  Rom.  i.  4.  32Cor.  ii.  14-10.  5  1  St.  Pet.  iv.  4. 

2  Gen.  vi.  12.  *  Ibid.  iv.  10,  11. 


mass.  265 

there  was  a  church.  The  gift  of  Tongues,  which  had 
given  such  power  to  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,1  was  multiplied  with  such 
frequency,  when  men  came  near  the  baptismal  font, 
that  the  beholders  were  astonished,  or,  as  the  full 
force  of  the  sacred  text  gives  it,  they  were  stupified  ;2 
it  continued  to  be  the  sign,  the  wonder,  whose  influence 
on  the  unbeliever,  after  first  exciting  his  surprise, 
went  on  gradually  inclining  both  his  thoughts  and 
his  heart  towards  the  word  of  faith.3  But  the  work 
of  his  conversion  received  a  still  greater  impulse, 
when  he  was  introduced  into  the  assembly  of  the  men 
of  his  own  neighbourhood,  whom  hitherto  he  had  only 
known  in  the  simple  intercourse  of  every-day  life : 
he  then  found  them  transformed  into  prophets,  who 
could  see  into  the  most  hidden  recesses  of  his  un- 
believing soul ;  all  were  his  convincers,  all  were  his 
judges, — how  was  he  to  resist  ?  No,  he  fell  prostrate 
on  the  ground,  he  adored  God,  he  could  not  but  ac- 
knowledge that  the  Lord  was  indeed  in  such  an 
assembly.4 

The  Corinthians  to  whom  St.  Paul  wrote  that 
Epistle,  were  rich  in  these  spiritual  favours  ;  nothing 
of  this  kind  of  grace  was  wanting  to  them,  and  the 
Apostle  gave  thanks  to  God  for  his  having  so  abun- 
dantly endowed  them,  for,  thereby,  a  strong  testimony 
was  given  to  the  christian  religion.5  But  it  would 
have  been  a  great  mistake,  if,  from  this  profusion, 
bestowed  upon  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  man 
had  concluded  that  the  Corinthians  were  perfect. 
Jealousies,  vanity,  obstinacy,  and  other  miseries, 
earned  for  them  the  name  of  carnal,  which  was  given 
to  them  by  the  same  divine  Spirit,  and  made  the 
Apostle  tell  them  that  he  was  compelled  to  treat 
them  as  children,  incapable  of  receiving  anything 

1  Acts,  ii.  6-11.  3  1  Cor.  xiv.  22.  6  Ibid.  i.  4-7. 

2  Jbid.  x.  44-48.  *  Ibid.  24,  25. 


266  TENTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

like  sublime  teaching.1  These  privileged  receivers 
of  gratuitous  graces  pointed  out  very  clearly,  there- 
fore, the  difference  between  the  value  the  Christian 
should  attach  to  these  exceptionally  great,  but, 
perhaps  to  the  possessor's  own  soul,  unproductive, 
favours,  and  between  the  value  he  should  set  on 
justifying  and  sanctifying  grace  which  makes  the 
soul  pleasing  to  God. 

This  second, — the  regularly  appointed  result  of 
the  Sacraments,  which  were  instituted,  by  our  Lord's 
munificence,  for  the  use  of  all  men, — this  justifying, 
tJiis  sanctifying,  grace  is  the  necessary  basis  of  salva- 
tion ;  it  is,  also,  the  one  sole  measure  of  future  glory, 
for,  its  development  and  increase  depend  on  the 
merit  of  each  individual  possessor.  Gratuitous 
Grace,  on  the  contrary,  is  irregular  and  spontaneous 
both  in  its  origin  and  its  effects,  and*  is  quite  inde- 
pendent of  the  recipient,  be  his  dispositions  or  merits 
what  they  may.  Like  the  authority  given  to  one 
over  the  souls  of  others, — like  those  several  ministries 
mentioned  in  our  Epistle, — thi.«  Gratuitous  Grace 
has  for  its  aim,  not  so  much  the  advantage  of  him 
who  receives  it,  as  the  advantage  of  his  fellow-men ; 
and  this  aim  is  realized,  independently  of  the  virtue, 
or  the  imperfection,  of  the  one  whom  God  has  selected 
as  his  instrument.  So  that,  miracles  or  prophecy  do 
not  necessarily  presuppose  a  certain  amount  of  holi- 
ness in  the  thaumaturgus  or  the  prophet.  We  have 
a  proof  of  it  in  our  Corinthians,  and  a  still  stronger 
in  Balaam  and  Judas ;  God,  who  had  his  own  designs, 
which  were  not  to  be  frustrated  by  their  faults  or 
sins,  left  them  in  possession  of  his  own  gifts,  just  as 
he  does  in  the  Priest,  who  may,  perhaps,  be  anything 
but  what  he  should  be,  and  who,  nevertheless,  validly 
makes  use  of  faculties  and  powers  more  divine  than 
any  of  those  others.     We  have  it  from  our  divine 

'  Cor.  iii.  1-3. 


MASS. 


267 


Master  himself:  Many,  says  he,  will  say 
that  day  (of  judgment,)  "Lord!  Lord!  In 


to  me  oil- 
have  we  not 
"prophesied  in  thy  name,  and,  in  thy  name,  cast  out 
11  devils,  and  done  many  wonderful  works  in  thy 
"  name  f  "  And  then  will  J  profess  unto  them,  "  I 
"  never  knew  you.  Depart  from  me,  ye  that  work 
"iniquity  !"  * 

In  these  days,  when  such  manifestations  of  super- 
natural power  are  no  longer  needed  for  the  promul- 
gation of  the  Gospel,  and  are,  therefore,  less  frequent, 
— it  is  generally  the  case  that,  when  they  are  found 
in  a  Christian,  they  are  an  indication  of  a  real  and 
sanctifying  Union  existing  between  him  and  the 
Spirit  of  love.  That  Holy  Spirit,  who  raises  such  a 
Christian  above  the  ordinary  paths,  takes  pleasure 
in  his  own  divine  work,  and  wishes  to  have  it  attract 
the  attention  either  of  all  the  faithful,  or,  at  least, 
of  some  privileged  souls, — who,  being  moved  by 
these  extraordinary  signs,  give  thanks  to  God  for 
the  favours  he  has  bestowed  on  that  soul.  And 
yet,  even  in  such  case,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to 
measure  the  holiness  of  that  favoured  soul  by  the 
number  or  greatness  of  such  exterior  gifts.  The 
development  of  charity  by  the  exercise  of  the  several 
virtues,  is  the  only  thing  that  makes  men  be  Saints. 
Divine  Union,  whether  it  be  that  degree  of  it  which 
is  attainable  by  all,  or  those  grand  heights  of  Mystic 
Theology  which  are  reached  by  a  few  privileged 
ones, — divine  Union  does  not,  in  any  way,  depend 
on  those  brilliant  phenomena.  These,  when  they 
are  bestowed  upon  a  servant  of  God,  do  not,  gen- 
erally, wait  for  his  reaching  perfection  in  divine  love, 
— though  it  is  love  alone  will  give  him,  if  he  be 
faithful,  the  perfection  of  true  holiness. 

The  practical  conclusion  we  are  to  draw  from  all 
this,  is,  what  the  Apostle  makes  the  summary  of  his 

1  St.  Matth.  vii.  22,  23. 


268  TEKTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    TENTECOST. 

teaching  on  this  subject :  Have  a  great  esteem  for  all 
these  gifts ;  look  on  them  as  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who,  thereby,  bestows  manifold  degrees  of 
adornment  on  the  whole  body  of  the  Church ; l  do  not 
despise  any  of  these  ; 2  but,  when  you  see  or  hear  of 
any  of  them,  count  those  as  the  most  precious,3  which 
produce  most  edification  in  the  Church,  and  in  souls.* 
Let  us,  above  all,  hearken  to  what  St.  Paul  adds : 
I  have  a  way  to  show  unto  you  more  excellent  than  all 
these/5  If  I  should  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men 
and  of  angels  ; — if  I  should  have  prophecy,  and  should 
know  all  mysteries,  and  all  knowledge ; — if  1  should 
have  all  faith,  so  that  1  could  remove  mountains  ; — if 
I  have  not  charity,  I  am  nothing,  it  profits  me 
nothing.  *  *  Prophecies  will  be  made  void,  tongues 
will  cease,  knowledge  will  be  destroyed  and  be  substi- 
tuted by  the  vision  beatific ;  but  Charity  will  never 
fail,  will  never  cease ;  of  all  things,  Charity  is  the 
greatest  /6 

In  the  Gradual,  the  Church  returns,  once  more, 
to  speak  of  the  confidence,  which,  as  Bride,  she  puts 
in  her  Lord's  help  ;  encouraged  by  the  love  she  bears 
him,  and  which  keeps  her  in  the  paths  of  equity,  she 
does  not  fear  his  judgments.  The  Alleluia- Verse 
extols  the  Spouse's  glory  in  Sion ;  but,  this  time,  and 
henceforth  for  ever,  when  Sion  and  Jerusalem  are 
spoken  of,  they  are  the  true  and  the  new  ones. 

GRADUAL. 

Custodi  me,  Domine,  ut  Guard  me,  O  Lord,  as  the 
pupiliarn  oculi :  sub  umbra  apple  of  thine  eye  :  and  pro- 
alarum  tuarum  protege  me.  tect  me  under  the  shadow  of 

thy  wings. 

y.  Devultutuo  judicium  $".  Let  my  cause  be  tried  in 

meum  prodeat :   oculi  tui  thy  presence  :  let  mine  eyes 

videant  sequitatem.  see  j  ustice  done. 

1  1  Cor:  xii.  11-30.  3  Ibid.  xii.  31.  6  Ibid.  xii.  31. 

2  Ibid.  xiv.  39.  4  Ibid.  xiv.  12.  6  Ibid.  xiii.  1-13. 


MASS. 


269 


Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$".  A  hymn  is  due  to  thee, 
0  God,  in  Sion  :  and  in  Jeru- 
salem, shall  a  vow  be  paid 
unto  thee.     Alleluia. 


Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Te  decet  hymnus, 
Deus,  in  Sion  :  et  tibi  red- 
detur,  votum  in  Jerusalem. 
Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ch.  xviii. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  spake 
this  parable  to  some  who 
trusted  in  themselves  as  just, 
and  despised  others.  Two 
men  went  up  into  the  temple 
to  pray  :  the  one  was  a  Phari- 
see, and  the  other  a  publican. 
The  Pharisee  standing,  prayed 
thus  with  himself  :  O  God,  I 
give  thee  thanks  that  I  am 
not  as  the  rest  of  men,  extor- 
tioners, unjust,  adulterers,  as 
also  is  this  publican.  I  fast 
twice  in  the  week  :  I  give 
tithes  of  all  that  I  possess. 
And  the  publican  standing 
afar  off  would  not  so  much  as 
lift  up  his  eyestowards heaven: 
but  struck  his  breast,  saying  : 
O  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner.  I  say  to  you,  this  man 
went  down  to  his  house  jus- 
tified rather  than  the  other, 
because  every  one  that  exalt- 
eth  himself,  shall  be  humbled  ; 
and  he  that  humbleth  himself, 
shall  be  exalted. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Lucam. 

Cap  xviii. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Dixit 
Jesus  ad  quosdam,qui  in  se 
confidebanttamquamjusti, 
et  aspernabantur  ceteros, 
parabolam  istam  :  Duo  ho- 
mines ascenderunt  in  tem- 
plum  ut  orarent  :  Unus 
pharisaeus,  et  alter  publica- 
nus.  Pharisaeus  stans,  hsee 
apud  se  orabat  :  Deus,  gra- 
tias  ago  tibi,  quia  non  sum 
sicut  ceteri  hominum  :  rap- 
tores,  injusti,  adulteri,  velut 
etiam  hie  publicanus.  Je- 
juno  bis  in  sabbato  :  deci- 
mas  do  omnium,  quae  pos- 
sideo.  Etpublicanusalonge 
stans,  nolebat  nee  oculos  ad 
caelum  levare :  sed  percu- 
tiebat  pectus  suum,  dicens: 
Deus,  propitius  esto  mihi 
peccatori.  Dicovobis:  Des- 
cendit  hie  justificitus  in 
domum  suam  ab  illo  :  quia 
omnis  qui  se  exaltat,  humi- 
liabitur  :  et  qui  se  humiliat, 
exaltabitur. 


Commenting  this  passage  of  St.  Luke,  Venerable 
Bede l  thus  explains  the  mystery :  "  The  Pharisee  is 
"  the  Jewish  people,  who  boasts  of  the  merits  he  had 


1  V.  Bed.  in  Luc.  v. 


270  TENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

"  acquired  to  himself  by  observing  the  precepts  of 
"  the  law ;  the  Publican  is  the  Gentile,  who,  being 
"  far  off  from  God,  confesses  his  sins.  The  Phari- 
"  see,  by  reason  of  his  pride,  has  to  depart  in  humilia- 
"  tion  ;  the  Publican,  by  his  lamenting  his  miseries, 
"  merited  to  draw  nigh  to  God,  that  is,  to  be  exalted. 
"  It  is  of  these  two  people,  and  of  every  man,  who  is 
"  proud  or  humble,  that  it  is  written  :  The  heart 
11  of  a  man  is  exalted  before  destruction,  and  it  is 
"  humbled  before  he  be  glorified."^ 

In  the  whole  Gospel,  then,  there  was  no  teaching 
more  appropriate,  as  a  sequel  to  the  history  of  Jeru- 
salem's fall.  The  children  of  the  Church,  who,  in 
her  early  years,  .saw  her  humbled  in  Sion,  and  perse- 
cuted by  the  insulting  arrogance  of  the  Synagogue, 
now  quite  understand  that  word  of  the  Wise  Man  : 
Better  is  it  to  be  humbled  with  the  meek,  than  to  divide 
spoils  ivith  the  proud  !2  According  to  another  Pro- 
verb, the  tongue  of  the  Jew, — that  tongue  which 
abused  the  Publican  and  ran  down  the  poor  Gentile, — 
is  become,  in  his  mouth,  as  a  rod  of  pride,*  a  rod 
which,  in  time,  struck  himself,  by  bringing  on  his 
own  destruction.  But,  whilst  adoring  the  justice  of 
God's  vengeance  and  giving  praise  to  his  mercy,  the 
Gentiles  must  take  care  not  to  go  into  the  path 
wherein  was  lost  the  unhappy  people,  whose  place 
they  now  occupy.  Israel's  offence,  says  St.  Paul, 
has  brought  about  the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles ;  but, 
Ms  pride  would  be  also  their  ruin ;  and  whereas 
Israel  is  assured,  by  prophecy,  of  a  return  to  God's 
favour  when  the  end  of  the  world  shall  be  approach- 
ing,4— there  is  no  such  promise  of  a  second  call  of 
mercy  to  the  Gentiles,  should  they  ever  apostatise 
after  their  baptism.  If,  at  present,  the  power  of 
Eternal  Wisdom   enables   the   Gentiles   to   produce 


1  Prov.  xviii.  12.  3  Ibid,  xiv.  3. 

2  Ibid.  xvi.  19.  *  Rom.  xi.  25-27. 


MASS.  271 

fruits  of  glory  and  honour,1  let  them  never  forget  how 
once  they  were  vile  barren  trees:  then, humility,  which 
alone  can  keep  them  right,  as,  formerly,  it  alone 
drew  upon  them  the  eye  of  God's  mercy, — humility 
will  be  an  easy  duty;  and,  at  the  same  time,  they 
will  understand  the  regard  they  should  always  enter- 
tain for  the  people  of  Israel,  in  spite  of  all  his  sin?. 

For,  at  the  time  that  the  original  defect  of  their 
birth  made  the  Gentiles  be  as  so  many  wild-olive  trees, 
producing  nothing  but  worthless  fruits, — the  good, 
the  genuine,   the  natural  olive-tree,   through  whose 
branches  flowed  the  sap  of  grace,  was  growing  and 
flourishing,  sucking   sanctification  into  its  branches 
from  the  holy  root  of  the  Patriarchs,  blessed  of  God.2 
"We  must  remember,  that  this  tree  of  salvation  is 
ever  the  same.     Some  of  its  branches  fell  off,  it  is 
true,  and  others  were  substituted ;  but  this  accession 
of  the  Gentiles,  who  were  permitted  by  grace  to  graft 
their  branches  into  the  holy  stock, — this  accession 
effected  no  change,  either  in  the  stock,  or  in  its  root. 
The  God  of  the  Gentiles  is  not  another,  but  the  same, 
as  the  God  of  Isaac  and  Jacob  ;  the  heavenly  olive- 
tree  is  one,  and  only  one,  and  its  roots  rest  in  Abra- 
ham's bosom  :  it  is  from  the  faith  of  this  the  just  man 
by  excellence,3 — it  is  from  the  blessing,  promised  to 
him4  and  to  his  divine  Bud,5  the  blessing  which  was 
to  be  imparted  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth, — that 
flows  the  life-giving  and  rich  sap,  which  will  transform 
the  Gentile  world  in  all  future  ages.     When,  there- 
fore, Christian  nations  are  boasting  of  their  origin 
and  descent,  let  them  not  forget  the  one  which  is 
above  all  the  rest.     The  founders  of  earthly  empires 
are  not,  in  God's  way  of  counting,  the  true  fathers  of 
the  people  of  those  empires :  in  the  order  of  super- 
natural, that  is,   of  our  best,  interest,  Abraham  the 


1  Ecclus.  xxiv.  23.        3  Ibid.  iv.  11-18.        5  Ibid.  xxii.  18. 
*  Rom.  xi.  16-24.  4  Gen.  xii.  3. 


272      TENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

Hebrew,1  he  that  went  forth  from  Chaldea  at  the  call 
of  God,3 — he,  by  the  fecundity  of  his  faith,  is  the 
truest  father  of  nations.3 

Now  we  can  understand  those  words  of  the  Apostle : 
Boast  not,  0  thou,  wild- olive  tree,  that,  contrary  to 
nature,  wast  ingrafted  into  the  good  olive-tree,  boast  not 
against  the  original  brandies.  But  if  thou  art  tempted 
to  boast,  remember,  thou  bearest  not  the  root,  but  the 
root  beareth  thee.  Therefore,  be  not  high-minded,  but 
feart 

Humility,  which  produces  within  us  this  salutary 
fear,  is  the  virtue  that  makes  man  know  his  right 
place,  with  regard  both  to  God  and  his  fellow-men. 
It  rests  on  the  deep-rooted  conviction,  put  into  our 
hearts  by  grace,  of  how  God  is  everything  in  man, 
and  of  how  we,  by  nature,  are  nothingness,  nay,  less 
than  nothingness,  because  we  have  degraded  ourselves 
by  sin.  Reason  is  able,  of  herself  alone,  to  convince 
anyone  who  takes  the  trouble  to  reflect,  of  the  nothing- 
ness of  a  creature  ;  but,  such  conviction,  if  it  remain 
a  mere  theoretical  conclusion,  is  not  Humility :  it  is 
a  conviction  which  forces  itself  on  the  devil  in  hell, 
whose  vexation  at  such  a  truth  is  the  chief  source  of 
the  rage  of  that  leader  of  the  proud.  As  faith,  which 
reveals  to  us  what  God  is  in  the  supernatural  order, 
does  not  come  from  mere  reason,  nor  remain  confined 
to  the  intellect  alone, — so  neither  does  humility, 
which  teaches  us  what  we  ourselves  are :  that  it  may 
be  true  real  virtue,  it  must  derive  its  light  from 
above,  and  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  must  move  our  will 
also.  At  the  same  time  that  this  Holy  Spirit  fills 
our  souls  with  the  knowledge  of  their  littleness,  and 
misery,  he  also  sweetly  leads  them  to  the  acceptance 
and  love  of  this  truth,  which  reason,  if  left  entirely 
to  herself,  would  be  tempted  to  look  on  as  a  disagree- 
able thought. 

1  Gen.  xiv.  13.  2/^<Z.xii.  1-4.   s/Wtf.xvii.4-7.   *  Rom.  xi.  18, 20, 24. 


mass.  273 

And,  when  this  holy  Spirit  of  truth,1  this  divine 
witness  of  hearts,2  takes  possession  of  a  soul,  what  an 
incomparably  stronger  light  is  there  in  the  humility 
which  He  imparts,  than  in  that  which  mere  human 
reason  forces  on  a  man!  We  are  bewildered  at 
seeing  to  what  lengths  this  sentiment  of  their  own 
misery  led  the  Saints  :  it  made  them  deem  themselves 
inferior  to  every  one ;  it  drove  them  to  act  and  speak 
in  a  way  which,  in  our  flippant  judgment,  outstept 
the  bounds  of  both  truth  and  justice  !  But,  the 
Holy  Ghost,  who  guided  and  ruled  them,  passed  a 
very  different  judgment ;  and  it  is  precisely  because 
of  His  being  the  Spirit  of  all  truth  and  all  justice, — 
in  other  words,  because  of  his  being  the  Sanctifying 
Spirit, — that,  as  he  willed  to  raise  them  to  extra- 
ordinary holiness,  he  therefore  gave  them  an  extra- 
ordinary clearsightedness,  both  as  to  what  they 
themselves  were,  and  what  God  is.  Satan,  the  spirit 
of  wickedness,  makes  his  slaves  act  just  the  opposite 
to  the  divine  way.  The  way  he  makes  them  take,  is 
the  one  he  took  for  himself,  from  the  very  beginning  ; 
and  which  our  Lord  thus  expresses  :  He  stood  not  in 
the  truth  ;3  he  aimed  at  being  like  unto  the  Most 
High.4,  This  pride  of  his  succeeded  in  fixing  him,  for 
all  eternity,  in  the  hell  of  absurdity  and  lie.  There- 
fore, Humility  is  Truth ;  and,  as  that  same  Jesus 
says :  The  Truth  shall  make  you  free,5  by  liberating 
us  from  the  tyranny  of  the  father  of  lies  ;6  and,  then, 
having  made  us  free,  it  makes  us  holy ;  it  sanctifies 
us,7  by  uniting  us  to  God,  who  is  living  and  substan- 
tial Truth. 

In  proportion  as  the  human  creature  advances  in 
the  paths  of  divine  Union,  and  draws  nigher  to  this 
infinite  all,  this  One  who  alone  is  by  essence,8 — 
man,  far  from  losing  any  of  his  own  borrowed  being, 

1  St.  John,  xiv.  17.     4  Is.  xiv.  14.  7  Ibid.  xvii.  17. 

2  Wiad.  i.  6.  5  St.  John,  viii.  32,34.    8  Exod.  iii.  14. 

3  St.  John,  viii.  44.    6  Ibid.  44. 

VOL.  xi.  T 


274      TENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

receives  a  marvellous  increase  of  both  light  and  heat. 
It  would  be  more  correct,  perhaps,  to  say,  that,  as  by- 
drawing  nigher  to  God,  he  lives,  not  he,  but  CJwist  lives 
in  Jiim,1  so,  together  with  that  life  of  his  own  self,  he 
is  entirely  losing  the  factitious  light  which  used  to 
accompany  that  diminished  life  of  his,  and  which, 
when  he  was  far  removed  from  the  divine  centre  of 
light,  may  have  seemed  to  him  grand,  because  it 
came  from  no  source  but  his  own  poor  Self !  Yes, 
when  he  is  in  close  union  with  the  divine  Light,  all 
that  flicker  of  his  own  is  lost ;  and  what  a  happy 
loss,  when  it  gives  him  such  a  gain!  The  stars 
which  gravitate  round  the  sun,  get  more  brilliant  with 
his  light,  the  nearer  they  approach  him ;  till,  at  last, 
they  quite  disappear  under  the  immediate  action  of 
their  glorious  centre ;  whereas,  the  brightness  they 
have  from  him  seems  less  dependent  when  in  the 
isolatedness  produced  by  distance  ;  it  seems  all  the 
more  to  be  their  own,  the  further  they  are  from  him. 

There  are  men  who,  like  Satan,  have  done  all  in 
their  power  to  throw  themselves  out  of  the  orbit 
of  the  divine  sun.  Rather  than  acknowledge  that 
they  owe  all  they  have  to  the  Most  High  God,  they 
would  sink  back  again  into  nothingness,  if  they 
could.  To  the  heavenly  treasures  which  the  common 
Father  opens  out  to  all  who  own  themselves  to  be 
His  children,  they  prefer  the  pleasure  of  keeping  to 
natural  good  things,  for  then,  so  they  talk,  they  owe 
what  they  get  to  their  own  cleverness  and  exertions. 
They  are  foolish  men,  not  to  understand,  that,  do 
what  they  please,  they  owe  everything  they  have  or 
get  to  this  their  forgotten  God.2  They  are  weak 
sickly  minds,  taking  for  principles  which  they  may 
be  proud  of,  these  vapours  of  conceit  in  which  their 
disordered  brain  finds  delight.  Their  high-minded- 
ness  is  but  ignominy ;  their  independence  leads  but 

1  Gal.  ii.  20.  2  1  Cor.  iv.  7. 


mass.  275 

to  slavery ;  for,  though  refusing  to  have  God  as  their 
Father,  they  must,  by  necessity,  have  Him.  as  their 
Master  ;  and  thus,  not  being  his  children,  they  must 
be  his  slaves.  As  slaves,  they  keep  to  the  vile  food, 
which  they  themselves  preferred  to  the  pure  delights, 
wherewith  Wisdom  inebriates  them  that  follow  her. 
As  slaves,  they  have  acquired  the  right  to  the  scourge 
and  the  fetter.  They  chose  to  be  satisfied  with  what 
they  had,  and  would  have  neither  the  throne  that  was 
prepared  for  them,1  nor  the  nuptial  robe  ; 2  let  them, 
if  they  will,  prefer  their  prison,  and  there  deck  them- 
selves in  the  finery  which  moths  will  be  soon  making 
their  food  !  But,  during  these  short  years  of  theirs, 
they  are  branding  their  bodies  with  a  deeper  slavery, 
than  ever  red-hot  iron  stamped  on  vilest  bondsman. 
All  this  comes,  because,  with  all  the  empty  philoso- 
phy which  was  their  boast,  they  would  not  listen  to 
the  Christian  teaching, — that,  real  greatness  consists 
in  the  Truth,  and  that  Humility  alone  leads  to  it. 

Not  only  does  man  not  unman  himself  by  hum- 
bling himself, — for  he  thereby  is  but  believing  him- 
self to  be  what  he  really  is, — but,  according  to  the 
Gospel  expression,  the  degree  of  that  voluntary 
abasement  is  the  measure  of  God's  exaltation  of  him. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is,  beyond  measure,  liberal  in  be- 
stowing his  gifts  on  one,  who  is  sure  to  refer  all  the 
glory  of  them  to  the  divine  Giver.  It  is  to  the  little, 
that  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  makes  revelations, 
which  he  hides  from  the  proudly  wise  and  prudent.3 
More  correctly,  the  truly  wise,  the  perfect  ones  of 
whom  St.  Paul  speaks,  who  alone  understand  the 
mysteries  of  God's  infinite  love,4  of  which  they  have 
had  experience  even  in  this  present  life, — are  they 
not  those  little  ones,  of  whom  we  spoke  elsewhere,5 
whom  divine  Wisdom  calls  to  his  banquet,6  who  are 

1  Wisd.  vi.  22.  3  St.  Luke,  x.  21.  6  Our  10th  Vol.  p.  397. 

2  Ecclus.  vi.  32.  *  1  Cor.  ii.  6-16.  6  Prov.  ix.  4. 


276  TENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER    PENTECOST. 

nothing  in  their  own  eyes,1  but  whose  confiding 
simplicity  ravishes  his  heart,2  and  who  find  that  all 
good  things  come  to  them  together  with  this  divine 
visitor  ?  3  Yerily,  it  is  in  them,  that  among  all  the 
children  of  men,  he  finds  his  delights.4  It  is  just 
what  the  disciples  could  not  understand,  when,  after 
the  words  of  our  Lord,  which  are  given  in  to-day's 
Gospel,  they  insisted,  as  St.  Luke  tells  us,  on  keep- 
ing back  the  little  ones  who  wanted  to  get  too  near 
Him.  But,  this  Jesus  of  ours,  this  Wisdom  Incar- 
nate insisted  on  their  being  brought  to  him,  saying 
very  much  the  same  as  he  had  already  done  in  the 
Old  Testament  pages  :  Suffer  little  children  to  come 
to  me :  do  not  ye  forbid  them  !  for,  of  such  is  the  king- 
dom of  God,  and  of  them  that  are  like  them.  Amen 
1  say  to  you :  whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom 
of  God  as  a  child,  shall  not  enter  into  it!5 

In  that  heaven,  that  Kingdom  of  God,  the  Humility 
of  the  Saints  is  far  greater  than  it  was  whilst  they 
were  here  on  earth,  because  they  now  see  the  realities, 
which,  then  they  could  only  faintly  take  in.  Their 
happiness,  yonder  above,  is  to  be  gazing  on  and 
adoring  that  altitude  of  God,  of  which  they  will  never 
have  an  adequate  knowledge ;  and  the  more  they 
look  up  at  that  infinite  perfection,  the  deeper  do 
they  plunge  into  their  own  original  nothingness. 
Let  us  get  these  great  truths  well  into  us,  and  we 
shall  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  how  it  was, 
that  the  greatest  Saints  were  the  humblest  creatures 
here  below ;  and.  how  the  same  beautiful  fact  is  still 
one  great  charm  of  heaven ;  it  must  be  so,  for  the 
light  of  the  elect  is  in  proportion  to  their  glory. 
TV  hat,  then,  must  all  this  exquisite  truth  be,  when 
we  apply  it  to  the  great  Mother  of  God?  The 
nearest  to  the  throne  of  her  divine  Son,  she  is  pre- 
cisely what  she  was  in  Nazareth  ;  6  that  is,  she  is  the 

1  Wisd.  ix.  5.  3  Ibid.  vii.  11.  5  St.  Luke.xviii.  15-17. 

-  J  bid.  viii.  4  Prov.  viii.  31.  c  St.  Luke,  i.  48. 


mass.  277 

humblest  of  all  creatures,  because  she  is  the  most 
enlightened  of  all,  and,  therefore,  understands,  better 
than  even  the  Seraphim  and  Cherubim,  the  greatness 
of  God  and  the  nothingness  of  creatures. 

It  is  Humility  which  inspires  the  Church  with  the 
confidence  she  expresses  in  the  following  Offertory. 
The  more  this  virtue  enables  a  man  to  feel  his  own 
weakness,  the  more,  likewise,  does  it  show  him  the 
power  of  God,  who  is  ever  ready  to  help  them  that 
call  upon  him. 

OFFERTORY. 

To  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I         Ad   te,  Domine,  levavi 

raised  up  my  soul :  my  God,  animammeam:Deusmeus, 

I  put  my  trust  in  thee,  let  me  in  te  confido,  non  erubes- 

not  be  put  to  shame  :  neither  cam  :   neque  irrideant  me 

let  mine  enemies  scoff  at  me  :  inimici  mei:  etenim  univer- 

for,  none  that  rely  on  thee,  si  qui  te  exspectant,  non 

shall  ever  be  confounded.  confundentur. 

The  Mass  is  both  the  highest  worship  which  can 
be  given  to  the  divine  Majesty,  and  the  sovereign 
remedy  of  our  miseries.     The  Secret  tells  us  this. 

May  the  sacrifice  we  offer,  Tibi,  Domine,  sacrificia 

O  Lord,  be  presented  before  dicata  reddantur  :  quas  sic 

thee,    which    thou    hast    ap-  ad  honorem   nominis    tui 

pointed  to  be  offered  in  hon-  deferenda     tribuisti,    ut 

our  of  thy  name  ;  and,  at  the  eadem  remedia  fieri  nostra 

same  time,  become  a  remedy  prsestares.    Per  Dominum. 
to  us.     Through,  etc. 

The  other  Secrets  as  in  page  135. 

The  Communion- Anthem  sings  the  praise  of  this 
OblatioJi,  which  is  all  pure  and  full  of  most  perfect 
justice;  it  has  replaced,  on  the  Altar  of  God,  the 
victims  prescribed  by  the  mosaic  law. 


278 


TENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


COMMUNION. 


Acceptabis  sacrificium 
justitiae,  oblationes  et  holo- 
causta  super  altare  tuum, 
Domine. 


Thou  wilt  accept  the  sacri- 
fice of  righteousness,  oblations, 
and  whole  burnt-offerings,  on 
thy  altar,  0  Lord. 


The  august  Sacrament  is  ever  repairing  trie  losses 
we  sustain  through  our  many  miseries  ;  and  yet,  all 
this  would  not  be  of  much  profit  to  us,  unless  the 
divine  benignity  were  to  be  continually  bestowing  on 
us  those  actual  graces,  which  preserve  and  increase 
the  treasures  of  the  soul.  We  cannot  get  on  with- 
out this  special  aid ;  let  us  ask  for  it,  in  the  Post- 
communion. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 


QusesumuSjDomine  Deus 
noster ;  ut  quos  divinis  re- 
parare  non  desinis  sacra- 
mentis,  tuis  non  destituas 
benignus  auxiliis.  Per 
Dominuni. 


We  beseech  thee,  O  Lord 
our  God,  that,  in  thy  mercy, 
thou  wouldst  never  deprive 
those  of  thy  help,  whom  thou 
continually  strengthenest  by 
these  divine  mysteries. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  "page  137. 


YESPEPS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON    OF    THE    MAGNIFICAT. 


Descendit  hie  j  ustificatus 
in  domum  suam  ab  illo  : 
quia  omnis  qui  se  exaltat, 
humiliabitur:  et  qui  se  hu- 
miliat,  exaltabitur. 


This  man  went  down  to  his 
house  justified  rather  than  the 
other  :  because,  every  one 
that  exalteth  himself,  shall  be 
humbled  ;  and  he  that  hum- 
bleth  himself  shall  be  exalted. 


279 


LET  US   PRAY.  OREMUS. 

O  God,  who  chiefly  mani-  Deus,  qui  omnipotentiam 
festest  thine  omnipotence  by  tuam  parcendo  maxime  et 
pardoning  and  having  mercy:  miserandomanifestas,mul- 
increase  thy  mercy  upon  us  ;  tiplica  super  nos  misericor- 
that,  hastening  to  the  things  diam  tuam,  ut  ad  tua  pro- 
thou  hast  promised,  thou  mayst  missa  currentes,  ccelestium 
make  us  partakers  of  heavenly  bonorum  facias  esse  con- 
goods.    Through,  etc.  sortes.    Per  Dominum. 


280    ELEVENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


THE  ELEVENTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER  PENTECOST. 

"With  the  Greeks,  this  Sunday, — their  eleventh  of  Saint 
Matthew, — is  called  The  Kings  Parable,  who  calls  his 
servants  to  account.1  In  the  Western  Church,  it 
has  gone  under  the  name  of  Sunday  of  the  deaf  and 
dumb,  ever  since  the  Gospel  of  the  Pharisee  and  Pub- 
lican has  been  assigned  to  the  tenth.  To-day's  Mass, 
as  we  now  have  it,  still  gives  evidence  as  to  what 
was  its  ancient  arrangement.  Our  commentary  on 
to-day's  liturgy,  will  show  us  this  very  plainly. 

In  those  years,  when  Easter  falls  nearest  to  the 
21st  of  March,  the  Books  of  Kings  are  continued  as 
lessons  of  Matins  up  to,  but  never  beyond,  this  Sun- 
day. The  sickness  of  the  good  king  Ezechias,  and 
the  miraculous  cure  he  obtained  by  his  prayers  and 
tears,  are  then  the  subject  of  the  first  Lessons  of  the 
Night  Office.2 

MASS. 

The  learned  and  pious  Abbot  Rupert, — writing  on 
this  Sunday's  Mass  previous  to  the  change  made  in 
the  order  of  the  Gospel  Lessons, — thus  explains  the 
Church's  reason  for  selecting  the  following  Introit : 
"  The  Publican,  in  the  Gospel,  accuses  himself,  say- 
"  ing  :  I  am  not  worthy  to  lift  i<p  mine  eyes  to  heaven  ! 
il  St.  Paul,  in  the  Epistle,  does  in  like  manner,  and 

"  St.  Matth.  xviii.  23-35.  2  4  Kings,  xx. 


MASS. 


281 


"says:  I  am  the  hast  of  the  Apostles,  who  am  not 
ct  worthy  to  he  called  an  Apostle,  because  I  persecuted  the 
"  Church  of  God.  As,  then,  this  Humility,  which  is 
"  set  before  us  that  we  may  practise  it,  is  the  guar- 
"  dian  of  the  union  between  the  servants  of  God, 
"  because  if  keeps  them  from  being  puffed  up  one 
"  against  the  other,1 — it  is  most  appropriate  that  we 
"  should  first  sing  the  Introit,  which  tells  us,  that 
"  God  mdketh  men,  in  His  house,  abide  together  as 
"  though  they  were  all  but  one  soul."2 

INTROIT. 

God  in  his  sanctuary:  God,  Deus  in  loco  sancto  suo: 

who  maketh  brethren  abide  Deus,  qui  inhabitare  facit 

together  in  the  house:  he  will  unanimes  in   domo  :   ipse 

give  might  and  strength  to  his  dabit  virtutem  et  fortitudi- 

people.  nem  plebi  suae. 

Ps.  Let  God  arise,  and  his  Ps.   Exsurgat   Deus,   et 

enemies  shall    be   dispersed;  dissipentur  inimiciejus:  et 

and  let  those  that  hate  him,  fugiant,  qui  oderunt  eum, 

flee   before  his   face.     Glory,  a  facie  ejus.     Gloria  Patri. 

etc.    God.  Deus. 

The  Collect,  which  follows,  is  most  touching,  when 
we  see  it  in  the  light  of  the  Gospel  which,  originally, 
was  fixed  for  this  Sunday.  Though  that  connection 
has  now  been  broken,  yet  the  appropriateness  is  still 
very  striking ;  for,  the  Epistle,  as  Abbot  Rupert  was 
just  telling  us,  continues  to  urge  us  to  Humility,  by 
proposing  to  us  the  example  of  St.  Paul ;  the  Humi- 
lity of  the  repentant  Publican  has  been  anticipated. 
Our  Mother  the  Church  is  all  emotion  at  beholding 
this  Publican, — this  object  of  contempt  to  the  Jew, — 
striking  his  breast,  and  scarce  able  to  put  his  sorrow 
into  words :  she,  writh  motherly  tenderness,  comes  and 
takes  up  his  faltering  prayer,  and  gives  it  her  own 
eloquence.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  delicate  way, 
in  which  she  asks  of  the   Omnipotent,  that,  in  his 

1  1  Cor.  iv.  0.  2  Rur.  De  div.  Off.  xii.  11. 


282 


ELEVENTH    SUNDAY   AFTElt   PENTECOST. 


infinite  mercy,  he  would  restore  peace  to  troubled 
consciences,  by  "pardoning  them  their  sins,  and  grant- 
ing them  what  they,  poor  sinners,  are  too  afraid  to 
presume  to  ask  for. 


COLLECT. 


Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,  qui  abundant'ia  pie- 
tatis  tuae  et  inerita  suppli- 
cum  excedis  et  vota:  effun- 
de  super  nos  misericordiam 
tuam  ;  ut  dimittas  quas 
conscientia  metuit,  et  adji- 
cias  quod  oratio  non  prse- 
sumit.    Per  Dominum. 


0  almighty  and  eternal  God, 
who,  by  the  abundance  of  thy 
goodness,  exceedest  both  the 
merits  and  the  requests  of  thy 
suppliants :  pour  forth  thy 
mercy  upon  us  :  that  thou 
mayst  pardon  what  our  con- 
science fears,  and  mayst  grant 
what  our  prayer  presumes  not 
to  ask.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio Epistolsebeati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Corinthios. 


1  Cap.  xv. 

Fratres,  Notum  vobis 
facio  Evangelium,  quod 
praedicavi  vobis,  quod  et 
accepistis,  in  quo  et  statis, 
per  quod  et  salvamini:  qua 
ratione  praedicaverim  vo- 
bis, si  tenetis,  nisi  frustra 
credidistis.  Tradidi  enim 
vobis,  in  primis  quod  et 
accepi:  quoniam  Christus 
mortuus  est  pro  peccatis 
nostris  secundum  Scrip- 
turas:  et  quia  sepultus  est, 
et  quia  resurrexit  tertia  die 
secundum  Scripturas  :  et 
quia  visus  est  Cephas,  et 
post  hoc  undecim.  Deinde 
visus  est  plus  quam  quin- 
gentis  fratribus  simul:  ex 
quibus  multi  manent  usque 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Corinthians. 

1  Ch.  xv. 

Brethren :  I  make  known 
unto  you  the  gospel  which  I 
preach  to  you,  which  also  ye 
have  received,  and  wherein  ye 
stand,  by  which  also  ye  are 
saved :  if  ye  hold  fast  after 
what  manner  I  preached  unto 
you,  unless  ye  have  believed 
in  vain.  For  I  delivered  unto 
you  first  of  all,  which  I  also 
received :  how  that  Christ  died 
for  our  sins  according  to  the 
Scriptures :  and  that  he  was 
buried,  and  that  he  rose  again 
the  third  day  according  to  the 
Scriptures:  and  that  he  was 
seen  by  Cephas;  and  after  that 
by  the  eleven.  Then  he  was 
seen  by  more  than  five  hundred 
brethren  at  once ;  of  whom 


MASS. 


283 


many  remain  until  this  pre-  adhuc,  quidam  autem  dor- 
sent,  and  some  are  fallen  mierunt.  Deinde  visus  est 
asleep.  After  that  he  was  Jacobo,  deinde  Apostolis 
seen  by  James,  then  by  all  the  omnibus:  novissime  autem 
apostles  :  and  last  of  all,  he  omnium  tamquam  abortivo 
was  seen  also  by  me,  as  one  visus  est  et  mihi.  Ego 
born  out  of  due  time.  For  I  enim  sum  minimus  Apos- 
am  the  least  of  the  apostles,  tolorum,  qui  non  sum  dig- 
who  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  nus  vocari  Apostolus,  quo- 
an  apostle,  because  I  perse-  niam persecutes  sum  Eccle- 
cuted  the  Church  of  God.  But  siam  Dei.  Gratia  autem 
by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  Dei  sum  id  quod  sum,  et 
I  am;  and  his  grace  in  me  gratia  ejus  in  me  vacua 
hath  not  been  void.  non  f  uit. 

Last  Sunday,  the  Publican  reminded  us  of  the 
Humility  which  should  exist  in  the  sinner  :  to-day, 
the  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles  shows  us,  by  his  own  ex- 
ample, that  this  virtue  is  quite  as  suitable  to  a  man, 
who,  though  now  justified,  never  forgets  how,  in  the 
past,  he  offended  his  Maker.  The  sins  of  the  now 
just  man,  even  though  long  since  forgiven,  are  always 
before  him  j1  having  a  tendency  to  be  his  own  accuser,2 
he  finds,  in  the  fact  that  God  has  pardoned  and  for- 
gotten his  sins,3  nothing  but  an  additional  motive  for 
his  own  never  ceasing  to  remember  them.  The 
heavenly  favours,  which  may  sometimes  come  upon 
him,  as  a  recompense  for  the  sincerity  of  his  repentance, 
— the  manifestation  of  the  secrets  of  eternal  Wisdom 
may  be  accorded  him,4 — he  may,  perhaps,  be  per- 
mitted to  enter  into  the  powers  of  the  Lord,  and  there 
get  a  keen  insight  into  the  rights  of  infinite  justice,5 — 
yet,  all  these  favours  do  but  help  him  to  see,  more 
clearly,  the  enormity  of  those  voluntary  sins  of  his, 
which  added  their  own  malice  to  the  original  stains 
he  was  born  with.6  As  he  progresses  in  sanctity, 
Humility  becomes  to  him  something  more  than  a 
satisfaction  paid  to  justice  and  truth,  by  a  mind  en- 

1  Fs.  1.  5.  3  Ezech.  xviii.  5  Ps.  lxx.  16. 

2  Prov.  xviii.  17.  4  Ps.  1.  8.  6  Ps.  1.  6,  7. 


284     ELEVENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

lightened  from  on  nigh : — in  proportion  as  he  lives 
with  God  in  closer  and  closer  union,  and,  by  con- 
templation, goes  up  higher1  in  light  and  love, — divine 
charity,  which  is  ever  pressing  him 2  on  every  side, 
turns  the  very  remembrance  of  his  past  sins  into  what 
will  make  that  Charity  more  ardent.  That  burning 
Charity  of  his  fathoms  the  deep  abyss,  whence  grace 
has  drawn  him  ;  and  then,  she  darts  upwards,  from 
those  depths  of  hell,  more  vehement,  more  imperious, 
more  active,  than  ever.  Gratitude  for  the  priceless 
riches  he  now  possesses  by  the  munificence  of  his 
divine  Benefactor,  does  not  satisfy  that  sinner  of 
former  days ; — the  avowal  of  his  past  miseries  must 
and  does  escape  from  his  enraptured  soul  as  a  hymn 
to  his  God. 

Like  Augustine,  who  was  but  imitating  Paul,3 — 
"  he  glorifies  the  just  and  the  good  God,  by  pub- 
"  lishing  both  the  good  he  has  received  and  the  bad 
"  of  his  own  acts, — and  this,  in  order  to  win  over  to 
"  the  One  sole  object  of  his  praise  and  his  love  the 
"  minds  and  hearts  of  all  who  hear  him."4  This 
illustrious  convert  of  Monica  and  Ambrose  headed 
the  magnificent  Book  of  his  Confessions  with  these 
words  of  the  47th  Psalm,  which  so  admirably  express 
the  object  he  proposed  to  himself,  by  thus  telling  all 
about  himself :  Great  art  thou,  0  Lord,  and  exceed- 
ingly to  be  praised :  Great  is  thy  poiver,  and  of  thy 
wisdom  there  is  no  number.5  "And  yet,"  says  the 
Saint,  "  man  wishes  to  praise  thee, — man,  a  mere 
"  speck  of  thy  creation,  who  carries  about  him  his 
"own  mortality,  and  the  testimony  of  his  sin,  and 
"the  testimony  that  thou  resistest  the  proud;6  and 
"  yet,  this  man  wishes  to  praise  thee, — man,  a  mere 
"  speck  of  thy  creation.  Thou  excitest  him  to  take 
"  delight  in  praising  thee.  Receive,  then,  the  horn- 
"  age  which  is  offered  thee  by  the  tongue  that  was 

1  St.  Luke,  xiv.  10.  3  1  Cor.  xv.  8-10.  5  Ps.  xlvii.  2 ;  clxvi.5. 

2  2  Cor.  v.  14.  4  St.  Aug.  Retract,  ii.  C.  c  St.  James,  iv.  6. 


mass.  285 

"  formed  for  the  purpose  of  praising  thee.  Let  my 
"  flesh  and  all  my  bones,  that  have  been  healed  by 
"  Thee,  cry  out :  Who,  0  Lord,  is  like  unto  thee  ? l 
"  Let  my  soul  praise  thee,  that  it  may  love  thee ; 
"  and,  that  she  may  praise  thee,  let  her  confess  thy 
"  mercies.  I  wish  now  to  go  over,  in  my  mind,  all 
"  my  long  wanderings,  and  I  will  confess  the  things 
"  which  fill  me  with  shame,  and  will  make  of  them 
"  a  sacrifice  of  joy.2  Not  that  I  love  my  sins,  bat  it 
"  is  that  I  may  love  thee,  0  my  God,  that  I  recal 
"  them  to  mind ;  it  is  out  of  love  of  thy  love,  that  I 
"  now  recur  to  those  bitter  things,  that  I  may  taste 
"  thy  delights,  0  Sweetness  that  never  deceives ! 
"  Blissful  Sweetness,  that  has  no  dangers,  0  thou 
"  that  collectest  all  my  powers,  and  recallest  them 
"  from  the  painful  scattering  into  which  they  had 
"  been  thrown  by  my  separation  from  Thee,  0  Thou 
"  one  centre  of  all  being !  What  am  I  to  myself, 
"  when  I  have  not  Thee,  but  a  guide  that  leads  me 
"  to  the  abyss  ?  Or,  what  am  I,  when  all  is  well 
"  with  me,  but  a  little  one  that  is  sucking  in  the 
"  milk  which  thou  providest,  or  enjoying  Thee,  the 
"  Food  that  knows  not  corruption  ?  And  what  man- 
"  ner  of  man  is  any  man,  for  he  is  but  a  man  ?  Let 
si  them  that  are  strong  and  mighty, — them  that  have 
"  not,  as  yet,  had  the  happiness  of  being  laid  low 
"  and  cast  down, — let  them  laugh  at  me !  I  am  a 
"  weak  man  and  poor,  and  I  give  thee  praise.  For 
"  that  I  need  neither  voice  nor  words  ;  the  cries  of 
"the  thought  are  what  thou  hearest.  For,  w hen  I 
"  am  wicked,  my  being  displeased  with  myself,  is  a 
"  real  giving  thee  praise ;  but  when  I  am  pious,  my 
"  not  attributing  it  to  myself,  is,  again,  a  real  giving 
"  thee  praise  ;  for  if  Thou,  0  Lord,  bless  the  just  man* 
"it  is  because  thou  hadst  first  justified^  him  when 
"  he  was  ungodly."  5 

1  Ps.  xxxiv.  10.  2  Ps.  cxv.  17.  3  Ps.  v.  13. 

4  Rom.  iv.  5.      3  St.  Aug.  Confessions,  i.  1 ;  ii.  1 ;  iv.  1;  v.  1;  x.  2. 


286  ELEVENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

By  the  grace  of  God,  1  am  what  1  am ;  the  just 
man  should  make  this  language  of  the  Apostle  be 
his  own.  And  when  this  fundamental  truth  is 
thoroughly  impressed  upon  his  soul,  then  may  he 
fearlessly  add,  with  him :  His  grace  in  me  hath  not 
been  void.  For,  Humility  is  based  upon  Truth,  as 
we  said  last  Sunday ;  and,  as  it  would  be  contrary 
to  truth  were  one  to  refer  to  man  what  man  has 
from  God,  so,  likewise,  would  it  be  an  injury  to 
truth  not  to  recognise,  as  the  Saints  did,  the  works 
of  grace  where  God  has  wrought  them.  In  the 
former  case,  justice, — in  the  latter,  gratitude  would 
be  offended, — as  well  as  truth.  Now,  Humility, — 
whose  direct  aim  is  to  avoid  these  unjust  infringe- 
ments on  the  glory  due  to  God,  by  repressing  the 
risings  of  pride, — Humility  is  also  the  earnest 
prompter  of  gratitude,  so  truly  so,  indeed,  that  a 
proud  man  can  never  be  a  grateful  one ;  or,  to  say 
it  in  other  words, — the  greatest  enemy  to  the  gen- 
erous virtue  of  gratitude  is  pride. 

It  is  quite  true,  that  it  is  good,  and  prudent,  and, 
generally  speaking,  necessary,  for  souls  to  dwell  on 
the  consideration  of  their  faults  rather  than  upon 
the  favours  they  have  received  from  God,  and  this 
more  especially  in  the  first  beginning  of  their  con- 
version,— still,  it  is  never  lawful  for  any  man  to 
forget,  that,  besides  being  grieved  for  his  past  sins 
and  being  vigilant  as  to  present  temptations,  he  has, 
also,  the  bounden  duty  of  ceaselessly  thanking  the 
divine  Benefactor,  who  gave  him  both  the  grace  of 
a  change  of  life,  and  the  subsequent  progress  in 
virtue.1  When  a  Christian  cannot  see  a  grace,  or 
any  good,  in  himself,  without  having  immediately  to 
struggle  against  self-complacency  and  a  tendency  to 
prefer  himself  to  others, — he  must  not  be  troubled, 
of  course,  for  the  sin  of  pride  is  not  in  the  evil 

1  Ps.  1.  16, 17. 


mass.  287 

suggestions  which  may  arise  within  him,  but  in  the 
consent  which  is  yielded  to  such  suggestions ;  and 
yet,  this  weakness  which  accompanies  the  thinking 
on  God's  graces  is  not  without  its  dangers  in  the 
spiritual  life ;  and  the  Christian,  who  is  resolved  on 
making  any  advance  in  perfection,  must  sweetly  aim 
at  getting  altogether  rid  of  such  weakness.  Aided 
by  grace,  he  will  gradually  find  the  eye  of  his  soul 
growing  stronger,  by  the  infirmity  of  nature  getting 
cured,  and  by  the  removal  of  the  involuntary  rem- 
nants of  sin,  which,  as  so  many  vicious  humours, 
falsify  the  beautiful  light  of  Gfod's  gifts,  or  even 
sometimes  distort  it  altogether  by  an  unhappy  re- 
fraction. If  thine  eye  be  single,  says  our  Lord,  thy 
whole  body  icill  be  lightsome,  having  no  part  of  dark- 
ness ;  the  whole  shall  be  lightsome,1 — the  light  shall 
enlighten  thee  completely  and  surely,  because  it  will 
come  to  thee  without  any  vapoury  interference  or 
deviation. 

If  the  eye  be  simple! — yes,  it  is  holy  simplicity, 
daughter  and  inseparable  companion  of  humility, 
that  will  show  us  how  these  two  things  co-exist,  and 
mutually  tell  on  each  other,  when  a  soul  is  what  it 
should  be, — the  close  deliberate  consideration  of  the 
favours  she  has  received  from  heaven,  and  the  clear 
consciousness  of  her  own  miseries.  This  admirable 
simplicity  will  lead  us  to  the  school  of  the  Scriptures 
and  the  Saints,  there  to  teach  us  that  the  soul's  being 
praised  in  the  Lord?  and  our  glorying  in  the  Lord,2, 
is  really  a  giving  praise  and  glory  to  God  himself. 
When  our  Lady  declared,  in  her  Canticle,  that  all 
generations  would  call  her  blessed,  the  divine  enthu- 
siasm which  was  inspiring  her  was  quite  as  fully  the 
ecstasy  of  her  humility  as  it  was  that  of  her  love.4 
The  lives  of  God's  best  servants  are,  at  every  turn 


1  St.  Luke,  xi.  34-36.  3  1  Cor.  i.  31. 

2  Ps.  xxxiii.  3.  4  St.  Luke,  i.  48. 


288     ELEVENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

showing  us  these  sublime  transports,  wherein  they 
make  the  Magnificat  of  their  Queen  become  their 
own  hymn  of  praise  to  that  God,  magnifying  him  for 
all  the  great  things  which  he,  the  mighty  One,  vouch- 
safed to  do  through  their  instrumentality.1  When 
St.  Paul, — after  having  expressed  the  low  estimation 
he  had  of  himself,  compared  with  the  other  Apostles, 
— then  adds,  that  grace  had  not  been  a  failure  in 
him,  and  that  he  had  even  laboured  more  abundantly 
than  all  of  them,2 — we  are  not  to  suppose  that  he 
has  changed  his  tone,  or  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  who 
guides  him,  now  wishes  to  recal  his  previous  words ; 
no  :  it  is  one  and  the  same  conviction,  one  and  the 
same  desire,  which  inspire  these  words,  apparently 
so  different  and  so  contrary :  the  conviction  and 
desire  that  God  must  not,  and  shall  not,  be  disap- 
pointed in  his  gifts,  either  by  the  self- appropriation 
of  pride,  or  by  the  silence  of  ingratitude. 

We  have  purposely  limited  our  reflexions  to  the 
truths  suggested  by  the  concluding  lines  of  our 
Epistle,  because  they  complete  what  we  had  to  say 
on  Humility, — that  indispensable  virtue,  on  which 
depends,  not  only  all  progress,  but  even  all  surety, 
in  the  Christian  life.  What  St.  Paul  here  says 
regarding  the  Resurrection  of  our  Lord,  which  is  the 
basis  of  the  apostolic  'preaching  and  of  the  faith  of 
mankind,3  is  a  subject  of  quite  equal  importance  \ 
but,  this  grand  doctrine, — which,  through  the  Paschal 
solemnity,  gives  to  the  Liturgical  Year  its  both  pivot 
and  centre, — has  been  treated  of,  during  the  Eastern 
Octave,  with  all  the  fulness  it  deserved  ;  and,  even 
were  we  not  compelled  to  it  from  want  of  space,  we 
could  not  do  better  than  refer  our  readers  to  that 
Volume.  4 

The   Gradual,    according    to    some   of    our   most 

1  St.  Luke,  i.  49.  2  1  Cor.  xv.  10.  3  Ibid.  U. 

*  Our  first  Vol.  of  "  Paschal  Time," 


MASS. 


289 


esteemed  Liturgists,  is  offered  us  as  the  thanksgiving 
of  the  humble,  who  are  healed  by  God,  according 
to  the  hope  they  had  put  in  him.1 


GRADUAL. 


My  heart  trusted  in  God, 
and  I  was  relieved ;  and  my 
body  hath  recovered  its 
strength  :  and  I  will  praise 
him,  with  my  whole  heart. 

ft.  To  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I 
cried  out:  be  not  silent,  0  my 
God:  nor  depart  from  me. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Exult  in  God,  our  helper: 
joyfully  sing  to  the  God  of 
Jacob:  sing  a  hymn  of  joy 
upon  the  harp.    Alleluia. 


In  Deo  speravit  cor 
meum,  et  adjutus  sum  :  et 
refloruit  caro  mea  :  et  ex 
voluntate  mea  confitebor 
illi. 

ft.  Ad  te,  Domine,  cla- 
mavi:  Deus  meus,  ne  sileas: 
ne  discedas  a  me. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Exsultate  Deo,  adju- 
tori  nostro :  jubilate  Deo 
Jacob,  sumite  psalmum  ju- 
cundum  cum  cithara.  Alle- 
luia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel    of  the    holy    Gospel 


according  to 


Mark. 


Ch.  mi. 

At  that  time:  Jesus  going 
out  of  the  coast  of  Tyre,  he 
came  by  Sidon  to  the  sea  of 
Galilee  through  the  midst  of 
the  coast  of  Decapolis.  And 
they  bring  to  him  one  deaf 
and  dumb:  and  they  besought 
him  that  he  would  lay  his 
hand  upon  him.  And  taking 
him  from  the  multitude  apart, 
he  put  his  fingers  into  his  ears, 
and  spitting,  he  touched  his 
tongue  •  and  looking  up  to 
heaven,  he  groaned  and  said 
to  him:  Ephpheta,  that  is,  Be 
opened.      And    immediately 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Marcum. 

Gap.  vii. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Exiens 
Jesus  de  finibusTyri,venit 
per  Sidonem  ad  mare  Gali- 
lseaa  inter  medios  fines  De- 
capoleos.  Et  adducunt  ei 
surdum  etmutum,  et  depre- 
cabantur  eum,  ut  imponat 
illi  manum.  Et  apprehen- 
denseum  de  turba  seorsum, 
misit  digitos  suos  in  auri- 
culas ejus  :  et  expuens,  te«- 
tigit  linguam  ejus:  et  sus- 
piciens  in  coelum,  ingemuit, 
et  ait  illi:  Ephphetha,  quod 
est,  adaperire.  Et  statim 
apertae  sunt  aures  ejus,  et 


1  Rup.  uhi  supra;  "Durand.  Ration,  vi.  125. 
vol.  xi.  U 


290     ELEVENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

solutum  est  vinculum  lin-  his  ears  were  opened,  and  the 
guse  ejus,  et  loquebatur  string  of  his  tongue  was  loosed, 
recte.  Et  praecepit  illis,  ne  and  he  spoke  right.  And  he 
cui  dicerent.  Quanto  autem  charged  them  that  they  should 
eis  prsecipiebat,  tanto  ma-  tell  no  man.  But  the  more  he 
gis  plus  prsedicabant :  et  charged  them,so  much  the  more 
eo  amplius  admirabantur,  a  great  deal  did  they  publish  it. 
dicentes:  Bene  omnia  fecit:  And  so  much  the  more  did 
et  surdos  fecit  audire,  et  they  wonder,  saying:  He  hath 
mutos  loqui.  done  all  things  well ;  he  hath 

made  both  the  deaf  to  hear 
and  the  dumb  to  speak. 

Jesus  is  no  longer  in  Judea ;  the  names  of  the 
places,  mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  to-day's  Gospel, 
tell  us  very  clearly,  that  the  Gentile  world  has  be- 
come the  scene  of  the  divine  operations  for  man's 
salvation.  What  manner  of  man,  then,  is  this  who 
is  led  to  the  Saviour,  and  the  sight  of  whose  miseries 
make  the  Incarnate  Word  heave  a  sigh  ?  And  what 
is  the  meaning  of  the  extraordinary  circumstances 
which  produce  the  cure  ?  A  single  word  of  Jesus 
could  have  done  it  all,  and  his  power  would  have 
shone  forth  all  the  more  brightly.  But,  the  miracle, 
which  is  here  related,  contains  a  great  mystery ;  and 
the  Man-God,  who  aims  mainly  at  giving  us  a  lesson 
by  this  his  mercy,  makes  the  exercise  of  his  power 
subordinate  to  the  teaching  which  he  desires  to 
convey  to  us. 

The  holy  Fathers  tell  us,  that  this  man  represents 
the  entire  human  race,1  exclusive  of  the  Jewish 
people.  Abandoned  for  four  thousand  years  in  the 
sides,  that  is,  in  the  countries,  of  the  North,  where 
the  prince  of  this  world  was  ruling  as  absolute  master,2 
it  has  been  experiencing  the  terrible  effects  of  the 
seeming  forgetfulness,  on  the  part  of  its  Creator  and 
Father,  which  was  the  consequence  of  original  sin. 
Satan, — whose  perfidious  craftiness  has  caused  man 

1  Ludolph.  Caktii.  Vita  J.  Chr.  i.  90.  2  Is.  xiv.  12. 


MASS.  291 

to  be  driven  out  of  Paradise, — has  made  him  his  own 
prey,  and  nothing  could  exceed  the  artifice  he  has 
employed  for  keeping  him  in  his  grasp.  Wisely 
oppressing1  his  slave,  he  adopted  the  plan  of  making 
him  deaf  and  dumb,  for  this  would  hold  him  faster 
than  chains  of  adamant  could  ever  do.  Dumb,  he 
could  not  ask  God  to  deliver  him  ;  deaf,  he  could  not 
hear  the  divine  voice ;  and  thus,  the  two  ways  for 
obtaining  his  liberty  were  shut  against  him.  The 
adversary  of  God  and  man, — Satan, — he  may  boast 
of  his  tyranny.  The  grandest  of  all  God's  creations 
looks  like  a  failure ;  the  human  race,  in  all  its 
branches,  and  in  all  nations,  seems  ruined ;  for,  even 
that  people  whom  God  had  chosen  for  his  own,  and 
was  to  be  faithful  to  Him  when  every  other  had  gone 
astray,2  even  that  has  made  no  other  use  of  its  privi- 
leges than  the  denying  its  Lord  and  its  King,  more 
cruelly  than  all  the  rest  of  mankind ! 

What,  then !  is  the  Bride,  whom  the  Son  of  God 
came  to  seek  upon  the  earth, — is  the  society  of  saints, 
— to  be  limited  to  those  few  who  declared  them- 
selves his  disciples  during  the  years  of  his  mortal 
life  ?  Not  so  :  the  zeal  of  the  newly  formed  Church, 
and  the  ineffable  goodness  of  God,  produced  a  far 
grander  result.  Driven  from  Jerusalem,  as  her 
divine  Spouse  had  been,  the  Church  met  the  poor 
captive  of  Satan  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Judea ; 
she  would  fain  bring  him  into  the  kingdom  of  God ; 
and,  through  the  apostles  and  their  disciples,  she 
brings  him  to  Jesus,  beseeching  Him  to  lay  his  divine 
hand  upon  him.  No  human  power  could  effect  his 
cure.  He,  deafened  by  the  noise  of  his  passions,  it 
is  only  in  a  confused  way,  that  he  can  hear  even  the 
voice  of  his  own  conscience ;  and,  as  to  the  sounds  of 
tradition,  or  the  speakings  of  the  prophets,  they  are 
to  him  but  as  an  echo,  very  distant  and  faint.   Worst 

1  Exod.  i.  10.  2  Deut.  xxxii.  9. 


292     ELEVENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  TENTECOST. 

of  all,  as  his  hearing  is  gone,  that  most  precious  of 
our  senses  whilst  on  earth, — so,  likewise  is  gone  the 
power  of  making  good  his  losses,  for  as  the  Apostle 
teaches,  the  one  thing  that  could  save  him  is  Faith, 
and  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,1  and  his  hearing  is  dead. 

Our  Jesus  groans,  when  they  have  brought  this 
poor  creature  before  him.  He  was  grieved  at  seeing 
the  cruelties  the  enemy  had  inflicted  on  this  his  own 
privileged  being,  this  beautiful  work,  of  which  He 
himself  had  served  as  model  and  type  to  the  Blessed 
Trinity,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world.2  Raising  up 
to  heaven  those  eyes  of  his  sacred  Humanity, — those 
eyes,  whose  language  has  such  resistless  power,3 — he 
sees  the  Eternal  Father  acquiescing  to  the  intentions 
of  his  own  merciful  compassion.  Then,  resuming  the 
exercise  of  that  creative  omnipotence,  which,  in  the 
beginning,  had  made  all  things  to  be  very  good*  and 
all  his  works  be  perfect,5  he,  as  God  and  as  the  Word,6 
utters  the  mighty  word  of  restoration :  Ephpheta ! 
Be  thou  opened/  Nothingness,  or  rather  (in  this 
instance)  Ruin,  which  is  worse  than  nothingness,  obey 
the  well-known  voice ;  the  ears  of  the  poor  sufferer 
are  opened,  joyfully  opened  to  the  teachings,  which  his 
delighted  Mother  the  Church  pours  into  them.  She 
is  all  the  gladder,  because  it  was  her  prayers  that 
won  this  deliverance ;  and  he,  in  whom  Faith  comes 
now  through  his  ears  making  him  a  changed  being, 
— he,  finding  that  his  tongue  can  speak,  speaks,  or 
rather,  sings  out  a  canticle  of  praise  to  his  God, — a 
canticle  none  the  less  well  sung,  because  it  is  the  first 
time  he  has  been  able  to  be  its  chanter,  i 

And  yet,  as  we  were  observing,  this  merciful  Lord 
of  ours,  by  this  cure,  aims  not  so  much  at  showing 
the  power  of  his  divine  word,  as  at  giving  a  glorious 
teaching  to  his  followers;   he  wishes  to  reveal  to 

1  Rom.  x.  17.  *  Gen.  i.  31.  6  St.  John,  i.  3. 

2  Gen.  i.  26.  6  Deut.  xxxii.  4^        1  Ps.  1.  17. 

3  St.  John,  xi.  42. 


mass.  293 

them,  under  certain   visible   symbols,   the  invisible 
realities  produced,  by  bis  grace,  in  the  secret  of  the 
Sacraments.     It  is  for  the  sake  of  such  teaching,  that 
the  Gospel  has  mentioned  such  an  apparently  trifling 
detail  as  this, — that  when  the  deaf  and  dumb  man  was 
brought  before  him,  he  took  him  apart,  apart,  so  to 
say,  from  the  multitude  of  the  noisy  passions  and  the 
vain  thoughts,1  which  had  made  him  deaf  to  heavenly 
truths.     After   all,  would   there   be   much   good  in 
curing  him,  if  the  occasion  of  his  malady  were  not 
removed,  and  he  were  to  relapse  perhaps  that  same 
day  ?     So  then,  having,  by  this  separation,  taken  pre- 
cautions for  the  future,  Jesus  inserts  into  the  ears  of 
the  man's  body  his  own  divine  fingers  which  bring 
the  Holy  Ghost,2  and  make  to  penetrate  right  to  the 
ears  of  his  heart  the  restorative  power  of  this  Spirit 
of  love.     And  finally,  more  mysteriously,  because  the 
truth  which  was  to  be  expressed  is  more  profound, — 
He  touches,  with  the  saliva  of  his  sacred  mouth,  that 
tongue  which  had  become  incapable  of  giving  glory  and 
praise  ;  and  Wisdom  (for  it  is  she  that  is  here  mysti- 
tically  signified,) — Wisdom,  that  cometh   forth  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Most  Highland,  flows  for  us  from  the 
Saviours  fountains4  as  a  life-giving  drink,5 — yes,  this 
Wisdom  openeth  the  mouth  of  dumb  man,6  just  as 
she  maketh  eloquent  the  tongues  of  speechless  infants.7 
Therefore  it  is,  that  the  Church, — in  order  to  show 
us  that  the   event  recorded  in   to-day's   Gospel   is 
figurative,  not  merely  of  one  individual  man,  but  of 
us  all, — has  prescribed,  that  the  circumstances  which 
accompanied  the  cure  of  this  deaf  and  dumb  sufferer 
shall  be  expressed  in  the  ceremonies  of  holy  Baptism. 
The  Priest,  before  pouring  the  water  of  the  sacred 
Font  on  the  person  who  is  presented  for  Baptism, 
puts  on  the  Catechumen's  tongue  the  salt  of  Wisdom, 

1 V.  Bed.  in  Marc.  ii.      3  Ecclus.  xxiv.  5.         6  Wisd.  x.  21. 
2  Cf.  St.  Lake,  xi.  20  ;     4  Is.  xii.  3.  7  Ibid. 

St.  Matth.  xii.  28.      5  Ecclus.  xxiv.  5. 


294  ELEVENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

and  touches  his  ears,  saying:  Ephpheta!  that  is,  Be 
opened  !x 

There  is  an  instruction  of  another  kind  included  in 
our  Gospel,  and  which  is  worthy  of  our  notice,  as 
closely  bearing  on  what  we  have  been  saying  regarding 
Humility.  Our  Lord  imposes  silence  on  those  who 
have  been  witnesses  of  the  miraculous  cure,  although 
he  knew  that  their  praise- worthy  enthusiasm  could 
never  allow  them  to  obey  him.  By  his  injunction, 
he  wishes  to  give  a  lesson  to  his  followers, — that  if, 
at  times,  it  is  impossible  to  keep  men  from  being  in 
admiration  at  the  works  they  achieve, — if,  sometimes, 
the  Holy  Spirit,  in  opposition  to  their  wishes,  forces 
them  to  undergo  public  applause  for  the  greater  glory 
of  the  God  whose  instruments  they  are, — yet  must 
they  always  do  all  in  their  power  to  avoid  being 
noticed;  they  must  prefer  to  be  despised,2  or,  at  least, 
not  talked  of;  they  must  love  to  be  hid  in  the  secret 
of  the  face  of  God;3  and,  after  the  most  brilliant, 
just  as  truly  as  they  would  after  the  most  menial 
duties,  they  must  say  from  the  heartiest  conviction : 
We  are  unprofitable  servants,  we  have  but  done 
%vhat  we  ought  to  do.4 

It  is  again  the  hymn  of  the  humble,  whether 
delivered,  or  healed,  or  glorified,  by  God,  which  is 
sung  in  the  Offertory. 

OFFERTORY. 

Exaltabote,Domine,quo-  I  will  extol  thee,  0  Lord, 

niam  suscepisti  me  :  nee  because  thou  hast  upholden 
delectasti  inimicosmeossu-  me,  and  hast  not  gratified  the 
per  me :  Domine,  clamavi  desire  of  mine  enemies  against 
ad  te,  et  sanasti  me.  me.   Lord,  I  cried  out  to  thee, 

and  thou  healed  st  me. 

The  assembly  of  God's  servants  beseech  him,  in  the 
following   Secret,  graciously  to  accept   their  gifts; 

1  Rit.  rom.  Ordo  baptism.  3  Ps.  xxx.  21. 

2  Ps.  lxxxiii.  11.  4  [St.  Lake,  xvii.  10. 


MASS. 


295 


and,  in  this  holy  Sacrifice,  to  turn  them  into  the 
homage  of  their  delighted  service,  and  the  support  of 
their  weakness. 

SECRET. 

Look  down,  O  Lord,  we  be-  Respice,  Domine,  quaesu- 

seech  thee,  on  our  homage;  mus, nostrampropitiusser- 

that  the  gifts  we  offer  thee  vitutem:  utquodofferimus, 

may  be  acceptable  to  thee,  and  sit  tibi  munus  acceptum,  et 

a    help     to    our    weakness,  sitnostrae  fragilitatis  subsi- 

Through,  etc.  dium.  Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

No  more  appropriate  Anthem,  than  the  following, 
could  have  been  selected,  as  the  Communion,  for 
the  season  which  finds  men  busy  in  harvesting  the 
fruits  of  the  earth.  Oh  !  yes,  we  should  make  it  our 
first  thought  to  give  to  God,  through  his  Church  and 
the  poor,  the  first  fruits  of  these  blessings  which  He 
himself  has  bestowed  upon  us.  But,  in  order  be- 
comingly to  honour  the  Lord  in  this,  we  must  take 
care  not  to  boast,  as  the  Pharisee  did,  in  this  our 
fulfilment  of  a  duty  so  imperative,  and  yet  so  very 
profitable  to  ourselves  who  obey  it. 

COMMUNION. 

Honour  the  Lord  out  of  thy  Honora  Dominum  de  tua 
substance,  and  with  the  first  substantia,  et  de  primitiis 
fruits  of  thy  crops  ;  and  thy  frugum  tuarum :  et  imple- 
barns  shall  be  filled  abun-  buntur  horrea  tua  saturita- 
dantly,  and  thy  wine-presses  te,  et  vino  torcularia  re- 
shall  overflow.  dundabunt. 

The  heavenly  remedy  of  these  sacred  Mysteries 
acts  upon  our  body  and  soul :  it  is  for  the  salvation 
of  both,  and,  therefore,  we  should  love  these  Mysteries 
as  our  best  glory  on  earth.  In  the  Postcommunion, 
the  Church  prays  that  her  children  may  be  blessed 
in  the  whole  fulness  of  these  blessings. 


296 


ELEVENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


POST-COMMUNION. 


Sentiamus,  qusesumus 
Domine,  tuiperceptionesa- 
cramenti,  subsidium  men- 
tis et  corporis:  ut  in  utro- 
que  salvati,  ccelestis  re- 
medii  plenitudine  glorie- 
mur.    Per  Dominum. 


May  we  experience,  by  the 
participation  of  these  thy 
mysteries,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  help  in  body  and  mind: 
that,  in  the  salvation  of  both, 
we  may  enjoy  the  full  effect 
of  this  heavenly  remedy. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Postcommunion,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON    OF    THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Bene  omnia  fecit,  et  sur- 
dos  fecit  audire,  et  mutos 
loqui. 

OREMUS. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,  qui  abundant ia  pie- 
tatis  tuse  et  merita  suppli- 
cum  excedis  et  vota:  effun- 
de  super  nosmisericordiam 
tuam,  ut  dimittas  quae 
conscientia  metuit,  et  adji- 
cias  quod  oratio  non  prae- 
sumit.    Per  Dominum. 


He  hath  done  all  things 
well :  he  hath  made  both  the 
deaf  to  hear,  and  the  dumb  to 
speak. 

LET   US   PRAY. 

0  almighty  and  eternal  God, 
who,  by  the  abundance  of  thy 
goodness,  exceedest  both  the 
merits  and  the  requests  of  thy 
suppliants  :  pour  forth  thy 
mercy  upon  us :  that  thou 
mayst  pardon  what  our  con- 
science fears,  and  mayst  grant 
what  our  prayer  presumes  not 
to  ask.    Through,  etc. 


mass.  297 


THE  TWELFTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER    PENTECOST. 
0 

MASS. 

On  this  Sunday,  which  is  their  Tivelfth  of  Saint 
Matthew,  the  Greeks  read,  in  the  Mass,  the  episode  of 
the  young  rich  man  who  questions  Jesus,  given  in  the 
19th  Chapter  of  the  Saint's  Gospel.  In  the  West,  it 
is  the  Gospel  of  the  good  Samaritan,  which  gives  its 
name  to  this  twelfth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

The  Introit  begins  with  that  beautiful  verse  of  the 
69th  Psalm:  Come  to  mine  assistance,  0  God!  0 
Lord,  make  haste  to  help  me  I  Cassian,  in  his  tenth 
Conference  has  admirably  drawn  out  the  beauty  of 
these  words,  and  shows  how  they  are  appropriate  for 
every  circumstance  of  life,  and  how  fully  they  respond 
to  every  sentiment  of  the  Christian  soul.1  Durandus 
applies  this  Introit's  being,  used  in  to-day's  liturgy  to 
Job,  because  the  Lessons  for  the  Divine  Office,  which 
are  taken  from  that  Book  of  Scripture,  are  sometimes, 
though  not  often,  the  ones  which  coincide  with  this 
Sunday.2  Rupert  looks  on  this  Introit  as  the  fitting 
prayer  of  the  deaf  and  dumb  man,  whose  cure  was  the 
subject  of  our  reflexions  this  day  last  week.  He  says  : 
"  The  human  race,  in  the  person  of  our  first  parents, 
tc  had  become  deaf  to  the  commandments  of  God,  and 
"  dumb  in  his  praise ;  the  first  use  he  makes  of  his 
"  untied  tongue,  is   to  call  upon  the  God  who  had 

1  Cass.  Collat.  x.  10.  2  Dur.  Rat.  vi.  126. 


298  TWELFTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

"  healed  him/'1  The  same  words  are  the  Church's 
first  address,  each  morning,  to  her  Creator,  and  her 
opening  of  each  of  the  canonical  hours,  both  day  and 
night. 

INTKOIT. 

Deus,     in     adjutorium  Incline  unto   mine   aid,  O 

meum  intende :    Domine,  God  !     O  Lord,  make  haste  to 

adadjuvandummefestina:  help  me  !    Let  mine  enemies 

confundantur,    et  revere-  be  confounded  and  ashamed 

antur     inimici     mei,     qui  that  seek  my  soul, 

quosrunt  animam  meam.  Ps.    Let   them    be  turned 

Ps.    Avertantur    retror-  backward,     and     blush     for 

sum,  et  erubescant,  qui  co-  shame,  that  desire  evils  to  me. 

gitant  mihi  mala.     Gloria  Glory,  etc.    Incline. 
Patri.  Deus. 

It  frequently  happens,  (and  we  have  already  ex- 
plained the  reason,)  that  the  Collect  of  the  Masses  for 
the  Time  after  Pentecost  contains  an  allusion  to  the 
Gospel  of  the  foregoing  Sunday.  The  one  for  to-day 
is  evidently  such.  Eight  days  back,  we  were  taught 
how  man,  who  had  rendered  himself  incapable  of 
serving  his  Creator,  finds  by  Divine  mercy,  that  his 
supernatural  faculties  are  restored  to  him ;  and  that, 
then,  he  gives  forth  the  voice  of  praise,  and  that,  too, 
rightly — (loquebatur  recte). — The  Church,  taking  up 
the  idea  here  suggested,  prays  thus : 

COLLECT. 

Omnipotens  et  misericors  0   almighty    and   merciful 

Deus,  de  cujusmunere  ve-  God,    from    whose     gift    it 

nit,  ut  tibi  a  fidelibus  tuis  cometh,    that     thy    Faithful 

digneetlaudabiliterservia-  worthily  and  laudably  serve 

tur :  tribue,  qusesumus,  no-  thee  :    grant  us,   we   beseech 

bis ;    ut   ad    promissiones  thee,  that  we  may  run  on, 

tuas  sine  offensione  curra-  without    stumbling,    to    the 

mus.    Per  Dominum.  things  thou  hast  promised  us. 

Through,  etc. 

The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 

1  Rup.  De  div.  Off.  xii.  12. 


MASS. 


299 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Corinthians. 

2  Ch.  Hi. 

Brethren  :  We  have  con- 
fidence through  Christ  to- 
wards God  :  not  that  we  are 
sufficient  to  think  any  thing 
of  ourselves  as  of  ourselves  : 
but  our  sufficiency  is  from 
God.  Who  also  hath  made  us 
fit  ministers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, not  in  the  letter  but  in 
the  spirit.  For  the  letter 
killeth  ;  but  the  spirit  quick- 
eneth.  Now  if  the  ministra- 
tion of  death,  engraven  with 
letters  upon  stones,  was  glo- 
rious, so  that  the  children  of 
Israel  could  not  steadfastly 
behold  the  face  of  Moses,  for 
the  glory  of  his  countenance, 
which  is  made  void :  how 
shall  not  the  ministration  of 
the  Spirit  be  rather  in  glory  1 
For  if  the  ministration  of 
condemnation  be  glory,  much 
more  the  ministration  of 
justice  aboundeth  in  glory. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Corinthios. 

2  Cap.  Hi. 

Fratres,  Fiduciam  talem 
habemus  per  Christum  ad 
Deum :  non  quod  sufncien- 
tes  simus  cogitare  aliquid  a 
nobis,  quasi  ex  nobis  :  sed 
sufficientia  nostra  ex  Deo 
est:  qui  et idoneos  nos  fecit 
ministros  novi  testamenti, 
non  littera,  sedspiritu:  lit- 
tera  enim  occidit,  spiritus 
autem  vivificat.  Quod  si 
ministratio  mortis  litteris 
deformatain  lapidibus,  fuit 
in  gloria,  ita  ut  non  possent 
intendere  filii  Israel  in  fa- 
ciem  Moysi,  propter  glori- 
am  vultus  ejus,  quae  eva- 
cuatur  :  quomodo  non  ma- 
gis  ministratio  spiritus  erit 
in  gloria?  Nam  si  minis- 
tratio damnationis  gloria 
est :  multo  magis  abundat 
ministerium  justitiae  in 
gloria. 


The  glorious  promises,  mentioned  in  the  concluding 
words  of  our  Collect,  are  described  to  us  in  the 
Epistle,  which  seems,  at  first  sight,  to  be  entirely  in 
praise  of  the  Apostolic  ministry  ;  but  the  glory  of  the 
Apostles  is  the  glory  of  Him  whom  they  announce ; 
and  this  one  glory,  which  is  His, — Christ,  the  Head, 
communicates  it  to  all  his  members,  making  it  also 
their  one  glory.  This  divine  glory  flows,  together  with 
the  divine  life,  from  that  sacred  Head;  and  they  both 
flow,  and  copiously  too,  through  all  the  channels  of 


300  TWELFTH    SUNDAY    AFTElt    PENTECOST. 

holy  Church.1  If  they  do  not  come  to  all  christians 
in  the  same  proportions, — such  difference  in  no  wise 
denotes  that  the  glory  or  the  life  themselves  are  of  a 
different  kind  to  some  from  what  they  are  to  others. 
Each  member  of  Christ's  mystical  Body  is  called  upon 
to  form  his  own  degree  of  capacity  for  glory  ;  not  of 
course,  as  the  Apostle  says,  that  we  are,  of  ourselves, 
sufficient  even  to  think  anything  as  of  ourselves, — 
but,  what  diversity  is  there  not,  in  the  way  in  which 
men  turn  to  profit  the  divine  capital  allotted  to  each 
by  grace ! 

Oh  !  if  we  did  but  know  the  gift  of  God  !  a  if  we 
did  but  understand  the  supereminent  dignity  reserved, 
under  the  law  of  love,  to  every  man  of  good  will ! 3 
then,  perhaps,  our  cowardice  and  sluggishness  would, 
at  last,  go  ;  perhaps,  then,  our  souls  would  get  fired 
with  the  noble  ambition  which  turns  men  into  saints. 
At  all  events,  we  should  then  come  to  realise, — that 
christian  humility,  of  which  we  were  speaking  on  the 
last  two  Sundays,  is  not  the  vulgar  grovelling  of  a 
low-minded  man,  but  the  glorious  entrance  upon  the 
way  which  leads,  by  divine  Union,  to  the  one  true 
greatness.  Are  not  those  men  inconsistent  and 
senseless,  who,  longing,  by  the  very  law  of  their 
nature,  for  glory, — go  seeking  it  in  the  phantoms  of 
pride,  and  allow  themselves  to  be  diverted,  by  the 
baubles  of  vanity,  from  the  pursuit  of  those  real 
honours,  which  Eternal  Wisdom4  had  destined  for 
them !  And  those  grand  honours  were  to  have  been 
heaped  upon  them,  not  only  in  their  future  heaven, 
but  even  here  in  their  earthly  habitation, — and  God 
and  his  Saints  were  to  have  been  admiring  and 
applauding  spectators ! 

In  the   name,   then,    of  our   dearest   and   truest 
interests,  let  us  give  ear  to  our  Apostle,  and  get  into 

1  Eph.  iv.  15,  16.  3  St.  Luke,  ii.  14. 

2  St.  John,  iv.  10.  *  Ecclus.  vi.  29-32. 


MASS. 


301 


us  his  heavenly  enthusiasm.  We  shall  understand 
his  exquisite  teaching  all  the  better,  if  we  read  the 
sequel  to  the  few  lines  assigned  for  to-day's  Epistle. 
It  is  but  fully  carrying  out  the  wishes  of  the  Church, 
when  her  children,  after  or  before  assisting  at  her 
liturgical  services,  take  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and 
read  for  themselves  the  continuation  of  passages, 
which  are  necessarily  abridged  during  the  public 
celebrations.  It  were  well,  if  they  did  this  all 
through  the  Year.  What  a  fund  of  instruction  they 
would  thus  acquire !  To-day,  however,  there  is  an 
additional  motive  for  the  suggestion,  inasmuch  as 
this  second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is  brought 
before  us  for  the  first  and  only  time  during  this 
season  of  the  Liturgy. 

But,  let  us  examine  what  is  this  glory  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  so  fills  the  Apostle  with  ecstacy, 
and,  in  his  mind,  almost  entirely  eclipses  the  splen- 
dour of  the  Old.  Splendour  there  undoubtedly  was 
in  the  Sinai  covenant.  Never  had  there  been  such 
a  manifestation  of  God's  majesty,  and  omnipotence, 
and  holiness,  as  on  that  day,  when  gathering 
together,  at  the  foot  of  the  Mount,  the  descendants 
of  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  he  mercifully  renewed, 
with  this  immense  family,  the  covenant  formerly 
made  with  their  Fathers,1  and  gave  them  his  Law  in 
the  extraordinarily  solemn  manner  described  in  the 
book  of  Exodus.  And  yet,  that  Law,  engraven  as 
it  was  on  stone  by  God's  own  hand,  was  not,  for  all 
that,  in  the  hearts  of  the  receivers ;  neither  did  its 
holiness  prevent,  though  it  condemned,  sm, — sin 
which  reigns  in  man's  heart.2  Moses,  who  carried 
the  divine  writing,  came  down  from  the  Mount, 
having  the  rays  of  God's  glory  blazing  on  his  face ; 3 
but,  it  was  a  glory  which  was  not  to  be  shared  in  by 
the  people  of  whom  he  was  the  head;  it  was  for 

1  Gen.  xv.  18.        2  Rom.  vii.  12,  13.        3  Exod.  xxxiv.  29-35. 


302  TWELFTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

himself  alone,  as  was  likewise  the  privilege  he  had 
enjoyed  of  speaking  with  God  face  to  face ; 1  it  ceased 
with  him ;  thus  signifying,  hy  its  short  duration,  the 
character  of  that  ministration,  which  was  to  cease  on 
the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  just  as  the  night's  bor- 
rowed light  vanishes  when  the  day  appears.  And, 
as  it  were  the  better  to  show,  that  the  time  was  not 
as  yet  come,  when  God  would  manifest  his  glory, — 
the  children  of  Israel  were  not  able  to  gaze  stead- 
fastly on  the  face  of  Moses ;  so  that,  when  he  had 
to  speak  to  the  people,  he  had  need  to  put  on  a  veil. 
Though  a  mere  borrowed  light,  the  brightness  of 
Moses'  face  represented  the  glory  of  the  future 
Covenant,  whose  splendour  was  to  shine,  not,  of 
course,  externally,  but  in  the  hearts  of  us  all,  by 
giving  us  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
God,  in  the  face  of  Christ  Jesus.2  Light,  living  and 
life-giving,  which  is  none  other  than  the  divine 
Word,3  the  Wisdom  of  the  Father,4  a  Light  and  a 
Wisdom,  which  the  energy  of  the  Sacraments, 
seconded  by  contemplation  and  love,  makes  to  pass, 
from  the  Humanity  of  our  divine  Head,  to  the  very 
recesses  of  our  souls. 

We  shall  find  our  Sunday  giving  us  a  second 
reminder  of  Moses ;  but  the  true  and  enduring  great- 
ness of  the  hebrew  leader  is  in  what  we  have  been 
stating.  In  the  same  way  that  Abraham  was  grander 
by  the  spiritual  progeny  which  was  the  issue  of  his 
Faith,  than  he  was  by  the  posterity  that  was  his  in  the 
flesh, — so,  the  glory  of  Moses  consisted,  not  so  much 
in  his  having  been  at  the  head  of  the  ancient 
Israelites  for  forty  long  years,  as  in  his  having 
represented,  in  his  own  person,  both  the  office  of  the 
Messiah  King,  and  the  prerogatives  of  the  new 
people.     The  Gentile  is  set  free  from  the  law  of  fear 


1  Exod.  xxiii.  11.  3  St.  Jolin,  i.  4-9. 

2  2  Cor.  iv.  6.  *  Wisd.  vii.  25,  26. 


MASS.  303 

and  sin l  by  the  law  of  grace,  which  not  only  declares 
justice,  but  gives  it ;  the  Gentile,  having  been  made 
a  son  of  God,2  communes  with  Him  in  that  liberty 
which  comes  of  the  Spirit  of  love.3  But,  this  privi- 
leged Gentile  has  no  type  which  so  perfectly  repre- 
sents him,  in  the  first  Covenant,  as  this  the  very 
lawgiver  of  Israel,  this  Moses  who  finds  such  favour 
with  the  Most  High  as  to  be  admitted  to  behold 
His  glory,4"  and  converse  with  Him  with  all  the 
intimacy  of  friend  to  friend?  Whereas  God 
showed  himself  to  this  his  servant, — as  far,  that  is, 
as  mortal  man  is  capable  of  such  sight,6 — and  as  he 
was  seen  by  him  without  the  intermediation  of 
figures  or  images,7 — so,  when  he  approached  thus  to 
God,  Moses  took  from  his  face  the  veil  he  wore  at 
other  times.  The  Jew  persists,  even  to  this  very 
day,  in  keeping,  between  himself  and  Christ,  this 
veil,  which  is  removed  to  all  the  world  else  ; 8  the 
Christian,  on  the  contrary,  with  the  holy  daring,  of 
which  the  Apostle  speaks,9  removes  all  intermediates 
between  God  and  himself,  and  draws  aside  the  veil 
of  all  figures.  Beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord  with 
face  uncovered,  we  are  transformed  into  the  same 
image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord,10  for  we  become  other  christs,  and  are  made 
like  to  God  the  Father,  as  is  his  Son  Christ  Jesus. 

Thus  is  fulfilled  the  will  of  this  Almighty  Father 
for  the  sanctification  of  the  elect.  God  sees  himself 
reflected  in  these  predestinated,  who  are  become, 
in  the  beautiful  light  divine,  conformable  to  the 
image  of  his  Son.11  He  could  say  of  each  one  of 
them  what  he  spoke  at  the  Jordan  and  on  Thabor : 
This  is  my  beloved  son,  in  %vhom  I  am  ivell  pleased12 

1  Rom.  viii.  2.  5  Ibid.  11.  9  Ibid.  12. 

2  Ibid.  15.  6  Hid.  20.  10  Ibid.  18. 

'  2  Cor.  lii.  17.  7  Num.  xii.  8.  "  Rom.  viii.  29. 

*  Exod.  xxxiii.  17-19.    8  2  Cor.  iii.  14.  12  St.  Matth.  iii.  17  ; 

xvii.  5. 


304  TWELFTH   SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

He  makes  them  his  true  temple,1  verifying  the  word 
he  spoke  of  old :  I  will  set  my  tabernacle  in  the 
midst  of  you :  I  will  walk  among  you,  and  will  be 
your  God ;2  I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  East, 
and  gather  thee  from  the  West ;  I  will  say  to  the 
North  :  "  Give  wp  /"  and  to  the  South:  "Keep  not 
back ! "  Bring  my  sons  from  afar,  and  my 
daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  1 3 

Such  are  the  promises,  for  whose  realization  we 
should,   as  the  Apostle  says,  he  all  earnestness  in 
working  out  our  sanctification,  by  cleansing  our- 
selves from  all  defilement  of  the  flesh  and  of  the 
spirit,  in  the  fear  of  God,4  and  in  his  love.     Such  is 
that  glory  of  the  New  Testament,  that  glory  of  the 
Church  and  of  every  Christian  soul,  which  so  im- 
mensely surpasses   the  glory  of  the   Old   and   the 
brightness  which  lit  up  the  face  of  Moses.     As  to  our 
carrying  this  treasure  in  frail  vessels,  we  must  not, 
on  that  account,  lose  heart,  hut,  the  rather,  rejoice  in 
this  weakness,  which  makes  God's  power  all  the  more 
evident ;  we  must  take  our  miseries,  and  even  Death 
itself,  and  turn  them  into  profit,  by  giving  the  stronger 
manifestation  of  our  Lord  Jesus'  life  in  this  mortal 
flesh  of  ours.     What  matters  it  to  our  faith  and  our 
hope,  if  our   outward   man  is  gradually  falling  to 
decay,  when  the  inner  is  being  renewed  day  by  day  ? 
The  light  and  transitory  suffering  of  the  present  is 
producing  within  us  an  eternal  weight  of  glory.     Let 
us,  then,  fix  our  gaze,  not  on  what  is  seen,  but  on 
what  is  unseen ;  the  visible  passes,  the  invisible  is 
eternal.5 

The  human  race,  delivered  from  its  long  ages  of 
dumbness,  and  blessed,  at  the  same  time,  with  God's 
gifts,  sings,  in  the  Gradual,  the  hymn  of  its  warmest 
gratitude. 

1  2  Cor.  vi.  16.  3  Is.  xliii.  5-7.  6  2^Cor.  iv.  7-18,  etc. 

2  Lev.  xx vi.  12.  4  2  Cor.  vii.  1. 


MASS. 


305 


GRADUAL. 


I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all 
times  :  his  praise  shall  be 
always  in  my  mouth. 

"ff.  In  the  Lord  shall  my 
soul  be  praised:  let  the  meek 
hear  and  rejoice. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$\  0  Lord,  the  God  of  my 
salvation,  I  have  cried,  in  the 
day  and  in  the  night,  before 
thee.     Alleluia. 


Benedicam  Dominum  in 
omni  tempore:  semper  laus 
ejus  in  ore  meo. 

y.  In  Domino  laudabitur 
anima  mea:  audiant  man- 
sueti,  et  laetentur. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

^.  Domine  Deus  salutis 
mead,  in  die  clamavi  et 
nocte  coram  te.  Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel    of    the    holy  Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ch.  x. 

At  that  time:  Jesus  said  to 
his  disciples:  Blessed  are  the 
eyes  which  seethe  things  which 
ye  see.  For  I  say  to  you,  that 
many  prophets  and  kings  have 
desired  to  see  the  things  that 
ye  see,  and  have  not  seen 
them;  and  to  hear  the  things 
that  ye  hear,  and  have  not 
heard  them.  And  behold,  a 
certain  lawyer  stood  up,  tempt- 
ing him,  and  saying  :  Master, 
what  must  I  do  to  possess 
eternal  life  %  But  he  said  to 
him:  What  is  written  in  the 
law  %  how  readest  thou  1  He 
answering  said  :  Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
thy  whole  heart,  and  with  thy 
whole  soul,  and  with  all  thy 
strength,  and  with  all  thy 
mind:  and  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself.  And  he  said  to  him : 
Thou  hast  answered  right  : 
this  do  and  thou  shalt  live. 

VOL.    XI. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Lucam. 

Cap.  x. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Dixit 
Jesus  discipulissuis:  Beati 
oculi,  qui  vident  quaa  vos 
videtis.  Dico  enim  vobis, 
quod  multi  prophetse,  et 
reges  voluerunt  videre  quae 
vos  videtis,  et  non  vide- 
runt :  et  audire  quae  audi- 
tis,  et  non  audierunt.  Et 
ecce  quidam  Legisperitus 
surrexit  tentans  ilium,  et 
dicens  :  Magister,  quid  fa- 
ciendo  vitam  aeternam  pos- 
sidebo?  At  ille  dixit  ad 
eum :  In  lege  quid  scrip- 
turn  est  1  quomodo  legis  ] 
Ille  respondens  dixit :  Di- 
liges  Dominum  Deum  tuum 
ex  toto  corde  tuo,  et  ex 
tota  anima  tua,  et  ex  omni- 
bus viribus  tuis,  et  ex  omni 
mente  tua :  et  proximum 
tuum  sicut  teipsum.  Dixit- 
que  illi :  Becte  respondis- 
ti :  hoc  fac,  et  vives.    Ille 

X 


306 


TWELFTH   SUNDAY    AFTER  PENTECOST. 


autem  volens  justiacare 
seipsum,  dixit  ad  Jesum  : 
Et  quis  est  meus  proximus? 
Suscipiens  autem  Jesus, 
dixit:  Homo  quidam  des- 
cendebat  ab  Jerusalem  in 
Jericho,  et  incidit  in  la- 
trones,  qui  etiam  despolia- 
verunt  eum  :  et  plagis  im- 
positis  abierunt,  semivivo 
relicto.  Accidit  autem  ut 
sacerdos  quidam  descen- 
deret  eadem  via :  et  viso 
illo,pra3terivit.  Similiter  et 
Levita,  cum  esset  secus  lo- 
cum, et  videret  eum,  per- 
transiit.  Samaritanus  au- 
tem quidam  iter  faciens, 
venit  secus  eum:  et  videns 
eum,  misericordia  motus 
est,  et  appropians,  alligavit 
vulnera  ejus,  ini'undens 
oleum,  et  vinum :  et  im- 
ponens  ilium  in  jumentum 
suum,  duxit  in  stabulum, 
et  curam  ejus  egit.  Et  al- 
tera die  protulit  duos  de- 
narios,  et  dedit  stabulario, 
et  ait :  Curam  illius  habe  : 
et  quodcumque  superero- 
gaveris,  ego  cum  rediero, 
reddam  tibi.  Quis  horum 
trium  videtur  tibi  proxi- 
mus  fuisse  illi,  qui  incidit 
in  latrones  1  At  ille  dixit : 
Qui  fecit  misericordiam  in 
ilium.  Et  ait  illi  Jesus: 
Vade,  et  tu  fac  similiter. 


But  he  willing  to  justify  him 
self,  said  to  Jesus  :  And  who 
is  my  neighbour  1  And  Jesus 
answering, said:  A  certain  man 
went  down  from  Jerusalem  to 
Jericho,  and  fell  among  rob- 
bers, who  had  stripped  him, 
and  having  wounded  him, 
went  away,  leaving  him  half 
dead.  And  it  chanced  that  a 
certain  priest  went  down  the 
same  way :  and  seeing  him, 
passed  by.  In  like  manner 
also  a  Levite,  when  he  was 
near  the  place,  and  saw  him, 
passed  by.  But  a  certain  Sa- 
maritan, being  on  his  journey, 
came  near  him  ;  and  seeing 
him,  was  moved  with  com- 
passion. And  going  up  to 
him,  bound  up  his  wounds, 
pouring  in  oil  and  wine  ;  and 
setting  him  upon  his  own  beast, 
brought  him  to  an  inn,  and 
took  care  of  him.  And  the 
next  day,  he  took  out  two 
pieces,  and  gave  to  the  host, 
and  said  :  Take  care  of  him  ; 
and  whatsoever  thou  shalt 
spend  over  and  above,  I  at  my 
return  will  repay  thee.  Which 
of  these  three  in  thy  opinion  was 
neighbour  to  him  that  fell 
among  robbers'?  But  he  said: 
He  that  shewed  mercy  to  him. 
And  Jesus  said  to  him  :  Go, 
and  do  thou  in  like  manner. 


The  Doctor  and  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  was  speak- 
ing to  us,  in  the  Epistle,  of  the  glory  of  the  New 
Testament :  He,  of  whom  Paul  was  but  the  servant, 
— Jesus,  the  Man-God,  reveals  to  us,  in  the  Gospel, 
the  perfection  of  that  Law,  which  he  came  to  give  to 
the  world.     And  as  though  he  would,  in  a  certain 


MASS.  307 

way,  unite  his  own  divine  teachings  with  those  of  his 
Apostle,  and  justify  that  Apostle's  enthusiasm,  it  is 
from  the  very  depth  of  his  own  most  holy  soul,  and 
in  the  Holy  Ghost;1  that,  having  thanked  his  Eternal 
Father  for  these  great  things,  he  cries  out,  turning 
to  his  Disciples  :  "  Blessed  are  the  eyes  that  see  the 
things  which  ye  see  I" 

The  same  idea  was  expressed  by  the  Prince  of  the 
Apostolic  College,  when  he  spoke  of  the  unspeakable 
and  glorious  joy,2  which  resulted  from  the  new  Alli- 
ance, wherein  figures  were  to  be  replaced  by  realities. 
In  his  first  Epistle  to  the  elect  of  the  Holy  Spirit,3 
Peter  speaks,  in  the  same  strain,  as  his  divine 
Master4  had  done,  of  the  unfulfilled  aspirations  of 
the  Saints  of  the  Old  Testament, — these  admirable 
men,  whom  St.  Paul  describes5  as  being  so  grand  in 
faith,  as  to  be  both  heroic  in  combat  and  sublime  in 
virtue.  St.  Peter,  then,  expresses,  in  inspired  lan- 
guage, how  the  elect  of  the  Church  of  expectation 
were  continually  looking  forward  to  the  grace  of  the 
time  that  was  to  come  ;  how  they  were  ever  counting 
the  years  which  were  to  intervene ;  how  they  were 
carefully  searching  {scrutinising ,  as  our  Yulgate  words 
it,)  the  long  ages,  to  find  out  when  that  happy  time 
would  be  realised,  although  they  were  well  aware, 
that  the  longed-for  sight  of  the  mysteries  of  salvation 
was  never  to  be  theirs,  and  that  their  mission  was 
limited  to  prophesying  those  future  grandeurs  to 
future  generations.6 

But,  who  are  those  Kings  spoken  of  in  our  Gospel, 
as  uniting  with  the  Prophets  in  the  desire  to  see  the 
things  ive  see  ?  To  say  nothing  of  those  holy  ones 
who  thought  less  of  the  throne  they  sat  on,  than  of 
the  divine  Object  of  the  world's  expectation, — may 
we  not  say,  with  the  holy  Fathers,7  that  they  well 

1  St.  Luke,  x.  21-23.  3  Ibid.  i.  5  Heb.  xi. 

3  1  St.  Pet.  i.  8.  i  St.  Amb.  in  Luc.  x.     6  1  St.  Pet.  i.  10-12. 

7  V.  Beda,  in  Luc.  iii.    Homily  for  the  day. 


308  TWELFTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

deserved  to  be  called  kings,  whom  St.  Paul  describes 
as,  by  their  faith,  conquering  kingdoms,  vanquish- 
ing armies,  stopping  the  mouths  of  lions,  masters  of 
the  very  elements,  yea,  what  is  more,  masters  of  their 
own  selves  ?  Heedless  of  the  mockeries,  as  well  as 
of  the  persecutions  of  the  world,  that  was  not  worthy 
to  possess  such  men, — these  champions  of  the  faith 
were  seen  wandering  in  the  deserts,  sheltering  in 
dens  and  caves,  and  yet  as  happy  as  kings,  because  of 
a  certain  Object  whom  they  intensely  loved,  and 
longed  to  see,  and  yet  whom  they  knew  they  were 
not  to  see,  until  after  their  deaths,  and  until  tedious 
ages  had  run  their  long  course.1 

We,  then,  who  are  their  descendants, — we  for 
whom  they  were  obliged  to  wait,  in  order  to  enjoy  a 
share  of  those  blessings  which  their  sighs  and  vehe- 
ment desires  did  so  much  to  hasten, — do  we  appre- 
ciate the  immense  favour  bestowed  on  us  by  our 
Lord  ?  We,  whose  virtue  scarcely  bears  comparison 
with  that  of  the  fathers  of  our  faith,  and  who,  not- 
withstanding, by  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
love,  have  been  more  enlightened  than  ever  were  the 
prophets,  for,  by  that  Holy  Spirit,  we  have  been  put 
in  possession  of  the  mysteries  which  they  only  fore- 
told,— how  is  it,  that  we  are  so  sadly  slow  to  feel  the 
obligation  we  are  under  of  responding,  by  holiness  of 
life,3  and  by  an  ardent  and  generous  love,  to  the 
liberality  of  that  God,  who  has  gratuitously  called 
us,  from  darkness,  to  his  admirable  light  ? 3  Having 
so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses  over  our  heads,  let  us 
lay  aside  every  weight  and  sin  which  surrounds  us, 
and  run,  by  patience,  in  the  fight  proposed  to  us. 
Let  us  fix  our  eyes  on  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher 
of  faith,  who,  having  joy  set  before  him,  preferred  to 
endure  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  now  sit- 
teth  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God.4     We 

1  Heb.  xi.  33-39.  3  1  St.  Pet.  ii.  9. 

2  1  St.  Pet.  i,  13-16.  «  Heb.  xii.  1,  2. 


MASS.  309 

know  him  with  greater  certainty  than  we  do  the 
events  which  are  happening  under  our  eyes,  for,  he 
himself,  hy  his  Holy  Spirit,  is  ever  within  us,  incor- 
porating his  mysteries  into  us. 

The  illumination  of  holy  Baptism  has  produced 
within  our  souls  that  revelation  of  Christ  Jesus 
which  constitutes  the  basis  of  the  Christian  life,  and 
for  which  the  Man-God  congratulated  his  disciples. 
It  was  of  that  revelation  or  knowledge  that  he  spoke, 
rather  than  of  the  exterior  sight  of  his  human  nature, 
a  sight,  which  was  common  not  only  to  his  devoted 
followers,  but  to  every  enemy  that  chose  to  stare  at 
him.  The  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  makes  this  very 
clear,  when,  after  the  change  produced  in  the 
Disciples  by  the  Holy  Ghost's  coming  upon  them,  he 
thus  spoke  :  If  ive  once  knew  Christ  according  to 
the  flesh, — now,  ive  knoiv  him  so  no  longer.1  It  is 
literally  in  us,  and  no  longer  in  the  cities  of  Judea, 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  to  be  found.2  It  is  faith 
that  shows  us  the  Christ,  who  is  dwelling  in  our 
hearts,  that  he  may  establish  us  in  charity,  and  grow 
in  us,  by  transforming  us  into  himself,  and  fill  us 
with  all  the  fulness  of  God.3  It  is  by  fixing  his  eye 
on  the  divine  image,  which  silently  lights  up  the 
soul  that  has  been  purified  by  Baptism, — that,  as  we 
were  just  now  saying,4  the  inner  man  is  renewed 
from  day  to  day,  by  incessant  contemplation,  and 
growing  love,  and  persevering  and,  at  last,  perfect 
imitation, — of  his  Creator  and  Saviour.5 

How  important,  then,  that  we  let  the  supernatural 
light  have  such  free  scope  and  expansion  within  us, 
that  not  one  of  our  acts,  or  thoughts,  not  even  the 
deepest  recess  of  our  hearts, — shall  escape  its 
sovereign  influence  and  guidance!  It  is  on  this 
point,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  works  prodigies  in  faith- 
ful souls  :  the  unrestrained  development  of  those  his 

1  2  Cor.  v.  16.  3  Eph.  iii.  16-19.         5  Coloss.  iii.  10. 

2  St.  Luke,  xvii.  21.      4  Page  304. 


310  TWELFTH   SUNDAY   AFTElt  PENTECOST. 

highest  Gifts, — Understanding  and  Wisdom, — gives 
such  a  predominance  to  the  divine  light,  that  the 
brightness  of  the  sun's  rays  pales  to  the  eyes  of  these 
Saints.  Sometimes  even,  in  his  omnipotent  freedom 
of  breathing  when  and  as  he  willeth,  this  Holy  Spirit 
waits  not  for  the  regular  development  of  those  Gifts 
of  His,  which  he  bestows  upon  all :  the  soul,  drawn 
up  to  heights  unreached  by  the  ordinary  paths  of 
the  christian  life,  finds  herself  plunged  in  the  deepest 
abyss  of  Wisdom ; 1  there  she  delightedly  imbibes 
the  rays  which  come  to  her  from  the  eternal  summits, 
and,  in  their  tranquil  and  radiant  simplicity  which 
holds  all  in  itself,  she  feels  that  she  has  the  secret 
of  all  things.  There  are  moments,  when,  raised  up 
still  higher, — above  the  region  of  the  senses  or  the 
domain  of  human  reasoning,  yea,  as  St.  Denis  the 
Areopagite  words  it,  above  all  the  intelligible* — she 
is  permitted  to  rest  her  wings  on  the  summit,  where 
dwells  the  uncreated  light  in  its  essence, — that  thrice 
holy  sanctuary,  whence  it  streams  down  even  to  the 
furthest  limits  of  creation,  lending  something  of  its 
divine  splendour  to  every  creature.  Then  is  it,  that 
mercifully  acting  on  the  soul,  which  cannot  yet  bear 
the  direct  infinite  glory, — the  Blessed  Trinity  shrouds 
her  in  that  mysterious  darkness,  of  which  the  Saints 
speak  as  belonging  to  these  highest  degrees  of  mys- 
tical ascension.  The  darkness,  beyond  which  is  the 
very  God  of  Majesty,3  is  an  obscurity  which  pene- 
trates the  soul  with  higher  bliss  than  does  lisrht 
itself;  it  is  a  sacred  night,  whose  silence  is  more 
eloquent  than  any  sound  that  this  earth  could  hear ; 
it  is  a  holy  of  holies,  where  adoration  absorbs  the 
soul ;  vision  is  not  there,  still  less  is  science ;  and 
yet,  it  is  in  this  sanctuary,  that  understanding  and 
love,  acting  together  in  ineffable  unison,  take  hold 
of  the  sublimest  mysteries  of  theology. 

1  St.  Denis  Areop.  De  div.  nom.  vii.  3. 
2  De  myst.  theol.  LI.  3  Ps.  xvii.  12. 


MASS.  311 

It  is  quite  true  that  such  favours  as  these  are  im- 
parted to  but  few  ;  and  no  man  can  lay  the  slightest 
claim  to  them,  be  his  virtue  ever  so  great,  or  his  fide- 
lity ever  so  tried.  Neither  does  perfection  depend  upon 
them.  Faith,  which  guides  the  just  man,  is  enough 
to  make  him  estimate  the  life  of  the  senses  for  what 
it  really  is, — miserable  and  grovelling.  With  the  aid 
of  ordinary  grace,  he  easily  lives  in  that  intimate 
retirement  of  the  soul,  wherein  he  knows  that  the  holy 
Trinity  resides, — he  knows  it,  because  he  has  it  from 
the  teaching  of  the  Scripture.1  His  heart  is  a  kind 
of  heaven,  where  his  life  is  hidden  in  God,  together 
with  that  Jesus  upon  whom  are  fixed  all  his  thoughts  :a 
there  he  gives  to  his  beloved  Lord  the  only  proof  of 
love  which  is  to  be  trusted,  the  only  one  that  this 
Lord  asks  at  our  hands, — the  keeping  of  the  command- 
ments.3 In  spite  of  the  ardent  longings  of  his  hope, 
he  waits  patiently  and  calmly  for  that  final  revelation 
of  Christ,  which  on  the  last  day,  will  give  him  to 
appear  together  with  Him  in  glory ; 4  for,  as,  without 
seeing  Him,  he  believes  in  Him,  so,  without  seeing 
Him,  he  knows  that  he  loves  Him.5  The  ever  ad- 
vancing growth  in  virtue,  which  men  observe  in  such 
a  man,  is  a  more  unmistakable  proof  of  the  power  of 
faith,  than  can  be  those  extraordinary  manifestations 
of  which  we  were  just  speaking,  and  in  which  the  soul 
is  so  irresistibly  subdued,  that  she  has  scarcely  the 
power  to  refuse  her  love. 

Hence,  it  is  not  without  a  reason  and  a  connexion 
that  the  Gospel  chosen  for  to-day  passes  at  once,  after 
the  opening  verses  which  we  have  been  commenting, 
to  the  new  promulgation  of  the  great  commandment, 
which  includes  the  whole  Law  and  the  Prophets.6 
Faith  assures  man,  that  he  may  and  must  love  the 

1  St.  John,  xiv.  23.      s  St.  John,  xiv.  21.      5  1  St.  Fet.  i.  8. 

2  Coloss.  iii.  3.  *  Coloss.  iii.  4.  6    St.     Matth.    xxiL 

36-40. 


312  TWELFTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Lord  his  God  with  his  whole  heart,  and  with  his  whole 
soul,  and  his  whole  strength,  and  his  whole  mind,  and 
his  neighbour  as  himself.  In  the  Homily  on  the  sacred 
text  offered  to  us  hy  the  Church,1  the  interpretation 
goes  not  beyond  the  question  proposed  by  the  Jewish 
lawyer  :  by  this,  she  as  good  as  tells  us,  that  the  latter 
portion  of  the  Gospel,  though  by  far  the  longer,  is  but 
the  practical  conclusion  to  the  former,  according  to 
that  saying  of  the  Apostle,  that  Faith  icorketh  by 
charity.2  The  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  though 
containing  materials  for  the  sublimest  symbolic  teach- 
ing, is  spoken  here  in  its  literal  sense,  by  our  Lord, 
for  the  one  purpose  of  removing  the  restrictions  put, 
by  the  Jews,  on  the  great  precept  of  love. 

If  all  perfection  be  included  in  love, — if,  without 
love,  no  virtue  produces  fruit  for  heaven, — it  is  im- 
portant for  us  to  remember,  that  love  is  not  of  the 
right  kind  unless  it  include  our  neighbour ;  and  it  is 
only  after  stating  this  particular,  that  St.  Paul  affirms, 
that  love  fid filleth  the  whole  law,3  and,  that  love  is  the 
plenitude  of  the  laiv.^  Thus  we  find  that  the  greater 
number  of  the  precepts  of  the  Decalogue  are  upon  our 
duties  to  our  neighbour-/0  and  we  are  told,  that  the  love 
we  have  for  God  is  only  then  what  it  ought  to  be, 
when  we  not  only  love  Him,  but  when  we  also  love 
what  He  loves,  that  is,  when  we  love  man  whom  He 
made  to  his  own  likeness.6  Hence,  the  apostle  St. 
Paul  does  not  explicitly  distinguish,  as  the  Gospel  does, 
between  the  two  precepts  of  love,  and  says  :  A 11  the 
law  is  fid  filled  in  one  sentence:  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself"1 

Such  being  the  importance  of  this  love,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  have  a  clear  understanding  as  to  the  meaning 
and  extent  of  the  word  neighbour.  In  the  mind  of 
the  Jews,  it  comprised  only  their  own  race ;  and,  in 

1  The  Office  of  Matins.  3  Rom.  xiii.  8.  5  Ibid.  0. 

2  Gal.  v.  6.  4  Ibid.  10.  6 1  St.  John,  iv.  20- 

7  Gal.  v.  14. 


MASS.  SI 


this,  they  were  following  the  custom  of  the  pagan 
nations,  for  whom  every  stranger  was  an  enemy. 
But,  here  in  our  Gospel,  we  have  a  representative  of 
this  Jewish  diminished  law1  eliciting,  from  Him  who 
is  the  author  of  the  law,  an  answer  which  declares  the 
precept  in  all  its  fulness.  This  time,  he  does  not 
make  his  voice  be  heard  amidst  thunder  and  fire,  as 
on  Mount  Sinai.  He,  as  Man  living  and  conversing 
with  men,2  reveals  to  them,  and  in  the  most  intelli- 
gible possible  way,  the  whole  import  of  the  eternal 
commandment  which  leads  to  life.3  In  a  parable, 
(wherein,  as  many  think,  He  is  relating  a  fact  which 
has  really  happened,  and  is  known  to  those  to  whom 
he  is  addressing  it,)  our  Jesus  describes  how  there  was 
a  man  who  went  forth  from  the  Holy  City,  and  how 
he  fell  in  with  a  Samaritan,  that  is,  with  a  stranger 
the  most  despised  and  the  most  disliked  of  all  that  an 
inhabitant  of  Jerusalem  looked  on  as  his  enemies.4  And 
yet,  the  shrewd  lawyer  who  questions  Jesus,  and,  no 
doubt,  all  those  who  had  been  listening  to  the  answer, 
are  obliged  to  own  that  the  neighbour,  for  the  poor 
fellow  who  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  robbers,  was 
not  so  truly  the  priest,  or  the  levite,  (though  both  of 
them  were  of  his  own  race,)  as  this  stranger,  this 
Samaritan,  who  forgets  all  national  grudges  as  soon 
as  he  sees  a  suffering  creature,  and  cannot  look  on  him 
in  any  other  light  than  as  a  fellow-man.  Our  Jesus 
made  himself  thoroughly  understood  ;  and  every  one 
present  must  have  well  learnt  the  lesson, — that  the 
greatest  of  all  laws,  the  law  of  love,  admits  no  excep- 
tion, either  here  or  in  heaven. 

The  Offertory  is  taken  from  the  book  of  Exodus, 
where  Moses  is  described  as  striving  with  God,  striv- 
ing, that  is,  to  induce  him  to  spare  his  people,  after 
their  crime  of  .the  golden  calf;  Moses  was  permitted 

1  Ps.  xi.2.  3Ibid.  iv.  1. 

2  Baruch,  iii.  38.  4  St.  John,  iv.  9. 


314 


TWELFTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


to  triumph,  and  God's  anger  was  appeased.  It  may 
sometimes  happen  that  this  Sunday  falls  close  upon, 
or  even  on,  the  very  day  when  the  Church,  in  her 
Martyrology  (September  the  fourth),  makes  a  com- 
memoration of  the  Jewish  leader ;  and  Honorius  of 
Autun1  tells  us,  that  this  is  the  reason  of  their  being 
such  frequent  mention  made  in  to-day's  liturgy  of 
this  glorious  lawgiver  of  Israel. 


OFFERTORY. 


Precatus  est  Moyses  in 
conspectu  Domini  Dei  sui, 
et  dixit  :  Quare,  Domine, 
irasceris  populo  tuo?  Parce 
irae  animse  tuse  :  memento 
Abraham,  Isaac,  et  Jacob, 
quibus  jurasti  dare  terram 
nuentem  lac  et  mel.  Et  pla- 
catus  f  actus  est  Dominus  de 
malignitate,  quam  dixit  fa- 
cere  populo  suo. 


Moses  prayed  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Lord  his  God, 
and  said  :  Why,  O  Lord,  art 
thou  angry  at  thy  people? 
Spare  the  wrath  of  thy  soul : 
remember  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  to  whom  thou 
didst  swear  to  give  a  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey. 
And  the  Lord  was  appeased, 
and  did  not  do  the  evil  he  had 
threatened  his  people. 


The  Secret  prays  our  Lord  to  accept  graciously 
the  offerings  of  the  Sacrifice, — offerings,  which  are 
made  for  the  purpose  of  winning  pardon  for  us,  and 
giving  honour  to  his  divine  majesty. 


SECRET. 


Hostias,  quaesumus  Do- 
mine, propitius  intende, 
quas  sacris  altaribus  exhi- 
bemus ;  ut,  nobis  indul- 
gentiam  largiendo,  tuo 
nomini  dent  honorem.  Per 
Dominum. 


Mercifully  look  down,  O 
Lord,  on  the  offerings  we  lay 
on  thy  holy  altar ;  that  they 
may  be  to  the  honour  of  thy 
name,  by  obtaining  pardon  for 
us.     Through,  etc. 


The  other  secrets  as  in  page  135. 


Gemm.  auim.  iv.  69. 


MASS.  315 

As  it  was  last  Sunday,  so,  again,  to-day,  the  Com- 
munion-Anthem evidently  alludes  to  harvest-time 
and  vintage.  Bread,  wine,  and  oil,  are  not  only  the 
supports  of  our  material  life  ;  they  are,  also,  the 
matter  of  the  most  august  of  our  Sacraments.  No 
moment  is  so  fitting  for  man's  speaking  their  praise, 
as  that  of  his  having  been  made  a  sharer  in  the  sacred 
banquet. 

COMMUNION. 

The  earth,  O  Lord,  shall  be  De  fructu  operum  tuo- 
filled  with  the  fruit  of  thy  rum,  Domine,  satiabitur 
works ;  that  thou  mayest  bring  terra:  et  educas  panem  de 
forth  bread  from  the  earth,  terra,  et  vinum  laetificet  cor 
and '  that  wine  may  cheer  the  hominis  :  ut  exhilaret  fa- 
heart  of  man  :  that  he  may  ciem  in  oleo,  et  panis  cor 
make  the  face  cheerful  with  hominis  confirmet. 
oil, '  and  that  bread  may 
strengthen  man's  heart. 

The  life  imparted  to  rus  by  the  sacred  Mysteries, 
finds  in  them  its  perfection,  also,  and  its  protection, — 
for  they  are  continually  removing  from  us,  gradually 
more  and  more,  those  remnants  of  the  evil  which  had 
first  brought  death  upon  us.  Such  is  the  teaching 
expressed  in  the  Postcommunion. 

rOSTCOMMUNION. 

May  the  sacred  participa-         Vivificet  nos,  qusesumus 

tion  of  these  thy  mysteries,  O  Domine,  hujus  participatio 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  give  us  sancta  mysterii:  et  pariter 

life;  and  be  to  us,  both  an  ex-  nobis  expiationem  tribuat 

piation     and      protection. —  et  munimen.     Per  Domi- 

Through,  etc.  num. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  injxtge  137. 


316 


TWELFTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


VESPEES. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,   Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON    OF    THE    MAGNIFICAT. 


Homo  quidam  descende- 
bat  ab  Jerusalem  in  Jeri- 
cho, et  incidit  in  latrones, 
qui  etiam  despoliaverunt 
eum,  et  plagis  impositis 
abierunt,  semivivo  relicto. 


A  certain  man  went  down 
down  from  Jerusalem  to 
Jericho,  and  fell  among  rob- 
bers, who  had  stripped  him ; 
and,  having  wounded  him, 
went  away,  leaving  him  half 
dead. 


OREMUS. 

Omnipotens  et  misericors 
Deus,  de  cujus  munere  ve- 
nit,  ut  tibi  a  fidelibus  tuis 
digne  et  laudabiliter  servia- 
tur:  tribue,  qusesumus,  no- 
bis ;  ut  ad  promissiones  tuas 
sine  offensione  curramus- 
Per  Dominum. 


LET   US   PLAY. 

0  almighty  and  merciful 
God,  from  whose  gift  it 
cometh,  that  thy  Faithful 
worthily  and  laudably  serve 
thee :  grant  us,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  may  run  on, 
without  stumbling,  to  the 
things  thou  hast  promised  us. 
Through,  etc. 


MASS.  317 


THE    THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

The  dominical  series, — which,  formerly,  counted  from 
the  feast  of  Saint  Peter,  or  of  the  Apostles, — never 
went  beyond  this  Sunday.  The  feast  of  Saint  Lau- 
rence gave  its  name  to  those  which  follow ;  though 
that  name  began  with  even  the  ninth  Sunday,  for  the 
years  when  Easter  was  nearest  the  Spring  equinox. 
When,  on  the  contrary,  that  Solemnity  was  kept  at 
its  almost  latest  date,  the  weeks  began  from  to-day 
to  be  counted  as  the  Weeks  of  the  seventh  month 
(September). 

The  Ember- Days  of  the  Autumn  quarter  sometimes 
occur  even  this  week ;  whilst,  other  years,  they  may 
be  as  late  as  the  eighteenth.  We  will  speak  of  them, 
when  we  come  to  the  seventeenth  Sunday,  for,  it  is 
in  the  week  following  that,  that  the  Roman  Missal 
inserts  them. 

In  the  Western  Church,  the  thirteenth  Sunday 
takes  its  name  from  the  Gospel  of  the  ten  lepers, 
which  is  read  in  the  Mass:  the  Greeks,  who  count  it 
as  the  thirteenth  of  Saint  Mattheiv,  read  on  it  the 
parable  of  the  vineyard,  whose  labourers,  though 
called  at  different  hours  of  the  day,  all  receive  the 
same  pay.1 

MASS. 

Now  that  she  is  in  possession  of  the  promises  so 
long  waited  for  by  the  world, — the  Church  loves  to 
repeat  the  words,  wherewith  the  just  men  of  the  old 

1  St.  Matth.  xx. 


318         THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

law  used  to  express  their  sentiments.  Those  just 
men  were  living  during  the  gloomy  period,  when  the 
human  race  was  seated  in  the  shadow  of  death.  We 
are  under  incomparably  happier  circumstances  ;  we 
are  blessed  with  graces  in  abundance ;  Eternal  Wis- 
dom has  spared  us  the  trials  our  forefathers  had  to 
contend  with,  by  giving  us  to  live  in  the  period  which 
has  been  enriched  by  all  the  mysteries  of  salvation 
being  fulfilled.  There  is  a  danger,  however,  and  our 
Mother  the  Church  does  her  utmost  to  avert  us  from 
falling  into  it ;  it  is  the  danger  of  forgetting  all  these 
blessings  of  ours.  Ingratitude  is  the  necessary  out- 
come of  forgetfulness,  and  our  to-day's  Gospel  justly 
condemns  it.  On  this  account,  the  Epistle,  and  here 
our  Introit,  remind  us  of  the  time  when  man  had 
nothing  to  cheer  him  but  hope :  a  promise  had, 
indeed,  been  made  to  him,  of  a  sublime  covenant 
which  was,  at  some  distant  future,  to  be  realised ; 
but,  meanwhile,  he  was  very  poor,  was  a  prey  to  the 
wiles  of  Satan,  his  cause  was  to  be  tried  by  divine 
justice,  and  yet  he  prayed  for  loving  mercy. 

INTROIT. 

Respice,  Domine,  in  tes-  Have  regard  to  thy  cove- 

tamentum  tuum,  et  animas  nant,  O  Lord,  and  abandon 

pauperum  tuorum  ne  dere-  not  the  souls  of  thy  poor  to 

linquas  in  finem  :  exsurge,  the  end.    Arise,  O  Lord,  and 

Domine,  et  judica  causam  judge  thine  own  cause;  and 

tuam  :    et  ne  obliviscaris  forget  not  the  cries  of  them 

voces  quserentium  te.  that  seek  thee. 

Fs.  Ut  quid,  Deus,  repu-  Fs.  Why,  O  God,  hast  thou 

listi  in  finem,  iratus  est  fu-  cast  us  off,   unto  the    end  % 

ror  tuus  super  oves   pas-  why    is    thy   wrath    kindled 

cuse  tuse  ]      Gloria  Patri.  against  the  sheep  of  thy  pas- 

Respice.  ture?  Glory,  etc.  Have  regard. 

This  day  last  week,  we  were  considering  how  im- 
portant are  Faith  and  Charity,  to  a  Christian  who  is 
living  under  the  Law  of  grace.  There  is  another 
virtue  of  equal  necessity :  it  is  Hope ;  for,  although 


MASS.  319 

he  already  have  the  substantial  possession  of  the 
good  things  which  will  constitute  his  future  happiness, 
the  gloom  of  the  land  of  exile,  where  the  Christian 
is,  at  present,  living,  prevents  him  from  seeing  them. 
Moreover,  this  mortal  life  being  essentially  a  period 
of  trial,  wherein  each  one  is  to  win  his  crown,1  the 
struggle  makes  even  the  very  best  feel,  and  that  right 
to  the  end,  the  weight  of  incertitude  and  anguish. 
Let  us,  therefore,  pray  with  the  Church,  in  her  Col- 
lect, for  an  increase  of  the  three  fundamental  virtues 
of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity;  and,  that  we  may 
deserve  to  reach  the  perfection  of  the  good  which  is 
promised  us  in  heaven,  let  us  sue  for  the  grace  of 
devotedness  to  the  commandments  of  God  ;  they  lead 
us  to  our  eternal  home.  Let  us  remember,  how  the 
Gospel  of  Sunday  last  included  them  all  in  Love, 

COLLECT. 

O  almighty  and  eternal  God,  Omnipotens  sempiterne 

grant  unto  us  an  increase  of  Deus,  da  nobis  fidei,  spei, 

faith,  hope,  and  charity:  and,  etcharitatisaugmentum:  et 

that  we   may  deserve    what  ut  mereamur  assequi  quod 

thou  promisest,  make  us  to  promittis,   fac  nos   amare 

love  what  thou  commandest.  quod  prsecipis.   Per  Domi- 

Through,  etc.  num. 

The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 

EPISTLE. 

Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St.  Lectio  Epistolae  beati 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the  Pauli  Apostoli  ad  Gala- 
Galatians.  tas. 

Ch.  Hi.  Cap.  Hi. 

Brethren  :     To     Abraham  Fratres,  Abrahae    dictae 

were  the  promises  made  and  sunt   promissiones,  et  se- 

to  his  seed.  He  saith  not,  and  mini  ejus.     Non  dicit :  Et 

to  his  seeds  as  of  many  :  but  seminibus,  quasi  in  multis, 

1  Cor.  ix.  25. 


320 


THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


sed  quasi  in  uno :  Et  semini 
tuo,  qui  est  Christus.  Hoc 
autem  dico,  testamentum 
confirmatum  a  Deo  :  quae 
post  quadringentos  et  tri- 
ginta  annos  facta  est  lex, 
non  irritum  facit  ad  eva- 
cuandam  promissionem. 
Nam  si  ex  lege  haereditas, 
jam  non  ex  promissione. 
Abrahse  autem  per  repro- 
missionem  donavit  Deus. 
Quid  igitur  lex  1  Propter 
transgressiones  posita  est, 
donee  veniret  semen,  cui 
promiserat,  ordinata  per 
Angelos  in  manu  media- 
toris.  Mediator  autem 
uniusnon  est:  Deus  autem 
unusest.  Lex  ergo  ad  versus 
promissa  Dei  1  Absit.  Si 
enim  data  esset  lex,  quae 
posset  vivificare,  vere  ex 
lege  esset  j  ustitia.  Sed  con- 
elusit  Scriptura  omnia  sub 
peccato,  ut  promissio  ex 
fide  Jesu  Christi  daretur 
credentibus. 


as  of  one,  and  to  thy  seed, 
which  is  Christ.  Now  this  I 
say,  that  the  testament  which 
was  confirmed  by  God,  the 
law  which  was  made  after  four 
hundred  and  thirty  years,  doth 
not  disannul,  or  make  the  pro- 
mise of  no  effect.  For  if  the 
inheritance  be  of  the  law,  it  is 
no  more  of  promise.  But  God 
gave  it  to  Abraham  by  pro- 
mise. Why  then  was  the  law  % 
It  was  set  because  of  trans- 
gressions, until  the  seed  should 
come,  to  whom  he  made  the 
promise,  being  ordained  by 
angels  in  the  hand  of  a  media- 
tor. Now  a  mediator  is  not 
of  one  :  but  God  is  one.  Was 
the  law  then  against  the  pro- 
mises of  God?  God  forbid  ! 
For  if  there  had  been  a  law 
given  which  could  give  life, 
verily  justice  should  have  been 
by  the  law.  But  the  Scripture 
hath  concluded  all  under  sin, 
that  the  promise  by  the  faith 
of  Jesus  Christ  might  be  given 
to  them  that  believe. 

Look  up  to  heaven,  and  number  the  stars,  if  thou 
canst!  So  shall  thy  seed  bef1  Abraham  was  almost 
a  hundred  years  old,2  and  Sara's  barrenness  deprived 
him  of  all  natural  hope  of  posterity,  when  these  words 
were  spoken  to  him  by  God.  Abraham,  nevertheless, 
believed  God,  says  the  Scripture,  and  it  was  reputed  to 
him  unto  justice.3  And  when,  later  on,  that  same 
faith 4  would  have  led  him  to  sacrifice,  on  the  mount, 
that  son  of  the  promise,  his  one  only  hope, 
God  renewed  his  promise,  and  added  :  In  thy  seed, 
shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed.^ 


1  Gen.  xv.  5 

2  Kom.  iv.  19. 


Gen.  xxii.  IS. 


3  Gen.  xv.  6. 
4Heb.xi.  17-19. 


MASS.  821 

It  is  now  that  the  promise  is  fulfilled ;  the  event 
justifies  Abraham's  faith.  He  believed  against  all  hope, 
trusting  to  that  God  who  quickeneth  the  dead,  and 
calleth  those  things  that  are  not,  as  those  that  are  l\ 
and,  according  to  the  expression  of  John  the  Baptist, 
from  the  very  stones  of  the  gentile  world,  there  rise 
up,  in  all  places,  children  to  Abraham.2 

His  faith,  firm  and,  at  the  same  time,  so  simple, 
gave  to  God  the  glory 3  which  he  looks  for  from  his 
creatures.  Man  can  add  nothing  to  the  divine  per- 
fections ;  but, — agreeably  to  God's  own  words, — 
though  he  sees  them  not  directly  here  below,  he  ac- 
knowledges those  perfections  by  adoring  and  loving 
them ;  he  makes  his  faith  tell  upon  his  whole  life ; 
and  this  use  which  he  freely  makes  of  his  faculties, — 
this  voluntary  devotedness  of  an  intelligent  being, — 
magnifies  God,  by  adding  to  his  extrinsic  glory. 

Following  in  Abraham's  steps,4  there  have  come 
those  multitudes,  born  for  that  heaven  of  faith,  which 
he  showed  to  the  whole  earth.  They  live  by  faith  ; 5 
and  thereby  in  all  their  acts,  they  give  to  God  the 
homage  of  confession  and  praise,  through  his  Son 
Christ  Jesus  ;  and,  like  Abraham,  they  receive,  in 
return,  a  blessing,  a  benediction,  of  an  ever  increasing 
justice.6  The  magnificent  development  of  the  Church, 
which  gives  this  new  posterity  to  Abraham,  is  greater 
and  more  visible  since  the  fall  of  Israel.  In  countries 
the  remotest,  in  the  midst  of  cities  that  once  were  all 
pagan,  we  see  crowds  of  men,  women  and  children 
imitating  Abraham,7  that  is,  at  heaven's  call,  leaving, 
if  not  their  country,  at  least  every  thing  that  once 
made  earth  dear  to  them ;  and  like  him,  trusting  in 
the  fidelity  and  power  of  God  to  fulfil  his  promises,8 
they  lived  as  strangers  amidst  their  neighbours,  yea, 

1  Rom.  iv.  17,  18.        4  Rom.  iv.  12.  7  Gen.  xii.  1. 

2  St.  Matth.  iii.  9.        5  Ibid.  i.  17.  8  Rom.  iv.  20,  21. 

3  Rom.  iv.  20.  6  Ibid.  iv.  23,  24 ;  Gal. 

iii.  9. 
VOL.  xi.  Y 


322         THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

and  in  their  very  homes,  using  this  world  as  though 
they  did  not  use  it.1  In  the  tumult  of  cities  as  in  the  de- 
sert, in  the  midst  of  the  vain  pleasures  of  the  world,  whose 
fashion  and  figure  passeth  away,2 — they  have  no  other 
thought  than  that  of  the  unseen  realities,3  no  other 
care  than  that  of  pleasing  God.4  They  take  to  them- 
selves the  word  that  was  spoken  to  their  father  :  Walk 
before  me,  and  be  perfect ! 5  and,  in  truth,  it  was  to  all 
of  them  that  it  was  spoken  ;  it  was  the  condition  in 
the  alliance,  concluded  hy  God  with  those  his  faith- 
ful servants  of  all  ages,  in  the  person  of  the  grand 
Patriarch,  who  was  not  only  their  progenitor,  but  their 
model  too  ;  and  God  responds  also  to  their  faith,  either 
by  private  manifestations,  or  by  the  still  surer  voice 
of  his  Scriptures,6  saying :  Fear  not !  1  am  thy  pro- 
tector, and  thy  reward  exceeding  great !  7 

Truly,  then,  the  benediction  of  Abraham  has  been 
poured  forth  on  the  Gentiles.8  Christ  Jesus,  the  true 
Son  of  the  promise,  the  only  seed  of  salvation,  has, 
by  faith  in  his  Resurrection,9  assembled  from  every 
nation 10  them  that  are  of  a  good- will,11  making  them 
all  one  in  him,  making  them,  like  himself,  children 
of  Abraham,12  and,  what  is  better  still,  children  of 
God.13  For  the  benediction  that  was  promised,  at 
the  beginning  of  the  alliance,  was  the  Holy  Ghost 
himself,14  the  spirit  of  adoption  of  children  that  came 
down  into  our  hearts,  to  make  us  all  heirs  of  God  and 
joint-heirs  of  Christ.15  O  mighty  power  of  Faith, 
which  breaks  down  the  former  walls  of  division, 
unites  nations  together,16  and  substitutes  the  love  and 
freedom  of  children  of  the  Most  High  for  the  law  of 
bondage  and  fear.17 

1  1  Cor.  vii.  31.  7  Gen.  xv.  1.  13  Ibid.  iv.  5-7. 

2  1  Cor.  viii.  31.  8  Gal.  iii.  14.  1J  Ibid.  iii.  14. 

3  Heb.  xi.  1.  9-Rom.  iv.  24.  *5  Rom.  viii.  15-17. 
*  1  Cor.  vii.  32.  10  Gal.  iii.  28.  ,6  Eph.  ii.  14-18. 

5  Gen.  xvii.  1.  "  St.  Luke,  ii.  14.        V  Rom.  viii.  2. 

«  2  St.  Pet.  i.  19.  I2  Gal.  iii.  29. 


mass.  323 

And  yet,  grand  as  was  this  spectacle  of  the  Gentiles 
becoming  incorporated  into  the  chosen  race,  and  being 
made  sharers,  in  Christ,  of  the  holy  promises,1 — it 
did  not  please  all  people.  The  carnal  Jew,  who  boasts 
of  having  Abraham  for  his  father,  though  he  cares 
little  about  imitating  his  works,2 — the  Circumcised 
who  vaunts  the  bearing  in  his  flesh  the  sign  of  a  Faith 
which  dwells  not  in  his  heart,3 — these  men  who  have 
rejected  Christ,  now  reject  his  members,  and  would 
fain  destroy  his  Church,  or,  at  least,  trammel  it.  They 
are  enraged  at  seeing  crowding  in,  from  every  portion 
of  the  globe,4  that  immense  concourse,  which  their  vile 
jealousy  has  vainly  sought  to  keep  back.  Whilst 
their  wounded  pride,  kept  them  from  going  in,5  the 
Gentiles  were  sitting  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob,  and  all  the  Prophets,  at  the  banquet  of  God's 
kingdom  ;  6  the  last  became  the  first.7  Even  to  the 
end  of  time,  Israel, — who,  by  his  own  obstinacy,  has 
forfeited  his  ancient  glory, — will  continue  to  be  the 
enemy  of  this  spiritual  posterity  of  Abraham,  which 
has  supplanted  him  ; 8  but  his  persecutions  against  the 
children  of  the  promise  and  of  the  lawful  Bride,  will 
but  result  in  showing  that  he  is,  as  St.  Paul  says,  the 
son  of  Agar,  the  son  of  the  bond- woman,  who,  together 
with  her  child,  is  excluded  from  the  inheritance  and 
kingdom.9 

He  prefers  to  refuse  the  liberty  offered  him  by  the 
Lord,  rather  than  acknowledge  the  definitive  abroga- 
of  his  now  dead  Law  :  be  it  so ;  his  hatred  will  not 
induce  the  children  of  the  Church,  (who  are  prefigured 
by  Sara,  the  free- woman,)  to  reject  the  grace  of  their 
God,  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  their  enemy  ;  it  will  not 
induce  them  to  abandon  the  justice  of  Faith,  and  the 
riches  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  life  in  Christ,  in  order  to 

'  Eph.  iii.  6.  4  St.  Luke,  xiii.  29.      7  Ibid.  30. 

8  St.  John,  viii.  39.        5  Ibid.  xv.  28.  8  Gen.  xxvii.  36. 

3  Rom.  iv.  11.  6  Ibid.  xiii.  28.  9  Gal.  iv.  22-31. 


324         THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

go  back  again  to  the  yoke  of  slavery1,  which,  let  the 
Jew  do  what  he  will,  was  broken  into  pieces  by  the 
Cross  he  himself  set  up  on  Calvary.2     Up  to  the  last, 
the  true  Jerusalem,  the  free  city,  our  mother, — she 
that  was  once  the  barren  woman,  but,  now,  is  so  glad 
a  Bride  with  her  children  around  her, — yes,  she  will 
meet  the  superannuated,  yet  ever  busy,  pretensions  of 
the  Synagogue,  by  reading  to  her  assembled  sons  and 
daughters  the  Epistle  we  are  having  to-day.     Up  to 
the  last,  St.  Paul,  in  her  name, — speaking  of  the  law 
of  Sinai,  which  was   made   known  to    its   subjects, 
through  the  mediation  of  Moses  and  the  Angels, — 
will  prove  its  inferiority  as  compared  to  the  covenant 
made  by  Abraham  directly  with  God ;  each  year,  as 
emphatically  as  on  the  day  he  wrote  his  Epistle,  Paul 
will  declare  the  transient  character  of  that  legislation, 
which  came  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after  &  pro- 
mise which  could  not  be  changed ;  neither  was  such 
legislation  to  continue,  when  the  time  should  come 
for  that  Son  of  Abraham  to  appear,  from  whom  the 
world  was  waiting  to  receive  the  promised  benediction. 
But,  what  is  to  be  said  of  the  incapability  of  the 
mosaic  ministration  to  give  man  strength,  and  enable 
him  to  rise  up  from  his  fall  ?  The  Gospel,  on  which 
we   were   meditating  eight   days  back,  and   which, 
formerly,  was  assigned  to  this  present  Sunday,  gave 
a  symbolical  and  striking  commentar)*"  on  the  useless- 
ness  of  the  Old  Law  in  regard  to  this ;  at  the  same 
time,  it  showed  us  the  remedial  power  which  resided 
in    Christ,    and  was   by    Him   transmitted  to   the 
ministers  of  the  New  Law.     "  Every  portion  of  the 
Office  of  the  thirteenth  Sunday,"  says  Abbot  Eupert, 
"  bears  on  the  history  of  that  Samaritan,  whose  name 
"  signifies  keeper ;  it  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who, 
"  by  his  Incarnation,  comes  to  the  rescue  of  the  man, 
"whom  the  Old  Law  was  not  able  to  keep  from 

IGal.v.1.  2  Ibid.  ii.  19-21. 


mass.  325 

"  harm ;  and  when  this  Jesus  leaves  the  world,  he 
"  consigns  the  poor  sufferer  to  the  care  of  the  Apostles, 
11  and  apostolic  men,  in  the  house  of  the  Church. 
"  The  intentional  selection  of  this  Gospel  for  to-day 
"  throws  a  great  light  on  our  Epistle,  as  also  on  the 
"  whole  Letter  to  the  Galatians,  from  which  it  is 
"  taken.     Thus,  the  Priest  and   the  Levite   of  the 
"  Parable,  are  a  figure  of  the  Law ;  and  their  passing 
*'  by  the   half-dead   man,    seeing  him,  indeed,   but 
"  without    making    an    attempt    to    heal    him, — is 
"  expressive  of  what  that  Law  did.     True,  it  did  not 
"  go  counter  to  God's  promises  ;  but,  of  itself,  it  could 
"justify  no  man.     A  physician,  who  does  not  him- 
"  self  intend  to  visit  a  patient,  will,  sometimes,  send 
"  a  servant,  who  is  expert  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
"  causes  of  the  malady,  yet  who  has   not  the  skill 
"  needed  for  mixing  the  remedy  required,  but  can 
"  merely  tell  the  sick-man  what  diet  and  what  drinks 
11  he  must  avoid,  if  he  would  prevent  his  ailment  from 
"  causing   death.     Such  was  the   Law,   set,   as  the 
"Epistle  tells  us,   because  of  transgressions,  as  a 
"  simple  safeguard,  until  such  time  as  there  should 
"  come  the  good  Samaritan,  the  heavenly  Physician. 
"  Having,  from  his  very  first  coming  into  this  world, 
"fallen  among  robbers,  Man  is  stripped  of  his  super- 
"  natural  goods,   and  is  covered  with  the   wounds 
"  inflicted  on  him  by  original  sin  ;  if  he  do  not  abstain 
"  from  actual  sins,  from  those  transgressions  against 
11  which  the  Law  was  set  as  a  monitor,  he  runs  the 
'•  risk  of  dying  altogether."1 

It  is  on  this  account  that  the  Gradual  repeats  the 
supplication  of  the  Introit :  Respice,  Domine,  in 
testamentum  tuum ;  for,  as  Hupert  observes,  it  was 
the  cry  of  the  ancient  people,  who,  sighing  at  the 
weakness  of  the  powerless  Law  of  Sinai,  besought  God 
to  fulfil  the  covenant  he  had  promised  to  Abraham's 

1  Rcp,  De  div.  Off.  xii.  13. 


326      THIRTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

faith.  They  cried  out  to  Christ,  as  the  poor  creature 
might  have  done  to  the  good  Samaritan,  after  he  saw 
the  priest  and  the  levite  pass  him  hy,  without  an 
effort  made  to  save  him. 


GRADUAL. 


Respice,  Domine,  in  tes- 
tamentum  tuum:  et  animas 
pauperum  tuorum  ne  obli- 
viscaris  in  finem. 

ft  Exsurge,  Domine,  et 
judica  causam  tuam  :  me- 
mor  esto  opprobrii  servo- 
rum  tuorum. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Domine,  refugium 
factus  es  nobis,  a  genera- 
tione,  et  progenie.  Alle- 
luia. 


Look  down,  O  Lord,  upon 
thy  covenant ;  and  forget  not 
for  ever  the  souls  of  thy  poor. 

ft.  Arise,  0  Lord,  and  judge 
thine  own  cause  :  remember 
how  thy  servants  are  up- 
braided. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft  Thou,  O  Lord,  art  our 
re|uge,  from  generation  to 
generation.  Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Lucam. 

Cap.  xvii. 

In  illo tempore  :Dumiret 
Jesus  in  Jerusalem,  transi- 
bat  per  mediam  Samariam 
et  Galilaaam.  Et  cum  in- 
grederetur  quoddamcastel- 
lum,  occurrerunt  ei  decern 
viri  leprosi,  qui  steterunt  a 
longe  :  et  levaverunt  vo- 
cem,  dicentes  :  Jesu  prae- 
ceptor,  miserere  nostri. 
Quos  ut  vidit,  dixit :  Ite, 
ostendite  vos  sacerdotibus. 
Et  factum  est  dum  irent, 
mundatisunt.  Unusautem 
ex  illis,  ut  vidit  quia  mun- 
datus  est,  regressus  est, 
cum  magna  voce  magnifi- 
cans  Deum,  et  cecidit  in 
faciem    ante    pedes    ejus, 


Sequel  of    the    holy   Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ch.  xvii. 

At  that  time  :  As  Jesus  was 
going  to  Jerusalem,  he  passed 
through  the  midst  of  Samaria 
and  Galilee.  And  as  he  en- 
tered into  a  certain  town, 
there  met  him  ten  men  that 
were  lepers,  who  stood  afar 
off ;  and  lifted  up  their  voice, 
saying :  Jesus,  Master,  have 
mercy  on  us.  Whom  when 
he  saw,  he  said :  Go,  show 
yourselves  to  the  priests.  And 
it  came  to  pass,  that  as  they 
went,  they  were  made  clean. 
And  one  of  them,  when  he  saw 
that  he  was  made  clean,  went 
back,  with  a  loud  voice 
glorifying  God.  And  he  fell 
on  his  face,  before  his  feet, 


mass.  327 

giving  thanks  :  and  this  was  gratias  agens :  et  hie  erat 

a    Samaritan.       And    Jesus  Samaritanus.   Respondens 

answering,  said:    Were  not  autem  Jesus,  dixit:  Nonne 

ten  made  clean,  and  where  are  decern  mundati  sunt  1  et 

the  nine  1    There  is  no  one  novem  ubi  sunt  ]    Non  est 

found  to  return  and  give  glory  inventus    qui    rediret,    et 

to    God,    but    this    stranger.  daret  gloriam  Deo,  nisi  hie 

And  he  said  to  him  :  Arise,  go  alienigena.      Et    ait    illi : 

thy  way  ;  for  thy  faith  hath  Surge,    vade :    quia    fides 

made  thee  whole.  tua  te  salvum  fecit. 


The  Samaritan  Leper,  cured  of  that  hideous  malady 
which  is  an  apt  figure  of  sin,  in  company  with  nine 
lepers  of  Jewish  nationality, — represents  the  despised 
race  of  Gentiles,  who  were  at  first  admitted,  by  stealth, 
so  to  say,  and  by  extraordinary  privilege,  into  a  share 
of  the  graces  belonging  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
of  Israel.1  The  conduct  of  these  ten  men,  on  occasion 
of  their  miraculous  cure,  is  in  keeping  with  the  attitude 
assumed  by  the  two  people  they  typify,  regarding  the 
salvation  offered  to  the  world  by  the  Son  of  God.  It 
is  a  fresh  demonstration  of  what  the  Apostle  says : 
All  are  not  Israelites,  that  are  of  Israel;  neither 
are  all  they  ivlio  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,  children ; 
"  but,"  says  the  Scripture,2  "  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed 
be  called"  that  is  to  say,  not  they  who  are  the 
children  of  the  flesh,  are  the  children  of  God :  but 
they,  that  are  the  children  of  the  promise,  are  counted 
for  the  seed  ;3  they  are  born  of  the  faith  of  Abraham, 
and  are,  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  his  true  progeny. 

Our  holy  Mother  the  Church  is  never  tired  of  this 
subject,  the  comparison  of  the  Two  Testaments,  and 
the  contrast  there  is  between  the  two  people.  "We 
deem  it  our  duty,  before  proceeding  farther,  to  ex- 
plain how  this  is,  for  there  are  many  persons,  who 
cannot  understand  what  benefit  can  come  to  us 
Christians,  from  hearing  this  subject  preached  to  us. 

:  St.  Matth.  xv.  24.        2  Gen.  xxi.  12.       3  Rom.  ix.  6-8. 


328       THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The'kind  of  spirituality,  which,  with  many  of  us,  has 
now-a-days  been  substituted  for  the  liturgical  life  so 
thoroughly  lived  in,  and  so  precious,  to  our  Catholic 
ancestors,  gives  a  certain  disrelish  for  the  ideas  which  the 
Church  so  perseveringly  brings  before  them  during  so 
many  of  her  Sundays.  They  have  become  habituated 
to  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  very  limited  truth ;  it  is 
all  subjective,  as  well  as  little ;  and  they  consider  it 
a  very  excellent  thing,  to  forget  all  other  teaching, 
except  what  they  happen  to  possess,  and  beyond 
which  it  is  a  trouble  to  go.  With  Christians  of  this 
class,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  feel  puzzled  at 
finding  the  Church  continually  urging  them  to  take 
an  interest  in  a  long  past,  which  they  call  of  no  prac- 
tical utility  to  them!  But,  the  interior  life,  truly 
worthy  of  the  name,  is  not  what  these  good  people 
imagine.  No  school  of  spirituality,  either  now,  or 
ever,  made  the  ideal  of  virtue  consist  in  indifference 
for  those  great  historic  facts  which  are  evidently  so 
precious  in  the  eyes  of  the  Church,  and  of  God  him- 
self. And  what  is  the  usual  result  of  this  isolating 
themselves  from  their  Mother's  most  cherished  appre- 
ciations ?  It  is,  that  by  this  determined  shutting 
themselves  up  in  their  own  private  prayers,  they,  by 
a  just  punishment,  lose  sight  of  the  true  end  of 
prayer,  which  is  union  with  and  love  of  God.  Their 
meditation  is  deprived  of  that  element  of  intimate 
and  fruitful  converse  with  God,  which  is  assigned  it 
by  all  the  masters  of  the  spiritual  life ;  it  soon  becomes 
an  unproductive  exercise  of  analysis  and  reasoning, 
in  which  there  is  nothing  but  abstract  conclusions. 

Now,  when  God  mercifully  invited  men  to  "the 
divine  nuptials  by  manifesting  to  them  his  Word,  it 
was  not  by  abstraction  that  he  gave  to  our  earth  this 
the  Son  of  his  own  eternal  Substance.  As  to^  his 
divinity,  men  could  not,  in  their  present  state,  see  it 
in  a  direct  way.  Had,  then,  God  shown  us,  in  this 
pretended  abstract  way,  that  eternal  Son  of  his,  in 


mass.  32 

whom  are  found  all  beauty,  and  warmth,  and  life, — 
it  would  have  been  imperfect  and  cold.  This  he  did 
not  do  ;  but,  as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  he  manifested,  he 
shewed,  the  great  mystery  of  godliness  in  the  Flesh  ;x 
the  Word  became  a  living  soul  ;2  eternal  Truth  as- 
sumed to  himself  a  Body,  that  so  he  might  converse 
with  men,3  and  grow  up  like  one  of  themselves.4  And, 
when  that  Body,  which  eternal  Truth  was  to  hold 
as  his  own  for  ever,  was  taken  up  in  glory,b — the 
Church,  the  Bride  of  this  Man-God,  the  bone  of  his 
bones,  and  flesh  of  his  flesh,6  continued  in  the  world 
this  manifestation  of  God,  by  the  member  of  Christ ; 
she  continued  that  historic  development  of  the  Word, 
which  is  only  to  cease  when  time  is  no  more.  This 
manifestation,  this  development,  surpasses  all  human 
calculations,  and  reveals  fresh  aspects  of  the  Wisdom 
of  God  even  to  the  Angels  themselves.8  Undoubtedly, 
a  real  regard  is  to  be  had  for  those  axioms,  to  which 
great  minds  have  reduced  the  principles  of  science  in 
an  abstract  logical  order,  quite  independently  of  his- 
tory and  facts  :  but,  neither  with  God,  nor  with  man, 
has  this  sort  of  petrified  theorising  anything  in  it  of 
the  life,  the  influence,  the  activity  of  substantial 
truth.  In  the  Church,  as  in  God,  truth  is  life  and 
light  ;9  her  grand  Credo  would  never  ring  so  trium- 
phantly as  it  does  through  our  churches,  it  would 
never  make  its  way  so  irresistibly  up  to  heaven,  if  it 
were  but  a  bare  series  of  true  definitions  and  phrases : 
its  superhuman  power  comes  from  each  of  its  articles, 
almost  each  of  its  words,  teeming  with  the  blood  of 
martyrs  upon  it,  and  radiant,  for  the  Church  and  for 
God,  with  the  splendour  of  toils,  and  sufferings,  and 
combats  of  thousands  of  sainted  Confessors  and 
Doctors,  the  very  aristocracy,  that  is,  of  human  nature 


1  1  Tim.  iii.  1G.  *  St.  Luke,  ii.  52.  1  Ibid.  i.  23. 

2  Gen.  ii.  7.  5  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  8  Eph.  iii.  10. 

3  Baruch,  iii.  38.  G  Eph.  v.  30-32.  9  St.  John,  i.  4. 


330        THIRTEENTH   SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

ennobled  by  Baptism,  whose  living  is  to  be  the  com- 
pleting the  Body  of  Christ  here  below.1 

The  subject  is  too  full  to  be  treated  of  here  ;  but 
this  much  is  irresistible, — that,  after  the  master-fact 
of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Word,  who  came  upon  our 
earth  to  manifest  God,  through  the  ages  of  time,  by 
Christ  and  his  members,2  there  is  not  one  which  is 
more  important,  not  one  which  has  been  and  still  is 
so  dear  to  God,  as  the  vocation  of  the  two  peoples  that 
were  successively  called  by  Him  to  the  blessing  of  an 
aliance  with  him.  The  gifts  and  vocations  of  God 
are,  as  the  Apostle  expresses  it,  without  repentance,  or 
regret,  on  his  part.  Those  Jews,  who  are  now  his 
enemies  because  they  reject  the  Gospel,  are  still  called 
charissimi,  they  are  still  the  beloved  and  dearly 
beloved,  because  of  their  Fathers.3  Forkthe  same 
reason,  a  time  will  come,  and  the  whole  world  is 
waiting  for  it,  when  the  denial  of  Juda  being  revoked 
and  his  iniquities  blotted  out,  the  promises  made  to 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  will  be  literally  fulfilled.4 
Then  the  divine  unity  of  the  two  Testaments  will  be 
made  evident ;  and  the  two  peoples  themselves  will 
be  made  one,  under  their  one  head,  Christ  Jesus.5 
The  covenant  of  God  with  man  being  then  fully  realised, 
such  as  he  had  designed  it  in  his  eternal  wisdom, — 
the  earth  having  yielded  its  fruit,6 — the  world  having 
done  its  work, — the  sepulchres  will  give  back  their 
dead,7  and  History  cease  here  on  earth,  leaving  glori- 
fied human  nature  to  bloom  in  unreserved  fulness  of 
life,  under  God's  complacent  eye. 

The  truths,  then,  which  are  again  brought  before 
our  notice  by  to-day's  Gospel,  are  anything  but  dry 
or  old-fashioned  ;  nothing  is  so  grand ;  and,  we  must 
add,  though  superficial  minds  will  wonder  at  it  — 


1  Coloss.  i.  24  ;  ii.  19,     4  Ibid.  25-27.  6  Ps.  lxvi.  7. 

2  2  Cor.  iv.  10,  11.  e  Eph.  ii.  14.  7  Rom.  xi.  15. 

3  Rom.  xi.  28,  29. 


MASS.  331 

there  is  nothing  more  practical  in  this  season  of  the 
year,  for  it  is  the  season  that  is  consecrated  to  the 
mysteries  of  the  Unitive  Life.  After  all,  in  what, 
primarily,  does  union  between  God  and  man  consist, 
but  in  unanimity  of  the  divine  and  human  minds  ? 
Now,  we  know  that  the  divine  mind  has  manifested 
all  its  designs  in  the  respective  history  of  the  two 
Testaments  and  the  two  Peoples  ;  and,  that  the  final 
result  which  is  to  bring  these  two  histories  to  their 
close,  is  the  one  only  end  which  infinite  Love  was  in 
the  beginning,  and  is  now,  and  will  for  ever  be,  pro- 
posing to  fulfil.  The  Church,  therefore,  far  from 
showing  herself  to  be  not  up  to  the  present  age  by 
recurring  continually  to  truths  such  as  these,  is  but 
clearly  proving  herself  to  be  the  most  intelligent 
Bride  of  Jesus, — is  but  evincing  the  changeless  lovely 
youthfulness  of  a  heart,  which  ever  beats  in  unison 
with  that  of  her  Spouse. 

Let  us  now  resume  the  literal  explanation  of  our 
Gospel.  As  we  were  observing  on  a  previous 
Sunday,  our  Jesus  here,  again,  wishes  rather  to 
give  us  a  useful  teaching,  than  to  manifest  his  divine 
power.  It  is  for  this  purpose,  that  he  does  not  cure 
these  ten  lepers  who  besought  him  to  have  mercy 
on  them,  as,  on  another  occasion,  he  cured  one  who 
was  suffering  from  the  same  misery.  To  this  latter, 
who  besought  Him,  he  restored  cleanliness  by  a  few 
words ;  this  was  at  the  beginning  of  his  public  life  ; 
he  said  :  "  Be  thou  made  clean  !  "  and,  forthwith  the 
leprosy  was  cleansed?  But  the  lepers  of  our  Gospel 
is  an  event  that  took  place  in  the  latter  portion  of 
our  Lord's  sojourn  amongst  men  :  and  they  are  made 
clean,  only  whilst  on  their  way  to  show  themselves 
to  the  priests ;  Jesus  sends  them  to  the  priests,  just  as 
he  had  done  in  the  previous  case;  and  thus,  from 
the  beginning  to  the  close  of  his  mortal  life,  he  gives 

1  St.  Matth.  viii.  3. 


332         THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

an  example  of  the  respect  which  was  to  be  paid  to 
the  Old  Law,  so  long  as  it  was  not  abrogated.  That 
Law  gave  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  the  power,  not  of 
curing,  but  of  discerning  leprosy,  and  passing  judg- 
ment on  its  being  cured  or  not.1 

The  time,  however,  is  now  come  for  a  Law  that 
is  to  be  far  above  that  of  Sinai ;  and  it  has  a  priest- 
hood, whose  judgments  are  not  to  be  concerning  the 
state  of  the  body,  but,  by  pronouncing  the  sentence 
of  absolution,  is  to  effectually  remove  the  leprosy  of 
souls.     The  cure  which  the  ten  lepers  felt  coming 
upon  them  before  they  had  reached  the  priests,  ought 
to  have  sufficed  to  show  them,  in  Jesus,  the  power 
of  the  new  priesthood,  which  had  been  foretold  by 
the  Prophets  ; 2  the  power  which,  by  thus  forestalling 
it,  in  their  favour,   surpasses   the  authority  of  the 
ancient    ministration,    is,    or    should    be,   evidence 
enough  of  the  superior  dignity  of  Him  who  exercises 
it.     If  only  they  were  in  suitable  dispositions  for  the 
sacred  rites,  which  are  going  to  be  used  in  the  cere- 
mony of  their  purification,3 — the  Holy  Ghost,  who, 
heretofore,  had  inspired  the  prophetic  details  of  the 
mysterious  function  about  to  be  celebrated,  would 
enable  them  to  understand  the  signification  of  the 
expiatory  sparrow,  whose  blood,  being  sprinkled  upon 
the  living  water,  sets  free,  by  the  wood,  its  fellow 
sparrow.      That  first  bird   typifies   our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who   likens   himself,  in   the   psalm,  to   the 
lonely  sparrow ; 4  his  immolation  on  the  Cross,  which 
gives  to  water  the  power  of  cleansing  souls,  commu- 
nicates  to   the  other   sparrows,  his  Brethren,6   the 
purity  of  the  Blood  divine. 

But,  the  Jew  is  far  from  being  ready  for  under- 
standing these  great  mysteries.  And  yet,  the  Law 
had  been  given  to  him,  that  it  might  serve  him  as  a 
hand  leading  him  to  Christ,  and  without  exposing 

1  Lev.  xiii.  a  Lev.  xiv.  1-32.  5  Ps.  lxxxiii.  4. 

2  Is.  lxvi.  21-23.  4  Ps.  ci.  8. 


mass.  333 

him  to  err.1  It  was  a  signal  favour,  granted  him, 
not  from  any  merits  of  his  own,  but  because  of  his 
Fathers.2  The  favour  was  all  the  more  precious, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  bestowed  at  a  time,  when  the 
tradition  regarding  a  future  Redeemer  was  almost 
entirely  lost  by  the  bulk  of  mankind.  Gratitude 
should  have  been  uppermost  in  the  heart  of  Juda ; 
but  pride  took  its  place.  He  was  so  taken  up  with 
the  honour  that  had  been  put  on  him,  that  it  made 
him  lose  all  desire  for  the  Messiah.  He  cannot 
endure  the  thought,  that  a  time  will  come,  when  the 
Sun  of  Justice  having  risen  for  the  whole  earth, 
the  limited  advantage  which  was  given  to  a  few 
during  the  hours  of  night,  shall  be  eclipsed  by  the 
bright  noon  of  a  light  which  all  vie  to  enjoy.  He, 
therefore,  proclaims,  that  the  Old  Law  is  definitive, 
though  the  Law  protests  itself  to  be  but  transitory ; 
he,  therefore,  insists  on  the  perpetuity  of  the  reign 
of  types  and  shadows.  He  lays  it  down  as  a  dogma 
that  no  divine  intervention  can  ever  equal  that  made 
on  Sinai* ;  that  every  future  prophet,  every  Sent  of 
God,  must  be  inferior  to  Moses;  that  all  possible 
salvation  is  in  the  Law,  and  that  from  it  alone  flows 
every  grace. 

This  explains  to  us  how  it  was,  that  of  the  ten 
men  cured  of  leprosy  by  Jesus,  nine  of  them  are 
found  who  have  not  even  the  remotest  thought  of 
coming  to  their  Deliverer  to  thank  him :  these  nine 
are  Jews ;  Jesus,  to  their  minds,  is  a  mere  disciple 
of  Moses,  a  bare  instrument  of  favours  holding  his 
commission  from  Sinai ;  and,  as  soon  as  they  have 
gone  through  the  legal  formality  of  their  purification, 
they  take  it  that  all  their  obligations  to  God  are 
paid.  The  Samaritan,  the  despised  gentile,  whose 
sufferings  have  given  him  that  humility  which  makes 
the  sinner  clear-sighted, — he  is  the  only  one  who 

1  Gal.  iii.  24.  2  Deut.  iv.  37 ;  ix.  4-6. 


334        THIRTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

recognises  God  by  his  divine  works,  and  gives  him 
thanks  for  his  favours.  How  many  ages  of  apparent 
abandonment,  of  humiliation  and  suffering,  must  pass 
over  Juda  too,  before  he  will  recognise  and  adore 
his  God,  and  confess  to  him  his  sins,  and  give  him 
his  devoted  love,  and,  like  this  stranger,  hear  Jesus 
pronounce  his  pardon,  and  say :  Arise !  Go  thy 
way  I  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole  and  saved  thee! 

Let  us,  by  our  fervent  prayers,  hasten  the  time 
which  will  be  so  glorious  for  the  two  peoples,  when 
united  in  the  same  faith  by  the  consciousness  of  the 
same  hopes  then  realised,  they  will  cry  out  to  our 
Redeemer  these  words  of  our  Offertory : 

OFFERTORY. 

In  te  speravi,  Domine,  In  thee,  0  Lord,  have  I  put 
dixi :  Tu  es  Deus  meus,  in  my  trust :  thou  art  my  God  ; 
manibus  tuis  tempora  mea.      my  times  are  in  thy  hands. 

It  is  the  oblation  that  is  now  on  the  Altar,  that  is 
to  obtain  for  us,  from  God,  the  pardon  of  our  past 
offences,  and  the  graces  we  hope  for,  for  the  time  to 
come.  Let  us,  in  the  Secret,  beseech  him  to  accept, 
for  the  Sacrifice,  these  gifts  which  the  Church,  in  the 
name  of  us  all,  has  presented  to  him. 

SECRET. 

Propitiare,  Domine,  po-  Be  thou  propitious,  0  Lord, 

pulo  tuo,  propitiare  mune-  to  thy  people,  and  mercifully 

ribus  :    ut    hac    oblatione  receive  their  offerings  ;  that 

placatus,  et  indulgentiam  being  appeased  thereby,  thou 

nobis  tribuas,  et  postulata  mayest  grant  us  pardon,  and 

concedas.    Per  Dominum.  bestow  upon  us  what  we  ask. 

Through,  etc. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

Oh !  when  will  the  children  of  Juda  come  and 
experience    for  themselves  the  superiority    of  the 


mass.  335 

Bread  of  the  New  Testament  over  the  Manna  of  the 
Old  ?  We  Gentiles,  the  last-comers,  but  who  have 
preceded  our  elder  brethren  at  the  banquet  of  love, — 
let  us  sing  all  the  more  fervently,  in  our  Communion- 
Anthem,  the  divine  siveetness  of  this  true  Bread  of 
heaven. 

COMMUNION. 

Thou  hast  given  us  bread  Panem  de  coelo  dedisti 

from  heaven,    O  Lord,  con-  nobis,  Domine,  habentem 

tainingwhatsoever  is  delicious  omne    delectamentum,   et 

and  sweet.  omnem  saporem  suavitatis. 

As  the  Postcommunion  expresses  it,  the  work  of 
our  redemption  by  Jesus  our  Lord,  is  confirmed  and 
grows  within  us,  as  often  as  we  assist  at  these  sacred 
Mysteries.  The  Church  prays  that  her  children  may 
be  blessed  with  the  grace  of  this  fruitful  frequency, 
wherewith  we  are  present  at  these  Mysteries  of 
salvation, 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

May  these  heavenly  mys-  Sumptis,  Domine,  cceles- 
teries,  0  Lord,  which  we  have  tibus  sacramentis,  ad  re- 
received,  advance  our  eternal  demptionis  seternae,  quae- 
redemption-     Through,  etc.         sumus,    proficiamus    aug- 

mentum.   Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON    OF    THE   MAGNIFICAT. 

But,  one  of  them,  when  he  Unus  autem  ex  illis,  ut 
saw  that  he  was  made  clean,  vidit  quod  mundatus  est, 
went  back,  glorifying  God  regressus  est,  cum  magna 
with  a  loud  voice.    Alleluia.        voce    magnificans    Deum. 

Alleluia. 


336        THIRTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


OREMUS. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,  da  nobis  fidei,  spei, 
et  charitatis  augmentum  : 
et  ut  mereamur  assequi 
quod  promittis,  fac  nos 
am  are  quod  praecipis.  Per 
Dominum  nostrum. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

0  almighty  and  eternal  God, 
grant  unto  us  an  increase  of 
faith,  hope,  and  charity:  and, 
that  we  may  deserve  what 
thou  promisest,  make  us  to 
love  what  thou  commandest. 
Through,  etc. 


MASS.  337 


THE  FOURTEENTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

MASS. 

In  the  "Western  Church,  this  Sunday  is  called  that 
of  the  two  masters,  because  of  the  Gospel  which  is 
read  upon  it. 

The  Greeks  give  it  the  name  of  the  Sunday  of  the 
Invited  to  the  Marriage- feast?  or,  the  fourteenth  of 
Saint  Matthew,  unless  the  Feast  of  the  Exaltation  of 
the  Holy  Cross  (14  September)  happen  to  fall  during 
the  ensuing  week.  In  this  latter  case,  this  and  the 
following  Sundays  are  called  of  the  Exaltation,  and 
take  for  their  Gospels,  the  first  from  St.  John,  the 
second  from  St.  Mark.  After  this,  follow  the  Sundays 
called  of  Saint  Luke,  which  go  on  till  Lent,  in  the 
manner  already  described  for  Saint  Matthew. 


MASS. 

Behold,  0  God,  our  protector  !  and  look  on  the  face 
of  thy  Christ!  Thus  begins  the  Church,  as  she 
advances  towards  the  Altar,  whereon  the  holy 
Sacrifice  is  going  to  be  offered  up.  The  Church  is 
the  Bride  of  the  Man- God ;  she  is,  as  the  Apostle 
says,  his  glory ; 2  but,  the  Spouse,  according  to  the 
same  Saint  Paul,  is  both  the  image  and  the  glory  of 
God,3  and  the  head  of  his  Bride*     In  all  truth,  then, 

1  St.  Matth.  xxii.    2  1  Cor.  xi.  7.     •  Ibid.    4  Ibid.  3 ;  Eph.  v.  23. 

VOL.    XI.  Z 


338     FOURTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

and  with  full  confidence  that  she  will  be  graciously- 
heard,  the  Church,  in  presenting  her  petitions  to  the 
Most  High,  begs  of  him  to  look  on  the  face  of  his 
Christ,  who  is  also  hers. 

INTROIT. 

Protector  noster,  aspice,  Behold,  O  God,  our  pro- 

Deus,  et  respice  in  faciem  tector,  and  look  on  the  face  of 

Christi  tui:  quia  melior  est  thy  Christ :  for,  better  is  one 

dies  una  in  atriis  tuis  super  day    in    thy    courts,    above 

millia.  thousands. 

Ps.  Quam  dilecta  taber-  Ps.   How    lovely    are    thy 

nacula  tua,  Domine  virtu-  tabernacles,  0  Lord  of  hosts  ! 

turn !  concupiscit,  et  deficit  My  soul  longeth  and  fainteth 

animamea  in  atria  Domini,  for  the   courts  of  the  Lord. 

Gloria  Patri.  Protector.  Glory,  etc.    Behold. 

The  remembrance  of  the  future  glories  which  fill 
the  Church  with  gladness,  and  the  dignity  of  the 
divine  Union  which,  even  in  this  present  life,  makes 
her  truly  Bride, — do  not  prevent  her  from  always 
feeling  the  need  she  has  of  help  from  on  high.  "Were 
she  to  be  deprived  one  single  moment  of  God's 
assistance,  she  would  see  her  children,  through  their 
innate  human  frailty,  hurrying  into  the  abyss  of  vice, 
such  as  the  Apostle  describes  in  to-day's  Epistle. 
Let  us  join  with  our  Mother,  in  her  Collect,  and 
beseech  God,  that  he  will  grant  us  that  uninterrupted, 
that  constant,  mercy,  which  is  absolutely  necessary 
for  us. 

COLLECT. 

Custodi,  Domine,  quae-  Preserve,  O  Lord,  we  be- 

suinus,     Ecclesiam    tuam  seech  thee,  thy  Church  by  thy 

propitiatione  perpetua  :  et  constant  mercy  ;  and  whereas, 

quia  sine  te  labiturhumana  without  thee,  human  mortality 

mortalitas,  tuis  semper  au-  fails,  may  it,  by  thine  aid,  be 

xiliis  et  abstrahatur  a  no-  ever    delivered     from    what 

xiis,   et  ad  salutaria  diri-  things    are    hurtful,   and  be 

gatur.  Per  Dominum.  directed  towards  such  as  are 

salutary.     Through,  etc. 


MASS. 

The  other  Collects  as  in  page  125. 


339 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  Saint 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Galatians. 

Ch.  v. 

Brethren :  Walk  in  the  spirit, 
and  you  shall  not  fulfil  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh.  For  the  flesh 
lusteth  against  the  spirit ;  and 
the  spirit  against  the  flesh : 
for  these  are  contrary  one  to 
another  :  so  that  you  do  not 
the  things  that  you  would. 
But  if  you  are  led  by  the 
spirit,  you  are  not  under  the 
law.  Now  the  works  of  the 
flesh  are  manifest,  which  are, 
fornication,  uncleanness,  im- 
modesty, luxury,  idolatry, 
witchcrafts,  enmities,  conten- 
tions, emulations,  wraths, 
quarrels,  dissensions,  sects, 
envy,  murders,  drunkenness, 
revellings,  and  such  like.  Of 
the  which  I  foretell  you,  as  I 
have  foretold  to  you,  that  they 
who  do  such  things  shall  not 
obtain  the  kingdom  of  God. 
But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is 
charity,  joy,  peace,  patience, 
benignity,  goodness,  longani- 
mity, mildness,  faith,  modesty, 
continency,  chastity.  Against 
such  there  is  no  law.  And 
they  that  are  Christ's,  have 
crucified  their  flesh  with  the 
vices  and  concupiscences. 


Lectio     Epistolae   beati 
Pauli  Apostoli  ad  Galatas- 

Cap.  v. 

Fratres,  Spiritu  ambulate, 
et  desideria  carnis  non  per- 
ficietis.  Caro  enim  concu- 
piscit  adversus  spiritum  : 
spiritus  autem  adversus 
carnem  :  haec  enim  sibi  in- 
vicem  adversantur :  ut  non 
quaecumque  vultis,  ilia  fa- 
ciatis.  Quod  si  Spiritu  du- 
cimini,  non  estis  sub  lege. 
Manifestasunt  autem  opera 
carnis :  quae  sunt  fornica- 
tio,  immunditia,  impudici- 
tia,  luxuria,  idolorum  ser- 
vitus,  veneficia,  inimicitiae, 
contentiones,  aemulationes, 
irae,  rixae,  dissensiones, 
sectae,  invidiae,  homicidia, 
ebrietates,  comessationes, 
et  his  similia,  quae  praedico 
vobis,  sicut  praedixi  :  quo- 
niam  qui  talia  agunt,  re- 
gnum  Dei  non  consequen- 
ts. Fructus  autem  Spiritus 
est  :  charitas,  gaudium, 
pax,  patientia,  benignitas, 
bonitas,  longanimitas,  man- 
suetudo,  fides,  modestia, 
continentia,  castitas.  Ad- 
versus hujusmodi  non  est 
lex.  Qui  autem  sunt  Christi, 
carnem  suam  crucifixerunt 
cum  vitiis  et  concupiscen- 
tiis. 


The  Bride  who  came  from  the  top  of  Sanir  and 


340    FOURTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

Hermon  that  she  might  be  crowned,1  knows  not  the 
servitude  of  Sinai  ;2  still  less  is  she  under  the  slavery 
of  the  senses.  On  the  mountain,  where  her  tent  is 
fixed  for  ever,3  her  Spouse  has  broken  the  fetters  of 
the  Jewish  law,  and  that  more  galling  chain  which 
tied  all  people  down, — the  web  of  sin  that  covered  all 
nations  of  the  earth.4  She,  the  Bride,  is  queen, — her 
sons  are  kings  ;5  the  milk  whereon  she  feeds  them,6 
infuses  liberty  within  them.7  Filled  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  is  their  glory  and  their  strength,8  they 
they  have  the  Lord  of  Hosts  looking  on  them,  as 
they  bravely  fight  battles  such  as  Princes  should 
engage  in.9  Satan,  too,  has  beheld  their  glorious 
struggles,  and  his  kingdom  has  been  shaken  to  its 
foundations.™  Two  cities  now  divide  the  world  be- 
tween them;11  and  the  Holy  City,  made  up  of 
vanquishers  over  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  is 
full  of  admiration  and  joy  at  seeing  that  the  noblest 
of  the  nations  flock  to  her.12  The  law  which  reigns 
supreme  within  her  walls  is — love ;  for  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  rules  her  happy  citizens,  takes  them  far 
beyond  the  injunctions  or  prohibitions  of  any  law. 
Together  with  Charity,  there  spring  up  Joy,  Peace, 
and  those  other  Fruits,  here  enumerated  by  the 
Apostle  ;  they  grow  spontaneously  from  a  soil  which 
is  saturated  with  the  glad  waters13  of  a  Stream,  which 
is  no  other  than  the  Sanctifying  Spirit,  who  inundates 
the  City  of  God.14  We  are  not  astonished  at  this  new 
Sion's  being  loved  by  the  Lord  above  all  the  tabernacles 
of  Jacob,15  beautiful  as  those  once  were.16  Now  that 
the  Blessing  has  taken  on  earth  the  place  once  held 
by  the  Laiv,  the  Servants  of  ^God  have  been  turned 


1  Cantic.  iv.  8.  6Is.  lxvi.  8-12.  »  St.  Aug.  De  Civit. 

2  Gal.  iv.  24-26.  7  Gal.  iv.  31.  Dei. 

3  Is.  ii.  2.  8  Rom.  viii.  14,  26.     12  Is.  lx.  5. 
*Ibid.  xxv.  7.                9Eph.  iv.  8  ;  vi.  12.  13Ps.lxiv.  1L 
5 1  St.  Peter,  ii.  9.       10  St.  John  xii.  31.        14  Ps.  xlv.  5. 

15  Ps.  Ixxxvi.  2.      16  Num.  xxiv.  5. 


MASS.  341 

into  Children,  Sons  and  Daughters.  Even  whilst 
living  in  the  flesh,  they  bear  evidence  of  their 
heavenly  origin,  by  going  on  from  virtue  unto  virtue. 
Though  sojourning  in  this  vale  of  tears,  they  are  ever 
on  the  ascent,  approaching  gradually  nigher  to  the 
high  summits  of  holiness  :  they  reflect  in  their  lives 
the  perfection  of  their  heavenly  Father,1  who,  sur- 
rounded as  he  thus  is  in  Sion  by  this  noble  family,  is 
seen  to  be,  in  all  truth,  the  God  of  gods.2 

Flesh  and  blood  have  had  no  share  in  their  divine 
birth  ; 3  flesh  and  blood  have  no  hand  in  their  regene- 
rated life.4  Their  first  birth  being  in  the  flesh,  they 
were  flesh,  and  did  the  works  of  death  and  ignominy 
mentioned  in  the  Epistle,  showing,  at  every  turn, 
that  they  were  from  slime  of  earth  ;5  but,  born  of  the 
Spirit,  they  are  spirit,6  and  do  the  works  of  the  Spirit, 
in  spite  of  the  flesh  which  is  always  part  of  their 
being.7  For,  by  giving  them  of  his  own  life,  the 
Spirit  has  emancipated  them,  by  the  power  of  love, 
from  the  tyranny  of  sin,8  which  held  dominion  over 
their  members  ;9  and,  having  been  grafted  on  Christ, 
they  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God.10 

Man,  therefore,  who  was  once  a  slave  to  con- 
cupiscence, has  regained  on  the  cross  of  Christ  that 
equilibrium  of  his  existence11  which  is  true  liberty. 
The  supremacy,  which  the  soul  had  forfeited,  in 
punishment  for  her  revolt  against  God,12  has  been 
restored  to  her  by  the  laver  of  the  water  of  baptism, 
and  now  that  she  is  once  more  queen,  it  is  but  just 
that  she  chastise  the  slave,  who  so  long  lorded  it  over 
her,  his  rightful  sovereign.  Man  owes  nothing  to 
the  flesh,13  especially  after  the  miseries  it  has  brought 
upon  him ;  but,  further  than  this,  God,  too,  has  been 
insulted  by  the  sensual  abominations  committed  in 

1  St.  Matth.  v.  48.  6  St.  John,  iii.  6.        »  Ibid.  viii.  3. 

2  Ps.  lxxxiii.  6-8.  7  2  Cor.  x.  3.  la  Ibid.  i.  28. 

3  St.  John,  i.  12.  8  Horn.  viii.  2.  13  Ibid.  viii.  12. 

4  1  Cor.  xv.  50.  9  Ibid.  vii.  23. 
6  Gen.  ii.  7.  ,0  Ibid.  4. 


342        FOURTEENTH   SUNDAY  AFTER   PENTECOST. 

his  sacred  presence ;  and  he,  too,  demands  atonement. 
For  this  purpose,  he  mercifully  takes  man,  now  that 
he  is  enfranchised,  and  confides  to  him  the  task  of 
sharing  with  his  divine  Majesty,  in  taking  revenge  on 
their  common  enemy  and  usurper.  Then,  again,  this 
mortifying  the  flesh  and  keeping  it  in  subjection,  is  a 
necessary  means  for  retaining  the  good  position  already 
obtained.  It  is  true,  that  the  rebel  has  been  made 
incapable  of  damaging  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  who  walk  not  according  to  the  flesh  and  its  vile 
suggestions ; 1  but,  it  is  equally  true,  that  the  rebel  is 
rebel  still,  and  is  ever  watching  opportunities  for 
assailing  the  spirit.  If  there  be  exceptions,  they  are 
exceedingly  rare.  The  rule  of  the  flesh  is, — to  attack 
the  spirit  all  through  life,  and  try  to  make  it  yield. 
If  one  were  an  Antony  in  the  desert,  the  flesh  would 
be  fierce  in  its  assaults,  even  there.  If  the  Saint 
were  a  Paul,  just  fresh  from  the  third  heaven  of  his 
sublime  revelations,  the  flesh  would  have  impudence 
enough  to  buffet  even  him.2  So  that,  had  we  no  past 
sins  to  atone  for,  the  commonest  prudence  would  urge 
us  to  take  severe  measures  of  precaution  against  an 
enemy,  who  is  so  fearfully  untiring  in  his  hatred  of 
us,  and,  what  is  worse,  lives  always  in  our  own  home. 
That  St.  Paul,  of  whom  we  were  just  speaking,  says 
of  himself :  I  chastise  my  body,  and  bring  it  into  sub- 
jection, lest,  perhaps,  *  *  *  *  I  should  become  repro- 
bate !B 

Penance  and  Mortification  differ  in  this  :  that, 
Penance  is  a  debt  of  justice,  incumbent  on  the  sinner ; 
Mortification  is  a  duty  commanded  by  prudence ; 
which  duty  becomes  that  of  every  Christian,  who  is 
not  foolish  enough  to  pretend  to  be  out  of  the  reach 
of  concupiscence.  Is  there  any  one  living,  who  could 
honestly  say,  that  he  has  fully  acquitted  himself  of 
these  two  duties  :  that  he  has  satisfied  the  claims  of 

i  Rom.  viii.  1.         2  2  Cor.  xii.  7.        3  1  Cor.  ix.  27. 


mass.  343 

God's  justice  ?  and  that  he  has  stifled  every  germ  of 
his  evil  passions  ?  All  spiritual  masters,  without 
exception,  teach,  that  no  man,  who  is  desirous  either 
for  perfection  or  salvation,  should  limit  himself  to 
the  rules  of  simple  Temperance,  that  cardinal  virtue 
which  forbids  excess  in  pleasures,  be  they  of  one 
kind  or  another.  This,  they  tell  us,  is  not  enough  ; 
and  that  the  Christian,  taking  up  another  virtue, 
namely  Fortitude,  must,  from  time  to  time,  refuse 
himself  even  lawful  gratifications ;  must  impose  pri- 
vations on  himself,  which  are  not  otherwise  of  obli- 
gation ;  must,  even,  inflict  punishment  on  himself,  in 
the  manner  and  measure  permitted  him  by  a  discreet 
director.  Amidst  the  thousands  of  holy  writers,  who 
treat  on  this  point  of  asceticism,  let  us  listen  to  the 
amiable  and  gentle  St.  Francis  of  Sales :  "  If,"  says 
he,  in  his  Introduction  to  a  Devoid  Life,  "  If  you  can 
"  bear  fasting,  you  would  do  well  to  fast  on  certain 
"  days,  beyond  those  fasts  which  the  Church  com- 
"  mands  us  to  observe  .  .  . ;  even  when  one  does 
"  not  fast  much,  yet  does  the  enemy  fear  us  all  the 
"  more,  when  he  knows  that  we  know  how  to  impose 
"  a  fast  on  ourselves.  Wednesdays,  Fridays,  and 
"  Saturdays,  were  the  days,  whereon  the  Christians 
"  of  former  times  most  practised  abstinence.  There- 
"  fore,  do  you  choose  out  of  these  for  your  fasts,  as 
"  far  as  your  devotion  and  the  discretion  of  your 
"  director  will  counsel  you  to  do.  .  .  The  discipline, 
"  when  taken  with  moderation,  possesses  a  marvel- 
"  lous  power  for  awakening  the  desire  for  devotion. 
"  The  hair-shirt  is  efficacious  in  reducing  the  body 
"  to  subjection  .  .  . ;  on  days  which  are  especially 
"  devoted  to  penance,  one  may  wear  it,  the  advice 
"  of  a  discreet  Confessor  having  been  previously 
"  taken." x  Thus  speaks  the  learned  Doctor  of  the 
Church,  the  saintly  Bishop  of  Geneva,  whose  sweet 

1  Introduction  to  a  Devout  Life  ;  III  part;  ch.  xxiii. 


344   FOURTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

prudence  is  almost  proverbial ;  and  they  to  whom  he 
addresses  these  instructions  are  persons  living  in  the 
world.  In  the  world,  quite  as  much  as  in  the 
cloister,  the  Christian  Life,  if  seriously  taken  up, 
imperatively  requires  this  incessant  war  of  the  spirit 
against  the  flesh.  Let  that  war  cease,  and  the  flesh 
speedily  usurps  the  sway,  and  reduces  the  soul  to  a 
state  of  torpor,  by  either  seizing  her  very  first 
attempts  at  virtue  and  chilling  them  into  apathy,  or 
by  plunging  her,  at  a  single  throw,  deep  into  the 
filth  of  sin. 

Neither  is  it  to  be  feared,  that  affability  in  the 
Christian's  social  intercourse  will  be,  in  any  way, 
impaired  by  this  energy  of  self-mortification.  That 
virtue  which  is  based  on  such  forge tfulness  of  oneself, 
as  to  make  him  love  discomfort  and  suffering  for 
God's  sake,  does  not  render  such  a  man  one  whit 
less  pleasing  in  company,  nor  rob  the  friendly  circle 
he  frequents  of  one  single  charm.  But,  will  it  not 
interfere,  somewhat,  with  an  article  which  the  world 
is  very  jealous  about  ?  No :  when  Dress  is  what 
christian  reserve  would  have  it  be, — in  other  and 
plainer  words,  when  it  is  the  love  of  Jesus  that  re- 
gulates the  arrangements, — there  is  no  toilet,  where 
the  jewels  of  penance  may  not  find  their  place,  with- 
out in  the  least  intruding  with  those  of  the  world. 
The  day  of  judgment  will  give  a  strange  lesson  to 
those  many  good-for-nothing  and  cowardly  Chris- 
tians, who  feel  sure,  that  every  one  of  their  acquaint- 
ance is  as  fond  of  easy-going  softness  as  they  them- 
selves are !  Then  will  be  revealed  to  them  the 
pious  schemes  of  penance,  which  christian  love  of 
the  Cross  suggested,  as  means  for  crucifying  their 
flesh  even  amidst  pleasures,  and  to  those  very  per- 
sons, who  were  the  most  admired  in  the  worldling's 
earthly  paradise  of  gay  saloons. 

And  ought  it  not  to  be  thus  ?  ought  not  the  Cross 
to  be  most  dear  to  men  ?    Yes,  unless  we  hold  that 


MASS. 


345 


Christianity  and  divine  love  have  entirely  disappeared 
from  this  world.  How  is  it  possible  to  love  Jesus, 
the  Man  of  sorrows,1  and  not  love  his  sufferings  ? 
Can  we  say,  that  we  are  walking  in  his  footsteps,  if 
we  are  not  on  the  road  to  Calvary  ?  If  any  man 
will  come  after  me,  says  this  Jesus,  let  him  deny  him- 
self, and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me  ! 2  And  the 
Church,  who  is  one  with  her  divine  Spouse, — the 
Church  who  completes  Him  in  all  things,3  and,  therefore, 
continues  through  all  ages,  his  life  of  expiation  and 
atonement,  puts  on  her  children  the  sublime  task,  which 
the  Apostle  thus  expresses :  1  Jill  up  those  things,  that 
are  wanting  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  by  suffering  in 
my  flesh  for  his  body,  which  is  the  Church.4" 

Sublime  task  indeed !  filial,  as  far  as  the  Church 
is  concerned,  but  divine,  also,  and  deifying,  if  we 
consider  the  union  it  produces  between  the  Word 
and  the  Soul :  he,  the  Word,  gives  to  the  soul  what 
he  has  not  given  to  the  Angels  ;  that  is,  he  invites 
her  to  a  share  of  that  Chalice,  which  the  Eternal 
Father  reserved  to  Jesus'  sacred  Humanity.5  Here 
we  have  the  intimacy  of  the  Bride : — the  one  same 
Cup  for  the  Two,  and  it  unites  their  two  lives  into 
one.  It  is  a  Cup  of  sorrow's  holy  inebriation  ;  they 
both  drink  it  with  avidity ;  and  that  avidity  gives 
such  vehemence  to  their  union,  that  the  creature,  at 
times,  leaves  her  ecstacy  all  stigmatised  in  soul,  yea, 
it  may  be  in  her  body  too,  with  the  Wounds  of  her 
Crucified  Lord.  But  whether  our  Lord  communi- 
cate or  not,  either  invisibly  or  visibly,  the  stigmata 
of  his  love  to  the  soul  that  is  devoted  to  Him, — there 
is  always,  under  one  form  or  other,  the  royal  seal, 
which  gives  the  surest  sign  of  authenticity  to  the 
contract  of  divine  union  here  below ;  that  seal  is — 
suffering.     Many, — who,  on  hearing  or  reading  the 

1  Is.  liii.  3.  3  jjph.  i.  23.  ■  St.  John,  xviii.  11. 

2  St.  Matth.  xvi.  24.       4  Coloss.  i.  24. 


346    FOURTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTEU  PENTECOST. 

favours  gratuitously  granted  to  certain  saintly  souls, 
are  excited  to  a  feeling  of  holy  envy, — would  shrink 
back  with  dismay,  if  they  were  told  of  the  trials  they 
had  to  go  through,  before  gaining  such  mystic 
ascensions.  Even  when  the  trials  of  purification, 
(of  which  we  were  speaking  on  a  former  occasion,1) 
are  all  over,  the  place  of  meeting  is  invariably  that, 
which  the  inspired  Canticle  calls  the  Mount  of  myrrh? 
which  is  but  another  name  for  suffering.  Myrrh  is 
the  first  fragrant  herb  culled  by  the  divine  "Word  in 
the  mystic  garden, — nay,  it  is  the  only  one  he 
expressly  mentions.3  Myrrh  distils  from  the  Bride's 
hands,  and  her  fingers  are  full  of  it;4  her  Spouse  is 
the  bouquet  she  clasps  to  her  heart,  but  that  bouquet 
is  one  of  Myrrh ;  J  and  his  lips  are  as  lilies  dropping 
choice  Myrrh.6 

Of  course,  we  are  too  miserable  ever  to  aspire  to  be 
raised  up  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  those  heights  of  the 
mystic  life,  where  divine  union  produces  such  marvel- 
lous results  as  those  we  have  already  mentioned  ;  but, 
let  us  remember,  that  neither  the  intensity  nor  the 
merit  of  love,  no,  not  even  the  reality  of  effective 
Union,  depend  on  those  exterior  manifestations.  It 
should  suffice  to  make  us  love,  and  even  go  in  quest 
of,  suffering,  to  remember  how  faith  teaches  us,  that 
it  was  life-long  with  Him,  who  wishes,  and  infinitely 
deserves,  to  be  the  one  object  of  our  thoughts  and 
affections.  We  are  members  of  a  Head  who  was 
crowned  with  thorns  ;  can  we  pretend  to  have  nothing 
but  pleasures  and  flowers  ?  Let  us  not  forget,  that 
all  the  Saints  must,  when  in  heaven,  be  likenesses  of 
the  new  Adam  ;  7  and  that  the  Eternal  Father  admits 
no  one  into  his  House,  who  is  not  conformable  to  the 
image  of  his  Son.8 


1  The  6th  Sund.  aft.    3  Ibid.  v.  1.  «  Ibid.  v.  13. 

Pent.  4  Ibid.  v.  5.  7  1  Cor.  xv.  45-49. 

2  Cantie.  iv.  6.  6  Ibid.  i.  12.  8  Rom.  viii.  29,  30. 


MASS. 


347 


In  the  Gradnal,  the  Church  sings  the  happy  con- 
fidence she  has  put  in  her  divine  Spouse.  The  Alle- 
luia Verse  invites  us  to  rejoice,  as  she,  our  Mother, 
does,  in  God  our  Saviour. 


GRADUAL. 


It  is  better  to  trust  in  the 
Lord,  than  to  trust  in  man. 

ft.  It  is  better  to  hope  in  the 
Lord,  than  to  hope  in  princes. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Come,  let  us  praise  the 
Lord  with  joy;  let  us  joyfully 
sing  to  God  our  Saviour.  Alle- 
luia. 


Bonum  est  confidere  in 
Domino,  quam  confidere  in 
homine. 

ft.  Bonum  est  sperare  in 
Domino,  quam  sperare  in 
principibus. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Venite,exsultemus  Do- 
mino: jubilemus  Deo  salu- 
tari  nostro.    Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel  ac- 
cording to  Matthew. 

Ch.  vi. 

At  that  time :  Jesus  said  to 
his  disciples  :  No  man  can 
serve  two  masters.  For  either 
he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love 
the  other  :  or  he  will  sustain 
the  one,  and  despise  the  other. 
Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon.  Therefore  I  say  to 
you,  be  not  solicitous  for  your 
life,  what  ye  shall  eat,  nor  for 
your  body,  what  ye  shall  put 
on.  Is  not  the  life  more  than 
the  meat,  and  the  body  more 
than  the  raiment  1  Behold 
the  birds  of  the  air,  for  they 
neither  sow,  nor  do  they  reap, 
nor  gather  into  barns,  and 
your  heavenly  Father  feedeth 
them.  Are  not  ye  of  much 
more  value  than  they  1  And 
which     of    you,    by    taking 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthaeum. 

Cap.  vi. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Dixit 
Jesus  discipulis  suis  : 
Nemo  potest  duobus  do- 
minis  servire:  aut  enim 
ununi  odio  habebit,  et  al- 
terum  diliget:  aut  unum 
sustinebit,  et  alterum  con- 
temner Non  potestis  Deo 
servire,  et  mammonae.  ldeo 
dico  vobis,  ne  solliciti  sitis 
animae  vestrae  quid  mandu- 
cetis,  neque  corpori  vestro 
quid  induamini.  Nonne 
anima  plus  est  quam  esca: 
et  corpus  plus  quam  vesti- 
mentum  ]  Bespicite  vola- 
tilia  cceli,  quoniam  non 
serunt,  neque  metunt, 
neque  congregant  in  hor- 
rea:  et  Pater  vester  cceles- 
tis  pascit  ilia.    Nonne  vos 


318   FOURTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


thought,  can  add  to  his  stature 
one  cubit  1  And  for  raiment 
why  are  ye  solicitous  %  Con- 
sider the  lilies  of  the  field  how 
they  grow  :  they  labour  not, 
neither  do  they  spin.  But  I 
say  to  you,  that  not  even 
Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was 
arrayed  as  one  of  these.  And 
if  the  grass  of  the  field,  which 
is  to-day,  and  to-morrow  is 
cast  into  the  oven,  God  doth 
so  clothe ;  how  much  more 
you,  0  ye  of  little  faith.  Be 
not  solicitous  therefore,  say- 
ing, what  shall  we  eat,  or  what 
shall  we  drink,  or  wherewith 
shall  we  be  clothed?  For 
after  all  these  things  do  the 
heathens  seek.  For  your 
Father  knoweth  that  you  have 
need  of  all  these  things.  Seek 
ye  therefore  first  the  kingdom 
of  God,  and  his  justice,  and 
all  these  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you. 


magis  pluris  estis  illis  *? 
Quis  autem  vestrum  cogi- 
tans,  potest  adjicere  ad 
staturam  suam  cubitum 
unum  1  Et  de  vestimento 
quid  solliciti  estis  ?  Con- 
siderate lilia  agri,  quomodo 
crescunt :  non  laborant, 
neque  nent.  Dico  autem 
vobis,  quoniam  nee  Salo- 
mon in  omni  gloria  sua 
coopertus  est  sicut  unum 
ex  istis.  Si  autem  fcenum 
agri,  quod  hodie  est,  et  eras 
in  clibanum  mittitur,  Deus 
sic  vestit :  quanto  magis 
vos  modicaa  fidei  ?  Nolite 
ergo  solliciti  esse,  dicentes: 
Quid  manducabimus,  aut 
quid  bibemus,  aut  quo 
operiemur  %  Hasc  enim 
omnia  gentes  inquirunt. 
Scit  enim  Pater  vester, 
quia  his  omnibus  indigetis. 
Quaerite  ergo  primum  reg- 
num  Dei,  et  justitiam  ejus: 
et  hsec  omnia  adjicientur 
vobis. 

The  supernatural  life  can  never  be  healthy  in  men's 
souls,  unless  it  triumph  over  the  three  enemies,  which 
St.  John  calls, — concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  concupis- 
cence of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life?  As  to  the 
first  of  these,  our  Epistle  has  been  instructing  us  upon 
the  obstacle  it  raises  against  the  action  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  on  the  means  we  are  to  adopt  for  surmount- 
ing it.  Pride  of  life  is  overcome  by  Humility,  on 
which  the  Church  has  several  times  spoken  to  us, 
during  the  previous  Sundays.  The  Gospel,  which  has 
just  been  read  to  us,  is  the  condemnation  of  the  con- 
cupiscence of  the  eyes,  that  is,  attachment  to  the  goods 
of  this  world,  which,  of  themselves,  are  but  goods  in 
name  and  appearance. 

1  1  St.  John,  ii.  16. 


mass.  349 

iVb  man,  says  our  Lord,  can  serve  two  masters ;  and 
these  two  Masters  are, — God,  and  Mammon;  Mam- 
mon means  riches}  Riches  are  not,  of  their  own 
nature,  bad.  When  lawfully  acquired,  and  used 
agreeably  to  the  designs  of  God,  Biches  help  the 
possessor  to  gain  true  goods  for  his  soul ;  he  stores  up 
for  himself,  in  the  kingdom  of  his  eternal  home, 
treasures,  which  neither  thieves  nor  rust  can  reach.2 
Ever  since  the  Incarnation,  wherein  the  divine  "Word 
espoused  Poverty  to  himself,  it  is  the  Poor  that  are 
heaven's  nobility ;  and  yet,  the  mission  of  the  rich 
man  is  a  grand  one.  He  is  permitted  to  be  rich,  in 
order  that  he  may  be  God's  minister  to  make  all  the 
several  portions  of  material  creation  turn  to  their 
Creator's  glory.  He  graciously  vouchsafes  to  intrust 
into  his  hands  the  feeding  and  supporting  the  dearest 
of  his  children, — that  is,  the  Poor, — that  is,  the 
indigent  and  suffering  members  of  his  Christ.  He 
calls  him  to  uphold  the  interests  of  his  Church,  and 
be  the  promoter  of  works  connected  with  the  salva- 
tion of  men.  He  confides  to  him  the  keeping  up  the 
beauty  of  his  temples.  Happy  that  man,  and  worthy 
of  all  praise,  who  thus  directly  brings  back  to  the 
glory  of  their  maker  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  the 
precious  metals  she  yields  from  her  bosom !  Let 
not  such  a  man  fear:  it  is  not  of  him  that  Jesus 
speaks  those  anathemas  uttered  so  frequently  by  him 
against  the  rich  ones  of  this  world.  He  has  but  one 
Master , — the  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  whose  steward 
he  humbly  and  gladly  acknowledges  himself  to  be. 
Mammon  does  not  domineer  over  him ;  on  the  con- 
trary he  makes  her  his  servant,  and  obliges  her  to 
minister  to  his  zeal  in  all  good  works.  The  solicitude 
he  takes  in  spending  his  wealth  in  acts  of  justice  and 
charity,  is  not  that  which  our  Gospel  here  blames ; 
for,  in  all  such  solicitude,  he  is  but  following  our 

1  Homil.  diei.  2  St.  Matth.  vi.  19,  20. 


350    FOURTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

Lord's  precept, — of  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God; 
and  the  riches,  which  pass  through  his  hands  in  the 
furtherance  of  good  works,  do  not  distract  his 
thoughts  from  that  heaven  where  his  heart  is,  be- 
cause his  true  treasure  is  there.1 

It  is  quite  otherwise,  when  riches,  instead  of  being 
regarded  as  a  simple  means,  become  the  very  end  of 
a  man's  existence,  and  that  to  such  an  extent,  as  to 
make  him  neglect,  yea,  and  sometimes  forget,  his 
last  end.  The  ways  of  every  covetous  man,  says  the 
Scripture,  destroy  the  souls  of  the  possessors.2  The 
Apostle  explains  this,  by  saying,  that  the  love  of 
money  drives  a  man  into  temptation  and  the  snares 
of  the  devil,  by  the  countless  unprofitable  and  hurt- 
ful desires  it  excites  within  him ;  it  drowns  men  in 
destruction  and  perdition,  making  them  even  barter 
away  their  faith.3  And  yet,  the  more  an  avaricious 
man  gets,  the  less  he  spends.  To  nurse  his  treasure, 
to  gaze  upon  it,4  to  be  thinking  of  it  all  day  and 
night  long,  when  obliged  to  go  from  home, — that  is 
what  he  lives  for ;  and  his  money  becomes,  at  last, 
his  idol.8  Yes,  Mammon  is  not  merely  his  master, 
whose  commands  are  obeyed  before  all  others, — but 
it  is  his  god,  before  which  he  sacrifices  friends,  rela- 
tives, country,  and  himself,  for  he  devotes,  and,  as  it 
is  said  in  Ecclesiasticus,  throws  his  whole  soul  and 
body  away  to  his  idol.6  Let  us  not  be  astonished  at 
our  Gospel  declaring,  that  God  and  Mammon  are 
irreconcilable  enemies  ;  for,  who  was  it  but  Mammon, 
that  had  our  Lord  Jesus  sacrificed  on  its  hateful 
altar,  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver  ?  Of  all  the  devils 
in  hell,  is  tbere  one  whose  hideous  guilt  is  deeper, 
than  the  fallen  angel  who  prompted  Judas  to  sell 
the  Son  of  God  to  his  executioners  ?  It  is  the 
avaricious,  who  alone   can   boast  of  deicide !     The 

1  St.  Matth.  vi.  21.        3  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10.        5  Eph.  v.  5  ;    Coloss. 

2  Prov.  i.  19.  4  Eccles.  v.  9,  10.  iii.  5. 

6  Ecclus.  x.  10. 


MASS.  3>1 

vile  love  of  money,  which  the  Apostle  defines  as  the 
root  of  all  evils,1  can  lay  claim  to  having  produced 
the  greatest  crime  that  was  ever  perpetrated  ! 

But,  without  going  into  such  crimes  as  made  the 
authors  of  the  inspired  books  of  even  the  Old  Testa- 
ment  say,   that    nothing   is   more    ivicked    than   the 
covetous  man  .  .  .  ;  there  is  not  a  more  wicked  thing, 
than  to  love  money,2 — it  is  easy  to  allow  oneself  to  be 
led,  as  regards  this  world's  goods,  into  an  excessive 
solicitude,  that  is,  into  one  which  prudence  condemns. 
"What  ineffable  truth  and  clearness  are  there  not  in 
the   reasoning   of  our  Jesus,    as   put  before   us   in 
to-day's  Gospel!     To   attempt  to   add   any  human 
words  to  these  of  His,  would  be  an  insult  offered  to 
both  their  charm  and  their  energy.     The  exquisitely 
beautiful  comparisons  of  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  the 
lilies  of  the  field,  by  which  our  divine  Master  shows 
how  such  solicitude  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  con- 
fidence we  should  have  in  our  heavenly  Father, — are 
beyond    all    comment.      We    may   just    add,   that 
solicitude  of  this  sort  would  prove  the  existence  of 
an  attachment  to  earthly  things,  which   is   incom- 
patible with  anything  approaching  to  christian  per- 
fection, or  to  the  desire  of  making  progress  in  the 
paths  of  divine  Union.     The  Unitive  Way  is  possible 
in  every  state  of  life ;  only,  there  must  be  one  con- 
dition   observed,   and    that    is,   the    soul    must  be 
detached  from  every  tie  that  could  keep  her  from 
going  to  God.     The  Eeligious  breaks  these  ties  by 
his  three  vows,  which  are  in  direct  opposition  to  the 
triple  concupiscence  of  fallen  nature;  the  layman, 
who,  though  he  is  living  in  the  world,  desires  to  be 
what  his  Creator  would  have  him  be,  must,  without 
the  aid  of  the  real  separation  which  the  Religious 
makes,  be  quite   as   completely  detached  from   his 
own  will,  and  sensuality,  and  riches,  in  order  that 


1 1 


Tim.  vi.  10.  2  Ecclus.  x.  9,  10. 


352         FOURTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

all  his  intentions  and  aspirations  may  be  fixed  on 
the  eternal  home,  where  his  one  infinite  loved 
Treasure  is.  If  he  does  not  bring  himself,  even  in 
the  midst  of  his  riches,  to  be  as  poor  in  spirit  as  the 
Religious  is  in  deed,  his  progress  will  be  checked  at 
the  very  first  step  he  takes  in  the  contemplative  life ; 
and,  if  he  allow  the  obstacle  to  block  up  the  way,  he 
must  give  up  all  idea  of  rising,  in  light  and  love, 
above  the  lowly  paths  of  the  majority  of  Christians. 

Like  the  other  portions  of  to-day's  Liturgy,  the 
Offertory  is  all  confidence  and  joy.  The  Prince  of 
the  heavenly  hosts, — the  Archangel,  St.  Michael, — 
whose  Feast  is  at  hand,  and  whom  the  Church 
always  invokes  in  the  blessing  of  the  incense  at  this 
part  of  the  Mass, — is  he  not  ever  ready  to  protect 
and  watch  over  those  who  fear  the  Lord  ? 

OFFERTORY 

Immittet  Angelus  Dom-  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  shall 

ini  in  circuitu  timentium  encamp    round    about    them 

eum  et  eripiet  eos:  gustate  that  fear  him  :  taste  and  see, 

et  videte,  quoniam  [suavis  that  the  Lord  is  sweet, 
est  Dominus. 

Let  us,  in  the  Secret,  pray  that  the  saving  host, 
offered  on  the  Altar,  may,  by  its  virtue,  purify  our 
soul,  and  draw  the  divine  power  to  our  assistance. 

SECRET. 

Concede  nobis,  Domine,  Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 

qusesumus  :  ut  hsec  hostia  Lord,   that  this  saving  host 

salutaris  et  nostrorum  fiat  may  both  cleanse  us  from  our 

purgatio  delictorum,  et  tuae  sins,  and  render  thy  majesty 

propitiatio  potestatis.    Per  propitious  to  us.      Through, 

Dominum.  etc. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 


mass.  353 

The  Communion-Anthem,  taken  from  the  Gospel, 
which  now  is  assigned  to  this  Sunday,  was  not  the  one 
primitively  used;  the  ancient  liturgists  make  no 
mention  of  it  in  its  present  position,  nor  is  it  to  be 
found  there  in  any  of  the  manuscripts  consulted  by 
Blessed  Thomasi,  when  he  was  preparing  the  publica- 
tion of  his  Antiphonary.  The  composition  of  this 
and  some  other  Masses  shows  some  few  variations  of 
this  kind ; — but  these  are  details,  which,  whatever 
may  be  their  interest  in  other  respects,  savour  too 
much  of  erudition,  and  the  nature  of  this  Work 
necessarily  excludes  them. 

COMMUNION. 

Seek  ye  first  the  Kingdom  Primum  quserite  regnum 

of  God,  and  all  things  shall  be  Dei,   et  omnia  adjicientur 

added   unto  you,    saith    the  vobis,  dicit  Dominus. 
Lord. 

An  ever  growing  love  of  purity,  heaven's  protec- 
tion, and  final  perseverance, — these  are  the  precious 
fruits  of  our  frequent  assistance  at  these  sacred 
Mysteries.  Let  us  secure  them,  by  joining  our  Mother 
in  her  Postcommunion  prayer. 

POSTCOMMTJNION. 

May  these  thy  mysteries,  O  Purificent  semper  et  mu- 
God,  continually  purify  and  niant  tua  sacramenta  nos, 
strengthen  us,  and  procure  us  Deus  :  et  ad  perpetuae  du- 
eternal  salvation.  Through,  etc.      cant  salvationis  effectum. 

Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPEBS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

vol.  xi.  2  A 


354        FOURTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


ANTIPHON    OF    THE    MAGNIFICAT. 


Quserite  primum  regnum 
Dei,  et  justitiam  ejus,  et 
haec  omnia  adjicientur  vo- 
bis.    Alleluia. 


Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  his  justice,  and  all 
these  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you.    Alleluia. 


OREMUS. 

Custodi,  Domine,  quoe- 
sumus,  Ecclesiam  tuam 
propitiatione  perpetua  :  et 
quia  sinetelabitur  humana 
mortalitas,  tuis  semper  au- 
xiliis  et  abstrahatur  a  no- 
xiis,  et  ad  salutaria  diri- 
gatur.  Per  Dominum  nos- 
trum. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

Preserve,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  thy  Church  by  thy 
constant  mercy ;  and  whereas, 
without  thee,  human  mortality 
fails,  may  it,  by  thine  aid,  be 
ever  delivered  from  what 
things  are  hurtful,  and  be 
directed  towards  such  as  are 
salutary.     Through,  etc. 


MASS.  u.J  5 


THE  FIFTEENTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 


MASS. 

This  Sunday's  Introit, — which  now  goes  under  the 
name  of  the  Sunday  of  the  widow  of  Nairn,  because  of 
the  Gospel  read  on  it, — gives  us  a  sample  of  the 
prayers  we  should  address  to  our  Lord  in  our  neces- 
sities. Last  Sunday,  we  heard  our  Jesus  promising 
to  provide  for  all  our  wants,  on  the  condition  that  we 
would  serve  him  faithfully,  by  seeking  his  kingdom. 
When  we  present  our  petitions  to  him,  let  us  show 
him  the  confidence  he  so  well  deserves  from  us ;  and 
we  shall  be  graciously  heard. 

INTROIT. 

Incline  thine  ear,  0  Lord,  Inclina,  Domine,  aurem, 

unto  me,  and  hear  me  :  save  tuam  ad  me,  et  exaudi  me: 

thy  servant,  0  my  God,  who  salvum  fac  servum  tuum, 

hopeth  in  thee :  have  mercy  on  Deus  meus,  sperantem  in 

me,  O  Lord,  for  I  have  cried  te :  miserere  mihi,  Domine, 

to  thee  all  the  day.  quoniam  ad  te  clamavi  tota 

die. 

Ps.  Give  joy  to  the  soul  of  Ps. Lsetifica  animam  servi 

thy  servant :  for,  to  thee,  O  tui :  quia  ad  te,  Domine, 

Lord,  have  I   lifted  up  my  animam  meam  levavi.  Glo- 

soul.    Glory,  etc.    Incline.  ria  Patri.    Inclina. 

The  humility  wherewith  our  holy  Mother  the 
Church  presents  her  supplications  to  God,  should 
serve  as  a  model  to  us.  If  the  Bride  herself  thus 
treats  with  God,  what  ought  not  be  our  sentiments  of 
lowliness,  when  we  appear  in  the  presence  of  sovereign 


856 


FIFTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Majesty  ?  We  may  well  say  to  this  tender  Mother 
of  ours,  what  the  Disciples  said  to  Jesus :  Teach  us 
how  to  pray  P     Let  us  unite  with  her  in  this  Collect. 


COLLECT. 


Ecclesiam  tuam,Domine, 
miseratio  continuata  mun- 
det  et  muniat:  et,  quia  sine 
te  non  potest  salva  consis- 
tere,  tuo  semper  munere 
gubernetur.  PerDominum. 


May  thy  continued  mercy, 
OLord,  cleanse  and  defend  thy 
Church;  and,  because,  without 
thee,  she  cannot  keep  safe, 
may  she  always  be  governed 
by  thy  Gift.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolas  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Galatas, 


Cap.  v.  et  vi. 

Fratres,  Si  Spiritu  vivi- 
mus,  Spiritu  et  ambulemus. 
Non  efficiamur  inanis  glo- 
rise  cupidi,  invicem  provo- 
cantes,  invicem  invidentes. 
Fratres,  et  si  prasoccupatus 
fuerit  homo  in  aliquo  de- 
licto, vos,  qui  spirituales 
estis,  hujusmodi  instruite 
in  spiritu  lenitatis,  consi- 
derans  teipsum,  ne  et  tu 
tenteris.  Alter  alterius  one- 
ra  portate,  et  sic  adimple- 
bitis  legem  Christi.  Nam 
si  quis  existimat  se  aliquid 
esse,  cum  nihil  sit,  ipse 
se  seducit.  Opus  autem 
suum  probet  unusquisque, 
et  sic  in  semetipso  tantum 
gloriam  habebit,  et  non  in 
altero.  Unusquisque  enim 
onus  suum  portabit.    Corn- 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Galatians. 

Ch.  v.  and  vi. 

Brethren  :  If  we  live  in  the 
Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the 
Spirit.  Let  us  not  be  made 
desirous  of  vain  glory,  pro- 
voking one  another,  envying 
one  another.  Brethren,  if 
a  man  be  overtaken  in  any 
fault,  ye,  who  are  spiritual, 
instruct  such  a  one  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness,  considering  thy- 
self, lest  thou  also  be  tempted. 
Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens: 
and  so  ye  shall  fulfil  the  law 
of  Christ.  For  if  any  man 
think  himself  to  be  some- 
thing, whereas  he  is  nothing, 
he  deceiveth  himself.  But  let 
every  one  prove  his  own  work, 
and  so  he  shall  have  glory  in 
himself  only,  and  not  in 
another.  For  every  one  shall 
bear  his  own  burden.   And  let 


1  St.  Luke,  xi.  1. 


mass.  357 

him,  that  is  instructed  in  the  municet  autem  is,  qui  cate- 
word,  communicate  to  him,  chizatur  verbo,ei,quiseca- 
that  instructeth  him,  in  all  techizat,  in  omnibus  bonis, 
good  things.  Be  not  deceived,  Nolite  errare  :  Deus  non 
God  is  not  mocked.  For  what  irridetur.  Quae  enim  semi- 
things  a  man  shall  sow,  those  naverit  homo,  haec  et  metet. 
also  shall  he  reap.  For  he  that  Quoniam  qui  seminat  in 
soweth  in  the  flesh,  of  the  flesh  carne  sua,  de  carne  et 
also  shall  reap  corruption.  But  metet  corruptionem  :  qui 
he,  that  soweth  in  the  spirit,  autem  seminat  in  spiritu, 
of  the  spirit  shall  reap  life  de  spiritu  metet  vitamseter- 
everlasting.  And  in  doing  nam.  Bonum  autem facien- 
good,  let  us  not  fail.  For  in  tes,  non  deficiamus  :  tem- 
due  time  we  shall  reap  not  pore  enim  suo  metemus, 
failing.  Therefore,  whilst  we  non  deficientes.  Ergo  dum 
have  time,  let  us  work  good  to  tempus  habemus,operemur 
all  men,  but  especially  to  those  bonum  ad  omnes,  maxime 
who  are  of  the  household  of  autem  ad  domesticos  fidei. 
the  faith. 

Holy  Church  resumes  the  lesson  of  St.  Paul,  where 
she  left  it  last  Sunday.  The  Spiritual  life,  the  life 
produced  in  our  souls  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  place  of 
the  former  life  of  the  flesh, — this  is  still  the  subject  of 
the  Apostle's  teaching.  When  the  flesh  has  been 
subdued,  we  must  take  care  and  not  suppose  that  the 
structure  of  our  perfection  is  completed.  Not  only 
must  the  combat  be  kept  up  after  the  victory,  under 
penalty  of  losing  all  we  have  won, — but,  we  must  also 
be  on  the  watch,  lest  one  or  other  of  the  heads  of  the 
triple  concupiscence  take  advantage  of  the  soul's 
efforts  being  elsewhere  directed,  to  raise  itself  against 
us,  and  sting  us  all  the  more  terribly,  because  it  is 
left  to  do  just  as  it  pleases.  The  Apostle  warns  us, 
here,  of  vain-glory,  and  well  he  may ;  for  vain-glory 
is,  more  than  other  enemies,  always  in  a  menacing 
attitude,  ready  to  infuse  its  subtle  poison  even  into 
acts  of  humility  and  penance ;  hence,  the  Christian, 
who  is  desirous  to  serve  God,  and  not  his  own  grati- 
fication, by  the  virtues  he  practises,  must  keep  up  a 
specially  active  vigilance  over  this  passion. 

Just  let  us  think,  for  a  moment,  on  the  madness 


358  FIFTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTEK   TENTECOST. 

that  culprit  would  be  guilty  of,  who  having  his  sen- 
tence to  death  commuted  for  a  severe  flogging,  should 
take  pride  in  the  stripes  left  on  his  body  by  the  whip  ! 
May  this  madness  never  be  ours !  It  would  seem, 
however,  as  though  it  were  far  from  being  impossible, 
seeing  how  the  Apostle,  immediately  after  his  telling 
us  to  mortify  our  flesh,  bids  us  take  heed  of  vain- 
glory. In  fact,  we  are  not  safe  on  this  subject,  except- 
ing inasmuch  as  the  outward  humiliation  inflicted  by 
us  on  our  body  has  this  for  its  principle,  that  our  soul 
should  voluntarily  humble  herself  at  the  sight  of  her 
miseries.  The  ancient  Philosophers,  too,  had  their 
maxims  about  the  restraint  of  the  senses  ;  but,  those 
among  them  who  practised  those  admirably  worded 
maxims,  found  them  a  stepping-stone  for  their  pride 
to  mount  up  mountains  high  in  self-conceit.  It  could 
not  be  otherwise;  for  they  were  totally  devoid  of 
anything  like  the  sentiments  which  actuated  our 
Fathers  in  the  faith,  who,  when  they  clad  themselves 
in  sackcloth  and  prostrated  on  the  ground,1  cried  out 
from  the  heart-felt  conviction  of  the  miseries  of  human 
nature :  Have  mercy  on  me,  0  God,  according  to  thy 
great  mercy/  for  I  was  conceived  in  iniquities,  and  my 
sin  is  ever  before  me  !2 

To  practise  bodily  mortification  with  a  view  to 
get  the  reputation  of  being  saints,  is  it  not  doing 
what  St.  Paul  here  calls  solving  in  the  flesh,  that,  in 
due  time,  that  is,  on  the  day,  when  the  intentions  of 
our  hearts  will  be  made  manifest,3  we  may  reap  not 
life  and  glory  everlasting,  but  endless  disgrace  and 
shame  ?  Among  the  works  of  the  flesh  mentioned  in 
last  Sunday's  Epistle,  we  found  contentions,  dissensions, 
jealousies,4  all  of  which  are  the  ordinary  out-come  of 
this  vain-glory,  against  which  the  Apostle  is  now 
warning  us.  The  production  of  such  rotten  fruits, 
would  be  an  unmistakeable  sign,  that  the  heavenly 

1  1  Paralip.  xxi.  16 ;  etc.    2  Ts.  1.    3  1  Cor.  iv.  5.     *  Gal.  v.  19-21. 


mass.  359 

sap  of  grace  had  gone  from  our  souls,  and,  that  in  its 
stead,  there  had  been  brought  the  fermentation  of 
sin ;  and  that  now,  having  made  ourselves  slaves,  as 
of  old,  we  must  tremble  because  of  the  penalties 
threatened  by  God's  law.  God  is  not  mocked;  and  as 
to  the  confidence  which  generous  fidelity  of  love 
imparts  to  those  who  live  by  the  Spirit, — it  would, 
in  the  case  we  are  now  supposing,  be  but  a  hypocri- 
tical counterfeit  of  the  holy  liberty  of  the  children  of 
God.  They  alone  are  his  children,  whom  the  Holy 
Spirit  leads,1  and  leads  them  in  charity  ;2  those  others 
are  led  on  by  the  flesh,  and  such  cannot  please 
God.3 

If,  on  the  contrary,  we  would  have  an  equally 
unmistakeable  sign,  which  is  quite  compatible  with 
the  obscurities  of  faith,  that  we  are  really  in  posses- 
sion of  divine  Union,  let  us  not  take  occasion  from 
the  sight  of  other's  defects  and  faults  to  be  puffed  up 
with  pride,  but  rather,  from  the  consideration  of  our 
own  miseries,  be  indulgent  to  every  one  else.  If 
others  fall,  let  us  give  them  a  helping  and  prudent 
hand.  Let  us  bear  one  another's  burdens  along  the 
road  of  life,  and  then,  having  thus  fulfilled  the  law  of 
Christy  we  shall  know  (and  oh !  the  joy  there  is  in 
such  knowing!)  that  we  abide  in  Him,  and  He  in 
us.4  These  most  thrilling  words,  which  were  made 
use  of  by  our  Lord  to  express  the  future  intimacy  he 
would  have  with  whomsoever  should  eat  the  Flesh 
of  the  Son  of  Man  and  drink  his  Blood  in  holy  Com- 
munion,6 St.  John,  who  had  told  them  to  us,  takes 
them  and  uses  them  in  his  Epistles,  and  (let  us  mark 
the  deep  mystery  of  the  application,)  applies  them  to 
whomsoever,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  observes  the  great 
commandment  of  loving  his  neighbour.6 

Would  to  God  we  could  ever  have  ringing  in  our 

1  Rom.  viii.  14.     2  Gal.  iv.  13.     3  Rom.  viii.8.    4  1  St.  John,  to.  13. 
1  St.  John,  vi.  57.  6  1  St.  John,  iii.  23,  24 ;  iv.  12,  13. 


360         FIFTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER    PENTECOST. 

ears  the  saying  of  the  Apostle :  Whilst  we  have  time, 
let  us  work  good  to  all  men  !  For  the  day  will  come, 
and  it  is  not  so  very  far  off,  when  the  Angel,  carrying 
the  mysterious  Book,  and  having  one  foot  on  the 
earth  and  the  other  on  the  sea,  shall  make  his  mighty 
voice  as  that  of  a  lion  he  heard  through  the  universe, 
and,  with  his  hand  lifted  up  towards  heaven,  shall 
swear  hy  Him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  that 
time  shall  be  no  more  !l  Then  will  man  reap  with 
joy,  what  he  shall  have  sown  in  tears  ;2  he  failed  not, 
he  grew  not  weary,  of  doing  good  whilst  in  the  dreary 
land  of  his  exile, — still  less  will  he  ever  tire  of  the 
everlasting  harvest,  which  is  to  be  in  the  living  light 
of  the  Eternal  Day. 

As  we  sing  the  Gradual,  let  us  remember  that  the 
only  praise  which  gives  God  pleasure,  is  that  which 
goes  up  to  him  from  a  soul,  where  reigns  the  harmony 
of  the  several  virtues.  The  christian  life,  which  is 
regulated  by  the  ten  commandments,  is  the  ten-stringed 
psaltery?  on  which  the  Finger  of  God,  who  is  the  Holy 
Ghost,4  plays  to  the  Spouse  the  music  that  he  loves  to 
hear. 

GRADUAL. 

Bonuni  est  confiteri  Do-  It  is  good  to  give  praise  to 

mino:  et  psallere  nomini  the  Lord:  and  to  sing  to  thy 

tuo,  Altissime.  name,  O  Most  High  ! 

ft.  Ad     annuntiandum  ft.  To  show  forth  thy  mercy 

mane  misericordiam  tuam,  in  the  morning,  and  thy  truth 

et  veritatem  tuam  per  noc-  in  the  night, 
tern. 

Alleluia,  alleluia.  Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Quoniam  Deus  mag-  ft.  For  the  Lord  is  a  great 

nus  Dominus,  et  rex  mag-  God,  and  a  great  King  over 

nus  super  omnem  terram.  all  the  earth.    Alleluia. 
Alleluia. 

1  Apoc.  x.  1-6.        2  Ps.  cxxv.  5.  3  Ps.  cxliii.  9. 

*  Cf.  St.  Luke,  xi.  20  ;  St.  Matth.  xii.  23. 


MASS. 


361 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Lucam. 

Cap.  vii. 

In  illo  tempore:  Ibat 
Jesus  in  civitatem  quae  vo- 
catur  Nairn:  et  ibant  cum 
eo  discipuli  ejus,  et  turba 
copiosa.  Cum  autem  appro- 
pinquaret  portae  civitatis, 
ecce  defunctus  efferebatur, 
filius  unicus  matris  suse:et 
base  vidua  erat:  et  turba 
civitatis  multa  cum  ilia. 
Quam  cum  vidisset  Domi- 
nus,  misericordia  motus 
super  earn,  dixit  illi:  Noli 
flere.  Et  accessit,  ettetigit 
loculum  (hi  autem  qui  por- 
tabant  steterunt).  Et  ait: 
Adolescens,  tibi  dico,  sur- 
ge. Et  resedit  qui  erat  mor- 
tuus,  et  ccepit  loqui.  Et 
dedit  ilium  matri  suae.  Aece- 
pit  autem  omnes  timor:  et 
magnificabant  Deum,dicen- 
tes:  Quia  Propheta  magnus 
surrexit  in  nobis:  et  quia 
Deus  visitavit  plebem  suam. 

This  is  the  second  time,  during  the  Year,  holy 
Church  offers  this  Gospel  to  our  consideration ;  we 
cannot  be  surprised  at  this,  for  the  Fathers  selected 
by  her,  as  its  interpreters,1  tell  us,  on  both  of  these 
occasions,  that  the  afflicted  mother,  who  follows  her 
son  to  the  grave,  is  the  Church  herself. 

The  first  time  we  saw  her  under  this  symbol,  of  a 
mother  mourning  for  her  child,  was  in  the  penitential 
season  of  Lent.2     She  was  then,  by  her  fasting  and 

1  St.  Amb.  in  Luc.  v ;  St.  Aug.  Serm.  44  de  verb.  Dom. 
2  Thursday  of  the  4th  Week  of  Lent. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel  ac- 
cording to  Luke. 

Ch.  vii. 

At  that  time:  Jesus^  went 
into  a  city  called  Nairn:  and 
there  went  with  him  his  Dis- 
ciples, and  a  great  multitude. 
And,  when  he  came  nigh  to 
the  city,  behold  a  dead  man 
was  carried  out,  the  only  son 
of  his  mother  ;  and  she  was  a 
widow:  and  much  people  of  the 
city  were  with  her.  And  when 
the  Lord  saw  her,  he  had  com- 
passion on  her,  and  said  to  her: 
Weep  not !  And  he  came  near, 
and  touched  the  bier.  And 
they  that  carried  it  stood  still. 
And  he  said :  Young  man  !  I 
say  to  thee  arise.  And  he  that 
was  dead,  sat  up,  and  began 
to  speak.  And  he  delivered 
him  unto  his  mother.  And 
there  came  a  fear  on  them  all: 
and  they  glorified  God,  saying: 
A  great  Prophet  hath  risen  up 
amongst  us,  and  God  hath 
visited  his  people! 


362  FIFTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

prayer,  (united  as  those  were  with  her  Jesus'  sufferings,) 
preparing  the  resurrection  of  such  of  our  brethren  as 
were  dead  in  sin.  Their  resurrection  was  realised, 
and  we  had  them,  in  all  the  fullness  of  their  new 
life,  seated,  side  by  side  with  us  at  the  Paschal  Table. 
What  exquisite  joy,  on  that  Feast  of  Feasts,  inundated 
the  Mothers  heart,  as  she  thus  shared  in  the  trium- 
phant gladness  of  her  divine  Spouse  !  He,  her  Jesus 
was,  by  his  one  Resurrection,  twice  over  the  conqueror 
of  death, — he  rose  from  the  grave,  and  he  gave  back 
the  child  to  the  Mother.  The  Disciples  of  this  Risen 
Lord,  who  follow  him  closely  by  their  observance  of 
the  evangelical  counsels,  yes,  they,  and  the  whole 
multitude  that  associated  themselves  with  the  Church, 
glorified  Jesus  for  his  wonderful  works,  and  sang  the 
praises  of  that  God  who  thus  vouchsafed  to  visit  his 
people. 

The  Mother  ceased  to  weep.  But,  since  then,  the 
Spouse  has  again  left  her,  to  return  to  his  Father  ; 
she  has  resumed  her  widow's  weeds,  and  her  sufferings 
are  continually  adding  to  the  already  well-nigh  in- 
supportable torture  of  her  exile.  And,  whence  these 
sufferings  ?  From  the  relapses  of  so  many  of  those 
ungrateful  children  of  hers,  to  whom  she  had  given  a 
second  birth,1  and  at  the  cost  of  such  pains  and  tears  ! 
The  countless  cares  she  then  spent  over  her  sinners, 
and  that  new  life  she  gave  them  in  the  presence  of 
her  dying  Jesus, — all  this  made  each  of  the  penitents, 
during  the  Great  Week,  as  though  he  were  the  only 
son  of  that  Mother.  What  an  intense  grief,  says  St. 
John  Chrysostom,  that  so  loving  a  Mother  should  see 
them  relapsing,  after  the  communion  of  such  mysteries, 
into  sin  which  kills  them  !  "  Spare  me," — as  she  may 
well  say,  in  the  words  which  the  holy  Doctor  puts 
into  the  Apostle's  mouth, — "  Spare  me !  No  other 
11  child,  once  born  into  this  world,  ever  made  his 
"Mother  suffer  the  paDgs  of  child-birth  over  again  l" 

1  Gal.  iv.  19. 


mass.  363 

To  repair  the  relapse  of  a  sinner,  costs  her  no  less 
travail,  than  the  giving  birth  to  such  as  had  never 
believed.1 

And  if  we  compare  these  times  of  ours  with  the 
period,  when  sainted  Pastors  made  her  words  be 
respected  all  over  the  world, — is  there  a  single  Chris- 
tian, who  is  still  faithful  to  the  Church,  who  does 
not  feel  impelled,  by  such  contrast,  to  be  more  and 
more  devoted  to  a  Mother  so  abandoned  as  she  now 
is  ?  Let  us  listen  to  the  eloquent  words  of  St. 
Laurence  Justinian  on  this  subject.  "  Then,"  says 
he,  "  all  resplendent  with  the  mystic  jewels,  where- 
"  with  the  Bridegroom  had  beautified  her  on  the 
"  wedding-day,  she  thrilled  with  joy  at  the  increase 
"  of  her  children,  both  in  merit  and  number ;  she  urged 
"  them  to  ascend  to  ever  greater  heights ;  she  offered 
"them  to  God,  she  raised  them,  in  her  arms,  up  to- 
"  wards  heaven.  Obeyed  by  them,  she  was,  in  all 
u  truth,  the  mother  of  fair  love  and  fear  ;2  she  was 
"  beautiful  as  the  moon,  bright  as  the  sun,  terrible  as 
"an  army  set  in  array.3  She  stretched  out  her 
"  branches  as  the  turpentine-tree,  and  beneath  their 
"  shadow,  she  sheltered  them  she  had  begotten,  against 
"  the  heat,  and  the  tempest,  and  the  rain.  So  long, 
"  then,  as  she  could,  she  laboured,  feeding  at  her 
"  breasts  all  those  she  was  able  to  assemble.  But  her 
"  zeal,  great  as  it  was,  has  redoubled  from  the  time 
"she  perceived  that  many,  yea  very  many,  had  lost 
"  their  first  fervour.  Now  for  many  years,  she  is 
"  mourning,  at  the  sight  of  how,  each  day,  her 
"  Creator  is  offended,  how  great  are  the  losses  she 
"  sustains,  and  how  so  many  of  her  children  suffer 
"  death.  She  that  was  once  robed  in  scarlet,  has  put 
11  on  mourning  garments;  her  fragrance  is  no  longer 
"  felt  by  the  world ;  instead  of  a  golden  girdle,  she 


1  St.  Chrys.  De.  pcenit.  Horn.  1.        2  Ecclus.  xxiv.  24. 
3  Cantic.  vi.  9. 


364         FIFTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

u  has  but  a  cord,  and  instead  of  the  rich  ornament  of 
"  her  breast,  she  is  vested  in  haircloth.1  Her  lamen- 
tations and  tears  are  ceaseless.  Ceaseless  is  her 
"  prayer,  striving  if,  by  some  way,  she  may  make  the 
"  present  as  beautiful  as  in  times  past ;  and  yet,  as 
"  though  it  were  impossible  for  her  to  call  back  that 
"  lovely  past,  she  seems  wearied  at  such  supplication. 
"  The  word  of  the  prophet  has  come  true :  They  are 
i(  all  gone  aside,  they  are  become  unprofitable  together ; 
"  there  is  none  that  cloth  good,  no,  not  one  P  .  .  .  The 
"  manifold  sins  committed,  by  the  Church's  children, 
"  against  the  divine  precepts,  show  that  they  who  so 
"  sin  are  rotten  members,  members  alien  to  the  body  of 
"  Christ.  Nevertheless,  the  Church  forgets  not  that 
"  she  gave  them  birth  in  the  laver  of  salvation  ;  she 
"  forgets  not  the  promises  they  then  made  to  renounce 
"  the  devil,  and  the  pomps  of  the  world,  and  all  sin. 
"  Therefore,  does  she  weep  over  their  fall,  being  their 
"  true  mother,  and  never  losing  the  hope  of  winning 
"  their  resurrection  by  her  tears.  0  what  a  flood  of 
"  tears  is  thus  every  day  shed  before  God  !  What 
"  fervent  prayers  does  not  this  spotless  virgin  send, 
"  by  the  ministry  of  the  holy  Angels,  up  to  Christ, 
"  who  is  the  salvation  of  sinners  !  In  the  secret  of 
"  hearts,  in  lonely  retreats,  as  well  as  in  her  public 
"  temples,  she  cries  out  to  the  divine  mercy,  that  they, 
"  who  are  now  buried  in  the  filth  of  vice,  may  be 
il  restored  to  life.  "Who  shall  tell  the  joy  of  her 
"  heart,  when  she  receives  back  living,  the  children 
u  she  mourned  over  as  dead  ?  If  the  conversion  of 
"  sinners  is  such  a  joy  to  heaven,3  what  must  it  be  to 
"  such  a  Mother?  According  to  the  multitude  of  the 
''  sorrows  of  her  heart*  so  will  be  the  consolations,  giving 
"joy  to  her  soul."5 

It  is  the  duty  of  us  Christians,  who,  by  God's  mercy, 


1  Is.  iii.  24.      2  Ps.  xiii.  3.      3  St.  Luke,  xv.  7.      4  Ps.  xciii.  19. 
6  S.  Laur.  Just.  De  compuuet.  et  planctu  christ.  perfect. 


mass.  365 

have  been  preserved  from  the  general  decay,  to  share 
in  the  anguish  of  our  Mother,  the  Church ;  we  should 
humbly  but  fervently  co-operate  with  her  in  all  her 
zealous  endeavours  to  reclaim  our  fallen  brethren. 
We  surely  can  never  be  satisfied  with  not  being  of 
the  number  of  those  senseless  sons  who  are  a  sorrow  to 
their  Mother?  and  despise  the  labour  of  her  that  bore 
them.2  Had  we  not  the  Holy  Spirit  to  tell  us,  how 
he  that  honoureth  his  Mother,  is  as  one  that  layeth  up 
to  himself  a  treasure? — the  thought  of  what  our 
birth  cost  her4  would  force  us  to  do  everything  that 
lies  in  our  power  to  comfort  her.  She  is  the  dear 
Bride  of  the  Incarnate  Word ;  and  our  souls,  too, 
aspire  to  union  with  Him ;  let  us  prove  that  such 
Union  is  really  ours,  by  doing  as  the  Church  does, — 
that  is,  by  showing  in  our  acts  the  one  thought,  the 
one  love,  which  the  divine  Spouse  always  imparts  to 
souls  that  enjoy  holy  intimacy  with  him,  because 
there  is  nothing  he  Himself  has  so  much  at  heart, — 
the  thought  of  bringing  the  whole  world  to  give  glory 
to  his  Eternal  Father,  and  the  love  of  procuring  salva- 
tion for  sinners. 

Let  us  unite  with  the  Church,  our  Mother^  in  sing- 
ing now  in  the  Offertory,  the  realisation,  in  part  at 
least,  of  her  expectations ;  let  not  our  lips  ever  be 
shut  up  in  senseless  silence,  when  we  have  our  God 
bestowing  favours  on  us. 

OFFERTORY. 

With  expectation,  I   have  Exspectans    exspectavi 

waited  for  the  Lord,  and  he  Dominum,  et  respexit  me: 

was  attentive  to  me  :  and  he  et  exaudivit  deprecationem 

heard  my  prayer;  and  he  put  meam,  et   immisit    in  os 

a  new  canticle  into  my  mouth,  meum    canticum    novum, 

a  song  to  our  God.  hymnum  Deo  nostro. 


1  Prov.  xvii.  25.  3  Ecclus.  iii.  5. 

2  Ibid.  xxx.  17.  4  Tob.  iv.  4. 


366 


FIFTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


In  the  Secret  let  us  put  ourselves,  and  everything 
that  belongs  to  us,  under  the  custody,  the  keeping  all- 
powerful,  of  the  divine  Mysteries. 


SECRET. 


Tua  nos,  Domine,  sacra- 
menta  custodiant:  et  con- 
tra diabolicos  semper  tue- 
antur  incursus.  Per  Do- 
minum. 


May  thy  mysteries,  O  Lord, 
be  custody  unto  us:  and  always 
defend  us  against  the  attacks 
of  the  devil.     Through,  etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

Jesus'  word  called  back  from  death  the  son  of  the 
widow  of  Nairn  ;  his  Flesh  is  the  Life  of  the  world, 
for  it  is  the  Bread,  whose  praise  we  are  now  to  cele- 
brate in  our  Communion- Anthem. 

COMMUNION. 


Panis,  quern  ego  dedero, 
caro  mea  est  pro  sseculi 
vita. 


The  bread,  which  I  will 
give,  is  my  flesh  for  the  life 
of  the  world. 


Divine  Union  is  not  perfect  in  us,  unless  the 
Mystery  of  love  so  predominates  over  both  our  minds 
and  bodies,  as  that  they  be  fully  possessed  by  it,  as 
our  Mother  here  words  its  efficacy ;  we  must  be 
influenced  and  directed  by  it,  and  not  by  nature,  that 
is,  by  the  dictates  of  flesh  and  blood  and  human 
sense. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 


Mentes  nostras  et  corpora 
possideat,  qusesumus  Do- 
mine, doni  ccelestis  opera- 
tio  :  ut  non  noster  sensus 
in  nobis,  sed  jugiter  ejus 
praeveniat  effectus.  Per  Do- 
minum. 


May  the  operation  of  the 
heavenly  Gift  possess  our 
minds  and  bodies,  we  beseech 
thee,  O  Lord  :  that  our  own 
sense  may  not  rule  us,  but 
may  the  efficiency  (of  that 
Gift)  ever  take  the  lead  in  us. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Postcommunion,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 


367 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON   OF    THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


A  great  Prophet  hath  risen 
up  among  us,  and  God  hath 
visited  his  people. 

LET   US  PRAY. 

May  thy  continued  mercy, 
O  Lord,  cleanse  and  defend 
thy  Church  ;  and,  because, 
without  thee,  she  cannot  keep 
safe,  may  she  always  be  gov- 
erned by  thy  Gift.  Through, 
etc. 


Propheta  magnus  sur- 
rexit,  in  nobis,  et  quia  Deus 
visitavit  plebem  suam. 

OREMUS. 

Ecclesiam  tuam,  Domine, 
miseratio  continuata  mun- 
det  et  muniat ;  et  quia  sine 
te  non  potest  salva  consis- 
tere,  tuo  semper  munere 
gubernetur.  PerDominum. 


368 


SIXTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE  SIXTEENTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 


-0- 


MASS. 

The  resuscitation  of  the  son  of  the  widow  of  Nairn, 
on  which  our  thoughts  were  fixed  last  Sunday,  has 
reanimated  the  confidence  of  our  beloved  Mother  the 
Church ;  her  prayer  goes  up  all  the  more  earnestly 
to  her  Spouse,  who  leaves  her  on  earth,  for  a  time, 
that  she  may  grow  dearer  to  him,  by  sufferings  and 
tears.  Let  us,  of  course,  enter  into  these  her  senti- 
ments, which  guided  her  in  the  choice  of  to-day's 
Introit. 


INTROIT. 


Miserere  mihi,  Domine, 
quoniam  ad  te  clamavi  tota 
die  :  quia  tu,  Domine,  sua- 
vis  ac  mitis  es,  et  copiosus 
in  misericordia  omnibus  in- 
vocantibus  te. 

Ps.  Inclina,  Domine,  au- 
rem  tuam  mihi,  et  exaudi 
me  :  quoniam  inops  et  pau- 
per sum  ego.  Gloria  Patri. 
Miserere. 


Have  mercy  on  me,  0  Lord, 
for  I  have  cried  unto  thee  all 
the  day  ;  for  thou,  O  Lord, 
art  sweet  and  mild,  and  plen- 
teous in  mercy  to  all  that  call 
upon  thee. 

Ps.  Incline  thine  ear  unto 
me,  O  Lord,  and  hear  me : 
for  I  am  needy  and  poor. 
Glory,  etc.    Have  mercy. 


Such  is  our  inability  in  the  work  of  salvation, 
that,  unless  Grace  prevent,  that  is,  anticipate,  us,  we 
cannot  have  so  much  as  the  thought  of  doing  what 
is  holy ;  and  again,  unless  it  follow  up  the  inspira- 
tions it  has  given  us,  and  lead  them  to  a  happy 
termination,  we  shall  never  be  able  to  pass,  from  the 
simple  thought,  to  the  act  of  any  virtue  whatsoever. 


MASS. 


S69 


If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  be  faithful  to  Grace,  our 
life  will  be  one  uninterrupted  tissue  of  good  works. 
Let  us,  in  our  Collect,  ask,  both  for  ourselves,  and 
for  all  our  neighbours,  the  persevering  continuity  of 
this  most  precious  aid. 


COLLECT. 


May  thy  grace,  we  beseech 
thee,  O  Lord,  ever  go  before 
us,  and  follow  us  ;  and  may 
it  ever  make  us  intent  upon 
good  works.    Through,  etc. 


Tua  nos,  quaesumus  Do- 
mine,  gratia  semper  et  prae- 
veniat  et  sequatur:  ac  bonis 
operibus  jugiter  praestet 
esse  intentos.     Per  Domi- 


num. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in^>a#e  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Ephesians. 

Ch.  Hi. 

Brethren  :  I  pray  you  not 
to  faint  at  my  tribulations  for 
you,  which  is  your  glory.  For 
this  cause  I  bow  my  knee  to 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  of  whom  all  paternity 
in  heaven  and  earth  is  named, 
that  he  would  grant  you,  ac- 
cording to  the  riches  of  his 
glory,  to  be  strengthened  by 
his  Spirit  with  might  unto 
the  inward  man.  That  Christ 
may  dwell  by  faith  in  your 
hearts  :  that  being  rooted  and 
founded  in  charity,  ye  may 
be  able  to  comprehend,  with 
all  the  saints,  what  is  the 
breadth  and  length,  and  height, 
and  depth  :  to  know  also  the 
charity  of  Christ,  which  sur- 

VOL.    XI. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Ephesios. 


Cap.  Hi. 

Fratres,  Obsecro  vos,  ne 
deticiatis  intribulationibus 
meis  pro  vobis,  quae  est 
gloriavestra.  Hujusreigra- 
tia  flecto  genua  mea  ad 
Patrem  Domini  nostri  Jesu 
Christi,  ex  quo  omnis  pa- 
ternitas  in  ccelis,  et  in  terra 
nominatur,  ut  det  vobis  se- 
cundum divitias  gloriae  suae, 
virtute  corroborari  per  Spi- 
ritum  ejus  in  interiorem 
hominem,  Christum  habi- 
tare  per  fidem  in  cordibus 
vestris  :  in  charitate  radi- 
cati,  et  fundati,  ut  possitis 
comprehendere  cum  omni- 
bus Sanctis,  quae  sit  latitudo, 
et  longitudo,  et  sublimitas, 
et  profundum  :  scire  etiam 

2B 


370  SIXTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

supereminentem    scientiae  passeth  all  knowledge,  that  ye 

charitatem  Christi,  ut  im-  may  be  filled  unto  all  the  ful- 

pleamini  in  omnem  pleni-  ness  of  God.     Now  to  him 

tudinemDei.  Eiautem,qui  who  is  able  to  do  all  things 

potens  est  omnia  facere  su-  more  abundantly  than  we  de- 

perabundanter  quam  peti-  sire  or  understand,  according 

mus,  aut  intelligimus,  se-  to  the  power  that  worketh  in 

cundumvirtutem,qu83ope-  us:  to  him  be  glory  in  the 

ratur  in  nobis  :  ipsi  gloria  church,  and  in  Christ  Jesus, 

in  Ecclesia,  et  in  Christo  unto    all   generations,   world 

Jesu  in  omnes  generationes  without  end.     Amen, 
sseculi  sa3culorum.    Amen. 

My  heart  hath  uttered  a  good  word!  I  speak  my 
works  to  my  King!1  The  enthusiasm  of  the  royal 
Psalmist,  when  singing  the  glorious  Nuptial  Song, 
has  taken  possession  of  our  Apostle's  whole  soul,  and 
inspires  him  with  this  marvellous  Epistle,  which 
seems  to  put  into  music,  into  a  song  of  love,  the 
sublime  teachings  of  all  his  other  Letters.  "When  he 
wrote  this  to  his  Ephesians,  he  was  Nero's  prisoner  ; 
but  it  shows  that  the  word  of  God  is  anything  but 
hampered  by  the  chains  that  make  an  Apostle  a 
captive.2 

Although,  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  is  far  from 
being  the  longest  of  his  Letters,  yet  it  is  from  it  that 
the  Church  borrows  most,  during  these  Sundays  after 
Pentecost ;  and  we  may  argue  from  such  choice,  that 
it  gives,  more  than  any  other  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles, 
that  leading  subject,  upon  which  the  Church  is 
particularly  anxious  to  direct  her  children's  thoughts, 
during  this  season  of  the  Liturgical  Year.  Let  us, 
therefore,  thoroughly  master  themystery  of  the  Gospel? 
by  hearkening  to  the  herald  who  received  it,  as  his 
special  mission,  to  make  known  to  the  Gentiles  the 
treasure  that  had  been  hidden  from  eternity  in  God.4 
It  is  as  Ambassador  that  he  comes  to  us;  ^  and  the 
chains    which   bind   him,   far  from   weakening  the 

1  Ps.  xliv.  2.        3  Eph.  vi.  19.        5  Ibid.  vi.  20. 

2  2  Tim.  ii.  9.       *  Ibid.  iii.  8,  9. 


MASS.  371 

authority  of  his  message,  are  hut  the  glorious  "badge 
which  accredit  him  with  the  disciples  of  the  Christ, 
who  died  ou  Calvary. 

For,  God  alone,  as  he  tells  us  in  the  music  we  have 
just  heard,  can  strengthen  in  us  the  inward  man 
enough  to  make  us  understand,  as  the  Saints  do,  the 
"  dimensions,"  (breadth,  length,  height,  and  depth,)  of 
the  great  mystery  of  Christ  dwelling  in  man,  and 
dwelling  in  him  for  the  purpose  of  filling  him  icith  the 
plentitude  of  God.  Therefore  is  it,  that  falling  on 
his  knees  before  Him  from  Whom  flows  every  perfect 
gift,  and  who  has  begotten  us  in  the  truth  by  his 
love,1  he,  Paul,  our  Apostle,  asks  this  God  to  open, 
by  faith  and  charity,  the  eyes  of  our  heart,  that  so, 
we  may  be  able  to  understand  the  splendid  riches  of 
the  inheritance  he  reserves  to  his  children,  and  the 
exceeding  greatness  of  the  divine  power  used  in  our 
favour,  even  in  this  life.2 

But,  if  holiness  is  requisite  in  order  to  obtain  the 
full  development  of  the  divine  life  spoken  of  by  the 
Apostle, — let  us  also  take  notice,  how  the  desire  and 
the  prayer  of  St.  Paul  are  for  all  men ;  and  how, 
therefore,  no  one  is  excluded  from  that  divine  vocation. 
Indeed,  as  St.  John  Chrysostom  observes,3  the 
Christians,  to  whom  he  sends  his  Epistle,  are  people 
living  in  the  world,  married,  having  children  and 
servants,  for  he  gives  them  rules  of  conduct  with 
regard  to  each  point.4  The  Saints  of  Ephesus,  as  of 
all  other  places,  are  no  others  than  the  Faithful  of 
Christ  Jesus,5  that  is  to  say,  they  are  those  who  faith- 
fully follow  the  divine  precepts,  in  the  condition  of 
life  proper  to  each.  Now,  it  depends  on  us  to  follow 
God's  grace;  nothing  else  but  our  own  resistance 
prevents  the  Holy  Ghost  from  making  Saints  of  us. 
Those  sublime    heights,   to  which    the  progressive 

1  St.  James,  i.  17,  18.        3  la  ep.  ad  Eph.  Horn.  1.        5  Ibid.  i.  1. 

2  Eph.  i.  18,  19.  4  Eph.  v.  22 ;  vi.  1,  5. 


372  SIXTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

movement  of  the  sacred  Liturgy  has,  since  Pentecost, 
been  leading  the  Church,  are  open  to  all  of  us.  If 
the  new  order  of  ideas  introduced  by  this  movement 
strike  us,  at  times,  as  being  beyond  our  practical 
attainment,  the  probable  reason  of  such  cowardice  is, 
and  a  short  examination  of  conscience  will  bear 
witness  against  us, — that  we  neglected,  ever  since 
Advent  and  Christmas,  to  profit,  as  we  should  have 
done,  of  the  teachings  and  graces  of  every  kind,  which 
were  given  us  as  means  for  advancing  in  light  and 
christian  virtue.  The  Church,  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Cycle,  offered  her  aid  to  every  one  of  us,  and 
that  aid  she  adapted  to  each  one's  capabilities ;  but 
she  could  never  remain  stationary,  because  some  of 
us  were  too  lazy  to  move  onwards ;  she  could  never 
consent,  out  of  a  regard  for  our  laggings  and  sluggish- 
ness, to  neglect  leading  men  of  good  will  to  that 
divine  Union,  which,  they  were  told,  "  crowns  both 
"the  Year  of  the  Church,  and  the  faithful  soul  that 
u  has  spent  the  Year  under  the  Church's  guidance."1 
But,  on  no  account,  must  we  lose  courage.  The 
Cycle  of  the  Liturgy  runs  its  full  course  in  the 
heavens  of  the  Church  each  Year.  It  will  soon  be 
starting  afresh,  again  adapting  the  power  of  its  graces 
to  each  one's  necessities  and  weaknesses.  If,  with  that 
new  Year  of  Grace,  we  learn  a  lesson  from  our  past 
deficiencies ;  if  we  do  not  content  ourselves  with  a 
mere  theoretical  admiration  of  the  exquisite  poetry, 
and  loveliness,  and  charms,  of  its  opening  seasons ; 
if  we  seriously  set  ourselves  to  grow  with  the  growth 
of  that  light,  (which  is  no  other  than  Christ  him- 
self,)2— if  that  is,  we  profit  of  the  graces  of  progress 
which  that  Light  will  again  infuse  into  our  souls, — 
then,  the  work  of  our  sanctification  having  been 
this  time  prepared,  has  a  cheering  and  "  a  new 
chance    of    "  receiving    that    completeness,     which 

1  Our  Volume  for  "  Christmas,"  p.  23.        2  St.  John,  i.  5. 


mass.  373 

had    been    retarded   by    the    weakness   of    human 
nature.''  ^ 

Even  now,  though  our  dispositions  may  not  be  all 
they  should  be,  yet  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  Spirit  of 
loving  mercy,  who  reigns  over  this  portion  of  the 
Cycle,  will  not  refuse  the  humble  prayer  we  make  to 
Him,  and  will  supply,  at  least,  in  some  measure,  our 
sad  shortcomings.  Great,  after  all,  has  been  our 
gain  in  this,  that  the  eye  of  our  faith  has  had  new 
supernatural  horizons  opened  out  to  it,  and  that  it 
has  reached  those  peaceful  regions,  which  the  dull 
vision  of  the  animal  man2  fails  to  discover.  It  is 
there,  that  divine  Wisdom  reveals  to  the  perfect  that 
great  secret  of  love,  which  is  not  known  by  the  wise 
and  the  princes  of  this  world, — secret,  which  the  eye 
had  not  before  seen,  nor  the  ear  heard,  nor  the  heart 
even  suspected  as  possible.3  From  this  time  forward, 
we  shall  the  better  understand  the  divine  realities, 
which  fill  up  the  life  of  the  servants  of  God ;  they 
will  seem  to  us,  as  they  truly  are,  a  thousand  times 
preferable,  both  in  importance  and  greatness,  to  those 
vain  frivolities  and  occupations,  in  the  midst  of  which 
is  spent  the  existence  of  so-called  practical  men. 
Let  us  take  delight  in  thinking  upon  that  divine 
choice,  which,  before  time  was,  selected  us  for  the 
fullness  of  all  spiritual  benedictions,4  of  which  the 
temporal  blessings  of  the  people  of  old5  were  but  a 
shadow.  The  world  was  not  as  yet  existing,  and 
already  God  saw  us  in  his  Word;6  to  each  one  among 
us,  he  assigned  the  place  he  was  to  hold  in  the  Body 
of  his  Christ  ;7  already,  his  fatherly  eye  beheld  us 
clad  with  that  grace,8  which  made  him  well  pleased 
with  the  Man-God ;  and  he  predestinated  us,9 
as    being    members    of    this   his   beloved   Son,    to 

1  The  10th  and  the  present  Vol.  p.  12. 

2  1  Cor.  ii.  14.       3  Ibid.  6-9      4  Eph.  i.  3.       6  Dent,  xxviii.  1-14. 

6  Eph.  i.  4.  7  1  Cor.  xii.  12-31  ;    Eph.  iv.  12-16. 

8  Ibid.  i.  6.  9  Ibid.  4,  5. 


374  SIXTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

sit  with  him,    on   his   right   hand,   in   the   highest 
heavens.1 

Oh !  how  immense  are  our  obligations  to  the  Eternal 
Father,  whose  good  pleasure2  has  decreed  to  grant 
such  wondrous  gifts  to  our  earth!  His  will  is  his 
counsel*  it  is  the  one  rule  of  all  his  acts  ;  and  his  will 
is  all  love.  It  is  from  the  voluntary  and  culpable 
death  of  sin,4  that  he  calls  us  to  that  Life,  which  is 
his  own  Life.  It  is  from  the  deep  disgrace  of  e very- 
vice,  that,  after  having  cleansed  us  in  the  Blood  of 
his  Son,5  he  has  exalted  us  to  a  glory,  which  is  the 
astonishment  of  the  Angels,  and  makes  them  tremble 
with  adoring  admiration.6  Let  us  then  be  holy7  for 
the  sake  of  giving  praise  to  the  glory  of  such  grace.8 
Christ,  in  its  divinity,  is  the  substantial  brightness 
and  eternal  glory  of  his  Father;9  if  he  has  taken  to 
himself  a  Body,  if  he  has  made  himself  our  Head,  it 
was  for  no  other  purpose  than  that  he  might  sing  the 
heavenly  canticle  in  a  new  way.  Not  satisfied  with 
presenting,  in  his  sacred  Humanity,  a  sight  most 
pleasing  to  his  Father, — that  is,  the  sight  of  the 
created  reflex  of  divine,  and  therefore  infinite, 
perfections, — he  wished,  moreover,  that  the  whole  of 
creation  should  give  back  to  the  adorable  Trinity  an 
echo  of  the  divine  harmonies.  It  was  on  this  account, 
that  he,  in  his  own  Flesh,  broke  down  the  old  enmi- 
ties existing  between  Gentile  and  Jew  ;10  and,  then, 
bringing  together  these  that  were  once  enemies,  he 
made  of  them  all  one  spirit,  and  one  body,  so  that 
their  countless  human  voices  might,  through  Him, 
tblend  in  unison  of  love  with  the  angelic  choirs,  and 
thus,  standing  around  God's  throne,  might  attune 
the  one  universal  song  of  their  praise  to  that  of  the 
infinite  Word  Himself.  Thus  shall  we  become  for 
ever  to  God,  like  this  divine  Word,  the  praise  of  his 

1  Eph.  i.  20  23 ;  ii.  6.  6  Ibid.  i.  7.  8  Ibid.  6. 

»  Ibid.  i.  9.  6  HyranfortheAscen-  9  Heb.  i.  3. 

3  Ibid.  11.  siou;  Matins,  10  Eph.  ii.  14-18. 

4  Ibid.  7;  ii.  1-5.  1  Eph.  i.  4. 


MASS. 


375 


glory,  as  the  Apostle  thrice  loves  to  express  himself 
in  the  beginning  of  this  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.1 
Thus,  too,  is  to  be  wrought  that  mystery,  which,  from 
all  eternity,  was  the  object  of  God's  eternal  designs, 
mystery,  that  is,  of  divine  union,  realised  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  uniting,  in  his  own  one  Person,  in  infinite 
love,  both  earth  and  heaven.2 

The  Church,  which  is  showing  herself  in  the  midst 
of  the  Gentiles,  bears  on  herself  the  mark  of  her 
divine  Architect ;  God  shows  himself,  in  her,  in  all 
majesty ;  and,  by  her,  his  fear  is  made  to  be  felt  by 
the  kings  of  the  earth. 


GRADUAL. 


The  Gentiles,  O  Lord,  shall 
fear  thy  name,  and  all  the 
kings  of  the  earth  thy  glory. 

y.  For,  the  Lord  hath  built 
up  Sion;  and  he  shall  be  seen 
in  his  glory. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Sing  to  the  Lord  a  new 
canticle  :  for  the  Lord  bath 
done  wonderful  things.  Alle- 
luia. 


Timebunt  gentes  nomen 
tuum,  Domine,  et  omnes 
reges  terrae  gloriam  tuam. 

y.  Quoniam  sedificavit 
DominusSion:  etvidebitur 
in  ma j  estate  sua, 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  Cantate  Domino  can- 
ticum  novum:  quia  mira- 
bilia  fecit  Dominus.  Alle- 
luia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Luke. 

Ch.  xiv. 

At  that  time  :  When  Jesus 
went  into  the  house  of  one  of 
the  chief  of  the  Pharisees  on 
the  Sabbath-day  to  eat  bread, 
they  watched  him.  And  be- 
hold there  was  a  certain  man 
before  him  that  had  the 
dropsy.  And  Jesus  answer- 
ing, spoke  to  the  lawyers  and 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Lucam. 

Cap.  xiv. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Cum 
intraret  Jesus  in  domum 
cujusdam  principis  Phari- 
sseorum  sabbato  manducare 
panem,  et  ipsi  observabant 
eum.  Et  ecce  homo  quidain 
hydropicus  erat  ante  ilium. 
Et  respondens  Jesus,  dixit 
ad  Legisperitos,  et  Phari- 


1  Eph.  i.  6,  12,  14. 


2  Ibid.  9,  10. 


376 


SIXTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


sseos,  dicens  :  Si  licet  sab- 
bato  curare  1  At  illi  tacue- 
runt.  Ipse  vero  apprehen- 
sum  sanavit  eum,  ac  dimi- 
sit.  Et  respondens  ad  illos, 
dixit:  Cnjus  vestrum  asi- 
nus,  aut  bos  in  puteum 
cadet,  et  non  continuo  ex- 
tranet ilium  die  sabbati?  Et 
non  poterant  ad  haec  res- 
pondereilli.  Dicebat  autem 
et  ad  invitatos  parabolam, 
intendens  quomodo  primos 
accubitus  eligerent,  dicens 
ad  illos :  Cum  invitatus 
fueris  ad  nuptias,  non  dis- 
cumbas  in  primo  loco,  ne 
forte  honoratior  te  sit  invi- 
tatus ab  illo,  et  veniens  is, 
qui  te  et  ilium  vocavit, 
dicat  tibi :  Da  huic  locum : 
et  tunc  incipias  cum  rubore 
novissimum  locum  tenere. 
Sed  cum  vocatus  fueris, 
vade,  recumbe  in  novissimo 
loco :  ut,  cum  venerit  qui 
te  invitavit,  dicat  tibi  : 
Amice,  ascende  superius. 
Tunc  erit  tibi  gloria  coram 
simul  discumbentibus :  quia 
omnis  qui  se  exaltat,  humi- 
liabitur:  et  qui  se  humiliat, 
exaltabitur. 


Pharisees  saying:  Is  it  lawful 
to  heal  on  the  Sabbath-day  ? 
But  they  held  their  peace. 
But  he  taking  him,  healed 
him,  and  sent  him  away.  And 
answering  them,  he  said  : 
Which  of  you  shall  have  an 
ass  or  an  ox  fall  into  a  pit ; 
and  will  not  immediately  draw 
him  out  on  the  Sabbath-day  ? 
And  they  could  not  answer 
him  to  these  things.  And  he 
spoke  a  parable  also  to  them 
that  were  invited,  marking 
how  they  chose  the  first  seats 
at  the  table,  saying  to  them: 
When  thou  art  invited  to  a 
wedding,  sit  not  down  in  the 
first  place,  lest  perhaps  one 
more  honourable  than  thou 
be  invited  by  him:  and  he  that 
invited  thee  and  him,  come 
and  say  to  thee:  Give  this  man 
place  ;  and  then  thou  begin 
with  shame  to  take  the  lowest 
place.  But  when  thou  art  in- 
vited, go,  sit  down  in  the  low- 
est place,  that  when  he  who 
invited  thee  cometh,  he  may 
say  to  thee  :  Friend,  go  up 
higher.  Then  shalt  thou  have 
glory  before  them  that  sit  at 
table  with  thee;  because  every 
one  that  exalteth  himself,  shall 
be  humbled;  and  he  that  hum- 
bleth  himself,  shall  be  exalted. 


Holy  Church  here  tells  us,  and  in  a  most  unmis- 
takeable  way,  what  has  been  her  chief  aim  for  her 
children  ever  since  the  Feast  of  Pentecost.  The 
Wedding  spoken  of  in  to-day's  Gospel  is  that  of 
heaven,  and  of  which  there  is  a  prelude  given  here 
below,  by  the  Union  effected  in  the  sacred  banquet 
of  Holy  Communion.     The  divine  invitation  is  made 


mass.  377 

to  all ;  and  the  invitation  is  not  like  that  which  is 
given  on  occasion  of  earthly  weddings,  to  which  the 
Bridegroom  and  Bride  invite  their  friends  and  re- 
latives as  simple  witnesses  to  the  union  contracted 
between  two  individuals.  In  the  Gospel  Wedding, 
Christ  is  the  Bridegroom,  and  the  Church  is  the 
Bride.1  These  nuptials  are  ours,  inasmuch  as  we  are 
members  of  the  Church ;  and  the  banquet- hall,  in 
this  case,  is  something  far  superior  to  that  of  a  com- 
mon-place marriage. 

But,  that  this  Union  be  as  fruitful  as  it  ought  to 
be,  the  soul,  in  the  sanctuary  of  her  own  conscience, 
must  bring  along  with  her  a  fidelity  which  is  to  be  an 
enduring  one, — a  love  which  is  to  be  active,  even 
when  the  feast  of  the  sacred  mysteries  is  past.  Divine 
Union,  when  it  is  genuine,  masters  one's  entire  being. 
It  fixes  one  in  the  untiring  contemplation  of  the 
Beloved  Object,  in  the  earnest  looking  after  His  in- 
terests, in  the  continual  aspiration  of  the  heart  to- 
wards Him,  even  when  He  seems  to  have  absented 
Himself  from  the  soul.  The  Bride  of  the  divine 
Nuptials, — could  she  be  less  intent  on  her  God,  than 
those  of  earth  are  on  their  earthly  Spouse  ?2  It  is  on 
this  condition  alone,  that  the  christian  soul  can  be 
said  to  have  entered  on  the  Unitive  Life,  or  can  show 
its  precious  fruits. 

But,  for  the  attaining  all  this, — that  is,  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  have  that  full  control  over  the 
soul  and  its  powers,  which  makes  her  to  be  truly  His, 
and  subjects  her  to  Him  as  the  Bride  is  to  her  Spouse,3 
— it  is  necessary,  that  all  alien  competition  be  entirely 
and  definitively  put  aside.  Now,  there  is  one  sad 
fact,  which  every  one  knows :  the  divinely  noble  Son 
of  the  Eternal  Father,4  the  Incarnate  Word  whose 
beauty  enraptures  the  heavenly  citizens,5  the  Immor- 

1  Apoc.  xix.  7.  3  Ibid.  xi.  8-10.  6  Acta  S.  Agn. 

2  1  Cor.  vii.  34.  *  Wisd.  viii.  3. 


378         SIXTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFT  Ell   PENTECOST. 

tal  King,  whose  exploits  and  power  and  riches  are 
beyond  all  that  the  children  of  men  can  imagine,1 — 
yes,  He  has  rivals,  human  rivals,  who  pretend  to  have 
stronger  claims,  than  He,  to  creatures  whom  he  has 
redeemed  from  slavery,  and,  that  done,  has  invited 
them  to  share  with  Him  the  honours  of  his  throne. 
Even  in  the  case  of  those,  whom  his  loving  mercy 
succeeds  in  winning  over  wholly  to  Himself,  is  it  not 
almost  always  the  way,  that  He  is  kept  waiting,  for 
perhaps  years,  before  they  can  make  up  their  minds 
to  be  wise  enough  to  take  Him  ?  During  that  long 
period  of  unworthy  wavering,  he  loses  not  his  patience, 
he  does  not  turn  elsewhere  as  he  might  in  all  justice 
do,  but  he  keeps  on  asking  them  to  be  wholly  His,2 
mercifully  waiting  for  some  secret  touch  of  one  of  his 
graces,  joined  with  the  unwearied  labour  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  to  get  the  better  of  all  this  inconceivable  re- 
sistance. 

Let  us  not  be  surprised  at  the  Church's  bringing 
the  whole  influence  of  her  Liturgy  to  bear  on  the 
winning  souls  over  to  Christ, — for  every  such  conquest 
she  makes  for  Him,  is  a  fresh  and  closer  bond  of 
union  between  herself  and  her  Lord.  This  explains, 
how,  in  some  of  these  previous  Sundays,  she  has  given 
us  such  admirable  instructions  regarding  the  efforts 
of  the  triple  concupiscence.  Earthly  pleasures,  pride, 
and  covetousness,  are  really  the  treacherous  advisers, 
who  excite  within  us,  against  God's  claims,  those 
impertinent  rivals,  of  whom  we  were  just  now  speaking. 
Having  now  reached  the  sixteenth  week  of  this  Season 
of  the  reign  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  taking  it  for 
granted  that  her  Sons  and  Daughters  are  in  right 
good  earnest  about  their  christian  perfection, — the 
Church  hopes  that  they  have  [fairly  unmasked  the 
enemy.  She  comes,  therefore,  to  us,  to-day,  hoping 
that  her  teaching  will  not  fail  to  impress  us,  and  that 

1  Ps.  xliv.  2  Apoc.  iii.  20. 


mass.  379 

we  shall  no  longer  put  off  that  most  loving  Jesus  of 
ours,  whose  great  mystery  of  love  is  preached  to  us 
in  the  allegory  of  our  Gospel,  and  of  which  he  him- 
self said  :  The  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  to  a  King, 
ivho  made  a  marriage  for  his  Son* 

But,  after  all,  her  anxiety  as  Mother  and  Bride 
never  allows  her  to  make  quite  sure  of  even  her  best 
and  dearest  children,  so  long  as  they  are  in  this 
world.  In  order  to  keep  them  on  their  guard  against 
falling  into  sin,  she  bids  them  listen  to  St.  Ambrose, 
whom  she  has  selected  as  her  homilist  for  this  Sunday.2 
He  addresses  himself  to  the  christian  who  has  become 
a  veteran  in  the  spiritual  combat,  and  tells  even  him, 
that  Concupiscence  has  snares  without  end,  even  for 
him  !  Alas  !  yes,  he  may  trip,  any  day  ;  he  has  got 
far,  perhaps  very  far,  on  the  road  to  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  but,  even  so,  he  might  go  wrong,  and  be,  for 
ever  shut  out  from  the  Marriage  Feast,  together  with 
heretics,  pagans,  and  jews.3  Let  him  be  on  the  watch, 
then,  or  he  may  get  tainted  with  those  sins,  from 
which,  hitherto,  he  has  kept  clear,  thanks  to  God's 
grace.  Let  him  take  heed,  or  he  might  become  like 
the  man  mentioned  in  to-day's  Gospel,  who  had  the 
dropsy  ;  and  dropsy,  says  our  saintly  preacher  of 
Milan,  is  a  morbid  exuberance  of  humours,  which 
stupify  the  soul,  and  induce  a  total  extinction  of 
spiritual  ardour.4  And  yet,  even  so,  that  is,  even  if 
he  were  to  get  such  a  fall  as  that,  let  him  not  forget, 
that  the  heavenly  physician  is  ever  ready  to  cure  him. 
The  Saint,  in  this  short  Homily,  condenses  the  whole 
of  St.  Luke's  14th  chapter,  of  which  we  have  been 
reading  but  a  portion ;  and  he  shows,  a  little  further 
on,  that  attachment  to  the  goods  of  this  life  is  no 
less  opposed  to  the  ardour,  which  should  carry  us  on 
the  wings  of  the  spirit,  towards  the  heaven  where 
lives  and  reigns  our  Love. 

1  St.  Matth.  xxii.  2.  8  Ibid. 

3  S.  Amb.  in  Luc.  vii.  homil.  diei.  *  Ibid. 


380  SIXTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

But,  above  all,  it  is  the  constant  attitude  and 
exercise  of  Humility,  to  which  he  must  especially 
direct  his  attention,  who  would  secure  a  prominent 
place  in  the  divine  Feast  of  the  Nuptials.  All  Saints 
are  ambitious  for  future  glory  of  this  best  kind ;  but, 
they  were  well  aware,  that,  in  order  to  win  it,  they 
must  go  low  clown,  during  the  present  life,  into  their 
own  nothingness ;  the  higher  in  the  world  to  come, 
the  lower  in  this.  Until  the  great  day  dawn,  when 
each  one  is  to  receive  according  to  his  works,1  we  shall 
lose  nothing,  by  putting  ourselves,  meanwhile,  below 
every  body.  The  position  reserved  for  us  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  depends  not,  in  the  least,  either  upon 
our  own  thoughts  about  ourselves,  or  upon  the  judg- 
ment passed  on  us  by  other  people ;  it  depends  solely 
on  the  will  of  that  God,  who  exalteth  the  humble,  and 
bringeth  down  the  mighty  from  their  seat2  Let  us 
hearken  to  Ecclesiasticus.  The  greater  thou  art,  the 
more  humble  thyself  in  all  things,  and  thou  shalt  find 
grace  before  God ;  for  great  is  the  power  of  God  alone, 
and  he  is  honoured  by  the  humble}  Were  it  only, 
then,  from  a  motive  of  self-interest,  let  us  follow  the 
advice  of  the  Gospel,  and,  in  all  things,  claim,  as  our 
own,  the  last  place.  Humility  is  not  sterling,  and 
cannot  please  God,  unless,  to  the  lowly  estimation  we 
have  of  ourselves,  we  join  an  esteem  for  others,  pre- 
venting every  one  with  honour,4,  gladly  yielding  to  all 
in  matters  which  do  not  affect  our  conscience ;  and 
all  this,  from  a  deep-rooted  conviction  of  our  own 
misery  and  worthlessness  in  the  sight  of  Him  who 
searches  the  reins  and  heart.5  The  surest  test  of  our 
Humility  before  God,  is  that  practical  charity  for  our 
neighbour,  which,  in  the  several  circumstances  of 
every-day  life,  induces  us,  and  without  affectation,  to 
give  him  the  precedence  to  ourselves. 


1  St.  Matth.  xvi.  27.      3  Ecclus.  iii.  20,  21.       5  Apoc.  ii.  23. 

2  St.  Luke,  i.  52.  *  Bom.  xii.  10. 


MASS.  381 

On  the  contrary,  one  of  the  most  unequivocal  proofs 
of  the  falseness  of  certain  so-called  spiritual  ways,  into 
which  the  enemy  sometimes  leads  incautious  souls, 
is  the  lurking  contempt  wherewith  he  inspires  them 
for  one  or  more  of  their  acquaintance ;  dormant, 
perhaps,  habitually, — but  which,  when  occasion 
offers,  and  it  frequently  offers,  they  allow  it  to  in- 
fluence their  thoughts,  and  words,  and  actions.  To 
a  greater  or  less  extent,  and,  it  may  be,  with  more 
or  less  unconsciousness,  self-esteem  is  the  basis  of 
the  structure  of  their  virtues ;  but,  as  for  the  illumin- 
ations, and  mystical  sweetnesses,  which  these  people 
sometimes  tell  their  intimate  friends  they  enjoy,  they 
may  be  quite  sure,  that  such  favours  do  not  come  to 
them  from  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  the  substantial 
light  of  the  Sun  of  Justice  shall  appear  in  the  valley 
of  the  Judgment,  all  counterfeits  of  this  kind  will  be 
made  evident,1  and  they  who  trusted  to  them,  and 
spent  their  lives  in  petting  such  phantoms,  will  find 
them  all  vanishing  in  smoke.  The  having  then  to 
take  a  much  lower  place,  than  the  one  they  dreamt 
of,  may  have  this  one  solace,  that  some  place  may  be 
still  given  them  in  the  divine  banquet.  They  will 
have  to  thank  God  that  their  chastisement  goes  no 
further  than  the  one  of  seeing,  with  shame,  those 
very  people  passing  high  up  in  honour  above  them, 
for  whom,  during  life,  they  had  such  utter  contempt. 

The  greater  the  conquests  made  by  the  Church, 
the  greater  are  the  efforts  of  hell  to  destroy  the  souls 
of  her  dear  children.  This  fearful  danger  calls  for 
her  fervent  prayers ;  and  our  Offertory- Anthem  is 
one  of  these. 

OFFERTORY. 

Look  down,  O  Lord,  to  help  Domine,    in     auxilium 

me  :  let  them  be  put  to  conf  u-      meum  respice  :  conf  undan- 
sion    and    shame,  that    seek      tur    et    revereantur,    qui 

1  1  Cor.  iv.  5. 


382 


SIXTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


qiuerunt  animam  meam,  ub 
auferant  earn  ;  Domine,  in 
auxilium  meuiu  respice. 


after  my  soul,  to  take  it  away: 
look  down,  O  Lord,  to  help 
me. 


The  Secret  reminds  us,  how  the  Sacrifice,  at  which 
we  are  present,  and  which  is  to  be  consummated,  in 
a  few  moments,  by  the  words  of  Consecration,  is  the 
most  direct  and  efficacious  of  all  the  immediate  pre- 
parations that  we  can  make  for  the  Communion  of 
the  Body  and  Blood,  which  that  Sacrifice  produces 
on  the  Altar. 


SECRET. 


Munda  nos,  quaesumus, 
Domine,  sacrificii  prsesentis 
effectu,  et  perfiee  miseratus 
in  nobis,  ut  ejusmereamur 
esse  participes.  Per  Domi- 
num. 


Cleanse  us,  O  Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  by  the  efficacy 
of  this  present  Sacrifice  :  and, 
by  thy  mercy,  make  us  wor- 
thy to  partake  thereof. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

Now  that  the  Church  is  filled,  by  the  holy  Com- 
munion just  received,  with  the  true  substantial 
Wisdom  of  the  Father,  she  promises  God,  as  her 
thank-offering,  that  she  will  keep  his  justice,  which 
is  his  law,  and  that  she  will  labour  to  make  his 
divine  teaching  produce  its  fruits. 


COMMUNION. 


Domine,  memorabor  jus- 
titise  tuae  solius :  Deus,  do- 
cuisti  me  a  juventute  mea, 
et  usque  in  senectam  et  se- 
nium: Deus,  ne  derelinquas 
me. 


I  will  remember  thy  justice 
alone,  O  Lord  :  0  God,  thou 
hast  instructed  me  from  my 
youth,  and  unto  old  age  and 
grey  hairs :  O  God,  forsake 
me  not. 


In  the  Postcommunion,  let  us  pray,  with  the 
Church,  that  we  may  be  renewed  by  the  purity, 
w?hich  these  heavenly  Mysteries  bring  to  us,  who  are 


VESFERS. 


383 


well  prepared  for  the  gift :  the  effect  of  such  a  gift 
tells  upon  our  bodies,  both  ia  this  and  the  next  life. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 


Mercifully,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  purify  our  souls, 
and  renew  them  by  these 
heavenly  mysteries ;  that  we 
may  receive  help  thereby, 
both  while  we  are  in  these 
mortal  bodies,  and  hereafter. 
Through,  etc. 


Puriflca,  quaesumus  Do- 
mine,  mentes  nostras  benig- 
nus,  et  renova  ccelestibus 
sacramentis  :  ut  consequen- 
ter  et  corporum  praesens 
pariter,  et  futurum  capia- 
mus  auxilium.  Per  Domi- 
num. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in^a^e  137. 


VESPEES. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON    OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


"When  thou  art  invited  to  a 
wedding,  sit  down  in  the 
lowest  place,  that  he  who  in- 
vited thee  may  say  unto  thee: 
Friend !  go  up  higher  :  and 
thou  shalt  have  glory  before 
them  that  sit  at  table  with 
thee.    Alleluia. 


Cum  vocatus  fueris  ad 
nuptias,  recumbe  in  novis- 
simo  loco,  ut  dicat  tibi  qui 
te  invitavit :  Amice,  ascen- 
de  superius ;  et  erit  tibi 
gloria  coram  simul  discum- 
bentibus.    Alleluia. 


LET   US   PRAY. 


May  thy  grace,  we  beseech 
thee,  0  Lord,  ever  go  before 
us,  and  follow  us ;  and  may 
it  ever  make  us  intent  upon 
good  works.    Through,  etc. 


OREMUS. 

Tua  nos,  quaesumus  Do- 
mine,  gratia  semper  et 
praeveniat  et  sequatur  :  ac 
bonis  operibus  j  ugiter  praes- 
tetesseintentos.  PerDomi- 
num. 


o84        SEVENTEENTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE    SEVENTEENTH    SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

The  Gospel,  which  is  now  assigned  to  the  Mass  of 
the  seventeenth  Sunday,  has  given  it  the  name  of 
the  Sunday  of  the  love  of  God,  dating,  that  is,  from 
the  time  when  the  Gospel  of  the  cure  of  the  dropsy 
and  of  the  invitation  to  the  ivedding -feast,  was  antici- 
pated hy  eight  days.  Previously,  even,  to  that 
change,  and  from  the  very  first,  there  used  to  be  read, 
on  this  seventeenth  Sunday,  another  passage  from 
the  New  Testament,  which  is  no  longer  found  in  this 
serial  of  Sundays  :  it  was  the  Gospel  which  mentions 
the  difficulty  regarding  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
which  the  Sadducees  proposed  to  our  Lord.1 

MASS. 

The  judgments  of  God  are  always  just,  whether  it 
be,  in  his  justice,  humbling  the  proud,  or,  in  his 
mercy,  exalting  the  humble.  This  day,  last  week, 
we  saw  this  Sovereign  disposer  of  all  things,  allotting 
to  each  his  place  at  the  divine  banquet.  Let  us 
recal  to  mind  the  behaviour  of  the  guests,  and  the 
respective  treatment  shown  to  the  humble  and  the 
proud.  Adoring  these  judgments  of  our  Lord,  let  us 
sing  our  Introit ;  and,  as  far  as  regards  our  own 
selves,  let  us  throw  ourselves  entirely  upon  his 
mercy. 

1  St.  Matth.  xxii.  23-33. 


MASS. 


385 


INTROIT. 


Thou  art  just,  O  Lord,  and 
thy  judgment  is  right ;  deal 
with  thy  servant  according  to 
thy  mercy. 

Ps.  Blessed  are  the  unde- 
fined in  the  way:  who  walk  in 
the  law  of  the  Lord.  Glory, 
etc.    Thou. 


Justus  es,  Domine,  et 
rectum  judicium  tuum:  fac 
cum  servo  tuo  secundum 
misericordiam  tuam. 

Ps.  Beati  immaculati  in 
via:  qui  ambulant  in  lege 
Domini.  Gloria  Patri.  Jus- 
tus es. 


The  most  hateful  of  all  the  obstacles  which  divine 
love  has  to  encounter  upon  earth,  is  the  jealousy  of 
Satan,  who  endeavours,  by  an  impious  usurpation  of 
his  own,  to  rob  God  of  the  possession  of  our  souls, — 
souls,  that  is,  which  were  created  by  and  for  Him 
alone.  Let  us  unite  with  holy  Church,  in  praying, 
in  the  Collect,  for  the  supernatural  assistance  we 
require,  for  avoiding  the  foul  contact  of  the  hideous 
serpent. 

COLLECT. 


Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  that  thy  people  may 
avoid  all  the  contagions  of  the 
devil;  and,  with  a  pure  mind, 
follow  thee,  who  alone  art 
God.    Through,  etc. 


Da,  quaesumus  Domine, 
populo  tuo  diabolica  vitare 
contagia :  et  te  solum  Deum 
pura  mente  sectari.  Per 
Dominum. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Ephesians. 

Ch.  iv. 

Brethren:  I  who  am  a  pri 
soner  in  the   Lord,   beseech 
you  that  you  walk  worthy  of 
the  vocation  in  which  you  are 
called,  with  all  humility  and 

VOL.  XI. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati 
Pauli  Apostoli  ad  Ephe- 
sios. 

Cap.  iv. 

Fratres,  Obsecro  vos  ego 
vinctus  in  Domino,  ut  digne 
ambuletis  vocatione,  qua 
vocati  estis,  cum  omni  hu- 
militate,  et  mansuetudine, 
2C 


386       SEVENTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

cum  patientia,  supportan-  mildness,  with  patience,  sup- 

tes   invicem  in   charitate,  porting  one  another  in  charity, 

soliciti    servare    unitatem  Careful  to  keep  the  unity  of 

spiritus  in  vinculo  pacis.  the    Spirit    in    the   bond   of 

Unura  corpus,  et  unus  spi-  peace.      One  body  and    one 

ritus,  sicut  vocati  estis  in  spirit;  as  you  are  called  in  one 

una  spe  vocationis  vestrae.  hope   of  your  calling.      One 

Unus  Dominus,  una  fides,  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism, 

unum     baptisma.      Unus  one  God,  and  Father   of   all, 

Deus  et  Pater  omnium,  qui  who  is  above  all,  and  through 

est  super    omnes,   et    per  all,  and  in  us  all,  who  is  bles- 

omnia,  et  in  omnibus  no-  sed  for  evermore, 
bis.    Qui  est  benedictus  in 
ssecula  sseculorum.  Amen. 

The  Church,  by  thus  giving  these  words  from  St. 
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  again  takes  up  the 
subject  so  dear  to  her, — the  dignity  of  her  children. 
She  beseeches  them,  to  correspond,  in  a  becoming 
manner,  to  their  high.  Vocation.  This  Vocation,  this 
Call,  which  God  gives  us,  is,  as  we  have  been  so 
often  told,  the  call,  or  invitation,  made  to  the  human 
family,  that  it  would  come  to  the  sacred  nuptials  of 
divine  Union ;  it  is  the  Vocation  given  to  us  to  reign 
in  heaven  with  the  Word,  who  had  made  himself  our 
Spouse,  and  our  Head.1  The  Gospel  read  to  us  eight 
days  ago,  which,  was,  formerly,  the  one  appointed  for 
this  present  Sunday,  and  was  thus  brought  into  close 
connection  with  our  Epistle, — that  Gospel,  we  say, 
finds  itself  admirably  commented  by  these  words  of 
St.  Paul  to  the  Ephesians,  and  it,  in  turn,  throws 
light  on  the  Apostle's  words  about  the  Vocation. 
When  thou  art  invited  to  a  Wedding  ("  cum  vocattjs 
fueris")  sit  down  in  the  loicest  place!  These  were 
our  Lord's  words  to  us,  last  Sunday;  and  now,  we 
have  the  Apostle  saying  to  us :  Walk  worthy  of  the 
vocation  in  which  ye  are  called,  yes,  walk  in  that 
vocation  with  all  humility  ! 

Let  us  now  attentively  hearken  to  our  Apostle, 

1  Eph.  ii.  5. 


mass.  387 

telling  us  what  we  must  do,  in  order  to  prove  our- 
selves worthy  of  the  high  honour  offered  to  us  by  the 
Son  of  God.  We  must  practise,  among  other  virtues, 
these  three, — humility,  mildness,  and  patience.  These 
are  the  means  for  gaining  the  end  that  is  so  generously 
proposed  to  us.  And,  what  is  this  end  ?  It  is  the 
unity  of  that  immense  body,  which  the  Son  of  God 
makes  his  own,  by  the  mystic  nuptials  he  vouchsafes 
to  celebrate  with  our  human  nature.  This  Man-God 
asks  one  condition  from  those  whom  he  calls,  whom 
he  invites,  to  become,  through  the  Church,  his  Bride, 
bone  of  his  bones  and  flesh  of  his  flesh.1  This  one  con- 
dition is, — that  they  maintain  such  harmony  among 
them,  that  it  will  make  one  body  and  one  spirit  of 
them  all,  in  the  bond  of  peace.  "  Bond  most  glori- 
"  ous  !"  cries  out  St.  John  Chrysostom,  "  bond  most 
"  admirable,  which  unites  us  all  mutually  with  one 
"  another,  and  then,  thus  united,  unites  us  with 
H  God."2  The  strength  of  this  bond,  is  the  strength 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  himself,  who  is  all  holiness 
and  love;  for  it  is  that  Holy  Spirit  who  forms 
these  spiritual  and  divine  ties ;  He  it  is,  who,  with 
the  countless  multitude  of  the  Baptised,  does  the 
work  which  the  soul  does  in  the  human  body,  that  is, 
it  gives  it  life,  and  it  unites  all  the  members  into  one- 
ness of  person.  It  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  young 
and  old,  poor  and  rich,  men  and  women,  distinct  as 
all  these  are  in  other  respects,  are  made  one,  fused, 
so  to  say,  in  the  fire  which  eternally  burns  in  the 
blessed  Trinity.  But,  in  order  that  the  flame  of 
infinite  love  may  thus  draw  into  its  embrace  our 
regenerated  humanity,  we  must  get  rid  of  selfish 
rivalries,  and  grudges,  and  dissensions,  which,  so 
long  as  they  exist  among  us,  prove  us  to  be  carnal? 
and,  therefore,  that  we  are  unfit  material  for  either 
the  divine  flame  to  touch,  or  for  the  Union  which 

1  Eph.  v.  30.      2  S.  Chrys.  in  Ep.  ad  Eph.  Horn.  ix.  3.      *  1  Cor.  iii.  3. 


388   SEVENTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

that  flame  produces.  According  to  the  beautiful 
comparison  of  St.  John  Chrysostom,1 — when  fire  lays 
hold  of  various  species  of  wood  which  have  been 
thrown  into  it,  if  it  find  the  fuel  properly  dry,  it 
makes  one  burning  pile  of  all  the  several  woods  ; 
but,  if  they  are  damp  and  wet,  it  cannot  act  on  them 
separately,  nor  reduce  the  whole  to  one  common 
blaze :  so  is  it  in  the  spiritual  order ;  the  unhealthy 
humidity  of  the  passions  neutralises  the  action  of  the 
sanctifying  Spirit ;  and  Union,  which  is  both  the 
means  and  end  of  love,  becomes  an  impossibility. 

Let  us,  therefore,  bind  ourselves  to  our  brethren 
by  that  blessed  link  of  charity,  which,  if  it  fetters  at 
all,  fetters  only  our  bad  tempers  ;  but,  in  all  other 
respects,  it  dilates  our  hearts,  by  the  very  fact  of  its 
giving  free  scope  to  the  Holy  Ghost  to  lead  them 
safely  to  the  realisation  of  that  one  hope  of  our 
common  vocation  and  calling, — which  is  to  unite  us 
to  God  by  love.  Of  course,  charity,  even  with  the 
Saints,  is,  so  long  as  they  are  on  this  earth,  a 
laborious  virtue ;  because,  even  with  the  best,  grace 
seldom  restores  to  a  perfect  equilibrium  the  faculties 
of  man,  which  were  put  out  of  order  by  original  sin. 
From  this  it  follows,  that  the  weaknesses  of  human 
nature  will  sometimes  show  themselves,  either  by  excess 
or  by  deficiency ;  and  when  these  weaknesses  do  crop 
up,  it  is  not  only  the  saint  himself  is  humbled  by  their 
getting  the  better  of  him,  but,  as  he  is  well  aware, 
they,  who  live  with  him,  have  to  practise  kindness 
and  patience  towards  him.  God  permits  all  this,  in 
order  to  increase  the  merit  of  us  all,  and  make  us 
long  more  and  more  for  heaven.  For  it  is  there  alone, 
that  we  shall  find  ourselves  not  only  totally,  but 
without  any  effort,  in  perfect  harmony  with  our 
fellow-men ;  and  this,  because  of  the  perfect  peaceful 
submissiveness  of  our  entire  being  under  the  absolute 

1  S.  Chrys.  ubi  supra. 


mass.  389 

sway  of  the  thrice  holy  God,  who  will  then  be  all  to 
all?  In  that  happy  land,  it  will  be  God  himself  will 
wipe  away  the  tears  of  his  elect,  for  their  miseries 
will  all  be  gone ;  and  their  miseries  will  be  gone, 
because  their  whole  being  will  be  renovated,  because 
united  with  Him,  who  is  its  infinite  source.3  The 
eternal  Son  of  God  having  then  conquered,  in  each 
member  of  his  mystical  Bjdy,  the  hostile  powers  and 
death  itself,3  will  appear,  in  the  fulness  of  the  mystery 
of  his  Incarnation,  as  the  true  Head  of  humanity, 
sanctified,  restored,4  and  developed  in  Him.  He  will 
rejoice  at  seeing  how,  by  the  workings  of  the  sanctify- 
ing Spirit,  there  has  been  wrought  the  destined  degree 
of  perfection  in  each  of  the  several  parts  of  that 
marvellous  Body,5  which  He  vouchsafed  to  aggregate 
to  Himself  by  the  bond  of  love  ;  and  all  this  in  order 
that  he  might  eternally  celebrate,  in  a  choir  composed 
of  himself,  the  Incarnate  Word,  and  all  creation,  the 
glory  of  the  ever  adorable  Trinity.  How  will  not 
the  sweetest  music  of  earth  be  then  surpassed !  How 
will  not  our  most  perfect  choirs  seem  to  us  then  to 
have  been  almost  like  the  noise  of  children  singing 
out  of  tune,  compared  with  the  concord  and  harmony 
of  that  eternal  song !  Let  us  get  ourselves  ready  for 
that  heavenly  concert.  Let  us  put  our  voices  in  order, 
by  now  attuning  our  hearts  to  that  plenitude  of  love, 
which,  alas  !  is  not  often  enjoyed  here  below,  but 
which  we  should  ever  be  trying  to  realise,  by  that 
patiently  supporting  the  faults  of  our  brethren  and 
ourselves,  which  the  Epistle  so  earnestly  impresses 
iipon  us. 

One  would  almost  say  that,  in  the  ecstasy  of  her 
delight,  at  hearing  these  few  sounds  of  heaven's  music 
brought  to  her  by  such  a  singer  as  her  Apostle — our 
Mother  the  Church  feels  herself  carried  away  far 
beyond  time,  and  boldly  joins  a  short  song  of  her  own 

1  1  Cor.  xv.  28.        3  i  Cor.  xv.  24-28.        6  Ibid.  iv.  13-16. 

2  Apoc.  xxi.  4,  5.    4  Eph.  i.  10. 


390       SEVENTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


to  that  of  her  Jesus  and  his  Paul.  Yes,  it  looks 
like  it,  for  by  way  of  a  conclusion  to  the  text  of  our 
Epistle,  she  adds  an  ardent  expression  of  praise, 
which  is  not  in  the  original ;  and  thus  she  forms  a 
kind  of  doxology  to  the  inspired  words  of  her  apostolic 
Chanter. 

We  now  know  the  priceless  gifts  brought  to  our 
earth  by  the  Man-God.1  Thanks  to  the  prodigies  of 
power  and  love  achieved  by  the  divine  Word  and  the 
sanctifying  Spirit, — the  soul  of  the  just  man  is  a  little 
heaven  on  earth.  In  this  strong  appreciation  of 
marvels,  which  have  made  the  christian  people  "be 
chosen  by  God  as  his  own, — his  own  inheritance, — 
let  us  sing  our  Gradual  and  Alleluias. 


GRADUAL. 


Beata  gens,  cujus  est  Do- 
minus  Deus  eorum:  popu- 
lus,  quern  elegit  Dominus 
in  haereditatem  sibi. 

$\  Verbo  Domini  cceli 
firmatisunt:  etspiritu  oris 
ejus  omnis  virtus  eorum. 

Alleluia,  alleluia: 

~ft .  Domine,  exaudi  ora- 
tionem  meam:  et  clamor 
meus  ad  te  perveniat. 
Alleluia. 


Blessed  is  the  nation  that 
hath  the  Lord  for  its  God  : 
the  people  whom  he  hath 
chosen  for  his  inheritance, 

$".  By  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  breath  of  his  mouth, 
were  the  heavens  formed,  and 
the  whole  host  thereof. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$\  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer, 
and  let  my  cry  come  unto 
thee. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthseum. 

Gap.  xxii. 

In  illo  tempore:  Acces- 
serunt  ad  Jesum  Pharisaei, 
et  interrogavit  eum  unus 
ex  eis  legis  doctor,  tentans 
eum  :  Magister,  quod  est 


Sequel    of   the   holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  xxii. 

At  that  time  :  The  Phari- 
sees came  to  Jesus:  and  one 
of  them,  a  doctor  of  the  law, 
asked  him,  tempting  him  : 
Master,    which  is    the  great 


1  Eph.  iv.  8. 


MASS. 


391 


commandment  of  the  law  1 
Jesus  said  to  him:  Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
thy  whole  heart,  and  with  thy 
whole  soul,  and  with  thy 
whole  mind.  This  is  the  great- 
est and  the  first  command- 
ment. And  the  second  is 
like  to  this  :  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  On 
these  two  commandments 
dependeth  the  whole  law  and 
the  prophets.  And  the 
Pharisees  being  gathered  to- 
gether, Jesus  asked  them  say- 
ing :  What  think  ye  of 
Christ]  whose  son  is  he? 
They  say  to  him :  David's. 
He  saith  to  them:  How  then 
doth  David  in  spirit  call  him 
Lord,  saying:  The  Lord  said 
to  my  Lord,  Sit  on  my  right 
hand,  until  I  make  thy 
enemies  thy  footstool1?  If 
David  then  called  him  Lord, 
how  is  he  his  son  ?  And  no 
man  was  able  to  answer  him 
a  word  ;  neither  durst  any 
man  from  that  day  forth  ask 
him  any  more  questions. 


man  datum  magnum  in  lege. 
Ait  illi  Jesus :  Diliges  Do- 
minum  Deum  tuum  ex  toto 
corde  tuo,  et  in  tota  ani- 
ma  tua,  et  in  tota  mente 
tua.  Hoc  est  maximum,  et 
primummandatum.  Secun- 
dum autem  simile  est  huic: 
Diliges  proximum  tuum  si- 
cut  teipsum.  In  his  duobus 
mandatis  universa  lex  pen- 
det,  et  prophetse.  Congre- 
gatis  autem  Pharisseis,  in- 
terrogavit  eos  Jesus,  di- 
cens:  Quid  vobis  videtur 
de  Christo1?  cujus  fllius 
est  1  Dicunt  ei:  David.  Ait 
illis:  Quomodo  ergo  David 
in  Spiritu  vocat  eum  Do- 
minum,  dicens:  Dixit  Do- 
minus  Domino  meo  :  Sede 
a  dextrismeis,  donee ponam 
inimicos  tuos  scabellum 
pedum  tuorum  1  Si  ergo 
David  vocat  eum  Dominum, 
quomodo  filius  ejus  est] 
Et  nemo  poterat  ei  respon- 
dere  verbum ;  neque  au- 
susfuitquisquam  ex  ilia  die 
eum  amplius  interrogare. , 


The  Man-God  allowed  temptation  to  approach  his 
sacred  person  in  the  desert ; *  he  disdained  not  to 
sustain  the  attacks,  which  the  devil's  spiteful  cunning 
has,  from  the  world's  first  beginning,  been  suggesting 
to  him,  as  the  surest  means  of  working  man's  per- 
dition. Our  Jesus  permitted  the  demon  thus  to 
tempt  him,  in  order  that  he  might  show  his  faithful 
servants  how  they  are  to  repel  the  assaults  of  the 
wicked  spirit.  To-day,  our  adorable  Master,  who 
would  be  a  model  to  his  children  in  all  their  trials,2 


1  St.  Matt!),  iv.  1-11.        *  Heb.  ii.  17,  18 ;  iv.  15. 


392       SEVENTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

is  represented  to  us  as  having  to  contend,  not  with 
Satan's  perfidy,  but  with  the  hypocrisy  of  his 
bitterest  enemies,  the  Pharisees.  They  seek  to  ensnare 
him  in  his  speech,1  just  as  the  representatives  of  the 
world,  which  he  has  condemned,2  will  do  to  his 
Church,  and  that  in  all  ages,  right  to  the  end  of  time. 
But  as  her  divine  Spouse  triumphed,  so  will  she,  for, 
he  will  enable  her  to  continue  his  work  upon  earth, 
and  amidst  the  same  temptations  and  the  same  snares. 
She  is  ever  to  come  off  with  victory,  by  maintaining 
a  most  inviolable  fidelity  to  God's  law  and  truth. 
The  tools  of  Satan,  who  are  the  heretics,  and  the 
princes  of  the  world,  chafing  at  the  restraint  put,  by 
Christianity,  on  their  ambition  and  lust,  will  always 
be  studying  how  best  to  outwit  the  guardian  of  the 
divine  oracles,  by  their  captious  propositions  or 
questions.  When  necessity  requires  her  to  speak, 
she  is  quite  ready  ;  for,  as  Bride  of  that  divine  Word, 
who  is  his  Father's  eternal  and  substantial  utterance, 
what  can  she  be,  but  a  voice,  either  to  announce  him 
on  earth,  or  sing  him  in  heaven  ?  That  word  of  hers, 
endowed  as  it  is  with  the  power  and  penetration  of 
God  himself,  will  not  only  never  be  taken  by  surprise, 
but,  like  a  two-edged  sword,  it  will  generally  go  much 
deeper,  than  the  crafty  questioners  of  the  Church 
anticipated ;  it  will  not  only  refute  their  sophistry,  it 
will,  also,  expose  the  hypocrisy  and  wickedness  of 
their  intentions.3  By  their  sacrilegious  attempts, 
they  will  have  gained  nothing  but  disgrace  and  shame, 
and  the  mortification  of  having  occasioned  a  fresh 
lustre  to  Truth  by  the  new  light  in  which  it  has  been 
put,  and  of  having  procured  a  clearer  knowledge  of 
dogma  or  morals,  for  the  devoted  children  of  the 
Church. 

It  was  thus  with  the  Pharisees  of  to-day's  Gospel. 
As  the  Homily  upon  it  tells  us,  they  wanted  to  see, 

1  St.  Matth.  xxii.  15.        3  St.  John,  xvi.  8-11.  a  Heb.  iv.  12. 


mass.  393 

if  Jesus,  who  had  declared  himself  to  be  God,  would 
not,  consequently,  make  some  addition  to  the  com- 
mandment of  divine  love  ;  and  if  he  did,  they  would 
he  justified  in  condemning  him,  as  having  tried  to 
change  the  letter  of  the  law  in  its  greatest  command- 
ment1 Our  Lord  disappoints  them.  He  met  their 
question,  by  giving  it  a  longer  answer  than  they  had 
asked  for ;  that  is,  having  first  recited  the  text  of 
the  great  commandment  as  given  in  the  Scripture, 
he  continued  the  quotation,  and,  by  so  doing,  showed 
them  that  he  was  not  ignorant  of  the  intention 
which  had  induced  them  to  question  him :  he  con- 
tinued the  quotation,  by  reminding  them  of  the 
second  commandment,  which  is  like  unto  the  first, — 
the  commandment,  that  is,  of  love  of  the  neighbour, 
and  that  condemned  their  intended  crime  of  deicide. 
Thus  were  they  convicted  of  loving  neither  their  neigh- 
bour, nor  God  himself,  for  the  first  commandment 
cannot  be  observed,  if  the  second,  which  flows  from, 
and  completes  it,  be  broken. 

But,  our  Lord  does  not  stop  there  ;  he  obliges 
them  to  acknowledge,  at  least,  implicitly,  the  divinity 
of  the  Messiah.  He  puts  a  question,  in  His  turn,  to 
them,  and  they  answer  it,  by  saying,  as  they  were 
obliged  to  do,  that  the  Christ  was  to  be  of  the  family 
of  David  ;  but,  if  he  be  his  Son,  how  comes  it,  that 
David  calls  him  "  his  Lord,"  just  as  he  calls  God 
himself,  as  we  have  it  in  the  109th  Psalm,  where  he 
celebrates  the  glories  of  the  Messiah  ?  The  only 
possible  explanation  is,  that  the  Messiah,  who  in  due 
time,  and  as  Man,  was  to  be  born  of  David's  house, 
was  God,  and  Son  of  God,  even  before  time  existed, 
according  to  the  same  Psalm :  From  my  womb,  before 
the  day-star,  1  begot  thee.2  This  answer  would  have 
condemned  the  Pharisees,  so  they  refuse  to  give  it ; 
but;  their  silence  was  an  avowal ;  and,  before  very 

1  S.  Chrys.  Horn,  lxxvii.  in  Matth.         2  Ps.  cix.  3. 


394      SEVENTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

long,  the  eternal  Father's  vengeance  upon  these  vile 
enemies  of  his  Son,  will  fulfil  the  prophecy  of  making 
them  his  footstool  in  blood  and  shame  :  that  time  is 
to  be  the  terrible  day,  when  the  justice  of  God  will 
fall  upon  the  deicide  city. 

Let  us  Christians,  out  of  contempt  for  Satan, 
who  stirred  up  the  expiring  Synagogue  to  thus  lay 
snares  for  the  Son  of  God, — let  us  turn  these  efforts 
of  hatred  into  an  instruction  which  will  warm  up 
our  love.  The  Jews,  by  rejecting  Christ  Jesus, 
sinned  against  both  of  the  commandments  which 
constitute  charity,  and  embody  the  whole  law ;  and 
we,  on  the  contrary,  by  loving  that  same  Jesus,  ful- 
fil the  whole  law. 

This  Jesus  of  ours  is  the  brightness  of  eternal 
glory,1  one,  by  nature,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  he  is  the  God,  whom  the  first  commandment 
bids  us  love ;  and,  it  is  in  Him,  also,  that  the  second 
has  its  truest  and  adequate  application.  For,  not 
only  is  he  as  truly  Man  as  he  is  truly  God,  but  he  is 
the  Man  by  excellence,3  the  perfect  Man,  on  whose 
type,  and  for  whom,  all  other  men  were  formed ; 3  he 
is  the  model  and  brother  to  all  of  them ;  *  he  is,  at 
the  same  time,  the  leader,  who  governs  them  as  their 
King,5  and  offers  them  to  God  as  their  High  Priest ; 6 
he  is  the  Head,  who  communicates  to  all  the  mem- 
bers of  the  human  family  both  beauty,  and  life,  and 
movement,  and  light;  he  is  the  Redeemer  of  that 
human  family,  when  it  fell,  and,  on  that  account,  he 
is,  twice  over,  the  source  of  all  right,  and  the  ulti- 
mate and  highest  motive,  even  when  not  the  direct 
Object,  of  every  love,  that  deserves  to  be  called  love, 
here  below.  Nothing  counts  with  God,  excepting  so 
far  as  it  has  reference  to  this  Jesus.  As  St. 
Augustine  says,7  God  only  loves  men,  inasmuch  as 

1  Heb.  i.  3.  »  Rom.  viii.  29.  5  St.  John,  xviii.  37. 

2  St.  John,  xix.  5.         4  Heb.  ii.  17.  8  Heb.  x.  14. 

7  S.  Aug.  in  Johan.  Tract  ex. 


MASS. 


395 


they  either  are,  or  may  one  day  become,  members  of 
his  Son  ;  it  is  his  Son,  that  he  loves  in  them  :  thus, 
he  loves,  with  one  same  love,  though  not  equally, 
both  his  Word,  and  the  Flesh  of  his  Word,  and  the 
members  of  his  Incarnate  Word.  Now,  Charity  is 
love, — love  such  as  it  is  in  God,  communicated  to  us 
creatures  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Therefore,  what  we 
should  love,  by  charity,  both  in  our  own  selves,  and 
in  others, — is  the  divine  Word,  as  either  being,  or, 
as  another  expression  of  the  same  St.  Augustine 
adds,  "  that  it  may  be,"  in  others  and  in  ourselves. 

Let  us  take  care,  also,  as  a  consequence  of  this 
same  truth,  not  to  exclude  any  human  being  from 
our  love,  excepting  the  damned,  who  are,  thereby, 
absolutely  and  eternally  cut  off  from  the  body  of  the 
Man-God.  Who  can  boast  that  he  has  the  Charity 
of  Christ,  if  he  do  not  embrace  his  Unity  ?  The 
question  is  St.  Augustine's  again.2  Who  can  love 
Christ,  without  loving,  with  Him,  the  Church,  which 
is  his  Body  ?  without  loving  all  his  members  ? 
What  we  do,  be  it  to  the  least,  or  be  it  to  the  wor- 
thiest,— be  it  of  evil,  or  of  good, — it  is  to  Him  we 
do  it,  for  he  tells  us  so.3  Then,  let  us  love  our 
neighbour  as  ourselves,  because  of  Christ,  who  is  in 
each  of  us,  and  gives,  to  us  all,  union  and  increase 
in  Charity.4 

That  same  Apostle  who  says  :  "  The  end  of  the 
law  is  charity j5  says  also  :  The  end  of  the  law  is 
Christ ; 6  and  we  now  see  the  harmony  existing 
between  these  two  distinct  propositions.  We  under- 
stand, also,  the  connection  there  is  between  the  word 
of  the  Gospel :  On  these  two  commandments  dependeth 
the  whole  law  and  the  prophets,  and  that  other  saying 
of  our  Lord  :  Search  the  Scriptures,  for  the  same  are 
they  that  give  testimony  of  me.7     The  fulness  of  the 

1  Serm.  cclv.  in  dieb.  3  S.  Matth.  xxv. 40-45.  6  Rom.  x.  4. 

pasch.  |  *  Eph.  iv.  15,  16.         '  St.  JohD,  v.  39. 

2  Epist.  lxi.  «  x  Tim<  j  5# 


396   SEVENTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

law,  which  is  the  rule  of  men's  conduct,  is  in  Charity,1 
of  which  Christ  is  the  end,  just  as  the  Object  of  the 
revealed  Scriptures  is  no  other  than  the  Man- God, 
who  embodies  in  his  own  adorable  unity,  for  us  his 
followers,  all  moral  teaching,  and  all  dogma.  He  is 
our  faith  and  our  love,  "  the  end  of  all  our  resolu- 
tions," says  St.  Augustine ;  "  for  all  our  efforts  tend 
11  but  to  this, — to  perfect  ourselves  in  Him  ;  and  this 
"  is  our  perfection, — to  reach  Him  :  having  reached 
"  Him,  seek  no  farther,  for  he  is  your  End."  2  The 
holy  Doctor  gives  us,  when  we  have  reached  this 
point,  the  best  instruction  as  to  how  we  are  to  live 
in  the  divine  Union :  "  Let  us  cling  to  One,  let  us 
"  enjoy  One,  let  us  all  be  one  in  Him;"  hcereamus 
TJniy  fruamur  Uno,  permaneamns  unum.3 

The  beautiful  Anthem  for  to-day's  Offertory, 
separated,  as  we  now  have  it,  from  the  Verses  which 
formerly  accompanied  it,  does  not  suggest  why,  in 
the  earliest  ages,  it  was  assigned  to  this  Sunday.  We 
subjoin  these  Yerses  to  the  Anthem,  which  has  been 
retained.  The  second  concludes,  with  the  announce- 
ment of  the  arrival  of  the  Prince  of  the  heavenly 
Hosts,  who  is  coming  to  the  aid  of  God's  people. 
This  gives  the  desired  explanation ;  and  it  becomes 
all  the  clearer,  when  we  remember,  that  this 
Sunday  begins  the  week  of  the  great  Archangel  in 
the  Antiphonary  published,  from  the  most  ancient 
manuscripts,  by  the  blessed  Thomasi ;  and,  that  the 
following  Sunday  is  there  designated  as  the  first 
Sunday  after  Saint  Michael  (post  Sancti  Angeli). 

OFFERTORY. 

Oravi  Deum  meum  ego  I  Daniel  prayed  unto  my  God, 

Daniel,    dicens :    Exaudi,  saying :    Graciously    hear,   O 

Domine,  preces  servi  tui :  Lord,  the  prayers  of  thy  ser- 

illuminafaciemtuain  super  vant:  show  thy  face  upon  thy 

1  Rom.  xiii.  10.    2  S.  Aug.  in  Ps.  lvi.      •  De  Trinit.  L.  iv.  11. 


MASS. 


397 


sanctuary:  and  mercifully  look 
upon  this  people,  upon  which 
is  invocated  thy  name,  O 
God! 

$".  I.  Whilst  I  was  speaking 
and  praying,  and  confessing 
my  sins,  and  the  sins  of  my 
people  of  Israel. 

Upon  which. 

$".  II.  I  heard  a  voice  saying 
unto  me :  Daniel !  understand 
the  words  that  I  speak  unto 
thee  ;  for,  I  am  sent  unto  thee  ; 
for,  Michael,  likewise  cometh 
to  help  me. 

And  mercifully  look. 


sanctuarium  tuum:  et  pro- 
pitius  intende  populum  is- 
tum,  super  quern  invoca- 
tum  est  n omen  tuum.  Deus. 

"ft.  I.  Adhuc  me  loquente 
et  orante,  et  narrante  pec- 
cata  mea,  et  delicta  populi 
mei  Israel. 

jSuper  quern. 

y.  II.  Audivi  vocem  di- 
centem  mihi:  Daniel,  intel- 
lige  verba  quos  loquor  tibi  ; 
quia  ego  missus  sum  ad  te  ; 
nam  et  Mithael  venit  in  ad- 
jutorium  meum. 

Et  propitius  intende, 


Forgiveness  of  our  past  sins,  and  preservation  from 
future  ones, — these  are  the  effects  produced  by  the 
Holy  Sacrifice.  Let  us  pray  for  them,  in  the  Secret, 
together  with  the  Church. 


SECRET. 


We  humbly  beseech  thy 
majesty,  O  Lord  :  that  the 
sacred  mysteries  we  are  cele- 
brating may  rid  us  of  our  past 
sins,  and  of  all  such  for  the 
future.    Through,  etc. 


Majestatem  tuam,  Domi- 
ne,  suppliciterdeprecamur: 
ut  haec  sancta,  quae  geri- 
mus,  et  a  prseteritis  nos 
delictis  exuant,  et  futuris. 
Per  Dominum. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 


It  is  whilst  assisting  at  these  great  Mysteries,  that 
the  christian  soul  in  the  enthusiasm  of  her  love, 
presents  to  her  God  her  promises  and  her  engage- 
ments. Let  her,  then,  give  herself  unreservedly  to 
the  God,  who  overwhelms  her  with  his  favours ;  but, 
whilst  thus  giving  free  vent  to  the  holy  emotions 
which  she  so  justly  feels,  let  her  not  forget,  that  He 
who  hides  himself,  out  of  consideration  for  our  weak- 
ness, under  the  eucharistic  veil,  is  the  Most  High, 


398        SEVENTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

who  is  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  an  avenger 
of  infidelity  to  what  is  voiced. 


COMMUNION. 


Vovete,  etreddite  Domino 
Deo  vestro  omnes.  qui  in 
circuitu  ejus  affertis  mune- 
ra:  terribili  et  ei,  quiaufert 
spiritum  principum:  terri- 
bili apud  omnes  reges  terras. 


Vow  ye,  and  pay  to  the 
Lord  your  God,  all  ye  that, 
round  about  him,  bring  gifts  : 
to  him  that  is  terrible ;  even 
to  him,  who  taketh  away  the 
spirit  of  princes  :  to  the 
terrible  with  the  kings  of  the 
earth. 


It  is  the  very  holiness  of  God,  that,  in  this  divine 
Sacrament,  comes  for  the  purpose  of  curing  our 
vices,  and  fortifying  our  faltering  steps  in  the  road 
which  leads  to  eternity.  In  the  prayer  of  the  Post- 
communion,  let  us  yield  our  souls  to  his  almighty 
influence. 


POSTCOMMUNION. 


Sanctificationibus  tuis, 
omnipotens  Deus,  et  vitia 
nostra  curentur,  et  remedia 
nobis  seterna  proveniant. 
Per  Dominum. 


May  our  vices  be  cured,  O 
almighty  God,  and  eternal 
remedies  procured  for  us,  by 
these  thy  holy  mysteries. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON    OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Quid  vobis  videtur  de 
Christo1?  cujus  Alius  est1? 
Dicunt  ei  omnes:  David. 
Dicit  eis  Jesus:  Quomodo 
David  in  Spiritu  vocat  eum 


What  think  ye  of  Christ  1 
whose  Son  is  he  1  They  all  say 
to  him:  David's.  Jesus  saith 
unto  them:  How  doth  David, 
in  Spirit,  call  him  Lord,  say- 


VESPERS.  399 

ing:   the  Lord  said  unto  my      Dominum,    dicens:    Dixit 
Lord,  sit  on  my  right  hand.  Dominus    Domino     meo: 

Sede  a  dextris  meis  1 

LET  US  PRAY.  OREMUS. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Da,  qusesumus  Domine, 

Lord,   that    thy  people  may  populo  tuo  diabolica  vitare 

avoid  all  the  contagions  of  the  contagia:  et  te  solum  Deum 

devil ;  and,  with  a  pure  mind,  pura  mente  sectari.     Per 

follow    thee,    who  alone    art  Dominum. 
God.    Through,  etc. 


400  THE    EMBER-DAYS    OF    SEPTEMBER. 


THE  EMBER-DAYS  OF  SEPTEMBER. 


Foe  the  third  time  this  year,  Holy  Church  comes 
claiming  from  her  children  the  tribute  of  Penance, 
which,  from  the  earliest  ages  of  Christianity,  was 
looked  upon  as  a  solemn  consecration  of  the  Seasons. 
The  historical  details  relative  to  the  institution  of 
the  Ember  Days,  will  be  found  on  the  Wednesdays 
of  the  third  week  of  Advent  and  of  the  first  week  of 
Lent ;  and  on  those  same  two  days,  we  have  spoken 
of  the  intentions  which  Christians  should  have  in  the 
fulfilment  of  this  demand  made  upon  their  yearly 
service. 

The  beginnings  of  the  Winter,  Spring,  and  Autumn 
quarters,  were  sanctified  by  abstinence  and  fasting, 
and,  each  of  them,  in  turn,  has  witnessed  heaven's 
blessing  falling  upon  their  respective  three  months ; 
and,  now,  Autumn  is  harvesting  the  fruits,  which 
divine  mercy,  appeased  by  the  satisfactions  made  by 
sinful  man,  has  vouchsafed  to  bring  forth  from  the 
bosom  of  the  earth,  notwithstanding  the  curse  that 
still  hangs  over  her.1  The  precious  seed  of  wheat, 
on  which  man's  life  mainly  depends,  was  confided  to 
the  soil  in  the  season  of  the  early  frosts,  and,  with 
the  first  fine  days,  peeped  above  the  ground ;  at  the 
approach  of  glorious  Easter,  it  carpeted  our  fields 
with  its  velvet  of  green,  making  them  ready  to  share 
in  the  universal  joy  of  Jesus'  resurrection ;  then, 
turning  into  a  lovely  image  of  what  our  souls  ought 
to  have  been  in  the  season  of  Pentecost,  its  stem 

1Gen.iii.l7. 


THE    EMBER-DAYS    OF    SEPTEMBER.  401 

grew  up  under  the  action  of  the  hot  sun  ;  the  golden 
ear  promised  a  hundred-fold  to  its  master ;  the  har- 
vest made  the  reapers  glad  ;  and,  now  that  September 
has  come,  it  calls  on  man  to  fix  his  heart  on  that 
good  God,  who  gave  him  all  this  store.  Let  him  not 
think  of  saying,  as  that  rich  man  of  the  Gospel  did, 
after  a  plentiful  harvest  of  fruits :  My  soul !  thou  hast 
much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years !  take  thy  rest ! 
eat !  drink !  make  good  cheer !  And  God  said  to 
that  man  :  Thou  fool !  this  night,  do  they  require  thy 
soul  of  thee !  and  ivhose  shall  those  things  be,  which 
thou  hast  provided  .?1  Surely,  there  is  too  much  of 
the  Christian  among  us,  to  allow  us  to  be  senseless  in 
that  way.  If  we  would  be  truly  rich  with  God,  if  we 
we  would  draw  down  his  blessing  on  the  preservation, 
as  well  as  on  the  production,  of  the  fruits  of  the 
earth,  let  us,  at  the  beginning  of  this  last  quarter  of 
the  year,  have  recourse  to  those  penitential  exer- 
cises, whose  beneficial  effects  we  have  always 
experienced  in  the  past.  The  Church  gives  us  the 
commandment  to  do  so,  by  obliging  us,  under  penalty 
of  grievous  sin,  to  abstain  and  fast  on  these  three 
days,  unless  we  be  lawfully  dispensed. 

We  have  already  spoken  on  the  necessity  of  pri- 
vate penance,  for  the  Christian  who  is  at  all  desirous 
to  make  progress  in  the  path  of  salvation.  But,  in 
this,  as  in  all  spiritual  exercises,  a  private  work  of 
devotion  has  neither  the  merit  nor  the  efficacy  of  one 
that  is  done  in  company  with  the  Church,  and  in 
communion  with  her  public  act;  for  the  Church,  as 
Bride  of  Christ,  has  an  exceptional  worth  and  power 
in  all  she  does ;  and  these  qualities  are  communicated 
by  her,  to  works  of  penance  done,  in  her  name,  in 
the  unity  of  the  social  body.  St.  Leo  the  Great  is 
very  strong  on  this  fundamental  principle  of  Chris- 
tian virtue ;  and  we  find  him  insisting  on  it,  in  the 

1  St.  Luke,  xii.  16-21. 
vol.  xi.  2  T> 


402  THE   EMBER-DAYS    OF    SEPTEMBER. 

sermons  he  preached  to  the  Faithful  of  Rome,  on 
occasion  of  this  Fast,  of  what  was  then  called,  the 
Fast  of  the  seventh  month.  "  Although,"  says  he, 
"  it  be  lawful  for  each  one  of  us  to  chastise  his  body, 
44  by  self-imposed  punishments,  and  restrain,  with 
"  more  or  less  severity,  the  concupiscences  of  the  flesh, 
"  which  war  against  the  spirit, — yet,  need  is,  that,on 
"  certain  days,  there  be  celebrated  a  general  fast  by 
"  all.  Devotion  is  all  the  more  efficacious  and  holy, 
14  when,  in  works  of  piety,  the  whole  Church  is 
"  engaged  in  them,  with  one  spirit  and  one  soul. 
44  Everything,  in  fact,  that  is  of  a  public  character,  is, 
44  to  be  preferred  to  what  is  private ;  and  it  is  plain, 
44  that  so  much  the  greater  is  the  interest  at  stake, 
14  when  the  earnestness  of  all  is  engaged  upon  it.  As  for 
"  individual  efforts,  let  each  one  keep  up  his  fervour 
44  in  them ;  let  each  one,  imploring  the  aid  of  divine 
44  protection,  take  to  his  own  self  the  heavenly 
44  armour,  wherewith  to  resist  the  snares  laid  by  the 
44  spirits  of  wickedness  ; — but,  the  soldier  of  the 
44  Church, — (the  soldier  that  has  the  spirit  of  the 
"  Church, — ecclesiasticus  miles,)  though  he  may  act 
44  bravely  in  his  own  private  combats,  (specialibus 
44  prceliis,)  yet  will  he  fight,  more  safely,  and  more 
"  successfully,  when  he  shall  confront  the  enemy  in  a 
44  public  engagement;  for  in  that  public  engagement, 
44  he  has  not  only  his  own  valour  to  trust  to,  but, 
44  under  the  leadership  of  a  King  who  can  never  be 
"  conquered,  he  is  in  the  battle  fought  by  all  his 
44  fellow-soldiers,  and,  by  being  in  their  company  and 
il  ranks,  he  has  a  fellowship  of  mutual  aid."1 

Another  year,  when  preaching  for  the  same  occa- 
sion, this  eloquent  Pontiff,  and  Doctor  of  the  Church, 
was  even  more  energetic  and  lengthy,  in  putting  these 
great  truths  before  the  people ;  would  to  God  the 
words  of  such  a  Pope,  as  Leo  the  Great,  could  make 

1  St.  Leo,  iv.  De  jej.  sept,  mensis. 


THE    EMBER-DAYS    OF    SEPTEMBER.  403 

themselves  heard  by  our  present  generation,  and  in- 
duce us  Christians  to  mistrust  the  individualistic 
tendencies  of  what  is  called  the  piety  suited  to  the 
age  we  live  in.  Fortunately,  the  words  of  the  Saint 
exist,  and  in  all  their  "  pontifical  eloquence ;"  we  in- 
vite our  readers  to  peruse  his  "  Sermons  ;"  all  we  have 
space  for,  is  a  short  selection  from  his  third  Sermon 
on  the  Fast  of  the  seventh  month  (our  September 
Ember  Days). 

"  God  has  sanctioned  this  privilege, — that,  what  is 
"  celebrated  in  virtue  of  a  public  law,  is  more  sacred 
'  than  that  which  depends  on  a  private  regulation. 
:  The  exercise  of  self-restraint  which  an  individual 
"  Christian  practises  by  his  own  will,  is  for  the 
"  advantage  of  that  single  member ;  but,  a  fast,  un- 
"  dertaken  by  the  Church  at  large,  includes  every 
"  one  in  the  general  purification.  God's  people  never 
u  is  so  powerful,  as  when  the  hearts  of  all  the  Faith- 
"  ful  join  together  in  the  unity  of  holy  obedience,  and 
"  when,  in  the  Christian  camp,  there  is  one  and  the 
"  same  preparation  made  by  all,  and  one  and  the 

"  same   bulwark   covering  us  all See,  most 

"  dearly  beloved,  here  is  the  solemn  Fast  of  the 
"  seventh  month  urging  us  to  profit  by  the  potency 
"  of  the  unity,   (of  which  we  were  speaking,)  and 

1  which   is   invincible Let   us  raise   up  our 

'  hearts,  withdraw  from  worldly  occupations,  and 
"  steal  some  time  for  furthering  our  eternal  goods. 
"  .  .  .  .  The  most  plenary  remission  of  sin  is  ob- 
"  tained,  when  there  is  the  whole  Church  in  the  like 
'  prayer  and  the  like  confession ;  for,  if  the  Lord 
'  promises,  that  when  two  or  three  shall,  with  a  holy 
"  and  pious  unanimity,  agree  to  ask  Him  anything 
;c  whatsoever,  it  shall  be  granted  to  them,1 — what  is 
'  there,  that  can  be  refused  to  a  people  of  many  thou- 


1  St.  Matth.  xviii.  19,  20. 


404       THE  EMBER-DAYS  OF  SEPTEMBER. 

"  sands,  who  are  all  alike  engaged  in  observing  one 
"  and  the  same  practice  of  religion,  and  are,  with  one 
"  common  accord,  praying  with  one  and  the  same 
"  spirit  ?  In  the  eyes  of  God,  my  dearly  beloved,  it 
"  is  a  great  and  precious  sight,  when  all  Christ's 
"  people  are  earnest  at  the  same  offices ;  and  that, 
"  without  any  distinction,  men  and  women  of  every 
"  grade  and  order,  are  all  working  together  with  one 
"  heart.  To  depart  from  evil  and  do  good1,  that  is 
"  the  one  and  same  determination  of  them  all.  They 
"  all  give  glory  to  God  for  the  works  he  achieves  in 
"  his  servants.  They  all  unite  in  returning  hearty 
"  thanks  to  the  loving  Giver  of  all  blessings.  The 
"  hungry  are  fed  ;  the  naked  are  clad  ;  the  sick  are 
"  visited  ;  and  no  one  seeketh  his  own  profit,  but 

"  that  of  others By  this  grace  of  God,  who 

"  worketh  all  in  all,2  the  fruit  is  common,  and  the 
"  merit  is  common  ;  for  the  affection  of  all  may  be  the 
"  same,  although  all  are  not  equally  rich ;  and  they 
"  who  are  receivers  of  the  liberality  of  others,  may 
"  not  be  able  to  make  a  like  return,  but  they  can 
"  entertain  a  like  affection.  There  is  nothing  out  of 
"joint  in  such  a  people  as  that;  there  are  no 
"  variances  ;  for  all  the  members  of  the  whole  body 
"  are  alike  in  the  energy  of  the  same  piety.  .  .  .  The 
"  beauty  of  the  whole  becomes  the  excellence  of  each 
"  member.  .  .  .  Let  us,  then,  embrace  this  blessed 
"  solidity  of  holy  unity,  and  with  one  agreement  of 
"  the  same  good  will,  let  us  enter  upon  this  solemn 
"  Fast/'3 

Let  us  not,  in  our  prayers  and  fasts,  forget  the  new 
Priests  and  other  Ministers  of  the  Church,  who,  on 
Saturday  next,  are  to  receive  the  imposition  of  hands. 
The  September  ordination  is  not,  usually,  the  most 
numerous  of  those  given  by  the  Bishop  during  the 

1  Ps.  xxxiii.  15.  '  1  Cor.  xii.  6. 

3  St.  Leo,  Serm.  iii.  De  jej.  sept,  mensis. 


THE    EMBER-DAYS   OF    SEPTEMBER.  405 

year.  The  sublime  function,  to  which  the  Faithful 
owe  their  Fathers  and  Guides  in  the  spiritual  life, 
has,  however,  a  special  interest,  at  this  period  of  the 
year,  which,  more  than  any  other,  is  in  keeping  with 
the  present  state  of  the  world,  which  is  one  of  rapid 
decline  towards  ruin.  Our  Year,  too,  is  on  the  fall, 
as  we  say.  The  sun,  which,  we  beheld  rising  at 
Christmas,  as  a  giant  who  would  burst  the  bonds  of 
frost  asunder,  and  restrain  the  tyranny  of  darkness, — 
now,  as  though  he  had  grown  wearied,  is  drooping 
towards  the  horizon ;  each  day,  we  see  him  gradually 
leaving  that  glorious  zenith,  where  we  admired  his 
dazzling  splendour,  on  the  day  of  our  Emmanuel's 
Ascension ;  his  fire  has  lost  its  might ;  and  though 
he  still  holds  half  the  day  as  his,  his  disc  is  growing 
pale,  which  tells  us  of  the  coming  on  of  those  long 
nights,  when  Nature,  stripped  of  all  her  loveliness  by 
angry  storms,  seems  as  though  she  would  bury  her- 
self, for  ever,  in  the  frozen  shroud  which  is  to  bind 
her.  So  is  it  with  our  world.  Illumined  as  it  was 
by  the  light  of  Christ,  and  glowing  with  the  fire  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  it  sees,  in  these  our  days,  that  cha- 
rity is  growing  cold,1  and  that  the  light  and  glow  it 
had  from  the  Sun  of  Justice,  are  on  the  wane.  Each 
revolution  takes  from  the  Church  some  jewel  or  other, 
which  does  not  come  back  to  her  when  the  storm  is 
over ;  tempests  are  so  frequent,  that  tumult  is  becom- 
ing the  normal  state  of  the  times.  Error  predominates, 
and  lays  down  the  law.  Iniquity  abounds.  It  is  our 
Lord  himself  who  said :  When  the  Son  of  Man  comeih, 
shall  he  find,  think  yet  Faith  on  earth  P 

Lift  up,  then,  your  heads,  ye  children  of  God !  for 
your  redemption  is  at  hand.3  But,  from  now,  until 
that  time  shall  come,  when  heaven  and  earth  are  to  be 
made  new  for  the  reign  that  is  to  be  eternal,  and 
shall  bloom  in  the  light  of  the  Lamb,  the  Conqueror,4 

1  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  12.  3  Ibid.  >xi.  28-31. 

2  St.  Luke,  xviii.  8.  4  Apoc.  xxi. 


406  THE   EMBER-DAYS    OF    SEPTEMBER. 

— cha/ys,  far  worse  than  these,  must  dawn  upon  this 
world  of  ours,  when  the  elect  themselves  would  be 
deceived,  if  that  were  possible  I1  How  important  is 
it  not,  in  these  miserable  times,  that  the  Pastors  of 
the  flock  of  Christ  be  equal  to  their  perilous  and 
sublime  vocation ;  let  us  then  fast  and  pray ;  and 
how  numerous  soever  may  be  the  losses  sustained  in 
the  christian  ranks,  of  those  who  once  were  faithful 
in  the  practices  of  penance,  let  us  not  lose  courage. 
Few  as  we  may  be,  let  us  group  ourselves  closely 
round  the  Church,  and  implore  of  that  Jesus,  who  is 
her  Spouse, — that  he  vouchsafe  to  multiply  his  gifts, 
in  those  whom  he  is  calling  to  the,  now  more  than 
ever,  dread  honour  of  the  Priesthood  ;  that  he  infuse 
into  them  his  divine  prudence,  whereby  they  may  be 
able  to  disconcert  the  plans  of  the  impious ;  his  un- 
tiring zeal  for  the  conversion  of  ungrateful  souls ;  his 
perseverance  even  unto  death,  in  maintaining,  with- 
out reticence  or  compromise,  the  plenitude  of  that 
truth,  which  he  has  destined  for  the  world,  and  the 
unviolated  custody  of  which,  is  to  be,  on  the  last  Day, 
the  solemn  testimony  of  the  Bride's  fidelity. 

1  St.  Mark,  xiii.  22. 


EIGHTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST  407 


THE  EIGHTEENTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

The  Paralytic  carrying  his  bed  is  the  subject  of 
this  day's  Gospel,  and  gives  the  eighteenth  Sunday 
after  Pentecost  its  title.  It  has  been  thought,  by 
some,  that  its  having  the  number  it  bears,  has  caused 
it  to  be  inserted  in  the  Missal  immediately  after  the 
Ember  Days  of  autumn.  We  will  not,  like  the 
Liturgists  of  the  Middle  Ages,1  discuss  the  question 
as  to  whether  we  should  consider  it  as  having  taken 
the  place  of  the  vacant  Sunday,  which,  formerly, 
used  always  to  follow  the  ordination  of  the  sacred 
ministers,2  in  the  manner  we  have  elsewhere  described.3 
Manuscript  Sacramentaries  and  Lectionaries,  of  very 
ancient  date,  give  it  the  name,  which  was  so  much 
in  use,  of  Dominica  vacate  Whatever  may  be  the 
conclusion  arrived  at,  there  is  one  interesting  point 
for  consideration, — that  the  Mass  of  this  day  is  the 
only  one,  in  which  is  broken  the  order  of  the  lessons 
taken  from  St.  Paul,  and  which  invariably  form  the 
subject  of  the  Epistles,  from  the  sixth  Sunday  after 
Pentecost :  the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians, — which  we 
have  had  already  before  us,  and  will  be  afterwards 
continued, — is  to-day  interrupted,  and,  in  its  stead, 
we  have  some  verses  from  the  first  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  wherein  the  Apostle  gives  thanks  to  God 
for  the  manifold  gratuitous  gifts  granted,  in  Christ 

1  Berno  Aug.  Cap.  v ;  etc. 

2  Microlog.  Cap.  xxix. 

3  Advent :  Ember  Saturday. 

4  Thomasi  Opp.  Edit.  Vezzosi,  t.  v.  p.  148,  149,  309. 


408         EIGHTEENTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Jesus,  to  the  Church.  Now  ;  the  powers  conferred, 
by  the  imposition  of  the  Bishop's  hands,  on  the 
ministers  of  the  Church, — are  the  most  marvellous 
gift  that  is  known  on  earth,  yea,  in  heaven  itself. 
The  other  portions  of  the  Mass,  too,  are,  as  we  shall 
see  further  on,  most  appropriate  to  the  prerogatives 
of  the  new  Priesthood.  So  that  the  Liturgy  of  the 
present  Sunday  is  doubly  telling,  when  it  immediately 
follows  the  Ember  Days  of  September.  But  this 
coincidence  is  far  from  being  one  of  every  year's  occur- 
rence, at  least,  as  the  Liturgy  now  stands  ;  nor  can  we 
dwell  longer  on  these  subjects,  without  seeming  to  be 
going  too  far  into  archaeology,  and  exceeding  the 
limits  we  have  marked  out  for  ourselves. 

MASS. 

The  Introit  of  the  Sunday  Masses,  since  Pentecost, 
was  always  taken  from  the  Psalms.  From  the  12th 
to  the  118th,  the  Church,  without  ever  changing  the 
order  of  these  sacred  canticles,  chose  from  each  of 
them,  as  its  own  turn  came,  the  Verses  most  appro- 
priate to  the  Liturgy  of  each  Sunday.  But,  dating 
from  to-day,  she  is  going  to  select  her  Introits  else- 
where, with  one  exception,  however,  when  she  will 
again  turn  to  this  the  Book,  by  excellence,  of  divine 
praise.  Her  future  opening- Anthems,  for  the 
Dominical  Liturgy,  to  the  end  of  the  Year,  will  be 
taken  from  various  other  books  of  the  Old  Testament. 
For  this  18th  Sunday,  we  have  Jesus,  son  of  Sirach, 
the  inspired  writer  of  Ecclesiastes,  asking  God  to 
ratify,  by  the  accomplishment  of  what  they  foretold, 
the  fidelity  of  his  Prophets?  The  interpreters  of 
the  divine  oracles  are,  now,  the  Pastors,  whom  the 
Church  sends,  in  her  own  name,  to  preach  the  word 
of  salvation  and  peace;  let  us,  her  children,  pray 
with  her,  that  their  words  may  never  be  void. 

1  Ecclea.  xxxvi.  18. 


MASS. 


409 


1NTROIT. 


Give  peace,  0  Lord,  to  them 
who  patiently  wait  for  thee, 
that  thy  Prophets  may  be 
found  faithful;  hear  the  pray- 
ers of  thy  servant,  and  of  thy 
people  Israel. 

Ps.  I  rejoiced  at  the  things 
that  were  said  unto  me :  we 
shall  go  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  Glory,  etc.    Give  peace. 


Da  pacem,  Domine,  sus- 
tinentibus  te,  ut  Prophetae 
tui  fideles  inveniantur  ; 
exaudi  preces  servi  tui  et 
plebis  tuae  Israel. 

Ps.  Laetatus  sum  in  his, 
quae  dicta  sunt  mihi:  in 
domum  Domini  ibimus. 
Gloria  Patri.  Da  pacem. 


The  surest  way  to  obtain  grace,  is  to  be  ever 
humbly  acknowledging,  to  our  God,  our  deep  con- 
viction, that,  of  ourselves,  we  cannot  please  his  divine 
Majesty.  The  Church  continues  to  give  us,  in  her 
Collects,  the  most  admirable  expressions  of  such  an 
avowal. 


collect. 


May  the  working  of  thy 
mercy,  O  Lord,  direct  our 
hearts:  for,  without  thee,  we 
cannot  please  thee .  Through, 
etc. 


Dirigat  corda  nostra, 
quaesumus  Domine, '  tuae 
miserationis  operatio:  quia 
tibi  sine  te  placere  non  pos- 
sumus.     Per  Dominum. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Corinthians. 

1  Ch.  i. 

Brethren:  I  give  thanks  to 
my  God  always  for  you,  for 
the  grace  of  God,  that  is  given 
you  in  Christ  Jesus;  that  in 
all  things  ye  are  made  rich  in 
him,  in  all  utterance,  and  in 
all  knowledge,   as  the  testi- 


Lectio  Epistolae  beatiPauli 
Apostoli  ad  Corinthios. 


1  Cap.  i. 

Fratres,  Gratias  ago  Deo 
meo  semper  pro  vobis  in 
gratia  Dei,  quae  data  est 
vobis  in  Christo  Jesu :  quod 
in  omnibus  divitesfacti  est- 
is  in  illo,  in  omni  verbo,  et 
in  omni  scientia:  sicut  testi- 


410        EIGHTEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

monium  Christi  confirma-  mony  of  Christ  was  confirmed 

turn  est  in   vobis:   ita  ut  in  you.     So  that  nothing  is 

nihil  vobis  desit  in  ulla  gra-  wanting  to  you  in  any  grace, 

tia,  exspectantibus  revela-  waiting  for  the  manifestation 

tionem  Domini  nostri  Jesu  of  our    Lord    Jesus    Christ. 

Christi,  qui  et  confirmabit  Who  also  will  confirm    you 

vos  usque  in  finem  sine  cri-  unto  the  end  without  crime, 

mine,  in  die  adventus  Do-  in  the  day  of  the  coming  of 

mini  nostri  Jesu  Christi.  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  last  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  no  longer 
far  off!  The  approach  of  that  final  event,  which  is 
to  put  the  Church  in  full  possession  of  her  divine 
Spouse,  redoubles  her  hopes ; — but,  the  Last  Judg- 
ment, which  is  also  to  pronounce  the  eternal  per- 
dition of  so  great  a  number  of  her  children,  mingles 
fear  with  her  desire;  and  these  two  sentiments  of 
hers,  will  henceforth,  be  continually  brought  forward 
in  the  holy  Liturgy. 

It  is  evident,  that  Expectation  has  been,  so  to  say, 
an  essential  characteristic  of  her  existence.  Separated 
as  she  is,  at  least,  as  to  the  vision  of  his  divine  charms, 
— she  would  have  been  sighing  all  day  long  in  this 
vale  of  tears,  had  not  the  love,  which  possesses  her, 
driven  her  to  spend  herself,  unselfishly  and  unre- 
servedly, for  Him  who  is  absolute  Master  of  her 
whole  heart.  She,  therefore,  devotes  herself  to  la- 
bour and  suffering,  to  prayers  and  tears.  But  her 
devotedness,  unlimited  as  it  has  been,  has  not  made 
her  hopes  less  ardent.  A  love  without  desires,  is  not 
a  virtue  of  the  Church  ;  she  condemns  it  in  her  chil- 
dren, as  being  an  insult  to  the  Spouse. 

So  just,  and,  at  the  same  time,  so  intense,  were, 
and  from  the  very  first,  these  her  aspirations,  that 
Eternal  Wisdom  wished  to  spare  his  Bride,  by  con- 
cealing from  her,  the  duration  of  her  exile.  The  day 
and  hour  of  his  return  is  the  one  sole  point,  upon 
which,  when  questioned  by  his  Apostles,  Jesus  re- 
fused to  enlighten  his  Church.1  That  secret  consti- 
St.  Matth.  xxiv.  3,  36 


MASS. 


411 


tuted  one  of  the  designs  of  God's  government  of  the 
world ;  but  besides  that,  it  was  also  a  proof  of  the 
compassion  and  affection  of  the  Man-God  :  the  trial 
would  have  been  too  cruel ;  and  it  was  better  to  leave 
the  Church  under  the  impression,  which  after  all  was 
a  true  one, — that  the  end  was  nigh  in  God's  sight, 
with  whom  a  thousand  Years  are  as  one  day.1 

It  is  this  which  explains,  how  it  was,  that  the 
Apostles,  who  were  the  interpreters  of  the  Church's 
aspirations,  are  continually  recurring  to  the  subjects 
of  the  near  approach  of  our  Lord's  coming.  St.  Paul 
has  just  been  telling  us,  and  that  twice  over  in  the 
same  breath,  that  the  Christian  is  he  who  waiteth 
for  the  manifestation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
for  the  day  of  his  Coming.  In  his  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  he  applies  to  the  second  Coming,  the 
inflamed  desires  of  the  ancient  Prophets  for  the  first  ;2 
and  says :  Yet  a  little,  and  a  very  little  while,  and 
He  that  is  to  come,  will  come,  and  will  not  delay.3 
The  reason  is,  that,  under  the  New  Covenant,  as 
under  the  Old,  the  Man-God  is  called,  on  account  of 
his  final  manifestation,  which  is  always  being  looked 

for,  HE  THAT  IS  COMING,    HE  THAT  IS  TO  COME.5      The 

cry,  which  is  to  close  the  world's  history,  is  to  be  the 
announcement  of  his  arrival:  Behold!  the  Bride- 
groom is  COMING.6 

And  St.  Peter,  too,  says  :  "Having  the  loins  of  your 
"  mind  girt  up,  think  of  the  glory  of  that  Bay, 
"  whereon  the  Lord  Jesus  is  to  be  revealed !  Hope 
"for  it,  with  a  perfect  hope  !"7  The  Prince  of  the 
Apostles  foresaw  the  contemptuous  way,  in  which 
future  false  teachers  would  scoff  at  this  long  expected, 
but  always  put-off,  Coming ;  Where  is  his  promise,  or 
his  Coming  ?  For,  since  the  fathers  slept,  all  things 
continue  so,  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  /* 

1  2  St.  Pet.  iii.  8.  *  St.  Matth.  xi.  3.       7  1  St.  Pet.  i.  5,  7, 13. 

2  Heb.  ii.  3.  6  Apoc.  i.  8.  8  2  St.  Pet.  iii.  3,  4. 

3  Heb.  x.  37.  6  St.  Matth.  xxv.  6. 


412         EIGHTEENTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

Yes,  he  foresaw  this,  and  forestalled  their  sarcasm,  by 
answering  it  in  the  words,  which  his  brother  Paul1 
had  previously  used  :2   The  Lord  delayeth  not  his 
•promise,  as  some  imagine;  out,  beareth  patiently, 
for  your  sake,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish, 
but  that  all  should  return  to  penance.     But,  the  day 
of  the  Lord  shall  come  as   a  thief,  in  which  the 
heavens  shall  pass  away  with  great  violence ;  and 
the  elements  shall  be  dissolved  with  heat;  and  the 
earth,  and  the  works  that  are  in  it,  shall  be  burnt 
up.     Seeing,  then,  that  all  these  things  are  to  be 
dissolved,  what  manner  of  people  ought  ye  to  be  in 
holy  conversations  and  godliness,  waiting  for,  and 
hastening  unto,  the  coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord, 
by  which,  the  heavens  being  on  fire,  shall  be  dis- 
solved, and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  the  burning 
heat  of  fire  ?    But,  we  look  for  new  heavens  and 
new  earth,  according  to  his  promise,  in  which 
heavens   and   earth,  justice  dwelleth.      Wherefore, 
dearly  beloved,  waiting  for  these  things,  be  diligent 
that  ye  may  be  found,  before  Him,  unspotted  and 
blameless  in  peace2,  .  .  .  Wherefore,  Brethren,  know- 
ing these  things  before,  beware !  lest,  being  led  away 
by  the  error  of  the  unwise,  ye  fall  from  the  steadfast- 
ness, which  is  noiv  yours.4" 

If,  in  those  last  days,  danger  is  to  be  so  great,  that 
the  very  powers  of  heaven  shall  be  moved,5  our  Lord, 
as  we  are  told  in  our  Epistle,  has  providentially  con- 
firmed in  us  his  testimony  and  our  faith,  by  con- 
tinual manifestations  of  his  power.  And,  as  it  were 
to  confirm  that  other  word  of  the  same  Epistle,  that 
lie  will  thus  confirm  unto  the  end  them  that  believe 
in  him, — he  is  almost  prodigal  of  prodigies  in  these 
our  times,  as  though  they  were  precursors  of  the  End. 
Miracles  are  forcing  themselves  on  the  world's  un- 
willing notice ;  and  our  modern  facilities,  for  propa- 

1  2  St.  Pet.  iii.  15.     3  2  St.  Pet.  iii.  9-14.       6  St.  Matfch.  xxiv.  29. 

2  Rom.  ii.  4.  *  Ibid.  17. 


mass.  413 

gating  news,  are  made  to  tell  this  glory  of  the  Lord, 
all  over  his  earth  !  In  the  name  of  Jesus,  in  the 
name  of  one  or  other  of  his  Saints,  but,  especially,  in 
the  name  of  his  Immaculate  Mother,  who  is  preparing 
the  final  triumph  of  the  Church, — the  blind  see,  the 
lame  walk,  the  deaf  hear,  every  misery  of  both  body 
and  soul  is  suddenly  made  to  yield.  So  incontestable, 
indeed,  and  so  public,  is  the  manifestation  of  super- 
natural power,  that  business-managers  of  all  kinds, 
though  they  must,  out  of  regard  for  incredulity,  laugh 
at  the  facts,  yet  are  they  most  serious  in  turning  the 
occasion  to  their  profit !  Such  very  material  agencies 
as  Railway-Companies,  have  been  but  too  glad  to  be 
obliged  to  put  on  extra  Trains,  to  accommodate  the 
Faithful  thousands,  and  carry  them  as  quickly  as 
they  could,  to  the  favoured  sanctuaries,  where  the 
holy  Mother  of  God  has  appeared.  It  is  not  in  Catho- 
lic countries  only,  that  the  divine  power  has  made 
itself  felt.  Quite  recently,  in  the  very  centre  of 
Mahometan  infidelity, — have  we  not  read  it  in  our 
papers,  how  the  city  of  the  Sultans  rejoiced  at  hearing 
of  the  marvels  done  by  the  Queen  of  heaven,  within 
its  own  walls  ?  The  water  of  the  miraculous  foun- 
tain has  been  carried  even  into  the  city  of  Mecca, 
where  is  the  tomb  of  the  founder  of  Islam,  and  into 
which,  until  but  lately,  it  was  death  for  any  Christian 
to  enter. 

The  infidel  may  talk  as  he  please,  about  there  be- 
ing no  God  I1  If  he  hear  not  the  divine  testimony, 
it  is  because  corruption,  or  pride,  has  more  power 
over  him  than  the  light  of  reason, — just  as  it  was 
with  the  enemies  of  Jesus,  during  his  life  upon  the 
earth.  He  is  like  to  the  asp  of  the  Psalm,2  which 
maketh  itself  deaf;  it  stoppeth  its  ears,  that  it  may 
never  hear  the  voice  of  the  divine  Enchanter,  who 
speaketh  that  he  may  save.     His  life  is  one  piece  of 

1  Ps.  xiii.  1.  2  Ps.  lvii.  5,  6. 


414         EIGHTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

madness^  and  folly  ;2  he  has  done  his  best  to  draw 
down  vengeance  upon  himself. 

Let  us  not  be  like  him ;  but  with  the  Apostle,  let 
us  thank  God,  for  the  rich  profusion  of  Grace,  which 
he  has  so  mercifully  poured  out  upon  us.     Never 
were  his  gratuitous  gifts  more  necessary,  than  in  these 
our  miserable  times.     True,  it  is  not  a  first  promulga- 
tion, that  we  stand  in  need  of;  but,  the  efforts  of 
hell  against  it  have  become  so  violent,  that  in  order 
to  withstand  them,  there  is  need  of  a  power  from  on 
high,  equal,  in  some  sense,  to  that  we  read  of  as 
granted  in  the  beginning  of  the  Church.     Let  us  be- 
seech our  Lord,  to  bless  us  with  men,  powerful  in 
word  and  work.     Let  us,  by  the  fervour  of  our  fast- 
ings and  prayers,  obtain,  from  his  divine  Majesty, 
that  the  imposition  of  hands  may  produce,  now  more 
than  ever,  in  them  that  are  called  to  the  Priesthood, 
its  full  result:  that  it  may  make  them  rich  in  all 
things,  and  especially  in  all  utterance,  and  in  all 
knowledge.     May  these  days  of  ours,  in  which  all 
principles  are  growing  shadowy,  find  that  the  super- 
natural light,  at  least, — the  light  of  salvation, — is 
kept  up,  in  full  splendour  and  purity,  by  the  zeal  of 
the  Guides  of  the  flock  of  Christ.     May  the  com- 
promises and  flinchings  of  a  generation,  in  which  all 
truth  is  being  etiolated  and  minced,  never  lead  our 
newly  ordained  Priests,  either  themselves  to  shorten, 
or  permit  any  one  else  to  curtail,  the  measure  of  the 
perfect  man,3  which  was  put  into  their  hands,  in 
order  that  they  might  apply  it  to  every  Christian, 
who  is  desirous  of  observing  the  Gospel !     In  spite 
of  all  threats, — in  spite  of  the  noisy  passions  which 
are  boisterous  against  any  Priest  who  dares  to  preach 
the  truth, — let  their  voice  be  just  what  it  should  be, 
— that  is,  an  echo  of  the  Word:  let  it,  that  is,  possess 
the  holy  firmness  and  vibration  of  the  Saints ! 

1  Ps.  lvii.  5,  6.  *  Ps.  xiii.  1.  3  Eph.  iv.  13. 


MASS. 


415 


In  the  Gradual,  the  Church  repeats  the  Introit- 
Verse,  to  celebrate,  once  more,  the  joy  felt  by  the 
Christian  people  at  hearing  the  glad  tidings,  that 
they  are  soon  to  go  into  the  House  of  the  Lord. 
That  House  is  Heaven,  into  which  we  are  to  enter, 
on  the  last  day,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  leading  the 
way.  But  the  House  is  also  the  temple,  in  which  we 
are  now  assembled,  and  into  which  we  are  introduced 
by  the  representatives  of  that  same  Lord  of  ours, — 
that  is,  by  his  Priests. 


GRADUAL. 


I  rejoiced  at  the  things  that 
were  said  unto  me :  we  shall 
go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

ft.  Let  peace  be  in  thy 
strength,  and  abundance  in 
thy  towers. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  The  Gentiles  shall  fear 
thy  name,  O  Lord  :  and  all 
the  kings  of  the  earth  thy 
glory.    Alleluia. 


Laetatus  sum  in  his, 
quae  dicta  sunt  mini  :  in 
domum  Domini  ibimus. 

ft.  Fiat  pax  in  virtute 
tua,  et  abundantia  in  turri- 
bus  tuis. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Timebunt  gentes  no- 
men  tuum,  Domine :  et 
omnes  reges  terrse  gloriam 
tuam.    Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel   of   the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Gh.  ix. 

At  that  time :  Jesus  entering 
into  a  boat,  he  passed  over  the 
water  and  came  into  his  own 
city.  And  behold  they  brought 
to  him  one  sick  of  the  palsy, 
lying  on  a  bed.  And  Jesus 
seeing  their  faith,  said  to  the 
man  sick  of  the  palsy  :  Be  of 
good  heart,  son,  thy  sins  are 
forgiven  thee.  And  behold 
some  of  the  Scribes  said  with- 
in themselves  :  He  blasphem- 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthseum. 

Cap.  ix. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Ascen- 
dens  Jesus  in  naviculam, 
transfretavit,  et  venit  in 
civitatem  suam.  Et  ecce 
offerebant  ei  paralyticum 
jacentem  in  lecto.  Et  vi- 
dens  Jesus  fidem  illorum, 
dixit  paralytico  :  Confide, 
fili,  remittuntur  tibi  pecca- 
ta  tua.  Et  ecce  quidam  de 
scribis  dixerunt  intra  se: 
Hie  blasphemat.    Et  cum 


416  EIGHTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

vidisset  Jesus  cogitationes  eth.    And  Jesus  seeing  their 

eorum,  dixit :  Ut  quid  co-  thoughts,  said  :    Why  do  ye 

gitatis    mala  in    cordibus  think    evil    in   your  hearts] 

vestris  %    Quid  est  f acilius  Whether  is  it  easier  to  say  : 

dicere :    Dimittuntur   tibi  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  ; 

peccata  tua  :    an    dicere  :  or  to  say  :  Arise  and  walk  1 

Surge  etambulalUtautem  But  that  ye  may  know  that 

sciatis,  quia  filius  hominis  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on 

habet  potestatem  in  terra  earth  to  forgive  sins,    (then 

dimittendi  peccata,  tunc  ait  said  he  to  the  man  sick  of  the 

paralytico:  Surge,  tolle  lee-  palsy,)  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed, 

turn  tuum,  et  vade  in  do-  and  go  into  thy  house.     And 

mum  tuam.  Et  surrexit,  et  he  arose   and  went  into  his 

abiit  in  domum  suam.   Vi-  house.  And  the  multitude  see- 

dentes  autem  turbae  timue-  ing  it,  feared  and  glorified  God 

runt,      et     glorificaverunt  that  gave  such  power  to  men. 
Deum,  qui  dedit  potesta- 
tem talem  hominibus. 

In  the  13th  Century,  in  many  Churches  of  the 
West,  the  Gospel  for  to-day,  was  that,  wherein  our 
Lord  speaks  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  as  seated 
on  the  chair  of  Moses.1  The  Abbot  Rupert,  who 
gives  us  this  detail,  in  his  book  on  the  Divine  Offices, 
shows  how  admirably  this  Gospel  harmonised  with 
the  Offertory,  which  is  the  one  we  still  have,  and 
which  alludes  to  Moses.  "  This  Sunday's  Office," 
says  he,  "  eloquently  points  out  to  him  who  presides 
"  over  the  House  of  the  Lord,  and  has  received 
"  charge  of  souls, — the  manner  in  which  he  should 
"  comport  himself  in  the  high  rank,  where  the  divine 
"  call  has  placed  him.  Let  him  not  imitate  those 
"  men,  who  unworthily  sat  on  the  Chair  of  Moses ; 
"  but  let  him  follow  the  example  of  Moses  himself, 
"  who,  in  the  Offertory  and  its  verses,  presents  the 
"  heads  of  the  Church  with  such  a  model  of  perfec- 
"  tion.  Pastors  of  souls  ought,  on  no  account,  to  be 
"  ignorant  of  the  reason  why  they  are  placed  higher 
"  than  other  men :  it  is,  not  so  much  that  they  may 
"  govern  others,  as  that  they  may  serve  them."2  Our 

1  St,  Matt,  xxiii,  1-12.  8  Rur.  Div.  off.  xii.  18. 


MASS.  417 

Lord,  speaking  of  the  Jewish  doctors,  said:  "All 
whatsoever  they  shall  say  to  you,  observe  and  do ;  but 
according  to  their  works ,  do  ye  not :  for  they  say,  and 
do  not1  Contrariwise  to  these  unworthy  guardians 
of  the  Law, — they  who  are  seated  on  the  Chair  of 
doctrine,  "  should  teach,  and  act  conformably  to  their 
"  teaching,"  as  the  same  Abbot  Rupert  adds ;  "  or 
'  rather,"  says  he,  "  let  them  first  do,  what  it  is  their 
u  duty  to  do,  that  they  may  afterwards  teach  with 
11  authority  ;  let  them  not  seek  after  honours  and 
"  titles,  but  make  this  their  one  object, — to  bear  on 
"  themselves  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  to  merit  t< 
"  avert,  from  those  who  are  confided  to  their  care 
"  the  wrath  of  God,  as  we  are  told  in  the  Offertory, 
"  Moses  did."2 

The  Gospel  which  speaks  of  the  Scribes  and  Pha- 
risees who  were  seated  on  the  Chair  of  Moses,  has 
now  been  appointed  for  the  Tuesday  of  the  second 
week  of  Lent.  But,  the  one  which  is,  at  present, 
given  for  this  Sunday,  equally  directs  our  thoughts  to 
the  consideration  of  the  superhuman  powers  of  the 
Priesthood,  which  are  the  common  boon  of  regenera- 
ted humanity.  The  Faithful,  whose  attention  used 
formerly,  on  this  Sunday,  to  be  fixed  on  the  right  of 
Teaching,  which  is  confided  to  the  Pastors  of  the 
Church,  are  now  invited  to  meditate  upon  the  prero- 
gative which  these  same  men  have — of  forgiving 
sins,  and  healing  souls.  As  a  conduct,  in  opposition 
with  their  teaching,  would  in  no  wise  interfere  with 
the  authority  of  the  sacred  Chair,  from  which,  for  the 
Church  and  in  her  name,  they  dispense  the  bread  of 
doctrine  to  her  children, — so,  whatever  unworthiness 
there  may  happen  to  be  on  the  soul  of  a  Priest,  it 
does  not,  in  the  least,  lessen  the  power  of  the  Keys, 
which  he  has  had  put  into  his  hands,  and  which  open 
heaven,  and  shut  hell.     For  it  is  the  Son  of  Man, — 

1  St.  Matt,  xxiii.  3.  *  Hup.  1.  c. 

vol.  xi.  2  E 


418        EIGHTEENTH   SUNDAY  AFTER   PENTECOST. 

it  is  Jesus, — who,  by  the  Priest,  be  he  a  saint,  or  be 
he  a  sinner,  rids  of  their  sins  His  brethren  and  His 
creatures,  whose  miseries  He  has  taken  upon  Him- 
self, and  has  atoned  for  their  crimes  by  His  Blood.1 

The  miracle  of  the  cure  of  the  Paralytic,  which 
gave  an  occasion  to  Jesus  of  declaring  his  power  of 
forgiving  sins,  inasmuch  as  he  was  Son  of  Man,  has 
always  been  especially  dear  to  the  Church.     Besides 
the  narration  she  gives  us  of  it  from  St.  Matthew,  in 
to-day's  Gospel,  she  again,  on  the  Ember  Friday  of 
Whitsuntide,  relates  it  in  the  words  of  St.  Luke.2 
The  Catacomb  frescoes,  which  have  been  preserved 
to  the  present  day,  equally  attest  the  predilection  for 
this   subject,  wherewith  she  inspired  the  christian 
artists  of  the  first  centuries.     From  the  very  begin- 
ning of  Christianity,  heretics  had  risen  up,  denying 
that  the  Church  had  the  power,  which  her  divine 
Head  gave  her,  of  remitting  sin  :  such  false  teaching 
was  equivalent  to  the  irretrievably  condemning,  to 
spiritual  death,  an  immense  number  of  Christians, 
who,  unhappily,  had  fallen  after  their  baptism,  but 
who,  according  to  Catholic  dogma,  might  be  restored 
to  grace  by  the  Sacrament  of  Penance.     With  what 
energy,  then,  wrould  not  our  Mother  the  Church  de- 
fend the  treasure,  we  mean,  the  remedy,  which  gives 
life  to  her  children  !  She  uttered  her  anathemas  upon, 
and  drove  from  her  communion,  those  Pharisees  of 
the  New  Law,  who,  like  their  Jewish  predecessors, 
refused  to  acknowledge  the  infinite  mercy  and  uni- 
versality of  the  great  mystery  of  the  Redemption. 

Like  to  her  divine  Master,  who  had  worked  under 
the  eyes  of  the  Scribes  and  his  contradictors, — the 
Church,  too,  in  proof  of  her  consoling  doctrine,  had 
worked  an  undeniable  and  visible  miracle  in  the 
presence  of  the  false  teachers ;  and  yet,  she  failed  to 
convince  them  of  the  reality  of  the  miracle  of  sancti- 

1  Heb.  ii.  10-18.  *  St.  Luke,  v.  17-26. 


MASS.  419 

fication  and  grace  invisibly  wrought  by  her  words  of 
remission  and  pardon.  The  outward  cure  of  the 
Paralytic  was  both  the  image,  and  the  proof,  of  the 
cure  of  his  soul,  which,  previously,  had  been  in  a 
state  of  moral  paralysis  ;  but,  he  himself  represented 
another  sufferer:  that  other,  was  the  human  race 
which,  for  ages,  had  been  a  victim  to  the  palsy  of  sin. 
Our  Lord  had  left  the  earth,  when  the  faith  of  the 
Apostles  achieved  this  their  first  prodigy, — of  bring- 
ing to  the  Church  the  world,  grown  old  in  its  infir- 
mity. Finding  that  the  human  race  was  docile  to 
the  teaching  of  the  divine  messengers, and  was,already, 
an  imitator  of  their  faith,  the  Church  spoke  as  a 
Mother,  and  said  :  Be  of  good  heart,  JSonf  thy  sins  are 
forgiven  thee!  At  once,  to  the  astonishment  of  the 
philosophers  and  sceptics,  and  to  the  confusion  of 
hell, — the  world  rose  up  from  its  long  and  deep 
humiliation ;  and,  to  prove  how  thoroughly  his 
strength  had  been  restored  to  him,  he  was  seen  carry- 
ing on  his  shoulders,  by  the  labour  of  penance  and 
the  mastery  over  his  passions,  the  bed  of  his  old 
exhaustion  and  feebleness,  on  which  pride,  lust,  and 
covetousness,  had  so  long  held  him.  From  that  time 
forward,  complying  with  the  word  of  Jesus,  which 
was  also  said  to  him  by  the  Church,  he  has  been 
going  on  towards  his  house,  which  is  heaven,  where 
eternal  joy  awaits  him  !  And  the  Angels,  beholding 
such  a  spectacle,  on  earth,  of  conversion  and  holiness,1 
are  in  amazement,  and  sing  glory  to  God,  who  gave 
such  power  to  men. 

Let  us,  also,  give  thanks  to  Jesus,  whose  marvellous 
dower,  which  is  the  Blood  he  shed  for  his  Bride, 
suffices  to  satisfy,  through  all  ages,  the  claims  of 
eternal  justice.  It  was  at  Easter  Time,  that  we  saw 
our  Lord  instituting  the  great  Sacrament,  which,  thus? 
i  in  one  instant,  restores  the  sinner  to  life  and  strength.2 

1  St.  Luke,  v.  26.        *  Wednesday  of  5th  week  after  Easter. 


420  EIGHTEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

But,  how  doubly  wonderful  does  not  its  power  seem, 
when  we  see  it  working  in  these  times  of  effeminacy 
and  well-nigh  universal  ruin  !  Iniquity  abounds ; 
crimes  are  multiplied ; — and  yet,  the  life-restoring 
pool,  kept  full  by  the  sacred  stream,  which  flows  from 
the  open  Side  of  our  crucified  Lord,  is  ever  absorbing 
and  removing,  as  often  as  we  permit  it,  and  without 
leaving  one  single  vestige  of  them,  those  mountains 
of  sins,  those  hideous  treasures  of  iniquity  which  had 
been  amassed,  during  long  years,  by  the  united  agency 
of  the  devil,  the  world,  and  man's  own  self. 

The  Offertory  speaks  to  us  of  the  figurative  altar, 
which  was  set  up  by  Moses,  for  the  reception  of  the 
oblations  of  the  figurative  Law,  which  oblations  fore- 
shadowed the  great  and  only  true  Sacrifice,  at  which 
we  are  now  present.     After  the  Anthem  which  is 
still  in  use,  we  will  append  the  Verses  which  were 
anciently  added.     Moses  is  there  represented,  as  the 
type  of  those  faithful  Prophets,  mentioned  in  the 
Introit;  he  is  shown  to  us,  as  the  model  of  those  true 
leaders  of  God's  people,  who  devote  themselves  in 
procuring   mercy  and  peace   to   those    whom    they 
guide.1     God  sometimes  seems  to  resist  them ;  but  he 
always  lets  himself  be  overcome  !  and,  in  return  for 
their  fidelity,  he  admits  them  into  the  most  intimate 
manifestations  of  his  light  and  his  love.     The  first 
Verse  shows  us  the  Priest  in  his  public  life  of  inter- 
cession and  devotedness  for  others  ;  the  second  reveals 
to  us  his  private  life,  of  which  prayer  and  contempla- 
tion are  the  main  occupation.     We  shall  not  be  sur- 
prised at  the  length  of  these  Verses,  the  singing  of 
which  would  far  exceed  the  time  for  offering  the  Host 
and  Chalice,  such  as  is  now  the  custom, — if  we  re- 
member how  it  was  the  ancient  usage,  that  the  whole 
assembly  of  the  Faithful,  present  at  the  Holy  Sacri- 

1  Rup.  ubi  supra. 


MASS. 


421 


fice,  took  part  in  the  oblation  of  the  bread  and  wine 
needed  for  the  Liturgy.  So,  likewise,  the  Com- 
munion, which,  at  present,  consists  of  only  a  few  lines, 
was,  originally,  nothing  but  the  Antiphon  to  an 
entire  Psalm,  which,  in  the  ancient  Antiphonaries, 
was  appointed  for  each  day,  when  it  was  not  the  same 
as  the  In troit- Psalm  ;  the  Psalm  was  sung,  repeating 
the  Antiphon  after  each  Verse,  until  the  number  of 
the  communicants  was  completed. 

OFFERTORY. 


Moses  consecrated  an  altar 
unto  the  Lord,  offering  whole- 
burnt  offerings  thereon,  and 
slaying  victims:  he  made  an 
evening  sacrifice  for  a  sweet 
odour  unto  the  Lord  God,  in 
the  sight  of  the  children  of 
Israel. 

$".  I.  The  Lord  spake  unto 
Moses  saying:  Come  up  unto 
me,  upon  mount  Sina,  and  thou 
shalt  stand  on  the  top  thereof. 
Moses  rising  up,  went  up  the 
mountain,  where  the  Lord  had 
appointed  him:  and  the  Lord 
came  down  unto  him  in  a  cloud, 
and  stood  before  his  face. 
Which  Moses  seeing,  he  fell 
down  and  adored,  saying:  I 
beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  forgive 
the  sins  of  thy  people.  And 
the  Lord  said  unto  him:  I  will 
do  according  to  thy  word. 

Then  Moses  made  an  evening 
sacrifice. 

$.  II.  Moses  prayed  to  the 
Lord  and  said:  If  I  Ji/xve  found 
favour  in  thy  sight,  show  me 
thyself  openly,  that  I  may  see 
thee.  A  nd  the  Lord  spake  unto 
him,  saying:  For  man  shall  not 
see  me,  and  live;  but,  be  thou 
on  the  height  of  the  rock,  and 


Sanctificavit  Moyses  al- 
tare  Domino,  offerens  super 
illud  holocausta,  et  immo- 
lans  victimas:  fecit  sacri- 
ficium  vespertinum  in  odo- 
rem  suavitatis  Domino  Deo 
in  conspectu  filiorum  Is- 
rael. 

y.  I.  Locutus  est  Domi- 
nus  ad  Moysen  dicens:  As- 
cende  ad  me  in  mon  tern  Sina, 
et  stabis  super  caeumen  ejus. 
Surgens  Moyses,  ascendit  in 
montem,  ubi  constituit  ei 
Beus;  et  descendit  ad  eum 
Dominus  in  nube,  et  adstitit 
ante  faciem  ejus.  Videns 
Moyses,  procidens  adoravit, 
dicens:  Obsecro,  Domine, 
dimitte  peccata  populi  tui. 
Et  dixit  ad  eum  Dominus: 
Faciam  secundum  verbum 
tuum. 

Tunc  Moyses  fecit  sacri- 
ficium  vespertinum. 

"ft.  II.  Oravit  Moyses  Do- 
minum,  et  dixit:  Si  inveni 
gratiam  in  conspectu  tuo, 
ostende  mihi  teipsum  ma- 
nifeste,  ut  videam  te.  Ft 
locutus  est  ad  eum  Dominus 
dicens:  Non  enim  videbit 
me  homo,  et  vivere  potest : 


422 


EIGHTEENTH   SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


my  right  hand  shall  protect 
thee,  till  I  pass:  whilst  I  pass 
I  will  take  away  my  hand,  and 
then  shalt  thou  see  my  glory: 
but  my  face  shall  not  be  seen 
by  thee;  for  I  am  God,  showing 
wonderful  things  in  the  earth. 
Then  Moses  made. 


sed  esto  super  altitudinem 
lapidis,  et  p>rotegat  te  dexte- 
ra  mea  donee  pertranseam: 
dum  pertransiero,  auferam 
manum  meam,  et  tunc  vide- 
bis  gloriam  meam:  fades 
autem  mea  non  videbitur 
tibi  quia  ego  sum  Deus  os- 
tendens  mirabilia  in  terra. 
Tunc  Moyses  fecit. 

The  sublime  eloquence  of  the  Secret  is  beyond  all 
comment.  Let  us  get  thoroughly  imbued  with  the 
high  teaching,  here  so  admirably  summed  up  in  a  few 
short  words  :  let  us  come  to  understand  that  our  life 
and  conduct  should  have  a  something  divine  about 
them,  in  order  to  our  being  true  respondents  to  the 
mysteries,  which  are  revealed  to  our  understandings, 
and  incorporated  into  us,  by  the  venerable  "commer- 
cia  "  (it  is  our  Mother's  word,  and  we  presume  not  to 
alter  it,) — the  veneranda  commercia  of  this  Sacri- 
fice. 

SECRET. 


Deus,  qui  nos  per  hujus 
sacrificii  veneranda  com- 
mercia, unius  summce  divi- 
nitatis  parti cipes  efficis  : 
prsesta  quaesumus  ;  ut,  si- 
cut  tuam  cognoscimus  ve- 
ritatem,  sic  earn  dignis 
moribus  assequamur.  Per 
Dominum. 


0  God,  who,  by  the  venera- 
ble participations  of  this  sa- 
crifice, makest  us  partakers  of 
the  one  supreme  divine  na- 
ture :  grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  as  we  know  thy  truth, 
so  may  we  show  it  by  a  wor- 
thy conduct  of  life.  Through, 
etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

The  Communion-Anthem  is  addressed  to  the 
Priests,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  us  all ;  for,  if  the 
Priest  offers  the  Victim,  which  is  the  holiest  that  can 
be, — we  should  not  think  of  accompanying  him  into 
the  Court  of  our  God,  without  bringing  up,  that  it 
may  be  united  to  the  divine  Host,  that  other  victim, 


MASS. 


423 


which  is  our  own  selves.     It  is  God's  injunction: 
Thou  shalt  not  appear  empty  before  me ! 1 

COMMUNION. 

Bring  up  sacrifices,  and  Tollite  hostias,  et  intro- 
come  into  his  courts  :  adore  ite  in  atria  ejus  :  adorate 
ye  the  Lord  in  his  holy  court.      Dominum  in  aula  sancta 

ejus. 

Whilst  giving  thanks,  in  the  Postcommunion  for 
the  priceless  gift  of  the  sacred  mysteries,  let  us  be- 
seech our  God  to  perfect  within  us  the  grace  of 
always  receiving  it  worthily. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

Being  fed,  O  Lord,  with  the  Gratias    tibi  referimus. 

sacred    gift,    we    give    thee  Domine,  sacro  munere  ve 

thanks,    humbly    beseeching  getati,  tuam  misericordiam 

thy  mercy,  that  thou  wouldst  deprecantes  :  ut  dignos  nos 

make  us  worthy  of  its  recep-  ejus   participatione   perfi- 

tion.    Through,  etc.  cias.  Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON  OF  THE  MAGNIFICAT. 

The  paralytic  took  up  his  Tulit    ergo    paralyticus 

bed,  on  which  he  had  been  lectum  suum  in  quo  jace- 

laid,  magnifying  God  ;  and  all  bat,    magnificans    Deum  ; 

the  people,  as  soon  as  it  saw  et  omnis  plebs,  ut  vidit, 

his,  gave  praise  unto  God.  dedit  laudem  Deo. 

1  Exod.  xxiii.  15. 


424        EIGHTEENTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


OREMUS. 

Dirigat  corda  nostra, 
queesumus  Domine,  tuae 
miserationis  operatio :  quia 
tibi  sine  te  placere  non 
possumus.   Per  Dominum. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

May  the  working  of  thy 
mercy,  O  Lord,  direct  our 
hearts  :  for,  without  thee,  we 
cannot  please  thee.  Through, 
etc. 


mass.  425 


THE  NINETEENTH  SUNDAY 

AFTER  PENTECOST. 


-0- 


MASS. 

The  divine  Leader  of  God's  people  is  their  salva- 
tion and  that  in  all  their  distress.  Did  we  not  last 
Sunday,  see  him  prove  himself  as  such,  and  in  a  very 
telliug  way, — by  curing  both  body  aod  soul  of  the 
poor  Paralytic,  who  was  a  figure  of  the  whole  human 
race  ?  Let  us  hear  his  voice,  in  the  Introit,  with  love 
and  gratitude  ;  let  us  promise  him  the  fidelity  he 
asks  of  us;  his  Law,  if  we  will  but  observe  it,  will 
preserve  us  from  a  relapse. 

The  Anthem  which  follows  is  made  up  of  several 
passages  of  Holy  Writ,  without  being  exactly  that  of 
any  one  of  them.  The  Verse  is  taken  from  the  77th 
Psalm. 

introit. 

I  am  the  salvation  of  the  Salus  populi  ego  sum, 
people,  saith  the  Lord :  in  what  dicit  Dominus :  de  quacum- 
distress  soever  they  call  upon  que  tribulatione  ciamave- 
me,  I  will  hear  them:  and  will  rint  ad  me,  exaudiam  eos : 
be  their  Lord  for  ever.  et  ero  illorum  Dominus  in 

perpetuum. 

Ps.  Attend,  O  my  people,         Ps.   Attendite,     popule 

unto  my  law:  incline  your  ear      meus,  legem  meam:  incli- 

to  the  words  of  my  mouth,      nate  aurem  vestram  in  ver- 

Glory,  etc.    I  am  the  salvation,      ba  oris  mei.    Gloria  Patri, 

Salus. 

Free  both  in  mind  and  body,  by  the  omnipotent 
word  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  human  race  can  devote 
itself,  with  all  activity,  to  the  service  of  God.  Let 
us  obtain  from  his  divine  Majesty,  by  uniting  our 


426        NINETEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

prayer  with  that  of  the  Church  in  her  Collect,  that 
the  fatal  paralysis,  which  was  once  so  cruel  a  tyrant 
over  our  souls  and  faculties,  may  never  return. 


COLLECT. 


Omnipotens  et  misericors 
Deus,universanobis  adver- 
santia  propitiatus  exclude: 
ut  Hiente  et  corpore  pariter 
expediti,  quae  tua  sunt, 
liberis  mentibus  exequa- 
mur.    Per  Dominum. 


O  almighty  and  merciful 
God,  kindly  keep  away  from 
us  all  things  that  are  adverse 
to  us:  that  being  also  free  in 
mind  and  body,  we  may,  with 
unimpeded  minds,  attend  to 
the    things    that    are    thine. 


Through,  etc. 
The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolsebeati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Ephesios. 


Cap.  iv. 

Fratres,  Renovamini  spi- 
ritu  mentis  vestrae,  et  in- 
duite  novum  hominem,  qui 
secundum  Deum  creatus  est 
in  justitia,  et  sanctitate  ve- 
ritatis.  Propter  quod  depo- 
nentes  mendacium,  loqui- 
miniveritatemunusquisque 
cum  proximo  suo:  quoniam 
sumus  invicem  membra. 
Irascimini,  et  nolite  pecca- 
re:  sol  non  occidat  super 
iracundiam  vestram.  No- 
lite  locum  dare  diabolo: 
qui  furabatur,  jam  non  fu- 
retur:  magis  autem  labo- 
ret,operando  manibussuis, 
quod  bonum  est,  ut  habeat 
unde  tribuat  necessitatem 
patienti. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Ephesians. 

Ch.  iv. 

Brethren:  be  renewed  in  the 
spirit  of  your  mind;  and  put 
on  the  new  man,  who,  accord- 
ing to  God,  is  created  in  jus- 
tice, and  holiness  of  truth. 
Wherefore  putting  away  lying, 
speak  ye  the  truth  every  man 
with  his  neighbour:  for  we  are 
members  one  of  another.  Be 
angry  and  sin  not.  Let  not 
the  sun  go  down  upon  your 
anger.  Give  not  place  to  the 
devil.  He  that  stole,  let  him 
now  steal  no  more:  but  rather 
let  him  labour  working  with 
his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  he  may  have  some- 
thing to  give  to  him  that 
sutfereth  need. 


The  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  which  was  inter- 
rupted last  Sunday,  in  the  manner  we  then  described, 


mass.  427 

is  continued  to-day,  by  the  Church.  The  Apostle 
has  already  laid  down  the  dogmatical  principles  of 
true  holiness;  he  now  deduces  the  moral  consequences 
of  those  principles. 

Let  us  call  to  mind,  how  the  holiness,  which  is  in 
God,  is  his  very  Truth, — Truth,  living  and  harmonious 
which  is  no  other,  than  the  admirable  concert  of  the 
Three  divine  Persons,  united  in  love.  We  have 
seen,  that  holiness,  as  far  as  it  exists  in  us  men,  is, 
also,  Union,  by  infinite  love,  with  the  eternal  and 
living  Truth.  The  Word  took  a  Body  unto  himself, 
in  order  to  manifest,  in  the  Flesh  this  sanctifying 
and  perfect  Truth}  of  which  he  is  the  substantial 
expression  f  his  Humanity,  sanctified  directly  by  the 
plenitude  of  the  divine  life  and  truth,  which  dwell 
within  him,3  became  the  model,  as  well  as  the  means, 
the  way,  of  all  holiness  to  every  creature.4  It  was 
not  sin  alone,  but  it  was,  moreover,  the  finite  nature 
of  man,  that  kept  him  at  a  distance  from  the  divine 
life  ;5  but  he  finds,  in  Christ  Jesus,  just  as  they  are 
in  God,  the  two  elements  of  that  life  :  truth,  and  love. 
In  Jesus,  as  the  complement  of  his  Incarnation,  Wis- 
dom aspires  at  uniting  with  herself  all  the  members, 
also,  of  that  human  race,  of  which  He  is  the  Head,6 
and  the  First-Born  ;7  by  Him,  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose 
sacred  fount,  He  is,8  pours  himself  out  upon  man, 
whereby  to  adapt  him  to  his  sublime  vocation,  and 
consummate,  in  infinite  love,  (which  is  himself,)  that 
union  of  every  creature  with  the  divine  Word.  Thus 
it  is,  that  we  verily  partake  of  that  life  of  God,  whose 
existence  and  holiness  are  the  knowledge  and  love 
of  his  own  Word ;  thus  it  is,  that  we  are  sanctified 
in  Truth?  by  the  participation  of  that  very  holiness, 
wherewith  God  is  holy  by  nature. 

1  St.  John,  i.  14.  *  St.  John,  xiv.  6.         7  Coloss.  i.  15-20. 

2  Heb.  i.  3.  5  Eph.  iv.  18.  8  CJ.  St.  John,  iv.  14  ; 
8  Coloss.  ii.  3,  9,  10.    6  Eph.  i.  10.  vii.  37,  39. 

9  Ibid.  xvii.  17. 


428       NINETEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

But,  although  the  Sou  of  Man,  being  God,  partici- 
pates for  us  his  brethren,  in  the  life  of  union  in  the 
Truth,  which  constitutes  the  holiness  of  the  blessed 
Trinity, — he  communicates  that  Life,  that  Truth,  that 
deifying  Union,  to  none  save  but  to  those,  who  are 
truly  become  his  members,  and  who,  in  Him,  re- 
produce between  one  another,  by  the  operation  of  the 
Spirit  of  Truth*  and  love,  that  unity,  of  which  that 
sanctifying  Spirit  is  the  almighty  bond  in  the  God- 
head. May  they  all  be  one,  as  thou,  Father,  in  me, 
and  I  in  thee,  said  this  Jesus  of  ours,  to  his  Eternal 
Father  :  that  they,  also,  may  be  one  in  us.  I  have 
given  unto,  them  the  glory,  that  is  to  say,  the  holiness 
which  thou  hast  given  unto  me,  that  they  may  be 
one  as  we,  also,  are  one  ;  I  in  them,  and  Thou  in 
me,  that  they  may  be  consummated,  (that  is,  be  made 
perfect,)  in  unity.2  Here  we  have,  and  formulised 
by  our  Lord  himself,  the  simple,  but  fruitful  axiom, 
— the  foundation, — of  christian  dogma  and  morals. 
By  that  sublime  prayer,  he  explained  what  he  had 
previously  been  saying:  i*  sanctify  myself  for  them, 
— that  they,  also,  may  be  sanctified  in  Truth.3 

Let  us  now  understand  the  moral  doctrine  given 

us  by  St.  Paul  in  our  to  day's  Epistle,  and  what  it 

is  he  means  by  that  justice,  and   that  holiness  of 

truth,  which  is  that  of  Christ,4  of  the  new  man,  whom 

every  one  must  put  on,  who  aspires  to  the  possession 

of  the  riches  spoken  of  in  the  passages  already  read 

to  us  from  this  magnificent  Epistle.     Let  us  re-read 

the  Epistle  for  the  17th  Sunday,  and  we  shall  find, 

that  all  the  rules  of  christian  ascetecism,  as  well  as  of 

the  mystic  life,  are  to  St.  Paul's  mind,  summed  up 

in  those  words  :  Be  careful  to  keep  unity  !5     It  is  the 

principle  he   lays  down  for  all,  both  beginners,  and 

the  perfect.     It  is  the  crowning   of  the  sublimest 

vocations  in  the  order  of  grace,  as  well  as  the  founda- 

1  CJ.  St.  John,  xv.  26.  4  Rom.  xiii.  14. 

*  Ibid.  xvii.  21-23.  6  Eph.  iv.  3. 

3  Ibid.  xvii.  19. 


mass.  429 

tion  and  reason  of  all  God's  commandments  ;  so  truly 
so,  indeed,  that,  if  we  be  commanded  to  abstain  from 
lying,  and  speak  the  truth  to  them  that  live  with  us, 
the  motive  for  it  all  is,  because  we  are  members  one 
of  another. 

There  is  a  holy  anger,  of  which  the  Psalmist  speaks,1 
and  which  is  the  outcome,  on  certain  occasions,  of 
zeal  for  the  divine  law  and  charity  ;  but  the  move- 
ment of  irritation,  excited  in  the  soul,  must,  even  then, 
be  speedily  calmed  down  ;  to  foster  it,  would  be  a 
giving  place  to  the  devil ;  that  is,  it  would  be  the 
giving  him  an  opportunity  for  weakening,  or  even 
destroying,  within  us,  by  bitterness  and  hatred,  the 
structure  of  holy  unity? 

Before  our  conversion,  our  neighbour,  as  well  as 
God,  was  grieved  by  our  sins  ;  we  cared  little  or  no- 
thing for  injustice,  provided  it  was  not  noticed ; 
egotism  was  our  law,  and  it  was  proof  enough  of  the 
reign  of  Satan  over  our  souls.  Now,  that  the  spirit 
of  holiness  has  expelled  the  unworthy  usurper, — the 
strongest  evidence  of  His  being  our  rightful  master, 
is, — that  not  only  the  rights  of  others  are  sacred  in 
our  estimation,  but  that  our  toil  and  our  labours  are 
all  full  of  the  idea,  of  how  to  make  them  serviceable 
to  our  neighbour.  In  a  word,  as  the  Apostle  con- 
tinues a  little  further  on,  we  walk  in  love,  because, 
as  most  clear  children,  we  are  followers  of  God.3 

It  is  by  this  means  alone,  says  St.  Basil,  that  the 
Church,  manifests  to  this  earth  of  ours  the  many  and 
great  benefits  bestowed  on  the  world  by  the  Incar- 
nation. The  Christian  family,  which,  heretofore,  was 
split  up  into  a  thousand  separate  fragments,  is  now 
made  one,  one  in  itself,  and  one  in  God  ;  it  is  the 
repetition  of  what  our  Lord  did,  by  assuming  Flesh 
and  making  it  one  with  himself.4 

1  Ps.  iv.  5.  a  Eph.  v.  1,  2. 

2  S.  Chrys.  in  ep.  ad  Eph.  horn.  xiv.  4  S.  Basil,  Const,  mon.  xviii. 


430        NINETEENTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


Our  Jesus  has  restored  to  our  hands  (which,  once, 
were  paralysed  for  every  supernatural  work.)  the  full 
freedom  of  their  movements ;  then,  let  us  raise  them 
up,  spiritually,  in  prayer,  giving  glory  to  God  by  this 
our  homage,  which  he  graciously  accepts  as  a  fragrant 
sacrifice.  The  Church,  in  the  Gradual,  gives  us  this 
teaching,  and  by  her  own  example  as  well. 


GRADUAL. 


Dirigatur  oratio  mea,  si- 
cut  incensum  in  conspectu 
tuo,  Domine. 

$".  Elevatio  manuum  mea- 
rum  sacrificium  vesperti- 
num. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$".  Confitemini  Domino, 
et  invocate  nomen  ejus: 
annuntiate 
opera  ejus.    Alleluia. 


inter    gentes 


Let  my  prayer  be  directed 
as  incense,  in  thy  sight,  O 
Lord. 

~ft.  May  the  lifting  up  of  my 
hands  be  as  an  evening  sacri- 
fice. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$\  Give  glory  to  the  Lord, 
and  call  upon  his  name:  pro- 
claim among  the  gentiles  his 
works.  Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthseum. 

Cap  xxii. 

In  illo  tempore:  Loque- 
batur  Jesus  Principibus  sa- 
cerdotum,  et  Pharisaeis  in 
parabolis,  dicens  :  Simile 
factum  est  regnum  ccelorum 
homini  regi,  qui  fecit  nup- 
tias  filio  suo.  Et  misit  ser- 
vos suos  vocare  invitatos 
ad  nuptias,  et  nolebant  ve- 
nire. Iterum  misit  alios  ser- 
vos, dicens:  Dicite  invita- 
tis:  Ecce  prandium  meum 
paravi;  tauri  mei,  et  altilia 
occisa  sunt,  et  omnia  parata ; 
venite  ad  nuptias.  Illi  au- 
tem  neglexerunt,  et  abier- 
unt,  alius  in  villam  suam, 
alius  vero  ad  negotiationem 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel  ac- 
cording to  Matthew. 

Ch.  xxii. 

At  that  time:  Jesus  spoke  to 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees  in  a 
parable,  saying:  The  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  likened  to  a  king, 
who  made  a  marriage  for  his 
son.  And  he  sent  his  servants, 
to  call  them  that  were  invited 
to  the  marriage :  and  they 
would  not  come.  Again  he 
sent  other  servants,  saying: 
Tell  them  that  were  invited: 
Behold,  I  have  prepared  my 
dinner:  my  beeves  and  fatlings 
are  killed,  and  all  things  are 
ready :  come  ye  to  the  marriage. 
But  they  neglected,  and  went 
their  ways,  one  to  his  farm, 
and  another  to  his  merchan- 


MASS. 


431 


dise.  And  the  rest  laid  hands 
on  his  servants,  and  having 
treated  them  contumeliously, 
put  them  to  death.  Bat  when 
the  king  had  heard  of  it,  he 
was  angry,  and  sending  his 
armies,  he  destroyed  those 
murderers,  and  burnt  their 
city.  Then  he  saith  to  his  ser- 
vants :  The  marriage  indeed  is 
ready:  but  they  that  were  in- 
vited, were  not  worthy.  Go 
ye  therefore  into  the  high- 
ways; and  as  many  as  ye  shall 
find,  call  to  the  marriage.  And 
his  servants  going  forth  into 
the  ways,  gathered  together 
all  they  found,  both  bad  and 
good:  and  the  marriage  was 
filled  with  guests.  And  the 
king  went  in  to  see  the  guests: 
and  he  saw  there  a  man  who 
had  not  on  a  wedding  garment. 
And  he  saith  to  him:  Friend, 
how  earnest  thou  in  hither 
not  having  on  a  wedding  gar- 
ment? But  he  was  silent. 
Then  the  king  said  to  the 
waiters:  Bind  his  hands  and 
his  feet,  and  cast  him  into  the 
exterior  darkness  ;  there  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
teeth.  For  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen. 


suam:  reliqui  vero  tenu- 
erunt  servos  ejus,  et  contu- 
meliis  affectos  occiderunt. 
Rex  autem  cum  audisset, 
iratus  est:  et  missis  exer- 
citibus  suis,  perdidit  horni- 
cidas  illos,  et  civitatem 
illorum  succendit.  Tunc 
aitservis  suis:  Nuptiae  qui- 
dem  paratas  sunt,  sed  qui 
invitati  erant,  non  fuerunt 
digni,  Ite  ergo  ad  exitus 
viarum,  et  quoscumque 
inveneritis,  vocate  ad  nup- 
tias.  Et  egressi  servi  ej  us 
in  vias,  congregaverunt 
omnes,  quos  invenerunt, 
malos  et  bonos:  etimpletae 
sunt  nuptise  discumben- 
tium.  Intra vit  autem  rex 
ut  videret  discumbentes,  et 
vidit  ibi  hominem  non  ves- 
titum  veste  nuptiali.  Et 
ait  illi:  Amice,  quomodo 
hue  intrasti,  non  habens 
vestem  nuptialem  1  At  ille 
obmutuit.  Tunc  dixit  rex 
ministris:  Ligatis  manibus 
etpedibus  ejus,mittiteeum 
in  tenebras  exteriores:  ibi 
erit  fletus  et  stridor  den- 
tium.  Multi  enim  sunt 
vocati,  pauci  vero  electi. 


This  Gospel  has  given  to  the  present  Sunday  the 
name  of  the  Sunday  of  the  invited  to  the  marriage. 
And  yet,  from  the  very  opening  of  the  dominical 
series,  which  began  with  the  Descent  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Church  gave  us  the  Gospel  teaching, 
which  she  offers  to  us,  now  a  second  time,  for  our 
consideration.  On  the  second  Sunday  after  Pente- 
cost, she  related  to  us,  from  St.  Luke,1  the  parable  of 
the  great  supper,  to  which  many  were  invited,  and 
1  St.  Luke,  xiv.  16-24. 


432         NINETEENTH   SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

which  now  St.  Matthew,  entering  into  fuller  details 
calls  a  marriage-feast. 

Set  thus  before  us,  both  at  the  beginning  and  at  the 
close  of  the  liturgical  season,  over  which,  the  Holy 
Spirit  reigns  supreme, — this  parable  is,  as  it  were,  the 
interpreter  of  the  whole  portion  of  the  Year,  which 
it  thus  hems  in:  it  is  an  additional  revelation  of  the 
true  aim  of  the  Church.  But,  how  much  has  the 
light  not  increased,  since  the  first  time  we  had  these 
mystery-telling  allegories !  The  certain  man  (homo 
quidam,)  who  made  a  great  supper,  and  invited 
many,  is  become  the  King,  who  makes  a  marriage" 
for  his  Son,  and,  in  this  marriage,  gives  us  an  image 
of  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.  The  world's  history,  too, 
has  been  developing,  as  we  gather  from  the  terms 
respectively  used  by  the  two  Evangelists.  Those  who 
were  the  first  invited,  and  contented  themselves  with 
declining  the  kindness  of  the  Master  of  the  House, 
have  grown  in  their  impious  ingratitude ;  laying 
hands  on  the  messengers  sent  them  by  the  loving 
kindness1  of  the  King,  they  treat  them  with  con- 
tumely, and  put  them  to  death !  We  have  seen  the 
merited  punishment  inflicted  on  these  deicides,  by 
this  Man,  who  was  God  himself,  the  father  of  Israel, 
now  become  King  of  the  Gentiles :  we  have  seen  how 
he  sent  his  armies  to  destroy  them,  and  burn  their 
City?  And  now  at  last,  in  spite  of  the  refusal  of 
the  Invited  of  Juda,  in  spite  of  the  treacherous 
opposition  put  by  them  against  the  celebration  of 
the  Nuptials  of  the  Son  of  God,  all  things  are  ready 
for  the  Marriage,  and  the  banquet-hall  is  filled  with 
guests. 

Our  heavenly  King  has  confided,  to  the  ministers 
of  his  love,  the  work  of  calling,  and  from  every 
people,  the  new  Guests:  but,  now  that  his  ambassa- 
dors, according  to  his  command,  have  traversed  the 

1  See  our  10th  Volume,  p.  358, 

2  See  9th  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 


mass.  433 

whole  earth,1  bringing  together  all  nations  for  this 
day  of  the  joy  of  his  heart,2 — he  himself  is  coming  in 
person,  to  see  that  nothing  is  wanting  to  the  due 
preparation  for  the  Feast,  and  give  the  signal  for  the 
eternal  banquet  of  the  divine  Nuptials.  Now,  for 
such  a  feast,  and  in  such  a  place,  if  there  be  any 
deficiency,  it  can  only  be  on  the  part  of  the  Guests. 
Let  them,  then,  be  careful  not  to  draw  down  upon 
themselves,  in  this  general  and  last  examination,  the 
displeasure  of  the  great  King,  who  has  called  them 
to  an  alliance  with  himself.  Though  he  have  con- 
descended to  call  them,  notwithstanding  their  ex- 
treme poverty,  from  the  public  streets  and  high-ways, 
— he  has  given  them  abundant  time  to  lay  aside 
their  tatters  ;  and  knowing,  that  they  could  not  get 
ready  of  themselves,  he  has  placed  at  their  disposal, 
for  the  marriage-feast,  the  richest  garments  of  his 
grace  and  virtues.  Wo,  then  to  him,  who  on  the 
last  day,  shall  be  found  not  having  the  wedding-gar- 
ment of  charity !  such  a  want  would  admit  of  no 
excuse  ;  and  the  King  would  justly  punish  it,  by 
excluding  the  guilty  man  from  the  feast,  as  one  that 
had  insulted  his  Son. 

Every  thing  we  have  had  on  the  preceding  Sun- 
days, has  shown  us  how  solicitous  the  Church  ever 
is  in  preparing  mankind  for  that  wonderful  Marriage 
whose  realisation  is  the  one  object  aimed  at  by  the 
divine  Word,  in  his  coming  upon  our  earth.  During 
her  long  exile,  the  Bride  of  the  Son  of  God  has  been 
a  living  model  to  her  children  ;  and,  by  her  instruc- 
tions, she  has  been  unceasingly  preparing  them  for 
the  understanding  of  the  great  mystery  of  divine 
Union.  Three  weeks  ago,3  treating  more  directly, 
than  she  had  hitherto  done,  on  the  great  subject  of 
her  ambition  as  Mother  and  Bride,  she  reminded  them 
of  the  great  call.     Eight  days  later  on,4  she  gave 

1  Ps.  xviii.  5.  5  The  16th.  Sund.  aft.  Pent. 

2  Cantic.  iii.  11.  4  The  17th  Sunday. 
vol.  xi.  2  F 


434        NINETEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER    PENTECOST. 

them  another  lesson  and  it  was, — that  the  Bride- 
groom of  the  nuptials,  to  which  they  were  invited, 
revealed  himself  to  them  in  that  Man-God,  who  was 
the  object  of  the  two-fold  precept  of  love,  which  em- 
bodies the  whole  Law.  To-day,  we  have  the  teaching 
in  all  its  perfection.  It  is  condensed  in  the  Night- 
Office,  where  we  have  St.  Gregory  explaining  her 
whole  teaching.  The  great  Doctor  and  the  great 
Pope  thus,  in  the  name  of  the  Church,  explains  our 
Gospel : 

u  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  assembly  of  the 
"just ;  for,  the  Lord  says  by  a  Prophet :  Heaven  is  my 
"  throne  ;'  and  Solomon  says:  The  soul  of  the  just  man 
"  is  the  throne  of  ivisdom,2  and  Paul  calls  Christ  the 
"  Wisdom  of  God?  If,  therefore,  heaven  be  the 
"  throne  of  God,  we  must  evidently  conclude,  that, 
11  as  Wisdom  is  God,  and  the  soul  of  the  just  man  is 
"  the  throne  of  Wisdom, — this  soul  is  a  heaven.  .  .  . 
"  The  kingdom  of  heaven,  then,  is  the  assembly  of 
"the  just.  .  .  If  this  Kingdom  is  said  to  be  like  to  a 
"  King,  who  made  a  marriage  for  his  Son,  your 
"  charity  at  once  understands  who  is  this  King,  who 
"  is  the  father  of  a  son,  King  like  himself.  It  is  he. 
*  of  whom  the  Psalmist  says  :  Give  to  the  King  thy 
"judgment,  0  God,  and,  to  the  King's  Son,  thy 
"justice  /*  God  the  Father  made  the  marriage  of 
"  God  his  Son,  when  he  wished,  that  he  who  had  been 
"God  before  all  ages,  should  become  Man  towards 
"  the  end  of  ages.  But,  we  must  not,  on  that  account 
"  suppose,  that  there  are  two  persons  in  Jesus  Christ, 
li  our  God  and  our  Saviour.  .  .  It  is  for  that  reason, 
"  that  it  is,  perhaps,  clearer  and  safer  to  say,  that  the 
"  King  made  a  onarriage  for  his  Son,  in  that,  by  the 
"mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  he  united  the  Church 
"  to  him.  The  womb  of  the  Virgin-Mother  was  the 
"  nuptial-chamber  of  that  Bridegroom,  of  whom  the 

Is.  lxvi.  1.  3  1  Cor.  i.  24. 

3  Wisd.  vii.  27.  *  Ps.  lxii.  2. 


mass.  435 

"  Psalmist  says  i1  He  hath  set  his  tabernacle  in  the 
"  sun :  and  he,  as  a  Bridegroom,  cometh  out  of  his 
"  bride-  chamber  !'** 

Notwithstanding  her  dignity  of  beloved  Bride  of 
the  Son  of  God,  the  Church  is,  none  the  less,  subject 
to  tribulations  here  below.  The  enemies  of  the 
Spouse,  having  no  longer  any  direct  power  to  injure 
our  Lord,  they  turn  all  their  rage  against  her.  In 
these  trials,  endured,  as  they  are,  by  the  Church  with 
love,  Jesus  sees  a  fresh  trait  of  that  resemblance 
which  he  wishes  her  to  have  to  himself;  he,  therefore, 
leaves  her  to  suffer  in  this  world,  contenting  himself 
with  ever  upholding  and  saving  her,  as  the  Offertory 
says,  in  the  midst  of  the  evils  which  go  on  thicken- 
ing around  her. 

OFFERTORY. 

If  I  should  walk  in  the  Si  ambulavero  in  medio 
midst  of  tribulation,  thou,  O  tribulationis,  vivificabis 
Lord,  wilt  quicken  me:  and  me,  Domine:  et  super  iram 
thou  hast  stretched  forth  thy  inimicorum  meorum  ex- 
hand,  against  the  wrath  of  tendes  manum  tuam,  et 
mine  enemies,  and  thy  right  salvum  me  faciet  dextera 
hand  hath  saved  me.  tua. 

The  august  Sacrifice  which  is  about  to  be  offered, 
always  obtains  its  effect,  as  far  as  the  glory  of  the 
divine  Majesty  is  concerned  ;  but  its  virtue  is  applied 
to  man  in  a  greater  or  lesser  degree,  according  to  the 
dispositions  of  the  creature,  and  the  divine  mercy 
Let  us  in  the  Secret,  beseech  our  heavenly  Father, 
that  he  vouchsafe  to  give  us  to  experience  abundantly 
the  effects  of  the  divine  Mysteries,  which  are  so  soon 
to  be  produced  on  our  Altar. 

1  Pa.  xviii.  6.  «  S.  Greg.  Horn,  xxxviii.  in  Er. 


436        NINETEENTH    SUNDAY   AFTEll    PENTECOST. 


SECRET. 


i  Haec  munera,  quaesumus 
Domine,  quae  oculis  tuae 
majestatis  offerimus,  salu- 
taria  nobis  esse  concede. 
Per  Dominum. 


Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  that  the  offerings  we 
bring  before  thy  divine  Ma- 
jesty, may  avail  unto  our 
salvation.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

The  Man- God,  by  his  divine  contact  in  the  sacred 
banquet,  has  spiritually  given  vigour  to  our  members; 
let  us  recal  to  mind,  that  we  must,  henceforward, 
consecrate  them  to  his  service  and  that  our  feet,  now 
made  sure,  must  run  in  the  way  of  the  divine  com- 
mandments. 

COMMUNION. 


Tu  mandasti  mandata 
tua  custodiri  nimis:  utinam 
dirigantur  vise  meae,  ad 
custodiendas  justificati- 
ones  tuas  ! 


Thou  hast  commanded  thy 
commandments  to  be  kept 
most  diligently:  oh!  that  my 
ways  may  be  directed  to  keep 
thy  justifications! 


The  Postcommunion,  again,  seems  to  be  an  allusion 
to  the  Gospel  of  the  Paralytic,  which  used  formerly 
to  be  read  on  this  Sunday.  In  it,  we  implore  the 
assistance  of  the  heavenly  Physician,  who  sets  man 
free  from  the  palsy,  which  held  him  a  prisoner  ;  he, 
also,  gives  him  the  strength  needed  for^fulnlling  the 
law  of  God  bravely  and  perseveringly. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 


Tua  nos,  Domine,  medi- 
cinalis  operatio  et  a  nostris 
perversitatibus  clementer 
expediat,  et  tuis  semper 
faciat  inhaerere  mandatis. 
Per  Dominum. 


May  the  healing  efficacy  of 
these  thy  mysteries,  O  Lord, 
mercifully  free  us  from  our 
perverseness,  and  make  us 
always  obedient  to  thy  com- 
mandments. Through,  etc. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 


437 


VESPERS. 

The   Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPRON   OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Now,  the  King  went  in  to 
see  the  guests:  and  he  saw 
there  a  man  who  had  not  on 
a  wedding  garment,  and  he 
saith  unto  him:  Friend,  how 
earnest  thou  in  hither  not  hav- 
ing on  a  wedding  garment  1 

LET  US  PRAY. 

O  almighty  and  merciful 
God,  kindly  keep  away  from 
us  all  things  that  are  adverse 
to  us:  that  being  also  free  in 
mind  and  body,  we  may,  with 
unimpeded  minds,  attend  to 
the  things  that  are  thine. 
Through,  etc. 


Intravit  autem  rex  ut  vi 
deret  discumbentes:  et  vid- 
it  ibi  hominem  non  vesti- 
tum  veste  nuptiali,  et  ait 
illi:  Amice,  quomodo  hue 
intrasti  non  habens  vestem 
nuptialem  ? 

OREMUS. 

Omnipotens  et  misericors 
Deus,  uni versa  nobis  adver- 
santia  propitiatus  exclude: 
ut  mente  et  corpore  pariter 
expediti,  quae  tua  sunt,  li- 
beris  mentibus  exequamur. 
Per  Dominum. 


438        TWENTIENTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE  TWENTIETH  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST.  v 
0 

MASS. 

The  Gospel  of  last  Sunday  spoke  to  us  of  the 
nuptials  of  the  Son  of  God  with  the  human  race. 
The  realisation  of  those  sacred  nuptials  is  the  object 
which  God  had  in  view,  by  the  creation  of  the  visible 
world  ;  it  is  the  only  one  he  intends  in  his  govern- 
ment of  society.  This  being  the  case,  we  cannot  be 
surprised,  that  the  parable  of  the  gospel,  whilst  reveal- 
ing to  us  this  divine  plan,  has  also  brought  before  us 
the  great  fact  of  the  rejection  of  the  Jews,  and  the 
vocation  of  the  Gentiles,  which  is  not  only  the  most 
important  fact  of  the  world's  history,  but  is,  also,  the 
one  which  is  the  most  intimately  connected  with  the 
consummation  of  the  mystery  of  the  divine  Union. 

And  yet,  as  we  have  already  said,1  the  exclusion  of 
Juda  is,  one  day,  to  cease.  His  obstinate  refusal  of 
the  grace,  has  been  the  occasion  of  us  Gentiles  having 
it  brought  to  us  by  the  messengers  of  God's  loving 
mercy.  But,  now  that  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles2  has 
heard  and  followed  the  heavenly  invitation,  the  time 
is  advancing  when  the  accession  of  Israel  will  com- 
plete the  Church  in  her  members,  and  give  the  Bride 
the  signal  of  the  final  call,  which  will  put  an  end  to 
the  long  labour  of  ages,3  by  making  the  Bridegroom 
appear.4  The  holy  jealousy,  which  the  Apostle  was 
so  desirous  to  rouse,  in  the  people  of  his  race,  by 

I  The  13th  Sunday  after  PeLtecost.        3  Rom.  viii.  22. 
*  Rom.  xi.  25,  26.  *  Apoc.  xxii.  17. 


mass.  439 

turning  towards  the  Gentiles,1  will  make  itself,  at  last, 
be  felt  by  the  descendants  of  Jacob.  What  joy  will 
there  not  be  in  heaven,  when  they,  repentant  and 
humble,  shall  unite,  before  God,  in  the  song  of  glad- 
ness sung  by  the  Gentiles,  in  celebration  of  the 
entrance  of  his  countless  Jewish  people  into  the  house 
of  the  divine  banquet !  That  union  of  the  two  people 
will  truly  be  a  prelude  to  the  great  day  mentioned  by 
St.  Paul,  when,  speaking  in  his  patriotic  enthusiasm 
of  the  Jews,  he  said :  If  their  offence  (if  their  fall) 
hath  been  the  riches  of  the  ivorld,  and  their  diminution 
be  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles, — how  much  more  the 
fulness  of  them!2 

Now,  the  Mass  of  this  twentieth  Sunday  after 
Pentecost  gives  us  a  foretaste  of  that  happy  day, 
when  the  gratitude  of  the  new  people  is  not  to  be  the 
only  one  to  sing  hymns  of  praise  for  the  divine  favours 
bestowed  on  our  earth.  The  ancient  Liturgists  tell 
us,  that  our  Mass  consists,  partly  of  the  words  of  the 
Prophets,  giving  to  Jacob  an  expression  of  his  repent- 
ance, whereby  he  is  to  merit  a  return  of  God's 
favours,  and,  partly,  of  inspired  formulas,  wherein 
the  Gentiles,  who  are  already  within  the  hall  of  the 
marriage- feast,  are  singing  their  canticles  of  love.3 
The  Gentile- Choir  takes  the  Gradual  and  Com- 
munion-Anthem ;  the  Choir  of  the  Jews,  the  Introit 
and  Offertory. 

The  Introit  is  from  the  book  of  Daniel.4  Exiled  to 
Babylon  with  his  people,  the  Prophet, — in  that 
captivity  whose  years  of  bitterness  were  a  figure  of 
the  still  longer  and  intenser  sufferings  of  the  present 
dispersion, — laments,  with  Juda,  in  that  strange  land, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  instructs  his  people  how  they 
may  be  re- admitted  into  God's  favour.  It  is  a  secret 
which  Israel  had  lost  ever  since  his  commission  of  the 

1  Rom.  xi.  13,  14.  2  Ibid.  12.         ?  Berno  Aug.  v;  Rup.  de 

div.  Off.  xii.  20  ;  Durand.  Ration  vi.  137.         i  Dan.  iii. 


440  TWENTIETH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

crime  on  Calvary;  though,  in  the  previous  ages  of 
his  history,  he  knew  the  happy  secret,  and  had  con- 
tinually experienced  its  efficacy.  What  it  was,  it 
still  is,  and  ever  will  be :  it  consists  in  the  humble 
avowal  of  the  sinner's  falls,  in  the  suppliant  regret  of 
the  culprit,  and  in  the  sure  confidence  that  God's 
mercy  is  infinitely  above  the  sins  of  men,  how 
grievous  soever  those  may  have  been. 

INTROIT. 

Omnia,  qua?  fecisti  nobis,  All  things  whatsoever  thou 

Donrine,  in  verojudicio  fe-  hast  done  unto  us,  O   Lord, 

cisti:  quia  peccavimus  tibi,  thou    hast    done  by    a   just 

et  mandatis  tuis  non  obe-  judgment:  for  we  have  sinned, 

divimus:  sed,  da  gloriam  and  disobeyed  thy  command- 

nomini  tuo:  et  fac  nobis-  ments:  but,  glorify  thy  name: 

cum  secundum  multitudi-  and  deal  with  us  according  to 

nem  misericordiae  tuae.  thy  great  mercy. 

Ps.  Beati  immaculati  in  Ps.  Blessed  are  the  undefiled 

via:  quia  ambulant  in  lege  in  the  way,  who  walk  in  the 

Domini.      Gloria      Patri.  law  of  the  Lord.    Glory,  etc. 

Omnia.  All  things. 

The  divine  forgiveness,  which  restores  the  soul  to 
purity  and  peace,  is  the  indispensable  preparation  for 
the  sacred  marriage-feast ;  for  the  wedding-garment 
of  its  guests  must,  under  pain  of  exclusion,  be  with- 
out a  stain ;  their  heart,  too,  must  be  without 
bitterness,  lest  it  should  cause  the  Bridegroom  to  be 
offended.  Let  us  implore  this  precious  pardon.  Our 
Lord,  is  all  the  more  ready  to  grant  it  us,  when  we 
ask  it  through  his  beloved  Bride,  the  Church,  our 
beloved  Mother.  Let  us  unite  our  voices  with  hers, 
and  say  her  Collect. 

COLLECT. 

Largire,  qusesumus  Do-  Being  appeased,  O  Lord, 
mine,  fidelibus  tuis  indul-  bestow  pardon  and  peace  upon 
gentiam  placatus,etpacem:      thy  Faithful ;  that  they  being 


MASS. 


441 


also  cleansed  from  all  their 
offences  (against  thee),  may 
serve  thee  with  a  secure  mind. 
Through,  etc. 


utpariterab  omnibus  raun- 
dentur  offensis,  et  secura 
tibi  mente  deserviant.  Per 
Dominum. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  Saint 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Ephesians. 

Ch.  v. 

Brethren  :  See,  therefore, 
how  ye  walk  circumspectly, 
not  as  unwise,  but  as  wise: 
redeeming  the  time,  because 
the  days  are  evil.  Wherefore, 
become  not  unwise,  but  under- 
standing what  is  the  will  of 
God.  And  be  not  drunk  with 
wine,  wherein  is  luxury,  but 
be  ye  filled  with  the  holy 
Spirit,  speaking  to  yourselves 
in  psalms  and  hymns,  and 
spiritual  canticles,  singing  and 
making  melody  in  your  hearts 
to  the  Lord:  giving  thanks 
always  for  all  things  in  the 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
to  God  and  the  Father. 
Being  subject  one  to  another 
in  the  fear  of  Christ. 


Lectio  Epistolas  beati 
Pauli  Apostoli  ad  Ephesios. 

Cap.  v. 

Fratres,  Videte  quomodo 
caute  ambuletis:  non  quasi 
insipientes,  sed  ut  sapien- 
tes :  redimentes  tempus, 
quoniam  dies  mali  sunt. 
Propterea  nolite  fieri  im- 
prudentis,  sed  intelligentes 
quae  sit  voluntas  Dei.  Et 
nolite  inebriari  vino,  in  quo 
est  luxuria,  sed  implemini 
Spiritu  sancto,  loquentes 
vobismetipsisin  psalmis,et 
hymn  is,  et  canticis  spiritu- 
alibus,  cantantes,  et  psallen- 
tes  in  cordibus  vestris  Do- 
mino, gratias  agentes  sem- 
per pro  omnibus,  in  nomine 
Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi 
Deo  et  Patri.  Subjecti  in- 
vicem  in  timore  Christi. 


As  the  nuptials  of  the  Son  of  God  approach  their 
final  completion,  there  will  be,  also,  on  the  side  of 
hell,  a  redoubling  of  rage  against  the  Bride,  with  a 
determination  to  destroy  her.  The  dragon  of  the 
Apocalypse,1  the  old  serpent  who  seduced  Eve,  will 
vomit  his  vile  foam,  as  a  river,  from  his  mouth,2 — 


1  Apoc.  xii.  9. 


*  Ibid.  15. 


442  TWENTIETH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

that  is,  he  will  urge  on  all  the  passions  of  man,  that 
they  may  league  together  for  her  ruin.  But,  do  what 
he  will,  he  can  never  weaken  the  bond  of  the  eternal 
alliance;  and,' having  no  power  against  the  Church 
herself,  he  will  turn  his  fury  against  the  last  children 
of  the  new  Eve,  who  will  have  the  perilous  honour 
of  those  final  battles,  which  are  described  by  the 
Prophet  of  Patmos.1 

It  is  then,  more  than  at  all  previous  times,  that  the 
Faithful  will  have  to  remember  the  injunction  given 
to  us  by  the  Apostle,  in  to-day's  Epistle ;  that  is, 
they  will  have  to  comport  themselves  with  that  cir- 
cumspection, which  he  enjoins,  taking  every  possible 
care  to  keep  their  understanding,  no  less  than  their 
heart,  pure,  in  those  evil  days.  Supernatural  light 
will,  in  those  days,  not  only  have  to  stand  the  attacks 
of  the  children  of  darkness,  who  will  put  forward 
their  false  doctrines ;  it  will,  moreover,  be  minimised 
and  falsified  by  the  very  children  of  the  light  yield- 
ing on  the  question  of  principles;  it  will  be  endan- 
gered by  the  hesitations,  and  trimmings,  and  human 
prudence,  of  those  who  are  called  far-seeing  men. 
Many  will  practically  ignore  the  master-truth,  that 
the  Church  never  can  be  overwhelmed  by  any  created 
power.  If  they  do  remember  that  our  Lord  has  pro- 
mised, himself  to  uphold  his  Church  even  to  the  end 
of  the  world,2  they  will  still  have  the  impertinence  to 
believe,  that  they  do  a  great  service  to  the  good 
cause,  by  making  certain  politically  clever  concessions, 
which,  if  they  were  tried  in  the  balance  of  the  sanc- 
tuary, would  be  found  under  weight !  Those  future 
worldly-wise  people  will  quite  forget,  that  our  Lord 
will  have  no  need,  for  helping  him  to  keep  his  promise, 
of  crooked  schemes,  however  shrewd  those  may  be ; 
they  will  entirely  overlook  this  most  elementary  con- 
sideration,— that  the  co-operation,  which  Jesus  deigns 

1  Apoc.  xii.  17.  *  St.  Mattb.  xxviii.  20. 


MASS. 


443 


to  accept,  at  the  hands  of  his  servants,  in  the  defence 
of  the  rights  of  his  Church,  never  could  consist  in  the 
garbling,  or  in  the  disguisement,  of  those  grand 
truths,  which  constitute  the  power  and  beauty  of  the 
Bride.  Is  it  possible,  that  they  will  forget  the 
Apostle's  maxim,  which  he  lays  down  in  his  Epistle 
to  the  Eomans, — that  the  conforming  oneself  to  this 
world, — the  attempting  an  impossible  adaptation  of 
the  Gospel  to  a  world  that  is  un-christianised, — is 
not  the  means  for  proving  what  is  the  good,  and  accept- 
able, and  the  perfect  will  of  God.1  So  that,  it  will  be 
a  thing  of  great  and  rare  merit,  in  many  an  occurrence 
of  those  unhappy  times,  to  merely  understand  what  is 
the  will  of  God,  as  our  Epistle  expresses  it. 

Look  to  yourselves,  would  St.  John  say  to  those 
men,  that  ye  lose  not  the  things  which  ye  have  wrought ; 
make  yourselves  sure  of  the  jull  reward,  which  is  only 
given  to  the  persevering  thoroughness  of  doctrine  and 
faith!2  Besides,  it  will  be  then,  as  in  all  other 
times,  that,  according  to  the  saying  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  simplicity  of  the  just  shall  guide  them,3  and 
far  more  safely,  than  any  human  ingenuity  could  do ; 
humility  will  give  them  Wisdom  ;4  and,  keeping 
themselves  closely  united  to  this  noble  companion, 
they  will  be  made  truly  wise  by  her,  and  will  know 
what  is  acceptable  to  God.b  They  will  understand, 
that  aspiring,  like  the  Church  herself,  to  union  with 
the  eternal  Word, — fidelity  to  the  Spouse,  for  them, 
as  it  is  for  the  Church,  is  nothing  else  than  fidelity  to 
the  truth  ;  for  the  Word,  who  is  the  one  same  object 
of  love  to  both  of  them,  is,  in  God,  no  other  than  the 
splendour  of  infinite  truth.6  Their  one  care,  there- 
fore, will  ever  be,  to  approach  nearer  and  nearer  to 
their  Beloved,  by  a  continually  increasing  resemblance 
to  him ;  that  is  to  say,  by  the  completest  reproduc- 


1  JRom.  xii.^2.  3  Prov.  xi.  3.  6  Wisd.  ix.  10. 

8  2  St.  John,  8,  9.         *  Ibid.  2.  «  Ibid.  vii.  25,  26. 


444  TWENTIETH   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

tion,  both  in  their  words  and  works,  of  the  beautiful 
Truth.  By  so  doing,  they  will  be  serving  their  fellow- 
creatures  in  the  best  possible  way,  for  they  will  be 
putting  in  practice  the  counsel  of  Jesus,  who  bids 
them  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  justice, 
and  confide  in  him  for  all  the  rest.1  Others  may 
have  recourse  to  human  and  accommodating  com- 
binations, fitted  to  please  all  parties ;  they  may  put 
forward  dubious  compromises,  which,  (so  their  sug- 
gestors  think,)  will  keep  back,  for  some  weeks,  or 
some  months  perhaps,  the  fierce  tide  of  revolution  ;— 
but  those  who  have  God's  spirit  in  them,  will  put  a 
very  different  construction  on  the  admonition  given 
us,  by  the  Apostle,  in  to-day's  Epistle,  where  he  tells 
us  to  redeem  the  time. 

It  was  our  Lord  who  bought  time,  and  at  a  great 
price ;  and  he  bought  it  for  us,  that  it  might  be  em- 
ployed, by  his  faithful  servants,  in  procuring  glory  for 
God.  By  most  men,  it  is  squandered  away  in  sin  or 
folly ;  but  those  who  are  united  to  Christ,  as  living 
members  to  the  Spouse  of  their  souls,  will  redeem 
it ;  that  is,  they  will  put  such  an  intensity  into  their 
faith  and  their  love,  that,  as  far  as  it  is  possible  for 
human  nature,  not  a  moment  of  their  time  shall  be 
anything  but  an  earnest  undiminished2  tribute  of  their 
service  of  their  Lord.  To  the  insolent  and  blaphemous 
things,  which  are  then  to  be  spoken  by  the  Beast,3  these 
determined  servants  of  God  will  give,  for  their  brave 
answer,  the  cry  of  St.  Michael,  which  he  uttered 
against  Satan,  who  was  the  helper  of  the  Beast:4  Who 
is  like  unto  God  ! 

These  closing  weeks  of  the  year  used,  in  olden 
times,  to  be  called :  Weeks  of  the  holy  Angel.  We 
have  seen,  in  one  of  these  Sundays,6  how  there  was 
announced  the  great  Archangel's  coming  to  the  aid 


1  St.  Matth.  vi.  33.       8  Apoc.  xiii.  5,  6.        •  The  17th. 

2  Pa.  xi.  2.  *  loid.  2. 


MASS. 


445 


of  God's  people,  as  Daniel,  the  Prophet,  had  foretold 
would  be  at  the  end  of  the  world.1  When,  therefore, 
the  final  tribulations  shall  commence;  when  exile 
shall  scatter  the  Faithful,  and  the  sword  shall  slay 
them,2  and  the  world  shall  approve  all  that,  prostrate, 
as  it  then  will  be,  before  the  Beast  and  his  image,3 — 
let  us  not  forget,  that  we  have  a  leader  chosen  by 
God,  and  proclaimed  by  the  Church ;  a  leader  who 
will  marshal  us  during  those  final  combats,  in  which, 
the  defeat  of  the  Samts4,  will  be  more  glorious  than 
were  the  triumphs  of  the  Church,  in  the  days  when 
she  ruled  the  world.  For,  what  God  will  then  ask  of 
his  servants,  will  not  be  success  of  diplomatical  ar- 
rangements, nor  a  victory  won  by  arms,  but  fidelity 
to  his  truth,  that  is,  to  his  Word ;  a  fidelity  all  the 
more  generous  and  perfect,  as  there  will  be  an  almost 
universal  falling  off  around  the  little  army  fighting 
under  the  Archangel's  banner.  Uttered  by  a  single 
faithful  heart,  and  under  such  circumstances,  and 
uttered  with  the  bravery  of  faith  and  the  ardour  of 
love, — the  cry  of  St.  Michael,  which  heretofore  routed 
the  infernal  legions,  will  be  a  greater  honour  to  God, 
than  will  be  the  insult  offered  to  him  by  the  millions 
of  the  degraded  followers  of  the  Beast. 

Let  us  get  thoroughly  imbued  with  these  thoughts, 
which  are  suggested  by  the  opening  lines  of  our 
Epistle.  Let  us,  also,  master  the  other  instructions 
it  contains,  and  which,  after  all,  differ  but  little  from 
the  ones  we  have  been  developing.  On  this  Sunday, 
when,  formerly,  was  read  the  Gospel  of  the  nuptials 
of  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  invitation  to  his  divine 
banquet, — our  holy  Mother,  the  Church,  appropriately 
in  the  Epistle,  bids  us  observe  the  immense  difference 
there  is  between  these  sacred  delights,  and  the  joys 
of  the  world's  marriage  feasts.  The  calm,  the  purity, 
the  peace  of  the  just  man,  who  is  admitted  into  in- 

1  Dan.  xii.  1.     2  Apoc.  xiii.  7,  10.     3  Ibid.  3,  4,  8,  15.     *  Ibid.  7. 


446         TWENTIETH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

timacy  with  God,  are  a  continual  feast  to  his  soul  ;! 
the  food  served  up  at  that  feast  is  Wisdom  ;2  Wis- 
dom, too,  is  the  beloved  Guest,  who  is  unfailingly 
there.3  The  world  is  quite  welcome  to  its  silly  and, 
often,  shameful  pleasures  ;  the  Word  and  the  soul, 
which,  in  a  mysterious  way,  he  has  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,*  join  together  to  sing  to  the  eternal 
Father  in  admirable  unison ;  they  will  go  on,  for 
ever,  with  their  hymns  of  thanksgiving  and  praise, 
for  the  materials  of  both  are  infinite.  The  hideous 
sight  of  the  earth's  inhabitants,  who  will  then,  by 
thousands,  be  paying  homage  to  the  harlot,  who  sits 
on  the  Beast,  and  offers  them  the  golden  cup  of  her 
abominations,5 — no,  not  even  that  will  interfere,  in 
the  least,  with  the  bliss  caused  in  heaven  by  the  sight 
of  those  happy  souls  on  earth.  The  convulsions  of 
a  world  in  its  last  agony,  the  triumphs  of  the  woman 
drunk  with  the  bloodofthe  martyrs,6 — far  from  breaking 
in  on  the  harmony  which  comes  from  a  soul  which  is 
united  with  the  Word,  they  will  but  give  greater  fulness 
to  her  notes  which  sound  forth  the  divine,  and  greater 
sweetness  to  the  human  music  of  the  human  song. 
The  Apostle  tells  all  this  in  his  own  magnificent  way, 
where  he  says :  Who,  then,  shall  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  Christ  ?  shall  tribulation  ?  or  distress  ?  or 
famine  ?  or  nakedness  ?  or  danger  ?  or  persecution  ? 
or  the  sword  ?  True,  it  is  ivritten :  For  thy  sake  we 
are  put  to  death  all  the  day  long ;  ive  are  accounted  as 
sheep  for  the  slaughter  :7 — but,  in  all  these  things,  we 
overcome,  because  of  Him  that  hath  loved  us.  For,  J 
am  sure,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor 
principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 
to  come,  nor  might,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any 
other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  our  Lord.8 

1  Prov.  xv.  16.  *  Cantic.  i.  1.  '  Ps.  xliii.  22. 

s  Ecclus.  xxiv.  29.  6  Apoc.  xvii.  1-5.     8  Rom.  viii.  35-39. 

3  Wisd.  viii.  16  ;  Apoc.  *  Ibid.  xvii.  6. 
iii.  20. 


MASS. 


447 


In  the  Introit,  the  Jewish  people  sang  its  repen- 
tance and  humble  confidence  ;  and  now,  in  the 
Gradual,  we  have  the  Gentiles  proclaiming,  in  music 
taught  them  by  the  Church,  how,  in  the  delights  of 
the  nuptial  banquet,  their  hopes  have  been  realised, 
yea,  and  surpassed. 


GRADUAL. 


The  eyes  of  all  do  hope  in 
thee,  O  Lord  :  and  thou  givest 
them  meat  in  due  season. 

ft.  Thou  openest  thy  hand, 
and  fillest  every  living  crea- 
ture with  thy  blessing. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  My  heart  is  ready,  0 
God,  my  heart  is  ready  ;  I 
will  sing,  and  give  praise  on 
my  glory.    Alleluia. 


Oculi  omnium  in  te  spe- 
rant,  Domine  :  et  tu  das 
illis  escam  in  tempore  op- 
portuno. 

ft.  Aperis  tu  manum 
tuam,  et  imples  omne  ani- 
mal benedictione. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Paratum  cor  meum, 
Deus,  paratum  cor  meum, 
cantabo,  et  psallam  tibi, 
gloria  mea.    Alleluia. 


GOSPEL 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  John. 

Ch.  iv. 

At  that  time  :  There  was  a 

certain  ruler  whose  son  was 

sick    at    Capharnaum.       He 

having  heard  that  Jesus  was 

come  from  Judea  into  Galilee, 

went  to  him,  and  prayed  him 

to  come  down  and  heal  his 

son,  for  he   was  at  the  point 

of   death.      Jesus    therefore 

said  to  him  :   Unless  ye  see 

signs  and  wonders  ye  believe 

not.    The  ruler  saith  to  him  : 

Lord,  come  down  before  that 

my  son  die.     Jesus  saith  to 

him  :    Go  thy  way,  thy  son 

liveth.    The  man  believed  the 

word  which  Jesus  said  to  him. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Joannem. 

Cap.  iv. 

In illo  tempore:  erat  qui- 
dam  regulus,  cujus  Alius 
infirmabatur  Capharnaum. 
Hie  cum  audisset,  quia 
Jesus  adveniret  a  Judsea  in 
Galilseam,  abiit  ad  eum:  et 
rogabat  eum  ut  descen de- 
ret,  et  sanaret  filium  ejus: 
incipiebatenimmori.  Dixit 
ergo  Jesus  ad  eum  :  Nisi 
signa,  et  prodigia  videritis, 
non  creditis.  Dicit  ad  eum 
regulus:  Domine,  descende 
priusquam  moriatur  filius 
meus.  Dixit ei  Jesus:  Vade 
filius  tuus  vivit.  Credidit 
homo  sermoni,  quern  dixit 


448 


TWENTIETH   SUNDAY    AFTER   TENTECOST. 


ei  Jesus,  etibat.  Jamautem 
eo  descendente,  servi  oc- 
currerunt  ei,  et  nuntiave- 
runt  dicentes,  quia  filius 
ejus  viveret.  Interrogabat 
ergo  horam  ab  eis,  in  qua 
melius  habuerit.  Et  dixe- 
runt  ei:  quia  herikora  sep- 
tima  reliquit  eum  febris. 
Cognovit  ergo  pater,  quia 
ilia  hora  erat,  in  qua  dixit 
ei  Jesus:  Filius  tuus  vivit: 
et  credidit  ipse,  et  domus 
ejus  tota. 


and  went  his  way.  And  as 
he  was  going  down,  his  ser- 
vants met  him :  and  they 
brought  word,  saying,  that  his 
son  lived.  He  asked  there- 
fore of  them  the  hour  wherein 
he  grew  better.  And  they 
said  to  him  :  Yesterday  at 
the  seventh  hour  the  fever 
left  him.  The  father  there- 
fore knew  that  it  was  at  the 
same  hour  that  Jesus  said  to 
him :  Thy  son  liveth  ;  and 
himself  believed,  and  his 
whole  house. 


The  Gospel  for  to-day  is  taken  from  St.  John ; — 
it  is  the  first  and  only  time,  during  the  whole  course 
of  these  Sundays  after  Pentecost.  It  gives  the  twen- 
tieth Sunday  the  name  of  Ruler  of  Capharnawn. 
The  Church  has  selected  this  Gospel,  on  account  of 
its  bearing  a  certain  mysterious  relation  to  the  state 
the  world  will  be  in,  when  those  last  days  shall  come, 
which  the  Liturgy  of  this  close  of  the  Church's 
Year  is  so  continually  and  prophetically  bringing 
before  us. 

The  world  is  drawing  towards  its  end ;  like  the 
Ruler's  son,  it  begins  to  die.  Tormented  by  the  fever 
of  the  passions,  which  have  been  excited  in  Caphar- 
naum,  the  city  of  business  and  pleasure, — it  is  too 
weak  to  go  itself  to  the  Physician  who  could  cure  it. 
It  is  for  its  father,  for  the  pastors,  who,  by  baptism, 
gave  it  the  life  of  grace,  and  govern  the  christian 
people  as  rulers  of  holy  Church, — it  is  for  them  to- 
go  to  Jesus,  and  beseech  him  to  restore  the  sick  man 
to  health.  St.  John  begins  this  account,1  by  men- 
tioning the  place  where  they  were  to  find  Jesus :  it 
was  at  Cana,  the  city  of  the  marriage-feast,  and 
where  he  first  manifested  his  power 2  in  the  banquet- 


:  St.  John,  iv.  46. 


8  Ibid.  ii.  11. 


mass.  449 

hall ;  it  is  in  heaven,  that  the  Man- God  abides,  now 
that  he  has  quitted  our  earth,  where  he  has  left  his 
disciples  deprived  of  the  Bridegroom,1  and  having  to 
pass  a  certain  period  of  time  in  the  field  of  penance. 
Capharnaum  signifies  the  field  of  penance  and  of  con- 
solation, which  penance  brings  with  it.  Such  was 
this  earth  intended  to  be,  when  Man  was  driven 
from  Eden;  such  was  the  consolation,  to  which, 
during  this  life,  the  sinner  was  to  aspire ;  and, 
because  of  his  having  sought  after  other  consolations, 
— because  of  his  having  pretended  at  turning  this 
field  of  penance  into  a  new  paradise, — the  world  is 
now  to  be  destroyed.  Man  has  exchanged  the  life- 
giving  delights  of  Eden  for  the  pleasures  which  kill 
the  soul,  and  ruin  the  body,  and  draw  down  the 
divine  vengeance. 

There  is  a  remedy  for  all  this,  and  only  one, — it  is 
the  zeal  of  the  pastors,  and  the  prayers  of  that 
portion  of  Christ's  flock,  which  has  withstood  the 
torrent  of  universal  corruption.  But  it  is  of  the 
utmost  importance,  that,  on  this  point,  the  Faithful 
and  their  Pastors  should  lay  aside  all  personal  con- 
siderations, and  thoroughly  enter  into  the  spirit 
which  animates  the  Church  herself.  Though  treated 
with  the  most  revolting  ingratitude,  and  injustice, 
and  calumny,  and  treachery  of  every  sort, — this 
Mother  of  mankind  forgets  all  these  her  own  wrongs, 
and  thinks  only  of  the  true  prosperity  and  salvation 
of  the  very  countries  which  despise  her.2  She  is 
well  aware  that  the  time  is  at  hand  when  God  will 
make  justice  triumphant;  and  yet,  she  goes  on 
struggling,  as  Jacob  did,  with  God,3  until  there  come 
the  dawn  of  that  terrible  day,  foretold  by  David  and 
the  sibyl.4     At  the  thought  of  the  pool  of  fire,6  whose 

1  St.  Matth.  ix.  15.  4  The  sequence  Dies 

2  Allocutions  of  Leo  irce. 

13th.  6  Apoc.  xxi.  8. 

3  Gen.  xxxii.  24-28. 

vol.  xi.  2  G 


450  TWENTIETH    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

hellish  vapours  are  already  seeming  to  infest  our 
atmosphere,  and  into  which  are  to  be  plunged 
her  rebellious  children, — she  looks  almost  as  though 
she  forgot  the  approach  of  the  eternal  nuptials,  and 
had  lost  her  vehement  longings  as  a  Bride.  One 
would  say,  that  she  thinks  of  nothing  but  of  her 
being  a  Mother  ;  and,  as  such,  she  keeps  on  praying 
as  she  has  always  been  doing, — only  more  fervently 
than  ever, — that  the  end  may  be  deferred, — pro 
mora  finis? 

That  we  may  fulfil  her  wishes,  let  us,  as  Tertullian 
says,  "  assemble  together  in  one  body,  that  we  may, 
"so  to  speak,  offer  armed  force  to  God  by  our  prayers. 
"  God  loves  such  violence  as  that."2  But,  that  our 
prayer  may  have  power  of  that  kind,  it  must  be  in- 
spired by  a  faith  which  is  thorough,  and  proof  against 
every  difficulty.  As  it  is  our  faith  which  overcometh 
the  world,3  so  it  is,  likewise,  our  faith  which  triumphs 
over  God,  even  in  cases  which  seem  beyond  all  hu- 
man hope.  Let  us  do  as  our  Mother  does,  and  think 
of  the  danger  incurred  by  those  countless  men,  who 
madly  play  on  the  brink  of  the  precipice,  into  which, 
when  they  fall,  they  fall  for  ever.  It  is  quite  true 
they  are  inexcusable ;  it  was  only  last  Sunday,  that 
they  were  reminded  of  the  weeping,  and  gnashing  of 
teeth,  in  the  exterior  darkness,  which  they  will  under- 
go who  despise  the  call  to  the  King's  marriage-feast  :4 
— but,  they  are  our  brethren,  and  we  should  not  be  so 
quietly  resigned  at  seeing  them  lose  their  souls.  Let 
us  hope  against  all  hope.  Our  Lord,  who  knew,  with 
certainty,  that  obstinate  sinners  would  be  lost, —  did 
he,  on  that  account,  hesitate  to  shed  all  his  Blood  for 
them  ? 

It  is  our  ambition  to  unite  ourselves  to  him,  by  the 
closest  possible  resemblance  ;  let  us,  then,  be  resolved 


1  Tertull.  Apol.  xxxix.  3  1  St.  John,  v.  4. 

2  Ibid.  4  St.  Matth.  xxii.  13. 


MASS.  451 

to  imitate  in  that  also,  were  occasion  to  serve  us ;  at 
all  events,  let  us  pray,  and  without  ceasing,  for  the 
Church's  and  our  enemies,  so  long  as  we  are  not 
assured  of  their  being  lost.  It  is  here,  that  nothing 
is  useless,  nothing  is  thrown  away ;  for,  come  what 
may,  God  is  greatly  honoured  by  our  faith,  and  by 
the  earnestness  of  our  charity. 

Only,  let  us  be  careful  not  to  merit  the  reproach 
uttered  by  our  Redeemer  against  the  limping1  faith  of  the 
fellow-townsmen  of  the  Ruler  of  Capharnaum.  We 
know,  that  our  Jesus  has  no  need  to  come  down  from 
heaven  to  earth,  in  order  to  give  efficiency  to  the  com- 
mands of  his  gracious  will.  If  he  deign  to  multiply  signs 
and  wonders  around  us,  we  will  rejoice  at  them,  be- 
cause of  our  brethren  who  are  weak  of  faith,  we  will 
make  them  an  occasion  for  exalting  his  holy  name, — 
but,  we  will  lovingly  assure  him,  that  our  soul  had  no 
need  of  new  proofs  of  his  power,  in  order  to  believe  in 
him ! 

The  Jewish  people,  whilst  enduring  its  well-merited 
captivity,  and  straying  along  the  river-banks  of  Baby- 
lon, has  grown  repentant,  and,  in  our  Offertory,  joins 
our  Mother  the  Church,  in  singing  the  admirable 
hundred  and  thirty-sixth  Psalm ; — there  never  was 
such  a  song  of  exile. 

OFFERTORY. 

Upon  the  rivers  of  Babylon  Super  flumina  Babylo- 
we  sat  and  wept,  when  we  nis  illic  sedimus,  et  flevi- 
remembered  thee,  0  Sion  !  mus,    dum    recordaremur 

tui,  Sion. 

The  whole  power  of  the  God,  who,  with  a  word, 
cures  both  soul  and  body,  resides  in  the  Mysteries 
which  are  about  to  be  celebrated  on  our  Altar  here. 
Let  us,  in  the  Secret,  beseech  him,  that  their  effects 
may  tell  on  our  hearts. 

1  Heb.  xii.  13. 


452        TWENTIETH    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


SECRET. 

Ccelestem  nobis  prsebeant         May  these  mysteries,  O  Lord, 

haec   mysteria,   quaesumus  we  beseech  thee,  procure  us  a 

Domine,    medicinam :    et  heavenly  remedy,  and  cleanse 

vitia  nostri  cordis  expur-  away  the  vices  of  our  hearts. 

gent.    Per  Dominum.  Through,  etc. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

The  word  spoken  of  in  the  Communion- Anthem, 
as  having  raised  man  up  from  the  abyss  of  his  misery, 
is  that  of  the  Gospel,  which  calls  mankind,  saying : 
Come  to  the  marriage!1  But,  although  deified  by 
his  participation,  here  below,  in  the  Mystery  of  faith, 
— man  aspires  to  the  perfect  and  eternal  Union,  which 
is  to  be  in  the  mid-day  of  glory. 

COMMUNION. 

Memento  verbi  tui  servo  Remember,  O  Lord,  thy 
tuo,  Domine,  in  quo  mihi  word  to  thy  servant,  and  by 
spem  dedisti:  haec  me  con-  which  thou  gavest  me  hope: 
solataestinhumilitatemea.      this  hath  comforted  me  in  my 

distress. 

A  persevering  fidelity  in  observing  God's  command- 
ments is  the  best  preparation  a  christian  can  make 
for  approaching  to  the  holy  Table,  as  the  Postcom- 
munion  tells  us. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

Ut  sacris,  Domine,  red-  That  we  may  be  worthy  of 

damur   digni    muneribus  :  thy  sacred  gifts,  0  Lord,  grant, 

fac    nos,   quaesumus,   tuis  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  may 

semper  obedire   mandatis.  always  obey  thy    command- 

Per  Dominum.  ments.    Through,  etc. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

1  St.  Matth.  xxii.  4. 


VESPERS. 


453 


ANTIPHON   OF   THE  MAGNIFICAT. 


Now  the  father  knew  that 
it  was  at  the  same  hour,  that 
Jesus  said  unto  him:  Thy  son 
liveth;  and  himself  believed, 
and  his  whole  house. 


Cognovit  autem  pater 
quia  ilia  hora  erat,  in  qua 
dixit  Jesus :  Filius  tuus  vi- 
vit;  et  credidit  ipse,  et  do- 
mus  ejus  tota. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

Being  appeased,  O  Lord, 
bestow  pardon  and  peace  upon 
thy  Faithful;  that  they  being 
also  cleansed  from  all  their 
offences  (against  thee),  may 
serve  thee  with  a  secure  mind. 
Through,  etc. 


OREMUS. 

Largire,  qusesumus  Do- 
mine,  fidelibus  tuis  indul- 
ge ntiamplacatus,  et  pacem : 
ut  pariter  ab  omnibus  mun- 
dentur  offensis,  et  secura 
tibi  mente  deserviant.  Per 
Dominum. 


454       TWENTY-FIRST    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 


THE  TWENTY-FIRST  SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 
0 

The  remaining  Sundays  are  the  last  of  the  Church's 
cycle  ;  but,  their  proximity  with  its  final  termination 
varies  each  Year,  according  as  Easter  was  early  or 
late.  This  their  moveable  character  does  away  with 
anything  like  harmony  between  the  composition  of 
their  Masses  and  the  Lessons  of  the  Night  Office,  all 
of  which,  dating  from  August,  have  been  appointed 
and  fixed  for  each  subsequent  week.  This  we  have 
already  explained  to  our  Readers.1  Still,  the  instruc- 
tion, which  the  Faithful  ought  to  derive  from  the 
sacred  Liturgy,  would  be  incomplete,  and  the  spirit 
of  the  Church,  during  these  last  weeks  of  her  Year, 
would  not  be  sufficiently  understood  by  her  children, 
unless  they  were  to  remember,  that  the  two  months 
of  October  and  November  are  filled,  the  first,  with 
readings  from  the  book  of  the  Machabees,  whose  ex- 
ample inspirits  us  for  the  final  combats, — and  the 
second,  with  lessons  from  the  Prophets,  proclaiming  to 
us  the  judgments  of  God.2 

MASS. 

Durandus,  Bishop  of  Mende,  in  his  Rational,  tells 
us,  that  this,  and  the  following  Sundays  till  Advent, 
bear  closely  on  the  Gospel  of  the  Marriage-Feast,  of 
which  they  are  really  but  a  further  development. 
"  Whereas,"  says  he,  speaking  of  this  twenty-first 
Sunday,  "  this  Marriage  has  no  more  powerful  op- 

1  The  7th  Sund.  aft.  Pent.  2  See  above,  pp.  7,  8. 


MASS. 


455 


V  ponent  than  the  envy  of  Satan, — the  Church  speaks 
"  to  us,  to-day,  on  our  combat  with  him,  and  on  the 
"  armour  wherewith  we  must  be  clad,  in  order  to  go 
"  through  this  terrible  battle,  as  we  shall  see  by  the 
"  Epistle.  And  because  sackcloth  and  ashes  are  the 
"  instruments  of  penance,  therefore  does  the  Church 
"  borrow,  for  the  Introit,  the  words  of  Mardochai, 
"  who  prayed  for  God's  mercy  in  sackcloth  and 
"  ashes."1 

These  reflexions  of  Durandus  are  quite  true ;  but, 
if  the  thought  of  her  having  soon  to  be  united  with 
her  divine  Spouse  is  uppermost  in  the  Church's  mind, 
— yet,  it  is  by  forgetting  her  own  happiness,  and 
turning  all  her  thoughts  to  mankind,  whose  salvation 
has  been  entrusted  to  her  care  by  her  Lord,  that  she 
will  best  prove  herself  to  be  truly  his  Bride,  during 
the  miseries  of  those  last  days.  As  we  have  already 
said, — the  near  approach  of  the  general  judgment, 
and  the  terrible  state  of  the  world  during  the  period 
immediately  preceding  that  final  consummation  of 
time,  is  the  very  soul  of  the  Liturgy  during  these  last 
Sundays  of  the  Church's  Year.  As  regards  the  pre- 
sent Sunday,  the  portion  of  the  Mass  which  used 
formerly  to  attract  the  attention  of  our  catholic  fore- 
fathers, was  the  Offertory,  taken  from  the  book  of  Job, 
with  its  telling  exclamations,  and  its  emphatic  repe- 
titions. We  may,  in  all  truth,  say,  that  this  Offertory 
contains  the  ruling  idea,  which  runs  through  this 
twenty-first  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Reduced,  like  Job  on  the  dung-hill,  to  the  extre- 
mity of  wretchedness,  the  world  has  nothing  to  trust 
to,  but  to  God's  mercy.  The  holy  men  who  are  still 
living  in  it,  imitating  in  the  name  of  all  mankind, 
the  sentiments  of  the  just  man  of  Idumea,  honour 
God  by  a  patience  and  resignation,  which  do  but  add 
power  and  intensity  to  their  supplications.      They 

1  Dun.  Ration,  vi.  138. 


456      TWENTY-FIRST   SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

begin  by  making  their  own  the  sublime  prayer  made, 
by  Mardochai,  for  his  people,  who  were  doomed  to 
extermination.     The  world  is  condemned  to  a  similar 


ruin.1 


INTROIT. 


In  voluntate  tua,  Domi-  All  things,  0  Lord,  are  in 
ne,  universa  sunt  posita,  et  thy  power,  and  no  one  can 
non  est  qui  possit  resistere  resist  thy  will:  for  thou  madest 
voluntati  tuse:  tu  enim  fe-  all  things,  heaven  and  earth, 
cisti  omnia,  ccelum  et  ter-  and  all  things  that  are  con- 
ram,  et  universa  quaa  cceli  tained  within  the  compass  of 
ambitu  continentur  :  Do-  the  heavens:  thou  art  Lord  of 
minus  universorum  tu  es.  all. 

Ps.  Beati  immaculati  in  Ps.    Blessed  are  the  unde- 

via:  quia  ambulant  in  lege  filed  in  the  way:  who  walk  in 

Domini.    Gloria  Patri.    In  the  law  of  the  Lord.    Glory, 

voluntate.  etc.    All  things. 

The  Church  shows  us  very  clearly,  in  the  Collect, 
that,  although  she  is  quite  ready  to  go  through  the 
roughest  times,  yet  she  prefers  peace ;  because,  that 
furnishes  her  with  undisturbed  freedom  for  paying  to 
her  God  the  united  homage  of  religion  and  good 
works.  The  closing  petition  made  by  Mardochai,  in 
the  prayer,  whose  commencement  forms  our  Introit, 
— was,  that  God  would  bestow  on  his  people  the 
liberty  necessary  for  that  occupation,  on  which  the 
world's  well-being  ever  depends, — we  mean,  the  occu- 
pation of  giving  praise  to  God.  These  were  Mar- 
dochai's  grand  words  :  May  we  live,  and  praise  thy 
name,  0  Lord!  and  shut  not  thou  the  mouths  of  them  that 
sing  to  thee  I 

COLLECT. 

Familiam  tuam,  qusesu-  Preserve  thy  family,  O  Lord, 

mus  Domine,  continua  pie-  wre  beseech  thee,  by  thy  con- 

tate  custodi :  ut  a  cunctis  stant  mercy:  that,  under  thy 

adversitatibus,teprotegen-  protection,  it  may  be  freed 

1  Esth.  xiii.  9-11. 


MASS. 


457 


from  all  adversities,  and  be 
devoted  to  thy  name  in  the 
practice  of  good  works. 
Through,  etc. 


te,  sit  libera :  et  in  bonis 
actibus  tuo  nomini  sit  de- 
vota.    Per  Dominum. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Ephesians. 

Ch.  vi. 

Brethren  :  Be  strengthened 
in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  might 
of  his  power.  Put  ye  on  the 
armour  of  God,  that  ye  may 
be  able  to  stand  against  the 
deceits  of  the  devil.  For 
our  wrestling  is  not  against 
flesh  and  blood  ;  but  against 
principalities  and  powers, 
against  the  rulers  of  the 
world  of  this  darkness,  against 
the  spirit  of  wickedness  in 
the  high  places.  Therefore 
take  unto  you  the  armour  of 
God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to 
resist  in  the  evil  day,  and  to 
stand  in  all  things  perfect. 
Stand  therefore,  having  your 
loins  girt  about  with  truth, 
and  having  on  the  breast-plate 
of  justice,  and  your  feet  shod 
with  the  preparation  of  the 
gospel  of  peace;  in  all  things 
taking  the  shield  of  faith, 
wherewith  ye  may  be  able  to 
extinguish  all  the  fiery  darts 
of  the  most  wicked  one.  And 
take  unto  you  the  helmet  of 
salvation,  and  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word 
of  God. 

The  early  beginnings  of  man's  union  with  his  God 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Ephesios, 


Cap.  vi. 

Fratres,  Confortamini  in 
Domino,  et  in  potentia  vir- 
tutisejus.  Induitevosarma- 
turam  Dei,  ut  possitis  stare 
adversus  insidias  diaboli : 
quoniam  non  est  nobis  col- 
luctatio  adversus  carnem  et 
sanguinem  :  sed  adversus 
principes  et  potestates,  ad- 
versus mundi  rectores  tene- 
brarum  harum,  contra  spi- 
ritualia  nequitise,  in  cceles- 
tibus.  Propterea  accipite 
armaturam  Dei,  ut  possitis 
resistere  in  die  malo,  et  in 
omnibus  perfecti  stare. 
State  ergo  succincti  lumbos 
vestros  in  veritate,  et  in- 
duti  loricam  justitise,  et 
calceati  pedes  in  prsepara- 
tione  Evangelii  pacis :  in 
omnibus  sumentes  scutum 
fidei,  in  quo  possitis  omnia 
tela  nequissimi  ignea  ex- 
stinguere  :  et  galeam  salu- 
tis  assumite :  et  gladium 
spiritus,  quod  est  verbuni 
Dei. 


458      TWENTY-FIRST    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

are,  generally  speaking,  deliciously  calm.  Divine 
Wisdom,  once  he  has  led  his  chosen  creature,  by 
hard  laborious  work,  to  the  purification  of  his  mind 
and  senses,  allows  him,  (when  the  sacred  alliance  is 
duly  concluded,)  to  rest  on  his  sacred  breast,  and 
thoroughly  attaches  the  devoted  one  to  Himself,  by 
delights  which  are  an  ante-dated  heaven,  making  the 
soul  despise  every  earthly  pleasure.  It  seems  as 
though  the  welcome  law  of  Deuteronomy  were 
always  in  force,1  namely,  that  no  battle,  and  no 
anxiety,  must  ever  break  in  upon  the  first  season  of 
the  glorious  Union.  But,  this  exemption  from  the 
general  taxation  is  never  of  long  duration  ;  for, 
combat  is  the  normal  state  of  every  man  here 
below.2 

The  Most  High  is  pleased  at  seeing  a  battle  well 
fought  by  his  christian  soldiers.  There  is  no  name 
so  frequently  applied  to  Him  by  the  Prophets,  as 
that  of  the  God  of  Hosts.  His  divine  Son,  who  is 
the  Spouse,  shows  himself  here,  on  this  earth  of 
ours,  as  the  Lord  icho  is  mighty  in  battle?  In  the 
mysterious  nuptial  Canticle  of  the  forty-fourth  Psalm, 
he  lets  us  see  him  as  Most  Powerful  Prince,  girding 
on  his  grand  Sword*  and  making  his  way,  with  his 
sharp  arrows,  through  the  very  heart  and  thick  of 
his  enemies,6  in  order  to  reach,  in  fair  valiance  and 
beautiful  victory  the  Bride  he  has  chosen  as  his  own.6 
She,  too,  just  like  him, — she,  the  Bride,  whose 
beauty  he  has  vouchsafed  to  love,7  and  wills  her  to 
share  in  all  his  own  glories,8 — yes, — she  too  advances 
towards  him,  in  the  glittering  armour  of  a  warrior,9 
surrounded  by  choirs10  singing  the  magnificent  ex- 
ploits of  the  Spouse,  and,  she  herself  terrible  as  an 
army  set  in  array.11     The  armour  of  the  brave  is  on 

1  Deut.  xxiv.  5.  6  Ibid.  6.  9  Cantic.  iv.  4. 

2  Job.  vii.  1.  6  Ibid.  5.  ,0  Ibid.  vii.  1. 
a  Ps.  xxiii.  8.  7  Ibid.  12.  n  Ibid.  vi.  9. 
4  Ps.  xliv.  4.  8  Ibid.  10. 


MASS. 


459 


her  arms  and  breast ;  her  noble  bearing  reminds  one 
of  the  tower  of  David  with  its  thousand  bucklers.1 

United  to  her  divine  Lord,  warriors  the  most 
valiant  stand  about  her ;  they  merit  that  privilege,  by 
their  well-proved  sword  and  their  skill  in  war  ;  each 
one  of  them  has  his  sword  quite  ready,  because 
of  the  night-surprises,  which  the  enemy  may  use 
against  this  most  dear  Church.2  For,  until  the 
dawn  of  the  eternal  day,  when  the  shadows  of  this 
present  life  are  put  to  flight 3  by  the  light  of  the 
Lamb,4  who  will  then  have  vanquished  all  his 
enemies, — yes,  until  that  day,  power  is  in  the  hands 
of  the  rulers  of  the  icorld  of  this  darkness,  says  St. 
Paul,  in  our  to-day's  Epistle ;  and,  it  is  against  them, 
that  we  must  take  to  ourselves  the  armour  of  God, 
which  he  there  describes ;  we  must  wear  it  all,  if  we 
wTould  be  able  to  resist,  in  the  evil  day. 

The  evil  days,  spoken  of  by  the  Apostle  last  Sun- 
day,5 are  frequent  in  the  life  of  every  individual,  as, 
likewise,  in  the  world's  history.  But,  for  every  man, 
and  for  the  world  at  large,  there  is  one  evil  day,  evil 
beyond  all  the  others :  it  is  the  last  day,  the  day  of 
judgment,  the  day  of  exceeding  bitterness,  as  the 
Church  calls  it,6  on  account  of  the  woe  and  misery 
which  are  to  fill  it.  We  talk  of  so  many  years  as 
passing  away,  and  of  centuries  succeeding  each 
other ;  but,  all  these  are  neither  more  nor  less  than 
preparations  hurrying  on  the  world  to  the  Last  Day. 
Happy  they  who,  on  that  Day,  shall  fight  the  good 
fight,7  and  win  victory  !  or  who,  as  our  Apostle 
expresses  it,  shall  stand,  whilst  all  around  them  is 
ruin,  yea,  stand,  in  all  things, perfect/  They  shall 
not  be  hurt  by  the  second  death ; 8  wreathed  with 
the  crown  of  justice,9  they  shall  reign  with  God,10  on 
his  throne,  together  with  his  Son.11 

1  Cantic.  iv.  4.  5  Eph.  v.  16.  9  2  Tim.  iv.  8. 

2  Ibid.  lii.  7,  8.  6  Kesp.  Libera  me.  10  Apoc.  xx.  6. 

3  Ibid.  iv.  6.  "  2  Tim.  iv.  7.  "  Ibid,  hi.  21. 

4  Apoc.  xxi.  9,  23.  8  Apoc.  ii.  11. 


460       TWENTY-FIRST    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

The  war  is  an  easy  one,  when  we  have  this  Man- 
God  for  our  Leader.  All  he  asks  of  us,  is  what  tho 
Apostle  thus  words  :  Be  strengthened  in  the  Lord,  and 
in  the  might  of  his  power!  It  is  leaning  on  her 
Beloved,  that  the  beautiful  Church  is  to  go  up  from 
the  desert ;  and,  thus  supported,  she  is  actually  to  be 
flowing  with  delights?  even  in  those  most  sad  days. 
The  faithful  soul  is  out  of  herself  with  love,  when 
she  remembers,  that  the  armour  she  wears,  is  the 
armour  of  God,  that  is,  the  very  armour  of  her 
Spouse.  It  is  quite  thrilling  to  hear  the  Prophets 
describing  this  Jesus,  this  Leader,  of  ours,  accoutred 
for  battle,  and  with  all  the  pieces  we,  too,  are  to 
wear :  he  girds  himself  with  the  girdle  of  faith ; 2 
then  he  puts  the  helmet  of  salvation  on  his  beautiful 
head ;  3  then,  the  breast-plate  of  justice ;  4  then,  the 
shield  of  invincible  equity ;  5  and,  finally,  a  magni- 
ficently tempered  sword,  the  sword  of  the  spirit,  which 
is  the  word  of  God.G  We  should  almost  think  we 
were  here  having  a  list  of  our  own  arms  ;  well,  yes, 
but  they  are  his,  first ;  and  the  Gospel  shows  him  to 
us,  as  entering,  Himself,  on  the  great  battle,  that  he 
might  show  us  how  to  use  these  same  divine  arms, 
which  he  puts  upon  each  of  us,  if  we  will  but  be  his 
soldiers. 

This  armour  consists  of  many  parts,  because  of  its 
varied  uses  and  effects ;  and  yet,  whether  offensive 
or  defensive,  all  of  them  have  one  common  name, — 
and  that  name, — is  Faith.  Our  Epistle  makes  us 
say  so.  And,  our  Jesus,  our  Leader,  taught  it  us, 
when  to  the  triple  temptation  brought  against  him 
by  the  devil  on  the  mount  of  Quarantana,  he  made 
answer  to  each  temptation,  by  a  text  from  the  sacred 
Scriptures.7  The  victory  which  overcometh  the 
world,   is   our  Faith,   says   St.   John.8     When  St. 

1  Cantic.  viii.  5.  4  Wisd.  v.  19.  7  St.  Matth.  iv.  1-11. 

2  Is.  xi.  5.  *  Ibid.  20.  «  1  St.  John,  v.  4. 

3  Ibid.  lix.  17.  6  Apoc.  ii.  16. 


MASS. 


461 


Paul,  at  the  close  of  his  career,  reviews  the  combats 
he  had  fought  through  life,  he  sums  up  all  in  this 
telling  word:  I  have  kept  the  faith.1  The  life  of 
Paul,  in  that,  should  be  the  life  of  every  christian, 
for  he  says  to  us :  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  ! 2 
It  is  Faith,  which,  in  spite  of  those  fearful  odds 
enumerated  in  to-day's  Epistle  as  being  against  us, — 
it  is  Faith,  that  ensures  the  victory  to  men  of  good 
will.  If,  in  the  warfare  we  must  go  through,  we 
were  to  reckon  the  chances  of  our  enemies  by  their 
overwhelming  forces  and  advantages,  it  is  quite  cer- 
tain that  we  should  have  little  hope  of  winning  the 
day  ;  lor,  it  is  not  with  men  like  ourselves,  it  is  not, 
as  the  Apostle  puts  it,  with  flesh  and  blood,  that  we 
have  to  wrestle,  but  with  enemies  that  we  can  never 
grapple  with,  who  are  in  the  high  places  of  the  air 
around  us,  and  are,  therefore,  invisible,  and  most 
skilled,  and  powerful,  and  wonderfully  up  in  all  the 
sad  secrets  of  our  poor  fallen  nature,  and  turning 
the  whole  weight  of  their  advantages  to  trick  man, 
and  ruin  him,  out  of  hatred  for  God.  These  wicked 
spirits  were  originally  created,  that,  in  the  purity  of 
their  unmixed  spiritual  nature,  they  should  be  a 
reflex  of  the  divine  splendour  of  their  Maker ;  and 
now,  having  rebelled  by  pride,  they  exhibit  that 
execrable  prodigy  of  angelic  intelligences  spending  all 
their  powers  in  doing  evil  to  man,  and  in  hating 
truth. 

How,  then,  are  we, — who,  by  our  very  nature,  are 
darkness  and  misery, — to  wrestle  with  these  spiritual 
principalities  and  powers,  who  devote  all  their  wisdom 
and  rage  to  produce  darkness,  so  as  to  turn  the  whole 
earth  into  a  world  of  darkness  ?  "  By  our  becoming 
Light,"  answers  St.  John  Chrysostom.3  The  light, 
it  is  true,  is  not  to  shine  upon  us,  in  its  own  direct 


1  2  Tim.  iv.  7. 

2  1  Tim.  vi.  12. 

3  St.  Chrys.  Horn.  xxii.  in  ep.  ad  Eph. 


i 


462       TWENTY-FIRST    SUNDAY    AFTER    PENTECOST. 

brightness,  until  the  great  day  of  the  revelation  of 
the  sons  of  God;  1  but,  meanwhile,  we  have  a  divine 
subsidy,  which  supplements  sight ;  that  subsidy  is — 
the  Revealed  Word.2  Baptism  did  not  open  our 
eyes  so  as  to  see  God,  but  it  opened  our  ears  so  as  to 
give  us  to  hear  him,  when  he  speaks  to  us  ;  now,  he 
speaks  to  us  by  the  Scriptures,  and  by  his  Church  ; 
and  our  Faith  gives  us,  regarding  Truth  thus  Re- 
vealed, a  certainty,  as  great  as  though  we  saw  it  with 
the  eyes  of  either  body  or  soul,  or  both.  By  his 
child-like  docility,  the  just  man  walks  on  in  peace, 
with  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel  within  him.  Better 
than  breast-plate  or  helmet,  the  shield  of  faith  pro- 
tects us,  and  from  every  sort  of  injury  ;  it  blunts  the 
fiery  darts  of  the  world,  it  repels  the  fury  of  our  own 
passions,  it  makes  us  far-seeing  enough  to  escape  the 
most  artful  snares  of  the  most  icicked  ones.  Is  not 
the  word  of  God  good  for  every  emergency  ?  and  we 
may  have  it  as  often  and  as  much  as  we  please. 
Satan  has  a  horror  of  the  Christian  who,  though  he 
may  be  weak  in  other  respects,  is  strong  in  this 
divine  icord.  He  has  a  greater  fear  of  that  man, 
than  he  has  of  all  your  schools  of  philosophy,  and  all 
its  professors  ;  he  has  got  accustomed  to  the  torture 
of  such  a  man's  crushing  him  beneath  his  feet 3  and 
with  a  rapidity ,4  which  is  akin  to  what  our  Lord  tells 
us  he  himself  witnessed  :  I  saw  Satan,  like  lightning, 
falling  from  heaven  : 5  it  was  on  the  great  battle-day,6 
when  he  was  hurled  from  paradise  by  that  one  word 
michael, — exquisite  word,  which  was  given  to  the 
triumphant  Archangel  to  be  his  everlasting  noble 
name  !  and  he  himself,  by  that  word  of  God,  and  by 
that  victory  for  God,  was  made  our  model  and  our 
defender.  We  have  already  explained  to  our  readers 
why  it  is,  that  these  closing  weeks  of  the  Church's 
Year  are  so  full  of  the  grand  Archangel  St.  Michael 

1  Rom.  viii.  19.  3  Rom.  xvi.  20.  5  St.  Luke,  x.  18. 

2  2  St.  Pet.  ii.  19.  4  J  bid.  «  Apoc.  xii.  7. 


MASS. 


463 


In  the  Gradual  and  its  Yersicle,  the  Church  tells 
her  Lord,  how  he  has  ever  been  the  refuge  of  his 
people :  his  goodness,  like  his  power,  were  before  all 
ages,  because  he  is  God  from  all  eternity.  May  he, 
therefore,  now  protect  his  faithful  servants,  who, 
reduced  to  a  scanty  number,  as  Israel  was  of  old,  are 
preparing  the  last  exodus  of  the  Church,  which  is 
leaving  this  world  turned  infidel,  and  is  hastening  to 
the  true  land  of  promise. 


GRADUAL. 


Lord  !  thou  hast  been  our 
refuge  from  generation  unto 
generation. 

ft.  Before  the  mountains  were 
made,  or  the  earth  and  the 
world  were  formed :  thou  art 
God,  for  ever  and  ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  When  Israel  went  out  of 
Egypt,  the  house  of  Jacob 
from  a  barbarous  people. 
Alleluia. 


Domine,  ref  ugium  factu3 
es  nobis  a  generatione  et 
progenie. 

ft.  Priusquam  montes  fie- 
rent,  aut  formaretur  terra 
et  orbis:  a  saeculo,  et  usque 
in  sseculum  tu  es  Deus. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  In  exitu  Israel  de  M- 
gypto,  domus  Jacob  de  po- 
puio  barbaro.    Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  xviii. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  spoke 
to  his  disciples  this  parable  : 
The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
likened  to  a  king  who  would 
take  an  acount  of  his  servants. 
And  when  he  had  begun  to 
take  the  account,  one  was 
brought  to  him  that  owed  him 
ten  thousand  talents.  And  as 
he  had  not  wherewith  to  pay 
it,  his  lord  commanded  that 
he  should  be  sold,  and  his  wife 
and  children,  and  all  that  he 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthaeuni. 

Cap.  xviii. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Dixit 
Jesus  discipulis  suis  para- 
bolam  hanc :  Assimilatum 
est  regnum  coelorum  hoini- 
ni  regi,  qui  voluit  rationem 
ponere  cum  servis  suis.  Et 
cum  coepisset  rationem  po- 
nere, oblatus  est  ei  unus, 
qui  debebat  ei  decern  millia 
talenta.  Cum  autem  non 
haberet  unde redderet,  jus- 
sit  eum  dominus  ejus  ve- 
numdari,  et  uxorem  ejus, 


461        TWhNTY-FIllST    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTKCOST. 


et  filios,  et  omnia  quae  ha- 
bebat,  et  reddi .     Procidens 
autem   servus  ille,   orabat 
eum,  dicens :    Patientiam 
habe  in  me,  et  omnia  red- 
dam  tibi.     Misertus  autem 
dominus  servi  illius,  dimi- 
sit  eum,  et  debitum  dimisit 
ei.    Egressus  autem  servus 
ille,  invenit  unum  de  con- 
servis  suis,  qui  debebat  ei 
centum  denarios:  et  tenens 
suffocabat    eum,     dicens : 
Piedde  quod  debes.  Et  pro- 
cidens conservus  ejus,  ro- 
gabat  eum,  dicens :  Patien- 
tiam babe  in  me,  et  omnia 
reddam  tibi.  Ille  autem  no- 
luit ;  sed  abiit,  et  misit  eum 
in  carcerem,  donee  redde- 
ret  debitum.    Videntes  au- 
tem con  servi  ejus  quae  fie- 
bant,contristati  suntvalde: 
et  venerunt,  et  narraverunt 
domino    suo    omnia    quae 
facta  fuerant.  Tuncvocavit 
ilium  dominus  suus,  et  ait 
illi:  Servenequam,omne  de- 
bitum dimisi  tibiquoniam 
rogasti    me :    nonne    ergo 
oportuit  et  te  misereri  con- 
servi  tui,  sicut  et  ego  tui 
misertus  sum?    Et  iratus 
dominus  ejus,  tradiditeum 
tortoribus,  quoadusque  red- 
deret  universum  debitum. 
Sic  et  Pater  meus  ccelestis 
faciet  vobis,  si  non  remise- 
ritis  unusquisque  f ratri  suo 
de  cordibus  vestris. 


had,  and  payment  to  be  made. 
But  that  servant  falling  down, 
besought  him,  saying  :  Have 
patience  with  me,  and  I  will 
pay  thee  all.    And  the  lord  of 
that  servant  being  moved  with 
pity,  let  him  go,  and  forgave 
him  the  debt.    But  when  that 
servant  was  gone  out,  he  found 
one  of  his  fellow-servants  that 
owed  him  a  hundred  pence  ; 
and  laying  hold  of  him,  he 
throttled  him,  saying  :    Pay 
what  thou  owest.     And  his 
fellow-servant    falling  down, 
besought  him,  saying :  Have 
patience  with  me,  and  I  will 
pay  thee  all.    And  he  would 
not :  but  went  and  cast  him 
into  prison,  till  he  paid  the 
debt.  Now  his  fellow-servants 
seeing  what  was  done,  were 
very  much  grieved,  and  they 
came  and  told  their  lord  all 
that  was  done.    Then  his  lord 
called  him,  and  said  to  him  : 
Thou  wicked  servant,  I  for- 
gave thee  all  the  debt,  because 
thou  besoughtest  me:  shouldst 
not  thou  then  have  had  com- 
passion also  on  thy   fellow- 
servant,  even  as  I  had  com- 
passion on  thee  1  And  his  lord 
being  angry,  delivered  him  to 
the  torturers,  until  he  paid  all 
the  debt.     So  also  shall  my 
heavenly  Father  do  to  you,  if 
ye  forgive  not  every  one  his 
brother  from  your  hearts. 


"  0  thou  just  Judge  of  vengeance  (on  man,)  grant 
"  us  the  gift  of  forgiveness,  before  the  Day  of  reckon- 
"  ing  cometh ! "  Such  is  the  petition  that  comes  from 
the  heart  of  holy  Mother  Church,  as  she  thinks  on 
what  may  have  befallen  those  countless  children  of 


MASS.  40  3 

hers,  who  have  been  victims  of  death  during  this,  as 
every  other,  year;  it  is,  moreover,  the  supplication 
that  should  be  made  by  every  living  soul,  after 
hearing  the  Gospel  just  read  to  us.  The  Sequence, 
Dies  irce*  from  which  these  words  are  taken,  is  not 
only  a  sublime  prayer  for  the  Dead ;  it  is,  likewise, 
and  especially  at  this  close  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Year, 
an  appropriate  expression  for  all  of  us  who  are  still 
living.  Our  thoughts  and  our  expectations  are  naturally 
turned  towards  our  own  deaths.  We  almost  seem 
forgotten,  and  overlooked,  in  this  evening  of  the 
world's  existence ;  but,  it  is  not  so,  for  we  know,  from 
the  sacred  Scripture,  that  we  shall  join  those  who 
have  already  slept  the  last  sleep,  and  shall  be  taken, 
together  with  them,  to  meet  our  divine  Judge.2 

Let  us  hearken  to   some  more  of  our   Mother's 

words,   in  that  same  magnificent  Sequence ;  this  is 

their  meaning:  "How  great  will  be  our  fear,  when 

the   Judge   is  just  about  to  come,  and  rigorously 

examine  all  our  works ! — The  trumpet's  wondrous 

sound  will  pierce  the  graves  of  every  land,  and 

summon  us  all   before  the   throne  !  " — Death  will 

stand  amazed,  and  nature  too,  when  the  "  creature 

'  shall  rise  again,  to  go  and  answer  Him  that  is  to 

' judge! — The  written  Book  shall  be  brought  forth, 

1  wherein  all  is  contained,  for  which  the  world  is  to 

'be   tried. — So,   when   the   Judge   shall   sit  on  his 

1  throne,  every  hidden  secret  shall  be  revealed,  nothing 

'  shall    remain    unpunished ! — What   shall   I,  poor 

'wretch,  then  say?      Who  ask  to  be  my   patron, 

1  when  the  just  man  himself  shall  scarce  be  safe? — 

'  0  King  of  dreaded  majesty !  who  savest  gratuitously 

1  them  that  are  saved,  save  me,  0  fount  of  love  ! — Do 

1  thou  remember,  loving  Jesu !  that  I  was  cause  of 

'  thy  life  on  earth !     Lose  me  not,  on  that  Day !  "3 

Undoubtedly,  such  a  prayer  as  this  has  every  best 

1  Sequence,  Dies  irce.    2  1  Thess.  iv.  14-16.    3Seq.  Dies  irce. 
vol.  xi.  2  H     . 


466         TWENTY-FIRST   SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

chance  of  being  graciously  heard,  addressed  as  it  is  to 
Him,  who  has  nothing  so  much  at  heart  as  our  salva- 
tion, and  who,  for  procuring  it,  gave  himself  up  to 
fatigue,  and  suffering,  and  death  on  the  Cross:  hut 
we  should  be  inexcusable,  and  deserve  condemnation 
twice  over,  were  we  to  neglect  to  profit  of  the  advice 
he  himself  gives  us,  whereby  to  avert  from  us  the 
perils  of  "  that  day  of  tears,  when  guilty  man  shall 
"  rise  from  the  dust,  and  go  to  be  judged !  "l  Let  us, 
then,  meditate  on  the  parable  of  our  Gospel,  whose 
sole  object  is  to  teach  us  a  sure  way  of  settling,  at 
once,  our  accounts  with  the  divine  King, 

We  are  all  of  us,  in  fact,  that  negligent  servant, 
that  insolvent  debtor,  whose  master  might,  in  all  justice, 
sell  him,  with  all  he  has,  and  hand  him  over  to  the 
torturers.     The  debt  contracted  with  God,  by  the  sins 
we  have  committed,  is  of  that  nature,  as  to  deserve  end- 
less tortures  ;  it  supposes  an  eternal  hell,  in  which  the 
guilty  one  will  ever  be  paying,  without  ever  cancelling 
his  debt.     Infinite  praise,  then,  and  thanks  to  the 
divine  Creditor,  who,    being  moved   to  pity,  by  the 
entreaties  of  the  unhappy  man,  who  asks  for  time 
and  he  will  pay  all, — yes,  this  good  God  grants  him 
far  beyond  what  he  prays  for, — he,  there  and  then, 
forgives  him  the  debt.     He  puts  but  this  condition  on 
the  pardon,  as  is  evident  from  the  sequel, — he  insists, 
and  most  justly,  that  he  should  go  and  do,  in  like 
manner,  towards  his  fellow- servants,  who  may,  per- 
haps, owe  something  to  him.     After  being  so  gene- 
rously forgiven  by  his  Lord  and  King, — after  having 
his  infinite  debt  so  gratuitously  cancelled, — how  can 
he  possibly  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  very  same  prayer 
which  won  pardon  for  himself,  now  that  a  fellow- 
servant  makes  it  to  him  ?  is  it  to  be  believed,  that  he 
will  refuse  all  pity  towards  one,  whose  only  offence,  is 
that  he  asks  him  for  time,  and  he  will  pay  all  ? 

1  Seq.  Dies  irce. 


mass.  467 

"  It  is  quite  true,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  that  every 
"man  has  his  fellow-man  a  debtor, — for,  who  is  the 
"  man,  that  has  had  no  one  to  offend  him  ?  but,  at  the 
"  same  time,  who  is  the  man,  that  is  not  debtor  to 
"  God,  for  all  of  us  have  sinned  ?  Man,  therefore,  is 
"  both  debtor  to  God,  and  creditor  to  his  fellow-man. 
"  It  is  for  this  reason,  that  God  has  laid  down  this  rule 
"  for  thy  conduct, — that,  thou  must  treat  thy  debtor, 
"  as  He  treats  his.  .  .  .*  We  pray  every  day ;  every 
"  day,  we  send  up  the  same  petition  to  the  divine 
"throne;  every  day,  we  prostrate  ourselves  before 
u  God,  and  say  to  him :  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we 
"forgive  them  that  are  debtors  to  us.2  Of  what  debts 
"  speakest  thou  ?  Is  it,  of  all  thy  debts  ?  or  of  one  or 
"two  only?  Thou  wilt  say:  Of  all.  Do  thou,  there- 
"fore,  forgive  thy  debtor,  for  it  is  the  rule  laid  upon 
"  thee,  it  is  the  condition  accepted  by  thee."3 

"  It  is  a  greater  thing,"  says  St.  John  Chrysostom, 
"  to  forgive  our  neighbour  the  trespasses  he  has  com- 
"  mitted  against  us,  than  to  condone  him  a  sum  of 
"  money ;  for,  by  forgiving  him  his  sins,  we  imitate 
"  God."4  And,  after  all,  what  is  the  injury  committed 
by  one  man  against  another  man,  if  compared  with 
the  offence  committed  by  man  against  God  ?  Alas ! 
we  have  all  got  the  habit  of  that  second ;  even  the 
just  man  knows  its  misery  seven  times5  over,  and,  as 
the  text  probably  means,  seven  times  a  dag ;  so  that, 
it  comes  ruffling  our  whole  day  long.  Let  this,  at 
least,  be  our  parallel  habit, — that,  we  contract  a 
facility  in  being  merciful  towards  our  fellow-men, 
since  we,  every  night,  have  the  assurance  given  us, 
that  we  shall  be  pardoned  all  our  miseries,  on  the 
condition  of  our  owning  them.  It  is  an  excellent 
practice,  not  to  go  to  bed,  without  putting  ourselves 
in  the  dispositions  of  a  little  child,  who  can  rest  his 

1  St.  Aug.  Serm.  lxxxiii.  2.  2  St.  Matt.  vi.  12.   3  St.  Aug.  Ibid.  4. 
4  S.  Chrys.  in  ep.  ad  Eph.  Horn.  xvii.  1.        *  Pro  v.  xxiv.  16. 


4G8         TWENTY-FIKST    SUNDAY'   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

head  on  God's  bosom,  and  there  fall  asleep ;  but,  if 
we  thus  feel  it  a  happy  necessity,  to  find  in  the  heart 
of  our  heavenly  Father,1  forge tfulness  of  our  day's 
faults,  yea,  more  an  infinitely  tender  love  for  us  his 
poor  tottering  children, — how  can  we,  at  that  very 
time,  dare  to  be  storing  up  in  our  minds  old  grudges 
and  scores  against  our  neighbours,  our  brethren,  who 
are  also  his  children  ?  Even  supposing,  that  we  had 
been  treated  by  them  with  outrageous  injustice  or 
insult, — could  these  their  faults  bear  any  comparison 
with  oar  offences  against  that  good  God,  whose  born- 
enemies  we  were,  and  whom  we  have  caused  to  be 
put  to  an  ignominious  death  ?  Whatsoever  may  be 
the  circumstances  attending  the  unkindness  shown  us, 
we  may  and  should  invariably  practise  the  rule  given 
us  by  the  Apostle :  Be  ye  kind  one  to  another  I  merci- 
ful !  forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God  hath  forgiven 
you,  in  Christ  I  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  most  dear 
children/2  What !  thou  callest  God  thy  Father,  and 
dost  thou  remember  an  injury  that  has  been  done 
thee  ?  "  That,"  says  St.  John  Chrysostom,  "  is  not 
"  the  way  a  son  of  God  acts  in  !  The  work  of  a  son 
"  of  God  is  this, — to  pardon  one's  enemies,  to  pray 
"  for  them  that  crucify  him,  to  shed  his  blood  for 
"  them  that  hate  him.  Would  you  know  the  conduct 
"  of  one  who  is  worthy  to  be  a  son  of  God  ?  he  takes 
u  his  enemies,  and  his  ingrates,  and  his  robbers,  and 
"  his  insulters,  and  his  traitors,  and  makes  them  his 
"  brethren  and  sharers  of  all  his  wealth  !"3 

We  here  give,  in  its  entirety,  the  celebrate  Offer- 
tory of  Job,  with  its  Verses.  The  observations  we 
made  at  the  beginning  of  the  Mass,  will  enable  us  to 
enter  into  the  spirit  of  this  liturgical  piece.  As 
Amalarius  says,4  the  Anthem,  which  has  been  retained, 
gives  us  the  words  of  the  historian,  who  simply  relates 

1  St.  Matth.  vi.  9.        3  S.  Chrys.  in  ep.  ad  Eph.  Horn.  xiv.  3. 

2  Eph.  iv.  32  ;  v.  1.      4  Amal.  De  eccl.  Off.  L.  iii.  c.  39. 


MASS. 


469 


the  facts,  one  after  the  other,  without  any  remarks ; 
but,  in  the  Verses,  we  have  Job  himself  speaking,  his 
body  all  humbled,  and  his  soul  full  of  sorrow :  the 
repetition  of  the  same  words,  their  interruptions,  their 
refrain,  their  broken  phrases,  vividly  represent  his 
panting  for  breath,  and  intense  suffering. 


OFFERTORY. 


There  was  a  man,  whose 
name  was  Job,  and  that  man 
was  simple  and  upright,  and 
fearing  God:  and  Satan  asked 
to  tempt  him  ;  and  power  was 
given  him  by  the  Lord  over 
his  possessions,  and  over  his 
flesh:  and  he  destroyed  all  his 
substance,  and  his  sons:  and 
he  wounded  his  flesh  with  a 
grievous  ulcer. 

y.  I.  Oh  !  tJiat  my  sins  ivere 
weighed  in  a  balance  !  Oh  !  that 
my  sins,  tvhereby  I  Jiave  de- 
served wrath, — whereby  I  have 
deserved  wrath, — were  weighed 
in  a  balance!  and  the  calamity, 
— the  calamity  tJiat  I  suffer, — 
it  tuould  appear  heavier  ! 

There  ivas  a  man. 

ft.  II.  For,  what  is,— for, 
ivluzt  is,— for,  w/iat  is  my 
strength,  that  I  can  hold  out  ? 
or,  what  is  my  end,  that  I 
should  keep  patience  ? 

There  ivas  a  man. 

ft.  III.  Is  my  strength  the 
strength  of  stones  ?  Or,  is  my 
flesh  of  brass  ? — or,  is  my  flesh 
of  brass  % 

There  was  a  man. 

ft.     IV.     For,— for— for, 

mine  eye  shall  not  return  to  see 

good  things, — to  see  goodthings, 

— to  see  good  things, — to  see 


Vir  erat  in  terra  Hus  no- 
mine Job,  simplex  et  rectus 
actimens  Deum:  quern  Sa- 
tan petiit,  ut  tentaret ;  et 
data  est  ei  potestasa  Domi- 
no in  facultates,  et  in  car- 
nem  ejus,  perdiditque  om- 
nem  substantiam  ipsius,  et 
filios:  carnem  quoque  ejus 
gravi  ulcere  vulneravit. 

ft.  I.  Utinamappenderen- 
tur  peccata  mea;  utinam 
appenderentur  peccata  mea, 
qaibus  iram  merui,  quibus 
iram  merui  ;  et  calamitas, 
et  calamitas  guam  potior  ; 
ha?c  gravior  apparent. 

Vir  erat. 

1fF.  II.  Quae  est  enim,  quae 
est  enim,  qua?  est  enim  for- 
titudo  mea  ut  sustineam  1 
aut  quis  finis  meus  ut  pa- 
tienter  agam  ? 

Vir  erat. 

$".  III.  Numquid  forti- 
tudo  lapidum  est  fortitudo 
mea  ?  aut  caro  mea  anea  est  ? 
aut  caro  mea  cenea  est? 

Vir  erat. 

y.  IV.  Quoniam,  quoniam, 
quoniam  non  revertetur 
oculus  meus  ut  videat  bona, 
ut  videat  bona,  ut    videat 


470         TWENTY-FIRST   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


bona,  ut  videat  bona,  ut  vi-  good  things, — to  see  good  things, 
deat  bona,  ut  videat  bona,  — to  see  good  things, — to  see 
ut  videat  bona,  ut  videat  good  things, — to  seegoodthings, 
bona,  ut  videat  bona.  — to  see  good  things, — to  see 

good  things, — to  seegoodthings, 
— to  see  good  things  / 
Vir  erat.  There  was  a  man. 

The  salvation  of  the  world,  and  that  of  each  indi- 
vidual man,  is,  virtually,  ever  in  the  august  Sacrifice, 
whose  power  restores  man,  by  appeasing  God.  With 
a  confidence  that  fails  not,  let  us  use  it,  as  the  most 
efficacious  recourse  that  can  be  made  to  the  divine 
mercy. 


SECRET. 


Suscipe,  Domine,  propi- 
tius  hostias,  quibus  et  te 
placari  voluisti,  et  nobis 
sal  utem  potenti  pietate  res- 
titui.    Per  Dominum. 


Mercifully  receive,  0  Lord, 
these  offerings,  by  which  thou 
art  pleased  to  be  appeased;  and 
restore  us  to  salvation,  by  thy 
powerful  goodness.  Through, 
etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

An  unflagging  hope  ever  accompanies  the  admirable 
patience  of  holy  Church.  Persecutions,  be  they  ever 
so  fierce  or  long,  never  interrupt  her  prayer;  for,  as 
the  Communion  expresses  it,  she  keeps  in  her  heart  a 
faithful  recollection  of  the  word  of  salvation  that  was 
given  her  by  God. 

COMMUNION. 


In  salutari  tuo  anima 
mea,  et  in  verbum  tuum 
speravi:  quando  facies  de 
persequentibus  me  judi- 
cium %  iniqui  persecuti 
sunt  me:  adjuva  me,  Do- 
mine Deus  meus. 


My  soul  hath  looked  to  be 
saved  by  thee,  and  hath  re- 
lied on  thy  word:  when  wilt 
thou  judge  them  that  perse- 
cute me?  The  wicked  ones 
have  persecuted  me:  help  me, 
O  Lord  my  God  ! 


Now  that  we  have  been  nourished  by  the  food  of 
immortality,  let  us  live  on  it,  with  all  the  evidence  of 
a  soul  that  is  made  pure. 


YESPE  US. 


471 


POSTCOMM  UNION. 


Having  received  the  food  of 
immortality,  we  beseech  thee, 
O  Lord,  that  what  we  have 
taken  with  our  mouths,  we 
may  receive  with  a  pure  mind. 
Through,  etc. 


Immortalitatis  alimoniam 
consecuti,  qusesumus  Do- 
mine:  ut  quod  ore  percepi- 
mus,  pura  mente  sectemur. 
Per  Dominum. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON   OF   THE 

Thou  wicked  servant !  I  for- 
gave thee  all  the  debt,  because 
thou  besoughtest  me:  shouldst 
not  thou,  then,  have  had  com- 
passion also  on  thy  fellow-ser- 
vant, even  as  I  had  compassion 
on  thee  1    Alleluia. 


MAGNIFICAT. 

Serve  nequam,  omne 
debitum  dimisi  tibi,  quo- 
niarn  rogasti  me:  nonne 
ergo  oportuit  et  te  misereri 
conservi  tui,  sicut  et  ego 
tui  misertus  sum?  Alleluia. 


LET  US  PRAY. 

Preserve  thy  family,  O  Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  by  thy  con- 
stant mercy:  that,  under  thy 
protection,  it  may  be  freed 
from  all  adversities,  and  be 
devoted  to  thy  name  in  the 
practice  of  good  works. 
Through,  etc. 


OREMUS. 

Familiam  tuam,  qusesu- 
mus Domine,  continua 
pietate  custodi:  ut  a 
cunctis  adversitatibus,  te 
protegente,  sit  libera:  et 
in  bonis  actibus  tuo  nomini 
sit  devota.  Per  Dominum. 


472     TWENTY-SECOND   SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE  TWENTY-SECOND  SUNDAY 

AFTER    PENTECOST. 


MASS. 

«  According  to  Honorius  of  Autun,  the  Mass  of  to- 
day has  reference  to  the  days  of  Antichrist.1  The 
Church,  foreseeing  the  reign  of  the  man  of  sin,2  and 
as  though  she  were  actually  undergoing  the  persecu- 
tion, which  is  to  surpass  all  others, — she  takes  her 
Introit  of  this  twenty- second  Sunday  from  the  Psalm 
De  profundis.3 

If,  unitedly  with  this  prophetic  sense,  we  would 
apply  these  words  practically  to  our  own  personal 
miseries,  we  must  remember  the  Gospel  we  had 
eight  days  ago,  and  which,  formerly,  was  the  one 
appointed  for  the  present  Sunday.  Each  one  of  us 
will  recognise  himself  in  the  person  of  the  insolvent 
debtor,  who  has  nothing  to  trust  to,  but  his  master's 
goodness  ;  and,  in  our  deep  humiliation,  we  shall  ex- 
claim :  I  thou,  0  Lord,  mark  iniquities,  who  shall  endure 
it  ?4 

INTROIT. 

Si  iniquitates  observave-  If  thou,  O  Lord,  wilt  mark 

ris,  Domine,  Domine,  quis  iniquities,  Lord!  who  shall  en- 

sustinebit  ]    quia  apud  te  dure  it  1    For  with  thee  there 

propitiatio  est,  Deus  Israel.  is  merciful  forgiveness,  0  God 

of  Israel ! 

Ps.  De  profundis  clamavi  Ps.   Out  of  the  depths  have 

ad  te,  Domine :    Domine,  I  cried  unto  thee,  0  Lord  : 

exaudivocemmeam.  Gloria  Lord  !  hear  my  voice.     Glory, 

Patri.    Si  iniquitates.  etc.    If  thou. 

1  Hon.  Aug.  Gemm.  an.  iv.  93.  3  Ps.  cxxix. 

a  2  Thess.  ii.  3  4  Rup.  De.  div,  off.  xii.  22. 


MASS. 


473 


We  have  just  been  rousing  our  confidence,  by- 
singing,  that  with  God,  there  is  merciful  forgiveness. 
It  is  He  himself  who  gives  that  loving  unction  to  the 
prayers  of  the  Church,  which  proves  that  he  wishes 
to  grant  them.  But,  we  shall  not  be  thus  graciously 
heard,  as  she  is,  unless,  like  her,  we  ask  with  faith, 
that  is  to  say,  conformably  with  the  teachings  of  the 
Gospel.  To  ask  with  faith,  is  to  forgive  our  fellow- 
creatures  their  trespasses  against  us ;  on  that  condi- 
tion, we  may  confidently  beseech  our  common  Lord 
and  Master  to  forgive  us.1 


COLLECT. 


O  God,  our  refuge  and 
strength  !  give  ear  to  the  holy- 
prayers  of  thy  Church,  0  thou, 
the  author  of  holiness  ;  and 
grant,  that  what  we  ask  with 
faith,  we  may  effectually  ob- 
tain.   Through,  etc. 


Deus,  refugium  nostrum, 
et  virtus:  adesto  piis  Eccle- 
sise  tuse  precibus,  auctor 
ipse  pietatis,  et  prsesta:  ut 
quod  fideliter  petimus,  effi- 
caciter  consequamur.  Per 
Dominum. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Philippians. 


Ch. 


i. 


Brethren:  We  are  confident 
of  this  very  thing,  that  he  who 
hath  begun  a  good  work  in 
you,  will  perfect  it  unto  the 
day  of  Christ  Jesus.  As  it  is 
meet  for  me  to  think  this  for 
you  all:  for  that  I  have  you  in 
my  heart;  and  that  in  my 
bands,  and  in  the  defence  and 
confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye 


Lectio  Epistolfie  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Philippenses. 


Cap.  i. 

Fratres,Confidimus  in  Do- 
mino Jesu,  quia  qui  coepit 
in  vobis  opus  bonum,  per- 
ficiet  usque  in  diem  Christi 
Jesu.  Sicut  est  mini  justum 
hoc  sentire  pro  omnibus 
vobis,  eo  quod  habeam  vos 
in  corde,  et  in  vincuiis 
meis,  et  in  defensione,  et 
confirmatione      Evangelii, 


1  Berx.  Aug.  De  Offic.  Miss.  v. 


47  4     TWEKTY-SKCOND   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

socios  gaudii  mei    omnes  are  all  partakers  of  my  joy. 

vos  esse.   Testis  enim  mihi  For  God  is  my  witness,  how  I 

est  Deus,  quomodo  cupiam  long  after  you  all  in  the  bowels 

omnes    vos    in   visceribus  of  Jesus  Christ.    And  this  I 

Jesu  Christi.    Et  hoc  oro,  pray,  that  your  charity  may 

ut  charitas  vestra  magis  ac  more  and    more    abound   in 

magis  abundet  in  scientia,  knowledge  and  in  all  under- 

et  in  omni  sensu:  ut  pro-  standing;  that  ye  may  approve 

betis  potiora,  ut  sitis  sin-  the  better  things,  that  ye  may 

ceri,  et  sine  offensa  in  diem  be  sincere  and  without  offence 

Christi,  repleti  fructu  jus-  unto  the  day  of  Christ.  Filled 

titiae  per  Jesum  Christum,  with    the   fruits    of  justice, 

in  gloriam  et  laudem  Dei.  through    Jesus    Christ,   unto 

the  glory  and  praise  of  God. 

St.  Paul,  in  the  Church's  name,  again  invites  our 
attention  to  the  near  approach  of  the  Last  Day.  But, 
what,  on  the  previous  Sunday,  he  called  the  evil  day, 
he  now,  in  the  short  passage  taken  from  his  Epistle 
to  the  Philippians,  which  has  just  been  read  to  us, 
calls,  and  twice  over,  the  day  of  Christ  Jesus.  The 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians  is  full  of  loving  confidence; 
its  tone  is  decidedly  one  of  joy ;  and  yet,  it  plainly 
shows  us  that  persecution  was  raging  against  the 
Church,  and  that  the  old  enemy  was  making  capital 
of  the  storm,  to  stir  up  evil  passions,  even  amidst  the 
very  flock  of  Christ.  The  Apostle  is  in  chains ;  the 
envy  and  treachery  of  false  brethren  intensify  his 
sufferings  ?  still,  joy  predominates  in  his  heart  over 
everything  else,  because  he  is  come  to  that  perfection 
of  love,  wherein  divine  charity  is  enkindled  by  suffer- 
ing more  even  than  by  the  sweetest  spiritual  caresses. 
To  him,  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain  ;3  he 
cannot  make  up  his  mind  which  of  the  two  to  choose, 
— death,  which  would  give  him  the  bliss  of  being 
with  his  Jesus,3 — or  life,  which  will  add  to  his  merits 
and  his  labours  for  the  salvation  of  men.4  What  are 
all  personal  considerations  to  him  ?     His  one  joy,  for 

1  Philip,  i.  15,  17.        2  Ibid.  21.        3  Ibid.  23.        « Ibid.  22. 


mass.  475 

both  the  present  and  the  future,  is — that  Christ  may 
be  known  and  glorified,  no  matter  how  I1  As  to  his 
hopes  and  expectations,  he  cannot  be  disappointed, 
for,  Christ  is  sure  to  be  glorified  in  his  body,  by  its 
life  and  by  its  death  !3 

Hence,  in  Paul's  soul,  that  sublime  indifference, 
which  is  the  climax  of  the  Christian  life  ;  it  is,  of 
course,  a  totally  different  thing  from  that  fatal  apathy,  to 
which  the  false  Mystics  of  the  17th  century  pretended 
to  reduce  the  love  of  man's  heart.  What  tender 
affection  has  not  this  convert  of  Damascus  for  his 
brethren,  once  he  has  reached  this  point  of  perfec- 
tion !  God,  says  he,  is  my  witness,  how  I  long  after 
you  all,  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ/  The  one  ambi- 
tion which  rules  and  absorbs  him,3  is — that  God,  who 
has  begun  in  them  the  ivork,  which  is  good  by  excel- 
lence,— the  work  of  Christian  perfection,  (such  as  we 
know  had  been  wrought  in  the  Apostle  himself,)  may 
be  continued  and  perfected  in  them  all,  by  the  day, 
when  Christ  is  to  appear  in  his  glory.4  This 
is  what  he  prays  for, — that  the  wedding  garment  of 
those  whom  he  has  betrothed  to  the  one  Spouse,6  in 
other  words,  that  charity  may  beautify  them  with  all 
its  splendour  for  the  grand  Day  of  the  eternal  nup- 
tials.6 

Now,  what  is  the  sure  means,  whereby  charity  is  to 
be  perfected  in  them  ?  It  must  abound,  more  and 
more,  in  knowledge  and  in  all  understanding  of  salva- 
tion, that  is,  in  Faith.  It  is  Faith,  that  constitutes 
the  basis  of  all  supernatural  virtue.  A  restricted,  a 
diminished,1  Faith,  could  never  support  a  large  and 
high-minded  charity.  Those  men,  therefore,  are 
deceiving  themselves,  whose  love  for  revealed  truth 
does  not  keep  pace  with  their  charity  !     Such  Chris- 


1  Philip,  i.  18.  3  Ibid.  24-27.  5  2  Cor.  xi.  2. 

2  Ibid.  20.  4  Coloss.  iii.  4.  6  Durand.  Rat.  vi.139. 

7  Ps.  xi.  2.     (Diminutce  veritates. ) 


476     TWENTY-SECOND   SUNDAY    AFTER  PENTECOST. 

tianity  as  that,  believes  as  little  as  it  may;  it  has  a 
nervous  dread  of  new  definitions ;  and,  out  of  respect 
for  error,  it  cleverly  and  continually  narrows  the 
supernatural  horizon.  Charity,  they  say,  is  the  queen 
of  virtues ;  it  makes  them  take  everything  easily, 
even  lies  against  Truth ;  to  give  the  same  rights  to 
error  as  to  Truth, — is,  in  their  estimation,  the  highest 
point  of  Christian  civilisation  grounded  on  love ! 
They  quite  forget,  that  the  first  object  of  charity 
being  God,  who  is  substantial  Truth,  he  has  no  greater 
enemy  than  a  lie ;  they  cannot  understand  how  it  is, 
that  a  Christian  does  not  do  a  work  of  love,  by 
putting  on  the  same  footing,  the  Object  beloved,  and 
His  mortal  enemy ! 

The  Apostles  had  very  different  ideas  :  in  order  to 
make  charity  grow  in  the  world,  they  gave  it  a  rich 
sowing  of  truth.  Every  new  ray  of  Light  they  put 
into  their  disciples'  hearts,  was  an  intensifying  of 
their  love ;  and  these  disciples,  having,  by  Baptism, 
become  themselves  light,1  they  were  most  determined 
to  have  nothing  to  do  with  darkness.  In  those  days, 
to  deny  the  truth,  was  the  greatest  of  crimes ;  to 
expose  themselves,  by  a  want  of  vigilance,  to  infringe 
on  the  rights  of  truth,  even  in  the  slightest  degree, 
was  the  height  of  imprudence.2  When  Christianity 
first  shone  upon  mankind,  it  found  error  supreme 
mistress  of  the  world ;  having,  then,  to  deal  with  a 
universe  that  was  rooted  in  death,3  Christianity 
adopted  no  other  plan  for  giving  it  salvation,  than 
that  of  making  the  Light  as  bright  as  could  be ;  its 
only  policy  was  to  proclaim  the  power  which  truth 
alone  has  for  saving  man,  and  to  assert  its  exclusive 
right  to  reign  over  this  world.  The  triumph  of  the 
Gospel  was  the  result :  it  came  after  three  centuries 
of  struggle;  a  struggle,  intense  and  violent,  on  the 
side  of  darknes  which  declared  itself  to  be  supreme 

1  Eph.  v.  8.  2  Ibid.  15,  17.  3  St.  Matth.  iv.  16. 


MASS.  477 

and  was  resolved  to  keep  so, — but,  a  struggle,  most 
patient  and  glorious  on  the  side  of  the  Christians, 
the  torrents  of  whose  blood  did  but  add  fresh  joy  to 
the  brave  army,  for  it  became  the  strongest  possible 
foundation  of  the  united  Kingdom  of  Love  and 
Truth. 

But  now,   with   the  connivance   of  those,  whose 
Baptism  made  them,  too,   be  Children  of  Light, — 
error  has  regained  its  pretended  Rights  ;  as  a  natural 
consequence,  the  charity  of  an  immense  number  has 
grown  cold  in  proportion  j1  darkness  is  again  thickening 
over  the  world,  as  though  it  were  in  the  chill  of  its 
last  agony.     The  children  of  light?  who  would  live 
up  to  their  dignity,  must  behave  exactly  as  did  the 
early  Christians.    They  must  not  fear,  nor  be  troubled ; 
but,    like  their  forefathers   and  the   Apostles,  they 
must  be  proud  to  suffer  for  Jesus's  sake,5  and  prize 
the  word  of  life4,  as   quite  the  dearest   thiDg   they 
possess;    for  they  are  convinced,  that,  so   long  as 
truth  is  kept  up  in  the  world,  so  long  is  there  hope 
for  it.5     As  their  only  care  is,  to  make  their  manner  of 
life  worthy  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,6  they  go  on,  with 
all  the  simplicity  of  children  of  God,  faithfully  fulfill- 
ing the  duties  of  their  state  of  life,  in  the  midst  of  a 
wicked    and   perverse   generation,    as   stars   of  the 
firmament  do  in  the  night.  7      u  The  stars  shine  in 
"  the  night,"  says  St.  John  Chrysostom,  "  they  glitter 
"  in  the  dark ;  so  far  from  growing  dim  amidst  the 
"  gloom  that  surrounds   them,  they   seem    all    the 
"  more  brilliant.     So  will  it  be  with  thee,  if  thou  art 
u  virtuous  amidst  the  wicked  ;  thy  light  will  shirje  so 
"much    the   clearer."8 — "  As   the   stars,"    says   St. 
Augustine,  "  keep  on  their  course  in  the  track  marked 


1  St.  Matth.  xxiv.  12.  5  St.  John,  viii.  32. 

*  Eph.  v.  8.  «  Philip,  i.  27. 

3  Philip,  i.  28-30.  7  Ibid.  ii.  15. 

4  Ibid.  ii.  16.  8  S.  Chrys.  in  Phil.  Horn.  viii.  4 


478      1WENTY-SEC0ND   SUNDAY   AFIER   PENTECOST. 


"  out  for  them  by  God,  and  grow  not  tired  of  sending 
11  forth  their  light  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  neither 
"  heed  they  the  calamities  which  may  be  happening 
"  on  earth, — so  should  do  those  holy  ones  whose 
"conversation  is  truly  in  heaven;1  they  should  pay 
"  no  more  notice  as  to  what  is  said  or  done  against 
"  them,  than  the  stars  do."2 

The  Gradual  hymns  the  praise  of  the  sweet  and 
strong  unity,  maintained,  in  the  Church,  even  to  the 
end  ;  she  has  done  this,  by  the  charity,  in  which  the 
Epistle  urged  us  to  be  making  fresh  progress,  and 
which  the  ancient  Gospel  of  this  same  Sunday  put 
before  us  as  the  one  means  for  finding  a  favourable 
sentence  passed  on  us,  at  the  Day  of  Judgment.3 


GRADUAL. 


Ecce  quam  bonum,  et 
quam  jucundum  habitare 
fratres  in  unum ! 

$*.  Sicut  unguentum  in 
capite  quod  descendit  in 
barbam,  barbam  Aaron. 


Alleluia,  alleluia. 

"ft.  Qui  timent  Dominum, 
sperent  in  eo  ;  adjutor  et 
protector  eorum  est.  Alle- 
luia. 


Behold  !  how  good  and  how 
pleasant  it  is,  for  Brethren  to 
dwell  together  in  unity  ! 

$".  It  is  like  the  precious 
ointment  on  the  head,  that 
ran  down  upon  the  beard, 
{yea,  the  whole)  beard,  of 
Aaron. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$".  They  that  fear  the  Lord, 
hope  in  him ;  he  is  their 
helper  and  their  protector. 
Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthseura. 

Cap.  xxii. 

In  illo  tempore:  Abeun- 
tes  Pharisaei,  consilium  in- 
ierunt,  ut  caperent  Jesum 
in  sermone.  Et  mittunt  ei 


Sequel    of  the    holy    Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  xxii. 

At  that  time:  The  Pharisees 
going,  consulted  among  them- 
selves how  to  ensnare  Jesus 
in  his  speech.    And  they  send 


1  Philip,  iii.  20. 


*  S.  Aug.  Enarr.  in  Fs.  xciii.  5,  6. 
3  See  page  463. 


MASS. 


479 


to  him  their  disciples,  with 
the Herodians,  saying:  Master, 
we  know  that  thou  art  a  true 
speaker,  and  teachest  the  way 
of  God  in  truth,  neither  carest 
thou  for  any  man:  for  thou 
dost  not  regard  the  person  of 
men.  Tell  us  therelore  what 
thou  dost  think  ;  is  it  lawful 
to  give  tribute  to  Caesar  or 
not?  But  Jesus  knowing 
their  wickedness,  said  :  Why 
do  you  tempt  me,  ye  hypo- 
crites 1  Shew  me  the  coin  or 
the  tribute.  And  they  offered 
him  a  penny.  And  Jesus 
saith  to  them  :  Whose  image 
and  inscription  is  this  1  They 
say  to  him  :  Caesar's.  Then 
he  saith  to  them  :  Kender 
therefore  to  Caesar  the  things 
that  are  Caesar's  :  and  to  God 
the  things  that  are  God's. 


discipulos  suos  cum  Hero- 
dianis,  dicentes  :  Magister, 
scimus  quia  verax  es,  et 
viam  Dei  in  veritate  doces, 
et  non  est  tibi  cura  de 
aliquo :  non  enim  respicis 
personam  hominum :  die 
ergo  nobis,  quid  tibi  vide- 
tur:  licet  censum  dare 
Caesari,  an  non  1  Cognita 
autem  Jesus  nequitia 
eorum,  ait  :  Quid  me  ten- 
tatis,  hypocritae  1  ostendite 
mini  numisma  census.  At 
illi  obtulerunt  ei  denarium. 
Et  ait  illis  Jesus :  Cujus  est 
imago  haec,  et  super- 
scription Dicunt  ei :  Caesaris. 
Tunc  ait  illis:  Keddite  ergo 
quae  sunt  Caesaris,  Caesari: 
et  quae  sunt  Dei,  Deo. 


The  getting  truths  to  be  diminished,1  is,  evidently, 
to  be  a  leading  peril  of  the  latter  times, — for,  during 
these  weeks  which  represent  the  last  days  of  the 
world,  the  Church  is  continually  urging  us  to  a  sound 
and  solid  understanding  of  truth,  as  though  she  con- 
sidered that  to  be  the  great  preservative  for  her 
children.  Last  Sunday,  she  gave  them,  as  defensive 
armour,  the  shield  of  faith,  and,  as  an  offensive 
weapon,  the  word  of  God.2  On  the  previous  Sunday, 
it  was  circumspection  of  mind  and  intelligence  that 
she  recommended  to  them,3  with  a  view  to  their 
preserving,  during  the  approaching  evil  days,  the 
holiness  which  is  founded  on  truth  ;4  for,  as  she  told 
them,  the  previous  week,  their  riches  in  all  knowledge 
are  of  paramount  necessity.5     To-day,  in  the  Epistle, 


1  Ps.  xi.  2. 

2  Ep.  of  the  21st  Sund.  aft.  Pent 


3  Ep.  of  the  20th  Sunday. 

4  Ep.  of  the  19th  Sunday. 
6  Ep.  of  the  18th  Sunday. 


480    TWENTY-SECOND    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

she  implored  of  them,  to  be  ever  progressing  in 
knowledge  and  all  understanding,  as  being  the  essential 
means  for  abounding  in  charity,  and  for  having  the 
work  of  their  sanctification  perfected  for  the  day  of 
Christ  Jesus.  The  Gospel  comes  with  an  appropriate 
finish  to  these  instructions  given  us  by  the  Apostle : 
it  relates  an  event  in  our  Lord's  life,  which  stamps 
those  counsels  with  the  weightiest  possible  authority, 
— the  authority  of  the  example  of  Him,  who  is  our 
divine  Model.  He  gives  his  disciples  the  example 
they  should  follow,  when,  like  himself,  they  have 
snares  laid,  by  the  world,  for  their  destruction. 

It  was  the  last  day  of  Jesus's  public  teaching; 
it  was  almost  the  eve  of  his  departure  from  this 
earth.1  His  enemies  had  failed  in  every  attempt 
hitherto  made  to  ensnare  him ;  this  last  plot  was  to 
be  unusually  deep-laid.  The  Pharisees,  who  refused 
to  recognise  CaBsar's  authority,  and  denied  his  claim 
to  tribute,  joined  issue  with  their  adversaries,  the 
partisans  of  Herod  and  Rome,  to  propose  this  insidious 
question  to  Jesus:  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Casar, 
or  not  ?  If  our  Lord's  answer  was  negative,  he  in- 
curred the  displeasure  of  the  government ;  if  he  took 
the  affirmative  side,  he  would  lose  the  estimation  of 
the  people.  "With  his  divine  prudence,  he  disconcerted 
their  plans.  The  two  parties,  so  strangely  made  friends 
by  partnership  in  one  common  intrigue,  heard  the 
magnificent  answer,  which  was  divine  enough  to  make 
even  Pharisees  and  Herodians  one  in  the  Truth :  but, 
Truth  was  not  what  they  were  in  search  of;  so  they 
both  skulked  back  again  into  their  old  party  squabbles. 
The  league  formed  against  our  Jesus  was  broken  ;  the 
effort  made  by  error,  recoiled  on  its  own  self,  as  must 
ever  be  the  case ;  and  the  answer  it  had  elicited, 
passed,  from  the  lips  of  our  Incarnate  Lord,  to  those 
of  his  Bride,  the  Church,  who  would  be  ever  repeat- 
1  Tuesday  in  Holy  Week,' 


MASS.  481 

ing  it  to  this  world  of  ours,  for  it  contains  the  first 
principle  of  all  governments  on  earth. 

Render  to  Ccesar  the  things  that  are  Ccesar  s,  and  to 
God  the  things  that  are  God's :  it  was  the  dictum  most 
dear  to  the  Apostles.  If  they  boldly  asserted,  that  we 
must  obey  God,  rather  than  men,1  they  explained  the 
whole  truth,  and  added :  Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the 
higher  powers  :  for  there  is  no  power  but  from  God : 
and  those  that  are,  are  ordained  of  God.  Therefore, 
he  that  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance  of 
God;  and  they  that  resist,  purchase  to  themselves  dam- 
nation. Wherefore,  be  subject  of  necessity,  not  only  for 
wrath,  but  also  for  conscience'  sake.  For,  therefore, 
also  ye  pay  tribute ;  for  they  are  the  ministers  of  God 
serving  unto  this  purpose.2 

The  will  of  God  /3 — there  is  the  origin,  there  is  the 
real  greatness  of  all  authority  amongst  men  !  Of 
himself,  man  has  no  right  to  command  his  fellow- 
man.  The  number,  however  imposing  it  may  be, 
makes  no  difference  with  this  powerlessness  of  men 
over  my  conscience ;  for,  whether  they  be  one,  or  five 
hundred,  I,  by  nature,  am  equal  to  each  one  among 
them ;  and,  by  adding  the  number  of  their  so-called 
rights  over  me,  they  are  only  adding  to  the  number 
of  nothingnesses.  But,  God,  wishing  that  men  should 
live  one  with  the  other,  has  thereby  wished,  that 
there  exist  amongst  them  a  power  which  should  rule 
over  the  rest ;  that  is,  should  direct  the  thousands  or 
millions  of  different  wills  to  the  unity  of  one  social 
end.  God  leaves  to  circumstances,  though  it  is  his 
providence  that  regulates  those  circumstances, — he 
leaves  to  men  themselves,  at  the  beginning  of  any 
mere  human  society, — a  great  latitude  as  to  the  choice 
of  the  form,  under  which  is  to  be  exercised,  both  the 
civil  power  itself,  and  the  mode  of  its  transmission.  But, 
once  regularly  invested  with  the  power,  its  depositories, 

1  Acts,  v.  29.      2  Rom.  xiii.  1,  2,  5,  6.    3 1  St.  Pet.  ii.  15. 
VOL.  XI.  21 


482      TWENTY- SECOND    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 

its  possessors, — are  responsible  to  God  alone,  as  far, 
that  is  as  the  legitimate  exercise  of  their  authority 
goes, — because  it  is  from  God  alone  that  that  power 
comes  to  them ;  it  does  not  come  to  them  from  their 
people,  who,  not  having  that  power  themselves,  cannot 
give  it  to  another.  So  long  as  those  rulers  comply  with 
the  compact,  or  do  not  turn  to  the  ruin  of  their  people 
the  power  they  received  for  its  well-being, — so  long 
their  right  to  the  obedience  of  their  subjects  is  the 
right  of  God  himself, — whether  they  exercise  their 
authority  in  exacting  the  subsidies  needed  for  govern- 
ment ;  or  in  passing  laws,  which,  for  the  general  good 
of  the  people,  restrain  the  liberty  otherwise  theirs,  by 
natural  right ;  or,  again,  by  bidding  their  soldiers 
defend  their  country,  at  the  risk  of  life.  In  all  such 
cases,  it  is  God  himself  that  commands,  and  insists  on 
being  obeyed :  in  this  world,  he  puts  the  sword  into 
the  hands  of  representatives,  that  they  may  punish 
the  disobedient  ;x  and,  in  the  next,  he  himself  will 
eternally  punish  them,  unless  they  have  made  amends. 
How  great,  then,  is  not  the  dignity  of  human 
Law !  It  makes  the  legislator  a  representative  of 
God,  and,  at  the  same  time,  spares  the  subject  the 
humiliation  of  feeling  himself  debased  before  a  fellow- 
man  !  But,  in  order  that  the  law  oblige,  that  is,  be 
truly  a  law,  it  is  evident,  that  it  must  be,  first  and 
foremost,  conformable  to  the  commands  and  the  pro- 
hibitions of  that  God,  whose  will  alone  can  give  it  a 
sacred  character,  by  making  it  enter  into  the  domain 
of  man's  conscience.  It  is  for  this  reason,  that  there 
cannot  be  a  law  against  God,  or  his  Christ,  or  his 
Church.  When  God  is  not  with  him  who  governs, 
the  power  he  exercises  is  nothing  better  than  brute 
force.  The  sovereign,  or  the  parliament,  that  pre- 
tends to  govern  a  country  in  opposition  to  the  laws  of 
God,  has  no  right  to  aught  but  revolt  and  contempt 

1  Rom.  xiii.  4. 


mass.  483 

from  every  upright  man ;  to  give  the  sacred  name  of 
law  to  tyrannical  enactments  of  that  kind,  is  a  pro- 
fanation, unworthy,  not  only  of  Christian,  but  of  every 
man  who  is  not  a  slave. 

The  Offertory — Anthem,  as  also  the  Yerses  which 
used  to  be  joined  to  it,  refers,  like  the  Introit,  to  the 
period  of  the  last  persecution.  The  words  are  taken 
from  the  prayer  addressed  to  God  by  Esther,  when 
about  to  enter  into  the  presence  of  Assuerus,  that  she 
might  plead  with  him  against  Aman,  who  is  a  figure 
of  Antichrist,  Esther  is  a  type  of  the  Church  ;  and 
we  could  not  better  show  the  spirit  in  which  we  ought 
to  sing  our  Offertory,  than  by  quoting  the  inspired 
words  which  preface  this  sublime  prayer.  Queen  Esther, 
fearing  the  danger  that  was  at  hand,  had  recourse 
to  the  Lord.  And  when  she  had  laid  away  her 
royal  apparel,  she  put  on  garments  suitable  for 
weeping  and  mourning ;  instead  of  divers  "precious 
ointments,  she  covered  her  head  with  ashes  and  filth, 
and  she  humbled  her  body  with  fasts :  and  all  the 
places,  in  which  before  she  %vas  accustomed  to  re- 
joice, she  filled  with  her  torn  hair  !  And  she  prayed 
to  the  Lord  the  God  of  Israel,  saying  :  0  my  Lord ! 
who  alone  art  our  King,  help  one  a  desolate  woman, 
and  who  have  no  other  helper  but  thee !  \ 

OFFERTORY. 

Kemember  me,  0  Lord,  who  Recordare  mei,  Domine, 

art  above  all  power;  and  put  omnipotentatuidominans: 

a  right  speech  in  my  mouth,  et  da  sermonem  rectum  in 

that  my  words  may  be  pleasing  os  meum,  ut  placeant  verba 

to  the  prince.  mea  in  conspectu  principis. 

y.  Remember,  tlutt  I  have  ^J.  Recordare  quod  stete- 

stood  in  thy  sight.  rim  in  conspectu  tuo. 

y.  Turn     his    heart     into  $".    Everte  cor    ejus   in 

hatred  of  them  tlutt  oppose  us,  odium  repugnantium  nobis, 

and  of  them  that  consent  unto  et  in  eos  qui  consentiunt  eis; 

them;  but,  deliver  us  by  thy  nos  autem  libera  in  manu 

hand,  0  our  God  for  ever  !  tua,Deusnoster in  ceternum. 

1  Esth.  xiv.  1-3. 


484      TWENTY-SECOND   SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

V.  Qui  regis  Israel,  in-  $".  0  thou  that  rulest  Israel, 

tende ;    qui    deducts  velut  give    ear;   thou    that    leadest 

ovem  Joseph.  Joseph  like  a  sheep. 

Recordare  mei,  Domine.  Remember  me,  0  Lord. 

The  surest  guarantee  a  christian  can  have  against 
adversity,  is  freedom  from  sin.  It  is  sin  that  stirs 
up  the  anger  of  God,  and  cries  upon  him  for  vengeance. 
Let  us  unite  in  the  following  prayer  of  the  Church. 


SECRET. 

Da,  raisericors  Deus:  ut  Grant,  0  merciful  God,  that 

haec  salutaris  ohlatio,  et  a  this  sacrifice  of  salvation  may, 

propriis  nos    reatibus  in-  constantly,  both  free  us  from 

desinenter  expediat,  et  ab  our  sins,  and  protect  us  from  all 

omnibus  tueatur  adversis.  adversity.    Through,  etc. 
Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

The  Communion- Anthem  shows  us  with  what  per- 
severance and  earnestness,  the  Church  prays  to  her 
divine  Lord.     We  must  imitate  her. 

COMMUNION. 

Ego  clamavi  quoniam  I  have  cried  out,  because 
exaudistime,  Deus:  inclina  thou  heardest  me,  0  God; 
aurem  tuam,  et  exaudi  bend  down  thine  ear,  and 
verba  mea.  graciously    hearken    to    my 

words. 

Whilst  offering  the  sacred  mysteries  in  memory  of 
our  Jesus,  as  he  commanded  us  to  do, — we  must  not 
forget,  that  these  same  are,  also,  our  refuge  in  all  our 
miseries.  It  would  be  presumption,  or  folly,  to  neglect 
to  pray,  that  they  may  thus  protect  us.  The  Church, 
here  again,  is  our  model,  in  utilising  these  most  power- 
ful of  all  means  for  help. 


VESPERS. 


485 


POSTCOMMUXION. 


Having  received,  O  Lord, 
the  sacred  mysteries,  we 
humbly  beseech  thee,  that 
what  thou  hast  commanded 
us  to  do  in  remembrance  of 
thee,  may  be  a  help  to  us  in 
our  weakness.  Who  livest, 
etc. 


Sumpsimus,  Domine, 
sacri  dona  mysterii,  humi- 
liter  deprecantes:  ut  quae 
in  tui  commemorationem 
nos  facere  praecepisti,  in 
nostrae  proficiant  infirmi- 
tatis  auxilium.    Qui  vi vis. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPEBS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON   OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Kender,  therefore,  to  Caesar 
the  things  that  are  Caesar's: 
and  to  God,  the  things  that 
are  God's.    Alleluia. 


Reddite  ergo  quae  sunt 
Caesaris  Caesari;  et  quae 
sunt  Dei  Deo.    Alleluia. 


LET  US   PRAY. 

O  God,  our  refuge  and 
strength  !  give  ear  to  the  holy 
prayers  of  thy  Church,  O  thou, 
the  author  of  holiness;  and 
grant,  that  what  we  ask  for 
with  faith,  we  may  effectually 
obtain.    Through,  etc. 


OREMUS. 

Deus  ref  ugium  nostrum, 
et  virtus:  adesto  piis 
Ecclesiae  tuae  precibus, 
auctor  ipse  pietatis,  et 
praesta:  ut  quod  fideliter 
petimus,  emcaciter  conse- 
quamur.    Per  Dominum. 


486       TWENTY-THIRD    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 


THE    TWENTY-THIED    SUNDAY 

AFTER   PENTECOST. 

0 

For  the  years  when  trie  number  of  the  Sundays  after 
Pentecost  is  only  twenty-three,  the  Mass  for  to-day 
is  taken  from  the  twenty-fourth  and  last  Sunday ; 
and  the  Mass  appointed  for  the  twenty-third,  is  said 
on  the  previous  Saturday,  or  on  the  nearest  day  of 
the  preceding  week,  which  is  not  impeded  by  a  double 
or  semi-double  feast. 

But,  under  all  circumstances,  the  Antiphonary  ends 
to-day.  The  Introits,  Graduals,  Communions,  and 
Postcommunions,  which  are  given  below,  are  to  be 
repeated  on  each  of  the  Sundays  till  Advent,  which 
may  be  more  or  less  in  number,  according  to  the 
Years.  Our  readers  will  remember,  how,  in  the  time 
of  St.  Gregory,  Advent  was  longer  than  we  now  have 
it  j1  and  that,  in  those  days,  its  weeks  commenced  in 
that  part  of  the  Cycle,  which  is  now  occupied  by  the 
last  Sundays  after  Pentecost.  This  is  one  of  the 
reasons  which  explain  there  being  a  lack  of  liturgical 
riches  in  the  composition  of  the  dominical  Masses 
which  follow  the  twenty-third. 

Even  on  this  one,  formerly,  the  Church,  without 
losing  sight  of  the  Last  Day,  used  to  lend  a  thought 
to  the  new  season  which  was  fast  approaching,  the 
season,  that  is,  of  preparation  for  the  great  feast  of 
Christmas.  There  used  to  be  read,  as  Epistle,  the 
following  passage  from  Jeremias,  which  was  after- 

1  See  our  "Advent :"  Chap.  i.  page  23  ct  seq. 


mass.  487 

wards,  in  several  Churches,  inserted  in  the  Mass  of 
the  first  Sunday  of  Advent :  Behold  I  the  days  come, 
saith  the  Lord,  and  1  icill  raise  up  to  David  a  just 
branch :  and  a  King  shall  reign,  and  shall  be  wise  : 
and  shall  execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth. 
In  those  days,  shall  Jnda  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall 
dwell  confidently  :  and  this  is  the  name  that  they  shall 
call  Him  :  The  Lord  our  Just  One.  Therefore,  be- 
hold the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  and  they  shall  say 
no  more :  The  Lord  liveth,  ivho  brought  up  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt !  But :  The 
Lord  liveth,  who  hath  brought  out,  and  brought  hither, 
the  seed  of  the  house  of  Israel,  from  the  land  of  the 
north,  and  out  of  all  the  lands,  to  which  1  had  cast 
them  forth  !     And  they  shall  dwell  in  their  own  land? 

As  is  evident,  this  passage  is  equally  applicable  to 
the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  and  the  restoration  of 
Israel,  which  are  to  take  place  at  the  end  of  the 
world.  This  was  the  view  taken  by  the  chief  liturgists 
of  the  Middle- Ages,  in  order  to  explain  thoroughly  the 
Mass  of  the  twentj^-third  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
First  mentioning  to  our  readers,  that,  originally,  the 
Gospel  of  this  Sunday  was  that  of  the  multiplication 
of  the  five  loaves,  let  us  listen  to  the  profound  and 
learned  Abbot  Rupert,  who,  better  than  anyone,  will 
teach  us  the  mysteries  of  this  day,  which  brings  to  a 
close  the  grand  and  varied  Gregorian  Melodies,  that 
we  have  been  having  during  the  whole  year. 

"  Holy  Church,"  says  he,  "  is  so  intent  on  paying 
"her  debt  of  supplication,  and  prayer,  and  thanks- 
"  giving,  for  all  men,  as  the  Apostle  demands,2  that 
"  we  find  her  giving  thanks  also  for  the  salvation  of 
11  the  children  of  Israel,  who,  she  knows,  are  one  day 
"  to  be  united  with  her.  And,  as  their  remnants  are 
"  to  be  saved  at  the  end  of  the  world,3  so,  on  this  last 
"  Sunday  of  the  Year,  she  delights  at  having  them, 

1  Jerem.  xxiii.  5-8.         2  1  Tim.  ii.  1.  3  Rom.  ix.  27. 


488      TWENTY-THIRD   SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

"  just  as  though  they  were  already  her  members !  In 
"  the  Introit,  calling  to  mind  the  prophecies  con- 
"  cerning  them,  she  thus  sings  every  Year :  My 
"  thoughts  are  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  affliction. 
"  Verily,  his  thoughts  are  those  of  peace,  for  he  pro- 
"  mises  to  admit  to  the  banquet  of  his  grace,  the  Jews, 
"  who  are  his  brethren  according  to  the  flesh ;  thus 
"  realising  what  had  been  prefigured  in  the  history  of 
"  the  patriarch  Joseph.  The  brethren  of  Joseph, 
"  having  sold  him,  came  to  him,  when  they  were 
"  tormented  by  hunger ;  for  then  he  ruled  over  the 
"  whole  land  of  Egypt ;  he  recognised  them,  he  re- 
"  ceived  them,  and  made,  together  with  them,  a  great 
"  feast ;  so  too,  our  Lord  who  is  now  reigning  over 
"  the  whole  earth,  and  is  giving  the  bread  of  life,  in 
"  abundance,  to  the  Egyptians,  (that  is,  to  the  Gen- 
"  tiles,)  will  see  coming  to  him  the  remnants  of  the  chil- 
"  dren  of  Israel.  He,  whom  they  had  denied  and  put 
"  to  death,  will  admit  them  to  his  favour,  will  give 
"  them  a  place  at  his  table,  and  the  true  Joseph  will 
"  feast  delightedly  with  his  brethren. 

"  The  benefit  of  this  divine  Table  is  signified,  in 
"  the  Office  of  this  Sunday,  by  the  Gospel,  which  tells 
"  us  of  our  Lord's  feeding  the  multitude  with  five 
"loaves.  For,  it  will  be  then,  that  Jesus  will  open 
"  to  the  Jews  the  five  books  of  Moses,  which  are  now 
"being  carried  whole,  and  not  yet  broken, — yea, 
"  carried  by  a  child,  that  is  to  say,  this  people  itself, 
"  who,  up  to  that  time,  will  have  been  cramped  up  in 
"  the  narrowness  of  a  childish  spirit. 

11  Then  will  be  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Jeremias, 
"  which  is  so  aptly  placed  before  this  Gospel :  They 
"  shall  say  no  more  :  The  Lord  liveth,  ivho  brought  up 
"  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  I  But, 
"  the  Lord  liveth,  who  hath  brought  out  the  seed  of 
"  Israel  from  the  land  of  the  north,  and  from  all  the 
"  lands  into  which  they  had  been  cast. 

"  Thus  delivered  from  the  spiritual  bondage  which 


mass.  489 

u  still  holds  them,  they  will  sing  with  all  their  heart, 
"  the  words  of  thanksgiving  as  we  have  them  in  the 
"  Gradual :  Thou  hast  saved  us,  0  Lord,  from  them 
"  that  afflict  us  I 

"  The  words  we  use  in  the  Offertory :  From  the 
'*  depths  I  have  cried  to  thee,  0  Lord,  clearly  allude 
"  to  the  same  events  ;  for,  on  that  day,  his  brethren 
"  will  say  to  the  great  and  true  Joseph  :  We  beseech 
"  thee  to  forget  the  wickedness  of  thy  brethren  P-  The 
"Communion:  Amen,  1  say  to  you,  all  things  whatso- 
"  ever  ye  ash,  when  ye  pray,  fyc,  is  the  answer  made 
"  by  that  same  Joseph,  as  it  was  by  the  first  :2  Fear 
"  not!  Ye  thought  evil  against  me  .*  but  God  turned  it 
"  into  good,  that  he  might  exalt  me,  as  at  present  ye  see, 
"  and  might  save  many  people.  Fear  not,  therefore,  I 
"  will  feed  you,  and  your  children."3 

MASS. 

The  Introit,  which  we  have  just  had  explained  to 
us  by  Rupert,  is  taken  from  the  Prophet  Jeremias,4 
as  was  the  ancient  Epistle. 

INTROIT. 

The  Lord  saith  :  I  think  DicitDominus:  Ego  cog- 
thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  ito  cogitationes  pacis,  et 
affliction;  ye  shall  call  upon  nonafflictionis:  invocabitis 
me,  and  I  will  hear  you  :  and  me,  et  ego  exaudiam  vos  : 
bring  back  your  captive  people  et  reducam  captivitatem 
from  all  places.  vestram  de  cunctis  locis. 

Ps.   Thou,    O    Lord,    hast  Ps.  Benedixisti,  Domine, 
blessed  thy  land:  thou  hast  terramtuam:  avertisti  cap- 
brought    back    the     captive  tivitatem    Jacob.      Gloria 
children    of   Jacob.      Glory,  Patri.    Dicit  Dominus. 
etc.    The  Lord. 

Prayer  for  pardon  is  continually  on  the  lips  of  the 
christian  people,  because   the   weakness   of  human 

1  Gen.  1.  17.  3  Rup.  De  div.  Off.  xii.23. 

2  Ibid.  19-21.  *  Jerem.  xxix. 


490      TWENTY-THIRD  SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

nature  is,  here  below,  ever  making  itself  felt,  even 
by  the  just  man.1  God  knows  our  frailty,  and  he  is 
always  ready  to  pardon  us ;  but  it  is  on  the  condition, 
that  we  humbly  acknowledge  our  faults,  and  have 
confidence  in  Ms  mercy.  These  are  the  sentiments 
which  suggest  to  the  Church  the  words  of  the 
Collect. 


COLLECT. 


Absolve,  quaesumus  Do- 
mine,  tuorum  delicta  popu- 
lorum  :  ut  a  peccatorum 
nexibus,  quae  pro  nostra 
fragilitate  contraximus,tua 
benignitate  liberemur.  Per 
Dominum. 


Absolve,  O  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  sins  of  thy 
people  ;  that,  by  thy  clemency, 
we  may  be  delivered  from  the 
bonds  of  sins  contracted  by 
our  own  frailty.   Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolaebeati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Philippenses. 


Cap.  in  et  iv. 

Fratres,  Imitatores  mei 
estote,  et  observate  eos,  qui 
ita  ambulant,  sicut  habetis 
formam  nostram.  Multi 
enim  ambulant,  quos  saepe 
dicebam  vobis  (nunc  autem 
et  flens  dico)  inimicos  cru- 
cis  Christi :  quorum  finis 
interitus  :  quorum  Deus 
venter  est :  et  gloria  in  con- 
f  usioneipsorum,  quiterrena 
sapiunt.  Nostra  autem  con  - 
versatio  in  ccelis  est :  unde 
etiam  Salvatorem  exspec- 
tamus  Dominum  nostrum 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Philippians. 

Ch.  in  and  iv. 

Brethren  :  Be  followers"of 
me,  and  observe  them  who 
walk  so  as  ye  have  our  model. 
For  many  walk,  of  whom  I 
have  told  you  often  (and  now 
tell  you  weeping)  that  they 
are  enemies  of  the  cross  of 
Christ ;  whose  end  is  destruc- 
tion, whose  God  is  their  belly, 
and  whose  glory  is  their 
shame  :  who  mind  earthly 
things.  But  our  conversation 
is  in  heaven  ;  from  whence 
also  we  look  for  the  Saviour, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 


1  Prow  xxiv.  16. 


MASS. 


491 


will  reform  the  body  of  our  Jesum  Christum,  qui  re- 

lowness,    made    like    to    the  form abit corpus  humilitatis 

body  of  his  glory,  according  nostra3,  configuratum  cor- 

to  the  operation  whereby  also  pori  claritatis  suae,  secun- 

he  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  dum      operationem,     qua 

unto  himself.    Therefore,  my  etiam  possit  subjicere  sibi 

dearly  beloved  brethren,  and  omnia.    Itaque,  f ratres  mei 

most  desired,  my  joy,  and  my  charissimi,  et   desideratis- 

crown  :  so  stand  fast  in  the  simi    gaudium    meum    et 

Lord,  my  dearly  beloved.     I  corona  mea  :   sic  state  in 

beg  of  Evodia,  and  I  beseech  Domino,  charissimi.    Evo- 

Syntyche,  to  be  of  one  mind  diamrogo,etSyntichende- 

in  the  Lord.    And  I  entreat  precor  idipsum  sapere  in 

thee    also,  my   sincere    com-  Domino.   Etiam  rogo  et  te, 

panion,    help    those    women  germane    compar,    adjuva 

that  have  laboured  with  me  illas,  quae  mecum  labora- 

in  the  Gospel,  with  Clement  verunt  in  Evangelio  cum 

and  the  rest  of  my  fellow-  Clemente,  et  cseteris  adju- 

labourers,   whose   names  are  toribus  meis,  quorum  no- 

in  the  book  of  life.  mina  sunt  in  libro  vitae. 

The  Clement,  whose  name  is  here  mentioned  by 
ihe  Apostle,  is  that  of  St.  Peter's  second  successor. 
Very  frequently,  the  twenty-third  Sunday  after 
Pentecost  comes  close  upon  the  feast  of  this  great 
Pope  and  Martyr  of  the  first  century.  Disciple  of 
Paul,  and,  later  on,  in  close  intimacy  with  Peter, 
and  named  by  the  Yicar  of  Christ  as  the  fittest  to 
succeed  him  in  the  apostolic  chair, — Clement,  as  we 
shall  see  on  the  23rd  of  November,  was  one  of  those 
Saints,  who,  in  those  early  times,  were  the  most 
venerated  by  the  Faithful.  The  mention  made  of 
him,  in  the  Office  of  the  Time,  just  before  his  appear- 
ance on  the  Cycle  of  holy  Church,  excited  the  chris- 
tian people  to  joy,  and  roused  its  fervour ;  it  reminded 
them,  that  one  of  their  best  and  dearest  protectors 
would  soon  be  visiting  them. 

At  the  time  when  St.  Paul  was  writing  to  the 
Philippians,  Clement,  who  was  long  to  survive  the 
Apostles,  was  prominently  one  of  those  men  spoken 
of  in  our  Epistle, — that  is,  one  of  the  followers  of 
those  illustrious  models ,  who  were  called  to  perpetuate 


492      TWENTY-THIRD  SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

in  the  flock  confided  to  their  care,1  the  pattern,  of  holy 
living ;  and  that,  not  so  much  hy  their  zealous  teach- 
ing, as  by  the  force  of  example.  The  Church,  the 
One  true  Bride  of  the  divine  Word,  was  known  by 
the  incommunicable  privilege  of  possessing  within 
her  the  Truth, — not  only  its  dead  letter,  but  its  ever 
living  self,  and  this,  by  her  holiness.  The  Holy 
Ghost  has  not  kept  the  books  of  sacred  Scripture 
from  passing  into  the  hands  of  the  sects  separated 
from  the  centre  of  unity ;  but,  he  has  reserved  to  the 
Church  the  treasure  of  tradition,  which  transmits, 
surely  and  fully,  from  one  generation  to  another,  the 
Word  who  is  light  and  life ; 2  yes,  this  tradition  is 
kept  up  by  the  truth  and  holiness  of  the  Man- God ; 
they  are  ever  existing  in  his  members,  they  are  ever 
tangible  and  visible  in  the  Church.3  Holiness,  which 
is  inherent  in  the  Church,  is  tradition  in  its  purest 
and  strongest  form,  because  it  is  the  truth,  not  only 
preached,  but  reduced  to  action  and  work,4  as  it  was 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  as  it  is  in  God.5  It  is  the 
deposit?  which  the  disciples  of  the  Apostles  had  the 
mission  to  hand  faithfully  down  to  their  successors, 
just  as  the  Apostles  themselves  had  received  it  from 
the  Word,  who  had  come  upon  the  earth. 

Hence,  St.  Paul  did  not  content  himself  with 
entrusting  dogmatic  teaching  to  his  disciple  Timothy;7 
he  said  to  him :  Be  thou  an  example  to  the  Faithful, 
in  word,  and  in  living.8  He  said  much  the  same  to 
Titus :  Show  thyself  an  example  of  good  works,  in 
doctrine  and  in  integrity  of  life?  He  repeated  to  all: 
Be  ye  followers  of  me,  as  I  also  am  of  Christ.10  He 
sent  Timothy  to  the  Corinthians,  that  he  might 
remind  them,  or,  where  it  was  necessary,  might  teach 
them,  not  only  the  dogmas  of  his  Gospel,  but,  like- 

1  1  St.  Pet.  v.  3.    4  1  Thess.  ii.  13.     7  2  Tim.  ii.  2. 

2  St.  John,  i.  4.     5  St.  John,  v.  17.     8  1  Tim.  iv.  12. 

3  1  St.  John,  i.  1.   6  1  Tim.  vi.  20.      9  Tit.  ii.  7. 

10  1  Cor.  iv.  16. 


mass.  493 

wise,  his  ways  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  is,  his  manner  of 
life;  for,  this  manner  of  life  of  the  Apostle  was,  in  a 
certain  measure,  his  teaching  every  where  in  all  the 
Churches ; !  and  he  lauded  the  Faithful  of  Corinth 
for  their  heing  mindful  to  imitate  him  in  all  things, 
which  was  a  keeping  to  the  tradition  of  Christ.2  As 
for  the  Thessalonians,  they  had  so  thoroughly  entered 
into  this  teaching,  taken  from  their  Apostle's  life, 
that,  as  St.  Paul  says  of  them,  they  had  become  a 
pattern  to  all  believers  ;  this  silent  teaching  of  chris- 
tian revelation,  which  they  showed  forth  in  their 
conduct,  made  it  superfluous  for  the  messengers  of 
the  Gospel  to  say  much.3 

The  Church  is  a  magnificent  Temple,  which  is 
built  up,  to  the  glory  of  God,  by  the  living  stones, 
which  let  themselves  be  set  into  its  walls.  The  con- 
structing of  those  sacred  walls,  and  on  the  plan  laid 
down  by  Christ,  is  a  work  in  which  all  are  permitted  to 
share.  What  one  does  by  word,5  another  does  by 
good  example  ;6  but,  both  of  them  build,  both  of  them 
edify  the  holy  City ;  and,  as  it  was  in  the  Apostolic 
Age,  so  always, — example  is  more  powerful  than 
word,  unless  that  word  be  backed  by  the  authority  of 
holiness  in  him  who  speaks  it,  unless,  that  is,  he  lead 
a  life  according  to  the  perfection  taught  by  the  Gos- 
pel. 

But,  as  the  giving  edification  to  those  around  him, 
is  an  obligation  incumbent  on  the  Christian, — an 
obligation  imposed  both  by  charity  he  owes  to  his 
neighbour,  and  by  the  zeal  he  should  have  for  the 
house  of  God, — so,  likewise,  under  pain  of  presump- 
tion, he  should  seek  his  own  edification  in  the  conduct 
of  others.  The  reading  of  good  books,  the  study  of 
the  Lives  of  the  Saints,  the  observing,  as  our  Epistle 
says,  the  respectfully  observing  those  holy  people  with 
whom  he  lives, — all  this  will  be  incalculable  aid  to 

1 1  Cor.  iv.   17.  3  1  Thess.  i.  5-8.  5  1  Cor.  xiv.  3. 

3  Ibid.  xi.  1-2.  i  Eph.  ii.  20-22.  6  Roai.  xiv.  19. 


494      TWEK1Y-THIRD   SUNDAY  AFTER   PENTECOST. 

him,  in  the  work  of  his  own  personal  sanctification 
and  in  the  fulfilment  of  God's  purposes  in  his  regard. 
This  devout  intercourse  with  the  elect  of  earth  and 
heaven,  will  keep  us  away  from  men  who  are  enemies 
of  the  Cross  of  Christ  and  mind  earthly  things,  and 
put  their  happiness  in  carnal  pleasures.  It  will  make 
our  conversation  be  in  heaven.  Preparing  for  the  day 
which  cannot  now  he  far  off, — the  day  of  the  Coming 
of  our  Lord,  we  shall  stand  fast  in  Him,  in  spite  of 
the  falling  off  of  so  many  amongst  us,  who,  by  the 
current  of  the  world's  fashion,  are  hurried  into  perdi- 
tion. The  troubles  and  sufferings  of  the  last  times 
will  but  intensify  our  hope  in  God,  for  they  will  make 
us  long  all  the  more  ardently  for  the  happy  day,  when 
our  Eedeemer  will  appear  and  complete  the  work  of 
the  salvation  of  his  servants,  by  imparting,  to  their 
very  flesh,  the  brightness  of  his  own  divine  Body. 
Let  us,  as  our  Apostle  says,  be  of  one  mind  in  the  Lord; 
and,  then,  as  he  bids  his  dear  Philippians  do,  let  us 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,  yes,  let  us  rejoice,  for,  the 
Lord  is  nigh.1 

GRADUAL. 

Liberasti   nos,   JDomine,  Thou  hast  saved  us,  O  Lord, 

ex  affligentibus  nos:  et  eos  from  them  that  afflict  us:  and 

qui  nos  oderunt,  confudisti.  hast  put  them  to  shame  that 

hate  us. 

$\  In   Deo  laudabimur  $".  In  God  shall  we  glory  all 

tota  die,  et  in  nomine  tuo  the  day  long  ;    and,   in    thy 

confitebimur  in  saecula.  name,  we  will  give  praise  for 

ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia;  Alleluia,  alleluia. 

y.  De  profundis  clamavi  ff.  Out  of  the  depths  I  have 

ad   te,    I)omine:    Domine  cried  unto  thee,  0  Lord:  Lord, 

exaudi    orationem    meain.  hear  my  prayer.  Alleluia. 
Alleluia. 

1  Philip,  iv.  4,  5. 


MASS. 


495 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel    of    the   holy   Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  ix. 

At  that  time :  As  Jesus  was 
speaking  to  the  multitude: 
Behold  a  certain  ruler  came 
up  and  adored  him,  saying: 
Lord,  my  daughter  is  even  now 
dead  ;  but  come  lay  thy  hand 
upon  her,  and  she  shall  live. 
And  Jesus  rising  up  followed 
him,  with  his  disciples.  And 
behold  a  woman  who  was 
troubled  with  an  issue  of  blood 
twelve  years,  came  behind 
him,  and  touched  the  hem  of 
his  garment.  For  she  said 
within  herself:  If  I  shall  touch 
only  his  garment  I  shall  be 
healed.  But  Jesus  turning 
and  seeing  her,  said:  Be  of 
good  heart,  daughter,  thy  faith 
hath  made  thee  whole.  And 
the  woman  was  made  whole 
from  that  hour.  And  when 
Jesus  was  come  into  the 
house  of  the  ruler,  and  saw 
the  minstrels  and  the  multi- 
tude making  a  rout,  he  said: 
Give  place:  for  the  girl  is  not 
dead,  but  sleepeth.  And  they 
laughed  him  to  scorn.  And 
when  the  multitude  was  put 
forth,  he  went  in  and  took  her 
by  the  hand.  And  the  maid 
arose.  And  the  fame  hereof 
went  abroad  into  all  that 
country. 

Although  the  choice  of  this  Gospel  for  the  twenty- 
third  Sunday  has  not  great  antiquity  on  its  side,  yet 
is  it  in  most  perfect  keeping  with  the  post-pentecostal 
Liturgy,  and  confirms  what  we  have  stated,  relative 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthseum. 

Cap.  ix. 

In  illo  tempore:  Loquente 
Jesu  ad  turbas,  ecce  prin- 
ceps  unus  accessit,  et  ado- 
rabateum,dicens:  Domine, 
filia  mea  modo  defuncta, 
est:  sed  veni,  impone  ma- 
num  tuam  super  earn,  et  vi- 
vet.  Et  surgens  Jesus  se- 
quebatur  eum,  et  discipuli 
ejus.  Et  ecce  mulier,  quae 
sanguinis  fluxum  patieba- 
tur  duodecim  annis,  acces- 
sit retro,  et  tetigit  fimbriam 
vestimenti  ejus.  Dicebat 
enim  intra  se:  Si  tetigero 
tantum  vestimentum  ejus, 
salva  ero.  At  Jesus  con  ver- 
sus, et  videns  earn,  dixit : 
Confide,  filia,  fides  tua  te 
salvam  fecit.  Et  salva  facta 
est  mulier  ex  ilia  hora.  Et 
cum  venisset  Jesus  in  do- 
mum  principis,  et  vidisset 
tibicines,  et  turbam  tumul- 
tuantem,  dicebat :  Rece- 
dite,  non  est  enim  mortua 
puella,  sed  dormit.  Et  de- 
ridebant  eum.  Et  cum  ejec- 
ta  essefc  turba,  intravit,  et 
tenuit  manum  ejus.  Et 
surrexit  puella.  Et  exiit 
f  ama  haee  in  universam  ter- 
rain illam. 


49 G       TWENTY-THIRD    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

to  the  character  of  this  portion  of  the  Church's  Year. 
St.  Jerome  tells  us,  in  the  homily  selected  for  the 
day,  that  the  Hemorrhoissa,  healed  by  our  Lord,  is 
a  type  of  the  Gentile  world ;  whilst  the  Jewish  people 
is  represented  by  the  daughter  of  the  Ruler  of  the 
Synagogue.1  This  latter  is  not  to  be  restored  to  life, 
until  the  former  has  been  cured  ;  and  this  is  precisely 
the  mystery  we  are  so  continually  commemorating 
during  these  closing  weeks  of  the  Liturgical  Year, — the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  recognising  and  welcoming  the 
divine  Physiciarj,  and  the  blindness  of  Israel,  at  last 
giving  way  to  the  Light.2 

We  have  celebrated,  during  this  Year  of  Grace,  all 
the  grand  Mysteries  of  the  Redemption,  and  this 
ought  to  enable  us  to  appreciate  the  glorious  economy, 
as  the  Fathers  love  to  call  what  we  admire  under 
another  name.  The  spirit  of  the  Church's  Liturgy 
at  this  close  of  her  and  our  Year,  lets  us  see  the 
world,  as  though  its  end  were  come ;  it  looks  as 
though  it  were  sinking  away,  down  into  some  deep 
abyss, — and  yet,  no ;  it  is  only  that  it  may  shake  off 
the  wicked  from  its  surface,  and  then,  it  will  come  up 
again  blooming  in  light  and  love.  All  this  has  been 
the  divine  reality  of  the  Year  of  Grace  we  have  had 
put  before  us,  yea,  and  in  us,  by  our  sweet  Mother 
the  Church ;  and  now,  we  are,  or  ought  to  be,  in  a 
mood  to  feel  a  thrill  of  admiration  at  the  mysterious, 
yet,  at  the  same  time,  the  strong  and  sweet  ways  of 
eternal  Wisdom.3  At  the  beginning,  when  Man  was 
first  created,  sin  soon  followed,  breaking  up  the 
harmony  of  God's  beautiful  world,  and  throwing  man 
off  the  divine  path  where  his  Creator  had  placed  him. 
Time  and  wickedness  went  on ;  till  there  was  a 
family,  on  which  God's  mercy  fell ;  the  light  which 
beamed  on  that  privileged  favourite,  only  showed 
the  plainer  the  thick  darkness  in  which  the  rest  of 
mankind  was  vegetating.     The  Gentiles,  abandoned 

1  S.  Hieron.  in  Matth.  cap  ix.       2  Bom.  xi.  25.      3  Wisd.  viii.  1. 


mass.  497 

to  their  misery, — all  the  more  terrible,  because  they 
had  caused  it,  and  loved  it, — saw  God's  favours  all 
bestowed  on  Israel,  whilst  themselves  were  disregarded, 
and  wished  to  be  so.  Even  when  the  time  came  for 
original  sin  to  be  remedied,  it  seemed  as  though  that 
was  just  the  time  for  the  final  reprobation  of  the 
Gentiles, — for,  the  salvation  that  came  down  from 
heaven  in  the  person  of  the  Man-God,  was  seen  to 
be  exclusively  directed  towards  the  Jews  and  the 
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.1 

But,  the  people  that  had  been  treated  with  so  much 
predilection,  and  whose  Fathers  and  first  Rulers  had 
so  ardently  prayed  for  the  coming  of  the  Messias, 
was  no  longer  up  to  the  position  made  for  it  by  the 
holy  patriarchs  and  prophets.  Its  beautiful  religion, 
founded  as  it  was  on  desire  and  hope,  was  then 
nothing  but  a  sterile  expectancy,  which  kept  it 
motionless,  and  unable  to  advance  a  single  step 
towards  its  Redeemer.  As  to  its  Law,  Israel  then 
minded  nothing  but  the  letter,  and,  at  last,  turned  it 
into  a  mummy  of  sectarian  formalism.  Now,  whilst 
in  spite  of  all  this  sinful  apathy,  it  was  mad  with 
jealousy,  pretending  that  no  one  else  had  any  right 
to  heaven's  favours, — the  Gentile,  whose  ever  increas- 
ing misery  urged  him  to  go  in  search  of  some  deliverer, 
found  one,  and  recognised  him  in  Jesus  the  Saviour 
of  the  world  ;  he  was  confident  that  this  Jesus  could 
cure  him  ;  so  he  took  the  bold  initiative,  went  up  to 
Him,  and  had  the  merit  of  being  the  first  to  be 
healed.  True,  our  Lord  had  treated  him  with  an 
apparent  disdain  ;  but  that  had  only  had  the  effect  of 
intensifying  his  humility,  and  humility  has  a  power 
of  making  way  anywhere,  even  into  heaven  itself.2 

Israel,  therefore,  was  now  made  to  wait.  One  of 
the  Psalms  he  sang,  ran  thus  :  Ethiopia  shall  be  the 
first  to  stretch  out  her  hands  to  God?    It  is  now  the 

1  St.  Matth.  xv.  24.  2  Ecclus.  xxxv.  21.  3  Ps.  lxvii.  32. 

vol.  xi.  2  K 


498        TWENTY-THIRD    SUNDAY   AFTER   PENTECOST. 

turn  for  Israel  to  recover,  by  the  pangs  of  a  long 
abandonment,  the  humility  which  had  won  the 
divine  promises  for  his  Fathers,  the  humility  which 
alone  could  merit  his  seeing  those  promises  fulfilled. 

By  this  time,  however,  the  word  of  salvation  has 
made  itself  heard  throughout  all  the  nations,  healing 
and  saving  all  who  desired  the  blessing.  Jesus,  who 
had  been  delayed  on  the  road,  came  at  last  to  the 
house,  towards  which  he  first  purposed  to  direct  his 
sacred  steps  ;  he  reached,  at  last,  the  house  of  Juda, 
where  the  daughter  of  Sion  was  in  a  deep  sleep  ;  she 
is  in  it  still !  His  almighty  compassion  drives  away 
from  the  poor  abandoned  one  the  crowd  of  false 
teachers  and  lying  prophets,  who  had  sent  her  into 
that  mortal  sleep,  by  all  the  noise  of  their  vain 
babbling :  he  casts  forth  for  ever  from  her  house 
those  insulters  of  his  own  divine  self,  who  were  quite 
resolved  to  keep  the  dead  one  dead.  Taking  the 
poor  daughter  by  the  hand,  he  restores  her  to  life, 
and  to  all  the  charm  of  her  first  youth  ;  proving  thus, 
that  her  apparent  death  had  been  but  a  sleep,  and 
that  the  long  delay  of  dreary  ages  could  never  belie 
the  word  of  God,  which  he  had  given  to  Abraham, 
his  servant.1 

Now  therefore,  let  this  world  of  ours  hold  itself  in 
readiness  for  its  final  transformation  ;  for  the  tidings 
of  the  restoration  of  the  daughter  of  Sion  puts  the 
last  seal  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  prophecies. 
It  remains  now  but  for  the  graves  to  give  back  their 
dead.2  The  valley  of  Josaphat  is  preparing  for  the 
great  meeting  of  the  nations  ;3  Mount  Olivet  is  once 
more4  to  have  Jesus  standing  upon  it,  but,  this  time, 
as  Lord  and  J  udge  ! 5 

1  St.  Luke,  i.  54,  55.        2  Dan.  xii.  1,  2.        8  Joel,  iii.  2. 
4  Acts,  i.  11.  6  Zach.  xiv.  4. 


mass.  499 


OFFERTORY. 

Out  of  the  depths  have  I  De  profundis  clamavi  ad 

cried  unto  the,  O  Lord  :  Lord,  te,  Domine:  Domine,  exau- 

hear  my  prayer:   out  of  the  di    orationem   meam  :    de 

depths  have  I  cried  unto  thee,  profundis  clamavi  ad   te, 

0  Lord  !  Domine. 

The  service  we  pay  to  God  is,  of  itself,  far  beneath 
what  his  sovereign  Majesty  deserves ;  but  the  Sacri- 
fice, which,  every  day,  constitutes  part  of  our  service, 
ennobles  it  even  to  an  infinite  worth,  and  supplies 
all  our  own  deficiencies  of  merit.  This  is  what  we 
are  told  in  this  Sunday's  Secret. 

SECRET. 

We  offer  thee,  O  Lord,  this  Pro     nostrae    servitutis 

sacrifice  of  praise,  as  a  repeat-  augmento  sacrificium  tibi, 

ed  token  of  our  homage;  that  Domine,  laudis  offerimus  : 

thou  mayest  mercifully  accom-  ut,    quod    immeritis   con- 

plish  in  us,  what  thou  hast  tulisti,  propitius  exequaris. 

already  granted,  beyond  our  Per  Dominum. 
deserts.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

COMMUNION. 

Amen  I  say  unto  you, — all  Amen  dico  vobis,  quid- 
things  whatsoever  ye  ask  for  quid  orantes  petitis,  credite 
when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  quia     accipietis,    et     fiet 
shall  receive,  and  it  shall  be  vobis. 
done  unto  you. 

Having,  by  these  sacred  Mysteries,  entered  into  a 
participation  of  divine  life,  let  us  beseech  our  Lord, 
that  we  may  no  longer  be  subject  to  the  dangers  of 
this  world.     Let  us  say  with  the  Church  : 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

We  beseech  thee,  O  almighty  Qusesumus,  omnipotens 

God,  that  thou  wouldst  not      Deus :     ut,    quos     divina 
permit  to  be  subject  to  the      tribuis   participatione 


500      TWENTY-THIRD    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


gaudere,  humanis  non 
sinas  subjacere  periculis. 
Per  Dominum. 


dangers  of  this  human  life, 
those  whom  thou  hast  admit- 
ted to  the  joyful  participation 
of  thy  divine  life.  Through, 
etc. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  'page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON   OF    THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


At  Jesus  conversus  et 
videnseam,  dixit:  Confide, 
filia,  fides  tua  te  salvam 
fecit.    Alleluia. 


OREMUS." 

Absolve,  qusesumus  Do- 
mine,  tuorumdelicta  popu- 
lorum :  ut  a  peccatorum 
nexibus,  quae  pro  nostra 
f  ragilitate  contraximus,  tua 
benignitate  liberemur.  Per 
Dominum. 


But  Jesus  turning,  and 
seeing  her,  said:  Be  of  good 
heart,  daughter !  thy  faith 
hath  made  thee  whole.  Alle- 
luia. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

Absolve,  O  Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  the  sins  of  thy  people  ; 
that,  by  thy  clemency,  we  may 
be  delivered  from  the  bonds 
of  sins  contracted  by  our  own 
frailty.    Through,  etc- 


LAST   SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  501 


THE  TWENTY-FOURTH  AND  LAST  SUNDAY 

AFTER  PENTECOST. 

The  number  of  the  Sundays  after  Pentecost  may 
exceed  twenty-four,  and  go  up  as  far  as  twenty-eight, 
according  as  Easter  is  each  Year,  more  or  less  near  to 
the  vernal  equinox.  But,  the  Mass  here  given,  is 
always  reserved  for  the  last ;  and  the  intervening 
ones,  he  their  number  what  it  may,  are  taken  from 
the  Sundays  after  the  Epiphany,  which,  in  that  case, 
were  not  used  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.1  This, 
however,  does  not  apply  to  the  Introit,  Gradual, 
Offertory,  and  Communion,  which,  as  we  have  already 
said,  are  repeated  from  the  twenty-third  Sunday. 

We  have  seen  how  that  Mass  of  the  twenty-third 
Sunday  was  regarded,  by  our  fore-fathers,  as  really 
the  last  of  the  Cycle.  Abbot  Rupert  has  given  us 
the  profound  meaning  of  its  several  parts.  Accord- 
ing to  the  teaching  we  have  already  pondered  over,2 
the  reconciliation  of  Juda  was  shown  us  as,  being,  in 
time,  the  term  intended  by  God  :  the  last  notes  of  the 
sacred  Liturgy  blended  with  the  last  scene  of  the 
world's  history,  as  seen  and  known  by  God.     The  end 

1  Further  on  (vid.  inf.,  pages  515-533,)  we  have  given  these 
Sundays,  which  are  the  3rd,  4th,  5th,  and  6th,  after  the  Epiphany. 
Those  Years,  when  there  are  Twenty-five  Sundays  after  Pentecost, 
it  is  the  6th  after  the  Epiphany,  which  is  put  after  the  twenty-third ; 
— if  the  number  of  those  Sundays  be  twenty-six,  the  5th  after  the 
Epiphany  becomes  the  twenty-fourth  after  Pentecost ; — if  the 
number  be  twenty- seven,  we  go  back  to  the  4th  after  the 
Epiphany,  and  the  rest  follow  ; — if  it  be  as  high  as  twenty- eight, 
we  begin  with  the  3rd. 

2Thel3thSund.  aft.  Pent. 


502  LAST   SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 

proposed  by  eternal  Wisdom  in  the  world's  creation, 
and  mercifully  continued,  after  the  Fall,  by  the 
mystery  of  Redemption,  has  now,  (we  speak  of  the 
Church's  Year  and  God's  workings,)  been  fully  carried 
out : — this  end  was  no  other,  than  that  of  divine 
Union  with  Human  Nature,  making  it  one  in  the 
unity  of  one  only  body.1  Now  that  the  two  antagonist- 
people,  gentile  and  jew,  are  brought  together  in  the 
one  same  New  Man  in  Christ  Jesus  their  Head,2  the 
Two  Testaments,  which  so  strongly  marked  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  ages  of  time,  the  one  called  the 
Old,  the  other  the  New, — yes,  these  Two  Testaments 
fade  away,  and  give  place  to  the  glory  of  the  Eternal 
Alliance. 

It  was  here,  therefore,  that  Mother  Church  formerly 
finished  her  Liturgical  Year.  She  was  delighted  at 
what  she  had  done  during  all  the  past  months  ;  that 
is,  at  having  led  her  children,  not  only  to  have  a 
thorough  appreciation  of  the  divine  plan,  which  she 
had  developed  before  them,  in  her  celebrations, — but, 
moreover,  and  more  especially,  to  unite  them  them- 
selves, by  a  veritable  Union,  to  their  Jesus,  by  a  real 
communion  of  views,  and  interests,  and  loves.  On 
this  account,  she  used  not  to  revert  again  to  the 
second  Coming  of  the  God-Man  and  the  Last  Judg- 
ment, two  great  subjects  which  she  had  proposed  for 
her  children's  reflexions,  at  the  commencement  of 
the  Purgative  Life,  that  is,  her  season  of  Advent.  It 
is  only  since  a  few  centuries  that,  with  a  view  of 
giving  to  her  Year  a  conclusion  more  defined  and 
intelligible  to  the  Faithful  of  these  comparatively 
recent  times,  she  closes  the  Cycle  with  the  prophetic 
description  of  the  dread  Coming  of  her  Lord,  which  is 
to  put  an  end  to  Time,  and  open  Eternity.  From 
time  immemorial,  St.  Luke  had  had  the  office  of 
announcing,  in  Advent,  the   approach  of  the  Last 

»Eph.  ii.  16.  2Ibid.  15. 


MASS.  503 

Judgment  j1  the  Evangelist  St.  Matthew  was  selected 
for  this  its  second,  and  more  detailed,  description,  on 
the  last  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 


MASS. 


1NTROIT. 

The  Lord  saith  :  I  think  Dicit  Domimis :  Ego  co- 
thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  gito  cogitationes  pacis,  et 
affliction  ;  ye  shall  call  upon  non  afflictionis :  invocabitis 
me,  and  I  will  hear  you  :  and  me,  et  ego  exaudiam  vos  : 
bring  back  your  captive  people  et  reducam  captivitatem 
from  all  places.  vestram  de  cunctis  locis. 

Ps.    Thou,    O    Lord,    hast  Ps.  Benedixisti,  Domine, 
blessed  thy  land  :  thou  hast  terram  tuam :  avertisti  cap- 
brought  back  the  captive  chil-  tivitatem  Jacob.  Gloria  Pa- 
dren  of    Jacob.      Glory,  etc.  tri.   Dicit  Dominus. 
The  Lord. 

The  doing  of  good  works,  by  the  help  of  divine 
grace,  prepares  us  to  receive  a  still  greater  grace,  for 
greater  works  in  the  future.  In  the  Collect,  let  us 
unite  with  our  Mother,  the  Church,  in  praying  for  an 
efficacious  influence,  of  the  divine  Mover,  upon,  our 

mils. 

COLLECT. 

Stir  up,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Excita,qu3esumusDomi- 

Lord,  the  wills  of  thy  Faithful;  ne,  tuorum  fidelium  volun- 

that,  becoming  more  zealous  tates,    ut     divini    operis 

as  to  the  fruit  'of  the  divine  fructum    propensius  exe- 

Work,  they  may   receive  the  quentes,  pietatis  tuae  reme- 

greater  remedies  of  thy  good-  dia  majora  percipiant.  Per 

ness.      Through,  etc.  Dominum. 

The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 
1  First  Sunday  of  Advent. 


504 


LAST   SUNDAY   AFTER  PENTECOST. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Colossenses. 

Cap.  i. 

Fratres,  Non  cessamus 
pro  vobis  orantes  et  postu- 
lates, ut  impleamini  agni- 
tione  voluntatis  Dei  in  om- 
ni  sapientia,  et  intellectu 
spiritali :  ut  ambuletis  di- 
gne  Deo  per  omnia  placen- 
tes :  in  omni  opere  bono 
fructificantes,  et  crescentes 
in  scientia  Dei:  in  omni  vir- 
tute  confortati  secundum 
potentiam  claritatis  ejus,  in 
omni  patientia,  et  longani- 
mitate  cum  gaudio,  gratias 
agentes  Deo  Patri,  qui  di- 
gnos  nos  fecit  in  partem 
sortis  sanctorum  in  lumine: 
qui  eripuit  nos  de  potestate 
tenebrarum,  et  transtulit 
in  regnum  Filii  dilectionis 
suaa ;  in  quo  habemus  re- 
demptionem  persanguinem 
ejus,  remissionem  pecca- 
torum. 

Thanksgiving,  and  Prayer !  There  we  have  the 
epitome  of  our  Epistle,  and  an  eloquent  conclusion  of 
the  Apostle's  course  of  instructions :  it  is,  also,  both 
summary  and  conclusion  of  the  Year  of  the  sacred 
Liturgy.  The  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles  has  been  zealous, 
beyond  measure,  in  his  fulfilment  of  the  task  assigned 
to  him  by  Mother  Church.  Of  a  certainty,  the  fault 
is  not  his,  if  the  souls  he  undertook  to  guide,  on  the 
morrow  of  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  of  Love,  have  not 
all  reached  that  summit  of  perfection,  which  he 
longed  we  should  all  get  up  to !   Those  who  have  gone 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Colossians. 

Ch.  i. 

Brethren  :  We  cease  not  to 
pray  for  you,  and  to  beg  that 
ye  may  be  filled  with  the 
knowledge  of  his  will,  in  all 
wisdom,  and  spiritual  under- 
standing :  that  ye  may  walk 
worthy  of  God,  in  all  things 
pleasing :  being  fruitful  in 
every  good  work,  and  increas- 
ing in  the  knowledge  of  God  : 
strengthened  with  all  might, 
according  to  the  power  of  his 
glory,  in  all  patience  and  long- 
suffering  with  joy.  Giving 
thanks  to  God  the  Father,  who 
hath  made  us  worthy  to  be 
partakers  of  the  lot  of  the 
saints  in  light :  who  hath  de- 
livered us  from  the  power  of 
darkness,  and  hath  translated 
us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son 
of  bis  love,  in  whom  we  have 
redemption  through  his  blood, 
the  remission  of  sins. 


MASS.  505 

bravely  forward  in  the  path,  which,  a  year  since,  was 
opened  out  to  them  by  holy  Church,  now,  by  a  happy 
experience,  know,  that  that  path  most  surely  leads 
them  to  the  life  of  Union,  where  divine  charity  reigns 
supreme !  Who  is  there,  that,  with  anything  like 
earnestness,  has  allowed  his  mind  and  heart  to  take 
an  interest  in  the  several  Liturgical  Seasons,  which 
have  been  brought  before  us,  and  been  celebrated,  by 
the  Church,  during  the  past  twelve  months, — has  not 
also  felt  an  immense  increase  of  light  imparted  to 
him  ?  Now,  Light  is  that  indispensable  element, 
which  delivers  us  from  the  poiver  of  darkness,  and 
translates  us,  by  the  help  of  God,  into  the  kingdom 
of  the  Son  of  his  love.  The  work  of  redemption, 
which  this  his  beloved  Son  came  down  upon  earth, 
to  accomplish  for  his  Father's  glory,  could  not  do 
otherwise  than  make  progress  in  those  who  have, 
with  more  or  less  fervour,  entered  into  the  spirit  of 
his  Church,  during  the  whole  Year,  that  is,  from  the 
opening  of  Advent,  right  up  to  these  the  closing  days 
of  the  sacred  Cvcle.  All  of  us,  then,  whosoever  we 
may  be,  should  give  thanks  to  this  Father  of  Lights,1 
who  hath  thus  made  us  worthy  to  be  partakers, 
somewhat  at  least,  of  the  lot  of  the  Saints. 

So,  then,  all  of  us,  be  the  share  of  such  participa- 
tion what  it  may, — yes,  all  of  us  must  pray,  that  the 
excellent  gift*  which  has  been  put  into  our  hearts, 
may  fervently  yield  itself  to  the  still  richer  develop- 
ment, which  the  coming  new  Cycle  is  intended  to 
produce  within  us. 

The  just  man  cannot  possibly  remain  stationary  in 
this  world  ;  he  must  either  descend  or  ascend  ;  and 
whatever  may  be  the  degree  of  perfection  to  which 
grace  has  led  him,  he  must  be  ever  going  still  higher, 
as  long  as  he  is  left  in  this  life.3  The  Colossians,  to 
whom  the  Apostle  was  writing,  had  fully  received 

1  St.  James,  i.  17.  2  Ibid.  3  Ps.  lxxxiii.  6. 


506  LAST   SUSDAY   AFTER    PENTECOST. 

the  Gospel :  the  word  of  truth,  which  had  been  sown 
in  them,  had  produced  abundant  fruit,  in  faith,  hope, 
and  love : 1  and  yet,  instead  of  relenting,  on  that 
account,  his  solicitude  in  their  regard,  it  is  precisely 
for  that  reason,2  that  St.  Paul,  who  had  prayed  for 
them  up  to  then,  ceases  not  to  go  on  praying  for 
them.  So  let  us  do, — let  us  go  on  praying.  Let  us 
beg  of  God,  that  he  will  again,  and  always,  fill  us  with 
his  divine  Wisdom,  and  with  the  Spirit  of  under- 
standing. We  need  all  that,  in  order  to  correspond 
with  his  merciful  designs.  If  the  new  Year  of  the 
Church,  which  is  so  soon  to  begin,  find  us  faithful  and 
making  fresh  progress,  we  shall  be  repaid  with  new 
aspects  of  Truth  in  the  garden  of  the  Spouse,  and  the 
fruits  we  shall  produce  there,  will  be  more  plentiful, 
and  far  sweeter,  than  in  any  by-gone  Year.  There- 
fore,— let  us  make  up  our  minds  to  walk  worthy  of 
God,  "  with  dilated  hearts,"3  and  bravely,  for  the  eye 
of  his  approving  love  will  be  ever  upon  us,  as  we  toil 
along.  Ob,  yes !  let  us  run  on  in  that  up-hill  path, 
which  will  lead  us  to  eternal  repose  in  the  Beatific 
Vision ! 

GRADUAL. 

Liberasti  nos,   Domine,  Thou  hast  saved  us,  0  Lord, 

ex  affligentibus  nos :  et  eos,  from  them  that  afflict  us  :  and 

qui  nos  oderunt,  conf  udisti.  hast  put  them  to  shame  that 

hate  us. 

y .  In  Deo  laudabimur  ^.  In  God  shall  we  glory  all 

tota  die,  et  in  nomine  tuo  the  day  long  ;   and,    in   thy 

confitebimur  in  ssecula.  name,  we  will  give  praise  for 

ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

y.  De  profundis  clamavi  $".  Out  of  the  depths  I  have 

ad  te,   Domine:  Domine,  cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord:  Lord, 

exaudi    orationem   meam.  hear  my  prayer.    Alleluia. 
Alleluia. 

1  Coloss.  i.  4-6.        2  Ibid.  9.       3  S.  Benedict,  The  Holy  Rule. 


MASS. 


►07 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel  ac- 
cording to  Matthew. 

Ch.  xxiv. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  said  to 
his  disciples:  When  ye  shall 
see  the  abomination  of  desola- 
tion, which  was  spoken  of  by 
Daniel  the  prophet,  standing 
in  the  holy  place :  he  that 
readeth,  let  him  understand. 
Then  they  that  are  in  Judea, 
let  them  flee  to  the  mountains; 
and  he  that  is  on  the  house- 
top, let  him  not  come  down  to 
take  anything  out  of  his  house; 
and  he  that  is  in  the  field,  let 
him  not  go  back  to  take  his 
coat.  And  wo  to  them  that  are 
with  child,  and  give  suck  in 
those  days.  But  pray  that 
your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter, 
or  on  the  Sabbath.  For  there 
shall  be  then  great  tribulation, 
such  as  hath  not  been  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  until 
now,  neither  shall  be.  And 
unless  those  days  had  been 
shortened,  no  flesh  could  be 
saved  :  but  for  the  sake  of  the 
elect,  those  days  shall  be 
shortened.  Then  if  any  man 
shall  say  to  you  :  Lo  !  here  is 
Christ,  or  there :  do  not  believe 
him:  For  there  shall  arise 
false  christs,  and  false  pro- 
phets, and  shall  shew  great 
signs  and  wonders,  insomuch 
as  to  deceive,  if  possible,  even 
the  elect.  Behold  I  have  told  it 
you,  before  hand ;  if  there- 
fore they  shall  say  to  you : 
Behold  he  is  in  the  desert,  go, 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matthaeuni. 

Cap.  xxiv. 

In  illo  tempore :  Dixit 
Jesus  discipulis  suis  :  Cum 
videritis  abominationem 
desolationis,  qua?  dicta  est 
a  Daniele  propheta,  s  tantem 
in  loco  sancto,  qui^  legit 
intelligat :  tunc  qui  in  Ju- 
daea sunt,  fugiant  ad  mon- 
tes :  et  qui  in  tecto,  non 
descendat  tollere  aliquidde 
domo  sua  :  et  qui  in  agro, 
non  revertatur  tollere  tuni- 
cam  suam.  Vae  autem  prae- 
gnantibus,  et  nutrientibus 
in  illis  diebus.  Orate  autem 
ut  non  fiat  fuga  vestra  in 
hieme,  vel  Sabbato.  Erit 
enim  tunc  tribulatio  mag- 
na, qualis  non  f  uit  ab  initio 
mundi  usque  modo,  neque 
fiet.  Et  nisi  breviati  fuis- 
sent  dies.illi,  nonfieret  salva 
omnis  caro:  sed  propter 
electos  breviabuntur  dies 
illi.  Tune  si  quis  vobis 
dixerit :  Ecce  hie  est  Chris- 
tus,aut  illic:  nolite  credere. 
Surgent  enim  pseudochris- 
ti,  et  pseudoprophetse  :  et 
dabunt  signa  magna  et 
prodigia,  ita  ut  in  errorem 
inducantur  (si  fieri  potest) 
etiam  electi.  Ecce  praedixi 
vobis.  Si  ergo  dixerint 
vobis  :  Ecce  in  deserto  est, 
nolite  exire :  Ecce  in  pe- 
netralibus,  nolite  credere. 
Sicut  enim  f  ulgur  exit  ab 
Oriente,  et  paret  usque  in 


508 


LAST    SUNDAY    AFTER   PENTECOST. 


ye  not  out :  Behold  he  is  in  the 
closets,  believe  it  not.  For  as 
lightning  cometh  out  of  the 
east,  and  appeareth  even  into 
the  west ;  so  shall  also  the 
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be, 
Wheresoever  the  body  shall  be 
there  shall  the  eagles  also  be 
gathered  together.  And  im- 
mediately after  the  tribulation 
of  those  days,  the  sun  shall  be 
darkened,  and  the  moon  shall 
not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars 
shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the 
powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be 
moved :  and  there  shall  appear 
the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  in 
heaven :  and  then  shall  all 
tribes  of  the  earth  mourn :  and 
they  shall  see  the  Son  of 
Man  coming  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven  with  much  power  and 
majesty.  And  he  shall  send 
his  angels  with  a  trumpet,  and 
a  great  voice :  and  they  shall 
gather  together  his  elect  from 
the  four  winds,  from  the  far- 
thest parts  of  the  heavens  to 
the  utmost  bounds  of  them. 
And  from  the  fig-tree  learn  a 
parable:  when  the  branch 
thereof  is  now  tender,  and  the 
leaves  come  forth,  ye  know 
that  summer  is  nigh.  So  ye 
also,  when  ye  shall  see  all 
these  things,  know  ye  that  it 
is  nigh  even  at  the  doors. 
Amen,  I  say  to  you,  that  this 
generation  shall  not  pass,  till 
these  things  be  done.  Heaven 
and  earth  shall  pass,  but  my 
words  shall  not  pass. 

Several  times,  during  Advent,  we  meditated  on  the 
circumstances  which  are  to  accompany  the  Last 
Coming  of  Christ  our  Lord  ;  and,  in  a  few  days,  the 


Occidentem  :  ita  erit  et  ad- 
ventus  Filii  hominis.  Ubi- 
cumque  fuerit  corpus,  illic 
congregabuntur  et  aquilae. 
Statim  autem  post  tribula- 
tionem  dierum  illorum  sol 
obscurabitur,  et  luna  non 
dabit  lucem  suam,  et  stellae 
cadent  de  ccelo,  et  virtutes 
ccelorum  commovebuntur : 
et  tunc  parebit  signum  Filii 
homiuis  in  ccelo :  et  tunc 
plangent  omnes  tribus  ter- 
ras: et  videbunt  Filium 
hominis  venientem  in  nub- 
ibus  cceli  cumvirtutemulta 
et  majestate.  Et  mittet 
Angelos  suos  cum  tuba,  et 
voce  magna:  et  congrega- 
bunt  electos  ejus  a  quatuor 
ventis,  a  summis  ccelorum 
usque  ad  terminos  eorum. 
Ab  arbore  autem  fici  dis- 
cite  parabolam :  cum  jam 
ramus  ejus  tener  fuerit,  et 
folia  nata,  scitis  quia  prope 
est  893tas;  ita  et  vos,  cum 
videritis  haec  omnia,  scitote 
quia  prope  est  januis. 
Amen  dico  vobis,  quia  non 
praeteribit  generatio  haec, 
donee  omnia  haec  fiant. 
Ccelum  et  terra  transibunt, 
verba  autem  mea  non 
praeteribunt. 


MASS.  509 

same  great  teachings  will  be  again  brought  before  us, 
filling  our  souls  with  a  salutary  fear.  May  we,  then, 
be  permitted,  on  this  last  Sunday  of  our  Liturgical 
Year,  to  address  ourselves,  in  a  prayer  of  desire  and 
praise,  to  our  adorable  Lord  and  King,  the  solemn 
hour  of  whose  Judgment  is  to  be  the  consummation 
of  his  work,  and  the  signal  of  his  triumph. 

O  Jesus !  who  then  art  to  come  to  deliver  thy 
Church,  and  avenge  that  God  who  has  so  long  borne 
every  sort  of  insult  from  his  creature  man,  that  day 
of  thy  coming  will  indeed  be  terrible  to  the  sinner ! 
He  will  then  understand,  how  the  Lord  hath  made 
all  things  for  himself,  all,  even  the  ungodly,  who,  on 
the  evil  day,  is  to  show  forth  the  divine  justice.1 
The  whole  world,  fighting  on  his  side  against  the 
wicked2  shall  then,  at  last,  be  avenged  for  that  slavery 
of  sin,  which  had  been  forced  upon  it.3  Vainly  will 
the  wicked  cry  out  to  the  rocks  to  fall  upon  them, 
and  hide  them  from  the  face  of  him  that  will  then 
be  seated  on  his  throne  :4  the  abyss  will  refuse 
to  ingulf  them :  in  obedience  to  him  who  holds 
the  keys  of  death  and  hell,5  it  will  give  forth,  to  a 
man,  its  wretched  victims,  and  set  them  at  the  foot 
of  the  dread  tribunal.  0  Jesus,  how  magnificent  will 
not  thy  power  then  appear !  The  heavenly  hosts  will 
also  be  standing  around  thee,  forming  thy  brilliant6 
court,  and  assembling  thy  elect  from  the  four  quarters 
of  the  earth. 

For  we  also,  we  thy  redeemed,  who  had  become  thy 
members  by  becoming  the  members  of  thy  beloved 
Church, — we  are  to  be  there  on  that  day,  and  our 
place,  O  ineffable  mystery !  is  to  be  the  one  thou  hast 
reserved  for  thy  Bride, — it  is  to  be  thy  own  throne,7 
where  seated,  we  shall  judge  the  very  angels.8  Even 
now,  all  those  blessed  of  the  Father,9  all  those  elect, 

1  Prov.  xvi.  4.        4  Apoc.  vi.  16.  '  Ibid.  iii.  21. 

8  Wisd.  v.  21.         6  Ibid.  i.  18.  8  1  Cor.  vi.  3. 

«  Rom.  viii.  21.      «  Ibid.  xix.  14.  9  St.  Matth.  xxv.  3. 


510       LAST  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

whose  youth,  like  that  of  the  eagle,  has  been  so  often 
renewed  by  their  receiving  thy  precious  Blood,1 — have 
they  not  had  their  eyes  fitted  to  gaze,  and  without 
being  dazzled,  on  the  Sun  of  Justice,  when  he  shall 
appear  in  the  heavens  1  The  tediousness  of  their 
long  exile  has  given  such  keenness  to  their  hunger, 
that  nothing  will  have  power  to  stay  their  flight,  once 
the  sacred  prey  of  thy  divine  Body  shall  be  shown 
them !  What  hindrance  could  be  strong  enough  to 
check  the  impetuosity  of  the  love,2  which  will  bring 
them  all  together  to  the  banquet  of  the  eternal  Pasch? 
The  trumpet  of  the  Archangel,  which  will  ring 
through  the  graves  of  the  just,  is  to  be  a  summons 
calling  them,  not  to  death,  but  to  life, — to  the  sight 
of  the  old  enemy's  destruction,3 —  to  a  redemption, 
which  is  to  include  their  very  bodies,4 — to  the  un- 
impeded passover  to  the  true  Land  of  promise, — in  a 
word,  to  the  Pasch,  and,  this  time,  quite  real,  and  for 
all,  and  for  ever.  What  will  not  be  the  joy  of  that 
true  Day  of  the  Lord  !5 — what  joy  for  them  that  have, 
by  faith,  lived  in  Christ,  and  loved  him  without 
seeing  him  !6  Identifying  themselves  with  thee,  O 
Jesus,  notwithstanding  the  weakness  of  the  flesh, 
they  have  continued  here  below,  thy  life  of  suffering 
and  humiliation  :  what  a  triumph,  when,  delivered 
for  ever  from  sin,  and  vested  in  their  immortal  bodies, 
they  shall  be  borne  aloft  before  thy  face,  that  they 
may  for  ever  be  with  thee  !7 

But,  their  chiefest  joy  on  that  great  Day,  will  be 
to  assist  at  the  glorification  of  their  most  dear  Lord, 
by  the  manifestation  of  the  power  which  was  given  to 
him  over  all  flesh.8  It  is  to  be  then,  0  Emmanuel ! 
that,  crushing  the  heads  of  kings,  and  making  thine 
enemies  thy  footstool,9  thou  wilt  be  shown  as  the  one 


1  Ps.  cii.  5.  4  Rom.  viii.  23.  1  1  Thess.  iv.  6. 

*  Cantic.  viii.  6.         6  Ps.  cxvii.  24.  8  St.  John,  xvii.  2. 

»  1  Cor.  xv.  28.         6  1  St.  Pet.  i.  8.  9  Ps.  cix. 


MASS.  511 

Ruler  of  all  nations.1     It  is  to  be  then,  that  heaven, 
and  earth,  and  hell,  will  bow  their  knee2  before  that 
Son  of  Man,  who,  heretofore,  appeared  on  earth  as  a 
slave,  and  was  judged,  and  condemned,  and  put  to 
death  between  two  thieves;  it  is  to  be  then,  dear 
Jesus,   that  thou  wilt  judge  the  unjust  judges,  to 
whom,  even  in  the  midst  of  all  the  humiliations  they 
put  on  thee,  thou  didst  foretell  this  thy  Coming  on 
the  clouds  of  heaven.3     And  when,  after  the  irrevoc- 
able sentence  has  been  passed,  the  wicked  shall  go  to 
everlasting  torments,  and  the  just  to  life  eternal,4  thy 
Apostle  tells  us,  that  having  conquered  thine  enemies, 
and  been  proclaimed  undisputed  King,  thou  wilt  con- 
sign to  thy  eternal  Father  this  thy  Kingdom  won  over 
death ;  it  will  be  the  perfect  homage  of  thee,  the 
Head,  and  of  all  thy  faithful  members.5     God  will 
thus  be  all  in  all.     It  will  be  the  perfect  accomplish- 
ment of  that  sublime  prayer  thou  taughtest  mankind 
to  make,6  which  they  daily  offer  up  to  the  Father  who 
is  in  heaven,  and  say  to  him :  Hallowed  be  thy  name  ! 
Thy  Kingdom  come  !  Thy  ivill  be  done  on  earthy  as 
it  is  in  heaven!     0  blissfully  peaceful  Day,  when 
blasphemy  is  to  cease,  and  when  this  poor  earth  of 
ours,  cleansed  by  fire  from  the  filth  of  sin,  shall  be 
turned  into  a  new  paradise  !      Where,  then,  is  the 
Christian,  who  would  not  thrill  with  emotion  at  the 
thought  of  that  last  of  all  the  Days  of  time,  which  is 
to   usher  in  beautiful  Eternity  ?     Who  would  not 
despise  the  agonies  of  his  own  last  hour,  when  he  re- 
flects  that    those  sufferings  have   really  only    one 
meaning  in  them, — that  is,  as  the  Gospel  words  it, 
that  the  Son  of  Man  is  nigh  even  at  the  very  doors! 
0  sweet  Jesus,  detach  us,  every  Year,  more  and 
more  from  this  world,  whose  fashion  passeth  away,7 
with  its  vain  toils,  its  false  glories,  and  its   lying 
pleasures.     It  was  thine  own  foretelling,  that,  as  in 

1  Ps.  ii.     2  Philip,  ii.  10.     3  St.  Matth.  xxvi.  64.    *  Ibid.  xxv.  46. 
5  1  Cor.  xv.  24-28.        6  St.  Matth.  vi.  9.        7  1  Cor.  vii.  31. 


512  LAST   SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

the  days  of  Noe,  and  Sodom,  men  will  go  on  with 
their  feasting,  and  business,  and  amusements,  without 
giving  any  more  thought  to  thy  approaching  Coming, 
than  their  forefathers  heeded  the  threat  of  the  Deluge, 
or  of  the  fire,  which  came  upon  them  and  destroyed 
them.1  Let  these  men  go  on  with  their  merry- 
making, and  their  sending  gifts  one  to  the  other,  as 
thine  Apocalypse  expresses  it,  because,  so  they  will 
have  it,  Christ  and  his  Church  are  then  to  be  worn- 
out  ideas  !2  Whilst  they  are  tyrannising  over  thy 
holy  City  in  a  thousand  varied  ways,  and  persecuting 
her  as  no  past  period  had  ever  done,  they  little  think 
that  all  this  is  an  announcement  of  the  Eternal 
Nuptials,  which  are  nigh  at  hand.  All  these  trials 
were  the  fresh  jewels,  which  the  Bride  was  to  have  on 
her  before  all  her  beauty  was  complete ;  and  the 
blood  of  her  last  Martyrs  was  to  incarnadine  her 
already  splendid  robes  with  all  the  richness  of  royal 
crimson.  As  for  us,  we  lend  an  ear  to  the  echoes  of 
our  home  above ;  and,  from  the  throne  of  our  God, 
we  hear  going  forth  the  voice  heard  by  thy  beloved 
Prophet  of  Patmos :  Give  praise  unto  our  God,  all 
ye  his  servants,  and  ye  that  fear  him,  little  and  great! 
Alleluia!  For  the  Lord  our  God  the  almighty  hath 
reigned !  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,  and  give  glory 
unto  him;  for  the  Marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come, and  his 
Wife  hath  prepared  herself!6  Yet  a  little  while,  till 
the  number  of  our  brethren  be  made  up  ;4  and  then, 
with  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride,  we  will  say  to  thee,  in 
all  the  ardour  of  our  souls  that  have  long  thirsted 
after  thee  :  Come,  Lord  Jesus  !5  Come,  and  perfect 
us  in  love,  by  Union  eternal,  unto  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  and  of  thyself  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
for  ever  and  ever! 

1  St.  Luke,  xvii.  26-30.         3  Apoc.  xix.  5-7.  6  Ibid.  xxii.  17. 

2  Apoc.  xi.  10.  iIbid.ri.ll. 


MASS.  513 


OFFERTORY. 

Out  of  the  depths  have  I  De  profundis  clamavi  ad 

cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord :  Lord,  te,  Domine :  Domine,  exau- 

hear  my  prayer  :  out   of  the  di  orationem  meam  :    de 

depths  have  I  cried  unto  thee,  profundis  clamavi  ad  te, 

O  Lord  I  Domine. 

In  the  Secret,  let  us  ask  of  God,  that,  at  the  ap- 
proach of  the  Last  Judgment,  he  turn  all  hearts 
towards  himself,  and  vouchsafe  to  make  our  earthly 
desires  give  place  to  the  desire  for,  and  relish  of,, 
heavenly  things. 

SECRET. 

Mercifully  hear  our  suppli-  Propitius  esto,  Domine, 

cations,  O  Lord  :  and,  having  supplicationibus  nostris:  et 

received    the    offerings    and  populituioblationibuspre- 

Erayers  of  thy  people,  turn  the  cibusque  susceptis,omnium 
earts  of  us  all  unto  thee ;  nostrum  ad  te  corda  con- 
that,  being  freed  from  earthly  verte  ;  ut  a  terrenis  cupi- 
desires,  we  may  come  to  desire  ditatibus  liberati,  ad  coe- 
heavenly  things.  Through,  etc,  lestiadesideriatranseamus. 

Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

COMMUNION. 

Amen  I  say  unto  you, — all  Amen  dico  vobis,  quid- 
things  whatsoever  ye  ask  for  quid  orantes  petitis,  credite 
when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  quia    acciepietis,    et    fiet 
shall  receive,  and  it  shall  be  vobis. 
done  unto  you. 

May  the  divine  Sacrament,  as  is  the  Church's 
petition  in  the  Postcommunion,  fully  cure,  by  its 
virtue,  whatsoever  there  may  remain  faulty  in  our 
souls,  at  this  close  of  the  Year ! 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Concede  nobis,  qusesu- 
Lord,    that,    whatsoever    be      mus  Domine,  ut  per  hsec 

xi.  2  L 


514 


LAST  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


sacramenta,  quae  sumpsi- 
nms,  quidquid  in  nostra 
mente  vitiosum  est,  ipso- 
rum  medicationis  dono  cu- 
retur.  Per  Dominum. 


faulty  in  our  souls,  may  be 
cured  by  the  virtue  of  the 
mysteries  we  have  received. 
Through,  etc. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON   OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 


Amen  dico  vobis,  quia 
non  prseteribit  generatio 
haec,  donee  omnia  fiant: 
ccelum  et  terra  transibunt, 
verba  autem  mea  non  tran- 
sibunt, dicit  Dominus. 

OREMUS. 

Excita,  quaesumusDomi- 
ne,  tuorum  fideliumvolun- 
tates,  ut  divini  operis  fruc- 
turn  propensius  exsequen- 
tes,  pietatis  tuae  remedia 
majora  percipiant.  Per 
Dominum, 


Amen'I  say  to  you,  that  this 
generation  shall  not  pass,  till 
all  these  things  be  done : 
heaven  and  earth  shall  pass, 
but,  my  words  shall  not  pass, 
saith  the  Lord. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

Stir  up,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord, the  wills  of  thy  Faithful; 
that,  becoming  more  zealous 
as  to  the  fruit  of  the  divine 
Work,  they  may  receive  the 
greater  remedies  of  thy  good- 
ness.   Through,  etc. 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 


515 


THE   THIRD    SUNDAY 

AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 


-0- 


INTROIT. 


The  Lord  saith :  I  think 
thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of 
affliction  ;  ye  shall  call  upon 
me,  and  I  will  hear  you  :  and 
bring  back  your  captive  people 
from  all  places. 

Ps.  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast 
blessed  thy  land  :  thou  hast 
brought  back  the  captive  chil- 
dren of  Jacob.  Glory,  etc. 
The  Lord. 


Dicit  Dominus :  Ego  co- 
gito  cogitationis  pacis,  et 
non  afflictionis:  invocabitis 
me,  et  ego  exaudiam  vos: 
et  reducam  captivitatem 
vestram  de  cunctis  locis. 

Ps.  Benedixisti,  Domine, 
terram  tuam :  avertisti  cap- 
tivitatem Jacob.  Gloria 
Patri.    Dicit  Dominus. 


COLLECT. 


O  Almighty  and  Eternal 
God,  mercifully  behold  our 
weakness  ;  and  stretch  forth 
the  right  hand  of  thy  majesty 
to  protect  us.    Through,  etc. 


Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,infirmitatem  nostram 
propitius  respice  :  atque 
ad  protegendum  nos,  dex- 
teram  ;tuae  majestatis  ex- 
tende.    Per  Dominum. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of 
Saint  Paul  the  Apostle  to 
the  Romans. 

Ch.  xii. 

Brethren :  Be  not  wise  in 
your  own  conceits.  To  no 
man  rendering  evil  for  evil. 
Providing  good  things,  not 
only  in  the  sight  of  God,  but, 
also,  in  the  sight  of  all  men. 
If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as 


Lectio  Epistolse  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  adRomanos. 

Cap.  xii. 

Fratres:  Nolite  esse  pru- 
dentes  apud  vosmetipsos  : 
nulli  malum  pro  malo  red- 
dentes:  providentes  bona 
non  tantum  coram  Deo,  sed 
etiam  coram  omnibus  homi- 
nibus  j  si  fieri  potest,  quod 


516 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 


ex  vobis  est,  cum  omnibus 
hominibus  pacemhabentes: 
non  vosmetipsos  defen- 
dentes,  charissimi,  sed  date 
locum  irse  ;  scriptum  est 
enim  :  Mihi  vindicta,  ego 
retribuam,  dicit  Dominus. 
Sed  si  esurierit  inimicus 
tuus,  ciba  ilium ;  si  sitit, 
potum  da  illi :  hoc  enim 
f  aciens,  carbones  ignis  con- 
geres super  caput  ejus.  Noli 
vinci  a  malo,  sed  vince  in 
bono  malum. 


is  in  you,  having  peace  with 
all  men.  Not  revenging  your- 
selves, my  dearly  beloved,  but 
give  place  unto  wrath.  For, 
it  is  written  :  Revenge  to  me  : 
I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord. 
But,  if  thine  enemy  be  hungry, 
give  him  to  eat :  if  he  thirst, 
give  him  to  drink  :  for,  doing 
this,  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of 
fire  upon  his  head.  Be  not 
overcome  by  evil,  but  over- 
come evil  by  good. 


GRADUAL. 


Liberasti  nos,  Domine, 
ex  affligentibus  nos  :  et  eos 
qui  nos  oderunt,  confu- 
disti. 

$".  In  Deo  laudabimur 
tota  die,  et  in  nomine  tuo 
confitebimur  in  ssecula. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

flT.  De  profundis  clamavi 
ad  te,  Domine :  Domine, 
exaudi  orationem  meam. 
Alleluia. 


Thou  hast  saved  us,  0  Lord, 
from  them  that  afflict  us  :  and 
hast  put  them  to  shame  that 
hate  us. 

$".  In  God  shall  we  glory  all 
the  day  long ;  and,  in  thy 
name,  we  will  give  praise  for 
ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

$".  Out  of  the  depths  I  have 
cried  unto  thee,  OLord:  Lord, 
hear  my  prayer.    Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evan- 
gelii  secundum  Matthseum. 

Cap.  viii. 

In  illo tempore:  Cumdes- 
cendisset  Jesus  de  monte, 
secutae  sunt  eum  turbae 
multse  ;  et  ecce  leprosus 
veniens,  adorabat  eum  di- 
cens  :  Domine,  si  vis,  potes 
memundare.  Etextendens 
Jesus  manum,  tetigit  eum 
dicens  :  Volo,  mundare.  Et 
confestim     mundata     est 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  viii. 

At  that  time  :  When  Jesus 
was  come  down  from  the 
mountain,  great  multitudes 
followed  him  ;  and  behold,  a 
leper  came  and  adored  him, 
saying:  Lord,  if  thou  wilt, 
thou  canst  make  me  clean. 
And  Jesus  stretching  forth  his 
hand,  touched  him,  saying : 
I  will !  be  thou  made  clean. 


THIRD    SUNDAY    AFTER   THE   EPIPHANY. 


517 


And  forthwith  his  leprosy  was 
cleansed.  And  Jesus  saith  to 
him :  See  thou  tell  no  man  ; 
but,  go,  show  thyself  to  the 
priest,  and  offer  the  gift  which 
Moses  commanded  for  a  testi- 
mony unto  them.  And,  when 
he  had  entered  into  Caphar- 
naum,  there  came  to  him  a 
Centurion,  beseeching  him, 
and  saying  :  Lord,  my  servant 
lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  palsy, 
and  is  grievously  tormented. 
And  Jesus  saith  to  him  :  I  will 
come  and  heal  him.  And  the 
Centurion  making  answer, 
said :  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy 
that  thou  shouldst  enter  under 
my  roof  ;  but,  only  say  the 
word,  and  my  servant  shall  be 
healed.  For,  I  also  am  a  man 
under  authority,  having  under 
me  soldiers ;  and  I  say  to  this : 
Go  !  and  he  goeth  ;  and  to  an- 
other :  Come  !  and  he  cometh; 
and  to  my  servant :  Do  this  ! 
and  he  doeth  it.  And,  when 
Jesus  heard  this,  he  marvelled, 
and  said  to  them  that  followed 
him  :  Amen,  I  say  unto  you,  I 
have  not  found  so  great  faith  in 
Israel.  And  I  say  to  you  that 
many  shall  come  from  the  east 
and  the  west  and  shall  sit 
down  with  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven ;  but  the  chil- 
dren of  the  kingdom  shall  be 
cast  out  into  the  exterior 
darkness  :  there  shall  be  weep- 
ing and  gnashing  of  teeth. 
And,  Jesus  said  to  the  Cen- 
turion :  Go  !  and,  as  thou  hast 
believed,  so  be  it  done  unto 
thee.  And,  the  servant  was 
healed  at  the  same  hour. 


lepra  ejus.  Et  ait  illi  Jesus: 
Vide,  nemini  dixeris ;  sed 
vade,  ostende  te  Sacerdoti, 
et  offer  munus,quod  prdece- 
pit  Moyses,  in  testimonium 
illis.  Cum  autem  introisset 
Capharnaum,  accessit  ad 
eum  centurio,  rogans  eum 
et  dicens :  Domine  puer 
meus  jacet  in  domo  paraly- 
ticus, et  male  torquetur. 
Et  ait  illi  Jesus :  Ego  veni- 
am  et  curabo  eum.  Et  re- 
spondens  centurio,  ait  : 
Domine,  non  sum  dignus 
ut  intres  sub  tectum  meum; 
sed  tantum  die  verbo,  et 
sanabitur  puer  meus.  Nam 
et  ego  homo  sum  sub  po- 
testate  constitutus,  habens 
sub  me  milites,  et  dico  huic: 
Vade,  et  vadit ;  et  alii : 
Veni,  et  venit ;  et  servo 
meo :  Fac  hoc,  et  facit. 
Audiens  autem  Jesus,  mira- 
tus  est,  et  sequentibus  se 
dixit:  Amen  dico  vobis, 
non  inveni  tantam  fidem  in 
Israel.  Dico  autem  vobis, 
quod  multi  ab  Oriente  et 
Occidente  venient,  et  re- 
cumbent cum  Abraham  et 
Isaac  et  Jacob  in  regno 
ccelorum  ;  filii  autem  regni 
ejicientur  in  tenebras  ex- 
teriores ;  ibi  erit  fletus  et 
stridor  dentium.  Et  dixit 
Jesus  centurioni :  Vade,  et 
sicut  credidisti,  fiat  tibi. 
Et  sanatus  est  puer  in  ilia 
hora. 


518  THIRD   SUNDAY   AFTER   THE    EPIPHANY. 


OFFERTORY. 

De    profundis    clamavi  Out  of  the  depths  I  have 

ad  te,   Domine:   Domine,  cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord:  Lord, 

exaudi  orationem  meam :  hear  my  prayer :  out  of  the 

de  profundis  clamavi  ad  te,  depths  I  have  cried  unto  thee, 

Domine.  O  Lord. 

SECRET. 

Hsechostia,  Domine  quae-  May  this  offering,  O  Lord, 

sumus,  emundet  nostra  de-  we  beseech  thee,  cleanse  away 

licta :  et  ad  sacrificium  cele-  our  sins  :    and    sanctify    the 

brandum  subditorum  tibi  bodies  and  souls  of  thy  ser- 

corpora,  mentesque  sancti-  vants,   to  prepare  them    for 

ficet.   Per  Dominum.  celebrating      this      sacrifice. 

Through,  etc. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

COMMUNION. 

Amen  dico  vobis,  quid-  Amen  I  say  unto  you, — all 
quid  orantes  petitis,  ere-  things  whatsoever  ye  ask  for 
dite  quia  accipietis,  et  net  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye 
vobis.  shall  receive,  and  it  shall  be 

done  unto  you. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

Quos  tantis,  Domine  lar-  We  beseech  thee,  O  Lord, 
giris  uti  mysteriis  :  quaesu-  that  we,  to  whom  thou  vouch- 
mus  ;  ut  effectibus  nos  safest  the  use  of  these  great 
eorum  veraciter  aptare  dig-  mysteries  may  be  made  truly 
neris.  Per  Dominum.  worthy  to  receive  the  benefits 

thereof.     Through,  etc. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


YESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Yersicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON    OF    THE    MAGNIFICAT. 

Domine,  si  vis,  potes  me  Lord,   if    thou    wilt,   thou 

mundare  ;   et  ait    Jesus  :      canst  make  me  clean.    And 
Volo,  mundare.  Jesus  saith  :  I  will !    Be  thou 

made  clean  ! 


THIRD   SUNDAY   AFTER   THE   EPIPHANY. 


519 


LET  US  PRAY. 


O  Almigty  and  Eternal  God, 
behold  our  weakness  ;  and 
stretch  forth  the  right  hand 
of  thy  majesty  to  protect  us. 
Through,  etc. 


OREMUS. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 
Deus,  innrmitatemnostram 
propitius  respice :  atque  ad 
protegendumnos,  dexteram 
tuae  majestatis  extende. 
Per  Dominum. 


520 


FOURTH   SUNDAY   AFTER  THE   EPIPHANY. 


THE    FOURTH    SUNDAY 

AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 
0— — 


INTR01T. 


Dicit  Dominus  :  Ego  co- 
gito  cogitationes  pacis,  et 
non  afflictionis :  invocabitis 
me,  et  ego  exaudiam  vos  : 
et  reducam  captivitatem 
vestram  de  cunctis  locis. 

Ps.  Benedixisti,  Domine, 
terrain  tuam :  avertisti  cap- 
tivitatem Jacob.  Gloria 
Patri.  Dicit  Dominus. 


The  Lord  saith :  I  think 
thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of 
affliction  :  ye  shall  call  upon 
me,  and  I  will  hear  you  :  and 
bring  back  your  captive  people 
from  all  places. 

Ps.  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast 
blessed  the  land  :  thou  hast 
brought  back  the  captive  chil- 
dren of  Jacob.  Glory,  etc.  The 
Lord. 


COLLECT. 


Deus,  qui  nos  in  tantis 
periculis  constitutos,  pro 
numana  scis  fragilitate  non 
posse  subsistere  :  da  nobis 
salutem  mentis  et  corporis; 
ut  ea,  quae  pro  peccatis  nos- 
tras patimur,  te  adjuvante, 
vincamus.  Per  Dominum. 


0  God,  who  knowest,  that 
through  human  frailty,  we  are 
not  able  to  subsist  amidst  such 
great  dangers  ;  grant  us  health 
of  soul  and  body  ;  that,  what- 
soever things  we  suffer  be- 
cause of  our  sins,  we  may 
conquer  them,  by  thine  assis- 
tance.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects  as  in  page  125, 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati 
Pauli  Apostoli  adRomanos. 

Cap.  xiii. 

Fratres,  Nemini  quid- 
quam  debeatis,  nisiutinvi- 
cem  diligatis  :  qui  enim 
diligit  proximum,  legem 
implevit.  Nam  :  Non  adul- 
terabis  ;  Non  occides ;  Non 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  to  the  Romans. 

Ch.  xiii. 

Brethren  :  Owe  no  man  any 
thing,  but  to  love  one  another: 
for,  he  that  loveth  his  neigh- 
bour, hath  fulfilled  the  law. 
For,  thou  shalt  not  commit 
adultery  :  Thou  shalt  not  kill : 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY.   521 


Thou  shalt  not  steal :  Thou 
shalt  not  bear  false  witness  : 
Thou  shalt  not  covet :  and,  if 
there  be  any  other  command- 
ment, it  is  comprised  in  this 
word:  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself.  The  love 
of  our  neighbour  worketh  no 
evil.  Love,  therefore,  to  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law. 


f  uraberis  ;  Non  f  alsum  tes- 
timonium dices  ;  Non  con- 
cupisces,  et  si  quod  est 
aliudmandatum,in  hocver- 
bo  instauratur:Diliges  pro- 
ximumtuum  sicutteipsum. 
Dilectio  proximi  malum 
non  operatur.  Plenitudo 
ergo  legis  est  dilectio. 


GRADUAL. 


Thou  hast  saved  us,  O  Lord, 
from  them  that  afflict  us  ;  and 
hast  put  them  to  shame  that 
hate  us. 

^.  In  God  shall  we  glory 
all  the  day  long  ;  and,  in  thy 
name,  we  will  give  praise  for 
ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  Out  of  the  depths  I  have 
cried  unto  thee,  0  Lord :  Lord, 
hear  my  prayer.  Alleluia. 


Liberasti  nos,  Domine, 
ex  affligentibus  nos  :  et  eos, 
qui  nos  oderunt,  conf  udisti. 

"ft.  In  Deo  laudabimur 
tota  die,  et  in  nomine  tuo 
confitebimur  in  ssecula. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  De  profundis  clamavi 
ad  te,  Domine  :  Domine, 
exaudi  orationem  meam. 
Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel  of  the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  viii. 

At  that  time  :  When  Jesus 
entered  into  the  boat,  his  dis- 
ciples followed  him  !  And,  be- 
hold, a  great  tempest  arose  in 
the  sea,  so  that  the  boat  was 
covered  with  waves  ;  but  he 
was  asleep.  And  his  disciples 
came  to  him,  and  awakened 
him,  saying  :  Lord !  save  us, 
we  perish.  And  Jesus  saith 
to  them  :  Why  are  ye  fearful, 
O  ye  of  little  faith?  Then 
rising  up,  he  commanded  the 
winds  and  the  sea,  and  there 
came  a  great  calm,  but,  the 


Sequentia  sancti  Evan- 
gelii  secundum  Matthaeum. 

Cap.  viii. 

In  illo  tempore  :  Ascen- 
dente  Jesu  in  naviculam  ; 
secuti  sunt  eum  discipuli 
ejus  :  et  ecce  motus  magnus 
factus  est  in  mari,  ita  ut 
navicula  operiretur  flucti- 
bus,  ipse  vero  dormiebat. 
Et  accesserunt  ad  eum  dis- 
cipuli ejus,  et  suscitaverunt 
eum  dicentes :  Domine, 
salva  nos,  perimus.  Et 
diciteis  Jesus :  Quidtimidi 
estis,  modicse  fidei  1  Tunc 
surgens,  imperavit  ventis  et 
mari ;  et  facta  est  tranquil- 


522       FOURTH   SUNDAY   AFTER  THE   EPIPHANY. 


litas  magna.  Porro  homines 
mirati  sunt,  dicentes : 
Qualis  est  hie,  quia  venti  et 
mare  obediunt  ei  1 


men  wondered,  saying  :  What 
manner  of  man  is  this  ]  for 
the  winds  and  the  sea  obey 
him  ! 


OFFERTORY. 


De  profundis  clamavi  ad 
te,  Domine  :  Domine,  ex- 
audi  orationem  meam  :  de 
profundis  clamavi  ad  te, 
Domine. 


Oat  of  the  depths  I  have 
cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord  :  Lord 
hear  my  prayer  :  out  of  the 
depths  I  have  cried  unto  thee, 
OLord. 


SECRET. 


Concede,  qusesumus  om- 
nipotens  Deus,  ut  hujus 
sacrificii  munus  oblatum, 
fragilitatem  nostram  ab 
omni  malo  purget  semper, 
et  muniat.   Per  Dominum. 


Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
almighty  God,  that  the  offer- 
ing of  this  sacrifice  may  always 
cleanse  our  frailty  from  all 
evil,  and  be  a  protection  to 
us.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 


COMMUNION. 


Amen  dico  vobis,  quid- 
quid  orantes  petitis,  credite 
quia  accipietis,  et  fiet 
vobis. 


Amen  I  say  unto  you, — all 
things  whatsoever  ye  ask  for 
when  ye  pray  ;  believe  that  ye 
shall  receive,  and  it  shall  be 
done  unto  you. 


POSTCOMMUNION. 


Munera  tua  nos,  Deus,  a 
delectationibus  terrenis  ex- 
pediant,  et  coelestibus  sem- 
per instaurent  alimentis. 
Per  Dominum. 


May  thy  gifts,  which  we 
have  partaken  of,  0  God,  de- 
tach us  from  all  earthly  plea- 
sures, and  ever  refresh  and 
strengthen  us  with  heavenly 
food.     Through,  etc. 


The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY.   523 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 


ANTIPHON  OF  THE  MAGNIFICAT. 


Save  us,  O  Lord,  we  perish : 
command,  O  God,  and  make 
the  sea  calm. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

O  God,  who  knowest,  that 
through  human  frailty,  we  are 
not  able  to  subsist  amidst 
such  great  dangers  ;  grant  us 
health  of  soul  and  body ;  that, 
whatsoever  things  we  suffer 
because  of  our  sins,  we  may 
conquer  them,  by  thine  assis- 
tance.   Through,  etc. 


Domine,  salva  nos  peri- 
mus  :  impera,  et  fac,  Deus, 
tranquillitatem. 

OREMUS. 

Deus,  qui  nos  in  tantis 
periculis  constitutos,  pro 
humana  scis  fragilitate  non 
posse  subsistere  :  da  nobis 
salutem  mentis  et  corporis; 
ut  ea,  quae  pro  peccatis  nos- 
tris  patimur,  te  adjuvante, 
vincamus.  Per  Dominum. 


524 


FIFTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   THE   EPIPHANY. 


THE    FIFTH    SUNDAY 

AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 


INTROIT. 


Dicit  Dominus  :  Ego 
cogito  cogitationes  pacis,  et 
non  afflictionis :  invocabitis 
me,  et  ego  exaudiam  vos  : 
et  reducam  captivitatem 
vestram  de  cunctis  locis. 

Ps.  Benedixisti,  Domine 
terrain  tuam  :  avertisti  cap- 
tivitatem Jacob.  Gloria 
Patri.  Dicit  Dominus. 


The  Lord  saith  :  I  think 
thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of 
affliction  ;  ye  shall  call  upon 
me,  and  I  will  hear  you  :  and 
bring  back  your  captive  peo- 
ple from  all  places. 

Ps.  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast 
blessed  thy  land:  thou  hast 
brought  back  the  captive  chil- 
dren of  Jacob.  Glory,  etc.  The 
Lord. 


COLLECT. 


Familiam  tuam,  quae- 
sumus  Domine,  continua 
pietate  custodi :  ut  quae  in 
sola  spe  gratiae  ccelestis  in- 
nititur,  tua  semper  protec- 
tione  muniatur.  Per  Donii- 
num. 


Preserve,  we  beseech  thee, 
O  Lord,  thy  family  by  thy 
constant  mercy ;  that,  as  it 
leans  solely  on  the  hope  of 
heavenly  grace,  it  may  always 
be  defended  by  thy  protec- 
tection.    Through,  etc. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lectio  Epistolae  beati  Pauli 
Apostofi  ad  Colossenses. 


Cap.  Hi. 

Fratres,  Induite  vos  si- 
cut  electi  Dei,  sancti,  et  di- 
lecti,  viscera  misericordiae, 
benignitatem,  humilitatem, 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Colossians. 

Ch.  Hi. 

Brethren  :  Put  ye  on,  there- 
fore, as  the  elect  of  God,  holy, 
and  beloved,  the  bowels  of 
mercy,    benignity,    humility, 


FIFTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   THE   EPIPHANY. 


525 


modesty,  patience  ;  bearing 
with  one  another,  and  forgiving 
one  another,  i  if  any  have  a 
complaint  against  another  ; 
even  as  the  Lord  hath  forgiven 
you,  so  ye  also.  But,  above 
all  these  things,  have  charity, 
which  is  the  bond  of  perfec- 
tion :  and  let  the  peace  of 
Christ  rejoice  in  your  hearts, 
wherein,  also,  ye  are  called  in 
one  body  :  and  be  ye  thank- 
ful. Let  the  word  of  Christ 
dwell  in  you  abundantly  in 
all  wisdom,  teaching  and  ad- 
monishing one  another  in 
psalms,  hymns,  and  spiritual 
canticles,  singing  in  grace  in 
your  hearts  to  God.  All  what- 
soever ye  do  in  word,  or  in 
work,  all  things  do  ye  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
giving  thanks  to  God  and  the 
Father,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord. 


modestiam,patientiam,sup- 
portantes  invicem,  et  do- 
nantes  vobismetipsis,  si 
quis  adversus  aliquem  ha- 
bet  querelam  :  sicut  et  Do- 
minus  donavit  vobis,  ita  et 
vos.  Super  omnia  autem 
hsec  charitatem  habete  ; 
quod  est  vinculum  perfec- 
tionis:  et  pax  Christi  exsul- 
tet  in  cordibus  vestris,  in 
qua  et  vocati  estis  in  uno 
corpore :  et  grati  estote. 
Verbum  Christi  habitet  in 
vobis  abundanter,  in  omni 
sapientia,  docentes,  et  com- 
monentes  vosmetipsos,  psal- 
mis,  hymnis,  et  canticis 
spiritualibus,  in  gratia  can- 
tantes  in  cordibus  vestris 
Deo.  Omne  quodcumque 
facitis  in  verbo  aut  in  ope- 
re,  omnia  in  nomine  Domi- 
ni Jesu  Christi,  gratias 
agentes  Deo  et  Patri  per 
Jesum  Christum  Dominum 
nostrum. 


GRADUAL. 


Thou  hast  saved  us,  O  Lord, 
from  them  that  afflict  us  :  and 
hast  put  them  to  shame  that 
hate  us. 

$\  In  God  shall  we  glory 
all  the  day  long ;  and,  in  thy 
name,  we  will  give  praise  for 
ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

Jf.  Out  of  the  depths  I  have 
cried  unto  thee,  0  Lord :  Lord, 
hear  my  prayer.  Alleluia. 


Liberasti  nos,  Domine, 
ex  affligentibus  nos  :  et  eos, 
qui  nos  oderunt,  confudisti. 

^.  In  Deo  laudabimur 
tota  die,  et  in  nomine  tuo 
confitebimur  in  ssecula. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

^.  De  profundis  clamavi 
ad  te,  Domine :  Domine, 
exaudi  orationem  meam. 
Alleluia. 


526 


FIFTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   THE    EPIPHANY. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evange- 
lii  secundum  Matthaeum. 

Cap.  xiii. 

In  illo  tempore :  Dixit 
Jesus  turbis  parabolam 
hanc :  Simile  factum  est 
regnum  ccelorum  homini, 
qui  seminavitbonum  semen 
in  agro  suo.  Cum  autem 
dormirent  homines,  venit 
inimicus  ejus,  et  super- 
seminavit  zizania  in  medio 
tritici,  et  abiit.  Cum 
autem  crevisset  herba,  et 
f  ructum  f  ecisset,  tunc  appa- 
ruerunt  et  zizania.  Acce- 
dentes  autem  servi  patris 
familias,  dixerunt  ei :  Do- 
mine,  nonne  bonum  semen 
seminasti  in  agro  tuo  1 
Unde  ergo  habet  zizania. 
Et  ait  illis :  Inimicus 
homo  hoc  fecit.  Servi 
autem  dixerunt  ei :  Vis, 
imus,  et  colligimus  ea  ?  Et 
ait :  Non :  ne  forte  colli- 
gentes  zizania,  eradicetis 
simul  cum  eis  et  triticum. 
Sinite  iutraque  crescere 
usque  ad  messem,  et  in 
tempore  messis  dicam  mes- 
soribus:  Colligite  primum 
zizania,  et  alligate  ea  in 
fasciculos  ad  comburen- 
dum,  triticum  autem  con- 
gregate et  in  horreum 
meum. 


Sequel  of  the  Holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  xiii. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  spoke 
this  parable  to  the  multitude, 
saying  :  ^  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  likened  to  a  man 
that  sowed  good  seed  in  his 
field.  But,  while  men  were 
asleep,  his  enemy  came  and 
oversowed  cockle  among  the 
wheat,  and  went  his  way. 
And  when  the  blade  was 
sprung  up,  and  brought  forth 
fruit,  then  appeared  also  the 
cockle.  Then  the  servants  of 
the  good  man  of  the  house, 
coming,  said  unto  him  :  Sir  ! 
didst  thou  not  sow  good  seed 
in  thy  field  1  whence,  then, 
hath  it  cockle  1  And  he  said 
to  them  :  An  enemy  hath  done 
this.  And  the  servant  said 
unto  him  :  Wilt  thou  that  we 
go  and  gather  it  up  1  And  he 
said  :  No  :  lest,  perhaps, 
gathering  up  the  cockle,  ye 
root  up  the  wheat  also  together 
with  it.  Let  both  grow  until 
the  harvest,  and  in  the  time 
of  the  harvest  I  will  say  to  the 
reapers :  Gather  up  first  the 
cockle,  and  bind  it  in  bundles 
to  burn ;  but,  the  wheat,  gather 
ye  into  my  barn. 


OFFERTORY. 


De  profundis  clamavi  ad 
te,  Domine:  Domine,  ex- 
audi  orationem  meam  :  de 
profundis  clamavi  ad  te, 
Domine. 


Out  of  the  depths,  I  have 
cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord :  Lord, 
hear  my  prayer :  out  of  the 
depths  have  I  cried  unto  thee, 
O  Lord ! 


FIFTH   SUNDAY   AFTEK  THE   EPIPHANY.  527 


SECRET. 

We  offer  thee,  O  Lord,  this         Hostias    tibi,    Domine, 

sacrifice  of  propitiation,  that  placationis  offerimus,  ut  et 

thou  wouldst  mercifully  for-  delicta    nostra    miseratus 

give  us  our  sins,  and  guide  our  absolvas,  et  nutantia  corda 

faltering  hearts.  Through,  etc.  tu  dirigas.  Per  Dominum. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 


COMMUNION. 

Amen  I  say  unto  you,  all         Amen  dico  vobis,  quid- 
things  whatsoever  ye  ask  for      quid  orantes  petitis,  credite 
when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye      quia  accipietis,  et  net  vobis. 
shall  receive,  and  it  shall  be 
done  unto  you. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

We  beseech  thee,  O  almighty         Quaesumus    omnipotens 

God,  that  we  may  one  day  re-  Deus  :  ut  illius  salutaris  ca- 

ceive  the  effects  of  that  salva-  piamus  effectum,  cujus  per 

tion,  of  which  we  have  received  hsec  mysteria  pignus  ac- 

the  pledge  in  these  mysteries,  cepimus.  Per  Dominum. 
Through,  etc. 

The  other  Postcomm unions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  'pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON   OF   THE   MAGNIFICAT. 

Gather  up  first  the  cockle,  Colligite  primum  zizania, 
and  bind  it,  in  bundles  to  et  alligate  ea  in  fasciculos 
burn  :  but,  gather  the  wheat  ad  comburendum :  triticum 
into  my  barn,  saith  the  Lord,      autem  congregate  in  hor- 

reum  meum,  dicit  Dominus. 


528 


FIFTH    SUNDAY   AFTER   THE   EPIPHANY. 


OREMUS. 

Familiam  tuam,  quse- 
sumus  Domine,  continua 
pietate  custodi :  ut  quae  in 
sola  spe  gratise  coelestis  in- 
nititur,  tua  semper  pro- 
tectione  muniatur.  Per 
Dominum. 


LET  US   PRAY. 

Preserve,  we  beseech  thee, 
O  Lord,  thy  family  by  thy 
constant  mercy ;  that,  as  it 
leans  solely  on  the  hope  of 
heavenly  grace,  it  may  always 
be  defended  by  thy  protection. 
Through,  etc. 


SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   THE   EPIPHANY. 


529 


THE    SIXTH     SUNDAY 

AFTER  THE   EPIPHANY. 


■0- 


INTROIT. 


The  Lord  saith :  I  think 
thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of 
affliction  ;  ye  shall  call  upon 
me,  and  I  will  hear  you  :  and 
bring  back  your  captives  from 
all  places. 

Ps.  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast 
blessed  thy  land :  thou  hast 
brought  back  the  captive  chil- 
dren of  Jacob.  Glory,  etc.  The 
Lord. 


Dicit  Dominus  :  Ego 
cogito  cogitationes  pacis, 
et  non  afflictionis  :  invoca- 
bitis  me,  et  ego  exaudiam 
vos :  et  reducam,  captivi- 
tatem  vestram  de  cunctis 
locis. 

Ps.  Benedixisti  Domine, 
terram  tuam :  avertisti  cap- 
tivitatem  Jacob.  Gloria 
Patri.   Dicit  Dominus. 


COLLECT. 


Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
almighty  God,  that,  ever  medi- 
tating on  such  things  as  are 
reasonable,  we  may,  both  in 
word  and  deed,  carry  out  the 
things  which  are  pleasing  unto 
thee.    Through,  etc. 


Praesta,  qneesumus  omni- 
potens  Deus  :  ut  semper 
rationabilia  meditantes  ; 
quae  tibi  sunt  placita  et  dic- 
tis  exsequamur,  et  factis. 
Per  Dominum. 


The  other  Collects,  as  in  page  125. 


EPISTLE. 


Lesson  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the 
Thessalonians. 

1  Ch.  i. 

Brethren  :   "We  give  thanks 

unto  God  always  for  you  all : 

making  a  remembrance  of  you 

i  in  our  prayers  without  ceasing : 

being    mindful    of     you    in 

VOL  XI. 


Lectio  Epistolse  beati  Pauli 
Apostoli  ad  Thessa- 
lonicenses. 

1  Cap.  i. 

Fratres,  Gratias  agimus 
Deo  semper  pro  omnibus 
vobis,  memoriam  vestri 
facientes  in  orationibus 
nostris  sine  intermissione, 

2M 


530 


SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER    THE    ETIPHANY. 


memores  operis  fidei  ves- 
trae,  et  lab  oris  et  charitatis, 
et.sustinentisespei  Domini 
nostri  Jesu  Christi,'  ante 
Deum  et  Patrem  nostrum  : 
scientes,  fratres  dilecti  a 
Deo,  election  em  vestram  : 
quia  Evangelium  nostrum 
non  fuit  ad  vos  in  sermone 
tantum,  sed  et  in  virtute, 
et  in  Spiritu  sancto,  et  in 
plenitudine  multa,  sicut 
scitis  quales  fuerimus  in 
vobis  propter  vos.  Et  vos 
imitatores  nostri  facti  estis, 
et  Domini,  excipientes  ver- 
bum  in  tribulatione  multa, 
cum  gaudio  Spiritus  sancti: 
ita  ut  facti  sitis  forma 
omnibus  credentibus  in 
Macedonia,  et  in  Achaia. 
A  vobis  enim  diffamatus 
est  sermo  Domini,  non 
solum  in  Macedonia,  et  in 
Achaia,  sed  et  in  omni  loco 
fides  vestra,  quse  est  ad 
Deum,  profecta  est,  ita  ut 
non  sit  nobis  necesse  quid- 
quam  loqui.  Ipsi  enim  de 
nobis  annuntiant  qualem 
introitum  habuerimus  ad 
vos  :  et  quomodo  conversis 
estis  ad  Deum  a  simulacris, 
servire  Deo  vivo,  et  vero,  et 
exspectare  Filium  ejus  de 
ccelis  (quern  suscitavit  ex 
mortuis)  Jesum,qui  eripuit 
nos  ab  ira  ventura. 


the  work  of  your  faith,  and 
labour,  and  charity,  and  of  the 
enduring  of  the  hope  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  before  God 
and  our  Father  ;  knowing, 
brethren  beloved  of  God,  your 
election.  For,  our  Gospel  hath 
not  been  to  you  in  word  only, 
but  in  power  also,  and  in 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much 
fulness,  as  ye  know  what 
manner  of  men  we  have  been 
among  you  for  your  sakes. 
And  ye  became  followers  of 
us,  and  of  the  Lord,  receiving 
the  word  in  much  tribulation, 
with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost : 
so  that,  ye  were  made  a 
pattern  to  all  that  believe  in 
Macedonia  and  in  Achaia. 
For,  from  you  was  spread 
abroad  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
not  only  in  Macedonia  and  in 
Achaia,  but  also  in  every  place 
your  faith,  which  is  towards 
God,  is  gone  forth,  so  that  we 
need  not  speak  anything.  For 
they  themselves  relate  of 
us,  what  manner  of  entering 
in  we  had  unto  you  :  and  how 
ye  turned  to  God  from  idols, 
to  serve  the  living  and  true 
God,  and  to  wait  for  his  Son 
from  heaven  (whom  he  raised 
up  from  the  dead)  Jesus,  who 
hath  delivered  us  from  the 
wrath  to  come. 


GRADUAL. 


Liberasti  nos,  Domine, 
ex  affligentibus  nos ;  et  eos, 
qui  nos  oderunt,  confu- 
disti. 

ft.  In  Deo  laudabimur 


Thou  hast  saved  us,  O  Lord, 
from  them  that  afflict  us  :  and 
hast  put  them  to  shame  that 
hate  us. 

ft.  In  God  shall  we  glory  all 


SIXTH   SUNDAY    AFTER   THE    EPIPHANY. 


531 


the  day  long  ;  and,  in  thy 
name,  we  will  give  praise  for 
ever. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

Out  of  the  depths  I  have 
cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord:  Lord, 
hear  my  voice.  Alleluia, 


tota  die  ;  et  in  nomine  tuo 
confitebimur  in  saecula. 

Alleluia,  alleluia. 

ft.  De  profundis  clamavi 
ad  te,  Domine:  Domine, 
exaudi  orationem  meam. 
Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. 


Sequel    of    the  holy  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew. 

Ch.  xiii. 

At  that  time  :  Jesus  spoke 
this  parable  :  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  like  to  a  grain  of 
mustard-seed,  which  a  man 
took  and  sowed  in  his  field. 
Which,  indeed,  is  the  least  of 
all  seeds ;  but,  when  it  is  grown 
up,  it  is  greater  than  all  herbs, 
and  becometh  a  tree,  so  that 
the  birds  of  the  air  come  and 
dwell  in  the  branches  thereof. 
Another  parable  he  spoke  unto 
them  :  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  like  unto  leaven,  which  a 
woman  took  and  hid  in  three 
measures  of  meal,  until  the 
whole  was  leavened.  All  these 
things  Jesus  spoke  in  parables 
to  the  multitudes,  and  with- 
out parables  he  did  not  speak 
to  them  :  that  the  word  might 
be  fulfilled,  which  was  spoken 
by  the  Prophet,  saying :  I 
will  open  my  mouth  in  par- 
ables ;  I  will  utter  things 
hidden  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world. 


Sequentia  sancti  Evangelii 
secundum  Matths&um, 

Cap.  uiii* 

In  illo  tempore  :  Dixit 
Jesus  turbis  parabolam 
hanc :  Simile  est  regnum 
ccelorum  grano  sinapis, 
quod  accipiens  homo  semi- 
navit  in  agro  suo  :  quod 
minimum  quidem  est  omni- 
bus seminibus  :  cum  autem 
creverit,  majus  est  omnibus 
oleribus,  et  fit  arbor,  ita  ut 
volucres  cceli  veniant^  et 
habitent  in  ramis  ejus. 
Aliam  parabolam  locutus 
est  eis  :  Simile  est  regnum 
ccelorum,  fermento,  quod 
acceptum  mulier  abscondit 
in  farinas  satis  tri bus,  donee 
fermentatum  est  totum. 
Haac  omnia  locutus  est 
Jesus  in  parabolis  ad  tur- 
bas  et  sine  parabolis  non 
loquebatur  eis  :  ut  implere- 
tur  quod  dictum  erat  per 
Prophetam,  dicentem  : 
Aperiam  in  parabolis  os 
meum,  eructabo  abscondita 
a  constitutione  mundi. 


OFFERTORY. 


Out   of  the  depths  have  I 
cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord :  Lord, 


De  profundis  clamavi  ad 
te,  Domine  :  Domine,  ex- 


532  SIXTH   SUNDAY   AFTER   THE   EPIPHANY. 

audi  orationem  meam  :  de     hear  my  prayer  :  out  of  the 

Erof  undis    clamavi  ad  te,      depths  have  I  cried  unto  thee, 
>omine.  O  Lord  ! 


SECRET. 

Haec  nos  oblatio,  Deus,  May  this  oblation,  O  God, 

mundet,  quaesumus,  et  re-  we  beseech  thee,  cleanse,  re- 

novet,  gubernet,  et  prote-  new,  govern,  and  protect  us. 

gat.  Per  Dominum.  Through,  etc. 

The  other  Secrets,  as  in  page  135. 

COMMUNION. 

Amen  dico  vobis,  quid-  Amen  I  say  unto  you, — all 
quid  orantes  petitis,  credite  things  whatsoever  ye  ask  for 
quia  accipietis,  et  fiet  vobis.      when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye 

shall  receive,  and  it  shall  be 

done  unto  you. 

POSTCOMMUNION. 

p  Coelestibus,Domine,pas-  Being  fed,  O  Lord,  with 
ti  deliciis,  quaesumus,  ut  heavenly  dainties,  we  beseech 
semper  eadem,  per  quae  thee,  that  we  may  always 
veraciter  vivimus,  appeta-  hunger  after  them,  for  by  them 
mus.  Per  Dominum.  we  have  true  life.    Through, 

etc. 

The  other  Postcommunions,  as  in  page  137. 


VESPERS. 

The  Psalms,  Capitulum,  Hymn,  and  Versicle,  as 
above,  pages  74-84. 

ANTIPHON   OF  THE  MAGNIFICAT. 

Simile  est  regnum  coelo-  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 

rum  fermento,  quod  accep-  like  to  leaven,  which  a  woman 

turn  mulier  abscondit    in  took  and  hid  in  three  measures 

farinae  satis  tribus,  donee  of  meal,  until  the  whole  was 

fermentatum  est  totum.  leavened. 


SIXTH    SUNDAY    AFTER   THE    EPIPHANY. 


.33 


LET   US  PRAY. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
almighty  God,  that  ever  medi- 
tating on  such  things  as  are 
reasonable,  we  may,  both  in 
word  and  deed,  carry  out  the 
things  which  are  pleasing  unto 
thee.    Through,  etc. 


OREMUS. 

Praesta,  quaesumus  omni- 
potens  Deus  :  ut  semper 
rationabilia  meditantes  : 
quse  tibi  sunt  placita  et  dic- 
tis  exsequamur,  et  factis. 
Per  Dominum. 


END  OF  THE  PROPER  OF  THE  TIME. 


662C15 


BX  1970  .68313  1868  v. 11   IMS 
Gueranger,  Prosper, 
Liturgical  year    2nd  ed.   — 


PONYiKK.AU   INSTTTUT* 
OF-    MEO!Af:VAL    STUDIE* 

59     Q'JCEN'S     PAUK 
I  OCONTO     ^.      C*N«0* 


