Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  CjOOQle 


Digitized  by  CjOOQle 


Digitized  by  Google 


!»c.  CKurv 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


ruK 

( 

ROMAN  MISSAL, 

TRANSLATED  INTO  THE  EN(JH8H  LANGUAGE 


voR  THv  nv  or 


THE  LAITY. 

V ^ 


fO  WHICH  IS  PREriXED,  AN  HISTORICAL  BXPLAHATIOH  OP  THI 
VS8TMRMTS,  CEREMONIES,  ETC.,  APPERTAININe  TO 
THE  HOLT  BACRIPICE  OF 


THE  MASS. 


BY  THE 

RIGHT  REV’D.  DOCTOR  ENGLAND. 

LATE  BISHOP  OP  CHARLESTON. 


TO  WHICH  IS  ADDED 


THE  VESPERS. 


IMIBI.ISHED  BY  EUGENE  CUMMISKEY, 

130  SOUTH  SIXTH  STREET. 

1843.  - 

* O'— o', „z.aB, Google 


Entkheti  according  to  the  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  yea; 
1843,  by 

EUGENE  CUMMISKET^ 
in  the  Cierk’s  O0icc  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Eastern 
District  of  Veonsvlvania. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


PREFACE. 


The  object  of  the  present  publication,  is  to  instruct 
the  members  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  on  the 
nature  of  the  most  solemn  act  of  their  religion.  The 
Saviour  who  established  that  religion,  charged  his 
apostles,  saying.  That  which  I speak  to  you  in 
*he  dark,  speak  ye  in  the  light;  and  that  which 
you  hear  in  the  ear,  preach  ye  upon  the  house- 
tops.* And  the  Council  of  Trent  lays  a solema* 
injunction  upon  pastors  frequently  to  explain  lo  the 
people  the  nature  of  the  Holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass. 
To  discharge  his  duty  by  obeying  those  distinct  di- 
.rections  of  Christ  and  of  his  Church,  in  the  best 
manner  he  could,  was  the  intention  of  the  editor  of 
this  work.  He  was  also  of  opinion  that  many  well 
disposed  members  of  other  communions  might  be 
greatly  benefited  by  its  perusal;  as  he  generally 
found  them  not  only  uninformed  of  the  Catholic  doc- 
trines, but  having  on  their  minds  the  most  extraor- 
dinary and  erroneous  impressions  as  to  the  belief  of 
Roman  Catholics. 

The  work  consists,  first,  of  an  historical  and  in- 
structive explanation  of  the  plan  and  decorations  of 
a Roman  Catholic  Church,  of  the  vestments  of  the 

♦ Matt.  X. 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


IV 


PREFACE. 


diflerent  Clergymen  who  may  officiate  therein,  of 
the  nature  and  institutions  of  the  various  ceremo- 
nies of  the  Holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  and  of  those 
prayers  which  appeared  to  need  explanation. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  is, 
“ That  in  the  Mass,  there  is  offered  to  Grod,  a true, 
proper,  and  propitiatory  sacrifice  for  the  living  and 
the  dead,”  and  that  the  victim  offered  to  God,  is 
the  body  and  blood,  together  with  the  soul  and  di- 
vinity of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  under  the  appear- 
ance of  bread  and  wine.”  Assuming  this  doctrine 
to  be  true  in  all  its  parts,  the  Editor  trusts  the  can- 
did reader  will  find,  upon  examination,  that  the  cere- 
monies are  not  only  not  ridiculous,  but  are  deeply 
significant,  highly  instructive,  wisely  instituted,  and 
greatly  edifying.  Every  Roman  Catholic  necessa- 
rily believes  this  doctrine  in  its  fullest  extent  and 
plainest  meaning,  otherwise  he  would  cease  to  be  a 
nember  of  the  Church:  as  he  is  also  supposed  t«». 
Know  the  grounds  upon  which  this  doctrine  rests, 
for  if  he  be  ignorant  of  them,  his  ignorance  is  the 
consequence  of  his  neglect,  it  was  deemed  quite  un- 
necessary to  enter  upon  those  grounds  in  the  ex- 
planation to  the  Catholic  reader;  and  to  enter  upon 
them  with  sufficient  accuracy  and  expansion,  to 
satisfy  the  mind  of  any  other  person,  would  require 
more  space  than  could  be  conveniently  given,  or 
than  would,  indeed,  be  compatible  with  a principal 
object  of  the  compiler— to  keep  the  price  of  the  book 
as  low  as  possible. 

To  establish  the  doctrinal  parts  of  the  Liturgy, 

r Google 


PREFACE. 


T 


would  require  the  proofs  of  the  “ Real  presence  ” 
of  “ Transubstaotiation,’’  of  “Communion  of 
Saints,”  of  “The  intercession  of  Angels  and  of 
Saints,”  of  ^‘respecting  the  relics  of  Saints,”  of  “the 
existence  of  Purgatory,”  of  “praying  for  the  dead,” 
and  for  the  validity  of  the  Sacrifice>  of  “ the  indeli- 
ble character  of  Holy  Orders,”  as  well  as  of  “ the 
distinction  ofOrders,”and  “ their  divine  institution.” 
This  range  would  be  far  too  extensive  to  comprise 
in  such  a prefatory  explanation,  as  the  Missal  re- 
quired ; and  the  subjects  were  too  important  to  be 
only  slightly  touched  upon,  in  place  of  being  fully 
examined.  Hence  the  Editor  determined  to  avoid 
them  altogether,  and  to  refer  those  "Who  may  be  de- 
sirous of  information  upon  such  topics,  to  the  works 
written  expressly  for  the  elucidation  and  vindication 
of  those  doctrines.  Therefore  the  explanation  does 
not  contain  a single  argument  in  support  of  doctrine. 
. The  next  part  of  the  work  is  the  translation  of  the 
Missal.  The  Editor  has  not  advanced  any  positions 
of  his  own ; his  labour  has  been  to  compress,  to  con- 
nect, and  to  translate  what  had  been  diffusely  written 
upon  the  subject  by  some  of  the  best  »nd  earliest 
writers  of  the  Church : indeed  he  could  give  nothing 
new  5 for  the  glory  of  the  Church  in  which  he  has 
the  honour  to  hold  so  responsible  a station,  as  it  is 
also  a proof  of  her  integrity,  is  that  she  has  never 
deviated  from  *the  form  of  sound  words  tvkich  she  has 
heard  from  the  Apostles,  but  f the  things  which  she 
ha£  heard  of  them  by  many  witnesses,  the  samt  sJ-jS 

* ii  Tim.  1. 13  ; 2 Tim.  ii.  2 

1* 

D .Google 


VI 


PREFACE. 


has  commended  to  faithful  men  who  ha/oe  been  fit  to  \ 
teach  others;  and  she  has  thus  *8toodfast,  and  held 
the  traditions  which  she  has  learned  of  them,  whether 
by  word  or  by  epistle.  Her  doctrine  in  all  ages  has 
been  the  same ; such  as  it  is  now,  it  was  one  thou- 
sand years  ago ; such  as  it  was  then,  it  was  in  the 
days  of  the  Apostles ; such  as  they  taught  it,  they 
received  it  from  our  Divine  Redeemer,  who  sent 
them  to  teach  all  nations,  with  a promise  of  his  spe- 
cial protection,  ^all  days,  even  the  consummation  of 
the  world.  The  ingenuity  of  man,  his  penetration 
and  research,  may  enable  him  daily  to  discover  new 
facts  which  were  unobserved  by  his  ancestors,  and 
thus  the  arts  and  the  sciences  are  in  a state  of  per- 
petual progressive  improvement.  This  vast  terri- 
tory of  nature,  in  which  so  much  treasure  lies  as  yet 
concealed,  is  the  mighty  expanse  in  which  God  gave 
the  human  mind  liberty  to  roam  abroad  at  its  dis- 
cretion. 

But  as  the  Lord  commanded  boundaries  to  be  set 
round  Sinai  while  in  the  exhibition  of  his  majesty, 
he  vindicated  his  right  to  receive  obedience,  and 
commanded  man  to  believe  and  to  practise  upon  his 
authority ; the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
are  to  be  learned  only  by  revelation,  and  the  perfec- 
tion of  religion  consists  in  the  exact  and  scrupulous 
preservation  of  the  truth  originally  disclosed.  Man 
is  not  free  to  call  God  before  his  tribunal,  and  to 
demand  from  him  the  reason  for  his  acts,  nor  is  he 
at  liberty  to  reject  the  propositions  which  have  been 


* 2 ThcM.  ii.  14. 


t Matt,  xxviii.  20. 

Google 


PREFACE. 


VI. 


originally  delivered,  nor  to  depart  from  their  spirit; 
and  hence  the  Apostle  St.  Paul  wrote,  *TJtough  ire, 
or  an  angel  from  Heaven,  preach  a gospel  to  you^ 
besides  that  which  we  have  preached  to  you,  let  him 
be  anathema.  For  the  religion  of  Christ  is  essen- 
tially unchangeable,  its  doctrines  are  irreformable — 
for  truth  cannot  become  falsehood,  nor  falsehood  be- 
come truth*  Hence  the  Editor  of  this  work  has  only 
sought  for,  and  brought  forward,  what  had  been 
originally  testified  by  that  cloud  of  witnesses  that 
has  gone  before  him  in  the  Church,  and  entreats,  as 
a recompense  for  his  labours,  a share  of  the  prayers 
of  those  who  may  profit  thereby. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


EXPLANATION 

OF 

THE  MASS. 


The  Mass  is  the  principal  office  of  the  new  law,  in 
which,  under  the  appearance  of  bread  and  wine,  the 
Redeemer  of  the  world  is  offered  up  in  an  unbloody 
manner  upon  our  altars,  as  a true,  proper,  and  propi- 
tiatory sacrifice  for  the  living  and  the  dead. 

It  is  not  a different  sacrifice  from  that  of  the  cross ; 
for  the  victim  in  each  is  the  same;  the  High  Priest 
who  makes  the  offering  is  the  same:  Christ  having 
personally  and  manifestly  made  the  oblation  upon 
Calvary,  and  this  High  Priest,  according  to  the  order 
of  Melchisedech,  having  instituted  this  office  on  the 
night  before  his  death,  commissioned  his  apostles  and 
their  successors,  in  all  days,  to  the  consummation  of 
the  world,  to  do  the  same,  for  a commemoration  of 
him,  to  show  forth  his  death  until  his  second  coining, 
they  are  his  substitutes  and  representatives,  whilst  he 
is  the  principal  but  invisible  offerer.  The  sacrifice,  t 
though  repeated,  is  not  different,  but  the  mode  of  the 
oblation  in  the  repetition  differs  from  that  bloody 
spectacle,  which  was  exhibited  in  Jerusalem,  in  the 
person  of  him  by  whose  bruises  we  were  healed. 

This  holy  sacrifice,  in  which  Christ  who  is  the 
Lamb  without  spot,  offers  himself  upon  our  altars,  is 
hat  clean  oblation  referred  to  by  the  prophet  Mala- 
chias,  which  is  every  where  made  to  the  eternal  Fa- 
ther. from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going  down 
hereof,  and  by  which  his  name  is  magnified  amongst 
he  Gentiles. 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


The  intention  of  the  compiler  of  this  essay  not  be* 

I ing  to  enter  into  a controversial  disquisition  upon  the 
nature  of  the  Mass,  but  to  ^ve  to  those  who  hold  the  , 
true  faith  concerning  this  ^ea^  sacrifice,  such  an  ex- 
planation of  its  accompaniments  and  ceremonies  as 
may  enable  them  to  attend  thereat  with  suitable  devo- 
tion* and  thereby  obtain  more  abundant  grace,  he  will 
not  enter  upon  any  of  those  grounds  where  the  vindi- 
cation of  the  doctrines  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church 
is  found,  but  at  once  commence  the  explanation. 

Sacrifice  consists  in  the  production  of  the  victim, 
its  oblation  by  a laivful  minister,  and  a destructive 
change  being  made  therein,  in  acknowledgment  of 
God’s  supreme  dominion.  The  person  who  performs 
the  act  of  sacrifice  is  called  a Priest,  the  place  on 
which  it  is  performed  an  altar. 

In  the  Mass,  Christ  is  th^ victim;  he  is  produced 
by  the  consecration,  which  by  the  power  of  God,  and 
the  institution  of  the  Redeemer,  and  the  act  of  the 
Priest,  places  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  under 
the  appearance  of  bread  and  wine  upon  the  altar;  then 
the  Priest  makes  ah  oblation  of  this  victim  to  the  eter- 
nal Father  on  behalf  of  the  people,  and  the  victim 
undergoes  a destructive  change,  showing  forth  the 
death  of  the  Redeemer,  and  making  commemoration 
thereof,  by  the  exhibition  of  the  apparent  separation 
of  the  body  from  the  blood ; the  former  being  under 
the  appearance  of  bread,  and  the  latter  under  the  ap- 
pearance of  wine,  and  by  the  consumption  of  both  by 
the  Priest. 

The  performance  of  this,  is  the  essential  part  of  the 
Mass ; all  that  is  necessary  for  its  validity  is  the 
priestly  character  of  the  minister,  and  the  consecra 
t’on,  oblation,  and  consumption  of  the  victim.  And 
for  the  performance  hereof  Christ  left  power  to  hiP 
apostles,  and  to  those  to  whom  they  should  commu- 
nicate the  same,  and  to  their  successors  for  ever — 
“Do  this  for  a commemoration  of  me.”  Luke  xxii.  10 

No  particular  dress  is  essentially  necessary  on 

r Google  ^ ' 


10 


ON  THE  MASS. 


part  of  the  celebrant,  nor  is  his  power  confined  to  t/ie 
using  of  any  particular  language ; nor  is  any  ceremo^ 
, ny,  except  those  instituted  by  our  Saviour,  so  essential 
as  to  be  indispensably  necessary  to  the  validity  of  the 
sacrifice. 

But  it  must  be  evident,  that  unless  some  regulations 
were  made  upon  these  points,  there  would  be  intermi- 
nable variance,  and  perpetual  changes ; therefore,  al- 
though our  blessed  Lord  made  no  specific  rule  on  this 
bead,  we  find  that  particular  dresses,  and  particular 
ceremonies  have  been  adopted  and  established  by  va- 
rious portions  of  the  Church. 

The  Liturgy  in  use  in  this  country,  and  in  the 
principal  portion  of  the  western  division  of  the 
Church,  is  that  of  Rome.  Several  other  portions  of 
the  Roman  Catholic  Church  follow  other  Liturgies, 
varying  from  us  in  their  dress,  ceremonies,  and  lan- 
guage, though  their  faith  is  exactly  the  same  as  ours, 
as  is  also  their  government, being  under  tiie  guidance 
of  Bishops,  who  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  the 
Pope  and  hold  his  communion ; but  their  Liturgies 
are  in  many  instances  equally  ancient  as  ours ; others 
are  as  ancient  as  the  days  of  St.  John  Chrysostom, 
others  as  those  of  St,  Basil,  &c.  This  explanation 
shall  be  confined  to  the  ceremonies  of  the  Roman 
Missal,  and  the  western  portion  of  the  Church,  as 
practised  in  most  parts  of  Europe  and  Africa,  and  in 
all  America. 

In  the  explanation  we  shall  look  for  three  meanings 
in  every  object  and  ceremony.  The  first,  the  literal, 
natural,  ana  it  may  be  said,  the  original  meaning; 
the  second,  the  figurative,  or  emblematic  signification; 
and  thirdly,  the  pious,  or  religious  meaning — fre- 
quently the  two  last  will  be  found  the  same;  some- 
times all  three  will  be  found  combined. 

We  begin  with  the  altar — 'I’his  is  either  entirely 
of  stone,  or  a consecrated  stone*is  placed  on  a table 
or  wooden  appearance  cf  a tomb;  the  vicinity  o. 
which  is  ornamented  with  architecture,  paintings, 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


i; 


statues,  vases,  re4ics,  &c.,  where  they  can  be  pro-  p 
cured ; and  our  churches  are,  where  it  can  be  conve- 
niently done,  so  built  as  that  the  altars  may  be  at  the 
eastern  end,  and  the  celebrant  may  look  tow  ards  that 
point,  and  the  people  pray  towards  that  quarter. 

Formerly  the  Christians  celebrated  the  sacred  mys- 
teries upon  the  tombs  of  the  martyrs,  which  were  of 
stone;  but  the  persecutions  having  ceased,  and  large 
churches  having  been  erected,  the  place  where  the 
holy  sacrifice  was  to  be  offered  was  decorated,  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  tomb  was  still  preserved,  and  the 
relics  of  the  martyrs  transported  thither,  and  preserved 
with  care  and  respect,  as  testimonies  of  former 
triumphs,  and  excitements  to  future  good  conduct. 
Our  religion  had  its  origin  in  the  east,  and  we  turn 
towards  that  quarter  to  testify  whence  we  have  re- 
ceived our  doctrines,  and  to  beseech  the  assistance  of 
that  Saviour  who,  though  he  can  hear  us,  whitherso- 
ever we  may  turn,  yet  has  made  Judea  the  great  theatre 
of  mercy  and  redemption,  and  there  left  the  memorials 
of  his  acts  and  institutions. 

The  altar  signifies  Christ,  who  is  the  great  corner 
stone  of  the  spiritual  edifice  which  he  has  raised  up 
to  his  Father.  The  rising  of  the  sun  in  the  east,  after 
it  has  sunk  in  the  west,  and  been  hidden  during  the 
night,  may  be  w'ell  considered  as  an  emblem  of  our 
'esurrection,  after  the  night  of  death ; and  as  this  lu- 
minary arises  in  glory,  dispelling  darkness,  and  in- 
vigorating the  earth,  so  has  Christ  risen  from  his 
tomb  to  confound  his  enemies,  spread  his  doctrine 
through  the  earth,  and  invigorate  man  by  his  giace. 
East  is  the  old  English  name  for  rising,  and  hence 
ibe  name  Easter  Sunday  for  that  day  on  which  ^ve 
commemorate  the  resurrection  of  our  Saviour. 

There  is  one  wooden  altar  now  in  St.  Feter's 
church,  in  Rome,  upon  which  only  the  Pope  cele- 
brates, and  this  has  been  preserved  from  the  earli>  st 
Christian  antiquity,  as  having  been  that  upon  which 
the  blessed  apostle  St.  Peter  offered  the  h )ly  sacrifice. 


.Google 


V2 


ON  THE  MASS. 


The  law  commanding  that  the  altars  should  be  of 
stone,  prevails  now  in  the  church  during  upwards  of 
lifteen  hundred  years. 

This  altar  is  covered  with  clean  white  linen  or 
cotton  cloths,  as  well  for  the  decency  of  appearance 
as  for  the  expression  of  the  purity  and  sanctity  which 
should  accompany  Christ.  Lights  are  also  placed 
on  the  altar,  from  the  usage  of  the  most  ancient  times 
It  is  an  eastern  custom,  as  St.  Jerome  testifies,  to  ex- 
press joy,  for  even  in  the  blaze  of  the  sun,  the  torches 
and  candles  were  lighted  to  manifest  this  feeling ; 
and  as  our  religion  has  been  received  from  the  east, 
most  of  our  ancient  customs  are  of  eastern  origin. 
These  lights  also  sigpnify  the  Holy  Ghost»  who  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost  descended  in  the  form  of  fiery 
tongues  upon  the  apostles,  and  these  tongues  are  well 
represented  by  the  blaze  of  candles,  which  thus  show 
that  this  sacred  Spirit  still  presides  in  that  church,  in 
which  he  was  to  remain  all  days  to  the  consummation 
of  the  world  ; they  also  signify  the  virtues  of  faith 
and  charity  which  we  should  exhibit,  that  men  may 
see  our  good  works  and  glorify  our  Father  who  is  in 
heaven. 

1 hough  God  prohibited  man  from  leaking  idols 
and  adoring  them,  yet  he  commanded  Moses  to 
make  images  of  cherubim,  which  he  was  to  place  for 
the  ornament  of  the  Holy  of  Holies — and  Solomon 
in  his  temple  had  many  similar  decorations,  and  from 
the  earliest  days  of  Christianity  statues  and  pictures 
have  been  amongst  the  chief  ornaments  of  Churches, 
and  tended  much  to  excite  the  devotion  of  the  faithful. 
There  are  cards  containing  some  of  the  prayers  which 
are  said  during  the  Mass,  placed,  for  the  convenience 
of  the  celebrant  upon  the  altar. 

The  place  about  the  altar  is  sometimes  called  the 
chancel,  because  it  was  separated  from  the  body  of 
the  Church  by  Canceller  or  rails.  It  is  at  other  times 
called  the  sanctuary,  from  being  that  part  of  the' 
Church,  where  the  holy  offices  are  performed.  The 

D .Google 


ON  THE  MAS8. 


13 


body  of  the  Church  is  called  the  Naye,  from  its 
similarity  to  a ship  Navis,  in  which  the  faithful  are 
as  it  were  embarked  under  the  government  of  their 
Clergy. 

The  use  of  incense  in  the  Church  is  so  ancient, 
that  we  cannot  find  any  time  of  its  introduction.  It 
has  been  alleged  that  we  took  it  from  the  Pagans. 
The  allegationis  incorrect;  it  has  been  taken  from 
the  Jews,  whom  God  commanded  to  offer  it.  The 
Pagans  also  took  it  from  them,  but  we  do  not  find 
the  Jews  commanded  to  abandon  its  use  because  it 
was  abused  by  the  idolaters.  It  has  been  also  said 
that  lights  and  incense  were  used  by  the  first  Chris- 
tians, in  consequence  of  their  being  under  the  ne- 
cessity of  assembling  in  caves,  which  were  dark  and 
lamp.  This  is  not  altogether  true;  there  were 
other  causes  which  have  been  stated,  and  if  the  first 
Christians  could  innocently  retain  what  were  also 
used  by  coteraporary  Pagans,  why  may  not  their  suc- 
cessors as  innocently  retain  what  they  used  without 
crime. 

We  next  must  consider  the  vestments,  or  dress  of 
the  Priest,  during  the  celebration  of  the  Mass.  Over 
his  cassock  or  gown  he  first  puts  on  the  amict,  then 
the  alb,  which  he  girds  round  him  with  a cincture, 
then  the  maniple  on  his  left  arm,  the  stole  on  his  neck, 
crossed  on  his  breast,  and  the  chasuble  or  outer  vest- 
ment. Some  peculiar  dress  is  usually  worn  by  all 
public  functionaries  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties, 
and  whether  we  look  round  and  contemplate  the 
present  race  of  human  beings,  or  examine  the  records 
of  history,  we  shall  find  this  principle  almost  univer- 
sal, from  the  uncultivated  Indian,  to  the  most  polish- 
ed nation.  In  the  various  circumstances  of  life  to  », 
upon  occasions  of  joy,  or  of  mourning,  the  dress  ex- 
hibits the  feeling.  God  himself  vouchsafed  to  direct 
the  manner  in  which  the  vestments  of  the  Jewish 
Priesthood  should  be  made,  and  thus  established  and 
sanctified  the  principle. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


14 


UN  THE  MASS. 


The  vesture  of  the  Priest  is  with  some  variations^ 
the  ancient  Roman  dress  of  state ; which  consisted  of 
what  was  called  the  Toga  and  TraboM,  The  mod- 
erns in  common  life  have  altogether  departed  from 
the  ancient  costume,  whilst  the  Church,  anxious  tc 
preserve  as  far  as  possible  every  thing  in  its  original 
state,  has  made  very  little  alteration.  The  amici 
and  the  maniple  are  her  only  additions.  They  have 
been  added  for  convenience  and  retained  for  piety 
Previous  to  the  use  of  neckcloths,  which  are  of  com- 
paratively modern  introduction,  the  neck  was*  alto 
gether  uncovered  ; this  was  extremely  inconvenieni 
to  the  Clergyman,  who  had  in  many  instances  to  sing 
and  preach  in  the  Church,  and  the  injurious  effects 
which  resulted  from  having  no  covering  for  the  neck 
in  those  cases,  caused  the  introduction  of  the  amict, 
which  is  a piece  of  cloth,  generally  linen,  that  was 
worp  round  the  neck,  and  sometimes,  besides  covering 
the  neck,  formed  a sort  of  hood  for  the  protection  of 
the  head,  except  in  those  cases  where  the  nature  of  ^ 
the  office  demanded  the  respect  of  being  uncovered ; 
and  being  placed  on  the  head,  and  tied  round  the 
shoulaers,  the  wearer  could  protect  his  head,  or  neck, 
or  both,  as  he  found  convenient.  This  is  therefore 
the  literal  or  natural  explanation  of  the  amict.  The 
neck-cloth  having  been  intioduced  by  the  Croats,  and 
generally  adopted  by  the  other  inhabitants  of  Europe, 
the  great  object  of  the  introduction  of  the  amict  was 
otherwise  obtained  by  the  change  in  dress ; but  the 
vesture  was  retained,  for  the  emblematic  and  pious 
purposes.  The  emblematic  object  9f  the  vestments 
was  principally  to  remind  us  of  the  passion  of  Christ, 
to  commemorate  which  the  great  sacrifice  of  the  mass 
was  instituted.  Christians  were  upon  this  principle 
>old,  that  upon  seeing  this  vestment  placed  on  the 
head,  they  should  recollect  how  their  Redeemer  was 
blindfolded  and  spit  upon  for  their  transgressions. 

The  object  of  piety  for  which  it  was  retained,  is  to 
excite  in  the  'jlergyman  and  his  congregation  that  sen- 

r Google 


OM  THE  Mass. 


15 


tiinent  expressed  by  the  prayer  which  is  repeated  by 
him  at  the  time  he  clothes  himself  therewith. 

P/oce,  0 Lordn  on  my  head,  an  helmet  of  eahation^ 
to  repel  the  OMaults  of  the  devil. 

At  present  this  vestment  is  altogether  covered  by 
that  which  is  next  put  on ; that  is,  the  alb. 

The  alb  is  the  ancient  Roman  dress  called  the  toga, 
such  as  it  was  worn  under  the  emperors  about  the 
second  century  of  Christianity.  It  has  been  stated 
that  it  was  the  dress  of  the  pagan  priests.  No  doubt 
it  was;  and  it  was  also  the  dress  of  the  pagan  gen- 
tlemen, and  pagan  magistrates,  for  it  was  the  usual 
dress  of  all  genteel  persons — and  previously  to  the 
introduction  of  Christianity,  they  were  for  the  greater 
part,  if  not  all,  pagans.  On  festive  days  especially, 
their  toga  was  white.  This  was  the  colour  of  the 
dress  of  almost  every  public  officer,  and  it  would  be 
placing  Christians  in  a very.awkward  predicament,  if 
they  were  obliged  to  cast  away  every  dress  the  like  of 
which  had  been  worn  by  pagans  or  infidels,  even  in 
their  religious  ceremonies.  The  writer  of  this  essay 
would,  if  this  principle  were  admitted,  oblige  every 
Christian,  or  at  least  every  Christian  clergyman  to  put 
away  the  usual  dress  of  our  days,  for  he  can  prove 
that  it  has  been  worn  '«^ithin  a very  short  period  by 
one  of  the  principal  performers  in  the  most  solemn 
pagan  rites,  in  use  at  present. 

This  indeed,  is  what  may  be  properly  called  super- 
stition, to  say  that  because  z.  dress  has  been  used  by 
persons  doing  what  was  wrong,  a similar  dress  never 
may  be  worn  by  a person  doing  what  is  right.  The 
Catholic  church  teaches  that  there  is  nothing  of  its 
own  nature  bad  in  dress,  unless  it  should  become 
indecent. 

Emblematically  this  vestment  reminds  us  of  the 
white  garment  in  which  Herod  clad  the  Saviour, 
when  mocking  him  as  a fool,  he  sent  him  back  to 
Pilate.  This  vestment  is  called  alb,  from  its  colour, 
alba  white. 

Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


16 


ON  THE  MASS. 


It  excites  to  piety,  by  teaching  us  the  purity  of 
heart  and  body  which  we  should  possess  in  being 
present  at  the  holy  mysteries;  aind  this  is  well  ex- 
pressed in  the  prayer  which  is  said  by  the  clergyman 
when  putting  on  this  garment. 

Make  me  white^  0 hord^  and  cleanse  my  hearU  that 
being  rendered  white  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  I may 
partake  of  eternal  joys. 

The  Roman  gentleman  suffered  his  robe  to  flow 
loosely  when  he  was  unoccupied,  but  when  he  had 
any  duty  to  perform,  he  was  cuxinctus  or  girded,  for 
which  purpose  he  had  a cincture  to  gird  his  toga,  and 
as  the  clergyman  is  about  to  perform  a duty,  he  girds 
himself  with  a cincture,  which  reminds  us  that  Christ 
was  bound  for  our  crimes— and  is  also  calculated  to 
impress  upon  our  souls  the  necessity  of  girding,  (Luke 
xii.v  35,)  our  loins  with  the  virtue  of  purity,  that  we 
may  hold  in  our  hands  the  burning  lamps  of  charity 
and  faith,  to  receive  our  Lord  when  he  shall  return 
from  the  nuptials.  The  pra>er  is  expressive. 

Gird  me,  0 Lord,  with  the  cincture  of  purity,  and 
destroy  in  my  loins  every  seed  of  lust  ,*  so  that  the  vir^ 
tue  of  continence  and  chastity  may  remain  in  me. 

The  Clergyman  next  puts  the  Maniple  upon  his 
left  arm;  this  was  formerly  an  Handkerchief,  or  cloth 
used  for  the  same  purpose  as  we  now  use  handker- 
chiefs, and  had  its  name  from  its  being  an  handful,  or 
being  carried  on  the  hand,  manus,  or  from  the  word 
mappula,  an  handkerchief.  But  having  in  process 
of  time  become  too  much  enriched  with  ornament  to 
be  used  for  this  purpose,  it  has  been  preserved  for  its 
emblematic  and  pious  significations. 

It  is  a sort  of  oppressive  weight  upon  the  arm, 
which  reminds  us  of  the  weight  of  our  sins  having 
been  laid  upon  the  Saviour,  thus  causing  him  to  sut- 
fer  in  tears  and  affliction  that  he  may  bring  us  to 
glory  and  joy.  In  allusion  to  that  verse  of  the  Psalm-, 
ist,  “ Going  and  weeping  they  sowed  in  tears,  but  re- 
turning  they  shall  come  in  joy,  bearing  their  maniples 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS.  17 

in  gladness.”  ^he  prayer  at  putting  on  this  vest- 
ment is, 

May  I deserve^  0 Lordy  to  hear  the  maniple  of  weep- 
ing and  grief  thai  I may  with  exultation  receive  ilje 
reward  of  labour. 

The  Priest  then  puts  the  stole  on  his  neck,  bring- 
ing it  over  his  shoulders,  and  crossing  it  on  his  breast, 
he  makes  it  fast  with  the  cincture. 

This  vestment  was  appropriate  to  public  speakers, 
and  originally  used  for  a similar  purpose  as  that  to 
which  the  maniple  was  subsequently  applied ; it  was 
not  crossed  on  the  breast,  but  hung  loosely  down  from 
the  shoulders  to  the  front  of  the  personi,  and  was  ge- 
nerally of  linen : hence  the  stole  is  at  present  worn  in 
that  way  by  preachers.  It  became  so  much  orna- 
mented as  to  be  unfit  for  its  original  destination,  and 
has  been  retained  as  an  emblematic  vestment.  Its 
name,  Stole,  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  de- 
rived from  its  resemblance,  when  hanging  loosely 
from  the  shoulders,  *o  the  front  of  the  Persian  robe 
called  a Stole,  which  being  a sort  of  pellice  having 
sleeves,  and  being  rounded  over  the  shoulders,  and 
meeting  pretty  tidily  to  the  front  of  the  person,  ex- 
hibited, when  open,  an  appearance  very  similar  to 
that  of  a flowing  ur  loose  stole,  worn  by  a preacher, 
which  is  the  m^e  in  which  it  was  worn  by  the  an- 
cient orators.  In  some  ancient  writers  it  is  called 
orarium.  It  is  also  at  present  used  as  the  distinctive 
mark  of  authority  in  the  church  when  a number  of 
clergymen  are  assembled  together,  as  except  on  a few 
extraordinary  occasions,  no  person  wears  the  stole, 
cut  the  presiding  or  principal  clergyman,  and  the  per- 
son who  preaches  or  officiates. 

It  is  a sort  of  yoke  laid  on  the  shoulders,  and  there- 
fore well  calculated  to  bring  to  our  recollection  the 
obedience  and  humility  of  the  Son  of  God  who,  cloth- 
ing himself  in  the  stole  of  our  flesh,  look  upon  him 
the  yoke  of  our  punishment,  that  we  may  be  clad  in 
the  glory  of  his  immortality. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


18 


ON  THE  MASS. 


When  the  Priest  crosses  it  before  his  breast,  it  is 
that  he  may  he  reminded  of  the  necessity  of  having 
before  his  heart  the  protection  of  the  Saviour’s  cross. 
At  putting  it  on  he  prays — Restore  %mio  me  0 Lord^ 
the  stole  of  immortality,  which  1 haf>e  lost  in  the  pre^ 
varieation  of  my  first  parent;  and  although  I approach 
unworthily  to  thy  sacred  mystery,  may  I deserve  ever- 
lasting  joy. 

The  Chasuble,  or  outer  vestment,  is  the  Roman 
Trabsea,  or  robe  of  state,  in  which  some  slight 
changes  have  been  made.  Those  changes  are,  cut- 
ting open  the  sides,  and  altering  the  mode  of  em- 
broidery. The  Trabaea  was  generally  a large  silken 
garment,  which  had  a hole  in  the  centre,  through 
which  the  head  passed,  the  garment  then  rested  on 
the  shoulders  of  the  wearer,  and  hung  down  on  all 
sides,  nearly  to  the  ground,  and  the  ^ge  or  border, 
as  well  at  the  extremity  of  the  robe,  as  round  the  hole, 
w&s  trimmed  and  enriched,  and  the  robe  decorated 
throughout,  either  by  painting  or  embroidery.  When 
the  wearer  wanted  to  use  his  hands,  the  ides  of  the 
. robe  were  lifted  on  his  shoulders  in  plaits,  and  the  ap- 
pearance then  was  exactly  that  which  is  now  made 
oy  a Priest  in  his  Chasuble.  As  this  continuation  of 
the  robe  all  round  was  found  to  be  greatly  inconveni 
ent,  particularly  as  the  clergyman  was  frequently 
without  other  ecclesiastical  assistants,  when  he  offici- 
ated, this  robe  was  cut  at  the  sides,  so  as  to  enable 
him  to  use  his  hands  more  conveniently,  and  by  de- 
grees it  assumed  its  present  form.  In  the  embroidery 
a cross  was  marked  upon  the  back  of  the  Chasuble, 
and  two  stripes  representing  a pillar  on  the  front,  to 
designate  that  the  Priest  and  the  people  should 
ca/ry  their  cross  after  Christ,  and  lean  for  support 
upon  the  Church,  which  St.  Paul  calls  the  pillar  of 
truth. 

This  chasuble,  exhibiting  the  Cross  upon  the 
Priest’s  back,  shows  how  after  the  purple  garment 
was  thrown  upon  his  shoulders;  the  Redeemer  had 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


UK  m MASS. 


19 


Ae  Cross  also  laid  upon  him,  bearing  which  he  went 
to  Calvary  to  offer  the  Sacrifice  of  our  Redemption. 

The  prayer  said  by  the  Priest  when  he  vesta  him- 
self therewith,  is.  Lord,  who  hast  said  my  yoke  is 
sweet,  and  my  burthen  light : grant  that  I may  be  able 
so  to  hear  it,  as  to  obtain  thy  grace. 

The  Priest  thus  vested,  now  is  the  representative  of 
Christ,  going  to  offer  that  sacrifice  which  he  institu- 
ted on  the  night  before  he  suffered,  in  order  to  show 
forth  by  this  commemorative  observance  his  death 
until  bis  second  coming. 

The  next  circumstance  to  be  observed,  is  the  dif- 
ference of  colour  of  the  vestments  on  different  da^s. 
The  object  of  the  Church  is,  thus  to  inform  the  faith- 
ful at  once  of  the  sort  of  office  which  is  performed. 
Hence,  where  the  means  of  the  congregation  will 
allow  of  tne  regulation  being  carried  into  effect,  she 
commands  that  the  vestments  and  hangings  of  the 
Temple  shall  be  of  different  colours  on  different  occa* 
sions.  The  colours  prescribed  are  White,  Red,  Violet, 
Green,  and  Black.  White  is  used  on  the  great  fes- 
tivals of  our  Redeemer,  and  on  the  days  when  we 
recall  to  our  minds  the  virtues,  and  entreatthe  prayers 
of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary,  of  the  good  Angels,  and 
of  those  Saints  who  served  God  with  fidelity  in  the 
practice  of  virtue,  but  did  not  shed  their  blood  by 
martyrdom.  Red  is  worn  on  the  festivals  in  honour 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  in  the  form  of  fiery  tongues 
descended  on  the  apostles ; and  on  the  festivals  of 
those  saints  who  were  martyred,  as  exhibiting  their 
blood.  Violet,  in  times  of  penance  and  humiliation; 
principally,  therefore,  in  Lent  and  Advent.  Green, 
on  those  days  when  there  is  no  particular  festival  or 
observance;  and  Black,  in  Masses  for  the  dead,  and 
on  Good  Friday,  when  we  commemorate  the  death  of 
the  Redeemer. 

There  a e several  orders  of  Clergymen  in  the 
Church ; Bishops,  Priests,  Deacons,  Subdeacons,  and 
persons  in  minor  orders-  -which  last  orders  are  of 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


20 


ON  THE  MASS. 


iiicclesiastiea)  institution.  The  dresses  distin^isb 
those  several  persons.  We  have  noticed  the  vest- 
ments of  the  Priest  when  he  celebrates  Mass.  A 
Bishop  also  offers  this  holy  sacrifice : the  other  Cler- 
gymen have  not  authority  to  make  this  great  oblation  ; 
but  they  attend  thereat  as  subordinate  Ministers. 
The  under  dress  of  the  Priest  is  a black  cassock  or 
gown,  which  he  wears  to  denote  his  separation  from 
the  world  and  its  vanities.  That  of  a Bishop  is  pur- 
ple. to  signify  the  superiority  of  his  order,  and  his 
autnority  torule  in  the  Church  of  God,  (Acts  xx.v.  28) 
over  which  he  wears  a short  white  robe  called  a 
Rochet^  to  denote  the  purity  with  which  he  should  be 
surrounded,  and  a cross  which  hangs  before  his  breast. 
The  Roman  nobility  formerly  wore  a small  golden 
ball,  which  was  called  Bulla^  as  designating  their 
rank ; whence  this  custom  is  supposed  to  Dave  origi- 
nated ; but  the  Christian  Bishop  has  his  in  the  shape 
of  a Cross,  to  teach  him  to  glory  in  nothing  but  the 
Cross  of  his  Redeemer.  He  also  sometimes  wears  a 
short  purple  cloak  with  a hood,  which  is  called  a 
M&zette  or  Cappa^  and  his  mitre,  which  is  of  eastern 
origin,  differs  considerably  in  its  shape  from  that  of 
Aaron,  and  Jewish  Priests.  The  two  pieces  which 
hang  from  it  behind,  are  the  lappets  or  ribbands, 
which  formerly  were  used  to  bind  it  under  his  chin» 
but  which  are  now  seldom,  if  ever,  used  for  that  pur- 
pose. He  also  carries  a crosier,  which  has  at  its  top 
a shepherd’s  crook,  to  denote  that  he  is  one  of  those 
Pastors  charged  by  the  Saviour  with  the  care  of  his 
flock — and  on  some  very  solemn  occasions,  such  as 
an  ordination,  he  wears  the  dresses  of  the  inferior  or- 
ders with  his  own,  to  show  that  he  contains  them  in 
himself,  and  is  the  source  from  which  their  authority 
is  derived.  An  Archbishop’s  cross  has  two  tnins- 
verse  |)iece8,  and  the  Pope’s  has  three,  to  denote  their 
gradations  of  rank  or  power.  And  he  who  wears  a 
cross  upon  his  breast,  aoes  not  bring  the  stole  across 
when  he  prepares  to  celebrate  the  Mass. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


ON  THE  MASS. 


21 


Deacon  wears  his  stole  on  the  left  shoulder,  to 
signify  the  subordination  of  his  order,  And  binds  it  at 
his  right  side,  to  prevent  its  flowing  too  loosely.  In 
place  of  the  chasuble  he  wears  a Dalmatic,  which  is 
rather  shorter  than  a chasuble,  and  was  always  open 
at  the  sides,  but  had  short  sleeves  which  are  now  cut 
open,  and  has  no  cross  on  the  back,  for  he  only  assists 
at  the  sacri  flee,  but  does  not  offer  it.  This  was  the 
dress  of  the  people  of  Dalmatia,  whence  its  name. 

The  Subdeacon  wears  no  stole,  as  he  has  no  autho- 
rity to  preach  the  gospel  in  public,  and  his  outer  vest- 
ment is  rather  narrower  than  that  of  the  Deacon ; it  is 
called  a Tunick,  and  was  the  dress  of  persons  in  the 
middle  class  of  society  in  Rome. 

The  Clergymen  in  minor  orders  wear  the  black 
Cassock,  over  which  they  wear  a surplice  or  white 
robe,  to  signify  purity  and  innocence.  Tins  also  is 
the  usual  dress  of  Priests,  Deacons,  and  Suhdeacons, 
except  on  the  more  solemn  occasions. 

Having  thus  been  made  acquainted  with  the  vari- 
ous dresses  of  the  different  Clergymen  who  may  of- 
ficiate at  Mass,  we  come  to  ask  the  meaning  of  the 
word  Mass.  The  Latin  from  which  it  is  derived,  if 
it  be  not  taken  immediately  from  the  Hebreir  or  Syro- 
Ohaldaie,  is  mtssa,  which  word  is  generally  supposed 
to  be  a perverted  mode  of  pronouncing  the  word 
MissAH,  which  is  a Hebrew  expression  for  a sacrifi- 
cial offering;  and  is  found  in  the  16th  chapter  of  the 
oook  of  Deuteronomy — missak  nedaba^  which  means 
a voluntary  offering,  to  be  made  on  the  festival  of 
Pentecost,  and  this  word  Mi^sah  is  derived  from  the 
radical  word  JWos,  which  means  the  tribute  paid  by 
an  inferior  to  his  sovereign.  Others,  and  they  by  no 
means  writers  of  inferior  account,  derive  the  Latin 
word  from  Missio^  or  the  sending  away  of  the  people 
after  the  offering,  or  the  sending  of  the  sacrifice  to 
God  ; but  the  impression  of  the  compiler  of  this  essay 
is  decidedly  favourable  to  the  opinion  of  those  who 
derive  the  word  from  the  Hebrew.  From  whatever 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


source  it  inay  be  derived,  it  is  one  of  the  most  ancient 
words  in  Christianity,  being  found  in  the  earliest 
writers. 

The  next  inquiry  is  concerning  the  language  in 
which  it  is  celebrated.  In  the  Western  Church,  it 
now  is,  and  always  has  been  Latin.  To  many  per- 
sons who  have  not  been  accustomed  to  reflect  upon 
tlie  doctrines  of  the  Catholic  Church,  this  appears 
strange,  but  their  great  difficulty  arises  from  an  almost 
inevitable  error  to  which  they  are  exposed.  They 
know  nothing  of  religion  but  praying,  preaching,  and 
reading;  and  because  they  have  known  nothing  else 
in  religion,  they  imagine  that  religion  has  nothing 
else.  This  is  a most  erroneous  impression.  Religion 
has  a Sacrifice  and  Sacraments,  wliich  are  not  any 
of  those  acts,  though  much  prayer  and  some  instruc- 
tion are  found  to  accompany  them.  They  are  acts  ; 
thus  Baptism,  which  is  more  efficacious  than  either 
prayer  or  preaching  or  reading,  is  neither  one  nor  tw  o 
nor  all  of  those — but  it  is  an  act  instituted  by  Christ, 
upon  the  performance  of  which,  he  has  bound  himself 
to  produce  a certain  eflecl ; it  is  true,  there  are  words 
accompanying  the  act,  but  as  they  are  for  the  Lord  wdio 
understands  all  languages,  it  is  no  matter  in  what 
language  they  are  spoken.  So  the  Mass  is  not  a 
common  prayer,  but  an  act  of  sacrifxc  in  which  by  the 
ministry  of  the  Priest,  God  does  acts  beneficial  to  the 
people.  The  benefit  to  the  people  is  derived  not 
merely  from  the  words  said,  but  from  the  acts  done. 
The  acts  are  the  producing  the  victim  upon  the  altar, 
and  offering  him  to  God  for  our  sins  after  he  has  been 
produced;  and  the  producing  the  holy  Sacrament  of 
the  Eucharist;  that  the  faithful  may  receive  the  body 
and  blood  of  the  Saviour  in  his  Sacrament.  Now  as 
the  object  of  the  Mass  is  the  performance  of  those 
acts,  the  questions  for  consideration  are,  first — Is  any 
particular  language  essential  to  their  performance: 
and  next,  are  there  any  sufficient  reasons  why  q di  ad 
language  should  be  continued  in  us(?  rat'ier  than 


.Google 


THE  MASS. 


23 


living  language  be  adopted  1 With  regard  to  the  first, 
it  may  be  unhesitatingly  answered — No  particular 
language  is  essential  to  the  validity  of  the  acts.  Se- 
condly— ^'Fhere  are  many  sufficient  reasons  for  con- 
tinuing the  use  of  the  Latin  language  in  our  Liturgy, 
in  preference  to  adopting  the  modern  languages. 

In  the  first  place,  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  being 
essentially  unchangeable,  a dead  language,  which  is 
subject  to  no  change,  as  to  the  meaning  of  its  expres- 
sions, is  far  better  calculated  to  preserve  it  unchange- 
ably, than  modern  languages  which  are  perpetually 
varying.  The  same  idea  which  was  conveyed  by 
those  words  one  thousand  years  ago,  is  now  conveyed 
by  them ; and  if  the  world  should  so  long  continue, 
will  be  conveyed  by  them,  after  the  lapse  of  one  thou- 
sand years  more : whereas,  if  the  English  words 
which,  one  thousand  years  ago,  were  used  to  convey 
the  same  idea,  were  now  written  for  us,  they  would 
be  perfectly  unintelligible.  Thus  an  unc^ngeable 
language  is  used  as  the  medium  for  conveying  through 
fluctuating  times,  and  changing  people,  an  unalterable 
doctrine. 

Next;  this  doctrine  is  not  merely  that  of  an  isola- 
ted people,  who  speak  the  same  language,  but  that  of 
many  nations  who  speak  different  tongues,  though 
they  have  the  same  faith  ; they  preserve  amongst 
them,  of  necessity,  a perpetual  communion,  for  the 
preservation  of  which  a common  languagfi  is  necessa- 
ry ; and  they  use  that  which  has  been  originally  es- 
tablished, and  universally  received  amongst  them 
from  the  beginning.  Their  mode  of  communion  is 
oy  their  sacraments,  sacrifices,  and  public  offices; 
nence  they  are  all  celebrated  in  that  common  lan- 
guage. 

Again — Their  Clergy  and  Laity  are  frequently  un- 
der the  necessity  of  travelling  from  one  country  to 
another,  and  this  common  language  enables  them  to 
fffer  up  and  attend  at  the  Holy  Sacrifice,  in  whatever 
place  they  may  be,  with  the  same  benefit  as  if  they 

, Google 


24 


ON  THE  MASS. 


were  in  tie  land  of  their  nativity;  and  though  they 
should  not  be  acquainted  with  an  individual  in  the 
place,  nor  understand  one  word  of  the  language  of  the 
country,  the  Clergyman  or  the  Layman  finds  himself 
• amongst  brethren  to  whom  he  may  administer,  or 
from  whom  he  may  receive  sacraments,  and  with 
whom  he  can  join  in  the  adoration  of  his  God  ; and 
whose  belief  is  identically  the  same  as  his  own,  on 
every  point  of  faith. 

By  preserving  this  common  language  also,  the 
Clergy  of  those  various  lands,  however  remote  or  dis- 
similar in  habits  and  tongues,  can  communicate  with 
each  other.  Their  Bishops  hold  intercourse  between 
themselves  and  that  See  which  is  their  common  cen- 
tre; and  thus  be  certain  of  the  continuance  and  ex- 
istence of  the  true  faith,  and  hold  the  communion  of 
saints. 

These  and  many  other  advantages,  are  the  results 
of  the  Liturgy  being  in  the  Latin  tongue;  and  the 
publication  of  such  a work  as  the  present,  and  which 
is  to  be  found  in  every  Catholic  country,-  together 
with  the  frequent  explanations  of  the  Pastors,  to; 
which  they  are  obliged  by  the  Council  of  Trent,  are 
sufficient  to  remedy  the  only  inconvenience  which 
would  be  apprehended — by  making  those  who  do  not 
understand  the  Latin  language  acquainted  with  the 
meaning  of  what  is  said  in  that  tongue. 

Some  of  the  service  is  read  in  a loud  voice,  and 
more  of  it  in  a low  inaudible  manner,  which  is  a cus- 
tom older  than  even  Christianity,  tending  to  impress 
upon  the  mind,  that  some  things  are  clearly  known 
and  distinctly  understood,  and  that  other  things  are 
now  hidden  from  us  for  the  trial  of  our  obedience  and 
faith.  The  Jewish  people  did  not  hear  the  prayers 
which  their  Priest  used  when  he  offered  incense,  and 
on  various  other  occasions,  they  prayed  abroad  in  the 
court,  whilst  he  offered  in  the  Sanctuary,  at  the  altar. 
Again — Let  it  be  remembered,  that  the  Mass  is  not  i. 
naked  form  of  prayer,  by  using  which  we  merely  en 

n Google 


ON  THE  mass. 


25 


treat  God’s  mercy  ; it  is  a sacrifice  in  which  the  flesh 
and  blood  of  Christ  are  produced,  and  offered  up  on 
our  behalf,  and  accordincr  to  the  devotion  with  which 
we  attend,  we  may  expect  the  favour  of  the  Most 
fiigh.  All  this  may  be  done  in  a low  voice,  as  well 
as  in  an  audible  tone. 

It  is  customary  before  Mass  to  sprinkle  the  congre- 
gation with  Holy  Water,  or  on  entering  the  Church 
each  individual  may  sprinkle  himself  from  a vessel 
which  contains  this  water.  This  ceremony  is  to  re- 
mind us  of  the  necessity  of  entering  with  purity  of 
heart,  having  washed  away  the  iniquities  and  distrac- 
tions of  the  world.  In  the  court,  before  the  entrance 
of  many  of  the  ancient  churches,  there  was  a foun- 
tain, in  which  the  persons  about  to  attend  washed 
their  hands  or  feet,  to  denote  the  purity  of  heart 
they  should  possess.  It  is  an  emblematic  ceremony, 
calculated  to  excite  our  devotion,  and  fix  our  attention. 
The  water  is  blessed,  as  according  to  the  Apostle  St. 
Paul— every  creature  may  be  sanctified  by  the  Word 
of  God  and  by  prayer — (1  Tim.  iv.  5.)  The  manner 
of  blessing  it  is  by  first  blessing  salt,  which  in  imita- 
tion of  the  prophet  Eliseus,  when  he  healed  the  wa- 
ters of  Jericho,  is  cast  into  the  water  in  the  figure  of 
a Cross,  in  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  proper  prayer  having  been 
said  over  the  water,  and  then  the  Priest  entreats  the 
mercy  and  protection  of  God  upon  those  who  shall 
sprinkle  themselves  of  their  houses  therewith,  that 
they  may  be  guarded  against  the  incursions  of  the 
evil  spirits,  and  enabled  to  serve  God.  If  the  Clergy- 
man sprinkles  it  he  repeats  the  Antiphon  from  the 
50th  Psalm — “ Thou^  0 Lprd^  shall  sprinkle  me,  and 
I shall  be.  cleansed;  thou  shall  vmsh  me,  and  1 shall  be 
made  whiter  than  snow,^  Then  the  entire  or  a few 
verses  of  the  same  psalm : Have  mercy  on  me,  0 Lord^ 
&c.  After  which  he  repeats  the  Doxology,  i.  e.  Glory 
be  to  the  Father,  &c.,  and  then  the  Antiphon  again. 

This,  in  allusion  to  the  sprinkling  of  the  waters  of 

n , Google 


26 


ON  THB  MASS. 


lustration  amongst  the  Jews,  as  related  in  the  19th 
chapter  of  the  book  of  Numbers,  by  which  their  un- 
cleanness was  removed. 

The  preparations  for  the  SacHfice  having  been 
made,  we  now  come  to  the  examination  of  the  ser- 
vice ; for  the  purpose  of  knowing  accurately  the  cer- 
emonies of  which  we  must  look  a little  to  the  ancient 
mode  of  constructing  Christian  Churches.  The 
Sanctuary  was  an  inclosure  at  the  eastern  end  of  the 
Church,  which  was  an  oblong  building;  and  this 
Sanctuary  or  Chancel  was  elevated  above  the  rest  of 
the  Church,  so  that  all  the  faithful  might  be  able  to 
see  the  Clergyman  who  officiated  therein.  The  Altar 
was  elevated  on  a platform  within  this  Chancel,  so 
that  the  principal  Clergyman  who  officiated  thereat 
might  be  more  distinctly  observed.  On  the  south 
side  of  this  Chancel  was  the  door  of  entrance  from 
the  Sacristy  or  private  room  of  the  Clergyman.  On 
the  north  side  was  the  Bishop’s,  seat,  raised  higher 
than  the  rest,  and  generally  covered  with  a canopy. 
In  front  of  the  chancel  was  an  enclosed  and  elevated 
place,  called  the  Ambo,  from  which  sometimes  the 
Epistle  and  Gospel  were  announced,  and  the  sermon 
or  instruction  given,  and  in  which  the  minor  clergy 
and  singers  sat.  At  other  times  the  Pulpit  for  the 
Preacher  was  more  elevated,  and  at  the  side  of  the 
church  opposite  the  Bishop’s  seat.  At  the  western 
end  of  the  large  space,  called  the  Nave,  were  folding 
doors  or  a curtain,  which  separated  from  tiie  nave  a 
smaller  division,  called  the  Nartha,  or  Porch,  and  tc 
the  front  of  which  was  an  inclosure  or  court,  surround- 
ed by  cloisters,  under  a piazza  or  colonade. 

The  church  was  attended  by  three  descriptions  cf 
persons : those  who  were  admitted  to  its  communion  : 
penitent  faithful  under  a temporary  exclusion,  and 
hearers,  who  came  for  instruction,  but  'vere  not  yet 
baptized.  The  court  and  cloisters  were  occupied  by 
the  penitents ; the  Vestibule  or  porch,  by  the  hearers, 
and  the  first  class  occupied  the  nave. 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


The  Mass  was  also  a service  of  two  parts ; that  ci 
the  Catechumens,  and  the  mysteries  of  the  faithful 
with  the  intervening  instructior . The  first  part  ended 
with  the  Gospel.  The  second  part  ‘‘epin  after  the 
Creed.  The  Penitents,  hearers  and  Catechumeni, 
or  persons  under  instruction  for  Baptism,  attenoed  a*^ 
the  first  part,  heard  the  sermon,  and  then  were  exclu- 
ded : and  the  faithful  only  were  allowed  to  remain  for 
the  mysteries,  with  the  nature  of  which  they  only 
were  made  acquainted. 

After  the  assembly  had  met,  and  the  aspersion 
had  taken  place,  the  choristers  sung  an  antiphon  ta- 
ken from  one  of  the  Psalms,  and  appropriate  to  the 
festival  which  was  celebrated.  This  antiphon  is 
generally  that  verse  of  the  Psalm  which  is  most  ex- 
pressive of  the  mystery  or  fact  commemorated  on  that 
day.  Sometimes  the  antiphon  is  taken  from  one  of 
the  other  sacred  books,  and  the  psalm  was  always 
sung,  with  the  doxology,  and  the  antiphon  as  is  al- 
ways done,  repeated.  This  was  done  as  the  bishop 
or  principal  clergyman  entered  the  door  from  the 
vestry  to  the  chancel ; hence  it  was  called  ad  incrai- 
turn,  or  at  the  entrance,  ^nd  is  now  known  by  the 
name  of  “ The  introit.”  If  the  psalm  was  very  long, 
only  a few  verses  were  sung,  and  hence  at  present 
the  custom  is  to  sing  only  the  antiphon,  the  first 
verse,  or  two  verses  of  the  psalm,  then  the  doxology, 
“ Glory  be  to  the  Father,”  &c.,  and  then  repeat  tlie 
antiphon. 

For  instance,  the  first  mass  on  Christmas  day  com- 
mences with  the  following  antiphon  from  the  2d 
Psalm.  ‘-The  Lord  hath  said  to  me;  thou  art  my 
Son,  this  day  h ive  I begotten  thee.”  The  first  verse 
is  then  read,  and  after  the  doxology  the  antiphon  re- 
peated. But  it  would  be  a good  practice  in  the  course 
of  the  day  to  read  the  entire  psalm,  and  reflect  upon 
the  manner  in  which  the  prophecy  therein  contained 
has  been  fulfilled.  This  is  the  object  of  the  church 
in  its  selection,  and  were  the  faithful  to  practice  this 

r Google 


28 


ON  THE  MASS. 


pfous  custom  as  she  wishes,  they  whould  be  greatly 
improved  in  the  knowledge  of  religion,  for  thus  in 
the  course  of  the  year  does  the  church  bring  in  review 
before  them,  the  great  mysteries  of  redemption  in  their 
succession,  and  the  great  examples  of  her  saints  for 
their  instruction  in  virtue. 

During  the  repetition  or  chaunting  of  the  introit, 
the  clergyman  who  presided,  came  to  the  foot  of  the 
altar,  and  commenced,  as  usual  with  the  first  Chris- 
tians, on  alnriost  every  occasion,  by  signing  himself 
with  the  figure  of  the  cross,  and  invoking  the  blessing 
of  the  Holy  Trinity-^nd  then  repeating  the  62d 
psalm,  judica,  with  its  antiphon  before  and  after,  to 
express  his  fervent  desire  of  approaching  the  altar  of 
God.  Then  entreating  the  assistance  of  the  Lord, 
ne  bowed  down  in  a posture  of  humility,  confessing 
to  God,  to  the  angels  and  saints  of  heaven,  and  to  his 
.fellow-creatures  on  earth,  that  he  was  an  unworthy 
sinner,  and  entreating  the  prayers  of  those  heavenly 
spirits,  and  of  his  fellow-mortals  to  God,  on  his  be- 
half. The  other  clergy  and  people  then  prayed  that 
God  may  be  merciful  to  him,  and  then  made  their  ac- 
knowledgement to  him,  begging  his  prayers  on  their 
behalf.  After  praying  for  tnem  he  expressed  his  con- 
fidence in  God,  and  went  up  to  the  altar,  the  deacon 
and  subdeacon  lifting  up  his  trabsea  or  chasuble  at 
the  sides,  so  as  to  leave  his  hands  free  at  present 
though  the  chasuble  be  open,  they  retain  the  old  cus- 
tom, and  hold  it  at  each  side.  Having  arrived  at  the 
altar  he  kissed  it  through  respect,  repeating  in  a low 
voice,  the  prayers  which  maybe  found  in  the  Missal,  ^ 
and  the  meaning  of  which  will  be  seen  from  what  has 
been  already  stated.  He  then  blessed  the  incenSc 
with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  perfumed  the  back  part 
of  the  altar,  the  flat,  the  sides  and  front  tliereof — so 
that  by  this  perfume  ascending  in  clouds  of  smoke  to 
heaven,  the  faithful  might  be  taught  that  if  they  at-  • 
tended  with  proper  dispositions  their  prayers  and  feac- 
rifices  would  ascend  to  God  with  an  odour  of  sweetness 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


pleasingr  in  his  sight ; this  was  the  lesson  taught  by 
God  himself  in  the  institution  of  incense  in  the  old 
law ; as  expressed  by  the  royal  prophet,  who  certain- 
ly knew,  as  well  by  tradition  as  by  inspiration,  the 
object  of  the  Most  High.  Hence  to  teach  us  the  ne- 
cessity of  prayer  morning  and  night,  it  was  burned 
upon  a golden  altar  in  the  old  law  morning  and  even- 
ing. Let  the  Christian  when  he  beholds  it  recollect  his 
duty  of  sending  up  the  odour  of  prayer  discharged  by 
the  ardent  fire  of  faith  and  charity,  towards  heaven, 
that  it  may  be  grateful  to  that  God  whom  he  adores. 
After  incensing  the  altar,  the  bishop  went  to  his  seat, 
and  read  in  a low  voice  what  the  choir  had  sung.  If 
it  was  a priest  officiated,  he  read  it  from  the  book 
which  was  placed  upon  the  altar  at  the  side  next  the 
vestry  room,  which  of  course  was  on  his  right  hand 
side,  when  he  stood  with  his  face  to  the  altar.  The 
very  ancient  work  on  the  church  liturgy,  called  the 
Micrologue,  and  the  liturgy  attributed  to  St.  James 
the  apostle,  as  indeed  every  ancient  document  on  the 
subject,  all  mention  this  confession  previous  to  the 
introit ; and  the  work  on  the  ecclesiastical  hierarchy 
attributed  to  Denis,  the  Areopagite,  the  antiquity  of 
which  is  universally  admitted,  and  the  liturgy  of  St. 
Basil  mention  the  repetition  of  one  or  more  psalms  at 
the  commencement  of  Mass.  But  the  regulation  of 
the  introit,  in  its  present  form,  is  ascribed  to  Pope 
Oelestine  I,  in  424.  The  doxology  is  of  the  very 
highest  antiquity,  and  generally  attributed  to  the 
apostles.*  We  learn  fromTheodoretj-  and  Sozomen:); 
that  the  Arians  changed  it  to  suit  their  tenets  in  the 
following  way.  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  through  the 
Son  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  &c.  Whilst  the  Catholics 
continued  as  usual — Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost;  &c.  The  ceremony 
<jf  the  sign  of  the  cross  with  which  the  celebrant  mark- 
ed himself,  by  putting  his  right  hand  to  his  forehead, 

• Baronius.  t Lib.  2.  hist.  cap.  42.  t Lib.  3,  cap.  19. 
3* 

' Digitized  by  CjOO^IC 


30 


IN  THE  MASS. 


then  below  his  breast,  then  to  his  left  and  right  shorn» 
ders  at  the  commencement  of  the  Mass,  and  at  the 
beginning  of  the  introit,  is  the  usual  manner  in  whicii 
from  the  very  origin  of  Christianity,  the  true  believers 
brought  to  their  recollection  the  fact  of  Christ’s  hav« 
ing  died  upon  a cross,  and  from  which  death  they 
expected  every  blessing.  Tertullian,  in  the  year 
250,  mentions  it  as  their  usual  practice  upon  every 
occasion. 

The  celebrant  then  leaving  the  book  comes  to  the 
middle  of  the  altar,  and  if  he  be  accompanied  by  the 
deacon  and  sub-deacon  they  stand  behind  him,  the 
deacon  higher  than  the  sub-beacon,  from  the  superi- 
ority of  his  order;  and  between  them  they  alternately 
repeat  thrice  Kyrie  Eleison,  or  the  Lord  have  mercy 
on  us,  in  Greek,  in  honour  of  the  eternal  Father ; 
thrice  Christe  Eleison,  or  Christ  have  mercy  on  us, 
in  honour  of  the  eternal  Son;  and  thrice  Kyrie  Eleison, 
in  honour  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  ancient  custom 
has  subsisted  at  all  times  in  the  church.  It  is  men- 
tioned in  the  liturgies  of  St.  James,  of  St.  Mark,  of  St. 
Bazil,  and  of  St  Chrysostom.  St.  Gregory  theprcat 
mentions  it  as  having  been  always  in  use ; and  St. 
Augustine  states  it  to  be  an  ancient  and  universal 
Christian  custom*  amongst  Greeks,  Latins,  and  bar- 
barians.  The  same  saint  remarks  the  admirable 
disposition  of  Providence  in  causing  Pilate  to  proclaim 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  king  of  the  Jews  to  the  whole 
world,  in  the  three  great  prevaitisg  languages  of  the 
universe;  for  as  St.  John  remarks,  the  title  was 
placed  over  his  bead  in  Hebrew,  in  Greek,  and  in  Latin, 
so  in  those  three  languages  in  the  Mass,  is  the  whole 
world  as  it  were  united  in  proclaiming  his  praise,  and 
exhibiting  his  power,  and  entreating  his  mercy.  The 
Greek  is  here  found,*  and  the  hosanna  and  alleluia, 
are  preserved  as  well  as  sabaoth  and  other  phrases  of 

* Epist.  178  Allerc  cum 


Digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


on  TH£  MASS. 


31 


tlie  Hebrew,  uniting  all  nations  in  one,  by  faith,  and 
prayer,  and  sacrifice. 

The  angelic  hymn,  or  Gloria  in  excelsis^  is  the  next 
part  of  the  Mass,  except  when  on  occasions  of  grief, 
penance,  supplication  for  the  dead,  and  other  such  it 
is  omitted,  as  being  a hymn  of  joy.  It  is  called  the 
angelic  hymn,  as  its  first  words  are  those  sung  by  the 
angels  on  the  night  when  Christ  was  born — “Glory 
be  to  God  on  high,  and  on  earth  peace  to  men  of  good 
will,”  the  remainder  has  been  added  in  the  earliest 
days  of  the  church,  some  persons  say  by  Pope  Su 
Telesphorus,  others  by  St.  Hilary,  bishop  of  Poictiers, 
others  by  ^ope  Symmachus.  Whoever  added  the 
latter  part  was  evidently  filled  with  an  ardent  spirit 
of  the  most  sublime  piety.  The  first  expressions  are 
found  in  the  liturgy  of  St.  James:  St.  Clement  of 
Home,  in  his  earjy  works,  gives  a considerable  por- 
tion of  it,  which  he  calls  “Morning  Prayer;”  and 
Pope  Damasus  informs  us  that  it  was  his  predecessor 
Telesphorus,  who  in  the  year  142  ordered  it  to  be 
sung  or  said  at  Mass.  The  choir  does  not  commence 
this  hymn  as  it  does  the  introit  and  Kyrie  Eleison, 
but  the  celebrant  sings  the  first  words,  and  is  then 
joined  oy  the  choir.  The  mystic  reason  for  which  is 
found  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  gospel  of  St.  Luke, 
where  he  relates  that  an  angel  announced  in  joyful 
accents  the  birth  of  Christ  to  the  shepherds,  and  then 
was  joined  by  a multitude  of  the  heavenly  host,  sing- 
ing Glory,  &c.  Thus  the  celebrant,  who,  from  the 
nature  of  his  office,  is  the  herald  of  glad  tidings,  com- 
mences the  hymn  and  is  then  joined  by  the  choir  of 
faithful  servants.  When  this  hymn  is  sung,  the  cele- 
brant and  his  attendants  having  said  it  privately,  sit 
down  daring  the  performance  by  the  choir. 

The  celebrant  then  kisses  the  altar,  and  turning  to- 
wards the  people  extends  his  hands,  saying,  Dominu» 
Vobiscum,  “ May  the  Lord  be  with  you,”  and  is  an- 
swered, Et  cum  spiritu  tuo,  “ And  with  thy  spirit.’ 


i 


Digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


32 


ON  THE  MASS. 


A bishop  says  on  this  occasion,  Pax  vobis,  “ Po.ice 
be  with  you  ” — and  he  then  goes  to  the  book. 

This  mode  of  salutation  is  most  ancient,  and  may  be 
found  in  the  book  of  .Judges,  chap.  6,  and  in  several 
otner  parts  of  the  old  and  new  Testament.  Nor  can  ' 
there  be  a more  pious  mode  of  expression  devised  for 
the  occasion.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  as  it  were 
drawn  or  inhaled  from  Christ,  who,  as  was  originally 
remarked,  is  represented  by  the  altar,  the  extension 
of  the  hands  signifies  the  union  of  charity  which  sub- 
sists between  the  pastor  and  his  fiock,  and  his  anxiety 
to  embrace  them  with  religious  affection ; he  desires 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  rest  with  them  after  its  hav- 
ing been  derived  from  Christ,  and  poured  out  upon 
them ; and  they  in  grateful  return  pray  that  he  too 
may  be  filled  with  the  same.  The  bishop,  as  the  suc- 
cessor of  those  apostles  to  whom  the  Saviour  gave 
the  injunction  related  in  the  lOth  chapter  of  St.  Mat- 
thew’s Gospel,  wishes  them  that  peace  which  the 
world  cannot  give.  This  salutation  is  for*  the  pur-  ^ 
pose  of  exciting  the  attention  of  the  people  to  the 
prayers  or  collects  which  immediately  follow,  and  to 
read  which  the  celebrant  goes  to  where  the  book  has 
remained. 

The  most  ancient  Liturgies,  those  of  St.  Peter,  St. 
James,  St.  Mark,  St.  Basil,  St.  Ambrose,  »St.  Chry- 
sostom, and  in  fact  every  one  extant,  all  exhibit  this 
ceremony. 

It  is  piously  remarked,  that  it  is  repeated  seven 
times  during  me  office  of  the  Mass,  as  it  were  once 
against  each  of  the  capital  sins,  and  to  obtain  one  of 
the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  One  on  each  occasion. — 

The  celebrant  having  gone  to  the  book  again,  ex- 
cites the  attention  of  those  present  by  his  invitation  to 
pray.  Oremus,  “let  us  pray.” — And  then,  having  his 
hands  raised  and  extended,  as  Moses  held  his  hands 
in  prayer  upon  the  mountain  when  Israel  overcame 
.Vmalec,  he  reads  the  Collects. 

These-prayers  are  called  collects  for  many  reasons  ; 


.Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


33 


first,  They  are  offered  up  in  the  name  and  on  behalf 
of  the  faithful  collected  together;  next,  they  collect 
as  it  were  the  wishes  and  wants  of  the  faithful  into  a 
few  ideas,  which  are  expressed  in  few  words.  Va- 
rious other  reasons  are  added  by  several  writers,  but 
those  two,  taken  from  some  of  the  most  ancient  docu- 
ments, appear  to  be  the  best  founded.  The  collect 
varies  in  the  Masses  of  each  Sunday,  and  festival, 
and  also  on  some  few  special  occasions,  as  during  the 
Lent,  the  days  of  Quarter-tense,  &c.;  on  some  occa- 
sions three,  five,  and  even  seven  collects,  are  said. 
They  are  an^ongst  the  most  ancient  prayers  in  use  in 
the  Church ; some  of  them  are  attributed  to  the  Apos- 
tles, and  found  in  the  Liturgies  which  bear  their 
names : others  of  them  have  been  written  by  St.  Am- 
brose; some  by  Pope  Gelasius  I.,  and  some  by 
Pope  St.  Gregory,  who  inserted  those  approved  of 
into  his  work  called  The  Sacramental, — ^The  Council 
of  Milevi,  held  at  the  commencement  of  the  fifth  cen- 
tury, forbad  the  public  reading  in  Churches  of 
prayers  written  by  individuals,  unless  they  were  per- 
sons properly  qualified,  or  that  the  prayers  had  been 
approved  of  by  a Synod.  At  the  end  of  the  collect 
the  people  answer  Amtn^  to  signify  their  assent  and 
desire. 

On  occasions  of  penance  and  humiliation,  the  cele- 
brant, before  he  reads  the  prayer,  says,  Flectamus 
^erma^  “Let  us  bend  our  knees,”  and  then  kneels, 
in  which  act  of  humiliation  he  ie  joined  by  the  peo- 
Vple.  The  use  of  this  expression  was  more  generally 
left  to  the  Deacon,  who  stood  behind  the  celebrant, 
and  the  siibdeacon,  who  stood  behind  the  Deacon, 
then  called  upon  them  to  rise  to  the  prayef,  by  the 
word  Levate, 

After  the  collect  follows  the  Epistle;  so  called,  be- 
cause it  is  a portion  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  generally 
selected  from  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  or  one  of  the 
other  canonical  Epistles  of  the  New  Testament ; but 
on  many  occasions,  it  is  selected  from  one  of  the 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


34 


ON  THE  MASS. 


Prophets,  or  from  some  other  part  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. Justin  Martyr  mentions  this  custom,  in  his 
second  Apology,  Turtullian,  in  chap.  39  of  his  Apo- 
logetic, and  Denis  the  Areopagite,  in  the  3d  chap,  of 
the  Eccles.  Hierar.  The  custom  was  generally  sup- 
posed to  be  derived  from  the  Jews,  who  on  every 
Sabbath  read  the  law  and  the  prophets  in  their  syna- 
gogues, (Luke  iv.  16.  Acts  xiii.  15,  27.)  and  which 
custom  they  still  retain.  The  Epistle  is,  as  Pope 
Innocent  IIL  states,  taken  sometimes  from  the  old 
law,  and  sometimes  from  the  new  law,  because  it  as 
it  were  brings  them  to  meet,  the  prophecies  of  the 
Introit  being  found  fulfilled  in  the  Gospel,  which  fol- 
lows soon  after  the  Epistle,  and  frequently  the  Epis- 
tle contains  the  prophecy,  the  fulfilment  of  which  is 
found  in  the  Gospel,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  Mass  for 
the  feast  of  the  Epiphany : hence,  he  says,  the  person 
who  reads  or  sings  the  Epistle,  may  be  said  to  repre- 
sent St.  John  the  Baptist,  the  precursor  who  closed 
the  line  of  the  prophets,  and  pointed  out  distinctly 
that  Lamb  of  God  who  takes  away  the  sins  of 
the  world.  St.  Bonaventure  says,  that  the  Epistle 
very  properly  follows  the  collect,  for  it  is  after  having 
put  up  our  prayer  to  the  throne  of  mercy,  when  we 
may  find  grace  in  seasonable  aid,  we  should  receive 
that  iustruction  which  the  holy  Scriptures  contain. 
The  Church  desires  that  we  may  prepare  our  hearts 
by  prayer  to  receive  the  seed  of  the  word  of  God, 
which  being  sown  in  good  soil,  thus  prepared, 
will  bring  forth  fruit  an  hundred  fold.  But  she  has 
too  often  to  regret,  that  it  is  lost  on  the  way  side,  or, 
falling  upon  the  stony  ground,  or  amongst  thorns, 
becomes  altogether  unproductive.  (Luke  viii.  11.) 

At  a solemn  Mass,  the  Epistle  is  chaunted  by  the 
sub-deacon,  standing  with  his  face  towards  the  altar, 
on  the  lower  platform  or  floor  of  the  Sanctuary,  at  the 
south  side,  or  that  on  his  right  hand,  which  is  thence 
called  the  Epistle  side  of  the  ChanCel,  of  the  Sanctu- 
ary, and  of  the  altar.  After  he  concludes,  he  makes 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


3d 

his  reverence  to  the  altar,  which  represents  Christ,  by 
going  to  the  centre  of  the  Chancel  and  bending  his 
knee ; then  he  goes  to  the  celebrant  who  has  continued 
at  the  book,  reading  in  a low  voice,  and  kneeling  ob- 
tains his  blessing ; he  then  delivers  the  book  which 
he  has  used  to  the  deacon,  who  remained  standing 
near  the  celebrant,  and  removes  the  book  which  th»j 
celebrant  has  used  to  the  other  side  of  the  altar,  whilst 
the  deacon  lays  the  book  which  he  has  received  upon 
die  altar. 

The  tone  of  this  Epistle-ohaunt  is  very  ancient,  it 
was  in  this  tone  the  Greeks  chaunted  their  solemn  re- 
citations on  days  of  public  meeting — having  been 
received  from  them  in  many  parts  of  the  East,  upon 
the  establishment  of  their  games  and  festivals  in  Asia, 
after  the  overthrow  of  Darius,  and  the  Macedonian 
conquests,  and  having  been  introduced  into  the  West 
when  it  become  fashionable  in  Rome  to  import  her 
customs  from  Greece,  it  was  quite  prevalent  at  the 
time  of  the  establishment  of  Christianity : and  thus 
was  at  the  earliest  period,  introduced  into  the  solemn 
service  of  the  Church.  The  Jews  had  a sort  of  so- 
lemn chaunt  in  their  religious  offices,  but  it  has  no 
resemblance  to  this  chaunt  of  the  Epistle,  nor  to  that 
of  the  Gospel,  which  those  skilled  in  ancient  music, 
unhesitatingly  pronounce  to  be  Grecian;  and  indeed 
most  of  our  Ancient  Church  hymns  are  evidently  de- 
rived from  the  same  source— such  for  instance  as  the 
Hymn  for  the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  which 
is  one  of  our  oldest. 

Ut  queant  laxis  reasonare  hbns 
Mira  gestorum  famuli  tuorum, 

Solve  polluti  labii  reatum, 

Sancte  Joannes. 

This  is  evidently  fine  lyric  Poetry,  and  was  the 
loiHidation  of  the  Gregorian  notes,  as  may  be  per- 
by  comparing  the  sound  of  the  notes,  in  the 
Gamut,  Ut  re  mi  fa,  sol  la  as  found  in  this  verse  and 

Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


30 


ON  THE  MASS*. 


92,  as  found  in  the  word  promissi  in  the  third  verse, 
with  that  of  the  syllables  in  tlie  proper  singing  of  this 
hymn. 

The  inferiority  of  his  order,  and  his  not  being 
authorized  to  preach  the  gospel,  are  the  reasons  why  he 
stands  on  the  lower  platform,  and  does  not  turn  to- 
wards the  people.  Some  authors  add  the  mystic 
reason  of  showing  that  the  prophecies  were  but  indis> 
tinctly  understood,  as  they  were  but  obscurely  given 
in  the  old  law : the  people  indeed  hear  the  voice  as 
they  did  at  Sinai,  but  do  not  see  the  face  of  him  who 
speaks. 

The  seventy  whom  Christ  sent  to  prepare  the  way 
for  him,  returned  with  joy  to  him  after  the  discharge 
of  their  duty,  (Luke  x.  17.)  So  the  sub-deacon,  after 
having  prepared  the  way  for  the  Gospel,  comes  to  the 
celebrant  for  his  benediction,  and  having  received  this, 
he  transfers  the  book  to  him  who  is  to  publish  the 
Gospel. 

After  the  Epistle,  the  choir  performs,  and  the  cele- 
brant reads  a few  verses,  which  are  called,  the  Re- 
sponsory,  the  Gradual,  the  Alleluia,  the  tract,  the 
sequence  or  the  prose,  the  verses  are  differently  called 
according  to  their  nature  or  the  occasion  on  which 
they  are  sung. 

They  are  called  responsory,  either  because  they  were 
the  answer  of  the  Choir  to  the  Epistle,  or  because 
one  person  began,  and  was  answered  by  the  rest  of 
the  choir.  The  first  verse  was  called  the  Gradual, 
because  it  was  sung  'whilst  the  deacon  was  ascending 
the  steps  (^sradus)  to  where  the  Gospel  was  formerly 
sung,  which  was  generally  the  Amho,  The  Gradual 
was  sung  in  a slow  solemn  manner,  as  Pope  Innocent 
in.  informs  us,  in  his  w^ork  on  the  mystery  of  the 
Mass,  book  ii.  c.  31 — “The  Gradual  follows,  which 
insinuates  the  lamentation  of  penance.***They  do 
more  correctly  who  do  not  express  the  gradual  in  fes- 
tive modulati  tones,  but  who  rather,  merely  sing  it 
in  a grave  and  rough  chaunt  of  lamentation. 

D .Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


37 


The  Alleluia,  which  signifies,  “ Praise  the  Lord,” 
is  snng  or  said  after  the  Gradual,  except  on  days  of 
penance ; as  the  same  author  says,  c.  32,  “ After 
g^rief,  consolation  follows;  therefore,  the  Alleluia  is 
sung  after  the  Gradual.*  ♦ f The  canticles  of  joy  after 
the  lamentation  of  penance.”  And  Remig  of  AUis- 
sodor,  in  the  treatise  on  the  celebration  of  Mass; 
“Alleluia  signifies  Praise  the  Lord,*  * ♦ as  St.  John 
says,  And  c^ier  this  I heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of 
much  people  in  heaven^  saying  Alleluia:  (Apoc.  xix.  6) 
and  as  we  know  that  by  this  word  the  angels  ^iraise 
God  in  heaven,  we  believe  the  Lord  is  pleased  with 
this  sound  of  praise ; hence  we  sing  it,  to  show  that  on 
earth  we  adore  the  same  God,  whom  the  angels  adore 
in  heaven.  It  is  frequently  repeated  in  times  of  great 
joy  ; such  as  Easter,  the  Paschal  time,  &c.,  and  the 
'fVact  is  then  omitted,  as  it  is  adapted  for  times  of 
Penance.  The  Alleluia  is  particularly  omitted  from 
Septuagesima  Sunday  to  Easter,  which  is  a time  of 
Penance ; and  as  Pope  Innocent  III.  says,  represents 
the  seventy  years  of  the  Jewish  captivity,  during 
which  the  children  of  Israel  would  not  sing  a canticle 
of  joy.  By  the  rivers  cf  Babylon^  there  we  sat,  and  we 
wept^  when  we  remembered  Sion,  On  the  willows  in 
the  midst  thereof  we  hanged  up  our  harps ; because 
then  they  who  led  us  away  captives,  asked  us  for  the 
words  of  our  songs,  and  they  who  took  us  away,  sing 
for  us  a hymn  of  the  Canticles  of  Sion,  How  shall  we 
sing  the  Canticles  of  the  Lordin  a strange  land?  If  If or^ 
get  thee,  0 Jerusalem,  may  my  right  hand  he  forgot- 
ten, (Psalm  cxxxvi.)  In  times  of  penance,  the  sinner 
calls  to  mind  that  he  is  a stranger,  banished  from  the 
mansion  of  his  father.  He  longs  to  return  to  peace, 
and  to  forgiveness.  He  cannot  sing  the  canticles  of 
joy  in  a strange  land  ; but  his  words  flow  slowly  and 
solemnly  along  the  lengthened  tones  of  the  Tract, 
which  .has  its  name  from  being  drawn  out  (Jtractus) 
in  a melancholy  note.  The  last  part  is  called  the 
sequence,  because  it  follows  {sequitw')  the.  entre.  It 

p ^ .Google 


38 


ON  THE  MASS/ 


is  also  called  the  prose;  and  is  a sort  of  hymn,  used 
on  the  most  solemn  occasions  of  Easter,  Pentecost, 
and  Corpus  Christi. 

The  custom  of  singing  between  the  Epistle  %nd 
Gospel,  is  very  ancient  amongst  the  Greeks,  as  ap- 
pears from  the  Liturgy  of  St.  John  Chrysostom ; but 
in  the  Latin  church  it  was  not  so  generally  received, 
as  we  find  it  prohibited  in  some  places  by  the  4th 
council  of  Toledo,  in  the  11th  canon;  nor  was  the 
time  for  singing  or  omitting  the  Alleluia  fixed  with 
accuracy,  until  the  7th  or  8th  century.  The  10th 
canon  of  the  above  mentioned  council  forbids  it  to  be 
sung  in  lent,  and  it  is  thought  the  canon  was  made 
in  consequence  of  some  personshaving  introduced  the 
forbidden  custom.  St.  Augustine,  in  the  15th  chap, 
.of  his  1 19th  Epistle,  says  that  it  was  sung  only  from 
Easter  to  Pentecost;  and  on  Sundays,  to  celebrate 
the  resurrection.  Pope  St.  Gregory,  having  been 
blamed  for  having  ordered  it  to  be  sung  at  Mass,  ex- 
cept from  Easter  to  Pentecost,  stalfd  ahat  the  law 
was  only  published  by  him ; but  that  the  custom  was 
introduced  under  Pope  Damasus,  by  St.  Jerome.* 

The  celebrant,  bowing  down  before  the  altar,  re- 
peats the  prayer,  “ Cleanse  my  hearQ'*  &c. ; which  is 
sufficiently  plain  to  shew  its  object,  and  to  impress 
upon  ouf  minds  the  necessity  of  having  pure  hearts 
to  receive  the  truth,  and  pure  lips  to  announce  it.  The 
allusion  to  the  cleansing  of  the  prophet’s  lips,  (Isaias 
vi.  7,)  is  beautiful : He  then  reads  the  gospel  at  the 
north  side,  or  that  at  his  left  hand  side,  when  he  faces 
the  altar. 

In  a solemn  Mass  the  deacon  kneels  on  the  lower 
step  of  the  platform,  and  prays : “ Cleanse,”  &c. ; 
then  goes  to  the  celebrant  for  his  blessing,  which  he 
asks  on  his  knees,  at  the  epistle  side;  the  celebrant 
bestows  it,  in  the  following  words : “ May  the  Lord 
be  in  thy  heart  cind  on  thy  lips,  that  thou  mayest  an* 

^ Lib.  vii.  Ep.  Ixiii.  to  John.  Bishop  of  Syracuse. 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS 


«9Q 


nounce  his  gospel  in  a worthy  and  compelenl  manner, 
in  ihe  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.”  Then  rising,  the  deacon  descends, 
ai^  after  having  made  his  reverence. to  the  altar,  he 
goes,  preceded  by  the  incense-bearer  and  two  acolyihs 
with  lighted  tapers,  and  the  sub-deacon,  to  the  gospel 
side ; and  having  saluted  the  people,  with  his  face  turn- 
ed towards  the  north,  in  the  vfords.  Dominus  vobiscum, 
he  proclaims  the  portion  of  the  Gospel  which  he  is  To 
publish ; and  having  marked  liis  forehead,  mouth  and 
breast,  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  he  perfumes  the 
book  with  incense,  sings  the  Gospel,  points  out  to  the 
sub-deacon  the  portion  which  he  has  sung,  saying, 
Haec  sunt  verba  Christi i “these  are  the  W'ords  of 
Christ.”  The  sub-deacon  carries  the  book  open  to 
the  celebrant,  repeats  the  same  words  as  he  points 
that  portion  out,  and  the  celebrant  kisses  tlic  book, 
saying  Credo  and  Confiteor  i “I  believe  and  confess.” 
The  deacon  inceqses  the  celebrant,  and  having  bowed 
to  him,  they  resume  theii^  places. 

The  deacon  is  an  authorized  minister  of  the  Church, 
appointed  to  preach  the  Gospel  by  his  ordination, 
previously  to  his  doing  which  he  seeks  the  grace  of 
God  by  prayer ; next,  he  seeks  a mission,  for  as  St 
Paul  says,  Hoio  shall  they  preach  unless  they  be  sent  7 
(Ep.  to  Rom.  X.  15.)  He  takes  the  book  of  the  gos- 
pels, containing  the  heavenly  doctrine  from  the  altar, 
which  represents  Christ,  asks  authority  to  preach 
from  the  celebrant,  as  his  superior,  (Matt.  ix.  38,  and 
X.  7,)  and  the  lord  of  the  harvest,  whose  duty  it  is  to 
send  workmen  into  that  harvest ; and  having  received 
it  in  the  name  of  the  blessed  Trinity^  and  through  the 
institution  of  him  who  died  upon  a cross,  the  sign 
of  which  the  celebrant  makes  over  the  deacoff;  he 
proceeds  to  proclaim  the  Gospel,  or  glad  tidings  of 
salvation,  preceded  by  the  perfume  of  the  good 
works ; for  as  Innocent  III.  says  upon  this,  “ A 
preacher  ought  to  send  forth  tho  odour  of  good  esteem, 
according  to  tliat  of  the  aposll?;  we  are  the  good 

r Google 


40 


ON  THE  MASS. 


odour  of  Christ  to  dod,  in  every  place.”  The  light» 
signify  how  by  the  means  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Gos- 
pel, they  were  enlightened,  who  sat  in  darkness  and 
in  the  shadow  of  death.  The  deacon  passes  to  a 4 f- 
ferent  side  from  that  at  which  the  prophecies  and  lie 
Epistle  were  read,  to  show  the  change  from  the  law 
of  Moses,  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ;  and  he  faces  the 
north,  as  well  to  proclaim  the  truth  to  the  people, 
without  turning  his  back  to  the  altar,  as  to  declare  to 
him  who  cometh  from  the  north,  (Isaias  xiv.  13  and 
31,)  that  the  Lord  hath  founded  Sion,  and  the  poor  of 
his  people  to  whom  the  glad  tidings  are  preached, 
(Luke  vii.  23,)  shall  trust  in  it.  He  and  the  peaple 
mark  their  foreheads,  mouths  and  breasts,  with  the 
sign  of  our  redemption,  joining  with  the  Apostle  in 
his  prayer ; God  forbid  that  1 should  glory  ^ save  in  the 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  (Galat.  vi,  14.)  It  is 
exhibited  on  the  forehead  for  profession  ; on  the  mouth 
for  declaration,  and  on  the  heart  for  belief;  As  Pope 
Innocent  III.  says  (Lib.  3,  Myst.  Misss,  c.  43 :)  “ He 
should  sign  himself  upon  the  forehead,  he  should  sign 
himself  upon  the  mouth,  and  he  should  sign  himself 
upon  the  breast,  as  if  to  say,  I am  not  ashamed  of  the 
cross  of  Christ,  but  I believe  in  my  heart,  what  I 
preach  with  my  mouth.”  He  perfumes  the  book  out 
of  respect,  and  to  teach  us  how  the  odour  of  virtue 
proceeds  from  the  Gospel.  When  the  sub-deacon 
gives  the  book  to  the  celebrant  and  points  out  the  por- 
tion which  has  been  proclaimed,  stating  it  to  be  the 
Word  of  Christ,  the  celebrant  kisses  it,  through  respect, 
and  makes  the  declaration  mentioned  above;  for,  as 
St.  Paul  says.  With  the  heart  we  believe^  unto  justice  # 
hut  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation,. 
(2  Rihi.  X.  10.)  The  deacon  then  incenses  the  cele- 
brant, through  respect,  as  he  does  on  two  other  occa- 
♦.iope  during  the  Mass.  During  the  deacon’s  singing  the 
Gospel,  if  a Bishop  be  the  celebrant,  he  stands  un- 
covered through  respect  but  rests  upon  his  crosier, 
TA  well  for  support,  tis  to  exhibit  the  superior  pastoral 


Google 


UN  THE  MASS. 


4\ 

charge  with  which  he  is  invested:  the  people  all 
stand  daring  the  reading  or  singing  of  the  Gospel. 
This  is  a very  old  custom  ; we  find  it  commanded  in 
a decretal  epistle  of  Pope  Anastatius  I.  It  is  alsj 
mentioned  in  the  2d  book  of  the  constitutions  of 
Clement,  who  says  in  the  57th  chap,  (alias  61)  that 
it  was  so  regulated  by  the  .apostles,  through  respect  to 
the  words  of  Christ.  The  ceremony  of  asking  the 
blessing  by  the  deacon,  is  very  old,  as  are  also  that 
of  announcing  the  Gospel  by  the  words  Sequentia^ 
&c. ; the  answer,  Gloria  iibi  Domine^  “ Glory  be  to 
thee,  O Lord,”  being  found  in  the  Liturgy  of  St.  John 
Chrysostom,  and  quoted  as  ancient  by  Amalarius, 
lib.  18  tic  off,  Mis$x,  and  Alcuen,  lih,  De  off,  divin. 
Ail  the  old  Liturgies,  and  councils,  and  fathers  men- 
tion the  Gospel. 

After  the  Gospel  the  creed  is  properly  introduced, 
as  the  profession  of  that  faith  which  the  Gospel  has 
promulgated.  That  now  recited  is  the  creed  .of  Con- 
stantinople— that  originally  used  was  the  Apostles’ 
creed  ; but  after  the  decision  of  the  Council  of  Nice, 
and  the  condemnation  of  Arius,  it  was  made  more  ex- 
plicit upon  the  subject  of  his  errors.  In  the  year  381 
.the  Council  of  Constantinople  was  held,  and  to  op- 
pose new  errors,  the  creed  assumed  its  present  form. 
It  is  begun  by  the  celebrant  and  taken  up  by  the 
choir,  to  shew  that  faith  springs  from  Christ,  and 
through  him  is  established  amongst  the  people.,  We 
find  it  in  the  liturgy  of  St.  John  Chrysostom,  and 
mentioned  by  the  3d  Council  of  Toledo.  It  is  said  or 
sung  only  on  Sundays  and  great  festivals.  After  the 
celebrant  and  his  attendants  repeat  it,  they  sit  until 
ihc  choir  has  concluded.  0 

This  is  the  end  of  what  is  called  the  Mass  of  Cate- 
chumens. Formerly  the  deacon  at  this  period  order- 
ed the  catechumens  and  infidels,  &c.,  to  retire — ^the 
sermon  had  been  preached  after  the  Gospel ; they 
had  received  instruction,  but  the  faithful  only,  and  in 
some  instances  only  Uie  communicants  were  suffered 

. Google 


43 


ON  THE  MASS. 


to  attend  at  the  mysteries*  Upon  the  deacon’s  pro* 
clamation,  the  porters  excluded  those  not  admitted  to 
full  communion  of  the  faithful,  and  closed  the  doors. 

All  hitherto  was  read  openly ; now  the  mysteries 
began,  and  the  chief  part  was  read  in  an  under  voice. 

The  first  part  of  the  Mass  of  the  faithful  is  the 
offertory.  This  is  a small  portion  of  the  scriptures 
applicable  to  the  mystery  or  fact  which  is  commemo- 
rated, and  of  course  varies  every  day.  This  is  called 
the  offertory,  because  it  was  sung  by  the  choir  whilst 
the  faithful  made  their  offerings,  for  in  the  early  ages 
of  the  church,  every  person  made  some  oflfering  at  the 
altar  when  he  or  she  attended  the  holy  sacrifice. 
“Whilst  the  offertory  is  sung,”  says  Innocent  III. ^ . 
“ the  priest  receives  the  oblations  from  the  people,  or 
the  hosts  from  the  attendants  ” This  custom  of  sing* 
ing  and  music  at  the  offering  was  very  ancient.  We 
find  it  in  the  days  of  the  good  king  Ezechias,*  And 
when  the  holocausts  were  offered,  they  began  to  sing 
praises  to  the  Lord,  and  to  blow  with  trumpets,  and  to 
perform  with  different  instruments  which  king  David 
had  prepared.  The  same  spirit  which  presided  over 
the  Jewish  church  in  the  days  of  its  purity,  presides 
over  the  Christian  church,  and  will  continue  so  to  do^  ^ 
all  days  to  the  end  of  the  world. f 

* II.  Paralip.  xxix.  27,  &c. 

t The  obiection  of  some  persons  to  the  introduction  of 
music,  in  the  solemn  service  of  the  Creator  is  strange — 
]\Ian  should  consecrate  all  his  powers  and  acquirements  to 
the  greater  glory  of  his  Lord ; and  if  this  fine  science  and 
touching  art  is  to  be  excluded,  it  is  impossible  to  discover 
upon  what  principles  the  excluuon  will  rest,  without  being 
fatal  to  every  other  mode  of  external  worship.  Music,  it 
is  said,  is  used  in  theatres,  and  is  used  for  the  excite- 
ment of  levity  and  criminal  dispositions;  so  has  speaking, 
therefore  we  should  not  speak,  there  should  be  no  preach- 
ers; so  has  reading,  therefore  we  should  not  study  the 
s irred  volumes.  But  improper  speaking  and  reading,  are 
very  different  from  preaching  and  reading  the  Scriptures, 
rndoubtedly  they  are,  and  sacred  solemn  music  is  very 

D .Google 


ON  TH£  MASS. 


43 


The  offerings  were  at  first  indiscriminately  made 
of  whatever  the  people  thought  proper  to  give,  either 
for  the  sacrifice,  or  for  the  support  of  the  clergy  ; but 

different  from  profane  and  lascivious  airs.  But  the  same 
sort  of  instruments  are  used.  And  so  the  same  sort  of 
tongues,  and  the  same  sort  of  types,  and  the  same  sort  of 
paper.  Perhaps  the  identical  cases  of  type  which  were 
used  to  print  a bad  novel,  or  an  indecent  jest-book,  arc 
used  to  print  the  Holy  Bible — is  the  sacred  book  profaned 
thereby  ? Besides  the  frequent  mention  of  instrumental 
and  vocal  music,  for  the  service  of  God,  in  the  dfierent 
parts  of  the  old  Testament,  we  have  the  distinct  statements 
of  St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse,  or  Revelations,  xiv.  1.  &c. 
And  I beheldf  and  lo  a larnb  stood  upon  Mount  Sion,  and 
with  him,  an  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  having  his 
name,  and  the  name  of  his  father  written  upon  their  fore- 
heads. And  I heard  a voice  from  heaven,  as  the  noise  of 
many  waters,  and  as  the  vowe  of  ^reat  thunder:  and  the 
voice  which  I heard,  was  as  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  on 
their  harps,  and  they  sung  as  it  were  a new  canticle  hef ore 
the  throne,  ^c.  xv.  2.  And  I saw  as  it  were  a sea  of  glass 
mingled  with  fire,  and  them  that  had  overcame  the  beast,  and 
his  image  and  the  nurrher  of  his  name,  standing  on  the  sea 
of  glass,  having  the  harps  of  God;  and  singing  the  canticle 
of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  canticle  of  the  f^arph, 
(J*c.  Ep.  of  St.  James  v.  13.  Is  any  man  cheerful  in  mind 
ht  him  sing.  We  may  therefore  well  conceive  the  sublime 
British  poet  fully  justified  in  attributing  to  Angels,  adora- 
tion by  music. 

How  often  from  the  steep 

Of  echoing  hill  or  thicket  have  we  heard 
Celestial  voices  to  the  midnight  air, 

Sole,  or  responsive  to  each  other’s  notes, 

Sitting  their  great  Creator  ? Oft  his  bands 
While  they  keep  watch,  or  nightly  rounding  walk, 
With  heavenly  touch  of  instrumental  sounds 
In  full  harmonic  number  join’d,  their  songs 
Divide  the  night  and  lift  our  thoughts  to  Heaven. 

Paradise  Lost.  Book  4. 

The  following  extract  from  Mr.  Kelts’  essay. on  Music 
shall  close  this  note. 

“ As  the  notes  used  to  express  any  sensations  may  be 
equally  in  unison  with  those  of  a similar  nature.  Music  re- 


Digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


44 


ON  THE  MAb8. 


the  Apostolic  canons  4 and  5,  regulate  that  only  corn, 
grapes,  oil  for  lights,  and  incense  should  be  offered 
at  the  altar.;  all  other  offerings  were  to  be  taken  to 
the  Bishop’s  house,  to  be  divided  by  him  and  the 
priests,  with  the  deacons  and  other  minor  clergy ; 
and  the  first  Council  of  Orleans  held  in  511,  at  the 
time  of  king  Clovis,  in  its  14th  canon  regulates  the 
proportion  in  which  the  division  was  to  be  made  in 
Gaul.  The  second  Council  of  Mascom,  held  in  the 
year  585,  at  the  time  of  king  Gortran,  and  of  Pope 
Pelagius  II.,  ordered  offerings  to  be  made  in  the 
Gallic  churches  by  every  individual  who  attended. 
The  4th  Council  of  Carthage,  held  in  the  year  398, 
forbad  the  offerings  of  those  who  were  at  open  enmity, 
of  those  who  oppressed  the  poor,  and  of  several  others 
to  be  received— canons  93  and  94.  The  deacon  and 
sub-deacon  generally  received  the  offerings ; during 
which  time  the  choir  performed  the  offertory,  but  the 
custom  of  receiving  these  contributions  has  long  since 
gradually  ceased.  Where  there  is  no  choir  the  cele- 
brant reads  it  in  a loud  voice. 

After  the  offertory,  at  a solemn  Mass,  or  indeed 

quires  the  aid  of  language,  to  characterize  any  individual 
passion.  If  correspondent  words  are  the  associates  of 
sound,  they  become  by  this  alliance  specific  indications  of 
the  manners  and  passions ; and  the  pleasure  conveyed  to 
the  ear,  is  attended  by  the  more  refined  gratification  of  the 
understanding.  Mysterious  as  the  mode  of  operation  by 
sound  may  be,  it  is  clear  that  nature  has  connected  certain 
emotions  with  them,  and  their  effect  is  sufficiently  ascer  - 
tained, and  deeply  felt;  for  they  are  the  keys  which  un- 
lock all  the  passions  of  the  soul.  Sounds  variously  modi- 
fied, and  judiciously  combined  with  words,  can  melt  with 
pity,  sink  in  sorrow,  transport  with  joy,  rouse  to  courage, 
and  elevate  with  devotion.  They  have  a peculiar  effect  in 
cherishing  the  tender  passions,  and  calling  up  the  long  for- 
gotten images  of  the  past,  wnth  all  their  attendant  train  of 
nssorinied  ideas.  While  the  ear  is  delighted  with  the  strains 
of  harmony,  the  fancy  is  buried  in  the  contemplation  of 
the  most  attracting  images,  and  the  whole  soul  is  exalted 
to  the  bright  regions  of  joy  and  happiness.” 

r Google  • 


ON  TUE  MASS. 


46 


during  its  performance,  the  deacen  and  sub-deacon 
go  up  to  the  altar,  both  at  the  epistle  side;  should  the 
chalice  not  be  on  the  altar,  but  placed  on  the  credence- 
table,  below,  the  sub-deacon  carries  it  up.  If  a bishop 
celebrates  in  pontificals,  he  remains  in  his  seat  or 
throne  durii^  the  Mass  of  the  catechumens,  and  he 
now  takes  on  his  gloves  and  washes  his  hands  topre- 
pare  for  the  sacrifice,  and  goes  to  the  altar  to  oflfer  it. 
^t^ould  he  be  attended  by  an  assistant  priest  in  a 
cope,  that  priest  does  what  would  otherwise  b« 
done  by  the  deacon  during  this  offering,  and  the  canon, 
and  the  deacon  performs  whatever  else  may  be 
necessary.  This  explanation  shall  be  given  on  the 
supposition  of  no  assistant  priest  being  in  attendance 
— and  in  plain  Masses  the  celebrant  does  every  thing 
himself. 

The  deacon  being  on  the  right  hand  of  the  cele- 
brant, uncovers  the  chalice,  which  has  on  its  mouth 
a linen  cloth  called  a purificatory,  for  wiping  the  cha- 
lice and  patten;  the  patten  is  a small  plate  on  which 
the  bread  for  consecration  is  placed,  this  is  laid  on 
the  chalice.  If  the  deacon  have  not  spread  the  cor- 
poral upon  the  altar  during  the  creed,  he  now  takes 
it  from  the  burse  or  case  in  which  it  is  kept,  and 
spreads  it  on  the  altar.  The  corporal  is  a linen  cloth 
neatly  folded,  except  when  spread  upon  the  altar  du- 
ring the  sacrifice,  and  the  bread  which  afterwards 
becomes  the  body  ((Jorpus)  and  the  chalice  are  placed 
upon  it.  Taking  the  patten  with  the  bread  on  it  from 
the  chalice,  the  deacon  gives  it  to  the  celebrant,  who 
lifting  it  up  offers  it,  repeating  the  prayer.  Jccepi 
&c.,  as  in  the  ordinary  of  the  Mass.  After  which, 
having  made  therewith  the  sign  of  the  cross,  he  lays 
it  on  tue  altar.  Meantime  the  deacon  cleanses  the 
chalice,  and  having  put  wine  into  it,  the  sub-deacon 
places  the  water  before  the  celebrant,  which  he  blesses 
with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  the  prayer,  0 God, 
wh  > in  creating,  &c.  The  sub-deacon  then  puts  a 
small  quantity  of  water  into  the  chalice,  and  the  dea- 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


46 


ON  THE  MASS. 


con  having  wiped  it*  carefully,  gives  it  to  the  cele- 
brant, who  being  assisted  by  the  deacon,  also  repeat- 
ing the  prayer,  offers  it,  saying.  We  offer  unto  thec^ 
&c. — then  having  made  the  sign  of  ^ cross  there- 
with, he  lays  it  on  the  altar,  and  the  cmacon  covers  it 
with  a pall,  which  is  a piece  oif  linen,  sometimes  or- 
namented, but  always  made  so  stiff,  by  the  sewing  it 
on  pasteboard  or  otherwise,  as  to  rest  steadily  on  th^ 
chalice  and  preserve  its  contents  from  any  thinp 
which  might  defile  them : formerly  the  corporal  was 
larger  and  a portion  of  it  was  turned  over  the  chalice, 
but  this  was  found  very  inconvenient.  The  celebrant 
then  bowing  down,  says  the  prayer,  Accept  usy  O 
Lord,  &c. — after  which,  rising  he  says,  Come,  0 AL 
mighty,  &c. — and  at  the  word  bless,  he  makes  the 
sign  of  the  cross  over»  the  host  and  chalice — then 
blesses  the  incense  by  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  the 
prayer,  May  the  Lord,  &c. — and  perfumes  the  bread 
and  wine,  and  the' altar,  repeating  the  prayers  which 
follow.  After  which  he  washes  his  hands,  saying  the 
prayer,  I will  wash,  &c. — and  then  returns  to  the 
middle  of  the  altar,  where  bowing  down  he  repeats 
his  request  of  sacrifice,  saying.  Receive,  0 Holy  Trin^ 
iiy,  &c. — then  kissing  the  altar,  he  turns  round,  and 
expanding  his  hands,  says.  Orate  Fratres,  &c. — du- 
ring this  and  the  secret  prayer,  and  the  preface,  until 
just  before  the  Sanctus,  the  deacon  and  sub-deacon 
stand  in  their  proper  places  behind  the  celebrant,  but 
go  up  to  the  altar,  the  deacon  on  the  right  and  the 
sub-deacon  on  the  left,  to  join  in  the  words  Holy,  Holy, 
Holy,  &c.— after  which  the  sub-deacon  having  made 
his  reverence  to  the  altar,  descends  to  his  former 
place,  and  the  deacon  comes  to  the  left  hand  side,  to 
assist  in  turning  the  leaves  of  the  book,  during  the 
canon  which  immediately  follows. 

In  some  places,  an  ancient  custom  is  retained  by 
the  sub-deacon  of  having  a large  veil  placed  on  his 
shoulders  when  be  is  about  to  take  the  chalice  from 
the  credence  fo  the  altar;  and  then  after  the  offertory, 


Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


47 


foldincr  the  pattea  in  the  end  of  this  veil,  and  so  hold- 
ing it  in  his  place,  until  the  celebrant  wants  the 
patten  after  the  Lord’s  Prayer. 

Another  ancient  custom  of  some  places  is,  that 
when  the  deacon  has  incensed  the  celebrant,  after 
the  offertory,  he  proceeds  to  incense  the  clergy,  accord- 
ing to  their  rank,  and  is  himself  then  incensed  by 
^e  incense  bearer,  who  afterwards,  bowing  to  the 
leveral  portions  of  the  congregation,  pays  them  the 
like  respect. 

Should  the  Bishop  be  present,  in  his  place,  and  the 
celebrant  be  a priest,  the  water  and  incense  are  taken 
to  the  Bishop  to  be  blessed,  and  he  is  incensed  before 
the  celebrant  by  the  deacon.' 

In  the  sacrifice  we  are  now  to  look  for  three  distinct 
oblations,  all  united  in  the  same  act  of  religion.  The 
oblation  of  the  bread  and  wine  for  the  purpose  of  their 
substance  being  destroyed,  and  their  appearances  cov- 
ering the  body  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  obla- 
tion of  the  body  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  under  the 
appearances  of  bread  and  wine,  and  the  oblation  of 
himself  and  of  the  faithful  in  union  with  Jesus  Christ, 
hy  the  celebrant.  The  three  are  performed  by  the 
one  continued  act  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass ; and 
it  is  only  by  keeping  the  distinction  clearly  in  view, 
we  shall  be  enabled  fully  to  comprehend  the  meaning 
of  the  prayers. 

The  bread  which  is  offered  is  unleavened  ; such 
was  the  kind  which  the  Saviour  used  at  the  institu- 
tion, for  it  took  place  at  the  time  of  the  unleavened 
bread;  (Mark  xiv.  12,)  and  some  water  is  mingled 
with  wine  in  the  chalice,  because  ‘ts  the  councils  of 
Trent  says,  it  has  been  received  as  an  uninterrupted 
apostolical  custom,  and  believed  to  be  founded  upon 
the  authority  of  Christ  himself,  who  is  stated  to  have 
<ione  so  at  the  institution ; and  this  assertion  is  sup- 
ported by  the  entire  host  of  ancient  witnesses.  *The 

* Can.  xxxiL 

/ 

n Google 


48 


ON  THL  MAS8. 


council  of  Constantinople,  called  that  of  Trulla,  from 
the  hall  in  which  it  was  held,  in  the  year  692,  quotes 
the  following  passage  from  the  Liturgy  of  St.  James 
the  Apostle,  and  first  Bishop  of  Jerusalem  : “ In  like 
manner,  taking  the  chalice  after  he  had  supped,  and 
mixing  water  with  wine^  and  blessing,”  &c.  St. 
Clement,  a cotemporary  of  the  apostles,  states  in 
chap.  17,  book  8.  of  the  Apostolic  Constitution,  that 
our  Lord  mixed  water  with  the  wine — as  does  St. 
Iraeneus,  the  Bishop  of  Lyons,  in  lib.  4.  cap.  57.  St. 
Cyprian,  Bishop  of  Carthage,  in  the  year  250,  writes 
in  lib.  2,  Ep.  3,  that  the  custom  of  mixing  water  with 
wine  in  the  chalice,  is  a tradition  from  our  Lord.  The 
quantity  of  water  is  very  small ; and  St.  Cyprian  also 
gives  us  the  mystic  reason  for  this,  in  Ep.  63,  ad 
Cxoitium,  “ We  see  the  people  signified  in  the  water, 
but  the  wine  exhibits  the  blood  of  Christ,  When, 
therefore,  water  is  mixed  with  wine  in  the  chalice, 
Christ  is  united  to  his  people^’  &c. ; from  this  the 
prayer  is  perfectly  intelligible. 

As  in  the  bread  many  grains  are  brought  into  one 
substance,  and  in  the  chalice  many  grapes  are  brought 
into  one  substance,  so  in  the  church  of  Christ,  many 
individuals  are  brought  into  the  unity  of  faith,  and 
connecu  d together  by  the  bonds  of  charity,  and  though 
thousands  should  assemble  together,  in  the  same  edi- 
fice, or  the  great  offering  be  made- in  millions  of  places 
throughout  the  Christian  world,  still  the  offering  is 
but  one,  the  prayers  are  for  all ; our  great  father  is 
intreated  to  look  upon  us  as  one  fold^  under  one  shep- 
herd: (John  X.  16.2  They  who  are  present  at  this  obla- 
tion, should  there^re  be  filled  with  the  spirit  of  chari- 
ty, and  banish  from  them  enmities^  contentions^  emur- 
lation.'<^  wraths^  quarrels^  dissenfionsj  sects,  tnvy,  and 
such  like ; fjr.  they  who  do  such  things,  shall  not  obtain 
the  kingdom  of  God,  (Clal.  v.  20.) 

In  the  prayer  at  offering  the  host,  which,  as  yet  is 
'.ut  bread,  the  church  has  in  view  the  chief  sacrifice 
which  is  to  be  made  under  the  appearance  of  bread, 

r Google 


ON  TH£  MASS. 


49 


dnd  therefore  seeks,  even  now,' the  effects  of  the  re- 
demption by  Christ,  who  is  to  be  the  victim,  ultimate- 
ly produced,  and  principally  offered,  and  through 
whose  merits  only  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  life  cver- 
lasting,  are  attainable.  But  in  the  oblation  of  the 
chalice,  the  expressions  are  more  confined  yet,  though 
the  words  are  such  as  would  be  fully  true,  without 
any  further  reference  ;•  it  is  clear  that  our  salvation^ 
and  that  of  the  whole  worlds  can  be  obtained  only 
through  the  blood  of  the  Redeemer. 

When  the  priest  bows  down,  saying  the  next 
prayer,  Accept  ws,  &c.;  in  the  name  of  the  people,  he 
offers  them  up  as  a sacrifice,  praying  that  they  may 
be  received  ; he  bows  to  denote  the  humility  which 
should  fill  every  heart;  and  he  expresses  it  in  his 
prayer ; for,  a troubled  spirit  is  a sacrifice  to  God,  and 
a contrite  and  humble  hearU  he  will  not  despise.  ( Psalm 
1.  17.)  Such  an  oblation  is  always  pleasing  to  the 
Lord;  therefore  they  who  assist  at  Mass,  should  endea- 
vour to  be  truly  bowed  down  in  humility,  and  to  avoid 
being  puffed  up,  ambitious,' liable  to  anger,  thinking 
evil,  or  rejoicing  in  iniquity  i for  if  they  be  criminal 
in  those  respects,  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4,  &c.)  though  they 
should  know  all  mysteries,  and  have  all  knowledge  and 
faith,  so  as  to  remove  mountains,  and  distribute  all 
their  goods  to  feed  the  pool , and  deliver  their  bodies  to 
be  burned,  it  profiteih  nothing.  (1  Cor.  xiii.  2 and  3.) 
The  correction  of  the  heart,  is  the  great  object  of  reli- 
gion; and  the  sacrifice  of  ourselves,  which  the  Loro 
requires,  is  the  abandonment  of  those  bad  disposi- 
tions, which  are  so  interwoven  with  our  nature,  that 
the  Saviour  found  it  necessary  to  .^inform  us,  that  if 
iny  man  will  come  after  him,  he  rhust  deny  himself, 
and  ia^e  up  his  cross  and  follow  (Matt.  xvi.  24.)  that 
Christ  who  offered  himself  as  a sacrifice  for  mankind. 

The  next  prayer  is  made  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  a 
special  manner,  for  the  third  divine  person  of  the 
blessed  Trinity  is  generally  designated  as  the  Sanc- 
tifier; for  reasons  with  which  every  Christian  must 

Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


50 


ON  THN  MASS. 


be  acquainted.  He  is  specially  invoked  here,  as  his 
intervention  is,  in  the  order  of  Providence,  requisite 
to  produce  the  effect  songht  for;  and  when  he  is  in- 
voked to  bless  this  sacrifice^  the  celebrant  makes  the 
sign  of  the  cross  over  the  oblation,  to  show  his  faith, 
in  every  good  gift  and  divine  being  obtained  through 
the  merits  of  our  divine  Saviour,  who  was  crucified  for 
us.  Short  and  simple  as  this  prayer  is,  the  mind  is  over- 
whelmed and  lost  in  the  contemplation  of  its  conse- 
quences. First  it  exhibits  to  us  the  bread  and  wine 
to  be  consumed,  as  an  holocaust.*^  For  in  sacrifices 
of  holocaust,  or  whole  burnt  offerings,  the  victim  was 
entirely  consumed  by  fire,  to  the  honour  of  the  Deity  : 
so  here  -the  substance  of  the  bread  and  wine  is  destroy- 
ed, not  by  material,  but  mystic  fire,  by  him  who  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost  descended  in  the  form  of  tongues 
of  fire  upon  the  Apostles.  This  sacred  fire  consumes 
the  substance  but  preserves  the  appearances,  in  order 
to  be  the  veils  which  conceal  from  mortal  eyes  the  di- 
vine victim  who,  in  the  beginning,  offered  hitnself  as 
the  substitute  for  those  ancient  observances.  For  it 
was  impossible  that  with  the  blood  of  oxen  and  goats^ 
sins  should  be  taken  away.  Wherefore,  when  he  cometh 
into  the  world,  he  saith:  Sacrifice  and  oblation  thou 
wouldst  not  .•  but  a body  thou  hast  fitted  to  me : Holo^ 
ca lists  and  for  sin  did  not  please  thee.  Then,  said  /, 
behold,  I come  : In  the  head  of  the  book  it  is  written  of 
ne,  that  I should  do  thy  will,  (Hebrews  x.  4,  &c.) 
Py  the  sword  of  the  word,  and  the  jfire  of  the  spirit, 
this  mystic  oblation  takes  place ; but  the  destruction 
of  this  first  substance  is  not  the  great  sacrifice  of  the 
Muss;  for  the  bread  and  wine  are  destroyed  only  tc 
make  room  for  the  great  victim  to  be  principally 
offered ; and  the  production  of  which,  whether  for 
the  original  sacrifice  on  Calvary,  or  its  repetition  on 

* See  0[) Macules  de  Bossuet,  T.  i.  p.  130.  t See  the 
Kccrel  prayt  i . jr  Easter  Friday,  in  Whitsun  week. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


ON  TUE  MASS. 


51 


our  altars,  has  always  been  attributed  to  this  sacred 
Spirit. 

Thus  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke,  we  read  *Tht  Holy 
Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee  and  the  power  of  the  mosi 
hi^h  shall  overshadow  thee.  And  therefore  also  the 
Holy  One  which  shall  be  bom  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the 
Son  of  God,  (i.  35)  And  in  the  Apostles’  creed.  And 
in  Jesus  Christ  His  only  Son,  our  Lord,  who  was  con- 
ceived by  the  Holy  Ghost,  And  in  the  Liturgy  of  St. 
Basil,  which  is  that  principally  in  use  in  the  East 
a prayer  is  used  that  the  bread  may  become  the  real 
body,  and  the  wine  the  real  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  who  changes  this  bread  and  this  wine,  » 
And  St.  Isidore  of  Pelusium  a disciple  of  St.  John 
Chrysostom,  who  also  compiled  a Liturgy  in  very 
general  use  in  the  East,  says,  Thai  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  truly  God,  and  after  other  reasons  adds,  and  because 
at  the  mystic  table,  it  is  he  who  makes  common  bread 
the  real  body  in  which  the  Son  of  God  made  himself 
incarnate  ,*  (Lib.  1.  Ep.  10.9,)  and  he  afterwards* 
says  the  same  of  the  wine  changed  into  the  blood. 
The  same  is  found  in  almost  every  ancient  Liturgy, 
as  testified  by  St.  Cyril,  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  who 
lived  in  the  middle  of  the  preening  century,  and 
after  having  given  his  testimony  in  these  few  words, 

I Thus  that  which  the  Holy  Ghost  touches  is 
changed,  and  sanctified.  In  the  ancient  Gothic  Mis- 
sal which  was  used  In  many  parts  of  Africa  and 
other  portions  of  the  Western  Church,  the  following 
prayer  is  found. “ O Lord  may  the  Holy  Ghost  thy 
co-eternal  co-operator  descend  upon  this  sacrifice,  to 
the  end  that  the  fruits  of  the  earth  which  we  present 
unto  thee  may  be  changed  into  thy  body,  and  what 
this  chalice  contains  into  thy  blood.” 

Wherefore  vve  may  now  clearly  perceive  the  great 
object  of  this  assembly  of  Christians  from  the  days 

* Ep.  2.  13.  t Cat.  Myst.  v.  1 Miss.  Got.  xii. 


gitized  by 


Google 


52 


ON  THE  MASS. 


of  the  Apostles  to  the  present,  to  be,  for  the  pmiss  of 
the  Lord  ; for  the  instructions  to  be  derived  from  the 
lessons  of  the  old  law,  and  of  the  new,  as  delivered 
by  those  persons  whose  commission  therefore  is  de- 
rived from  Jesus  Christ  through  the  Apostles.  For 
the  profession  of  their  belief  in  the  doctrines  of  the 
Church ; for  the  oblation  of  themselves,  that  dying  to 
the  world,  they  may  live  with  Christ,  and  for  the  of- 
fering of  bread  and  wine  to  be  changed  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  institution  of  the  Redeem- 
er, and  the  Ministry  of  the  Clergyman  into  the  body 
and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  they  may  thus  (1  Cor. 
xi.  26,)  make  a commemoration  of  him  shewing  forth 
the  death  of  the  Lord  until  his  second  coming,  and 
receiving  by  the  oblation  of  this  victim,  the  applica- 
tion of  the  fruits  of  redemption  to  their  souls.  Whilst 
in  addition  to  this,  they  who  prove  and  try  themselves, 
may  hy  eating  Christy  also  live  by  him,  (John  vi.  58.) 
In  the  contemplation  of  such  a scene  the  soul  breaks 
from  her  prison,  and  flies,  not  over  an  imaginary  land 
of  vision,  but  traversing  the  regions  of  the  East,  col- 
lects the  facts  of  ages,  and  brings  into  one  point,  the 
sacrifice  of  Abel,  and  that  of  Melchisedec,  its  applica- 
tion by  the  royal  Psalmist,  that  lamb  of  Egypt,  the 
institution  of  the  Eucharistic  oblation,  and  the  suffer- 
ings of  Calvary,  exhibiting  thus  to  the  intellect  the 
best  subjects  for  reflection  and  to  the  affections,  the 
most  powerful  excitements  to  oiety  and  devotion. 

At  such  a moment  as  this  :ne  soul  is  prepared  for 
prayer,  and  the  incense  which  is  its  emblem  is  finally 
introduced,  as  well  to  spread  its  perfumes  round 
the  holy  place  as  to  waft  its  odour  to  the  heavens. 
It  is  blessed  iir  der  the  intercession  of  the  Archangel 
Michael  standing  at  the  right  hand  side  of  the  Altar 
of  incense,  and  of  all  the  elect,  &c.*‘  Some  ancient 
Missdh  have  it  Gabriel,  instead  of  Michael,  and  this 
would  appear  to  be  more  critically  correct,  for  clearly 

" Sacram.  S.  Greg.  Miss,  du  Tillet  and  de  Sees. 

D .Google 


ON  TBE  MASS. 


53 


ihe  prayer  appears  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  first  chap 
ter  of  St.  Luke  where,  verse  11,  the  Angel  appears 
on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  altar  of  incense,  and 
verse  19,  he  states  that  he  is  Gabriel.  Others  state 
that  it  alludes  to  the  8th  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse 
verse  iii.  &c.  *S.nd  another  Angel  came  and  stood  before 
the  cdtavy  having  a golden  censer  ,•  and  there  was  given 
to  him  much  incense^  that  he  should  offer  of  the  prayers 
of  all  ihe  saints  upon  the  golden  altar,  which  is  bffore 
the  throne  of  God,  And  ihe  smoke  of  ihe  incense  cf  the 
prayers  of  ihe  saints,  ascended  up  before  God  from  the 
hand  of  the  Angel,  They  state  this  angel  to  be  Mi- 
chael, the  prince  of  the  heavenly  host,  and  state 
the  prayer  to  be  addressed  to  God,  by  the  intercession 
of  his  Archangel  and  the  heavenly  host  to  cause  our 
prayers  to  be  equally  acceptable  to  the  Most  High, 
and  our  incense  to  ascend  with  equal  favour  in  his 
presence  as  that  mentioned  in  the  Apocalypse. 

The  celebrant  washes  the  extremities  of  his  fingers 
at  the'epistle  side,  repeating  the  portion  of  the  xkvi. 
Psalm,  which  commences  at  the  6th  verse,  1 will 
wash,  ^c.  The  custom  is  very  ancient ; it  is  done 
for  a double  object,  natural  and  mystic.  The  first, 
because  the  hands  having  now  been  used  in  the  oflTer- 
iog  and  incensing  might  have  contracted  some  slight 
soil  should  be  cleansed,  particularly  the  extremities 
of  those  fingers  which  are  to  touch  the  holy  Sacra- 
ment; the  second,  to  shew  that  the  person  offering 
this  holy  Sacrifice,  should  be  free  from  even  the  small- 
est stain  of  sin,  or  spiritual  filth.  St.  Denis  the 
Areopagite  in  his  work  on  the  Eccles.  Hiear.  chapter 
10,  mentions  this  washing  of  the  fingers  in  the  fol- 
lowing words:  “The  Pontiff  accompanied  by  the 
venerable  order  of  Priests,  washing  his  hands;  for 
he  that  is  washed  (as  the  Scriptures  testify)  needs 
no  other  washing  than  that  of  his  extremities,  or  tops 
of  the  fingers,hy  which  indeed  the  greatest  cleanliness 
is  produced,”  &c.  And  again,  “ It  is  right  that  they 
who  approach  to  this  most  pure  sacrifice,  should  be 
5* 


.Google  • 


54 


ON  THE  MASS. 


cleansed  fronieven  the  least  distractions  of  the  soul.” 
This  is  a fine  allusion  to  that  act  of  humility  arid  in- 
struction of  the  Saviour,  on  the  ni^ht  when  he  estab- 
lished the  Eucharistic  institution,  as  read  in  the  13th 
chapter  of  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  John.  “ He  that 
is  washed  needeth  not  hut  to  wash  his  feei^  but  is  clean 
wholly,'*^  St.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  in  the  6lh  chapter  of 
his  mystic  catechism,  says,  “You  have  seen  that  a 
deacon  washes  the  hands  of  the  celebrant  and  of  the 
other  Priests  about  the  altar.  Think  you  it  was  to 
cleanse  the  body  ? By  no  means,  for  when  we  enter 
the  church,  we  are  not  in  such  a state  as  to  need 
washing  for  cleanliness.  But  this  washing  of  the 
hands  teaches  us  that  we  should  be  clean  from  all  sin, 
for  the  hands  signify  our  acts;  to  wash  the  hands 
then  is  nothing  more  than  to  purify  our  works.”  And 
the  Apostolic  constitutions  remark.  Lib.  8,  chapter 
11,  “That  the  water  which  is  in  this  place  given  to 
the  priests  to  wash  their  hands,  is  a sign  of  the  purity 
which  becomes  souls  consecrated  to  God.”  Both 
celebrant  and  attendants  should  therefore  on  this  oc- 
casion be  penetrated  with  the  most  heartfelt  sorrow 
for  sins,  and  sincerely  intreat  pardon  for  their  of- 
fences, and  beg  that  the  Lord  may  wash  away  theii 
iniquities,notonly  from  their  hands  but  from  their  feet 
and  their  heads,  (John  xiii.  9,)  and  should  any  per- 
sons addicted  to  gross  crimes  be  present,  they  should 
seriously  enter  into  themselves  and  reflect,  that  if  they 
live  according  to  the  works  of  the  flesh,  they  cannot 
enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  These  works  are  mani~ 
fest^  fornication^  uncleanliness,  immodesty,  luxury, 
drunkenness,  revellingp,  and  such  like,  (Galat.  v.)  If 
then  they  have  yielded  their  members  to  serve  unclean* 
liness  and  iniquity,  unto  iniquity,  let  them  now  yieta 
their  fnembers  to  serve  justice  unto  sanctification,  (firm, 
vi.  19.)  Let  them  wash  away  their  crimes  with  the 
tears  of  contrition,  and  the  blood  of  that  lamb,  who 
is  about  to  be  offered.  Unless  they  attend  with 
such  dispositions,  at  the  holy  Sacrifice,  they  but  make 

n Google 


ON  THE  MA8b. 


55 


a mockery  of  Christ,  and  God  is  not  mocked  with 
impunity. 

This  ablution  was  performed  at  the  epistle  side — 
which,  as  before  remarked,  was,  in  a regularly  built 
church,  the  south  side,  and  therefore  next  to  the 
sacristy,  where  the  necessaries  of  the  altar  were  kept 
— the  psalm  was  concluded  by  the  doxology,  “Glory 
be  to  the  Father,”  &c.— except  in  Masses  for  the 
dead,  when  the  usual  conclusion  of  the  psalms  on 
that  occasion,  was  substituted.  “ Eternal  rest  grant 
unto  them,  O Lord.  And  let  perpetual  light  shine 
unto  them.  Amen.”  And  in  times  of  most  solemn 
penance,  it  was  omitted,  as  being  an  expression  of 
joyful  praise. 

The  celebrant  then  comes  to  the  middle  part  of  the 
altar,  and  bowing  down,  says  the  next  prayer.  Receive^ 
0 Holy  TVinity^  &c.  This  prayer  in  its  present  form 
is  probably  a cause  of  difficulty  to  some  persons  who 
do  not  examine  with  sufficient  care,  nor  reflect  upon 
what  they  too  hastily  condemn.  They  object  that  by 
this  prayer,  the  churcii  professes  to  offer  th<  sacrifice 
equally  to  the  blessed  trinity  and  to  the  saints.  This  is 
not  the  fact,  nor  is  such  the  meaning  of  the  prayer.  It 
consists  of  three  distinct  parls.  The  first  requesting 
the  oblation  to  be  received  in  memory  of  the  Passion, 
Resurrection  and  Ascension  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
This  is  distinct,  and  the  plain  meaning  of  the  request 
is  evidently  conformable  to  the  institution.  Bo  this 
for  a commemoraiion  of  me»  (Luke  xxii.v.  19)  The 
second  part,  requesting  the  oblation  to  be  received  in 
honour  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  and  other  saints — tna- 
it  may  be  available  to  their  honour  and  to  our  salva- 
tion. This  latter  clause,  “our  salvation,”  creates 
no  difficulty.  The  question  is  now  what  is  meant  by 
offering  the  sacrifice  in  honour  of  the  saints  ? First, 
then,  the  word  honour  in  the  first  part  of  the  prayer, 
IS  clearly  not  an  exact,  though  it  be  a literal  transla- 
tion of  the  original  prayer — for  it  should  be  rather 
translated  on  the  festival  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  <SvC. 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


ON  THE  MAS». 


35 

Le  Bnin  remarks^  that  the  words  found  in  the  oldest 
copies  are  in  honore^  and  not  in  honor tm^  and  states 
also,  that  the  words  ad  honortm^  found  immediately 
after  strengthens  the  proof  of  this  reading  being  cor- 
ed, for  the  persons  who  framed  the  prayer  would 
otherwise  have  fallen  into  a glaring  ano  inexplicahle 
tautology.  In  honore  evidently  ought  tr  be  transla- 
ted on  the  festival  or  at  the  time  we  honour.  Thus  ii 
would  appear  as  well  from  the  critical  examination,  as 
from  various  facts  which  that  author  adduces,  that 
this  is  the  true  meaning  of  this  first  phrase.  But  ad 
honorem^  that  it  may  be  available  to  their  honour, 
i.  e.  the  saints,  is  distinct,  we  must  then  see  its 
meaning. 

St.  Augustine  writes,f  “ So  that  although  we  raise 
altars  to  the  memory  of  the  martyrs,  we  do  not  build 
any  to  them.  For  which  of  our  prelates  at  any  time 
celebrating  at  the  altar  in  any  of  the  places  of  the 
saints,  has  said,  ‘We  offer  unto  thee,  Peter,  or  Paul, 
or  Cypriani’  But  that  which  is  offered,  is  offered  to 
God  who  has  crowned  the  martyrs,  at  those  places 
where  is  celebrated  their  memory  whom  he  has 
crowned.”  And  again,  in  another  place,  “ ^iNordo 
we  give  to  those  martyrs  temples,  priests  and  sacrifices: 
because,  not  they,  but  their  God  is  our  God.”  Thus 
no  sacrifice  was  offered  to  the  saints,  though  places 
were  consecrated  to  their  memory,  where  their  virtues 
w ere  honoured,  and  altars  raised  at  which  this  honour 
was  paid.  Not  hy  sacrifice  to  them,  but  by  sacrifice 
to  God ; to  their  God  and  ours,  to  him  who  enabled 
them  by  his  grace  to  triumph  over  sin,  and  to  obtain 
glory — the  honour  we  pay  to  them  redounds  to  him, 
who  in  them  has  crowned  his  own  graces;  and  when 
w e pray  that  this  sacrifice  may  be  received  by  the 
Godhead,  it  is  to  the  holy  Trinity  it  is  offered,  not  to 
saints;  it  is  offered  in  commemoration  of  Christ,  on 

* Explic.  lit.  hist,  and  dog.  part  iii.  art.ix.  t Lib.  20, 
contra  Faust,  c.  21.  t Lib.  8 de  civ.  c.  27. 

p .Google 


ON  THIS  MASS. 


5 i 

the  festival  of  the  saints,  perhaps  in  places  consecra- 
ted to  God  in  their  memory,  and  we  pray  it  may  be 
evailable  to  their  honour^  we  do  not  offer  it  to  them 
that  they  may  receive  it — this  would  be  idolatry. 
Hut  it  is  offered  to  God  to  their  honour ; and  so  far 
f'om  this  being  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  Christ,  or 
against  his  institutions,  it  is  calculated  to  promote  his 
honour,  and  in  conformity  with  his  institutions;  for 
when  we  honour  the  saints,  we  only  pay  to  God  the 
homage  of  our  praise  for  their  perfections,  we  praise 
his  work  in  them,  and  their  glory  redounds  to  Him 
who  created  them  and  sanctified  them : and  surely  it 
was  to  procure  them  honour,  and  glory,  and  salvation, 
that  he* sacrificed  himself  on  Calvary,  and  we  only 
repeat  the  offering  for  the  purpose  of  commemorating 
and  fulfilling  his  institutions.  Nay,  he  distinctly  de- 
clares, For  them  do  I sacrifice  myselfi  that  they  also 
may  he  sanctified  in  truths  and  its  consequence,  hon- 
oured in  glory.  (John  xvii.  19.) 

Thus  the  sacrifice  is  offered  to  the  Trinity,  but  not 
to  the  saints,  and  though  they  are  honoured,  that  re- 
spect redounds  to  the  greater  glory  of  the  Lord. 

The  third  part  of  the  prayer  is  a request  that  those 
saints  whose  memory  we  celebrate  on  earth  may  in- 
tercede for  us  in  heaven.  Here,  then,  we  distinctly 
point  out  how  far  they  can  assist  us  “by  intercession,” 
and  we  show  that  intercession  to  be  again  subordinate 
to  that  of  the  Redeemer,  and  only  available  through 
his  merits,  for  the  prayer  concludes  by  the  words 
which  clearly  prove  those  merits  to  be  the  foundation 
on  which  we  rest  all  our  hope  by  those  words, 
“ Through  the  same  Christ,  our  Lord,  Amen.” 

But  why,  it  is  said,  need  we  ask  to  have  our  sacri- 
n;*«  received,  if  that  sacrifice  be  Christ,  who  must 
necessarily  be  acceptable  T*  Because  we  are  not  ne- 
cessarily acceptable,  and  the  object  is  to  apply  to  us 
the  benefit  of  this  offering,  by  granting  to  us  those 
dispositions  which  will  qualify  us  to  profit  by  that 
which  in  itself  is  excellent. 

“ gitized  by  CjOO^ IC 


ON  THE  MASS. 


5H 

This  prayer  was  originally  said,  only  on  the  festi- 
vals of  saints,  and  special  mention  then  was  made  of 
that  saint  whose  festival  was  celebrated,  but  during 
the  latter  700  or  800  years  the  special  name  has  been 
omitted,  and  the  general  form  used  as  now.  Many 
of  the  ancient  Missals  style  it  the  prayer  of  St  Am- 
brose, we  however,  have  no  better  evidence  to  attri- 
bute its  formation  to  him. 

The  celebrant  then  having  kissed  the  altar  through 
respect,  turns  round  to  request  the  faithful  to  pray 
with  him,  saying Orote fratres^  &c.  “Brethren pray,” 
&c. — the  answer  to  which  is  given  in  the  name  of  the 
people  by  the  attendant  praying  Suscipiat,  &c.  “ May 
the  Lord  receive,”  &c.  The  celebrant  pronounces 
only  the  first  words  in  an  audible  voice ; and  repeats 
the  remainder  in  a perfectly  under  tone,  to  teach  the 
faithful  that  silent  or  internal  prayer,  together  with 
meditation  on  the  divine  mysteries  is  what  best  befits 
the  solemn  occasion  which  now  presents  itself ; and 
this  invitation  is  given  to  rouse  them  from  any  dis- 
tractions which  might  have  occupied  their  thoughts, 
as  well  as  to  excite  them  to  greater  attention  to  the 
solemn  mysteries:  and  in  order  to  cutoff  all  occasion 
of  distracti  on  from  the  celebrant,  no  person  is  allowed 
to  come  so  near  as  to  be  under  his  observation,  except 
when  it  is  necessary  to  attend  him.  Nor  does  he  turn 
round  towards  the  people  from  this  moment  until  after 
the  conclusion  of  the  Sacrifice ; but  as  Moses  held 
his  hands  lifted  and  apart  in  prayer  upon  the  moun- 
tain, in  order  that  Israel  might  overcome  Amalec, 
(Exod.  xvii.)  He  now  holds  them  in  the  same 
manner  whilst  the  faithful  endeavour  to  overcome  that 
enemy  who  impedes  their  progress  to  the  true  land  of 
our  inheritance : nor  doel  he  change  them  from  this 
position  except  when  any  special  act  is  to  be  done- 
which  requires  their  use  and  on  a few  other  occasions 
which  shall  be  noticed. 

The  mode  of  invitation  to  prayer  at  this  place,  and 
• IS  answer  have  varied  very  considerably,  but  Hin 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


5y 

sabstance  has  always  been  the  samt.  In  many  ot 
the  ancient  Missals,  the  words  which  the  priest  says 
now  in  a loud  voice,  viz.  Oraiefratres^  is  all  that  was 
marked,  whilst  others  entered  more  fully  into  the  ex- 
planation of  the  object  of  the  prayer.  In  the  liturgy 
of  St.  Chrysostom,  the  celebrant  and  deacon  mutually 
said : “ May  the  Holy  Ghost  descend  upon  you,” 

and  in  the  liturgy  of  St.  James,  the  celebrant  continu- 
ed his  prayer  at  the  altar,  and  just  before  the  preface 
the  assistants  prayed  as  in  the  liturgy  of  St.  Crysos- 
tom.  In  others  the  celebrant  gave  the  irtvitation,  and 
the  people  prayed  without  giving  a special  answer ; 
but  the  present  order  has  been  generally  established 
in  the  Latin  church  during  800  or  900  years. 

The  prayer  exhibits  the  progress  of  charity  and 
the  c^munion  of  the  faithful : after  seeking  the 
praise  and  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  then  desire  our  own 
benefit,  and  then  that  of  the  whole  church ; showing 
that  we  must  first  love  God  above  all  things,  even 
above  ourselves,  then  loving  ourselves,  and  our 
brethren  as  ourselves  for  the  love  of  God. 

The  celebrant  then  reads  the  prayer  or  prayers 
called  the  secret  or  secrets,  the  number  of  which  cor- 
responds to  the  number  of  Collects.  This  prayer 
has  been  differently  called,  sometimes  Super  obhia 
“ over  the  oblations.”  This  needs  no  explanation,  for 
now  the  oblations  we.e  on  the  altar.  This  is  found 
in  the  Sacramentary  of  St.  Gregory,  and  in  that  of 
Pope  St.  Gelasius.  They  are  more  generally  called 
Secreta  or  Secrets.  Som^  authors  say  that  this  name 
was  given  because  they  were  said  in  a low  voice ; 
however,  we  have  seen  all  the  prayers  since  the  offer- 
tory, and  find  that  with  the  exception  of  the  preface, 
and  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  all  the  other  prayers  to  the 
end  of  the  Canon  are  said  in  a low  voice.  The  com- 
piler of  this  essay  is  therefore  more  inclined  to  the 
opinion  of  the  great  Bishop  of  Meaux*  that  this 

* Bossuet  Explicat  De  la  Messe,  parag.  ii. 

r Google 


60 


ON  THE  Mass. 


prayer  was  called  Secreta^  because  it  was  said  ovei 
the  part  of  the  offerings  of  the  people,  which  was  to 
be  consecrated  after  the  Secretio  or  separation  had 
been  made.  This  explanation  appears  the  more 
natural  as  being  at  the  same  time  founded  upon  a 
fact,  and  having  the  very  same  meaning  as  super  ob^  • 
lata  the  other  title  of  the  prayer. 

During  the  repetition  of  the  secret  prayers  the  cele- 
brant is  supposed  to  have  so  thoroughly  imbibed  the 
spirit  of  devotion,  that  he  no  longer  can  contain  it 
within,  and  he  therefore  concludes  them  by  repeating 
or  singing  the  latter  words  per  omnia  Secula  Seculo^ 
rum,  “World  without  end  ” aloud  ; the  choir  answers 
“Amen.”  The  next  salutation  is  that  of  Dominus 
vohiscum  which  has  been  already  explained.  Then 
Sursum  Corda,  “ Lift  up  your  hearts,  ” to  which  he  is 
answered  Habemus  ad  Doininum,  W e have  lifted 
them  up  to  the  Lord.”  Then  the  celebrant  says  or 
sings,  Gratias  agamus  Domino  Deo  nostro,  “ Let  us 
give  thanks  to  the  Lord  our  God.”  And  is  answered. 
Dignum  et  Justum  est,  “It  is  meet  and  just,”  after 
which  he  says  or  sings  the  preface,  which  is  so  called, 
because  it  immediately  precedes  the  canon  of  the  Mass. 

Formerly,  in  some  churches,  immediately  after  the 
Orate  fratres  the  sanctuary  was  enclosed  in  curtains, 
and  the  celebrant  was  not  seen,  henc^  it  was  useless 
for  him  to  turn  towards  the  faithful  in  saluting 'them 
during  the  canon,  or  immediately  preceding  it:  but 
even  where  there  were  no  curtains,  as  at  present  we 
ha /e  none,  the  solemn  occupation  of  the  celebrant 
prevents  his  turning  roundt  I'he  most  ancient  litur- 
gies contain  this  invitation  to  lift  up  our  hearts  to  the 
Lord,  and  it  is  so  general  through  all  the  first  writers 
and  early  documents,  as  to  be  evidently  of  Apostolic 
introduction.  It  is  found  in  the  constitutions  by 
Clement  Lib.  8.  c.  17.  St.  Cyprian,  fer.  6.  de  orat. 
Dom.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem.  Cat.  Myst,  5.  divers 
places  in  St.  John  Chrysostom  and  St.  Augustine, 
&c.  The  invitation  to  give  thanks  to  the  Lord  our 

r Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


61 


(lod  is  equally  ancient,  and  the  preface  is  found  in 
e^^ry  liturgy  which  has  been  discovered. 

The  Greeks  have  only  one  preface,  but  the  Latins 
have  had  a vast  number,  almost  every  principal  festi- 
val of  the  great  mysteries  or  of  any  distinguished  saint, 
• having  a proper  preface:  but  about  the  year  1050, 
they  were  reduced  to  ten,  and  all  the  others  abolished. 
Those  retained,  are  the  same  that  were  enumerated 
as  fully  sanctioned  by  the  church,  about  the  year  580, 
by  Pope  Pelagius  II,  in  his  answer  to  the  Bishops  of 
Germany  and  France.  They  are  the  common  pre- 
face, and  those  of  Christmas,  Epiphany,  Lent,  Easter, 
Ascension,  Pentecost,  the  Trinity,  the  Apostles,  and 
the  Cross.  Pope  Urban  II,  in  the  year  1095,  approv- 
ed of  that  of  the  blessed  Virgin  in  the  councils  of 
PJaisance  and  Clermont.  Though  the  decree  be  not 
found  in  the  acts  of  the  councils,  it  is  quoted  by  Gra- 
tian  fifty  years  after.  Those  form  at  present  the  body 
of  prefaces  of  the  Roman  Missal. 

Nothing  can  be  more  appropriate  than  for  man  who 
aspires  to  a heavenly  country,  to  lift  up  his  heart  and 
seek  for  it.  His  thoughts  and  his  desires  should  be 
in  heaven,  for  where  his  treasure  is,there  also  should  his 
heart  be;  he  desires  to  join  with  the  angels  in  glory,  then 
should  he  also  join  with  them  here  below  in  praising 
their  great  Creator.  And  nothing  can  surely  be  more 
just,  nor  more  necessary  than  that  we  who  have  re- 
ceived all  things  fron  his  bounty,  and  who  have  so 
often  experienced  his  mercy,  should  give  him  thanks 
therefor;  but  at  no  moment  should  our  gratitude  be 
more  strong,  nor  our  feelings  more  lively,  than  when 
we  contemplate  the  Son  of  God  slain  for  our  trans- 
gressions, and  now  expect  him  upon  the  altar  to  be 
under  the  sacramental  veils,  at  once  our  victim,  and 
our  sustenance. 

Our  praises  are  given  to  God,  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  and  in  giving  them,  we  behold  him, 
surrounded  as  it  were  by  the  whole  heavenly  court, 
from  the  most  humble  angel,  the  most  ardent  seraph, 

Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


62 


ON  THE  MASS. 


who  rapt  in  the  fire  of  love,  burns  in  extacy  and 
blazes  in  glory  near  the  throne.  And  they  rest  nut 
day  and  nighty  saying  holy,  holy,  holy,  and  giving 
glory  and  honour  and  benediction  to  him  that  sitteth  on 
the  throne.  (Apoc.  iv.  8.)  In  the  fervour  of  the  moment, 
the  celebrant  invites  his  flock  to  join  with  them  in  the 
sacred  canticle,  and  the  choir  and  people  unite  in 
their  jubilee  of  exultation. 

In  saying  those  words,  Holy^  &c.,  the  celebrant 
joins  his  hands,  and  bows  down  his  head,  in  humble 
adoration,  whilst  he  repeats  to  the  “ Lord  God  of 
Sabaoth,  the  heavens  and  the  earth  are  full  of  his 
glory:  Hosanna  in  the  highest;  blessed  is  he  who 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  he  makes  the 
sign  of  the  cross,  to  exhibit  the  source  of  blessing  to 
fallen  man,  and  repeats  “ Hosanna  in  the  highest.” 

This  hymn  is  found  in  all  the  most  ancient  litur- 
gies.* St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  in  his  address  to  the 
Catechumens,  urging  them  to  accelerate  their  prepa- 
ration for  baptism,  “Why  do  you  not  hasten  to  receive 
baptism,  that  you  may  be  able  to  sing  with  the  faith- 
ful the  canticle  of  the  Seraphim  ?”  And  St.  John 
Chrysostom  asks  the  faithful  how  they  can  sing  in- 
decent songs  with  those  mouths  w hich  have  chaunted 
Holy,  Holy,  Holy  to  the  Lord.  It  w'as  formerly 
omitted  on  fast  days,  and  in  Masses  for  the  dead  ; but 
the  second  council  of  Vaison,  in  529,  at  which  St. 
Cesarius  was  present,  ordered  it  to  be  said  at  all 
Masses,  “even  in  Lent  and  for  the  dead.”  This  cus 
tom  soon  became  general. 

The  hymn  is  found  in  the  first  place  in  the  sixth  chap- 
ter of  the  prophet  Isaias,  where  we  read  the  very  words, 
as  sung  by  the  seraphim.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy  Lord 
God  of  Sabaoth,  or  of  armies,  or  hosts ; the  heavens 
and  the  earth  are  full  of  his  glory.  For  the  reason 
w’hich  has  been  previously  given,  the  church  retains 
the  oiiginal  Hebrew  word  Sabaoth,  instead  of  taking 

* Sec  Le  Brun,  part  iv.  parag.  4. 

r Google 


ON  TH£  MASS. 


63 


its  translation.  St,  Ambrose  says,  the  triple  chaunt 
is  in  honour  of  the  Trinity  ;*  and  this  great  Lord  is 
called  the  God  of  armies  or  of  hosts ; for  he  is  that 
Ancient  of  days  described  by  Daniel,  •)■  from  be- 
fore whom  a fiery  stream  issued,  and  thousands  of 
thousands  ministered  unto  him^  and  ten  thousand 
times  hundreds  of  thousands  stood  hfore  him.  Ter- 
tnllian  says,  that  the  church  causes  us  to  repeat 
it  here  below, that  we  may  be  associated  with  those 
in  whose  company  we  hope  to  rest  for  eternity. 

But  now  coming  more  directly  to  the  specific  ob- 
ject of  the  sacrifice,  the  church  contemplates  him 
who  reconciled  us  to  his  Father,  and  beholding  his 
near  approach,  she  puts  into,  our  mouths  the  Hosan- 
nas to  him  who  comes  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  The 
son  of  David,  not  now  entering  Jerusalem  to  be 
mangled  upon  the  cross,  but  preparing  to  descend 
tipon  our  altar  to  immolate  himself  as  the  victim  of 
his  own  love  and  our  salvation.  Hosanna  is  not  on- 
ly an  ejaculation  of  praise,  but  also  a prayer  for 
mercy.  It  was  the  cry  of  the  Jews  at  the  feast  of 
Tabernacles,  and  of  the  multitudes,  who  strewed 
their  garments  in  his  way,  and  accompanied  Jesus 
into  Jerusalem,  bearing  branches  in  their  hands,  and 
crying  out.  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  Davids  blessed  is  he 
who  comes  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ,*  Hosanna  in  the 
hipest.  Matt.  xxi.  9. 

The  various  other  additions  to  the  preface  on  the 
occasion  of  special  feasts,  or  observances,  are  suffi- 
ciently explanatory  in  themselves,  such  as  the  shed- 
ding of  that  ray  of  divine  light  upon  us  by  the  birth 
of  the  Saviour,  which  is  ailuded  to  in  the  preface, 
proper  for  Christmas.  His  appearing  manifest  in  oui 
flesh,  in  that  for  Epiphany.  The  object  of  the  fast 
in  Lent ; the  effect  of  his  crucifixion  in  the  preface 
of  the  cross ; his  sacrifice,  by  which  he  is  our  Pascli, 
and  his  resurrection  at  Easter;  his  conversation  with 

* Lib.  XXX.  c.  18,  de  Spir.  Sane.  tvii.  9,  &c.  tDe  orat.  iiL 

Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


64 


ON  THE  MASS. 


his  apostles  and  ascension ; the  descent  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  at  Whitsuntide,  and  the  effects  of  this  de- 
scent; the  favour  conferred  on  the  blessed  Virgin 
Mary,  and  the  power  of  the  apostles,  together  with 
the  unity  of  the  church,  and  the  source  of  spiritual 
jurisdiction.  All  those  are  separately  and  specially 
brought  in  review  before  our  minds  through  the 
year,  on  various  oc^jasions,  by  the  special  or  proper 
prefaces. 

The  assistant  rings  the  bell  at  the  sanctus,  to  rouse 
the  attention  of  the  congregation,  and  to  excite  them 
to  join  in  the  hymn. 

The  next  part  is  the  canon.  This  has  its  name 
from  being  a part  which  has  always  been  an  un- 
changing rule,  by  which  the  celebrant  was  to  be 
directed  ; and  which  was  not  subject  to  the  discre- 
tion of  the  priest  or  bishop,  even  in  those  early  days 
when  much  was  left  to  their  prudence.  The  mean- 
ing of  the  word  canon,  is  “ a rule.”  It  consists  of 
that  part  of  the  Liturgy  which  commences  with  the 
words  Te  igitur  clemen  tissime  pater,  &c. ; “ we 
therefore  humbly  pray,”  &c.,  down  to  the  words  joer 
omnia  Soecula  Socculorum,  Amen.  “For  ever  and 
ever.  Amen,”  just  before  the  Lord’s  prayer.  But 
latterly  the  canon  is  considered  to  comprise  the 
Lord’s  prayer,  and  to  extend  to  the  prayers  at  tak- 
ing the  chalice  and  the  ablutions  inclusive. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  ^icient  parts  of  the  Litur- 
gy ; we  find  it  in  very  nearly  the  same  words  as  are 
now  in  the  Roman  Missal,  in  the  ancient  Ordo  Ro- 
manus, which  quotes  it  as  of  the  oldest  date.  It  is 
on  all  hands  agreed  that  the  last  person  who  amend- 
ed and  reduced  it  to  its  present  form,  was  Pope  St. 
Gregory  the  great,  in  the  year  695.  Kemnitz  and 
most  others  who  have  written  against  the  Catholic 
doctrine  on  this  point,  say  that  in  the  year  590  it 
assumed  its  present  form.  In  his  63d  epistle,  Gt. 
Gregory  states  that  before  his  time,  but  he  does  not 
state  exactly  when, .it  had  been  compiled  by  an  era- 

D .Google 


ON  THE  xMASS. 


65 


inent  scholastic  ; that  is,  by  a person  of  considerable 
information.  Pope  Vigilius  in  the  year  645,  men- 
tions it  as  “ the  text  of  canonical  prayer.”  Pope 
Leo  I.  in  the  year  445,  added  the  following  word?, 
Sanctum  Sacrificium  et  immaculatam  hostiam^ 
holy  sacrifice  and  unspotted  victim,”  just  after  the 
words  tibi  obtulit  Sacerdos  tuus  Melchisedech  “ thy 
high  priest  Melchisedech  oflfered  to  thee,”  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  second  paragraph  aftef  the  words 
of  consecration : and  Pope  Innocent  I.  calls  the 
canon  by  excellence  “The  prayer,”  in  the  year 
408,  in  his  epistle  to  Decentius,  where  he  speaks 
of  the  custom  of  repeating  the  names,  or  making  the 
memento,  “before  the  priest  makes  the  prayer.” 
St.  Augustine  about  the  year  420,  calls  it  by  the  same 
name,  where  he  says  in  his  149th  epistle,  that 
“ nearly  the  entire  church  concludes  all  its  petition 
with  the  Lord’s  prayer.”  St.  Ambrose  who  was  the 
teacher  of  St.  Augustine,  in  his  fourth  book  on  the  Sa- 
craments, has  the  two  prayers  which  immediately 
precede  the  consecration,  and  the  two  which  imme- 
diately follow  it,  almost  letter  for  letter  as  they  are 
now  found  in  the  canon,  and  he  quotes  them  as  taken 
from  the  ancient  rites.  In  the  4th  chapter  of  this 
4ih  book  he  distinctly  mentions  the  substance  of 
the  first  prayer  of  our  canon,  as  does  Optatus  of 
Melevi,  in  his  second  book  against  Parmenian,  and 
St.  Augustine  in  his  84th  tract  on  St.  John,  men- 
tions those  prayers  thereof,  in  which  the  saints  are 
named  and  invoked,  and  prayers  offered  for  the  dead. 
St.  Cyprian  in  the  year  250,  calls  it  the  prayer  which 
follows  the  preface.  St.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  St. 
Basil,  and  Pope  Vigilius  testify  that  those  customs 
and  prayers  wereJhanded  down  from  the  apostles ; 
and  this  testimony  was  not  contradicted,  but  was 
supported  by  their  cotemporaries  and  immediate 
successors.  It  was  also  called  Actio,  Mysterium,  &c., 
by  many  of  the  most  ancient  writers.  St.  Pelagius 
writes  both  phrases.  In  adione  Sacri  Mysterii 
6* 


66 


ox  THE  MASS. 


is  the  name  by  which  he  calls  it  * “ in  the  per- 
fonnance  of  the  holy  mystery.”  The  second  coun- 
cil of  Carthage  in  the  year  390,  calls  it  Ordo  Agendi 
“ the  order  of  doing” — that  is  of  producing  the  Sa- 
craments or  offering  the  Sacrifice— doing  an  act. 
Those  who  are  at  all  conversant  with  the  history  of 
the  early  ages  of  the  church,  will  not  be  astonished 
at  not  finding  earlier  written  documents  upon  the 
subject,  for  they  are  well  aware  of  the  custom  which 
prevailed  during  the  first  three  centuries  and  a half, 
of  not  committing  the  forms  of  the  sacraments  or 
the  prayers  of  the  mysteries  to  writing,  they  were 
taught  to  the  Clergy,  and  not  written : hence  we 
could  have  no  earlier  documents.  It  must  be  then 
quite  plain  that  no  better  evidence  could  be  expected 
of  the  antiquity  of  our  canon. 

But  in  addition  to  these  we  may  add  some  consi- 
derations which  have  very  great  weight.  First  it  is 
usual  in  the  dyptics  of  the  churches  to  insert  the 
names  of  the  saints,  to  be  repeated  in  the  canon ; now 
in  this  canon  there  is  not  the  name  Df  any  but  of  a martyr 
of  a very  early  date— therefore  all  the  dyptics  which  have 
been  introduced,  must  have  been  of  a corresponding 
period,  and  not  later  than  the  third  century.  Second- 
ly, we  have  the  most  accurate  statements  of  all  the 
changes  that  have  been  made  in  the  canon  by  any  of 
the  Pontiffs,  and  they  are  very  few ; we  have  also  the 
various  additions  to  that  part  of  the  office,  which  was 
left  more  to  discretion  than  the  canon,  hence  we  con- 
clude that  if  the  canon  was  not  of  apostolic  origin,  we 
would  have  had  some  account  of  its  author;  or  if  any 
serious  change  had  been  made,  we  would  have  teamed 
it  equally  as  well  as  we  did  that  made  by  Pope  Leo, 
and  that  other  by  Pope  Gregory,  wlfcn  in  his  revision 
thereof  he  added  the  words  Uiesque  ncstros  in  tua  pace 
disponas,  “ And  dispose  our  days  in  thy  peace,  ’ as  at 
the  end  of  the  prayers  said  by  the  celebrant  with  his 

* S.  Pelag.  in  Ep.  Agobard.  ad.  Ludov.  imp. 

lOOgle 


ON  THE  MASS. 


67 


S)ands  spread  over  the  offering — and  again  in  the 
enumeration  of  the  apostles,  the  order  is  very  different 
from  any  other  which  we  find ; and  can  be  best 
accounted  for,  as  also  can  the  introduction  of  their 
names  and  of  those  of  saints  who  lived  nearly  two 
centuries  after  the  apostles,  in  a work  attributed  to  the 
apostolic  age,  by  the  account  of  what  the  dyptics 
were — as  shall  be  given. 

We  shall  now  examine  the  prayers  of  the  canon, 
and  find  that  as  the  council  of  Trent  declares,*  it 
contains  nothing  but  what  is  calculated  to  lift  the 
soul  to  God,  and  that  it  consists  of  the  compositions 
of  our  Lord  himself,  of  the  apostles,  and  the  most 
holy  and  earliest  Pontiffs. 

The  celebrant  begins  by  lifting  his  hands  and  eyes 
to  heaven,  in  imitation  of  our  divine  Lord,  when  in- 
voking his  eternal  Father,  then  he  respectfully  kisses 
the  altar,  and  at  the  words  ^ these  gifts,  these  pre- 
sents, these  holy  and  unspotted  sacrifices,*’  he  thrice 
makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  the  offering  to  conse- 
crate it  to  God  through  the  merits  of  Christ,  and  then 
continues  the  prayer  with  his  hands  lifted  and  extend- 
ed, until  that  part  where  he  invokes  the  Lord  for  his 
living  friends,  “Be  mindful,  O Lord” — here  he 
closes  his  hands,  and  rests  for  a short  time  in  mental 
prayer  for  them,  and  also  to  give  the  congregation  an 
opportunity  of  enumerating  their  friends  in  their 
prayers.  After  which  he  extends  his  hands  and  con- 
tinues, to  the  end  of  that  prayer,  “ Through  the  same 
Christ,  our  Lord — Amen.*’ 

The  object  of  this  prayer  is  evident;  it  is  to  obtain 
from  the  eternal  Father,  the  author  of  all  good,  through 
the  merits  of  his  beloved  Son,  the  blessings  which  we 
ask  for.  The  first  of  those  is,  that  he  would  “ vouchsafe 
to  accept”  the  offering  which  we  make;  it  is  as  yet  but 
bread  and  wine,  but  we  offer  it  for  the  purpose  of  its 
being  mads  the  body  and  blood  of  Jtsus  Christ — for 

*Sess.  Txli.  c.  4. 

_ ny  Google 


68 


ON  THE  MASS. 


which  end  the  blessing  of  the  eternal  Father  is  neces- 
sary thereon ; hence  he  is  prayed  “ to  bless  these 
gifts.”  We  call  that  which  is  given  by  a superior  to 
an  inferior,  a gift,  and  as  we  have  received  those  from 
God,  who  is  oiir  superior,  we  make  the  acknow- 
ledgement of  his  bounty  even  in  our  making  the  offer- 
ing; but  what  an  inferior  presents  with  a request  that 
it  may  be  received  well,  expresses  what  we  do  in 
giving  “these  presents”  to  our  superior,  with  a 
request  that  he  may  accept  them  as  our  “ sacrifice” 
which  is  already  “ holy,”  as  having  been  consecrated 
to  him,  and  “ unspotted,”  for  it  is  the  purest  which 
we  can  bestow,  and  we  anticipate  that  under  those 
mystic  veils  will  soon  be  placed  the  “ unspotted” 
lamb  figured  by  him  who  in  Egypt  was  chosen  with- 
out blemish. 

The  object  of  our  oblation  is  in  the  first  place  for 
the  Holy  Catholic  Church — because  we  are  brethren 
throughout  the  whole  world,  having  hut  one  Lord^ 
one  faiths  one  baptism^  one  God  and  father  of  alU  to 
whom  Christ  our  Lord,  ascending  on  high,  lea  captivi- 
iy  captive^  and  gave  gifts  to  men,  (Ephes.  iv,  5,  &c.) 
We  then  request  of  the  Lord  “ to  grant  peace”  to  the 
church  by  saving  it  from  the  persecution  of  enemies, 
“ to  preserve  it”  in  that  peace  by  taking  away  enmity, 
'M  will  and  malice,  “ to  unite  it”  by  removing  the’ 
spirit  of  schism  which  too  often  exhibits  itself,  and 
“ to  govern  the  church  throughout  the  world,”  by 
preserving  the  spirit  of  unity  in  the  bond  of  peace. 

And  as  we  have  but  one  fold  under  one  shepherd 
(John  X.  16,)  the  next  petition  is  for  him  who  as  the 
vicegerent  of  Christ,  is  our  visible  head  here  below, 
we  tlierefore  pray  specially  for  our  holy  father  the 
Pope— according  to  the  injunction  of  St,  Paul  to  the 
Hebrews,  Remember  your  prelates  who  have  spoken  the 
icord  of  God  to  you^  bishop  of  Rome 

ing  the  centre  of  Catholic  communion,  we  should 
iipcpssarily  first  offer  up  our  prayers  for  him  after 
asking  for  the  unity  of  the  Catholic  Church;  such 

fty  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


were  the  sentiments  of  St.  Iraeneus,*  when  lie  men- 
tions the  necessity  of  every  other  church  agreeing 
with  that  of  Rome,  and  as  St,  Cyprian  8ays,f  he  pre- 
sides as  the  vicar  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  successor  of 
Peter,  upon  whom  only  the  church  was  founded,  to 
show  its  essential  unity. 

In  the  year  449  Dioschorus,  patriarch  of  Alexan- 
dria, struck  the  name  of  Pope  Leo  from  the  dyptics 
of  his  church,  and  it  was  looked  upon  as  an  enormous 
crime.  Nicephorus  mentions  in  his  xvi  L.  17  c. 
Acacias,  the  bishop  of  Constantinople  dared  to  efface 
from  the  dyptics  the  name  of  Pope  Felix  11.  in  480. 
The  emperor  Constantine,  Pogonot  mentions  in  a let- 
ter which  is  found  in  the  acts  of  the  Council  of 
Constantinople,  in  the  year  680  an4  is  addressed  to 
the  Pope  Agatho,  that  he  resisted  the  patriarch  who 
strove  to  erase  his  name  from  the  dyptics : but  the 
great  schism  under  Photius,  in  675,  completely 
separated  a great  portion  of  the  east  from  Catholicity, 
and  thenceforward  it  is  excluded  by  his  adherents ; 
but  the  Catholics  whether  in  the  east  or  the  W’est 
have  retained  it. 

After  the  name  of  him  who  governs  the  entire 
church,  the  name  of  him  who  governs  the  particulai 
portion  is  next  mentioned,  for  as  the  Pope  is  the  cen- 
tre of  unity  for  the  whole  church,  the  bishop  is  for  the 
whole  diocese,  as  St.  Cyprian  says  in  his  66th  epis- 
tle, “that  is  a church,  a people  united  to  their  priest, 
and  the  shepherd  adhering  to  his  flock.”  And  no- 
thing can  be  more  natural  than  that  the  faithful 
should  pray  for  their  bishops,  (Heb,  xiii.  17,)  because 
they  watch  as  being  to  render  an  account  of  the  souls  of 
their  flock,  therefore  the  flock  should  pray  for  them, 
and  in  some  places  where  there  are  Catholic  princes, 
.heir  names  are  added. 

The  names  of  those  persons  of  whom  special  men- 
tion was  made  in  the  Mass,  were  formerly  written  on 

* Lib.  3,  De  Hercs  t Lib.  dc  uoit.  EccL 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


70 


ON  THE  MASS. 


papers  or  parchment  folded  twice,  so  that  they  were 
called  dyptics,  from  this  double  fold ; hence  then 
were  found  upon  the  dyptics,  the  names  of  the  Pope, 
of  the  Bishop,  of  the  King  or  Emperor,  where  he 
was  a Catholic,  and  in  another  part  of  the  saints  of 
whom  commemoration  was  made,  or  whose  festivals 
were  celebrated  ; and  again,  of  the  dead  to  be  prayed 
for,  as  we  shall  see  in  their  proper  places.  Thus  a 
name  being  on  the  dyptics  meant  its  being  written  on 
the  scrip  of  the  altar  for  some  one  of  those  purposes. 

The  prayer  continues  to  advert  to  the  sacrifice 
being  offered  not  only  for  those,  but  also  for  our 
other  living  friends  of  whom  we  choose  to  make  spe- 
cial mention ; and  to  allow  an  opportunity  for  this 
the  celebrant  rests  to  make  his  own  memento  iri  the 
proper  place,  and  to  allow  the  assistants  to  make 
theirs,  but  the  prayer  first  reminds  them  of  the  neces- 
sity of  faith  without  which  it  is  impossible  to  please 
God;  (Heb.  xi.  6.)  and  hence  the  prayer  continues 
“ as  also  for  all  orthodox  believers  und  professors  of 
the  Catholic  and  apostolic  faith”— that  faith  which 
is  the  belief  of  all  nations^  and  which  has  been  de- 
rived from  the  apostles,  and  is  not  the  offspring  of 
human  vanity  nor  of  human  ingenuity,  but  of  apos- 
tolic tradition,  and  which  was  originally  received 
from  Christ  himself,  and  is  not  the  little  ])roduce  of 
any  single  nation  and  its  colonies,  and  the  descen- 
dants of  the  colonists,  but  that  body  of  doctrine  spread 
through  every  nation  by  the  messengers  of  Christ, 
and  exhibited  in  every  age  by  their  successors. 

After  this  special  application  to  individuals  the 
celebrant  next  reflects  upon  the  numbers  that  surround 
him — and  says  “ and  of  all  here  present,  whose  faith 
and  devotion  are  known  unto  thee,  for  whom  we  of- 
fer, or  who  offer  up  to  thee  this  sacrifice  of  praise;” 
because,  although  the  sacrifice  is  in  itself  excellent, 
its  application  to  individuals  will  be  generally  bene- 
ficial, only  in  proportion  to  their  faith  and  devotion, 
of  which  the  searcher  of  hearts  alone  can  jucUj:e.; 

ed  by  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


71 


hence  the  necessity  of  onr  attending  with  the  dis- 
positions which  have  been  before  enumerated,  and  of 
preserving  our  devotion  unimpaired  throughout. 

Formerly,  as  we  have  seen,  the  faithful  made  of- 
ferings in  kind  for  the  sacrifice,  and  other  offerings 
towards  the  support  of  the  clergy ; hence  that  ex- 
pression, “ who  offer  unto  thee,”  but  subsequently 
upon  the  custom  falling  into  disuse,  an  offering  was 
made  in  money,  instead  of  the  original  one  in  kind, 
with  a request  that  the  celebrant  would  make  a spe- 
rial  offering  of  the  sacrifice  on  behalf  of  the  contri- 
butor; hence  the  words  “for  whom  we  offer” — but 
as  the  faithful  join  with  the  celebrant,  and  as  he  acts 
as  their  minister,  and  on  their  behalf,  they  too  may 
be  said  “ to  offer  this  sacrifice  of  praise  for  themselves 
Iheir  families  and  friends.” 

Every  Christian  has  three  great  objects  in  view, 
the  preservation  of  his  bodily  health,  which  is  the 
shief  temporal  blessing  he  can  expect,  his  spiritual 
freedom  and  the  eternal  salvation,  but  he  recollects 
the  injunction  of  the  Lord  : Be  not  soKcitous  saying 
what  shall  we  eat^  or  what  shall  we  d/rink^  or  where^ 
with  shall  we  be  covered-— for  all  those  things  the  hear 
'hens  seek  after,  * **  * seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God 
ind  his  justice f ^c.  (Matt.  vi.  31.)  Hence  his  first 
petition  for  himself  and  his  friends  is,  “ for  the  re-, 
lemption  of  their  souls,”  which  have  been  enslaved  by 
ain;  and  next  “for  the  health”  of  the  body,  and 
pasting  his  eyes  forward  to  those  regions  of  eternity, 
whither  he  and  «his  friends  must  pass  from  this 
vale  of  tears,  he  adds,  “ and  the  salvation  they  hope 
for,  and  for  which  they  now  pay  their  vows,”  that  is, 
affer  up  their  earnest  supplications  “ to  thee,  the  eter- 
nal living  and  true  God.” 

The  first  word  of  the  next  paiAgraph  is  differently 
understood  by  writers  on  the  Liturgy.  “ Communi- 
cating” or  holding  communion  with,  is  by  many,  re- 
ferred to  the  saints,  whose  jpamee  follow,  to  shew 
il.Kt  though  now  separated  fiom  us,  and  in  glory  as 


Dig  ■ zed  by  Google. 


ON  TB£  MASS. 


72 

the  church  triumphant,  we  are  members  of  the  same 
body,  holding  the  same  faith  as  they  did  on  earth. 
Whilst  others  say,  that  it  only  means  holding  com- 
munion with  each  other,  as  members  of  the  true 
Church  here  below,  and  adduce  in  support  of  theii 
opinion  other  parts  of  the  Liturgy,  which  on  some  oc- 
casions are  introduced  immediately  after  the  word 
“ Communicating,”  and  altogether  disjoining  it  from 
the  subsequent  part  of  the  prayer ; as  on  Easter  Sun- 
day, where  the  meaning  is  evident,  ^^Being  united  in 
communion^  and  celebrating  this  sacred  day  of  the 
resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  according  to 
the  flesh  : moreover  honouring  the  memory  of  Ute  ever 
glorious^ 

• This  portion  of  the  Canon  teaches  us  to  honour  the 
memory  of  the  saints,  to  seek  their  intercession,  and 
enumerates  some  of  the  principal  and  earliest  of 
those  holy  personages.  Different  churches  had  dif- 
ferent names  in  this  place,  and  many  of  them  a long- 
er enumeration.  In  the  first  ages  of  the  church, 
there  was  placed  upon  the  altar  a paper  or  parch- 
ment folded  double,  whence  it  was  called  a Dyptic ; 
it  was  the  register  of  that  church ; this  had  three  co- 
lumns, one  in  which  the  names  of  the  Pope,  the 
Bishop,  sometimes  the  King  or  Emperor,  and  of  the 
benefactors  of  the  church,  were  inscribed,  and  this 
was  frequently  read  aloud  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Canon.  In  the  second  column  were  the  names  of 
the  saints  who  were  principally  honoured  and  in- 
voked in  that  church,  and  lastly  the,naTnes  of  deceas- 
ed persons  belonging  to  the  church  for  the  repose  of 
whose  souls  the  prayers  of  the  living  were  implored. 
Thus  the  Dyptics  exhibited  at  once  the  three  states 
of  the  faithful,  militant,  triumphant  and  suffering, 
but  still  united  in  the  communion  of  Saints.  Tlie 
d’Terence  of  those  registers  in  different  churches  wi.l 
now  be  no  cause  of  surprise,  nor  will  it  exhibit  any 
difference  of  faith,  for  though  the  names  may  be,  and 
must  generally  be  different,  the  principles  of  theii 

Dig  I'd  by  CjOO^Ic 


Oli  THE  MASS. 


73 


introductioTi  mxist  evideDtly  be  the  same.  At  a yery 
early  period,  the  names  of  the  Saints  whose  memory 
was  to  be  principally  honoured,  were  transferred 
from  the  Dyptics  to  the  Canon,  and  as  the  enume- 
ration would  be  almost  interminable  if  all  who  were 
honoured  and  invoked  should  be  named,  only  a few 
were  inserted,  and  the  general  phrase  added,  “ and  of 
all  thy  Saints.”  Without  entering  into  any  proof  to 
support  the  doctrine,  one  remark  may  he  allowed, 
that  whatever  meritm  we  attribute  to  them,  or  what- ' 
ever  aid  we  expect  from  them,  must  all  be  from  that 
great  source  of  good  to  us  “ Christ  our  Lord.”  And 
in  the  invocation  we  only  follow  what  has  been  trans- 
mitted to  us  from  the  days  of  the  apostles,  by  whose 
immediate  disciples  their  names  were  placed  upon 
the  Registers,  and  to  which  were  afterwards  added 
the  names  of  those  who  like  them  had  lived  in  the 
practice  of  virtue,  and  died  in  the  odour  of  sanctity  .. 
Mention  was  made  of  them  at  the  altar,  as  St,  Augus- 
tine says,  * “ At  the  very  table,  we  commemorate 
them,  not  that  we  should  pray  for  them,  but  rather, 
that  they  might  pray  for  os,”  and  in  another  place  ■f 
“ It  is  an  injury  to  pray  for  a martyr,  to  whose 
prayers  we  should  be  commended.”  And  thus  a 
learned  expounder  of  the  Canon  writes  “ We  honour 
the  head  in  his  members,  God  in  his  Saints.” 

Reing  thus  fortified  by  the  intercession  of  those 
Saints,  the  celebrant  now  spreads  his  hands  over  the 
oflferings:  as  the  high  priest  of  Judea  formerly  laid 
bis  hands  upon  the  goat  to  load  that  victim  W'ith  the 
sins  of  the  people,  and  as  the  priests  of  the  old  law 
always  laid  their  hands  upon  the  heads  of  those 
victims  which  were  oflered  for  sin.  By  laying  his 
hands  thus  over  the  oblation,  he^too  identifies  himself 
therewith,  and  thus  makes  the  complete  sacriGuo  of 
himself,  the  people,  and  the  bread  and  wine  to  the 

• Tract  84  in  Joan,  t germ.  17  de  verbis  Apost.  tOde 
Camerae,  in  Expos.  Sac.  Can.  dis.  2. 

7 

Digitized  by  Google 


74 


ON  THE  MABS. 


Lord,  for  the  purposes  recited  in  the  prayer,  where  he 
entreats  the  Almighty  “ graciously  to  accept  this  ob- 
lation of  his  servitude”  in  the  ministry,  “ as  also  of  ^ 
his  whole  family,”  that  congregation  of  which  he  is 
the  head.  'I'he  special  objects  now  enumerated  are 
first  “ the  disposition  of  our  days  in  peace.”  That 
peace  which  is  the  result  of  a good . conscience,  that 
peace  which  the  world  cannot  give,  (John  xiv.  27,) 

— because 4he  world  frequently  lulls  the  conscience 
into  a deceitful  repose,  saying  peace,  peace,  and  there 
is  no  peace;  the  second  object  is  to  “ preserve  us 
from  eternal  damnation,”  by  keeping  us  in  this  life 
from  sin,  which  alone  can  produce  damnation ; and 
the  third  object  is,  to  “rank  us  in  the  number  of  the 
elect;”  because  in  his  mercy  he  can  choose  us,  and 
select  us,  and  give  us  extraordinary  aid,  whereby 
favouring  us  in  his  good  will,  more  than  others,  to 
whom  he  gives  a sufficiency  of  grace  to  enable  them 
to  be  saved,  if  they  will  correspond  therewith ; be 
can  pour  forth  his  assistance  more  abundantly  upon 
us,  and  thus  insure  our  salvation  by  his  extraordinary 
mercy.  All  this  we  implore  “through  Christ  our 
Lord,”  (John  xvi.  24,)  who  exhorts  us  to  ask  in  his 
name. 

The  expression  of  the  three  great  objects  of  our 
offering  in  this  prayer  was  add^  to  the  Canon  by 
St.  Gregory  the  great,  as  we  read  in  his  life  by  John 
the  Deacon,  L.  2.  n.  17,  in  Walfridus  lib.  de  rebus. 
Eccl.  c.  22,  in  the  sixth  lesson  of  his  festival  in  the 
breviary,  March  12,  and  from  the  venerable  Bede, 
Hist.  Eccl.  1 2 c.  1.  “And  also  in  the  celebration 
of  the  Mass,  he  superadded  these  phrases  full  of  .he 
greatest  perfection  diesque  nostros,'*'  &;c.  However 
Ainalarius  in  prefat  2,  in  lib.  de  Off.  states  that  the 
objects  were  substantially  contained  in  the  Canon  in 
the  times  of  St.  Ambrose,  which  was  two  hundred 
years  earlier. 

We  now  come  to  the  prayer  which  immediately 
precedes  the  consecration,  and  which  we  find  in 

I oy  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


75 


every  Latin  farjnula  that  is  extant,  and  which  has  al- 
ways been  looked  upon  as  having  been  altogether 
derived  from  the  Apostles.  And  as  regards  the  sub- 
stance of  the  prayers,  the  only  difference  between 
the  Latin  and  Eastern  liturgies  on  this  point,  is, 
that  the  Greeks  repeat  the  prayer  which  they  have 
correspondent  to  this,  after  the  form  instituted  by  our 
Saviour,  and  the  Latins  place  it  immediately  before 
the  words  of  his  institution. 

We  are  now  arrived  at  that  part  which  is  the  most 
solemn,  important,  and  interesting  of  the  entire ; 
every  thing  hitherto  had  reference  remotely  or  prox- 
imately  to  the  awful  moment  which  approaches. 
For  now  the  true  victim  is  about  to  be  produced.  Ir 
a well  regulated  Cathedral,  this  indeed  is  a moment  of 
splendid,  improving,  and  edifying  exhibition  to  the 
well  instructed  Christian.  The  joyful  hosannas  of 
the  organ  have  died  away  in  deep  and  solemn  notes 
which  seemed  to  be  gradually  lost  as  they  ascended 
to  the  throne  of  God,  and  solemn  silence  pervades 
the  church  r the  celebrant  stands  bareh^ded  about 
to  perform  the  most  awful  duty  in  which  man  could 
possitW  be  engaged.  His  assistants  in  profound  ex- 
pectaticn  await  the  performince  of  that  duty  ; taper- 
bearers  line  the  sides  of  the  Saniuary,  and  with  their 
lighted  lamps  await  the  arrival  of  their  Lord.  In- 
cense-bearers kneel,  ready  to  envelope  the  altar  in  a 
cloud  of  perfumes  which  represents  the  prayers  of 
the  Saints  ; and  at  the  moment  of  the  consecration 
when  the  celebrant  elevates  the  host,  and  the  tink- 
ling of  a small  bell  gives  notice  of  the  arrival  of  the 
lamb,  every  knee  is  bent,  every  head  is  bowed,  graiu- 
lating  music  bursts  upon  the  ear,  and  the  lights 
which  surround  the  throne  of  him  who  comes  to  save 
a world,  are  seen  dimly  blazing  through  the  clouds 
of  perfumed  smoke,  which  envelopes  this  mystic 
place.  Yet  even  on  the  most  humble  altar  which  re- 
iigiju  rebars,  a\id  at  which  poverty  attends,  though 
stripped  of  all  external  pomp  and  circumstance  of 


D:rj!:zed  by  Google 


76 


ON  THE  MASS. 


show ; the  same  victim  is  found,  the  same  ^aces 
may  be  obtained,  and  purer  piety  may  kneel  with 
more  sensible  devotion,  and  form  a closer  alliance 
wiih  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  especially  if  by  eatingr 
his  flesh, and  drinking  his  blood,  the  union  of  abode 
in  Christ  should  take  place, /or  Afs Jitak  is  meat  iiuieed, 
and  his  blood  is  drink  indeed.  (John  vi.  56.) 

We  have  in  the  Gospels  a short  record  of  the  acts 
of  the  Saviour,  at  the  institution.  Jesus  took  breads 
and  blessedy  and  brake  ,*  and  he  gave  to  kis  disciples 
and  said  .*  take  ye  and  eat : this  is  my  body,  and  tak- 
ing the  chalice,  he  gave  thanks  ami  gave  to  them^ 
saying : Drink  ye  all  of  this.  For  this  is  my  blood 
of  the  new  testament,  which  shall  be  shed  f<jr  many^ 
unto  remission  of  sins.  (Matt,  xxvi,  26,  27.)  Here 
we  And  the  acts  to  be  taking  bread,  blessing  it, 
breaking  it,  giving  to  his  disciples  what  he  held,  ac- 
companied by  a declaration  that  it  was  his  body. 
This  is  no  place  to  enter  upon  an  examination  of  the 
word  brake,  as  this  is  not  a controversial  disquisition; 
but  it  may  b|  observed  that  many  eminent  linguists, 
and  deep  antiquarians,  and  learned  divines,  state  the 
meaning  to  be  breaking  in  sacrifice,  because  the  word 
has  been  frequently  used  in  that  sense : and  this 
they  state  to  be  the  key  to  the  explanation  of  the 
words  in  St.  Mark  xiv.  22,  where  the  whole  is  de- 
scribed as  one  act,  blessing  broke ; that  is,  by  his 
blessing  offered  the  sacrifice ; and  to  that  of  St.  Luke 
xxii.  19.  This  is  my  body  which  is  given  for  you^ 
not  only  given  to  you,  for  they  say,  if  it  were  only  a 
sacrament  it  would  have  been  then  only  given  to  them, 
but  not /or  them  ; as  there  was  no  other  perso»i  tc 
whom  it  could  be  given  for  them,  because  it  w as 
given  to  no  other,  and  the  verb  is  in  the  present  tenae, 
and  must  refer  to  some  act  then  in  performance  ; and 
the  distinction  of  tenses  is  made  by  each  of  the 
three  Evangelists,  where  speaking  of  the  blood  in  the 
subsequent  verse,  each  says,  shall  be  shed,  that  is  fu- 
tuie,  referring  to  the  next  day.  But  if  bv  his  blessing 


Dig  tized  by  Google 


ON  TH^  MA86. 


77 


lie  did  offer  it  in  sacrifice,  then  indeed  we  can  clearly 
see  the  acts  to  be  taking  bread,  by  blessing  it  for 
them,  and  afterwards  giving  the  Sacrament  to  them. 

Oui^nly  object  at  present  is  to  trace  as  weil  as 
we  can  the  origin,  and  to  find  the  exact  meaning  of 
the  prayer  which  immediately  precedes  the  words  of 
consecration  in  the  Reman  Missal.  Christ  used 
prayer,  gave  thanks^  and  he  blessed  the  bread  which 
he  took,  and  then  declared  what  substance  was 
there ; and  he  commanded  the  Apostles,  and  through 
them  their  successors,  to  do  what  he  did.  Do  this. 

It  has  been  before  remarked,  and  no  fact  is  better 
established  than  it  is,  that  in  the  early  ages  of  the 
Church,  the  forms  or  words  for  the  Sacraments  were 
not  committed  to  writing:  thus  St.  Basil  says* 
“ who  is  it  that  has  left  us  in  writingthe  words  which 
are  used  for  the  consecration  of  the  Eucharist.” — 
And  just  after  he  centinues,  “ we  are  not  content 
with  using  only  those  words  which  are  reported  by 
the  Apostle,  and  the  Gospel ; but  we  add  to  them 
others  before  and  after,  as  of  great  efficacy  for  the 
mysteries,  and  which  we  have  learned  cRily  from  this 
unwritten  doctrine.”  Justin  Martyr  in  his  apology 
[■says,  that  our  ordinary  food  “ is  changed  into  the 
Eucharist  by  the  word  of  God  and  by  prayer'’*  Ori- 
gen^;  says,  that  “ we  eat  of  this  bread  sanctified  by 
the  word  of  God  and  by  consecration.”  TertuHian§ 
says  that  Christ  “ made  the  bread  his  body  by  the 
words /Aes  es  my  body''  St.  Ambrose  saysjl  “The 
change  of  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  bloi-d 
takes  place  the  moment  the  words  of  Christ  are  pro- 
nounced: “before  the  consecration,  it  is  bread,  out 
when  the  words  of  Christ  are  added,  it  is  no  longer 
bread,  but  the  body  of  Christ.”  The  same  writer 
says  % “ Blessing  is  of  more  efficacy  than  nature, 


* Li  de  Spiritu  S.  c.  27.  t Apolog.2  ad  Antonin.  tHom. 
15.  in  Matt.  ^Tert.  adver.  Marc  1.4.  c.  40.  II De  Sacram 
L 4.  c.  4.  UDe  iis  qui.  init,  c.  9. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


79 


ON  TBE  «TASS. 


for  the  blessing  changes  nature  itself’  and  the  exam- 
ple he  adduces  is  the  consecration  of  the  Eucharist 
by  the  blessing.  St.  Augustine  says,*  “But  our 
bread  and  chalice  become  mystical  to  us  by  coEsecra- 
tion  and  in  another  place,|  “ It  is  consecrated  by 
the  mystic  prayer.”  Thus  we  find,  prayer,  blessing- 
and  the  words  of  Christ  all  through  used  for  the  con- 
secration. 

The  prayer  which  next  follows  has  been  looked 
upon  at  all  times  as  that  which  has  come  down  from 
the  Apostles,  in  the  way  mentioned  by  St.  Basil.  In 
repeating  it  the  celebrant  thrice  makes  the  sign  of  the 
Cross  over  the  offerings,  then  once  over  the  bread,  and 
once  over  the  wine,  and  lifting  his  eyes  to  heaven  to 
invoke  the  power  of  the  eternal  God,  and  in  imita- 
tion of  the  Saviour,  he  again  holding  the  bread  in  his 
band,  makes  the  sign  of  the  Cross  over  it  at  the  word 
blessed^  and  pronouncing  the  words  of  Consecration 
bending  over  the  altar,  and  holding  the  host  in  his 
hands,  he  kneels  to  adore  his  Lord  and  Saviour  then 
concealed  under  the  appearance  of  bread,  and  rising, 
elevates  it  to  be  seen  and  adored  by  the  people ; and 
having  again  made  his  adoration,  he  repeats  the  same 
ceremony  with  regard  to  the  Chalice. 

In  the  prayer  the  celebrant  entreats  of  the  Lord 
“ that  he  would  vouchsafe  in  all  respects  to  bless  the 
oblation”  now  made,  by  separating  it  from  common 
use  to  be  a holy  oblation,  “to  approve”  it  by  ranking 
it  amongst  those,  which  having  been  sanctified,  are 
looked  upon  with  peculiar  favour  “to  ratify,”  the 
same,  by  so  fully  confirming  his  benediction,  as  that 
these  gifts  may  never  more  be  taken  from  the  Lord^ 
“ To  make  it  rational”  as  well  by  enabling  us  to  ap- 
pear in  a rational  and  becoming  manner  before  our 
God,  according  to  that  of  the  Apostle.  Ibeseeck  you 
brethren^  by  the  viercy  of  God^  that  you  present  your 
bodies  a living  Sacrifice^  holy,  pleasing  unto  God  your 

* I 20.  Conrra  Faust,  t Lib.  3 de  S^acerd. 

♦ 

Dig  tized  byCjOO^IC 


ON  THB  MASfik 


79 


rewtonabU  service^  (Rom.  xii.  1,)  as  by  makinoftt  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ,  who  taking  away  the  Sacri- 
fices of  irrational  animals  offered  himself  with  his 
rational  ^oul,  &c.,  and  “ acceptable,”  so  that  in  every 
respect  it  may  be  faultless,  not  only  on  the  part  of  the 
victim,  but  on  the  part  of  the  celebrant  and  the  assist* 
ants.  The  great  object  of  all  is  thus  exprpssed  “ that 
it  may  be  made  for  us,  the  body  and  blood  of  the 
most  beloved  son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.”  There  is 
00  doubt  but  the  institution  of  the  Saviour  will  pro- 
•iuce  its  effect;  and  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ 
Nill  be  produced ; but  the  object  of  the  prayer  is 
■lore,  it  is  to  have  the  benefit  of  his  death  applied  to 
M,  by  making  it  available  for  us. 

The  other  part  which  is  the  consecration,  is  taken 
chiefly  from  the  Gospels,  in  the  repetition  of  which 
ihe  celebrant  lifts  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  blesses  the 
bread  and  the  chalice  as  the  Saviour  did,  and  hav- 
ing pronounced  the  words  of  consecration  pays  the 
tribute  of  his  adoration  to  the  true  victim  which  has 
now  been  produced  by  the  operation  of  the  Hedy 
Ghost,  in  place  of  the  substances  of  bread  and  wine 
which  have  been  destroyed. 

We  may  here  well  exclaim  with  St.  John  Chry- 
aosiom,*  “ O miracle ! O the  benignity  of  God,  who 
whilst  he  is  seated  with  the  Father  above,  is  in  the 
same  moment  of  time  in  the  hands  of  all,  and  gives 
himself  to  those  who  desire  to  receive  and  to  embrace 
him.”  And  againf  “ Elias  left  his  cloak  to  his  dis- 
ciple, but  the  Son  of  God  ascending  on  high  left  his 
flesh  behind.  Elias  was  indeed  stripped,  but  Christ 
at  the  same  time  left  it  to  us,  and  ascended  with  it  in 
his  possession.”  In  another  place  he  8ays:t:  “ At  that 
time  tlie  Angels  assist  with  the  Priest  and  the  whole 
orders  of  heavenly  powers  lifts  its  shout;  and  the 
place  near  the  altar  is  full  of  Angels  in  honour  of  hirr 

• Horn.  2.  ad.  pop.  Antioc.  t Lib.  6 de  Sacerdot.  T Lib 
3de  Trin.  c.  4. 


Digitized  by  Google 


60 


ON  TUE  MASS. 


who  •is  iiL  moisted.”  He  then  relates  a vision  of  an 
old  man,  who  had  often  been  favoured  by  the  Lord 
/ with  special  manifestations,  and  who  stated  that,  as 
far  as  human  weakness  could  bear  the  sight,  he  was 
enabled  on  one  occasion  to  behold  a multitute  of  the 
heavenly  host,  such  as  appeared  to  the  Shepherds  on 
the  night  of  the  nativity,  as  related  by  the  Evangelists, 
clad  in  shining  garments,  surrounding  the  altar  at  the 
time  of  consecration,  and  with  their  heads  bowed 
down  as  soldiers,  were  accustomed  to  bow  down  be- 
fore their  kings  and  emperors,  and  in  his  21st  Homily 
on  the  Acts,  the  same  writer  has  this  passage,  “ What 
say  you  ] The  host  is  in  his  hands,  the  Angels  are 
present,  so  are  the  Archangels,  the  Son  of  God  is 
there,  all  attend  with  the  greatest  awe.” 

The  mode  of  paying  the  tribute  of  adoration  to  the 
Saviour  who  then  was  present,  was  different  accord- 
ing to  the  customs  of  the  times  and  of  the  people, 
la  the  liturgy  of  St.  James,  the  mode  was  for  the 
deacon  to  proclaim  immediately  after  the  consecra- 
lion,  that  it  had  taken  place,  and  to  call  upon  the  con- 
gregation for  their  praise  and  preparation.  The 
following  is  the  enumeration  of  epithets  used  by  him, 
“ For  those  oblated  gifts,  sanctified,  precious,  super- 
heavenly,  ineffable,  unspotted,  glorious,  redoubtable, 
terrific,  divine.”  In  the  mass  of  the  pre-sanctified, 
“Now  the  virtues  of  the  heavens  join  invisibly  in 
adoration  with  us,  for  behold  the  Lord  of  glory 
enters,”  was  the  expression  by  which  proclamation 
was  made  of  the  bringing  in  of  the  Sacrament  which 
had  been  consecrated  on  the  preceding  Sunday  ; and 
in  the  liturgy  of  St.  John  Chrysostom,  just  before 
communion  was  the  time  fixed  for  it,  then  approach- 
ing— the  person  said,  “I  believe,  O Lord,  that  thou 
an  Christ,  the  son  of  the  living  God.”  ' I will  mt 
give  you  a traitor’s  kiss,  as  Judas  did.” 

In  the  Latin  church,  the  principal  time  was  at  ’.h 
old  elevation;  that  is,  just  before  the  Lord’s  prayer 
‘vhcu  the  celebrant  lifting  the  host  and  the  chalice  tc- 


gitized  byCjOO^IC 


ON  THE  MASS. 


81 


gelber,  said  the  words  “all  honour  and  glory.”  'Fhe 
custom  was  so  general,  so  well  known,  and  so  little 
notion  of  its  being  contradicted  or  called  in  question 
in  the  early  days^of  the  church,  that  w’e  have  scarcely 
anything  written  upon  the  subject.  Thus  although 
there  are  some  few  persons  who  do  not  take  off  their 
hats  at  present  in  their  religious  assemblies,  yet  the 
custom  is  so  general  and  so  well  known,  that  the  ne- 
cessity of  our  stating  the  practice  of  our  being  un- 
covered in  order  to  give  the  testimony  to  posterity 
would  never  strike  any  person.  But  if  a serious  devi- 
ation from  an  old  doctrine  were  attempted,  the  persons 
who  held  that  doctrine,  would  mark  their  adherence 
more  strongly  in  order  to  its  confirmation,  thus  it  was 
only  upon  the  attempt  at  innovating  upon  her  doctrines 
that  the  Catholic  Church  more  particularly  marked 
by  some  striking  exhibition,  her  adherence  to  truth 
and  her  opposition  to  innovation.  The  doctrine  of 
the  real  presence  was  not  seriously  opposed  until  the 
time  of  Berengarius,  in  1050;  it  is  true  he  quoted 
John  Scotus  Erigena,  and  Bertram,  about  two  centu- 
ries preceding;  but  their  innovations  were  so  little 
known,  if  indeed  it  were  true  that  they  compiled  what 
was  attributed  to  them,  that  they  and  their  errors  were 
then  forgotten. 

But  centuries  before  tbeir  days,  Theodoret*  had 
stated  that  Christians  adored  the  sacred  symbols,  as 
being  what  they  were  believed  to  be;  this  expression, 
“ what  they  were  believed  to  be,”  is  found  in  Tertul- 
lian,  treating  of  the  Eucharist,  and  in  other  early 
writers  upon  the  same  subject,  as  they  did  not  wish 
to  speak  too  openly  of  their  doctrines  before  the  Pa- 
gans. But  St.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,"!'  informs  us,  as 
do  many  of  the  other  writers  before  and  at  that  time, 
what  they  believed  it  to  be,  when  he  tells  the  Chris- 
tians of  the  profound  respect  he  should  feel  in  reaching 
out  the  hand  upon  which  he  was  to  receive  his  king. 


Dial.  2.  t Cat.  v.  Myst. 

ri'gltized  byCjOO^IC 


ON  THE  MASS. 


and  how  he  should  at  the  .same  time  bow  dawn  in 
adoration  before  the  sacred  chalice.  St  Ambrose* 
treating  of  that  passage  of  ihe  98th  Psalm,  above  the 
footstool  of  his  feet^  says  that  it  is  theuearth,  which  is 
that  footstool;  from  that  earth  the  flesh  of  Christ 
originally  came,  “this”  he  says  “we  adore  in  the 
mysteries,  and  it  was  this  which  the  apostles  adored 
in  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  we  said  above.”  St.  Augus- 
tine mentions  it  in  his  explanation  of  that  verse  of  the 
21st  Psalm, I and  all  the  rich  ones  of  the  people  have 
eaten  and  adored^  where  he  speaks  of  their  coming  to 
the  Eucharist  and  eating  that  which  they  have  adored  ; 
and  again  in  his  commentary  on  the  98th  Psalm  he 
explains  the  passage  as  St.  Ambrose  did,  but  much 
more  fully,  and  amongst  other  expressions  he  has  the 
following— “ No  person  eats  that  flesh  unless  he  hayo 
first  adored  it.”  In  the  ancient  work  on  the  Ecclesi- 
astical Hierarchy  attributed  to  Denis  the  Areopagyte 
we  find:);  a prayer  of  adoration  addressed  to  Christ  in 
the  sacrament.  Origan  § in.an  address  to  the  faithful 
about  to  communicate,  tells  them  to  humble  them- 
selves before  their  Lord  as  the  centurion  did.  St.  John 
Chrysostom  in  his  61st  Homily  to  the  people  of  An- 
tioch, calls  upon  then  to  adore  the  Sacrament,  and  to 
receive  it.  In  his  liturgy  the  Rubric  states  after  the 
consecration,  the  priest  adores,  then  the  deacon  adores, 
and  then  the  people  adore,  the  deacon  calling  upon 
them  to  give  their  attention,  the  priest  then  makes  the 
holy  elevation.  || 

But  this  elevation,  in  the  Greek  church,  was  gene- 
rally made  just  before  the  communion,  and  not,  as  we 
have  it  now,  at  the  instant  of  consecration.  The 
ceremony,  as  described  by  the  ancient  books  and 
rituals,  was  very  striking.  It  has  been  before  ob- 
served, lliat  nt  the  beginning  of  the  Canon,  the  sanc- 
tuary was  closed,  an3  curtains  drawn  round  it;  now 

*Lib  3 deSpir.  Sane.  tEp.  120ad.  Honor  c.  27.  X Cap.  3, 
par, 3.  ^Hoin  5 in  divers.  lIDe^aHogue  Tract  de  Euch.  p.  147. 

ed  by  Google 


ON  THE  Mass. 


83 


.lie  curtains  were  drawn  aside,  the  gates  flew  open, 
and  the  celebrant  presented  the  holy  sacrament  to  the 
adoration  of  the  faithful,  before  the. communicants  ap- 
proached. In  some  places  they  knelt,  in  others  they 
only  bowed  the  head  ; and  in  some  places  a custom, 
even  to  this  day,  prevails,  that  soldiers  only  pres^^nt' 
their  arms.  St.  John  Chrysostom,  in  his  3d  Homily 
to  the  people  of  Ephesus,  says,  that  they  should  look 
upon  the  opening  of  the  gates  of  the  sanctuary  as  the 
opening  of  the  gates  of  heaven ; and  with  the  eyes  ol 
faith  to  behold  present  Christ  and  his  angels.  And 
in  his  61st,  to  thS  people  of  Antioch,  “ Behold  the  1 1- 
hle  of  the  King;  angels  are  his  attendants.  The 
King  is  there;  if  your  garments  be  clean,  adore  him, 
and  receive  the  communion.”  8t.  Germanus,  of 
Constantinople,  in  the  middle  of  the  8th  century, 
states,*  that  the  elevation  of  the  adorable  body  repre- 
sents the  elevation  on  the  cross,  and  also  the  resur- 
rection from  the  dead;  and  that  when  with  this  holy 
sacrament  the  sign  of  the  cross  is  thrice  made  over 
the  patten,  it  is  in  honour  of  the  Trinity. 

It  was  the  custom  for  the  deacon  then  to  call  out 
iranrediately  after  the  elevation,f  “ Holy  things  for 
holy  persons;”  and  the  people  answered,  “There  is 
but  one  holy,  one  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  in  the  glory 
of  his  Father.”  “ This,”  says  Simon  of  Thessalonica, 
commenting  on  it,  “is4he  fulfilment  of  that  prophecy 
of  St.  Paul,  that  every  knee  shall  bend  at  the  naim^ 
of  Jesus,  and  every  tongue  confess,  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  in  the  glory  of  the  Father.” 

Amalariusi):  mentions  their  remaining  on  their 
knees  in  adoration  in  the  Latin  church  until  the  Lord’s 
Prayer;  just  before  which,  formerly  the  only  eleva- 
tion of  the  host  which  was  made  took  place.  Bui 
after  the  errors  of  Berengarius,  the  piety  of  the  faith- 
ful introduced  stronger  evidence  of  their  faith,  and 

* Lib.  1.  Rer.  Ecct.  t Eucho!  Grtec  p 81  t L’H,  3. 
c.  22  and  23. 


Digitized  by  Google  . 


84 


ON  THE  MASS. 


the  first  person  who  introduced  the  elevation,  as  it  is 
now  practised  in  the  Latin  church,  immediately  after 
the  consecration,  43  thougrht  to  be  Hildebert,  Bishop 
of  Mans,  and  subsequently,  about  the  year  1130, 
Archbishop  of  Tours  in  France.  Many  reliprious  or- 
ders, which  existed  early  in  the  twelfth  century,  had 
the  custom  then ; and  that  also  of  ringinor  the  bell  at 
the  elevation.  Yvo  of  Chartres,  who  died  in  1115, 
complimented  Maud,  queen  of  England,  for  the  present 
which  she  made  to  the  church  of  our  lady  of  Chartres, 
of  bells  to  ring  at  the  consecration ; but  the  custom 
was  not  yet  general,  for  it  was  only  in  1215  that  a 
general  statute  was  made,  by  order  of  Citeaux,  to 
have  the  bell  rung  during  the  consecration;  in  1188, 
Eudes,  Bishop  of  Paris,  ordered  the  host  to  be  eleva- 
ted at  the  consecration;  and  soon  after,  William, 
Bishop  of  Paris,  made  a statute  to  ring  the  bells. 
The  custom  was  introduced  into  Germany  in  1203, 
by  Guy,  the  cardinal  legate,*  and  about  the  same  pe- 
riod we  have  a statute  cf  the  Bishop  of  Coventry,  in 
England,  upon  the  subject.  Thus  the  custom  was 
caused  by  the  error  of  Berengrarins,  in  order  to  evince 
by  more  precise  external  observances,  the  belief 
which  was  always  held. 

The  triie  victim  being  now  upon  the  altar,  we  have 
no  longer  bread  and  wine  to  contemplate,  but  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ  under  their  appearance; 
and  we  must  keep  this  in  mind  in  considering  the 
prayers  which  follow.  In  the  first  prayer  the  cele- 
brant makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  the  victim, 
when  he  calls  it  “ a pure  host,  an  holy  host,  an  un- 
spotted host,  the  holy  bread  of  eternal  life^  and 
chalice  of  everlasting  salvation.”  But  it  is  no  longer 
to  bless  them,  for  the  Author  of  every  blessing  is  there. 
The  sign  is  made  to  remind  us,  first,  that  we  have 
present  the  victim  who  immolated  himself  for  us  upon 
the  cross:  next  that  every  blessing  must  be  derived 
from  that  immolation,  and  thuen  to  commemorate  hi=? 
death,  and  obtain  its  application  tc  our  souls.  Ve 

• Dig  nd  by  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


85 


here  “ his  servants  ” at  the  altar,  and  his  holy  peo- 
ple,” who  attend  with  devotion,  thus  fulfil  the  in- 
junction of  Christ,  to  do  this  in  commemoration  of 
him ; for  we  commemorate  the  passion,  resurrection, 
and  ascension  of  our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
“ offer  to  his  most  excellent  majesty  this  host,  pure, 
holy,  and  unspotted,  which  has  been  now  produced 
from  those  gifts  and  bounties  which  he  has  bestowed 
upon  us.” 

The  celebrant  proceeds  to  entreat  that  the  Lord 
would  “ vouchsafe  to  look  with  a propitious  and  se- 
rene countenance”  upon  our  oblation,  which  now  con- 
sists of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  which 
must  of  its  own  nature  be  acceptable,  and  needs  not 
our  entreaty  to  gain  favour  in  heaven  ; and  ourselves 
and  our  prayers,  which  are  not  so  perfect,  and  may 
therefore  be  objects  of  displeasure  in  his  sight,  in 
consequence  of  our  crimes,  and  the  imperfection  of 
our  acts,  even  when  we  undertake  to  do  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  In  the  fear,  therefore,  which  ac- 
companies this  doubt,  we  make  the  request,  and  to 
animate  our  hope,  we  call  to  mind  some  of  our  fellow- 
mortals,  whose  dispositions  did  render  them  objects 
of  celestial  favour.  We  hence  are  emboldened  to  ask 
that  he  would  “accept”  us  and  our  offering,  “as  he 
was  graciously  pleased  to  accept  the  gifts  of  his  just 
servant  Abel,”  who  by  faith  offered  to  God  a sacrifice 
exeeedint^  that  of  Cain^  by  which  he  obtained  a iestiino^ 
ny  that  he  was  just,  (Heb.  xi.  4.)  “ And  the  sacrifice 
of  our  Patriarch  Abraham,”  who  by  faith,,  when  he 
was  iricdy  offered  Isaac  ,*  and  he  that  received  the  pro- 
mises^ offered  up  his  only  begotten  son,  (Heb.  xi.  17.) 
{To  whom  it  was  said,  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  call- 
ed.) Accounting  that  God,-is  able  to  raise  up  even  from 
t^  dead.  Whereupon  also  he  received  him  for  a para- 
ble, And  that  which  his  high  priest  Melchisedech 
offered  to  him  a holy  sacrifice  and  unspotted  victim.” 

Here  now  the  Christian  beholds  himself  united  in 
fiith  and  sacrifice  with  the  venerable  sages  ofantiqui- 
8 

by  Google  • ^ 


86 


ON  THE  MASS. 


ty,  for  Abel  knew  that  the  redemption  should  be  ef- 
f^^cted  in  blood,  and  vnihout  f he  shedding  nfhlood  there 
is  no  remission ; (Heb.  ix.  22,)  therefore  he  t'ok  not 
of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  but  of  the  firstlinf^s  of  his 
flock,  and  off*ered  his  sacrifice  in  the  hope  of  future 
atonement,  and  only  through  the  merits  of  Christ,  the 
shedding  of  whose  blood  was  figured  therein,  was  it 
acceptable.  Abraham  who  had  learned  mysteries  in 
the  land  of  vision,  darted  his  eye  through  the  shadowy 
vista  of  ages,  Rejoicing  that  he  might  see  the  day  of 
the  Saviour : he  saw  it  and  was  glad,  (John  viii.  56.) 
His  paternal  heart  yearned  within  hin),  when  after  the 
holocaust,  he  embraced  the  living  Isaac  upon  the 
mountain;  Isaac,  his  dearly  beloved,  who  carried 
upon  his  back,  the  wood  upon  which  he  was  to  be 
immolated,  and  yet  lived  after  the  oblation;  and 
whilst  the  tear  of  gratitude  and  devotion  swelled  in 
the  eye,  or  moistened  the  furrow  of  his  aged  cheek, 
the  venerable  father  of  the  faithful  could  scarcely  re- 
press his  feelings  at  beholding  the  figure  of  Christ 
immolated  and  living,  sacrificed  and  not  consumed. 
Melchisedech  was  king  of  Salem,  priest  of  the  most  high 
God,  who  met  Abraham  returning  from  the  slaughter 
of  the  kings,  and  blessed  him,  king  of  justice,  and  king 
of  peace,  without  father,  without  mother,  without  ge~ 
naifo<ry ; having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of 
ifs  i but  likened  unto  the  Son  of  God  continueth  a priest 
forever,  greater  than  Abraham,  (Heb.  vii.  passim.) 
Of  Melchisedech  Paul  had  much  to  say,  and  hard 
to  be  intelligibly  uttered,  because  they  to  whom  he 
wrote  had  become  weak  to  hear,  (Heb.  v.  4.)  This 
Melchisedech  offered  sacrifice  in  bread  and  wine. 


Here  then  we  have  the  atonement  by  blood,  in  Abel, 
the  victim  immolated  and  living  in  Isaac;  and  under 
the  appearance  of  bread  and  wine  in  Melchisedech, 


all  figures  now  fulfilled,  under  onr  eyes : this  is  the 
reason  of  having  those  three  great  patriarchs  selected 
from  the  host  of  true  adorers,  who  by  faith  have  ofifered 
their  oblations,  and  made  their  vows  in  spirit  and  in 

truth.  ^ , 

i by  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


87 


Then  bowing  down  before  the  altar,  in  the  posture 
of  humility,  the  celebrant  prays  that  the  “Almighty 
God  would  command  these  things  to  be  carried  by  the 
hands  of  his  holy  angrel  to  his  altar  on  high,  in  the 
sight  of  his  divine  majesty.” 

There  are  two  explanations  given  of  this  prayer ; 
one  by  Le  Brun  and  a number  of  authors  whom  he 
cites,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  the  angel  here  men- 
tioned is  “ the  angel  of  the  New  Testament,”  “ the 
messenger  of  glad  tidings,”  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and 
that  the  object  of  the  pfayer  is  by  showing  the  ear- 
nestness of  our  desire  we  intreat  of  God  in  the  phrase 
“command,”  to  cause  this  angel  to  present  not  only 
his  flesh  and  blood,  but  also  our  supplications  before 
our  eternal  Father,  that  being  now  presented  by  him, 
they  may  become  acceptable  even  upon  the  altar  of 
*'caven ; for,  as  St.  Augustine  says,  “ The  good  and 
liie  wicked  approach  the  altar  which  is  on  earth, 
but  there  is  a sublime  invisible  altar  whither  the  un- 
just man  cannot  come.”  (Psal.  25  and  42.) 

The  other  explanation  may  be  found  in  Bellarmine, 
Bossuet,  &c.  They  state  that  we  only  seek  the  in- 
tercession of  the  angels,  and  that  our  prayers  may  be 
carried  by  them  as  those  of  Tobias  were  by  the  angel 
Raphael,  to  be  presented  before  the  Lord.  This  also 
appears  to  be  the  opinion  of  Innocent  III.,  in  his  expla- 
nation of  the  Mass,  and  some  of  the  old  liturgies  have 
the  word  angels  in  the  plural;  so  that  the  meaning 
would  appear  to  be,  that  as  Bossuet  remarks,  it  was 
an  Old  and  constant  tradition  of  the  church,  as  may 
be  seen  in  Tertu Ilian,  and  many  of  the  fathers,  that 
one  or  more  angels  presided  in  the  meetings  of  the 
faithful ; we  now  having  the  victim  produced,  wliieh 
must  be  pleasing,  beg  also  that  the  presiding  angel 
or  angels  of  the  assembly,  may,  at  the  command  of 
the  most  powerful  God,  bear  our  prayers  to  that  invisi- 
ble altar  on  high,  to  lay  them  in  union  with  this  vic- 
tim before  the  throne  of  mercy,  that  we  find  grau 

in  seasonable  aid. 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


88 


ON  TU£  MASS. 


This  prayer  is  especially  made  for  those  who  are 
to  receive  the  holy  sacrament  of  the  eucharist,  as 
must  appear  from  its  conclusion,  “That  as  many  as 
shall  partake  of  the  most  sacred  body  and  blood  of 
thy  Son  at  this  altar,  may  be  filled  with  every 
heavenly  ^ce  and  blessing,  through  the  same  Christ 
our  Lord.  Amen.” 

In  repeating  this  part  the  celebrant  kisses  the  altar, 
and  npt  to  bless,  but  to  show  the  source  of  blessing, 
he  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross,  once  over  the  body, 
and  once  over  the  blood ; and  lastly  to  become  a 
partaker  of  the  merits  of  the  death  upon  the  cross,  on 
himself. 

Then  closing  his  hands  as  when  he  prayed  for  the 
living,  he  now  prays  for  the  faithful  departed,  “Who 
aie  gone  before  us  with  the  sign  of  faith,”  baptism, 
“and  rest  in  the  sleep  of  peace;”  having  received  tUe  , 
sacraments  of  the  church,  and  being  in  the  full  enjoy- 
ment of  her  communion,  which  is  her  peace — they 
but  rest  from  their  labours,  sleeping  for  a time  in  the 
arms  of  death,  to  be  roused  from  their  slumber  by  the 
archangel’s  trumpet,  to  enter,  as  the  church  hopes, 
into  the  enjoyment  of  glory. 

They  who  have  separated  themselves  from  the 
church,  by  rejecting  her  doctrines,  disclaiming  her 
authority, ridiculingher  observances,  transgressing  her 
precepts,  breaking  her  unity,  exciting  strife,  creating 
obstacles  to  the  discharge  of  her  ministerial  duties, 
abstaining  from  her  sacraments,  sneering  at  her  solici- 
lude  for  their  welfare  and  conversion,  and  scandaliz- 
ing her  children  by  the  turpitude  of  their  conduct, 
frequently  desire  to  be  consoled  by  her  in  death,  and 
to  1^  ranked  amongst  those  pious  children  whose  pride 
has  been  their  adherence  to  the  spouse  of  Christ. 
But  they  should  reflect  that  if  they  have  estranged 
themselves  from  her  through  life,  it  would  be  only 
justice  that  she  should  treat  them  as  strangers  in 
death.  But  no!  She  still  extends  to  them  the  arms 
of  charity,  and  if  they  desire  sacraments,  and  declare 
d by  Google 


ON  TH£  MASS. 


89 


their  dispositions  to  be  those  of  repentant  though 
prodigal  children,  she  not  only  gives  them  the  banquet 
of  reconciliation,  and  flings, over  them  the  robe  of 
grace,  but  moreover  in  the  hope  of  serving  them  even 
after  death,  follows  them  with  her  prayers  into  the 
regions  of  eternity. 

She  knows  that  the  unrepenting  criminal  is  lost 
forever ; for  him  she  has  no  hope — for  him  prayer, 
oblation,  commemoration,  are  useless.  His  doom  is 
irrevocable.  She  knows  that  they  who  die  in  the 
perfection  of  virtue,  having  been  made  partakers  of 
the  fulness  of  atonement,  are  happy  in  the  Lord, 
they  need  not  our  prayer.  But  contemplating  the 
conduct  of  the  Lord  towards  repenting  sinners,  as 
manifested  in  various  instances  in  the  sacred  volumes, 
she  knows  that  a temporal  punishment  frequently  re- 
mains due  to  the  sinner,  after  the  guilt  of  his  crime 
* has  been  remitted ; thus  Adam  was  sentenced  to  earn 
his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow ; Moses  was  ex- 
cluded from  the  land  of  promise;  David  lost  his  child, 
and  was  afflicted  in  his  family.  She  knows  that  fre- 
quently her  children  are  summoned  from  life  with 
part  of  this  penalty  unpaid,  and  that  they  endure  a 
rurgation  therefor  in  the  other  world,  until  beingr  no 
longer  debtors  to  justice,  they  shall  be  made  partakers 
of  mercy,  and  having  paid. the  last  farthing,  they  shall 
enter  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord. 

She  knows  the  frailty  and  the  imperfection  of  man, 
and  that  we  are  all  transgressors,  in  many  things. 
She  knows  the  mercy  of  God  to  be  equal  to  his  jus- 
tice, and  therefore  she  knows,  as  she  has  learned  from 
the  apostles,  that  when  taken  unawares,  with  many 
of  our  minor  transgressions  unrepented  for,  we  will 
not  be  condemned  to  eternal  torments,  but  having 
suflered  a temporary  purgation,  we  shall  be  admitted 
by  mercy  to  heaven,  after  justice  shall  have  been 
satisfied. 

They  who  are  in  this  state  of  purgation,  are  still 
members  of  the  church,  and  may  therefore  be  aided 

P* 

juy  Google 


90 


ON  THE  MASS. 


by  our  prayers  and  sacrifices,  and  hence  from  theday.*; 
of  the  apostles,  commemoration  was  made  for  them 
in  the  Mass.  The  memento  for  the  living-  was  made 
before  the  consecration,  that  grace  may  be  obtained 
by  them  to  assist  worthily  thereat,  but  that  for  the 
dead  was  made  after  the  production  of  the  victim, 
which  we  offer  on  their  behalf.  The  names  of  those 
to  be  specially  prayed  for,  were  found  on  the  dyptics 
of  the  various  churches.  All  the  old  liturgies  men- 
tion the  custom ; especially  those  of  St.  Peter,  St. 
James,  and  St.  Mark,  as  does  St.  Clement,  in  his 
apostolic  constitutions.  “ This  tradition  ” of  praying 
for  the  departed,  “ has  come  to  us  from  our  divine 
chiefs.”  Dion.  lib.  Eccles.  Hierar.  cap,  7,  St.  John 
Chrysostom  says,*  “It  is  not  in  vain  that  it  has  been 
regulated  by  the  apostles,  that  in  celebrating  the 
venerable  mysteries,  mention  should  be  made  of  the 
dead ; they  knew  well  that  it  would  be  highly  ser-  * 
viceable  to  them.”  Tertullian  say8,|  “ we  make  the 
oblations  for  the  dead  on  their  anniversary  day.”  Su 
Cyprian,  in  his  66th  epistle,  mentions  that  a man  in 
his  diocese,  named  Victor  having  died,  leaving  a 
priest  named  Faustinus  the  executor  of  his  will,  he 
having  a considerable  property,  prevented  Mass  being 
offered  for  his  soul,  or  the  commemoration  being  made 
for  him  at  the  memento,  stating  as  his  justification  a 
statute  of  a provincial  synod  in  Africa,  which  forbad 
any  person  at  his  death  to  impose  upon  any  clergy- 
man such  a duty  as  would  draw  off  his  attention  from 
the  discharge  of  his  clerical  office;  and  this  under  the 
penalty  of  not  having  prayers  or  oblations  offered  for 
the  repose  of  his  soul.  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  informs 
ust  that  he  offered  the  body  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
for  the  soul  of  his  sister.  St.  Ambrosell  offered  Mass 
for  the  soul  of  his  brother,  and  for  that  of  the  Empe- 
:or,  Valontinian ; he  also  consoles  Faustinus^  upon 

• Homily  3 in  Ep.  ad  Philip.  tDe  corona.  Milit.  tOra». 
in  Macria  ux.  IlDeobiiu  fra'ris  Satyr.  ^Confes.  lib.  9.  c.  13 


Dig : zed  by  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


91 


the  death  of  his  sister,  and  exhorts  him  not  to  efrieve 
in  tears,  but  to  have  her  soul  commended  to  God,  in 
the  oblations,  and  in  his  liturgy  we  have  the  com- 
memoration, as  well  as  in  that  of  St.  John  Crysos- 
tom.  St.  Augustine  mentions*  the  request  of  his 
mother,  St.  Monica,  at  the  time  of  her  death,  to  be  re- 
membered at  the  holy  altar.  In  fact  the  documents 
^re  to  be  every  where  found,  in  support  of  the  anti- 
quity, universality,  and  apostolicity  of  the  custom  ; 
whether  we  examine  the  records  of  councils,  study 
the  works  of  the  lathers,  look  into  the  liturgies  of  the 
east  or  the  west,  of  Egypt  or  of  Thrace. 

Formerly  the  names  on  the  dyptics  were  read 
aloud ; now  the  celebrant  and  the  congregation  only 
mentally  recommend  the  individuals  for  whom  they 
desire  to  pray,  and  then  the  request  continues,  “ to 
these,  O Lord,  and  to  all  that  sleep  in  Christ,”  that 
18,  who  through  his  merits  are  to  awake  to  glory, 
“grant  we  beseech  thee,  a place  of  refreshment,” 
after  the  labours  of  their  endurance  under  the  inflic- 
tion of  justice,  “light”  instead  of  the  darkness  and 
uncertainty  of  even  their  temporary  exclusion  from 
heaven,  and  especially  thdt  light  which  from  the 
ithrone  of  God,  shines  upon  and  envelopes  the  just, 
“ and  peace  ” in  the  speedy  admittance  to  eternal  joy 
“ through  the  same  Christ,  our  Lord.  Amen.” 

Having  now  paid  the  tribute  of  charity  to  our  de- 
parted brethren,  it  is  but  just  that  we  should  come 
back  to  a recollection  of  ourselves,  and  to  recal  us  to 
this,  the  celebrant  raises  his  voice  at  the  nobis  quoque 
pe^torihus^  “Also,  to  us  sinners,”  and  with  the  hu- 
mility of  a true  penitent,  feeling  the  necessity  of  an 
amendment  of  heart,  and  sorrow  for  its  aberrations, 
and  imitating  the  publican,  and  those  converted  at 
the  crucifixion,  he  strikes  his  breast,  and  proceeds  to 
intreat  “confiding  in  the  multitude  of  God’s  mercies, 
seme  part  and  fellowship  with  ” the  saints  whom  ho 

* £p.  ad.  Faustin.  de  obit.  sor. 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


92 


ON  THE  MAbS. 


names,  and  they  are  selected  from  all  classes  of  per- 
sons, to  teach  us  that  salvation  is  within  the  reach 
of  all.  John  the  Baptist,  the  precursor  of  Christ,  the 
last  of  the  prophets,  Stephen,  a deacon,  the  first 
Christian  martyr,  Matthias,  an  apostle,  Barnabas,  one 
of  the  disciples,  Ignatius,  a bishop,  Alexander,  a pope, 
Marcellinus,  a priest,  Peter,  an  exorcist.  Felicitas,  and 
Perpetua,  matrons,  Agatha,  Lucy,  Agnes,  Cecelia, 
and  Anastatia,  virgins.  This  is  the  blessed  “ com- 
pany into  which  he  beseedhes  admittance*'  for  him 
and  for  his  people,  “ not  of  their  own  merit,”  for  they 
are  sinners,  “but  of  God’s  own  gratuitous  pardon,'’ 
and  this  still  besought  and  expected,  “ through  Christ 
our  Lord,”  “ by  whom,  O Lord,  thou  dost  always 
create,  sanctify,  quicken,  bless  and  give  us  all  these 
good  things.  By  him,  and  with  him,  and  in  him,  is 
to  thee,  God  the  Father  Almighty,  in  the  unity  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  all  honour  and  glory,  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen.” 

This  prayer  is  the  concluding  part  of  the  canon 
properly  so  called,  and  preceded  and  accompanied 
what  was  called  the  small  elevation,  now  the  second 
elevation,  and  at  one  time  indeed  the  only  elevation 
of  the  sacrament.  The  celebrant  looking  upon  the  i 
altar,  and  contemplating  Jesus  Christ  hidden  under 
the  sacramental  appearances,  and  reflecting  also  upon 
what  had  been  originally  placed  upon  that  altar,  bread 
and  wine,  those  gifts  which  the  Lord  bestows  upon 
us  for  ^ur  sustenance,  is  desirous  of  thanking  the 
Giver  of  every  good,  for  “all  those  good  things,” 
granted  for  the  nourishment  of  our  bodies  and  the 
food  of  our  souls.  He  considers  that  all  things  were 
“created”  by  the  “word  of  God:”  for  “./?//  things 
vwre  made  by  him : and  without  him  was  ma/de  nothing 
that  was  made,^^  (John  i.  3.)  “ By  him  ” then  was 

our  bread  and  wine  “created,”  by  the  eternal  father, 
but  after  this  creation,  they  were  placed  upon  the  altar 
•'nd  there  “sanctified”  by  the  word  of  God,  and  by 
prayer  “ quickened  ” by  the  change  that  took  place 


ed  by  Google 


4 

ON  THE  MASS.  93 

wben  the  body  and  blood  of  the  living  Christ,  who 
having  risen  from  the  dead,  didh  now  no  more,  (Rom. 
vi.  9.)  was  placed  where  they  had  been,  and  under 
their  appearance  “hlessed  ” by  the  efficacy  of  that 
divine  sacrament  to  communicate  grace  to  our  souls, 
and  now  “ given”  to  those  who  prepare  to  receive  the 
same. 

We  are  then  desirous  of  paying  the  homage  of  our 
praise  and  thanks  to  the  great  Author  of  our  benefit, 
and  we  give  to  him  “all  honour  and  glory  by”  that 
beloved  Son  who  is  our  great  mediator,  and  who 
reigns  co-equal  God  “ with  him ;”  and  being  “ in 
him,”  by  his  consubstantiality,  forms  but  one  nature 
with  him  and  the  other  divine  person  of  the  blessed 
Trinity,  “in  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  ever  and 
ever,  amen.” 

At  the  words  “ sanctify,”  “ quicken,”  and  “bless,” 
the  celebrant  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  the 
victim,  to  signify  from  what  source  all  these  effects 
are  derived  : and  uncovering  the  chalice,  after  having 
paid  his  adoration,  he  signs  the  cross  with  the  host 
within  the  circumference  of  the  chalice,  at  the  words 
“ by  him  and  with  him  and  in  him,”  to  signify  the 
perfect  union  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  though 
apparently  separated : and  at  the  words  “ Father  Al- 
mighty,” and  “Holy  Ghost,”  outside  the  chalice, 
to  signify  the  separation  of  persons,  but  the  unity  of 
their  act  of  blessing  through  the  efficacy  of  the  sacri- 
fice of  the  cross ; and  then  holding  the  host  and  cha- 
lice together  be  elevates  them  a little,  at  the  words 
“ all  honour  and  glory,”  to  signify  that  it  is  through 
Christ  our  victim  we  are  able  to  pay  our  debt  of  grati- 
tude and  praise.  Hence  by  many  this  is  called  the 
oblation  of  the  victim  which  had  been  produced,  and 
the  small  elevation.  In  many  places  it  is  customary 
to  ring  the  bell  on  this  occasion.  The  celebrant 
having  paid  his  adoration  after  having  covered  t)  ■\ 
chalice  rises,  and  ooiuludes  this  prayer  in  a loud,  vo;-  u 
to  n^ti^y  its  clo-^e  to  the  congregation;  and  he  ir.ea 

; by  Google 


94 


ON  THE  MASS. 


entefs  upon  the  next  part,  which  is  the  prepara tiou 
for  and  receiving  the  communion. 

Optatus  of  Milevi  informs  us,*  that  in  his  time  in  the 
African  churches  it  was  usual  after  the  canon  and  be> 
fore  the  preparation  for  communion,  for  the  Bishop  or 
a priest  to  impose  hands  for  the  remission  of  sins  upon 
those  who  sought  reconciliation,  and  then  turn  to  the 
altar  to  say  the  Lord’s  prayer.  But  . this  custom, 
whether  it  was  that  of  administering  the  sacrament  of 
penance,  or  of  absolving  publicly,  before  communion, 
those  who  had  been  guilty  of  public  sins,  was  not 
general,  and  even  in  those  places  where  it  prevailed, 
seems  not  to  have  continued  long,  except  on  Maundy 
Thursday,  when  the  public  penitents  were  publicly 
reconciled.  But  the  Lord’s  prayer  was  from  the  be- 
ginning said  at  this  part  of  the  office,  as  every  liturgy 
shows ; and  St.  Jerom  states^  that  it  was  our  blessed 
Lord  himself  who  taught  his  apostles  that  the  faithful 
should  daily  at  the  sacrifice  of  his  body,  presume  to 
say  Our  Father,  Hence  the  church  shows  the  foun- 
dation on  which  she  rests  her  authority  for  bringing 
her  children  thus  familiarly  to  address  their  Creator: 
“ Let  us  pray.”  “ Being  instructed  by  thy  saving 
precepts,  and  following  thy  divine  directions,  we 
presume  to  say  : Our  Father,”  &c.  fMatt.  vi.  9.) 

To  enter  into  an  explanation  of  th's  divine  prayer 
in  this  place  would  for  most  of  the  readers  of  this  dis- 
sertation be  unnecessary,  and  would  be  str&ying  from 
the  great  object  of  the  compiler,  which  was  merely 
to  explain  what  could  not  otherwise  be  so  easily  dis- 
covered, and  in  doing  which  he  has  already  gone  far 
beyond  the  limits  w'hich  he  originally  prescribed  for 
himself : he  shall  only  say  with  Terlullian,  “That 
it  is  a compendium  of  the  whole  gospel;  and  with 
I'ope  innocent  I1I.§  “For  a variety  of  reasons  this 
prayer  excels  all  others,  from  the  authority  of  hinc 
who  taught  It,  for  it  came  from  the  very  mouth  of  the 

* Lib.  2,  Contra.  Parmen.  tLib.  3,  Contra.  Pelag.  IDs 
Oret.  ^Myst.  Miss.  iii.  17. 


''■gitized  byCjOO^IC 


ON  THE  MASS. 


95 


Saviour;  from  the  brevity  of  its  expressions,  for  it  is 
easily  learned,  and  spoken;  from  the  sufficiency  of 
its  petition,  for  it  contains  all  that  is  necessary  for  this 
world  and  the  next;  from  the  richness  of  its  myste- 
ries, for  it  contains  wonderful  hidden  treasures.” 

The  celebrant  says  it  in  a loud  voice  or  sings  it,  to 
impress  the  meaning  and  object  of  the  petition  upon 
his  hearers,  and  at  the  end  they  answer  him  by  re- 
peating the  last  petition,  “But  deliver  us  from  evil.” 

The  deacon  goes  up  to  the  right  hand  side  of  the 
celebrant,  before  the  conclusion  of  this  prayer,  during 
which  he  has  stood  behind  ; and  the  sub-deacon  how 
also  carries  up  the  Patten  whic^i  he  gives  to  the  dea 
con,  and  then  returns  to  his  place  below;  the  deacon 
having  wiped  the  Patten,  places  it  in  the  right  hand 
of  the  celebrant,  who  continues  in  a low  voice  the 
next  prayer,  after  having  answered  “ amen  ” to  the 
Lord’s  prayer. 

He  desires  to  be  delivered  from  all  evils,  entering 
fully  into  the  spirit  of  the  divine  prayer  which  has 
been  just  concluded,  “past”  evils,  which  are  the 
consequence,  of  the  sins  we  have  committed,  bad 
habits,  disturbed  imaginations,  and  evil  propensities, 
“ present  ” evils,  temporal  calamities  and  tempta- 
tions tinder  which  we  labour;  and  “future”  evils, 
which  we  trust  may  be  averted  by  the  power  of  the 
most  high.  We  are  taught  to  seek  farther  protection, 
and  to  specify  more  particularly  what  we  most  desire; 
and  we  implore  those  blessings  through  the  interces- 
sion of  the  blessed  and  ever-glorioiis  virgin,  “ Mary 
mother  of  God.”  This  phrase,  “ Mother  of  God,^’ 
shows  clearly  that  either  the  entire  of  this  prayer 
must  have  been  formed  subsequently  to  the  year  43*1, 
or  at  least  this  expression  added  after  that  year.  We 
find  the  prayer  in  many  old  liturgies,  but  in  none  so 
far  back  as  the  year  500;  and  not  being  in  the  canon,' 
It  was  not  so  brought  into  review  and  under  observa- 
tion as  that  portion  was  until  about  the  year  600.  It 
was  only  after  the  condemnation  of  Nestorius  at  the 

by  Google 


9G  UN  THE  MASS. 

council  of  Ephesus  in  431,  that  the  faithful  were  in 
the  habit  of  styling  the  blessed  virgin  “ Mother  of 
God but  Nestorius  having  denied  her  being  the 
“ Mother  of  God,”  though  he  acknowledged  her  to 
be  the  mother  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  consequence  of  his 
herepy  in  asserting  the  double  personality  of  the 
Saviour;  to  evince  their  adherence  to  the  ancient  doc- 
trine, and  the  condemnation  of  his  error,  thenceforth 
they  addressed  the  blessed  virgin,  saying  “Holy 
Mary,  Mother  of  God^  pray  for  us,”  &c.  The  prayer 
continues,  and  through  the  intercesssion  “ of  the  holy 
apostles,  Peter  and  Paul,  and  of  Andrew,  and  of  all 
the  Saints.”  The  special  mention  of  those  three 
apostles  is  almost  distinct  evidence  of  this  prayer 
having  been  ^iginally  drawn  up  in  the  city  of  Rome, 
for  we  have  St.  Peter  who  founded  the  church  in  that 
city,  St.  Paul  who  aided  him  during  many  years  in 
its  administration,  and  who  there  suffered  martyrdom 
with  St.  Peter;  and  St.  Andrew,  the  brother  ofPf*er, 
who  on  that  account  was  specially  honoured  in  titat 
city,  so  much  so,  that  his  festival  was  kept  with  al- 
most equal  solemnity,  and  on  the  festival  of  St.  An- 
drew, it  was  marked  in  one  of  the  most  ancient  copies 
of  the  Or(io,  that  the  Pope  should  commence  theoffico 
at  the  church  of  St.  Andrew,  and  conclude  it  at  tliat  of 
his  brother  Peter.  However  some  very  old  copies  of 
this  prayer  have  been  found  with  the  names  of  other 
Saints  after  that  of  Andrew. 

The  great  object  of  the  prayer  was,  “ peace,  that 
we  may  always  be  free  from  sin  and  secure  from  all 
disturbance,”  which  are  both  concomitants  of  war. 
The  celebrant  in  repeating  this  prayer  signed  himself 
with  the  Patten  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  and  kiss- 
ed it  as  the  emblem  of  peace  and  charity;  for  upon 
it  that  oblation  had  been  made,  which  exhibited  the 
union  and  peace  of  the  congregation ; and  now  it 
was  to  be  placed  under  the  holy  sacrament,  whence 
we  expect  that  peace  which  the  world  cannot  give. 
The  prayer  concluded  in  the  usual  way ; “ Through 


Dig  ed  by  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


97 


Christ  oiir  Lord,  who  with  thee  in  the  iin\ty  of  the 
H®ly  Ghost,  liveth  and  reigneth  God,  world  without 
ertd — Amen.” 

In  repeating  the  last  words  of  this  prayer,  the  cel- 
ebrant perforins  a ceremony  which  has  subsisted  from 
the  time  of  the  institution  by  our  Saviour.  He  breaks 
the  sacrament  over  the  chalice  ; formerly  it  was  ovei 
the  Patten,  but  it  was  about  1100  years  ago  regu- 
lated to  break  it  over  the  chalice,  that  any  particles 
separating  therefrom  might  be  received  into  that 
sacred  vessel ; and  in  putting  a small  particle  into 
the  chalice  the  celebrant  as  usual  concludes  the 
prayer  in  a loud  voice,  “ for  ever  and  ever — Amen.” 
And  then  as  he  puts  the  particle  into  the  chalice,  he 
thrice  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  therewith,  wishing 
the  congregation — “ May  the  peace  of  the  Lord  al- 
ways be  with  you :”  to  which  the  usual  answer  was 
given,  “ and  with  thy  spirit.”  Formerly  upon  this 
being  said  the  kiss  of  peace  was  given  through  the 
congregation,  in  token  of  unity  and  charity,  by  the 
men  to  the  men,  and  by  the  women  to  the  Wvomen, 
who  for  this  purpose  sat  at  different  sides  of  the 
church.  Mention  is  made  of  this  by  Tertullian  and 
other  very  ancient  writers. 

The  mixing  of  the  host  with  the  contents  of  the 
chalice,  is  very  ancient,  indeed  so  much  so,  that  we 
can  find  no  trace  of  its  introduction;  but  we  find  it 
always  customary — and  on  many  occasions.  First, 
bishops  living  at  a distance,  frequently  sent  each  to 
the  other,  in  token  of  communion,  a consecrated  host, 
by  a priest  or  deacon,  and  the  person  to  whom  it  was 
sent  put  it  into  his  chalice,  and  took  it  therefrom  at 
the  next  Mass  that  he  celebrated.  Secondly,  it  was 
customary  in  many  churches,  to  keep  a portion  of 
what  had  been  consecrated  at  one  mass  to  be  con- 
sumed in  the  chalice  at  the  next,  to  shew  that  the 
sacrifice  though  continued  on  differnnt  days,  was  the 
same.  Thirdly,  what  had  been  reserved  for  the  sick 
was  generally  consumed  in  this  manner.  Fourthly,  it 

- by  Google 


98 


ON  THE  MASS. 


was  the  custom  in  many  churches  where  communion 
was  given,  under  both  kinds,  to  mix  them  in  the  cha- 
lice, and  to  give  the  communion  therefrom ; and  fifthly, 
there  was  from  the  commencement  a powerful  mystic 
reason  for  the  practice.  The  death  of  Christ  had  been 
shewn  by  the  mystic  separation  of  the  body  and 
blood,  his  reanimation  and  resurrection  were  to  be 
shewn  by  their  mystic  union,  which  took  place  in 
this  manner.  “Thus,”  writes  Pope  Innocent  III. 
“ the  chalice  represents  the  monument,  whence  the 
deacon,  who  is  the  angel  of  the  church  removes  the 
pall,  as  the  heavenly  messenger  removed  the  stone 
from  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre” — and  here  Christ 
having  died  for  our  sins,  and  offered  himself  for  our 
iniquities,  is  now  re-animated,  and  gives  us  that  ce- 
lestial food  where  the  flesh  which  was  dead,  now  vi- 
vified by  the  spirit,  is  profitable  to  those  who  prove 
and  try  themselves. 

It  was  on  the  day  of  his  resurrection  that  Christ 
first  addressed  his  apostles,  in  those  memorable 
words,  “ Peace  be  to  you,”  and  celebrating  that  re- 
««arrection,  the  celebrant  prays  that  this  peace  may 
remain  always  with  them,  being  derived  from  the 
blessed  trinity  through  the  cross  of  the  Saviour. 

He  now  prepares  for  communion,  and  first  bowing, 
he  thrice  in  a penitent  manner,  strikes  his  breast, 
calling  upon  “ the  Lamb  of  God  who  takes  away 
the  sios  of  the  world,  to  have  mercy  on  him,”  — b i\ 
on  the  third  occasion  to  “ grant  him  peace” — that 
peace  which  the  world  cannot  give — and  then  bow'- 
ing  down  before  the  altar,  he  prays  for  peace  and 
unity  for  the  whole  church. 

In  masses  for  the  dead,  we  offer  for  those  in  pur- 
gatory, and  hence  instead  of  saying  “ have  mercy  on 
us” — “ grant  us  peace,” — the  celebrant  says  “ grant 
them  rest” — “grant  them  eternal  rest ;”  and  the 
prayer  for  the  peace  of  the  church  is  omitted,  but  the 
celebrant  proceeds  to  read  the  two  other  prayers  be- 
fore communion,  and  then  receives  the  holy  sacrament 


ed  by  Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


99 


In  high  Masses,  after  this  prayer  f('r  peace,  the 
deacon,  who  during  its  repetition  has  been  on  his 
knees  at  the  celebrant’s  right  hand,  rises,  and  they 
both  kiss  the  altar,  the  celebrant,  as  it  were  to  re- 
ceive the  spirit  of  peace  from  Jesus  Christ,  the  dea- 
con through  respect,  and  after  embracing  each  other 
the  celebrant  kissds  the  deacon,  saying,  “ Peace  be 
with  thee.”  The  deacon  answers,  “and  with  thy 
spirit;”  and  having  made  his  reverence  to  the  altar, 
gives  the  peace  in  like  manner  to  the  sub-deacon  in 
his  place  below,  and  they  then  come  up  to  assist  at 
the  altar,  the  celebrant  continuing  his  prayers  for 
communion,  which  are  so  plain  as  to  need  no  ex- 
position. 

Tn  pulling  the  particle  into  the  chalice  the  cele- 
brant says  “ May  this  mixture  and  consecration  of 
the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  be  to 
ns  that  receive  it,  eternal  life.”  The  meaning  of 
the  word  “ consecration,”  in  this  place  has  always 
been  understood  to  be  the  putting  of  two  holy  things 
together ; not  a blessing  or  separation  for  religious 
purposes — consecrare,  quasi  simul  sacrare. 

The  Agnus  Dei,  ^c,,  “ Lamb  of  God,  &c.,”  was 
ordered  to  be  sung  at  the  Mass,  by  Pope  Sergius  I., 
who  came  to  the  chair  in  687.  But  the  custom  of 
saying  it  must  have  prevailed  in  many  places  pre- 
viously to  this,  because  we  find  very  clear  allusions 
thereto  in  works  and  liturgies  of  a much  earlier 
date.  St.  John  Chrysostom  who  lived  300  years  be- 
fore Sergius  has  this  passage:  “It  is  not  in  vain  that 
we  make  commemoration  for  the  dead  at  the  sacred 
mysteries,  or  that  we  approach  the  divine  Lamb,  who 
is  there,  and  who  takes  away  the  sins  of  the  world, 
to  beseech  his  mercy  for  them.”  And  the  first  gene- 
ral council  of  Nice  in  the  year  325,  calls  upon  us 
“ by  faith  to  conceive  and  to  know  that  on  that  holy 
table  is  placed  that  Lamb  of  God  who  take£  away  the 
sifi8  cf  the  world,  and  who  is  immolated  in  an  unbloody 
manner  by  the  priests.”  Tn  the  Mass  of  St.  Severus, 

D:g:i:.ed  byGOOglC 


100 


ON  THE  MASS. 


Patriarch  of  Alexandria»  the  words  prescribed  for  the 
priest  when  he  breaks  the  Sacrament,  are,  “ Thou  art 
the  Lamb  of  God  who  takest  away  Or  blottest  out 
the  sins  of  the  world.”  In  fact,  the  number  of  figures 
was  so  great,  and  the  expressions  upon  which  its  in- 
troduction must  have  been  founded,  are  so  strong,  that 
it  is  next  to  impossible  that  the  prayer  should  not 
have  been  one  of  the  first  formed  in  the  Church,  and 
it  appears  in  one  of  the  ancient  liturgies  of  St.  Peter. 

It  was  probably  a lamb  that  Abel  sacrificed ; it 
was  a male  lamb  that  Abraham  substituted  for  Isaac  ; 
it  was  a lamb  that  was  sacrificed  in  Egypt,  and  it 
was  instead  of  the  Paschal  lamb  that  the  Eucharist 
was  established : a lamb  was  the  morning  and 
evening  sacrifice  of  the  Jews ; and  these  were  all 
figures  of  that  Lamb,  for  whose  arrival  Isaias  pray- 
ed. Send  forik^  0 Lord,  the  Lamb,  the  ruler  of  the 
earth,  from  Petra  of  the  desert,  to  the  mount  of  the 
dauMer  of  Sion,  (Isaias  xvi.  1,)  and  of  whom  John 
the  Baptist  said  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God — behold  him 
who  takeih  away  the  sins  of  the  w:rH,  (John  i.  29,) 
and  frequent  mention  is  made  of  the  Lamb  in  the 
Apocalypse. 

The  prayer  for  peace  is  found  in  some  very  old 
copies  of  the  Sacramentaries,  &c.  The  prayers  for 
communion  were  various,  and  in  a great  measure 
left  to  the  discretion  of  the  celebrant,  but  those  two 
now  inserted  and  ordered,  are  two  of  the  most  an- 
cient forms  that  are  known.  After  those  prayers  the 
celebrant  pays  again  the  tribute  of  his  adoration,  and 
rising,  takes  the  host  and  says,  “I  will  take  the 
heavenly  bread  and  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,” 
then  striking  his  breast,  he,  says  thrice,  Lord  I am 
not  worthy  that  thou  shouldst  enter  under  my  roof, 
say  but  the  word,  and  my  soul  shall  be  healed.” 
This  is  a most  ancient  custom  which  is  mentioned  by 
Tertnllian,  by  Origen,  and  many  other  early  writers, 
and  is  founded  upon  the  expressions  of  the  centurion 
'11  the  Gospel. 


ri'gltized  by 


Google 


ON  THE  MASS. 


101 


I'he  celebrant  then  communicates  himself  saying 
the  appropriate  prayers  which  are  found  in  the  or- 
der, and'  aftfifwards  has  wine  poured  into  the  chalice, 
with  which  he  thoroughly  clears  it  of  any  particles 
of  the  Sacrament  which  might  remain  therein,  and 
afterwards  has  wine  and  water  poured  upon  those 
fingers  wjth  which  he  has  touched  the  Sacrament, 
and  after  cleansing  them  perfectly,  he  drinks  this 
ablution  also  from  the  Chalice,  which  is  then  wiped, 
and  dried. 

If  communion  were  to  be  given,  it  was  usually 
done  after  the  celebrant  had  communicated  himself, 
and  then  the  choir  sung  some  Psalms,  as  it  is  re- 
corded in  the  Gospel  that  after  they  had  sung  an 
hymn  when  the  Apostles  were  first  fed  with  this  di- 
vine banquet,  they  went  out,  and  such  was  the  custom 
of  the  Jews  partaking  of  the  Paschal  Lamb, 
they  sang  the  113th  Psalm,  when  Israel  went  out  from 
Egypt.  The  Psalm  usually  performed  on  this  occa- 
\ sion  in  the  early  days  of  Christianity  was  the  33d. 
I tvill  bless' the  Lord  at  all  iimes^  the  9th  verse.  0, 
taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  sweety  &c.,  was  some- 
times chosen  as  the  Antiphon.  Other  Psalms  were 
sometimes  taken,  and  then  only  part  of  a Psalm,  and 
at  present  but  one  or  two  verses,  which  is  called 
the  communion,  though  at  present  the  communion  is 
frequently  given  after  IVlass,  and  not  at  this  time. 

The  book  was  removed  to  the  side  where  it  origi- 
nally was,  as  being  its  usual  place ; or  for  the  mystic 
reason,  to  shew  that  the  Jewish  Church  would  in 
the  latter  days  come  over  to  Christ  after  the  fulness 
of  the  Gentiles  should  have  been  received.  (Rom.  xi. 
19.)  The  celebrant  r^ds  the  communion  at  the 
b »ok,  and  then  going  to%ie  middle  of  the  altar,  gives 
the  people  the  usual  salutation,  and  then  at  the  book 
invites  them  to  join  in  prayer.  Oremus.  “ I^t  us 
pray,”  and  reads  or  sings  the  Post-communion,  which 
prayer  corresponds  with  the  collect,  and  secret,  and 
is.  generally  a thanksgiving  for  communion,  and  has 
0* 


Digitized  by  Google 


102 


ON  THE  MASS. 


its  nsme  from  having  been  read  after  the  communion. 
Besides  the  Post-communion,  there  is  sometimes  read 
at  the  same  place,  a prayer  headed  Super  populum^ 
“ over  the  people,”  and  before  which  a notice  was 
given  by  the  deacon.  Humiliate  capita  vestra  Deo^ 
“ Bow  down  your  heads  to  God.”  Upon  which  they 
bowed  towards  the  East,  and  the  prayer  yas  then 
said  ; this  was  only  on  days  of  penance  or  humilia- 
tion, particularly  when  no  person  but  the  celebrant 
communicated,  and  when  therefore  they  who  did  not 
receive  the  holy  communion  could  not  so  well  join 
in  the  Post-communion.  The  celebrant  again  sa- 
luted the  people,  and  except  on  days  of  penance  or 
in  Masses  for  the  dead,  the  deacon  turned  round  and 
gave  notice  of  departure  by  saying  or  singing  Ite  Mis^ 
sa  est,  “ Go^  the  Mass  is  over.”  In  Easter  week  he 
added  two  alleluias,  and  the  choir  answered,  Deo 
patias*  “ Thanks  be  to  God.”  The  people,  however, 
did  not  generally  depart  before  they  received  the 
blessing,  previously  to  giving  which,  the  celebrant 
bowing  down  before  the  altar  repeated  the  prayer. 
Placeat,  “ Let  the  performance  of  my  homage,”  &c. 
After  which  he  gave  his  blessing,  praying  that  the 
“Almighty  God,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  may 
bless  them.”  On  days  of  penance,  instead  of  Ite 
Missa  est,  the  deacon  turns  to  the  altar,  not  to  the 
people,  and  says  or  sings  Benedicamus  Domino,  “Let 
us  bless  the  Lord,”  as  an  invitation  to  them  to  con- 
tinue in  prayer ; and  in  Masses  for  the  Dead,  Requies^ 
cant  in  pace,  “May  they  rest  in  peace.”  In  those 
latter  Masses,  no  blessing  is  given,  because  the  prin- 
cipal object  of  the  Mass  is  the  relief  of  the  faithful 
departed,  and  not  so  much  the  advantages  of  the  as- 
sistants, for  whose  benefit  thre  last  blessing  was  in» 
trodnced,  in  the  very  earliest  ages  in  the  Gree.!.’: 
Church,  and  subsequently  in  the  Latin  Church. 

The  celebrant  then  repeats  the  Gospel  of  St.  .Tohri, 
which  contains  the  most  sublime  testimony  of  the 


ri'gltized  byCjOO^IC 


ON  THE  MLkSB, 


103 


DWlnhy  and  Incarnation  of  our  blessed  Lord,  and  at 
the  passage,  *ind  the  word  was  made  Jleah,  and  dwelt 
amongst  us,  he  and  the  congregation  bend  their  knees 
to  honour  the  divine  mystery.  This  has  been  intro- 
duced a;t  the  request  of  pious  persons  who  have  in 
various  places  at  different  times  besought  it,  and  is  in 
general  practice,  now  upwards  of  800  or  900  years. 
In  place  of  this  Gospel  sometimes  another  is  said 
This  occurs  when  a festival  is  celebrated  on  a Sun 
day,  or  on  a day  in  Lent,  or  Quarter-tense,  which 
has  a proper  Gospel  of  its  own,  and  which  Gospel  is 
then  read  instead  oT  that  of  St.  John. 

In  some  places  it  is  usual  for  the  celebrant  after  re- 
citing the  last  Gospel  to  repeat  together  with  the  as- 
sistants the  129th  Psalm.  From  the  depths,  §re*,  for 
the  faithful  departed. 

In  the  foregoing  explanation,  the  origin  and  mean- 
ing of  the  various  ceremonies  and  observances,  and 
vestments  and  prayers  of  the  liturgy  of  the  Mass 
are  laid  before  the  reader  in  such  a manner  as  it  is 
hoped  exhibits  the  action  to  be  a pious  and  rational  and 
edifying  observance,  derived  from  the  earliest  anti- 
quity, and  founded  upon  divine  authority.  When 
therefore  the  Chistian  attends  thereat,  he  should  en- 
deavour to  go  back  in  spirit  to  Jerusalem  and  Calva- 
ry, and  contemplating  the  institutions  of  Christ,  and 
ills  sufferings,  so  to  conduct  himself  as  to  obtain 
abundant  benedictions,  which  must  always  be  de- 
rived from  the  merits  of  that  victim  who  offers  himself 
in  this  sacrifiee  on  our  behalf. 

The  compiler  has  laboured  under  many  disad- 
vantages, from  the  situation  in  which  he  has  been 
placed,  occupied  in  visiting  his  diocess,  and  without 
books  to  which  he  might  refer,  during  a considerable 
portion  of  the  time  in>  which  this  dissertation  has 
been  hastily  thrown  together.  It  has  not  been  com- 
piled at  one  time  but  with  many  interruptions.  For 
Its  literary  faults  he  must  be  excused.  He  is  under 
tiifl  impression  that  its  doctrine  is  perfectly  correct, 


i 

ri'gltized  by  CjOO^Ic 


t04 


ON  TB£  MASS. 


but  if  in  any  thing  he  have  deviated  from  the  forn* 
of  sound  words  held  by  the  holy  Roman  Catholic 
and  Apostolic  Church,  he  is  anxious  immediately  tc 
correct  it 


INTRODUCTION, 

CONTAINING  A SUMMARY  OP  THE  RUBRICS^ 


I.  The  Mass  consists  of  several  portions,  some  of  whicf* 
are  always  the  same,  and  some  of  which  vary  on  severa! 
occasions. 

II.  That  part  which  does  not  vary  is  called  “ the  ordi- 
nary ot  the  mass,^’  and  may  be  found  in  its  proper  place,, 
alter  the  office  of  holy  Saturday,  that  is  the  Saturday  next 
before  Easter  Sunday. 

Ilf.  That  part  which  varies,  consists  of  the  Introit,  Col- 
lects, Epistle,  with  its  accompaniments,  Gospel,  Offer- 
tory, Secrets,  Preface,  Communion  and  Post  Commu- 
nion, and  they  may  be  found  in  their  proper  place  as  de- 
scribed below. 

1.  I’he  prefaces  are  all  found  together  between  that 
part  of  the  Ordinary  of  the  Mass  which  immediately  pre- 
cedes the  Secrets,  and  the  Canon,  and  each  preface  has 
its  proper  title,  by  which  it  may  be  easily  known. 

IV.  The  Church  celebrates  her  offices  either  according 
to  the  time  of  the  year,  or  for  the  festival  of  some  Saint; 
or  for  some  particular  occasion. 

V.  The  year  begins  with  the  first  Sunday  of  Advent,  af- 
ter Advent  is  the  festival  of  Christmas,  on  the  eighth  day 
after  which  is  the  Circumcision,  next  is  the  Epiphany  , 
after  which  the  Sun  da  vs  are  numbered,  first,  second,  &c., 
to  Septuagesima  Sunday  ; then  the  Sundays  ©f  Sexagesi- 
ma, and  Quinquagesima,  the  Wednesday  next  after  whicU 
is  Ash  "Wednesday  tlie  first  day  in  Lent,  in  which  there 
are  proper  masse.s  for  every  day  ; the  filth  Sunday  of 
Lout,  U called  Passion  Sunday,  live  next  Palm.  Sunday 


zed  by  Google 


RUBRICS. 


105 


the  week  of  which  is  called  the  greater  week  ; this  is  fol- 
lowed by  Easter  Sunday  and  the  Easter  week  ; the  next 
Sunday  is  called  Low  Sunday,  which  is  the  first  after 
Easter.  Between  Easter  and  the  Ascension  are  five  Sun- 
days, which  after  Low  Sunday  are  numbered  the  second, 
third,  &/C.,  after  Easter.  Monday,  Tuesday  and  Wednes- 
after  the  fifth  of  these  Rre  called  Rogation  days.  Thurs- 
day is  the  feast  of  the  Ascension  ; ten  days  after  which  is 
Pentecost  or  Whit  Sunday,  with  its  week ; the  next 
Suud^  is  Trinity  Sunday,  which  is  of  course  the  first 
after  Pentecost ; the  Thursday  following,  which  is  the  fes- 
tival of  the  most  holy  Eucharist,  commonly  called  Corpus 
Christi.  From  this  the  Sundays  are  numbered,  Second, 
third,  Slc.j  after  Pentecost  to  advent,  which  commences 
the  next  vear. 

VI.  The  festivals  of  the  saints  begin  with  the  vigil  or 
eve  of  St.  Andrew  the  Apostle,  which  is  the  29th  of  No- 
vember, and  proceed  regularly  through  the  days  of  the 
month,  until  the  round  of  the  entire  year  is  made,  unto  the 
28ih  of  the  same  month. 

VII.  The  offices  for  particular  occasions  are  celebrated, 
for  the  dedication  of  a church,  for  choosing  a Pope,  on  the 
anniversary  of  the  bishop’s  consecration,  for  the  dead,  &.c. 

VIII.  On  every  day  in  the  year,  except  Good  Friday, 
Mass  can  be  celebrated. 

IX.  The  particular  portions  of  the  liturgy  are  to  lie 
found  by  knowing  what  office  is  celebrated  on  that  parti- 
cular day. 

X.  Sometimes  the  festival  of  a saint  occurs  on  the  same 
day  when  some  office  according  to  the  time  of  the  year 
should  be  celebrated. 

XL  To  regulate  this,  the  offices  of  the  time  and  of  the 
festivals  have  been  classified. 

XII.  I'he  classes  are  doubles  of  the  1st  and  of  the  2d 
cl^ : greater  doubles,  plain  doubles,  semi-doubles,  and 
simples  ; and  their  precedence  when  they  concur,  is  regu- 
lated l^  the  class  to  which  each  belongs. 

XIIL  The  Mass  is  generally  celebrated  of  that  which 
holds  the  highest  rank. 

XIV.  Tile  Missal  is  regulated  according  to  the  order  of 
paraOTaphs,  V.  VI.  and  VII.  II.  and  III. 

'Ine  variable  parts  of  the  Masses  according  to  the  lime 
of  the  year,  from  Advent  to  Easter  are  found  placed  first ; 
then  the  ordinary  of  the  Mass,  with  the  prefaces,  as  mark- 
ed in  clause  I.;  then  thv?  variable  parts  of  the  Mass, 
from  Easuer  to  AdvenL  Ai.c:  liiis  ibe  yariablc  pujisof 

d by  Google 


lOG 


RUB«ICS. 


the  Masson  the  several  festivals  of  the  saints,  which  havn 
proper  variable  parts,  in  their  order  from  the  vi^l  of  St. 
Andrew,  uninterruptedly , throughout  the  year,  with  the 
exception  of  those  days  from  the  25th  ofDeccmber  to  the 
Ist  of  January,  which  variable  parts  for  festivals  are 
found  in  their  proper  places  between  Christmas  and  Epi- 
phany, in  the  part  of  the  Mass  of  the  time;  then  the 
proper  Masses  for  particular  occasions,  are  placed  after 
the  common  of  saints. 

XV.  The  variable  parts  ofthe  Mass  for  the  festivals  of 
the  saints,  are  either  proper  or  common. 

XVI.  The  proper  for  saints,  is  that  variable  part  which 
has  been  specially  compiled,  and  appointed  for  the  parti 
cular  Masses,  on  the  festivals  of  those  individuals,  and  is 
said  only  on  their  special  festivals,  and  is  always  found 
under  the  day  of  the  month  when  that  feast  is  celebrated. 

X VIT.  The  common  of  saints,  is  that  variable  part  which 
is  said  on  the  different  festivals  of  various  saints  of  the 
same  description,  or  class. 

XVIII.  The  saints  whose  festivals  are  celebrated,  are 
divided  into  classes,  according  to  their  various  situations^ 
or  works  or  sufferings.  Apostles,  martyrs,  confessors 
who  were  bishops,  confessors  who  were  not  bishops,  vir- 
gins. holy  women,  &,c. 

XIX.  After  the  proper  Masses  of  the  saints,  and  before 
the  Masses  for  particular  occasions  are  placed  the  variable 

f)art8  of  Masses  for  the  common  of  saints,  under  the  fol- 
owing  several  heads  for  their  proper  classes,  viz. : 1.  For 
the  vigil  of  an  apostle.  2.  Of  a martyr  bishop,  another  of 
the  same.  3.  Of  a martyr  not  bishop,  another  of  the  same. 
4.  Of  martyrs  within  the  Paschal  time.  5.  Of  many  mar* 
fyrs  in  the  Paschal  time.  6.  Of  many  martyrs  without  the 
Paschal  time,  two  others  of  the  same.  7.  Of  a confessor 
bishop,  another  of  the  same.  8.  Of  doctors.  9.  Of  a c^« 
fessor  not  bishop,  another  of  the  same.  10.  Of  abbots,  ll. 
Of  virgins  martyrs,  another  of  the  same.  12.  Of  many 
virgins  martyrs.  13.  Of  a virgin  only,  another  of  the  same. 
14.  Of  holy  w’onren,  not  virgins  but  martyrs.  15.  Of  a 
holy  woman,  neither  martyr  nor  virgin. 

XX.  After  the  Masses  for  particular  occasions  are  seve 
ral  Collects, Secrets  and  Post-communions,  for  special  pur 
poses,  which  will  be  known  by  looking  to  their  titles. 

2.  When  the  office  is  known,  if  it  be  of  the  time,  look 
tor  it  in  its  proper  place,  according  to  the  time  of  the  yea 
as  in  paraljraph  V.  and  you  will  find  its  variable  parts.— 


Oitized  byCjOO^IC 


RUBKICS.  107 

these,  together  with  the  Ordinary  of  the  Mass,  will  give 
you  the  entire  liturgy  of  the  Mass  of  the  day. 

3.  If  the  Mass  be  of  a saint,  look  for  the  day  of  the  month 
in  its  place,  according  to  paragraph  VI.;  if  there  be  a pro- 
per Mass,  you  will  find  there  its  variable  parts;  tf  there 
be  not  a proper  Mass,  you  will  find  a reference  to  the  Maas 
in  the  Common  of  saints,  as  in  paragraph  XIX.  where 
those  variable  parts  will  be  had. — Look  for  that  common 
.Mass,  and  by  combining  its  variable  parts  with  the  ordi- 
‘nary,  the  litursry  will  be  found. 

4.  Sometimes  part  of  the  variable  portion  is  taken  from 
the  proper,  as  in  the  day  of  the  month,  and  from  the  com- 
mon as  described  in  paragraph  XIX.;  then  the  three  parts 
must  be  combined  by  reading  all  that  is  found  in  the  proper 
under  the  day  of  the  month,  and  the  remainder  of  the 
variable  part  from  the  common  Mass,  and  combining 
them  with  the  ordinary  of  the  Mass. 

5.  Sometimes  a Commemoration  is  made;  that  is,  the 
Collect,  Secret  and  f ost-communion  of  one  festival,  of 
a lesser  denomination,  are  said  after  those  of  the  Mass 
of  the  day, — they  are  to  be  found  as  you  would  look  for 
the  variable  part  of  the  Mass  of  the  festival  to  which 
they  belong,  under  the  day  of  the  month  if  they  be  pro- 
per, or,  if  not,  in  the  common  Mass  to  which  that  place 
refers.  If  the  Commemoration  be  of  a Sunday,  or  any 
other  day,  the  Mass  of  which  is  found  in  that  part  regu 
lared  according  to  the  time,  the  Collect,  Secret  or  Post- 
communion, will  be  found  in  the  proper  place  according 
to  lime. 

6.  When  a final  Mass  is  to  be  celebrated,  which  hap- 
pens on  a day  which  has  no  proper  Mass  assigned  there- 
fore, either  by  the  day  of  the  month  or  by  the  proper  of 
lime,  the  Mass  of  the  preceding  Sunday  is  said,  without 
the  Gloria  in  excelsis  or  the  Creed. 

XXI.  The  moveable  feasts  are  all  those  comprehend- 
ed in  the  enumeration  of  paragraph  V.  with  the  exception 
of  Christmas,  the  Circumcision  and  Epiphany.  They  arc 
called  moveable,  because  they  are  not  on  fixed  dayu  of 
the  month,  but  move  from  day  to  day,  as  does  the  festi- 
val of  Easter.  on  which  they  depend,  and  which  is  regula- 
ted by  the  pha.ees.of  the  moon;  being  celebrated  on  the 
first  Sunday  which  follow's  the  fourteenth  day  after  the 
first  new  moon  immediately  after  the  vernal  equinox. 

7.  \ Table  of  those  moveable  feasts,  for  a number  of 
years  is  given  to  assist  the  person  using  this  Missal. 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


108 


RUBRICS. 


XXII.  There  are  six  Sundays  marked  after  Epiphany 
before  Septuagesima  Sunday,  sometimes  Easter  happen- 
ing very  early,  only  three  or  four  of  those  Sundays  in- 
tervene,— the  others  are  then  omitted,  and  the  othce  of 
Septuagesima  taken  up  on  its  proper  day. 

aXIII.  There  are  twenty-four  Sund^s  marked  be- 
tween Pentecost  and  Advent ; when  Easter  is  early, 
Pentecost  is  early  of  course,  and  a greater  number  of 
Sundays  than  twenty-four  intervene  before  Advent.  The 
office  is  regulated  by  taking  up  the  Masses,  &c.  of  the  Sun- 
days omitted  after  Epiphany  that  year,  after  the  23d  Sun- 
day following  Pentecost,  and  celebrating  them  in  their 
succession,  leaving  however  the  Mass  of  the  24th  Sunday 
after  Pentecost  to  be  invariably  celebrated  on  the  Sun- 
day next  before  the  first  Sunday  of  Advent. 

aXIV.  The  first  Sunday  of  Advent  is  always  that 
which  is  nearest  to  the  feast  of  St.  Andrew  the  apostle, 
viz.;  that  which  happens  on  or  between  the  27th  of  No- 
vember and  the  3d  of  December, — which  is  the  reason  for 
commencing  the  festivals  of  the  saints,  with  the  Vigil  of 
St.  Andrew,  that  as  the  Missal  begins  with  the  first  Sun- 
day of  Advent,  which  commences  the  ecclesiastical  year, 
both  its  parts,  of  the  Timci  and  of  the  Saints,  might  cor- 
respond. 

8.  But  in  the  Calendar  the  enumeration  of  festivals  be- 
gins with  the  let  of  January,  for  the  convenience  of  the 
reader. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


INTRODUCTION. 


ill  the  Scriptural  parts  which  in  the  Original  Latin  are 
taken  from  the  Vulgate,  have,  in  this  Edition  been  faith* 
fully  compared  until,  and  made  literally  conformale  to 
the  received  and  approved  Version  of  the  Holy  Scrip* 
tures,  as  revised  and  edited  by  the  Right  Rev.  and  Ven 
Dr.  Richard  ChaUoner,  of  learned  and  pious  memory. 

The  Prayers  and  portions  of  Holy  Scripture,  of  which 
the  Mass,  or  Liturgy  of  the  Catholic  Church,  is  com- 
posed, are  in  part  unalterably  the  same,  and  partly  dif- 
ferent every  day:  those  that  are  fixed  and  invariable,  are 
contained  in  wnat  is  called  the  Ordinary  of  the  Mass, 
froiii  pages  xv.  to  xlviii.  inclusively ; and  the  change- 
able or  proper  parts,  (viz.  the  Introits,  Collects, 
Epistles  and  Lessons,  Graduals  and  Tracts,  Gos- 
pels, Offertories,  Secrets,  Communions  and  Post- 
cOmm unions)  form  the  subsequent  contents  of  the  book. 
But  as  the  Prefaces  are  not  so  frequently  subject  to 
chai^,  they  follow  each  other  in  regular  succession  in 
the  Ordinary. 

The  Ecclesiastical  Year,  with  respect  to  the  Sundays 
and  Moveable  Feasts,  commences  with  the  first  Sun- 
day of  Advent,  and  closes  on  the  Last  Sunday  after 
Pentecost;  and  with  regard  to  the  Festivals  of  the 
Saints,  from  the  Feast  of  St.  Andrew,  the  30th  of  No- 
vember, to  the  Eve  of  the  same  Festival  the  year  follow- 
ing, inclusively. 

In  order  therefore  to  find  out  the  proper  Mass  of  the 
day,  look  for  that  day  of  the  month  in  the  Calendar,  op- 
posite to  which  may  be  seen  a reference  to  the  page 
wherein  it  is  contained ; and  if  a Double  should  fall  on 
a Sund^,  then  the  Mass  of  the  Double  is  said  instead 
of  the  Mass  of  the  Sunday,  except  it  be  a Sunday  of 
the  FIRST  class,  viz.  the  first  Sunday  of  Advent  or 
Lent,  Passion,  Palm,  Easter,  Whit,  and  Trinity 
Sundays  : and  the  Sundays  of  the  second  class,  which 
cannot  be  superseded,  except  by  Doubles  of  the  first 
class,  are  the  ii.  iii.  and  iv.  of  Advent,  Septuagesima, 
Sexagesima,  and  Quinquagesima,  as  also  the  ii.  iii.  and 
‘Y.  of  Lent.  It  must  however  be  remarked  that  the 
\ 

Digitized  by  Google 


ki  IM  KOnUCTION. 

Gospels  for  Sundays  thus  superseded  by  Doubles  ve 
never  omitted,  but  always  recited  (instead  of  St.  John's 
Gospkl)  at  the  end  of  Mass  ; and  also  that  a Commem- 
oration of  the  Sunday,  by  its  proper  Collect,  Secret, 
and  Postcommunion,  is  mways  made  immediately  after 
the  Collect,  &c.  of  the  festival. 

But  as  it  sometimes  happens  that  a Double  is  trans- 
ferred to  a future  vacant  day,  on  account  of  the  Octave 
of  some  festival  of  higher  rank  intervening,  then  the  dif- 
ficulty of  finding  out  such  transferred  festival,  may  be 
easily  removed  by  consulting  the  Laity's  Directory ^ pub- 
lished as  a guide  to  the  morning,  as  well  as  the  evening 
service  of  the  church. 

As  references  are  frequently  made  to  the  Common  of 
Saints j commencing  at  p.  459,  to  the  Proper  of  Saints j 
beginning  with  p.  521,  and  continuing  in  regular  pro- 
gression to  the  end  of  the  Ecclesiastic^  Year ; the  read- 
er will  find  the  Masses  thus  referred  to,  designated  by 
numerical  letters,  from  No.  I.  to  XXI.  inclusively : w 
it  therefore  observed,  that  on  whatever  day  of  the  month 
these  numerical  references  appear  in  the  Calendar,  or 
General  Index,  it  denotes  that  the  Mass  thereof  (having 
no  proper  parts  assigned  to  it)  is  taken  entirely  from  tlie 
Common  Mass  referred  to : but  should  any  exceptions 
occur,  they  are  staled  in  a parenthesis. 

Commemorations  are  made  by  the  addition  of  a Col- 
lect, Secret  and  Postcommunion,  to  those  that  are 
proper  to  the  feast  of  the  day.  When  therefore  the  word 
COLLECT,  with  an  &c.  annexed  thereto,  appears  in 
the  Rubrics,  the  denotes  that  its  proper  Secret  and 
Postcommunion  are  also  comprehended. 

ABBREVIATIONS  EXPLAINED. 

ap.  Apostle,  m.  Martyr,  mm.  Martyrs,  p.  Pope,  abp. 
Archbishop,  bp.  Bishop,  pr.  Priest,  c.  Confessor,  D. 
Doctor,  ab.  Abbot,  v.  Virgin,  w.  Widow,  B.  Blessed,  </. 
Double,  sd.  Semidouble,  d.  I.  cl.  Double  of  the  first 
class,  d.  IT.  cl.  Double  of  the  second  class,  gr.  d. 
Greater  Double.  The  Holy-days  of  obligation  are  in 
(CAPITALS,  and  the  days  of  particular  devotion  in 
Italics 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


Tht  CALENDAR,  or  GENERAL  INDEX  toiU 
Immoveable  Feasts, 

JANUARY,  XXXI  Days. 

1 CIRCUMCISION  of  our  Lord,  d.  IL  d.  88 

2 Octave-day  of  St  Stephen,  d.  533 

3 Octave-day  of  St.  John,  d,  as  on  his  Feast  81 

4 Octave-day  of  Holy  Innocents,  d.  as  on  ibid.  82 

5 Octave-day  of  St  Thomas,  d.  534 

6 EPIPHANY  of  our  Lord,  d.  /.  d.  89 

11  Commem,  of  St  Hygine,  by  the  Collect,  In- 
firmitatem, &c.  461 

13  The  Octave-day  of  the  Epiphany,  cL  534 

n,  Sunday  after  Epiphany,  Feast  of  the  most 

holy  Name  of  Jesus,  d.  IL  d,  94 

14  St  Hilary,  bp.  conf.  sd.  535 

15  St  Paul  the  first  Heimit,  d.  536 

16  St  Marcellus,  p.  m.  sd,  537 

17  St  Anthony,  ab.  Mass  XV.*  p.  491.  (Gospel 

in  Mass  XIV.)  490 

18  St  Peter’s  Chair  at  Rome,  gr.  d.  538 

19  St  Wolstan,  bp.  of  Worcester,  c.  d,  540 

20  SS.  Fabian  and  Sebastian,  mm.  d.  541 

21  St  A^es,  V.  m.  first  Feast,  d.  542 

SS.  Vincent,  &c.  mm.  sd,  ib. 

St  Raymund  of  Pennafort,  c.  sd,  543 

St  Timothy,  bp.  m.  sd,  ib. 

The  Conversion  of  St  Paul,  ap.  gr.  d.  544 
St  Polycarp,  bp.  m.  sd,  546 

St  John  Chrysostom,  bp.  c.  sd,  547 

St  Agnes,  a second  time  ib. 

St  Francis  de  Sales,  bp.  c.  d.  548 

St  Martina,  v.  m.  sd.  Mass  XVI,  493 

31  St  Peter  Nolascus,  c.  d.  548 

FEBRUARY,  XXVIII  or  XXIX  Days. 

1 St  Ignatius,  bp.  m.  sd,  548 

2 Purification  of  B.  V.  Mary,  d.  II,  d.  549 

A2 


,y  Google 


IV 


MARCH  and  APRIL. 


3 St  Blase,  bp.  m.  Mass  II. 

4 St  Andrew  Coi-sini,  bp.  c.  d. 

5 St  Agatha,  v.  m.  d. 

6 St  Dorothy,  v.  m.  Mass  XVII. 

7 St  Romuald,  ab.  d.  Mass  XV.* 

8 St  John  of  Matha,  c.  d. 

9 St  Appollonia,  v.  m.  Mass  XVI. 
lO  St  Scholastica,  V.  d. 

14  St  VfJentine,  pr.  m. 

15  SS.  Faustinas  and  Jovita,  mm.  Mass  IX. 

18  St  Simeon,  bp.  m.  Mass  I. 

22  St  Peter’s  Chair  at  Antioch,  gr.  d. 

24  or  25  SL  Mallhias,  ap.  d.  IL  cl. 

MARCH,  XXXI  Days. 

1 St.  David,  bp.  c.  d.  Mass  X.* 

2 St  Chad,  bp.  of  Lichfield,  c.  d. 

4 St  Casimir,  c.  sd. 

7 St  Thomas  of  Aquin,  c.  D,  d. 

8 St  Felix,  bp.  c.  d.  Mass  X.* 

9 St  Frances,  w.  d. 

10  The  forty  Martyrs,  sd. 

11  St  John  of  God,  c.  d. 

12  St  Gregory,  p.  c.  and  D d. 

17  St.  Patrick,  ap.  Patron  of  Ireland,  bp.  c.  so. 

19  St.  Joseph,  c.  d.  II.  cl. 

23  St  Cuthbert  bp.  of  Lindisfame,  c.  d. 

24  St  Benedict,  ab.  d.  Mass  XV.* 

25  ANNUNCIAT.  of  B.  V.  Mary,  d.  IL  cl. 

APRIL,  XXX  Days. 

2 St  Francis  of  Paula,  c.  d. 

3 St  Richard,  bi'^hop  of  Chichester,  c.  d. 

4 St  Isidore,  bp  't  d.  Mass  XII. 

5 St  Vincent  Ferrerius,  c.  d. 


11  St  Leo,  p.  c.  d. 

13  St  Hermenegild,  m.  sd. 

14  SS.  Tiburtius,  &c.  mm. 

17  St  Anicete,  p.  m. 

21  St  Anselm,  abp.  c.  d.  Mass  XII. 


464 

555 

ib. 

496 

491 

557 

493 

557 
ib. 

479 

461 

538 

558 

482 

559 

560 
ib. 

481 

561 
ib. 

562 
ib. 

563 
ib. 

564 
491 

565 


566 

567 
485 

567 

568 
ib. 

569 
ib. 

485 


Digitized  by  Google 


MAY  and  JUNE. 


22  SS.  Soter  and  Cains,  bps.  mm.  5(X> 

23  St,  George,  m.  patron  of  England,  d.  L d,  57C 

24  St.  Fidelis,  m.  d,  571 

25  St,  Mark,  evangelist,  d,  IL  cL  ib, 

26  SS.  Cletus,  &c.  bps.  m.  sd,  573 

* 28  St.  Vitalis,  m.  Mass  V.  470 

29  St.  Peter,  m.  d,  573 

3(^  The  Octave-day  of  St.  George,  d,  570 

MAY,  XXXI  Days. 

SS.  Philip  and  James  aps.  d,  I.  d,  574 

2 Su  Athanasius,  bp.  c.  d,  575 

3 Finding  of  the  H,  Cross,  cL  II,  d,  577 

4 St.  Monic^  w.  d,  579 

5 St.  Catherine  of  Sienna,  v.  d,  580 

6 St.  John  before  the  Latin  Gate,  gr.  d,  581 

7 St.  Stanislaus,  bp.  m,  d,  ib. 

8 Apparition  of  St.  Michael,  5€c  29.  666 

9 St.  Gregoiy  Nazianzen,  bp.  D.  d,  581 

10  St.  Antoninus,  bp.  c.  sd,  582 

1 1 St  Pius  V.  p.  c.  sd,  583 

12  SS.  Nereus,  &c.  mm.  sd,  ib. 

14  St  Boniface,  m.  584 

16  St  Ubaldus,  bp.  c.  sd,  ib. 

17  St  Paschal  Baylon,  c.  d,  ib. 

18  St  Venantius,  m.  d,  ib. 

19  St  Dunstan,  apb.  of  Canterbury,  d,  585 

20  St  Bemardine,  c.  sd,  * ib. 

21  St  Peter  Celestine,  pope,  c.  d,  586 

25  St  Aldhelm,  bp.  of  Salisbury,  c.  d,  ib. 

26  St  Augustin,  ap.  of  Eng.  bp.  c.  d,  II,  d,  587 

27  St  Philip  Nerius,  c.  d,  ib. 

30  St  Felix,  p.  m.  Mass  I.  461 

31  St  Petronilla,  v.  Mass  XX.  499 

JUNE,  XXX  Days. 

2 Octave-day  of  St  Au^stbi,  d,  588 

3 St  Mary  Magdalen  of  Pazzi,  v.  sd,  ib. 

6 St  Norbert,  bp.  c.  d.  ib. 

8 St  William,  anp.  of  York,  c.  <L  589 

A3 


Digitized  by  Google 


JULY. 


9 SS.  Primus,  &c.  mm.  569 

JO  St  Margaret,  Q.  of  Scots,  w.  ad.  590 

11  St,  Barnabas f ap.  d,  ib. 

St  John  a Facundo,  c.  d,  592 

13  St  Anthony  of  Padua,  c.  d.  593 

14  St  Basil  the  Great,  bp.  c.  and  D.  d.  ib. 

15  SS.  Vitus,  Modestus,  &c.  mm.  594 

18  SS.  Mark  and  Marcellian,  mm.  595 

19  St  Juliana,  de  Falconeris,  v.  d,  597 

20  St  Silverius,  p.  m.  ib. 

22  St  Alban,  proto-m.  of  England,  gr,  d.  598 

23  Vigil  of  St  John  the  Baptist  ib. 

24  JS/htivity  of  St,  John  Baptistj  d,  I,  cL  600 

25  St  Wmiam,  Abbot  of  York  602 

26  SS.  John  and  Paul,  mm.  603 

27  St  Leo,  p.  c.  sd,  605 

28  Vigil  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul  ib. 

29  SS.  PETER  and  PAUL.  aps.  d,  1,  cL  ^ 607 

30  Commem,  of  St  Paul  ap.  d,  * 609 

JULY,  XXXI  Days. 

1 Octave-day  of  St  J.  Baptist,  d,  same  as  m 600 

2 The  Visitation  of  the  B.  V.  Mary,  gr,  d,  611 

Within  the  Octave  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul  612 

6 Octave-day  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,  cL  ib. 

7 Translation  of  St  Thomas,  m.  gr,  <L  614 

8 St  Elizabeth,  Q.  w.  ad,  615 

10  The  7 Brethren  and  SS.  Rufina,  &c.  mm.  ad.  ib. 

1 1 St  Pius,  p.  m.  Mass  I.  Statuit  461 

12  St  John  Gaulbert,  ab.  d,  616 

13  St  Anaclete,  Mass  II.  p.  464,  ( Goapdf  Luke)  463 

14  St  Bonaventure,  bp.  c.  and  D.  d.  617 

15  Translation  of  St  S with  in,  bp.  c.  ib. 

16  B.  V.  Mary  of  Mount  Carmel,  gr,  d.  618 

17  St  Osmund,  bp.  of  Salisbury,  c.  d,  ib. 

18  St  Camilliis  de  I^ellis,  c.  d.  619 

19  St  Vincent  a Paulo,  c.  d.  620 

20  St  Jerome  Emilian,  c.  d.  ib. 

21  St  Henry,  euip.  c.  sd.  623 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUGUST.  vii 

22  St.  Mary  Magdalen,  d.  m 

23  St  Apollinaris,  bp.  m.  cL  0*24 

24  St  Alexius,  c.  sd,  f)2(» 

25  St.  James,  ap.  d.  H.  cl.  (i27 

26  St.  Anne,  Mother  of  the  B.  V.  Mary,  gr.  d.  628 

^ St  Pantaleon,  m.  Mass  IV.  468 

28  SS.  Nazarius,  Celsus,  &c.  mm.  sd.  (>23 

29  St  Martha,  v.  sd.  630 

30  SS.  Abdon  and  Sennen,  mm.  <;31 

31  St  Ignatius,  c.  d.  632 

* AUGUST,  XXXI  Days. 

1 St  Peter’s  Chains,  gr.  d.  ih. 

2 St  Stephen,  p.  m.  6.‘13 

3 The  finding  of  St  Stephen,  Mass,  as  his  Feast  78 

4 St  Dominic,  c.  d.  633 

5 B.  V.  M.  ad  Nive^  gr.  d.  Votive  Mass,  507 

6 The  Transfiguration  of  our  Lord,  gr.  d.  634 

7 St  Cajetan,  c.  d.  6^ 

8 SS.  Cyriacus,  Largus,  &c.  mm.  sd.  ib 

9 Vigil  of  St  Lawrence  638 

10  St.  Lawrence,  m.  d.  II.  d.  ib 

11  SS.  Tiburtius  and  Susanna,  mm.  64C 

12  St  Clare,  v.  d.  Mass  XIX.  498 

13  SS.  Hippolite  and  Cassian,  mm.  640 

14  Vigil  of  the  Assumption  641 

15  ASSUMPTION  of  B.  V.  M.  d.  I.  cl.  642 

Sund.  within  the  Oct.  St  JOACHIM,  c.  gr.  d.  644 

16  St  Hyacinth,  c.  d.  Mass  XIII.  488 

17  Octave-day  of  St  Lav^ence,  d.  645 

18  Commem,  of  St.  Agapete,  in.  646 

20  St  Bernard,  ab.  Mass  XV.  * p.  491,  (except 

Lesson,  as  on  St  Greg.  Naz.  May  9.  581 

21  St  Jane  Frances,  w.  d.  646 

22  Octave-day  of  the  Assumption,  d.  647 

23  St  Philip  Benitius,  c.  d.  648 

24  SL  Bartholomew,  ap.  d.  II.  cl.  ib. 

25  St  Lewis,  king,  c.  sd.  649 

26  St  Zephyrin,  p.  in.  651 


Digitized  by  Google 


vm  SEPTEMBER  and  OCTOBER. 

27  St  Joseph  Calasanctius,  c.  cL  651 

28  St  Augustin,  bp.  c.  D.  d.  652 

29  Decollation  of  St  John  Baptist,  d.  653 

30  St  Rose  of  Lima,  v.  rf.  654 

31  St  Aidan,  bp.  of  Lmdisf.  d.  Mass  X.*  Statuit  482 

SEPTEMBER,  XXX  Days. 

1 St  Raymond  Nonnatus,  c.  d,  655 

2 St  Stephen,  king,  c.  ad  ib. 

5 St  Laur.  Justinian,  bp.  c.  Mass  X.*  482 

8 JStaiiviiy  of  B.  V.  Mary.  See  her  Conception.  529 
On  Sunday  witbin  the  Octave  is  kept  tlie 
Feast  of  the  HOLY  NAME  of  B.  V.  M.  gr  d.  656 

9 Commem,  of  St  Gorgonius,  m.  657 

/ 10  St  Nic.  of  Tolentine,  c.  Mass  XTV.  489 

11  Comm,  of  SS.  Protus  and  Hyacuith,  mm.  657 

14  The  Exaltation  of  the  Holy  Cross,  gr.  d.  658 

15  Octave-day  of  the  B.  V.  Mary’s  Nativ.  d.  659 

16  Cornelius  and  Cyprian,  mm.  660 

17  The  Stigmas  of  St  Francis,  d.  ^ ib, 

18  St  Joseph  a Cupertino,  c.  d.  661 

19  SS.  Januarius,  &c.  mm.  Mass  IX.  479 

20  SS.  Eustachius,  &c.  mm.  d.  661 

21  St.  Matthew,  an.  and  e^ang.  d.  II.  cL  662 

22  St  Thomas  of  Villanovu,  bp.  c.  d,  663 

23  St  Linus,  p.  m.  ad.  664 

24  B.  V.  Mary  of  Mercy,  gr.  d ib. 

26  SS.  Cyprian  and  Justina,  mm.  ib. 

27  SS.  Cosmas  and  Damian,  mm.  ad.  665 

28  St  Wenceslaus,  duke,  m.  ad.  ib. 

29  Dedicatum  of  St.  Michael,  d.  II  d.  666 

30  St  Jerome,  pr.  c.  D.  cL  668 

OCTOBER,  XXXI  Days. 

On  the  first  Sunday  is  kept  the 
Feast  of  the  Rosary  of  B.  V.  M.  gr.  d.  ib 

1 St  Remigius,  bp.  c.  Mass  X.  * 482 

2 The  Holy  Angels  Guardians,  d.  661) 

3 St  Thomas  Im.  of  Hereford,  c.  rf.  670 

5 St  Francis  of  Assisium,  c.  d.  ib. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NOVEMBER.  jl 

5 St.  Placidus,  &c.  mm.  671 

6 St.  Bruno,  c.  d,  ibu 

7 St.  Mark,  p..c.  672 

8 St.  Bridget,  w.  rf.  ib. 

9 SS.  Dionysius,  Rusticus,  &c.  min.  673 

10  St  Paulinus,  abp.  of  York,  3Iass  X.  • 482 

11  St  Francis  Borgia,  c.  sd.  674 

12  St  Wilfrid,  abp.  of  York,  d.  675 

13  St  Edward,  king  and  c.  d.  IL  d,  ib. 

14  St  Calistus,  p.  m.  sd»  ib. 

15  St.  Teres^  v.  d,  676 

17  St.  Hedwiges,  w.  sd,  ib. 

18  St,  Luke^  evang.  d.  IL  d.  677 

19  St.  Peter  of  Alcantara,  c.  d,  678 

20  Octave-day  of  St  Edward,  d,  as  on  the  Feast  675 

21  SS.  Ursula,  &c.  w.  mm.  gr,  d,  678 

22  St  John  Cantius,  c.  d.  679 

25  St  John  of  Beverley,  abp.  of  York,  c.  680 

26  St  Evaristus,  p.  m.  Mass  I.  461 

27  Vigil  of  SS.  Simon  and  Jude,  aps.  681 

28  SS.  Simon  and  Judcy  aps,  d.  IL  d.  682 

29  Venerable  Bede,  c.  d.  * 684 

31  Vigil  of  All  Saints.  ib. 

NOVEMBER,  XXX  Days. 

1 ALL  SAINTS,  d.  IL  d.  685 

2 Commem,  of  all  the  Faithful  departed,  a.  688 

3 St  Winefrid,  v.  m.  d.  689 

4 St  Charles  Borromeus,  bp.  c.  d.  ib. 

8 The  Octave-day  of  All- Saints,  d.  690 

9 Dedication  of  our  Saviour’s  Church,  d.  ib. 

10  St  Andrew  Avelline,  c.  sd.  691 

11  St  Martin,  bp.  c.  d.  ib. 

12  St  Martin,  p.  in.  sd.  692 

13  St  Didacus,  c.  sd.  693 

14  Translation  of  St  Erconwald,  bp.  c.  d.  ib. 

15  St  Gertrude,  v.  and  abliess,  d.  694 

16  St  Edmund,  abp.  of  Canterbury,  c.  d.  ib. 

17  St  Hugh,  bp.  of  Luicoln,  c.  d.  694 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


z 


DECEMBEIL 


lb  Dedic.  of  the  churches  of  SS,  Peter,  &.c.d. 
1&  St  Elizabeth,  w.  d. 

20  St  Edmund  king,  m.  d. 

21  Presentation  of  the  B.  V.  M.  gr.  d. 

22  St  Cecily,  v.  m.  d. 

23  St  Clement,  p.  m.  stL 

24  St  John  of  the  Cross,  c.  d 

25  St  Catharine,  v.  m.  d. 

26  St  Felix  Valois,  c.  d. 

27  St  Gregory  Thaumaturgus,  bp.  c.  d. 

29  Vigil  of  St  Andrew,  m. 

30  St.  Andrew,  ap.  d.  II.  cl. 

DECEMBER,  XXXI  Days. 

2 St  Bibiana,  v.  m.  sd. 

3 St  Francis  Xavier,  c.  d. 

4 St  Peter  Chrysologos,  bp.  c.  d. 

5 St  Berinus,  bp.  c.  d.  Mass  X.* 

6 St.  Nicholas,  bp.  c.  d. 

7 St  Ambrose,  bp.  c.  D.  d. 

8 Conception  of  the  B.  V.  Mary,  d.  II.  cl. 

10  St  Melchiades,  p.  m.  Mass  1. 

11  St  Damasus,  p.  c.  sd. ' 

13  St  Lucy,  V.  m.  d. 

'15  Octave-day  of  the  conception,  d. 

16  St  Eusebius,  bp.  m.  sd.  Mass  II. 

21  St.  Thomas,  ap.  d.  II.  cl. 

25  The  NATIVITY  of  our  Lord,  d.  I.  d. 

26  St.  Stephen,  1st  m.  d.  II.  cl. 

27  St.  John,  ap.  evang.  d.  II.  cl. 

28  Holyinnocents,  d.  II.  cl. 

29  St.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  bp.  m.  d.  II.  cl. 
^ Sunday  within  the  Octave  of  the  Nativity. 

31  St  Silvester,  p.  c.  d. 


504 

695 
ib. 

696 
ib 
ib. 

696 

ib. 

699 

ib. 

521 

524 

525 

526 
ib. 

482 

527 

528 

529 
461 

531 
ib. 

529 

464 

532 
72 
78 
81 
82 

85 

86 

533 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 » ) 

INDEX. 

To  such  Masses,  Hymns,  &c.  as  covld  not  he  included 
in  the  Calendar  or  General  Index. 

Votive  Masses. 

Mass  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  p.  700 

of  the  Holy  Ghost  701 

of  the  B.  V.  M.  fix)m  Advent  to  Christmas  509 

of  the  B.  V.  M.  from  Xmas  to  Candlemas  51 0 

of  the  B.  V.  M.  from  Candlemas  to  Advent  507 

for  the  Bridegroom  and  Bride  705 

for  the  Sick  709' 

in  the  time  of  War  712 

Masses  for  the  Dead. 

On  the  day  of  a person’s  death  or  burial  * 510 

On  the  3d,  7th,  and  30th  day  after  decease  516 

Anniversary  Mass  of  the  Dead  517 

Common  Mass  of  the  Dead  518 

Occasional  Collects,  Secrets,  and  Postcommu- 
nions, for  days  that  are  not  doubles  714 

Te  Deum,  to  be  sung  in  time  of  public  thanks- 
giving 703 

Paraphrase  or  translation  of  Te  Denm  704 

Psalm  xix.  Exaudiat,  for  the  King  719 

The  penitential  Psalm  Miserere  279 

Ordinaiy  of  the  Mass  xv 

Pange  lingua  275 

The  Magnificat  279 

V.  O faidiful  Cross,  with  the  Hymn  following  it  295 
Vexilla  Regis  297 

Victimce  Paschali  330 

Litanies  and  Prayers  following  ditto  359 

Adeste  fideles  719 

A^eni  Creator  ib. 

Veni  Sancte  Spiritus  376 

Lauda  Sion  396 

Nunc  dimittis  552 


Digitized  by  Google 


( M«-  ) 


§ H< 

Ul 

n 

_ p 

p H 

3 e 

ll 

• m 

1843 

FiTbTl 

1844 

Feb. 

1845 

Jan.  ] 

1846 

Feb. 

1847 

Jan.  ; 

1848 

Feb.  5 

1849 

Feb. 

1850 

Jan.  i 

1851 

Feb.  ; 

1852 

Feb. 

1853 

Jan.  1 

1854 

Feb.  : 

1855 

Feb. 

1856 

Jan.  1 

1857 

Feb. 

1858 

Jan.  1 

1859 

Feb.! 

1860 

Feb. 

1861 

Jan.  ! 

1862 

Feb. 

1863 

Feb. 

;1864 

Jan.  ! 

:1865 

Feb. 

11866 

Jan.  : 

il867 

Feb. 

;1868 

Feb. 

1869 

Jan. 

1870 

Feb. 

1871 

Feb. 

[1872 

Jan. 

[1873 

Feb. 

11874 

Feb. 

1875 

Jan. 

1876 

Feb. 

1877 

Jan. 

( xii»  ) 


ANTHEMS  AT  SPRINKLING  THE 
HOLY  WATER. 

Before  Solemn  Mass  on  the  Sundays, Trinity 
to  Pabn-Sunday,  inclusiveLy^  the  foUomng  Anthem 
is  sung: 

Ant,  A Sperges  me  Anth,  ^HOU  shalt 
Domine  hys-  JL  sprinkle  me, 

sopo,  et  mimdabor:  la-  with  hyssop,  O Lord, 
vabis  me,  et  super  nivem  and  I sliall  be  cleansed : 
dealbabor.  thou  shall  wash  me,  and 

1 shall  be  made  whiter 
than  snow. 

Ps.  Miserere  mei,  De-  Ps.  Have  mercy  on  me, 
us,  secundum  magnam  O God,  according  to  thy 

misericordiam  tuam.  great  mercy. 

V.  Gloria  Patri,  &c.  V.  Glory  be  to  the 
Father,  &c. 

Ant.  Asperges  me,  Anth,  Thou  wilt  sprin* 
&c.  kle  me,  &c. 

The  Priest^  being  returned  to  the  Foot  of  the  Altar^ 
says, 

V.  Ostende  nobis,  V.  Show  us,  O Lord, 

Domine,  misericordiam  thy  mercy, 

tuam. 

R.  £t  salutare  tuum  R.  And  grant  us  thy 
da  nobis.  salvation. 

V.  Domine,  exaudi  V.  O Lord,  hear  my 

orationem  meam.  pr^er. 

R.  Et  clamor  meus  ad  K.  And  let  my  cry 
te  veniat.  come  unto  thee. 

V.  Dominus  vobis-  V.  The  Lord  be  with 

cum  you, 

R.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo.  R.  And  with  thy  s])irit. 

For  the  Prayer,  Exaudi,  see  the  next  Page, 

6 

Digitized  by  Google 


( XIV  ) 


From  EASTER  to  WHIT-SUNDAY,  indusivdvy 
instead  of  the  fort^oing^  the  follotoing  ANTHEM 
is  sung,  and  Alleluias  art  added  to  tf^  V.  Ostende 
nobis,  and  its  R.  £t  salutare,  &c. 


ANTHEM. 


n)I  aquain  egredi- 
entem  de  templo  a 
latere  dextro,  Alleluia : 
et  omnes  ad  quos  perve- 
nit aqua  ista,  salvi  facti 
sunt  et  dicent,  Allel 
Ps.  Confitemini  Do- 
mino, quoniam  bonus : 
quoniam  in  saeculum  mi- 
sericordia ejus.  Gloria. 


I Saw  water  flowing 
from  the  right  side 
of  the  temple,  Alleluia, 
and  all  to  whom  that 
water  came,  were  saved, 
and  they  shall  say,  AUeL 
Ps.  Praise  the  Lord, 
because  he  is  good:  be- 
cause his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever.  Glory,  &c. 


7^e  Prayer,  Exaudi. 

Hear  us,  O holy  Lord,  Almighty  Father,  eter- 
nal God!  and  vouchsafe  to  send  thy  holy 
angel  from  heaven,  to  guard,  cherish,  protect,  visit, 
and  defend  all  that  are  assembled  in  this  place: 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen, 


A Preparatory  Prayer  before  Mass, 

PROSTRATE  in  s|>irit  at  the  foot  of  thy  holy 
altar,  I adore  thee,  O Almighty  God!  and 
firmly  believe  that  the  Mass,  at  which  I am  going 
to  assist,  is  the  sacrifice  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
thy  Son,  Christ  Jesus.  O ! grant  that  I may  assist 
thereat  with  the  attention,  resi>ect,  and  awe  due  to 
such  au^st  mysteries:  and  that  by  the  merits  of 
the  Victim  there  offered  for  me,  I myself  may  be- 
come an  agreeable  sacrifice  to  thee,  who  livest  and 
reignest  with  the  same  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  one 
God,  world  without  end.  Amen, 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


( »r  ) 


THE  ORDINARY 

OF  THE  MASS. 

Tht  Priest  at  the  Foot  of  the  Altar , beginnings  satth^ 

IN  Nomine  Patris,  •J'Ct  TN  the  Name  of  the 
Filii,  et  Spiritus  Sane-  J-  Father,  and  of  the 
tL  Amen.  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 

Ghost  Amen. 

Ant.  Introiho  ad  altare  Anth.  1 will  go  unto 
Dei.  the  Altar  of  God. 

R.  Ad  Deum,  qui  laeti-  R.  To  God,  who  re- 
ficat  juventutem  meam.  joiceth  my  youth. 

Psalm  xlii. 

JUDICA  me  Deus,  et  TUDGE  me  O God, 
discerne  causam  me-  ^ <md  distinguish  my 
am  de  gente  non  sancta:  cause  .from  the  nation 
ah  homine  iniquo  et  do-  that  is  not  holy:  deliver 
loso  erne  me.  me  from  the  unjust  and 

deceitful  man. 

R.  Quia  tu  es  Deus,  R.  For  tliou  art  God 
fortitudo  mea,  quare  me  my  strength,  why  hast 
repulisti  ? et  quare  tristis  thou  cast  me  off?  and 
incedo,  dum  affligit  me  why  do  I go  sorrow- 
inimicus  ? ful  whilst  the  enemy  af- 

flicteth  me? 

P.  Emitte  lucem  tuam,  P.  Send  forth  thy 
et  veritatem  tuam : ipsa  light  and  thy  truth : they 
me  deduxerunt,  et  ad-  have  conducted  me,  and 
duxerunt  in  Montem  brought  me  unto  the  holy 
sanctum  tuum,  et  in  Ta-  Hill,  and  into  thy  Ta- 
bernacula tua.  bemacles. 

R.  Et  introibo  ad  al-  R.  And  I will  go  unto 
tare  Dei : ad  Deum  qui  the  Altar  of  God : to 
B 2 

Digitized  by  Google 


xvi 


THP.  ORDINARY 


leetificat  juventutem  me- 
am. 

P.  Confitebor  tibi  in  ci- 
fhara  Deus  Deus  meus: 
quare  tristis  es,  anima 
mea,  et  quare  conturbas 
$ me? 

R.  Spera  in  Deo,  quo- 
niam adhuc  confitebor 
illi:  salutare  vultus  mei, 
et  Deus  meus. 

P.  Gloria  Patri,  et  Fi- 
lio, et  Spiritui  Sancto. 

R.  Sicut  erat  in  prin- 
cipio, et  nunc,  et  semper, 
et  in  saecula  saeculomm. 
Arnen. 

P.  Introibo  atl  altare 
Dei. 

R.  Ad  Deum  qui  laeti- 
ficat juventutem  meam. 

P.  Adjutorium  nostrum 
in  nomine  Domini. 

R.  Qui  fecit  coelum  et 
terram. 

P.  Confiteor  Deo  om- 
nipotenti, &c. 

R.  Misereatur  tui  om- 
nipotens Deus,  et  dimis- 
sis peccatis  tuis,  perducat 
te  ad  vitam  aeternam. 

P.  Arnen. 

R.  Confiteor  Deo  om- 
nipotenti, beatae  Mariae 
semper  Virgini,  beato 
Michaeli  Archangelo, 
beato,  Joonni  Baptistae, 
sanctis  Apostolis  Petro 


God  who  giveth  joy  to 
my  youth. 

P.  To  thee,  O God,  my 
God  I will  give  praise 
upon’ the  harp:  why  art 
thou  sad,  O my  soul ; and 
why  dost  thou  disquiet 
me? 

R.  Hope  in  God,  for 
I will  still  give  praise  to 
him,  the  salvation  of  my 
countenance  and  my  God. 

P.  Glory  be  to  the  Fa- 
ther, and  to,  &c. 

R.  As  it  was  in  the  be- 
ginning, is  now,  and  ever 
shall  be,  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

P.  I vnll  go  unto  tlie 
altar  of  God. 

R.  To  God  who  rejoic- 
eth  my  youth. 

P.  Our  help  is  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord. 

R.  Who  made  heaven 
and  earth. 

P.  I confess  to  Almigh- 
ty God,  &c. 

R.  May  Almighty  God 
be  merciful  to  mee,  and 
forgiving  thee  thy  sins, 
bring  thee  to  everlasting 
life.  P. . Amen. 

R.  I confess  to  A1 
mighty  God,  to  bless- 
ed Mary,  ever  a Vir 
gin,  to  blessed  Michael 
the  Archangel,  to  blessed 
John  Baptist,  to  the  holy 


oy  Google 


or  THE  MASS. 


xvil 


ot  Fault),  omnibus  sanc- 
tis, et  tibi  Pater,  quia 
jieccavi  niinis  cogita- 
tione, verbo  et  opere, 
mea  culpa,  mea  culpa, 
mea  maxima  culpa,  laeo 
precor  beatam  Mariam 
semper  Virginem,  bea- 
tum Michaelem  Arch- 
angelum,  beatum  Joan- 
nem  Baptistam,  sanctos 
Apostolos  Petrum  et 
Paulum,  omnes  sanctos, 
et  te  Pater,  orare  pro 
me  ad  Dominum  Deum 
nostrum. 

P.  Misereatur  vestri 
omnipotens  Deus,  et  di- 
missis peccatis  vestris, 
perducat  vos  ad  vitam 
aeternam.  R.  Arnen, 

P.  Indulgentiam,  abso- 
lutionem, et  remissionem 
peccatorum  nostrorum, 
tribuat  nobis  onmipqtens 
et  misericors  Dominus. 
R.  Arnen. 

P.  Deus  tu  conversus 
▼ivificaJbis  nos. 

R.  Et  plebs  tua  laeta- 
bitur in  te. 

P.  Ostende  nobis. 
Domine,  misericordiam 
tuam. 

R.  £t  salutare  tuum 
da  nobis. 

B 


Apostles  Peter  and  Paul, 
to  all  the  saints,  and  to 
you.  Father,  that  I have 
sinned  exceedingly  in 
thouglit,  word  and  deed, 
through  my  fault,  through 
my  fault,  through  my 
most  grievous  fault. 
Therefore  I beseech  .the 
Blessed  Mary,  ever  a vir- 
gin, Blessed  Michael  the 
Archangel,  Blessed  Jolm 
Baptist,  the  holy  Apos- 
tles Peter  and  Paul,  and 
all  the  saints,  and  you, 
O Father,  to  pray  to  the 
Lord  our  GJod  for  me. 

P.  May  Almighty  God 
be  merciful  unto  you, 
and,  forgiving  you  your 
sins,  bring  you  to.  life 
everlasting.  R.  Amen, 

P.  May  the  Almighty 
and  merciful  Lord  grant 
us  pardon,  absolution, 
and  remission  of  our 
sins.  R.  Amen, 

P.  Thou,  O Grod,  being 
turned  towards  us,  wilt 
enliven  us. 

R.  And  thy  people 
will  rejoice  in  thee. 

P.  Show  us,  O Lord, 
thy  mercy. 

R.  And  grant  us  thy 
salvation. 

3 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ORDINARY 


Xvili 


P.  Domine,  exaudi 
orjitionem  meam. 

R.  Et  clamor  meus  ad 
te  veniat 

P.  Dominus  vobis- 
cum. 

R.  Et  cum  spii*itu  tuo. 


P.  O Lord  hear  my 
prayer. 

R.  And  let  my  cry 
come  unto  thee. 

P.  The  Lord  be  with 
you. 

R,  And  with  thy  spirit 


Tke  Priest  going  up  to  the.  Mtar^  says^ 

Aufer  a nobis  qusBsu-  Take  a>vay  from  us 
mus  Domine,  iniquitates  our  iniquities,  we  be- 
nostras:  ut  ad  Sancta  seech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
Sanctorum,  puris  merea-  we  may  be  wortliy  to  en- 
mur  mentibus  introire,  ter  with  pure  minds  into 
Per  Christum  Dominum  the  Holy  of  holies.  Thro’, 
nostrum.  Amen,  Amen, 

JVhen  come  up  to  the  Altar,  bowing  down,  he  says, 
Orarnus  te  Domine  We  beseech  thee  O 
per  merita  sanctorum  Lord  by  the  merits  of 
tuorum,  quorum  reli-  thy  saints,  whose  relics 
quiee  hie  sunt,  et  orani-  are  here,  and  of  all  the 
um  sanctorum : ut  indul-  saints : that  thou  wouklst 
gere  digneris  omnia  pec-  vouchsafe  to  forgive  me 
cata  mea.  Amen,  all  my  sins.  Amen, 

Here,  at  solemn  Masses,  the  Priest,  (after  having 
blessed  the  incense  with  the  following  words : May- 
est  thou  be  bles*f*sed  by  Him,  in  whose  honour 
thou  shalt  be  burnt,  and  fumed  the  altar  in  the 
form  of  a Cross),  turns  to  the  book,  and  reads  the 
Introit  ; which,  being  every  day  different,  must 
be  sought  for  in  its  proper  place.  After  which,* 
Kjrie  eleison  and  Christe  eleison  are  aUemaiely 
sung  in  the  choir, 

P.  Kyrie  eleison,  R.  Kyrie  eleison,  P.  Kyrie 
eleison.  Lord^  have  mercy  upon  us, 

R.  Christe  eleison,  P.  Christe  eleison,  R.  Christe 
eleison.  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 


'’'gitized  by.CjOO^IC 


or  THE  MASS. 


XIX 


P.  Kwe  eleison,  R.  Kyrie  eleisori,  P.  Kyrie  elei- 
«on.  Ijordy  have  mercy  upon  us, 

GLORIA  IN  EXCELSIS. 

Gloria  in  excelsis  ^LORY  be  to  God 
Deo,  et  in  terra  vT  on  high,  and  on 
pax  hominibus  bonae  vo-  earth,  peace  to  men  of 
iuntatis.  Laudamus  te;  good  will.  We  praise 
benedicimus  te ; adora-  thee ; we  bless  thee  ; we 
mu3  te;  glorificamus  te.  adore  thee;  we  glorify 
Gratias  agimus  tibi  prop-  thee.  We  give  thee 
ter  inagnam  gloriam  thanks  for  thy  great 
tuam.  Domine  Deus,  glory,  O Lord  God, 
Rex  ccBlestis,  Deus  Pa-  heavenly  King,  God  the 
ter  omnipotens.  Domine  Father  Almighty.  O 
Fill  unigenite  Jesu  Chris-  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  tlie 
te.  Domine  Deus,  Agnus  only  begotten  Son.  O 
Dei,  Filius  Patris,  qui  Lord  God,  Lamb  of 
tollis  peccata  mundi,  mi-  God,  Son  of  tlie  Father, 
serere  nobis.  Qui  tollis  who  takest  away  the  sins 
peccata  mundi,  suscipe  of  the  world  have  mercy 
deprecationem  nostram,  on  us.  Who  takest  away 
Qui  sedes  ad  dexteram  the  sins  of  the  world  re- 
Patris,  miserere  nobis,  ceive  our  prayers.  Who 
Quoniam  tu  solus  sane-  sittest  at  the  right  hand 
tus.  Tu  solus  Dominus,  of  the  Father,  have  mer- 
Tu  solus  altissimus,  Jesu  cy  on  us.  For  thou  only 
Christe,  cum  Sancto  Spi-  art  holy.  Thou  only  art 
ritu,  in  gloria  Dei  Patris,  the  Lord.  Thou  only,  O 
Amen,  Jesus  Christ,  together 

with  the  H.  Ghost,  art 
most  high  in  the  glofjtof 
God  the  Father.  Amen, 
Turning  towards  the  people,  the  Priest  salutes  theut, 
saying, 

P.  Dominus  vobiscum.  P.  The  Lord  be  with 
you. 

R.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo.  R.  And  witli  thy  spirit 


Digitized  by  Google 


XX 


TUE  ORDINARY 


(E?*  Uie  Collect  (which  may  he  fotmd  tn  its 
proper  place)  the  following  is  the  second  Collect 
from  Candlemas  day  to  Passion  Sunday,  and  from 
the  III.  Sunday  cfler  Pentecost  HU  Advent,  except 
on  Doubles  or  within  Octaves ; the  third  is  at  the 
choice  of  the  Priest^  and  may  he  found  amongst  the 
Occasional  Prayers,  page 

II.  COLLECT.  A cunctis.  Preserve  us,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  from  all  dangers  of  body  and  soul  : 
and  by  the  intercession  of  glorious  and  blessed 
Mary,  tlie  ever  Virgin  Mother  of  God,  of  the  blessed 
apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  of  blessed  N.  and  of  all 
the  saints,  grant  us,  in  thy  inercy,  health,  and  peace 
that  aU  adversities  and  errors  being  removi,  thy 
Church  may  serve  thee  with  a pure  and  undisturbed 
devotion.  Through. 

From  Low  Sunday  inclusively  tUl  the  Ascension, 
instead  of  the  foregoing^  is  said  the  COLLECT, 
Concede ; urith  its  corresponding  Secret  and 
P.  Com.  as  in  the  Votive  Mass,  Salve,  of  the 
B.  V.  M.  page  507. 

After  the  Collect  or  Collects,  the  Epistle  is  read. 
At  the  end  whereof  the  Assistants  answer  Deo 
^tias;  then  Allows  the  Gradual  or  the  Tract, 
either  of  which  may  he  seen  in  their  proper  places. 

The  Prayer^  Munda  cor  meum,  before  the  Gospel. 

CLEANSE  my  heart  and  my  liiis,  O Almighty 
God,  who  didst  cleanse  the  lips  of  the  pro- 
phet Isaiah  with  a burning  coal:  and  vouchsafe, 
through  thy  gracious  mercy,  so  to  purify  me,  that 
I may  worthily  attend  to  thy  holy  Gospel.  Through 
Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 

May  the  Lord  in  my  heait,  and  on  my  lips, 
that  I may  worthily,  and  in  a becoming  manner 
attend  to  his  holy  Gospel.  Amen. 


ri'gltized  byCjOO^IC 


or  THE  MASS. 


XXJ 


P.  Dominus  vobis- 
mm. 

K.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 

P.  Sequentia  (vel  ini- 
tium ) sancti  Evangelii 
secundum,  &c. 

R.  Gloria  tibi  Domi- 
ne. 


P.  The  Lord  be  with 
you. 

R.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

P.  The  continuation  (or 
the  beginning)  of  the  holy 
Gk)S])el  according  to,  &c. 

R.  Glory  be  to  thee, 
O Lord. 


The  Gospel  may  5e  seen  in  its  proper  place. 

At  the  end  of  the  Gospel,  the  Assistants  ansioety 
R.  Laus  tibi,  Christe.  R.  Praise  be  to  thee, 
O Christ. 

Then  they  say  with  the  Priest^  in  a low  voice. 
May  our  sms  he  blotted  out  by  the  words  of  the 
Gospel. 

The  NICENE  CREED. 


CREDO  in  unum 
Deum  Patrem  omni- 
potentem, factorem  coeli 
et  terrae,  visibilium  om- 
nium et  invisibilium. 

Et  in  unum  Domi- 
num Jesum  Christum, 
Filium  Dei  imigenitum, 
et  ex  Patre  natum  ante 
omnia  saecula.  Deum 
de  Deo : Lumen  de  Lu- 
mine; Deum  verum  de 
Deo  vero;  genitum  non 
factum ; consubstantia- 
lem Patri,  per  quem 
omnia  facta  sunt.  Qui 
propter  nos  homines,  et 
propter  nostram  saluteni 
descendit  de  coelis.  Et 
incarnatus  est  de  Spiri- 
tu Sancto,  ex  Maria  Vir- 


I Believe  in  one  God, 
the  Father  Almighty, 
Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth,  and  of  all  things 
visible  and  invisible. 

And  in  one  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  only  begot- 
ten Son  of  God,  and 
bom  of  the  Father  be- 
fore all  ages.  God  of 
God;  Light  of  Light; 
true  God  of  true  God; 
begotten  not  made ; con- 
substantial  to  the  Fa- 
tlier,  by  whom  all  tilings 
were  made..  Who  for 
us  men,  and  for  our  sal- 
vation, came  do^  fi'oin 
heaven,  and  became  in- 
carnate by  the  Holy 
Ghost  of  the  Virgin 


Digitized  by  Google 


XXll  THE  ORDINARY 


gilie:  ET  HOMO  FAC- 
TUS EST*.  Crucifixus 
etiani  pro  nobis  sub 
Pontio  Pilato,  passus  et 
sepultus  est.  Et  resur- 
rexit tertia  die  secundum 
Scripturas.  Et  ascendit 
ill  coelum,  sedet  ad  dex- 
teram PatriSi  Et  iterum 
venturus  est  cum  gloria 
judicare  vivos  et  mor- 
tuos ; cujus  regni  non 
erit  finis. 


Et  in  Spiritum  Sanc- 
tum, Dommum  et  vivi- 
ficantem, qui  ex  Patre 
Filioque  procedit ; qui 
cum  Patre  et  Filio  simul 
adoratur,  et  conglorifica- 
tur; qui  locutus  est  per 
prophetas.  Et  unam 
sanctam  Catholicam  et 
Apostolicam  Ecclesiam. 
Confiteor  unum  Baptis- 
ma in  remissionem  pec- 
catorum. Et  expecto 
resurrectionem  mortuo- 
rum, et  vitam  venturi 
saeculi.  Arnen, 

P.  Dominus  vobis- 
cum. 

R.  Et  cum  spii’itii  tuo. 


Mair:  AND  WAS 

MADE  MAN.*  He  was 
crucified  also  for  us,  suf- 
fered under  Pontius  Pi- 
late, and  was  buried. 
And  the  third  day  he  rose 
again  according  to  the 
Scriptures.  And  ascend- 
ed into  heaven,  sittetli 
at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father.  And  he  is  to 
come  again  witli  glory 
to  judge  both  the  living 
and  the  dead,  of  whose 
kingdom  there  shall  be 
no  end. 

And  in  tlie  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Lord  and 
Giver  of  life,  who  pro- 
ceedeth  from  the  Father 
and  the  Son;  who,  to- 
gether with  the  Father 
and  the  Sou,  is  adored 
and  glorified ; who 
sjioke  by  the  prophets. 
And  one  holy  Catholic 
and  apostolic  Church. 
1 confess  one  baptism  for 
tlie  remission  of  sins. 
And  1 expect  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead,  and 
the  life  of  the  world  to 
come.  Amen, 

P.  The  Lord  be  with 
you. 

R.  And  with  thy  spirit. 


* At  these  words  the  assistants  kneel  down  to  adore 
God  for  the  ineffable  mystery  of  the  incarnation. 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


\ 

OF  THE  MASS.  XXiu 


Oremus,  Lei  us  pray. 

Here  foUaws  the  OFFERTORY,  rohich  may  he  seen 
in  its  proper  place. 

Oblation  of  the  Host. 

Suscipe,  sancte  Pater,  Accept,  O holy  Fa- 

omnipotens  jeteme  Deus,  tlier,  abnighty  and  eter* 
hanc  immaculatam  Host-  nal  God,  this  unspotted 
iain,  quam  ego  indignus  Host,  which  I tliy  un- 
&inulus  tuus  offero  tibi  worthy  servant  offer  un- 
Deo  meo  vivo  et  vero,  to  thee,  my  living  and 
pro  innumerabilibus  pec-  true  God,  for  my  innu- 
catis,  offensionibus  et  merable  sins,  offences, 
negligentiis  meis,  et  pro  and  negligences,  and  for 
omnibus  circumstanti-  all  here  present;  as  also 
bus ; sed  et  pro  omnibus  for  all  faithful  Christians, 
fidelibus  Christianis,  \i-  both  living  and  dead; 
vis  atque  defunctis;  ut  that  it  may  avail  both 
mihi  et  illis  proficiat  ad  me  and  them  unto  life 
salutem  in  vitam  aeter-  everlasting.  Amen. 
nam.  Amen. 


When  the  Priest  puts  the 
Chalice^ 

Deus  qui  humanae  sul)- 
stantiae  •dignitatem  mira- 
biliter condidisti,  ct  mi- 
rabilius reformasti ; da 
nobis  per  hujus  Aquae 
et  Vini  Mysterium,  ejus 
divinitatis  esse  consortes, 

2ui  humanitatis  nostrae 
eri  dignatus  est  parti- 
ceps, Jesus  Christus  Fi- 
lius tuus  Dominus  nos- 
ter: qui  tecura  vivit  et 
regnat  in  unitate  Spiritus 
sancti  Deus;  p>er  omnia 
saecula  saeculorum.  Arnen. 


Wine  and  Water  into  the 
he  saySf 

O God,  who,  in  creat- 
ing human  nature,  hast 
wonderfully  dignified  it, 
and  still  more  wonder- 
fully reformed  it:  grant 
that  by  the  mystery  of 
this  Water  and  Wine,  we 
may  be  made  partakers 
of  his  divine  nature,  who 
vouchsafed  to  become 
partaker  of  our  human 
nature,  namely,  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  thy  Son, 
who  with  thee,  in  the 
unity  of,  ^c.  Amen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ORDINARV 


xxiv 


Oblation  of  the  Chalice. 


Offerimus  tibi,  Do- 
mine, calicem,  salutaris, 
tuam  deprecantes  cle- 
mentiam : ut  in  conspec- 
tu divinse  Majestatis  tuse, 
pro  nostra  et  totius  mun- 
di salute  cum  odore  sua- 
vitatis ascendat  Ameru, 


We  offer  unto  thee,  O 
Lord,  the  chalice  of  sal- 
vation, beseeching  thy 
clemency:  that  it  may 
ascend  before  thy  di- 
vine Majesty,  as  a sweet 
odour,  for  our  salvation, 
and  for  that  of  the  whole 
world.  Ament 


When  the  Priest  bows  before  the  AUar,  he  says. 

In  spiintu  humilitatis.  Accept  us,  O Lord,  in 
et  in  animo  contrito  sus-  the  spirit  of  humility, 
cipiamur  a te.  Domine:  and  contrition  of  heart: 
et  sic  fiat  sacrificium  nos-  and  grant  that  the  sacri- 
trum  in  conspectu  tuo  fice  we  offer  this  day  in 
hodie,  ut  placeat  tibi,  Do-  thy  sight,  may  be  pleas- 
rnine  Deus.  ing  to  thee,  O Lord  God. 

When  he  bleeses  the  Bread  and  Wine,  he  says^ 

Veni,  sanctificator,  om-  Come,  O almighty  and 
nii»otens  seterne  Deus,  eternal  God,  the  sancti- 
et  benedic  hoc  sacrifi-  fier,  and  bless  this  sacri- 
cium  tuo  sancto  noinhii  fice,  prepared  for  the 
praeparatum.  glory  of  thy  holy  bame. 


/fere,  in  solemn  MoLSses^  he 

Per  intercessionem 
beati  Michaelis  archan- 
gel! stantis  a dexteris  Al- 
taris Incensi,  et  omnium 
electorum  suorum,  incen- 
sum istud  dignetur  Do- 
minus benedicere,  et  in 
odorem  suavitatis  acci- 
pere. Per  Christum  Do- 
minum nostrum.  Arnen* 

% 


blesses  the  Incense,  saying. 

May  the  Lord,  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed 
Michael  the  archangel, 
standing  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Altar  of  Incense, 
and  of  all  his  elect,  vouch- 
safe to  bless  this  incense, 
and  receive  it  as  an  odour 
of  sweetness.  Through, 
Amen* 


Digitized  by  Google 


or  TMK  MASH. 


• xxr 


At  mcensing  the  Bread  cmd  JVinr^  he  says^ 

Incensum  istud  a te  May  this  Incense 
benedictum,  ascendat  ad  which  thou  hast  blest, 
te  Domine,  et  descendat  O Lord  ascend  to  thee, 
super  nos  misericordia  and  may  thy  mercy  de- 
tua.  scend  upon  us. 

At  incensing  the  AUar^  he  says,  Ps.  cxl. 

Dirigatur,  Domine,  Let  my  prayer  O 

oratio  mea,  sicut  incen-  Lord,  be  directed  as  i^ 
sum,  in  conspectu  tiio:  cense  in  thy  sight:  tlie 
elevatio  manuum  mea-  lifting  up  of  my  hands, 
rum  sacrificium  vesper-  as  evening  sacrifice.  Set 
tinum.  Pone  Domine  a watch,  O Lord,  befoi-e 
custodiam  ori  meo,  et  my  mouth:  and  a door 
ostium  circumstantiae  la-  of  prudence  around  my 
biis  meis:  ut  non  decli-  lips;  that  my  heart  in- 
net  cor  meum  in  verba  cline  not  to  evil  words  to 
malitiae,  ad  excusandas  make  excuses  in  sins, 
excusationes  in  peccatis. 

On  giving  the  Censer  to  the  Deacon,  he  says, 

May  the  Lord  enkindle  within  us  tlie  fire  of  his 
love,  and  the  flame  of  everlasting  charity. 

flashing  his  Hands,  he  says,  Ps.  xxv.  6. 

Lavabo  inter  inno-  I will  wash  my  hands 

cenies  manus  me^:  et  among  the  innocent : and 
circumdabo  altare  tuum,  will  compass  thy  altar, 
Domine.  O Lord. 

Ut  audiam  vocem  lau-  That  I may  hear  the 
dis:  et  enarrem  universa  voice  of  thy  praise:  and 
mirabilia  tua.  tell  all  thy  * wondrous 

works. 

Domine  dilexi  deco-  I have  loved  O Lord, 

rem  domus  tuae,  et  locum  the  beauty  of  thy  house, 

habitationis  glorise  tuae.  and  the  place  where  thy 

gloiy  dwelleth. 

Ne  perdas  cum  impiis  Take  not  away  my 
animam  meam ; et  cum  soul,  with  the  .wicked ; 
C 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


xxvi 


THE  ORDINARY  OF^  THE  MASS. 


\ir!s  sanguinum  vitam 
meam. 

In  quorum  manibus 
iniquitates  sunt:  dextera 
eorum  repleta  est  mu- 
neribus. 

Ego  autem  in  inno- 
centia mea  ingressus 
sqm:  redime  me,  et  mi- 
serere mei. 

Pes  meus  stetit  in  di- 
i*ecto:  in  ecclesiis  bene- 
dicam te  Domine. 

Gloria  Patri,  et  Filio, 
&c. 


nor  my  life  with  bloody 
men. 

In  whose  liands  are  ini- 
quities: their  right-hand 
is  filled  with  gif& 

But  I have  walked  in 
my  innocence : redeem 
me  and  have  mercy  on 
me. 

My  foot  hath  stood  in 
the  direct  way : in  the 
churches  I will  bless 
diee,  O Lord. 

Glory  be  to  the  Fatlier 
&c. 


Bomng  before  the  middle  of  the  AUar^  he  says, 


Suscipe  sancta  Trini- 
tas hanc  oblationem, 
quam  tibi  offerimus  ob 
memoriam  Passionis,  Re- 
surrectionis, et  Ascensio- 
nis Jesu  Christi  Domini 
nostri : et  in  honorem 
beatse  Mariae  semper 
Virginis,  et  beati  Joannis 
Baptistae,  et  sanctorum 
Apostolorum  Petri  et 
Pauli,  et  istorum,  et  om- 
nium Sanctorum : ut  illis 
proficiat  ad  honorem, 
nobis  autem  aul  salutem : 
et  illi  pro  nobis  interce- 
dere dignentur  in  coelis, 
quorum  memoriam  agi- 
mus in  terris.  Per  eum- 
dem,  &C.  Arnen. 


Receive  O holy  Trini- 
ty, this  oblation  which 
we  make  to  tl>ee  in  me- 
mor}»^  of  the  Passion,  Re 
8urrection,and  Ascension 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  in  honour  of  the 
blessed  Mary  ever  a 
virgin,  of  blessed  John 
Baptist,  the  holy  Apostles 
Peter  and  Paul,  amd  of 
all  the  Saints:  that  it 
may  be  available  to  their 
honour,  and  our  salva- 
tion : and  may  tliey 
vouchsafe  to  intercede 
for  us  in  heaven,  whose 
memory  we  celebrate  on 
earth.  Through  the  same 
Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


PREFACES. 


xxvil 


Then  turning  himsdf  towards  the  Peojde,  he  saySj 
Orate  Fratres : ut  me-  Brethren,  jiray  that  my 
um  ac  vestrum  sacrifici-  sacrifice  and  yours  may 
um  acceptabile  fiat  apud  be  acceptable  to  God  tfa!e 
Deiim  patrem  omnipo-  Father  Almighty, 
tentem.  . 

R.  Suscipiat  Dominus  R.  May  the  Lord  re- 
sacrificium  de  manibus  ceive  the  sacrifice  fit)m 
tuis  ad  laudem  et  glori-  thy  hands,  to  the  praise 
am  nominis  sui,  ad  utili-  and  glory  of  his  name 
tatem  quoque  nostram,  to  our  benefit,  and  to  that 
totiusque  Ecclesiae  suae  of  all  his  holy  Church, 
sanctae. 

After  reading  the  Secret,  which  may  he  seen  in  its 
proper  place,  the  second  Secret  from  Candlemas- 
day,  tiU  Passion-Sunday  and  fi-om  the  111.  Sunday 
cfler  Pentecost  until  Advent,  [except  on  Doubles  and 
within  Octaves)  is  the  follotving, 

II.  SECRET. — Gmciously  hear  us,  O God  our 
Saviour ; tiiat  by  viitue  of  this  sacrament,  thou  may- 
est  defend  us  from  all  enemies,  of  both  soul  and 
body : grant  us  grace  in  tliis  life,  and  glory  in  the  next. 
From  Low-Sunday,  exclusively,  tiU  the  Ascension, 
instead  of  the  foregoing  is  said  the  SECRET, 
* May,  O Lord,  &c,  as  in  the  Votive  Mass,  SALVE, 
of  the  B.  V.  M.  p.  508. 

P.  Per  omnia  saecula.  P.  World  without  end. 
saeculorum.  R.  Amen,  R.  Amen. 

The  Preface. 

P.  Dominus  vobiscuni.  P.  The  Lord  be  with 
R.  Et  cum  spiritu  tiio.  you.  R.  And  with  thy 
P.  Sursum  corda.  R.  spirit.  P.  Lift  up  your 
Habemus  ad  Dominum,  hearts.  R.  Wehavelift- 
P.  Gratias  agamus  Do-  ed  them  up  to  the  Lord, 
niino  Deo  nostro.  R.  P.  Let  us  give  thanks  to 
Dignum  et  justum  est.  the  Lord  our  God.  R.  It 
is  meet  and  just. 

_ C2 

Digitized  by  Google 


xxviii 


PREFACES. 


Tht  Preface  on  Festivals  and  other  Days  that  have 
none  proper,  and  in  Masses  for  the  Dead. 


N.  B.  IThis  mark*  refers  to  the  snbseqaevt  part  of  the 
proper  Prefeces. 


"^ERE  dignum  et  jus- 
» turn  est,  sequiun  et 
salutare,  nos  tibi  semper, 
et  ubique  gratias  agere: 
Domine  sancte,  Pater 
omnipotens,  aeterne  Deus. 
* Per  Chrikum  Domi- 
num nostrum.  Per  quem 
majestatem  tuam  laudant 
angeli,  adorant  domina- 
tiones, tremunt  potesta- 
tes ; Coeli  coelorumque 
virtutes,  ac  beata  sera- 
phim, socia  exultatione 
concelebrant  Cum  qui- 
bus et  nostras  voces,  ut 
admitti  jubeas  depreca- 
mur, supplici  confessione 
dicentes: 

. Sanctus,  sanctus,  sanc- 
tus, Dominus  Deus  Sa- 
baoth. Pleni  sunt  coeli 
et  teiTa  gloria  tua.  Ho- 
sanna in  excelsis.  Be- 
nedictus qui  venit  in  no- 
mine Domuii,  Hosanna 
in  excelsis. 


IT  is  tnily  meet  and 
just,  right  and  availa- 
ble to  salvation,  that  we 
should  always,  and  in  all 
places,  give  thanks  to 
thee,  O holy  Lord,  Fa- 
ther Almighty,  eternal 
Grod.  * Thro’  Christ  our 
Lord : by  whom  the  an- 
gels praise  thy  majesty, 
the  dominations  adore  it, 
the  powers  tremble  be- 
fore It,  the  heavens,  the 
heavenly  virtues,  and 
blessed  seraphim,  with 
common  jubilee  glorify  it. 
Together  with  whom  we 
beseech  thee,  that  we  may 
be  admitted  to  join  our 
humble  voices,  saying: 

Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord 
€rod  of  Sabaoth.  Hea- 
ven and  earth  are  full  of 
thy  glory.  Hosanna  in 
the  highest  Blessed  is 
he  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  Ho- 
sanna in  the  highest 


On  Trinitt-Sundat,  and  every  other  Sunday 
in  the  Year  that  has  no  proper  Preface. 

* Qui  cum  unigenito  * Who  together  with 
Fiho  tuo  et  Spiritu  Sane-  thy  only  begotten  Son 
to  unus  es  Deus,  unus  es  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  art 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACI.S. 


XXl> 


Dominus : non  in  unius  one  Grod,  and  one  Lord 
singularitate  Personae,  not  in  a singularity  of  one 
sed  in  unius  Trinhate  Person,  but  in  a Trinity 
substantiae.  Quod  enim  of  one  substance.  For 
de  tua  gloria,  revelante  what  we  believe  of  thv 
te  credimus,  hoc  de  Fi-  glory,  as  thou  hast  reveal- 
lio  tuo,  hoc  de  Spiritu  ed,  the  same  we  believe  of 
Sancto,  sine  differentia  thy  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
discretionis  sentimus.  Ut  Ghost,  without  any  dif- 
in  confessione  verae,  sem-  ference  or  distinction.  So 
pitemaeque  Deitatis,  et  that  in  the  confession  of 
in  Personis  proprietas,  et  the  true  and  eternal  Dei 
in  essentia  Unitas,  et  in  ty,  we  adore  a distinction 
Majestate  adoretur  ae-  in  the  Persons,  an  unity 
qu^itas  Quam  laudant  in  the  essence,  and  an 
angeli  atque  archangeli,  equality  in  the  Majesty, 
cherubim  quoque  ac  se-  \^iom  the  angels  and 
raphim : qui  non  cessant  archangels,  the  cherubim 
clamare  quotidie,  una  also  and  seraphim  praise : 
voce  dicentes,  Sanctus,  and  cease  not  daily  to 
&c.  cry  out  with  one  voice 

saying.  Holy,  &c. 

From  Christmas-Day  till  the  Epiphany  ; on  Corpus 
Christi ; ani  on  our  Lord’s  Transfigui*ation. 

N.  B.  Prefaces  thtts  marked  t are  concluded  in  the 
same  manner  as  this. 

* Quia  per  incarnati  * Since  by  the  mys- 
Verbi  mysterium,  nova  tery  of  the  Word  made 
mentis  nosti-ee  oculis  lux  flesh,  a new  ray  of  thy 
tu8B  claritatis  infusit : ut  glory  has  appeared  to  the 
dum  visibiliter  Deum  eyes  of  our  souls:  that 
cognoscunus  per  liunc  while  we  behold  God 
m invisibilium  amorem  visibly,  we  may  be  car- 
rapiamur.  f Et  ideo  ried  by  him  to  the  love  of 
cum  angelis  et  archan-  things  invisible,  f And 
gelis,  cum  thronis  et  therefore  with  the  angels 
dominationibus ; cumque  and  archangels,  with  the 
C3 

oy  Google 


XXX 


PREFACES. 


omni  militia  ccBlestia  thrones  and  dominations : 
exercitus,  hymnum  glo-  and  with  all  the  heavenly 
rite  tiiae  canimus,  sine  host,  we  sing  an  everlast 
fine  dicentes.  Sanctus,  ing  hymn  to  thy  glory, 
Sanctus,  &c.  saying.  Holy,  &c. 

On  the  Epiphany  and  during  its  Octave. 

* Quia  cum  unigenitus  * Because  when  thy 

tuns  in  substautia  nos-  only  l^egotten  Son  ap- 
tj  je  mortalitatis  appjiruit,  peared  in  the  substance 
nova  nos  inunortal itatis  of  our  mortal  flesh,  he 
snaj  luce  reparavit,  f Et  repaired  us  by  the  new 
ideo,  &c.  light  of  his  immortality. 

f And  therefore,  &c. 

In  Lent  Hll  Passion-Sunday. 

* Qui  corporali  jejunio  * Who  by  this  bodily 

vitia  comprimis,  mentem  fast  extinguishest  our 
elevas,  virtutem  largiris  vices,  elevatest  our  un- 
et prsemia.  * Per  Chris-  derstanding,  bestowest 
turn,  &c.  on  us  virtue  and  its  re- 

ward. ♦ Thro’  &c. 

' On  Passion  and  Palm  Sundays, 

Maimdy-Tliursday,  and  Feasts  of  the  Holy  Cross. 

* Qui  salutem  humani  ♦ Who  hast  appointed 

generis  in  ligno  Crucis  that  the  salvation  of  man- 
constituisti:  ut  unde  kind  should  be  wrought 

mors  oriebatur,  inde  vita  on  the  wood  of  the  cross: 
resurgeret : et  qui  in  lig-  that  from  whence  death 
no  vincebat,  in  ligno  came,  thence  life  might 
quoque  vinceretur.  * Per  arise,  and  that  he  who 
Christum.  &c.  overcame  by  the  tree, 

might  also  by  the  tree  be 
overcome.  *Thro’, 

From  Holt  Saturday  till  the  Ascension. 

VEre  dignum  et  jus-  TT  is  truly  meet  and 
turn  est,  aequum  et  -Ljust,  right  and  avail- 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


PREFACES. 


XXX] 


salutare,  te  quidem  Do-  able  to  salvation,  to 
mine  omni  tempore,  sed  praise  thee,  O Lord,  at  all 
[ in  hoc  potissimum  nocte  times,  but  chiefly  on  this 
vd  die,  vel  ] in  ho<;  glo-  [night  or  day,  or,  at  this 
riosius  piSBdicare,  cum  time]  when  Christ  our 
Pascha  nostrum  immola-  Passover  was^  sacrificed 
tus  est  Christus.  Ipse  for  us.  For  he  is  the  true 
eniin  venis  est  Agnus,  Lamb  who  hatli  taken 
qui  abstulit  peccata  mun-  away  the  sins  of  the 
di.  Qui  mortem  nostram  world.  Who  by  dying 
moriendo  destruxit,  et  has  destroyed  our  deaths 
vitara  resurgendo  repara-  and  by  rising  again  has 
vit.  t Et  ideo,  ^ restored  us  to  life,  f And 

From  Ascknsion-Day  till  Whitsun- Eve. 

* Per  Christum  Domi-  * Through  Christ  our 
num  nostrum.  Qui  post  Lord.  Who  after  his 
resurrectionem  suam  om-  resurrection  appeared 
nibus  discipulis  suis  ma-  openly  to  all  his  disciples, 
nifestus  appcuuit,  et  ipsis  and  in  their  presence  as- 
ceraentibus  est  elevatus  cended  into  heaven,  to 
in  coelum,  ut  nos  divini-  inake^is  partakers  of  bis 
tatis  suae  tribueret  esse  divine  nature.  f And 
participes,  f Et  ideo,  &c,  therefore,  &c. 

From  Whitsun-Eve  till  Trinity-Sunday ; and  in 
Votive  Masses  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

* Per  Christum  Domi-  * Through  Christ  our 
num  nostrum.  Qui  ascen-  Lord.  Who  ascending 
dens  super  omnes  coelos,  above  all  the  heavens, 
sedensque  ad  dexteram  and  sitting  at  thy  right 
tuam,  promissum  Spiri-  hand,  didst  send  do^vn 
tiun  sanctum  [ hodierna  the  promised  holy  Spirit 
die ] in  filios  adoptionis  [this  day ] upon  the  ohil- 
effiidit.  Quapropter  pro-  dren  of  adoption.  Where- 
fiisis  gaudiis  totus  in  orbe  fore  the  whole  world  dis- 
terrarum  mundus  exul-  plays  its  excess  of  joy. 
tat.  Sed  et  supemse  'vir-  The  heavenly  virtues  also 
tutes  atque  angclicte  po  and  all  the  angelic  pow- 

Digitized  by  Google 


XXXii  ' PREFACES. 

testates,  hyinnum  glorisB  ers,  sing  in  concert  an 
tua5  concinunt,  sine  fine  everlasting  hymn  to  thy 
dicentes.  Sanctus,  &c.  glory,  saying.  Holy,  &c. 

On  Festivals  of  the  B.  V.  Mart  {the  Purificaii</ii 
• excepted,) 

* Et  te  in  N.  t Beatse  * That  we  should 
Marite  semper  Virginis  praise,  bless,  and  glorify 
colaudare,  benedicere,  et  thee  on  the  N.  J of  the 
praedicare.  Quae  et  uni-  blessed  Mary,  ever  a Vir- 
geuitum  tuum  Sancti  gin.  Who  by  the  over- 
Spii*itii8  obumbratione  Siadowing  of  the  Holy 

concepit:  et  Virginitatis  Ghost  conceived  thy  on- 
gloria  permanente,  lumen  ly  begotten  Son : and  the 
aeternum  mundo  efiudit,  glory  of  her  virginity  still 
Jesum  Christum  Domi-  remaining,  brought  forth 
I^hIn  nostrum.  * Per  the  eternal  light  of  the 
qiK^,  &c.  world,  Jesus  Christ  our 

Lord.  * By  whom,  &c, 

On  the  Festivals  of  the  Aposti.es. 

"^ERE  dignum  et  jus-  TT  is  truly  meet  and 
▼ turn  est,  aequum  et  J-  just,  right  and  avail- 
salutare,  te  Doniine  sup-  able  to  salvation,  humbly 
jrficiter  exorare,  ut  gre-  to  beseech  thee  that  thou 
gem  tuum  Pastor  aeterne  O Lord,  our  eternal 
non  deseras,  sed  per  bea-  Shepherd  wouldst  not 
tos  apostolos  tuos  conti-  foi'sake  thy  flock,  but 
nua  protectione  custo-  keep  it  under  thy  conti- 
dias.  Ut  iisdem  rectori-  nual  protection  by  thy 
bus  gubernetur,  quos  blessed  apostles.  That 
operis  tui  vicarios  eidem  it  may  be  governed  by 
contulisti  praeesse  pas-  those  whom  thou  hast 
tores.  ♦ Et  ideo,  dec.  appointed  its  vicars  and 
payors.  * And,  dec. 

t Here  the  Name  of  her  several  Festivals,  as  they  oc^ 
cur  in  the  course  of  the  Year,  should  be  expressed. 


ri'gltized  by  CjOO^Ic 


{ xxxiii  ) 


THE  CANON  OF  THE  MASS. 


TE  igitur,  clementissi- 
me Pater,  per  Jesum 
Christum  FUium  tuum 
Dominum  nostrum,  sup- 
plices rogamus  ac  peti- 
mus, uti  accepta  habeas, 
et  benedicas,  hroc  dona, 
hfec  munera,  haec  sancta 
sacrificia  illibata,  im- 
primis qu®  tibi  offerimus 
pro  Ecclesia  tua  sancta 
catholica : quam  paci- 
ficae, custodire,  adu- 
nare, et  regere  digneris 
toto  orbe  terrarum:  ima 
cum  famulo  tuo  Papa 
nostro  N.  et  Antistite 
nostro  N. 

et  omnibus  Orthodox- 
is, atque  Catholic®  et 
Apostolic®  Fidei  Culto- 
ribus. 


WE  tlierefore,  humbly 
pray  and  beseech 
thee  most  merciful  Fa- 
ther, thro’  Jesus  Christ 
thy  Son,  our  Lord,  that 
thou  wouldst  vouchsafe 
to  accept  and  bless  these 
gifts,  these  presents,  these 
holy  unspotted  sacrifices, 
which  in  the  first  place 
we  offer  thee  for  thy 
holy  Catholic  Church,  to 
which  vouchsafe  to  grant 
peace;  as  also  to  pre- 
serve, unite,  and  govern 
it  throughout  the  world : 
together  with  thy  sei'vant 
N.  our  pone  N.  our 
Bishop, 

as  also  all  ortnodox  be- 
lievers and  pi-ofessora  of 
the  catholic  and  apostolic 
Faith. 


Commemoration  of  the  Liting. 


Memento  Domine  fa-  Be  mindful  O Lord 
mulorum  famularumque  of  thy  servants,  men  and 
tuarum  N.  et  N.  women,  N.  and  N. 

He  prays  sUenUy  for  those  he  intends  to  pray  for. 


Et  omnium  circum- 
stantium, quorum  tibi 
fides  cognita  est,  et  nota 
devotio,  pro  quibus  tibi 
offerimus:  vel  qui  tibi 
oflbrunt  hoc  sacrificium 
laudis,  pro  se,  suisque 
cumibus:  pro  redemp- 


And  of  all  here  pre- 
sent, whose  Faith  and 
Devotion  is  known  unto 
thee,  for  whom  we  offer . 
or  who  offer  up  to  thee 
this  sacrifice  of  pmise  for 
themselves,  their  fami- 
lies, and  fi’iends : for  the 


zed  by  Google 


ijudv 


TUE  CAlVOIf  OF  THE  MASS. 


done  anmiarum  suarum, 
pro  spe  salutis  et  inco- 
iuinitatis  suee : tibique 
reddunt  vota  sua  setemo 
Deo,  vivo  et  vero. 


Communicantes,  et 
memoriam  venerantes, 
inprimis  gloriosae  sem- 
per Virginis  Mariae,  Ge- 
nitricis Dei  et  Domini 
nostri  Jesu  Christi : sed  et 
beatorum  Apostolorum 
ac  Martyrum  tuorum, 
Petri  et  Pauli,  Andreae 
Jacobi,  Joannis^  Thomae, 
Jacobi,  Philippi,  Bartho- 
loinaei,  Matdiaei,  Simo- 
nis et  Thadaei:  Lini, 
Cleti,  Clementis,  Xysti, 
Conielii,  Cypriani,  Lau- 
rentii, Chrysogoni,  Jo- 
annis  et  Pauli,  Cosmae 
et  Damiani,  et  omnium 
Sanctorum  tuorum : quo- 
rum meritis  precibusque 
concedas,  ut  in  omnibus 
protectionis  tuae  munia- 
mur auxilio.  Per  eum- 
dem  Christum  Dominum 
nostrum.  Arnen. 


redemption  of  their  tiouls;, 
for  the  health  and  salva- 
tion they  hope  for,  and 
for  which  they  now  pay 
their  vows  to  thee,  the 
eternal,  living,  and  true 
God. 

Communicating  with, 
and'  honouring  in  the 
fii*st  place,  the  memory  of 
tiie  ever  glorious  Virgin 
Mary,  Mother  of  oui 
Lord  and  God  Jesus 
Christ:  as  also  of  the 
blessed  Apostles  and 
Maityi*s,  Peter  and  Paul, 
Andrew,  James,  John, 
Thomas,  James,  Philip, 
Baitholomevv,  Matthew, 
Simon  and  Thadeus, 
Linus,  Cletus,  Clement, 
Xystus,  Cornelius,  Cy- 
prian, Lawrence,  Chryso- 
gonus, John  and  Paul, 
Cosmas  and  Damian,  and 
of.  all  thy  Saints ; by 
whose  merits  and  firayers 
grant  that  we  may  lr3 
always  defended  by 
help  of  thy  protect i^v 
Thro’  the  same  - Chri?' 
our  Lord.  Amen. 


Sjprtadir^  hia  Hands  over  the  Oblation  he  sai/s, 
Jianc  i^ur  oblati-  We  therefore  tM  si  er.) 
onem  servitutis  nostres,  thee,  O Lord,  gi-arious 
sed  et  cunctCB  Emilies  ly  to  accept  this  obln 
tU8B,  qucBsumus  Domine,  tion  of  our  sf  it 
ut  plaoatus  accipias:  as  also  thy  wluilo  ih 


' gitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


THE  CANON  or  THE  ILASS.  3CXXV 

diesque  nostros  in  tua  mily;  dispose  our  days 
pace  dis^nas, ‘atque  ab  in  thy  peace,  preserve 
sterna  aam natione  nos  us  from  etenial  damna- 
eripi,  et  in  Electorum  tu-  tion,  and  rank  us  in  the 
orum  jubeas  grege  nu-  number  of  thine  Elect, 
inerari.  Per  Christum  Through  Clirist  our  Lord. 
Dominum  nostrum.  — Amen, 

Amen, 

Quam  oblationem  tu  Which  oblation  do 
Deus  in  omnibus,  quae-  thou,  O God,  vouchsafe 
sumus  benedictam,  ad-  in  all  respects,  to  bless, 
scriptam,  ratam,  ratio-  approve,  ratify,  and  ac- 
nabilem,  acceptabilem-  cept ; that  it  may  be 
que  facere  digneris;  ut  made  for  us  the  body 
nobis  Corpus  et  Sanguis  and  blood  of  thy  most 
fiat  dilectissimi  Filii  tui  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ 
Domini  nostri  Jesu  our  Lord. 

Christi. 

Qui  pridie  quam  pate-  Who  the  day  before 
retur,  accepit  panem  in  he  suffered,  took  bread 
sanctas  ac  venerabiles  into  his  holy  and  venera- 
manus  suas,  et  elevatis  ble  hands,  and  with  his 
oculis  in  coelum,  ad  te  eyes  lifted  up  towards 
Deum  Patrem  suum  om-  heaven,  giving  thanks  to 
nipotentem:  tibi  gratias  thee.  Almighty  God,  his 
a^^  benedixit,  fregit,  Father;  he  blessed  it, 
di^tque  discipulis  suis  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to 
dicens ; Accipite  et  man-  his  disciples,  saying : 
ducate  ex  hoc  omnes.  Take  and  eat  ye  all  of 
Hoc  EST  ENIM  CORPUS  this,  FoR  THIS  IS  Ml 
MEUM.  BODY. 

AJler  pronouncing  the  Words  of  Consecration^  the 

Priest  kneeling,  adores  and  elevates  the  sa4yred 

Host 

Simili  modo  postquam  In  like  manner,  after 
coenatum  est,  accipiens  et  he  had  supped,  taking 
hunc  pneclarum  calicem  also  this  excellent  chalice 
n sanctas  ac  venerabiles  into  his  holy  and  vene- 


Digitized  by  Google 


xxscvi 


THE  CANON  OF  THE  MASS, 


moDUs  suas,  item  tibi 
ratias  agens  benedixit,, 
editque  discipulis  suis 
dicens : Accipite  et 

BIBITE  EX  £0  OMNES, 
Hic  EST  ENIM  CAEIX 
SANGUINIS  MEI  NOVI 
ET  iETERNI  TESTAMEN- 
TI : MYSTERIUM  FIDEI  t 
qUI  PRO  VOBIS  ET  PRO 
MULTIS  EFFUNDETUR  IN 
REMISSIONEM  PECCATO- 
RUM. 

Hsbc  quotiescumque 
feceritis,  in  mei  memori- 
am &cietis. 


rabie  liands,  ^vinff  tbce 
also  thanks,  ne  biessetl, 
and  gave  it  to  liis  disci- 
ples, saying:  Take  ani* 

DRINK  TE  ALL  OF  THIS 
FOR  THIS  IS  THE  CHA 
LICE  OF  MT  BLOOD  01 
THE  NEW  AND  ETERNAJ 
TESTAJHENT : THE  MTS 
TERY  OF  faith:  WHICH 
SHALL  BE  SHED  FOR 
YOU,  AND  FOR  MANY,  TO 
THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS. 

As  often  you  do 
these  things,  ye  shall  do 
them  in  remembrance  of 
me. 


Here  also  kneelings  he  adores  and  elevates  the 
Chalice, 


Unde  et  memore^  Do- 
mine, nos  servi  tui,  sed 
et  plebs  tua  sancta  ejus- 
dem Christi  Filii  tui,  Do- 
mini nostri,  tam  beatas 
j)assionis,  necnon  et  ab 
inferis,  Resm’rectionis,8ed 
et  in  Coelos  gloriosae  as- 
censionis, offerirniis  prae- 
clarae Majestati  tuae,  de 
tuis  dpnis  ac  datis,  Hos- 
tiam puram.  Hostiam 
sanctam.  Hostiam  imma- 
culatam, panem  sanctum 
vitae  aeternae,  et  Calicem 
salutis  perpetuae. 

Supra  quae  propitio  ac 
sereno  vultu  resjncere 


Wherefore,  O Lord, 
we  thy  servants,  as  also 
thy  holy  people,  calling 
to  mind  tlie  blessed  pas- 
sion of  the  same  Christ 
tliy  Son  our  Lofd,  his  re- 
surrection from  tlie  dead, 
and  admirable  ascension 
into  heaven,  ofter  unto 
thy  most  excellent  Majes- 
ty of  thy  gifts  bestowed 
upon  us,  a pure  Host,  a 
holy  Host,  an  unspotted 
Host,’  tlie  holy  bread  of 
eternal  life,  and  chalice 
of  everlasting  salva  ion. 

Upon  which  vouch- 
safe to  look,  with  a pro- 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  CANON  OF  THF.  MASS. 


XXXVU 


digneris,  et  accepta  ha- 
bere, sicuti  accepta  ha- 
bere dignatus  es  munera 
pueri  tui  justi  Abel,  et 
sacrificium  PatriarchsB 
nostri  Abrahce;  et  quod 
tibi  obtulit  summus  sa- 
cerdos tuus  Melchise- 
dech,  sanctum  sacrifici- 
um, immaculatam  Hos- 
fiam. 

Supplices  te  rogamus, 
omnipotens  Deus,  jube 
haec  praeferri  ppr  manus 
sancti  angeli  tm  in  subli- 
me altare  tuum,  in  con- 
spectu divinae  Majestatis 
tuae,  ut  quotquot  ex  hac 
altaris  participatione,  sa- 
cro-sanctum  Filii  tui 
corpus  et  sanguinem 
sumpserimus,  omni  bene- 
dictione caelesti  et  gratia 
repleamur.  Pereumdem 
Christum  Dominum  nos- 
trum. Arnen, 


pitious  and  serene  coun- 
tenance, and  to  accept 
them,  as  thou  wert  gra- 
ciously pleased  to  accept 
the  gifts  of  thy  just  ser- 
vant Abel,  and  tlie  sac- 
rifice of  our  Patriarch 
Abraham,  and  that 
which  thy  High  Priest 
Melchisedech  ofiered  to 
thee,  a holy  sacrifice 
and  unspotted  victim. 

We  most  Humbly  be- 
seech thee.  Almighty 
God,  command  these 
things  to  be  carried  by 
the  hands  of  thy  holy  an- 
gels to  thy  altar  on  high, 
m die  sight  of  thy  divine 
Majesty,  diat  as  many 
as  shall  partake  of  the 
most  sacred  body  and 
blood  of  .thy  Son  at  this 
altar,  may  be  filled  with 
every  heavenly  grace  and 
blessing.  Thro’  the  same 
Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 


COMMEMORATION  OF  THE  DEAD. 

Memento  etiam.  Do-  Be  mindful,  O Lord, 
mine,  famulorum  famu-  of  thy  servants  N.  and 
larunque  tuarum  N.  et  N.  who  are  gone  before 
N.  qui  nos  praecesserunt  us  with  the  sign  of  Faith, 
cum  signo  Fidei5  et  dor-  and  rest  in  the  sleep  of 
miunt  in  somno  pacis.  peace. 

Here  particular  mention  is  sUently  made  of  such  of 
the  Dead  cls  are  to  heprayed for. 

Ipsis,  Domine,  et  om-  To  these,  O Lord,  and 
nibiis  m Christo  quies-  to  all  that  sleep  in  Christ 
D 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


XXXVUI  THE  CANON  OF  THE  MASS. 

centibus,  locum  refri^-  grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
rii,  lucis  et  pacis,  ut  m-  a place  of  refreshment, 
dulgeas  deprecamiu*:  per  light,  and  peace : through 
eunidem  Christum  Do-  the  same  Chiist  our 
minum  nostrum.  Amen,  Lord.  Ameiu 

5 Here  striking  his  Breast,  the  Pnest  says. 


Nobis  quoque  pecca- 
toribus famulis  tuis  de 
multitudine  miseratio- 
num tuarum  sperantibus, 
partem  aliquam  et  so- 
cietatem donare  digneris, 
cum  tuis  sanctis  apostolis 
et  martyribus;  cum  Jo- 
anne, Stephano,  Mat- 
thia,  Bamaba,  Ignatio, 
Alexandro,  Marc^ellino, 
Petro,  Felicitate,  Per- 
petua, Agath^  Lucia, 
Agnete,  Csecilia,  Anas- 
tasia, et  omnibus  sanctis 
tuis:  intra  quorum  nos 
consortium,  non  sestima- 
tor  meriti,  sed  veniae, 
quaesumus  lai-gitor  ad- 
mitte. Per  Christum  Do- 
minum nostrum. 

Per  quem  haec  om- 
nia, Domine,  semper 
bona  ereas,  sanctifi- 
cas, vivificas,  benedicis, 
et  praestas  nobis.  Per 
ipsum,  et  cum  ipso,  et 
in  ipso,  est  tibi  Deo  Patri 
omnipotenti,  in  unitate 
Spiritus  Sancti,  omnis 
honor  et  gloria. 


Also  to  us  sinners,  thy 
servants,  confiding  in  the 
multitude  of  thy  mercies, 
vouchsafe  to  grant  some 
part  and  fellowship  with 
thy  holy  apostles  and 
martyrs;  with  John,  Ste- 
phen, Matthias,  Barna- 
bas, Ignatius,  Alexander, 
MarcelUne,  Peter,  Feli- 
citas, Perpetua,  Agatha, 
Lucy,  Agnes,  Cecily, 
Anastasia,  and  with  all 
thy  saints:  into  whose 
company  we  beseech 
thee  to  admit  us,  not  in 
consideration  of  our  me- 
rit, but  of  thy  own  gra- 
tuitous pardon.  Through 
Christ  our  Lord. 

By  whom,  O Lord, 
thou  dost  alwa3r8  cre- 
ate, sanctify,  quicken, 
bless,  and  give  us  all 
these  good  things.  By 
him  and  with  him,  and 
in  him,  is  to  thee,  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  in  the 
unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
all  honour  and  glory 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  CANON  OF  THE  MASS. 


XXXIX 


P.  Per  omnia  saecula 
saeculorum.  R.  Amtn* 
Oremus, 

■pRaeceptis  salutaribus 
-t  moniti,  et  divina 
institutione  formati,  au- 
demus dicere : 

Pater  noster,  qui  es  in 
coelis,  sanctificetur  no- 
men tuum : adveniat 
regnum  tuum:  fiat  vo- 
luntas tua  sicut  in  coelo, 
et  in  terra:  panem  nos- 
trum quotidianum  da 
nobis  hodie;  et  dimitte 
nobis  debita  nostra,  si- 
cut et  nos  dimittimus 
debitoribus  nostris : et  ne 
nos  inducas  in  tentatio- 
nera:  R.  Sed  libera  nos 
a malo.  P.  Arnen. 

Libera  nos,  quaesumus, 
Domine,  ab  omnibus 
malis,  praeteritis,  prae- 
sentibus et  futuris ; et  in- 
tereedente  beata  et  do- 
riosa  semper  Virgine  Dei 
Genitrice  Maria,  cum 
beatis  apostolis  tuis  Petro 
et  Paulo,  atque  Andrea, 
et  omnibus  sanc^  da 
propitius  pacem  in  die- 
bus nostris:  ut  ope  mi- 
sericordiae tuae  acquti,  et 
a peccato  simus  semper 
liberi,  et  ab  onmi  per- 
turbatione sec.iri.  Per 


P.  For  ever  and  ever. 
R.  Arnen. 

Let  US  pray. 

"pEing  instructed  by 
-Dthy  saving  precepts, 
and  following  thy  divine 
directions,  we  presume 
to  say: 

Our  Father,  who  art 
in  heaven,  hallowed  be 
thy  name:  thy  kingdom 
come:  thy  wUl  be  done 
on  earth,  as  it  is  in  hea- 
ven : give  us  this  day  our 
daily  bread ; and  forgive 
ns  our  trespasses,  as  we 
forgive  them  that  trespass 
against  us.  And  lead  us 
not  into  temptation : 
R.  But  deliver  us  from 
eviL  P.  Amen. 

Deliver  us,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  from  all 
evils,  j>ast,  present,  and  to 
come;  and  bv  the  in- 
tercession of  the  blessed 
and  ever  glorious  Virgin 
Mary  Mother  of  God, 
and  of  the  holy  apostles 
Peter  and  Paul,  and  of 
Andrew,  and  of  all  the 
saints,  mercifully  grant 
peace  in  our  days:  that 
thro*  the  assistance  of  thy 
mercy,  we  may  be  al- 
ways free  fi^ni  sin,  and 
secure  from  all  disturb- 
D2 


Digitized  by  Google 


xl  THE  CANON  OF  TOE  MASS. 

enndem  Dominum  nos-  ance.  Through  the  same 
trumJesHm  Christum  Fi-  Jesus  Christ,  thy  Son 
Jiiim  tuum,  qui  tecum  our  Lord,  who  with  thee 
vivit  et  regnat,  in  imitate  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
Si»iritii8  Sancti,  Deus.  liveth  and  reigneth,  God. 

P.  Per  omnia  sspcula  P.  World  without  end. 
sreculorum.  R.  Amen,  R.  Amen, 

P.  Pax  Domini  sit  P.  May  the  peace  of 
semper  vobi^um.  the  Lord  be  always  with 

you. 

R.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo.  R.  And  with  thy  spiriL 

Breakhig  the  Host,  he  puts  a Particle  thereof  into  the 
Chalice  saying,  May  this  mixture,  and  consecra- 
tion of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  be  to  us  that  receive  it  eifectual  to  eternal 
life.  Amen, 

Then  boi&ing  and  striking  his  Breast,  he  says : 

Agnus  Dei,  qui  toUis  Lamb  of  God,  who 

rjccata  mundi,  takest  away  the  sins  of 

miserere  nobis,  the  world,  * have  mercy 

* misenire  nobis,  upon  us,  * have  mercy 

♦ dona  nobis  pacem.  upon  us,  * give  us  peace. 

In  Masses  for  the  Dead  he  says  twice,  Give  them 
rest ; and  lastly,  * Give  them  eternal  rest. 

The  following  Prayer  is  then  also  omitted. 

Domine  Jesu  Christe,  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
qui  dixisti  apostolis  tuis,  saidst  to  thy  apostles,  1 
pacem  relinquo  vobis,  leave  you  peace,  I give 
pacem  meam  do  vobis,  you  my  peace,  regard 
ne  respicias  peccata  mea,  not  my  sins,  but  the 
sed  fidem  Ecclesise  tuse ; faith  of  thy  church ; and 
eamque  secundum  vo-  grant  her  that  peace  and 
Juntatem  tuam  pacifi-  unity  which  is  agreeable 
cai*e  et  coadunare  digne-  to  tiiy  will : who  livest 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  CA^fOiX  OF  THE  MASS. 


ris  qui  vivis  et  regnas 
Deus,  per  omnia  ssecula 
sseculorum.  Amen. 

Domine  Jesu  Christe, 
Fili  Dei  vivi,  qui  ex  vo- 
luntate Patris,  co-ope- 
rante  Spiritu  Sancto,  per 
mortem  tuum  mundum 
vivificasti,  libera  me  per 
hoc  sacro-sanctum  corpus 
et  sanguinem  tuum  ab 
omnibus  iniquitatibus 
meis,  et  universis  malis : 
et  fac  me  tuis,  semper 
inhaerere  mandatis,  et  a 
te  nunquam  separari  per- 
mittas: qui  cum  eodem 
Deo  Patre  et  Spiritu 
Sancto  vivis  et  regnas 
Deus  in  saecula  saeculo- 
rum. Arnen. 

Perceptio  corporis  tui, 
Domine  Jesu  Christe, 
quod  ego  indignus  su- 
mere praesumo,  non  mi- 
hi proveniat  in  judicium 
ct  condemnationem ; sed 
pro  tua  pietate  prosit 
mihi  ad  tutamentum 
mentis  et  corporis,  et  ad 
medelam  percipiendam: 
qui  vivis  et  regnas  cum 
Deo  Patre,  in  unitate 
Spiritus  Sancti,  Deus,  per 
omnia  saecula  saeculo- 
rum. Arnen. 


xli 

and  reignest  foi  ever  and 
ever.  Arnen. 

Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son 
of  the  living  God,  who, 
according  to  the  will  of 
thy  Father,  hast  by  thy 
death,  thro’  the  co-ope- 
ration of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
given  life  to  the  world, 
deliver  me  by  this  thy 
most  sacred  body  and 
blood  from  ^dl  my  ini- 
quities, and  from  all 
evils;  and  make  me  al- 
ways adhere  to  thy  com- 
mandments, and  never 
suffer  me  to  be  sej^arated 
from  thee:  who  livest 
and  reignest  with  God 
the*  Father,  &c.  Amen. 

Let  not  the  participa- 
tion of  thy  body,  O Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  which  1, 
diough  unworthy,  pre- 
sume to  receive,  turn  to 
my  judgment  and  con- 
demnation , but  thix)’  thy 
mercy,  may  it  be  a safe- 
guard and  remedy,  botli 
to  soul  and  body;  who 
with  God  the  Father,  hi 
the  unity  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  livest  and  reignest 
God  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. 


Taking  the  Host  in  his  Hands,  he  says, 
Panem  coelestem  ac-  I will  take  the  bread  of 
D3 


>=d  by  Google 


xlii  THE  CANON  OF  THE  MASS. 

cipiaiTi,  et  nomen  Do-  heaven,  and  call  upon  the 
inmi  mvocabo.  name  of  our  Lord. 

Striking  his  Breast,  wUh  Humility  and  Devotion,  he 
says  thrice. 

Domine,  non  sum  dig-  Lord,  1 am  not  worthy 
DUS  ut  intres  sub  tectum  that  thou  shouldst  enter 
meum;  sed  tantum  dic  under  my  roof;  say  but 
verbo,  et  sanabitur  ani-  the  word,  and  my  soul 

ma  mea.  shall  be  healed. 

Receiving  reverently  both  Parts  of  the  Host,  he  saysy 

Corpus  ^otnini  dosut  May  the  body  of  our 
Jesu  Christi  custodiat  Lord  Jesus  Christ  pre- 
animam  meam  in  vham  serve  my  soul  to  life 
setemam.  Amen,  everlasting.  Amien, 

Taking  the  Chalice,  he  says, 

Uuid  retnbuam  Domi-  What  return  ^all  I 
no  pro  omnibus  quee  re-  make  the  Lord  for  all  he 
tribuit  mihi  ? Calicem  has  given  to  me  ? I will 
saiutaris  accipiam,  et  no-  take  the  Chalice  of  ssd- 
men  Domini  invocabo.  vation,  and  call  upon 
Laudans  invocabo  Do-  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
minum,  et  ab  iniinicis  Praising,  I will  call  upon 
rneis  salvus  ero.  the  Lord,  and  rfiall  be 

saved  from  my  enemies 

Receiving  the  blood  of  our  Saviour,  he  says, 

Sanguis  Domini  nostii  The  blood  of  oiu*  Lord 
Jesu  ChrM  custodiat  Jesus  Christ  presei*ve 
animam  tneam  in  vitam  mv  soul  to  everlasting 
ceteruam.  Amen.  ii&.  Amen. 

Taking  the  first  Ablution,  he  says, 

Quod  ore  sumpsimus,  Grant,  Lord,  that  wha* 
Doraine,  pura  mente  ca-  we  have  taken  with  our 
piamus,  et  de  munere  mouth,  we  may  receive 
temporali,  fiat  nobis  re-  with  a pure  mind,  that 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  CAliOy  OF  THE  MASS.  xlHl 

medium  sempiternum.  of  a temporal  gift  it  may 
become  to  us  an  eternal 
remedy. 

TaJdng  the  second  Ahlution^  he  says, 

Corpus  tuum  Domine,  May  thy  body,  O Lord, 
quod  sumpsi^  et  sanguis  which  1 have  received, 
quern  potavi,  adhsereat  and  thy  blood  which  1 
visceribus  meis ; et  praesta  have  di*ank,  cleave  to  my 
ut  in  me  non  remaneat  bowels;  and  grant,  that 
scelerum  macula,  quern  no  stain  of  sin  may  re- 
pura  et  sancta  refecerunt  main  in  me,  who  have 
sacramenta.  Qui  vivis  been  fed  wi^h  this  pure 
et  regnas  in  saecula  sae-  and  holy  sacrament.  Who 
culorum.  Amen.  livest  and  reignest,  &c. 

Then  he  returns  to  the  Book,  and  reads  the  Commu- 
nion, tahich  may  be  seen  in  its  proper  pUtce. 
Dominus  vobiscum.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 

R.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo.  R.  And  with  thy  spirit 
Oremus.  Let  us  pray. 

From  Candlemas-day  tiU  Passion  Sunday,  and  from 
the  III.  Sunday  after  Pentecost  until  Advent,  {ex- 
cept on  Doubles  and  within  Octaves)  after  the 
proper  Postcommunion,  the  follounng  is  the 

II.  POSTCOM.  {Mundet.)  May  the  oblation 
of  this  divine  sacrament,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
both  cleanse  and  defend  us ; and  by  the  intercession 
of  the  blessed  Mary  the  Virgin  Mother  of  God,  of 
the  blessed  apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  of  blessed  N. 
and  of  all  the  saints,  free  us  from  all  s’m,  and  deliver 
us  from  all  adversity. 

From  Low  Sunday,  exclusively,  till  the  Ascension,  in- 
stead  of  the  foregoing,  is  said  the  P.  Comm.  * Sump- 
tis, &c.  as  in  tlw  Votive  Mass  SALVE  for  the  B. 
V.  M.  p.  509. 

After  the  Postcommunion,  is  added  the  following 


Digitized  by  Google 


Xliv  THE  CANON  OF  THE  MASS. 

PRAYER.  (Et  famulos.) 

Defend  also,  O Lord,  from  all  adversity,  thy 
servant  N.  our  Pope,  N.  our  Bishop, 

together  with  the  people  committed  to 

his  care:  grant  peace  in  our  days,  and  banish  all 
wickedness  from  thy  Church : thro’,  &c. 

Dominus  vobiscum.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 
R.  Et  cum  spiritu  tuo.  R.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Ite  missa  est  (vel)  Be-  Go,  you  are  dismissed, 

nedicamus  Domino.  (o^  let  us  bless  the  Lord. 

R.  Deo  gratias.  6«  Thanks  be  to  (Jod. 

In  Masses  for  the  Dead, 

^ P.  Requiescant  in  pace.  P.  May  they  rest  iu 
R.  Amen.  peace.  R.  Amen. 

Bowing  before  the  Altar^  the  Priest  says 
Placeat  tibi  sancta  Let  the  perfonnance  of 
Trinitas,  obsequium  ser-  my  homage  be  pleasing 
vitutis  meae ; et  praesta,  to  thee,  O holy  Trinity ; 
ut  sacrificium  quod  and  grant  that  the  sacri- 
oculis  tuae  Majestatis  fice  which  I,  tho’  imwor- 
indignus  obtuli,  tibi  sit  thy,  have  offered  up  in 
acceptabile,  mihique,  et  the  sight  of  thy  Majesty, 
omnibus  pro  quibus  illud  may  be  acceptable  to 
obtuli,  sit  te  miserante,  thee,  and  thro’  thy  mercy 
propitiabile.  Per  Chris-  be  a propitiation  for  me, 
turn  Dominum  nostrum,  and  all  those  for  whom  it 
Amen.  has  been  offered.  Thro’ 

Ihiming  himself  towards  the  People^  he  gives  them  his 
Blessing,  saying, 

May  Almighty  God,  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 

Ghost,  bless  you.  Atnen.  li 

P.  Dominus  vobiscum.  P.  Our  Lord  be  'with 
R.  Et  cum  spii*itu  tuo.  you.  R.  And  \vith  thy 
P.  Initium  sancti  Evange-  spirit  P.  The  beginning 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  CANON 

lii,  secundum  Joannem. 
R.  Gloria  tibi,  Domine. 

IN  principio  erat  Ver- 
bum, et  Verbum  erat 
apud  Deum ; et  Deus 
erat  Verbum : hoc  erat  in 
principio  apud  Deum. 
Omnia  per  ipsum  facta 
sunt,  et  sine  ipso  factum 
est  nihil,  quod  factmn 
est : in  ipso  vita  erat, 
et  vita  erat  lux  hominum : 
et  lux  in  tenebris  lucet, 
et  tenebras  eam  non 
comprehenderunt 


Fuit  homo  missus  a 
Deo,  cui  nomen  erat  Jo- 
annes. Hic  venit  in  tes- 
timonium, ut  testimoni- 
um perhiberet  de  lumi- 
ne, ut  omnes  crederent 
per  illum.  Non  erat  ille 
lux;  sed  ut  testimonium 
i^rhiberet  de  lumine. 
Erat  lux  vera  quae  illumi- 
nat omnem  hominem 
venientem  in  hunc  mun- 
dum. 

In  mundo  erat,  et 
mundus  per  ipsum  factus 
est,  et  mundus  eum  non 
cognovit  In  propria 
venit,  et  sui  eum  non  re- 
ceperunt Quotquot  au- 
tem feceperimt  eum,  de- 
Jit  eis  potestatem  filios 


OF  THE  MASS.  Xlv 

of  the  Gospel  according 
to  St  John.  R.  Glory 
be  to  thee,  G Lord. 

IN  the  beginning  was 
the  Word,  and  the 
Word  was  with  God,  and 
the  Word  was  Gk)d : the 
same  was  in  the  begin- 
ning with  God.  All  things 
were  made  by  him,  and 
without  him  was  made 
notliing  that  was  made; 
in  him  was  life,  and  the 
life  was  the  light  of  men : 
and  the  light  shineth  in 
darkness,  and  the  dark- 
ness did  not  comprehend 
it. 

There  was  a man  sent 
from  God,  whose  name 
was  Jolm.  This  man 
came  for  a witness,  to 
give  testimony  of  the 
light,  that  all  men  misrht 
believe  through  him.  He 
was*  not  the  light,  but 
was  to  give  testimony 
of  tlie  light.  That  was  the 
true  light  which  enlight- 
eneth  every  man  that 
cometh  into  this  world. 

He  was  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made 
by  him,  and  the  world 
knew  him  not.  He  came 
unto  his  own,  and  his 
own  received  him  not. 
But  as  many  as  received 
him,  to  them  he  gave 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


xlvi  V.  R.  AND  PKATER  FOR  THE 


Dei  fieri:  his  qui  cre- 
dunt in  iiomuie  ejus,  qui 
non  ex  sanguinibus,  ne- 
que ex  voluntate  camis, 
neque  ex  voluntate  viri, 
sed  ex  Deo  nati  sunt : Et 
Verbum  caro  factum 
EST,  et  habitavit  in  no- 
bis; et  vidimus  gloriam 
eju^  gloriam  quasi  uni- 
geniti a Patre,  plenum 
gratiae  et  veritatis. 


R.  Deo  gratias. 


power  to  l>e  made  the 
sons  of  God:  to  them 
that  believe  in  his  name, 
who  are  bora,  not  of 
blood,  nor  of  the  will  of 
the  fiesh,  nor  of  the  will 
of  man,  but  of  God : 
And  THE  WORD  WAS 
MADE  FLESH,  and  dwelt 
among  us;  and  we  saw 
his  glory,  as  it  were  the 
glory  of  the  only  begot- 
ten of  the  Father,  full  of 
grace  and  truth. 

R.  Thanks  be  to  God, 


Digitized  by  Google 


BEFORE,  AND  AT  THE  BENEDICTION.  xlvii 

0 Salutaris  hostia ! ^ Saving  Host ! that 

Quae  coeli  pandis  heaven’s  gate 

ostium : Laidst  open  at  so  dear  a 

Bella  premunt  hostilia:  rate: 

Intestine  vFars  invade 
Da  robur,*  fer  auxilium.  our  breast ; 

Be  thou  our  strength, 
support,  and  rest, 

2.  Uni  trinoque  Do-  2.  To  God  the  Father, 
mino,  and  the  Son, 

Sit  sempiterna  gloria : And  Holy  Spirit,  Three 

in  One, 

Qui  vitam  sine  termino,  Be  endless  praise:  may 

HE  above. 

Nobis  donet  in  patria.  With  life  eternal  crovvn 

our  love. 

At  the  Benediction. 

TAntum  ergo  Sacra-  rpo  this  mysterious 
mentum,  -i-  table  now. 

Veneremur  cemui : Our  knees,  our  hearts, 

and  sense  we  bow : 

l5t  antiquum  documen-  Let  ancient  rites  resign 
turn  their  place 

Novo  cedat  ritui : To  nobler  elements  of 

grace: 

Praestet  fides  supplemen-  And  faith  for  all  defects 
turn,  supply. 

Sensuum  defectui.  , Whilst  sense  is  lost  in 

mystery. 

Genitori,  genitoque  To  God  the  Father 

bom  of  none, 

Laus  et  jubilatio  To  Christ  his  co-etemal 

Son, 

Salus,  honor,  virtus,  quo-  And  Holy  Ghost,  whose 
que,  equal  rays 

Sit  et  benedictio : From  both  proceed,  \te 

equal  praise : 

IVocedenti  ab  utroque.  One  honour,  jubilee,  and 

fame. 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic  ' 


Xlviii  AT  THE  BE-VEDICTION. 

Coinpar  sit  laudatio.  For  ever  bless  his  glori* 
Amen.  ous  name.  Amen. 

V Panem  de  cobIo,  V.  Thou  hast  given 
prasstitisti  eis,  Mdvia,  them  bread  from  heaven 
AUeluia, 

R.  Onme  delectamen-  R.  Replenished  with 
turn  in  se  habenten.,.^  whatever  is  delicious, 
Iduicu  Alleluia, 

The  Prayer, 

DEUS,  qui  nobis,  sub  ^ Grod,  who  in  this 
Sacramento  mira-  wonderful  sacra- 

bili  passionis  tuce  memo-  ment,  has  left  us  a per- 
riam  reliquisti : tribue  petual  memorial  of  thy 
quaesumus,  ita  nos  cor-  passion  ; grant  us,  we 
IK)ris  et  sanguinis  tui,  beseech  thee,  so  to  re- 
sacra mysteria  venerari  verence  the  sacred  mys- 
ut  redemptionis  tui  fruc-  teries  of  thy  body  and 
turn  in  nobis  jugiter  blood,  as  in  our  souls  to 
sentiamus.  Qui  be  always  sensible  of  the 

redemption  thou  hast 
purchased  for  us.  Who. 
IT  Whilst  the  Priest  (holding  the  Remonstrance  in 
his  Hand)  exposes  the  B.  Sacrament  to  the  Vent- 
ration  of  the  FaitJful,  the  foUomng  Anthem  is  oc- 
casionally  sung. 

O Sacrum  Convivium ! O Sacred  Banquet ! in 
in  quo  Christus  sumitur : whibh  Christ  is  received : 
recolitur  memoria  passio-  the  memory  of  his  pas- 
nis  ejus : mens  impletur  sion  renewed : the  mind 
gratia : et  futurae  gloriee  replenished  with  grace : 
nobis  pignus  datur.  AI-  and  a pledge  of  future 
leluia.  glory  is  given  to  us.  Al- 

leluia. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


PROPER  MASSES 


Foa 

THE  SUNDAYS 

. AND 

MOVEABLE  FEASTS 

THROOQHOUT  THE  YEAR 


FIRST  SUNDAY  OF  ADVENT. 

The  Church  emplojrs  th#»  four  weeks  that  prreceae 
Christmas  in  preparing  the  faithful  for  that  great  so* 
lemnity ; hence  the  beginning  of  the  ecclesiastical  year  is 
called  Advent,  from  the  Latin  word  Adventus,  which  signi- 
fies the  coming,  viz.  of  Jesus  Christ.  Our  hrst  parents 
soon  after  their  fell,  were  comforted  with  the  prediction 
of  this  great  event,  when  God  assured  them  that  the  time 
would  come  when  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  crush 
the  head  of  the  serpent.**  This  promise  was  renewed 
to  Abraham,  confirmed  to  Isaac,  cfetermined  to  the  tribe 
of  Juda,  fixed  in  the  house  of  David ; and  lastly,  the  time 
of  its  perfect  accomplishment  was  exactly  calculated  by 
the  prophet  Daniel. 


INTROIT.  P5.xxiv. 

TO  choe,  O Lord,  have  ffD  te  levctvi  animam 

I lifted  up  my  Soul,  wl  meam : De^is  meus^ 
In  thee,  O my  God,  I put  in  te  cor^ido,  non  erubes- 
niy  trust ; let  me  not  be  cam : neque  irrideant  me 
E 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


50 


FIRST  SUNDAY 


ashamed.  Neitlier  let  my  inimid  mei:  denim  uni- 
enemies  laugh  at  me:  for  versi,  qui  te  expectant, 
none  of  them  that  wait  on  non  confundentur.  Ps. 
tliee  shall  be  confounded.  Vias  tuas,  Domine,  dt- 
ps. Shew,  O Lord,  thy  monstra  mihi : et  semiteut 
ways  to  me,  and  teach  me  tuas  edoce  me, 
thy  jmths. 

F,  Glory,  &c.  V.  Gloria  Patri,  ^*c. 

To  thee,  &c.  to  Ps.  Ad  te,  Sfc,  to  Ps. 

And  thus  the  Introit  is  always  repeated, 

Gloria  in  excelsis  is  omitted  from  this  Sunday  tUl 

Christmas,  and  from  Septuagesima  until  Easter, 

unless  on  doubles,  Sfc. 

COLL.  Excita,  quces. — Exert,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  thy  power,  and  come : that  by  thy  protec- 
tion we  may  be  freed  from  the  imminent  dangers  of 
our  sins,  and  be  saved  by  thy  mercy,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth,  &c.  R.  Amen. 

EVom  this  day  to  Christmas-eve,  after  the  Collect  oj 
the  day,  the  two following  Collects  are  said. 

Of  the  B.  V , MARY.  *Deus  qui. — O God,  who  wast 
pleased  that  thy  Word,  when  the  angel  delivered  his 
message,  should  take  flesh  in  the  womb  of  the  bles- 
sed Virgin  Mary:  give  ear  to  our  humble  petitions; 
and  grant,  that  we,  who  believe  her  to  be  truly  the 
Mother  of  God,  may  be  helped  by  her  prayers. 

For  the  CHURCH.  *Eccl.  tuce. — ^Mercifully  hear, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  the  prayers  of  thy  Church, 
that  all  oppositions  and  errors  being  removed,  she 
may  serve  tliee  with  a secure  and  undisturbed  devo- 
tion. Thro’.  &c.  Amen. 

Or  instead  of  the  foregoing,  the  following  may  he 
said. 

For  the  POPE.  Deus  omniunu — O Grod,  the  pastoi 
and  governor  of  all  the  faithful,  look  down  in  thy 
mercy  on  thy  servant  N.  whom  thou  hast  appointea 
Pastor  over  thy  Church:  and  grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  that,  botli  by  word  and  example,  he  may  edify 


Digitized  byCjOOglC 


IN  ADVENT 


51 


a/i  those  that  are  under  his  char^,  and,  with  the 
flock  intrusted  to  him,  arrive,  at  length,  at  eternal 
happiness.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Rom,  xiii.  11. 14. — Brethren : Knowing 
that  it  is  now  the  hour  for  us  to  rise  from  sleep.  For 
now  our  salvation  is  nearer  than,  when  we  believed. 
The  night  is  past,  and  the  day  is  at  hand : let  us 
therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  put  on 
the  armour  of  light  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in  the 
days : not  in  rioting  and  drunkenness,  not  in  cham- 
bering and  impurities,  not  in  contention  and  envy : 
but  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxiv. — None  of  them  that  wait  on  thee 
shall  be  confounded.  V.  Shew,  O Lord,  thy  ways  to 
me,  and  teach  me  thy  paths.  Alleluia^  Alleluia, 

V,  Shew  us,  O Lord,  V.  Ostende  nobis,  Do- 
thy  mercy,  and  grant  us  mine,  miseiicordiam  tuain, 
thy  salvation.  Alleluia,  et  salutare  tuum  da  nobis. 
Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Jjuke  xxi.  25.  33.  — At  that  time : 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : There  shall  be  signs  in  the 
sun,  and  in  the  moon,  and  in  the  stars : and  upon 
the  earth  distress  of  nations,  by  reason  of  the  confu- 
sion of  the  roaring  of  the  sea  and  of  the  waves,  men 
withering  away  for  fear,  and  expectation  of  what 
shall  come  upon  the  whole  world.  For  the  powers 
of  the  heavens  shall  be  moved ; and  then  they  shall 
see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in  a cloud  with  great 
|X)wer  and  majesty.  But  when  these  things  fegin 
to  come  to  pass,  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  hea^: 
because  your  redemption  is  at  hand.  And  he  spoke 
to  hem  a sunilitude ; See  the  fig-tree  and  all  the 
trees ; when  they  now  shoot  forth  their  fruit,  you 
know  the  summer  is  nigh : so  likewise  when  you  see 
these  things  come  to  pass,  know  that  the  kingdom 
of  Grod  is  at  hand.  Amen,  I say  to  you,  this  gene 
ration  shall  not  pass  away,  till  all  things  be  fulMecL 


Digitized  by  Google 


52 


FIRST  SUNDAr 


Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away : but  my  words 
shall  not  pass  away.  Credo. 

OFFICRTORY.  Ps.  xxiv. — ^To  thee  O Lord 
have  I lifted  up  my  soul.  In  thee  O my  God  I pin 
my  trust,  let  me  not  be  ashamed,  neither  let  my 
enemies  laugh  at  me : for  none  of  them  that  wait  on 
thee  shall  be  confounded. 

SECRET.  Grant,  O Lord,  that  these  sacred 
mysteries  may  cleanse  us  by  their  powerful  virtue, 
and  bring  us  with  greater  purity  to  him,  who  was 
the  author  and  institutor  of  them.  Thro’. 

Of  the  B.  V.  M.  ♦ Strengthen,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  in  our  souls,  the  mysteries  of  the  true  faith : 
tliat  we  wh6  confess  him,  that  was  conceived  of  a 
. Virgin,  to  be  true  God,  and  true  man,  may,  hy 
die  power  of  his  saving  resurrection,  deserve  to 
come  to  eternal  joys.  Thro’  the  same,  &c. 

For  the  CHURCH.  • Protect  us,  O Lord,  while  we 
assist  at  thy  sacred  mysteries,  that  being  employed 
in  acts  of  religion,  we  may  serve  thee  both  in  b^y 
and  mind.  Thro’. 

Instead  of  the  tasty  may  he  said  the  follotmng 
For  the  POPE.  Be  appeased,  O Lord,  with  die  of- 
fering we  have  made,  and  cease  not  to  protect  thy 
servant  N.  whom  thou  hast  been  pleased  to  appoint 
Pastor  over  thy  Church.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixxxiv. — For  the  Jjordwill  give  his 
goodness : and  our  earth  shall  yield  her  fhiit 

P.  COMM.  Suscipiamus. — ^May  we  receive,  O 
Lord,  thy  mercy  in  the  midst  of  thy  temple,  that 
with  due  honour  we  may  prepare  for  the  approach- 
ing solemnity  of  our  reparation.  Thro’. 

Of  the  B.  V.  M.  * Gratiam  tuam. — Pour  forth,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  thy  grace  into  our  hetuts, 
that  we,  who,  by  the  message  of  an  angel,  have 
known  the  incarnation  of  thy  Son,  the  Christ,  may 
by  his  p^sion  and  cross,  come  to  the  glory  of  his 
resurrection.  Tliro’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


IN  ADVENT. 


53 


For  the  CHURCH.  ^Qumsumus. — We  beseech 
t>iee,  O Almighty  Grod,  not  to  leave  exposed  to  the 
dangers  of  human  life,  those  whom  thou  hast  permit- 
ted to  partake  of  those  divine  mysteries.  Thro’. 
Instead  of  the  last,  may  be  said  the  following. 

For  the  POPE.  May  the  participation  of  this  divine 
sacrament  protect  us,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord : and 
always  procure  safety  and  defence  to  thy  servant  N. 
whom  thou  hast  appointed  Pastor  over  thy  Church, 
together  with  the  flock  committed  to  his  charge. 
Thro\ 

Instead  of  Ite  missa  est,  is  said,  Benedicamus  Do- 
mino: which  rule  is  always  to  be  observed  when  the 
Gloria  in  excelsis  is  omUM. 

On  the  week  days  in  Advent,  the  Mass  of  the  fore-  • 
going  Sunday  is  said  widess  there  be  a proper  Mass 
for  me  day,  but  the  Alleluias  and  V.  following  the 
Gradual  are  omitted. 

SECOND  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT. 
INTROIT.  Is.  XXX. 

pEople  of  Sion,  be-  ’^Opvlus  Sion,  ecce  Do- 
JL  hold  the  Lord  will  JT  minus  venid  ad  sal- 
come  to  save  the  Gen-  vandas  Gentes:  et  audi- 
tiles:  and  the  Lord  mhU  tarn  facid  Dominus  glori- 
make  the  glory  of  his  am  vocis  suce  in  Mitia 
voice  heard  to  the  joy  of  cordis  vestri.  Ps.  79.  Qui 
your  hearts.  Ps.  79.  regis  Israd  intende : qui 
Give  ear  O thou  that  rulest  deducis  vdut  ovem,  Joseph. 
Ismel:  thou  that  lead-  V.  Gloria. 
est  Joseph  like  a sheep. 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Exdta,  Domine. — Stir  up,  O Lord, 
our  hearts  to  prepare  the  ways  of  thy  only  begotten 
Son : that  by  his  coming  wfi  may  be  enabled  to  serve 
thee  with  pure  minds.  Who  livest. 

For  the  II.  and  III.  Collects,  see  the  first  Sunday, 
page  50. 

E3  ^ 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


54 


SECOND  SUNDAY 


EPISTLE.  Rom,  xv.  4.  13.  Brethren:  What 
things  soever  were  written  were  •written  for  our  in- 
struction that  through  patience  and  the  comfort  of  the 
scriptures  we  might  have  hope.  Now  the  God  of 
patience  and  of  comfort  grant  you  to  be  of  one  mind 
one  towards  another,  according  to  Jesus  Christ; 
that  with  one  mind  and  with  one  mouth  you  may 
glorify  God  and  the  Fatlier  of  our  I^ord  Jesus  Christ. 
Wherefore  receive  one  another,  as  Christ  also  hath 
received  you  to  the  honour  of  God.  For  I say  that 
Jesus  was  minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  tnjth 
of  God,  to  confirm  the  promises  made  unto  the  Fathers. 
But  tliat  the  Gentiles  are  to  glorify  God  for  his  mer- 
cy, a^i  it  is  written:  “Therefore  1 will  confess  to 
thee,  O Lord,  among  the  Gentiles,  and  will  sing  to 
thy  name.”  And  again;  he  saith:  “Rejoice,  ye 
Gentiles,  with  his  people.”  And  again:  “Praise 
the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles,  and  magnify  him  all  ye 
people.”  And  again  Isaiah  saith:  “There  shall 
be  a root  of  Jesse,  and  he  that  shall  rise  up  to  rule 
the  Gentiles,  in  him  the  Gentiles  shall  hope.”  Now 
the  God  of  Hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in 
believing,  that  you  may  abound  in  hope,  and  in  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

GRAD.  Ps,  :riix. — He  shall  come  in  his  comeli- 
ness and  beauty  from  Sion ; God  will  come  visibly. 
V.  Gather  to  him  his  saints,  who  have  observed  «is 
covenant  more  than  sacrifice.  AllduicL,  Alleluia, 

V.  I rejoiced  at  what  V.  Letlatus  sum  in  his 
was  told  me:  we  are  to  qucB  dicta  suvt  mihi  in 
go  up  to  the  house  of  the  domum  Domini  ibimus. 
Lord.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xi.  2,  10. — At  that  time: 
When  John  had  heard  in  prison  the  works  of 
Christ,  sending  two  of  his  disciples  he  said  to  him  • 
Art  thou  he  that  art  to  come,  or  look  we  for  ano- 
ther.^ And  Jesus  making  answer,  said  to  them : Go 
and  relate  to  John  what  you  have  heard  and  seen. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


IN  ADVENT. 


55 


The  blind  see,  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleans- 
ed, the  deaf  hear,  tlie  dead  rise  again,  the  poor  have 
the  g08]>el  pi*eached  to  them.  And  blessed  is  he  that 
shall  not  be  scandalized  in  me.  And  wlien  they 
went  their  way,  Jesus  hn^gan  to  say  to  the  multitude, 
eonceming  John:  What  went  you  out  into  tlie  de- 
sert to  see  ? A i*eed  shaken  with  the  wind  ? But  what 
went  you  out  to  see  ? A man  clothed  in  soft  gar- 
ments? Behold,  they  that  are  clothed  in  soft  gar- 
ments are  in  the  houses  of  kings.  But  what  went 
you  out  to  see?  A prophet?  Yea,  I tell  you,  and 
more  than  a prophet.  For  this  is  he  of  whom  it  is 
written : “Behold,  I sena  my  angel  before  thy  face, 
^o  shall  pi*epare  thy  way  before  thee.”  Credo. 
^OFFERT.  Thou  wilt  turn,  O Grod,  to  us,  and 
bring  us  to  life,  and  thy  people  shall  rejoice  in  thee. 
Shew  us,  O Lord,  thy  mercy,  and  grant  us  thy  sal- 
vation. 

SECRET.  Be  appeased,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  by  our  humble  prayere  and  sacrifices ; and  al- 
though we  can  allege  no  deserts  on  our  pait,  grant 
us  thy  protection.  Thro’. 

For  tha  II.  and  III.  Secrets,  see  p.  52. 

COMM.  Arise,  O Jerusalem,  and  stand  on  high, 
and  behold  the  joy  that  will  come  to  thee  from  thy 
God. 

P.  COMM. ' Repleti. — Beiu , Hlled,  O Lord,  with 
this  spiritual  food,  we  humbly  n-seech  thee,  to  teach 
us,  by  partaking  of  this  myst*'  , to  despise  earthly 
things,  and  to  love  such  as  are  u«^avenly. 

For  the  II.  and  III.  Postcommunions,  see  p.  52,  5R 


THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT. 
INTROIT,  Philip  iv.  and  Ps.  Ixxxiv. 

Rejoice  in  the  Lord  Audete  in  Domino 

always ; again,  1 semper ; iierum  dico, 

rejoice.  Let  your  gavdete:  modestia  vestra 
modesty  be  known  to  aU  nota  sit  omnibus  homini • 


Digitized  by  Google 


56 


THIRD  SUNDAY 


meu:  the  Lord  is  nigh,  bus:  Dominus enim prop^ 
Be  nothing  solicitous:  but  est:  nihil  solicUi  siiisz 
in  every  thing  by  prayer  sed  in  omni  oratione  peti- 
and  supplication  with  tiones  vestrce  innotescant 
thanksgiving  let  yoiu*  pe-  apud  Deum.  Ps.  Bene- 
titions  be  made  laiownto  dixisti,  Domine,  terram 
(lod.  Ps.  O Lord  thou  tuam,  avertisti  captivita 
host  blest  thy  land ; thou  tern  Jacob,  V.  Gloria, 
hast  turned  away  the  cap- 
tivity of  Jacob.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Aurem  tuam, — Bend  thine  ear,  O 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  to  our  prayers,  and  enlight 
en  the  darkness  of  our  mftds  by  the  gi-ace  of  thy 
visitation.  Who  livest.  ^ 

For  the  other  CoUects,  see  p.  50. 

EPISTLE.  Philip,  iv.  4.  7. — Brethren : Rejoice 
in  the  Lord  always ; again,  I say.  Rejoice.  Let  your 
modesty  be  known  to  all  meif.  The  Lord  is  nigh. 
Be  nothing  solicitous : but  in  every  thing  by  prayer 
and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  petitions 
be  made  known  to  God.  And  the  peace  of  God. 
which  surpasseth  all  understanding,  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds  in  Christ  Jesus. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxix. — Lord,  who  sittest  on  the 
Cherubim,  exert  thy  power,  and  come.  V.  Thou, 
who  rulest  Israel,  hearken ; thou  wholeadest  Joseph 
ns  a sheep.  Alleluia,  Alleluia^ 

V.  Exert,  O Lord,  thy  V.  Excita,  Domine, 
power,  and  come  to  save  potentiam  tuam,  et  veni  : 
us.  Alleluia.  ut  salvos  facias  nos.  Al- 

leluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  i.  19,28. — At  that  time  i The  Jews 
sent  from  Jerusalem  Priests  and  Levites  to  John, 
to  ask  him  : Who  art  thou  ? And  he  confessed,  and 
did  not  deny : and  he  confessed : I am  not  the 
Christ.  And  they  asked  him:  What  then?  Art 
thou  Elias  ? And  he  said  • I am  not.  Art  thou  a 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


IN  ADVEjrr. 


57 


prophet  ? And  he  answered : No.  They  said  there- 
fbre  unto  him : Who  art  thou,  that  we  may  give  an 
answer  to  them  that  sent  us  ? What  sayest  thou  of 
thyself?  He  said : I am  the  voice  of  one  ciyiiig  in 
the  wilderness,  Make  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord,” 
as  said  the  prophet  Isaias.  And  they  that  were  sent 
were  of  the  pharisees.  And  they  asked  him  and  said 
to  him  : Why  then  dost  thou  baptize,  if  thou  be  not 
Christ,  nor  Elias,  nor  the  prophet  ? John  answered 
them,  saying:  I baptize,  with  water;  but  there  Iiath 
stood  one  in  the  midst  of  you,  whom  you  know  not. 
The  same  is  he  that  sh^l  come  after  me,  who  is 
prefeiTed  before  me ; the  latchet  of  whose  shoe  I am 
not  worthy  to  loose.  These  things  were  done  in 
Bethania  beyond  the  Jordan,  where  John  wos  bap- 
tizing. Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxxiv. — Lord,  thou  hast  blessed 
thy  land : thou  hast  turned  away  the  captivity  of 
Jacob.  Thou  hast  forgiven  the  iniquity  of  thy 
people. 

SECRET.  May  we  always,  O Lord,  offer  thee 
this  sacrifice  of  our  devotion,  both  to  comply  Avith 
the  institution  of  tliese  sacred  mysteries,  and  won- 
derfully to  procure  ourselves  that  salvation  which 
thou  designest  us.  Thro’. 

For  the  other  Secrets,  see  p,  52. 

COMM.  Is,  XXXV. — Say,  be  comforted,  O ye 
fearful  of  heait,  and  fear  not ; behold  our  God  will 
come  and  save  us. 

P.  COMM.  Imploramus, — ^W e implore,  O Lord, 
tliy  mercy,  that  these  divine  helps  having  cleansed  us 
from  sin,  may  prepare  us  for  the  ensuing  solemnity. 

For  the  rest  of  the  Postcommunions  see  pp,  52  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


58 


WEDNESDAY 


QUATUOR  TEMPORA,  OR  EMliER-DAYS. 

The  Ember-days,  (so  called  from  our  forefathers’  fast- 
ing on  those-  days  in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  or  from 
their  eating  nothing  but  .cakes  baked  under  the  embers.) 
are  the  Wednesday,  Friday,  and  Saturday  of  the  first 
week  of  Lent,  of  Whitsun-week,  of  the  third  week’  in 
September,  and  of  the  third  week  in  Advent.  The  spir- 
it of  the  Church  is,  to  engage  her  children  at  these  stated 
times  tc  pray,  fast,  and  penorm  such  other  good  works 
as  may  prevail  with  God  to  furnish  his  Church  with 
good  pastors;  Saturday  in  Ember- week  being  the  ap- 
pointed day  for  ordaining  and  consecrating  persons  to 
the  sacred  ministry.  We  are  likewise  to  beg  God’s  bles- 
sing on  the  fruits  of  tlie  earth,  and  give  him  thanks  for 
those  we  have  already  received. 

WEDNESDAY  IN  EMBER  WEEK. 
INTROIT,  h.  xlv.  Ps.  xviii. 

Drop  down  dew,  ye  heavens,  from  above,  and 
let  the  clouds  rain  the  just : let  the  earlii  be 
opened  and  bud  forth  a Saviour.  Pa.  The  heavens 
show  forth  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  de- 
clareth  the  work  of  his  hands.  V.  Glory. 

AJler  Kyrie  eleison  is  said,  Let  us  pray. 

Let  us  kneel  down*.  Flectamus  genua. 

R.  Stand  up  again.  R.  Levate. 

COLLECT.  PrcBsta  qtuBsumus. — Grant  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  the  approaching 
solemnity  of  our  redemption  may  afford  us  the  suc- 
coura  of  this  present  life,  and  heap  on  us  tlie  rewards 
of  eternal  happiness.  Thro’. 

1.  LESSON.  Is.  ii.  2.  5. — In  those  days  the  prophet 
Isaiah  said : In  the  last  days,  the  mountain  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord  shall  be  prepared  on  the  top  of 

* At  solemn  Masses  this  is  sung  by  the  Deacon  ; when 
all  kneel,  till  the  Subdeacon,  after  a little  pause,  bids 
them  stand  up  again  to  join  with  the  Priest  whilst  he 
says  the  Collect. 


Digitized  by  Google 


IN  EMBER-WEEK. 


59 


the  mountains,  and  it  shall  be  exalted  above  the 
hills : and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it.  And  many 
people  shall  go,  and  say : Come  and  let  us  go  up 
to  tlie  mountain  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  house  of  the 
God  of  Jacob,  and  he  will  teach  us  his  ways,  and  we 
will  walk  in  his  paths ; for  the  law  shall  come  forth 
from  Sion,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusa- 
lem. And  he  shall  judge  the  Gentiles,  and  rebuke 
many  people ; and  they  shall  tiun  their  swords  into 
plough-shares,  and  their  spears  into  sickles : nation 
shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall 
they  be  exercised  any  more  to  war.  O house  of  Ja- 
cob, come  ye,  and  let  us  walk  in  the  light  of  the 
Lord. 

GRADUAIj.  Ps,  xxiii. — Lift  up  your  gates  O 
you  princes;  and  be  you  lifted  up,  O eteraS  gates, 
and  the  King  of  Glory  shall  enter  in.  Who  sh^  as- 
cend into  the  mountain  of  the  Lord ; or  who  shall 
stand  in  his  holy  place?  The  innocent  in  hands, 
and  clean  of  heart 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R.  And  with  thy  spirit 

COLLECT.  Festina, — ^Make  haste,  we  beseech 
thee  O Lord,  and  delay  not ; but  grant  us  the  as- 
sistance of  thy  heavenly  grace ; that  they  who  trust 
in  thy  goodness,  may  be  relieved  by  the  comfort  of 
thy  coming.  Who  livest 

Here  are  said  the  other  Collects,  as  directed,  p,  50. 

n.  LESSON.  Is,  vii.  10, 16. — In  those  days : The 
Lord  spoke  unto  Achaz,  saying : Ask  thee  a sign  of 
the  Lord  thy  God,  either  unto  the  depth  of  hdl,  or 
imto  the  height  above.  And  Achaz,  said ; I will  not 
ask,  and  I will  not  tempt  the  Lord.  And  he  said : 
He€u*  ye  therefore,  O house  of  David ; Is  it  a small 
thing  for  you,  to  be  grievous  to  men,  that  you  ai*e 
grievoits  to  my  God  also?  Therefore  Ae  Lord  him- 
self shall  give  you  a sign.  Behold  a Virgin  shall  con- 
ceive and  bear  a son,  and  his  name  shall  be  called 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


f)0  WEDNESDAY  IN  EMBER- WEEK* 

Emmanuel.  He  shall  eat  butter  and  honey,  that  he 
may  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  to  choose  the  good. 

GRADUAL.  P«.  cxliv.  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto 
all  them  that  call  upon  him ; to  all  that  call  upon  him 
in  ti*uth.  V.  My  mouth  shall  speak  the  praise  of  the 
Lord : and  let  all  flesh  bless  his  holy  name. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  L 26.  38. — that  time:  The 
angel  Gabriel  was  sent  firom  God  into  a city  of  Ga- 
lilee, called  Nazareth,  to  a virgin  espoused  to  a 
man  whose  name  was  Joseph,  of  the  house  of 
David;  and  the  Virgin’s  name  was  Mary.  And 
the  angel,  being  come  in,  said  to  her ; Hail  full  of 
grace,  the  Lord  is  witli  thee : blessed  art  thou  among 
women.  Who  having  heard,  she  was  troubled 
at  his  saying,  and  thought  with  herself  what  manner 
of  salutation  this  should  be.  And  the  angel  ‘said 
to  her;  Fear  not,  Mary,  for  thou  hast  found  grace 
with  God.  Behold  thou  shalt  conceive  in  thy 
womb,  and  shalt  bring  forth  a son ; and  thou  shaft 
call  his  name  Jesus.  He  shall  be  great,  and  shall 
be  called  the  Son  of  the  Most  High,  and  the  Lord 
God  shall  mve  unto  him  the  throne  of  David  his  fa- 
ther : and  he  shall  reign  in  the  house  of  Jacob  for- 
ever, and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end.  And 
Mary  said  to  tlie  Angel : How  shall  this  be  done,  be- 
cause I know  not  man  ? And  the  angel  answering, 
said  to  her : The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee, 
and  the  power  of  the  Most  High  shall  oversha- 
dow thee.  And  therefore  also  the  Holy  which 
shall  be  bom  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Son  of 
God.  And  behold  thy  cousin  Elizabeth  she  also 
hath  conceived  a son  in  her  old  age ; and  this  is  the 
sixth  month  with  her  that  is  called  barren ; because 
no  word  shall  be  impossible  with  God.  And  Mary 
said : behold  the  handmaid  cf  the  Lord,  be  it  done 
to  me  a''.cording  to  tliy  word. 

OFFERTORY.  Is,  xxxv. — ^Take  courage,  and 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


FRIDAY  IN  F/MBER-tVliCK.  ()1 

lear  not:  for  behold  our  God  will  do  justice;  he 
will  come  himself,  and  save  us. 

SECRET.  Let  our  fasts,  we  beseecli  thee,  O 
Lord,  be  acceptable  to  tliee,  that  by  atoning  for  our 
sins,  they  may  both  make  us  worthy  of  thy  grace, 
and  bring  us  to  the  everlasting  effects  of  thy  pro- 
mises. Thro’.  ^ 

COMM.  Is.  vii. — ^Behold,  a virgin  sliall  conceive 
and  bring  forth  a Son  ; and  his  name  shall  be  called 
Emmanuel. 

P.  COMM.  Salxdaris. — Being  filled,  O Lord, 
by  the  participation  of  thy  saving  mysteries,  we 
humbly  beseech  thee,  that  as  tve  rejoice  in  the 
taste  thereof,  we  may  be  renewed  by  their  effects. 
Thro’. 

FRIDAY  IN  EMBER-WEEK. 
INTROIT.  P5.  cxviii. 

Thou  art  near,  O Lord:  and  all  thy  ways  are 
truth.  I Jiave  known  from  the  beginning  con- 
cerning thy  testimonies:  that  thou  hast  founded  them 
forever.  Ps.  Blessed  are  the  undefiled  in  the  way } 
who  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  ExcitUy  quaesumus. — Exert,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  tliee,  thy  power,  and  come : that  they 
who  trust  in  thy  goodness,  may  speedily  be  delivered 
from  all  adversity.  Who  livest. 

LESSON.  Is.  xi.  1. 5. — Thus  saith  the  Lord  God : 
And  there  shall  come  forth  a rod  out  of  the  root  of 
Jesse,  and  a flower  shall  rise  up  out  of  his  rootw 
And  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  him : the 
spirit  of  wisdom,  and  of  understanding,  the  spirit  of 
counsel,  and  of  fortitude,  the  spirit  of  knowledge, 
and  of  godliness,  and  he  shall  be  filled  with  the  spi- 
rit of  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  He  shall  not  judge  ac- 
cording to  the  sight  of  the  eyes,  nor  reprove  according 
to  the  hearing  of  the  ears.  But  he  shall  jud^e  the 
poor  with  justice,  and  shall  reprove  with  equity  for 
F 


Digitized  by  C*ogle 


62 


FRIDAY  IN  EMBER-WEEK. 


the  meek  of  the  earth : and  he  shall  strike  the  earth 
witli  the  rod  of  his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  bis 
lips  he  shall  slay  the  wicked.  And  justice  shall  be 
the  girdle  of  his  loins:  and  faith  the  girdle  of  his 
reins. 

GRADUAL.  P^.  lxxxiv. — Shew  us,  O Lord,  thy 
mercy;  and  grant  us  thy  salvation.  V.  Lord,  thou 
hast  blessed,  thy  land;  thou  hast  turned  away  the 
captivity  of  Jacob. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  i.  39.  47. — ^ that  time:  Mai-y 
rising  up  in  those  days,  went  into  the  hill  country 
with  haste  into  a city  of  Juda.  And  she  entered 
into  the  house  of  Zachaiy,  and  saluted  Elizabetli. 
And  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  Elizabeth  heard  the 
salutation  of  Mary,  tlie  infant  leaped  in  her  womb. 
And  Elizabeth  was  fOled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  And 
she  cried  out  with  a loud  voice,  and  said : Blessed 
art  thou  among  women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of 
thy  womb.  And  whence  is  this  to  me,  that  the 
mother  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  me  ? For  be- 
hold as  soon  as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation  sounded 
in  my  ears,  the  infant  in  my  womb  leaped  for  joy. 
And  blessed  ait  thou  that  hast  believed,  because 
those  things  shall  be  accomplished  that  were  spoken 
to  thee  by  the  Lord.  And  Maiy  said:  My  soul 
doth  magnify  the  Lord : and  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced 
in  God  my  Saviour. 

OFFERTORY.  Ps,  Ixxxiv. — Thou  wilt  turn,  O 
God,  and  bring  us  to  life : and  thy  people  shall  rejoice 
in  thee.  Shew  us,  O Lord,  thy  mercy ; and  gi*ant 
us  thy  salvation. 

SECRET.  Having  received,  O Lord,  our  offer- 
ings and  prayers,  cleanse  us,  we  beseech  thee,  by 
these  heavenly  mysteries,  and  mercifully  hear  us. 

COMM.  Zach,  xiv.— Behold,  the  Lord  will  come, 
and  all  his  saints  with  him ; and  in  that  day  there 
shall  be  a great  light. 


)y  Google 


«ATURDAT  IN  EMBER- WEEK.  * 63 

P.  COMM.  nos, — ^May  the  receiving,  O 

Lord,  of  thy  sacrament,  give  us  a new  life,  that  by 
putting  aside  the  old  man,  it  may  bring  us  to  the 
participation  of  this  saving  mystery.  Tluro’. 

SATURDAY  IN  EMBER-WEEK. 
INTROIT.  P«.lxxix 

COME,  and  shew  us  thy  faith,  O Lord,  who 
sittest  on  the  Clienibim : and  we  shall  be  saved. 
Ps,  Thou  who  rulest  Israel  hearken ; who  leadest 
Joseph  as  a sheep.  V.  Gloiy. 

After  the  Kyrie  eleison,  is  sctid : 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  a^in. 

I.  COLLECT.  Deusy  qui  conspicis,— O God, 
who  seest  us  afflicted  through  our  own  wickedness ; 
mercifully  grant,  that  by  thy  coming  we  may  be 
comforted.  Who  livest. 

1.  LESSON.  Is,  xix.  20.  22. — In  those  days: 
They  shall  cry  to  the  Lord  because  of  the  oppressor, 
and  he  shall  send  them  a Saviour  and  a defender  to 
deliver  them.  And  the  Lord  shall  be  known  by 
Egypt,  and  the  Egyptians  shall  know  the  Lord  in 
that  day,  and  shall  worship  him  with  sacrifices  and 
offerings:  and  they  shall  make  vows  to  the  Lord, 
and  perform  them.  And  the  Lord,  shall  strike 
Egypt  with  a scourge,  and  shall  heal  it,  and  they 
shall  return  to  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  be  pacified  to- 
wards them,  and  heal  them. 

GRADUAIi.  Ps,  xviii. — ^His  going  out  is  from 
the  end  of  heaven,  and  his  circuit  even  to  the  end 
thereof:  V.  The  heavens  shew  forth  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  firmament  declareth  the  work  of  his  hands. 
Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

II.  COLLECT.  Concede  queesurnus, — Grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  groan 
under  the  old  captivity  of  sin,  may  lie  freed  by  the 
uew  birth  of  thy  only  Son,  which  we  are  preparing 
for.  Who  livedi. 

F2 


pd  by  Google 


64 


SATURDAY  IN  EMBER'WEEK. 


II.  LESSON.  Is.  XXXV.  1.  7. — 7%us  suitk  the 
Lord:  The  land  that  was  desolate  and  unpassable 
shaU  be  glad,  and  the  wilderness  shall  rejoice,  anil 
sliall  flourish  like  the  lily.  It  shall  bud  forth,  and 
blossom,  and  shall  rejoice  with  joy  and  praise : the 
glory  of  Libanus  is  given  to  it,  the  beauty  of  Carmel 
and  Saron,  they  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and 
the  beauty  of  our  God.  Strengthen  ye  the  feeble 
hands,  and  confirm  the  weak  knees.  Say  to  the 
faint  hearted : Take  courage,  and  fear  not : behold 
your  God  will  bring  the  reven^  of  recompense; 
God  himself  will  come  and  will  save  you.  Then 
shall  the  eyes  of  the  blind  be  opened,  and  the  ears 
of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame 
man  leap  as  a hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb 
shall  be  free ; for  waters  are  broken  out  in  the  de- 
sert, and  streams  in  the  wilderness.  And  that 
which  was  dry  land,  shall  become  a pool,  and  the 
thij*sty  land  springs  of  water,  saitk  the  Lord  M- 
mighly, 

GRADUAL.  Ps.  xviiL — He  hath  set  his  taber- 
nacle in  the  sun : and  he  as  a bridegroom  coming 
out  of  his  bride  chamber.  V.  His  going  out  is  from 
the  ends  of  heaven,  and  his  circuit  even  to  the  end 
thereof. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

III.  COLLECT.  Indignos  nos. — Comfort  us,  O 
Lord,  thy  unworthy  sen^ants,  who  lie  dejected  under 
the  horror  of  our  crimes,  by  the  coming  of  thy  only 
Son.  Who  liveth. 

III.  LESSON.  Is.  xl.  9.  10.— Thus  saUh  the 
Lord:  Get  thee  up  upon  a high  mountain,  thou 
that  bringest  good  tidings  to  Sion : lift  up  thy  voice 
with  strength,  thou  that  bringest  good  tidings  tc 
Jerusalem:  'lift  it  up,  fear  not.  Say  to  the  cities  of 
Juda:  Behold  your  God:  behold  the  Lord  God 
shall  come  with  strength,  and  his  ann  shall  nile 
behold  his  rev/nru  is  with  him,  and  his  work  is  be- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SATURDAT  IN  EMBER-WEEK.  G5 

fore  liim.  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a shepherd . 
he  shall  gather  together  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and 
shaU  take  them  up  in  his  bosom. 

GRADUAL.  Ps.  Ixxix. — O God  of  Hosts,  con- 
vert us : and  shew  thy  face,  and  we  shall  be  saved. 

V.  Stir  up  thy  might,  O Lord,  and  come  to  save 
us. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

IV.  COLLECT.  Prasta,  qtuBsumus, — Grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  the  approaching 
solemnity  of  thy  Son’s  birth  may  afford  us  the  re- 
medies of  this  present  life,  and  obtain  for  us  the  re- 
wards of  etem^  happiness.  Thro’  the  same. 

IV.  LESSON.  Is.  xlv.  1.  9. — ^TThus  saith  the 
Lord  to  my  anointed  Cyrus,  whose  right  hand  I 
have  taken  hold  of,  to  subdue  nations  before  his 
face,  and  to  turn  the  backs  of  kings,  and  to  open 
the  doors  before  him,  and  the  gates  shall  not  be  shut. 

I will  go  before  thee,  and  ’^l  humble  the  great 
ones  of  the  earth : 1 will  bi*eak  in  pieces  the  gates  of 
brass,  and  will  burst  the  bars  of  iron.  And  I will 
give  thee  hidden  treasures,  and  the  concealed  riches 
of  secret  places : that  thou  mayest  know  that  I am 
the  Lord  who  call  thee  by  thy  name,  the  God  of 
Israel.  For  the  sake  of  my  servant  Jacob,  and  Is- 
rael my  elect,  I have  even  c^led  thee  by  thy  name : 

I have  made  a likeness  of  thee,  and  thou  hast  not 
known  me.  I am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else : 
there  is  no  God  besides  me : 1 girded  thee,  and  thou 
hast  not  known  me : that  they  may  know  who  are 
from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  they  who  are  from  ^ 
the  west,  that  there  is  none  beside  me.  I am  the 
Lord,  and  there  is  none  else,  I form  the  light,  and 
create  darkness,  I make  peace,  and  create  evil: 

I the  Lord  that  do  all  these  things.  Drop  down 
dew,  ye  heavens,  from  above,  and  let  the  clouds 
rain  the  just;  let  tlie  earth  be  opened,  and  bud 
F3 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


()G  SATURDAY  IN  EMBER- WEEK. 

forth  a saviour : and  let  justice  spring  up  together : 1 
the  Lord  have  created  him. 

GRADUAL.  Ps,  Ixxix. — Stir  up  thy  might,  O 
Lord,  and  come  to  save  us.  Give  ear,  O thou  that 
riilf^st  Israel : thou  that  leadest  Joseph  like  a sheep ; 
thou  that  sittest  upon  the  chenibims,  shine  forth  be- 
fore Ephraim,  Benjamin,  and  Manasses. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

V.  COLLECT.  Preccs  popvli. — Mercifully  hear, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  the  prayers  of  tliy  peo- 
ple ; tliat  we,  who  are  justly  afflicted  for  our  sins, 
may  receive  comfort  from  thy  kind  visit.  Who 
livest. 

V.  LESSON.  Dan.  iii.  49. — In  those  days: 
The  angel  of  tlie  Lord  went  down  with  Azarias,  and 
his  companions  into  the  furnace : and  he  drove  the 
flame  of  the  fire  out  of  the  furnace,  and  made  the 
midst  of  the  furnace  like  the  blowing  of  a wind 
bringing  dew,  and  the  fire  touched  them  not  at  all, 
nor  troubled  them,  nor  did  them  any  harm.  Then 
these  three,  as  with  one  mouth,  praised  and  glorified, 
and  blessed  Gk)d  in  the  furnace,  saying: 

CANTICLE. 

Blessed  art  thou,  O Lord,  the  Gk)d  of  our  fathers : 
and  worthy  of  praise  and  glory  forever. 

And  blessed  is  the  name  of  thy  glory ; which  is 
holy ; and  woithy  of  praise  and  glory  forever. 

Blessed  art  thou  in  the  holy  temple  of  tliy  glory : 
and  worthy  of  praise  and  glory  forever. 

Blessed  art  thou  upon  the  sacred  throne  of  thy 
kingdom : and  worthy  of  praise  and  gloi'y  forever. 

Blessed  art  thou,  on  the  sceptre  of  thy  divinity : 
and  worthy  of  praise  and  glory  forever. 

Blessed  art  thou,  who  sittest  on  the  Cherubim, 
beholding  the  deep : and  worthy  of  praise  and  glory 
forever. 

Blessed  art  thou  who  walkest  on  the  wings  ol 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


SATURDAY  IN  EMBER-WEEK.  -67 

the  winds,  and  on  the  waves  of  the  sea  : and  worthy 
of  praise  and  glory  for  ever. 

May  all  the  angels  and  thy  holy  ones  bless  thee: 
may  they  praise  and  glorify  thee  for  ever. 

May  the  heavens,  earth,  sea,  and  all  therein  bless 
thee : may  they  praise  and  glorify  thee  for  ever. 

V.  Glory  be  to  the  F'ather,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to 
the  Holy  Ghost : who  is  worthy  of  praise  and  glory 
for  ever. 

R.  As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  now  is,  and  ever- 
more shall  be,  world  without  end.  Amen.  Wlio  is 
worthy  of  praise  and  glory  for  ever. 

Blessed  art  f thou,  O Lord,  the  God  of  our  fore- 
fathers,  and  worthy  of  praise  and  glory  for  ever. 

V.  The  Lord  be  with  you.  R.  And  with  thy 
spirit 

VI.  COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  tribm, — O God,  who, 
in  behalf  of  the  three  young  men,  didst  render 
harmless  the  flames  of  fire:  mercifully  grant,  that 
we  thy  servants  may  not  be  burnt  by  the  flames  of 
vice.  Thro’. 

Here  are  said  the  other  Collects,  as  directed,  p.  50. 

EPISTLE.  2 Thess,  ii.  1.  8. — Brethren,  We  l)e- 
seech  you  by  the  coming  of  o\ir  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  of  our  gathering  together  unto  him : that  you 
be  not  easily  moved  fi*om  your  mind,  nor  be  fright- 
ed, neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by  epistle, 
as  sent  from  us,  as  if  the  day  of  the  Lord  were  at 
hand.  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means : for 
unless  tliere  come  a revolt  first,  and  the  man  of  sin 
l)e  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition,  who  op})oseth,  and 
is  lifled  up  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is 
worshipped,  so  that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God 
shewing  himself  as  if  he  were  God.  Remember  you 
not,  that  when  I was  yet  with  you  I told  you  these 
things  ? And  now  you  know  what  ^vithholdeth,  that 
ne  may  be  revealed  in  his  time.  For  the  mystery 
of  iniquity  already  worketh:  only  that  he  who  now 


Digitized  by  Google 


58 


FOURTH  SUNDaF 


boldeth,  do  hold,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way, 
aud  then  that  wicked  one  stiail  l>e  revealed,  whoni 
the  Loni  Jesus  shall  kill  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth, 
and  shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  coming. 

GRADUAL.  Ps,  Ixxix. — Thou  who  rulest  Is- 
rael, hearken : tlion  who  leadest  Joseph  as  a sheep. 
V.  Thou  who  sittesi  on  the  Cherubim,  shew  thy- 
self to  Ephraim,  Benjamin,  and  Manasse.  V.  Ex- 
ert thy  power,  O Lord,  and  come  to  save  us. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  iii.  in  the  next  p,  69. 

OFFERTORY.  Rejoice  excee<lingly,  O daugh- 
ter of  Sion,  publish  it,  O daughter  of  Jerusalem': 
behold  thy  King  and  Saviour  cometh  to  thee. 

SECRET.  Hear  us,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
and,  being . appeased  by  these  offerings,  grant  they 
may  increase  our  devotion,  and  advance  our  salva- 
tion. Thro\ 

COMM.  Ps.  xviiL — ^He  hath  rejoiced  as  a giant 
to  run  the  way : his  going  out  is  from  the  end  of 
heaven,  and  his  circuit  even  to  the  end  thereof. 

P.  *COMM.  QurBsumus. — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord  our  God,  that  tliou  wouldst  nmke  these  sacred 
mysteries,  which  thou  hast  given  us,  strengthen  in 
us  the  effects  of  our  reparation,  and  be  a remedy  to 
us,  both  now  and  hereafter.  Thi*o’. 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT. 
INTROIT.  Is.  xlv;  Ps.  xviiL 


HOP  down  dew,  ye 
heavens  from  above 
and  let  the  clouds  rain 
the  just : let  the  earth  be 
opened  and  bud  forth  a 
Saviour.  Ps.  The  heav- 
ens shew  forth  the  glory 
of  €k)d : and  the  ftrma- 
inent  declareth  the  works 
of  his  hands.  V.  Glory. 


Orcde  ccdi  desuper,  et 
nubes  pluant  juMum 
aperiatur  terra,  et  ger 
minet  Salvatorem.  Ps.  18 
Cceli  enarrant  gloriam 
Dei ; et  opera  manuum 
gus  annuntiat  firmamen^ 
tum  V.  Gloria. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


fjf  ADVENT. 


€9 


COLLECT.  Excila  qurtsumus. — Exert,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Lord,  thy  power,  and  come:  and 
succour  us  by  thy  great  might : that  by  the  nssistanee 
of  thy  grace,  thy  indulgent  mercy  may  hasten,  what 
is  delayed  by  our  sins.  Who  livest. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor,  iv.  L — Brethren:  Let  a man  so 
account  of  us  as  of  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  the 
di&pensers  of  the  mysteries  of  God.  Here  now  it  is  re- 
quired amongst  the  dispensers  that  a man  be  found 
faitlifuL  But  to  me  it  is  a very  small  thing  to 
be  judged  by  you,  oi*  by  man’s  day;  hut  neither  do  I 
judge  my  own  self.  For  I am  not  conscious  to  my- 
self of  any  thing;  yet  1 am  not  hereby  justified  ; but 
he  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord.  Therefore  jud^e 
not  before  the  time  till  the  Lord  come ; who  both  will 
bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and 
will  make  manifest  the  council  of  hearts ; and  then 
shall  every  man  have  praise  from  God. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxliv. — The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  all  tliosc 
who  call  upon  him ; to  an  that  call  upon  him  in  truth. 
V.  My  mouth  shall  speak  the  praise  of  the  Lord : 
and  let  aU  flesh  bless  his  holy  name.  AUelidn. 
Alleluia. 

V,  Come,  O Lord,  and  V.  Feni,  Domine^  et 
<lelay  not;  release  thy  noli  tardare:  relaxa/aci- 
j^ople  Israel  from  tlieir  nora  plchis  luce  Israel. 
sins.  ^Itteluia.  AUfeluia. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  iii.  1.  6. — ^Now  in  the  fifteentli 
year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Ceesar  (Pontius  Pilate 
being  governor  of  Judea,  and  Herod  Tetrarch  of 
Galilee,  and  Philip  his  brotlier  Tetrarch  of  Iturea, 
and  the  country  of  Trachonitis,  and  Lysanias  Te- 
trarch of  Abilina  under  the  high  Priests  Annas  and 
CaiphasUhe  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  John  the 
son  of  Zachary  in  the  desert.  And  he  came  into 
all  the  country  about  the  Jordan,  preaching  the 
baptism  of  penance  for  the  remission  of  sins,  as  it  was 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


70 


CHRISTMAS  EVE. 


written  in  the  book  of  the  words  of  Isaias  tne  prc 
phet:  “A  voice  of  one  ciying  in  the  wilderness 
prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord : make  sti*aight  hi.s 
paths,  every  valley  shall  be  filled,  and  every  moun- 
tain and  hUl  shall  be  brought  low:  and  the  crooked 
shall  be  made  stiaight : and  the  rough  ways  plain 
and  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Luke,  i.— Hail,  Mary,  full  of  grace, 
the  Lord  is  with  thee:  blessed  art  thou  amongst 
women : and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb. 

SECRET.  Hear  us,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
and  being  appeased  by  these  oflferings,  giwit  they  may 
increase  our  devotion,  and  advance  our  salvation. 

For  the  rest  of  the  Secrets  see  p.  52. 

COMM.  Is,  vii. — Behold  a virgin  shall  conceive, 
and  bare  a son,  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Em- 
manuel. 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis. — Having  received  what  has 
been  oflfered  to  thee,  O Lord,  grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  tlie  more  frequently  we  partake  of  these 
sacred  mysteries,  the  more  our  devotion  may  increase. 
For  the  rest  of  the  Postcommunions  see  pp.  52,  53. 

CHRISTMAS  EVE. 

INTROIT.  This  day  you  shall  know,  that  the 
Lord  will  come,  and  save  us : and  in  the  morning 
you  shall  see  his  glory.  Ps.  The  earth  is  the  Lord’s 
and  the  fulness  thereof:  the  world,  and  all  tliat 
dwell  therein.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Dem  qui  nos. — ^O  God,  who  mak- 
est  us  rejoice  in  the  yearly  expectation  of  the  least 
of  our  ]^em))tion:  grant,  that  we  who  cheerfull\- 
receive  thy  only  begotten  Son  as  a redeemer,  may 
behold  without  fear  the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
corning  as  our  judge.  Who  livest. 

Thfis  is  the  only  Collect,  unless  it  be  Sunday,  when  a 
Commem,  of  it  is  here  made,  as  well  as  at  Hn  Se 
cret  and  P.  Comm,  but  its  Gospel  is  no  I - : / at 
Uit  end  of  Mass. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


CHRISTMAS  EVR. 


71 


EPISTLE.  Rom,  i.  1 . 6. — Paul  a servant  of  Jesus 
Christ,  called  to  be  an  apostle,  separated  unto  the 
gospel  of  (»od,  which  he  had  promised  before  by  his 
prophets  in  the  holy  scriptures,  concerning  his  Son, 
who  was  made  to  him  of  the  seed  of  David  according 
to  the  flesh ; Avho  was  predestinated  the  Son  of  God 
in  power  according  to  the  spirit  of  sanctification,  by 
the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead ; by  whom  we  have  received  grace  and  apostle- 
ship  for  obedience  to  the  faith  in  all  nations  for  his 
name,  among  whom  are  you  also  the  called  of  Je- 
sus Christ. 

GRAD.  As  the  Introit  to  Ps.  V,  Thou  who 
nilest  Israel,  hearken,  thou  who  leadest  Joseph  like 
a sheep : thou  who  sittest  on  the  Cherubim,  shew 
thyself  to  Ephraim,  Benjamin  and  Manasses.  [If  it 
he  Sunday  add  Alleluia,  Alleluia,]  V.  To-morrow  the 
sins  of  the  earth  shall  be  cancelled,  and  the  Saviour 
of  the  world  shall  reign  over  us.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  i.  18.  20, — When  Mary  the 
mother  of  Jesus  was  espoused  to  Joseph,  before  they 
came  together,  she  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  Whereu|wn  Joseph  her  husband,  being  a just 
man,  and  not  willing  publicly  to  expose  her,  was 
minded  to  put  her  away  privately.  But  while  he 
thought  on  these  things,  behold  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
ai)p^Lred  to  him  hi  his  sleep,  saying:  Joseph,  son  of 
David,  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife,  for 
that  which  is  conceived  in  her  is  of  die  Holy  Ghost 
And  she  shall  bring  forth  a Son : and  thou  shalt  call 
his  name  Jesus;  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from 
their  sins. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  23. — Lift  up  your  gates,  O ye 
princes : and  be  ye  lifted  up,  O eternal  gates,  and 
the  Kim  of  glory  shall  enter  in. 

SECRET.  Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  that  as  we  celebrate  the  eve  of  the  adorable 
birth  of  thy  Son,  we  may  one  day  receive  with  joy 
•lis  eternal  rewards.  Who  livetli. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


72 


(■HKISTMA8.  I.  MASS. 


COMM.  Is,  xl. — The  glory  of  the  Loi*d  shall  be  re- 
vealed, and  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God. 

P.  COMM.  Grant  us,  we  beseech  tliee,  O Lord 
relief  by  celebrating  the  birth  of  thy  only  Son 
whose  sacred  mysteries  are  our  meat  and  di*hik.  Thro 


CHRISTMAS. 

ON  this  solemn  Festival  three  Masses  are  sung  or 
said,  to  represent  to  us  that  Christ  by  his  nativity 
came  into  tlie  world  to  save,  1.  Those  who  were  be- 
fore the  Luw : 2.  Those  who  were  under  the  Law : 
3.  Those  under  the  Gospel.  By  these  three  Masses 
the  Church  likewise  honors  a threefold  Nativity  of 
Christ.  1.  His  eternal  generation  and  Nativity,  born 
from  all  eternity  and  before  all  time  of  his  Father  : 
2.  His  nativity  and  generation  in  time  according  to 
his  human  nature,  being  born  of  the  Blessed  Virgin 
Mary : 3.  His  spiritual  birth  by  grace  in  the  souls  of 
the  just. 


CHRISTMAS.  l.Mas».  At  Midnight. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  ii. — The  Lord  hath  said  to  me: 
Tliou  art  my  Son,  tliis  day  have  I begotten  thee.  Ps, 
Why  have  the  Gentiles  raged,  and  the  people  dev  ised 
vain  things  ? V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  haiic, — O God,  who  ha.«t 
enlightened  this  most  sacred  night  by  the  brightness 
of  him  who  is  tlie  true  light;  grant,  we  beseech 
tliee,  that  we  wlA  have  known  the  mysteries  of  this 
light  on  earth,  may  likewise  come  to  the  enjoyment 
of  it  in  heaven.  Who  liveth. 

EPISTLE.  THt.  ii.  11.  15. — Dearly  beloved: 
The  grace  of  God  our  Saviour  hath  appeared  to  all 
men.  Instructing  us,  that  denying  ungodliness  and 
worldly  desu^s,  we  should  live  soberly,  and  justly, 
and  godly,  in  this  world,  looking  for  the  blessed 
hope,  and  coming  of  the  glory  of  tlie  great  God 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


AT  MlDmGHT 


78 


and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ:  who  gave  himself 
lor  118,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity, 
and  might  cleanse  to  himself  a people  acceptable, 
a pursuer  of  good  works.  These  thuigs  speak,  and 
exhort,  and  rebuke  with  all  authority.  I^et  no  man 
despise  thee. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cix. — ^With  thee  is  the  principality 
in  the  day  of  thy  strengtli : in  tlie  brightness  of 
the  saints : from  tne  womb  before  the  day-star  I be- 
got thee.  F.  The  Lord  said  to  my  Lord : Sit  thou 
at  my  right-hand : until  1 make  thy  enemies  thy  foot- 
stool. Alleluia,  Alleluia.  F.  Ps.  ii.  The  Lord 
hath  said  to  me : Thou  art  my  Son,  tliis  day  have  1 
begotten  thee.  AUduia. 

GOSPEL,  hukt  ii.  1. 14. — ^And  it  came  to  pass 
that  in  those  days  there  went  out  a decree  from  CoBsar 
Aupistus^  that  the  whole  world  should  be  enrolled. 
This  enrolling  was  first  jnade  by  Cyrinus  the 
governor  of  Syria.  And  aU  went  to  be  enrolled, 
every  one  into  his  own  city.  And  Joseph  also  went 
up  from  Galilee  out  of  flie  city  of  Nazaretli  into 
Judea,  to  the  city  of  David,  which  is  called  Bethle- 
hem: because  he  was  of  the  house  and  fiunily  of 
David,  to  be  enrolled  with  Mary  his  espoused  wife, 
who  was  with  child.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that 
when  they  were  there,  her  days  were  accomplished, 
that  she  should  be  delivered.  And  she  brought 
forth  her  first-born  son,  and  wiypped  him  up  in 
swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  him  m a manger:  be- 
cause there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  iim.  And 
there  were  in  the  same  country  shepherds  watching 
and  keeping  the  night  watches  over  their  flock.  And 
behold  an  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by  them,  aud 
the  brightness  of  God  shone  round  about  diem,  and 
they  feared  with  a great  fear.  And  the  angel  said  to 
them : Fear  not : for  behold  I bring  you  go^  tidings 
of  great  joy,  that  shall  be  to  all  the  peoj^e : for  this 
O 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


74 


CHRISTMAS.  11.  MASS. 


clay  is  bom  to  you  a Saviour,  wbo  is  Christ  the 
Lonl,  in  the  city  of  David.  And  this  shall  be  a 
sign  unto  you  : you  shall  find  the  infant  wrapped  in 
swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  in  a manger.  And  sud- 
denly there  was  with  the  angel  a multitude  of  the 
heavenly  army,  praising  God,  and  saying : Glory  to. 
God  in  the  highest : and  on  earth  peace  to  men 
of  good-will. — Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xcv. — Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  and 
let  the  earth  be  glad  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  for 
that  he  is  come. 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we 
make  to  thee  on  this  present  solemnity,  that  by  thy 
grace,  through  the  intercourse  of  these  sacred  myste- 
ries, we  may  be  conformable  to  him,  in  whom  our 
nature  is  united  to  thine.  Who  liveth. 

COMM.  Ps,  cix. — In  the  brightness  of  the  saints ; 
<mm  the  womb  before  the  day-star  I begot  thee. 

P.  COMM.  Da  noUs, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord  our  God,  that  we  who  celebrate  with  joy 
the  birth  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  partaking 
several  times  of  these  sacred  mysteries,  may,  by  a 
worthy  conduct  of  life,  come  to  be  united  with  him. 
Who  liveth. 

II.  MASS.  At  break  of  day. 

INTROIT.  Is,  ix. — ^A  li^l  shall  shine  upon  us 
this  day:  because  the  Lord  is  bom  for  us:  and 
his  name  shall  be  the  Wonderfuu  One,  God,  the 
Prince  op  Peace,  the  Father  of  the  World  to 
come,  of  whose  reign  there  shall  be  no  end.  Ps. 
The  Lord  hath  reigned,  he  is  clothed  with  beauty : 
the  Lord  is  clothed  with  strength,  And  hath  girded 
himsdf.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Da  nobis, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that,  as  we  are  enlightened  by 
the  new  light  of  thy  Word  become  fiesh,  we  may 
shew  in  our  actions  the  effects  of  that  Mth  that 
shineih  in  our  minds.  Thro’  the  same. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


CHEI8TMAS.  II.  MASS. 


75 


COLLECT  of  St.  Anaatasia, 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that; 
as  we  celebrate  the  solemnity  of  blessed  Ana‘*tnHia 
thy  martyr,  we  may  be  sensible  of  the  effects  of  her 
prayers  to  thee  in  our  behalf.  Thro’.  ^ 

EPISTLE.  Tit.  iii.  4.  7. — Most  dearly  beloved  • 
The  goodness  and  kindness  of  God  our  Saviour  ap- 
peared : not  by  the  works  of  justice,  which  we  have 
done,  but  according  to  his  mercy,  he  saved  us,  by 
the  laver  of  regeneration,  and  renovation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  whom  he  hath  poured  forth  upon  us, 
abundantly,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour : that 
being  justified  by  his  grace,  we  may  be  heirs  accord- 
ing to  hope  of  life  everlasting,  thj*o’  Jesus  Christ  oiu* 
Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxviiL — ^Blessed  be  Hethatcoineth  in 
the  name  of  tlie  Lord.  The  Lord  is  our  God,  and 
he  hath  shone  upon  us.  V.  This  is  the  Lord’s  doing, 
and  it  is  wonderful  in  our  eyes.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 
V.  The  Lm’d  hath  reigned,  he  is  clothed  with  beauty : 
the  Lord  is  clothed  with  streiigtli,  and  hath  girded 
himself  with  might  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  iL  15.  20. — At  thoA  time:  The 
shepherds  said  one  to  another:  Let  us  ^o  over  to 
Bethlehem,  and  let  us  see  tliis  word  that  is  come  to 
pass  which  the  Lord  hath  shewed  to  us.  And  they' 
came  with  haste : and  they  foimd  Mary  and  Joseph, 
and  the  infimt  lying  in  a manger.  And  seeing,  they 
understood  of  the  word  that  had  been  spoken  to 
them  concerning  this  child.  And  all  that  heard  won- 
dered: and  at  those  things  that  were  told  .them 
by  the  shepherd^  But  Mary  kept  all  the^  words, 
pondering  them  m her  heart.  And  tlie  shepherds 
returned,  glorifying  and  praising  God,  for  all  the 
things  they  had  heard  and  seen,  as  it  was  told 
unto  them.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xcii. — ^The  Lord  hath  established 
G2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


76 


111.  ftUfS.  ON  CHAISTNAS  DAT. 


the  world,  which  shall  all  be  moved;  thjr  throne,  O 
Lord,  isprepared  fi'oin  of  old, thou  art  from  everlasting. 

SECRET.  May  the  offerings,  O Lord,  we  make, 
be  agreeable  to  the  mystery  of  this  day’s  birth, 
and  always  pour  forth  peace  upon  us;  that  as  he, 
who  though  bom  man,  shewed  himself  also  God ; 
so  may  this  earthly  substance  give  us  that  which  is 
divine. 

SECRET  of  St.  Anastasia,  Graciously  receive, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  our  offerings,  and  grant, 
by  tlie  merits  of  blessed  Anastasia  the  martyr,  that 
th^  may  avail  to  our  salvation.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Zach,  ix. — Rejoice,  O daughter  of  Sion, 
shout  for  joy,  O daughter  of  Jerusjilem ; behold  thy 
king  wiil  come  to  thee  the  just  and  Saviour  of  the 
world. 

P.  COMM.  Hujus  nos. — May  we,  O Lord,  al- 
ways receive  new  light  from  this  sacrament,  which 
reneweth  to  us  the  memory  of  tliat  wonderful  birth, 
which  destroyed  the  old  man.  Thro*. 

P.  COMM,  of  St.  Anast.  Thou  hast  fed,  O Lord, 
thy  family  with  these  sacred  oblations : ever  there- 
fore comfort  us  with  her  intercession,  whose  feast 
we  celebrate.  Thro’. 


III.  MASS.  On  Christmas-day. 


INTROIT. 

A Child  is  bom  t > us, 
and  a Son  is  given 
to  us,  and  the  government 
is  u[)on  his  shoulder:  and 
his  name  shall  be  called 
rJje  Angel  of  the  great 
Council,  Ps.  Sing  to  the 
Lord  a new  canticle,  for 
he  hatli  done  wonderful 
li.iugs.  V.  Glory. 


Isaias  ix. 

W^UER  naius  est  nohist^ 
et  Filius  datus  est 
nobis : cujus  imperium 
super  humerum  et 

vocabitur  nomen  yus^ 
Magni  Concilii  Angelus. 
Ps.  97.  Cantate  Domino 
canticum  novum : quia 
mirabilia fecit.  . 

Y.  Gloria. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


III.  HASSk  ON  CHRISTMAS-DAT.  77 

CbLLECT.  Conce(k. — Grant,  we  l^eseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  groan  under  the  old 
captivity  of  sin,  may  he  freed  therefrom  by  the  birth 
of  thy  only  begotten  Son.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE,  Heh»  i.  1,  12. — God,  who  at  sundry 
' times  and  in  divers  mannei*s  spoke  in  times  past  to  the 
fathers  by  the  prophets,  last  of  all,  m those  days,  hath 
spoken  to  us  by  his  Son,  whom  he  hath  appointed 
heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  world; 
who  being  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  and  the  figure 
of  his  substance,  and  upholding  all  things  by  the 
word  of  his  power,  making  purgation  of  sins,  sitteth 
on  the  right-hand  of  the  majesty  on  high;  being 
made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he  hath 
inherited  a more  excellent  name  tlian  they.  For  to 
which  of  the  angels  hath  he  said  at  any  time,  “ Thou 
art  my  Son,  to  day  have  1 begotten  thee.^”  And 
again : “ I will  be  to  him  a father,  and  he  shall  J)e 
to  me  a Son  And  again,  when  he  bringeth  in  the 
first  begotten  into  tlie  world,  he  saith:  “And  let 
all  the  angels  of  God  adore  him.”  And  to  the 
angels  indeed  he  saith ; “ He  that  maketli  his  angels, 
spirits ; and  his  ministers  a flame  of  fire.”  But  to  the 
&n : “ Thy  throne,  O GkKl,  is  for  ever  and  iiver ; 
a sceptre  of  justice  is  the  sceptre  of  tliy  kingdom. 
Thou  hast  loved  justice  and  hated  iniquity ; therefore, 
God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee  witli  the  oil  of 
gladness  above  thy  fellows.”  And;  “Thou,  in 
the  beginning,  O Lord,  didst  found  the  earth; 
and  the  works  of  thy  hands  are  the  heavens.  They 
sliall  perish,  but  thou  shalt  continue;  and  they  shall 
all  grow  old  as  a gaiTiient.  And  as  a vesture  shall 
thou  change  them,  and  they  shall  be  changed : but 
thou  art  the  self-same,  and  thy  yeara  shall  not  fail.” 

GRAD.  Ps.  xcvii. — ^All  the  ends  of  the  earth  hatli 
seen  the  salvation  of  our  God ; sing  joyfully  to  the 
Lord  all  the  earth.  V.  'Phe  Lord  hath  made  knowm 
his  salvation : he  hath  revealed  his  justice  hi  tlie  sight 
of  the  Gentiles.  AUduiou 
G3 


Digitized  by  Google 


78 


ST*  STEPBKIf* 


V.  A sanctified  day  V.  Dies  sand^toakts 
hath  shone  upon  us:  iUuxUrwbis : i^iUGenteSj 
come^  ye  Gentiles,  and  et  adorate  Doninum,  quid 
adore  the  Lord,  for  this  hodie  descendit  lux  mapna 
day  a great  light  is  come  super  terrain.  Alleluia, 
down  upon  the  earth. 

Mleluicu 

GOSPEL.  John  L In  the  beginning,  &c.  as  in  tlic 
Ordinary,  p.  xlv. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixxxviii. — ^Thine  are  the  heavens, 
and  thine  is  the  earth ; the  world  and  the  fulness 
thereof  thou  hast  founded:  Justice  and  judgment 
are  the  preparation  of  thy  throne. 

SECRET.  Sanctify,  O Lord,  our  offerings,  by 
the  new  birth  of  thy  only  begotten  Son,  and  cleanse 
us  from  the  stains  of  our  sins.  Thro’,  the  same. 

CoMMiTNicANTEs,  HU  the  Circumciiraon. 

Being  united  in  communion,  and  celebrating 
this  most  sacred  day,  [in  the  1st  Mass,  sacred 
night,!  on  which  the  spodess  vir^ity  of  the  blessed 
Mary  Drought  forth  a Saviour  to  this  world,  moreover 
honouring  in  the  first  place,  the  memory  of  the 
same  glorious  V.  M.  &c.  as  in  p.  xxxiv. 

COMM.  Ps.  xcvii. — ^The  whole  earth  hath  seen 
the  salvation  of  our  God. 

P.  COMM.  PrcBsta,  ^(ssumus. — Grant  we  be 
seech  thee,  O Almighty  wd,  that  as  the  Saviour  of 
the  world,  who  was  bom  this  day,  procured  for  us 
a divine  birth,  he  may  also  bestow  on  us  immor- 
tality. Who  liveth. 

At  the  end  of  this  Mass  is  said  the  Gospel  of  the 
Epiphany,  p.  91. 


St.  STEPHEN  Ihe  first  Martyr. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  cxviiL 

T3RINCES  sat,  and  spoke  against  me : and  sinners 
L pei-secuted  me:  help  me,  O Lord  my  God,  for 
\hy  servant  hath  pi-actiaed  thy  commandme  itfiL  Ps* 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


ST.  STEPHEN.  79 

Blessed  are  the  undefiled  in  the  way : who  walk  in 
the  law  of  the  Lord.  V.  Glory. 

COULECT.  Da  nobis, — Gran^  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  that  we  may  imitate  him  whose  memory 
we  celebrate,  so  as  to  learn  to  love  even  our  ene- 
mies, because  we  now  solemnize  his  martyrdom, 
who  knew  how  to  pray,  even  for  his  persecutors,  to 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  thy  Son.  Who  liveth. 

Commem,  of  Christmas,  by  the  Collect,  Secret,  ana 
P.  Comm,  of  the  III.  Mass,  p,  77. 

LESSON,  ^cts  vi.  8.  10.  vii.  54.  69. — In  those 
days:  Stephen,  lull  of  grace  and  fortitude,. did  ^at 
wonders  and  signs  among  the  people.  Now 
there  arose  some  of  that  which  is  called  the  syna- 
gogue*of  the  Libertines,  and  of  the  Cyrenians,  and 
of  the  Alexandrians,  and  of  them  that  were  of  Cilicia 
and  Asia,  disputing  with  Stephen.  And  they  were 
not  able  to  resist  the  wisdom  and  the  spirit  that 
spoke.  Chap.  vii.  54.  Now  hearing  these  thin^ 
they  were  cut  to  the  heart,  and  they  gnashed  with 
their  teeth  at  him.  But  he  being  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  looking  up  steadfastly  to  heaven,  saw  the 
glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on  the  right-hand 
of  God.  And  he  said:  Behold  I see  the  heavens 
opened,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right- 
hand  of  God.  And  they,  crying  out  with  a loud 
voice,  stopped  their  eai-s,  and  with  one  accord  ran 
violently  upon  him.  And  casting  him  forth  With- 
out the  city,  they  stoned  him:  and  tlie  witnesses 
laid  down  their  garments  at  the  feet  of  a young  man, 
whose  name  was  Saul.  And  they  stoned  Stephen, 
invoking  and  saying:  Lord  Jesus  receive  my  spirit. 
And  fidling  on  his  Imees,  he  cried  with  a loud  voice, 
saying : Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge.  And 
when  he  said  this,  he  fell  asleep  in  the  Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxviii. — Princes  sat,  and  spoke  against 
me : and  the  wicked  iiersecuted  me.  V,  Help  me,  O 


Da;  zed  byGOOglC 


eo 


8T.  STEPHEN. 


Loi-d  my  : save  me  for  thy  mercies  sake. 
hdoLf  Alleluia, 

V,  I see  the  heavens  opened,  and  Jesus  standing 
at  the  right  hand  of  the  power  of  God.  AUeluia, 

GrOSPEL.  Matt,  xxiii.  34.  39. — At  that  time, 
Jesus  said  to  the  Scribes  and  Phaiisees : Behold  1 
send  to  you  prophets,  and  wise  men,  and  scribes : 
and  some  of  them  you  will  put  to  death,  and  crucify, 
and  some  you  will  scourge  in  your  synagogues,  aiid 
persecute  from  city  to  city:  that, upon  you  may 
come  all  the  just  blood  that  hath  been  shed  upon  the 
earth,  from  the  blood  of  Abel  the  just,  even  unto 
the  blood  .of  Zacharias  the  son  of  B^chias,  whom 
you  killed  between  the  temple  and  the  altar.  Amen. 
I say  to  you,  all  these  things  shall  come  upon  this 
generation.  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou"  that 
lullest  the  prophets,  and  honest  them  that  are  sent 
unto  thee,  how  often  would  I have  gathered  to- 
gether thy  children,  as  the  hen  doth  gather  her 
chickens  under  her  wings,  and  thou  wouldst  not? 
Behold,  your  house  shall  be  left  to  you  desolate. 
For  I say  to  you,  you  shall  not  see  me  henccjforth 
till  you  say : Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Acts  vi.  7. — The  Apostles  chose  Ste- 
phen, a Levite,  full  of  faith,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
whom  the  Jews  stoned,  praying  and  saying:  Lord 
Jesus,  receive  my  spirit.  Alleluia, 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  these  offerings  in 
memory  of  thy  saints : and  as  their  sufferings  have 
made  them  glorious,  so  may  our  devotion  render  us 
free  from  sin.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Acts  vii. — 1 see  the  hejjvens  openeil,  and 
Jesus  standing  on  the  right-hand  of  the  power  of 
God : Lord  Jesus  receive  niy  spirit,  and  lay  not  this 
sin  to  their  charge. 

P.  COMM.  AuxUientur, — ^May  the  mysteries  wo 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


ST.  JOHN  THE  EVANGELIST.  81 

lave  received,  O Lord,  be  a help  to  us,  and,  by  the 
intercession  of  the  bless^  mai^r,  Stephen,  strengthen 
us  with  thy  perpetual  protection.  Thro*. 


St.  JOHN  the  EVANGELIST. 

INTROIT,  In  medio,  as  in  MASS  XII.  Common  qf 
Doctors. 

COLLECT.  EcclesicB. — ^Mercifully,  O Lord,  en- 
lighten thy  Chiu-ch,  tliat  being  taught  by  blessed 
John,  thy  Apostle  and  Evangelist,  she  may  come 
to  thy  eternal  rewards.  Thro’. 

The  Commem,  of  Christmas,  and  of  St.  Stephen, 

by  their  several  CoUects,  Secrets,  and  P.  Comms., 

LESSON.  Ecclus.  xv.  1.  G. — He  that  feareth  God, 
will  do  good : and  he  that  possesseth  justice,  shall  lay 
hold  on  her.  And  she  will  meet  him  as  an  honour- 
able mother.  With  the  bread  of  life  and  understand- 
ing, she  shall  feed  him,  and  give  him  the  water  of 
wholesome  wisdom  to  drink ; and  she  shall  be  made 
strong  in  him,  and  he  shall  not  be  moved : and  she 
shall  hold  him  fast,  and  he  shall  not  be  confounded : 
and  she  shall  exalt  him  among  his  neighbours,  and 
in  the  midst  of  the  Church  she  shall  open  his  mouth, 
and  shall  fill  him  with  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  un- 
derstanding, and  shall  clothe  him  with  the  robe  of 
glory.  She  shall  heap  upon  him  a treasure  of  joy 
and  gladness,  and  our  Lord  God  shall  cause  him 
to  inherit  an  everlasting  name. 

GRAD.  John  xxi. — A report  was  spread  among 
the  brethren,  that  that  disciple  should  not  die : but 
Jesus  said  be  should  not  die.  V.  But,  so  I will 
have  him  remain  till  I come : follow  thou  me. 
luia,  Alleluia.  V.  This  is  the  disciple  that  beareth 
testimony  of  these  things,  and  we  know  his  testi- 
mony is  true.  AUduia. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


83  THE  HOLT  INNOCENTS. 

GOSPEL.  Mn  XXL  19.  24.—.^  that  time 
Jesus  said  to  Peter : follow  me.  Peter  turning  about, 
saw  that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  following,  who 
also  leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper,  and  sliid: 
Lord,  who  is  he  that  shall  betray  thee  ? Him  there- 
fore when  Peter  had  seen,  he  saith  to  Jesus:  Lord 
and  what  shcdl  this  man  do^  Jesus  saith  to  him: 
So  I will  have  him  to  remain  till  I come,  what  is  it 
to  thee  ? follow  thou  me.  This  saying,  therefore,  went 
abroad  among  the  brethren,  that  that  disciple  should 
not  die.  And  Jesus  did  not  say  to  him : He  should 
not  die;  but,  so  I will  have  him  to  remain  till  I 
come,  what  is  it  to  thee  ? This  is  that  disciple  who 
giveth  testimony  of  these  thin^  and  hath  written 
these  things:  and  we  know  Uiat  his  testimony  is 
true.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xci. — ^The  just  shall  flourish  like 
the  palm  tree : he  shall  grow  up  like  the  cedar  of 
Libanus. 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  the  oflTerings  we 
make  to  thee,  on  his  feast,  by  whose  intercession  we 
hope  to  be  delivered.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xxi. — report  was  spread  among 
the  brethren,  that  that  disciple  should  not  die.  But 
Jesus  said  not,  he  should  not  die;  but  so  will  i that 
he  remain  till  1 come. 

P.  COMM.  RefecH  cibo. — Bein^  refi^shed,  O 
Lord,  with  this  heavenly  meat  and  drmk,  we  humbly 
beseech  thee,  that  we  may  be  assisted  by  his  prayer^ 
on  whose  feast  we  have  received  these  sacred  mys- 
teries. Tlu-o’. 


The  HOLY  INNOCENTS. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  viii. — Out  of  the  mouth  of  inflmts 
and  sucklings  thou  hast  perfected  ‘ praise  to  con- 
ibimd  thy  enemies.  Ps.  O Lord,  our  Lord,  how 
admirable  is  thy  name  in  the  whole  earth!  V 
Glory. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  HOLT  INNOCENTS.  83 

Gloria  in  Excelsia  is  not  said,  except  it  he  Sunday, 
or  the  Octave-day. 

COLLECT.  Dem,  cujus. — O Grod,  whose  praise 
the  Holy  Martyrs,  the  Innocents,  published  this  day, 
not  by  speaking,  but  by  dying:  mortily  in  us  all  our 
vicious  inclinations,  that  we  may  shew  forth,  in  our 
actions,  thy  &ith  which  we  profess  with  our  li))s. 
Thro’. 

The  Commems.  of  Christmas,  of  St.  Stephen,  of  SL 
John,  by  their  respective  Collects,  Secrets,  and  P. 
Communions,  as  pp.  77.  79.  and  81. 

LESSON.  Rev.  xiv.  1.  5. — In  those  days : I be- 
held, the  Lamb  standing  on  mount  Sion,  and 
with  him  a hundred  forty-four  thousand,  having  his 
name,  and  the  name  of  his  Father  written  on  their 
foreheads.  And  I heard  a voice  from  heaven,  as 
the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  great 
thunder : and  the  voice  which  I heard,  was  as  the  voice 
of  harpers,  harping  on  their  harps.  And  they  sung  as 
it  were  a new  canticle,  before  the  throne,  and  before 
the  four  living  creatures,  and  the  ancients,  and  no  man 
could  say  the  canticle,  but  those  himdred  forty-four 
thousand  who  were  purchased  from  the  earth. 
These  are  they  who  were  not  defiled  with  women : 
for  they  are  virgins.  These  follow  the  Lamb  whither- 
soever he  goeth.  These  were  purchased  from  among 
men,  the  first  fruits  to  God,  and  to  the  Lamb : and 
in  their  mouths  there  was  found  no  lie;  for  they 
are  without  spot  before  the  throne  of  God. 

GRAD.  Ps. — Our  soul  hath  been  delivered,  as  a 
sparrow  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowlers.  V.  The  snare 
is  broken,  and  we  are  delivered : our  help  is  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  who  made  heaven  and  earth. 

JUldma,  MLeiuia.  V.  Praise  the  Lord:  you  his 
servants,  praise  ye  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Metuia* 
If  it  he  not  the  Octave-day  or  Sunday,  the  above  Alle- 
luias and  V.  are  omitted;  and  in  iheir  stead  is 
aid  the  Tract. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


84 


THK  HOLT  INNOCENTS. 


TRACT.  Ps,  Ixxviii. — They  have  spilt  the 
olood  of  the  saints,  like  water  about  Jerusalenu  F. 
And  there  were  none  to  bury  them.  V.  Revenge, 
O Lord,  the  blood  of  thy  saints,  wliich  hath  been 
spilt  on  the  earth. 

GOSPEL.  Malt,  ii.  13. 18. — ^ the  same  time : An 
angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  sleep  to  Joseph,  saying 
Arise,  and  take  the  Child  and  his  Mother,  and  ny 
into  Egypt;  and  be  there  until  I shall  tell  thee.  For 
it  will  come  to  pass  that  Herod  will  seek  the  Child 
to  destroy  him.  Who  arose,  and  took  the  Child 
and  his  mother  by  night,  and  retired  into  Egypt: 
and  he  was  there  until  the  death  of  Herod : that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  which  the  Lord  spoke  by  the  pro- 
phet, saying : “ Out  of  Egypt  have . I called  my 
Son.”  Then  Herod  perceiving  that  he  was  deluded 
by  the  wise  Men,  was  exceeding  angry : and  sending 
killed  all  the  men-children  that  were  in  Bethlehem, 
and  in  all  the  borders  thereof,  from  two  years  okl 
and  under,  according  to  the  time  which  he  had  dili- 
gently enquired  of  the  wise  men.  Then  was  fiil- 
. filled  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremias  the  pro- 
phet, saying:  “A  voice  in  Raima  was  heard,  la- 
mentation and  great  mourning:  Rachel  bewailing 
her  children,  and  would  not  be  comforted,  because 
they  are  not.”  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxxiiL — Our  soul  hath  been  deliver- 
ed, as  a Sparrow  out  of  the  snares  of  the  fowlers.  The 
snare  is  broken  and  we  are  delivered, 

SECRET.  May  the  pious  pravers  of  thy  saints, 
O Lord,  be  never  wantu^  to  us,  both  to  make  our 
offerings  acceptable,  and  to  obtain  for  us  ihy 
mercy.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt.  ii. — ^A  voice  in  Rama  was  heard, 
lamentation  and  great  mourning : Rachel  bewailing 
her  children,  and  would  not  be  comforted,  because 
thw  are  not. 

P COMM.  Votiva. — ^Now  we  have  partaken,  C 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


8T. 


85 


I^rd,  of  the  votive  offeraa^  gmot,  we  beseeeh 
thee,  that  by  the  prayei*s  of  thy  saints,  tliey  nay 
procure  us  the  helps  of  this  present  life,  and  those 
of  diat  which  is  to  come.  Thro’. 

St.  T.  of  CANTERBURY,  Bp.  and  M. 
INTROIT.  Let  us  all  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and 
celebrate  this  festival  in  honour  of  blessed  Thomas 
the  martyr,  for  whose  martyrdom  the  angels  rejoice, 
and  praise  the  Son  of  God.  Ps.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord 
O ye  just : praise  becometh  the  upright.  V.  Glory, 
COLLECT.  2>eu9,  pro  cujus. — O God,  in  defence 
of  whose  Church,  the  glorious  prelate  Thomas, 
fell  by  the  swords  of  wicked  men:  gr^t,  we  be- 
seech thee,  that  all  who  implom  his  assistance,  may 
find  comfort  in  the  grant  of  their  petition.  Thio’. 
h,  this  Mass,  Commems.  of  Christmas,  Si,  Stephem 
St,  John,  and  H.  Innocents,  are  made  by  their  Col- 
lects, 8fc,  as  above,  from  p,  77  to  84  inclusively. 
EPISTLE.  Heb,  v.  1.  6. — Brethren:  Every 
high  priest  taken  from  among  men,  is  ordained 
for  men  in  the  things  that  appertain  to  God,  that  he 
may  offer  up  gifts  and  sacrifices  for  sins : who  can 
have  compassion  cm  them  that  are  ignorant  and 
ffiat  err:  because  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with 
infirmity:  and  therefore  he  ought,  as  for  the  peo- 
ple, so  also  for  himself,  to  offer  for  sins.  Neither 
doth  any  man  take  the  honour  to  himself^  but  he 
that  is  c^led  by  God,  as  Aaron  was.  So  also  Christ 
did  not  glorify  himself  that  he  mi^t  be  made  a high 
priest : but  he  that  said  to  him,  “ Thou  art  my  Son, 
this  day  have  I begotten  thee.”  As  he  saith  also  in 
another  place : “ Thou  art  a priest  for  evei^  according 
to  the  order  ofMelchisedech.” 

GRAD.  Ecclus,  xliv. — Behold  a great  Prelate, 
who  m his  days  pleased  God.  F.  There  was  none 
found  like  him  ki  keeping  the  law  of  the  Most 
High.  MLeluia,  Mlduia.  F.  1 am  the  good  shep- 
H 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


86  SUNDAY  WITHIN  rax  OCTAVK. 

herd,  and  1 know  mj  sheep,  and  my  sheep  know 

me.  JUlduia, 

GOSPEL.  John  x.  11.  16. — As  on  the  Second 
Sunday  after  Easter. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  XX. — ^Thou  hast  set,  O Lord,  on  his 
head,  a crown  of  precious  stones ; he  asked  life  of 
thee : and  thou  di^  give  it  him.  Alleluia, 
SECRET.  Sanctify  O Lord,  the  offerings  con- 
secrated to  thee : and  being  appeased  thereby,  mer- 
cifully look  upon  us,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
T.  thy  Martyr  and  Bishop.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  x. — I am  the  good  shepherd,  and 
I know  my  sheep,  and  my  sheep  know  me. 

P.  COMM.  H(bc  nos  com, — ^May  this  commu- 
nion, O Lord,  cleanse  us  from  sin,  and,  by  the  inter- 
cession of  blessed  Thomas,  thy  martyr  and  bishop, 
make  us  effectually  partakers  of  this  heavenly  re- 
medy. Thro’. 


SUNDAY  within  the  Octave  of  Christmas. 
INTROIT.  Wisdom  xviiL  Ps,  xcii. 


WHILE  all  thin^ 
were  in  quiet  si- 
lence, and  the  night  was 
in  the  midst  of  her  course, 
diy  Almighty  Word,  O 
Lord,  came  down  frwn 
tby  royal  throne. 

Ps,  The  Lord  hath 
reigned,  he  is  clothed 
wiSi  beauty : the  Lord  is 
clothed  yviiti  strength,  and 
bath  girded  himself. 

F,  Glory 


UM  medium  silen* 
Hum  teneruni  omma^ 
tlnoxin  suo  cursu  medium 
Her  haberet,  Omnipotens 
Sermo  tuus,  Domine^  de 
codis  a regdibus  sedibus 
veniL 

Ps.  xciL  Dominus  reg- 
navit, decorem  indutus 
est:  indutus  est  Dominus 
fortitudinem,  et  proecinint 
se* 

V.  GUma. 


COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  regulate  our  actions  according  to  thy  divine 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


8 UNDA r WITHIN  THE  OCTAVE.  87 

will,  tb^  in  the  name  of  thy  beloved  Son,  we  may 
abound*  in  good  works.  Thro’. 

Commems.  of  Christmas,  St.  Thomas,  &c.  ly  Umr 
respective  Collects,  &c.  pp*  77.  and  85. 

EPISTLE.  God.  iv.  1.  7. — Brethren:  As  long 
as  the  heir  is  a child,  he  didereth  nothing  from  a 
servant,  though  he  be  Lord  of  all : but  is  under  tu- 
tors and  governors,  until  the  time  appointed  by  the 
father:  So  we  also,  when  we  were  children,  were 
serving  under  the  elements  of  the  world.  But 
when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  his 
Son,  made  of  a woman,  made  under  the  law : that 
he  might  redeem  them  who  were  under  the  law; 
that  he  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons.  And 
because  you  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  the  Spirit  of 
his  Son  into  your  hearts,  crying:  Abba,  Father. 
Therefore  now  he  is  not  a servant,  but  a Son,  And 
if  a son,  an  heir  also  through  God. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xliv,  and  xcii. — Thou  art  beautiful 
above  the  sons  of  men : grace  is  poured  abroad  in  thy 
lips.  V.  My  heart  hath  uttered  a good  word,  I speak 
my  works  to  the  King.  My  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a 
scrivener  that  writeth  swiftly.  Alleluia,  AUeluia. 

V.  The  Lord  hath  Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V. 
reigned,  he  clothed  him-  Dominus  regriavU,  deco- 
self  with  beauty : he  hath  rem  induit : induit  Do- 
clothed  himself  with  minus  fortitudinem  ei 
strength,  and  armed  him-  proecinxU  se  virtute.  Al- 
self  with  might.  Alleluia,  leluia. 

GOSPEL,  hake  ii.  33.  40, — At  that  time : Joseph, 
and  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  were  wondering  at  those 
things  which  were  spoken  concerning  him.  And 
Simon  blessed  them,  and  said  to  Mary  his  Mother : Be- 
nold  the  child  is  set  for  the  fall,  and  for  the  resurrec- 
tion of  many  in  Israel,  and  for  a sign  which  shall  be 
contradicted.  And  thy  own  soul  a sword  shall  pierce, 
that  out  of  many  heaits  thoughts  may  be  revealed. 
H2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  CIRCTTMCmOir. 


And  there  was  one  Anna  a prophetess,  tlie  daughter 
of  Phanuel,  of  the  tribe  of  Asar ; she  was  fjur  ad- 
vanced in  years,  and  had  lived  with  her  husband 
seven  years  from  her  virility.  And  she  was  a wi- 
dow until  fourscore  and  four  years:  who  departed 
not  from  the  temple,  by  fastings  and  {nayers  serving 
day  and  night  Now  she  at  £e  same  hour  coming 
in,  confess^  to  the  Lord ; and  ^ke  of  him  to  €lQ 
that  looked  for  the  redemption  oi  Israel.  And  aft^ 
they  had  performed  all  things  according  to  the  law 
of  the  Lora  they  returned  into  Galilee,  to  their  city, 
Nazareth.  And  the  child  grew  and  waxed  stroi^, 
full  of  wisdom ; and  the  grace  of  God  was  in  him. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xcii. — God  hath  established  the 
world  which  shall  not  be  moved ; thy  thi*one  O God, 
is  prepared  from  of  old ; thou  art  from  everlasting. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  that  this  sacrifice  offered  to  thy  Divine  Majesty, 
may  obtain  for  us  the  grace  of  true  devotion,  and  a 
happy  eternity.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt,  ii. — ^Take  the  child  and  his  mo- 
ther, and  go  into  the  land  of  Israel ; for  they  are 
dead  who  sought  the  life  of  the  child. 

P.  COMM.  Per  hujus, — ^May  the  efiicacy  of  this 
sacrament,  O Lord,  cleanse  us  from  our  sins,  and 
obtain  for  us  the  acconmlishment  of  our  just  desires. 
Thro’. 


THE  CIRCUMCISION.. 

INTROIT.  Isaias,  ix. — Puer  natus  est,  p,  76. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  salutis, — O God,  who  by 
the  fruitful  virginity  of  the  blessed  Mary,  hast  given 
mankind  the  rewards  of  eternal  salvation : grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  that  we  may  experience  her  interces- 
sion, through  whom  we  deserved  to  receive  the 
Author  of  Life,  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist  thy  Son,  who, 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  £PU*HANT. 


89 


EPISTLE.  TO.  ii-^s  in  p.  72. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xcvii. — ^AU  the  ends  of  the  earth  have 
seen  the  salvation  of  our  God : sing  joyiuUy  to  the 
Lord  all  the  earth.  F.  The  Lord  hath  made  known 
his  salvation  : he  hath  revealed  his  justice  in  the  sight 
of  the  Gentiles.  Mduia,  V,  A sanctified  day  hath 
shone  upon  us:  come,  ye  Gentiles,  and  adore  the 
Lord,  for  this  day  a great  light  is  come  down  upon 
the  earth.  Mleluia^  Mduia, 

V.  God,  who  at  sundry  V.  Heb.  L MvJiifar 
times  and  in  divers  man-  rte  olim  Deua  loquens  pa^ 
ners  spoke  in  times  past  tribiLs  in  prophetis^  novis- 
to  our  Fathers  bv  the  pro-  sime  diebus  istis  locutus  esi 
phets,  last  of  all  in  these  nobis  in  Pilio.  Alleluia, 
days  hath  spoken  to  us  by 
his  son.  Allduia. 

GOSPEL.  lAike  iL  21. — At  that  time:  After 
eight  days  were  accomplished  that  the  child  should 
be  circumcised ; his  name  was  called  Jesus,  which 
was  called  by  the  angel,  before  he  was  conceived  in 
the  womb.  Credo. 

OFFERT,  Ps.  Ixxxviii. — ^Thine  are  the  heavens, 
and  thine  is  the  earth.  The  world  and  tlie  fulness 
thereof  thou  hast  founded,  justice  and  judgment  are 
the  preparations  of  thy  throne. 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  our  offerings,  and 
prayers : cleanse  us  by  these  heavenly  mysteries,  and 
mercifully  heai*  us.  tairo*. 

COMM.  Ps.  xcvii. — ^AU  the  ends  of  the  earth 
have  seen  the  salvation  of  our  God. 

P.  COMM.  H(Bc  nos. — ^May  this  communion,  O 
Lord,  cleanse  us  from  sin,  and  by  the  intercession 
of  blessed  Mary,  the  virgin-mother  of  Gk)d,  make 
us  partakers  of  thy  heavenly  remedy.  Thro\ 

THE  EPIPHANY. 

INTROIT.  Malachi  iii.  Ps.  Ixxi. 

BEhold  the  Lord  the  jr^CCE  advenit  Domi* 
ruler  is  come:  and  jLJ  nator  Dominus:  ei 
H3 


Digitized  by  Google 


90 


'THE  EPIPHANT. 


dominion,  power,  imd  rtgmm  in  manu  ^us,  et 
ewipire  are  in  his  hand.  potestas  et  imperium. 

Ps.  Give  to  the  king  thy  Ps.  Deus^  judicium  tuum 
judgment,  O Gk)d,  and  to  re^  da ; et  justitiam  tuam 
the  king’s  son  thy  justice.  JUw  regis.  V.  Gloria. 

V.  Glory. 

COLL.  Dem^  qui  hodierna. — O God,  who  by 
the  direction  of  a star  didst  this  day  manifest  thy  only 
Son  to  the  Gentiles ; mercifully  grant  that  we,  who 
now  know  thee  by  faith,  m^  come  at  length  to  see 
the  ^ory  of  thy  Majesty.  'Avd*  the  same. 

LESSON.  Isaias  lx.  1.  9. — ^Arise,  be  enlighten- 
ed, X)  Jerusalem:  for  diy  light  is  come,  and  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee.  For  behold 
darkness  shall  cover  the  earth,  and  a mist  the 
people : but  the  Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  his 
gloiy  shall  be  seen  upon  thee.  And  the  Gentiles 
shall  walk  in  thy  light,  and  kings  in  the  brightne^ 
of  thy  rising.  Lift  up  thy  eyes  round  about  and  see : 
all  these  are  gathered  together,  they  are  come  to 
thee,  thy  sons  shall  come  from  afar,  and  thy  daugh- 
ters shall  rise  up  at  thy  side.  Then  shalt  thou  see 
and  abound,  and  thy  heart  shall  wonder  and  be  en- 
larged, when  the  multitude  of  die  sea  shall  be  con- 
verted to  thee,  the  sti*ength  of  the  Gentiles  sliall 
come  to  thee.  The  muhitude  of  camels  shall  cover 
thee,  the  dromedaries  of  Madian  and  Epha : all  they 
from  Saba  shall  come,  bringing  gold  and  frank- 
incense, and  shewing  forth  praise  to  the  Lord. 

GRAD.  Is.  lx.  M(dt.  ii. — ^All  shall  come  from 
Saba,  bringing  gold  and  frankincense,  and  publish- 
ing the  praises  of  the  Lord.  Arise,  be  enlightened 
O Jerusalem : for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon 
thee.  Meluia,  Alleluia. 

V.  We  saw  his  star*  in  V.  Vidimus  stellam  ejus 
the  east:  and  are  come  in  oriente;  et  venimus 
with  our  offerings  to  cum  muneribus,  adorare 
adore  the  Loi*d.  AUeluia.  Dominum.  Alleluia. 

' Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


THE  EPIPBAinr. 


91 


GOSPEL.  MaU.  ii.  1.  12. — When  Jesus  was 
bom  in  Bethlehem  of  Juda,  in  the  days  of  king 
Herod,  behold  there  came  wise  men  from  the  east, 
to  Jerusalem,  sa^g,  where  is  he  that  is  bom  King 
of  the  Jews?  For  we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  east, 
and  are  come  to  adore  him.  And  Herod  hearing 
this  was  troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem  with  him.  And 
assembling  together  all  the  chief  priests  and  the 
scribes  of  the  people  he  inquiry  of  them  where 
Christ  should  he  Iram.  But  they  said  to  him,  in 
Bethlehem  of  Juda.  For  so  it  is  written  by  the  pro- 
phet. “And  thou  Bethlehem  the  land  of  Juda 
art  not  the  least  among  the  princes  of  Juda ; for  out 
of  thee  shall  come  form  the  captain  that  shall  rule  iny 
people  Israel”  Then  Herod  privately  callmg  the 
wise  men,  learned  diligently  of  tlieiri  the  time  of 
the  star  which  appeared  to  them : and  sending  them 
into  Bethlehem,  said : Go  and  diligently  inquire  after 
the  child;  and  when  you  have  found  him,  bring 
me  word  again,  that  I also  may  come  and  adore 
him.  Who  having  heard  the  king,  went  their  way ; 
and  behold  the  star  which  they  had  seen  in  the  east 
went  before  them,  until  it  came  and  stood  over  where 
the  child  was.  And  seeing  the  star,  they  rejoiced 
with  exceeding  CTeat  joy.  And  entei*ing  into  the 
house,  they  found  the  child  with  Mary  his  mother, 
and  falling  down  they  adored  him : and  opening  their 
treasures,  they  offered  him  gifts,  gold,  frankincense, 
and  myrrh.  And  having  received  an  answer  in  sleep 
that  they  should  not  return  to  Herod,  they  went  back 
another  way  into  their  own  country.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixxi. — The  Kings  of  Tharsis  and 
the  Islands  ^all  offer  presents:  the  Kings  of  the 
Arabians  and  of  Saba  shall  bring  gifts:  am  all  the 
kings  of  the  earth  shall  adore  him : all  nations  shall 
serve  him. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


1)2 


I.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY. 


SECRET.  Mercifully 'look  down,  O Lord,  wo 
beseech  thee,  on  the  offerings  of  thy  church: 
among  which  gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh  are  no 
bnger  offered ; but  what  was  signified  by  those  of- 
ferings is  sacrihced  and  received,  J^us  Christ,  thy 
Son  our  Lord.  Who  liveth. 

Communicantes. — ^Being  united  in  communion, 
and  celebrating  that  most  sacred  day  on  which 
thy  only  begotten  Son,  co-etemal  with  thee  in  thy 
glory,  appeared  in  a visible  body  in  the  reality  of 
our  flesh.  Moreover,  honouring  in  the  first  place  the 
memory  of  blessed  Mary  ever  a Virgin,  &c.  p.  xxxiv. 

COMM. — We  have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and 
are  come  with  offerings  to  adore  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  PrcMta,  qufBsumns. — Gran^  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  our  minds  may 
be  so  purified,  as  to  understand  what  we  celebrate 
on  this  great  solemnity.  Thro’. 

I.  SUNDAY  after  EPIPHANY. 
INTROIT.  Is.  vi.  Ps.  xcix. 

I Saw  a man  seated  on  a excdso  ihrom  vidi  Le- 
high throne,  whom  a X dere  mruniy  quern  ado-^ 
multitude  of  angels  ador-  red  multitudo  Angelorum 
ed,  singing  all  together : pscdlentes  in  unum : Ecce 
Behold  him,  whose  name  cujus  imperii  nomen  est  in 
and  empire  are  to  last  for-  (ztemum, 
ever.  Ps.  Sing  joyfully  Ps.  Jubilate  Deo  omnia 
to  God,  all  the  earth : terra : servite  Domino  in 
serve  ye  the  Lord  with  lediiia.  V.  Gloria. 
gladness.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Voia  queesumus. — ^According  to  thy 
divine  mercy,  O Lord,  receive  the  vows  of  thy  peo- 
ple, who  pour  forth  their  prayers  to  thee ; that  they 
may  know  what  their  duty  requireth  of  them,  and 
be  able  to  comply  with  what  they  know.  Thro’. 
Here,  arid  at  the  Secret,  and  Postcommunion,  is  made 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


I.  SUWDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY.  93 

a Cbmmemoration  of  the  Epiphany,  fty  the  Collect, 

&c.  of  that  Feast,  p.  90.  &c. 

EPISTLE.  Rom,  xiL  1.  5. — Brethren:  I be- 
seech you,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  that  you  pre- 
sent your  bodies  a living  sacrifice,  holy,  pleas- 
ing unto  Go<L  your  reasonable  service.  And  be 
not  ,confonned  to  this  world : but  be  reformed  in 
the  newness  of  your  mind,  that  you  may  prove  what 
is  the  good,  and  the  acceptable,  and  the  perfect  will 
of  God.  For  I say,  by  die  grace  that  is  given  me, 
to  all  that  are  among  you,  not  to  be  more  wise  than 
it  beboveth  to  be  wise,  but  to  be  wise  unto  sobriety, 
and  according  as  God  hath  divided  to  eveiy  one  the 
measui*e  of  faith.  For  as  in  one  body  we  have 
many  members,  but  all  the  membei-s  have  not  the 
same  office:  so  we,  being  many,  are  one  body  in* 
Christ,  and  every  one  members  of  one  another,  in 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps,  IxxL — Blessed  be  the  Lord  the  God 
of  Israel,  who  alone  hath  done  great  wondere  from 
the  beginning.  V,  Let  the  mountains  receive  peace 
for  thy  people,  and  the  hills  righteousness.  Alleluia, 

V.  Sing  joyfully  to  the  V.  Jubilate  Deo  omnia 

Lord  all  the  earthy  and  terra:  servite  Domino  in 
serve  ye  the  Lord  with  UbURo,  Alleluia, 
gladness.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Luke,  ii.  42.  52. — ^When  Jesus  was 
twelve  years  old,  they  went  Up  to  Jemsalem  accord- 
ing to  the  custom  of  the  feast.  And  ha\ing  fulfilled 
the  days,  when  they  returned,  the  child  Jesus  re- 
mained in  Jerusalem,  and  his  parents  knew  it  not. 
And  thinking  that  he  was  in  the  company,  they  came 
a day’s  journey,  and  sought  him  among  their  kins- 
folks and  acquaintance.  And  not  finding  him,  they 
returned  into  Jerusalem  seeking  him.  And  it  came 
to  pass,  that  after  three  days  they  found  him  in  the 
temple  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,  hearing 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


94  II.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY. 

them,  and  a^ing  them  questions.  And  all  tliat 
heard  him,  were  astonished  at  his  wisdom  and  his 
answers.  And  seeing  him,  they  wondered.  And 
bis  mother  said  to  him : Son,  why  hast  thou  done  so 

11  ? Behold  thy  father  and  I have  sought  thee 
sorrowing.  And  he  said  to  them:  How  is  it  that 
yon  sought  me  ? Did  you  not  know  that  I must  be 
about  my  father’s  business  ? And  they  understood 
not  the  word  that  he  spoke  unto  them.  And  he 
went  down  with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth : and 
was  subject  to  them.  And  his  mother  kept  all  these 
words  in  her  heart.  And  Jesus  advanced  in  wis- 
dom, and  age,  and  grace  with  Grod  and  men. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xcix. — Sing  joyfully  to  the  Lord, 
all  the  earth,  serve  ye  the  Lora  with  gladness : pre- 
sent yourselves  to  him  with  transports  of  joy,  for  the 
Lord  is  God. 

SECRET.  May  the  sacrifice  we  have  offered  to 
thee,  O Lord,  always  enliven  and  defend  us.  Thro’. 

COMM,  Luke  ii. — Son,  why  hast  thou  done  so 
with  us  ? I and  thy  father  have  sought  thee  with 
sorrow.  And  why  did  you  seek  me  ? Did  you  not 
know  that  I must  be  about  the  concerns  of  my 
Father  .J’ 

P.  COMM.  Supplices. — Grant  we  humbly  be- 
•E.ech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  those  whom  thou 
refreshest  with  thy  sacraments,  may,  by  a life  weli- 
pleasing  to  thee,  worthily  serve  thee.  Thro’. 

m 11.  SUNDAY  after  EPIPHANY. 

The  FEAST  of  the  HOLY  NAME  JESUS. 

INTROIT.  PhU.  ii.  Ps.  viii. 

At  the  name  of  Jesus  TJSTnomineJesuomnege^ 
let  every  knee  bend  X nu  Jkctalur  ccdestium^ 
in  heaven,  on  eaith,  and  terrestrium  et  infernorum  : 
under  the  earth:  and  eve-  et  omnis  lingua  canfiieor- 
ly  tongue  coiffess  that  the  <ur,  quia  Dominus  Jesus 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


95 


THE  FEAST  OF,  &C. 

Ix>rd  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  Christus  in  gloria  est  De% 
riory  of  Grod  the  Father.  Patris,  Ps.  Domine  Do- 
Ps.  O Lord  our  Lord,  minus  noster^  quam  admi* 
how  wonderful  is  thy  rabilt  est  nomen  tuum  in 
name  over  the  whole  universa  terra,  V.  Gloria, 
earth.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui,^-0  God,  who  iiidst  ap- 
point thy  only  begotten  Son  the  Saviour  of  mankind, 
and  commandest  that  his  name  should  he  called 
JESUS : mercifully  grant,  that  we  who  venerate  his 
holy  name  on  ea^,  may  also  enjoy  his  sight  in 
heaven.  Thro’. 

COLLECT  of  the  Sunday,  Omnipotens, — O al- 
mighty* and  etomal  God,  supreme  Ruler,  both  of 
heaven  and  earth,  mercifully  give  ear  to  the  prayers 
of  thy  people,  and  grant  us  peace  in  our  time. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Acts  iv.  8.  12. — In  those  days : Peter 
being  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  said  to  them : Ye 
princes  of  the  people  and  ancients,  hear ; if  we  this 
day  are  examined  concerning  the  good  deed  done 
to  the  infirm  man,  by  what  means  he  hath  been 
made  whole,  be  it  known  to  you  all,  and  to  all  the 
people  of  Israel,  that  by  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  of  Nazareth,  whom  you  crucified,  whom 
God  hath  raised  from  the  dead,  even  by  him  this 
man  standeth  here  before  you  whole.  “This  is 
the  stone  which  was  rejected  by  you  the  buifders 
which  is  become  the  head  of  the  comer : ” neither 
is  there  salvation  in  any  other.  For  there  is  no 
other  name  under  heaven  given  to  men  whereby  we 
must  be  saved. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cv. — Save  us,  O Lord  our  God,  and 
gather  us  fiom  amidst  the  nations,  that  we  may  give 
thanks  to  thy  holy  name,  and  may  glory  in  thy  praise. 
F,  Is,  vL  Thou  Lord  art  our  Father  and  Redeemer. 

V,  My  mouth  shall  V.  Laudem  Domini  /o- 
publiflh  the  praises  of  the  quetur  os  meum,  et  bene^ 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


96  II.  SUNDAT  AFTER  EWFHAPHT. 

Lord:  and  let  all  flesh  diced  cnmic  can  nmtieti 
bless  his  holy  name.  ALd.  sanctum  gus.  AUeluia. 

After  Septuagesima,  instead  of  the  forgoing  V.  and 
Alleluia,  is  said  the 

TRACT.  Domine  Deus  virtutum  converte  nost 
et  ostende  faciem  tuam,  et  salvi  erimus:  sonet  vox 
tua  in  auribus  meis.  Convert  us  to  thee,  O Lord 
God  of  Hosts:  shew  thy  face,  and  we  shall  be 
saved : let  thy  voice  sound  in  my  ears. 

V,  For  sweet  is  thy  voice,  and  very  beautifiil  is 
thy  countenance.  V.  Thy  name,  O Jesus!  is  as  a 
sweet  perfume ; therefore  have  virgins  loved  thee. 

GK)SPEL.  Lukeu.  Asp.8d. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  boexvi. — 1 will  praise*  thee,  O 
Lord  my  God,  with  my  whole  heart,  and  I will  mve 
glory  to  thy  name  for  ever:  because,  O Lord  mou 
art  good  and  gracious,  and  full  of  mercy  towards  aD 
that  call  upon  thee.  AUeluia, 

SECRET.  May  thy  blessing,  O most  merciflil 
God,  by  which  every  creature  is  enlivened  and  sub- 
sists, sanctify  this  our  sacrifice,  which  we  ofifer  thee 
in  honour  of  the  name  of  thy  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus 
.Christ : that  it  may  be  accept^le  to  the  praise  of  ihy 
majesty,  and  avaiiable  to  our  salvation.  Thro’  the 
same. 

SECRET  of  the  Sundew,  Sanctify,  O Lord,  our 
ofierings,  and  cleanse  us  from  the  stams  of  our  sins. 
Thro’. 

PREFACE.  Quia  per  incarnati,  p,  xxx. 

COMM.  Ps,  Ixxxv. — All  the  nations  thou  hast 
made  shall  come  and  adore  before  thee,  O Lord, 
and  they  shall  glorify  thy  holy  name,  for  thou  art 
great  and  dost  wonderful  tbmgs.  Thou  art  God 
alone.  AUeluia, 

, P.  COMM.  Omnipotens, — O almigh^and  eter- 
nal Goi^iKrho  didst  both  create  and  redeem  us,  mer- 
cifully hear  our  prayers,  and  vouchsc^  with  a 
pleasmg  and  kind  countenance,  to  receive  the  sacrifice 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


97 


THE  FEAST  OF, 

itf  this  victim  of  our  ealvstion,  wtiich  we  have  ofttr 
«d  to  thy  divine  majesty,  in  honor  of  the  name  of 
thy  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; that  thy  grace  be- 
ing poured  on  us,  thro’  the  glorious  name  of  Jesus, 
as  a pledge  of  our  eternal  predestination,  we  may 
rejoice  that  our  names  are  written  in  heaven.  Thro’ 
the  same. 

P.  COMM,  of  the  Sunday,  Augeatur, — ^Ma^  the 
eflScacy  of  thy  power,  O Lord,  be  increased  m us, 
that  being  fed  with  thy  divine  sacraments,  we  may, 
thro’  thy  bounty,  be  prepared  to  receive  what  they 
promise.  Thro’. 

The  follomng  (beiftg  the  Gospel  of  the  Sunday)  is 
read  at  the  end  of  Mass. 

GOSPEL.  JoAn  ii.  1.  11. — At  that  time:  There 
was  a marriage  in  Cana  of  Galilee : and  the  mother 
of  Jesus  was  there.  And  Jesus  also  was  invited,  and 
his  disciples,  to  the  marriage.  And  the  wine  failing, 
the  mother  of  Jesus  salth  to  him : They  have  no  wine. 
And  Jesus  saithto  her : Woman,  w hat  is  it  to  me  and 
to  thee  ? My  hour  is  not  yet  come.  His  mother 
saith  to  the  waiters : Whatsoever  he  shall  say  to  you, 
do  ye.  Now  there  were  set  there  six  water  pots  of 
stone,  according  to  the  manner  of  the  purifying  of 
the  Jews,  containing  two  or  three  measures  apiece. 
Jesus  saith  to  them : Fill  the  water-pots  with  wa- 
ter. And  they  filled  them  up  to  the  brim.  And 
Jesus  saith  to  them : Draw  out  now,  and  carry  to 
the  chief  steward  of  the  feast.  And  they  carried  it. 
And  when  the  chief  steward  had  ttisted  the  water 
made  wine,  and  knew  not  whence  it  was,  but  the 
waiters  knew  who  had  drawn  the  water ; the  chief 
steward  calleth  the  bridegroom,  and  saith  to  him: 
Every  man  at  first  setteth  forth  good  wine,  and  when 
men  have  well  drank,  then  that  which  is  'vs^jjse.  But 
thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  untU  now.Wfhis  be- 
ginning of  miracles  did  Jesus  in  Cana  of  Galilee : 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


98  III.  SUNDAY  AFllER  EPIPHANY. 

and  he  manifested  his  ^lory,  and  his  disci|de8  be- 
lieved in  him.  Deo  grahasi 

III.  SUNDAY  after  EPIPHANY. 
INTROIT.  P8.  xcvL 

Adore  God,  all  you  ORATE  Deum^ 

his  angels:  Sion  «ZZ  omnes  angeli  gus : 
heard  and  was  glad,  and  audivit  el  Icetata  est  Ston : 
the  daughters  of  Juda  re-  et  exuUaverunt  JUiee  JudtR: 
joiced.  Ps,  The  Lord  Rs.  Dominus  regnavit,  cav 
hath  reigned,  let  the  ultet  terra,  ledentur  in- 
earth rejoice,  let  many  suI(B  midUe, 
islands  be  dad.  V.  Gloria, 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O almighty  and 
eternal  God,  mercifully  regard  our  wealmess,  and 
stretch  forth  the  right  hand  of  thy  majesty  to  protect 
us.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Rjom,  xii.  16. — Brethren:  Be  not 
wise  in  your  own  conceits.  To  no  man  rendering  evil 
for  evil.  Providing  good  things  not  only  in  the  sight 
of  God,  but  also  in  the  sight  of  all  men.  If  it  be 
possible,  as  much  as  in  you,  having  peace  with  all 
men.  Not  revenging  yourselves,  my  dearly  beloved, 
but  give  place  unto  wiath.  For  it  is  written:  “Re- 
venge to  me,  I will  repay,”  saith  the  Lord.  But 
“ if  thy  enemy  be  hungry,  give  him  to  eat : if  he 
thirst,  give  him  to  drink:  for  doing  this,  thou  shah 
heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.”  Be  not  overcome 
by  evil,  but  overcome  evil  by  good. 

GRAD.  Ps,  ci.  and  xcvi. — The  Gentiles  shall 
fear  thy  name,  O Lord:  and  all  the  kmgs  of  the 
earth  thy  glory.  V,  For  the  Lord  hath  built  up 
Sion,  and  he  shall  be  seen  in  his  glory.  Alleluia, 
Alleluia^ 

V,  Ps,  The  Lord  hath  V.  Ps,  xcvi.  Dominus 
reigned^et  the  earth  regnavit,  exvltet  terra ; 
rejoice  :^t  many  islands  latentur  insula  muUet, 
l)e  glad.  Alleluia,  Alleuia. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


Ilf.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY.  99 

GOSPEL.  MaU.  viii.  1.  15. — At  that  Ume: 
When  Jesus  was  come  down  from  the  mountain,  great 
multitudes  followed  him  : and  behold  a leper  came 
and  adored  him,  saying:  Lord,  if  thou  wilt  thou 
canst  make  me  clean.  And  Jesus  stretching  forth 
his  hand,  touched  him,  saying:  1 will,  be  thou 
made  clean.  And  foi^with  his  leprosy  was 
cleansed.  And  Jesus  saith  to  him : See  thou  tell  no 
man:  but  go  shew  thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer 
the  gift  which  Moses  commanded  for  a testimony 
unto  them.  ^And  when  he  had  entered  into  Cajftiar- 
iiaum,  there  came  to  him  a Centurion,  beseeching 
nim,  and  saying:  Lor(i  my  servant  lietli  at  home 
sick  of  the  p^sy,  and  is  Wievously  tormented.  And 
Jesus  saith  to  him  : 1 will  come  and  heal  him.  And 
the-Oenturion  making  answer  said : Lord,  I am  not 
worthy  that  thou  shoiildst  enter  under  my  roof:  but 
only  say  the  word,  and  my  servant  shall  be  healed. 
For  I also  am  a man  under  authority,  having  under 
me  soldiers,  and  I say  to  tliis.  Go,  and  he  goeth, 
and  to  another.  Come,  and  he  cometh,  and  to  my 
servant.  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  it.  And  when  Jesiis 
heard  this,  he  marvelled:  and  said  to  them  that 
foDowed  him : Amen  I say  to  you,  I have  not  found 
so  great  faith  m Israel.  And  I say  unto  yop,  that 
many  shall  come  from  tlie  east  and  the  west,  and 
shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven : but  the  children  of  the 
kingdom  shall  be  cast  out  into  the  exterior  darkness . 
there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  And 
Jesus  said  to  the  Centurion : Go,  and  as  thou  hast 
oelieved,  so  be  it  done  to  thee.  And  the  servant  wtis 
healed  at  the  same  hour.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxvii. — The  right  hand  of  the 
Lord  hath  wrought  strength : the  right  hand  of  the 
Lord  hath  exalted  me : I shall  not  die,  bi^||ive  and 
shall  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord. 

12 


Digitized  by.CjOO^IC 


100 


tv,  SUNDAY  AFTER  EFIFHANY. 


SECRET.  May  this  offering,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  cleanse  away  our  sins : and  sanctify  the 
bodies  and  souls  of  thy  ^rvants,  to  prepare  them  for 
worthily  celebniting  this  sacrifice.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Lake  iv.  22. — ^All  wondered  at  the 
words  that  came  from  the  mouth  of  God. 

P.  COMM.  tantis. — We  beseech  thee,  O 

Lord,  that  we,  to  whom  thou  vouchsafest  the  use 
of  ^ese  great  mysteries,  njay  be  made  truly  worthy 
to  receive  the  benefits  thereof.  Thro’. 


IV.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY. 

The  Introit,  Gradual  Offertory,  and  Communion,  as 
on  last  Sunday,  arc  continued  tiU  Septuagesima. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui.  ^ 

OGOD,  who  knowest  that  thro’  human  frailty 
we  are  not  able  to  subsist  amidst  so  many  dan- 
gers, grant  us  health  of  soul  and  body ; that  what- 
soever we  suffer  for  our  sins,  we  may  overcome  by 
thy  assistance.  Thro’. 

AJler  Candlemas  the  II.  Collect  (wl  cunctis)  p,  sxL 
ivith  its  Secrat,  p.  xxvii.  and  Postcom.  ».  xliv.  is 
continued  till  Passion  Sunday:  the  III.  (except 
from  Ash- Wednesday  to  Passion  Sunday)  is  at 
the  choice  of  the  Priest. 

EPISTLE.  Rom.  xiii.  8.  \0.— Brethren : Owo 
no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love  one  another:  for  he 
that  loveth  his  neighbour,  hath  fulfilled  the  law.  Foi 
“ Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery : Thou  shalt  not 
kill : Thou  shalt  not  steal : Thou  shalt  not  bear 
false  witness:  Thou  shalt  not  covet:”  and  if  there 
be  any  other  commandment,  it  is  comprised  in  this 
word : “ Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyselfl” 
The  love  of  our  neighbour  worketh  no  eviL  Love 
therefore  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  viii.  23.  27. — At  that  time : 
When  Jesus  entered  into  a boat  his  disciples 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


V.  8UNBAT  after  EPIPHANY. 


101 


ii^owed  him ; and  behold  a great  tempest  arose  in 
the  sea,  so  that  the  ship  was  cover^  with  waves, 
but  he  was  asleep.  And  his  disciples  came  to  him, 
and  awakened  him  saying:  Lord,  save  us,  we  pe- 
rish. And  Jesus  saith  to  them:  Why  are  ye  fear- 
ful, O ye  of  little  feith  ? Then  rising  up,  he  com- 
manded the  winds  and  the  sea,  and  there  came  a 
great  calm.  But  the  men  wondered,  saying:  What 
manner  of  man  is  this,  for  the  winds  and  the  sea 
obey  him.  Credo. 

SECRET.  Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  that  the  offering  of  this  sacrifice  may  always 
cleanse  our  frailty  from  all  evil,  and  be  a protection 
to  us.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Munera  iua, — ^May  thy  gifts,  which 
we  have  partaken  of,  O God,  detach  us  from  all 
earthly  pleasures,  and  ever  refresh  and  strengthen 
us  with  heavenly  food.  Thro’. 


V.  SUNDAY  after  EPIPHANY. 

COLLECT.  FamUiam. — Preserve,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  thy  family  by  thy  constant  mercy, 
that  we,  who  co^de  solely  in  the  support  of  thy 
heavenly  grace,  may  be  always  defended  by  thy 
protection.  Thro’. 

EPISTIiE.  C0I08.  iii.  12.  17.— Rrcf^en;  Put 
ye  on  therefore  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy,  and  be- 
K)ved,  the  bowels  of  mercy,  benignity,  humility, 
modeky,  patience:  bearing  with  one  another,  and 
forgiving  one  another,  if  any  have  a complaint 
against  another.  Even  as  the  Lord  hath  forgiven 
you,  so  you  also.  But  above  all  these  things  have 
charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfection : and  let  the 
peace  of  Christ  rejoice  in  your  hearts,  wherein  also 
you  are  called  in  one  body:  and  be  ye  thankful. 
Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  abundantly,  in 
all  wisdom:  teaching  and  admonishing  one  ainither 
13 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


109 


VI.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EFIPBANT. 


in  psalms,  hynms,  and  spiritual  canticles,  singllig 
in  grace  in  your  hearts  to  God.  All  whatsoever  you 
do  in  word  or  in  work,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the 
Father,  thro’  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

GOSPEL.  Matt  xiii.  24.  30. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  spoke  this  parable  to  the  multitude,  saying: 
The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  to  a man  that 
sowed  good  seed  in  his  field.  But  while  men  were 
asleep,  his  enemy  came  and  oversowed  cockle 
amox^  the  wheat,  and  went  his  way.  And  when 
the  bkde  was  sprung  up,  and  brought  forth  fruit, 
then  appeared  also  the  cockle.  Then  the  servants 
of  the  good  man  of  the  house  came  and  said  to  him : 
Sir,  didst  thou  not  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field  ? from 
whence  then  hath  it  cockle  ? And  he  said  to  them : 

An  enemy  hath  done  this.  And  the  servants  said  to 
him : Wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  gather  it  up  ? And 
he  said : No,  lest  while  you  gather  up  the  cockle, 
you  root  up  the  wheat  also  together  with  it  Let 
both  grow  until  the  harvest,  and  in  the  time  of  the 
harvest  I will  say  to  the  reapers : Gather  up  first  the 
cockle,  and  bind  it  in  bundles  to  bum,  but  gather  the 
wheat  into  my  bam. 

SECRET.  We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  this  sacrifice  • 
of  propitiation : that  thou  wouldst  mercifully  forgive 
us  our  sins,  and  guide  our  tottering  hearts.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  QurBsumus* — ^We  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  we  may  one  day  receive  the 
effects  of  that  salvation,  of  which  we  have  received 
the  pledge  in  these  mysteries.  Thro’. 

VI.  SUNDAY  after  EPIPHANY. 

COLLECT.  PrtBsta, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 

O Almighty  God,  that  being  always  intent  upon 
what  is  reasonable  and  just,  we  may,  both  in  word 
and  deed,  perforin  what  is  acceptable  to  tliee.  Thro* 


Digitized  by  Google 


TI.  SUITDAT  AFTCR  EPlFHANT. 


103 


EPISTLE.  ] 7%ess.  L 2.  10. — Brethren:  We 
ipve  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all:  makiug  a 
remembranee  of  you  in  our  prayers  without  ceasing; 
being  mindful  of  you  in  the  work  of  yoiu*  faith,  and 
hope  and  charity,  and  of  the  enduring  of  the  hope 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  before  God  ajid  our  Fa- 
ther: knowing,  brethren  beloved  of  God,  your 
election:  For  our  gospel  hath  not  been  to  you  in 
word  only  but  in  power  also,  and  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  in  much  iulness,  as  you  know  what  man 
ner  of  men  we  have  been  among  you  for  your  sakes. 
And  you  became  followers  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord- 
receiving  the  word  in  much  tribulation,  with  joy  of 
the  Holy  Ghost:  so  that  you  were  made  a pattern 
to  all  that  believe  in  Macedonia  and  in  Achaia.  For 
from  you  was  spread  abroad  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
not  o^y  in  Macedonia  and  in  Achaia,  but  also  in 
every  place  your  faith,  which  is  towards  Gfod,  is 

fone  forth,  so  that  we  need  not  to  ^eak  any  thing. 

'or  they  themselves  relate  of  us,  what  manner  of 
entering  in  we  had  unto  you ; and  how  you  turned 
to  Grod  from  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God, 
and  to  wait  for  his  Sou  from  heaven  {whom  he 
raised  up  from  the  dead)  Jesus,  who  hath  delivered 
us  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xiiL  31.  35. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  spoke  to  the  multitude  this  parable:  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a grain  of  mustard-seed, 
which  a man  took  and  sowed  in  his  field.  Which 
indeed  is  the  least  of  all  seeds:  but  when  it  is  grown 
up,  it  is  greater  than  all  herbs,  and  becdmeth  a 
ti^  so  that  tlte  birds  of  the  air  come  and  dwell  in 
the  branches  thereof  Another  parable  he  spoke  to 
them:  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  leaven, 
which  a woman  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of 
meal,  until  the  whole  was  leavened.  All  these 
dungs  Jesus  spoke  in  parables  to  the  multitudes ; and 


• Digitized  by  Google 


IW  SEPTUAGirtTMA  StTlfDAT. 

without  parables  be  did  not  speak  to  them ; that  the 
word  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the 
prophet,  saying:  “I  will  open  my  mouth  in  para- 
bles, 1 will  utter  things  hidden  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world.”  Creoo. 

SECRET.  May  this  oblation,  O God,  we  be- 
seech thee,  cleanse,  renew,  govern  and  protect  us. 

P.  COMM.  Ccdtstibus. — Being  fed,  O Lord, 
with  heavenly  dainties,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we 
may  always  hunger  after  tb^,  as  they  preserve  our 
life.  Thro.’ 

(jf  thert  he  not  VI.  Sundays  between  the  Epiphany 
and  Septuagesima,  what  remains  are  omitted^  ana 
taken  in  between  the  XXIII.  and  the  last  Sunday 
after  Pentecost. 

SEPTUAGESIMA  SUNDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xvii. 

The  groans  of  death,  f^lrcumdedermd  me  gfe- 
surrounded  me:  and  ^mitus  mortis^  dolores 
the  sorrows  of  bell  en-  mfemi  circumdederunt 
compassed  me : and  in  me:  et in  trxbvlatione  mea 
my  affliction  I called  upon  invocavi  Dominumy  et  cx- 
the  Lord,  and  he  heard  my  audivit  de  templo  sancto 
voice  from  his  holy  tern-  suo  vocem  meam.  Ps.  Di- 
ple.  Ptf.  I wll  love  thee,  ligam  te  Domine^  fortitu- 
O.Lord,  my  strength:  do  mea:  Dominus  firma- 
the  Lord  is  my  finnament  mentum  meum  et  refugium 
my  refuge,  and  my  deli-  mcwwt,  et  Uberator  meus. 
verer.  F.  Glor} . V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Preces. — ^Mercifully  hear,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Lord,  the  prayers  of  thy  people : that 
we  who  are  justly  afflict^  for  our  sins,  may  be  mer- 
cifully delivered  for  the  glory  of  thy  name.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  ix.  24.  and  x.  1. — Brethren:  . 
Know  you  not  that  tliey  that  run  in  the  race,  all 
run  indeed,  but  one  rcceiveth  the  prize?  So  run 
lliat  you  may  obtain.  And  every  one  that  sti  iveth 


• Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


flSrrVAOESIHA  9 UNDAT.  105 

for  die  mastery,  refraiaeth  himself  from  all  thinn: 
and  they  indeed  that  they  may  receive  a conniptihle 
crown:  but  we  an  incorruptible  one.  1 therefore 
so  run,  not  as  at  an  uncertainty:  1 so  fight,. not  as 
one  beating  the  air:  but  I ciiastise  my  body,  and 
bring  it  into  subjection:  lest  |ierhapa,  when  I have 
preached  to  others,  I myself  should  become  a cast- 
away.—Chapu  X.  1.  5.  For  1 would  not  liave  you 
ignorant,  brethren,  that  our  lathers  were  all  under 
the  doud,  and  all  passed  through  the  sea.  And  all 
in  Moses  were  baptized  in  the  doud,  and  in  the  sea , 
and  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  food:  and  all 
drank  the  same  spiritual  drink : (and  they  drank  of 
the  spiritual  rock  that  followed  them,  and  the  rock 
was  Christ)  But  with  the  moat  of  them  God  was 
not  well  pleased.  • 

GRAD.  Ps.  ix. — helper  in  due  time  in  tribula- 
tion.— Let  them  trust  in  thee  who  know  thee : for 
thou  hast  not  forsaken  them  that  seek  thee  0 Lord. 
V.  For  the  poor  man  shall  riot  be  forgotten  to  the 
end : the  patience  of  the  poor  man  shall  not  {lerish 
for  ever.  Arise,  O Lord,  let  not  man  prevail. 

TRACT.  Ps»  cxxix. — De  profundis  clamavi  ad 
ie,  Domine;  Domine^  exaudi  vocem  meain»  Out  of 
the  depths  I have  cried  to  diee,  O Lord;  Lord, 
hear  my  voice.  V»  Let  thy  ears  be  attentive  to  the 
voice  of  my  supphcation.  V»  If  thou,  O Lord,  wih 
mark  iniquities;  Lord,  who  shall  stand  it.  For  with 
thee  there  is  merciful  forgiveness : and  by  reason  of 
thy  Law,  I have  waited  tor  thee,  O Lord. 

From  this  day  tiU  Ash-Wednesday,  the  Tract  is  said 
on  Sundays  and  Festivals  only. 

GOSPEL.  MaU.  xx.  1. 16. — At  that  time:  Jesus 
spoke  to  his  disciples  this  parable : The  khigdom  of 
heaven  is  like  to  a householder  who  went  out  eorlv  in 
the  morning  to  hire  labourers  into  his  vineyard.  And 
when  having  agreed  with  the  labourers  for  a penny 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


lOG  tXPTUAGEStllfA  SUrrDAT. 

a day,  he  sent  them  into  bis  vineyard.  And  going 
out  about  the  third  hour,  he  saw  others  standing 
in  the  market  place  idle.  And  he  said  to  diem : Go 
you  also  into  my  vineyard,  and  I will  give  you  what 
shall  be  just.  And  they  went  their  way.  And 
again  lie  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  the  ninth 
hour,  and  dkl  in  like  manner.  But  about  the  ele^ 
venth  hour  he  went  out  and  found  others  standing, 
and  he  saith  to  them : Why  stand  you  here  all  die 
day  idle  ? They  say  to  him : Because  no  man  hath 
hired  us.  He  saith  to  them : Go  you  also  into  my 
vineyard.  And  when  evening  was  come,  the  Lord 
of  the  vineyard  said  to  his  stewtud : Call  the  labour- 
ers and  My  diem  their  hire,  beginning  from  the  last 
even  to  the  first.  When  therefore  they  were  come, 
diat  came  about  the  eleventh  hour,  they  received 
every  man  a penny.  But  when  the  first  also  came, 
•diev  thought  that  they  should  have  received  more : 
and  they  also  received  eveiy  man  a penny.  And 
receiving  it  they  murmtured  against  the  m^er  of 
die  house,  saying : These  last  have  worked  but  one 
hour,  and  thou  host  made  them  equal  to  us  that 
have  borne  the  burden  of  the  day,  and  the  heats. 
But  he  answering  said  to  one  of  them,  Friend,  I do 
thee  no  wi'ong:  didst  thou  not  agree  with  me  for  a 
penny  ? Take  what  is  thine,  and  go  thy  way : I wiC 
also  give  to  this  last  even  as  to  thee.  Or,  is  it  not 
lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I will  ? Is  thy  eye  evil, 
because  1 am  good?  So  shall  the  last  be  fii^st,  and 
the  first  last.  For  many  are  called,  but  few  chosen. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  91. — It  is  good  to  mve  praise  to 
the  Lord,  and  to  sing  to  thy  name,  O Most  High. 

SECRET.  Having  received,  O Lord,  our  offer- 
ings and  prayers,  cleanse  us,  we  beseech  thee,  by 
these  heavenly  mysteries,  and  mercifully  hear  us. 

COMM.  Ps.  30. — Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon 

I 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


SaPTVAOESmA  81Tin>AT  107 

thy  servant ; save  me  in  thy  mercy.  Let  me  not  be 
confounded,  for  I have  called  upon  thee. 

P.  GOMM.  jRdc/es.— May  thy  faithful,  O God, 
be  strengthened  by  these  thy  mysteries ; that  receiv- 
ing them,  they  may  sdll  desire  them ; and  desiring 
them  may  eternally  receive  them.  Thro*. 


SEXAGESIMA  SUNDAY. 
INTROIT.  P^.xliiL 


A RISE,  why  sleepest 
A tiiou,  O Lord  ? 
Arise,  and  cast  us  not  off 
to  the  end.  Why  tumest 
thou  thy  face  away?  and 
forgettest  our  tribulation. 
Our  belly  cleaveth  to 
the  earth:  Arise,  O 
Lord,  help  us,  and  deliver 
us.  Ps.  We  have  heard, 
0 God,  with  our  ears: 
our  fathers  have  declared 
to  us  thy  wonders.  F. 
Glory. 


TlXurge^  quare  obdor* 
JlJ  mis,  Domine  7 Ex* 
urge,  et  ne  repeUas  in  Ji* 
nem.  Quare  fodem  tuam 
avertis  ? Oblwisceris  tri* 
hvdaiionem  nostram^  Ad* 
haesit  in  terra  venter  nos* 
ter  : Exurge,  Domine, 
adju/va  ms,  et  libera  nos, 
P&  Deus,  auribus  nostris 
^ audivimus : Patres  nostri 
annuntiaverunt  nobis, 

V.  Gloria, 


COLLECT,  Deus  qui, — O God,  who  seest  that 
we  place  no  confidence  in  any  thing  we  do : pier- 
ciftilly  grant  that,  by  the  protection  of  the  Doctor  of 
the  Gentiles,  we  may  be  defended  against  tdl  advert 
fflty.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor,  xi,  19.  33.  and  xii.  1.  9. — Bre* 
fhren : You  gladly  suffer  the  foolish : whereas  your- 
selves are  wise.  For  you  suffer  if  a man  bring  you 
into  bondage,  if  a man  devour  you,  if  a man  take 
from  you,  if  a man  be  lifted  up,  if  a man  strike  yon 
on  the  face.  1 speak  according  to  dishonour,  as  if 
we  had  been  weak  in  this  part.  Wherein  if  any 
man  dare  (I  speak  foolishly)  1 dare  also.  They  are 
Hebrews  * so  am  1.  They  are  Israelites : so  am  1. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


m 


9CXA0CSIMA  SCfrOAr. 


They  are  the  seed  of  Abraham : so  am  L They  an? 
the  ministers  of  Christ  (1  speak  as  one  less  wise)  I 
am  more : in  many  more  labours,  in  prisons  more 
frequently,  in  stripes  above  measure,  in  deaths  oll^. 
Of  the  Jews  five  times  did  I receive  forty  stripes^  save 
one.  Thrice  was  I beaten  with  rods,  once  I was 
stoned,  thrice  I suffered  shipwreck ; a night  and  a 
day  I was  in  the  depth  of  the  sea.  In  journeying 
often,  in  perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in 
perils  from  ray  own  nation,  ra  perils  finm  the  Glen- 
tiles,  in  perils  in  the  city,  in  perils  in  the  wilderness, 
in  perils  in  the  sea,  in  perils  from  false  brethren. 
In  labour  and  painfiilness,  in  much  watching,  m 
hunger  and  thin^  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  na> 
kedness.  Besides  these  things  which  are  witliout : 
my  daily  instance,  the  solicitude  for  all  the  churches. 
Who  is  weak,  and  1 am  not  weak  ? Who  is  scan- 
dalized, and  I am  not  on  fire?  If  I must  needs 
glory : I will  glory  of  the  things  that  conceni  ray 
mfirmity.  The  Grod  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  is  blessed  for  ever,  knoweth  that  I lie 
not.  At  Damascus  the  governor  of  the  nation  under 
Aretas  the  king  guarded  the  city  of  the  Damascenes, 
to  apprehend  me : and  through  a window  in  a basket 
was  I let  down  by  the  wall,  and  so  escaped  his 
hands.  [Chap.  xii.  1.1  If  I must  glory  (h  is  ncrt  ex- 
pedient indeed:)  but  I will  come  to  the  visions  and 
revelations  of  the  Lord.  I know  a man  in  Christ 
about  fourteen  years  ago,  (whether  in  the  body  I 
know  not,  or  out  of  the  body,  I know  not,  God  know- 
eth,) such  a one  rapt  even  to  the  third  heaven.  Ami 
I know  such  a man  (whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of' 
the  body,  I cannot  tell : God  knoweth)  how  he  was 
caught  up  into  paradise ; and  heard  secret  words, 
which  is  not  granted  to  man  to  utter.  For  such  a 
one  I will  glory but  for  myself  I will  glory  nothing, 
but  in  my  infirmities.  For  though  I ^ould  have  a 
mind  to  glory,  I shaU  not  be  foolish : for  1 will  say 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


SEXAGESIMA  SUNDAT. 


109 


tile  truth.  But  1 forbear,  lest  any  man  s/i.'hjKI  tliink  of 
me  above  that  which  he  seeth  in  me,  or  any  thing  he 
heareth  from  me.  And  lest  the  greatness  of  the  reve- 
lations should  lift  me  up,  there  was  given  me  a sting 
of  my  flesh,  an  angel  of  Satan,  to  buffet  , me.  For 
which  tiling  I thrice  besought  the  Lord,  that  it  might 
depart  from  me:  and  he  said  to  me;  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee;  for  power  is  made  perfect  in 
infirmity.  Gladly  therefore  will  I glory  in  my  infir- 
mities, fliat  the  power  of  Christ  may  dwell  in  me. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxxii. — Let  the  Gentiles  know  that 
God  is  thy  name : thou  alone  art  tlie  Most  High  over 
all  the  earth.  V,  O my  Gk)d,  make  them  like  a 
wheel ; and  as  stubble  before  the  wind. 

TRACT.  Ps.  lix. — Commomsti,  Domine,  terram, 
d conlurhasti  earn.  Thou  hast  moved  the  earth,  O 
Lord,  and  hast  troubled  it.  F.  Heal  the  breaches 
thereof  for  it  is  moved.  V.  That  they  may  flee  from 
before  the  bow:  that  thy  elect  may  be  delivered. 

GOSPEL.  Duke  viii.  4.  16. — At  that  time : 
When  a very  great  multitude  was  gathered  together 
and  hastenedbut  of  the  cities  to  meet  Jesus,  he  spoke 
by  a similitude.  A sower  went  out  to  sow  his  seed; 
and  as  he  sowed  some  fell  by  the  way  side,  and  it  was 
trodden  down,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  devoured  it 
And  other  some  fell  upon  a rock ; and  as  soon  as  it 
was  sprung  up,  it  withered  away  because  it  had  no 
moisture.  And  other  some  fell  among  thorns,  and 
the  thorns  growing  up  with  it,  choked  it  And 
other  some  fell  upon  good  ground ; and  sprung  up, 
and  yielded  fruit  a hundred-fold.  Saying  these  things 
he  cried  out;  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
bear.  And  his  disciples  asked  him  what  this  .mra- 
We  might  be.  To  whom  he  said;  To  you  it  is 
given  to  know  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  God ; 
but  to  the  rest  in  parables:  that  seeing  they  may 
not  see,  and  hearing  they  may  not  understand.  Now 
K 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


110 


qUINqUAO£SlBiA  8UNDA>. 


the  parable  b this : The  seed  b the  word  of  GkxL 
Aod  tliey  by  the  way  side,  are  they  that  hear,  then 
the  devil  cometh,  and  taketh  the  word  out  of  their 
hearts,  lest  believing  they  should  be  saved.  Now 
they  upon  the  rock,  ai*e  they  who  when  they  hear, 
receive  the  word  with  joy : and  these  have  no  roots ; 
for  they  believe  for  awhile,  and  in  time  of  temptation 
fall  away.  And  tliat  which  fell  among  thorns,  are 
they  who  have  heard,  and  going  their  way,  are 
choked  with  the  cares  and  the  riches  and  pleasures 
of  thb  life,  and  yield  no  fruit.  But  that  on  the 
good  mund,  are  tliey  who  in  a good  and  perfect 
heart,  hearing  the  word,  keep  it,  and  bring  forth  fruit 
in  patience. 

OFFERT.  Pa.  xvi. — Perfect  thou  my  TOii^  in 
thy  paths : that  my  footsteps  be  not  moved : O in- 
cline thy  ear  unto  me  and  hear  my  words.  Shew 
forth  thy  wonderful  mercies:  who  saveth  them  that 
hope  in  thee  O Lord. 

SECRET.  May  the  sacrifice  we  have  oflTered  to 
thee,  O Lord,  always  enliven  us  and  defend  us. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Pa.  xlii. — I wiU  go  up  to  the  altar  of 
God,  to  God,  who  rejoiceth  my  youth. 

P.  COMM.  Suvplicea. — Grant,  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  those  whom 
thou  refreshest  with  thy  sacraments,  may,  W a life 
well  pleasing  to  thee,  worthily  serve  thee.  Thro’. 

QUINQUAGESIMA  SUNDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.xxx. 

Be  thou  unto  me  a God  J^STO  miki  in  Deum 

a protector,  and  a .jCrf  protectorem,  et  it 
house  of  refuge,  to  save  locum  refugii,  ut  aalvum 
me;  for  tliou  art  my  me  fadaa : quoniam  Jir- 
strength,  and  my  re-  mamentum  meum,  et  re- 
fiige;  and  for  thy  name’s  fugium  meum  ea  tu;  ei 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


<^(fnfQ17A6ESIMA  StTNDAT 


in 


iake  thou  wilt  lead  me,  propter  nomen  tuum  dux 
and  nourish  me.  Ps,  mihi  eris,  et  enutries  me. 
In  thee,  O Lord,  have  I Ps.  In  te,  Domine^  spe- 
hoped,  let  me  never  be  ravi,  non  confundar  in 
confounded : deliver  me  cetemum;  injustitia  tua 
in  thy  justice  and  rescue  libera  me,  et  eripe  me.  V. 
me.  F.  Glory.  Gloria. 

COLL.  Preces. — ^Mercifully  hear  our  prayers,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  and  being  freed  finom  the 
chains  of  our  sins,  preserve  us  from  all  adversity 
Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  xiii.  1.  lZ.-^Brethren : If  1 
speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  and 
have  not  charity,  I am  become  as  somiding  biTiss, 
or  a tinkling  cymbal.  And  if  I should  have  pro- 
phecy, and  should  know  all  mysteries,  and  all 
knowledge,  and  if  I should  have  dl  faith,  so  that  1 
could  remove  mountains,  and  have  not  charity,  1 
am  nothing.  And  if  I should  distribute  all  my  go(ds 
to  feed  the  poor,  and  if  I should  deliver  my  body 
to  be  burned,  and  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me 
nothing.  Charity  is  patient,  is  kind:  Charity  en- 
vieth  not,  dealeth  not  perversely:  it  is  not  puffed 
up,  it  is  not  ambitious,  seeketh  not  her  own,  is  not 
provoked  to  anger,  thinketh  no  evil,  rejoiceth  not 
m iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  with  the  truth:  beareth 
all  things,  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things, 
endureth  all  things.  Charity  never  falleth  away: 
whether  prophecies  shall  be  made  void,  or  tongues 
shall  cease,  or  knowledge  shall  be  destroyed.  For 
we  know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in  part  But 
when  tliat  which  is  perfect  is  come,  that  which  is  in 
part  shall  be  done  away.  When  1 was  a chikl,  I 
spoke  as  a child,  I understood  as  a child,  I thought 
as  a child.  But  when  I became  a man,  I put  away 
the  tilings  of  a child.  We  now  see  through  a glass 
in  a dark  manner;  but  then  face  to  face.  Now  I 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


1 13  QUINQUAGESIMA  3UNDAT. 

know  in  part : but  then  1 shall  know,  even  as  I am 
kllo^vll.  And  now  there  remain  faith,  hope,  cha- 
lity,  these  three:  but  the  greatest  of  these  is 
eiiaj-ity. 

GRAD.  Ixxvi. — Thou  art  God  that  alone 

dost  wonders:  thou  hast  made  tl»y' power  known 
among  the  nations.  F.  Thou  hast  delivered  thy 
people,  the  children  of  Israel  and  Joseph,  by  th« 
strength  of  thy  arm. 

TRACT.  Ps.  xeix. — Jubilate  Deo  omnia  terra; 
servile  Domino  in  IcUitia,  Sing  joyfully  to  God,^  all 
the  earth:  serve  ye  the  Lord  with  gladness.  V. 
Come  in  before  his  presence  with  joy.  Know  ye 
that  the  Lord  he  is  God.  F.  He  made  us ; and  not 
we  ourselves : we  are  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of 
his  pasture. 

GOSPEL.  • iMke  xviii.  31.  43.  — At  that  time: 
Jesus  took  unto  him  the  twelve,  and  said  to  them.. 
Behold  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  all  things  shall 
be  accomplished  which  were  written  by  the  pro- 
phets concerning  the  Son  of  Man.  For  he  shall  be 
delivered  to  the  Gentiles,  and  shall  be  mocked,  and 
scourged,  and  spit  upon:  and  after  they  have 
scourged  him,  they  will  put  him  to  death,  and  the 
third  day  he  shall  rise  again.  And  they  understood 
none  of  these  things,  and  this  word  was  hid  fit>m 
them,  and  they  understood  not  the  things  that  were 
said.  Now  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  he  drew 
nigh  to  Jericho,  a certain  blind  man  sat  by  the 
way-side,  beg^g.  And  when  he  heard  the 
midtitude  passmg  by,  he  asked  what  this  meant. 
And  they  told  him  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  p^ 
sing  by.  And  he  cried  out : Jesus,  Son  of  David, 
have  mercy  on  me.  And  they  that  went  before, 
rebuked  him,  that  he  should  hold  his  peace.  But 
he  cried  out  much  more:  Son  of  David,  have 
mercy  on  me.  And  Jesus  standing,  commandeil 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


ASH-WEDNESDAT. 


113 


bim  to  be’  brought  unto  him.  Aud  when  he  wa« 
come  near,  he  asked  him,  saying:  What  wilt  thou 
diat  1 do  to  thee  ? But  he  said : Lord,  that  1 may 
see.  And  Jesus  said  to  him : Receive  thy  sight ; thy 
faith  hath  made  thee  whole.  And  immediately  he 
saw,  and  followed  him,  glorifying  God.  And  all 
the  people  when  they  saw  it,  gave  praise  to  God. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviiL  — Blessed  art  thou,  O 
Jjord,  teach  me  thy  justifications : with  my  lips  have 
I pronounced  ail  tly?  judgments  of  thy  mouth. 

SECRET.  May  this  offering,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  cleanse  away  our  sins:  and  sanctify  the 
bodies  and  souls  of  thv  servants,  to  prepare  them  for 
worthily  celebrating  tnis  sacrifice.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  Ixxvii. — They  did  eat  and  wwe 
filled  exceedingly,  the  Lord  gave  them  their  desire : 
they  were  not  deprived  of  that  which  they  craved. 

P.  COMM.  Q;tuB8umus.  — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  we  who  have  taken  this  hea- 
venly food,  may  by  it  be  defended  fixrni  all  ad- 
versity. 


ASH-WEDNESDAY. 

• 

The  ceremony  of  applying  ashes,  in  the  form  of  a 
cross,  to  the  heads  of  the  faithful  on  this  day,  is  a 
relick  of  the  ancient  discipline  of  the  Church  which,  at 
the  beginning  of  Lent,  subjected  public  and  scandalous 
sinners  to  public  and  canonical  penance.  The  priest, 
(having  fir^  heard  their  confession,  clothed  them  with 
sackcloth — ^laid  ashes  on  their  heads,  and  «.prinkled  them 
with  holy  water)  recited  aloud  over  them  tne  seven  Peni~ 
tentiaX  Psalms,  assisted  therein  by  all  the  clergy  lying 
prostrate  on  the  ground.  After  the  procession  m which 
they  walked  bare-foot  in  the  penitential  dress  above  de- 
scribed, they  were  turned  out  of  the  Church,  not  to  be 
again  admitted  to  assist  at  the  sacred  mysteries,  till 
Maunday -Thursday.  The  Church  doors  were  then  shut, 
and  the  Mass  of  the  faithful  began. 

K 3 

oy  Google 


114 


▲SH-W£DN£SDAT. 


Though  public  penances  are  not  so  frequent  as  they 
formerly  were,  the  Council  of  Trent  expressly  orders 
them  for  public  crimes,  Sess.  xxiv.  c 8.  de  Reform.  And 
the  directions  given  in  the  Roman  Ritual,  de  Sacram 
Pmii.  are  : “ L«t  not  the  priest  absolve  those  who  have 
ipveiv^ublic  scandal,  till  they  have  made  public  satisfac- 
tion, and  removed  the  scandal.” 

We  are  therefore  to  perform  this  holy  ceremony  witli 
an  humble  and  contrite  soul,  with  a firm  resolution  of 
entering  upon  penitential  practices  in  order  to  punish 
our  sins,  and  to  satisfy  for  them  in  a manner  that  may 
bear  some  proportion  to  the  enormity  of  our  offences. 

THE  BLESSING  OF  THE  ASHES.  rt 

Ant.TTEAR  us,  O Lord,  for  thy  mercy  is  kind : 

-tl  look  on  us,  O Lord,  according  to  the 
multitude  of  thy  mercies.  Ps,  Save  me,  O God:  for 
the  waters  have  reached  my  soul.  V.  Glory. 

Ant.  Hear  us,  fyc.  to  Pa. 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Let  us  pray. — Omnipotens. 

0 Almighty  and  eternal  Goa  8pai*e  those  that 
repent,  shew  mercy  to  those  that  humbly  in- 
treat thee ; and  vouchsafe  to  send  from  heaven  thy 
holy  angel,  to  + bless,  and  + sanctify  these  ashes, 
that  they  may  be  a wholesome  remedy  to  all  who 
humbly  call  upon  thy  holy  name,  and  conscious  of 
their  sins,  accuse  themselves,  and  deplore  their 
crimes  in  sight  of  thy  divine  Majesty,  or  humbly  and 
earnestly  have  recourse  to  thy  sovereign  bounty:  and 
grant,  by  our  calling  on  thy  most  holy  name,  that 
whoever  shall  be  touched  by  these  ashes  for  the 
remission  of  their  sins,  may  receive  health  of  body 
and  defence  of  soul.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray. — Deua,  qui  non  mortem. 

OGod,  who  desirest  the  conversion,  and  not 
the  death  of  sinners,  graciously  consider  the 
weakness  of  human  nature,  and  mercifully  vouch- 
safe to  bless  these  ashes,  which  we  design  to  re- 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


ASH-WEDITESDAT. 


1J5 


ceive  on  our  heads,  in  token~-of  our  humiliation 
and  to  obtain  forgiveness : that  we,  who  know  that 
we  are  but  ashes,  and  must  return  to  dust  because 
of  our  wickedness,  may  obtain,  through  thy  mercy, 
pardon  of  all  our^sins,  and  the  recompense  pro- 
mised to  penitents.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.— Z>ei«,  qui  humilialione,  > 

OGod,  who  art  appeased  by  humiliation,  and 
pacified  by  satisfaction,  incline  to  our  prayers 
the  ears  of  thy  mercy ; and  pour  upon  the  heads 
of  thy  servants,  covered  with  these  ashes,  the  grace 
of  thy  blessing ; so  as  both  to  fill  them  with  the  spi- 
rit of  compunction,  and  to  grant  them  the  effects  of 
their  just  desires,  and  when  granted  to  remain  stable 
and  untouched  for  ever.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray. — Omnipotens, 

0 Almighty  and  eternal  God,  who  fbrgavest  the 
Ninivites,  when  they  did  penance  in  sack- 
cloth and  ashes:  mercifully  grant  us  so  to  imitate 
their  penance,  that  we  may  obtain  pardon  of  our 
sina  Thro’.  H.  Amen. 

J%e  Priest  having  sprinkled  the  Ashes  toUh  Holy 
Water,  saying  the  Anthem,  Asperges,  &c.  p,  xiiL 
toithout  the  rsalni,  and  fuming  them  ihnce,  re- 
ceives or  gives  them  to  himself;  then  he  lays  them 
on  the  heads  of  every  one,  saying  to  each : 

Pr,  Remember,  O man,  that  thou  art  dust,  and 
dialt  return  to  dust  again. 

In  the  meantime,  the  foUomng  Anthems  are  sung  by 
the  Choir, 

Ant.  Let  us  change  our  di*ess  for  ashes  and  sack- 
«doth : let  us  fast  a^  weep  in  the  presence  of  the 
Lord ; for  our  God  is  veiy  merciful  to  forgive  us  our 
sins. 

Ant.  The  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  shall 
weep  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  and  say: 
Spare,  O Lord,  O spare  thy  people,  and  shut  not 
the  mouths  of  those  who  praise  thee,  O Lord. 


Digitized  by  Google 


116 


A8H-WEDNESDAT. 


Ant.  Let  us  amend  of  the  sins  we  haA-e  com* 
mitted  through  ignorance:  lest  suddenly  overtaken 
by  the  day  of  our  death,  we  seek  for  time  to  do  pe- 
nance, and  be  not  able  to  find  it.*  Look  down  on 
us,  O Lord,  and  take  pity:  for  we  have  sinned 
against  thee.  V.  Help  us,  O God  oilr  Saviour,  and 
deliver  us  for  the  glory  of  thy  name,  O Lord.* 
Look  down  on  us,  fyc.  to  V.  Glory,  fyc.  Look 
down  on  us,  fyc.  to  V. 

The  Lord  be  with  thee.  R.  And  with  thy  spirit 
Let  us  pray. — Concede  nobis, 

Grant  us,  O Lord,  to  begin  with  holy  fasting 
our  Christian  warfare;  that  being  to  fight 
against  spiritual  wickedness,  we  may  be  aided  there- 
in by  temperance.  Thro’. 

INTROIT.  Wisd,  xi.  Ps.  Ivi. 

Thou,  O Lord,  hast  mercy  on  all,  and  Latest 
none  of  those  things,  which  thou  hast  created ; 
thou  winkest  at  the  sins  of  men,  to  draw  tliem  to 
repentance,  and  thou  pardonest  them:  because  thou 
art  the  Lord  our  God.  Ps,  Have  mercy  on  me,  O 
God,  have  mercy  on  me;  for  my  soul  trusteth  in 
thee.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  PrcestOy  Domine, — Grant,  O Lord, 
that  thy  faithful  may  enter  on  this  solemn  fast  witli 
suitable  piety,  and  go  through  it  with  unmolested 
devotion.  Thro’. 

•djier  the  II.  Collect,  A cunctis,  o.  xx.  the  follotving, 
ioith  Us  Secret  and  P.  COMM,  is  continued  fw 
Passion- Sunday. 

III.  COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O Almighty  and 
eternal  God,  who  hast  dommion  over  the  living  and 
the  dead,  and  art  merciful  to  all,  whom  thou  know- 
est  will  be  thine  by  faith  and  good  works : we  hum- 
bly beseech  thee,  that  they,  for  whom  we  have  pro- 
posed to  offer  our  prayers,  whether  this  world  stiH 
retains  them  in  the  flesh,  or  the  next  world  hath 
already  received  them  divested  of  their  bodies,  may. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASH- WEDNESDAY 


117 


by  the  clemency  of  thine  own  goodness,  and  the  in- 
tercession of  thy  saints  obtain  pardon  and  full  remis- 
sion of  their  sins.  Thro’. 

LP'SSON.  Joel  ii.  12.  19. Thus  saith  the 

Lord : Be  converted  to  me  with  all  your  heart,  in 
fasting,  in  weeping,  and  in  mourning.  And  rend 
your  hearts,  and  not  your  garments,  and  turn  to  the 
Lord  your  God:  for  he  is  ^^acious  and  merciful, 
patient  and  rich  in  mercy,  and  ready  to  repent  of  the 
evil.  Who  knoweth  but  he  will  return,  and  for- 
give, and  leave  a blessing  behind  hun,  sacrifice  and 
libation  to  the  Lord  your  God  ? Blow  the  trumpet 
in  Sion,  sanctify  a fast,  call  a solemn  assem oly, 
gather  together  the  people,  sanctify  the  Churcn, 
assemble  the  ancients,  gather  together  the  little  ones 
and  them  that  suck  at  the  breasts:  let  the  bride- 
groom go  forth  from  his  bed,  and  the  bride  out  of 
the  bride-chamber.  Between  the  porch  and  the 
altar  the  priests  the  Lord’s  ministei*s  shall  weep, 
and  shall  say:  Spare,  O Lord,  spai*e  tliy  people: 
and  give  not  thine  inheritance  to  reproach,  that  the 
heathens  should  rule  over  them.  Why  should  they 
say  among  the  nations : Where  is  their  God  ? The 
Lord  hath  been  zealous  for  his  land,  and  hath  spared 
his  people.  And  the  Lord  answered  and  said  to  his 
pwple : Behold  I will  send  you  coni,  and  wine,  and 
oil,  you  shall  be  filled  with  them:  and  I will  no 
more  make  you  a reproach  among  the  nations : saith 
the  Lord  Almighty. 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ivi. — Have  mercy  on  me  O God, 
have  mercy  on  me:  for  my  soul  hatli  trusted  in 
thee.  V,  He  hath  sent  fi-om  heaven,  and  delivered 
me : he  hath  made  them  a reproach  that  trode  upon 
me. 

* TRAGT.  Ps,  cii.  and  Ixxviii. — Deal  not  with  us, 
O Lord,  according  to  our  sins,  which  we  have  com- 
mitted, nor  punish  us  according  to  our  iniquities. 
V,  Remember  not,  O Lord,  our  former  uiiquities 


by  Google 


Digitized 


118 


ASH- WEDNESDAY. 


let  thy  mercies  speedily  prevent  us,  for  we  are  be- 
come exceeding  poor.  (M  this  verse  kned  down,)  V, 
Help  us,  O God  our  Saviour,  and  for  the  glory  of 
thy  name  O Lord  deliver  us,  and  forgive  us  our  sins 
fw  thy  name’s  sake. 

The  above  Tract  is  said  every  Monday,  Wednesday, 
and  Friday,  tiU  Wednesday  in  Holy  Week,  except 
there  he  a proper  one  appointed, 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  vi.  16.  21. — At  that  time; 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : When  you  fast  be  not  as 
the  hypocritesi,  sad.  For  they  disfigure,  their  faces, 
that  they  may  appear  to  men  to  fast  Amen  I say 
to  you,  they  have  received  theu'  reward.  But  thou, 
when  thou  fastest,  anoint  tliy  head,  and  wash  thy 
face:  that  thou  appear  not  to  men  to  fast,  but  to 
thy  Father,  who  is  in  secret : and  thy  Father,  who 
seetli  in  secret,  will  reward  thee.  Lay  not  up  for 
yourselves  ti'easures  on  earth:  where  the  rust  and 
moth  consume,  and  where  thieves  break  through 
and  steal.  But  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures 
in  heaven : where  neither  rust  nor  moth  doth  con- 
sume, and  where  thieves  do  not  break  through,  nor 
steal.  For  where  thy  treasure  is,  there  is  thy  heart 
also. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xxix. — I will  extol  thee,  O Lord, 
for  thou  hast  upholden  me : and  hast  not  made  iny 
enemies  to  rejoice  over  me.  O Lord,  I have  cried 
to  thee,  and  tliou  hast  healed  me. 

SECRET.  Grant,  O Lord,  that  we  may  be 
duly  prepared  to  present  these  our  offerings,  by 
which  we  celebrate  the  institution  of  this  venerable 
mystery.  Thro’. 

II.  SECRET.  Ordinary,  p.  xxvii. 

III.  SECRET.  O God,  to  whom  alone  is  known 
the  number  of  thine  elect  to  be  placed  in  eternal 
«bliss:  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  by  the  intercession  of 
all  thy  saints,  that  the  book  of  predestination  may 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


119 


THURSDAY  BEFORE,  &C. 

contain  the  names  of  all  those,  whom  we  have  un* 
dertaken  to  pray  for,  as  well  as  those  of  all  the  faith 
fuL  Thro’. 

Preface.  Qui  cot'mrali  jejunio,  p.  xxx. 

COMM.  Pa,  i. — ^He  that  ineditateth  night  and 
day  on  the  law  of  the  Lord  shall  yield  his  fi*uit  in 
due  season. 

P.  COMM.  Percepta, — ^May  the  mysteries  we 
have  received,  O Lord,  afford  us  help,  that  our  fast- 
ing may  be  acceptable  to  thee,  and  become  a remedy 
to  us.  Thro’. 

II.  P.  COMM.  Mundet, — Ordinaiy,  p.  xliv. 

III.  P.  COMM.  Puryicent, — May  the  mysteries 
we  have  received,  purify  us,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  and  merciful  God ; and  grant,  by  the  ui- 
tercession  of  all  thy  saints,  that  this  thy  sacrament 
may  not  increase  our  guilt  to  punishment,  but  be  a 
means  oft  obtaining  pardon  in  order  to  salvation: 
may  it  wash  away  sin,  strengthen  our  frailty,  secure 
us  against  the  dangers  of  the  world ; and  procure 
forgiveness  for  all  the  faithful  both  living  and  dead 
Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

The  Prayer,  Inclinantes,  ever  the  people, 

MEIRCIFULLY  look  dovm  upon  us,  O Lord, 
bowing  down  before  thy  divine  Majesty,  that 
they  who  have  been  refileshed  wi^  thy  divine  mys- 
teries, may  always  be  supported  by  thy  heavenly 
aid.  Thro’. 


THURSDAY  before  the  I.  Sunday  in  Lent. 
INTROIT.  Pa,  liv. 

WHEN  I cried  out  to  the  ^rd,  he  heard  my 
voice  against  those  who  were  coming  upon 
me:  he  that  is  before  all  ages  and  will  be  for  ever, 
liumbled  them : east  thy  care  on  the  Lord,  and  he 
will  feed  thee.  Pa,  Hear,  O God,  my  prayer,  and 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


l!id  THURSDAT  before  I.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 

despise  not  my  supplication : be  attentive  to  me  and 
bear  me*  V,  Gloiy. 

COLLECT.  jDciw,  qui  culpa, — O God,  who  by 
sin  art  offended,  and  pacified  by  repentance,  merci- 
fully regard  the  prayers  of  thy  people,  who  make 
supplication  to  thee ; and  turn  away  the  scourges  of 
thy  anger,  which  we  deserve  for  our  sins.  Thro’. 

LESSON*  Isaia^  xxxviii*  1. 6. — In  those  days  Ez- 
echias  was  sick  even  to  death,  and  Isaias  the  son  of 
Amos  the  prophet  came  unto  him,  and  said  to  him  i 
Thus  saith  the  Lord : Take  order  with  tliy  house  for 
thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live.  And  Ezechias  tmned 
his  face  towards  the  wall,  and  prayed  to  the  Lord, 
and  said : I beseech  thee,  O Lord,  remember  how  I 
have  walked  before  thee  in  truth,  and  with  a perfect 
heart,  and  have  done  that  which  is  good  in  thy  sight* 
And  Ezechias  wept  with  great  weeping.  And  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Isaias,  saying : Go  and  say 
to  Ezechias : Thus  saith  the  Lord  me  God  of  Davfd 
thy  father : I have  heard  thy  prayer,  and  I have  seen 
thy  tears : behold  I will  add  to  thy  days  fifteen  years : 
And  I will  deliver  thee  and  this  city  out  of  the  hands 
of  the  king  of  the  Assyrians,  and  I will  protect  it, 
Saith  the  Lord  Ahnighty. 

GRAD.  Ps,  liv. — Cast  thy  care  upon  the  Lord^ 
and  he  shall  sustain  thee : F.  When  I cried  out  to 
the  Lord,  he  heard  me,  and  defended  me  against 
those  that  were  coming  upon  me. 

GOSPEL.  Malt,  viii.  from  *in  the  Gospel  of  the 
III.  Sunday  cfter  Epiphany,  p,  99. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xxiv* — To  thee,  O Lord  have  I 
lifted  up  my  souL  O my  God : in  thee,  O my  God 
I put  my  trust,  let  me  not  be  ashamed ; neither  let 
my  enemies  laugh  at  me ; for  none  of  them  that  wait 
(m  thee  shall  be  confounded. 

SECRET.  Hear  us,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
and  being  appeased  by  these  offerings,  grant  they 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


FRIOAT  REFORC  THE,  &C.  131 

may  increase  our  devotion,  and  advance  our  salva- 
tion Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  1. — ^Thou  wilt  accept  a sacrifice  of 
righteousness,  oblations,  and  whole  bumt^offerings 
on  thy  altar,  O Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Ccdtstis» — Having  partaken  of  ^e 
blessings  of  these  heavenly  mysteries,  we  humbly 
beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  by  them  we  may 
receive  both  the  sacrament  and  eternal  salvation, 
Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Parce» — Spare,  O Lord,  spare  thy 
people : that  having  been  justly  chastised,  they  may 
find  comfort  in  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

FRIDAY  before  the  1.  Sunday  in  Lent. 

INTROIT.  Ps»  xxix. 

The  Lord  hatji  heard,  and  hath  had  mercy  on  me, 
the  Lord  hath  become  my  helper.  Ps»  I will . 
extol  thee,  O Lord,  for  thou  hast  upheld  me : and 
hast  not  made  my  enemies  to  rejoice  over  me, 
V»  Glory. 

COLLECT.,  hichoata  j^unia» — Graciously  fe- 
TOUT  us,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  in  the  fast  we 
have  undertaken ; tliat  what  we  observe  outwardly, 
we  may  perform  with  sincere  minds.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Is»  Iviii.  1.  9. — Thus  saith  the  Lord  Goa ; 
Cry,  cease  not,  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a trumpet, 
and  shew  my  people  their  wicked  doings,  and  the 
house  of  Jacob  their  sins.  For  they  seek  me  from 
day  to  day,  and  desire  to  know  my  ways,  as  a nation 
that  hath  done  justice,  and  hath  not  forsaken  the 
judgment  of  their  God : they  ask  of  me  the  judg- 
ments of  justice:  they  are  willing  to  approach  to 
God.  Why  have  we  fasted,  and  thou  hast  not  re- 
rarded  : why  have  we  humbled  our  souls,  and  tliou 
Wt  not  taken  notice  ? Behold,  in  the  day  of  your 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


m 


FRIDAY  BEFORE  THE 


fast,  your  own  will  is  found,  and  you  exact  of  all 
your  debtors.  Behold  you  fast  for  debates  and 
strife,  and  stinke  with  tlie  fist  wickedly.  Do  not 
fast  as  you  have  done  until  this  day,  to  make  your 
cry  to  he  heard  on  high.  Is  this  such  a fast,  as  1 
have  chosen : for  a man  to  afflict  his  soul  for  a day  ? 
is  this  it,  to  wind  his  head  about  like  a circle,  and 
to  spread  sackcloth  and  ashes  wilt  thou  call  this  a 
fast,  and  a day  acceptable  to  the  Lord  ? Is  not  this 
rather  the  fast  that  I have  chosen  ? loose  the  hands  of 
wickedness,  undo  the  bundles  that  oppress,  let  them 
that  are  broken  go  free,  and  break  asunder  every 
burden.  Deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  bring 
the  needy  and  the  harbourless  into  thy  house : 
when  thou  shalt  see  one  naked,  cover  nim,  and 
despise  hot  thy  own  flesh.  Then  shall  thy  light 
break  forth  as  the  morning,  and  thy  health  shall 
roeedily  arise,  and  thy  justice  shall  go  before  thy 
Mice,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  gather  thee  up. 
Then  shalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  shall  hear : thou 
shalt  cry,  and  he  shall  say ; Here  I am,  for  I the 
Lord  iky  God  am  merdful* 

GRAD.  Pa.  xxvi. — One  thing  have  I asked  of  the 
Lord,  this  will  I seek  after ; that  I «lay  dwell  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  V»  That  I may  see  the 
delight  of  the  Lord,  and  be  protected  in  his  holy 
temple. 

♦ TRACT.  Pa.  cii.— Deal  not,  p.  II7. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  v.  43.  48.  vi.  1.  4.—^  that 
time ; Jesus  said  to  his  disciples ; You  have  heard  that 
it  hath  been  said:  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor, 
and  hate  thy  enemy.  But  I say  to  you,  love  your 
enemies,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you : and  pray 
for  them  that  persecute  and  calumniate  you:  that 
you  may  be  the  children  oP  your  Father  who  is  in 
heaven,  who  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  upon  the  good 
and  bad,  and  raineth  upon  the  just  and  the  uigust.  For 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


I.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 


123 


‘f  you  love  them  that  love  you,  what  reward  shall 
you  have?  do  not  even  the  publicans  the  some? 
And  if  you  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  do  you 
do  more?  do  not  also  the  heathens  the  same. 
Be  you  therefore  perfect,  as  also  your  heavenly  Fa- 
tlier  is  perfect  (Chap,  vi.)  Take  heed  that  you  do 
not  your  justice  before  men,  to  be  seen  by  them : 
otherwise  you  shall  not  have  a reward  of  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven.  Therefore  when  thou  dost  an 
alms  deed,  sound  not  a trumpet  before  thee,  as  the 
hypocrites  do  in  the  s)magogues  and  in  the  streets, 
that  they  may  be  honoured  by  men.  Amen  I say  to 
you  they  have  received  their  reward.  But  when 
thou  dost  alms,  let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy 
right  hand  doth.  That  thy  alms  may  be  in  secret, 
and  thy  Father  who  seeth  in  secret,  w^l  repay  thee. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviii. — ^Preserve  my  life,  O Lord, 
according  to  thy  promise,  that  I may  ^ow  thy 
commandments. 

SECRET.  Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  the  sacrifice  we  offer  in  tliis  holy  time  of  Lent, 
may  render  our  souls  acceptable  to  thee,  and  make 
us  more  ready  in  the  practice  of  fasting.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  ii. — Serve  ye  the  Lord  with  fear : and 
rejoice  unto  him  with  trembling : embrace  discipliiie, 
lest  you  perish  firom  the  just  way. 

P.  COMM.  Spiritum  nobis, — Give  us,  O Lord,  the 
spirit  of  thy  charity,  that  thou  mayest,  by  thy  mer- 
cy, make  those  unanimous,  whom  thou  hast  fed 
with  one  and  the  same  heavenly  bread.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Tuere  Domine, — Defend,  O Lord, 
thy  people,  and  mercifully  cleanse  them  fix)m  all 
their  sins : for  no  misfortune  can  hurt  them,  if  no 
wickedness  rule  over  them.  Thro’. 

L2 


I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


( 124  ) 

SATURDAY  before  the  1.  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Thp,  Introit,  Gradual,  Tract,  Offertory,  and  Commu- 
nion, as  in  the  foregoing  Mass,  p,  121,  fyc. 

COLLECT.  Adesto  Domine. — Give  ear,  O Lord, 
to  our  prayers,  and  grant  that  we  may,  with  true 
devotion,  observe  this  solenm  fast,  which  was 
wholesomely  instituted  for  giving  health  to  both  our 
souls  and  bodies.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Isaias  Iviii.  9. 14. — Thus  sadh  the  Lord 
God : If  thou  wilt  take  away  the  chain  out  of  the 
midst  of  thee,  and  cease  to  stretch  out  the  finger, 
and  to  speak  that  which  is  good  for  nothing.  When 
thou  shalt  pour  out  thy  soul  to  the  hung^,  and  shalt 
satisfy  the  afflicted  soul,  then  shall  thy  liglit  rise  up 
in  dai’kness,  and  thy  darkness  shall  1^  as  the  noon- 
day. And  the  Lord  will  give  thee  rest  continually, 
and  will  fill  thy  soul  with  brightness,  and  deliver  thy 
bones,  and  thou  shalt  be  like  a watered  garden,  and 
like  a fountain  of  water,  whose  waters  shall  not 
fail.  And  the  places  that  have  been  desolate  for 
ages,  shall  be  built  in  thee : thou  shalt  raise  up  the 
foundations  of  generation  and  generation : and  thou 
shalt  be  called  the  repairer  of  the  fences,  turning  the 
paths  into  rest  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the 
sabbath,  from  doing  thy  own  will  in  my  holy  day, 
and  cull  the  sabbath  delightful,  and  the  holy  of  the 
Lord  glorious,  and  glorify  him,  while  thou  dost  not 
thy  own  ways,  and  thy  own  will  is  not  found,  to 
speak  a word : Then  shalt  thou  be  delighted  in  the 
Lord,  and  I will  lift  thee  up  above  the  high  places 
of  the  earth,  and  will  feed  thee  with  the  inheritance 
of  Jacob  thy  father.  For  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  it. 

GOSPEL.  Mark  vi.  47.  56. — At  that  time : 
When  it  was  late,  the  ship  was  in  the  midst  of  the 
eea,  and  himself  alone  on  the  land.  And  seeing  them 
labou  ing  in  rowing  (for  the  wind  was  against  them) 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


SATURDAY  BEFORE  I.  SUITOAY  IN  LENT.  125 

and  about  the  fourtli  watch  of  the  night  he  cometh 
to  them  walking  upon  the  sea,  and  he  would  have 
])assed  by  them.  But  they  seeing  him  walking 
upon  the  sea,  thought  it  was  an  apparition,  and 
they  cried  out  For  they  all  saw  hun,  and  were 
toDubled.  And  immediately  he  spoke  with  them, 
and  said  to  them : Have  a good  heart,  it  is  I,  fear 
ye  not  And  he  went  up  to  tliem  into  the 
fillip,  and  the  wind  ceased.  And  they  were  fer 
more  astonished  within  themselves : for  they  under- 
stood not  concerning  the  loaves:  for  their  heart 
.was  blinded*  And  when  they  had  passed  over,  they 
came  into  the  land  of  Grenesareth,  and  set  to  the 
shore.  And  when  they  were  gone  out  of  the  shift 
immediately  they  knew  him ; and  running  through 
that  whole  country,  they  began  to  carry  about  in 
beds  those  that  were  sick,  where  they  heard  he  was. 
And  whithersoever  he  entered,  into  towns,  or  into 
villages,  or  cities,  they  laid  the  sick  in  the  sti'eets, 
and  besought  him  that  they  might  touch  but  the  hem 
of  his  garment : and  as  many  as  touched  him  were 
made  whole. 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  the  sacrifice,  by 
the  immolation  of  which  thou  vouchsafest  to  lie  ap- 
peased; and  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  being 
purihed  by  its  efficacy,  we  may  offer  the  affections 
of  our  mind  well  pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Cfslestis. — Being  strengthened,  O 
Lord,  by  the  gift  of  a heavenly  life,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  what  is  a mystery  to  us  in  this  life,  may  help  us 
to  obtain  that  which  is  eternal.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Fideles, — ^May  thy  feithful,  O God^ 
be  strengtliened  by  thy  gifts:  that,  by  receiving 
them,  they  may  ever  hunger  after  tliem,  and  him- 
gering  after  them,  they  may  have  their  desires  satis*> 
ned  in  the  everlasting  possession  of  tliem.  Thro’. 

L3 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


4 A 


( 136  ^ 

1.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xc.  ^ 

He  shall  cry  to  me,  TNvocahii  me  it  ego 
and  I will  hear  him : Ji  exaudiam  eum  Eri- 
I will  deliver  him  and  piam  eum,  ei  glorificabo 
I will  glorify  him : I will  eum : Longitudine  die- 
fiU  him  with  length  of  rum  adimplebo  eum, — 
days.  Ps,  He  that  dwell-  Ps.  90.  Qui  habitat  in 
eth  in  the  aid  of  the  Most  cutjiUorio  altissimi,  in  pro- 
High,  shall  abide  under  tectione  Dei  cteli  commo- 
the  protection  of  the  God  rabitur, 
of  heaven.  V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria, 

COLLECT.  Deus  qut, — O God,  who  purifiest 
thy  Church  by  the  yearly  observation  or  Lent; 
grant,  that  what  thy  children  endeavour  to  detain  of 
thee  by  abstinence,  they  may  put  in  execution  by 
good  works.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor,  vi.  1. 10.— BrcfArcn ; We  ex- 
hort  you,  that  you  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in 
vain.  For  he  saith ; “ In  an  acceptable  time  have  I 
heard  thee  ; and  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I helped 
thee.”  llehold,  now  is  the  acceptable  time:  be- 
hold now  is  the  day  of  salvation.  Giving  no  of- 
fence to  any  man,  that  our  ministry  lie  not  blamed  • 
but  in  all  things  let  us  exhibit  ourselves  as  the  minis- 
ters of  God,  in  much  patience,  in  tribulation,  in 
necessities,  in  distresses,  in  stripes,  in  prison,  in 
seditions,  in  labours,  in  watchings,  in  fastings,  in 
chastity,  in  knowle^e,  in  long-suffering,  in  sweet- 
ness, in  tlie  Holy  Ghost,  in  charity  unfeigned,  in 
the  word  of  truth,  in  the  power  of  Gk)d ; by  the  ar- 
mour of  justice  on  the  right-hand,  and  on  the  left; 
by  honour,  and  dishonour : by  evil  report,  and  good 
report:  as  deceivers,  and  yet  true;  as  unknown, 
and  yet  known:  as  dying,  and  behold  we  live;  as 
chastised,  and  not  killed ; as  sorrowful,  yet  always 
rejoicing:  as  needy,  yet  enriching  many;  as  having 
nothing,  and  possessing  all  things. 

Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


I.  SUNDAY  IN  DENT. 


127 


GRAD.  P»,  xc. — God  hath  given  his  an^ls  chor^ 
over  tliee,  to  keep  tliee  in  all  thy  ways.  K.  In  their 
hands  they  shall  near  tliee  up : lest  at  any  time  thou 
dash  thy  foot  against  a stone. 

TRACT.  Ps,  xc. — Qui  habitat  in  adjutorio  aliis- 
simij  in  protectione  Dei  codi  commorabitur.  He  that 
dwelleth  in  the  aid  of  the  Most  High,  shall  abide 
under  the  protection  of  tlie  God  of  heaven.  F,  He 
shall  say  to  tlie  Lord,  thou  art  my  protector  and  my 
refuge:  my  God,  in  him  will  I trust.  V.  For  hie 
hatli  delivered  me  from  the  snare  of  the  hunters: 
and  from  their  sharp  word.  F,  He  will  overshadow 
thee  with  his  shoulders : and  under  his  wings  thou 
shalt  trust.  F,  His  truth  shall  compass  thee  with 
a shield » thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  the  teiTor  of 
tlie  night.  F,  Of  the  arrow  that  flieth  in  the  day ; 
of  the  business  that  walketh  in  the  dai*k : of  ruin,  or 
of  tlie  noon-day  devil.  F,  A thousand  shall  fall  at 
thy  side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right  hand : But 
it  shall  not  come  nigh  thee.  F,  For  he  hath  given  his 
angels  charge  over  thee ; to  keep  thee  in  all  thy 
ways.  F,  In  their  hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up : 
lest  thou  dash  thy  foot  againt  a stone.  V,  Thou 
shalt  walk  upon  the  asp  and  the  basilisk : and  thou 
shalt  trample  under  foot  the  lion  and  the  dragon.  F. 
Because  he  hath  hoped  in  me  I will  deliver  him : I 
will  protect  him,  b^ause  he  hath  known  my  name. 
He  shall  cry  to  me,  and  I will  hear  him : 1 am  with 
him  in  his  trouble.  F,  I will  deliver  him,  and  I will 
gloi^  him : I will  fill  him  with  length  of  days,  and 
I will  shew  him  my  salvation. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  iv.  1.  11. — At  that  time : Jesus 
was  led  by  the  spirit  into  the  desert,  to  be  tempted 
by  the  Devil.  And  when  he  had  fasted  forty  days 
and  forty  nights,  he  was  afterwards  hungry.  And 
the  tempter  coming,  said  to  him : If  thou  be  the 
Son  of  God,  command  that  these  stones  be  made 
bread.  But  he  answered  and  said;  It  is  written. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


128 


lfO;ii>AT  Uf  THE 


“ Not  by  bread  alone  doth  man  live,  but  by  every 
word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God/’ 
Then  the  Devil  took  him  mto  the  holy  city,  and  set 
him  upon  a pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and  said  to 
him : If  thou  be  the  Son  of  Grod,  cast  thyself  down ; 
for  it  is  written : “ He  hath  given  his  angels  charge 
over  thee,  and  in  their  hands  shall  they  beai*  thee  up, 
lest  perhaps  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a stone.” 
Jesus  said  to  him,  it  is  written  again,  “ Thou  shalt 
not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God.”  Again  the  Devil  took 
him  up  into  a very  high  mountain,  and  shewed  him 
all  the  icingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of 
them,  and  said  to  him : All  these  will  1 give  thee, 
if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  adore  me.  Then  Jesus 
said  to  him : Begone,  Satan : for  it  is  written : “ The 
Lord  thy  God  shalt  thou  adore,  and  him  only  shalt 
tliou  serve.”  Then  the  Devil  left  him ; and  behold 
angels  came  and  ministered  to  him.”  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xc. — ^The  Lord  will  overshadow 
thee  with  his  shoulders:  and  under  his  wings  thou 
shalt  tnist,  his  truth  shall  compass  thee  with  a shield. 

SECRET.  We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  in  the  most 
solemn  manner,  this  sacrifice  at  the  beginning  of 
Lent,  humbly  beseeching  thee,  that  as  we  retrench 
from  the  food  of  our  bodies,  we  may  also  refrain 
from  all  noxious  pleasures.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  xc. — The  Lord  will  overshadow 
thee  with  his  shoulders:  and  under  his  wings  thou 
shalt  trust : his  truth  shall  compass  thee  with  a shield. 

P.  COMM.  2\ii  nos, — May  the  holy  oblation,  O 
Lord,  of  thy  sacrament,  give  us  a new  life,  that,  by 
laying  aside  tlie  old  man,  it  may  bring  us  to  the 
participation  of  this  saving  mystery.  Thro’. 

MONDAY,  I.  WEEK  IN  LENT. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cxxiL 

AS  the  eyes  of  the  servants  are  on  the  hands  of 
their  masters,  so  are  our  eyes  on  the  Lord  our 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


I.  WEEK  or  l.EJfT. 


129 


God,  until  he  hare  mercy  on  us:  have  mercy  on  us, 

0 Lord,  have  mercy  on  us.  Pa.  To  thee  have  I 
lifted  up  my  eyes,  who  dwellest  in  heaven.  V. 
Glory. 

COLLECT.  Converte, — Convert  tis,  O God  our 
Saviour,  and  'mstruct  our  minds  with  thy  heavenly 
doctrine,  that  this  fast  of  Lent  may  be  beneficial  to 
us.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Ezek,  xxxiv.  11. 16. — Thusacdth  the  Lord 
God : Behold  I myself  will  seek  my  sheep,  and  will 
visit  them.  As  tlie  shepherd  visiteth  his  nock,  in  the 
day  when  he  shall  be  m the  midst  of  his  sheep  that 
were  scattered:  so  will  I visit  my  sheep,  and  will 
deliver  them  out  of  all  the  places  where  they  have 
been  scattered  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day.  And  I 
will  bring  them  out  from  the  peoples,  and  will  ga- 
ther them  out  of  the  countries,  and  will  bring  them 
to  their  own  land:  and  I will  feed  them  in  the 
mountains  of  Israel,  by  the  rivers,  and  in  all  the  ha- 
bitations of  the  land ; I will  feed  them  in  the  most 
fruitful  pastures,  and  their  pastures  shall  be  in  the 
high  mountains  of  Israel : there  shall  they  rest  on 
the  green  grass,  and  be  fed  in  fat  pastures  upon  the 
mountains  of  Israel.  I will  feed  my  sheep : and  1 
will  cause  them  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord  God. 

1 will  seek  that  which  was  lost:  and  that  which  was 
driven  away,  I will  bring  again : and  I will  bind  up 
that  which  was  broken,  and  I will  strengthen  that 
which  was  weak,  and  that  which  was  fat  and  strong 
1 will  preserve : and  I will  feed  them  in  judgment, 
$ailh  the  Lord  Almighty, 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxxiii. — Cast  an  eye  upon  us,  O 
God,  our  Protector,  look  down  upon  thy  servants. 
F,  O Lord  God  of  armies,  hear  the  prayers  of  thy 
servants. 

♦ TRACT.  Ps,  cii.  Deal  not,  p,  117. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxv.  31. — At  that  time:  Jesxts 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


130 


MONDAY  IN  TUX  &C. 


9aid  to  his  disciples : When  the  Son  of  Man  ahaii 
come  in  his  majesty,  and  all  the  angels  with  him 
then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  seat  of  his  majesty.  And 
all  nations  shall  be  gathered  together  before  him, 
and  h.e  shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  the 
shepherd  separateth  the  sheep  from  the  goats : and 
he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  but  the  goats 
on  his  left  Then  shall  the  king  say  to  them  that 
shall  be  on  his  right  hand : Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Fatlier,  possess  the  kingdom  preptu-ed  for  you  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  For  I was  hungry, 
and  you  ^ve  me  to  eat : I was  thirsty,  and  you  gave 
me  to  di’ink:  1 was  a stranger,  and  you  took  me 
in : naked,  and  you  clothed  me : sick,  and  you  vi- 
sited me:  I was  in  prison,  and  you  came  to  me. 
Then  shall  the  just  answer  him, saying:  Lord,  when 
did  we  see  thee  hungry,  and  fed  thee:  thirsty,  and 
gave  thee  di  ink?  And  when  did  we  see  thee  a 
stranger,  and  took  thee  in:  or  naked,  and  clothed 
thee  ? Or  when  did  we  see  th^e  sick  or  in  prison,  and 
came  to  thee  ? And  the  king  answering  shall  say  to 
them : Amen  I say  to  you,  as  long  as  you  have  done 
it  to  one  of  these  my  least  brethren,  you  did  it  to 
me.  Then  shall  he  say  to  them  also  that  shall  be 
on  his  left  hand : Depart  from  me,  you  cursed,  in- 
to everlasting  fire  which  was  prepared  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels.  For  I was  hungry,  and  you  gave  me 
not  to  eat ; I was  thii'sty,  and  you  gave  me  not  to 
drink.  I was  a stranger,  and  you  took  me  not  in : 
naked,  and  you  clothed  me  nof  sick,  and  pri- 
son, and  you  did  not  visit  me.  Then  shall  tney 
also  answer  him,  saying : Lord,  when  did  we  see 
thee  hungry,  or  tliirsty,  or  a stranger,  or  naked,  or 
sick,  or  in  prison  and  did  not  minister  to  thee? 
Then  he  shall  answer  them,  saying : Amen  I say  to 
you,  as  long  as  you  did  it  not  to  one  of  these  least 
ones,  neith^*  did  you  it  to  me.  And  these  shall  gc 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


TUfiSPAT  IxV  THE,  &e.  131 

into  everlasting  puni^ment,  but  the  just  into  life 
everlasting. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviii. — I will  lift  up  my  eyes, 
and  consider  thy  wonders,  O Lord,  that  thou  may- 
est  teach  me  thy  law : give  me  understanding,  and  I 
will  learn  thy  commandments. 

SECRET.  Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we 
have  made,  and  cleanse  us  from  the  stains  of  oui 
sins.  Thro’. 

COMM.  MaiL  xxv. — Verily,  I say  to-  you : What 
you  have  done  to  one  of  the  least  of  mine,  you  have 
done  to  me : come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  take 
possession  of  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
be^ning  of  the  wond. 

r.  COMM.  Scdutaris.-^Bemg  filled,  O Lord, 
by  the  participation  of  thy  saving  mysteries,  we 
humbly  beseech  thee,  that  as  we  rejoice  in  tne  taste 
thereof^  we  may  be  renewed  by  their  effects.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Absolve. — ^Loosen,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  bonds  of  our  sins:  and  mercifully 
turn  away  fi*om  us  whatever  we  deserve  for  them. 
Thro’. 


TUESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  kxxix. 

Thou,  O Lord,  hast  been  our  refuge  from  gene- 
ration to  generation : from  all  eternity,  thou  art. 
Ps.  Before  the  mountains  were  made,  or  the  earth 
and  the  world  was  formed  ; from  eternity  to  eternity 
thou  art  God.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Respice. — ^Look  down,  O Lord,  on 
thy  children,  and  grant  that,  while  we  chastise  our- 
selves by  mortifying  the  flesh,  our  minds  may  be  in- 
flamed with  the  love  and  desire  of  thee.  Tliro’. 

LESSON.  Is.  Iv.  6. 11. — In  those  days:  Isaias 
ihe  prophet  spaht^  sayhip ; Seek  ye  tlie  Lord  while 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


132  TCESPAt  IN  THE, 

lie  may  be  found ; call  upon  him  while  he  is  neiu'« 
Let  tlie  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  un- 
just man  his  thoughts,  and  let  him  return  to  the 
Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  on  him,  and  to  our 
God,  for  he  is  bountiful  to  forgive.  For  my 
thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts : nor  your  ways  my 
ways,  saitli  the  Lord.  For  as  the  heavens  are  ex- 
alted above  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  exalted  above 
your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  above  your  thoughts. 
And  as  the  rain  and  the  snow  come  down  from  hea- 
ven, and  return  no  more  thither,  but  soak  the  earth 
and  water  it,  and  make  it  to  spring,  and  give  seed 
to  tlie  sower,  and  bread  to  the  eater  i so  shall  my 
word  be  which  shall  go  forth  from  my  mouth:  it 
shall  not  return  to  me  void,  but  it  shall  do  what- 
soever I please,  and  shall  prosper  in  the  things  for 
which  I sent  it,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty, 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxL — Let  my  prayer  be  directed 
as  incense  in  thy  sight,  O Lord.  V,  The  lifting  up 
my  hands  as  evening  sacrifice. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxi.  10.  17. — At  that  time: 
When  he  was  come  into  Jerusalem,  the  whole  city 
was  moved,  saying:  Who  is  this  ? And  the  people 
said : This  is  Jesus  the  prophet,  From  Nazareth  of 
GalOee.  And  Jesus  went  mto  the  temple  of  God, 
and  cast  out  all  them  that  sold  and  bought  in  the 
temple,  and  overthrew  the  tables  of  the  money 
changers,  and  the  chairs  of  them  that  sold  doves : 
and  he  saith  to  them : It  is  written,  “ My  house  shall 
be  called  the  house  of  prayer ; but  you  have  made 
it  a den  of  thieves.”  And  there  came  to  him  the 
blind  and  the  lame  in  the  temple:  and  he  healed 
them.  And  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  seeing 
the  wonderful  things  that  he  did,  and  the  children 
cryinff  in  the  tempfe,  and  saying : “ Hosanna  to  the 
son  of  David,”  were  moved  with  indignation,  and  said 
to  him  * Hearest  thou  what  these  say  ? And  Je- 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


embek-wedicesday. 


m 

sus  said  to  them : Yea, have  you  never  read:  “ Out 
of  the  mouths  of  in^ts  and  of  suckUngs  thou  hast 
perfected  praise  ? ” And  leaving  them  he  vyent  out 
of  the  city  into  Bethania,  and  remained  there. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  XXX. — ^In  thee,  O Lord,  have  I 
hoped : I have  said : Thou  art  my  God,  the  days  of 
my  life  are  in  thy  hands. 

SECRET,  fie  appeased,  O Lord,  with  the  offer- 
ings vve  have  made,  and  defend  us  from  all  danger. 
Thro’. 

C03IM.  Ps.  iv. — ^When  I called  thou  didst  hear 
me,  the  God  of  my  justice : when  I was  in  distress 
thou  hast  enlai-ged  me : have  mercy  upon  me,  O 
Lord,  and  hear  my  prayer. 

P.  COMM.  QiuBsumus. — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  we  may  one  day  receive  the 
effects  of  that  salvation,  of  which  we  have  received 
the  pledge  in  these  mysteries.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  •^Cendant, — May  our  prayers,  O 
Lord,  ascend  to  thee,  and  deliver  thy  church  from 
all  wickedness.  Tliro’. 


EMBER  WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xxiv. 

REmember,  O Lord,  thy^  bowels  of  compassion : 

and  thy  mercies  that  are  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world : lest  our  enemies  rule  over  us : deliver  us, 
O God  of  Israel,  from  all  our  distress : Ps,  To  thee,  O 
Lord,  have  I lifted  up  my  soul:  in  thee,  O my  God, 
I put  my  trust ; let  me  not  be  ashamed.  V.  Glory. 

After  me  Kyrie  eleison,  is  said: 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  i2.  Stand  up  again. 

I.  COLLECT.  Preces  nostras. — ^Mercifully  hear 
our  prayers,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  and  stretch 
forth  the  right  hand  of  thy  power  against  eveiy  thing 
that  opposeth  us.  Thro’. 

L I4ESSON.  Exod.  xxiv.  15}.  18. — In  those  days  • 
M 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


134  EMB£B<W£DNESDAT. 

The  Lord  said  to  Moses : Come  up  to  me  into  the 
mount,  and  be  there:  and  I will  give  ttiee  tables 
of  stone,  and  the  law,  and  the  commandments 
which  I have  written : tliat  thou  mayest  teach  them. 
Moses  rose  up,  and  his  minister  Josue : and  Moses 
going  up  into  the  mount  of  God,  ^id  to  the  anci- 
ents : Wait  ye  here  till  we  return  to  you,  you  have 
Aaron  and  Hur  with  you:  if  any  question  shall  rise, 
you  shall  refer  it  to  them.  And  when  Moses  was 
gone  up,  a cloud  covered  the  mount.  And  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  dwelt  upon  Sinai,  covering  it 
with  a cloud  six  days,  and  the  seventh  day  he  called 
him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  cloud.  And  the  sight 
of  the  gloiy  of  the  Lord,  was  like  a burning  nre 
upon  the  top  of  the  mount,  in  the  eyes  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel.  And  Moses  entering  into  the  midst 
of  the  cloud,  went  up  into  the  mountain:  and  he 
was  there  foi^  days,  and  forty  nights. 

GRAD.  Ps. — The  troubles  of  my  heart  are  mul- 
tiplied : from  my  necessities  deliver  me  O Lord.  F. 
See  my  abjection  and  my  lal>our ; and  forgive  me  all 
my  sins. 

11.  COLLECT.  Devcflionem, — ^We  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  mercifully  to  regard  the  devotion  of  thy 
people : that  mortifying  their  bodies  by  fasting,  their 
minds  may  be  refreshed  by  good  works.  Thro’. 

II.  LESSON.  3 Kings  xix.  3.  8. — In  those  days 
Elias  came  into  Bersabee  of  Juda,  and  left  his  ser- 
vant there.  And  he  went  forward  one  day’s  journey 
mto  the  desert.  And  when  he  was  there,  and  sat 
under  a juniper  tree,  he  requested  for  his  soul  that 
he  might  die,  and  said : It  is  enough  for  me.  Lord, 
take  away  my  soul:  for  I am  no  better  than  my 
fathers.  And  he  cast  himself  down,  and  slept  in 
the  shadow  of  the  juniper  tree : and  behold  an  an^. 
of  the  Lord  touched  him  and  said  to  him : Arise 
and  eat.  And  he  looked,  and  behold  there  was  at 
his  head  a hearth-cake  and  a vessel  of  water : and 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


EMS£&-W£DN£SDAT. 


139 


ne  ate  and  drank,  and  he  fell  asleep  again.  And  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  came  again  the  second  time  and 
touched  him,  and  said  to  him : Arise,  eat : for  thou 
hast  yet  a great  way  to  go.  And  he  arase,  and  ate 
and  drank,  and  walked  in  the  strength  of  that  food 
forty  days  and  forty  nights,  unto  the  mount  of  God. 

TRACT.  Ps.  xxiv. — From  my  necessities,  deliver 
me  O Lord ; see  my  abjection  and  my  labour  and 
forgive  me  all  my  sins.  V»  To  thee,  O Lord,  have 
I lifted  up  my  soul : in  thee,  O my  God,  do  1,  put 
my  trust,  let  me  not  be  ashamed.  Neither  let  mv 
enemies  laugh  at  me.  F.  For  none  of  them  tliat  wait 
on  thee  sh^  be  confounded : let  all  them  be  con- 
founded, who  do  vain  things. 

GOSPEL.  Matt  xii.  38. — At  that  time:  Some 
of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  answered  him,  saying  • 
Master,  we  would  see  a sign  from  thee.  Who 
answering  said  to  them : An  evil  and  adulterous  ge- 
neration seeketh  for  a si^ ; and  a sign  shall  not  be 
riven  it,  but  the  sign  of  Jonas  tlie  prophet.  For  as 
Jonas  was  in  the  whale’s  belly  three  days  and  three 
nights:  so  shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  in  the  heart  of 
the  earth  three^days  and  three  nights.  The  men  of 
Ninive  shall  rise  in  judgment  with  this  generation, 
and  shall  condemn  it ; l^cause  they  did  penance  at 
the  preaching  of  Jonas.  And  behold  a greater  than 
Jonas  here.  The  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  in 
judgment  with  this  generation,  and  shall  condemn 
it : because  she  came  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  to 
hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  behold  a greater 
than  Solomon  here.  When  an  unclean  spirit  is 
gone  out  of  a man,  he  walketh  through  dry  places, 
seeking  rest,  and  findeth  none.  Then  he  saith: 
[ will  return  into  my  house,  from  whence  I came 
out.  And  coming  he  findeth  it  empty,  swept, 
and  garnished.  Then  he  goeth,  and  taketh  witli 
him  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself 
M2 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


196  THURiDAT  TIT  THE 

and  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there:  and  the  last  state 
of  that  man  is  made  worse  than  the  first  So  shall  it 
be  also  to  this  wicked  generation.  As  he  was  yet 
speaking  to  the  multitudes,  behold  his  mother  and 
his  bretliren  stood  without,  seeking  to  speak  to  him. 
And  one  swd  unto  him.  Behold  thy  mother  and  thy 
brethren  stand  without  seeking  thee.  But  he  an- 
swering him  that  told  him,  said:  Who  is  my  mo- 
ther, £UMi  who  are  my  brethren?  and  stretching 
forth  his  hand  towards  his  disciples,  he  said:  Be- 
hold my  mother  and  my  brethren.  For  whosoever 
shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  that  is  in  heaven ; he 
is  my  brother  and  sister,  and  mother. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxviii. — 1 will  meditate  on  thy 
law,  which  I have  loved  exceedingly ; and  1 will  put 
in  practice  thy  commandments,  which  I have  loved. 

SECRET.  We  offer  thee,  O Loi*d,  this  sacrifice 
of  propitiation,  that  thou  wouldst  mercifully  forgive 
us  our  sins,  and  guide  our  tottering  hearts.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  V. — Hear  my  cry;  attend  to  the 
voice  of  my  prayer,  O my  King  and  my  God, 
to  thee  I will  pray.  O'  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  TVi,  Domine. — ^May  tUb  receiving  of 
this  thy  sacrament,  O Lord,  botli  cleanse  us  from 
our  hidden  sins,  and  deliver  us  from  the  snares  of 
oui*  enemies.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Mentes. — Enlighten,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  our  minds  with  the  light  of  thy 
orightness : that  we  may  discern  what  is  to  be  done, 
atid  be  able  to  do  it.  Thro’. 

THURSDAY 
INTROIT.  Ps.  xcv. 

PRAISE  and  beauty  are  before  him:  holiness 
and  majesty  in  his  sanctuary.  Ps.  Sing  to  the 
Lord  a new  canticle,  sing  to  the  Lord  all  the- 
fturth.  V.  Glojy. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


I.  WEEK  IN  LENT. 


13? 

COLLECT  DevotionerA, — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  mercifully  to  regard  the  devotion  of  thy  peo- 
ple; that  mortifying  their  bodies  by  fasting,  their 
minds  may  be  refre^ed  by  good  works.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Ezekid,  xviii.  1.  9. — In  those  days: 
'fhe  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying:  What 
is  the  meaning  that  you  use  among  you  this  parable 
as  a proverb  in  the  land  of  Israel,  saying : The  fa- 
thei-s  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  teeth  of  the 
children  are  set  on  edge  ? As  I live,  saith  the  Lord 
Grod,  this  parable  shall  be  no  more  to  you  a proverb 
in  Israel.  Behold  all  souls  are  mine : as  the  soul  of 
the  father,  so  also  the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine ; the 
soal  that  sinneth,  the  same  shall  die.  And  if  a man 
be  just,  and  do  judgment  and  justice,  and  hath  not 
eaten  upon  the  mountains,  nor  lifted  up  his  eyes  to 
the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  hath  not  defiled 
his  neighbour’s  wife,  nor  come  near  to  a menstruous 
woman : and  hath  not  wronged  any  man,  but  hath 
restored  the  pledge  to  the  debtor,  hath  taken  no- 
thing away  by  violence : hath  given  his  bread  to  the 
hungry,  and  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a ge- 
ment : hath  not  lent  upon  usury,  nor  taken  any  in- 
crease: hath  withdrawn  his  hand  from  iniquity,^  and 
hath  executed  true  judgment  between  man  and  man : 
hath  walked  in  my  commandments  and  kept  my 
judgments,  to  do  according  to  the  truth : he  is  just, 
he  shall  surely  live,  saith  die  Lord  God. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xvi. — ^Keep  me,  O Lord,  as  the 
apple  of  thy  eye : protect  me  under  the  shadow  of 
thy  wings.  V,  Let  my  judgment  come  forth  from 
thy  countenance : let  thy  eyes  behold  the  things  that 
are  equitable. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xv.  21.  28. — that  time: 
Jesus  went  from  thence,  and  departed  into  the  coasts 
ofTyre  and  Sidon.  And  behold  a woman  of  Canaan 
who  came  out  of  those  coasts,  crying  out,  said  to  him : 
Have  mercy  on  me,  O Lord,  tliou  Son  of  David 
M3 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


EMBER-FRIDAT. 


13B 

mjr  daughter  is  grievously  troubled  by  a BevlL  Who 
answered  her  not  a word.  And  his  disciples  came 
and  besought  him,  saying : Send  her  away,  for  she 
crieth  after  us : and  he  answering,  said : I was  not 
sent  but  to  the  sheep  that  are  lost  of  the  house  of 
Israel.  But  she  came  and  adored  him,  saying: 
Lord,  help  me.  Who  answering  said:  It  is  not 
good  to  take  the  bread  of  the  children,  and  to 
cast  it  to  the  dogs.  But  she  said.  Yea,  Lord;  for 
the  whelps  also  eat  of  the  crumbs  Aat  fall  from  the 
table  of  their  masters.  Then  Jesus  answering,  said 
to  her : O woman,  great  is  thy  faith : be  it  done  to 
thee  as  thou  wik:  and  her  daughter  was  cured 
from  that  hour. 

OFFERT.  Pa.  33. — The  angel  of  the  Lord  shall 
encamp  around  about  them  that  fear  him : and  shall 
deliver  them : taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  sweet 

SECRET.  We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the 
offerings  which  accompdny  this  wholesome  fast, 
may,  through  thy  mercy,  save  us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  vi. — ^The  bread,  which  I will 
give,  is  my  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world. 

P.  COMM.  Tmrum. — By  the  free  grant  of  these 
thy  gifts,  O Lord,  augment  our  temporal,  and  re- 
new our  eternal  helps.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER*  Da  quresurntts. — Grant,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  that  all  Christian  people  may  ac- 
knowledge what  they  profess,  and  love  the  heavenly 
mystery  they  so  often  approach.  Thro’. 

EMBER-FRIDAY. 

INTROIT.  Pjt.xxiv. 

FROM  my  necessities,  deliver  me,  O Lord:  see  my 
abjection  and  my  labour  and  forgive  me,  all  my 
sins.  Pa.  To  thee  O Lord  have  I lifted  up  my  soul : 
in  thee  O my  God,  do  I put  my  trust,  let  me  n yi  be 
ashamed.  V.  Gloiy. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


EHBER-F&fBAT. 


139 


COLLECT.  Be  propitious,  O Lord,  to 

thy  people,  and  mercifully  strengthen  those  thv 
aid,  whom  thou  fillest  wkh  devotion  to  thee.  Thro\ 

LESSON.  Ezekid  xviii.  20.  28. — Thus  saitk  the 
Lord:  The  soul  that  sinueth^  the  same  shall  die: 
the  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  and 
the  fether  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  son:  the 
justice  of  the  just  shall  be  upon  hir^  and  the  wick- 
edness of  the  wicked  shall  be  upra  him.  But  if  the 
wicked  do  penance  for  all  his  sins,  which  he  hath 
committed,  and  keep  all  my  commandments,  and 
do  judgment  and  justice : living  he  shall  Hve,  and 
shall  not  die.  I will  not  remember  idl  his  iniquides 
that  he  hath  dbne:  in  his  ji»tice  which  he  hath 
wrought,  he  ihall  live.  Is  it  my  will  that  a sinner 
should  die,  saith  the  Lord  Go^  and  not  that  he 
should*  be  converted  from  his  ways,  and  live  ? But 
if  the  just  man  turn  himself  away  from  his  justice, 
and  do  iniquity  according  to  all  the  abominations, 
which  the  wicked  man  us^h  to  work,  shall  he  live? 
All  his  justices  which  he  bath  done,  shall  }ot  b<i 
remembered:  in  the  prevarication,  by  which  he 
hath  prevaricated,  and  in  his  sin,  which  he  hath 
committed,  in  them  he  shall  die.  And  you  have 
said : The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  right  Hear  ye, 
therefore,  O house  of  Israel : is  it  my  way  that  is  not 
right,  and  are  not  rather  your  wa3rs  perverse  ? For 
when  the  just  tumeth  himself  away  from  his  justic^ 
and  committeth  iniquity,  he  shall  die  therein:  in 
the  injusdce  that  he  ^th  wrought,  he  shall  dku 
And  when  the  wicked  tumeth  himself  away  from 
his  wickedness,  which  he  hath  wrought,  and  doeth 
judgment  and  justice,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive. 
Bet^use  he  oonsidereth  and  tumeth  away  himself 
from  all  his  iniquites,  which  he  hath  wrought,  he 
shall  surely  live,  and  not  die,  saiih  the  Lord  Mmighiy. 

GRADUAL.  Ps.  Ixxxv. — Save  thy  servant,  O 

/ 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


140 


BMBSE-FRIOAT. 


nay  God,  that  trusteth  in  thee.  F.  Give  ear,  O Lon?, 
to  my  prayer. 

* TRACT.  Pa»  cii. — Dea?  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  v.  1.  15.  — M that  time : 
There  was  a festival  of  the  Jews,  and  Jesus  w^t  up 
to  Jerusalem.  Now  there  is  at  Jerusalem  a ‘pond, 
called  Probatica,  which  in  Hebrew  is  named 
Betbsaida,  having  five  porches.  In  these  lay  a great 
multitude  of  sick,  of  blind,  of  lame,  and  of  vrithered, 
waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water.  And  the  an- 
gel of  the  Lord  descended  at  certain  times  into  the 
pond;  and  the  water  was  moved.  And  he  dial 
went  down  first  into  the  pond  after  the  motion  of 
the  water,  was  made  whole  of  whatsbever  infirmity 
he  lay  under.  And  there  was  a certain  man  there, 
that  had  been  eight  and  thirty  years  under  his  infir- 
mity. Him  when  Jesus  had  seen  lying,  and* knew 
that  he  had  been  now  a long  time,  he  saith  to  him : 
Wilt  thou  be  made  whole?  The  inGrm  man  an- 
swered him : Sir,  I have  no  man,  when  the  water  is 
troubled,  to.  put  me  into  the  pond.  For  whilst  I 
am  coming,  another  goeth  down  before  me.  Jesus 
saith  to  him:  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walki 
And  immediately  the  man  was  made  whole : and  he 
took  up  his  bed  and  walked.  And  it  was  the  Sab- 
bath that  day.  The  Jews  therefore  said  to  him  that 
was  cured:  It  is  the  Sabbath,  it  is  not  lawful  for 
thee  to  take  up  thy  bed.  He  answered  them : He 
that  made  me  whole,  he  said  to  me : Take  up  thy 
bed,  and  walk.  They  asked  him  therefore:  Who 
is  that  man  that  said  to  thee : Talie  up  thy  bed,  and 
walk?  But  he  that  was  liealed,  knew  not  who  it 
was.  For  Jesus  went  aside  from  the  multitude 
standing  in  the  place.  Afterwards  Jesus  findeth 
him  in  the  temple,  and  saith  to  him : Behold  thou  art 
made  whole:  sin  no  more,  lest  some  worse  thing 
Imppen  to  thee.  The  man  went  his  w^y,  and  tola 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


EMBER-SATDRDAT. 


141 


• 

die  Jews  that  it  was  Jesus  that  had  made  him  whole. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cii. — Bless  the  Lord,  O my  soul, 
and  never  forget  all  he  hath  done  for  thee : and  thy 
youth  shall  be  renewed  like  the  eagle’s. 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
the  oderings  of  our  homage,  and  mercifully  sanctify 
thy  own  gilte.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  vi. — Let  all  my  enemies  be  ashamed 
and  very  much  troubled^  let  them  be  tunied  back, 
and  be  ashamed  very  speedily. 

P.  COMM.  Per  Kvjus. — ^May  the  efficacy  of  this 
sacrament,  O Lord,  cleanse  us  from  our  sins,  and 
obtain  for  us  the  accomplishment  of  our  just  desires, 
lliro’.  ^ 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  ExavdL  — Graciously  hear  us,  O 
inerciful  God,  and  manifest  the  light  of  tliy  grace  to 
our  souls.  Thro’. 


EMBER-SATURDAY 
INTROIT.  Ps.  IxxxviL 

Let  my  prayer  come  in  before  thee,  incline  thy 
ear  O Lord,  to  my  petition.  Ps.  O Lord  tlie 
God  of  my  salvation  I have  cried  in  the  day,  and  in 
♦he  night  before  thee.  V.  Glory. 

Immediately  after  Kyrie  eleison,  ^c.  %s  said : 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again 
I.  COLLECT.  Popidum  tuum. — Mercifully,  O 
Lord,  look  down  on  thy  people,  and  in  thy  cle- 
mency turn  away  from  them  die  scourges  of  thy 
wrath.  Thro’. 

1.  LESSON.  Devi.  xxvL  12. — In  those  days: 
Moses  spoke  to  the  people^  saying : When  thou  hast 
made  an  end  of  tithing  all  thy  fruits,  in  the  third 
year  of  tithes  thou  shall  give  it  to  the  Levite,  and  to 
the  sU'anger,  and  to  the  fatlierless,  and  to  the  wi- 
dow, that  they  may  eat  within  diy  gates,  and  be 
dlled:  mid  thou  shait  speak  thus  in  the  siglit  of  the 


y Google 


m 


KMBS&-SATU11DAT. 


Lord  thy  God : 1 have  taken  that  whiclf  was  sosioti-* 
tied  out  of  my  house,  and  1 have  given  it  to  the  Le- 
vite  and  to  tlie  stranger,  and  to  the  fatherless  and  to 
the  widow,  as  thou  hast  commanded  me:  1 have 
not  transgressed  thy  commandments,  nor  forgotten 
thy  precejits.  I have  not  eat  of  them  in  my 
mourning,  nor  separated  them  for  any  uncleanness, 
nor  spent  any  thing  of  them  in  funerals.  1 have 
obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  my  God,  and  have 
done  all  things  as  thou  hast  commanded  me.  Look 
fix>in  thy  sanctuary,  and  thy  high  habitation  of  hea 
ven,  and  bless  thy  people  Israel,  and  the  land  which 
thou  host  given  us,  os  thou  didst  swear  to  our  fa- 
thers ; a land  flowing  with  milk  and* honey.  This 
day  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  commanded  thee  to  do 
these  commandments  and  Judgments : and  to  keep 
and  fulfil  them  with  all  thy  lieart,  and  >vith  all  tliy 
soul.  Thou  hast  chosen  the  Lord  this  day  to  lie 
thy  God,  and  to  walk  in  his  ways  and  keep  his  cere-  • 
monies,  and  precepts  and  judgments,  and  obey  his 
command.  And  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  this 
day  to  be  bis  peculiar  people,  as  he  hath  spoken  to 
lliee,  and  to  keep  all  his  commandments : And  to 
make  thee  higher  than  all  nations  which  he  hath 
created,  to  his  own  praise,  and  name,  and  glorj': 
that  thou  mayest  be  a holy  people  of  the  Lord  thy 
God,  as  he  hath  spoken. 

^ GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxviii. — ^Forgive  us,  O Lord,  our  of^ 
fences,  lest  the  Gentiles  say:  Where  is  now  tlieir 
God?  V,  Help  us,  O God,  our  Saviour,  and  for 
the  glory  of  thy  name  deliver  us,  O Lord. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

II.  COLLECT.  Protector,  — Look  on  us,  O 
God,  our  protector,  that  we,  who  labour  under  the 
weight  of  our  own  evils,  may  be  rescued  by  thy 
mercy  and  serve  thee  with  a free  mind.  Tliro . 

II.  LESSON.Denf.  xi.  22, 25. — In  those  days : Mosea 
said  to  the  children  of  Israel : If  you  keep  the  cont- 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


EMBERr  S ATURDA  f. 


143 


mandments  which  I command  you,  and  do  them,  to 
lOve  the  Lord  your  God,  and  walk  in  his  ways, 
cleaving  unto  him,  the  Lord  will  destroy  all  tliese 
nations  before  your  face,  and  you  shall  possess  them 
which  are  greater  and  stronger  than  you.  Every 
place,  that  your  foot  shall  tread  upon,  shall  he 
yours  From  the  desert,  and  from  Libanus,  fiom 
the  great  river  Euphrates  unto  the  western  sea  shall 
be  your  bordeiB,  none  shall  stand  agamst  you ; the 
Lord  your  God  shall  lay  the  dread  and  fear  of  you 
upon  all  the  land  that  you  shall  tread  upon,  as  he 
hath  spoken  to  you. 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxxiii. — Behold  O God  our  protector, 
and  look  down  upon  thy  servants.  V,  Lord  God 
of  armies,  hear  die  prayers  of  thy  servants. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

III.  COLLECT.  Adesto, — Give  ear  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  to  our  prayers ; that,  through  the  as- 
sistance of  thy  jgrace,  we  may  be  humble  m prospe- 
rity, and  without  fear  in  adversity.  Thro’. 

lU.  LESSON,  2 Machab,  i.  2a  27,— /a  thMt 
dojfs:  All  the  priests  made  prayer,  while  the  sa- 
crifice was  consuming,  Jonathan  beginning,  and  the 
rest  answering.  And  the  prayer  of  Nehemias  was 
after  this  manner:  ‘‘O  Lord  God,  creator  of  all 
things,  dreadful,  and  strong,  just,  and  merciful, 
who  alone  art  the  good  king.  Who  alone  art  gra- 
cious, who  alone  art  just,  and  almighty,  and  eter- 
nal, who  deliverest  Israel  fiom  all  evil,  who  didst 
choose  the  fathers,  and  didst  sanctify  them:  re- 
ceive the  sacrifice  for  all  thy  people  Israel,  and  pre- 
serve thy  own  portion,  and  sanctity  it.  Gather  to- 
gether our  scattered  people,  deliver  them  that  are 
slaves  to  the  Gentiles,  and  look  upon  them  that  are 
despised  and  abhoiTed : that  the  Gentiles  may  know 
that  thou  art  our  God.” 

GRAD*  Pa,  Ixxxix. — ^Tum  to  us,  O Lord,  a 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


S44 


EMBER'SATUKXiAt. 


little,  ajid  be  reconciled  with  thy  seiTants,  K O 
Lord  thou  hast  been  our  refuge  uoin  generation  to 
generation. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

rV.  COLLECT.  Preces. — ^Mercifully  hear,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Lord,  the  {Buyers  of  thy  peopte*:  that 
we,  wno  are  justly  afflict^  for  our  sins,  may  merci- 
fully be  delivered  for  the  glory  of  thy  name.  Thro’. 

IV.  LESSON.  JSccles.  xxxvi.  1. 10. — Have  mer- 
cy, upon  us,  O God  of  all,  and  behold  us,  and  shew 
us  the  light  of  thy  mercies:  and  send  thy  fear  upon 
the  nations  that  have  not  sought  after  thee;  that 
they  may  know  that  there  is  no  God  besides  thee, 
and  that  they  may  shew  forth  thy  wonders.  Lift  up 
thy  hand  over  the  strang^  nations,  that  they  may  see 
thy  power.  For  as  thou  hast  been  sanctifted  in  us 
in  their  sight,  so  tliou  shall  be  magnified  among  tliem 
in  our  presence ; that  they  may  know  thee,  as  we 
also  have  known  thee,  that  there  is  no  God  beside 
thee,  O Lord.  Renew  thy  signs,  and  work  new 
miracles.  Glorify  thy  hand,  and  thy  right  arm. 
Raise  up  indignation,  and  pour  out  wrath.  Take 
away  the  adversary,  and  erq^h  the  enemy.  Hasten 
the  time,  and  remember  the  end;  that  they  may 
declare  thy  wonderful  works,  O Lord  cmr  God. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxL — Let  my  prayer  be  directed  as 
incense  in  thy  sight,  O Lord.  V.  The  lifting  up  my 
hands  as*evening  sacrifice. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

V.  COLLECT.  •Actiones. — Prevent,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  our  actions  by  tliy  holy  inspirations, 
and  carry  them  on  by  thy  gracious  assistance : that 
every  prayer  and  work  of  ours  may  always  begin 
from  thee,  and  by  thee  be  happily  ended. 

V.  Lesson,  with  the  Canticle  and  VI.  Collect,  as 
pp.  66  and  67. 

Here  are  said  the  II.  and  III.  Collects,  directed  in 
the  Mass  on  Ash-Wednesday  p.  116. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


/ 

EMBER-SATURDAT.  145 

EPISTLE.  1 Thtss.  V.  14.  23. — Brethren:  We 
^jeseech  you  rebuke  the  unquiet,  comfort  the  feeble- 
minded, support  the  weak,  be  patient  towards  all 
men.  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  to  any 
man:  but  ever  follow  that  which  is  good  towards 
each  other,  and  towards  all  men.  Always  rejoice. 
Pray  without  ceasing.  In  all  things  give  thanks: 
for  this  is  tlie  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  concerning 
you  all.  Extinguish  not  the  spirit.  .Dem)ise  not 
prophecies.  But  prove  all  things:  hold  fast  that 
which  is  good.  From  all  appearance  of  evil  refrain 
yourselves.  And  may  the  God  of  peace  himself 
sanctify  you  in  all  things:  that  your  whole  spirit, 
and  soul,  and  body  may  be  preserved  blameless  in 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Christ  Jesus. 

TRACT.  Ps,  cxvi. — Praise  the  Lord  all  ye  na- 
tions : praise  him  all  ye  people.  V,  For  his  mercy 
is  confirmed  upon  us,  and  the  truth  of  the  Lord 
remaineth  for  ever. 

GOSPEL.  Malt,  xvii.  As  in  the  Mass  of  to-mor- 
row, p.  147. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixxxvii. — O Lord  the  God  of  my 
salvation ; I have  cried  in  the  day,  and  in  the  night 
let  ray  prayer  come  in  before  thee,  O Lord. 

SECRET.  Sanctify,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
our  fast  by  this  holy  sacrifice:  that  what  we  out- 
wardly profess  by  the  observance  of  this  fast,  may 
be  inwardly  effected  in  us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  vii.  ••  O Lord  my  God  in  thee, 
have  I put  my  trust,  save  me  from  all  them  that 
persecute  me,  and  deliver  me. 

P.  COMM.  Sanctyicationihus,  — May  this  holy 
sacrifice,  O Lord,  cure  us  of  all  our  suis,  and  become 
an  eternal  remedy  to  us.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAY  ER.  Fideles, — May  thy  much  desired  bles- 
sing, O God,  give  strength  to  thy  people : may  it  hia- 

' ed  by  Google 


146 


II.  SUNDAl  IN  UEINT. 


tier  them  from  ever  swerving  from  thy  will,  and 
make  tliem  always  enjoy  thy  blessing.  Thro\ 

II.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xxiv. 

T>  Einember,  O Lord,  Tf  Eminiscere  miseratio- 
XV  thy  bowels  of  com-  JU/nvm  tuarum^  Domine^ 
passion ; and  thy  mercies  et  misericordice  txuB,  quae 
that  are  from  the  begin-  a stuculo  sunt.  Ac  un- 
ning^of  the  world.  Let  ^uam  dominentur  nohts 
not  our  enemies  ever  rule  inimici  nostri : libera  nos, 
over  us : deliver  us,  O Gk)d  Deus  Israel,  ex  omnibus 
of  Israel,  from  all  our  dis-  angusHis  nostris. 
tress.  Ps.  To  thee,  O Ps.  Ad  te.  Domine,  le- 
Lord,  have  I lifted  up  my  vavi  animam  meam : Deus 
soul,  in  thee,  O my  Grod,  I mens  in  ie  confido,  non 
put  my  trust ; let  me  not  erubescam. 
be  ashamed.  V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui. — O God,  who  seest  how 
destitute  we  are  of  all  strength,  preserve  us  both 
within  and  without,  that  our  bodies  may  be  free 
from  all  adversity,  and  our  souls  purifred  irom^aU 
evil  thoughts.  . Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Thess.  iv.  1.  7.  '— Brethren:  We 
pray  and  beseech  you  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  as  you 
have  received  of  us,  how  you  ought  to  walk  and  to 
please  God,  so  also  you  would  walk,  that  you  may 
abound  the  more.  For  you  know  what  precepts 
I have  given  to  you  by  the  Lord  Jesus.  For  tnis 
is  the  wl  of  God,  your  sanctification:  that  you 
should  abstain  from  fornication,  that  every  one  of 
you  should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  sancti 
fication  and  honour:  not  in  the  passion  of  lust,  like 
the  Gentiles  tliat  know  not  God : and  that  no  man 
over-reach,  nor  circumvent  his  brother  in  busiuees 
because  the  Lord  is  the  avenger  of  all  these  things, 
as  we  have  told  you  before,  and  have  testified.  For 

ed  by  Google 


II.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT.  147 

God  hath  not  called  us,  unto  imcleanness,  but  unto 
sanctification. 

GRAD.  Ps,  XXV. — The  distress  of  my  soul  is  in- 
creased, deliver  me,  O Lord,  from  the  evils  tliat 
surround  me.  V,  See,  O Lord,  to  what  I am  re- 
duced : see  what  I suffer,  and  forgive  me  all  my  sins, 

TRACT.  Ps.  cv. — Conpiemini  Domino  quoriiam 
bornis : quoniam  in  scBculum  misericordia  ^us.  Give 
glory  to  the  Lord  for  he  is  good : for  his  mercy  eu- 
dureth  for  ever.  V.  Who  shall  declare  the  powers 
of  the  Lord  7 who  shall  set  forth  all  his  praises  7 V. 
Blessed  ai*e  they  that  keep  judgment  ana  do  justice 
at  all  times.  F.  Remember  us,  O Lord,  in  favour 
of  thy  people : visit  us  with  tliy  salvation. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xvii.  1.  9.  — M that  time : 
Jesus  taketh  unto  him  Peter  and  James,  and  John 
his  brother,  lind  bringeth  tliem  up  into  a high  moun- 
tain apart:  and  he  was  transfigured  before  them. 
And  his  face  did  shine  as  the  sun : and  his  garments 
became  white  as  snow.  And  behold  there  appeai*ed 
to  them  Moses  and  Elias  talking  with  him.  Then 
Peter  answei*ing,  said  to  Jesus : Lord,  it  is  good  for 
us  to  be  here : if  thou  wilt,  let  us  make  here  three 
tabernacle^  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and 
one  for  Elias.  And  as  he  was  yet  sj-eakiiig,  behold 
a bright  cloud  overshadowed  them.  And  lo  a voice 
out  of  the  cloud,  saying : This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  1 am  weU  pleased : hear  ye  him.  And  the 
disciples  hearing,  fell  upon  tlieir  face,  and  were  very 
much  afraid.  And  Jesus  came  and  touched  them : 
and  said  to  them:  Arise,  and  be  not  afraid.  And 
when  th^  lifted  up  their  eyes,  they  saw  no  one, 
but  only  Jesus.  And  as  they  came  down  from  the 
mountain,  Jesus  charged  tliem,  saying:  Tell  the 
vision  to  no  man,  till  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  risen 
from  the  dead.  Ckeoo. 

N2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


148 


MONDAl  IN  THE 


OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviiL — will  meditate  on  UiT 
jaw,  which  I have  loved  exceedingly:  and  I will 
pnictise  th^conimandments,  which  1 have  loved. 

SECRITT.  Look  down,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
tlice,  on  tliis  our  sacrifice,  that  it  may  increase  our 
devotion,  and  procure  our  salvation.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Ps,  V.  Undei-stand  iny  cry : hearken  to  the 
voice  of  my  prayer,  O my  King  and  my  God,  for 
to  thee  will  I pray,  O Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Supplices, — Grant  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  those,  whom 
lliou  hast  refreshed  with  thy  sacraments,  may  wor- 
tliily  serve  thee  in  tlie  conduct  of  theii*  lives.  Thro’. 

MONDAY. 

INTROIT.  P^.xxv. 

Deliver  me,  O Lord,  and  take  pity  on  me: 

for  my  foot  hath  stood  in  the  right  path:  in 
the  assemblies  will  I bless  the  Lord.  Ps,  Be  thou,  O 
Lord,  my  judge,  tor  I have  walked  in  my  inno- 
cency ; and  trusting  in  thee,  I shaU  not  be  weakened. 
V.  Gloiy. 

COLLECT.  Pr<Esta, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  thy  people  who  mortify 
themselves  by  abstinence  fix)m  meat,  may  likewise 
fast  from  sin,  and  follow  righteousness.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  Dan,  ix.  15  19. — In  those  days: 
Daniel  prayed  t%  the  Lord,  saying:  O Lord  onr 
God,  who  hast  brought  forth  thy  pr  ople  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt  with  a strong  hand  and  hast  made 
thee  a name  as  at  this  day : we  have  sinned,  we  have 
committed  iniquity,  O Lord,  against  all  thy  justice : 
let  thy  wfath  and  thy  indignation  be  turned  away  I 
beseech  thee,  from  thy  city  Jerusalem,  and  from  thy 
holy  mountain.  For  by  reason  of  our  sins,  and  the 
iniquities  of  our  fathers,  Jerusalem  and  thy  people 
are  a reproach  to  all  that  are  round  about  us.  Now 
therefore,  O oiur  God,  hear  tlie  sup]  Ucation  of  thy 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


II.  WEEK  OP  LENT. 


149 


eervantyand  his  flyers:  and  shew  thy  face  upon 
thy  sanctuary  which  is  desolate,  for  thy  own  sake. 
Incline,  O my  God,  thy  ear,  and  hear:  open  thy 
eyes,  and  see  our  desolation,  and  the  city  upon 
which  thy  name  is  called:  for  it  is  not  for  our  justi- 
fications Uiat  we  present  our  prayers  before  thy  face, 
but  for  the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mercies.  O 
Lord  hear:  O Lord,  be  appeased:  hearken  and  do : 
delay  not  for  thy  own  sake,  O my  God : because  thy 
name  is  invocated  upon  thy  city,  and  upon  thy  peo- 
ple, O Lord  our  God, 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixix. — ^Be  thou  my  helper  and  my  de- 
liverer: O Lord,  delay  not.  F.  Let  my  enemies 
v/lio  seek  my  soul,  be  put  to  confusion  dnd  shame. 

* TRACT.  ciL — ^Deal  not,».  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  viii.  21.  that  time: 

/esus  said  to  the  multitude  of  the  Jews : I go  and 
you  shall  seek  me,  and  you  shall  die  in  your  sin. 
Whither  I go,  you  cannot  come.  The  Jews  there- 
fore said:  Will  he  kill  himself,  because  he  said: 
Whither  I go,  you  cannot  come  ? And  he  said  to 
them:  You  are  from  beneath,  I am  from  above. 
You  are  of  this  world,  I am  not  of  this  world. 
The  ofore  I say  to  you,  that  you  shall  die  in  your 
sins.  For  if  you  believe  not  that  I am  he,  you  shall 
die  in  your  sin.  They  said  therefore  to  him : Who 
art  thou?  Jesus  said  to  them:  The  beginning,  who 
also  speak  unto  you.  Many  things  1 have  to  speak, 
and  to  judge  of  you.  But  he  that  sent  me  is  true : 
and  the  things  I have  heard  of  him,  the  same  I speak 
in  the  world.  Now  they  understood  not  that  he  call- 
ed God  his  Father.  Jesus  therefore  said  to  them : 
When  you  shall  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of  Man, 
then  shall  you  know  that  I api  he,  and  that  I <lo  no- 
thing of  myself,  but  as  the  Father  has  taught  me, 
these  things  I speak.  And  he  that  sent  me  is  with 
me,  and  he  hath  not  left  me  alone : for  I do  always 
the  things  that  please  him. 

N3 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


150 


TUESDAY  IN  THB 


OFFERT.  P«.  XV.--1  will  bless  the  Lord,  who 
hath  given  me  understanding  I set  the  Lord  always 
in  my  sight : for  he  is  at  my  right  baud,  that  1 be 
not  moved. 

SECRET.  May  this  sacrifice  of  propitiation  and 
praise  make  us,  O Lord,  worthy  of  thy  protection. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  viii. — O Lord  our  (Jod,  how  ad- 
mirable is  thy  name  in  the  v^Jiole  earth ! 

P.  COMM.  H(bc  no8. — ^May  this  communion,  O 
Lord,  cleanse  us  from  sin ; and  make  us  partakers  of 
the  heavenly  remedy.  Thro*. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Adeaio. — Hear  our  prayers  and  en- 
treaties, O Almighty  God ; and  grant  that  those,  to 
whom  thou  givest  hopes  of  thy  mercy,  may  expe- 
rience the  effects  of  tliy  usual  clemency.  Thro*. 

TUESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.xxvi. 

My  heart  nath  said  to  thee,  my  face  hath  sought 
thee : thy  face  O Lord  will  I still  seek : turn 
not  away  thy  face  from  me.  Pa.  The  Lord  is  my 
light  and  my  salvation;  whom  shall  I fear.?  V. 
(^ory, 

COLLECT.  PerJ^. — Grant  us,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  thy  assistance,  whereby  we  may  go 
through  the  ol^rvance  of  this  holy  fast,  that  what 
we  have  undertaken  by  thy  appointment,  we  may 
accomplish  by  thy  grace.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  3 Kings  xvii.  8.  16. — In  those  tiays: 
The  word  of  the  Lord  cmne  to  Elias  the  The^ite, 
saying:  Arise,  and  go  to  Sarephta  a city  of  the 
Sidonians,  and  dwell  there : for  I have  commanded 
a widow  woman  there  to  feed  thee.  He  arose,  and 
went  to  Sarephta.  And  when  he  was  come  to  the 
gate  of  the  city,  he  saw  the  widow  woman  gather 
lug  sticks,  and  he  »-alle<l  her,  and  said  to  her 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


II.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


151 


Give  me  a little  water  in  a ve^l,  that  1 may  drink. 
And  when  she  was  going  to  fetch  it,  he  called  after 
her,  saying : Bring  me,  also,  I beseech  thee,  a mor- 
sel of  bre^  in  thy  hand.  And  she  answered : As 
the  Lord  thy  God  liveth,  1 have  no  bread,  but  only 
a handful  of  meal  in  a po^  and  a little  oil  in  a 
cruse:  behold  1 am  gathering  two  sticks,  that  1 
may  go  in  and  dress  it  for  me  and  my  son  that  we 
may  eat  it,  and  die,  And  Elias  said  to  her : Fear 
not,  but  go,  and  do  as  thou  hast  said:  but  first 
make  for  me  of  the  same  meal  a little  hearth  cake, 
and  bring  it  to  me : and  after  make  for  thyself  and 
thy  son.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  the  God  of  Israel ; 
The  pot  of  meal  shall  not  waste,  nor  the  cruso 
of  oil  be  diminished,  until  the  day  wherein  the 
Lord  will  give  rain  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  She 
went,  and  did  according  to  the  word  of  Elias : and 
he  ate,  and  she,  and  her  house : and  from  that  day 
the  pot  of  meal  wasted  no^  and  the  cruse  of  oil 
was  not  diminished,  according  to  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  which  he  spoke  in  the  hand  of  Elias. 

GRAD.  P8,  liv.— Cast  thy  care  upon  the  Lord, 
and  he  shall  sustain  thee.  V,  When  I cried  out  to 
the  Lord,  he  heard  my  voice  against  those  who  were 
coming  upon  me. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxiii.  1.  12.  — At  that  time: 
Jesus  spoke  to  the  multitudes  and  to  his  disciples, 
saying : the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees  have  sitten 
on  the  chair  of  Moses.  All  things  tlierefore  whatsoever 
they  shall  say  to  you,  observe  and  do : but  accord- 
ing to  their  works  do  ye  not : for  they  say,  and  do  not 
For  they  bind  heavy  and  insupportable  burdens: 
and  lay  them  on  men’s  shoulders : but  w’ith  a finger 
of  their  own  they  will  not  move  them.  And  all 
these  works  they  do  to  be  seen  of  men.  For  they 
make  their  phylacteries  broad  and  enlarge  their 
fringes.  And  they  love  the 'first  places  at  feasts, 
and  the  first  chairs  in  the  synagogues,  and  salutations 
in  the  market-place,  and  to  be  called  by  men 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


152  WEDinSSDAT  IN  THE 

Ralibi.  But  be  not  you  called  Rabbi.  For  one  is 
your  master  and  all  you  are  brethren.  And  call 
none  your  father  upon  earth : for  one  is  your  father 
who  is  in  heaven.  Neither  be  ye  called  masters: 
for  one  is  your  master,  Christ.  He  that  is  the 
greatest  among  you  shall  be  your  servant.  And 
whosoever  shSl  exalt  himself,  shall  be  humbled: 
and  he  that  shall  humble  himself,  shall  be  exalted. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  1. — Have  mercy  on  me,  O Lord: 
according  to  thy  great  mercy ; O Lord,  blot  out  my 
iniquity. 

SECRET.  Mercifully  sanctify  us,  O Lord,  by 
these  mysteries:  and  let  them  cleanse  us  fmm  all 
ecirthly  vice,  and  bring  us  to  the  enjoyment  of  thy 
heavenly  gifts.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  ix. — I will  relate  all  thy  wonders,- — 
1 will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee,  I will  sing  praise 
to  thy  name,  O thou  Most  High. 

P.  COMM.  Ut  sacris, — Make  us  always,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Lord,  obedient  to  thy  commandments, 
that  we  may  be  worthy  of  thy  gifts,  which  we  have 
partaken  of.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER,  Propitiare, — Be  appeased,  O Lord, 
by  our  prayers,  and  heal  the  infirmities  of  oiu*  souls ; 
that  our  sins  being  forgiven,  we  may  ever  rejoice  in 
thy  blessings.  Thro’. 

WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  xxxviii. 

Forsake  me  not,  O Lord  my  God:  do  not  thou 
depart  from  me : attend  unto  my  help  O Lord,  the 
God  of  my  salvation.  Ps,  Rebuke  me  not,  O Lord, 
in  thy  indignation;  nor  chastise  me  in  thy  wrath. 
V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Popvlum  tuum, — ^Mercifully  reganl 
thy  people,  O Lora,  we  beseech  thee ; and  grant 
that  those  whom  thou  commandest  to  abstain  from 
flesh,  may  likewise  cease  fi-om  all  sin.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


II.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


153 


LESSON.  Esther  xiii.  8.  17. — In  those  days : 
Maidochai  besought  the  Lord,  remembering  all  his 
works,  and  said:  O Lord,  Lord,  almighty  King, 
for  all  things  are  in  thy  power,  and  there  is  none 
that  can  resist  thy  will,  if  thou  determine  to  save 
Israel.  Thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  aU 
things  that  are  under  the  cope  of  heaven.  Thou 
art  Lord  of  all,  and  there  is  none  that  can  resist  thy 
majesty.  Thou  knowest  all  things,  and  thou  know- 
est  that  it  was  not  out  of  pride  and  contempt,  or  any 
desire  of  glory,  that  I refused  to  worship  the 
proud  Aman,  (for  I would  willingly  and  readily 
for  the  salvation  of  Israel  hdve  kissed  even  the  steps 
of  his  feet :)  but  I feared  lest  I should  transfer  the 
honour  of  my  God  to  a man,  and  lest  1 should 
adore  any  one  except  my  God.  And  now,  O Lord, 
0 King,  O God  of  Abraham,  have  mercy  on  thy 
people,  because  our  enemies  resolve  to  destroy  us, 
and  extinguish  thy  inheritance.  Despise  not  thy 
portion  which  thou  hast  redeemed  for  tliyself  out  of 
Egypt.  Hear  my  supplication,  and  be  merciful  to 
thy  lot  and  inheritance,  and  turn  our  mourning  into 
joy,  that  we  may  live  and  praise  thy  name,  O Lord, 
and  shut  not  the  mouths  of  them  that  sing  to  thee, 
0 Lord  our  God. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxvii. — Save  O Lord  thy  people, 
and  bless  thy  inheritance.  To  thee  will  I cry,  O 
Lord ; O my  God  be  not  tliou  silent  to  me,  lest  I 
become  like  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit. 

* TRACT.— Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xx.  17.  28.  — At  that  time: 
Jesus  going  up  to  Jerusalem,  took  the  twelve  disci- 
ples apart,  and  said  to  them : Behold  we  go  up  to 
Jerusalem,  and  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  betrayed 
to  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes,  and  they  shall 
condemn  him  to  death,  and  shall  deliver  him  to 
the  Gentilii^  to  be  mocked,  and  to  'le  scourged,  and 
to  be  crucified,  and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


154 


WEDNESDAY  IN  THE 


again.  [*  Then  came  to  him  the  motner  of  the  sons 
of  Zebedee  with  her  sons,  adoring  and  asking  some- 
thing of  him.  Who  said  to  her : What  wilt  thou  r 
She  saith  to  him:  Say  that  these  my  two  sons 
may  sit,  the  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other 
on  thy  left,  in  thy  kingdom.  And  Jesus  answering, 
and  said:  You  know  not  what  you  ask.  Can  you 
drink  the  chalice  that  I shall  drmk  ? They  say  to 
him  : We  can.  He  saith  to  them : Of  my  chalice 
indeed  you  shall  drink : but  to  sit  on  my  right  hand 
or  left  hand,  is  not  mine  to  give  to  you,  but  to  them 
for  whom  it  is-  prepared  by  my  Father.f]  And  the 
ten  hearing  it  were  moVed  with  indignation  against 
the  two  brethren.  But  Jesus  called  them  to  him, 
and  said:  You  know  that  the  princes  of  the  Gentile, 
lord  it  over  them:  and  they  that  are  the  greater, 
exercise  power  upon  them.  It  shall  not  be  so  among 
you,  but  whosoever  will  be  the  greater  among  you, 
let  him  be  your  minister : and  he  that  will  be  first 
among  you,  shall  be  your  servant.  Even  as  the  Son 
of  Man  is  not  come  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a redemption  for  many. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xxiv. — To  thee,  O Lord,  have  1 
lifted  up  my  soul:  in  thee,  O my  God,  I put  my 
trust,  let  me  not  be  ashamed : neither  let  my  enemies 
laugh  at  me;  for  none  of  them  tljat  wait  on  thee 
shall  be  confounded. 

SECRET.  Mercifully  look  down,  O Lord,  on 
the  offerings  we  make  thee,  and  by  the  intercourse 
of  these  sacred  mysteries,  release  us  from  tlie  bonds 
of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  X. — ^The  Lord  is  just  and  hath 
loved  justice  ; his  countenance  beholdeth  righteous- 
ness. 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis. — ^We  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 

* Here  begins  the  Gospel  of  St.  James,  25tli  July,  and 
closes  at  t. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


n.  WKEK  OF  LKNT.  155 

fhat  the  recehrmg  diis  sacrament  may  forward  our 
eternal  redemption.  Thro’. 

TiCt  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 
PRAYERI  Deus  innoeenti^ — O God,  the  restorer 
and  lover  of  innocence,  draw  to  thysetf  the  hearts 
• of  thy  servants,  that  being  infiam^  by  tliy  holy 
Spirit,  they  may  be  constant  in  faith,  and  zealous  in 
good  work&  Thro’. 

THURSDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  Ixix. 

OGod,  come  to  my  assistance ; O Lord,  make 
baste  to  help  me : let  my  enemies  be  confound- 
ed and  ashamed  that  seek  my  soul.  Ps,  Let  them  he 
turned  backwards,  and  blush  forsliame  that  desire 
evils  to  me.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  PrtBstou — Grant  us,  we  beseech  thee, 
0 Lord,  the  assistance  of  thy  grace : that  w^hilat  we 
duly  apply  ourselves  to  fasting  and  prayer,  we  may 
be  delivered  from  all  enemies  both  of  soul  and  bodv. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Jer.  xvii.  5. 10. — ^Thus  saith  the  Lord  • 
Cursed  be  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh 
flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departeth  fix)m  the 
Lord.  For  he  shall  be  like  tamarick  in  tlie  desert, 
and  he  shall  not  see  when  good  shall  come : but 
he  shall  dwell  in  dr3mess  in  the  desert,  in  a salt  land 
juid  not  inhabited.  Blessed  be  the  man  that  trusteth 
in  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  shall  be  his  confidence. 
And  he  shaU  be  as  a tree  that  is  planted  by  tlie 
waters,  and  spreadeth  out  its  roots  towards  mois- 
ture : and  it  shall  not  fear  when  the  heat  cometh 
And  the  leaf  thereof  shall  be  green,  and  in  the  time 
of  drought  it  shall  not  be  solicitous,  neitlier  shall 
it  cease  at  any  time  to  bring  forth  fhiit  The  heart 
» perverse  a&)ve  all  things,  and  unsearchable,  whc 
can  know  it?  I am  the  Lord  that  search  the  heart, 
tnd  prove  the  reins;  who  give  to  every  one  accord- 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


156 


THURSDAY  IN  THE 


ing  to  his  way,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  hw 
devices,  saith  the  Lord  Almifrhiy, 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxviii. — Forgive  us,  O Lord,  cur 
offences,  lest  the  Ghintiles  say : Where  is  now  their 
God  ? Help  us,  O God  our  Saviour,  and  for  the 
glory  of  thy  name,  O Lord,  deliver  us. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xvi.  19.  31. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  said  to  the  Pharisees : There  was  a certain  rich 
man,  who  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen : and 
feasted  sumptuously  every  day.  And  there  was  a 
certain  beggar  named  Lazarus,  who  lay  at  his  gate, 
full  of  sores,  desiring  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs 
that  fell  from  the  rich  man’s  table,  and  no  one  did 
give  him,  moreover  the  dogs  canje  and  licked  his 
sores.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the  beggar  died,  and 
was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham’s  bosom. 
And  the  ri’h  man  also  died,  and  he  was  buried  in 
hell.  And  lifting  up  his  eyes,  J^hen  he  was  in  tor- 
ments, he  saw  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in  his 
bosom:  And  he  cried,  and  said:  Father  Abraham, 
have  mercy  on  me,  and  send  Lazarus  that  he  may 
dip  the  tip 'of  his  finger  in  water,  to  cool  my  tongue, 
for  1 am  tormented  in  this  flame.  And  Abraham 
said  to  him:  Son,  remember  that  thou  didst  re- 
ceive good  things  in  thy  life-time,  and  likewise 
Lazarus  evil  things : but  now  he  is  comfoited,  and 
thou  art  tormented.  And  besides  all  this,  between 
us  and  you  there  is  fixed  a great  chaos : so  that  they 
who  would  pass  from  hence  to  you,  cannot,  nor 
from  thence  come  hither.  And  he  said : Then  fa- 
ther, I beseech  thee  that  thou  wouldst  send  him  to 
my  father ’s  house.  For  I have  five  brethren,  that  he 
may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they  also  come  into  this 
place  of  torments.  And  Abraham  said  to  him: 
They  have  Moses  and  tlie  prophets:  let  them  hear 
them.  But  he  said:  No,  Father  Abraliam,  but  if 
any  one  went  to  them  from  the  dead,  they  will  dc 
penance.  And  he  said  to  him:  If  the^  hear  not 


Digitized  byCj’OO^lc 


II.  WEEK  or  LEKT.  157 

Moi5e8  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  believe, 
if  one  rise  again  from  the  dead. 

OFFERT.  Exod.  xxxii. — ^Moses  prayed  in  the  pre- 
sence of  tlie  Lord  his  God,  and  said : Why,  O liOnh 
art  thou  angry  with  thy  people  ? Let  the  wrath  oi 
thy  soul  be  appeased:  remember  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  to  whom  thou  didst  swear  to  give  a land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  And  the  Lord  was 
appeased:  and  did  not  the  evil  with  which  he 
threatened  his  people. 

SECRET.  May  the  fast  consecrated  to  thy  name, 
O Lord,  sanctify  us  by  this  present  sacrifice,  that  we 
may  experience  inwardly  the  effects  of  what  we  out- 
wardly profess  by  our  fast.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  vi. — He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and 
drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in  me,  and  1 in  him, 
saith  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Gratia. — ^May  thy  grace,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  tliee,  never  abandon  us,  but  ever  make  us 
uitent  on  thy  holy  service,  and  always  procure  us 
thy  help.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Mesto. — Be  favourable,  O Lord,  to 
thy  servants,  and  hear  their  prayers  in  the  ^-aiit  of 
everlasting  mercy ; that  glorying  in  thee  their  Crea- 
tor and  Governor,  they  may  have  all  tilings  jier- 
fected  and  perpetuated  to  them.  Thro’. 

FRIDAY. 

INTROIT.  P«.xvi. 

But  1 will  appear  before  thy  sight  in  justice : 1 
sha  1 be  satisfied  when  thy  glory  shall  appear. 
Ps.  Hear,  O Lord,  my  justice : attend  to  my  sup- 
plication. V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Da  <puBsumu8. — Grant,  O Almighty 
God,  that,  being  purified  by  this  fast,  we  may  come 
to  the  approaching  solemnity  with  clean  hearts. 
Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


o 


158 


rWDAt  m THB 


LESSON.  Gen,  xxxvii.  6.  22. — In  those  days, 
Joseph  said  to  his  brethren : Hear  my  dream  which  I 
have  dreamed:  I thought  we  were  binding  sheaves 
in  the  field : and  my  sheaf  arose  as  it  were,  and 
stood,  and  your  sheaves  standing  about  bowed 
down  before  my  sheaf.  His  bretbren  answered 
Slialt  thou  be  our  king?  or  shall  we  be  subject 
to  thy  dominion?  Therefore  this  matter  of  his 
dreams  and  words  ministered  nourishment  to  theit 
envy  and  hatred.  He  dreamed  also  another  dream, 
which  he  told  his  brethren,  saying:  I saw  in  a 
dream,  as  it  were  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  ele* 
ven  stars,  worshipping  me.  And  when  he  had  told 
this  to  bis  father,  and  brethren,  his  father  rebuked 
him,  and  said : What  meaneth  this  dream  that  thou 
liast  di'eamed  ? shall  I and  thy  mother,  and  thy  bre- 
thren, worship  thee  upon  the  earth  ? His  brethren 
therefore  envied  him : but  his  father  considered  the 
thii^  with  himself.  And  when  his  brethren  abode 
in  Sichem,  feeding  their  father’s  flocks,  Israel  said 
to  him:  Thy  brethren  feed  the  sheep  in  Sichem: 
come,  I will  send  thee  to  them.  And  when  he  an- 
swered : I am  ready : he  said  to  him : Go,  and  see 
if  all  things  be  well  with  thy  brethren,  and  the 
cattle : and  bring  me  word  a^in  what  is  doing.  So  • 
being  sent  from  the  vale  of  Hebron,  he  came  to  Si- 
chem. And  a man  found  him  there  wandering  in 
the  field,  and  asked  him  what  he  sought  But  he 
answei'ed : I seek  my  brethren : tell  me  where  they 
feed  their  flocks.  And  the  man  said  to  him : They 
are  departed  from  this  place : for  I heard  them  say : 
let  us  go  to  Dothain.  And  Joseph  went  fwward 
after  his  brethren,  and  found  them  in  Dothain.  And 
when  they  saw  him  afar  off,  before  he  came  nigh 
them,  they  thought  to  kill  him:  and  said  one  to 
another,  Behold  the  dreamer  cometh,  come  let  us 
kill  him,  and  cast  him  into  some  old  pit ; and  we 
will  say : some  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him ; and 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


II,  WEEK  OF  LENT 


m 

tlien  It  shall  appear  what  his  dreams  avail  him. 
And  Ruben  hearing  this,  endeavoured  to  deliver 
him  out  of  their  hands,  and  said:  Do  not  take 
away  his  life,  nor  shed  his  blood : but  cast  him  into 
this  pit  that  is  in  the  wilderness,  and  keep  your 
hands  harmless:  now  he  said  this,  being  desiro^ 
to  deliver  him  out  of  tlieir  hands  and  restore  him  to 
his  father. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxix. — ^In  my  trouble  I cried  to  the 
Lord,  and  he  heard  me.  F.  O Lord,  Deliver  my 
soul  from  wicked  lips,  and  a deceitful  tongue. 

* TRACT.  Ps.  cii.— Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  Malt.  xxi.  33.  46. — ^ that  time 
Jesus  spoke  to  the  mvliitude  of  the  Jews,  and  to  the 
chief  priests  this  parable : There  w?is  a householder 
who  planted  a vineyard,  and  made  a hedge  round 
about  it,  and  dug  in  it  a press,  and  built  a tower, 
and  let  it  out  to  husbandmen:  and  went  into  a 
strange  country.  And  when  the  time  of  the  fruits 
drew  nigh,  he  sent  his  servants  to  the  husbandmen, 
that  they  might  receive  the  fruits  thereof.  And  the 
husbandmen  laying  hands  on  his  servants,  beat  one, 
and  killed  another,  and  stoned  another.  Again  he 
sent  other  servants  more  than  the  former : and  they 
did  to  them  in  like  manner.  And  last  of  all  he  sent 
them  his  Son,  saying : They  will  reverence  my  Son : 
But  when  the  husbandmen  seeing  the  Son,  they  said 
among  themselves:  This  is  the  heir,  come,  let  us  kill 
hio^  and  we  sliall  liave  his  inheritance.  And  taking 
him  they  cast  him  forth  out  of  the  vineyard,  and 
killed  nim.  When  therefore  the  lord  of  the  vineyard 
shall  come,  what  will  he  do  to  those  husbandmen  ? 
They  say  to  him : He  will  bring  tlitose  evil  men  to 
an  evil  end ; and  will  let  out  his  vineyard  to  other 
husbandmen,  that  sliall  render  him  the  fruit  in  due 
season.  Jesus  saith  to  them : Have  you  never  read 
in  the  Scriptures : “ The  stone  which  the  builders 
rejected,  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner  ^ 
0 2 


i 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


SATURDAY  IU  THE 


m 

By  the  Lord  this  hath  been  done,  imd  it  is  wonderfiil 
in  our  eyes  ” Therefore  I say  to  you,  the  kingdom 
of  God  shall  be  taken  from  yon,  and  shall  be  given 
to  a nation  yielding  the  fruits  thereof.  And  whoso- 
ever shall  fall  on  this  stone,  shall  be  broken : but  on 
vnhomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  sliall  grind  him  to  powder. 
And  when  the  chief  priests  and  pharisees  had  heai»j 
his  parables,  they  knew  that  he  s^ke  of  them. 
And  seeking  to  lay  hands  on  him,  they  feared  the 
multitude : because  they  held  him  as  a prophet. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xxxix. — Look  down,  O Lord,  to 
deliver  me;  look  down,  O Lord,  to  help  me,  let 
them  be  confounded  and  ashamed  together  tliat  seek 
after  my  soul  to  take  it  away : look  down  to  my  aid, 
O Lord. 

SECRET.  May  the  effects  of  this  warfare,  O 
Lord,  remain  in  us,  and  be  increased  by  good  works. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  xi. — ^Thou,  O Lord,  wilt  preserve 
us : and  keep  us  from  this  generation  forever. 

If.  COMM.  Fac  no«.— ^rant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  that  having  received  this  pledge  of  our 
eternal  Ovation,  we  may  so  direct  our  course  there- 
to, as  happily  to  arrive  at  it.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Da  qtuBsumus, — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  to  thy  people  health  both  of  soul  and 
body,  that  by  the  continual  practice  of  good  works, 
they  may  always  be  defended  by  thy  powerfbl  pro- 
tection. Thro. 


SATURDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,xvm. 

The  law  of  the  Lord  is  unspotted,  converting 
souls;  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  is  fuithful 
^ving  wisdom  to  little  ones.  Ps.  The  heavens  shew 
forth  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  declareth 
the  work  of  his  hands.  V.  Glory. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


n.  wEsr  or  LEirt. 


161 


COLLECT.  Da  Orant,  O Lord,  we 

beseech  thee,  this  saving  effect  of  our  fast,  that  the 
chastisement  of  the  fiesli,  which  we  have  under- 
taken, may  become  the  improvement  of  our  souls. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Gen.  xxvii.  5.  39. — In  those  days: 
Rebecca  said  to  her  son  Jacob : I heard  thy  father 
talking  with  E^u  thy  brother,  and  saying  to  him: 
Bring  me  of  thy  hunting,  and  make  me  meats  that 
I may  eat,  and  bless  thee  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord, 
before  I die.  Now  therefore,  my  son,  follow  my 
counsel:  and  go  thy  way  to  thy  flock,  bring  me 
two  kids  of  the  best,  that  I may  make  of  them  meat 
for  thy  father,  such  as  he  gladly  eateth:  which 
when  thou  hast  brought  in,  and  he  hath  eaten,  he 
may  bless  thee  before  he  die.  And  he  answered  her : 
Thou  knowest  that  Esau  my  brother  is  a hairy  man, 
and  I am  smooth : if  my  father  shall  feel  me,  and 
perceive  it,  I fear  lest  he  will  think  I would  have 
mocked  him,  and  I shall  bring  upon  me  a curse 
instead  of  a blessing.  And  his  mother  said  to  him : 
Upon  me  be  this  curse,  my  sou : only  hear  thou  my 
voice,  and  go,  fetch  me  the  things  which  I have 
said.  He  went,  and  brought,  and  gave  them  to  his  mo- 
ther. She  dressed  meat  such  as  she  knew  his  father 
liked.  And  she  put  on  him  very  good  garments  of 
Esau,  which  she  had  at  home  with  her:  and  the 
little  skins  of  the  kids  she  put  about  his  hands,  and 
covered  the  bare  of  his  neck.  And  she  gave  him 
the  savoury  meat,  and  delivered  him  bread  that  she 
had  baked.  Which  when  he  had  carried  in,  he 
said  My  father  ^ But  he  answered  : I hear.  Who 
art  thou  my  son  ? And  Jacob  said:  I am  Esau  thy 
first-bom : I have  done  as  thou  didst  command  me : 
arise,  sit  and  eat  of  my  venison,  that  thy  soul  may 
bless  me.  And  Isaac  said  to  his  son : How  couldst 
♦hoii  find  it  so  quickly,  my  son  ? He  answered : It 
0 3 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


SATURDAY  III  THE 


lea 

was  the  will  of  €rod  that  what  I sought  came  quickly 
in  my  way.  And  Isaac  said : Come  hither,  that  I 
may  feel  thee  my  son,  and  may  prove  whether  thou 
be  ray  son  Esau  or  no : He  came  near  to  his  father, 
and  when  he  had  felt  him,  Isaac  said : The  voice 
indeed  is  the  voice  of  Jacob,  but  the  hands,  are  the 
hands  of  Esau.  And  he  knew  him  not,  because  his 
hairy  hands  make  him  like  to  the  elder.  Then  bles- 
sing him,  he  said : Art  thou  my  son  Esau  ? He  an- 
swered : I am.  Then  he  said  : Bring  me  the  meats  of 
thy  hunting,  my  son,  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee.  And 
when  they  were  brought  and  he  had  eaten,  he  of- 
fered him  wine  also,  which  after  he  had  drunk,  he 
said  to  him:  Come  near  me,  and  give  me  a kiss, 
my  son.  He  came  near,  and  kissed  him.  And  im- 
mediately as  he  smelled  the  fragrant  smell  of  his 
gai*meuts,  blessing  him,  he  said:  Behold  the  smell 
of  my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  a plentiful  field,  which 
the  Lord  hath  blessed.  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of 
heaven,  and  of  the  fatness  of  the  earth,  abundance 
of  corn  and  wine.  And  let  peoples  serve  thee,  and 
tribes  worship  thee:  be  thou  lord  of  thy  brethren, 
and  let  thy  mother’s  children  bow  down  before 
thee.  Cursed  be  he  |hat  curseth  thee : and  let  him 
that  blesseth  thee  be  filled  with  blessings.  Isaac  had 
scarce  ended  his  words,  when  Jacob  being  now  gone 
out  abroad,  Esau  came,  and  brought  in  to  his  ftith^ 
meats  ma^  of  what  he  had  taken  in  hunting,  say- 
ing : Arise,  my  father,  and  eat  of  thy  son’s  venison  : 
that  thy  soul  may  bless  me.  And  Isaac  said  to  him : 
Why!  who  art  thou?  He  answered:  1 am  thy 
/ first-bom  son  Esau.  Isaac  was  struck  with  fear, 
and  astonished  exceedingly : and  wondering  beyond 
what  can  be  believed,  said:  Who  is  he  that  even 
now  brought  me  venison  that  he  had  taken,  and  I 
ate  of  all  l)efore  thou  earnest  ? and  I have  blessed 
him,  and  he  shall  be  blessed.  Esau  having  heard  his 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


II.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


168 


Cither’s  words,  roared  out  with  a great  cry:  and 
being  in  a consternation,  said:  Bless  me  also,  my 
father.  And  he  said : Thy  brother  came  deceitfully 
and  got  thy  blessing.  But  he  said  again : Rightly  is 
his  name  called  Jacob : for  he  hath  supplanted  me 
lo  this  second  time:  my  first  birth-rignt  he  took 
away  before,  and  now  this  second  time  he  hath 
stolen  away  my  blessing.  And  again  he  said  to  his 
father : Hast  thou  not  reserved  me  also  a blessing  ? 
Isaac  answered : I have  appointed  liim  thy  lord,  and 
have  made  all  his  brethren  his  servants : I have  esta- 
blished him  with  com  and  oil,  and  after  this,  what 
shall  I do  more  for  thee  my  son  ? And  Esau  said  to 
him:  Hast  thou  only  one  blessing,  father.^  1 be- 
seech thee,  bless  me  also.  And  when  he  wept  with 
a loud  cry,  Isaac  being  moved,  said  to  him : In  the 
fat  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  dew  of  heaven  from 
above  shall  thy  blessing  be. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xci.  It  Is  good  to  give  praise  to  the 
Lord,  and  to  sing  to  thy  name,  O Most  High.  F 
To  shew  forth  thy  mercy  in  the  morning,  and  thy 
truth  in  the  night. 

GOSPEL.  Lnike  xv.  11.  32.  — At  that  time: 
Jesus  spoke  to  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  this  parable : 
A certain  man  had  two  sons : and  the  younger  of 
them  said  to  his  father : Father,  give  me  the  portion 
of  substance  that  faileth  to  me.  And  he  divided 
unto  them  his  substance.  And  not  many  days  after, 
the  younger  son  gathering  all  together,  went  abroad 
into  a far  country : and  there  wasted  bis  substance 
with  living  riotously.  And  after  he  had  spent  all, 
there  came  a mighty  fam'uie  m that  country,  and  he 
began  to  l)e  in  'vVant.  And  he  went  and  cleaved 
lo  one  of  the  citizens  of  that  country.  And  he 
sent  him  into  his  farm  to  feed  swine.  And  he  would 
fain  have  filled  his  belly  with  the  husks  the  swine  did 
eat:  and  no  man  gave  unto  him.  And  returning  lo 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


‘lt>4  SATURDAY  IN  TUE,  ^C. 

himself  he  said : How  many  hired  servants  in  iny 
fatlier’s  house  abound  with  bread,  and  I here  perish 
with  hunger?  I will  arise,  and  will  go  to  my 
iuther,  and  say  to  him : Father,  I have  sinned  against 
heaven,  and  before  thee : I am  not  now  worthy  to  be 
called  Uiy  son : make  me  as  one  of  thy  hh*ed  servants. 
And  rising  up  he  came  to  his  father.  And  when  he  was 
yet  a great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him,  and  was 
moved  with  compassion,  and  running  to  him  fell 
u jjon  his  neck  and  kissed  him.  And  the  son  said  to 
him:  Father  I have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  l)e- 
fore  thee,  I am  not  now  worthy  to  be  called  thy 
son.  But  the  fatlier  said  to  his  servants : Bring  fortii 
quickly  the  first  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,  and  put  a 
ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet:  and  bring 
hither  the  fatted  and  kill  it,  and  let  us  eat,  and 
make  merry : because  this  my  son  was  dead,  and  is 
now  come  to  life  again : was  lost,  and  is  found.  And 
they  began  to  be  merry.  Now  his  eldest  son  was  in 
tlie  field : and  when  he  came  and  drew  nigh  to  the 
bouse,  he  heard  music  and  dancing : and  he  called 
one  of  the  servants,  and  asked  what  these  things 
meant.  And  he  said  to  him : Thy  brother  is  come, 
and  thy  father  hath  killed  the  fatted  calf,  because  he 
hath  received  hun  safe.  And  he  was  angry,  and 
would  not  go  in.  His  father  therefore  coining  out 
began  to  entreat  him.  And  he  answering,  said  to  his 
father : Behold,  for  so  many  years  do  I serve  thee,  and 
I have  never  transgressed  thy  commandments,  and  yet 
thou  hast  never  given  me  a kid  to  make  merry  with 
jny  friends : but  as  soon  as  this  thy  son  is  come,  who 
hath  devoured  his  substance  with  harlots,  thou  hast 
killed  for  him  the  fatted  calf.  But  he  said  to  him : 
Son,  thou  art  always  with  me,  and  all  I have  is 
diine.  But  it  was  fit  we  should  make  merry  and  be 
glad,  for  this  thy  brother  was  dead,  and  is  come 
to  life  again ; he  was  lost  and  is  found. 

OFFERT,  Ps.  xii.  — Enlighten  my  eyes  that  I 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


III.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT.  1G5 

lever  sleep  in  death ; lest  at  any  time  ray  enemy  say 
1 have  prevailed  against  him. 

SECRET.  Mercifully  grant  us,  O Lord,  by  this 
•loly  sacrifice,  that  we,  who  desire  to  be  freed  fixim 
our  own  sins,  may  not  be  burdened  with  those  of 
others.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Lxike  xv. — Son,  thou  oughtest  to  rejoice 
because  thy  brother  was  dead,  and  is  come  to  life 
again : he  was  lost,  and  is  found. 

P.  COMM.  Sacramentu — May  the  sacred  taste  of 
this  thy  sacrament,  O Lord,  peneu*ate  the  innermost 
recesses  of  our  hearts,  and  make  us  plentifully  par- 
take of  its  effects.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Familiam. — Protect,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  thy  family  by  thy  continual  goodness, 
that  as  it  relieth  on  the  hopes  of  thy  heavenly  grace, 
80  it  may  be  defended  by  thy  heavenly  aid.  Thro’. 


III.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  xxiv. 


My  eyes  are  ever 
tovmrds  the  Lord: 


OCULI  mei  semper  ad 
Dominum,  quia  ipse 


for  he  shall  pluck  my  feet  evellet 
out  of  the  snare;  look 
thou  upon  me,  and  have 
mercy  on  me ; for  I am 
alone  and  poor.  Ps.  To 
thee,  O Lord  have  I lifted 
up  my  soul;  in  thee,  O 
my  God,  1 put  my  trust, 
let  me  not  be  ashamed. 

F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  ^oBsumus, — Be  attentive,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  to  the  prayers  of  ^y 
■ervants;  and  stretch  forth  the  arm  of  thy  divine 
majesty  in  our  defence.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Eplies.  v.  1.  9.^  Brethren:  Be  ye 


de  laqueo  pedes 
meos:  respice  in  me,  et 
miserere  mei  quoniam  uni- 
cus et  pauper  sum  ego. 

Ps.  M te,  Domini,  le- 
vavi animam  meam:  Deus 
meus,  in  te  confido,  non 
erubescam. 

V.  Gloria. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


16*]  III,  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 

therefore  followers  of  God,  as  most  dear  childreD 
and  walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  loved  us,  and  ball 
delivered  himself  for  us,  an  oblation  and  a sacrifice 
to  God,  for  an  odour  of  sweetness.  But  fomicatioi 
and  all  uncleanness,  or  covetousness,  let  it  not  sr 
much  as  be  named  among  you,  as  becometh  saints 
or  obscenity,  or  foolish  t^ing,  or  scurrility,  wliicl 
is  to  no  purpose : but  rather  giving  of  thanks.  Foi 
know  ye  this  and  understand  that  no  fornicator,  oi 
unclean,  or  covetous  person,  ^which  is  serving  of 
idols)  hath  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and 
of  God.  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words. 
For  because  of  these  things  cometh  the  anger  of 
God  upon  the  children  of  unbelief.  Be  ye  not  there, 
fore  partakers  with  them.  For  you  were  heretofore 
darkness,  but  now  light  in  the  Lord.  Walk  ye  at 
children  of  the  light — For  the  fruit  of  the  light  is  ii^ 
all  goodness,  and  justice,  and  truth. 

GRAD.  Ps,  ix. — ^Arise,  O Lord,  let  not  man  pre 
vail : let  the  gentiles  be  judged  in  thy  sight  V,  Whei 
my  enemy  shall  be  turned  back ; tliey  shall  be  weak 
ened  and  perish  before  thy  face. 

TRACT.  Ps,  cxxii. — M te  levavi  oculos  meo, 
qui  habitas  in  cedis.  To  tliee  have  I lifted  up 
eyes,  who  dwellest  in  heaven.  F,  Behold  as  the 
eyes  of  servants  are  on  the  hands  of  their  masters. 
F,  And  as  the  eyes  of  the  hand-maid  are  on  the 
hands  of  her  mistress : so  are  our  eyes  unto  the  Loixl 
our  God  until  he  have  mercy  on  us.  V,  Have  mer- 
cy on  us,  O Lord,  haye  mercy  on  us. 

GOSPEL.  Jjuke  xi.  14.  28. — At  that  time : Jesus 
was  casting  out  a devil,  and  the  same  was  dumb, 
and  when  he  had  cast  out  the  devil,  the  dumb 
spoke ; and  the  multitude  were  in  admiration  at  it 
But  some  of  them  said : he  ^astetb  out  devils,  by 
Belzebub  the  prince  of  devils.  And  others  tempt- 
ing, asked  of  him  a sign  fi*om  heaven.  Buv  he  seeing 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


111.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 


167 


their  thoughts,  said  to  them : Every  kingdom  divided 
against  itself,  shall  be  brought  to  desolation,  and 
house  upon  house  shall  fall.  And  if  Satan  also  Iwi 
divided  against  himself,  how  shall  his  kingdom  stand 
because  you  say,  that  through  Belzebiib  I cast  out 
devils.  Now  if  1 cast  out  devils  by  Belzebub : by 
whom  do  your  children  cast  them  out  ? Therefore 
they  shall  be  your  judges.  But  if  I by  the  finger  of 
God  cast  out  devils : doubtless  the  kingdom  of  God 
is  come  upon  j^ou.  When  a strong  man  armed 
keepeth  his  court,  those  things  are  in  peace  which 
he  possesseth.  But  if  a stronger  than  he  come  upon 
him  and  overcome  him,  he  will  take  away  all  his 
armour  wherein  he  trusted,  and  will  distribute  his 
spoils.  He  that  is  not  with  me,  is  against  me : and 
he  that  gathereth  not  with  me,  scattereth.  When 
the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  otit  of  a man,  he  walketh 
through  places  without  water,  seeking  rest : and  not 
finding,  he  saith:  I will  return  into  niy  house 
whence  I came  out.  And  when  he  is  come,  he 
findeth  it  swept  and  garnished.  Then  he  goeth  and 
taketh  with  him  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than 
himself,  and  entering  in  they  dwell  there.  And  the 
last  state  of  that  man  becometh  worse  than  the  first. 
And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  spoke  these  things,  a 
certain  woman  from  the  crowd  lifting  up  her  voice, 
said  to  him : Blessed  is  the  womb  that  bore  thee, 
and  the  paps  that  gave  thee  suck.  But  he  said: 
Yea  rather,  blessed  are  they  who  hear  the  word  of 
God,  and  keep  it.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xviii. — ^The  justices  of  the  Lord  are 
right  rejoicing  hearts:  his  (urdinances  are  sweeter 
honey  and  the  honey-comb : therefore  thy  serv- 
ant observeth  them. 

SECRET.  May  this  offering,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  cleanse  us  fiom  our  sins,  and  sanctify  the 
bodies  and  souls  of  div  servants  for  the  celebrating 
of  this  sacrifice.  Thro\ 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


MOKDAt  iJf  THE 


m 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixxxiii — Tne  sparrow  bath  found 
herself  a house,  and  the  turtle  a nest  where  she  may 
lay  her  young  ones ; in  like  manner,  O Lord  of  armies, 
my  King  and  my  God,  let  my  abode  be  near  thy 
altar : blessed  ai  e they  tliat  dwell  in  thy  house,  they 
sliaU  praise  thee  for  ever  and  ever. 

P.  COMM.  A cuncHs» — ^Mercifully,  O Lord,  we 
l)eseech  thee,  deliver  us  from  all  guilt  and  from  ail 
danger,  since  thou  admittest  us  to  be  partakers  of 
this  great  mystery.  Thro’. 


MONDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  Iv. — In  God  will  I praise  the 
word,  in  the  Lord  will  I praise  his  speed : In  Gtod 
I will  put  my  trust,  I will  not  fear  what  man  can 
do  against  me.  Ps.  Have  mercy  on  me,  O God,  for 
man  hath  trodden  me  under  foot  all  the  day,  warring 
he  hath  afflicted  me.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Cordibus. — ^We  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  mercifully  to  pour  forth  thy  grace  into  our 
hearts : that,  as  we  abstain  from  flesh,  so  we  may 
keep  our  senses  from  all  noxious  excesses.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  4 Kings  v.  1.  15. — In  those  days: 
Naaman,  general  of  the  anny  of  the  King  of  Syria, 
was  a great  man  with  bis  master,  and  honourable : 
for  by  him  the  Lord  gave  deliverance  to  Syria: 
and  he  was  a valiant  man  and  rich,  but  a leper. 
Now  there  had  gone  out  robbers  from  Syria,  and 
had  led  away  captive  out  of  the  land  of  Israel  a little 
maid,  and  she  waited  upon  Naaman’s  wife.  And 
she  said  to  her  mistress : I wish  my  master  had  been 
with  the  prophet  that  is  in  Samaria : be  would  cer- 
tainly have  healed  him  of  the  lepro^  which  he 
hath.  Then  Naaman  went  into  his  lord,  and  told 
him,  saying : Thus  and  thus  saith  tlie  ^1,  that  came 
from  tlie  land  of  Israel.  And  the  King  of  Syria 
said  to  him:  Go,  and  I will  send  a letter  to  the 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


III.  Vi^tK  or  LENT. 


IC» 

King  of  IsraeL  And  be  departed,  and  took  with 
biin  ten  talents  of  silver,  and  six  tliousand  pieces  of 
gold,  and  ten  changes  of  raiment,  and  brought 
the  letter  to  the  king  of  Israel,  in  these  words: 
When  thou  Shalt  receive  this  letter,  know  that  I have 
sent  to  thee  Naaman  my  servant,  that  thou  mayest 
heal  him  of  his  leprosy.  And  when  the  king  of 
Israel  had  read  the  letter,  he  rent  his  garments,  and 
said : Am  I God,  to  he  able  to  kill  and  to  give  life, 
that  this  man  hath  sent  to  me,  to  heal  a man  of  his 
leprosy  ? marl^,  iuid  see  bow  he  seeketh  occasions 
against  me.  And  when  Eliseus  the  man  of  God  had 
heard  this,  to  wit,  that  tlie  king  of  Israel  had  rent 
bis  garments,  he  sent  to  him,  saying;  Why  hast 
thou  rent  thy  garments  ? let  him  come  to  me  and 
let  him  know  that  there  is  a prophet  in 'Israel.  So 
Naaman  came  with  his  horses  and  chariots,  and 
stood  at  the  door  of  the  bouse  of  Eliseus : and  Eii- 
seus  sent  a messenger  to  him,  sayii^ ; Go  and  wash 
seven  times  in  tlie  Jordan,  and  thy  flesh  shall  recover 
health,  and  thou-  shall  be  clean.  Naaman  was  an-' 
gry,  and  went  away,  saying : I tliought  he  would 
nave  come  out  to  me,  and  standing  would  have  in- 
voked the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God,  and  touched 
with  his  hand  the  place  of  the  leprosy,  and  healed 
me.  Are  not  the  Almna,  and  the  Pharphar,  rivere 
of  Damascus,  better  than  all  the  waters  of  Israel, 
that  I may  wash  in  tliem,  and  be  made  clean  ? So 
as  he  turned,  and  was  going  away  with  indigne tioii, 
bis  sei*vants  came  to  liim,  and  said  to  him;  Father, 
if  the  prophet  had  bid  Aee  do  some  gi-eat  thing, 
surely  thou  shouldst  have  done  it:  how  much  rather 
what  he  now  hath  said  to  thee;  Wash,  and  thou 
shall  be  clean  ? Then  he  went  down,  and  washed 
in  the  Jordan  seven  tiii^  according  to  the  word  of 
the  man  of  God  ; and  his  flesh  was  restored,  like  the 
flesh  of  a little  child,  and  Was  made  clean.  And 

P 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


170  MONDAY  IN  THE  III.  WEEK,  &C. 

returning  to  the  man  of  God  with  all  his  train,  he 
came  and  stood  before  him,  and  said:  In  tnitli  1 
know  there  is  no  other  God  in  all  the  earth,  but 
only  in  Israel. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Iv. — O God  I have  declared  to  thee 
my  life : thou  hast  set  my  tears  in  thy  sight.  F.  Have 
mercy  on  me,  O Lord,  for  man  liath  trodden  me  under 
foot : all  the  day  long  he  hath  afflicted  me  fighting 
against  me. 

^ TRACT.  Ps,  cii.— Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL,  hake  iv.  23.  30.— theU  time : Jesus 
said  to  the  Pharisees : Doubtless  you  will  say  to 
me  this  similitude  : Physician  heal  thyself : as  great 
things  as  we  have  heard  done  in  Capharnaum,  do 
also  here  in  thy  own  counU*y.  And  he  said : Amen 
I say  to  you,  that  no  prophet  is  accepted  in  his  own 
country.  In  truth  I say  to  you,  thei*e  were  many 
widows  in  the  days  of  Elias  in  Israel,  when  heaven 
was  shut  up  three  years  and  six  months : when  there 
was  a m'eat  famine  throughout  all  the  land ; and  to 
none  of  them  was  EKas  sent,  but  to  Sarephta  of  Sidon 
to  a widow  woman.  And  there  were  many  lepers  in 
Israel  in  the  time  of  Eiiseus  the  prophet : and  none 
of  them  was  cleansed  but  Naaman  the  Syrian.  And 
all  they  in  the  synagogue,  hearing  these  things,  were 
tilled  with  anger.  And  they  rose  up  and  thrust  him 
out  of  the  city : and  they  brought  him  to  the  brow 
of  the  hill.  Whereon  their  city  was  built  that  they 
might  cast  him  down  headlong.  But  he  passing 
through  the  midst  of  them,  went  his  way. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  liv. — Hear  O God,  my  prayer, 
and  despise  not  my  supplication : be  attentive  to  me 
and  hear  me. 

SECRET.  Grant,  O Lord,  that  the  offering  we 
make  to  thee,  as  a mark  of  our  homage,  may  be 
come  to  us  a sacrament  available  to  our  salvation. 
Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


171 


TUESDAY  IN  THE  III.  WEEK,  &C. 

COMM.  P8.  xiii. — Who  shall  give  out  of  Sion 
tlie  salvation  of  Israel : Wlien  the  Lord  shall  have 
turned  away  the  captivity  of  his  people,  Jacob  shall 
rejoice,  and  Israel  shall  glad. 

P.  COMM.  PrfBsta,  qv/Bsumus, — Grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  and  merciful  God,  that 
what  we  take  with  our  mouths,  we  may  receive 
with  pure  minds.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God 

PRAYER.  Subveniat — ^May  thy  mercy,  O Lord, 
assist  us,  that  by  thy  protection  we  may  be  de- 
livered from  the  dangers  of  sin  that  surround  us,  and 
so  brought  to  eternal  happiness.  Thro’. 


TUESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xvi, — I have  cried  to  thee,  for 
thou,  O God,  hast  heard  me : incline  thy  ear  unto 
me,  O hear  my  words.  Keep  me,  O Lord,  as  the 
apple  of  thine  eye : protect  me  under  the  shadow 
of  thy  wings.  Ps.  Hear,  O Lord,  my  justice: 
attend  to  my  supplication.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Exaudi  nos. — Graciously  hear  us,  O 
Almighty  and  merciful  God,  and  grant  us  the  gift 
of  salutary  continence.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  4 Kings  iv.  1.  l.^In  those  days  : A 
certain  woman  of  the  wives  of  the  prophets  cried  to 
Eliseus,  saying:  Thy  servant  my  husband  is  dead, 
and  thou  knowest  diat  thy  servant  was  one  that 
feared  God,  and  behold  the  creditor  is  come  to  take 
away  my  two  sons  to  serve  him.  And  Eliseus  said 
to  her : What  wilt  tliou  have  me  do  for  diee  ? Tell 
me  what  hast  thou  in  tliy  house  ? And  she  answered : 
1 thy  handmaid  have  nothing  in  my  house  but  a 
litde  oil,  to  anoint  me.  And  he  said  to  her:  Go, 
borrow  of  all  thy  neighbours  empty  vessels  not  a few. 
And  go  in,  and  shut  thy  door,  when  thou  art  within, 
witli  thy  sons : and  pour  out  thereof  into  all  those 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


172  TUESDAY  IN  THE  III.  WEEK,  ^C. 

vessels;  and  when  they  are  full  take  them  away 
So  the  woman  went,  and  shut  the  door  upon  her, 
and  upon  her  sons ; they  brought  her  the  vessels,  and 
she  poured  in.  And  when  the  vessels  were  full  she 
said  to  her  son ; Bring  me  yet  a vessel.  And  he  an- 
swered : I have  no  more.  And  the  oil  stood.  And 
she  come  and  told  the  man  of  God.  And  he  said : 
Go,  sell  the  oil,  and  pay  the  creditor : and  thou  and 
thy  sons  live  of  the  rest 

GRAD.  Ps.  xviii. — From  my  secret  ones  cleanse 
me,  O Lord,  and  from  the  sihs  of  others  spare  thy 
servant.  V.  If  they  shall  have  no  dominion  over  me 
then  shall  I be  without  spot : and  I shall  be  cleansed 
from  the  greatest  sin. 

GOSPEL.  Mail,  xviii.  15.  22. — Jit  that  time: 
Jesxts  said  to  his  disciples  : If  thy  brother  shall  offend 
against  thee  go  and  reliuke  him  between  thee  and 
him  alone.  If  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  shalt  gain 
thy  brother.  But  if  he  will  not  hear  thee,  take  with 
thee  one  or  two  more : that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or 
three  witnesses  every  word  may  stand.  And  if  he 
will  not  hear  them,  tell  the  Churcli.  And  if  he  will 
not  hear  the  Church,  let  him  be  to  thee  as  tlie 
heathen  and  publican.  Amen  I say  to  you,  what- 
soever you  shall  bind  upon  eaith,  shall  be  bound  also 
in  heaven ; and  whatsoever  you  shall  loose  upon 
earth,  shall  be  loosed  also  in  heaven.  Again,  1 say 
to  you,  that  if  two  of  you  shall  consent  upon  earth, 
concerning  any  thing  whatsoever  they  sliall  ask,  it 
shall  be  done  to  them  by  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven 
For  where  there  are  two  or  three  gathered  togetlier 
in  iny  name;  there  am  1 in  the  midst  of  them. 
Then  came  Peter  unto  him  and  said : Lord,  how 
often  shall  my  brother  offend  against  me,  and  I for- 
give him  ? till  seven  times?  Jesus  saith  to  him ; I 
say  not  to  thee  till  seven  tunes;  but  till  seventy  times 
seven  tim^s. 

GFFERT.  Ps,  cxvii. — The  right  hand  of  the 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


WEDNESDAY  IN  ^HE  III.  WEEK,  &C. 


173 


J^ol-d  hath  wrought  strength,  the  right  hand  of  the 
iiOrd  hath  exalted  me : I ^all  not  die,  but  live ; and 
shall  publish  the  works  of  the  Lord. 

SECRET.  May  we  receive,  we  beseech  thee, 
()  Lord,  by  these  sacraments,  the  effect  of  our  re- 
demption ; so  that,  by  means  thereof,  we  may  with- 
draw from  all  human  excesses,  and  thou  mayest  be- 
stow upon  us  the  gift  of  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  xiv. — Lord  who  shall  dwell  in  thy 
tabernacle?  Or  who  shall  rest  in  thy  holy  hill? 
He  that  walketh  without  blemish,  and  worketb 
justice. 

P.  COMM.  jS’ocm.  -Being  cleansed,  O Lord,  by 
tJiese  holy  mysteries,  grant  us,  we  beseech  thee, 
both  pardon  and  grace.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  — ^Defend  us,  O Lord,  by  thy 

^^ection,  and  ever  preserve  us  from  all  iniquity. 

WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  XXX. — But  I have  hoped  in  tlie 
Lord : I will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  thy  mercy : for 
thou  hast  regarded  my  humility.  Ps.  In  thee,  O 
Lord,  have  I hoped,  let  me  never  be  confounded; 
deliver  me  in  thy  justice,  and  rescue  me.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Pr<Rsta  nobis. — Grant,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  that  being  improved  by  this  whole- 
some fast,  we  may  abstain  from  all  pernicious  vice, 
and  by  that  means,  more  easily  obtain  thy  mercy. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Exod.  xx.  12.  24. Thus  saith  the 

Lord  God : Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that 
thou  mayest  be  long  lived  upon  the  land  which  the 
Lord  thy  God  will  give  thee.  Thou  shalt  not  kill 
Thou  shalt  not  commit  adulter}'.  Thou  shalt  not 
steal  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  agahist  thy 
P3 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


174 


WEDNESDAY  IN  THE 


neighbour.  Thou  shall  not  covet  thy  neighbour’s 
house,  neither  shall  thou  desire  his  wife,  nor  his 
servant,  nor  his  hand-maid,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass, 
nor  any  thing  that  is  his.  And  all  the  people  saw 
the  voices  and  the  flames,  and  tlie  sound  of  the 
trumpet,  and  the  mount  smoking:  and  being  ter- 
rified and  struck  with  fear,  they  stood  afar  ofl^ 
saying  to  Moses:  Speak  thou  to  us,  and  we  will 
hear : let  not  the  Lord  speak  to  us,  lest  we  die.  And 
Moses  said  to  the  people:  Fear  not;  for  God  is 
come  to  prove  you,  and  that  the  dread  of  him  might 
be  in  you,  and  you  should  not  sin.  And  the  people 
stood  afar  off.  But  Moses  went  to  the  dark  cloud 
wherein  God  was.  And  the  Lord  said  to  Moses: 
Thus  shall  thou  say  to  the  children  of  Israel : You 
have  seen  that  I have  spoken  to  you  from  heaven. 
You  shall  not  make  gods  of  silver,  nor  shall  you 
make  to  yourselves  gods  of  gold.  You  shall  make 
an  altar  of  earth  unto  me,  and  you  shall  offer  upon 
it  your  holocausts  and  peace-offerings,  your  sheep 
and  oxen,  in  eveiy  place  where  the  memory  of  my 
name  shall  be. 

GRAD.  Ps,  vi. — Have  mercy  on  me,  O Lord,  for 
I am  weak : heal  me,  O Lord.  V.  My  bones  are 
troubled  and  my  soid  is  troubled  exceedingly. 

* TRACT.  Ps,  cii.  Deal  not,;?.  117. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xv.  1.  20. — At  that  time:  The 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  came  from  Jerusalem  to  Jesus, 
and  saying  to  him:  Why  do  thy  disciples  trans- 
gress the  tradition  of  the  ancients  ? For  they  wash 
not  their  hands  when  they  eat  bread.  But  he  an- 
swering, said  to  them : Why  do  you  alsQ  transgress 
the  commandment  of  God  for  your  tradition  ? For 
God  said : “ Honour  thy  father  and  mother : ” and, 
“ he  that  shall  curse  father  or  mother,  let  him  die  the 
death.”  But  you  say : Whosoever  shall  say  to  his 
flither  or  mother.  The  gift  whatsoever  proceedeth 


Digitized  by 


Google 


III.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


fiora  me,  sliall  profit  thee.  And  he  shaH  not  ho- 
nour his  fether  or  mother:  and  you  have  made 
void  the  commandment  of  God  foi*  your  tradition. 
Hypocrites,  well  has  Isaios  prophesied  of  you,  say- 
ing: "This  people  lionoureth  me  with  their  lips, 
but  their  heart  is  far  from  me.  And  in  vain  do  they 
worship  me,  teaching  doctrines  and  oommandments 
of  men,”  And  haviner  called  together  the  multitudes 
unto  bun,  he  said  to  them : Here  ye  and  under- 
stantL  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth,  de- 
fileth  a mail : but  what  cometh  out  of  the  mouth, 
this  defileth  a man.  Then  came  his  disciples,  and 
said  to  him : Dost  thou  know  that  the  Pharisees, 
when  they  heanl  this  word,  were  scandalized  ? But 
he  answering,  said ; Every  plant  which  ray  heavenly 
Father  bath  not  planted,  shall  be  rooted  up.  Let 
them  alone:  they  are  blind,  and  leaders  of  the 
blind.  And  if  the  Nind  lead  the  biin^  both  full 
into  tlie  pit.  Ami  Peter  answmng  said  to  him: 
Expound  to  us  this  parable.  But  he  said  ; Are  you 
also  yet  without  understanding?  Do  you  not  under- 
staml,  that  whatsoever  eotei*eth  into  the  moutli, 
goeth  into  the  belly,  and  is  cast  out  into  the  privy  ? 
nut  the  things  which  proceed  out  of  the  mouth, 
come  forth  from  die  heart,  and  those  thin^  defile  a 
man.  For  out  of  the  h<iartcome  forth  evil  thoughts, 
murders,  adulteries,  fornications,  thefbs,  false  testi- 
monies, blasphemies.  These  are  the  things  that  de- 
file a man.  But  to  eat  with  dnwashed  hands  doth 
uot  defile  a man. 

OFF  ERT.  Ps.  cviii.— Shew  us,  O Lord,  thy  mercy, 
for  the  glory  of  thy  name : for  thy  mercy  is  sweet. 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
tlie  prayers  of  thy  people,  together  with  the  offering 
of  these  hosts;  and  while  we  celebrate  these  thy 
mysteries,  defend  us  from  all  dangers.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  XV. — Thou  hast  made  known  to  me 
the  ways  of  life : thou  siialt  fill  me  witli  joy  with 
thy  countenimcc. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


17G 


THURSDAT  irr  THE 


P.  COMM.  Sancti/ket  nos, — May  the  heaven^ 
food,  which  we  hdve  t^en,  sanctify  us,  O Lord,  and 
freeing  us  from  all  errors,  make  us  wwthy  of  the 
heavenly  promises.  Thro*. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  Grod. 

PRAYER.  Concede, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  beg  the  frivour  of 
thy  protection,  being  delivered  from  aU  evils,  may 
serve  thee  with  a secure  mind.  Thro*. 


THURSDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixvii. — I am  the  salvation  of 
my  people,  saith  the  Lord : in  whatever  tribulation 
they  cry  out  to  me,  1 will  hear  them  ; and  I will  be 
their  Lord  forever.  Ps.  Attend,  O my  pec^e,  to 
my  law ; incline  your  ears  to  the  wor^  of  my 
nmuth.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Magnified,  — May  this  sacred  so- 
lemnity of  thy  servants.  Cosmos  and  Damian,  shew 
thy  greatness,  O Lord ; by  which,  in  thy  unspeak- 
able providence,  tliou  hast  granted  them  eternal 
glory,  and  us  the  aid  of  their  prayers.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  Jer.  viL  1.  7.— in  those  days:  The 
word  that  came  to  Jeremias  from  the  Lord,  saying : 
stand  in  the  gate  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  pro- 
claim there  this  word,  and  say : Hear  ye  the  word 
of  the  Lord,  all  ye  men  of  Juda,  that  enter  in  at 
these  gates,  to  adore  the  Lord.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  ho^  the  God  of  Israel : Make  your  ways 
and  your  doings  good;  and  I will  dweU  with  you 
in  this  place.  Trust  not  in  lying  words,  saying: 
The  temple  of  the  Lord,  tlie  tem|3e  of  the  Lord,  it 
is  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  For  if  you  will  order 
well  your  ways  and  your  doings ; if  you  will  execute 
judgment  between  a man  and  his  neighbour,  if  you 
oppress  not  the  stranger,  the  fiitherless  and  the  vvi- 
dow,  and  shed  not  innocent  blood  in  this  place,  and 
walk  not  after  strange  gods  to  your  own  hurt.  I 
will  dwell  with  you  in  this  place ; in  the  Ivjid 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


«t.  ^EEK  OF  UET^T.  177 

which  I gave  1 1 your  fathers  from  the  beginning  and 
for  evermore,  smth  the  Lord  JEniighty, 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxliv. — The  eyes  of  all  hope  in  tliee, 

0 Lord,  and  thou  givest  them  meat  in  due  season. 
F.  Thou  openest  thy  hand,  and  fillest  with  tliy  bless- 
ing every  living  creature.  , 

GOSPEL.  Luke  iv.  38.  44.  — At  that  time: 
Jesus  rising  up  out  of  the  synagogue,  wont  into 
Simon’s  house.  And  Simon’s  wife’s  mother  was  taken 
with  a great  fever,  and  they  besought  him  for  her. 
And  standing  over  her,  he  commanded  the  fever, 
and  it  left  her.  And  immediately  rising,  she  min- 
istered to  them.  And  when  the  sun  was  down,  aH 
tliey  that  had  any  sick  with  divers  diseases,  brought 
them  to  him.  But  he  laying  his  hands  on  every 
one  of  them,  healed  them.  And  devils  went  out 
from  many,  crying  out  and  saying:  Thou  art  the 
Son  of  God.  And  he  i*ebuking  them  suftered  diem 
not  to  speak,  for  they  knew  that  he  was  Christ.  And 
when  it  was  day,  going  out  he  went  into  a desert 
place ; and  the  multitude  sought  him,  ami  came  to 
him ; and  they  staj’ed  him  that  he  shoidd  not  depart 
from  them.  To  whom  he  said : To  other  cities  I 
must  preech  the  kingdom  of  God:  for  tlierefore  am 

1 sent.  And  he  was  preaching  in  the  synagoguesof 
Galilee. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxxxviL  — If  I shall  walk  in  the 
midst  of  tribidation,  thou  wilt  quicken  me,  O Lord; 
and  thou  hast  stretched  forth  thy  hand  against  the 
wrath  of  my  enemies ; and  thy'iight  hand  hath  saved 
me. 

SECRET.  We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  on  occasion  of 
the  precious  death  of  thy  hdy  servants,  this  sacri- 
fice, from  which  their  martyrdom,  and  that  of  all 
others,  took  its  beginning.  Thro’. 

COM  M.  Ps,  cxviii.  — Thou  hast  commanded  thy 
commandments  to  be  kept  most  diligently.  O that 
my  ways  may  be  directed  to  keep  tljy  justificationn. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


178 


FRIDAY  Ilf  THE 


P.  COMM.  Sii  nobis. — May  this  thy  sacrament, 
O Lord,  ]3rocui*e  for  us  that  salvation  which  we  beg 
(or  l)y  the  merits  of  thy  blessed  martyrs  Cosmas  and 
Damian.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  Grod. 

PRAYER.  Suijcctum. — May  thy  heavenly  mercy, 
O Lord,  always  increase  thy  people,  and  make  them 
ever  ol)edient  to  thy  commandments.  Thro’. 


FRIDAY. 

INTROIT. — Ps.  Ixxxv.-^hew  me,  O Lord,  a 
token  for  good : that  they  who  hate  me  may  see  it, 
and  be  confounded,  beS^use  thou,  O Lord,  hast 
helped  me  and  comforted  me.  Ps.  Bow  down  thine 
ear,  O Lord,  and  hear  me,  for  I am  needy  and  poor. 
V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Jejunia. — Let  thy  kind  favour,  O 
I^ord,  accompany  our  fast,  that  as  we  abstain  from 
«•or|)oral  food,  so  we  may  likewise  refrain  from  all 
vice.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Numb.  xx.  2.  13. — In  those 
The  children  of  Israel  came  together  against 
Moses  and  Aaron ; and  making  a sedition  they 
said : Give  us  water  to  drink.  And  Moses  and 
Aaron  leaving  the  multitude,  went  into  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  covenant,  and  fell  flat  upon  the 
groiuid,  and  cried  to  the  Lord  and  said:  O Lord 
God,  hear  the  cry  of  this  people,  and  open  to 
them  thy  treasure  a*fbuntam  of  living  water,  that 
being  satisfied,  th^  may  cease  to  murmur.  And 
the  ^ory  of  the  Lord  appeared  over  them.  And 
the  Lord  spoke  to  Moses  saying:  Take  the  rod 
and  assemble  the  people  together,  thou  and  Aaron 
thy  brotlier,  and  speak  to  the  rock  beforo  them,  and 
it  shall  yield  waters.  And  when  thou  hast  brought 
forth  water  out  of  the  rock,  all  the  multitude  and 
their  cattle  shall  drink.  Moses  therefore  took  the 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


III.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


179 


rod,  which  was  before  the  Lord,  as  he  had  com- 
manded him,  and  having  gathered  together  the  mul- 
titude before  the  rock,  ^ said  to  them : Hear,  ye 
rebellious  and  incredulous:  can  we  bring  you  fortli 
water  out  of  this  rock  ? And  when  Moses  had  lifted 
up  his  hand,  and  struck  the  rock  twice  with  the 
rod,  there  came  forth  water  in  great  abundance,  so 
that  the  people  and  their  cattle  drank.  And  the 
Lord  said  to  Moses  and  Aaron : Because  you  have 
not  believed  me,  to  sanctify  me  before  the  children 
of  Israel,  you  shall  not  bring  tiiese  people  into  the 
land  which  I will  give  them.  This  is  the  water  of 
contradiction,  where  the  children  of  Israel  strove 
^vith  words  against  the  Lord,  and  he  was  sanctified 
in  them. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxvii. — My  heart  trusted  in  the 
Lord,  and  I found  relief : my  flesh  is  healed,  and  1 
will  with  pleasure  return  him  thanks.  V,  To  thee, 
0 Lord,  have  I cried  out:  answer  me,  O my  God, 
and  dep€Lrt  not  from  me. 

* TRACT.  Ps.  cii.— Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  iv.  5.  41.  — At  that  time; 
Jesus  came  to  a city  of  Samaiia  which  is  called 
Sichar;  near  the  land  which  Jacob  gave  to  his 
son  Josepli-  Now  Jacob’s  well  was  there.  Jesus 
therefore  being  wearied  with  his  journey,  sat  thus 
on  the  well,  ft  was  about  the  sixth  hour.  There 
comelh  a woman  of  Samaria  to  draw  water.  Jesus 
saith  to  her:  Give  me  to  drink.  (For  his  disciples 
were  gone  into  the  city  to  buy  meats.)  Then  tliat 
Samaritan  woman  saith  to  him:  How  dost  thou, 
being  a Jew,  ask  of  me  to  drink,  who  am  a Sa- 
maritan woman  ? For  the  Jew's  do  not  communi- 
cate with  the  Samaritans.  Jesus  an8wei*ed,  and  said 
to  her:  If  thou  didst  know  the  gift  of  God,  and 
who  he  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink ; thou 
perhaps  wouldst  have  asked  of  him,  and  he  would  have 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


tSQ 


fULlDAt  Iff  'rffE 


f’lven  thee  Kving  water.  The  woman  saith  to  him^ 
ir,  tliou  hast  nothing  wherein  to  di*aw,  and  th«r 
well  is  deep:  from  whence  then  hast  tboa  living 
water  ? Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Jacoby  who* 
gave  hs  the  well,  and  drank  thereof  hinraelf,  and 
his  children,  and  his  cattle?  Jesus  answered  and 
said  to  her:  Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water,  shall 
thirst  again:  hut  he  that  shall  drink  of  the  water 
that  I shall  give  him,  shall  not  thirst  for  ever^  Bur 
the  water  tliat  I shall  give  him,  sliall  become  in  him 
a fountain  of  water  ^rin^g  op  into  life  everiast- 
ing.  The  woman  saith  to  him  t Sir,  Give  me  this 
water,  that  I may  not  thirst,  nor  come  hither  to 
draw.  Jesus  saith  to  her : Go,  call  tliy  husband, 
and  come  hither.  The  woman  answered,  and  said : 
I have  no  husband.  Jesus  saith  to  her : Thou  hast 
said  well,  1 have  no  husband : for  thou  hast  had  five 
htislmnds : and  he  whom  thou  now  hast,  is  not  thy 
husl)aiul.  This  thou  hast  said  truly.  The  woman 
saitli  to  him : Sir : I perceive  that  thou  art  a prophets 
Our  fathers  adored  on  this  mountain,  and  you  say. 
'that  at  Jerusalem  is  the  place  where  men  must  adore# 
Jesus  saith  to  her;  Woman,  believe  me,  the  hour 
cometh,  when  you  shall  neither  on  this  mountain, 
nor  in  Jerusalem,  adore  the  Father.  You  adore 
that  which  you  laiow  not ; we  adore  that  whieJ? 
we  know:  for  salvation  is  of  the  Jews  But  the 
hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  true  adorers 
shall  adore  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  For 
the  Father  also  seeketh  such  to  adore  hhn.  God  is^ 
a spirit,  and  they  that  adore  him,  must  adore  him  in 
8]3irit  and  in  truth.  The  woman  saith  to  him:  I 
know  that  the  Messias  cometh  (wlio  is  called  Christ)» 
therefore  when  he  is  come,  he  will  tell  us  all  things. 
Jesus  saith  to  her:  I am  he,  who  am  speaking  with 
thee.  And  immediately  his  disciples  came;  and 
they  wondered  that  be  talked  with  the  woman.  Yc4 
no  man  said:  What  seekest  thou,  or  why  talkest 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


in.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


181 


diou  Avith  her?  The  woman  therefore  left  her 
water-pot,  and  went  her  way  into  the  city,  and  saith 
to  the  men  there : Come,  and  see  a man  who  hatli 
told  me  all  things  whatsoever  I have  done.  Is  not  he 
tlie  Christ?  They  went  therefore  out  of  the  city,  and 
came  unto  him.  In  the  mean  time  the  disciples  pray- 
ed him,  saying;  Rabbi,  eat.  But  he  said  to  them : I 
have  meat  to  eat  which  you  knoAV  not  of.  The  disci- 
ples tlierefore  said  one  to  another ; Hath  any  man 
brought  him  to  eat  ? Jesus  saith  to  them ; My  meat 
is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  that  I may 
perfect  hLs  work.  Do  not  you  say,  there  are  yet  four 
months,  and  then  the  harvest  cometh?  Behold  I 
say  to  you,  lift  up  your  eyes,  and  see  the  countries, 
for  they  are  white  already  to  harvest  * And  he  that 
reapeth,  receiveth  wages,  and  gathereth  fruit  unto 
life  everlasting;  that  both  he  that  soweth,  and  he 
that  reapeth  may  rejoice  together.  For  in  this  is 
that  saying  true ; that  it  is  one  man  that  soweth,  and 
it  is  another  that  reapeth.  , I have  sent  you  to  reap 
that  ill  which  you  did  not  labour ; others  have  la- 
boured, and  you  have  entered  into  their  laboui-sl 
Now  of  that  city  many  of  the  Samaritans  believed  in 
him,  for  the  word  of  the  woman  giving  testimony : 
he  told  me  all  things  whatsoever  I have  done.  So  when 
the  Samaritans  were  come  to  him,  they  desired  him 
that  he  would  tarry  there.  And  he  abode  there  two 
days.  And  many  more  believed  in  him  because  of 
his  own  word.  And  they  said  to  the  woman;  We 
DOW  believe,  not  for  thy  saying ; for  we  ourselves 
have  seen  him,  and  know  that  he  is  indeed  the  Saviour 
of  the  world. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  V. — ^Hearken  to  the  voice  of  my 
prayer,  O my  King  and  my  God ; for  to  thee  will  I 
pray  O Lord. 

SECRET.  We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  mercifully 
regard  the  offerings  we  consecrate  tb  thee,  so  that 
they  may  become  acceptable  to  thee,  and  always 
advance  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

Q 

, oy  Google 


182  SATURDAY  IN  THE 

COMM.  John  iv. — He  who  shall  drink  the  wat(*r 
which  I shall  give  him,  saith  the  Lord,  it  shall  be- 
come in  him  arountain  of  water  springing  up  to  eter- 
nal life. 

P.  COMM.  Hujus, — ^May  the  receiving  of  this 
sacrament,  O Lord,  cleanse  us  from  sin,  and  bring 
js  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  PrftsUu — Grant  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  confide  in  thy  pro- 
tection, may,  thro’  thy  grace,  overcome  all  the  ene- 
mies of  our  salvation.  Thro’. 


SATURDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  V.  — Give  ear,  O Lord,  to  my 
words,  understand  my  cry : he€irken  to  the  voice  of 
my  prayer,  O my  King  and  my  God.  Ps,  For  to  thee, 
will  I pray : O Lord,  in  the  morning  thou  shalt  hear 
my  voice.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Pr<wto.--r-Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  they  who  mortify  themselves 
by  abstinence  from  food,  may,  by  observing  thy 
holy  law,  also  fast  from  all  sin.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Dan.  xiii.  1.  62.  — In  those  days: 
There  was  a man  that  dwelt  in  Babylon,  and  his 
name  was  Joakim : and  he  took  a wife  whose  name 
was  Susanna,  the  daughter  of  Helcias,  a very  beau- 
tiful woman,  and  one  that  feared  God.  For  her 
parents  being  just,  had  instructed  their  daughter 
according  to  tlie  law  of  Moses.  Now  Joakim  was 
very  rich,  and  had  an  orchard  near  his  house ; and 
the  Jews  resorted  to  him,  because  he  was  the  roost 
honourable  of  them  all.  And  there  were  two  of 
the  ancients  of  the  people  appointed  judges  that 
year,  of  whom  the  Lord  said:  Iniquity  came  out 
from  Babylon  from  the  ancient  judges,  that  seemed  t(» 
govern  the  people.  These  men  frequented  the 
house  of  Joakim,  and  all  that  had  any  matters  of 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


III.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


183 


judgment  came  to  them.  And  when  the  [leople 
de{>arted  away  at  noon,  Susanna  went  in,  and 
walked  in  her  husband’s  orchard.  And  the  old 
men  saw  her  going  in  every  day,  and  walking : Rn<l 
they  were  inflamed  with  lust  towards  her:  and  they 
|)erverted  their  own  mind,  and  turned  away  their 
eyes  that  they  might  not  look  unto  heaven,  nor 
remember  just  judgments.  So  they  were  both 
wounded  with  the  love  of  her,  yet  they  did  not 
make  known  their  grief  one  to  the  other : for  they 
were  ashamed  to  declare  to  one  another  their  lust, 
being  desirous  to  have  to  do  with  her:  and  they 
watched  carefully  every  day  to  see  her.  And  one 
said  to  the  otlier : Let  us  now  go  home,  for  it  is  din- 
ner time.  So  going  out  they  departed  one  from  ano- 
ther. And  turning  back  again,  they  came  both  to 
the  same  place : and  asking  one  another  tlie  cause, 
they  acknowledged  their  lust : and  then  they  agreed 
together  upon  a time  when  they  might  find  her 
alone.  And  it  fell  out,  as  they  watched  a fit  day, 
she  went  in  on  a time,  as  yesterday  and  the  day  be- 
fore, with  two  maids  only,  and  was  desirous  to 
wash  herself  in  the  orchard:  for  it  was  hot  weather 
And  ‘there  was  nobody  there,  but  the  two  old  men 
that  had  hid  themselves  and  were  considering  her. 
So  she  said  to  the  maids : Bring  me  oil,  and  wash- 
ing balls,  and  shut  the  doors  of  the  orchard,  that  I 
may  wash  me.  And  they  did  as  she  bade  them: 
and  they  shut  the  doors  of  the  orchard,  and  went 
out  by  a back  door  to  fetch  what  she  had  com- 
manded them,  and  they  knew  not  that  the  elders 
were  hid  within.  Now  when  the  maids  were  gone 
forth,  the  two  elders  arose,  and  ran  to  her,  and 
said : Behold  the  doors  of  the  orchard  ar||  shut, 
and  nobody  seeth  us,  and  we  are  in  love  wim  thee, 
wherefore  consent  to  us,  and  lie  with  us.  But  if‘ 
thou  wilt  not,  we  will  bear  witness  against 
thee,  that  a young  man  was  with  thee,  and  there- 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


184 


SATUBDAT  IW  THE 


fore  thou  didst  send  away  thy  maids  frona  thee. 
Susanna  sighed,  and  said:  1 am  sti-aitened  on  every 
side:  for  if  1 do  this  thing,  it  is  death  to  me: 
and  if  1 do  it  not,  I shall  not  escape  your  hands. 
But  it  is  better  for  me  to  fall  into  your  hands  vndi- 
out  doing  it,  tlian  to  sin  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord. 
VVitli  that  Susanna  cried  out  with  a loud  voice : and 
the  elders  also  cried  out  against  her.  And  one  of 
them  ran  to  the  door  of  the  orchard,  and  opened 
it  So  when  the  servants  of  tlie  house  heard  the 
cry  in  the  orchard,  they  rushed  in  by  the  bock  door, 
to  see  what  was  the  matter.  But  after  the  old  men 
had  spoken,  the  sen^ants  were  greatly  asliamed,  for 
never  had  there  been  any  such  word  said  of  Susanna. 
And  on  the  next  day,  when  the  people  were  come 
to  Joakim  her  husb^d,  the  two  elders  also  came, 
full  of  their  wicked  device  against  Susanna,  to  put 
her  to  death.  And  they  said  before  the  people: 
Send  to  Susanna,  daughter  of  Helcias,  the  wife  of 
Joakim.  And  they  presently  sent.  And  she  came 
with  her  parents,  and  children,  and  all  her  kindred. 
Now  Susanna  was  exceeding  delicate,  and  beautifid 
to  behoUL  But  those  wicked  men  commanded  tliat 
lier  fece  should  be  uncovered  (for  she  was  covered) 
tliat  so  at  least  they  might  be  satisfied  with  her 
beauty.  Therefore  her  friends  and  all  her  acquain- 
tance wept  But  the  two  elders,  rising  up  in  the 
midst  of  the  people,  laid  their  hands  upon  her  heacl. 
And  she  weeping  looked  up  to  heaven,  for  her  heart 
had  confidence  in  the  Lord.  And  the  elders  add : 
As  we  walked  m the  orchard  alone,  this  woman 
came  in  with  two  maids,  and  shut  the  doora  of  the 
orchard,  and  sent  away  the  maids  from  her.  Then 
a y(^g  man  that  was  there  bid,  came  to  her,  and 
lay  mth  her.  But  we  that  were  in  the  corner  of 
tlie  orchard,  seeing  this  wickedness,  ran  up  to 
them,  and  we  saw  them  lie  together.  And  as  for 
him  we  could  not  take  him,  because  he  was 
stronger  than  we,  and  opening  the  doors  he  leajMifl 

L)  g tized  by  CjOO^lC 


111.  WEEK  OF  LENT.  185 

out  but  having  taken  this  woman,  we  asked  who 
the  young  man  was,  but  she  would  not  tell  us : of 
this  thing  we  are  witnesses.  The  multitude  believed 
them,  as  being  the  elders  and  judges  of  the  people, 
and  they  condemned  her  to  death.  Then  Susan- 
na cried  out  with  a loud  voice,  and  said : O eternal 
God,  who  knowest  hidden  things,  who  knowest  aU 
things  before  they  come  to  pass,  thou  knowest  that 
they  have  home  false  witness  against  me:  and  be- 
hold I must  die,  whereas  I have  done  none  of  these 
things,  which  these  men  have  maliciously  forged 
against  me.  And  the  Lord  heard  her  voice.  And 
when  she  was  led  to  be  put  to  death,  the  Lord 
raised  up  the  holy  spirit  of  a young  boy,  whose 
name  was  Daniel:  and  he  cried  out  with  a loud 
voice : I am  clear  from  the  blood  of  this  woman. 
Then  all  the  people  turning  towards  him,  said: 
What  meaneth  this  word  that  thou  hast  spoken? 
But  he  standing  in  the  midst  of  them  said : Are  ye 
BO  foolish,  ye  children  of  Israel,  that  without  exam- 
ination or  knowledge  of  the  truth,  ye  have  con- 
demned a daughter  of  Israel  ? Return  to  judgment, 
for  they  have  borne  false  wimess  against  her.  So  all 
the  people  turned  again  in  haste,  and  the  old  men 
said  to  him:  Come  and  sit  thou  down  among  us, 
and  shew  it  us : seeing  God  hath  given  thee  the  ho- 
noiu*  of  old  age.  And  Daniel  said  to  the  people: 
Separate  these  two  far  from  one  another,  and  I will 
examine  them.  So  when  they  were  put  asunder  one 
from  the  other,  he  called  one  of  them  and  said  to 
him : O thou  that  art  grown  old  in  evil  days,  now 
are  thy  sins  come  out  which  thou  hast  committed 
before : in  judging  unjust  judgments,  oppressing  the 
innocent,  and  letting  the  guilty  go  free,  whereas 
tlie  Lord  saith : the  iimocent  and  tlie  just  thou  shall 
not  kilL  Now  then,  if  thou  sawest  her,  tell  me 
under  what  tree  thou  sawest  them  conversing  to- 
gether. He  said:  under  a mastick  tree.  And  Daniel 
Q3 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


186 


SATURDAT,  IN  THE 


said : Well  hast  thou  lied  against  thy  own  head 
for  behold  the  angel  of  God  having  received  the 
sentence  of  him,  shall  cut  thee  in  two.  And  baling 
put  him  aside,  he  commanded  that  the  other  slioubi 
come,  and  he  said  to  him  : O thou  seed  of  Cha- 
naan,  and  not  of  Juda,  beauty  hatli  deceived  thee, 
and  lust  hath  perverted  thy  heart  :nhus  did  you  do  as 
to  the  daughters  of  Israel,  and  they  for  fear  convers- 
ed with  you ; but  a daughter  of  Juda  would  not 
abide  your  wickedness.  Now,  therefore,  tell  me  under 
what  tree  tlidst  thou  take  them  conversing  together  r 
x4nd  he  answered : under  a holm  tree.  And  Daniel 
said  to  him:  Well  hast  thou  also  lied  against  thy 
own  head ; for  the  angel  of  the  Lord  waiteth  with  a 
sword  to  cut  thee  in  two,  and  to  destroy  thee. 
With  tliat  all  the  assembly  cried  out  with  a loud 
voice,  and  they  blessed  God,  who  saveth  tliera  that 
trust  in  him.  And  they  rose  up  against  the  two  el- 
ders (for  Daniel  had  convicted  them  of  false  witness 
by  tlieir  own  mouth)  and  they  did  to  them  as  they 
had  maliciously  dealt  against  their  neighbour,  to 
fulfil  the  law  of  Moses:  and  they  put  them  to 
fleath,  and  innocent  blood  was  saved  in  that  day. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxii.— -Though  I should  walk  in  the 
midst  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I will  fear  no  evils, 
lor  thou  art  with  me,  O Lord.  V.  Thy  rod  and  thy 
staff,  they  have  comforted  me. 

GOSPEL.  John  viii.  1. 11. — that  time:  Jesus 
went  to  mount  Olivet.  And  early  in  the  morning 
he  came  again  into  the  temple,  and  all  the  people 
came  to  him,  and  sitting  down  he  taught  them. 
And  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  brings  unto  him  a 
woman  taken  in  adultery ; and  tliey  set  her  in  the 
midst,  and  said  to  him : Master,  this  woman  was 
even  now  taken  in  adultery.  Now  Moses  in  the 
law  commanded  us  to  stone  such  a one.  But  what 
sayest  thou  ? And  this  they  said  tempting  him,  that 
they  might  accuse  him  But  Jesus  lowing  himself 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


IV.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


187 


down,  wrote  with  his  finger  on  the  ground.  When 
therefore  they  continued  asking  him,  he  lifted  up 
himself,  and  said  to  them : He  that  is  without  sin 
^mong  you,  let,  him  firat  cast  a stone  at  her.  And 
again  stooping  down,  he  wrote  on  the  gi*ound.  But 
they  hearing  this,  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at 
the  eldest,  and  Jesus  alone  remained,  and  the  wo- 
man standing  in  the  midst.  Then  Jesus  lifting  up 
himself,  said  to  her:  Woman,  where  are  they  that 
accused  thee.^  Hath  no  man  condemned  thee.^ 
Who  said:  No  man.  Lord.  And  Jesus  said:  Nei- 
ther will  I condemn  thee.  Go,  and  now  sin  no  more. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviii. — Direct  my  steps  according 
to  thy  word,  that  no  injustice  may  reign  in  me,  O 
Lord. 

SECRET.  Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  that  the  offering  of  this  sacrifice  may  cleanse 
and  protect  our  frail  nature  from  all  evil. 

COMM.  John  viii. — Woman,  hath  no  man  con- 
demned thee  ? No  man.  Lord.  Neither  will  I con- 
demn thee.  Now  sin  no  more. 

P.  COMM.  ^xKBsumus. — ^We  beseech  thee,  O Al- 
mighty God,  that  we  may  be  reckoned  among  his 
members,  whose  body  and  blood  we  partake  of. 
Who  livest,  &c. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  PrcBtende. — Stretch  forth,  O Lord, 
over  thy  people,  the  right  hand  of  thy  heavenly  aid, 
that  they  may  seek  thee  with  their  whole  heart,  and 
mercifully  obtain  what  they  ask  for  as  they  ought. 
Tfiro’. 


IV.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 

IN  the  Mass  of  this  day,  the  Church  seems  to  forget 
the  sentiments  of  penance  with  which  she  hath 
been  occupied  from  the  beginning  of  Lent.  The  rea- 
son whereof  is,  that  formerly  such  as  were  to  receive 
baptism  at  Easter,  were  enregistered,  after  having 
been  examined  this  week  : She  also  saw  the  time  now 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


188 


IV.  «UNDAT  IN  LENT. 


approachinff  for  the  reconciliation  of  the  penitents 
whom  she  had  subjected  to  public  penance  on  Ash 
Wednesday.  The  future  birth,  therefore,  of  those  who 
were  judged  worthy  of  the  grace  of  baptism  ; and  the 
resurrection  to  a new  life  of  several  of  her  child  renj 
who,  after  having  gone  astray,  return  to  God  by  a 
sincere  conversion,  is  this  day  the  subject  of  her  joy. 


INTROIT.  la, 
“P  Ejoice,  Jerusalem, 
and  meet  together  all 
you  who  love  her : rejoice 
exceedingly,  you  who 
have  been  in  son*ow,  that 
you  may  leap  for  joy, 
and  be  satiated  with  com- 
fort from  her  breasts. 

Ps.  I rejoiced  at  the 
things  that  were  said  to 
me : we  shall  go  into  the 
house  of  the  Lord, 
r.  Glory. 


Ixvi.  Ps.  exxi. 

Mtare,  Jerusalem^  et 
conventum  facite  otn- 
nes  qui  diligitis  eam  :ga\k- 
dete  cum  Ictlitia^  qui  in  tris- 
titia fuisiisj  ut  exuUeiis, 
et  satiemini  ah  uberibus 
consolationis  vestrre. 

Ps.  cxxi.  Lmtatus  sum 
in  hia  qvee  dicta  sunt 
mihi : in  domum  Domini 
ibimus. 

V.  Gloria. 


COLLECT.  Concede. — Orant,  we  heseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  are  justly  aftlicted 
according  to  our  demerits,  may  be  relieved  by  tliy 
comforting  grace.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Gal.  iv.  22.  31.— JBre^^ren : It  is 
written  that  Abraham  had  two  sons : the  one  by  a 
bond- woman,  and  the  other  by  a free-woman.  But 
he  who  was  of  the  bond-woman,  was  born  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh : but  he  by  the  free-woman,  w^as  by 
promise.  Which  things  are  said  by  an  allegory. 
For  these  are  the  two  testaments.  The  one  from 
Mount  Siua,  engendering  unto  bondage ; which  is 
Agar : for  Sina  is  a mountain  in  Arabia,  which  hath 
atfinity  to  that  Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and  is  in 
bondage  with  her  children.  But  that  Jerusalem, 
which  is  above,  is  free ; which  is  our  mother.  For 
it  is  written:  “Rejoice,  thou  barren,  that  bearest 
not;  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travailest  not: 


.d  by  Google 


IV.  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 


189 


for  many  are  the  children  of  the  desolate,  more  than 
of  her  that  hath  a husband.”  Now  we,  brethren,  as 
Isaac  was,  are  the  children  of  promise.  But  as  then, 
he  that  was  bom  according  to  the  flesh,  persecuted 
him  that  was  after  the  spirit : so  also  it  is  now.  But 
what  saith  the  scripture  ? “ Cast  out  the  bond- wo- 
man and  her  son : for  the  son  of  the  bond- woman 
shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the  fiw- woman.” 
So  then,  brethren,  we  are  not  children  of  the  bond- 
woman, but  of  the  fiiee ; by  the  freedom  wherewith 
Christ  hath  made  us  fi^. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxxi. — I rejoiced  at  the  things  that 
were  said  to  me ; we  shall  go  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord. 

F.  Let  peace  be  in  thy  strength,  and  abundance  in 
thy  towers. 

TRACT.  Ps.  cxxiv. — Qui  confidunt  tn  Domino, 
siciU  mons  Sion : non  commovebitur  in  cdemum,  qui 
habitat  in  Jerusalem.  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord, 
Ehall  be  as  mount  Sion : he  shall  not  be  moved  for- 
ever that  (^^lleth  in  Jerusalem.  V.  Mountains  are 
round  about  it ; so  the  Lord  is  round  about  his  peo- 
ple from  henceforth  now  and  for  ever. 

GOSPEL.  John.  vi.  1.  15. — At  that  time : Jesus 
went  over  the  sea  of  Galilee,  which  is  that  of  Tibe- 
rias: and  a great  multitude  followed  him,  because 
they  saw  the  miracles  which  he  did  on  them  that 
were  diseased.  Jesus  tlierefore  went  up  into  a moun- 
tain, and  there  he  sat  with  his  disciples.  Now  the 
pasch,  the  festival  day  of  the  Jews,  was  near  at  hand. 
VVhen  Jesus  therefore  had  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and 
seen  that  a venr  great  multitude  cometh  tc  him,  he 
said  to  Philip : Whence  shall  we  buy  breed  that  these 
may  eat  ? And  this  he  said  to  try  him : for  he  him- 
self knew  what  he  would  do.  Philip  answered  him 
Two  hundred  penny-worth  of  bread  is  not  sufficient 
for  them,  that  every  one  may  take  a little.  One  of 
his  disciples,  Andrew,  the  brother  of  Simon  Peter, 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


190 


MONDAY  IN  THE 


Bailh  to  bim : There  is  a boy  here  that  hath  five  bar- 
ley loaves,  and  two  fishes ; but  what  are  they  among 
so  many  ? Then  Jesus  said : Make  the  men  sit  down. 
Now  there  was  much  grass  in  the  place.  The  men 
tnerefore  sat  down,  in  number  about  five  thousand. 
And  Jesus  took  the  loaves;  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  disnibuted  to  them  that  were  sat  down. 
In  like  manner  also  of  the  fishes,  as  much  as  they 
would,  and  when  they  were  filled,  he  said  to  his  dis- 
ciples: Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain,  lest 
they  be  lost.  They  gathered  up  therefore,  and  filled 
twelve  baskets  with  the  fragments  of  the  five  barley 
loaves,  which  remained  over  and  above  to  them  th^ 
had  eaten.  Now  these  men,  when  they  had  seen  what 
a mhacle  Jesus  had  done,  said : This  is  of  a ti'uth 
the  prophet  that  is  to  come  into  the  world.  Jesus 
therefore  when  he  knew  that  they  would  come  to 
take  him  by  force  and  make  him  king,  fled  again 
uito  the  mountain  himself  alone.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxxxiv. — Praise  ye  the  Lord,  for  he 
is  good : sing  ye  to  his  name,  for  it  is^weet : what 
he  pleased  he  hath  done,  in  heaven  ancr  on  earth. 

SECRET.  We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  mercifully 
regard  this  present  sacrifice,  that  it  may  both  increase 
our  devotion,  and  advance  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMMUNION.  Ps.  cxxi. — Jerusalem,  which  is 
built  as  a city,  which  is  compact  together : for  thi- 
ther did  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of  the  Lord ; to 
praise  thy  name,  O Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Da  nobis, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee? 
O merciful  God,  that  we  may  sincerely  respect,  and 
receive  with  faith  thy  holy  mysteries,  w'ith  which 
thou  daily  feedest  us. 


MONDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  liii. — Save  me,  O God,  by  thy 
name,  and  judge  me  in  thy  strength:  O (iod,  hear 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


IV.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


191 


iny  prayer;  give  ear  to  the  words  of  my  mouth 
Ps,  For  strangers  have  risen  up  against  me ; and 
the  mighty  have  sougnt  after  my  soul.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  PrfBstcu — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 

0 Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  annually  celebrate 
this  holy  fast,  may  be  well  pleasing  to  thee  both  in 
body  and  mind.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  S Kings  i.  16.  28.  — In  those  days: 
Two  women  that  were  harlots,  came  to  king  Solo- 
mon, and  stood  before  him:  and  one  of  them  said  : 

1 beseech  thee,  my  Lord,  I and  this  woman  dwelt 
in  one  house,  and  I was  delivered  of  a child  with 
her  in  the  chamber.  And  the  third  day  after  that  I 
was  delivered,  she  also  was  delivered ; and  we  were 
together  and  no  other  person  with  us  in  the  house, 
only  we  two.  And  this  woman’s  child  died  in  the 
night.  For  in  her  sleep  she  overlaid  him.  And 
rising  in  th^  dead  time  of  the  night,  she  took  rny 
child  from  my  side,  while  thy  handmaid  was  asleep, 
and  laid  it  in  her  bosom : and  laid  her  dead  child  in 
my  bosom.  And  when  I rose  in  the  morning  to 
give  my  child  suck,  behold  it  was  dead ; but  consid- 
ering him  more  diligently  when  it  was  clear  day*, 
1 found  that  it  was  not  mine  which  I bore.  And  the 
other  woman  answered : It  is  not  so  as  thou*  sayest, 
but  thy  child  is  dead,  and  mine  is  alive.  On  the 
contrary  she  said : Thou  liest : for  my  child  liveth, 
and  thy  child  is  dead.  And  in  this  manner  ^hey 
strove  before  the  king.  Then  saith  the  king : The 
one  saith,  my  child  is  alive,  and  thy  child  is  dead. 
And  the  other  answereth,  Nav,  but  thy  child  is 
dead,  and  mine  liveth.  The  icing  therefore  said: 
Bring  me  a sword.  And  when  they  had  brouglit  a 
swora  before  the  king,  divide,  said  he,  the  living 
child  in  two,  and  give  half  to  the  one,  and  half  to 
the  other.  But  the  woman,  whose  child  was  alive, 
said  to  the  king  (for  her  bowels  were  moved  upon 
her  child),  I be^ech  thee,  my  Lord,  give  her  the 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


m 


MONDAY  Ilf  THE 


child  alive  and  do  not  kill  it.  But  the  other  said : 
Let  it  be  neither  mine  nor  thine,  but  divide  it,  The 
king  answered  and  said : Give  the  living  child  to 
this  woman,  and  let  it  not  be  killed,  for  she  is  the 
mother  thereof.  And  all  Israel  heard  the  judgment 
which  the  king  had  judged,  and  they  feared  the 
king,  seeing  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him  to 
do  judgment. 

GRAD.  Ps.  XXX, — Be  thou  unto  me  a God,  a pro- 
tector, and  a house  of  refuge  to  save  me.  V,  Ps,  Ixx. 
In  thee,  O God,  have  I hoped : O Lord,  let  me  never 
>e  confounded. 

* TRACT.  Ps,  cii. — Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  ii.  13.  25. — that  time : The 
9asch  of  the  Jews  was  at  hand,  and  Jesus  went  up 
to  Jerusalem,  and  he  found  in  the  temple  them  that 
lold  oxen,  and  sheep,  and  doves,  and  the  changers 
*f  money  sitting.  And  when  he  had  made  as  it  were 
\ scourge  of  little  cords,  he  drove  them  all  out  of 
the  temple,  the  sheep  also  and  the  oxen,  and  the 
money  of  the  changers  he  poured  out,  and  the  tables 
he  overthrew.  And  he  said  to  them  that  sold  doves ; 
Take  these  things  hence,  and  make  not  the  house  of 
Tiy  Fatlier  a house  of  ti*affic.  And  his  disciples  re- 
membered that  it  was  written : “ The  zeal  of  thy 
house  hath  eaten  me  up.”  Then  the  Jews  answer- 
ed, and  said  to  him ; What  sign  dost  thou  shew  us 
seeing  tJiou  dost  these  things  ? Jesus  answered,  and 
<aid  to  them:  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three 
lays  I will  raise  it  up.  The  Jews  then  said : Six 
ind  forty  years  was  this  temple  in  building,  and 
wilt  thou  raise  it  in  three  days  ? But  he  spoke  of 
the  temple  of  his  body.  When  therefore  he  was 
risen  again  from  the  dead,  his  disciples  remembered 
that  he  had  said  this,  and  they  believed  the  8criptu]>>, 
and  the  word  that  Jesus  had  said.  Now  when  he 
was  at  Jerusalem,  at  the  pasch,  upon  the  festival 
lay,  many  believed  in  his  name,  seeing  his  signs 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


IV.  WEEK  m LENT. 


193 


which  he  did.  But  Jesus,  did  not  tinist  himself  to 
them,  because  he  knew  all  men,  and  because  he 
needed  not  that  any  should  give  testimony  of  man, 
for  he  knew  what  was  in  man. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xcix. — Sing  joyfully  to  God,  all 
the  earth ; serve  the  Lord  with  gladness ; come  be- 
fore his  presence  with  exceeding  great  joy,  for  he  the 
Lord  himself  is  God. 

SECRET.  May  the  sacrifice  we  have  offered  thee, 
0 Lord,  always  give  us  life,  and  defend  us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  xviii. — From  my  secret  sins  cleanse 
me,  O Lord,  and  from  those  of  others;  spare  thy 
servant. 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis.-^May  the  receiving  of  these 
saving  mysteries,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  advance 
our  eternal  redenmtion.  Thro’. 

Let  tis  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  Grod. 

PRAYER.  Deprecatiomm, — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  hear  our  prayer,  and  grant  us  thy  protection, 
as  it  is  thou  who  inspirest  us  to  ask  it.  Thro’. 


TUESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  liv. — ^Hear,  O God,  my  prayer, 
and  despise  not  my  supplication : be  attentive  to  me 
and  hear  me.  Ps.  I am  grieved  in  my  exercise  ; and 
troubled  at  the  voice  of  the  enemy,  and  at  the  trib- 
ulation of  the  sinner.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Sacr(B, — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  the  holy  fast  we  observe  may  be  to  our  improve- 
ment in  holy  conversation,  and  draw  do^vn  upon  us 
the  constant  succours  of  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Exod.  xxxii.  7.  14. — In  those  days: 
The  Lord  spoke  to  Moses,  saying:  Go,  get  thee 
down  : thy  pBople,  which  thou  hast  brought  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt,  hath  sinned.  They  have  quickly 
Htrayed  fi*om  the  way  which  thou  didst  shew  them , 
and  they  have  made  to  themselves  a molten  calf,  and 
!.iave  adored  it,  and  s^rificing  victims  to  it,  have 


oy  Google 


194 


TUESDAY  IN  THE 


Raid:  These  are  thy  gods,  O Israel,  that  have 
liroufifht  thee  out  of  tlie  land  of  Egypt.  And  again 
the  Lord  said  to  Moses:  I see  that  this  people  is 
stiff-necked:  let  me  alone,  that  my  wrath  may  be 
kindled  against  them,  and  that  I may  destroy  them, 
and  I will  make  of  thee  a great  nation.  But  Moses 
besought  the  Lord  his  God,  saying : Why,  O Lord, 
is  thy  indignation  enkindled  against  thy  people, 
whom  thou  hast  brought  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
with  great  power,  and  with  a mighty  hand  ? Let 
not  the  Egyptians  say,  I beseech  thee : He  craftily 
brought  them  out,  that  he  might  kill  them  in  the  . 
mountains,  and  destroy  them  from  the  earth : let  thy 
anger  cease,  and  be  appeased  upon  the  wickedness 
of  thy  people.  Remember  Abraliam,  Isaac,  and  Israel 
thy  servants,  to  whom  thou  sworest  by  thy  own  sel^ 
saying : I will  multiply  your  seed  as  the  stars  of 
heaven : and  this  whole  land  that  I have  spoken  ofj 
1 will  give  to  your  seed,  and  you  shall  possess  it  for 
ever.  And  the  Lord  was  appeased  from  doing 
the  evil  which  he  had  spoken  against  his  people. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xliii. — Arise,  O Lord,  help  us,  and 
redeem  us  for  thy  name’s  sake.  F.  We  have  heard, 

O God,  with  our  ears ; our  fathers  have  declared  to 
us  the  work  thou  hast  wrought  in  their  days;  in  the 
(lays  of  old. 

GOSPEL.  John  vii.  14.  31. — At  that  timef 
About  the  midst  of  the  feast,  Jesus  went  up  into  the 
temple  and  taught.  And  the  Jews  wondered,  say- 
lug  : How  doth  this  man  know  letters,  having  never 
learned  ? Jesus  answered  them,  and  said : My  doc- 
trine is  not  mine,  but  his  that  sent  me.  If  any  man 
will  do  the  will  of  him,  he  shall  know  of  the  doc- 
trine whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I speak  of 
myself.  He  that  speaketh  of  himself,  seeketh  his 
own  glory : but  he  that  seeketh  the  glory  of  him 
that  sent  him,  he  is  true,  and  there  is  no  injustice 
in  hiiiL  Did  not  Moses  giv^ou  the  law  ? and  yet 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


IV.  W£EK  OF  LENT. 


195 


tiODo  of  you  keepeth  the  law.  Why  seek  you  to 
kill  me  ? The  multitude  answered  and  said : Thou 
hast  a devil : Who  seeketh  to  kill  thee  ? Jesus  im~ 
swered,  and  said  to  them : One  work  I have  done : 
and  you  all  wonder : therefore  Moses  gave  you  cir- 
cumcision : (not  because  it  is  of  Moses,  but  of  the 
fathers,)  and  on  the  Sabbath-day  you  circumcise  a 
man.  If  a man  receive  circumcision  on  the  Sab- 
bath-day, that  the  law  of  Moses  may  not  be  bro- 
ken ; are  you  angry  at  me,  because  I have  healed 
the  whole  man  on  the  Sablmth-day  ? Judge  not  ac- 
cording to  the  appearance,  but  judge  just  judgment. 
Some  therefore  of  Jerusdem  said : Is  not  this  he 
whom  they  seek  to  kill  ? And  behold  he  speaketh 
openly,  and  they  say  nothing  to  him.  Have  the 
rulers  known  for  a truth  that  this  is  the  Christ  ? But 
we  know  this  man  whence  he  is;  but  when  the 
Christ  cometh,  no  man  knoweth  whence  he  is.  Jesus 
therefore  cried  out  in  the  temple,  teaching  and  say- 
ing:' You  both  know  me,  and  you  know  whence  1 
am : and  I am  not  come  of  myself ; but  he  that 
sent  me  is  true,  whom  you  know  not,  I know 
him,  because  I am  from  him,  and  he  hath  sent  me. 
They  sought  therefore  to  apprehend  him:  and  no 
man  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his  hour  was  not 
yet  come.  But  of  the  people  many  believed  in  him. 

OFFERT.  Pa.  xxxix. — With  expectation  I have 
waited  for  the  Lord,  and  he  bath  looked  upon  me : 
and  he  heard  my  prayer;  and  hath  put  into  my 
mouth  a new  canticle,  a hymn  to  our  God. 

SECRET.  May  this  offering,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  cleanse  away  our  sins : and  sanctifv  both  the 
bodies  and  souls  of  thy  servants  for  worthily  celebrat- 
ing this  sacrifice.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Pa.  xix. — ^We  will  rejoice  in  thy  salva- 
tion : and  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  we  shall 
be  exalted. 

P.  COMM.  Hujxtf  noa. — May  the  receiving  of 
R2 


,y  Google 


196 


WEDNESDAY  IN  THE 


this  sacrament,  O Lord,  purify  us  from  sin.  and 
bring  us  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Tliro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Miserere. — ^Take  compassion,  O Lord, 
on  thy  people : and  mercifully  refresh  them  labouring 
under  continual  tribulations.  Thro’. 


WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ezech.  xxxvi. — When  I shall  have 
l)een  sanctified  amon^t  you,  I will  gather  you  fiom 
all  nations;  and  I will  pour  upon  you  clean  water, 
and  you  shall  be  cleansed  from  all  your  sins ; and  I * 
will  give  you  a new  spirit.  Ps.  xxxiii.  I wiD  bless 
the  Lord  at  all  times ; his  pi*aise  shall  be  always  in 
my  mouth.  V.  Glory. 

Immediately  after  Kyrie  eleison,  &c.  is  said: 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again.  • 

COLLECT.  DeiLS  quL — O God,  who  givest  to  the 
righteous  the  rewai^d  of  their  good  works,  and  by 
fasting,  pardon  to  sinners ; have  mercy  on  thy  sup- 
pliants, that  the  acknowledgment  of  our  guilt  may 
procure  us  the  remission  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Ezech,  xxxvi.  23.  28. — Thus  saith  the 
Lord  God:  I will  sanctify  my  great  name,  which 
was  profaned  among  the  Gentiles,  which  you  have 
profaned  in  the  midst  of  them:  that  the  Gentiles 
may  know  that  I am  the  Lord,  saith  the  Lord  of 
Hosts,  when  I shall  be  sanctified  in  you  before  their 
eyes.  For  I will  take  you  from  among  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  will  gather  you  together  out  of  all  the 
countries,  and  will  bring  you  into  your  own  land 
And  I will  pour  upon  you  clean  water,  and  you 
§hall  be  cleansed  from  edl  your  filthiness,  and  I will 
cleanse  you  from  all  your  idols.  And  I will  give 
you  a new  heart,  and  put  a new  spirit  within  you ; 
and  I will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your 
flesh,  and  will  give  you  a heart  of  flesh.  And  I will 
put  my  spirit  m the  midst  of  yoii,  and  I will  cause 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


rv.  WEEK  OF  LEIVT. 


197 


jrou  to  wa4k  in  my  commandments,  and  to  keep  my 
judgments,  and  do  them.  And  you  shall  dwell  in 
the  land  which  I gave  to  your  fathers,  and  you  shall 
he  my  people,  and  I will  be  your  Gkxl,  saklh  the 
Mmighiy, 

GRAD.  Ps»  xxxiii.  — Come,  children,  hearken  to 
me;  I will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  V,  Come 
ye  to  hitn,  and  be  enlightened : and  your  face  shall 
not  be  confounded. 

II.  COLLECT.  Pr<Bst(u — Grant,  we  beseech 
• thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  the  devotion,  which 
makes  us  punish  ourselves  by  this  yearly  fast,  may 
also  make  us  rejoice  to  the  end  that,  suppressing 
in  ourselves  aU  earthly  affections,  we  may  more 
easily  receive  thy  heavenly  inspirations.  Thro’. 

II.  LESSON.  Is.  1. 16. 19.— TAtw  satth  the  Lord 
God:  Wash  yourselves,  be  clean,  take  away  the 
evil  of  your  devices  from  my  eyes : cease  to  do  per- 
versely, learn  to  do  well:  seek  judgment,  relieve 
the  oppressed,  judge  for  the  fatherless,  defend  the 
widow.  And  then  come,  and  accuse  me,  saith  the 
Lord:  if  your  sins  be  as  the  scarlet,  they  shall  be 
made  as  white  as  snow : and  if  they  be  red  as  crim- 
son, they  shall  be  white  as  wool.  If  you  be  willing, 
and  will  hearken  to  me,  you  shall  eat  the  goc^ 
things  of  the  land,  saiih  the  Lord  Mmxghiy, 

GRAD.  Pa,  XXX ii. — Blessed  is  the  nation  whose 
God  is  the  Lord : the  people  whom  he  hath  chosen 
. for  his  inheritance.  V,  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  the 
neavens  were  established ; and  all  the  power  of  them 
by  the  spirit  of  his  mouth. 

* TRACT.  Pa,  cii.— Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  ix.'  1.  38. — At  that  time:  Jesus 
rising  by,  saw  a man  that  was  blind  from  his 
birth;  and  his  disciples  asked  him:  Rabbi,  who 
hath  sinned,  this  man,  or  his  parents,  that  be  should 
be  bom  blind  ? Jesus  ans^vered : Neither  hath  this 
R3 


1,1 by  Google 


198 


WEDNESDAY  IN  THE 


man  sinned,  nor  his  parents ; but  that  the  works  of 
God  should  be  made  manifest  in  him.  I must  work 
the  works  of  him  that  sent  me,  whilst  it  is  day : the 
night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work.  As  long  as 
I am  in  the  world,  I am  the  light  of  the  world. 
When  he  had  said  these  things,  he  spat  on  the 
ground,  and  made  clay  of  the  spittle,  and  spread 
3ie  clay  upon  his  eyes,  and  said  to  him : Go,  wash 
in  the  pool  of  Siloe,  which  is  interpreted,  Sent.  He 
went  his  way  therefore,  and  washed,  and  he  came  see- 
ing. The  neighbours  therefore,  and  they  who  had  seen 
him  before,  that  he  was  a beggar,  said : Is  not  this  he 
that  sat  and  begged  ? Some  said.  This  is  he.  But 
others  said : No,  but  he  is  like  him.  But  he  said : I 
am  he.  They  said  therefore  to  him 4 How  were  thine 
eyes  opened  ? He  answered : That  man  that  is  call- 
ed Jesus,  made  clay,  and  anointed  mine  eyes,  and 
said  to  me:  Go  to  the  pool  of  Siloe,  and  wash. 
And  I went,  I washed,  and  I see.  And  they  said 
to  him:  Where  is  he?  He  saith:  I know  not 
They  bring  him  that  had  been  blind  to  the  Phari- 
sees. Now  it  was  the  Sabbath,  when  Jesus  made 
the  clay,  and  opened  his  eyes.  Again  therefore  the 
Pharisees  asked  nim  how  he  had  received  his  sight. 
But  he  said  to  them : He  put  clay  ujfon  my  eyes, 
and  I washed,  and  I see.  Some  therefore  of  the 
Pharisees  said : this  man  is  not  of  God  who  keep- 
eth  not  the  Sabbath.  But  others  said ; How  can  a 
man  that  is  a sinner  do  such  miracles  ? And  there 
was  a division  among  them.  They  say  therefore  to  . 
the  blind  man  again : What  sayest  thou,  of  him  that 
hath  opened  thy  eyes  ? And  he  said : He  is  a pro- 
phet The  Jews  then  did  not  believe  concerning 
him,  that  he  had  been  blind,  and  had  received  his 
sight,  until  they  called  the  parents  of  him  that  had 
received  his  sight,  and  asked  them,  saying : Is  this 
your  son,  who  you  say  was  born  blind  ? How  then 
doth  he  now  see  ? His  parents  answered  them,  and 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


IV.  WFEK  OF  LENT.  191J 

said : We  know  that  this  is  our  son,  and  that  he  was 
bom  blind : but  how  he  now  seeth  we  know  not : 
or  who  hath  opened  his  eyes  we  know  not:  ask 
himself;  he  is  of  age;  let  him  speak  for  himself. 
These  tiling  his  parents  said,  because  they  feiired 
the  Jews : for  the  Jews  had  already  agreed  among 
themselves,  that  if  any  man  should  confess  him  to 
be  Christ,  he  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue. 
Therefore  did  his  parents  say : He  is  of  age,  ask 
him.  They  therefore  called  the  man  again  that  had 
been  blind,  and  said  to  him : Give  glory  to  God, 
We  know  that  this  man  is  a sinner.  He  said  then  to 
them : If  he  be  a sinner,  I know  dot : one  thing  I 
know,  that  whereas  I was  blind,  now  I see.  Then 
they  said  to  him  ; What  did  he  to  thee  ? How  did 
he  open  thy  eyes  ? He  answered  them : I have  told 
you  already,  and  you  have  heard : why  would  you 
hear  it  a^in : will  you  also  become  his  disciples  ? 
They  reviled  him,  therefore,  and  said : Be  thou  his 
disciple ; but  we  are  the  disciples  of  Moses.  We 
know  that  Goc^  spoke  to  Moses : but  as  to  this  man, 
we  know  not  from  whence  he  is.  The  man  an- 
swered, and  said  to  them : Why,  herein  is  a wonder- 
ful tiling,  that  you  know  not  from  whence  he  is,  and 
he  hath  opened  my  eyes.  Now  we  know  that 
God  doth  not  hear  sinners ; but  if  a man  be  a server 
of  God,  and  doth  his  will,  him  he  heareth.  From 
the  beginning  of  the  world  it  hath  not  been  iieard, 
that  any  man  hath  opened  the  eyes  of  one  l»oni 
blind.  Unless  this  man  were  of  God,  he  could  not 
do  any  thing.  They  answered  and  said  to  him: 
Thou  was  wholly  born  in  sins,  and  dost  thou  teach 
us?  And  they  cast  him  out.  Jesus  heard  tliat  they  had 
cast  him  out;  and  when  he  had  found  him,  he  said 
to  him : Dost  thou  believe  in  the  Sou  of  God  ? He 
answered,  and  said : Who  is  he.  Lord,  that  I may 
believe  in  him  ? And  Jesus  said  to  him : Thou  hast 
both  seen  him  • and  it  is  he  that  talketh  witli  tliee 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


200  THURSDAY  Ilf  THE 

And  he  said:  1 believe,  Lord.  And  ^ing  down, 
he  adored  him. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixv. — O bless  the  Lord  our  Go«J, 
ye  Gentiles ; and  make  Ahe  voice  of  his  praise  be  re- 
ceived who  hath  set  iny  soul  to  live : and  hath  not 
suffered  rny  feet  to  be  moved.  Blessed  be  the  Lord, 
who  hath  not  turned  away  my  prayer,  nor  his  mercy 
from  me. 

SECRET.  We  humbly  beseech  thee,  O Al- 
mighty God,  that  our  sins  may  be  cleansed  away  by 
this  sacrifice:  because  then  thou  wilt  bestow  on 
us  true  health  both  of  body  and  soul.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Jo/i7f  ix. — The  Lord  made  clay  of  spittle, 
and  anointed  my  eyes : and  1 went  and  washed  and 
saw,  and  believed  in  God. 

P.  COMM.  Sacramento. — ^May  the  mysteries,  O 
Lord  our  God,  which  we  have  received,  both  feed 
our  souls  and  protect  our  bodies.  Thro*. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  PatearU. — May  the  ears  of  thy  mercy, 
O Lord,  be  opened  to  the  prayers  pf  thy  servants: 
and  in  order  to  obtain  the  effect  of  our  petitions, 
grant  we  may  ask  what  is  pleasing  to  thee.  Thro*. 


THURSDAY. 

rNTROIT.  Ps.  civ. — Let  the  heart  of  them  re- 
joice that  seek  the  Lord : seek  ye  the  Lord,  and  be 
strengthened : seek  his  face  evermore.  Ps.  Praise 
the  Lord,  and  call  upon  his  name:  publish  his 
works  among  the  Gentiles.  V.  Gloiy. 

COLLECT.  PrfRsta,  qucBsumns. — Grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  the  devotion, 
which  makes  us  punish  oui*selves  by  this  yearly  fest, 
may  also  make  us  rejoice : to  the  end  tliat,  suppress- 
ing in  ourselves  all  earthly  affections,  we  may  more 
easily  receive  thy  heavenly  inspirations.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  4 Kings  iv.  25.  38. — In  those  days. 
A Sunomitess  came  to  Eliseus  on  mount  Carmel; 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


IV.  WEEK  OK  LENT. 


201 


mid  when  the  man  of  Grod  saw  her  coining  towards 
him,  he  said  to  Giezi  his  servant:  Behold  that 
Sunaniitess.  Go  therefore  to  meet  her,  and  say  to  her : 
Is  all  well  with  thee,  and  with  thy  husband,  and 
with  thy  son?  And  she  answered:  Well.  And 
when  she  came  to  the  man  of  God  to  the  mount, 
she  caught  hold  on  his  feet : and  Giezi  came  to  i^e- 
move  her.  And  the  man  of  God  said:  Let  her 
alone,  for  her  soul  is  in  anguish,  and  the  Lord  hath 
hid  it  from  me,  and  hath  not  told  me.  And  she 
said  to  him : Did  I ask  a son  of  my  Lord  ? Did  I 
not  say  to  thee : Do  not  deceive  me  ? Then  he  said 
to  Giezi : Gird  up  thy  loins,  and  take  up  my  staff  in 
thy  hand,  and  go.  If  any  man  meet  thee,  salute 
him  not : and  if  any  man  salute  thee,  answer  him 
not:  and  lay  my  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  child. 
But  the  mother  of  the  child  said:  As  the  Lord 
liveth,  and  as  my  soul  liveth,  I will  not  leave 
thee.  He  arose,  therefore,  and  followed  her. 
But  Giezi  was  gone  before  them  and  laid  the  staff 
upon  the  face  of  the  child,  and  there  was  no 
voice  nor  sense:  and  he  returned  to  meet  him, 
and  told  him,  saying : The  child  is  not  risen.  Eli- 
seus  therefore  went  into  the  house,  and  behold  the 
child  lay  detul  on  his  bed.  And  going  in  he  shut  the 
door  upon  him,  and  upon  the  child,  and  prayed  to 
the  Lord.  And  he  went  up,  and  lay  upon  the 
child : and  he  put  his  mouth  upon  his  mouth,  and 
bis  eyes  upon  his  eyes,  and  his  hands  upon  his 
hands : and  he  bowed  himself  upon  him,  and  the 
child’s  flesh  grew  warm.  Then  he  returned  and 
walked  in  the  house,  once  to  anif  fro : and  he  went 
up  and  lay  upon  him : and  the  child  gaped  seven 
times,  and  opened  his  eyes.  And  he  called  Giezi, 
and  said  to  him : Call  this  Sunamitess.  And  she 
being  called  went  in  to  him.  And  he  said ; Take 
up  thy  son.  She  came  and  fell  at  his  feet,  and  • 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


THURSDAY  IJT  THE 


worshipped  upon  the  OTound,  and  took  up  her  son, 
and  went  out.  And  *EIi8eus  returned  to  Galgal. 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxiii. — Look  down,  O Lord,  on 
thy  covenant,  and  forget  not  for  ever  the  souls  of 
thy  poor  servants.  F.  Arise,  O Lord,  judge  thy 
cause : remember  the  reproi^hes  that  are  cast  on 
thy  servants. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  vii.  11.  16.  — At  that  time; 
Jesus  went  into  a city  called  Naim : and  there  went 
with  him  his  disciples,  and  a great  multitude.  And 
when  he  came  nigh  to  the  city,  behold  a dead  man 
was  carried  out,  the  only  son  of  his  mother ; and 
she  was  a wridow : and  much  people  of  the  city  were 
with  her.  And  when  the  Lord  saw  her,  he  had 
compassion  on  her,  and  said  to  her:  Weep  not 
And  he  came  near  and  touched  the  bier.  And  they 
that  carried  it,  stood  still.  And  he  said:  Young 
man,  I say  to  thee,  arise.  And  he  that  was  dead, 
sat  up,  and  began  to  speak.  And  he  delivered  him 
to  his  mother.  And  there  came  a fear  on  them  aU : 
and  they  glorified  God,  saying:  A great  prophet 
is  risen  up  amongst  us,  and  God  hath  visited  his 
people. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixix. — Lord,  make  haste  to  help 
me : let  all  be  put  to  shame,  who  design  evil  to  thy 
servants.  / 

SECRET.  Purify  us,  O merciful  God,  that  the 
prayers  of  thy  Church,  which  are  pleasing  to  thee, 
being  accompanied  with  these  oflferings,  may  be- 
come more  so  by  the  purity  of  our  minds.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  ta. — Thy  justice  alone,  O Lord,  I 
will  remember : thou,  O God,  hast  instructed  me 
from  my  youth:  abandon  me  not,  O God,  in  my 
old  and  decrepit  age. 

P.  COMM.  C(Elestia, — Let  us  not,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  receive,  to  our  judgment,  these  hea- 
venly gifts,  which  thou  hast  prepared  as  a mniedy 
for  thy  faithful.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


IV.  WEEK  OF  LENT. 


203 


Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  PopulL — O God,  the  author  and  go- 
vernor of  thy  people,  deliver  them  from  the  sins,  by 
which  tliey  are  assaulted,  that  they  may  be  ahvays 
well  pleasing  in  thy  sight,  cind  safe  under  thy  pro- 
tection. Thro*. 


FRIDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  xviii. — The  meditation  of  my 
heart  is  always  in  thy  sight:  O Lord,  my  helper 
and  my  redeemer.  Ps,  The  heavens  shew  forth 
the  gloiT  of  God,  and  the  firmament  declareth  the 
work  of  his  hands.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui. — O God,  who  by  thy 
ineffable  mysteries  givest  new  life  to  the  world; 
grant,  we  beseech  Aee,  that  thy  Church  may  ad- 
vance in  the  observance  of  thy  etenial  precejjts, 
and  never  be  destitute  of  thy  temporal  assistance. 
Thro*. 

LESSON.  3 Kings  xviL  17.  24. — In  those  days : 
The  son  of  the  woman,  the  mistress  of  tlie  house, 
feU  sick,  and  the  sickness  was  very  grievous,  so  that 
there  was  no  breath  left  in  him.  And  she  said  to 
Elias:  what  have  I to  do  with  thee,  thou  man 
of  God.^  Art  thou  come  to  me,  that  my  ini- 
quities should  be  remembered,  and  that  thou 
shouldst  kill  my  son  ? And  Elias  said  to  her : Give 
me  thy  son.  And  he  took  him  out  of  her  bosom, 
and  carried  him  into  the  upper  chamber  where  he 
abode,  and  laid  him  upon  his  own  bed.  And  he 
cried  to  the  Lord  and  said : O Lord,  my  God,  hast 
thou  afflicted  also  the  widow,  with  whom  I am 
after  a sort  maintained,  so  as  to  kill  her  son  ? And 
he  stretched,  and  measured  himself  upon  the  child 
three  times,  and  cried  to  '.he  Lord  and  said:  O 
Lord  my  God,  let  the  scul  of  this  child,  I beseech 
thee,  return  »iito  In»  body  And  the  Lord  heard 
the  voice  ef  ar'd  the  3oul  of  the  child  retiirii- 


Digit  Vd  by  CjOO^Ic 


904 


fRIDAT  THE 


ed  unto  him,  and  he  revived.  And  Elias  took  the 
child,  and  brought  him  down  from  the  upper  chani 
her  to  the  house  below,  and  delivered  him  to  his* 
mother,  and  said  to  her : Behold  thy  son  liveth.  And 
the  woman  said  to  Elias : Now,  by  this  I know  thou 
art  a man  of  God,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy 
mouth  is  ti*ue. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxvii. — It  is  good  to  confide  in  the 
Lord  rather  than  to  have  confidence  in  man.  V,  It 
is  good  to  trust  in  the  Lord,  rather  than  to  trust  in 
princes. 

* TRACT.  Ps.  cii. — ^Deal  not,  p.  1J7. 

GOSPEL.  John  xi.  1.  45. — At  that  time : There 
was  a certain  man  sick  named  Lazarus,  of  Be- 
thania,  of  the  town  of  Mary,  and  of  Martha  her 
sister.  (And  Mary  was  she  that  anointed  the  Lord 
with  ointment,  and  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair, 
whose  brother  Lazarus  was  sick.)  His  sisters  there- 
fore sent  to  him,  saying:  ^ord,  behold,  he  whom 
thou  lovest  is  sick.  And  Jesus  hearing  it,  said  to  them; 
This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  for  the  glory  of 
God ; that  the  Son  of  God  may  be  glorified  by  it 
Now  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister  Mary,  "and 
Lazai'us.  When  he  had  heard  therefore  that  he  was 
sick,  he  still  remained  in  the  same  place  two  days 
Then  after  that  he  said  to  his  disciples : Let  us  go 
into  Judea  again.  The  disciples  say  to  him: 
Rabbi,  the  Jews  but  now  sought  to  stone  thee,  and 
goest  thou  thither  a^in  ? Jesus  answered : Are  there 
not  twelve  hours  ot  the  day  ? If  a man  walk  in  the 
day,  he  stumbleth  not,  because  he  seeth  the  light  of 
this  world ; but  if  he  walk  in  the  ni^t  he  stumbleth, 
because  the  fight  is  not  in  him.  These  things  he 
said : and  after  that  he  said  to  them : Lazarus  our 
friend  sleepeth ; but  I go  that  I niay  awake  him  out 
of  his  sleep.  His  disciples  therefore  said;  Lord,  if 
he  sleep  he  shall  do  well.  But  Jesus  spoke  of  his 
death ; and  they  thought  that  he  spoke  of  the  repose 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


WEEK  OK  LENT. 


m 


of  sleep.  Then  therefore  Jesus  said  to  them  plainly : 
Ijazarus  is  dead;  and  1 am  glad  for  your  sakes, 
that  I was  not  there,  that  you  may  believe:  but 
let  us  go  to  him.  Thomas  therefore,  who  is  called 
Didymus,  said  to  his  fellow  disciples.  Let  us  also  go, 
that  we  may  die  with  him.  Jesus  therefore  came, 
and  found  that  he  had  been  four  days  already  in  the 
grave.  (Now  Bethania  was  near  Jerusalem,  about 
fifteen  furlongs  off.)  And  many  of  the  Jews  were 
come  to  Martha  and  Mary,  to  comfort  them  concern- 
ing their  brother.  Martha,  therefore,  as  soon  as  she 
heard  that  Jesus  was  come,  went  to  meet  him ; but 
Mary  sat  at  home,  Martha,  therefore  said  to  Jesus : 
Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother  had  not 
died ; but  now  also  I know,  that  whatsoever  thou 
wilt  ask  of  God,  God  will  give  it  thee.  Jesus  saitb 
to  her : Thy  brother  shall  rise  again.  Martha  saitb 
to  him : I know  that  he  shall  rise  again  in  the  resur- 
rection at  the  last  day.^  Jesus  said  to  her : 1 am  the 
resurrection  and  the  life ; be  that  believeth  hi  me, 
although  he  be  dead,  shall  live : and  every  one  that 
liveth,  and  believeth  in  me,  shall  not  die  for  ever 
Belie  vest  thou  this?  She  saith  to  him:.  Yea,  Lord, 
I have  believed  that  thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
living  God,  who  art  come  into  this  world.  And 
when  she  had  said  these  things,  she  went,  and  called 
her  sister  Mary  secretly,  saying:  The  Master  is 
come,  and  calleth  for  thee.  She,  as  soon  as  she  heard 
this,  riseth  quickly,  and  cometh  to  him;  for  Jesus 
was  not  yet  come  into  the  toAvn ; but  he  was  still  in 
tliat  place  where  Martha  had  met  him.  The  Jews 
therefore,  who  were  with  her  in  the  house,  and 
comforted  her,  when  they  saw  Mary  that  she  rose 
up  speedily,  and  went  out,  followed  her  saying: 
She  goeth  to  the  jgi-ave,  to  w'eep  there.  When  Mary 
therefore  was  come  where  Jesus  w^as,  seeing  him. 
she  fell  down  at  his  feet,  and  saith  to  him ; Lord,  ii 
thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother  had  not  died. 
S 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


2(J6  FRIDAY  m THE  IV.  WEEK,  ik>C, 

Jesus  therefore,  when  he  saw  her  weeping,  and  the 
Jews  that  were  come  with  her,  weeping,  he  ^an- 
ed  in  the  spirit,  and  troubled  himself.  And  said: 
Where  have  you  laid  him  ? They  say  to  him : Lord, 
come  and  see.  And  Jesus  wept.  The  Jews  there 
fore  said : Behold  how  he  loved  him.  But  some  of 
them  said : Could  not  he,  that  oi>ened  the  eyes  of 
the  man  bom  blind,  have  caused  that  this  man 
should  not  die  ? Jesus  therefore  again  groaning  in 
himself,  cometh  to  the  sepulchre;  now  it  was  a 
cave,  and  a stone  was  laid  over  it  Jesus  saith: 
Take  away  the  stone.  Martha,  the  sister  of  him 
that  was  aead,  saitli  to  him : Lord,  by  tins  time  he 
stinketh,  for  it  is  now  the  fourth  day.  Jesus  saith  to 
her:  Did  not  I say  to  thee,  that  if  thou  believe, 
thou  shalt  see  the  glory  of  God  ? They  took  there- 
fore the  stone  away : And  Jesus  lifting  up  his  eyes, 
said:  Father,  1 give  thee  thanks  that  thou  hast 
heard  me.  And  I know  that  thou  hearest  me  al- 
ways, but  be/3ause  of  the  people  who  stand  about 
have  I said  it,  that  they  may  believe  that  thou^  hast 
sent  me.  When  he 'had  said  these  thin^  he  cried 
with  a loud  voice:  Lazarus,  come  forth.  And 
presently  he  that  had  been  dead  came  forth,  lK>und 
feet  and  hands  with  winding  bands,  and  his  face 
was  bound  about  with  a napkin.  Jesus  said  to 
them:  Loose  him  ^d  let  him  go.  Many  therefom 
of  the  Jews,  who  "were  come  to  Maiy  and  Martha, 
anc^  had  seen  the  things  that  Jesus  did,  believed  in 
him. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xvii. — Thou,  O Lord,  wilt  save 
the  humble  people ; hut  wilt  bring  down  the  eyes 
of  the  proud : for  who  is  God,  but  3iee,  O Lord  ? 

< SECRET.  May  these  offerings,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  purify  us,  and  always  render  thee  propi- 
tious. Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xi. — ^The  Lord  seeing  the  sisters 
of  Lazarus  weeping  at  the  grave,  wept  before  the 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


SATURDAY  Iff  THE  IV.  WEEK  OF,  &C.  207 

Jews,  and  cried  out : Lazarus,  come  forth.  And  he 
who  had  been» dead  four  days,  came  forth  bound 
hands  and  feet 

P.  COMM.  H<bc, — May  the  receiving  of  this 
sacrament,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  ever  free 
us  from  our  sins,  and  protect  us  from  aU  adversity. 
Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 
PRAYER.  Da  nobis, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighr*^  Grod,  that  we,  who  are  sensible  of  our 
own  we^^ess,  and  confide  in  thy  power,  may  al- 
ways rejoice  in  the  effects  of  thy  go<^ness.  Thro’. 


SATURDAY. 

INTROIT.  Is,  Iv. — ^You  tliat  thirst,  come  to  the 
waters,  saith  the  Lord : and  you  that  have  no  money, 
come  and  drink  with  joy.  Ps,  Ixxvii.  Attend,  O my 
people,  to  my  law : incline  your  ears  to  the  words  of 
iny  mouth.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Fial  Domine, — Grant  us,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  an  increase  of  devotion:  for  then 
only  will  our  fasts  avail  us,  when  they  are  well 
plefiing  to  thy  goodness.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Is,  xlix.  8.  \^,—Thiis  saith  the  Lord: 
In  an  acceptable  time  I have  heard  thee,  and  in  the 
day  of  salvation  I have  helpecf  thee:  and  I have 
preserved  thee,  and  given  thee  to  be  a covenant  of 
the  people,  that  thou  mightest  raise  up  the  earth, 
and  possess  the  inheritances  that  were  destroyed ; 
that  thou  mightest  say  to  them  that  are  bound: 
Come  forth:  and  to  them  that  are  in  darkness: 
Shew  yourselves.  They  shall  feed  in  the  ways, 
and  their  pastures  shall  be  in  every  plain.  They 
shall  not  hunger,  nor  thirst,  neither  shall  the  heat 
nor  the  sun  strike  them ; for  he  that  is  merciful  to 
them  shall  be  their  shepherd,  and  at  the  fountains 
of  waters  he  shall  give  them  drink.  And  I will 
S 2 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


208  SATURDAY  THE  IV.  WEEK,  &C. 

make  all  my  mountains  a way,  and  my  paths  shall 
be  exalted.  Behold  these  shall  come  from  afar,  and 
behold  these  from  the  north  and  from  the  sea,  and 
these  from  the  south  country.  Give  praise,  O ye 
heavens,  and  rejoice,  O earth,  ye  mountains  give 
praise  with  jubilation ; because  the  Lord  hath  com- 
forted his  people,  and  will  have  mercy  on  his  poor 
ones.*  And  Sion  said : The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me,  | 
and  the  Lord  hath  forgotten  me.  Can  a woman 
forget  her  infant,  so  as  not  to  have  pity  on  the  son  of  ' 
her  womb  ? And  if  she  should  forget,  will  I not 
forget  thee,  saith  the  Lord  Mmighly. 

GRAD.  Ps,  X. — To  thee,  O Lord,  is  the  poor  man 
left ; thou  wilt  be  the  helper  of  the  orphan.  V,  Why, 

O Lord,  hast  thou  retired  afar  off?  Wliy  dost  thou 
despise  us  in  our  wants  and  affliction  ? Whilst  the 
wicked  man  is  proud,  the  poor  man  is  set  on  fire. 

GOSPEL.  John  viii.  12.  20.  — At  that  timej 
Jesus  spoke  to  the  mxdtitude  of  the  Jews,  saying : I am 
the  lignt  of  the  world : he  that  folio weth  me,  walk- 
eth  not  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  l^ht  of  life. 

The  Pharisees  therefore  said  to  him:  Thou  givest 
testimony  of  thyself:  thy  testimony  is  not  4rue 
Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them : Although  I give 
testimony  of  myself,  my  testimony  is  true;  for  I 
know  whence  I came,  and  whither  I go : but  you 
know  not  whence Jl  come,  or  whither  I go.  you 
judge  according  to  the  flesh:  I judge  nut  any  man. 
x\nd  if  I do  judge,  my  judgment  is  true : because  I 
am  not  alone;  but  I and  the  father  that  sent  me. 

And  in  your  law  it  is  written,  that  the  testimony  of 
two  mfen  is  true.  1 am  one  that  give  testimony  of 
myself:  and  the  Father  that  sent  me,  giveth  testi- 
mony of  me.  They  said  therefore  to  him:  Where 
is  thy  father?  Jesus  answered : Neither  me  do  you 
know,  nor  my  Father : if  you  did  know  me,  perhaps 
yon  would  know  my  Father  also.  These  words  Jesus 
spoke  in  the  treasury,  reaching  in  tlie  temple:  and 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


PASSION  SUNDAY.  20kJ 

DO  inan  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his  hour  was 
not  yet  come. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xvii. — ^The  Lord  is  my  firmament, 
my  refuge,  and  niy  deliverer : and  in  him  will  I hoi)e. 

SECRET.  Be  appeased,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  with  these  our  offerings ; and,  in  thy  mercy, 
compel  our  will,  even  when  it  rebelleth,  to  submit 
to  thee.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  xxiL — ^The  Lord  ruleth  me:  and 
I shall  want  nothing,  he  hath  set  me  in  a place  of 
pasture ; he  hath  brought  me  up  on  the  water  of 
refreshment. 

P.  COJVIM.  nos, — ^May  thy  sacred  mysteries, 

O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  purify  us,  and,  by  their 
efficacy,  make  us  well  pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Deus  qui, — O God,  who  choosest 
rather  to  shew  mercy,  than  to  be  angry  with  those 
that  hope  in  thee : grimt  we  may  worthily  lament 
the  evil  we  have  committed,  that  so  we  may  find  the 
favour  of  thy  comfort.  Thro’. 


PASSION  SUNDAY. 

The  two  last  weeks  of  Lent  are,  in  a particular  man- 
ner, consecrated  to  the  Passion  of  Jesus  Christ.  And 
although  that  upon  which  we  are  now  entering,  be  only 
a preparation  to  the  following,  and  the  Church  represents 
therein  other  objects  to  our  thoughts,  the  passion  of 
Christ  is  nevertheless  often  referred  to,  for  which  reason 
tliis  day  is  called  Passion-sunday. 

The  Psalm  Judica,  as  well  as  the  Gloria  Patri,  at  the 
Introit,  is  omitted;  and  those  who  have  written  on  the 
Litur^,  assert  this  to  be  agreeable  to  the  ancient  prac- 
tice. They  further  in  general  observe,  that  the  particu- 
lar ceremonies  of  these  two  last  weeks,  but  more  espe- 
cially of  the  three  last  days  in  Lent,  are  venerable  remains 
of  ancient  usages.  ' 


S3 


ed  by  Google 


210 


PASSIOIf  SUNDAT. 


INTROIT.  Ps,  xiii. 

JUDGE  me,  O God,  TVDIC^  me,  Z>et»,  et 
and  distinguish  my  t/  disceme  causam  meaiM 
cause  from  the  nation  that  degente  non  sancta,  Ab 
is  not  holy:  deliver  me  homine  iniquo  el  doloso 
from  the  unjust  and  de-  eripe  me : quia,  iu  c-t 
ceitful  man : for  thou  art  Deus  mens,  et  fortitudo 
my  God  and  my  strength,  men, 

Ps.  Send  forth  thy  light  Ps.  Emitte  lucem  tuam 
and  thy  truth:  for  they  et  veritalem  tuam:  ipsa 
have  conducted  me,  and  me  deduxerunt  d adaux- 
brought  me  to  thy  holy  erunt  in  montem  sanctum 
mount,  and  into  thy  ta-  tuum,  d in  tabernacula 
bemacles.  Judge  me,  &c.  tua.  Judica  me  6lc, 

Gloria  Patri  is  omitted  tiU  Easter. 

COLLECT.  ^uoBsumus, — ^Mercifully  look  down 
on  thy  people,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God, 
that,  by  thy  bounty  and  protection,  they  may 
be  governed  and  guarded  both  in  body  and  soul. 
Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Heb,  ix.  11.  15. — Brethren:  Christ 
being  come  an  high  priest  of  the  good  things  to 
come,  by  a neater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle  not 
made  with  hands,  that  is,  not  of  this  creation:  nei- 
ther by  the  blood  of  goats,  or  of  calves,  but  by  his 
own  blood,  entered  once  into  the  Holies,  having 
obtained  eternal  redemption.  For  if  the  blood  of 
goats  and  of  oxen,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  being 
^rinkled,  sanctify  such  as  are  defiled,  to  the  cleans- 
ing of  the  flesh ; how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of 
Christ  (who  by  the  Holy  Ghost  offered  himself 
unspotted  unto  God)  cleanse  our  conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ? And  there- 
fore he  is  the  mediator  of  the  new  testament : that 
>y  means  of  his  death,  for  the  redemption  of  those 
xansgressions  which  were  under  the  former  testa- 

Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


PASSION  9UNDAT.  1 

«Kent,  they  that  are  called  may  receive  the  promise 
of  eternal  inheritance. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxlii. — Deliver  me,  O Lord,  from 
iny  enemies;  teach  me  to^do  thy  will.  Ps,  xvii. 
Thou,  O Lord,  art  my  deliverer  from  the  enraged 
Gentiles:  thou  wik  put  me  out  of  tlie  reach  of 
those  that  assault  me : and  thou  wilt  rescue  me  from 
the  unrighteous  man. 

* TRACT.  Ps,  cxxviiL — Sapt  exjmgnaverufU  mt 
a juventute  mea.  Many  a time  have  they  fought  against 
me  from  my  youth.  V,  Let  Israel  now  say : They  have 
often  attacked  me  from  my  youth.  V,  But  they 
could  not  prevail  over  me : the  wicked  have  wought 
upon  my  back.  V.  They  have  lengthened  their  ini- 
quity : the  Lord,  who  is  just,  will  cut  the  necks  of 
sinners. 

GOSPEL.  John  ^diL  46.  59. — At  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  the  multitude  of  the  Jews:  Which  of  you 
shall  convince  me  of  sin  ? If  I say  the  truth  to  you, 
why  do  you  not  believe  me  ? He  that  is  of  God, 
heareth  the  words  of  (rod.  Therefore  you  hear  them 
not  because  you  are  not  of  God.  The  Jews  therefore 
answered ; and  said  to  him : Do  not  we  say  well  that 
thou  art  a Samaritan  and  hast  a devil  ? Jesus  an- 
swered, I have  not  a devil : but  1 honour  my  Fa 
ther,  and  you  have  dishonoured  me.  But  I seek  not 
my  own  glory : there  is  one  that  seeketh  and  judg- 
eth.  Amen,  amen,  I say  to  you : If  any  man  keep 
my  word,  he  shall  not  see  death  for  ever.  The 
Jews  therefore  said:  Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a 
devil.  Ahn^ham  is  dead,  and  the  propliets:  and 
thou  sayest:  If  any  man  keep  my  word,  he  shall 
not  taste  death  ibr  ever.  Art  thou  greater  than 
our  Father  Abraham,  who  is  dead  ? and  the  pro 
pbets  are  dead.  Whom  dost  thou  make  thyself? 
Jesus  answered : If  I glorify  myself,  my  glory  is  no- 
ihing.  It  is  my  Father  that  glorifteth  me,  of  whom 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


312  MOrfDAT  IN  PASSrON  WEEK. 

YOU  say  tlmt  he  is  your  €rod.  And  you  hsre  iiot 
known  hiin,  hut  1 know  him.  And  if  1 should  say 
that  I know  him  not^  I ^M>uld  be  to  you,  a liaj^ 
But  1 do  know  him,  and  do  keep  bis  word.  Abr^ 
barn  your  father  rejoiced  that  he  mi^ht  see  my  day  r 
he  saw  it,  and  was  glad.  The  Jews  then  said  to 
him : Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast  thou 
seen  Abraham?  Jesus  said  to  them;  Amen,  amen, 
1 say  to  you,  before  Abraham  was  naade,  I am. 
The^^  took  up  stones  therefore  to  east  at  him.  Rut 
Jesus  hid  himself,  and  went  out  of  the  temple. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviii. — I will  praise  thee,  O 
Lord,  with  my  whole  heart : reward  thy  serrant : 1 
shall  live,  and  keep  thy  commaiKhnents : save  me- 
according  to  thy  word,  O Lord. 

SECRET.  May  these  offerings,  O Lord,  both 
loosen  the  bonds  of  onr  wickedness,  and  obtain  for 
us  the  gifts  of  thy  mercy.  Thro\ 

Preface.  * Qai  salutem  humani  generis^  p.  xxx. 

COMM.  This  is  the  body  which  shidl  be  deliv- 
ered up  for  you : this  is  fhe  cup  of  the  new  covenant 
in  my  blood,  saith  the  L<m).  As  often  as  you  re- 
ceive them  do  it  in  remembrance  of  me. 

P.  COMM.  Mesto. — Help  us,  O Lord  our  God, 
and  forever  protect  those  whom  thou  hast  refire^ed 
with  thy  saci^  mysteries.  Thro’. 


MONDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Iv. — Have  mercy  on  trie,  O Lord, 
for  man  hath  trodden  me  under  foot ; aft  the  day  long 
he  hath  afflicted  me  fighting  arainst  me.  Ps,  My 
enemies  have  trodden  on  me  all  tiro  day  long,  for  they 
are  many  that  make  war  against  nie.  Have  mercy, 
&c.  to  Ps, 

COLLECT.  Sanctifica, — Sanctify,  O.  Lord,  w© 
beseech  thee,  our  fasts,  and  mercifully  grant  us  the 
pardon  of  all  oUr  sins.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Janas  iii.  1.  10. — In  those  da^:  The 


zed  by  Google 


MOT^DAT  IW  PAtoSlOxV  WEEK. 


213 


word  of  the  Lord  eame  to  Jonas  die  second  tiiTie, 
sayin?.  Arise  and  go  to  Ninive  the  ^eat  city:  and 
preach  in  it  the  preaching  that  I Ind  thee.  And 
Jonas  arose,  and  went  to  Ninive  according  to  tiie 
^ord  of  the  Lord:  now  Ninive  was  a gi-eat  city  of 
three  days  journey.  And  Jonas  began  to  enter  into 
the  city  one  day’s  journey : and  he  cried  and  said : 
Yet  forty  days  and  Niuive  shall  be  destroyed.  . An<l 
the  mep  of  Ninive  believed  in  GU>d : and  they  pro- 
claimed a fest,  and  put  on  sackcloth  from  the  great- 
est to  the  least  And  the  word  came  to  the  King 
of  JHinive : and  he  rose  up  out  of  his  throne,  and 
^:ast  away  his  robe  from  him,  and  was  clothed  with 
sackcloth,  and  sat  in  ashes.  And  he  caused  it  to  be 
proclaimed  and  published  in  Ninive  from  the  mouth 
of  the  king  and  of  his  jwinces,  saying ; Let  neither 
men  nor  beasts,  oxen  nor  sheep,  taste  any  tiling: 
let  them  not  feed,  nor  drink  water.  And  let  men 
and  beasts  be  covered  with  sackcloth,  and  cry  to  the 
Lord  with  all  their  strength,  and  let  them  tunj  every 
one  from  his  evil  way,  and  from  the  iniquity  that 
is  in  their  hands.  Who  can  tell  if  God  will  fum, 
and  forgive : and  will  turn  away  from  his  fierce 
anger,  and  we  shall  not  perish  ? And  God  saw  their 
works,  that  they  were  turned  from  their  evil  way : 
and  the  Lord  our  God  had  mercy  on  the  people. 

GRAD,  Ps.  liii,— O God,  hear  my  prayer : give 
car  to  the  words  of  my  mouth.  V.  Save  me,  O God, 
by  thy  name,  and  rescue  me  by  thy  might. 

* TRACT-  Ps.  ciL — Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  viL  39.  39. — At  that  time : The 
rulers  and  Piiorisees  sent  ministers  to  apprehend 
Jesus.  Jesus  therefore  said  to  them:  Yet  a little 
while  I am  with  you:  and  then  I go  to  him  that 
aent  me.  You  shcdl  ^eek  me,  and  shdl  not  find  me 
and  where  I am,  thither  you  ccuinot  come.  The 
Jews  tW'efore,  said  among  themselves:  Wiiitfcer 


)igilized  by 


Google 


314 


TC£ST>4T  Ilf 


he  go,  lliat  we  shall  not  find  him  ? will  ne  go 
to  the  disfiersed  among  the  Gentiles,  and  teach  the 
Gentiles?  What  is  this  saying  that  he  hath  said: 
\'ou  sliall  seek  me,  and  s^l  not  find  me;  and  x 
where  I am  you  cannot  come  ? And  on  the  last 
and  great  day  of  the  festival,  Jesus  stood  and  cried, 
saying:  if  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  to  me,  and 
drink.  He  that  believeth  in  me,  as  the  scripture 
saith,  “Out  of  his  belly  shMl  flow  rivers  of  living 
water,”  Now  this  be  said  of  the  Spirit  which  they 
should  receive  who  believed  in  him. 

OFFERT.  Pj.  vi. — Turn  to  me,  O Lord,  and 
deliver  my  soul : O save  me  for  thy  mercy’s  sake. 

SECRET.  Grant  us,  O Lord  our  God,  that  the 
sacrifice  of  our  salvation  may  both  cleanse  us  fixim  ! 
our  sins,  and  appease  thy  Majesty.  Thro’.  I 

COM  M.  Ps.  xxiii. — ^The  Lord  of  Hosts,  he  is  the  ! 
King  of  Glory.  \ 

P.  COMM.  Sacramenti. — May  the  participation, 

O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  of  this  saving  sacrifice 
both  cleanse  us  and  heal  us.  Thro’, 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 
PRAYER.  Da  qwBsumius. — Grant,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  to  thy  people  health  both  of  body  and 
mind,  that  being  constant  in  the  practice  of  good 
work^  they  may  always  be  safe  under  thy  protec- 
tion. Thro’. 


, TUESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xxvt. — Expect  the  Lord,  do  man- 
fully,  and  let  thy  heart  take  coipige,  and  wait  thou 
for  the  Lord.  Ps.  The.  Lord  is  my  light  and  n?y 
salvation,  whom  ^all  I fear  ? 

COLLECT.  JVbslrtu — May  our  fiist,  O Lord,  w 9 
beseech  thee,  be  acceptable  to  thee,  and,  havir  5 
purified  us  from  sin,  make  us  worthy  of  thy  grar*  . 
nd  procure  us  everlasting  remedies.  Thro’. 


)igitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


PA9S10N  WEEH, 


215 


LESSON,  Dan,  xiv.  27,  42, — In  those  days : Th« 
DMple  cft'  Babylon  gathered  together  against  tlie 
king,  and  saW  to  him:  Deliver  up  to  us  Daniel, 
who  hath  decoyed  Bel,  and  killed  the  Dragon, 
otherwise  we  w/ll  destroy  thee  and  tliy  house.  And 
the  king  saw  tlVit  they  pressed  upon  him  violently : 
and  being  cofistrained  by  necessity,  he  delivered 
Daniel  to  theiii.  And  they  cast  him  into  the  den  of 
lions,  and  h&  was  there*  six  days.  And  in  the  deii 
there  were  «leven  lions,  and  they  had  given  to  them 
two  carc8‘3Se8  every  day,  and  two  sheep : but  then 
they  we?e  not  given  unto  them,  to  the  intent  that 
they  mi^^ht  devour  Daniel,  Now  there  was  in  Judea 
a prof  net  called  Habacuc,  and  he  had  boiled  pot- 
tage, and  had  broken  bread  in  a bowl;  and  was 
going  into  the  field  to  carry  it  to  the  reapers.  And 
Uif  angel  of  the  Lord  said  to  Habacuc:  Carry  the 
d^iner  which  thou  hast,  into  Babylon  to  Daniel, 
jvho  is  in  the  lions’  den.  And  Habacuc  said:  Lord, 
/'I  never  saw  Babylon,  nor  do  I know  tlie  den.  And 
^ the  angel  of  the  Lord  took  him  by  the  top  of  his 
head,  and  carried  him  by  the  hair  of  his  head,  and 
set  him  in  Babylon  over  the  den  in  the  force  of  his 
spirit.  And  Habacuc  cried,  saying:  O Daniel, 
thou  servant  of  God,  take  the  dinner  that  God  hath 
sent  tliee.  And  Daniel  said : Thou  hast  remember- 
ed me,  O God,  and  thou  hast  not  forsaken  them  that 
love  thee.  And  Daniel  arose  and  ate.  And  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  presently  set  Habacuc  again  in  his 
ovm  place.  And  ujion  the  seventh  day  the  king 
came  to  bewail  Daniel : and  he  came  to  the  den,  and 
looked  in,  and  behold  Daniel  was  sitting  in  the  midst 
of  the  lions.  And  the  king  cried  out  with  a loud 
voice,  saying : Great  art  thou,  O Lord,  tlie  God  of 
Daniel.  And  he  drew  him  out  of  the  lions’  deii. 
But  those  that  had  been  the  cause  of  his  destruction, 
he  cast  into  tlie  den,  and  they  were  devoured  in  a 
moraent  before  him.  Then  the  King  said:  Let  aU 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


rrCMDAT  IW 


ilCf 

the  iuhabitants  of  the  whole  earth  ftsar  the  God  ot 
Daniel ; for  he  is  t]>e  Saviour,  working  signs  and 
wonders  in  the  earthy  who  hath  delivered  Daniel 
out  of  the  ISons’  den. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xlii. — Judge  my  cause,  O I«ord,  and 
deliver  me  from  the  wicked  and  deceitful  man, 
F.  Send  forth  thy  light  and  thy  truth ; for  they  have 
led  me  on,  and  brought  me  up  to  thy  holy  mount. 

GOSPEL.  John  vii.  1.  13. — At  that  time:  Jesuj# 
walked  in  Galilee ; for  he  would  not  walk  in  Judea: 
because  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  him.  Now  the  Jewfj 
feast  of  tabernacles  was  at  hand.  And  his  brethrei» 
said  to  him : Depart  from  hence,  and  go  into  Judea : 
that  thy  disciples  also  may  see  thy  works  which  thou 
dost.  For  there  is  no  man  that  doth  any  thing  in 
secret,  and  he  himself  seeketh  to  be  known  openly  ; 
If  tliou  do  tliese  things  manifest  thyself  to  the  world. 
For  neither  did  his  brethren  believe  in  him.  Then 
Jesus  said  to  them ; My  time  is  not  yet  come ; but 
your  time  is  always  ready.  The  world  cannot  hate 
you  •j  but  me  it  hateth : because  I give  testimony  of 
it,  tliat  the  works  thereof  are  evil.  Go  you  up  to 
this  festival  day,  but  I go  not  up  to  this  festival  day : 
because  my  time  is  not  accomplished.  When  he  had 
said  these  things,  he  himself  staid  in  Galilee.  But 
after  his  brethren  were  gone  up,  then  he  also  w^ent 
up  to  tlie  feast,  not  opemy,  but  as  it  were  in  secrete 
The  Jews  therefore  sought  him  on  the  festival  day, 
and  said : Where  is  he  ? And  there  was  much  mur- 
muring among  the  multitude  concerning  him.  For 
some  said : He  is  a good  man.  And  others  said  : 
No,  but  he  seduceth  tlie  people.  Yet  no  man  spoke 
i>penly  of  him,  for  fear  of  the  Jews. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  ix. — Let  all,  who  know  thy  name, 
O Loixl,  hof>e  in  thee ; for  thou  forsakest  not  those 
who  seek  thee.  Sing  to  the  Lord,  who  dwelleth  iu 
6ion«  for  he  hath  not  forgot  the  prayer  of  the  poor. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


PASSION  WEEK. 


21 7 

SFiCRET.  The  sacrifices  we  beg  to  I)e  offered 
10  thee,  O Lord,  are  such  tokens  of  temporal  com- 
fort, that  we  cannot  despair  of  thy  eternal  promises. 
TJiro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  xxir. — Deliver  me,  O Grod  of  Israel, 
from  all  my  distress. 

P.  COMM.  Da  nobis. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  as  we  daily  celebrate  these 
divijie  mysteries,  we  may  be  made  worthy  of  the 
rewards  of  heaven.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  dovm  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Da  nobis. — Grant  us,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  perseverance  in  thy  service ; that  in  our 
daye  thy  faithful  may  increase  both  in  number  and 
goodness.  Thro’. 


WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xvii. — O my  deliverer  from  the  ^ 
angry  Gentiles,  thou  wilt  place  me  out  of  the  reach 
of  those  that  assault  me : thou,  O Lord,  wilt  rescue 
me  from  the  unrighteous  man.  Ps.  I will  love  thee, 

O Lord,  my  stren^h : the  Lord  is  my  support,  my 
refuge,  and  my  ddiverer. 

COLLECT.  Sanctificato. — Enlighten,  O God  of 
mercy,  the  hearts  of  thy  people  by  means  of  this  holy 
fast ; and  since  all  our  devotion  is  the  effect  of  thy 
bounty,  mercifully  hear  the  petitions  we  make.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Lcv.xix.  10. 19. — In  those  days:  The 
Lord  spake  to  Moses,  saying : Speak  to  all  the  as- 
sembly of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  thou  shalt  say 
to  them : I am  the  Lord  your  God.  You  shall  not 
steal.  You  shall  not  lie : neither  shall  any  man  de- 
ceive his  neighbour.  Thou  shalt  not  swear  falsely 
by  iny  name,  nor  profane  the  name  of  thy  God.  I 
am  the  Lord.  Thou  shalt  not  calumniate  thy  neigh- 
bour, nor  oppress  him  by  violence.  The  wages  of 
him  that  has  been  hired  by  thee,  shall  not  abide  with 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


218  WEDNESDAY  IN 

thee  .LAtil  the  morning.  Thou  shalt  not  speak  eyil 
of  the  deaf,  nor  put  a stumbling  block  befoi*e  the 
blind : but  thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  because 
I am  the  Lord.  Thou  shalt  not  do  that  which  is 
unjust,  nor  judge  unjustly.  Respect  not  the  person 
of  the  poor,  nor  honour  the  countenance  of  the 
mighty.  But  judge  thy  neighbour  according  to  jus- 
tice. Thou  shall  not  be  a detractor  nor  a whisperer 
among  the  people.  Thou  shalt  not  stand  against  the 
Wood  of  thy  neighbour.  I am  the  Lord.  Thou 
shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thy  heart,  but  reprove 
him  openly,  lest  thou  incur  sin  through  him.  Seek 
not  revenge,  nor  be  mindful  of  the  injury  of  thy 
citizens.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  friend  as  thyself.  I 
am  tlie  Lord.  Keep  ye  my  laws,  for  I am  ike  Lord 
your  God, 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxix. — 1 will  extol  thee,  O Lord,  for 
thou  hast  upheld  me : and  hast  not  made  my  ene- 
mies to  rejoice  over  me.  V,  O Lord  my  God,  I have 
cried  to  thee,  and  thou  hast  healed  me.  Thou  hast 
Drought  forth,  O Lord,  my  soul  from  hell,  and  thou 
hast  saved  me  from  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit. 

* TRACT.  Ps,  cii.— Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  x.  22.  38.— that  time:  It 
was  the  feast  of  the  dedication  at  Jerusalem : and 
it  was  winter.  And  Jesus  walked  in  the  temple  in 
Solomon’s  porch,  the  Jews  therefore  came  round 
about  him,  and  said  to  him : How  long  dost  thou 
hold  our  souls  in  suspense  ? if  thou  be  the  Christ  tell 
U3  plainly.  Jesus  answered  them : I speak  to  you, 
and  you  believe  not : the  works  that  1 do  in  the 
name  of  my  Father,  they  give  testimony  of  me : but 
you  do  not  believe,  because  you  are  not  of  my  sheep. 
My  sheep  hear  my  voice : and  I know  them,  and 
they  follow  me : and  I give  them  eternal  life ; and 
they  shall  not  perish  for  ever,  and  no  man  shall 
pluck  tliem  out  of  my  band.  That  which  my  Fa- 
ther hath  given  me,  is  greater  thtin  all : and  no  man 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


FAtfSlON  WEEK« 


219 


can  snatch  them  out  of  the  hand  of  r;i>  V oilier.  1 
and  the  Fatlier  are  one.  The  Jewa  n*  m look  up 
stones  to  stone  him.  Jesus  answered  i t,u\ : Many 
good  works  I have  shewed  you  from  i/i^  Father ; for 
which  of  those  works  do  you  stone  me ; The  Jews 
answered  him : For  a good  work  wo  stone  tliee  not, 
but  for  blasphemy : and  because  that  tliou  being  a 
man,  makest  thyself  God.  Jesus  answered  them:  Is 
it  not  written  in  your  Jaw : Isaid^  you  are  Gods*}  If 
he  called  them  gods,  to  whom  the  word  of  God 
was  spoken,  and  the  scripture  cannot  be  broken; 
do  you  say  of  him,  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified 
and  sent  into  the  world:  Thou  blasphemest:  be- 
cause I said,  I am  the  Son  of  God  ? If  I do  not  the 
works  of  ray  Father,  believe  me  not.  But  if  I do : 
though  you  will  not  believe  me,  believe  the  works, 
that  you  may  know  and  believe  that  tlie  Father  is  in 
me,  and  I in  the  Father. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Iviii. — Deliver  me,  from  my  en- 
emies, O my  God ; and  defend  me,  O Lord,  from 
them  that  rise  up  against  me.  ♦ 

SECRET.  Grant,  O merciful  God,  that  we  may 
offer  thee,  with  a sincere  heart,  this  sacrifice  of  pro- 
pitiation and  praise.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  XXV. — I will  wash  my  hands  with 
the  innocent : and  will  compass  tfiy  altar,  O'Lord,  that 
I may  hear  the  voice  of  thy  praise : and  publish  ail 
thy  wonderful  works. 

P.  COMM.  Cadeslis, — Having  received  thy  hea 
venly  gift,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
Gofl,  that  it  may  produce  in  us  the  effect  of  tlie  sa 
crament,  and  procure  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Adesto. — Hear  our  prayers  and  en- 
treaties, O Almighty  God,  and  grant  that  those  to 
whom  thou  givest  hopes  of  thy  mercy,  may  experi 
cnce  the  effects  of  thy  usutil  clemency.  Thro’. 

T2 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


L ^ J 

THURSDAY. 

INTROIT.  Dan,  iii. — All  thou  hast  done  for 
O Lord,  thou  hast  done  with  great  justice  ; because 
we  have  sinned  against  thee,  and  have  not  obeyed 
thy  commandments : but  do  thou  make  thy  name 
glorious,  and  deal  with  uS  according  to  the  multitude 
of  thy  mercies,  Ps,  cxviii. — Blessed  are  the  unde- 
filed in  the  way,  who  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord. 

COLLECT.  Pr<Esta, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  the  dignity  of  human  nature, 
which  hath  been  wounded  by  excess,  may  be  cured 
by  the  practice  of  healing  temperance.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Dan,  iii.  34.  45. — Jn  those  days : Aia- 
rias  prayed  to  the  Lord,  saying:  Deliver  us  not  up 
for  ever,  we  beseech  thee,  for  thy  name’s  sake,  and 
abolish  not  thy  covenant:  and  take  not  away  thy 
mercy  from  us,  for  the  sake  of  Abraham  thy  beloved, 
and  Isaac  thy  servant,  and  Israel  thy  holy  one : to 
whom  thou  hast  spoken,  promising  that  thou  wouldst 
multiply  their  se^ed  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the 
sand  that  is  on  the  sea  shore.  For  we,  O Lonl,  are 
diminished  more  than  any  nation,  and  are  bi  ought 
low  in  all  the  earth  this  day  for  our  sins.  Neitlier  is 
there  at  this  time  prince,  or  leader,  or  prophet,  or 
holocaust,  or  sacrifice,  or  oblation,  or  incense,  or 
place  of  first-fruits  before  thee.  That  we  may  find 
thy  mercy : nevertheless  in  a contrite  heart  and  hum- 
ble spirit  let  us  be  accepted.  As  in  holocausts  of 
rams,  and  bullocks,  and  as  in  thousands  of  fat  lambs : 
so  let  our  sacrifice  be  made  in  thy  sight  this  day, 
that  it  may  please  thee : for  there  is  no  confusion  to 
them  that  trust  in  thee.  And  now  we  follow  thee 
with  all  our  heart,  and  we  fear  thee,  and  seek  thy 
face.  Put  us  not  to  confusion,  but  deal  with  us  ac- 
cordmg  to  thy  meekness,  and  according  to  the  multi- 
tude of  thy  mercies.  And  deliver  us  according  to 
♦Jiv  wonderful  works,  and  give  glory  to  thy  name.  O 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


THURSOAT  IN  PASSION  WEEK.  921 

Lord : and  let  all  them  be  confounded  that  shew 
«yils  to  thy  servants,  let  them  be  confounded  in  all 
thy  might,  and  let  their  strength  be  broken : and  let 
them  faiow  that  thou  art  the  Lord,  the  only  Grod, 
and  glorious  over  all  the  world.  O Lord  our  God, 

GRAD.  Ps.  xcv. — Bring  up  sacrifices,  and  come 
into  his  courts ; adore  ye  the  Lord  in  his  holy  court. 
V,  Ps.  xxviii.  The  Lord  will  discover  the  thick 
woods ; and  in  his  Temple  all  shall  speak  his  glory. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  vii.  36.  50. — At  that  time: 
One  ol  the  Pharisees  desired  him  to  e^t  with  him 
And  he  went  into  the  house  of  the  Phansee,  and  sat 
down  to  meat.  And  behold  a woman  that  was  in 
the  city,  a sinner,  when  she  knew  that  he  sat  at 
meat  in  the  Pharisee’s  house,  brought  an  alabaster 
box  of  ointment : and  standing  behind  at  his  feet, 
she  began  to  wash  his  feet  with  tears,  and  wiped 
them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head,  and  kissed  his  reet, 
and  anointed  them  with  the  ointment.  And  the 
Pharisee,  who  had  invited  him,  seeing  it,  spoke  with- 
in himself  saying : This  man,  if  he  were  a prophet, 
would  know  surely  who  and  what  manner  of  wo- 
man this  is  that  touched  him,  that  she  is  a sinner. 
And  Jesus  answering,  said  to  him,  Simon,  I have 
somewhat  to  say  to  thee.  But  he  said : Master,  say 
it.  A certain  creditor  had  two  debtors,  the  one 
owed  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  other  fifty.  And 
whereas  they  had  not  wherewith  to  j)ay,  he  forgave 
them  both.  Which  therefore  of  the  two  loveth  him 
most  ? Simon  answering,  said : I suppose  that  he 
to  whom  he  forgave  most.  And  he  said  to  him: 
Thou  hast  judged  rightly.  And  turning  to  the  wo- 
man, he  said  unto  Simon : Dost  thou  see  this  woman  ? 
I entered  into  thy  house,  thou  gavest  me  no  wa- 
ter for  my  feet ; but  she  with  tears  hath  washed  my 
feet  and  with  her  hairs  hath  wiped  them.  Thou  gavest 
me  no  kiss;  but  she,  since  she  came  in,  hath  not 
ceased  to  kiss  my  feet.  My  head  with  oil  thou 
T3 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


223 


FRIDAT  Ilf 


didst  not  anoint ; but  she  wkh  ointment  hath  anoint- 
ed my  feet  Wherefore  I say  to  thee : Many  sins 
are  forgiven  her,  because  she  had)  loved  much.  But  to 
whom  less  is  forgiven,  he  loveth  less.  And  he  said 
to  her ; Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.  And  they  that 
sat  at  meat  with  him  began  to  say  within  themselves: 
Who  is  this  that  formveth  sins  also  ? And  he  said  to 
the  woman : Thy  faith  hath  made  thee  safe,  go  in 
I^eace. 

OFFERT.  Ps  cxxxvi. — ^Uponthe  rivers  of  Baby- 
lon there  we  sat,  and  wept,  when  we  remember^ 
thee,  O Sion. 

SECRET.  O Lord  our  God,  who  hast  appointed 
the  oderings  to  be  consecrated  to  thee,  to  consist 
chiefly  of  those  creatures,  which  thou  createdst  for 
the  support  of  our  weakness : grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  they  may  be  to  us  both  a help  in  this  life,  and  a 
sacrament  to  procure  us  that  wliich  is  eternal.  Thro’. 

. COMM.  Ps:  cxviii. — Remember,  O Lord,  the 
promise  thou  madest  to  thy  servant,  by  which  thou 
gavest  me  hope : it  is  that  which  hath  comforted  me 
in  my  distress. 

P.  COMM.  Quod, — Grant,  O Lord,  that  what  we 
have  received  with  our  mouths  we  may  also  take 
with  a pure  mind ; and  that,  of  a tenqwrary  gift,  it 
may  become  to  us  an  eternal  remedy.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Esto, — Be  propitious,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  to  thy  people : that,  forsaking  what 
displeaseth  thee,  they  may  And  comfort  in  keeping 
thy  law.  Thro’. 

FRIDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  XXX. — Have  mercy  on  me,  0 
Lord,  for  I am  in  distress : deliver  me  and  rescue  me 
from  the  hands  of  my  enemies,  and  my  pursuers : 
Lord,  let  me  never  be  put  to  shame,  since  I have 
called  on  thee.  Ps,  In  thee,  O Lord,  have  I hoped, 
^t  me  never  be  confounded,  deliver  me  in  thy  justice. 


.Google 


IN  PAS9ION  WEEK. 


2S» 

COLLECT.  Cordibus,  — Mercifully,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  pour  forth  thy  grace  into  our  hearts : 
that  repressing  our  sins  by  voluntary  mordhcations, 
we  may  rather  suffer  for  them  in  this  life,  than  be 
condemned  to  eternal  torments  for  them  in  the  next. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Jer,  xvii.  13. 18. — In  those  days : Jere- 
mias  said:  O Lord,  the  hope  of  Isi’ael : all  that  for- 
sake thee  shall  be  confounded:  they  that  depart 
from  thee,  shall  be  written  m the  earth ; because 
they  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  the  vein  of  living  wa- 
ters. Heal  me,  O Lord,  and  I shall  be  healed : save 
me,  and  I shall  be  saved : for  thou  art  my  praise. 
Behold  they  say  to  me . Where  is  the  wonl  of  the 
Lord  ? let  it  come.  And  I am  not  troubled,  fol- 
lowing thee  for  my  pastor,  and  I have  not  desired 
the  day  of  man,  thou  knowest  it.  That  which  went 
out  of  my  lips,  hath  been  right  in  thy  sight.  Be 
not  thou  a terror  unto  me,  thou  art  my  hope  in  the 
day  of  affliction.  Let  them  be  confounded  that  per- 
secute me,  and  let  not  me  be  confounded : let  them 
be  afraid,  and  let  me  not  be  afraid:  bring  upon  them 
the  day  of  affliction,  and  with  a double  destruction, 
destroy  them,  O Lord  our  God, 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxiv. — My  enemies  spoke  peaceably 
to  me ; but  in  thdr  anger  they  were  troublesome  to 
me.  V,  Thou  hast  seen  it,  O Lord,  be  not  silent ; 
abandon  me  not. 

* TRACT.  Ps,  cii. — Deal  not,  p,\\7, 

GOSPEL.  John  xi.  47.  54. — At  that  time; 
The  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  assembled  in  council 
against  Jesus,  and  said : What  do  we,  for  this  man 
doth  many  miracles  ? If  we  let  him  alone  so,  all 
men  wiU  believe  in  him:  and  the  Romans  will 
come,  and  take  away  our  place  and  nation.  But 
one  of  them  named  Caiphas,  being  the  high-priest 
that  year,  said  to  them : You  know  nothing,  neither 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


224 


FRIDAY  Ilf 


do  you  consider  that  it  is  expedient  for  you  iliat 
one  man  should  die  for  the  people,  and  that  the 
whole  nation  perish  not  And  this  he  spoke  not  of 
himself:  hut  being  the  high-priest  that  year,  he 
prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  the  nation ; and 
not  only  for  the  nation,  but  to  gather  in  one  the 
childi-en  of  God,  that  were  dispersed.  From  that 
day  therefore  they  devised  to  put  him  to  death. 
Wherefore  Jesus  walked  no  more  openly  among  the 
Jews,  but  he  went  unto  a country  near  the  desert, 
unto  a city  that  is  called  Ephrem,  and  there  he  abode 
with  his  disciples. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviii. — Blessed  art  thou,  O Lord, 
teach  me  thy  law;  and  deliver  me  not  up  to  the 
proud  ones  who  calumniate  me : and  I will  give  an 
answer  to  those  who  reproach  me. 

SECRET.  Grant,  O merciful  God,  that  we  may 
always  worthily  serve  at  thy  altar,  and  obtain  sal- 
vation by  constantly  partaking  of  what  is  offered 
thereon.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Deliver  me  not  up,  O Lord,  to  the  will 
of  my  pursuers : for  unjust  witnesses  have  risen  up 
against  me,  and  iniquity  hath  belied  itself. 

P.  COMM.  SumpH  sacri/icvL — ^May  the  sacrifice, 
O Lord,  we  have  partaken  of,  always  protect  us,  and 
repel  from  us  all  that  is  hurtful.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Concede, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  seek  the  honour  of 
thy  protection,  may  be  delivered  from  all  evil,  and 
serve  thee  with  a secure  mind.  Thro’. 


ON  FRIDAY  IN  PASSION  WEEK. 

The  SEVEN  DOLOURS  of  the  B.  V.  MARY. 
INTROIT.  John  xix. — There  stood  by  the  cross 
of  Jesus,  his  mother,  and  his  mother’s  sister,  Mary 
the  wife  of  Cleophas,  and  Salome,  and  Mary  Mag 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PASSION  WEEK. 


225 


dalen.  V.  Jesus  saii:  Woman,  behoM  diy  son; 
and  to  his  disciple : Behold  thy  mother.  F.  Glory. 

Gloria  in  excdsis  is  said  ta  this  Mass.  , 

COLLECT.  Deus,  in  cujus. — O God,  in  whose  ^ 
passion,  accordmff  to  Simeon’s  prophecy,  the  sword 
of  grief,  pierced  the  sweet  soul  of  gloiious  Mary,  the 
Virgin-mother;  graht  in  thy  mercy,  diat  we,  who 
with  honour  commemorate  her  sorrows  and  suffer- 
ings, may  he  helped  hy  die  glorious  merits  and 
prayers  of  all  the  saints  that  &ithhil1y  stood  hy  thy 
cross,  so  as  to  partake  of  die  happy  ihiits  of  thy  pas- 
sion. Who  liveth. 

Then  is  made  a Commem,  Friday  ^ its  Collect, 
Cordibus,  as  p.  223.  As  likewise  by  its  Secret  ana 
Postcommunion  in  their  proper  places. 

LESSON.  Judiih  xiii.  22.  25.-.The  Lord  hath 
blessed  thee' by  his  power,  because  by  thee  he  hath 
brought  our  enemies  to  nought.  Blessed  art  thou, 

O daughter,  by  die  Lord  the  most  high  God,  above 
ail  women  upon  the  earth.  Blessed  be  the  Lord 
who  made  l^v^  and  earth.  Because  he  hath  so 
magnified  thy  name  this  day,  that  thy  praise  shall 
not  depart  out  of  the  mouth  of  men,  who  shall  be 
mindful  of  the  power  of  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  that 
thou  hast  not  spared  thy  life,  by  reason  of  the  dis- 
tress and  tribulation  of  thy  people,  but  hast  prevent- 
ed our  ruin  in  the  presence  of  our  God. 

GRAD.  Thou  art  overwhelmed  with  grief  and 
m tears,  O Virgin  Mary,  standing  by  the  <uoss  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  thy  Son,  thy  Redeemer. 

TRACT.  Holy  Mary,  the  Queen  of  heaven  and 
Lady  of  the  world,  stood  full  of  grief  by  the  cross  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  F.  O all  you  that  pass  by 
the  way,  attend  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like 
onto  mme. 

The  SEQUENCE,  or  PROSE. 

O TABAT  Mater  dolorosa,  juxta,  crucem  lacrymosa 
^ dum  pendebat  Filius. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


226 


FKlllAY  IN 


Cujus  animam  gementem,  contristatam  et  dolen- 
tem pertransivit  gladius. 

O quam  tristis  et  afflicta,  iiiit  illa  benedicte  Matei 
unigeniti ! 

Qu8b  masrebat,  et  dolebat,  et  tremebat,  cum  vide- 
bat nati  poenas  inclytL 

Quis  est  homo  qui  non  fleret,  Christi  matrem  si 
videret,  in  tanto  supplicio ! 

Quis  posset  non  contristari,  piam  Matrem  contem- 
plari dolentem  cum  Filio  ? 

Pro  peccatis  suae  gentis,  vidit  Jesum  in  tormentis 
et  flagellis  subditum  ? 

Vidit  suum  dulcem  natum,  morientem  desolatum, 
dum  emisit  spiritum. 

Eia  Mater,  fons  amoris ! me  sentire  vim  doloris, 
fac  ut  tecum  lugeam. 

Fac  ut  ardeat  cor  meum  in  amando  Christum 
Deum,  ut  sibi  complaceam. 

Sancta  Mater  istud  agas,  crucifixi  fige  pjagas  cor- 
di meo  valide. 

Tui  nati  vulnerati,  tam  dignati  pro  me  pati,  poe- 
nas mecum  divide. 

Fac  me  vere  tecum  flere,  crucifixo  condolere  do- 
nec ego  vixero. 

Juxta  crucem  tecum  stare,  te  libenter  sociare  in 
planctu  desidero. 

Virgo  virginum  praeclara,  mihi  jam  non  sis  amara, 
fiic  me  tecum  pangere. 

Fac  ut  portem  Christi  mortem,  passionis  fac  con- 
sortem, et  plagas  recolere. 

Fac  me  plagis  vulnerari,  cruce  hac  inebriari,  ob 
amorem  filii. 

Inflammatus  et  accensus,  per  te,  virgo,  sim  de- 
fensus, in  die  judicii. 

Fac  me  cruce  custodiri,  morte  Christi  praemuniri, 
confoveri  gratia. 

Quando  corpus  morietur,  fac  ut  animae  donetur 
Paradisi  gloria.  Amen. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


PASSION  WEEK. 


227 


GOSPEL.  John  xix.  25.  27.  — At  that  Htiu 
There  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus,  his  mother,  aud 
his  mother’s  sister,  Mary  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary 
Magdalen.  When  Jesus  therefore  had  seen  his  mo- 
ther, and  the  disciple  standing,  whom  he  lci|^'ed,  he 
saith  to  his  mother ; Woman,  behold  thy  son  ; after 
that,  he  saith  to  the  disciple:  Behold  thy  mother. 
And  from  that  hour  the  disciple  took  her  to  his  own. 

OFFERT.  Remember,  O Virgin-mother  of  God, 
whilst  thou  standest  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  to 
speak  in  our  favour,  that  thou  mayest  turn  away,  his 
wrath  from  us. 

SECRET.  We  offer  thee,  O Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
our  prayers  and  sacrifices,  humbly  intreating  thee, 
that  we,  who,  in  our  prayers  of  this  day,  commemo- 
rate the  transfixion  of  the  most  sweet  soul  of  blessed 
Mary  thy  mother,  may  receive  our  reward  Avith  her 
and  her  blessed  companions  that  stood  under  thy 
cross,  this  holy  assembly  being  multiplied,  through 
the  rnerifh  of  thy  death.  Who  livest. 

PREFACE,  f In  the  transfixion.  Ordinary,  p.  xxxii. 

COMM.  Happy  are  the  senses  of  the  blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  who,  without  dying,  merited  the  crown 
of  martyrdom  under  the  cross  of  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Sacrificia,  — Grant,  O Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that  the  sacrifice  we  have  partaken  of,  while 
with  devotion  we  celebrate  the  transfixion  of  thy  bles- 
sed Virgin-mother^  may,  through  thy  mercy,  obtain 
for  us  the  effect  of  every  salutary  good.  Who  livest. 
At  the  end  of  Mass  is  read  the  Gospel  of  Friday,  p,  223. 

SATURDAY.  ^ * 

The  Introit,  Offertory,  and  Communion,  as  on  Fri- 
day, p.  222,  fyc. 

COLLECT.  Proficiat. — May  the  people  conse- 
crated to  thy  service,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  im- 
prove in  the  affections  of  piety ; that,  instructed  by 
tjjcse  holy  mysteries,  they  may  be  so  much  the  more 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


SATURDAY  IPr 


enriched  with  thy  heavenly  gifts,  as  they  become 
more  acceptable  to  thy  divine  majesty.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Jer,  xviii.  IS.  23. — In  those  days:  the 
wicked  Jews  said  to  one  another:  Come, and  let  us 
invent  devices  against  Jeremias:  for  the  law  shall 
not  perish  from  the  priest,  nor  counsel  from  the  wise, 
nor  the  word  from  the  prophet ; come,  and  let  us 
strike  him  with  the  tongue,  and  let  us  give  no  heed 
to  all  his  words.  Give  heed  to  me,  O Lord,  and 
hear  the  voice  of  my  adversaries.  Shall  evil  he  ren- 
dered for  good,  because  they  have  digged  a pit  for 
my  soul  ? Remember  that  I have  stood  in  thy  sight, 
to  speak  good  for  them,  and  to  turn  away  thy  indig- 
nation from  them.  Therefore  deliver  up  their  chil- 
dren to  famine,  and  bring  them  into  the  hands  of 
the  sword ; let  their  wives  be  bereaved  of  children, 
and  widows ; and  let  the  husbands  be  slain  by  death : 
let  their  young  men  be  stabbed  with  the  sword  in 
battle.  Let  a cry  be  heard  out  of  theis  houses: 
for  thou  shall  bring  the  robber  upon  them  suddenly : 
because  they  have  digged  a pit  to  take  me,  and  have 
hid  suares  for  my  feet.  But  thou,  O Lord,  knowest 
all  their  counsel  against  me  unto  death : forgive  not 
their  iniquity,  and  let  not  their  sin  be  blotted  out 
from  thy  sight : let  them  be  overthrown  before  thy 
eyes,  in  the  time  of  thy  wrath  do  thou  destroy  them, 
O Lord  our  God, 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxiv. — ^My  enemies  spoke  peace- 
ably to  me;  but  in  their  anger  they  were  trouble- 
some to  rtie.  F,  Thou  hast  seen  it,  O Lord,  be  not 
silent ; abandon  me  noh- 

GOSPEL.  John  xii.  10.  36. — Jit  that  time: 
The  chief  priests  thought  to  kill  Lazarus  also ; be- 
cause many  of  the  Jews  by  reason  of  him  went  away, 
and  believed  in  Jesus.  And  on  the  next  day  a great 
multitude,  that  was  come  to  tlie  festival  day,  when 
they  had  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming  to  Jerusalem, 
took  branches  of  palm  trees,  and  went  forth  to  meet 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


I»A8S10K  WCCK. 


liim,  and  cried . Hosmnct^  bleseed  is  he  that  cometh 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  King  of  Israel  And 
Jesus  found  a young  ass,  and  sat  upon  it,  as  it  is 
written  i “ Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion : behold,  thy 
King  cometh  sitting  on  an  ass’s  colt.”  These  things 
his  disciples  did  not  know  at  the  first:  but  when 
Jesus  was  glorified,  they  then  remembered  that 
these  things  were  written  of  him ; and  that  they  had 
done  these  things  to  him.  The  multitude  therefore 

Sve  testimony,  which  was  with  him,  when  he  called 
Lzarus  out  of  the  grave,  and  raised  him  from  the 
dead.  For  which  reason  also  the  people  came  to 
meet  him:  because  they  heard  he  had  done  this 
miracle.  The  Pharisees  therefore  said  among  them- 
selves : Do  you  see  that  we  prevail  nothing  ? behold, 
the  whole  world  is  gone  after  him.  Now  there 
were  certain  Gentiles  among  them  that  came  up  to 
adore  on  the  festival  day.  Tliese  therefore  came  to 
Philip,  TXho  was  of  Bethsaida  of  Galilee,  and  de- 
sired him,  saying:  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus.  Philip 
cometh,  and  telleth  Andrew.  Again  Andrew  and 
Philip  told  Jesus.  But  Jesus  answered  them,  saying ; 
The  hour  is  come  that  the  Son  of  Man  shell  be 
glorified.  Amen,  amen,  I say  to  you,  unless  the 
grain  of  wheat  falling  into  the  ground,  die  ; itself  re- 
maineth  alone.  But  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much 
fruit.  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it : and  he 
that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world,  keepeth  it  unto 
life  eternal.  If  any  man  minister  to  me,  let  him 
follow  me : and  where.  I am,  there  also'  shall  my 
minister  be.  If  any  man  minister  to  me,  him  will 
my  Father  honour.  Now  is  ray  soul  troubled.  And 
what  shall  I say  ? t ather,  save  me  from  this  hour. 
But  for  this  cause  I came  unto  this  hour.  Father 
glorify  Ihy  name.  A voice  therefore  came  from  hea- 
ven : “ I have  both  glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it 
again.”  The  multitude  therefore  tiiat  stood  and 
heard,  said  that  it  thundered.  Others  said : i An  an- 
U 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


230 


PALM-SUNDAT. 


gel  spoke  to  him.  Jesus  answered,  and  said : This 
voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but  for  j'^our  sakes. 
Now  is  the  judgment  of  the  world:  now  shall  tin? 
prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out.  And  I,  if  1 b<? 
lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  things  to  my- 
self. (Now  this  he  said  signifying  what  death  he 
should  die.)  The  multitude  answered  him  : We 
have  heard  out  of  the  law,  that  Christ  abideth  for- 
ever ;^and  how  sayest  thou : The  Son  of  Man  must 
be  lifted  up  ? Who  is  this  Son  of  Man  ? Jesus  there- 
fore said  to  them:  Yet  a little  while,  the  light  is 
among  you.  Walk  whilst  you  have  the  light,  that 
tlie  darkness  ovenake  you  not : and  he  that  walketh 
in  darkness  knoweth  not  whether  he  goeth.  Whilst 
5^ou  have  the  light,  believe  in  the  light,  that  you 
may  be  the  children  of  light.  These  things  Jesus 
spoke,  and  he  went  away  and  hid  himself  from  them. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  118. — Blessed  art  thou,  O Lord, 
teach  me  thy  justifications : deliver  me  not  to  proud 
calumniators : and  I shall  answer  those  who  reproach 
me. 

SECRET.  Mercifully,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
deliver  us  from  all  sins  and  dangers,  since  thou  al- 
lowest  us  to  partake  of  these  great  mysteries.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  IHvini, — lieing  filled  with  the  divine 
gift,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord  our  God,  that  we  may 
ever  live  by  thy  participation  thereof.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Tiveatur, — May  thy  right  hand,  0 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  protect  thy  people  making 
supplication  to  thee,  and  purifying  them  from  their 
sins,  make  them  wise,  that  they  may  make  such  use 
of  tlie  comforts  of  this  present  life,  as  to  arrive  at 
that  v\ftiich  is  eternal.  Thro’. 


PALM-SUNDAY 

JS  so  called  from  the  ceremony  of  blessing  branches 
of  Palms,  Olives,  or  some  other  tree,  to  be  distii 
buted  among  the  faithful  to  carry  in  procession ; in  re 


Dy  Google 


PALM  SUr«DAT. 


231 


membranee  of  what  the  Jewish  people  did,  when  Jesus 
Christ,  SIX  days  before  his  passion,  made  his  triumphant 
entry  into  Jerusalem  riding  on  an  ass’s  colt,  as  had  been 
foretold  by  the  prophet,  and  was  received  with  the  joy 
ful  acclamations  of  the  multitude,  as  well  as  those  ot 
his  disciples. 

Let  us,  therefore,  assist  at  the  ceremony  of  this  day 
with  recollection  and  piety:  and  whilst  we  bear  the 
Palms  in  our  hanas,  let  us  adore  him,  who  conquered 
hell  by  ,his  death,  and  endeavour  to  partake  of  his 
triumph,  by  overcoming  sin,  and  every  inclination 
contrary  to  the  spirit  of  &od. 

w|/ler  sprinkling  the  Holy  Jfater^  as  umud  on  othet 
Sundays,  the  Office  begins  thus : 

Anthem.  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David : blessed 
is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  O King 
of  Israel:  Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  iL  And  with  thy  spirit 
Let  U3  pray. 

COLLECT.  Dms  quern, — O God,  whom  to  love 
is  true  righteousness,  multiply  in  our  hearts  the  gills 
of  thy  holy  grace : and  since,  by  the  ilcath  of  tliy 
only  Son,  thou  hast  made  us  to  hope  for  those 
things  which  we  believe ; grant  that  by  his  resurrec- 
tion, we  may  arrive  at  the  happy  end  of  our  journey. 
Who  liveth. 

LESSON.  Exod,  xv.  27.  and  xvi.  1.  7. — In  those 
days : The  children  of  Israel  came  into  Elim,  where 
there  were  twelve  fountains  of  water,  and  seventy 
palm-trees:  and  they  encamped  by  the  waters. — 
Chap.  xvi.  And  they  set  forward  from  Elim  ; and 
ail  the  multitude  of  the  children  *of  Israel  came  into 
the  desert  of  Sin,  which  is  between  Elim  and  Sinai, 
the  fifteenth  day  of  the  second  month  after  they  came 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  all  the  congregation 
of  the  children  of  Israel  murmured  against  Moses  and 
Aaron  in  the  wilderness.  And  the  children  of  Israel 
said  to  them : Would  to  God  we  had  died  by  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  when  we  sat 
U2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


232 


PALM  SUNDAY. 


over  the  flesh  pots,  and  ate  bread  to  the  full : Why 
have  you  brought  us  into  this  desert,  that  you  might 
destroy  all  the  multitude  with  famine?  And  the 
Lord  said  to  Moses : Behold  I will  rain  bread  from 
heaven  for  you : let  the  people  go  forth,  and  gather 
what  is  sufficient  for  every  day,  that  I may  prove 
them  whether  they  will  walk  in  my  law,  or  no. 
But  the  sixth  day  let  them  provi  ie  for  to  bring  in, 
and  let  it  be  double  to  that  they  were  wont  to  gatlier 
every  day.  And  Moses  and  Aaron  said  to  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel : in  the  evening  you  shall  know  that 
the  Lord  hath  brought  you  forth  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt : and  in  the  morning  you  shall  see  the  gloiy 
of  ffie  Lord. 

Instead  of  the  Gradual  is  sung  either^ 

R.  The  chief  priests  therefore  and  the  Pharisees 
gathered  a council  and  said : What  are  we  doing, 
for  this  man  performeth  many  wonders  ? If  we  let 
him  go  on  thus,  all  will  believe  in  him  * And  the 
Romans  will  come  and  destroy  both  our  country 
and  us.  V.  But  one  of  them,  named  Caiphas,  being 
the  high  priest  of  that  year,  said  to  them : It  is  for 
your  interest  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people, 
and  not  the  whole  nation  perish.  Therefore  fi^om 
that  day  they  devised  to  kill  him,  saying : ♦ And  the 
Romans,  &c.  to  V. 

[Or  the  foUoivir^,  Matt,  xxvi.] 

R,  Jesus  prayed  unto  his  Father  on  mount  Olivet: 
O Father,  if  it  be  possible  let  this  cup  pass  from  me. 
The  spirit  indeed  is  ready,  but  the  flesh  is  weak. 
Thy  will  be  done.  V.  Watch  and  pray,  that  you 
enter  not  into  temptation.  The  spirit,  &c.  to  V. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxi.  i 9. — *dt  that  time : Jesus 
drawing  near  to  Jerusalem;  and  being  come  to 
Bethphage,  at  mount  Olivet,  he  sent  two  of  his  dis- 
ciples, and  said  to  them  : Go  ye  into  the  village  tha. 
is  over  against  you,  and  immediately  you  shall  finil 
an  ass  tied  and  a colt  with  her : loose  them  and  luing 
them  to  me : and  if  any  man  shall  siiy  any  thing  to 

D .Google 


PALM  SUNDAY. 


233 


you,  say  ye,  that  the  Lord  hath  need  of  them ; and 
forthwith  he  will  let  them  go.  Now  all  this  was 
done  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by 
the  prophet,  saying : Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  Sion : 
Behold,  thy  king  cometh  to  thee,  meek,  and  sitting 
upon  an  ass  and  a colt  the  foal  of  her  that  is  used 
to  the  yoke.”  And  the  disciples  going,  did  as  Jesus 
commanded  them.  And  they  brought  the  ass  and 
the  colt:  and  laid  their  garments  upon  them,  and 
made  him  sit  thereon.  And  a very  great  multitude 
spread  their  garments  in  the  way:  and  others  cut 
down  boughs  from  the  trees,  and  strewed  them  in 
the  way : and  the  multitudes  that  went  before  and 
that  followed,  cried,  saying : “ Hosanna  to  the 

Son  of  David:  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord.” 

THE  BLESSING  OF  THE  PALMS. 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R,  And  with  thy  spirit 
Let  us  pray.  Auge  Jidem. 

Increase,  O God,  the  faith  of  them  that  hope  in 
thee,  and  mercifully  hear  the  prayers  of  thy  sup- 

{)liants : let  thy  manifold  mercy  come  upon  us,  and 
et  these  branches  of  palm  trees,  or  olive  trees,  be 
blessed : and  as  in  a figure  of  the  Church  thou  didst 
multiply  Noah  going  out  of  the  ark,  and  Moses  go- 
ing out  of  Egypt  with  the  children  of  Israel ; so  let 
us,  carrying  palms  and  branches  of  olive  trees,  go 
and  meet  Christ  with  good  works,  and  enter  through 
him  into  eternal  joys.  Who,  &c.  R,  Amen. 

V.  The  Lord  be  with  you.  R.  And  with  thy  spirit. 
F.  Raise  up  your  heaits  on  high.  JR.  We  have  rais- 
ed them  up  to  the  Lord.  V.  Let  us  give  thanks  te 
the  Lord  our  God.  R,  It  is  meet  and  just. 

It  is  truly  meet  and  just,  right  and  available  to 
salvation,  always  and  in  all  places  to  give  thee^hanks, 
O holy  Lord,  Almighty  Father,  etirnal  God,  who 
art  glorious  in  the  assembly  of  thy  saint^.  For  thy 
creatures  serve  thee,  because  they  acknowledge  thee 
U3 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


PALM  SUNDAY. 


2a4 

(or  their  only  Creator  and  Grod.  Jknd  the  whole 
creation  praiseth  thee,  and  thy  saints  bless  thee  : be- 
cause they  confess  with  freedom,  before  the  kings 
and  powers  of  this  world,  the  great  name  of  thy 
only  begotten  Son.  Before  whom  the  angels  and 
archangels,  the  thrones  and  dominations  stand,  and 
with  all  the  troops  of  the  heavenly  host,  sing  a hymn 
to  thy  glory,  saying  without  ceasing ; 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  the  God  of  armiea 
The  heavens  and  the  earth  are  fiiU  of  thy  glory. 
Hosanna  in  the  highest.  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh 
^ in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  iL  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Let  us  pray.  Petimus, 

We  beseech  thee,  O holy  Lord,  Almighty  Father, 
Eternal  God,  that  thou  wouldst  be  pleased  to^^bless 
aud+sanctify  this  creature  of  the  olive  tree,  which 
thou  madest  to  shoot  out  of  the  substance  of  the 
wood,  and  which  the  dove  returning  to  the  ark 
brought  in  its  bill : that  whoever  receiveth  ih  may 
find  protection  of  soul  and  body : and  that  it  may 
prove,  O Lord,  a saving  remedy,  and  a sacred  sign 
of  thy  grace.  Thro’.  R,  Ameru  ^ 

Let  us  pray.  Deus^  qui  dispersa. 

O God,  who  gatherest  what  is  dispersed,  and 
preservest  what  is  gathered ; who  didst  bless  the  peo- 
ple, that  carried  boughs  to  meet  Jesus ; ble6s*j«also 
these  branches  of  the  palm-tree  and  olive-tree,  which 
thy  servants  take  with  faith  in  honour  of  thy  name : 
that  into  whatever  place  they  may  be  carried,  the 
inhabitants  of  that  place  may  obtain  thy  blessing: 
and  thy  right  hand  preserve  from  all  adversity,  and 
protect  those  that  have  been  redeemed  by  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  thy  Son.  Who  liveth.  R.  Amen. 
j Let  us  pray  Deus  qui  miro. 

O God^who  by  thy  wonderful  order  of  thy  prov- 
idence would  even  in  insensible  things  shew  us  the 
manner  or  our  salvation ; grant,  we  beseech  thee^ 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


PALM- SUNDAY. 


235 


tliat  tlie  devout  hearts  of  thy  faithfiil  may  Tinderstand 
to  their  benefit  the  mystical  meaning  of  that  cere- 
mony, when  the  multitude,  by  direction  from  lieav- 
en,  going  this  day  to  meet  our  Redeemer,  strewed 
under  his  feet  palms  and  olive-branches.  The  palms 
represent  his  triumph  over  the  prince  of  death:  and 
the  olive-branches  proclaim,  in  some  manner,  the 
coming  of  a spiritual  unction.  For  that  pious  mul- 
titude then  knew,  what  was  by  them  signified,  that 
our  Redeemer  compassionating  the  misery  of  man- 
kind, was  to  fight  for  the  life  of  the  whole  world 
with  the  prince  of  deatli ; and  to  triumph  over  him 
by  his  own  death.  And  therefore  in  that  action 
they  made  use  of  such  things,  as  might  declare  both 
the  triumph  of  his  victory,  and  the  riches  of  his 
mercy.  We  also  with  a firm  faith,  retaining  both 
the  ceremony  and  its  signification,  humbly  beseech 
thee,  O holy  Lord,  Almighty  Father,  Eternal  God. 
through  the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; that  we,  whom 
thou  hast  made  his  members,  gaining  by  him,  and 
in  him,  a victory  over  the  empire  of  death,  may  de- 
serve to  be  partakers  of  his  glorious  resun*ection. 
WhoJiveth.  R.  Amen, 

Let  us  pray.  qin  per  olivfB, 

O God,  who  by  an  olive-branch  didst  command 
the  dove  to  proclaim  peace  to  the  world : sanctify, 
we  beseech  thee,  by  thy  heavenly*fibenediction,  these 
branches  of  olives  and  other  trees  ; that  they  may  be 
serviceable  to  all  thy  people  unto  salvation.  Thro’. 
R,  Atnen, 

Let  us  pray.  Benedic, 

Bjess,»}«0  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  these  branches 
of  the  palm-tree,  or  olive-tree  ; and  grant  that  what 
thy  people  this  day  act  corporally  for  thy  honour, 
they  may  perform  tlie  same  spiritually  with  the 
greatest  devotion,  by  gaining  a victory  o^r  their 
enemy,  and  ardently  loving  mercy.  Thro’.  R 
Amen 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


236 


PALM-SUXDAY 


Here  the  Priest  sprinkles  the  Palms  with  itoly  Water, 
saying  Sprinkle,  &c.  as  in  p*  xiii.  and  having 
fumed  them  thrice  loith  incense,  he  says  : 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R,  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Let  us  pray.  Deus,  qui  FUium, 

O God,  who,  for  our  salvation,  didst  send  into  this 
world  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  that  he  might 
humble  himself  to  our  condition,  and  call  us  back 
to  thee.  For  whom  also,  as  he  was  coming  to  Jeru- 
salem to  fulfil  the  scriptures,  a multitude  of  faithful 
|)eople  with  a zealous  devotion  spread  their  garments 
together  with  palm  branches  in  the  way : grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  that  we  may  prepare  him  the  way  of 
faith,  out  of  which  the  stone  of  offence  and  the  rock 
of  scandal  being  removed,  our  actions  may  flourish 
with  branches  of  righteousness,  so  that  we  may  be 
worthy  to  follow  his  steps.  Who  liveth.  R,  Amen. 
The  Palms,  being  blessed,  are  distributed  to  the  people 
kneeling  and  kissing  them  as  well  as  the  PnesVs 
hand.  During  the  distribution  the  following  An- 
thems are  repeated  till  the  whole  are  distributed : 
Anthem.  The  Hebrew  children  carrying  olive- 
branches  met  the  Lord,  crying  out,  and  saying. 
Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

Anthem.  The  Hebrew  children  spread  their 
garments  in  the  way,  and  cried  out,  saying : Hosan- 
na to  the  Son  of  David ; blessed  is  he  that  cometh 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R,  And  with  thy  spirit 
Let  tis  pray.  Omnipotens, 

O Almighty  and  Eternal  God,  who  wouldst  have 
our  Lord  Jesus  Cluist  ride  on  the  colt  of  an  ass,  and 
didst  inspire  the  crowds  of  people  to  spread  their 
garments,  and  branches  of  trees  in  tlie  way,  and  to 
sing  Hosanna  to  his  praise : grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  we  may  imitate  their  innocence,  and  deserve  to 
partake  of  their  merits.  Thro’.  R,  Amen. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


PALM- 8 UNDAY. 


237 


\ 


Here  ihe  Procession  begin»  in  the  usual  form^  dur- 
ing which,  some  of  the  foUoxoing  Anthems  are  sung. 
The  Priest  or  Deacon  gimng  notice  thereof  ty 
saying: 

Let  us  set  out  in  peace.  R.  In  the  name  of 
Chiist.  Amen. 

Anthems  during  the  Procession. 

Anthem.  Matt.  xxi.  When  the  Lord  drew  nigh  to 
Jerusalem,  he  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  saying : Gro 
ye  into  the  village  that  is  over  against  you  ; and  you 
will  find  the  colt  of  an  ass  tied,  upon  which  no  man 
hath  sat ; loose  it,  and  bring  it  to  me.  If  any  one  a^ 
you  any  questions,  say : The  Lord  wanteth  it. 
They  untied  and  brought  it  to  Jesus,  and  laid  their 
garments  upon  it;  and  he  seated  himself  on  iL 
Others  spread  their  garments  in  the  way : others  cut* 
branches  from  the  trees ; and  those  who  folio v^ed, 
cried  out  Hosanna,  blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord ; and  blessed  be  the  reign  of  our 
father  David : Hosanna  in  the  highest.  O Son  of 
David  have  mercy  on  us. 

Anthem.  When  the  people  heard,  that  Jesus  was 
coming  to  Jerusalem,  they  took  palm-branches,  and 
went  out  to  meet  him : and  the  children  cried  out, 
saying : This  is  he,  who  is  come  for  the  salvation 
of  the  people.  He  is  our  salvation,  and  the  r idemp- 
tion  of  Israel.  How  great,  is  he,  whom  the  thrones 
and  dominations  go  out  to  meet!  Fear  not,  O 
daughter  of  Sion : behold  thy  king  cometh  to  thee 
sitting  on  an  ass’s  colt,  as  it  is  written.  Hail,  O 
King,  the  Creator  of  the  world,  who  art  come  to 
redeem  us. 

, Anthem.  Six  days  before  the  solemnity  of  the  Pass- 
over,  when  the  Lord  was  coming  into  the  city  of 
Jerusalem,  the  children  met  him,  and  carried  palm- 
branches  in  their  hands ; and  they  cried  out  with  a 
loud  voice,  saying;  Hosanna  in  the  highest : blessed 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


238 


PAliM'SUNDAf. 


art  thou  who  art  come  in  the  multitude  of  thy 
mercy : Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

Anthem.  The  multitude  goeth  out  to  meet  their  Re- 
deemer with  flowers  and  palms,  and  payeth  the  ho- 
mage due  to  a triumphant  conqueror : the  Gentiles 
proclaim  the  Son  of  God : and  their  voices  rend  the 
skies  in  the  praise  of  Christ : .Hosanna  in  the  highest 
Anthem.  Let  us  faithfully  join  with  the  angels  and 
children,  singing  to  the  Conqueror  of  deadi:  Ho- 
sanna in  the  higTiest 

Anthem.  A great  multitude  that  was  met  together 
at  the  festival  cried  out  to  the  Lord : Blessed  is  he 
that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord : Hosanna  in  the 
highest. 

^ ike  return  of  the  Procession,  two  or  four  chanters 
go  into  the  churchy  and  shutting  the  door^  with  their 
faces  towards  the  Procession,  sing  the  two  first 
verses  of  the  foUomng  Hymn^*  To  tnee,  O Christ, 
&c.  which  are  repeated  hy  the  Priest  and  the  others 
without  the  church.  Then  they  who  are  within, 
sing  the  following  verses;  to  which  those  that  art 
without,  after  every  two  verses,  answer, 

• rpo  thee,  O Christ,  be  glory,  praises  loud : 

JL  To  thee.  Hosanna,  cried  the  Jewish  crow’cL 
R.  To  thee. 

We  Israel’s  monarch,  David’s  Son  proclaim : 

Thou  coin’st,  blest  King,  in  God’s  most  holy  name. 
R.  To  thee. 

Angels  and  men,  in  one  harmonious  choir. 

To  sing  thy  everlast’mg  praise  conspire. 

R.  To  thee. 

Thee  Israel’s  children  met  with  conqu’ring  palms. 
To  thee  our  vows  we  pay  in  loudest  psalms, 
it  To  thee. 

For  thee  on  earth  with  boughs  they  strew ’d  the  ways 
To  thee  in  heaven  we  sing  melodious  praise, 
it  To  thee. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


PALM^SUiVDAY. 


239 


Accept  this  tribute,  which  to  thee  we  bring, 

As  thou  didst  theirs,  O good  uud  gracious  King. 

R,  To  thee. 

Here  the  Subdeacon  knocks  ai  the  door  tcith  the  foot 
of  the  cross : which  being  opened,  the  Procession 
enters  the  Church  singing.  This  ceremony  repre^ 
sents  our  pilgrimage  %n  this  mortal  life,  in  which 
we  unite  in  the  praises  of  God  with  the  blessed  in 
heaven : and  live  in  hopes  that  the  gates  thereqf 
will  be  opened  to  us  thro*  the  merits  of  the  cross  of 
Christ, 

R,  As  our  Lord  entered  the  holy  city,  the  He- 
brew children  declaring  the  resurrection  of  life, 
* With  palm- branches  cried  out:  Hosanna  in  tne 
highest.  V,  When  the  people  heard,  that  Jesus  was 
corning  to  Jerusalem,  they  went  out  to  meet  him, 
and  *With  palm-branches,  &c.  as  above,  to  V. 

At  Mass  all  hold  the  Palms  in  their  hands  during  the 
reading  or  singing  of  the  Passion. 

INTROIT.  Ps.iau 

Lord,  keep  not  thy  T^Omine,  ne  longe  fa- 
help  far  from  me ; X-/  das  auxUium  tuum  a 

look  to  my  defence ; me,  ad  defensionem  meam 
save  me  from  the  lion’s  aspice  : libera  me  de  ore 
mouth,  and  rescue  me  leonis,  et  a comibus  urn- 
in  ray  distress,  from  the  comium  humilitatem  me- 
horn»  of  unicorns.  am. 

Ps.  O God,  my  God,  Ps.  Deus,  Devs  mens, 
look  upon  me  : why  hast  respice  in  me : quare  me 
thou  forsaken  me  ? They  dereliquisti  ? Longe  a 
are  my  sins  that  keep  sal-  salute  men  verba  delicio- 
vation  far  from  me.  Lord  rum  meorum.  Domine, 
keep  not,  &c.  ne  longe,  Ifc. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  who  wouldst  have  our  Saviour  become 
man,  and  suffer  on  a cross,  to  give  mankind  an  ex- 
ample of  humility : mercifully  grant,  that  we  may 

Dig  lized  by  Google 


S40 


PALM-StTNDAY. 


improve  l)y  the  example  of  his  palience,  and  partake 
of  his  resurrection.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Philip  ii.  5.  11. — Brethren:  Let 
this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus ; 
who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  rob* 
bery,  to  be  equal  with  God : but  emptied  himself^ 
taking  the  form  of  a servant,  being  made  in  the  like- 
ness of  men,  and  in  habit  fouud  as  a man.  He 
humbled  himself,  becoming  obedient  unto  death  : 
even  to  the  death  of  the  cross.  For  which  cause  God 
also  hath  exalted  him,  and  hath  given  him  a name 
which  is  above  all  names:  that  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  shall  bow,  of  those  that  are  in  heaven, 
on  earth,  and  under  the  earth.  And  that  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
in  the  glory  of  the  Father. 

GRAD.  Ps»  Ixxii. — TIiou  hast  held  me  by  my 
right  hand,  and  by  thy  will  thou  hast  conducted  me : 
and  with  glory  thou  hast  received  me.  F.  How  good 
is  Gk)d  to  Israel,  to  them  that  are  of  a right  heart ! 
But  my  feet  were  almost  moved,  my  steps  had  well 
nigh  slipt,  because  I had  a zeal  on  smners  seeing  the 
prosperity  of  sinners. 

TRACT.  Ps.  xxi.— Dev3  mens,  respice  in 
me:  quare  rm  dereliquisti^  O God,  my  God,  look 
upon  me : why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? F.  far  fix)m 
my  salvation  are  the  words  of  my  sins.  F.  O ray* 
God  I shall  cry  by  day,  and  thou  wilt  not  hear: 
and  by  night,  and  it  shall  not  be  imputed  as  folly  in 
me.  F.  But  thou  dwellest  in  the  holy  place,  the 
praise  of  Israel.  F.  In  thee  have  our  fathers  hoped 
and  thou  hast  delivered  them.  F.  They  cried  out  to 
thee,  and  they  were  saved : they  trusted  in  thee,  and 
were  not  confounded.  F.  But  I am  a worm,  and  no 
man : the  reproach  of  men,  and  the  outcast  of  the 
people.  F.  All  they  that  saw  me  have  laughed  m<» 
to  sconi : they  have  spoken  with  the  lips,  and  wag 
ged  the  head.  F.  He  hoped  in  the  Lord,  sajd  they 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


J'ALM-SUNDAT. 


•Ml 


Itit  him  deliver  him ; let  him  save  hiir.  seeing  he  de- 
lighted in  him.  V,  They  considered  n e,  and  viewed 
me  attentively:  they  divided  iny  garments  amongst 
them,  and  cast  lots  for  my  vest.  V,  Deliver  me 
from  the  lion’s  mouth:  and  my  lowness  from  the 
horns  of  the  unicorns.  F.  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord, 
j)raise  him : O all  ye  of  the  seed  of  Jacob  magnify  him. 
F.  A people  that  is  to  come,  shall  be  declared  the 
Lord’s : and  the  heavens  shall  publish  his  justice. 
F.  To  a people,  to  be  bom,  whom  the  Loi^  hath 
made. 


The  PASSION  of  our  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST, 
according  to  Matt.  xxvi.  and  xxvii. 

/%T  that  time;  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples:  You 
know  that  after  two  days  shall  be  the  pasch, 
and  the  Son  of  Man  shall  l)e  delivered  up  to  be  cru- 
cified. Then  were  gathered  together  the  chief 
priests  and  ancients  of  the  people  into  the  coiut  of 
the  high  priest,  who  was  called  Caiphas : and  they 
consulted  togetlier,  that  by  sulitilty  they  might  a])- 
prehend  Jesus,  and  put  him  to  death.  But  they 
said:  Not  on  the  festival  day,  lest  perhaps  there 
should  be  a tumult  amongst  the  people.  And  when 
Jesus  was  in  Bethania,  in  the  house  of  Simon  the 
leper,  there  came  to  him  a woman  having  an 
alabaster-box  of  precious  ointment,  and  poured  it 
on  his  head  as  he  was  at  table.  And  the  disciples 
seeing  it,  had  indignation,  saying:  To  what  pur- 
pose 18  this  waste  ? For  this  might  have  been  sold  for 
much,  and  mven  to  the  poor.  And  Jesus  knowing 
it,  said  to  them:  why  do  you  trouble  this  w^oman? 
for  she  has  wrought  a good  work  upon  me.  For  the 
poor  you  have  always  with  you,  but  me  you  have  not 
always.  For  she,  in  pouring  this  ointment  upon 
my  body,  hath  done  it  for  niy  burial.  Amen,  I say 
to  you,  wheresoever  this  gospel  shall  be  preached  in 
the  whole  world,  that  also  which  she  hath  done, 
shall  J)e  told  for  a memory  of  her.  Then  went  one 
X 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


242 


PALM’SUNDAT. 


of  the  twelve,  who  was  called  Judas  Iscariot,  to  ihe 
c.hief  priests,  and  said  to  them : What  will  you  give 
me,  and  I will  deliver  him  unto  you  ? But  they  ap- 
pointed him  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  And  from  thence- 
forth he  sought  an  opportunity  to  betray  him.  And 
on  the  first  day  of  the  Azymes  the  disciples  came  to 
Jesus,  saying:  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for 
thee  to  eat  the  pasch?  But  Jesus  said : Go  ye  into 
the  city  to  a certain  man,  and  say  to  him : The  Master 
saith  my  time  is  near  at  hand,  I will  keep  the  pascli 
at  thy  house  with  my  disciples.  And  the  disciples 
did  as  Jesus  {mpointed  to  them,  and  they  prepared 
the  pasch.  Noiv  when  it  was  evening,  he  sat 
down  with  his  twelve  disciples.  And  whilst  they 
were  eating,  he  said : Amen,  I say  to  you,  that  one 
of  you  is  about  to  betray  me.  And  they  being  very 
much  troubled,  began  every  one  to  say  : Is  it  I, 
Lord  ? But  he  answering  said : He  that  dippeth  his 
hand  with  me  in  the  dish,  he  shall  betray  me.  The 
Son  of  man  indeed  goeth,  as  it  is  written  of  him ; 
but  wo  to  that  man,  by  whom  the  Son  of  Man  shall 
be  beo-ayed.  It  were  better  for  him,  if  that  man 
had  not  been  bom.  And  Judas,  that  betrayed  him, 
answering  said : Is  it  1,  Rabbi  ? He  saitli  to  him : 
Thou  hast  said  it.  And  whilst  they  were  at  supper, 
Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed,  cmd  broke ; and  gave 
to  his  disciples,  and  said:  Take  ye,  and  eat:  this 
is  my  body.  And  taking  the  chalice  he  gave  thanks : 
and  gave  to  them,  saving : Drink  ye  all  of  this.  • For 
this  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament  which  shall 
be  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins.  And  I say 
to  you,  I will  not  drink  from  henceforth  of  this 
fruit  of  the  vine,  until  that  day  when  I shall  drink  it 
new  with  you  in  the  kingdom  of  my  Father.  And  a 
hymn  l)eing  said,  they  went  out  into  mount  Olivet. 
Then  Jesus  said  to  them:  All  you  shall  be  scanda- 
lized in  me  this  night.  For  it  is  written:  “I  will 
strike  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  of  the  flock  shall 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


PALM-SUNBaT. 


343 


be  dispereed.”  But  after  I shall  be  risen  again,  I 
wiU  go  before  you  into  Galilee.  And  Peter  an- 
swering, said  to  him : Although  all  shall  be  scan- 
dalized in  thee,  I will  never  be  scandalized.  Jesus 
said  to  him:  Amen,  I say  to  thee,  that  in  this 
night,  before  the  cock  crow,  thou  wilt  deny  me 
thrice.  Peter  saith  to  him:  Yea,  though  I 
diould  die  with  thee,  I will  not  deny  thee.  And 
in  like  manner  said  all  the  disciples.  Then  Jesus 
came  with  them  into  a country  place  which  is 
caUed  Gethsemani ; and  he  said  to  his  disciples : Sit 
you  here,  till  I go  yonder,  and  pray.  And  taking 
with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee,  he 
began  to  grow  sorrowful  and  to  be  sad.  Then  he 
saith  to  them:  My  soul  is  sorrowful  even  unto 
death:  stay  you  here  and  watch  with  me.  And 
going  a little  further  he  fell  upon  his  face,  praying 
and  saying:  My  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this 
chalice  pass  from  me.  Nevertlieless,  not  as  I will, 
but  as  thou  wilt.  And  he  cometh  to  his  disciples, 
and  findeth  them  asleep,  and  he  saith  to  Peter: 
What  ? Could  you  not  watch  one  hour  with  me , 
Watch  ye,  and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempta- 
tion. The  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  ftesh  is 
weak.  Again  the  second  time  he  went,  and  play- 
ed, saying : My  Father,  if  this  chalice  may  not  pass 
away  but  1 must  drink  it,  thy  will  be  done.  And 
he  cometh  again,  and  findeth  them  sleeping ; for  their 
eyes  were  heavy.  And  leaving  them,  he  went 
again ; and  he  prayed  the  third  time,  saying  the  self- 
same words.  Then  he  cometh  to  his  disciples,  and 
saith  to  them:  Sleep  ye  now,  and  take  your  rest: 
behold  the  hour  is  at  hand,  and  the  Son  of  Man 
shall  be  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners.  Rise, 
let  us  go : behold  he  is  at  hand  that  will  betray  me. 
As  he  yet  spoke,  behold  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve, 
came,  and  with  him  a great  multitude  with  swords 
ind  clubs,  sent  from  the  chief  priests  and  the  anci- 
X2 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


PALM- SUNDAY. 


zu 

ents  of  the  people.  And  he  that  had  betrayed  him,  gave 
them  a sign,  saying ; Whomsoever  I shall  kiss,  that 
is  he,  hold  him  fast.  And  forthwith  coming  to  Je- 
sus, he  said:  Hail,  Rabbi.  And  be  kissed  him. 
And  Jesus  said  to  him ; Friend,  whereto  art  thou 
come  ? Then  they  came  up  and  laid  hands  on  Je- 
sus, and  held  him.  And  behold  one  of  them  that 
were  with  Jesus,  stretching  forth  his  hand,  drew  out 
his  sword;  and  striking  the  servant  of  the  high 
priest,  cut  off  his  ear.  Then  Jesus  said  to  him: 
rtit  up  again  thy  sword  into  its  place ; for  all  that 
take  the  sword,  shall  perish  with  the  sword.  Think- 
^ thou  that  I cannot  ask  my  Father,  and  he  will 
give  me  presently  more  than  twelve  legions  of 
angels?  How  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled, 
thtft  BO  it  must  be  done  ? In  that  same  hour  Jesus 
said  to  the  multitude  ? You  are  come  out  as  it  were 
to  a robber,  with  swords  and  clubs,  to  apprehend 
me.  I sat  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the  temple, 
and  you  laid  not  hands  on  me.  Now  ail  this  was 
done,  that  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets  might  be 
fulfilled.  Then  the  disciples  all  leaving  him,  fled. 
But  they  holding  Jesus,  led  him  to  Caiphas  the 
high  priest,  where  the  scribes  and  the  ancients  were 
assembled.  And  Peter  followed  him  afar  off,  even 
to  the  court  of  the  high-priest.  And  going  in,  he 
sat  with  the  servaT^ts,  that  he  might  see  the  end. 
And  the  chief  pries'^  and  the  whole  council  sought 
folse  witness  a^inst  Jesus,  that  they  might  put  him 
to  death : and  they  found  not,  whereas  many  false 
witnesses  had  come  in.  And  last  of  all  there  came 
two  felse  witnesses ; and  they  said : This  man  said,  I 
am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God,  and  after 
three  days  to  rebuild  it.  And  the  high-priest  rising 
up,  said  to  him:  AnswerOst  thou  nothing  to  the 
things  which  these  witness  against  thcr?  ? But  Jesus 
held  his  peace.  And  the  high-pne  / said  to  him 
f a^tjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  tha..  «‘lOU  tell  us  if 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


PALM  SU:VDAT. 


245 


thou  be  the  Christ  the  Son  of  Grod.  Jesus  saith  to 
him : Thou  hast  said  it.  Nevertheless  I say  to  you, 
hereailer  you  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on 
the  right  hand  of  the  power  of  God,  and  coming  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven.  Then  the  high>priest  rent 
his  garments,  saying:  He  hath  blasphemed,  what 
further  need  have  we  of  witnesses  ? Behold,  now 
vnu  have  heard  the  blasphemy:  what  think  yop? 
But  they  answering,  said:  He  is  guilty  of  death. 
Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffet  him, 
and  others  struck  his  face  with  the  palms  of  their 
hands,  saying : Prophe^  unto  us,  O Christ ; who  is 
he  that  struck  thee  ? But  Peter  sat  without  in  the 
court : and  there  came  to  him  a servant-maid,  say- 
ing : Thou  also  wast  with  Jesus  the  Galilean.  But 
he  denied  before  them  all,  saying : I know  not  what 
thou  sayest.  And  as  he  went  out  of  the  gate,  ano- 
ther maid  saw  him,  and  she  saith  to  them  that  were 
there : This  man  also  was  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
And  again  he  denied  with  an  oath : That  I know 
not  the  man.  And  after  a little  while  they  came 
that  stood  by,  and  said  to  Peter : Surely  thou  also 
art  one  of  them ; for  even  thy  speech  doth  discover 
thee.  Then  he  began  to  curse  and  swear  that  he' 
knew  not  the  man.  And  immediately  the  cock 
crew.  And  Peter  remembered  the  words  of  Jesus 
which  he  had  said:  Before  the  cock  crew,  thou 
wilt  deny  me  thrice.  And  going  forth,  he  wept 
bitterly.  And  when  morning  was  come,  all  the 
chief  priests  and  ancients  of  the  pebple  took  coimsel 
against  Jesus,  that  they  might  put  him  to  death. 
And  they  brought  him  boimd,  and  delivered  him  to 
Pontius  Pilate  the  governor.  Then  Judas,  who  be- 
trayed him,  seeing  that  he  was  condemned,  rej^nt- 
ing  himself  brought  back  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver 
to  the  chief  priests  and  ancients,  saying:  I have 
sinned,  in  betraying  innocent  blood.  But  they 
eaid:  What  is  that  to  us?  look  tliou  to  it.  And 

xa 

oy  Google 


PALM  SUNDAY. 


m 

casting  down  tlie  pieces  of  silver  in  the  temple,  he 
depart,  and  went  and  hanged  himself  with  an  hal- 
ter. But  the  chief  priests  having  taken  the  pieces 
of  silver,  said : It  is  not  iawtiil  to  put  them  into  the 
carbona,  because  it  is  the  price  of  blood.  And  after 
they  had  consulted  together,  they  bought  with  them 
the  potter’s  field,  to  & a burying  place  for  stran- 

nFor  this  cause  that  field  was  called  Hacel- 
a,  that  is,  the  field  of  blood,  even  to  this  day. 
Then  was  fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jere- 
inias  the  prophet,  saying:  <<And  they  took  the 
thirty  pieces  or  silver,  the  price  of  him  that  was  priz-  • 
ed,  whom  they  prized  of  the  children  of  Israel.  And 
they  gave  . them  unto  the  potter’s  field,  as  the  Lord 
appointed  to  me.”  And  Jesus  stood  before  the  go- 
vernor, and  the  governor  asked  him,  saying:  Art 
thou  the  king  of  the  Jews?  Jesus  saith  to  him: 
Thou  sayest  it  And  when  he  was  accused  by  the 
chief  priests  and  ancients,  he  answered  nothing.  Then 
Pilate  saith  to  him:  Dost  thou  not  hear  how  great 
testimonies  they  allege  against  thee?  And  he  an- 
swered him  to  never  a word ; so  that  the  governor 
wondered  exceedingly.  Now  upon  the  solemn  day 
the  governor  was  accustomed  to  release  to  the  peo- 
ple one  prisoner,  whom  they  would.  And  he  had 
then  a notorious  prisoner,  that  was  called  Barabbes. 
They  therefore  being  gathered  together,  Pilate  said : 
Whom  will  you  that  I release  to  you,  Bai’abbas,  or 
Jesus  that  is  called  Clirist?  For  he  knew  that  for 
envy  they  had  delivered  him.  And  as  he  was  sitting 
in  the  place  of  judgment,  his  wife  sent  to  him,  say- 
ing : Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man 
For  I have  sufifered  many  thinm  this  day  in  a dream 
because  of  bun.  But  the  chief  priests  and  ancients 
persuaded  the  people,  that  they  should  ask  Barab- 
bas,  imd  make  Jesus  away.  And  the  governor  an- 
swering, said  to  them:  Whither  will  you  of  the 
two  to  he  released  unto  you  ? But  tliey  said,  Barab- 

/Google 


PALM- SUNDAY, 


247 


hm.  Pilate  salth  to  them:  What  shall  I do  then 
with  Jesus  that  is  called  Christ  ? They  say  all : Let 
him  be  crucified.  The  governor  said  to  them 
Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done  ? But  they  cried  out 
the  more,  saying : Let  him  be  crucified.  And  Pi 
late  seeing  that  he  prevailed  nothing;  but  that  ra- 
ther a tumult  was  made ; taking  water  he  washed 
his  hands  before  the  peopde,  saying : 1 ain  innocent 
of  the  blood  of  this  just  man:  look  you  to  it.  And 
the  whole  people  answering,  said : His  blood  be  upou 
us,  and  upon  our  children.  Then  he  released  to 
iJiem  Barabbas:  and  having  scourged  Jesus,  deliver- 
ed him  unto  them  to  be  crucified.  Then  the  sol- 
diers of  the  governor  taking  Jesus  into  the  hall, 
gathered  together  unto  him  the  whole  band:  and 
stripping  him,  they  put  a scarlet  cloak  about  him 
And  platting  a crown  of  thorns,  they  put  it  upon 
his  head,  a^  a reed  in  his  right  hand.  And  bow- 
ing the  knee  before  him,  they  mocked  him,  saying : 
Hail,  king  of  the  Jews.  And  spitting  upon  him, 
they  lock  tiie  reed,  and  struck  his  head.  And  after 
they  had  mocked  him,  they  took  off  die  cloak  from 
him,  and  put  on  his  own  garments,  and  led  him 
away  to  crucify  him.  And  going  out  they  met  a 
man  of  Cyrene,  named  Simon : him  they  forced  to 
take  up  the  cross.  And  they  came  to  the  place  that 
is  called  Golgotha,  which  is  the  place  of  Calvary. 
And  they  gave  him  wine  to  drink  mingled  with  ^1. 
And  when  he  had  tasted,  he  would  not  drmk. 
And  after  they  had  crucified  him,  they  divided  his 
garments,  casting  lots:  that  it  might  be  folftlled 
which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  saying:  “They 
divided  my  garments  aniong  them ; and  upon  my 
vesture  they  cast  lots  ”:  and  they  sat  and  watched 
him.  And  they  put  over  his  head  his  cause  written : 
This  is  Jesus  the  Kino  of  the  Jews.  Then 
were  crucified  with  him  two  thieves:  one  on  the 
right  hand,  and  one  on  the  left.  And  they  that 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


248 


FALM-SUIfDAT. 


passed  by,  blasphemed  him,  waggii  g their  heads^ 
and  saying:  Vah,  thou  that  destroyest  the  temple  of 
Grod,  ami  in  three  days  dost  rebuild  it,  save  thy  own- 
self  : if  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from 
the  cross.  In  like  manner  also  tho  chief  priests, 
with  the  scribes  and  ancients,  mocking,  said ; 
He  saved  others ; himself  he  cannot  save : if  he  be 
the  king  of  Israel,  let  him  now  come  down  from  the 
cross,  and  we  will  believe  him.  He  trusted  in  God  r 
let  him  now  deliver  him,  if  he  will  have  him : for  he 
said : I am  the  Son  of  God.  And  the  self  same  thing 
the  thieves  also  that  were  crucified  with  him,  re- 
proached him  with.  Now  from  the  sixth  hour  there 
was  darkness  over  the  whole  earth,  until  the  nintii 
hour.  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a 
loud  voice,  saykig : Eli,  Eli,  lamma  sabacthani  ? 
that  is,  “ my  God,  my  G^,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ?”  And  some  that  stood  there  and  heard,  said : 
This  man  calleth  Elias.  And  immediately  one  of* 
them  running,  took  a sponge,  and  filled  it  with  vine- 
gar,  and  put  it  on  a reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink» 
And  the  others  said : let  us  see  whether  Elias  will 
come  and  deliver  him.  And  Jesus  again  crying  >vitli 
a loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost.  * And  behold 
he  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  two  from  the  top 
even  to  the  bottom,  and  the  earth  quaked,  and  the 
rocks  were  rent.  And  the  graves  were  opened ; and 
man^  bodies  of  the  saints  that  had  slept  arose.  And 
coming  out  of  the  tombs  after  his  resurrection,  came 
into  the  holy  city  and  apj^ared  to  many.  Now  the 
Centurion,  and  they  that  were  with  him  watching 
Jesus,  having  seen  the  earthquake  and  the  things 
that  were  done,  were  sore  afraid,  saying : Indeed 
this  was  the  Son  of  God.  And  there  were  there 
many  women  afar  off  who  bad  followed  Jesus  from 
Galilee,  ministering  unto  him:  among  whom  was 
Mary  Magdalen,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  James 
* Here  all  kneel,  and  pause. 

/Google 


PALM  SthvOAlf. 


and  Joseph,  and  the  mother  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee. 
And  when  it  was  evening,  there  came  a certain  rich 
fuan  of  Arimathea,  named  Joseph,  who  also  himself 
was  a disciple  of  Jesus.  He  went  to  Pilate,  and 
asked  the  body  of  Jesus.  Then  Pilate  commanded 
that  the  body  should  be  delivered.  And  Joseph  tak- 
ing the  body,  wrapped  it  up  in  a clean  linen  cloth, 
and  laid  it  in  his  own  new  monument,  which  he  had 
hewed  out  in  a rock.  And  he  rolled  a great  stone 
to  the  door  of  the  monument,  and  went  his  way, 
And  there  was  there  Mary  Magdalen,  and  the  other 
Mary  sitting  over  against  the  sepulchre. 

Here  the  Priest  says^  Cleanse  my  heart,  &c.  p.  xx. 

And  the  next  day,  which  followed  the  day  of 
preparation,  the  chief  priests  and  the  Pharisees 
came  together  to  Pilate,  saying:  Sir,  we  have  re- 
membered, that  that  seducer  said,  while  he  was 
yet  alive : After  three  days  I will  rise  again.  Com- 
tpand  therefore  the  sepulchre  to  be  guarded  until  the 
foird  day : lest  perhajis  his  disciples  come  and  steal 
him  away,  and  say  to  the  people  he  is  risen  from 
the  dead : and  the  last  error  shall  be  worse  than  the 
ftret.  Pilate  said  to  them : You  have  a guard  ; go, 
guard  it  as  you  know.  And  they  departing,  made 
the  sepulchre  sure,  sealing  the  stone,  and  setting 
gnarc^ 

OFFERT.  Ps,  IxviiL — My  heart  hath  expected 
reproach  and  misery : and  1 looked  for  one  that  would 
grieve  together  with  me ; but  there  was  none : an<l 
for  one  that  would  comfort  me,  and  I found  none  s 
they  gave  me  gaU  for  my  food,  and  in  my  thirst  they 
gave  me  vinegar  to  drink. 

SECRET.  Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  what  hath  been  offered  in  the  presence  of  thy 
divine  Majesty  may  procure  us  the  grace  of  devotion, 
and  effectually  obtain  a Wessed  eternity.  Thro’ 
COMM.  McdL  xxvi. — ^Father,  if  this  cup  cannot 
pass  away,  Imt  I must  drink  it,  thy  will  be  done 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


250 


MONDAY  IN 


P.  CO^IM.  Per  hujus.— M&y  our  vice^  O Lord, 
ho  destroyed,  and  our  righteous  desii-es  fulfilled  by 
ilie  efficacy  of  these  mysteries.  Thro*. 

In  private  Masses,  the  Gospel  Matt.  x».  (as  above 
in  the  blessing  of  the  Palms,  p.  232,)  is  here  read 
instead  of  the  ordinary  Gospel,  John  i.  p.  xlv. 

MONDAY  IN»^HOLY  WEEK. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  xxxiv. — kludge  thou,  O Lord,  th'^m 
that  wrong  me ; overthrow  them  that  fight  against 
me  : Take  hold  of  arms  and  shield,  and  rise  up  to  help 
me,  O Lord,  my  mighty  Saviour.  Ps.  Bring  out 
tl»e  sword,  and  shut  up  the  way  against  them  that 
persecute  me ; say  to  my  soul,  I am  thy  salvation. 
Judge  thou,  O Lord,  &c.  to  Ps. 

COLLECT.  Da,  quasumus.— Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  through  our 
weakness,  faint  under  so  many  adversities,  may  re- 
cover by  the  passion  of  thy  only  begotten  Son.  Who, 
with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  liveth,  &c. 

LESSON.  Is.  1.  5.  10.— -In  those  daps:  Isaias 
said:  The  Lord  God  hath  opened  my  ear,  and  1 
do  not  resist : I have  not  gone  back.  I have  given 
iny  body  to  the  strikers,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that 
plucked  them:  I have  not  turned  away  my  face 
from  them  that  rebuked  me,  and  spit  upon  me. 
The  Lord  Go4  is  my  helper,  therefore  am  I not  con- 
founded. He  is  near  that  justifieth  me,  who  will 
contend  with  me?  let  us  stand  together.  Who  is. 
my  adversary  ? let  him  come  near  to  me.  Behold 
the  Lord  God  is  my  helper : who  is  he  that  shall 
condemn  me?  Lo,  they  shall  all  be  destroyed  as  a 
garment,  the  itioth  shall  eat  them  up.  Who  is 
there  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord,  that  hearetb 
the  voice  of  his  servant,  that  hath  walked  in  dark- 
ness, and  hath  no  light  ? let  him  hope  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  and  lean  upon  his  God. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxiv.— Arise,  O Lord,  he  attentive 


Digilized  byCjOOgIC 


HOLY  WEEK. 


251 


to  my  trial ; my  God  and  my  Lord,  undertake  my 
cause.  V.  Draw  thy  sword,  and  stop  those  that  are 
in  pursuit  of  me. 

* TRACT.  Ps.  cii. — Deal  not,  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  John  xii.  1.  9. — Now  Jesus,  six  days 
before  tlie  pasch,  came  to  Bethania,  where  Lazarus 
had  been  dead,  whom  Jesus  raised  to  life.  And  lliey 
made  him  a supper  thfere ; and  Martha  served,  but 
Lazarus  was  one  of  them  that  were  at  table  with 
him.  Mary  therefore  took  a pound  of  ointment  of 
right  spikenard,  of  great  price,  and  anointed  the 
foet  of  Jesus,  and  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair : and 
the  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment. 
Then  one  of  his  disciples,  Judas  Iscariot,  he  that 
was  about  to  betray  him,  said : Why  was  not  this 
ointment  sold  for  three  hundred  pence,  and  given  to 
the  poor  ? Now  he  said  this,  not  because  he  cared 
for  the  |)oor,  but  because  he  was  a thief,  and  having 
the  purse  carried  the  things  that  were  put  therein. 

Jesus  therefore  said : Let  her  alone,  that  she  may 
keep  it  against  the  day  of  my  btirial,  for  the  poor 
you  have  always  with  you ; but  me  you  have  not 
always.  A great  multitude  therefore  of  the  Jews 
knew  that  me  was  there  ; and  they  came  not  for 
Jesus’s  sake  only,  but  that  they  might  see  Lazarus, 
whom  he  had  raised  from  the  dead. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxliii. — Deliver  me -from  my  ene- 
mies, O Lord : to  thee  have  I fled,  teach  me  to  do 
thy  will ; because  thou  art  my  God. 

SECRET.  Grant,  O Almighty  God,  that  being 
purified  by  the  powerful  virtue  of  this  sacrifice,  we 
may  arrive  with  greater  purity  to  the  author  and  in- 
stitutor thereof.  Tfiro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  xxxiv.  — Let  them  blush  and  Xni 
ashamed,  who  rejoice  at  my  misfortunes ; let  them 
be  covered  with  shame  and  confusion,  who  speak 
maliciously  against  me. 

P.  COMM.  Praeeant, — Let  thy  holy  mysteries, 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


252 


TUESUAl  n» 


O Lord,  inspire  us  with  divine  fervour:  that  we  may 
delight  both  in  their  effect  and  celebration.  Thro*. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  beads  to  God. 

PRAY  ER.  Adjuva. — Help  us,  O God,  our  salva- 
tion; and  grant  that  we  celebrate  with  joy  the 
memory  of  these  benefits,  by  which  thou  hast  been 
pleased  to  redeem  us.  Thro^ 


TUESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Gal.  vi. — We  ought  to  glory  in  the 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; in  whom  is  our  sal- 
vation, life,  and  resurrection;  by  whom  we  have 
been  saved  and  delivered.  Ps.  Ixvi.  May  GJod  have 
mercy  on  us^  and  bless  us;  may  his  countenance 
shine  upon  us,  and  niay  he  have  mercy  on  iis^  We 
ought,  &c.  to  Ps, 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O Almighty  and  ever- 
lasting God,  grant  that  we  may  so  celebrate  the 
mysteries  of  our  Lord^s  passion,  as  to  obtain  thy 
pardon.  Through  the  same. 

LESSON.  Jer.  xi.  18.  20.  — In  those  days: 
Jeremias  said:  Thou,  O Lord,  bath  shewed  me, 
and  I have  known:  then  thou  shewdst  me  their  do- 
* ings.  And  I was  as  a meek  lamb,  that  to  carried  to 
be  a victim : and  1 knew  ndt  that  they  had  devised 
counsels  against  me,  saying:  Let  us  put  wood  on 
his  bread,  and  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  liv- 
ing, and  let  his  name  be  remembered  no  more.  But 
thou,  O Lord  of  Sabaoth,  who  judgest  jukly,  and 
triest  the  reins  and  the  heart,  let  me  see  thy  revenge 
. on  them : for  to  thee  I have  revealed  my  cause. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxiv. — When  they  were  trouble- 
some to  me,  1 clothed  myself  with  hair-cloth,  and  I 
humbled  my  soul  with  fasting ; and  I will  yet  con- 
tinue to  pour  forth  my  prayer  in  my  bosom.  P.  Judge 
lliou,  O Lord,  them  that  wrong  me ; overthrow  them 
that  fight  against  me : take  hold  of  arms  and  shield ; 
and  rise  to  help  me. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


HOLY  WEEK.  253 

The  PASSION  of  our  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST, 
according  to  Mark  xiv.  and  xv. 

^ T that  time : Tlie  feast  of  the  pasch  and  of  the 
t/I  azymes  was  after  two  days:  and  the  chief 
priests  and  the  scribes  sought  how  they  might  by 
some  wile  lay  hold  on  him  and  kill  him.  But  they 
said ; Not  on  the  festival  day,  lest  there  should  be  u 
tumult  among  tlie  people.  And  when  he  was  in 
Bcthania,  in  me  house  of  Simon  the  leper,  and  was 
at  meat,  there  came  a woman  having  an  alabaster 
box  of  ointment  of  precious  spikenard : and  breaking 
the  alabaster  box,  she  poured  it  out  upon  his  head. 
Now  there  were  some  that  had  indignation  within 
themselves,  and  said:  Why  was  this  waste  of  the 
ointment  made  ? For  this  oint^iept  might  have  been 
sold  for  more  than  three  hundred  pence,  and  given 
to  the  poor.  And  they  murmured  against  her.  But 
Jesus  said : Let  her  alone,  why  do  you  molest  her  ? 
She  hath  wrought  a good  work  upon  me.  For  the 
poor  you  have  always  with  you,  and  whensoever  you 
wiU,  you  may  do  them  good ; but  me  you  have  not 
always.  What  she  had,  she  Hath  done : she  is 
come  before-hand  to  anoint  my  body  for  the  burial. 
Amen  I sky  to  you,  wheresoever  this  gospel  shall  be 
preached  in  the  whole  world,  that  mso  which  she 
hath  done  shall  be  told  for  a memorial  of  her. 
And  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve,  went  to  the 
chief  priests,  to  betray  him  to  them.  Who  healing 
it  were  glad;  and  promised  to  give  him  money. 
And  he  sought  how  he  might  conveniently  betray 
him.  Now  on  the  first  day  of  the  unleavened  bread, 
when  they  sacrificed  the  pasch,  the  disciples  say  to 
him : Whither  wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  prepai*e  for 
thee  to  eat  the  pasch?  And  he  sendedi  two  of 
his  disciples,  and  saith  to  them : go  ye  into  the  city, 
and  there  shall  meet  you,  a man  carrying  a pitcher 
of  water,  follow  him:  and  whithersoever  he  sliall 
Y 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


254 


TUESDAY  IN 


go  in,  say  to  the  master  of  the  house : The  Master 
saitii : Where  is  my  refectory,  that  I may  eat  the 
pasch  with  my  discijiles  ? And  he  will  shew  you  a 
large  dining  room  fui*nished;  and  there  prepare 
ye  for  us.  And  his  disciples  went  their  way,  and 
rame  into  the  city  ; and  they  found  as  he  had  told 
them,  and  they  prepared  the  pasch.  And  when 
evening  was  come,  he  cometh  with  the  twelve. 
And  when  they  were  at  table  eating,  Jesus 
saith : Amen  I say  to  you,  one  of  you  that  eateth 
with  me  shall  betray  me.  But  they  began  to  be 
sorrowful,  and  to  say  to  him  one  by  one:  Is  it 
I ? Who  saith  to  them : one  of  the  twelve,  who 
dippeth  his  hand  in  the  dish  with  me.  And  the 
Son  of  Man  indeed  goeth,  as  it  iS  written  of  him  *, 
but  wo  to  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  Man  shall 
be  betrayed.  It  were  better  for  him,  if  that  man 
had  not  been  born.  And  whilst  they  were  eating, 
Jesus  took  bread ; and  blessing,  broke,  and  gave  to 
them,  and  said:  Take  ye,  this  is  my  body.  And 
having  taken  the  chalice,  giving  thanks,  he  gave  it 
to  them  : and  they  ad  drank  of  it.  And  he  said  to 
them : This  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament, 
which  shall  be  shed  for  many.  Amen  I say  to 
you,  that  I will  drink  no  more  of  this  fruit  of  the 
vine,  until  tliat  day  when  I shall  drink  it  new  in  tl  e 
kingdom  of  God.  And  when  they  had  sung  an 
hymn,  they  went  forth  to  the  mount  of  Olives. 
And  Jesus  saith  to  them : You  will  all  be  scandalizerl 
in  my  regard  this  night;  for  it  is  written:  “I  vrill 
strike  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall  be  dispers- 
ed.” But  after  M shall  be  risen  again,  I will  go  be- 
fore you  into  Galilee.  But  Peter  saith  to  him : Al- 
though all  shall  be  scandalized  in  thee,  yet  not  1 
And  Jesus  saith  to  him  : Amen  I say  to  thee,  to-day, 
even  in  this  night,  before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou 
shalt  deny  me  thrice.  But  he  spoke  the  more  vehe- 
mently : Although  I should  die  together  with  thee. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


HOLT  WEEK. 


255 


1 will  not  deny  thee.  And  in  like  manner  also  said 
they  all.  And  they  came  to  a farm  called  Gethse- 
inani.  And  he  saith  to  his  disciples:  Sit  you  here, 
while  1 pray.  And  he  taketh  Peter,  and  James, 
and  John  with  him ; and  he  began  to  fear,  and  to 
be  heavy.  And  he  saith  to  them : My  soul  is  sor- 
rowful even  unto  death ; stay  you  here,  and  watch. 
And  when  he  had  gone  forward  a little,  he  fell  flat 
on  the  ground ; and  he  prayed  that,  if  it  might  he, 
the  hour  might  pass  from  him : and  he  saith : Abba, 
Father,  all  things  are  possible  to  thee,  remove 
this  chalice  fix)m  me,  but  not  what  I will,  but  what 
tliou  wilt  And  he  cometh,  and  findeth  them  sleep- 
ing. And  he  saith  to  Peter : Simon,  sleefiest  thou  ? 
couldst  thou  not  watch  one  hour.^^  Watch  ye,  and 
pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation.  The  spirit 
indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak.  And  going 
away  again,  he  prayed,  saying  the  same  words. 
And  when  he  returned  he  found  them  again  asleep, 
(for  their  eyes  were  heavy)  and  they  knew  not  what 
to  answer  him.  And  he  cometh  the  third  time, 
and  saith  to  them : Sleep  ye  now,  and  take  your 
rest.  It  is  enough:  the  hour  is  come;  behold  the 
Son  of  Man  shall  be  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sin- 
ners. Rise  up,  let  us  go.  Behohl  he  that  will  be- 
tray me,  is  at  hand.  And  while  he  was  yet  speak- 
ing, cometh  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve,  and 
with  him  a great  multitude  with  swords  and  staves, 
from  the  chief  priests,  and  the  scribes,  and  the  an 
dents.  And  he  that  beti’ayed  him  had  given  them  a 
sign  saying:  Whomsoever  I shall  kiss,  that  is  he, 
lay  hold  on  him,  and  lead  him  away  carefully.  And 
when  he  was  come,  immediately  going  up  to  him, 
he  saith : Hail,  Rabbi : and  he  kissed  him.  But  they 
laid  hands  on  him,  and  held  him.  And  one  of 
them  that  stood  by,  drawing  a sword,  struck  a ser- 
vanj;  of  the  chief  priest,  and  cut  off  his  ear.  And 
Jesus  emswering,  said  to  them : Are  you  come  out 
Y2 

oy  Google 


‘256 


TUES1IA7  Iit 


09  to  a robber  with  swords  and  staves  to  appro* 
bend  me?  I was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple 
leaching,  and  you  did  not  lay  hands-on  me.  But, 
that  the  scripture  may  be  fulfilled.  Then  his 
disciples  leaving  him,  all  fled  away.  And  a certain 
young  man  followed  him,  having  a linen  cloth  cast 
about  his  naked  body : and  they  laid  hold  on  him. 
But  he  casting  ofl*  the  linen  cloth,  fled  from  them 
nuked.  And  they  brought  Jesus  to  the  high  priest ; 
and  all  the  priests  and  the  scribes  and  the  ancients 
were  assembled  together.  And  Peter  followed  him 
afar  off* even  into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest;  and 
he  sat  with  the  servants  at  the  fire  and  warmed  liim- 
self.  And  the  chief  priests  and  all  the  council 
sought  for  evidence  against  Jesus  that  they  might 
put  him  to  death,  and  they  found  none.  For  many 
bore  false  witness  against  him,  and  their  evidence 
were  not  agreeing.  And  some  rising  up,  bore  false 
witness  against  him,  saying:  We  heard  him  say  : I 
will  destroy  this  temple  made  with  hands,  and 
within  three  days  I will  build  another  not  made  with 
hands.  And  their  witness  did  not  agree.  And  the 
high-priest  rising  up  in  the  midst,  asked  Jesus,  say- 
ing : Answerest  thou  nothing  to  the  things  that  are 
laid  to  thy  charge  by  these  men  ? But  he  held  his 
peace  and  answered  nothing.  Again  the  high-priest 
asked  him,  and  said  to  him : An  tliou  Christ  the 
Son  of  the  blessed  God  ? And  Jesus  said  to  him : I 
am.  And  you  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on 
the  right  hand  of  the  power  of  God,  and  coming 
in  the  clouds  of  heaven.  Then  the  high-priest 
rending  his  garments,  saitli:  What  need  we  any  further 
witnesses?  You  have  heard  the  blasphemy.  What 
think  you  ? Who  all  condemned  him  to  be  guilty 
of  death.  And  some  began  to  spit  on  him,  and  to 
cover  his  face,  and  to  buffet  him,  and  to  say  to  him  : 
Prophesy:  and  the  servants  struck  him  with  the 
palms  of  their  hands.  Now’  when  Peter  was  in  the 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


MOLT  WEEK. 


257 


court  below,  tliere  cometh  to  him  one  of  the  iiiuid- 
servants  of  the  high-priest ; and  when  she  had  seen 
Peter  warming  himself,  looking  on  him,  she  saith : 
Thou  also  wast  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  But  he  de- 
nied, saying:  I neither  know  nor  understand  what 
thou  sayest  And  he  went  forth  before  the  court, 
and  the  cock  crew.  And  again  a maid-servant  see- 
ing him,  began  to  say  to  the  standers  by:  This  is 
one  of  them.  But  he  denied  again.  And  afler  a 
while,  they  that  stood  by  said  again  to  Peter : Sure- 
ly thou  art  one  of  them,  for  thou  also  art  a Galilean. 
But  he  began  to  curse  and  swear,  saying:  I know 
not  this  man  of  whom  you  speak.  And  immedi- 
ately the  cock  crew  again.  And  Peter  remembered 
the  word  that  Jesus  had  said  to  him : Before  the 
cock  crow  twice,  thou  shalt  deny  me  thrice.  And 
he  began  to  weep.  (Chap,  xv.)  And  straightway  in 
the  morning,  the  chief  priests  holding  a consultation 
with  the  ancients  and  the  scribes,  and  the  whole 
council,  binding  Jesus,  led  him  away,  and  delivered 
him  to  Pilate.  And  Pilate  adied  him:  Art  thou 
the  king  of  the  Jews?  but  he  answering,  saith 
to  him  : Thou  sayest  it.  And  the  chief  priests  ac- 
cused him  in  many  things.  And  Pilate  again  asked 
him,  saying:  Answerest  thou  nothing?  behold  in 
how  many  things  they  accuse  thee.  But  Jesus  still 
answered  nothing;  so  that  Pilate  wondered.  Now 
on  the  festival  day  he  was  wont  to  release  unto  them 
one  of  the  prisoners,  whomsoever  they  demanded. 
And  there  was  one  called  Barabbas,  who  was  put  in 
firlson  with  some  seditious  men,  who  in  the  sefli- 
tion  hid  committed  murder.  And  when  the  mul- 
titude was  come  up,  they  began  to  desire  that  he 
would  dp  as  he  had  ever  done  unto  them.  And  Pi- 
late answered  them,  and  said : Will  you  that  I re- 
lease to  you  the  king  of  the  Jews?  For  he  knew 
that  the  chief  priests  had  delivered  him  u}>  out  of  en- 
vy. But  the  chief  priests  moved  the  people  that  he 
Y3 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


358  TUESDAT  11^ 

sliould  rather  release  Barabbas  to  them.  And  PSIate 
again  answering,  saith  to  them : What  will  you  then 
that  I do  with  the  king  of  the  Jews?  But  they 
again  cried  out : Crucify  him.  And  Pilate  saitli  to 
them:  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done?  But  they 
cried  out  the  more : Crucify  him.  And  Pilate  being 
willing  to  satisfy  the  people,  released  to  them  Ba- 
ttibbas,  and  delivered  up  Jesus,  when  he  had 
scourged  him,  to  be  crucified.  And  the  soldiers 
led  him  away  into  the  court  of  the  palace,  and  they 
called  together  the  whole  band ; and  they  clothed 
him  with  purple,  and  platting  a crown  of  thorns,  they 

1>ut  it  upon  him.  And  they  l^gan  to  salute  him : 
Jail,  king  of  the  Jews.  And  they  struck  his  head 
withered:  and  they  did  spit  on  him.  And  bowing 
their  knees,  they  adored  him.  And  after  tliey 
had  mocked  him,  they  took  off  the  purple  from  him : 
and  put  his  own  garments  on  him,  and  they  led 
him  out  to  crucify  him.  And  they  forced  one  Si- 
mon, a Cyrenian,  who  passed  by,  coming  out  of 
the  country,  the  father  of  Alexander  and  of  Rufus, 
to  take  up  his  cross.  And  they  bring  him  into  the 
place  called  Golgotha,  which  being  interpreted  is. 
The  place  of  Calvary.  And  they  gave  him  to 
drink  wine  mingled  witli  myrrh ; but  he  took  it  not. 
And  crucifying  him,  they  divided  his  garments  cast- 
ing lots  for  them,  what  every  man  ^ould  take. 
And  it  was  the  third  hour,  and  they  crucified  him. 
And  the  inscription  of  his  cause  was  written  ever. 
The  King  op  the  Jews.  And  with  him  they 
crucify  two  thieves,  the  one  on  his  right  hand  and 
the  other  on  his  left.  And  the  scripture  was  fulfill- 
ed which  saith : “ And  with  the  wicked  he  was  re- 
puted.” And  they  that  passed  by  blasphemed  him, 
wagging  their  heads,  and  saying:  Vah,  thou  that 
destroyest  the  temple  of  God,  and  in  three  days 
buildest  it  up  again : Save  thyself,  coming  down 
ftoju  the  cross.  Li  like  manner  also  the  chief  priests 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


HOLT  WEEK. 


2dS 

with  the  scribes  mocking,  said  one  to  another: 
He  saved  others,  himself  he  cannot  save.  Let 
Christ  the  King  of  Israel  come  down  now  from  the 
cross,  that  we  may  see  and  believe.  And  they  that 
were  cmcified  with  him  reviled  him.  And  when 
the  sixth  hour  was  come,  tliere  was  darkness  over 
the  whole  earth  until  the  ninth  hour.  And  at  the 
ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  out  with  a loud  voice,  saying: 
Eloi,  Eloi,  lamma  sabacthani?  which  is,  being  in- 
terpreted : My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  for- 
saken me  ? And  some  of  the  standers  by  hearing, 
said : Behold,  he  calletli  Elias.  And  one  running 
and  filling  a sponge  with  vinegar,  and  {>uttiDg  it 
upon  a reed,  gave  him  to  drink,  saying : Stay,  let 
us  see  if  Elias  will  come  to  take  him  down.  And 
Jesus  having  cried  out  with  a loud  voice,  gave  up 
the  ghost.  *And  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in 
two  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  And  the  centurion 
who  stood  over  against  him,  seeing  that  crying  out 
in  this  manner  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  said : Indeed 
this  man  was  the  Son  of  God.  And  there  were  also 
women  looking  on  afar  off;  among  whom  was 
Mary  Magdalen,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  James 
the  Less,  and  of  Joseph,  and  Salome;  who  also 
when  he  was  in  Galilee  followed  him,  and  minister- 
ed to  him,  and  many  other  women  that  came  up 
with  him  to  Jerusalem. 

Here  is  said,  Cleanse  my  heart.  Ordinary,  p.  xx. 

And  when  evening  was  now  come,  (because  it 
was  the  Parasceve,  that  is,  the  day  before  the 
Sabbath)  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  a noble  counsellor, 
who  was  also  himself  looking  for  the  kingdom  of 
God,  came  and  went  in  boldly  to  Pilate,  and  begged 
the  body  of  Jesus.  But  Pilate  wondered  that  he 
should  be  already  dead.  And  sending  for  the  cen- 
turion, he  asked  him  if  he  were  already  dead.  An<l 

* Here  all  kneel,  and  pause 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


360 


WEDNESDAY  IN 


when  he  had  understood  it  by  the  centurion,  lie 
gave  the  body  to  Joseph.  And  Joseph  buying  fine 
iinen,  and  taking  him  down,  wrapped  him  up  in  the 
fine  Unen,  and  laid  him  in  a sepulchre  which  was 
hewn  out  of  a rock,  and  he  rolled  a stone  to  the 
door  of  tlie  sepulchre. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxxxix. — Keep  me,  O Lord,  from 
the  hands  of  the  sinful  man ; and  fh)m  unjust  men 
deliver  me. 

SECRET. — May  these  sacrifices,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  which  are  accompanied  with  healing  fasts, 
mercifully  repair  us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  Ixviii. — ^The  judges  in  the  gate 
spoke  against  me,  and  they  that  drank  wine,  made 
songs  against  me.  But  I poured  forth  my  pmyer  to 
thee,  O Lord:  it  is  time,  O God,  to  shew  thy 
good  will  to  me,  according  to  the  multitude  of  thy 
mercies. 

P.  COMM.  Sanctificationibus, — May  these  thy 
holy  mysteries,  O Almighty  God,  both  cure  our  vices 
and  become  an  eternal  remedy  to  us.  Thro’. 

Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 

PRAYER.  Tm  nos, — May  thy  mercy,  O God, 
purify  us  from  the  corruption  of  the  old  man,  and 
enable  us  to  put  on  the  new.  Thro’. 

WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  PhU,  ii. — At  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should  bow,  of  those  that  are  in  heaven,  on 
earth,  and  under  the  earth : because  the  Lord  became 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross ; 
therefore  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  Glory  of 
God  the  Father.  Ps,  ci.  O Lord,  heai*  my  prayer, 
and  let  my  cry  come  unto  thee.  At  the  name,  &c 
Immediately  after  Kyrie  eleison,  &c,  is  said : 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

I.  COLLECT.  Prcesta, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


HOLT  WEEK. 


261 


0 Almighty  God,  that  we  who  continually  are  pun- 
ished for  our  excesses,  may  be, delivered  by  the 
passion  of  thy  only  begotten  Son.  Who,  &c. 

L LESSON.  Isaias  Ixii.  11.  Ixiii.  1.  7. — Thm 
saith  the  Lord  God : Tell  the  daughter  of  Sion : Be- 
hold thy  Saviour  cometh.  Who  is  this  that  cometh 
from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bosra,  tliis 
beautiful  one  in  his  robe,  walking  in  the  greatness 
of  his  strength  ? I,  that  speak  justice,  and  am  a de- 
fender to  save.  Why  then  is  thy  apparel  red,  and 
thy  garments  like  them  that  tread  in  the  wine  press  ? 

1 nave  trodden  the  wine  press  alone,  and  of  tlie 
Gentiles  there  is  not  a man  with  me : I have  tramp- 
led on  them  in  my  indignation,  and  have  trodden 
them  down  in  my  wrath,  and  their  blood  is  sprink- 
led upon  my  garments,  and  I have  stained  all  my 
apparel.  For  the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  my  heart, 
the  year  of  my  redemption  is  come.  I looked 
about  and  there  was  none  to  help : I sought,  and 
there  was  none  to  give  aid : and  my  own  arm  hath 
saved  me,  and  my  indignation  itself  hath  helped  me. 
And  I have  trodden  down  the  people  in  my  wrath, 
and  made  them  drunk  in  my  indignation,  and  have 
Drought  down  their  strength  to  the  earth.  I will  re- 
member the  tender  mercies  of  the  Lord,  the  praise 
of  the  Lord  for  all  the  things  that  the  liOrd  hatli  be- 
stowed on  us. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixviii. — Turn  not  away  thy  face  from 
thy  servant,  for  I am  in  trouble : hear  me  speedily. 
V.  Save  me,  O God,  for  the  waters  are  come  in  even 
unto  my  soul ; I stick  fast  in  the  mire  of  the  deep, 
and  there  is  no  sure  standing. 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R,  And  with  thy  spirit. 

II.  COLLECT.  Deus  qui, — O God,  who  wouldst 
have  thy  Son  suffer  on  the  cross,  to  deliver  us  from 
the  power  of  the  enemy  ; grant  that  we  thy  servants, 
may  obtain  the  grace  of  his  resurrection.  Thro’  the 
same. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


262 


WEDNESDAY  IN 


11.  LESSON.  Isaiaa  liii. — In  those  days : Isaits 
said : Who  hath  believed  our  report  ? and  to  whom 
is  the  arm  of  the  L.ord  revealed  ? And  he  shall  grow 
up  as  a tender  plant  before  him,  and  as  a root  out 
of  a thirsty  ground;  there  is  no  beauty  in  him,  nor 
comeliness : and  we  have  seen  him,  and  there  was 
no  sightliness  that  we  should  be  desirous  of  him : 
despised,  and  the  most  abject  of  men,  a man  of  sor- 
rows, and  acquainted  with  infirmity . and  his  look 
was  as  it  were  hidden  and  despised,  whereupon  we 
esteemed  him  not.  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  infir- 
mities, and  carried  our  sorrows;  and  we  have  ^ 
thought  him  as  it  were  a leper,  and  as  one  struck  by 
God  and  afilicted.  But  he  was  wounded  for  our  ini- 
quities, he  was  bruised  for  our  sins ; the  chastisement 
of  our  peace  was  upon  hun,  and  by  his  bruises  we 
are  healed.  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray, 
every  one  hath  turned  aside  into  his  own  way,  and 
the  Lord  hath  laid  upon  him  the  iniquity  of  us  alL 
He  was  offered  because  it  was  his  own  will,  ^d  he 
opened  not  his  mouth ; he  shall  be  led  as  a sheep 
to  the  slaughter,  and  shall  be  dumb  as  a lamb  b^ 
fore  his  shearer,  and  he  shall  not  open  his  mouth. 
He  was  taken  away  from  distress,  and  from  judg- 
ment ; who  shall  declare  his  generation  ? because 
he  is  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living ; for  the 
wickedness  of  my  people  have  I struck  him.  And 
he  shall  give  the  ungodly  for  his  burial,  and  the 
rich  for  his  death ; because  he  hath  done  no  iniquity, 
neither  was  there  deceit  in  his  mouth.  And  the 
Lord  was  pleased  to  bruise  him  in  infirmity ; if  he 
shall  lay  down  his  life  for  sin,  he  shall  see  a long- 
lived  seed,  and  the  will  of  the  Lord  shall  be  prosper- 
ous in  his  hand.  Because  his  soul  hath  laboured,  he 
shall  see  and  be  filled ; by  his  knowledge  shall  tliis 
my  just  servant  justify  many,  and  he  shml  bear  their 
iniquities.  , Therefore  will  I distribute  to  him  very 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


HOLT  WEEK. 


263 


many,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoils  of  the  strong, 
l)ecause  he  hath  delivered  his  soul  unto  death,  and 
was  reputed  with  the  wicked : and  he  hath  borne  the 
sins  of  many,  and  hath  prayed  for  the  transgressors. 

TRACT.  Ps,  ci. — Hear,  O Lord,  my  prayer; 
and  let  my  cry  come  unto  thee.  V,  Turn  not  away 
thy  face  from  me,  in  the  day  when  I am  in  trouble ; 
incline  thy  ear  to  me.  F.  In  what  day  soever  1 
shall  call  upon  thee,  hear  me  speedily.  F.  For  my 
days  are  vanished  like  smoke ; and  my  bones  are  as 
if  they  were  fried  in  a frying-pan.  F.  I am  smitten 
as  gi*ass,  and  my  heart  is  withered  ; because  I forgot 
to  eat  my  bread.  F.  Thou,  Q Lord,  arising  wilt 
have  mercy  on  Sion ; for  the  time  to  have  mercy  on 
her  is  come. 


The  PASSION  of  our  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST, 
according  to  Luke  xxii. — xxiii. 


/^T  that  time:  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread, 
which  is  called  the  Pasch,  was  at  hand.  And 
the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  sought  how  they 
might  put  Jesus  to  death : but  they  feared  the  peo- 
ple. And  Satan  entered  into  Judas,  who  was  sur- 
named  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve.  And  he  went, 
and  discoursed  with  the  chief  priests  and  the  magis- 
trates, how  he  might  betray  him  to  them.  And 
they  were  glad,  and  covenanted  to  give  him  money. 
And  he  promised.  And  he  sought  opportunity  to 
betray  him  in  the  absence  of  the  multitude.  And 
the  day  of  the  unleavened  bread  came,  on  which  it 
was  necessary  that  the  pasch  should  be  killed.  And 
he  sent  Peter  and  John,  saying : Go  and  prepare  us 
the  pasch,  that  we  may  eat.  But  they  said : Where 
wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  ? And  he  said  to  them : 
Behold,  as  you  go  into  the  city,  there  shall  meet 
you  a man  ccurying  a pitcher  of  water ; follow  him 
into  the  house  where  he  entereth  in : and  you  shall 
say  to  the  good  man  of  the  house : The  Masto 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


264 


WEDNESDAY  IN 


saith  to  thee : Where  is  the  ^lest-cliamber,  where 
I may  eat  the  pascli  with  my  disciples?  And  he  will 
shew  you  a large  dining-room  furnished  : and  there 
prepare.  And  they  going,  found  as  he  had  said  to 
them,  and  they  made  ready  the  pasch.  And  when 
the  hour  was  come,  he  sat  down,  and  the  twelve 
apostles  with  him.  And  he  said  to  them : With 
desire  I have  desired  to  eat  this  pasch  with  you  be- 
fore I suffer.  For  I say  to  you,  that  from  this  time 
I will  not  eat  it,  till  it  be  fuifflled  in  the  kingdom  of 
God.  And  having  taken  the  chalice  he  gave  thanks, 
and  said : Take  and  divide  it  among  you.  For 
I say  to  you,  that  I will  not  drink  of  the  fruit  of 
the  vine,  till  the  kingdom  of  God  come.  And  tak- 
ing bread,  he  gave  thanks,  and  brake,  and  gave  to 
them,  saying:  This  is  my  body,  which  is  given  to 
you : do  this  for  a commemoration  of  me.  In  like 
manner  the  chalice  also,  after  he  had  supped,  say- 
ing : This  is  the  chalice,  the  new  testament  of  ray 
blood,  which  shall  be  shed  for  you.  But  yet  be- 
hold, the  hand  of  him  that  betrayeth  me  is  with  me 
on  the  table.  And  the  Son  of  Man  indeed  goeth, 
according  to  that  which  is  determined : but  yet  wo 
to  that  man  by  whom  he  shall  be  betrayed.  And 
they  began  to  inquire  among  themselves,  which  of 
them  it  was  that  should  do  this  thing.  And  there 
was  also  a strife  amongst  them,  which  of  them 
should  seem  to  be  greater.  And  he  said  to  them  : 
The  kings  of  the  Gentiles  lord  it  over  them ; and 
they  that  have  power  over  them,  are  called  benefi- 
cent. But  you  not  so:  but  he  that  is  the  gi*eater 
among  you,  let  him  be  as  the  younger:  and  he 
that  is  the  leader,  as  he  that  serveth.  For  which  is 
neater,  he  that  sitteth  at  table,  or  he  that  serveth  ? 
Is  not  he  that  sitteth  at  table  ? but  I am  in  the  r lidst 
of  you,  as  he  that  serveth : and  you  ai-e  they  who 
have  continued  with  me  in  my  temptations  : and  J 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


HOLT  WEEK. 


365 


ijispose  to  you,  as  my  Father  hath  disposed  to  me, 
a kingdom : that  you  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  ta- 
ble in  my  kingdom;  and  may  sit  upon  thrones 
judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  And  the  Lord 
said : Simon,  Simon,  behold  Satan  hath  desired  to 
have  you,  that  he  may  sift  you  as  wheat.  But  I 
liave  prayed  for  thee  that  thy  faith  fail  not : and  thou, 
I>eing  once  converted,  confirm  thy  brethren.  Who 
said  to  him:  Lord,  I am  ready  to  go  with  thee 
both  into  prison,  and  to  death.  And  he  said  : I say 
to  thee,  Peter,  the  cock  shall  not  crow  this  day,  till 
thou  thrice  deniest  that  thou  knowest  me*.  And  he 
said  to  them:  When  I sent  you  without  purse^ 
and  scrip,  and  shoes,  did  you  want  any  thing?  But 
they  said : Nothing.  Then  said  he  to  them:  But 
now  he  that  hath  a purse,  let  him  take  it,  and  like- 
wise a scrip : and  he  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell 
his  coat  and  buy  one.  For  I say  to  you,  that  this 
that  is  written  must  yet  be  fulfilled  in  me,  “ And  he 
was  reckoned  among  the  wicked:”  for  the  things 
concerning  me  have  an  end.  But  they  said : Lord, 
here  are  two  swords.  And  he  said  to  them:  It  is 
enough.  And  going  out  he  went  according  to  his 
custom  to  the  mount  of  Olives.  And  his  disciples 
also  followed  him.  And  when  he  was  come  to  the 
place,  he  said  to  them:  Pray,  lest  you  enter  into 
temptation.  And  he  was  withdrawn  away  from 
them  a stone’s  ^’ast;  and  kneeling  down  he  pray- 
ed saying:  I’amer,  if  thou  wilt,  remove  this  cha- 
lice from  me ; but  yet  not  my  will,  but  thine  be 
done.  And  there  appeared  to  him  an  angel  from 
heaven,  strengthening  him.  And  being  in  an  agony, 
he  prayed  the  longer.  And  his  sweat  became  as 
drops  of  blood  trickling  down  ii]>on  the  ground. 
And  when  he  rose  up  from  prayer,  and  was  come  to 
Ills  disciples,  he  found  them  sleeping  for  sorrow. 
And  he  said  to  them : Why  sleep  you  ? Arise,  pray, 
I you  enter  into  temptation.  As  he  was  j’et  speak 

z 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


266 


WEDNESDAY  IN 


ing,  behold  a multitude:  and  he  that  was  called 
Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  went  before  them,  and 
drew  near  to  Jesus  to  kiss  him.  And  Jesus  said  to 
him:  Judas,  dost  thou  betray  the  Son  of  JMaii  with 
a kiss  ? And  they  that  were  about  him,  seeing  what 
would  follow,  said  to  him : Lord,  shall  we  sti’ike 
with  the  sword  ? And  one  of  them  struck  the  servant 
of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  off  his  right  ear.  But  Je- 
sus answering,  said : Suffer  ye  thus  fai*.  And  when 
he  had  touched  his  ear,  he  healed  him.  And  Jesus 
said  to  the  chief  priests  and  magisti*ates  of  the  teniple, 
and  the  ancients  that  were  come  to  him  : Are  you 
come  out,  as  it  were  against  a thief,  with  swords 
and  clubs  ? When  I was  daily  with  you  in  the  tem- 
ple, you  did  not  stretch  forth  your  hands  against 
me,  but  this  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  daik- 
ness.  And  ajiprehending  him,  they  led  him  to  the 
high  priest’s  house:  but  Peter  followed  afar  off. 
And  when  they  had  kindled  a fire  in  the  midst  of 
the  hall,  and  Avere  sitting  about  it,  Peter  was  in  the 
midst  of  them.  Whom  when  a certain  servant  maid 
had  seen  sitting  at  the  light,  and  had  earnestly 
beheld  him,  she  said : This  man  also  was  with  him. 
But  he  denied,  saying:  Woman,  I know  him  noL 
And  after  a little  while,  another  seeing  him,  said: 
Thou  also  art  one  of  them.  But  Peter  said:  O 
man,  I am  not.  And  after  the  space  as  it  were  of 
one  Iiour,  another  certain  man  affirmed,  saying : Of  a 
truth  this  man  was  also  with  him : for  he  is  also  a 
Galilean.  And  Peter  said : Man,  I know  not  what 
thou  sayest.  And  immediately  as  he  was  yet 
speaking,  the  cock  crew.  And  the  Lord  tiu-ning 
looked  on  Peter.  And  Peter  remembered  the  word 
of  the  Lord,  as  he  had  said : Before  the  cock  crow, 
thou  shalt  deny  me  thrice.  And  Peter  going  ovit 
wept  bitterly.  And  the  men  ^hat  held  him,  mocked 
him,  and  struck  him.  And  they  blindfolded  him 
and  smot  ^ him  on  the  face.  And  they  asked  him. 


,y  Google 


HOLY  WEEK. 


207 


saying ; Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  struck  thee  ? And 
blaspheming,  many  other  things  they  said  against 
him.  And  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  ancients  of  the 
people,  and  the  chief  priests,  and  scribes,  came  to> 
gether,  and  they  brought  him  into  their  council, 
saying:  If  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us.  And  he  said 
to  them:  If  I shall  tell  you,  you  will  not  believe  me; 
and  if  1 shall  also  ask  you,  you  will  not  answer  me, 
nor  let  me  go.  But  hereafter  the  Son  of  Man  shall 
be  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  the  power  of  God. 
Then  said  they  all : Art  thou  the  Son  of  God  ? And 
he  said : You  say  that  1 am.  And  they  said : What 
need  we  any  further  testimony  ? For  ourselves  have 
heard  it  from  his  own  mouth.  (Chap,  xxiii.)  And 
the  whole  multitude  of  them  rose  up,  and  led  him 
away  to  Pilate.  And  they  began  to  accuse  him,  say- 
ing: We  have  found  this  man  perverting  oiu*  nation, 
and  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  Caesar,  and  saying 
that  he  is  Christ  the  King.  And  Pilate  asked  him 
saying:  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews  ? But  he  an- 
swering said:  Thou  sayest  it.  But  Pilate  said 
to  tlie  chief  priests  and  to  the  multitude : 1 find  no 
«:ause  in  this  man.  But  they  were  more  earnest, 
saying : He  stirreth  up  the  people,  teaching  through- 
out all  Judea,  beginning  from  Galilee  to  .tliis  place. 
But  Pilate  hearing  Galilee,  asked  if  the  man  were 
of  Galilee  ? And  when  he  underatood  that  he  was 
of  Herod’s  jurisdiction,  he  sent  him  away  to  Herod, 
who  himself  was  also  at  Jerusalem  in  those  days. 
And  Herod  seeing  Jesus  was  very  glad,  for  he  was 
desirous  of  a long  time  to  see  him,  because  he  had 
heard  many  things  of  him:  and  he  hoped  to  see 
some  sign  wrought  by  hun.  And  he  questioned  him 
with  many  words.  But  he  answered  him  nothing. 
And  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  stood  by, 
earnestly  accusing  him.  And  Herod  with  his  army 
Bet  him  at  nought,  and  mocked  hun,  putting  on 
him  a white  garment,  and  sent  him  back  to  Pilate. 

Z 2 ^ 

Digitized  by  CjOO^IC 


268 


WEDNESDAY  IN 


And  Herod  and  Pilate  were  made  friends  that 
same  day:  for  before  they  were  enemies  to  one 
another.  Then  Pilate  calling  together  the  chief 
priests,  and  the  magistrates,  and  the  people,  said  to 
them : You  have  brought  this  man  to  me  as  one  that 
perveneth  the  people,  and  hehold  I,  having  exam- 
ined him  before  you,  find  no  cause  in  this  man  touch- 
ing those  things  wherein  you  accuse  him.  No,  nor 
Herod  neither.  For  I sent  you  to  him,  and  liehold, 
nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  to  him.  1 will 
chastise  him  therefore  and  release  him.  Now  of 
necessity  he  was  to  release  unto  them  one  upon 
the  feast  day.  But  the  whole  multitude  together 
cried  out  at  once,  saying:  Away  with  this  man, 
and  release  unto  us  ^^rabbas,  who  for  a cer- 
tain sedition  made  in  the  city,  and  for  a murder,  was 
cast  into  prison.  And  Pilate  again  spoke  to  them, 
desiring  to  release  Jesus.  But  they  cried  out  again, 
saying : Crucify  him,  crucify  him.  And  he  said  to  them 
the  third  time : Why,  what  evil  hath  this  man  done  ? 
I find  no  cause  of  death  in  him.  I will  chastise  him 
therefore,  and  let  him  go.  But  they  were  instant 
with  loud  voices  requiring  that  he  might  be  cruci- 
fied: and  their  voices  prevailed.  And  Pilate  gave 
sentence  that  it  should  be  as  they  required.  And 
he  released  unto  them  him  who  for  murder  and 
sedition  had  been  cast  into  prison,  whom  they  had 
desired:  but  Jesus  he  delivered  up  to  their  wilL 
And  as  they  led  him  away,  they  laid  hold  on  one 
Simon  of  Cyrene,  coming  from  the  country : and  they 
laid  the  cross  on  him  to  carry  after  Jesus.  And 
there  followed  him  a ^eat  multitude  of  people,  and 
of  women  who  bewaSed  and  lamented  him.  But 
Jesus  turning  to  them,  said:  Daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem, weep  not  over  me,  but  weep  for  your- 
selves, and  for  your  children.  For  behold  the  days 
shall  come,  wherein  they  will  say.  Blessed  are  the 
barren,  and  the  wombs  that  have  not  borne,  aiid  th^ 
paps  that  have  not  given  suck.  Then  shall  they 

D .Google 


HOLY  WEEK. 


begin  to  say  to  the  mountains : Fall  upon  us : ana 
to  the  hills,  cover  us.  For  if  in  the  green  wood 
they  do  tliese  things,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ? 
And  there  were  also  two  other  malefactors  led  with 
him,  to  be  put  to  death.  And  when  they  were 
come  to  the  place  which  is  called  Calvary,  they 
crucified  him  there ; and  the  robbers,  one  on  the 
right  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  left.  And  Jesus 
said : Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do.'  But  they  dividing  his  garments  cast  lots. 
And  the  people  stood  beholding,  and  the  rulei*s  with 
them  derided  him,  saying:  He  saved  others,  let  him 
save  himself,  if  he  be  Christ,  the  elect  of  God. 
And  the  soldiers  also  mocked  him,  coming  to  him, 
and  offering  him  vinegar,  and  saying : If  thou  be  the 
king  of  the  Jews,  save  thyself.  And  there  was  also 
a superscription  written  over  him  in  letters  of  Greek, 
and  Latin,  and  Hebrew : This  is  the  King  of  the 
Jews.  And  one  of  those  robbers  who  were  hang- 
ed, blasphemed  him,  saying : If  thou  be  Christ,  save 
thyself  and  ira.  But  the  other  answering,  rebuked 
him,  saying : Neither  dost  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou 
art  under  the  same  condemnation : And  we  indeed 
justly,  for  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds ; 
but  this  man  hath  done  no  evil.  And  he  said  to  Je- 
sus : Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  shalt  come  in- 
to thy  kingdom.  And  Jesus  said  to  him : Amen  I 
say  to  thee,  this  day  thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  para- 
dise. And  it  w^as  almost  the  sixth  hour;  and  there 
was  dai-kness  over  all  the  eai-th  until  the  ninth  hour. 
And  the  sun  was  darkened  ; and  the  veil  of  the  tem- 
ple was  rent  in  the  midst.  And  Jesus  crying  with  a 
loud  voice,  said:  Father,  into  thy  hands  I commend 
my  spirit.  And  saying  this,  he  gave  up  the  ghost*. 
Now  the  centurion  seeing  what  was  done,  glorified 
God,  saying : Indeed  this  was  a just  man.  And  all 
the  mult' tilde  of  them  that  were  come  together  to 
^ H-re  all  kneel,  and  pause. 

Z 3 

.Google 


270  WEDNESDAY  IN  HOLY  WEEK 

that  sight,  and  saw  the  things  that  were  done,  return- 
ed striking  their  breast.  And^all  his  acquaintance, 
and  the  women  that  had  followed  him  from  Galilee, 
stood  afar  off,  beholding  these  things. 

Here  is  said  the  Prayer^  Cleanse  my  heart,  &c.  p,  x.t. 

And  behold  there  was  a man  named  Joseph,  who 
was  a counsellor,  a good  and  just  man  : (the 
same  had  not  consented  to  their  counsel  and  doin^ 
of  Arimathea,  a city  of  Judea,  who  also^himselt 
looked  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  man  went  to 
Pilate  and. begged  the  body  of  Jesus.  And  taking 
him  down  he  wrapped  him  in  fine  linen,  and  laid 
him  in  a sepulchre  that  was  hewed  in  stone,  where- 
in never  yet  any  man  had  been  laid. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  ci. — Hear,  O Lord,  my  prayer ; and 
let  my  cry  come  to  thee:  turn  not  away  thy  face 
from  me. 

SECRET.  Accept,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee 
the  offerings  we  have  made ; and  mercifully  grant, 
that  we  may  receive,  with  pious  sentiments,  what 
we  celebrate  in  the  mystery  of  the  passion  of  our 
Lord.  Thro’  the  same. 

COMM.  Ps.  ci. — I mingled  my  drink  with  weeping 
for  having  lifted  me  up,  thou  hast  thrown  me  down, 
and  I am  withered  like  grass ; but  thou,  O Lord, 
endurest  for  ever : thou  shalt  arise,  and  have  mercy 
on  Sion ; because  the  time  to  have  mercy  on  her, 
is  come. 

P.  COMM.  Largire. — Grant,  O Almighty  God, 
that  we  may  have  a lively  hope,  that  thou  hast  give^i 
us  eternal  life  by  the  temporal  death  of  thy  Son,  re^ 
presented  in  these  adorable  mysteries.  Thro’  the  same. 
Let  us  pray.  Bow  down  your  heads  to  God. 
PRAYER.  Respice. — Look  down,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  on  this  thy  family,  for  wnich  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  scrupled  not  to  be  delivered  into 
the  hands  of  wicked  men,  and  undergo  the  punish- 
ment of  the  cross.  Who  liveth,  &c.  in  secret 

Dig  iized  dy  CjOO^Ic 


I 271  ] 

MAUNDY-THURSDAY. 

INTROIT.  Gall  vi. 

WE  ought  to  glory  in  '\I^OS  autem  gloiiari 
the  cross  of  our  t/  t oportet  in  cruce  Do- 
Lord  Jesus  Christ:  in  mini  nostri  Jesu  Christi: 
whom  is  our  salvation,  in  quo  est  solus,  vita,  el 
life  and  resurrection : by  resurrectio  nostra : per 
whom  we  have  been  sav-  quern  salvati,  et  liberali 
ed  and  delivered.  sumus. 

Ps.  May  God  have  Ps.  Ixvi.  Deus  miserea- 
mercy  on  us,  and  bless  tur  nostri,  et  benedicai 
US : may  his  countenance  nobis : illuminet  vultum 
shine  upon  us,  and  may  suum  super  iws,  et  mise- 
he  have  mercy  on  us. — reatur  nostri.  Ms  au- 
We  ought,  &c.  tern,  fyc.  to  Ps. 

The  bells  are  rung  during  the  lohole  time  of  the 
Gloria  in  excelsis:  after  which  they  remain  silent, 
till  the  same  time  on  Holy  Saturday. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  a quo. — O God,  from  whom 
both  Judas  received  the  punishment  of  his  sin,  and 
the  thief  the  reward  of  his  confession  : grant  ns  tlie 
effects  of  thy  mercy;  that  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
at  the  time  of  his  passion,  bestowed  on  l)oth  different 
rewards  according  to  their  merits ; so,  having  de- 
stroyed the  old  man  in  us,  he  may  give  us  grace  to 
rise  again  with  hitn.  Who  liveth. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  x\.  20.  32. Brethren: 

When  you  come  therefore  together  into  one  place,  it 
is  not  now  to  eat  the  Lord’s  supper.  For  every  one 
taketh  before  his  own  supper  to  eat.  And  one  indeed 
is  hungry,  and  another  is  drunk.  What,  have  you 
not  houses  to  eat  and  drink  in  7 Or  despise  ye  the 
church  of  God ; and  put  them  to  shame  that  have  - 
not  ? What  shall  I say  to  you  7 Do  I praise  you  ? 
In  this  I praise  you  not.  For  I have  received  of 
the  Lord  that  which  also  I delivered  to  you,  that 

.ed  by  Google 


272 


THE  HASS  FOR 


the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which  he  was  be- 
trayed, took  bread,  and  giving  thanks,  broke,  and 
said;  Take  ye  ajmd  eat;  this  is  my  body  which 

SHALL  BE  DELIVERED  FOR  YOU  I THIS  DO  FOR  THE 
COMMEMORATION  OP  ME.  In  like  manner  also  the 
Chalice,  after  he  had  supped,  saying;  This  Cha- 
lice IS  THE  New  Testament  in  my  blood  : this 
DO  YE,  as  often  AS  YE  SHALL  DRINK  IT,  FOR  THE 
COMMEMORATION  OF  ME.  For  as  often  as  you  shall 
eat  this  bread,  and  drink  the  chalice,  you  shall  shew 
the  death  of  the  Lord,  until  he  come.  Therefore 
whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread  and  drink  the  chalice 
of  the  Lord  unworthily,  shall  be  guilty  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  the  Lord.  But  let  a man  prove  himself 
and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  the 
chalice.  For  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unwor- 
thily, eateth  and  drinketh  judgment  to  himself,  not 
discerning  the  body  of  the  Lord.  Therefore  are 
there  many  infirm  and  weak  among  you,  and  many 
sleep.  But  if  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we  should 
not  be  judged.  But  whilst  we  are  judged,  we  are 
chastised  by  the  Lord ; that  we  be  not  condemned 
with  this  world. 

GRADUAL.  Phil.  ii. 

Christ  for  us  became  Christus  factus  est  pro 
obedient  unto  death,  even  nobis  obeduns  usque  ad 
to  the  death  of  the  cross,  mortem^  mortem  autem 
V.  For  which  cause,  God  cruets.  V.  Propter  quod 
also  hath  exalted  him,  and  et  Deijs  exaltavit  Uluniy 
hath  given  him  a name,  et  dedit  iUi  nomeu,  quod 
which  is  above  all  names,  est  super  omne  nomen. 

GOSPEL,  John  xiiL  1.  15. — Before  the  festival 
day  of  the  pasch,  Jesus  knowing  that  his  hour  was 
come  that  he  should  pass  out  of  this  world  to  the 
Father  ; having  loved  his  own  who  were  in  the  world, 
he  loved  them  unto  the  end.  And  when  supper  was 
done,  (the  devil  having  now  put  it  into  the  heart  of 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


MAUND  r-THURSDAT. 


27S 


Judas  Iscariot,  the  son  of  Simon  to  betray  him) 
kno^ving  that  the  Father  had  given  him  all  things 
into  his  hands,  and  that  he  carne  from  God,  and 
goeth  to  God:  he  riseth  from  supper,  and  layeth 
aside  his  garments,  and  having  taken  a towel,  gisded 
himself.  After  that,  he  putteth  water  into  a basin, 
and  began  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  disciples,  and  to 
wipe  them  with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  girded. 
He  cometh  therefore  to  Simon  Peter.  And  Peter 
saitli  to  him : Lord,  dost  thou  wash  my  feet  ? Jesus 
answered,  and  said  to  him  : What  I do,  thou  know- 
est  not  now,  but  thou  shall  know  hereafter.  Peter 
saith  to  him : Thou  shall  never  wash  my  feet.  Je- 
sus answered  him:  If  I wash  thee  not,  thou  shall 
have  no  part  with  me.  Simon  Peter  saith  to  him  : 
Lord,  not  only  my  feet,  but  also  my  hands  and  my 
head.  Jesus  saith  to  him:  He  that  is  washed,  need- 
cth  not  but  to  wash  his  feet,  but  is' clean  wholly. 
And  you  are  clean,  but  not  all.  For  he  knew  who 
he  was  that  would  betray  him ; therefore  he  said : 
You  are  not  all  clean.  Then  after  he  had  washed 
their  feet,  and  taken  his  garments,  being  set  down 
again,  he  said  to  them:  Know  you  what  I have 
done  to  you  ? You  call  me,  Master,  and  Lord : and 
you  say  well,  for  so  I am.  If  then  I,  being  your 
Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet ; you  also 
ought  to  wash  one  anothei-’s  feet.  For  I have  given 
you  an  example,  that  as  I have  done  to  you  so  do 
you  also.  Credo. 

OFFERTORY.  Ps.  cxvU. 

The  right  hand  of  the  Dextera  Domini  fecit 
Lord  hath  displayed  its  virtutem:  dextera  Domi- 
might : the  right  hand  of  m exaltavit  me  ; non  mo- 
the  Lord  hath  raised  me  riar,  sed  vivam,  et  narra- 
up  ; I shall  not  die,  but  ho  opera  Domini 
live  and  publish  the  works 
if  the  Lord. 

SECRET. — We  beseech  thee,  O holy  Lord,  Al- 


Digitized  by  CjOOgIC 


274 


THE  MASS  FOR 


mighty  Father,  Eternal  God,  that  our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ,  thy  Son,  may  make  our  sacrifice  acceptable 
to  thee,  who  on  this  day  commanded  his  disciples  to 
celebrate  it  in  memory  of  him.  Who. 

COMMUNICANTES. — Being  united  in  com- 
ini inion  and  celebrating  this  most  sacred  day  on 
which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  betrayed  for  us ; 
and  also  honouring  in  the  first  place  the  memory  of 
glorious  Mary,  ever  a Virgin,  and  Mother  of  the 
same  God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  as  also  thy 
blessed  apostles,  &c.  (as  in  the  Ordinary,  p,  xxxiv.) 

HANC  IGITUR.— W^e  therefore  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  graciously  to  accept  this  oflTering  of  us  thy 
servants,  and  of  thy  whole  family,  which  we  make 
in  memory  of  that  day  on  which  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  commanded  his  disciples  to  celebrate  the 
mysteries  of  his  body  and  blood ; and  dispose  our 
days  in  peace,  preserve  us  from  eternal  damnation, 
and  rank  us  in  the  number  of  thy  elect.  Thro’. 

N.  B.  In  detestation  of  the  traitorous  kiss  of 
JudaSy  the  PAX  after  A'gnus  Dei  is  not  given  to-day, 

COMMUNION.  John  xiii. 


The  Lord  Jesus,  after 
he  had  supped  with  his 
disciples,  washed  their 
feet,  and  said  to  them: 
Do  you  underetand  what 
I have  done  to  you,  I 
who  am  your  Lord  and 
Master  ? I have  set  you 
an  example,  that  you  may 
do  the  same. 


Dominus  Jesusy  post- 
quam ccenavit  cum  disci- 
pulis suisy  lavit  pedes  eo- 
ruMy  et  ait  illis:  sdtisy 
quid  fecerim  vobis,  ego 
Vominus  et  Magister  ? 
Exemplum  dedi  vob*3,  ut 
et  vos  ita  faciatis. 


P.  COMM.  Refecti. — ^We  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
our  God,  that  being  nourished  with  this  life-giving 
food,  we  may  receive  by  thy  grace,  in  immortal 
glory,  what  we  celebrate  in  this  mortal  life.  Thro’ 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


MAUNDT-THURSDAT. 


275 


the  PRESANCTIFIED  HOST,  rtstrved 
for  the  Mass  of  to-morrow^  is  carrying  in  proces- 
sion  to  the  place  prepared  for  its  reception,  the  fol 
lowing  Hymn  is  sung. 


T)Ange  lingua  gloriosi 
-L  Corporis  mysterium 
Sanguinisque  pretiosi, 
Ouem  in  mundi  pretium 
Fmctus  ventris  generosi, 
Rex  effudit  Gentium. 

Nobis  datus,  nobis  natus 
Ex  intacta  virgine. 

Et  in  mundo  conversatus 
Sparso  verbi  semine, 

Sui  moras  incolatus 
Miro  clausit  ordine,  [nse, 
In  supremae  nocte  coe- 
Recum^ns  cum  fratri- 
bus. 

Observata  le^e  plene 
Cibis  in  le^libus : 

Cibum  turbae  duodenae 
Se  dat  suis  manibus. 
Verbum  caro  panem 
verum 

Verbo  carnem  efRcit ; 


Fitque  sanguis  Christi 
merum 

Et  si  sensus  deficit ; 

Ad  firmandum  cor  sin- 
cerum 

Sola  fides  sufficit. 

Tantum  ergo  sacra- 
mentum 

Veneremur  cernui ; 

Et  antiquum  documen- 
tum 

Novo  cedat  ritui : 

Praestet  fides  supplemen- 
tum 

Sensuum  defectui. 

Genitori,  genitoque 

Laus  et  jubilatio ; 

Salus,  honor,  viitus,  qua- 
que 

Sit  et  benedictio : 

Procedenti  ab  utroque 

Compar  sit  laudatio. 

Arnen. 


VESPERS. 


Ant.  ^lALICEM  salutaris  accipiam,  et  nomen  Do- ' 
^ mini  invocabo. 

Ps.  cxv. 


CREDIDI  propter  meo ; • omnis  homo 
quod  locutus  sum;  mendax. 

* ego  autem  humiliatus  Quid  retribuam  De- 
sum nimis.  mino,  * pro  omnibus 

Ego  dixi  in  excessu  qufs  retribuit  mihi  ? 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


276 


VESPERS  FOR 


Calicem  salutaris  acci- 
piam, *et  nomen  Domi- 
ni invocabo. 

Vota  mea  Domino  red- 
dam coram  omni  populo 
ejus  * pretiosa  in  con- 
spectu Domini  mors  sanc- 
torum ejus. 

O Domine,  quia  ego 
servus  tuus,  * ego  servus 
tuus,  et  filius  ancillae  tuae. 

Dirupisti  vincula  mea : 
* tibi  sacrificabo  hostiam 


laudis  et  nomen  Domini 
invocabo. 

Vota  mea  Domino  red- 
dam in  conspectu  omnis 
populi  ejus;  *in  atriis 
domus  Domini,  in  medio 
tui,  Jerusalem. 

Ant.  Calicem,  &c. 

Ant.  Cum  his  qui  ode- 
runt pacem  eram  pacifi- 
cus ; dum  loquebar  illis, 
impugnabant  me  gratis. 


Ps,  cxix. 


Ad  Dominum,  cum  tri- 
bularer, clamavi,  *et 
exaudivit  me. 

Domine,  libera  ani- 
mam meam  a labiis  ini- 
(luis,  ^^et  a lingua  do- 
losa. 

Quid  detur  tibi,  aut 
quid  apponatur  tibi^  ad 
linguam  dolosam  ? 

Sagittae  potentis  acu- 
. tae,  * cum  cai  bonibus  de- 
solatoriis. 


Heu  mihi,  quia  incola- 
tus meus  prolongatus  est; 
habitavi  cum  habitantibus 
Cedar:  * multum  incola 
fuit  anima  mea. 

Cum  his  qui  oderunt 
pacem,  eram  pacificus; 
* cum  loquebar  illis,  ex- 
pugnabant me  gi'atis. 

Ant  Cum  his,  &c. 

Ant  Ab  hominibus  ini- 
quis hbera  me  Domine. 


Ps,  cxxxix. 


Eripe  me.  Domine, 
ab  homine  malo:  * 
a viro  iniquo  eripe  me. 
Qui  cogitaverunt  ini- 
quitates in  corde;  *tota 
die  constituebant  proelia. 

Acuerunt  linguas  suas 
sicut  serpentis;  * vene- 
num aspidum  sub  labiis 
eorum. 


Custodi  me.  Domine, 
de  manu  peccatoris ; * et 
ab  hominibus  iniquis 
eripe  me. 

Qui  cogitaverunt  sup- 
plantare gressus  meos,  • 
absconderunt  superbi  la- 
queum mihi. 

Et  funes  extenderunt 
in  laqueum ; * juxta  iter 


Digilized  byCjOO^lC 


MAUNDY-THUR8DAY.  277 


tfcaudalum  posuenmt 
rnihi. 

Dixi  Domino ; Deus 
mens  es  tu ; * exaudi 
Domine,  vocem  depre- 
cationis mese. 

Domine,  Domine,  vir- 
tus salutis  meae ; * obum- 
brasti super  caput  meum 
in  die  belli. 

Ne  tradas  me,  Domine, 
a desiderio  meo  peccato- 
ri ; * cogitaverunt  contm 
rne ; ne  derelinquas 
me,  ne  forte  exaltentur. 

Caput  circuitus  eorum, 
* labor  labiorum  ipsorum 
operiet  eos. 

Cadent  super  eos  car- 
bones, in  ignein  dejicies 

Ps. 

D Omine,  clamavi  ad 
te,  exaudi  me ; * 

intende  voci  mese,  cum 
clamavero  ad  te. 

Dirigatur  oratio  mea, 
sicut  incensum,  in  con- 
spectu tuo;  * elevatio 
manuum  mearum  sacrifi- 
cium vespertinum. 

Pone  Domine  custo- 
diam ori  meo ; * et  ostium 
circumstantiae  labiis 
meis. 

Non  declines  cor  me- 
um in  verba  malitiae,  * 

A 


eos:  * in  miseriis  non 
6ul>8istent. 

Vir  linguosus  non  di- 
rigetur in  terra:  * virum 
injustum  mala  capient  in 
interitu. 

Cognovi  quia  faciet 
Dominus  judicum  ino- 
pis ; ♦ et  vindictam  pau- 
penim. 

Verunitamen  justi  con- 
fitebuntur nomini  tuo ; * 
et  habitabunt  recti  cum 
vultu  tuo. 

Ant.  Ab  hominibus 
iniquis,  &c. 

Ant.  Custodi  me  a la^ 
queo  quem  statuerunt 
mihi,  et  a scandalis  ope- 
rantium iniquitatem. 

cxl. 

ad  excusandas  excusar 
tiones  in  peccatis. 

Cum  hominibus  ope- 
rantibus iniquitatem,, 
♦ et  non  communicabo 
cum  electis  eorum. 

Corripiet  me  justus  in 
misericordia,  et  increpa- 
bit me ; * oleum  autem 
peccatoris  non  impinguet 
caput  mcurn. 

Quoniam  adhuc  et  o • 
ratio  rnea  m beneplaci- 
tis eorum : absorpti 

sunt  juncti  petrse  judices 
eorum, 
a 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


278 


VESPERS  FOR 


Audienl  verba  rnea 
quoniam  potuerunt.  * 
Sicut  crassitudo  terrae 
erupta  est  super  terram. 

Dissipata  sunt  ossa 
nostra  secus  infernum ; * 
quia  ad  te,  Domine*  Do- 
mine, oculi  mei;  in  te 
speravi,  non  auferas  ani- 
mam meam. 

Custodi  me  a laqueo, 

Ps. 


quem  statuerunt  mihi ; * 
et  a scandalis  operantium 
inivuitatem. 

Cadent  in  reticulo  ejus 
peccatores ; ^singulariter 
smn  ego  donec  transeam. 

Ant.  Custodi  me,  &c. 

Ant.  Considerabam  ad 
dexteram  ; et  videbam ; 
et  non  erat  qui  cognosce- 
ret me. 


VOCE  mea  ad  Domi- 
num clamavi : * vo- 
ce mea  ad  Dominum  de- 
precatus sum. 

Effundo  in  conspectu 
ejus  orationem  meam,  * 
et  tribulationem  meam 
ante  ipsum  pronuntio ; 

In  deficiendo  ex  me 
spiritum  meum : * et  tu 
cognovisti  semitas  meas. 

In  via  hac,  qua  am- 
bulabam, * absconderunt 
superbi  laqueum  mihi. 

Considerabam  ad  dex- 
teram, et  videbam ; * 
et  non  erat  qui  cognos- 
ceret *ne. 

Periit  fuga  a me,  * et 


non  erat  qui  requirat  ani- 
mam meam. 

Clamavi  ad  te,  Domi- 
ne, * dixi : tu  es  spes 
mea,  portio  mea  in  ter- 
ra viventium. 

Intende  ad  deprecRtio- 
nem  meam  ; * quia  hu- 
miliatus sum  nimis. 

Libera  me  a perse- 
quentibus me ; * quia 
confortati  sunt  super  me. 

Educ  de  custodia  ani- 
mam meam  ad  confiten- 
dum nomini  tuo ; * me 
expectant  justi  donec 
retribuas  mihi. 

Ant.  Considerabam  aa 
dexteram.  &c. 


At  the  Magnificat. 

‘Ant.  Coenantibus  au-  V.  Christus  factus 
tem  illis  accepit  Jesus  est  pro  nobis-  obedi- 
panem,  et  benedixit  ac  ens  usque  ad  inor 
fregit,  deditque  discipulis  tem. 
suis. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


MAUXOAT-THU&flDAr 


ll/r A^ificat  * : anima 
-lVJ-  mea  Dominum. 

^ £t  exultavit  spiritus 
meus  * in  Deo  smutari 
meo. 

Quia  respexit  humUi- 
tatem  ancillae  suae ; * ec- 
ce  enim  ex  hoc  .beatam 
me  dicent  onmes  genera- 
tiones. 

Quia  fecit  mihi  mag- 
na, qui  potens  est;  * et 
sanctura  nomen  ejus. 

Et  misericordia  ejus  a 
progenie  in  progenies,  * 
timentibus  eum. 

Fecit  potentiam  m bra- 

aU  kneel,  and  aa^  Our  Father,  &c.  in  secret. 

Fa.  L 

Miserere  mei  Deus,  * Ecce  enim  in  inquita- 
secundum  mag-  tibus  conceptus  sum ; * 
nam  misericordiam  tuam,  et  in  peccatis  concepit 
Et  secundum  multitu-  me  mater  mea. 
dinem  miserationum  tu-  Ecce  enim  veritatem 
arum,  * dele  iniquitatem  dilexisti ; * incerta  et  oc- 
meam.  culta  sapientiee  tuee  ma- 

Amplius  lava  rae  ab  nifestasti  mihi, 
iniquitate  mea ; * et  a Asperges  me  hyssopo, 
peccato  meo  munda  me.  et  mundabor ; * lavabis 
Quoniam  iniquitatem  me,  et  super  nivem  deal- 
meam  ego  cognosco;  * babor. 
et  peccatum  meum  contra  Auditui  meo  dabis 
me  est  semper,  gaudium  et  leetitiam;  * 

Tibi  soli  peccavi,  et  et  exultabunt  ossa  bumi- 
malum  coram  te  feci ; * liata. 
ut  justificeris  in  sermoni-  Averte  faciem  tuam  a 
Dus  tuis,  et  vincas  cum  peccatis  meis ; * et  omnes 
judicaris.  iniquitates  meas  dele. 

A a 2 


chio  suo ; * dispersit  su- 
perbos mente  cordis  sui. 

Deposuit  potentes  de 
sede;  * et  exaltavit  hu- 
miles. 

Esurientes  implevit 
bonis ; * et  divites  dimisit 
inanes. 

Suscepit  Israel  pu  im 
suum;  * recordatu*  ni- 
sericordiae  suse. 

Sicut  locutus  et  ad 
patres  nostros,* Abn  •am, 
et  semini  ejus,  in  sa  .siila. 

Ant.  Ccenantibub  &c. 

V.  Christus  factu.^  &c. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


280 


GOOD-PRIDAT. 


Cor  mundum  crea  in 
me,  Deus ; * et  spiritum 
rectum  innova  in  visceri- 
bus meis. 

Ne  projicias  me  a fa- 
cie tua:  *et  spiritum  sanc- 
tum tuum  ne  auferas  a 
me. 

Redde  mihi  laetitiam 
salutaris  tui ; * et  spiritu 
principali  confirma  me. 

Docebo  iniquos  vias 
tuas;  * et  impii  ad  te 
convertentur. 

Libera  me  de  sanguin- 
ibus, Deus,  Deus  salutis 
meae ; - * et  exaltabit 
lingua  mea  Justitiam 
tuam. 

Domine,  labia  mea 

PRAYER.  Respice, — 


aperies,  * et  os  meum 
annuntiabit  laudem  tu- 
am. ' 

Quoniam  si  voluisses 
sacrificium,  dedissem  uti- 
que ; * holocaustis  non 
delectaberis. 

Sacrificium  Deo  spiri- 
tus contribulatus ; * cor 
contritum  et  humiliatum, 
Deus,  non  despicies. 

Benigne  fac  Domine, 
in  bona  voluntate  tua 
Sion ; * ut  aedificentur 
muri  Jerusalem. 

Tunc  acceptabis  sacri- 
ficium justitiae,  obla- 
tiones et  holocausta;  * 
tunc  imponent  super  al- 
tare tuum  vitulos. 

!jOok  down,  page  270, 


GOOD-FRIDAY. 

MASS  of  the  PRES.^NCTIFIED. 

Hie  Priest  (with  his  Ministers,  having  for  some  time 
lain  prostrate  in  the  sanctuary^  in  silent  prayer)  kt 
arises  and  goes  up  and  kisses  the  middle  of  the  altar : 
then  a Reader  begins  the  Lessons,  in  an  audible 
voice,  without  anp  title,  whilst  the  Priest  reads  them 
at  the  same  time,  m a low  voice,  at  the  Epistle  side 
ff  the  altar, 

1.  LESSON.  Osce  vi.  1.  6. — Thus  saith  the  Eord: 
In  their  affliction  they  will  rise  early  to  me : Come, 
and  let  us  Tetiim  to  the  Lord.  For  he  hath  taken 
us«  anti  he  will  heal  us:  he  will  strike,  and  he  will 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


MASS  OF  THE  PRESANCTIFIED. 

cure  US.  He  will  revive  after  two  days:  on  the 
third  day  he  vnW  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in 
his  sight.  We  shall  know  tind  we  shall  follow  on, 
that  we  may  know  the  Lord.  His  going  forth  is 
prepared  as  the  morning  light,  and  he  will  come  to 
us  as  the  early  and  the  latter  rain  to  the  earth. 
What  shall  I do  to  thee,  O Ephraim  ?,  what  shall  1 
do  to  thee,  O Juda?  Your  mercy  is  as  a morning 
cloud,  and  as  the  dew  that  goeth  away  in  the  morn- 
ing. For  this  reason  have  I hewed  them  by  the 
prophets,  I have  slain  them  by  the  words  of  my 
mouth : and  thy  judgments  shall  go  forth  as  the 
light.  For  I desired  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice ; and 
the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  holocausts. 

TRACT.  Habac.  iiL  — Domine^  audivi  auditio- 
nem  tuam,  et  timui:  conHderavi  opera  tua^  et  expa- 
vi. Lord,  I have  heard  thy  worlis,  and  was  afraid : 
I considered  thy  works,  and  trembled.  V.  Thou 
wilt  appear  between  two  animals ; when  the  yeara 
draw  near,  thou  wilt  be  known ; when  tlfb  time  shall 
come,  thou  wilt  be  shewn.  V.  When  my.  soul 
shall  be  in  trouble,  even  in  thy  wrath  thou  wilt  re- 
member thy  mercy.  V.  God  will  come  from  Li- 
banus, and  the  Holy  One  fi-om  the  dark  mountain. 
V.  His  majesty  hath  clouded  the  heavens ; and  tha 
earth  is  full  of  his  praise. 

Let  us  pray. 

Flectamus  genua.  Let  us  kneel  down. 

R.  Levate.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

COLLECT.  Detis,  a quo,  as  p.  271. 

II.  LESSON.  ExocL  xii.  1.  11. — In  those  days. 
Tlie  Lord  said  to  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  land  of 
E^pt : This  month  shall  be  to  you  the  beginning 
of  months:  it  shall  be  the  first  in  the  months  of 
the  year.  Speak  ye  to  the  whole  assembly  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  say  to  them:  On  the  tenth; 
day  of  this  month  let  every  man  take  a Jamb  by 
their  families  and  honses.  But  if  the  number  be 
Aa3 

r .Google  ^ 


282 


GOOD-FRIDAT. 


less  than  may  suffice  to  eat  the  lamb,  he  shall  take 
unto  him  his  neighbour  that  joineth  to  his  house, 
according  to  the  number  of  souls  which  may  be 
enough  to  eat  the  lamb.  And  it  shall  be  a lamb 
without  blemish,  a male  of  one  year;  according  tc 
which  rite  also  he  shall  kill  a kid.  And  you  shall 
keep  it  unto  the  fourteenth  day  of  this  month : and 
the  whole  multitude  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall 
sacrifice  it  in  the  evening.  And  they  shall  take  of 
the  blood  thereof,  and  put  it  upon  bpth  the  side- 
posts,  and  on  the  upper  door  posts  of  the  houses, 
wherein  they  shall  eat  it.  . And  they  shall  eat  the 
flesh  that  night  roasted  at  the  fire,  and  unleavened 
bread,  with  wild  lettuce.  You  shall  not  eat  thereof 
any  thing  raw,  nor  boiled  in  water,  but  only  roasted 
at  the  fire : you  shall  eat  the  head  with  the  feet  and 
entrails  thereof.  Neither  shall  there  remain  any 
thing  of  it  until  morning.  If  there  be  any  thing 
left,  you  sh^l  bum  it  with  fire.  And  thus  you  shaU 
eat  it : you  shall  gird  your  reins,  and  you  shall  have 
shoes  on  your  feet,  holding  staves  in  your  hands, 
and  you  shall  eat  in  haste : for  it  is  the  Phase  (that 
is  the  passage)  of  the  Lord. 

TRACT.  Ps.  cxxxix.  — Eripe  me,  Domiive^  ab 
hoinint  malo  : a viro  iniquo  libera  me,  fyc. 

Deliver  me,  O Lord,  from  the  evil  man : rescue 
me  from  the  unjust  man.  V,  Who  have  devised  in- 
iquities in  their  hearts : all  the  day  long  they  design- 
ed battles.  V,  They  have  sharpened  their  tongues 
like  a serpent:  the  venom  of  asps  is  under  their  bps. 
F.  Keep  me,  O Lord,  from  the  hand  of  the  wicked 
and  from  unjust  men  deliver  me.  F.  Who  have  pro- 
posed to  supplant  my  steps ; the  proud  have  hid  a 
net  for  me.  F.  And  they  have  stretched  out  cords 
for  a snare : they  have  laid  for  me  a stumbling  block 
by  the  way  side.  F.  I said  to  the  Lord ; thou  art 
my  God ; hear,  O Lord,  the  voice  of  my  supplica- 
lion.  F.  O Lord,  Lord  the  might  of  my  salvation 

D .Google 


MASS  OF  THE  PRESANCTIFIEO 


m 

cover  ihoa  my  head  in  the  day  of  battle.  V.  Gi^^e 
me  not  up,  O Lord,  from  my  desire  to  the  wicked : 
they  have  plotted  against  me,  do  not  thou  foi*sake 
me,  lest  they  should  triumph.  F.  The  head  of 
their  compassing  me  about : the  labour  of  their  lips 
shall  overwhelm  them.  F.  But  as  for  the  just  they 
shall  give  glory  to  thy  name : and  the  upright  shall 
dwell  with  thy  countenance. 

The  PASSION  of  our  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST 
according  to  John  xviiL  and  xix. 
f^T  that  time  t Jesus  went  with  his  disciples  over 
«/I  the  brook  Cedron,  where  there  was  a garden, 
into  which  he  entered  with  his  disciples.  And  Judas 
also,  who  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place ; because 
Jesus  had  often  resorted  thither  together  with  his 
disciples.  J udas  therefore  having  received  a band 
of  soldiers,  and  servants  from  the  chief  priests  and 
the  Pharisees,  cometh  thither  with  lanterns,  and 
torches,  and  weapons.  Jesus  therefore  knowing  all 
things  that  should  come  upon  him,  went  forth,  and 
said  to  them:  Whom  seek  ye.^  They  aiiswered 
him:  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  Jesus  saith  to  them:  I am 
lie.  And  Judas  also,  who  betrayed  him,  stood 
with  them.  As  soon  therefore  as  he  had  said  to 
them:  I am  he:  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to 
the  ground.  Again  therefore  he  asked  them : Whom 
seek  ye  .J*  And  they  said:  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Jesus 
answered:  I have  told  you,  that  I am  he.  If  there- 
fore you  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way.  That  the 
word  might  be  fulfilled  which  he  said:  Of  them 
ivhom  thou  hast  given  me,  I have  not  lost  any  one. 
Then  Simon  Peter  having  a sword  drew  it:  and 
struck  the  servant  of  the  high-priest,  and  cut  off  his 
right  ear.  And  the  name  of  the  servant  was  Malchus. 
Jesus  then  said  to  Peter:  Put  up  thy  sword  into 
the  scabbard:  The  chalice  which  my  Father  hath 
given  me,  shall  I not  drink  it  ? Then  the  band,  and 
the  tribune,  and  the  servants  of  the  Jews  took  Jesns, 
and  they  bound  him . And  they  led  him  away  to 

d by  Google 


384 


COOD-FRIDAT. 


Annas  first,  for  he  was  father-in-law  to  Caipbas, 
who  was  the  high-priest  of  that  year.  Now  Cai- 
phas  wjis  he  who  had  given  the  counsel  to  the  Jewsr 
That  it  was  expedient  that  one  man  should  die  for 
the  people.  And  Simon  Peter  followed  JTesus,  and  so 
did  another  disciple.  And  that  disciple  was  known 
to  the  high-priest,  and  went  in  with  Jesus  into  the» 
court  of  the  high-priest  But  Peter  stood  at  the 
door  without.  Tiie  other  disciple  therefore  who 
was  known  to  the  high-priest,  went  out,  and  spoke 
to  the  porteress,  and  lirought  in  Peter.  And  the 
maid  that  was  porteress,  saith  to  Peter;  Art  not 
thou  also  one  of  this  man’s  disciples : He  saith : 
I am  not.  Now  the  servants  and  officer^  stood  at 
a fire  of  coals,  because  it  was  cold,  and  warmed 
themselves.  And  with  them  was  Peter  also  standing 
and  warming  himself.  The  high-priest  then  asked 
Jesus  of  his  disciples  and  of  his  doctrine.  Jesus 
answered  him : I have  spoken  openly  to  the  world : 
I have  tdways  taught  in  the  synagogue,  and  in  the 
temple,  whither  all  the  Jews  resort ; and  in  secret  1 
have  spoken  nothing.  Why  asketh  thou  me  ? ask 
them  who  have  heard  what  I have  spoken  unto 
them : behold  tliey  know  what  things,  I have  said. 
And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  one  of  the  offi- 
cers standing  by,  gave  Jesus  a blow,  saying:  An- 
swerest  thou  the  high-priest  so?  Jesus  answered  him : 
If  I have  spoken  evil,  give  testimony  of  the  evil : but 
if  well,  why  strikest  thou  me  ? And  Annas  sent  him 
bound  to  Caiphas  the  high-priest.  And  Simon  Pe- 
ter was  standing,  audwarming  himself.  They  said 
therefore  to  him : Ait  not  thou  also  one  of  bis  dis- 
ciples ? He  denied  it,  and  said : I am  not.  One  of 
the  servants  of  the  bigh-pr^t  (a  kinsman  to  him 
whose  ear  Peter  cut  off  J saith  to  him ; Did  not  I see 
thee  in  the  garden  with  him?  Then  Peter  again 
denied ; and  immediately  the  cock  crew.  iSien 
they  led  Jesus  from  Caiphas  to  the  governor’s  hall 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


MASS  OF  TH£  PRESANCTIFIED.  285 

And  it  was  morning;  and  they  went  not  into  the 
hall,  that  they  might  not  l)e  defiled,  but  that  they 
might  eat  the  paseh.  Pilate  therefore  went  out  to 
them  and  said : What  accusation  bring  you  against 
this  man?  They  answered  and  said  to  him : If  he 
were  not  a malefactor  we  would  not  have  delivered 
him  up  to  thee.  Pilate  then  said  to  them : Take 
him  you,  and  judge  him  according  to  your  law. 
The  Jews  therefore  said  to  him : It  is  not  lawful  for 
us  to  put  any  man  to  death.  That  the  word  of  Jesus 
might  be  fulfilled  which  he  said,  signifying  what 
death  he  should  die  : Pilate  therefore  went  into  the 
hall  again,  and  called  Jesus  and  said  to  him  : An 
thou  the  king  of  the  Jews  ? Jesus  answered : Sayest 
thou  this  thing  of  thyselfj  or  have  otheis  told  it  thee 
of  me  ? Pilate  answered : Am  I a Jew  ? Thy  own 
nation,  and  the  chief  priest  have  delivered  thee  up 
to  me : what  hast  thou  done  ? Jesus  answered : My 
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  If  my  kingdom  were 
of  Ais  world,  my  seiwants  would  certa'uily  strive  that 
I should  not  be  delivered  to  the  Jews:  but  now  mv 
kingdom  is  not  from  hence.  Pilate  therefore  «lid  lu 
him:  Art  thou  a king  then  ? Jesus  answered  : Tlion 
sayest,  that  I am  a king.  For  this  was  I born,  and 
for  this  I came  into  the  world ; that  I should  give  tes- 
timony to  the  truth.  Eveiy  one  that  is  of  the  truth, 
hearedi  my  voice.  Pilate  snith  to  him:  What  is  the 
truth?  And  when  he  had  said  this,  he  went  out 
again  to  the  Jews,  and  said  to  them;  I find  no 
cause  in  him.  But  you  have  a custom  that  I should 
release  one  unto  you  at  the  pasch : will  you  therefore 
that  I release  unto  you  the  king  of  die  Jews?  Then 
cried  they  all  again  saying : Not  diis  man  but  Barab- 
bas.  Now  Barabbas  was  a robber.  Then  therefon* 
Pilate  took  Jesus,  and  scourged  him.  And  die  sol- 
diers plaiting  a crown  of  thorns,  put  it  upon  hi> 
head:  and  tliey  put  on  him  a purple  garment.  An 
*thej  came  to  him,  and  said ; ilail,  king  of  tlie  Jews 


CSigilized  byCjOO^IC 


286 


600D*f  R11>AY. 


and  they  give  him  blows.  Pilate  therefore  went 
forth  again,  and  saith  to  them:  Behold  1 bring  him 
foith  unto  you,  that  you  may  know  that  I find  no 
cause  in  him.  (Jesus  therefore  came  forth  bearing 
tlie  crown  of  thorns,  and  the  purple  garment.)  And 
he  saith  to  them : Behold  the  man.  When  the  chief 
priests  therefore  and  the  servants  had  seen  him,  they 
ciied  out  saying:  Crucify  him,  crucify  him.  Pilate 
saith  to  tiiem : Take  him  you,  and  crucify  him : for 
1 find  no  cause  in  him.  The  Jews  answered  him : 
We  have  a law ; and  according  to  that  law  he  ought 
to  die,  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God 
When  Pilate  therefore  had  heard  this  saying,  he 
feared  tlie  more.  And  he  entered  into  the  hall 
again;  and  he  said  to  Jesus:  Whence  art  thou? 
But  Jesus  gave  him  no  answer.  Pilate  therefore  saith 
to  him  : Speakest  thou  not  to  me  ? knowest  thou  not 
that  I have  power  to  crucify  thee,  and  I have  power 
to  release  thee  ? Jestis  answered : Thou  shouldst 
jiot  have  any  power  against  me,  unless  it  were  given 
thee  from  above.  Therefore  he  that  hath  delivered 
me  to  thee,  hath  the  greater  sin.  And  from  thence- 
forth Pilate  sought  to  release  him.  But  the  Jews 
cried  out,  saying;  If  thou  release  this  man,  thou  ait 
not  Ceesar’s  friend.  For  whosoever  maketh  himself 
a king,  speaketh  against  Ctesar.  Now  when  Pilate 
had  heard  these  words,  he  brought  Jesus  forth : and 
sat  down  in  the  judgment-seat  in  tlie  place  that  is 
called  Lithostrotos,  and  in  the  Hebrew  Gabbatha. 
And  it  was  the  parasceve  of  the  pasch,  about  the 
sixth  hour,  and  he  saith  to  the  Jews:  Behold  your 
king.  But  they  cried  out:  Away  with  him,  away 
with  him,  crucify  him.  Pilate  saith  to  them : Shall 
I crucify  your  king  ? The  chief  priests  answered : We 
have  no  king  but  Caesar.  Then  therefore  he  de- 
livered him  to  them  to  be  crucified.  And  they  took 
Jesus,  and  led  him  forth.  And  bearing  his  own 
cross,  he  went  foith  to  that  place  which  is  callei^ 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


MASS  OF  THE  PRF  SANCTIFIED.  287 

Calvary,  but  in  Hebrew  Golgotha.  Where  they 
crucified  him,  and  with  him  two  others,  one  on 
each  side,  and  Jesus  in  the  midst  And  Pilate  wrote 
a title  also : and  he  put  it  upon  the  cross.  And  the 
nTiting  was  JESUS  OF  NAZARETH  THE  KING 
OF  THE  JEWS.  This  title  therefore  many  of  the 
Jews  did  read:  because  the  place  where  Jesus  was 
crucified,  was  nigh  to  the  city ; and  it  was  written 
in  Hebrew,  in  Greek,  and  in  Latin.  Then  the  chief 
priests  of  tlie  Jews  said  to  Pilate : Write  not.  The 
king  of  the  Jews ; but  that  he  said,  T am  the  king  of 
the  JeAvs.  Pilate  answered:  What  I have  written,  I 
have  wintten.  The  soldiers  therefore  when  they  had 
crucified  him,  took  his  garments  (and  they  made  four 
parts,  to  every  ^Idier  a part),  and  also  his  coat. 
Now  the  coat  was  without  seam,  woven  from  thC 
top  throughout.  They  said  then  one  to  another: 
Let  us  not  cut  it,  but  let  us  cast  lots  for  it  whose  it 
shall  be;  that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled  which 
sahh : “ They  have  parted  my  garments  among  them 
and  upon  my  vesture  they  have  cast  lots.”  And  the 
soldiers  indeed  did  these  things.  Now  there  stood 
by  the  cross  of  Jesus,  his  mother,  and  his  mother’s 
sister,  Mary  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary  Magdalen. 
When  Jesus  therefore  had  seen  his  mother,  and  the 
disciple  standing  whom  he  loved,  he  saith  to  his 
mother:  Woman,  behold  thy  Son.  After  that,  he 
saith  to  the  disciple : Behold  thy  mother.  And  from 
that  hour  the  disciple  took  her  to  his  own.  After- 
ward Jesus  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  accom- 
plished, that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  said: 
I thirst.  Now  there  was  a vessel  set  there  full  of  vine- 
gar. And  they  putting  a sponge  full  of  vinegar  about 
hyssop  put  it  to  his  mouth.  Jesus  therefore  when  he 
had  taken  the  vinegar,  said  it  is  consul nuiated.  And 
oowing  his  head,  he  gave  up  the  ghost*  'J'hen  llic 

* Here  all  kneel,  and  pause. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


288  GOOD  FRIDAY. 

Jews  (liecaiise  it  was  the  parasceve)  that  the  hodios 
might  not  remain  upon  the  cross  on  the  sablmth-day 
(for  that  was  a great  sabbath-day),  besought  Pilate 
that  their  legs  might  be  broken,  an(l  that  they  might 
l)e  taken  away.  The  soldiers  therefore  came : anti 
they  broke  the  legs  of  the  first,  and  of  the  other 
that  was  crucified  with  him.  But  after  they  came 
to  Jesus,  when  they  saw  that  he  was  already  dead, 
they  did  not  break  his  legs.  But  one  of  the  soldiers 
wit£.  a sjiear  o|)ened  his  side,  and  immediately 
there  came  out  blood  and  water.  And  he  that  saw 
it  hath  given  testimony : and  his  testimony  is  true 
And  he  Kiioweth  that  he  saith  true ; that  you  also 
may  believe.  For  these  things  were  done  that  the 
scripture  might  be  fulfilled:  “ Yoy  shall  not  break 
a hone  of  him.’’  And  again  another  scripture  saith : 
“ They  shall  look  on  him  whom  they  pierced.” 

Here  is  said,  Cleanse  my  heart.  Ordinary,  p.  xx. 

And  after  these  thinj^  Joseph  of  Arimathea  (be- 
cause he  was  a disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly 
for  fear  of  the  Jews)  besought  Pilate  that  he  might 
take  tlie  body  of  Jesus.  And  Pilate  gave  leave.  He 
came  therefore  and  took  away  the  body  of  Jesus. 
And  Nicodemus  also  came,  be  who  at  the  first  came 
to  Jesus  by  night,  bringing  a mixture  of  myrrh  anrl 
aloes,  al)out  one  hundred  pound  weight.  They  took 
therefore  the  body  of  Jesus,  and  bound  it  in  linen 
cloths  with  the  spices,  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is 
to  bury.  Now  tliere  was  in  the  place,  where  he 
was  crucified,  a garden ; and  in  the  garden  a new 
sepulchre,  wherein  no  man  had  yet  been  laid. 
'Phere  therefore,  because  of  tlie  parasceve  of  the 
Jews,  tliey  laid  Jesus,  because  the  sepulchre  was 
nigii  at  hand. 

Then  the  Priest,  standing  on  the  Epistle  side,  says  os 
follows, 

[Let  us  pray,  most  dearly  beloved  brethi*en,  for  the 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


MASS  OF  THE  PRESAr^tTIFIED.  28! 

holy  Church  of  Grod,  that  the  Lord  God  would  Ik 
pleased  to  grant  it  peace,  maintain  it  in  union,  ani 
pi^erve  it  all  over  the  earth.  That  he  would  liko 
wise  bring  into  her  bosom,  the  princes  and  j>oten 
tates  of  the  whole  world,  and  grant  us  peace  anc 
tranquillity  in  this  life,  and  lo  glorify  God  the 
Father  Almighty.] 

Priest*  Let  us  pray.  Deacon.  Let  us  kneel  down* 
Subdeacon,  Stand  im  again. 

^ Almighty  and  Eternal  God,  who,  by  Christ,  hast 
yj  revealed  thy  gloiy  to  ail  nations;  preserve  the 
works  of  thine  own  mercy,  that  thy  Church,  which 
is  spread  over  the  whole  world,  may  persevere  with 
a constant  faith  in  the  confession  of  thy  name.  Thro’ 
the  same.  R,  J^men, 

[Let  us  pray  also  for  our  most  Holy  Father,  Pope  N. 
, that  our  Lord  God,  who  hath  made  choice  of  him 
in  the  order  of  the  Episcopacy,  may  preserve  him 
in  health  and  safety  for  the  good  of  his  holy  Church, 
and  to  govern  the  holy  people  of  God.] 

Priest,  Let  us  pray.  Deacon,  Let  us  kneel  down. 
Subdeacon,  Stand  up  again. 

0 Almighty  and  Eternal  Grod,  by  whose  appoint- 
ment all  things  are  established  and  maintained; 
mercifully  regard  our  prayers,  and  by  thy  goodness, 
preserve  the  Prelate  chosen  to  govern  us ; that  the 
Christian  people,  who  are  governed  by  thy  authority, 
may  increase  the  merits  of  their  faith  under  so  great 
a Bishop.  Thro’.  R,  Amen, 

[Let  us  also  pray  for  all  Bishops,  Priests,  Deacons, 
Subdeacons,  Acolytes,  Exorcists,  Readers,  Door- 
keepers, Confessors,  Virgins,  Widows,  and  for  all 
• tlie  holy  people  of  God.] 

Priest,  Let  us  pray.  Deacon,  Let  us  kneel  down. 
Suhdeacon,  Stand  up  again. 

O Almighty  and  Eternal  God,  by  whose  spirit 
the  whole  body  of  the  Church  is  sanctified  and 
Bb 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


290 


GOOD  FRIDAT. 


governed ; hear  our  prayers  for  all  orders  and  de^ 
grees  thereof ; that  by  the  assistance  of  thy  grace, 
thou  mayest  be  served  by  every  rank  and  conmtion. 
Thro’.  A Amm. 

[Let  us  pray  also  for  JST.  JST,  that  the  Lord  God  may 
reduce  to  his  obedience  all  barbarous  nations  for 
our  perpetual  peace.] 

Priest  Let  us  pray.  Deacon,  Let  us  kneel  down. 
Suhdeacon,  Stand  up  again. 

0 Almighty  and  Eternal  Gk»d,  in  whose  hands 
are  the  power  and  right  of  all  kingdoms: 
graciously  look  down  on  the  empire  A*.  JV*.  that  those 
nations  who  confide  in  their  own  haughtiness  and 
strength  may  be  reduced  by  the  powder  of  thy  right 
hand.  Thro’  R,  Amen, 

[I-.e.t  us  pray  also  for  our  Catechumens,  that  our 
Lord  God  may  open  for  them  the  ears^of  their 
hearts,  and  the  gates  of  mercy;  that  having  re- 
ceived the  remission  of  sin  by  the  laver  of  regene- 
ration, they  may  also  belong  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.] 

Priest  Let  us  pray.  Deacon.  Let  us  kneel  down. 
Subdeacon.  Stand  up  again. 

O Almighty  and  Eternal  God,  who  continually 
makest  the  Church  fhiiiful  in  new  children  ; 
increase  the  faith  and  understanding  of  our  Catechu- 
mens, that,  being  agaiu  bom  at  the  font  of  baptism, 
they  may  be  joined  to  thy  adopted  children.  Thro’ 
R.  Amen. 

[Let  u^ray,  most  dearly  beloved  brethren  to  God 
the  Father  Almighty,  that  he  would  purge  the 
world  of  all  errors,  cure  diseases,  drive  away  fa-  . 
mine,  open  prisons,  break  chains,  grant  a safe  re- 
turn to  travellers,  health  to  the  sick,  and  a secure 
harbour  to  such  as  are  at  sea.] 

Priest  Let  us  pray.  Deacon.  Let  us  kneel  down. 
Subdcacon.  Stand  up  again. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


VAM  OP  THC  PaSSA^VCllPIED  I 

OAlinighcv  aiid  F^tenml  UikI,  the  coiiitort  of  the 
adlicteil,  ani)  the  strength  of  tliose  that  labour; 
let  the  prayers  of  ail^  mirh  as  call  upon  thee  in  tri- 
tMiiatiou,  come  to  thee ; that  all  with  joy,  may  find 
the  effects  of  thy  mercy  in  their  necessities.  Thro*. 
H.  Jinien. 

[let  us  pray  also  for  all  heretics  and  schismatics, 
that  our  Lord  God  would  be  pleased  to  deliver 
them  from  all  their  errors,  and  call  them  back  to 
our  Holy  Mother  the  Catholic  and  Apostolic 
Church.] 

Priest  Let  us  pray.  Deacon,  Let  us  kneel  down. 
Svhdeacoiu  Stand  up  again. 

0 Almighty  and  Eternal  God,  who  savest  all. and 
woiddst  have  none  to  perish;  look  down  on 
those  souls  that  are  seduced  by  the  deceits  of  the 
devil ; that  the  hearts  of  ail  those  who  err,  laying 
aside  all  heretical  malice,  may  repent  and  return  to 
the  unity  of  the  truth.  Thro’.  A,  Amn, 

[Let  us  pray  also  for  the  perfidious  Jews ; that  the 
Lord  God  would  withdraw  the  veil  from  their 
• hearts,  that  they  also  may  acknowledge  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  thy  Son.] 

0;^  Flectamus  genua  is  here  omitted,  in  abhorrence  of 
the  insult  offered  bu  the  Jews  to  our  Saviour,  when 
they  knelt  before  him  in  derision,  in  the  hall  of 
Pilate^ s palace. 

O Almighty  and  Eternal  God,  who  deniest  not 
thy  mercy  even  to  the  perfidious  Jews ; hear 
our  prayers  which  we  pour  forth  for  the  blindness  ot 
that  people ; that  by  acknowledging  the  light  of  thy 
truth,  which  is  the  Christ,  they  may  be  brought  out 
of  their  darkness.  Thro’.  A.  Amen. 

[Let  us  pray  also  for  the  Pagans,  that  Almighty  God 
would  remove  all  iniquity  from  their  hearts ; that 
quitting  their  idols,  they  may  be  converted  to  the 
time  and  living  Glod,  and  his  only  Son,  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.] 


Bb2 


GOOD  FRIDAY. 


% 8 

Priest,  Let  us  pray.  Deacon,  Let  us  kneel  down. 
SMeacon.  Stand  up  again. 

0 Almighty  and  Eternal  Gk>dy  who  seekest  not  the 
death  of  sinners,  but  that  they  should  live; 
inercifullv  hear  our  prayers,  and  deliver  them  from 
their  idolatry : and,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  thy 
name,  admit  them  into  thy  holy  Churek  Through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  who  livest.  R,  Jhnm, 

Here  the  Priest  takes  doxon  the  cross^  and  uncovering 
the  top  of  iiy  says^ 

Ardh,  Behold  the  wood  of  the  cross,  on  which 
hung  the  Salvation  of  the  World. 

Then  the  Clergy^  and  all  the  people^  on  their  bended 
kneeSy  ansxoer: 

R,  Come  let  us  adore*.  Venite  adorem'fts. 

This  Anth.  and  R.  being  repealed  txtnce  more^  till 
. the  whole  Cross  is  uncovered^  the  Ptiest  lays  it  doim 
in  a proper  place,  and  all  kneeling  thrice  on  both 
knees,  reverently  approach  to,  and  devoutly  kiss  the 
feet  of  the  cruajtx.  During  this  ceremony,  two 
chanters  in  the  middle  of  the  choir  sing  alternately, 
the  versicles  called  the  Reproaches,  because  they  are 
in  the  name  of  Christ  reproaching  the  Jeioish  people 
with  ingratxtxide,  for  the  manifold  blessings  and 
favours  he  had  conferred  on  them, 

V,  My  people,  what  V.  Popule  meus,  quid 
have  I done  to  thee  ? Or  feci  tibi^  Aut  in  guo 
in  what  have  I grieved  contristavi  te7  Responde 
tliee  ? Answer  me.  mihi, 

* The  intention  of  the  Church,  in  exposing  the  cross 
to  our  veneration  on  this  day,  is,  that  we  might  the 
more  effectually  raise  up  our  hearts  to  HIM  who  ex- 
pired thereon  ror  our  redemption.  Whenever,  there- 
lure,  we  kneel  or  prostrate  ourselves  before  a crucifix, 
it  is  JESUS  CHRIST  only  whom  we  adore,  and  it  is 
in  him  alone  that  our  respects  terminate. 


,y  Google 


HASS  OF  THE  FRESANCTIFIED. 


V.  Because  I brought  V,  ^uia  ed,ixi  ie  de 
fhee  out  of  the  land  of  terra  tlgypti:  paralii 
Egypt ; thou  hast  pre-  crucem  Salvatori  tuo. 
pared  a cross  for  thy  Sa- 
viour. 


I.  Choir  sings,  ^gios  Theos. 

II.  Choir  answers,  Samtus  Deus. 

I.  Choir,  •^gtos  Ischyros, 

II.  Choir,  Sanctus  Portis. 


God. 


^ O holy 
I O Most  Holy  One. 


I.  Choir,  ,^gios  Athanatos  deison 

ivuts. 

II.  Choir,  Sanctus  immortalis^ 
miserere  nobis. 


O Holy  Immortal 
One,  have  mer- 
cy on  us. 


*#*  After  singing  the  foregoing  praises  of  God  in 
Greek  and  Latin  {formerly  the  two  most  universal 
languages^  to  shew  the  union  between  all  the 
Churches),  two  of  the  second  choir  proceed  with  the 
Reproaches. 

V.  Because  I was  thy  guide  through  the  desert  for 
forty  years,  and  fed  thee  with  manna,  and  brought 
thee  into  an  excellent  land,  thou  hast  prepared  a 
cross  for  thy  Saviour. 

Then  Agios  o Theos,  &c.  is  repeated  alternately  as 
above,  after  which  two  of  the  first  choir  sing : 

V.  What  more  should  I have  done  to  thee,  and 
have  not  done  ? I have  planted  thee  for  niy  most 
l3eautiful  vineyard : and  thou  hast  proved  very  bitter 
to  me,  for  in  my  thirst  thou  givest  me  vinegar  to 
drink ; and  piercedst  the  side  of  thy  Saviour  with  a 
spear. 

Agios  o Thoos,  &c.  is  repealed  as  above. 

V.  For  thy  sake  I scourged  Egypt  with  her  fii-st- 
bom ; and  thou  hast  delivered  me  up  to  be  scourged. 

The  whole  Choir.]  My  people,  what  have  I 
done  to  thee  ? or  in  what  have  I grieved  thee  ? An- 
swer me. 


by  Google 


Bb3 


294 


GOOD  FRIDAY. 


Two  of  I.  Choir.]  V.  I led  tliee  out  of  Eg^t, 
having  drowned  Pharaoh  in  the  Red  Sea ; and  thou 
hast  delivered  me  up  to  the  chief  priests. 

The  whole  Choir.  My  people,  &c. 

Two  of  II.  Choir.]  V,  I opened  the  sea  before 
thee ; and  thou  hast  opened  my  side  with  a spear. 

The  whole  Choir.  My  people,  &c. 

Two  of  I.  Choir.]  V,  I went  before  thee  in  a pillar 
of  cloud ; and  thou  hast  brought  me  to  the  court  of 
Pilate. 

The  tvhole  Choir.  My  people,  &c. 

Two  of  II.  Choir.]  PI  I fed  thee  with  manna 
in  the  desert ; and  thou  hast  beaten  me  with  buffets 
and  stripes. 

The  whole  Choir.  My  people,  &c. 

Two  of  I.  Choir.]  F.  I gave  thee  wholesome 
water  to  drink  out  of  fhe  rock,  and  thou  hast  given 
me  for  drink  gall  and  vinegar. 

The  whole  Choir.  My  people,  &c. 

Two  of  II.  Choir.l  F.  For  thy  ^e  I smote  ilic» 
king  of  Canaan;  and  thou  hast  smote  my  head  witli 
a cane. 

The  whole  Choir.  My  people,  &c. 

Two  of  I.  Choir.]  F.  I gave  thee  a royal  sceptre ; 
and  thou  hast  given  me  a crown  of  thorns. 

The  whole  Choir.  My  people,  &c. 

Two  of  II.  Choir.]  F.  By  great  might  I raised 
thee  on  high;  and  thou  hast  hanged  me  on  the 
gibbet  of  the  cross. 

The  whole  Choir.  My  people,  &c.  and  the 

Anthem.  We  adore  thy  cross,  O Lord,  and  we 
praise  and  glorify  thy  holy  resurrection,  for  by  the 
wood  of  the  cross  the  whole  earth  is  filed  with  joy. 

Ps.  May  Grod  have  mercy  on  us  and  bless  us ; 
may  his  countenance  shine  upon  us,  and  may  he  have 
mercy  on  us. 

Ant,  We  adore  thee,  &c.  to  Ps. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


MASS  OF  THE  PRESAlfCTIFIED. 


Then  is  svnr  the  Versicle,  O faithful  croos ! wUh  the 
Hymn,  in  the  follottn^  numner : 

O Faithful  cross!  O noblest  tree! 

Id  all  our  woods  there ’s  none  like  thee : 

No  earthly  groves,  no  shady  bow’rs 
Produce  such  leaves,  such  fhiit  such  flow’rs. 
♦Sweet  are  the  nails,  and  sweet  the  wood, 

’ That  bears  a weight,  so  sweet  so  good. 

HYMN. 

SING,  O my  tongue,  devoutly  sing 
The  glorious  laurels  of  our  King: 

Sing  the  triumphant  victory 
Gain’d  on  the  cross  erected  high ; 

Where  man’s  Redeemer  yields  his  breath, 

And,  dying,  conquers  hell  and  death. 

O &thful  cross,  &c.  is  repeated  to*. 

With  pity  our  Creator  saw 
His  noblest  work  transgress  his  law. 

When  our  first  parents  rashly  ate 
The  fatal  tree’s  forbidden  meat ; 

He  then  resolv’d  the  cross’s  wood 
Should  make  that  tree’s  sad  damage  good. 

Sweet  are  the  nails,  &c.yh)m*. 

By  this  wise  method  God  design’d 
From  sin  and  death  to  save  mankind ; 

Superior  art  with  love  combines. 

And  arts  of  Satan  countermines : 

And  where  the  traitor  gave  the  wound. 

There  healing  remedies  are  found. 

O fiiithfiil  cross,  &c.  to*. 

When  the  full  time  decreed  above 
Was  come  to  shew  this  work  of  love, 

Th’  Eternal  Father  sends  bis  Sdn, 

The  world’s  Cr^tor  from  his  throne ! 

Who  on  our  earth,  this  vale  of  tears, 

Cloth’d  with  a virgin’s  flesh  appears. 

Sweet  are  the  nails,  &c.  from*. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


296 


GOOD  FRtDAl. 


Thus  God  made  man,  an  in^t  lies, 
And  in  the  manger  weeping  cries ; . 

His  sacred  limbs  by  Mary  bound. 

The  poorest  tatter’d  rags  surround ; 

And  God’s  incarnate  feet  and  hands 
Are  closely  hound  with  swathing  hands. 
O &thful  cross,  &c.  to*. 

Full  thirty  years  were  fully  spent 
In  this  our  mortal  banishment ; 

And  then  the  Son  of  Man  decreed 
For  the  lost  sons  of  men  to  bleed; 

And  on  the  cross  a victim  laid, 

The  solemn  expiation  made. 

Sweet  are  the  nails,  &c.  from*. 

Gall  was  his  drink ; his  flesh  they  tear 
With  thorns  and  nails;  a cruel  spe6u* 
Pierces  his  side,  from  whence  a flood 
Streams  forth,  of  water  mix'd  with  blood ; 
With  what  a tide  are  wash’d  again 
The  sinful  earth,  the  stars  the  main ! 

O faithful  cross,  &c.  to*. 

Bend  tow’ring  tree,  thy  branches  bend. 
Thy  native  stubbornness  suspend ; 

Let  not  stiflT  nature  use  its  force. 

To  weaker  saps  have  now  recourse ; 

With  softest  arms  receive  thy  load. 

And  gently  bear  our  dying  God. 

Sweet  are  ihe  nails,  &c.  from*. 

On  thee  alone  the  Lamb  was  slain 
That  reconcil’d  the  world  again ; 

And  when  on  raging  seas  was  tost 
The  shipwreck’d  world  and  mankind  lost, 
Besprinkled  with  his  sacred  gore. 

Thou  safely  brought  them  to  the  shore 
O faithful  cross,  &c.  to*. 

All  glory  to  the  sacred  Three, 

One  undivided  Deity : 


Digitized  by  Google 


MASS  OF  THE  FEESANCTIFIED. 


297 


To  Father  Holy  Ghost  and  Son, 

Be  equal  praise  and  homage  done : 

Let  the  Whole  universe  proclaim 
Of  One  and  Three  the  glorious  name.  ^^men. 
Sweet  are  the  nails,  &c.  from** 


Towards  the  end  of  the  Adoration,  &c.  the  Candles 
on  the  Mar  are  lighted^  and  the  Cross  being  placed 
thereon^  the  Priest,  with  his  Attendants,  go  to  fetch 
the  Presanctified  Hostj^m  the  place  where  it  was 
yesterday  deposited.  Whilst  the  Procession  is  re- 
turning the  following  Hymn  is  svn^, 

T^XILLA  regis  pro-  Electa  digno  stipite 
V deunt,  Tam  sancta  membra  tan- 

Fulgit  Crucis  mysterium;  gere ! 

Qua  vita  mortem  pertu-  B^ta,  cujus  brachiis 


lit, 

Et  morte  vitam  protulit 
Qu8b  ^ vulnerata  lanceae 
Mucrone  diro,  criminum 
Ut  nos  laveret  sordibus. 
Manavit  unda  et  sanguine. 
Impleta  sunt,  quae  con- 
cinit . 

David  fideli  carmine, 
Dicendo  nationibus : 
Recavit  a ligno  Deus. 
Arbor  decora  et  fulgi- 
da. 

Ornata  regis  purpura ! 


Pretium  pependit  saeculi, 
Statera  facta  corporis, 
Tulitque  prasdam  tartari 
O crux,  ave  spes  uni- 
ca 

Hoc  passionis  tenipore ! 
Piis  ^auTO  gratia^ 
Reisque  dele  crimina. 

Te  fons  salutis^  Trini- 
tas, 

Collaudet  omnis  Spiritus; 
Quibus  crucis  victoriam 
Largiris,  adde  praemium. 
„ . . Arnen, 

Having  placed  pie  Sacred  Host  on  the  Altar^  he 
censes  tt  on  his  knees,  and  lays  it  on  the  corporal : 
and  cfler  receiving  the  Chalice  with  wine  and  water 
from  the  Deacon,  he  censes  both  Host  and  Chalice, 


[AY  this  incense,  which  hath  been  blessed  by 
thee,  O Lord,  ascend  to  thee,  and  may  thy 
neercy  descend  upon  us. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


GOOD  FRIDAr. 


ikt  censing  of  the  Mar. 

Let  ray  prayer,  O Lord,  ascend  lil^e  in^fense  ir. 

thy  sight ; and  let  the  lifting  up  of  my  hands 
be  like  the  evening  sacrifice.  Place,  O Lord,  a 
guard  u]X)n  ray  raouth,  and  a gate  of  prudence  be- 
fore my  lips,  that  my  heart  may  not  wander  after 
words  of  malice,  to  seek  excuses  in  sin. 

On  returning  the  Censer  to  the  Deacon  he  says : 

May  the  Lord  kindle  in  us  the  fire  of  his  love, 
and  the  fiame  of  everlasting  charity. 

Then  he  washes  his  fingers  without  saying  any  thing ; 
afterwards  he  hows  down  at  the  middle  of  the  altar, 
and  s^s : 

Accept  us,  O Lord,  coming  to  thee  in  the 
spirit  of  humility,  and  with  a contrite  heart ; 
and  grant  that  the  sacrifice  of  this  day  may  be  so 
celebrated  by  us  as  to  be  well  pleasing  to  thee,  O 
Lord  our  God. 

Then  turning  about  towards  the  people^  he  says  :* 
Pr.  ^RETHREN^,  pray  that  this  my  sacrifice  ^d 
-D  yours  may  be  acceptable  to  God  the  Fatlier 
Almighty. 

R.  May  the  Lord  receive  this  sacrifice  from  thy 
hands  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  his  own  name,  to 
our  benefit,  and  that  of  all  his  holy  Church. 

Let  us  pray. 

Pr.  TNSTRUCTED  by  tny  saving  precepts,  and 
J-  following  thy  divine  directions,  we  presume 
to  say : Our  Father,  &c.  p.  xxix. 

R.  Deliver  us  from  all  evil. 

Having  answered  Amen  tn  silence,  he  then  says  aloud: 

Deliver  us,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  &c.  as  in 
p.  xl. 

Having  elevated  the  Sacred  Host,  and  divided  it 
into  three  parts,  he  puts  one  of  them  into  the  Chalice 
saying: 

Let  not  the  participation  of  thy  body,  O Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  which  I,  though  unworthy,  pro 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


HOLT  SATURHAT. 


m 


surae  to  receive,  turn  to  my  judgment  and  con- 
demnatio a ; but  let  it,  through  thy  mercy,  become 
a safe-guard  and  remedy  both  to  soul  and  body: 
who  with  Grod  the  Father,  in  unity  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  livest  and  reignest,  one  God,  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

Taking  up  the  Sacred  Host  on  the  Paten,  he  says : 

IWIIjLi  receive  the  bread  of  heaven,  and  call  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Then  he  strikes  his  hrecLsty  repeating  thrice : 

Lord,  I am  not  worthy  thou  shouldst  enter  under 
my  roof ; speak  therefore  but  the  word,  and  my 
soul  shall  be  healed. 

Wien  he  receives  the  Sacred  Host,  he  says : 

May  the  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  preserve 
my  soul  to  everlasting  life.  Amen. 

Having  received  the  Chalice,  and  taken  the  Ablution, 
bowing  doton,  he  says : 

#^>RANT,  O Lord,  that  what  we  have  taken  with 
VX  our  mouths,  we  may  receive  with  a pure  heart ; 
that  as  we  now  receive  it  in  this  mortal  life,  it  may 
procure  us  that  which  is  eternal. 

VESPERS. 

Anthems  and  Psalms,  as  yesterdcy,  p,  275.  except 
the  Ant.  At  the  Magnim»t. 

Ant.  Cum  cwcepisset  acetum  dixit ; consummatum 
est : et  inclinato  capite,  emisit  spiritum. 

V.  Christus  factus  est  pro  nobis  obediens  usque  ad 
mortem,  mortem  autem  crucis. 

Our  Father  being  said  in  secret,  the  office  concludes 
with  the  Ps.  Miserere,  p.  279,  and  the  Prayer  Res- 
pice, p.  270. 


HOLY  SATURDAY. 

IN  the  first  ages  of  the  Church  there  was  no  Mass 
celebrated  either  on  this  day  or  yesterday.  The 
faithful  sitenOy  adored  Jesus  Christ  in  the  sepulchre  till 
towards  evening,  when  they  assembled  in  the  Church, 


900  OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS 

and  occupied  themselves  in  praying,  reading  lessons 
from  the  holy  Scriptures,  singing  psalms,  baptising  and 
confirming  catechumens,  &c.  <S^.  until  about  midmght; 
when  the  Mass  of  the  Resurrection  began.  Wherefore 
in  order  to  perpetuate  the  remembrance  of  the  fervent 
piety  of  her  first  children,  the  Church  still  retains  the 
word  niglU  in  the  Office  of  this  day. 

The  BLESSING  of  the  FIRK 
The  Lord  be  with  you.  R,  And  with  thy  spirit. 
Let  us  pray.  Deus^  qui. 

OGOD,  who  by  thy  only  Son,  the  chief  corner- 
stone of  thy  Church,  hast  bestowed  on  the 
faithful  the  fire  of  thy  divine  love : bless  4*  this  new 
fire  produced  from  a flint  for  our  use:  and  gnmt 
that  during  this  paschal  solemnity,  we  may  be  so 
inflamed  with  heavenly  desires,  that  with  purity  of 
mind,  we  may  come  to  those  festivals,  where  we 
may  enj(w  a light  which  will  never  end.  Thro’  the 
same.  it.  Amen. 

Let  us  pray.  Domine^  Deus. 

0LORD  God,  Almighty  Father,  never-failing 
light,  who  art  the  Creator  of  all  the  lights; 
bless  + this  light,  which  hath  been  before  blessed 
and  sanctified  by  thee,  who  hast  enlightened  the 
whole  world ; that  we  may  be  inflamed  by  that  same 
light,  and  enlightened  by  the  fire  of  thy  brightness : 
and  as  thou  didst  enlighten  Moses  when  he  went 
out  of  Egypt,  so  enlighten  our  hearts  and  sens^ 
that  we  may  obtain  that  light  and  life  which  will 
have  no  end.  Thro’  Christ  our  Lord.  R.  Amen. 
Let  us  pray.  Domine  sancte. 

0HOLY  Lord,  Almighty  Father,  Eternal  God, 
vouchsafe  to  assist  us,  while  we  bless  this  fire 
m thy  name,  and  in  that  of  thy  only  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  our  Lord  and  God,  and  the  Holy  Ghost: 
assist  us  against  the  fiery  darts  of  the  enemy,  and 
enlighten  us  with  thy  heavenly  grace.  Who  livest 
and  reignest  with  the  same,  &c.  R.  Amen. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


on  HOLY  SATURDAY. 


901 


The  BLESSING  of  the  Jive  Grains  of  INCENSE. 

PLENTILULLY  ^ur  forth,  we  lieseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  thy  blessing  on  this  incense 
and  kindle,  O invisible  regenerator,  the  brightness 
of  this  night;  that  not  only  the  sacrifice  which  is 
offered  this  night  may  shine  by  the  sacred  mixture  of 
thy  light;  but  also,  that  into  whatever  place  any 
thing  sanctified  by  these  mystical  prayers  shall  be 
carried,  there  by  the  power  of  thy  majesty,  all  the 
malicious  artifices  of  the  devil  may  be  defeated 
Thro’  Christ  our  Lord.  iJ.  Amen, 

After  an  Acolyte  has  pul  some  of  the  blessed  Fire  inte 
the  Censer,  the  Priest  adds  incense  saving : “ Maj 
thou  be  blessed  4*  by  him,  in  whose  honour  thou 
art  to  be  burnt.”  Here  he  sprinkles  the  Grains  oj 
Incense  and  the  Fire  thrice  saying : “ Sprinkle 
me,  &c.”  p.  xiiL  Then  having  fumed  them  thrice 
with  Incense,  he  takes  the  Cane  tviih  the  three 
Candles  to  the  entrance  of  the  Church,  where  one 
is  lighted  by  an  Acolyte  with  a candle  from  the  new 
fre,  whilst  the  Deacon  sings  alone:  “Behold  the 
light  of  Christ,”  to  whichy  all  kneelings  add: 
Thanks  be  to  God.” 

The  same  is  repeated  at  lighting  the  second  in  the 
middle  of  the  Church,  and  the  third  at  the  foot  of 
the  altar ; after  which  the  Deacon  says : “ Pray, 
Sir,  give  me  your  blessing.”  To  which  the  Priest 
replies : “ May  the  Lord  be  in  your  heart  and 
lips,  that  you  may  worthily  and  fitly  proclaim  his 
Paschal  praise : in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son  -R*  AvMn, 

During  the  BLESSING  of  the  PASCHAL  CAN 
DLE,  all  stofid  up, 

Let  now  the  heavenly  troop  of  angels  rejoice 
let  these  divine  mysteries  be  joyfully  celebrated : 
and  let  the  heavenly  trumpet  publish  the  victory  of 
lur  groat  King,  and  let  the  earth  also  triumph,  be- 
lig  beautified  with  such  resplendent  beams ; and  let 
C c 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


303 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS. 


it  see  the  darkness  which  overspread  the  whok 
world  chased  a^vay  by  the  splendor  of  our  Etemal 
King.  Let  our  Mother  the  Church  also  rejoice,  be- 
ing adorned  by  the  rays  of  so  ^eat  a light;  and  let 
this  temple  echo  with  the  joyful  acclamations  of  all 
the  people.  And  therefore  I beseech  you,  dear 
brethren,  who  behold  the  wonderful  brightness  of 
this  holy  light,  to  join  with  me  in  invoking  the  mercy 
of  Almighty  Grod  ; that  he  who  hath,  been  pleased, 
^vithout  any  merit  on  my  side,  to  admit  me  into 
the  number  of  his  Levites,  may  by  the  effusion  of 
light  upon  me,  enable  me  to  go  through  with  the 
encomium  of  this  taper.  Through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son,  who  with  him  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
liveth  and  reigneth  one  God  world  without  end. 
[L  Amen, 

V,  The  Lord  be  with  you.  R,  And  with  thy 
spirit.  V,  Raise  up  your  heai*ts  on  high.  R,  We 
have  them  raised  up  to  the  Lord.  V,  Let  us  give 
thanks  to  the  Lord  our  God.  R.  It  is  meet  and 
just. 

IT  is  truly  meet  and  just  to  proclaim  with  all  the 
affection  of  heart  and  soul,  and  sound  of  voice, 
the  invisible  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  and  his 
only  Son  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : who  paid  for  us  to 
his  eternal  Father  the  debt  of  Adam;  and,  by  his 
sacred  blood,  cancelled  the  guilt  of  the  original  of- 
fence. For  this  is  the  Paschal  solemnity,  in  which 
the  true  Lamb  was  slain,  by  whose  blood  the  doors 
of  the  faithful  are  consecrated.  This  is  the  night,  in 
which  thou  formerly  didst  bring  forth  our  forefathers, 
the  children  of  Israel,  out  of  Egjmt,  leading  them 
dry-foot  through  the  Red-Sea.  This  also  is  that 
night  which  dissipated  the  darkness  of  sin  by  the 
light  of  a pillar  of  fire.  This  is  the  night,  which, 
withdrawing  all  those  who,  through  the  whole  world, 
believe  in  Christ,  from  the  vices  of  the  world,  and 
the  darkness  of  sin,  restores  them  to  grace,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  HOLT  SATURDAY. 


303 


gives  tliem  a fellowship  with  the  sain  is.  This  is 
die  Dight  in  which  Christ  broke  the  chains  of  death, 
and  ascended  victorious  from  the  grave.  For  it 
would  have  availed  us  nothing  to  have  been  born, 
unless  we  had  also  the  advantage  of  being  redeemed. 
O the  wonders  of  thy  mercy  towards  us!  O the 
inestimable  excess  of  thy  love.  Thou  didst  deliver 
up  thy  Son  to  redeem  a slave ! O truly  necessary 
sin  of  Adam,  which  hath  been  blotted  out  by  the 
death  of  Christ!  O happy  fault,  which  deserved 
such  and  so  CTeat  a Redeemer!  O truly  blessed 
night,  which  alone  wast  privileged  to  know  the  hour 
and  moment  when  Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead ! 
This  is  the  night  of  which  it  is  written : “ And  the 
night  shall  be  as  light  as  day : and  the  night  shineth 
upon  me  in  my  pleasures.”  The  sacredness  there- 
fore of  this  night  puts  crimes  to  flight,  washes  away 
sin,  and  restores  innocence  to  the  fallen,  and  joy  to 
those  in  sorrow.  It  banishes  enmities,  produces 
concord,  and  makes  potentates  bow. 

Here  the  Deacon  fixes  the  five  Grains  of  Incense  in 
the  Cajietle  in  the  form  of  a Cross^  and  then  goes  on : 

Receive,  therefore,  O Holy  Father,  on  this  sa- 
cred night,  the  evening  sacrifice  of  this  incense, 
which  thy  holy  Church,  by  the  bands  of  her  minis- 
ters, presents  to  thee  in  the  solemn  oblation  of  this 
wax  candle,  made  out  of  the  labour  of  bees.  But 
now  we  know  the  meaning  of  the  encomiums  of  this 
taper  lighted  from  this  sparkling  fire  to  the  honour  of 
God.  (Here  he  lights  the  Paschov  Candle,)  Which 
fire,  though  now  divided,  suffers  no  loss  from  the 
communication  of  its  light,  whilst  it  feeds  on  the 
melted  wax  produced  by  the  bee  to  make  this  taper. 
(Here  the  lamps  are  lighted.)  O truly  blessed  night, 
which  plundered  the  Egyptians,  and  enriched  tlie 
Hebrews!  O night,  in  which  heaven  is  united  to 
earth,  and  God  to  man ! We  beseech  thee,  there 
fore,  O Lord,  that  this  taper,  consecrated  to  the 
Cc2 

y Google 


304 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS 


honour  of  thy  name,  may  continue  burning  to  dissi 
pate  the  dai*lmess  of  this  night ; and  beii^  accepted 
by  thee  as  a sweet  odour,  it  may  be  joined  to  the 
lights  of  heaven.  Let  the  morning  star  find  it  burn- 
ing : that  morning  stiu*,  1 mean,  which  never  sets ; 
who,  returning  from  the  grave,  darted  forth  his  be- 
nign rays  upon  mankind.  We  beseech  thee,  there- 
fore, O Lord,  to  grant  us  peace  during  this  Paschal 
solemnity,  and  with  thine  unintemipted  protection 
to  rule,  govern,  and  preserve  us  thy  servants,  and 
all  the  clergy  and  devout  laity;  together  with  our 
holy  father  Pope  N.  and  our  Bishop  N.  Look  down 
also  on  our  pious  King  1^.  and  since  thou  knowest 
O God,  the  desires  of  his  heart,  grant,  by  the  inefifa- 
ble  gi*ace  of  thy  goodness  and  mercy,  that  he  may 
enjoy  with  all  his  people,  an  uninterrupted  peace 
and  heavenly  victory.  Thro’.  R.  Amen* 

Then  are  read  the  Lessons  caUed  Prophecies  for  the 
Instruction  of  the  Catechumens. 

I.  PROPHECY.  Gen.  i.  ii. — In  tlie  beginning 
God  created  heaven  and  earth.  And  the  earth  was 
void  and  empty,  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of 
the  deep ; and  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  over  the 
watei’s.  And  God  said : be  light  made.  And  light 
was  made.  And  God  saw  die  light  that  it  was 
good : and  he  divided  the  hght  from  the  darkness. 
And  he  called  the  light  day,  and  the  darkness  night ; 
and  there  was  evening  and  morning  one  day.  And 
God  said : Let  there  be  a firmament  made  amidst 
the  waters:  and  let  it  divide  the  waters  from  the 
waters.  And  God  made  a firmament,  and  divided 
the  waters  that  were  under  the  firmament  from  those 
that  were  above  the  firmament.  And  it  \vas  so. 
And  God  called  the  firmament.  Heaven;  and  the 
evening  and  morning  were  the  second  day.  Gkid 
also  said : Let  the  waters  that  are  under  the  heaven 
lie  gathered  together  into  oni  place:  and  let  the 
dry  land  appear.  And  it  was  «o  done.  And  God 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


ON  HOLY  SATURDAY. 


305 


called  the  dry  land  Earth : and  the  gathering  t)ge- 
tlier  of  the  waters,  he  called  Seas.  And  Grod  saw 
that  it  was  good.  And  he  said : let  the  earth  bring 
forth  the  green  herb,  and  such  as  may  seed,  and  the 
fi-uit  tree  yielding  fruit  after  its  kind,  which  may 
have  seed  in  itself  upon  the  earth.  And  it  was  so 
done.  And  the  earth  brought  forth  the  green  herb, 
and  such  as  yieldeth  seed  according  to  its  kind,  and 
the  tree  that  beareth  fruit,  having  seed  each  one  ac- 
cording to  its  kind.  And  God  saw  that  it  was  good. 
And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  third 
day.  And  God  said : Let  there  be  lights  made  in 
the  firmament  of  heaven,  to  divide  the  day  and  the 
night,  and  let  them  be  for  signs,  and  for  seasons, 
and  for  days  and  years ; to  shine  in  the  firmament 
of  heaven,  and  to  give  light  upon  the  earth.  And 
it  was  so  done.  And  God  made  two  ^eat  lights ; a 
greater  light  to  nile  the  day,  and  a lesser  light  to 
rule  the  night;  and  stars.  And  he  set  them  in  the 
firmament  of  heaven,  to  shine  upon  the  earth.  And 
to  rule  the  day  and  the  night,  and  to  divide  the 
light  and  the  darkness.  And  God  saw  that  it  was 
good.  And  the  evening  and  morning  were  the 
fourth  day.  God  also  said : Let  the  watei*s  bring 
forth  the  creeping  creature  having  life,  and  the  fowl 
that  may  fly  over  the  earth  under  the  firmament  of 
heaven.  And  God  created  the  great  whales,  and 
every  living  and  moving  creature,  which  the  waters 
brought  forth,  according  to  their  kinds,  and  eveiy 
winged  fowl  according  to  its  kind.  And  God  saw 
that  it  was  good.  And  he  blessed  them,  saying; 
Increase  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  waters  of  the  sea ; 
and  let  the  birds  be  multiplied  upon  the  earth. 
And  the  evening  and  morning  were  the  fifth  day 
And  God  said : Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living 
creature  in  its  kind,  cattle,  and  creeping  things,  and 
beasts  of  the  earth  according  to  their  kinds ; and  it 
was  so  done.  And  God  made  the  beasts  of  the 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS. 


earth  according  to  their  kinds,  and  cattle,  and  every 
thing  that  creepeth  on  the  earth  after  its  kind.  And 
God  saw  that  it  was  good.  And  he  said : Let  us 
make  man  to  our  ima^  and  likeness,  and  let  him 
have  4pminion  over  tne  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the 
fowls  of  the  air,  and  the  beasts,  and  the  whole  earth, 
and  every  creeping  creature  that  moveth  upon  the 
earth.  And  God  created  man  to  his  own  image : to 
the  image  of  God  he  created  him : male  and  female 
he  created  them.  And  God  blessed  them,  saying: 
Increase  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  earth,  and  su^ 
due  it,  and  rule  over  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the 
fowls  of  the  air,  and  all  living  creatures  that  move 
upon  the  earth.  And  God  said:  Behold  I have 
given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed  upon  the  earth, 
and  all  trees  that  have  in  themselves  seed  of  their 
own  kind,  to  be  your  meat : and  to  all  beasts  of  the 
earth,  and  to  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  all  that 
move  upon  the  earth,  and  wherein  there  is  life,  that 
you  may  have  to  feed  upon.  And  it  was  so  done. 
And  God  saw  all  the  things  that  he  had  made,  and 
they  were  very  good.  And  the  evening  and  morning 
were  the  sixth  day.  (Chap  ii.)  So  the  heavens  and 
earth  were  finished,  and  all  the  furniture  of  them. 
And  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work  which 
he  had  made : and  he  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from 
all  his  work  which  he  had  done. 

Pr,  Let  us  pray.  Deac,  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Subd,  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Deus,  cm. — O God,  who  didst  wonder- 
fully create  man,  ana  redeem  him  by  a still  greater 
wonder:  grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  such  strength 
of  mind  and  reason  against  all  the  allurements  of 
sin,  that  we  may  deserve  to  obtain  eternal  joys. 
Thro*.  R,  Amen, 

IT.  PROPHECY.  Gen,  v.  31.  vi.  viL  viii.  18. 
— ^And  Noe,  when  he  was  five  hundred  years  old, 
begot  Sem,  Cham,  and  Japheth.  (Chap,  vi.)  And 


Dig  ed  by  Google 


ON  HOLT  SATURDAY. 


307 


after  that  men  began  to  be  multiplied  upon  tin; 
earth,  and  daughters  were  bom  to  them.  The  sons 
of  Grod  seeing  the  daughters  of  men,  that  they  were 
fair,  look  to  themselves  wives  of  all,  which  they 
chose.  And  God  said ; My  spirit  shall  not  remain 
in  man  forever,  because  he  is  flesh:  and  his  days 
shall  be  one  hundred  and  twenty  years.  Now  giants 
were  upon  the  earth  in  those  days.  For  after  tl^e 
sons  of  God  went  into  the  daughters  of  men,  and 
they  brought  forth  children,  these  are  the  mighty 
men  of  old,  men  of  renown.  And  God  seeing  that 
the  wickedness  of  men  was  great  on  the  earth,  and 
that  all  the  thought  of  their  heart  was  bent  upon 
evil  at  all  times,  it  repented  him  that  he  had  made 
man  on  the  earth.  And  being  touched  inwardly 
with  sorrow  of  heart,  he  said : 1 will  destroy  man, 
whom  I have  created,  from  the  face  .'f  the  earth, 
from  man  even  to  beasts,  from  the  creeping  thing 
even  to  the  fowls  of  the  air,  for  it  repenteth  me  that 
1 have  made  them.  But  Noe  found  grace  before  the 
Lord.  These  are  the  generations  of  Noe : Noe  was 
a just  and  perfect  man  in  his  generation,  he  walked 
with  God.  And  he  begot  three  sons,  Sem,  Cham, 
and  japheth.  And  the  earth  was  corrupted  before 
God,  and  was  filled  with  iniquity.  And  when  God 
had  seen  that  the  earth  was  corrupted  (for  all  flesh 
had  corrupted  its  way  upon  the  earth)  he  said  to 
Noe:  the  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me,  and 
the  earth  is  filled  with  iniquity  through  them,  and  I 
will  destroy  them  with  the  earth.  Make  thee  an 
ark  of  timter  planks:  thou  shaft  make  little  rooms 
in  the  ark,  and  thou  shaft  pitch  it  within  and  with- 
out. And  thus  shaft  thou  make  it.  The  length  of 
the  ark  shall  be  three  hundred  cubits : the  breadth 
of  it  fifty  cubits,  and  the  height  of  it  thirty  cubits. 
Thou  shaft  make  a window  in  the  ark,  and  in  a 
cubit  shaft  thou  finish  the  top  of  it : and  the  door 
of  the  ark  shaft  thou  set  in  the  side:  with  lower, 


ed  by  Google 


308 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS. 


middle  chambers,  and  thii*d  stories  sbalt  thou  make 
it.  Behold  I will  bring  the  waters  of  a gr^l  flood 
upon  the  eartli,  to  destroy  all  flesh,  wherein  is  the 
breath  of  life,  under  heaven.  All  things  that  are  in 
the  earth  shall  be  consumed.  And  I will  establish 
my  covenant  with  thee : And  thou  shalt  enter  into 
the  ark,  thou  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and  the 
wives  of  thy  sons  with  tliee.  And  of  every  living 
creature  of  all  flesh,  thou  shalt  bring  two  of  a sort 
into  the  ark,  that  they  may  live  with  thee ; of  the 
male  sex,  and  tlie  female.  Of  fowls  according  to 
their  kind,  and  of  beasts  in  their  kind,  and  of  every 
tiling  that  creepeth  on  the  earth  according  to  its 
kind : two  of  every  sort  shall  go  in  with  thee,  that 
they  may  live.  Thou  shalt  take  unto  thee  of  all 
food,  that  may  be  eaten,  and  thou  sbalt  lay  it  up 
with  thee : and  it  shall  be  food  for  thee  and  them. 
And  Noe  did  all  things  which  God  commanded  him 
(Chap,  vii.)  And  he  was  six  hundred  years  old, 
when  the  waters  of  the  flood  overflowed  the  earth. 
All  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up, 
and  the  flood-gates  of  heaven  were  opened.  And 
the  rain  fell  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty 
nights.  In  the  self-same  day  Noe,  and  Sem,  and 
Cham,  and  Japbeth,  his  sons:  his  wife,  and  the 
three  wives  of  his  sons  with  them,  went  into  the  ark : 
they  and  eveiy  beast  according  to  its  kind,  and  all 
the  cattle  in  their  kind,  and  every  thing  that  movet h 
upon  the  earth  according  to  its  kind,  and  every  fowl 
according  to  its  kind,  ail  birds,  and  all  that  fly 
And  the  ai'k  was  carried  upon  the  waters.  Ana 
the  waters  prevailed  beyond  measure  upon  the  earth : 
and  all  the  high  mountains  under  die  whole  heaven 
was  covered.  The  water  was  fifteen  cubits  highei 
than  the  mountains,  which  it  covered.  And  all  flesh 
was  destroyed  that  moved  upon  the  earth,  both  of 
fowl,  and  of  cattle,  and  of  beasts,  and  of  all  creeping 
things  that  creep  upon  the  earth:  and  Noe  only 


oy  Google 


0!l  HOLT  SATURDAY. 


remained,  and  they  that  were  with  him  in  the  ark. 
And  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth  a hundred 
and  fifty  days.  (Chap,  viii.)  And  God  remember- 
ed Noe,  and  all  the  living  creatures,  and  all  the 
cattle  which  were  with  him  in  the  ark,  and  brought 
a wind  upon  the  earth,  and  the  waters  were  abated. 
The  fountains  also  of  the  deep,  and  the  flood-gates 
of  heaven  were  shut  up,  and  the  rain  from  heaven 
was  restrained.  And  the  waters  returned  fi*om  off 
the  earth,  going  and  coming:  and  they  began  to  be 
abated  after  a hundred  and  fifty  days.  And  after 
that  forty  days  were  passed,  Noe  opening  the  win- 
dow of  the  ark  which  he  had  made,  sent  forth  a 
raven;  which  went  forth,  and  did  not  return  till 
the  waters  were  dried  upon  the  earth.  He  sent 
forth  also  a dove  after  him,  to  see  if  the  waters  had 
now  ceased  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  But  she  not 
finding  where  her  foot  might  rest,  returned  to  him 
into  the  ark : for  the  waters  were  upon  the  whole 
earth : and  he  put  forth  bis  hand,  and  caught  her, 
and  brought  her  into  the  ark.  And  having  waited 
yet  seven  other  days,  he  again  sent  forth  the  dove 
out  of  the  ark.  And  she  came  to  him  in  the  evening, 
carrying  a bough  of  an  olive-tree,  with  green  leaves, 
in  her  mouth,  Noe  therefore  understood  that  the 
waters  were  ceased  upon  the  earth.  And  he  stayed 
yet  other  seven  days ; and  he  sent  forth  the  dove, 
which  returned  not  any  more  unto  him.  And  God 
spoke  to  Noe,  saying ; Go  out  of  the  ark,  thou  and 
thy  wife,  thy  sons,  and  the  wives  of  thy  sons  with 
thee.  All  living  things  that  are  with  thee  of  all  flesh, 
as  well  in  fowls,  as  in  beasts,  and  all  creeping  things 
that  creep  upon  the  earth,  bring  out  with  thee,  and 
go  ye  upon  the  earth : increase  and  multiply  upon  it. 
So  Noe  went  out,  he  and  his  sons,  his  wife,  and  the 
wives  of  his  sons  with  him:  and  all  living  thwigs, 
and  cattle,  and  creeping  things  that  creep  upoi  the 
earth,  accordiLg  to  their  kinds,  went  out  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


310 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS. 


ark.  And  Noe  built  au  altar  unto  the  Lord : and 
taking  of  all  cattle  and  fowls  that  were  clean,  offered 
holocausts  upon  the  altar.  And  the  Lord  smelled  a 
sweet  savour. 

Pr.  I^t  us  pray.  />eac.  Let  us  kneel  down. 

SvJbd,  Stand  up  a^icu 

PRAYER.  DtiLs  incommxdabdis. — O God,  whose 
power  is  unchangeable,  and  whose  light  never  fail- 
eth,  mercifully  regard  the  wonderful  sacrament  of 
thy  whole  Church,  and  by  an  effect  of  thy  perpetual 
providence,  accomplish  in  peace  the  work  of  human 
salvation : and  let  the  whole  world  experience  and 
see,  that  what  was  now  fallen,  is  raised  up  again : 
vVhat  was  old,  is  become  new ; and  that  all  things 
are  again  settled  by  him  who  gave  them  their  first 
\)eing,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son.  Who  liveth. 
R.  Amen, 

III.  PROPHECY.  Gen.  xxii. — In  those  days: 
God  tempted  Abrahaim,  and  said  to  him:  Abraham, 
Abraham.  Aud  he  answered:  Here  I am.  He  said 
to  him : Take  tliy  only  begotten  Son  Isaac,  whom 
thou  lovest,  and  go  into  the  land  of  vision : and  there 
thou  shall  offer  him  for  an  holocaust  upon  one  of 
the  mountains  which  I will  shew  thee.  So  Abraham 
rising  up  in  the  night,  saddled  his  ass ; and  took  with 
him  two  young  men,  and  Isaac  his  son ; and  when 
he  had  cut  wood  for  the  holocaust,  he  went  his  way 
to  the  place  which  God  had  commanded  him.  And 
on  the  third  day,  lifling  up  his  eyes,  he  saw  the 
place  afar  off.  And  he  said  to  his  young  men : Stay 
you  here  with  the  ass : I and  the  boy  will  go  with 
speed  as  far  as  yonder,  and  after  we  have  worship- 
ped, will  return  to  you.  And  he  took  the  wood  for 
the  holocaust,  and  laid  it  upon  Isaac  his  son ; and 
he  himself  carried  in  his  hands  fire  and  a sword. 
And  as  they  two  went  on  together,  Isaac  said  to  his 
father : My  father.  And  he  answered : What  wilt 
thou,  son:.  Behold,  saith  he,  fire  and  wood' 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  HOLY  SATURDAY.  31  i 

where  is  the  victim  fo;*  the  holocaust?  And  Abra- 
ham said : God  will  provide  himself  a victim  for  a 
holocaust,  my  son.  So  they  went  on  together: 
and  they  came  to  the  place  which  God  had  shewed 
him,  where  he  built  an  altar,  and  laid  the  wood  in 
order  upon  it : and  when  he  had  bound  [saac,  his 
son,  he  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the  pile  of 
wood.  And  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  the 
sword  to  sacrifice  his  son.  And  behold  an  angel  of 
the  Lord  from  heaven  called  to  him,  saying:  Abra- 
ham, Abraham.  And  he  answered:  Here  I am. 
And  he  said  to  him : Lay  not  thy  hand  upon  the 
boy,  neither  do  thou  any  thing  to  him:  now  1 
knpw  that  thou  fearest  God,  and  hast  not  spared 
thy  only  begotten  son  for  my  sake.  Abraham  lifted 
up  his  eyes,  and  saw  behind  his  back  a ram  amongst 
the  briers,  sticking  fast  by  the  horns,  which  he  took 
and  offered  for  a holocaust  instead  of  his  son.  And 
he  called  the  name  of-  that  place.  The  Lord  seem. 
Whereupon,  even  to  this  day,  it  is  said:  In  the 
mountain  the  Lord  will  see.  And  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  called  to  Abraham  a second  time  from  heaven, 
saying : By  my  own  self  have  I sworn,  saith  the 
Lord : because  thou  hast  done  this  thing,  and  hast 
not  spared  thy  only  begotten  son  for  my  sake:  1 
will  bless  thee,  and  I will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the 
stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  sand  that  is  by  the  sea 
shore : thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gates  of  their  ene- 
mies. Aud  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  tlie 
earth  be  blessed,  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice. 
Abraliam  returned  to  his  young  men,  and  they  went 
to  Bersabee  together,  and  he  dwelt  there. 

Pr,  Let  us  pray.  Deac,  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Svbd,  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Deus,  fidelium. — O God,  the  sovereign 
Father  of  the  faithful,  who  throughout  the  whole 
world  multipliest  the  children  of  the  promise  by  the 
grace  of  thy  adoption  and  makest  thy  servant  Abra- 


Digitized  by  Google 


312 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MAtt.S. 


ham,  according  to  thy  oath,  the  father  of  all  nations 
by  tiiis  paschal  sacrament;  grant  that  thy  people 
may  worthily  receive  the  grace  of  thy  vocation. 
Thro’.  JR.  Amen, 

IV.  PROPHECY.  Exod,  xiv.  24. — In  those  days  : 
It  came  to  pass  in  the  morning  watch,  and  behold 
the  Lord  looking  upon  the  Egyptian  army  through 
the  pillar  of  fire,  and  of  the  cloud,  slew  their  host : 
and  overthrew  the  wheels  of  the  chariots,  and 
they  were  carried  into  the  deep.  And  ine  Egyp- 
tians said:  Let  us  flee  from  Israel:  for  the  Lord 
fighteth  for  them  against  us.  And  the  Lord  said  to 
Moses : Stretch  forth  thine  hand  over  the  sea,  that 
the  waters  may  come  again  upon  the  E^ptians, 
upon  their  chariots  and  horsemen.  And  when  Mo- 
ses had  stretched  forth  his  hand  towards  die  sea, 
it  returned  at  the  first  break  of  d^  to  the  former 
place : and  as  the  Egyptians  were  fleeing  away,  the 
wa.ters  came  upon  them,  and  the  Lord  shut  them  up 
in  the  middle  of  the  waves.  And  the  waves  return- 
ed, and  covered  the  chariots  and  the  horsemen  of 
all  the  eu'my  of  Pharao,  who  had  come  into  the  sea 
after  them,  neither  did  there  so  much  as  one  of 
them  remain.  But  the  children  of  Israel  marched 
through  the  midst  of  the  sea  upon  dry  land  and  the 
waters  were  to  them  as  a wall  on  the  right  hand  and 
on  the  left : and  the  Lord  delivered  Israel  in  that 
day  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Egyptians.  And  they 
saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea-shore,  and  the 
mighty  hand  that  the  Lord  had  used  against  them : 
and  the  people  feared  the  Lord,  and  they  believed 
the  Lord,  and  Moses  his  servant.  Then  Moses  and 
the  ''hildren  of  Israel  sung  this  canticle  to  the  Ijord, 
and  said : 

TRACT.  Exod,  xv.-  Let  us  sing  to  the  Lord : for 
he  is  gloriously  magnified ; the  horse  and  the  rider 
he  hath  thrown  into  the  sea.  He  hath  been  my  help 
and  my  protector  and  Saviour.  V,  He  is  my  (Joa. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  HOLY  SATURDAY. 


313 


and  I will  glorify  him  ; the  God  of  my  father,  and  1 
will  exalt  him.  V,  He  is  the  Lord  that  desuoyeth 
wai*s : his  name  is  the  Lord. 

Pr.  Let  us  pray.  Deac.  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Subd.  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Deus  cujtts. — O God,  whose  ancient 
miracles  we  see  renewed  in  our  days : whilst,  by  the 
water  of  regeneration,  thou  performest,  for  the  sal- 
vation of  the  Gentile^  that  which  by  the  power  of 
thy  right  hand  thou  didst  for  tlie  deliverance  of  one 
|>eople  from  the  Egyptian  pei'secinion ; grant  that 
all  the  nations  of  the  world  may  become  the  children 
of  Abraham,  and  partake  of  the  dignity  of  the  peo- 
ple of  Israel.  Thro’.  iJ.  ^tnen, 

V.  PROPHECY.  Is,  liv.  Iv.— This  is  the  inheri- 
tance of  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  their  justice 
with  me,  saith  the  Lord.  All  you  that  thirst  come 
to  the  water : and  you  that  have  no  money,  make 
haste,  buy,  and  eat : come  ye,  buy  wine  and  milk 
without  money,  and  without  any  price.  Why  do 
you  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and 
vour  labour  for  that  which  doth  not  satisfy  you  ? 
ileal-ken  diligently  to  me,  and  eat  that  which  is 
good,  and  your  soul  shall  be  delighted  in  fatness. 
Incline  your  ear,  and  come  to  me : hear,  and  your 
soul  shall  live,  and  I will  make  an  everlasting  cove- 
nant with  you,  the  fkithflil  mercies  of  David.  Rehold 
I have  given  him  for  a witness  to  the  people,  for  a 
leader  and  a master  to  the  Gentiles.  Behold  thou 
shah  call  a nation,  which  thou  knewest  not;  and 
the  nations  that  knew  not  thee  shall  run  to  thee,  be- 
cause of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  for  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel,  for  he  hath  glorified  thee.  Seek  ye  the  Lord 
while  he  may  be  found  ; call  upon  him  while  he  is 
near.  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
unjust  man  his  thoughts,  and  let  him  return  to  the 
Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  on  him,  and  to  oui 
Dd 


Digitized  by  Google 


!I14  OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS. 

God : for  he  is  bountiful  to  forgive.  For  my  th ought? 
are  not  your  thoughts,  nor  your  ways  my  ways, 
saith  the  Lord.  For  as  the  heavens  are  exalted  above 
the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  exalted  above  your  waysi, 
and  my  thoughts  above  your  thoughts.  And  as  the 
rain  and  the  snow  come  down  fi*om  heaven  and  re- 
tm*n  no  more  thither,  but  soak  the  earth,  and  water 
it,  and  make  it  to  spring,  and  give  seed  to  the  sower, 
and  bread  to  the  eater : so  shall  my  word  be,  which 
shall  go  forth  from  my  mouth : it  shall  not  return 
to  me  void,  but  it  shaJl  do  whatever  I please,  and 
shall  prosper  in  the  things  for  which  1 sent  it,  saiih 
the  Lord  Mmighty, 

Pr,  Let  us  pray.  Deae»  Let  us  knee?  down. 
&ub(L  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Omnipotens, — O almigh^  and  eter- 
nal God,  multiply,  for  the  honour  of  thy  name, 
what  thou  didst  promise  to  the  faith  of  our  fore- 
fathers: and  increase,  by  thy  sacred  adoption,  the 
children  of  that  promise:  and  what  the  ancient 
saints  doubted  not  would  come  to  pass,  thy  church 
may  now  find  in  great  part  accomplished.  Thro’. 
R.  Amen, 

VI.  PROPHECY.  Baruch  iii.  9.— Hear,  O Israel, 
the  commandments  of  life:  give  ear,  that  thou 
inayest  learn  wisdom.  How  happeneth  it,  O Israel, 
that  thou  art  in  thy  enemies’  land  ? Thou  art  grown 
old  in  a strange  country,  thou  art  defiled  witli  the 
dead:  thou  art  counted  with  them  that  go  down 
into  hell.  Thou  hast  fordakeu  the  fountain  of  wis- 
dom : for  if  thou  hadst  walked  in  the  way  of  God, 
thou  surely  hadst  dwelt  in  peace  for  ever.  Learn 
where  is  wisdom,  where  is  sti*ength,  where  is  under- 
standing: that  thou  mayest  know  also  where  is 
length  of  days  and  life,  where  is  the  light  of  the 
eyes,  and  peace.  Who  hatli  found  out  her  place 
and  who  hath  gone  in  to  her  treasures?  Where  are 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  HOLY  SATURDAY. 


J15 


toe  princes  of  the  nations,  and  they  that  rule  , over 
the  beasts  that  are  upon  the  earth  ? That  take  their 
pastime  with  the  birds  of  the  air,  that  hoard  up 
silver  and  gold,  wherein  men  trust,  and  there  is  no 
end  of  their  getting  ? who  work  in  silver  and  are  so- 
licitous, and  their  works  are  unsearchable  ? They 
are  cut  off,  and  are  gone  down  to  hell,  and  others 
are  risen  up  in  their  place.  Young  men  have  seen 
tlie  light,  and  dwelt  upon  the  eaitli : but  the  way 
of  knowledge  they  have  not  known,  nor  have  they 
understood  the  paths  thereof^  neither  have  their 
children  received  it,  it  is  far  from  their  face.  It 
hath  not  been  heard  of  in  the  land  of  Chanaan,  nei- 
ther had  it  been  seen  in  Theman.  The  children 
of  Agar  also,  that  searoh  after  wisdom,  that  is  of 
the  earth,  the  merchants  of  Merrha,  and  of  The- 
man, and  the  tellei-s  of  fables,  and  searchers  of  pru- 
dence and  understanding:  but  the  way  of  wisdom 
they  have  not  known,  neitlier  have  they  remembered 
her  paths.  O Israel,  how  great  is  the  house  of  God, 
and  how  vast  is  the  place  of  his  possession ! It  is 
great  and  hath  no  end:  it  is  high  and  immense. 
There  were  the  giants,  those  renowned  men  that 
were  from  the  beginning,  of  great  stature,  expert  in 
war.  The  Lord  chose  not  them,  neither  did  they 
find  the  way  of  knowledge : therefore  did  they  perish. 
And  because  they  had  not  wisdom,  they  perished 
through  their  folly.  Who  hatli  gone  up  into  heaven, 
and  taken  her,  and  brought  her  down  from  the 
clouds  ? Who  hath  passed  over  the  sea,  and  found 
her,  and  brought  her  preferably  to  cliosen  gold? 
There  is  none  3iat  is  able  to  know  her  ways,  nor  that 
can  search  out  her  paths : But  he  that  knoweth  all 
things,  knoweth  her,  and  hath  found  her  out  with 
his  understanding:  he  that  prepared  the  earth  for- 
evermore, and  filled  it  with  cattle  and  four-footed 
beasts:  he  that  sendeth  forth  light,  and  it  goeth; 
and  hath  called  it,  and  it  obeyed  him  witli  trembling. 
Dd2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


316 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS. 


And  the  stars  have  given  light  in  their  watches,  and 
rejoiced  : they  were  called,  and  they  said : Here  we 
are : and  with  cheerfulness  they  have  shined  forth  to 
him  that  made  them.  This  is  our  God,  and  then? 
shall  no  other  be  accounted  of  in  comparison  of 
him.  He  found  out  all  the  ways  of  knowledge,  and 
gave  it  to  Jacob  his  servant,  and  to  Israel  his  belov- 
ed. Afterwards  he  was  seen  upon  earth,  and  con- 
versed with  men. 

Pr,  Let  us  pray.  , Deac.  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Suhd,  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Dciw,  quu — O God,  who  continually 
multipliest  thy  church  by  the  vocation  of  the  Gentiles : 
mercifully  gi*ant  thy  perpetual  protection  to  those 
whom  thou  washest  with  the  water  of  baptism. 
Thro’.  R.  Amen. 

VII.  PROPHECY.  Ezech.  xxxvii. — hi  those  days: 
The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me,  and  brought 
me  forth  in  the  spirit  of  the  Lord : and  set  me  down 
in  the  midst  of  a plain  that  was  full  of  bones.  And 
he  led  me  about  through  them  on  every  side : now 
they  were  very  many  upon  the  face  of  the  plain,  and 
they  were  exceeding  dry.  Ana  he  said  to  me: 
Son  of  man,  dost  thou  think  these  bones  shall  live  ? 
And  I answered  ; O Lord  God,  thou  knowest.  And 
he  said  to  me : Prophesy  conceniing  these  bones : 
and  say  to  them:  Ye  dry  bones,  hear  the  word  of 
the  Lord.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  these  bones : 
Behold,  I will  send  spirit  into  you,  and  you  shall 
live,  and  I will  lay  sinews  upon  you,  and  will  cause 
flesh  to  grow  over  you,  and  will  cover  you  with 
skin : and  I will  give  you  spirit,  and  you  shall  live, 
and  you  shall  know  that  I am  the  Lord.  And  I 
prophesied  as  he  had  commanded  me : and  as  I pro- 
phesied there  was  a noise,  and  behold  a commotion : 
and  the  bones  came  together,  each  one  to  its  joint. 
And  I saw,  and  behold  the  sinews  and  the  flesh 
came  up  upon  them : and  the  skin  w'as  stretched 


Digitized  by  Google 


OW  HOLT  SATURDAY. 


817 


out  over  them,  but  there  was  no  spirit  in  them 
And  he  said  to  me : Prophesy  to  the  spirit,  prophesy, 

0 Son  of  man,  and  say  to  the  spirit : Thus  saith  the 
Lord  God : Come,  spirit,  from  the  four  winds,  and 
blow  upon  these  slain,  and  let  them  live  again.  And 

1 prophesied  as  he  had  commanded  me:  and  the 
spirit  carne  into  them,  and  they  lived;  and  they 
stood  upon  their  feet,  an  exceeding  gre^  army. — 
And  he  said  to  me : Son  of  man,  all  these  bones  are 
the  bouse  of  Israel : they  say ; Our  bones  are  dried 
up,  and  our  hope  is  lost,  and  we  are  cut  off.  There- 
fore prophesy,  and  say  to  them  • Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God : Behold,  I will  open  your  graves,  and  will  bring 
vou  out  of  your  sepulchres,  O my  people ; and  wifi 
bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel.  And  you  shall 
know  that  I am  the  Lord,  when  I shall  have  opened 
your  sepulchres,  and  shall  have  brought  you  out  of 
your  graves,  O my  people,  and  shaB  have  put  my 
spirit  in  you,  and  you  shall  live,  and  I shall  make 
you  rest  upon  your  own  land,  saith  the  Lord  JU* 
mighty, 

Pr,  Let  us  pray.  Deac,  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Suod.  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  DeiLS,  qui  nos. — O God,  who  by  the 
scriptures  of  both  testaments  teachest  us  to  celebrate 
the  Paschal  sacrament : give  us  such  a sense  of  thy 
mercy,  that,  by  receiving  thy  present  fiivoura,  we 
may  have  a firm  hope  of  thy  future  blessings.  Thro’. 
R.  •dmen, 

VIII.  PROPHECY.  Is.  iv.— In  that  day  seven 
women  shall  take  hold  of  one  man,  saying:  We 
will  eat  our  own  bread,  and  wear  our  own  apparel : 
only  let  us  be  called  by  thy  name,  take  away  our  re- 
proach. In  that  day  the  bud  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
in  magnificence  and  glory,  and  the  fmit  of  the  earth 
shall  be  high,  and  a great  joy  to  them  that  have 
escaped  of  Israel.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that 
every  one  that  shall  be  left  in  Sion,  and  that  shall  re- 
D d3 


oy  Google 


318 


OFFICE  BEFORE  MAS». 


main  in  Jeruealcm,  shall  be  called  holy,  every  one 
that  is  written  in  life  in  Jerusalem.  If  the  Lonl 
shall  wash  away  the  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Sion, 
and  shall  wash  away  the  blood  of  Jenisalem  out  of 
the  midst  thereof,  by  the  spirit  of  judgment,  and  by 
the  spirit  of  burning.  And  the  Lord  will  create 
upon  every  place  of  mount  Sion,  and  where  he  is 
called  upon,  a cloud  by  day,  and  a smoke  and  the 
brightness  of  a fiaming  fire  in  the  night : for  over  all 
the  glory  shall  be  a protection.  And  there  shall  be 
a tabernacle  for  a shade  in  the  day  time  fi*om  the 
heat,  and  for  a security,  and  covert  from  the  whirl- 
wind, and  from  rain. 

TRACT.  Is.  V. — ^3fy  beloved  had  a vineyard  on 
a hill  in  a fruitful  place.  V.  He  fenced  it  in,  and 
digged  it  about,  and  planted  it  with  the  choicest 
vines,  and  built  a tower  in  the  midst  thereof 
V.  And  set  up  a wine  press  therein,  for  the  vineyard 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel. 

Pr.  Let  us  pray.  Deac.  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Subd.  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  by  the  mouths 
of  the  holy  prophets  liiust  declared,  that  thiough  the 
whole  extent  of  thy  empire  it  is  thou  that  sowest  the 
good  seed,  and  improvest  the  choicest  branches  that 
are  found  in  all  the  children  of  thy  church : grant 
to  thy  people,  who  are  called  by  the  names  of  vine- 
yai'ds  and  corn,  that  they  may  root  out  all  thorns 
and  briers,  and  bring  forth  good  fiuit  in  plenty. 
Thro’.  R.  Amen. 

IX.  PROPHECY.  Exod.  xi. — In  those  days. 
The  Lord  said  to  Moses  and  Aaron,  &c.  as  in  the 
II.  Lesson  of  the  Mass  of  the  presanctified,  p.  281 
Pr.  Let  us  pray.  Deac.  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Subd.  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Omnipotens. — O Almighty  and  Eter- 
nal-God, who  art  wonderful  in  the  performance  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


OH  &OLT.«ATURDAT. 


319 

&n  thy  works;  let  thy  servants  whom  thou  hast  re- 
deemed, understand,  that  the  creation  of  the  world 
in  the  beginning  was  not  a more  excellent  work, 
than  the  sacrificing  of  Christ  our  passo  ver  at  the  end 
of  the  worlfL  Who  with  thee,  &c.  R.  Amen. 

X,  PROPHECY.  Jonas  iii. — In  those  days  : The 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jonas,  &c.  as  in  live  Les- 
son on  Monday  in  Passkm  Wee^  p.  212. 

Pr.  Let  us  pray.  Deas.  Let  us  kneel  down. 

Subd.  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Deus^  quL — O God,  who  Las  united 
the  several  nations  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  profession 
of  thy  name : give  us  both  a will  and  a power  to 
obey  thy  commands : that  all  thy  people,  who  are 
called  to  eternity,  may  have  the  same  faith  in  their 
minds,  and  piety  in  their  actions.  Thro*.  R.  Amen. 

XL  PROPHECY.  DeuL  xxxL  22.— /n  those  days : 
Moses  wrote  a canticle,  and  taught  it  the  children 
of  IsraeL  And  the  Lord  commanded  Josue,  the 
son  of  Nun,  and  said : Take  courage,  and  be  val- 
iant: for  thou  shalt  bring  the  children  of  Israel  into 
tlie  land,  which  i have  promised,  and  1 will  be  with 
thee.  Therefore  after  Moses  had  wrote  the  words 
of  this  law  in  a volume,  and  finished  it:  he  com- 
«nanded  the  Levites,  who  carried  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord,  saying:  Take  this  book  and 
put  it  in  the  side  of  the  ark  of  tlie  covenant  of  the 
Lord  your  God:  that  it  may  be  there  for  a testi- 
nriony  against  thee.  For  1 know  thy  obstinacy,  and 
thy  most  stiff  neck.  While  I am  yet  living,  and 
going  in  with  you,  you  have  always  been  rebellious 
against  the  Lord:  how  much  more  when  I shall  be 
dead?  Gather  unto  me  all  the  ancients  of  your 
tribes,  and  your  doctors,  and  I will  speak  these 
words  in  their  hearing,  and  will  call  heaven  and 
earth  to  witness  against  them.  For  I know  that, 
after  my  leath,  you  will  do  wickedly,  and  will 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


330  OFFICE  BBFORE  MA»S. 

quickly  turn  aside  fi*om  the  way  that  1 bare  coni' 
inanded  you : and  evils  siiaJl  come  ujxin  you  in-the 
latter  times,  when  you  shall  do  evil  in  the  sight  of 
the  l^rd,  to  provoke  him  by  the  works  of  your  hands. 
Moses  therefore  spoke,  in  the  healing  of  the  whole 
assembly  of  Israel,  the  words  of  this  canticle,  and 
finished  it  even  to  the  end. 

TRACT.  Deut,  xxxiL — ^Hear,  O ye  heavens,  and 
1 will  speak:  let  the  earth  give  ear  to  the  words  of 
my  mouth.  V.  Let  what  I say  be  looked  for  like 
rain : and  let  my  words  drop  down  like  dew.  V.  Like-- 
the  shower  upon  the  grass,  and  the  snow  upon  the 
dry  herb  : for  I will  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 
V.  Publish  the  greatness  of  our  God : he  is  God  ; 
his  worics  are  perfoct,  and  all  his  ways  are  justice. 
V.  God  is  faithful,  in  whom  there  is  no  iniquity : the 
Lord  is  just  and  holy. 

Pr.  Let  us  pray.  Deac,  Let  us  kneel  down. 
^bd.  Stand  up  again. 

PRAYER.  Deus  cdsiiudo, — O God,  who,  raisesr 
the  humble,  and  givest  strength  to  the  righteous: 
and  who  by  thy  holy  servant  Moses,  wast  pleased 
so  to  instruet  thy  people  by  the  singing  of  the  sacred 
canticle,  that  the  repetition  of  the  law  might  be  also 
our  direction  : shew  thy  power  to  all  the  multitude 
of  Gentiles  justified  by  thee,  and,  by  mitigating  thy 
terrors,  grant  them  joy:  that  ail  their  sins  being 
pardoned  by  thee,  the  threatened  ven^ance  may 
contribute  to  their  salvation.  Thro’.  Jx.  Amttu 

XII.  PROPHECY.  Daru  iii. — hi  those  days: 
King  ^iabuchodonoso^  made  a statue  of  gold,  of 
sixtjr  cubits  high,  and  six  cubits  broad,  and  he  set  it 
up  m the  plain  of  Dura,  in  the  province  of  Babylon. 
Then  Nabuchodonosor  the  king  sent  to  call  toge- 
ther the  nobles,  the  magistrates,  and  the  judges,  the 
capta’ms,  the  nilers,  and  governors,  and  all  the 
chief  men  of  the  provinces,  to  come  to  the  dedica- 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  HOLT  SATURHAT. 


321 


tion  of  the  statue  which  king  Nabuchodonosor  bad 
set  up.  Then  the  nobles,  the  magistrates,  and  the 
judges,  the  captains,  and  rulers,  and  the  great  men 
that  were  placed  in  authority,  and  all  the  princes  of 
the  provinces,  were  gathered  together  to  come  to 
the  dedication  of  the  statue  which  king  Nabucho- 
donosor had  set  up.  And  they  stood  before  the 
statue  which  king  Nabuchodonosor  had  set  up. — 
Then  a herald  cried  with  a strong  voice : To  you  it 
is  commanded,  O nations,  tribes,  and  languages: 
that  in  the  hour  that  you  shall  hear  the  sound  of  the 
trumpet,  and  of  the  flute,  and  of  the  harp,  of  the 
sackbut,  and  of  the  psaltery,  and  of  the  symphony, 
and  of  all  kind  of  music ; ye  fall  down  and  adore  the 
golden  statue  which  king  Nabuchodonosor  hath  set 
up.  But  if  any  man  should  not  fall  down  and  adore, 
he  shall  the  same  hour  be  cast  into  a furnace  of 
burning  fire.  Upon  this,  therefore,  at  the  time 
when  dl  the  people  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet, 
the  flute  and  the  harp,  of  the  sackbut,  and  the 
psaltery,  of  the  symphony,  and  of  all  kind  of  music ; 
all  the  nations,  tribes  and  languages,  fell  down  and 
adored  the  golden  statue,  which  king  Nabucho- 
donosor had  set  up.  And  presently,  at  that  very 
time  some  Chaldeans  came  and  accused  the  Jews: 
and  said  to  king  Nabuchodonosor:  O king,  live 
for  ever : Thou,  O king,  hast  made  a decree,  that 
every  man  that  shall  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet, 
the  flute,  and  the  harp,  of  the  sackbut,  and  the 
psaltery,  of  the  symphony,  and  of  all  kind  of  music, 
shall  prostrate  himself  and  adore  the  golden  statue : 
and, that  if  any  man  shall  not  fall  down  and  adore,  he 
should  be  cast  into  a furnace  of  burning  fire.  Now 
there  are  certain  Jews,  whom  thou  bast  set  over  the 
works  of  the  province  of  Babylon^  Sidrach,  Misacb, 
and  Abednago:  these  n>eii,  O king,  have  slighted 
thy  decree : they  woi-ship  not  thy  gods  nor  do  they 
a'iore  the  golden  statue  which  thou  hast  set  up 


gitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


323  OFFICE  BEFORE  MASS. 

Then  Nabuchodonosor,  in  fury,  and  in  wratn,  com 
inanded  that  Sidrach,  Misach,  and  Abednago,  should 
l>e  brought;  who  immediately  were*  brought  before 
the  king.  And  Nabuchodonosor  the  king  spoke  to 
tiiem,  and  said : Is  it  true,  O Sidrach,  Misach,  and 
Abednago,  that  you  do  not  worship  my  gods,  nor 
adore  the  golden  statue  that  1 have  set  up  ? Now 
therefore  if  you  be  ready,  at  what  hour  soever  you 
shall  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  flute,  harp, 
sackbut,  and  psaltery,  and  symphony,  and  of  all  kind 
of  music,  prostrate  yourselves,  and  adore  the  statue 
which  I have  made : but  if  you  do  not  adore,  you 
shall  be  cast  in  the  same  hour  into  the  furnace  of 
burning  fire:  and  who  is  the  God  that  shall  deliver 
you  out  of  my  hand  ? Sidrach,  Misach,  and  Abed- 
imgo  answered  and  said  to  king  Nabuchodonosor: 
We  have  no  occasion  to  answer  thee  concerning 
this  matter.  For  behold  our  God,  whom  we  wor- 
shi{>,  is  able  to  save  us  from  the  fUmiace  of  burning 
Are,  and  to  deliver  us  out  of  thy  hands,  O king. 
But  if  he  will  not,  be  it  known  to  thee,  O king,  that 
wo  will  not  worship  thy  gods,  nor  adore  the  golden 
statue  which  thou  hast  «let  up.  Then  was  Nab^ucho- 
donosor  filled  with  fury:  and  the  countenance  of  his 
face  was  changed  against  Sidrach,  Misach,  and 
Abednago,  and  be  commanded  that  the  furnace 
should  heated  seven  times  more  than  it  had  been 
accm>tomed  to  be  heated.  And  he  commanded  tlie 
strongest  men  that  were  in  his  army,  to  bind  tiie 
feet  of  Sidrach,  Misach,  and  Abednago,  and  to  cast 
them  into  the  furnace  of  burning  Are.  And  im- 
mediately these  men  were  bound  and  were  cast  into 
the  furnace  of  burning  fire,  with  their  coats  and  their 
caps,  and  their  shoes,  and  their  garments.  For  the 
king’s  commandment  was  urgent,  and  the  furnace 
was  heated  exceedingly.  And  the  flame  of  the  fire 
slew  those  men  that  had  cast  in  Sidrach,  Misach, 
and  Abednago,  But  these  tliree  men,  that  is,  Sidracl  u 


'^■gitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


ON  HOLY  SATURDAY. 


323 


Misach,  and  Abednago,  fell  down  bound  in  the  midst 
of  the  furnace  of  burning  fire.  And  they  walked  in 
the  midst  of  the  flame  praising  God,  and  blessing  the 
Lord. 

Let  us  pray.  Omnipotens. 

O Almighty  and  eternal  God,  the  only  hope  of 
the  world,  who,  by  the  voice  of  thy  prophets, 
has  manifested  the  mysteries  of  this  present  time: 
graciously  increase  the  desires  of  thy  people  ; since 
none  of  the  faithful  can  advance  in  any  virtue  with- 
out thy  inspiration.  Thro’.  R.  Amen. 

The  BLESSING  of  the  FONT. 

When  the  Celebrant  goes  towards  the  Font,  is  said  the 
TRACT.  As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  fountains 
of  water;  so  my  soul  panteth  after  thee,  O God. 
V.  My  soul  hath  thirsted  after  the  living  God : when 
shall  I come  and  appejir  before  the  mce  of  God? 
V.  My  tears  have  been  my  bread  day  and  night, 
while  they  say  to  me  every  day : Where  is  now  thy 
God? 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R.  And  with  thy  spiriL 
Let  us  pray.  Concede. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God, 
that  we,  who  celebrate  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  may,  by  the  inspimtion  of  heaven,  earnestly 
thirst  after  the  fountain  of  life.  Thro’. ...  in  unity 
of  the  same. 

When  the  Priest  comes  to  the  Font. 

The  Lord  be  with  you.  R.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

O Almighty  and  eternal  God,  be  present  at  these 
mysteries,  be  present  at  these  sacraments  of 
tliy  great  goodness : and  send  forth  the  spirit  of  thy 
adoption  to  regenerate  the  new  people,  whom  the 
font  of  baptism  bringeth  forth : that  what  is  to  be 
done  by  the  ministry  of  us  thy  servants,  may  Ik» 
accomplished  by  the  effect  of  thy  power.  Thro’ 
R.  Amen.  • 

V.  The  Lord  be  with  you.  R.  And  with  thj 

^ Digitized  by  Google 


3‘^4  OFFlC£  BEFORE  MASS 

spli’it.  F,  Raise  up  your  hearts  on  high.  R.  Wo 
have  tiiem  raised  up  to  the  Lord.  V.  Let  us  giv»^ 
tlianks  to  the  Lord  our  God.  R.  It  is  meet  and  jusL 

IT  is  truly  meet  and  just,  right  and  avaiiable  to 
salvation,  to  give  thee  thanlS  always,  and  in  ail 
places,  O holy  Lord,  almighty  Fatlier,  and  eternal 
God:  who,  by  thy  invisible  power,  dost  wonder- 
fully produce  the  effects  of  thy  sacraments:  and, 
though  we  are  unworthy  to  administer  such  great 
mysteries,  yet,  as  thou  dost  not  abandon  the  gifts  of 
thy  grace,  so  thou  inclinest  the  ears  of  thy  goodness 
even  to  our  prayers.  O God,  whose  spirit  in  the 
very  beginning  of  the  world  moved  upon  the  waters ; 
that  even  then  the  nature  of  water  might  receive 
the  virtue  of  sanctification : O God,  who  by  water 
didst  wash  away  the  crimes  of  a guilty  world,  and 
by  the  overflowing  of  the  deluge  didst  give  us  a 
flgure  of  regeneration;  that  one  and  the  same  ele- 
ment might,  in  a mystery,  be  the  end  of  vice,  and 
the  origin  of  virtue:  look  down,  O Lord,  on  thy 
Church,  and  multiply  in  her  thy  regenerations,  who 
by  the  streams  of  thy  abundant  grace,  fillest  thy  cit}^ 
with  joy,  and  openest  the  fonts  of  baptism  all  over 
the  world  for  the  renewal  of  the  Gentiles ; that  by 
the  command  of  thy  majesty  it  may  receive  the 
grace  of  thy  Son  from  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Here  the  Priest  divides  the  Water  in  the  form  of  a 
Cross. 

Who,  by  a secret  mixture  of  his  divine  virtue, 
may  render  this  water  fruitful  for  the  regeneration 
of  men  : to  the  end  that  those,  who  are  to  be  sancti- 
fied in  the  immaculate  womb  of  this  divine  font, 
and  are  to  be  bom  again  new  creatures,  may  come 
forth  a heavenly  offepring;  and  that  all,  however, 
distinguished  by  age  in  time,  or  sex  in  body,  may 
be  brought  forth  to  the  same  infancy  by  grace,  then- 
spiritual  mother.  Therefore  may  all  unclean  spirits, 
by  tfiy  command,  O Lord,  depart  from  hence- 


Digitized  by  Google 


OPT  HOLY  Sil  rnROAT. 


325 


may  all  the  malice  of  diabolical  wiles  be  entirely 
banished  ; may  no  power  of  the  enemy  prevail  here 
let  him  not  fly  about  to  lay  his  snares : let  him  not 
creep  in  by  his  secret  artifices ; let  him  not  corrupt 
with  his  infection. 

Here  he  touches  the  Water  idih  his  Hand. 

May  this  holy  and  hinocent  creature  be  fi*ee  from 
all  assaults  of  the  enemy,  and  purified  by  the  de- 
struction of  all  his  malice.  May  it  become  a living 
fountain,  a regenerating  water,  a purifying  stream : 
that  all  those,  that  are  to  be  washed  in  this  saving 
bath,  may  obtain,  by  the  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  grace  of  a perfect  purification. 

Here  he  makes  the  Sign  of  the  Cross  thrice  over  the 
Font,  saying : 

Wherefore  I bless  thee,  O creature  of  water,  by 
the  living  God,  by  the  true  God,  by  the 
holy  ^ God ; by  that  God,  who  in  the  beginning 
separated  thee  by  his  word  from  the  dry  land,  and 
whose  spirit  moved  upon  thee. 

[Here  he  divides  the  Water  tvilh  his  Hand,  and  thrones 
some  of  it  out  towards  the four  quarters  of  the  World.] 

Who  made  thee  flow  from  the  fountain  of  para- 
dise, tuid  commanded  thee  to  water  the  whole  eanh 
with  thy  four  rivers.  Who  changing  thy  bitterness 
in  the  desert  into  sweetness,  made  thee  fit  to  drink ; 
and  produced  thee  out  of  a rock  to  quench  the  thirst 
of  the  people.  I «f*  bless  thee  also  by  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  his  only  Son : who,  in  Cana  of  Gali- 
lee, changed  thee  into  wine,  by  a wonderful  miracle 
of  his  power.  Who  walked  upon  thee  dry-foot,  and 
was  baptized  in  thee  by  John  in  the  Jordan.  Who 
made  thee  flow  out  of  his  side,  together  with  his 
blood,  and  commanded  his  disciples  that  such  as  be- 
lieved should  be  baptized  in  thee,  saying : Go,  teach 
all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  • 

Ee 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


396 


OFFlCfe  ON  HOLT  SATURDAY. 


Do  thou,  O Almighty  God,  merciflilly  assist  uw 
who  observe  this  commandment : do  thou  graciously 
inspire  us. 

Here  hreatking  thrice  upon  the  Water  in  Form  of  a 
Cross,  he  says : 

Do  thou  with  thy  mouth  bl^  these  clear  waters ; 
that  besides  their  natural  virtue  of  cleansing  the 
body,  they  may  also  prove  effectual  for  purifying 
the  soul. 

Then  he  sinks  the  Paschal  Candle  into  the  Water 
three  different  times,  saying  each  time : 

May  the  virtue  of  the  Holy  Ghost  descend  into  all 
the  water  of  this  font. 

Then  breathing  thrice  on  the  Water,  he  goes  on. 
And  make  the  whole  substance  of  this  water  fruit- 
ful, and  capable  of  bringing  to  a new  life. 

Hepe  the  Paschal  Candle  is  taken  out  of  the  Water, 
and  the  Priest  goes  on. 

Here  may  the  stains  of  all  sin  be  washed  out ; 
here  may  human  nature,  created  to  thy  image,  and 
reformed  to  the  honour  of  its  author,  be  cleansed 
from  the  filth  of  the  old  man : that  all  who  receive 
this  sacrament  of  regeneration,  m^  be  bom  again 
new  children  of  true  innocence.  Thro’ — who  is  to 
come  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead,  and  the 
word  by  fire.  i?.  Amen, 

Here  the  People  are  sprinkled  with  the  blessed  Water, 
and  some  is  taken  away  by  the  Ministers,  to  distribute 
to  the  people  for  ‘use  in  their  houses,  qftenoards  the 
Oil  of  the  Catechumens  is  poured  in,  in  the  Form 
of  a Cross,  the  Priest  saying : 

May  this  font  be  sanctified  and  made  fruitful  by 
the  oil  of  salvation  for  such  as  are  to  be  bom  anew 
in  it,  unto  life  everlasting,  i?.  Amen. 

Then  he  pours  the  Chrism  into  it,  saying : 

May  this  infiision  of  the  chrism  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter,  be  per- 
formed in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  Jt  Amen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MASS  ON  HOLT  SATURDAY. 

Lastly^  he  yours  the  Oil  and  Chrisn^into  the  Watei 
in  tlie  Form  of  a Cross,  saying : 

May  this  mixture  of  the  chrism  of  sanctification, 
and  of  the  oil  of  salvation,  and  of  the  water  of  bap- 
tism, be  performed  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  R.  Amen. 

^er  Blessing  the  Font,  the  Priest,  with  his  Mini- 
sters, lies  prostrate  before  the  altar^  and  all  the  re^t 
kneel  whilst  the  Litany  \see  Ro^tioii  Days  359.] 
is  suns^  by  ttoo  Chanters  in  the  middle  of  the  Chpir, 
repeating  the  same  words  after  them,  to  Christe 
exaudi  nos  inclusively.  Kyrie  and  Christe  eleisou 
being  aUemately  sung  three  times,  the  Priest  tvUh 
his  Ministers  in  their  proper  vestments,  begins  IVFass 
saying  the  Ps.  Judic^  &c.  p.  xv.  but  no  Introit. 
At  intoning  the  Gloria  in  excelsis  the  ringing  of 
the  bells  is  resumed  and  continued  till  it  is  finished. 
COLLECT.  Deus. — O God,  whoeniightenest  this 
most  sacred  night  by  the  glory  of  the  resurrection  of 
the  Lord ; preserve  in  the  new  offspring  of  thy  family 
the  spirit  of  adoption  thou  hast  given  them;  that 
being  renewed  in  body  and  soul,  they  may  serve  thee 
with  purity  of  heart  Thro’, 

EPISTLE.  Colos,  iii.  1.  4. — Brethren:  If  you 
be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  the  things  that  are  above; 
where  Christ  is  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God: 
mind  the  things  that  are  above,  not  the  things  that 
are  upon  the  earth.  For  you  are  dead ; and  your 
life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  When  Christ  shall 
appear,  who  is  your  life ; then  you  also  shall  appear 
%vith  him  in  glory.  Alleluia,  AUetuia,  Alleluia. 

V.  Praise  the  Lord,  for  V.  Confitemini  Domi- 
he  is  good : for  his  mercy  no,  quoniam  bonus : quo- 
endureth  for  ever.  niam  in  sceculum  miseri- 

cordia ejus. 

^ TRACT.  Ps.  cxvi. — Praise  the  Lord  all  ye 
Mutions ; jo’m  in  his  praise,  all  ye  people.  V.  For 
Ee2 


Digitized  by  Google 


328  MASS,  &C.  ON  HOLT  SATURDAY.  > 

his  mercy  is  confirmed  upon  us ; and  the  truth  of 
rhe  Lord  remaineth  for  ever. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxxviii.  1.  7. — In  the  end  of 
tlio  Sabbath,  when  it  began  to  dawn  towards  the 
first  day  of  the  week,  came  Mary  Magdalen  and  the 
otlier  Mary  to  the  sepulchre.  And  behold  there 
was  a great  earthquake.  For  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
descended  from  heaven ; and  coining,  rolled  back 
the  stone,  and  sat  upon  it:  and  his  countenance  was 
as  lightning,  and  his  raiment  as  snow.  And  for  fear 
of  him,  the  guards  were  struck  with  terror,  and  be- 
came as  dead  men.  And  the  angel  answering,  said 
to  the  women ; fear  not  you ; for  I know  that  you 
seek  Jesus  who  was  crucified.  He  is  not  here,  for 
he  is  risen  as  he  said:  Come,  and  see  the  place 
where  the  Lord  was  laid.  And  going  quickly,  tell 
ye  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen  : and  behold  he  will 

fo  before  you  into  Galilee : thei*e  you  shall  see  him. 
tO  I have  foretold  it  to  you. 

The  Offertory  is  omitted  ; hut  Oblations  of  the  Host 
and  Chalice  are  rtmde^  as  in  the  Ordinary,  p xxiii. 
SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  the 
prayere  of  thy  people,  together  with  the  offering  of 
these  Hosts,  that  what  is  consecrated  by  these  paschal 
mysteries,  may,  by  the  help  of  thy  grace,  avail  us  to 
eternal  life.  Thro.’ 

For  the  Communicantes  and  Hanc  i^tur,  see  p.  331 . 
the  rest  as  in  the  Ordinary,  ^feither  Aguus  Dei 
Comm,  nor  P.  Comm,  are  saidj  but  as  soon  as  th0 
Priest  has  taken  the  last  Ablution,  are  begun  the 
VESPERS. 

Anth  . JUlduiOy  Meluioy  Mletuia. 

Ps.  cxvi. 

PRAISE  the  Lord,  all  T AUDATE  Dominum, 
ye  nations ; ♦ praise  -Li  omnes  gentes ; ♦ lau- 
him  all  ye  people.  date  eum  omnes  populi. 

For  his  mercy  is  con-  Quoniam  confirmata 
firmed  upon  us ; ♦ and  est  super  no»»  miseri^or- 


Digitized  by  Google 


EASTER  SUNDAY.  3^) 

ihe  tniA  of  the  Lord  re-  dia  ejus ; *et  veritas  Dt»- 
inaineth  for  ever.  Glo-  mini  raanet  in  reteruuiu. 
ly,  &C.  Gloria,  &c. 

Anth,  •Alleluia,  Alleluia^  Alleluia^ 

Anthem  at  the  Magnificat. 

In  the  evening  of  the  Vespere  antem  Sabbati 
Sabbath  which  dawns  on  qiiee  lucescit  in  prima 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  Sabbati,  venit  Maria 
came  Mary  Magdalen,  Magdalene,  et  altera  Ma- 
and  another  Mary,  to  see  ria,  videre  sepulchrum. 
ihe  sepulchre.  AlleL  Alleluuu 
At  the  Magnificat  [stt  p.  ^79.]  the  altar  is  fumed 
with  incense  as  usual. 

PRAYER.  Spiritum. — Pour  forth  on  us,  O Lord, 
the  spirk  of  thy  love;  and  those  whom  tliou  hast 
filled  with  the  paschal  sacrament,  may,  by  thy  good- 
ness live  in  perfect  concord.  Thro’. 

Then  all  concludes  as  at  Mass,  except  that  Alleluia, 
'Alleluia,  is  added  to  Ite,  missa  est,  and  Deo  gra- 
tias: and  these  Alleluias  are  continued  till  Low 
Sunday. 

EASTER  SUNDAY. 

Although  times  and  seasons  in  general  subsist 
not  but  by  the  order,  and  for  the  glory  of  God, 
yet  the  Church,  when  she  speaks  of  the  festival  of  tlie 
Resurrection,  calls  it  in  every  part  of  the  Divine  Office, 
(by  way  of  pre-eminence)  the  day  the  Lord  hath  made. 
All  the  days  of  the  mortal  life  of  Jesus,  previous  to 
that  of  his  Resurrection,  were,  according  to  St.  Paul, 
the  days  of  his  humiliation.,  whereas  this  is  properly 
called  the  day  of  hie  glory ; since  it  was  by  his  resur- 
rection that  tne  broad  seal  of  heaven  was  affixed  to  his 
doctrine, — his  other  miracles  confirmed, — his  mission 
proved, — and  all  his  labours  crowned.  Hence  arises 
the  Church’s  joy  on  Uiis,  the  greatest  of  her  festivals. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  cxxxviiL 

I HAVE  risen,  and  am  "nESURREXIet  adhuc 
as  yet  with  you,  Allel. : tecum  sum,  Alleluia 

Ee  3 


Dig  1 by  Google 


'S30  EASTER  BUlfDAT. 

thou  hast  stretched  forth  posuisti  super  mt  marmm 
thy  hand  to  me  AIleL:  tuaniy  ^tluia:  mirabilis 
thy  knowledge  is  become  facta  est  scitniia  tua^  M- 
wonderful,  Mel.  Mel.  leluia^  Alleluia. 

Ps.  Lord,  thou  hast  Ps.  DommCy  probash 
tried  me,  and  known  me : me,  et  cognovisti  me:  lu 
thou  hast  known  my  sit-  cognovisti  sessionem  meam 
ting  down  and  my  up-  et  resurrectionem  meanu 
rising.  V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  ^i. — God,  who,  on  this  day, 
by  thy  only  begotten  Son’s  victory  over  death,  didst 
open  for  us  a passage  to  eternity;  grant  that  our 
prayers,  which  thy  preventing  grace  inspireth,  may 
by  thy  help  become  effectual.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  v.  7.  8. — Brethren:  Purge 
out  the  old  leaven,  that  you  may  be  a new  paste,  as 
you  are  unleavened.  For  Christ,  our  pasch,  is  sa- 
crificed. Therefore  let  us  feast,  not  with  the  old 
leaven,  nor  wth  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wicked- 
ness, but  witli  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and 
truth. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxvii. — This  is  the  day  the  Lord  hath 
made : come  let  us  exult  and  rejoice  thereon.  V.  Praise 
the  Lord,  for  he  is  good : and  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever ; AUeluia^  Alleluia.  V.  Christ  himself  is 
become  our  paschal  sacrifice.  AUduicu 
The  PROSE. 

'U'lCTIMiE  Paschali  laudes  immolent  Chris- 
» tiani : 

Agnus  redemit  oves ; Christus  innocens  Patri  re- 
conciliavit peccatores. 

Mors  et  vita  duello:  conflixere  mirando:  dux 
vitte  mortuus,  regnat  vivus. 

Dic  nobis,  Maria,  quid  vidisti  in  via  ? 

Sepulchrum  Christi  viventis,  et  gloriam  vidi  resur- 
gentis. 

Angelicos  testes  sudariam  et  vestes. 


Digitized  by  Google 


EASTER  SUNDAY.  ^1 

Surrexit  Christus,  spes  mea ; precedet  vos  in  Ga- 
lilaeam. 

Scimus  Christum  surrexisse  a mortuis  vere : fu 
n(>bis,  victor  Rex,  miserere.  Arnen.  Alleluia. 

The  foregoing  Prose,  as  well  as  the  following  Com- 
municantes and  Hanc  igitur,  are  continued  in  every 

Mass  fi/Z  Saturday  next  inclusively. 

GOSPEL.  Mark  xvi.  1.  7.— At  that  time : Mary 
Magdalep,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  James  and 
Salome,  brought  sweet  spices,  that  coming  they 
might  anoint  Jesus.  And  very  early  in  the  morning 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  they  come  to  the  sepulchre, 
the  sun  being  now  risen.  And  they  said  one  to  ano- 
ther: Who  shall  roll  us  back  the  stone  from  the 
door  of  the  sepulchre?  And  looking,  they  saw 
the  stone  rolled  back.  For  It  was  very  great.  And 
entering  into  the  sepulchre,  they  saw  a young  man 
sitting  on  the  right  side  clothed  with  a white  robe : 
and  they  were  astonished.  Who  saith  to  them : Be 
not  affrighted ; you  seek  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  was 
crucified:  he  is  risen,  he  is  not  here,  behold  the 
place  where  they  laid  him.  But  go,  tell  his  disciples 
and  Peter,  that  he  goeth  before  you,  into  Galilee : 
there  you  shall  see  him,  as  he  told  you.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxv. — ^The  earth  trembled,  and 
was  silent,  while  God  arose  to  judgment.  Alleluia. 

SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
the  prayers  of  thy  people,  together  with  the  offer- 
ings of  these  hosts,  that  what  is  consecrated  by  these 
paschal  mysteries,  may  by  the  help  of  thy  grace, 
avail  us  to  eternal  life.  Thro’. 

Communicantes.  Being  united  in  communion, 
aud  celebrating  this  most  sacred  day  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  our  flesh : 
moreover,  honouring  the  memory  of,  &c.  in  the 
Ordinary,  p.  xxxiv. 

Hanc  igitur.  We  therefore  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  graciously  to  accept  this  oblation  of  thy  ser 


Digitized  by  Google 


332 


EASTER  MONDAY. 


vanls  and  of  thy  whole  family,  which  we  offer  to 
thee  also,  for  all  those  thou  hast  vouchsafed  to  rege- 
nerate, by  water  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  granting  then* 
the  remission  of  all  their  sins.  Dispose  our  days  in 
peace,  &c.  as  p,  xxxv. 

COMM.  1 Cor.  V — Christ  himself  is  become  our 
f )aschal  sacrifice,  Mleluia : therefore  let  us  feast  on 
the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth.  Allt- 
luicL,  Alleluia^  Alleluia, 

P.  COMM.  Spiritum  nobis, — Pour  forth  on  us, 
O Lord,  the  spirit  of  thy  love:  that  those  whom 
thou  hast  filled  with  the  paschal  sacrament,  may,  by 
thy  goodness,  live  in  perfect  concord.  Thro’ — in 
the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

EASTER  MONDAY. 

INTROIT.  Exodus  xiii. 

The  Lord  hath  brought  Tntroduxit  vos  Dominus 

you  into  a land  flow-  JL  in  terram  Ruentem  lac 
ing  with  milk  and  honey,  et  met,  AUduia : et  ut  lux 
Alleluia : let  then  the  law  Domini  semper  sil  in  ore 
of  the  Lord  be 'ever  in  vestro,  Allduia,  AUduia^ 
your  mouth,  AUduia^  Al~  Ps.  Cori/itemini  Domino, 
Iduia,  Ps,  Praise  the  et  invocate  nomen  (jus: 
Lord,  and  call  upon  his  annuntiate  inter  Genies 
name : publish  his  works  opera  ejus,  V,  Gloria^ 
among  the  Gentiles. 

V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who  by  the  mys 
tery  of  the  paschal  solemnity,  has  bestowed  remedies 
on  the  world;  continue,  we  beseech  thee,  thy 
heavenly  blessings  on  thy  people,  that  they  may  de- 
serve to  obtain  perfect  liberty,  and  advance  towards 
eternal  life.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Ads  x,  37.  43. — In  those  days : Peter 
standing  up  in  the  midst  of  the  people  said:  You 
know  the  word  that  hath  been  published  through 
all  Judea:  for  it  began  from  Galilee  after  the  ^»ap- 


Digitized  by  Google 


£ASTER  MONDAY.  833 

tism  which  John  preached,  Jesus  of  Nazareth ; how 
God  pointed  him  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with 
power,  who  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing 
all  that  were  oppressed  by  the  devil,  for  God  was 
with  him.  And  we  are  witnesses  of  all  things  that 
he  did  in  the  land  of  the  Jews  and  in  Jerusalem, 
whom  they  killed  hanging  him  upon  a tree.  Him 
God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and  gave  him  to  be 
made  manifest.  Not  to  all  the  people,  but  to  Wit- 
nesses pre-ordained  by  God,  even  to  us,  who  did  eat 
and  drink  with  him  aner  he  rose  again  from  the  dead. 
And  he  commanded  us  to  preach  to  the  people,  and 
to  testify  that  it  is  he  who  was  appointed  by  God  to 
be  judge  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead.  To  him  all 
the  prophets  give  testimony,  that  through  his  name 
all  receive  remission  of  sins,  who  believe  in  him. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxvii. — This  is  the  day  the  Lord 
hath  made:  come  let  us  exult  and  rejoice  thereon. 
V.  Let  Israel  now  say,  that  the  Lord  is  good  : that 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  Mhluia^  Allduia, 

V.  An  angel  of  the  Lord  V.  Angelus  Domini  dts- 
descended  from  heaven,  cendit  de  cceloy  et  accedens 
and  coming  to  the  monu-  revolvit  lapidem^  et  sede- 
ment,  rolled  back  the  hat  super  eum. 

Btone,  and  sat  upon  it. 

GOSPEL.  Duke  xxiv.  13.  35. — At  that  time: 
Two  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus  went  the  same  day  to  a 
town  which  was  sixty  furlongs  from  Jerusalem,  nam- 
ed Emmaus.  And  they  talked  together  of  all  tliese 
things  which  had  happened.  And  it  came  to  pass, 
that  while  they  tcdked  and  reasoned  with  themselves, 
Jesus  himself  also  drawing  near,  went  with  them. 
But  their  eyes  were  held  that  they  should  not  know 
him.  And  he  said  to  them:  What  ai*e  these  dis- 
courses that  you  hold  one  with  another  as  you  walk, 
and  are  sad  ? And  the  one  of  them  whose  name  was 
Cleophas,  answering,  said  to  him : Art  thou  only 
a stranger  in  Jerusalem,  and  hast  not  know’n  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


334 


ILilTER  MONDAY. 


things  that  have  been  done  there  in  these  dwjrs?  Tu 
whom  he  said : What  things  ? And  they  said : Con- 
cerning Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  was  a prophet, 
mighty  in  work  and  word  before  Gfod  and  all  the 
people.  And  how  our  chief  priests  and  princes  de- 
livered him  to  be  condemned  to  death,  and  crucified 
liim.  But  we  hoped  that  it  was  he  that  should 
have  redeemed  Israel:  and  now  besides  all  this,  to- 
da!^  is  the  third  day  since  these  things  were  don& 
Yea  and  certain  women  also  of  our  company,  af- 
frighted us,  who  before  if  was  light  were  at  the 
sepulchre.  And  not  finding  his  body,  came,  say- 
ing that  they  had  also  seen  a vision  of  angels,  who 
say  that  he  is  alive.  And  some  of  our  people  went 
to  the  sepulchre : and  found  it  so  as  the  women  had 
said,  but  him  they  found  not.  Then  he  said  to  them: 
O foolish,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  in  all  things 
which  the  prophets  have  spoken.  Ought  not  Christ 
to  have  suffered  these  things,  and  so  to  enter  into  his 
glory?  And  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  pro- 
phets, he  expounded  to  them  in  all  the  scriptures 
the  things  that  were  concerning  him.  And  they 
drew  nigh  to  the  town  whither  they  were  going : and 
he  made  as  though  he  would  go  farther.  But  they 
constrained  him,  saying:  Stay  with  us,  because  it 
is  towards  evening,  and  the  day  is  now  far  spenu 
And  he  went  in  with  them.  And  it  came  to  pass, 
whilst  he  was  at  table  with  them,  he  took  bread; 
and  blessed  and  brake,  and  gave  to  them.  And 
their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  knew  him:  and 
he  vanished  out  of  their  sight.  And  they  said  one  to 
the  other : Was  not  our  hearts  burning  within  us, 
whilst  he  spoke  in  the  way,  and  opened  to  us  the 
scriptures  ? And  rising  up  the  same  hour  they  went 
back  to  Jerusalem : and  they  found  the  eleven  ga- 
thered together,  and  those  that  were  with  them. 
Saying,  the  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  hath  appeared 
to  Simon.  And  they  told  what  things  were  done  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


EASTER  TUESDAY.  ‘335 

the  way : and  how  they  knew  him  in  the  breaking 
of  bread.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Matt.  xxix. — ^An  angel  of  the  Lord 
came  down  from  heaven,  and  said  to  the  women  : 
He  whom  you  seek,  is  risen,  as  he  told  you.  AlleL 

SECRET  and  P.  COMM,  as  yesterday,  p.  a31,a32. 

COMM.  Luke  xxiv. — ^TheLord  hath  risen  and 
appeared  to  Peter.  •Alleluia.  ^ 

EASTER  TUESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Eedes.  xv. — ^He  hath  given  them  tiie 
water  of  wisdom  to  drink,  : this  wisdom 

shall  be  stren^ened  in  them,  and  shall  not  be 
moved,  AUduta : it  shall  raise  them  up  for  ever, 
AUduia,  AUduia.  Ps.  Praise  the  Loi*d,  and  call 
upon  his  name : declare  his  deeds  among  the  Gen- 
tiles. V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  by  a new 
increase  does  continually  enlarge  thy  Church : gitint 
that  thy  servants  may  manifest  in  their  lives  the  sa- 
crament they  have  received  with  faith.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Acts  xiii.  26.  33. — In  those  days: 
Paul  standing  up,  and  with  his  hand  bespeaking 
silence,  said ; My  brethren,  children  of  the  stock  of 
Abraham,  and  whosoever  among  you  fear  God,  to 
you  the  word  of  this  salvation  is  sent.  For  they  that 
inhabited  Jerusalem,  and  the  rulers  thereof  not 
knowing  him,  nor  the  voices  of  the  prophets  which 
are  read  every  Sabbath,  judging  him  have  fulfilled 
them,  and  finding  no  cause  of  death  in  him,  they  de- 
sired of  Pilate,  that  they  might  kill  him.  And  when 
they  had  fulfilled  all  things  that  were  written  of  him, 
taking  him  down  from  the  tree,  they  laid  him  in  a 
sepulchre.  But  Gknl  raised  him  up  from  the  dead 
the  third  day : who  was  seen  for  many  days  by  them 
who  came  up  with  him  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem, 
who  to  this  present  are  his  witnesses  to  the  people. 
And  we  declare  unto  you  that  the  promise  which 


Digitized  by  Google 


33f]  EASTER  TUESDAY. 

was  made  to  our  fathers,  this  same  God  hath  fulfillea 
to  a ::  children,  raising  up  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxvii. — This  is  the  day  which  the 
Lord  hath  made : let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice  therein. 
V.  Let  them  now  say  so,  they  have  been  redeemed 
by  the  Lord  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy  : and  ga- 
thered them  out  of  the  countries,  MduiOy  MU- 
iUia,  The  Lord  who  hung  on  the  tree  of  the  cross 
forms,  is  risen  from  the  grave.  JiUduia, 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xxiv.  36.  47. — Jit  that  time: 
Jesus  stood  in  the  midst  of  his  disciples,  and  said  to 
them : Peace  be  to  you  ; it  is  I,  fear  not.  But  they 
being  troubled  and  frighted,  supposed  they  saw  a 
spirit.  And  he  said  to  them:  Why  ai*e  you  trou- 
bled, and  why  do  thoughts  arise  in  your  hearts  ? See 
my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I myself ; handle  me 
and  see : for  a spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  you 
see  me  to  have.  And  when  he  had  said  this,  he 
shewed  them  his  hands  and  his  feet.  But  while  they 
vet  believed  not  and  wondered  for  joy,  he  said: 
Have  you  here  any  thing  to  eat  ? And  they  offered 
him  a piece  of  broiled  fish,  and  a honey  comb. 
And  when  he  had  eaten  before  them,  taking  tlie  re- 
mains he  gave  to  them.  And  he  said  to  them : These 
are  the  words  which  1 have  spoke  to  you  whilst  I was 
yet  with  you,  that  all  things  must  needs  be  fiil- 
filled,  which  are  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  and 
in  the  prophets,  and  in  the  psalms,  concerning  me. 
Then  he  opened  their  understandings  that  they 
might  understand  the  scriptures.  And  he  said  to 
them : Thus  it  is  written,  and  tkns  it  behoved 
Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  rise  again  from  the  dead  the 
third  day : and  that  penance  and  remission  of  sins 
should  be  preached  in  his  name  unto  all  nations. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xviL — ^The  Lord  thundered  from 
heaven,  and  the  Most  High  sent  forth  his  voice: 
and  the  fountains  of  waters  appeared.  JiUeluicL, 


Digitized  by  Google 


WEDNESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 


337 


SECRET.  Receive,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
tlie  prayers  of  the  faithful,  together  with  tiiese  obla- 
tions : that  by  these* duties  of  piety  they  may  obtain 
eternal  life.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Colos,  iii. — If  you  be  risen  with  Clirist, 
seek  the  things  that  are  above,  where  Cluist  is 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  Meluia . mind  the 
things  that  are  above,  Alleluia, 

P.  COMM.  Concede, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  the  virtue  of  the  Paschal  sa- 
crament, which  we  have  received,  may  always  re- 
main in  our  souls.  Thro’. 


WEDNESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 
INTROIT.  Matt,  xxv. — Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  possess  the  kingdom.  Alleluia:  which  hath 
l)een  prepared  for  you  fiom  tlie  beginning  of  the 
world,  AUeluia,  Allduia,  Alleluia,  Ps,  Sing  to  the 
Lord  a new  song;  sing  to  the  Lord  all  the  earth. 
V,  Glory. 

I.  COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who  by  the 
yearly  solemnity  of  the  resurrection  of  our  I^ord, 
fillest  us  with  joy : mercifully  grant,  that,  by  tliese 
temporal  festivals  which  we  celebrate,  we  may  at 
last  come  to  the  possession  of  those  joys  that  are 
eternal.  Thro’. 

The  II.  Collect  tUL  Saturday  next  is,  eiihcr  Ecclesiae 
or  Deus  omnium,  with  their  respective  Secrets  and 
P.  Comms.  pp,  50,  &c. 

LESSON.  Acts  iii.  13. 19. — In  time  days : Peter 
opening  his  mouth,  said : You  men  of  Israel,  and 
you  who  fear  God,  give  ear.  The  God  of  Abraham, 
and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob,  and  the 
God  of  our  Fathers  hath  glorified  his  Son  Jesus, 
whom  you  indeed  delivered  up  and  denied  him  be- 
f)re  the  face  of  Pilate,  when  he  judged  he  should 
*)e  released.  But  you  denied  thy  Holy  One  apd  the 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


338  WEDNESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 

Just,  and  desired  a murderer  to  be  granted  unto  you. 
But  the  Author  of  life  you  killed,  whom  God  hath  rai- 
sed from  the  dead,  of  which  we  are  witnesses.  And 
the  faith  of  his  name,  this  man  whom  you  have  seen 
and  know,  hath  his  name  strengthened;  and  the 
faith  which  is  by  him,  hath  given  this  perfect  sound- 
ness in  the  sight  of  you  all.  And  now,  brethren  1 
know  that  you  did  it  through  ignorance,  as  did  also 
your  rulers.  But  those  things  which  God  befoi-e  had 
shewed  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  prophets,  that  his 
Christ  should  suffer,  he  hath  so  fulfilled.  Repent 
therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be 
blotted  out. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxvii. — ^This  is  the  day  which  the 
Lord  hath  made:  come  let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice 
therein.  V,  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought 
strength ; the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  exalted 
me.  Alleluia^  Alleluia,  V,  The  Lord  is  certainly 
risen,  and  hath  appeared  to  Peter. 

GOSPEL.  John  xxi.  1. 14. — At  that  time : Jesus 
shewed  himself  again  to  the  disciples  at  the  sea  of 
Tiberias.  And  he  shewed  himself  aRer  this  manner. 
There  were  together  Simon  Peter,  and  Thomas  who 
is  called  Didymus,  and  Nathaniel,  who  was  of  Cana 
in  Galilee,  and  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  two  others 
of  his  disciples.  Simon  Peter  saith  to  them:  I go  a 
fishing.  They  say  to  him : We  also  come  with  thee. 
And  they  went  forth  and  entered  into  the  ship ; and 
that  night  they  caught  nothing.  But  when  the 
morning  was  come,  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore : yet 
the  disciples  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus.  Jesus 
therefore  said  to  them : Children,  have  you  any  meat  ? 
They  answered  him : No.  He  saith  to  them : Cast 
the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship : and  you  shall 
find.  They  cast  therefore:  and  now  they  are  not 
able  to  draw  it  for  the  multitude  of  fishes.  That 
disciple  therefore  whom  Jesus  loved  said  to  Peter ; 
Tt  is  the  Lord  Simon  Peter,  when  he  heard  that  it 


Digitized  by  Google 


THURSDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK.  33i# 

was  the  Lord,  girt  his  coat  about  him  (for  he  was 
naked)  and  cast  himself  into  the  sea.  But  the  other 
disciples  came  in  the  ship  (for  they  were  not  far  from 
the  land,  but  as  it  were  two  hundred  cubits)  drag- 
ging the  net  with  fishes.  As  soon  then  as  they  came 
to  land,  they  saw  hot  coals  lying,  and  a fish  laid 
thereon,  and  bread.  Jesus  saith  to  them;  Bring 
hither  of  the  fishes  which  you  have  now  caught; 
Simon  Peter  went  up,  and  drew  the  net  to  land,  full 
of  great  fishes,  one  hundred  and  fifty-three.  And 
although  there  were  so  many,  the  net  was  not  bro- 
ken. Jesus  saith  to  them;  Come,  and  dine.  And 
none  of  them  who  were  at  meat,  durst  ask  him; 
Who  art  thou  ? knowing  that  it  was  the  Lord,  And 
Jesus  cometh  and  taketh  bread,  and  giveth  them, 
and  fish  in  like  manner.  This  is  now  the  third  time 
that  Jesus  was  manifested  to  his  disciples,  after  he 
was  risen  from  the  dead.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixxvii. — The  Lord  opened  the 
gates  of  heaven,  and  rained  down  Manna  for  them 
to  eat;  he  gave  them  the  bread  of  heaven;  man 
hath  eaten  the  bread  of  angels,  Alleluia, 

SECRET.  We  oflTer  thee,  O Lord,  vnth  jojr 
these  Paschal  sacrifices,  wherewith  thy  Church  is 
wonderfully  fed  and  nourished.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Rom,  vi. — Christ  rising  from  the  dead, 
dieth  no  more,  Allduia : death  shall  have  no  more 
any  power  over  him,  Alleluia^  Alleluia. 

P.  COMM.  Ab  Omni. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  that  being  cleansed  from  the  old  leaven, 
the  receiving  thy  venerable  sacrament  may  trans- 
form us  into  a new  creature.  Who,  with  the  Fath- 
er and  the  Holy  Ghost,  liveth,  dz^c. 


THURSDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 
INTROIT.  Wisd.  x.  — They  praised  with  one 
accord  thy  victorious  hand,  O Lord,  Alleluia,  For 
Ff  2 . 


oy  Google 


340  THURSDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 

wisdom  hath  opened  the  mouth  of  the  dumb,  tind 
made  the  tongues  of  infants  eloquent,  Alleluia  Alle- 
luia, Ps,  Ixxix.  Sing  to  the  Lord  a new  song,  for 
he  liath  done  wonders.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus^  qui, — O God,  who  hast  united 
vai-ious  nations  in  the  confession  of  thy  name : grant 
that  they  who  have  been  born  again  by  the  water 
of  baptism,  may  have  the  same  faith  in  their  hearts, 
and  the  same  piety  in  their  actions.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  Acta  viii.  26.  40.  — In  those  days: 
An  angel  of  the  Lord  spoke  to  Philip,  saying: 
Arise,  go  towards  the  south,  to  the  way  that  goeth 
down  from  Jerusalem  to  Gaza ; this  is  desert.  And 
rising  up  he  went.  And  behold  a man  of  Ethiopia, 
an  eunuch  of  great  authority  under  Candace  Queen 
of  the  Ethiopians,  who  had  charge  over  all  her  trea- 
sures, had  come  to  Jerusalem  to  adore.  And  he 
was  returning  sitting  in  his  chariot,  and  reading 
Isaias  the  prophet.  And  the  spirit  said  to  Philip : 
Go  near,  and  join  thyself  to  his  chariot.  And 
Philip  i*eturning  thither,  heard  him  reading  the 
prophet  Isaias,  and  he  said:  Thinkest  thou  that 
thou  undei*standesi  what  thou  readest?  Who  said : 
And  how  can  I,  unless  some  man  shew  me  ? and 
he  desired  Philip  that  he  would  come  up  and  sit 
with  him.  And  the  place  of  the  scripture  which 
he  was  reading  was  this : “ He  was  led  as  a sheep 
to  the  slaughter:  and  like  a lamb  without  voice 
before  his  shearer,  so  openeth  he  not  his  mouth.  In 
humility  his  judgment  was  taken  away.  His  gener- 
ation who  shaH  ueclare,  for  his  life  shall  be  taken 
from  the  earth  ? ” And  the  eunuch  answeVing  Philip, 
said : I beseech  thee,  of  whom  doth  the  prophet  speak 
this?  of  himself,  or  of  some  other  man?  Then 
Philip  opening  his  mouth,  and  beginning  at  this 
scripture,  preached  unto  him  Jesus.  And  as  they 
went  on  their  way,  they  came  to  a certain  water : 
and  the  eunuch  said ; See  here  is  water,  what  doth 


Digitized  by  Google 


TUURSDAF  IN  EASTER  WEEK.  341 

hinder  me  from  being  baptized  ? And  Philip  said . 
If  thou  believest  with  all  thy  heart,  thow  mayesU 
And  he  answering,  said:  I believe  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  Son  of  God.  And  he  commanded  the  chariot 
to  stand  still : and  they  went  ^own  into  the  water, 
both  Philip  and  the  eunuch,  and  he  baptized  him. 
And  when  they  were  come  up  out  of  the  water,  the 
spirit  of  the  Lord  took  away  Philip,  and  the  eunuch 
saw  him  no  more.  And  he  went  on  his  way  re- 
joicing. But  Philip  was  found  in  Azotus,  and  pass- 
ing through,  he  preached  the  gospel  to  all  the  cities 
till  he  came  to  Cesarea. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxvii. — ^This  is  the  day  which  the 
Lord  hath  made,  come  let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice 
therein.  V.  The  stone  which  the  builders  reject- 
ed, the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  comer 
stone : this  is  the  Lord’s  doing  and  it  is  wonderful 
in  our  eyes,  JSleluia^  Alleluia,  V,  Christ  is  risen, 
who  created  all  things,  and  hath  shewn  mercy  to 
mankind. 

GOSPEL.  John  xx.  11,  18. At  that  time: 

Mary  stood  at  the  sepulchre  without,  weeping. 
Now  as  she  was  weeping,  she  stooped  down,  and 
looked  into  the  sepulchre : and  she  saw  two  ailgels 
in  white,  sitting,  one  at  the  head,  and  one  at  the 
feet,  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  been  laid.  They 
say  to  her:  Woman,  why  weepest  thou ? She  saith 
to  them : Because  they  have  taken  away  my  Lord, 
and  I know  not  where  they  have  laid  him.  When 
she  had  thus  said,  she  turned  herself  back,  and 
saw  Jesus  standing;  and  she  knew  not  that  it  was 
Jesus.  Jesus  said  to  her : Woman,  why  weepest 
thou  ? whom  seekest  thou  ? She  thinking  that  it  was 
the  gardener,  saith  to  him : Sir,  if  thou  hast  taken 
him  hence,  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  him : and  I 
will  take  him  away.  Jesus  saith  to  her:  Mary.  She 
turning,  saith  to  him:  Rabboni  (which  is  to  say. 
Master.)  Jesus  saith  to  her:  Do  not  touch  me,  for 
Ff3 

Digitized  by  Google 


^ 342  FRIDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 

I am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father ; but  go  to  my 
brethren,  and  say  to  them,  I ascend  to  my  Father 
and  to  your  Father,  to  my  God  and  your  God. 
Mary  Magdalen  cometh  and  telleth  the  disciples. 
I have  seen  the  Lord,  and  these  things  he  said  to  me 
Credo.  ^ 

OFFERT.  Exoa,  xiii. — ^In  the  days  of  your  solem- 
nity, saith  the  Lord,  I will  bring  you  into  a land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  AUSluicu 

SECRET. — Graciously  accept,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  the  offerinOT  of  thy  people : that  being  re- 
newed by  the  confession  of  thy  name  and  by  bap- 
tism, they  may  obtain  everlasting  bliss.  Thro’. 

COMM.  1 Peter  ii. — ^You,  who  are  a purchased 
people,  publish  bis  m\^X^  Alleluia : It  is  he  who 
hath  called  you  from  darkness  to  his  wonderful  light, 
Alleluia* 

P.  COMM.  Exaudi, — Graciously  hear  our  prayers, 
O Lord,  that  by  frequenting  these  sacred  mysteries 
of  our  redemption,  we  may  obtain  the  necessaiy’ 
helps  of  this  life,  and  endless  joys  of  the  next.  Thro’. 

FRIDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixxvii. — The  Lord  hath  brought 
them  forth  in  hope,  Alleluia;  and  the  sea  hath 
covered  their  enemies.  Alleluia^  AUduvij  Alleluia. 
Ps.  Attend,  O my  people,  to  my  law,  incline  your 
ears  to  the  words  of  my  mouth.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens.— O Almighty  and  Eter- 
nal God,  who  bast  instituted  this  Paschal  mystery 
in  the  covenant  of  the  reconcihation  of  mankind; 
assist  us  with  thy  holy  grace,  that  what  we  profess  in 
this  solemnity,  we  may  practise  in  our  lives.  Thro’. 

EPISTLEL  1 Peter  iiL  18.  22. — Dear  Brethren : 
Christ  died  once  for  our  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust 
that  he  might  offer  us  to  God,  being  put  to  death 
indeed  in  the  flesh,  but  enlivened  in  the  spirit.  In 
which  also  coming,  he  preached  to  those  spinta  that 


Dig  ed  by  Google 


FRIDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 


343 


were  in  prison  ; which  had  been  some  time  incredu- 
lous, when  they  waited  for  the  patience  of  Gk>d  in  the 
days  of  Noe,  when  tlie  ark  was  a building:  wherein 
a few,  that  is,  eight  souls  were  saved  by  water 
Whereunto  baptism  being  of  the  like  form,  now 
eaveth  you  also ; not  the  putting  away*  of  the  filth  of 
the  flesh,  but  the  examination  of  a good  conscience 
towards  Gk)d  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  who 
is  on  the  right  hand  of  God. 

GRAD. — ^This  is  the  day  which  the  Lord  hath 
made : let  us  exult  and  rejoice  therein.  F.  Blessed 
be  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  The 
Lord  is  God,  and  he  hath  slione  upon  us.  Alleluia^ 
Alleluia.  V.  Publish  it  among  the  Gentiles,  that 
the  Lord  hath  reigned  from  the  cross.  a 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxviii.  16.  20. — At  that  time: 
The  eleven  disciples  went  into  Galilee  unto  the 
mountain  where  Jesus  had  appointed  them.  And 
seeing  him  they  adored;  but  some  doubted.  And 
Jesus  coming,  spoke  to  them,  saying;  All  power 
is  given  to  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Going  there- 
fore, teach  ye  all  nations : baptizing  them  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  1 
have  commanded  you ; and  behold  I am  with  you 
all  days,  even  to  the  consummation  of  the  world. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Exod.  xii. — This  day  shall  be  a me- 
morable one  to  you.  Alleluia.  You  shall  keep  it  a 
solemn  festival  to  the  Lord  throughout  all  youi 
generations;  an  everlasting  stated  solemnity.  Allel.’ 

SECRET. — Mercifully  accept  this  sacrifice,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  wliich  we  offer  for  the  remis- 
sion of  their  sins,  who  have  been  regenerated ; and 
to  obtain  speedily  the  help  of  thy  grace.  Thro.’ 

COMM.  Matt,  xxviii. — All  power  is  given  to  me 
m heaven  and  in  earth.  Alleluia : Go  teach  all  nations, 
baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Alleluia^  Alleluia. 

Digitized  by  Google 


SATURbAT  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 


P.  COMM.  Respice, — Look  down,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  upon  thy  people : and  since  thou  hast 
vouchsafed  to  give  them  a new  life  by  these  eternal 
mysteries,  giTint  them  also  pardon  of  their  temporal 
offences.  Thro’. 


SATURDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  civ. — ^The  Lord  hath  led  forth 
his  people  in  gladness,  Alleluia:  and  his  chosen  ones 
in  joy.  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  Ps,  Praise  the  Lord  and 
f’all  upon  his  name : publish  his  works  among  the 
Gentiles.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Concede, — Gnint,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  with  reverence  have 
celeit-ated  this  solemnity  of  Easter,  may  happil} 
arrive  at  everlasting  joys.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  1 Peter  \\, — Dear  Brethren:  Laying 
away  air  malice,  and  all  guile  and  dissimulations, 
and  envies,  and  all  detractions,  as  new-Bbm  babes, 
desire  the  rational  milk  without  guile ; that  there- 
by you  may  grow  into  salvation:  if  so  be  you 
have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  sweet,  unto  whom  com- 
ing, as  to  a living  stone,  rejected  indeed  by  men, 
but  chosen  and  made  honourable  by  God : be  you 
also  as  living  stones  built  up,  a spiritual  house,  a 
holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  ac- 
ceptable to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  Wherefore  it  is 
said  in  the  scripture : “ Behold  I lay  in  Sion  a chief 
corner-stone,  elect,  precious : and  he  that  shall  be- 
lieve in  him,  shall  not  be  confounded.”  To  you  there- 
fore that  believe,  honour ; but  to  them  that  believe 
not,  “the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  rJie 
same  is  made  the  head  of  the  corner ; ” and  a stone 
of  stumbling  and  a rock  of  scandal,  to  them  who 
stumble  at  the  word,  neither  do  believe,  whereunto 
also  they  are  set.  But  you  are  a chosen  generation, 
a kingly  priesthood,  a holy  nation,  a purchased  peo- 
ple: that  you  may  declare  his  virtues,  who  hath 


Dig  -ed  by  Google 


SATURDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 


345 


called  you  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light. 
“ Who  in  time  past  were  not  a people : but  are 
now  the  people  of  God.  Who  had  not  obtained 
mercy ; but  now  have  obtained  mercy.” 

Alleluia^  Alleluia.  V.  This  is  the  day  which  the 
Lord  hath  made:  let  us  exult  and  rejoice  therein, 
Alleluia,  V,  Praise  the  Lord,  ye  his  servants,  praise 
the  name  of  the  Lord. 

GOSPEL.  John  xx.  1.  9. — At  that  time:  The 
fii-st  day  of  the  week,  Mary  Magdalen  corneth  early, 
while  it  was  yet  dark,  to  the  sepulchre : and  she  saw 
the  stone  taken  away  from  the  sepulchre.  She  ran, 
therefore,  and  corneth  to  Simon  Peter,  and  to  the  other 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  and  saith  to  them : They 
have  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of  the  sepulchre^and 
wt  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him.  Peter 
therefore  went  out,  and  that  other  disciple,  and  they 
came  to  the  sepulchre.  And  they  both  ran  together, 
and  that  other  disciple  did  overrun  Peter,  and  came 
first  to  the  sepulchre.  And  when  he  stooped  down, 
he  saw  the  linen  cloths  lying : but  yet  he  went  not 
in.  Then  cometli  Simon  Peter,  following  him,  and 
went  into  the  sepulchre,  and  saw  the  linen  cloths 
lying.  And  the  napkin,  that  had  been  about  his  head, 
not  lymg  with  the  linen  cloths,  but  apart  wrapt  up 
into  one  place.  Then  that  other  disciple  also  went 
in,  who  came  first  to  the  sepulchre ; and  he  saw,  and 
believed ; for  as  yet  they  knew  not  the  scripture,  that 
he  must  rise  again  from  the  dead.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxvii. — Blessed  he  he  that  corneth 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord : we  have  blessed  you  out 
of  the  house  of  the  Lord;  the  Lord  is  God,  and  he 
hath  shone  upon  us.  Alleluia,  AUduia, 

SECRET. — GiRut,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
we  may  always  gratefully  solemnize  the  Paschal 
mysteries,  and  that  the  continual  celebration  of  the 
sacrament  of  our  redemption  may  be  to  us  a subject 
yf  perpetual  joy.  Thro’, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


346 


LOW  SUNDAY. 


COMM.  GflZ.  iii. — ^All  you  that  ha\  been  baf>- 
tized  in  Christ,  have  put  on  Christ,  AUetSiia, 

P.  COMM.  Redemptionis, — ^Being  strengthened 
O Lord,  by  the  sacrament  of  our  redemption,  grant 
that  through  this  help  to  eternal  salvation,  a true 
faith  may  Sways  be  increased  in  us.  Thro’. 


QUASIMODO,  or  LOW  SUNDAY. 

IS  called  in  the  Roman  Missal  J Dominica j in  albts,  oe* 
cause  those  who  were  baptized  on  Holy  Saturday 
laid  aside  the  white  garments  wherewith  they  were  yes- 
terday clothed,  and  began  this  day  to  be  no  longer 
distinguished  in  dress  From  the  rest  of  the  faithful. 
It  is  to  the  newly  baptized,  however,  and  those  who 
have  recovered  their  innocence  by  the  sacrament  of 
penance,  thaUthe  Chuich  addresses  herself,  exhorting 
them,  like  new-born  children,  earnestly  to  desire  the 
spiritual  milk  of  the  word  of  God,  which  alone  can 
maintain  in  them  that  life  of  grace  which  they  have 
just  recovered. 

INTROIT.  1 Peter  ii.  Ps,  Ixxx. 

A S ne w bom  babes,  Al-  UASIMOD  O,  gmiii 

desire  the  rational  ^ infantes^  Allel.  ra- 
inilk  without  guile,  Allel,  tionabUe  sine  dolo  lac  con- 
Altel,  AUel,  Ps,  Rejoice  cupiscite^  Alleluia,  Allel 
to  God  our  helper:  sing  Allel,  Ps.  Extdtate  Deo 
aloud  to  the  God  of  Jacob,  adjutori  nostro:  jubilate 
V,  Glory.  Deo  Jacob,  V.  Gloria, 

COLLECT.  Prcesla, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  have  celebrated  the 
solemnity  of  Easter,  may,  by  the  assistance  of  thy 
divine  grace,  ever  make  the  effects  thereof  manifest 
in  our  lives  and  actions.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 John  v.  4.  ^,^Dearly  bdoved: 
Whatsoever  is  born  of  God,  overcometh  the  world : 
and  this  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world, 
our  faith.  Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world, 
but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God? 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


LOW  SUNDAY. 


347 


This  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood,  Jesus 
Christ : not  by  water  only,  but  by  water  and  blood. 
And  it  is  the  spirit  which  testifieth,  that  Christ  is  the 
truth.  And  there  are  three  who  give  testimony  in 
heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
And  these  three  are  one.  And  there  are  three  that 
give  testimony  on  earth : the  spirit,  the  water,  and 
the  blood,  and  these  three  are  one.  If  we  receive 
the  testimony  of  men,  the  testimony  of  God  is  greater. 
For  this  is  the  testimony  of  God  which  is  greater, 
because  he  hath  testified  of  his  Son.  He  that  .be- 
lieveth  in  the  Son  of  God,  hath  the  testimony  of 
God  in  himself. 

Alleluia^  AlleL  V.  On  the  day  of  my  resurrection 
saith  the  Lord,  I will  go  before  you  into  Galilee, 
Allduicu 

V.  After  eight  days,  Post  dies  octo^  januis 

the  doors  being  shut,  Je-  clausis,  stetit  Jesus  in  wic- 
sus  stood  in  the  midst  of  dio  discipulorum  suorum, 
his  discipl^  and  said : ei  dixit : Pax  vobis»  AUel. 
Peace  be  with  you.  Alld. 

GOSPEL.  John  xx.  19.  31. — At  that  time: 
When  it  was  late  that  same  day,  being  the  same 
day  of  the  week,  and  the  doors  were  shut,  where 
the  disciples  were  gathered  together  for  fear  of  the 
Jews,  Jesus  came  and  stood  in  the  midst,  and  said 
to  them : Peace  be  to  you.  And  when  he  had  said 
this  he  shewed  them  his  hands  and  his  side.  The 
discmles  therefore  were  glad  when  they  saw  the 
liOrd.  He  said  therefore  to  them  again : Peace  be 
to  you.  As  the  Father  hath  sent  me,  I also  send  you. 
When  he  had  said  this,  he  breathed  on  them ; and 
he  said  to  them:  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost:  whose 
sins  you  shall  forgive,  they  are  forgiven  them : and 
whose  sins  you  shaU  retain,  they  are  retained.  Now 
Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve,  who  is  called  Didymus, 
was  not  with  them  when  Jesus  came.  The  other 

f 

Digitized  by  Google 


348 


LOW  SUNDAY. 


disciples  therefore  said  to  him ; We  have  seen  the 
Lord.  But  he  said  to  them:  Except  I shall  see  in 
his  hands  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  put  my  finger 
into  the  place  of  the  nails,  and  put  my  hands  into 
his  side,  I will  not  believe.  And  after  eight  days, 
again  his  disciples  were  within,  and  Thomas  with 
them.  Jesus  cometh,  the  doors  being  shut,  and  stood 
in  the  midst,  and  said : Peace  be  to  you.  Then  he 
said  to  Thomas : Put  in  thy  fingers  hither,  and  see 
ray  hands,  and  bring  hither  thy  hand,  and  put  it  into 
my  side ; and  be  not  faithless,  but  believing.  Thomas 
answered,  and  said  to  him : My  Lord  and  my  Grod ! 
Jesus  saith  to  him:  because  thou  hast  seen  me, 
Thomas,  thou  hast  believed : blessed  are  they  that 
have  not  seen,  and  have  believed.*  Many  other 
signs  also  did  Jesus  in  the  sight  of  his  disciples, 
which  are  not  written  in  this  book.  But  these  are 
written  that  you  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ 
the  Son  of  God : and  that  believing  you  may  have 
life  in  his  name.  • Credo. 

OFFERT.  Matt  xxviii. — An  angel  of  the  Lord 
came  down  from  heaven,  and  said  to  the  woman : 
He  whom  you  seek  is  risen,  as  he  told  you,  Met 

SECRET. — Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
the  ofiferings  of  thy  joyfiil  Church  : and  as  thou  hast 
given  occasion  to  this  ^eat  joy,  grant  she  may  re- 
ceive the  fruits  of  that  joy,  which  will  never  end. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xx. — Put  forth  thy  hand,  and  re- 
mark the  place  of  the  nails,  AUduia : and  be  not  in- 
credulous, but  believe,  Allduia^  AUduia. 

P.  COMM.  QwBsumus, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord  our  God,  that  the  sacred  mysteries  thou  hast 
given  us  to  preserve  the  grace  of  our  redemption, 
may  be  our  present  and  future  remedy.  Thro . 

* What  follows  is  omitted  on  the  Feast  of  St.  Thomas, 
21  st  of  December 

f 


Digitized  by  Google 


II.  SUNDAY  AFTER  RASTER. 

fl[^/VoOT  hence  till  the  Ascension  {^except  on  Doubles 
the  II.  Collect  is  Concede,  ds  in  the  Votive  Mass 
the  B.  V.  M.  from  Easter  to  Advent ; the  III. 
EcclesiiB,  or  Deus  omnium,  pp.  50,  Sfc,  toith  their 
respective  Secrets  and  P.  Comms. 

II.  SUNDAY  after  EASTER, 
INTROIT.  Ps,  xxxii. 

The  earth  is  full  of  the  I^isericordia  Do- 

mercy  of  the  Lord,  wfAmini  plena  est  terra 
AUel,  by  the  \t^ord  of  the  Alleluia : verbo  Domini 
Lord,  the  heavens  were  cedi  firmati  sunt.  Alleluia, 
established,  AUeL  Mel.  Alleluia. 

Ps.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  Ps.  Exsultate  justi  in 

O ye  just ; praise  becom-  Domino : rectos  decet  col- 

eth  the  upright.  laudatio.  V.  Gloria. 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus. — O God,  who,  by  the  humilia- 
tion of  thy  Son,  hast  raised  up  the  fallen  world: 
grant  to  thy  people  perpetual  joy : that  they  whom 
thou  hast  delivered  from  the  danger  of  everlasting 
death,  may  arrive  at  eternal  happiness.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Peter  ii.  21.  — Dearly  beloved: 

Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving  you  an  ex-*mple 
that  you  should  follow  his  steps.  JVho  did  no  sin, 
neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth.  Who  when 
he  was  reviled,  did  not  revile : when  he  suffered  he 
threatened  not:  but  delivered  himself  to  him  that 
judged  him  unjustly : who  his  own  self  bore  our  sins 
in  his  body  upon  the  tree : that  we  being  dead  to 
sins,  should  live  to  justice : by  whose  stripes  you 
were  healed.  For  you  were  as  sheep  going  astray : 
but  you  are  now  converted  to  the  shepherd  and 
bishop  of  your  souls. 

V.  I am  the  good  shep-  V.  Ego  sum  Pastor 
herd,  and  I know  my  bonus,  et  cognosco  over 
Gg 

Digitized  by  Google 


'fO  111.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER. 

.'•heep,  and  my  sheep  meas,  et  cognoscunt  me 
enow  me,  Alleluicu  mere,  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  x.  11.  16. — At  that  time : Jents 
I aid  to  the  Pharisees : I am  the  good  shepherd.  The 
<ood  shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  his  sheep.  But  the 
lirelipg  and  he  that  is  not  the  shepherd,  whose  own 
•he  sheep  are  not,  seeth  the  wolf  coming  and  leaveth 
•lie  sheep,  and  flieth,  and  the  wolf  catcheth,  and 
icattererh  the  sheep : and  the  hireling  flieth,  because 
*e  is  a hireling ; and  he  hath  no  care  for  the  sheep. 
\ am  the  good  shepherd:  and  I know  mine,  and 
mine  know  me.  As  the  Father  knoweth  me,  and  I 
xnow  the  father : and  I lay  down  my  life  for  my 
feeep.  And  otlier  sheep  I have,  that  are  not  of  this 
<bld:  P ern  also  I must  bring,  and  they  shall  hear 
ny  A)ice,  and  there  shall  be  one  fold,  and  one  shep- 
lerd.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixii. — O my  God,  my  God,  to  thee 
to  I watch  at  break  of  day : and  in  thy  name  I will 
/ft  up  my  hands.  Alleluia, 

SECRET. — May  this  holy  oblation,  O Lord,  draw 
iown  upon  us  thy  saving  blessing;  and  always  pro- 
mce  in  us  the  effect  of  what  is  represented  in  these 
acred  mysteries.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  x. — I am  the  good  shepherd,  Alle- 
Mia : and  I know  my  sheep,  and  my  sheep  know 
me.  Alleluia^  Alleluia, 

P.  COMM.  Pr(Bsta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that,  receiving  from  thee  the  grace 
of  life,  we  may  always  glory  in  tliy  gift.  Thro’. 


III.  SUNDAY  ajler  EASTER, 
INTROIT.  P5.  Ixv. 

OHOUT  with  joy  to  TUniLATE  Deo  omnis 
^ God  nil  the  earth,  t/  terra.  Alleluia:  psal- 
AUd, : sing  ye  a psalm  to  mum  dMe  nomini  qus, 
his  name,  Alleluia,  Give  Alleluia.  Date  gloriam 


Digitized  by  Google 


ill.  SUNDA.Y  AFTER  EASTER.  351 

glory  to  his  praise,  Alld.  laudi  Allel.  Allel. 

AlleL  JUld,  Ps,  Say  un-  Allel.  Ps.  DicUe  Dto : 
to  God:  how  terrible  are  quam  terribilia  sunt  opera 
thy  works,  O Lord ! Thy  tua.  Domini ! In  mtdti- 
great  power  shall  convict  tudine  virtutis  tuce  men- 
thy  enemies  of  a lie.  lientur  tibi  inimici  tui, 

V,  Glofy.  V.  Gloria, 

COLLECT.  DeuSf  qui. — O God,  who  shewest  the 
light  of  thy  truth  to  such  as  go  astray,  that  they  may 
return  to  the  way  of  righteousness : grant  that  all, 
who  profess  the  Christian  name,  may  forsake  what- 
ever is  contrary  to  that  profession,  and  closely  pur- 
sue what  is  agreeable  to  it.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Pder  ii.  11.  19. — Dearly  beloved: 
I beseech  you  as  strangers  and  pilgrims  to  refrain 
yourselves  from  carnal  desires,  which  war  against 
the  soul,  having  your  conversation  good  among  the 
Gentiles : that  whereas  they  speak  against  you  as  evil 
doers,  they  may,  by  the  good  works  whicli  they  shall 
behold  in  you,  glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation. 
Be  ye  subject  therefore  to  every  human  creature  for 
God’s  sake : whether  it  be  to  kings  as  excelling:  or 
to  governors  as  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of 
evU  doers,  and  for  the  praise  of  the  good : for  so  is 
the  will  of  God,  that  by  doing  well  you  may  put  to 
silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men : as  free,  and 
not  as  making  liberty  a cloak  for  malice,  but  as  the 
servants  of  God.  Honour  all  men  : love  the  brother- 
hood : fear  God : honour  the  king.  Servants  be 
subject  to  your  masters  with  all  fear,  not  only  to  the 
good  and  gentle,  but  also  to  the  froward.  For  this 
is  tlianks- worthy  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

AUduia,  Mlduia.  V.  Ps.  cx.  The  Lord  hath 
sent  redempnon  to  his  people.  Alleluia. 

V.  It  beltoved  Christ  to  V.  Opportebat  pati 
suffer,  and  to  rise  again  Christum,  et  resurgere  a 
from  the  dead  and  so  to  mortuis,  et  ita  intrare  in 
enter  into  his  Glory.  Allel.  gloriam  smm.  Alleluia. 

Gg2 

Dig  ioyCjOO^IC 


352  III.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER. 

GOSPEL.  John  x^'i.  16.  22. At  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : — A little  while,  and  now 
you  shall  not  see  me : and  again  a little  while,  and 
you  shall  see  me : because  I go  to  the  Father.  Then 
some  of  his  disciples  said  one  to  another ; What  is 
this  that  he  saith  to  us:  A little  while,  and  you  shall 
not  see  me : and  again  a little  while,  and  you  shall 
see  me,  and,  because  I go  to  the  Father?  They 
said  therefore : What  is  this  that  he  saith : A little 
while  ? we  know  not  what  he  speaketh.  And  Jesus 
knew  that  they  had  a mind  to  ask  him ; and  he  said 
to  them : Of  this  do  you  inquire  among  yourselves, 
because  I said : A little  while,  and  you  shall  not  see 
me : and  again  a little  while  and  you  shall  see  me. 
Amen,  amen,  I say  to  you,  that  you  shall  lament 
and  weep,  but  the  world  shall  rejoice  : and  you  shal 
be  made  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned 
into  joy.  A woman,  wdien  she  is  in  labour,  hath 
sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come : but  when  she 
hath  brought  forth  the  child,  she  remembereth  no 
more  the  anguish,  for  joy  that  a man  is  bom  into  the 
world.  So  also  you  now  indeed  have  sorrow,  but 
I will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice ; 
fuid  your  joy  no  man  shall  take  from  you.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxi. — Praise  the  Lord,  O my  souL 
I will  praise  the  Lord,  while  I live : I will  sing  a 
psalm  to  my  God,  while  I have  a being.  Alleluia, 

SECRET, — May  tliese  sacred  mysteries,  O Lord, 
diminish  in  us  the  love  of  the  things  of  this  world, 
and  increase  the  love  of  such  as  are  eternal.  Thro’. 

COMM.— A little  while,  and  you  shad  not  see  me, 
Alleluia : again  a little  while  and  you  shall  see  me : 
because  I go  to  the  Father.  AUel.  AUdk 

P.  COMM. — May  the  sacrament  we  have  receiv- 
ed, O Lord,  supply  us  with  the  spiritual  tuod  of  the 
wul,  and  all  necessaiy  helps  of  the  body.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


( 353  ; 

IV.  SUNDAY  after  EASTEK. 
INTEOIT.  Ps.  xcvii. 

SING  to  the  liOrd  a ^AJVTATE  Dormnu 
new  canticle,  Alleh  cmiticum  novwn,  Al- 
liecause  the  Lord  hath  leluia : quia  mirabilia  fe~ 
done  wonderful  things,  cit  Dominus  Alleb  ante 
AUtluia:  he  hath  revealed  conspectum  flentium  re- 
his  justice  in  the  sight  of  velavit  justitiam  suam^ 
the  Gentiles,  AlleL  AIM.  Allel.  Allel.  Allel.  Ps.  Sal- 
Allel.  Ps.  His  right-hand  vavit  sibi  dextera  ejus  et 
and  his  holy  arm  hath  hravhium  sanctum  ejus. 
saved  us.  F.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  makest  the 
faithful  to  be  of  one  mind:  grant  iJiat  thy  people 
may  love  what  thou  commandest,  and  desire  what 
thou  promisest:  that,  amidst  the  uncertainties  of 
this  world,  we  may  place  our  affections  where  there 
are  true  joys.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  James  i.  17.  21. — Dearly  beloved: 
Every  best  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift,  is  from  above, 
coming  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom 
there  is  no  change,  nor  shadow  of  alteration.  For 
of  his  own  will  hath  he  begotten  us  by  the  word  of 
truth,  that  we  might  be  some  beginning  of  his  crea- 
tures. You  know,  my  dearest  brethren.  And  let 
every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  but  slow  to  speak,  and 
slow  to  anger.  For  the  anger  of  man  worketh  not 
the  justice  of  God.  Wherefore  casting  away  aU  un- 
cleanness, and  abundance  of  naughtiness,  with  meek- 
ness receive  the  ingrafted  word,  which  is  able  to  save 
your  souls. 

Alleluia,  AUduia.  V.  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord 
hath  displayed  his  power:  the  right  hand  of  the 
Lord  hath  raised  me  up.  Alleluia. 

V.  Christ  rising  from  V.  Christus  resurgens 
the  dead,  dieth  no  more : ex  mortuis,  jam  n^n  mo- 
Gga 

Dig  iDyCjOO^IC 


354  IV.  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER. 

death  shall  no  longer  have  ritur:  mors  Uli  idlra  non 
power  over  him,  MeL  dominubUur,  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  xvL  5.  15. — At  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples.:  I go  to  him  that  sent  me : and 
none  of  you  asketh  me : Whither  goest  thou  ? But 
because  I have  spoken  these  things  to  you,  sorrow 
hath  filled  your  heart.  But  1 tell  you  the  truth : it 
is  expedient  to  you  that  I go : for  if  I go  not,  the 
Paraclete  will  not  come  to  you ; but  if  I go,  I will 
send  him  to  you.  And  when  he  is  come,  he  will 
convince  the  world  of  sin,  and  of  justice,  and  of 
judgment  Of  sin;  because  they*believed  not  in 
me.  And  of  justice:  because  I go  to  the  Father; 
and  you  shall  see  me  no  longer.  And  of  judgment: 
because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  already  judged. 
I have  yet  many  things  to  say  to  you : but  you  can- 
not bear  them  now.  But  when  he,  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  is  come,  he  will  teach  you  all  truth.  For  he 
shall  not  speak  of  himself;  but  what  things  soever 
he  shall  hear,  he  shall  speak : and  the  things  that 
are  to  come  he  shall  shew  you.  He  shall  glorify 
me : because  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  shew 
it  you.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixv. — Sing  to  the  Lord  all  the 
earth,  sing  a psalm  to  his  name:  come,  and  hear, 
and  I will  relate  to  you,  all  you  who  fear  God, 
what  ^eat  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  my  souL 
Allduuu 

SECRET. — O Go(^  who  madest  us  partakers  of 
the  one  Supreme  Divinity,  by  the  frequent  celebra- 
tion and  participation  of  this  holy  sacrifice : grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  that  as  we  know  thy  truth,  so  we  may 
live  up  to  it  by  a worthy  conduct  of  life.  Thro*. 

COMM.  John  xvi. — ^When  the  Comforter,  the 
Spirit  of  truth  shall  come,  he  will  convince  the 
world  of  sin  and  of  justice  and  of  judgment, 

IduiOt  AUd'iia. 


Digitized  by  Google 


T,  StTNUAT  AFTER  EASTER.  355 

P.  COMM.  Adtsta, — Help  us,  O God,  our  Lord, 
that  our  sins  may  be  forgiven,  and  that  we  may  be 
delivei-ed  from  all  dangers  by  the  sacrament,  which 
we  have  received  with  fiuth.  Thro’. 


y.  SUNDAY  qfttr  EASTER. 
INTROIT,  haias  xlviiL  Ps.  Ixv. 

'H  the  voice  of  'jj^OCEM  jucunditatis 
W annuntiaie^  el  audia- 
tur^ Alleluia.  Annun- 
tiate usque  ad  esiremum 
terrce:  liberavit  Dominus 
populum  suum.  Alleluia. 
Alleluia.  • 

Ps.  Jubilate  Deo  omnis 
terra  : psalmum  dicite  no- 
mini e^us : date  gloriam 
laudi  ejus* 

V.  Gloria. 


yjy  make  this  to  be 
heard.  Alleluia.  Publish 
to  the  utmost  bounds  of 
the  earth : that  the  Lord 
hath  redeemed  his  people. 
,AUeluia^  Alleluia. 

Ps.  Shout  with  joy  to 
God,  all  the  earth:  sing 
a t>salm  to  his  name : give 
glory  to  his  praise. 

F.  Glory. 


COLLECT.  Deus. — O God,  from  whom  all  that 
is  good  proceeds : grant  that  thy  people,  by  thy  in- 
spiration, may  resolve  on  what  is  right,  and  by  thy 
direction,  put  it  in  practice.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  James  L 22.  27. — Dearlif  beloved: 
Be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only,  de- 
ceiving your  own  selves.  For  if  a man  be  a hearer 
of  the  word  and  not  a doer ; he  shall  be  compared 
to  a man  beholding  his  own  countenance  in  a glass. 
For  he  beheld  himself  and  went  his  way,  and  pre- 
sently forgot  what  manner  of  man  he  was.  But  he 
that  hath  looked  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and 
hath  continued  therein,  not  becoming  a forgetful 
hearer,  but  a doer  of  the  work : this  man  shall  be 
blessed  in  his  deed.  And  if  any  man  thirik  himself 
religiotis,  not  bridling  his  tongue,  but  deceiving  his 
own'heaii:,  this  man’s  religion  is  vain.  Religion 
clean  and  undefiled  before  God  and  tlie  Father,  is 
this:  to  visit  the  fatherless  and  the  widows  in  their 


Dig  tized  by  Google 


356  T*  SCrCDAT  AFTER  EASTER. 

iribulaikm : txotdf  to  keep  otters-  seif  unspotted  from 
the  world. 

jmduioy  Mlduia,  F.  Christ  is  risen^  and  bath 
shone  upon  us^  whom  he  hath  redeemed  with  his 
blood.  Mlduicu 

F.  I came  forth  from  V.  Erivi  a Patre,  et 
theFiither,audIcame in-  vent  m mundum:  iterum 
to  the  world : I leave,  the  rdinquo  mundum^  et  vado 
world  again,  and  go  to  (xct  Patrem,  Alleluia, 
the  Fatlier.  Mletuia, 

GOSPEL.  John  xvk  23.  30.  — M that  time  z 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples  i Anien,  amen,.  1 say  to 
you  : if  you  ask  the  Father  any  thing  in  my  name, 
be  will  give  it  you.  Hitherto  you  have  not  asked 
any  thing  in  my  name.  Ask  and  you  shall  receive  ; 
that  your  joy  may  be  full.  These  things  I have 
spoken  to  you  in  proverbs.  The  hour  cometli  when 
I will  DO  more  speak  to  you  in  proverbs,  but  will 
shew  you  plainly  of  the  Father.  In  that  day  you 
shall  ask  in  my  name : and  1 say  not  to  you,  that  1 
will  ask  the  Fatlier  for  you.  For  the  Father  him- 
self loveth  you,  because  you  have  loved  me,  and  have 
believed  that  I came  out  from  God.  I came  forth 
from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world : again 
I leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father.  His  dis- 
ciples Say  to  him : Behold  now  thou  speakest  plain- 
ly, and  speakest  no  proverb.  Now  we  know  that 
thou  knowest  all  things,  and  thou  needest  not  that 
any  man  should  ask  thee.  By  this  we  believe  that 
thou  earnest  forth  from  God.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixv. — Bless  the  Lord  our  God: 
Ye  Gentiles,  and  make  the  voice  of  his  praise  be 
heard,  who  hath  set  my  soul  to  live,  and  hath  not 
suffered  my  feet  to  be  moved.  Blessed  be  the  Lord, 
who  hath  not  turned  away  my  prayer,  nor  his  mercy 
from  me.  Mleluia, 

SECRET. — Receive,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
the  prayers  of  tlie  faithful,  togetlier  with  these  ohlR- 


Digitized  by  Google 


ROGATION  DAYS.  357 

lions ; that  by  these  duties  of  piety  we  may  obtain 
etern^  life.  Thro’. 

COMl'.I.  Ps,  xev.—Sing  to  the  Lord  Alleluia, 
Bing  to  the  Lord,  and  bless  his  name:  publish  duly, 
every  day,  that  he  hath  saved  us.  Alleluia,  Alleluia, 
P.  COMM.  Tribue. — Grant,  O Lord  by  the  |K)wer 
of  the  heavenly  nourishment  we  have  received,  that 
we  desire  what  is  right,  and  obtain  our  desire.  Thro.’ 

ROGATION  DAYS. 

WHEN  the  Diocese  of  Vienne^  in  the  fifth  century 
had  been  dreadfully  afflicted  by  incessant  eartn 
quakes,  incursions  of  wild  beasts,  &c.  &c.  SZ.  Mamertus 
its  Bishop  experienced  such  happy  effects  from  the 
public  supplications  he  had  appointed  for  the  ceasing 
of  these  terrible  calamities,  that  the  same  pious  custom 
extended  itself  gradually  over  the  whole  Western 
Church;  and  hence  it  is,  that  on  the  three  days  pre- 
ceding the  Feast  of  the  Ascension,  abstinence  from 
flesh  is  enjoined,  and 'the  long  Litanies  are  sung  in 
solemn  procession  in  catholic  countries : that  the  wrath 
of  God  being  appeased  by  the  abstinence  and  prayers 
of  his  Chnrcn,  we  may  avert  those  punishments  which 
are  justly  due  to  our  sins. 

INTROIX  Ps.  xvii. — ^He  heard  my  voice  from 
his  holy  temple,  Alleluia.  And  my  cry  before  him 
came  into  his  ears.  Alleluia,  Allduia.  Ps.  I will 
love  thee,  O Lord,  my  Btrength : the  Lord  is  my 
firmament,  my  refuge,  and  my  deliverer.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  PrreslcL — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  in  our  afflictions  rely 
on  thy  goodness,  may,  under  thy  protection,  be  de- 
fended against  all  adversities.  Thro’. 

EPISTLEL  James  v.  16.  20. — Most  dearly  belov- 
ed: Confess  your  sins  one  to  another;  and  pray  one 
for  auotlier,  that  you  may  be  saved.  For  the  conti- 
nual prayer  of  a just  man  availeth  much.  Elias  was 
a man  passable  like  unto  us:  and  with  prayer  he 
prajed  tliat  it  might  not  rain  upon  the  cartel*  and  it 


zed  by  Google 


358 


ROGATION  DATS. 


rained  not  for  three  years  and  sbc  months.  And  he 
pmyed  again  and  the  heaven  gave  rain,  and  the 
earth  brought  forth  her  fruit.  My  brethren,  if  any 
of  you  err  from  the  truth,  and  one  convert  him ; he 
must  know,  that  he  who  caused  a sinner  to  be  con- 
verted from  the  error  of  his  way,  shall  save  his  soul 
Irom  death,  and  shall  cover  a multitude  of  sins. 

JlUduia,  V,  Praise  tlie  Lord,  for  he  is  good,  and 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

GOSPEL.  lAike  xi.  5.  13. — At  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples : Which  of  you  shall  have  a 
friend,  and  shall  ^o  to. him  at  midnight,  and  shal' 
say  to  him : Friend,  lend  me  three  loaves,  because  a 
friend  of  mine  has  come  off  his  journey  to  me,  and 
I have  not  what  to  set  before  him : and.  he  from 
within  should  answer  and  say : Trouble  me  not,  the 
door  is  now  shut,  and  my  children  are  with  me  in 
bed ; I cannot  rise  and  give  thee.  Yet  if  he  shall 
continue  knocking,  I say  to  you,  although  he  will 
not  rise  and  give  him,  because  he  is  his  fo‘end ; yet 
because  of  his  importunity  he  will  rise,  and  give  hint 
us  many  as  he  uecdeth.  And  I say  to  you.  Ask,  and 
it  shall  be  given  to  you : seek,  and  you  shall  find : 
knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  to  vou.  For  every  one 
that  asketh,  receiveth : and  he  that  seekeih,  findetli : 
and  to  him  that  knocketh,  it  shall  l>e  opened.  And 
which  of  you,  if  he  ask  his  father  bread,  will  he  gi\'e 
him  a stone  ? or  a fish,  will  he  for  a fish  give  him  a 
serpent.^  Or  if  he  ask  an  egg  will  he  reach  him  a 
scorpion  ? If  you  then  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 
good  gifts  to  your  children,  how  much  more  wili 
your  Father  from  heaven  give  the  good  Spirit  U\ 
them  that  ask  him  ? 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cviii. — I will  give  great  thanks  to 
the  Lord  with  my  mouth,  and  in  the  midst  of  many : 
I will  praise  him,  because  he  hath  stood  at  the  right- 
hand  of  the  poor  to  save  my  soul  fix)m  persecutors. 
AiUluia, 

SECRET. — May  these  offerings  O Lord,  loosen 


THE  I.ITANIES.  359 

the  bonds  of  our  wickedness,  and  obtain  for  us  the 
gift  of  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

COMM.  lAihe.  xi. — Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you : 
seek,  and  you  shall  find : knock,  and  it  shaU  be  open- 
ed to  you.  For  every  one  that  asketh,  receiveth: 
and  he  that  seeketh,  findeth ; and  to  him  that  knock- 
eth,  it  shall  be  opened.  Alleluia, 

P.  COMM.  Vota  nodlra, — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  mercifully  receive  our  prayers ; that  while  we 
partake  of  thy  gifts  in  oqr  affliction,  the  comfort  we 
find  may  increase  our  love.  Thro’. 

ANTHEM  before  the  Litanies. 

Exurge,  Domine,  adjuva  nos : et  libera  nos  prop- 
ter gloriam  nominis  tui.  AUeluia, 

Ps,  Deus,  auribus  nostris  audivimus ; patres  nos- 
tri annuntiaverunt  nobis.  F.  Gloria. 

/ Ant,  Exurge,  &c.  to  Ps, 

The  LITANIES. 

Paris  marked  thus  * are  omitted  on  Holy  Saturday. 

Kyrie  eleison.  Christe  Sancte  Michael,  ora. 
eleison.  Kyrie  elei-  Sancte  Gabriel.  ora. 
son.  Christe  audi  nos.  Sancte  Raphael,  ora. 
Christe  exaudi  nos.  Omnes  sancti  Angeli  et 

Pater  de  cceHs  Deus,  Mi-  Archangeli,  orate. 

serere  nobis.  Omnes  sancti  beatorum 

Fili  Redemptor  mundi  spirituum  Ordines,  orate 

Deus,  miserere  nobis.  pro  nobis. 

Spiritus  sancte  Deus,  mi-  Sancte  J.  Baptiste,  ora. 


serere  nobis.  ^Sancte  Joseph,  ora. 

Sancta  Trinitas  unus  De-  Omnes  sancti  Patriarchae 
us,  miserere  nobis.  et  Prophetae,  orate. 

Sancta  Maria,  Ora  pro  Sancte  Petre,  ora  pro 
nobis.  nobis. 

Sancta  Dei  genitrix,  ora  Sancte  Paule,  ora. 

pro  nobis.  Sancte  Andrea,  ora. 

Sancta  Virgo  Virginum,  ^Sancte  Jacobe,  ora. 

ora  pro  lobis.  Sancte  Joannes,  ora. 

Digitized  by  Google  ^ 


THE  L.1TANIES. 


SOP 

•Sancte  Thoma,  lira. 

*Sano  Jacobe,  ora. 

•Sancte  Philippe,  ora. 

•SancteBartholoinaeeora. 
•Sancte  MattliBee,  ora. 

•Sancte  Simon,  ora. 

•Sancte  Thaddaee,  ora. 

•Sancte  Matthia,  ora. 

•Sancte  Barnaba,  ora. 

I •Sancte  Luca,  ora. 

•Sancte  Marce,  ora. 

Omnes  sancti  Apostoli  et 
Evangelist®,  orate. 
Omnes  Sancti  Discipuli 
Domini,  orate. 

•Omnes  sancti  Innocen- 
tes, orate. 

Sancte  Stephane,  ora. 

Sancte  Laurenti,  ora. 

Sancte  Vincenti,  ora. 

♦Sancti  Fabiane  et  Sebas- 
tiane,  orate  pro  nobis. 
•Sancti  Joannes  et  Paule, 
. orate  pro  nobis. 

•Sancti  Cosma  et  Dami- 
ane,  orate, 

•Sancte  Gervasi  et  Pro- 
tasi, orate. 

Omnes  sancti  Martyres, 
orate. 

Sancte  Sylvester,  ora 

Sancte  Gregori,  ora. 

•Sancte  Ambrosi,  ora. 
Sancte  Augustine,  ora. 
•Sancte  Hieronyme,  ora. 
•Sancte  Marti  ne,  ora. 
•Sancte  Nicolae,  ora. 
Omnes  sancti  Pontifices 


et  Confessores,  orute 
pro  nobis. 

Omnes  sancti  Doctores, 
orate  pro  nobis. 

Sancte  Antoni,  ora. 

Sancte  Benedicte,  ora. 

•Sancte  Bemarde.  ora. 

Sancte  Dominice,  ora 

Sancte  Francisce,  ora. 

Omnes  sancti  Sacerdotes 
et  Levitffi,  orate. 

Omnes  sancti  Monachi  et 
Eremitae,  orate. 

Sancta  Maria  Magdale 
na,  ora. 

•Sancta  Lucia,  ora. 

Sancta  Agnes,  ora. 

•Sancta  C®cilia,  ora. 

•Sancta  Agatha  orr.. 

•Sancta  Catharina,  ora. 

Sancta  Anastasia,  ora. 

Omnes  sanet®  Virgines 
et  Vidu®.  orate. 

Omnes  Sancti  et  Sanet® 
Dei,  intercedite  pro 
nobis. 

Propitius  esto,  Parce  i o- 
bis  Domine. 

Propitius  esto.  Exaudi 
nos  Domine. 

Ab  omni  malo,  Libera 
nos  Domine. 

Ab  omni  peccato,  libera 
nos  Domine. 

•Ab  ira  tua,  libera  nos 
Domine. 

•A  subitanea  et  improvi- 
sa morte,  libera,  &c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THTC  LITANIES. 


;i6i 


’•Ab  insidiis  diaboM,  libe- 
ra nos  Domine. 

*Ab  ira,  odio,  et  omni 
mala  voluntate,  libera 
nos  Domine. 

•A  spiritu  fornicationis, 
libera  nos  Domine. 

•A  fulgure  et  tempestate, 
libera  nos  Domine. 

A morte  perpetua,  libera 
nos  Domine. 

Per  mysterium  sanctas 
incarnationis  tuse,  li- 
bera nos  Domine. 

Pef  adventum  tuum,  li- 
bera nos  Domine. 

Per  nativitatem  tuam,  li- 
bera nos  Domine. 

Per  baptilMum  et  sanc- 
tum jejunium  tuum, 
libera  nos  Domine. 

Per  crucem  et  passionem 
tuam,  libera,  &c. 

Per  mortem  et  'sepultu- 
ram tuam,  libera,  &c. 

Per  sanctam  resurrectio- 
nem tuam,  libera,  &c. 

Per  admirabilem  ascensi- 
onem tuam,  libera,  &c. 

Per  adventum  Spiritus 
sancti  Paracliti,  libera 
nos  Domine. 

In  die  judicii,  libera,  &c. 

Peccatores,  te  rogalnus 
audi  nos. 

(Jt  nobis  parcas,  te  roga- 
mus audi  nos. 

*Ut  nobis  uidulgeas,  te 
rogamus  audi  nos. 


*Ut  ad  veram  poenitenti- 
am nos  perducere  dig- 
neris, te  rogamus,  &c. 

Ut  Ecclesiam  tuam  sanc- 
tam regere  et  conser- 
vare digneris,  te  roga- 
mus audi  nos. 

Ut  domnum  Apostolicum 
et  omnes  Ecclesiasticos 
Ordines  in  sancta  re- 
ligione conservai*e  dig- 
neris, te  rogamus  audi 
nos. 

Ut  inimicos  sanctae  Ec- 
clesiae humiliare  dig- 
neris, te  rogamus,  &c. 

Ut  Regibus  et  Principi- 
bus Christianis  pacem 
et  veram  concordiam 
donare  digneris,  te  ro- 
gamus audi  nos. 

♦Ut  cuncto  populo  Chris- 
tiano pacem  et  unita- 
tem largiri  digneris,  te 
rogamus  audi  nos. 

Ut  nosmetipsos  in  tuo 
sancto  servitio  confor- 
tare et  conservare  dig- 
neris, te  rogamus,  &c. 

•Ut  mentes  nostras  ad 
coelestia  desideria  eri- 
gas, te  rogamus,  &c. 

Ut  omnibus  benefactori  ^ 
bus  nostris  sempiterna 
bona  retribuas,  te  ro- 
gamus audi  nos. 

•Ut  animas  nostras,  fra- 
trum, propinquorum, 
et  benefrctorum  nos- 


Hh 


362 


THE  I.ITANIEt, 


trorum  ab  eeterna  dam- 
natione eripias,  te  ro- 
gamus audi  nos. 

Ut  fructus  terrae  dare  et 
conservare  digneris,  te 
rogamus  audi  nos. 

Ut  omnibus  ddelibus  de- 
functis requiem  aeter- 
nam donare  digneris, 
te  rogamus  audi  nos. 

Ut  nos  exaudire  digneris, 
te  rogamus  audi  nos. 

*Fili  Dei,  te  rogamus,  &c. 

Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pec- 
cata mundi.  Parce  no- 
bis Domine. 

Ps. 

Deus  in  adjutorium 
meum  intende ; * 
Domine  ad  adjuvandum 
me  festina. 

2.  Confundantur  et  re- 
vereantur, * qui  quaerunt 
animam  meam. 

3.  Avertantur  retror- 
sum, et  erubescant,  ♦qui 
volunt  mihi  mala. 

4.  Avertantur  stadm 
erubescentes,  Qui  di- 
cunt mihi.  Euge,  Euge. 

5.  Exultent  et  laetentur 
in  te  omnes  qui  quaerunt 
te,  ♦ et  dicant  semper ; 
magnificetur  Dominus, 
qui  diligunt  salutare 
tuum. 


Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pec- 
cata mundi.  Exaudi 
nos  Domine 

Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pec- 
cata mundi.  Miserere 
nobis. 

Christe  audi  nos.  Christe 
exaudi  nos  f.  * Kyrit 
deison,  Christe  elei- 
son.  i^yrie  deison. 
Pater  noster,  in  secreto. 
V.  Et  ne  nos  inducas 
in  tentationem.  R,  Sed 
libera  nos. 


Ixix. 

6.  Ego  vero  eronus  et 
pauper  sum^Deus  ad- 
juva me. 

7.  Adjutor  meus,  et  li- 
berator meus  es  tu;  ♦ 
Domine  ne  moreris. 

Gloria  Patri,  &c. 

V.  Salvos  fac  servos 
tuos.  R.  Deus  meus 
sperantes  in  te.  V.  Esto 
nobis  Domine  turris  for- 
titudinis. R.  A facie 
inimici.  V.  Nihil  profi- 
ciat inimicus  in  nobis. 
R.  Et  filius  iniquitatis 
non  apponat  nocere  no- 
bis.* V.  Domine  non  se- 
cundum peccata  nostra 
&cia8  nobis.  R.  Neque 


1 Here  the  Ma:®»  on  Holy  Saturday  begins,  and  what 
follows  is  then  entirely  omitted. 


fk 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  UTANIES. 


363 


Hecundum  iniquitates  no- 
stras retribuas  nobis.  V. 
Oremus  pro  Pontifice 
nostro  N.  V,  Dominus 
conservet  eum,  et  vivi- 
ficet eum,  et  beatum  fa- 
ciat eum  in  terra,  et 
non  tradat  eum  in  ani- 
mam inimicorum  ejus. 
V.  Oremus  pro  benefac- 
toribus nostris.  R.  Re- 
tribuere dignare  Domine 
omnibus  nobis  bona  fa- 
cientibus, propter  nomen 
tuum,  vitam  aeternam.  F. 


Oremus  pro  fidelibus  de- 
functis. R.  Remiiem  aeter- 
nam dona  eis  Domine,  et 
lux  perpetua  luceat  eis. 
V.  Requiescant  in  pace. 
R.  Arnen.  F.  Pro  fra- 
tribus nostris  absentibus. 
R.  Salvos  fac  servos  tuos, 
Deus  meus  sperantes  in 
te.  F.  Mitte  eis  Domine 
auxilium  de  sancto.  R, 
Et  de  Sion  tuere  eos. 
F.  Domine  exaudi  ora- 
tionem meam.  R,  Et  cla- 
mor meus  ad  te  veuiat. 


Oremus,  Let  us  pray.  ^ 

OGOD,  whose  property  it  is  always  to  have 
mercy ^d  to  spare,  receive  our  petitions;  that 
we,  and  all  thy  servants,  who  are  bound  by  the 
chain  of  sin,  may,  by  the  compassion  of  thy  good- 
ness, mercifully  be  absolved. 

TT EAR,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  the  prayers  of 
XI  thy  suppliants,  and  pardon  us  our  sins,  who 
confess  them  to  thee ; that  of  thy  bounty,  thou  may- 
est  grant  us  pardon  and  peace, 
fl  "\(JT  of  thy  clemency,  O Lord,  shew  us  thy  un- 
^ speakable  mercy;  that  so  thou  mayest  both 
acquit  us  of  our  sins,  and  deliver  us  from  the  punkib- 
inent  we  deserve  for  them. 

OGOD,  who  by  sin  art  offended,  and  by  penance 
pacified,  mercifully  regard  the  prayers  of  thy 
people,  who  make  simplications  to  thee ; and  turn 
away  the  scourges  oi  thy  anger,  which  we  deserve 
for  our  sins. 

O ALMIGHTY  and  Eternal  God,  have  mercy 
on  thy  servant  N,  our  chief  Bishop,  and  direct 
him  according  to  thy  clemency,  in  the  way  of  ever- 
lasting salvation ; that,  by  thy  grace,  he  may  desire 
H h 2 


364 


THE  I^ITANIES. 


the  things  that  are  agreeable  to  thy  will,  and  per 
lijrm  them  with  all  his  strength. 

OGOD,  from  whom  are  all  holy  desires,  rigliteoiu? 

counsels,  and  just  works,  give  to  thy  servants 
that  ])eace  which  the  world  cannot  give ; that  our 
hearts  being  disposed  to  keep  thy  commandments, 
and  the  fear  of  enemies  taken  away,  the  times,  by 
thy  protection,  may  be  peaceable.  * 

INFLAME,  O Lord,  our  reins  and  hearts  with  the 
fire  of  thy  holy  spirit ; to  the  end  we  may  serve 
thee  with  a chaste  body,  and  please  thee  with  a 
clean  heart. 

OGOD,  the  Creator  and  Redeemer  of  all  the 
faithful,  give  to  the  souls  of  thy  servants  de- 
parted the  remission  of  all  their  sins ; tliat,  by  pious 
supplications  they  may  obtain  the  pardon  they  have 
always  desired. 

PREVENT,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  our  actions 
by  thy  holy  inspirations,  and  carry  them  on  by 
thy  gracious  assistance ; that  every  prayer  and  work 
of  ours  may  always  begin  from  thee,  and  by  thee  be 
happily  ended. 

0 ALMIGHTY  and  Eternal  God,  who  hast  do- 
minion over  the  living  and  tlie  dead,  and  art 
merciful  to  all,  whom  thou  kno west  will  be  thine  by 
faith  and  good  works : we  humbly  beseech  thee  that 
they,  for  whom  we  have  purposed  to  ofier  our  pray- 
ers, whether  the  present  world  still  retains  them  in 
the  flesh,  or  the  next  world  hath  already  received 
them  divested  of  their  bodies,  may  by  the  clemency 
of  thine  own  goodness,  and  the  intercession  of  thy 
saints,  obtain  pardon  and  full  remission  of  ther  sinsi. 
Tliro*.  R,  Amen.  ' 

V.  The  Lord  be  with  you.  R,  And  with  tjiy 
spirit  V.  May  the  almighty  and  merciful  Lord 
- graciously  hear  us.  R.  Amen.  V.  And  may  the 
souls  of  the  faithful  departed,  through  the  mercy  af 
God,  rest  in  peace,  R.  Amen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


( 365  ] 

EVE  of  the  ASCENSION. 

M as  on  the  Fifth  Sunday  q/ler  EASTER,  p.  355. 
{inciudvn^  a Comm^m.  of  the  Rogation  day,  p.  357, 
and  of  the  B.  V.  Mary,  hy  the  Collect,  Concede, 
as  referred  to  p.  349,)  except 

EPISTLE,  Ephes.  iv.  7. 13. — Brdhren : To  every 
one  of  us  is  given  grace,  according  to  the  measure 
of  the  giving  of  Christ.  Wherefore  he  saith : “ As- 
cending on  high  he  led  captivity  captive : he  gave 
gifts  to  men.”  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it, 
but  because  he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower 
parts  of  the  earth  ? He  that  descended,  is  the  same 
also  that  ascended  above  all  the  heavens,  that  he 
might  fill  all  things.  And  he  gave  some  apostles, 
and  some  prophets,  and  other  some  evangelists,  and 
other  some  pastors  and  doctors,  for  the  perfecting  of 
the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edi- 
fying of  the  body  of  Christ : until  we  all  meet  into 
tne  unity  of  faitli,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son 
of  God  unto  a perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the 
age  of  the  fulness  of  Christ. 

GOSPEL.  John  xviL  1.  11.  — At  that  time: 
Jesus  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  said : Father,  the 
hour  is  come,  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  may 
glorify  thee.  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over 
all  flesh,  that  he  may  give  eternal  life  to  all,  whom 
thou  hast  given  hitn.  Now  this  is  eternal  life;  that 
they  may  know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent.  I have  glorified  thee 
on  the  earth:  I have  finished  the  work  which  thou 
gavest  me  to  do:  and  now  glorify  thou  me,  O Fa- 
ther, with  thyself  with  the  glory  which  I had,  before 
the  World  was,  with  thee.  I have  manifested  thy 
name  to  the  men  whom  thou  hast  given  me  out  of 
the  world.  Thine  they  were,  and  to  me  thou  gavest 
them:  and  they  have  kept  thy  word.  Now  they 
have  known  that  all  things  which  tliou  hast  given  me 
Hh3 

oy  Google 


366 


ASCENSION  DAT. 


are  from  thee : because  the  words  which  thou  gaveat^^^ 
me,  I have  given  to  them : and  they  have  receivea^ 
them,  and  have  known  in  very  deed  that  I came 
out  from  thee,  and  they  have  beheved  that  thou  didst 
send  me.  I pray  for  them : 1 pray  not  for  the  worlds 
hut  for  them  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  because 
they  are  thine:  and  all  my  things  are  thine,  and 
thine  are  mine,  and  I am  glorified  in  them.  And 
now  I am  not  in  the  world,  and  these  are  in  the 
world,  and  I come  to  thee. 

ASCENSION  DAY. 

INSTITUTED  in  commemoration  of  Jesus  Christ*a 
ascension  into  heaven,  where,  seated  at  the  right- 
hand  of  his  Father,  he  continually  intercedes  for  us,  and 
invites  us  to  the  place  he  is  there  preparing  for  us,  of 
which  we  shall  certainly  be  one  day  put  in  possession, 
provided  we  follow  his  example.  But  although  there 
be  many  mansions  in  heaven,  yet  there  is  only  one  way 
to  go  thither.  Our  Head  arrived  there,  only  by  the  way 
of  sufferings;  let  us  never  then  flatter  ourselves  with 
the  thought  of  obtaining  eternal  happiness  on  any  other 
condition. 

INTROIT.  Acts  \. 

Ye  men  of  Galilee,  TTTRI  Galilcn^  quid  cut- 
why  look  you  with  r miramini  aspicientem 
surprise  up  to  heaven?  in  Cfdum?  Allel. 

Alld,  As  you  have  seen  admodum  vidistis  eum  as- 
him  ascending  to  heaven,  cendentem  in  C(dum,  ita 
so  shall  he  again  retura,  veniet.  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  * 
Alleluia,  Alleluia^  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

Ps,  Clap  your  h ands,  all  Ps.  Omnes  Gentes  vlau- 

ye  nations:  shout  unto  dite  manibus:  juoilate 
God  with  the  voice  of  joy.  Deo  in  voce  exuUaiionis 
V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria, 

COI.LECT.  Concede, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 

O Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  believe  that  thy 
only  Son,  our  Redeemer,  ascended  this  day  inta 

Digitized  by  Google 


ASCENSION  DAY.  367 

heaven,  may  also  have  our  hearts  always  fixed  on 
" heavenly  things.  Thro’  the  same. 

LESSON.  Acts  i.  1.  ll.~The  former  treatise,  1 
made,  O Theophilus,  of  all  things  which  Jesus  began 
to  do  and  to  teach,  until  the  day  on  which,  giving 
commandments  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  apostles 
whom  he  had  chosen,  he  was  taken  up.  To  whom 
also  he  shewed  himself  alive  after  his  passion,  by 
many  proofs,  by  forty  days  appearing  to  them,  and 
speaking  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  eating  to- 
gether with  them,  he  commanded  them,  that  they 
should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  should  wait 
for  the  promise  of  the  Father,  which  you  have  heard 
(saith  he)  by  my  mouth : for  John  indeed  baptized 
with  water,  but  you  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  not  many  days  hence.  They  therefore  who 
were  come  together,  ^ked  him  saying : Lord,  wilt 
thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  of  Israel  ? 
But  he  said  to  them : It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the 
times  or  moments,  which  the  Father  bath  put  in  his 
own  power ; but  you  shall  receive  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  coming  upon  you,  and  you  shall  be  wit- 
nesses to  me  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  Sa- 
maria, and  even  to  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth. 
And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  while  they  look- 
ed on,  he  was  raised  up ; and  a cloud  received  him 
out  of  their  sight.  And  while  they  were  beholding 
him  going  up  to  heaven,  behold  two  men  stood 
by  them  in  white  garments.  Who  also  said : Ye 
* men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  you  looking  up  to  hea- 
ven? This  Jesus  who  is  taken  up  from  you  into 
heaven,  shall  so  come  as  you  have  seen  him  going 
into  heaven. 

Alleluia^  AUdui^u  V.  God  ascended  in  triumph, 
and  the  Lord  at  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.  Alleluia. 

V.  The  Lord  on  Sina,  V.  Dominus  in  Sina,  in 
in  his  holy  place,  ascend-  sancto^  ascendens  in  aZ- 


Digitized  by  Google 


ASCENSION  DAT. 


%8 

ing  on  high,  hath  led  cap-  turn  captivum  duxit  cap- 
tivity  captive.  Alleluia.  iivitaiem.  Alleluia. 

GrOSPEL.  Mark  xvi.  14.  20. — At  that  Him  : 
Jesus  appeared  to  the  eleven  as  they  were  at  table ; 
and  he  upbraided  them  with  their  incredulity  and 
hardness  of  heart,  because  they  did  not  believe  them 
who  had  seen  him  after  he  was  risen  again.  And  he 
said  to  them : Go  ye  into  the  whole  world,  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature.  He  that  believeth  and 
is  baptized,  shall  be  saved : but  he  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  condenmed.  And  these  signs  shall  follow 
them  that  believe : In  my  name  they  shall  cast  out 
devils : they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues : they  shall 
take  up  serpents : and  if  they  shall  drink  any  deadly 
thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them:  they  shall  lay  their 
hanmi  upon  the  sick  and  they  shall  recover.  And 
the  Lord  Jesus,  after  he  had  spoken  to  them,  was 
taken  up  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  on  the  right-hand 
of  God.  But  they  ^oing  preached  every  where: 
the  Lord  working  withal,  and  confirming  the  word 
with  signs  that  followed.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xlvi. — God  is  ascended  with  jubilee, 
and  the  Lord  with  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.  AUel. 

SECRET.-^Receive,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we 
make  in  memory  of  the  glorious  ascension  of  thv 
Son:  and  mercifully  grant,  that  we  may  be  both 
delivered  from  present  danger,  and  arrive  at  ever- 
lasting life.  Thro’  the  same. 

COMMUNICANTES. — Being  united  in  commu-  , 
nion,  and  celebrating  the  most  sacred  day  on  which 
our  Lord,  thy  only  begotten  Son,  placed  the  sul)- 
stance  of  our  frail  nature,  which  he  had  taken  upon 
himself;  on  the  right  hand  of  thy  glory,  and  honour- 
ing the  memory  in  the  first  place,  &c.  as  in  the  Ordi- 
nary, p.  xxxiv. 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixvii. — Sing  to  the  Lord,  who  hath 
ascended  towards  the  east,  above  all  the  heavensi 
Alleluia. 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUNDAY  WITHIN  THE  OCTAVE. 


369 


P.  COMM.  Pr(B8ta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O almighty  and  most  merciful  God,  that  we  may 
obtain  the  invisible  effects  of  the  visible  mysteries 
we  have  received.  Thro’. 


SUNDAY  within  the  OCTAVE  of 
The  ASCENSION. 

INTROIT. 


TTEAR,  O Lord,  ray 
J-Jl  voice,  with  which  I 
have  cried  out  to  thee. 
Mlduia.  My  heart  hath 
said  to  thee:  1 have 
sought  thy  face:  1 will 
seek  thy  fece,  O Lord: 
turn  not  thy  face  from 
me.  AUd.  Allel,  Ps,  The 
Lord  is  my  light  and  my 
salvation : whom  shall  I 
fear?  F.  Glory. 


Psalm  xxvi. 

XAUDI,  Domine^  vo- 
cem meam^  qua  da- 
mam ad  ie,  Allel.  Tibi 
dixit  cor  mtum : QufBsivi 
vultum  tuam : vuUum 
tuam^  Domine^  requiram : 
ne  avertas  faciem  tuam  a 
me.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

Ps.  Dominus  illumina- 
tio mea  et  salus  mea : quem 
timebo  ? 

V.  Gloruu 


COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  inspire  thy  servants  with  true  devotion,  and 
grant  that  we  may  serve  thy  divine  Majesty  with 
sincere  hearts.  Thro’. 


Commem,  of  the  Ascension,  p,  366,  by  the  Collect, 
Secret,  and  P.  Comm,  thereof 
EPISTLE.  1 Pderiv,  7. — Most  dearly  beloved: 
prudent,  and  watch  in  prayers.  But  before  all 
things  have  a constant  mutual  charity  among  your- 
selves: for  charity  covereth  a multitude  of  sins. 
Using  hospitality  one  towards  another  without  mur- 
muring. As  every  man  hath  received  grace,  mini- 
stering the  same  one  tc  another : as  good  stewards 
of  the  manifold  grace  of  God.  If  any  man  speak, 
let  him  speak  as  the  words  of  God.  If  any  man  mi- 
nister, let  him  do  it  as  of  the  power  which  God  ad- 
ministeieth:  that  in  all  things  God  maybe  honoured 


Dig  . ,;ed  by  Google 


370  SUIfDAT  WITHIN  THE  OCTAVE. 

though  Jesus  Christ:  to  whom  is  glory  and  empire 
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 

JUUlmcL,  Mduia,  V,  The  Lord  hath  extended  his 
empire  over  all  nations:  God  sitteth  on  his  holy 
throne.  AUduia. 

V,  I will  not  leave  you  V.  Aon  vos  rdinquam 
orphans:  1 am  going,  orphanos:  vado^  et  venio 
but  I will  come  to  you  aa  vos,  d gaudebit  cor 
again,  and  your  hearts  vestrum.  Alleluia, 
shall  rejoice.  AUduia, 

GrOSPEL.  John  xv.  26.  xvi.  1.  4. — At  that  time : 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : When  the  Paraclete  cometh 
whom  I v«^ll  send  you  from  the  Father,  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  who  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  shall 
give  testimony  of  me : and  you  shall  give  testimony, 
because  you  are  with  me  from  the  beginning.  These 
things  have  I spoken  to  you,  that  you  may  not  be 
scandalized.  They  will  put  you  out  of  the  syna- 
gogues : yea  the  hour  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth 
you,  will  think  that  he  doth  a service  to  God.  And 
these  things  will  they  do  to  you,  because  they  have 
not  known  the  Father,  nor  me.  But  these  things  I 
have  told  you : that  when  the  hour  shall  come,  you 
may  remember  that  I told  you  of  them.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xlvi. — God  ascended  in  triumph 
and  the  Lord  at  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.  Allel, 

SECRET. — May  these  unspotted  sacrifices  purify 
us,  O Lord ! and  strengthen  our  souls  with  heavenly 
grace.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xvii. — ^Father,  when  I was  with 
them,  I kept  those,  whom  thou  gavest  me.  AUeL 
now  I return  to  thee : I do  not  pray  that  thou  mayest 
fake  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  wouldst 
keep  them  from  evil.  AUduia^  AUduia. 

P.  COMM.  Repletu — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  that  we  may  be  always  thankful  for  the  sa- 
cred gifts  with  which  we  have  been  filled.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


[ 371  ] 

WHITSUN-EVE. 

The  Vigil  of  Pentecost,  like  that  of  Easter,  has 
always  been  consecrated  in  a particular  manner 
to  fasting  and  prayer.  The  primitive  Christians,  after 
the  nsuu  praters  of  the  day,  spent  the  ^eatest  part 
of  the  night  in  the  Church,  and  hence  originates  the 
word  FigiZ  or  Wake. 

The  Mass,  like  that  of  Holy  Saturday,  is  preceded 
by  several  Ijissons  and  Tracts  out  of  the  Old  Testament, 
wd  by  the  Blessing  of  the  Font, 

I.  PROPHECY. — In  those  days:  God  tempted 
Abraham,  p.  310. 

Let  us  pray.  Dtus,  qui, 

GOD,  who  by  this  action  of  thy  servant  Abra- 
ham hi«t  given  to  mankind  an  excellent  exam- 
ple of  obedience ; grant  us,  both  to  break  our  per- 
verse wills,  and  to  fulfil  thy  righteous  commands. 
Thro’. 

II.  PROPHECY. — In  those  days:  It  came  to  pass 
in  the  morning  watch  and  TRACT,  Let  us  sing  to 
the  Lord,  p.  312. 

Let  us  pray.  Deus^  qui  primis. 

GOD,  who,  by  the  light  of  the  New  Testament, 
hast  expounded  the  miracles  wrought  in  the 
first  ages  of  the  world ; so  that  the  Red  Sea  was  a 
figure  of  the  sacred  font,  and  the  deliverance  of  the 
people  out  of  Egypt  did  represent  the  Christian  sa- 
craments : grant  that  all  nations  who  have  now  ob- 
tained the  privilege  of  Israelites  by  the  merit  of  faith, 
may  be  bom  again  by  the  participation  of  thy  spirit. 
Thro’. — in  unity  of  the  same. 

III.  PROPHECY. — In  those  days : Moses  wrote, 
p.  319,  and  TRACT,  Hear,  O ye,  p.  320. 

Let  us  pray.  Deus  giori/icatio. 

OGK)D,  the  glory  of  the  faithful  and  the  life  of 
the  righteous,  who  hast  instructed  us  also  by 
the  canticle  of  thy  servant  Moses : grant  thy  mercy 
to  all  nations,  hy  giving  them  happiness  and  dimi- 
nishing their  fri^ts,  that  the  revenge  threatened 
may  turn  to  their  eternal  salvation.  Tliro’ 


Dig  tized  by  Google 


372 


WHITSUN-EVE. 


IV,  PROPHECY. — In  that  day  seven  women,  jk 
317,  and  TRACT,  My  beloved  had,  p,  318. 

Let  us  pray.  Omnipotens, 

0 ALMIGHTY  and  Eternal  God,  who,  by  tliy 
only  Son,  hast  shewn  the  care  thou  takest  of 
thy  Church ; mercifully  cultivate  every  branch  which 
bringeth  forth  fruit  in  that  same  Christ,  who  is  the 
true  vine,  that  it  may  be  more  fruitful:  and  let  not 
the  thorns  of  sin  prevail  against  thy  faithful,  whom 
thou  hast  brought  out  of  Egypt  by  the  baptismal 
font ; but  protect  them  by  thy  holy  spirit,  that  they 
may  be  continually  enriched  by  the  fruits  of  good 
works.  Thro’  the  same — in  unity,  &c. 

V.  PROPHECY.  Hear,  O Israel,  p.  314 
Let  us  pray.  Dev^^  qui  nobis, 

OGOD,  who  hast  commanded  us,  by  thy  prophets, 
to  relinquish  the  things  of  this  world,  and  to 
hasten  to  those  that  are  eternal ; grant,  that  by  the 
heavenly  inspiration  we  may  comply  with  what  we 
know  thou  hast  commanded.  Thro’, 

VI.  PROPHECY,  fn  those  days : The  hand  of 
the  Lord,  p,  316. 

Let  us  pray.  Domine  Deus, 

OLORD  God  of  Hosts,  who  raisest  up  what  is 
fallen,  and  keepest  up  what  is  raised ; increase 
the  number  of  those  who  are  to  be  renewed  by  thy 
holy  name : that  all  who  receive  holy  baptism,  may 
always  be  governed  by  thy  holy  inspirations.  Thro*. 
While  the  Celebrant  soes  towards  the  Font  is  said  the 
TRACT,  As  the  hart  panteth,  as  on  Holy  Satur- 
day, p,  ; btd  if  there  be  no  blessing  of  the  Font 
then  IS  sung  the  Litanv,  p,  359, 

MASS  on  WHITSUN-EVE. 
INTROIT.  Ezech,  xxxvi. 

When  I shall  be  acknowledged  the  Holy  One 
amongst  you,  I will  gather  you  from  all  parts  of  the 
world ; and  1 will  pour  upon  you  clean  water,  and 
you  shall  be  cleansed  from  all  your  stains:  and  I 


Digitized  by  Google 


WHlTSnjS-EVfc. 


373 


ivill  give  you  a new  spirit,  Mdtda^  Mlduia,  Ps. 
xxxiii.  I will  for  ever  bless  the  Lord : his  praise  shall 
be  always  in  mjr  mouth.  V.  Glory, 

05^  The  Introit  is  only  said  at  Private  Masses,  when 
the  Prophecies,  &c.  have  been  omitted, 

COLLECT.  Pr(Bsta^  quasumus, — Grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  foat  the  rays  of  thy 
brightness  may  shine  upon  us ; and  that  the  light  of 
thy  light  may,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
stren^en  the  hearts  of  those  who  have  been  bom 
again  by  thy  grace.  Thro’  in  unity,  &c. 

LESSON.  Acts  xix.  1.  8.  — In  those  days:  It 
came  to  pass  while  Apollo  was  at  Corinth,  that  Paul 
having  passed  through  the  upper  coasts  came  to 
Ephesus,  and  found  certain  disciples : and  he  said  to 
them : Have  you  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  you 
believed?  But  they  said  to  him:  We  have  not  so 
much  as  heard  whether  there  be  a Holy  Ghost.  And 
he  said:  In  what  then  were  you  baptized?  Who 
said:  In  John’s  baptism.  Then  Paul  said:  John 
baptized  the  people  with  the  baptism  of  penance, 
saying:  That  they  should  believe  in  him  who  was 
to  come  after  him,  that  is  to  say,  in  Jesus.  Having 
heard  these  things,  they  were  baptized  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  And  when  Paul  had  imposed 
bis  hands  on  them,  the  Holy  Ghost  canie  upon  them, 
and  they  spoke  with  tongues  and  prophesied.  And 
all  the  men  were  about  twelve.  And  entering  into 
the  synagogue,  he  spoke  boldly  for  the  space  of  three 
months  disputing  and  persuading  concerning  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

Alleluia.  V.  Praise  the  Lord,  for  he  is  good ; and 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

* TRACT.  Ps.  cxvi. — Praise  the  Lord,  (ts  p.  327. 

GOSPEL.  John  xiv.  15. — At  that  time:  Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples : If  you  love  me  keep  my  com- 
mandments. And  I will  ask  the  Father,  and  he 
shall  give  you  another  Paraclete,  that  he  may  abide 
I i 


)y  Google 


374 


WHIT  SUNDAT. 


with  you  for  ever,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  whom  the 
world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not  nor 
knoweth  him:  but  you  shall  know  him;  because  he 
shall  abide  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.  I will 
not  leave  you  orphans:  I will  come  to  you.  Yet  a 
little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no  more.  But 
you  see  me ; because  I live,  and  you  shall  live.  In 
that  day  you  shall  know  that  I am  in  my’  Father, 
and  you  in  me,  and  I in  you.  He  that  hath  my 
commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that 
loveth  me.  And  he  that  loveth  me,  shall  be  loved 
of  my  Father : and  I will  love  him,  and  will  mani- 
fest myself  to  him. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  ciii. — Send  forth  thy  Spirit,  and 
they  will  be  created ; and  thou  wilt  renew  the  face 
of  the  earth  ; let  the  glory  of  the  Lord  be  for  ever- 
more. Meluia, 

The  Preface,  as  in  the  Ordinary,  p,  xxxii. 
Secret  and  Communicantes,  as  to-morrow,  p.  377 
The  Hanc  Igitur,  as  on  Easter  Sunday,  p.  331. 

COMM.  John  y\\, — ^Tbe  last  day  of  the  feast 
Jesus  said : Whoever  believeth  in  me,  rivers  of  living 
water  shall  flow  fi*om  his  heart ; and  this  he  said  of 
the  spirit,  which  those  were  to  receive  who  should 
believe  in  him,  Alleluia,  Alleluia^ 

P.  COMM.  (Sancti  Spiritus)  as  to-morrow,  p.  378 


WHIT  SUNDAY. 

Took  its  name  from  the  circumstances  of  the  new- 
ly baptized  among  our  ancestors  assisting  at  Mass 
in  the  white  garments  uiey  yesterday  received  at  the  bap 
tismal  font.  Its  ecclesiastical  name  Pentecost  signifies  the 
fiftieth,  because  the  mystery  which  it  celebrates  was  ac- 
complished on  the  fiftieth  day  alter  Christ’s  resurrection. 
The  object  of  this  great  festival  is,  to  return  thanks  to 
God  for  the  visible  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the 
apostles, — the  establishment  of  the  new  law,  and  propa- 
gation of  our  holy  religion. 


Digitized  by  Google 


WHIT  SUNDAY. 


375 


INTROIT.  Wisd.\. 

rpHE  spirit  of  the  Lord  ^PIRITUS  Domini  re- 
J-  hath  filled  the  whole  plevit  orbem  terrarum^ 

earth,  Alleluia : and  the  Alleluia : et  hoc  quod  con- 
whole  universe  hath  heard  tinet  omnia,  scientiam  ha- 
his  voice, Alleluia,Alleluia.  bet  vom,Alleluia,Alleluia. 

Ps,  Let  God  arise,  and  Ps.  Exurgat  Deus,  et 
his  enemies  be  dispersed:  dissipentur  inimid  ejus : 
let  them  who  hate  him,  et  fugiant,  qui  oderunt 
fly  before  his  face.  eum,  a faxie  eius, 

V.  Glory  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Dens,  qui. — O God,  who,  by  the 
light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  didst  this  day  instruct  the 
hearts  of  the  faithful : grant,  by  the  direction  of  the 
same  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  relish  what  is  right, 
and  always  enjoy  his  consolation.  Thro’ — in  the 
unity  of  the  same,  &c. 

LESSON.  Acts  ii.  1.  11. — When  the  days  of 
Pentecost  were  accomplished,  they  were  all  together 
in  one  place:  and  suddenly  there,  came  a sound 
fi*orn  heaven,  as  of  a mighty  wind  coming,  and  it 
filled  the  whole  house  where  they  were  sitting.  And 
there  appeared  to  them  parted  tongues  as  it  were  of 
fire,  and  it  sat  upon  every  one  of  them : and  they 
were  all  filled  witn  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  they  began 
to  speak  with  divers  tongues  according  as  the  Holy 
Ghost  gave  them  to  speak.  Now  there  \^ere  dwell- 
ing at  Jenisalem  Jews,  devout  men  out  of  every  na- 
tion under  heaven.  And  when  this  was  noised 
abroad,  the  multitude  came  together,  and  were 
confounded  in  mind,  because  that  every  man  heard 
them  speak  in  his  own  ton^e.  And  they  were  all 
amazed  and  wondered,  saying : Behold,  are  not  all 
these,  that  speak,  Galileans,  and  how  have  we  heard, 
every  man  our  own  tongue  wherein  we  were  bom  ? 
Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  inhabitants 
of  Mesopotamia,  Judea,  and  Cappadocia,  Pontus 
and  Asia,  Phrygia,  and  Pamphilia,  Egypt  and  the 
1 i2 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic  ^ 


376 


WHIT  SUNDAT. 


parts  of  Lybia  about  Cyrene,  and  strangers  of  Rome 
Jews  also  and  Proselytes,  Cretes  and  Arabians  : we 
have  heard  them  speak  in  our  own  ton^ies  tlie  won- 
derful works  of  Grod.  AUeluia^  AUelma. 

V.  Send  forth  thy  spirit,  V.  Ps.  ciii.  Emitte  spi- 
and  they  shall  be  created : ritum  tuum  et  creabun- 
and  thou  wilt  renew  the  tur:  et  renovabis  fadem 
face  of  the  earth.  Alleluia,  terrre,  Alleluia. 

V.  * Come,  O Holy  V.  * Pent,  Scmcte  Spi~ 
Ghost,  fill  the  hearts  of  ritm,  reple  tuorum  corda 
thy  faithful,  and  kindle  in  Jideliumy  et  tui  amoris  in 
them  the  fire  of  thy  love,  eis  ignem  accende. 

The  PROSE. 

YENI  Sancte  Spiritus,  et  emitte  ooelitus  lucis 
tuae  radium. 

Veni  Pater  pauperum,  veni  dator  munerum, 
veni  lumen  cordiura. 

Consolator  optime,  dulcis  hospes  animae,  dulce 
refrigerium. 

In  labore  requies,  in  aestu  temperies,  in  fletu  so- 
latium. 

O lux  beatissima,  reple  cordis  intima  tuorum  fide- 
lium. 

Sine  tuo  numine,  nihil  est  in  homine,  nihil  est 
innoxium. 

Lava  quod  est  sordidum,  riga  quod  est  aridum, 
sana  quod  est  saucium. 

Flecte  quod  est  rigidum,  fove  quod  est  frigidum, 
re^  quod  est  devium. 

Da  tuis  fidelibus,  in  te  confitentibus,  sacrum  sep- 
tenarium. 

Da  virtutis  meritum,  da  salutis  exitum,  da  pereime 
gaudium.  Arnen.  AUeluUu 
GOSPEL.  John  xiv.  23.  31. — At  that  timei 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : If  any  one  love  me,  he 
will  keep  my  word,  and  my  Father  will  love  him, 

At  this  V.  * all  kneel  down  at  every  Maas  till  Sunday 
next. 


Digitized  by  Google 


WHIT  SUNDAY. 


377 


find  we  will  come  to  him,  and  will  make  our  abode 
with  him : he  that  loveth  me  not,  keepeth  not  my 
words.  And  the  word  which  you  have  heard,  is  not 
mine : but  the  Father’s  who  sent  me.  These  things 
have  I spoken  to  you,  abiding  with  you.  But  the 
Paraclete,  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will 
send  in  my  name,  he  will  teach  you  all  things,  and 
bring  all  things  to  your  mind,  whatsoever  I shall 
have  said  to  you.  Peace  I leave  with  you,  my  peace 
I give  to  you : not  as  the  world  giveth,  do  I give 
unto  you.  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  nor  let 
it  be  afraid.  You  have  heard  that  I have  said  to 
you : I go  away  and  1 come  again  to  you.  If  you 
loved  me,  you  would  indeed  be  glad,  because  I go 
to  the  Father : for  the  Father  is  greater  than  I.  And 
now  I have  told  you  before  it  come  to  pass : that 
when  it  shall  come  to  pass,  you  may  believe.  I will 
not  now  speak  many  things  with  you.  For  the 
prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  in  me  he  hath  not 
any  thing.  But  that  the  world  may  know  that  I ’ove 
the  Father : and  as  the  Father  hath  given  me  com- 
mandment, so  do  I.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixvii. — Confirm,  O God,  what 
thou  hast  wrought  in  us,  from  thy  holy  temple, 
which  is  in  Jerusalem : kings  shall  offer  presents  to 
thee.  Alleluia, 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
these  oblations,  and  purify  our  hearts  by  the  light  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Thro’ — in  the  unity  ofj  &c. 

Communicantes.  Being  united  in  communion, 
and  celebrating  the  sacred  day  of  Pentecost,  on  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  appeared  to  the  apostles  under  the 
form  of  innumerable  tongues:  and  honouring  tlie 
memory,  &c.  as  in  the  Ordinary,  pa^e  xxxiv. 

Igitur,  as  on  Easter  Sunday,  p.  331. 

COMM.  Acts  ii. — Suddenly  there  came  a noise 
from  heaven,  as  of  a strong  rushing  wind,  where 
they  were  sitting.  Alleluia : and  they  were  all  filled 
[13 


y Google 


378 


WHIT  MOffOAT. 


with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  published  the  wonderful 
works  of  God.  i^eluicu 

P.  COMM.  Sancti  Spiritus, — May  the  pouring 
forth  of  the  Holy  Ghost  into  our  hearts  cleanse  them, 
O Lord,  and  render  them  fruitful  by  the  inward  dew 
of  his  grace.  Thro’  our  Lord — in  the  unity  of  the 
same,  &c. 


WHIT  MOT^DAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixxx, 

He  fed  them  with  the  f^IBAVIT tos  ex  adipe 
fat  of  wheat,  AUe~  ^ frumenti,  Alleluia: 
luia : and  filled  them  with  et  de  petra  mdle  satura- 
honey  out  of  the  rock,  vit  eos.  Allel.  Allel. 
mlUd,  Allel,  Ps,  Rejoice  Ps.  ExuUate  Deo  adjvn 
to  God,  our  helper : sing  tori  nostro : jubilate  Deo 
aloud  to  the  God  of  Jacob.  Jacob, 

V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria, 

COLLECT.  De^is,  qui, — O God,  who  didst  give 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  thy  apostles,  hear  the  players  of 
thy  people,  that  they  may  enjoy  a happy  peace,  who, 
by  thy  grace,  have  received  the  gift  of  true  faith. 

LESSON.  Ads  x,  42.  48. — In  those  days : Peter 
opening  his  mouth,  said : Brethren,  the  Lord  com- 
manded us  to  preach  to  the  people,  and  to  testify 
that  it  is  he  who  was  appointed  ^ God  to  be 
judge  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead.  To  him  all  the 
prophets  give  testimony,  that  through  his  name  all 
receive  remission  of  sins,  who  believe  in  him.  While 
Peter  was  yet  speaking  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost 
fell  on  all  them  that  heard  the  word.  And  the 
faithful  of  the  circumcision,  who  came  with  Peter, 
were  astonished,  for  that  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  poured  out  upon  the  Gentiles  also.  For 
they  heard  them  speaking  with  tongues,  and  magni- 
fying God.  Then  Peter  answered:  Can  any  man 
forbid  water,  that  these  men  should  not  be  baptized, 


Digitized  by  Google 


WHIT  MONDAY. 


a79 


who  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  we ; 
And  he  commanded  them  to  be  baptized  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

V,  The  apostles  pul>-  Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V. 
lished  in  divers  tongues  Loquebantur  variis  lingiiis 
the  wonderful  works  of  apostoli  inagnalia,  Dei, 
God.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

V,  * Come,  O Holy  Ghost,  with  th^  Prose,  Veni 

Sancte  Spiritus,  as  in  the  Msss  of  Yesterday,  p,  376. 

GOSPEL.  John  iii,  16. — At  that  time:  Jesus  said 
to  JSficodemus : God  so  loved  the  world,  as  to  give 
his  only  begotten  Son ; that  whosoever  believeth  in 
him,  may  not  perish,  but  may  have  life  everlasting. 
For  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world,  to  judge 
the  world,  but  that  the  world  may  be  saved  by  him. 
He  that  believeth  in  him,  is  not  judged.  But  h.e 
that  doth  not  believe  is  already,  judged:  because  he 
believeth  not  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son 
of  God.  And  this  is  the  judgment:  because  the 
light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness 
ratlier  than  the  light:  for  their  works  were  evil. 
For  evei*y  one  that  doth  evil  hateth  the  light,  and 
cometh  not  to  the  light,  that  his  works  may  not  be 
reproved.  But  he  that  doth  truth,  cometh  to  the 
light,  that  his  works  may  be  made  manifest,  because 
they  are  done  in  God.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xvii. — The  Lord  thundered  from 
heaven,  and  the  highest  gave  his  voice:  then  the 
fountains  of  waters  appeared.  Alleluia, 

SECRET.^ — Mercifully  sanctify,  we  beseech  tliee, 
O Lord,  these  offerings,  and  having  accepted  the 
oblation  of  our  spiritual  victim,  make  ourselves  an 
offering  pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xiv. — The  Holy  Ghost  shall  teach 
you.  Alleluia,  whatever  I shall  say  to  you.  AUeluia, 
Alleluia, 

P.  COMM.  Adesto. — Help,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  thy  people,  and  defend  from  the  fury  of  then 


Digitized  by  Google 


WHIT  TUESDAT. 


;«o 

enemies,  those  whom  tiiou  hast  fed  witli  thy  sacred 
mysteries.  Thro’. 

WHIT  TUESDAY. 

INTROIT. — Receive  your  glopr  with  joy, 
luia:  giving  thanks  to  God,  AUduia^  who  hath  call-  .• 
ed  you  to  a heavenly  kingdom.  AUel.  AlleL  AUeL 
Ps.  Attend,  O my  people,  to  my  law : incline  your 
ears  to  the  words  of  my  mouth.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Adsii. — ^Assist  us,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  with  the  power  of  thy  holy  spirit,  that 
our  hearts  may  be  purified,  according  to  thy  mercy, 
and  we  defended  from  all  adversities.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Acts  viii.  14.  \7,- In  those  days: 

When  the  apostles  who  were  in  Jerusalem,  had  heard 
that  Samaria  had  received  the  word  of  God ; they 
sent  to  them  Peter  and  John.  Who  when  they  were 
come,  prayed  for  them,  that  they  might  receive  the 
Holy  Ghost.  For  he  was  not  as  yet  come  upon  any 
of  them : but  they  were  only  baptized  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Then  they  laid  their  hands  upon 
them,  and  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V,  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  teach 
you  whatever  I shall  say  to  you.  Alleluia^ 

V.  * Come,  O Holy  Ghost,  with  the  Prose,  Veni 
Sancte  Spiritus,  as  on  Sunday,  p,  376. 

GOSPEL.  John  x.  1.  10.  — At  that  time  : Jesus 
said  to  the  Pharisees : Amen,  amen,  I say  to  you : 
he  that  entereth  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheepfold, 
but  climbeth  up  another  way,  the  same  is  a tliief 
and  a robber.  But  he  that  entereth  in  by  the  door 
is  the  shepherd  of  the  sheep.  To  him  the  porter 
oj>eneth ; and  the  sheep  hear  his  voice  : and  he  call- 
eth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out. 
And  when  he  hath  let  out  his  own  sheep,  he  goeth 
before  them : and  tlie  sheep  follow  him : because 
they  know  his  voice.  But  a stranger  they  follow  not, 
but  fly  from  him,  because  they  know  not  the  voice 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMBER  WEDNESDAY. 


381 


of  strangers.  This  proverb  Jesus  spoke  to  them. 
But  they  understood  not  what  he  spoke  to  them. 
Jesus  therefore  said  to  them  again : Amen,  amen,  I 
say  to  you,  I am  the  door  of  the  sheep.  All  others, 
as  many  as  have  come,  are  thieves  and  robbers : and 
the  sheep  heard  them  not.  I am  the  door.  By  me 
if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved : and  he  shall 
go  in,  and  go  out,  and  shall  find  pastures.  The  thief 
cometh  not,  but  for  to  steal,  and  to  kill,  and  to  de 
stroy.  I am  come  that  they  may  have  life,  and  ma} 
have  it  more  abundantly.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixxvii.  — The  Lord  opened  for 
them  the  gates  of  heaven,  and  rained  down  manna 
for  them  to  eat : he  gave  them  the  bread  of  heaven, 
men  eat  the  bread  of  angels.  Alleluia, 

SECRET. — May  the  oblation  of  this  sacrifice  pu- 
rify us,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  and  make  us  wor- 
thy to  partake  thereof.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xv. — ^The  Spirit  who  proceedeth 
from  the  Father,  Alleluia : shall  glorify  me.  AlU-^ 
luia  Alleluia, 

P.  C03IM.  Mentes, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
• O Lord,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  may  renew  our  souls 
by  these  divine  mysteries,  since  he  is  the  remission 
of  sin.  Thro’ — in  the  unity  of  the  same. 


EMBER  WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixvii. — O God,  when  thou  didst 
go  forth  in  the  sight  of  thy  people,  making  a way  for 
them  and  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  them,  Alleluia^  the 
earth  shook,  and  the  heavens  dropped  dew.  Alleluia^ 
Alleluia,  Ps.  Let  God  arise,  and  let  his  enemies  be 
scattered:  let  them  that  hate  him  flee  before  his 
face.  V,  Glory. 

I.  COLLECT.  Mentes  nostras, — May  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  proceedeth  from  thee,  enlighten,  we 
beseech  thoe,  O Lord,  our  hearts,  and  guide  us  into 


Digitized  by  Google 


382 


EMBER  WED.'fESDAT. 


all  truth  according  to  the  promise  of  thy  Son.  W ho 
— in  unity  of  the  same. 

I.  LESSON,  ^^cts  ii.  14.  21.  — In  those  days ; 
Peter  standing  up  with  the  eleven,  lifted  up  his 
voice  and  spoke  to  them:  Ye  men  of  Judea,  and 
all  you  that  dw'ell  in  Jerusalem,  be  this  known  to 
you  and  with  your  ears  receive  my  words.  For 
these  are  not  drunk,  as  you  suppose,  seeing  it  is  but 
the  third  hour  of  the  day : But  this  is  that  which 
was  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  Joel : “ And  it  shall 
come  to  pass  in  the  last  days  (saith  the  Lord)  I will 
pour  out  my  spirit  upon  ^1  ftesh:  and  your  sons 
and  your  daughter  shall  prophesy,  and  your  young 
men  shall  see  visions,  and  your  old  men  shall  dream 
dreams.  And  upon  my  servants  indeed,  and  upon 
my  handmaids,  will  I pour  out  in  those  days  of  my 
spirit,  and  they  shall  prophesy.  And  L will  shew 
wonders  in  the  heaven  above,  and  signs  on  the  earth 
beneath ; blood,  and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke. 
The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  and  the  moon 
into  blood,  before  the  great  and  manifest  day  of  the 
Lord  come.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whoso- 
ever shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  shall  be 
saved.” 

Alleluia,  V,  Ps,  xxxii. — By  the  word  of  the  Lord 
the  heavens  were  established  : and  all  the  power  of 
them  by  the  sphit  of  his  mouth. 

II.  COLLECT.  Preesta  queesumus, — Grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  O almighty  and  most  merciful  ^d, 
tliat  thy  holy  spirit  may  defend  and  dwell  in  our 
souls,  and  so  thoroughly  purify  us,  that  we  may  at 
length  become  the  temple  of  his  glory.  Thro’. 

From  this  day  to  Saturday  next  inclusively^  after  the 
Collect  of  the  day^  either  the  Collect,  Ecclesite  tuae 
or  Deus  omnium  is  said,  together  with  their  respec^ 
tive  Secrets  and  P.  Comm,  as  on  the  first  Sunday 
of  Advent,  p,  50,  &c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMBER  WEDNESDAY. 


383 


11.  LESSON.  Acts  V.  ]2.  16. — In  those  days: 
Were  many  signs  and  wonders  wrought  among  the 
people.  And  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  Sol- 
omon’s porch.  But  of  the  rest  no  man  durst  join 
himself  with  them  ; but  the  people  magnified  them. 
And  the  multitude  of  men  and  women  that  believed 
in  the  Lord  was  more  increased:  insomuch  that 
they  brought  forth  the  sick  into  the  streets,  and  laid 
them  on  beds  and  couches,  that  when  Peter  came, 
his  shadow  at  least  might  overshadow  any  of  them, 
and  they  might  be  delivered  from  their  infirmities. 
And  there  came  also  together  to  Jerusalem  a multi- 
tude out  of  the  neighbouring  cities,  bringing  sick 
persons,  and  such  as  were  troubled  with  unclean 
spirits,  who  were  all  healed. 

Alleluia^  Alleluia,  V,*  Come,  O Holy  Ghost,  with 
the  Prose  as  before^  p,  376. 

GOSPEL.  John  vi.  44.  52. — At  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  the  multitude  of  the  Jexos : No  man  can  come 
to  me  except  the  Fatlier,  who  hath  sent  me,  draw 
him : and  I will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day.  It  is 
written  in  the  prophets:  “And  they  shall  all  be 
taught  of  God.’’  Every  one  that  hath  heard  of  the 
Father,  and  hath  leamed,  cometh  to  me.  Not  that 
any  man  hath  seen  the  Father,  but  he  who  is  of  God, 
he  hath  seen  the  Father.  Amen,  Amen  I say  unto 
you : He  that  believeth  in  me  hath  everlasting  life. 
1 am  the  bread  of  life.  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna 
in  the  desert,  and  are  dead.  This  is  the  bread  which 
cometh  down  from  heaven : that  if  aity  man  eat  of 
it,  he  may  not  die.  1 am  the  living  bread  which 
came  down  from  heaven.  If  any  man  eat  of  this 
bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever : and  the  bread  that  I 
will  give  is  my  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xviii.  — I will  meditate  on  thy 
commandments,  which  I have  loved  very  much ; 
and  I will  put  in  practice  thy  commandments,  which 
1 have  loved.  Alleluia, 

Digitized  by  Google  ^ 


384  THURSDAY  IN  WHITSUN  WEEK. 

SECRET. — Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
this  offering,  and  grant  that  we  inav  celebrate  with 
piety  tiiese  sacred  mysteries.  Thro . 

COMM.  John  xiv.  I leave  you  peace,  Meluia, 
1 give  you  my  peace,  Meluia,  Allduia, 

P.  COMM.  Sumentes. Having,  partaken,  O 

Lord,  of  thy  heavenly  sacraments,  we  beseech  thy 
clemency  that  we  may  enjoy  the  effects  of  the  mys- 
teries we  celebrate  in  time,  in  an  eternity  of  bliss. 
Thro’. 


THURSDAY  IN  WHITSUN  WEEK. 

All  as  on  Whit  Sunday,  p.  375,  except. 

LESSON.  Acts  viii.  5.  9. — In  those  days : Philip 
going  down  to  the  city  of  Samaria,  preached  Christ 
to  them.  And  the  people  with  one  accord  were  at- 
tentive to  those  things,  which  were  said  by  Philip, 
bearing  and  seeing  the  miracles  which  he  did.  For 
many  of  them  who  had  unclean  spirits,  crying  with 
a loud  voice  went  out.  And  many  taken  with  the 
palsy,  that  were  lame,  were  healed.  And  there  was 
therefore  great  joy  in  that  city. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  ix,  1.  6. At  that  time:  Jesus  ^ 

calling  toother  the  twelve  apostles,  he  gave  them 
power  and  authority  over  all  devils,  and  to  cure  dis- 
eases. And  he  sent  them  to  preach  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  to  heal  the  sick.  And  he  said  to  them: 
Take  nothing  for  your  journey,  neither  staff,  nor 
scrip,  nor  bread,  nor  money,  neither  have  two  coats. 
And  whatsoever  house  you  shall  enter  into,  abide 
there,  and  depart  not  from  thence.  And  whosoever 
will  not  receive  you : when  you  go  out  of  that  city, 
shake  off  even  tne  dust  of  your  feet  for  a testimony 
against  them.  And  going  out  they  went  about 
through  the  tovms  preaching  the  gospel  and  healing 
every  where.  Credo. 


Digitized  by  Google 


[ 385  ] 

EMBER  FRIDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixx. — Let  my  mouth  be  filled 
with  thy  praise,  Alleluia : that  I may  sing,  Alleluia : 
my  lips  shall  rejoice,  when,  I sing  to  thee.  Alleluia^ 
Alleluia,  Ps.  In  thee,  O Lord,  have  I hoped,  let  me 
never  be  put  to  confusion : Deliver  me  in  tliy  justice 
and  rescue  me.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Da,  quctsumus. Grant,  we  be- 

seech thee,  O most  merciful  God,  that  thy  Church, 
being  assembled  by  thy  holy  spirit,  may  in  no  man- 
ner be  molested  with  the  disturbance  of  enemies. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Joel  ii.  27. — Thm  saith  the  Lord 
God:  And  you,  O children  of  Sion,  rejoice,  and 
be  joyful  in  the  Lord  your  God:  because  he 
hath  given  you  a teacher  of  justice,  and  he  will 
make  the  early  and  the  latter  rain  to  come  down 
for  you  as  in  the  beginning.  And  the  floors  shall 
be  filled  with  wheat,  and  the  presses  shall  ovei*flow 
with  wine  and  oil.  And  I will  restore  to  you  the 
years  which  the  locust,  and  the  bruchus,  and  the 
mildew,  and  the  palmer- worm  hath  eaten:  my 
great  host  which  I have  sent  upon  you.  And  you 
shall  eat  in  plenty  and  shall  be  filled:  and  you 
shall  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God,  who 
hath  done  wonders  with  you,  and  my  people  shall 
not  be  confounded  for  ever.  Ajid  you  shall  know 
that  I am  in  the  midst  of  Israel : and  I am  the  Lord 
your  God,  and  there  is  none  besides : and  my  peo- 
ple shall  not  be  confounded  for  ever,  saith  the  Lord 
Almighty. 

Alleluia,  Alleluia,  V.  O how  ^ood  and  sweet  is 
the  spirit  in  u§,  O Lord  I Alleluia.  V.  * Come,  O 
Holy  Ghost,  &c.  loUh  the  Prose,  p.  376. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  v.  17.  26. — At  that  time:  It 
came  to  pass  on  a certain  day,  that  Jesus  sat  teacb- 
Kk 


Digitized  by  Google 


386 


EMBER  FRIDAY. 


ing.  And  there  were  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the 
law  sitting  by,  that  were  come  out  of  every  town  of 
Galilee  and  Judea  and  Jerusalem ; and  the  power 
of  the  Lord  was  to  heal  them.  And  behold  men 
brought  in  a bed,  a man  who  had  the  palsy : and 
they  sought  means  to  bring  him  in,  and  to  lay  him 
before  him.  And  when  they  could  not  find  by  what 
way  they  might  bring  him  in,  because  of  the  multi- 
tude, they  went  up  upon  the  roof,  and  let  him 
down  through  the  tiles  with  his  bed  into  the  midst, 
before  Jesus.  And  when  he  saw  their  faith,  he  said : 
Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.  And  the  Scribes 
and  the  Pharisees  began  to  think,  saying:  Who  is 
this  who  speaketh  blasphemies?  Who  can  forgive 
sins,  but  God  alone  ? And  when  Jesus  knew  their 
thoughts,  answering,  he  said  to  them:  What  is  it 
vou  think  in  your  hearts?  Which  is  easier  to  say  ? 
*rhy  sins  are  forgiven  thee;  or  to  say:  arise  and 
walk  ? But  that  you  may  know  that  the  Son  of  Mau 
hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins,  (he  saith  to  the 
sick  of  the  palsy)  I say  to  thee,  arise,  take  up  thy 
bed  and  go  into  thy  house.  And  immediately  rising 
up  before  them,  he  took  up  the  bed  on  which  he  lay ; 
and  he  went  away  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  God. 
And  all  were  astonished;  and  they  glorified  God. 
And  they  were  filled  with  fear,  saying:  We  have 
seen  wonderful  things  to-day. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxlv. Praise  the  Lord,  O my 

soul ; whilst  I live  I will  praise  the  Lord : I will 
sing  praises  to  my  Gk)d,  while  I have  a being. 

Iduia, 

SECRET. — May  the  sacrifice  offered  in  thy  pre- 
sence, O Lord,  be  consumed  by  the  same  divine 
fire,  by  which  the  Holy  Ghost  infiarned  the  hearts 
of  the  disciples  of  Christ  thy  Son.  Thro’  the  same 
— in  unity  of  the  same. 

COMM.  John  xiv. — I will  not  leave  you  orphans : 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMBEB  SATURDAY.  387 

I will  come  to  you  aga^n,  Alleluia : and  your  hearts 
shall  be  glad.  AUeluia, 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimus, — ^Having  received,  O 
Lord,  these  sacred  mystic  gifls,  we  humbly  beg, 
that  what  thou  hast  ordered  us  to  do  in  remem- 
brance of  thee,  may  become  a help  to  our  weakness. 
Thro’. 


EMBER  SATURDAY. 

INTROIT.  Rom,  v. — ^The  love  of  God  is  poured 
into  your  hearts.  Alleluia^  by  his  spirit  that  dwelleth 
in  us,  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  Ps,  cii.  Bless  the  Lord,  O 
my  soul:  and  let  all  that  is  within  me,  pmise  his 
holy  name.  V,  Glory. 

I.  COLLECT. — Enrich,  O Lord,  our  hearts  by  a 
plentiful  effusion  of  thy  Holy  Spirit  by  whose  wis- 
dom we  were  created,  and  by  whose  providence  we 
are  governed.  Thro’ — in  unity  of  the  same. 

I.  LESSON.  Joel  ii.  28.  32. — Thus  saith  the  Lord 
(rod : I will  pour  out  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh : and 
your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy : your 
old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  and  your  young  men 
shall  see  visions.  Moreover  upon  my  servants  and 
handmaids  in  those  days  I will  pour  forth  my  spirit. 
And  I will  shew  wonders  in  heaven : and  in  earth, 
blood,  and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke.  The  sun 
shall  be  turned  into  diu*kness,  and  the  moon  into 
blood;  before  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  the 
Lord  doth  come.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that 
every  one  that  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
shall  be  saved.  Alleluia, 

V,  John  vi.  It  is  the  spirit  that  giveth  life : but 
the  flesh  availeth  nothing. 

II.  COLLECT.  lUo  nos, — Let  thy  holy  spirit,  O 
Tx)rd,  we  beseech  thee,  kindle  in  our  breasts  that 
fire,  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  brought  on  earth, 
and  earnesdy  desired  it  should  burn.  Who  lived . 

Kk2 


388 


EMBER  SATURDAY. 


II.  LESSON.  Ltv,  xxiii.  9.  21. — In  those  days . 
The  Lord  spoke  to  Moses,  saying:  Speak  to  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  thou  shalt  say  to  them: 
When  you  shall  have  entered  into  the  land,  which 
I will  give  you,  and  shall  reap  your  corn,  you  shall 
bring  sheaves  of  ears,  the  first-fruits  of  your  harvest, 
to  the  priest : who  shall  lift  up  the  sheaf  before  the 
Lord,  the  next  day  after  the  Sabbath,  that  it  may 
be  acceptable  for  you,  and  shall  sanctify  it.  You 
shall  count  therefore  from  the  morrow  after  the 
Sabbath,  wherein  you  ofiered  the  sheaf  of  the  first- 
fruits,  seven  full  weeks,  even  unto  the  morrow 
after  the  seventh  week  be  expired,  that  is  to  say, 
fifty  days,  and  so  you  shall  offer  a new  sacrifice 
to  the  Lord.  Out  of  all  your  dwellings,  two  loaves 
of  the  first-fruits,  of  two  tenths  of  flour  leaven- 
ed, which  you  shall  bake  for  the  first-fmits  of  the 
Lord.  And  you  shall  call  this  day  most  solemn,  and 
most  holy.  You  shall  do  no  servile  work  therein. 
It  shall  be  an  everlasting  ordinance  in  all  your  dwell- 
ings and  generations,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty,  AUel, 

V,  Job  xxvi.  His  spirit  hath  adorned  the  heavens. 

III.  COLLECT.  Dens, — O (Jod,  who,  for  the 
healing  our  souls,  commanded  us  to  mortify  our 
bodies  by  fasting:  mercifiilly  grant  that  we  may 
frithfiilly  serve  thee  both  with  body  and  soul.  Thro* 

III.  LESSON.  Devt.  xxvi.  I.  11. — In  those  days: 
Moses  said  to  the  children  of  Israel : Hear,  O Israel, 
lohat  I command  you  this  day : When  thou  art  come 
into  the  land  whicn  the  Lord  thy  God  will  give  thee 
to  possess,  and  hast  conquered  it,  and  dwellest  in  it 
thou  shalt  take  the  first  of  all  thy  fruits,  and  put 
tliem  in  a basket,  and  shalt  go  to  the  place  which  the 
Lord  thy  God  shall  choose,  that  his  name  may  be 
invocated  there : and  thou  shalt  go  to  the  priest  that 
shall  be  in  those  days,  and  say  to  him : 1 profess 
this  day  before  the  Lord  thy  God,  who  heard  us, 
and  looked  down  upon  our  affliction,  and  labour, 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMBER  SATORDAT. 


389 


aiid  distress ; and  brought  us  out  of  Egypt  with  a 
strong  hand,  and  a stretched  out  arm,  with  great 
terror,  with  signs  and  wonders : and  brought  us  into 
this  place,  and  gave  us  this  land,  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey.  And  therefore  now  I offer  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  laud  which  the  Lord  hath  given  me. 
And  thou  shalt  leave  them  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
thy  God,  adoring  the  Lord  thy  God.  And  thou 
shalt  feast  in  all  the  good  things  which  the  Lord  thy 
God  hath  given  thee.  Alleluia, 

V.  Acts  ii.  When  the  days  of  Pentecost  were 
completed,  they  were  all  sitting  together. 

IV.  COLLECT.  Prcesta!^  qucBsumus, — Grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that,  being  instrui'  ,ed 
by  these  holy  fasts,  we  may  avoid  all  vice,  and  n;  ^re 
easily  obtain  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

IV.  LESSON.  Lev.  xxvi.  3.  12.^ — In  those  dir,3: 
The  Lord  said  to  Moses : Speak  to  the  children  of 
Israel  and  say  to  them : If  you  walk  in  my  pr#^  cepts 
and  keep  my  commandments,  and  do  them.  [ will 
give  you  rain  in  due  season.  And  the  ground  shall 
bring  forth  its  increase,  and  the  trees  shall  be  filled 
with  fruit.  The  threshing  of  your  harvest  shall 
reach  unto  the  vintage,  and  the  vintage  shall  reach 
unto  the  sowing  time ; and  you  shall  eat  your  bread 
to  the  full,  and  dwell  in  your  land  without  fear.  I 
will  give  peace  in  your  coasts : you  shall  sleep,  and 
there  shall  be  none  to  make  you  afraid.  I wiD  take 
away  evil  beasts:  and  the  sword  shall  not  pass 
tlu'ough  your  quarters.  You  shall  pursue  your  ene- 
mies, and  they  shall  fall  before  you.  Five  of  yours 
shall  pursue  a hundred  others,  and  a hundred  of  you 
teti  thousand : your  enemies  shall  fall  before  you  by 
the  sword.  I will  look  on  you,  and  make  you  in- 
crease : you  shall  be  multiplied,  and  I will  establish 
my  covenant  with  you.  You  shall  eat  the  oldest  of 
the  old  store,  and  new  coming  on,  you  shall  cast 
away  the  old.  I will  set  my  tabernacle  in  the  midst 


Kk3 

Digitized  by 


Google 


390 


£MBER  SATURDAY. 


of  you.  and  my  soul  shall  not  cast  you  off.  f will 
walk  among  you,  and  will  be  your  God,  and  you 
shall  be  my  people,  saitk  the  Lord  Almighty,  Allel.  ■ 

V.  * Come,  O Holy  Spirit,  fill  the  hearts  of  thy 
faithful,  and  kindle  in  them  the  fire  of  thy  love. 

V.  COLLECT.  Prcasta  quasumus^-U^rojit,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  whilst  we  fast 
from  meat,  we  may  likewise  fast  from  all  those  vices 
to  which  we  are  prone.  Thro*. 

V.  LESSON.  Dan,  iiL  49.— ^/n  those  days : The 
angel  of  the  Lord  went  down  with  AzaHas  and  his 
companions  into  the  furnace : and  he  drove  the  fiame 
of  the  fire  out  of  the  fufnace,  and  made  the  midst  of 
the  furnace  like  the  blowing  of  a wind  bringing  dew, 
and  the  fire  touched  them  not  at  all,  nor  troubled 
them,  nor  did  them  any  harm.  Then  these  three,  as 
with  one  mouth,  praised,  and  glorified,  and  blessed 
God  in  the  furnace,  saying : Alleluia, 

V.  Blessed  art  thou,  O Lord,  the  God  of  our  fore- 
fatliers,  and  worthy  of  praise  for  ever. 

VI.  COLLECT.  Deusy  qui  tribus, — O God,  who, 
in  the  behalf  of  the  three  young  men,  didst  render 
harmless  the  flames  of  fire:  mercifully  grant,  that 
we,  thy  servants  may  not  be  burnt  by  the  flames  of 
vice.  Thro’. 

Here  is  said,  either  the  Collect,  Eccl.  tute,  or  Deus 
omnium,  p,  50. 

EPISTLE.  Rom,  v.  1.  5. — Brethren:  Being 
justified  by  faith,  let  us  have  peace  with  God,  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  By  whom  also  we  have 
access  through  faith,  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand, 
and  gldry  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  the  sons  of  God. 
And  not  only  so : but  we  glory  also  in  tribulations, 
knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience;  and 
patience  trial ; and  trial  hope.  And  hope  confoimd- 
eth  not;  because  the  charity  of  God  is  poured 
forth  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  given 
to  us. 


Digitized  by  Google 


EUnrtEU  «ATURDAT.  391 

TRACT,  Ps.  cxvL — Praise  ike  Lord,  as  p,  327, 
Prose,  Veni  Sancte  Spiritus,  as  htfore,  p,  376L 
GOSPEL.  JMrc  iv.  38.  44. — Ai  that  tiim : Jesus 
rising  up  out  of  tbe  synagogue,  went  into  Sirnon’a 
house.  And  Sipaon’s  wife’s  motiter  was  taken  with 
R great  fever:  and  they  besought  biin  for  her. — 
And  standing  over  her  he  commanded  the  fever, 
and  k left  her.  And  immediately  rising,  she  minis- 
tered  to  them.  And  when  the  sun  was  down,  all 
they  that  had  any  sick  with  divers  diseases,  brought 
them  to  him.  But  he  laying  his  hands  on  every  one 
of  them,  healed  theiru  And  devils  went  out  from 
tnany,  crying  out  and  sayhig:  Thou  art  the  Son  of 
God.  And  he  rebuking  them  suffered  them  not  to 
«peak:  for  diey  knew  that  he  was  Christ  And 
when  it  was  day,  going  out  he  went  into  a desart 
place:  and  the  multitudes  sought  him,  and  came 
tinto  him : and  they  stayed  him  that  he  should  not 
depart  from  them.  To  whom  he  said : to  other  cities 
also,  I must  preach  the  kingdom  of  God;  for 
therefore  am  I sent  And  he  was  preaching  in  the 
«ynagogues  of  Galilee.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  IxxxviL — O Lord  God  of  my  sal- 
vation, I have  cried  out  to  thee  day  and  night ; let 
my  prayer,  O Lord,  come  before  thee.  Alldma, 
SECRET. — To  the  end  that  our  fasts  may  be 
acceptable  to  thee,  O Lord,  grant  us,  we  beseech 
thee,  to  offer  thee  a heart  purified  by  the  efficacy  of 
this  sacrament  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  hi. — The  spirit  breatheth  where  he 
will,  and  you  hear  his  voice.  Alleluia,  Alldui^:  but 
you  know  not  when  he  comeffi,  nor  whither  he 
goeth.  Alleluia,  AUduia,  AUduieu 

P.  COMM.  PraheauL-  -May  thy  sacred  mysteries 
O Lord,  give  us  divine  fervour,  that  we  may  joyfully 
receive  both  them  and  their  effects.  Thro’i 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 392  ] 

TRINITY  SUNDAY. 

SINCE  without  a belief  of  the  existence  of  Three 
adorable  Persons  in  the  Godhead,  we  cannot  be 
Christians,  let  ns  this  day  beseech  Almighty  God  to 
strengthen  our  faith  in  the  mystery  of  the  ever  blessed 
Trinity,  and  teach  us  implicitly  to  submit  to  whatever 
other  dogma  the  Church  proposes  to  our  belief.  Let 
us  also  pray  for  those,  who,  taking  weak  reason  for 
their  guide  in  matters  of  reDnon,  refuse  to  believe 
what  God  himself  has  revealed  concerning  his  own 
incomprehensible  Majesty. 

INTROIT* 

Blessed  be  the  holy  'Benedicta  sil  sancta 
Trinity  and  undivid-  Jtf  Trinitas^  atque  indi- 
ed  Unity.  We  will  praise  visa  Unitas.  Conjitebi- 
k,  because  it  hath  shewn  mur  ci,  quia  fecit  nobis- 
his  niercy  to  us.  cum  misericoraiam  suam. 

Ps.  O Lord,  our  God»  Ps.  Domine^  Dominus 
how  wonderful  is  thy  noster,  quam  admirabile 
name  over  the  utmost  est  nomen  tuum  in  uuiver 
boundaries  of  the  earth,  sa  terra. 

V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O almighty  and  ever- 
lasting God  who  has  granted  thy  servants,  in  the 
confession  of  the  true  fiuth  to  acknowledge  the  glory 
of  an  Eternal  Trinity,  and  in  the  power  of  majesty, 
to  adore  an  Unity:  we  beseech  thee  that,  by  the 
strength  of  this  faith,  we  may  bo  defended  fi*om  all 
adversity.  Thro’. 

COLLECT.  (Deiw,  in  fe,)  of  the  I.  Sund.  after  Pen- 
tecost.— O God,  the  strength  of  such  as  hope  in  thee : 
mercifully  hear  us  calling  on  thee:  and  since  mortal 
weakdlss  can  do  nothing  without  thee,  grant  us  the 
assistance  of  thy  grace ; that  in  observing  thy  com- 
mandments, we  may  please  thee  both  in  will  and 
action.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Rom.  xi.  33.  36. — O the  depth  of  the 
riches  of  the  wisdom  and  of  the  knowledge  of  God ! 
How  incomprehensible  are  his  judgments,  and  how 

Dig : zed  by  Google 


TRIjaTT  SUNDAY. 


393 


unsearchable  his  ways!  For  who  hath-  known 
the  mind  of  the  Lord"?  Or  who  hath  been  his  coun- 
sellor ? Or  who  hath  first  given  to  him,  and  recom- 
pense shall  be  made  him?  For  of  him,  and  by  him, 
and  in  him  are  all  things : to  him  be  gloiy  for  ever. 
Amen. 

GRAD.  Dan.  iiL — Blessed  art  thou,  O Lord,  who 
beholdest  the  deep,  and  sittest  on  the  cherubim. 
y.  Blessed  art  thou,  O Lord,  in  the  firmament  of 
the  heaven,  and  worthy  of  praise  for  ever.  Alleluia. 
Alleluia. 

V.  Blessed  art  thou,  O V.  Benedictus  es  Do^ 
Lord,  the  Gfod  of  our  mine,  Deus  Patrum  nos^ 
Fathers,  and  worthy  of  trorum^  et  laudabilis  in 
praise  for  ever.  Alldui^  sttcvla.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xicviii.  18.  20. — At  that  Hmsi 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : All  power  is  given  to  me 
in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Gfoing,  ther/elbre,  teach 
all  nations:  Baptisino  them  in  the  name  op 
THE  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  op  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  what- 
soever I have  commeinded  you : and  behold  I am 
with  you  all  days,  even  to  the  consummation  of  the 
world.  CaEDb. 

OFFERT. — Blessed  be  God  the  Father,  and  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God,  as  likewise  the  Holy 
Ghost ; for  he  has  shewn  his  mercy  to  us. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
our  Grod,  by  the  invos^tion  of  thy  holy  name,  the 
victim  of  this  oblation  : and  by  it  make  us  an  eternal 
offering  to  thee.  Thro’. 

SECRET  of  the  I.  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Mercifully  receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  the 
sacrifice  we  offer  thee,  and  grant  that  it  may  be  a 
continual  help  to  us.  Thro’. 

COJVIM. — ^We  bless  the  God  of  heaven,  and  we 
will  praise  him  in  the  sight  of  all  the  living : because 
le  hath  shewn  ua  his  mercy. 


Digitized  by  Google 


304 


CORPUS  CHRISTI. 


P.  COMM.  Proficial, — May  the  rece  ving  of  this 
sacrament,  O Ixird  our  God,  avail  us  to  the  salva- 
tion of  body  and  soul : together  with  the  confession 
of  an  everlasting  Holy  Trinity,  and  of  the  undivided 
unity  thereof.  Tlu*o’. 

P.  COMM.  TaiUis  of  the  I.  Siind.  q/ler  Pentecost. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the  great  sa- 
crifice we  have  partaken  of,  may  avail  us  to  salva- 
tion, and  make  us  never  cease  praising  thee.  Thro*. 

GOSPEL,  of  the  1.  Sund.  o/ler  Pentecost.  Imke 
vi.  36.  41. — At  that  time : Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : 
Be  ye  merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful 
Judge  not,  and  you  shall  not  be  judged.  Condemn 
not,  and  you  shall  not  be  condemned.  Forgive, 
and  you  shall  be  forgiven.  Give,  and  it  shall  be 
given  to  you ; good  measure  and  pressed  down  and 
shaken  together  and  running  over  shall  l>e  given  into 
your  bosom^  For  with  the  same  measure  that  you 
sliall  mete  withal  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again. 
And  he  spoke  also  to  them  a similitude : Can  the 
bfmd  lead  the  blind  ? do  they  not  both  fall  into  the 
ditch  ? The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master : but 
every  one  shall  be  perfect,  if  he  be  as  his  master. 
And  why  seest  thou  the  mote  in  thy  •brother’s  eye; 
but  the  beam  that  is  in  thy  own  eye  thou  considerest 
not  ? or  how  const  thou  say  to  thy  brother : Bro- 
ther, let  me  pull  the  mote  out  of  thy  eye,  when 
thou  thyself  seest  not  the  beam  in  thy  own  eye  ? 
Hypocrite,  cast  fii'st  the  beam  out  of  thine  own  eye, 
and  then  thou  shalt  see  clearly  to  take  out  the  mute 
from  thy  brother’s  eye.  Deo  gratias, 

CORPUS  CHRISTL 

This  Festival  (instituted  about  the  middle  of  the 
thirteenth  century  by  a Bull  of  Urban  IV.)  was 
received  and  confirmed  by  the  General  Council  of 
Vienne,  anno  1311,  in  opposition  to  the  errors  o6  some, 
who  then,  as  well  as  now,  preferred  a false  philosophj 
to  the  belief  of  all  Christians  in  the  preceding  ages. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CORPUS  CHRISTI. 


395 


The  Processions  in  Catholic  countries  on  this  day, 
and  during  its  Octave,  were  instituted  as  triumphs  of 
Christ  and  his  church  over  the  obstinate  enemies  of 
this  adorable  mystery;  and  as  public  testimonies  of 
the  faith,  love  and  gratitude  of  the  true  children  of  God. 

INTROIT.  P^.lxxx. 

He  fed  them  with  the  ^IBAVIT  eos  ex  adipe 
fat  of  wheat,  AUe-  frumenti,  Alleluia:  et 
luia : apd  filled  them  with  de  petra  meile  saturavit 
honey  out  of  the  rock.  eos.  Allel.  Allel.  Allel. 
AUel.  Allel.  Allel.  Ps.  Ps.  ExuUate  Dpo  adjvr 
Exult  in  God  our  help ; tori  nostro : jubilate  Deo 
joyfully  sing  to  the  God  Jacob. 
of  Jacob.  V.  Gloiy.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qut. O God,  who  in  this 

•wonderful  sacrament,  has  left  us  a perpetual  memo- 
rial of  thy  Passion  ; grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  so 
to  reverence  the  sacred  mysteries  of  thy  body  and 
blood,  that  in  our  souls  we  may  always  be  sensible 
of  the  fruit  of  the  redemption  thou  hast  purchased 
for  us.  Who  livest. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  xi.23. — Brethren:  I have  re- 
ceived of  the  Lord,  that  which  also  I delivered  to 
you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which  he 
was  betrayed,  took  bread,  and  giving  thanks,  broke, 
and  said  : Take  ye,  and  eat : this  is  my  body  which 
shall  be  delivered  for  you : this  do  for  the  commemora- 
tion of  me.  In  like  manner  also  the  chalice,  after 
he  had  supped,  saying:  This  Chalice  is  the  JSTew  Tes- 
tament in  my  blood : this  do  ye,  as  often  as  you  shall 
drink  it,  for  the  commemoration  of  me.  For  as  often 
as  you  shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  chalice, 
you  shall  shew  the  death  of  the  Lord,  until  he  come. 
Therefore  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread,  or  drink 
of  the  chalice  of  the  Lord  unwortliily,  shall  be  guilty 
of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord.  But  let  a man 
prove  himself : and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


CORPUS  CHRISTI. 


{m 


drink  of  the  chalice.  For  he  tliat  eateth  and  drinke  th 
unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  judgment  to  him- 
self, not  discerning  the  body  of  the  Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxliv. — The  eyes  of  all  hope  in  thee, 
O Lord,  and  thou  givest  them  food  in  due  season. 
V Thou  openest  thy  hand,  and  fillest  with  thy  bles- 
sing every  living  creature.  AUduicu  Alleluia. 

y.  My  flesh  is  truly  V.  Caro  mea  vere  est 
meat,  and  my  blood  is  cihitSy  et  sanguis  mens 
truly  drink ; he  that  eat-  vere  est  potus : qui  man- 
eth-^y  flesh,  and  drink-  ducat  meam  carnem,  et 
eth  my  blood,  remaineth  bibit  meum  sangumem  in 
in  me,  and  I in  him.  me  maneU  et  ego  in  to. 

The  PROSE. 


Lauda,  Sion  salvato- 
rem ; Lauda  Ducem 
et  Pastorem : In  hymnis 
et  canticis. 

2.  Quantum  potes,  tan- 
tum aude ; quia  major 
omni  laude : nec  laudare 
suflicis. 

3.  Laudis  thema  speci- 
alis : panis  vivus  et  vita- 
lis : hodie  proponitur. 

4.  Quem  in  ^acrse  men- 
sa ccense ; turbse  fratrum 
duodensB : datum  non  am- 
bigitur. 

5.  Sit  laus  plena,  sit 
sonora:  sit  jucundJ^  sit 
decora : mentis  jubilatio. 

6.  Dies  enim  solemnis 
agitur,  in  qua  mensee 
prima  recolitur  hujus 
institutio. 

7.  In  hsec  mensa  novi 


Regis,  novum  Pascha 
novae  legis,  phase  vetus 
terminat 

8.  Vetustatem  novitas, 
umbram  fugat  veritas, 
noctem  lux  eliminat 

9.  Quod  in  coena  Chris- 
tus gessit,  faciendum 
hoc  expressit  in  sui  me- 
moriam. 

10.  Docti  sacris  insti- 
tutis, panem,  vinum  in 
saluds  consecramus  hos- 
tiam. 

1 1.  Dogma  datur  Chris- 
tianis, quod  in  carnem 
transit  panis,  et  vinum 
in  sanguinem. 

12.  Quod  non  capis, 

uod  non  vides,  animosa 

rmat  fides,  prceter  re- 
rum ordinem. 

13.  Sub  diversis  spe- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CORPUS  CHRISTI. 


397 


rrebus,  signis  tantum,  et  20.  Niilla  rei  fit  scia- 
non  rebus,  latent  res  sura : signi  tantum  fit 
eximire.  fractura : qua  nec  status, 

14.  Caro  cibus,  san-  nec  statura  signati  mi- 
guis  potus:  manet  tamen  nuitur. 

Christus  totus,  sub  utra-  21.  Ecce  panis  angelo- 
que specie.  rum,  factus  cibus  via- 

15.  A sumente  non  torum : vere  panis  filio- 
concisus,  non  confitictus,  rum,  non  mittendus  ca- 
non divisus,  integer  ac-  nibus. 

cipitur.  22.  In  figuris  prcesigna- 

16.  Sumit  unus,  sumunt  tur,  cum  Isaac  immo- 

mille : quantum  isti,  tan-  latUr : Agnus  Paschae  de- 
tum  ille:  nec  ^sumptus  putatur;  datur  Manna 
consumitur.  Patribus. 

17.  Sumunt  boni,  su-  23.  Bone  pasto!',  pa- 

munt  mali : sorte  tamen  nis  vere,  Jesu  nostri  mi- 
insequali,  vitae  vel  interi-  serere:  tu  nos  pasce,  nos 
tus.  tuere,  tu  nos  bona  fac 

18.  Mors  est  malis,  vita  videre  in  terra  viven- 
bonis,  vide  paris  sump-  tium. 

tionis,  quam  sit  dispar  24.  Tu  qui  cuncta 
exitus’  scis,  et  vales,  qui  nos 

19.  Fracto  demum  sa-  pascis  hic  mortales : tuos 

crarnento,  ne  vacilles,  ibi  commensales,  cohaer»;- 
sed  memento,  tantum  des  et  sodales,  fee  san  c- 
e8sesubfi‘agmento,quan-  torum  civium.  Amtti, 
tum  toto  tegitur.  AUduia, 

GOSPEL.  John  vi.  5d.  59,— At  fhat  Hint: 
Jeaua  said  to  the  mvltUude  of  the  Jews : My  flesh  is 
meat  indeed : and  my  blood  is  drmk  indeed.  He 
that  eateth  my  flesh  and  drinketh  my  blood,  abideth 
in  me,  and  I in  him.  As  the  living  Father  hath 
sent  me,  and  1 live  by  the  Father ; so  he  that  eateth 
me,  the  same  also  shall  live  by  me.  This  is  the 
bread  that  came  down  from  heaven.  Not  as  your 
fethera  did  eat  manna  and  are  dead,  lie  that  eat- 
eth this  bread  shall  live  forever.  Credo. 

LI 

Digitized  by  Google 


JJ98  II.  8UND1T  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

OFFERT.  Lev.  xii. — The  priests  of  the  Lord 
offer  to  God  incense  and  loaves : and  therefore  shall 
they  be  holy  to  their  God,  and  shall  not  defile  his 
name.  Alleluia. 

SECRET. — Mercifully  grant  thy  Church,  O Lord, 
we  lieseech  thee,  the  gifts  of  Unity  and  Peace,  which 
are  mystically  represented  in  these  offering  Thro’. 
On  ikis  dayy  and  during  the  Octave,  is  said  the  Pre- 
face, *Quia  per  Incarnati,  p.  xxx.  and  the  satne 
Mass,  unless  on  a Double. 

COMM.  1 Cor.  xi. — As  often  as  you  shall  eat 
this  bread,  and  drink  the  chalice,  you  shall  shew 
the  death  of  the  Lord  until  he  come.  Whosoever, 
therefore  shall  eat  this  bread,  or  dripk  the  chalice  of 
the  Lord  unworthily,  shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and 
of  the  blood  of  the  Lord.  Alleluia. 

P.  COMM.  Fax:  nos. — Grant  us,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  everlasting  possession  of  thyself,  as 
a pledge  of  which  we  have  received  thy  body  and 
blood.  Who  livest. 


II.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Psalm  xvii. 


The  Lord  hath  become 
my  protecrtor,  and 
set  me  at  large;  he  has 
saved  me,  because  he  lov- 
ed me.  Ps.  I will  love 
thee,0  Ijord,niy  strength: 
the  Lord  is  my  support, 
my  refuge,  and  my  de- 
liverer. V.  Glory. 


T^tACTUS  est  Dominus 
protector  metiSy  ei 
eduxit  me  in  latitudinem  : 
saJvum  me  fecit,  ^oniam 
voluit  me.  Ps.  Diligam  It 
Domine,  virtus  mea  : Do- 
minusjtnnamentum  meum 
et  e^ugium  meum,  et  I - 
heroior  meus.  V.  Gloria. 


COLLECT.  SancH. — Grant  us,  O Lord,  both  a 
constant  love  and  fear  of  thy  holy  name ; since  thou 
never  withdrawest  thy  protection  from  those,  whom 
thou  solidly  groundest  in  thy  love.  Thro’. 

Here  as  todl  as  at  the  Secret,  and  P.  Comm,  is  made 
a Commem,  oj  Corous  Cliristi,  p,  395. 


Digitized  by  Google 


11.  SUIfDAT*  AFTER  PENTECOST.  399 

EPISTLE.  1 John  iii.  13.  18. — Dearly  beloved: 
Wonder  not  if  the  world  hate  you.  We  know  tlint 
we  have  passed  from  death  to  life,  because  we  love 
the  brethren.  He  that  ioveth  not,  abideth  in  death. 
Whosoever  hateth  his  brother,  is  a murderer.  And 
you  know  that  no  murderer  liath  eternal  life  abiding 
in  himself.  In  this  we  have  known  the  charity  of 
. Grod,  because  he  hath  laid  down  h*is  life  for  us: 
and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren. 
He  that  hath  the  substance  of  this  world,  and  shall 
see  his  brother  in  need,  and  shut  up  his  bowels  from 
him : how  doth  the  charity  of  God  abide  in  him  ? 
My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word,  nor  in 
tongue,*  but  in  deed,  and  in  truth. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxix. — In  my  troubles  I cried  to  tlie 
Lord:  and  he  heard  me.  F,  Q Lord,  deliver  niy 
soul  from  wicked  lips  and  a deceitful  tongue.  Allel. 

F,  O Lord  my  God,  in  V.  Domine  Deus  metis 
thee  have  I put  my  trust : in  te  speravi : salvum  me 
save  me  from  those  that  /oc  ex  omnibus  persequen* 
persecute  me,  and  rescue  tibus  me,  et  libera  me. 
me.  .Alleluia.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Duke  xiv.  16. 24. — M that  time : Jesus 
spoke  this  parable  to  the  Pharisees : A certain  man 
made  a great  supper,  and  invited  many,  and  he 
sent  his  servant  at  the  hour  of  supper  to  say  to 
them  that  were  invited,  that  they  should  come,  for 
now  all  things  are  ready.  And  they  began  all  at 
once  to  madte  excuse.  The  first  said  to  him  : 1 have 
bought  a form,  and  must  needs  go  out  and  see  it : I 
pray  thee,  hold  me  excused.  And  another  said : I 
have  bought  five  yokes  of  oxen,  and  I go  to  try 
V them : I pray  thee,  hold  me  excused.  And  another 
said : I have  married  a wife,  and  therefore  I cannot 
come.  And  the  servant  returning  told  these  things 
to  his  lord.  Then  the  master  of  the  house  being 
angry,  said  to  his  serpant ; Go  out  quickly  into  the 
LI  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


400 


MI.  8 UNDAT  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


streets  and  lanes  of  the  city,  and  bring  in  hither  the 
poor,  and  the.  feeble,  and  the  blind,  and  the  lame. — 
And  the  servant  said : Lord  it  is  done  as  thou  hast 
commanded,  and  yet  there  is  room.  And  the  Icud 
Bilid  to  the  servant : Go  out  into  the  high  ways  and 
hedges;  and  compel  them  to  come  in,  that  iny  house 
may  be  filled.  But  I say  unto  you,  tJiat  none  of 
those  men  thaf  were  invited,  shall  taste  of  my  supper 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  vL — ^Tum  again,  O Lord,  and 
rescue  my  soul : save  me  for  thy  mercies  sake. 

SECRET. — May  this  sacrifice  offered  to  thy  name 
purify  us,  O Lord : and  make  us  every  day  advance 
towards  a heavenly  life.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  xi. — I will  sing  to  the  Lord,  who 
hath  bestowed  good  things  on  me : and  I will  sing  a 
psalm  to  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  Most  High. 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis. — Having  received,  O Lord, 
this  sacred  oblation,  grant,  that  oy  frequenting  these 
mysteries  we  may  hasten  our  salvation. 


III.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. 


Look  thou  upon  me, 
and  have  mercy  on 
me,  O Lord,  for  I am  a- 
lone  and  poor:  see  my 
abjection  and  my  labour, 
and  forgive  me  all  my  sins, 
O my  God.  Ps.  To  thee, 
O Lord,  have  I liffed  up 
my  soul : In  thee,  O my 
God,  I place  my  trust: 
let  me  not  be  ashamed. 
r.  Glory. 


Ps,  xxiv. 

Aspice  in  me,  ei 

miserere  mei  Domine 
quoniam  unicus  et  pauper 
sum  ego:  vide  humiltia- 
tem  meamy  et  laboretn 
meuroy  et  dimitte  omr 
nia  peccata  meOy  Deus 
meus,  Ps.  M te  Do- 
mincy  levavi  animam  me- 
am: Deus  tneusy  in  te 


confidoy  non  erubescam. 
V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Protector. — Q God,  tlie  protectoi 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


Ill,  SaNDAT  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


401 


of  those  who  hope  in  thee,  without  whose  aid  no- 
thing is  strong,  nothing  holy:  increase  thy  mercy 
cowards  us ; that  under  thy  direction  and  conduct, 
we  may  so  pass  through  the  blessings  of  this  life,  as 
not  to  lose  those  which  are  eternal.  Thro’. 

the  IL, Collect,  &c.  see  the  Ordinart,/?.  xx. 

EPISTLE.  1 Peter  v.  6.  11. — If  early  beloved: 

Be  you  humbled  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God, 
that  he  may  exalt  you  in  the  time  of  visitation. 
Casting  all  your  care  upon  him,  for  he  hath  care  of 
you.  Be  sober  and  watch : because  your  adversary 
the  devil,  as  a roaring  lion,  goeth  about,  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour : whom  resist  ye,  strong  in 
faith  ; knowing  that  the  same  affliction  befalls  youF  / 
brethren  who  are  in  the  world.  But  the  God  of  all 
grace,  who  hath  called  us  into  his  eternal  glory 
in  Christ  Jesus,  after  you  have  suffered  a little,  wriU 
himself  perfect  you,  and  confirm  and  establish  you. 

To  him  be  glory  and  empire  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. 

GRAD.  Ps.  liv. — Cast  thy  care  upon  the  Lord : 
and  he  shall  sustain  thee.  V.  When  1 cried  out  to 
the  Lord,  he  heard  my  voice  against  those  who  were 
coming  upon  me.  Alleluia^  Alleluia, 

V,  God  is  a just  Judge,  V.  Deus  judex  justia 

strong  and  patient : is  fortis  et  patiens : numquid 
he  angiy  every  day?  irascitur  per  singulos  dxesf 
Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Jjukb  XV.  1.  10. -At  that  time: 

The  publicans  and  sinners  drew  near  unto  him  to 
hear  him.  And  the  Pharisees  and  Scribes  murmur- 
ed, saying : This  man  receiveth  sinners  and  eateth 
with  them.  And  he  spoke  to  them  this  parable, 
saying:  What  man  of  you  that  hath  a hundred 
sheep ; and  if  he  shall  lose  one  of  them,  doth  he 
not  leave  the  ninety-nine  in  the  desart,  and  go  after 
that  which  was  lost  until  he  find  it  ? And  when  he 
hath  found  it,  lay  it  upon  his  shoulders  rejoicing : 

* LI  3 

oy  Google 


402 


1%.  SUNDAY  AFT£K  FKNTSC08T. 


and  coming  home  caU  together  his  friends  and  neigh 
boure,  saying  to  them:  Rejoice  ^ith  me,  because 
I have  found  my  sheep  that  was  lost  ? 1 say  to  you, 
that  even  so  there  shall  be  joy  in  heaven  upon  one 
sinner  that  dqtb  penance,  more  than  upon  ninety* 
nine  just  who  need  not  penance.  Or  what  woman 
having  ten  groats : if  she  lose  one  groat,  doth  not 
light  a candle,  and  sweep  the  house,  and  seek  dili- 
^ntly  until  she  find  it  ? And  when  she  hath  found 
it,  call  together  her  friends  and  neighbours,  saying : 
Rejoice  with  me,  because  I have  found  the  groat 
which  I had  lost  ? So  I say  to  you,  there  shidl  be 
joy  before  the  angels  of  God  upon  one  sinner  doing 
penance.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  ix. — Let  them  trust  in  thee,  O 
Lord,  who  know  thy  name : for  thou  ha«  not  for- 
saken them  that  seek  thee.  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord  who 
dwelleth  in  Sion : for  that  he  hath  not  forgotten  the 
prayer  of  the  poor. 

SECRET. — Look  down,  O Lord,  on  the  offerings 
of  thy  suppliant  Church ; and  grant  that  thy  fifith- 
ful  may  always  worthily  partake  thereof  in  order 
to  their  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM.  lAike  XV. — say  to  you : There  is  joy 
among  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  doing 
penance. 

P,  COMM.  Sancta, — ^May  thy  sacred  mysteries, 
O Lord,  which  we  have  received,  give  us  life : and 
cleansing  us  fiom  our  sins,  make  us  worthy  of  thy 
eternal  mercy.  Thro’ 

IV.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xY.vi, 

The  Lord  is  my  light  T^OjifiJVUS  iUurmnatio 
and  my  salvation,  X/  mea  et  salus  mea, 
whom  shall  I fear. ^ The  quem  timebo 9 Dominus 
Lord  is  the  protector  of  defensor  vhee  me/t,  a quo 
my  life,  of  whom  shall  I trepidabo  1 Qid  tribuUmf 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


ly.  SUJfDAT  AFTER  PENTECOST.  406 

b**  afraid  ? My  enemies  me  inimici  mei,  ipsi  infir 
that  trouble  pae  have  mati  sunt  et  ceciderunt, 
themselves  been  weaken-  Ps.  Si  consistant  adver- 

ed,  and  have  fallen.  sum  me  castra ; non  iime^ 

Ps,  If  armies  in  camp  bit  cor  meum, 
should  stand  together  V.  Gloria, 

against  me,  my  heart 
shall  not  fear.  V,  Glor3i. 

COLL.  Da, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O lx)rd, 
that  the  world,  with  regard  to  us,  may  be  governed 
in  peace  by  thy  providence,  and  thy  Church  pay  her 
devotions  to  thee  in  tranquillity.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Rom,  viii.  18.  23. Brethren:  1 

reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  time  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  to  come,  that 
shall  be  revealed  to  us.  For  the  expectation  of  the 
creature  waiteth  for  the  revelation  of  the  sons  of 
God.  For  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity, 
not  willingly,  but  by  reason  of  him  that  made  it 
subiect,  in  hope:  Because  the  creature  also  itself 
shall  be  delivered  from  the  servitude  of  corruption, 
into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God. 
For  we  know  that  every  creature  groaneth,  and  tra- 
vaileth  in  pain  even  till  now.  And  not  only  it,  but 
ourselves  also,  who  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  spirit, 
even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves,  waiting 
for  the  adoption  of  the  sons  of  God,  the  redemption 
of  our  body  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxviii. — Be  merciful,  O Lord,  to  our 
offences,  that  the  Gentiles  may  never  say  : Where 
now  is  their  God  ? V,  Help  us,  O Lord,  our  Sa- 
viour ; and  for  the  honour  of  thy  name  deliver  us, 
O Lord.  Mleluia,  Alleluia^ 

V.  O God,  who  sittest  V.  Ps.  ix.  Deus  qui 
on  thy  throne,  and  judg-  sedes  super  thronum  et 
eth  justly,  be  a refuge  to  judicas  cequitaiem,  esto 
the  poor  in  distress.  Al-  refugium  pauperum  in 
iduia,  tribidatione.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  v.  1.  11. At  thit  time:  It 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


404  IV.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

?unie  to  pass,  that  when  the  multitude  pressed  upon 
him  to  hear  the  word  of  God,  he  stood  by  the  lake 
of  Genesareth.  And  he  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the 
lake : but  the  fishermen  were  gone  out  of  them  and 
were  washing  their  nets.  And  going  up  into  one 
of  the  ships  that  was  Simon’s,  he  desired  him  to 
draw  back  a little  fi*om  tlie.  land.  And  sitting  he 
taught  the  multitudes  out  of  the  ship.  Now  when 
he  had  ceased  to  speak,  he  said  to  Simon : Launch 
out  into  the  deep,  and  let  down  your  nets  for  a 
draught  And  Simon,  answering,  said  to  him  : Mas- 
ter, we  have  laboured  all  the  night,  and  have  taken 
nothing : but  at  thy  word  I will  let  down  the  net 
And  when  they  had  done  this,  they  enclosed  a very 
great  rnultitude  of  fishes  and  their  net  broke.  And 
they  beckoned  to  their  partners  that  were  in  tlie 
other  ship,  that  they  should  come  and  help  them. 
And  they  came  and  filled  both  the  ships,  so  that 
they  were  almost  sinking.  Which  when  ’ Simon 
Peter  saw,  he  fell  down  at  Jesus’s  knees,  saying: 
Depart  from  me,  for  1 am  a sinful  man,  O Lonl. 
For  he  was  wholly  astonished,  and  all  that  were 
with  him,  at  the  draught  of  the  fishes  which  they 
had  taken.  And  so  were  also  James  and  John  tlie 
sons  of  Zebedee,  who  were  Simon’s  partners.  And 
Jesus  saith  to  Simon:  Fear  not:  from  henceforth 
thou  shalt  catch  men.  And  having  brought  their 
ships  to  land,  leaving  all  things  they  followed  him. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xii. — Enlighten  my  eyes,  that  1 
may  never  sleep  in  death ; lest  the  enemy  should 
ever  say : I have  prevailed  over  him. 

SECRET. — Receive  our  offering  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  and  be  appeased  thereny : and  merci- 
fully compel  our  wills  to  yield  to  thee,  even  when 
they  rebel.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  xvii. — ^The  Lord  is  my  support,  my 
refuge,  my  deliverer,  my  God,  my  helper. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


T.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  405 

P.  COMM.  Mysteria, — ^May  the  mysteries  we 
have  received,  both  purify  and  defend  us,  O Lord, 
by  the  efficacy  of  what  they  contain.  Thro’. 

V.  SUNDAY  qfter  PENTECOST. 

INTROIT.  Psalm  xxvi. 

■pTEAR,  O Lord,  my  TIXAUD Domme^ 
-Ll  voice,  with  which  I .Ej  vocem  meam,  qua  clor 
have  cried  to  thee : be  mavi  ad  te : adjtUor  mens 
thou  my  helper ; forsake  esto : ne  derelinquas  me, 
me  not,  do  not  thou  de-  neque  despicias  me,  Deus, 
spise  me,  O God,  my  Sa-  Salutaris  meus,  Ps.  Do- 
viour.  Ps.  The  Lord  is  minus  illuminaiio  mta,  et 
iny  light  and  my  salva-  salus  mea;  quem  timebo^ 
tion : whom  shall  I fear  ? V.  Gloria, 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT,  Deus  tpii, — O God,  who  hast  pre- 
pared invisible  good  things  for  those  that  love  thee: 
pour  forth  into  our  hearts  an  affectionate  love  for 
thee : that  loving  thee  in  all  things,  and  above  all 
things,  we  may  come  to  the  enjoyment  of  thy  pro- 
mises, which  are  above  whatever  we  can  desire. 
Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Peter  iii.  8.  15. — Dearly  beloved: 
Be  ye  all  of  one  mind,  having  compassion  one  of 
another,  being  lovers  of  the  brotherhood,  merciful, 
modest,  humble : not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  or  rail- 
ing for  railing,  but  contrariwise  blessing:  for  unto 
this  you  are  (Sdled,  that  you  mav  inherit  a blessing. 
“ For  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  good  days,  let  ^ 
him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips  that 
they  speak  no  guile.  Let  him  decline  from  evil  and 
do  good : let  him  seek  after  peace,  and  pursue  it : 
because  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  the  just,  and 
his  ears  unto  their  prayers : but  the  countenance  of 
the  Lord  against  them  that  do  evil  things.”  And  whc 
is  he  that  can  hurt  yon,  if  you  be  jealous  of  good? 
But  if  also  you  suffer  any  thing  for  justice  sake 

ed  by  Google 


106  * 


V.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


blessed  are  ye.  And  be  not  afhtid  of  their  fear,  and 
be  not  troubled.  But  sanctify  the  Lord  Christ  in 
your  hearts. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxxv. — Look  down,  O God.  our 
protector:  look  down  upon  thy  servants.  V.  O 
Lord  God  of  hosts,  hear  the  prayers  of  thy  servants. 
Alleluia^  Alleluia. 

V.  O Lord,  in  thy  might  V.  Ps.  xx.  Domine  in 
shall  the  king  rejoice : virtute  tua  loetabitur  rex : 
and  in  thy  salvation  shall  et  super  salutare  tuum 
he  exult  exceedingly.  At-  exidtabit  vehementer.  Al- 
leluia.  leluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  v.  20.  24. At  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : Unless  your  justice  ex- 
ceed that  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  you  shall  not 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  You  have  heard 
that  it  was  said  to  them  of  old : Thou  shalt  not  kill. 
And  whosoever  shall  kill,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the 
judgment.  But  I say  to  you,  that  whosoever  is 
angry  with  his  brother,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the 
judgment.  And  whosoever  shall  say  to  his  brother, 
Itasca,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  council.  And  who- 
soever shall  say.  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of 
hell  fire.  Therefore,  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the 
altar,  and  there  shalt  remember  that  thy  brother  hath 
any  thing  against  thee ; leave  there  thy  gift  before 
the  altar,  and  go  first  to  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother: 
and  then  come  and  offer  thy  gift.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  XV. — I will  bless  ihe  Lord  who 
hath  given  us  understanding. 

SECRET. — Be  appeased,  O Lord,  by  our  humble 
prayers,  and  mercifully  receive  these  offerings  of  thy 
servants : that  what  each  hath  offered  to  the  honour 
of  thy  name,  may  avail  to  the  salvation  of  all. 

COMM.  Ps.  vi. — One  thing  have  I asked  of  the 
Lord,  and  will  continue  to  ask : that  I may  dwell 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life. 

D n-.  zed  by  Google 


VI.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  • 407 

P.  COMM.  Quos  CadesH, — Grant,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee : that  we,  whom  thou  hast  fed  with  this 
heavenly  sacrifice,  may  be  cleansed  from  our  hidden 
sins,  and  delivered  from  the  snares  of  our  enemies. 
Thro’. 

VI.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  xxvii. 

The  Lord  is  the  T^OMIJVUS  fortitudo 
strength  of  his  peo-  A/  plebis  sikb  ; et  Pro- 
pie ; the  Protector  of  the  tector  salutarium  Christi 
Salvation  of  his  anointed,  sui  est,  Salvum  far.  po- 
Save,  O Lord,  thy  peo-  pulum  tuurrL  Domine,  ti 
pie,  and  bless  thy  inheri-  benedic  hrere ditati  ture,  ei 
tance,  and  govern  them  rege  eos  usque  in  soeculum. 
for  ever.  Ps,  To  thee,  Pk  Ad  te-  Domine,  da- 
O Lord,  will  I cry  out.  mabo,  Deus  mens  ne  si- 
O my  God,  be  not  silent : leas  a me : ne  quando  ta- 
refuse  not  to  answer  me,  ceas  a me,  et  assimilnbor 
lest  I become  like  those  descendentibus  in  lacum, 
who  descend  into  the  pit.  V.  Gloria. 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus  virtutum, — O God  of  all  power, 
to  whom  entirely  belongeth  whatever  is  best : im- 
plant in  our  hearts  the  love  of  thy  name,  and  grtfni 
us  an  increase  of  religion  that  thou  mayest  improve 
in  us  what  is  good,  and  preserve  what  thou  thus 
improvest  by  the  practice  of  piety.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Rom.  vi.  3. — Brethren : All  we  whc 
are  baptized  in  Christ  Jesus,  are  baptized  in  his  death. 
For  we  are  buried  together  with  him  by  baplisiii 
unto  death : that  as  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead  by 
the  glory  of  the  Father  so  we  also  may  walk  in 
newness  of  life.  For  if  we  have  been  planted  to- 
gether in  the  likeness  of  his  death,  we  shall  also  be 
in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection.  Knowing  this, 
that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  that  the 
body  of  sin  may  be  destroyed,  and  that  we  may 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


408  . VI,  SUNDAY  AFTER  PiNTECOST. 

serve  sin  no  longer.  For  he  that  b dead  is  justified 
from  sin.  Now  if  we  be  dead  with  Christ,  we  be- 
lieve that  we  shall  live  also  together  with  Christ 
Knowing  that  Christ,  rising  again  from  the  dead, 
dieth  now  no  more,  death  shall  no  more  have  do- 
minion over  him.  For  in  that  he  died  to  sin,  he 
died  once:  but  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth  unto 
God.  So  do  you  also  reckon  yourselves  to  be  dead 
indeed  to  sin,  but  alive  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxxix. — Turn  to  us  a little,  O Lord, 
and  be  appeased  with  thy  servants.  V.  Lord,  thou 
hast  been  our  refuge  from  generation  to  generation. 
Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

V.  Ps.  In  thee,  O Lord,  V.  Ps.  xxx. — In  it,  D<h 

have  I placed  my  trust,  mine,  speravi,  non  cemfun- 
let  me  never  be  put  to  dar  in  cetemum : injusti- 
shame : save  me  by  thy  tia  tua  libera  me  et  eripe 
justice,  and  rescue  me : me : indina  ad  me  aurem 
bend  thine  ear  to . me : tuam : accelera  trf  eripias 
make  haste  to  save  me.  me.  Alleluia. 

AUduia^ 

GOSPEL.  Mark  viii.  1.  9. At  that  time: 

When  there  was  a great  multitude  with  Jesus,  and 
had  nothing  to  eat : calling  his  disciples  together,  he 
saith  to  them : I have  compassion  on  the  multitude, 
for  behold  they  have  now  been  with  me  three  days, 
and  have  nothing  to  eat : and  if  I send  them  away 
fasting  to  their  own  home,  they  wij4  faint  inVhe 
way : for  some  of  them  came  afar  off.  And  his  dis- 
ciples answered  him : From  whence  can  any  one 
fill  them  here  with  bread  in  the  wilderness  ? And 
he  asked  them : How  many  loaves  have  ye  ? Who 
said;  Seven.  And  he  commanded  the  people  to 
sit  down  on  the  ground:  and  taking  the  seven 
loaves,  giving  thanks  he  broke,  and  gave  to  his  dis- 
ciples for  to  set  before  them,  and  they  set  them  be- 
fore the  people.  And  they  had  a few  little  frshes ; and 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


VII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  40& 

he  blessed  tlieih,  and  commanded  them  to  be  set 
before  them.  And  they  did  eat  and  were  filled, 
and  tliey  took  up  that  which  was  left  of  the  frag- 
ments, seven  baskets.  And  they  that  had  eaten 
were  about  four  thousand : and  he  sent  them  away 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xvi. — Perfect  thou  my  goings  in 
thy  paths,  that  my  footsteps  be  not  moved : Incline 
thy  ear  unto  me  and  hear  my  words : Shew  forth 
thy  wonderful  mercies ; *thou  who  savest  them  that 
trust  in  thee,  O Lord. 

SECRET. — Be  appeased,  O Lord,  by  our  hum- 
ble prayers,  and  mercifully  receive  the  offerings  of 
thy  people : and  that  the  vows  and  prayers  of  none 
may  be  in  vain,  grant  we  may  effectually  obtain  what 
we  ask.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  xxvi. — I will  go  up  rfnd  sacrifice  in 
his  tabernacle,  a victim  of  praise:  I will  sing  and 
repeat  a psalm  to  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Repleti. — We  are  filled,  O Lord,  with 
thy  gifts : grant,  therefore,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we 
may  be  cleansed  by  their  efiicacy,  and  strengthened 
by  their  aid.  Thro’. 

VII.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xlvi. 

CLAP  your  hands  all  d^MJVES  Gentes  plan- 
ye  Gentiles : Shout  K7  dite  manibus : jubv- 
unto  God  w^  the  voice  late  Deo  in  voce  extdta- 
ofjoy.  For  tne  Lord  is  tionis.  Ps.  Qtioniam  Do- 
most  high,  he  is  terrible : minus  excelsus^  terribilis : 
he  is  a great  King  over  Bex  magnus  super  omnem 
all  the  earth.  V.  Glory.  terrain.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus  cujus. — O God,  whose  provi- 
dence is  never  deceived  in  what  it  appointeth : we 
humbly  beseech  thee  to  remove  whatever  maybe 
prejudicial  to  us : and  grant  us  whatever  may  be  to 
tlie  advantage  of  our  souls.  Thro’. 

M m 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


410  VII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

EPISTLE.  Rom.  vi.  19. — Brethren:  1 speak  a 
liuman  thing,  liecause  of  thu  infirmity  of  your  flesh : 
for  as  you  have  yielded  your  members  to  serve  un- 
cleanness and  iniquity  unto  iniquity ; so  now  yield 
your  members  to  serve  justice,  unto  sanctification. 
For  when  you  were  the  servants  of  sin,  you  were  firee 
from  justice.  What  fruit  therefore  had  you  then  in 
those  things  of  which  you  are  now  ashamed  ? For 
the  end  of  them  is  death.  But  now  being  made  free 
from  .sin,  and  become  servants  to  God,  you  have 
your  fruit  unto  sanctification,  and  the  end  life  ever- 
lasting. For  the  wqges  of  sin  is  death.  But  the 
grace  of  God,  life  everlasting  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxiii. — Come,  children,  hearken  to 
me ; I will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  V,  Come 
ye  to  him,  and  be  enlightened : and  your  faces  shall 
not  be  confounded.  Alleluia,  Alleluicu 

V,  Clap  your  hands  all  V.  Omnes  Gentes  pUeu- 
ye  Gentiles:  shout  unto  dite  manibus:  JubUate 
God  with  the  voice  of  joy.  Deo  in  voce  exultationis. 
Alleluia.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  MaU.  vii.  15.  2\.—At  that  tinu: 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : Beware  of  felse  prophets, 
who  come  to  you  in  the  clothing  of  sheep,  but  in- 
wardly they  are  ravening  wolves.  By  their  fruits 
you  shall  know  them.  Do  men  gather  grapes  of 
thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles  ? Even  so  every  good  tree 
bringeth  forth  good  fruit,  and  the  ev^tree  bringetb 
forth  evil  fruit.  A good  tree  cannot  nnng  forth  evil 
fruit,  neither  can  an  evil  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit 
Every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit,  shall 
be  cut  down,  and  shall  je  cast  into  the  fire.  Where- 
fore by  their  fruits  you  shall  know  them.  Not  every 
one  that  saith.  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven : but  he  that  doth  the  will  of  my 
Father  who  is  in  heaven,  he  shall  enter  into  the  king 
dom  of  heaven.  Credo. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


VIII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST 


411 


OFFERT.  Dan,  iii. — As  in  holocausts  of  rams 
and  bullocks,  and  as  in  thousands  of  fat  sheep,  so  let 
our  sacrifice  be  made  in  thy  sight  this  day,  that  it 
may  please  thee : for  there  is  no  confusion  to  them 
that  trust  in  thee,  O Lord. 

SECRET.— -O  God,  who  in  one  perfect  sacrifice 
hast  united  all  the  various  sacrifices  of  the  law,  ac- 
cept from  thy  devout  servants  this  sacrifice,  and 
sanctify  it  by  the  like  blessing  as  thou  didst  the 
ofiTering  of  Abel : that  what  each  bath  offered  to 
thy  divine  Majesty,  may  avail  to  the  salvation  of  all. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  XXX. — Bow  down  thy  ear  to  me: 
make  haste  to  deliver  me. 

P.  COMM. ' Tua  nos, — Grant,  O Lord,  that  the 
healing  efficacy  of  these  thy  mysteries  may,  through 
thy  mercy,  free  us  from  all  our  sins,  and  bring  us  to 
the  practice  of  what  is  right.  Thro’, 


W 


VIII.  SUNDAY  a/Ter  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.*  Ps,x\vu, 

E have  received  thy  ^USCEPIMUS  Dms 
misericordiam  tuam 


mercy,  O God,  in 
the  midst  of  thy  temple ; 
According  to  thy  name, 
so  also  is  thy  praise  unto 
the  ends  of  the  earth  : thy 
right  hand  is  full  of  jus- 
tice. Ps,  Great  is  the 
Lord,  and  exceedingly  to 
be  praised ; in  the  city  of 
our  God,  on  his  holy 
V,  Glory. 


in  medio  templi  tui:  se- 
cundum nomen  tuum,  ita 
et  laus  tua  in  fines  terrce : 
Justitia  plena  est  dextera 
tua,  Ps.  MagnTis  Do- 
minus  et  laudabilis  nimis: 
in  civitate  Dei  nostri,  in 
monte  sancto  gus, 

V.  Glona, 


mountain. 

COLLECT.  Largire  nobis, — Grant  us,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  the  spirit  of  thinking  and  doing 
what  is  right,  that  we,  who  cannot  even  subsist  with- 
out thee,  may  live  according  to  thee.  Thro’. 

" iniroil  for  Candlemas-Day  also. 

Mm2 


,y  Google 


412  VIII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

EPISTLE.  Rom.  viii.  12. — Brethren:  We  are 
debtors,  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live  according  to  the 
flesh.  For  if  you  live  according  to  the  flesh,  you 
shall  die  : but  if  by  the  spirit  you  mortify  the  deeds 
of  the  flesh,  you  shall  live.  For  whosoever  are  led 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  Sons  of  God.  For 
you  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again 
in  fear:  but  you  have  received  the  spirit  of  adop- 
tion of  sons,  whereby  we  cry:  Abba,  (Father.) 
For  the  Spirit  himself  giveth  testimony  to  our  spirit, 
that  we  are  the  sons  of  God.  And  if  sons,  heirs  also : 
heirs  indeed  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ. 

GRAD.  Ps.  XXX. — Be  thoii  unto  me  a God,  a 
protector,  and  a place  of  refuge  to  save  me.  V.  O 
God,  on  thee  have  I relied ; let  me  never,  O Lord,  be 
put  to  shame.  Alleluia^  Alleluia. 

V.  Great  is  the  Lord,  V.  Ma^us  Dominus, 
and  exceedingly  to  be  et  laudahms  valde,  in  dm- 
praised  in  the  city  of  our  tate  Dei  nostri,  in  monJte 
God,  on  his  holy  moun-  sancto  ejus. 
tain.  Alleluia.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Duke  xvi.  1.  9. — At  that  time : Jesus 
spoke  to  his  disciples  this  parable : There  was  a cer- 
tain rich  man  who  hacl  a steward:  and  the  same 
was  accused  unto  him,  that  he  had  wasted  his 
goods.  And  he  called  him,  and  said  to  him  : How 
is  it  that  I hear  this  of  thee  ? give  an  account  of  thy 
stewardship:  for  now  thou  canst  be  steward  no 
longer.  And  the  steward  said  within  himself : What 
shall  I do,  because  my  lord  taketh  away  frdm  me 
the  stewardship  ? To  dig  I am  not  able  ; to  beg  I 
am  ashamed.  I know  what  I will  do,  that  when  I 
shall  be  removed  from  the  stewardship,  they  may 
receive  me  into  their  houses.  Therefore  calling  to- 
gether every  one  of  his  Lord’s  debtors  he  said  to  the 
first : How  much  dost  thou  owe  my  lord  ? But  he 
said:  A hundred  barrels  of  oil.  And  he  said  to  turn : 


IX.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  415 

Take  thy  bill  and  sit  down  quickly,  and  write  fifty  ? 
Then  he  said  to  another : And  how  much  dost  thou 
owe?  Who  said:  A hundred  quarters  of  wheat. 
He  said  to  him  take  thy  bill,  and  write  eighty.  And 
the  lord  commended  the  unjust  steward,  forasmuch 
us  he  had  done  wisely  : for  the  children  of  this  world 
are  wiser  in  their  generation,  than  the  children  of 
light.  And  I say  to  you : MaJie  unto  you  friends  of 
the  mammon  of  iniquity,  that  when  you  shall  ftiil, 
they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  dwellinga 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xvii. — Thou  wilt  save  the  humble 
people,  O Lord:  and  thou  wilt  humble  the  eyes  of 
the  proud,  for  who  is  God  besides  thee,  O Lord. 

SECRET. — ^Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
the  offerings  we  brmg,  which  are  the  gifts  of  thine 
own  bounty:  that  these  most  holy  mysteries  may, 
by  the  power  of  thy  grace,  make  our  conduct  in  this 
life  holy,  and  bring  us  to  those  joys  that  will  never 
end.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  xxxiii. — Taste,  and  see,  how  sweet 
is  the  Lord ! blessed  is  the  man  who  putteth  his 
trust  in  him. 

P.  COMM.  Sit  nohis. — May  this  heavenly  mys- 
tery, O Lord,  renew  us  both  in  soul  and  body : that 
we  may  find  in  ourselves  the  effects  of  what  we 
celebrate.  Thro’. 


IX.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  liii. 

Behold  God  is  my  TlCCE  Denis  adjuvat 
helper,  and  the  Lord  me : et  Dominus  sus- 
is  the  support  of  my  soul : ceptor  est  aninKB  mece: 
turn  out  the  evils  upon  averte  mala  inimids  meiSf 
tny  enemies,and  cut  them  et  in  veritate  tua  disperde 
off  in  thy  truth,  O Lord,  Ulos  protector  meusy  Do- 
iiiy  protector.  mine. 

Mm3 


DigitizsW  byCjOO^IC 


414 


IX.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


Ps,  Save  me,  O God,  Ps.  Deua,  in  nomim 
by  thy  name : and  deliver  tuo  saimm  me  fac : et  in 
rne  in  thy  strength.  virtute  tua  libera  me. 

V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Pateant. May  the  ears  of  ilry  ’ 

mercy,  O Lord,  be  open  to  the  prayers  of  thy  sup- 
pliants : and,  that  they  may  succeed  in  their  desires, 
make  them  ask  those  things  that  are  agreeable  to 
thee.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  x.  6.  13. — Brethren:  Let  us  • 
not  covet  evil  things,  as  they  also  coveted.  Neither 
become  ye  idolaters,  as  some  of  them:  as  it  is 
Written : “ The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink, 
and  rose  up  to  play.”  Neither  let  us  commit  forni- 
cation, as  some  of  them  committed  fornication,  and 
there  fell  in  one  day  three-and-twenty  thousand. 
Neither  let  us  tempt  Christ:  as  some  of  them 
tempted,  and  perished  by  the  serpents.  Neither  do 
you  murmur : as  some  of  them  murmured,  and  were 
destroyed  by  the  destroyer.  Now  all  these  things 
happened  to  them  in  figure : and  they  are  written 
for  our  correction,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the 
world  are  come.  Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketh 
himself  to  stand,  take  heed  lest  he  fall.  Let  no 
temptation  take  hold  on  you  but  such  as  is  human. 
And  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be 
tempted  above  that  which  you  are  able:  but  will 
make  also  with  temptation  issue,  that  you  may  be 
able  to  bear  it. 

GRAD.  Ps.  li. — O Lord,  our  Lord,  how  wonder- 
ful is  thy  name  over  the  whole  earth  ! V.  For  thy 
majesty  is  above  the  heavens.  Meluia^  Alleluia. 

Ps.  Rescue  me,  O my  Ps.  Eripe  me  de  ini- 
God,  from  my  enemies : micis  meis,  Deus  meus : 
and  from  those  that  rise  et  ah  insurgentibus  in  me, 
lip  against  me,deliver  me.  libera  me.  Alleluia. 
jilleiuia. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


X.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  415 

GOSPEL.  Jjuke  xix.  41  47.  — At  that  time : 
When  he  drew  near  Jerusalem,  seeing  the  city,  he 
wept  over  it,  saying : If  thou  also  hadst  known,  and 
that  ill  this  thy  day,  the  things  that  are  to  thy 
peace:  but  now  they  are  bidden  from  thy  eyes. 
For  the  days  shall  come  upon  thee : and  thy  enemies 
shall  cast  a trench  about  thee,  and  compass  thee 
round,  and  straiten  thee  on  every  side,  and  beat 
thee  flat  to  the  ground,  and  thy  children  who  are  in 
thee : and  they  shall  not  leave  in  thee  a stone  upon 
a stone : because  thou  hast  not  known  the  time  of 
thy  visitation.  And  entering  into  the  temple,  he  be- 
gan to  cast  out  them  that  sold  therein,  and  them  that 
bought.  Saying  to  them : It  is  written : “ My  house 
is  the  house  of  prayer : but  you  have  made  it  a den 
of  thieves.”  And  he  was  teaching  daily  in  the  tem- 
ple. Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xviii. — ^The  Justices  of  the  Lord 
are  right,  rejoicing  heaits:  and  his  precepts  are 
sweeter  than  honey  and  the  honey-comb ; and  there- 
fore doth  thy  servant  observe  them. 

SECRET. — Grant  hs,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
frequently  and  worthily  to  celebrate  these  mysteries : 
for  as  many  times  as  this  commemorative  sacrifice  is 
celebrated,  so  often  is  the  work  of  our  redemption 
performed.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  vi. — ^He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and 
drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in  me,  and  I in  him,  saith 
the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Tui  nobis, — May  the  participation  of 
this  thy  sacrament,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  both 
purify  us,  and  unite  us.  Thro’. 

X.  SUNDAY  ajler  PENTECOST. 

INTROIT.  Is.  xlviii.  Ps.  liv. 

WHEN  I cried  out,  ^UM  clamarem  ad 
the  Lord  heard  V/  Dominum,  exaudivit 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


416 


X.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


my  complaint  against 
those  that  weie  coming 
against  me  : and  he  that 
was  before  all  ages,  and 
will  be  for  ever,  humbled 
them : cast  thy  care  on 
the  Lord,  and  he  will  feed 
thee.  Ps.  Hear,  O God, 
my  prayer,  and  despise 
not  my  petition:  look 
down  upon  me,  and  hear 
me.  V,  Glory. 


vocem  meam,  ab  kis  qui 
appropinquant  mihi : et 
humiliavit  eos,  qui  est 
ante  scecida,  et  manet  in 
fttemum : jacta  cogitatum 
tuum  in  Domino,  et  ipse 
te  enutriet. 

Ps.  Exaudi,  Deus,  ora 
tionem  meam,  et  ite  des- 
pexeris deprecationem  me- 
am: intende  mihi,  et  ex- 
audi me.  V.  Gloria, 


COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  chiefly 
manifestest  thy  Almighty  power  in  pardoning  and 
shewing  mercy,  increase  thy  goodness  towards  us : 
that  having  recourse  to  thy  promises,  we  may  be 
partakers  of  thy  heavenly  blessing.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  xii.  2.  X)i^Brethren : You 
know  that,  when  you  were  heathens,  you  went  to 
dumb  idols,  according  as  you  were  led.  Wherefore 
I give  you  to  understand,  that  no  man,  speaking  by 
the  spirit  of  God,  saith  anathema  to  Jesus.  And  no 
man  can  say  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
Now  there  are  diversities  of  graces,  but  the  same 
spirit.  And  there  are  diversities  of  ministries,  but 
the  same  Lord.  And  there  are  diversities  of  opera- 
tions, but  the  same  God  who  worketh  all  in  all. 
And  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every 
man  unto  profit  To  one  indeed,  by  the  Spirit,  is 
given  the  word  of  wisdom:  and  to  another,  the 
word  of  knowledge,  according  to  the  same  spirit : 
to  another,  faith  in  the  same  spirit : to  another,  the 
grace  of  healing  in  one  spirit : to  another,  the  work- 
ing of  miracles : to  another,  prophecy : to  another, 
the  discerning  of  spirits : to  another,  divers  kinds  of 
tongues:  to  another,  interpretation  of  speeches 
But  in  all  these  things  one  and  the  same  spirit  work- 
eth, dividing  to  every  one  according  as  he  will. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


X.  SUNDAY  APTER  PENTECOST.  417 

GRAD.  Ps.  xvi. — Guard  me,  O Lord,  as  the  apple 
of  thine  eye:  and  protect  me  under  the  shadow  of 
thy  wings.  V.  Let  my  cause  be  tried  in  thy  pre- 
sence : let  my  eyes  see  justice  done.  Alleluia, 

V.  A hymn  is  due  tb  V.  Te  decet  hymnus, 
thee,  O God,  in  Sion:  Deu0in  Sion:  et  tibi 
and  in  Jerusalem  shall  a reddetur  votum  in  Jerusa- 
vow  be  paid  to  thee.  4/-  lem.  Alleluia. 
leluia. 

GOSPEL.  lAihe  xviii.  9.  14. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  spake  this  parable  to  some  who  trusted  in 
themselves  as  just,  and  despised  others.  Two  men 
went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray : the  one  was  a 
Pharisee,  and  the  other  a Publican.  The  Pharisee 
standing,  prayed  thus  with  himself:  O God,  I give 
thee  thanks  that  I am  not  as  the  rest  of  men,  extor- 
tioners, unjust,  adulterers,  as  also  is  this  publican. 
I fast  twice  in  the  week : I give  tithes  of  all  that  I 
possess.  And  the  publican  standing  afar  off  would 
not  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  towards  heaven  : but 
struck  his  breast,  saying:  O Gk)d  be  merciful  to  me 
a sinner.  I say  to  you,  this  man  went  down  to  his 
house  justified  rather  than  the  other,  because 
every  one  that  exalteth  himself^  shall  be  humbled ; 
and  he  that  humbleth  himself,  shall  be  exalted. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xxiv. — To  thee,  O Lord,  have  I 
raised  up  my  soul : my  God,  I put  my  trust  in  thee, 
let  me  not  be  put  to  shame : neither  let  my  enemies 
scoflf  at  me : for  none  that  rely  on  thee,  shall  ever  be 
confounded. 

SECRET. — May  the  sacrifice,  we  offer,  O Lord, 
be  presented  before  thee : which  thou  hast  appointed 
to  be  offered  in  honour  of  thy  name;  and  at  the 
same  time  become  a remedy  to  us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  1. — Thou  wilt  accept  a sacrifice  of 
righteousness,  oblations,  and  whole  bumt-offerings 
on  thy  altar,  O Lord. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


418 


XI.  SU^'DAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


P.  COMM.  Qu(Eaumus, — We  beseech  thee,  C 
Lord  our  God,  that  in  thy  mercy  thou  woiildst  never 
deprive  those  of  thy  help,  whom  thou  continually 
strengthenest  by  these  divine  mysteries.  Thro*. 

XI.  SUNDlfc^  after  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  Ixvii. 

God  in  his  sanctuary : TF^EUS  in  loco  sancto 
God,  who  maketh  JLf  suo ; Dcias  qui  in- 
brethren  abide  together  habitare  facit  unanimes 
in  concord : he  will  give  in  domo : ipse  dabit  vir- 
might  and  strength  to  txdem  et  fortitudinem  plebi 
his  people.  Ps,  Let  God  suae, 
arise,  and  his  enemies  Ps.  Exsurgat  Deus,  ei 
shall  be  dispersed;  and  dissipentur  inimici  ejus: 
let  those  that  hate  him,  et  fugiant  qui  oderunt  eum 
flee  before  his  face.  a facie  ejus, 

V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens,— O Almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  who,  in  the  abundance  of  thy  goodness, 
exceedest  both  the  merits  and  requests  of  thy  sup- 
pliants ; pour  forth  thy  mercy  upon  us : and  both 
pardon  what  our  consciences  dreadeth,  and  grant 
such  blessings  as  we  dare  not  presume  to  ask.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  xv.  1.  10. Brethren:  1 

make  known  unto  you  the  gospel  which  I preached 
to  you,  which  also  you  have  received,  and  wherein 
you  stand,  by  which  also  you  are  saved : if  *mu  hold 
fest  after  what  manner  I preached  unto  you,  unless 
you  have  believed  in  vain.  For  I delivered  unto  you 
first  of  all,  which  I also  received : how  that  Christ 
died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  scriptures:  and 
that  he  was  buried,  and  that  he  rose  again  the  third 
day  according  to  the  scriptures:  and  that  he  was 
seen  by  Cephas ; and  after  that  by  the  eleven.  Then 
was  he  seen  by  more  than  five  hundred  brethren  at 
once  ; of  whom  many  remain  until  this  present,  and 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XI.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  419 

some  are  fallen  asleep.  After  that  he  was  seen  by 
James,  then  by  all  the  apostles : and^pst  of  all,  he 
was  seen  also  by  me,  as  by  one  bom  out  of  due 
time.  For  I am  the  least  of  the  apostles,  who  am 
not  worthy  to  be  called  an  apostle,  because  I per- 
secuted the  Church  of  God.  But  by  the  grace  of 
€h)d  I am  what  I am ; and  his  grace  in  me  hath  not 
been  void. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxvii. — ^My  heart  trusted  in  God,  and 
J was  relieved : and  my  body  hath  recovered  its 
strength : and  I will  praise  him  with  my  whole  heart. 
F.  To  thee,  O Lord,  have  I cried  out : be  not  silent, 
O my  God,  nor  depart  from  me.  Alleluia, 

V.  Ps,  Exult  in  God  V.  Ps.  xix.  ExuUate 
our  hope : joyfully  sing  Deo  adjutori  nostro^  jubi- 
to  the  God  of  Jacob:  late  Deo  Jacob:  sumite 
sing  a hymn  of  joy  upon  psalmum  jucundum'  cum 
the  harp.  Alleluia,  cithara.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Mark  vii.  13.  37,  — At  that  time: 
Jesus  going  out  of  the  coast  of  Tyre,  he  came  by 
Sidon  to  the  sea  of  Galilee  through  the  midst  of  the 
coast  of  Decapolis.  And  they  bring  to  him  one 
deaf  and  dumb:  and  they  besought  him  that  he 
would  lay  his  hand  upon  him.  And  taking  him  from 
the  multitude  apart,  he  put  his  fingers  into  his  ears, 
and  spitting,  he  touched  his  tongue ; and  looking  up 
to  heaven,  he  groaned  and  said  to  him : Ephpheta, 
that  is.  Be  opened.  And  immediately  his  ears  were 
opened,  and  the  string  of  his  tongue  was  loosed, 
and  he  spoke  right.  And  he  charged  them  that 
they  should  tell  no  man.  But  the  more  he  charged 
them  so  much  the  more  a great  deal  did  they  pub- 
lish it.  And  so  much,  the  more  did  they  wonder, 
saying:  He  hath  done  all  things  weU;  he  hath 
made  both  the  deaf  to  hear  and  the  dumo  to  speak. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xxix. — I will  extol  thee,  O Lf»rd, 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


4'>^  XII.  SUXDAT  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

because  tlioii  hast  upholden  me,  and  hast  not  grati- 
fied tlie  desire  of  my  enemies  against  me : Lord,  I 
cried  out  to  thee,  and  thou  didst  hear  me. 

SECRET. — Look  down,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
on  our  homage : that  the  offerings  we  make  may  lie 
acceptable  to  thee,  and  a help  to  our  weakness. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Pror.  iii. — Honour  the  Lord,  out  of  tliy 
substance,  and  with  the  first  fruits  of  thy  crops : and 
thy  barns  shall  be  filled  abundantly,  and  thy  wine- 
presses shall  overflow. 

P.  COMM.  Sentiamus, — May  we  receive,  by  the 
participation  of  these  thy  mysteries,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  help  in  body  and  mind : that  in  the  salva- 
tion of  both  we  may  enjoy  the  full  effect  of  this  hea- 
venly remedy.  Tliro’. 

XII.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 

INTROIT.  P^.lxix. 

COME  to  my  assist-  Jf^EUS  in  adjutorium 
ance,  O Gk)d:  O Lord,  JL/  meum  inteime : Do- 
make  haste  to  help  me : mine,  ad  adjuvandum  me 
let  my  enemies  who  seek  festina : confundantur  ei 
my  soul,  be  put  to  shame  revereantur  inimici  mei, 
and  confusion.  qiii  quterunt  animam 

meam, 

Ps,  Let  them  be  put  Ps.  Avertantur  retror- 
to  flight  and  shame,  who  sum  et  erubescant,  qui 
conceive  evil  against  me.  co^ant  mihi  mala, 

V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria, 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O Almighty  and  mer- 
ciful God,  from  whose  gift  it  proceedetJi  that  thy 
people  worthily  serve  thee ; grant  we  beseech  thee, 
that  w e may  run  on,  without  stumbling,  to  the  ob- 
taining the  effects  of  thy  promises.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor.  iii.  4. 9. — Brethren:  We-have 
confidence  through  Christ  towards  God : not  that 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  421 

we  are  sufficient  to  think  any  thing  of  ourselves  as  of 
oui-seives : but  our  sufficiency  is  from  God.  Whc 
also  hath  made  us  fit  ministers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, not  in  the  letter  but  in  the  spirit.  For  the 
letter  killeth ; but  the  spirit  quickeneth.  Now  if  the 
ministration  of  death,  engraven  with  letters  upon 
stones,  was  glorious,  so  that  the  children  of  Israel 
could  not  steadfastly  behold  the  face  of  Moses,  for  the 
glory  of  his  countenance,  which  is  made  void : how 
shall  not  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  rather  in 
glory  ? For  if  the  ministration  of  condemnation  be 
glory,  much  more  the  ministration  of  justice  abound- 
eth  in  glory. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxiii. — I will  bless  the  Lord  at  all 
times:  his  praise  shall  be  always  in  my  moutli. 
V,  In  the  Lord  shall  my  soul  be  praised : let  the 
meek  hear  and  rejoice.  Alleluia,,  Alleluia, 

V,  O Lord,  the  God  of  V.  Domine,  Deus  sa- 
my  salvation.  I have  lutis  mece : in  die  cla~ 
cried  in  the  day  and  in  the  mavi,  et  node  coram  te. 
night  before  thee.  Allel,  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Duke  x.  23.  37. — At  th/zt  time : 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : Blessed  are  the  eyes  that 
see  the  things  which  you  see.  For  I say  to  you, 
that  many  prophets  and  kings  have  desired  to  see 
the  things  that  you  see,  and  have  not  seen  them ; 
and  to  hear  the  things  that  you  hear,  and  have  not 
heard  them.  And  behold  a certain  laAvyer  stood  up, 
tempting  him  : and  saying : Master,  what  must  I do 
to  possess  eternal  life  ? But  he  said  to  him : What 
is  written  in  the  law  ? how  readest  thou  ? He  an- 
swering said : “ Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God 
with  thy  whole  heart,  and  with  thy  whole  soul,  an%J 
with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind : and 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself.”  And  he  said  to  him: 
Thou  hast  answered  right : this  do  and  thou  shalt 
live.  But  he  willing  to  justify  himself,  said  to  Jesus : 
and 'who  is  my  neighbour?  And  Jesus  answering, 
Nn 


' gilized  byCjOO^IC 


422  XII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  FXNTECOST. 

said:  A certain  man  went  down  from  Jerusalem 
to  Jericho,  and  fell  amongrobbers,  who  had  stripped 
him,  and  having  wounded  him  went  away  leaving 
him  half  dead.  And  it  chanced  that  a certain  priest 
went  down  the  same  way : and  seeing  him,  passed 
by.  In  like  manner  also  a Levite,  when  he  was  near 
the  place,  and  saw  him,  passed  by.  But  a certain 
Samaritan  being  on  his  journey,  came  near  him ; 
and  seeing  him,  was  moved  with  compassion.  And 
going  up  to  him,  bound  up  his  wounds,  pouring  in 
oil  and  wine : and  setting  him  upon  his  own  l^ast 
brought  him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of  him.  And 
the  next  day  he  took  out  two  pieces,  and  gave  to  the 
host,  and  said : Take  care  of  him  ; and  whatsoever 
thou  shall  spend  over  and  above,  I at  my  return  will 
repay  thee.  Which  of  these  three  in  thy  opinion 
was  neighbour  to  him  that  fell  among  robbers  ? But 
he  said : He  that  shewed  mercy  to  him.  And  Jesus 
said  to  him:  Gro,  and  do  thou  in  like  manner. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Exod,  xxxii. — Moses  prayed  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  his  God,  and  said:  Why,  O 
Lord,  art  thou  angr}»^  at  thy  people  ? Spare  the  wrath 
of  thy  soul : remember  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
to  whom  thou  didst  swear  to  give  a land  flowing 
with  milk  and  honey  : and  the  Lord  was  appeased, 
and  did  not  do  the  mischief  he  had  threatened  liis 
people. 

% SECRET. — Mercifiilly  look  down,  O Lord,  on  the 

offerings  we  lay  on  thy  holy  altar ; that  they  may  be 
to  the  honour  of  thy  name,  by  obtaining  pardon  for 
us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  ci. — The  earth,  O Lord,  shall  be 
filled  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works : that  thou  mayest 
bring  forth  bread  from  the  earth,  and  that  wine  may 
cheer  the  heart  of  man : that  he  may  make  the  face 
cheerful  with  oil,  and  that  bread  may  strengthen 
man’s  heart. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XIII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  423 

P.  COMM.  Vivificet. — May  the  sacred  participa 
lion  of  these  thy  mysteries,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
give  us  life  ; and  be  to  us  both  an  expiation  and  pro- 
tection. Thro’. 

\XIII.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Psalm  Ixxiii. 

Have  regard  to  thy  'nESPICE,D(mine,%n 
covenant,  O Lord,  Xt/  testamentum  tuum, 
and  abandon  not  the  et  animas  pauperum  tuo- 
souls  of  thy  poor:  arise,  rum  ne  aereUnquas  in 
O Lord,  judge  thine  own  finem : exurge^  Domine^ 
cause,  and  forget  not  the  et  judica  causam  tuam^  et 
cries  of  those  who  seek  ne  obliviscaris  voces  quce- 
thee.  Ps.  Why,  O God,  rentium  le.  Ps.  Ut  quidy 
hast  thou  cast  us  off  unto  Deus  repulisti  in  finem : 
the  end : why  is  thy  iratus  est  furor  tuus  su-  • 
wrath  kindled  against  the  per  oves  pascuae  tuce  $ 
sheep  of  thy  pasture  ? V.  Gloria. 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O Almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  grant  us  an  increase  of  faith,  hope,  and 
charity ; and,  that  we  may  deserve  what  thou  promis- 
est,  make  us  love  what  thou  commandest.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Gal..  iiL  16.22. Brethren:  To 

Abraham  were  the  promises  made  and  to  his  seed. 

He  saith  not,  and  to  his  seeds  as  of  many : but  as 
of  one,  and  to  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ.  Now  this  ^ 
I say,  that  the  testament  which  was  confirmed  by 
God,  the  law  which  was  made  after  four  hundred 
and  thirty  years,  doth  not  disannul,  or  make  the 
promise  of  no  effect.  For  if  the  inheritance  be  of 
the  law,  it  is  no  more  of  promise.  But  God  gave 
it  to  Abmham  by  promise.  Why  then  was  the  law  ? 

It  was  set  because  of  transgressioi^,  until  the  see<l 
should  come,  to  whom  he  made  the  promise,  being 
ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a mediator.  Now 
Nn2 

by  Google 


434  XIII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

a mediator  is  not  of  one : but  Gk)d  is  one.  Was  the 
law  then  against  the  j)romi8es  of  Grod  ? Grod  forbid. 
For  if  there  had  been  a law  given  which  could  give 
life,  verily  justice  should  have  been  by  the  law 
But  the  scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  sin,  that 
the  promise  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be 
given  to  them  that  believe. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxii. — Look  down,  O Lord,  on  thy 
covenant,  and  forget  not  for  ever  the  souls  of  thy 
poor  ones.  V,  Arise,  O Lord,  judge  thy  o^vn  cause : 
remember  how  thy  servants  are  upbraided.  JlUeluioj 
Allelm<u 

V,  Thou,  O Lord,  art  V.  Domine^  refugium 
our  refuge  from  genera-  factus  es  nobis  a genera- 
tion  to  generation.  Alld,  tione  et  progenie.  AlleL 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xvii.  11.  19. A that  time: 

As  Jesus  wiis  going  to  Jenjsalein,he  passed  through 
• tlie  midst  of  Samaria  and  Galilee.  And  as  he  en- 
tered into  a certain  town,  there  met  him  ten  men 
that  were  lepers,  who  stood  afar  off;  and  lifted  up 
their  voice,  saying:  Jesus,  master^  have  mercy  on 
us.  Whom  when  he  saw  he  said : Go,  shew  your- 
selves to  the  priests.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  as 
they  went,  they  were  made  clean.  And  one  of  them 
when  he  saw  that  he  was  made  clean,  went  back, 
vrith  a loud  voice  glorifying  God.  And  he  fell  on 
his  face  before  his  feet,  giving  thanks:  and  this 
was  a Samaritan.  And  Jesus  answering  said : 
Were  not  ten  made  clean,  and  where  are  the  nine  ? 
There  is  no  one  found  to  return  and  give  glory  to 
Grod,  but  this  stranger.  And  he  said  to  him  : Arise, 
go  thy  way;  for  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  XXXV. — In  thee  have  I put  my 
trust,  O Lord : thou  art  my  Grod,  and  my  life  is  in 
thy  hands. 

SECRET. — Be  thou  propitious,  O Lord,  to  thy 
people : and  mercifully  receive  their  ofterings ; that 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XIV.  SUNDAY  AFTKR  PENTECOST.  4?J 

being  appeased  thereby,  thou  mayest  grant  us  par- 
don, and  hear  our  requests.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Wisd.  xvi. — ^Thou  hast  given  us  bread 
from  heaven,  O Lord,  containing  whatever  is  deli- 
cious and  sweet. 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis. — ^May  these  heavenly  mys- 
teries, O Lord,  which  we  have  received,  advance 
our  eternal  redemption.  Thro’. 

XIV.  SUNDAY  after  PEN^PECOST. 
INTROIT.  P^.lxxxiii. 

Behold,  O God,  our  JJRO^CTOR  nosta 
I)rotector : and  look  JL  aspice  Deus^^  et  respice 
on  the  face  of  thy  Christ : in  facxem  Ckristi  iui : quia 
for  better  is  one  day  in  mdior  est  dies  una  in 
thy  courts  above  thou-  atriis  tuis  super  millia. 
sands.  Ps.  How  lovely  Ps.  Quam  ditecia  taber- 
are  thy  tabernacles,  O nacvla  tua^  Domine^  vir- 
Lord  of  hosts ! My  soul  tulum ! Concupiscit^  et 
longeth  and  fainteth  for  deficit  anima  mea  in  atria 
the  courts  of  the  Lord..  Domini. 

V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Custodi. — Preserve,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  thy  Church  by  thy  constant  mercy : 
and  since  our  weak  mortality  is  continually  falling 
without  thy  assistance,  may  thy  ^ce  withdraw  it 
from  what  is  hurtful,  and  direct  it  in  the  ways  of 
salvation.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Gat.  v.  16.  24.— Bret^cn;  Walk 
in  the  spirit,  and  you  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh.  For  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit ; and 
the  spirit  against  the  flesh:  for  these  are  contrary 
one  to  another : so  that  you  do  not  the  things  that 
you  would.  But  if  you  are  led  by  the  spirit,  you 
are  not  under  the  law.  Now  the  works  of  the  flesh 
are  manifest,  which  are,  fornication,  uncleanness, 
N n 3 

by  Google 


426  XIV.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST 

immodesty,  luxury,  idolatry,  witchcrafts,  enmities, 
contentions,  emulations,  wraths,  qujirrels,  dissen- 
sions, sects,  envy,  murders,  drunkenness,  revellings, 
and  such  like.  Of  the  which  I foretell  you,  as  f 
have  foretold  to  you,  that  they  who  do  such  things 
shall  not  obtain  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  the  fHiit 
of  the  Spirit  is  charity,  joy,  peace,  patience,  benigni- 
ty, goodness,  longanimity,  mildness,  faith,  modesty, 
continency,  chastity.  Against  such  there  is  no  law. 
And  they  that  are  Christ’s,  have  crucified  their  flesh 
with  the  vices  and  concupiscences. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxvii. — It  is  better  to  trust  in  the 
Lord,  than  to  trust  in  man.  V.  It  is  better  to  hope 
in  the  Lord,  than  to  hope  in  princes.  Alleluia. 

V.  Come  let  us  rejoice  V.  Venite,  exultemus 
in  the  Lord ; let  us  joy-  Domino ; jubilemus  Deo 
fully  sing  to  God  our  Salutari  nostro.  Alleluia. 
Saviour.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  vi.  24.  33. At  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : No  man  can  serve  two 
masters.  For  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love 
the  other:  or  he  will  sustain* the  one,  and  despise 
the  other.  You  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon. 
Therefore  I say  to  you,  be  not  solicitous  for  your 
life,  what  you  shall  eat,  nor  for  your  body,  what 
you  shall  put  on.  Is  not  the  life  more  than  the 
meat,  and  the  body  more  than  the  raiment?  Behold 
the  birds  of  the  air,  for  they  neither  sow,  nor  do 
they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns,  and  your  heavenly 
Father  f^deth  them.  Are  not  you  of  much  more 
value  than  they?  And  which  of  you,  by  taking 
thought,  can  add  to  his  stature  one  cubit  ? And  for 
raiment  why  are  you  solicitous  ? Consider  the  lilies 
of  the  field  how  th^  grow : they  labour  not,  nei- 
ther do  they  spin.  But  I say  to  you,  tliat  not  even 
Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  arrayed  as  one  of  these. 
And  if  the  grass  of  the  field,  which  is  to-day  and  to- 
morrow is  cast  into  the  oven,  God  doth  so  clothe 

by  Google 


XV.  STJTTDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  427 


hf>w  much  more  you,  O ye  of  little  faith  ? Be  not 
solicitous  therefore,  saying,  what  shall  we  eat,  or 
what  shall  we  drink,  or  wherewith  shall  we  be  cloth- 
ed ? For  after  all  these  things  do  the  heathens  seek. 
For  your  Father  knoweth  that  you  have  need  of  all 
these  things.  Seek  ye  therefore  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  his  justice,  and  all  these  tilings  shall  be 
added  unto  you.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xxxiii. — The  angel  of  the  Lord 
shall  encamp  round  about  them  that  fear  him,  and 
shall  deliver  them : taste  and  see,  that  the  Lord  is 
sweet. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  this  victim  of  salvation  may  both  cleanse  us 
from  oiir  sins,  and  render  thy  Majesty  propitious  to 
us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Maii,  vi. — Seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  given  to  you  over 
and  above,  saith  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Purificent. — May  these  thy  mysteries, 
O God,  continually  purify  us  and  strengthen  us: 
and  procure  us  eternal  salvation.  Thro’. 


XV.  SUNDAY  mer  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT  Ps.  Ixxxv. 


BOW  down  thy  ear, 
O Lord,and  hear  me : 
save  thy  servant,  O my 
God,who  hopeth  in  thee : 
have  mercy  on  me,  O 
Lord,  for  I have  cried  to 
thee  all  the  day.  Ps.  Give 
joy  to  the  soul  of  thy 
servant:  lor  to  thee,  O 
Lord,  I have  lifted  up 
my  soul. 

V.  Glory. 


/‘JVCLIJVAf  Domine, 

aurem  tuam  ad  me, 
et  exaudi  me : salvum  foe 
servum  tuum,  Deus  meus, 
sperantem  in  te  mserere 
mihi,  Dovmne,  quoniam 
ad  te  clamavi  tota  die, 
Ps.  Lcetifica  animam  servi 
tui:  (j[uia  ad  te.  Domine, 
levavi  animam  meam. 

V.  Gloricu 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


4l!i8  XV,  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

COLLECT.  Ecclesiam, — May  thy  continual  mercy 
purify  and  defend  thy  church:  and  since  without 
thee  it  cannot  be  safe,  may  it  always  be  directed  by 
the  influence  of  thv  grace.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  GcU,  V,  25.  vi.  1.  10. Brethren 

If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit 
Let  us  not  be  made  desirous  of  vain  glory,  provok- 
ing one  another,  envying  one  another.  (Chap,  vi.) 
Brethren,  if  a man  be  overtaken  in  any  fault,  you, 
who  are  spiritual,  instruct  such  a one  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness,  considering  thyself^  lest  thou  also  be 
tempted.  Bear  ye  one  another’s  burdens:  and  8t> 
you  shall  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  For  if  any  man 
think  himself  to  be  something,  whereas  he  is  nothing, 
he  deceiveth  himself.  But  let  every  one  prove  Lis 
own  work,  and  so  he  shall  have  glory  in  himself 
only,  and  not  in  another.  For  every  one  shall  bear 
his  own  burden.  And  let  him,  that  is  instructed  in 
the  word,  communicate  to  him,  that  instructeth  him, 
in  all  good  things.  Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not 
mocked.  For  what  things  a man  sh^  sow,  those 
also  shall  he  reap.  For  he  that  soweth  in  his  flesh, 
of  the  flesh  also  shall  reap  corruption.  But  he,  that 
soweth  in  the  spirit,  of  the  spirit  shall  reap  life  evei- 
lasting.  And  in  doing  good,  let  us  not  fail.  For 
in*due  time  we  shall  reap  not  failing.  Therefore, 
whilst  we  have  time,  let  us  work  good  to  all  men, 
but  especially  to  those  who  are  of  the  household  of 
the  faith. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xcL — It  is  good  to  give  praise  to  the 
Lord:  and  to  sing  to  thy  name,  O Most  High. 
F.  To  shew  forth  thy  mercy  in  the  morning,  and  Shy 
truth  in  the  night.  AUeluia^  Allduia, 

V*  For  the  Lord  is  a V.  Omniam  Deus  mag~ 
gr^t  God,  and  a great  nus  Dominus^  et  Rejt 
King  over  all  the  earth,  magnus  super  omnem  ter- 
Alleluia,  ram.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  lMke\\i:^Scep,202, 


D rr.zed  by  Google 


XVI.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


429 


OFFERT.  Ps,  xxxix. — With  expectation  I have 
waited  for  the  Lord,  and  he  was  attentive  to  me : 
and  he  heard  my  prayer,  and  he  put  a new  canticle 
into  my  mouth : a hymn  to  our  God. 

SECRET. — thy  mysteries,  O Lord,  preserve 
us,  and  always  defend  us  against  die  attacks  of  the 
devil. 

COMM.  John  vi. — ^The  bread  which  I will  give 
is  my  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world. 

P.  COMM.  Mentes, — ^INIay  the  efficacy  of  these 
divine  mysteries,  O Lord,  possess  both  our  souls 
and  bodies : that  their  effects,  not  our  own  sensuali- 
ty, may  always  take  the  lead  in  us.  Thro’. 


XVI.  SUNDAY  after.  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  P«.lxxxv. 

Have  mercy  on  me  l^f SERERE  nvUii^Do- 

O Lord,  for  I have  JfJL  mine^  quoniam  ad  te 
cried  to  thee  all  the  day : clamavi  tota  die : quia  tu^ 
for  thou,  O Lord,  art  Domine^  suavis  ac  mitis 
sweet  and  mild,  and  es,  et  copiosus  in  misef'i^ 
plenteous  in  mercy  to  all  cordia  omnibus  invocanti- 
that  call  upon  thee.  Ps.  bus  te.  Ps.  Inclina.^  Do- 
Bow  down  thy.  ear,  O mine,  aurem  tuam  mihi. 
Lord,  and  hear  me:  for  et  exaudi  me:  quoniam 
I am  needy  and  poor.  inops  et  pauper  sum  egti. 
F.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Tua  nos. — ^May  thy  grace,  O Lord, 
alwavs  prevent  and  follow  us;  and  make  us  con- 
stantly zealous  in  the  practice  of  good  works.  Thro’. 


EPISTLE.  Ephes.  iii.  13.  21. — Brethren : I praj 
you  not  to  faint  at  my  tribulations  for  you,  which  is 
your  gloiy.  For  this  cause  1 bow  my  knee  to  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  all  pa- 
ternity in  heaven  and  earth  is  named,  that  he  would 


grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory,  to  be 
strengthened  by  his  Spirit  with  might  unto  the  in- 


Dx,  t;zed  by  Google 


4[l0  XTl.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

ward  man.  That  Christ  nwy  dwell  by  faith  in  }'oi> 
hearts : that  being  rooted  and  founded  in  charity,  yo» 
may  be  ^le  to  comprehend,  with  all  the  saints,  wha 
is  the  breadth  and  length,  and  height  and  depth : to 
know  also  tlie  charity  of  Christ,  which  surpasseth  al 
knowledge,  that  yoi'  may  be  filled  unto  all  the  ful 
ness  of  God.  Now  to  him  who  is  able  to  do  all 
things  more  abimdantly  than  we  desire  or  understand, 
according  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us : to  him 
be  glory  m the  Church,  and  in  Christ  Jesus,  unto  all 
generations  world  without  end.  Amen. 

GRAD.  Pa.  ci. — The  Gentiles,  O Lord,  shall 
fear  thy  name,  and  all  the  kin^  of  the  earth  thy 
glory.  V,  For  the  Lord  has  built  up  Sion : and  he 
shall  be  there  seen  in  his  glory.  JUlduia,  MLeluicu 

V.  Sing  to  the  Lord  a V.  Cantate  Domino 
new  song ; for  the  Lord  canticum  novum : ^uia 
hath  done  wonderful  mirabUia  fecit  Dominus. 
things.  AUduia.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xiv.  1.  11. — At  that  time: 
When  Jesus  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the  chief 
of  tlie  Pharisees  on  the  Sabbath-day  to  eat  brea^ 
they  watched  him.  And  behold  there  was  a certain 
man  before  him  that  had  the  dropsy.  And  Jesus 
answering,  spoke  to  the  lawyei*s  and  Pharisees  sjiy- 
ing:  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  Sabbath-day?  But 
they  held  their  peace.  But  he  taking  him,  healed 
him,  and  sent  him  away.  And  answering  them,  he 
said : Which  of  you  shall  have  an  ass  or  an  ox  fall 
into  a pit ; and  will  not  immediately  draw  him  out 
on  the  Sabbath-day  ? And  they  could  not  answer 
him  to  these  things.  And  he  spoke  a parable  also 
to  them  that  were  invited,  marking  how  they  chose 
the  firet  seats  at  the  table,  saying  to  them : When 
thou  art  invited  to  a wedding,  sit  not  down  in  the 
first  place,  lest  perhaps  one  more  honourable  than 
thou  be  invited  by  him  ; and  he  that  invited  thee  and 
Wim,  come  and  say  to  thee,  Give  this  man' place 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


IVII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  *3- 

and  then  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest 
place.  But  when  thou  art  invited,  go,  sit  down  in 
the  lowest  place : that  when  he  who  invited  thee 
cometh,  he  may  say  to  thee.  Friend,  go  up  higher. 
Then  shalt  thou  have  glory  before  them  that  sit  at 
table  with  thee:  because  every  one  that  exalteth 
himself,  shall  be  humbled ; and  he  that  humbleth 
himself,  shall  be  exalted.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xxxix. — Look  down,  O Lord,  to 
help  me:  let  them  be  put  to  confusion  and  shatue, 
who  seek  to  take  away  ray  life : look  down,  O Lord, 
to  help  me. 

SECRET. — Cleanse  us,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
by  the  efficacy  of  this  sacrifice:  and  by  thy  mercy 
make  us  worthy  to  partake  thereof.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixx. — I will  remember  thy  justice 
alone,  O Lord:  O God,  thou  bast  instructed  me 
fi-om  my  youth : abandon  not  me  in  my  old  age,  and 
at  the  end  of  my  life. 

P.  COMM.  Purifica. — ^Mercifully,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  purify  our  souls,  and  renew  them  by 
these  holy  mysteries;  that  we  may  receive  help 
thereby,  both  while  we  are  in  these  mortal  bodies 
and  hereafter.  Thro’. 


XVII.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cxviii. 

rjlHOU  art  jus^  O Lord,  r USTUS  es^  Domine^  et 

jL  and  thy  judgment  t/  redurnjudiciunUuum: 
is  right : deal  with  thy  fac  cum  servo  tuo  secun- 
servant  according  to  thy  aum  misericordiam  tuam. 
mercy.  Ps.  Blessed  are  Ps.  Beati  immaculati  in 
the  undefiled  in  the  way : via : qui  ambulant  in  lege 
who  walk  in  the  law  of  Domine. 
the  Lord.  V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria, 

COLLECT.  Da,  queesumus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  p Lord,  that  thy  people  may  avoid  all  con- 

# 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


43!i  XVll.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

togion  of  the  devil:  and  with  a cleao  heart  fbllo^v 
thee,  the  only  true  Grod.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Eph€8.  i\.  1.  6.— BreMrcn:  I who 
am  a prisoner  in  the  Lord,  beseech  you  that  you 
walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  in  which  you  are  call- 
ed. With  dl  humility  and  mildness,  with  patience, 
supporting  one  another  in  charity.  Careful  to  keep 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.  One 
body  and  one  spirit ; as  you  are  called  in  one  hope 
of  your  calling.  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism. 
One  Grod,  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and 
through  all,  and  in  us  all,  who  is  blessed  for  ever 
more.  • 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxxii. — Blesped  is  the  nation  that 
hath  the  Lord  for  its  God : the  people  whom  he  hath 
chosen  for  his  inheritance.  V.  By  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  and  the  breath  of  his  mouth,  were  the  heavens 
formed,  and  the  whole  host  thereof.  AUeluicu 
Ps,  O Lord,  hear  my  Ps.  Domine^  exaudi 

prayer,  and  let  my  cry  orationem  meam,  et  da 

come  unto  thee.  AUe-  mor  mens  ad  te  perveniat, 
luia.  Alleluia. 

GrOSPEL.  Matt.  xxii.  35.  46. — At  that  time: 
The  Pharisees  come  to  Jesus ; and  one  of  them,  a 
doctor  of  the  law,  asked  him,  tempting  them : Mas- 
ter, which  is  the  great  commandment  of  the  law  ? 
Jesus  said  to  him:  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God 
. with  thy  whole  heart,  and  with  thy  whole  som,  and 
with  thy  whole  mind.  This  is  the  greatest  and  the 
first  commandment.  And  the  second  is  like  to  this : 
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thysdf.  On  these 
two  commandments  dependeth  the  whole  law  and 
the  prophets.  And  the  Pharisees  being  gathered  to- 
gether, Jesus  asked  thevm,  saying:  What  think  you 
of  Chnst  ? whose  son  is  he  ? they  say  to  him : Da- 
vid’s. ^ He  saith  to  them : How  then  doth  David  in 
roirit  c^l  him  Lord,  saying:  The  Lord  said  to  my 
Lord,  sit  on  my  right  hand  untU  I make  thy  enemies 

% 

Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


WEDNESDAT  IN  EMBER  WEEK.  43^ 

thy  footstool^  If  David  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is 
he  his  son  ? And  no  man  was  able  to  answer  him  a 
wojd ; neither  durst  any  man  from  that  day  forth 
ask  him  any 'more  questions.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Dan,  ix. — I Daniel  prayed  unto  my 
God,  saying:  Hear,  O Liord,  the  prayei*s  of  thy  ser- 
vant: look  favourably  on  thy  sanctuary  ; and  mer- 
cifully look  down  upon  this  thy  people,  who  are 
called  by  thy  name,  O Grod. 

SECRET. — We  humbly  beseech  thy  Majesty,  O 
Lord,  that  the  sacred  mysteries  we  cehbrate  may 
cleanse  us  from  all  past  ofiences,  and  from  those  we 
may  hereafter  be  guilty  of.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  Ixxv.  — Vow  ye,  and  pay  to  the 
Lord  your  God ; all  you  that  round  about  him  bring 
present : to  him  that  is  terrible ; even  to  him,  who 
taketh  away  the  spirit  of  princes;  to  the  terrible 
with  the  kings  of  the  earth. 

P.  COMM.  Sanctificationibus, — May  our  vices  be 
cured,  O Almighty  God ! and  an  eternal  remedy  pro- 
cured for  us  by  these  sacred  mysteries.  Thro’. 


EMBER  WEEK  IN  SEPTEMBER. 

WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixxx. — Rejoice  to  God  our  helper  : 
sing  aloud  to  the  God  of  Jajcob:  take  the  pleasing 
psaltery  and  harp ; sound  the  trumpet  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  month,  for  it  is  a commandment  in  Israel 
and  a judgment  to  the  God  of  Jacob.  Ps,  He  gave 
the  commandment  to  Joseph,  when  he  came  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt;  he  heard  a tongue  which  he 
knew  not.  V Glory. 

Jljler  Kyrie  eleison,  is  said, 

•Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R,  Stand  up  againw 
I.  COLLECT.  Misericordia, — May  our  weakness, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  be  supported  by  the  relief 
of  thy  mercy ; that  as  we  are  continually  decaying 
O o 


Digitized  byCjOO^Ie 


434  WBDPrt*SDAT:  EMBEB  WEEK. 

})y  our  own  nature,  we  may  be  strengthened  by  thy 
goodness.  Thro’. 

I.  LESSON.  Amos  ix.  13. — Thvssaith  the  Lord 
God:  Behold  the  days  come,  when  the  ploughman 
shall  overtake  the  reaper,  and  the  tread^  of  grapes 
him  that  sovveth  seed  ; and  the  mountains  shall  drop 
sweetness,  and  every  hill  shall  be  tilled.  And  I will 
bring  back  the  captivity  of  niy  people  Israel ; and 
they  shall  build  tlie  abandoned  cities^  and  inhabit 
them  ; and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink  the 
wine  of  them  ; and  shall  make  gardens,  and  eat  the 
fruits  of  them.  And  I will  plant  them  upon  their 
own  land  ; and  I will  no  more  pluck  them  out  of 
their  land,  which  I have  given  them,  saith  the  Lord 
thy  God, 

GRx\D.  Ps,  cxii.—Who  is  as  the  Lord  our  God, 
who  dwelleston  high ; and  looketh  down  on  the  low 
things  in  heaven  and  in  the  earth  ? V.  Raising  up 
:lie  needy  from  the  earth ; and  lifting  up  the  poor 
out  of  the  dunghill. 

II.  COLLECT.  Prftstd, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee 
O Lord,  the  humble  request  of  thy  family ; that 
whilst  they  observe  abstinence  from  bodily  food,  their 
souls  may  fast  from  sin.  Thro’. 

Here  is  said  the  II.  and  III.  Collects,  as  p,  xx. 

II.  LESSON.  2 Esdr.  viii.  1. 10.— /a  those  days  : 
All  the  people  were  gathered  together  as  one  man, 
to  the  street  which  is  before  the  water  gate,  and  they 
spoke  to  Esdrjis  the  scribe,  to  bring  the  book  of  the 
law  of  Moses,  which  the  Lord  had  commanded  to 
Israel.  Then  Esdras  the  priest  brought  the  law  be- 
fore the  multitude  of  men  and  women,  and  all  those 
that  could  understand,  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh 
month.  And  he  read  it  plainly  in  the  street  that  was 
before  the  water  gate,  from  the  morning  until  mid- 
day, before  the  men  and  the  women,  and  all  those 
that  could  understand.  And  the  ears  of  all  the  peo- 
ple were  attentive  to  the  book.  And  Esdras  the 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


IN  S’^PTEMBER.* 

8cril)e  stood  upon  a step  of  wood,  which  he  irade  to 
speak  upon.  And  he  opened  the  book  before  all  the 
people,  for  he  was  nl)ove  all  the  people ; and  when 
he  had  opened  it,  all  the  people  stood.  And  Esdros 
Idessed  tKi  Lord  the  great  God : and  all  the  people 
answered : Amen,  amen ; lifting  up  their  hands. 
And  they  bowed  down,  with  their  faces  to  the 
ground.  Now  the  Levites  made  silence  among  the 
people  to  hear  the  law;  and  the  people  stood^in 
tlieir  place.  And  they  read  in  the  book  of  the  law 
of  God  distinctly  and  plainly  to  be  understood  ; and 
they  understood  when  it  was  read.  And  Nehemias, 
and  Esdras  the  priest  and  scribe,  and  the  Levites  who 
interpreted  to  all  the  people,  said:  This  is 'a  holy 
day  to  the  Lord  our  God,  do  nor  mourn  nor  weep. 
For  all  the  people  wept  when  they  heai*d  the  words 
of  the  law.  And  he  said  to  them : Go,  eat  fat  meats, 
and  drink  sweet  wine,  and  send  portions  to  them 
that  have  not  prepared  for  themselves ; because  it  is 
the  holy  day  of  the  Lord,  and  be  not  sad,  for  tlie  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  our  strength. 

GRAD.  Pa.  xxxii. — Blessed  is  the  nation,  whose 
God  is  the  Lord ; the  people,  whom  the  Lord  hath 
chosen  for  its  inheritance.  V.  By  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  the  heavens  were  established:  and  all  the 
power  of  them  by  the  spirit  of  his  mouth. 

GOSPEL.  Mark  ix.  16. — that  time:  One  of 
the  multitude  speaking  to  Jesus,  said : Master,  1 have 
brought  my  son  to  thee,  having  a dumb  spirit, 
who,  wheresoever  he  taketh  him,  dasheth  him,  and 
he  foarneth,  and  gnasheth  with  his  teeth,  and  pinetli 
away : and  I spoke  to  thy  disciples  to  cast  him  out, 
and  they  could  not.  Who  answering  them,  said : 
O incredulous  generation,  how  long  shall  I be  with 
you  ? how  long  shall  I suffer  you  ? bring  him  unto 
me.  And  they  brought  him.  And  when  he  had 
seen  him,  immediately  the  spirit  troubled  him : and 
being  thrown  down  upon  the  ground,  he  rolled 
Ooa 

by  Google 


436  WEDNESDAY:  EMBER  WEEK. 

about  foaming.  And  he  a^ked  his  father:  How  long 
time  is  it  since  this  hath  happened  unto  him  ? But 
he  said : From  his  infancy : and  oftentimes  liath  he 
fast  him  into  the  fire  and  into  waters,  to  destroy 
him.  But  if  thou  canst  do  any  thing,  h«lp  us,  hav- 
ing compassion  on  us.  And  Jesus  saith  to  him  : If 
thou  canst  believe,  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that 
helieveth.  And  immediately  tlie  Father  of  the  boy 
cfying  out,  with  tears  said : I do  believe,  Lord : help 
my  unbelief.  And  when  Jesus  saw  the  multitude 
running  together,  he  threatened  the  unclean  spirit, 
saying  to  him : Deaf  and  dumb  spirit,  I command 
thee,  go  out  of  him ; and  enter  not  any  more  into 
him.  And  crying  out,  and  greatly  tearing  him,  he 
went  out  of  him,  and  he  became  as  dead,  so  that 
many  said : He  is  dead.  But  Jesus  taking  him  by 
the  hand,  lifted  him  up ; and  he  arose.  And  when 
he  was  come  into  the  house,  his  disciples  seci*etly 
asked  him : Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out  ? And 
he  said  to  them : This  kind  can  go  out  by  nothing, 
but  by  prayer  and  fasting. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxviii. — I will  meditate  on  thy  com- 
mandments, which  I have  loved  exceedingly ; and  1 
will  put  forth  my  hands  to  thy  commandments  which 
I have  loved. 

SECRET. — May  this  oblation,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  cleanse  away  our  sins ; and  sanct  fy  both 
the  bodies  and  souls  of  thy  servants  for  the  celebrat- 
ing of  this  sacrifice.  Thro’. 

COMM.  2 Esdr,  viii. — Eat  your  fat  meats  and 
drink  your  sweet  wine,  and  send  iK)rtions  to  them 
that  have  not  prepared  any  for  themselves : because 
it  is  the  holy  day  of  the  Lord,  and  be  not  sad ; for 
the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength. 

P.  COMM.  Sumentes. — Having  received,  O Lord, 
these  heavenly  gifts,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  that 
what  by  thy  mercy  we  celebrate  with  due  homage, 
we  may  also  receive  with  dispositions  woithy  of  thy 
presents.  Thro’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


[ 437  ] 

FRIDAY  IN  J5MBER  WEEK. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  civ.  Let  the  hearts  cf  them  rejoice 
that  seek  the  Lord:  seek  ye  the  Lord,  and  be 
strengthened:  seek  his  face  evermore.  Ps,  Give 
glory  to  the  Lord,  and  call  upon  his  name:  declare 
his  deeds  among  the  Gentiles.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  PrcBsta, — Grant,  we  beseech  tliee, 

0 Almighty  God,  that  whilst  with  yearly  devotion 
we  keep  these  holy  appointed  times,  we  may  be 
well-pleasing  to  thee  in  body  and  mind.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Osee,  xiv.  2. — Thus  saith  the  Lord: 
Retura,  O Israel,  to  the  Lord  thy  God : for  thou  hast 
fallen  down  by  thy  iniquity.  Take  with  you  words, 
and  return  to  the  Lord  and  say  to  him : Take  away 
all  iniquity,  and  receive  the  good ; and  we  will  ren- 
der the  calves  of  our  lips.  Assyria  shall  not  save  us, 
we  will  not  ride  upon  horses,  neither  will  we  s&y  any 
more:  tlie  works  of  our  hands  are  our  gods;  foi 
thou  wilt  hav^e  mercy  on  the  fatherless  that  is  in  thee. 

1 will  heal  their  breaches,  I will  love  them  freely ; 
for  my  wrath  is  turned  away  from  them.  • 1 will  be 

' as  the  dew,  Israel  shall  spring  as  the  lily,  and  his 
root  shall  shoot  forth  as  that  of  Libanus.  His 
branches  shall  spread,  and  his  glory  shall  be  as  the 
olive-tree ; and  his  smell  as  that  of  Libanus.  They 
shall  be  converted  that  sit  under  his  shadow . they 
shall  live  upon  wheat,  and  they  shall  blossom  as  a 
vine : his  memorial  shall  be  as  the  wine  of  Libanus. 
Ephraim  shall  say.  What  have  I to  do  any  more  witli 
idols  ? I will  hear  him,  and  I will  make  him  flourish 
like  a green  fir-tree:  from  me  is  thy  fruit  found. 
Who  is  wise,  and  he  shall  understand  these  things  ? 
prudent,  and  he  shall  know  these  things  ? — For  the. 
ways  of  the  Lord  are  right,  and  the  just  shall  walk 
in  them  ; but  tlie  transgressor  shall  fall  in  them. 

GRAD.  Ps,  lxz.\ix. — ^Turn  to  us,  O Lord,  a while 
O o3 


gilized  by  CjOO^Ic 


438 


SATURDAY  : EIXBER  WEEK. 


and  hear  thy  servants.  V.  Lord,  thou  hast  been  oor 
refuge  from  generation  to  generation. 

GOSPEL.  Lukf  viL  »‘36.  50.  as  in  p.  221. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cii. — Bless  the  Lord,  O my  so  il, 
and  never  forget  all  he  hath  done  for  thee : and  thy 
youth  shall  be  renewed  like  the  eagle’s. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  sacrifice  we  offer  on  this 
fast,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  be  well  pleasing  to 
thee ; that  cleansing  away  our  sins,  it  may  make  us 
worthy  of  thy  grace,  and  bring  us  to  thy  eternal 
promises.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  cxviii. — ^Remove  from  me  reproach 
and  contempt;  because  I have  sought  after  thy 
ordinances,  O Lord:  for  thy  testimonies  are  my 
meditation. 

P.  COMM.  Qudssnmm, — We  beseech,  thee,  O 
almighty  (Jod,  that  while  we  return  thee  thanks  for 
what  we  have  received,  we  may  receive  those  bless> 
ings,  Vhich  are  stdl  greater.  Thro’. 


SATURDAY  IN  EMBER  WEEK. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xciv.= — Come  let  us  adore  God, 
and  fell  down  before  the  Lord,  and  weep  before  the 
Lord  that  made  us;  for  he  is  the  Lord  our  Grod. 
Ps.  Come  let  us  praise  the  Lord  with  joy : let  us 
joyfully  sing  to  God  our  Saviour.  V.  Glory. 

After  Kyrie  eleison,  is  said, 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

I.  COLLECT. — O Almighty  and  everlasting  Gk)d, 
who,  by  a wholesome  abstinence,  healest  both  body 
and  soul : we  humbly  beseech  thy  Majesty,  that,  be- 
ing appeased  by  our  prayers  and  fasts,  thou  inayest 
grant  us  present  and  future  help.  Thro’. 

I.  LESSON.  Lev.  xxiii.  26. — In  those  days : The 
Lord  spake  to  Moses  saying:  Upon  the  tenth  day  of 
the  seventh  month  shall  be  the  day  of  atonement ; 
it  shall  be  most  solemn,  and  shall  be  called  holy : 
and  you  shall  afflict  your  souls  on  that  day,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IN  SEPTEMBER. 


439 


shall  offer  a holocaust  to  the  Lord.  You  shall  no 
servile  work  in  the  time  of  this  day  ; because  it  is  a 
day  at  propitiation,  that  the  Lord  your  God  may  be 
merciful  unto  you.  Every  soul  that  is  Uot  afflicted 
on  this  day,  shall  perish  from  among  his  people : 
and  every  soul  that  shall  do  any  work,  the  same  will 
1 destroy  from  among  his  people.  You  shall  do  no 
work  therefore  on  that  day : it  shall  be  an  everlast- 
ing ordinance  unto  you  in  all  your  generations  and 
dwellings.  It  is  a Sabbath  of  rest,  and  you  shall  af- 
flict your  souls,  beginning  on  the  ninth  day  of  the 
month : from  evening  until  evening  you  shall  cele- 
brate your  Sabbaths,  sailh  the  Lord  JUmighiy, 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxviii. — Forgive  us,  O Lord,  our 
sins : never  let  the  Gentiles  say  : Where  is  now  their 
God  ? V.  Help  us,  O God  our  Saviour ; and  for 
the  honour  of  thy  name  O Lord,  deliver  us. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R,  Stand  up  again. 

II.  COLLECT.  Da  nobis.-r-Gmut,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  by  fasting  we  may  be 
filled  with  thy  grace;  and  by  abstinence  become 
stronger  than  all  our  enemies.  Thro’. 

IT.  LESSON.  Lev.  xxiii.  39.  43. — In  those  days : 
The  Lord  spoke  to  Moses,  saying : From  the  fiftieth 
day  of  the  seventh  month,  when  you  shall  have 
gathered  in  all  the  fruits  of  your  land,  you  shall 
celebrate  the  feast  of  tlie  Lord  seven  days,  on  the 
first  day  and  the  eighth  shall  be  a Sabbath,  that  is  a 
day  of  rest.  And  you  shall  take  to  you  on  the  first 
day  the  fruits  bf  the  fairest  tree,  and  branches  of 
palm  trees,  and  boughs  of  thick  trees,  and  willows  of 
the  brook,  and  you  shall  rejoice  before  the  Lord  your 
God.  And  you  shall  keep  the  solemnity  thereof 
seven  days  in  the  year.  It  shall  be  an  everlasting 
ordinance  in  your  generations.  In  the  seventh  month 
shall  you  celebrate  this  feast.  And  you  shall  dwell 
m bowers  seven  days,  every  one  that  is  of  the  race 
of  Israel,  shall  dwell  in  tabernacles : that  your  pos- 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


44C 


sj^urday:  embrr  week. 


£erity  ma^  know  tbat  I made  the  children  of  Israe 
to  dwell  in  tabernacles,  when  I brought  them  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt.  1 arn  the  Lord  your  God. 

GRAD.  Pf,  Ixxxiii. — Behold,  O God,  our  Protec- 
tor, look  down  on  thy  servants.  F.  Lord  God  of 
Hosts,  hear  the  prayers  of  thy  servants. 

Let/ us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  i?.  Stand  up  again. 

III.  COLLECT.  Tuere, — Defend,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  thy  family;  that  by  thy  bounty,  we 
may  obtain  those  helps  of  salvation,  which,  by  thy 
inspiration,  we  seek  after.  Thro*. 

III.  LESSON.  Micheas yi\,  14. — O Lord  our  God: 
Feed  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock  of  thy  in- 
heritance, them  that  dwell  alone  in  the  forest,  accord- 
ing to  the  days  of  old.  The  nations  shall  see,  and 
shall  be  confounded  at  all  their  strength.  Who  is  a 
God  like  to  thee,  who  takest  away  iniquity,  and 
passest  by  the  sin  of  the  remnant  of  thy  inheritance  ? 
he  will  send  his  fury  in  no  more,  because  he  de- 
lighteth  in  mercy.  He  will  turn  again  and  have 
mercy  on  us : he  will  put  away  our  iniquities  ; and 
he  will  cast  all  our  sins  into  the  bottom  of  the  sea. 
Thou  wilt  perform  the  truth  to  Jacob,  thy  mercy  to 
Abraham : which  thou  hast  sworn  to  our  fathers, 
from  the  days  of  old,  O Lord  our  God. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxxix. — Turn  to  us,  O Lord,  a 
w’hile,  and  hear  thy  servants.  F.  O Lord,  thou  hast 
been  our  refuge  from  generation  to  generation. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  R.  Stand  up  again. 

IV.  COLLECT.  Prasta. — Grant,'  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  that  we  may  so  abstain  from  corporeal 
food,  as  to  fast  from  all  those  vices  that  attack  uai 
Thro*. 

IV.  LESSON.  Zach.  viii.  14. — in  those  diys  : 
The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me  saying : Thus  saith 
the  Lord  of  Hosts:  As  I purposed  to  afiiict  you, 
when  your  fathers  had  provoked  me  to  wrath,  and 
I had  no  mercy : so  turning  aga'm,  1 have  thought 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


IN  SEPTEMBER. 


441 


in  these  days  to  do  good  to  the  house  of  Juda,  and 
Jerusalem:  fear  not  These  then  are  the  things 
which  you  shall  do : Speak  ye  truth  every  one  to  his 
\ neighbour:  judge  ye  truth  and  judgment  of  peace 
in  your  gates.  And  let  none  of  you  imagine^evil  in 
your  hearts  against  his  friend : and  love  not  a false 
oath : for  all  these  are  the  things  that  I hate,  saith 
the  Lord.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  came 
to  me,  saying : Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts : The 
fast  of  the  fourth  month,  and  the  fast  of  the  fifth, 
and  the  fast  of  the  seventh,  and  the  fast  of  the  tenth, 
shall  be  to  the  house  of  Juda,  joy,  and  gladness,  and 
great  solemnities;  only  love  ye  truth,  and  peace, 
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts, 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxl. — Let  my  prayer  be  directed  as 
incense  in  thy  sight,  O Lord.  V.  The  lifting  up  of 
my  hands,  as  evening  sacrifice. 

Let  us  pray.  Let  us  kneel  down.  JR.  Stand  up  again. 

V.  COLLECT.  Vi  nobis, — As  it  is  by  thy  grace, 
O Lord,  we  render  thee  the  tribute  of  this  solemn 
fast ; so  grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  the  favour  of  thy 
mercy  and  pardon.  Thro*. 

V.  LESSON".  Dan,  iii.  49. — In  those  days : The 
angel  of  the  Lord  went  down  with  Azarias  and  his 
companions  into  the  furnace : and  he  drove  the  flame 
of  the  fire  out  of  the  furnace,  and  made  the  midst 
of  the  furnace  like  the  blowing  of  a wind  bringing 
dew,  and  the  fire  touched  them  not  at  all,  nor  troubled 
them,  nor  did  them  any  harm.  Then  these  three, 
as  with  one  mouth,  praised  and  glorified,  and  blessed 
God  in  the  furnace  saving. 

Here  foUow  the  Canticle  and  VI.  Collect,  pp.  66,  67, 
toith  the  Collect,  A cunctis,  p.  xx. 

EPISTLE.  Heh,  ix.  2.  12. — Brethren:  Thee 
was  a tabernacle  made  the  first,  wherein  were  the 
candlesticks,  and  the  table,  and  the  setting  forth  of 
loaves,  which  is  called  the  Holy.  And  after  the 
second  veil,  the  tabernacle,  which  is  called  the 


Digitized  byCjO0^IC 


442  SATURDAY:  EMBER  WEEK. 

Holy  of  Holies : having  the  golden  censer,  and  the 
ark  of  the  testament  covered  about  on  every  part  with 
gold,  in  which  was  a golden  pot  that  had  manna, 
and  the  rod  of  Aaron  tuat  had  blossomed,  and  the 
tables  of  the  testament,  and  over  it  W’ere  the  cheru- 
birns  of  glory  overshadowing  the  propitiatory : of 
which  it  is  not  needful  to  speak  now  particularly. 
Now  these  things  being  thus  ordered ; into  the  fii^ 
tabernacle  the  priests  indeed  always  entered,  accom- 
plishing the  offices  of  sacrifices.  But  into  the  second, 
the  high-priest  alone,  once  a year;  not  without 
blood,  which  he  offereth  for  his  own,  and  the  people’s 
ignorance:  the  Holy  Ghost  signifying  this,  that  the 
way  into  the  Holies  was  not  yet  made  manifest, 
whilst  the  former  tabernacle  was  yet  standing. 
Which  is  a parable  of  the  time  then- present:  accord- 
ing to  which  gifts  and  sacriftees  are  offered,  which 
cannot,  as  to  the  conscience,  make  him  perfect  that 
serveth,  only  in  meats  and  in  drinks,  and  divers  wash- 
ings, and  justices  of  the  flesh,  laid  on  them  until  the 
time  of  correction.  But  Christ  being  come  an  high- 
[)riest  of  the  good  things  to  come,  by  a greater  and 
more  perfect  tabernacle  not  made  with  hands,  that  is, 
not  of  this  creation  : neither  by  the  blood  of  goats,  or 
of  calves,  but  by  his  own  blood,  entered  once  into 
the  Holies,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption. 

TRACT.  Ps.  cxvi. — Praise  the  Lord  all  ye  na- 
tions ; praise  him  all  ye  people : for  his  mercy  is  con- 
firmed upon  us ; and  tlie  ti'uth  of  the  Lord  remaineth 
for  ever. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xiii.  6.  17.  that  time: 

Jesus  spoke  to  the  multitude  this  parable : A certain 
man  had  a fig-tree  planted  in  his  vineyard,  and  he 
*»riie  seeking  fruit  on  it,  and  found  none.  And  he 
said  to  the  dresser  of  the  vineyard  : Behold  for  these 
three  years  I come  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig-tree,  and 
I find  none.  Cut  it  down  therefore : why  cumbereth 
it  the  ground  = But  he  answering  said  to  him  : 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


IN  SEPTEMBER. 


443 


Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also  until  I dig  about  it, 
and  dung  it.  And  if  happily  it  bear  fruit;  but  if 
not,  then  after  thou  shaft  cut  it  down.  And  he  was 
teaching  in  their  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath.  And 
behold  there  was  a woman  who  had  a spirit  of  infir- 
mity eighteen  years : and  she  was  bowed  together, 
neither  could  she  look  upwards  at  all.  Whom  when 
Jesus  saw,  he  called  her  unto  him,  and  said  to  her: 
Woman,  thou  art  delivered  from  thy  infirmity.  And 
he  laid  his  bands  upon  her,  and  immediately  she 
was  made  straight,  and  glorified  God.  And  the. 
ruler  of  the  synagogue  (being  angry  that  Jesus  had 
healed  on  the  Sabbath)  answering,  said  to  the  mul- 
titude: Six  days  there  are  wherein  you  ought  to 
work.  In  them  therefore  come,  and  be  healed  ; and 
not  on  the  Sabbath-day.  And  the  Lord  answering 
him  said : Ye  hypocrites,  doth  not  every  one  of  you 
on  the  Sabbath  day  loose  his  ox  or  his  ass  from  the 
manger,  and  l^ad  them  to  water?  And  ought  not 
this  daughter  of  Abraham,  whom  Satan  had  bound, 
lo,  these  eighteen  years,  be  loosed  from  this  bond 
on  the  Sabbath-day  ? And  when  he  had  said  these 
things,  all  his  adversaries  were  ashamed : and  all 
the  people  rejoiced  for  all  the  things  that  were  glori- 
ously done  by  him. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxxvii. — O Lord  the  God  of  my 
salvation,  I have  cried  in  the  day  and  in  the  night  be- 
tbre  thee : let  my  prayer  come  in  before  thee,  O Lord. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O almighty 
Grod,  that  the  offerings  presented  before  the  eyes  of 
thy  Majesty,  may  obtain  for  us  the  grace  of  devotion, 
and  everlasting  life.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Lev,  xxiii. — In  the  seventh  month  you 
shall  keep  feasts,  because  I made  the  children  of 
larael  dwell  in  tents,  when  I brought  them  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt : I am  the  Lord  your  God. 

P.  COMM.  Perjiciant, — ^May  thy  sacraments,  O 
Lord  eflTect  in  us  wliat  they  contain : that  we  mav 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


444 


XVIII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST, 


enjov  in  reality  what  we  now  celebrate  in  represen- 
tation. Thro’. 


XVIII.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 


INTROIT. 

Give  peace,  O Lord, 
to  those  who  patient- 
ly wait  for  thee,  that  thy 
prophets  may  be  found 
faithful : hear  the  prayers 
of  thy  servant,  and  of  thy 
people  Israel. 

Ps.  I rejoiced  at  the 
tilings  that  were  said  to 
me : we  shall  go  into  the 
house  of  the  Lord. 

V,  Glory. 


Eccles.  xxxvi. 

A poLcem,  Domine 
sustinentibus  te,  id 
propketfB  tui  Jideles  inve- 
niantur : exaudi  preces 
servi  tui,  et  plebis  tiue 
Israel. 

Ps.  Leetcdus  sum  in  his 
qiuB  dicta  sunt  mihi:  in 
domum  Domini  ibimus. 

V.  Gloria. 


COLLECT.  Dirigat. — May  the  influence  of  thy 
mercy,  O Lord,  direct  our  souls:  for  without  thy 
help  we  can  do  nothing  well  pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  i.  4.  8.  — Brethren:  I give 
thanks  to  my  God  always  for  you,  for  the  grace  of 
God,  that  is  given  you  in  Christ  Jesus  ; that  in  all 
things  you  ai*e  made  rich  in  him,  in  all  utterance, 
and  in  all  knowledge,  as  the  testimony  of  Christ  was 
confirmed  in  you.  So  that  nothing  is  wanting  to 
you  in  any  giace,  waiting  for  the  manifestation  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Who  also  will  confirm  you 
unto  the  end  without  crime,  in  the  day  of  tlie  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxxi. — I rejoiced  at  the  things  that 
were  said  to  me : we  shall  go  into  the  house  of  tlie 
Lord.  V.  Let  peace  be  in  thy  strength,  and  abun- 
dance in  thy  towers.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

V.  The  Gentiles  shall  V.  Timebunt  Gentes 
fear  thy  name,  O Lord : nomen  tuum,  Domine : et 
and  all  the  kings  of  the  omnes  Reges  terree  glori- 
earth  thy  glory.  AUduia  amtuam.  Alleluia. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XIX.  SUWDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  445^ 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  ix.  1.  8. — At  that  time:  Jesus 
Ruteriiig  into  a boat,  he  passed  over  the  water  and 
came  into  his  own  city.  And  behold  they  brought 
to  him  one  sick  of  the  palsy,  lying  on  a bed.  And 
Jesus  seeing  their  faith,  said  to  the  man  sick  of  the 
jialsy : Be  of  good  heart,  son,  thy  sins  ai*e  forgiven 
thee.  And  behold  some  of  the  Scribes  said  within 
themselves:  He  blasphemeth.  And  Jesus  seeing 
their  thoughts,  said ; Why  do  you  think  evil  in  your 
heai'ts  ? Whether  it  is  easier  to  say.  Thy  sins  are 
forgiven  thee  : or  to  say.  Arise  and  walk.  But  that 
you  may  know  that  the  Son  of  Man  hath  power  on 
earth  to  forgive  sins,  (then  said  he  to  the  man  sick 
of  the  palsy,)  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  into 
thy  house.  And  he  arose  and  went  into  his  house. 
And  the  multitudes  seeing  it,  feared,  and  glorified 
God  that  gave  such  power  to  men.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Exod,  xxiv. — Closes  consecrated  an 
altar  to  the  Lord,  offering  whole  burnt-offerings 
thereon,  and  slaying  victims;  he  made  an  evening 
sacrifice  for  a sweet  odour  to  the  Lord  God  in  the 
sight  of  the  children  of  Israel. 

SECRET. — O God,  who  by  the  participation  of 
this  august  sacrifice  rnaf^est  us  partakei*s  of  the  one 
supreme  divine  nature : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that 
as  we  know  thy  truth,  so  we  may  shew  it  by  a wor- 
thy conduct  of  life.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  xcv. — Bring  up  sacrifices,  and  come 
into  his  courts;  adore  the  Lord  in  his  holy  court. 

P.  COMM.  Gratias, — -Being  fed,  O Lord,  with 
tnis  holy  sacrifice ; we  give  thee  thanks,  humbly  be- 
seeching thy  mercy;  that  thou  wouldst  make  us 
worthy  of  what  we  have  received.  Thro’. 

XIX.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 

INTROIT.  Psalm  Ixxvii. 

I AM  the  Saviour  of  C^LUS  populi  ego  sum^ 
ray  people,  saith  the  cUtU  Dominus:  de  qua- 

Pp 


oy  Google 


446  XIX.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

Lord:  in  whatever  dis-  ciimque  tribulatione  da- 
tress  they  call  on  me,  I maverint  wi  wie,  exaudiant 
will  hear  them : and  will  eos : et  ero  illorum.  Domir 
be  their  Lord  for  ever,  niw  in  perpetuum.  Ps.  Jli‘ 
Ps.  Attend,  O my  people,  tendite,  popule  meus,  le- 
to my  law,  incline  your  gem  meam : inclinate  am- 
ears  to  the  words  of  my  rem  vestram  in  verba  oris 
mouth.  V.  Glory.  mei,  V.  Gloida. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O Almighty  and  mer- 
ciful God,  favourably  defend  us  from  all  adversity : 
that  being  free  both  in  soul  and  body,  we  may  with 
security  of  mind  perform  thy  service.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  Eph.  iv.  23.  28. — Brethren ; Be  re- 
newed in  the  spirit  of  your  mind  ; and  put  on  the 
new  man,  who,  according  to  God,  is  created  in  jus- 
tice, and  holiness  of  truth.  Wherefore  putting  away 
lying,  speak  ye  the  tnith  every  man  with  his  neigh- 
bour : for  we  are  members  one  of  another.  Be  angry 
and  sin  not.  Let  not  the  sun  go  down  u{)on  your 
anger.  Give  not  place  to  the  devil.  He  that  stole, 
let  him  now  steal  no  more : but  rather  let  him  la- 
bour working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good, 
that  he  may  nave  something  to  give  to  him  that  suf- 
fereth  need. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxl. — Let  my  prayer  be  directed  as 
incense  in  thy  sight,  O Lord.  The  lifting  up  of  my 
hands,  as  evening  sacrifice.  Allduia,  Alleluia. 

V.  Give  glory  to  the  V.  Confitemini  Domi- 
Lord,  and  call  upon  his  no,  et  invocate  nomen  ejus  : 
name  : deliver  his  deeds  annuntiate  inter  Gentes 
among  the  Gentiles.  AIM.  opera  ejus.  A lleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxii.  1.  14. At  that  time: 

Tesus  spoke  to  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  in  a para- 
ble, saying : The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  to 
a king,  who  made  a marriage  for  his  son.  And  he 
sent  his  servants,  to  call  them  that  were  invited  to 
che  marriage : and  they  would  not  come.  Again  he 
^ent  other  servants,  saying : Tell  them  that  were  in- 

Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


XrX.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  447 

vited : Behold,  I have  prepared  niy  dinner ; rnj' 
beeves  and  fatlings  are  killed,  and  all  things  are 
ready  : come  ye  to  the  marriage.  But  they  uegtec*^- 
ed,  and  went  their  ways,  one  to  his  farm,  and  another 
to  his  merchandise.  And  the  rest  laid  hands  on  his 
ser?ants,  and  having  treated  them  contumeliously 
pul  them  to  death.  But  when  the  king  had  heard 
of  he  was  angry,  and  sending  his  armies,  he  de- 
str  >yed  those  murderers,  and  burnt  their  city.  Then 
hf,  saith  to  his  servants:  The  marriage  indeed  is 
ready ; but  they  that  were  invited,  were  not  worthy. 
Go  ye  therefore  into  the  high- ways ; and  as  many 
as  you  shall  find,  call  to  the  marriage.  And  his 
servants  going  forth  into  the  ways,  gathered  to- 
gether all  they  found,  bc/th  bad  and  good : and  the 
marriage  was  filled  with  guests.  And  the  king  went 
in  to  see  the  guests ; and  he  saw  there  a man  who 
h^  not  on  a wedding  garment.  And  he  saith  to 
hinfi : Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not  having 
on  a wedding  garment  ? But  he  was  silent.  Then 
the  king  said  to  the  waiters:  Bind  his  hands  and 
his  feet,  and  cast  him  into  the  exterior  dai'kness; 
there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  For 
many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxxxvii. — If  I should  walk  in  the 
midst  of  tribulation,  thou,  O Lord,  wilt  quicken  me : 
and  thou  hast  stretched  forth  thy  hand  against  the 
wrath  of  my  enemies,  and  thy  right  hand  hath 
saved  me. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
the  offerings  we  bring  before  thy  divine  Majesty 
may  avail  to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMMi  Ps,  cxv'in. — ^Thou  hast  commanded  thy 
commandments  to  be  kept  most  diligently : O that 
iriy  ways  may  be  directed  to  keep  thy  justificationa 

P.  COMM.  7\ia  710S, — May  the  healing  efficacy 
of  tliese  thy  mysteries,  O Lord,  mercifully  free  us 
Pp2 


oy  Google 


448 


XX,  SUNDAY  APTER  PEWTECOST. 


from  o'lr  perverseness,  and  make  us  always  obedient 
to  thy  commandments.  Thro’. 

XX.  SUNDAY  ajter  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Dan,  iii. 

WHATEVER  thou  quat  fecisti  tw- 

hast  done  to  us,  O bis^  Doming,  in  vero 
liOrd,  thou  hast  doue  by  judicio  fecisti:  quia" pec- 
a just  judgment ; for  we  cavimus  tibi,  et  mandatis 
have  sinned  and  disobey-  tuis  non  ohedivimus:  sed  da 
ed  thy  commandments : gloriam  nomini  tw,  et  fac 
but  glorify  thy  name,  and  nobiscum  secundum  multi- 
deal  with  us  according  to  tudinem  miscricordicB  tucv, 
thy  great  mercy.  Ps.  cxviii.  Becdi  imma- 

Blessed  are  the  un-  culati  in  via:  qui  anibu- 
defiled  in  tlie  way,  who  lant  in  lege  Domini 
walk  in  the  law  of  the  V.  (Maria  Palri^  et 
Lord,  V,  Glory.  jFVZio,  fyc. 

COLLECT.  Largire, — Favourably  grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  thy  servants  both  pardon  and 
peace ; that,  being  cleansed  from  the  guilt  of  all 
their  offences,  they  may  serve  thee  with  secure  minds. 
Thi-o’. 

EPISTLE.  Enk,  v.  15. 21. — Brethren : See  there- 
fore how  you  walk  circumspectly  not  as  unwise,  but 
as  wise  : redeeming  the  time,  because  the  days  are 
evil.  Wherefore  become  not  unwise,  but  under- 
standing what  is  the  will  of  God.  And  be  not  drunk 
with  wine,  wherein  is  luxury,  but  be  ye  filled  with 
the  holy  Spirit,  speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and 
hymns,  and  spiritual  canticles,  singing  and  making 
melody  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord : giving  thanks 
always  for  all  things  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  God  and  the  Father.  Being  subject  one  to 
another  in  the  fear  of  Christ. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxliv. — ^The  eyes  of  all  hope  in  thee, 
O Lord:  and  thou  givest  them  meat  in  due  season 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XX.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST,  449 

K Thou  openest  thy  hand,  and  fillest  with  thy  bless- 
ing every  living  creature.  Jlllduia^  Mlelvia. 

V,  My  heai*t  is  ready,  O V.  Paralum  cor  meumy 
Grod,  my  heart  is  ready:  I i)cw5,  paratum  cor  meum : 
will  sing,  and  give  praise  cantahoy  et  psallam  tibiy 
on  my  glory.  Alleluia,  gloria  mea.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  iv.  46.  53. At  that  time: 

There  was  a certain  ruler  whose  son  was  sick  at  Ca- 
phamaum.  He  having  heard  that  Jesus  was  come 
from  Judea  into  Galilee,  went  to  him,  and  prayed 
him  to  come  down  and  heal  his  son  : for  he  was  at 
the  point  of  death.  Jesus  therefore  said  to  him : 
Unless  you  see  signs  and  wonders,  you  believe  not. 
The  ruler  saith  to  him : Lord,  come  down  before 
that  my  son  die.  Jesus  saith  to  him  : Go  thy  way, 
thy  son  liveth.  The  man  believed  the  word  which 
Jesus  said  to  him,  and  went  his  way.  And  as  he 
was  going  down,  his  servants  met  him;  and  they 
brought  word,  saying,  that  his  son  lived.  He  asked 
therefore  of  them  the  hour  wherein  he  grew  better. 
And  they  said  to  him : yesterday  at  the  seventh fiour 
the  fever  left  him.  The  father  therefore  knew  that 
it  was  at  the  same  hour  that  Jesus  said  to  him  : Thy 
son  liveth;  and  himself  believed,  and  his  whole 
house.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxxxvi. — ^Upon  the  rivers  of  Ba- 
bylon, we  sat  and  wept,  when  we  remembered  thee, 
O Sion. 

SECRET. — ^May  these  mysteries,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  procure  us  a heavenly  remedy,  and 
cleanse  away  the  vices  of  our  hearts.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  cxviii. — Remember,  O Lord,  what 
thou  saidst  to  thy  servant,  and  by  which  thou 
gavest  me  hopes:  this  hath  comforted  me  in  rhy 
distress. 

P.  COMM.  Vt  sacris. — That  we  may  be  worthy 
P p 3 


' gilized  byCjOO^IC 


450  XXI.  SUNDAY  APTER  PENTECOST. 

of  thy  sacred  gifts,  O Lord  : grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
we  may  always  obey  thy  commandments.  Thro’. 

XXL  SUNDAY  q/Jer  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Esther  xiii. 

All  things,  O Lord,  voluntate  tuoj  Do- 

are  in  thy  power : JL  mine,  universa  sunt  po- 
und no  one  can  resist  thy  sUa : et  non  est  qui  possit 
will ; for  thou  madest  resistere  voluntati  ^ tuae : 
all  things : heaven  and  tu  enim  fecisH  omnia,  c^e- 
earth,  and  whatever  is  lum  et  terram,  et  universa 
contained  within  the  quee  ccdi  ambitu  continen 
compass  of  the  heavens : tur : Dominus  universo- 
thou  art  Lord  of  all.  rum  tu  es. 

Ps,  Blessed  are  the  un-  Ps.  Beati  immaculati 
defiled  in  the  way ; who  tn  via ; qui^  ambulant  in 
walk  in  the  law  pf  the  lege  Domini, 

Lord.  V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria, 

^OliLECT.  FamUiam, — Preserve  thy  family,  O 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  by  thy  constant  mercy  : that 
under  thy  protection,  it  may  be  freed  from  all  adver- 
sity ; and  by  the  practice  of  good  works,  continue 
devoted  to  thy  name.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Ephes,  vi.  10.  17. Brethren;  Be 

strengthened  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  might  of  his 
power.  Put  you  on  the  armour  of  God,  that  you 
may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  deceits  of  the  deviL 
For  our  wrestling  is  not  against  flesh  and  blood ; 
but  against  principalities  and  powers,  against  the 
rulers  of  the  world  of  this  darkness,  a^inst  the  spirit 
of  wickedness  in  the  high  places.  Therefore  take 
unto  you  the  armour  of  God,  that  you  may  be  able 
to  resist  in  the  evil  day,  and  to  stand  in  all  things 
perfect.  Stand  therefore  having  your  loins  girt  about 
with  truth,  and  having  on  the  breast-plate  of  jus- 
tice, and  youi*  feet  shod  with  the  prepaj-ation  of  the 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XXI.  SUNDAY  AFTER.  PENTECOST. 


451 


gospel  of  peace  : in  all  things  taking  the  shield  of 
faith,  wherewith  you  may  be  able  to  extinguish  all 
the  fiery  darts  of  the  most  wicked  one.  And  take 
unto  you  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  the  sword  of 
the  spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God. 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxxix. — Lord  thou  hast  been  our 
refuge  fi*om  generation  to  generation.  V.  Before  the 
mountains  were  made,  or  the  earth  and  the  world 
were  formed  : thou  art  God  for  ever  and  ever.  MleL 

V.  When  Israel  went  V.  In  exitu  Israel  de 
out  of  Egypt,  the  house  Egypto,  domus  Jacob  de 
of  Jacob  from  a barba-  populo  barbaro.  Alleluia, 
rolls  people.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xviii.  23.  35. At  that  time: 

Jesus  spoke  to  his  disciples  this  parable : The  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  likened  to  a king  who  would  take 
an  account  of  his  servants.  And  when  he  had  begun 
to  take  the  account,  one  was  brought  to  him  that 
owed  him  ten  thousand  talents.  And  as  he  had  not 
wherewith  to  pay  it,  his  lord  commanded  that  he 
should  be  sold,  and  his  wife  and  children,  and  all 
that  he  had,  and  payment  to  be  made.  But  that 
servant  falling  down,  besought  him,  saying : »Have 
patience  with  me  and  I will  pay  thee  all.  And 
the  lord  of  that  servant  being  moved  with  pity,  let 
him  go  and  forgave  him  the  debt.  But  when  that 
servant  was  gone  out,  he  found  one  of  his  fellow- 
servants  that  owed  him  a hundred  pence  ; and  lay- 
ing hold  of  him,  he  throttled  him  saying : Pay  what 
thou  owest.  And  his  fellow-sei*vant  railing  down, 
besought  him,  saying : Have  patience  with  me,  and 
I will  pay  thee  all.  And  he  would  not : but  went 
and  cast  him  into  prison,  till  he  paid  tlie  debt.  Now 
his  fellow-sei*vants  seeing  what  was  done,  were  very 
much  grieved,  and  they  came  and  told  their  lord 
all  that  was  done.  Then  his  lord  called  him,  and 
said  ta  him : Thou  wicked  servant,  I forgave  thee  all 


I 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


432  XXII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

the  debt,  because  thou  besoughtest  me : shouldst 
not  thou  then  have  had  compassion  also  on  tliy  fel 
low -servant,  even  as  1 had  compassion  on  diee  ^ 
And  his  lord  being  angry  delivered  him  to  the  tor- 
turers, until  he  paid  all  the  debt.  So  also  shall  my 
heavenly  Father  do  to  you,  if  you  forgive  not  every 
oue  his  brother  from  your  hearts.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Job  i. — ^There  was  a man  whose  name 
was  Job,  and  that  man  was  simple  and  upright,  and 
fearing  God : and  Satan  asked  to  tempt  him  ; and 
power  was  given  him  by  the  Lord  over  his  posses- 
sions, and  over  his  flesh ; and  he  destroyed  all  his 
substance,  and  his  sons ; and  he  wounded  his  flesh 
with  a grievous  ulcer. 

SECRET. — Mercifully  receive,  O Lord,  these 
offerings,  by  which  thou  art  pleased  to  be  appeased, 
and  restore  us  to  salvation  by  thy  powerful  good- 
ness. Thro*. 

COMM.  Ps,  cxviii. — ^My  soul  hath  looked  to  be 
saved  by  thee,  and  hath  relied  on  thy  word  : when 
wilt  thou  judge  those  who  persecute  me?  The 
wicked  ones  have  long  persecuted  me,  help  me,  O 
Lord  my  God. 

P.  COMM.  Immortalitatis. — Having  received  the 
food  of  immortality,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
what  we  have  taken  ^vith  our  mouths  we  may  re- 
ceive with  pure  souls.  Thro’. 


XXII.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.  Ptf.cxxix. 

IF  thou,  O Lord,  wilt  iniquitates  observave- 
mark  iniquities ; Lord,  O m.  Domine^  Domine 
who  shall  stand  it  ? For  quis  sustinebit  ? Quia 
with  thee  there  is  propi-  apud  te  propitiatw  esty 
tiation,  O God  of  Israel.  Deus  Israel. 

Ps.  Out  of  the  depths  Ps.  De  profundis  da 


Digitized  byCjOOglC 


XXII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST.  453 

1 bave  cried  to  thee,  O mavi  ad  tt,  Dominej  Do- 
Lord,  Lord  hear  my  mine  exaudi  vocem  meam, 
voice.  V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus  refimum. — O God,  our  refuge 
and  strength,  fountain  or  all  goodness,  mercifully 
give  ear  to  the  fervent  prayers  of  thy  church,  and 
grant,  that  what  we  ask  with  faith,  we  may  effect 
tually  obtain.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Philip,  i.  6.  11. — ^Brethren:  We 
are  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  he  who  hath 
begun  a good  work  in  you,  will  perfect  it  unto  the 
day  of  Christ  Jesus.  As  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think 
this  for  you  all : for  that  1 have  you  in  my  heart : 
and  that  in  my  bands,  and  in  the  defence  and  con- 
firmation of  the  gospel  you  are  all  partakers  of  my 
joy.  For  God  is  my  witness,  how  I long  after  you 
all  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ  And  this  1 pray, 
that  your  charity  may  more  and  more  abound  in 
knowledge  and  in  all  understanding ; that  you  may 
approve  the  better  things,  that  you  may  be  sincere 
and  without  offence  unto  the  day  of  Christ  P’illed 
with  the  fruit  of  justice,  through  Jesus  Christ,  unto 
the  glory  and  praise  of  God. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxxxii. — Behold  how  good  and  how 
pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity. 
V.  It  is  like  the  precious  ointment  on  the  head,  that 
ran  down  upon  the  beard  of  Aaron.  Alleluia^  Al- 
leluia. 

P".  They  that  fear  the  V.  Qui  tim&nt  Domi- 
Lord,  hope  in  him : he  is  num  sperent  in  eo : adju- 
their  helper  and  their  pro-  tor  et  protector  eorum  est. 
tector.  Alleluia.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxii.  15.  21. At  that  time: 

The  Pharisees  going,  consulted  among  themselves 
bow  to  ensnare  Jesus  in  his  speech.  And  they  send 
to  him  their  disciples,  with  the  Herodians,  saying : 
blaster,  we  know  that  thou  art  a true  speaker,  and 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


454  XXIII.  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth,  neither  care^  thou 
for  any  man : for  thou  dost  not  regard  the  pei’son  of 
men  Tell  us  therefore  what  thou  dost  think,  is  ii 
lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Ceesar  or  not?  But  Jesus 
knowing  their  wickedness,  said:  Why  do  you 
tempt  me,  ye  hypocrites?  Shew  me  the  coin  or 
the  tribute.  And  they  offered  him  a penny.  And 
Jesus  saith  to  them  : Whose  image  and  inscriptiou 
is  this  ? They  say  to  him  Caesar’s.  Then  he  saith 
to  them  : Render  therefore  to  Caesar  the  things  that 
ai*e  Caesar’s : ai^d  to  God,  the  things  tliat  are  God’s. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Esther  xiv. — Remember  me,  O Lord, 
who  art  above  all  power ; and  put  a proper  speech 
in  my  mouth,  that  my  words  may  be  pleasing  when 
I come  before  the  prince. 

SECRET. — Grant,  O merciful  God,  that  this  sa- 
rvifice  of  salvation  may  constantly  both  free  us  from 
oivc  sins,  and  protect  us  from  all  adversity.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  XV. — I cried  out,  because  thou 
heardest  me,  O God  ; bend  now  thine  ear,  and  hear 
my  words, 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimus. — Having  received,  O 
Lord,  the  sacred  mysteries,  we  humbly  beseech  thee, 
that  what  thou  hast  ordered  us  to  do  in  remembrance 
of  thee,  may  be  a help  to  our  weakness.  Thro’. 


XXIII.  SUNDAY  after  PENTECOST. 

Should  there  be  but  23  Sundays  after  Pentecost, 
the  Mass  of  the  24th  is  said  to-day,  and  this  on  the 
preceding  Saturday,  (if  it  be  neither'  a double  or 
semi-double)  in  whi^  casey  it  is  said  on  somt 
vacant  day  before  it. 

INTROIT.  Jer.  xxix. 

The  Lord  saith : I en-  T\IC IT  Dominus : Ego 

tertain  thoughts  of  JL/  cogito  cogitationes 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


XX III.  SUNJ^Af  AFTER  PENTECOST.  455 

peace,  not  of  affliction : pada^  et  non  edictionis : 
you  shall  call  on  me,  and  invocabitis  me,  et  ego  cr- 
1 will  hear  you:  and  audiam  vos:  et  reducam 
bring  back  your  captive  captivitatem  vestram  de 
people  from  all  places.  cunctis  locis. 

Ps.  Thou,  O Lord,  hast  Ps.  Benedixisti  Domine, 
blessed  thy  land:  thou  terram  tuam:  avertisti 
hast  brought  back  the  captivitatem  Jacob. 
captive  children  of  Jacob.  V.  Gloria. 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Absolve. — Pardon,^  Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  sins  of  thy  people : that  we  may  be 
delivered  by  thy  goodness  from  the  guilt  we  have 
contracted  % our  own  weakness.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  PhUip.  iii.  17.  21.  iv.  1.  3. — Brethren: 
Be  followers  of  me,  and  observe  them  who  walk  so 
as  you  have  our  model.  For  many  walk,  of  whom 
I have  told  you  often  (apd  now  tell  you  weeping) 
that  they  are  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ ; whose 
end  is  destruction,  whose  God  is  their  belly,  and 
whose  glory  is  their  shame:  who  mind  earthly 
things.  But  our  conversation  is  in  heaven ; from 
whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  who  will  reform  the  body  of  our  low- 
ness, made  like  to  the  body  of  his  glory,  according 
to  the  operation  whereby  also  he  is  able  to  subdue 
all  things  unto  himself.  (Chap,  iv.)  Therefore,  my 
dearly  beloved  brethren,  and  most  desired,  my  joy, 
and  my  crown : so  stand  fast  in  the  Lord,  my  dearly 
beloved.  I beg  of  Evodia,  and  I beseech  Syntyche, 
to  be  of  one  mind  in  the  Lord.  And  I entreat  thee 
also  my  sincere  companion,  help  those  women  that 
have  laboured  with  me  in  the  gospel,  with  Clement 
and  the  rest  of  my  fellow  labourers,  whose  names 
are  in  the  book  of  life. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xliii.— Thou  hast  saved  us  O Lord 
from  them  that  afflict  us:  and  hast  put  them  to 
shame  that  hate  us.  V.  In  God  shall  we  glory  all 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


456  xxiii.  Bu.vDAr  after  pe.vtecost. 

the  day  long:  and  in  thy  name  w i will  give  praise 
for  ever.  Alleluia,  Alleluia, 

V,  Out  of  the  depths  V.  Ps.  cxxix.  De  pro- 
1 have  cried  to  thee,  O fundis  clainavi  ad  te,  Do- 
Lord : Lord  hear  my  mine : Domine,  exaudi 
voice.  Alleluia,  vocem  meam.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  ix.  18.  26. At  that  time: 

As  Jesus  was  8]>eaking  to  the  multitude  : Behold  a 
certain  ruler  came  up,  and  adored  him,  saying: 
Lord,  my  daughter  is  even  now  dead;  but  come  lay 
thy  hand  upon  her,  and  she  shall  live.  And  Jesus 
rising  up  folio w5^1  him,  with  his  disciples.  And  be- 
hold a woman  who  was  troubled  with  an  issue  of 
blood  twelve  years,  came  behind  him,  and  touched 
the  hem  of  his  garment.  For  she  said  within  her- 
self: If  1 shall  touch  only  his  garment,  I shall  lie 
healed.  But  Jesus  turning  and  seeing  her,  said : Be 
of  good  heart,  daughter,  thy  faith  hath  made  thee 
whole.  And  the  woman  was  made  whole  from  that 
hour.  And  when  Jesus  was  come  into  the  house  of 
the  ruler,  and  saw  the  minstrels  and  the  multitude 
making  a rout,  he  said  s Give  place : for  the  girl  is 
not  dead,  but  sleepeth.  And  they  laughed  him  to 
scorn.  And  when  the  multitude  was  put  forth,  he 
went  in  and  took  her  by  the  hand.  And  the  maid 
arose.  And  the  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into  all 
that  country.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxxix. — Out  of  the  depths  I have 
cried  to  thee,  O Lord ; Lord  hear  my  voice : from 
the  depths  I have  cried  to  thee,  O Lord. 

SECRET. — We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  this  sacriRce 
of  praise,  as  a repeated  token  of  our  homage  ; that 
thou  mayest  accomplish  in  us  what  thou  hast  already 
granted  beyond  our  deserts.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Mark  xi. — Amen,  I say  unto  you,  all 
things  whatsoever  you  ask  when  ye  pray,  believe  that 
you  shall  receive : and  they  shall  come  unto  you. 

P.  COMM.  QiuBsumus. — We  beseech  thee,  O 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


XXIV  SUNDAY  AFTER  PENTECOST. 


457 


Almighty  God,  that  thou  wouldst  not  leave  exposed 
to  the  dangers  of  this  life,  those  whom  thou  hast  joy- 
fully made  partakers  of  this  divine  food.  Thro’. 

05^  there  cannot  he  less  than  23,  nor  more  than  28 
Sundays  after  Pentecost,  it  is  to  be  observed^  that 
the  Mass  of  the  2ith  is  always  said  on  that  Sunday 
which  immediately  •precedes  Advent.  When  there^ 
fore  it  happens  that  there  are  any  intervening 
Sundays  between  the  23d  and  the  last,  the  In- 
troit, Gradual,  Offertory,  and  Communion,  are 
taken  from  the  23d,  and  the  rest  of  the  Mass  from 
the  Sundays  which  were  omitted  after  Epiphany: 
for  instance,  if  but  one  Sunday,  the  Mass  is  of  the 
6th  after  Epiphany ; if  two,  of  the  5th  and  6th ; if 
‘ three,  of  the  4th,  5th,  and  6th ; and  if  four,  of 
the  3d,  4th,  5th,  and  6th. 


XXIV.  Or  last  SUNDAY  ajler  PENTECOST. 

Ml  as  on  the  t'wenty- third  Sunday,  except 
COLLECT.  Excita. — Stir  up,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  the  hearts  of  thy  faithful : that,  becoming 
more  zealous  in  the  performance  of  good  works, 
they  may  receive  from  thy  goodness  more  effectual 
i-emedies  for  their  disorders.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Colos.  L 9. 14. — Brethren:  We  cease 
not  to  pray  for  you,  and  to  be^  that  you  may 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  in  all  wis- 
dom, and  spiritual  understanding:  that  you  may 
walk  worthy  of  God,  in  all  things  pleasing:  being 
fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and  increasing  in  the 
knowledge  of  God:  strengthened  with  all  might, 
according  to  the  power  of  his  glory,  in  all  patience 
and  long-sufiering  with  joy.  Giving  thanks  to  God 
the  Father,  who  hath  made  us  worthy  to  be  par- 
takers of  the  lot  of  the  saints  in  light?  who  hath 
delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and  hath 
translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his  love 

Qq 

.d  hy  Google 


458  XXIV.  SUIfDAT  AFTER  PENTECOST. 

In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood, 
the  remission  of  sins. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxiv.  15.35. — M that  time: 
Jestis  said  to  his  disciples : When  you  shall  see  the 
abomination  of  desolation,  which  was  spoken  of  by 
Daniel  the  prophet,  standing  in  the  holy  place : he 
that  readeth,  let  him  understand.  Then  they  that 
are  in  Judea,  let  them  flee  to  the  mountains ; and 
he  that  is  on  the  house-top  let  him  not  come  down 
to  take  any  thing  out  of  his  house : and  he  that  is  in 
the  field,  let  him  not  go  back  to  take  his  coat.  And 
wo  to  them  that  are  with  child,  and  give  suck  in 
those  days.  But  pray  that  your  flight  be  not  in 
the  winter,  or  on  the  Sabbath.  For  there  shall  be 
then  great  tribulation,  such  as  hath  not  been  from 
the  beginning  of  the  world  until  now,  neither  shall 
be.  And  unless  those  days  had  been  shortened,  no 
flp^h  could  be  saved  : but  for  the  sake  of  the  elect, 
those  days  shall  be  shortened.  Then  if  any  man 
shall  say  to  you : Lo  here  is  Christ,  or  there : do 
not  believe  him : For  there  shall  arise  false  Christs, 
and  false  prophets,  and  shall  shew  great  signs  and 
wonders,  insomuch  as  to  deceive  (if  possible)  even 
.lie  elect.  Behold  I have  told  it  you,  before  hand, 
if  therefore  they  shall  say  to  you:  Behold  he  is 
in  the  desert ; go  ye  not  out : Behold  he  is  in  the 
closets,  believe  it  not.  For  as  lightning  conieth  out 
of  the  east,  and  appeareth  even  into  the  west ; so 
shall  also  the  coining  of  the  Son  of  Man  be.  Where- 
soever the  body  shall  be,  there  shall  the  eagles  also 
be  gathered  together.  And  immediately  after  the 
tribulation  of  those  days,  the  suii  shall  be  darkened, 
and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars 
shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the  powers  of  the  heavens 
shall  be  moved : and  there  shall  appear  the  sign  of 
the  Son  of  Man  in  heaven : and  then  shall  all  tribes 
of  the  earth  mourn : and  they  shall  see  the  Son  of 
Man,  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  much 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


VIGIL  OF  AN  APOSTLE. 


459 


power  and  majesty.  And  he  shall  send  his  angels 
with  a trumpet,  and  a great  voice:  and  they  shall 
gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four  winds,  from 
5ie  farthest  parts  of  the  heavens  to  the  utmost 
bounds  of  them.  And  from  the  fig-tree  learn  a para- 
ble : when  the  branch  thereof  is  now  tender,  and  the 
leaves  come  forth,  you  know  that  summer  is  nigh. 
So  you  also,  when  you  shall  see  all  these  things,  know 
ye  that  it  is  nigh  even  at  the  doors.  Amen,  I say  to 
you,  that  this  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  these 
things  be  done.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass,  but 
my  words  shall  not  pass.  Credo. 

SECRET. — ^Mercifully  receive,  O Lord,  the  pray- 
ers and  offerings  of  thy  people : turn  our  hearts  to 
thee ; that  being  freed  fi*om  earthly  concupiscence, 
we  may  desire  heavenly  pleasures.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Concede. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  that  whatever  vice  our  souls  are  subject  to 
may  be  cured  by  the  virtue  of  the  sacrament  we  have 
received.  Thro’. 


COMMOJ^  QF  SAIJ^TTS. 

SINCE  the  Church  of  Christ,  under  the  immediate 
direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  has  instituted  festivals 
in  honour  of  the  Apostles,  Martyrs,  Confessors,  &c. 
who,  either  by  their  preaching — their  miracles — the 
shedding  of  their  blood,  or  the  purity  of  their  lives,  have 
borne  ample  testimony  to  the  truth  of  our  holy  religion, 
let  us  regard  them  as  our  Ancestors,  from,  whom  the 
precious  inheritance  of  faith  hath  descended  to  us ; let 
us  thank  God  on  their  several  anniversaries,  for  having 
made  us  members  of  his  one,  holy.  Catholic  and  Apostolic 
Church : and  whilst  we  submit  our  reason  and  under- 
standing to  the  sublime  mysteries  she  teaches,  let  us 
bend  our  stubborn  wills  to  the  practice  of  the  heavenly 
precepts  she  inculcates. 

MASS  mthe  VIGIL  0/ an  APOSTLE. 
INTROIT.  Pa.  li. — I as  a fruitful  olive,  true 

Qqa 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


460 


ViaiL  OF  AN  APOSTLE. 


in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  have  hoped  in  the  mercy  of 
my  God : and  I will  wait  on  thy  name,  for  it  is  good 
in  the  sight  of  thy  saints.  Ps.  Why  dost  thou 
glory  in  mischiefj  that  ait  mighty  in  iniquity.^ 
V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  DcLf  qut^sumus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  Glod,  that  the  venerable  solemnity 
of  thy  blessed  apostle  N.  which  we  are  now  prepar- 
ing to  celebrate,  may  increase  our  devotion  and  ad- 
vance our  salvation.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Eccles,  xliv.  and  xlv. — The  blessing  of 
tne  Lord  is  on  the  head  of  the  righteous  man. 
Therefore  did  the  Lord  give  him  an  inheritance,  and 
assign  him  a part  among  the  twelve  tribes ; and  he 
found  grace  in  the  sight  of  all  flesh.  And  he  made 
him  great  to  the  terror  of  his  enemies,  and  by  his 
words  he  tamed  monsters.  He  rendered  him  glori- 
ous in  the  presence  of  kings,  and  gave  him  his  com- 
mandments in  the  sight  of  his  people,  and  shewed 
him  his  glory.  For  his  fluth  and  meekness  he  sanc- 
tified him,  and  made  choice  of  him  among  all  flesh : 
and  publicly  gave  him  precepts,  and  the  law  of 
life  and  discipline,  and  highly  exalted  him.  He 
settled  with  him  an  eternal  covenant,  and  encom- 
passed him  with  the  girdle  of  righteousness  and  the 
Lord  hath  put  on  him  a crown  of  glory. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxi. — The  just  shall  flourish  like  the 
palm-tree : he  shall  grow  up  like  the  Cedar  of  Li- 
banus in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  V.  To  shew  forth 
thy  mercy  in  the  morning,  and  thy  truth  in  the 
night. 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  12.  16. At  that  Ume: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : This  is  my  command- 
ment, that  you  love  one  another,  as  I have  loved 
you.  Greater  love  than  this  no  man  hath,  that  a 
man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends.  You  are  my 
friends,  if  you  do  the  things  that  I command  you. 

I will  not  now  cull  you  servants;  for  the  servant 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


MASS  I.  STATUIT,  &C. 


4G1 


'KDOweth  not  what  his  lord  doth.  But  I have  called 
you  friends ; because  all  things  whatsoever  I have 
heard  of  my  Father,  I have  made  known  to  you. 
You  have  not  chosen  me:  but  I have  chosen  you; 
and  have  appointed  you  that  you  should  go,  and 
should  bring  forth  fruit ; and  your  fruit  should  re- 
main : that  whatsoever  you  shall  ask  of  the  Father 
in  my  name,  he  may  give  it  you. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  viii. — Thou  hast  crowned  him 
with  glory  and  honour,  and  hast  set  him  over  the 
works  of  thy  hands,  O Lord. 

SECRET. — Whilst  with  respect  for  the  Apostolic 
dignity,  we  offer  these  sacred  mysteries,  grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  (by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
N.  thy  Apostle,  whose  triumphs  we  are  preparing 
to  celebrate)  that  thy  people  may  ever  pray  to  thee, 
and  obtain  their  desires.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  XX. — His  glory  is  great  in  thy  salva- 
tion: glory  and  great  beauty  shalt  thou  lay  upon 
him. 

P.  COMM.  Sancti. — Being  appeased,  O Lord, 
by  the  prayers  of  thy  holy  apostle  N.  gi'ant  us  for- 
giveness, and  a remedy  against  all  future  relapses. 
Thro’. 

MASS  I.  Statuit,  of  a MARTYR  ayid  BP. 

INTROIT.  Eccles.  xlv.  / 

The  Lord  settled  with  OTATUIT  ei  Dominm 
him  a covenant  of  testamentum  pacis,  e* 
peace,  and  made  him  a principem  fecit  eum : ut 
Chief  that  he  might  have  sit  illi  Sacerdotii  digni 
the  honour  of  Priesthood  tas  in  setemum.  Ps.  Sle 
for  ever.  Ps.  O Lord,  mento,  Domine,  David, 
remember  David,  and  all  et  oinnis  mansuetudinis 
his  meekness.  ejus. 

V.  Glory.  V.  Glory, 

COLLECT.  Infirmitatem. — Have  regard,  O Al 
Q q 3 

oy  Google 


462 


MASS  I.  STATUIT. 


mighty  God  to  our  weakness ; and  as  we  sink  under 
the  weight  of  our  doings,  let  the  glorious  intercession 
of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr  and  Bishop,  be  a protec- 
tion to  us.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Jamas  i.  12.  18.— 2>earZy  beloved: 
Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth*  temptation ; for 
when  he  hath  been  proved,  he  shall  receive  the  crown 
of  life,  which  God  hath  promised  to  them  that  love 
him.  Let  no  man,  when  he  is  tempted,  say  that  he 
is  tempted  by  God.  For  God  is  hot  a tempter  of 
evils,  and  he  tempteth  no  man.  But  every  man  is 
templed  by  his  own  concupiscence,  being  drawn 
away  and  allured.  Then  when  concupiscence  hath 
conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin.  But  sin,  when  it  is 
completed,  begetteth  death.  Do  not  err  therefore, 
my  dearest  brethren.  Every  best  gift,  and  every 
perfect  gift,  is  from  above,  coming  down  from  the 
Father  of  lights,  wdth  whom  there  is  no  change,  nor 
shadow  of  alteration.  For  of  his  own  will  hath  he 
begotten  us  by  the  word  of  truth,  that  we  might  be 
some  beginning  of  his  creatures. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxxviii. — 1 have  found  David  my 
servant : with  my  holy  oil  I have  anointed  him  : for 
my  hand  shall  help  him ; and  my  arm  shall  strengthen 
him.  F.  The  enemy  shall  have  no  advantage  over 
him : nor  the  son  of  iniquity  have  power  to  hurt 
him.  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  V.  Ps.  cix.  Tu  as  sacerdos 
in  cdemum  secundum  ordinem  Mdchisedeclu  Alleluia, 
Alleluia.  V,  Thou  art  a priest  for  ever  according 
to  the  order  of  Melchisedech.  Alleluia,  Alleluicu 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 

TRACT.  Ps.  'XX.^Desiderium  animce  ejus  tri- 
buisti ei : et  voluntate  labiorum  ejus  non  fraudasti 
eum,  ifc.  Thou  hast  given  him  his  heart’s  desire : 
and  hast  not  withholden  from  him  the  will  of  his  lips. 
F.  For  thou  hast  prevented  him  with  blessings  of 
sweetness.  V,  Thou  hast  set  on  his  head  a crown 
of  precious  stones. 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


or  a'marttii  and  bishop.  463 

GOSPEL.  Lvke  xiv.  26.  33. — M*  that  time : 
Jestis  said  to  his  disciples  : If  auy  man  come  to  me, 
and  hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and 
•children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea  and  his  own 
life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple.  And  whosoever 
•doth  not  caiTy  bis  cross  and  come  after  me,  cannot 
be  my  disciple.  For  which  of  you  having  a mind  to 
build  a tower,  doth  not  hi'st  sit  down  and  reckon  the 
charges  that  are  necessary,  whether  he  have  where- 
withal to  finish  it : lest  after  he  hath  laid  the  founda- 
tion, and  is  not  able  to  finish  it,  all  that  see  it  begin 
to  mock  him  saying:  This  man  began  to  build, 
and  Was  not  able  to  finish.  Or  what  king  about  td 
go  and  make  war  against  another  king,  doth  not  first 
sit  down  and  think  whether  he  be  able  with  ten 
thousand,  to  meet  him  that  with  twenty-thousafid 
cometh  out  against  him.  Or  else  whilst  the  other  is 
yet  afar  off,  sending  an  embassy,  he  desireth  condi- 
tions of  peace.  So  likewise  every  one  of  you  that 
doth  not  renounce  all  that  he  possesseth,  cannot  be 
tny  disciple. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxxviii. — My  truth  and  my  mercy 
shall  be  with  him : and  in  my  name  shall  his  honi 
foe  exalted. 

SECRET. — ^Mercifully  receive,  O Lord,  the  offer- 
ings dedicated  to  thee  by  the  merits  of  blessed  N.  thy 
Martyr  and  Bishop,  and  grant  they  may  be  a con- 
tinual support  to  us.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  Ixxxviiu — Once  have  I sworn  by  injr 
iioliness,  and  his  seed  shall  endure  for  ever ; and  his 
throne  as  the  sun  before  me,  and  as  the  moon  perfect 
for  ever,  and  a faithful  witness  in  heaven. 

P.  COMM.  Refecti, — Being  fed  with  the  partici- 
pation of  thy  sacred  gifts,  we  beseech,  thee,  O Lord 
our  God,  that  we  may  feel  the  efficacy  thereof  by 
the  intercession  of  blessed  N.  thy  Mait}^  and  Bishop, 
whose  feast  we  celebrate.  Tlu*o’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


[ 464  ] 

MASS  II.  Sacerdotes  Dei,  of  (he  smne» 
INTROIT.  Dan.  iii. 

0 YE  priests  of  God,  OACERDOTES  Dei 
bless  the  Lord : O ^ benedicite  Domin- 

}re  saints  and  humble  of  urn : sancti  et  humiles 
leart,  praise  God.  Ps.  O conle  laudate  Deum.  Ps 
all  ye  works  of  the  Lord,  Benedicite  omnia  opera 
bless  the  Lord,  praise  Domini  Domino,  laudate 
him,  and  extol  him  for  et  superexaltate  eum  in 
ever.  V.  Glory.  ssecula.  F.  Gloria. 

. COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  nos. — O God,  wiio,  by 
the  yearly  solemnity  of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr  and 
Bishop,  rejoicest  the  hearts  of  thy  faithful ; merci- 
Rilly  grant  that  we  who  celebrate  his  martyrdoro, 
may  enjoy  his  protection.  Thro’ 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor,  i.  3.  7. — Brethren:  Blessed 
be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  comfort,  who 
comforteth  us  in  ail  our  tribulation;  that  we  also 
may  be  able  to  comfort  them  who  are  in  all  distress, 
by  the  exhortation  wherewith  we  also  are  exhorted 
by  God.  For  as  tlie  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in 
us,  so  also  by  Christ  doth  our  comfort  abound. — 
Now  whether  we  be  in  tribulation,  it  w for  your  ex- 
hortation and  salvation : or  whether  we  be  comforted, 
tt  is  for  your  consolation:  or  whether  we  be  ex- 
horted, it  is  for  your  exhortation  and  salvation,  which 
worketh  the  enduring  of  the  same  sufferings  which 
we  also  suffer.  That  our  hope  for  you  may  be  stead- 
fast : knowing  that  as  you  are  partakeis  of  the  suf- 
ferings, so  sh^l  you  be  also  of  the  cons  rlation : in 
1,  hrist  Jesus  our  Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps.  viii. — ^Thou  hast  crown'-d  him  with 
glory  and  honour.  V.  And  hast  set  him  over  the 
works  of  thy  hands,  O Lord.  Meluia,  Mlduia. 
V.  Hie  est  sacei'dosy  quern  coronavit  Dominus.  AlleL 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


OF  L MARTYR  AND  BISHOF-.  465 

V,  This  is  the  priest  whom  the  Lord  hath  crowned 

t/UlditiicL»  0 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 

TRACT.  Ps.  cxi. — Beatus  vir  qui  timet  Dominum ; 
ill  mandatis  ejus  cupit  nimis,  $fc,  — Blessed  is  the 
man  that  feareth  the  Lord,  in  his  commandments  he 
delighteth  exceedingly.  V.  His  seed  shall  be  mighty 
upon  earth ; the  generation  Of  the  righteous  shall  be 
blessed.  F.  Glory  and  wealth  shall  be  in  his  house ; 
and  his  justice  remaineth  for  ever  and  ever. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xvi.  24  27. — At  thut  time: 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : If  any  man  will  come 
after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross 
and  follow  me.  For  he  that  will  save  his  life,  shall 
lose  it : and  he  that  shall  lose  his  life  for  my  sake, 
shall  find  it.  For  what  doth  it  profit  a man,  if  he 
^in  the  whole  world,  and  stifiTer  the  loss  of  his  own 
soul  ? Or  what  exchange  shall  a man  ^ive  for  his 
soul?  For  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  the  glory 
of  the  Father  with  his  angels : and  then  will  he  ren- 
der to  every  man  according  to  his  works. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  IxxxviiL — I have  found  David, 
fifiy  servant : with  my  holy  oil  have  I anointed  him. 
For  my  hand  shall  help  him,  and  my  arm  shall 
strengthen  him. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  con- 
secrated to  thee : and  being  appeased  thereby,  mer- 
cifully look  upon  us,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
JV.  thy  Martyr  and  Bishop.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Ps.  XX. — Thou,  O Lord,  hast  set  upon 
liifi  head  a crown  of  precious  stones. 

P.  COMM.  JE/cec  nos. — May  this  communion,  O 
£x>rd,  cleanse  us  from  sin,  and,  by  the  intercession 
of*  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr  and  Bishop,  make  us  effec- 
WLsMy  partakers  of  this  heavenly  remedy. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


I 466  ] 

MASS  III.  In  virtute,  of  a MARTYR  not  a 
BISHOP. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  XX. 

T N thy  strength,  O Lord,  TN  virtute  tua,  Do- 
-i-  the  just  shall  rejoice : -L  mine,  laetabitur  jus- 
and  in  thy  salvation  be  tus:  et  super  salutare 
shall  rejoice  exceeding-  tuum  exultabitvehemen- 
ty:  thou  hast  given  him  ter:  desiderium  anunsB 
his  heart’s  desire.  ejus  tribuisti  ei. 

Ps,  For  thou  hast  pre-  Ps  Quoniam  praeve- 
veuted  him  with  bless-  nisti  eum  in  benedictio- 
ings  of  sweetness : thou  nibus  dulcedinis : posuis- 
hast  set  on  his  bead  a ti  in  capite  ejus  coronam 
crown  of  precious  stones,  de  lapide  pretioso. 

V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Prasta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we,  who  celebrate  the  festival 
of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr,  may,  by  his  intercession, 
be  strengthened  in  the  love  of  thy  name. 

LESSON.  Wisd,  x.  10.  14. — The  Lord  conduct- 
ed the  just  man  through  the  right  ways,  and  shewed 
him  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  gave  him  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  holy  things:  made  him  honourable  in  his 
labours,  and  accomplished  his  labours.  In  the  de- 
ceit of  them  that  over-reached  him,  she  stood  by 
him,  and  made  him  honourable.  She  kept  him 
safe  from  his  enemies,  and  she  defended  him  from 
seducers,  and  gave  him  a strong  conflict,  that  he 
might  overcome,  and  know  that  wisdom  is  mightier 
than  all.  She  forsook  not  the  just  when  he  was 
sold,  but  delivered  him  fiom  sinners:  she  went 
down  with  him  into  the  pit,  and  in  bands  she  left 
him  not,  till  she  brought  him  the  sceptre  of  the  king- 
dom, and  power  against  those  that  oppressed  him : 
and  shewed  them  to  be  liars,  that  accused  him,  and 
gave  him  everlasting  glory. 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


OF  A MARTYR  NOT  A BISHOP. 


407 


GUAD.  Ps,  cxi. — Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth 
the  Lord : he  shall  delight  exceedingly  in  his  com- 
mandments. V.  His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon 
earth ; the  generation  of  the  righteous  shall  be  bless- 
ed. AUeluKt,  Alleluia,  V.  Posuisti  Domint^  super 
caput  dus  coronam  de  lapide  pretioso.  Alleluia. 

V,  Thou  hast  set  on  his  head,  O Lord,  a crown  of 
precious  jewels.  Alleluia, 

AJler  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT.  Desiderium^  p,  462. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  x.  34.  42. At  that  time ! 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples  : Do  not  think  that  I came 
to  send  peace  upon  earth : I came  not  to  send  peace, 
but  the  sword.  For  I came  to  set  a man  at  variance 
against  his  father,  and  the  daughter  against  her  mo- 
ther, and  the  daughter-in-law  against  her  mother-in- 
law.  And  a man’s  enemies  against  they  of  his 
own  household.  He  that  loveth  his  father  or  mother 
more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me : and  he  that 
loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy 
of  me.  And  he  that  taketh  not  up  his  cross,  'and 
fblloweth  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me.  He  that  findeth 
hiB  life  shall  lose  it : and  he  that  shall  lose  his  life 
for  me,  shall  find  it.  He  that  receiveth  you,  re- 
ceiveth  me ; and  he  that  receiveth  me,  receiveth  him 
that  sent  me.  He  that  receiveth  a prophet  in  the 
name  of  a prophet,  shall  receive  the  reward  of  a 
prophet : and  he  that  receiveth  a just  man  in  the 
name  of  a just  man,  shall  receive  the  reward  of  a 
just  man.  And  whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  to  one 
of  these  little  ones  a cup  of  cold  water  only  in  the 
name  of  a disciple,  amen,  1 say  to  you,  he  shall  noc 
lose  his  reward. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  viii. — ^Thou  hast  crowned  him, 
O Lord,  with  glory  and  honour,  and  hast  set  hira' 
over  the  woi*ks  of  thy  hands. 

SECRET. — Receive,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
oiir  offerings  and  prayers:  purify  us  by  these  hea- 
«^  erily  mysteries,  and  mercifully  hear  us.  Thro’. 

ed  by  Google 


468 


MASS  IV.  L£TAB1TUB. 


COMM.  MaU.  XV L — If  aoy  man  will  come  after 
me,  let  him  deny  himself,  take  up  his  cross  and  fol- 
low me. 

P.  COMM.  Da  qu(B8umus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord  our  God,  that  as  we  rejoice  on  the 
feasts  of  thy  saints  in  this  life,  so  we  may  enjoy  their 
sight  for  ever  in  that  which  i«»  to  come.  Thro’. 

MASS  IV.  Laetabitur,  the  same. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  kiiii. 

^HE  just  man  shall  re-  T iETABITUR  justus 
JL  joice  in  the  Lord,  and  -Li  in  Domino,  et  sjvera- 
shall  hope  in  him,  and  all  bit  in  eo : et  laudabun- 
the  upright  in  heart  shall  tur  omnes  recti  corde, 
be  praised.  Ps.  Hear,0  Ps.  Exaudi,  Deus,  ora- 
God,  my  pfayer,  when  I tionem  meam,  cum  de- 
make supplication  to  thee:  precor:  a timore  inimici 
deliver  my  soul  from  the  eriiie  animam  meam, 
fear  of  the  enemy.  V.  Gloria. 

F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Prasta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
N.  thy  Martyr,  we  may  be  delivered  from  all  cor- 
poral adversities,  and  our  hearts  be  cleansed  from  all 
evil  tlioughts.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Tim.  iL  8.  10.  iii.  10.  12. — Dcarlif 
beloved:  Be  mindful  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
risen  again  from  the  dead,  of  the  seed  of  David,  ac- 
cording to  my  gospel.  Wherein  I labour  even  unto 
bands,  as  an  evil  doer:  but  the  word  of  God  is 
not  bound.  Therefore  I endure  all  things  for  the 
sake  of  the  elect,  that  they  also  may  obtain  the  sal- 
vation, which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  with  heavenly  glory. 
(Chap.  iL)  But  thou  hast  fully  known  my  doc- 
trine, manner  of  life,  purpose,  faith,  long-suffer- 
ing, love,  patience,  persecutions,  afftictions : such 
as  came  upon  me  at  Antioch,  at  Iconium,  and  at 
Lystra:  what  pei*secutions  I endured,  and  out  of 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


or  A MARTYR  NOT  A BISHOP. 


409 


them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me.  And  all  that  will 
live  godly  in  Jesus  Christ,  shall  suffer  persecution. 

GRAD.  Ps.  XXX vi. — When  the  just  man  falleth, 
he  shall  not  be  bruised : For  the  Lord  putteth  his 
hand  under  him. . V.  He  sheweth  mercy  and  lendeth 
all  the  day  long : and  his  seed  shall  be  in  blessing. 
JUlduia, 

V.  Qui  sequitur  me,  non  ambulat  in  tenebris  sed 
habebit  lumen  vitee  eetemee.  Alleluia.  V.  He  that  fol- 
io weth  me,  walketh  not  in  darkness,  but  shall  have 
the  light  of  life.  MMuia. 

After  Septuag.  instead  ^ Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Beatus,  p.  465. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  x.  26.  33. At  ifiat  time. 

J^is  said  to  his  disciples : Nothing  is  covered  that 
shall  not  be  revealed,  nor  hid,  that  shall  not  be 
known.  That  which  I tell  you  in  the  dai’k,  speak 
ye  in  the  light : and  that  which  you  hear  in  the  ear, 
preach  ye  upon  the  house  tops.  And  fear  ye  not 
them  that  kill  the  body,  and  are  not  able  to  lyll  the 
soul : but  rather  fear  him  that  can  destroy  both  soul 
and  body  into  bell.  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a 
farthing : and  not  one  of  them  shall  fall  to  the  ground 
without  your  Father.  But  the  veiy  hairs  of  your 
head  are  all  numbered.  Fear  not  therefore;  better 
are  you  than  many  sparrows.  Every  one  therefore 
that  shall  confess  me  before  men,  I will  also  con- 
fess him  before  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  X. — Thou  hast  set  on  his  head,  O 
liOrd,  a crown  of  precious  stones : he  asked  life  of 
thee,  and  thou  didst  gi-ant  him  it.  AUduia. 

SECRET. — May  our  devotion,  O Lord,  be  accept- 
able in  thy  sight : and  may  this  intercession  on  whose 
festival  we  pay  it,  make  it  available  to  our  salvation. 
Thi*o’. 

COMM. — Let  him  who  serveth  me,  follow  me; 
and  where  I am,  there  also  shall  my  servants  be. 

P.  COMM.  Refedi. — Being  fed  by  the  paiticipa- 
Rr 


D r zed  byGoOgle 


470 


MASS  V.  PKOXnBXISTI, 


tioD  of  thy  sacred  gifts,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord  our 
God,  that  we  may  feel  the  efficacy  thereof^  by  the 
mtercessioD  of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr,  who»  feast 
we  celebrate.  Thro’. 


MASS  V.  Protexisd,  of  a MARTYR  in 


PASCHAL  TIME. 


INTROIT 

Thou  hast  protected 
me,  O God,  from  the 
assembly  of  the  malig- 
nant, AUduia : from  the 
multitude  of  the  workers 
of  iniquity.  AUd,  AlleL 
Ps.  Hear,*0  God,  my 
prayer,  when  I make 
supfdication  to  thee:  de- 
liver my  soul  from  the  fear 
of  the  enemy.  V.  Glory. 


Ps.  Ixiu. 

PROTEXISTI  me, 

Deus,  a conventu 
malignantium,  AUduia: 
a multitudine  operan- 
tium iniquitatem.  AUt- 
luioj  AUduUu 
Ps.  Exaudi,  Deus,  ora- 
tionem meam,  cum  de- 
precor : a timore  inimici 
eripe  animam  meam. 

V.  Gloria. 


COLLECT.  Infirmitatem. — Of  a Martyr  and 
Bishop.  Have  re^rd,  O Abnighty  God,  to  our  weak- 
ness, and,  as  we  sink  under  the  weight  of  our  doings, 
let  the  glorious  intercession  of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr 
and  Bishop,  be  a protection  to  us.  Thro’. 

Another.  DtuSy  quL — O God,  who  by  the  yearly 
solemnity  of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr  and  Bishop,  re- 
joicest  the  hearts  of  thy  faithful,  mercifully  grmit 
that  we,  who  celebrate  his  mart)Tdom,  may  enjoy 
his  protection.  Thro’. 

COLLECT.  PreBsta. — Of  a Martyr  not  a Bishop. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we 
who  celebrate  the  festivd  of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr, 
may  by  his  intercession,  be  strengthened  in  the  love 
of  thy  name.  Thro’. 

Another.  Preesta  qaeuumus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Afnnghty  God,  that  by  the  intercession  of 
blcs^  N.  thy  Martyr,  we  may  be  delivered  from 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


OF  A MARTYR  IN  PASCflAR  TIME.  471 

all  temporal  adversities, xand  our  hearts  be  cleansed 
from  all  evil  thoughts.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Jf’isd,  V.  1.  5. — The  just  shall  stand 
with  great  constancy  against  those  that  have  afflictetl 
them,  and  taken  away  their  labours.  These  seeing 
it  shall  be  troubled  with  ten-ible  fear,  and  shall  be 
amazed  at  the  suddenness  of  their  unexpected  sal- 
vation, saying  within  themselves,  repenting  and 
groaning  for  anguish  of  spirit : These  are  they  whom 
we  had  some  time  in  derision,  and  for  a parable  of 
reproach.  We  fools  esteemed  their  life,  madness, 
and  their  end  without  honour.  Behold,  how  they 
are  numbered  among  the  children  of  Gotl,  and  their 
lot  is  amongst  the  saints. 

Instead  of  the  foregoing  Lesson,  th^  EPISTLE, 
2 Tim.  ii.  p.  468,  is  occasionally  read. 

Alleluia^  Alleluia.  V.  The  heavens  shall  confess 
thy  wonders,  O Lord,  and  thy  truth  also  in  the  church 
of  the  saints.  Alleluia.  V.  Posuisti  Domine^  super 
caput  ejus  coronam^  de  lapide  pretioso.  Alleluia. 
y.  Thou  hast  set  on  his  head,  O Lord,  a crown  of 
precious  stones.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  1.  7. — At  that  time:  Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples : I am  the  true  vine ; and  iny 
Father  is  the  husbandman.  Every  branch  in  me, 
that  beareth  not  fruit,  he  will  take  away : and  every 
one  that  beareth  fruit,  he  will  purge  it,  that  it  may 
bring  forth  more  fruit.  Now  you  are  clean  by  rea- 
son of  the  word  which  I have  spoken  to  you.  Abide 
in  me,  and  I in  you.  As  the  branch  cannot  bear 
fruit  of  itself^  unless  it  abide  in  the  vine,  so  neither 
can  you,  unless  you  abide  in  me.  I am  the  vine ; 
you  the  branches : he  that  abideth  in  me,  and  1 in 
him,  tlie  same  beareth  much  fruit : for  without  me 
you  can  do  nothing.  If  any  one  abide  not  in  me, 
he  shall  be  cast  forth  as  a branch,  and  shall  wither, 
and  they  shall  gather  him  up,  and  cast  him  into  the 
R r 2 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


472 


MASS  y,  PROTEXISTI,  &C. 


fire,  and  he  biimeth.  If  you  abide  in  me,  and  my 
>vord  abide  in  you,  you  shall  ask  whatever  you  will 
Hiul  it  shall  be  done  unto  you. 

OFF'ERT.  Ps,  Ixxxviii. — The  heavens  shall  con- 
fess thy  wonders,  O Lord:  and  thy  truth  in  the 
church  of  the  saints.  MLduicL,  Mtlxda. 

SECRET.  Of  a Martyr  and  a Bishop. — Mercifully 
receive,  O Lord,  the  offering  dedicated  to  the«*  by 
the  merits  of  blessed.  N.  thy  Martyr  and  Bishop,  and 
grant  they  may  be  a continual  support  to  us.  Tliro’ 
Another. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  conse- 
crated to  thee  : and,  being  appeased  thereby  merci- 
fully look  upon  us  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  N. 
thy  Martyr  and  Bishop.  Thro*.  , 


SECRET.  Of  a Martyr  not  a Bishop. — Receive, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  our  offerings  and  prayers: 


Another, — May  our  devotion,  O Lord,  be  accept- 
able in  thy  sight ; and  may  his  intercession,  on  whose 
festival  we  pay  it,  make  it  available  to  our  salvation. 
Thro\ 

COMM.  Ps,  Ixiii. — ^The  just  shall  rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  and  shall  hope  in  him : and  all  the  upright  in 
heart  shall  be  praised.  JUlduia^  Alleluia, 

P.  COMM.  Refectu — Of  a Martyr  and  Bishop. 
Being  fed  by  the  participation  of  thy  sacred  gifts,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  our  God,  that  we  may  feel 
the  efficacy  thereof  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  N. 
tliy  Martyr  and  Bishop.  Thro*. 

Another,  H<bc  nos  Communio,  — May  this  com- 
munion, O Lord,  cleanse  us  from  sin,  and  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr  and  Bishop, 
make  us  eftectually  partakers  of  this  heavenly  remedy 
Thro*. 

P.  COMM.  Da,  qufBsumus, — Of  a Martyr  not  a 
Bishop.  Grant,  we  neseech  thee,  O liOrd  our  Grod. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


473 


HASS  VI.  STATUIT  TUI,  &C. 

that  as  we  rejoice  on  the  feasts  of  thy  saints  in  this 
life,  so  we  may  enjoy  their  sight  for  ever  in  that 
which  is  to  come.  Thro’. 

Another,  Refecti, — Being  fed  by  the  participation 
of  thy  sacred  gifts,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord  our 
God,  that  we  may  feel  the  efiicacy  thereof  bj  the 
intercession  of  blessed  N.  thy  Martyr.  Thro’. 


MASS  VI.  Sancti  tui,  of  MANY  MARTYRS. 
INTROIT.  P8,  cxliv. 

Thy  saints,  O Lord,  O ANCTI  tui.  Domine, 
shall  bless  thee ; and  benedicent  te ; glo- 
speak  of  the  glory  of  thy  riam  regni  tui  ^cent, 
kingdom.  Allel,  MleL  Alleluia,  AUduicu 

Ps.  I will  extol  thee,  O Ps,  Exultabo  te,  Deus, 
God,  my  king ; and  bless  mens  rex ; et  benedicam 
thy  name  for  ever  and  nomini  tuo  in  ssaculum 
ever.  V,  Glory.  sseculi.  V,  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Beatorum, — Of  Martyrs  and  Bishops. 
We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the  solemnity  of  the 
blessed  Martyrs  and  Bishops  N.  and  N.  may  be  a 
protection  to  us,  and  their  venerable  prayers  recom- 
mend us  to  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — Of  Mar^rs  only,  O 
God,  by  whose  favour  we  celebrate  the  f^tival  of  thy 
holy  Martyrs  N.  and  N.  grant  we  may  enjoy  their 
fellowship  in  eternal  bliss.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Peter  i.  3.  7. — Blessed  be  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  according 
to  his  great  mercy  hath  regenerated  us  into  a lively 
hope,  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead,  unto  an  inheritance  uncorruptible  and  un de- 
filed, and  that  cannot  fade,  reserved  in  heaven  for 
you,  who  by  the  power  of  God  are  kept  by  faith 
unto  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time. 
Wherein  you  shall  greatly  rejoice,  if  now  you  must 
be  for  a little  time  made  sorrowful  in  divers  tempta- 
tions; that  the  trial  of  your  faith,  (much  more  pre- 
Rr3 


zed  by  Google 


474 


1LI8S  VI.  SANCTI  TUI,  &/C. 

cious  than  gold  which  is  tried  by  the  fire)-may  be 
tbund  unto  praise,  and  glory,  and  honour,  at  the 
appearing  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

•^Ueluu^  ^BUdma,  V,  Thy  saints,  O Lord,  shaU 
flourish  like  the  lily  : and  as  the  sweet  perfume  of 
balsam  shall  they  be  before  thee.  JVldma,  V.  Pre- 
tiosa in  conspedu  Domini  mors  sanctorum  ejus.  Ah 
leluia^  Alleluia.  V.  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints.  MLduuu 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  5.  11. — Jit  that  time:  Jesus 
scah  to  his  disciples : I am  the  vine,  you  the  branches: 
he  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I in  him,  the  same  bear- 
eth  much  fruit : for  without  me  you  can  do  nothing. 
If  any  one  abide  not  in  me,  he  shall  be  cast  forth  as 
a branch,  and  shall  wither,  and  they  shall  gather  him 
up,  and  cast  him  into  the  fire,  and  he  bumeth.  If 
^ou  abide  in  me,  and  my  word  abide  in  you,  you 
shall  ask  whatever  you  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you.  In  this  is  my  Father  glorified ; diat  you 
bring  forth  very  much  fruit,  and  become  my  disciplea 
As  the  Father  hath  loved  me,  I also  have  loved  you. 
Abide  in  my  love.  If  you  keep  my  commandments, 
you  shall  abide  in  my  love ; as  I also  have  kept  my 
Father’s  commandments,  and  do  abide  in  his  love. 
These  things  have  I spoken  to  you,  that  my  joy  may 
be  in  you,  and  your  joy  m^  be  filled. 

OFFERT..  Ps.  xxxi. — Re  glad  in  the  Lord,  and 
rejoice  ye  just ; and  glory  all  ye  right  of  heart. 
leluia,  AUduicL. 

SECRET.  Of  Martyrs  and  Bishops. — Attend,  O 
Lord  to  our  earnest  prayers,  which  we  put  up  in 
memory  of  thy  saints ; and  since  we  trust  not  in  our 
own  righteousness,  may  we  be  helped  by  the  merits 
of  those,  who  were  well-pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  Of  Martyrs  not  Bishops. — ^We  brine 
tliee,  O Lord,  the  offerings  of  our  devotion  ; and 
may  they  be  acceptable  to  thee  in  honour  of  thy  saints, 
and  available  to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


475 


MASS  VII.  INTRET,  &C. 

COMM.  Ps,  xxxii. — Be  glad  in  the  Lord,  O ye 
just.  Alleluia : praise  becometh  the  upright.  AlleL 

P.  COMM.  ^u(Bsumus. — O/*  Martyrs  ami  Bishops. 
Being  filled  with  thy  saving  mysteries,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  that  we  may  he  helped  by  their  inter- 
cession, whose  festival  we  celebrate.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Prastanohis, — (yMaityrsnof  Bishops. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by  the  intercession 
of  thy  Holy  Martyrs  N.  and  N.  that  what  we  have 
taken  with  our  mouths,  we  may  receive  with  a pure 
soul.  Thro’. 


MASS  VII.  Intret  of  MANY  MARTYRS. 
INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixxviii. 


Let  the  sighing,  O 
Lord,  of  the  prison- 
ers come  in  before  thee : 
render  to  our  neighbours 
s ^venfbld  in  their  bosom ; 
revenge  the  blood  of  thy 
saints  which  hath  been 
shed. 

Ps,  OGod,the  heathens 
are  come  into  thy  inherit- 
ance; they  have  defiled 
thy  holy  temple:  they 
have  made  Jerusalem  as 
a place  to  keep  fruit. 

V.  Glory. 


INTRET  in  conspectu 
tuo.  Domine,  gemi- 
tus compeditorum : red- 
de vicinis  nostris  septu- 
plum in  sinu  eorum: 
vindica  sanguinem  sanc- 
torum tuorum,  qui  efifu- 
siis  est. 

Ps,  Deus,  venerunt 
Gentes  in  h®reditatem 
tuarii : polluerunt  tem- 
plum sanctum  tuum:  po- 
suerunt Jerusalem  in  po- 
morum custodiam. 

V,  Gloria. 


COLLECT.  Beatorum, — We  beseech  tliee,  O 
Lord,  that  the  solemnity  of  thy  blessed  Martyrs  and 
Bishops  N.  and  N.  may  be  a protection  to  us,  and 
their  venerable  prayers  recommend  us  to  thy  mercy. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Wisd,  iii.  8. — ^The  souls  of  the  just  are 
in  the  band  of  God,  and  the  torment  of  death  shall 
not  touch  them.  In  the  sight  of  the  unwise  they 
seemed  to  die ; and  their  de{)arture  was  taken  for 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


476  MASS  YII.  IITTRBT,  &C. 

misery ; and  their  going  away  from  us,  for  utter  dc 
struction:  but  they  are  in  peace.  And  though  in 
the  sight  of  men  they  suffered  torments,  tiieir  hope  is 
full  of  immortality.  Afflicted  in  few  things,  in  many 
they  shall  be  well  rewarded  ; because  God  hath  tned 
them,  and  found  them  worthy  of  himself.  As  gold 
in  the  furnace  he  hath  proved  them,  and  as  a victim 
of  a holocaust  he  hath  received  them,  and  in  time 
there  shall  be  respect  had  to  them.  The  just  shall 
shine,  and  run  to  and  fro,  like  sparks  among  the 
reeds.  They  shall  judge  nations,  and  rule  over  peo- 
ple, and  their  Lord  shaU  reign  for  ever. 

GRAD.  Exod,  xv. — God  is  glorious  in  his  saints, 
wonderful  in  his  Majesty,  and  miraculous  in  his 
works.  V.  Thy  right  hand,  O Lord,  is  rtiagnified  in 
strength:  thy  right  hand  hath  slain  the  enemy. 
Alleluia^  Alleluia.  V.  Corpora  sanctorum  in  pace 
se^uUa  sunt ; et  nomina  eorum  vivent  in  generatione^ 
et  generationem.  Alleluia.  F.  The  bodies  of  the 
saints  are  buried  in  peace ; and  their  names  shall 
live  for  ever  and  ever.  Alleluia. 

J^fler  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 

TRACT.  Ps.  exxv. — Qui  seminant  in  lacn/mis,  in 
exuUatione  metent.  They  who  sow  in  teara  shall 
reap  in  joy.  V.  Going  they  went  and  wept,  and  cast- 
ing their  seed.  V.  But  coming  they  shall  come  with 
joy  and  fulness,  carrying  their  sheaves.* 

GOSPEL.  lAikexxi.  9.  J9. — At  that  tme:  Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples : When  vou  shall  hear  of  wars 
and  seditions,  be  not  terrified ; these  things  must 
first  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  yet  presently. 
Then  he  said  to  them : Nation  shall  rise  against  na- 
tion, and  kingdom  against  kingdom.  And  there 
shall  be  great  earthquakes  in  divers  places,  and  pesti- 
lences, and  famines,  and  terrors  from  heaven,  and 
there  shall  be  great  signs.  But  before  all  these  tilings 
they  will  lay  their  hands  on  you : and  persecute  you, 
delivering  you  up  to  the  synagogues  and  into  pri- 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


477 


MASS  VIII.  SAPIENTIAM,  &C. 


Fons,  dragginff  you  before  kings  and  governors  for 
ray  name’s  sake.  And  it  shall  happen  unto  you  for  a 
testimony.  Lay  it  up  therefore  in  your  hearts,  not 
to  meditate  before  how  you  shall  answer.  For  I 
will  give  you  a mouth  and  wisdom,  which  all  your 
adversaries  shall  not  be  able  to  resist  and  gain-say. 
And  you  shall  be  betrayed  by  your  parents,  and  bre- 
thren, and  kinsmen,  and  friends : and  some  of  you 
they  will  put  to  death.  And  you  shall  be  hated  by 
all  men  for  my  name’s  sake : but  a hair  of  your  head 
shall  not  perish.  In  your  patience  you  shall  possess 
your  souls. 

OFFERT.  Pa.  Ixvii. — God  is  wonderfiil  in  his 
saints : the  God  of  Israel  is  he,  who  will  give  power 
and  strength  to  his  people ; blessed  be  God.  AUd. 

SECRET. — ^Attend,  O Lord,  to  our  earnest  pray- 
ers, which  we  put  up  in  memory  of  thy  saints  ; and 
since  we  trust  not' in  our  own  righteousness,  may  we 
be  helped  by  the  merits  of  those,  who  were  well- 
pleasing to  thee.  Thro’. 

COMM.  fVisd.  iii. — And  though  in  the  sight  of 
men  they  suffered  torments.  God  hath  tried  them : 
as  gold  in  the  fiimace  he  hath  proved  them,  and  like 
an  holocaust  he  accepted  them. 

P.  COMM.  QufBSumus. — Being  filled  with  thy 
saving  mysteries,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  we 
may  be  helped  by  their  intercession,  whose  festivals 
we  celebrate.  Thro’. 


MASS  VIII.  Sapientiam,  of  the  same. 
INTROIT.  Ecdes.xliv. 


Let  nations  relate  the 
wisdom  of  the  saints ; 
and  the  Church  publish 
their  praises.Their  names 
shall  live  for  ever. 

Pf  Rejoice  in  the  Lord, 


SAPIENTIAMsancto- 
rum  narrent  populi; 
et  laudes  eorum  nuntie 
Ecclesia.  Nomina  eorum 
vivent  in  saeculum  saeculi. 
Ps.  Exultatc  justi  in 


)igilized  by  CjOO^Ic 


78 


MASS  VIII.  SAPIENTIAM,  6lC, 

ye  juflt : praise  becometh  Domino:  rectos  decet 
Ine  righteous.  collaudatio. 

V.  Glory.  V,  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  nos. — O God,  by  whose 
favour  \ye  celebrate  the  festival  of  thy  holy  Martyrs 
N.  and  N.  grant  that  we  may  enjoy  their  fellowship 
in  eternal  bliss.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Wisd.  V.  16.  20.— The  just  sh.-ll  live 
for  evermore,  and  their  reward  is  with  the  Lord,  and 
the  care  of  them  with  the  Most  High.  Therefore 
shall  they  receive  a kingdom  of  glory,  and  a crown 
of  beauty  at  tlie  hand  of  the  Lord : for  with  his  right 
hand  be  will  cover  them,  and  with  his  holy  arm  >vill 
he  defend  them.  And  his  zeal  will  take  its  armour, 
and  he  will  arm  the  creature  for  the  revenge  of  his 
enemies.  He  will  put  on  justice  as  a breast-plate, 
and  will  take  true  judgment  instead  of  a helmet : He 
will  take  equity  for  an  invincible  shield. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxxiii. — Our  soul  hath  been  deliver- 
ed, as  a sparrow  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowlers. 
F.  The  snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  delivered,  our 
help  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  made  heaven 
and  earth.  Allduia^  JMduia.  V.  Ps.  Ixvii. — Justx 
i^vltTiiur  et  exidterd  in  consptctu  Dei^  et  delecteniur 
in  IcBtitia.  Alleluia.  V.  Let  the  just  feast  and  re- 
joice before  God : and  be  delighted  wiih  gladness. 
Mlduia. 

AJicr  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Qwi  seminantf  p.  476. 

GOSPEL.  JUtke  vi.  17.  23.—.^  that  time : Jesus 
descending  from  the  mountain,  stood  in  a plain 
place,  and  the  company  of  his  disciples,  and  a very 
great  multitude  of  people  from  all  Judea  and  Jem 
Salem,  and  the  sea  coast  both  of  Tyre  and  Sidon, 
who  were  come  to  hear  him,  and  to  be  healed  of 
their  diseases.  And  they  that  were  troubled  with 
unclean  spirits,  were  cured.  And  all  the  multitude 
sought  to  touch  him,  for  vk-tue  went  out  from  hkn, 


Google 


479 


MASS  IX.  SALUS  AUTEM,  &C. 


and  healed  all.  And  he,  lifting  up  his  eyes  on  his 
disciples,  said  : Blessed  are  the  poor ; for  your’s  is 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Blessed  are  ye  that  hunger 
now:  for  you  shall  be  filled.  Blessed  are  ye  that 
weep  now ; for  you  shall  laugh.  Blessed  shall  you 
be  wl  en  men  shall  hate  you,  and  when  they  shall 
separate  from  you,  and  shall  reproach  you,  and  cast 
out  your  name  as  evil,  for  the  Son  of  Man’s  sake. 
Be  glad  in  that  day,  and  rejoice : for  behold,  your 
reward  is  great  in  heaven. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxlviii. — The  saints  shall  rejoice  in 
glory:  they  shall  be  joyful  in  their  beds:  the  high 
praises  of  God  shall  be  in  their  mouth.  Alleluia, 

SECRET. — We  bring  thee,  O Lord,  the  offerings 
of  our  devotion  ; and  may  they  be  acceptable  to  thee 
in  honour  of  thy  saints,  and,  by  thy  mercy,  available 
to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Luke  xii. — But  I say  to  you  my  friends : 
fear  not  those  who  persecute  you. 

P.  COMM.  Prdesta, Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 

O Lord,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy  Martyrs  N. 
and  N.  that  what  we  have  taken  with  our  mouths 
we  may  receive  with  a pure  souk  Thro’. 


MASS  IX.  Salus  autem,  of  the  same, 
INTROIT.  Ps.  xxxvi. 


The  salvation  of  the 
just  is  from  the  Lord : 
and  he  is  their  protector 
in  the  time  of  trouble. 

Ps.  Be  not  emulous  of 
evil  doers : nor  envy  them 
that  work  iniquity. 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus^  quv 


Salus  autem  justo- 
rum a Domino:  el 
protector  eorum  est  in 
tempore  tribulationis. 

Ps.  Noli  aemulari  in 
malignantibus ; neque  ze- 
laveris facientes  iniquita- 
tem. V.  Gloria. 

O God,  who,  by  the 


yearly  solemnity  of  thy  holy  Martyrs  N.  and  N. 
comfortest  us  thy  people ; mercifully  grant,  that,  as 
we  rejoice  at  their  merits,  we  may  likewise  be  en- 
roui-aged  by  their  examples.  Thro’. 


digitized  by  CjOO^ Ic 


480 


MASS  IX.  SAXUS  ADTEM,  &C. 

EPISTLE.  Heb.  x.  32.  38.  — Brethren : CaU  to 
mind  the  former  days,  wherein,  being  illunninafi3d, 
you  endured  a great  fight  of  afflictions.  And  on  the 
one  hand  indeed,  by  reproaches  and  tribulations 
were  made  a gazing-stock  ; and  on  the  other,  be- 
come companions  of  them  that  were  used  in  such 
sort.  For  you  both  had  compassion  on  them  that 
were  in  bands,  and  took  with  joy  the  being  stripped 
of  your  own  goods,  knowing  that  you  have  a better 
and  a lusting  substance.  Do  not  therefore  lose  your 
confidence,  which  hath  a great  reward.  For  patience 
IS  necessary  for  you  : that,  doing  the  will  of  God,  you 
•lay  receive  the  promise.  For  yet  a little  and  a very 
little  while,  and  he  that  is  to  come,  will  come  and 
will  not  delay.  But  my  just  man  liveth  by  faith. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxxiii. — The  just  cried  and  the  Lord 
beard  them,  and  delivered  them  out  of  all  their 
troubles.  V.  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  that  are 
of  a contrite  heart : and  he  will  save  the  humble  of 
heart.  JlUel,  AUel,  y.  Te  martyrum  candidatus  lan- 
iat exercitus,  Domine,  Alleluia.  V,  The  white-robed 
army  of  Martyrs  praise  thee,  O Lord.  Alleluia, 

After  Septuag.  instead  q/*  Alleluia,  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Qui  seminant,  p.  476. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxiv.  3.  14.  — At  that  time: 
As  Jesus  was  sitting  on  mount  Olivet,  the  disciples 
came  to  him  privately,  saying : Tell  us  when  these 
things  shall  be  ? and  what  shall  be  the  signs  of  thy 
coming,  and  of  the  consummation  of  the  world  ? 
And  Jesus  answering  said  to  them : Take  heed  that 
no  man  seduce  you : for  many  will  come  in  my  name, 
saying,  I am  Christ:  and  they  will  seduce  many. 
And  you  shall  hear  of  wars,  and  rumours  of  wars. 
See  that  ye  be  not  troubled.  For  these  things  must 
come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  yet.  For  nation 
shall  rise  against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  king- 
dom ; and  there  shall  be  pestilences  and  famines,  and 
earthquakes  in  places:  now  all  these  are  the  begin- 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


481 


MASS  X.  * STATUIT,  &C. 

fling  of  sorrows.  Then  shall  they  deliver  you  up  to 
be  afflicted,  and  shall  put  you  to  death : and  you 
shall  be  hated  by  all  nations  for  my  name’s  sake. 
And  then  shall  many  be  scandalized : and  shall  be- 
tray one  another : and  shall  hate  one  another.  And 
many  false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall  seduce  many. 
And  because  iniquity  bath  abounded,  the  charity  of 
many  shall  grow  cold.  But  he  that  shall  persevere 
to  the  end  shall  be  saved. 

OFFERT.  fVisd,  iii. — The  souls  of  the  just  are  in 
the  hand  of  God : and  the  torment  of  death  shall  not 
touch  them.  In  the  sight  of  the  unwise  they  seemed 
to  die  : but  they  are  in  peace.  JlUduia, 

SECRET. Be  appeased,  O Lord,  we  beseech 

thee,  by  the  offerings  we  have  made ; and  defend  us 
from  all  dangers,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy 
Martyrs  N.4nd  N.  Thro’. 

COMM. — What  I say  to  you  in  the  dark,  speak 
you  in  the  light,  saith  the  Lord : and  what  is  whis- 
pered you  in  the  ear,  preach  you  on  the  house-tops. 

P.  COMM.  H(Bc  nos, — May  this  (communion,  O 
Lord,  purify  us  from  sin,  and,  by  the  intercession  of 
thy  holy  Martyrs  N.  and  N.  make  us  partakers  of 
the  joys  of  heaven.  Thro’. 


MASS  X.  * Statuit,  of  a CONFESSOR  and  BISHOP. 

Exclusive  of  those  degrees  of  Confessors  who 
have  glorified  Jesus  Christ,  as  well  by  their  suf- 
ferings for  religion,  as  by  the  purity  of  their  lives, 
^ (such  as  Bishops,  Priests,  Doctors  of  the  Church,  Monk^ 
and  Solitaries),  there  were  also  others,  of  various  secular 
conditions,  who  passed  through  life  without  being  at- 
tached to  the  things  of  the  world.  Despising  what- 
ev^  is  transitory,  they  dedicated  themselves  to  God ; 
and  mortifying  their  bodies  by  a rigorous  penance, 
obtained  so  absolute  a conquest  over  their  own  will,  as 
to  suffer  a kind  of  martyrdom.  Let  us  therefore  be- 
seech God  on  their  several  festivals,  that  he  would  en- 
able us  to  follow  their  example. 

•Ss 


by  Google 


182 


MASS  X.*  STATUIT, 


INTROIT,  Statuit,  as  in  Mass  I.  p,  461. 

COLLECT.  Da,  qufBsumus* — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  Grod,  tliai  the  venerable  solemnity 
of  bles^^ed  N.  thy  Confessor  and  Bishop,  may  improve 
our  devotion,  and  strengthen  in  us  the  hopes  of  salva- 
tion. Thro’. 

LESSON.  EccUa.  xliv,  and  xlv.— Behold  a great 
priest,  who  in  his  time  pleased  God,  and  was  found 
just ; and  in  the  time  of  wrath  bwame  an  atone- 
ment. There  were  none  found  hke  him  in  olieerving 
the  law  of  the  Most  High.  Therefore,  by  an  oath 
did  the  Lord  make  him  great  amongst  his  people. 
He  gave  him  the  blessing  of  all  nations,  and  establ^- 
ed  his  covenant  on  his  head.  He  acknowledged  him 
in  his  blessings;  he  stored  up  his  mercy  for  him: 
and  he  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.  (Chap, 
xlv.)  He  exalted  him  in  the  sight  of  kings : and 
gave  him  a crown  of  glory.  He  made  with  him  an 
eternal  covenant:  and  bestowed  on  him  a great 
priesthood : and  rendered  him  blessed  in  glory.  To 
perform  the  priestly  office,  to  sing  praises  to  the  name 
of  God ; and  to  offer  him  precious  incense  for  an 
odour  of  sweetness. 

GRAD.  Ecdes»  xliv. Behold  a great  prelate, 

who  in  his  days  pleased  God.  F.  There  was  none 
found  like  him  in  keepM  the  law  of  the  Most  High. 
Alleluia,  Alleluia,  Tu  es  sacerdos  in  atemum 
secundum  ordinem  Melchisedech,  Alleluia.  F.  Thou 
art  a priest  for  ever,  according  to  the  order  of  Mel- 
chisedech. Alleluia. 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  stM 
TRACT,  J5eaft«,p.  465. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxv.  14.  that  tme; 

Jesus  spoke  this  parable  to  his  disciples : A man  going 
into  a far  country,  called  his  servants,  ^d  delivered 
to  them  his  goods.  And  to  one  he  gave  five  talents, 
and  to  another  two,  and  to  another  one,  to  every  one 
according  to  his  proper  ability:  and  immediately  he 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


OF  A CONFESSOR  AND  BISHOP.  483 

took  his  journey.  And  he  that  had  received  the  five 
telents  went  his  way  and  traded  with  the  same,  and 
gained  dther  five.  And  in  like  manner  he  that  had 
received  the  two,  gained  other  two.  But  he  that 
had  received  the  one,  going  his  way  digged  into  the 
earth,  and  hid  his  lord’s  money.  But  after  a long 
time  the  lord  of  those  servants  came,  and  reckoned 
with  them.  And  he  that  had  received  the  five 
talents  coming,  brought  other  five  talents,  saying: 
Lord,  thou  didst  deliver  to  me  five  talents,  behold 
I have  gained  other  five  over  and  above.  His  lord 
said  to  him : Well  done  good  and  faithful  servant, 
because  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a few  things,  I 
will  place  thee  over  many  things:  enter  thou  into 
the  joy  of  thy  lord.  And  he  also  that  had  received 
the  two  talents  came  and  said : Lord,  thou  deliver- 
edst  two  talents  to  me : behold  I have  gained  other 
two.  His  lord  said  to  him : Well  done  good  and 
faithful  servant,  because  thou  hast  been  faithful  over 
a few  things,  I will  place  thee  over  many  things : 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  lord. 

OFFERT.  Pd.  88. — I have  found  David,  my  ser- 
vant :•  with  my  holy  oil  I have  anointed  him : For 
my  hand  shall  help  him,  and  my  arm  shall  strengthen 
him. 

SECRET. — ^May  thy  saints,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  cause  joy  to  all  thy  people : that  while  we  cele- 
brate their,  merits,  we  may  experience  their  patron- 
age. Thro’. 

COMM.  LuJce  xii. — ^This  is  the  faithful  and  pru- 
dent servant,  whom  the  Lord  placed  over  his  family, 
to  give  them  in  due  season  their  measure  of  wheat. 

P.  COMM.  Pr«dia.— Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  while  we  return  thee  thanks  for 
what  we  have  partaken  of,  we  may,  by  the  inter- 
cession of  blessed  N.  thy  Confessor  and  Bishop,  re- 
ceive still  greater  favours.  Thro’. 

Ss2 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


/ 


[ 484  ] 

MASS  XL  Sacerdotes  tui,  of  the  satne. 
INTROIT.  Psalm  cxxxi. 

Let  thy  priests,  O OACERDOTES  tui, 
Lord,  be  clothed  ^ Domine,  induant  jus- 
with  justice  ; and  let  thy  titiarn,  et  sancti  tui  exul- 
saints  rejoice.  For  thy  tent.  Propter  David  ser- 
servant  David’s  sake,  turn  vum  tuum,  non  avertas 
not  away  the  face  of  thine  faciem  Christi  tui. 
anointed.  Ps,  Memento,  Domine, 

Ps,  Remember,  O Lord,  David,  et  omnia  mansue- 
David  and  all  bis  meek-  tudinis  ejus.  V,  Gloria, 
ness.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Exavdi, — Hear,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  prayers  we  offer  on  this  solemnity 
of  blessed  N.  thy  Confessor  and  Bishop : and  by  his 
intercession,  who  worthily  served  thee,  deliver  us 
from  all  our  sins.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Heh.  vii.  2a  ^7,^Breikren : There 
were  made  many  priests,  because  by  reason  of  death 
they  were  not  suffered  to  continue.  But  Jesus,  for 
that  he  continueth  for  ever,  hath  an  everlasting  priest- 
hood. Whereby  he  is  able  also  to  save  for  ever  them 
that  come  to  God  by  him : always  living  to  make  in- 
tercession for  us.  For  it  was  fitting  that  we  should 
have  such  a high  priest,  holy,  innocent,  undefiled, 
separated  from  sinners,  and  made  higher  than  the 
heavens ; who  needeth  not  daily  (as  the  other  priests) 
to  offer  sacrifice  fii-st  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people’s : for  this  Jesus  our  Lord  did  once  in 
offering  himself. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxxx. — I will  clothe  her  priests  with 
salvation,  and  her  saints  shall  rejoice  exceedingly 
V.  There  will  I bring  forth  a horn  to  David ; I have 
prepared  a lamp  for  my  anointed.  Alleluia,  Alleluia, 
V.  Juravit  Dominus  et  non  ptenitebit  eum:  T\i  es 
sacerdos  in  (Btemum  secundum  ordinem  Melchisedech. 
Alleluia.  V.  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  re- 
pent: thou  art  a priest  for  ever  according  to  the 
order  of  Melchisedech.  Alleluia, 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


^ MASS  XII.  IN  MEDIO,  &C.  485 

AJltr  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT.  Beaiusy  p.  465. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xxiv  42.  47.  — At  that  time: 
Jests  said  to  his  disciples : Watch  yc  therefore,  be- 
cause ye  know  not  at  what  hour  your  Lord  will  come. 
But  this  know  ye,  that  if  the  good  man  of  the  house 
knew  at  what  hour  the  thief  would  come,  he  would 
certainly  watch,  and  would  not  suffer  his  house  to 
be  broken  open.  Wherefore  be  you  also  ready,  be- 
cause at  what  hour  you  know  not,  the  Son  of  Man 
will  come.  Who  thinkest  thou  is  a faithful  and  wise 
servant,  whom  his  lord  has  apnointed  over  his  family 
to  give  them  meat  in  season  r * Blessed  is  that  ser- 
vaill,  whom  when  his  lord  shall  come,  he  shall  find 
so  doing.  Amen,  I say  to  you,  he  shall  place  him 
over  all  his  goods  f. 

OFFERT. — ^My  truth  and  my  mercy  shaU  be  with 
him ; and  in  my  name  shall  his  be  exalted. 

SECRET. — ^IVIay  the  annual  solemnity,  we  l^eseech 
thee,  O Lord,  of  holy  N.  thy  Confessor  and  Bishop, 
render  us  acceptable  to  thy  mercy : that  by  this  sa- 
crifice of  propitiation,  he  may  both  receive  a happy 
reward,  and  obtain  for  us  the  gifts  of  thy  mercy. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  * Blessed,  &c.  as  ahove^fronj,  * to  f. 

P.  COMM.  Deus  Melium, O God,  the  re- 

wardei  of  faithful  souls,  grant  that  we  may  obtain 
forgiveness  by  the  prayers  of  blessed  N.  thy  Confes- 
sor and  Bishop,  whose  venerable  feast  we  celebrate. 
Thro’. 


MASS  XII.  In  medio,  of  DOCTORS. 
INTROIT.  Eccles,  xv. 


He  opened  his  mouth  TN  medio  Ecclesiae  ape- 
in  the  midst  of  the  -1-  ruit  os  ejus,  et  im- 
Church,  and  the  Lord  plevit  eum  Doniinus  spi- 
filled  him  with  the  spirit  ritu  sapientiae  et  intel 
Ss3 

oy  Google 


466 


filASS  XII.  IN  MEDIO, 


Df  wisdom:  he  clad  him  lectus:  stolam  glorise  in- 
witli  a robe  of  glory.  duit  eum. 

Ps.  It  is  good  to  give  Ps,  Bonum  est  confi- 
praise  to  the  Lord,  and  to  teri  Domino,  et  psallere 
sing  to  thy  name,  O Most  nomini  tuo,  Altissune 
High.  F.  Gloiy.  F.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui, — O Grod,  who  didst  give 
Blessed  N.  to  thy  people  for  a minister  of  eternal  sal- 
vation: grant  we  beseech  thee,  that  he  w’ho  was 
the  instructor  of  our  life  here  on  earth,  may  become 
our  intercessor  in  heaven.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  2 Tim.  iv.  1.  8. — Most  dearly  beloved: 
1 charge  thee  before  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall 
judge  the  living  and  the  dead,  by  his  coming,  and 
nis  kingdom : preach  the  word ; be  instant  in  sea- 
son, out  of  season ; reprove,  intrea%  rebuke,  in  all 
patience  and  doctrine.  For  there  shall  be  a time, 
when  they  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine : but  ac- 
cording to  their  own  desires  they  wiU  heap  to  them- 
selves teachers,  having  itching  ears.  And  will  in- 
deed turn  away  their  hearing  from  the. truth,  but 
will  be  turned  into  fables.  But  be  thou  vigilant, 
labour  in  all  things,  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist, 
fulfil  thy  ministry.  Be  sober.  For  I am  even  now 
ready  to  be  sacrificed : and  the  time  of  my  dissolu- 
tion is  at  hand.  1 have  fought  a good  fight,  1 have 
finished  my  course,  1 have  kept  the  faith.  As  to^the 
rest,  there  is  laid  up  for  me. a crown  of  justice, 
which  the  Lord,  the  just  judge,  will  render  to  me  in 
that  day : and  not  only  to  me  but  to  them  also  who 
love  his  coming. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxvi. — ^The  mouth  of  the  just  shall 
meditate  wisdom : and  his  tongue  shall  speak  judg- 
ment. F.  The  law  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart : and 
his  steps  shall  not  be  supplanted,  O Lord.  Mid.  JlUeL 
V.  Amavit  eum  Dominus,  et  omavit  eum;  stolam 
gloria  induit  eum.  V.  The  Lord  loved  him,  and  adorn- 
ed him,  and  hath  clothed  him  with  a robe  rf  gloiy. 

Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


OF  DOCTORS. 


487 


Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Beaius,  465. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  v.  13.  19. At  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples:  You  are  the  salt  of  the 
earth.  But  if  the  salt  lose  its  savour,  wherewith 
shall  it  be  salted  ? It  is  good  for  nothing  any  more 
but  to  be  cast  out,  and  to  be  trodden  on  by  men. 
You  are  the  light  of  the  world.  A city  seated  on  a 
mountain  cannot  be  hid.  Neither  do  men  light  a 
candle  and  put  it  under  a bushel,  but  upon  a candle- 
stick, that  it  may  shine  to  all  that  are  in  the  house. 
So  let  your  light  shine  before  men,  that  they  may 
see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  who  is 
in  heaven.  Do  not  think  that  T am  come  to  destroy 
the  law,  or  the  prophets.  I am  not  come  to  destroy, 
but  to  fulfil.  For,  amen  I say  unto  you,  till  heaven 
and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  not  pass  of 
the  law  till  all  be  fulfilled.  He  therefore  that  shall 
break  one  of  the  least  of  these  commandments,  and 
shall  so  teach  men,  shall  be  called  the  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  But  he  that  shall  do  and  teach, 
he  shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  ^ 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xc. — The  just  shall  flourish  like 
the  paldi-tree : he  shall  grow  up  like  the  cedar  of 
Libanus. 

SECRET. — Let  the  pious  prayers  of  thy  holy  ser- 
vant N.  never  be  wanting  to  us,  O Lord : that  they 
may  make  our  offerings  acceptable  to  thee,  and 
always  obtain  for  us  thy  pardon.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Imke  xii. — This  is  the  faithful  and  pru- 
dent sei-vant,  whom  the  Lord  placed  over  his  family, 
to  give  them  their  measure  of  wheat  in  due  season. 

P.  COMM.  Ut  nobisk — Let  blessed  N.  O Lord, 
tliy  Confessor  and  great  Doctor,  become  our  advo- 
cate, that  this  thy  holy  sacrifice  may  procure  our 
salvation.  Thro’ 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


I 488  J 

MASS  XIIl.  Os  justi,  of  a CONFESSOR  not  a BP. 
INTROIT.  Ps,  xxxvi. 

The  mouth  of  the  just  (^S  justi  meditabitur 
man  shall  meditate  sapientiam,  et  lingua 
wisdom,  and  his  tongue  ejus  loquetur  judicium; 
speak  judgment : the  law  lex  Dei  ejus  in  corde 
of  his  God  is  in  his  heart  ipsius. 

Ps,  Be  not  emulous  of  Ps,  Noli  eemulari  in 
evil  doers,  nor  envy  them  mali^antibus : neque  ze- 
that  work  iniquity.  laveris  facientes  iniquita* 

V\  Glory.  tern.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Dms^  qui, — O God,  who  comfbrtest 
us  by  the  yearly  solemnity  of  blessed  N.  thy  Confes- 
sor; mercifully  grant,  that  while  we  celebrate  his 
festival,  we  m^  imitate  his  actions.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  £ccL  xxxL  8.  11. — Blessed  is  the  man 
that  is  found  without  blemish;  and  that  hath  not 
gone  after  gold,  nor  put  his  trust  in  money  nor  in 
treasures.  Who  is  he,  and  we  will  praise  him,  for 
he  hath  done  wonderful  things  in  his  life.  Who  hath 
been  tried  thereby,  and  made  perfect,  he  shall  have 
glory  everlasting.  He  that  could  have  transgressed, 
and  hath  not  transgressed : and  could  do  evil  things, 
and  hath  not  done  them.  Therefore  are  bis  goc^ 
es'tablished  in  the  Lord,  and  all  the  church  of  the 
saints  shall  declare  his  alms. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xci. — The  just  shall  flourish  like  the 
palm-tree ; he  shall  grow  up  like  the  cedar  of  Li- 
banus in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  V.  To  shew  forth 
thy  mercy  in  the  morning,  and  thy  truth  in  the  night. 
AUeluiOj  Mlduia,  V.  Beatus  vir  qui  suffert  te^or 
lionem,  quoniam  cum  probatus  fuerit^  accipiet  coronam 
vitee.  Alleluia.  V,  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth 
temptation ; for  when  he  hath  been  proved,  he  shall 
receive  the  crown  of  life.  Mleluia, 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Beatus,  p.  465. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xiL  35.  40.  — At  that  time 

D i zed  by  Google 


MASS  XIV.  JUSTUS  UT  PALMA,  &C.  4811 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples:  Let  your  loins  be  girt,  and 
lamps  burning  in  your  hands,  and  you  yourselves 
like  to  men  who  wait  for  their  lord,  when  he  shall 
return  from  their  wedding;  that  when  he  coraeth 
and  knocketh,  they  may  open  to  him  immediately. 
Blessed  are  those  servants,  whom  the  Lord,  when  he 
cometh,  shall  find  watching : Amen,  I say  to  you, 
that  :ie  will  gird  himself^  and  make  them  sit  down 
to  meat,  and  passing  will  minister  unto  them.  And 
if  he  shall  come  in  the  second  watch,  or  come  in  the 
third  watch,  and  find  them  so,  blessed  are  those  ser- 
vants. But  this  know  ye,  that  if  the  householder  did 
know  at  what  hour  the  thief  would  come,  he  would 
surely  watch,  and  would  not  suffer  his  house  to  be 
broke  ojien.  Be  you  then  also  ready : for  at  what 
hour  you  think  not,  the  Son  of  man  will  come. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxxviii. — My  truth  and  my  mercy 
ore  with  him : and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be 
exalted. 

SECRET. — We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  in  honour  of 
thy  saints,  a sacrifice  of  praise,  by  which  we  hope  to 
be  delivered  from  all  present  and  future  evils.  Thru’. 

COMM.  Matt.  xxiv. — Blessed  is  that  servant 
whom  when  his  Lord  shall  come,  he  shall  find  watch- 
ing. Amen,  1 say  to  you,  he  shall  place  him  over 
fdl  his  goods. 

P,  COMM.  Refecti. — ^Being  refi-eshed,  O Lord, 
with  this  heavenly  meat  and  drink,  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  that  we  may  be  assisted  by  his  pmyers, 
on  whose  feast  we  have  received  these  sacred  myste- 
ries. Thro’. 


MASS  XIV.  Justus  ut  palma,  of  the  same. 
INTROIT.  Ps.xci. 

The  just  shall  flourish  T USTUS  ut  palma  flu- 
like the  palm-tree:  rebit:  sicut  cedrus 

he  shall  grow  up  like  the  Libani  multiplicabitur : 
cedar  of  Libanus : being  plantatus  in  domo  Do- 


,y  Google 


490  MASS  Xir.  JUSTUS  UT  PALHA.  3. 

planted  in  the  house  of  mini,  in  atriis  domus  De 

the  Lord,  in  the  courts  of  nostri. 

the  house  of  our  Grod.  Ps,  Bonum  est  confi 

Ps,  It  is  good  to  give  teri  Domino : et  psallere 
praise  to  the  Lord : and  nomini  tuo  Altissime ! 
to  sing  to  thy  name,  O V.  Gloria. 

Most  High!  T.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Adesto. — ^Attend,  O Lord,  to  the 
humble  prayers  we  present  to  thee  on  the  solemnity 
of  blessed  N.  thy  Confessor ; that  we  who  have  no 
confidence  in  our  own  righteousness,  may  be  helped 
by  his  prayers,  who  was  so  pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  iv.  9.  14. — Brethren : We  are 
made  a spectacle  to  the  world,  and  to  angels  and  to 
men.  We  are  fools  for  Christ’s  sake,  but  you  are 
wise  in  Christ:  we  are  itveak  but  you  are  strong; 
you  are  honourable,  but  we  without  imuour.  Even 
unto  this  hour,  we  both  hunger  and  thirst,  and  are 
naked,  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  fixed  abode, 
and  we  labour  working  with  our  own  hands : we 
are  reviled,  and  we  bless:  we  are  persecuted,  and 
wc  suffer  it.  We  are  blasphemed,  and  we  entreat: 
we  are  made  as  the  refuse  of  this  world,  the  ofiscour- 
ing  of  all,  even  until  now.  I write  not  these  things 
to  conibund  you  ; but  I admonish  you  as  my  dearest 
children,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxvi. — The  mouth  of  the  just  shal* 
meditate  wisdom ; and  his  tongue  shall  speak  judg- 
ment The  law  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart,  and  his 
steps  shall  not  be  moved.  AUeL  AUel.  V.  Beatus,  vir 
qut  timet  Dominum ; in  mandatis  ^us  cupit  nimis. 
Allel.  F.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  reareth  the  Lord 
he  delights  exceedingly  in  his  commandments.  AUel 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Beatus,  p.  465. 

GOSPEL.  Jjuke  xiL  32.  34. At  that  time 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : Fear  not  little  flock,  for 
it  hath  pleased  your  Father  to  give  you  p kingdon^ 

Do  . 0/ Google 


MASS  XV.  * OS  JUSTI  OP  ABBOTS.  49l 

Sell  what  you  possess  and  give  alms.  Make  to  your 
selves  bags,  which  grow  not  old,  a treasure  in  heaven 
which  faileth  not : where  no  thief  approachein,  nor 
moth  corrupteth.  For  where  your  treasure  is,  there 
will  your  heart  be  also. 

OFFERT. — Ps.  XX. — In  thy  strenrth,  O Lort^  the 
just  shall  joy  : and  in  thy  salvation,  he  shall  rejoice 
exceedingly  ; thou  hast  given  him  his  souPs  desire. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  that  our  humble  offerings  may  be  acceptable 
to  thee,  for  the  honour  of  thy  saints,  and  purify  us 
both  in  body  and  mind.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt,  xix. — Amen,  I say  to  you,  that 
you  who  have  forsaken  all  thmgs  and  fbllovyed  me, 
shall  receive  an  hundred  fold,  and  shall  possess  life 
everlasting. 

P.  COMM.  QwBsumus, — ^We  beseech  thee,  O Al- 
mighty God,  that  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy  con- 
fessor N.  the  heavenly  food  we  have  received  may 
defend  us  from  all  adversity.  Thro’. 

MASS  XV.  * Os  justi  o/ ABBOTS. 

INTROIT,  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  488. 

COLLECT.  Intercessio, — May  the  intercession, 
O Lord,  of  the  blessed  Abbot  N,  recommend  us  to 
thee : that  what  we  cjmnot  hope  for  through  our  own 
merits,  we  may  obtain  by  his  prayers.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Eccles.  xlv.  1.  6. — This  saint  was  \te- 
loved  of  God  and  men  : whose  memory  is  in  bene- 
diction. He  made  him  like  the  saints  in  glory,  and- 
magnified  him  in  the  fear  of  his  enemies.  And  with 
his  words  he  made  prodigies  to  cease.  He  glorified 
him  in  the  sight  of  kings,  and  gave  him  command- 
ments in  the  sight  of  hiS  people,  and  shewed  him  his 
glory.  He  sanctified  him  in  his  faith  and  meekness, 
and  chose  him  out  of  all  flesh.  For  he  heard  him 
and  his  voice,  and  brought  him  into  a cloud.  And  he 
gave  him  commandments  before  his  face,  and  a law 
of  life  and  instruction. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


m 


MASS  XV.  * 08  JUSTI,  OF  ABBOTS. 


GRAD.  Ps.  XX. — Lord  thou  hast  prevented  him 
with  blessings  of  sweetness;  thou  hast  set  on  his 
head  a crown  of  precious  stones.  V,  He  asked  life 
of  thee,  and  thou  hast  given  him  length  of  days,  for 
ever  and  ever.  Mlduui^  MLduicu  V.  Justus  ui 
palma  Jhrebit : sicut  cedrus  lAhani  mvltiplicabiiur 
Alleluia,  The  just  shall  flourish  like  the  palm  tree ; 
he  shall  grow  up  like  tlie  cedar  of  Libanus.  MUluicu 

*^fcer  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Beatus,  p.  465. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xix.  27.  29. JH  that  time 

Peter  said  to  Jesus:  Behold  we  have  left  all  things, 
and  have  followed  thee:  what  therefore  shall  we 
have  ? And  Jesus  said  to  them : Amen,  I say  to 
you,  that  you  who  have  followed  me  in  the  regenera- 
tion, when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  on  the  seat  of  his 
majesty,  you  also  shall  sit  on  twelve  seats  judging 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  And  every  one  that  liath 
left  house,  or  brethren,  or  sisters,  or  father,  or  mo- 
tlier,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands  for  my  name’s 
sake,  shall  receive  an  hundred  fold,  and  shall  possess 
life  everlasting. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  XX. Thou  hast  given  him,  O 

Lord,  his  soul’s  desire : and  hast  not  witnholden  fiim 
him  the  will  of  his  lips.  Thou  hast  set  on  his  bead 
a crown  of  precious  stones. 

SECRET. — May  blessed  N.  the  Abbot  intercede 
for  us,  O Lord,  that  the  offerings  we  have  laid  on 
thy  altars,  may  avail  us  unto  salvation.  Thro*. 

COMM.  laike  xii. — ^This  is  the  faithful  and  pru- 
dent servant,  whom  the  Lord  placed  over  his  ftimily, 
to  mve  them  their  measure  of  wheat  in  due  season. 

P.  COMM.  Protegat. — ^May  the  receiving  of  this 
sacrament,  ‘and  the  intercession  of  blessed  N.  the 
Abbot,  protect  us,  O Lord  ; that  we  may  both  copy 
after  the  virtues  of  his  life,  and  experience  the  help 
of  his  intercession.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


• 493  ] 

MASS  XVI.  Loquebar,  ofa\  irgin  aiid  Martyr. 

WHATEVER  objections  human  policy  may  urge 
against  the  state  of  virginity,  it  is  nevertheless 
perfectly  agreeable  to  the  Christian  system.  An  in- 
carnate God  recommends  it  by  word  and  example 
St.  Paul  bestows  the  greatest  encomiums  on  it;  and  in 
every  age,  those  who  preserved  their  virgini^  were 
always  esteemed  the  noblest  portion  of  the  flock  of 
Christ.  On  the  festivals  therefore  of  these  illustrious 
spouses  of  the  Son  of  God,  let  us  beseech  him  to  grant 
the  grace  of  perseverance  to  all  such  as  by  vow  have 
voluntarily  consecrated  themselves  to  his  service  in  that 
perfect  state,  as  well  as  for  that  purity  of  soul,  which 
IS  essentmlly  necessary  for  every  one^  since  without  it, 
no  one  can  see  God. 

INTROIT.  P^.cxviiL 

I SPOKE  of  thy  testi-  T OQUEBAR  de  testi- 
monies before  kings,  moniis  tuis  in  con- 
and  I was  not  ashamed  : spectu  regum,  et  non  con- 
( meditated  also  on  thy  fundebar:  et  meditabar 
c.ommandments,  which  I in  mandatis  tuis  quae 
loved  exceedingly.  dilexi  nimis. 

Ps.  Blessed  are  the  un-  Ps.  Beati  immaculati 
defiled  in  the  way,  who  in  via,  qui  ambulant  in 
walk  in  the  law  of  the  lege  Domini. 

Lord.  ^ V,  Glory.  V,  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deas,  qui.  — O God,  who  amongst 
other  mnacles  of  thy  power,  has  bestowed  the  crown 
of  martyrdom  even  on  the  weaker  sex  : mercifully 
grant  that  we,  who  solemnize  the  festival  of  blessed 
N.  thy  Virgin  and  Martyr,  may,  by  following  her 
example,  come  to  thee.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Eccles.  li*  1.  8.  — I will  give  glory  to 
thee,  O Lord,  my  king,  and  I will  praise  thee,  O 
<jod,  my  Saviour.  I will  give  glory  to  thy  name 
for  thou  hast  been  a helper  and  protector  to  me, 
and  hast  preserved  my  body  from  destruction,  from 
the  snare  of  an  unjust  tongue,  and  from  the  lips  of 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


494 


MASS  XVI.  LOQUEBAR, 


them  that  forge  lies,  and  in  the  sight  of  them  that 
stood  by,  thou  hast  been  my  helper.  And  thou  hast 
delivered  me,  according  to  the  multitude  of  the  mercy 
of  thy  name,  fh>m  the  roaring  lions,  that  were  ready 
to  devour  me.  Out  of  the  hands  of  them  that  sought 
my  life,  and  from  the  gates  of  afflictions,  which 
compassed  me  about;  from  the  oppression  of  the 
dame  which  surrounded  me,  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
lire  I was  not  burnt.  From  the  depth  of  the  belly 
of  hell,  and  from  an  unclean  tongue,  and  from  lying 
words,  from  an  unjust  king,  and  from  a slanderous 
tongue : my  soul  shall  praise  the  Lord  even  to  death, 
because  thou  succourest  those  that  trust  in  thee,  and 
deliverest  them  from  the  hands  of  the  Grentiles,  O 
Lord  our  God. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xliv. — ^Thou  hast  loved  justice  and 
hated  iniquity.  V.  Therefore,  God,  thy  God  bath 
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness.  Meltda, 
Alleluia,  V.  Adducentur  Regi  Virtues  post  earn: 
oroximm  ejus  acerentur tibi  in  IckiticL  Alleluia.  V,  After 
her  shall  virgins  be  brought  to  the  king : her  tieigh- 
boure  shall  be  brought  to  thee  with  joy.  AUeluia, 
After  Septuag.  instead  of  AUeluia  and  V.  is  said 

TRACT.  Ps.  xUv. — Veni  sponsa  Christi,  aocipe 
coionam  quamtibi  Domimis  proeparanii  in  (Biemum: 
pro  cujus  amore  sanguinem  tuum  fudisti  Corne, 
spouse  of  Christ,  receive  the  crown  which  the  Lord 
hath  prepared  for  thee  for  ever : for  whose  love  thou 
didst  shed  thy  blood.  V.  Thou  hast  loved  justice, 
and  hated  iniquity:  therefore  God,  thy  God  hath 
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fel- 
lows. V.  With  thy  comeliness  and  thy  beauty  set 
out,  proceed  prosperously  and  reign. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxv.  1.  13. At  that  time: 

Jesus  spoke  to  his  disciples  this  parable : The  king- 
dom of  heaven  shall  be  like  to  ten  virgins,  who  taking 
their  lamps  went  out  to  meet  the  bridegroom  and 
the  bride.  And  five  of  them  were  foolish,  and  five 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  A VIRGIN  AND  MARTI  R. 


495 


Wise.  ■ But  the  five  foolish,  havioff  taken  their  lamps, 
did  not  take  oil  with  tliem : but  the  wise  took  oil  in 
their  vessels  with  the  lamps.  And  the  bridegroom 
tarrying,  they  all  slumbered  and  slept.  And  at  mid- 
night there  was  a cry  made : Behold  the  bridegroom 
cometh,  go  ye  forth  to  meet  him.  Then  all  those 
virgins  arose  and  trimmed  their  lamps.  And  the 
foolish  said  to  the  wise ; Give  us  of  your  oil,  for 
our  lamps  are  gone  out.  . The  wise  answered,  s^- 
ing : Lest  perhaps  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  for 
you,  go  you  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy  for 
yourselves.  Now  whilst  they  went  to  buy,  the 
bridegroom  came : and  they  that  were  ready,  went 
in  with  him  to  the  marriage,  and  the  door  was  shut. 
But  at  last  came  also  the  other  virgins,  saying: 
Lord,  Lord  open  to  us.  But  he  answered,  saying: 
Amen,  1 say  to  you,  1 know  you  not.  Watch  ye, 
therefore,  because  you  know  not  the  day  nor  the 
hour. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xliv. — ^Virgins  shall  be  brought  in 
her  retinue  to  the  king : her  relations  shall  be  pre- 
sented to  thee  with  joy  and  gladness : they  shall  be 
introduced  into  the  temple  to  the  Lord  the  King.  ’ 

SECRET. — Receive,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we 
bring  on  the  solemnity  of  blessed  N.  thy  Virgin  and 
Martyr  by  whose  intercession  we  hope  to  be  deliver- 
ed. Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  cxviii. — ^Let  the  proud  be  ashamed, 
because  they  have  done  unjustly  towards  me,  but  I 
will  be  employed  in  thy  commandments,  in  thy  jus- 
tifications that  I may  not  be  confounded. 

P.  COMM.  Auxilierdur, — May  the  mysteries  we 
have  received,  O Lord,  be  a help  to  us,  and,  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  N.  thy  Virgin  and  Martyr, 
cause  us  to  enjoy  her  continual  protection.  Thro’. 
Tt2 


Digitized  by’CjOO^IC 


A 


[ 496  ] 

MASS  XVII.  Me  expectaverunt,  of  the  same. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  cxviii. 

The  . wicked  have  TV/TE  expectaverunt 
waited  for  me  to  des-  -iVl  jieccatores,  ut  per- 
troy  me:  but  I have  un-  derent  me:  testimonia  tua 
derstood  thy  testimonies^  Domine,  intellexi.  Omnis 
O Lord.  I have  seen  an  consummationis  vidi  fi- 
end of  all  perfection:  thy  nem : latum  mandatum 
commandment  is  exceed-  tuum  nimis, 
ingly  broad.  Ps.  Beati  immaculati 

Ps.  Blessed  are  the  un-  in  via,  qui  ambulant  in 
defiled  in  the  way,  who  leg  Domine, 
walk  in  the  law  of  the  F.  Gloria. 

Lord.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  InduLgevdiam. — Let  blessed  N.  thy 
Virgin  and  Martyr,  O Lord,  sue  for  our  pardon: 
who  by  the  purity  of  her  life,  and  profession  of  thy 
virtue,  was  always  pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Eedes.  li.  13.  17. — O Lord,  my  God, 
thou  hast  exalted  my  dwelling  place  upon  the  earth, 
and  1 have  prayed  for  death  to  pass  away.  I called 
upon  the  Lord  the  father  of  my  Lord,  that  he  would 
not  leave  me  in  the  day  of  my  trouble,  and  in  the 
time  of  the  proud,  without  help.  I will  praise  thy 
name  continually  and  will  praise  it  with  thanksgiving; 
and  my  prayer  was  heard.  And  thou  hast  saved  me 
from  destruction,  and  hast  delivered  me  from  the 
evil  *time.  Therefore  I will  give  thanks  and  praise  to 
thee,  O Lord  our  God. 

’ GRAD.  Ps.  xlv. — God  will  assist  her  with  his 
favourable  countenance : God  is  in  the  midst  of  her, 
she  shall  not  be  moved.  The  stream  of  the  river 
maketh  the  city  of  God  joyful : the  Most  High  hath 
sanctified  his  own  tabernacle.  Alleluia.  V.  Hcec 
est  Firgo  sapiens^  et  una  de  numero  prudentium.  Al- 
leluia. V.  This  is  a wi^e  Virgin,  and  one  of  the 
number  of  th:‘  prudent,  w^icluia. 


Digitized  by  Google 


OF  MANY  VV.  AND  MM. 


* 495 


Mer  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Fern,  p.  494. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xiii.  as  in  p.  501.  ^ . 

OFF  ERT.  Ps,  xliv. — Grace  is  ^rea(i  on  thy  lips, 
therefore  hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever. 

SECRET. — Mercifully  receive,  O Lord,  the  of- 
ferings consecrated  to  thee,  and  by  the  merits  of 
blessed  N.  thy  Virgin  and  Martyr,  grant  they  may 
be  to  us  a continual  support.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps,  cxviii. — I have  done  judgment  and 
justice,  O Lord,  let  not  the  proud  calumniate  me : 
I have  walked  upright  in  the  ways  of  thy  command- 
ments : 1 have  hated  all  evil  ways. 

P.  COMM.  Divini  muneris. — Being  plentifully 
fed  with  thy  divine  gifts,  we  beseech,  thee,  O Lord 
our  God,  that  by  partaking  of  them  through  the  in- 
tercession of  blessed  N.  thy  Virgin  and  Martyr,  we 
may  obtain  eternal  life.  Thro’. 


MASS  XVIH.  * Loquebar,  of  many  VV.  and  MM. 

All  as  in  Mass,  XVI.  p.  493,  except 
COLLECT.  Da  nobis. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord  our  God,  that  with  a constant  devotion,  we 
may  celebrate  the  victories  of  thy  holy  Virgins  and 
Martyrs  N.  and  N.  that  though  we  cannot  solenmize 
them  oa  we  ought,  we  may  seek  their  prayers  with 
all  due  humility.  Thro’.  . , 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  viL  as  in  p.  500. 
SECRET.-^Look  down,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
on  the  offerings  laid  on  thy  altar,  on  this  feast  of  thy 
holy  Virgins  and  Martyrs  N.  and  N.  that  as  thou 
hast  bestowed  glory  on  them  so  by  the  sacred  mys- 
teries, thou  mayest  grant  us  pardon.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Preesta  nobis. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,-0  Lord,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  Virgins  and 
Martyrs,  to  receive  with  a pure  mind  what  we  re- 
ceive with  our  moutlis.  Thro’. 

Tt3 

r Google 


[ 498  ] 

MASS  XIX.  Dilexisti,  of  a Virgin  only, 
INTROIT,  b,  Ixiv. 

Thou  hast  loved  jus-  "PvILEXISTI  justitiam 
tice  and  hated  iniqui-  -L'  et  odisti  iniquitatem: 
ty  • therefore,  God,  thy  propterea  unxit  te  Dei^ 
Uod  hath  anointed  thee  beus  tuus,  oleo  Isetiti» 
with  the  oil  of  gladness,  pree  consortibus  tuis, 
above  thy  fellows. 

Ps,  ^^y  heart  hath  ut-  Ps,  Eructavit  cor  meum 
tered  a good  word : I verbum  bonum ; dico  ego 
speak  my  works  to  the  opera  m^a  RegL 
King.  F.  Glory.  F.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Exaudi. — Give  ear  to  us,  O God  our 
Saviour,  that  as  we  celebrate  with  joy  the  solemnity 
of  blessed  N.  thy  Virgin,  so  we  may  improve  in  the 
adection  of  piety.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor.  x.  15.  xi.  1.  2.« — Brethren: 
Let  him  that  glorieth,  glory  in  the  Lord : for  not  he 
that  comrnendeth  Itself,  is  approved : but  he  whom 
God  comrnendeth. ' (Chap,  xi.)  Would  to  God  you 
could  bear  with  some  little  of  my  folly:  but  do 
bear  with  me.  For  I am  jealous  of  you  with  the 
jealousy  of  God.  For  I have  espoused  you  to  one 
husband,  that  I may  present  you  as  a chaste  virgin 
to  Christ. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xliv. — ^With  ^y  comeliness  and 
tliy  beauty  set  out  proceed  prosperously  and  reign. 
F.  Because  of  truth  and  meekness,  and  justice,  and 
thy  right  hand  shall  conduct  thee  wonderfully.  Al~ 
Idtua,  AJlduia.  V Adducentur  Virgines  post 
earn : proximce  ejus  afferentur  tifn  in  laUitia.  Al- 
leluia. F.  After  her  virgins  shall  be  brought  to  the 
King : her  neighbours  shall  be  brought  to  thee  with 
joy.  Alleluia. 

AJUr  Septuag.  instead  q/*  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT.  Ps.  xliv. — Audi^  JUia,  el  vide,  et  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


A VIRGIN  NOT  A MARTTR. 


499 


dina  aurem  tuam : quia  concupivit  Rex  spedem  tuam. 
Hearken,  O daughter,  and  see,  and  uwAine  thy  ear, 
for  the  King  is  taken  with  thy  beauty.  Vi  AH  the 
rich  amon^  the  people  shall  entreat  thy  countenance : 
tlie  daughters  of  kings  shall  honour  thee.  F.  Virgins 
shall  be  brought  in  her  retinue  to  the  King ; her  re- 
lations shall  be  presented  to  thee.  F.  They  shall  be 
brought  with  gladness  and  rejoicing : they  shall  be 
brought  into  the  temple  of  the  King. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxv.  as  in  p.  494. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xliv. — ^The  daughters  of  kings 
have  delighted  thee  in  thy  gloiy.  The  queen  stood 
on  thy  right  hand  in  gilded  clothing,  surrounded 
with  variety. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  offerings,  O Lord,  of  thy  de- 
vout people,  be  acceptable  to  thee  in  honour  of  thy 
saints : by  whose  merits  they  have  experienced  help 
in  their  afflictions.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Matt.  XXV, — ^The  five  wise  virgins  took 
oil  in  their  vessels  with  their  lamps : and  at  midnight 
there  was  a ciy  made;  Behold!  the  bridegroom 
cometh  : go  ye  out  and  meet  Christ  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Satiasti. — ^Thou  hast  fed,  O Lord, 
thy  family  w’ith  these  sacred  oblations:  ever  there- 
fore comfort  us  with  her  intercession,  whoi^  feast 
we  celebrate.  Thro’. 


MASS  XX.  Vultum  tuum,  of  the  same. 
INTROIT.  P«.  xliv. 


All  the  rich  among 
the  people  shall  en- 
treat thy  countenance : 
after  her  shall  virgins 
be  brought  to  the  king : 
her  neighbours  shall  be 
brought  to  thee  in  joy  and 
gladness. 

Ps.  My  heart  hatli  ut- 


ULTUM  tuum  de- 
precabuntur omnes 
divites  plebis:  adducen- 
tur Regi  virgines  post 
eam:  proximje  ejus  af- 
ferentur tibi  in  Icetitia  et 
exultaiione. 

Ps.  Enictavit  cor  meun 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


500  - MASS  XX.  VULTUM  TUUM, 

tered  a good  word  : I verbum  bonum : dico  ego 
speak  my  works  to  the  opera  mea  RegL 
King.  V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Exaudi, — Give  ear  to  us,  O God  our 
Saviour,  that  as  we  celebrate  with  joy  the  solemnity 
of  blessed  N.  thy  Virgin,  so  we  may  improve  in  the 
affection  of  piety  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  vii  25.  34. — Brethren:  Con- 
cerning virgii^  1 have  no  commandment  of  the 
Lord : but  f give  counsel,  as  having  obtained  mercy* 
of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful.  I thi^  therefore  that 
this  is  good  for  the  present  necessity,  for  a man  so 
to  be.  Art  thou  bound  to  a wife  ? seek  not  to  be 
loosed.  Art  thou  loosed  from  a wife  ? seek  not  a 
wife.  But  if  thou  take  a wife,  thou  hast  not  sinned. 
And  if  a virgin  marry,  she  hath  not  sinned ; never- 
theless, such  shall  have  tribulation  of  the  fresh.  But 
I spare  you.  This  therefore  I say,  brethren:  the 
time  is  short : it  remaineth,  that  they  also  who  have 
wives,  be  as  if  they  had  none ; and  they  that  weep, 
as  though  they  wept  not ; and  they  that  rejoice,  as 
if  they  rejoiced  not;  and  they  that  buy  as  though 
tliey  possessed  not ; and  they  that  use  this  world,  as 
if  they  used  it  not : for  the  fashion  of  this  world  pas- 
seth  away.  But  I would  have  you  to  be  without  so- 
licitude. He  that  is  without  a wife,  is  solicitous  for 
the  things  that  belong  to  the  Lord,  how  he  may 
please  God.  But  he  that  is  with  a wife,  is  solicitous 
for  the  things  of  the  world,  bow  he  may  please  his 
wife ; and  he  is  divided.  And  the  unmarried  woman 
and  the  virgin  thinketh  on  the  thin^  of  the  Lord 
that  she  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  q;>irit,  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xliv. — ^The  King  shall  greatly  d^ire 
thy  beauty : for  he  is  the  Lord  thy  God.  V,  Hearken. 
O daughter,  see,  and  incline  thy  ear.  Mlel,  JlUeL 
V.  H<bc  est  virgo  sapiens^  et  una  de  numero  prudenr 
Hum,  Alleluia.  V,  This  is  a wise  virgin,  and  one 
' ‘he  number  of  the  prudent.  Alleluia. 


OF  A VIRGIN  NOT  A MARTTR.  501 

Afler  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Atuli JUia,  p.  498. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xiii.  44.  52. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  spake  to  his  disciples  this  parable:  The  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  like  unto  a treasure  hidden  in  a 
field.  Which  a man  having  found,  hid-  it,  and  for 
joy  thereof  goeth,  and  selleth  all  that  he  hath,  and 
Duyeth  that  field.  Again  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
like  to  a merchant  seeking  good  pearls.  Who  when 
• he  had  found  one  pearl  of  great  price,  went  his  way, 
and  sold  all  that  ne  had,  and  bought  it.  Again  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a net  cast  into  the  sea, 
and  gathering  together  of  all  kinds  of  fishes.  Which, 
when  it  was  filled  they  drew  out,  and  sitting  by  the 
shore,  they  chose  out  the  good  into  vessels,  but  the 
l3ad  they  cast  forth.  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the 
world.  The  angels  shall  go  out,  and  shall  sefiarate 
the  wicked  from  among  the  just.  And  shall  cast  them 
intt  the  furnace  of  fire ; there  shall  be  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth.  Have  ye  understood  all  tliese 
things?  They  say  to  him:  Yes.  He  said  unto 
them ; Therefore  eveiy  scribe  instructed  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  is  like  to  a man  who  is  a householder 
who  bringeth  forth  out  of  his  treasure  new  things 
and  old. 

OFFERT.  P«.  xliv. — ^After  hei^  shall  virgins  Iw 
brought  to  the  King : her  neighbour  shall  be  brought 
to  thee  with  gladness  and  rejoicing : they  shall  be 
brought  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  the  King. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  offerings,  O Lord,  of  thy 
devout  people  be  acceptable  to  thee  in  honour  of  thy 
saints ; by  whose  merits  they  have  experienced  help 
in  their  afflictions.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt  xiiL — The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
like  a merchant  seeking  good  pearls : who  when  he 
had  found  one  pearl  of  great  price,  he  went  his  way 
and  sold  all  that  he  had  and  bought  it 


Digitized  by  Google 


902 


MARS  XXI.  CpeNOTl, 


P.  COMM.  SatiagH.  — Thou  bast  fed,  O Lord, 
thy  family  with  these  sacred  oblations : ever,  there- 
fore, comfort  us  with  her  intercession,  whose  feast 
we  celebrate.  Thro*. 

MASS  XXL  Cognovi,  ^HOLY  WOMEN. 

The  Church  has  decreed  honours,  not  onlv  to  those 
who  have  sanctified  the  married  state  6y  the  ex- 
ercise of  the  virtues  of  a profound  humility,  unwearied 
patience,  and'  purity  of  heart,  but  also  to  others,  who 
after  an  irregular  course  of  life,  became  so  highly  in-* 
flamed  with  the  love  of  God,  as  to  be  rendered  almost 
rqual  to  virgins.  Let  us  then  beg  of  Him,  through  the 
intercession  of  these  Saints,  that  he  would  grant  us 
the  gnce  of  a sincere  compunction  for  our  past  trans- 
gressions, accompanied  by  such  an  ardent  charity  as 
covereth  a multitude  of  sins. 

INTROIT.  Ps  cxviiL 

T KNEW,  O Lord,  that  pOGNOVl  Domine 
A thy  judgments  are  ^ quia  aequitas  judicia 
V equity  : and  in  thy  truth  tua ; et  in  veritate  tua 
thou  hast  humbled  me:  humiliasti  me:  Confige 
Pierce  thou  my  flesh  with  timore  tuo  carnes  meas : 
tlw  fear : feriam  afraid  a mandatis  tuis  timui, 
of  thy  judgments. 

p8.  Blessed  are  the  iin-  Ps.  Beati  immaculati 
defiled  in  the  way : who  in  via : qui  ambulant  in 
walk  in  the  law  of  the  lege  Domini. 

Lord.  V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Exaudi.  — Give  ear  Kf  us,  O GJod 
,our  Savioiu*,  that  as  we  celebrate  with  joy  the  so- 
emnity  of  blessed  N.  so  we  may  improve  in  the  af- 
fection of  tnie  piety.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  Prov.  xxxi.  10. — ^Who  shall  find  a 
valiant  woman?  the  price  of  her  is  as  of  things 
brought  from  afer  offj  and  from  the  uttermost 
coasts.  The  heart  of  her  husbnnd  trusteth  in  her, 
and  he  shall  have  no  need  of  sjxiils.  She  will  render 

Digitized  by  Google 


OF  HOLT  WOMEH. 


508 


him  good  and  not  evil,  all  the  days  of  her  life.  She 
hath  sought  wool  and  flax,  and  hath  wrought  by  the 
counsel  of  her  hands.  She  is  like  the  merchant’s 
ship,  she  bringeth  her  bread  from  afar.  And  she 
hath  risen  in  the  night,  and  given  prey  to  her  house- 
I hold,  and  victuals  to  her  maidens.  She  hath  con- 
sidered a field,  and  bought  it : with  the  fi-uit  of  her 
hands  she  hath  planted  a vineyard.  She  hath  girded 
her  loins  with  strength,  and  hath  strengthened  her 
arm.  She  hath  tasted  and  seen  that  her  traific  is 
' good : her  lamp  shall  not  be  put  out  in  the  night. 
She  hath  put  out  her  hand  to  strong  things,  and  her 
fingers  have  taken  hold  of  the  spindle.  She  hath 
opened  her  hand  to  the  needy,  and  stretched  out  her 
hands  to  the  poor.  She  shall  not  fear  for  her  house 
in  the  cold  of  snow,  for  all  her  domestics  are  cloth- 
ed with  double  garments.  She  hath  made  for  her- 
self clothing  of  tapestry;  fine  linen  and  purple  is 
her  covering.  Her  husband  is  honourable  in  the 
gates,  wh^e  he  sitteth  among  the  senators  of  the 
land.  She  made  fine  linen  and  sold  it,  and  delivered 
a girdle  to  the  Chananite.  Strength  and  beauty  are 
her  clothing,  and  she  shall  laugh  in  the  latter  d«y. 
She  hath  opened  her  mouth  to  wisdom,  and  the  law 
of  clemency  is  on  her  tongue.  She  hath  looked  well 
to  the  paths  of  her  house,  and  hath  not  eaten  her 
bread  idle.  Her  children  rose  up,  and  c^ed  her 
blessed:  her  husband,  and  he  praised  her.  Many 
daughters  hath  gathered  together  riches : thou  hast 
surp^sed  tltem  alL  Favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty 
is  vain : the  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord,  she  shall 
be  praised.  Give  her  of  the  fruit  of  her  hands,  and 
let  her  works  praise  her  in  the  gates. 

GRAD.  Ps*  xliv. — Grace  is  poured  abroad  on  thy 
lips,  therefore  hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever.  Be- 
cause of  truth,  and  meekness,  and  justice ; and  thy 
right  hand  shall  conduct  thee  wonderfully,  •dtleluioj 
Mdvifu  V.  Spide  tua  et  pvlckriiudwe  tua^  inUn^ 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


504  ▲I’tNf VERSA RT  MASS  (IF  TME 

prospere  procede ; et  regna.  Alleluia.  V.  In  thy  come- 
liness and  beauty  go  on,  proceed  prosperously  and 
reign.  AUelvia. 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Fent,p.494. 

GOSPEL.  MaJtt.  xiii.  as  in  p.  501 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xliv. — Grace  is  poured  abroad  on 
thy  lips,  therefore  hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever  and 
ever. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  oderings,  O Lord,  of  thy 
devout  people,  be  acceptable  to  ^ee  in  honour  of 
thy  saints : by  whose  merits  they  have  experienced 
help  in  their  afflictions.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Ps.  xliv.: — ^Thou  hast  loved  justice,  and 
hated  iniquity ; therefore,  God,  thy  .God  hath 
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fel- 
lows. 

P.  COMM.  Satiasti. — ^Thou  hast  fed,  O Lord, 
thy  family  with  these  sacred  oblations : ever  there- 
fore comfort  us  with  her  intercession  whose  feast  we 
celebrate.  Thro’. 


ANNIVERSARY  MASS  of  the  DEDICATION 
of  a CHURCH. 

INTROIT.  Gen.  xxviii. 

^HIS  place  is  awful ! it  rilKRRIBlLIS  est  locus 
J-  is  the  house  of  God,  -L  iste ! hie  Domiis  Dei 
the  gate  of  heaven : and  est,  et  porta  coeli : et  vo- 
it  shall  be  called  the  cabitur  aula  DeL 
palace  of  God. 

Ps.  How  lovely  are  thy  Ps.  Qpam  dilecta  ta- 
taberaacles,  O Lord  of  bemacula  tua.  Domine 
Hosts!  My  soul  longeth  virtutum!  Concupiscit  et 
and  fainteth  for  the  courts  deficit  anima  mea  in  atria 
of  the  Lord.  V.  Glory.  Domini.  V.  Gloria. . 

COLLECT.  Deusj  qm  nobis.  — O God,  t|Vho  re- 
newest  every  year  the  day  of  the  consecration  of  this 


Digitized  by  Google 


DKDICATIOJ?  or  A CHURCtf. 


505 


thy  holy  temple,  and  bringest  us  always  in  health  to 
the  celebrating  these  sacred  mysteries:  hear  the 
prayers  of  thy  people,  and  grant  that  whosoever 
shall  come  hither  to  ask  any  blessing  of  thee,  may 
rejoice  in'  obtaining  all  his  requests.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  iJer.  xxi.  2.  5. In  those  days:  1 

John  saw  the  holy  city,  the  new  Jerusalem  coming 
down  out  of  heaven,  from  God,  prepared  as  a bride 
adorned  for  her  husband.  And  I heard  a great  voice 
from  the  throne,  saying:  Behold  the  tabernacle  of 
God  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them.  And 
they  shall  be  his  people  : and  God  himself  with  them 
shall  be  tlieir  God.  And  God  shall  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  their  eyes : and  death  shall  be  no  more, 
nor  mourning,  nor  crying,  nor  sorrow  shall  be  any 
more,  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away.  And 
he  that  sat  on  the  throne  said : Behold  1 make  all 
things  new. 

GRAD. — ^This  place  was  made  by  God,  a mystery 
above  all  value  : it  is  without  reproof.  V,  O God, 
on  whom  choirs  of  angels  attend,  hear  the  prayers 
of  thy  servants.  Alleluia,  Alleluia.  Adorabo  ad 
templum  sanctum  tuum:  et  cor^ebor  nomini  tuo. 
Alleluia.  V.  I will  adore  thee  m thy  holy  temple, 
and  1 will  praise  thy  name.  Alleluia. 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT.  Quicorfdunt,  p.  189. 

GOSPEL.  LuJce  xix.  1.  10. At  that  time: 

Jesus  entering  in,  he  walked  through  Jericho.  And 
behold  there  was  a man  named  Zacheus,  who  was 
the  chief  of  the  publicans,  and  he  was  rich.  And 
he  sought  to  see  Jesus,  who  he  was,  and  he  could 
not  for  the  crowd,  because  he  was  low  of  stature. 
And  running  before  he  climbed  up  into  a sycamore 
tree  that  he  might  see  him  : for  he  was  to  pass  that 
way.  And  when  Jesus  was  come  to  the  place,  look- 
ing up  he  saw  him,  and  said  to  him : Zacheus  make 
Uii 

Google 


506  aVniversart  mass  of  the,  &c. 

haste  and  come  down : for  this  day  I must  abide  in 
thy  house.  And  he  made  haste  and  came  down,  and 
received  him  with  joy.  And  when  all  saw  it,  they 
iiiurinured,  saying,  that  he  was  gone  to  be  a guest 
with  a man  that  was  a sinner.  But  Zacheus  stand- 
ing said  to  the  Lord : Behold,  Lord,  the  half  of  my 
goods  I give  to  the  poor : and  if  I have  wronged  any 
man  of  any  thing,  I restore  him  four-fold.  Jesus 
said  to  him : This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this  house  ; 
because  he  also  is  a son  of  Abraham.  For  the  Son  of 
man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost. 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  1 Chron.  xxix. — Lord  God,  in  the 
simplicity  of  my  heart  have  I joyfully  offered  all  these 
things:  and  I have  seen  with  great  joy  thy  people, 
which  are  here  present.  O God  of  Israel,  preserve 
them  for  ever  in  this  disposition.  Alleluia, 

SECRET.  — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
our  petition,  that  whilst  we  offer  thee  these  our  vows, 
we  may,  by  thy  help,  obtain  an  eternal  reward. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  •Matt,  xxi. — ^My  house  shall  be  called 
the  house  of  prayer,  saith  the  Lord : in  it  whosoever 
Rsketh  recelveth ; and  he  who  seekeih,  findeth ; and 
the  door  shall  be  opened  to  him  that  knocketh. 

P.  COMM.  Dexis^  qxd  de  vivis, — O God,  who, 
out  of  living  and  choice  stones,  preparest  to  thy 
majesty  an  eternal  abode,  help  thy  people  at  their 
prayers;  diat  as  thy  Church  is  corporally  enlarge^l, 
so  it  may  be  spiritually  increas6cL  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 507  ] 

VOTIVE  MASSES  of  ihe  B.  V.  MARY. 

From  CANDLEMAS  to  ADVENT. 
INTROIT. 

Hail,  HoIv  Mother,  OALVE,  Saucta  Pa 
who  didst  bring  forth  rens,  enixa  puerpera 

the  King  who  reigns  over  Regem,  qui  coelum  ter- 
heaven  and  earth  forever-  ramque  regit  in  saecula 
more.  saeculorum. 

Ps,  My  heart  hath  ut-  Ps.  Eructavit  cor  me- 
tered good  tidings ; I ad-  um  verbum  bonum : dico 
dress  my  works  to  the  ego  opera  mea  Regi. 
King.  V.  Glory.  F,  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Concede  nos. — Grant,  O Lord,  we 
l>eseech  thee,  that  we  thy  servants  rqay  enjoy  con- 
stant health  of  body  and  mind,  and  by  the  glorious 
intercession  of  blessed  Mary,  ever  a Virgin,  be  de- 
livered from  all  temporal  afflictions,  and  come  to 
those  joys  that  are  eternaL  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Eccles.  xxiv.  14. 16.— From  the  begin- 
ning, and  before  the  world,  was  I created,  and  unto 
the  world  to  come  I shall  not  cease  to  be,*  and  in  the 
holy  dwelling  place  have  I ministered  before  him. 
And  so  was  1 established  in  Sion,  and  in  tiie  holy 
city  likewise  I rested,  and  my  power  was  in  Jerusa- 
lem. And  I took  root  in  an  honourable  people,  and 
in  the  portion  of  my  God  his  inheritance,  and  ray 
abode  is  in  the  hill  assembly  of  saints. 

GRAD. — Thou  art  blessed,  and  worthy  of  our  re- 
spects, O Maiy,  the  Virgin,  who,  without  prejudice 
to  thy  virginity,  didst  become  the  mother  of  the 
Saviour.  V.  O Virgin-mother  of  God ! he  whom 
the  whole  world  cannot  contain,  became  man,  and 
was  shut  up  in  thy  womb.  Allel.  Allel.  V.  Virga 
Jesse  floruit : virgo  Deum  et  hominem  genuit : pacem 
Uu2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


508  VOTIVE  MASSES  OF  THE  B.  V.  MART. 

Deus  reddidit^  in  se  reconcilians^  inut,  summis.  Al- 
leluia. V,  A sucker  of  Jesse  hath  budded : a Virgin 
hath  brought  forth  him,  who  is  God  and  man : God 
hath  restored  peace  by  reconciling  in  his  person  the 
highest  things  with  the  lowest.  Alleluia. 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Gaude,  p.  510. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  ix.  27.  28. At  that  time : 

Whilst  Jesus  spoke  to  the  multitude : A certain  w Oman 
from  the  crowd  lifting  up  her  voice  said  to  him: 
Blessed  is  the  womb  that  bore  thee,  and  the  paps 
that  gave  thee  suck:  but  he  said  ; Yea,  rather  bles- 
sed 4re  they  who  hear  the  word  of  God  and  keep  it. 

From  Easter  to  Pentecost. 

GOSPEL.  John  xix.  25,  27. At  that  time: 

There  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus,  his  mother,  and 
his  mother’s  sister,  Mary  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary 
Magdalen.  When  Jesus  therefore  had  seen  his  mo- 
ther and  the  disciple  standing,  whom  he  loved,  he 
said  to  his  mother:  Woman,  behold  thy  son.  After 
that,' he  saith  to  his  disciple:  Behold  thy  mother. 
And  from  that  hour  the  disciple  took  her  to  his 
own. 

OFFERT.  From  Candlemas  to  Easter. 

Thou  art  truly  happy,  O sacred  Virgin  Mary,  and 
most  worthy  of  praise : for  out  of  thee  arose  the  Sun 
of  righteousness,  Christ  our  God. 

OFFERT.  From  Easter  to  Pentecost. 

Blessed  art  thou,  O Virgin  Mary,  who  didst  bear 
the  Creator  of  all  things:  thou  didst  bring  forth  hun, 
who  made  thee,  and  remainest  a Virgin  for  ever. 
AUeluicu 

OFFERT.  From  Pentecost  to  Advent. 

Hail  Mary,  full  of  grace ; the  Lord  is  with  thee  ; 
blessed  art  thou  amongst  women : and  blessed  is  the 
fruit  of  thy  womb. 

SECRET. — May,  O Lord,  by  thy  own  mercy,  and 
tlie  intercession  of  blessed  Mary,  ever  a Vii-gin.  this 


Digitized  by  Google 


VOTIVE  MASSES  OF  THE  B.  V.  MARY.  50l^ 

oblation  procure  us  peace  and  happiness  both  in  this 
life,  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.  Thro’. 

COMM. — Blessed  is  the  womb  of  Mary,  the  Vir- 
' gin  which  bore  the  Son  of  the  eternal  Father. 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis. — Having  received,  O Lord, 
what  is  to  advance  our  salvation  ; gi-ant  we  may  al- 
ways be  protected  by  the  patronage  of  blessed  Maiy, 
ever  a Virgin,  in  whose  honour  we  have  offered  this 
sacrifice  to  thy  Majesty.  Thro’. 

When  a Votive  Mass  of  the  B.  V.  is  said  on  Sa- 
turday, the  II.  Collect,  &c.  are  as  follows.  Hw 
III.  either  Ecclesiae,  or  Deus  omnium,  p.  50. 

II.  COLLECT.  Deus  qui  corda. — O Clod,  who 
by  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  has  instructed  the 
hearts  of  the  faithful ; grant,  that  by  the  direction  of 
die  same  Holy  Spirit,  we  may  relish  what  is  right, 
and  alw^s  enjoy  his  consolation.  Thro’. 

II.  SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings 
we  have  made ; and  cleanse  our  hearts  by  the  fire  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Thro’. 

II.  P.  COMM.  Sancti  Spiritus. — May  the  pour- 
ing forth  of  thy  Holy  Spirit.  O Lord,  cleanse  our 
hearts,  and  make  them  faithful  by  his  inward  dew 
felling  on  them.  Thro*. 


From  ADVENT  to  CHRISTMAS. 

Introit,  Offertoiy,  and  Communion,  as  on  ike  IV. 
Sunday  of  Advent,  p.  68.  Collect,  Secret,  and 
P.  Coram.  are  the  II.  Collect,  &c.  on  the  firet  Sun- 
day, p.  50,  ^c.  Lesson  aiid  Gosprjl  as  on  the 
Annunciation,  the  25th  of  March. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxiii. Lift  up  your  gates,  O ye 

princes,  and  be  ye  lifted  up,  O eternal  gates ; and  the 
King  of  glory  shall  enter  in.  V,  Who  shall  ascend 
into  the  mountain  of  the  Lord : or  who  shall  stand  in 
his  holy  place  ? He  whose  hands  are  innocent,  and 
whose  heart  is  clean.  AUeluia^  Alleluia. 

U u3 

- Google 


510 


biasses  for  the  oead. 


V,  Hail  Mary  full  of  grace,  the  Lord  is  with  thee 
blessed  art  thou  amongst  women.  MLduicu 


Frtm  CHRISTMAS  to  CANDLEMAS. 

INTROIT.  Vultum  tuum,;?.  499. 

Collect,  Secret,  and  P.  Comm,  as  on  the  CIRCUM  • 
CISION,  ppj  88,  89.  Epistle,  T^ils  iii,  and  Gospel 
Luke  ii.  as  %n  p.  75. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xUv. — ^Thou  art  beautiful  above  the 
sofffl  of  men:  grace  is  poured  abroad  on  thy  lips. 
V,  My  heart  hath  uttered  a good  word  ; I speak  my 
works  to  the  King:  my  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a 
scrivener  that  writeth  swiftly.  AUelma^  Alleluia, 
V,  After  child-birth  thou  remainedst  still  a pure  Vir- 
gin ; O Mother  of  God  intercede  for  us.  Alleluia, 
After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Gaudej  Maria,  Vir^,  cunctas  hartses 
sola  interemisti.  Rejoice,  O Virgin  Mary,  thou  alone 
hast  destroyed  all  heresies.  V,  Who  didst  believe 
tbe  words  of  Gabriel  the  archangel.  V.  Whilst  a 
Virgin,  thou  didst  bring  forth  him  that  was  Gkxl  and 
man  ; and  after  child-birth  didst  remain  a pure  Vir- 
gin. O Mother  of  God,  intercede  for  us. 

OFt  ERT. — Thou  art  truly  happy,  as  p.  508. 
COMwM. — Blessed  is  the  womb  of  Mary  the  Vir- 
gin, which  bore  the  Son  of  the  eternal  Father. 


MASS  for  the  DEAD. 


On  the  Day  of  Decease  or  Burial. 
INTROIT. 


^ RANT  them  eternal 
rest,  O Lord ; and 
let  perpetual  light  shine 
on  them. 

Ps.  A hymn  becometh 
thee  O God,  in  Sion  ; and 


T)  EQUIEM  setemam 
•aA/  dona  eis,  Domine ; 
et  lux  perpeiua  luceat  eis. 

Ps.  Te  decet  hymnus, 
Deus,  in  Sion:  et  libi 
reddetur  votum  in  Jeru- 


Digitized  by  Google 


MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 


511 


a vow  shall  be  paid  to  salem.  Exaudi  orationem 
thee  in  Jerusalem.  O meam : ad  te  oinnis  caro 
hear  my  prayer : all  flesh  veniet, 
shall  come  to  tliee. 

Grant  them,  &c.  to  Ps.  Requiem,  &c.  usq,  ad  Ps* 

COLLECT.  Deus,  cui. — O God,  whose  property 
it  is  always  to  have  mercy  and  to  spare,  we  humbly 
present  our  prayers  to  thee  in  behalf  of  the  soul  of 
thy  servant  N.  which  thou  hast  this  day  called  out 
of  the  world : beseeching  thee  not  to  deliver  it  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy,  nor  to  forget  it  for  ever ; but 
command  it  to  be  received  by  the  holy  angels,  and 
to  be  carried  into  paradise  ; that  as  it  believed  and 
hoped  in  thee,  it  may  be  delivered  from  the  pains  of 
hell,  and  inherit  everlasting  life. 

EPISTLE.  lThes.iv.l2.  V.—Brethren:  We 
will  not  have  you  ignorant  concerning  them  that  are 
asleep,  that  you  be  not  sorrowful,  even  as  others  who 
have  no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died 
and  rose  again,  even  so  them  who  have  slept  through 
Jesus,  will  God  bring  with  him.  For  this  we  say 
unto  you  in  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  who  are 
alive,  who  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  shall 
not  prevent  them  who  have  slept.  For  the  Lord 
himself  shall  come  down  from  heaven  with  com- 
mandment: and  with  the  voice  of  an  archangel,  and 
with  the  trumpet  of  God : and  the  dead  who  are  in 
Christ,  shall  rise  first.  Then  we  who  are  alive,  who 
are  left,  shall  be  taken  up  together  with  them  in  the 
clouds  to  meet  Christ,  into  the  air,  and  so  shall  we 
be  always  with  the  Lord.  Wherefore  comfort  ye 
one  another  with  these  words. 

GRAD.  Requiem  ceternam  dona  eis^  Dondne  el 
lux  perpetua  luceaJt  eis.  V.  Ps.  cxi.  In  memoria 
edema  erit  justus : ah  auditione  mala  non  timehit 
Grant  them  eternal  rest,  O Lord,  and  let  perpetual 
light  shine  on  them.  F.  The  just  shall  be  in  ever- 


Digitized  by  Google 


512 


B1A8SE8  FOR  THE  DEAD. 


lasting  remembrance:  be  shall  not  fear  the  evi 
hearing 

TRACT.  Jlbsolve,  Domine^  animas  omnium  Jid^ 
Hum  defunctorum  ah  onvni  vinculo  dilectorum,  V.  K 
f^atia  tua  illis  succurente^  mereantur  evadere  judx 
cium  ultionis,  V.  Et  lucis  atemce  beatitudine  ptifrui 

-Release,  O Lord,  the  souls  of  all  the  faithful  de 
parted  from  the  bonds  of  their  sins.  V.  And  by  the 
assistance  of  thy  grace  may  they  escape  the  sentence 
of  condemnation.  V,  And  enjoy  the  bliss  of  eternal 
light. 


The  SEQUENCE  or  PROSE. 


The  day  of  wrath,  that 
dreadful  day 
Shall  the  whole  world  in 
ashes  lay. 

As  David  and  the  Sybils 
say. 

What  horror  will  invade 
the  mind. 

When  the  strict  Judge, 
who  would  be  kind, 
Shall  have  few  venial 
faults  to  find ! 

The  last  loud  trumpet’s 
wond’rous  sound 
Must  thro’  the  rending 
tombs  rebound. 

And  wake  the  nations 
under  ground. 

Natui*e  and  death  shall 
with  surprise 
Behold  the  pale  offender 
rise! 

And  view  the  Judge  with 
conscious  eyes. 


J^IES  iree,  dies  ilia 

Solvet  saeclum  in  favilla : 

Teste  David  cum  Sybilla. 

Quantus  tremor  est  fu- 
turus, 

Quando  Judex  est  ven- 
turus. 

Cuncta  stricte  discussu- 
rus! 

Tuba  mirum  spargens 
sonum 

Per  sepulchra  regionum. 

Coget  omnes  ante  thro- 
num. 

Mors  stupebit,  et  natura, 

Cum  resurget  creatura. 

Judicanti  responsura. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MASSES  TOR  THE  DEAD. 


Then  shall  with  universal 
dread 

The  sacred  mystic  book 
be  read, 

To  try  the  living  and  the 
dead. 

The  Judge  ascends  his 
awful  throne, 

He  makes  each  secret  sin 
be  known, 

And  all  with  shame,  con- 
fess their  own. 

O then ! what  int’rest 
shall  I make. 

To  save  my  last  impor- 
tant stake. 

When  the  most  just  have 
cause  to  quake  ? 

Thou  mighty  formidable 
King! 

Thou  mercy’s  unexhaust- 
ed spring ! 

Some  comfortable  pity 
bring. 

Forget  not  what  my  ran- 
som cost, 

Nor  let  my  dear-bought 
soul  be  lost,  [tost. 

In  storms  of  guilty  terror 

Thou,  who  for  me  didst 
feel  such  pain. 

Whose  precious  blood  the 
cross  did  stain : 

Let  not  those  agonies  be 
vain. 

Thou,  whom  avenging 
pow’rs  obey, 

Cancel  my  debt  (too  great 
lo  pay) 


513 

Liber  scriptus  proferetur, 

V 

In  quo  totum  continetur. 

Unde  mundus  judicetur. 

Judex  ergo  cum  sedebiL 

Quidquid  latet,  apparebit: 

Nil  inultum  remanebit 

Quid  sum  miser,  tunc 
dicturus. 

Quem  patronum  rogatu- 
rus. 

Cum  vix  justus  sit  secu- 
rus? 

Rex  tremendsB  majesta- 
tis! 

Qui  salvandos  salvas  gra- 
tis. 

Salva  me  fons  pietatis. 

Recordar^  Jesu  pie. 

Quod  sum  causa  tuse  vise, 

Ne  me  perdas  illa  die. 

Quserens  me,  sedisti  las- 
sus: 

Redemisti,  crucem  pas- 
sus : 

Tantus  labor  non  sit  cas- 
sus. 

Juste  Judex  ultionis, 

Donum  fac  remissionis 


Digitized  by  Google 


514 


MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 


Before  the  sad  accounting 
day. 

Surrounded  with  amaz- 
ing fears; 

Whose  load  my  soul  with 
an^ish  bears ; 

1 si^  I weep:  accept 
my  tears. 

Thou,  who  wast  mov’d 
with  Mary’s  grie^ 

And  by  absolving  of  the 
thief, 

Hast  given  me  hope,  now 
give  relief. 

Reject  not  my  unworthy 
prayer. 

Preserve  me  from  the 
dangerous  snare. 

Which  death  and  gaping 
hell  prepare. 

Give  my  exalted  soul  a 
place 

Among  tlie  chosen  right- 
hand  race, 

The  sons  of  Qod,  and 
heirs  of  grace. 

From  that  insatiate  abyss, 

Where  flames  devour, 
and  serpents  hiss. 

Promote  me  to  thy  seat 
of  bliss. 

Prostrate,  my  contrite 
heart  I rend. 

My  Grod,  my  Father,  and 
my  friend ! [end. 

Do  not  forsake  me  in  my 

Well  may  they  curse  their 
second  birth. 


Ante  diem  rationis 

Ingemisco  tanquam  reus : 

Culpa  rubet  vultus  meus : 

Supplicanti  parce,  Deus. 

Qui  Mariam  absolvisti, 

Et  latronem  exaudisti. 

Mihi  quoqje  spem  de- 
disti. 

Preces  meae  non  sunt 
digne : 

Sed  tu  bonus  fac  benigne, 

Ne  perenni  cremer  igne. 

Inter  oves  locum  praesta. 

Et  ab  haedis  me  seques- 
tra, 

Statuens  in  parte  dextra. 

Confutatis  maledictis. 
Flammis  acribus  addictis. 

Voca  me  cum  benedictis. 

Ora  supplex  et  acclinis. 

Cor  contritum  quasi  cinis, 

Gere  curam  mei  finis. 
Lacrymosa  dies  illa ! 


Digitized  by  Google 


MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 


515 


Who  rise  to  a surviving  Qua  resurget  ex  favilla 
death,  . Judicandus  homo  reus. 

Thou  great  Creator  of  Huic  ergo  parce  Deus : 
mankind, 

Let  guilty  man  compas-  Pie  Jesu  Domine,  dona 
sion  find.  Amen,  eis  requiem.  Amen. 

GOSPEL.  John  xi.  21.  28. — - — At  that  time  : 
Martha  said  to  Jesus:  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been 
here,  my  brother  had  not  died.  But  now  also  J 
know  that  whatsoever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God,  Gor! 
will  give  it  thee.  Jesus  saith  to  her : Thy  brother 
sliall  rise  again.  Martha  saith  to  him  : 1 know  that 
he  shall  rise  again  in  the  resurrection  at  the  last  day. 
Jesus  said  to  her : I am  the  resurrection  and  the  life ; 
he  that  believeth  in  me,  although  he  be  dead,  shall 
live.  And  every  one  that  liveth,  and  believeth  in 
me,  shall  not  die  for  ever.  Believest  thou  this  .5 
She  saith  to  him : Yea,  Lord,  I have  believed  that 
thou  art  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  who  art 
come  into  this  world. 

OFFERTORY. 


Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
King  of  Glory,  deliver  the 
souls  of  all  the  faithful 
departed  from  the  flames 
of  hell,  and  from  the 
deep  pit  Deliver  them 
from  the  lion’s  mouth, 
lest  hell  swallow  them, 
lest  they  fall  into  dark- 
ness : and  let  the  standard 
bearer,  St  Michael,  bring 
them  into  the  holy  light : 
* Which  thou  promisedst 
of  old  to  Abraham  and 
his  posterity.  F.  We  of- 
fer thee,  O Lord,  a sacri- 
lic©  of  praise  and  prayers : 


Domine  Jesu  Christe, 
Rex  glorisB  libera  ani- 
mas omnium  fidelium 
defunctorum  de  pomis  in- 
ferni, et  de  profundo  lacu: 
libera  eos  de  ore  leonis, 
ne  absorbeat  eas  tartarus, 
ne  cadant  in  obscurum ; 
sed  signifer  sanctus 
Michael,  repneseniet 
eas  in  lucem  sanctam : 
* Quam  olim  Abrahte 
promisisti,  et  semini  ejus. 
V.  Hostias  et  preces  tibi, 
Domine,  laudis  offeri 
mus : tu  suscipe  pro  ani- 
mabus  illis,  quarum  ho 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


51f:  MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 

accept  them  in  behalf  of  die  memoriam  facimuf>: 
the  souls  we  cominemo-  fac  eas,  Domine,  de 
rate  this  day : and  let  morte,  transire  ad  vitarn. 
them  pass  from  death  to  * Quam  oliin,  &c.  usa. 
life.  * Which,  &c.  to  V.  ad  F, 

SECRET. — Have  mercy,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  on  the  soul  of  thy  servant,  N.  for  which  we 
offer  this  -victim  of  praise,  humbly  beseeching  thy 
majesty  that  by  this  propitiatory  sacrifice  he  (or  she) 
may  arrive  at  eternal  rest.  Thro’. 

COMMUNION. 

Let  eternal  light  shine  Lux  setema  luceat  eis, 
on  them,  O Lord,  with  Domine,  * cum  sanctis 
thy  saints  for  ever:  for  tuis  in  roternum : quia 
thou  art  merciful.  V.  pius  es.  F.  Requiem  ae- 
Grant  them,  O Lord,  eter-  ternam  dona  eis,  Domine : 
nal  rest : and  let  perpet-  et  lux  perpetua  luceat  eis. 
ual  light  shine  on  them.  * Cura  sanctis,  &c.  tiw. 
* With  to  F.  ad  F. 

P.  COMM.  Pr(B8ta, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  the  soul  of  thy  servant,  which 
this  day  hath  departed  this  life,  being  purified  and 
freed  from  sin  by  this  sacrifice,  may  obtain  both  £bi^ 
giveness  and  eternal  rest.  Thro’. 

On  the  3d,  7th,  or  30th  day  after  decease,  the  tchoU 
of  the  foregoing  Mass  is  said,  except 
COLLECT.  QucBSumus, — Admit,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  the  soul  of  thy  servant  N.  (the  third,  seventh, 
or  thirtieth  day)  of  whose  decease  we  commemorate, 
into  the  fellowsnip  of  thy  saints,  and  refresh  it  wkli 
the  perpetual  dew  of  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Mercifully  look  down,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  on  the  offerings  we  make  for  the 
soul  of  thy  servant  N.  that  being  purified  by  these 
heavenly  mysteiies,  it  may  find  rest  in  thy  mercy 
Thro’. 

Digitized  by  Google 


MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 


517 


P.  COMP4.  Suscipe.— Receive,  O Lord,  our  pray- 
ers in  bebalfof  the  soul  of  thy  servant  N.  that  if  any 
stains  of  the  corruptions  of  this  world  still  stick  to 
it,  they  may  be  washed  away  by  thy  forgiving  mercy. 
Thro’. 


ANNIVERSARY  MASS  for  the  DEAD. 
as  on  the  day  of  decease  or  burial,  j?.^5]0,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus  indidgentiarium. — O God,  the 
Lord  of  mercy,  give  to  the  soul  [5011/5]  of  thy  ser- 
vant [servants]  whose  anniversary  we  commemorate, 
a place  of  comfort,  a happy  rest,  and  the  light  of 
glory.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  2 Mach.  xii.  43.  46. — In  those  days : 
Judas  the  valiant  commander  making  a gathering, 
he  sent  twelve  thousand  drachmas  of  silver  to  Je- 
rusalem, for  sacrifice  to  be  offered  for  the  sins  of  the 
dead ; thinking  well  and  religiously  concerning  the 
resurrection.  (For  if  he  had  not  hoped  that  they 
that  were  slain  should  rise  again,  it  would  have 
seemed  superfluous  and  vain  to  pray  for  the  dead.) 
And  because  he  considered  that  they  who  had 
fidlen  asleep  with  godliness,  had  great  grace  laid  up 
for  them.  It  is  therefore  a holy  and  wholesome 
thought  to  pray  for  the  dead,  that  they  may  be  loos- 
ed from  their  sins. 

GOSPEL.  John  vi.  37.  49. At  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  the  multitude  of  the  Jews : All  that  the 
Father  giveth  me,  shall  come  to  me : and  him  that 
coineth  to  me,  I will  not  cast  out.  Because  I came 
down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  my  own  will,  but  the 
l^ill  of  him  that  sent  me.  Now  this  is  the  will  of 
the  Fatlier  that  sent  me : that  of  all  that  he  hath 
given  me,  I should  lose  nothing,  but  should  raise  it 
up  again  in  the  last  day.  And  tliis  is  the  will  of  my 
Father  who  sent  me ; that  every  one  who  seeth  the 
Son,  and  believeth  in  him,  may  have  life  everlasting, 
and  1 will  raise  him  up  in  the  last  day. 


,y  Google 


518  MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 

SECRET. — Favourably  hear,  O Lord,  our  hum- 
ble prayers  in  behalf  of  the  soul  of  thy  ser- 

vant \8ervants\  the  anniversary  of  whose  death  is 
this  day,  for  whom  we  offer  up  this  sacrifice  of  praise : 
that  thou  mayest  vouchsafe  to  admit  it  [f^em]  to 
the  fellowship  of  thy  saints. 

P.  COMM.  PrcBstcu — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  that  the  soul  [souls]  of  thy  servant  [servants] 
the  anniversary  of  whose  death  we  commemorate, 
being  purified  by  this  sacrifice,  may  obtain  both 
pardon  afid  eternal  rest.  Thro’. 

The  COMMON  MASS  for  the  DEAD. 

All  as  on  the  day  of  Decease,  or  Burial,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui,for  Bishops  or  Priests. 

OGOD,  by  whose  favour  thy  servants  were  rais- 
ed to  the  dignity  of  Bishops  [or  Priests]  and 
thus  honoured  with  the  Apostolic  fiinctions : grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  that  they  may  be  admitted  to  the 
eternal  fellowship  of  thy  apostles  in  heaven.  Thro’. 
For  Brethren,  Friends,  and  Benefactors. 

Deus  VenuB, — O Grod,  the  author  of  mercy,  and 
lover  of  the  salvation  of  mankhid  ; we  address  thy 
clemency  in  behalf  of  our  brethren,  relations  and 
benefactors,  who  are,  departed  this  life,  that  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  Mary,  ever  a Virgin,  and  of 
all  thy  saints,  thou  wouldst  receive  them  into  the 
enjoyment  of  eternal  happiness.  Thro*. 

For  all  the  Faithful  departed. 

Fidelium. — O God,  the  Creator  and  Redeemer  of 
all  the  faithful,  give  to  the  souls  of  thy  servants  de^ 
parteci  the  remission  of  their  sins : that  through  the 
help  of  pious  supplications,  they  may  obtain  the  par- 
don they  have  always  desired.  Who  livest. 

LESSON.  Bev,  xiv.  13. — In  those  days : I heard 
a voice  from  heaven,  sapng  to  me : Blessed  are  the 
dead  who  die  in  the  Loixl.  From  henceforth  now, 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD.  51.^ 

saith  the  Spirit  that  they  may  rest  from  then*  la- 
bours : for  their  works  follow  them. 

GOSPEL.  John  vi.  51.  55.  — At  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  the  multitude  of  the  Jews:  I am  the  living 
bread  which  came  down  from  heaven.  If  any  man 
eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever : and  the  bread 
that  I will  give,  is  my  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world. 
The  Jews  therefore  strove  among  themselves,  saying : 
How  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat : Then 
Jesus  said  to  them:  Ameh,  amen  I say  unto  you: 
Except  you  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and 
drink  his  blood,  you  shall  not  have  life  in  you.  He 
that  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath 
everlasting  life : and  I will  raise  him  up  in  the  last 
day. 

SECRET,/or  Bishops  or  Priests. 

Accept,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  the  sacri  lice 
we  offer  for  the  souls  of  thy  servants.  Bishops  [ or 
Priests]  that  those  whom  in  this  life  thou  didst  ho- 
nour with  the  episcopal  [ or  priestly  ] dignity,  thou 
inayest  join  to  the  fellowship  of  thy  saints  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  Thro’. 

For  Brethren,  Friends  and  Benefactors. 

O God,  whose  mercy  is  infinite,  graciously  hear 
the  prayers  which  we  thy  humble  servants  offer  thee : 
and  grant  to  the  souls  of  our  Brethren,  Friends,  and 
Benefactors,  on  whom  thou  didst  bestow  the  grace 
:o  confess  thy  name,  the  pardon  of  all  their  sins  by 
these  mysteries  of  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

For  all  the  Faithful  departed. 

Look  down  fevourably,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
on  the  sacrifice  we  oflfer  for  the  souls  of  thy  servants ; 
that  as  thou  wast  pleased  to  bestow  on  them  the 
merit  of  Christian  faith,  thou  wouldst  al^  grant  them 
the  reward  thereof.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Prosit.  For  Bishops,  fyc. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by  thy  mercifU) 
Xx2 


Google 


520  MASSES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 

clemency  which  we  have  implored  on  behalf  of  the 
souls  of  thy  servants,  Bishops  [ or  Priests  ] that  by 
thy  mercy  they  may  eternally  enjoy  thy  presence,  in 
whom  they  have  hoped  and  believed.  Thro’. 

For  Brethren,  Friends,  and  Benefactors.  Pr<Rsia, 
— Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty  and  merci- 
fiil  God,  that  the  souls  of  our  Brethren,  Friends,  and 
Benefactors,  for  whom  we  have  offered  this  sacrifice 
to  thy  Mmesty,  being,  by  virtue  of  these  mysteries, 
purified  from  all  sin,  may,  through  thy  mercy,  re- 
ceive the  blessing  of  perpetual  light.  Thro’. 

For  All  ihjt  Faithful  parted.  Animabus. — Grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Lora,  that  our  humble  prayers 
in  behalf  of  the  souls  of  thy  servants,  both  men  and 
women,  may  be  profitable  to  them:  so  that  thou 
niayest  deliver  them  fronA  all  theii  sins,  and  make 
them  partakei*s  of  the  redemption  thou  iiast  purchas- 
ed for  them.  Who  livest. 

Collect,  &c.  for  a deceased  Father  or  Mother. 

COLLECT.  O God,  who  hast  commanded  us  to 
honour  our  Father  and  Mother : mercifully  shew  pity 
to  the  souls  [ or  soul  ] of  my  Father  [ or]  my  Mother, 
and  forgive  him  [or  her  ] their  [ or  his  or  her]  sins: 
and  grant  that  1 may  see  them  [ or  him  or  her  ] in 
the  joys  of  eternal  life.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Receive,  O Lord,  the  sacrifice  I ofier 
for  the  souls  [or  soul  ] of  my  Father,  [or  of]  my 
Mother : grant  them  [ or  him  or  her  ] eternal  joys  in 
the  land  of  the  living : and  associate  me  with  them 
[ or  him  or  her  ] \n  the  bliss  of  thy  saints.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM. — May  the  participation  of  these  hea- 
venly mysteries,  O Lord,  I beseech  thee,  obtain  rest 
and  light  for  the  souls  [or  soul  ] of  my  Father[or  of  J 
iny  Mother:  and  may  thy  grace  crown  me  with 
them  [ or  him  or  her  ] for  ever.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NOVEMBER. 


521 


THE  PROPER  OF  SAINTS. 

As  tlie  primitive  Christians  were  accustomed  to 
meet  every  year  on  the  anniversary  of  the  Martyrs 
n the  churches  or  chapels  usually  erected  to  their  mem- 
ory in  the  same  place  where  the  whole,  or  some  sacred 
remains  of  their  bodies  had  been  buried,  and  as  their 
tombs  served  for  an  altar,  so  it  has  ever  since  been  the 
custom  to  put  the  relics  of  some  Saint  in,  or  beneath 
altar  stones.  The  Mass  was  not  offered  to  the  Mar- 
tyr, but  to  the  God  of  Martyrs,  to  whom  almu  sa- 
crifice is  due,  to  thank  him  as  well  for  the  strength  and 
courage  wherewith  he  had  animated  them,  as  for  that 
state  of  bliss  to  which  he  has  admitted  t^em.  Such  was 
the  origin  of  the  festivals  of  the  Saints. 

XXIX.  VIGIL  OF  ST.  ANPREW. 

When  this  Vigil  falls  in  Advent,  the  II  Collect  is  of 
Advent,  the  III.  of  St.  Sturninus.  When  it 
falls  on  Saturday,  the  II.  is  Concede,  p»  507,  and 
the  III.  is  Eccl.  p,  50,  or  Deus  omnium,  ih,  with 
their  respective  Secrets  and  P,  Comms. 

The  abovementioned  Prayers  are  also  said  on  every 
Vigil  ( except  those  of  Christmas,  Easter,  and  Whit- 
sunday, which  have  ordy  one  Collect ) arul  tvithin 
all  Octaves,  when  the  Mass  of  the  Octave  is  said, 
if  directions  to  the  contrary  are  not  given. 
INTROIT.  Matt.  iv. — ^Tho  Lord  saw  near  the 
sea  of  Galilee  two  brethren,  Peter  and  Andrew,  and 
he  called  them,  saying : come  ye  after  me,  and  I will 
make  you  fishers  of  men.  Ps.  xviii.  The  heavens 
shew  forth  the  glory  of  God : and  the  firmament  de- 
clareth  the  work  of  his  hands.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  QpcBsumus. We  beseech  thpe,  O 

Almighty  God,  that  thy  blessed  apostle  Andrew, 
whose  festival  we  are  preparing  to  celebrate,  may 
implore  thy  assistance  in  our  behalf,  that  being  dis- 
charged fit)m  the  guilt  of  our  crimes,  we  may  like- 
wise be  freed  firom  all  dangers.  Thro*. 

Xx3 


79th  NOVEMRER. 


522 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui.-^Of  St.  SATURNEWS. 
— O God,  by  whose  favour  we  celebrate  the  glory 
of  blessed  Saturninus,  thy  Martyr:  grant  that  we 
may  be  assisted  by  his  merits.  Thro’. 

LESSON,  as  on  the  Vigil  of  an  Apostle,  p.  460. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxxxviii. — To  me,  thy  friends,  O God, 
are  made  exceedingly  honourable:  their  principality 
is  exceedingly  strengthened.  V.  I will  number  them, 
and  they  shall  be  multiplied  above  the  sands. 

GOSPEL.  John,  i.  35.  51. At  that  time 

John  stood,  and  two  of  his  disciples : and  beholding 
Jesus  walking,  he  saith : Behold  the  Lamb  of  God. 
And  the  two  disciples  heard  him  speak,  and  they 
followed  Jesus.  And  Jesus  turning,  and  seeing  them 
following  him,  saith  .to  them : What  seek  you  ? 
Who  said  to  him : Rabbi,  (which  is  to  say,  being  in^ 
terpreted.  Master,)  where  dwellest  thou  ? He  saith 
to  them : Come  and  see.  They  came,  and  saw 
where  he  abode,  and  they  staid  with  him  that  day : 
now  it  was  about  the  tenth  hour.  And  Andrew  the 
brother  of  Simon  Peter  was  one  of  the  two  who  bad 
heard  of  John,  and  followed  him.  He  findeth  first 
his  brother  Simon,  and  saith  to  him:  We  have 
found  the  Messias,  which  is,  being  interpreted,  the 
Christ.  And  he  brought  him  to  Jesus.  And  Jesus 
looking  upon  him,  said : Thou  art  Simon,  the  Son 
of  Jona:  thou  shalt  be  called  Cephas,  which  is  in- 
terpreted, Peter.  On  the  following  day  he  would  go 
forth  into  Galilee,  and  he  findeth  Philip.  And  Jesus 
saith  to  him:  Follow  me.  Now  Philip  was  of 
Bethsaida,  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Peter.  Philip 
findeth  Nathanael,  and  saith  to  him:  We  have 
found  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  law,  and  the  pro- 
phets did  write,  Jesus  the  son  of  Joseph  of  Naza- 
reth. And  Nathanael  saith  to  him  ; Can  any  thing 
of  good  come  from  Nazareth  ? Philip  saith  to  him : 
Come  and  see.  Jesus  saw  Nathanael  coming  to 
him,  and  he  saith  to  him : Behold  an  Israelite  in- 


Digitized  by  Google 


29^  NOVEMBER. 


52r^ 


deed,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile.  Nathaniel  saith 
to  him  : Whence  knowest  thou  me?  Jesus  answer- 
ed and  said  to  him : Belbre  that  Philip  called  thee, 
when  thou  wast  under  the  fig-tree,  [ saw  ihee. 
Nathaniel  answered  him,  and  said : Rabbi,  thou  art 
the  Sou  of  God,  thou  art  the  King  of  Israel.  Jesus 
answered,  and  said  to  him : Because  I said  unto  thee, 
1 saw  thee  under  the  fig-tree,  thou  believest : greater 
things  than  these  shall  thou  see.  And  he  saith  to 
him : Ainen,  amen  I say  to  you,  you  shall  see  the 
heaven  opened,  and  the  Angels  of  (^d  ascending  and 
descending  upon  the  Son  of  Man. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  viii. — Thou  hast  crowned  him 
with  glory  and  honour : and  hast  set  him  over  the 
works  of  thy  hands,  O Lord. 

SECRET. — We  offer  thee,  O Ix)rd,  the  gifts  to  be 
consecrated,  whereby  we,  celebrating  the  festival  of 
blessed  Andrew  the  Apostle,  beseech  thee,  that  our 
minds  may  also  be  purified.  Thro*. 

SECRET,  of  St.  SATURNINUS. 

Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we  have  consecrat- 
ed to  thee,  and  being  appeased  thereby,  mercifully 
look  down  upon  us,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Saturninus,  thy  Martyr.  Thro*. 

COMM.  John  i. — Andrew  saith  to  Simon  his 
brother:  We  have  found  the  Messiah,  who  is  called 
the  Christ:  and  he  brought  him  to  Jesus. 

P.  COMM.  Perceptis. — Having  received,  O Lord, 
thy  holy  sacrament,  we  beseech  thee  that,  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  Andrew  thy  Apostle,  what  we 
perform  in  memory  of  his  venerable  passion,  may  be 
a remedy  to  us. 

P.  COMM.  Sanctificet,  of  St.  SATURNINUS. 
— May  the  receiving  of  this  thy  sacrament,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  sanctify  us : and  by  the  intercession 
of  thy  saints,  make  us  acceptable  to  thee. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


5^ 


30^  ^OV£MBER. 


XXX.  Sl  ANDREW,  ap. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cxxxviii. 

TO  me,  thy  friends,  O lyT  I H I autem  nimis 
God,  are  made  ex-  -i^VJL  honorati  sum  amici 
rcedingly  honourable  : tui,  Deus : niinis  confbr- 
their  principality  is  ex-  tatus  est  principatus  eo- 
ceedingly  strengthened,  rum.  Ps.  Domine,  pro- 
Ps.  Lord,  thou  h^  prov-  basti  me  et  cognovisti  me* 
ed  me  and  known  me:  in  cognovisti  sessionem 
thou  hast  known  my  sit-  ineain  et  resurrectionem 
ting  down  and  my  rising  meain.  V.  Gloria, 
up.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Majestatem. — We  humbly  beseech 
thy  divine  Majesty,  O Lord,  that  as  the  blessed 
Apostle  Andrew  was  a teacher  and  pastor  of  thy 
Church,  so  he  may  be  with  thee  our  perpetual  inter- 
cessor. Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Rom.  x.  10.18. Brethren:  With 

the  heart  we  believe  unto  justice:  but,  with  the 
mouth,  confession  is  made  unto  salvation.  For  the 
scripture  saith : ffhosoever  believdh  in  him^  shall  not 
be  confounded.  For  there  is  no  distinction  of  the 
Jew  and  the  Greek : for  the  same  is  Lord  over  all, 
rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him.  For  whosoever  shall 
call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  saved.  How 
then  shall  they  call  on  him,  in  whom  they  have  not 
believed  ? Or  how  shall  they  believe  him,  of  whom 
they  have  not  heard  ? And  how  shall  they  hear, 
without  a preacher  ? And  how  shall  they  preach, 
unless  they  be  sent  ? as  it  is  written : How  beautiful 
are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  peace, 
of  them  that  bring  good  tidings  of  good  things  i But 
all  do  not  obey  tne  gospel.  For  fsaias  saitn : Lord, 
who  hath  believed  our  repoit  ? Faith  then  cometh 
by  hearing:  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  Christ. 
But  I say : have  they  not  heard  Yes  verily,  thdr 
sound  hath  gone  forth  into  all  the  ^earth,  and  their 
toords  unto  the  enas  (f  the  whole  world 


Digitized  by  Google 


^ DECEMBER. 


r25 


GRAD.  Ps.  xliv. — Thou  wilt  set  them  rulers  ov^r 
all  the  earth,  and  they  shall  remember  thy  name,  O 
Lord.  F.  In  place  of  thy  fathers  thou  hast  cliildren 
born  to  thee:  therefore  shall  nations  praise  thee. 
AUelma,  AlMma,  V.  The  Lord  loved  Andrew  like 
a sweet  smelling  odour  AUeL 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  iv.  18.  23. At  that  time: 

Jesus  walking  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,  saw  two  bre- 
thren, Simon  who  is  called  Peter,  and  Andrew  his 
brother,  casting  a net  hito  the  sea  (for  they  were 
fishers).  And  he  saith  to  them : Come  ye  alter  me, 
and  I will  make  you  to  be  fishers  of  men.  And  they 
immediately  leaving  their  nets,  followed  him.  And 
going  on  from  thence,  he  saw  two  other  brethren, 
James  the  son  of  Zebedee,  and  John  his  brother,  in 
a ship  with  Zebedee  tlieir  father,  mending  their  nets; 
and  he  called  them.  And  they  forthwith  left  their 
nets  and  father,  and  followed  him.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ptf.  cxxxviii. — To  me,  O God,  thy 
friends  are  exceeding  honourable ; exceeding  mighty 
in  their  power. 

SECRET.  — May  the  holy  prayers  of  blessed 
Andrew  the  Apostle,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  ren- 
der our  sacrifice  pleasing  to  thee;  that  what  we 
solemnize  in  his  honour,  his  merits  may  render  ac- 
ceptable, Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt.  iv. — Come  ye  after  me,  and  1 
will  make  you  to  be  fishers  of  men : and  they  imme- 
diately leaving  their  nets,  followed  him. 

^ P.  COMM.  Sumpsimus. — As  the  divine  mysteries 
we  have  paitaken  of  with  joy  on  this  festival  of  bles- 
sed Andrew,  conduce  to  the  glory  of  thy  saints ; so, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  let  them  obtain  for  us  par- 
don. Thro’. 

December  II.  St.  BIBIANA,  v.  m. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XVII.  p.  496,  except 

COLLECT.  Deusj  omnium, — O God,  the  be- 


/Google 


526  3i  AND  4^  DECEMBER. 

Blower  of  all  good  gifls,  who  in  th^  servant  Bibiana 
joinedst  the  of  martyrdom  with  the  flower  of 
virginity,  grant,  that  through  her  intercession,  our 
hearts  may  be  united  to  thee  by  charity ; and  that 
being  delivered  from  all  dangers,  we  may  obtain  ever- 
lasting rewards.  Thro*. 

III.  St  FRANCIS  XAVIER,  c. 
INTROIT. — I spake  of  thy  law  in  the  presence  of 
kings,  and  I was  not  ashamed : and  meditated  on  thy 
commandments,  which  I loved  exceedingly.  Pi. 
Praise  the  Lord  all  ye  nations ; praise  him  all  ye  peo- 
ple : for  his  mercy  is  confirmed  upon  us,  and  the 
truth  of  the  Lord  remaineth  for  ever.  FL  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Dtus,  qui  Indiorum. — O God,  who, 
by  the  preaching  and  miracles  of  blessed  Francis, 
didst  bring  into  thy  Church  the  people  of  the  Indies: 
mercifully  grant  that  we  may  imitate  his  virtues, 
whose  glorious  merits  we  venerate.  Thro*. 
EPISTLE.  Rom,  x.  ».  524.  Grad.  Offert,  and 
Comiii.  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  488.  Secret  and 
P.  Comm,  as  in  Mass  XIV,  p.  491. 

GOSPEL.  Mark  xvi.  15.  18. that  Hme: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples:  Go  ye  into  the  whole 
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature. 
He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved: 
but  he  that  believeth  not,  shall  be  condemned.  And 
these  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe : In  my 
name  they  shall  cast  out  devils;  they  shall  spe^ 
with  new  tongues:  they  shall  take  up  serpents:  and 
if  they  shall  drink  any  deadly  thing,  it  shdl  not  hurt 
them : they  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  sick,  and 
they  shall  recover. 

IV.  St.  PETER  CHRYSOLOGUS,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XII.  p.  485,  except 
COLLECT.  DeuSj  (pii. — O feod,  who  by  thy  divine 
providence  didst  ordain  that  blessed  Peter  should  be 
foreshewn  by  heaven,  and  chosen  as  an  exalted 


Digitized  by  Google 


6lh  DECEMBER. 


527 


teacher  to  govern  and  instruct  thy  Church : grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  that  he  who  taught  us  the  true  way 
of  life  whilst  here  on  earth,  may  now  intercede  for 
us  in  heaven.  Thro’. 

COLLECT,  in  commemoration  o/‘St.  Barbara,  as 
Deus  qui  in  Mass  XVI.  p.  493. 

VI.  St.  NICHOLAS,  bp.  c. 

INTROIT,  Statiiit,  p.  461. 

COLLECT.  Z>eMS,  qui. — O God,  who  by  innumer- 
able miracles  hast  honoured  blessed  Nicholas  the 
Bishop : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  by  his  merits 
and  intercession  we  may  be  delivered  from  eternal 
frames.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Heb.  xiii.  7.  17. — Brethren:  Re- 
member your  prelates  who  have  spoken  the  word  of 
God  to  you : whose  frith  follow,  considering  the 
end  of  their  conversation.  Jesus  Christ  yesterday 
and  to-day : and  the  same  for  ever.  Be  not  led 
away  with  various  and  strange  doctinnes.  For  it  is 
best  that  the  heart  be  established  with  grace,  not 
with  meats : which  have  not  profited  those  that  walk 
in  them.  We  have  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no 
power  to  eat  who  serve  the  tabernacle.  For  the 
bodies  of  those  beasts,  whose  blood  is  brought  inu) 
the  Holies  by  the  high-priest  for  sin  are  burned  with- 
out the  camp.  Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might 
sanctify  the  people  by  his  own  blood,  suffered  with- 
out the  gate.  Let  us  go  foith  therefore  to  him  with- 
out the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach.  For  we  have 
not  here  a lasting  city,  but  we  seek  one  that  is  to 
come.  By  him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of 
praise  always  to  God,  that  is  to  say,  the  fruit  of  lips  . 
confessing  to  his  name.  And  do  not  forget  to  do 
good  and  to  impart ; for  by  such  sacrifices  God’s  fa- 
vour is  obtained.  Obey  your  prelates,  and  be  sub- 
ject to  them.  For  they  watch,  as  being  to  render  an 
account  of  your  souls. 

GRAD,  to  Alleluia,  as  in  Mass  1.  p.  461.  ‘ 

D .Google 


528 


7 th,  DECEMBER. 


V,  The  righteous  man  shall  flourish  like  the  palm- 
tree  ; he  shall  thrive  like  the  cedar  of  Libanus.  JUlcL 

CfOSPKL.  Matt.  xxv.  as  in  Mass  X.  p.  482. 

OFFERT. — My  truth  and  my  mercy  are  with 
him : and  in  my  name,  his  power  shall  be  exalted. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lonl 
our  God,  those  gifts  which  we  offer  thee  on  the  fes- 
tival of  our  holy  Bishop  Nicholas:  that  our  lives  may 
never  swerve  from  truth,  either  in  pro8j>erity  or  ad- 
versity. Thro’. 

* COMM. — Once  have  I sworn  by  my  holy  name: 
his  posterity  shall  remain  for  ever,  and  his  throne  as 
the  sun  before  me,  and  as  the  moon,  perfect  for  ever, 
and  as  the  faithful  witness  in  heaven. 

P.  COMM. — Mfty  the  sacrifice  we  have  partaken 
of,  O Lord,  on  the  solemnity  of  thy  holy  Bishop 
Nicholas,  continually  protect  us.  Thro*. 


VII.  St  AMBROSE,  b.  c.  and  D. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XII.  p,  485,  except 

GRAD.  Eccles.  xliv. — Behold  a great  prelate, 
who  in  his  days  pleased  God.  V.  There  was  none 
found  like  him  in  keeping  the  law  of  the  Most  High. 
AUelma,  Alleluia.  V.  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and 
will  not  repent  it:  Thou  art  a priest  for  ever  ac- 
cording to  the  order  of  Melchisedech.  Alleluia. 

OFFERT. — My  truth,  &c.  as  above. 

SECRET. — O almighty  and  eternal  God,  grant 
by  the  intercession  of  B.  Ambrose,  thy  Confessor  and 
Bishop,  that  the  gifts  we  have  oflTered  to  thy  divine 
Majesty  may  procure  for  us  eternal  salvation.  Thro*. 

* COMM.--v3«  ahove^  Once  have  1 sworn,  &c. 

P.  COMM.  Sacramenta. — Gran^  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  having  received  the  sacrament 
♦ of  our  salvation,  we  may  be  ever  assisted  by  the 
prayers  of  blessed  Ambrose,  thy  Confessor  and  Bish- 
op, on  whose4estival  we  have  oflTered  this  sacrifice 
to  thy  divine  majesty.  Thro*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wl  DECEMBER. 


52C 


VI 11.  CONCEPTION  of  Hit  B.  V.  MARY. 

{By  chaining  the  word  Conception  into  Nativity,  and 
including  a Commem,  of  St.  Adrian,  m.  by  the  Col- 
lect, &c.  Preesta,  from  Mass  V.  p,  482,  this  Mass 
also  serves  for  the  8th  September.] 

INTROIT,  Salve,  p.  507. 

COLLECT.  Famulis, — Grant,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  to  thy  servants  the  gifts  of  thy  heavenly 
grace : that  as  our  redemption  began  in  the  deliveiy 
of  the  blessed  Virgin,  so  in  this  solemnity  of  her 
Conception,  [ J^ativity\  we  may  have  an  increase  of 
peace.  Thro*. 

LESSON.  Pr<yv,  viii.  22.  25.  — The  Lord  pos- 
sessed me  in  the  beginning  of  his  ways,  before  he 
made  any  thing,  from  the  beginning.  I was  set  up 
from  eternity,  and  of  old  before  the  earth  was  made. 
The  depths  were  not  as  yet,  and  I was  already  con- 
ceived, neither  had  the  fountains  of  waters  as  yet 
sprung  out : the  mountains  with  their  huge  bulk  had 
not  as  yet  been  established : before  the  hiUs  I was 
biDught  forth : he  had  not  yet  made  die  earth,  nor 
the  rivers,  nor  the  poles  of  the  world.  When  he 
prepared  the  heavens,  I was  there : when  with  a cer- 
tain law  and  compass  he  enclosed  the  depths : when 
he  established  the  sky  above,  and  poised  the  foun- 
tains of  waters ; when  he  compassed  the  sea  with  its 
bounds,  and  set  a law  to  the  waters,  that  they  should 
not  pass  their  limits : when  he  balanced  the  founda- 
tion of  the  earth.  I was  with  him  forming  all  things, 
and  was  delighted  every  day,  playing  before  him  at 
all  times,  playing  in  the  world : and  my  delight  is  to 
be  with  the  children  of  men.  Now,  therefore,  ye 
children,  hear  me,  blessed  are  they  that  keep  my 
ways.  Hear  instruction  and  be  wise,  and  reuise  it 
not.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  heareth  me,  and  that 
watcheth  daily  at  my  gates,  and  waiteth  at  the  posts 

Y y 


Digitized  by  Google 


530  ^ DECEMBER. 

of  my  doors.  He  that  shall  hud  me  shall  hud  life, 
and  shall  have  salvation  from  the  Lord. 

GRAD. — Thou  art  blessed,  and  worthy  of  our 
respects,  O Mary  the  Virgin,  who  without  prejudice 
to  thy  virginity,  didst  become  the  mother  of  the  Sa- 
viour. Mduia,  Alleluia,  V,  Happy  art  thou,  O holy 
Virgin  Mary,  and  worthy  of  all  praise ; because 
from  thee  arose  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  Christ  our 
God.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  MaU.  i.  1.  16. The  book  of  the 

generation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David,  the 
son  of  Abraham.  Abraham  begot  Isaac.  And  Isaac 
begot  Jacob.  And  Jacob  begot  Judas  and  his  brethren. 
And  Judas  begot  Phares  and  Zara  of  Thamar.  And 
Pliares  begot  Esron.  And  Esron  begot  Aram.  And 
Aram  begot  Aminidab.  And  Aminidab  begot  Naas- 
son.  And  Naasson  begot  Salmon.  And  Salmon  begot 
Booz  of  Rahab.  And  Booz  begot  Obed  of  Ruth 
And  Obed  begot  Jesse.  And  Jesse  begot  David  the 
king.  And  David  the  king  begot  Solomon,  of  her 
who  had  been  the  tcife  of  Urias.  And  Solomon 
l>egot  Roboam.  And  Roboam  begot  Abia.  And 
Abia  begot  Asa.  And  Asa  begot  Josaphat.  And 
Josaphat  begot  Joram.  And  Joram  begot  Ozias. 
And  Ozias  begot  Joatham.  And  Joatham  begot 
Achaz.  And  Achaz  begot  Ezechias.  And  Ezechias 
begot  Manasses.  And  Manasses  begot  Amon.  And 
Amon  begot  Josias.  And  Josias  begot  Jechonias 
and  his  brethren  in  the  transmigration  of  Babylon. 
And  after  the  transmigration  of  J^bylon,  Jechonias 
begot  Salathiel.  And  Salathiel  begot  Zorobabel. 
And  Zorobabel  begot  Abiud.  A^nd  Abiud  begot 
Eliacim.  And  Eliacim  begot  Azor.  And  Azor  be- 
got Sadoc.  And  Sadoc  begot  Achim.  And  Achim 
l)egot  Eliud.  And  Eliud  begot  Eleazar.  And  Elea- 
zar  begot  Matham.  And  Matham  begot  Jacob.  And 
Jacob  begot  Joseph,  the  husband  of  Mary,  of  whom 
was  born  Jesus,  who  is  called  Christ. 


Digitized  by  Google 


AND  13Ul  DECEMBER.  5Sl 

OFFERT. — Blessed  art  thou,  O Mary  the  Virgin, 
who  didst  bear  the  Creator  of  all  things.  Thou 
broughtest  forth  him  who  made  thee,  and  remainest 
a viran  for  ever. 

SECRET. — May  the  humanity  of  thy  hofy  be- 
gotten Son,  O Lord,  succour  us,  that  he,  (who  being 
born  of  a Virgin,  diminished  not,  but  consecrated 
her  virginity)  may  free  us,  who  celebrate  the  festival 
of  her  Conception  [JVtativity]  from  our  sins:  and 
render  our  oblation  acceptable  to  thee.  Who.- 
Cornm.  and  P.  Comm,  as  is  the  Votive  Mass,/?.  509. 

XI.  St.  DAMASUS,  p.  c.  * 

Ail  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 

COLLECT.  Exaudi, — Give  ear,  O Lord,  to  our 
prayers,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Damasus, 
thy  Confessor  and  Bishop,  mercifully  grant  us  par- 
don and  peace.  Thro*. 

GRADUAL  and  OFFERTORY,  as  in  Mass  X. 
p,  482.  SECRET,  as  in  Mass  XX.  p,  501. 

COMM.  Matt,  XXV. — Lord,  thou  didst  deliver  to 
me  five  talents : behold  I have  gained  other  five  over 
and  above.  Well  done  good  and  faithful  servant: 
because  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a few  things,  I 
will  place  thee  over  many  things,  enter  thou  into  the 
joy  of  thy  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Da  quaesumus, — Grant, -we  beseech 
thee  O Lord,  that  thy  faithful  may  always  celebrate 
with  joy  the  festivals  of  thy  saints,  and  ever  be  pro- 
tected by  their  prayers.  Thro*. 

XIII.  St  LUCY,  V.  m. 

Introit,  Collect  and  Epistle  as  in  Mass  XIX./?.  498. 

GRA  D. — Thou  hast  loved  justice  and  hated  ini- 
quity. V,  Therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed 
dice  with  the  oil  of  gladness.  Alleluia^  AUdvda, 
Yy  2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


532 


21«^  DECEMBER. 


V.  Grace  is  poured  abroad  in  thy  lips:  therefore 
hath  God  blessed  thee.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEl  I.  Offertory,  Secret,  and  P.  Comm,  as  in 
Mass  XX.  p.  499. 

COMM. Princes  have  persecuted  me  without 

cause,  and  my  heart  hath  trembled  at  thy  words: 
but  I will  rejoice  in  thy  commandments,  like  one 
wlio  hath  found  rich  spoils. 


XXL  St  THOMAS,  ap. 

INTROIT,  Mihi  autem,  p.  524. 

COLLECT.  Da  no6w.-— Grant,  O Lord,  we  be> 
seech  thee,  that  we  may  rejoice  on  the  solemnity  of 
thy  blessed  Apostle  Thomas;  to  the  end  that  we 
may  always  have  the  assistance  of  his  prayers,  and 
zealously  profess  the  faith  he  taught 

EPISTLE.  Ephes.  ii.  19.  22. — Brethren:  You 
are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners : but  you  are 
fellow-citizens  witlythe  saints,  and  the  domestics  of 
God,  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  cor- 
ner-stone: in  whom  all.tlie  building  being  framed 
together,  groweth  up  into  a holy  temple  in  the  Lord. 
In  whom  you  also  are  built  together  into  an  habita- 
tion of  God  in  the  ^irit 

GRAD. — Thy  friends,  O God,  are  made  exceed- 
ingly honourable,  exceedingly  mighty  is  their  jR>wer. 
1 will  number  them ; and  they  shall  be  multiplied 
above  the  sand.  Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  Rejoice  in 
the  Lord,  O ye  just : praise  becometh  the  upright 
Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  xx.  to*  as  on  Low  Sund.  o.  347. 

OF^FERTI  Ps.  xviii. ^Their  sound  hath  gone 

forth  into  all  the  earth:  and  their  words  unto  the 
ends  of  the  world. 

SECRET. — We  pay,  O Lord,  the  homage  due  to 
thee,  humbly  l)csceching  iliee  to  ureserve  in  us  thy 

D /Google 


31«/  DECEMBER  AND  JANDART.  533 

own  gifts  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Thomas  the 
apostle,  on  the  day  of  whose  glorious  confession  we 
offer  a sacrifice  of  praise.  Thro’. 

COMM. — Reach  hither  thy  hand,  and  feel  the 
print  of  the  nails : and  be  not  incredulous,  but  be- 
lieve. 

P.  COMM.  Adjtsio, — ^Assist  us,  O merciful  God, 
and  vouchsafe,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Thomas 
the  apostle,  to  preserve  in  us,  what  thou  hast' be- 
stowed upon  us.  Thro’. 


XXXI.  St.  SYLVESTER,  p.  c. 
INTROIT,  Sacerdotes,  p.  484.  Collect,  Secret  and 
P.  Comm,  as  in  p.  482,  tvUh  Commemorations 
of  all  the  Festivals,  from  Christmas-day  in- 
elusively, 

EPISTLE.  2 Tim,  iv.  I.  8.  oa  tnp.  486. 

GRAB. — ^Behold  a great  Prelate,  who  in  his  days 
pleased  God.  V,  There  was  none  found  like  him 
in  keeping  the  law  of  God.  AUel,  AUel.  V,  Ps.  I 
have  found  my  servant  David : I have  anointed  him 
with  my  holy  oil.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Duke  xii.  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  488. 
OFFERT.  Ps,  txxxviii. — ^I  have  found  David  my 
servant : with  my  holy  oil  I have  anointed  him.  My 
hand  shall  help  him : and  my  arm  Shall  strengthen 
him. 

COMM.  MaU,  xxiv.  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  489.  ^ 


January  II.  Octave-day  of  St.  STEPHEN. 

AU  as  on  the  Feast  itself  p,  78,  except 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O Almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  who  didst  consecrate  the  first  fruits  of  mar- 
tvrdom  in  the  blood  of  blessed  Stephen  the  Levite  : 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  he  may  intercede  for  us 


Google 


534  5tk  AND  idtk  JANUARY. 

who  begged  mercy,  even  for  his  persecutors,  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son.  Who  liveth. 

V.  Octave  of  St  THOMAS  of  CANTERBURY. 
Mass  as  on  his  Feast,  p.  85,  unth  Commems.  of  the 
Eve  of  the  Epiphany,  of  the  Sunday  within  the 
Octave  of  Christmas,  and  of  St  Telesphorus,  hy 
the  Collect,  &c.  of  Mass  II.  p,  464,  &c. 

w®  the  end  of  Mass  is  read  the  foUoioing 
GOSPEL  of  the  Eve  of  the  Epiphany.  Matt. 
ii.  19.  23. — At  that  time:  When  Herod  was  dead, 
behold  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  sleep  to 
Joseph  in  Egypt,  wying : Arise  and  take  the  child 
and  his  mother  and  go  into  the  land  of  Israel.  For 
they  are  dead  that  sought  the  life  of  the  child.  Who 
arose,  and  took  the  ch^ild  and  his  mother,  and  came 
into  the  liuid  of  Israel.  But  hearing  that  Archelaus 
reigned  in  Judea  in  the  iT>om  of  Herod  his  father, 
he  was  afraid  to  go  thither : and  being  warned  in  his 
sleep,  retired  into  the  quarters  of  Galilee.  And 
coming  he  dwelt  in  a city  called  Nazareth  : that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  which  was  said  by  the  prophets : 
that  he  shall  be  called  a Nazarite.  Deo  gratias. 


Jctnuary  XIII.  Octave-day  of  the  EPIPHANY. 

All  as  on  the  Feast,  p.  89,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus  cujus. — O God,  whose  only  be- 
gotten Son  appeared  in  the  substance  of  our  flesh : 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  may  be  interiorly 
reformed  by  him,  whom  we  confess  to  have  outward 
ly  taken  our  flesh  k)n  himself.  Thro’. 

GOSPEL.  John  i.  29.  34.  — At  that  time:  John 
saw  Jesus  coming  to  him,  and  he  saith : Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,  behold  he  who  taketh  away  the  sins 
of  the  world.  This  is  he  of  whom  I said : after  me 
cometh  a man  who  is  preferred  before  me : because 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUD  \Alh  JANUARY. 


535 


tic  was  before  me.  And  I knew  him  not,  but  that 
he  may  be  made  manifest  in  Israel,  therefore  am  I 
come  baptiziii»  with  water.  And  John  gave  testi- 
jnony,  saying;  1 saw  the  Spirit  coming  do>yn  as  a 
•dove  fW)m  heaven,  and  he  remained  upon  him.  And 
1 knew  him  not:  but  he  who  sent  me  to  baptize 
with  water,  said  to  me ; ‘He  upon  whom  thou  «halt 
^e  the  Spirit  descending,  and  remaining  on  him, 
he  It  is  that  baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  And 
1 saw : and  1 gave  testimony,  that  this  is  the  Son  of 
Ood.‘ 

SECRET, — We  oiier  sacrifice  to  thee,  O Lord, 
in  remembrance  of  the  manifestation  of  thy  Son: 
tumbly  beseeching  thee,  that  as  our  Lord  Jesus 
Jhrist  is  the  author  of  what  we  c^fer,  so  he  may 
fully  receive  the  same.  Who  liveth. 

P.  COMM,  Ccdesti  lurmne, — ^May  thy  heavenly 
light,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  go  before  us  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places:  that  we  may  contemplate 
with  a clear  sight,  and  receive  with  due  affection  the 
mystery  whereof  thou  hast  been  pleased  we  should 
partake.  Thro’. 

N.  B.  After  the  Octave  liU  Candlemas,  th£  IJ-  and 
III.  Collects,  &C,  are  the  same  as  those  thus  nuuked  * 
p,p.  50.  52.  and  3d, 


XIV.  Sl  HILARY,  bp.  c. 

Adi  as  in  Mass  XIL  p.  485,  loith  a Commem,  of  St. 

Felix,  by  the  follomiig  Collect,  &c. 

COLLECT.  Concede., — Grant,  we  l^seech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  tliat  the  examples  of  thy  saints 
may  excite  us  to  the  amendment  of  our  lives ; that 
as  we  celebrate  their  festivals,  so  we  may  imitate 
their  virtues.  Thro’. 

SECRET  of  the  same, — Mercifully  receive,  O 
Lord  the  offerings  consecrated  to  thee  by  the  merits 


Digitized  by  Google 


S36 


'\5th  JANUART. 


of  blessed  Felix  thy  Mart}  r,  and  gi*ant  they  may  be 
a continual  support  to  us.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  QutBsumus.  QT  the  scant. — ^We  be- 
seech thee,  O Lord,  that,  being  fed  by  these  holy 
mysteries  of  our  salvation,  we  may  be  helped  by  the 
prayers  of  blessed  Felix,  thy  Martyr,  whose  festival 
we  celebrate.  Thro’. 


XV.  St.  PAUL,  the  first  Hermit. 

INTROIT,  Justus  ut  palma,  p.  489. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qm  nos. — O God,  who  dost 
comfort  us  by  the  yearly  solemnity  of  blessed  Paul 
thy  Confessor,  mercifully  grant  that  while  we  cele- 
brate his  festival,  we  may  imitate  his  actions.  Thro’ 

Intercessio  of  St.  Maurus.  COLLECT,  jk  491. 

EPISTLE.  Philip  iu.  7. 12. Brethren  z The 

things  that  were  gain  to  me,  the  same  I have  ceuni- 
ed  loss  for  Christ.  Furthermoi*d'  I count  all  things 
to  be  but  loss  for  the  excellent  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ  my  Lord : for  whom  I have  suffered  the  loss 
of  all  things,  and  count  them  but  as  dong,  that  1 
may  gain  Christ:  and  may  be  found  in  him  not 
having  my  justice,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
which  is  of  the  faith  of  Christ  Jesus,  which  is  of  God, 
justice  in  faith : that  I nnay  know  him,  and  the  power 
of  his  resurrection,  and  the  fellowship  of  his  suffer- 
ings, being  made  confoi*mable  to  his  death,  if  by  any 
means  I may  attain  to  the  resurrection  which  is  firom 
the  dead,  ffot  as  though  1 had  already,  attained,  or 
were  already  perfect : but  I follow  after,  if  I may 
by  any  means  apprehend,  wherein  I am  also  appre- 
hended by  Christ  Jesus. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xci. — The  just  shall  ftonrish  Iflte  the 
palm-tree : he  shall  grow  up  like  the  cedar  of  Li- 
banus in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  V.  To  shew  fortli 
thy  mercy  in  the  morning,  and  thy  truth  in  the  night 


Digitized  by  Google 


IGth  JAMTART. 


537 


JUldvia^  AUduicu  The  just  shall  bud  as  the'  lily, 
and  shall  flourish  for  ever  before  the  Lord.  Allduia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xi.  25.  30. At  that  time: 

Jesus  anstsered  and  said:  I confess  to  thee,  O Fa- 
ther, Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  thou  hast 
hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast 
revealed  them  to  little  ones.  Yea,  Father;  for  so 
it  hath  seemed  good  in  thy  sight  All  things  are  de- 
livered to  me  my  Father.  And  no  one  knoweth 
the  Son,  but  the  Father ; neither  doth  any  one  know 
the  Father  but  the  Son,  and  he  to  wliom  it  shall 
please  the  Son  to  reveal  him.  Come  to  me,  all  you 
that  labour,  and  are  burdened,  and  1 will  refresh 
you.  Take  up  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me, 
because  I am  meek,  and  humble  of  heart ; and  you 
«hall  find  r^st  to  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is  sweet, 
and  my  burden  light 

OFFERT,  and  SECRET  as  in  Mass  XIV.  p.  4UL 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixiii. — The  just  shall  rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  and  shall  hope  in  him : and  all  tlie  u[>right  in 
heart  shall  be  praised. 

P.  COMM. — Refecti,  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  480. 
(ySt  Maurus,  Protegat,  eis  in  Mass  XV.  402. 


XVL  St  MARCELLUS,  p.  m. 
f ntroit.  Gradual,  and  Ofiert  as  in  Mass  I.  p,  4fil,  &c. 

COLLECT.  Preces* — ^l\lercifully  hear,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  the  prayers  of  thy  people,  that  we 
may  be  assisted  by  the  merits  of  blessed'  Marcellus, 
thy  Martyr  and  Bishop,  the  feast  of  whose  suflerings 
we  celebrate  with  joy.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE  and  GOSPEL,  from  Mass  IL  p,  464, 
465. 

SECRET.— Graciously  receive,  O God,  we  be- 
eeech  thee,  the  offering  we  have  made,  and,  in 
/sonsidcrafion  of  the  merits  of  blessed  Marcellum,  thy 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


538 


IStil  JANUARY. 


Martyr  and  Bishop,  grant  they  may  pi-ocure  for  us 
the  helps  necessary  to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 
COMM,  as  on  St.  Damascus  the  11th  Dec.  p,  531. 
P.  COMM.  Satiasti. — ^Thou  hast  fed,  O Lord, 

ihy  family  with  these  sacred  oblations ; ever  there- 
fore comfort  us  by  his  intercession,  whose  feast  we 
celebrate.  Thro’. 

XVIII.  St.  PETER’S  CHAIR  at  ROME,  &c. 

By  omitting  the  COMM,  of  Sl  Prisca  f,  this  Mass 
serves  also  for  his  Chair  at  Antioch  on  the  22d 
February. 

INTROIT.  Statuit,  as  in  Mass  I.  p.  461 
COLLECT.  Detis,  tmi  beato. — O God,  who  by 
delivering  to  the  blessed  apostle  Peter  tlje  ke\  s of 
the  kingdom  oflieaven,  didst  give  him  the  power  of 
binding  and  loosing : grant  that,  by  his  intercession, 
we  may  be  freed  from  the  bonds  of  our  sins.  Who 
livest. 

Of  St.  Paul.  Ifeus^  qui  mvUitudmem. — O God, 
who  by  the  preaching  of  blessed  Paul  the  Apostle, 
didst  instruct  the  multitude  of  tlie  Gentiles : grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  that  whilst  we  celebrate  his  mem- 
ory, we  may  find  tl}e  effects  of  his  prayei's.  Thro’. 

f Of  St.  Prisca.  Da  quresumus. — Grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  celebrate 
the  memory  of  blessed  Prisca,  thy  Virgin  and  Mar- 
tyr, may  find  comfort  on  her  yearly  festival  and  im- 
prove by  the  example  of  her  great  faith.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Pet.  i.  1.  7. — Peter,  an  Apostle  of 
Jesus  Christ,  to  the  strangers  dispersed  through 
Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithyuia, 
elect,  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the 
Father,  unto  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  unto 
obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ : 
grace  unto  you  and  peace  be  multiplied.  Blessed  be 
the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 


Digitized  by 


Google 


18^  JANUARY. 


539 


according  to  his  great  mercy  hath  regenerated  us 
unto  a lively  hope,  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
fh)ra  the  dead,  unto  an  inheritance  incoiTuptible,  and 
undefiled,  and  that  cannot  fade,  reserved  in  heaven 
for  you,  who  by  the  power  of  God  are  kept  by  faith 
unto  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time. 
Wherein  you  shall  greatly  rejoice,  if  now  you  must 
l>e  for  a little  time  made  sorrowful  in  divers  tempta- 
tions: that  the  trial  of  your  faith  (much  more  pre- 
cious than  gold,  which  is  tried  by  the  fire)  may  be 
found  unto  praise,  and  glory,  and  honour,  at  the  ap- 
pearing of  Jesus  Christ. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxvL — Let  them  exalt  him  in  the 
jhurch  of  the  people ; and  praise  him  in  the  chair  of 
ihe  ancients.  V»  Let  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  give 
glory  to  him:  and  his  wonderful  works  to  the 
children  of  men.”  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  V,  Thou  art 
Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I will  build  my  church. 
Alleluia,  * 

TRACT.  (After  Septuagesima.)  Thou  art  Peter, 
%nd  upon  this  rock  I will  build  my  church  and  the 
gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  And  1 
will  give  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
V,  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be 
bound  in  heaven.  V.  And  whatsoever  thou  shalt 
ioose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xvi.  as  on  the  29th  of  June. 
Offert.  Thou  art,  &c.  as  in  the  precedhig  Tract,  to  V, 

SECRilT. — ^^May  the  intercession,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  of  Bishop  Peter  thy  apostle,  render  the 
prayers  and  offerings  of  thy  church  acceptable  to 
thee : that  the  mysteries  we  celebrate  in  his  honour, 
may  obtain  for  us  the  pardon  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

Of  St.  Paul. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  of 
thy  people  by  the  prayers  of  Paul  tliy  apostle : that 
what  is  acceptable  to  thee,  because  by  thee  insti- 
tuted, may  become  still  more  acceptable  by  his  in- 
tercession. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^IC 


540 


I9th  jAjiUAaT.  _ 


\ Of  St,  Prisca. — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  the  sacrifice  we  offer  in  honour  of  the  martyrdom 
of  thy  saints,  may  loose  the  bonds  of  our  sins,  and 
procure  for  us  the  gifts  of  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

COMM.— Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  J 
will  build  my  church. 

P.  COMM. — ^May  the  sacrifice  we  have  offered. 
O Lord,  fill  us  with  holy  joy : that  as  we  publish  the 
miracles  thou  hast  virrought  in  the  person  of  thy 
Apostle  Peter,  so  we  may,  through  his  prayers  re- 
ceive the  abundant  effects  of  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

Of  SU  Paul.  Sancti/icati.— Being  sanctified,  0 
Lord,  by  these  saving  mysteries,  we  pray  that  we 
may  never  be  deprived  of  his  intercession  whom  thou 
hast  appointed  our  patron  and  guide. 

\ Of  St.  Prisca.  Qu(Bsumu3,^Being  filled  with 
these  saving  mysteries,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  we  may  be  assisted  by  jthe  prayere  of  her  whose 
festival  we  keep.  Thro’. 


XIX.  St.  WOLSTAN,  Bishop  of  Worcester. 

Mas  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 

COLLECT,  ^ritum. — Infuse  into  our  souls,  0 
Lord,  the  spirit  or  thy  love : that  by  the  intercession 
of  blessed  Wolstan,  thy  Confessor  and  Bishop,  we 
may  be  made  worthy  to  enjoy  the  fruits  thereof  in 
eternal  felicity.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — ^Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
the  offerings  of  thy  suppliant  servants:  and  grant 
that  what  our  guilty  conciences  dare  not  hope  for, 
thy  mercy  would  bestow  on  us,  by  the  intercession 
of  blessed  W olstan.  T hro’. 

P.  COMM.  Salutaris, — Being  replenished,  O Lord, 
with  thy  wholesome  mysteries,  we  humbly  beseech 
thy  clemency,  that  the  prayers  of  him  may  not  be 
wanting  to  us,  under  whose  patronage  thou  hast 
placed  us.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


\iOth  JAIVUART.  541 

XX.  SS.  FABIAN  and  SEBASTIAN  mm. 

INTROIT,  as  in  Mass  VII.  p.  475. 

COLLECT.  Ivjxnnitatem  with  its  Secret  and 
P Comm,  in  the  plural  number,  as  in  p.  462. 

EPISTLE..  Heb,  xi.  33.  39. — Brethren:  The 
saints  by  faith  conquered  kingdoms,  wrought  justice, 
obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions, 
quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of 
the  sword,  recovered  strength  from  weakness,  be- 
came valiant  in  battle,  put  to  flight  the  armies  of 
foreigners : women  received  their  dead  raised  to  life 
again.  But  others  were  racked,  not  accepting  de- 
liverance, that  they  might  find  a better  resurrection. 
And  others  had  trial  of  mockeries  and  stripes,  more- 
over also  of  bands  and  prisons : they  were  stoned, 
they  were  cut  asunder,  they  were  tempted,  they 
were  put  to  death  by  the  sword,  they  wandered  about 
in  sheep-skins,  and  in*  goat-skins,  being  in  want, 
distressed,  afflicted:  of  whom  the  world  was  not 
worthy ; wandering  in  deserts,  in  mountains,  and  in 
dens,  and  in  caves  of  the  earth.  And  all  these  b^ing 
approved  by  the  testimony  of  faith,  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord. 

GRAD.  Exod.  xv. — God  is  glorious  in  his  saints, 
wonderful  in  his  mmesty,  and  performeih  prodigies. 
V.  Thy  right-hand,  O Lord,  is  magnified  in  strength : 
thy  right-hand,  O Lord,  hath  slain  the  enemy. 
Alleluia,  Alleluia,  V,  Thy  saints,  O God,  shall  bless 
thee,  and  publish  the  glory  of  thy  kingdom.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Luke  vi.  as  in  Mass  VIII.  p,  478. 

OFFERT. — Be  glad  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoice  ye 
righteous : and  praise  him  all  ye  upright  of  heart. 

COMM.  Luke  vi. — A great  many  that  were  dis- 
eased, and  tormented  by  unclean  spirits,  came  to  him, 
because  a virtue  proceeded  from  him,  and  healed 
them  all 

Z z 


Digitized  by  Google 


549 


2l8t  Am)  33(/  JANOART. 


XXL  St.  AGNES,  V.  m. 

INTROIT,  Me  expectaverunt,  as  in  p.  496. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  who  makest  choice  of  the  weak  things  of 
tills  w'orld  to  confound  the  strong : mercifully  grant 
that  we,  who  celebrate  the  feast  of  blessed  Agnes, 
thy  Virgin  and  Martyr,  may  experience  the  effects  of 
her  prayers.  Thro’. 

LESSON,  as  in  Mass  XVI.;?.  493. 

GRAD. — Grace  is  spread  on  thy  lips,  therefore 
hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever.  V.  For  thy  truth, 
meekness,  and  righteousness,  shall  thy  right  hand 
also  lead  thee  on  wonderfully.  AUduia^  Alleluia. 
V.  The  five  wise  virgins  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with 
their  lamps,  and  at  midnight  there  was  a cry : Be- 
hold the  bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye  forth  and  meet 
Christ  the  Lord.  Alleluia. 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said  ikt 

Tract,  Veni  Sponsa,  which  with  the  Gospel  and 

Offert,  are  also  taken  from  Mass  XVI.p.494,  &c. 

SECRET. — Favourably  receive,  O Lord,  the  of- 
ferings we  make  thee,  and  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  Agnes,  thy  Virgin  and  Martyr,  loosen  the 
lK)nds  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

COMM. — The  five  wise  virgins,  &c.  as  in  p.  499. 

P.  COMM.  Refecti. — Being  refreshed,  O Lord, 
with  this  heavenly  meat  and  drink,  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee  that  we  may  be  aided  by  her  prayers,  or 
whose  festival  we  have  received  these  sacred  myste 
ries.  Thro’. 


XXII.  SS.  VINCENT  and  ANAST ASIUS,  mm. 

All  as  in  Mass  VII.  v.  475,  except 
COLLECT.  Adesto. — ^Hear,  O Lord,  our  earnest 
prayers,  that  we  who  are  sensible  of  the  guilt  of 
our  crimes,  may  be  delivered  therefrom  by  the  pray- 
ers of  fny  blessed  Maiiyrs  Vincent  and  Anastasiii*. 
Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


23(2  and  242A  jamuabt. 


54.3 

SECRET. — We  bring,  as  in  Mass  VIll.  p,  479. 

P.  COMM.  ClufRsumus. — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  by  the  intercession  of  tliy  blessed 
Martyrs  Vincent  and  Anastasias,  the  heavenly  food 
we  have  received  may  defend  *i8  from  all  advei*sity. 
Thro’. 


XXIII.  St.  RAYMOND  of  PENNAFORT,  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  healum — O God,  who 
didst  make  blessed  Raymond  an  excellent  minister 
ofthe  sacrament  of  penmice,  and  didst  miraculously 
conduct  him  through  tlie  waves  of  the  sea ; grant, 
by  his  intercession,  tliat  we  may  bring  forth  worthy 
fmits  of  penance,  and  be  enal)led  to  arrive  at  ilio 
|M)rt  of  eternal  salvation.  Thro’ 

Commem,  of  St.  Etiiereniiana,  hq  the  Collect,  In- 
dulgentia7n,  with  its  Secret,  ani  P.  Comm,  as  in 
Mass  XVII.  p.  496,  &c. 


XXIV.  St.  TIMOTHY,. bp.  m. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  I.  p.  461.  except 
EPISTLE.  1 Tim.  vi.  11.  16. — Dear  Brother: 
Pursue  justice,  godliness,  faith,  charity,  patience, 
mildness.  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith : lay  hold  on 
eternal  life,  whereunto  thou  art  called,  and  hast 
confessed  a good  confession  before  many  witnesses. 
I charge  thee  before  God,  who  quickeneth  all  things, 
and  before  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave  testimony  under 
Pontius  Pilate,  a good  confession  that  thou  keep 
rhe  commandment  without  spot,  blameless  unto  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  in  his  times 
lie  shall  shew,  who  is  the  Blessed,  and  only  Mighty, 
the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords : who  only  hath 
immorttUity,  and  inhabiteth  light  inaccessible,  whom 
lao  man  hath  seen  nor  can  see  ; to  whom  be  honour 
and  empire  everlasting.  Arneii. 

Zz2 

r Google 


M4 


25^4  JANUARY. 


XXV.  CONVERSION  of  St.  PAUL. 

INTROIT.  2 Tim,  i. — 1 know  whom  I have  be- 
lieved and  I am  certain  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that 
which  I have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day. 
Ps,  Lord  thou  hast  proved  me,  and  hast  known  me: 
iliou  hast  known  rny  sitting  down,  and  my  up-rising. 
V,  Glory 

COI^IiECT.  Dexis^  qui, — O God,  who,  by  the 
preaching  of  blessed  Paul  thy  Apostle,  didst  instruct 
the  whole  world ; grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we, 
who  this  day,  honour  his  conversion,  may,  by  his  ex- 
ample, learn  to  come  to  thee.  Thro’. 

Of  St.  Peter,  Deus^  qui  heato,  as  on  the  Feasi  of 

his  Chair  ai  Rome,  the  18th  of  January,  ».  538. 

LF^SSON.  Acts  ix.  1.  22. — In  those  days : Satil 
breathing  out  threatenings  and  slaughter  against  the 
disciples  of  the  Lord,  went  to  the  high  priest,  and 
asked  of  him  letters  to  Damascus,  to  the  synagogues, 
that  if  he  found  any  men  and  women  of  this  way, 
he  might  bring  them  bound  to  Jerusalem.  And  as 
he  went  on  his  journey,  it  came  to  pass  that  he  drew 
nigh  to  Damascus : and  suddenly  a light  from  hea- 
ven shined  round  about  him.  And  falling  on  the 
ground  he  heard  a voice  saving  to  him  : Saul,  Saul, 
why  persecutest  thou  me  P Who  said : Who  art 
thou.  Lord?  And  he  said:  I am  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
whom  thou  persecutest.  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick 
against  the  goad.  And  be  trembling  and  astonished, 
said:  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?  And 
the  Lord  said  to  him : Arise,  and  go  into  the  city, 
and  there  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  must  do. 
Now  the  men  who  went  in  company  with  him  stood 
amazed,  hearing  indeed  a voice,  but  seeing  no  man. 
And  Saul  arose  from  the  ^ound,  and  when  hik  eyes 
were  opened  he  saw  nothing.  But  they  leading  him 
by  the  hand,  brought  him  to  Damascus.  And  he 
was  there  three  days  without  sight,  and  he  did 
neither  eat  nor  drink.  Now  there  was  a certain  dis- 


Digitized  byCjOOgIC 


*25fA  JANUARr. 


545 


ciple  at  Damascus,  named  Ananias : and  *the  Lord 
said  to  him  in  a vision:  Ananias.  And  he  said: 
Behold  I am  here,  Lord.  And  the  Lord^atdto  him: 
Arise  and  go  into  the  ^reet  that  is  called  Strait,  and 
seek  in  the  house  of  Judas,  one  named  Saul  of  Tarsus. 
For  behold  he  prayeth.  (And  he  saw  a man  named 
Ananias,  coming  in  and  putting  his  hands  upon  him, 
that  he  might  recover  his  sight.)  But  Ananias  an- 
swered : Lord,  I have  heard  by  many  of  this  man,  how 
much  evil  he  liath  done  to  thy  saints  in  Jerusalem: 
and  here  he  bath  autliority  from  the  chief  priests  to 
bind  all  that  invoke  thy  name.  And  the  Lord  said 
to  him : Gro  thy  way,  for  this  man  is  to  me  a vessel 
of  election,  to  caiTy  my  name  before  the  Gentiles,  and 
kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel.  For  I will  shew 
him  how  great  things  he  must  suffer  for  my  name’s 
sake.  And  Ananias  went  his  way,  and  entered  into 
the  house : and  laying  his  hands  upon  him,  he  said : 
Brother  Saul,  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  sent  me,  he  that 
appieared  to  thee  in  the  way  as  thou  earnest:  that 
thou  mayest  receive  thy  sight,  and  be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost.  And  immediately  there  fell  upon  his 
eyes  as  it  were  scales,  and  he  received  his  sight: 
and  rising  up  he  was  baptized.  And  when  he  had 
taken  meat,  he  was  strengthened.  And  he  was  with 
the  disciples  that  were  at  Damascus  for  some  days. 
And  immediately  he  preached  Jesus  in  the  syna- 
gogues, that  he  is  the  Sou  of  God.  And  all  that 
heard  him  were  astonished,  and  said  : Is  not  this  he 
who  persecuted  in  Jerusalem  those  who  called  upon 
tJiis  name : and  came  hither  for  that  intent  that  he 
might  carry  them  bound  to  the  chief  priests?  But 
Saul  increased  much  more  in  strength,  and  confound- 
ed the  Jews  who  dwelt  in  Damascus,  affirming  tliai 
this  is  the  Christ. 

GRAD.  GaL  ii. — He  who  wrought  in  Peter  to 
the  apostleship,  WTought  in  me,  also,  among  tlie 
Z z 3 


Digitized  by  Google 


546 


JANUARY.  * 


Gentiles : and  they  have  known  the  grace  of  God  that 
was  given  to  me.  V.  The  grace  of  God  was  not 
fruitless  in  me : but  his  grace  always  abideth  in  me. 
JUleluia,  AUduicu  V.  The  great  St.  Paul  was  a 
chosen  vessel,  and  truly  worthy  of  honour : who  also 
deserves  to  be  seated  on  a twelfth  throne.  Alleluia, 
AJler  Septiiag.  instead  of  the  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT. — ^Thou,  O holy  Paul,  the  Apostle  art  a 
chosen  vessel : thou  art  truly  worthy  of  glorj  F. 
Thou  wast  the  preacher  of  truth  and  the  doctor  of  the 
Gentiles  in  the  faith  and  in  the  truth.  F.  By  thee 
all  nations  have  known  the  grace  of  God.  F.  Inter- 
cede for  us  to  God  who  chose  thee. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xix.  as  in  Mass  XV.  p.  492. 
OFFERT.  Ps.  cxxxviii. — To  me,  O God,  thy 
friends  are  made  exceedingly  honourable : their 
principality  is  exceedingly  strengthened. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  &c.  asp.  539.  Qf  St,  Peter, 
May  the  intercession,  &c.  ib. 

COMM. — ^Verily  I say  to  you : that  you  who  have 
forsaken  all  things  and  followed  me,  shall  receive  an 
hundred  fold  and  obtain  eternal  life. 

P.  COMM.  Of  St.  Peter,  May,  &c.  as  on  the 
ISth  instant,  p.  540. 

XXVI.  St.  POLYCARP.  bp.  m. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  II.  p.  464,  except 
EPISTLE.  1 John  iii.  10.  16. — Most  dearly  be- 
loved: Whosoever  is  not  just,  is  not  of  God,  nor  he 
that  loveth  not  his  brother.  For  this  is  the  declara- 
tion, which  you  have  heard  from  the  beginning, 
that  you  should  love  one  another.  Not  as  Cain, 
who  was  of  the  wicked  one,  and  killed  his  brother. 
And  wherefore. did  he  kill  him?  Because  his  own 
works  were  wicked : and  his  brother’s  just.  Won- 
der not,  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you.  We  know 
that  we  have  |)assed  fi  om  death  to  life,  liecause  we 


Digitized  by  Google 


27<^  AND  JANUARY.  547 

love  the  brethren.  He  that  loveth  not  abidetli  in 
death.  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother,  is  a murderer. 
Aftd  you  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life 
abiding  in  himself.  In  this  we  have  known  the 
charity  of  God,  because  he  hath  laid  down  his  life  for 
us : and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  bre- 
thren. 

GOSPEL.  MaU.  x.  and  P.  COMM.  Refecti, 
as  in  p.  409. 


XXVIl.  St.  JOHN  CHRYSOSTOM,  bp.  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XII.  p.  485,  except 

COLLECT.  Ecclesiam,— May  thy  heavenly  grace, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  enlarge  the  Church  which 
thou  hast  been  pleased  to  enlighten  by  the  resplen- 
dent virtues  and  learning  of  blessed  John  thy  Con- 
fessor and  Bishop.  Thro’. 

GRAD. — Behold  a great  Prelate,  who  in  his  days 
pleased.  God.  V,  There  was  none  found  like  him  in 
keeping  the  law  of  the  Most  High.  AUel,  AUel, 
V.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  suffereth  temptation,  for 
when  he  hath  been  tried  he  shall  receive  a crown  of 
life.  Allduia, 

XXVHI.  St.  AGNES,  v.  m.  a second  time, 

INTROIT.  Vvltum  tuum,  p.  499. 

COLLECT.  Devs,  qui,—0  God,  who  rejoicest 
us  by  the  yearly  solemnity  of  blessed  Agnes,  thy 
Yirgin  and  Martyr grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we 
may  imitate  her  life,  to  whose  memory  we  pay  this 
bonour.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE,  Gradual  and  Tract,  as  in  p,  500. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xiii.  as  in  p,  501. 

OFFERT. — Grace  is  spread  on  thy  lips,  therefore 
hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever. 

SECRET. — May  thy  blessing,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  plentifully  descend  upon  these  our  offerings, 
that  through  thy  merey  they  may  both  sanctify  us 


Digitized  by  Google 


54b  2M  Aim  tiOlh  jaituart  and  februart. 

and  cause  us  to  rejoice  in  the  solemnity  of  thy  mar- 
tyrs. Thro*. 

COMM. — ^The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a mer- 
chant seeking  good  pearls,  who  having  found  one  of 
great  value,  went  and  sold  all  his  possessions  and 
lK>ught  it. 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimtis. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  that  the  votive  mysteries  we  have  received 
on  this  annual  solemnity,  may  both  succour  us  in 
this  temporal  life,  and  procure  for  us  that  which  will 
have  no  end.  Thro’. 


XXIX.  St.  FRANCIS  de  SALES.  • 
M as  in  Mass  X.  ♦ p,  482,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  for  the  sal- 
vation of  souls  wast  pleased  that  blessed  Francis,  tliy 
Confessor  and  Bishop,  should  become  all  to  all: 
mercifully  grant,  that,  being  plentifully  enriched  witli 
the  sweetness  of  thy  charity,  by  following  his  direc- 
tions, and  b^  the  help  of  his  merits,  we  may  obtain 
life  everlasting.  Thro’. 

XXX.  St.  PETER  NOLASCUS,  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIV.  ».  489,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who,  in  imita- 
tion of  thy  charity,  didst  inspire  blessed  Peter  to  in- 
stitute a new  order  in  the  Church  for  the  redemption 
of  captives;  grant,  by  his  intercession,  that  being 
delivered  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  we  may  enjoy  ever- 
lasting liberty  in  our  heavenly  country.  Thro’. 


Fehrmry  1.  St.  IGNATIUS,  bp.  m. 

INTROIT,  Gal.  vi.— God  forbid  that  1 should 
glory  save  but  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ: 
by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  I to  the 
world.  Ps.  cxxxL  Remember  David,  O Lord,  and 
all  his  meekness.  V.  Glory. 


Digitized  by  Google 


2li  FEBIITJART. 


549 


Coll.  Secr.  and  P.  Comm,  as  in  Mass  1.^.  462. 

EPISTLE.  Rom,  viii.  35.  39. — Brethren : Who 
then  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ? shall 
tribulation  ? or  distress  ? or  famine  ? or  nakedness  ? 
or  danger  ? or  persecution  ? or  the  sword  ? (As  it  is 
written : “ For  thy  sake  we  are  put  to  death  all  the 
day  long.  We  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the 
slaughter.”)  But  in  all  these  things  we  overcome, 
because  of  him  that  hath  loved  us.  For  I am  sure 
that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  princi- 
palities, nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 
to  come,  nor  might,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any 
other  creature,  shcdl  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

GRAD.  Behold,  as  on  January  27,  p,  547. 

•dlleluiOf  Alleluia,  V.  Gal,  ii. — With  Christ  1 am 
nailed  to  the  cross : I live,  now  not  1,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me.  AUeluia, 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said  the 
TRACT,  Desiderium^  p.  462. 

GOSPEL.  John  xii.  a»  on  St  Laurence,  Av^,  10. 

OFFERT. — Thou  hast  crowned,  cls  inp,  4o7. 

COMM. — 1 am  the  wheat  of  Christ : I^m  to  be 
ground  by  the  teeth  of  wild  beasts,  that  I may  be 
round  pure  bread. 


II.  PURIFICATION  of  the  B.  V.  MARY. 

This  feast  is  kept,  not  only  in  remembrance  of  our 
Saviour's  Presentation  in  the  Temple  forty  days 
after  his  birth,  (in  compliance  with  the  law  of  Moses, 
Lev.  xii.)  but  also  in  commemoration  of  his  blessed 
Mother’s  purifying  herself,  by  offering  that  sa- 
crifice in  the  temple,  which  was  prescrited  by  the 
same  law.  Its  institution  must  be  of  an  early  date, 
since  we  find  mention  made  of  it  in  the  5th  centu^. 
By  the  distribution  of  the  blessed  candles,  the  faithful 
are  exhorted  to  be  as  piously  disposed  as  holy  Simeon 
was  when  he  took  Christ  in  his  arms,  and  prophesied 
that  he  should  become  the  light  of  the  Gentiles  and 


Digitized  by  CjOO^IC 


55a 


FEBRUARY. 


the  GLORY  of  Israel.  Let  us  therefore  receive  the  can 
dies  from  the  hands  of  the  Priest  with  a becoming  piety, 
as  an  emblem  of  Christ,  who  is  the  light  of  our  souls,  and 
with  him  let  us  also  offer  up  ourselves,  as  purified  by 
his  blood  to  his  Eternal  Father. 

M the  BLESSING  of  the  CANDLES. 

The  Lord  be  \vitl\  you.  R,  And  with  thy  spirit 
Let  us  pray.  Domine  sancte, 

Holy  Lord,  Father  Almighty  and  Eternal  God, 
who  didst  create  all  things  out  of  nothing, 
and  by  the  labour  of  the  bees  following  thy  com- 
mands, hast  brought  this  liquor  to  the  perfection  of 
wax;  and  who,  on  this  day,  didst  accomplish  the 
desire  of  the  righteous  Simeon,  we  humbly  beseech 
tliee,  that  by  the  invocation  of  thy  most  holy  name, 
and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Mary,  ever  a vir- 
gin, whose  festival  we  this  day  devoutly  celebrate, 
and  by  the  prayers  of  all  thy  saints,  thou  wouldst 
vouchsafe  to  bless  and  sanctify  + these  candles, 
for  the  service  of  men,  and  for  the  good  of  their  bodies 
aii^  souls  in  all  places ; and  that  thou  wouldst  please 
mercifully  to  hear  from  thy  holy  temple,  and  from 
the  throne  of  thy  majesty,  the  prayers  of  this  thy 
people,  who  tlesire  to  carry  them  in  their  hands  with 
reverence,  and  with  sacred  hymns  to  praise  thy 
name ; and  shew  mercy  to  all  that  cry  out  unto  thee, 
whom  thou  hast  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of 
thy  beloved  Son ; who  liveth.  R,  Amen. 

Let  us  pray.  Omnipotens  sempiterne  Deus, 

O ALMIGHTY  and  Eternal  Grod,  who  on  this 
day  wast  ple^ased  that  thy  only  Son  should  be 
presented  in  the  temple,  and  be  received  into  the 
arms  of  holy  Simeon : we  humbly  beseech  thy  mercy 
to  bless  sjuictify  «f»,  and  give  the  light  of  thy 
Heavenly  benediction  to  these  candles,  which  we  thy 
servants  desire  to  carry  in  honour  of  thy  name:  that 
by  offering  them  to  thee,  our  Lord  God,  we  may  be 
inflamed  with  the  fire  of  thy  sweet  love,  and  made 


Digitized  by  Google 


2d  FEBRUART.  55] 

virortby  to  be  presented  in  the  holy  temple  of  thy 
glory.  Thro’ the  same.  i2.  Amen. 

Let  us  pray.  Domine  Jesu, 

Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  true  light,  that  enlighten 
eth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world ; 
pour  forth  thy  blessing  «f»  upon  these  candles,  and 
sanctify  «f»  them  by  the  light  of  Jhy  grace : and  grant 
in  thy  mercy,  that  as  these  candles,  by  their  visible 
light,  dispel  the  darkness  of  the  night,  so  our  hearts, 
burning  with  invisible  fire,  and  enlightened  by  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  may  be  delivered  from  all 
blindness  of  sin:  that  the  eye  of  our  soul  being 
purified,  we  may  discern  those  things  that  are  pleas- 
ing to  thee,  and  beneficial  to  our  souls : that  after 
having  finished  the  darksome  passage  of  this  life,  we 
inay  come  to  never-fading  joys  through  thee,  O Jesus 
Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  who,  in  perfect 
Trinity  livest.  R.  Amen. 

Let  us  pray.  Omnipotens  sempiterne, 

O ALMIGHTY  and  Eternal  God,  who,  by  thy 
servant  Moses,  commaiidest  the  purest  oil  to 
be  prepared  for  lamps,  continually  to  burn  in  thy 
presence,  mercifully  pour  forth  the  gi-ace  of  thy  bless- 
ing •{«  on  these  candles:  that  as  they  supply  us  with 
visible  light,  so,  by  thy  assistance,  the  light  of  thy 
Spirit  may  never  be  wanting  inwardly  in  our  souls. 
Thro’.  R,  Amen. 

Let  us  pray.  Domine  Jesu. 

Lord  Jesus  Cflrist,  who  appearing  amongst  men 
in  the  substance  of  her  flesh,  wast  pleased  this 
day  to  be  presented  in  the  temple  by  thy  parents, 
and  whom  the  venerable  Simeon,  enlightened  by  the 
Holy  Ghos't,  publicly  confessing,  received  in  his  arms, 
and  blessed : mercifully  grant,  that,  being  inspired 
Olid  taught  by  the  grace  of  the  same  holy  Spirit,  we 
may  sincerely  acknowledge  and  faithfully  love  thee : 
who  with  God  the  Father,  in  the  unity  of  the  same 
Holy  Spirit,  livest,  &c.  R.  Amen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


552 


2i  FEBRUARY. 


Here  the  Priest  having  put  incense  in  the  Censer 
sprinkles  the  Candles  with  Holy  Water,  sa^ng. 
Sprinkle,  &c.  D.  xiii.  tmthoid  the  Ps,  AJler  fum- 
ing them  he  distributes  them  to  the  Faithful,  whc 
receive  them  kneeling,  kissing  the  Candle, 
and  then  the  Hand  of  the  Priest.  During  the 
Distribution  of  the  Candles  is  sung^ 
x\NT.  Lumen  ad  revelationem  Gentium,  et  glo^ 
riam  plebis  tujB  Israel. 

Canticle,  Luke  ii. 

Nunc  dimittis  servum  tuum  Domine : * secun- 
dum verbum  tuum  in  pace.  Arii,  Lumen,  &c. 
Quia  viderunt  oculi  mei : * salutare  tuum. — 
Ard,  Lumen,  &c. 

Quod  parasti  ♦ ante  faciem  omnium  populorum. 
Ani.  Lumen,  &c. 

Gloria  Patri,  &c.  Ard,  Lumen,  &c. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio,  &c.  Lumen,  &c. 
Then  is  sung  the  foUototng 
Exurge  Domine  adjuva  nos:  et  libera  nos 
propter  nomen  tuum.  Ps,  Deus  auribus  nostris  audi- 
vimus ; patres  nostri  annuntiaverunt  nobia  V,  Gloria. 
Ant.  Exurge,  to  Ps, 

After  Septiiag.  when  this  Festival  does  not  faU  on  a 
Sunday,  is  said 

P,  Flectamus  genua.  R,  Levate. 
PRAYER.  Exaudi, — Give  ear,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  to  thy  people;  that  what  we  outwardly 
perform  by  this  yearly  devotion, •we  may  inwardly 
obtain  the  effects  of,  by  the  light  of  thy  grace.  Thitr 
Amen. 

At  Mass  the  Candles  are  held  lighted  during  the  Goa- 
pel,  and  from  the  Consecration,  tiU  after  the  Com 
munion. 

INTROIT,  * Suscmmus,  as  in  p,M, 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O Almighty  and  Eter- 
nal God,  we  humbly  beseech  thy  divine  majesty, 
that  as  thy  only  Son  in  the  substance  of  our  ffesh, 


Digitized  by  Google 


* FEBRUARY. 


553 


was  this  day  presented  in  the  temple,  so  our  souls, 
being  perfectly  cleansed,  may  become  a pure  obla- 
tion and  presented  to  thee.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Mai,  iii.  1.  4.  — Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God  : Behold  I send  my  angel,  and  he  shall  prepare 
the  way  before  my  face.  And  presently  the  Lord 
whom  you  seek,  and  the  angel  of  the  ^Testament 
whom  you  desire,  shall  come  to  his  temple.  Behold 
he  cometh,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts : and  who  shajl 
be  able  to  think  of  the  day  of  his  coming  ? and  who 
shall  stand  to  see  him?  For  he  is  like  a refining 
fire, and  like  the  fuller’s  herb:  and  he  shall  sit  refin- 
ing and  cleansing  the  silver,  and  he  shall  purify  the 
sons  of  Levi,  and  shall  refine  them  as  gold,  and  as 
silver,  and  they  shall  offer  sacrifices  to  the  Lord  in 
justice.  And  the  sacrifice  of  Judea  and  Jerusalem 
shall  please  the  Lord,  as  in  the  days  of  old,  and  in 
the  ancient  years:  saith  the  Lord  Almighty. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xlvii. — We  have  received  thy  mercy 
O God,  in  the  midst  of  thy  temple  ; according  to  thy 
name,  O God,  so  also  is  thy  praise  unto  the  ends  of 
the  earth.  V,  As  we  have  heard,  so  have  we  seen 
in  the  city  of  our  God,  on  his  holy  mountain.  Al- 
leluia, Alleluia.  V,  The  old  man  carried  the  Child, 
and  the  Child  governed  the  old  man.  Alleluia. 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 

TjRACT.  JVunc  dimittis. — Now  thou  dost  dis- 
miss thy  sei*vant,  O Lord,  according  to  thy  word,  in 
peace.  Because  my  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation. 
Which  thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all  peo- 
ple. A light  to  the  revelation  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
the  gloiy  of  thy  people  Israel. 

GOSPfJL.  Luke  ii.  22  32. At  that  time : 

After  the  days  of  the  purification  of  Mary,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  Moses,  were  accomplished,  they 
trarried  Jesus  to  Jerusalem,  to  present  him  to  the 
Lord.  As  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  Every 
male  opening  the  womb  shall  be  called  holy  to  the  Lora. 

Digitized  by  Google 


554 


FEBRUARI. 


And  to  offer  a sacrifice  according  as  it  is  written 
in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  a pair  of  turtle  doves,  or  two 
young  pigeons.  And  behold  there  was  a man  in  Je- 
rusalem named  Skneon,  and  this  man  was  just  and 
devout,  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel : and 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  in  him.  And  he  had  received 
an  answer  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he  should  not 
see  death,  before  he  had  seen  the  Christ  of  the  Lord. 
And  he  came  by  the  Spirit  into  tlie  temple.  And 
when  his  parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus,  to  do 
for  him  according  to  the  custom  of  the  law,  he  also 
took  him  into  his  arms,  and  blessed  God,  and  said : 
Now  thou  dost  dismiss  thy  servant,  O Lord,  accord- 
ing to  thy  word,  in  peace.  Because  my  eyes  have 
seen  thy  salvation,  which  thou  hast  prepared  before 
the  face  of  all  peoples : a light  to  the  revelation  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  thy  people  Israel 
Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xliv. — Grace  is  spread  on  thy  lips, 
therefore  hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever  and  ever. 

SECRET. — ^Mercifully  hear  our  prayers,  O Lord, 
and  grant  us  the  assistance  of  thy  mercy,  that  what 
we  offer  to  thy  divine  majesty  may  be  worthy  to  be 
accepted.  Thro*. 

Preface,  Quia  per  incarnati,  p,  xxx. 
COMM.  IjuMe  i. — Simeon,  received  an  answer 
from  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he  should  not  see  deatb 
till  he  beheld  the  Christ  of  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  QucBsumus, — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord 
our  God,  that  the  sacred  mysteries  we  have  received 
to  preserve  our  new  life,  may  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  Mary,  ever  a Virgin,  become  a remedy  to  us 
both  now  and  for  the  future.  Thro*. 

Wien  the  Purification  falls  on  Septuagesima,  Sexa- 
gesima, or  Quinquagesima  Sunday,  although  the 
Candles  are  biessecU  fyc,  yet  the  Mass  is  doored 
till  next  day. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J 


555 


Ath  AND  Wl  FEBRUARY. 

IV.  St  ANDREW  CORSJNI,  bp  c. 

M as  in  Mass  X*.  p.  482,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus^  quL — O God,  who  m every 
age  furuishest  the  Church  with  fresh  examples  of 
virtue : grant  thy  faithful  so  closely  to  imitate  bless- 
ed Andrew,  thy  Confessor  and  Bishop,  as  to  be,  one 
day,  partakers  in  his  reward.  Thro’. 


V.  St.  AGATHA,  v.  m. 

ML  as  in  Mass  XVJ.  p,  493,  except 

INTROIT. — Let  us  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  cele- 
brate this  festival  in  honour  of  blessed  Agatha  the 
Martyr,  for  whose  martyrdom  the  angels  rejoice, 
and  join  in  the  praises  of  the  Son  of  God.  Ps,  My 
heart  hath  uttered  a good  word : I speak  my  works 
to  the  king.  V,  Glory. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  i.  2a  31. — Brethren:  See 
your  vocation,  that  there  are  not  many  wise  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble : 
but  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  hath  God  chosen, 
that  he  may  confound  the  wise:  and  the  weak 
things  of  the  world  hath  God  chosen,  that  b)  may 
confound  the  strong:  and  the  bitse  things  of  the 
world,  and  the  things  that  are  contemptible  hath 
God  chosen,  and  things  that  are  not,  that  he  might 
bring  to  nought  things  that  are,  that  no  flesh  should 
glory  in  his  sight.  But  of  him  are  you  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and 
justice,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption:  that, 
as  it  is  written.  He  that  glorieth,  may  glory  i \ the 
t^ora 

GRAD.  Ps.  xlv. — God  will  assist  her  wit’;  his 
looks:  God  is  in  her,  and  she  shall  not  fail.  y\  A 
swift  running  stream  rejoiceth  the  city  of  God'  the 
Most  High  hath  consecrated  his  tabernacle.  MU  'da^ 
3 A2 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


556 


SUh  FEBRUARY. 


JUldtua,  V,  I spoke  of  thy  testimonies  before  kings, 
and  I was  not  ashamed.  Allelvia, 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 
TRACT,  Qui  seminant,  p.  476. 

GOSPEL.  MatL  xix.  3.  12. At  that  time: 

The  Pharisees  came  to  Jesus  tempting  him,  and  say- 
ing: Is  it  lawful  for  a man  to  put  away  his  wife 
for  every  cause?  Who  answering,  said  to  them: 
Have  ye  not  read,  that  he  who  made  man  from  the 
beginning,  made  them  male  and  female^  And  be 
said : For  this  cause  shall  a man  leave  father  and 
mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  two 
shall  he  in  one  flesh.  Therefore  now  they  are  not  two, 
but  one  flesh.  What  therefore  Gfod  hath  joined  to- 
gether, let  no  man  put  asunder.  They  say  to  him: 
Why  did  Moses  command  to  give  a bill  of  divorce,  and 
to  put  away  ? He  saith  to  them : Because  Moses, 
by  reason  of  the  hardness  of  your  heart,  permitted 
you  to  put  away  your  wives : but  from  the  begin- 
ning it  was  not  so.  And  I say  to  you,  that  whosoever 
shall  put  away  his  wife,  except  it  be  for  fornication, 
and  shall  marry  another,  comrnitteth  adultery  ; and 
he  that  shall  marry  her  that  is  put  away,  comrnitteth 
adultery.  His  disciples  say  unto  him : If  the  case 
of  a man  with  his  wife  be  so,  it  is  not  expedient  to 
marry.  Who  said  to  them : All  men  take  not  this 
word*  but  they  to  whom  it  is  given.  For  there  are 
eunuchs,  who  were  born  so  from  their  mother’s 
womb:  and  there  are  eunuchs,  who  were  made  so 
by  men : and  there  are  eunuchs,  who  have  made 
themselves  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  He 
that  can  take,  let  him  take  it. 

COMM.  — He  who  vouchsafed  to  heal  all  ray 
wounds,  and  restore  my  breast  to  niy  body,  is  the 
living  God,  whom  I call  upon. 


Digitized  by  Google 


c 

8th^  AND  liih  FEBRUART.  557 

VIII.  St.  JOHN  of  MATHA,  c. 

M as  in  Mass  XIII.'jo.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus, — O God,  who  by  Holy  John 
was  pleased  under  thy  heavenly  directions  to  insti- 
tute the  Order  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  for  the  re- 
demption of  captives  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Saracens: 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  by  his  merits  we  may 
be  delivered,  by  thy  grace,  from  all  captivity  of  both 
body  and  mind.  Thro’. 


X.  St.  SCHOLASTICA,  v. 

M as  in  Mass  XIX.  p,  498,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  to  recom- 
mend to  us  innocence  of  life,  wast  pleased  to  let  the 
soul  of  thy  blessed  Virgin  Scholastica  ascend  to  hea- 
ven in  the  shape  of  a dove : grant  by  her  merits  and 
prayers,  that  we  may  lead  innocent  lives  here,  and 
ascend  to  eternal  joys  hereafter.  Thro’. 


XIV.  St.  VALENTINE,  pr.  and  m. 

All  as  in  Mass  III.  p.  466,  except 

COLLECT.  Prcesta, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  solemnize  the  festival 
of  blessed  Valentine,  thy  Martyr,  may,  by  his  instruc- 
tion be  delivered  from  all  the  evils  that  threaten  us. 
Thro’. 

SECRET.  — Be  appeased,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  with  tlie  offerings  we  have  made,  and  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  Valentine,  thy  Martyr,  defend 
us  from  all  dangers.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sit  nobis, — May  this  divine  sacrament 
sti^ngthen  us,  O Lord,  both  in  body  and  soul,  that 
by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Valentine,  thy  Martyr, 
we  may  receive  the  effects  of  what  we  celebrate. 
Thro’. 


3 A 3 


558 


24f^  OR  FEBRUARY. 


XXIV.  or  XXV.  St.  MATTHIAS,  ap. 

INTROIT,  Mihi  autem,  asinp,  524. 

COLLECT.  Deus, — O God,  who  didst  add  bless- 
ed Matthias  to  the  number  of  thy  Apostles,  grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  that  by  his  prayers  we  may  be  ever 
sensible  of  the  efects  of  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Acts  i.  15.  26. In  those  days: 

Peter  rising  up  in  the  midst  of  the  brethren,  said : 
(now  the  number  of  persons  together  was  about  an 
hundred  and  twenty.)  Men  brethren,  the  scripture 
must  needs  be  fulfilled  which  the  Holy  Ghost  spoke 
before  by  the  mouth  of  David  concerning  Judas,  who 
was  the  leader  of  them  that  apprehended  Jesus : who 
was  numbered  with  us,  and  had  obtained  part  of  this 
’ministry.  And  he  indeed  hath  possessed  a field  of 
the  reward  of  iniquity,  and  being  hanged,  burst 
asunder  in  the  midst : and  all  his  bowels  gushed  out. 
And  it  became  known  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  Jeru- 
salem : so  that  the  same  field  was  called  in  their 
tongue  Haceldama,  that  is  to  say,  the  field  of 
blood.  For  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Psalms: 
Let  their  habitation  become  desolate^  and  let  there  be 
none  to  dwell  therein.  And  his  bishopric  let  another 
take.  Wherefore  of  these  men  who  have  coin- 
panied  with  us,  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
came  in  and  went  out  among  us,  beginning  from  the 
baptism  of  John  until  the  day  wherein  he  was  taken 
up  from  us,  one  of  these  must  be  made  a witness 
with  us  of  his  resurrection.  And  they  appointed  two, 
Joseph,  called  Barsabas,  who  was  surnamed  Justus, 
and  Matthias.  And  praying  they  said  : Thou,  Lord, 
who  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  men,  shew  whether  of 
these  two  thou  hast  chosen,  to  take  the  place  of  this 
ministry  and  apostleship,  from  which  Judas  hath 
by  transgression  fallen,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own 
place.  And  they  gave  tliem  lots,  and  the  lot  fell 


• Digitized  by  Google 


2£?  MARCH.  55{) 

upon  Matthias  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  eleven 
apostles. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxxxviii. — ^Thy  friends,  O God,  aie 
made  exceedingly  honourable : their  principality  is 
exceedingly  strengthened.  V.  1 will  number  them, 
and  they  shall  be  multiplied  above  the  sand. 

TRACT,  Desiderium  animee^  p.  462. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xi.  as  on  15th  January,  p.  537. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xliv. — Thou  shall  make  them 
princes  over  all  the  earth  : they  shall  remember  thy 
name,  O Lord,  throughout  all  generations. 

SECRET.—  Grant,  O Lord,  that  (the  prayer  of 
blessed  Matthias  thy  apostle,  accompanying  the  offer- 
ings we  make  to  thy  holy  name]  we  may  be  both 
cleansed  from  our  sins,  and  defenned  thereby.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt,  xix. — You  who  have  followed  me, 
shall  sit  on  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel. 

P.  COMM.  Preesta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  by  virtue  of  the  sacrament 
we  have  received,  and  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Matthias,  thy  apostle,  we  may  obtain  the  pardon 
our  sins  and  peace.  Thro’.  / 


Match  11.  St.  CHAD,  Bishop  of  Litchfield. 
jm  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — Almighty  and  eternal 
God,  who  rejoicest  us  this  day  in  the  observation  of 
the  festival  of  blessed  Chad,  thy  confessor  and  bishop, 
we  humbly  beseech  thy  clemency,  that,  as  we  de- 
voutly observe  his  solemnity,  we  may  through  his  in- 
tercession obtain  the  reward  of  eternal  life.  Thro’. 

SECRET. Be  favourable,  O Lord,  to  our 

prayers:  and  grant,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Chad,  thy  confessor  and  bishop,  that  by  assisting  at 
these  mysteries,  we  may  be  delivered  from  all  sin, 
and  purified  by  thy  grace.  Thro’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


560 


Aih  AND  7th  MARCH. 


P.  COMM.  Pr(Bstcu — Grant,  we  beseeih  thee 
O I.ord,  our  God,  that  we  who  have  offered  to  thee 
these  divine  mysteries,  may  obtain  thy  mercy  and 
arlvance  to  a full  enjoyment  of  them  above.  Thro’. 


IV.  St  CASIMIR,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  Xlll.  p.  48S,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus.  qui, — O God,  who  amidst  the 
delights  of  a court,  and  tlie  attractive  snares  of  the 
world,  didst  preserve  holy  Casimir  constant  and  faith- 
ful in  thy  service : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  by 
his  intercession,  thy  people  may  despise  the  transitory 
things  of  this  world,  and  eagerly  pursue  those  that 
are  everlasting.  Thro’. 

Here  is  made  a Commem,  of  St  Lucius  hy  the 
• N Collect,  &c.  of  Mass  II.  p,  464. 


VII.  St  THOMAS  of  AQUIN,  c.  D. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XII.  p.  485,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — 0»God,  who  by  the 
wonderful  learning  of  blessed  Thomas,  thy  confessor, 
hast  illustrated  thy  Church,  and  by  his  virtues  bast 
enlarged  it:  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  may 
understand  what  he  taught,  and,  in  our  lives,  follow 
what  he  practised.  Thro’. 

LESSON,  ffisd,  vii.  7.  14. — ^I  wished,  and  un- 
derstanding was  given  me : and  I called  upon  God, 
and  the  spirit  of  wisdom  came  upon  me : and  I pre- 
ferred her  before  kingdoms  and  thrones,  and  esteem- 
ed riches  nothing  in  comparison  of  her.  Neith^  did 
I compare  unto  her  any  precious  stone,  for  all  gold 
in  comparison  of  her  is  as  a little  sand,  and  silver  in 
respect  to  her  shall  be  counted  as  clay.  I loved  her 
above  health  and  beauty,  and  chose  to  have  her  in- 
stead of  light,  for  her  light  cannot  be  put  out.  Now 
all  good  things  came  to  me  together  with  her,  and 
innumerable  riches  through  her  hands.  And  I re- 


Digitized  by  Google 


V 


9thAyi>  10th  MARCH.  56 J 

joiced  in  them  all : for  this  wisdom  went  before  me, 
and  I knew  not  that  she  was  the  mother  of  them  all. 
Which  I have  learned  without  guile,  and  communi- 
cate without  en^^,  and  her  riches  I hide  not.  For 
she  is  an  infinite  treasure  to  men,  which  they  that 
use  become  the  friends  of  God,  being  commended 
for  the  gifts  of  discipline. 


IX.  St.  FRANCES,  w. 

M as  in  Mass  XXI.  p.  502,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus, — O God,  who  amongst  other 
privileges  of  thy  grace  didst  honour  blessed  Frances, 
tliy  handmaid,  with  the  familiar  company  of  Angels : 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  by  her  prayei-s,  that  we  also 
may  be  admitted  into  their  society.  Thro’. 


X.  The  FORTY  MARTYRS. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  xxxiii. — ^The  just  cried  and  the 
Lord  heard  them:  and  delivered  them  out  of  all 
their  troubles.  Ps,  I will  bless  the  Lx)rd  at  all 
times:  his  praise  shall  be  always  in  my  mouth. 
V,  Glo^. 

COLLECT.  Praesta,  — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almi'ghty  God,  that  as  we  have  seen  the  courage 
of  thy  holy  martyrs,  in  the  confession  of  thy  faith,  so 
we  may  experience  then*  kindness  in  interceding  with 
thee  for  us.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE,  Heh,  xi.  as  on  January  20,  p,  541. 

. GRAD.  Ps,  cxxxii. — Behold  how  good  and  plea- 
sant it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity 
V,  It  ffe  like  the  precious  ointment  on  the  head,  that 
ran  down  upon  the  beard,  the  beard  of  Aaron. 

TRACT,  seminant,  as  in  Mass  VII.  p,  476. 
and  GOSPEL,  Jjuke  vi.  from  Mass  VII.  p,  478. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xxxi. — Be  glad  in  the  Lord,  and 
rejoice,  O ye  just ; and  ^lory  all  ye  right  of  heart. 


Digitized  by  Google 


iltk  AJSD  12ih  BIARCH. 


5(S 

SECRET.  — MercifuDy  look  down,  O Lord,  on 
the  sacrifice  we  offer  thee  : and  grant,  by  the  inter- 
cession of  thy  martyrs,  tliat  it  may  increase  our  de- 
votion, and  avail  to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM. — McUL  xii. — Whoever  shall  do  the  will 
of  my  Father,  that  is  in  heaven : he  is  my  brother 
and  sister,  and  mother,  saith  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Qu{Bsumii3. — We  beseech  thee,  O Al- 
mighty God,  that  we  may  one  day  obtain  the  effects 
of  that  salvation,  of  which  we  have  received  the 
pledge  in  these  mysteries.  Thro’. 


XI.  St.  JOHN  of  GOD. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  488,  except 

COLLECT.  Dem,  quL — O God,  who  didst  grant 
thy  servant  John,  being  iufiamed  with  the  fire  of  thy 
love,  to  walk  without  hurt  through  the  midst  of 
flames,  and  by  him  institute  a new  order  in  thy 
Church  : grant,  by  his  merits,  that  the  fire  of  thy 
charily  may  cure  our  diseased  souls,  and  obtain  for 
us  eternal  remedies. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxii.  as  in  p,  432.  ^ 

XII.  St.  GREGORY,  p.  c. 

INTROIT,  Sacerdotes  tui,  Mass  XI.  p.  484. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  bast  re- 
warded the  soul  of  blessed  Gregory,  thy  servant, 'with 
eternal  bliss : mercifully  grant  that  we  who  are  op- 
pressed by  the  weight  of  our  sins,  may  find  relief  by 
liis  intercession.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Tim.  as  in  Mass  XII.  p.  486. 

GRAD. — ^The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  he  will  not 
repent,  thou  ait  a priest  for  ever  according  to  the 
order  of  Melchisedech.  V.  The  Lord  said  to  iny 
\Lord,  sit  thou  at  my  right-hand. 

TRACT,  Beatus  vir,  as  in  p.  465. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Util  AND  19til  MARCH.  563 

GOSPEL,  Matt,  v.  as  in  p,  487. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by 
the  intercession  of  blessed  Gregory, that  this  sacrifice 
may  be  beneficial  to  us,  by  the  offering  of  which 
thou  hast  been  pleased  to  cancel  the  sins  of  the  world. 
Thro’. 

COMM. — This  is  the  prudent  and  faithful  servant, 
whom  the  Lord  placed  over  his  family,  to  give  them 
their  measure  of  wheat  in  due  season. 

P.  COMM.  DeuSf  qui, — O God,  who  didst  equal 
blessed  Gregory,  thy  Bishop,  to  the  rest  of  thy 
saints  in  merit : mercifully  grant,  that  as  we  cele- 
brate his  memory,  we  may  also  follow  his  example. 
Thro’. 


XVII.  St.  PATRICK,  ap.  and  patron  of  Ireland. 

„^111  as  in  Mass  X.*  p,  482,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  gut. — O God,  who  wast  pleas- 
ed to  send  blessed  Patrick  thy  Bishop  and  Confessor, 
to  preach  thy  glory  to  the  Gentiles : grant,  that  by 
his  merits  and  intercession  we  may,  through  tliy 
grace,  be  enabled  to  keep  thy  commandments. — 


XIX.  Sl  JOSEPH,  c. 

INTROIT,  Justus  ut  palma,  Mass  XIV,  p.  489. 

CQLLECT.  Sanctissima, Grant,  we  l)eseec.h 

thee,  O Lord,  that  we  may  be  assisted  by  the  merits 
of  the  spouse  of  thy  most  Holy  Virgin  Mother,  and 
that  what  we  cannot  Obtain  through  our  own  weak- 
ness, may  be  grained  us  by  his  prayers.  Who. 
Lesson,  Eedes,  xlv.  p,  491.  Grad.  Ps,  xx.  p.  492,  ani 
T<  act,  Ps,  cxi.  p,  465. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  i.  18.  21.— When  Mdry,  the 
mother  of  Jesus  was  espoused  to  Joseph,  before 
they  came  together,  she  was  found  with  child  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Whereupon  Joseph  her  husband,  being  « 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


5G4  20/^  MARCH. 

a just  man,  and  not  willing  publicly  to  expose  her, 
was  minded  to  put  her  away  privately.  But  while 
he  thought  on  these  things,  behold  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  appeared  to  him  in  his  sleep,  saying:  Joseph, 
son  of  David,  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy 
wife,  for  that  which  is  conceived  in  her,  is  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  And  she  shall  bring  forth  a Son,  and 
thou  shall  call  his  name  Jesua  For  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  their  sins. 

OFFERT.— My  truth  and  my  mercy  are  with 
him  : and  in  my  name  shall  his  power  be  exalted. 

SECRET. — ^We  pay  thee,  O Lord,  out  boundeo 
homage,  humbly  beseeching  thee,  to  preserve  in  us 
thy  gifts,  by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Joseph,  the  hus- 
band of  the  Mother  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  thy 
Son,  on  whose  festival  we  offer  thee  this  sacrifice  of 
praise.  Thro\ 

COMM. — Joseph,  son  of  David,  fear  not  to  take 
Mary  thy  wife : for  that  which  is  conceived  in  her  is 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

P.  COMM. — Adesto, — Hear  us,  O merciful  God, 
and  vouchsafe,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Joseph, 
thy  confessor,  to  preserve  in  us,  what  thou  has^  be- 
stowed on  us.  Thro’. 


XX.  Sl  CUTHBERT,  bp.  of  Lindisfame,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  didst  ren- 
der the  saints  glorious  by  the  inestimable  gifts  of  thy 
grace,  grant,  by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Cuthbert,  thy 
confessor  and  bishop,  that  we  may  worthily  arrive 
at  the  summit  of  virtue.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
the  sacrifice  of  the  redemption  of  mankind,  and  by 
the  prayers  of  blessed  Cuthbert,  thy  confessor  and 
bishop,  may  it  procure  for  us  health  of  body  and 
soul.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


25^/t  MARCH. 


565 


P.  COMM.  Sancta, — ^May  the  holy  mysteries  we 
nave  received,  O Lord,  protect  us  by  their  efficacy, 
and  through  the  intercession  of  blessed  Cuthbert,  thy 
confessor  and  bishop  the  lustre  of  whose  life  shined  so 
gloriously,  preserve  us  in  peace  and  holiness.  Thro’. 


XXV.  ANNUNCIATION  of  the  B.  M. 

INTROIT,  Vultum  tuum.  Mass  XX.  p.  499. 

05^  For  the  Collect,  Secret,  and  P.  Cornm.  see  the 
II.  Collect,  &c,  on  the  first  Sunday  of  Advent,' 
p(^es  50  and  .52. 

LESSON.  See  II.  Lesson,  Is,  vii.  10.  16.  p,  59. 
GRAD. — Grace  is  spread  on  thy  lips:  therefore 
hath  the  Lord  blessed  thee  for  ever.  V,  For  thy 
truth,  meekness  and  righteousness,  shall  thy  right 
hand  lead  thee  on  wonderfully. 

TRACT,  Ps,  xliv. — ^Audi  filia,  p,  498. 

Jljlcr  Easter,  instead  of  the  foregoing  Grad,  and 
Tract,  is  said  Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  »dve  Maiia^ 
gratia  plena : Dominus  tecum : henedicta  tu  in  mu- 
leribus.  Alleluia.  V,  Hail  Mary,  full  of  gi-ace,  the 
Lord  is  with  thee : blessed  art  thou  antoiigst  women. 
Alleluia,  V,  A Sucker  of  Jesse  hath  budded:  a 
Virgin  hath  brought  forth  him  who  is  God  and 
man : God  hath  restored  peace,  by  reconciling  in  his 
person,  the  highest  things  with  the  lowest.  Alleluia, 
GOSPEL.  Luke  i.  §6.  38. — At  that  time : The 
angel  Gabriel  was  sent  from  God  into  a city  of 
Galilee,  called  Nazareth,  to  a virgin  espoused  to 
a man  whose  name  was  Joseph,  of  the  house 
of  David ; and  the  virgin’s  name  was  Mary.  And 
the  angel  being  come  in,  said  unto  her:  Hail 
Mary,  full  of  grace,  the  Lord  is  with  thee : blessed 
art  thou  among  women.  Who  having  heard,  was 
troubled  at  his  saying,  and  thought  with  herself 
what  manner  of  salutation  this  should  be.  And 
3 B 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


f APRIL. 


.V56 

the  angel  said  to  her:  Fear  not,  Mary,  for  thou 
hast  found  grace  with  God.  Behold  thou  shalt  con- 
ceive in  thy  womb,  and  shalt  bring  forth  a son. 
and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus.  He  shall  be 
great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Most  High, 
and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of 
David  his  father : and  he  shall  reign  in  the  house  of 
Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no 
end.  And  Mary  said  to  the  angel : How  shall  this 
be  done,  because  I know  not  man  ? And  the  angel 
answering,  said  to  her:  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come 
upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Most  High  shall  over- 
shadow thee.  And  therefore  also  the  Holy  which 
shall  be  bom  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God. 
And  behold  thy  cousin  Elizabeth  she  also  hath  con- 
ceived a son  in  her  old  age ; and  this  is  the  sixth 
month  with  her  that  is  called  barren : because  no 
word  shall  be  impossible  with  God.  And  Maiy  said : 
Behold  the  handmaid  of  tlie  Lord,  be  it  done  to  me 
accordii^  to  thy  word. 

OFFERT.  lAike  i. — Hail  Mary  full  of  grace,  the 
Lord  is  with  thee : blessed  art  thou  amongst  women, 
and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb. 

COMM.  Isaiah  vii. — Behold  a virgin  shall  con- 
ceive and  bring  forth  a son,  and  his  name  shall  be 
cAilled  Emmanuel. 


^pril  II.  St.  FRANCIS  o/PAULA,  c. 
as  in  Mass  XIV.  p.  489,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus^  humilium.— O God,  ^ho 
exaltest  the  humble,  and  didst  raise  blessed  Francis 
to  the  gloiy  of  thy  saints : grant,  we  beseech  tliee, 
tlirough  his  intercession,  that  by  following  liis  ex- 
ample, we  may  happily  obtain  the  rewards  thou  hast 
promised  to  the  hunjble.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Phil  in.  as  on  January  ) 5,  p.5S^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sd  AlfD  5th  APRIL. 


567 


SECRET. — May  the  offerings,  O Lord,  of  thy 
devout  people,  which  we  lay  upon  thy  altara,  by  the 
merits  of  blessed  Francis,  be  advantageous  to  us  and 
pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sumpta. — ^May  the  heavenly  sacra* 
ments,  O Lord,  which  we  have  received,  through 
the  prayers  of  blessed  Francis,  secure  for  us  all  ne- 
cessary help,  as  well  for  this  life  as  for  that  which 
is  to  come.  Thro’. 


III.  St  RICHARD,  bp.  qf  Chichester,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  X.  p.  482,  except 
COLLECT.  Dens  qui. — O God,  who  hast  en- 
lightened thy  Church  by  the  merits  and  resplendent 
miracles  of  ble^ed  Richard,  thy  confessor  and  bishoj), 
grant  that  we  thy  servants. may,  through  his  inter- 
cession, obtain  eternal  glory.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  merciful  God, 
that  the  gifts  we  have  offered  in  the  sight  of  thy 
divine  Majesty,  may,  by  the  prayers  of  blessed 
Richard,  thy  confessor  and  bishop,  obtain  for  us  the 
grace  of  living  holily  and  obtaining  eternal  glory. 
Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  H(sc  sacro  sancta. — ^May  these  holy 
mysteries,  O Lord,  of  which  blessed  Richard,  thy 
confessor  and  bishop  is  the  dispenser,  confer  on  us 
their  salutary  effects.  Thro’. 

V.  St.  VINCENT  FERRERIUS,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus. — O God,  who  wast  yileased 
to  enlighten  thy  Church  by  the  virtues  and  preaching 
of  blessed  Vincent,  thy  confessor:  grant,  that  we  thy 
servants  may  be  instructed  by  his  example,  and  by 
his  prayers,  delivered  from  all  evil.  Thro’. 

3B2 


Google 


568 


AND  13^^  APRIL. 


XL  St.  LEO,  p.  c.  D. 

jni  08  in  Mass  Xll.  p,  445,  except 

LESSON.  Eccles,  xliv.  and  xlv.  p.  482. 
GOSPEL.  Matt,  xvi.  as  on  the  Feast  of  SS. 
Peter  and  Paul,  June  29,  p.  608. 


XIII.  Sl  HERMENEGILD,  m. 

AU  as  in  Mass  III.  p.  466,  except 

COLLECT.  Devs, — O God,  by  whose  holy  spirit 
blessed  Hermenegild,  thy  martyr,  was  taught  to  des- 
pise an  earthly  for  a heavenly  crown  : grant  we  be- 
seech thee,  that,  by  his  example,  we  may  learn  to 
despise  temporal  things,  and  fix  our  hearts  on  those 
which  are  eternal.*  Thro’. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xir.  26.  33. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  saith  to  the  multitude : If  any  man  come  to  me, 
and  hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and 
children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own 
life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple.  And  whosoever 
doth  not  carry  his  cross  and  come  after  me,  ennnot 
be  my  discijde.  For  which  of  you  having  a mind  to 
build  a tower,  doth  not  first  sit  down  and  reckon 
the  charges  that  are  necessary,  whether  he  have 
wherewithal  to  finish  iL  Lest  after  he  hath  laid  the 
foundation,  and  is  not  able  to  finish  it,  all  that  see 
it  begin  to  mock  him,  saying : This  man  l>egan  to 
build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish.  Or  what  king 
about  to  go  and  make  war  against  tui other  king,  doth 
not  first  sit  down  and  think,  whether  he  be  able  with 
ten  thousand  to  meet  him  that  with  twenty  thousand 
coineth  against  him.  Or  else  while  the  other  is  yet 
afar  off  he  seudeth  an  embassy,  and  desireth  condi- 
tions of  peace.  So  likewise  every  one  of  you  that 
<loth  rot  renounce  all  that  he  possesseth,  cannot  be 
my  disciple. 


Digitized  by  Google 


14iA,  17th  AND  22J  APRIL 


56!) 


XIV.  St.  TIBURTIUS,  &c.  mm. 

Jill  as  in  Mass  VI.;?.  473,  except 
COLLECT.  PrtBsta. — Grant,  we  b^ech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  solemnize  the  festival 
of  thy  holy  Martyrs,  Tiburtiu^  Valerian,  and  Maxi- 
mus, may  likewise  imitate  their  vh'tues.  Thro’. 
LESSON.  Wisd.  and  GOSPEL.  John,  from p.  471. 
SECRET. — AVe  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the 
sacrifice  which  we  offer  thee  in  honour  of  the  tri- 
umphs of  thy  Martyrs,  may  loose  the  bonds  of  our 
sins,  and  procure  us  the  gifts  of  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

P COMM.  Sacro  munere, — Being  filled  with  thy 
heavenly  gifts,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  what  we  perform  as  an  homage  due  to  thee, 
may  avail  us  to  salvation.  Thro’. 


XVII.  St.  ANIC  ETE,  p.  im 
Ml  as  in  Mass  V.  p.  470,  except 

GOSPEL.  John  xvi.  20.  32. M that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : Amen,  amen  I say  to  you, 
that  you  shall  lament  and  weep,  but  the  world  shall 
rejoice : and  you  shall  be  made  sorrowful,  but  your 
sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy.  A woman,  when 
she  is  in  labour  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is 
come : but  when  she  hath  brought  forth  the  child, 
she  remembereth  no  more  the  anguish,  for  joy  that 
a man  is  brought  into  the  world.  So  also  you  now 
indeed  have  sorrow,  but  I will  see  you  again,  and 
your  hearts  shall  rejoice : and  your  joy  no  man  shall 
take  from  you. 


XXII.  SS.  SOTER  and  CAIUS,  bps.  mm. 

^ Ml  as  in  Mass  VI.  p,  473,  except 
LESSON.  Apoc.  xix.  1.  9. — In  those  days:  I 
John  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  many  multitudes 
3B3 

r Google 


570 


23<f  APRIL. 


in  heaven,  saying:  Alleluia:  salvation,  and  glory, 
and  power  is  to  our  God:  for  true  and  just  are  his 
judgments,  who  hath  judged  the  great  harlot  which 
coiTupted  the  earth  with  her  fornication,  and  hath 
revenged  the  blood  of  his  servants  at  her  hands. 
And  again  they  said:  AUduia,  And  her  smoke 
ascendeth  for  ever  and  ever.  And  the  four  and 
twenty  ancients,  and  the  four  living  creatures  fell 
down  and  adored  God  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
saying : Arnen,  AUduicu  And  a voice  came  out  from 
the  tlvone,  saying:  Give  pi-aise  to  our  Grod,  all  ye 
his  servants : and  you  that  fear  him,  little  and  gi*eat. 
And  I heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a great  multitude, 
and  as  the  voice  of  many  watere,  and  as  the  voice  of 
great  thunders,  saying:  AUduia:  for  the  Lord 
our  Grod,  the  Almighty  hath  reigned. . Let  us  he  glad 
and  rojoice,  and  give  glory  to  him : for  the  niarrifige 
of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  prepareil 
herself  And  it  is  granted  to  her  that  she  should 
clothe  herself  with  fine  linen  glittering  and  white. 
For  the  fine  linen  are  the  justifications  of  the  siiints 
And  he  said  to  me : Write : blessed  are  they  that  are 
called  to  the  mai*riage  supjier  of  the  Lamb. 

XXIII.  S.  GEORGE,  m.  Patron  of  England. 

All  as  in  Mass  V.  p,  470,  except 

COLLECT.  Beus,  qui  nos  beatu — O God,  whc 
by  the  merits  and  prayers  of  blessed  George,  thy 
Martyr,  fillest  the  heai-ts  of  thy  people  with  joy; 
mercifully  grant,  through  his  intercession,  that  the 
blessing  we  ask,  we  may  happily  obtain  by  mecms  of 
thy  grace.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Tim,  as  in  Mass  IV.  p.  468. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offer iiiCT  vje 
have  made ; and,  through  the  intercession  of  blessed 
George,  thy  Martyr,  by  them  cleanse  us  from  the 
Btains  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


AND  25^  APRIL. 


571 


P.  COMM.  Supplices, — ^We  humbly  beseeeh  tbee, 
O Almighty  God,  mat  those  whom  thou  hast  refresh- 
ed with  thy  sacraments,  may,  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  George,  thy  Martyr,  Iw  a life  well-pleasing 
to  thee,  worthily  serve  thee.  Thro’, 


XXIV.  St.  FIDELIS,  m, 

M as  in  Mass  V.  p,  470,  except 
COLLECT.  Deits,  qvi. — O God,  who  didst  fill 
the  heart  of  blessed  Fidelis  with  the  fire  of  seraphic 
love;  and  whilst  he  laboured  in  the  propagation  of 
the  -true  faith,  didst  honour  him  with  the  crown  of 
martyrdom  and  the  gift  of  miracles : grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  that  by  his  merits  and  intercession,  we 
may  be  so  confirmed  by  thy  grace,  as  to  be  found 
faithful  in  thy  service  even  unto  death.  Thro’, 


XXV,  S^  MARK,  the  Evangelist. 

A DREADFUL  plague  having  broke  out  at  Rome, 
anno  589,  which  carried  off  a great  number  of 
the  people,  and  among  the  rest  Pope  PMagius,  who  then 
sat  in  St.  Peter’s  Chair,  St.  Gregory  his  successor  ap- 
pointed public  prayers  for  appeasing  the  anger  of  God, 
the  happy  effects  cff  which  became  so  evident  by  the 
immediate  cessation  thereof,  that  the  same  pious  custom 
has  been  ever  since  continued.  Wherefore,  since  by 
our  repeated  transgressions  we  also  have  just  reason  to 
deprecate  the  scourges  of  divine  vengeance,  let  us  this 
day  humble  ourselves  by  prayer  and  abstinence  before 
the  throne  cff  mercy,  beseeching  God  to  preserve  us 
from  ail  pestilential  distempers,  forgive  us  our  sins; 
and  grant  his  blessing  on  the  fruit  of  the  earth. 
INTROIT,  Pixjtexisti,  as  in  p.  470. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  didst  raise 
blessed  Mark,  thy  evangelist,  to  the  honourable  com- 
tnission  of  preaching  the  gospe* . grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  may  ever  recuvi.  jenelit  irom  his  in 
structions»  and  be  defende-.!  t)  ai  ; ^layers.  Thro’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


572 


25^  APRIL. 


LESSON.  EztL  i.  10.  14. — The  likeness  jf  the 
four  living  creatures  was  this : there  was  the  face  of 
a man,  and  the  face  of  a lion  on  the  right  side  of  all 
the  four;  and  the  face  of  an  ox  on  the  left  side  of  all 
the  four ; and  the  face  of  an  eagle  over  all  the  four. 
And  their  faces  and  their  wings  were  stretched  up- 
ward ; two  wings  of  every  one  were  joined,  and  two 
covered  their  bodies.  And  every  one  of  them  went 
straight  forward : whither  the  impulse  of  the  spirit 
was  to  go,  thither  they  went,  and  they  turned  not 
when  tliey  went  And  as  for  th^  likeness  of  the  living 
creatures,  their  appearance  was  like  that  of  burning 
coals  of  fire,  and  like  the  appearance  of  lamps.  This 
was  the  vision  running  to  and  fro  in  the  midst  of  the 
living  creatures,  a bright  fire,  and  lightning  going 
forth  from  the  fire.  And  the  living  creatures  ran  and 
returned  like  flashes  of  lightning. 

Mduia,  Alleluia.  The  heavens,  O Lord,  declare 
thy  wonders,  and  the  fulfilling  of  thy  promise  in  the 
assembly  of  the  saints.  Allehda. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  x.  1.  9. At  that  time:  The 

Lord  appointed  other  seventy-two ; and  he  sent  them 
two  and  two  before  his  face  into  every  city  and  place 
whither  he  himself  was  to  come.  And  he  said  to 
them : the  harvest  indeed  is  great,  but  the  labourers 
are  few.  Pray  ye  therefore  the  Loi*d  of  the  harvest, 
that  he  send  labourers  unto  his  harvest.  Go : behold 
I send  you  as  lambs  among  wolves.  Carry  neither 
purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes ; and  salute  no  man  by 
the  way.  Into  whatsoever  house  you  enter,  first 
say : Peace  be  to  this  house,  and  if  the  son  of  peace 
be  there,  your  pence  shall  rest  upon  him : but  if  not, 
it  shall  return  to  you.  And  in  the  same  house  re- 
main, eating  and  drinking  such  things  as  they  have. 
For  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  Remove  not 
from  house  to  house.  And  into  what  city  soever 
you  enter,  and  they  receive  you,  eat  such  things  as 
are  set  before  you ; and  heal  the  sick  that  are  there»  a. 


Dio 


/Google 


2Gth  AND  Q9th  APRIL. 


573 


and  say  to  them : the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  nigh 
unto  you.  Credo. 

SECRET. — Bringing  thee  our  offerings,  O Lord, 
on  this  solemnity  of  blessed  Mark,  the  evangelist,  we 
humbly  beseech  thee,  that  as  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  raised  him  to  glory,  so  his  intercession  may 
make  us  both  in  word  and  deed,  well  pleasing  to 
thee.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  IxiiL — The  just  man,  &c.  p.  472. 

P.  COMM.  Tribucmt  nobis. — ^May  thy  sacred 
mysteries,  O Lord,  afford  us  continual  help,  so  as 
by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Mark,  thy  evangelist,  they 
may  ever  defend  us  from  all  adversity.  Thro’. 

For  the  Litanies,  stc  Rogation  Days,  p.  359. 

XXVL  SS.  CLETUS  & MARCELLINE,  bps.  mm. 

All  as  in  Mass  VI.  p.  473,  except 

COLLECT.  Beatorum. — Grant,  O Lord,  that  the 
gloiious  confession  of  thy  blessed  martyrs  and  bish- 
ops, Cletus  and  Mareelline,  may  strengthen  us,  and 
their  pious  intercession  continually  defend  us.  Thro’. 

Comm,  of  St  George,  by  the  Collect,  &c.  p.  571. 


XXIX.  St  PETER,  m. 

All  as  in  Mass  XV.  p.  470,  except 

COLLECT.  PrcbstcL — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  may  with  true  zeal  profess 
the  faith  of  blessed  Peter  thy  martyi*,  for  the  pro- 
pagation whereof  he  was  crowned  with  a glorious 
death.  Thro’. 

Commem,  of  St  George,  p.  570. 

SECRET. — Favourably  regard,  O Lord,  the  pray- 
ers we  offer  thee,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Peter,  thy  martyr,  continually  protect  the  defenders 
of  the  faith.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Fideles. — May  the  sacraments  we  have 
received,  O Lord,  preserve  thy  faithful,  and  by  tha 


''■gitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


l5/  MAT. 


bi 

ultercession  of  blessed  Peter,  thy  martyr  defend  ua 
ag^nst  the  assaults  of  the  enemy.  Thro’. 


May  I.  SS.  PHILIP  and  JAMES,  aps. 

INTROIT.  2 Esdrasix, — ^They  cried  out  unto 
thee,  O Lord,  in  their  affliction : and  thou  didst  hear 
them  from  heaven.  AlleluicL,  AUduia.  Ps.  Rejoice, 
i n the  Lord,  O ye  just ' praise  becometh  the  upright 
V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus^  qui  nos  annua — O God,  who 
comfortest  us  by  the  yearly  solemnity  of  thy  aposdes 
Philip  and  James : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we 
may  be  instructed  by  their  example,  for  whose  merits 
we  rejoice.  Thro’. 

LESSON,  }Vis(L  V,  as  in  p,  471. 

Alleluia,  AUduia.  V.  The  heavens  shall  confess 
tlw  wonders,  O Lord : and  thy  truth  in  the  Church 
or  the  saints.  Alleluia.  V.  So  long  a time  have  I 
been  with  you,  and  have  you  not  known  me?  Philip, 
he  that  seeth  me,  seeth  my  Father  also.  AUduia. 

GOSPEL.  John  xiv.  1.  13. Ai  (hoi  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : Let  not  your  hearts  be 
troubled.  You  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me. 
In  my  Father’s  house  there  are  many  mansions.  If 
not,  I would  have  told  you,  that  I go  to  prepare  a 
place  for  you.  And  if  I shall  go  and  prepare  a 
fdace  for  you,  I will  come  again,  and  will  take  you 
to  myself  that  where  I am,  you  also  may  be.  And 
whither  I go  you  know,  and  the  way  you  know. 
Thomas  saith  to  him  ; Lord  we  know  not  whither 
thou  goest : and  how  can  we  know  the  way ; Jesus 
saith  to  him:  I am  the  way,  and  the  truth  and 
the  life.  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father,  but  by  me. 
If  you  had  known  me,  you  would  without  doubt 
have  known  my  Father  also : and  from  henceforth 
you  shall  loiow  him,  and  you  have  seen  him.  Philip 
saith  to  him:  Lord  shew  us  the  Father,  and  it  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


MAY. 


575 


enough  for  us.  Jesus  saith  to  him : So  long  a time 
have  I been  with  you : and  have  you  not  known  me  ? 
Philip,  he  that  seeth  me  seeth  the  Father  also.  How 
aayest  thou,  Shew  us  the  Father  ? Do  you  not  be- 
lieve, that  I am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me  ? 
yhe  words  that  I speak  to  you,  I speak  not  of  myself. 
But  the  Father  who  abideth  in  me,  he  doth  the  works. 
Believe  you  not  that  I am  in  the  Father,  and  the 
F father  in  me  ? Otherwise  believ6  for  the  very  works’ 
sake.  Amen,  amen  I say  to  you,  he  that  believeth 
in  me,  the  works  that  I do,  he  also  shall  do,  and 

freater  tlian  these  shall  he  do.  Because  I go  to  the 
'ather,  and  whatsoever  you  shall  ask  the  Father  in 
my  name,  that  will  I do.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xviii. — ^The  heavens,  O Lord, 
ihall  declare  thy  wonders,  and  the  fulfilling  of  thy 
promises  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints.  AUtluioL, 
Mleluia. 

SECRET. — ^Favourably  receive,  O Lord,  the  of- 
ferings we  bring  on  the  feast  of  thy  holy  apostles, 
Philip  and  James ; and  turn  away  all  the  misfortunes 
we  deserve.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xiv. — So  long  a time  have  I been 
with  you  and  have  you  not  known  me  ? Philip,  he 
that  seeth  me,  seeth  my  Father  also.  Alleluia.  Be- 
lieve you  not  that  1 am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father 
in  me  ? Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

P.  COMM.  (^(Bsurnus,  as  in  p.  477. 


II.  St.  ATHANASIUS,  bp.  c.  D. 

INTROIT.  In  medio,  p.  485,  the  rest  as  in 
Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor.  iv.  5.  15. — Brethren:  We 
preach  not  ourselves,  but  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord : 
and  ourselves  your  servants  through  Jesus.  Foi 
Grod  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  dark 
aess,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


576 


2d  MAT. 


the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Christ  Jesus.  But  we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen 
vessels,  that  the  excellency  may  be  of  the  power  of 
God,  and  not  of  us.  In  all  things  we  suffer  tribu- 
• lation,  but  are  not  distressed:  we  are  straitened, 
but  are  not  destitute : we  suffer  persecution,  but  are 
not  forsaken : we  are  cast  down,  but  we  perish  not : 
always  bearing  about  in  our  body  the  mortification 
of  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  may  be  made 
manifest  in  our  bodies.  For  we  who  live  are  always 
delivered  unto  death  for  Jesus  sake:  that  the  life 
also  of  Jesus  may  be  made  manifest  in  our  mortal 
flesh.  So  then  death  worketh  in  us,  but  life  in 
you.  Bdt  having  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  as  it  is 
written : 1 hdieved,  for  which  cause  1 have  spoken : 
we  also  believe,  for  which  cause  we  s]>eak  also: 
knowing  that  he  who  raised  up  Jesus,  will  raise  us 
up  also  with  Jesus,  and  place  us  with  you. 

Allduioy  Alleluia.  Thou  art  a priest  for  ever  ac- 
cording to  the  order  of  Melchisedech.  AUelma. 
V.  Ble^ed  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation : 
for  when  he  hath  been  proved,  he  shall  receive  the 
crown  of  life.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  x.  23.  33. At  that  time: 

Jesx!^  said  to  his  disciples : When  they  shaU  perse- 
cute you  in  this  city  nee  into  another.  Amen  1 say 
to  you,  you  shall  not  finish  all  the  cities  of  Israel : 
till  the  Son  of  Man  come.  The  disciple  is  not 
above  the  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  lord. 
It  is  enough  for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  master, 
'and  the  servant  as  his  lord.  If  they  have  called  the 
good  man  of  the  house  Beelzebub,  how  much  more 
them  of  his  household  ? Therefore  fear  them  not. 
For  nothing  is  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed, 
nor  bid  that  shall  not  be  known.  That  which  I 
tell  you  in  the  dark,  speak  ye  in  the  light : and  that 
which  you  hear  in  the  ear,  preach  ye  upon  the  house 
tops.  And  fear  ye  not  them  that  kill  the  body,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


3i  M »T. 


577 


are  not  al«e  to  kill  the  soul : but  rather  fear  him  that 
can  destroy  both  soul  and  body  into  hell.  Credo. 

OFFERT. — I have  found  David  my  servant : with 
iny  holy  oil  have  I anointed  him:  for  my  hand  shall 
help  him,  and  my  arm  shall  strengthen  him.  AlUL 


III.  The  FINDING  of  the  HOLY  CROSS. 

INTROIT.  Nos  autem,  Gal.  vi.  as  inp.  271. 

COLLECT.  Deus^  qui.-^O  God,  who,  in  the 
miraculous  discovery  of  the  Holy  Cross,  Wast  pleased 
to  renew  the  wonders  of  thy  passion:  grant,  that 
by  the  ransom  paid,  on  that  saving  wood,  we  may 
find  help  for  the  obtaining  life  eternal.  Who  livesU 
Commem,  of  SS.  Alexander,  Eventius,  and  Theo- 
dulus,  Martyrs,  and  Juvenalis,  Confessor. 

COLLECT.  Fraesta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  celebrate  the  festival 
of  thy  saints,  Alexander,  Eventius,  Theodulus,  and 
Juvenalis,  may  by  their  intercession,  be  delivered 
from  all  impending  misfortunes.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  PhU.  ii.  5.  11. Brethren:  Let  this 

mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus ; who 
being  in  the  form  of  God,  tliought  it  not  robbery  to 
be  equal  with  God : but  emptied  himself,  taking  the 
form  of  a servant,  being  made  in  the  likeness  of  men, 
and  in  habit  found  as  a man.  He  humbled  himself, 
becoming  obedient  unto  death,  even  to  the  death 
of  the  cross.  For  which  cause  God  also  hath  exalt- 
ed him,  and  hath  given  him  a name  which  is  above 
all  names:  that  in  the  name  of  Jesus  * eveiy  knee 
should  bow,  qf  these  that  are  in  heaven,  on  earth, 
and  under  the  eaith.  And  that  every  tongue  should 
r*pnfess  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father.  AUel.  Alld. 

V.  Publish  among  the  nations,  that  the  Lord  hath 

**  Here  all  kneel  " 

3C 

r Google 


578  Sd  MAT. 

triumphed  on  the  cross.  MLduuu  Sweet  wood, 
sweet  nails,  that  bore  so  sweet  a weight!  Thou 
alone  wast  worthy  to  bear  the  king  of  heaven  and 
the  Lord.  AUeluicu 

GOSPEL.  John  iii.  1.  15. At  that  time: 

There  was  a man  of  the  Pharisees,  named  Nicode- 
inus,  a ruler  of  the  Jews.  This  man  came  to  Jesus 
by  night,  and  said  to  him:  Rabbi,  we  know  that 
thou  art  come  a teacher  from  God  : for  no  man  can 
do  these  signs  which  thou  dost,  unless  God  be  with 
him.  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  him : Amen, 
amen  1 say  to  thee,  unless  a man  be  born  again,  he 
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Nicodemus  saith 
to  him : How  can  a man  be  borA  again  when  he  is 
old  ? can  he  enter  a second  time  into  his  mother’s 
^onib,  and  be  born  again  ? Jesus  answered  : Amen, 
amen  1 say  to  thee,  unless  a man  be  born  again  of 
water  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  cannot  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God.  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh, 
is  flesh : and  that  which  is  bom  of  the  spirit,  is  spirit 
Wonder  not  that  I said  to  thee,  you  must  be  bom 
again.  The  Spirit  breatheth  where  he  will : and  thou 
hearest  his  voice,  but  thou  knowest  not  whence  he 
cometh,  nor  whither  he  goeth  ; so  is  every  one  that 
is  born  of  the  Spirit.  Nicodemus  answered,  and 
said  to  him  : How  can  these  things  be  done  ? Jesus 
answered,  and  said  to  him:  Art  thou  a master  in 
Israel,  ahd  knowest  not  these  things  ? Amen,  amen 
I say  to  thee,  that  we  speak  what  we  know,  and  we 
testify  what  we  have  seen,  and  you  receive  not  our 
testimony.  If  I have  spoken  to  you  earthly  things, 
and  you  believe  not : how  will  you  believe  if  I shall 
speak  to  you  heavenly  things?  And  no  man  hath 
ascended  into  heaven,  but  he  that  descended  from 
heaven,  the  Son  of  Man  who  is  in  heaven.  And  as 
Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  desert,  so  must 
ih'i  Son  of  Man  be  lifted  up:  that  whosoever  believ- 


gitized  byCjOO^IC 


MAT.  57D 

eth  in  him  may  not  perish,  but  may  have  life  ever* 
lasting.  Credo. 

OFFERT  Ps,  cxvii. — Tlie  right  hand  of  the  Lord 
hath  wrought  strength,  the  right-hand  of  the  Lord 
liaih  exalted  me : 1 shall  not  die,  but  live ; and  shall 
declare  the  works  of  the  I^ord.  Alleluia, 

SECRET — Favourably,  O Lord,  look  down  on 
the  sacrifice  we  oflTer  thee,  that  it  may  deliver  us 
from  all  the  miseries  of  war,  and  surely  fix  us  under 
thy  protection,  that  by  the  standard  of  thy  Son's 
holy  cross,  we  may  overcome  all  the  assaults  of  the 
enemy.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  Of  SS.  Alexander,  fyc. — Let  thy 
heavenly  blessing,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  plenti- 
fully descend  upon  these  oblations,  which,  through 
thy  bounty,  sanctify  us  and  fill  us  with  joy  in  tlio 
solemnity  of  thy  saints.  Thro’. 

Preface.  Qui  salutem  humani  generis,;?,  xxx. 

COMM. — By  the  sign  of  the  cross  deliver  us, 
Lord  God,  from  all  our  enemies.  Alleluia. 

P.  COMM.  Repleti. — Beiri^  filled  with  the  hea- 
venly meat,  and  strengthened  with  the  spiritual  cup, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty  Gk)d,  to  defend  from 
the  evil  spirit  those,  whom,  by  thy  Son's  cross,  fthe 
arms  of  justice,  for  the  redemption  of  the  world)  tnou 
hast  commanded  to  triumph.  Thro’.  * 

P.  COMM.  Of  SS.  Alexander,  ^'c. — Being  re- 
freshed by  the  participation  of  these  sacred  mysteries, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  we  may  find  the 
effects  of  what  we  celebrate,  by  the  intercession  of 
tliy  blessed  Martyrs,  Alexander,  &c.  Thro’. 


IV.  St.  MONICA. 

All  as  in  Mass  XXI.  p.  502,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus  incerentium. — O God,  the  com- 
forter of  the  afflicted,  and  help  of  such  as  put  their 
trust  in  thee,  who  with  an  eye  of  mercy  didst  regard 
the  pious  tears  of  holy  Monica,  for  the  conversion 
3 C 2 


Google 


580 


4/^  MAY. 


of  her  son  Augustin : grant,  that  by  the  prayers  cf 
l.'Oth  these  thy  servants,  we  may  heartily  bewail  our 
sins,  aiul  find  favour  by  thy  grace.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Tim,  v.  3.10. — Dearly  beloved  son : 
Honour  widows,  that  are  widows  indeed.  Bui  if 
any  widow  have  children  or  grand -children,  let  hei 
learn  first  to  govern  her  own  house,  and  to  make  a 
return  of  duty  to  Jier  parents:  for  this  is  acceptable 
before  God.  But  she  that  is  a widow  indeed  and 
desolate,  let  her  trust  in  God,  and  continue  in  sup- 
plications and  prayers  night  tiud  day.  For  she  that 
liveth  in  pleasure,  is  dead  while  she  is  living.  And 
this  give  in  charge,  diat  they  may  be  blameless.  But 
if  any  man  have  not  care  of  his  own,  and  especially 
of  those  of  his  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and 
is  woi*se  than  an  infidel.  Let  a widow  be  chosen  of 
no  less  than  threescore  years  of  age,  who  hath  been 
the  wife  of  one  husband,  having  testimony  for  her 

food  works,  if  she  have  brought  up  children,  if  she 
ave  received  to  harbour,  if  she  have  washed  the 
saints*  feet,  if  she  have  ministered  to  them  that  suf- 
fer tribulation,  if  she  hath  diligently  followed  every 
good  work. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  vii.  as  inp,  202. 

V.  St.  CATHARINE  of  SIENNA,  v. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIX.  p,  498,  except 

COLLECT.  Da,  quatsumus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  celebrate  the 
festival  of  blessed  Catharine,  thy  Virgin,  may  rejoice 
in  her  yearly  solemnity,  and  profit  by  the  example 
in  her  eminent  virtues.  Thro*. 

SECRET. — May  the  prayers  we  offer  on  (he  festi- 
val of  blessed  Catharine  ascend  to  thee,  O Lord,  to 
gether  with  the  victim  of  our  salvation,  hi^ght  with 
heavenly  sweetness.  Thro*. 

P.  COMM.  Mlernitatem. — Grant,  O Lord,  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


6^^  7/7/,  AND  9th  MAT. 


581 


we  may  have  eternal  life  communicated  to  us  by  the 
nourishment  we  have  received  at  thy  holy  table, 
which  supported  the  temporal  life  of  blessed  Catha- 
rine thy  virgin.  Thro\ 


VI.  St.  JOHN  at  the  Latin  Gate. 

INTROIT.  Protexisti  me,  as  in  n.  470. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O Goa,  who  seest  us 
assaulted  with  evils  on  every  side,  grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  the  powerful  intercession  of  blessed  John, 
thy  apostle  anjd  evangelist,  may  always  be  a protec- 
tion to  us.  Thro’. 

After  the  Lesson,  Wisd,  v.  p,  478,  is  said  . 

AUeluia^  Alleluia.  V.  The  just  shall  flourish  lilre 
the  palm-tree  : he  shall  grow  up  like  the  cedar  of 
Libanus.  AUeluia.  V,  The  righteous  shall  bud  forth 
like  the  lily,  and  flourish  for  ever  in  the  light  of  the 
Lord.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xx.  as  in  p.  453. 

Secret,  Receive,  Comm,  and  P.  Comm.  RefecH 
as  in  pp.  472,  473. 


VII.  St.  STANISLAU^.  bp.  m. 

AU  as  in  Mass  V.  p.  470,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  pro. O God,  for  whose 

honour  the  glorious  bishop  Stanislaus  fell  by  the 
swords  of  wicked  men : gi*ant,  we  beseech  thee,  that 
all  who  implore  his  aid,  may  obtain  the  happy  effect 
of  their  prayers.  Thro’. 


IX.  St.  GREGORY  NAZIANZEN,  bp.  c.  D. 

All  as  in  Mass  XII.  p.  48.5,  except 
LESSON.  Eccles.  xxxix.  0.  14. — The  just  man 
will  give  his  heart  to  resort  early  to  the  Lord  that 
made  him,  and  he  will  pray  in  the  sight  of  the  Most 
High.  He  will  open  his  month  in  prayer,  and  will 

Google 


582 


“iOth  MAT. 


make  supplication  for  bis  sins.  For  if  it  shall  please 
the  ^eat  Lord,  he  will  fill  him  with  the  spirit  of 
understanding;  and  he  will  pour  forth  the  words  of 
his  wisdom  as  showers,  and  in  his  prayer  he  will 
confess  to  the  Lord.  And  he  shall  direct  his  counsel, 
and  his  knowledge,  and  in  his  secrets  shall  he  medi- 
tate. He  shall  shew  forth  the  discipline  he  hath 
learned,  and  shall  glory  in  the  law  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord.  Many  shall  praise  his  wisdom,  and  it 
shall  never  be  forgotten.  The  memory  of  him  shall 
not  depart  away,  and  his  name  shall  be  in  request 
irom  generation  to  generation.  Nations  sliall  de- 
clare his  wisdom,  and  his  name  shall  shew  forth  his 
praise. 


X.  St.  ANTONINUS,  bp.  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  X.  * p.  482,  except 
COLLECT.  Sancii  AntonivL — Grant,  O Lord, 
we  may  be  assisted  by  the  merits  of  holy  Antoninus 
thy  confessor  and  bishop : that,  as  we  glorify  thee  for 
thy  wonders  wrought  in  him,  so  we  may  with  joy 
experience  thy  mercy  towards  us.  Thro’. 

Of  SS.  Gordianus  and  Epimachus. 
COLLECT.  Da,  queesumus, — Grant,  we  beseech  • 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  celebrate  the 
festival  of  thy  lioly  martyrs,  Gordianus  and  Epima- 
chus, may,  by  their  prayers,  find  the  effects  of  thy 
divine  assistance.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Mercifully  receive,  O Lord,  the  offer- 
ings consecrated  to  thee,  by  the  merits  of  blessed 
Gordianus  and  Epimachus,  thy  maityrs,  and  grant 
they  may  be  to  us  a continual  support.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  QiKBsumus. — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  tliat  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Gordianus  and  Epimachus,  thy  martyrs,  the  heaven- 
ly food  we  have  received  may  defend  us  from  all  ad- 
versity. Thro’. 


Digitized  by  Google 


nth  AND  i2th  MAT. 


583 


XI.  St.  PIUS,  Pope  Conf.  ■ 

All  as  in  Mass  X.  * p.  482,  except 

COLLECT.  Z)eu5,  qui, — O God,  who  wast  pleased 
to  raise  blessed  Pius  to  the  dignity  of  chief  bishop, 
in  order  to  depress  the  enemies  of  thy  church,  and 
restore  the  divine  worship : make  us  by.  thy  grace, 
so  diligently  in  all  that  concemeth  thy  service,  that 
we  may  defeat  the  treacherous  designs  of  our  ene- 
mies, and  rejoice  in  everlasting  peace.  Thro’. 


XII.  SS.  NEREUS,  &c.  mm. 
INTROIT.  Ps.  xxxii. — Behold  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord  are  on  them  that  fear  him : and  on  them  that 
hope  in  his  mercy,  AUduia ; to  deliver  their  souls 
from  death;  for  he  is  our  helper  and  protector. 
Alleluia^  AUduia,  Ps,  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  ye  just ; 
praise  becometh  the  upright. 

COLLECT.  Semper, — May  the  blessed  solemnity 
of  thy  martyrs,  Nereus,  Achilleus,  Domitilla,  and 
Pancratius,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  afford  us  com 
fort  and  make  us  worthy  to  serve  thee.  Thro’. 
LESSON.  Wisd,  V,  as  in  p,  471, 

AUduia^  AUduia,  V,  These  were  truly  brothers, 
who,  triumphing  over  the  iniquity  of  the  world,  fol- 
lowed Christ,  and  are  now  in  possession  of  the  glori- 
ous kingdom  of  heaven.  Alleluia,  V,  The  white- 
robed  army  of  martyrs  praise  thee,  O Lord.  ALldL 
GOSPEL.  John  iv.  as  in  p,  449. 

SECRET. — ^We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the 
confession  of  thy  blessed  martyrs,  Nereus,  Achilleus, 
Domitilla,  and  Pancratius,  being  acceptable  to  thee, 
they  may  recommend  our  offerings,  and  ever  implore 
thy  mercy  on  our  behalf.  Thro’. 

c<3mm.  Ts.  xxxii. — Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  O you 
righteous  ones.  AUduia,  It  becometh  the  upright 
to  join  in  his  praises.  AUduia, 


,y  Google 


(l84  14^  16^  17^  AND  BTAT. 

P.  COMM.  OwBsumus,  Damine. — We  beseech 
ihee,  O l^ord,  by  the  prayers  of  thy  blessed  luartyis, 
Nereus,  Achilleus,  Domitilla,  and  Pancratius,  that 
the  holy  mysteries  we  have  received  may  render  thee 
more  and  more  favourable  to  us.  Thro*. 

XIV.  St  BONIFACE,  m. 

CLS  in  Mass  V.  p.  470,  except 
COLLECT.  JDa,  qiuBsumus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  celebrate  the 
festival  of  blessed  Boniface,  thy  martyr,  may,  by 
his  prayers,  find  the  efifects  of  thy  divine  assistance. 
Thro*. 


XVI.  St  UBALDUS,  bp.  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  X.  * p.  482,  except 
COLLECT.  Auxilium, — Help  us,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  in  thy  mercy : and  grant,  by  the  intei  - 
cession  of  blessed  Ubaldus,  thy  bishop  and  confessor, 
that  we  may  be  defended  by  thy  right  hand  against 
all  the  snares  of  the  devil.  Thro*. 


s XVII.  St  PASCHAL  BAYLON. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus^  qui — O God,  who  didst  adorn 
blessed  Paschal,  thy  confessor,  with  an  admirable 
love  of  the  sacred  mysteries  of  thy  body  and  blood  : 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  may  be  made  wor- 
thy partakers  of  the  same  spiritual  nourishment 
wUch  he  so  abundantly  received  firom  this  divine 
banquet  Thro*. 

XVIII.  St  VENANTIUS,  m. 

AU  as  in  Mass  III.  p.  406,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O Go^  who  hast  con- 


'’'gitized  byCjOO^IC 


\Wi  AND  20^^  MAT.  585 

secrated  this  day  by  the  triumph  of  blessed  Venantius, 
thy  mart3T,  mercifully  hear  the  prayers  of  thy  peo- 
ple : and  grant  that  we,  who  honour  his  virtues,  may 
imitate  the  constancy  of  his  faith.  Thro’. 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  1.  7.  as  in  p,  471. 

SECRET.  — Grant,  O Almighty  God,  that  the 
merits  of  blessed  Venantius  may  render  this ‘oblation 
acceptable  to  thee:  that  we,  being  assisted  by  his 
prayers,  may  become  partakers  of  his  glory.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimus. — Having  received,  O 
Lord,  the  sacrament  of  eternal  life,  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  that  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Ve- 
nantius, thy  martyr,  it  may  procure  for  us  pardon 
and  grace.  Thro. 


XIX.  St  DUNSTAN,  c.  abp.  of  Canterbury. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Dem,  qui. — O God,  who  hast  trans- 
lated the  blessed  Dunstan,  thy  high  priest,  to  thy 
heavenly  kingdom:  grant  that  we,  by  his  glorious 
merits,  may  pass  from  hence  to  never  ending  joys. 
Thro’. 

SECRET. — ^Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
the  offerings  thy  suppliant  servants  lay  before  thee 
on  this  solemnity  of  blessed  Dunstan,  thy  confessor 
and  bishop,  requesting  that,  imder  his  venerable  pa- 
tronage, they  may  be  defended  from  the  snares  of  all 
their  enemies.  Thro’.  ^ 

P.  COMM.  Beati. — ^Assist  us,  O LorTl,  by  the 
prayers  of  blessed  Dunstan,  thy  confessor  and  bishop, 
in  whose  veneration  we  have  partaken  of  thy  sacra- 
ments. Thro’. 


XX.  St.  BERNARDINE,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Domine  Jesu. — O Lord,  Jesus,  who 
didst  p>ur  forth  into  the  bsart  of  blessed  Bernardinos, 


Digitized  by  Google 


586  215^  AND  75th  mat. 

tJiy  confessor,  a more  than  ordinary  love  of  thy  most 
holy  name : mercifully  grant  us,  by  his  virtues  and 
prayers,  the  spirit  of  thy  love.  Who  livest. 
GOSPEL.  Matt,  xix.  asinp.  492. 


XXI.  St.  PETER  CELESTINE,  p.  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  X*.  p.  482,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  beatum. — O God,  who 
didst  raise  blessed  Celestiue  to  the  dignity  of  chief 
bishop,  which  thou  taughtest  him  to  quit  for  a more 
humble  and  private  state : mercifully  grant,  that,  by 
his  example,  we  may  despise  the  things  of  this  world, 
and  happily  obtain  the  blessings  promised  to  the 
humble.  Thro’. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xix.  as  inp.  492. 


XXV.  St.  ALDKELM,  bp.  of  Salisbury,  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  X.  * p.  482,  except 

COLLECT.  DeuSf  qui  hodierna. — O God,  who 
this  day  didst  raise  blessed  Aldhelm,  thy  holy  bishop, 
to  eternal  joys : grant,  by  his  merits  and  prayers, 
that  thy  mercy  may  lead  us  also  thither.  Thro’. 

Of  St.  Urban.  Da  quasumus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  celebrate  the 
feast  of  blessed  Urban,  thy  martyr  and  bishop  may 
be  aided  by  his  prayers  to  thee  in  our  behalf.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — ^May  our  offering,  O Lord,  be  accept- 
able to  thee  by  the  prayers  of  this  saint,  on  whose 
festival  we  make  it.  Thro’. 

Of  St.  Urban. — May  this  oblation,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  cleanse  us  from  all  sin,  and  sanctify 
both  the  bodies  and  souls  of  thy  servants  for  the 
offering  up  to  thee  this  sacrifice.  Thro’.  . 

P.  COMM.  Solemnitatem. — Mercifully  help  us, 
O Lord,  while  we  celebrate  the  feast  of  blessed  Ald- 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


26^^  AND  vnth  MAT. 


587 


helm,  thy  bishop,  and  grant,  by  his  merits,  we  may 
be  admitted  to  the  joys  of  heaven.  Thro’. 

^ Q/"  St.  Urban,  Refecti,  p,  463. 


XXVI.  St  AUGUSTIN,  ap.  of  England. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  XL  p,  4S4,  except 
COLLECT.  Dens,  qui, — O God,  who  didst  ap- 
point the  blessed  bishop  Augustin  first  preacher  of 
the  gospel  to  the  English  nation,  grant,  we  bese(;ch 
thee,  that  we  may  be  assisted  by  his  prayers  in  hea- 
ven, whose  merits  we  honour  on  earth.  Thro’. 
Collect,  Infirmitatern,  of  St  Eleutherius,  with 
its  Secret  and  P.  Comm,  from  Mass  V.  p.  470. 
GOSPEL.  Lake  x.  as  on  St  Mark,  p.  o72. 
SECRET. — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the 
offering  we  have  made  may  be  acceptable  to  thee, 
by  which  we  venerate  the  merits  of  blessed  Augustin 
thy  confessor  and  bishop,  and  call  to  our  remem- 
brance the  wonderful  means  by  which  we  obtained 
our  liberty  and  life.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sancta. — May  thy  holy  mysteries,  O 
Lord,  which  we  have  celebrated  on  the  solemn  feast 
of  blessed  Augustin,  thy  confessor  and  bishop,  pro- 
tect us:  and  may  we  ever  be  filled  with  and  hunger 
aRer  the  same.  Thro’. 


XXVII.  St.  PHILIP  NERIUS,  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  481,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus. — O God,  who  hast  raised 
blessed  Philip,  thy  confessor,  to  the  glory  of  the 
saints:  mercifully  grant,  that  we  who  celebrate  his 
festival  witli  joy,  may  improve  by  his  example. 
Thro’. 

Collect,  &c.  o/^St.  Augustin  as  above,  and  those  of 
St.  John,  p.  m.from  Mass  V.  p.  47Q 


Google 


588  St/,  3(/,  AND  6/A,  JUNE. 

Junt  II.  OCTAVE  of  St.  AUGUSTIN. 

AU  08  on  the  25th  May,  p,  586,  tvith  a Commem,  of 
SS.  MarceIlinus,  &c.  mm.  cw  follows : 

COLLECT,  Deus  qui  nos,  as  in  p.  478. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
the  sacrifice  we  oflTer  on  this  festival  of  thy  holy 
martyrs,  may  loose  the  bonds  of  our  sins,  and  pro- 
cure for  us  the  grant  j3f  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sacro  munere, — Being  fed  with  these 
sacred  gifts,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
by  this  sacrifice,  which,  according  to  our  bounden 
duty,  we  offer,  we  may  be  sensible  of  an  increase  of 
our  redemption.  Thro’. 


III.  St.  MARY  MAGDALEN  of  PAZZI,  v. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIX.  p,  498,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  virginitatis,  — O God,  the 
lover  of  purity,  who  didst  inflame  the  breast  of  bless- 
ed Mary  Magdalen  with  the  fire  of  thy  love,  and 
enrich  it  with  heavenly  graces : grant  we  may  imitate 
her  purity  and  charity,  whose  festival  we  celebrate. 
Thro’. 


VI.  St.  NORBERT,  bp.  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  X.  * p,  482,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who  didst  raise 
up  blessed  Norbert,  thy  confessor  and  bishop,  to  be 
an  eminent  preacher  of  thy  word,  and  by  him  wast 
pleased  to  institute  a new  order  in  thy  church* 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  by  his  merits  we  may 
obtain  the  helj)  of  thy  grace  to  live  according  to  what 
he  taught  and  practised.  Thro’. 


'’'gitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


• 8th  AND  9th  JUNE. 


V VIII.  St.  WILLIAM,  Archbishop  0/ York,  c, 
Ml  as  in  Mass  XI.  p,  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who  i:ejoicest 
us  by  the  merits  and  intercession  of  blessed  William, 
thy  confessor  and  bishop,  mercifully  grant  that  what- 
ever we  ask  of  thee  in  his  name  may  be  granted  us 
by  the  favour  of  thy  grace.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offering  we 
have  made,  and  through  the  intercession  of  messed 
William,  thy  confessor  and  bishop,  cleanse  us  from 
the  stains  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

P.  COM3L We  humbly  beseech  thee,  O Al- 

mighty God,  that  those  whom  thou  refreshest  with 
thy  sacraments  may,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
William,  thy  confessor  and  bishop,  by  a holy  life, 
worthily  serve  thee.  Thro’. 


IX.  SS.  PRIMUS  and  FELICIANUS,  mm. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  VIII.  p.  477,  except 

COLLECT.  Fac, — Grant,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  may  always  follow  the  example  of  thy 
holy  martyrs  Primus  and  Felicianus,  and  by  their 
prayers,  daily  experience  their  protection.  Thro’. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxxviii. — The  neavens  shall  confess 
thy  wondei-s,  O Lord,  and  thy  truth  in  the  church  of 
the  saints.  V.  The  mercies  of  the  Lord  I will  sing 
for  ever,  from  generation  to  generation.  Mleluia, 
Meluia.  V.  These  were  truly  brothers  who  triumph- 
ed over  the  iniquity  of  the  world,  followed  Christ, 
and  are  now  in  possession  of  the  glorious  kingdom  of 
heaven.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xi.  as  on  the  15th  January,/?.  537. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixv.  asinp.  477. 

SECRET. — May  the  offerings,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  which  we  make  on  this  day  of  the  martyr- 
dom of  thy  saints,  appease  thee,  cleanse  us  from  our 
3D 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S90 


AND  llth  JUNE.^ 


sins,  and  render  the  prayers  and  vows  of  thy  servanta. 
acceptable.  Thro’. 

COMM.  John  XV. — 1 have  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world,  that  you  should  go,  and  should  bring  forth 
fruit : and  your  fruit  should  remain. 

P.  COMM.  QjiKBsumus. — Grant,  O Almighty  Ood, 
ihat  thy  holy  martyrs  Primus  and  Felicianus,  whose 
feast  we  have  solemnized  with  the  celebration  of 
these  heavenly  mysteries,  may,  through  thy  mercy, 
obtain  for  us  the  pardon  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 


X.  St.  MARGARET,  Queen  of  Scots. 

All  as  in  Mass  XXI.  p.  502.  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  beatum, — O God,  i;^dio 
didst  render  blessed  Margaret  Queen  of  the  Scots, 
truly  wonderful  for  her  charities  towards  the  poor: 
grant  by  her  prayers  and  example,  that  thy  charity 
may  continually  increase  in  our  hearts.  Thro’. 


XI.  St.  BARNABAS,  ap. 

INTROIT,  Mihi  autem,  as  in  p,  5^1. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who  comfbrte5}t 
us  by  the  merits  and  prayers  of  blessed  Barnabas: 
grant,  in  thy  mercy,  that  we,  who  by  him  petition 
for  thy  blessings,  may  obtain  them  by  the  gift  of  thy 
grace.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Acts  xi.  21.  26.  xiii.  1.  3. — In  those 
days : A great  number  believing  were  converted  to 
the  Lord.  And  the  tidings  came  to  the  ears  of  the 
Church  that  was  at  Jerusalem,  touching  these  tbin^: 
and  they  sent  Barnabas  as  far  as  Antioch. 
when  he  was  come,  and  had  seen  the  grace  of  God, 
rejoiced  ; and  he  exhorted  them  all  with  purpose  of 
heart  to  continue  in  the  Lord.  For  he  was  a good 
man,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith.  And 
a great  multitude  was  added  to  the  Lord.  And 
Barnabas  went  to  Tarsus,  to  seek  Saul : whom  when 


Digitized  byCjOOglC 


llth  JUNE. 


59] 


\ 


he  had  found,  he  brought  to  Antioch,  and  they  con- 
versed there  in  the  Church  a whole  year:  and  they 
taught  a great  multitude,  so  that  at  Antioch  the 
disciples  were  first  named  Christians.  (Chap.  xiiL) 
Now  there  were  in  the  Church  which  was  at  Antioch, 
prophets  and  doctors,  among  whom  was  Barnabas, 
and  Simon,  who  was  called  Niger,  and  Lucius  of 
Cyrene,  and  Manahen  who  was  the  foster-brother  of 
Herod  the  Tetrarch,  and  Saul.  And  as  they  were 
ministering  to  the  Lord,  and  fasting,  the  Holy  Ghost 
said  to  them : Separate  me  Saul  and  Barnabas,  for 
the  work  whereunto  I have  taken  them.  Then 
they  fasting  and  praying,  and  imposing  their  hands 
upon  them,  sent  tnem  away. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xviii. — Their  sound  hath  gone  forth 
into  all  the  earth  : and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of 
the  world.  V,  The  heavens  shew  forth  the  gloiy  of 
God : and  the  firmament  declaretn  the  work  of  his 
hands.  Alleluia^  Alleluia,  V,  1 have  chosen  you  out 
of  the  world,  that  you  should  go  and  should  bring 
forth  fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  should  remain. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  ^ 16.  22. At  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples:  Behold  I send  you  as 
sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves.  Be  ye  therefore  wise 
as  serpents,  and  simple  as  doves.  But  beware  of 
men.  For  they  will  deliver  you  up  in  councils,  and 
they  will  scourge  you  in  their  synagogues.  And  you 
shall  be  brought  before  governors,  and  before  kings 
for  my  sake,  for  a testimony  to  them  and  to  the 
Gentiles : but  when  they  shall  deliver  you  up,  take 
no  thought  how  or  what  you  speak : for  it  shall  be 
given  you  in  that  hour  what  to  speak.  For  it  is  not 
you  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father  that 
speaketh  in  you.  The  brother  also  shall  deliver  up 
the  brother  to  death,  and  the  father  the  son : and 
the  children  shall  rise  up  against  the  parents,  and 
shall  put  them  to  death.  And  you  shall  be  hated 
3D2 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


592 


YHh  JUNE. 


oy  all  men  for  my  name’s  sake : but  he  that  shall 
persevere  to  the  end,  he  shall  he  saved.  Credo. 

OFFERT. — Thou  shalt  make  them  princes  over 
all  the  earth : they  shall  remember  thy  name,  O Lord, 
from  generation  to  generation. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we 
have  made,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Barna- 
bas, the  apostle,  cleanse  us  from  the  stains  of  our 
sins.  Thro’. 

COMM. — You,  who  have  followed  me,  shall  sit 
on  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

P.  COMM.  Supplices. — We  humbly  beseech  thee. 
O Almighty  God,  that  those  whom  thou  refreshest 
with  thy  sacraments,  may,  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  Barnabas,  thy  apostle,  worthily  please  thee 
in  their  conduct  of  life.  Thro’. 


XII.  St.  JOHN  A FACUNDO,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  488,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus  aucior. — O God,  the  author  of 
peace  and  lover  of  charity,  who  gavest  to  blessed 
John,  thy  confessor,  the  extraordinary  grace  of  re- 
conciling those  who  were  at  variance : grant,  by  his 
merits  and  intercession,  that  being  well-grounded  in 
thy  charity,  we  may  be  by  no  temptations  separated 
from  thee.  Thro*. 

COLLECT,  (Sanctorum)  of  SS.  Basiuides,  9fc. 
mm. — Grant,  O Lord,  that  the  festival  of  thy  holy 
martyrs,  Basilides,  Cyrinus,  Nabor,  and  Nazarius, 
may  be  a comfort  to  us,  and  that  our  devotion  may 
bring  forth  the  fruit  tliat  has  made  them  blessed  for 
ever.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  (Of  the  same.) — In  veneration  of  die 
blood  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Basilides,  Cyrinus,  Nabor, 
and  Nazarius,  we  solemnly  bring  tliese  offerings, 
O Lord,  to  celebrate  thy  wonders  by  whom  so  great 
a victory  was  obtained.  Thro*. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


593 


\ 

13^  AND  14^^  JUNE. 

P.  COMM.  (Semper.)  Of  the  same. — Grmt, 
O Lor<^>  that  we  who  always  celebrate  the  festival 
of  thy  lioly  martyrs,  Basilides,  Cyrinus,  Nabor,  and 
Nazarius,  may  ever  be  sensible  of  the  effects  of  their 
intercession.  Thro’. 

XIII.  St.  ANTHONY  0/ PADUA,  c. 

All  as  tn  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Ecclesiam. — ^May  this  solemnity,  O 
God,  of  blessed  Anthony,  thy  confessor,  be  a com- 
fort to  thy  church  : that  thy  people  may  never  want 
the  assistance  of  thy  grace,  and  at  length  come  to 
the  possession  of  eternal  joys.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  iv.  as  inp.  490. 

GRAD. — The  just  man  shall  flourish  like  the  palm- 
tree,  he  shall  thrive  like  the  cedar  of  Libanus  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  'V.  To  publish  thy  mercies  in  the 
irioming,  and  thy  truth  by  night.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 
V.  The  Lord  loved  him,  and  adorned  him:  he 
clothed  him  with  a robe  of  glory.  Alleluia. 

SECRET. — May  this  oblation,  O Lord,  avail  to  the 
salvation  of  thy  people,  for  whom  thou  wast  pleased 
to  offer  thyself  a living  host  to  thy  Father.  Who. 

P.  COMM.  Divinis. — Being  filled,  O Lord,  with 
these  heavenly  gifts,  we  beseech  thee,  that  by  the 
merits  and  intercession  of  blessed  Anthony,  thy  Con- 
fessor, we  may  he  sensible  of  the  effects  of  thy  saving 
sacrifice.  Thro’. 

XIV.  St.  BASIL,  cD. 

Introit  and  Epistle,  as  in  Mass  XII.  p.  485.  Collect, 
Exaudi,  unth  its  Secret  and  P.  Comm,  the  Offer- 
tory also  and  P.  Comm,  as  in  Mass  XL  p.  484. 
GRAD. — The  mouth  of  the  righteous  man  shall 
utter  wisdom,  and  his  tongue  shall  speak  judgment. 
V.  The  law  of  God  is  in  his  heart,  and  Ids  feet  shall 
not  ho  tript  up.  Alleluia^  Alleluia.  K.  I have  found 
3D3 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


K)4  IC//1  JUNE. 

my  seneant  David,  and  have  anointed  him  with  my 
holy  oils. 

GOSPEL.  lAike  xiv.  26.  35. — At  that  time  : Jesus 
said  to  the  multitude : If  any  man  come  to  me,  and 
hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  chil- 
dren, and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea  and  his  own  life 
also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple.  And  whosoever 
doth  not  carry  his  cross  and  come  after  me  cannot 
be  my  disciple.  For  which  of  you,  having  a mind 
to  build  a tower,  doth  not  first  sit  down  and  reckon 
the  charges  that  are  necessary,  whether  he  have 
wherewithal  to  finish  it.  I^est  after  he  hath  laid  the 
foundation,  and  is  not  able  to  finish  it,  all  that  see  it 
begin  to  mock  him,  saying : This  man  began  to  build, 
and  was  not  able  to  finish.,  Or  what  king  about  to 
go  and  make  war  against  another  king,  doth  not  first 
sit  down  and  think  whether  he  be  able  with  ten 
thousand  men  to  meet  him  that  with  twenty  thou- 
sand cometh  against  him.  Or  else  whilst  the  other 
is  yet  afar  off,  sending  an  embassy,  he  desireth  con- 
ditions of  peace.  So  likewise  every  one  of  you  that 
doth  not  renounce  all  that  he  possesseth,  cannot  be 
my  disciple.  Salt  is  good : but  if  the  salt  should 
lose  its  savour,  wherewith  shall  it  be.  seasoned  ? It  is 
neither  profitable  for  the  land,  nor  for  the  dunghill, 
but  shall  be  cast  out.  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let 
him  hear.  Credo. 


XVI.  SS.  VITUS,  MODESTUS,  &c.  min. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  xxxiii.  as  on  the  26th  June,  j5. 603. 

COLLECT.  Dti  ecclesice. Grant,  we  beseech 

thee,  O Lord,  by  the  prayers  of  these  thy  holy  martyrs 
that  thy  church  may  be  free  from  all  pride,  and  im- 
prove daily  in  humility : that  declining  all  that  is  evil, 
she  may  freely  practise  that  which  is  just  |ind  good. 
Thro*. 

LESSON.  Wisd.  iii.  as  inp,  475. 

GRAD.  Ps,  cxlix. — The  saints  shall  rejoice  in 
glory : they  shall  be  joyful  in  their  beds.  V,  Sing 

Google 


IBth  JUNE. 


595 


ye  to  the  Lord  a new  canticle : let  his  praise  be  in 
the  church  of  the  saints.  Alleluia,  Alleluia.  Thy 
saints,  O Lord,  shall  bless  thee : they  shall  publish 
the  glory  of  thy  kingdom.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Jjuke  x.  16.  20. — At  that  time : Jestts 
said  to  his  disciples : He  that  heareth  you,  heareth 
me : and  he  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  me  : and 
he  that  despiseth  me,  despiseth  him  that  sent  me. 
And  the  seventy-two  returned  with  joy,  saying: 
Lord,  the  devils  also  are  subject  to  us  in  thy  name. 
And  he  said  to  them:  I saw  Satan  like  lightning 
falling  from  heaven.  Behold,  I have  given  you  power 
to  tread  upon  serpents,  and  scorpions,  and  upon  all 
the  power  of  the  enemy : and  nothing  shall  hurt  you. 
But  yet  rejoice  not  in  this,  that  spirits  are  subject 
to  you : but  rejoice  in  this,  that  your  names  are 
written  in  heaven. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixv. — God  is  wonderful,  p.  477. 

SECRET. — ^As  the  offerings  we  have  made,  O 
Lord,  in  honour  of  thy  saints,  testify  the  glorv  of  the 
divine  power : so  may  they  procure  us  the  efiects  of 
thy  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM. — ^The  souls  of  the  righteous  are  in  the 
band  of  God,  and  the  torments  of  wickedness  shall 
not  touch  them.  In  the  sight  of  the  unwise  they 
seemed  to  die : but  they  are  now  in  peace. 

P.  COMM.  Repleti. — Being  filled,  O Lord,  with 
what  hath  been  solemnly  blessed,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  by  the  intercession  of  thy  blessed  martyrs, 
Virtus  Modestus,  and  Crescentia,  this  healing  sacra- 
ment may  be  probtable  to  both  our  souls  and  bodies. 
Thro’. 


XVIII.  SS.  MARK  and  MARCELLIAN,  mm. 
INTROIT,  Salus  aiitem,/?.  479. 

COLLECT.  PreBsta  qucesumus. — Grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  we  who  celebrate 
the  festival  of  thy  holy  martyi*s,  Mark  and  Marcellian. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


596 


18/A  JUNE. 


may,  by  their  prayers,  be  delivered  from  all  impend- 
ing evils.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  Ronu  v.  1. 5. — Brethren : Being  jus- 
tified by  faith,  let  us  have  peace  with  God  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  By  whom  also  we  have 
access  through  faith  into  his  grace,  wherein  we  stand, 
and  glory  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  tlie  sons  of 
God.  And  not  only  so ; but  we  glory  also  in  tri- 
bulations, knowing  tnat  tribulation  worketh  patience. 
And  patience  trial : and  trial  hope.  And  hope  con- 
foundeth  not : because  the  charity  of  God  is  poured 
forth  in  our  heiuts,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  who  is  given 
to  us. 

GRAD. — ^The  souls  of  the  righteous  are  in  the 
hand  of  God,  and  the  torments  of  wickedness  shall 
not  touch  tliem.  V.  In  the  sight  of  the  unwise  they 
seemed  to  die  ; but  they  are  now  in  peace.  Alleluia, 
Meluia.  V.  These  were  true  brothers,  who  could 
not  be  overcome  in  combat:  who  shedding  their 
blood,  followed  the  Lord.  JUleltda. 

GOSPEL.  Ldokt  xi.  47.  51. — w2/  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees:  Wo  to  you,  who 
build  the  monuments  of  the  prophets:  and  your 
fathers  lulled  them.  Truly  you  bear  witness  that 
you  consent  to  the  doings  of  your  fathers : for  they 
indeed  killed  them,  and  you  build  their  sepulchres. 
For  this  cause  also  the  wisdom  of  God  said : I will 
send  to  them  prophets  and  apostles,  and  some  of 
them  they  will  kill  and  persecute : that  the  blood  of 
all  the  prophets,  which  was  shed  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  may  be  required  of  this  generation, 
from  the  blood  of  Abel  unto  the  blood  of  Zacbarias, 
who  was  slain  between  the  altar  and  the  temple. 
Yea  1 say  to  you,  it  shall  be  required  of  this  gen- 
eration. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxxiii.7— Our  soul  hath  been  de- 
livered as  a sparrow  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowlers 
the  snare  is  broken  and  we  are  delivered. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


19^^  AND  5^0^  JUNE. 


597 


SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  con- 
«ecrated  to  thee,  and,  being  appeased  thereby,  mer- 
cifully look  down  upon  us,  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  Mark  and  Marcellian,  thy  martyrs.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt  XXV. — Amen,  I say  to  you:  as 
long  as  you  did  it  to  one  of  these  my  least  brethren, 
you  did  it  to  me : come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father, 
possess  you  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world. 

P.  COMM.  Salutaris, ^Being  filled,  O Lord, 

"with  this  thy  saving  sacrifice,  we  humbly  beseech 
tljee,  that,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy  martyrs, 
Mark  and  Marcellian,  we  may  be  renewed  by  the 
effects  thereof.  Thro*. 


XIX.  St.  JULIANA  de  FALCONERIS,  v. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIX,  p,  498,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus  ^ui. — O God,  who  vouchsafedst 
to  refresh  blessed  Juliana,  thy  virgin,  in  a miraculous 
man  tier,  with  the  precious  body  of  thy  Son  in  her 
last  sickness ; grant,  we  beseech  thee,  by  her  merits 
and  intercession,  that  we  also,  in  our  last  conflict, 
may  be  so  refreshed  and  strengthened  with  the  same, 
as  to  be  brought  to  our  heavenly  country. 

Commem,  of  SS.  Gforvasius  and  Protasius,  by  the 
Collect,  Deus  qui,  with  its  Secret  and  P.  Comm. 
as  in  Mass  IX.  p,  479. 


XX.  St.  SYLVERIUS.  p.  m. 

All  as  in  Mass  I.  p,  461,  except 

EPISTLE.  Jude  i.  17.  21. Dearly  beloved: 

Be  mindful  of  the  words  which  have  been  spoken 
before  by  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Who 
told  you,  that  in  the  last  time  there  should  com# 
mockers,  wilking  according  to  their  own  desires  in 
ungodliness  These  are  they,  who  separate  them 


ri'gltized  by 


Google 


598 


9Qd  JL19D  fi3d  JUNE 


selves ; sensual  men,  having  not  the  spirit  But  vou. 
my  beloved,  building  youi'selves  upon  your  most  holy 
faith,  praying  in  the  Holy  Gho^  keep  yourselves 
in  the  love  of  God,  waiting  for  the  mercy  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  life  everlasting. 


XXII  St  ALBAN,  Protomartyr  of  England. 

M as  in  Mass  III.  p,  466,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus  qvi, — O God,  who  hast  con- 
secrated this  day  by  the  martyrdom  of  blessed  Alban : 
grant,  that  as  we  annually  rejoice  in  the  celebration 
of  his  festival,  we  may  be  continually  favoured  with 
his  assistance.  Thro*. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxvi.  as  in  Mass  II.  p.  465. 

SECRET.-  As  we  praise  thee,  O Lord,  in  vene- 
rating thy  blessed  martyr,  Alban ; so,  we  beseech 
thee,  through  this  pious  offering  of  atonement,  that 
he  would  always  l>e  our  intercessor.  Thro*. 

P.  COMM.  Ut  tua, — That  thy  sacraments,  O 
Lord,  may  cleanse  us  from  sin,  and  presei-ve  in  us 
the  fervour  of  charity,  grant,  we  beseech  thy  Divine 
Majesty,  that  we  may  be  always  assisted  by  the  in- 
tercession of  blessed  Alban,  thy  martyr.  Thro*. 


XXIII.  VIGIL  0/ St.  JOHN  BAPTIST.  % 
INTROIT.  Lxtke  i. — Fear  not,  Zacharias,  thy 
prayer  is  heard,  and  thy  wife,  Elizabeth,  shall  bear 
thee  a son,  and  thou  shall  call  his  name  John : He 
shall  be  great  before  the  Lord,  and  be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  even  from  his  mother’s  womb;  and 
many  shall  rejoice  in  his  nativity.  Psalm  xx.  In 
thy  might,  O Lord,  shall  the  king  rejoice : and  he 
shall  exult  exceedingly  at  being  saved  by  thee. 
F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Prcesta^  ^(esumus. — Grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  thy  people  may 
walk  in  the  way  of  salvation  ; and,  by  following  the 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


23rf  JUNE. 


599 


exhortation  of  blessed  John,  the  forerunner,  may 
come  safely  to  him,  whom  he  foretold,  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  thy  Son.  Who  liveth. 

LESSON.  Jer.  i.  4.  10. — In  those  days:  The 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying : Before  I form- 
ed thee  in  the  bowels  of  my  mother,  I knew  thee : 
and  before  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  womb  I 
sanctified  thee,  and  made  thee  a prophet  unto  the 
nations.  And  I said:  Ah,  ah,  ah.  Lord  God:  be- 
hold I cannot  speak,  for  I am  a child.  And  the 
Lord  said  to  me : Say  not : I am  a child : for  thou 
shalt  go  to  all  that  I shall  send  thee : and  whatever 
I shall  command  thee,  thou  shalt  speak.  Be  not 
afraid  at  their  presence : for  I am  with  thee  to  de- 
liver thee,  saith  the  Lord.  And  the  Lord  put  forth 
his  hand,  and  touched  my  mouth : and  the  Lord  said 
to  me : Behold  I have  given  my  words  in  thy  mouth : 
lo  I have  set  thee  this  day  over  the  nations,  and  over 
kingdoms,  to  root  up,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to 
waste,  and  to  destroy,  and  to  build,  and  to  plant, 
saith  the  Lord  Almighty. 

GRAD.  John  i. — Tnere  was  a man  sent  from  God 
whose  name  was  John.  V.  He  came  to  bear  testi- 
mony of  the  light,  and  to  prepare  for  the  Lord  a per- 
fect people. 

GOSPEL.  Lmke  i.  5.  17. — There  was  in  the 
days  of  Herod,  the  king  of  Judea,  a certain  priest 
named  Zacharias,  of  the  course  of  Abia,  and  his  wife 
was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,  and  her  name  Eliza- 
beth. And  they  were  both  just  before  God,  walking 
in  all  the  commandments  and  justifications  of  the 
Lord  without  blame.  And  they  had  no  son,  for  that 
Elizabeth  was  barren,  and  they  both  w^ere  well  ad- 
vanced in  years.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he 
executed  the  priestly  function  in  the  order  of  his 
course  before  God,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
priestly  office,  it  was  his  lot  to  offer  incense,  going 
into  the  temple  of  the  Lord : and  all  the  multitude 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


600- 


JUNE. 


of  the  people  was  praying  without  at  the  hour  of 
incense.  And  there  appeared  to  him  an  angel  of  the 
Lord,  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar  of  in- 
•cense.  And  Zacharias  seeing  him  was  tj;‘Oubled,  and 
fear  fell  upon  him : but  the  angel  said  to  him : Fear 
not,  Zacharias,  for  thy  prayer  is  heard,  and  thy  wife 
Elizabeth  shall  bear  thee  a son,  and  thou  shalt  c-a'l 
his  name  John;  and  thou  shalt  have  joy  and  glad- 
ness, and  many  shall  rejoice  at  his  nativity.  For  he 
shall  be  great  before  the  Lord:  and  shall  drink  no 
wine  nor  strong  drink,  and  he  shall  be  filled  with  tlie 
Holy  Ghost  even  from  his  mother’s  womb.  And 
he  shall  convert  many  of  the  children  of  Israel  to  the 
Lord  their  God.  And  he  shall  go  before  him  in  the 
spirit  and  power  of  Elias:  that  he  may  turn  the 
hearts  of^the  fishers  to  the  children,  and  the  incre- 
dulous to  the  w’isdom  of  the  just,  to  prepare  to  the 
Lord  a perfect  people. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  viii. — Thou  hast  crowned  him 
•with  glory  and  honour,  and  set  him  over  the  works 
of  thy  hands. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we 
have  made  to  thee,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
John  the  Baptist,  and  the  efficacy  of  these  mysteries^ 
cleanse  us  from  the  stains  of  our  sins.  Thro*. 

COMM. — Gi-eat  is  his  glory  in  being  saved  by 
thee,  O Lord : thou  wilt  crown  him  with  glory,  and 
great  honour.  Thro*. 

P.  COMM.  Beati  Joannis. — May  the  prevailing 
prayers  of  blessed  John  the  Baptist,  O Lord,  accon>- 
pany  ours : and  may  he  implore  the  mercy  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  our  behalf,  whose  coming  he 
foretold,  and  who  with  thee  livedi,  &c. 

XXIV.  NATIVITY  of  St.  JOHN  BAPTIST. 

INTROIT.  Is.  xlix. — ^The  Lord  called  me  by  my 
name  from  my  mother’s  womb,  and  made  my  mouth 
like  a sharp  sword : in  the  shadow  of  his  band  he 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


2Ath  JUNE. 


fiOi 

hath  protected  me,  and  fnade  me  as  a chosen  arrow. 
Ps.  It  is  good  to  praise  the  Loi  d,  and  sing  to  thy 
name,  O thou  the  Most  High.  V,  Gloiy. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui  prasenUm. — O God,  who 
hast  honoured  this  day  by  the  birth  of  blessed  John 
the  Baptist:  grant  that  thy  people  may  rejoice  in 
spirit,  and  guide  them  in  the  way  of  eternal  salva- 
tion. Thro*. 

LESSON.  Is,  xlix.  1.  7. — Give  ear,  ye  islands, 
and  hearken  ye  people  from  afar.  The  Lord  hath 
called  me  from  the  womb,  from  the  bowels  of  my 
mother  he  hath  been  mindful  of  my  name.  And  he 
hath  made  my  mouth  like  a sharp  sword:  in  the 
shadow  of  his  hand  he  hath  protected  me,  and  hath 
made  me  as  a chosen  arrow : in  his  quiver  he  hath 
hidden  me.  And  he  said  to  ine:  Thou  art  my  ser- 
vant in  Israel,  for  in  thee  will  I glory.  And  now 
saith  the  Lord  that  formed  me  from  the  womb  to  be 
his  servant:  Behold,  I have  given  thee  to  be  the 
light  of  the  Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  my  salva- 
tion even  to  the  farthest  part  of  the  earth.  Kings 
shall  see,  and  princes  shall  rise  up  and  adore  for  the 
Lord’s  sake,  and  for  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  who  hath 
chosen  thee. 

GRAD.  Jer.  i. — ^Before  I formed  thee  in  the 
womb,  I knew  thee  : and  before  thou  earnest  forth 
from  the  womb  I sanctified  thee.  V,  The  Lord  put 
forth  his  hand  and  touched  my  mouth  : and  said  to 
me : Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  Thou  child,  shalt  be  call- 
ed the  Prophet  of  the  Most  High : thou  shalt  go  be- 
fore the  Lord  to  prepare  his  ways.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  i,  57.  68. — Elizabeth’s  full  time 
of  being  delivered  was  come,  and  she  brought  forth 
a son.  And  her  neighbours  and  kinsfolk  heard  that 
the  Lord  hath  shewed  his  great  mercy  towards  her, 
and  they  congratulated  with  her.  And  it  came  to 
pass  that  on  the  eighth  day  they  came  to  circumcise 
the  child,  ar)d  they  called  him  by  his  father’s  name 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


602 


25/A  JUNE. 


Zacharias.  And  his  mother  answering  said  : Not  so, 
hut  he  shall  be  called  John.  And  they  said  to  her: 
There  is  none  of  thy  kindred  that  is  called  by  that 
name.  And  they  made  signs  to  his  father,  how  he 
_ would  have  him  called.  And  demanding  a writing- 
table,  he  wrote,  saying:  John  is  his  name.  And 
they  all  wondered.  And  immediately  his  mouth 
was  opened  and  his  tongue  Zoojef/,  and  he  spoke  bles 
sing  God.  And  fear  came  upon  dl  their  neighbours, 
and  all  these  things  were  noised  abroad  over  all  the 
hill-country  of  Judea:  and  all  they  that  had  heard 
them,  laid  them  up  in  their  hearts,  saying:  What 
a one,  think  ye,  shall  this  child  be?  For  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  was  with  him.  And  Zacharias  his  fa- 
ther was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost:  and  he  pro- 
phesied, saying : Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ; 
because  he  ham  visited  and  wrought  the  redemption 
of  his  people. 

OFFEKT.  Ps,  xci. — The  just  man  shall  flourish 
like  the  palm-tree : he  shall  grow  up  like  the  cedar 
of  Libanus. 

SECRET. — We  heap  offerings,  O Lord,  on  thy 
altars,  celebrating  with  due  honour  his  nativity,  who 
both  foretold  the  coming  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world, 
and  shewed  him  when  come,  Jesus  Christ  our  liOrd 
thy  Son.  Who  liveth. 

COMM.  lAike  i. — ^Thou,  child,  shalt  be  called  the 
Prophet  of  the  Most  High : for  thou  shalt  go  before 
tlie  face  of  the  Lord  to  prepare  his  ways. 

P.  COMM.  iStmoI.T— Let  thy  Church,  O God,  re- 
joice on  the  nativity  of  blessed  John  the  Baptist,  by 
whom  she  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  author  of 
lier  regeneration,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son. 
Who  liveth. 


XXV.  St.  WILLIAM,  0/ York.  ab.  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  XV.  * p.  491,  except 
COLLECT.  Dens,  qui. — O God,  who  in  thy 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


26tA  JUNE. 


naints  hast  afforded  both  an  example  and  help  to  our 
weakness,  in  order  to  enable  us  to  walk  in  the  road 
of  salvation  : grant  us  so  to  revere  the  merits  of  the 
blessed  Abbot  William,  that  we  may  feel  the  benefit 
of  his  suffrages,  and  tread  in  his  steps.  Thro’. 


XXVI.  SS.  JOHN  and  PAUL,  mm. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  xxxiii. — ^Many  are  the  afflictions 
of  the  just,  but  out  of  them  all  will  the  Lord  deliver 
them.  The  Lord  keepeth  all  their  bones,  not  one  of 
them  shall  be  broken.  Ps.  I will  bless  the  Lord  at 
all  times : his  praise  shall  be  alwavs  in  my  mouth. 
y.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  C^iKBsumns. — We  beseech  thee,  O Al- 
mighty God,  that  we  may  receive  this  day  redoubled 
joy  from  the  glorious  solemnity  of  the  blessed  martyrs, 
John  and  Paul,  who  in  their  faith  and  sufferings, 
were  truly  brothers.  Thro . 

LESSON.  Eccles.  xliv.  10. 15. — ^These  were  men 
of  mercy,  whose  godly  deeds  have  not  failed : good 
things  continue  with  their  seed,  their  posterity  are  a 
holy  inheritance,  and  their  seed  hath  stood  in  the 
covenants : and  their  children  for  their  sakes  remain 
for  ever : their  seed  and  their  glory  shall  not  be  for- 
saken. Their  bodies  are  buried  in  peace,  and  their 
name  liveth  unto  generation  and  generation.  Let 
the  people  shew  forth  their  wisdom,  and  the  Church 
declare  their  praise. 

GRAD. — Ps.  cxxxii. — Behold  how  good  and  how 
pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity 
V.  It  is  like  the  precious  ointment  on  the  head,  that 
ran  down  upon  tne  beard  of  Aaron.  Mleluia^  Alle- 
luia. V.  These  were  truly  brothers,  who  triumphed 
over  the  iniquity  of  tlie  world,  followed  Christ,  and 
are  now  in  possession  of  the  glorious  kingdom  of 
heaven.  AUeluia. 

GOSPEL.  LaUcb  xii.  1.  8. — At  that  time : Jesus 
tend  to  his  disciples : Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  the 
3 E 2 


ed  by  Google 


JUNE. 


fSOi 

Pharisees,  which  is  hypocrisy.  For  there  is  nothing 
covered,  that  shall  not  be  revealed : nor  hidden,  that 
shall  not  be  known.  For  whatsoever  things  you 
have  spoken  in  darkness,  shall  be  published  in  the 
light : and  that  which  you  have  spoken  in  the  ear  in 
the  chambers,  shall  be  preached  on  the  house-tops. 
And  I say  to  you,  my  friends : Be  not  afraid  of  them 
that  kill  the  l^dy,  and  afler  that  have  no  more  that 
they  can  do.  But  I will  shew  you  whom  ye  shall 
fear:  fear  ye  him  who  after  he  hath  kill^,  hath 
power  to  cast  into  heU.  Yea  I say  to  you,  fear  him. 
Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two  faithings,  and  not 
one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  Grod  ? Yea  the  very 
hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  Fear  not 
therefore : you  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows. 
And  I say  to  you,  whosoever  shall  confess  me  before 
men,  him  shall'the  Son  of  Man  also  confess  before 
the  angels  of  Grod. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  V. — ^All  they  that  love  thy  name 
shall  glory  in  thee:  for  thou,  O Lord,  .wDt  bless 
the  just : O Lord,  thou  hast  crowned  us  as  with  the 
shield  of  thy  good  will. 

SECRET. — ^Mercifully  receive,  O Lord,  the  offer- 
ings consecrated  to  thee  by  the  merits  of  thy  holy 
martyrs,  John  and  Paul:  and  grant  they  may  be  to 
us  ^ continual  support.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Wisd.  iii. — ^Though  in  the  sight  of  men 
they  suffered  torments,  God  hath  tried  them : as 
gold  in  the  furnace  he  hath  proved  them,  and  as  a 
victim  of  holocaust  he  hath  received  them. 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimus, — Having  received,  O Lord, 
thy  divine  sacraments  on  the  festival  of  thy  holy 
martyrs,  John  and  Paul:  grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  what  we  here  celebrate  in  time,  we  may  here- 
aftei  receive  in  a happy  eternity.  Thro*. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


272A  AMD  "^Sth  JUNE. 


ms 


XXVII.  St.  LEO,  p.  c. 

M as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  didst  render 
blessed  Leo  worthy  of  the  rewards  of  thy  saints: 
mercifully  grant  that  we,  who  keep  his  festival, 
may  likewise  follow  the  example  of  his  holy  life. 
Thro’. 

He^'e  and  at  the  Secret  and  P.  Comm,  is  made  a 

Commem,  of  St.  John  Baptist;  and  also  of  the 

Vigil  o/’SS.  Peter  and  Paul  as  below. 

GOSPEL,  Malt.  xxv.  as  in  p.  482. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by 
the  intercession  of  blessed  Leo,  that  this  oblation 
may  be  available  to  us,  by  the  offering  of  which  thou 
was  pleased  to  Wot  out  the  sins  of  the  whole  world. 
Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Deus,  yut  animce. — O God,  who  hast 
bestowed  on  the  soul  of  thy  servant  Leo,  the  rewards 
of  eternal  happiness : mercifully  grant,  that  we,  who 
are  burdened  with  the  weight  of  our  sins,  may,  by 
his  intercession,  find  relief.  Thro’. 


XXVIII.  VIGIL  o/SS.  PETER  and  PAUL. 

INTROIT.  John  xxi. — The  T^ord  paid  to  Peter 
when  thou  wast  younger,  thou  didst  gird  thyself,  and 
didst  walk  where  thou  wouldst ; but  when  thou  shalt 
be  old,  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy  hands  and  ano- 
ther shall  gird  thee,  and  lead  thee  whither  thou 
wouldst  not : and  this  he  said,  signifying  by  what 
death  he  should  glorify  God.  Ps.  The  heavens  shew 
forth  the  glory  of  God  : and  the  finnament  declareth 
the  works  of  his  hands.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Proesta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  whom  thou  hast  founded 
cjn  the  rock  of  the  apostolic  faith,  may  be  never, 
shaken  by  any  troubles. 

dE3 


pd  by  Google 


606 


JUNK. 


LESSON.  Acts  iii.  1.  10. — In  those  days : Pctei 
and  John  went  up  to  the  temple,  at  the  ninth  hour  of 
prayer.  And  a certain  man  who  was  lame  from  his 
mother’s  womb,  was  carried ; whom  they  laid  every 
day  at  tlie  gate  of  the  temple,  which  is  called  Beau- 
tiful, that  he  might  ask  alms  of  them  that  went  into 
the  temple.  He,  when  he  had  seen  Peter  and  John 
about  to  go  into  the  temple,  asked  to  receive  an  alma 
But  Peter  with  John  fastening  his  eyes  upon  him, 
said  : Look  upon  us.  But  he  looked  earnestly  upon 
them,  hoping  that  he  should  receive  something  of 
them.  Then  Peter  said : Silver  and  gold  I have  none : 
but  what  I have  I give  thee : In  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Nazareth,  arise  and  walk.  And  taking  him 
by  the  right  hand,  he  lifted  him  up,  and  forthwith 
his  feet  and  soles  received  strength.  . And  he  leaping 
up  stood,  and  walked : and  went  in  with  them  into 
the  temple,  walking,  and  leaping,  and  praising  God. 
And  all  the  people  saw  him  wmking  and  praising 
God.  And  they  knew  him,  that  it  was  he  who  sat 
begging  alms  at  the  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  temple: 
and  they  were  filled  with  wonder  and  amazement  at 
that  which  had  happened  to  him. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xviii.  to  Alleluia,  as  on  the  11th 
June,  p,  591. 

GOSPEL.  John  xxi.  15.  19. At  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  Simon  Peter:  Simon  son  of  John, 
lovest  thou  me  more  than  these  ? He  saith  to  him  ; 
Yea.  Lord:  thou  knowest  that  I love  thee.  He 
saith  to  him : Feed  my  lambs.  He  saith  to  him 
again:  Simon  sow  of  John,  lovest  thou  me?  He 
saith  to  him:  Yea,  Lord,  thou  knowest  that  1 love 
thee.  He  saith  to  him  : Feed  my  lambs.  He  saith 
to  him  the  third  time : Simon  son  of  John  lovest  thou 
me  ? Peter  was  grieved,  because  he  said  to  him  the 
third  time : Lovest  thou  mS  7 And  he'said  to  him  : 
l^rd,  thou  knowest  all  things : thou  knowest  that 

love  thee.  He  sai  l to  him : Feed  my  sheep. 


Digitized  by  GoOglC 


29^^  JUNE. 


607 


Amen,  amen  I say  |o  thee,  when  thou  wast  younger, 
thou  didst  gird  thyself,  and  didst  walk  where  thou 
wouldst : hilt  when  thou  shalt  be  old,  thou  shall 
stretch  forth  thy  hands,  and  another  shall  gird  thee, 
and  lead  thee  whither  thou  wouldst  not.  This  he 
said,  signifying  by  what  death  he  should  glorify  God. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxxxviii. — To  me,  thy  friends,  O 
God,  are  made  exceedingly  honourable : their  prin* 
cipality  is  exceedingly  strengthened. 

SECRET. — ^Sanctify,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee, 
the  offerings  of  thy  people  by  the  intercession  of  thy 
apostles,  and  cleanse  us  from  the  stains  of  uur  sins. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  John  xxi. — Simon,  son  of  John,  lovest 
thou  me  more  than  these  ? Lord,  thou  knowest  all 
things : diou  knowest,  O Lord,  that  1 love  thee. 

P.  COMM.  ( Quos  codesti,)  as  to-morrow,  p.  609. 

XXIX.  SS.  PETER  AND  PAUL. 

INTROIT.  Acts  xii.  11. 

NOW  I know  in  very  l^UNC  scio  vere  quia 
deed  that  the  Lord  misit  Dominus  aii- 
hath  seat  his  angel  and  gelum  suum,  et  eripuit 
4lelivered  me  out  of  the  me  de  manu  Heiodis,  et 
hand  of  Herod,  and  from  de  omni  expectalione 
all  the  expectation  of  the  plebis  Judaec^m. 
people  of  the  Jews.  Ps,  cxxxviii.  Domine, 

Ps.  O Lord,  thou  prov-  probasti  me,  et  cogno- 
ed  me,  and  hast  known  visti  me ; tu  cognovisti 
me:  thou  hast  known  sessionem  ineum,  et  re- 
tny  sitting  do\ni,  and  my  6un*ectionem  meam. 
rising  up.  V.  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  hast  con- 
secrated this  day  by  the  martyrdom  of  thy  glorious 
apostles  Peter  and  Paul;  grant,  that  tfiy  Church 
may  in  all  things  follow  their  directions,  by  whom 
was  laid  the  foundation  of  religion.  Thro*. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


eo8 


2^^  JUNE. 


LESSON.  Acts  xVi.l,  11. — those  days:  Herod 
the  king  stretched  forth  Ids  hand  to  afflict  some  of 
the  Church.  And  he  killed  James  the  brother  of 
John  with  the  sword.  And  seeing  that  it  pleased 
the  Jews,  he  proceeded  to  take  up  Peter  also.  Now 
it  was  in  the  days  of  azymes.  And  when  he  hud 
apprehended  him  he  cast  him  into  prison,  delivering 
him  to  four  files  of  soldiers  to  be  kept,  intending 
after  the  pasch  to  bring  him  forth  to  the  people. 
Peter  therefore  was  kept  in  prison.  But  prayer  was 
made  without  ceasing  by  the  Church  unto  God  for 
him.  Ajid  when  Herod  would  have  brought  nun 
forth,  the  same  night  Peter  was  sleeping  between 
two  soldiers,  bound  with  two  chains;  and  the 
keepers  before  the  door  kept  the  prison.  And  be- 
hold an  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by  him : and  a 
light  shined  in  the  room ; and  he  striking  Peter  on 
the  side  raised  him  up,  saying : Arise  quickly.  And 
the  chains  fell  off  from  his  hands.  And  the  angel 
said  to  him : Gird  thyself,  and  put  on  thy  sandak. 
And  he  did  so.  And  he  said  to  him : Cast  thy  gar- 
ment about  thee,  and  follow  me.  And  going  out 
he  followed  him,  and  he  knew  not  that  it  was  ti*ue 
which  was  done  by  the  angel : but  thought  he  saw 
a vision.  And  passing  through  the  first  and  second 
ward,  they  came  to  the  iron  gate  that  leadeth  to  the 
city,  which  of  itself  opened  to  them.  And  going 
out,  they  passed  on  through  one  street : and  immedi 
ately  the  angel  departed  fi-om  him.  And  Peter  com 
ing  to  himself,  said ; Now  I know  in  very  deed  that 
the  Lord  hath  sent  his  angel,  an*d  hath  delivered  me 
out  of  the  hand  of  Herod,  and  from  aU  the  expecta- 
tion of  the  people  of  the  Jews. 

GRAD.  To  me,  &c.  as  at  the  Offertory,  607. 

V.  ^Pu  es  Petrus^  et  super  hanc  petram  (Bdi/icaho 
Ecdesiam  meam.  Alleluia.  V,  Thou  art  Peter : and 
upon  tliis  rock  I w ill  build  my  Church.  Alleluia. 


)y  Google 


90th  JUNE. 


609 


GOSPEL.  Matt  xvi.  13.  19. J9t  that  time: 

Jesus  came  into  the  quarters  of  Cesarea  Phillipi : 
and  be  asked  his  disciples  saying:  Whom  do  men 
say  that  the  Son  of  Man  is  ? But  they  said : Some, 
John  the  Baptist,  and  other  some,  Elias,  and  others 
Jeremias,  or  one  of  the  prophets.  Jesus  saith  to 
them : But  whom  do  you  say  that  I am  ? Simon 
Peter  answered  and  said : Thou  art  Christ  the  Son 
of  the  living  God.  And  Jesus  answering,  said  to  him : 
Blesseii  art  thou  Simon  Bar-Jona;  because  flesh  and 
blood  hath  not  revealed  it  to  thee,  but  my  Father 
who  is  in  heaven.  And  I say  to  thee : That  thou 
art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I will  build  my 
Church,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against 
it.  And  I will  give  to  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  And  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  upon 
earth,  it  shall  be  bound  also  in  heaven : and  whatso- 
ever thou  shalt  loose  on  earth,  it  shall  be  loosed  also 
in  heaven.  Credo. 

OFFERT. — Thou  wdlt  appoint  them  nilers  over 
the  whole  earth : they  shall  be  mindful  of  thy  name, 
O Lord,  from  generation  to  generation. 

SECRET.— May  the  prayers  of  the  apostles,  O 
Lord,  accompany  the  offerings  consecrated  to  thy 
name ; and  grant  that  we  may  be  both  cleansed  and 
defended  thereby.  Thro’. 

COMM.  MaU,  xvi.— Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon 
this  rock  I will  build  my  Church. 

P.  COMM.  Quo5  c<EZe5<i.— Defend,  O Lord,  from 
all  adversity,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  apostles, 
those  whom  thou  hast  nourished  with  heavenly  food. 
Thro*. 

XXX.  COMMEMORATION  of  St  PAUL. 
sMason  January  25,  p.  543,  with  a Commem,  of 
St  John  the  Baptist,  p.  601,  except 

EPISTLE.  Gal.  i.  11.  '^0.— Brethren : I give 
you  to  understand,  that  the  gospel  which  was 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


610  30^  JUNK. 

preached  by  me,  is  not  according  to  man.  Fur 
neither  did  1. receive  it  of  man,  nor  did  I learn  it; 
hut  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  For  you  have 
heard  of  my  conversion  in  time  past  in  the  Jews’  re- 
ligion : how  that  beyond  measure  I persecuted  the 
Church  of  God,  and  wasted  it,  and  I made  progress 
in  the  Jews’  religion  above  many  of  my  equals  in  my 
own  nation,  being  more  abundantly  zealous  for  the 
tractions  of  my  fathers.  But  when  it  pleased  him, 
who  separated  me  from  my  mother’s  womb,  and 
called  me  by  his  grace,  to  reveal  bis  Son  in  me,  that 
I might  preach  him  among  the  Gentiles,  immediately 
1 condescended  not  to  flesh  and  blood.  N either  went 
[ to  Jerusalem  to  the  apostles  who  were  before  me: 
but  I went  into  Arabia,  and  again  1 returned  to 
Damascus.  Then,  after  three  years,  I went  to  Jeru- 
salem to  see  Peter,  and  I tarried  with  him  fifteen 
days ; but  other  of  the  apostles  I saw  none : saving 
James  the  brother  of  the  Lord.  Now  the  things 
which  I write  to  you ; behold  before  Grod  I lie  not. 

^//eZuia,  Mleluia,  V.  O holy  apostle  Paul,  preacher 
of  the  truth,  and  doctor  of  the  Gentiles,  intercede  for 
us.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  x,  as  on  the  11th  of  June  p,  591. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxxxviii. — ^To  me  thy  friends,  O 
God,  are  made  exceedingly  honourable : their  princi- 
pality is  exceedingly  strengthened. 

COMM.  Matt.  xix. — Amen,  1 say  to  you : that 
you  who  have  forsaken  all  things,  and  followed  ro«\ 
shall  receive  an  hundred  fold,  and  shall  possess  liie* 
everlasting. 

P.  COMM.  Perceptis, — Having  received,  O Lord, 
these  holy  mysterie^  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  by  the 
intercession  of  thy  blessed  apostle  Paul,  that  what 
we  have  celebrated  in  thanksgiving  for  the  glory  be- 
stowed upon  him,  may  be  a remedy  to  us.  Thro’ 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


yrf  JULY. 


611 


Jvly  JI  VISITATION  oftht  B.  V.  M. 

fntroit,  Grad.  Offert.  Comm,  and  P.  Comm.  a«  in 
the  Votive  Mass,  Salve,  p.  507.  The  Collect,  &c, 
as  on  December  8,  p,  5^.  with  Commems.  of  SS. 
Peter  and  Paul,  as  on  June  29,  p.  607. 

( Commem,  of  SS.  Processus  and  Martinian,  mm. 

COLLECT*.  Deus^  quL — O God,  who  by  th« 
glorious  sufferings  of  thy  holy  martyrs  Processus  and 
Martinian,  art  pleased  to  protect  and  defend  us: 
grant,  we  may  improve  by  their  example,  and  find 
comfort  in  their  prayers.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Card.  ii.  8.  14. — Behold  he  cometh, 
leaping  upon  the  mountains,  skipping  over  the  hills. 
My  beloved  is  like  a roe  or  a young  hart.  Behold 
he  standeth  behind  our  waU,  looking  through  the 
windows,  looking  through  the  lattices.  &hold 
iny  beloved  sj)eaketh  to  me:  Arise,  make  haste,  my 
love,  my  dove,  my  beautiful  one,  and  come.  For 
winter  is  now  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone.  The 
flowers  have  appeared  in  our  land,  the  time  of  prun- 
ing is  come,  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our 
land : the  fig-tree  hath  put  forth  her  green  figs,  the 
vine  in  flower  yield  their  sweet  smell.  Arise,  ray 
love,  my  beautiful  one,  and  come.  My  dove  in  the 
clefb  of  the  rock,  in  the  hollow  places  of  the  wall, 
shew  me  thy  face,  let  thy  voice  sound  in  my  ear : 
for  thy  voice  is  sweet,  and  thy  face  comely. 
GOSPEL,  hake  i.  as  in  p.  62.  Ckedo. 
SECRET.  ( Of  SS.  Processus,  fyc. ) Receive,  O 
Lord,  our  prayers  and  offerings:  and  that  they  may 
be  found  worthy  in  thy  sight,  let  us  be  assisted  by 
the  prayers  of  thy  saints.  Thro’. 

P.  C6MM.  'Refecti. — Being  nourished  by  the 
participation  of  the  holy  body  and  precious  blood  of 
this  sacrifice ; we  beseech  thee,  O Lord  our  God, 
fliat  what  we  perform  with  pious  devotion,  may  be 
a certain  means  of  obtaining  our  salvation.  Thro’ 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


612 


2(2  JULT. 


mthin  the  OCTAVE  of  SS.  PETER  aiid  PAIU 
Introit,  Mihi  autem,  p,  524.  Collect,  &c.  as  on 
June  29,  p,  607. 

LESSON.  Acts  V.  12.  16. — In  those  days : By  the 
hands  of  the  apostleb  were  many  signs  and  wonders 
wrought  among  the  people.  And  they  were  all  with 
one  accord  in  Solomon’s  porch.  But  of  the  rest  no 
man  durst  join  himself  to  them : but  the  people  mag- 
nified them.  And  the  multitude  of  men  and  women 
that  believed  in  the  Lord  was  more  increased : inso- 
much, that  they  brought  forth  the  sick  into  the  streets, 
and  Imd  them  on  beds  and  couches,  that  when  Peter 
came,  his  shadow,  at  least,  might  overshadow  any  of 
them,  and  they  might  be  delivered  from  their  in- 
firmities. And  there  came  also  together  to  Jerusalem 
a multitude  out  of  the  neighbouring  cities,  bringing 
sick  persons,  and  such  as  were  troubled  with  un- 
clean spirits ; who  were  all  healed. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xliv. — ^Thou  shalt  make  them  princes 
over  all  the  earth ; they  shall  remember  thy  name, 
O Lord.  P.  Instead  of  thy  fathers  sons  are  bom  to 
thee : therefore  shall  people  praise  thee.  Alleluia, 
AUduia.  V.  I have  prayed  for  thee,  Peter,  that 
thy  feith  fail  not:  and  when  thou  art  converted, 
strengthen  thy  brethren.  AUduia, 

GOSPEL.  ‘ Matt,  xix.  as  inp,  492. 

COMM. — ^You  who  have  followed  me  shall  sit 
upon  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 


VI.  OCTAVE  of  SS.  PETER  and  PAUL. 

INTROIT. — Sapientiam,  as  in  p,  477.  ^ 

COLLECT.  Deus,  emus, — O God,  whose  ri^t 
hand  saved  blessed  Peter  n*om  being  drowned  whilst 
he  walked  upon  the  sea,  and  delivered  his  fellow 
apostle  Paul  from  the  bottom  tliereof,  when  he  had 
been  a third  6me  shipwrecked : mercifully  bear  us 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


6^  JULY. 


618 


and  grant,  that  by  the  merits  of  both,  we  may  obtain 
a happy  eternity.  Thro’. 

LESSON,  Eccles.  xliv.  as  mp,  603. 

GRAD. — The  souls  of  the  just  are  in  the  hand  of 
God,  and  the  torment  of  the  wicked  shall  not  touch 
them.  V.  In  the  sight  of  the  unwise  they  seem  to 
die,  but  they  are  in  peace.*  Allduia,  Mleluia, 
You  have  continued  with  me  in  all  my  sufferings, 
and  I prepare  a kingdom  for  you:  that  you  may* 
sit  on  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 
Melxda, 

GOSPEL.  xiv.  02,  33.  • ■ that  titnp-  * 

Jesus  obliged  his  disciples  to  go  up  into  the  boat, 
and  to  go  before  him  over  the  water,  till  he  dis- 
missed the  people.  And  having  dismissed  the  mul- 
titude, he  went  up  into  a mountain  to  pray.  And 
when  it  was  evening,  he  was  there  alone.  But  the 
boat  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  was  tossed  with  the 
waves:  for  the  wind  was  contrary.  And  in  the 
fourth  watch  of  the  night,  he  came  to  them  walking 
upon  the  sea.  And  they  seeing  him  walking  upon 
the  sea,  were  troubled,  saying:  It  is  an  apparition. 
And  they  cried  out  for  fear.  And  immediately  Jesus 
spoke  to  them,  saying : Be  of  good  heart ; it  is  I, 
fear  ye  not.  And  Peter  making  answer,  said : Lord, 
if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  to  thee  upon  the  waters. 
And  he  said:  Come.  And  Peter  going  down  out 
of  the  boat,  walked  upon  the  water  to  come  to 
Jesus.  But  seeing  the  wind  strong  he  was  afraid : 
and  when  he  began  to  sink,  he  cried  out,  saying : 
Lord,  save  me.  Arid  immediately  Jesus  stretching 
forth  his  hand  took  hold  of  him,  and  said  to  him : 
O thou  of  little  faith,  why  dost  thou  doubt  And 
when  they  were  come  into  the  boat,  the  wind  ceased. 
And  they  that  were  in  the  boat,  came  and  adored 
him,  saying:  Indeed  thou  art  the  Son  of  God. 
Credo. 

3F 


Digitized  by  Google 


614  7th  J€L « 

OFFERT.  -The  saints  shall  rejoice  in  glory : they 
shall  rejoice  on  their  couches : they  shall  sing  the 
high  praises  of  God. 

SECRET. — That  the- prayers  and  offerings  we 
oring,  O Lord,  may  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  grant 
we  may  be  assisted  by  the  prayers  of  thy  apostles 
Peter  and  Paul.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Same  as  the  foregoing  Gradual  to  the* 
* P.  COMM.  Protege, — Protect,  O Lord,  thy  peo- 
ple : an‘d  continually  preserve  those  who  have  con- 
fidence in  the  interce^ion  of  thy  holy  apostles,  Peter 
and  Paul.  Thro’. 


VII.  TRANSI.ATION  of  the  RELICS  of  St 
THOMAS  abp.  of  CANTERBURY,  m. 

M OS' on  the  2dth  of  December,  p.  85,  except 

COLLECT.  Devs,  qxii, — ^O  God,  who  grantest  us 
to  celebrate  the  Translation  of  the  relics  of  blessed 
Thomas  thy  martyr  and  bishop : we  humbly  beseech 
thee,  that,  by  his  merits  and  prayers,  we  may  pass 
from  vice  to  virtue,  and  from  the  prison  of  this  flesh, 
to  an  eternal  kingdom.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — O God,  who  changest,  by  thy  heavenly 
benediction,  the  bread  and  wine  nto  thy  body  and 
blood : grant,  that  by  the  interr  ession  of  blessed 
Thomas,  thy  martjT  and  bishop,  having  recourse  to 
thy  mercy,  we  may  conform  to  thy  will.  Who 
livest. 

COMM.  John  X. — I am  the  good  shepherd,  and 
1 know  my  sheep,  and  my  sheep  know  me. 

P.  COlliM.  Devs,  qui, — O God,  who  translated 
blessed  Thomas,  thy  martyr  and  bishop  from  tem- 
poral sufleiings  to  eternal  joys:  gi^t,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  who  celebrate  his  festival,  may,  by  bis 
Mtronage,  pass  to  the  joys  of  heaven.  Thro*. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


Sth  AJND  lOih  JULT 


615 


VIII.  St.  ELIZABETH,  w. 

M as  in  Mass  XXI.  p,  502,  except 

COLLECT.  Clementissime, O most  inercifuj 

God,  who,  amongst  other  admirable  endowments, 
didst  privilege  blessed  Elizabeth  with  the  gift  of 
making  wars  cease : grant,  by  her  prayere,  that  after 
having  enjoyed  the  peace,  which  we  humbly  crave  in 
this  mort*d  life,  we  may  be  received  into  everlasting 
bliss.  Thro’. 


X.  The  SEVEN  BRETHREN,  mm.  and  SS.  RU- 
FINA, and  SECUNDA,  w.  mm. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  cxii. — Praise  the  Lord,  ye  chil- 
dren, praise  ye  the  name  of  the  Lord : who  iiinketh 
a baiTen  woman  to  dwell  in  a house  the  joyful 
mother  of  children.  Ps.  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  from  henceforth,  now  and  for  ever.  V,  Gloiy. 

COLLECT.  Prcesta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  as  we  have- been  informed  of 
the  constancy  of  these  glorious  martyrs  in  the  prdfi»- 
sion  of  thy  faith,  so  we  may  experience  their  kind- 
ness in  recommending  us  to  thy  mercy  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Prov.  xxix.  as  in  p.  502. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxxiii. — Our  souls  hath  beernleliver- 
ed  as  a sparrow  out  of  the  snare  6f  the  Ibwlers. 
V.  The  snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  delivered.*^ 
Our  help  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  made 
heaven  and  earth.  Mlduia^  Alleluia.  V.  These  were 
truly  brothers,  who  triumphed  over  the  iniquity  of 
the  world,  followed  Christ,  and  are  now  in  posseosjor 
of  the  glorious  kingdom  of  heaven.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xii.  46.  50. At  that  time 

As  Jesus  was  speaking  to  the  multitudes,  behold  ili^ 
mother  and  his  brethren  stood  without,  seeking  to 
speak  to  him.  And  one  said  to  him:  Behold  diy 
mother  and  thy  brethren  stand  without  seeking  ihee- 
3 F 2 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


61C 


12th  JTTLT. 


But  he  answenng  him  that  told  him,  said : Who  if 
my  mother  and  who  are  my  brethren  ? And  stretch- 
ing forth  his  hand  towards  his  disciples,  he  said: 
Behold  niy  mother  and  my  brethren.  F or  whosoever 
shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  that  is  in  heaven,  the 
same  is  my  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxxiii. — Our  soul,  &c.  as  Grad, 
p.  615,  to*. 

SECRET. — Mercifully,  O Lord,  look  down  on  the 
sacrifice  which  we  offer  thee ; and  grant,  by  the  in- 
tercession of  thy  saints,  that  it  may  increase  our  de- 
votion, and  avail  to  pur  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt,  xii.— Whosoever  shall  do  the  will 
of  my  Father,  who  is  in  heaven : the  same  is  my 
brother,  sister,  and  mother,  saith  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  QtKBsumus. — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  by  tlie  intercession  of  thy  saints, 
we  may  obtain  the  effect  of  that  salvation,  a pledge 
whereof  we  have  received  in  these  mysteries.  TInro’. 

XII.  St.  JOHN  GAULBERT,  ab.  c. 

€ts  in  Mass  XV.* p.  495,  except 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  v.  43.  48. JH  that  time: 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples:  You  have  heard  that  it 
hath  been  said.  Thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour,  and 
hate  thy  enemy.  But  I say  to  you,  love  your  ene- 
mies, do  good  to  them  that  hate  you  and  pray  for 
Ihem  that  persecute  and  calumniate  you:  that  you 
may  be  the  children  of  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven 
who  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  upon  the  good  and  bad 
and  raineth  upon  the  just  and  unjust.  For  if  you 
love  them  that  love  you,  what  rewaid  shaU  you  have, 
do  not  even  the  publicans  this  ? And  if  you  salute 
your  brethren  only,  what  do  you  more  ? Do  not  also 
the  heathens  this  r Be  you  therefore  perfect,  as  also 
yopr  heavenly  Father  is  perfect. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


14t^‘AND  I5f^  JULY. 


617 


Commem,  of  SS.  Nabor  and  Felix,  mnu 

COLLECT.  Prossteu — Grant,  we  be^ech  thee, 
O Lord,  that  as  we  make  a yearly  commemoration 
of  these  thy  holy  mart3rrs:  so  we  may  always  be 
partakers  of  their  intercession.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  tliee,  O Lord,  that 
the  offerings  of  thy  people  may  be  acceptable  to  thee 
through  the  intercession  of  thy  holy  martyrs  Nabor 
and  Felix : and  that  they  may  be  rendered  worthy 
by  the  merits  of  those,  in  honour  of  whose  triumphs 
they  are  offered  to  thy  holy  name.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  J^atalitiia, — Being  refreshed,  by  virtue' 
of  the  sacrament  we  have  received  on  the  festival  of 
thy  saints,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  we  may 
eternally  enjoy  the  good  things  wherewith  thou  hast 
now  been  pleased  to  cherish  us.  Thro’. 

XIV.  St.  BONAVENTURE,  bp.  c.  and  D. 

•Mas  in  Mass  XII.  p,  485,  except 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxvi. — ^The  mouth  of  the  just  shall 
meditate  wisdom : and  his  tongue  shall  speak  judg- 
ment. V.  The  law  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart.  And 
his  steps  shall  not  be  supplanted.  •dUeiuicL,  Alkluuu 
V,  The  Lord  hath  sworn  and  he  will  not  repent. 
Thou  art  a priest  for  ever  according  to  the  oixler  of 
Melchisedech.  AUeluia, 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixxxviii. — ^May  truth,  &c.  and 
SECRET. — May  the  annual  solemnity,  &c.  as  in 
Mass  XL  p.  485. 


XV.  St.  SWITHIN,  bp.  of  Winchester,  c. 

•M  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — A Imighty  and  eternal 
God,  who  hast  made  this  day  honourable  by  the 
celebration  of  the  festival  of  blessed  Swithin,  thy 
confessor  and  bishop,  grant  to  th/  < hurch  that  we 
3F3 


by  Google 


618 


16ih  AND  I7tk  JULT. 


may  o^jtain  heaven  through  his  intercession,  whose 
memory  we  venerate  on  earth.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Look  down,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
on  thy  people  who  approach  thy  sacraments  on  this 
festival  of  blessed  S with  in,  thy  confessor  and  bishop^ 
and  grant  that  what  they  offer  in  honour  of  thy  name, 
may,  by  his  prayers,  avail  to  the  pardon  of  their  sina 
Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Pignus. — Having  received  the  pledge 
of  eternal  life,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  by 
the  intercession  of  blessed  Swithki,  thy  confessor  and 
bishop,  we  may  hereafter  openly  partake  of  what  we 
have  now  sacramentally  received.  Thro’. 


XVI.  B.  V.  M.  of  MOUNT  CARMEL. 

M as  in  the  Votive  Mass,  Salve,  p.  507,  except 

COLLECT.  DeuSy  qui, — O God,  who  hast  ho- 
noured the  order  of  the  Carmelites  with  the  singular 
title  of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary,  Mother  of  God: 
merciftilly  grapt  that  we  who  solemnize  this  her 
commemoration,  may  by  the  aid  of  her  prayers  ar- 
rive at  eternal  happiness.  Thro’. 

XVII.  St.  OSMUND,  bp.  o/Salisbui7,c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  X.  * p.  482,  except 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — ^Almighty  and  eternal 
God,  who  rcjoicest  us  on  this  festival  of  blessed  Os- 
mund, thy  confessor  and  bishop,  we  humbly  beseech 
thy  clemency,  that  as  we  devoutly  celebrate  his  so- 
lemnity, we  may  obtain  through  his  prayers,  the 
glory  of  eternal  life.  Thro*. 

SECRET. — Sanctify  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
our  offerings  through  the  merits  and  intercession  of 
blessed  Osmund,  that  they  may  be  changed  into  th 
body  and  blood  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  avail  to 
the  salvation*  of  our  souls.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


mth  JULY.  619 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis, — ^Havin^  received^  thy  sa- 
cred gifts,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  by  their 
efficacy  we  may  imitate  the  example  of  blessed  Os- 
mund, tliy  confessor  and  bishop,  and  thereby  obtain 
eternal  joys.  Thro*. 


XVIII.  St.  CAMILLUS  de  LELLIS,  c.  ^ 
INTROIT. — ^No  man  hath  greater  love,  than  to 
lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends.  Ps,  Blessed  is  he 
that  attendeth  to  the  needy  and  poor ; for  in  the  evil 
day  the  Lord  will  deliver  him.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  DeuSj  qui, — O God,  who  didst  glori- 
ously animate  blessedCamillus  with  a singular  charity 
in  assisting  souls  in  their  last  agony ; pour  forth,  we 
beseech  thee,  into  us  by  his  intercession,  the  spirit 
of  thy  love,  that  we  may  overcome  the  enemy  at 
the  hour  of  death,  and  arrive  at  a crown  in  heaven. 
Thro*. 

Commem,  qf  St  Stmphorosa,  &c.  by  the  Collect, 
&c.o/Mass  VIII.  p.  477. 

Epistle,  John  iii.  cts  inp,  399.  Grad,  and  Offert  as 
in  Mass  Xl.  pp,  484,  485. 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  12. 16. — At  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples : This  is  my  commandment,  that 
you  love  one  another,  as  I have  loved  you.  Greater 
love  than  this  no  man  hath,  that  a man  lay  down  his 
life  for  his  friends.  You  are  my  friends,  if  you  do 
the  things  that  I command  you.  I will  not  now  call 
you  servants : for  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  the 
Lord  doth.  But  I have  called  you  friends:  because 
all  things  whatsoever  I have  heard  of  my  Father,  I 
have  made  known  to  you.  You  have  not  chosen 
me ; but  I have  chosen  you ; and  have  appointed 
you,  that  you  should  go,  and  should  bring  forth  fruit ; 
and  your  fruit  should  remain : that  whatsoever  you 
shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  may  give 
It  you. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


I9th  AND  JCLT. 


eao 

SECRET?. — Let  the  spotless  victim,  by  the  offer 
iAg  of  which  we  renew  the  work  of  our  redemption, 
[the  effects  of  the  immense  charity  of  Jesus  Chnst) 
become  for  us,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Camil- 
lus, a salutary  remedy  against  all  our  weaknesses  of 
l)ody  and  soul,  and  a comfort  and  defence  in  our  last 
agony.  Thro’. 

COMM. — I was  sick  and  you  visited  me : amen, 
amen,  I say  unto  you : inasmuch  as  you  have  done 
this  to  one  of  the  least  of  my  brethren,  you  have  done 
it  unto  me. 

P.  COMM.  Per  Iubc, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  by  these  heavenly  mj'steries,  which  we  have 
received  with  piety  and  devotion  on  this  festi\'al  of 
blessed  Camillus,  foat  we  may  be  refreshed  with  the 
same  at  the  hour  of  death,  and,  being  delivered  from 
all  sin,  be  joyfully  received  into  the  bosom  of  thy 
mercy.  Thro’. 

j 

XIX.  St.  VINCENT  a PAULO,  c. 

M as  in  Mass  XIV.  p.  489,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  quu — O God,  who  didst 
strengthen  blessed  Vincent  with  apostolic  courage 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor,  and  promote  the 
honour  of  the  ecclesiastical  order : grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  who  respect  his  merits,  may  be  instruct- 
ed by  the  example  of  his  virtues.  Thro’. 

Grad.  Ps.  xci.  and  Gospel,  Luke  xii.  as  in  p,  488. 


XX.  St.  JEROME  EMILIAN,  c. 

INTROIT.  Jeremiah  Lam.  ii. — My  liver  is  pour- 
ed out  on  the  earth,  for  the  destruction  of  the 
daughter  of  niy  people,  when  the  children,  and  the 
sucklings  fainted  away  in  the  streets  of  the  city. 
Ps.  Praise  the  Lord,  ye  children : praise  the  name 
of  the  Lord.  V.  Glory. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


20^  JULY. 


COLLECT.  Deus,  misencordtcarum, O Gk)d, 

the  Father  of  mercies : grant,  by  the  merits  and  in- 
tercession of  blessed  Jerome,  whom  thou  wast  pleased 
to  make  a helper  and  father  to  poor  orphans,  that 
we  may  faithfully  preserve  the  spirit  of  adoption,  by 
which  we  are  called,  and  are  in  reality  thy  children. 
Thro’. 

Commem,  of  St  Margaret,  by  the  Collect,  &c.  of 
Mass  XVII.  p.  496. 

LESSON.  Isaiah,  Iviii.  7.  11. — Deal  thy  bread 
to  the  hungry,  and  bring  the  needy  and  the  harbour- 
less into  thy  house : when  thou  shalt  see  one  naked, 
cover  him,  and  despise  not  thy  own  flesh.  Then  shall 
thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning,  and  thy  health 
shall  speedily  arise,  and  thy  justice  shall  go  before 
thy  face,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  gather  thee 
up.  Then  shalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  shall  hear: 
thou  shalt  cry,  and  he  shall  say : Here  I am.  If 
thou  wilt  take  away  the  chain  out  of  the  midst  of 
thee,  and  cease  to  stretch  out  the  finger,  and  to  speak 
that  which  is  good  for  nothing.  When  thou  shalt 
pour  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungiy,  and  shalt  satisfy  the 
afliicted  soul,  then  shall  thy  light  rise  up  in  darkness, 
and  thy  darkness  shall  be  as  the  noon-day.  And  the 
Lord  will  give  thee  rest  continually,  and  will  fill  thy 
soul  with  brightness,  and  deliver  thy  bones,  and  thou 
shalt  be  like  a watered  garden,  and  like  a fountain  of 
water  whose  waters  shall  not  fail. 

GRAD  Prov.  v. — Let  thy  fountains  be  conveyed 
abroad,  and  in  the  streets  divide  thy  waters.  V,  Ac- 
ceptable is  the  man  who  sheweth  mercy  and  lendeth : 
he  shall  order  his  words  with  judgment,  because  he 
shall  not  be  moved  forever.  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  F.  He 
hath  distributed,  he  hath  given  to  the  poor:  his  jus- 
tice remaineth  for  ever.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xix.  13.  22. At  that  time: 

Some  little  children  were  presented  to  him,  that  he 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


JITLY. 


should  impose  hands  upon  them  and  pray.  And  the 
disciples  rebuked  them.  But  Jesus  said  to  them: 
Suffer  the  little  children,  and  forbid  them  not  to 
come  to  me : for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  for  such. 
And  when  he  had  imposed  hands  upon  them,  he 
departed  from  thence.  And  behold  one  came  and 
said  to  him:  Good  master,  what  good  shall  I do 
that  I may  have  life  everlasting?  Who  said  to 
him  : Why  askest  thou  me  concerning  good  ? One 
is  good,  God.  But  if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep 
the  commandments.  He  said  to  him:  Which? 
And  Jesus  said : Thau  shalt  do  no  murder,^  Thou  shah 
not  commit  adulteiy^  Thou  shatt  not  steal,  Thou  shalt 
not  bear  false  witness.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy 
mother : and.  Thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy^ 
self  The  young  man  saith  to  him : All  these  things 
have  I kept  from  my  youth,  what  is  yet  wanting  to 
me  ? Jesus  saith  to  him : If  thou  wilt  be  perfect, 
go,  sell  what  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and 
Shou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven : and  come,  fol- 
low me. 

OFFERT.  Tob.  xii. — ^When  thou  didst  pray  with 
tears,  and  didst  bury  the  dead,  and  didst  leave  thy 
dinner,  and  hide  the  dead  by  day  in  thy  house,  and 
bury  them  by  night,  I offered  thy  prayer  to  the 
Lord. 

SECRET. — Most  merciful  God*  who  destroying 
the  old  man,  didst  vouchsafe  to  form  a new  one  in 
blessed  Jerome : grant,  by  his  merits,  that  we  also, 
putting  on  the  new  man,  may  offer  thee  this  sacrifice 
of  propitiation  as  a most  sweet  odour.  Thro’. 

COMM. — Pure  and  spotless  religion  before  God 
the  Father  is  this : to  visit  orphans  and  widows  in 
their  distress:  and  to  keep  one’s  self  undefiled  in 
this  world. 

P.  COMM.  Jlngtlorum. — Bring  refreshed  with 
the  bread  of  angels,  we  humbly  beseech  tiiee,  O 
Lord,  that  we  who  rejoice  on  the  solemnity  of 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic  • 


^Ist  AND  22(2  JULY. 


623 


blessed  Jerome,  thy  Confessor,  may  also  follow  his 
example,  and  thereby  obtain  an  ample  reward  in 
heaven  Thro’. 


XXL  St.  HENRY,  Emperor. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIII.  Os  justi,  jo.  488,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  didst  tliis 
day  remove  blessed  Henry  thy  confessor  from  his 
earthly  throne  to  an  etenial  kingdom : we  humbly 
beseech  thee,  that  as  by  the  assistance  of  thy  grace, 
he  was  proof  against  all  the  temptations  of  the  world  : 
so  we  may  follow  his  example  in  withstanding  all 
the  flatteries  of  this  world,  and  serve  thee  with  clean 
hearts.  Thro’. 


XXII.  St.  MARY  MAGDALEN. 

INTROIT.  Me  expectavenint,  as  in  p.  496. 

COLLECT.  Beat<B  Mariae, — Grant,  O Lord,  we 
may  be  assisted  by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Mary 
Magdalen:  at  whose  request  thou  wast  pleased  to 
raise  Lazarus  from  the  dead,  after  he  had  been  four 
days  in  thfe  grave.  Who  liveth. 

LESSON.  Cant,  iii.  2.  5.  viii.  6,  7. — I will  rise 
and  will  go  about  the  city : in  the  streets  and  tluj 
broad  ways,  I will  seek  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  : 
I sought  him,  and  I found  him  not.  The  watchmen 
who  keep  the  city  found  me.  Have  you  seen  him 
whom  my  soul  loveth  ? When  I had  a little  passed 
by  them,  I found  him  whom  my  soul  loveth;  I 
held  him,  and  I will  not  let  him  go,  till  I bring 
him  into  my  mother’s  house,  and  into  the  chamber 
of  her  that  bore  me.  I adjure  you,  O daughters  of 
Jerusalem,  by  the  roes  arid  harts  of  the  fields,  that 
you  stir  not  up;  nor  wake  my  beloved  till  she  please. 
(Chap,  viii.)  Put  me  as  a seal  upon  thy  heart,  as  a 
seal  upon  thy  arm:  for  love  is  strong  as  death 


Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


23(2  JULY. 


jealousy,  is  hard  as  hell,  the  lamps  therefore  ori 
lamps  of  fire  and  dames.  Many  waters  (cannot  quench 
eharitj;,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it : if  a man 
should  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love, 
he  shall  despise  it  as  nothing. 

GRAD.  JPs.  xliv% — Thou  hast  loved  justice  and 
hated  iniquity.  V»  Therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath 
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness.  ^^lUltua, 
MLtlida,  V.  Grace  is  poured  abroad  in  thy  lips; 
therefore  hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever.  Alleltdcu 

GOSPEL.  Lmke  vii.  cls  in  p.  221. 

OFFERT. — The  daughters  of  kings  honour  thee : 
the  queen  was  on  thy  right  hand  in  a rolje  of  gold, 
with  a variety  of  other  ornaments. 

SECRET. — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the 
glorious  merits  of  blessed  Mary  Magdalen  may  ren- 
der our  offerings  acceptable  to  thee : since  thy  only 
begotten  Son  graciously  received  the  service  which 
she  did  him.  Who  liveth. 

COMM.  Ps.  cxviii.  I have,  &c.  as  inp,  497. 

P.  COMM.  Sum^a. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  that  we  who  .have  received  thy  precious 
body  and  blood,  the  only  sovereign  remedy,  may,  by 
the  intercession  of  the  blessed  Mary  Magdalen,  be 
delivered  from  all  evils.  Who  liveth. 


XXIII.  St  APOLINARIS,  bp.  m. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  II.  p.  464,  except 

COLLECT.  Detis,  Jidelium. O God,  the  re- 

warder of  thy  faithful  servants,  who  hast  consecrate»! 
this  day  by  the  martyrdom  of  blessed  Apolinaris,  thy 
Bishop  : grant  we  may  obtain  entire  pardon  for  all 
our  otences,  hy  his  prayers,  whose  memory  we  ce- 
lebrate on  this  present  festival.  Thro*. 

Commem,  of  St  Liborius,  by  the  Collect,  Sccre 
and  P.  Comm,  (f  Mass  X.  * p.  482. 


'’'gitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


23i  JULY. 


EPISTLE.  1 Peter  v.  1.  11. Dearly  beloved : 

The  ancients  that  are  among  you,  I beseech  who 
am  myself  also  an  ancient  and  a witness  of  the  suf- 
ferings of  Christ,  as  also  a partaker  of  that  gloiy 
which  is  to  be  revealed  in  time  to  come.  Feed  the 
flock  of  God,  which  is  among  you,  taking  care  of  it 
not  by  constraint,  but  willingly  according  to  God : 
and  not  for  filthy  lucre’s  sake,  out  voluntarily : neither 
as  lording  it  over  the  clergy,  but  being  made  a pat- 
tern of  the  flock  from  the  heart.  And  when  the 
Prince  of  pastors  shall  appear,  you  shall  receive  a 
never-fading  crown  of  glory.  In  like  manner  ye 
young  men  be  subject  to  tlie  ancients.  And  do  ye 
all  insinuate  humility  one  to  another,  for  God  re- 
sisieth  the  proud,  hut  to  the  humble  he  giveth  grace. 
Be  you  humbled  therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of 
God,  that  he  may  exalt  you  in  the  time  of  visita- 
tion : casting  all  your  care  upon  him,  for  he  hath 
cjire  of  you.  Be  sober  and  watch  : because  your  ad- 
versary the  devil,  as  a roaring  lion  goeth  about,  seek- 
ing whom  he  may  devour:  whom  resist  ye  strong 
in  faith  ; knowing  that  the  same  affliction  befalls  your 
brethren  who  are  in  the  world.  But  the  God  of  all 
grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  eternal  glory  in 
Christ  Jesus,  after  you  have  suffered  a little,  will 
himself  perfect  you,  and  confirm  you,  and  establish 
you.  To  him  be  glory  and  empire  for  ever  and  ever 
.4  men. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxxviii,  to  Alleluia,  as  in  p.  462. 
V.  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  he  will  not  repent : 
Thou  art  a priest  for  ever  according  to  the  order  of 
Melchisedech.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Ijuke  xxii.  24.  30. — At  that  time: 
There  arose  a strife  among  the  disciples,  which  of 
them  should  seem  to  be  greater.  And  Jesus  said  to 
them  : The  kings  of  the  Gentiles  lord  it  over  them : 
and  they  that  have  power  over  them,  are  called  be- 
neficent. But  you  not  so  : but  he  that  is  the  greater 
3 G 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


626 


24^^  JC7LT. 


cmong  you,  let  him  become  as  the  younger : aiul 
he  that  is  leader,  as  he  that  serveth.  For  which  ia 
greater,  he  that  sitteth  at  table,  or  he  that  serveth : 
Is  not  he  that  sitteth  at  table  ? But  I am  in  the  midst 
of  yon,  as  he  that  serveth : and  you  are  they  who 
have  continued  with  me  in  my  temptations : and  I 
dispose  to  you,  as  my  Father  hath  disposed  to  me,  a 
kingdom:  that  you  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table, 
in  my  kingdom : and  may  sit  upon  thrones,  judging 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

OFFERT. — My  truth  and  my  mercy  are  with 
him  : and  in  my  name  shall  his  power  be  exalted. 

SECRET. — Look  favourably,  O Lord,  on  these 
gifts  which  we  offer  in  commemoration  of  blessed 
Apolinaris  thy  bishop  and  martyr,  and  for  the  expia- 
tion of  our  offences.  Thro’. 

COMM.  MaU,  XXV. — Lord,  thou  didst  deliver  to 
me  five  talents:  behold  I have  gained  other  five  over 
and  above:  Well  done  good  and  faithful  servant,  be- 
cause thou  hast  been  raithful  over  a few  things,  I 
will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things : enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord. 

P.  COMM,  Tua  Sancta, — ^Having  received  thy 
holy  mysteries,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  we 
may  enjoy  the  continual  protection  of  blessed  Apoli-- 
naris,  because  thou  never  ceasest  propitiously  to  re- 
gard those  to  whom  thou  hast  granted  the  favour  of 
such  protection.  Thro’. 


XXIV.  St.  ALEXIUS,  u. 
mW,  as  tn  Mass  XIII.  v,  488,  mth  a Comm,  of  St 
Pantaleon,  by  the  Collect,  &c.  of  Mass  I V.  p,  468, 
except 

EPISTLE.  1 Tim,y\.  6.  12. Dear  Brother: 

Godliness  with  contentment,  is  great  ^in.  For  we 
brought  nothing  into  this  world  : and  certainly  we 
can  cariy  nothing  out.  But  having  food,  and  where- 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


25^  JULY. 


627 


with  to  be  covered,  with  these  we  are  content.  For 
they  that  will  become  rich,  fall  into  temptation, 
and  into  the  snare  of  the  devil,  and  into  many  un- 
profitable and  hurtful  desires  which  drown  men  into 
destruction  and  perdition.  For  the  desire  of  money 
is  the  root  of  all  evils ; which  some  coveting  have 
erred  from  the  faith,  and  have  entangled  themselves 
in  many  sorrows.  But  thou,  O man  of  God,  fly  tliese 
things,  and  puraue  justice,  godliness,  faith,  charity, 
patience,  mildness.  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith, 
lay  hold  on  eternal  life. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxv.  as  in  p.  482. 


XXV.  St.  JAMES,  ap. 

INTROIT. — ^Mihi  autem,  as  in  p.  524. 

COLLECT,  Esto,  JDowiinc.— Sanctify,  O Lord, 
and  preserve  thy  people ; that  being  assisted  by 
James,  thy  Apostle,  they  may  please  thee  in  their 
conduct  of  life,  and  always  serve  thee  with  a steadfast 
faith.  Thro’. 

Commem,  of  St.  Christopher,  m.  by  the  Collect, 
&c.  as  in  Mass  III.  p.  466. 

LESSON.  1 Cor.  iv.  9.  15. — Brethren : 1 think 
that  God  hath  set  forth  us  apostles,  the  last,  as  it 
were  men  appointed  to  death ; because  we  are  made 
a spectacle  to  the  world,  and  to  dngels,  and  to  men. 
We  are  fools  for  Christ’s  sake,  but  you  are  wise  in 
Christ : we  are  weak,  but  you  are  jtrong : you  are 
honourable,  but  we  without  honour.  Even  unto 
this  hour  we  both  hunger  and  thirst,  and  are  naked, 
and  are  buflfetted,  and  have  no  fixed  abode.  And 
we  labour  working  with  our  own  hands : we  are 
reviled,  and  we  bless : we  are  persecuted,  and  we 
Buffer  it.  We  are  blasphemed,  and  we  entreat:  we 
are  made  as  the  refuse  of  .this  world,  the  oflfscour- 
ing  of  all  even  until  now.  I write  not  these  things 
to  confound  you  ; but  I admonish  you  as  my  dear- 
est children : for  if  you  have  ten  thousand  instructors 
3G2 


by  Google 


m 


JULY. 


in  Christ,  yet  not  many  fathers.  For  in  Christ  Jesiu 
by  the  gospel  I have  begotten  you. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xliv. — Thou  shalt  make  them  princes 
over  all  the  earth  : they  shall  remember  thy  name,  O 
Lord.  F.  Instead  of  thy  fathers,  sons  are  born  to 
thee:  therefore  shall  people  praise  thee.  Jilleluia, 
JlUduia,  V,  I chose  you  out  of  the  world,  to  go  on 
and  bring  fortli  fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  might  abide. 
JUleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Mail,  an,  from  * to  j as  in  ».  154. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  — Their  sound  hath  gone 

fortli  into  all  the  earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  ends 
of  the  world. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  .martyrdom  of  blessed  James, 
thy  Apostle,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  render  the 
oblations  of  thy  people  acceptable  to  thee ; and  may 
his  prayers  make  them  agreeable,  which  otherwise 
would  not  be  so,  for  want  of  merit  in  us. 

COMM. — You,  who  have  followed  me,  shall  sit 
on  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

P.  COMM.  Beati. — ^Assist  us,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  James,  thy  Apos- 
tle, on  whose  festival  we  have  joyfully  received  thy 
holy  mysteries.  Thro’. 


XXVI.  St.  ANNE,  Mother  oj  the  B.  V.  M. 

INTROIT. — ^et  us  all  rejoice,  and  celebrate  this 
festival  in  honoOT  of  blessed  Anne:  on  whose  solem- 
nity the  angels  rejoice,  and  praise  the  Son  of  God. 
Ps.  My  heart  hath  uttered  good  tidings : iny  works 
I refer  to  the  king.  V.  Gloiy. 

COLLECT.  Deus^  qui. — O God,  who  by  thy 
grace  wast  pleased  to  choose  blessed  Anne  to  be  the 
mother  of  the  Virgin  Mary;  mercifully  grant  that 
we,  who  celebrate  her  festival,  may  be  helped  by  hei 
prayers  to  thee.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Prov.  xix.  as  in  p.  502. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


28(4  JULT. 


622 

GRAD. — Thou  hast  loved  justice,  and  hated  ini- 
quity. V,  Therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed 
thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness.  Mlduia,  JlUeluia, 
V.  Grhce  is  spread  on  thy  lips : therefore  hath  God 
blessed  thee  for  ever.  AUduia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xiii.  as  in  p.  501. 

OFFERT. — The  daughters  of  kings  honour  thee ; 
the  queen  was  on  thy  right  hand  in  a robe  of  gold, 
with  a variety  of  other  ornaments. 

SECRET. — ^Being  appeased,  O Lord,  by  this  sa- 
crifice, look  down  upon  us,  and  grant  that,  by  the 
intercession  of  B.  Anne,  the  moth«r  of  her  who  bore 
thy  only  begotten  Son  J.  Christ,  it  may  increase  our 
devotion,  and  avail  to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM. — Grace  is  spread  on  thy  lips : therefore 
hath  God  blessed  thee  for  ever  and  ever. 

P.  COMM.  Ccdtstihus. — Being  fed  by  these  hea- 
venly mysteries,  Gnmt,  O Lord,  that  we  may  ob- 
tain eternal  salvation,  by  the  intercession  of  B.  Anne, 
whom  thou  wast  pleased  to  make  choice  of  to  be  the 
mother  of  her  who  bore  thy  Son.  Thro’. 


XXVIII.  SS.  NAZARIUS,  &c.  mm. 

AU  as  in  Mass  VIl.  p.  47^,  except 

COLL.  Sanctorum. — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  the  constancy  of  holy  Nazarius,  Celsus,  Victor, 
and  Innocent,  thy  servants,  in  the  ^ofession  of  their 
faith,  may  be  a help  to  us,  and  a means  of  obtaining 
strei^h  from  thee  in  all  our  infirmities.  Thro’. 

LESSON,  msd.  X.  17.  20.— God  hath  rendered 
to  the  just  the  wages  of  their  labours,  and  conducted 
them  in  a wonderful  way : and  he  was  to  them  for  a 
covert  by  day,  and  for  the  light  of  stars  by  night : 
and  he  brought  them  through  the  Red  Sea,  and  car- 
ried them  over  through  a great  water.  But  their 
enemies  he  drowned  in  the  sea,  and  from  the  depth 
3 G3  * 


by  Google 


030 


JULY. 


pi  hell  he  brought  them  out.  Therefore  the  just 
took  the  spoils  of  the  wicked,  and  they  sung  to  thy 
holy  name,  O Lord,  and  they  praised  with  one  accord 
thy  victorious  hand,  O Lord  our  God, 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  that  being  appeased  by  the  offerings  we  make 
to  th^e  in  honour  of  thy  saints,  Nazarius,  Celsus. 
Victor,  and  Innocent,  we  may  thereby  receive  new 
life.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sanctorum, — Being  appeased,  O LonI, 
we  beseech  thee,  by  the  intercession  of  holy  Naza- 
rius, Celsus,  Victor,  and  Innocent,  grant  that  the 
mystery  we  now  celebrate  in  time,  we  may  receive 
in  eternal  salvation.  Thro’. 


XXIX.  St.  MARTHA,  v. 

M 08  in  Mass  XIX.  p,  498,  except  the  Gospel,  Ijuke  x. 
as  on  August  15,  toiUi  a Comm,  of  SS.  Felix, 
mm.  as  follows : 

COLLECT.  Prcesta, — Grant,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  that  as  thy  Christian  people  rejoice  on 
the  solemnity  of  thy  holy  mm.  Felix,  Simplicius, 
Faustin,  and  Beatrix ; so  they  may  partake  of  their 
eternal  joys,  and  be  one  day  possessed  of  that  hap- 
piness which  they  now  so  earnestly  desire.  Thro\ 
SECRET. — We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  these  obla- 
tions in  commemoration  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Felix 
Simplicius,  Faustin,  and  Beatrix : humbly  beseech- 
ing thee  that  they  may  obtain  for  us  pardon  of  out 
sins,  and  eternal  salvation.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  PrcBsta, — Grant,  we  beseech  theev 
O Almighty  God,  that  the  mysteries  we  have  cele- 
brated on  the  festival  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Felix 
Simplicius,  Faustin,  and  Beatrix,  may  procure  for 
IS  the  merciful  pardon  of  oiu*  sins.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


30^  JULY. 


63] 


XXX.  SS.  ABDON  and  SENNEN,  inm. 
iDtroit,  Grad,  to  Mleluia^  and  Offert,  as  in  Mass  VII 
p.  475. 

COLLECT.  Deus, — O God,  who  by  thy  abun- 
dant grace,  didst  crown  B.  Abdon  and  Sennen  with 
glory : grant  thy  servants  the  pardon  of  their  sins, 
that,  tlie  merits  of  thy  saints  pleading  in  our  beh^f, 
we  may  be  delivered  from  all  adversities.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor.  vi.  4,  10. — Brethren  : Let  us 
exhibit  ourselves  as  the  ministers  of  God,  in  much 
patience,  in  tribulation,  in  necessities,  in  distresses, 
in  stnt)es,  in  prisons,  in  seditions,  in  labours,  in 
watch iii^rs,  in  fastings,  in  chastity,  in  knowledge,  in 
long-suffering,  in  sweetness,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  in 
charity  unfeigned,  in  the  word  of  truth,  in  the  power 
of  God  ; by  the  armour  of  justice  on  the  right 
hand,  and  on  the  left : by  honour,  and  dishonour, 
by  evil  report,  and  good  report : as  deceivers,  and  yet 
true : as  unknown,  and  yet  l^iown : as  dying,  and  be- 
hold we  live:  as  chastised,  and  not  killed : as  sorrow- 
ful, yet  always  rejoicing:  as  needy,  yet  enriching 
many;  as  having  nothing,  and  possessing  all  things. 

Alltluiay  Alleluia.  V.  The  souls  of  the  righteous 
are  in  tlie  hands  of  God,  and  the  torments  of  tlie 
wicked  shall  not  touch  them.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  v.  as  on  the  1st  November. 

SECRET. — Grant,  as  in  p.  491.  N 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixxviii. — Tliey  gave  the  dead  bodies 
of  thy  servants,  O Lord,  to  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of 
the  air:  the  ffesh  of  thy  saints  for  the  beasts  of 
the  eartli.  According  to  the  greatness  of  thy  arm, 
take  possession  of  the  children  of  them  that  have 
been  put  to  death. 

1*.  COMM.  Per  hujus. — By  virtue  of  this  mys- 
tery, O Lord,  may  our  vices  be  destroyed,  and  by  the 
intercession  of  thy  holy  mart}TS,  Abdon  and  Sennen, 
our  just  desires  fulfilled. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


632 


3J^/  JULT  AND  lat  AUOUSl. 

XXXI.  St.  IGNATIUS,  Confesaor. 

INTROIT,  to  Ps.  as  in  p.  94. — Ps.  All  who  love 
Ihy  name  shall  glory  in  thee:  because  thou  wilt  bless 
the  righteous  man.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  for  the 
increase  of  the  glory  of  thy  holy  name,  wast  pleased, 
by  blessed  Ignatius,  to  strengthen  thy  Church  mi- 
litftit  with  a new  supply : grant,  that  being  aided  by 
his  prayers,  during  our  warfare  on  earth,  we  may  so 
imitate  his  virtues,  as  to  be  happily  crowned  with 
him  in  heaven.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 THm.  as  in  p.  468. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xci. — The  just  man,  &c.  p.  488. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  x.  cw  on  St  Mark,  the  25fti  April. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxxvi. — My  truth  and  my  mercy 
shall  be  with  him : and  in  my  name  his  horn  shall  be 
exalted. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  charitable  prayers  of  blessed 
Ignatius,  O Lord,  accompany  our  oblation : that 
the  holy  mysteries  wherein  thou  hast  established  the 
fountain  of  all  holiness,  may  also  sanctify  us  in  tj'uth. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Luke  xii. — I am  come  to  cast  fire  on  the 
earth,  and  what  will  I,  but ‘that  it  be  kindled  ? 

P.  COMM.  Laudis. — May  the  sacrifice  of  praise, 
O Lord,  which  we  have  offered  thee  with  thanks- 
giving for  holy  Ignatius,  cause  us  to  arrive,  by  his 
intercession,  at  that  happy  state  w here  we  may  per- 
petually praise  thy  majesty.  Thro’. 


August  1.  St  PETER’S  CHAINS. 

•dll  as  on  the  29th  of  June,  p.  607,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus^  qui. — O God,  who  deliveredst 
blessed  Peter  the  Apostle  from  his  chains,  and  set 
him  untouched  at  liberty,  deliver  us,  we  beseoch 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


AND  ith  AUGUST.  633 

thee,  from  the  bonds  of  our  sins,  and  mercifully  pro-* 
tect  us  from  all  evil.  Thro’. 


IT.  St.  STEPHEN,  p m. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cxxxi. — I will  clothe  his  priests 
with  salvation,  and  his  saints  shall  rejoice  with  ex- 
ceeding great  joy.  Ps.  O Lord,  remember  David 
and  all  his  meekness.  V.  Gloiy. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  nos,  as  inp.  464. 

LESSON.  Acts  XX.  17.  21.~/n  those  days ; Paul 
sending  from  Miletus  to  Ephesus,  he  called  the  an- 
cients of  the  church.  And  when  they  were  come  to 
him,  and  were  together,  he  said  to  them:  You 
know,  from  the  fim  day  that  I came  into  Asia,  in 
what  manner  I have  Iwen  with  you  for  all  the  time : 
serving  the  Lord  with  all  humility,  and  with  tears, 
and  temptations,  which  befell  me  by  the  conspiracies 
of  the  Jews : how  1 have  kept  back  nothing  that  was 
])rofitable  to  you,  but  have  preached  it  to  ydu,  and 
taught  you  publicly,  and  from  house  to  house : tes- 
tifying both  to  Jews  and  Gentiles  penance  towards 
God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Grad.  EccL  p.  482.  Gospel,  Matt,  xvi.  Offert. 

Secret  and  P.  Comm,  as  in  p.  465.  Comm. 

(Lord  thou  didst)  as  on  the  23d.  July  p.  526, 


IV.  St  DOMINIC,  c. 

INTROIT.  Os  justi,  as  inp.  488. 

COLLECT.  DeiiSy  qui. — O God,  who  hast  en- 
lightened thy  church  by  the  eminent  virtues  and 
preaching  of  blessed  Dominic,  thy  Confessor:  grant 
that  by  his  prayers  we  may  be  provided  against  all 
temporal  necessities,  and  daily  improve  in  all  spirit- 
ual good.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 TH,m.  as  in  p.  4%*. 

GRAD.— The  just  shall  flourish  like  the  palm 
tree:  he  shall  grow  up  like  the  cedar  of  Libanus 


• uy  Google 


634 


bth  AUGUST. 


in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  V,  To  shew  forth  thy  mercy 
in  the  morning,  and  thy  truth  in  the  night.  MLduia, 
Jillduicu  V,  The  just  man  shall  bud  forth  like  the 
lily,  and  flourish  for  ever  before  the  Lord.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xii.  as  in p,  488. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxxviii. — ^My  truth  and  my  mercy 
are  with  him,  and  in  my  name  shall  his  power  be 
exalted. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  gifts  we  have 
offered  thee,  and  by  the  merits  of  blessed  Dominic, 
thy  Confessor,  grant  that  they  may  be  healing  to  us. 
Thro’. 

COMM. — This  is  the  faithful  and  prudent  servant, 
whom  the  Lord  placed  over  his  family,  to  give  them 
their  measure  of  wheat  in  due  setison. 

P.  COMM. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  that  we  who  are  oppressed,  with  the  burden  of 
our  sins,  be  delivered  therefrom  by  the  interces- 

sion of  B.  Dorniiiic,  thy  Confessor.  Thro’. 


VI.  TRANSFIGURATION  of  our  LORD. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  Ixxvi.— -Thy  lightnings  enlight- 
ened the  whole  world ; the  earth  shook  and  trembled. 
Ps,  How  lovely  are  thy  tabernacles,  O Lord  of  Hosts ! 
My  soul  longeth  aind  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the 
Lord.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus^  qtd, O God,  who  by  the 

testimony  of  the  prophets,  didst  confirm  the  myste- 
ries of  our  faith  in  the  glorious  transfiguration  of  thy 
Son,  and  by  a voice  from  heaven  shewedst  us  that 
we  are  thy  adopted  children : mercifully  grant  that 
we  may  be  heirs  to  the  King  of  Glory,  and  partakers 
of  his  bliss.  ’ Thro’. 

Commem,  of  St.  Xystus,  &c.  mm.  by  the  Collect. 
Secret  and  P.  Comm,  of  Mass  VI.  p,  473. 
EPISTLE.  2 Peter  i.  16,  19. — Beany  Beloved 
We  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


Qth  AUGUST. 


635 


when  we  made  known  to  you  the  power  and  pre- 
sence of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : but  having  been 
made  eye-witnesses  of  his  majesty.  For,  he  received 
from  God  the  Father  honour  and  glory : this  voice 
coming  down  to  him  from  the  excellent  glory,  This 
is  my  beloved  Son  in  tohom  I have  pleased  myself,  hear 
ye  him.  And  this  voice  we  heard  brought  from  hea- 
ven, when  we  were  with  him  in  the  holy  mount. 
And  we  have  the  more  prophetical  word : whereunto 
you  do  well  to  attend,  as  to  a light  that  shineth  in  a 
dark  place,  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the  day-star 
arise  in  your  hearts. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xliv. — ^Thou  art  beautiful  above  the 
sons  of  men : grace  is  poured  abroad  in  thy  lips. 
V.  My  heart  hatii  uttered  a good  word;  I speak 
iny  works  to  the  king.  Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  He  is 
the  brightness  of  eternal  light ; the  unspotted  mirror 
and  the  image  of  his  goodness.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xvii,  as  in  p.  147. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  cxi. — Glory  and  wealth  shall  be  in 
bis  house : and  his  justice  remaineth  for  ever  and 
ever.  Alleluia,  Alleluia. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
our  oblations,  by  the  glorious  transfiguration  of  thine 
only  begotten  Son : and,  by  the  splendour  of  his  light, 
cleanse  us  from  the  stains  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

Preface,  Quia  per  incainati, /».  xxx. 

COMM.  Matt.  xvii. — ^Tell  not  the  vision  you 
have  seen  to  any  one,  till  the  Son  of  Man  arises  from 
the  dead. 

COMM.  PreBsta.  — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  our  minds  being  enlight- 
en^-d,  we  may  comprehend  the  mysteries  we  cele 
brate  on  the  solemnity  of  t le  Transfiguration  of  thy 
Son  Thro’ 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


7ih  AND  Bth  AUGUST. 


t»6 


Vll.  St.  CAJET  AN,  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  XI IL/?.  488,  except 

COLLECT.  Dexis. — O God,  through  whose  grace 
B.  Cajetan  imitated  the  life  of  the  Apostles : g]*anl, 
by  his  prayers  and  example,  that  we  may  always  rely 
fill  thee,  and  fix  our  hopes  on  heaven.  Thro’. 

COLLECT,  0/*St.  Donatus. — O God,  the  glory 
»)f  thy  priests ; grant,  we  beseech  thee,  to  us  thy 
servants,  that  in  solemnizing  the  festival  of  thy  holy 
rn.  and  bp.  Donatus,  we  may  be  partakers  of  his 
prayers.  Thro’. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  vi.  as  inp.  426. 

SECRET.  ( Of  St  Donatus.) — Increase  in  u^  O 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  the  fruit'  of  true  devotion, 
by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Donatus,  thy  ni.  and 
bp.  whom  we  honour  by  offering  the  gills  conse- 
crated to  the  praise  of  thy  name.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  (Of  St  Donatus.)  Almighty  and 
eternal  God,  who  makest  us  partakers  and  ministers 
of  thy  sacraments : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  hy 
the  intercession  of  blessed  Donatus,  thy  m.  and  bp 
we  may  imitate  his  faith  and  piety.  Thro’. 


VIII.  SS.  CYRIACUS,  LARGUS,  &c.  mm. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xxxiii. — Fear  the  Lord,  all  ye  his 
saints,  for  there  is  no  want  to  them  that  fear  him : 
the  rich  have  wanted,  and  suffered  hunger:  but 
they  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  be  deprived  of  any 
good.  Ps,  I will  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times : his 
praise  shall  be  for  ever  in  my  mouth.  F,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui,  as  in  p,  479. 

EPISTLE.  1 Tfiess,  ii.  13. — Brethren:  We  also 
give  thanks  to  God  without  ceasing:  because  that 
when  you  had  received  of  us  the  word  of  the  hearing 
of  God,  you  received  it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but 
(aa  it  is  indeed)  the  word  of  God,  who  worketh  io 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


Wl  AUGUST 


637 


you  that  have  believed.  For  you,  I)rethreii,  are  be- 
come followers  of  the  churches  of  God  which  are  in 
Judea,  in  Christ  Jesus : for  you  also  have  suffered 
the  same  things  from  your  own  countrymen,  even  as 
they  have  from  the  Jews : who  both  killed  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  the  prophets,  and  have  .pcvsecuted  us,  and 
they  pleased  not  God,  and  are  advei'saries  to  all  men  ; 
prohibiting  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  may 
be  saved,  to  fill  up  their  sins  always : for  the  wrath 
of  God  is  come  upon  them  to  the  end. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxxiii. — Fear  the  Lord  all  ye  his 
saints : for  there  is  no  want  to  them  that  fear  him. 
V.  They  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  lie  deprived  of 
miy  good.  Alleluia^  Alleluia,  V.  Wisd.  iii.  The 
righteous  shall  shine,  and  shall  run  as  fire  among  the 
reeds,  for  ever.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL.  Mark  xvi.  15.  18. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples:  Go  ye  into  the  whole 
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  He 
that  believeth,  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved  : .but 
he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  condemned.  And 
these  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe:  in  my 
name  they  shall  cast  out  devils:  they  shall  speak 
with  new  tongues : they  shall  take  up  serpents : and 
if  they  shall  drink  any  deadly  thing,  it  shall  not  hurt 
them : they  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  sick,  and 
they  shall  recover. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xxxi. — Be  glad  in  the  Lord  and 
leap  for  joy,  ye  righteous:  and  praise  him,  all  ye 
Ufiright  of  heart. 

SECRET. — May  our  devotion,  O Lord,  be  pleasing 
to  thee,  and  avail  us  to  salvation,  by  the  meriTs  of 
those  on  whose  festival  we  ])ay  it  to  thee.  Thro’. 

COMM.  P5.  xvi. — These  miracles  shall  accom- 
pany those  that  believe  in  me  : they  shall  lay  haiitlB 
on  the  sick,  and  they  shall  recover. 

P.  COMM.  (Refecti^ ) as  in  p,  473. 

3 H 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


G38 


9th  lOth  AUGUST. 


IX.  VIGIL  St  LAWRENCE,  m. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cxi. — ^He  hath  distributed,  he  hath 
given  to  the  poor:  his  justice  remaineth  for  ever  and 
ever : his  horn  shall  be  exalted  in  glory.  Ps.  Blessed 
is  the  man  that  feareth  the  Lord : he  shall  delight 
exceedingly  in  his  commandments.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Adesto. — Give  ear,  O Lord,  to  our 
prayers,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  La>VTence 
thy  martyr,  whose,  festival  we  are  now  preparing  lo 
celebrate,  pour  forth  upon  us  the  gift  of  thy  everlast- 
ing mercy.  Thro’. 

Commem,  of  St  Romanus,  hy  the  Collect,  &c.  of 
Mass  lY.p.  468. 

LESSON.  Eccles.  li.  as  in.p.  496. 

GRAD. — He  hath  distiibutecl,  he  hath  given  to  the 
poor : his  justice  remaineth  for  ever  and  ever.  V.  His 
seed  shall  be  mighty  upon  earth : the  generation  of 
the  righteous  shml  be  blessed. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xiv.  as  in  p.  465. 

OFFERT.  Job  xvi. — My  prayer  is  pure,  there- 
fore I desire  it  may  be  heard  in  heaven  : for  there  is 
my  Judge,  and  he  thatknoweth  my  heart  is  on  high  : 
let  pi*ayer  ascend  to  the  Lord. 

SECRET.  Favourably  receive  our  offerings,  O 
Lord,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Lawrence, 
thy  martyr,  loosen  die  bonds  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

COMM. — Let  him  who  serveth  me,  follow  rae : 
and  where  I am,  there  also  shall  nay  servant  lie. 

P.  COMM.  Da  qucesumus. — Gran^  we  besee^m 
diee,  O Lord,  our  God,  that  as  we  rejoice  on  he 
' feasts  of  thy  saints  in  this  life,  so  we  may  enjoy  their 
sight  for  ever  in  diat  which  is  to  come.  Thro’. 


X.  St.  LAWRENCE,  m. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xcv. — Praise  and  beauty  are  be- 
fore him : holiness  and  majesty  in  his  sanctueuy 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


10^^  AUGUST. 

Ps.  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord  a new  canticle : sing  to  the  * 
Lord  all  the  earth.  V,  Glor}\ 

COLLECT.  Da  nobis. — Enable  us,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  to  extinguish  in  ourselves  the 
noxious  heat  of  sin,  by  whose  grace  blessed  Lawrence 
triumphed  over  flames  and  the  most  exquisite  tor- 
ments. Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor.  ix.  6.  10. Brethren : He 

who  soweth  sparingly,  shall  also  reap  sparingly : and 
he  who  soweth  in  blessings,  shall  also  reap  or  bless- 
ings. Every  one  as  he  hath  determined  in  his  heart, 
not  with  sadness,  or  of  necessity.  For  God  loveth  a 
cheerful  ^ver.  And  God  is  able  to  make  all  ^ace 
abound  in  you  : that  ye  always  having  all  sufiiciency 
in  all  things  may  abound  to  every  good  work. — 

As  it  is  written  : He  hath  dispersed  abroad,  he  hath 
given  to  the  poor:  his  justice  remaineih  for  ever. 
And  he  that  ministereth  seed  to  the  sower,  will 
both  give  you  bread  to  eat  and  will  multiply  your 
seed,  and  increase  the  growth  of  the  fruits  of  your 
justice. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xvi. — ^Thou  hast  proved  my  heart, 

O Lord,  and  visited  it  by  night.  V.  Thou  hast  tried 
me  by  fire  ; and  iniquity  hath  not  been  found  in  me. 
Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  Lawrence  the  Deacon  wrought 
a good  work ; who  by  the  sign  of  the  cross  gave 
sight  to  the  blind.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  xii.  24.  26. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples : Amen,  amen,  I say  to 
you,  unless  the  grain  of  wheat  falling  into  the 
ground,  die,  itself  remaineth  alone.  But  if  it  die,  it 
bringeth  forth  much  fiTiit.  He  that  loveth*  his  life, 
shall  lose  it : and  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world, 
keepeth  it  unto  life  eternal.  If  any  man  minister 
un*;o  me,  let  him  follow  me : and  where  I am,  there 
also  shall  my  minister  be.  If  any  man  minister  to 
me,  him  wiU  my  Father  honour. 

:iH  2 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


640 


lliA  AND  13f^  AUGUST. 


OFFERT.  Ps,  xcv. — Praise  and  beauty  are  be« 
fore  his  sight : holiness  and  majesty  in  his  sanctuary. 

SECRET. — Graciously  receive  our  offerings,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord  \ and  in  consideration  of  the 
merits  and  prayers  of  blessed  Lawence,  grant  they 
may  aid  us  to  salvation.  Thro*. 

COMM.  John  xii. — If  any  man  minister  to  me, 
let  him  follow  me : and  where  I am,  there  also  shall 
my  minister  be. 

P.  COMM.  StuTo,  — Being  nourished  by  thy 
sacred  gifts,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  what  we 
perform  according  to  our  bounden  duty,  we  may 
sensibly  perceive  to  advance  our  salvation,  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  Lawrence:  thy  martyr.  Thro* 


XL  Cornmem.  of  SS.  TIBURTIUS,  &c.  mm. 

COLLECT.  Sanctorum. — ^JNIay  we  always  find 
comfoit,  O Lord,  in  tlie  continual  protection  of  thy 
holy  martyrs,  Tiburtius  and  Susanna : for  we  trust 
thou  wilt  ever  regard  those  with  an  eye  of  mercy, 
whom  thou  favourest  with  such  succours.  Thro*. 

SECRET. — Favourably,  O Lord,  receive  the  of- 
ferings and  prayers  of  thy  people,  that  the  oblation 
of  the  sacred  mysteries  may  be  acceptable  to  thee, 
by  the  intercession  of  thy  saints.  Thro*. 

P.'  COMM.  Sumpsimus. — Grant,  O Lord,  that 
the  pledge  of  eternal  redemption  which  we  have  re- 
ceived, may  procure  for  us,  by  the  intercession  of  iliy 
holy  martyrs,  the  succours  necessary  for  this  life  and 
that  to  come.  Thro*. 


XIII.  Commem,  of  SS.  HYPPOLITE,  &c.  mm 
COLLECT.  Da,  qucBsumus. — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  the  sacred  solemnity  of 
thy  holy  martyrs,  Hyppolite  and  Cassian,  may  be  to 
us  an  increase  of  devotion  and  a help  to  saJvatjon 
Thro*. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


14tt  AOOUST 


6« 


SECRET. — Receive,  O Lord,  our  ofieriugs  on  this 
festival  of  thy  saints : and  may  their  bearing  witness 
of  thy  truth  advance  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sacramentorum. — Let  the  participc- 
tion  of  thy  sacraments,  O Lord,  save  us : and  con- 
firm us  in  the  light  of  thy  truth.  Thro’. 


XIV.  VIGIL  of  the  ASSUMPTION. 

INTROIT,  Vultum  tuum,j5.  499. 

COLLECT.  Detis,  qui. — O God,  who  hast  pleased 
to  make  choice  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  in  her  to 
dwell  for  a time,  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  being 
secure  under  her  protection,  we  may  with  comfort 
solemnize  her  festival.  Who  livest. 

Collect,  &c.  of  St.  Lawrence,  as  on  his  Feast,  p.  639. 
Collect,  &c.  oJrSt  Eusebius,  (w  in  Mass  XIII.  n.  488. 

LESSON.  Eccles.  xxiv.  23.»— As  the  vine  1 have 
brought  forth  a pleasant  odour : and  my  flowera  are 
the  fruit  of  honour  and  riches.  I am  the  mother  of 
fair  love,  and  of  fear,  and  of  knowledge,  and  of  holy 
hope.  In  me  is  all  grace  of  the  way  and  of  the 
truth.  In  me  is  all  hope  of  life  and  of  virtue.  Come 
over  to  me,  all  ye  that  desire  me,  and  be  filled  wjth 
my  fruits.  For  my  spirit  is  sweet  above  honey,  and 
my  inheritance  above  honey  and  the  honey-comb. 
My  memory  is  unto  everlasting  generations.  They 
that  eat  me,  shall  yet  hunger ; and  they  that  drink 
roe,  shall  yet  thirst.  He  that  hearkeneth  to  me,  shall 
not  be  confounded  : and  they  that  work  by  me,  shall 
not  sin.  They  that  explain  me,  shall  have  life  ever- 
lasting. 

GRAD. — ^Thou  art  blessed,  to  Allel.  as  inp.  507. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xi.  as  in  p.  508. 

OFFERT. — Blessed  art  thou,  &c.  as  inp.  508. 

SECRET. — May  the  prayers,  O Lord,  of  the 
Mother  of  God  render  our  offerings  acceptable  to 
thee,  whom  thou  didst  take  out  of  this  present  world, 
3H  3 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


o42 


15th  AUGUST. 


that  she  mifrht  intercede  with  thee  for  the  pardon  of 
our  sins.  Thro’. 

COMM. — Blessed  is  the  womb  of  Mary  the  virgin, 
which  bore  the  Son  of  the  eternal  Father. 

P.  COMM.  Concede, — Assist,  O merciful  God, 
our  frailty  ; that  we  who  are  preparing  to  celebrate 
the  festival  of  the  holy  Mother  of  God,  may  by  the 
succour  of  her  prayers,  rise  from  our  iniquities. 
Thro’. 


XV.  ASSUMPTION  of  the  B.  V.  M. 
INTROIT. 

Let  us  all  rejoice  in  ^ AUDEAMUS  omnes 
the  Lord,  whilst  we  VT  jn  Domino,  diem  fes- 
celebrate  this  festival  in  turn  celebrantes,  sub  ho- 
bonour  of  the  B.  V.  M.  nore  beatae  Mariae,  Virgi- 
for  whose  Assumption  nis,  de  cujus  Assumptione 
the  angels  rejoice,  and  gaudent  angeli,  et  col- 
praise  the  Son  of  God.  laudant  Filium  DeL 
Ps,  My  heart  hath  ut-  Ps,  Eructavit  cor  meum 
tered  a good  word : I verbum  bonum : dico  ego 
speak  my  works  to  the  opera  niea  Regi. 
king.  V,  Glory.  V.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Famulorum, — Forgive,  O Lord,  we 
oeseech  thee,  the  sins  of  thy  people : that  we,  who 
are  not  able  to  do  any  thing  of  oui*selves  that  can  be 
pleasing  to  thee,  may  l>e  assisted  iu  the  way  of  salva- 
tion by  the  prayers  of  the  Mother  of  thy  Son.  Thro^ 
the  same. 

LESSON.  Eco'zs.  xxiv.  11.  20. — I sought  rest 
every  where,  and  I shall  abide  in  the  inheiytance  of  the 
Lord.  Then  the  Creator  of  all  things  gave  his  orders, 
and  said  to  me : and  he  that  made  me,  rested  in  my 
tabernacle,  and  he  said  to  me : Let  thy  dwelling  be 
in  Jacob,  and  thy  inheritance  in  Israel,  and  take  root 
in  my  elect.  From  the  beginning,  and  before  the 
world  was  I created,  and  unto  the  world  to  come  1 

Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


15/^  AUGUST. 


643 


shall  not  cease  to  be,  and  in  the  holy  dwelling  place 
I have  ministered  before  him.  And  I was  so  estab- 
lished in  Sion,  and  in  the  holy  city  likewise  I rested, 
and  my  power  voas  in  Jernsalem.  And  I took  root 
in  an  honourable  people,  and  in  the  |X)rtion  of  ray 
Crod  his  inheritance,  and  my  abode  is  in  the  full  as- 
sembly of  saints.  I was  exalted  like  a cedar  in  Li- 
banus, and  as  a cypress  tree  on  mount  Sion.  I was 
exalted  like  a palm  tree  in  Cades,  and  as  a rose 
plant  In  J ericho : as  a fair  olive  tree  in  the  plains, 
and  as  a plane  tree  by  the  water  in  the  streets,  was 
I exalted.  I gave  a sweet  smell  like  cinnamon,  and 
aromatical  balm:  like  the  myrrh  I yielded  a sweet 
odour. 

GRAD.  P5.  xliv. — Because  of  thy  truth  and  meek- 
ness, and  justice,  and  thy  riglit  hand  shall  conduct 
thee  wonderfully.  F.  Hear,  O daughter,  and  see  and 
be  attentive : for  the  king  is  taken  with  thy  beauty. 
AUduicUf  Alleluia.  V.  Assumpta  est  Maria  in  calum, 
gaudet  exercitus  angelorum.  Alleluieu  V.  Mary  is 
taken  up  into  heaven,  and  all  the  host  of  angels  are 
in  joy.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  lAjke  x-  38.  42. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  entered  into  a certain  town ; and  a certain 
woman  named  Martha,  reeeived  him  into  her  house. 
And  she  had  a sister  called  Mary.  Who  sitting  also 
at  the  Lord'^s  feet,  heard  his  word.  But  Martha 
was  busy  about  much  serving.  Who  stood  and  said: 
Lord,  hast  thou  no  care  that  my  sister  hath  left  me 
alone  to  serve  ? Speak  to  her  therefore,  that  she  help 
trie.  And  the  Lord  answering,  said  to  her:  Martha, 
Martha,  thou  art  careful,  and  art  troubled  about 
many  things.  But  one  thing  is  necessary.  Mary 
hath  chosen  the  best  part,  which  shall  not  be  taken 
Irom  her.  Credo. 

OFFERT. — Mary  is  taken  up  into  heaven,  the 
angels  rejoice,  and  Join  in  the  praises  of  the  I>ord. 
^MdmcL 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


644 


SUNDAY  WITUIN  THE  OCTAVE. 


SECRET. — May  the  prayer^  O Lord,  of  the  Mother 
of  Cod  assist  thy  people : that  we  may  experience  her 
intercession  for  us  in  thy  heavenly  glory,  whom  we 
know  departed  this  life  to  satisfy  tne  condition  of  our 
mortality.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Imke  x. — ^Maiy  has  chosen  the  best  part, 
which  shall  not  be  taken  from  her  for  ever. 

P.  COMM.  MtnscB, Having  partaken  of  thy 

heavenly  table,  we  humbly  beseech  thy  clemency, 
O Lord  our  God,  that  we  who  honour  the  Assump- 
tion of  the  Mother  of  God,  may  by  her  intercession, 
be  delivered  from  all  evils.  THiro’. 


SUNDAY  withm  the  OCTAVE.  St.  JOACHIM,  c. 
INTROIT.  Pa.cxi. 

He  hath  distributed,  T^ISPERSIT,  dedit 
he  hath  ^ven  to  the  -1^  pauperibus : justitia 
poor:  his  justice  remain-  ej us  manet  in  seeculuin 
eth  for  ever  and  ever : his  sseculi : cornu  ejus  exal- 
hom  shall  be  exalted  in  tabitur  in  gloria, 
glory.  Ps.  Blessed  is  the  Ps.  Beatus  vir  qui  timet 
man  thatfeareth  the  Lord:  Dominum:  in  mandatis 
he  shall  delight  exceeding;  ejus  cupit  nimis, 
ly  in  his  commandments!  K.  Gloria. 

V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Dcus,  qui, O God,  who  amongst 

all  thy  saints,  didst  choose  blessed  Joachim  to  be  the 
father  of  her  who  bore  thy  Son  : grant  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we  may  be  sensible  of  his  protection,  whose 
festival  we  celebrate.  Thro’. 

Collect,  &c.  qf  the  Sunday,  and  then  of  the  Aa- 
sumption,  p,  642. 

LESSON,  Eccles.  xxxi.  as  in  p,  488. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxi. — ^He  hath  distributed,  he  hath 
given  to  the  poor : his  justice  remaineth  for  ever  and 
ever.  V.  His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon  earth : the 
generation  of  the  righteous  shdl  be  blessed.  mMlei 
Alltl,  V.  O Joachim^  sancte  conjitge  Annat^  pates 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


\7th  AUGUST, 


645  / 


ali/KB  virginiSf  hie  famulis  confer  salviis  opem.  V.  O 
Joachim,  holy  husband  of  Anne,  fatlier  of  the  holy 
Virgin,  obtain  for  us  in  this  life  what  is  necessary  for 
our  salvation. 

GOSPEL.  Mail.  i.  as  on  the  8th  of  Dec.  p,  530. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  viii.  — Thou  hast  cTowned  iyin, 
O Lord,  with  glory  and  honour,  and  hast  set  him 
over  the  works  of  thy  hands. ' 

SECRET. — Favourably  receive,  O most  merciful 
God,  the  sacrifice  offered  to  thy  Majesty  in  honour 
of  the  holy  patriarch  Joachim,  father  of  the  Virgin 
Mary : that  by  the  intercession  of  him,  of  his  spouse, 
and  of  their  blessed  dau  ghter,  we  may  obtain  pardon 
of  all  our  sins,  and  eternal  glory.  Thro’, 

COMM. — This  is  the  faithful  and  prudent  servant, 
whom  the  Lord  hath  placed  over  his  family,  to  give 
them  their  measure  of  wheat  in  due  season. 

P.  COMM.  QufEsumus. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  by  the  merits  and  prayers  of  bless- 
ed Joachim,  the  father  of  her  who  bore  thy  beloved 
Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  the  sacrament  which 
we  have  received  may  make  us  worthy  of  being  as- 
sisted by  thy  gi*ace  in  this  life,  and  of  partaking  of 
eternal  glory  in  the  world  to  come.  Thro’. 

The  Gospel  of  the  Sunday  is  read  at  the  end  of  Mass. 


XVIL  OCTAVE  o/Sl  LAWRENCE,  m. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  xvL — Thou  hast  proved  my  heart, 
O Lord,  and  visited  it  by  night : thou  hast  tried  me 
by  fire,  and  iniquity  hath  not  been  found  in  me. 
Ps.  Hear,  O Lord,  my  justice : attend  to  my  sup- 
plication. V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Excita. — Raise  up,  O Lord,  in  thy 
ciiureh,  that  spirit  which  blessed  Lawrence  obeyed  • 
that  being  filled  with  the  same,  we  may  zealously 
love  what  he  loved,^  and  practice  what  he  taughL 
Thro’.—  in  unity  of  the  same. 

Collect,  &c.  (fthe  Assumption,/?.  642. 

..oy  Google 


ISlh  AND  2ist  AUGUST. 


m 


EPISTLE,  2 Cor.  xi.  as  on  the  Feast,  v.  639. 

GRAD.  Ps.  viii. — ^Thou  hast  crownea  him  ^vith 
• glory  and  honour,  O Lord.  V.  And  thou  hast  set  him 
over  the  works  of  thy  hands.  Allel.  AUel,  V.  Law- 
rence the  Deacon,  wi-ought  a good  work,  who  by  the 
sign  of  the  cross  gave  sight  to  the  blind.  AUel, 

GOSPEL.  John  xii.  as  on  the  Feast,  p.  6^. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  XX.  as  in  p.  491. 

SECRET. — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the 
holy  prayers  and  merits  of  blessed  Lawrence,  may 
render  our  sacrifice  well  pleasing  to  thee,  to  whom 
w-e  solemnly  offer  it  in  his  honour.  Thro’. 

Preface,  of  the  blessed  virgin  Mary,^.  xxxii. 

COMM.  Matt.  xvi. — Let  him  who  would  come 
after  me,  deny  himself,  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow 
me. 

P.  COMM.  Supplices. — ^^Ve  humbly  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Law- 
rence, thy  martyr,  ever  to  keep  under  thy  protection 
tliose  who  have  partaken  of  thy  heavenly  gifts.  Thro’. 


XVIII.  Comniem.  of  St.  AGAPETE,  m. 

COLLECT.  L<Btetur. — May  thy  church  rejoice, 
O God,  under  the  protection  of  blessed  Agapete,  thy 
martyr,  and  by  the  assistance  of  his  prayers  increase 
in  devotion,  and  he  secured  against  all  adversities. 
Thro’. 

SECRET. — ^Receive,  O Lord,  the  present  we  offer 
thee  on  his  feast,  by  whose  intercession  we  hope  to 
be  delivered. 

P.  COMM.  Satiasti. — Thou  hast  fed,  O Lord, 
thy  family  with  these  sacred  oblations : ever  there- 
fore, comfort  us  with  his  intercession  whose  feast  we 
celebrate.  Thro’. 


XXL  St.  JANE  FRANCES,  w,  ( 

All  as  in  Mass  XXI.  p.  502,  except 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O Almighty  and  mer 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


'‘Zid  A. /OUST. 


647 


ciful  God,  who  hast  granted  blessed  Jane  Frances, 
inflamed  with  the  love  of  thee,  a wonderful  degree 
of  fortitude  through  all  the  paths  of  life,  and  wast 
pleased  through  her,  to  adorn  thy  church  with  a new 
offspring : grant,  by  her  merits  and  prayers,  that  we 
f who,  sensible  of  our  weakness,  confide  in  thy  strength, 
' may  overcome  all  adversities  with  the  help  of  thy 
heavenly  grace.  Thro\ 

Commem,  of  the  Assumption,  p,  642. 

SECRET. — May  these  offerings,  we  beseech  thee 
O Lord,  enkindle  in  us  the  fire  of  thy  love,  which 
burned  so  vehemently  in  the  heart  of  blessed  Frances, 
and  consumed  it  with  the  flames  of  everlasting  char- 
ity. Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Spiritum. — Infuse  into  us,  O Lord, 
the  spirit  of  thy  love,  that  by  the  prayers  of  blessed 
Jane  Frances,  thou  w^ouldst  cause  those  whom  thou 
hast  fed  with  the  bread  of  heaven  to  despise  whatever 
is  earthly,  and  follow  thee  with  pure  minds.  Thro’. 


XXII.  OCTAVE  of  the  ASSUMPTION. 

JUl  03  on  the  Feast,  p.  642,  with  the  following  Com- 
mem. o/*SS.  Timothy,  &c.  mm. 

COLLECT.  AuxUium. — ^Help  us,  O Lord,  in  thy 
mercy,  and,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  martyrs, 
Tymothy,  Hyppolite  and  Symphorian,  shelter  us  un 
der  the  protection  of  thy  goodness.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  offerings,  O Lord,  of  thy  de- 
vout people  be  acceptable  to  thee  in  honour  of  thy 
saints,  by  whose  merits  they  have  experienced  help 
in  their  afflictions.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Divini  muneris. — Being  abundantly 
fed  with  thy  divine  gifts,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord 
our  God,  that,  by  tne  intercession  of  thy  blessed 
martyrs,  we  may  obtain  eternal  life,  by  partaking 
rhereofi  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


64d 


23J  AND  24M  AUGUST. 


XXIIl.  St.  PHILIP  BENITIUS,  c. 

- AL  as  in  Mass  XIV.  o.  489,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  in  blessed 
Philip,  thy  confessor,  has  leP  us  an  example  of  humil- 
ity ; grant  that,  in  imitation  of  him,  we  may  despise 
the  prosperity  of  this  world,  and  have  our  hearts 
always  fixed  on  the  happmess  of  the  next.  Thro* 


XXIV.  St.  BARTHOLOMEW,  ap. 

INTROIT,  Mihi  autem,  as  in  p.  524. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O Aim ighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  who  comfortest  thy  people  by  the  sacreil 
and  venerable  solemnity  of  thy  blessed  ap(»tle 
Bartholomew : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  may 
love  what  he  believed,  and  practise  what  he  taughL 
Thro*. 

EPISTLE  1 Cor.  xii.  27.  31. Brethren:  You 

are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  of  a member. 
And  God  indeed  hath  set  some  in  the  church,  first 
apostles,  secondly  prophets,  thirdly  doctors,  after  that 
miracles,  then  the  graces  of  healings,  helps,  govern- 
ments, kinds  of  tongues,  interpretations  of  speeches. 
Are  all  apostles  ? Are  all  prophets  ? Are  all  doctors  ? 
Are  all  workers  of  miracles  ? Have  all  the  grace  of 
healing  ? Do  all  speak  with  tongues  ? Do  all  inter- 
pret ? But  be  ye  zealous  for  the  better  gifts. 

GRAD,  as  m the  Feast  of  St.  Andrew,  jo.  524. 

Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  The  glorious  choir  of  apos- 
tles bless  thee,  O Lord.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  vi.  12.  19. — At  that  time: 
J68US  went  ouc  into  a mountain  to  pray,  and  be  pas- 
sed the  whole  night  in  the  prayer  of  God.  And  when 
day  was  come,  he  called  unto  him  his  disciples : and 
he  chose  twelve  of  them  (whom  also  he  named  Apos- 
tles) : Simon  whom  he  surnamed  Peter,  and  Andrew 
his  nrother,  Jamesand  John,  Philip  and  Bartholomew, 
Mattliew  and  Thomas,  James  the  son  of  AJpheus,  and 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


25th  AUGUST. 


649 


Simon  who  is  called  Zelotes,  and  Jude  the  brother  of 
James  and  Judas  Iscariot  who  was  the  traitor.  And 
coming  down  witli  them,  he  stood  in  a plain  place, 
and  the  company  of  his  disciples,  and  a very  great 
multitude  of  people  from  all  Judea  and  Jerusalem, 
and  the  sea-coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  who  were  come 
to  hear  him,  and  to  be  healed  of  their  diseases.  And 
they  that  were  troubled  with  unclean  spirits  were 
cured.  And  all  the  multitude  sought  to  touch  him, 
for  virtue  went  out  from  him,  and  healed  all.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  cxxxviii. — To  me,  thy  friends,  O 
God  are  made  exceedingly  honourable : their  princi- 
pality is  exceedingly  strengthened. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
as  we  celebrate  the  festival  of  thy  apostle  Bartholo- 
mew, we  may  be  partakers  of  thy  benefits,  by  his 
intercession,  in  whose  honour  we  offer  thee  this  sa- 
crifice of  praise.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt,  xix. — ^You,  who  have  followed 
me,  shall  sit  on  seats,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel,  saith  the  Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Sumvtum, — Grant,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  that  the  pledge  of  our  eternal  redemption, 
which  we  have  received,  may,  by  the  intercession  of 
thy  apostle  Bartholomew,  procure  for  us  the  neces- 
sary assistance  for  this  life,  and  for  that  which  is  to 
come.  Thro’. 


XXV.  St.  LEWIS,  King  and  c.  . 

All  as  in  Mass  XIII.  n.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus^  qui, — O God,  who  removedst 
blessed  Lewis  thy  confessor,  from  an  earthly  kingdom 
to  the  glory  of  an  heavenly  crown : grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  by  his  virtues  and  prayers,  that  we  may 
be  received  into  the  company  of  the  King  cf  kings, 
Jesus  Christ  thy  only  Son.  Who. 

Lesson,  Wisd,  x.  as  in  p.  466.  and  Grad.  Pi.  xcL 
(ts  in  p.  488. 

3 I 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


650 


AUGUST. 


GOSPPL.  lAtke  xix.  12.  — At  that  time 

4esus  spoke  this  parable  to  his  disciples : A certain  no- 
bleman went  into  a far  country,  to  receive  for  liiin- 
pelf  a kingdom,  and  to  return.  And  calling  his  ten 
ser\'ants,  he  gave  them  ten  pounds,  and  said  to 
them:  Trade  till  I come.  But  his  citizeas  hated 
him : and  they  sent  an  embassage  after  him,  saying: 
We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us.  And 
it  came  to  pass  that  he  returned,  having  received  the 
kingdom:  and  he  commanded  his  servants  to  bo 
called,  to  whom  he  had  given  the  money : that  he 
might  know  how  much  every  man  had  gained  by 
trading.  And  the  first  came,  saying:  Lord,  thy 
pound  hath  gained  ten  poundsi  And  he  said  to  him : 
Well  done,  thou  good  servant,  because  thou  hast  been 
faithful  in  a little,  thou  shalt  have  power  over  ten 
cities.  And  the  second  came,  saying:  Lord,  thy 
pound  hath  gained  five  pounds.  And  he  said  to 
him:  Be  thou  also  over  five  cities.  And  another 
came,  saying:  Lord,  behold  here  is  thy  pound, 
which  1 have  kept  laid  up  in  a napkin : for  J feared 
thee,  because  thou  art  an  austere  man : thou  takest 
up  what  thou  didst  not  lay  down,  and  thou  reapest 
tliat  which  thou  didst  not  sow.  He  saith  to  him : 
Out  of  thy  own  mouth  I jud^  thee,  thou  wicked 
servant.  Thou  knewest  that  I was  an  austere  man, 
taking  up  what  I laid  not  down,  and  reaping  that 
which  I did  not  sow : and  why  then  didst  thou  not 
give  my  money  into  the  bank,  that  at  my  coming  1 
might  have  exacted  it  with  usury  ? And  he  said  to 
them  that  stood  by:  Take  the  pound  away  from 
him,  and  give  it  to  him  that  hath  the  ten  pounds. 
And  they  said  to  him : Lord,  he  hath  ten  pounds. 
But  I say  to  you,  that  to  every  one  that  hath  shall 
be  given,  and  he  shall  abound : and  from  him  that 
hath  not,  even  that  which  he  hath  shall  be  taken  from 
him. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  Ixxxviii. — My  truth  and  my  mercy 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


AND  ^th  AUGUST.  65i 

shall  be  with  him,  and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be 
exalted. 

SECRET. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almijghty 
God,  that  as  thy  Confessor,  blessed  Lewis,  despising 
all  the  delights  of  the  world,  studied  only  to  please 
Christ  his  King ; so  also  his  prayers  may  render  us 
acceptable  to  thee.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Dem^  quL—0  God,  who  didst  render 
blessed  Lewis,  thy  Confessor,  illustrious  on  earth, 
and  now  glorious  in  heaven : appoint  him,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  defender  of  thy  church.  Thro’. 


XXVI.  St.  ZEPHVRINE,  p.  m. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  II.  p,  464,  except 
COLLECT.  PrcBsta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  as  we  rejoice  in  the  merits  of 
blessed  Zephyrine,  thy  martyr  and  bp.  we  may  re- 
ceive benefits  from  his  example.  Thro’. 


XXVII.  Sl  JOSEPH  CALASANCTIUS,  c. 

INTROIT. — Come,  children,  heai-ken  to  me:  I 
will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Ps.  1 will  bless 
the  Lord  at  all  times  : his  praise  shall  be  always  in 
my  mouth.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who,  by  blessed 
Joseph,  didst  provide  for  thy  church  new  helps  by 
the  instruction  of  youth  in  the  spirit  of  understanding 
and  piety:  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  by  his  ex- 
ample and  intercession,  we  may  both  so  act  and 
teach,  as  to  obtain  an  eternal  reward.  Thro’. 

LESSON,  msd,  X.  as  in  p.  466. 

GRAD.  Ps,  xxxvi.  as  in  p.  490. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  as  on  the  29th  Se])t  to*,  p,  667. 

OFFERT. — ^The  Lord  hears  the  prayers  of  the 
poor  ones : he  directs  their  hearts,  and  his  ear  is  bent 
on  them. 

SECRET. — ^We  lay  on  thy  altar,  O Lord,  the 
312 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


653 


28/A  AUGUST. 


o/ferings  we  have  made  unto  thee,  that  they  may  be- 
come a means  of  propitiation  unto  us,  by  the  inter- 
cession of  him,  whose  patronage  thou  hast  been 
pleased  to  grant  us.  Thro’. 

COMM. — Suffer  little  ones  to  come  unto  me,  and 
hinder  them  not : for  to  such  belongs  the  kin^om 
of  heaven. 

P.  COMM.  Sancii/icali, — Being  sanctified,  O 
Lord,  by  this  saving  mystery,  we  beseech  thee,  that, 
by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Joseph,  thy  Confessor, 
we  may  ever  increase  in  piety.  Thro’. 


XXVIII.  St.  AUGUSTIN,  bp.  c.  D. 

All  as  in  Mass  XII.  p,  485,  except 

COLLECT.  Adesto. — Give  ear,  O Lord,  to  our 
prayers,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Augustin, 
tliy  conf.  and  bp.  favourably  bestow  the  effects  of  thy 
accustomed  mercy  on  us,  to  whom  thou  hast  given 
reason  to  trust  in  thy  goodness.  Thro’. 

COLL.  [Of  St.  Hermes.)  Deus,  qui. — O God, 
who  gavest  blessed  Hermes,  thy  martyr,  strength  and 
constancy  in  his  sufferings : grant,  by  his  example, 
that  for  thy  love  we  may  despise  whatever  this  world 
esteems  great,  and  dread  none  of  its  terrors.  Thro’. 

GRAD,  to  AUeltda,  as  in  p.  486. 

V.  I have  found  David,  my  servant : with  my  holy 
oil  I have  anointed  him.  Alleluia. 

SECRET.  [Of  St.  Hermes.)— We  offer  thee, 
O Lord,  the  sacrifice  of  praise  in  commemoration  of 
thy  sain^:  grant,  therefore,  we  beseech  thee,  that 
what  hath  procured  glory  for  them  may  avail  to  oui 
salvation.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  (Of  St.  Hermes.) — Being  fed  with 
thy  heavenly  food,  O Lord,  we  beseech  tny  clemency, 
that  by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Hermes,  thy  martyr 
we  may  partake  of  the  salutary  effects  of  the  myste- 
ries which  we  celebrate  with  humility.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


29/A  AUGUST.  633 

XXIX.  DECOLLATION  of  St.  J.  BAPTIST. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cxviii.  as  in  p.  493,  to 

Ps,  It  is  good  to  praise  the  Lord,  and  to  sing  to 
thy  name,  O thou  the  Most  High ! V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Sancti  Joannis, — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  the  venerable  solemnity 
of  blessed  John  the  Baptist,  thy  precursor  and  mar- 
tyr, may  procure  us  the  effects  of  thy  saving  aid. 
Who  livest. 

Collect,  fyc.  o/*St.  Sabina,  as  in  p.  493. 

LESSON.  Je?\  i.  17.  19. — In  those  days : The 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me  saying ; Gird  up  thy 
loins  and  arise,  and  speak  to  them  all  that  I com- 
mand thee.  Be  not  afraid  at  their  presence : for  I 
will  make  thee  not  to  fear  their  countenance.  For 
behold  I have  made  thee  this  day  a fortified  city, 
and  a pillar  of  iron,  and  a wall  of  brass,  over  all  the 
land,  to  the  kings  of  Juda,  to  the  princes  thereof 
and  to  the  priests,  and  to  the  people  of  the  land. 
And  they  shall  fight  against  the^and  shall  not  pre- 
vail : and  I am  with  thee,  saith  me  Lord,  to  deliver 
thee. 

GRAD,  to  AUduia,  as  in  Mass  XII.  p.  486. — 
V.  The  righteous  man  shall  bud  forth  like  a lily : and 
flourish  for  ever  before  the  Lord.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Mark  vi.  17,  29. At  that  time  • 

Herod  sent  and.apprehended  John,  and  bound  him 
in  prison  for  the  sake  of  Herodias  the  wife  of  Philip 
his  brother,  because  he  had  married  her.  For  John 
said  to  Herod : It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  thy 
brother’s  wife.  Now  Herodias  laid  snares  for  him : 
and  was  desirous  to  put  him  to  death,  and  could  not 
For  Herod  feared  John,  knowing  him  to  be  a just 
and  holy  man : and  kept  him,  and  when  he  'heard 
him,  he  did  many  things:  and  he  heard  him  willing- 
ly. And  when  a convenient  day  was  come,  Herod 
made  a supper  for  his  birth  day,  for  the  princes,  and 
313 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


30ih  AUGUST. 


fS54 

tribunes,  and  chief  men  of  Galilee.  And  when  the 
daughter  of  the  same  Herodias  had  come  in,  and  had 
danced,  and  pleased  Herod,  and  them  that  were  at 
table  with  him,  the  king  said  to  the  damsel ; Ask  of 
me  what  thou  wilt,  and  I will  give  it  thee.  Amd  he 
swore  to  her : Whatsoever  thou  shalt  ask,  I will  give 
thee,  though  it  he  the  half  of  my  kingdom.  Who 
when  she  was  gone  out,  said  to  her  mother : What 
shall  I ask  ? But  she  said : the  head  of  John  the 
BaptisL  And  when  she  was  come  in  immediately 
with  haste  to  the  king,  she  asked,  saying : I will  that 
forthwith  thou^ive  me  in  a dish  the  head  of  John  the 
Baptist.  And  the  king  was  struck  sad ; yet  because 
of  his  oath,  and  because  of  tliem  that  were  with  him 
at  table,  he  would  not  displease  her : but  sending  an 
executioner,  he  commanded  that  his  head  should  be 
brought  in  a dish.  And  he  beheaded  him  in  the  pri- 
son, and  brought  his  head  in  a dish ; and  gave  it  to 
the  damsel,  and  the  damsel  gave  it  to  her  mother. 
Wliich  his  disciples  hearing,  came,  and  took  his  body, 
and  laid  it  in  a tomb. 

OFFERT. — In  thy  strength,  O Lord,  the  just  shall 
joy : and  in  thy  salvation  he  shall  rejoice  exceeding- 
ly : thou  hast  given  him  his  heart’s  desire. 

SECRET — Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that 
the  offerings  we  bring  on  this  festival  of  thy  martyr 
blessed  John  the  i^ptist,  may,  by  his  intercession, 
procure  for  us  ^Ivation. 

P.  COMM.  Conferat. — May*  the  solemnity  of  holy 
John  the  Baptist  enable  us,  O Lord,  both  to  venerate 
what  these  august  mysteries  signify  and  to  find  the 
effects  thereof  in  ourselves.  Thro’. 


XXX.  St.  ROSE  of  LIMA. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIX.  p.  498,  except 

COLLECT.  Bonorum. — O Almighty  Go<l,  the 
giver  of  all  good  gifts,  who  vvast  pleased  that  blessed 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


AND  2(2  SEPTEMBER. 


655 


Rose,  abundantly  favoured  with  the  dew  of  heavenly 
grace,  should  beautify  the  Indies  with  her  purity  and 
patience : grant  that  we  thy  servants,  following  the 
perfume  of  her  virtues,  may  become  an  agreeable 
odour  to  Christ.  Thro’. 

COLLECT,,  fyc.  Sl  Felix.  Majestatem» — ^We 
humbly  beseech  thy  Majesty,  O Lord,  that  as  in  ce- 
lebrating the  festivals  of  the  saints,  thou  fillest  us 
with  new  joys : so  thou  wouldest  vouchsafe  to  pro- 
tect us  by  their  prayers.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  ( Of  ib.) — Favourably  regard,  O Lord,  • 
the  offerings  of  thy  people,  and  make  them  sensible 
of  the  salutary  effects  of  what  they  celebrate  with  a 
devout  mind  in  honour  of  thy  saints.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Repleti.  (Of  ib.) — Being  fed,  O 
liOr^  with  thy  heavenly  ^fts,  we  beseech  thee,  by 
the  intercession  of  thy  saints,  that  we  may  always 
remain  thankful.  Thro’. 


September  1.  St  RAYMOND  NONNATUS,  c. 

JIU  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  didst  make 
blessed  Raymond,  thy  confessor,  wonderfully  emi- 
nent by  redeeming  the  faithful  out  of  captivity : 
grant,  by  his  prayere,  that  being  freed  from  the  bonds 
of  sin,  we  may  cheerfully  perform  what  is  most 
pleasing  to  thee.  Thro’. 


11.  St  STEPHEN,  King  and  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 

COLLECT.  Concede. — Grant  to  thy  church. 
Almighty  God,  that*  as  blessed  Stephen,  thy  confes- 
sor, while  he  reigned  on  earth,  enlarged  her  bounds, 
so  being  now  glorious  in  heaven,  he  may  be  her 
protector.  Thro’. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xix.  as  on  the  2oth  Aug.  p.  650. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


656 


8ih  SEPTEMBER. 


SECRET. — Favourably  look  down,  O Almighty 
God,  on  our  offerings,  and  grant,  that  as  we  cele- 
brate the  mysteries  of  our  Lord’s  passion,  we  may 
imitate  what  we  perform.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Prasta, — Grant,  we  beseech  tJiee,  O 
Almighty  God,  that  we  may  with  suitable  devotiou 
imitate  the  faith  of  thy  confessor,  blessed  Stephen  : 
who,  by  the  propagation  of  the  same  faith,  merited 
to  pass  from  an  earthly  kingdom  to  the  glory  of  an 
heavenly  one.  Thro’. 

VIII.  NATIVITY  B.  V.  M.  as  p,  529. 

Shoidd  the  following  festival  {lohich  occurs  on  the 
SUNDAY  toithin  the  OCTAvE  of  the  preceding) 
fall  on  the  XIV.  it  is  transferred  to  the  next  vacant 
day  ,*  hut  if  on  the  XV.  then  the  ensuing  Mass  is 
said  without  any  Commem,  of  the  Octave-day’. 

FEAST  of  the  NAME  of  the  B.  V.  MARY. 
INTROIT : — Vultuni  tuum,  as  in  p,  499. 
COLLECT.  Concede. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  thy  faithful,  who  rejoice  un- 
der the  name  and  protection  of  the  most  blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  may,  by  her  pious  intercession,  be  de- 
livered from  all  evils  here  on  earth,  and  be  brought 
to  the  eternal  joys  of  heaven.  Thro’. 

Collect,  ^c.  of  the  Sunday  afler  Pentecost 
LESSON.  Eccles.  xxiv.  fe.  31. — As  the  vine  I 
have  brought  forth  a pleasant  odour : and  my  flowers 
arc  the  fruit  of  honour  and  riches.  I am  the  mo- 
ther of  fair  love,  and  of  fear,  and  of  knowledge,  and 
of  holy  hope.  In  me  is  all  grace  of  the  way  and  of 
the  tnnh,  in  me  is  all  hope  of  life  and  of  virtue. 
Come  over  to  me,  all  ye  that  desire  me,  and  he  filled 
with  my  fruits.  For  my  spirit  is  sweet  above  honey, 
and  my  inheritance  above  honey  and  the  honey- 
comb. My  memory  is  unto  everlasting  generations 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


Wi  AND  Ilf  A SEPTEMBER. 


657 


They  that  eat  me  shall  yet  hunger:  and  they  that 
drink  me  shall  yet  thirst.  He  that  hearkeneth  to  me, 
shall  not  be  confounded : and  they  that  work  by  me, 
shall  not  sin.  They  that  explain  me,  shall  have  life 
everlasting. 

GRAD. — ^Thou  art  blessed,  and  worthy  of  our  re- 
spects, O Maiy,  the  Virgin,  who  without  prejudice 
to  thy  virginity,  didst  become  the  Mother  of  the 
Saviour.  V.  O Virgin  Mother  of  God ! he  became 
man,  and  was  shut  up  in  thy  womb,  whom  the  whole 
world  cannot  contain.  Alleluia,  Alleluia, 

V.  Post  partum  Virgo  inviolata  permansisti : Dei 
genitrix,  intercede  pro  nobis,  V,  After  child-birth  \ 
thou  didst  remain  a pure  Virgin : O Mother  of  God, 
intercede  for  us.  Alleluia, 

GOSPEL. — Duke  i.  as  on  the  25th  March,  p,  565, 
Offertory  Secret,  Coram.  and  P.  Comm,  as  in  the 
Votive  Mass,/?.  507.  At  the  end  of  Mass  is  read 
the  Gospel  of  the  Sunday. 


IX.  COMMEM.  0/ St.— GORGONIUS,  ra. 

COLLECT.  Sanctus, — May  the  intercession,  O 
Lord,  of  blessed  Gorgonius,  thy  martyr,  bring  com- 
fort to  thy  people ; and  fill  them  witli  spiritual  joy 
on  this  his  sacred  festival.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — May  the  offerings  of  us  thy  servants, 
O Lord,  be  acceptable  to  thee,  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  Gorgonius,  thy  martyr. 

P.  COMM.  Familiam, — Grant,  O God,  that  thy 
^ servants  may  taste  and  be  fed  with  eternal  joys : and 
by  the  example  of  thy  martyr  Gorgonius,  be  conti- 
nually replenished  with  the  good  odour  of  thy  Son 
Christ.  Who  liveth. 


. XL  COMMEM.  o/SS.  PROTUS,  &c.  mm. 
^COLLECT.  Beatorum, — ^We  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  that  the  constancy  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Protus 
and  Hyacinth,  may  be  an  encouragement  to  us  in 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


658 


14^^  SEPf EMBER. 


our  sufierings ; and  that,  by  their  prayers,  we  may 
find  a continual  protection.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — We  offer  thee,  p Loi^  in  memory 
of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Protus  and  Hyacinth,  the  gilfe 
which  are  due  to  thee : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that 
we  may  thereby  receive  the  assistance  necessary  for 
eternal  life. 

P.  COMM.  Ut  percepta, — grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy  mar- 
tyrs, Protus  and  Hyacinth,  that  tliy  holy  mysteries 
which  we  have  received,  may  purify  us. 


XIV.  EXALTATION  of  the  H.  CROSS. 

INTROIT. — Nos  autem,  asinp,  271. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — 0 God,  who  this  day 
fillest  thy  people  with  joy,  by  the  yearly  solemnity  of 
the  Exaltation  of  the  Holy  Cross : grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  as  we  believe  the  sacred  mystery  of  our  re- 
demption in  this  mortal  life,  so  we  may  feel  the  ef- 
fects thereof  in  the  life  to  come.  Thro’. 

Collect,  Farntdis,  &c.  of  the  Nativity,  jo.  529. 

Epistle,  PhU,  ii.  5,  as  on  the  SdofMeiy,  p,  577. 

Grad,  as  on  Maundy-Thursday,^.  272. 

V.  Mleluia^  ^Uduia,  Sweet  nails,  sweet  wood, 
that  bore  so  sweet  a burden : thou  alone  wast  worthy 
to  bear  the  King,  the  Lord  of  Heaven.  AUeluicu 

GOSPEL.  John  xii.  31.  36. — ^t  that  time : Jesus 
said  to  the  mvllUude  of  the  Jews:  Now  is  the 
judgment  of  the  world:  now  shall  the  prince  of 
this  world  be  cast  out.  And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  % 
the  earth,  will  draw  all  things  to  myself.  (Now 
this  he  said  signifying  what  death  he  should  die.) 
The  multitude  answered  him : we  have  heard  out 
of  the  law,  that  Christ  abideth  for  ever:  and  how 
sayest  thou : The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted  up  ? 
Who  is  this  Son  of  Man  ? Jesus  therefore  said  to 
them:  Yet  a little  while,  the  light  is  among  you. 
Walk  whilst  you  have  the  light,  that  the  darkness 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


15^4  SEPTEMBER, 


659 


overtake  you  not.  And  he  that  walketh  in  darkness 
knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth.  Whilst  you  have 
the  light,  believe  in  the  light,  that  you  may  Ije  the 
children  of  light.  Credo. 

OFFERT.— Defend,  O Lord,  thy  people,  by  the 
sign  of  the  Gross,  from  the.  snares  of  their  enemies ; 
that  we  ipay  do  thee  laudable  service,  and  our  sacri- 
fice may  bo  acceptable.  AUduia, 

SECRET. — Being  about  to  be  nourished  by  the 
body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  wliorii 
the  standard  of  the  Cross  was  blessed : we  beset  eh 
thee,  O Lord  our  God,  that  we  may  eternally  enjoy 
tlie  salutai-y  effects  of  that  precious  Cross,  which  we 
have  the  happiness  to  reverence.  Thro’. 

PREFACE. — Qui  salutem,  p.  XXX. 

COMM. — By  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  deliver  us,  O 
God,  from  all  our  enemies. 

P.  COMM.  Adesto. — Assist  us,  O Lord  our  God, 
and  by  virtue  of  the  Holy  Cross,  defend  those  from 
all  danger  whom  thou  caiisest,  with  joy,  to  render  it 
the  honour  it  deserves.  Thro’. 

XV.  OCTAVE  of  the  NATIVITY  o/B.  M.  V. 
All  as  on  the  Conception,  ».  529,  toitk  the  following 
Commem.  q/’St.  Nicomedes. 

COLLECT.  Adesto. — Be  merciful,  O Lord,  to  thy 
people,  that  being  improved  by  the  singular  virtues 
of  blessed  Nicomedes  thy  martyr,  they  may  have  the 
continual  assistance  of  his  prayers,  for  the  obtaining 
thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — ^Favourably  receive,  O Lord,  the  gifts 
we  offer,, and  may  the  prayers  of  blessed  Nicomedes, 
thy  martyr,  render  them  agreeable  to  thee.  Thro’ 

P,  COMM.  Purificent.. — ^May  the  mysteries,  which 
we  have  received  purify  us,  O Lord ; and,  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  Nicomedes,  thy  martyr,  deli 
ver  us  fit)m  all  our  sins.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


660  l&hxVB  17th  SEPTEMBER. 

XVI.  SS.  CORNELIUS  and  CYPRIAN,  mm. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  VII.  p,  475,  imth  a Commem,  of 
SS.  Euphemia,  &c.  mm. 

COLLECT.  PrtBsta. — Grant,  O Lord,  we  may 
with  joy  receive  the  effects  of  our  prayers,  so  as  hap- 
pily to  imitate  the  holy  manyrs,  Euphemia,  Lucia, 
and  Geminianus,  in  the  constant  profession  of  their 
faith,  whose  sufferings  we  honour  with  a yearly  de- 
votion. Thro’. 

SECRET.  ( Of  the  same.) — Mercifully  look  down, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  on  the  offerings  of  thy  peo- 
ple, and  grant  that  we  may  enjoy  their  suffrages, 
whose  feast  thou  grantest  us  to  celebrate.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Exattdia.  {Of  the  same.) — Hear,  C 
Lord,  our  prayers,  and  grant  that  we  may  be  con- 
tinually defended  by  the  assistance  of  thy  holy  mar- 
tyrs, Euphemia,  Lucia,  and  Greminianus,  whose  fes- 
tival we  celebrate.  Thro’. 


XVII.  The  STIGMAS  of  St.  FRANCIS. 

AU  as  on  the  lUh  October,;?.  670,  except 
COLLECT.  Domine  Jesu. — O Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who,  for  the  inflaming  our  cold  and  tepid  souls  with 
the  fire  of  thy  love,  was  pleased  to  renew  the  sacred 
marks  of  thy  passion  in  the  flesh  of  blessed  Francis: 
mercifully  grant,  through  his  virtues  and  prayers,  that 
we  may  always  bear  thy  cross  with  patience,  and 
bring  forth  worthy  fruits  of  penance.  Who  livest 
GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxiv.  as  inp.  485. 

P.  COMM.  Devs,  qui. — O God,  who  Ijast  many 
ways  demonstrated  the  wonderful  mysteries  of  the 
cross  in  blessed  Francis  thy  Confessor : grant,  we 
lieseech  thee,  that  we  may  always  imitate  the  exan»- 
ples  of  his  devotion,  and  be  fortified  by  continual 
meditation  on  the  same  cross.  Thro’. 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


ISth  AJXD  20th  SEPTEMBER. 


661 


XVI II.  St.  JOSEPH  a Cupertine,  c. 

INTROIT.  Eccles.  i. — The  love  of  God  is  honour- 
able wisdom,  and  they  to  whom  she  shall  shew  her- 
self, love  her  by  the  sight  and  by  the  knowledge  of 
her  great  works.  Ps,  How  lovely  are  thy  tabernacles, 
O Lord  of  Hosts ! My  soul  longeth  and  fainteth  for 
the  courts  of  the  Lord.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Dms,  qui, O God,  who  wast 

pleased  to  draw  all  things  to  thy  only  begotten  Son, 
when  raised  on  high : mercifully  grant  3iat,  by  the 
merits  and  example  of  thy  seraphic  confessor,  Joseph, 
being  raised  above  all  earthly  desires,  we  may  arrive 
at  him.  Who  liveth. 

EPISTLE,  1 Cor,  xiii.  (us  in 

GRAD.  Ps,  XX. — Thou  hast  prevented  him,  O 
Lord,  with  blessings  of  sweetness ; thou  hast  set  on 
his  head  a crown  of  precious  stones.  F.  He  asked 
life  of  thee,  and  thou  hast  given  him  length  of  days 
for  ever  and  ever.  Mel,  Allel,  V,  The  eye  of  the 
Lord  looked  kindly  on  him  : he  lifted  him  from  his 
humble  state,  and  raised  up  his  head.  Alleluia, 

GK)SPEL.  Matt,  xxii.  as  inp,  446. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  xxxiv. — But  when  they  were  trou 
blesome  to  me  I was  clothed  with  haircloth.  I hum- 
bled my  soul  ^vith  fasting : and  my  prayer  shall  be 
turned  into  my  bosom. 

SECRET.— We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  in  honour  of  thy 
saints,  a sacrifice  of  praise,  by  which  we  hope  to  be 
delivered  from  all  present  and  future  evils.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps, — I am  poor  and  sorrowdul : thy  salva- 
tion, O God,  hath  set  me  up : I will  praise  the  name  of 
God  with  a canticle : and  I will  magnify  him  in  praise. 

P.  COMM.  RefecHy  as  in  p,  489. 

XX.  SS.  EUSTACHIUS  and  Companions,  mm. 
AU  as  fn  Mass  VIII.  o.  477,  toitk  a Comniem.  of  St. 

Matthew  by  the  Collect  of  tht  Vigil  of  an  Apostle, 

p,  463,  and  the  following  Gospel  ai  the  end  of  Mass 
3K 
9 

zed  by  Google 


663 


^Ist  SEPTEMBER. 


GOSPEL.  LttArc  v.  27.  32. — ^ that  time : JesQs 
saw  a publican  named  Levi,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of 
custom,  and  he  said  to  him : Follow  me.  And  leav- 
ing all  things  he  rose  up  and  followed  him.  And 
Levi  made  him  a great  reast  in  his  own  house : and 
there  was  a great  company  of  publicans  and  of  others, 
that  were  at  table  with  them.  But  the  Pharisees  and 
Scribes  murmured,  saying  to  his  disciples : Why  do 
you  eat  and  drink  with  publicans  and  sinners  ? And 
Jesus  answering,  said  to  them : They  that  are  wnole 
need  not  the  physician  ; but  they  that  are  sick.  1 
came  not  to  call  the  just,  but  sinners  to  penance. 


XXI.  St  MATTHEW,  ap.  and  Evangelist 

INTROIT,  Os  justi,  as  in  p.  488. 

COLLECT.  BecUi  Apostoli. — Grant,  O Lord,  we 
may  be  aided  by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Matthew,  the 
apostle  and  evangelist : that  what  we  cannot  obtain 
by  our  own  weakness,  may  be  granted  us  by  his  in- 
tercession. Thro’. 

LESSON,  Ezek.  i.  as  on  St  Mark’s  Day,  p.  572. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxi. — Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth 
the  Lord,  he  shall  delight  exceedingly  in  his  com- 
mandments. V.  His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon 
earth : the  generation  of  the  righteous  shall  be  bles- 
sed. Alleluia^  AUduicu  V,  The  glorious  choir  of 
apostles  praise  thee,  O Lord.  AUduia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  ix.  9.  13. At  that  time: 

Jesus  saw  a man  sitting  in  the  custom-house,  named 
Matthew;  and  he  said  to  him:  Follow  me.  And 
he  arose  up,  and  followed  him.  And  it  came  to  pass 
as  he  was  sitting  at  meat  in  the  house,  behold  many 
publicans  and  sinners  came,  and  sat  down  with  Jesus 
and  his  disciples.  And  the  Pharisees  seeing  it,  said 
to  his  disciples : Why  doth  your  master  eat  with 
publicans  and  sinners  ? But  Jesus  hearing  it,  said : 
They  that  are  in  health,  need  not  a physician,  but 


Digitized  by  CjOO^lC 


22<2  SEPTEMBER. 


663 


they  that  are  ill.  Go  then  and  learn  what  this  mean- 
eth.  I wUl  have  mercy ^ and  not  sacrifice.  For  I am 
not  come  to  call  the  just,  but  sinners.  Credo. 

OFFERT. — Thou  hath  set  on  his  head  a crown  of 
precious  stones : h'e  asked  life  of  thee,  and  thou  didst 
grant  it  unto  him.  *dUeluia. 

SECRET. — May  the  offerings  of  thy  Church,  we 
beseech  thee  O Lord,  be  rendered  agreeable  to  thee 
by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Matthew,  thy  apostle  and 
evangelist,  by  whose  excellent  preaching  she  is  in- 
structed. Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  XX. — His  glory  is  great  in  thy  sal- 
vation : glory  and  great  beauty  shalt  thou  lay  upon 
him,  O Lord. 

P.  COMM.  Perceptis. Having  received  these 

holy  mysteries,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by  the  in- 
tercession of  the  blessed  apostle  and  evangelist  Mat- 
thew, that  what  we  have  celebrated  in  thanksgiving 
for  the  glory  bestowed  on  him,  may  be  a remedy  to 
us.  Thro*. 


XXII.  St.  THOMAS  of  VUla  Nova,  bp.  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  X.  * p.  482,  except 
COLLECT.  DeuSf  gut. — O God,  by  whose  gifts 
the  blessed  bishop  Thomas  became  eminent  for  his 
charity  towards  the  poor:  we  beseech  thee  by  his 
intercession  plentifully  to  pour  forth  the  riches  of  thy 
mercy  on  all  those  who  call  upon  thee.  Thro*. 

COLLECT  of  SS.  Maurice,  &c.  (Annue.) — 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  the 
festival  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Maurice  and  his  Compa- 
nions, may  bring  joy  to  our  souls ; that  confiding  in 
their  prayers  we  may  rejoice  on  their  feast  Thro*. 

SECRET  of  the  same. — Look  down,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  on  the  offerings  we  make  in  memory 
of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Maurice  and  his  Companion^ 
and  grant  that  we  may  be  ever  partakers  of  the  fruit 
3K2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


24/^  AND  26^^  SEPTEMBER. 

thereof  by  their  intercession,  in  honour  of  whom  they 
are  acceptable  to  thee.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM,  of  the  same,  (CodesUhus,) — ^Being  re- 
freshed by  these  heavenly  and  joyful  mysteries,  we 
humbly  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  we  may  enjoy 
their  protection,  in  whose  triumphs  we  glory.  Thlro' 

XXIII.  St.  LINUS,  p.  m. 

All  as  in  Mass  T.  jt?.  461,  except 
COLLECT.  (Deus,  qm,  nos)^  with  its  Secret  amd 
P.  Coram.  as  in  Mass  II.  o.  464. 

COLLECT,  of  St.  Theda.  (Da  qucesumus,)— 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,0  Almighty  God,  that  we  who 
celebrate  the  passion  of  blessed  Theda,  thy  vir^n  and 
martyr  may  find  joy  on  this  her  yearly  solemnity,  and 
be  improved  by  the  example  of  so  great  a faith.  Thro’. 
Secret,  (Receive,)  and  P.  Comm.  (AuxUientmr^) 
q/* St.  Theda,  cw  in/).  495. 

XXIV.  B.  V.  MARY  of  Mercy. 

AU  as  in  the  Votive  Mass,  Salve,/).  507,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus^  qui, — O God,  who  by  the  most 
glorious  Mother  of  thy  Son,  wast  pleased  to  appoint 
a new  order  in  thy  Church  for  delivering  the  faithful 
out  of  the  hands  of  infidels : grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  we  also  may  be  delivered  from  the  slavery  of  the 
devil,  by  her  merits  and  prayers  whom  we  devoutly 
honour  iu  the  institution  of  so  charitable  a work 
Thro’. 


XX  VI.  SS.  CYPRIAN  and  JUSTIN  A,  mm. 

All  as  in  Mass  IX.  p,  479,  except 
COLLECT.  Beatorum, — ^May  these,  tliy  holy 
martyrs  Cyprian  and  'Justina,  O Lord,  be  a continual 
protection  to  us,  for  thou  wilt  never  let  tliy  mercy 
be  wanting  to  those,  whom  thou  favourest  with  such 
assistance.  Thro’. 

Secret,  (We  bring)  and  P.  Comm.(Prff«to.)  p,  479. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


V^tK  AND  SEPTEMBER. 


665 


XXVIl.  SS.  COSMAS  and  DAMIAN,  mm. 

All  as  in  Mass  VIII.  p,  477,  except 

COLLECT.  Proistou — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  celebrating  the  festival  of  thy 
holy  martyrs,  Cosmas  and  Damian,  we  may,  by  their 
intercession,  be  delivered  from  all  impending  evils. 
Thro’, 

GRAD. — ^The  just  cried  out,  &c.  p,  480,  to 

V.  These  were  truly  brothers,  who  have  triumphed 
over  the  iniquity  of  the  world,  followed  Christ,  and 
are  in  possession  of  the  glorious  kingdom  of  heaven. 
AUelma. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  V. — ^All  they  that  love  thy  name 
shall  glory  in  thee.  For  thou,  O Lord,  wSt  bless 
the  just:  O Lord,  thou  hast  crowned  us,  as  with  a 
shield  of  thy  good  will. 

SECRET. — Let  us  not  be  deprived,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  of  the  pious  intercession  of  thy  saints, 
which  may  render  our  offerings  acceptable  to  thee, 
and  obtain  for  us  the  pardon  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixxviii. — ^They  have  given  the  bodies 
of  thy  servants,  O Lord,  to  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of 
the  air ; the  flesh  of  thy  saints  to  the  beasts  of  the 
earth : according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  arm : take 
possession  of  them  that  have  been  put  to  de^th. 

P.  COMM.  Protegat, — ^We  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
to  assist  thy  people  by  virtue  of  this  heavenly  banquet, 
and  the  joint  intercession  of  thy  sahits. 

% 


XXVIII.  St.  WENCESLAUS,  m. 

All  as  in  Mass  III.  p.  466,  except 
COLLECT.  Devs,  qui, — 0 God,  who  by  a 
glorious  martyrdom,  was  pleased  to  remove  blessed 
Wenceslaus  from  an  earthly  government  to  the  king- 
dom of  heaven : grant,  that  by  Jus  prayers,  we  may 
3 R 3 


,y  Google 


SEPTEMBER. 


be  preserved  from  all  adversity,  and  at  length  ad- 
mitted to  partake  of  the  same  glory.  Thro’. 
GOSPEL.  MaJU,  xvL  as  in  p,  465. 


XXIX.  DEDICATION  of  St.  MICHAEL, 

And  also  for  the  Feast  of  his  Apparition  &th  May, 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cii. — Bless  the  Lord,  all  ye  his 
angels:  you  that  are  mighty  in  strength,  and  ex- 
ecute his  word,  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  orders. 
Alld.  Alld.  Ps,  Bless  the  Lord,  O!  my  soul:  let 
all  that  is  within  me  praise  his  holy  name.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus  qui, — O God,  who,  by  a won- 
derful order,  hast  regulated  the  employnjents  of  angels 
and  men  : grant  that  those  who  are  always  minister- 
ing before  thee  in  heaven,  may  defend  our  lives  here 
on  earth.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Rev.  L 1.  5. — In  those  days:  God 
gave  unto  him  to  make  known  to  his  servants  the 
things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass : and  signi- 
fied, sending  by  his  angel  to  his  servant  John : who 
hath  given  testimony  to  the  word  of  God,  and  the  tes- 
timony of  Jesus  Christ,  what  things  soever  he  hath 
seen.  Blessed  is  he,  that  readeth  and  heareth  the 
words  of  this  prophecy : and  keepeth  these  things 
which  are  written  in  it.  For  the  time  is  at  hand.  John 
to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  Asia.  Grace  be 
unto  you  and  peace  from  him  that  is,  and  that  was, 
and  that  is  to  come,  and  fi-om  the  seven  spirits  which 
are  before  his  throne  ; and  fi’om  Jesus  Christ,  who  is 
the  faithful  witness,  the  first  begotten  of  the  dead,  and 
the  prince  of  the  kings  of  the  eartli,  who  hath  loved 
us,  and  hath  washe^  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood.  • 

GRAD.  Ps.  cii. — Bless  the  Lord,  all  ye  his  angels : 
you  that  are  mighty  in  Strength:  and  execute  his 
word.  V.  Bless  the  Lord,  O my  soul,  and  let  all 
that  is  within  me  praise  his  holy  name.*  AUel.  Alld 


Digitized  by  Google 


SEPTEMBER. 


607 


V.  Holy  Michael  the  Archangel,  defend  us  in  the 
battle  : that  we  may  not  perish  in  the  dreadful  judg- 
ment. Mduia,  Alleluia,  f [N.  B.  On  the  viii. 
of  May  the  Grad,  to  * w omitted^  and  after  f is  add- 
The  sea  shook,  and  the  earth  trembled,  when 
Michael  the  Archangel  came  down  from  heaven. 
AUeluicu 

' GOSPEL.  Matt,  xviii.  1.  30. At  that  time : 

The  disciples  came  to  Jesus  saying:  Who,  thinkest 
thou  is  the  greater  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 
And  Jesus  calling  unto  him  a little  child,  set  him  in 
the  midst  of  them,  and  said : Amen  I say  to  you, 
unless  you  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  chil- 
dren, you  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven. Whosoever  therefore  shall  humble  himself  as 
. this  little  child,  he  is  the  greater  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  And  he  that  shall  receive  one  such  little 
child  in  my  name,  receiveth  me.  * But  he  that  shall 
scandalize  one  of  these  little  ones  that  believe  in  me, 
it  were  better  for  him  that  a mill-stone  should  be 
hanged  about  his  neck,  and  that  he  should  be  drown- 
ed in  the  depth  of  the  sea.  Wo  to  the  world  because 
of  scandals.  For  it  must  needs  be  that  scandals 
come;  but  nevertheless  wo  to  that  man  by  whom 
the  scandal  cometh.  And  if  thy  hand  or  thy  foot 
scandalize  thee,  cut  it  ofl^  and  cast  it  from  thee.  It 
is  better  for  thee  to  go  into  life  maimed  or  lame, 
than  having  two  hands  or  two  feet,  to  be  cast  into 
everlasting  fire.  And  if  thy  eye  scandalize  thee, 
pluck  it  out,  and  cast  it  from  thee.  It  is  better  for 
thee  having  one  eye  to  enter  into  life,  than  having 
two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell  fire.  See  that  you  des- 
pise not  one  of  these  little  ones;  for  I say  to  you, 
that  their  angels  in  heaven  always  see  the  face  of  my 
Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

OFFERT.  Rev.  viii. — An  angel  stood  on  the  altar 
of  the  temple,  having  in  his  hand  a golden  censer; 
«nd  much  incense  was  given  him : and  the  smoko 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


G68  30^  SEPTEMBER  AND  OCTOBER. 

of  the  incense  ascended  in  the  sight  of  God.  AUd 
Alleluia, 

SECRET. — ^We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  this  sacrifice, 
of  praise,  that  by  the  intercession  of  thy  angels,  thou 
wouidst  mercifully  receive  the  same,  and  grant  that 
it  may  avail  us  unto  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Dan.  iii. — O,  all  ye  the  angels  of  the 
Lord,  bless  the  Lord : sing  an  hymn  to  him,  and  ex- 
tol him  for  ever.  Alleluia. 

P.  COMM.  Beati. — We  humbly  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  tliat  being  assisted  by  the  intercession  of 
B.  Michael,  thy  archangel,  we  may  receive  in  spirit, 
what  we  have  received  with  our  mouths.  Thro’ 


XXX.  St.  JEROME,  pr.  c.  and  D. 

All  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who,  to  ex- 
pound the  holy  scriptures,  wast  pleased  to  provide  for 
thy  holy  church  that  great  doctor,  the  blessed  Jerome : 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  by  his  merits  and  thy 
grace,  we  may  live  according  to  what  he  taught  us 
by  word  and  example.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Grant  us  ^ce,  O Almighty  God,  by 
virtue  of  these  heavenly  gifts,  to  serve  thee  with  per- 
fect liberty  of  mind,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Jerome,  thy  Confessor,  that  the  gifts  we  now  offer 
may  heal  us  and  procure  us  glory.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Repleti. — Being  filled  with  this  hea- 
venly food,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  to  grant  us, 
by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Jerome,  thy  Confessor, 
the  grace  of  thy  mercy. 


I.  Sunday  of  October. 

FEAST  of  the  ROSARY  of  the  B.  V.  MARY. 
All  as  in  the  Votive  Mass,  Salve,  ».  507,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  cujus. — O God,  whose  only 
Son,  by  his  life,  death,  and  resurrection,  hath  ob 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


^ OCTOBER. 


669 


tamed  for  ua  the  rewards  of  eternal  salvation : grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  that  meditating  on  these  mysteries 
in  the  most  holy  Rosary  of  the  B.  V.  M.  we  may  imi- 
tate what  they  contain,  and  come  to  the  happiness 
which  they  promise.  Thro’. 

Here^  as  weU  as  at  the  Secret  and  P.  Comm,  is  mcuk 
a Commem,  of  the  Sunday  after  Pentecost,  the 
Gospel  tohereof  is  read  at  the  end  of  the  Mass. 


II.  FEAST  of  the  ANGELS  GUARDIANS. 

INTROIT.  Ps.  cii.  as  on  Michaelmas  Day,  p,  666. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qm. — O God,  who,  in  thy 
wonderful  providence,  hath  been  pleased  to  appoint 
tliy  holy  angels  for  our  guardians : mercifully  hJar 
our  prayei*s,  and  grant  we  may  rest  secure  under 
their  protection,  and  enjoy  their  fellowship  in  heaven 
for  ever.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Exod.  xxiii.  20.  23. — Thus  saith  th$ 
Lord  God : Behold  I will  send  my  angel,  who  shall 
go  before  thee,  and  keep  thee  in  thy  journey,  and 
bring  thee  into  the  place  that  I have  prepared. 
Take  notice  of  him,  and  hear  his  voice,  artd  do 
not  think  him  one  to  be  contemned : for  he  will  not 
forgive  when  thou  hast  sinned,  and  my  name  is  in 
him.  But  if  thou  wilt  hear  his  voice,  and  do  all 
that  I speak,  I will  be  an  enemy  to  thy  enemies,  and 
will  afflict  them  that  afflict  thee.  And  my  angel 
shall  go  before  thee. 

GBSvD.  Ps.  xci  cii. — God  hath  given  his  angels 
charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways.  V. 
In  their  hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  thou  dash 
thy  foot  against  a stone.  Mleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  Bless 
the  Lord,  all  ye  his  hosts:  you  ministera  of  his  that 
do  his  will,  praise  the  Lord.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  as  on  Michaelmas-day,  p.  667. 

OFFERT.  Bless  the  Lord,  all  ye  his  angels : you 
uninisters  of  his  that  do  his  will. 


Digitized  byCjOOglC 


if70  2d  AND  4/4  OCTOBEK. 

SECRET. — Favourably  receive,  O Lord,  the  gifts 
which  we  offer  thee  in  honour  of  thy  holy  angels: 
and  mercifully  grant  that,  by  their  continui  protec- 
tion, we  may  be  delivered  ^m  present  dangers,  and 
obtain  eternal  life.  Thro*. 

COMM. — Bless  the  Lord,  all  ye  angels  of  the 
Lord ; sing  a hymn  to  his  praise,  and  extol  him  for 
ever.  Allduicu 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimxis, — Having  joyfully  receiv- 
ed, O Lord,  the  divine  mysteries  on  this  festival  of 
thy  holy  angels ; we  beseech  thee,  that,  by  their  in- 
tercession, we  may  always  be  delivered  from  the 
snares  of  our  enemies,  and  fortified  against  all  adver- 
sities. Thro*. 


III.  St.  THOMAS,  bp.  of  HEREFORD,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XI.  ».  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  quL — O God,  who  hast  adorn- 
ed thy  church  with  the  angelical  purity  and  virtues 
of  thy  blessed  Bp.  Thomas : grant  that  we  thy  ser- 
vants may,  by  his  merits  and  prayers,  be  associated 
with  the  heavenly  host  of  angels.  Thro*. 


IV.  St  FRANCIS  of  Assisium,  c. 

INTROIT.  Gal,  vi.— But  God  forbid  that  I 
should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  I 
to  the  world.  Ps.  I cried  to  tne  Lord  with  my  voice : 
with  my  voice  I made  supplication  to  die  Lord. 
V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus^  quu — O God,  who  by  the 
exemplary  virtues  of  blessed  Fmncis,  didst  enlarge 
thy  church  by  a new  offspring:  grant  we  may  fol- 
low him  in  despising  the  things  of  this  world, -and  he 
blessed  in  the  perpetual  enjoyment  of  thy  heavenly 
grace.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  Gal,  vi.  14,  18. — Breth^'en:  God 
forbid  that  I should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


AND  Glh  OCTOBER.  * f)71 

LordJesus  Christ ; by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  to 
me,  and  I to  the  world.  For  in  Chri^  Jesus  neither 
circumcision  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumcision, 
but  a new  creature.  And  whosoever  shall  follow 
this  rule,  peace  on  them,  and  mercy,  and  upon  the 
Israel  pf  God.  From  henceforth  let  no  man  be 
troublesome  to  me.  For  I bear  the  marks  of  the 
J-iOrd  Jesus  in  my  body.  The  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit,  brethren.  Amen.  - 
GRAD.  Ps,  xxxvi.  as  in  p.  486,  to 
V.  Francis,  poor  and  bumble,  goeth  rich  into  hea- 
ven, and  is  honoured  with  celestial  hymns.  AlleL 
GOSPEL.  Matt.  xi.  as  on  the  15th  Jan.  p.  537. 
OFFERT.  Ps.  Ixxxviii. — My  truth  and  my  mercy 
are  with  him,  and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be  ex- 
alted. 

SECRET. — Sanctify  the  ^fls  dedicated  to  thee, 
O Lord  : and  by  the  interceasion  of  blessed  Francis, 
purify  us  from  every  stain  of  sin.  Thro’. 

COMM. — L/ake  xii. — ^This  is  the  faithful  and  wise 
servant,  whom  the  Lord  hath  placed  over  his  fanjily, 
to  give  them  their  measure  of  wheat  in  due  season. 

P.  COMM.  Ecclesiam. — We  beseech  thee,  O 
Lord,  that  thy  heavenly  grace  may  increase  thy 
church,  which  thou  hast  vouchsafed  to  enlighten  by 
the  glorious  merits  and  example  of  blessed  Francis, 
tliy  confessor.  Thro’. 


V.  SS.  PLACIDUS  and  COMPANIONS,  mm. 
All  as  in  Mass  IX.  p.  479,  except  the  Collect,  Secret, 
and  P.  Comm,  which  are  taken  from  Mass  VIII. 
pp.  478,  479. 


VI.  St.  BRUNO,  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Sancti  Bmnonis. — Grant,  O Lord, 
we  may  be  assisted  by  the  holy  prayers  of  blessed 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


672  • Ith  A*ND  8/^  OCTOBER. 

Bruuo,  thy  Confessor,  that  we,  who  hai^  grievously 
offended  thy  divine  Majesty,  may,  through  his 
merits  and  intercession,  obtain  p€u*don  of  all  our  sins. 
Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  (QikE5umi«,)  j?.  491. 


VII.  St.  MARK,  p.  c. 

M as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 

COLLECT.  Exaudi. — ^Hear,  O Lord,  our  pray 
ers,  and,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed  Mark,  thy 
Confessor  and  Bishop,  mercifully  grant  us  pardon 
and  peace.  Thro’. 

Of  SS.  Sergius,  Bacchus,  fyc.  (Sanctorum.) — ^We 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  the  eminent  virtues  of 
thy  holy  martyrs,  Sergiiis,  Bacchus,  Marcellus,  and 
Appuleius,  may  be  a benefit  to  our  souls,  and  en- 
courage us  to  be  always  fervent  in  thy  love. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  offerings,  &c.  as  inp.  499. 

Of  SS.  Sa'gius,  fyc. — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  this  host,  which  is  to  be  offered  to  thee,  may 
render  thy  divine  Majesty  appeased  by  the  worthy 
intercession  of  thy  saints. 

P.  COMM.  J&a,  qucesumus. — Grant,  O Lord,  wb 
beseech  thee,  that  thy  faithful  people  may  always 
joyfully  honour  thy  saints,  and  ever  be  protected  by 
their  prayers.  Thro’. 

Of  SS.  Sergius,  &c.  (Sacramentis.) — Strengthen 
us,  O Lord,  by  the  mysteries  which  we  have  received, 
and,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Sergius, 
Bacchus,  Marcellus,  and  Appuleius,  grant  us  spi- 
ritual arms,  whereby  wc  may  be  defended  from  all 
assaults  of  the  devil. 


VIII.  St  BRIDGET,  w. 

as  in  Mass  XXI.  p.  502,  except  \ 
COLLECT. — O Lord  our  God,  who  tnrough  thy 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


9lh  OCTOBER. 


673 


only  begotten  Son  hast  revealed  heavenly  secrets  to 
blessed  Bridget:  grant,  through  her  pious  interces- 
sion, that  we  thy  servants  may  rejoice  for  ever  in  the 
communication  of  thy  everlasting  glory.  Thro’. 
EPISTLE.  1 Tim.  as  on  4th  of  May,  p.  580 
GOSPEL.  Matt.  xiii.  as  in  p.  501. 


IX.  SS.  DIONYSIUS,  &c.  mm. 

AU  as  in  Mass  VIII.  p.  477,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui. — O God,  who  didst  this 
day  support  blessed  Dionysius,  thy  martyr  and  bi- 
snop,  with  the  gift  of  constancy  in  his  sufferings : and 
didst  join  to  him  Rusticus  and  Eleutherius,  to  spread 
thy  name  among  the  Gentiles:  grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  that,  after  their  example,  we  may  despise  the 
pleasing  things  of  this  world,  and  fear  none  of  its 
terrors.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Acts  xvii.  22. — In  those  days:  Paul 
standing  in,  the  midst  of  Areopagus,  said:  Ye  men 
of  Athens,  I perceive  that  in  all  things  you  are  too 
superstitious.  For  passing  by  and  seeing  your  idols, 
I found  an  altar  also  on  which  was  wi*itten  : To  the 
unknown  God.  What  therefore  you  worship  witli- 
out  knowing  it,  that  I preach  to  you.  God  who 
made  the  world  and  all  things  therein,  He  being 
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  dwelleth  not  in  temples 
made  v\dth  hands,  neither  is  he  served  with  men’s 
hands,  as  though  he  needed  any  thing,  seeing  it  is  he 
who  giveth  to  all,  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things : 
and  hath  made  of  one,  all  mankind,  to  dwell  upon 
the  whole  face  of  the  earth,  determining  appointed 
times,  and  the  limits  of  their  habitation,  that  they 
should  seek  God,  if  happily  they  may  feel  after  him 
or  find  him  ; although  he  be  not  far  from  every  one 
of  us:  for  in  him  we  live  and  move,  ai^^ 
some  also  of  your  own  poets  said : For  u 
his  offspring.  Being  therefore  the  offsprin 
3L 


Digilized  byCjOO^lC 


(574 


11/4  OCTOBER. 


we  must  not  suppose  the  Divinity  to  be  like  unto 
gold,  or  silver,  or  stone,  the  graving  of  art  and  dte- 
vice  of  man.  And  God  indeed  having  winked  at  the 
times  of  this  ignorance,  now  declareth  to  men,  that 
all  should  every  where  do  penance,  because  he  hath 
appointed  a day  wherein  he  will  judge  the  world  in 
equity,  by  the  man  whom  he  hath  appointed,  giving 
faith  to  all,  by  raising  him  up  from  the  dead.  And 
when  they  had  heard  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
some  indeed  mocked  ; but  others  said  : We  will  hear 
thee  again  concerning  this  matter.  So  Paul  went 
out  from  among  them.  But  certain  men  adhered  to 
him,  and  believed  ; among  whom  was  also  Dionysius 
the  Areojingite,  and  a woman  named  Damaris,  and 
others  with  them. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xii.  as  on  the  26th  June,  p.  603. 

SECRET. — Favourably,  O Lord,  receive  the  gifts 
which  thy  people  offer  thee  in  honour  of  thy  saints: 
and  by  their  intercession,  we  beseech  thee  to  sanctify 
us.  Thro’.  • 

P.  COMM.  Sumptis, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy  martyrs, 
Dionysius,  Rusticus,  and  Eleutherius,  that  we  may 
advance  more  and  more  in  the  way  of  our  eternal 
redemption,  by  virtue  of  the  sacraments  which  we 
have  received.  Thro’. 


XI.  St  FRANCIS  BORGIA,  c. 

JIU  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p,  iSS'except 

COLLECT,  Domine  Jesu. — Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  art  both  the  model  and  the  reward  of  true  hu- 
mility, we  beseech  thee,  that  as  by  thy  grace  blessed 
Francis  became  a glorious  follower  of  thee  in  the  con- 
tempt of  earthly  grandeur:  so  we  pJso,  by  the  like 
imitation  of  thee,  may  attain  to  the  same  glory.  Who 
livest 


/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


675 


ISth  AND  \Ath  OCTOBER. 

GRAD.  Ps.  XX. — Lord,  thou  hast  prevented,  jo.  492. 
Gospel,  Matt.'xlx,  and  Offert.  Ps.  xx.  Und. 


XII.  St.  WILFRID,  Archbishop  of  York.  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus  qui. — O God,  by  whose  grace 
the  blessed  bishop  Wilfrid  became  illustrious  for  the 
splendour  of  his  merits : grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that 
\ye  always  may  be  defended  by  his  patronage,  under 
whose  instructions  we  have  been  taught  to  aspire 
after  heavenly  things.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Purify,  we  beseech  thee,  O Almighty 
God,  the  souls  of  thy  servants  with  the  light  of  thy 
holy  Spirit,  that  the  gifts  we  offer  thee  may  become 
acceptable  through  the  intercession  of  blessed  Wilfrid, 
thy  confessor  and  bishop.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Redemptionis. — Having  feasted  on 
the  food  of  eternal  redemption,  we  humbly  implore 
thy  mercy,  O Lord,  that  through  the  merits  and  in- 
tercession of  blessed  Wilfrid,  thy  confessor,  we  may 
obtain  the  gift  of  eternal  salvation.  Thro’. 


XIII.  St.  EDWARD,  King,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIII.  ».  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus  qui. — O God,  who  hast  crowned 
the  blessed  King  Edward,  thy  confessor,  with  a dia- 
dem of  glory ; grant  that  we  may  honour  him  in 
such  a manner  on  earth,  as  to  hereafter  reign  with 
him  in  heaven.  Thro’. 


XIV.  St.  CALISTUS,  p.  m. 

All  as  in  Mass  II.  p.  464,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus  qui. — O God,  who  seest  that 
^re  faint  under  our  own  infirmities  : mercifully  grant, 
that  the  examples  of  the  saints  may  raise  us  up  to 
the  sincere  love  of  thee.  Thro’. 

3L2 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


676  AND  17ih  October. 

Collect  of  St.  Edward,  as  on  the  ISth. 

EPISTLE.  Heb.  v.  p.  85,  closes  at  these  words^ 
as  AaroD  was. 

GRAD.  Ps,  Ixxxviii. — I have  found,  as  in  p.  4G2,  to 

V,  The  Lord  loved  him,  and  adorned  him,  and 
dothed  him  with  a robe  of  gloiy.  JUlduicu 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  x.  as  in  p,  467. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  ixxxviii. — ^My  truth  and  niy  mercy 
shall  be  with  him : and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn 
be  exalted. 

SECRET. — Grant,  O Lord,  that  this  mystic  obla- 
tion may  avail  both  to  cleanse  us  from  our  sins,  and 
assure  us  of  eternal  salvation.  Thro’. 

SECRET.—We  offer  (Of  St.  Edward.)  p.  489. 

COMM. — Blessed  is  tlie  servant  whom  tne  Lord, 
when  he  cometh,  shall  find  watching.  Amen,  I say 
to  you,  he  shall  set  him  over  all  he  hath. 

P.  COMM.  (^ucBsumus, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  these  sacred  mysteries  may 
purify  us  from  our  sins,  and  obtain  for  us  the  grace 
to  live  well.  Thro’. 

' P.  COMM.  Of  St.  Edward,  (Rc/ccfi),  p,  489. 


XV.  St.  TERESA,  V. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIX  p,  498,  except 
COLLECT.  Exaudi. — Hear  us,  O God,  our  Sa- 
viour, and  as  we  rejoice  on  the  solemnity  of  blessed 
Teresa,  thy  virgin,  so  may  our^ouls  be  improved  by 
her  heavenly  instructions,  and  inflamed  with  the  love 
of  thee.  Thro’. 


XVII.  St  IIEDWIGES,  w. 

All  as  in  Mass  XXL  p.  502,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus  qui. — O God,  who  didst  teach 
blessed  Hedwiges  to  fly  from  the  pomps  of  the  world, 
end  with  her  vvlioJe  heart  to  embrace  the  humility 


Digilized  byCjOO^lC 


iSth  OCTOBEK. 


677 


of  the  cross : graot,  by  her  merits  and  example,  that 
we  also  may  learn  to  tread  under  our  feet  the  fading 
pleasures  of  this  world,  and  to  overcome  all  that 
standeth  in  the  way  of  our  salvadon,  by  embracing 
thy  cross.  Who  livest 
Collect,  &c.  of  St.  Edward,  as  inp.  675. 

XVIII.  St.  LUKE  the  Evangelist 
INTROIT. — ^Mihi  autem,  as  in  p.  524. 
COLLECT.  hUerveniai, — Maj  the  holy  evangelist 
Luke,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  mtercede  for  us,  who 
continually  bore  the  mortification  of  the  cross  in  his 
body  for  the  honour  of  thy  name.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor.  viii.  16.  24. — Brethren : Thanks 
be  to  God,  who  hath  given  the  same  carefulness  for 
you  in  the  heart  of  Titus,  for  indeed  he  accepted  the 
exliortation : but  being  more  careful,  of  his  own  will 
he  went  unto  you.  We  have  sent  also  with  him  the 
brother,  whose  praise  is  in  ♦he  gospel  through  all  the 
churches : and  not  that  only,  but  he  was.  also  or- 
dained by  the  churches  companion  of  our  travels,  for 
this  grace,  which  is  administered  by  us  to  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  and  our  determined  will : avoiding  this, 
lest  any  man  should  blame  us  in  this  abundance 
which  is  administered  by  us.  For  we  forecast  what 
may  be  good  not  only  before  God,  but  also  before 
men.  And  we  have  sent  with  them  our  brother  also, 
whom  we  have  proved  diligent  in  many  things : but 
now  much  more  diligent,  with  much  confidence  in 
you,  either  for  Tjtus,  who  is  my  companion  and  fel- 
low-labourer towards  you,  or  our  brethren,  the 
apostles  of  the  churches,  the  glory  of  C hrist.  Where- 
fore shew  ye  to  them,  in  the  sight  of  the  churches, 
the  evidence  of  your  charity,  and  of  our  boasting  on 
your  behalf. 

GRx^D.  Ps.  xviii.  as  on  the  11th  June,p.  591. 

GOSPEIi.  Luke  x.  as  on  the  25tli  April,  p,  572. 
3 L 3 


uigitized  byCjOO^IC 


678 


l9th  AND  ^Ist  OCTOBER. 


OFFERT.  Ps,  cxxxviii. — To  me,  thy  friends,  O 
God,  are  exceedingly  honourable : their  principality 
is  exceedingly  strengthened, 

SECRET. — Give  us  g^e,  O Almighty  God,  by 
virtue  of  these  heavenly  gifts,  to  serve  thee  with  per- 
fect liberty  of  mind,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Luke,  thy  evangelist : that  the  gifts  which  we  now 
offer,  may  work  in  us  a cure,  and  procure  us  glory 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Matt,  xix. — ou  who  have  followed  me, 
sbidl  sit  on  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

P.  COMM,  Pr<E5te.-^rant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  what  we  have  received  from 
thy  holy  altar,  may,  by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Luke, 
the  evangelist,  sanctify  our  souls,  and  preserve  us 
from  all  danger.  Thro’. 


XIX.  St.  PETER  of  ALCANTARA,  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIV.  p,  489,  except 

COLLECT.  DeuSf  qui, — O God,  who  wast 
pleased  to  render  blessed  Peter,  thy  confessor,  emi- 
nent for  his  exemplary  piety  and  wonderful  contem- 
plation: grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  being  duly 
mortified  in  our  bodies,  our  souls  may  be  better  dis- 
posed to  receive  thy  heavenly  graces.  Thro’. 

//ere,  well  as  at  the  Secret  and  P.  Comm,  is  made 
a Commem.  q/*St.  Edward  the  Confessor,^.  674. 

EPISTLE.  Philip  iii.  as  inp,  536. 


XXI.  SS.  URSULA  and  her  Companions^  mim 

AU  as  in  Mass  XVIII.  p.  497,  except 

COLLECT.  Da  nobis, — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  we  may  celebrate  the  victories 
of  thy  holy  virgins,  SS.  Ursula  and  her  companions, 
with  a constant  devotion : and  that  although  -ve  can- 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


VSld  OCTOBER. 


679 


not  celebrate  them  as  we  ought,  we  may  however 
aim  at  this  duty  with  all  humility.  Thro’. 

Here,  as  also  at  the  Secret  and  P.  Comm,  is  made  a 
Commem.  o/*St  HiLARioN,yrowiMass  XV.  p.  492. 

EPISTLE,  1 Cor.  vii.  from  Mass  XX.  p,  500, 
Secret  and  P.  Comm,  as  in  Mass  XVIII.  p,  497. 


XXII.  St.  JOHN  CANTIUS,  c. 

INTROIT.  Eccles,  xviii. — ^The  mercy  of  man  is 
toward  his  neighbour ; but  the  mercy  of  God  is  upon 
all  flesh.  He  hath  mercy  and  teacheth  and  correct- 
eth  as  a shepherd  doth  his  flock.  V.  Blessed  is  the 
man  who  hath  not  walked  in  the  council  of  the  un- 
godly, nor  stood  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sat  in  the 
ohair  of  pestilence.  F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Da  qiuRsumus, — ^Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  Gk)d,  that  advancing  in  the  science 
of  the  saints  after  the  example  of  blessed  John  thy 
confessor,  and  shewing  mercy  to  others,  we  may,  by 
his  merit^  obtain  mercy  of  thee.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  James  ii.  12. 17. — Speak  ye,  and  so 
do,  as  being  to  be  judged  by  the  law  of  liberty.  For 
judgment  without  mercy  to  him  that  hath  not  done 
mercy.  And  mercy  exadteth  itself  above  judgment. 
What  shall  it  profit,  my  brethren,  if  a man  say  he 
hath  faith,  but  hath  not  works  ? Shall  faith  be  able 
to  save  him  ? And  if  a brother  or  sister  be  naked, 
and  want  daily  food : and  one  of  you  say  to  them  : 
Go  in  peace,  be  you  warmed  and  filled:  yet  give 
them  not  those  things  that  are  necessary  for  the  borly : 
what  shall  it  profit  ? So  faith  also,  if  it  have  not 
works,  is  dead  in  itself. 

GRAD.  Ps.  evL — Let  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  give 
glory  to  him,  and  his  wonderful  works  to  the  children 
of  men.  F.  For  he  hath  satisfied  the  empty  soul : 
and  hath  filled  the  hungry  soul  with  good  things, 
m^el  AUel,  F.  He  hath  opened  his  hand  to  the 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


000  25^^  OCTOBER. 

needy;  and  stretched  out  his  hands  to  tlie  K>or. 
JVlduia, 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xii.  as  in  Mass  XIII  p,  488. 

SECRET. — Favourably  receive,  we  beseech  the<5, 
O Lord,  these  offerings  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  John,  thy  Confessor,  and  grant,  that  loving 
thee  above  all  things,  and  all  mankind  for  thy  sake, 
we  may  please  thee,  both  in  heai*t  and  action. 
Thro’. 

COMM.  Luke  vi. — Give  and  it  shall  be  given 
to  you;  good  measure  pressed  down,  and  shaken 
together,  and  running  over  shall  they  give  into  your 
bosom. 

P.  COMM.  Pre/ion.— Being  deliciously  fed,  O 
Lord,  with  thy  precious  body  and  blood,  we  humbly 
entreat  thy  mercy,  that  by  the  ments  of  blessed 
John,  thy  Confessor,  we  may  so  imitate  his  charity, 
as  to  be  associated  to  him  in  glory.  Thro’. 


XXV.  St.  JOHN  of  BEVERLEY,  abp.  o/ York. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XI.  p.  484,  except 
COLLECT.  2>ciw,  quu — O God,  who  didst  con- 
secrate this  day  to  the  honour  of  blessed  John,  thy 
Confes^r  and  Bishop,  grant  that  thy  church  may 
truly  rejoice  on  his  festival ; that,  assisted  by  his  me- 
rits and  example,  we  may  obtain  mercy.  Thro’ 
(ySS.  Chrysanthus^  fyc.  (Beatorum.) — May  the 
prayers,  O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  of  thy  holy 
martyrs,  Chrysanthus  and  Daria,  be  assisting  to  us' 
that  we  may  be  happily  sensible  of  the  effects  of  their 
charity,  whose  memories  we  honour  on  this  festival. 
Thro’. 

SECRET. — Mayest  thou  mercifully  receive,  O 
Lord,  this  gift  from  our  hands : and  through  the 
prayers  of  blessed  John  thy  Confessor  arid  Bishop, 
absolve  us  from  all  our  sins.  Thro’. 

Of  SS.  Chrysanthus,  Sfc, — May  the  offerings  of 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


f^7ih  OCTOBER. 


1581 


thy  people,  O Lord,  be  pleasing  to  thee,  which  are 
solemnly  offered  to  thee  on  the  feast  of  thy  holy  mar- 
tyrs Chrysanthus  and  Daria.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sanctificati. Being  sanctified  by 

these  sacred  mysteries,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord-  * 
that  as  thou  hast  placed  us  under  the  patronage  of 
blessed  John,  thy  Confessor  and  Bishop,  we  may  be 
helped  by  his  prayers.  Thro*. 

Of  SS.  ChrysanChus,  fyc.  (Mysticis.) — Being  re- 
freshed, O Lord,  by  the  holy  mysteries,  which  are 
all  our  delight  and  desire  ; we  beseech  thee  to  grant 
us,  by  the  interce^ion  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Chrysan- 
thus and  Daria,  the  spiritual  effect  of  the  mystery 
we  celebrate  in  this  life.  Thro*. 


XXVII  VIGIL  of  SS.  SIMON  and  JUDE. 

All  08  in  Mass  VII.  p.  475,  except 

COLLECT.  Concede. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee 
O Almighty  God,  that  as  we  are  preparing  to  cele- 
brate the  glorious  solemnity  of  thy  Apostles  Simon 
and  Jude  ; so  by  their  prayers  to  thy  divine  Majesty 
in  our  behalf^  we  may  be  truly  disposed  for  the  re- 
ceiving of  thy  heavenly  blessings.  Thro*. 

EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  iv.  cu  in  Mass  XIV.  p.  490. 

GRAD.  Ps.  Ixxviii. — ^Revenge,  O Lord,  the  blood 
of  thy  saints,  which  has  been  shed.  V.  * They  have 
given  the  dead  bodies  of  thy  servants  to  be  meat  for 
the  fowls  of  the  air ; the  flesh  of  thy  saints  for  the 
beasts  of  the  earth. 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  cls  in  Mass  V.  p.  471. 

OFFERT.  Pa.  cxlix. — The  saints  shall  rejoice  in 
glory : they  shall  be  joyful  in  their  beds : the  high 
praises  of  God  shall  be  in  their  mouth.  AUeluia. 

SECRET. — Being  conscious  that  the  gifts,  which 
we  offer  thee  on  the  vigil  of  thy  holy  apostles  Simon 
and  Jude,  are  hindered  from  being  acceptable  to 
thee,  by  our  guilty  conscience;  we  humbly  b<v 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


aeaf  2Sth  OCTOBER. 

■eech  thee,  that  their  merits  may  recommend  them 
. to  thee.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Ps.  Ixxviii. — ^They  gave,  &c.  as  ahovt 
from  V.*  in  iht  Gradual. 

* P.  COMM.  Sumptis. — Grant,  O Lord,  we  hum- 
bly beseech  thee,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  blessed 
Apostles  Simon  and  Jude,  that  the  sacrament,  which 
we  have  received  in  this  life,  may  procure  for  us  life 
eternal.  Thro’ 

XXVIII.  SS.  SIMON  and  JITDE,  aps. 

INTROIT. — Mibi  autem,  asinp.  524. 

COLLECT.  DeiLS,  qui. — O God,  who  by  thy 
blessed  Apostles,  Simon  and  Jude,  hast  taught  us  to 
know  thee,  grant  we  may  solemnize  their  etenial 
glory  with  ti*ue  devotion,  and  by  observing  their 
festival,  be  improved  in  the  love  of  thee.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Ephes.  iv.  7.  13. Brethren:  To 

every  one  of  us  is  given  grace  according  to  tlie  mea- 
sure of  the  giving  of  Christ.  Wherefore  he  saith : 
Ascending  on  high  he  led  captivity  captive:  he  gave 
gifts  to  men.  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it,  but 
because  he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower  paits 
of  the  earth.  He  that  descended  is  the  same  also 
that  ascended  above  all  the  heavens,  that  he  might 
fill  all  things.  And  he  gave  some  apostles,  and  soitic 
prophets,  and  other  some  evangelists,  and  other 
some  pastors  and  doctors.  For  the  perfecting  of  the 
saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edify- 
ing of  the  body  of  Christ : until  we  all  meet  into  the 
unity  of  faith  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of 
God,  unto  a perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the 
age  of  the  fulness  of  Christ. 

GRAD. — Thou  wilt,  to  the  Alleluia,  asinp.  525. 

V.  Thy  fi-iends,  O God,  are  exceedingly  nonour- 
able : their  principality  is  exceedingly  strengthened. 
Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  17.  25. — At  that  time 


Digitized  by  Google 


28/^  OCTOBER. 


683 


Je9U3  said  to  his  di^dples : These  thiriOT  I command 
you,  that  you  love  one  another.  If  the  world  hate 
you,  know  ye  that  it  hath  hated  me  before  you.  If 
you  had  been  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love 
its  own ; but  because  you  are  not  of  the  world,  but 
, I have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the 
' world  hateth  you.  Remember  my  word  that  I said 
to  you : The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  master. 
If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  persecute 
you : if  they  have  kept  my  word,  they  will  keep 
yom-s  also.  But  all  these  things  they  will  do  to  you 
for  my  name’s  sake:  because  they  know  not  him 
that  sent  me.  If  I had  not  come,  and  spoken  to 
them,  they  would  not  have  sin : but  now  tney  have 
no  excuse  for  their  sin.  He  that  hateth  me,  hateth 
my  Father  also.  If  I had  not  done  among  them  the 
works  that  no  other  man  hath  done,  they  would  not 
have  sin : but  now  they  have  both  seen  and  hated 
both  me  and  my  Father.  But  that  the  word  may  be 
fulfilled,  which  is  written  in  their  law : They  hated 
loithovt  cause.  Credo. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xviii. — ^Their  sound  hath  gone 
forth  into  all  the  earth : and  their  words  unto  the 
ends  of  the  world. 

SECRET. — We,  O Lord,  honouring  the  immor- 
tal glory  of  the  blessed  Apostles  Simon  and  Jude, . 
humbly  beseech  thee,  that  being  purified  by  these 
sacred  mysteries,  we  may  more  worthily  celebrate 
their  festival.  Thro’. 

COMM. — ^You  who  have  followed  me,  shall  sit 
on  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

P.  'COMM.  Perceptis, — Having  received  thy  sa- 
cred mysteries,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
that  by  the  intercession  of  thy  blessed  Apostles,  Si 
mon  and  Jude,  the  sacrifice  we  offer  on  their  vene- 
rable passion,  may  become  a remedy  to  us.  Thro’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


684 


29</l  ANO  OCTOBER. 


XXIX.  VENERABLE  BEDE,  c. 

AUastn  Mass  Xlll.  p,  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Da  nobi4, — O €rod,  who  hast  en- 
lightened thy  church  hy  the  learning  of  blessed  Bede, 
thy  Confessor  and  Doctor,  mercifully  grant  that  we 
thy  servants  may  be  always  enlightened  by  Iiis  wis- 
dom, and  assist^  by  his  merits.  Thro’. 


XXXI.  The  VIGIL  of  ALL  SAINTS. 

INTROIT,  ffisd.  iii. — The  saints  shall  judge 
nations,  and  rule  over  people;  and  the  Lord 
their  God  shall  reign  for  ever.  Ps,  xxxii.  Rejoice 
in  the  Lord,  O ye  just:  praise  I'ecometli  the  upright. 
F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Demine, — O Lord  God,  plentifully 
pour  down  u|)on  us  thy  mce  ; that  we  may  one  day 
partake  of  their  bliss,  whose  glorious  solemnity  we 
are  now  preparing  to  celebrate.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  V.  6.  12. — In  those  days:  Be- 

hold I,  John,  saw  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and 
of  the  four  living  creatures,  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
ancients,  a Lamb  standing  as  it  were  slain,  having 
seven  horns  and  seven  eyes : which  are  the  seven 
spirits  of  God,  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth.  And  he 
came,  and  took  the  book  out  of  the  right  hand  of 
him  that  sat  on  the  throne.  And  when  he  had 
opened  the  book,  the  four  living  creatures  and  the 
four  and  twenty  ancients  fell  down  before  the  Lamb, 
having  every  one  of  them  harps,  and  golden  vials  full 
of  odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  And 
they  sung  a new  canticle,  saying : Thou  art  worthy, 
O Lord,  to  take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals 
thereof:  because  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed 
us  to  God,  in  thy  blood,  out  of  every  tribe,  and 
tongue,  and  people,  and  nation.  And  hast  made 
us  to  our  God  a kingdom  and  priests,  and  we  shall 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


NOTSMBER 


685 


reign  on  the  earth.  And  I beheld,  and  I heard  the 
voice  of  many  angels  round  about  the  throne,  and 
the  living  creatures  and  the  ancients : and  tJie  num- 
ber of  them  was  tfiousands  of  thousands,  saying, 
with  a loud  voice : The  Lamb  that  was  slain  is  wor- 
thy to  receive  power  and  divinity,  and  wisdom,  and 
strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  benediction, 
for  ever  and  ever.  A men. 

GRAD.  Pa.  cxlix. — ^The  saints  shall  exult  in 
glory : they  shall  rejoice  in  tlieir  beds.  V.  Sing  to 
the  Lord  a new  canticle : let  his  praise  be  in  the 
church  of  the  saints. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  vi.  as  in  p.  478. 

OFFERT.  Pa.  cxlviii. — ^Tl^  saints  shall  rejoice  in 
glory : they  shall  be  joyful  in  their  beds : the  high 
praises  of  God  shall  be  in  their  moutli. 

SECRET. — ^We  cover  thy  altar,  O Lord,  with 
our  offerings:  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  they 
may  procure  for  us  eternal  salvation,  by  the  inter- 
cession of  all  thy  saints,  whose  festival  we  are  pre- 
paring to  celebrate.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Wisd.  iii. — ^The  souls  of  the  just  are  in 
the  hand  of  God,  and  the  torment  of  the  wicked 
shall  not  touch  them:  in  the  sight  of  the  unwise 
they  seemed  to  die,  but  they  are  in  peace. 

P.  COMM.  Sacrameidia. — Having  with  joy  re- 
ceived, O Lord,  these  sacraments  on  the  vigil  of  that 
festival,  which  we  are  desirous  of  celebrating : grant 
tliat  wa  may  be  assisted  by  their  prayers,  in  whose 
memory  those  mysteries  are  offered.  Thro’. 


J^avemher  I.  FEAST  OF  ALL  SAINTS. 
INTROIT. 

Let  us  all  rejoice  in  ^ Audeamus  omnes  in 
the  Lord,  and  cele-  Domino,  diem  fes- 
3 M 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


G86 


Ist  NOVEMBER. 


l»rate  this  festival  in  ho-  turn  celebrantes  sub  ho- 
nour of  all  the  saints,  on  nore  sanctorum  omnium 
whose  solemnity  the  an-  de  quorum  solemnitate 
f^ls  rejoice  and  praise  the  gaudent  Angeli,  et  coUau- 
Son  of  God.  dant  Filium  Dei. 

Rejoice  in  the  Lord  Ps,  Exultate  justi  in 
()  ye  just : praise  becom-  Domino,  rectos  decet  col- 
eth  the  upright.  laudatio. 

F.  Glory.  F.  Gloria. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — ^Almighty  and  eternal 
God,  by  whose  favour  we  honour  on  one  solenmity 
the  merits  of  all  thy  saints : grant  we  may  obtain  a 
plentiful  blessing  of  thy  so  much  desired  mercy, 
since  we  have  so  many  petitioners  in  our  behalf. 
Thro’. 

LESSON.  Rev.  vii.  2. 12. — In  those  days  : Be- 
hold I,  John,  saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the 
rising  of  the  sun,  having  the  sign  of  the  living  God  • 
and  he  cried  with  a loud  voice  to  the  four  angels,  to 
whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea, 
saying:  Hurt  not  the  earth,  nor  the  sea,  nor  the 
trees,  till  we  have  signed  the  servants  of  our  Gk>d  in 
their  foreheads.  And  I heard  the  number  of  them 
that  were  signed,  an  hundred  forty-four  thousand 
were  signed,  of  every  tribe  of  the  children  of  Isi^l. 
Of  the  U-ibe  of  Juda,  were  twelve  thousand  signed : 
Of  the  tribe  of  Ruben,  twelve  thousand  signed : Of 
the  tribe  of  Gad,  twelve  thousand  signed : Of  the 
tribe  of  Aser,  twelve  thousand  signed : Of  the  tribe 
of  Nephthali,  twelve  thousand  signed : Of  the  tribe  of 
Manasses,  twelve  thousand  signed  : Of  the  tribe  of 
Simeon,  twelve  thousand  signed : Of  the  tribe  of  Levi, 
twelve  thousand  signed : Of  the  tribe  of  Issachar, 
twelve  thousand  signed : Of  the  tribe  of  Zebulon, 
twelve  thousand  signed:  Of  the  tribe  of  Joseph, 
twelve  thousand  signed : Of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin, 
twelve  thousand  signed.  After  this  I saw  a great 
multitude,  which  no  man  could  number,  of  all  na- 


lilized  byCjOO^IC 


lat  NOVEMBER. 


C87 


lions  and  tribes,  and  peoples  and  tongues : standing 
i)efore  the  throne  and  in  sight  of  the  Lamb 
clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands 
and  they  cried  with  a loud  voice,  saying : Salvation 
to  our  God  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the 
Lamb.  And  ail  the  angels  stood  round  about  the 
throne,  and  the  ancients,  and  the  four  living  crea- 
tures : and  they  fell  down  before  the  throne  upon  their 
faces,  and  adored  God,  saying : Amen.  Benediction, 
and  glory,  and  wisdom,  and  thanksgiving,  honour, 
and  power,  and  strength  to  our  God  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen. 

GRAD.  Ps.  xxxiii. — ^Fear  the  Lord  all  ye  his 
saints : for  there  is  no  want  to  them  that  feai'  him. 
P,  They  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  abound  with  all 
good.  Alleluicc,  Alltluia,  V.  Matt,  xi^  Venite  ad 
me  omnes  qui  laboratis  et  onerati  estis,  et  ego  re- 
tiam vos.  Alleluia.  V.  Come  to  me  all  you  that 
laboiu*  and  are  burdened,  and  I will  refresh  you. 
Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Malt.  v.  1.  12. — At  that  time: 
Jesus  seeing  tlie  multitude,  went  up  into  a mountain, 
and  when  he  was  set  down,  his  disciples  came  unto 
him.  And  opening  his  mouth  he  taught  them,  say- 
ing; Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit  for  their’s  is  the 
kingdorh  of  heaven.  Blessed  ai‘e  the  meek : for  they 
shall  possess  the  land.  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn . 
for  they  shall  be  comforted.  Blessed  are  they  that 
hunger  and  thirst  after  justice : for  they  shall  have 
their  fill.  Blessed  are  the  merciful ; for  they  shall 
obtain  mercy.  Blessed  are  the  clean  of  heart ; for 
they  shall  see  God.  Blessed  are  the  peace  makers  ; 
for  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of  God,  Blessed 
are  they  that  suffer  peraecution  for  justice  sake : for 
their’s  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Blessed  are  ye 
when  they  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you,  and 
speak  all  that  is  evil  against  you,  untruly,  for  my 
3M2 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


2d  NOTEMBER. 


sake ; be  glad  and  rejoice,  for  your  reward  is  very 
great  in  lieaven.  Credo. 

OF FERT.  Wisd.  iii.— The  souls  of  the  just  are  in 
the  hand  pf  Go<l,  and  the  torment  of  death  shall  not 
touch  thc:n.  In  the  sight  of  the  unwise  they  seemed 
to  die:  ..nt  they  are  in  peace.  JVlduia, 

SECRET. — We  bring  to  thee,  O Lord,  the  offer- 
ings of  our  devotion ; and  may  they  be  acceptable  to 
thee  in  honour  of  thy  saints,  and,  by  thy  mercy,  avail- 
able to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

COMM.  Malt  V. Blessed  are  the  clean  of 

heart;  for  they  shall  see  God.  Blessed  are  the 
peace  makers : for  they  shall  be  called  the  children 
of  God.  Blessed  are  they  that  suffer  persecution  for 
righteousness  sake : for  their’s  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 

P.  COMM.  />«,  qv/Ksumxis, — Grant,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  that  thy  faithful  people  may  always 
ioyfully  honour  thy  saints ; and  ever  be  protected  by 
their  prayers.  Thro’. 


11.  COMMEM,  of  the  FAITHFUL,  departed. 

All  as  in  the  Mass  (Requiem)  p.  510.  except  th^  Col- 
lect, Fidelium,  with  its  Secret  and  P.  COMM,  as 
in  the  Common  Mass.  p.  518,  and  what  follows. 
EPISTLE.  1 Cor.  xv.  51.  .—Brethren : Be- 
hold I tell  you  a mysteiy : We  shall  indeed  all  rise 
again : but  we  shall  not  all  be  changed.  In  a moment 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trumpet : for 
the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  rise  again 
incorruptible : and  we  shall  be  changed.  For  this 
corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption ; and  this  mor- 
tal must  put  on  immortality.  And  when  this  monal 
hath  put  on  immortality,  then  shall  come  to  pass  t!ie 
saying  that  is  written;  Death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory.  O grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? O ceath, 
uhere  is  thy  sting  9 Now  the  sting  of  death  is 


Digitized  byCjOO^lC 


2d  AND  4th  NOVEMBER. 


G89 


Rod  the  strenui  of  sin  is  the  law.  But  thanks  be  to 
God  who  hath  given  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ 

GOSPEL.  John  v.  25.  29. — that  time : Jesus 
said  to  the  multitude  of  the  Jews : Amen,  amen  I say 
unto  you,  that  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when 
the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and 
they  that  hear  shall  live.  For  as  the  Father  liath 
life  in  himself ; so  he  hath  given  to  the  Son  also  to 
have  life  in  himself : and  he  hath  given  him  power 
to  do  judgment,  because  he  is  the  ^n  of  Man. 
Wonder  not  at  this,  for  the  hour  cometh  wherein  all 
that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son 
of  God.  And  diey  that  have  done  good  things  shall 
come  forth  unto  the  resurrection  of  life : but  they  that 
have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of  judgment  ' 


III.  St  WINEFRID,  V.  m. 

All  as  in  Mass  XVII.  p.  496,  except 
COLLECT.  ExaudL — Hear  us,  O God  our  Sa- 
viour : and  as  we  rejoice  on  the  festival  of  blessed 
Winefrid,  thy  virgin  and  martyr,  so  we  may  improve 
in  the  love  of  piety  and  devotion.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Favourably  look  down  on  our  offer- 
ings, O Lord,  and  by  the  intercession  of  B.  Winefrid, 
thy  V.  and  m.  loosen  the  chains  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  PlaceanL — Let  the  performance  of 
our  homage  be  pleasing  to  thee,  O Almighty  God : 
that  the  holy  mysteries  we  have  received  may,  by  the 
intercession  of  blessed  Winefrid,  thy  virgin  andnaar- 
tyr,  reconcile  us  to  thy  grace,  >md  cause  us  to  rejoice 
in  eternal  happiness.  Thro’. 

IV.  St  CHARLES  BORROMEUS,  bp.  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  X.  * p.  482,  except 
COLLECT,  Ecclesiam, — Preserve  thy  Church, 
O Lord,  under  the  continual  protection  of  blessed 
Charles,  thy  c.  and  bp.  that  as  he  was  eminent  for 
3M3 


C90 


8ih  AND  9th  NOVEMBER. 


the  discharge  of  the  pastoral  duty,  so  his  prayers  may 
make  us  zealous  in  the  love  of  thy  holy  name.  Thro^ 
COLLECT.  {Pr(Bsta,)  of  St.  Vitalis,  &c. — Grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that ‘we  who  keep  the  so- 
lemnity of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Vitalis  and  Agricola, 
may  be  helped  by  their  prayers.  Thro*. 

Secret  and  P.  Comm.  ^SS.  Vitalis,  &c.  as  inp»  481. 


VIIL  OCTAVE-DAY  of  ALL  SAINTS. 

JSL  as  on  the  Feast,  p,  685,  toith  a Commem,  (f  the 
Four  Crowned  Martyrs. 

COLLECT.  Prresta, — Gi*ant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Almighty  God,  that  as  we  have  been  informed  of 
tlie  constancy  of  the  glorious  martyrs  in  the  profession 
of  thy  faith,  so  we  may  experience  tlieir  kindness  in 
recommending  us  to  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  (Of  the  same,)  May  thy  plentiful  bles- 
sing, O Lord,  descend  upon  our  offerings,  which,  by 
the  intercession  of  thy  martyrs/may  render  them 
well  pleasing  to  thee,  and  make  them  the  sacrament 
of  our  redemption.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Cidestibus, — Being  refreshed  with 
these  heavenly  and  joyful  mysteries,  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  O Lord,  that  we  may  enjoy  their  protec- 
tion, in  whose  triumphs  we  glory.  Thro’. 


IX.  DEDICATION  of  our  Saviour’s  Church. 

AU  as  in  the  Anniversary  Mass,  p.  504. 

COLLECT.  (Deus,  gut,)  of  St,  Theodore, — O 
God,  who  comfbrtest  and  protectest  us  by  the  glori- 
ous confession  of  bl^ed  Theodore,  thy  martyr ; 
grant  we  may  be  strengthened  by  his  example,  and 
assisted  by  his  pray  era.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  Of  the  same, — ^Receive,  O Lord,  the 
prayers,  together  with  the  offerings  of  thy  faithful 
people : and  grant,  by  the  intercession  of  B.  Theodore, 
thy  mart3rr,  that  by  these  acts  of  piety  and  devotion, 
we  may  arrive  at  the  glory  of  lieaven.  Thro’. 

uigilized  byCjOO^IC 


lOttl  AND  12^^  NOVEMBER. 


691 


P.  COMM.  Pr{Bgta,  Of  the  same. — Grant  us,  wn 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Theodore,  thy  martyr,  to  receive  with  a pure  mind, 
what  we  have  taken  with  our  mouths.  Thro’. 


X.  St.  ANDREW  AVELLINE,  c. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 
COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who  disposedst 
the  heart  of  B.  Andrew,  thy  c.  by  the  arduous  vow 
of  daily  advancing  in  virtue,  to  ascend  by  wonderfiil 
steps  to  thee ; grant,  by  his  merits  and  intercession, 
that  we  may  so  far  partake  of  the  same  grace,  as  to 
continually  advance  towards  perfection,  and  be  hap- 
pily brought  to  an  eminent  degree  of  gloiy.  Thro’. 

COLLECT.  Of  SS.  Tryphon.  Fac  nos. — Grant, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  may  always  fol- 
low the  example  of  thy  holy  martyrs,  Tryphon 
Respicius,  and  Nympha,  and  by  their  prayers  daily 
experience  their  protection.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  Of  the  same. — We  bring  thee,  O Lord 
the  offerings  of  our  devotion ; and  may  they  be  ac- 
ceptable to  thee  in  honour  of  thy  saints,  and  by  thy 
mercy  available  to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Prcesta.  Of  the  same. — Grant,  we 
beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by  the  intercession  of  thy  holy 
martyrs  Tryphon,  Respicius,  and  Nympha,  that  what 
we  have  t^en  with  our  mouths,  we  may  receive 
with  a pure  soul.  Thro*. 


XI.  St  MARTIN,  bp.  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  X.*  p.  482,  except 
COLLECT.  Deusj  qui. — O God,  who  seest  that 
we  rely  not  on  our  own  strength : mercifully  grant, 
by  the  prayers  of  blessed  Martin,  thy  c.  and  bp.  that 
we  may  be  defended  against  all  adversity.  Thro’. 
Commem,  of  St.  Mennas,  by  the  Collect,  Secret  anti 
r.  Comm.  o/'Mass  III.p.  466. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


G92 


12th  KOVElfBER. 


GRAD. — ^Behold  a great  prelate,  who  hi  his  days 
pleased  God.  V.  There  was  none  found  like  him  in 
keeping  the  law  of  the  Most  High.  AlLduut,  Alleluia. 
V.  The  blessed  man,  holy  Martin,  bishop  of  Toure, 
(lied : whom  the  Angels,  Archangels,  Thrones,  Do- 
minations, and  Powers  received.  AUduia, 
GOSPEL.  Jjuke  xi.  33.  36. — At  that  time  : Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples : No  man  ligbteth  a candle,  auil 
putteth  it  in  a hidden  place,  nor  under  a bushel,  but 
upon  a candlestick,  that  they  that  come  in  may  see 
the  light.  The  light  of  thy  body  is  thy  eye.  If  tby 
eye  single,  thy  whole  body  will  be  lightsome:  but 
if  it  be  evil,  tby  body  will  also  be  darksome.  Take 
heed  therefore,  that  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not 
darkness.  If  then  .thy  whole  body  be  light,  some, 
having  no  part  of  darkness : the  whole  shall  be  light- 
some, and  as  a bright  lamp  shall  enlighten  thee. 

OFFERT. — ^My  truth  and  my  mercy  shall  be 
with  him : and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be  exalted. 

^ SECRET.— Grant,  O merciful  God,  that  this  sav- 

ing oblation  may  free  usfi’om  all  our  sins,  and  defend 
us  from  all  adversities.  Thro*. 

COMM. — Blessed  is  the  servant  whom  the  Lord, 
when  he  cometh,  shall  find  watching.  Amen,  I say 
to  you,  he  shall  set  him  over  all  he  hath. 

r.  COMM.  Prcesta. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
O Lord  our  God,  that  these  sacraments  may  avail  to 
our  salvation,  by  the  intercession  of  those,  on  whose 
feast  we  have  with  solemnity  offered  them.  Thro*. 


XII.  St.  MARTIN,  p.m. 

All  as  in  Mass  II.  p,  4(34,  except 
EPISTLE.  1 Peter ^ iv.  13. — Dearly  Bdoved:  If 
you  partake  of  the  sufi[erings  of  Christ,  rejoice,  that 
when  nis  glory  shall  be  revealed,  you  may  also  be 

glad  with  exceeding  joy.  If  you  be  reproached  for 
le  name  of  Christ,  you  shall  be  blessed : for  that 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


13^  ANO  lith  NOVEMBER.  693 

which  is  If  the  honour,  glory,  and  power  of  God, 
and  that  which  is  his  spirit,  resteth  upon  you.  But 
let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a murderer,  or  a thief,  or  a 
railer,  or  a coveter  of  other  men’s  things.  But  if  as 
a Christian,  let  him  not  be  ashamed : but  let  him 
glorify  God  in  his  name.  For  the  time  is  that  judg- 
ment should  begin  at  the  house  of  God.  And  if 
first  at  us,  what  shall  be  the  end  of  them  that  believe 
not  the  gospel  of  God.5>  And  if  the  just  man  shall 
scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the 
sinner  appear  ? Wherefore  let  them  £uso  that  suffer 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  commend  their  souls 
in  good  deeds  to  the  faithffil  Creator. 

GOSPEL.  Luke  xiv.  as  in  p.  463. 


XIII.  St.  DIDACUS,  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  XIV.  p.  489,  except 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O Almighty  and  eter- 
nal God,  who,  by  a wonderful  providence,  inakest 
choice  of  the  weak  things  of  this  world  to  confound 
the  strong : mercifully  grant,  that,  being  perfected  in 
all  humility,  we  may  be  raised  by  the  prayers  of  thy 
holy  Conmssor,  blessed  Didacus,  to  the  everlasting 
glory  of  heaven.  Thro’. 


XIV.  St.  ERCONWALD,  bp.  of  London,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XI.  p,  4^  except 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — ^Almighty  and  eternal 
God,  who  rejoicest  us  on  this  festivaJ  of  B.  Ercon- 
wald,  thy  c.  and  bp. : we  humbly  beseech  thy  cle- 
mency, that  whilst  we  devoutly  celebrate  his  solem- 
nity, we  may,  by  his  intercession,  obtain  the  means 
of  arriving  at  eternal  happiness.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Be  favourable,  O Lord,  to  our  pray- 
ers, and  by  the  intercession  of  B.  Erconwald,  thy 
c.  and  bp.  grant,  that  whilst  we  venerate  thy  hea- 
venly sacraments,  we  may  be  free  from  sin,  and 
cleansed  and  purified  by  ihy  grace.  Thro’. 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


G94  15^  16tfc,  Aim  17ih  November. 

P.  COMM.  PrtJuUu — We  beseech  thee,  O Lord 
our  God,  that  having  obtained  mercy  by  these  divine 
mysteries,  we  who  have  here  offered  them  may  ad- 
vance to  the  complete  enjoyment  of  them  on  high. 

XV.  St.  GERTRUDE,  v. 
jm  as  in  Mass  XIX.  o.  498,  except 
COLLECT.  Dexjis,  quL — O God,  who  didst  pre- 

Care  an  agreeable  abode  for  thyself  in  the  heart  of 
lessed  feitrude,  the  Virgin,  graciously  cleanse  our 
hearts,  we  beseech  thee,  through  her  merits  and  in- 
tercession, from  all  stains,  and  grant  we  may  enjoy 
the  same  happiness  with  her.  Thro’. 

XVl.  St.  EDMUND,  abp.  of  Canterbury,  c. 

^ as  in  Mass  X.  * p,  482,  except  # 

COLLECT.  Deus^  qyd. — O God,  w’ho  out  of  the 
abundant  designs  of  thy  goodness  hast  been  pleased 
to  adorn  the  lite  of  B.  Edmund,  thy  c.  and  bp.  with 
merits,  and  to  cause  thy  church  to  rejoice  in  his 
miracles:  mercifully  grant  that  we  thy  servants 
may  reform  our  lives  after  his  example,  and  that  un- 
der his  protection  we  may  be  preserved  from  all  ad- 
versity. Thro’. 

SECRET. — ^May  the  gifts  we  offer  be  pleasing  to 
thee,  O Lord,  thro’  the  prayers  of  B.  Edmund,  thy  c, 
and  bp.  and  be  available  to  our  salvation.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Mentes, — Strengthen,  O Lord,  our 
souls  by  the  sacrament  we  have  received : that  as 
thou  hast  comforted  us  by  the  fresh  miracles  of  B. 
EMmund,  thy  c.  and  bp.;  so  thou  wouldst  help  us 
by  his  suffrages,  and  enlighten  us  by  his  example. 
Thro’. 


XVII.  St.  HUGH,  bp.  of  Lincoln,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XI.  p,  484,  except 

COLLECT.  DeuSy  qui, O God,  who  didst 

eminently  adorn  B.  Hugh,  thy  c.  and  bp.  by  the  cx- 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


Idtik  AND  NOVEMBER.  695 

cellencyof  his  merits  and  brilliancy  of  his  miracles: 
grjint,  we  beseech  thee,  that  the  lustre  of  his  virtues 
may  excite  us  to  an  imitation  of  his  actions.  Thro’ 
SECRET. — May  the  prayers,  O Lord,  of  B.  Hugh, 
thy  *c.  and  bp.  accompany  the  gifts  we  now  offer 
thee ; that  by  the  aid  of  his  prayers  and  intercession, 
we  may  obtain  both  grace  and  glory.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM. — May  this  oblation  of  our  service  be 
pleasing  to  thee,  O Lord,  by  the  intercession  of  B. 
Hugh,  thy  c.  and  bp.  lest  our  guilt  should  exclude  us 
from  the  benefit  of  this  heavenly  sacrament.  Thro’. 


XIX.  St,  ELIZABETH,  w. 

All  as  in  Mass  XXJ.  p,  502,  except 
COLLECT.  Tuorum, — ^Enlighten  the  hearts  of 
thy  faithful,  O most  merciful  God,  and  by  the  praye/s 
of  blessed  Elizabeth,  grant  we  may  despise  the  pleas- 
ing things  of  this  world,  and  ever  be  refreshed  with 
the  com&rts  of  heaven.  Thro’. 


XX.  St  EDMUND,  King  and  ni. 

AU  as  in  Mass  HI.  p,  466,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus^  ineffabilis,’-^  God,  of  un- 
roeakable  mercy,  who  by  the  death  of  blessed  King 
Edmund  hast  made  him  victorious  over  his  enemies: 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  thy  family  may, 
through  his  intercession,  be  enabled  to  overcome  the 
old  enemy,  by  suppressing  within  us  every  incitement 
to  evil.  Thro . 

SECRET. — ^Mercifully  look  down,  O Lord,  on  this 
sacrifice  of  oiw  redemption,  and  favourably  receive 
it  in  behalf  of  this  thy  family.  Thro'. 

P.  COMM.  Sint, — ^May  the  offer  of  our  service 
be  acceptable  to  thee,  O Almighty  God:  that  the 
holy  things  we  have  received  may,  by  the  intercession 
of  JD.  Edmund,  the  King  and  m.  obtain  for  us  the  re- 
wards of  eternal  life.  Thro’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


696  21«/,  22i/,  AND  23^/  November. 

XXL  PRESENTATION  o/<^  B.  V.  MARY. 

Jki  as  in  the  Votive  Mass^jt?.  507,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  gut. — O (Jod,  who  waat  pleasea 
that  blessed  Mary,  ever  a Virgin,  become  an  abode 
for  the  Holy  Ghost  should  this  day  be  presented  to 
thee  in  the  temple : grant,  by  her  intercession,  tliat 
we  may  be  presented  before  thy  divine  Majesty  in 
the  temple  of  God.  Thro’. 

XXII.  St.  CECILY,  V.  ra. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XVI.  u.  493,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  gut. — O God,  who  gi*aiitest  ns 
the  yearly  comfort  of  celebrating  the  feast  of  B.  Cecily, 
tliy  V.  and  m.  grant,  that  as  we  honour  her  in  glory, 
we  may  follow  her  example  in  the  practice  of  a vir- 
tuous life.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Ecdes.  \L  as  in  p.  496. 

GRAD. — Hearken,  O daughter,  and  see  and  incline 
thy  ear : for  the  king  is  taken  with  thy  beauty.  V, 
With  thy  comeliness  and  thy  beauty  set  out,  proceed 
prosperously,  and  reign.  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  V,  The 
five  wise  virgins  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their 
lamps : and  at  midnight  there  was  a cry ; Behold, 
the  Bridegroom  comes:  go  forth,  and  meet  Christ 
the  Lord.  Alleluia, 

SECRET. — ^May  this  sacrifice  of  propitiation  and 
praise,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  by  the  intercession 
of  B.  Cecily,  thy  v.  and  m.  ever  make  us  worthy  of 
thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Satiasti, — ^Having  fed,  O Lord,  thy 
family  with  these  sacred  oblations:  ever  therefore 
comfort  us  with  her  intercession,  whose  feast  we 
celebrate.  Thro’. 


XXIII.  St.  CLEMENT,  p.  m. 
INTROIT.  Ps,  Ivi. — ^My  words,  saith  the  Lord, 
which  I have  put  in  thy  mouth,  shall  not  depart  from 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


23(2  NOVEMBER. 


697 


hence : and  thy  offering  Shall  be  pleasing  on  my 
altar.  Ps.  cxi.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth  the 
Lord : in  his  commandments  he  taketh  great  delight. 
V.  Glory 

COLLECT,  DeuSi  qui  nos,  as  in  p,  464. 

Of  St.  Felicitas.  ProBsta, — Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  by  celebrating  the  feast 
of  B.  Felicitas,  thy  m.  we  may  be  protected  by  her 
merits  and  prayers.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Phil,  iii.  as  inp,  455. 

GRAD.  Ps.  cix. — The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  he 
will  not  repent : Thou  art  a pj-iest  for  ever,  accord- 
ing to  the  order  of  Melchisedech.  V.  The  Lord  said 
to  my  Lord ; Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand.  Allduia, 
Alleluia.  V.  This  is  the  priest,  whom  the  Lord  hath 
crowned.  Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  Mail.  xxiv.  Oflfert  and  Comm,  as  in 
p.  485. 

SECRET. — Sanctify,  O Lord,  the  offerings  we 
bring  to  thee,  and  by  the  intercession  of  blessed 
Clement,  thy  martyr  and  bishop,  cleanse  us  from  the 
stains  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

O/*  St.  Felicitas, ^Mercifully  look  down,  O 

Lord,  on  the  vows  of  thy  people : and  grant  we 
may  enjoy  her  patronage,  whose  festival  we  cele- 
brate. Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Corporis. — Being  nourished  by  the 
participation  of  thy  sacred  body  and  precious  blood, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Lord  our  God,  that  what  we 
perform  with  pious  devotion,  may,  by  the  interces- 
sion of  blessed  Clement,  thy  martyr  and  bishop,  be 
to  us  a certain  means  of  salvation.  Thro’. 

Of  St.  Felicitas.  Supplices. — We  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  O Almighty  God,  that  by  the  intercession 
of  thy  saints,  thou  wouldst  increase  in  us  thy  gifts, 
and  regulate  our  lives.  Thro’. 

3N 


Digilized  byCjOO^lC 


606  24tk  Ain>  fi5th  November. 

XXIV.  St.  JOHN  of  Vie  CROSS,  c. 

All  as  in  Mass  XIII.  p.  488,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui, — O God,  who  dirlst  in- 
spire blessed  John,  thy  confessor,  with  an  ardent  love 
of  self-denial  and  of  the  cross : grant,  we  may  so  fol- 
low his  example;  as  to  obtain  eternal  glory.  Thix)’. 

Of  St  Chry.sogonus.  Adesto. — Give  ear,  O God, 
to  our  prayers,  that  we,  who  in  all  humility  ac!know- 
ledge  the  guilt  of  our  offences,  may,  by  the  prayers 
of  blessed  Chrysogonus,  thy  martyr,  be  delivered 
from  the  burden  of  our  sins.  Thro’. 

SECRET.  Of  the  same. — Be  appeased,  O Lord, 
we  beseech  thee,  by  the  offerings  we  have  made : 
and  defend  us  from  all  dangers  by  the  intercession 
of  blessed  Chrysogonus,  thy  martyr.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Tid^  Domine. — Grant,  O Lord,  that 
by  the  participation  of  thy  sacrament,  we  may  be 
cleansed  from  our  secret  sins,  and  freed  from  the 
snares  of  our  enemies.  Thro’. 

Of  St  Chrysogonus.  Tui,  Domine. — ^May  we 
O Lord,  by  the  participation  of  this  thy  sacrament, 
he  both  cleansed  from  our  sins,  and  delivered  from 
all  the  snares  of  our  enemies.  Thro’. 


XXV.  St  CATHARINE,  v.  m. 

AU  as  in  Mass  XVI.  p.  493,  except 
COLLECT.  DeuSf  qui. — O God,  who  gavest  the 
law  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  didst  wonderfully 
translate  the  body  of  blessed  Catharine,  thy  virgin 
and  martyr  thither,  by  tlie  ministry  of  holy  angels: 
mercifully  grant,  by  her  merits  and  prayers,  that 
we  may  safely  come  to  the  mount  which  is  Christ 
Who  liveth. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


UGtk  AND  27^^  NOVEMBER. 


XXVI.  St  FELIX  VALOIS,  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  XIV.  p,  489,  except 

COLLECT.  Deus^  qui, — O God,  who  by  thy 
heavenly  inspiration  didst  call  blessed  Felix  thy  con- 
fessor out  of  the  desert  to  exercise  his  charity  in  the 
redemption  of  captives:  grant,  that  having  obtained 
thy  grace  by  his  intercession,  we  may  be  freed  from 
the  captivity  of  sin,  and  brought  safe  to  our  heaven- 
ly country.  Thro’. 

Collect  of  St  Peter,  Infirmitatem,  vnth  its  Se- 
cret and  P.  Comm,  as  in  Mass  I.  p,  461. 


XXVII.  St  GREGORY  Thaumaturgus,  bp.  c. 

Ml  as  in  Mass  X.*  p.  48ii,  except 

GOSPEL.  Mark  xi.  22. — At  that  time:  Jesus 
answering  said  to  his  disciples : Have  the  faith  of 
God.  Amen  I say  to  you,  that  whosoever  shall  say 
to  this  mountain : Be  thou  removed,  and  be  cast  into 
the  sea,  and  shall  not  stagger  in  his  heart,  but  be- 
lieve, that  whatsoever  he  saith  shall  be  done,  it  shall 
be  done  unto  him.  Therefore  I say  to  you,  all  things, 
whatsoever  you  ask  when  yc  pray,  believe  that  you 
shall  receive : and  they  sh^  come  unto  you. 


VOTIVE  MASS  of  the  BLESSED  TRINITY. 

AU  as  on  Trinity  Sunday,  p,  392,  except 

EPISTLE.  2 Cor,  xiii.  II. — Brethren:  Rejoice, 
be  perfect,  take  exhortation,  be  of  one  mind,  have 
peace : and  the  God  of  peace  and  of  love  shall  be 
with  you.  The  grace  of  our  Loixl  Jesus  Christ,  and 
3 N2 


Digitized  byCjOO^Ie 


700  VOTIVE  MASS  OF  THE  HOLT  GHOST. 

the  charity  of  Grod,  and  the  communication  of  the 
Holy  (jfhost,  be  with  you  all  Amen. 

^JUr  Septuag.  instead  of  the  Alleluia  and  V.  p.  393 
IS  said 

TRACT.  Te  Deim  patrem  ingenitum^  te  Filium 
unigenitum^  te  Spiritum  Sanctum  Paraclitum,  sane- 
tam  et  individuam  Trinitatem^  toto  corde,  confitemur 
laiulamus  atque  benedicimus,  V.  Quoniam  magnus  es 
tu,  et  faciens  mirabUia,  tu  es  Deus  solus.  V.  Tlbi 
laus,  tibi  gratiarum  artio,  in  sceciUa  sempiterna,  O 
beata  Trinitas. 

In  Paschal  Time,  instead  qf  the  Gradual,  is  said, 
Alleluia,  Alleluia.  V.  Benedictus  es  Domine  Deus 
patrum  nostrorum  et  laudabilis  in  scecula.  Alleluia, 
V.  Benedicamus  Patrem  et  Filium  cum  Sancio  SpirUu 
Alleluia. 

GOSPEL.  John  xv.  26. — *dt  that  time:  Jesus 
said  to  his  disciples:  When  the  Paraclete  cometh 
whom  I will  send  you  from  the  Father,  the  Spirit  of 
Truth  who  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  shall  give 
testimony  of  me : and  you  shall  give  testimony,  be- 
cause you  are  with  me  from  the  beginning.  (Chap, 
xvi.)  These  things  have  I spoken  to  you,  that  you 
may  not  be  scandalized.  They  will  put  you  out  of 
the  synagogues : yea,  the  hour  cometh,  that  whoso- 
ever killeth  you,  will  think  that  he  doth  a service  to 
God.  And  these  things  they  will  do  to  you,  because 
they  have  not  known  the  Father,  nor -me.  But  these 
things  1 have  told  you,  that  when  the  hour  shall 
come,  you  may  remember  that  I told  you. 


VOTIVE  MASS  of  the  HOLY  GHOST. 

Omitting  the  Prose  and  Preface,  (he  rest  is  as  <m 
Whitsunday,  p.  375,  except 

LESSON.  Acts  viii.  14.  17.  as  in  p.  380. 
GRAD. — Blessed  is  the  nation,  whose  God  is  the 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


VOTIVE  MASS  OF  THE  HOLT  GHOST.  701 

Lord : the  people  whom  the  Lord  hath  chosen  for  his 
inheritance.  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  the  heavens 
were  established  ; and  all  the  power  of  them  by  the 
spirit  of  his  mouth.  Alleluia,  Alleluia,  V.  * Come,  O 
Holy  Ghost,  fill  the  hearts  of  thy  faithful,  and  kindle 
in  them  the  fire  of  thy  love.  Allduia, 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  the  foregoing  Alleluia  and 
V.  is  said  the 

TRACT.  Ps,  ciii. — Send  forth  thy  Spirit  and 
they  shall  be  created,  and  thou  wilt  renew  the  face 
of  the  earth.  V.  O Lord,  how  good  and  sweet  is 
thy  spirit  in  us.  F.  Come,  O Holy  Spirit,  fill  the 
hearts  of  thy  faithful,  and  kindle  in  them  the  fire  of 
thy  love. 

N.  B.  In  Paschal  time,  instead  of  the  foregoing  Gra- 
dual, &c.  is  said  the  V.  Emitte  spiritu  m^n.  376. 

Either  the  Votive  Mass  of  the  Blessed  Trinity,  or 
that  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  said  on  any  occasion  of 
thanksgiving,  with  the  addition  of  the  following 
Collect,  Secret,  and  Postcommunion. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  cuius. — O God,  whose  mercies 
are  without  number,  and  the  treasure  of  whose  good- 
ness is  infinite,  we  give  thee  thanks  for  the  blessings 
tliou  hast  bestowed  on  us : always  beseeching  thy 
divine  Majesty,  that  as  thou  grantest  what  we  ask, 
so  thou  wouldst  contimie  thy  favours  to  us  in  such  a 
manner,  that  by  them  we  may  be  prepared  for  re- 
ceiving the  rewards  of  eternal  happiness.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Receive,  O Lord,  this  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving,  and  grant  that  those  whom  thou  hast 
heard,  and  hitherto  preserved,  thou  mayest  hereafter 
defend  from  all  adversity,  that  they  may  serve  and 
love  thee  more  and  more.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Deus  qui  neminem. — O God,  who 
sufFerest  not  those  who  hope  in  thee  to  be  over 
much  affiicted,  but  mercifully  attendest  to  their  pe- 

* Here  kneel. 

3N3 

digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 


702 


TE  DEUM. 


titions ; we  give  thee  thanks  for  having  heard  our 

Erayers,  humbly  beseeching  thee,  that  by  what  we 
ave  received,  we  may  be  delivered  from  all  adver- 
sity. Thro’. 

Tht  thanksgiving  Ifymn,  TE  DEUM,  is  said  or  sung 
o^er  Mass. 

TE  Deum  laudamus : Te  Dominum  conlitemur. 

Te  eetemum  Patrem  omnis  terra  veneratur. 
Tibi  omnes  angeli,  tibi  coeli  et  universae  potestates, 
Tibi  cherubim  et  seraphim,  incessabili  voce  procla- 
mant; 

Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Dominus  Deus  Saboath, 
Pleni  sunt  coeli  et  terra  majestate  gloriae  tuae. 

Te  gloriosus  Apostolorum  chorus ; 

Te  prophetarum  laudabilis  numerus ; 

Te  martyrum  candidatus  laudat  exercitus. 

Te  per  orbem  terrarum,  sancta  confitetur  ecclesia, 
Patrem  immensae  majestatis : 

Venerandum  tuum  verum,  et  unicum  Filium ; 
Sanctum  quoque  Paraclitum  Spfritum. 

Tu  Rex  gloriae  Christe ; 

Tu  patris  Sempiternus  es  Filius. 

Tu  ad  liberandum  suscepturus  hominem,  non  hor- 
ruisti virginis  uterum ; 

Tu  devicto  mortis  aculeo,  aperuisti  credentibus  regna 
coelorum. 

Tu  ad  dextram  Dei  sedes : in  gloria  Patris. 

Judex  crederis  esse  venturus : 

Te  ergo,  quaesumus,  tuis  famuHs  subveni,  quos  pre- 
tioso sanguine  redemisti. 
iEterna  fac  cum  sanctis  tuis  in  gloria  numerari. 
Salvum  fac  populum  tuum,  Domine:  et  benedic 
haereditati  tuae. 

Et  rege  eos,  et  extolle  illos  usque  in  aeternum. 

Per  singulos  dies  benedicimus  te. 

Et  laudamus  nomen  tuum  in  saeculum ; et  in  saecu- 
lum saeculi. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


TE  DEUM.  703 

Digiiare,  Domine,  die  isto : sine  peccato  nos  custo- 
dire. 

Miserere  nostri,  Domine : miserere  nostri. 

Fiat  misericordia  tua.  Domine,  super  nos : quemad- 
modum speravimus  in  te. 

In  te  Domine  speravi : non  confundar  in  setemum. 
V.  Benedicamus  Patrem  et  Filium,  cum  Sancto 
Spiritu. 

R.  Laudemus  et  8U[>erexa1temus  eum  in  saecula. 
The  Prayer^  COLLECT,  Deus  cujus,  as  in  p.  702. 
Paraphrasiical  Translation  of  Te  Deum. 

THEE,  sov’reign  God  our  grateful  accents  praise  • 
We  own  thee  Lord,  and  bless  thy  wond’rous 
ways. 

To  thee,  eternal  Father,  earth’s  whole  frame. 

With  loudest  trumpets  sounds  immortal  fame. 

Lord  God  of  Hosts ! to  thee  the  heavenly  powers, 
With  sounding  anthems  fill  thy  vaulted  tow’rs. 

The  Cherubim  thrice  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  cry : ^ 

Thrice  Holy  all  the  Seraphim  reply,  > 

And  thrice  returning  echoes,  endless  song  supply.  ) 
Both  heaven  and  earth  thy  Majesty  display ; 

They  owe  their  beauty  to  thy  glorious  ray. 

Thy  praises  fill  the  loud  apostles’  choir : 

The  train  of  prophets  in  the  song  conspire. 

Legions  of  martyrs  in  the  chorus  shine. 

And  vocal  blood,  with  vocal  music  join, 

By  these  thy  Church,  inspir’d  with  heav’nly  art. 
Around  the  world  maintains  a second  part ; 

And  tunes  her  sweetest  notes,  O God ! to  thee, 

The  Father  of  unbounded  Majesty  ; 

The  Son,  ador’d  co-partner  of  thy  seat. 

And  equal  everlasting  Paraclete. 

Thou  king  of  glory,  Christ,  of  the  Most  High 
Thou  co-eternal  filial  Deity : 

Thou  who  to  save  the  world’s  impending  doom, 
Vouchsafdst  to  dwell  within  a virgin’s  womb; 


Digilized  byCjOO^IC 


704  MASS  FOR  THE  BRIDEGROOM. 

Old  tyrant  Death  disarm’d ; before  thee  flew 
The  bolts  of  heav’n,  and  back  the  foldings  drew 
To  give  access,  and  make  the  faithful  way ; 

From  God’s  right-hand  thy  filial  beams  display. 
Thou  art  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead. 

Then  spare  those  souls  for  whom  thy  veins  have  bled 
O take  us  up  amongst  the  blest  above, 

To  share  with  them  thy  everlasting  love. 

Presence,  O Lord,  thy  people,  and  enhance 
Thy  blessing  on  thine  own  inheritance. 

For  ever  raise  their  hearts,  and  rule  their  ways : 
Kach  day  we  bless  thee,  and  proclaim  thy  praise : 

No  age  shall  fail  to  celebrate  thy  name ; 

Nor  hour  neglect  thy  everlasting  fame. 

Preserve  our  souls,  O Lord,  this  day  from  ill : 

Have  mercy  on  us.  Lord  I have  mercy  still. 

As  we  have  hop’d  do  thou  reward  our  pain : 

We’ve  hop’d  in  thee,  let  not  our  hope  be  vain. 

V,  Let  us  bless  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

R,  Let  us  praise  and  extol  him  for  ever. 


MASS  for  the  BRIDEGROOM  and  BRIDE,  at 
BENEDICTION  of  the  MARRIAGE. 

INTROIT.  Tob,  vii. — ^Mav  the  God  of  Israel 
join  you  together : and  may  he  be  with  you,  who 
was  merciful  to  our  two  frst  parents^  when  ^one. 
And  now,  O Lord,  make  them  praise  thee  with  a 
full  and  sincere  heart  AUeluia,  Mlduicu  Pa. -Blessed 
ore  all  they  that  fear  the  Lord,  that  walk  in  his  way& 
F.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Exaudt  nos. — Hear  us,  O Almighty 
and  merciful  God,  that  what  we  according;  to  our 
office  perform,  may  be  abundantly  sanctified  by  thy 
blessing.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  Eph,  V.  22.  33. — Brethren  : Let  wo- 
men be  subject  to  their  husbands,  as  to  the  Lord. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


MASS  FOR  THE  BRIDEGROOM.  705 

Because  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife : as  Christ 
is  the  head  of  the  Church : he  is  the  Saviour  of  his 
body.  Therefore  as  the  Church  is  subject  to  Christ, 
so  also  let  die  wives  be  to  their  husbands  in  all 
things.  Hu^ands  love  your  wives,  as  Christ  also 
loved  the  Church,  and  delivered  himself  up  for  it : 
that  he  might  sanctify  it,  cleansing  it  by  the  laver  of 
water  in  the  word  of  life ; that  he  might  present  it 
to  himself  a glorious  Church  not  having  spot  or 
wrinkle,  nor  any  such  thing,  but  that  it  should  be 
lioly  and  without  blemish.  So  also  ought  men  to 
love  then*  wives  as  their  own  bodies.  He  that  loveih 
his  wife,  loveth  himself  For  no  man  ever  hated 
his  own  flesh : but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,  a« 
also  Christ  doth  the  Church : for  we  are  members  of 
his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.  “ For  this 
cause  shall  a man  leave  his  father  and  mother : and 
shall  stick  to  his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  two  in  om 
flesh.”  This  is  a great  sacrament : but  I speak  ir 
Christ  and  in  the  Church.  Nevertheless  let  every 
one  of  you  in  particular  love  his  wife  as  himself:  ano 
let  the  wife  fear  her  husband, 

GRAD.  Ps.  cxxvii.— Thy  wdfe  shall  he  as  a fruit 
ful  vine  on  the  sides  of  thy  house,  F.  Thy  children 
as  olive  plants  round  about  thy  table.  Mleluuiy 
Alleluia,  V,  Ps,  xix. — ^May  the  Lord  send  thee 
help  from  the  sanctuary,  and  defend  thee  out  of  Sica. 
Alleluia, 

After  Septuag.  instead  of  Alleluia  and  V.  is  said 

TRACT.  Ps,  cxxvii.  Behold  thus  shall  the  man 
be  blessed  that  fetureth  the  Lord.  V,  May  the  Lord 
bless  thee  out  of  Sion,  and  mayest  thou  see  the  good 
things  of  Jerusalem  all  the  days  of  thy  life.  V,  And 
mayest  thou  see  thy  children’s  children : peace  upon 
Israel. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  xix.  3.  6. — At  that  time:  The 
Pharisees  came  to  Jesus,  tempting  him,  and  say- 
ing; Is  it  lawful  for  a man  to  put  away  his  wife 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


706 


THE  NUPTIAL  BLEBSme. 


for  every  cause?  Who  answering  said  to  them: 
Have  ye  not  read,  that  he  who  made  man  fh>m  the 
beginning,  made  them  male  and  female  ? And  he 
said : **  for  this  cause  shall  a man  leave  father  and 
mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  two 
shall  be  in  one  flesh.”  Therefore  now  they  are  not 
two,  but  one  flesh.  What  therefore  God  hath  jomed 
together,  let  not  man  put  asunder. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  XXX. — In  thee,  O Lord,  have  1 put 
my  trust : I have  said ; thou  art  my  God ; my  life  is 
in  thy  hands. 

SECRET. — ^Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
the  offerings  we  make  for  the  sacred  law  of  wedlock : 
and  as  thou  wast  the  author  of  this  work,  be  also  the 
regulator  thereof.  Thro’. 

The  NUPTIAL  BLESSING. 

After  the  Pater  noster,  the  Pritst  standing  on  the 
Epistle  side,  turns  towards  the  Bridegroom  and 
Bride  kneeling  before  him  anil  says : 

Let  us  pray.  Propitiare, 

MERCIFULLY  give  ear,  O Lord,  to  our  prayers, 
and  let  thy  grace  accompany  this  thy  in- 
stitution, by  which  thou  hast  oi*dained  the  propaga- 
tion of  mankind,  that  this  tie,  which  is  made  W thy 
authority,  may  be  preserved  by  thy  grace.  Thro*’. 
R,  Amen. 

Let  us  pray.  Deus^  qui  potestate. 

OGod,  who,  by  the  power  of  thy  might,  didst 
create  all  things  out  of  nothing:  who,  at  the 
first  forming  of  the  world,  having  made  man  to  the 
likeness  of  God,  didst,  out  of  his  flesh,  make  the 
woman,  and  give  her  to  him  for  a helpmate : and 
by  this  didst  inform  us,  that  what  in  its  beginning 
was  one,  ought  never  to  be  separated.  O God, 
who  by  so  excellent  a mystery,  hast  consecrated  this 
union  of  the  two  sexes,  and  hast  been  pleased  to 
moke  it  a type  of  the  great  sacrament  of  Christ  and 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


THE  NUPTIAL  BLESSING. 


707 


tiis  Church.  O God,  by  whom  woman  is  joined  to 
man,  and  that  union,  which  was  instituted  in  tlie 
beginning,  is  still  accompanied  with  such  a blessing, 
as  alone,  neither  in  punishment  of  original  sin,  nor 
by  the  sentence  of  the  deluge,  had  been  recalled; 
mercifully  look  down  upon  this  thy  handmaid,  who, 
being  now  to  be  joined  in  w’^edlock,  earnestly  desires 
to  be  taken  under  thy  protection : may  love  and  peace 
constantly  remain  in  her : may  she  marry  in  Christ ' 
faithful  and  chaste ; may  she  ever  imitate  the  holy 
women  of  former  times : may  she  be  pleasing  to  her 
liusband,  like  Rachael : discreet,  like  Rebecca : may 
she,  in  hej*  yeai-s  and  fidelity,  be  like  Sarah:  and 
may  the  first,  author  of  all  evil,  at  no  time,  have  any 
share  in  her  actions.  May  she  remain  attached  to 
the  faith  and  the  commandments,  and,  being  joined 
to  one  man  in  wedlock,  may  she  fly  all  unlawful 
addresses : may  a regulai’ity  of  life  and  conduct  be 
her  strength  against  the  weakness  of  her  sex : may 
she  be  modest  and  grave,  bashful  and  venerable,  and 
well  instructed  in  heavenly  doctrine.  May  she  be 
finitful  in  her  oflspring,  approved  and  innocent : and 
may  it  be  at  len^h  her  happy  lot  to  arrive  at  the 
rest  of  the  blessed  in  the  kingdom  of  Gk)d : may  they 
both  see  their  children’s  children  to  the  third  and 
fourth  generation,  and  live  to  their  wished-for  old 
age.  Thro’.  R.  Amen. 

COMM.  Ps.  cxxviL — ^^fbus  shall  every  man  be 
blessed  that  feareth  the  Lord : mayest  thou  see  thy 
children’s  children : peace  be  to  Israel. 

P.  COMM.  Quasumxut. — ^Mercifully  accompany, 
O Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  what  thy  providence  hath  . 
instituted;  and  preserve  in  length  of  peace  those, 
whom  thou  lawfolly  joinest  together.  Thro’. 

Before  the  Priest  gives  the  Blessing  to  the  People,  he 
turns  to  the  BrideCToom  and  Bride,  cmd  says: 

May  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac, 
and  the  God  of  Jacob  be  with  you:  and  . 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


708 


VOTIVE  MASS  FOR  THE  SICK. 


may  he  flilhl  his  blessing  in  you : that  you  may  see 
your  children’s  children  to  the  third  and  fourth  gene- 
ration : and  afterwards  enter  into  the  possession  of 
eteraal  life,  through  the  assistance  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
liveth,  &c.  R.  Amen. 

Then  he  exhorts  them  to  observe  an  inviolable  fidelity 
toward  each  other;  to  mactise  continence  ai  the 
times  of  Prayer,  (especumy  on  Fast-days  and  ^eat 
solemnities)  and  to  persevere  in  the  fear  of  God. 


A VOTIVE  MASS  for  the  SICK. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  liv. — Hear,  O God,  my  prayer, 
and  despise  not  my  supplication : be  attentive  to  me, 
and  hear  me.  Ps.  I am  grieved  in  my  exercise : and 
am  troubled  at  the  voice  of  the  enemy,  and  at  the 
tribulation  of  the  sinner.  V.  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens, — O Almighty  and  evei- 
lasdng  God,  the  eternal  salvation  of  them  that  be- 
lieve in  thee ; hear  us  in  behalf  of  thy  servants,  who 
are  sick,  for  whom  we  humbly  crave  the  help  of  thy 
mercy,  that  theik*  health,  being  restored  to  them, 
they  may  render  thanks  to  thee  in  thy  Church. 
Thro’. 

]f  the  sick  person  he  near  the  point  of  Death. 

COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O Alnriighty  and  mer- 
ciful God,  who  hast  prepared  for  mankind  the 
t^ans  of  salvation,  and  the  rewards  of  eternal  life: 
look  down,  in  thy  mercy,  on  thy  servant  now  la- 
bouring under  the  calamity  of  sicknes^  and  be  thou 
the  comfort  of  his  [or  her]  soul,  which  thou  hast 
created ; that,  at  the  hour  of  death,  it  may  be  pre- 
sented to  thee,  by  the  hands  of  the  angel^  without 
spot.  Thro’. 

EPISTLE.  James  v.  13. 16. — Brethren:  Is  any  of 
vou  sad  ? Let  him  pray.  Is  he  cheerful  in  mind  7 Let 
him  sing  psalms.  Is  any  man  sick  among  you  ? Xet 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


A VOTIVE  MASS  FOR  THE  SICE*.  709 

Ilim  bring  in  the  priests  of  the  church,  and  let  them 
pray  over  him,  anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord:  and  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick 
man ; and  the  Lord  shall  raise  him  up : and  if  he  be 
in  sins,  they  shall  be  forgiven  him.  Confess  there- 
fore your  sins  one  to  another : and  pray  one  for  ano- 
ther, that  you  may  be  saved. 

GRAD.  Ps.  vi. — ^Have  mercy  on  me,  O Lord,  for 
I am  weak : he€d  me,  O Lord.  V,  All  my  bones  are 
troubled,  and  my  soul  is  troubled  exceedingly. 
luia,  Alleluia,  V.  Hear,  O Lord,  my  prayer:  and 
let  my  ciy  come  to  thee.  Alleluia, 

After  SeptuagesinHi,  instead  of  the  Alleluias  and  V. 
following,  is  said  the 

TRACT.  Ps,  XXX. — ^Have  mercy  on  me,  O Lord, 
for  I am  afflicted : my  eye  is  troubled  with  wrath, 
my  soul,  and  my  belly.  V,  For  my  life  is  wasted 
with  grief;  and  my  years  in  sighs.  V,  My  strength 
is  weakened  through  poverty,  and  my  bones  are 
disturbed. 

GOSPEL.  Matt,  viii.  5.  13. At  that  time: 

When  Jesus  had  entered  into  Caphamaum,  there 
came  to  him  a Centurion,  beseeching  him,  and 
saying:  Lord,  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the 
palsy,  and  is  grievously  tormented.  And  Jesus  saith 
to  him : I will  come  and  heal  him.  And  the  Cen- 
turion making  answer  saith  : Lord,  I am  not  worthy 
that  thou  shouldst  enter  under  my  roof : but  only 
say  the  word,  and  my  servant  shall  be  healed.  For 
I also  am  a man  subject  to  authority,  having  under 
me  soldiers:  and  I say  to  this  man.  Go,  and  he. 
goeth,  and  to  another.  Come,  and  he  cometh,  and  to 
my  servan^  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  it.  And  Jesus 
hearing  this,  marvelled : and  said  to  them  that  fol- 
lowed him : Amen,  I say  to  you,  I have  not  found 
so  great  faith  in  Israel.  And  I say  to  you  that  many 
shfdl  come  from  the  East  and  the  West,  and  shall  sit 
30 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


^10  A VOTIVE  MASS  FOR  THE  SICK. 

«!o\vn  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven : but  the  children  of  the  kingdom 
shall  be  cast  out  into  exterior  darkness : there  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  And  Jesus  said 
to  the  Centurion : Go,  and  as  thou  hast  believed, 
so  be  it  done  to  thee.  And  the  servant  was  healed 
at  the  same  hour. 

OFFERT.  Ps,  li'^ — ^Hear,  O God,  my  prayer, 
and  despise  not  my  supplication : be  attentive  to  me, 
and  hear  me. 

SECRET. — O God,  by  whose  pleasure  the  mo- 
ments of  our  life  are  numbered,  receive  the  prayers 
and  sacri^ces  of  thy  servants,  for  whom,  in  their  sick- 
ness, we  implore  thy  mercy ; that  we  may  rejoice  in 
the  health  of  those,"whom  we  now  apprehend  to  be 
in  danger.  Thro*. 

If  the  sick  Person  he  near  the  point  of  Death, 

SECRET. — Receive,  O Lord,the  sacrifice  we  offer 
for  thy  servant,  who  is  near  the  end  of  his  [ or  her  ] 
life : and  grant,  that  by  it,  all  his  [ or  her]  sins  may 
be  cleansed  away,  that  he  [ or  she  ] who  is  chastised 
by  thy  appointment  in  this  life,  may  obtain  eternal 
reat  in  that  which  is  to  come.  Thro*. 

COMM.  Ps.  XXX. — ^Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon 
thy  servant,  save  me  in  thy  mercy,  save  me : Lord, 
let  me  not  be  confounded  O Lord,  for  I have  called 
upon  thee. 

P.  COMM.  Deus,  infirmiteUis. — O Lord,  the  sin- 
gular aid  of  human  weakness,  shew  the  power  of 
3iy  help  to  thy  sick  servant : that  being  assisted  l^ 
thy  mercy,  he  may  come  in  health  again  to  thy  holy 
Church.  Thro*. 

If  the  sick  Person  he  near  the  point  of  Death, 

P.  COMM.  Queesumus. — We  beseech  thy  mercy, 
O Almighty  God,  that  thou  wouldst  please  to 
strengthen  with  thy  grace  thy  servant  by  the  efiicacy 
of  ^ese  mysteries,  that  the  enemy  may  not  prevail 
against  him  f or  her]  at  the  hour  of  his  [or  Acrl  death, 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


AeA.SS  IN  TIME  OF  WAR.  ^1) 

but  that  he  [or  she]  may  pass  to  eternal  life  with  thj 
angels.  Thro’. 


MASS  in  time  of  WAR. 

Ps.  Miserere,  p.  27^,  is  previously  said  or  sun^, 
after  which  follows  the  Prayer,  O Grod,  who  by  sin 
art  offended,  at  the  bottom  of  p.  363. 

INTROIT.  Ps,  xxiv. — Remember,  O Lord,  thy 
bowels  of  compassion,  and  thy  mercies,  that  are  from 
the  beginning  of  the  world : lest  at  any  time  our  ene- 
mies should  prevail  over  us : deliver  us,  O God  of 
Israel,  from  all  our  perplexities.  Ps,  ib.  To  thee,  O 
Lord,  have  I lifted  up  my  soul : in  thee,  O my  God, 
I put  my  ti*ust ; let  me  not  be  ashamed.  V,  Glory. 

COLLECT.  Deus,  qui  conteris  bella, — O God  of 
battles,  who  grantest  the  victory  to  those  that  put 
their  trust  in  thee : mercifully  hear  the  prayers  of  us 
thy  servants,  that  the  evil  designs  of  our  enemies 
being  defeated,  we  may  praise  thee  with  muTeasing 
gratitude.  Thro’. 

LESSON.  Jer,  xlii. — In  those  days : All  the  cap- 
tains of  the  warriors  came,  and  said  to  Jeremiah  the 
prophet : pray  thou  for  us  to  the  Lord  thy  God.  And 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah,  and  he  called 
all  the  captains  of  the  warriors,  and  all  the  people, 
from  the  least  to  the  greatest.  And  he  said  to  them 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  to  whom  you 
sent  me,  to  present  your  supplications  before  him : 
If  you  will  ne  quiet,  and  remain  in  this  land,  I will 
build  you  up,  and  not  pull  you  down : I will  plant, 
and  not  pluck  you  up ; for  now  I am  appeased  for  the 
evil  that  I have  done  to  you.  Fear  not  because  of 
the  King  of  Babylon,  of  whom  you  are  greatly 
afraid : fear  him  not,  saith  the  Lord : for  I am 
with  you,  to  save  you,  and  to  deliver  you  from  his 
' hand.  And  I will  shew  mercies  to  you,  and  wiU 
302 


uigitized  byCjOO^IC 


712.  MASS  IN  TIME  OF  WAR. 

take  pity  on  you,  and  will  cause  you  to  dwell  in 
your  own  land,  saith  the  Lord,  the  Almighty. 

GRAD.  Ps.  IxxvL — ^Thou  art  the  God,  that  alone 
uost  wonders : Thou  hast  made  thy  power  known 
among  the  nations.  V»  Thou  hast  by  thy  power 
delivered  thy  people,  the  children  of  Israel  and  Jo- 
seph. Alleluia,  Alleluia.  Ps.  Iviii.  Deliver  me  from 
my  enemies,  O my  God : and  defend  me  from  them 
that  rise  up  against  me.  Alleluia, 

AJier  Septuagesima  (but  not  in  Paschal  time)  instead 
of  di^oregoing  Alleluias  and  V.  is  saidthe 

TRACT,  Deal  not  with  us,  as  in  p.  117. 

GOSPEL.  Matt.  xxiv.  3.  8. — At  that  Hnie: 
The  disciples  came  to  him  privately,  saying : Tell 
us  when  shall  these  things  be  ? and  what  shall  be 
the  sign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the  consummation  of 
the  world  ? And  Jesus  answering,  said  to  them : 
Take  heed  that  no  man  seduce  you : for  many  will 
come  in  my  name,  saying : I am  Christ : and  they  will 
seduce  many.  And  you  shall  hear  of  wars,  and  ru- 
mours of  wars.  See  that  ye  be  not  troubled.  For 
these  things  must  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not 
yet.  For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and  king- 
dom against  kingdom : and  there  shall  be  pestilences, 
and  famines,  and  earthquakes  in  places:  now  all  » 
these  are  the  beginnings  of  sorrows. 

OFFERT.  Ps.  xvii. — ^Thou  «wilt  save  the  humble 
people.  Lord : but  wilt  bring  down  the  eyes  of  the 
proud  : for  who  is  God,  but  friee,  O Lord  ? 

SECRET. — Graciously  receive,  O Lord,  the  sacri- 
fice we  offer  unto  thee ; that  being  delivered  from  the 
scourges  of  war,  we  may  be  pla(^  under  the  wings 
of  thy  protection.  Thro’. 

COMM.,  Ps.  XXX. — Bow  down  thy  ear  to  me,  O 
Lord ; make  haste  to  deliver  me. 

P.  COMM.  Deus  regnorum. — O Gk)d,  the  su- 
preme ruler  of  kings  and  kingdoms,  who,  by  chas- 
tising, dost  heal  us,  and  by  pardoning,  dost  preserve  » 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


OCCASIONAL  COLLECTS,  &C.  11c. 

us:  pour  down  upon  us  thy  mercy,  that  resting  in 
perfect  security,  under  thy  powerful  protection,  we 
may  apply  the  blessings  of  peace  as  remedies  towards 
the  amendment  of  our  lives.  Thro’. 


Occasional  Collects,  Secrets,  and  P.  Coimns.  to  he 
said  after  the  proper  ones  on  days  that  are  not  dou- 
bles, cU  the  CMtce  of  the  Priest  or  Persons  hearing 
Mass. 

For  desiring  the  Prayers  of  the  Saints. 
COLLECT.  Concede. — Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
. O Almighty  God,  that  the  intercession  of  holy  Mary, 
the  mother  of  God,  and  that  of  all  the  holy  Apostles, 
Martyrs,  Confessors,  Virgins,  and  of  all  the  elect, 
may  every  where  bring  joy  to  us:  that  while  we 
celebrate  their  virtues,  we  may  experience  their  pa- 
tronage. Thro’  the  same. 

SECRET. — Be  appeased,  O Lord,  with  the  offer- 
ings we  have  made;  and  by  the  intercession  of 
blessed  Mai*y,  ever  a Virgin,  and  of  all  thy  saints, 
defend  us  from  all  dangers.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimus. — ^We  have  received,  O 
Lord,  thy  heavenly  mysteries,  celebrating  the  me- 
mory of  blessed  Mary,  ever  a Virgin,  and  of  all  thy 
saints:  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  what  we  per- 
form here  in  time,  we  may  receive  the  joyful  effects 
of  in  eternity.  Thro’. 

For  all  States  of  the  Church. 
COLLECT.  Omnipotens. — O Almighty  and  ever- 
lasting God,  by  whose  spirit  the  whole  body  of  the 
church  is  sanctified  and  governed hear  our  humble 
prayers  for  all  degrees  thereof,  thit,  by  the  assist- 
ance of  thy  grace,  they  may  faithfully  serve  thee. 
Thro’. 

SECRET. — Grant  thy  servants,  O Lord,  the  par- 
don of  their  sins,  comfort  in  life,  and  thy  perpetual 
803 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


714  OCCASIONAL  COLLECTS,  &C. 

protectiou:  that,  persevering  in  thy  service,  they 
raay^  always  obtain  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Libera, — Deliver,  O Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  from  all  sin  and  from  all  enemies,  thy  servants, 
who  offer  their  humble  prayers  to  thee,  that,  leading 
holy  lives,  they  may  be  attacked  by  no  misfortunes. 
Thro’. 

For  a Congregation  or  Family. 

COLLECT.  Defende, — Preserve,  O Lord,  we 
beseech  thee,  this  family  from  all  misfortunes,  through 
the  intercession  of  blessed  Mary,  ever  a Virgin ; and, 
as  in  all  humility  they  prostrate  themselves  before 
thee,  do  thou  mercifully  defend  them  from  all  the 
snares  of  their  enemies.  Thro’. 

SECRET.- — Receive,  we  beseech  thee,  O Al- 
mighty God,  our  devout  oblation ; and,  by  virtue  of 
this  sacrament,  defend  thy  servants  from  all  adver- 
sity. Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Simptis. — ^Having  received  the  offer- 
ings of  our  redemption,  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  O 
merciful  God,  that,  by  the  celebration  thereof^  we  may 
find  thy  protection  against  all  adversity.  Thro’. 

For  Peace  in  a Congregation  or  Family. 

COLLECT. — O God,  the  author  of  peace  and 
lover  of  charity,  give  to  thy  servants  true  agreement 
with  thy  holy  will ; that  we  may  be  freed  from  all 
the  temptations  that  disturb  us.  Thro’. 

SECRET.— Being  appeased  by  this  sacrifice,  grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  O Lord,  that  we  may  not  be  bur- 
dened with  the  sins  of  others,  who  beg  to  be  freed 
from  our  own.  Thro*. 

P.  COMM. — Pour  forth  upon  us,  O Lord,  the 
spirit  of  charity : that  thou  mayest,  by  thy  mercy, 
make  those  of  one  mind  whom  thou  hast  fed  wiffi 
one  bread.  Thro*. 

•Against  Persecutors  and  Evil-Doers. 

COLLECT.  HosHum, — Crush,  O Lord,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  pride  of  our  enemies : an^  by  the 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


OCCA.^IOIfA.L  COLLECTS,  &C.  715 

power  of  thy  right  hand,  frustrate  all  their  malicious 
and  obstinate  designs.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — May  we,  O Lord,  by  the  virtue  of 
this  sacrament,  be  both  cleansed  from  our  hiddeu 
sins  and  delivered  from  the  snares  of  our  enemies. 
Thro’. 

P.  COMM.  Protedor. — Look  down  on  us,  O Gk)d 
our  protector,  an<l  free  us  from  the  danger  of  our 
enemies,  that  we  may  serve  thee  without  any  dis- 
turbance. Thro’. 

In  any  Necessity. 

COLLECT.  Deus  refugiunu-^O  God,  our  re- 
fuge and  strength,  fountain  of  all  goodness,  merci- 
fully give  ear  to  the  fervent  prayers  of  thy  church, 
and  grant  diat  what  we  ask  with  frith,  we  may  ef- 
fectually obt£un.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Grant,  O merciful  God,  that  this  sa> 
crifice  of  our  salvation  may  continually  cleanse  us 
from  all  our  guilt,  and  defend  us  from  all  adversity. 

P.  COMM.  Sumpsimus. — ^We  have  received,  O 
Lord,  the  sacred  gifts  of  thy  mystery,  beseeching 
thee,  that  what  thou  commandest  us  to  do  in  re- 
membrance of  thee,  may  be  a help  to  our  weaknesa 
Thro’. 

In  any  Tribulation. 

COLLECT. — Turn  not  away  thine  eyes,  O most 
merciful  God,  from  thy  people  crying  out  to  thee  in 
their  affliction : but  for  the  glory  of  thine  own  name, 
relieve  us  in  our  necessities.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Mercifully  receive,  O Lord,  the  of- 
ftirings  by  which  thou  vouchsafest  to  be  appeased  ; 
and  by  thy  great  goodness  restore  us  to  safety.  Thro’. 

P.  COMSi. — Look  down  mercifully,  we  beseech 
thee,  O Lord,  on  our  tribulation  ; and  turn  away  the 
wraffl  of  thy  indignation,  which  we  justly  deserve. 
Thro’. 

In  a Famine  or  Pestilence. 

COLLECT. — Grant,  us,  O Lord,  the  effects  of 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


716 


OCCASIONAL  COLLECTS,  &C. 

our  humble  and  pious  prayers : and  by  thy  goodnes» 
deliver  us  from  this  famine  or  pestilence,  that  men 
may  be  sensible  such  scourges  proceed  from  thy 
anger,  and  cease  by  thy  mercy.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — O God,  who  nourishest  and  renewest 
the  two-fold  substance  of  man  by  virtue  of  these  sa- 
cramental gifts : mercifully  grant  that  by  their  aid 
nothing  may  be  wanting  to  our  souls  and  bodies. 
Thro’ 

P.  COMM. — ^Feed  those,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
with  corporal  food,  whom  thou  art  pleased  to  nourish 
with  thy  eternal  mysteries.  Thro’. 

For  Rain. 

COLLECT. — O God,  in  whom  we  live,  move  and 
have  our  being,  send  us,  we  beseech  thee,  seasonable 
ravn ; that  enjoying  a sufficiency  of  the  necessaries 
of  tliis  life,  we  may  aspire  with  more  confidence  after 
those  blessings  which  are  eternal.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Be  appeased,  O Lord,  with  the  offer- 
ings we  make  thee ; and  send  us  the  aid  of  season- 
able rain.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM. — Grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
wholesome  rain  ; and  water  firom  heaven  the  drought 
of  the  earth.  Thro’. 

For  Fair  Weather. 

COLLECT. — ^Hear  us,  O Lord,  crying  out  to  thee, 
and  grant  our  humble  request  of  a dry  season ; that 
we  who  are  justly  afflicted  for  our  sins  may  experi- 
ence thy  clemency  and  mercy.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — May  thy  grace,  O Lord,  always  go 
before  and  follow  us ; and  mercifiilly  receive,  as  con- 
secrated to  thy  name,  the  offerings  we  bring  for  the 
remission  of  our  sins ; that  by  the  intercession  of  thy 
saints,  they  may  avail  us  to  salvation.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM.^We  beseech  thy  mercy,  O Almighty 
God,  that  thou  wouldst  stop  the  overflowing  of  rain, 
and  shew  us  thy  pleasing  countenance.  Thro’. 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


OCCASIONAI*  COLLECTS,  &C. 


717 


*,9gainst  Storms. 

COLLECT. — ^Defend,  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord, 
this  house  against  the  assaults  of  our  spiritual  ene- 
mies : and  cause  the  present  dreadful  disorder  of  the 
air  to  cease.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — e offer  thee,  O Lord,  our  praises 
and  sacrifices  in  thanlcsgiving  for  the  favours  we  have 
already  received:  humbly  beseeching  thee  to  grant 
those  we  now  stand  in  need  of.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM. — ^O  Almighty  and  eternal  God,  who 
both  healest  us  by  chastisement,  and  preservest  us  by 
the  grant  of  thy  pardon  ; hear  our  humble  prayers ; 
that  we  may  rejoice  in  the  ceasing  of  this  storm,  and 
always  make  a good  use  of  the  grant  of  thy  favours. 
Thro’. 

For  the  Gift  (/Tears. 

COLLECT. — O Almighty  and  most  merciful  God, 
who,  to  quench  the  thim  of  thy  people,  madest  water 
spring  out  of  a rock ; draw  from  our  stony  hearts 
the  tears  of  compunction,  that  effectually  bewailing 
our  sins,  we  may,  through  thy  mercy,  obtain  pardon 
for  them.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — Mercifully  look  down,  O Lord,  on  the 
offerings  we  make  to  thy  majesty ; and  draw  from 
our  eyes  such  twTents  of  teai-s,asmay  extinguish  the 
burning  flames  we  deserve  for  our  sins.  Thro’. 

P.  COMM. — Mercifully  pour  forth  into  our  hearts, 
O Lord  God,  the  grace  of  thy  holy  Spirit : which, 
by  sighs  and  tears,  may  make  us  wash  away  the  stains 
of  our  sins,  and  obtain  for  us  the  desired  pardon. 
Thro’. 

•gainst  Evil  thoughts. 

COLLECT. — O Almighty  and  most  merciful  God, 
regard,  in  thy  goodness,  our  prayers,  and  deliver  our 
hearts  from  the  disquietude  of  all  perverse  and  evil 
thoughts:  that  we  may  become  an  abode  for  thy 
holy  Spirit.  Thro’. 

SECRET. — We  offer  thee,  O Lord,  this  sacrifice 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


718 


PSALM  EXAUDIAT. 


of  salvation  : that  purging  our  hearts  from  unclean 
thoughts,  thou  wouldst  preserve  them  undefiled, 
and  enlighten  them  by  the  grace  of  thy  holy  Spirit, 
Thro’. 

P.  COMM. — O God,  who  enlightenest  every  man 
coming  into  this  world ; illuminate,  we  beseech  thee, 
our  hearts  with  the  light  of  tliy  grace,  that  always 
entertaining  such  thoughts  as  are  worthy  and  well 
pleasing  to  thy  divine  Majesty,  we  may  sincerely 
love  thee.  Thro’. 


Psalm  xix.  Exaudiat^ 


EXAUDIATte  Do- 
minus in  die  tribula- 
tionis;* protegat  te  no- 
men Dei  Jacob. 

Mittat  tibi  auxilium  de 
sancto  ;*  et  d^  Sion  tuea- 
tur te. 

Memor  sit  omnis  sacri- 
ficii tui  ;*  et  holocaustum 
tuum  pingue  fiat. 

Tribuat  tibi  secundum 
cor  tuum  :*  et  omne  con- 
silium tuum  confirmet. 

Laetabimur  in  salutare 
tuo;*  et  in  nomine  Dei 
nostri,  magnificabimur. 

Impleat  Dominus  om- 
nes petitiones  tuas  ;*nunc 
cognovi,  quoniam  salvum 


fecit  Dominus  Christum 
suum. 

Exaudiat  illum,de  ccelo 
sancto  suo ; *in  potentati- 
bus, salus  dextrje  ejus. 

Hi  in  cun-ibus,  et  hi  in 
equis;*  Nos  autem,  in 
nomine  Dei  nostri,  invo- 
cabimur. 

Ipsi  obligati  sunt,  et 
ceciderunt;*  Nos  autem 
surrexinius,  et  erecti  su 
mus. 

Domine  salvum  fac  re- 
em:*  et  exaudi  nos  in 
ie  qua  invocaverimus 
te.  V,  Gloria. 

Oremus. — Quaesumus, 
p.  xlvi. 


ADESTE  FIDELES,  sung  from  Christmas-Day 
to  the  Octave-day  oftl^  Epiphany. 

Adeste  fideles,  laeti  triumphantes, 

Venite,  venite  in  Bethlehem : 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


adeste  fideles. 


719 


Natum  videte  Regem  Angelorum : 

Venite  adoremus,  venite  adoremus, 

Venite  adoremus  Dominum.* 

Deum  de  Deo : lumen  de  lumine 
Gestant  puellae  viscera: 

Deum  verum  genitum  non  factum 
Venite  adoremus,  venite,  &c.  to*. 

Cantet  nunc  Io,  chorus  Angelorum 
Cantet  nunc  aula  coelestium : 

Gloria  in  excelsis  Deo ; 

Venite  adoremus,  venite,  &c.  to*.  ^ 

Ergo  qui  natus  die  hodierna, 

Jesu  tibi  sit  gloria : 

Patris  aeterni,  Verbum  caro  factum 
Venite  adoremus,  venite,  &c.  to*. 

The  foUotoin^  Hymn  xs  generally  sung  before  solemn 
Mass  on  Whitsunday. 

Infirma  nostri  corporis, 
Virtute  firmans  perpetL 
Hostem  repellas  lon- 
gius. 

Pacemque  dones  protinus 
Ductore  sic  te  praevio. 
Vitemus  omne  noxium. 
Per  te  sciamus  da  Pa- 
trem, 

Noscamus  atque  Filium*. 
Teque  utriusque  Spiri- 
tum, 

Credamus  omni  tempore. 

Deo  Patri,  sit  gloria. 

Et  Filio  qui  a mortuis; 
Surrexit  ac  Paraclito. 

In  saeculon  ia  saecula. — 
Arnen 


VENI  Creator  Spiri- 
tus, 

Mentes  tuorum  visita. 
Imple  superna  gratia, 
Quae  tu  creasti  pectora. 

Qui  diceris  Paraclitus, 
Altissimi  donum  J)ei. 
Fons  vivus,  ignis,  chari- 
tas : 

Et  Spiritalis  unctio. 

Tu  septiformis  munere. 
Digitus  paeternae  dexterae, 
Tu  rite  promissum  Patris, 
Sermone  ditans  guttura. 
Accende  lumen  sensi- 
bus, 

Infunde  amorem  cordi- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


L 720  I 

4* 

FIVE  POINTS  or  RESOLUTIONS 
Which  may  be  formed  foith  much  spiritual  profit^  either 
before  or  ct/ler  hearing  Mass. 

1. 

I destest  and  abhor,  all  and  every  one  of  the  sins  I 
have  ever  committed,  or  that  have  been  committed 
by  others  from  the  be^nning  of  the  world  to  the  pre- 
sent hour,  or  that  may  be  hereafter  committed  to  the 
end  thereof : and  would,  with  the  grace  of  God,  do 
my  utmost  fo  prevent  them,  which  I therefore  huni- 
bly  implore. 

II. 

I extol  and  approve  of  all  the  good  works  that  have 
been  done  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  or  that 
may  be  done  hereafter  to  the  consummation  thereof : 
and  would,  with  the  help  of  God,  multiply  them, 
whose  grace  I most  humbly  implore. 

III. 

I purpose  henceforth  to  direct  all  my  thoughts, 
words  and  actions,  to  the  greater  glory  of  God,  in 
union  with  all  those  good  intentions  wliich  the  saints 
have  ever  had — ^now  have— or  can  possibly  have 
hereafter. 

IV. 

I pardon  and  forgive,  from  the  bottom  of  my  hear, 
all  my  enemies — all  who  calumniate  or  detract  me — 
all  who  would  by  any  means  injure  me,  or  wish  that 
evil  would  befall  me. 

V. 

O ! that  it  were  possible  I could  save  all  mankind 
by  dying  for  each  individual ; this  I would  freely  do  by 
the  help  of  the  grace  of  God,  which  I therefore  ear- 
nestly invoke,  for  without  his  grace,  I can  do  nothing 
Ex.  Missale  Romano. 


FINIS 


Digitized  byCjOO^IC 


Digitized  by  Google 


,y  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


