ae 


SIs 


's 


hae 

Shiri 
eek 
the 


Bream 
Air 


ete 


Pet 


naeicset 
CReonrnicraatiys 
er peat 


Hie, 


BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 


LOANED BY THE TRUSTEES OF THE 


HENRY PIERCE LIBRARY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


ae, 


. Tue Publishers regret that it has been found im- 


possible to complete the ANNOTATED PRAYER Book as © 
soon as they were led to expect. To prevent farther 
disappointment, therefore, it has been judged advisable 
to issue the work in two Parts, which may afterwards 
be bound together, if desired. 

Part II., it is confidently hoped, will be published 


in October. 


May Ist, 1866. 


THE ANNOTATED 


BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER. 


LONDON : 
GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, 


8ST. JOIUN’S SQUARE. 


PREFACE. 


‘Tats work is an attempt to gather into one concise view all the most important 
information that is extant respecting the devotional system of the Church of England 
as founded on the Book of Common Prayer. 
Much research and study have been expended upon this subject during the last 
quarter of a century ; and the Prayer Book has been largely illustrated by the works of 
Sir William Palmer, Mr. Maskell, and Archdeacon Freeman. Many smaller books than 
these have also been published with the object of bringing into a compact form the 
results of wide and learned investigations: the most trustworthy and complete of 
all such books being Mr. Procter’s excellent “‘ History of the Book of Common Prayer, 
with a Rationale of its Offices.” But it has long seemed to the Editor of the present 
volume that a work of another kind was wanted, which (without superseding any pre- 
vious one of established merit) should exhibit more concisely and perspicuously the con- 
nexion between the ancient and the modern devotional system of the Church of England 
by placing the two side by side, as far as the former is represented in the latter: and 
which should also give a general condensed illustration of our present Prayer Book from 
all those several points of view from which it must be regarded if it is to be properly 
understood and appreciated. 

Perhaps there is no one book, except the Holy Bible, which has been so much 
written about as the Prayer Book since the Reformation, and perhaps so much was 
never written about any one book which left so much still unsaid. The earliest class of 
commentators is represented by John Boys, who died Dean of Canterbury in 1619, and 
who had in earlier life published a Volume of Postils which were preceded by a diffuse 
comment on the principal parts of the Prayer Book. In these there is much ponderous 
learning, but a total absence of any liturgical knowledge. Bishop Andrewes and Arch- 

| bishop Laud began to open out the real meaning and the true bearing of our Offices, 
being well acquainted with the Greek Liturgies, and having some knowledge, at least, of 


the Breviaries and the Missals of the Church of England. L’Estrange, Sparrow, Cosin, 


0?" 


vl PREFACE. 


and Elborow represent a still further advance towards a true comprehension of the 
Prayer Book; Bishop Cosin especially being thoroughly familiar with the Sarum Missal, 
and perhaps with the Breviary and other Office-books of the old Church of England. 
In the latter part of the sixteenth century, Liturgical studies seem, indeed, to have been 
taken up by many of the Clergy, especially by the Nonjurors, and interleaved Prayer 
Books are preserved in the Bodleian and other libraries which testify to the industry 
that was shown in illustrating its text, especially from the Greek Liturgies. None seem 
so thoroughly to have qualified themselves for the task of illustrating and interpreting 
the Book of Common Prayer as Fothergill, a nonjuror, whose interleaved Prayer Book 
in eleven large volumes, together with his unmatched collection of old English Service- 
books, is now in the Chapter Library at York'. But his notes and quotations were not 
digested into order: and although a work founded upon them would have been invalu- 
able in days when there was no better authority than the superficial Wheatley, they have 
since been superseded by the publications of Palmer and Maskell. 

The works of Comber, Wheatley, and Shepherd, were doubtless of great value in 
their way; but it is melancholy to observe that they tended in reality to alienate the 
minds of their readers from all thought of Unity and Fellowship with the Church of our 
Fathers, and set up two idols of the imagination, a Church originated in the sixteenth 
There 


is not a single published work on the Prayer Book previous to the publication of 


century, and a Liturgy ‘‘ compiled,” and in the main invented, by the Reformers. 


Palmer’s Origines Liturgice in 1832, which makes the least attempt to give a truthful 
view of it, so thoroughly was this shallow conceit of a newly-invented Liturgy ingrained 
in the minds of even our best writers. 

Notwithstanding, therefore, the great abundance of works on the Book of Common 
Prayer, there seems to be still ample room for one like the present, in which-the spirit 
of our Offices is illustrated from their origin and history as well as from their existing 
form ; and in which a large body of material is placed before the reader by means whereof 
he may himself trace out that history, and interpret that spirit. 


The object of the present work may be stated, then, to be that of illustrating and 


* Marmaduke Fothergill was born at York in 1652, 
took his degree at Magdalene College, Cambridge, and 
became Rector of Skipwith. In 1688 he was offered 
the Rectory of Lancaster, but not being able to take 
the oaths to William and Mary, he could neither ac- 
cept preferment, nor receive the degree of D.D., for 
which he had qualified. He lived at Pontefract, till 
driven thence by a whig J. P., but died in West- 
minster, on Sept. 7, 1731. Mr. Fothergill made a 


noble collection of ancient Service-books, which, with 
the rest of his Library, he left to Skipwith parish, on 
condition of a room being built to receive them. This 
not being done, the widow applied to Chancery, and 
by a decree of that court the books were all handed 
over to York Minster. Mr. Fothergill also left an 
endowment of £50 a year for a catechist at Ponte- 
fract. His volumes show that he was a most indus- 


trious reader. 


PREFACE. vil 


explaining the Devotional system of the Church of England by (1) a careful comparison 
of the Prayer Book with the original sources from which it is derived, (2) a critical 
examination of all the details of its history, and (3) a full consideration of the aspect in 
which it appears when viewed by the light of those Scriptural and primitive principles 
on which the Theology of the Church of England is founded. 

For the plan of the work, the general substance of it, and for all those portions the 
authorship of which is not otherwise indicated, the Editor must be held responsible. 
For the details of the text and notes in those parts which have been contributed by 
others (excepting the Marginal References), the authors must, of course, be considered 
individually responsible. Circumstances have arisen which threw into the Editor’s hands 
a larger proportion of the work than he originally intended to undertake, especially 
in connexion with the Communion and the Occasional Offices; but he does not wish to 
claim any indulgence on this account, being fully assured that a commentary of the kind 
here offered ought to be judged solely by its merits as an authentic interpreter and 
guide. The Introduction to the Communion Service, and the earlier portion of the 
Notes upon it are by the Editor. 

In the Offices for the Visitation and Communion of the Sick, the Editor has to 
acknowledge valuable assistance from a friend who does not permit his name to be used. 
Those Offices have been treated in a rather more homiletic method than most of the 
others, in the hope that the Notes may assist in persuading both Lay and Clerical 
readers to desire a more pointed and systematic application of the Church’s gifts in time 
of Sickness than that which is offered by the prayers ordinarily used. 

The text is, of course, that of the Sealed Books; but some hberty has occasionally 
been taken with the punctuation, which, whether in the Sealed Books, or in the copies 
sent out by the Universities and the Queen’s Printers, is in a most unsatisfactory 
condition. In the Psalms and Canticles, a diamond-shaped ‘‘ point” has been used for 
the purpose of more plainly marking the musical division of verses, as distinguished from 
the grammatical punctuation. The spelling is also modernized throughout. 

In conclusion, the Editor begs to tender his grateful thanks to many friends who 
have assisted him with their suggestions and advice. Those thanks are also especially 
due to the Rey. T. W. Perry, of Brighton, and the Rev. W. D. Macray, of the Bodleian 
Library, who have gone through all the proof-sheets, and have been largely instrumental 
in securing to the reader accuracy in respect to historical statements. 

The Editor is indebted to the Rev. Jonn Baccuus Dykens, M.A., and Doctor of 
Music, Vicar of St. Oswald’s, Durham, for the Second Section of the Ritual Introduc- 
tion, on THe MANNER OF PERFORMING DivINE SERVICE. 

The Third Section of the Ritual Introduction, on THe Accnussorius or Divine 


vill PREFACE, 


’ 


Service, is by the Rev. Tuomas Watter Perry, author of * Lawful Church Ornaments,” 
&e., &e. . 

Tur Rev. Josepa THomas Fowitnr, M.A., Chaplain of St. John’s College, Hurst- 
pierpoint, is the writer of the Notes on the Minor Hotypays of the Calendar. 

Tae Rev. Wint1Am Bricut, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of University College, Oxford; 
and author of “A History of the Church from a.p. 313 to a.p, 451,” ‘ Ancient 
Collects,” &c., &c., is the writer of the Inrropuction To, anp Notes on tHE Litany. 
Also of the Essay on tae Scorrisa Lirurey in the Appendix. 

Tue Rey. Perer Gonpsmira Mepp, M.A., Dean and Tutor of University College, 
Oxford, co-Editor with Mr. Bright of the Latin Prayer Book, and author of ‘‘ House- 
hold Prayer,” &c., is the principal writer of the Norss on tHe Communion Orrice from 
the Church Militant Prayer to the end; and the compiler of the Apprnpix to that 
Office. Mr. Medd has also contributed the references to the hymns of the seasons. 

Tus Rev. Macxenzis E. C, Watcorr, B.D., F.R.S.L., F.S.A., of Exeter College, 
Oxford, Precentor and Prebendary of Chichester Cathedral, and author of “ THE 
EnciisH OrpinaL,” &c., &c., has contributed the Inrropuction to, anp Notes ON THE 


ORDINAL. 


CONTENTS OF PART I. 


PREFACE 
List of Authorities 
Chronological Table 
An Historical Introduction to the eae ee 
A Ritual Introduction to the Prayer Book— 
Section I. The Principles of Ceremonial Worship 


Section II. The Manner of performing Divine Service. By Rev. J. B. Dykes, Mus. D. 


Section IIT. The Accessories of Divine Service. By Rev. T. W. Perry . 
Title, &c., of the Sealed Prayer Books 
Acts of Uniformity 
Preface, &c., to the Prayer Book 
Tables and Rules 
An Introduction to the (erie 
The Calendar with Comparative View : 
Notes on the Minor Holydays. By Rev. J. T. rise : 
An Introduction to Morning and Evening Prayer 
Morning Prayer . 
Evening Prayer . 
Athanasian Creed 
An Introduction to the Litany. ‘By Rev. W. Bright 
The Litany, with Notes. By Rev. W. Bright . 
Occasional Prayers and Thanksgivings 
An Introduction to the Collects, Epistles, and Gospels 
The Collects, Epistles, and Gospels 


A complete Table of the Contents of the whole work, together with a full Index 
and Glossary, will be furnished with Part II. 


A LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL 


LITURGICAL AND HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES 


QUOTED OR REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK. 


Amalarius [Bishop of Treves, a.p. 830], De Divin. Off. Cologne, 1568. 
Andrewes, Bishop, Notes on Prayer Book. Ang. Cath. Lib. 1854. 
Anglican Church Calendar. 1851. 
Assemanni Codex Liturgicus. 
Baker, Sir Richard, on the Lord’s Prayer. 1638. 
Beleth [thirteenth century], Rationale Divin. Off. Lyons, 1612. 
Bingham’s Antiquities of the Christian Church. 
Blunt’s Directorium Pastorale. 
Bona, Cardinal, De Rebus Liturg. Paris, 1676. 
De Diviné Psalmodid. Antwerp, 1677. 
Brady’s Clavis Calendaria. 1812. 
Breviary, Mozarabic. 
Roman. 
Salisbury. 1495—1541. 
York. 1493—1526. 
Bright’s Ancient Collects and other Prayers. 
Brogden’s Illustrations of the Liturgy. 1842. 
Bulley’s Variations of the Communion and Baptismal Offices. 
Burn’s Ecclesiastical Law. Phillimore’s ed., 1842. 
Burney’s History of Music. 
Burnet, Bishop, History of the Reformation. 
—————— Vindication of English Ordinations. 
Butler’s Lives of the Saints. 
Calendars of State Papers. Domestic. 1547—1580. 
Ss ———_—_—_—_—_—_____—_——._ 1660—1662. 
Cardwell, Documentary Annals. 
History of Conferences. 
Synodalia. 
Three Primers of 1535, 1539, 1545. 
Two Liturgies of Edward VI. 
Catalani, Pontif. Roman. Commentariis illustratum. 1738. 
Churton’s Life of Dean Nowell. 
Collier’s Ecclesiastical History. 
Comber on the Common Prayer. 
i a2 


xi A LIST OF LITURGICAL AND HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 


Cosin, Book of Common Prayer, 1619 ed., with MS. emendations. D. III. 5, Cosin’s Library, 
Durham. . . 
Collection of Private Devotions. 1627. 
Notes and Collections on the Prayer Book. Works, Vol. V. Ang. Cath. Lib. 1855. 
Daniel, Codex Liturgicus. 
Thesaurus Hymnologicus. 
Documents relating to the Act of Uniformity. 1862. 
Durandus [.p. 1216], Rationale Divin. Off. Lyons, 1612. 
Dyce, Book of Common Prayer with Plain Tune. 
Elborow on the Book of Common Prayer. 1663. 
English Church Union Kalendars. 1868-4. 
Farrow’s Baptismal Offices illustrated. 1838. 
Fleury’s Church History. Newman’s transl. 
Forbes’, Bishop, Explanation of the Nicene Creed. 
——————— Commentary on the Litany. 
Freeman’s Principles of Divine Service. 
Rites and Ritual. 
Gavanti Thesaurus Sacrorum Rituum. 1792. 
Gelasius’ Sacramentary [a.p. 492]. Muratori’s ed. 
Gerberti Liturgia Alemannica. 
Goar, Rituale Grecorum. 1647. 
Grancolas, Commentarius Historicus in Romanum Breviarium. Venice, 1754. 
Grand Debate between the Bishops and the Presbyterians. 1661. 
Gregory, St., Sacramentary [a.p. 590]. Menard’s ed. 
Greswell on the Burial Service. 1836, 
Gueranger’s Institutions Liturgiques. 1840—1851. 
Guericke’s Manual of Church Antiquities. Morrison’s translation. 1851. 
Hale’s Precedents. 1847. 
Hallier, De Sacris Ordinationibus. 1636. 
Harvey on the Creeds. 1854. 
Hermann’s Simplex ac Pia Deliberatio. 1545. 
Daye’s translation [edd. 1547, 1548]. 


Heurtley’s Collection of Creeds. 1858. 
Heylin’s History of the Reformation. cc. Hist. Soc. 
Hickes’ Letters [Lib. Ecc. Cath. Dunelm. ew dono Auctoris}. 1705. 
Hierurgia Anglicana. 1848. 
Hittorpius, De Divinis Officiis. Cologne, 1568. 
Jebb’s Choral Service. 
—— Ritual Law and Custom of the Church Universal. 
Jenkyns’ Cranmer’s Remains. 
Jerome, St., Comes or Lectionary. Pamelius’ ed. Cologne, 1571. 
Kalendar of the English Church. 1865-6. 
Keble’s Eucharistical Adoration. 1857. 
Kennett’s, Bishop, Register. 1728. 
Landon’s Ecclesiastical Dictionary. 1849. 
Manual of Councils. 1846. 
Lathbury’s History of the Convocation. 1853. 
———————_—_—_—_—_———— Prayer Book. 1859. 
Leo, St., Sacramentary [a.p. 451]. Mauratori’s ed. 
L’Estrange’s Alliance of Divine Offices [a.p. 1690]. Ang. Cath. Lib. 1846, 
Lingard’s Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church. 
Littledale, North-side of the Altar. 
On the Mixed Chalice. 
Liturgies, &c., of K. Edward VI. Parker Soc. 1844. 


A LIST OF LITURGICAL AND HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 


Liturgies, &c., of Q. Elizabeth. Parker Soc. 1847. 
Mabillon, Museum Italicum. 1687-9. 
De Liturgié Gallicand. Paris, 1685. 

Manuale Sarisburiensis. 14.98, 

Martene, De Antiquis Ecclesie Ritibus. Antwerp, 1763. 
Maskell, Ancient Liturgy of the Church of England. 1846. 
Dissertation on Holy Baptism. 1846. 
Monumenta Ritualia Ecce. Ang. 1848. 

On the Doctrine of Absolution. 1849. 
‘Mason, Vindicie Ecc. Anglic. sive de legitimo ejusdem Ministerio. 
Massingberd, Lectures on the Prayer Book. 

Masters’ reprint of the Sealed Book of Common Prayer. 1848. 
Meibomius, Antique Musice Auctores Septem. 1652. 
Merbecke’s Common Prayer Noted. 1550. 


Micrologus [Johannis, Episcopi, thirteenth century. Maskell’s date, 1080]. Pamelius’ ed. 


1565. 
Mirroure of our Ladye. 1530. 
Missale ad Usum ac Consuetudinem Sarum. Paris, 1514. 
, pars prima, temporale. Burntisland. 1861. 
Morinus, De Sacris Ordinationibus. 1655. 
Muratori, Liturgia Romana Vetus. 1748. 
Neale’s Commentary on the Psalms. Vol. I. 1860. 
Essays on Liturgiology. 1863. 
Introduction to the History of the Holy Eastern Church. 1850. 
Primitive Liturgies. 
Tetralogia Liturgica. 1849. 
Palmer’s Origines Liturgice. 1832. 
Pamelius [a.p. 1536—1587], Antiquitates Liturgice. 
— Liturgicon Kcclesize Latine. Cologne, 1571. 
Parker, Correspondence of Archbishop. Parker Soe. 1853. 
Perry’s Historical Considerations relating to the Declaration on Kneeling. 1863. 
Pickering’s reprints of the Books of Common Prayer. 
Pinnock’s Laws and Usages of the Church and Clergy. 
Pontificals of Salisbury, Bangor, and Exeter. 
Portiforii seu Breviarii Sarisb. fascic. i. and ui, 1843-5. 
Position of the Priest at the Altar. 1858. 
Poullain’s L’Ordre des Priéres, &. London, 1552. 
Prideaux’s Validity of English Orders. 
Private Prayers of the Reign of Edward VI. Parker Soc. 
___———— Queen Elizabeth. Parker Soc. 
Procter’s History and Rationale of the Prayer Book. 1857. 
Psalter, Anglo-Saxon and Early English. Surtees’ Soc. 1843-7, 
Translation of Sarum, with Explanatory Notes and Comments. 1852. 
Purchas’ Directorium Anglicanum. 1858. 
Qnd ed., edited by Rev. F. G. Lee. 1865. 
Pusey’s Doctrine of the Real Presence. 
The Real Presence the Doctrine of the English Church. 
—— Scriptural Views of Holy Baptism. 
Quignonez, Cardinal, Reformed Roman Breviary. Lyons, 1543. [Edd. 1535-6 to 1568. ] 
Renaudot, Liturg. Orient. Collectio. 
Scudamore, The Communion of the Laity. 1855. 
Sparrow, Bishop, Collection of Articles, Injunctions, &. 1661. 
Rationale of the Prayer Book. . 
Stephens’ edition of Sealed Book of Common Prayer. Ecc. Hist. Soc. 1849-54, 


xili 


Antwerp, 


XIV A LIST OF LITURGICAL AND HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 


Stephens’ Book of Common Prayer, from the Irish MS. in the Rolls’ Office, Dublin. ce. Hist. Soe. 
Strype’s Memorials of Cranmer. Ecc. Hist. Soe. 
Thomassii Opera. 1747-69. 
Thomassin, Discipline de ’Eglise, &e. 1679-81. 
Thomson, Vindication of the Hymn Te Deum Laudamus. 1858. 
Thrupp on the Psalms. 
Tyler, Meditations from the Fathers illustrating the Prayer Book. 1849. 
Walafridus Strabo [a.p. 830], De Rebus Ecc. Cologne, 1568. 
Warren’s Answer to Maskell on Absolution. 1849, 
The Lord’s Table the Christian Altar. 1843. 
Wheatley on the Common Prayer. Corrie’s ed., 1858. 
Wilberforce on the Holy Eucharist. 18538. 
Wilkins’ Concilia. 
Williams, Isaac, on the Psalms. 
Zaccaria, Bibliotheca Ritualis. 1776-81. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 


A.D. 
Liturgy of Cassian and Leo [see p. 147] . : ‘ : : . circ, 420 
Sacramentary of St. Leo : : ; ‘ : : ‘ ; . 451 
Gelasius. : : : 3 ‘ A . 492 
—————_———— Gregory . , ‘ ; : . 590 
St. Augustine’s revised Liturgy of Briain sce pp. Xvi. 147] : : f . ire. 600 
Salisbury Use of St. Osmund ‘ ; : ; ; . 1085 
English Prymer. [Maskell’s Mon. Rit. es ne . ire. 1890 
Liber Festivalis. [A book of medieval English Homilies, ined by erseistals ; . 1488 
Salisbury Breviary reformed. [ist ed.]  . ; . 1516 
Mirror of our Lady. [A translation of and conocer? on the Fei Offices ed the Mass.} . 1530 
Salisbury Breviary reformed. ie ed.] . : ; : : A . 1531 
Missal ————— : : : : : ; ; . 1533 
English Psalters printed . : 3 : ‘ : i j . 1534—1540 
Marshalls s Prymer : ; ; : : f : : . 1535 
English Epistles and oS Printed : ; : : : ; . 1588—1548 
Flee? sPrymer . : : : . 1539 
The “Great Bible” set up in G@hurches as he BY Aenoried Version” : : . 1540 
Salisbury Use further reformed, and adopted Me order of the Convocation) Hueonehodt the 
Province of Canterbury : ; : : : . 1541 
Committee of Convocation commissioned to revise Service books . : : . 1542—1549 
English Litany ordered for use in Churches : : ; ; : . June ll, 1544 
King Henry the Eighth’s Prymer : . 1545 
Archbishop Hermann’s Consultation ore. 1543 ; Tete, 1545], printed in shea 1547 ; 
reprinted ‘ : : : : : . 1548 
Edward the Sixth’s First Year . : ae diye 28, 1646- 7, to Jan. 27, 1547-8 
English Order of Communion added to ince Macao 
Brought before Convocation : : : ; ; . Nov. 30, 1547 
Taken into use. : : 5 March 8, 1547-8 
Book of Common Prayer. [First Book of Bayard Mak as 
Submitted to Convocation (by Committee of 1542-9) ‘ . Nov. 24, 1548 
Laid before Parliament as part of Act of Uniformity [2 & 3 Edw. Ainge 1] Dec. 9, 1548 
Passed by the House of Lords ditto ditto Jan. 15, 1548-9 
———————- Commons ditto ditto Jan. 21, 1548-9 
Received Royal Assent. [Date not yet ascertained. ] 
Published . ; : ; : ; : : March 7, 1548-9 
Taken into general use. : 2 : . dune 9, 1549 
Edward the Sixth’s Second Year . : : : . dan. 28, 1547- 8, to Jan. 27, 1548-9 


English Ordinal 5 . - : ‘ ‘ : March, 1549-50 


XV1 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. - 


A.D. 
Book of Common Prayer. [Second Book of Edward VI.]— 
[Committee of Convocation commissioned, probably ‘ 5 . 1boe 
Passed through Parliament as part of Act of sapaza B & 6 Edw. Wig. li ie 6, 1552 
Ordered to be taken into use from ‘ . Nov. 1, 1552 
Edward VI. died : . July 6, 1553 
Acts of Uniformity G@ueludine Prayer Books) repenled ne 1 Mary, C68. (11, C.. 00 nnn Oct. 1553 
Queen Elizabeth’s Accession ; : . Nov. 17, 1558 
Edward VI.’s Second Book restored eri some aitatione by 1 Eliz., c. 2 : . June 24, 1559 
Queen Elizabeth’s Latin Book of Common Prayer 4 : : ; : -- 1660 
Commission to revise Calendar and Lessons ; : F ; : . Jan, 22, 1561 
Hampton Court Conference 3 : ‘ ; : ; . dan. 14—18, 1603-4 
Scottish Book of Common Prayer ‘ , : : : : ; ”, 26ST 
Prayer Book suppressed by “ ordinance” of Parliament . : ; : , Jan. 3, 1644-5 
Use of Prayer Book revived : : : : : : . June, 1660 
Savoy Conference 4 j ; : hal 15—July 24, 1 
Book of Common Prayer [that now in es 
Commission to the Convocations to revise it ; : 5 . June 10, 1661 
Revision completed by Convocations : : ; : . Dec. 20, 1661 
Approved by King in Council Feb. 24, 1661-2 
Passed House of Lords as part of Act of Tarot [14 Cn 1] . April 10, 1662 
——____——- Commons ditto . May 8, 1662 
Received Royal Assent ditto : . May 19, 1662 
Taken into general use. , , : ; : . Aug. 24, 1662 
Adopted by Irish Convocatio a : : . Nov. 11, 1662 
Standard copies certified under Great Seal) ‘ : . Jan. 5, 166223 
Embodied in Irish Act of Uniformity [17 and 18 Car. 11 : . June 18, 1666 
William the Third’s Commission to review Prayer Book . : : . 1689 
Revised Calendar authorized by 24 Geo. II., ¢. 23 : : ; : : »: 1762 
American Book of Common Prayer ‘ a & 3 1785-9 


AN 


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


TO THE 


PRAYER BOOK. 


For more than two centuries the Book of Common Prayer has remained altogether unaltered, the last 
changes that were made in it being those which brought it into its present, and now venerable, form, in 
1661. But the various stages of its development from the ancient formularies of the Church of England 
extended through a period of one hundred and fifty years; and the history of that development is of the 
highest importance to those who wish to understand and use the Prayer Book; as well as of consider- 
able interest to all from the fact of its being an integral part of our national history. 

_ The Church of England has had distinctive formularies of its own as far back as the details of its 
customs in respect to Divine Worship can be traced. The earliest history of these formularies is obscure, 
but there is good reason to believe that they were derived, through Lyons, from the great patriarchate 
of Ephesus, in which St. John spent the latter half of his life. There was an intimate connexion 
between the Churches of France and England in the early ages of Christianity, of which we still have a 
memorial in the ancient French saints of our Calendar; and when St. Augustine came to England, he 
found the same rites used as he had observed in France, and remarks upon them as differing in many 
particulars from those of Rome. It is now well known that this ancient Gallican Liturgy came from 
Ephesus’. But there can be no doubt that several waves of Christianity, perhaps of Apostolic Chris- 
tianity, passed across our island; and the Ephesine or Johannine element in the ancient Prayer Books 
of the Church of England probably represents but the strongest of those waves, and the predominating 
influence which mingled with itself others of a less powerful character. 

It. was in the sixth century [4.p. 596] that the great and good St. Augustine — st. Aucustine 
undertook his missionary work among the West Saxons. The mission seems to have vie, Hngdsh 
been sent from Rome by Gregory the Great, under the impression that the inhabitants 
of England were altogether heathen; and if he or Augustine were not unacquainted with what St. 
Chrysostom, St. Jerome, and others had said respecting the early evangelization of Britain, they had 
evidently concluded that the Church founded in Apostolic times was extinct. When Augustine arrived 
in England, he found that, although the West Saxons were heathen, and had driven the Church into 
the highlands of Wales by their persecution, yet seven bishops remained alive, and a large number of 
clergy, who had very strong views about the independence of the Church of England, and were 
unprepared to receive the Roman missionary except on terms of equality. The chief difficulty felt by 
St. Augustine arose from the difference just referred to between the religious system of Rome (the only 
Church with which he was acquainted) and those of France and England. This difficulty, a great one 
to a man so conscientious and simple-minded, he submitted to Gregory in the form of questions, and 
among them was the following one on the subject of Divine Worship :—“ Whereas the Faith is one, 
why are the customs of Churches various? and why is one manner of celebrating the Holy Communion 
used in the holy Roman Church, and another in that of the Gauls?” This diversity becomes even 


1 See Palmer’s Origines Liturg., i. 153. Neale and Forbes’ Gallican Liturgies. Freeman’s Principles of Divine Service, ii. 399. 


b 


XVili AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


more prominent in the words which Augustine addressed to the seven Bishops of the ancient Church of 
England, when they met in conference at the place afterwards called St. Augustine’s Oak. “ You act,” 
said he, “in many particulars contrary to our customs, or rather, to the customs of the universal Church, 
and yet, if you will comply with me in these three points, viz. to keep Easter at the due time; to 
perform the administration of baptism, by which we are born again to God, according to the custom 
of the holy Roman and Apostolic Church; and jointly with us to preach the Word of God to the 
nation of the Angles, we will readily tolerate all your other customs, though contrary to our own.” 
The answer of St. Gregory contained wise and Catholic advice; and to it we owe, under Providence, the 
continued use of an independent form of Divine Worship in the Church of England from that day to 
the present. “You, my brother,’ said Gregory, “are acquainted with the customs of the Roman 
Church in which you were brought up. But it is my pleasure that if you have found any thing either 
in the Roman or the Gallican or any other Church which may be more acceptable to Almighty God, 
you carefully make choice of the same; and sedulously teach the Church of the Angles, which is at pre- 
sent new in the Faith, whatsoever you can gather from the several Churches. For things are not to be 
loved for the sake of places, but places for the sake of good things. Select, therefore, from each Church 
those things that are pious, religious, and correct; and when you have made these up into one body, 
instil this into the minds of the English for their Use.” [Greg. Opera, 11. 1151, Bened. ed.; Bede’s 
Eccl. Hist. i. 27.) The Liturgy of the Roman Church spoken of in this reply is represented by the 
ancient Sacramentary of St. Gregory, to which such frequent references are given in the following 
pages: that of the Gallican Church is also extant’, and has been shown (as was mentioned before) to be 
the Liturgy of the Church of Ephesus. The words “any other Church” might be supposed to refer to 
an independent English Liturgy, but there is no reference to any in the question to which Gregory is 
replying, and he evidently knew nothing of England except through Augustine. From other writers it 
seems that the Liturgy of England before this time had been the same with that of France; but the 
native clergy always alleged that their distinctive customs were derived from St. John. 

Being thus advised by St. Gregory, the holy missionary endeavoured to deal as gently as possible 
with those whose customs of Divine Worship differed from his own; but his prepossessions in favour of 
the Roman system were very strong, and he used all his influence to get it universally adopted through- 
out the country. 

Uniformity in all details was not, however, attainable. The national feeling of the ancient Church 
steadily adhered to the ancient rite for many years; while the feeling of the Church founded by St. 
Augustine was in favour of a rite more closely in agreement with that of Rome. As collision was the 
first natural consequence of this state of things, so some degree of amalgamation as naturally followed in 
course of time ; that which was local, or national, mingling with that which was foreign in the English 
devotional system, as it did in the English race itself. Some attempts were made, as in the Council of 
Cloveshoo [a.p. 747], to enforce the Roman Liturgy upon all the dioceses of the country, but it is 
certain that the previous devotional customs of the land had an exceedingly tenacious hold upon the 
clergy and the people, and that no efforts could ever wholly extirpate them’, 

At the time of the Conquest another vigorous attempt was made to secure 
uniformity of Divine Service throughout the country, and with the most pious 
intentions. Osmund, Bishop of Salisbury, and Chancellor of England, remodelled the 
Offices of the Church, and left behind him the famous Portiforium or Breviary of Sarum, ‘containing 
the Daily Services ; together with the Sarum Missal, containing the Communion Service ; and, probably, 
the Sarum Manual, containing the Baptismal and other “ occasional” Offices. These, and some other 
Service-books, constituted the “Sarum Use,” that is, the Prayer Book of the Diocese of Salisbury. It 
was first adopted for that diocese in a.p. 1085, and was introduced into other parts of England so 
generally that it became the principal devotional Rule of the Church of England, and continued so for 
more than four centuries and a half: “the Church of Salisbury,” says a writer of the year 1256, 
“being conspicuous above all other Churches like the sun in the heavens, diffusing its light every where, 
and supplying their defects.” Other Uses continued to hold their place in the dioceses of Lincoln, 
Hereford, and Bangor, and through the greater part of the province of York; though in the diocese of 
Durham the Salisbury system was followed. At St. Paul’s Cathedral, and perhaps throughout the 


The “Use” of 
Salisbury. 


1 See the names Menard, Muratori, and Mabillon, in the List 2 See Maskell’s Ancient Liturgy, Preface, p. liv. 
of Authorities. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. XIX 


diocese of London, there was an independent Use until a.v. 1414; and probably there were several 
others in Cathedral Churches, while the Roman system was adopted by most monasteries. The Salis- 
bury Use, that of York, that of Bangor, and that of Hereford, are well known to modern ritualists. 
They appear to be traceable to a common origin; but they differ in so many respects from the Roman 
Breviary, and even from the Missal (with which a closer agreement might have been expected), that they 
clearly derive their common origin from a source independent of the Roman Church. And, whatever 
quarter they may have been derived from in the first instance, it is equally clear that the forms of 
Divine Service now known to us under these names represent a system which was naturalized so many 
ages ago that it has been entitled to the name of an independent English rite for at least a thousand years. 

There are no means of deciding how far the original Use of Salisbury differed from 
that which is known to us. The copies remaining belong to a much later period than 
the eleventh century, and there is reason to think that some accretions had gathered 
around the ancient devotions of the Church of England by that time. The tide of change by which these 
were to be removed began to set in a few years after the accession of Henry VIII., when a new edition 
of the Salisbury Portiforium was issued, perhaps under the influence of Cardinal Wolsey, whose efforts 
towards bringing about a Reformation have been too little recognized. This edition was printed in 
1516; and is said by a modern learned Editor, the Rev. C. Seager, to have well deserved the name of a 
Reformed Breviary from the important changes which had been made in it’. There was little variation 
indeed from the old forms; but there was a distinct initiation of the principles which were afterwards 
carried out more fully in the Book of Common Prayer of 1549. The rubrics were much simplified ; 
Holy Scripture was directed to be read in order, without omission ; and the Lessons were restored to 
their ancient length, which was about double of what they had been redueed to in some previous 
editions of the Breviary. 

In 1531 this Reformed Edition of the Salisbury Portiforium or Breviary was reprinted; and two 
years later the Missal was published, reformed on the same principles; in the latter special care being 
taken to provide an apparatus for enabling the people to find out the places of the Epistles and Gospels. 
And though no authorized translation of the Bible had yet been allowed by Henry VIII., Cranmer and 
the other Bishops began to revise Tyndale’s translation in 1534, and encouraged the issue of books 
containing the Epistles and Gospels in English, of which many editions were published between 1538 
and the printing of the Prayer Book*. A fresh impulse seems thus to have been given to the use of the 
old English Prymers, in which a large portion of the Services (including the Litany) was translated 
into the vulgar tongue, and also a third of the Psalms, and to which in later times the Epistles and 
Gospels were added. In 1530 also had been published an admirable commentary on some of the daily 
services (in which the greater part of them is translated into English), under the title of “The Mirroure 
of our Ladye,” which furnishes a strong indication of the endeavours that were being made to render 
Divine Service intelligible to those who could not read Latin. 

In.1540 the Psalter was printed by Grafton in Latin and English [Bodleian Lib., Douce BB. 71], 
and there seems to have been an earlier edition of a larger size about the year 1534, The Psalter had 
long been re-arranged, so that the Psalms were said in consecutive order, according to our modern 
practice, instead of in the ancient but complex order of the Breviary. [See Introd. to Psalter. ] 

In 1541 another amended, and still further reformed edition of the Salisbury Breviary was 
published, in the title-page of which it is said to be purged from many errors. By order of Convocation 
[March 3, 1541-2] this was adopted throughout the whole province of Canterbury, and an uniformity 
secured which had not existed since the days of Augustine. With this edition an order was also put 
forth that Lessons should be read in English after the Te Deum and Magnificat. Nor is it an insig- 
nificant circumstance that the book was now printed by Whitchurch (from whose press issued the Book 
of Common Prayer), instead of being printed in Paris as formerly. 

The ancient formularies had, however, by change of circumstances, become unsuitable in several 
respects for the Church of England, They had grown into a form in which they were extremely well 
adapted (from a ritual point of view) for the use of religious communities, but were far too complex 
for that of parochial congregations, When monasteries were abolished, it was found that the devotional 
system of the Church must be condensed if it was to be used by mixed congregations, and by those 


Reformation of 
the Sarum Use. 


1 Portiforium Sarisb., p. vii. Leslie, 1843. uses of the English Church. Compiled by Mr. F. H. Dickinson. 
2 See List of Printed Service-books, according to the ancient | Masters. Reprinted from Kcclesiologist of Feb. 1850, 


XX AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


who were not specially set apart for that life of rule and continual worship for which monastic com- 
munities were intended. The Breviary services had never been familiar to the people of England, any 
more than they are to the Continental laity of the present day. They were accretions around some 
shorter and more primitive form of responsive public service which had been found insufficient for those 
who formed themselves into special societies for the purpose of carrying on an unceasing round of prayer 
and praise. But now that the “religious” of the Church were to be so separated no longer, Divine 
Providence led her to feel the way gradually towards a return to the earlier practice of Christianity ; 
the idea of a popular and mixed congregation superseded that of a special monastic one; and the daily 
worship being transferred from the Cloister to the Parish Church, its normal form of Common Prayer 
was revived in the place of the Prayers of a class or the solitary recitation of the Parish Priest. 
No blame was cast upon the former system for its complexity; but the times were changed, a new . 
order of things was becoming established, and, although the primezples of the Church are unchangeable, so 
entire a remoulding of society entailed of necessity a corresponding adaptation of her devotional practice, 
both for the honour of God and the good of souls, to the wants that had come to light. 

That such was really the object of the steps which were taken towards a Reformed English 
Breviary or Portiforium is confirmed by the course of events. Something in the nature of a confirma- 
tion is also afforded by a comparison of these attempts with others of a similar kind which were made 
abroad towards obtaining a Reformed Roman Breviary. Some years after the Convocation of the 
Church of England had issued the 1516 edition of the Salisbury Use, Leo X. gave directions to 
Zaccharie Ferréri de Vicence, Bishop of Guarda, in Portugal, to prepare a new version of the Breviary 
Hymns. This was done, and the volume published under the authority of Clement VII. in 1525, with 
this prominent announcement of a Reformed Breviary on the title-page :—“< Breviariwm Eeclesiasticum 
ab eodem Lach. Pont. longe brevius et facilius redditum et ab omni errore purgatum propediem exibit.” 
The promised reform was effected by Cardinal Quignonez, a Spanish Bishop, and was published under 
the same authority as the Hymnal, in 1535-6. But this Reformed Roman Breviary was intended 
chiefly, if not entirely, for the use of the clergy and monks in their private recitations; and its introduc- 
tion in some places for choir and public use eventually led to its suppression in 1568. No provision 
whatever was made (as there had been in connexion with the English reform) for adapting it to the use 
of the laity. During the whole forty years of its use there is no trace of any attempt to connect the 
Breviary of Quignonez with vernacular translations of prayers or scriptures. And, although it was 
undoubtedly an initiatory step in the same direction as that taken by our own Reformers (who indeed 
used the Breviary of Quignonez in their subsequent proceedings), yet it was never followed up, nor 
intended to be followed up; and the object of the Roman reform throws out in stronger light that of 
the English. 

The measures already taken by the ecclesiastical authorities of England were plainly 
regarded as being of a temporary nature only. No more Service-books were allowed 
to be printed than were absolutely necessary for the performance of Divine Worship, as 
it was seen that a much more thorough revision of them must take place. Meanwhile, 
Convocation was appointed, with the sanction of Henry VIII., to consider the nature 
of the revision that was to be made. This Committee was appointed in 1542, and consisted of the 
Bishops of Salisbury ' and Ely (Shaxton and Goodrich), with six Clergy of the Lower House of Convo- 
cation ; the object of their appointment being stated to be the examination, correction, and reformation 
of “all mass-books, antiphoners” [anthem-books], “ and portuises,” that is portiforia, or breviaries. This 
Committee continued in existence for a long period, and its last work was the Book of Common Prayer, 
published in 1549. But for a time its public action was restrained by the “Statute of Six Articles,” 
which, in point of fact, made such labours highly penal’. There is good reason to think that Henry VIII. 


Committee of 
Convocation for 
Reform of Service- 
books. 


a Committee of 


1 The Bishops of Salisbury are ex officio Precentors of the 
Province of Canterbury. 

2 The Statute of Six Articles was an Act of Parliament passed 
under the personal influence of Henry VIII., and against the 
persevering efforts of the Bishops in the House of Lords, in the 
year 1539. It made highly penal any denial of either of six 


short statements which embodied the chief points of doctrine 


then brought into controversy. It formed the key of the position 
for the time; and, knowing this, Cranmer and other Bishops 
maintained the debate for cleven days in the hope of preventing 


the bill from passing, he himself arguing against it for three days. 
The penalties annexed to this Act were, for preaching or writing 
against the first article, burning (without pardon on recantation) ; 
imprisonment for life, with forfeiture, for preaching or writing 
against any of the others, with death for the second offence. In 
his reply to the Devonshire rebels, Archbishop Cranmer writes 
respecting this statute (which they wished to have restored), “If 
the King’s Majesty himself had not come into the parliament 
house, those laws had never passed.”—Strype’s Cranmer, ii. 515. 
Ecce. Hist. Soc. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. XX1 


was himself the author of this Statute, and it was certainly passed by his influence. The Bishops 
had vigorously opposed it in the House of Lords with an eleven days’ debate, and their experience showed 
them that any reformation of the ancient services must be carried on with extreme caution while this 
law was in operation under so despotic a monarch', But as soon as Convocation met, after the death of 
Henry, a resolution was passed, “ That the works of the Bishops and others, who by the command of the 
Convocation. have laboured in examining, reforming, and publishing the Divine Service, may be produced, 
and laid before the examination of this house.” This resolution was passed on November 22nd, 1547, 
and as some of the Clergy complained that it was not safe to do this while the Statute of Six Articles 
remained in force, Cranmer exerted himself, and successfully, to. get it repealed, and so to set the 
‘Committee and the Convocation free. 

-The first efforts of the Committee had been to prune down the complexity and = Reform of the 
superabundance of the existing Rubrics.. This was so great that some, pages of the Rubrics. 
Service-books contained many more words of direction in red letters than of prayers in black. The 
whole ceremonial of Divine Service was involved in this inquiry, including the ancient and venerable 
practices of the Church, as well as numberless recent and often .superstitious ones. In 1543 they 
prepared a long Canon on ‘The Ceremonies to be used in the Church of England, together with an 
explanation of the meaning and significancy of them.” How far this was published at the time is not 
clear; but it is highly probable that the investigation which resulted in this document was also the 
foundation on which the Rubrics of 1549 were constructed. 

The reconstructors of our devotional offices acted wisely in reducing the number of Rubrics, and 
generally moderating the ceremonial system of the Church of England. They said that “the great 
excess and multitude of them hath so increased in these latter days, that the burthen of them was 
intolerable,” and they spoke with the experience of practical men, who were familiarly acquainted all 
their lives with that about which they wrote. But one inconvenience has arisen out of the manner in 
which they did their work, from which later generations have suffered more than they could foresee. 
They went upon the principle of expressing only the most essential things in the Rubric, and left many 
others to tradition. As Bishop Cosin states it’, “The book does not every where enjoin and prescribe 
every little order, what should be said or done, but takes it for granted that people are acquainted with 
such common, and things always used already.” Many of these usages are referred to in the subsequent 
pages of this volume, and need not be mentioned now. It is sufficient to say, that some of them dropped 
out of memory altogether during the persecution of the Church and the suppression of the Establish- 
ment under the rule of the Commonwealth ; that others, from want of written authority, have become 
the subject of controversy; and that the ritual tradition to which the Reformers trusted so much 
when they put forth their condensed form of Rubric, has only been partially recovered even in our 
own time. . 

Meanwhile they had also set forth, in 1544, the Litany in English, revised from the old English 
Litany, which had been in use for a hundred and fifty years or more; and with additions from the Litany 
of- Luther, and that of Archbishop Hermann’s Reformed Ritual of Cologne. Though, however, the 
King consented to this, he seems to have refused to sanction any further labours of the Committee, and 
they were obliged to proceed with extreme caution during the remainder of his life. 

Freedom of action for the Bishops and Clergy of Convocation having been obtained eae 
by the repeal of the Statute of Six Articles (or the “ Whip with Six Cords,” as it was the Committee. 
grimly called), they immediately commenced advancing to the practical end of the 
Revision which had been in view for so many years. On November 30th, 1547, Archbishop Cranmer 
(now a member of this important Committee) brought before Convocation “ a form of a certain ordinance 
for the receiving of the Body of our Lord under both kinds, viz., of bread and wine.” This was adopted, 


1 Yet Cranmer made a vigorous effort to persuade the king into | reformation in King Henry the Eight his days than at this time, 
authorizing the publication of their revision. On January 24, | the king being in his infancy. For if the king’s father had set 
1546, he sent Henry a draught of a letter to be addressed to | forth any thing for the reformation of abuses, who was he that 
himself by the king, in which it is referred to, and by which it | durst gainsay it?” He probably foresaw that there would be 
was intended to put it in force. But the king would not adopt | Roman and Puritan schisms, and thought that they might have 
the suggestion. The Archbishop wisely pressed on these pro- | been prevented by the Church, when backed by the concen- 
posed reforms in the hope that they would be firmly rooted, if | trated power of Henry, while there was little hope of stemming 
established by so vigorous a hand as that of Henry VIII, “It | their force under his successors. 
was better,” he said to his Secretary in 1547, “to attempt such 2 Works, vol. v. p. 65. 


xxi AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


and published in March under the title of “The Order of the Communion,” being an English addition 
to the ancient Salisbury Use of the Missal, which was left otherwise untouched. [See Notes on 
Communion Service. | 

The Committee of Revision had now been considerably enlarged, and since it occupies ‘so important 
a position in respect to the subsequent history of England, it will be well to give their names as they 
stood in 1547-8, and in 1549. 


From the Upper House of Convocation. 


Thomas Cranmer . : . Archbishop of Canterbury. . 

Thomas Goodrich . ; : Bishop of Ely [afterwards Lord Chancellor]. 
Henry Holbech (or Randes) . Bishop of Lincoln. 

George Day . : ; : Bishop of Chichester, 


John Skip . ‘ : : Bishop of Hereford. 
Thomas Thirlby . : : Bishop of Westminster. 
Nicholas Ridley’ . : : Bishop of Rochester [afterwards of London]. 


From the Lower House of Convocation. 


William May : : 4 Dean of St. Paul’s, 

Richard Cox ‘ ¢ ; Dean of Ch. Ch. [afterwards Bishop of Ely.] 
John Taylor : iE wy Dean of Lincoln [afterwards Bishop of Lincoln]. 
Simon Heynes . 3 : Dean of Exeter. 


Thomas Robertson é . Archdeacon of Leicester [afterwards Dean of Durham]. 
John Redmayne . ; 4 Master of Trin. Coll. Camb. 


In what manner the Convocation of the Province of York was represented is not on record; but 
from the proceedings of 1661 (which would be founded on strict precedent) there can be no doubt that 
its co-operation was obtained in some way ; and the names of the Archbishop of York and his Suffragans 
are indeed contained in a list of Bishops who were indirectly or directly mixed up with those above. 
recorded. 

It is evident there had been a conviction all along that it was necessary to adopt the “ vulgar 
tongue ” as the language in which the revised Services of the Church of England were to be used. The 
English Litany, which had been used by the people for many generations, was authorized for public use 
in Divine Service in 1544, The Processional (containing other Litanies) was translated in the same 
year, though never brought into use; and the “ Order of Communion” was a step in the same uniform 
direction of progressive reformation. Much interesting light is thrown on the manner in which this 
cautious progress was made, by a letter of Archbishop Cranmer to Henry VIII., respecting the 
English Processional just referred to: its date being Oct. 7, 1544 °:— 

“Tt may please your Majesty to be advertised, that, according to your Highness’ commandment, 
sent unto me by your Grace’s Secretary, Mr. Pagett, I have translated into the English tongue, so well 
as I could in so short a time, certain processions, to be used upon festival days, if after due correction 
and amendment of the same, your Highness shall think it so convenient. In which translation, foras- 
much as many of the processions, in the Latin, were but barren, as me seemed, and little fruitful, I was 
constrained to use more than the liberty of a translator: for in some processions I have altered divers 
words ; in some I have added part ; in some taken part away; some I have left out whole, either for 
bycause the matter appeared to me to be little to purpose, or byeause the days be not with us festival 
days” [having been abrogated in 1537] ; “and some processions I have added whole, because I thought 
I had better matter for the purpose than was the procession in Latin; the judgement whereof I leave 
wholly unto your Majesty: and after your Highness hath corrected it, if your Grace command some 
devout and solemn note to be made thereunto (as is to the procession which your Majesty hath already 
set forth in English), I trust it will much excitate and stir the hearts of all men unto devotion and 
godliness. But in mine opinion, the song that shall be made thereunto should not be full of notes, but 
as near as may be for every syllable a note; so that it may be sung distinctly and devoutly, as be the 


1 Jenkyns’ Cranmer, i. 315. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. xxill 
Matins and Evensong, Venite, the Hymns, Ze Deum, Benedictus, Magnificat, Nunc Dimittis, and all the 
Psalms and Versicles; and in the Mass, Gloria in Eucelsis, Gloria Patri, the Creed, the Preface, the 
Pater Noster, and some of the Sanctus and Agnus. As concerning the Salve festa dies, the Latin note, 
as I think, is sober and distinct enough; wherefore I have travailed to make the verses in English, and 
have put the Latin note unto the same. Nevertheless, they that be cunning in singing, can make a 
much more solemn note thereto. I made them only for a proof, to see how English would do in song. 
But by cause mine English verses lack the grace and facility that I would wish they had, your Majesty 
may cause some other to make them again, that can do the same in more pleasant English and phrase. 
As for the sentence” [the English sense], “I suppose it will serve well enough. Thus Almighty God 
. preserve your Majesty in long and prosperous health and felicity, From Bekisbourne, the 7th of 
October. “ Your Grace’s most bounden 
“ Chaplain and Beadsman, 
«'T’, CANTUARIEN. 
“To the King’s most excellent Majesty.” 


From other transactions between the Archbishop and the King, it may be inferred that the sugges- 
tion was first sent by the former, perhaps at the request of Convocation, to the latter, then returned in 
the form of an order from the Crown to the Archbishop as head of the Convocation; and that the above 
letter is the official reply to that order. It does not appear that the King permitted this English Pro- 
cessional to be published. The previous Procession alluded to by Cranmer in this Letter was the Litany 
nearly as it is now used, which was ordered to be sung in English (as it had long been known to the 
people through the Prymers) by a mandate of the Crown, dated June 11, 15447. 

It had always, in fact, been the practice of the Church of England to encourageand yee of the Ver- 
promote the intelligent use of her services by the people at large: and in this, perhaps, nacular. 
she has always differed considerably from other European churches’, From the earliest periods we find 
injunctions imposed upon the Clergy that they should be careful to teach the people the Creed, the Lord’s 
Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in their own tongue. Thus, in a.p. 740 there was an excerpt of 
Egbert, Archbishop of York, to the effect, “that every priest do with great exactness instil the Lord’s 
Prayer and Creed into the people committed to him, and shew them to endeavour after the knowledge of 
the whole of religion, and the practice of Christianity*’.” About the same time, in the southern Province, 
it is ordered “that they instil the Creed into them, that they may know what to believe, and what 
to hope for‘.” Two centuries later there is a canon of /Elfric, Archbishop of Canterbury, enjoining the 
clergy to “speak the sense of the Gospel to the people in English, and of the Pater noster, and the Creed, 
as oft as he can, for the inciting of the people to know their belief, and retaining their Christianity*.” 
Similar injunctions are to be found in the laws of Canute in the eleventh century, the constitutions of 
Archbishop Peckham in the thirteenth, and in the canons of many diocesan synods, of various dates in 
the medizval period. Many expositions of the Creed, Lord’s Prayer, Ten Commandments, and other 
principal formule are also to be found in English, and these give testimony to the same anxious desire 
of the. Church to make the most use possible of the language spoken by the poor of the day*®. Inter- 
linear translations of some, at least, of the offices, were also provided, just as the English and Welsh 
Prayer Book is printed in parallel columns in modern times. 

But in days when books were scarce, and when few could read, little could be done towards 
giving to the people at large this intelligent acquaintance with the services except by oral instruction 
of the kind indicated. Yet the writing-rooms of the Monasteries did what they could towards mul- 
tiplying books for the purpose ; and some provision was made, even for the poorest, by means of Horn- 
books, on which the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed, and the Angelic Salutation were written. The following 


1 The Salisbury Processional was republished in Latin some | English. Yet it was very commonly understood in medieval 
time in 1544, probably because the king would not consent to | times. 
have it used in English as proposed by Cranmer. 3 Johnson’s Eng. Canons, i. 186. 4 Thid. 248, 

2 One chief reason of this difierence is doubtless to be found in 5 Thid. 398. 


the fact that the Latin language was spoken almost, if not quite, 
vernacularly in France, Spain, Portugal, and Italy, to a late 
period, as it is now in Hungary: and that the modern languages 
of these countries were formed out of it. In England Latin was 
never vernacular, and it furnished only a small part of our settled 


6 Jt must be remembered that English was not spoken univer- 
sally by the upper classes for some centuries after the Conquest. 
In 1362, an Act of Parliament was passed, enjoining all school- 
masters to teach their scholars to translate into English instead 
of French. 


XXIV AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


is an engraving made from one of two which were found by the present writer under the floor of Over 
Church, near Cambridge, in 1857. It is of a late date, and has had “In the Name of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,” in the place of the Angelic Salutation; but it is given as 
an illustration of the traditional practice, and because it is of special interest from being found in a 
church. 


Paw 
NW it 


While these horn-books were thus provided for the poor, the Seriptorium of the Monastery also pro- 
vided Prymers in English and Latin for those who could afford the expensive luxury of a book. The 
Latin Prymers are well known under the name of “ Books of Hours.” Vernacular Prymers exist which 
were written as early as the fourteenth century, and many relies of old English devotion of that date will 
be found in the following pages of this volume. These English Prymers contained about one-third of 
the Psalms, the Canticles, the Apostles’ Creed, with a large number of the prayers, anthems, and perhaps 
hymns. ‘They continued to be published up to the end of Henry VIII.’s reign ; and, m a modified 
form, even at a later date: and they must have familiarized those who used them with a large portion of 
the Services, even when they did not understand the Latin in which those services were said by the 
Clergy and choirs. 

Books were also provided in which were given tables of reference to the Lessons, Epistles, and 
Gospels: The following is the title of one, and a specimen of the references is annexed :— 

“Here begynneth a rule that tellith in whiche chapitris of the bible ye may fynde the lessouns, 
pistlis and gospels, that ben red in the churche aftir the vse of salisburi: markid with lettris of the a. b. 
c. at the begynnynge of the chapitris toward the myddil or eende; aftir the ordre as the lettris stonden 
in the a. b. ¢. first ben sett sundaies and ferials togidere: and aftir that the sanctorum, the propre and 
comyn togider of al the yeer: and thanne last the commemoraciouns: that is clepid the temporal of al 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. 


XXV 


the yere. First is written a clause of the begynnynge of the peu and gospel, and a clause of the 
endynge therof.” 


ende. in the lord Ths Ct. 
ende. osanna in high thingis.” 


“The first sonenday i Rom. xiii. ¢. 
of aduent. - § Mattheu. xxi. ec. 


d. we knowen this tyme. 
a. whanne ihs cam nygh., 


Such provisions for the accompaniment of the Latin Service went a good way towards rendering it 
intelligible to those who could read. Nor must we omit to mention the sermons for Christian Seasons, 
and on the elements of Christian Faith and Practice, which went under the name of the “ Festivale” or 
_ “Liber Festivalis.” These were printed by Caxton in 1483, and often reprinted between then and the 
time when our present Homilies and other books of the kind were set forth '. 

‘Soon after the accession of Edward VI., which occurred in J anuary 1546-7, a Visitation of all the 
Dioceses of England was commenced, and the well-known “Injunctions of Edward VI.” were printed 
on July 31st, 1547. In May of the same year a King’s letter? was sent to the Archbishops, giving 
notice of an intended Visitation, and in October some other Injunctions were issued by the Royal 
Visitors, which appear never to have been printed. They are here copied (with the exception of the last 
three, which have no bearing on our subject) from Fothergill’s MS. Collections in York Minster 
Library *. 

“ Injunctions given by the King’s Majestie’s Visitors in his Highness’ Visitation to Robt. Holdgate 
Ld. A. B. the Dn. Chapter, and all other the Ecclesiastical ministers of and in the Cathedral Church of 
York, 26 8bris An. 1547. 

[1] “Ye shall at all days and times when nine lessons ought or were accustomed to be sung, sing 
Mattins only of six Lessons and six Psalms with the song of Te Deum Laudamus or Miserere, as the 
time requireth, after the six Lessons: and that dayly from the Annunciation of our Lady to the first day 
of October ye shall begin Mattins at six of the clock in the morning, and residue of the year at seven of 
the clock, 

[2] “Item. Ye shall sing and celebrate in note or song within the said Church but only one Mass, 
that is to say, High Mass only, and none other, and daily begin the same at nine of the clock before 
noon. 

[3] “ Item. Ye shall daily from the said feast of the Annunciation to the said first day of October, 
sing the Evensong and Complin without any responds: and begin the same at three of the clock in the 
afternoon. ‘The residue of the year to begin at two of the clock, or half an hour after. 

[4] “Item. Ye shall hereafter omit, and not use the singing of any hours, prime, dirige, or com- 
mendations; but every man to say the same as him sufficeth or he is disposed. 

[5] “Item. Ye-shall sing, say, use, or suffer none other Anthems in the Church but these hereafter 
following, and such as by the King’s Majesty and his most Honourable Council hereafter shall be set 
forth. 


Anthem. 


* Tike as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, even so was our Saviour Jesus Christ lift upon 


the Cross, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have joy for ever. 


1 The necessity for a vernacular Service is strongly asserted in 
the Preface to the edition of the Prymer [a.p. 1545]-which 
goes by the name of “the King’s,” though probably the king had 
nothing to do with it further than signing an order for its publi- 
cation. It is there declared, ‘‘The party that understandeth not 
the pith and effectualness of the talk that he frankly maketh 
with God, may be as an harp or pipe haying a sound, but not 
understanding the noise that itself hath made ;” and the king is 
then made to say that he has given to his subjects “a determinate 
form of praying in their own mother-tongue, to the intent that 
such as are ignorant of any strange speech, may have what to 
pray in their own acquainted and familiar language with fruit 
and understanding.” But the credit thus given to the king was 
given in the adulatory spirit of the age. Such books had long 


For God so loved 


been provided for the laity by the Clergy, but they were now to 
be issued under royal authority: and it would have been more 
honest to have said how the case really stood. After his con- 
demnation, Archbishop Cranmer wrote, in a letter to Queen Mary, 
that the Revision Committee, though composed of men who held 
different opinions, “agreed without controversy (not one saying 
contrary) that the Service of the Church ought to be in the, 
mother tongue.” Ridley also writes to his chaplain that he had 
conferred with many on the subject, and “never found man (so 
far as I do remember), neither old nor new, gospeller nor papist, 
of what judgment soever he was, in this thing to be of a contrary 
opinion.” 

2 Cardwell’s Doc. Ann. i. 24. 

3 Probably they were issued for the southern Province also, 


Cc 


Xxvl AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son, that such as believe in Him should not perish, but have 
life everlasting. 

“WV. Increase, O Lord, our faith in Thee. 

“k, That we may work His pleasure only. 


Collect. 


“ Most bountiful and benign Lord God, we, Thy humble servants, freely redeemed and justified by 
the passion, death, and resurrection of our Saviour Jesus Christ, in full trust of salvation therein, most 
humbly desire Thee so to strengthen our faith and illuminate us with Thy grace, that we may walk and 
live in Thy favour, and after this life to be partakers of Thy glory in the everlasting kingdom of Heaven, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. So be it. 


Let us pray. 


Another Anthem. 


« Be it evident and known unto all Christians that through our Lord Jesus Christ forgiveness of sins 
is preached unto you, and that by Him all that believe are justified from all things from the which we 
could not be justified by the law of Moses. So be it. 

“W. O Lord, for Christ’s sake our Saviour. 

“RK, Accept and hear our humble prayer. 


Let us pray. 


“We sinners do beseech Thee, O Lord, to keep Edward the sixth, Thy Servant, our King and Gover- 
nor; that it may please Thee to rule his heart in Thy faith, fear, and love ; that he may ever have affiance 
in Thee, and ever seek Thy honour and glory. That it may please Thee to be his defender and keeper, 
giving him the victory over all his enemies, through oar Lord Jesus Christ. So be it. 


“The residue of the day ye shall bestow in virtuous and godly exercises, as in study and contempla- 
tion of God His most holy word. 

* All which and singular Injunctions before mentioned the Lord Archbishop of this Church, his 
Chancellor, Archdeacons, or Official, shall publish and send, or cause to be published and sent and ob- 
served in to every Church, College, Hospital, and other ecclesiastical places within his Diocese. 

[6] “Item. All Sermons, Collations, and Lectures of Divinity hereafter to be had or made in 
visitations, Synods, Chapters, or at any other time or place, shall not be used in the Latin Tongue, but 
in the English, to the intent that every man having recourse thereunto may well perceive the 
same.” 

These remarkable Injunctions have quite the appearance of taking up the reform of the Liturgy 
exactly where it had been laid down through the refusal of Henry VIII. to sanction the English 
Processional: for what are here called “ Anthems” are exactly similar in character to those parts of the 
Service which were printed for each Festival in the Latin Processional of Salisbury, the variable part 
of the Litany, by which it was adapted to the different seasons of the Christian year. They were also 
used in the “ Hours,” and seem to show the original form of the “ Anthem *” 

But all sound reasons for offering up the praises and prayers of the Church in Latin had really 
passed away many years before this. The reverent prejudices which had still held men to the old habit 
were also dying off; and the time had arrived when the English language could with wisdom be wholly 
adopted by the English Church in her work of Divine Service. 

The hockeenenne No records have yet been discovered which throw any light upon the details of 
which the Prayer the Committee’s work in producing the Prayer Book of 1549. It appears to have 
oe Wee eee occupied them for several months, notwithstanding their previous labours; and 
there is every mark of deliberation and reverence in the result. The foundation of their work, or rather 
the quarry out of which they extracted their chief materials, was the Reformed Salisbury Use of 1516 
and 1541 : but some other books were evidently used by them, and it may be safely concluded that they 
did not end their labours before they had gone through a large amount of liturgical research. The 


1 See also the Haster Processional Anthem at p. 105, 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. XXVIl 
following list may be taken as fairly representing the principal books which the Committee of Con- 
vocation had before them as the materials for their work of revision :— 

The Salisbury Portiforium', Missal, Manual, and Pontifical. 

The York and other Uses?. 

The Reformed Breviary of Cardinal Quignonez. 1535-6°. 

Simplex ac Pia Deliberatio of Hermann, Archbishop of Cologne. 

The same in English. 1548%. (A previous edition also in 1547.) 

The Prymer in English, of various dates®. 

The “ Great” Bible’. 

How far the Book of Common Prayer was influenced by these works will be shown in the margin 
and. the foot-notes of the following pages. But even a superficial glance at the latter will make it 
apparent that the new book was, substantially, as it still remains, a condensed reproduction, in English, 
of those Service-books which had been used in Latin by the Church of England for many centuries 
before. 

The Reformation in Germany was in active progress at this time (not having yet lost the impetus 
given to it by the strong-handed leadership of Luther), and Cranmer had been much in correspondence 
with Melancthon and some other German divines during the reign of Henry VIII. But these foreign 
reformers had scarcely any influence upon the Prayer Book of 1549; and were probably not even con- 
sulted during its progress towards completion. Melancthon and Bucer assisted the Archbishop of Cologne 
in preparing his “ Consultation” (one of the books referred to), and they probably used Luther’s version 
of the ancient Nuremberg offices. But this volume contributed little to our Prayer Book beyond a few 
clauses in the Litany, and some portions of the Baptismal Service ; and it is somewhat doubtful whether 
in the case of the Litany our English form was not in reality the original of that in Hermann’s book. 
Most likely the latter was translated and brought before Convocation with the hope that it would have 
much influence; but the Committee of Revision were too wise and too learned in Liturgical matters to 
attach much importance to it *. 

It is, in some respects, unfortunate that we cannot trace the book of 1549 into any further detail 
during the time when it was in the hands of the Committee. We cannot even form any definite con- 
jecture as to the parts respectively taken by its members in the work before them; nor can one of the 
original collects which they inserted be traced back to its author. And yet there is some satisfaction in 
this. The book is not identified with any one name, but is the work of the Church of England by its 
authorized agents and representatives; and as we reverence the architects of some great cathedral for 
their work’s sake, without perhaps knowing the name of any one of them, or the portions which each 
one designed, so we look upon the work of those who gave us our first English Book of Common Prayer, 


1545 *. 


1 «Breviarium seu Portiforium secundum Morem et Consue- 
tudinem Ecclesiee Sarisburiensis Anglicane.” It is called “ Salzs- 
tury Use” in the Preface of our Prayer Book ; and that term, or 
Sarum Use, is adopted generally for the Breviary, Missal, and 
other Service-books of the same origin. 

2 Referred to in the Prayer Book Preface, as “‘ Hereford Use, 
the Use of Bangor, York Use, and Lincoln Use.” 

3 « Breviarium Romanum, ex sacra potissimum Scriptura, et 
probatis Sanctorum historiis nuper confectum, ac denuo per 
eundem Authorem accuratius recognitum, eaque diligentia hoc in 
anno a mendis ita purgatum, ut Momi judicium non pertimescat. 
Lugduni. 1543.” 

4 «Simplex ac pia deliberatio de Reformatione Hcclesiarum 
Electoratus Coloniensis.” 

5 « A simple and religious consultation of us Hermann by the 
grace of God Archbishop of Colone and Prince Elector, &c., by 
what meanes a Christian reformation, and founded in God’s 
worde, Of doctrine, Administration of Divine Sacraments, Of 
Ceremonies, and the whole cure of soules, and other ecclesiastical 
ministries, may be begun among men until the lord graunte a 
better to be appoynted, either by a free and christian counsaile, 
generall or national, or else by the states of the Empire of the 
nation of Gemnany, gathered together in the Holy Ghost. 
Perused by the translator thereof and amended in many places. 


1548. Imprinted at London by Jhon Daye and William Seres 
dwellynge in Sepulchre’s paryshe at the signe of the Resurrection, 
alytle aboue Holbourne Conduit. Cum gratia et privilegio im- 
primendum solum.” 

8 See Maskell’s “Monumenta Ritualia Ecclesie Anglicanz,” 
vol. ii.; and Burton’s “ Three Primers of Henry VIII.” 

7 «<The Byble in Englyshe, that is to saye, the content of all 
the holy scripture bothe of y® olde and newe testament, truly 
translated after the veryte of the Hebrue and Greke textes, by 
y® dylygent studye of diverse excellent learned men, expert in 
the forsayde tonges. Printed by Rychard Grafton and Edward 
Whitchurch. Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum. 1539.” 

8 It may be added that Cranmer had married a niece of Osian- 
der, who is said to have prepared the Nuremberg formularies for 
Luther, and who was also the original compiler of a Catechism 
for Nuremberg and Brandenberg, of which that of Justus Jonas 
is a Latin translation. John a Lasco is said to have had some 
influence with Cranmer, and he certainly lived with the Arch- 
bishop at Lambeth from September to February in the year 
1548-9. But the Prayer Book was before Parliament on Decem- 
ber 9th, 1548-9, and was before the King in Council previously. 
It passed the Lords on January 15th, and the Commons on the 
21st. Foreigners were very forward in interfering, but their 
suggestions were civilly put aside at this time. 


e 2 


XXVIl AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


admiring its fair proportions, and the skill which put it together, and caring but little to inquire whose 
was the hand that traced this or that particular compartment of the whole. , 
Although we cannot thus trace out the work of each hand in this great undertaking, we can, 
Nature of the However, by means of internal evidence, and a comparison with the older formularies, 
greed inthe find out the nature of their labours, and something of the manner in which they went 
; about them. It was made a first principle that every thing in the new Prayer Book 
was to be in English; a principle respecting which, as has been shown before, there seems to have been 
not the slightest doubt or hesitation. Their first labour was, then, that of condensing the old services 
into a form suitable for the object in view, and yet keeping up the spirit and general purpose of the 
original and ancient worship of the Church. 

[1] A great step was made in this direction by substituting a Calendar of Lessons referring to the 
Holy Bible for the Lessons at length as they had been hitherto printed in the Breviary. This made it 
possible to combine the Breviary [daily services], the Missal [Holy Communion], Epistles and Gos- 
pels (&c.), and the Manual [Occasional Offices], in one volume. A precedent for this was offered by a 
practice which had been adopted in the fifteenth century of printing the Communion Service (though not 
the Epistles and Gospels) as part of the Breviary’. The Marriage Service was also printed in the 
Missal, which was a precedent for introducing the other services of the Manual into the Prayer 
Book. 

[2] The next step towards condensation was the adoption of a less variable system in the daily 
services, so that the Collect of the day, the Lessons, and the Psalms should be almost the only portions 
of Mattins and Evensong which needed to be changed from day to day, or week to week. 

[3] Lastly, the several hours of Prayer were condensed into two, Mattins and Evensong, with a 
third added on Sundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, in the form of the Litany. The ancient arrange- 
ment of the day for Divine Service was as follows :— 


Nocturns or Mattins ; a service before daybreak. 

Lauds ; a service at daybreak, quickly following, or even joined on to, Mattins. 
Prime; a later morning service, about six o’clock, 

Tierce ; a service at nine o’clock. 

Seats ; a service at noon. 

Nones ; a service at three o’clock in the afternoon. 

Vespers; an evening service. 

Compline ; a late evening service, at bedtime. 


These services were often, if not generally, “accumulated” in the Medieval Church as they are at 
the present day on the Continent; several being said in succession, just as Mattins, Litany, and the 
Communion Service have been “ accumulated,” in modern times, in the Church of England. But the 
different offices had many parts in common, and this way of using them led to unmeaning repetitions of 
Versicles and Prayers. This evil was avoided by condensing and amalgamating them, so that repe- 
titions took place only at the distant hours of Morning and Evening. The services of Mattins, Lauds, 
and Prime, were thus condensed into Mattins; those for Vespers and Compline into Evensong. The 
three other hours appear (from a table of Psalms given in the Introduction to the Psalter) to have fallen 
out of public use long before the reformation of our offices; and they were probably regarded as services 
for monastic and private use only”. The general result of this process of condensation will be best seen 
by the following table, in which the course of the ancient Mattins, Lauds, and Prime, is indicated side 
by side with that of the Mattins of 1549; and in the same manner, Vespers and Compline are set 
parallel with Evensong. From this comparison it will be clearly seen that the Book of Common Prayer 
was framed out of the ancient Offices of the Church of England, by consolidation and translation of the 
latter, the same principles which have been above indicated being also extended to the Communion 
Service and the Occasional Offices. The details of the changes that were made will be found in the notes 
under each portion of the Prayer Book in the following pages. 


1 So in Sarum Breyiaries of 1499, 1507, 1510, 1514, 1535, 2 See also No. 4 of the Injunctions which are printed on 
1541. B. Mus. and Bodleian Libraries. page xxv. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. 


§ Sarum Daily Services and those of 1549. 


Salisbury Use. 
Mattins. Lauds. Prime. 
Invocation. Y. and Ry. Invocation. 
Our Father. Our Father. 
O Lord, open Thou. 
_ O God, make speed. O God, make speed. O God, make speed. 
Glory be. Glory be. Glory be. 
- Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. 
Venite, exultemus. 
Hymn. Hymn. 
Psalms. Psalms. Psalms. 
Lessons. 
Te Deum. 
Canticle. Athanasian Creed. 
Short chapter. Short chapter. 
Hymn. 
Benedictus. 
Short Litany. 
Our Father. 
Sufirages. [ Creed, | Suffrages, Con- 


1st Collect. 
2nd Collect. 


Vespers. 


Invocation. 
Our Father. 


O God, make speed. 


Psalms. 

Short chapter. 
Hymn. 
Magnificat. 


Short Litany. 
Our Father. 
Suffrages. 


1st Collect. 
2nd Collect. 


fession and Absolution. 


3rd Collect. 
Intercessory Prayers. 


Prayer Book of 1549. 


Mattins. 


Our Father. 

O Lord, open Thou. 
O God, make speed. 
Glory be. 

Alleluia. 

Venite, exultemus. 


Psalms. 
1st Lesson. 
Te Deum or Benedicite. 


2nd Lesson. 


Benedictus. 
Creed. 

Short Litany. 
Our Father. 


Suffrages. 


1st Collect. 
2nd Collect. 
8rd Collect. 


Compline. 


Invocation. 

Our Father. 

O God, make speed. 
Psalms. 


Short chapter. 
Hymn. 
Nune Dimittis. 


Short Litany. 

Our Father. 

Suffrages, [Creed,] Con- 
fession and Absolution. 


3rd Collect. 
Intercessory Prayers. 


Eyensong. 


Our Father. | 

O God, make speed. 
Psalms. 

1st Lesson. 


Magnificat. 
2nd Lesson. 


Nunc Dimittis. 
Creed. 

Short Litany. 
Our Father. 
Suffrages. 


1st Collect. 
2nd Collect. 
8rd Collect. 


Xxix 


When these learned Divines had completed their work, the Prayer Book was submitted to Con- 
vocation (which met on November 24th, 1548), that it might go forth with the full authority of the 
Church. It was then communicated to the King in Council, and afterwards laid before Parliament on 
December 9th, 1548, that it might be incorporated into an Act of Parliament [2nd and 8rd Edw. VI. 
cap. 1]. This Act (including the Prayer Book) passed the House of Lords on January 15th, and the 


House of Commons on January 21st, 1548-9, 


It was the first Act of Uniformity, and it enacted that 


the Prayer Book should come into use in all churches on the Feast of Whitsunday following, which was 
June 9th, 1549. The Book itself was published on March 7th, 1548-9, thus allowing three months’ inter- 
val, during which the Clergy and Laity might become acquainted with the new Order of Divine Service. 


AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


xxx 


Yet, although it was in one sense new, they who had been engaged upon it felt so strong a conviction 
that it was substantially identical with the old, that in after days Cranmer offered to prove that “the 
order of the Church of England, set out by authority of Edward the Sixth, was the same that had been 
used in the Church for fifteen hundred years past '.” 

In the Act of Parliament which enacted the Book of Common Prayer, it was said to have been 
composed under the influence of the Holy Ghost; and there is, doubtless, an indication of this belief in 
the choice of the day on which it was enjoined to be used. So solemn were the views which those who 
arranged and set forth the Prayer Book took of their work, so anxious their desire that it should be 
sealed with the blessing of God. 


It was unfortunate for the peace of the Church of England, that those who were in authority at 
this period were disposed to yield too much to the influence of foreigners whose principles were totally 
alien from those on which the English Reformation was based. That Reformation had been strictly 
Catholic in its origin and in its official progress, and the repudiation of foreign interference with the 
Church of England had been one of its main features. But foreign interference now arose from a 
different quarter, Calvin and his associates endeavouring, with characteristic self-assurance, to bias the 
mind of England towards Genevan Presbyterianism, rather than Anglican Catholicity. Calvin himself 
thrust a correspondence upon the Protector Somerset, upon the young King, and upon Archbishop 
Cranmer’. A letter of his still exists in the State Paper Office, which was written to the Duke of 
Somerset on October 22nd, 1548, and in which he urges the Protector to push the Reformation further 
than it had hitherto gone. Others to the same purpose may be found in Strype’s Memorials of Cranmer 
(iii. 25]. Peter Martyr and Martin Bucer (neither of whom could understand the English language) 
were placed in the most important positions at Oxford and Cambridge by Somerset; John a Lasco, a 
Polish refugee, was quartered upon Cranmer for six months, and afterwards established in a schismatiec 
position in London; and Poullain [Valerandus Pollanus] was, m a similar manner, established at 
Glastonbury *. These appointments show the manner in which the Church of England was sagaciously 
leavened with foreign Protestantism by those who wished to reduce it to the same abject level; and they 
are but a few of the many indications which exist that the Puritanism by which the Church was so 
imperilled during the succeeding hundred and twenty years arose out of foreign influences thus brought 
to bear upon the young clergy and the laity of that generation. 

These influences soon began to affect the Book of Common Prayer, which had been, with so much 
forethought, learning, and pious deliberation, prepared by the Bishops and other Divines 
who composed the Committee to which reference has so often been made. It had 
been accepted with satisfaction by most of the Clergy and the Laity*; and had even been taken into 
use by many at Easter, although not enjoined to be used until Whitsunday, so desirous were they of 
adopting the vernacular service. It was, probably, the quiet acceptance of the Prayer Book by the 
Clergy which raised hopes in the foreign party of moulding it to their own standard of Protestantism. 

It is certain that an agitation had been going on, among the latter, from the very time when 
the Book of 1549 had been first brought into use. A Lasco, Peter Martyr, and Martin Bucer 
appear to have been continually corresponding about the Prayer Book, and plotting for its alteration, 
although they knew it only through imperfect translations hastily provided by a Scotchman named 
Aless, living at Leipsic, and Sir John Cheke. In the Convocation of 1550 a debate on the subject of 
Revision was started among the Bishops, and the question was sent down also to the Lower House, but 
it was postponed by the latter until the following Session, and what was done further does not appear ; 
though it is probable that the consideration of the Thirty-nine Articles absorbed the whole attention of 


Reyision of 1552. 


1 Bp. Jeremy Taylor’s Works, vii. 292. 

2 Heylin’s Reformation, i. 227. Necl. Hist. Soc, 

’ The same hospitable but unwise charity towards religious 
refugees was shown by James I. in the case of Antonio de Dominis, 
Archbishop of Spalatro, and with most unfortunate results. 

4 Even Bishop Gardiner’s official reply to the Privy Council 
on the subject was favourable to the Prayer Book. ‘He had 
deliberately considered of all the Offices contained in the Common 
Prayer Book, and all the several branches of it: that though he 
could not have made it in that manner, had the matter been 


referred unto him, yet that he found such things therein as did 
very well satisfy his conscience; and therefore, that he would not 
only execute it in his own person, but cause the same to be offi- 
ciated by all those of his diocese.’ [Heylin’s Reformation, i. 209. 
Eccl. Hist. Soc.] Somerset, writing to Cardinal Pole, June 4th, 
1549, and sending him a Prayer Book, says that there was “a 
common agreement of all the chief learned men in the Realm ” 
in favour of the new “form and rite of service.” [State Papers, 
Dom. Edw. VI, vol. 7.] Edward VI.’s reply to the Devon- 
shire rebels asserts the same thing. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. XXX1 


Convocation for several sessions, and that the proposition for a revised Prayer Book was set aside, as far 
as the official assembly of the Church was concerned. The young King had now, however, been aroused 
by the meddlesome letters of Calvin, and perhaps by some of the Puritan courtiers, to entertain a strong 
personal desire for certain changes in Divine Service; and not being able to prevail on the Bishops to 
accede to his wishes, he declared to Sir John Cheke (with true Tudor feeling) that he should cause the 
Prayer Book to be altered on his own authority. It was this determination of Edward, probably, which 
finally turned the scale in favour of a more constitutional Revision. 

No records remain to show us in what manner or by whom this Revision was ultimately made. It 
has been suggested by Dr. Cardwell [Two Liturgies of Edw. VI., xvii. n.] that the Convocation 
. delegated its authority to a Commission appointed by the King, and that this Commission was the same 

with that which had set forth the Ordinal of 1550, consisting of “six Prelates, and six other men of 
this Realm, learned in God’s law, by the King’s Majesty to be appointed and assigned ;” but of which 
only the name of Bishop Heath of Worcester is recorded. Archdeacon Freeman considers it to be “ all 
but certain that it was the Ordinal Commission which conducted the Revision of 1552,” especially 
because the Ordinal was affixed to the Act of Parliament by which the revised book was legalized’. 
There is no certain proof that the Prayer Book of 1552, commonly called the Second Book of Edward 
VLI., ever received the sanction of Convocation; yet it is highly improbable that Cranmer would have 
allowed it to get into Parliament without it. Edward’s second Act of Uniformity, with the revised 
Prayer Book attached, was passed on April 6th, 1552, with a proviso that the book was to come into use 
on the Feast of All Saints following. Three editions of the book were printed, but in so unsatisfactory 
a manner, that on Sept. 27th any further issue of those already printed was forbidden by an Order in 
Council. At the same time a Royal mandate was sent to Archbishop Cranmer, the purport of which 
can only be gathered from his reply. This reply is of sufficient interest to be printed at length :— 

“ After my right humble commendations unto your good Lordships. 

“Where I understand by your Lordships’ letters that the King’s majesty his pleasure is that 
the Book of Common Service should be diligently perused *, and therein the printer’s errors to be 
amended. I shall travaile therein to the uttermost of my power—albeit I had need first to have had 
the book written which was past by Act of Parliamerft, and sealed with the great seal, which remaineth 
in the hands of Mr. Spilman, clerk of the Parliament, who is not in London, nor I cannot learn where 
he is. Nevertheless, I have gotten the copy which Mr. Spilman delivered to the printers to print by, 
which I think shall serve well enough. And where I understand further by your Lordships’ letters 
that some be offended with kneeling at the time of the receiving of the sacrament, and would that 
I (calling to me the Bishop of London, and some other learned men as Mr. Peter Martyr or such like), 
should with them expend, and weigh the said prescription of kneeling, whether it be fit to remain as a 
commandment, or to be left out of the book. I shall accomplish the King’s Majesty his commandment 
herein :—albeit I trust that we with just balance weighed this at the making of the book, and not only we, 
but a great many Bishops and others of the best learned within this realm appointed for that purpose. 
And now the book being read and approved by the whole State of the Realm, in the High Court of 
Parliament, with the King’s majesty his royal assent—that this should be now altered again without 
Parliament—of what importance this matter is, I refer to your Lordships’ wisdom to consider. I know 
your Lordships’ wisdom to be such, that I trust ye will not be moved with these glorious and unquiet 
spirits which can like nothing but that is after their own fancy ; and cease not to make trouble when things 
be most quiet and in good order. If such men should be heard—although the book were made every year 
anew, yet it should not lack faults in their opinion. ‘ But, say they, ‘it is not commanded in the 
Scripture to kneel, and whatsoever is not commanded in the Scripture is against the Scripture, and 
utterly unlawful and ungodly.’ But this saying is the chief foundation of the Anabaptists and of divers 
other sects. This saying is a subversion of all order as well in religion as in common policy. If this 
saying be true, take away the whole Book of Service; for what should men travell to set in order in 
the form of service, if no order can be got but that is already prescribed by Scripture? And because I 
will not trouble your Lordships with reciting of many Scriptures or proof in this matter, whosoever 
teacheth any such doctrine (if your Lordships will give me leave) I will set my foot by his, to be tried by 


1 See also Heylin’s Reformation, i. 228, 229, it is said that the king had caused the former Book of 1549 to be 
2 The word “perused ” has a technical sense, the force of which | “perused, explained, and made fully perfect.” It thus meant 
is shown by the Act which authorized the Book of 1552, in which | more than the correction of clerical errors. 


AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


XXxil 


jire, that his doctrine is untrue ; and not only untrue, but also seditious and perilous to be heard of any 
subjects, as a thing breaking their bridle of obedience and losing from the bond of all Princes’ 
laws. 

“My good Lordships, I pray you to consider that there be two prayers which go before the receiving 
of the Sacrament, and two immediately follow—all which time the people praying and giving thanks do 
kneel. And what inconvenience there is that it may not be thus ordered, I know not. If the kneeling 
of the people should be discontinued for the time of the receiving of the sacrament, so that at the receipt 
thereof they should rise up and stand or sit, and then immediately kneel down again—it should rather 
import a contemptuous than a reverent receiving of the Sacrament. ‘But it is not expressly contained in 
the Scripture’ (say they) ‘that Christ ministered the sacrament to his apostles kneeling.’ Nor they find 
it not expressly in Scripture that he ministered it standing or sitting. But if we will follow the plain 
words of the Scripture we should rather receive it lying down on the ground—as the custom of the world 
at that time almost everywhere, and as the Tartars and Turks use yet at this day, to eat their meat 
lying upon the ground. And the words of the Evangelist import the same, which be avaxetwas and 
avarintw, which signify, properly, to lie down upon the floor or ground, and not to sit upon a form or 
stool. And the same speech use the Evangelists where they sh(ow) that Christ fed five thousand 
with five loaves, where it is plainly expressed that they sat down upon the ground and not upon stools. 

“T beseech your Lordships take in good part this my long babbling, which I write as of myself only. 
The Bishop of London is not yet come, and your Lordships required answer with speed, and therefore 
am I constrained to make some answer to your Lordships afore his coming. And thus I pray God long 
to preserve your Lordships and to increase the same in all prosperity and godliness. 

« At Lambeth, this 7th of October, 1552, 
“Your Lordships’ to command, 
CUT OC ANE acs 


On July 6th, 1553, Edward VI. died, and it does not appear that any of the revised books had 
been printed after 1552; the “ Declaration on kneeling” being inserted on a fly-leaf. It seems very 
unlikely, therefore, that this second Prayer Book of Edward VI. was ever taken into common use’; and 
its chief importance is derived from the circumstance that it was made the basis of those further Revi- 
sions which resulted in the Prayer Book which has now been used without alteration for two centuries *. 


1 State Papers, Domestic, Edw. VI. xv. 15. 

* It was never used at all in Ireland. 

3 The following is a condensed account of the two Acts of 
Uniformity passed in the reign of Edward VI. :— 


§ 2 and 3 Edw. VI.c.1. [a.p. 1549.] 

I. For a long time there have been “divers forms of Common 
Prayer ” used in England, that is to say, ‘the use of Sarum, of 
York, of Bangor, and of Lincoln; and besides the same, now of 
late much more divers and sundry forms and fashions have been 
used in the Cathedral and parish churches of England and Wales, 
as well concerning the Mattins or Morning Prayer and the Even- 
song, as also concerning the Holy Communion, commonly called 
the Mass, with divers and sundry rites and ceremonies concerning 
the same, and in the administration of other Sacraments of the 
Church.” Some have been pleased with the use of “rites and 
ceremonies in other form than of late years they have been used,” 
and others greatly offended. The King, Protector, and Council 
have tried to stay such innovations, but without success; where- 
fore to the intent that a uniform, quiet, and godly order should be 
adopted, his Highness has appointed the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, with other bishops and learned divines, to arrange such an 
order, “having as well eye and respect to the most sincere and 
pure Christian religion taught by the Scripture, as to the usages 
in the Primitive Church.”” This “rite and fashion of Comimon 
and open Prayer and administration of the Sacraments, has been, 
BY THE AID or THE HoLty GHOST, WITH ONE UNIFORM 
AGREEMENT, concluded by them, and is set forth in the Book of 
Common Prayer.” This form of “ Mattins, Evensong, celebration 
of the Lord’s Supper, commonly called the Mass, and adminis- 
tration of each of the Sacraments, and all their common and 
open prayer,” is therefore to be said and used from and after the 


Feast of Pentecost next ensuing, “and none other or othcr- 
wise.” 

II. Any clergyman refusing to use the Book of Common 
Prayer, or using any other forms than those set forth therein, 
shall, on conviction by verdict of a jury, forfeit one of his bene- 
fices, and suffer six months’ imprisonment for the first offence ; for 
the second offence be imprisoned for twelve months, and forfeit 
all “his spiritual promotions ;” and for the third offence suffer 
imprisonment for life. Unbeneficed clergy to be imprisoned six 
months for the first offence, and perpetually for the second. 

III. No “interludes, plays, songs, rhymes,” or any other open 
words, are to be allowed to be spoken “ in the derogation, deprav- 
ing, or despising of the same Book, or of any thing therein con- 
tained, or any part thereof.” No one shall forcibly compel a clergy- 
man to use other forms than those of the Prayer Book, under penal- 
ties similar in character to those enacted in the second clause. 

IV. Gives power to the Judges to inquire, hear, and determine 
all offences committed contrary to this Act. 

VY. Provides that any Archbishop or Bishop may associate him- 
self with the Judge in the trial of such offences as have been 
committed within his own diocese. 

VI. The Prayer Book may be used in Greek, Latin, or Hebrew, 
by such as understand those languages, with the exception of the 
Holy Communion. 

VII. In “Churches, Chapels, Oratories, or other places,” any 
Psalm or Prayer taken out of the Bible may be used, provided 
the proper Service has been previously said. 

VIII. That the books shall be bought at the charges of the 
parishioners, and where they have been obtained before Pentecost 
shall be put in use within three weeks afterwards, 

The five following clauses are of a technical kind, and need not 
be noticed. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK, Xxxill 

The Acts of Uniformity passed in the reign of Edward were legally repealed by im, Preyer Book 
1 Mary, sess. ii. c. 2, which was passed in October, 1553. By this Act the Services of made unlawful by 
the Church of England were restored to the condition in which they were in the last Green Mary, 
year of Henry VIII. A proclamation was also issued, enjoining that no person should use “ any 
book or books concerning the common service and administration set forth in English to be used in the 
churches of this realm, in the time of King Edward the VIth, commonly called the Communion Book, 
or Book of Common Service and Ordering of Ministers, otherwise called the Book set forth by the 
authority of Parliament, for Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments; but shall, within 
fifteen days bring or deliver the said books to the Ordinary, where such books remain, at the said 
‘ Ordinary’s will and disposition to be burnt.” This Act and Proclamation were preceded, apparently, 
by an Act of Convocation of the same tenour; for the Upper House had been requested by the Lower 
(both being doubtless “packed” assemblies at the time) to suppress the “schismatical book called the 
Communion Book, and the Book of Ordering Ecclesiastical Ministers.” Thus the work which had 
been done with so much care and deliberation was, for a time, set aside; Divine Service was again said 
in Latin, and the customs of it reverted, to a great extent, to their medieval form. As, however, the 
monasteries were not revived, the devotional system of Queen Mary’s reign must, in reality, have been 
considerably influenced in the direction of reformation. We have already seen that “the last year of 
the reign of Henry VIII.” (which was the standard professedly adopted) was a period when much 
progress had been made towards establishing the devotional system afterwards embodied in the Book of 
Common Prayer; and it seems likely that the services of the Church in the reign of Queen Mary were 
a modified form of, rather than an actual return to, the medieval system which existed before the six- 
teenth century. 

Queen Elizabeth succeeded to the throne on November 17th, 1558, and for a month permitted no 
change to be made in the customs of Divine Service. 

On December 27th of that year, a Proclamation was issued condemning unfruitful disputes in matters 
of religion, and enjoining all men “ not to give audience to any manner of doctrine or preaching other 
than to the Gospels and Epistles, commonly called the Gospel and Epistle of the day, and to the ten 
commandments, in the vulgar tongue, without exposition or addition of any manner, sense, or meaning 
to be applied or added; or to use any other manner of publick prayer, rite, or ceremony in the Church, 
but that which is already used and by law received; or the common Litany used at this present in 
her Majesty’s own chapel’; and the Lord’s Prayer, and the Creed, in English, until consultation may 
be had by Parliament, by her Majesty and her three estates of this realm’, for the better conciliation 
and accord of such causes as at this present are moved in matters and ceremonies of religion.” 

The first Act of Parliament in the reign of Queen Elizabeth restored to the Crown Ws 

pine A 7 Revision of Queen 
the supremacy over persons and causes ecclesiastical, which had been taken away from pyyaheth’s reign. 
it in the previous reign. But this does not seem to have been considered sufficient 
authority for dealing with the subject of Divine Service; nor does it seem to have been possible, at 
first, to place it in the hands of Convocation. An irregular kind of Committee was therefore appointed 
at the suggestion of Sir Thomas Smith, the Queen’s Secretary, who were to meet at his house im Cannon 
Row, Westminster, and who were “to draw in other men of learning and gravity, and apt men for that 
purpose and credit, to have their assents.” This Committee consisted of the following persons :— 


than of any other worthy cause,” the said book has, by command 


E . 
POPS S Beas +3, of the King, and with the authority of Parliament, been “faith- 


[4.D. 1552. ] 


I. The Book of Common Prayer, “a very godly order, agree- 
able to the Word of God and the primitive Church, very com- 
fortable to all Christian people desiring to live in Christian con- 
versation, and most profitable to the state of this realm,” having 
been set forth by authority of Parliament, yet a great number of 
persons “following their own sensuality, and living either without 
knowledge or due fear of God,” neglect to come to church on 
Sundays and Holy-days. 

II. For reformation thereof, it is enacted that every person 
shall duly attend church, unless they have some reasonable hin- 
drance. The two following clauses give authority to punish those 
who disobey the Act. 

V. Doubts about the manner of using the Prayer Book having 
arisen, “rather by the curiosity of the minister and mistakers, 


fully and godly perused, explained, and made fully perfect,” and 
a form for the consecration of bishops, and ordination of priests 
and deacons, has been annexed to it. The revised book is to be in 
force under the provisions of the former Act; and shall be put in 
use by all persons after the Feast of All Saints, under penalties 
such as those previously enacted: every Curate reading this Act 
on one Sunday in every quarter of a year; and enforcing the 
duty of Common Prayer in an exhortation to his people. 

These two Acts of Uniformity were repealed by 1 Mary, sess. ii. 
cap. 2, but revived by 1 Eliz. cap. 2, the first of the two Acts 
now printed in the Prayer Book. 

1 The English Litany of Henry VIII. See State Papers, 
Dom. Eliz. i. 68. 

2 That is, Lords, Commons, and Clergy. See note at p. 64. 


d 


XXXIV AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


Matthew Parker, subsequently Abp. of Canterbury. 

Edmund Grindal, Bp. of London, Abp. of York, and Abp. of Canterbury. 
James Pilkington, # Bp. of Durham. 

Richard Cox, restored, Bp. of Ely. 

William May, appointed Abp. of York, but died before consecration. 

William Bill, subsequently Dean of Westminster. 

Sir Thomas Smith, _,, Dean of Carlisle. 

David Whitehead, __,, [Declined the Archbishopric of Canterbury. ] 

Edwin Sandys, ‘ Bp. of Worcester, and Abp. of York. 

Edmund Guest, we Bp. of Rochester, and of Salisbury. 


3) 


The last two were summoned to attend upon the Committee after its first appomtment. It has 
been supposed, from a vindication of the changes made which was sent by him to Cecil ', that Guest was 
the person chiefly concerned in the revision, and that he acted for Parker, who was absent through 
illness. Cox and May were on the Committee of 1542-1549. 

While this Committee was engaged on its labours, an attempt was made to reconcile the extreme 
Romanist party by a Conference of Divines held before the Privy Council and others in Westminster 
Abbey; but the attempt failed through the impracticable temper of the leading men on the Romanist 
side: and thus the way was made clear for a new Act of Uniformity on the basis of those passed in 
Edward’s reign. 

The Queen and Cecil both appear to have desired that the original Prayer Book, that of 1549, 
should be adopted as far as possible; but the second Book, that of 1552, was taken by the Committee of 
Divines, and with a few alterations of some importance, submitted to the Queen to be set before Par- 
liament. The most important of these alterations were the following :— 

[1] A Table of Proper Lessons for Sundays was prefixed. 

[2] The “accustomed place” or Chancel, instead of “in such place as the people may best hear,” 
was appointed for the celebration of Divine Service. 

[3] The “Ornaments” of the Church and the Ministers which had been in use under the first 
Book of Edward, but had been reduced to a minimum by the second, were directed again to be taken 
into use. 

[4] The Litany clause, “ From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enor- 
mities,” was now omitted. 

[5] The present form for administering the consecrated Elements to the communicants was sub- 
stituted for that ordered by the Book of 1552, which was the latter half only of that now used. As the 
first half of the words is the form that was used in the Book of 1549, the new form was thus a combina- 
tion of the two. 

[6] The declaration respecting kneeling, which had been inserted on a fly-leaf at the end of the 
Communion Service in the Book of 1552, was now omitted altogether. 

Thus altered, the Book was laid before Parliament, which (without any discussion) annexed it to 
the Act of Uniformity. [1 Eliz. cap. 2.] This Act was passed on April 28th, 1559, and it enacted that 
the revised Prayer Book should be taken into use on St. John the Baptist’s day following. It was 
used, however, in the Queen’s chapel on Sunday, May 12th, and at St. Paul’s Cathedral on Wednesday, 
May 15th. After the appointed day had passed, a Commission was issued [July 19, 1559] to Parker, 
Grindal, and others for carrying into execution the Acts for Uniformity of Common Prayer, and for 
restoring to the Crown its jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical matters’. A Royal Visitation was also held in 
the Province of York, under a Commission dated July 25th*. It then appeared that the Prayer Book 
was so generally accepted by the Clergy, that out of 9400 only 189 refused to adopt it; this number 
including those Bishops and others of the most extreme Romanist party, who had been appointed in 
Queen Mary’s reign on account of what in modern times would be called their Ultramontane prejudices. 

It is worth notice, however, that the Book of Common Prayer as thus revised in 1559 was quietly 
accepted by the great body of Romanist laity ; and also that the Pope himself saw so little to object to 
in it that he offered to give the book his full sanction if his authority were recognized by the Queen and 


1 Cardw. Conf. 48. Strype’s Ann. i. 120, ii. 459. 3 Ibid. iv. 62. 
2 State Papers, Dom. Eliz. v. 18. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. XXXV 


kingdom. “As well those restrained,” said Sir Edward Coke, “as generally all the papists in this 
kingdom, not any of them did refuse to come to our church, and yield their formal obedience to the laws 
established. And thus they all continued, not any one refusing to come to our churches, during’ the 
first ten years of her Majesty’s government. And in the beginning of the eleventh year of her reign, 
Cornwallis, Bedingfield, and Silyarde, were the first recusants; they absolutely refusing to come to our 
churches. And until they in that sort began, the name of recusant was never heard of amongst us.” 
In the same Charge, Coke also states as follows:—That the Pope [Pius IV.] “before the time of his 
excommunication against Queen Hizabeth denounced, sent his letter unto her Majesty, in which he did 
allow the Bidle, and Book of Divine Service, as it is now used among us, to be authentick, and not 

‘repugnant to truth. But that therein was contained enough necessary to salvation, though there was 
not in it so much as might conveniently be, and that he would also allow it unto us, without changing 
any part: so as her Majesty would acknowledge to receive it from the Pope, and by his allowance ; 
which her Majesty denying to do, she was then presently by the same Pope excommunicated. And this 
is the truth concerning Pope Pius Quartus as I have faith to God and men. I have oftentimes heard 
avowed by the late Queen her own words; and I have conferred with some Lords that were of greatest 
reckoning in the State, who had seen and read the Letter, which the Pope sent to that effect; as have 
been by me specified. And this upon my credit, as I am an honest man, is most true’.” It may have 
been with the object of making the Pope acquainted with the real character of the Prayer Book that it 
was translated into Latin in the same year; and it is, possibly, to the work of translation that a 
document in the State Paper Office refers [Eliz. vii. 46] which, on November 30th, 1559, mentions the 
progress made by the Convocation in the Book of Common Prayer’. The Latin Version (differing in no 
small degree from the English) was set forth on April 6th, 1560, under the authority of the Queen’s 
Letters Patent. 

The only other change that was made in the Prayer Book during the reign of Elizabeth was in 
the Calendar. On January 22nd, 1561, the Queen issued a Commission to the Archbishop of Can- 
terbury, the Bishop of London, Dr. Bill, and Walter Haddon, directing them “to peruse the order of 
the said Lessons throughout the whole year, and to cause some new calendars to be imprinted, whereby 
such chapters or parcels of less edification may be removed, and other more profitable may supply their 
rooms*.” This commission was issued by the authority given in the 13th clause of Elizabeth’s Act of 
Uniformity, which is cited in its opening paragraph ; and in the end of it there is a significant direction, 
“that the alteration of any thing hereby ensuing be quietly done, without show of any innovation in 
the Church.” In the Calendar revised by these Commissioners the names of most of those Saints were 
inserted which are to be found in that of our present Prayer Book. 

But although no further changes were made in the authorized devotional system of the Church 
during the remainder of the century, continual assaults were being made upon it by the Puritan party, 
extreme laxity was tolerated, and even sanctioned, by some of the Bishops (as, for example, at North- 
ampton, by Bishop Scambler of Peterborough), and the people were gradually being weaned from their 
love for a Catholic ritual: while, in the meantime, a great number of the new generation were being 
trained, by continual controversy and by enforced habit, into a belief that preaching, either in the pulpit 
or under the disguise of extemporaneous prayer, was the one end and aim of Divine Service®. In 1592 
the Puritans had grown so rancorous that they presented a petition to the Privy Council in which the 
Church of England is plainly said to be derived from Antichrist ; the press swarmed with scurrilous and 
untruthful pamphlets against the Church system; and the more sober strength of this opposition may be 
measured very fairly by the statements and arguments of Hooker in his noble work, the “ Ecclesiastical 
Polity.” 

On the accession of James I., which occurred on May 7th, 1603, the hopes of those who wished 


1 The Lord Coke, his Speech and Charge, London, 1607. See | that the Book of Common Service in Latin is ready to print: 
also Camden, Ann. Eliz., p. 59, ed. 1615. Twysden’s Historical | and also the little book of Private Prayers for children and 
Vindication of the Church of England, p. 175. Validity of the | servants. State Papers, Dom. Eliz. vi. 11. 

Orders of the Church of England, by Humphrey Prideaux, D.D., 3 Parker Correspondence, p. 132. State Papers, xvi. 7. 

1688. Bramhall’s Works, ii. 85, ed. 1845. Bp. Babington’s 4 These foreign fashions and principles were pertinaciously 
Notes on the Pentateuch; on Numbers vii. Courayer’s Defence | maintained by those who had fled the country in Queen Mary’s 
of the Dissertation on the Validity of English Ordinations, ii. | days, and returned with what Parker called “«Germanical natures” 
360. 378. Harrington’s Pius IV. and the Book of Common | in Queen Elizabeth’s. [Strype’s Parker, i. 156.) See also Cardw, 
Prayer, 1856. Conf. 117—120, for a strong illustration of this in Convocation. 


2 Sir John Mason, however, writes to Cecil, on Aug. 11th, 1559, 5 
2 


AN HISTORICAL 


XXXV1 


INTRODUCTION 


to get rid of the Prayer Book were strengthened by the knowledge that the King had been brought 


up by Presbyterians. 


A petition was presented to him, called the “ Millenary Petition,” from the 


number of signatures attached to it, in which it was represented that “more than a thousand” of his 
Majesty’s subjects were “groaning as under a common burden of human rites and ceremonies,” from 
which they prayed to be relieved by a reduction of the Prayer Book system to their own standard. 


The result of this petition was the “ Hampton Court Conference,” 


an assembly of Clergy and Non- 


conformists, summoned by the King to meet in his presence at the Palace of Hampton Court, and discuss 
the grievances complained of. This Conference met on the 14th, 16th, and 18th of 


Revision in the 
reign of James I. 


January, 1603-4, in the presence of the King and the Privy Council; but the former 


was so disgusted with the unreasonableness of the Puritan opponents of the Prayer 
Book, that he broke up the meeting abruptly on the third day, without committing the Church to any 
concessions in the direction they required. Under the same clause of the Act of Uniformity by which 
Queen Elizabeth had directed a revision of the Calendar, the King did, however, cause a few changes 


to be made in the Prayer Book’, 


[1] The words “ or remission of sins” were added to the title of the Absolution. 
_ [2] The “Prayer for the Royal Family” was placed at the end of the Litany; and also some 


Occasional Thanksgivings. 


[3] Two slight verbal changes were made at the beginning of the Gospels for the Second Sunday 


after Easter and the Twentieth Sunday after Trinity. 
[4] An alteration was made in one of the Rubrics for Private Baptism. 


[See the Office. ] 


[5] The title of the Confirmation Service was enlarged. 

[6] The latter part of the Catechism, respecting the Sacraments, was added. 

[7] Some slight changes were made in the Calendar. 

In the following year a petition was presented to the King from ministers in the Diocese of Lincoln, 


in which fifty “ gross corruptions” were enumerated 


in the Prayer Book: and they demanded its total 


abolition as the only means by which the land could be rid of the idolatry and superstition which it 
enjoined. Such was the spirit of the times upon which the Church of England was now entering, and 
which culminated after a struggle of forty years more in the suppression of the Prayer Book. 


Suppression of 


An “ ordinance” was passed by the Parliament on January 3rd, 1645, which repealed 


the Prayer Book in the Acts of Uniformity, and enacted that the Book of Common Prayer should not 


1645. 


thenceforth be used in any Church, Chapel, or place of worship in England or Wales. 


On August 23rd, 1645, another ordinance forbade the use of it in private, required all copies of the Book 
be given up, and imposed heavy penalties upon those who dared to disobey these singularly tyrannical 


injunctions. 


For fifteen years the prayers of the Church of England could only be said in extreme 


privacy, and even then with danger of persecution to those who used them ’. 


§ The Revision of 1661, 


When the new form of government, established by Cromwell, had collapsed after his death, the 
restoration of the ancient constitution of the country involved the restoration of its ancient Church, and 


consequently of its ancient system of devotion as represented by the Book of Common Prayer. 


Not- 


withstanding the highly penal law which had been passed against its use, there had been many bold and 


faithful men who had not feared to “ obey God rather than men.” 
notable instances of this stedfastness, and they did not by any means stand alone’, 


Bishops Bull and Sanderson had been 
As the time drew 


1 See the official document in Cardw. Conf. pp. 217—225. 

* In the State Papers, Kennett’s Register, and Walker’s 
Sufferings of the Clergy, there are many cases recorded of heavy 
fines levied on those who were discovered using the Prayer Book. 

3 «The iniquity of the times would not bear the constant and 
regular use of the Liturgy; to supply therefore that misfortune, 
Mr. Bull formed all the devotions he offered up in public, while 
he continued minister of this place, out of the Book of Common 
Prayer, which did not fail to supply him with fit matter and 
proper words upon all those occasions that required him to apply 
to the throne of grace with the wants of his people. He had 
the example of one of the brightest lights of that age, the judi- 
cious Dr. Sanderson, to justify him in this practice; and his 


manner of performing the public service was with so much fer- 

vour and ardency of affection, and with so powerful an emphasis , 
in every part, that they who were most prejudiced against the 

Liturgy, did not seruple to commend Mr. Bull as a person that 

prayed by the Spirit, though at the same time they railed at the 

Common Prayer as a beggarly element, and as a carnal per- 

formance. 

“A particular instance of this happened to him while he was 
minister of St. George’s, which, because it showeth how valuable 
the Liturgy is in itself, and what nnreasonable prejudices are 
sometimes taken up against it, the reader will not, I believe, 
think it unworthy to be related. He was sent for to baptize the 
child of a Dissenter in his parish, upon which occasion he made 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. XXXV1 
near for the return of Charles IT. to the throne of his fathers, Prayer Books were brought from their 
hiding-places, printers began to prepare a fresh supply’, and its offices began to be openly used, as in the 
case of the good and great Dr. Hammond, who was interred with the proper Burial Service on April 26th, 
1660. Before the end of 1660, the demand for Prayer Books had been so great, notwithstanding the 
number of old ones which had been preserved, that three several editions in folio, quarto, and a smaller 
size are known to have been printed. 

Charles the Second landed in England on May 29th, 1660, the Holy Communion having been cele- 
brated on board the “Naseby” at a very early hour in the morning; probably by Cosin, the King’s 
Chaplain, whose influence was afterwards so great in the revision of the Prayer Book. As soon as the 
. Court. was settled at Whitehall, Divine Service was restored in the Chapel Royal. On July Sth, 
Evelyn records in his Diary [ii. 152], that “from henceforth was the Liturgy publicly used in our 
Churches.” Patrick is known to have used it in his church on July 2nd; and Cosin, who reassumed 
his position as Dean of Peterborough at the end of that month, immediately began to use it in his 
Cathedral. From Oxford, Lamplugh (subsequently Archbishop of York) writes on August 23rd, 1660, 
that the Common Prayer was then used every where but in three colleges’, showing how general had 
been its restoration in the University Chapels, and perhaps also in the City Churches. By October, 
1661, Dean Barwick had restored the Choral Service first at Durham, and then at St. Paul’s. The feeling 
of the people is indicated by several petitions which were sent to the King, praying that their ministers 
might be compelled to use the Prayer Book in Divine Service, the Mayor and Jurats of Faversham (for 
example) complaining that their Vicar, by refusing to give them the Common Prayer, is “thus denying 
them their mother’s milk*’ The non-conforming ministers at first allowed that they could use the 
greatest part of the Prayer Book; yet when requested by the King to do so, omitting such portions 
as they could not use, they declined*; but on the part of the laity in general the desire for its 
restoration seems to have been much greater than could be supposed, considering how many had never 
(as adults) even heard a word of it used in Church; and probably had never even seen a Prayer Book. 

Before the King had left the Hague, a deputation of Presbyterian ministers, including Reynolds, 
Calamy, Case, and Manton, had gone over to him to use their influence in persuading him that the use 
of the Prayer Book having been so long discontinued, it would be most agreeable to the English people 
if it were not restored ; and especially to dissuade him from using it and the surplice, in the Chapel 
Royal. No doubt this was a very daring misrepresentation of the state of the public mind on the 
subject ; but the King appears to have been aware that it was so, for he declined, with much warmth, to 
agree to the impertinent and unconstitutional request, telling them in the end of his reply, that “ though 
he was bound for the present to tolerate much disorder and indecency in the exercise of God’s worship, 
he would never in the least degree, by his own practice, discountenance the good old order of the Church 
in which he had been bred *” As we have already seen, the Prayer Book was restored to use in the 
Chapel Royal immediately after the King’s return, : 

On July 6th, five weeks afterwards, there was a debate in Parliament respecting the settlement of 
religion. Some suggested that the restoration of the “old religion” was the only settlement required ; 
but in the end it was agreed to pray the King that he would call an assembly of divines for the purpose 


use of the office of Baptism, as prescribed by the Church of 
England, which he had got entirely by heart ; and he went through 
it with so much readiness and freedom, and yet with so much 
gravity and devotion, and gave that life and spirit to all that he 
delivered, that the whole audience was extremely affected with his 
performance; and notwithstanding that he used the sign of the 
cross, yet they were so ignorant of the offices of the Church that 
they did not thereby discover that it was the Common Prayer. 
But after that he had concluded that holy action, the father of the 
child returned him a great many thanks, intimating at the same 
time with how much greater edification they prayed, who entirely 
depended upon the Spirit of God for His assistance in their ex- 
tempore effusions, than those did who tied themselves up to pre- 
meditated forms; and that if he had not made the sign of the 
cross, that badge of Popery, as he called it, nobody could have 
formed the least objection against his excellent prayers. Upon 
which Mr. Bull, hoping to recover him from his ill-grounded pre- 
judices, showed him the office of Baptism in the Liturgy, wherein 


was contained every prayer which he had offered up to God on 
that occasion; which, with farther arguments that he then urged, 
so effectually wrought upon the good man and his whole family, 
that they always after that time frequented the parish church, 
and never more absented themselves from Mr. Bull’s communion.” 
—Nelson’s Life of Bull, p. 31. 

1 John Williams and Francis Eglesfield printed an edition 
against the King’s return, and what copies remained in their 
warehouse were seized by agents of Bill the King’s printer on 
Nov. 7th, 1660. There is extant also a royal mandate to Bill, 
dated July 25, 1661, commanding him to restore to R. Royston, 
of Oxford, a quantity of Prayer Books which he had seized by 
mistake, supposing them to be falsely printed. State Papers, 
Domestic, Charles IT., vol. xxxix. 87; xlvii. 67, 

2 State Papers, ibid. xi. 27. 

3 Tbid. xxxii. 97. 109; 1. 22. 

4 Kennett’s Register, p. 629. 

5 Clarendon, History of the Great Rebellion, iii. 990. 


AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


XXXVI 


of considering the subject. The King, however, issued a “ Declaration” on October 25th, in which he 
refers to his letter from Breda promising toleration to all opinions, and to the visit of the Presbyterian 
preachers ; and complains of the intolerant spirit which is shown towards himself by the Presbyterians 
in wishing to deprive him of the services in the Chapel Royal, and in much misrepresenting his words, 
acts, and motives. He states, that it had been his intention to call a Synod at once to consider the 
affairs of the Church, but that personal feeling is so strong as to make such a step unwise for the present. 
Throughout this Declaration the King assumes that the Church is restored in its integrity ; but promises 
that he will call an assembly of “learned Divines, of both persuasions,” to review the “Liturgy of the 
Church of England, contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and by law established ;” again exhorting 


those who cannot conscientiously use the whole of it, to use such portions as they do not object to’. 
It was in fulfilment of this promise that a Royal Commission was addressed on March 25th, 1661, 
to the following Divines, who constituted what is known as the “ Savoy Conference,” from its place of 


meeting :— 
On the Church side. 


Accepted Frewen, Archbishop of York. 

Gilbert Sheldon, Bishop of London, afterwards 
Archbishop of Canterbury. 

John Cosin, Bishop of Durham. 

John Warner, Bishop of Rochester. 

Henry King, Bishop of Chichester. 

Humphry Henchman, Bishop of Salisbury, after- 
wards of London. 

George Morley, Bishop of Worcester, afterwards of 
Winchester. 

Robert Sanderson, Bishop of Lincoln. 

Benjamin Laney, Bishop of Peterborough, after- 
wards of Lincoln and Ely. 

Brian Walton, Bishop of Chester. 

Richard Sterne, Bishop of Carlisle, afterwards 
Archbishop of York. 

John Gauden, Bishop of Exeter, afterwards of 
Worcester. 


On the Presbyterian side. 


Edward Reynolds, Bishop of Norwich. 

Anthony Tuckney, D.D., Master of St. John’s 
Cambridge. 

John Conant, D.D., Reg. Prof. Div., Oxford. 

William Spurstow, D.D. 

John Wallis, D.D., Sav. Prof. Geom., Oxford. 

Thomas Manton, D.D. [offered Deanery of Ro- 
chester. | 

Edmund Calamy [offered Bishopric of Lichfield]. 


Richard Baxter [offered Bishopric of Hereford]. 
Arthur Jackson. 


Thomas Case. 
Samuel Clarke. 


Matthew Newcomen. 


Coadjutors. 


John Earle, Dean of Westminster, afterwards 
Bishop of Worcester and Salisbury. 

Peter Heylin, D.D., Subdean of Westminster. 

John Hacket, D.D., afterwards Bishop of Lichfield. 

John Barwick, D.D., afterwards Dean of St. Paul’s. 

Peter Gunning, D.D., afterwards Bishop of Chi- 
chester and Ely. 

John Pearson, D.D.’, afterwards Bishop of Chester. 

Thomas Pierce, D.D. 

Anthony Sparrow, D.D., afterwards Bishop of 
Exeter and Norwich. 

Herbert Thorndike, D.D. 


Thomas Horton, D.D. 


Thomas Jacomb, D.D. 
William Bate. 
John Rawlinson. 


William Cooper. 

John Lightfoot, D.D. 

John Collings, D.D. 
Benjamin Woodbridge, D.D. 


William Drake. 


As this Conference was the last official attempt to reconcile what was afterwards called the “ Low 


Church party” and Dissenters to the cordial use of the Catholic Offices of the Church, it will be desirable 
to give a short account of its proceedings. The Letters Patent authorized the Commissioners “ to 
advise upon and review the said Book of Common Prayer, comparing the same with the most ancient 
liturgies, which have been used in the Church in the primitive and purest times; and to that end to 


1 Cardwell’s Conferences, p. 286. » « And was after by Synod commissioned to review the Com- 


mon Prayer Book.” Fothergill’s MS., York Minster Lib. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. XXXIX 


assemble and meet together from time to time, and at such times within the space of four calendar 
months now next ensuing, in the Master’s lodgings in the Savoy in the Strand, in the county of 
Middlesex, or in such other place or places as to you shall be thought fit and convenient; to take into 
your serious and grave considerations the several directions, rules, and forms of prayer, and things in the 
said Book of Common Prayer contained, and to advise and consult upon and about the same, and the 
several objections and exceptions which shall now be raised against the same. And if occasion be, to 
make such reasonable and necessary alterations, corrections, and amendments therein, as by and between 
you and the said Archbishop, Bishops, Doctors, and persons hereby required and authorized to meet and 
advise as aforesaid, shall be agreed upon to be needful or expedient for the giving satisfaction unto tender 
consciences, and the restoring and continuance of peace and unity in the Churches under our protection 
and government; but avoiding, as much as may be, all unnecessary alterations of the forms and liturgy 
wherewith the people are already acquainted, and have so long received in the Church of England 1.” 

This Commission met at the Savoy in the Strand on April 15th, and its sittings ended on July 24th, 
1661: the Session of Parliament and Convocation commencing on May 8th of the same year. The 
“several objections and exceptions” raised against the Prayer Book were presented to the Bishops in 
writing. These are all on record in two or three contemporary reports of the Conference, of which one 
is referred to in the foot-note, and they are printed at length in Cardwell’s Conferences on the Book of 
Common Prayer. Many of these “ exceptions” are of a frivolous kind, and the remarks which accom- 
panied them were singularly bitter and uncharitable, as well as diffuse and unbusiness-like. It seems 
almost incredible that grave Divines should make a great point of “The Epistle is written in ” being an 
untrue statement of the case when a portion of a prophecy was read and technically called an “ Epistle;” 
or that they should still look upon it as a serious grievance when the alteration conceded went no further 
than “ For the Epistle »’ or, again, that they should spend their time in writing a long complaint about 
the possibility of their taking cold by saying the Burial Service at the grave. Yet sheets after sheets of 
their papers were filled with objections of this kind, and with long bitter criticisms of the principles of 
the Prayer Book. The Bishops replied to them in the tone in which Sanderson’s Preface to the Prayer 
Book is written, but they seem to have keenly felt what Sanderson himself expressed—mild and gentle as 
he was—when he long afterwards said of his chief opponent at the Savoy, “that he had never met with a 
man of more pertinacious confidence, and less abilities, in all his conversation’.” Perhaps too they were 
reminded of Lord Bacon’s saying respecting his friends, the Nonconformists of an earlier day, that they 
lacked two principal things, the one learning, and the other love. 

The Conference was limited by the Letters Patent to four months’ duration, but when that time had 
drawn to an end little had been done towards a reconciliation of the objectors to the use of the Prayer 
Book. Baxter had composed a substitute for it, but even his friends would not accept it as such, and 
probably Baxter’s Prayer Book never won its way into any congregation of Dissenters in his life- 
time or afterwards. In Queen Elizabeth’s time Lord Burleigh had challenged the Dissenters to bring him 
a Prayer Book made to fit in with their own principles ; but when this had been done by one party of Dis- 
senters, another party of them offered six hundred objections to it, which were more than they offered to 
the old Prayer Book. The same spirit appears to have been shown at the Savoy Conference ; and the 
principle of unity was so entirely confined to unity in opposition, that it was impossible for any solid 
reconciliation of the Dissenters to the Church to have been made by any concessions that could have been 
offered. After all the “ exceptions” had been considered and replied to by the Bishops’ side (replies again 
replied to by the untiring controversial pens of the opposite party), the result of the Commission was 
exhibited in the following list of changes to which the Bishops were willing to assent :— 


The Concessions offered by the Bishops at the Savoy Conference. 


§ 1. We are willing that all the epistles and gospels be used according to the last translation. 

§ 2. That when any thing is read for an epistle which is not in the epistles, the superscription shall 
be “ For the epistle.” 

§ 3. That the Psalms be collated with the former translation, mentioned in rubr., and printed 
according to it. 


1 Cardw. Conf. 257—368. “Grand Debate between the most 2 Kennett’s Register, p.551. This can hardly refer to Baxter, 
Reverend the Bishops and the Presbyterian Divines..... The | who was a man of some learning; but no doubt his excessive 
most perfect copy.” 1661. i vanity and moroseness were a chief cause of the failure. 


xl AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


§ 4. That the words “this day,” both in the collects and prefaces, be used only upon the day itself; 
and for the following days it be said, “as about this time.” 

§ 5. That a longer time be required for signification of the names of the communicants ; and the 
words of the rubric be changed into these, “at least some time the day before.” 

§ 6. That the power of keeping scandalous sinners from the communion may be expressed in the 
rubr. according to the xxvith and xxviith canons; so the minister be obliged to give an account of the 
same immediately after to the ordinary. 

§ 7. That the whole preface be prefixed to the commandments. 

§ 8. That the second exhortation be read some Sunday or Holy Day before the celebration of the 
communion, at the discretion of the minister. 

§ 9. That the general confession at the communion be pronounced by one of the ministers, the 
people saying after him, all kneeling humbly upon their knees. 

§ 10, That the manner of consecrating the elements be made more explicit and express, and to that 
purpose these words be put into the rubr., “ Then shall he put his hand upon the bread and break it,” 
“ then shall he put his hand unto the cup.” 

§ 11. That if the font be so placed as the congregation cannot hear, it may be reterred to the 
ordinary to place it more conveniently. 

§ 12. That these words, “yes, they do perform these,” &c., may be altered thus: “ Because they 
promise them both by their sureties,” &c. 

§ 13. That the words of the last rubr. before the Catechism may be thus altered, “that children 
being baptized have all things necessary for their salvation, and dying before they commit any actual 
sins, be undoubtedly saved, though they be not confirmed.” 

§ 14. That to the rubr. after confirmation these words may be added, “ or be ready and desirous to 
be confirmed.” 

§ 15. That these words, “with my body I thee worship,” may be altered thus, “with my body I 
thee honour.” 

§ 16. That these words, “till death us depart,” be thus altered, “ till death us do part.” 

§ 17. That the words “sure and certain” may be left out. 

The Conference being ended, and with so little practical result, the work of Revision was committed 
to the Convocations of the two Provinces of Canterbury and York. On June 10th, 1660, a Licence had 
been issued to the Archbishop of Canterbury [Juxon], empowering the Convocation of his Province to 
“debate and agree upon such points as were committed to their charge’*.” Another was issued to the 
Archbishop of York [Frewen], of a similar tenour, on July 10th [or 23rd]. But little was likely to be 
done while the Savoy Conference was sitting, beyond preparation for future action. A fresh Licence 
was issued on October 10th, by which the Convocation of Canterbury was definitely directed to review the 
Book of Common Prayer and the Ordinal’, under the authority of the Commission sent to them on the 
10th of June*; and on November 22nd a similar letter was sent to the Archbishop of York. This letter 
enjoined the Convocations to review the Prayer Book, and then to present it to “ us for our further con- 
sideration, allowance, or confirmation *.” 

It is probable that much consideration had been given to the subject during the five months that 
elapsed between the issue of the first Licence and that of the second, as a Form for the 29th of May had 
been agreed upon, and also the Office for Adult Baptism. When, however, the Convocation of Canter- 
bury met on November 21st, 1661, “the King’s letters were read,” and the revision of the Prayer Book 
was immediately entered upon with vigour and decision’, The Upper House appointed a Committee, 
consisting of the following :— 

Matthew Wren, Bishop of Ely. 
Robert Skinner, ,,  ,, Oxford. 
John Warner, » 9) Rochester. 
Humphry Henchman, ,, Salisbury. 
George Morley, ,, ,, Worcester. 


1 State Papers, Dom. Charles 11. xliii, October 10. 5 The Bishops returned to their seats in the House of Lords 
2 Kennett’s Register, p. 503. on Nov. 20th, and from that time the junior Bishop said prayers 
3 State Papers, Dom. Charles II, xlni. daily as formerly. The Presbyterian minister had been “excused 


4 Kennett’s Register, p. 564, from attendance” on the House of Commons some time before. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. xli 


Robert Sanderson, Bishop of Lincoln. 
William Nicholson, ,, , Gloucester. 
John Cosin, es, Durham. 

The last-named had been invited (with the Archbishop of York, and the Bishops of Carlisle and 
Chester) to be present and assist at the previous session of the Southern Convocation ; and was now 
appointed on the Committee as the most learned ritualist among the Bishops. Wren, Warner, and Skinner 
had been Bishops in the Convocation of 1640?. 

It was necessary that the co-operation of the York Lower House of Convocation should be secured : 
the Archbishop and three Bishops of that Province therefore wrote to them, saying that the time was 
‘very short for the work in hand, and that it would much facilitate its progress if some Clergy were 
appointed to act in the Southern Convocation as Proxies for the Northern. Eight such proxies were 
appointed, three of whom were members of the lower house of Canterbury Province, and five of the lower 
house of York’, 

The Committee of Bishops met at Ely House; and Sancroft, at this time Rector of Houghton-le- 
Spring, Prebendary of Durham, and Chaplain to Cosin, appears to have acted as their Secretary. Bishop 
Cosin had prepared a folio Prayer Book of 1619, in which he had written down in the margin such altera- 
tions as he considered desirable: and this volume, which is preserved in the Cosin Library, Durham 
[D. III. 5], has been thoroughly examined for the present work, all the alterations so made being either 
referred to or printed in the Notes *. This volume was evidently used as the basis of their work by the 
Bishops, although (as will be seen) they did not adopt all the changes proposed by Cosin, and introduced 
others which are not found in his Prayer Book. They were thus enabled to proceed rapidly with the 
work of revision, and on November 23rd sent a portion of their labours down to the Lower House, which 
returned it on the 27th. The whole Prayer Book was completed by December 20th, and a form of 
Subscription was then agreed upon, of which a copy in Bishop Cosin’s handwriting is inserted in his 
Durham Book, and which is also to be found, with all the names attached, in Kennett’s Register, pp. 584, 
585. The Revised volume, thus prepared, was a MS. of five hundred and forty-four pages, and appears 
to have been the same that was ultimately attached to the Act of Uniformity. It is said to have been 
preserved in the Parliament Office as recently as 1825, and is referred to as existing there in the Record 
Commissioners’ edition of the Statutes, vol. v. p. 8365; but it has since disappeared. 

There was a delay of some weeks before the Prayer Book thus revised received the approval of the 
King in Council. The Act of Uniformity was under the consideration of the House of Lords, and on 
February 12th, 1661-2, the Earl of Dorset expressed the disappointment of the House at not receiving 
the revised Prayer Book ; on which the Bishop of London promised that it should shortly be brought in. 
A Privy Council was then summoned, at which four Bishops were ordered to be present. This met on 
February 24th, 1661-2, the Bishops of London, Durham, Salisbury, Worcester, and Chester being 
present: “at which time the Book of Common Prayer, with the Amendments and Additions, as it was 
prepared by the Lords Bishops, was read and approved, and ordered to be transmitted to the House of 
Peers, with this following recommendation, signed by His Majesty :’—the recommendation being that 
the Prayer Book as altered be that appointed to be used by the intended Act of Uniformity’. On the 
next day it was sent to the House of Lords, with the Great Seal attached *; and on March 17th was 
declared (without any review of its contents) to be the Book referred to in the Act of Uniformity then 
passing through the House. On March 18th the thanks of the House were conveyed to Convocation 
for their care in revising the Book, and on April 10th it was sent down to the House of Commons. 

On the 16th of April the question was put in the House of Commons whether there should be any 
debate upon the amendments inserted in the Prayer Book by Convocation, and it was decided in the 


Book; and had prepared a fourth, suggesting amendments which 


1 Archbishop Juxon, Bishops Duppa, Piers, and Roberts, had 
also been Bishops in 1640. Four other Bishops in the Upper 
House of 1661, Sheldon, Floyd, Griffith, and Ironside, had been 
in the Lower House in 1640, and so had about twenty members 
of the Lower House of 1661. 

2 Kennett’s Register, pp. 563—565. 

3 A fair copy of this volume, written by Sancroft in a Prayer 
Book of 1634, is preserved in the Bodleian Library [Arch. Bodl. 
D. 28], and has been collated with the original for the present 
work. Cosin had also written three sets of Notes on the Prayer 


he considered to be necessary several years before. These are 
collected in the fifth volume of his Works, published in the 
Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology. Some MS. Notes on the 
Prayer Book, Harl. MS. 7311, are also said to be his. 

4 Kennett’s Register, pp. 632, 6338. State Papers, li. 5. 

5 When the Bill for Uniformity had been sent up from the 
House of Commons, a Prayer Book (probably that of Elizabeth) 
had been attached to it, but this was set aside for that of the 


Convocation. Kennett’s Register, p. 642. 


e 


xlii AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 

negative. A resolution was, however, afterwards passed, that they “might have been debated by the 
order of the House.” Thus, although the Act of Uniformity was much discussed in the House of 
Commons, the Book of Common Prayer was accepted by them, as well as by the Lords, exactly as it had 
passed out of the hands of the Bishops; and nothing was ever said about their right to consider the 
work of the Convocation until it had been decided that it was to pass unaltered through the secular part 
of the Legislature. This determination was also strongly illustrated by two circumstances that occurred 
while the Prayer Book was before the two Houses. (1) A strong desire was expressed in the House of 
Commons that a proviso should be introduced into the Act of Uniformity, enjoining reverent gestures 
during the time of Divine Service. This proviso was twice read, “but the matter being held proper for 
the Convocation,” it was ordered that those members who managed the Conference with the Lords 
should intimate the desire of the House, “ that it be recommended to the Convocation to take order for 
reverend and uniform gestures and demeanours to be enjoined at the time of Divine Service and 
preaching :” this course being ultimately adopted, and an addition made by Convocation to the X VIIIth 
Canon, in consequence, on May 12th, 1662*. (2) The second circumstance is thus stated in the Journals 
of the House of Lords, on the 8th of May, 1662: “ Whereas it was signified by the House of Commons 
at the Conference yesterday that they found one mistake in the rubrick of Baptism, which they conceive 
was a mistake of the writer, Persons being put instead of Children, the Lord Bishop of Durham 
acquainted the house, that himself and the Lord Bishop of Carlisle had authority from the Convocation 
to amend the said word, averring it was only a mistake of the scribe; and accordingly they came to the 
Clerk’s table, and amended the same’.” 

The amendments proposed by the House of Commons in the Act of Uniformity all tended to raise 
the tone in which the Prayer Book was to be used, and to make the provisions of the Act more strict. 
They especially required that the Surplice, and the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, should continue to be 
used. [Kennett’s Reg., pp. 676. 679.] These amendments were all agreed to by the Lords on May 10th; 
and thus the Prayer Book, as amended by Convocation, and the Act of Uniformity, as amended by Par- 
lament, both received the Royal Assent on May 19th, 1662. 

In answer to inquiries from the House of Lords, the Bishops had guaranteed (on April 21st) that the 
Book should be in print and ready for use on August 24th, the Feast of St. Bartholomew, which was the 
day fixed by Parliament for the Act to come into operation. The printing was undertaken by Convo- 
cation, which, as early as March 8th, had appointed Dr. Sancroft to be Supervisor, and Messrs. Scatter- 
good and Dillingham, Correctors of the press*. The following MS. entry on the fly-leaf of Bishop 
Cosin’s Durham Book, in the Bishop’s own hand, will show how much anxious thought he had taken for 
this and all other matters connected with the Revision of the Prayer Book :— 


« Directions to be given to the printer. 

“Set a fair Frontispiece at the beginning of the Book, and another before the Psalter, to be designed 
as the Archbishop shall direct, and after to be cut in Brass. 

“ Page the whole Book. 

“ Add nothing. Leave out nothing. Alter nothing, in what Volume soever it be printed. Par- 
ticularly ; never cut off the Lord’s Prayer, Creed, or any Collect with an &c.; but wheresoever they are 
to be used, print them out at large, and add [Amen] to the end of every prayer. 


t Kennett’s Register, pp. 671. 680. 684. 

2 Kennett’s Register, p. 680. An order for correcting this 
error had passed Convocation on April 21st. Ibid. p. 666. 

A more curious slip of the pen is said to have been corrected 
with a bold readiness by Lord Clarendon. “ Archbishop Tenison 
told me by his bedside on Monday, Feb. 12, 1710, that the Con- 
vocation book intended to be the copy confirmed by the Act of 
Uniformity had a rash blunder in the rubrick after Baptism, 
which should have run [It is certain by God’s word, that children 
which are baptized dying before they commit actual sin are un- 
doubtedly saved]. But the words [which are baptized] were 
left out, till Sir Cyril Wyche coming to see the Lord Chancellor 
Hyde found the book brought home by his lordship, and lying in 
his parlour window, even after it had passed the two houses, and 
happening to cast his eye upon that place, told the Lord Chan- 
cellor of that gross omission, who supplied it with his own hand.” 
Ibid. p. 643. This story was fifty years old when it reached 


Bishop Kennett, but it has an air of probability: and such strange 
accidents in the most important matters have not unfrequently 
oceurred. So the word “not” was once omitted from the seventh 
commandment in a whole edition of the Holy Bible; the printers 
being heavily fined for the mistake. 

3 Among Archbishop Sancroft’s MSS. in the Bodleian, there 
is a letter from one of Bishop Cosin’s chaplains, written from 
Bishop Auckland on June 16th, 1662, in which he says, “ My lord 
desires at all times to know particularly what progress you make 
in the Common Prayer.” There is alsoa mandate from Charles II. 
to the Dean and Chapter of Durham among the State Papers, 
dated June 16th, 1662, likewise, and ordering them to dispense with 
Prebendary Sancroft’s residence, as he ‘‘ has been for some months, 
and still is attending the impression of the Liturgy ;” and adding 
that “it is not the meaning of the statutes to require the resi- 
dence of members of the Chapter when service of greater use 
to the Church requires them.” State Papers, lvi. 61. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. xii 

“ Never print the Lord’s Prayer beyond—‘ deliver us from evil. Amen.’ 

“Print the Creeds always in three paragraphs, relating to the three Persons, &e. 

“Print not Capital letters with profane pictures in them. 

“Tn all the Epistles and Gospels follow the new translation. 

“As much as may be, compose so that the leaf be not to be turned over in any Collect, Creed, Verse 
of a Psalm, Middle of a sentence, &e. 

“Set not your own Names in the Title-page nor elsewhere in the Book, but only ‘ Printed at 
London by the printers to the King’s most excellent Majesty. Such a year.’ 

“Print [Glory be to the Father, &c.] at the end of every Psalm, and of every part of cviz. Psalm. 


“In this Book :— 


© Where a line is drawn through the words, that is all to be left out. 
“ Where a line is drawn under the words, it is to be printed in the Roman letter. 
“ Where a prickt line is drawn under the words, it is not part of the book, but only a direction to 
the printer or reader. 
“Where this note [ is set, a break is to be made, or a new line begun. 
“ Where a double line is drawn under any words, they are to be printed in Capitals '.” 


While the Act of Uniformity was passing through Parliament, the House of Commons inserted a 
clause which provided that “a true and perfect copy of this Act, and of the said Book annexed hereunto,” 
should be provided by the Deans and Chapters of every Cathedral or Collegiate Church before Christmas 
Day, obtained “under the Great Seal of England,” and also that similar copies should be delivered into 
the respective Courts of Westminster, and into the Tower of London, to be kept and preserved as records. 
It was also provided that these books should “be examined by such persons as the King’s Majesty shall 
appoint under the Great Seal of England for that purpose, and shall be compared with the original Book 
hereunto annexed.” These Commissioners were to have power “to correct, and amend in writing, any 
error committed by the Printer in the printing of the same book, or of any thing therein contained, and 
shall certify under their hands and seals . . . . that they have examined and compared the said Book, 
and find it to be a true and perfect Copy.” The Prayer Books so certified and sealed with the Great 
Seal were then enacted to be as good Records as the MS. itself. 

Soon after the Book was printed, a Commission was therefore issued: a strong Royal mandate 
having been meanwhile sent to the University of Cambridge, commanding the Vice-Chancellor to inhibit 
the University printers from sending out any copies printed otherwise than was allowed them’. ‘The 
Commission was dated Nov. Ist, 1662, and was addressed to John Croftes, Dean of Norwich; Joseph 
Henshaw, Dean of Chichester; Richard Chaworth; William Paul, Dean of Lichfield; Wiliam Bra- 
bourne; Mark Franck, Archdeacon of St. Alban’s; and George Madling. Certain alterations were 
made, chiefly in the headings and titles of Prayers, Psalms, &c., in all the Books which were to 
receive the Great Seal; and a Certificate was appended to each of them, signed by the Commis- 
sioners on December 18th. The Books so certified were afterwards ordered to be passed under the 
Great Seal, and as many copies sealed as the Lord Chancellor thought fit*, Letters Patent, dated 
January 5th, 1662-8, being appended to each. Thus the Book of Common Prayer was carefully guarded 
through every stage of its preparation, that it might go forth to the people of England with all the 
authority that law can give, and that a perfect Record might never be wanting of the true document by 
which the system of Divine Service is regulated in the Church of England. 

An attempt was made in the reign of William III. to remodel the Prayer Book on principles 
much less Catholic than those which had been uniformly adopted in former revisions, but the attempt 
happily failed‘. No further alteration of its pages has taken place, and the Prayer Book of 1662 is 
still the Prayer Book of the Church of England in 1866. 


1 Tt is very singular that Burton had alleged, some five-and- 
twenty years before, that there was “in the great printing house 
at London a Common Prayer Book,” altered with Cosin’s hand, 
to show “how he would have it altered.’ Prynne makes a some- 
what similar assertion in his criticism of Cosin’s Devotions, printed 
in 1626 and 1627. [Lathbury’s Convocation, p. 273.] These an- 
ticipations of Cosin’s influence show that he was marked out for 
a leader in the work of revision. 


2 State Papers, Domestic, Charles II., lviti. 42. 

3 [bid. Ixi. 144; lxiii. 42. 

4 The whole of the proposed Revision of 1689 was printed in a 
“blue book” by order of the House of Commons, dated June 2nd, 
1854. A full account of it is also given in Procter’s History of 
the Common Prayer, pp. 144—160. As it has never had any 
authority or influence, it has been considered unnecessary to give 
any particulars respecting it here. 


e 2 


xliv AN HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 


§ National Versions of the Prayer Book. 


The English system of Divine Service was adopted by the Church of Scotland in the seventeenth 
century, and by that of the United States of America in the eighteenth: and although the Churches of 
both countries are but small bodies, when compared with the numbers of the population, the versions of the ~ 
Book of Common Prayer adopted by them have an historical claim to be called national versions,—that 
of Scotland having been adopted under royal and ecclesiastical authority, while that of America was 
adopted under the most authoritative sanction of the ecclesiastical body to which the original English 
colonists of the continent belonged. 

The Scottish The Reformation was not carried forward in Scotland with the same calm, dis- 

Prayer Book. passionate, and humble reverence for the old foundations which was so conspicuous in 
that of the Church of England. For many years no uniform system of devotion took the place of the 
ancient offices, and it was not until the reign of James I. that any endeavour was made to put an end 
to that ecclesiastical anarchy which was thinly veiled by Knox’s miserable Book of Common Order. The 
General Assembly of 1616 agreed to the proposal that a national Liturgy should be framed: but King 
James wished to introduce the English Prayer Book, and it was used in his presence at Holyrood on May 
17th, 1617. Three years afterwards an Ordinal was published for the use of the Scottish Church; and 
the draft of a Liturgy was submitted to the King by Archbishop Spottiswoode. This was revived on the 
accession of Charles I., and in 1629 official measures were taken for obtaining its reconsideration and 
adoption by the Church of Scotland; although both the King and Laud were anxious to have the English 
Prayer Book introduced without alteration. Eventually the King gave way to the wish of the Scottish 
Bishops that a national form of Divine Service should be adopted: an episcopal committee was appointed 
(of whom Maxwell, Bishop of Ross, and Wedderburn, Bishop of Dumblane, appear to have been the most 
active), and they were engaged on the work for many months, some delay being caused, apparently, by 
the necessity of communicating with the King and the Archbishop of Canterbury, which had arisen from 
the altered relations of the two countries. The Scottish Prayer Book of 1637 was the result of these 
labours. It has been popularly connected with the name of Archbishop Laud, but it was the compilation 
of Scottish Bishops; and all the English Archbishop did was (as one of a commission of which Wren 
and Juxon were the other two members) to offer suggestions, prevent rash changes, communicate between 
the Crown and the Scottish Bishops respecting alterations, and facilitate the progress of the book 
through the press. 

The Book of Common Prayer so prepared was not submitted to the General Assembly of the Church of 
Scotland. As the preceding pages have shown, the English book was, from first to last, the work of 
Convocation ; and no doubt the Scottish book ought also to have had the sanction at least of the whole 
Scottish Church by representation, and not only of the Crown and the Bishops. In the year 1637 it 
was imposed upon the Church of Scotland by letters patent and the authority of the Bishops: but, as is 
well known, its introduction was vigorously opposed by a fanatical faction which in the end became 
supreme, and both the Church and the Prayer Book of Scotland were suppressed. That now in use in 
the Scottish Church was introduced in later times; but the book of 1637 is so much connected with the 
history of the period, and has, besides, so much liturgical interest, that a fuller notice of it has been 
inserted in the Appendix at the end of this volume. 


Pravcee Until the separation of the North American colonies from England, the English 
Book of Common Prayer was used without any alteration in the American Church. 

After they became independent, as the United States, it was thought expedient for the Church to make 
some changes, especially as alterations were being introduced without authority, and there seemed danger 
of much disorder in Divine worship if a form were not adopted which could have some claim to be called 
national. The first step towards this was taken at the General Convention of the American Church held 
at Philadelphia in 1785: during the next four years the various Offices were gradually remodelled until 
they took the form in which they are now used, and which was authorized by the General Convention of 
1789. Committees had been appointed to prepare an entirely new book : but in the end the English 
Prayer Book was taken as the basis to be adopted. The language was in many parts modernized, the 
Communion Office was restored to a form similar to that of 1549, a selection of Psalms was appointed 
instead of our daily order, the use of the Athanasian Creed was discontinued, and some other less 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. xlv 


important alterations were made. But the Preface declares that the American Church “is far from 
intending to depart from the Church of England in any essential point of doctrine, discipline, or wor- 
ship, or farther than local circumstances require.” 


§ Translations of the Prayer Book. 


The Book of Common Prayer arose, in no small degree, from a conviction, on the part of the Clergy 
and Laity of England, that Divine Service should be offered to God in the vernacular tongue of those on 
whose behalf and by whom it is being offered. The principle thus adopted in respect to themselves has 
been carried out as far as possible in all the missionary operations of the Church of England; and the 
establishment of her forms of Divine Service in countries where the English language is not freely 
spoken, has generally been accompanied by the translation of the Book of Common Prayer into the 
language of those who are being won over to the Church of Christ. A necessity has also arisen for 
translations into some European languages: while provision was made for rendering it into Welsh and 
Irish at the time of its first issue. An account of the Latin translation will be found under the rubric 
relating to the use of Divine Service in other languages than the English. 

The following list contains the names of forty languages and dialects, into which the Book of 
Common Prayer has been translated, but the number is constantly increasing as the missionary work of’ 
the Church is developed :— 


Latin Portuguese Armeno-Turkish Kafir 

Greek Italian Arabic Bullom 

Hebrew Dutch Hindustani Yoruban 

Welsh Danish Mahratta Malay 

Irish Russian Tamil Dyak 

Gaelic Polish Susu Singhalese 
Manks Modern Greek Amharic Indo-Portuguese 
French Persian Telugoo Cree 

German Turkish Chinese Malagasy 
Spanish Armenian Hawaiian Maori 


Most of these translations have been produced under the auspices of the Society for Promoting 
Christian Knowledge, and of the Prayer Book and Homily Society ; and some guarantee is thus given 
for accuracy. It should also be mentioned as a fact of interest and importance that the Hawaiian 
version was made in 1868 by the native king, Kamehameha IV., who also annexed to it a Preface 
which shows a thorough knowledge of the principles of the Prayer Book. 


A 


RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


TO THE 


PRAYER BOOK. 


SECTION I. 


THE PRINCIPLES OF CEREMONIAL WORSHIP. 


Forms and ceremonies in Divine Service are bodily manifestations of spiritual worship, and the ordinary 
means by which that worship is expressed to God. 

The whole scheme of Redemption is based on a principle which shows that God establishes com- 
munion between Himself and mankind chiefly through the body and bodily acts, and not through 
purely mental ones, as the exercise of thought or will. For when a perfect and unimpeded spiritual 
intercourse was to be renewed between the Creator and His fallen creatures, God, Who “is a Spirit,” 
took upon Him a bodily nature, and by means of it became a Mediator, through Whom that intercourse 
could be originated and maintained. For the particular application, also, of the benefits of His mediation, 
Christ ordained Sacraments, which are outward and visible signs endowed with the capacity of conveying 
inward and spiritual grace to the soul through the organs of the body. 

In analogy with this principle, Ceremonial worship, or Ritual, may be defined as the external body 
of words and actions by which worship is expressed and exhibited before God and man. As it is 
ordained that men shall tell their wants to God in prayer, although He knows better than they know 
themselves what each one’s necessities are, so it is also ordained that spiritual worship shall be com- 
municated to Him by words and actions, although His Omniscience would be perfectly cognizant of it 
without their intervention. 

The Divine Will on this subject has been revealed very clearly and fully in the Holy Bible; from 
its earliest pages, which record the sacrifices of Cain, Abel, and Noah, to its latest, im which the worship 
of Heaven is set forth as it will be offered by the saints of God when the worship of Earth will have 
passed away. 

Before the origination of the Jewish system of ceremonial, we find customs which indicate the use 
of certain definite forms in acts of Divine worship. The chief of these is Sacrifice, in which the fruits of 
the earth were offered to God, or the body of some slain animal consumed by fire on His altar. Such 
acts of sacrifice were purely ceremonial, even supposing them to have been unaccompanied by any words ; 
and the account of Abraham’s sacrifice, in Genesis xv. 9—17, illustrates very remarkably the minute 
character of the ritual injunctions given by God even before the time of the Mosaic system. The Divine 
institution of the outward ceremony of Circumcision is another instance of the same kind, and one of 
even greater force, from the general and lasting nature of the rite as at first ordained; a rite binding on 
the Jewish nation for nearly two thousand years. Another ceremonial custom to be observed in the 
Patriarchal times, is that of “bowing down the head” when worshipping the Lord [Gen. xxiv. 26. 48] ; 
another, that of giving solemn benedictions, accompanied by laying on of hands [Gen. xxvii. 27—29 ; 
xxvill. 1—4:; xlvii. 10; xviii. 9—20] ; another, that of setting up a pillar, and pouring oil upon it 
[Gen. xxv. 18; xxxv. 14]; another, purification before sacrifice [Gen. xxxv. 2]; and, to name no 
more, one other, the reverent burial of the dead [Gen. xxii. 19; xxxv. 19; 1. 10], which even then was 
an act of reverence towards God, as well as of respect and affection towards the departed. 

The introduction of a higher form of corporate worship was accompanied by a great development of 


A RITUAL INTRODUCTION TO THE PRAYER BOOK. xl vii 


ceremony or ritual, Of what was previously in use, we can only infer that it was divinely instituted ; 
but the divine institution of the Jewish system of ritual is told us in the most unmistakeable 
terms in the Holy Bible, and the narration of it occupies more than seven long chapters of the 
Book of Exodus [xxiv.—xxxi.], together with the greater part of the twenty-seven chapters of 
Leviticus. | 

This system of ritual (sometimes called “ Mosaic,” but in reality Divine) was revealed with cireum- 
stances of the utmost solemnity. After a preparation of sacrifices, Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and 
the seventy elders, went up into the lower part of Mount Sinai, and from thence “ they saw the God of 
Israel: and there was under His feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the 
body of Heaven in clearness.” Moses was then commanded to go up to the summit of the mountain, 
“and a cloud covered the mount. And the glory of the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai, and the cloud 
covered it six days: and the seventh day He called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud. And the 
sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children 
of Israel. And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him into the mount: and Moses was in 
the mount forty days and forty nights” [Exod. xxiv. 9—18]. During this awful time of converse 
between God and His servant Moses, it appears that the one subject of revelation and command was that 
- of ceremonial worship: the revelation of the moral law being recorded in the single verse, “ And He gave 
unto Moses, when He had made an end of communing with him upon Mount Sinai, two tables of testi- 
mony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God” [Exod. xxxi. 18]. 

The revelation of God’s will respecting forms and ceremonies, which was thus awfully given to 
Moses, went into very minute particulars, which were chiefly respecting the construction of the Taber- 
nacle, the dress of those who were to minister in it, the imstrwmenta of Divine Service, and the ceremonies 
with which that service was to be carried on. The architecture of the structure itself, the design of its 
utensils, and of the priestly vestments, and that kind of laws for the regulation of Divine Service which 
we now know as rubrics, were thus communicated to Moses by God Himself, and in the most solemn 
manner in which any revelation was ever given from Heaven. And when the revelation was completed, 
“the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uni, the son of 
Hur, of the tribe of Judah: and I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in under- 
standing, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship. .. . . And I, behold, I have given with 
him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise-hearted 
I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee” [Hxod. xxxi. 1—6]. Thus 
Divine Inspiration was given to the principal architects and superintendents of the external fabric by 
means of which Divine Service was to be carried on, as well as a Revelation of its structure, and of the 
ceremonial itself; and no words can heighten the importance and value which Almighty God thus indi- 
cated as belonging to ceremonial worship. 

Nor did this importance and value belong to ceremonial worship only in the early period of the 
Jewish nation’s life. It was not given to them as a means of spiritual education, by which they should 
be gradually trained to a kind of worship in which externals should hold a less conspicuous position. 
Nothing whatever appears, in the revelation itself, of such an idea as this; but the ceremonial is 
throughout regarded as having reference to Him in Whose service it was used, looking to the Object of 
worship, and not to the worshippers. And accordingly, when the Jewish nation attained its highest 
pitch of prosperity, and probably of intellectual as well as spiritual progress, in the latter years of David 
and in the reign of Solomon, this elaborate system of ceremonial worship was developed instead of being 
narrowed. The magnificent preparations which David made for building the Temple are recorded in 
1 Chron. xxii., xxvilil., and xxix.; and those which he made for establishing the service there, in 1 Chron. 
Xvi., XxXllii—xxvi.: the descriptions of the structure and of the utensils being almost as minute and 
detailed as in the commandments of God on Sinai respecting the Tabernacle. In this more intellectual 
age of the Jewish nation, and for this development of ceremonial worship, God vouchsafed to give 
inspiration to His servants for their work, as He had done to Bezaleel and Aholiab. When the Holy 
Bible gives the account of David furnishing Solomon with the designs for the Temple and its furniture, 
these significant words are added, “ And the pattern of all that he had by the Spit.” Even more 
striking are David’s own words: “ All this the Lord made me understand in writing by His hand upon 
me, even all the works of this pattern. ... . The Lord God, even my God, will be with thee; He will 
not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of the 
Lord” [1 Chron. xxviii. 12.19]. The fulfilment of this prophetic promise is indicated in a subsequent 


xlvili A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


place by the words, “ Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the building of the 
house of God” [2 Chron. iii. 3]: and the Divine approval of all that was done is strikingly shown in 
1 Kings ix. 3. 2 Chron. vy. 11—14; and vii. 1, 2. Nor should the fact be overlooked that the most 
costly and beautiful house of God which the world ever saw was built, the most elaborate and gor- 
geous form of Divine Service established, by one who was no imaginative enthusiast, but by one 
whose comprehensive knowledge and astute wisdom exceeded those of any man who had ever before 
existed, and were perhaps greater than any learning or wisdom, merely human, which have since 
been known. Solomon was a man of science, an ethical philosopher, and a statesman, yet a ritualist. 

Thus the use of Ceremonial Worship in some form is shown to have existed even in the simple 
Patriarchal ages; and to have been ordained in its most extreme form by God Himself in the times of 
Moses, David, and Solomon. Let it be reverently added, that it was this extreme form of Ceremonial 
Worship which our Lord recognized and took part in when He went up to Jerusalem to celebrate the 
great Festivals, and the restoration of which in its purity He enforced both at the beginning and end of 
His ministry by His “cleansing the Temple” from the presence of those who bought and sold there. 
The vain and empty private ceremonies which the Pharisees had invented met with the severe condemna- 
tion of our Lord; but there is not one act or word of His recorded which tends in the least towards 
depreciation of the Temple service; or which can lead to the supposition that the worship of God “in 
spirit and in truth” is to be less associated with forms and ceremonies when carried on by 
Christians, than when it was offered by Moses, David, Solomon, and the Old Testament saints of many 
centuries. 

The ritual practices of the Apostolic age are to some extent indicated in the New Testament, but 
as the Temple service was still carried on, and Jerusalem formed the religious centre of the Apostolic 
Church, it is clear that an elaborate ceremonial was not likely to be established during the first quarter 
of a century of the Church’s existence. Yet this earliest age of the Church witnesses to the principle of 
ceremonial worship, as the Patriarchal age had done; and each foreshadowed a higher development of it. 
A learned German ritualist has written thus on this subject :—‘ On mature reflection, I am satisfied 
that the Apostles by no means performed the Divine Liturgy with such brevity, at least as a general 
rule, as some have confidently asserted. The faithful, whether converts among the Jews or Gentiles, 
were accustomed to ceremonies and prayers in their sacrifices; and can we suppose that the Apostles 
would neglect to employ the like, tending so greatly as these must do to the dignity of the service, and 
to promote the reverence and fervour of the worshipper? Who can believe that the Apostles were 
content to use the bare words of consecration and no more? Is it not reasonable to suppose that they 
would also pour forth some prayers to God, especially the most perfect of all prayers which they had 
learned from the mouth of their Divine Master, for grace to perform that mystery aright; others pre- 
paratory to communion, and again, others of thanksgiving for so imestimable a benefit?” [Krazer de 
Liturgiis, 1. 1—3.] 

But there are distinct traces of actual forms of service in the Acts of the Apostles, and in some of 
the Epistles. In the second chapter of the former, at the forty-second verse, it is said of the first 
Christians that they continued stedfastly in the doctrine [79 dvday] and in the fellowship [7H Kowevia] 
of the Apostles; and in the breaking of the Bread [17 «Adoe. Tod adprov}, and in the prayers [rais 
mpooevxats| ; the two latter expressions clearly indicating settled and definite ceremonial usages with 
which the writer knew his readers to be acquainted. St. Paul’s reference to a Sunday offertory [1 Cor. 
xvi. 1]; to the observance of decency and order in the celebration of Divine Service {1 Cor. xiv. 40] ; 
to the ordinances, or traditions, which he had delivered to the Corinthians, and which he had received 
from the Lord Himself (1 Cor. xi. 2]; and to the divisions of Divine Service in his words, “I exhort, 
therefore, that first of all, supplications [dence], prayers [mpocevyas], intercessions [évrev&eus], and 
Eucharists [evyaptotias], be made for all men” [1 Tim. ii. 1],—these show that an orderly and formal 
system was already in existence; while his allusion to “the traditions” [tas mrapaddoceis] seems to 
point to a system derived from some source the authority of which was binding upon the Church. 
Such an authority would attach to every word of our Blessed Lord; and when we know that He 
remained on earth for forty days after His Resurrection, and that during that period He was instructing 
His Apostles in “the things pertainmg to the Kingdom of God” [Acts i. 3], it is most natural to 
suppose that the main points of Christian ritual were ordained by Him, as those of the Jewish ritual had 
been ordained during the forty days’ sojourn of Moses on Sinai. It is to be remembered also that there 
are forms and ceremonies in use by the Church which were undoubtedly ordained by Christ, such as the 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. xlix 


laying on of hands in Ordination, the use of water and certain words in Holy Baptism, and the manual 
ceremonies at the Holy Communion. 

At a later period, when the Temple service had altogether ceased, when the temporary dispensation 
of a miraculous Apostolate was drawing to a close, and when the Church was settling into its permanent 
form and habits, St.John (the last and most comprehensive of the Apostolic guides of the Church) 
wrote the book of the Revelation; and several portions of it seem intended to set forth in mystical 
language the principles of such ceremonial worship as was to be used in the Divine Service of Christian 
churches. In the fourth chapter, the Apostle is taken up to be shown, as Moses had been shown, a 
“pattern in the Mount;” and as that revelation to Moses began to be made on the Sabbath of the old 
Dispensation, so it was “ the Lord’s Day” on which St. John was “in the Spirit,” that he might have 
this new revelation made to him. As, moreover, the revelation made to Moses was one respecting the 
ritual of the Jewish system, so there is an unmistakeable ritual character about the vision first seen by 
St. John; the whole of the fourth and fifth chapters describing a scene which bears a close resemblance 
to the celebration of the Holy Eucharist, as it was celebrated in the early ages of the Church, and as it 
is still celebrated in the East. 

The form and arrangement of churches in primitive times was derived, in its main features, from 
- the Temple at Jerusalem. Beyond the porch was the narthex, answering to the court of the Gentiles, 

and appropriated to the unbaptized and to penitents. Beyond the narthex was the nave, answering to 
the court of the Jews, and appropriated to the body of worshippers. At the upper end of the nave was 
the choir, answering to the Holy Place, for all who were ministerially engaged in Divine Service. 
Beyond the choir was the Bema or Chancel, answering to the Holy of Holies, used only for the 
celebration of the Holy Eucharist, and separated from the choir by a closed screen, resembling the 
organ screen of our cathedrals, which was called the Iconostasis. As early as the time of Gregory 
Nazianzen, in the fourth century, this screen is compared to the division between the present and the 
eternal world [Carm. xi.], and the sanctuary behind it was ever regarded with the greatest reverence as 
the most sacred place to which man could have access while in the body; the veiled door which formed 
the only direct exit from it into the choir and nave being only opened at the time when the Blessed 
Sacrament was administered to the people there assembled. The opening of this door, then, brought 
into view the Altar and the Divine mysteries which were being celebrated there. And when St. John 
looked through the door that had been opened in Heaven, what he saw is thus described: “ And behold a 
Throne was set in Heaven... . and round about the Throne were four and twenty seats; and upon the 
seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment; and they had on their heads 
crowns of gold: . . . . and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the Throne . . . . and before 
the Throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal.” Here is exactly represented an arrangement of 
the altar familiar to the whole Eastern Church and to the early Church of England, in which it 
occupies the centre of an apse in front of the seats of the Bishop and Clergy, which are placed in the 
curved part of the wall. And, although there is no reason to think that the font ever stood near the 
altar, yet nothing appears more likely than that the “sea of glass like unto crystal” mystically 
represents that laver of regeneration through which alone the altar can be spiritually approached. 
Another striking characteristic of the ancient Church was the extreme reverence which was shown to 
the book of the Gospels, which was always placed upon the altar and surmounted by a cross. So “in 
the midst of the Throne, and round about the Throne,” St. John saw those four living creatures which 
“have been universally interpreted to represent the four Evangelists or the four Gospels; their position 
seeming to signify that the Gospel is ever attendant upon the altar, penetrating, pervading, and 
embracing the highest mystery of Divine Worship, giving “glory and honour and thanks to Him that 
sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever.” In the succeeding chapter St. John beholds Him for 
whom this altar is prepared. “I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the Throne, and of the four living 
creatures, and in the midst of the elders; stood a Lamb as It had been slain, having seven horns and 
seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.” It cannot be doubted that 
this is our Blessed Lord in that Human Nature on which the septiformis gratia was poured without 
measure; and that His appearance in the form of “the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, 
and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing,” represents the mystery of His prevail- 
ing Sacrifice and continual Intercession. But around this living Sacrifice there is gathered all the 
homage of an elaborate ritual. They who worship Him have “every one of them harps,” to offer Him 


the praise of instrumental music; they have “golden vials full of incense, which are the prayers of 
f 


1 A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


saints,” even as the angel afterwards had “ given unto him much incense that he should offer it with the 
prayers of the saints upon the golden altar which was before the Throne’:” they sing a new song, 
mingling the praises of “the best member that they have” with that of their instrumental music; and 
they fall down before the Lamb with the lowliest gesture of their bodies in humble adoration. Let it 
also be remembered that one of the Anthems here sung by the choirs of Heaven is that sacred song, 
“Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come ;” the Eucharistic use of 
which is traceable in every age of the Church. 

These striking coincidences between the worship of Heaven revealed to St. John and that which was 
and is offered at the altars of the Church on earth, warrant us in considering this portion of the Revela- 
tion as a Divine treasury wherefrom we may draw the principles upon which the worship of earth ought 
to be organized and conducted. And the central point of the principles thus revealed is that there is a 
Person to be adored in every act of Divine Worship now, as there was a Person to be adored in the system 
which culminated in the Temple Service. This Person is moreover revealed to us as present before the 
worshippers. And He is further represented as our Redeeming Lord, the “ Lamb that was slain,’ He 
who said respecting Himself to St. John at the opening of the Apocalyptic Vision, “I am He that liveth 
and was dead, and am alive for evermore.” 

This Presence was promised by our Blessed Lord in words which the daily prayer of the Church 
interprets to have been spoken with reference not only to Apostolic or Episcopal councils, but also to 
Divine Service: “ Where two or three are gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of 
them.” [Matt. xviii. 20.] It is quite impossible to view this promise in the light of Holy Scripture, 
and especially of that part of the Revelation which has been referred to above, without seeing that its 
fullest and most essential meaning connects it with the Eucharistic Presence of Christ, the “ Lamb as it 
had been slain.” This truth so pervaded the mind of the ancient Church that in its primitive ages 
Divine Service consisted of the Holy Eucharist only’; and the early Liturgies speak to Christ in such 
terms as indicate the most simple and untroubled Faith in the actual Presence of our “ Master” and 
Lord*. Hence the Ceremonial Worship of the early Church was essentially connected with this Divine 
Service; and to those who were so imbued with a belief in the Eucharistic Presence of their Lord the 
object of such ceremonial was self-evident. The idea of reflex action upon the worshipper probably never 
occurred to Christians in those times. Their one idea was that. of doing honour to Christ, after the 
pattern of the four living creatures, the four and twenty elders, the angels, and the ten thousand times 
ten thousand and thousands of thousands who said “ Worthy is the Lamb :” after the pattern of those 
who, even in Heaven, accompanied their anthems with the music of harps, and their prayers with the 
sweet odour of incense. 

The mystery of our Lord’s Presence as the Object of Divine Worship les at the root of all the cere- 
monial practices of the Church: and a conviction that this Presence is vouchsafed chiefly through the 
Holy Eucharist causes the latter to become the visible centre from which all ritual forms and cere- 
monies radiate. It is true that there are some ceremonies which may be said to belong to the organiza- 
tion of Divine Service; but even that organization is linked on to acts of worship, since it is in the service 
of God, who enjoins order, and exhibits it in all His works. But this latter class of ceremonies is not large, 
and scarcely affects the general principle which has been previously stated. There are, again, some cere- 
monies which may be called educational or emotional in their purpose, but they are so only in a secondary 
degree; and such a character may be considered as accidentally rather than essentially belonging to 
them. 

The principles of Ceremonial Worship thus deduced from Holy Scripture may be shortly applied to 
some of the more prominent particulars of the ritual of the Church of England, leaving exact details for 
the two subsequent sections of this Introduction. 

1. The local habitation provided for the welcome of our Lord’s mystical Presence is provided of a 
character becoming the great honour and blessing which is to be vouchsafed. It is the House of God, 
not man’s house; a place wherein to meet Him with the closest approach which can be made in this 


1 It is observable that the incense is not a symbolical figure for | by our Mattins and Evensong, were derived from the Jewish 
prayer, but is said to be offered in combination with prayer. [Rev. | ritual; and the Christians of Jerusalem evidently “ went up to” 
vill. 3, 4. ] those of the Temple Service while it lasted. 

2 The Holy Eucharist was the only distinctively Christian part 3 See a prayer at p. 27, from the Liturgy of St. Mark, but 
of Christian worship. The “hours of prayer,” now represented | addressed to the First Person of the Blessed Trinity. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. li 


life. Hence, if Jacob consecrated with the ceremony of unction the place where God made His covenant 
with him, and said of it, “This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven 2” so 
should our churches be set apart and consecrated with sacred ceremonies making them holy to the Lord. 
So also, because they are to be in reality, and not by a mere stretch of language, the Presence chambers 
of our Lord, we must regard them as the nearest to heaven in holiness of all places on earth by the virtue 
of that Presence. And, lavishing all costly material, and all earnest skill upon their first erection and 
decoration, we shall ever after frequent them with a consciousness that “the Lord is in His holy Temple,” 
and that all which is done there should be done under a sense of the greatest reverence towards Him. 

2. Hence too, the furniture of the House of God, the utensils or instrumenta necessary for Divine 

_ Service, should all be constructed with a reverent regard to the Person in whose service they are to be 
used. Costly wood or marble, precious metals and Jewels, used for such an object, do not minister to 
luxury, and have no direct and primary reference at all to those who will use them or look upon them. 
But as ministering to the honour of Christ our Lord they cannot be too freely used: nor need we ever 
fear of expending wealth or skill too abundantly when we read of the manner in which God accepted all 
that Solomon had done for His holy Temple at J erusalem, and all the beauty and splendour with which 
He is worshipped in Heaven. The same principle applies with equal force to the apparel in which the 

“ministers of God carry on His Divine Worship ; surplice and albe, cope and vestment, all being used in 
His honour and for no other primary object whatever. If they are not necessary for the honour of God, 
the greater part of them are not needed at all, 

3. The use of instrumental music, of singing, and of musical intonation, instead of colloquial modes 
of speech, are all to be explained on the same ground. Universal instinct teaches that the praises of 
God ought to be sung, and that singing is the highest mode of using in His service the organs of speech 
which He has given us. An orderly musical intonation is used by priest and people in their prayers, 
that they may speak to their Maker otherwise than they would speak to their fellow-men, acknowledging 
even by their tone of voice that He is to be served with reverence, ceremony, and awe. 

4. And, lastly, the gestures used in Divine Service are used on similar principles. Kneeling in 
prayer, standing to sing praise, turning towards the East or the Altar when saying the Creeds, humbly 
bowing the head at the Name of Jesus or of the Blessed Trinity,—these are all significant gestures of 
reverence towards One who is really and truly present to accept the worship which they offer ; One who 
accepts such reverence from the holy Angels and the glorified Saints, and who will not be otherwise than 
willing to receive it from His ministers and members in the Church on earth. 

These, then, are the principles of Ceremonial Worship which pervade the Book of Common Prayer ; 
and for the practical expression of which provision is made in the rubrics and in the ritual tradition to 
which the rubrics directly or indirectly point. They are principles which were originally laid down with 
the most awful solemnity by God Himself; which were not abrogated by any act or word of our Lord 
when He was upon earth; which were illustrated afresh on the first formation of the Christian Church 
in as solemn a manner as that in which they were originally enunciated ; which were practically adopted 
by those Christians who lived nearest to the time of our Lord’s ministry and teaching; and which have 
been followed out in our own Church from the most ancient days. The particular manner in which 
these Divinely revealed principles of Ceremonial Worship are practically applied to Divine Service as 
regulated by the present rules of the Church of England will be shown in the following: sections. 


SECTION II. 


THE MANNER OF PERFORMING DIVINE SERVICE. 


Tue performance of Divine Service may be regarded in a twofold relation; as it affects the eye, and as 
it affects the ear. In other words, it may be considered as coming within the province, and under the 
superintendence of, one or other of the two representative Church officers, the Sacrist and the Precentor. 
In the present section some remarks will be offered upon it under its latter aspect, as it bears upon the 
subject of Church Music. 
In looking, then, from the Precentor’s point of view, at the question of the manner of performing 
{2 


li A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


Divine Service in the Church of England, the first thing which strikes us is this,—that the directions 
in our Prayer Book, although scanty, are yet full of significance, implying much more than they seem 
actually to express. They carry us back to former times for their elucidation, and obviously assume a 
certain amount of familiarity with pre-Reformation usage. Thus the very brevity of our musical 
rubrics is one of their most interesting features, as necessarily presupposing a former history, and as 
referring us to that history for the completion and explanation of their concise verbal injunctions. 

There is a world of meaning in the simple little word “ Evensong,” as applied to our daily Evening 
Office. So again, such brief notices as, “here followeth the anthem ;” “then shall be said, or sung ;” 
“here shall follow;” “then shall be read;” “here the Priest and Clerks shall say ;” “these Anthems 
shall be sung or said;” with many others, all seem to demand some additional explanation over and 
above what their words actually express, 

But before directing attention to the musical notices of our Prayer Book, and their immediate 
history, it will be necessary to carry our thoughts further back, and see what is the ultimate basis on 
which they test. And this will compel us to touch, though very briefly, on the subject of the Divine 
authority for the employment of music in the worship of Almighty God. 

No lengthened remarks will be needed on this head. For the fact of music forming a recognized 
and Divinely ordained element in the public worship of God, and of the Almighty having herein given 
His deliberate sanction and approval to that which the instinctive piety of all nations has taught them, 
is familiar to all careful readers of Holy Scripture. Still it is well that Christians should have this truth, 
of the Divine origin and authority of Church music, firmly impressed on their minds; that they should 
be perfectly settled on this point, that it is not only not wrong to employ music freely in Divine Service, 
but a direct contravention of God’s revealed Will wo¢ to employ it, where it can be had; that Church 
music, therefore, should not be regarded with indifference, as a mere “non-essential,” but as a matter 
demanding earnest and reverent consideration. 

We pass over the Antediluvian and Patriarchal times, as the notices of a definite and settled Ritual, 
and consequently of sacred music, are but slight. We pass over, also, the sojourn of the Chosen People 
in Egypt, and their wanderings in the desert. So long as God’s Church was in poverty, and under per- 
secution, struggling for existence, and unable, through sheer necessity, to “put on her garments of 
praise,” God (in Jewish, as afterwards in Christian times) waived her becoming tribute and “ Service of 
Song.” We must not look for our example to a state of things confessedly abnormal and transitory. 
We must refer to a period when the Church was able, through her outward circumstances, to give that 
full ritualistic form and expression to her worship which God deemed consistent with the duty she owed 
to Him’. Let us at once pass on, then, to the period of King David. 

The first great religious celebrations in his reign took place in connexion with the removal of the 
Ark from its place of banishment (after it had been captured by the Philistines in the time of Eli) to its 
resting-place on Mount Sion. There were two grand Choral Processional Services in connexion with 
this removal. The former of these, in consequence of certain ritual irregularities which offended God, 
came to a sad and untimely close. [1 Chron. xiii. 8—12; xv. 11—16.] The latter is the one which, 
as meeting with God's express approbation, especially demands our notice. It is in reference, then, 
to this second and successful ceremonial, that we read of David, by God’s appointment, “ speaking 
to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, 
psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy.” “Thus all Israel ”— 
the narrative proceeds—“ brought up the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord with shouting, and with 
sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps ” 
{1 Chron. xv. 28]. 

Nor was the work of Praise at,an end. So soon as the solemn business of the Translation of the 
Ark is over, there must still be a special festival of Thanksgiving in commemoration of the auspicious 


event, as well as provision made for a continwous service of Praise. Hence David “appointed certain of 


[ 


1 «Yn Egypt,” writes Hooker, “it may be God’s people were 
right glad to take some corner of a poor cottage, and there serve 
God upon their knees; peradventure, covered with dust and 
straw sometimes..... In the Desert, they are no sooner pos- 
sessed of some little thing of their own, but a Tabernacle is 
required at their hands. Being planted in the land of Canaan, 
and having David to be their King, when the Lord had given 


him rest, it grieved his righteous mind to consider the growth of 
his own estate and dignity, the affairs of Religion continuing still 
in the former manner. What he did propose it was the pleasure 
of God that Solomon his son should perform; and perform in a 
manner suitable to their present, not to their ancient state and 
condition,” &c, [Hecl. Pol. LV. ii. 4] 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. lii 


the Levites to minister before the Ark of the Lord, and to record, and to thank and praise the Lord God 
of Israel ;” some “with psalteries and harps ;” some to make “a sound with cymbals;” besides “the 
priests with trumpets continually before the Ark of the Covenant of God.” 

Then it was, that “David delivered first this Psalm to thank the Lord [Ps. ev.] into the hand of 
Asaph and his brethren: ‘ Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon His Name... . sing unto Him, sing 
Psalms unto Him .... Sing unto the Lord, all the earth: show forth from day to day His salvation, ” 

And that the words of this Song should be practically realized, and the offering of Praise not cease 
with the festive occasion which had drawn forth the Psalm, we read of “ Asaph and his brethren” being 
“left before the Ark of the Covenant to minister continually ;” of “ Heman and Jeduthun,” and others, 
. “who were expressed by name,” “being chosen to give thanks to the Lord, with trumpets and cymbals 

. and with musical instruments of God” [1 Chron. xvi. 37. 41, 42]; of a great company of Levites 
Bean set by David “over the Service of Song in the House of the Lord, after the Ark had rest ;”” who 
“ ministered before the dwelling-place of the Tabernacle of the Congregation with singing” [ib. vi. 
31, 32]; and of “ the singers, chief of the fathers of the Levites . . . . who were employed in that work 
day and night” [ib. ix. 33]. And so highly developed did the musical department of the Divine Service 
become, that we see David, later in life, enumerating no fewer than “four thousand, who praised the 

‘Lord with the instruments which I made to praise therewith” [ib. xxiii. 5]. And lest we should deem 
these and kindred ritual arrangements of “the Man after God’s own heart,’ “the Sweet Psalmist of 
Israel,” mere private unauthorized exhibitions of strong musical and esthetic taste on the part of an 
individual monarch, we are expressly told in one place, that “all these things were done according to 

. the commandment of the Lord by His Prophets.” [2 Chron. xxix. 25.] Solomon carefully per- 
petuated all the musical arrangements of his father, and after the completion of his glorious Temple, 
according to the pattern shown him by God Himself, he transferred thither all the “ iastrwments ” which 
David had made for God’s service. 

On the magnificent ceremonial of the Temple Dedication, with its gorgeous musical and ritual 
accessories [2 Chron. v.; vii. 1—6], we need not dwell, since it is familiar to all; but it may be as 
well to remark that it is not for nothing that the Holy Ghost has thought fit to give us such an 
example of a Consecration Service. Surely if the ordinary bald Consecration and other Festal Services 
of modern times, with which we ourselves are familiar, are according to the Divine Mind, are suitable 
to the Dignity of Hr to Whom they are offered, and are adequate expressions before Angels and Men 
of His awful and “ excellent Majesty,’ this soul-stirring description would seem somewhat unnecessary, 
and hardly to have been “ given for our learning.” 

In proportion as subsequent monarchs neglected God, in that proportion did they cease to care for 
the Ritual of His House, and suffered the music of His Sanctuary to decline. And conversely, as any 
monarch was mindful of the Lord of Hosts, and zealous for His Honour, so do we ever see one token of 
his zeal and devotion in his reverent attention to the Ritual and the Music of God’s Holy Temple. Of 
Joash, of Hezekiah, of Josiah, the Holy Ghost recounts with special approbation their efforts for the 
restoration and encouragement of Church Music. But times grew darker. God’s people fell away from 
Him. They forgat that “ God was their strength, and the High God their Redeemer.” The sad era of 
the Captivity ensued. The harps of Sion were hung on Babel’s willows. On the return from the ‘Cap- 

tivity we read of laudable and energetic attempts on the part of Ezra and Nehemiah to restore the 
ancient choral worship, and with a certain amount of success. But Israel’s glory was departed. 

Thus we learn, even from this brief and incomplete survey, that God’s Church is emphatically “a 
singing Church ;” that music, vocal and instrumental, is designed, by His express appointment, to 
constitute one essential element, one necessary feature, one integral part, of His public Ritual; that the 
absence of music and suitable ceremonial in the history of His ancient Church, is, in every case, not the 
result of His Will, but of man’s sinful disregard of that Will; an infallible sign, not of the faithfulness, 
but of the unfaithfulness of His people. 

But has not Christianity introduced a change? At no time and in no manner has God ever given 
a hint that He has altered His will on this subject. Our Blessed Lord did not utter one single 
word in disparagement of the general principle of ceremonial worship, or of the ancient ritual, or music, 
of God’s Church. It was one of His chief earthly delights to take part in that worship Himself: and 
an elaborately ceremonial worship was the only public worship which He attended while sojourning 
here below. He was first discovered in His youth in His Father’s Temple. His first recorded words 
are, “ Wist ye not that I must be €v rots tod IIatpos pov;” words which “remind the earthly mother 


A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


liv 


that it was in the courts of His Heavenly Father’s House that the Son must needs be found; that His 
true home was in the Temple of Him Whose glories still lingered round the heights of Moriah’? Do 
we not see Him here and elsewhere expressing in deed that which of old He expressed in word by the 
mouth of His “Sweet Singer,”—“ Lord, I have loved the Habitation of Thy House... . My soul hath 
a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of My God?” 

And even after the Ascension, while we read of our Lord’s chosen ones meeting together for their 
private celebrations of the Blessed Eucharist in their own consecrated Oratory, “the large Upper Room ” 
(that sacred spot, hallowed first by the visible Presence of Christ, and then by that of the Holy Ghost’), 
we find them exhibiting the effect of their Master’s reverent example and teaching, by “ continuing,” 
none the less, “ daily, with one accord, in the Temple,” for the public worship of God. 

Our Lord came, not to abolish, but to transfigure the old Ritual; not to diminish, but to increase 
its glory; to breathe into its dead forms a Divine and Life-giving Energy. Christian worship, at its 
first introduction, was not designed to supplant, but to supplement, the ancient Ritual. It was probably 
simple in outward character, as being only private ; God’s public worship being still entrusted to, and 
conducted by, the Ministers of the Old Dispensation. For a time, doubtless, the two went on simul- 
taneously ; the public worship of the Old, the private worship of the New Dispensation. The two were 
ultimately to be fused together: the outward and expressive forms of the Old, adapted, under the guid- 
ance of the Holy Ghost, to clothe the august realities of the New. 

It is plainly recorded when and where the first Christian Service took place; viz. on the eve of our 
adorable Lord’s Passion, and in ‘the large Upper Room ”—hereafter to become the first Oratory of the 
Christian Church. Though outwardly, it may be, without pomp and show, as bearing on it the shadow 
of the great Humiliation to be consummated on the morrow, yet has the world never beheld, before or 
since, a Service of such surpassing dignity, sacredness, and significance. Here we witness the meeting- 
point of two Dispensations; the virtual passing away of the Law, and its transfiguration into the Gospel ; 
the solemn Paschal close of the Old Economy, the Holy Eucharistic Inauguration of the New. Here we 
see the whole Representative Church assembled together with its Divine Head. And here we find every 
essential element of Christian Worship introduced and blessed by Incarnate God Himself. The grand 
central feature of the Service is the Holy Eucharist itself. Clustering round, and subsidiary to it, we 
find supplication, intercession, exhortation, benediction, excommunication, and Holy Psalmody: “after 
they had sung (iuvjcavres) they went out to the Mount of Olives.” Here, in the solemn Eucharistic 
Anthem which accompanied the first Celebration ;—the Celebrant, God Incarnate, “ giving Himself with 
His Own Hands ;” and the Leader of the Holy Choir, God Incarnate, fulfilling His own gracious predic- 
tion, “In the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto Thee” (vvjow oe)—do we behold the Divine 
Source of that bright and ever-flowing stream of “Psalm, Hymn, and Spiritual Song,’ which was to 
“make glad the City of God.” 

In this august and archetypal Service, then, we see all those venerable essentials of Christian Wor- 
ship which it would afterwards devolve upon the Church, under the guidance of the indwelling Spirit, 
to embody and express in her solemn Liturgies; and for the clothing and reverent performance and 
administration of which, it would be needful for her, under the same Holy Teaching, to borrow and adapt 
from that Divine Storehouse of Ritual which God had provided in the ancient Ceremonial *. 


1 Ellicott, “Historical Lectures on the Life of our Lord,” 
p. 93. Ist ed. 

2 Our English version, “breaking bread from house to 
house ” [Acts ii. 46], would lead us to imagine, if it suggested 
the Eucharist at all, that this. solemn Breaking of the 
Bread of Life—that “Bread which is the Communion of the 
Body of Christ”—took place irregularly, now in one private 
house, now in another. This is not, however, the meaning. 
Kar’ olicoy is not at any house, but ‘at home,” at one particular 
house, or home. And where was the then Home of the Infant 
Church but that Sacred Place where the Holy Ghost had de- 
scended, “filling the whole Howse where they were sitting P ” 
there, even in that “Large Upper Room,” where the first Eucha- 
rist had been celebrated, where our Lord had appeared on two 
consecutive Sundays— the Upper Room” [7d dmepgov, Acts i. 
13], to which our Lord’s chosen ones resorted after the Ascension 
in obedience to His command that they should not depart from 


Jerusalem, but wait there for His Promised Gift, and “ where 
abode Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip,” &c. &c., 
who “all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, 
with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with His 
brethren.” 

3 It is necessary to bear in mind, not only what the Upper 
Room Service was designed, but also what it was not designed, 
to teach us. Some would gather from it a lesson against the use 
of solemn circumstance and ceremonial in Christian worship ; but 
most incorrectly. 

Passing over the significant notice, that the “Large Upper 
Room,” even before any of the Holy Company entered it, was by 
God’s secret Providence (working by human or angelic ministra- 
tion) “furnished and prepared”—words which may imply much 
—it must never be forgotten that, in the possibly simple arrange- 
ments of the Feast, there was something mysteriously in keeping 
with the then estate of Him who was to be Lord of the Feast. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK, lv 


But the chief point for us, at present, is this; that in the “ Hymn” of our Ever-Blessed Redeemer 
we meet with a xew, and, if possible, more constraining sanction to the use of Music in Divine Worship. 
We learn that the “Service of Song,” ordained of old by God for His Church, and commended by so 
many marks of His approval, so far from being discountenanced by our Lord, was deliberately sanctioned, 
appropriated, perpetuated, re-consecrated, “ fn His Body’s sake,” by His own most blessed practice and 
example, Music was henceforth, no less than of old, to form one necessary adjunct, one essential element 
in Divine Worship. Nor must we fail to notice that, as music was doubtless intended to find its appro- 
priate place throughout the endire offices of the Christian Church, even as the threefold division of Church 
Music into “ Psalm, Hymn, Spiritual Song',” twice emphatically repeated by the Holy Ghost, would 
seem to indicate, so its special home is fis Liturgy. Wherever absent, it should not be absent here: 
and the immediate juxta-position of the Words of Institution, in both Gospels, with the mention of 
the Hymns, may be reverently conceived to teach this. So also does the Church seem instinctively to 
have felt : regarding the Holy Eucharist as the great centre round which her songs of praise should 
cluster and revolve; the great source from which they should take their rise, and flow-forth. Pliny’s 
mention of the early morning meetings of the first Christians to offer Divine Worship and sing hymns 
to Christ, probably refers to their Eucharistic assemblies. And Justin Martyr’s expression must have a 
‘similar allusion, when he speaks of their offering up “ solemn rites and hymns,” Iousas Kat bpvous,— 
where the word ITow7ras is interpreted by Grabius to denote the solemn prayers “in Mysteriorum Cele- 
bratione.” [Apol. 1. 13.] 

With regard to the natwre of the music used in God’s Church in early times, we are utterly in 
the dark. Over the grand old Temple Music, in fact over the whole of the ancient Jewish Ritual Song, 
there is an impenetrable veil hanging. There are doubtless natural reasons which may, in a measure, 
account for the fact ; especially this, that the ancient Jews seem to have possessed no musical characters ; 
so that the melodies used in their services have been traditional, and as an inevitable consequence, 
more or less at the mercy of the singers. And we must further bear in mind that, ever since the 
woful time of the Captivity, the Holy Nation, instead of maintaining its ancient grand Theocratic 
independence, has been in subjection successively to all the great powers of the world; to the Baby- 
lonian, Medo-Persian, Greeco-Macedonian dynasties ; then, in turn, to Egypt and Syria; then to the 
mighty power of Rome. When we consider this, and take into account also their intestine factions, 
their constant unfaithfulness to God, their gradual loss therefore of their inward strength and glory, and 
with it of the beauty and completeness of that perfect Ritual which at once clothed, expressed, 
enshrined, and preserved their Holy Faith; can we wonder that, even before their dispersion into all 
lands, the memory of much of their own ancient music had faded away, and their Church song had 
lost its character, under the ever-varying heathen influences to which 1t had so long been incidentally 
subjected ? 


He had “emptied Himself;” and His voluntary self-abasement 
was on the eve of its full consummation. At this very Repast He 
suffers an Apostle to “lean on His Breast” in the unrestrained 
familiarity of friendly intercourse. From the loving and simple 
freedom, then, of this first Eucharist (in which God Incarnate 
was Himself the visible Celebrant) no single argument can be 
adduced against outward tokens of awe and reverence before our 
Lord’s supernatural and spiritual Presence, which would not 
equally apply to His natural and visible Presence. 

Qur Lord is now “very highly exalted.’ The very same 
Apostle who here reclined on His Bosom, as on that of a dear 
friend, is careful to narrate to us how that, when next he beheld 
Him, after His entrance into Glory, he “fell at His feet as 
dead.” 

So, again, the Holy Ghost is no less careful to record, “ for our 
learning,” the solemn warning which the Christian Church so 
speedily received, as to the paramount necessity of fencing round 
this Holy Mystery with suitable ceremonial; telling us of the 
solemn judgments of the Most High upon those early commuzi- 
cants, who, presuming on the simple exterior of this august 
Service, ere yet the Church had been able to perfect her expres- 
sive Ritual, and approaching the Sacred Table without reverence, 
“not discerning the Lord’s Body,” and counting the “ Blood of 
the Covenant” a “common thing,” drew down upon them the 


heavy wrath of God, being smitten with “grievous diseases, and 
sundry kinds of death.” 

1 Eph. v.19. Col. iii. 16. 

In this threefold division, it is scarcely possible to miss some 
special secret relation with the three several Persons of the Ever- 
Blessed Trinity. (1) The “ Psalms,” flowing to us from, and 
uniting us to, the Old Dispensation, primarily lead us up to, and 
reveal to us, “the Father of an infinite Majesty.” (2) The 
“« Hymns,” originating, as we have seen, from the Eucharistic 
Hymn in the Upper Room, bring us into special connexion with 
our Lord Jesus Christ. (3) The “ Spiritual Songs,” as their 
very name indicates, rather represent the free, unrestrained out- 
breathings in Holy Song of that Divine Spirié which animates 
and inspires the Body of Christ. 

So that we find the first in our Psalters ; the second chiefly in 
our Liturgical Hymns, “ Gloria in Excelsis,” “ Ter Sanctus,” and 
the like; the third in our metrical songs, or odes,—those songs in 
which Christian feeling has ever delighted to find expression. 

The first class is rather occupied with God Himself; the second, 
with God in His dealings with man, through the One Mediator ; 
the third, with man in his dealings with God, through the Spirit 
of God quickening him. Reverence and devotion speak in the 
first; dogma finds utterance in the second; Christian emotion 
in the third. 


A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


From the modern Jewish music we can learn nothing. Music, we are told, has been authoritatively 
banished from the Synagogue ever since the destruction of Jerusalem ; the nation deeming its duty to 
be, rather to mourn over its misfortunes in penitential silence, until the Coming of Messiah, than to 
exult in songs of praise. Hence the music which still practically exists in so many Jewish congregations 
throughout the world, is more or less arbitrary, and destitute of traditional authority’. 

We are in equal doubt as to the nature of the ancient Christian music. All we know is that anti- 
phonal singing was at a very early period introduced : in fact, there can be no reasonable doubt that it 
was a heritage bequeathed to the Christian Church from her elder Jewish sister, and that the Author of 
it was none other than the “ Chief Musician” Himself. It was at Antioch, however, where the practice 
seems first to have systematically established itself, and whence it was ultimately spread over Chris- 
tendom. This was a city of great importance in the history of Church Music. The Church in Antioch 
was the one which, next in order after that of Jerusalem, rose to pre-eminence. It was in a special way 
the mother and metropolis of Gentile Christendom. The very name Christian originated here. Socrates’ 
account of the beginning of antiphonal singing in this city is too interesting to be passed over. The 
passage is thus given in Dr. Hanmer’s translation (London, 1636) :— 


“ Now let us record whence the hymnes that are song interchangeably in the Church, commonly called Antemes [Anthems], had 
their originall. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch in Syria, the third Bishop in succession from Peter the Apostle, who was conversant, 
and had great familiarity with the Apostles, saw a vision of Angels which extolled the Blessed Trinity with Hymnes that were sung 
interchangeably : and delivered unto the Church of Antioch the order and manner of singing expressed in the Vision. Thereof, it 
came to passe, that every Church received the same tradition. So much of Antemes.” [Soc. lib. vi. ¢. 12.] 


Antioch, as capital of Syria, capital also of Roman Asia in the East, seems to have become a great 
intellectual as well as theological centre. Here we find the principal theological School of Syria and 
the East ; a school exercising a great influence throughout Christendom *. Antioch appears to have been 
the city in which Church Song first worked itself into shape; where Jewish tradition and Gentile intel- 
ligence met and blended; where the ancient Hebrew antiphonal system of Psalm recitation, and the 
shattered fragments of the old Ritual Song, allied themselves with, and were subjected to the laws of, 
modern Grecian musical science. It seems almost certain that Church music is rather Greek than 
Hebrew in origin. Hellenism had long been doing a Providential, though subsidiary work in preparing 
the world for Christianity. And though Greece had fallen under the iron grasp of the power of Rome, 
she had, in turn, subdued her conquerors to her literature, her language, and her arts. In the depart- 
ment of Christian Song, then, in the Church’s first essays at giving musical expression to her sacred 
services, no doubt she would be mainly indebted to the science and skill of that nation which had already 
furnished her with a language, and which yet ruled the intellect of the world. The very names of the 
(so-called) ecclesiastical modes, or scales,—Dorian, Phrygian, Lydian, Mixo-Lydian, &c.,—bear incidental 
testimony to this fact. Perhaps the Church’s metrical hymn-music is that branch of her song which is 
most directly and immediately borrowed from ancient Greece. We find the old Greek and Roman 
metres freely employed in the ancient Christian hymns; and doubtless the music to which they were 
first allied, bore no very remote resemblance to that used in the heathen temples. 


1 Dr. Burney says that ‘the only Jews now on the globe who 
have a regular musical establishment in their Synagogue, are the 
Germans, who sing in parts: and these preserve some old melo- 
dies or chants which are thought to be very ancient.” 

Padre Martini collected a great number of the Hebrew chants, 
which are sung in the different synagogues throughout Europe. 
Dr. Burney has inserted several of these in his History of Music. 
But, with a single exception, they show not even the remotest 


affinity to the Gregorian system of melody; nor, in the sequence 
of their notes, any possible observance of the ecclesiastical modes 
or scales. 

There is, however, one exception. One single melody bears so 
strange a resemblance (probably purely accidental) to a Church 
Chant, that it is worth preserving. Transcribed into modern 
notation, and written in a chant form, with simple harmony, it is 
as follows :— 


Melody to the Title of the LI Psalm, or Lamnatzeach, as sung by the Spanish Jews. 


(Original Key, 
F.) 


—e Ss 


2 An influence which was eventually exercised towards very pernicious ends. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. lvit 


Metrical hymns appear to have been first used to any extent by heretics, for the promulgation 
of their tenets; and then by the Church, with the view of counteracting heretical teaching, and 
popularizing the true faith. St. Chrysostom’s attempts to overcome attractive Arian hymn- 
singing at Constantinople with more attractive orthodox hymn-singing, are well known. Socrates 
tells us of “the melodious concert and sweet harmony in the night season ;” of the “silver 
candlesticks, after the manner of crosses, devised for the bearing of the tapers and wax candles,” 
presented to the good Bishop by “ Hudowxia, the Empress,’ and used by him to add beauty to his 
choral processions. 

It was shortly before this period that St. Ambrose had introduced into the West the system 
of Hymn-singing and Antiphonal Psalm-chanting. He is said to have learnt it at Antioch, and 
to have brought his melodies thence. Responsive singing seems never to have been practised in 
the West till his time: and the circumstances attendant upon its introduction,—for the purpose 
of relieving his people in their nightly services during the Arian Persecution,—form an interesting 
episode in Church History. St. Augustine’s touching account of the effect produced upon himself 
by the psalms and hymns in St. Ambrose’s Church in Milan, has often been quoted, and is well 
known. And it is in reference to the period just referred to, that he informs us [Conf. ix. 7], that 
“4t was then ordained that the Psalms and Hymns should be sung ‘secundum morem Orientalium 
partium ;”” and that from Milan this Eastern antiphonal system spread throughout all parts of 
Western Christendom. 

It is very difficult to ascertain accurately (and this is not the place to discuss) the exact nature and 
extent of the influence exerted by St. Ambrose over the Music of the Church in the West. That his 
influence was very considerable is shown by the fact of the extended use of the term “ Cantus Ambrosianus” 
for Church song generally. Possibly this wide use of the term may account for the title given to the 
old melody of the “ Ze Deum,’ which—certainly, at least, in the form in which it has come down to us— 
cannot be of the extremely early date which its name would appear to imply. 

But the name of St. Ambrose, as a musical reformer, was eclipsed by that of his illustrious successor, 
St. Gregory, who flourished about 200 years after. As Church Song was all “ Ambrosian” before his 
time, so has it, since, been all “ Gregorian.” ‘The ecclesiastical modes, or scales, were finally settled by 
him; until the time when Church music broke through its trammels, rejected the confined use of modes 
and systems essentially imperfect, and, under the fostermg influence of a truer science, developed its 
hidden and exhaustless resources. 

Without entering into any detail respecting the ancient Church scales, it may not be out of place to 
state thus much :— 

I. The four scales admitted by St. Ambrose, called the Dorian, Phrygian, Lydian, Mixo-Lydian 
(modifications of the ancient Greek scales so named), were simply, in modern language, our respective 
seales of D, E, F, G, without any accidentals ; the melodies written in each ranging only from the key- 
note to its octave, and ending properly on the key-note, thence called the “ jinal’.” 

Now each particular scale had its own reciting note (or “ dominant”), generally a fi/ti above the final. 

Thus (had there been-no exception) we should have had :— 


D , A 

The respective E and their corresponding B 
“finals” of the F “ dominants,”’ or notes C 
4 scales G | for recitation D 


But there was one exception. For some reason or other, B was not approved of as a Recitation note; 
and hence, in the second scale, C was substituted for it. 

II. To each of these four scales, St, Gregory added a subordinate, or attendant, scale—just as, in the 
ancient Greek system, each “ principal”? mode had two subsidiary, or “plagal,’ modes ; the one below 
(i7ro) it, and the other above (ue) it—beginning four notes Je/ow it, and therefore characterized by the 
prefix tro (hypo, or under). 

Thus, to St. Ambrose’s 1st (or Dorian) mode, St. Gregory added a Hypo-Dorian. 

To his 2nd (or Phrygian), St. Gregory added a Hyyo-Phrygian. 


scale, on which a melody, which came to a full close, would 
naturally terminate. 


1 Tt is not meant that all the chants or melodies in each mode 
do really end on the “ final 7’ but that this is the note, in the 


S 


lvitit A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


To his 8rd (or Lydian), St. Gregory added a Hypo-Lydian. 
» 4th (or Mixo-Lydian) ,, 3 Hypo-Mixo-Lydian. 
So that the number of the scales, instead of four, became eight. 

Each added scale is essentially the same as its corresponding “ principal” scale; the “final” (or 
key-note, so to speak) of each being the same. Thus, D (for instance) is the proper final note for 
melodies, whether in the Dorian or Hypo-Dorian mode. 

The only points of difference between St. Gregory’s added, and St. Ambrose’s original, scales are 
these :— ; 

1. That each added scale lies a fourth below its original. 

Thus, while the melodies in the four primary scales lie respectively between D, HE, F, G, and their 
octaves ; the melodies in the “ plagal,” or secondary, scales lie between A, B, C, D, and their octaves. 

2. And next, that the recitation notes (or dominants) of the two sets of scales are different; those 
of the added scales being respectively F, A, A, C. . 

Thus the eight scales as finally settled by St. Gregory are as follows :— 


Range of 8 notes “« Final ” (or “ Dominant ” (or 
Name. beginning from Key note) Reciting note) 
Ist. Dorian D D A 
2nd. Hypo-Dorian A D F 
3rd. Phrygian E E C 
4th. Hypo-Phrygian B E A 
5th. Lydian F F C 
6th. Hypo-Lydian C F A 
7th. Mixolydian G G D 
8th. Hypo-Mixolydian D G C 


In strict Gregorian song the notes were all of uniform length ; and the only accidental ever allowed 
was the B flat. 

It was necessarily by slow degrees that Ritual song assumed its full proportions, and the Divine 
Service clothed itself, in all its parts, with suitable musical dress. 

Monotonic Recitative forms the basis of “plain song.” In fact, in early times it would appear that, 
except in the Hymns, Church music was exceedingly simple in character. St. Augustine tells us that 
St. Athanasius strongly discouraged the use of much inflexion of voice and change of note in the saying 
of the Divine Office. He would even have the Psa/ms sung almost in monotone: a practice, however, 
with which St. Augustine’s keen musical susceptibilities could not bring him wholly to sympathize. 

From the simple monotone, the other portions of the plain song little by little develope themselves. 
The bare musical stem becomes ever and anon foliate: its monotony is relieved with inflexions, recurring 
according to fixed rule. Then it buds and blossoms, and flowers into melodies of endless shape. 

When the musical service of the Western Church became in a measure fixed, it consisted mainly of 
the four following divisions :— 

1. There was, jirst, the song for the prayers, the “Cantus Collectarum,’ which was plain 
monotone °. ; 

2. Secondly, there was the song for the Scripture Lections, the “Cantus Prophetarum,” “ Epistola- 
rum,” “ Evangelu,’ which admitted certain inflexions. These inflexions were for the most part of a 
fixed character, and consisted (ordinarily) in dropping the voice,—a. at each comma or colon, a minor 
third (“accentus medius”) ; 8. at each full-stop, a perfect fifth (“accentus gravis”) *. 


1 In the Roman use, the monotone was unbroken; but in the | the “ accentus moderatus,” or “ interrogativus,” 


Sarum use, there was generally the fall of a perfect fifth (entitled St a == 
the “grave accent”) on the last syllable before the Amen. Fe —a|| 
ees eee === 5 ee 
= Dearest B. And the “accentus gravis” — to the 
A - men. ee 


2 But in case the clause ended with a monosyllable, the follow- | gueantus. acuttis®® = 
ing var.ations took place :— j oe 


! 
é Fe== == || It is noticeable that while the Church of England (following the 
: “ 2 gave t i . 5 
meee ts medlus Sao eeEean eases | ES ‘esas | lead of Merbecke) has retained the use of the “mediate” and 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. © lix 


The same rule was followed in intonating the versicles and responses, the versicle and response together 
being regarded as a complete sentence; the close of the former requiring the “mediate,” the close of the 
latter the “ grave” accent '. 

3. The third division embraces the Psalm-chants. These seem originally to have followed the rule 
of the “Cantus Prophetarum ;” to have consisted of plain monotone, relieved only by one of the 
“accents ” at the close of each verse. In course of time the middle, as well as the end of the verse, came 
to be inflected. The inflexions became more varied and elaborate; the result being a whole succession of 
distinct melodies, or chants, following the laws of the several ecclesiastical modes. 

4, As the third division admitted of far greater licence than either of the two former (ultimately, of 
_ very considerable melodic latitude), so was the fourth division more free and unrestrained than all. This 
embraces the music for the Hymns, metrical or prose; for Prefaces, Antiphons, and the like. From 
these any continuous recitation note disappears altogether, and an unrestricted melody is the result. 

' Church Song has passed through many vicissitudes ; becoming at times viciously ornate, debased, 
and emasculate. So long as the people took part in the service, the music was necessarily kept very 
simple. When they ceased to participate, and the service was performed for them, the once simple 
inflexions and melodies became expanded and developed,—ten, twenty, or more notes being constantly 
given to a syllable ; and the plam song became the very reverse of plain, and for all purposes of edifica- 
tion practically useless. 

Many protests were from time to time issued; but it was not until the period of the Council of 
Trent, in the sixteenth century, that really effectual and energetic measures were taken to arrest the 
growing evil. At that time the laborious task of examining and revising the Plain Song of the 
Western Church was entrusted to Palestrina (who took for his coadjutor the indefatigable Guidetti) by 
the musical commissioners (one of them the great St. Carlo Borromeo) appointed by the Council of Trent. 

But twenty years before Palestrina had set about his toilsome work, a similar movement had been 
initiated in this country, in connexion with our revised Office-books. 

When the great remodelling of our English Services took place, earlier in the same century ; when 
the energetic and successful attempt was made to render them once more suitable, not only for private 
and claustral, but for public congregational use, and at the same time to disencumber them of any 
novelties in doctrine or practice which in the course of ages had fastened round them; when the old 
Mattins, Lauds, and Prime of the Sarum Breviary were translated into the vernacular, compressed, and 
recast into the now familiar form of our English “ Mattins,” or “ Morning Prayer,” and the Vespers and 
Compline of our “Evening Prayer,” or “ Evensong ;” the question of the music for these rearranged 
offices forced itself upon the notice of our Church rulers. And it is most interesting to note, how the 
same wise conservative spirit, which had guided the changes in the words, manifested itself in the 
corresponding changes in the music with which those words were to be allied. 

Radical alteration in either department there was none, simplification being the main object. And 
thus, in the province of Church Music, the great aim was not to discard, but to wtidize the ancient plain 
song, to adapt it to the translated offices, to restore it to something more of its primitive “ plainness,” to 
rid it of its modern corruptions, its wearisome “ ewmas,” and ornaments and flourishes ; so that the 
Priest’s part, on the one hand, might be intelligible and distinct, and not veiled in a dense cloud of 
unmeaning notes, and the people’s part, on the other, so easy and straightforward, as to render their 
restored participation in the public worship of the Sanctuary at once practicable and pleasurable. 

It has been hastily imagined by some in modern days that our great liturgical revisionists of the 
sixteenth century designed to abolish the immemorial custom of the Church of God, alike in Jewish and 
Christian times, of saying the Divine Service in some form of solemn musical recitative, and to introduce 
the unheard-of custom of adopting the ordinary colloquial tone of voice. But such a serious and 
uncatholic innovation never appears to have entered into their heads. 

The most that can be said of our English Post-Reformation rule on this subject is, that in case 
of real incapacity on the part of the priest, or other sufficient cause, the ordinary tone of voice may be 
employed ; but this only as an exceptional alternative. The ru/e itself remains unchanged, the same 


as of 51d. 


1 Or their substitutes, in case of a monosyllabic termination 


“moderate”? accents, she seems practically to have parted with 
See the preceding note. 


the “grave” and the “acute.” 


g 2 


Ix A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


The Rubrical directions, “read,” “say,” “sing,” expressed in the old technical language, are substan- 
tially what they were before. The first of these words, “legere,” was the most general and comprehen- 
sive; merely expressing recitation from a book, without defining the “modus legendi,” or stating whether 
the recitation was to be plain or inflected. The usual modes of recitation are expressed in the words 
“say” and “sing ;” the former (“dicere”) pointing to the simpler, the latter (“cantare”) to the more 
ornate mode.. Thus the old “legere ” might signify (and often did) ornate singing; and it might signify 
(and often did) plain monotone; and it is observable that the words “say” and “sing” are often 
employed interchangeably in the old rubrics, when their specific distinctions do not come into pro- 
minence’. 

Now the same holds good in our present Book. For instance, in one place we find a rubric ordering 
that the Athanasian Creed shall be “read here.” Now, the point of this rubric being the particular 
position in which the Creed shall be recited, and not the particular mode of its recitation, the general 
term “legere”’ is employed. The “ modus legendi” is determined by other rubrics, which prescribe that 
it may be “either said, or sung ;” i. e., which allow of Jo¢h modes of choral recitation, either the plain, 
or the ornate; either the simple monotone, or the regular chant. 

The same thing occurs in another rubric, which (like the former), dealing with the position, not the 
mode, orders the “ Venite” to be “read” in a certain place. Now the general term “read” in this 
instance is obviously equivalent with the word “ sing ;” the Church of England always contemplating 
that the Psalms shall be not said on the monotone, but sung to recular chants’. 

The two works which directly illustrate the mind of the English Church as to the musical rendering 
of her reformed Service are, lst, the Litany published by Cranmer with its musical notation (the first 
instalment of our Book of Common Prayer) ; and, 2ndly, the more important work containing the 
musical notation of all the remainder of that Book, edited (plainly under the Archbishop’s supervision) 
by John Merbecke, and published “cum privilegio” in the same year with the first Prayer Book of 
Edward VI. 

A word or two may be said respecting both these publications. 

1. The Litany was published in 1544 in a work entitled “ An exhortation unto praier thought mete 
by the King’s Majestie and his clergie, to be read &. Also a Litany with suffrages to be said or 
> Now this Litany was set to the beautiful and simple old Litany chant still used in most of our 
Cathedrals and Parish Churches where the service is chorally rendered. It was republished by Grafton, 
with harmonies in five parts, a month after its first appearance. Some twenty years afterwards it was 
again harmonized by Tallis; and it has been harmonized and set in different forms by many of our 
English Church musicians. 

2. The other publication was entitled “ The Booke of Common Praier noted,” wherein “is conteyned 
so much of the Order of Common Praier as is to be song in Churches.” Like the Prayer Book itself, it 
contains nothing absolutely new: the old English Service Music being simplified and adapted to our 
revised and translated Offices. The adjustment of the musical notation is as follows :— 

i. For the Prayers, the old “ Cantus Collectarum,” or simple monotone, is used *. 

u. For the Versicles and Responses, the old inflected “ Cantus Prophetarum *.” 

ui: In the Seripture Lections, however, it seems manifest that it was not in contemplation to retain 
the use of this last-mentioned inflected Song, which of old appertained to them. In the Pre-Reformation 
Service-books the ‘ Capitula” and the Lections were generally very short; the latter being moreover 
broken and interrupted by Antiphons. Here, inflected musical Recitative might not be inappropriate. 
But to sing through a long lesson from the English Bible in the same artificial method, would be plainly 
wearisome, if not somewhat grotesque’. Hence our rubric ordered that “in such places where they do 
sing, then shall the lesson. be sung in a plain tune, after the manner of distinct reading; and likewise 
the Epistle and Gospel.” 


sung.’ 


1 « How depe and inwarde comforte shoulde yt be to you to 3 In two instances (but only two) Merbecke has adopted a 
synge and rede and say thys holy seruyce.” Oure Ladyes My- | special peculiarity of the Sarum (as distinguished from the Roman) 
roure, f. v. Rite, in the employment of the grave accent (see p. lviii) on 

2 «The Psalter, or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be | the last syllable of the collect preceding the “ Amen,” 
sung (or said) in Churches.” The Psalter, we see, is specially 4 See also p. lviii. 
pointed for singing: the pointing itself plainly expressing the ° See an instance of this method described at p. 96, note. 


mind and wish of the Church. The “say” only gives a permissi- 
ble alternative where there is no choir. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. Ixi 


Now here the emphatic word appears to be “plain,” as opposed to “inflected ;” and the object of 
the rubric, to recommend the substitution of the “Cantus Collectarum,” or monotone, for the Lessons, 
Epistle, and Gospel, in place of the ancient “ Cantus Prophetarum.” It is needless to point out, by the 
way, in the face of a rubric which defines the mode in which even the /essons are to be “ sung” how 
little idea there was on the part of our Liturgical Revisers of interfering generally with the ancient 
musical performance of Divine Service. 

It may not be out of place here to remark, that the above rubric which ordered the “plaim tune” 
for the lessons, was, after the lapse of above a century, ultimately withdrawn. The Puritans strongly 
urged its withdrawal at the Savoy Conference, prior to the last Review in 1661. Our Divines at first 
refused to yield, alleging that the objections urged against the use of Monotone for Holy Scripture were 
groundless. However, they gave way at last: and it is, perhaps, happy that they did. For, while in 
thé case of solemn public addresses to Almighty God, the grave, devout, unsecular, ecclesiastical recita- 
tive is alone appropriate; in the case of addresses to man, even though they are lessons of Holy Scripture, 
which are read for purposes of instruction, a freer and less formal mode of utterance seems alike suitable 
and desirable. 

iv. The Ze Deum is set to the ancient Ambrosian melody, simplified and adapted to the English 

words from the version given in the Sarum Breviary. 

v. The other Canticles and the Psalms are assigned to the old Gregorian chants. The Book does 

not actually contain the Psalter with its chants (just as it does not contain the Litany with its music, 
which had.been already published). A simple Gregorian melody (8th tone, lst ending) is given for the 
“Venite ;” after which is added, “and so forth with the rest of the Psalms as they are appointed.” 
The primary object of this was, probably, to keep the Book in a reasonably small compass, and avoid the 
great additional expense of printing a musical notation for each verse of the entire Psalter. But 
partly, no doubt, it was the uncertainty then felt (and even to the present day, to some extent experienced) 
as to the best mode of selecting and adapting the old chants to English words, which caused the editors 
instinctively to shrink from the responsibility of so soon determining these delicate points, and to 
_ prefer leaving it to the different Choirs and Precentors to make experiments, and adapt and select 
according to their own judgment. There is no proof that it was intended to fasten this particular 
book upon the English Church. It was probably of a tentative and experimental character. It was 
put forth as a companion to our Revised Service-book, as a practical explanation of its musical rubrics, 
and as also furnishing examples and specimens of the way in which the framers of our vernacular offices 
originally contemplated that they should be allied with the old Latin Ritual Song. 

vi. In the music for the Hallelujah (“The Lord’s Name be praised”), for the Lord’s Prayer in the 
Post-Communion, and for the Kyrie (the melody of the latter borrowed from the Sarum “ Missa pro 
Defunctis”’), we find merely the old Sarum plain-song reproduced in simplified form. 

vii. The Nicene Creed, Gloria in Excelsis, and offertory sentences appear, from the structure of the 
music, to be all set to simplified forms of ancient Gregorian melodies. But their immediate source has 
not yet been clearly ascertained. 

From what has been said it will incidentally appear, 1st, how fully determined were our sixteenth 
century Revisionists that the Offices in their new form should not lose their old choral and musical 
character; and thus that Divine Service should still continue what it had ever theoretically been, a 
“ Service of Song.” And, 2nd, how earnestly anxious they were that the music should be of a plain 
and simple character, so that it might be a real aid in the great object they had before them, that of 
restoring to the people their long-suspended right of due and intelligent participation in the public 
worship of the Sanctuary. 

In illustration of these points, Cranmer’s letter to Henry VIII., dated Oct. 7, 1544, is interesting ; 
and although it is printed entire at p. xxii, it is necessary again to refer to it in connexion with our 
present subject. After speaking of the English Litany already published with musical notation; and 
of certain other Litanies, or “ Processions,’” which he had been preparing, and which he requests the 
King to cause to be set to music, on the ground that “if some devout and solemn note be made there- 
unto,” “ it will much stir the hearts of all men to devotion ;” he proceeds to offer his opinion as to the 
kind of music suitable for these Litanies, as also for other parts of the Service : 

“In mine opinion the Song that shall be made thereunto would not be full of notes, but as near as may be for every syllable a 


note; as be, in the Matins and Evensong, ‘ Venite,’ the Hymns ‘Te Deum,’ ‘ Benedictus,’ ‘ Magnificat,’ ‘Nune Dimittis,’ and all the 
Psalms and Versicles ; and, in the Mass, ‘Gloria in excelsis,’ ‘Gloria Patri,’ the Creed, the Preface, the ‘ Pater noster,’ and some of 


Ixii A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


the ‘Sanctus’ and‘ Agnus.’ As concerning the ‘Salve, festa dies,’ the Latin note, as I think, is sober and distinct enough ; wherefore 
T have travailed to make the verses in English, and have put the Latin note unto the same. Nevertheless, they that be cunning in 
singing can make a much more solemn note thereto. I made them only for a proof, to see how English would do in song.” 


The last portion of this letter introduces a subject on which it is necessary to add a few words, viz., 
the use of Metrical Hymns in public worship. 

Cranmer himself was most anxious to have retained the use of them, and with that view set about 
translating the Breviary Hymns. But he was so dissatisfied with his attempts, that eventually he gave 
up the idea. This loss was a serious one, and soon made itself experienced. Fervent Christian feeling 
must find means of expression; and if not provided with a legitimate outlet, such as the Hymns of the 
Church were intended to furnish, will vent itself in ways irregular, and, perhaps, in unorthodox language. 

It is difficult to ascertain the exact time when the practice of popular Hymn and metrical Psalm 
singing established itself in connexion with our revised ritual, though independently of its direct 
authority. Such singing was in use very early in Elizabeth’s reign, having doubtless been borrowed 
from the Protestants abroad. For the purpose of giving a quasi-official sanction to a custom which it 
would have been very unwise to repress, (and thus, through a sort of bye-law, to supply a practical 
want in our authorized public Ritual,) it was ordained, by a Royal Injunction in the year 1559, 
that, while there was to be “a modest and distinct sony so used in all parts of the Common Prayers in 
the Church that the same might be understanded as if it were read without singing ;” (in other words, 
while the old traditional plain-song, in its simplified form, is to be employed throughout the whole of 
the service; yet,) “for the comforting of such as delight in musick it may be permitted, that in the 
beginning or at the end of the Common Prayer, either at morning or evening, there may be sung an 
hymn or such like song to the praise of Almighty God, in the best sort of melody and musick that may 
be conveniently devised; having respect that the sentence [i.e. sense] of the hymn may be under- 
standed and perceived.” 

To this Injunction of Queen Elizabeth we owe our modern Anthem; on which it is necessary to 
add a few words. 

The term itself is merely an Anglicized synonym of the word Antiphon. Its old spelling was Antem, 
Anteme, or Antempne’. Its origin is the Greek word dvtidwvor, or rather avtidwva (antiphona: neut. 
plur.), which is the old ecclesiastical term. From aatiphona comes the Italian and Spanish antzfona, 
as well as the old English form antephne, and the Anglo-Saxon antefn. Now, just as the Anglo-Saxon 
word ste/z (the end, or prow, of a ship) became stem in English, so did Ante/x become Antem. The 
further change of the initial aut into anth is merely parallel with the corresponding change of the Old 
English ¢e and fat into thee and that’. 

From the fact of Barrow in one of his sermons spelling the word “ Anthymn,’ Dr. Johnson and 
others have hastily inferred that its true origin is to be traced in dvti buvos or dvOvpvos (anti-hymnus, 
or anthymnus), which would give it the meaning of a responsive hymn. And it is by no means 
improbable that the accidental similarity in sownd between the final syllable of “Anthem” and the 
word “hymn,” coupled with the faet of the intelligible, and in a measure correct, meaning which this 
plausible derivation would seem to afford, has not been without its influence in determining the popular 
sense of the word itself. But there is not a vestige of authority for this latter derivation, nor shadow of 
doubt that ¢ev7 and not vuvos is the root out of which “ Anthem” grows. 

In its earliest form, the Anthem, or Antiphon, seems to have been a single verse out of any Psalm 
repeated after the recitation of the Psalm (and, in later times, de/ore its recitation also) with a view of 
fixing the hey-note, so to speak, of the Psalm; of bringing into prominence, and fastening attention 
upon, some special idea contained within it. In course of time the Antiphons came to be selected, not 
exclusively from the particular Psalms to which they were affixed. Appropriate passages of Scripture 
from any part, even short uninspired sentences in prose or verse, came to be similarly applied. From 
the fact of the Antiphon giving the key-note or leading idea of the Psalm to which it was attached, we 
find the word Anthem frequently used for the text of a sermon *. 


1 See p. lvi, and “ the Myrroure of our Lady,” fol. Ixxxix. sively), so, in the actual and varied use of the word, we find, 
2 For a discussion on the derivation and use of the word Anthem, | sometimes the Responsive, and sometimes the Musical, element 
see Notes and Queries, 2nd Series, xi. 457. 491; xii. 90. 151. coming into prominence: occasionally, one or the other element 


5 It may be remarked, that as the idea of Responsive Music lies | entirely disappearing. In the text of a sermon, for instance, 
at the bottom of Antiphon, or Anthem (whence we find old | there is nothing musical. In a modern Anthem, there is nothing 
writers speaking of the Psalms as sung Anthem-wise, i.e. respon- | necessarily responsive. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. Ixii 


When the use of a “ Hymn, or such like song,” was authoritatively permitted at the beginning or 
end of Common Prayer—not only with a view of adding dignity and interest to the worship of Almighty 
God, and rendering the Service of Praise more worthy of Him to whom it was offered; but with the 
twofold secondary end also (1) of “comforting” musical people by allowing the strains of the Sanctuary 
a greater freedom of development than the mere chant and plain-song intonations admitted, and thus 
(2) of encouraging amongst all classes the study and practice of music—our Church composers, in casting 
about for suitable words, seem first to have had recourse to the old Antiphons, many of which they set 
to music. Other similar brief and characteristic passages of Holy Scripture, Prayers, Hymns, and the 
like, were speedily selected for the same purpose ; but the name “ Anthems,” whether they happened to 

have been used as Antiphons or not, equally attached itself to all. 

| Many have endeavoured to discover some definite ritual significance in the word itself, and in the 
position occupied by the Anthem in our Service, to account for its name. It has been regarded as 
the intentional “residuum” of the Antiphons of the old Service-books. But such theories, though 
interesting, are unsubstantial. It is all but certain, that it was through a loose, accidental, popular 
application of an old term, the strict meaning of which was not a matter of much concern, rather than 
through any deliberate conviction of the modern Anthem being, practically or theoretically, identical 
with, or a legitimate successor and representative of the old Antiphon, that the name Anthem finally 
allied itself with that class of musical compositions or Sacred Motets which now form a recognized 
adjunct to our English Service’. It may be added that, in country parishes, where a trained choir 
could not be obtained, a metrical Psalm would be sung in the place of the Anthem, and fall under the 
same general designation. 

The actual period of the introduction of the term in its familiar modern and popular sense, to 
denote a piece of sacred music for the use of the Church, may perhaps be approximately illustrated by a 
comparison of the titles of two successive editions of a very important musical work. Within the year 
after the publication of Queen Elizabeth’s Injunction giving permission for the use of a “ Hymn, or 
such like song,’ John Day printed his great choral work entitled, “Certain notes set forthe in 4 & 
5 parts, to be sung at the Morning, Communion, & Evening Prayer, very necessary for the Church 
of Xt to be frequented & used. And unto them be added divers godly Prayers & Psalmes in the 
like form to the Honour and Praise of God.’ Five years later, this fine work, to which Tallis with 
other famous Church writers contributed, was reprinted, though with a somewhat different title : 
“Morning & Evening Prayer & Communion set forth in 4 parts, to be sung in Churches, both for 
men & children, with divers other godly Prayers & Anthems of sundry men’s doyings.” In the 
second edition we thus have the word “Anthems” used, where in the first edition “ Psalmes” had been 
employed. 

An illustration of the early actual use of the Anthem, in its modern English sense, is afforded by 
Strype, in his description of the Lent Services which took place in the Chapel Royal, within a year of 
the time when the permissive Injunction for the use of “a Hymn, or such like song,” was published, at 
the beginning of Elizabeth’s reign. 


«The same day” (he writes, i.e. Midlent Sunday, March 24, 1560), “in the afternoon, Bp. Barlow, one of King Edward’s 
Bishops, now Bishop of Chichester, preached in his Habit before the Queen. His sermon ended at five of the clock: and, presently 
after, her Chapel went to Evening Song. The Cross as before standing on the Altar; and two Candlesticks, and two Tapers burning 
in them. And, Service concluded, a good Anthem was sung.” [See also Machyn’s Diary, 1560. ] 


Thus the place of the Anthem became practically settled after the third Collect, with which 
Morning and Evening Prayer at that time concluded; although it was not till above 100 years after 
this period that there was any rudrical recognition of the Anthem, or direction concerning the time of 
its performance. When, however, at the last Review, in 1661, the concluding prayers were added, the 
Anthem was not removed to the end of the Service, as before, but was still allowed to retain its old 
traditional place after the third Collect. And it was with a view of fixing this position that the 
Rubric was inserted, “In Choirs and places where they sing, here followeth the Anthem.” 

But although this is the only place where the introduction of a “ Hymn, or such like song,” or 
“ Anthem,” is definitely authorized, yet custom has sanctioned a much freer interpretation of the 


1 It will also be observed, that the two English words—really | have finally parted company; the former retaining its ancient 
identical, and coming from the same root—Antiphon and Anthem, | ritual, the latter acquiring a modern musical meaning. 


A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


lxiv 


Rubric than its words actually convey. Practical need has asserted and substantiated its claim. The 
Rubric, or rather the original Injunction on which the Rubric was based, has shown itself conveniently 
expansive and elastic, and the word “ Anthem” proved a pregnant and germinant one, covering at 
onee the Hymn, the Introit, and the Anthem proper. The truth is, however, that it is to custom and 
necessity, not to Rubrics or Injunctions, that we owe the general introduction of Music, as distinct 
from Plain song, into our Revised Offices. Custom drew forth the Injunction of Queen Elizabeth ; the 
Injunction subsequently gave rise to the Rubric. But as Music originally found its way into our 
Reformed Service, independently of written authority, so, independently of written- authority, does it 
continue. For the very necessity which received formal recognition in the Anthem-Rubric, refuses to 
be satisfied with or limited by the strict terms of that Rubric. The Anthem, in some shape or other, 
was a fact before ever any written authority called it into legal existence; and in like manner, Hymn- 
singing, over and above the Anthem, has been, and is, and will be, an actual act, notwithstanding its 
apparent want of formal rubrical sanction. 

The result of all is, that while “¢Ze Anthem” still retains its place, as a special offering to God of 
the firstfruits of sacred musical skill and science, “in choirs and places” where such an offering is 
possible, the additional introduction elsewhere of suitable Hymns, whether in the Eucharistic or other 
Offices, as aids and reliefs to the Services, is not only not thereby excluded, but practically and sub- 
ordinately and implicitly sanctioned. 


This Section may be concluded with some practical rules on the subject of which it has treated. 

1. Although, as we have seen, there was no deliberate intention, on the part of our Liturgical 
Revisers, that the old Antiphon should be reproduced, or find an exact counterpart in the modern 
Anthem; still, on the other hand, it is most desirable that the Anthem should practically—by its 
appropriate character, by its responding accordantly to the Service of the day, bringing out and 
emphasizing its special theme—vindicate its right to the title it has obtained, and prove itself a 
legitimate successor and representative of the Antiphon’. Anthems or Hymns may thus become 
invaluable auxiliaries; imparting a freedom and variety to our Service which it would not otherwise 
possess, and rendering it susceptible of easy adaptation to the ever-changing phases of the Church’s 
year. If the “ Hymn, or such like song,” does not possess any of this “ Antiphonal” character, if it is 
regarded merely in the hight of so much music interpolated into the Office by way of relief, it becomes 
simply an element of disintegration, splitting up the Service into several isolated fragments, instead of 
imparting a unity and consistency and character to the whole. Hence the need of due and reverent 
care in the selection of the Anthems and Hymns. Judiciously chosen, they may not only give new 
beauty and meaning to our Services, but may also prove most useful and delightful means of propagating 
and popularizing Church doctrine, and promoting the growth of genuine and healthy Church feeling. 

2. As regards the position of the Hymns. The Elizabethan Injunction specifies the “beginning or 
end of Common Prayer ;” and the Rubric says, “after the third Collect.” So that we have three 
available places for “ Hymns, or such like songs.” The Hymn at the deyinning of Common Prayer, 
although desirable on great Festivals, as a kind of Antiphon fixing the key-note of the whole succeeding 
Service, is somewhat inconsistent with the general penitential character of the Introduction to our 
Mattins and Evensong, and should not, therefore, be ordinarily employed’. During the. Eucharistic 
Office, the singing of Hymns, independently of the Nicene Creed, and the great Eucharistic Hymn 
“Gloria im Excelsis,” is most desirable. There may be (1) an introductory “ Introit ;” (2) a Hymn, 
or (as the alternative provided in Edward’s First Prayer Book) the “ Agnus Dei*,” after the Prayer of 
Consecration ; and (3) a Hymn, or (as a very suitable alternative) the “ Nune Dimittis,;? when the 
Service is over, and the remains of the Consecrated Elements are being reverently consumed. In the 


1 Tt should, perhaps, be remarked, that there still remain in the 
Prayer Book a few instances of the word Anthem retaining its 
old meaning. For example, the Invitatory Psalm, “ Venite 
exultemus,” is regarded in some sort as a fixed Antiphon before 


as did break the continual course of the reading of the Scrip- 
ture.” 4 

The “O Saviour of the world,” after the Psalm in the “ Visita- 
tion of the Sick,” is strictly an Antiphon. 


the Psalms for the day, and is in this sense called an Anthem; 
the Rubric enjoining its constant use, “except on Haster-day, 
upon which another Anthem is appointed.”. The word is also 
used in its old sense in the following passage from the Introduc- 
tion, “‘ Concerning the Service of the Church :’—* For this cause 
be cut off Anthems, Responds, Invitatories, and such like things 


2 See, however, a note on the invitatory character of the 
sentences, at p. 1. 
3 «In the Communion time the Clerks shall sing— 
“*OQ Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world: 
have mercy upon us. 
“*O Lamb of God, &c., grant us Thy peace,” 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK, Ixv 


Office for Holy Matrimony, the Order for the Burial of the Dead, and other occasional Offices, Hymns 
may be often most appropriately and happily introduced. 

3. With regard to the exact nature of the music to be employed in the Psalms, Hymns, Canticles, 
Anthems, &c., it would be most unwise, even if possible, to lay down any strict rules. While it would 
be a great error to discard many of the ancient Hymn-tunes and Psalm-chants of the Church, it would 
be a no less serious error to keep exclusively to them. The Church must bring forth from her treasure- 
house “things new and old;” not only the severe (and to some ears uncouth) unisonous strains of by- 
gone times, but also the rich, full harmonies of modern days. All must be freely, fearlessly employed, 
according as taste, or special circumstances, or choral capability may dictate. Experiments must be 
made, mistakes perhaps braved ; for many questions as to the best practical methods of linking together 
' the “ sphere-born, harmonious sisters, Voice and Verse” in the Service of the Sanctuary remain as yet 
undecided. Hasty dogmatism, and intolerant exclusiveness, in reference to the accessories of Divine 
Worship, are much to be deprecated, for in all matters of external apparatus the Church of England 
has yet much to learn. In putting forth. the full strength of our Prayer Book, and developing its 
inward powers and energies, there will be also gradually disclosed outward features and graces which 
seem new and strange from their having been so long latent. But it is certain that all the resources of the 
Church, external as well as internal, are needed for modern times; and that all appliances, musical, ritual, 
esthetic, should be brought to bear on the services rendered to God by so cultivated an age, and set forth 
before men to win and help their souls. God having given all these outward aids—musie, ritual, art— 
He means them to be employed for His glory, and in order to influence, and subdue, and attract man- 
kind. As churches should be beautiful, and ritual beautiful, so music also should be beautiful; that it 
may be a more fitting offering to Him, and better calculated to impress, soften, humanize, and win. 
None of these Divinely-granted helps may be contemptuously laid aside. All should be reverently, 
humbly, piously used; used for God, not for self; used in full and fearless confidence that it is His 
own blessed wi// that they should be used; used with the single eye to the glory of God, and the 
spiritual welfare of His people. 


SECTION III. 
THE ACCESSORIES OF DIVINE SERVICE. 


Divine SERVICE being, as the term implies, the act of Worship rendered to Gop, it follows from the 
consideration of His Majesty that the place where it is offered, and the persons engaged in conducting it, 
should be furnished with whatever is suitable to denote its reverent dignity. 

The practice of the Jewish Church in this respect, based as it was on a Divine command which 
prescribed even its minutest details, proves that such accessories are not in their own nature unacceptable 
to God, or inconsistent with the claims of a Spiritual Being to the homage of His rational creatures. 

Further, the sanction given by our Lord Jesus Christ and His Apostles to the services of the 
Temple and the Synagogue, and the application made of the Jewish Ritual by St. Paul in his Epistle to 
the Hebrews, furnish indisputable authority for incorporating similar symbolic uses with Christianity, 
in order that it may present itself to mankind in a not less attractive form than the Religious System 
which it was designed to complete, but did in the end supersede. 

That such a Christian adaptation of other existing Religious Ritual Customs was considered to be 
right and desirable, is evidenced by the fact that the Christian Church, from its earliest days downwards, 
has every where exhibited, though in varying degrees, this combination of Symbolical Ritualism with 
the highest spiritual worship ; and thus has practically enunciated a law—that Divine Service is to be 
accompanied with external accessories. 

The Rutz given by the Church of England in applying this principle is contained in the following 
general Rubric, which is placed in a prominent position at the beginning of the Prayer Book :— 

“And here is to be noted, that such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof, at all 
Times of their Ministration, shall be retained, and be in use, as were in this Church of England, by the 
Authority of Parliament, in the Second Year of the Reign of King Hdward the Sixth.” 

A Rubric substantially, though not quite verbally, identical with this, first appeared in the Eliza- 

h 


A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixvi 


bethan Prayer Book of 1559: the necessity for which arose out of the determination, on Queen Eliza- 
beth’s accession, to abandon the Latin Service-books, which had been restored in Queen Mary’s reign, 
and to revert to the form of Divine Worship arranged in the Second Prayer Book of King Edward VI. 
[a.D. 1552], though with some revisions which made it more conformable to the First Reformed 
Prayer Book [a.p. 1549]. This change in the Services necessarily required some adaptation in the 
Accessories of Divine Worship; and as these had also undergone alterations during the period in which 
the Prayer Books of 1549 and 1552 were employed, it was requisite to adopt some standard by which 
to regulate them. The standard chosen was the use which prevailed “by the Authority of Parliament, 
in the Second Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth” The Rubric which declared this decision 
was also incorporated with the Elizabethan Act of Uniformity; it was retained in the very slightly 


revised Prayer Book of James I., and was re-enacted at the last revision in 1661. 


It will facilitate 


the comparison of these four directions, to place them in parallel columns, thus :— 


Prayer Book, 1559. 


“ And here is to be 
noted, that the Minister 
at the time of the Com- 
munion, and at all other 
times in his Ministra- 
tion, shall use such Or- 
naments in the Church 
as were in use by autho- 
rity of Parliament in 
the second year of the 
relon of King Edward 
the Sixth, according to 
the Act of Parliament 
set in the beginning of 
this Book.” 


Statute 1 Eliz. c. 2, 
§ 25, 1558-9. 

“Provided always, 
and be it enacted, that 
such Ornaments of the 
Church, and of the 
Ministers thereof, shall 
be retained and be in 
use, as was inthis Church 
of England by authority 
of Parliament, in the se- 
cond year of the reign of 
King Edward the Sixth, 
until other order shall 
be therein taken by the 
authority of the Queen’s 
Majesty, with the advice 


Prayer Book, 1603-4. 


“ And here is to be 
noted that the Minister 
at the time of the Com- 
munion, and at all other 
times in his Ministra- 
tion, shall use such Or- 
naments in the Church, 
as were in use by autho- 
rity of Parliament, in 
the second year of the 
reign of King Edward 
the Sixth, according to 
the Act of Parliament 
set in the beginning of 
this Book.” 


Prayer Book, 1662. 


“And here is to be 
noted, that such Orna- 
ments of the Church, 
and of the Ministers 
thereof at all times of 
their Ministration, shall 
be retained and be in 
use as were in this 
Church of England by 
the Authority of Parlia- 
ment, in the second year 
of the reign of King 
Edward the Sixth?” 


of her Commissioners 
appointed and autho- 
rized under the Great 
Seal of England, for 
Causes Ecclesiastical, or 
of the Metropolitan of 
this Realm.” 


But it should be noticed that, though the first three of these directions furnished the primary and general 
Rule during the period from 1559 to 1662, there were issued contemporaneously other orders relating to 
the same subject: these occur (1) in the Elizabethan Insunortons of 1559; (2) in the Elizabethan 
ADVERTISEMENTS of 1564-5; (3) in the Jacobean Canons of 1603-4; (4) in the Caroline Canons of 1640. 
Of all these, however, it must be remembered that they were not designed to supersede the fuller 
direction given in the two Rubrics and in the Statute: but that the rst were explanatory of the Rubric 
and Statute of 1559; the Second, Third, and Mourth were drawn out by the laxity of the times, which 
necessitated endeavours to secure something like a general and uniform decency in the conduct of 
Divine Worship, and in order to effect this, insisted only upon the fewest and simplest of the Acces- 


1 In Bishop Cosin’s Durham Prayer Book the Rubric is altered 
from its previous to its present form in his handwriting. At the 
end of the alteration is a note (not intended for printing, but 
underscored with a dotted line), “These are the words of the Act 
itself. v. Supra.” He also began to write a list, but gave over 
the task after writing the word “Surplice.” Probably he thought 
that to specify them might peril the Rubric itself; though it is 
clear that his wish was to name them, for, in his * Particulars to 


be considered, explained, and corrected, in the Book of Common 
Prayer,” he appends this note to the Rubric :—“ But what those 
ornaments of the Church and of the minister were, is not here 
specified, and they are so unknown to many, that by most they 
are neglected. Wherefore it were requisite that those ornaments, 
used in the second year of King Edward, should be here particu- 
larly named and set forth, that there might be no difference about 
them.” [ Works, Ang. Cath. Lib. vol. v. p. 507.] 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. Ixvil 


sories which were prescribed under the fuller Rule. But these four series of special orprrs being 
sometimes cited as Directions advisedly contrariant to the general RULES, it is desirable to state somewhat 
more particularly their precise character and object. 

1. The Insuncrions of 1559. Such of these as related to the Accessories of the Services and Offices 
appointed in the Prayer Book of 1559 were demanded by the then existing condition of things. The 
Statute 1 Mary, Sess. 2, ¢. 2, a.p. 1553, had abolished the alterations made in the reign of Edward VL., 
and legally restored the Services (together with their Accessories) to the condition in which they were 
left “in the last year of Henry Eighth.” The consequence of this was, that the Injunctions of 1547 
(whether ¢ien or previously having the force of an Act of Parliament or not is here immaterial) ceased 
to be of any authority, at least so far as they at all affected the character of the Services: nor do they 
seem to have subsequently regained their authority; for the reviving Statute, 1 Eliz. c. 1, a.v. 1558, 
does not touch them, and the Elizabethan Act of Uniformity could, at most, only very indirectly refer 
to them when restoring the book of 1552, “with the order of service,” subject, however, to “the 
alterations and additions” made by the statute of 1559. Probably indeed it was intended not to con- 
tinue the Injunctions of 1547, whether they had lapsed or not, since the issuing of new Injunctions 
would furnish a more convenient method of altering the former ones, if requisite, than the mere pub- 
lication of amendments. But however this may have been, the Marian period having legally re- 
introduced some of those practices which the Injunctions of 1547 had regarded as abuses, they could 
not be forbidden on the ground of being unlawful. The obvious plan therefore was to repeat the 
process of 1547, and thus define legally how much of the existing general custom was designed to be 
preserved, by distinctly specifying such particular items of it as were thought desirable to be abolished. 
This was done by the Elizabethan Injunctions, which were founded upon those of 1547, and were fol- 
lowed by certain “ Interpretations and further Considerations ;” and thus, (except such of them as did 
not deal at all with any old, or authorized some new, practice in regard to Ritual and Ceremonial 
matters,) they simply subtracted certain portions from the existing whole, and so enabled the Clergy and 
Laity of that day to know exactly which and how many of the Accessories of Divine Service then 
employed were to be regarded as coming within the terms of the Rubric and Statute—“in the Second 
Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.” Rather less was, however, abolished by the Injunc- 
tions of 1559 than by those of 1547—e. ¢. nothing was said about the removal of Images, though the 
second Injunction forbade to “set forth or extol the dignity of any images, robes, or miracles.” 

2. The ApverTiseMENTS of 1564-5. The necessity for these sprang from the great and growing 
negligence of the anti-ritual party, and their opposition to the then existing law which regulated the 
Ritual and Ceremonial. To so great a height had this attained, that it provoked a letter of complaint 
from the Queen to Archbishop Parker, dated January 25, 1564-5, wherein Her Majesty said that— 
« We, to our no small grief and discomfort do hear, that... . for lack of regard given thereto in due 
time, by such superior and principal officers as you are, being the Primate, and other the Bishops of your 
province,.... there is crept and brought into the Church ... . an open and manifest disorder and offence 
to the godly wise and obedient persons, by diversity of opinions, and specially in the external, decent 
and lawful rites and ceremonies to be used in the Churches ....:” and the Queen further declared that— 
“We.... have certainly determined to have all such diversities, varieties, and novelties ....as breed 
nothing but contention, offence, and breach of common charity, and are also against the laws, good 
usages, and ordinances of our realm, to be reformed and repressed and brought to one manner of 
uniformity through our whole realm and dominions. ... . ” [Parker Correspondence, p. 224. ] 

In consequence of this Royal Letter the Archbishop directed the Bishop of London (Grindal), as 
Dean of the Province, to inform the other Bishops of the Queen’s commands, and also to direct them 
“that they inviolably see the laws and ordinances already established to be without delay and colour 
executed in their particular jurisdictions.” [Parker Correspondence, p. 229.] Moreover, the varieties com- 
plained of were to be stated in returns which were to be sent to the Archbishop by the end of February. 

But it is not difficult to understand, what seems to have been the case, that it was no easy task to 
deal with the prevalent disorder, encouraged as it was by a not inconsiderable body of persons (including 
many Clergy and some Bishops) who had a violent dislike of the prescribed Ritual and Ceremonial. 
Nor is it surprising to find that the Bishops, in order to promote uniformity, contented themselves with 
insisting upon the observance of only such of the existing requirements as they thought necessary for the 
decent conduct of Divine Worship. This minimum requirement was embodied in the Advertisements 
which, about a month later, were submitted to the Queen for her approval, that so they might be issued 

h 2 


Ixvill A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


with the full force of Ecclesiastical Law; yet, anxious as Her Majesty was to stop irregularities, the 
requisite authorization was withheld; and when, after some delay, they were permitted to be published, 
their enforcement appears to have depended upon the general authority of the Ordinaries ; nor is it at all 
clear that they afterwards obtained that Royal sanction which alone could have armed the Bishops with 
adequate powers to compel their observance. There does not appear to be any very precise information 
on. the matter, but the little which is available seems to imply that the Queen (if not also some of her 
Council) was dissatisfied with so low a standard of conformity as the Bishops had set up; and also that 
there was an unwillingness to supersede the Rubric on Ornaments, and its corresponding clause in the 
Act of Uniformity, by egalizing what probably it was then hoped would be no more than a temporary 
step towards attaining a further compliance with the Ecclesiastical Law under more favourable circum- 
stances. 

3. The Canons of 1603-4. The history of the thirty-eight years between the publication of the 
Elizabethan Advertisements and the accession of James I., is that of a continuous strife between the 
Ecclesiastical Authorities and the non-conforming party in the Church of England; the efforts of the 
latter being encouraged by the hope, or persuasion, that the new King’s familiarity with Scottish 
practices might favourably incline him towards their Presbyterian prepossessions. The Hampton Court 
Conference, which was held within the first year of King James’s reign, was an effort to convince them, 
and to remove, if possible, any reasonable ground of complaint; but its proceedings revealed the weakness 
of the objections, and terminated in a resolution that any changes ought to be in the direction, not of 
laxity, but of strictness; and so the few alterations which were made in the Book of Common Prayer 
were of the latter character, and served to bring out more distinctly some points of its Doctrine,—points, 
however, which were clearly implied in the Services. 

But it was easier, no doubt, to make Doctrine more objective in the Formularies than to enforce 
discipline, especially in Ritual and Ceremonial matters which were peculiarly obnoxious to those of 
Presbyterian inclinations. The long acquiescence in a low standard of practice in these respects could 
hardly be other than fatal to any attempt to impose obedience to the larger legal requirements which 
still subsisted. So, being, as it was, necessary, in the loose and fragmentary condition of many of the 
then existing Ecclesiastical Ordinances, to provide some complete code of discipline, it was nevertheless 
impossible probably to do more than re-enforce those more limited Orders which could not be dispensed 
with, unless the Clergy and Churches in England were to assume a garb little, if at all, distinguishable 
from the Ministers and Temples of the foreign Reformed bodies or of the Presbyterian Community in 
Scotland. 

Accordingly, in the Book of Canons “collected by Bishop Bancroft out of the Articles, Injunctions, 
and Synodical Acts passed and published in the reigns of King Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth,” 
and passed by “both Houses” of Convocation [Collier, E. H., i. p. 687], all that was deemed cndispen- 
sable was embodied, and in virtue of the King’s Letters Patent, which ratified these Canons, became 
Statutably binding upon the Clergy, and Leclesiastically obligatory upon the Laity. 

4, The Canons of 1640. During the last twenty years of King James’s reign, and the first 
fourteen years of his successor, King Charles I., there was a gradual improvement in the externals of 
Divine Service, due in part, no doubt, to the Canons just remarked upon, but more probably to greater 
vigilance among the Ecclesiastical Authorities, and to an increasing desire for the restoration of what 
had fallen into desuetude, though it was still upheld by Ecclesiastical enactments. But the Puritan 
leaven was still working in the Church of England, and its fermenting power was increased by Civil 
proceedings with which it came in contact. The effect of this was that accusations, vaguer or more 
specific, became current, and presented serious obstacles to those loyal and well-affected Churchmen who 
were doing what they could to rescue the worship of the Church from the ill condition to which a long 
period of negligence had reduced it. 

It was for the purpose of defending generally this reformation, and of sanctioning particularly some 
of its more prominent features, that the Convocation of 1640 agreed to a small code of seventeen new 
Canons: their design being thus distinctly proclaimed in the Letters Patent which were prefixed to 
them :— 

“Forasmuch as We are given to understand, that many of Our subjects being misled against the 
Rites and Ceremonies now used in the Church of England, have lately taken offence at the same, upon 
an unjust supposal, that they are not only contrary to Our Laws, but also introductive unto Popish 
Superstitions, whereas it well appeareth unto Us, upon mature consideration, that the said Rites and 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. lxix 


Ceremonies, which are now so much quarreled at, were not onely approved of, and used by those learned 
and godly Divines, to whom, at the time of Reformation under King Edward the Sixth, the compiling: 
of the Book of Common Prayer was committed (divers of whom eidored Martyrdom in Queen Maries 
days), but also again taken up by this whole Church under Queen Elizabeth, and so duly and ordinarily 
practised for a great part of her Reign, (within the memory of divers yet living) as it could not then be 
imagined that there would need any Rule or Law for the observation of the same, or that they could be 
thought to savour of Popery. 

“ And albeit since those times, for want of an express rule ott and by subtile practices, the said 
Rites and Ceremonies began to fall into disuse, and in place thereof other foreign and unfitting usages 
by little and little to creep in; Yet, forasmuch as in Our Royal Chapels, and in many other Churches, 

most of them have been ever constantly used and observed, We cannot now but be very sensible of this 
matter, and have cause to conceive that the authors and fomenters of these jealousies, though they colour 
the same with a pretence of zeal, and would seem to strike only at some supposed iniquity in the said 
Ceremonies: Yet, as we have cause to fear, aim at Our own Royal Person, and would fain have Our 
good subjects imagine that we Our Self are perverted, and doe worship God in a Superstitious way, and 
that we intend to bring in some alteration of the Religion here established... . 

“ But forasmuch as we well perceive that the misleaders of Our well-minded people do make the 
more advantage for the nourishing of this distemper among them from hence, that the foresaid Rites and 
Ceremonies, or some of them, are now insisted upon, but only in some Diocesses, and are not generally 
revived in all places, nor constantly and uniformly practised thorowout all the Churches of Our Realm, 
and thereupon have been liable to be quarreled and opposed by them who use them not... .” 

Therefore the King had “ thought good to give them free leave to treat in Convocation: and agree 
upon certain other Canons necessary for the advancement of God’s glory, the edifying of His holy 
Church, and the due reverence of His blessed Mysteries and Sacraments :” and further “ to ratifie by 
Our Letters Patent under Our Great Seal of England, and to confirm the same... .” 

It has been thought that these Canons have ceased to possess authority, owing to the language 
of the 13 Charles IT. c. 12, § 5, a.v. 1661, where it is stated that this Act is not “to abridge or diminish 
the King’s Majesty’s Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters and affairs, nor to confirm the Canons made in 
the year One thousand six hundred and forty, nor any of them, nor any other Ecclesiastical laws or 
canons not formerly confirmed, allowed, or enacted by Parliament, or by the Established Laws of the 
land, as they stood in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and thirty-nine.” 

But, on consideration, it will be seen that the words are cautionary, and were intended to prevent 
any misconception as to the force of this Act, which was passed “for explanation of a Clause contained 
in” 17 Charles I. c. 2. The Act merely excludes these Canons from any Parliamentary authority which 
it might be supposed to confer on them; but then it does precisely the same with “any other EKccle- 
siastical laws or canons not formerly confirmed, allowed, or enacted by Parliament :” this necessarily 
includes the Canons of 1603-4, yet their authority is admitted. The Act in no way affects the recognized 
authority derived by the Canons of 1640, or by any others, from Royal Letters Patent: on the contrary, 
it helps to confirm such authority by declaring that it was not meant “to abridge or diminish the King’s 
Majesty’s Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters and affairs ;” and of this the confirmation of Canons was 
made an important part by the Act of Submission 25 Henry VIII. c. 19. 

From what has now been said with reference to these four Series of Ecclesiastical Ordinances, it 
will be seen that only the two latter have any thing more than Historical authority : it is only to the 
Canons of 1603-4 and 1640 that any legal obligation still attaches: but even these no longer retain 
the force which they once possessed in limiting or defining or dispensing with in practice the larger and 
more general Rule prescribed in the Prayer Book; for the revision of that Book in 1661, sanctioned as 
it was by the Convocations of the two Provinces and legalized by the Act of Uniformity 13 & 14 
Charles II. c. 4, provided the latest and most authoritative law for regulating the Services of the 
Church of England; so that if in any instance a direction of these Canons and a direction of the 
Prayer Book are found to be conflicting, the Canon must yield to the Prayer Book, as bemg of supreme 
authority. 

It is only right, however, to observe—that, as custom has so long sanctioned usages in accordance 
with the Canons of 1608-4, and as the Ordinaries and other administrators of the Ecclesiastical Laws 
have allowed the superior Rule to remain in abeyance, those who do not act upon the reimposed Rubric 
ought not to be regarded as culpably negligent of the law: nor is it likely that they would be 


bee A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


considered liable to Ecclesiastical censure or punishment for the omission; unless, indeed, such omission 
was in disregard of an Episcopal admonition to obey the law. 


The Rubric relating to the Ornaments of the Church and of the Ministers, which stood in the 
Books of Elizabeth and James I., is retained, then, with certain verbal changes (not however affecting 
its former sense) in the Prayer Book of 1662, that at present in use. And, by travelling back to “ the 
Second Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth,” and fixing upon the Ornaments then in use “in 
this Church of England, by the authority of Parliament,” this Rubric passes over all changes and 
varieties subsequent to that year, and sets up a standard by which it is easy to decide what are now the 
proper Accessories of Divine Worship. It has been called “The Interpretation Clause” of the Prayer 
Book, and with much appropriateness; for it not only furnishes an exact mode of solving doubts which 
may arise as to the precise meaning of the directions which prescride things to be used in Divine Service, 
but also it is a rehable guide in ascertaining whether any thing not prescribed is needful or suitable in 
executing the Offices which the Prayer Book provides. 

But, though the present authority of this Rubric could not be disputed, the meaning of those words 
of it, “by the Authority of Parliament, in the Second Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth,” 
had in recent times often been a subject of controversy prior to the year 1857. Then, however, the 
celebrated Ecclesiastical suits arising out of the opposition to certain Ornaments introduced into the 
Churches of St. Paul, Knightsbridge, and St. Barnabas, Pimlico, led to a definitive Judgment on this 
point by the existing Final Court of Appeal in Ecclesiastical Causes, viz. the Judicial Committee of 
Her Majesty’s Privy Council’. 

In judicially interpreting this Rubric, with the view of applying it to the Ornaments complained of, 
the Judges drew a clear distinction between ORNAMENTS, 1. e. ARTICLES “used im the Services,’ and 
ARTICLES “ set up im Churches as Ornaments, in the sense of decorations.” 

They expressed themselves “ satisfied that the construction of this Rubric which they suggested at 
the hearing of the case is its true meaning, and that the word ‘ornaments’ applies, and in this Rubric 
is confined to those Articles the use of which in the Services and Ministrations of the Church is 
prescribed by the Prayer Book of Edward the Sixth.” 

In proof of this they added, that “the term ‘ornaments’ in Ecclesiastical law is not confined, as 
by modern usage, to articles of decoration or embellishment, but it is used in the larger sense of the 
word ‘ornamentum,’ which, according to the interpretation of Forcellini’s Dictionary, is used ‘ pro 
quocumque apparatu, seu instrumento.’ All the several articles used in the performance of the 
Services and Rites of the Church are ‘Ornaments.’ Vestments, Books, Cloths, Chalices, and Patens, are 
amongst Church Ornaments; a long list of them will be found extracted from Lyndwood, in Dr. 
Phillimore’s Edition of ‘ Burn’s Ecclesiastical Law’ (vol. i. pp. 375—377). In modern times, Organs 
and Bells are held to fall under this denomination.” 

Having thus defined the term “Ornaments,” their Lordships then interpreted the expressions 
“ Authority of Parliament” and “Second Year” as connected with the Reign of Edward VI.: their 
conclusion was arrived at thus :— 

After noticing the alterations in King Edward’s Second Prayer Book (which diminished the 
number of the Ornaments prescribed in his First Book), and referring to the abolition of the Reformed 
Services by Queen Mary, they state that “on the Accession of Queen Elizabeth, a great controversy 
arose between the more violent and the more moderate Reformers as to the Church Service which should 
be re-established, whether it should be according to the First, or according to the Second Prayer Book 
of Edward the Sixth. The Queen was in favour of the First, but she was obliged to give way, and a 
compromise was made, by which the Services were to be in conformity with the Second Prayer Book, 
with certain alterations; but the Ornaments of the Church, whether those worn or those otherwise used 
by the Minister, were to be according to the First Prayer Book.” 


1 The causes were argued before the Lord Chancellor (Cran- ; their Lordships, on March 21st, made their Report, which was 
worth), Lord Wensleydale, T. Pemberton Leigh (afterwards Lord | subsequently confirmed by the Queen in Council. The Counsel 
Kingsdown), Sir John Patteson, and Sir William H. Maule; the | for the Appellants were Sir Fitzroy Kelly and Dr. Phillimore (now 
Archbishop of Canterbury (Sumner) and the Bishop of London | Queen’s Advocate); and Dr. Bayford and Mr. A. J. Stephens for 
(Tait) being summoned by command of the Queen to attend and | the Respondents. 
advise at the hearing. After seven days’ argument in February, | 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. Ixxi 


Then they compare the four Directions, as to the Ornaments, which occur in the Elizabethan Act of 
Uniformity and the Prayer Books of 1559, 1603-4, 1662 (given already at p. lxvi), declaring of them that 
“they all obviously mean the same thing, that the same dresses and the same utensils, or articles, which 
were used under the First Prayer Book of Edward the Sixth may still be used.” 

Further, they discuss an important question which was raised as to the date of the Royal Assent to 
the Act of Uniformity which legalized the Prayer Book of 1549, and they resolve that the “use” of the 
Book “and the Injunctions contained in it, were established by authority of Parliament in the Second 
Year of Edward the Sixth, and this is the plain meaning of the Rubric.” It has indeed been questioned, 
and with some reason, whether what can be gathered from the known records of the time warrants 
this decision as to the date in question ; but if it be an error, it is practically unimportant in connexion 
with their entire interpretation of the Rubric; for, whether 1547—the date of King Edward’s Injunc- 
tions, or 1549—the date of the First Prayer Book, be the “Second Year” mentioned in the Rubric, 
the result is the same, because no change was made in the Ornaments between those years. More- 
over, the Rubric has now been judicially interpreted by a Court from which there lies no appeal, 
and therefore that interpretation, and that only, is the sole ground upon which the members of 
the Church of England can legally stand in endeavouring to carry out the requirements of the Rubric 
on Ornaments. 

One thing more the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council showed in reference to the meaning of 
this Rubric, viz. that though it is prescriptive, it is not exhaustive: this opinion was arrived at from 
their consideration of the fact, that the Second Prayer Book of Edward VI. (like the First Book, and 
indeed the previous Service-books) “does not expressly mention” every thing which, nevertheless, it 
is certain was used under it, e.g. the Paten (just as the First Book does not mention, e.g. the Linen 
Cloth) ; and also from the circumstance that they had to decide whether the Credence-table (which is 
not prescribed nominatim) could be regarded as a Legal Ornament. The opinion of the Court is thus 
stated,—“ Here the Rubrics of the Prayer Book become important. Their Lordships entirely agree 
with the opinions expressed by the learned Judges [i. e. of the Consistory and Arches Courts] in these 
cases, and in ‘ Faulkner v. Lichfield, that in the performance of the services, rites, and ceremonies 
ordered by the Prayer Book, the directions contained in it must be strictly observed; that no omission 
and no addition can be permitted; but they are not prepared to hold that the use of all articles not 
expressly mentioned in the Rubric, although quite consistent with, and even subsidiary to the Service, is 
forbidden. Organs are not mentioned; yet because they are auxiliary to the singing, they are allowed. 
Pews, cushions to kneel upon, pulpit-cloths, hassocks, seats by the Communion Table, are in constant 
use, yet they are not: mentioned in the Rubric.” So, as their Lordships further argued, there being a 
Rubric which “directs that at a certain point in the course of the Communion Service (for this is, no 
doubt, the true meaning of the Rubric) the Minister shall place the bread and wine on the Communion 
Table,” in their judgment, “nothing seems to be less objectionable than a small side-table, from which 
they may be conveniently reached by the officiating Minister, and at the proper time transferred to the 
Communion Table.” 

One remark, however, may be made before quitting the consideration of this judicial rendering of 
the Rubric; and it is this—that, although it so completely covered the whole debateable ground by 
deciding that “the same” things “which were used under the First Prayer Book of Edward the Sixth may 
still be used,” it does not follow that a/Z such things can be legally restored now quite irrespective of 
any differences in the Prayer Book of 1549 as compared with that of 1662,—the one at present in use. 
It may not be useless to say, that before any Edwardian Ornament is re-introduced, under the terms of 
this decision, it must first be inquired, whether the particular Ministration in which it is proposed to 
employ it is now so essentially the same as it was in 1549 that the Ornament has the like symbolical or 
practical use which it had then. It will probably be found that very few indeed of those Ornaments are 
inapplicable at this time ; but to determine this it is important to proceed now to ascertain, 

First, What were the customary Ornaments of that period. 

There are four sources from which it may be ascertained with considerable accuracy what “ Orna- 
ments were in the Church of England, by the authority of Parliament, in the second year of the reign 
of King Edward the Sixth.” These are,— 

L. The ancient Canon Law, which is held to have been then (as now) statutably binding upon 
the Church by the 25th Henry VIII. c. 19, in all points where it is not repugnant to or incon- 
sistent with later Ecclesiastical Law. 


A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


Ixxii 


II. The Salisbury Missal, which was the Liturgy chiefly’ used, and of which a new edition was 
published by authority in 1541; the Bangor, Hereford, and York books (especially the latter) may also 
be appealed to as illustrative of or supplementary to the Salisbury book, for they had long been more or 
less in use. “The Order of the Communion” of 1548 (which provided for the administration of the 
Lord’s Supper in both kinds) directed that “until other order shall be provided,” there should be no 
“ varying of any other rite or ceremony in the Mass ;” so that these Service-books continued to be used 
intact until the first Prayer Book of King Edward VI. was published in 1549. 

III. The directions, explicit or implicit, in the Prayer Book of 1549. 

IV. The Inventories of Ornaments which were made in pursuance of Edward VI.’s Instructions to 
the Commissioners appointed in 1552 to survey the Church goods throughout the kingdom. These 
Inventories are very numerous, and for the most part are preserved in the Public Record Office, Fetter 
Lane, London: they do not indeed exhibit such full catalogues as would have been found in 1549, for 
many things had been sold (especially where they were duplicates) to meet Church expenses of various 
kinds; and some too had been embezzled. But they are thus the more reliable as being likely to show 
what Articles it was deemed needful to retain for the Services then authorized. Three of these 
Inventories (and they are by no means the richest which might have been chosen) are here selected for 
comparison, as affording a probably fair specimen of the rest, viz. a Cathedral, a London Parish Church, 


and a Country Parish Church. 
Secondly, It must be determined what Ornaments, whether by express prescription or by plain 
implication, are now pointed out for use in the Ministrations of the Church of England. 
V. These Ornaments are to be sought in the Canons of 1603-4 and of 1640; also in the directions, 
explicit or implicit, of the present Book of Common Prayer. 


I. 


Enauisa CANons 
A.D. 740 to 1463. 


Altars of stone. 
A Table. 


Frontal for the High 
Altar. 

A clean white large 
linen cloth for the 
Altar. 


Corporas (and Case). 


«A very clean cloth” 
for ‘‘the Priest to 
wipe his fingers and 
lips after receiving 
the Sacrament.” 

Paten. 


Chalice. 

Wine and Water to be 
used,—implying ves- 
sels for them. 


' The preference which seems to have been given to the Rites 
of Sarum is illustrated by the circumstance, that the Convocation 
of Canterbury decreed, March 8, 1541, that the “use and custom 


“ ORNAMENTS OF THE CHURCH.” 


II. 


THe OLp ENGLISH 
LITURGIES. 
1. Sarum. 
2. Bangor. 
3. York. 
4. Hereford. 


1, 2, 3, 4. Altar. 


1. Linen Cloth. 


1, 2, 3, 4. Corporal. 


2. Sudarium. 


1, 2, 3, 4. Paten. 


1, 2, 3, 4. Chalice. 

1, 2, 3, 4. Wine and 
Water brought to 
the Priests,—imply- 
ing vessels in which 
to bring them. 


II. 


Tur PRAYER Book 
A.D. 1549. 


The Altar, the Lord’s 
Table, God’s board. 


“laying the bread 
upon the Corporas.” 


««Paten or some other 
comely thing.” 

Chalice or Cup. 

Cruetts —implied in 
“putting the Wine 
into the Chalice... 
putting thereto a 
little pure and clean 
water.” 


Ves 


INVENTORIES. 
1. Winchester Cathedral, 
Oct. 8, 1552. 
2. St. Martin, Outwich, 
London, Sept. 16, 1552. 
8. Stanford-in-the- Vale, 
Berks, May 11, 1558. 


1. The High Altar. 

2. A Communion Table. 
3. A Tabull with a frame. 
1, 2. Cushions. 


1, 3. Frunts for the Altar. 
2. Altar Cloth. 


1. Altar Cloths, white, co- 


loured, plain, and diaper. 


2. Table Cloths, plain and 


diaper. 
3. Altar Cloths. 
1, 3. Corporis Cloths. 


1, 2, 3. Paten. 


1, 2, 3. Chalice. 
1, 2, 3. Cruetts. 


We 


MOoRE RECENT AUTHORITIES. 
1. Canons, 1603-4, 

2. Canons, 1640. 

3. The Prayer Book, 1662. 


1, A Communion Table. 

2. An Altar. 

8. The Lord’s Table. 

[Desk or Cushion—needed 
for the Altar Book. } 

1. A carpet of silk or other 
decent stuff. 

1. A fair Linen Cloth. 

8. Fair white Linen Cloth. 


3. A fair Linen Cloth for 
covering what remaineth of 
the Consecrated Elements. 

[Mundatory—needed to wipe 
Chalice, &c.] 


3. Paten. 


3. Cup ov Chalice. 

1. Pot or Stoup in which 
to bring the Wine to the 
Communion Table. 

3. Flagon. 


of the Church of Salisbury should be observed by all and singular 
clerics throughout the Province of Canterbury, in saying their 
canonical hours.” (Wilkins’ Concilia, iii. 861-2.) 


i 


I. 


Bread to be offered by 
the faithful—imply- 
ing some presentation 
of it at the time. 


Bells, with their ‘ropes. 


Cross, for processions 
and for the dead. 
“Two Candles, or one 
at the least, at the 
time of High Mass.” 


A Cense pot. 


Font of stone, with a 
lock and key. 


Images, especially of 
the Saint to which 
the Church is dedi- 
cated. 

Banners for Rogation 
Days. 

A Bier for the dead. 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. 


“ORNAMENTS OF THE CHURCH” (continued). 


: IE 
1, 2, 8, 4. Bread, 
Wine, and Water, 
brought to the 
Priest, — implying 


some place from 
which they were 
brought. 


1. Cross, Crucifix. 


1. Two Wax Candles 
in Candlesticks to be 
carried to the Altar 
steps. 

1, 2, 3. Thurible. 


1. Font. 


1,2. Pulpit (or Ambo) 
for the Epistle and 
Gospel. 

1. Seats. 


1. Images. 


1. Banners. 


1001, 
Credence—implied in 
“then shall the Mi- 
nister take so much 
Bread and Wine as 
shall suffice ... and 
setting both the 
Bread and Wine 
upon the Altar.” 


Poor men’s Box. 


Font. 


Pulpit. 


Chair for Archbishop 
or Bishop. 


1M 


Credence — unlikely to be 
mentioned, being com- 
monly structural. 


3. Poor men’s Box. 
2, 3. Bells, in the steeple, 


1, 2, 8. Cross for the Altar. 


1, 2, 3. Two Candlesticks for 
the Altar. 


1, 3. Large Candlesticks— 
Standards. 


1, 3. Censers. 

1, Ship—for Incense. 

1, 2. Spoon—for Incense. 

Font—unlikely to be men- 
tioned, not being move- 
able. 


r 


2, Cloth for the Pulpit. 


2. Organs. 


1, 3. Banners. 


2. Herse Cloth for burying. 

1, 3. Cloths to cover and 
keep clean the Linen Altar 
Cloth. 


Ixxiil 


Ne 


3. Credence — implied in 
“when there is a Commu- 
nion the Priest shall then 
place upon the Table so 
much Bread and Wine as 
he shall think sufficient.” 


3. Bason for Alms. 

1. Chest for Alms. 

1, 3. Bell for the Services of 
the Church, and for any 
passing out of this life. 

Cross—lawful as a decorative 
Ornament. 

Two Lights—the old direc- 
tions for them not repealed. 


Standard Candlesticks—con- 
sistent with the Services. 


Censer—Use of Incense never 
legally abolished. 


1, 3. Font. 

3. Vessel for Water —im- 
plied in “then to be filled 
with pure water.” 

3. Shell — consistent 
“pour water.” 

1, 3. Litany Desk—Zimplied 
in “ some convenient place” 
and “the place where they 
are accustomed to say the 
Litany.” 

1. Stall ov Reading-pew, to 
read Service in. 

1, 3. Pulpit. 


with 


3. Kneeling - desk — _ for 
Churchings. 

3. Chair for the Archbishop 
or Bishop. 


Organ—desirable. 

1. The Ten Commandments. 

“Other chosen sentences 
upon the walls.” 


(Decorative Ornaments.) 
3. Rogation Days recognized. 
Bier—requisite. 
Pall—requisite. 


Covering for Linen Cloth— 
desirable. 


Besides the “Ornaments” contained in this List, there are many others mentioned in the 
Inventories, which are merely Ornaments “in the sense of Decorations.” Such are the following :— 
Curtains for the sides of Altars; Hangings for the wall behind the Altar and of the Chancel; Carpets for 
the Altar steps; Cloths and Veils for Lent. 

There were also “ Ornaments,” i. e., Articles “ used in the Services,” which, on various grounds, are 
barely, or not at all, consistent with the character of the present Prayer Book Services, or with some of 
its directions. Thus we find :—the Pyx, or Monstrance, with its covering and canopy for the Reserved 
Sacrament (the former of which could only be used in circumstances which really necessitated Reser- 
vation for the Sick); Bason and Towel for the Priest to wash his hands before Consecrating; Sanctus, 

‘Sacryng, and other Bells; Light and Covering for the Easter Sepulchre ; Vessels for Holy Water; the 
Chrysmatory for the oil of Unction in Baptism and Visitation of the Sick; the Pax for the Kiss of 
Peace; the Reliquary. 


i 


[xxiv A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


“ORNAMENTS OF THE MINISTERS.” 


I. i II. IV. ve 
Cope. 1, 2. Cope. Cope. 1, 2, 3. Cope. 1. Cope. 
Principal Mass Vest- | 1, 2, 4. Vestment. Vestment. 2, 3. Vestment. 3. General Rubric. 
ment. “And here is to be noted, 
Chesible. 1, 2. Chasuble. 1, 3. Chasuble. that such Ornaments of the 
Dalmatic (for Deacon). | 1. Dalmatic. 1, 3. Deacon (i.e. Dalmatic). | Church, and of the Minis- 
Tunic (for Sub-deacon). | 1. Tunicle. Tunicles. 1, 3. Sub-deacon (i.e. Tu- | ters thereof at all times of 
H nicle). their Ministration, shall be 
Albe. 1, 4. Albe. Albes. 1, 2, 3. Albes. retained and be in use as 
Girdle. were in this Church of 
Stole. 1, 3. Stole. England by the Authority 
Maniple. of Parliament, in the second 
year of the Reign of King 
Amice. 1, 2, 4. Amice. 2. Amice. Edward the Sixth.” 
1, 3. Mitre. 
Pastoral Staff (Bp.). | 1. Crosier Staff (Bp.). 
1, Gloves (Bp.). 
1. Ring (Bp.). 
1. Gremial (o7 Apron). 
Rochette (Bp.). 3. “ Rochet” and the rest of 
the “ Episcopal Habit.” 
Surplices. 1, 2. Surplices. Surplice. 2, 3. Surplices. 1. Surplice. 
Hood. 1. Hood. 
1. Tippet. 


It will be seen, by an examination of these comparative Tables of Ornaments, that very few indeed 
of those which are mentioned in the Inventories, the old English Canons, and the Sarum and other 
books, are not distinctly and by name shown to be legally usable now if the combined authority of the 
Prayer Books of 1549 and 1662, together with that of the Canons of 1603 and 1640, is, as it must be, 
taken into account. Moreover, of those excepted, there is not one of which it can be fairly alleged, that 
it is wholly incongruous with the letter and the spirit of those Services which, in the present Prayer Book, 
occupy the place of the older Services in connexion with which these Ornaments were employed. 


If it were necessary here to resort to a further mode of proving what Ornaments are now /awfud in 
the Church of England, it would be desirable to adopt the test indicated by the Judicial Committee of 
the Privy Council as noticed at p. lxx. The Judges referred to a List of Church Ornaments, extracted 
from Lyndwood, in Burn’s Ecclesiastical Law: they all occur in one or other of three series of those old 
English Canons, already summarized in the foregoing tables, viz. [1] Archbishop Grey’s Constitutions, 
A.D. 1250; [2] Archbishop Peckham’s Constitutions at Lambeth, a.p. 1281; and [8] Archbishop 
Winchelsy’s Constitutions at Merton, a.p. 1305. These laws define what Ornaments the Parishioners 
were required to provide at those periods, and are really the basis of those Rules which professedly guide 
the Ecclesiastical Courts now in deciding the similar liability of Parishioners in the present day. These 
Constitutions are contained in Johnson's English Canons (Ang. Cath. Library): a comparison of them 
would show what was considered to be generally necessary for Divine Service under the Old English 
Rituals, and so would materially aid in determining what is /egad/y requisite now, so far as the present 
Services are in unison with the ancient ones, 


In considering the legal requirements of the general Rubric on the Ornaments of the Church and 
of the Ministers, it is very important to recollect that its retention in the present Book of Common 
Prayer was not the mere tacit permission for an existing direction to remain; for not only (as has been 
already shown at p. lxvi) were certain verbal changes made in the Rubric, as it had been printed in the 
Books of 1559 and 1604, but the question of its retention or rejection was pointedly raised by the 
Presbyterian party at the Savoy Conference, and was then deliberately answered by the Bishops. The 
Presbyterians said, “ Forasmuch as this Rubric seemeth to bring back the Cope, Albe, &c., and other 
Vestments forbidden by the Common Prayer Book, 5 & 6 Edw. VI., and so our reasons alleged against 
ceremonies under our eighteenth general exception, we desire that it may be wholly left out.” (Cardw., 
Conf. p. 314.) The Bishops replied, “§ 2. rub. 2. For the reasons given in our answer to the eighteenth 
general, whither you refer us, we think it fit that the Rubric continue as it is.” (Ibid. p. 351.) The 
“yeasons ”’ here referred to are as follows :—“ Prop. 18, § 1. We are now come to the main and prin- 
cipal demand as is pretended, viz. the abolishing the laws which impose any ceremonies, especially three, 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. {xxv 


‘ 

the surplice, the sign of the cross, and kneeling. These are the yoke which, if removed, there might be 
peace. It is to be suspected, and there is reason for it from their own words, that somewhat else 
pinches, and that if these ceremonies were laid aside, and these or any other prayers strictly enjoined 
without them, it would be deemed a burden intolerable: it seems so by No. 7, where they desire that 
when the Liturgy is altered, according to the rest of their proposals, the minister may have liberty to 
add and leave out what he pleases.” (Ibid. p. 345.) In what light the excepting Ministers viewed 
this answer of the Bishops may be gathered from their “ Rejoinder ” (London, 1661), where, in noticing 
it, they reply, “ We have given you reason enough against the imposition of the usual ceremonies ; 
and would you draw forth those absolute ones to increase the burden?” [Documents relating to the Act 
Of Uniformity, 1862. Grand Debate, &e., p. 118.] 

It is plain, therefore, that, in the judgment of the Episcopal authorities at that time, it was con- 
sidered desirable to Jegalize a provision for Ornaments which, if acted upon, would conform the appear- 
ance of the Churches and Services to those general features which they presented in the second year of 
the reign of Edward VI., i.e., as the Judicial Committee has decided, to that condition in which the 
first Prayer Book of Edward VI. designed to leave them. Indeed it seems highly probable that had 
Bishop Cosin, the chief reviser in 1661, been allowed entirely to guide his Episcopal brethren on this 
matter, he would have made the Rubric so detailed and explicit as to place it beyond the reach of 
controversy ; for, as already noticed at p. Ixvi’, in his “ Particulars to be considered, explained, and 
corrected in the Book of Common Prayer,’ he says, with almost a prophetic instinct of subsequent and 
present controversies, “ But what these Ornaments of the Church and of the Minister were, is not here 
specified, and they are so unknown to many, that by most they are neglected. Wherefore it were 
requisite that those Ornaments, used in the second year of King Edward, should be here particularly 
named and set forth, that there might be no difference about them.” (Works, v. p. 507.) Moreover, 
as is also mentioned in the same note (p. ]xvi), he had begun to write a List of the Ornaments, but got 
no further than the word “ Surplice.” 

There does not appear to be any explanation on record to show why this suggestion, apparently so 
valuable, was not acted upon. Probably the ground which had to be recovered after fifteen years’ banish- 
ment of the Prayer Book from Churches which had also been more or less despoiled of their Ornaments, 
combined with the extensively adverse temper of the time and its special manifestation in the Savoy 
Conference, warned the Bishops that an authorized catalogue (whether in the Prayer Book or elsewhere) 
of all the Legal Ornaments of King Edward’s Second Year, might raise a too formidable barrier against 
endeavours to restore the use of any of them at that time. And so it may have been regarded as the 
more prudent course only to re-establish the general rule as to the Ornaments, trusting to an improved 
Ecclesiastical tone to develope in time its actual details. 

The thirty years which have elapsed since the termination of the first quarter of this Nineteenth 
Century have been gradually realizing this probable expectation of a future development, in a way and to 
an extent with which no previous period since 1662 can be at all compared : for, indeed, through a variety 
of causes, there had been a more or less continuous declension from even that standard of Ritual and 
Ceremonial which the Restoration practically raised, though in fact it was considerably lower than 
the one /egally prescribed. The renewed understanding and appreciation of doctrine—especially of 
Sacramental Doctrine—as embodied in the Formularies and taught by old and great Divines of the 
Church of England; the improved taste for Ecclesiastical Art; the deeper sense of the reverential 
proprieties with which the acts of Public Worship should be surrounded: these and other favourable 
circumstances have combined, notwithstanding much indifference and opposition, to produce a re-action. 
in favour of Ceremonial and its corresponding Accessories more extensive probably than that which arose 
in the time of King Charles I., and, as it may reasonably be believed, of a far more stable character. 

The present time, then, would seem to be a not unfavourable one for endeavouring to act upon 
Bishop Cosin’s suggestion by specifying in this Annotated Prayer Book (though of course in a wholly 
unauthoritative way, except so far as the Law itself is therein correctly represented), “what these 
Ornaments of the Church and of the Ministers were” at the period referred to in the Rubric which orders 


1 Where it will be seen also that in his Durham Prayer Book he has written the exact words of Elizabeth’s Act of Uniformity, 
except in the slight variation “at all times of their Ministration,” thus putting the Rubric into its present form. 


i, 


Ixxvi A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


that they “shall be retained, and be in use.” ‘The account already given in this Section will, it is 
believed, have described them with sufficient clearness and exactness: the three following Tables are 
designed to show more explicitly the prescribed use or the inherent fitness of the several Ornaments in 
connexion with those “all times of their Ministration” at which the Rubric directs the Clergy to 
employ them. Those which may be said to be Rubrically essential are distinguished from those which 
may be accounted as Rubrically supplemental by the latter beg printed in Jtalics. 


ORNAMENTS OF THE CHURCH. 


Mattins, Baptism, Visitation ‘ 
Evensong, Holy Com-| Public and 3 and Commu- hurching | Burial of the 
To be used at Litany, iene Pale: Private; Matrimony. nion of the | of Women. Dead. 
mination. Catechizing. Sick. 
Altar or Lord’s Table. oa — To present | If a Celebra- 
her Offerings. tion. 
Cross or Picture. To be always there, being a permanent Ornament, i. e. Decoration. 
Frontal and Super-frontal. | To be always there, being the ordinary Furniture. 
The Two Lights. Evensong —— When a Cele- | | When a Cele- 
bration. bration. 
The Linen Cloth. es do. Com. of Sick. do. 
Book Rest 07 Cushion. —- —— 
Corporal and Case. —— When a Cele- | Com. of Sick. When a Cele- 
bration. bration. 
Fair Linen Cloth or Veil. — do. do. do. 
Bason for Alms, &c. a —. a — do. 
Standard Candlesticks. — eS — ed 
Paten and Chalice. oe When a Cele- | Com. of Sick. When a Cele- 
bration. bration. 
Paten for Bread to be 
offered. — do. do. do. 
Flagon for Wine and Water. a do. do. do. 
Veil (Silk) to cover Vessels. — do. do. do. 
Linen Palls to cover Chalice. — do. do. do. 
Mundatory. —. do. do. do. 
Censer, Ye. do. —— 


Font and Vessel for Water. | For Public Baptisms—some convenient vessel for Private Baptism. 
Bier and Pall. cism 


Processional Cross. Still retained in some Cathedrals, e. g. Chichester. 
Banners. For Rogation Days and special occasions. 
Chair. For the Archbishop or Bishop at Ordinations and Confirmations. 


ORNAMENTS OF THE MINISTERS. 


Cope or Vestment. —— When a Cele- When a Cele- 
bration. bration. 

Dalmatic (for Gospeller or 

Deacon). — do. do. 
Tunicle (for Epistoler or 

Sub-deacon). — do. do. 
Albe and Girdle. a do. do. 
Stole. _— — —— — == 
Maniple and Amice. —_—. When a Cele- When a Cele- 

bration. bration. 
Surplice (with Sleeves). — ares as — 
Hood or Tippet. wt ——- eae Eaiwes ds 
EPISCOPAL ORNAMENTS. 
Rochette. — — Public Bap- —— ee — 
tism and 
Catechizing. 

Surplice or Albe. =a — do. == ad od 
Cope or Vestment. == — do. == a —— 
Pastoral Staff. SS ee do. ae == — 
Gremial or Apron. == —— do. <= —= — 
Mitre and Ring. === —— do. ss =e | — 


«*x The Episcopal Ornaments are the same for Confirmation, Ordination, Consecration of Churches and Burial Grounds: 
perhaps the Rubric at the end of the First Prayer Book, in directing “a Surplice or Albe, and a Cope or Vestment,” may have intended 
the use of the Albe and Vestment when the whole Communion Service was used. 


In any consideration of the Ornaments to be used in Divine Service, it is not only unavoidable but 
important to consider such points as [a] their material, [b] their colour, [c] their form, particularly in 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. Ixxvil 


reference to such of them as, by reason of long disuse, are but little known to the greater part of 
English Church people. The fact—that those Ornaments which have been retained in use among us do 
exhibit mostly their ancient material, colour, and form, except as altered, for the better or the worse, by 
any subsequent fashions—may fairly be taken to indicate what would have been the case with those 
Ornaments which have fallen into disuse: and this view is strongly confirmed by the very general 
preservation of these ancient characteristics in the Royal, Noble, Civic, Legislative, Judicial, Military, 
and Naval Ornaments which (unlike so many of the Ecclesiastical) have never ceased to be employed 
among us. Furthermore it is noteworthy that, in the very extensive modern restorations which have 
been accomplished, the permanent Decorations of Churches, the Altar-plate, and Altar-coverings have 
decidedly followed, for the most part, the ancient patterns and models which were familiar at the period 
’ selected as the Standard in the Rubric on Ornaments. 

- The English Church, while presenting in her Ornaments the same ordinary features which were 
common to the rest of Christendom, always had her own special usages, and those, too, somewhat diver- 
sified in details by several local varieties; as, indeed, was and is also the case in Kingdoms or Dioceses 
connected with other Branches of the Catholic Church. Though most has perished, enough remains in 
England of actual ancient specimens (besides the more abundant illustrations in old Illuminations) 
of Windows, Carvings, Monuments, Brasses, Seals, and the like, to furnish authoritative guidance, espe- 
cially in regard to the Porm of ancient Ornaments. 

Moreover, in the Inventories of Church Goods, the descriptions of Material and Colour are so 
numerous and detailed as to supply what is, to a great extent, unavoidably lacking in these respects in 
the illustrations just named, owing either to the nature of them, e. g., Carvings which rarely exhibit 
Colours, or to errors which may be due, for instance, to the glass-painter or the illuminator who, perhaps, 
was at times less careful to give the actual colour of a Vestment in an Hcclesiastical Function than to 
furnish a picture in accordance with his own taste. The following Tables contain a summarized analysis 
of such contents of five Inventories as relate to the Vestments of the Ministers and the Choir, and also 
to the various Hangings or Articles employed in furnishing and decorating the Altars and Chancels : 
they are all of the date of 1552 and 1553, and so they exhibit accurately Ornaments which were 
preserved in the Churches at the very period to which the Rubric on Ornaments directs attention, when 
prescribing the general Rule as to the things which “shall be retained, and be in use” now in the 
Church of England. Three of these Inventories, viz., Holy Trinity Cathedral, Winchester, 1552; 
St. Martin, Outwich, London, 1552-3; and Stanford-in-the-Vale, Berks, 1553, have been used already 
to illustrate other points: the two additional ones now cited are St. Paul’s Cathedral, 1552, and 
St. Nicolas, Cole Abbey, London, 1552. 


MATERIAL OF VESTMENTS AND THE NUMBER IN EACH KIND. 


Cloth of Gold. . . . 30 Sarsnetb. . . . .- 16 WEEN oe Ss a oe 6 
Cloth of Silver . . =. 6 Bawdkyn . . . . 226 IBM 6 6 4 4 2 
WOME © 6 6 GO 4 + 137 Wintec @ 5 5 6 & 146 IDS 5 66 6 8 
Sma Go o oO & ¢ 30 MHEG og. 6 454 e 54 Rie Gon 6 oO Go 4 ih 
SHIR B46 a6. & 6 6 134 Chamlett 9 WEI 6 gd 6 6 48 

337 451 65 


Total ..-. 853 


A cursory inspection of these Lists of Ornaments shows at once that, as respects [a] Material, the 
choice, while amply varied, ran very much upon the richer fabrics, whether of Home or Foreign Manu- 
facture ; Cloth of Gold, and Satin of Bruges, being the more costly, were, as might be expected, the 
most rare; but Velvet, Satin, Silk, Bawdkyn, and the like, were not uncommonly used; though such 
inferior stuffs as Taffeta, Chamlett, and Fustian often occur. The nature or quality of what was to be 
employed seems not to have been prescribed; indeed, had there been a desire to do so (which is very 
improbable) the varying pecuniary abilities of Parishes would have made it needful to avoid any rule on 
the subject, except requiring them to provide according to their means the essential (and if they could 
any supplementary) things appertaining to the Services of the Church. 

The same principle is acted upon now in the Holy Eastern Church. A Priest of that Communion 
informs the writer that “there are no strict rules for the Material: when possible, silken and brocaded 
Vestments are to be preferred. Where the means are circumscribed, plain linen ones are worn, or of 
whatever material, so long as it is clean, and made in the proper shape.” With them doubtless it is, as 
the foregoing catalogue proves it to have been with us, that the instinct of natural piety,—viz. the 


xxviii A RITUAL INTRODUCTION 


devotion of the best to God’s service—is not relied upon in vain. Nor was the care and cost bestowed 
upon the Material limited to the foundation of the Vestments or Hangings; embroidery of all kinds 
was abundantly displayed in pattern or powdering, whether in Silk or Gold (not seldom in the much 
valued Gold of Venice), so that the Sacred Name, the Crucifix, the Cross, Crowns, Angels, Imagery, 
Eagles, Herons, Lions, Dolphins, Swans, the Sun and Moon, Stars, Wheat-sheaves, Grapes, Flowers, 
and the like, adorned the Fabrics of which the Vestures were made; or composed the rich Orphreys, 
which were rendered all the more beautiful and costly by Pearls and Precious Stones; as though the 
donors desired to attain in the adornments of the Sanctuary to somewhat of the fulness of meaning 
contained in the Psalmist’s words, “The king’s daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of 
wrought gold. She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework.” [Ps. xlv. 18, 14.] 

So, again, as to [b] Colour: the Inventories now under examination show it to have been chiefly 
of six kinds, viz., White, Red, Blue, Green, Yellow, and Black; besides various combinations of all 
these. The proportions in which they existed are shown in the following Table of Vestments which 
were in the five churches at the date of the Inventories :— 


COLOURS AND NAMES OF THE VESTMENTS. 


White.| Red. | Blue. | Green.} Yellow. | Black.| Various. | Totals. 


O56 6 6 6 o o 6 o || WE | oy 83 40 20 13 75 459 
Chasubles: 9) 2) Sigata. Ps 28 34 24 10 7 ats) 37 155 
Dalmaticsyl cst 1.eve ners 22 33 23 6 6 13 13 116 
WRuniclesien Men rey mete tie 22 24 27 6 6 12 26 123 

Motalswemars are 193 198 ise 62 39 53 151 853 


It may be as well to remark here that all the Green Vestments in this List belonged to the two 
Cathedral churches, except ove Chasuble, Dalmatic, and Tunicle, which were in St. Martin, Outwich. 

Green occurs much less frequently than other colours: it was an Exeter colour, and is also found in 
Lists of Vestments belonging to the Northern Province; but there seems very little to indicate with any 
certainty when it was used, though perhaps it served for ordinary week-days, especially in Trinity-tide. 

So, again, with regard to Blwe: while it appears to have been a much more usual colour, it is often 
very uncertain what kind of Blue is meant, whether Cerulean or some darker shade; frequently indeed 
the latter is indicated by the words “blodium” and “indicus,” which mean a sort of hyacinthine and 
darker blue; but these must not be confounded with purple, which is also found im the same or other 
Lists. The occasions, however, on which Blue or Purple was employed are somewhat conjectural, though 
there is more to guide: light Blue seems sometimes to have been used in Commemorations of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, and a somewhat darker shade is to be seen in Iluminations of about the fifteenth Century, 
in Copes used at Funerals. 

A similar variety is found, both as to material and colour, in the Coverings and Hangings used for 
the Altars and Chancels: the annexed list exhibits their Colours :— 


Gold. | Blue. | Green.| White.| Red. | Black.| Various. 
Altar Coverings . ee Bemee 3 11 6 18 6 2 22 
JNMETRIEEMNEE, Ge og po 6 3 al 6 8 2 2 9 
Altar Curtains : 2 _ 6 8 4 2 4 10 
Chancel Hangings . . — 2 — 2 5 — — 
6 20 20 32 15 8 41 


Besides the colours already enumerated, others are sometimes mentioned, such as Brown, Tawney, 
Murrey, Pink, and Cheyney ; also combinations of colours, viz., Red and Green, Paly of White and 
Green, Red and White, Blue and White, Blue and Yellow, White and Red chequered. These different 
colours, or mixtures of colours, are to be found alike in Vestments of the Ministers, or of the Altars, no 
less than in the Hangings of the Churches. 

It is worth noticing that the more usual Hcclesiastical colours are those which may be especially 
accounted the Colours of England—Red, White, and Blue—being combined in the National Flag, and 
designating the Admirals of this Country’s Fleets: possibly the close, though curious and apparently 
untraceable, relations which have for several centuries subsisted between the Church and the Navy’, in 
the Admiralty and Ecclesiastical Courts, may have tended to perpetuate this correspondence. 


1 Dyer (Modern Rurope, p. 189) mentions that in Spain | Don Pedro, Archbishop of Toledo, was High Admiral of Castile 
Philip II. brought naval matters before the Inquisition, and that | “by a then not uncommon union of offices.” 


TO THE PRAYER BOOK. Ixxix 


Further, it may be mentioned, as probably indicating the effect which Ecclesiastical customs pro- 
duced or helped to perpetuate, that Red, Violet, and Black are mentioned, as colours worn on the Judi- 
cial Bench, according to the Term, in some Regulations made by the Judges in 1635. [See Gentleman’s 
Magazine, Oct. 1768.] Green, also, appears to have been at one time a favourite colour with them. 

Moreover, the retention of Red, Purple, and Green—and especially the prevalence of Red—in the 
rich and decent, no less than (as was once too common) in the miserable and dirty coverings of handsome 
or unsightly Altar-tables in the churches, are in all likelihood the traditional use of these same colours 
which formerly were more commonly and more variously employed in the Services of the Church of 
England, and that, too, not without regard to some written or unwritten rule as to the Services and 
Seasons at which they should be used. * 

That a desire has long existed, and increases, again to adopt a greater variety of colour in the 
Ornaments of the Church, and especially in the coverings of the Altar, is plain from what has been 
accomplished and is still doing: one object of this wished-for variety is the very useful one of dis- 
tinguishing, and so teaching, by outward tokens, the changes of the Church Seasons and the occurrence 
of Ecclesiastical Holydays. For lack of any existing Rule on this subject in the Church of England, 
the Rule of the rest of the Western Church has not unnaturally been followed in many cases, especially 
as the ancient English rule or practice was either not at all known, or not easily to be collected, even by 
those who were aware that some leading points of it were to be found without much difficulty. As the 
need of some guide in this matter is becoming more general, it may not be without a really practical use 
to compare the old English rules with those of the Roman and the Eastern Churches: by doing this a 
somewhat uniform principle will probably be found, sufficient also to furnish a general rule for those 
who, while rightly wishing to be not out of harmony with the rest of Christendom, would with equal 
propriety prefer to follow any older practice of the Church of England which would afford a satisfactory 
direction in the absence of any definite rule authorized by living Ecclesiastical Authority. 

The Roman rule is laid down with precision: the old English rule can in part be definitely ascer- 
tained, and the rest may be, with some probability, analogically conjectured from the Rubrics of the 
Sarum Missal compared with St. Osmund’s Register and the Inventories of Church goods already 
noticed. The Eastern Church, as a learned Priest of it states (in reference to the Vestments of the 
Clergy), does not give “in her Ritual books” any such “ minute rules with regard to the colours of 
the Vestments, as are to be found in the Western Ritual. The Church enjoins her ministers to care 
more for the simple purity and propriety of the vestments than for their richness. In those cases where 
means are at hand, she bids the ministers to wear richer vestments of any colour for the joyful seasons of 
the year, and Black or Red ones for the times of fasting and sorrow. Thus, in Passion week, and Great 
Lent, at Burials, &c., Black or Purple Vestments are worn. It is customary to wear White Silk Vest- 
ments (if possible) at Epiphany and Easter.” In this description of the general and unspecific character 
of the Eastern rule, there 1s a considerable correspondence with the features of the Sarum rulejust noticed. 

The following Table may be considered as furnishing a fairly reliable view of these three Rules ; 
though, for the reasons above given, the Roman rule alone is the fullest and most explicit :— 


COMPARATIVE TABLE OF COLOURS ACCORDING TO THE SARUM, ROMAN, AND 
EASTERN USE. ~ 


Seasons. Sarum. | Roman. | Eastern. Festivals, &c. Sarum. | Roman. | Eastern. 
Advent—Sundaysin . . . . .| Red. Violet. | Violet Circumcision and Transfiguration | White. | White. | No pre- 
- Week-daysin . . . .| Blue Violet. | or dark || Festival of the Name of Jesus .| White. | White. | ciseprac- 
(prob.). colour. Festivals of the Holy Cross . . | Red. Red. tical rule 
Christmas—Octave of . . . .| White. | White. | White Festivals of the B. V. Mary . .| White | White. | can be 
a restof - . . . .| White | White. | or bright (perhaps some | Blue). given for 
(prob.). colour. St. Michael and All Angels . .| White. | White. |these: the 
Epiphany—Octave of. . . . .| White. | White. | White if}) St. John Baptist—Nativity of . uncertain] White. | general 
x rest of. . . - juncertain| Green. | possible. do. Beheading of . | Red principle 
Septuagesima to Easter—Sundays Red. Violet. | Violet (prob.). | Red. which 
ig Week-days (Ferial). | Red or | Violet. | or dark || Apos les—out of Haster-tide . .| Red. Red. regulates 
Purple. colour. St. John Evangelist—in Christ- the colour 
Ash-Wednesday . . ~~ ~ -| Red. Violet. do. mas-tide . White. | White. | for sea- 
Maundy Thursday. . . - - -| Red. Violet. | Blackall|| St. Joh Evangelist, ante port. Jat. |uncertain| Red. sons ap- 
Good Friday. . . . +. - ~ -| Red. Black. |this week|| Convers on of St. Paul . do. White. | plies to 
Easter Eve . - . » « + + -| Red. Violet, | (Red al- |} Lammas Day.—St. Peter ad Vine. do. White. | Festivals 
White | lowed). Evangehsts—out of Easter-tide . | Red. Red. which 
for Mass.| White, All Martyrs. = |Reds Red, are ob- 
Easter—throughout (ex. Gr. Fe.) . | White. | White. | bright, |! ey in Paschal time . .| White. White. | served 


Ixxx A RITUAL INTRODUCTION TO THE PRAYER BOOK. 


COMPARATIVE TABLE OF COLOURS, &c.—(continued.) 


Seasons, Sarum. | Roman. | Eastern. Festivals, &c. Sarum. | Roman. | Hastern. 
Ascension—Octave of. .. . . .| White. | White. | and Holy Innocents—if not Sunday . | Red Violet. | by the 
on restof. . . . . .| White | White. | mixed os if Sunday . .| (prob.). | Red. Eastern 
(prob.). colours. |} Confessors . . . . . + ~ «| Yellow. | White. | Church. 
Vigil of Pentecost. . . . . .| Red(?) | Violet, | White Bishops). 4). .) «1 =) of) euMcertain MW hite, 
Red tors! ori Greens\||| OCtOrsieu sens ie nian do. White. 
Mass. or White|| Holy Men .. . Sod do. White. 
Pentecost. . . eee wien cd: Red. and Virgins—not Martyrs TR « «. « « | White. |-Wihite: 
_ Vigil of Holy Tr inity - Seo cane! MECC. Qed. Green Holy Women .<s. < % . ~'|) White. ||| \Wihite: 
Trinity Sunday . . .*%.| Red(?) | White. | mixed. All Saints sii Sle.) se Oe WVinibe. a WVinites 
Sundays in Trinity (ex. Gr. Fe.) . Red. Green. Rimber Seasons . . . . . ~ {uncertain} Violet. | Dark co- 
Week-days (Ferial) in Trinity . .| Green | Green. Rogation Days)". 95 . . = « do. Violet. | lour. 
(perhaps). Masses for the Dead. . . . .| Black. | Black. | Black or 
Offices for the Dead. . . . «| Blueor | Black. Purple 
x*y In further illustration of the principle which (in the absence Purple. (ex. Hast. 
of detailed rules) serves to direct the Eastern Church in the week), 
choice of Colours for use in Divine Service, it may be mentioned|| Vigils . . . . {uncertain} Violet. | Dark co- 
that White is regarded as symbolical of Truth, Red of ardent Love}| Dedication of a Church—Octave of |} White. | White. | lour. 
and Passion, Green of the Life of Grace, and Violet of Peni-|| Processions. . . SE oes NOE Violet. 
tence. 


Having thus given some description of the Material and Colour of the “ Ornaments of the Ministers,” 
their [ec] Form may be best shown by reference to the Illustrations and accompanying descriptions which 
will be found in the General Appendix to this volume: and some further remarks are made as to their 
use in the Communion Service at p. 159. 


This, then, is a general outline of the Legal and Historical grounds on which may be rested the 
claim to use in the Church of England such principal Accessories of Divine Service as can be fairly 
considered to form part of the Ritual and Ceremonial heritage of the Church. The fact—that the 
Anglican Communion is an integral portion of that Mystical Body—furnishes the most valid reason for 
not being indifferent to the aspect which she should present when viewed, as is essential to a right 
estimate of her position, in connexion with the rest of Christendom. And the further fact—that the 
external features of her Public Services have come to be a subject of common and public discussion— 
renders it necessary that reliable information should be given to those whose opportunities of research are 
unavoidably, more or less, limited. 

These are the considerations which have chiefly influenced the line of argument taken in this portion of 
the Ritual Introduction to a Volume which professes to deal more or less completely with all the various 
subjects contained in the Book of Common Prayer. It is hoped that what has been advanced will assist 
the reader in forming a satisfactory judgment on points which, it seems clear, are acquiring year by year 
an increasingly practical character. Much more might have been stated in explanation or proof of the 
several matters considered, but an essay of this kind must bear a reasonable proportion to the other 
contents of the Book, and moreover it cannot advantageously be very detailed or greatly antiquarian. 
Those who desire to investigate more fully and particularly the various points here discussed will find in 
the List of Authorities at the beginning of the Volume a reference to works which may be usefully 
consulted. 

It should be mentioned in conclusion that, while from the nature of the case an account of Ritual ~ 
Accessories belonging to the Book of Common Prayer now in use, could not merely be a notice of antiquated 
Ecclesiastical Usages, it is nevertheless not the object of this Section specially to advocate the restoration 
of what it has endeavoured to prove to be conformable to the law, and consistent with the character of the 
English Church. The reasons which must influence, and the conditions which must regulate, the revival 
of long disused, however lawful, Accessories of Divine Service, are so many and so varied as of themselves 
to relegate the question of their re-introduction to a sphere beyond the legitimate bounds of these pages. 
The purpose of this Introduction is fulfilled in the attempt to show what Accessories the Church of 
England apparently designed “to be retained.” Where and when they may profitably “be in use” can 
only be determined by those who, being. satisfied with the truth and reasonableness of what is here or 


elsewhere stated, are in a legitimate position to decide upon the practical application of information thus 
obtained. 


THE BOOK 


OF 


Common-Iraper, 


And Administration 


Of the 


SACRAMENTS, 


Of the CHURCH, 
According to the Use 


Of the 


CHURCH of ENGLAND; 


Together with the 
PSALTER or PSALMS 


OF 


DAVID, 


Pointed as they are to be Sung or Said in CHURCHES : 
AND THE 
FORM OR MANNER 
OF 


Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating 


OP 
BISHOPS, PRIESTS, 


AND 


; AND OTHER 
RITES AND CEREMONIES 
DEACONS. 


2] THE TITLE OF THE PRAYER BOOK. 


THE TITLE OF THE PRAYER BOOK. 


Common Prayer| This familiar term seems first to have been 
used authoritatively in a rubric to the English Litany of 1544: 
“Tt is thought convenient in this Common Prayer of Procession 
to have it set forth and used in the Vulgar Tongue, for stirring 
the people to more devotion.” It is again found in the Injunc- 
tions of Edward VI., issued in 1546-7. But it is a very ancient 
term, being found in use as far back as A.D. 252, in St. Cyprian’s 
Treatise on the Lord’s Prayer ; of which he writes, “ Publica est 
nobis et Communis Oratio.” 

Common Prayer and Public Prayer are not theologically iden- 
tical, although the terms are used in the same legal sense in the 
respective titles of the two Acts of Uniformity. In an exact sense, 
Common Prayer is defined by the authoritative words of our Lord, 
«“ Where two or three are gathered together in My Name, there 
am I in the midst of them.” [Matt. xviii. 20.] The Name of 
God is an expression used with great frequency in Holy Scripture 
to denote the authority of God; in the same manner as we say, 
that the official agents of the Sovereign act in the Name of the 
Sovereign, when they engage in the duties of their office. To be 
met together in the Name of Christ is to be met together under 
His authority, not as an accidental or promiscuous assembly ; and 
officially, that is, in the presence and with the aid of His authorized 
agents. 

Thus, true Common Prayer is that which is offered in Divine 
Servicesin the Church, by a Bishop or Priest (or a Deacon as 
locwm tenens in some cases), in the presence and with the aid of 
three, or at least two other Christian persons. Such prayer pre- 
supposes a reverent assent to our Lord’s application of the words, 
«My House! shall be called the house of prayer,” and to those 
already quoted. To it also may be applied the words of St. 
Cyprian ? :—“ They continued with one accord in prayer, mani- 
festing at the same time the instancy of their praying, and the 
agreement. Because God, who ‘maketh men to be of one mind in 
an house,’ admits into the house divine and eternal those only 
among whom is unanimous prayer.” 

This kind of prayer is therefore the highest kind of all. Other 
prayer is exalted in kind, and probably in efficacy, in proportion 
as it connects itself with that which is Common; as it is offered 
in that sense in which we are taught to say Our Father ; as it is 
offered under the conviction that Christian individuals stand 
not alone, each one for himself before God, but are parts of one 
Body whereof all the members are in communion one with an- 
other through the One Intercessor, of Whom the ministers of the 
Church are the earthly representatives. 

and administration of the Sacraments| This does not ex- 
clude the Sacraments from Common Prayer. The corporate 
work of the Church is distinctly recognized in the administration 
of Baptism, and the Holy Communion is the root and apex of 
Common Prayer. But it puts forward prominently the idea of a 
never-ceasing round of Divine Service as distinguished from the 
occasional (however frequent) offering of the Holy Eucharist. 

other rites and ceremonies of the Church] These words claim, 
as a matter of course, that the substance of the Prayer Book is 
in accordance with the theological and devotional system of the 
Catholic Church : and, in connexion with those which immediately 
follow, they plainly enunciate the principle set forth mere at large 
in the Thirty-fourth Article of Religion, that while that system is 
binding on the whole Church, yet particular Churches have a right 
to carry it out in their own way, according to their own “use” as 
to detail and ceremonial °. 


2 To Kupcaxév, Kyrke, Church, the house of the Lord. 

2 On the Lord's Prayer, iv. 

3 The phrase ‘‘Rites and Ceremonies” is not at all equivalent to our 
modern words Ritual and Ceremonial: but refers to the minor services of 
the Church, such as the Commination, or the Churching of Women. Arch- 
bishop Cranmer’s fourth article of 1536 is a good illustration of the meaning 
intended: “IV, Of Rites and Ceremonies. As vestments in God’s service; 
sprinkling holy water; giving holy bread; bearing candles on Candlemas 
Day; giving of ashes on Ash-Wednesday; bearing of palms on Palm 


according to the use of the Church of England] This right 
was acted upon so freely in ancient days that there was a con- 
siderable variation in the details and ceremonial of Divine Service 
as it was celebrated in different parts of England. Each Prayer 
Book took its name from the place of its origin, and was thus 
called the “ York use,” the “ Bangor use,” the “Hereford use,” 
the “Salisbury use,” and so forth: but when uniformity of Com- 
mon Prayer was established upon the basis of these old service- 
books, one “use” only retained its authority, that of the Church 
of England. : 

In modern prayer books the words “the United Church of 
England and Ireland” are substituted for the words “ the Church 
of England,” under an Order of Council, dated January 1, 1801; 
but this exercise of the Royal authority goes beyond that permit- 
ted by the Act of Uniformity; and is very misleading *. The 
two Churches are, and always have been, in communion with each 
other, the interchange of friendly relations has always been very 
free, and they have been united in a common political bond since 
1801. The formularies of the Church of England have also been 
adopted in the Church of Ireland, but a false gloss is put upon 
the real title of the Prayer Book when it is printed in the un- 
justifiable form referred to. The Church of England can alter 
its own “use,” and so can the Church of Ireland, but neither can 
control the customs of the other: and, in fact, there are some im- 
portant variations in the Prayer Books of the two countries which 
make the expression “the use of the United Church of England 
and Ireland”? a misnomer. The Prayer Book as it now exists is 
an adaptation of ancient formularies made by the Church of 
England alone. Its adoption by other Churches cannot alter the 
fact, and therefore cannot justly influence the title. However 
much it may be adopted therefore in Ireland, Scotland, and other 
possessions of the English crown, America, the Book of Common 
Prayer is still “ according to the use of the Church of England>.” 

together with the Psalter] In the earlier Prayer Books the 
Psalter was printed with a separate Title-page, as distinct from 
the Services. The first of Bishop Cosin’s “ Directions to be given 
to the Printer,” is also, “Set a fair Frontispiece at the beginning 
of the Book, and another before the Psalter; to be designed as 
the Archbishop shall direct, and after to be cut in brass.” Such 
an engraved Title-page is affixed to the Sealed Books, and a proof 
copy is bound up with Cosin’s own volume: but that to the 
Psalter was not provided. The Ordinal was bound up with the 
Prayer Book for the first time in 1661. 


The following Tables will illustrate some of the preceding re- 
marks, and show at a glance what changes have been authorized. 

The table of the Contents of the Prayer Book is not in itself of 
much interest, but it has been se freely handled by modern 
printers that a work like the present cannot go forth without an 
accurate copy of the authorized form. The successive changes 
made in it have a certain interest, and they are therefore 
arranged in parallel columns in the following Table. There is 
thus given also a sort of bird’s-eye view of the History of the 
Prayer Book. 


Sunday; creeping to the Cross, and kissing it, and offering unto Christ 
before the same on Good Friday; setting up the sepulchre of Christ; hal- 
lowing the font, and other like exorcisms, and benedictions, and laudable 
customs: that these are not to be condemned and cast away, but continued, 
to put us in remembrance of spiritual things. But that none of these cere- 
monies have power to remit sin.’’—Strype’s Memorials of Cranmer, i. 89. 
Eccl. Hist. Soc. Ed. 

A rubric at the end of the Elizabethan Prayer Books enjoins also that 
‘every parishioner shall communicate at the least three times in the year, 
of which Easter to be one, and shall also receive the Sacraments and other 
Rites according to the order in this book appointed.” 

4 The Act of Uniformity empowers the Sovereign to alter the names of 
the King, Queen, and Royal Family, as occasion shall require; but to alter 
the name of the Church itself is a very different thing. In Marriage 
Licences, and in Letters of Orders, the old form is used: but in many docu- 
ments the alteration has been adopted. It is right to add that in the title- 
page of Edward VI.’s Injunctions he is called ‘‘in earth under Christ, 
of the Church of England and of Ireland the supreme head.”’ 

5 The distinctive title, ‘Church of England,” is very ancient, being found 
in Magna Charta, where it appears to be used as a familiar phrase. 


SS — eee a eee 


1549. 


= 


The Book of the Common Prayer 
and Administration of the Sacraments, 
and other Rites and Ceremonies of the 
Church: after the use of the Church 
of England, 

Londini in Officina Richardi Graftoni 
Regii impressoris. Cum privilegio ad 
imprimendum solum. Anno Domitu 
MDXLIX. Mense Martii. 

[Colophon.] Imprinted at London in 
Fleet-street, at the sign of the Sun over 
against the Conduit, by Edward Whit- 
church. The seventh day of March, 
the year of our Lord 1549. 


THE CONTENTS. 


§ Successive Titles of the Prayer Book. 


1552. 


[8 


1661. 


The Book of Common Prayer, and 
Administration of the Sacraments and 
other Rites and Ceremonies in the 
Church of England. 

§ Londini, in Oficina Edwardi 
Whytchurche. 

{| Cum Privilegio ad Imprimendum 
Solum. Anno 1552. 


The Book of Common-Prayer and 
Administration of the Sacraments, and 
other Rites and Ceremonies of the 
Church, according to the use of the 
Church of England ; together with the 
Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed 
as they are to be Sung or Said in 
Churches ; and the Form or Manner 
of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrat- 
ing of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. 


a 


1549. 


The Contents of this Book. 

1. A Preface. 

2. A Table and Kalendar for Psalms 
and Lessons, with necessary rules pe’- 
taining to the same. 

3. The Order for Matins and Evenseng, 
throughout the year. 

4. The Introits, Collects, Epistles, and 
Gospels, to be used at the celebration of 
the Lord’s Supper and holy Communion 
through the year, with proper Psalms and 
Lessons, for divers feasts and days. 

5. The Supper of the Lord and holy 
Communion, commonly called the Mass. 

_ 6. The Litany and Suffrages. 
7. Of Baptism, both public and private. 
8. Of Confirmation, where also is a 
Catechism for children. 

9. Of Matrimony. 

10. Of Visitation of the Sick, and Com- 
munion of the same. 

11. Of Burial. 

12, The purification of women. 

13. A declaration of Scripture, with 
certain prayers to be used the first day of 
Lent, commonly called Ashwednesday. 

14. Of Ceremonies omitted or retained. 

15. Certain notes for the more plain 
explication and decent ministration of 
things contained in this book. 


§ Successive Tables of Contents. 


1552. 


The Contents of this Book. 

1. A Preface. 

2. Of Ceremonies, why some be abolished 
and some retained. 

3. The order how the Psalter is ap- 
pointed to be read. 

4. The Table for the order of the Psalms 
to be said at Morning and Evening Prayer. 

5. The order how the rest of holy Serip- 
ture is appointed to be read. 

6. Proper Psalms and Lessons at Morn- 
ing and Evening Prayer, for certain feasts 
and days. 

7, An Almanack. 

8. The Table and Kalendar for Psalms 
and Lessons, with necessary rules apper- 
taining to the same. 

9. The order for Morning Prayer and 
Evening Prayer, throughout the year. 

10. The Litany. 

11. The Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, 
to be used at the ministration of the holy 
Communion, throughout the year. 

12. The order of the ministration of the 
holy Communion. 

13. Baptism, both public and private. 

14. Confirmation, where also is a Cate- 
chism for children. 

15. Matrimony. 

16. Visitation of the Sick. 

17. The Communion of the Sick. 

18. Burial. 

19. The Thanksgiving of Women after 
childbirth. 

20. A Commination against sinners, 
with certain Prayers to be used divers 
times in the year. 

21. The form and manner of making 
and consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and 
Deacons. 


| 


1661. 


The Contents of this Book. 

1. An Act for the Uniformity of Com- 
mon Prayer. 

2. The Preface. 

38. Concerning the Service of the Church. 

4. Concerning Ceremonies. 

5. The Order how the Psalter is ap- 
pointed to be read. 

6. The Order how the rest of the holy 
Scripture is appointed to be read. 

7. A Table of proper Lessons and Psalms. 

8. Tables and Rules for the Feasts and 
Fasts through the whole year. 

9. The Kalendar, with the Table of 
Lessons. 

10. The Order for Morning Prayer. 

11. The Order for Evening Prayer. 

12. The Creed of S. Athanasius. 

13. The Litany. 

14, Prayers and Thanksgivings upon 
several occasions. 

15. The Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, 
to be used at the Ministration of the holy 
Communion throughout the year. 

16. The Order of the Ministration of 
the holy Communion. 

17. The Order of Baptism, both publick 
and private. 

18. The Order of Baptism for those of 
riper years. 

19. The Catechism, with the Order for 
Confirmation of children. 

20. Matrimony. 

21. Visitation of the Sick, and Com- 
munion of the Sick. 

22. Burial. 

23. Thanksgiving for Women after 
child-bearing. 

24. A Commination or Denouncing of 
God’s anger and judgments against sinners. 

25. The Psalter. 

26. The Order of Prayers to be used at 
Sea. 

27. A Form and Manner of Ordaining 
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. 


LA we EEE ee Ee eee 
Anz: 


AN ACT 


FOR THE 


UNIFORMITY OF COMMON PRAYER, 


and Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, 


Primo Elizabetha. 


WHERE at the death of our late Soveraign Lord King Hdward 
the Sixth, there remained one uniform order of Common Service, 
and Prayer, and of the administration of Sacraments, Rites and 
Ceremonies in the Church of England, which was set forth in one 
Book, intituled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administra- 
tion of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the 
Church of England, Authorized by Act of Parliament holden in 
the fifth and sixth years of our said late Soveraign Lord King 
Edward the Sixth, intituled, An Act for the Uniformity of 
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments; The 
which was repealed, and taken away by Act of Parliament, in the 
first year of the Reign of our late Soveraign Lady Queen Mary, 
to the great decay of the due honour of GoD, and discomfort to 
the professors of the trutlt of Christs Religion : 

Be it therefore enacted by the Authority of this present Par- 
liament, That the said Statute of Repeal, and every thing therein 
contained, only concerning the said Book, and the Service, Ad- 
ministration of Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonies contained or 
appointed in, or by the said Book, shall be void and of none 
effect, from and after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John 
Baptist next coming: and That the said Book, with the order 
of Service, and of the Administration of Sacraments, Rites and 
Ceremonies, with the alteration and additions therein added and 
appointed by this Statute, shall stand, and be, from, and after 
the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, in full force 
and effect, according to the tenour and effect of this Statute: 
Any thing in the foresaid Statute of Repeal to the contrary not- 
withstanding. 

[2] And further be it Enacted by the Queens Highness, with the 
assent of the Lords and Commons of this present Parliament 
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all, and sin- 
gular Ministers in any Cathedral, or Parish-Church, or other 
place within this Realm of Hngland, Wales, and the Marches of 
the same, or other the Queens Dominions, shall from and after 
the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming, be 
bounden to say and use the Mattens, Evensong, celebration of 
the Lords Supper, and administration of each of the Sacraments, 
and all other Common and open Prayer, in such order and form 
as is mentioned in the said Book, so Authorized by Parliament in 
the said fifth and sixth year of the Reign of King Hdward the 
Sixth; with one alteration, or addition of certain Lessons to be 
used on every Sunday in the year, and the form of the Letany 
altered, and corrected, and two sentences only added in the de- 
livery of the Sacrament to the Communicants, and none other, or 
otherwise: and, That if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other 
whatsoever Minister, that ought or should sing, or say Common 
Prayer mentioned in the said Book, or minister the Sacraments, 
from, and after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist 
next coming, refuse to use the said Common Prayers, or to 


minister the Sacraments in such Cathedral, or Parish-Church, or 
other places, as he should use to minister the same, in such order 
and form, as they be mentioned, and set forth in the said Book, 
or shall wilfully, or obstinately standing in the same, use any 
other Rite, Ceremony, Order, Form, or manner of celebrating of the 
Lords Supper openly, or privily, or Mattens, Even song, admi- 
nistration of the Sacraments, or other open Prayers, than is men- 
tioned, and set forth in the said Book, [Open Prayer in, and 
through this Act, is meant that Prayer, which is for other to 
come unto, or hear, either in Common Churches, or private 
Chappels, or Oratories, commonly called the Service of the 
Church] or shall preach, declare, or speak any thing in the dero- 
gation, or depraving of the said Book, or any thing therein con- 
tained, or of any part thereof, and shall be thereof lawfully con- 
victed, according to the Laws of this Realm, by verdict of twelve 
men, or by his own confession, or by the notorious evidence of 
the fact; shall lose, and forfeit to the Queens Highness, Her 
Heirs, and Successors, for his first offence, the profit of all his 
Spiritual Benefices, or Promotions, coming, or arising in one 
whole year next after his conviction: And also that the person so 
convicted shall for the same offence suffer imprisonment by the 
space of six moneths, without Bail, or Mainprise: And if any 
such person, once convict of any offence concerning the premisses, 
shall after his first conviction, eftsoons offend, and be thereof in 
form aforesaid lawfully convict ; That then the same person shall 
for his second offence suffer imprisonment by the space of one 
whole year, and also shall therefore be deprived zpso facto of all 
his Spiritual Promotions; and, That it shall be lawful to all 
Patrons, or Donors of all and singular the same Spiritual Pro- 
motions, or any of them, to present, or collate to the same, as 
though the person or persons so offending were dead: and That, 
if any such person, or persons, after he shall be twice convicted 
in form aforesaid, shall offend against any of the premisses the 
third time, and shall be thereof, in form aforesaid, lawfully con- 
victed; That then the person so offending, and convicted the 
third time shall be deprived ¢pso facto of all his Spiritual Pro- 
motions, and also shall suffer imprisonment during his life: And 
if the person, that shall offend, and be convict in form aforesaid, 
concerning any of the premisses, shall not be Beneficed, nor have 
any Spiritual Promotion; That then the same Person, so offend- 
ing, and convict, shall for the first offence suffer imprisonment 
during one whole year next after his said conviction, without 
Bail or Mainprise: And if any such person not having any Spi- 
ritual Promotion, after his first conviction, shall eftsoons offend 
in any thing concerning the premisses, and shall in form aforesaid 
be thereof lawfully convicted; That then the same person shall 
for his second offence suffer imprisonment during his life. 

[3] And it is Ordained, and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 
That if any person, or persons whatsoever, after the said Feast of 


AN ACT FOR THE UNIFORMITY OF COMMON PRAYER. [5 


the Nativity of St. John Baptist next coming, shall in any 
Enterludes, Playes, Songs, Rimes, or by other open words de- 
clare, or speak any thing in the derogation, depraving, or de- 
spising of the same Book, or of any thing therein contained, or 
any part thereof, or shall by open fact, deed, or by open threat- 


nings compel, or cause, or otherwise procure, or maintain any . 


Parson, Vicar, or other Minister in any Cathedral, or Parish- 
Church, or in Chappel, or in any other Place, to sing, or say any 
Common, or open Prayer, or to minister any Sacrament otherwise, 
or in any other manner, and form, than is mentioned in the said 
Book ; or that by any of the said means shall unlawfully inter- 
rupt, or let any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister in any Cathe- 
dral, or Parish-Church, Chappel, or any other place to sing or 
say Common and open Prayer, or to minister the Sacraments, or 
any of them, in such manner, and form, as is mentioned in the 
said Book; That then every such person, being thereof lawfully 
convicted in form abovesaid, shall forfeit to the Queen our Sove- 
raign Lady, Her Heirs, and Successors for the first offence an 
hundred marks: And if any person, or persons, being once con- 
vict of any such offence, eftsoons offend against any of the last 
recited offences, and shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully 
convict; That then the same person, so offending and convict, 
shall for the second offence forfeit to the Queen our Soveraign 
Lady, Her Heirs, and Successors Four hundred marks: And if 
any person, after he in form aforesaid shall have been twice con- 
vict of any offence concerning any of the last recited offences, 
shall offend the third time, and be thereof in form abovesaid 
lawfully convict ; That then every person, so offending and con- 
vict, shall for his third offence forfeit to our Soveraign Lady 
the Queen all his Goods and Chattels, and shall suffer imprison- 
ment during his life: And if any person or persons, that for his 
first offence concerning the premisses, shall be convict in form 
aforesaid, do not pay the sum to be paid by vertue of his con- 
viction, in such manner and form, as the same ought to be paid, 
within six weeks next after his conviction; That then every 
person so convict, and so not paying the same, shall for the same 
first offence, in stead of the said sum, suffer imprisonment by the 
space of six moneths without Bail or Mainprise: And if any 
person, or persons, that for his second offence concerning the 
premisses shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the said 
sum to be paid by vertue of his conviction, and this estatute, in 
such manner and form, as the same ought to be paid, within six 
weeks next after this said second conviction; That then every 
person so convicted, and not paying the same, shall for the same 
second offence, in the stead of the said sum, suffer imprisonment 
during twelve moneths without Bail or Mainprise: and, That 
from and after the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint John 
Baptist next coming, all, and every person and persons, inhabit- 
ing within this Realm, or any other the Queens Majesties Do- 
minions, shall diligently and faithfully, having no lawful, or 
reasonable excuse to be absent, indeavour themselves to resort to 
their Parish-Church, or Chappel accustomed, or upon reasonable 
let thereof, to some usual place, where Common Prayer, and such 
service of GoD shall be used in such time of let, upon every Sun- 
day, and other dayes ordained and used to be kept as holy days, 
and then, and there to abide orderly and soberly, during the time 
of Common Prayer, Preachings, or other Service of Gop there to 
be used and ministred, upon pain of punishment by the censures 
of the Church ; and also upon pain, that every person so offend- 
ing shall forfeit for every such offence twelve pence, to be levied 
by the Churchwardens of the Parish, where such offence shall be 
done, to the use of the poor of the same Parish, of the goods, 
lands, and tenements of such offender, by way of distress. 

[4] And for due execution hereof, the Queens most excellent 
Majesty, the Lords Temporal, and all the Commons in this present 
Parliament assembled, doth in Gops Name earnestly require, and 
charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that 
they shall endeavour themselves to the uttermost of their know- 
ledges, that the due and true execution hereof may be had 
throughout their Diocesse and Charges, as they will answer 
before Gop for such evils and plagues, wherewith Almighty Gop 
may justly punish His people for neglecting His good and whol- 


som law. And for their Authority in this behalf, Be it further 
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the 
same Archbishops, Bishops, and ail other their officers, exercising 
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, aswel in place exempt, as not exempt, 
within their Diocesse shall have full power and Authority by this 
Act to reform, correct and punish by censures of the Church, all, 
and singular persons, which shall offend within any of their juris- 
dictions, or Diocesse, after the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint 
John Baptist next coming, against this Act and Statute: Any 
other Law, Statute, Priviledge, Liberty, or Provision heretofore 
made, had, or suffered to the contrary notwithstanding. 

[5] And it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 
That all and every Justice of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices 
of Assize shall have full power and Authority in every of their 
open and general Sessions to enquire, hear and determine all and 
all manner of offences, that shall be committed, or done contrary 
to any Article contained in this present Act, within the limits of 
the Commission to them directed, and to make process for the 
execution of the same, as they may do against any person being 
indicted before them of trespass, or lawfully convicted thereof. 

[6] Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority afore- 
said, That all and every Archbishop and Bishop shall and may at 
all time and times at his liberty and pleasure, joyn and associate 
himself by vertue of this Act to the said Justices of Oyer and 
Determiner, or to the said Justices of Assise, at every of the said 
open and general Sessions, to be holden in any place within his 
Diocess for and to the inquiry, hearing, and determining of the 
offences aforesaid. 

[7] Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 
That the Books concerning the said Service shall at the costs and 
charges of the Parishioners of every Parish, and Cathedral Church 
be attained, and gotten before the said Feast of the Nativity of 
Saint John Baptist next following, and that all such Parishes 
and Cathedral Churches, or other places, where the said Books 
shall be attained and gotten before the said Feast of the Nativity 
of Saint John Baptist, shall within three weeks next after the 
said books so attained and gotten, use the said Service, and put 
the same in use according to this Act. 

[8] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
no person or persons shall be at any time hereafter impeached, or 
otherwise molested of or for any of the offences above mentioned, 
hereafter to be committed, or done contrary to this Act, unless 
he or they so offending be thereof indicted at the next general 
sessions to be holden before any such Justices of Oyer and De- 
terminer, or Justices of Assise, next after any offence committed 
or done, contrary to the tenour of this Act. 

[9] Provided always, and be it Ordained, and Enacted by the 
Authority aforesaid, That all and singular Lords of the Parliament, 
for the third offence above mentioned, shall be tried by their 
Peers. 

[10] Provided also, and be it Ordained, and Enacted by the Au- 
thority afore said, That the Mayor of London, and all other Mayors, 
Bayliffs, and other Head-officers of all, and singular Cities, 
Boroughs, and Towns-corporate within this Realm, Wales and 
the Marches of the same, to the which Justices of Assise do not 
commonly repair, shall have full power and Authority by vertue 
of this Act, to enquire, hear, and determine the offences above- 
said, and every of them yearly, within fifteen days after the 
Feasts of Easter, and saint Michael the Archangel, in like 
manner and form, as Justices of Assise, and Oyer, and Deter- 
miner may do. 

[11] Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the 
Authority aforesaid, That all and singular Archbishops, and 
Bishops, and every of their Chanceliors, Commissaries, Arch- 
deacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar Hcclesiastical 
jurisdiction shall have full power and Authority by vertue of this 
Act, aswel to enquire in their Visitation, Synods, or elsewhere 
within their jurisdiction, at any other time, and place, to take 
accusations, and informations of all, and every the things above 
mentioned, done, committed, or perpetrated within the limits of 
their jurisdiction and Authority, and to punish the same by 
admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or deprivation, or 


6] AN ACT FOR THE UNIFORMITY 


other censures, and processes, in like form, as heretofore hath 
been used in like cases by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws. 

[12] Provided alwaies, and be it Enacted, That whatsoever 
person offending in the premisses shall for the first offence receive 
punishment of the Ordinary, having a testimonial thereof under 
the said Ordinaries seal, shall not for the same offence eftsoons be 
convicted before the Justices ; and likewise receiving for the said 
first offence punishment by the Justices, he shall not for the 
same first offence eftsoons receive punishmert of the Ordinary: 
Any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwith- 
standing. 

[13] Provided always, and be it Enacted, That such ornaments 
of the Church and of the ministers thereof shall be retained, and 
be in use, as was in this Church of Hngland by the Authority of 
Parliament in the second year of the reign of King Hdward the 
Sixth, until other order shall be therein taken by Authority of 
the Queens Majesty, with the advice of Her Commissioners, ap- 


pointed and Authorized under the great seal of England for 
causes Hcclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan of this Realm : And 
also, That if there shall happen any contempt, or irreverence to 
be used in the Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church, by the mis- 
using of the Orders appointed in this Book; the Queens Majesty 
may by the like advice of the said Commissioners, or Metro- 
politan, ordain and publish such further Ceremonies, or Rites, as 
may be most for the advancement of Gons glory, the edifying of 
His Church, and the due reverence of Curists holy Mysteries 
and Sacraments. 

[14] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
all Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, wherein, or whereby any other 
Service, Administration of Sacraments, or Common Prayer is 
limited, established, or set forth to be used within this Realm, or 
any other the Queens Dominions, and Countries, shall from 
henceforth utterly be void, and of none effect. 


AN ACT 


FOR THE 


UNIFORMITY OF PUBLICK PRAYERS, 


And Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies: And for 
establishing the Form of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, 
Priests, and Deacons in the Church of Hngland. 


XIV. Carol. II. 


WHEREAS in the first year of the late Queen Elizabeth there 
was one Uniform Order of Common Service and Prayer, and of 
the Administration of Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies in the 
Church of England (agreeable to the Word of Gop, and usage of 
the Primitive Church) compiled by the Reverend Bishops and 
Clergy, set forth in one Book, Entituled, Tie Book of Common 
Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites 
and Ceremonies in the Church of England, and enjoyned to be 
used by Act of Parliament, holden in the said First year of the 
said late Queen, Entituled, An Act for the Uniformity of Com- 
mon Prayer, and Service in the Church, and Administration of 
the Sacraments, very comfortable to all good people desirous to 
live in Christian conversation, and most profitable to the Estate 
of this Realm, upon the which the Mercy, Favour and Blessing of 
Almighty Gop is in no wise so readily and plentifully poured, as 
by Common Prayers, due using of the Sacraments, and often 
Preaching of the Gospel, with devotion of the hearers: And yet 
this notwithstanding, a great number of people in divers parts of 
this Realm, following their own sensuality, and living without 
knowledge and due fear of Gop, do wilfully and Schismatically 
abstain, and refuse to come to their Parish Churches and other 
Publick places where Common Prayer, Administration of the 
Sacraments, and Preaching of the Word of GoD is used upon the 
Sundays and other days ordained and appointed to be kept and 
observed as Holy days: And whereas by the great and scandalous 
neglect of Ministers in using the said Order, or Liturgy so set 
forth and enjoyned as aforesaid, great mischiefs and inconve- 
niences, during the times of the .ate unhappy troubles, have. 


arisen and grown; and many people have been led into Factions 
and Schisms, to the great decay and scandal of the Reformed 
Religion of the Church of Hngland, and to the hazard of many 
souls: for prevention whereof in time to come, for setling the 
Peace of the Church, and for allaying the present distempers, 
which the indisposition of the time hath contracted, The Kings 
Majesty (according to His Declaration of the Five and twentieth 
of October, One thousand six hundred and sixty) granted His 
Commission under the great Seal of Hngland to several Bishops 
and other Divines to review the Book of Common Prayer,.and to 
prepare such Alterations and Additions, as they thought fit to 
offer ; And afterwards the Convocations of both the Provinces of 
Canterbury and York, being by his Majesty called and assembled 
(and now sitting) His Majesty hath been pleased to Authorize 
and require the Presidents of the said Convocations, and other 
the Bishops and Clergy of the same, to review the said Book of 
Common Prayer, and the Book of the Form and manner of the 
Making and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; And 
that after mature consideration, they should make such Additions 
and Alterations in the said Books respectively, as to them should 
seem meet and convenient ; And should exhibit and present the 
same to His Majesty in writing, for his further allowance or 
confirmation ; since which time, upon full and mature delibera- 
tion, they the said Presidents, Bishops, and Clergy of both Pro- 
vinces have accordingly reviewed the said Books, and have made 
some Alterations which they think fit to be inserted to the same ; 
and some Additional Prayers to the said Book of Common-Prayer, 
to be used upon proper and emergent occasions; and have ex- 


OF PUBLICK PRAYERS. 


hibited and presented the same unto his Majesty in writing, in 
one Book, Entituled, Zhe Book of Common Prayer, and Admi- 
nistration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of 
the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, to- 
gether with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are 
to be sung or said in Churches; and the Form and Manner of 
Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and 
Deacons: All which His Majesty having duely considered hath 
fully approved and allowed the same, and recommended to this 
present Parliament, that the said Books of Common Prayer, and 
of the Form of Ordination and Consecration of Bishops, Priests, 
and Deacons, with the Alterations and Additions, which have 
been so made and presented to His Majesty by the said Convoca- 
tions, be the Book, which shall be appointed to be used by all 
that Officiate in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and 
Chappels, and in all Chappels of Colledges and Halls in both the 
Universities, and the Colledges of Haton and Winchester, and in 
all Parish-Churches and Chappels within the Kingdom of Zng- 
land, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, 
and by all that Make, or Consecrate Bishops, Priests or Deacons 
in any of the said Places, under such Sanctions and Penalties as 
the Houses of Parliament shall think fit: Now in regard that 
nothing conduceth more to the setling of the Peace of this 
Nation (which is desired of all good men) nor to the honour of 
our Religion, and the propagation thereof, than an Universal 
agreement in the Public Worship of Almighty Gop; and to the 
intent that every person within this Realm, may certainly know 
the rule, to which he is to conform in Public Worship, and Ad- 
ministration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of 
the Church of Hngland, and the manner how, and by whom 
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are, and ought to be Made, Or- 
dained and Consecrated ; 

[2] Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by 
the advice, and with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Tem- 
poral, and of the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, 
and by the Authority of the same, That all and singular Minis- 
ters, in any Cathedral, Collegiate, or Parish-Church or Chappel, 
or other place of Publick Worship within this Realm of Zngland, 
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall be 
bound to say and use the Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer, 
Celebration and Administration of both the Sacraments, and all 
other the Publick, and Common Prayer, in such order and form 
as is mentioned in the said Book, annexed and joyned to this 
present Act, and Entituled, The Book of Common Prayer, and 
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Cere- 
monies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of 
England : together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, Pointed 
as they are to be sung or said in Churches; and the form or 
manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, 
Priests, and Deacons: and That the Morning and Evening 
Prayers, therein contained, shall upon every Lords day, and 
upon all other days and occasions, and at the times therein ap- 
pointed, be openly and solemnly read by all and every Minister 
or Curate in every Church, Chappel, or other place of Publick 
Worship within this Realm of England, and places aforesaid. 

[3] And to the end that Uniformity in the Publick Worship 
of Gop (which is so much desired) may be speedily effected, Be it 
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Parson, 
Vicar, or other Minister whatsoever, who now hath, and enjoyeth 
any Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Promotion within this Realm of 
England, or places aforesaid, shall in the Church, Chappel, or 
place of Publick Worship belonging to his said Benefice or Pro- 
motion, upon some Lords day before the Feast of Saint Bartho- 
lomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thou- 
sand six hundred sixty and two, openly, publickly, and solemnly 
read the Morning and Evening Prayer appointed to be read by, 
and according to the said Book of Common Prayer at the times 
thereby appointed, and after such reading thereof shall openly 
and publickly, before the Congregation there assembled, declare 
his unfeigned assent, and consent to the use of all things in the 
said Book contained and prescribed, in these words, and no 
other ; 


{7 


[4] LA. B. Do here declare my unfeigned assent, and consent 
to all, and every thing contained, and prescribed in, and by the 
Book intituled, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration 
of the Sacraments, and other Rites, and Ceremonies of the 
Church, according to the use of the Church of England; to- 
gether with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are 
to be sung, or said in Churches, and the form, or manner of 
Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, ard 
Deacons ; 


[5] And, That all and every such person, who shall (without 
some lawful Impediment, to be allowed and approved of by the 
Ordinary of the place) neglect or refuse to do the same within the 
time aforesaid, or (in case of such Impediment) within one 
Moneth after such Impediment removed, shall zpso facto be de- 
prived of all his Spiritual Promotions; And that from thenceforth 
it shall be lawful to, and for all Patrons, and Donors of all and 
singular the said Spiritual Promotions, or of any of them, accord- 
ing to their respective Rights, and Titles, to present, or collate to 
the same; as though the person, or persons, so offending or 
neglecting were dead. 

[6] And beit further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
every person, who shall hereafter be presented, or collated, or put 
into any Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Promotion within this Realm 
of England and places aforesaid, shall in the Church, Chappel, or 
place of Publick Worship, belonging to his said Benefice or Pro- 
motion, within two Moneths next after that he shall be in the 
actual possession of the said Kcclesiastical Benefice or Promotion, 
upon some Lords day openly, publickly and solemnly Read the 
Morning and Evening Prayers, appointed to be Read by, and 
according to the said Book of Common Prayer, at the times 
thereby appointed, and after such Reading thereof, shall openly, 
and publickly before the Congregation there assembled, declare 
his unfeigned assent, and consent to the use of all things therein 
contained and prescribed, according to the form before appointed : 
and That all and every such person, who shall (without some 
lawful Impediment, to be allowed and approved by the Ordinary 
of the place) neglect or refuse to do the same within the time 
aforesaid, or (in case of such Impediment) within one month 
after such Impediment removed shall zpso facto be deprived of 
all his said Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions; and That 
from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to, and for all 
Patrons, and Donors of all and singular the said Ecclesiastical 
Benefices and Promotions, or any of them (according to their 
respective Rights and Titles) to present, or collate to the same, 
as though the person or persons so offending, or neglecting, wero 
dead. 

[7] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
in all places, where the proper Incumbent of any Parsonage, or 
Vicarage, or Benefice with Cure doth reside on his Living, and 
keep a Curate, the Incumbent himself in person (not having 
some lawful Impediment, to be allowed by the Ordinary of the 
place) shall once (at the least) in every month openly and pub- 
lickly Read the Common Prayers and Service, in, and by the 
said Book prescribed, and (if there be occasion) Administer each 
of the Sacraments and other Rites of the Church, in the Parish 
Church or Chappel, of, or belonging to the same Parsonage, 
Vicarage, or Benefice, in such order, manner and form, as in, 
and by the said Book is appointed, upon pain to forfeit the sum 
of Five pounds to the use of the poor of the Parish for every 
offence, upon conviction by confession, or proof of two credible 
Witnesses upon Oath, before two Justices of the Peace of the 
County, City, or Town-Corporate where the offence shall be com- 
mitted, (which Oath the said Justices are hereby Impowred to 
Administer) and in default of payment within ten days, to be 
levied by distress, and sale of the goods and chattels of the 
Offender, by the Warrant of the said Justices, by the Church- 
wardens, or Oyer-seers of the Poor of the said Parish, rendring 
the surplusage to the party. 

[8] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
every Dean, Canon, and Prebendary of every Cathedral, or Col- 
' legiate Church, and ali Masters, and other Heads, Fellows, Chap- 


8] AN ACT FOR THE UNIFORMITY 


lains, and Tutors of, or in any Colledge, Hall, House of Learning, 
or Hospital, and every Publick Professor, and Reader in either of 
the Universities, and in every Colledge elsewhere, and every Par- 
son, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer, and every other person in holy 
Orders, and every School-master keeping any publick, or private 
School, and every person Instructing, or Teaching any Youth in 
any House or private Family as a Tutor, or School-master, who 
upon the first day of May, which shall be in the year of our 
Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty two, or at any time 
thereafter shall be Incumbent, or have possession of any Deanry, 
Canonry, Prebend, Mastership, Headship, Fellow-ship, Professors- 
place, or Readers place, Parsonage, Vicarage, or any other Eccle- 
siastical Dignity or Promotion, or of any Curates place, Lecture, 
or School; or shall instruct or teach any Youth as Tutor, or 
School-master, shall before the Feast-day of Saint Bartholomew, 
which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred 
sixty two, or at or before his, or their respective admission to be 
Incumbent, or have possession aforesaid, subscribe the Declaration 
or Acknowledgement following, Seilicet : 


[9] ZA. B. Do declare that it is not lawful upon any pretence 
whatsoever to take Arms against the King; and that I do 
abhor that Traiterous Position of taking Arms by His Autho- 
rity against His Person, or against those that are Commission- 
ated by him; and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the 
Church of England, as it is now by Law established. And I do 
declare that I do hold, there lies no Obligation upon me, or on 
any other person from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn 
League and Covenant, to endeavour any change, or alteration of 
Government, either in Church, or State; and that the same was 
in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of 
this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of this King- 
dom. 


[10] Which said Declaration and Acknowledgement shall be 
subscribed by every of the said Masters and other Heads, Fellows, 
Chaplains, and Tutors of, or in any Colledge, Hall, or House of 
Learning, and by every publick Professor and Reader in either of 
the Universities, before the Vice-Chancellor of the respective 
Universities for the time being, or his Deputy; And the said 
Declaration or Acknowledgement shall be subscribed before the 
respective Arch-bishop, Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocess, by 
every other person hereby injoyned to subscribe the same, upon 
pain, that all and every of the persons aforesaid, failing in such 
subscription, shall lose and forfeit such respective Deanry, Ca- 
nonry, Prebend, Mastership, Headship, Fellowship, Professors 
place, Readers place, Parsonage, Vicarage, Hcclesiastical Dignity, 
or Promotion, Curates place, Lecture, and School, and shall be 
utterly disabled, and zpso facto deprived of the same; and that 
every such respective Deanry, Canonry, Prebend, Mastership, 
Headship, Fellowship, Professors place, Readers place, Parson- 
age, Vicarage, Hcclesiastical Dignity, or Promotion, Curates 
place, Lecture and School shall be void, as if such person so fail- 
ing were naturally dead. 

[11] And if any Schoolmaster or other person, Instructing or 
teaching Youth in any private House or Family, as a Tutor or 
Schoolmaster, shall Instruct or Teach any Youth as a Tutor 
or Schoolmaster, before License obtained from his respective 
Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocess, according to the 
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, (for which he shall pay twelve- 
pence onely) and before such subscription and acknowledgement 
made as aforesaid; Then every such School-master and other, 
Instructing and Teaching as aforesaid, shall for the first offence 
suffer three months Imprisonment without bail or mainprise ; 
and for every second and other such offence shall suffer three 
months Imprisonment without bail or mainprise, and also forfeit 
to His Majesty the sum of five pounds. 

And after such subscription made, every such Parson, Vicar, 
Curate, and Lecturer shall procure a certificate under the Hand 
and Seal of the respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the 
Diocess, (who are hereby enjoyned and required upon demand 
to make and deliver the same) and shall publickly and openly 
read the same, together with the Declaration, or Acknowledge- 


ment aforesaid, upon some Lords day within three months then 
next following, in his Parish Church where he is to officiate, in 
the presence of the Congregation there assembled, in the time of 
Divine Service ; upon pain that every person failing therein shall 
lose such Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, Curates place, or 
Lecturers place respectively, and shall be utterly disabled, and 
ipso facto deprived of the same; And that the said Parsonage, 
Vicarage, or Benefice, Curates place or Lecturers place shall be 
void, as if he was naturally dead. 

[12] Provided always, that from and after the Twenty fifth day 
of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thou- 
sand six hundred eighty two, there shall be omitted in the said 
Declaration or Acknowledgement so to be subscribed and read, 
these words following, sczdicet, 


And I do declare that I do hold there lies no obligation on 
me, or on any other person from the Oath, commonly called The 
solemn League and Covenant, to endeavour any change, or alte- 
ration of Government either in Church or State; And that the 
same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the 
Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of 
this Kingdom ; 


So as none of the persons aforesaid shall from thenceforth be 
at all obliged to subscribe or read that part of the said Declara- 
tion or Acknowledgement. 

[18] Provided always, and be it Enacted, That from and after 
the Feast of Saint Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our 
Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no person, who 
now is Incumbent, and in possession of any Parsonage, Vicarage, 
or Benefice, and who is not already in holy Orders by Episcopal 
Ordination, or shall not before the Feast-day of Saint Bartholo- 
mew be ordained Priest or Deacon, according to the form of 
Episcopal Ordination, shall have, hold, or enjoy the said Parson- 
age, Vicarage, Benefice with Cure or other Kcclesiastical Pro- 
motion within this Kingdom of England, or the Dominion of 
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed; but shall be utterly 
disabled, and zpso facto deprived of the same ; and all his Eccle- 
siastical Promotions shall be void, as if he was naturally dead. 

[14] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
no person whatsoever shall thenceforth be capable to be admitted 
to any Parsonage, Vicarage, Benefice, or other Ecclesiastical Pro- 
motion or Dignity whatsoever, nor shall presume to Consecrate 
and Administer the holy Sacrament of the Lorps Supper, before 
such time as he shall be Ordained Priest, according to the form 
and manner in, and by the said Book prescribed, unless he have 
formerly been made Priest by Episcopal Ordination, upon pain to 
forfeit for every offence the sum of One hundred pounds; (one 
moyety thereof to the Kings Majesty, the other moyety thereof 
to be equally divided between the poor of the Parish where the 
offence shall be committed, and such person, or persons as shall 
sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information 
in any of his Majesties Courts of Record; wherein no Essoign, 
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed) And to be disabled 
from taking, or being admitted into the Order of Priest, by the 
space of one whole year then next following. 

[15] Provided that the Penalties in this Act shall not extend 
to the Foreiners or Aliens of the Forein Reformed Churches al- 
lowed, or to be allowed by the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and 
Successors, in Hngland. : 

[16] Provided always, That no title to confer, or present by lapse 
shall accrue by any avoidance, or deprivation ipso facto by vertue 
of this Statute, but after six months after notice of such void- 
ance, or deprivation given by the Ordinary to the Patron, or such 
sentence of deprivation openly and publickly read in the Parish 
Church of the Benefice, Parsonage, or Vicarage becoming void, 
or whereof the Incumbent shall be deprived by vertue of this 
Act. 

[17] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
no Form, or Order of Common Prayers, Administration of Sacra- 
ments, Rites or Ceremonies shall be openly used in any Church, 
Chappel, or other Publick place of or in any Colledge, or Hall in 
either of the Universities, the Colledges of Westminster, Win- 


OF PUBLICK PRAYERS. [9 


chester, or Eaton, or any of them, other than what is prescribed 
and appointed to be used in and by the said Book ; and That the 
present Governour, or Head of every Colledge and Hall in the 
said Universities, and of the said Colledges of Westminster, Win- 
chester, and Eaton, within one month after the Feast of Saint 
Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One 
thousand six hundred sixty and two: And every Governour or 
Head of any of the said Colledges, or Halls, hereafter to be 
elected, or appointed, within one month next after his Election, 
or Collation, and Admission into the same Government, or Head- 
ship, shall openly and publickly in the Church, Chappel, or other 
Publick place of the same Colledge, or Hall, and in the presence 
‘of the Fellows and Scholars of the same, or the greater part of 
them then resident, Subscribe unto the Nine and thirty Articles 
of Religion, mentioned in the Statute made in the thirteenth 
year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, and unto the said 
Book, and declare his unfeigned assent and consent unto, and 
approbation of the said Articles, and of the same Book, and to 
the use of all the Prayers, Rites, and Ceremonies, Forms, and 
Orders in the said Book prescribed, and contained according to 
the form aforesaid; and that all such Governours, or Heads of 
the said Colledges and Halls, or any of them as are, or shall be in 
holy Orders, shall once at least in every Quarter of the year (not 
having a lawful Impediment) openly and publickly Read the 
Morning Prayer, and Service in and by the said Book appointed 
to be Read in the Church, Chappel, or other Publick place of the 
same Colledge or Hall, upon pain to lose, and be suspended of, 
and from all the Benefits and Profits belonging to the same 
Government or Headship, by the space of Six months, by the 
Visitor or Visitors of the same Colledge or Hall; And if any 
Governour or Head of any Colledge or Hall, Suspended for not 
Subscribing unto the said Articles and Book, or for not Reading 
of the Morning Prayer and Service as aforesaid, shall not at, or 
before the end of Six months next after such suspension, Sub- 
scribe unto the said Articles and Book, and declare his consent 
thereunto as aforesaid, or read the Morning Prayer and Service 
as aforesaid, then such Government or Headship shall be ipso 
facto void. 

[18] Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful to use the 
Morning and Evening Prayer, and all other Prayers and Service 
prescribed in and by the said Book, in the Chappels or other 
Publick places of the respective Colledges and Halls in both the 
Universities, in the Colledges of Westminster, Winchester, and 
Haton, and in the Convocations of the Clergies of either Province 
in Latine; Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary not- 
withstanding. 

{19] And beit further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
no person shall be, or be received as a Lecturer, or permitted, suf- 
fered, or allowed to Preach as a Lecturer, or to Preach, cr Read 
any Sermon or Lecture in any Church, Chappel, or other place of 
Publick worship, within this Realm of Hngland, or the Dominion 
of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, unless he be first 
approved and thereunto Licensed by the Archbishop of the Pro- 
vince, or Bishop of the Diocess, or (in case the See be void) by 
the Guardian of the Spiritualties, under his Seal, and shall in the 
presence of the same Archbishop, or Bishop, or Guardian Read 
the Nine and thirty Articles of Religion, mentioned in the 
Statute of the Thirteenth year of the late Queen Elizabeth, with 
Declaration of his unfeigned assent to the same; and That every 
person, and persons who now is, or hereafter shall be Licensed, 
Assigned, Appointed, or Received as a Lecturer, to preach upon 
any day of the week in any Church, Chappel, or place of Publick 
worship within this Realm of Hngland, or places aforesaid, the 
first time he Preacheth (before his Sermon) shall openly, pub- 
lickly, and solemnly Read the Common Prayers and Service in 
and by the said Book appointed to be Read for that time of the 
day, and then and there publickly and openly declare his assent 
unto, and approbation of the said Book, and to the use of all the 
Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein con- 
tained and prescribed, according to the Form before appointed in 
this Act; And also shall upon the first Lecture-day of every 
month afterwards, so long as he continues Lecturer, or Preacher 


there, at the place appointed for his said Lecture or Sermon, 
before his said Lecture or Sermon, openly, publickly, and solemnly 
Read the Common Prayers and Service in and by the said Book 
appointed to be read for that time of the day, at which the said 
Lecture or Sermon is to be Preached, and after such Reading 
thereof, shall openly and publickly, before the Congregation there 
assembled, declare his unfeigned assent and consent unto, and 
approbation of the said Book, and to the use of all the Prayers, 
Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein contained and 
prescribed, according to the form aforesaid; and, That all and 
every such person and persons who shall neglect or refuse to do 
the same, shall from thenceforth be disabled to Preach the said, 
or any other Lecture or Sermon in the said, or any other Church, 
Chappel, or place of Publick worship, until such time as he and 
they shall openly, publickly, and solemnly Read the Common- 
Prayers and Service appointed by the said Book, and Conform in 
all points to the things therein appointed and prescribed, accord- 
ing to the purport, true intent, and meaning of this Act. 

[20] Provided alwaies, that if the said Sermon or Lecture be to 
be Preached or Read in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church or 
Chappel, it shall be sufficient for the said Lecturer openly at the 
time aforesaid, to declare his assent and consent to all things 
contained in the said Book, according to the form aforesaid. 

[21] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 
if any person who is by this Act disabled to Preach any Lecture or 
Sermon, shall during the time that he shall continue and remain 
so disabled, Preach any Sermon or Lecture; That then for every 
such offence the person and persons so offending shall suffer Three 
months Imprisonment in the Common Gaol without Bail or 
mainprise, and that any two Justices of the Peace of any County 
of this Kingdom and places aforesaid, and the Mayor or other 
chief Magistrate of any City, or Town-Corporate, within the 
same, upon Certificate from the Ordinary of the place made to 
him or them of the offence committed, shall, and are hereby re- 
quired to commit the person or persons so offending to the Gaol 
of the same County, City, or Town Corporate accordingly. 

[22] Provided alwaies, and be it further Enacted by the Au- 
thority aforesaid, That at all and every time and times, when any 
Sermon or Lecture is to be Preached, the Common Prayers and 
Service in and by the said Book appointed to be Read for that time 
of the day, shall be openly, publickly, and solemnly Read by some 
Priest, or Deacon, in the Church, Chappel, or place of Publick 
worship, where the said Sermon or Lecture is to be preached, 
before such Sermon or Lecture be Preached; And that the Lec- 
turer then to Preach shall be present at the Reading thereof. 

[23] Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not extend to 
the University-Churches in the Universities of this Realm, or 
either of them, when or at such times as any Sermon or Lecture 
is Preached or Read in the same Churches, or any of them, for, or 
as the publick University-Sermon or Lecture; but that the same 
Sermons and Lectures may be Preached or Read in such sort and 
manner as the same have been heretofore Preached or Read; 
This Act, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof 
in any wise notwithstanding. 

[24] And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That 


‘the several good Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, which have 


been formerly made, and are now in force for the Uniformity of 
Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, within this Realm 
of England, and places aforesaid, shall stand in full force and 
strength to all intents and purposes whatsoever, for the establish- 
ing and confirming of the said Book ; Entituled, The Book of 
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and 
other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use 
of the Church of England ; together with the Psalter or Psalms 
of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches ; 
and the form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating 
of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; herein before mentioned to 
be joyned and annexed to this Act; and shall be applied, prac- 
tised, and put in ure for the punishing of all offences contrary to 
the said Laws, with relation to the Book aforesaid, and no other. 

[25] Provided alwaies, and be it further Enacted by the Au- 
thority aforesaid, That in all those Prayers, Litanies, and Collects, 

B 


10] 


which do any way relate to the King, Queen, or Royal Progeny, 
the Names be altered and changed from time to time, and fitted 
to the present occasion, according to the direction of lawful 
Authority. : 

[26] Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority afore- 
said, That a true Printed Copy of the said Book, Entituled, T’he 
Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, 
and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the 
use of the Church of England; together with the Psalter, or 
Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said m 
Churches ; and the form and manner of Making, Ordaining, and 
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, shall at the costs 
and charges of the Parishioners of every Parish-Church, and 
Chappelry, Cathedral Church, Colledge, and Hall, be attained and 
gotten before the Feast-day of Saint Bartholomew, in the year of 
our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, upon pain of 
forfeiture of Three pounds by the month, for so long time as they 
shall then after be unprovided thereof, by every Parish, or Chap- 
pelry, Cathedral Church, Colledge, and Hall, making default 
therein. 

[27] Provided alwaies, and be it Enacted by the Authority afore- 
said, That the Bishops of Hereford, Saint Davids, Asaph, Bangor, 
and Landaff, and their Successors shall take such order among 
themselves, for the souls health of the Flocks committed to their 
Charge within Wales, That the Book hereunto annexed be truly 
and exactly Translated into the Brittish or Welsh Tongue, and 
that the same so Translated and being by them, or any three of 
them at the least viewed, perused, and allowed, be Imprinted to 
such number at least, so that one of the said Books so Trans- 
lated and Imprinted, may be had for every Cathedral, Collegiate, 
and Parish-Church, and Chappel of Ease in the said respective 
Diocesses, and places in Wales, where the Welsh is commonly 
spoken or used before the First day of May, One thousand six 
hundred sixty five; and, That from and after the Imprinting and 
publishing of the said Book so Translated, the whole Divine Ser- 
vice shall be used and said by the Ministers and Curates through- 
out all Wales within the said Diocesses, where the Welsh Tongue 
is commonly used, in the Brittish or Welsh Tongue, in such 
manner and form as is prescribed according to the Book hereunto 
annexed to be used in the Hnglish Tongue, differing nothing in 
any Order or Form from the said Hnglish Book ; for which Book, 
so Translated and Imprinted, the Church-wardens of every of the 
said Parishes shall pay out of the Parish-money in their hands 
for the use of the respective Churches, and be allowed the same 
on their Accompt; and, That the said Bishops and their Suc- 
cessors, or any Three of them, at the least, shall set and appoint 
the price, for which the said Book shall be sold; And one other 
Book of Common Prayer in the Huglish Tongue shall be bought 
and had in every Church throughout Wales, in which the Book 
of Common Prayer in Welsh is to be had, by force of this Act, 
before the First day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and 
four, and the same Book to remain in such convenient places, 
within the said Churches, that such as understand them may 
resort at all convenient times to read and peruse the same, and 
also such as do not understand the said Language, may by con- 
ferring both Tongues together, the sooner attain to the know- 
ledge of the Hnglish Tongue; Any thing in this Act to the 
contrary notwithstanding ; And until Printed Copies of the said 
Book so to be Translated may be had and provided, the Form of 
Common Prayer, established by Parliament before the making of 
this Act, shall be used as formerly in such parts of Wales, where 
the English Tongue is not commonly understood. 

[28] And to the end that the true and perfect Copies of this Act, 
and the said Book hereunto annexed may be safely kept, and per- 
petually preserved, and for the avoiding of all disputes for the 
time to come; Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority afore- 
said, That the respective Deans and Chapters of every Cathedral, 
or Collegiate Church, within England and Wales shall at their 
proper costs and charges, before the twenty fifth day of December, 
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, obtain under the Great 
Seal of England a true and perfect printed Copy of this Act, and 
of the said Book annexed hereunto, to be by the said Deans and 


AN ACT FOR THE UNIFORMITY OF PUBLICK PRAYERS. 


Chapters, and their Successors kept and preserved in safety for 
ever, and to be also produced, and shewed forth in any Court of 
Record, as often as they shall be thereunto lawfully required ; 
And also there shall be delivered true and perfect Copies of this 
Act, and of the same Book into the respective Courts at West- 
minster, and into the Tower of London, to be kept and preserved 
for ever among the Records of the said Courts, and the Records 
of the Tower, to be also produced and shewed forth in any Court 
as need shall require ; which said Books so to be exemplified 
under the Great Seal of England, shall be examined by such 
persons as the Kings Majesty shall appoint under the Great Seal 
of England for that purpose, and shall be compared with the 
Original Book hereunto annexed, and shall have power to correct, 
and amend in writing any Error committed by the Printer in the 
printing of the same Book, or of any thing therein contained, 
and shall certifie in writing under their Hands and Seals, or the 
Hands and Seals of any Three of them at the end of the same 
Book, that they have examined and compared the same Book, 
and find it to be a true and perfect Copy; which said Books, and 
every one of them so exemplified under the Great Seal of Hng- 
land, as aforesaid, shall be deemed, taken, adjudged, and ex- 
pounded to be good, and available in the Law to all intents and 
purposes whatsoever, and shall be accounted as good Records as 
this Book it self hereunto annexed; Any Law or Custom to the 
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. 

[29] Provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained 
shall not be prejudicial or hurtful unto the Kings Professor of the 
Law within the University of Oxford, for, or concerning the 
Prebend of Shipton, within the Cathedral Church of Sarum, 
united and annexed unto the place of the same Kings Professor 
for the time being, by the late King James of blessed memory. 

[80] Provided always, That whereas the Six and thirtieth Article 
of the Nine and thirty Articles agreed upon by the Arch-bishops, 
and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the 
Convocation holden at London, in the year of our Lord, One 
thousand five hundred sixty two, for the avoiding of diversities 
of Opinions, and for establishing of consent, touching true Re- 
ligion, is in these words following, viz. 

That the Book of Consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, 
and Ordaining of Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the 
time of King Edward the Siath, and confirmed at the same time 
by Authority of Parliament, doth contain all things necessary to 
such Consecration and Ordaining, neither hath it any thing that 
of itself is superstitious, and ungodly; And therefore whosoever 
are Consecrated or Ordered according to the Rites of that Book, 
since the second year of the aforenamed King Edward unto this 
time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated or Ordered according to 
the sume Rites; We decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and 
lawfully Consecrated and Ordered ; 

[31] It be Enacted, and be it therefore enacted by the Authority 
aforesaid, That all Subscriptions hereafter to be had or made unto 
the said Articles, by any Deacon, Priest, or Ecclesiastical person, 
or other person whatsoever, who by this Act or any other Law 
now in force is required to Subscribe unto the said Articles, shall 
be construed and taken to extend, and shall be applied (for and 
touching the said Six and thirtieth Article) unto the Book con- 
taining the form and manner of Making, Ordaining, and Conse- 
crating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in this Act mentioned, 
in such sort and manner as the same did heretofore extend unto 
the Book set forth in the time of King Edward the Sixth, men- 
tioned in the said Six and thirtieth Article; Any thing in the 
said Article, or in any Statute, Act, or Canon heretofore had or 
made, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. 

[82] Provided also, That the Book of Common Prayer, and Ad- 
ministration of the Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of 
this Church of Hngland, together with the form and manner of 
Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons here- 
tofore in use, and respectively established by Act of Parliament 
in the First and Eighth years of Queen Elizabeth, shall be still 
used and observed in the Church of Hagland, until the Feast of 
Saint Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, 
One thousand six hundred sixty and two. 


{4.p 1661.) 


THE PREFACE. 


T hath been the wisdom of the Church of England, ever since the first com- 

piling of her Publick Liturgy, to keep the mean between the two extremes, 
of too much stiffness in refusing, and of too much easiness in admitting any 
variation from it. For, as on the one side common experience sheweth, that 
where a change hath been made of things advisedly established (no evident 
necessity so requiring) sundry inconveniences have thereupon ensued; and 
those many times more, and greater than the evils, that were intended to be 
remedied by such change: So on the other side, the particular Forms of Divine 
worship, and the Rites, and Ceremonies appointed to be used therein, being 
things in their own nature Indifferent, and alterable, and so acknowledged; it 
is but reasonable, that upon weighty and important considerations, according 
to the various exigency of times and occasions, such changes and alterations 
should be made therein, as to those that are in place of Authority should from 


THE PREFACE. 


This was placed before the Book of Common Prayer in 1661, 
and with a special regard to the circumstances of the times, the 
country having just emerged from the Great Rebellion, and the 
Church of England from a very great persecution. Under such 
circumstances it is impossible not to admire the temperate and 
just tone which characterizes it throughout. 

The writer of this Preface was Sanderson, Bishop of Lincoln, 
who was probably chosen on account of qualifications such as 
would fit him for composing in this tone an explanation of the 
course which it had been necessary to take, and which had been 
taken, with reference to the Book of Common Prayer. He is, 
and was then, well known for his works on Conscience, and on 
the Obligation of an Oath: and he was looked up to with great 
respect by all parties in those days of religious division. 

“For the satisfying all the dissenting brethren and other,” 
says Kennett, in his Register (p. 638), “the Convocation’s reasons 
for the alterations and additions to the Liturgy were by them 
desired to be drawn up by Dr. Sanderson, which being done by 
him, and approved by them, was appointed to be printed before 
the Liturgy, and may be now known by this Title, The Preface, 
and begins thus, Jé hath been the wisdom of the Church, sc.” 
In the Acts of the Upper House of Convocation it is recorded 
that “on Monday the 2nd of December, the Preface or Intro- 
duction to the Common Prayer Book was brought in and read.” 
It was referred to a Committee composed of Wren, Bishop of 
Ely; Skinner, Bishop of Oxford; Henchman, Bishop of Salisbury ; 
and Griffith, Bishop of St. Asaph, and some amendments were 
made in it as it passed through their hands. 

first compiling] This is a phrase which could hardly have 
dropped from Sanderson’s exact pen. No doubt the period re- 
ferred to is that of the Reformation; but as every page of the 
following work will show, the change which then took place in 
the Divine Worship of the Church of England was founded on 
offices which were re-formed out of the old ones, not compiled” 
in any true sense; and that the addition of ‘ first” to the word 
adopted is calculated to raisrepresent the true origin of our 
“ publick Liturgy.” 

in their own nature Indifferent] This and other apologetic 
expressions of the Preface must be read by the light of contem- 
porary history. But it is undoubtedly true that tn their own 
nature, Rites and Ceremonies are “indifferent.” Their impor- 
tance arises from the relation in which they are placed with 
reference to God as the Object of worship, and man as the 


worshipper of God. That relation being established, what was 
indifferent in its own nature becomes of high import through the 
new character which is thus given to it. 

alterable| In the 34th Article of Religion this statement is 
more elaborately set forth: “Of the Traditions of the Church.— 
It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places 
one, and utterly like ; for at all times they have been divers, and 
may be changed according to the diversities of countries, times, 
and men’s manners, so that nothing be ordained against God’s 
Word. Whosoever through his private judgment, willingly and 
purposely, doth openly break the traditions and ceremonies of the 
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be 
ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be rebuked 
openly, (that others may fear to do the like,) as he that offendeth 
against the common order of the Church, and hurteth the autho- 
rity of the Magistrate, and woundeth the consciences of the weak 
brethren. 

« Every particular or national Church hath authority to ordain, 
change, and abolish, ceremonies or rites of the Church ordained 
only by man’s authority, so that all things be done to edify- 
ing.” 

those that are in place of Authority| Who are the properly 
authorized persons may also be known from the 20th Article 
of Religion: “ Of the authority of the Church.—The Church hath 
power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in Contro- 
versies of Faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to 
ordain any thing that is contrary to God’s Word written, neither 
may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant 
to another. Wherefore, although the Church be a witness and a 
keeper of holy Writ, yet, as it ought not to decree any thing 
against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any 
thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation.” 

As will be seen from the Historical Introduction to this volume, 
this principle was carried out by throwing the whole responsibility 
of revising the older Prayer Book on the Convocations of Canter- 
bury and York, which officially represented the Church of 
England. Statutable authority was given to the work of the 
Church by the Crown in Parliament, in 14 Carol. II. ‘The 
principle is further enunciated in the succeeding words of the 
Preface, where the “Princes ” or reigning Sovereigns are named, 
but the whole work of revision during their respective reigns is 
attributed to the Church, which “upon just and weighty con- 
siderations her thereunto moving, hath yielded to make such 
alterations in some particulars, as in the respective times of those 
sovereigns were thought convenient.” 


B2 


] 


THE PREFACE. 


time to time seem either necessary or expedient. Accordingly we find, that in 
the Reigns of several Princes of blessed memory since the Reformation, the 
Church, upon just and weighty considerations her thereunto moving, hath 
yielded to make such alterations in some particulars, as in their respective times 
were thought convenient: Yet so, as that the main Body and Essentials of it 
(as well in the chiefest materials, as in the frame and order thereof) have still 
continued the same unto this day, and do yet stand firm and unshaken, not- 
withstanding all the vain attempts and impetuous assaults made against it by 
such men as are given to change, and have always discovered a greater regard 
to their own private fancies and interests, than to that duty they owe to the 
publick. 

By what undue means, and for what mischievous purposes the use of the 
Liturgy (though enjoined, by the Laws of the Land, and those Laws never yet 
repealed) came, during the late unhappy confusions, to be discontinued, is too 
well known to the world, and we are not willing here to remember. But when, 
upon His Majesty’s happy Restoration, it seemed probable, that, amongst other 
things, the use of the Liturgy also would return of course (the same having 
never been legally abolished) unless some timely means were used to prevent 
it; those men who under the late usurped powers had made it a great part of 
their business to render the people disaffected thereunto, saw themselves in 
point of reputation and interest concerned (unless they would freely acknow- 
ledge themselves to have erred, which such men are very hardly brought to do) 
with their utmost endeavours to hinder the restitution thereof. In order where- 
unto divers Pamphlets were published against the Book of Common Prayer, the 
old Objections mustered up, with the addition of some new ones more than 
formerly had been made, to make the number swell. In fine great importuni- 
ties were used to His Sacred Majesty, that the said Book might be Revised, 
and such Alterations therein, and Additions thereunto made, as should be 


vain attempts and impetuous assaults| The unreasonable con- 
duct of those who opposed the restoration of the Church and her 
devotional system was scarcely more conspicuous than the fierce 
energy by which it was characterized. For four months these 
“impetuous assaults” were carried on in the Savoy Conference ; 
and abundant evidence was given that “private fancies and 
interests” had much stronger influence than the public good. 
Baxter, the chief leader of the opposition, composed a substitute 
for the Prayer Book which dissenting congregations could not 
be got to use, any more than the Church of England could be 
prevailed on to adopt it ; and yet on such a private fancy as this 
most of that bitter opposition centred. Nor must it be for- 
gotten that “private interest” was deeply concerned, since the 
constitutional restoration of the Church and the Prayer Book 
necessarily involved the restoration of the surviving clergy to the 
benefices which men who were not priests of the Church of 
England had wrenched out of their hands. These facts are re- 
ferred to simply to show that the expressions here used in the 
Preface are not those of bitterness or controversy, but plain 
statements of what actually occurred ; and which it was necessary 
to mention for the sake of explanation, as ordered by Con- 
vocation. 

divers Pamphlets!] The most important reply to these 


1 It may be interesting and useful to append the titles of some of these 
Pamphlets that were published before December, 1660 :— 

The Old Nonconformist, touching the Book of Common Prayer and Cere- 
monies. 4to. 40 pp. 1660. 


Presbyterial Ordination vindicated ...., with a brief discourse concern- | 


ing imposed Forms of Prayer and Ceremonies. 4to. 48 pp. 1660. 

Erastus Junior, by Josiah Webb, Gent., a serious detester of the dregs of 
the Anti-christian Hierarchy yet remaining among us. 4to, 1660, [The 
author was supposed to be a Romanist.] 

The Judgment of Foreign divines, as well from Geneva as other parts, 
touching the Discipline, Liturgy, and Ceremonies of the Church of England. 
With a letter from Calvin to Knox on the same subject. 4to. 1660. 


pamphlets, next to the Prayer Book itself, was “A Collection of 
Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Consti- 
tutions Ecclesiastical, with other Public Records of the Church 
of England; chiefly in the times of K. Edward VIth, Q. Eliza- 
beth, and K. James. Published to vindicate the Church of 
England, and to promote Uniformity and Peace in the same. 
And humbly presented to the Convocation.” This collection was 
made by Dr. Sparrow, afterwards Bishop successively of Exeter 
and Norwich. It was published in 1661, and was a kind of legal 
or constitutional sequel to a well-known work which he had 
printed in December, 1660, “A Rationale upon the Book of 
Common Prayer, wherein that Service is vindicated from the 
grand accusation of Superstition, by showing that it is a Reason- 
able Service, and so not Superstitious.” 

great importunities] This refers to the deputations set to the 
King before and after he came into England, by the Presbyte- 
rians ; which led to the Savoy Conference. The word “persua- 


Reasons showing the necessity of Reformation of the public doctrine. Offered 
to the consideration of Parliament by divers Ministers of sundry Counties of 
England. 4to. 1660. 

The Common Prayer unmasked. 4to. 1660. 

The Common Prayer Book ro Divine Service; or, a small Curb to the 
Bishops’ Career, &c. By Vavasour Powell. 4to. 1660. 

Beams of former Light, discovering how evil it is to impose doubtful and 
disputable Forms and Practices upon Ministers. 4to. 1660. 

Reasons showing the Necessity of the Reformation of the Public Doctrine, 
Worship, Rites and Ceremonies, Church government and discipline. Re- 
puted to be (but indeed are not) established by Law. By Cornelius Burgess. 
4to. 1660. 

Smectymnuus Redivivus. 4to. 1660. 

A Treatise of Divine Worship. Tending to prove that the Ceremonies 
imposed upon the Ministers of the Gospel in England in present Contro- 
versy, are in their present use unlawful. Printed 1604. 4to. 1660. 

[‘‘Exceptions against the Common Prayer” was not printed until 1661, 
after the King had yielded to the “‘importunities ” referred to; and was not 
therefore one of these pamphlets.} 


THE PREFACE. 


thought requisite for the ease of tender Consciences: whereunto His Majesty, 
out of his pious inclination to give satisfaction (so far as could be reasonably 
expected) to all his subjects of what persuasion soever, did graciously con- 
descend. 

In which review we have endeavoured to observe the like Moderation as 
we find to have been used in the like case in former times. And therefore of 
the sundry Alterations proposed unto us, we have rejected all such as were either 
of dangerous consequence (as secretly striking at some established Doctrine, or 
laudable Practice of the Church of England, or indeed of the whole Catholick 
Church of Christ) or else of no consequence at all, but utterly frivolous and 
vain. But such alterations as were tendered to us (by what persons, under 
what pretences, or to what purpose soever so tendered) as seemed to us in any 
degree requisite or expedient, we have willingly, and of our own accord assented 
unto: Not enforced so to do by any strength of Argument, convincing us of 
the necessity of making the said Alterations: For we are fully persuaded in 
our judgments (and we here profess it to the world) that the Book, as it stood 
before established by Law, doth not contain in it any thing contrary to the 
Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or which a godly man may not with a 
good Conscience use and submit unto, or which is not fairly defensible against 
any that shall oppose the same ; if it shall be allowed such just and favourable 
construction as in Common Equity ought to be allowed to all Human Writings, 
especially such as are set forth by Authority, and even to the very best Trans- 
lations of the holy Scripture itself. 

Our general aim therefore in this undertaking was, not to gratify this or 
that party im any their unreasonable demands; but to do that, which to our 
best understandings we conceived might most tend to the preservation of Peace 
and Unity in the Church; the procuring of Reverence, and exciting of Piety, 
and Devotion in the publick Worship of God; and the cutting off occasion 
from them that seek occasion of cavil or quarrel against the Liturgy of the 
Church. And as to the several variations from the former Book, whether by 
Alteration, Addition, or otherwise, it shall suffice to give this general account, 
That most of the Alterations were made, either first, for the better direction of 


(13 


ston” was introduced at this time to indicate one or the other side 
of those who supported and those who opposed the Prayer Book. 

In which review WH have endeavoured] This is the language 
of men who were sure of the ground, constitutional and eccle- 
siastical, upon which they were treading. They could speak as 
the Church of England, because the Convocations of Canterbury 
and York faithfully represented her. 

Catholick Church of Christ] This is one of many places in 
which the position of the Church of England towards the Cathio- 
lic Church is taken for granted as sound and firm. Another such 
has been pointed out already in the Title-page of the Prayer Book. 

Srivolous and vain] It is very remarkable to see how trifling 
these objections, officially made at the Savoy Conference, often 
were. One of them was to the reading of any part of the Burial 
Service at the grave, as the minister was sure to catch cold by 
doing so. The Bishops replied that a cap would remedy this 
inconvenience; and this was the reply given by the Dissenting 
Ministers : which, though long, is inserted as being very charac- 
teristic of the tone of the whole objections that were offered : 
«“ We marvel that you say nothing at all to our desire (that it be 
expressed in a Rubrick, that prayers and exhortations there used, 
be not for the benefit of the dead, but only for the instruction 
and comfort of the living). You intend to have a very indiscreet 
Ministry, if such a needlesse Circumstance may not be left to 
their discretion. The contrivance of a Cap instead of a Rubr. 
showeth that you are all unacquainted with the subject, of which 
you speak : and if you speak for want of experience of the case of 
souls, as you now do about the case of men’s bodies, we could 


wish you some of our experience of one sort (by more converse 
with all the members of the flock) though not of the other. But 
we would here put these three or four Questions to you. 

“1. Whether such of ourselves as cannot stand still in the 
cold winter at the grave, half so long as the Office of Burial re- 
quireth, without the certain hazard of our lives (though while 
we are in motion we can stay out longer), are bound to believe 
your Lordships, that a Cap will cure this better than a Rubr., 
though we have proved the contrary to our cost? and know it as 
well as we know that cold is cold. Do you think no place but 
that which a cap or clothes do cover, is capable of letting in the 
excessively refrigerating air ? 

“2, Whether a man that hath the most rational probability, if 
not a moral certainty, that it would be his death, or dangerous 
sickness (though he wore 20 caps) is bound to obey you in this 
case P 

«3. Whether usually the most studious, laborious ministers, 
be not the most invaletudinary and infirm ? and 

«4, Whether the health of such should be made a jest of, by 
the more healthful; and be made so light of, as to be cast away, 
rather than a ceremony sometime be left to their discretion ? 
And whether it be a sign of the right and genuine spirit of Re- 
ligion, to subject to such a ceremony, both the life of godliness, 
and the lives of ministers, and the people’s souls ? Much of this 
concerneth the people also, as well as the ministers.’— Grand 
Debate, p. 145. 

It is to be hoped the time can never return when such trifling 
and selfish arguments can be used on such a question. 


14] 


THE PREFACE. 


them that are to officiate in any part of Divine Service; which is chiefly done 
in the Kalendars and Rubricks: Or secondly, for the more proper expressing 
of some words or phrases of ancient usage in terms more suitable to the lan- 
guage of the present times, and the clearer explanation of some other words 
and phrases, that were either of doubtful signification, or otherwise lable to mis- 
construction: Or thirdly, for a more perfect rendering of such portions of holy 
Scripture, as are inserted into the Liturgy; which, in the Epistles and Gospels 
especially, and in sundry other places, are now ordered to be read according to 
the last Translation: and that it was thought convenient, that some Prayers 
and Thanksgivings, fitted to special occasions, should be added in their due 
places; particularly for those at Sea, together with an office for the Baptism of 
such as are of riper years: which, although not so necessary when the former 
Book was compiled, yet by the growth of Anabaptism, through the licentious- 
ness of the late times crept in amongst us, is now become necessary, and may 
be always useful for the baptizing of Natives in our Plantations, and others 
converted to the Faith. If any man, who shall desire a more particular account 
of the several Alterations in any part of the Liturgy, shall take the pains to 
compare the present Book with the former ; we doubt not but the reason of the 
change may easily appear. 


And having thus endeavoured to discharge our duties in this weighty 
affair, as in the sight of God, and to approve our sincerity therein (so far as lay 
in us) to the consciences of all men; although we know it impossible (in such 
variety of apprehensions, humours, and interests, as are in the world) to please 
all; nor can expect that men of factious, peevish, and perverse spirits should 
be satisfied with any thing that can be done in this kind by any other than 
themselves: Yet we have good hope, that what is here presented, and hath been 
by the Convocations of both Provinces with great diligence examined and 
approved, will be also well accepted and approved by all sober, peaceable, and 
truly conscientious sons of the Church of Lngland. 


the growth of Anabaptism] The effect of this upon the genera- 
tion in which this Preface was written must have been very 
awful: and the necessity for the Service spoken of was strongly 
felt by the Convocation. In a work on the Bills of Mortality, 
written in 1665, there are some incidental remarks which 
strikingly corroborate those of this Preface: “The keeping of 
Parish Registers having been taken out of the hands of every 
Parish Minister, and committed to some inferior fellow elected 
by the people, and confirmed by the Justices of Peace, had been 
much neglected, and was again reduced into better order. And 
till this year the account of Christenings had been neglected 
more than that of Burials; one and the chief cause whereof was 
2 religious opinion against the baptizing of Infants, either as 
unlawful or unnecessary. If this were the only reason, we 
might, by our defects of this kind, conclude the growth of this 
opinion, and pronounce that not half the people of England be- 
tween the years 1650 and 1660 were convinced of the need of 
baptizing. .... Upon the whole matter it is most certain that 
the number of heterodox believers was very great between the 
said year 1650 and 1660, and so peevish were they as not to 
have the births of their children registered ....1” It may well 


1 Grant’s Observations on the Bills of Mortality. 8vo. 1665. 


be believed that it was this privation of the grace of Baptism 
which led to such fearful profligacy and infidelity in the time of 
Charles IT. and his immediate successors. 

Convocations of both Provinces] For greater expedition in the 
work of revision certain Commissioners were appointed by the 
Convocation of York to sit in the Convocation of Canterbury as 
their representatives ; and thus was accomplished a selection of 
representatives from the whole body of the Church of England 
clergy. 

The last words of this Preface contain an appeal to other times 
than those in and for which they were written. The safe path 
which was marked out so wisely by the Reformers has proved -to 
be one which has approved itself to all subsequent generations, 
and it was the effort of the 1661 Revisers to walk in it faithfully, 
by returning, wherever they could, to the original English Prayer 
Book of 1549. Had they attempted to do this to a greater 
extent, there might have been danger of their whole work being 
set aside. Sobriety in wild and fanatical times, peace in a con- 
troversial age, and conscientiousness when so many were unscru- 
pulous, were wise watchwords. 


CONCERNING THE SERVICE OF THE CHURCH. 


[A.v. 1549.] | 


Ogee was never any thing by 
the wit of man so well devised, 
or so sure established, which, in cou- 
tinuance of time hath not been cor- 
rupted: As, among other things, it 
may plainly appear by the Common 
Prayers in the Church, commonly 
called Divine Service. The first original 
and ground whereof if a man would 
search out by the ancient Fathers, he 
shall find, that the same was not or- 
dained but of a good purpose, and for 
a great advancement of godliness. 
For they so ordered the matter, that 
all the whole Bible (or the greatest 
part thereof), should be read over once 
every year; intending thereby, that 
the Clergy, and especially such as were 
Ministers in the congregation, should 
(by often reading, and meditation in 
God’s word) be stirred up to godli- 
ness themselves, and be more able to 
exhort others by wholesome doctrine, 
and to confute them that were Adver- 
saries to the Truth; and further, that 
the people (by daily hearing of holy 
Scripture read in the Church) might 
continually profit more and more in 
the knowledge of God, and be the 
more inflamed with the love of his true 
Religion. 


But these many years passed, this 
godly and decent Order of the ancient 
Fathers hath been so altered, broken, 


* * * * 


THIL enim humano elaboratum Pretest 
ingenio, tam exactum initio un- Reformed 
quam fuit, quin postea, multorum ac- — viry, 1585-7. 
cedente judicio, perfectius reddi possit, 
ut in ipsis etiam ecclesiasticis institutis 
circa primitivam presertim ecclesiam 


contigisse videmus. 
* % * 


* 


* * 


Et profecto si quis modum precandi 
olim a majoribus traditum diligenter 
consideret, plane intelligat horum om- 
nium precipuam ab ipsis habitam 


esse rationem. 


* * * * * 


Tertia, ut religionis quoque futuri 
magistri quotidiana sacre scripture et 
ecclesiasticarum historiarum lectione 
erudiantur, complectanturque (ut 
Paulus ait) eum, qui secundum doc- 
trinam est, fidelem sermonem, et po- 
tentes sint exhortari in doctrina sana, 
et eos, qui contradicunt, arguere. 


* % *% %* * 


Sed facta est nescio quo pacto pre- 
cantium negiligentia, ut paullatim a 


sanctissimis illis veterum patrum in- 


This explanatory introduction is the original Preface of the 
Prayer Book, and is supposed to have been written by Cranmer. 
It was moved to this place when the present Preface was inserted 
in 1661. Two short sentences were also erased. 

By whomsoever it was written, there can be no doubt that it 
was composed with the Reformed Roman Breviary of Quignonez 
lying open before the writer. The passages in the right-hand 
column are, with two exceptions, taken from an edition of 1537, 
belonging to Queen’s College, Oxford, and the preface to this 
edition agrees with all the later copies. But the Paris edition of 
1536 (probably following the Roman one of 1535) differs con- 
siderably }. Our English Preface is most like the later edition 
of Quignonez; but the paragraph enclosed in brackets appears 
to show that the earlier one was also known to the Reformers of 
our Services. There are six copies of this Breviary in the Bod- 
leian Library, one at the British Museum, one at the Routh 


1 The writer has not been able to meet with this, but copies from Gue- 
ranger’s Institutions Liturgiques, p. 398. 


Library of Durham University, one in the Public Library at 
Cambridge, and one in Queen’s College, Oxford; but none of 
these are earlier than 1537. Others are in private hands. 

It has already been mentioned, in the Historical Introduction 
(p. xx), that this Reformed Roman Breviary exercised some in- 
fluence upon the reformed English offices. It set us the example 
of compression in the services, and also of method. Quignonez 
removed the ancient Confession and Absolution to the beginning 
of the daily services, and in this too he was followed by our 
Reforniers. His Breviary, again, established a system of two 
lessons on ordinary, or ferial days; the first of which was taken 
from the Old Testament, and the second from the New Testa- 
ment. On festivals, a third lesson was added, which was gene- 
rally a short passage from a homily of St. Gregory or some other 
vatristic author. The two former were seldom entire chapters, 
but were taken in a regular succession, like our own daily lessons. 
In some respects the changes made by Cardinal Quignonez, and 
sanctioned by Paul ILI. in a Papal bull, were more sweeping in 
| their character than those of our own reform. It is evident rom 


16] 


and neglected, by planting in uncertain 
Stories, and Legends, with multitude 
of Responds, Verses, vain Repetitions, 
Commemorations, and Synodals; that 
commonly when any Book of the Bible 
was begun, after three or four Chapters 
were read out, all the rest were unread. 
And in this sort the Book of Jsazah 
was begun in Advent, and the Book 
of Genesis in Septuagesima ; but they 
were only begun, and never read 
through: After like sort were other 
Books of holy Scripture used. And 
moreover, whereas St. Paul would 
have such language spoken to the 
people in the Church, as they might 
understand, and have profit by hearing 
the same; The Service in this Church 
of Hngland these many years, hath 
been read in Latin to the people, which 
they understand not; so that they have 
- heard with their ears only, and their 
heart, spirit, and mind, have not been 
edified thereby. And furthermore, not- 
withstanding that the ancient Fathers 
have divided the Psalms into seven 
Portions, whereof every one was called 
a Nocturn: Now of late time a few of 
them have been daily said, and the 
rest utterly omitted. Moreover, the 
number and hardness of the Rules 
ealled the Pze, and the manifold chang- 


his preface that others, beside himself, were engaged on the work 
of revision ; and this, as well as the long time occupied over it, 
offers another point of comparison between the two reformed 
service-books, those of Rome and England. 

more majorum| Later on occur also the following words: 
«Ac illud ante omnia visum nobis est in consuetudinem revocare, 
ut Scriptura Sacra maxime omnium toto anno, et omnes psalmi 
singulis septimanis perlegerentur.” 

Ut exemplo] This passage is in the earlier edition of 1536, but 
not in that from which the rest is quoted. The writer has been 
obliged to quote it from Gueranger, not being able to meet with 
this edition in England. 

Responds | These were short anthems, similar to that which is 
ten times sung during the reading of the passage of Scripture 
which contains the Ten Commandments. Theoretically they gave 
the key-note of the Lection; but this principle was often deviated 
from, and the sense was frequently broken up rather than illus- 
trated. The practice, in moderation, is a very excellent one}. 

Terses| Versicles, a short form of respond. 

vain Repetitions| See Historical Introduction, p. xxvii. 

Conmemorations| Anthems commemorative of festivals. 

Synodals| The provincial constitutions or canons which were 
read in parish churches after the conclusion of synods. The read- 
ing of them after the lessons was probably the origin of the corre- 
sponding custom of giving out notices after the Second Lesson. 


_— 


1 See p. 11, where the 9th Respond for Festivals in Advent is given in a 
note. 


CONCERNING THE SERVICE OF THE CHURCH. 


stitutis discederetur. Nam __ libri 
Scripture sacre, qui statis annis tem- 
poribus legendi erant more majorum 
.... vix dum incepti omittuntur in 
alio breviario. Tum historie sancto- 
rum quedam tam inculte, et tam 
sine delectu script habentur in eodem, 
ut nec authoritatem habere videantur 
nec gravitatem. [Ut exemplo esse 
possunt liber Genesis, qui incipitur in 
Septuagesima, liber Isai, qui in Ad- 
ventu, quorum vix singula capitula 
perlegimus: ac eodem modo cetera 
Veteris Testamenti volumina degusta- 
mus magis quam legimus. Nec secus 
accidit in Evangelia, et reliquam 
Seripturam Novi Testamenti, quorum 
in loco successerunt alia, nec utilitate 
cum his, nec gravitate comparanda, 
que quotidie agitatione lingue magis 
quam intentione mentis inculcantur. | 


* * * * * 


. . et psalmorum plerisque omissis, 


pauci singulis fere diebus repeterentur. 
* * * * * 


Accedit tam perplexus ordo, tamque 
difficilis precandi ratio, ut interdum 


the Pie] The following is exactly one-third of the Pica or 
Pie for a single Sunday, the first of Advent. Maskell observes 
that it was not possible for the same service to occur on the same 
Sunday of the year twice running; and it will be seen that 
Quignonez and our Reformers did not overstate the case in 
respect to the complexity of this ancient rule. In York Minster 
Library there is a volume containing the Pie only. 


«Pica de Dominica Prima Adventus. 


«LITERA DOMINICALIS A.—Tertia Decembris tota can- 
tetur Historia Aspiciens. Secundee Vespere erunt de Sancto 
Osmundo, cum pleno servitio in crastino; et solennis memoria de 
octava, et de Dominica, et de Sancta Maria cum antiphona Ave 
Maria.—Feria 2 de S. Osmundo: ix. lectiones: omnia de Com- 
muni unius Confessoris et Pontificis. Sec. vesp. erunt de com- 
memoratione, et mem. de Sancto, de octava, de Adventu, et de 
S. Maria, cum ant. Ave Maria.—Feria 3, 5, et sabbato, de com- 
memorationibus, et Responsoria ferialia pratermittantur; et 
Missa de oct. S. Andrew dicitur in capitulo. 

«LIT. DOM. B.—Quinto Cal. Dec. tota cantetur hist. Aspiciens, 
et mem. de S. Maria.—Fer. 2, 6, et sabb. de commem.—Fer. 3 de 
feria, et nihil de martyribus nisi mem. ad vesp. et ad matutinas 
de S. Maria. Missa de vigilia.—Fer. 4. de Apostolo, et solen. 
mem. de Ady. et de S. Maria.—Fer. 5 de fer. cum Resp. feri- 
alibus, et mem. de oct. et Missa de 4 fer.” And so on, through 
the seven Sunday Letters. 

It was, perhaps, from the confused appearance which a page of 


' Pica presents that printers came to call any portion of type 


CONCERNING THE SERVICE OF THE CHURCH. 


ings of the Service was the cause, that 
to turn the Book only was so hard and 
intricate a matter, that many times 
there was more business to find out 
what should be read, than to read it 
when it was found out. 

These inconveniences therefore con- 
sidered, here is set forth such an Order, 
whereby the same ‘shall be redressed. 
And for a readiness in this matter, 
here is drawn out a Kalendar for that 
purpose, which is plain and easy to be 
understood ; wherein (so much as may 
be) the reading of holy Scripture is so 
set forth, that all things shall be done 
in order, without breaking one piece 
from another. For this cause be cut 
off Anthems, Responds, Invitatories, 
and such like things as did break the 
continual course of the reading of the 
Scripture. 

Yet, because there is no remedy, 
but that of necessity there must be 
some Rules; therefore certain Rules 
are here set forth; which, as they are 
few in number, so they are plain and 
easy to be understood. So that here 
you have an Order for Prayer, and for 
the reading of the holy Scripture, 
much agreeable to the mind and pur- 
pose of the old Fathers, and a great 
deal more profitable and commodious, 
than that which of late was used. It 
is more profitable, because here are 
left out many things, whereof some 
are untrue, some uncertain, some vain 
and superstitious ; and nothing is or- 
dained to be read, but the very pure 
Word of God, the holy Scriptures, or 
that which is agreeable to the same ; 
and that in such a language and order 
as is most easy and plain for the un- 
derstanding both of the readers and 
hearers. It is also more commodious, 
both for the shortness thereof, and for 
the plainness of the Order, and for 
that the Rules be few and easy. 


[17 


paulo minor opera in requirendo pona- 


tur, quam, cum inveneris, in legendo. 
* * * * * 


Versiculos, responsoria, et capitula 
omittere idcireo visum est... . et le- 
gentes sepe morentur cum molestia 
queritandi, locum relinqui voluimus 
continenti lectioni Scripture Sacre... 


Habet igitur hee precandi ratio tres 
maximas commoditates. Primam, quod 
precantibus simul acquiritur utriusque 
Testamenti peritia. Secundum, quod 
res est expeditissima propter summam 
ordinis simplicitatem et nonnullam 
brevitatem. Tertiam, quod histori 
sanctorum nihil habeant, ut prius quod 
graves, et doctas aures offendat. 

* * * * % 
quasdam omisimus illis nec proba- 
bilitate nec gravitate pares.... 


nn 


which is in utter disorder through accident or otherwise by the 
name of “pie.” The ecclesiastical use of the word is thought to 
have been derived from mivaé, an index, or table, from the wooden 
boards on which the directions for service were written out in 
primitive days. It is identical with “ordinale” and with 
“Directorium sacerdotum.” The “Pica” type of later days 
took its name from the large letters in which the pica of the 
Anglican Portiforia was printed. 

few and easy] The following passage was omitted from the 


Preface at the last revision :—“ Furthermore, by this order the 
Curates shall need none other books for their public service, but 
this book and the Bible. By the means whereof, the people shall 
not be at so great charges for books as in times past they have 
been.” It was crossed out by Bishop Cosin; not, probably, from 
any idea that the passage was an unworthy one, but because it 
was so entirely out of date when the press had made the advance 
it had in 1661. Although, moreover, the passage was applicable 
to the case of poor parish churches, it was not so in that of richer 
C 


18] 


And whereas heretofore there hath 
been great diversity in saying and 
singing in Churches within this Realm ; 
some following Salisbury Use, some 
Hereford Use, and some the Use of 
Bangor, some of York, some of Lin- 
coln; now from henceforth all the 
whole Realm shall have but one Use. 

And forasmuch, as nothing can be 
so plainly set forth, but doubts may 
arise in the use and practice of the 
same; to appease all such diversity (if 
any arise) and for the resolution of all 
doubts, concerning the manner how 
to understand, do, and execute, the 
things contained in this Book; the 
parties that so doubt, or diversely take 
any thing, shall alway resort to the 
Bishop of the Diocess, who by his dis- 
cretion shall take order for the quieting 
and appeasing of the same; so that 
the same order be not contrary to any 
thing contained in this Book. And if 
the Bishop of the Diocess be in doubt, 
then he may send for the resolution 
thereof to the Archbishop. 


THE LATIN PRAYER BOOK. 


HOUGH it be appointed, That all things shall be read and sung in the 
Church in the Znglish Tongue, to the end, that the congregation may be 
thereby edified; yet it is not meant, but that when men say Morning and 
Evening Prayer privately, they may say the same in any language that they 


themselves do understand. 


ones and cathedrals, where as many books as formerly are required 
for the use of the choirs. There are practically in use by most of 
the clergy and choirs in one or other class of Churches, separate 
Breviaries, Missals, Manuals, Antiphonaries, “ Service”-books, 
Psalters, and Lectionaries ; the whole volume of the Holy Bible 
being now used for the latter, instead of those parts only which 
are needed for the daily and proper Lessons. 

but one Use| Another part of the Preface erased by Cosin 
was this; and it seems to have been suggested by a passage in 
that of Quignonez : 


And if any wili judge this 
way more painful, because that 
all things must be read upon 
the Book, whereas before, by 
the reason of so often repetition 
they could say many things by 
heart: if those men will weigh 
their labour, with the profit and 
knowledge which daily they 
shall obtain by reading upon 
the book, they will not refuse 
the pain, in consideration of the 
great profit that shall ensue 
thereof. 


Si cui autem in hoe Breviario 
laboriosum videbitur pleraque 
omnia ex libro legi, cum multa 
in alio quee propter frequentem 
repetitionem ediscuntur memo- 
riter pronuntientur, compenset 
cum hoc labore cognitionem 
Scripture Sacree, quee sic indies 
augescit; et intentionem anime, 
quam Deus ante omnia in pre- 
cantibus requiret: hane enim 
majorem legentibus, quam me- 
moriter prosequentibus adesse 
necesse est: et hujusmodi labo- 
rem non modo fructuosum, sed 
etiam salutarem indicabit. 


shall resort to the Bishop| There is no power here given to 


the Bishop of the Diocese to deviate from the rules laid down in 
the Book of Common Prayer. He is the administrator, not the 
maker, of the ritual law of the Church. 


THE LATIN PRAYER BOOK}. 


In the first Act of Uniformity (2 & 3 Edward VI. c. 1), the 
fifth clause was as follows: ‘“ Provided always that it shall be 
lawful to any man that understandeth the Greek, Latin, and 
Hebrew tongue, or other strange tongue, to say and have the 
said prayers heretofore specified of Matins and Evensong in Latin 
or any such other tongue, saying the same privately as they do 
understand. And for the further encouraging of learning in the 
tongues in the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, to use and 
exercise in their common and open prayer in their Chapels, being 
no Churches or other places of Prayer, the Matins, Evensong, 
Litany, and all other prayers, the Holy Communion, commonly 
called the Mass, excepted, in the said book prescribed in Greek, 
Latin, or Hebrew ; any thing in this present Act to the con- 
trary notwithstanding.” 

In the Act of Uniformity at present in force (14 Car. IL.), this 
clause is also enacted: “ Provided always, That it shall and may 
be lawful to use the Morning and Evening Prayer, and all other 
Prayers and Service prescribed in and by the said book, in the 
Chapels or other Publick Places of the respective Colleges and 


i A Greek version was printed in 1573, 


PRIVATE RECITATION OF THE SERVICES BY THE CLERGY. 


[19 


And all Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning and Evening 
Prayer, either privately or openly, not being let by sickness, or some other 


urgent cause, 


And the Curate that ministereth in every Parish-Church or Chapel, being 
at home, and not being otherwise reasonably hindered, shall say the same in the 
Parish-Church or Chapel where he ministereth, and shall cause a Bell to be 
tolled thereunto a convenient time before he begin, that the people may come 
to hear God’s Word, and to pray with him. 


Halls in both the Universities, in the Colledges of Westminster, 
Winchester, and Eaton, and in the Convocations of the Clergies 
of either Province in Latine ; Any thing in this Act contained to 
the contrary notwithstanding.” 

Letters patent were issued by Queen Elizabeth to the same 
effect, and printed at the beginning of the Latin Prayer Book 
issued by her authority in 1560; there being no limitation (as 
there is not in the present Act of Uniformity) with respect to 
the Communion Service'. Bishop Cosin added to the existing 
rule the words “especially in the Colleges and Halls of either 
University, and in the Schools of Westminster, Eaton, and Win- 
chester,” but the alteration was not printed, though not erased by 
the Committee of Revision. 

The first Latin Version of the Book of Common Prayer was 
made in 1551 by a former Canon of St. Andrew’s, Edinburgh, 
named Alexander Aless, and under the direction of Archbishop 
Cranmer?. As some provision would certainly be made by 
authority for carrying out the proviso of the Act of Uniformity, 
it is probable that the translation of Aless was made for this 
purpose; although, because Cranmer used it for giving Martin 
Bucer a knowledge of the English formularies, it is commonly 
said that he had it done expressly for that object. Bucer in his 
Censura distinctly says “librum istum Sacrorum, per inter- 
pretem, quantum potui, cognovi diligenter ;” and a comparison 
of dates makes it almost certain that he gained what little know- 
ledge he there had of our English services through an oval inter- 
pretation, before he received the copy of Aless’ version from 
Cranmer. But Aless was now a professor in a Lutheran, that is, 
a Presbyterian, University; and his Latin version is very far 
from being rendered with that dona fides so ostentatiously put 
forth on the title-page. 

This version was, however, the foundation of that issued by 
Queen Elizabeth in 1560, having been revised by Walter Haddon?. 
But Queen Elizabeth’s Latin Prayer Book differs considerably 
from her English one; and although, in many respects, it better 
represents the original Prayer Book of 1549, it can hardly be taken 
as having authority under our present Act of Uniformity. In 
addition to the ordinary services, there were also added to this 
Latin version an Office, “ In commendationibus Benefactorum,” 
and another, “ Celebratio cenwe Domini, in funebribus, si amici 
et vicint defuncti communicare velint.’ These two offices were 
specially mentioned as “peculiaria quedam” in the Letters 
Patent. The book was reprinted in 1574 and in 1596, and is to 
be found in a modern reprint among the Parker Society’s pub- 
lications; and no doubt it was adopted for the private recitation 
of the Daily Offices in days when Latin was more freely used 


1 An authorized French translation was printed by Archbishop Cranmer’s 
order in 1552. In a letter to Secretary Cecil (Strype’s Memorials, iii. 698, 
Eccl. Hist. Soc.) the Archbishop says that this was first done by Sir Hugh 
Paulet’s commandment (who was Governor of Calais), and overseen by the 
Lord Chancellor (Goodrich, Bishop of Ely), and others, being afterwards 
revised by a learned Frenchman who was a Doctor of Divinity, This 
revision was for the second book of Edward VI., and was printed in 1553. 

2 Ordinatio Ecclesiz, seu Ministerii Ecclesiastici, in florentissimo Regno 
Angliz, conscripta sermone patrio, et in Latinam linguam bona fide con- 
versa, et ad consolationem Ecclesiarum Christi, ubicunque locorum ac 
gentium, his tristissimis temporibus, edita ab Alexandro Alesio, Scoto, 
Sacre Theologiz Doctore. Lipsie. MDLI. 

3 Liber Precum Publicarum, seu Ministerii Ecclesiastice administrationis 
Sacramentorum, aliorumque rituum & ceremoniarum in Ecclesia Anglicana. 
Cum privilegio Regie Majestatis. 


than it has been in later times. These words are to be found at 
the close of the Letters Patent: “ Eadem etiam formula Latina 
precandi privatim uti hortamur omnes reliquos Ecclesia nostre 
Anglicane ministros, cujuscunque gradus fuerint, tis diebus, 
quibus aut non solent, aut non tenentur parochianis suis, ad 
adem sacram pro more accedentibus, publice preces vernacula 
lingua, secundum formam dicti Statuti, recitare”’ Which ex- 
hortation may be taken as a contemporary interpretation of the 
clause to which this note refers. 

The Daily Services, the Psalter, and some additional Collects 
and Prayers were translated into Latin for the use of Christ 
Church, Oxford, in 16604. But this is not a complete version of 
the Book of Common Prayer. 

A Latin Version, which is by far the most complete and exact 
that has ever been produced, was printed by Messrs. Rivington 
in 1865. In this, the ancient and original Latin phraseology 
is adopted wherever it can be traced, and the more recent 
portions are rendered into Latin of a similar character®. 


PRIVATE RECITATION OF THE SERVICES BY 
THE CLERGY. 


The second paragraph of the above Appendix to the Preface of 
1549 enjoins the Clergy to say the Daily Offices constantly either 
privately or openly, unless hindered by some urgent cause. This 
direction has undergone the following changes :— 


1549. 1552. 


Neither that any And all priests and 
man shall be bound deacons shall be 


1661. 


And all priests and 
deacons are to say 


to the saying of 
them, but such as 
from time to time, in 
Cathedral and Colle- 
giate churches, pa- 
rish churches, and 
chapels to the same 
annexed, shall serve 
the congregation. 


bound to say daily 
the Morning and 
Evening Prayer, 
either privately or 
openly, except they 
be letted by preach- 
ing, studying of di- 
vinity, or by some 
other urgent cause. 


daily the Morning 
and Evening Prayer, 
either privately or 
openly, not being let 
by sickness, or some 
other urgent cause. 


In the Scotch Prayer Book of 1637 the words were added, “ of 
which cause, if it be frequently pretended, they are to make the 
bishop of the diocese, or the archbishop of the province, the 
judge and allower.” Bishop Cosin also added to “urgent cause,” 
‘‘which the Bishop of the Diocese shall approve.’ But the 
present form appears to be that which he ultimately adopted, 
and that which was accepted by the Committee of Revision. 

This rule was regarded by Bishop Cosin, as he tells us in his 
notes to the Prayer Book [ Works, vol. v. p. 9] as a continua- 
tion of the ancient rule of the unreformed Church: and such 
has been the opinion of most sound writers since his time. 
The Letters Patent attached to the Latin Prayer Book of Queen 
Elizabeth confirm this view; and so also does the practice of 
many holy clergymen at every period since the Reformation. 
The principle of it is that the Clergy are bound to offer the 


4 Liber Precum Publicarum in Usum Ecclesiz Cathedralis Christi. Oxon. 
Oxonie. 1660. 

5 Libri Precum Publicarum Ecclesie Anglicane Versio Latina. A 
Gulielmo Bright, A.M., et Petro Goldsmith Medd, A.M. Presbyteris, 
Collegii Universitatis in Acad. Oxon, Sociis, Facta. Apud Rivington, 
Londini, Oxonii, Cantabrigia, 1865. 


C2 


20] 


OF CEREMONIES. 


OF CEREMONTES, 
WHY SOME BE ABOLISHED, AND SOME RETAINED. 


such Ceremonies as be used in 


some at the first were of godly intent 


F 
O the Church, and have had their | and purpose devised, and yet at length 


_beginning by the institution of man, | turned to vanity and superstition: | 


prayers of the Church daily to the glory of God, and as inter- 
cessors for their flocks, whether any come to join them in the 
offering or not. Such private recitation of the daily offices is, 
however, only to be used when the better way of “ open prayer” 
with a congregation cannot be adopted. 


DAILY MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER. 


The third paragraph of the above rule very clearly enjoins the 
use of Daily Service. Bishop Cosin wished to define the hours at 
which it was to be said within certain limits, by adding to “a 
convenient time before he begin,’—‘“ which may be any hour 
between six and ten of the clock in the morning, or between two 
and six of the clock in the evening :” and although his alteration 
was not adopted, it serves to show us what were then considered 
the canonical limits of the times for Mattins and Evensong. 

The Laity should never allow their Clergy to find the House 
of God empty when they go there to carry out this most excellent 
rule of the Church. In the fifteenth Canon, which directs “the 
Litany to be read on Wednesdays and Fridays,” there is an 
injunction which shows in what manner the practice of Daily 
Service ought to be kept up by the Laity as well as the Clergy: 
“The minister, at the accustomed hours of service, shall resort to 
the Church and Chapel, and, warning being given to the people 
by tolling of a bell, shall say the Litany prescribed in the Book 
of Common Prayer; whereunto we wish every householder dwell- 
ing within half-a-mile of the Church to come, or send one at the 
least of his household, fit to join with the Minister in prayers.” 
It was undoubtedly the intention of the first Reformers, and of all 
who, at any time, revised our Services, to have them used daily, 
Morning and Evening, openly in the Church, by the Clergy and 
as many of the Laity as may be able to attend. Many endow- 
ments have been left for assisting to carry out this intention of 
the Church ; and the practice has been kept up in some parish 
Churches (as well as in the Cathedrals) without any break, 
except during the persecution of the 17th century. In 1724, 
when the population of London was only one-sixth of what it is 
at the present time, there were seventy-five churches open daily 
for Divine Service; and there are many proofs that the same 
diligence in prayer was used in the country as well as in large 
cities. 

Such continual public acts of Divine Worship are expedient for 
various reasons. (1) It is due to the honour of Almighty God 
that the Church in every place consecrated to His service should 
begin and end the day by rendering Him a service of praise. 
(2) Each Church and parish being a corporate centre and cor- 
porate whole, prayer for God’s grace and His mercy should be 
offered morning and evening, for the body which the Church 
and such congregation as can assemble represents. Thus the 
Divine Presence is drawn down to the Tabernacle that It may 
thence sanctify the whole Camp. (8) The benefit to the Clergy 
is very great, of offering Divine Worship, prayer, and intercession, 
in the presence of, and in company with, some of their flock. 
(4) There are advantages to those who frequently join in Divine 
Service which can only be fully known by experience, but which 
will then be appreciated as blessings not otherwise to be ob- 
tained. (5) The service of the Sanctuary is the most real and 
true form of that daily Morning and Evening worship for which 
Family prayer has been originated as an imperfect substitute; 
for it is the true Common Prayer (see p. 2]) of the Church 


offered ‘in the Name of Christ by two or three gathered together 
under His authority, and according to His ordinance. 

It may be noticed that the Act of Uniformity enjoins that the 
Common Prayer shall be said on Sundays and Holy Days, and on 
all other Days ; and that the title of our Morning and Evening 
Service is, “The Order for Morning or Evening Prayer DAILY 
throughout the year.” In the beginning of the “Form of 
Prayer to be used at Sea,” there is also this rubric, «“@ The 
Morning and Evening Service to be used daily at Sea, shall be 
the same which is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer.” 
And the next rubric is, “These two following Prayers are to be 
also said in Her Majesty’s Navy every day.” 


OF CEREMONIES. 

This justification of the course taken at the Reformation 
with respect to the Ceremonial part of Divine Worship was 
probably written by Archbishop Cranmer, being included in 
some early lists of his works. It was originally inserted at the 
end of the Prayer Book, and was followed by some ritual direc- 
tions reprinted below. In 1552, the part ‘‘ Of Ceremonies” was 
placed after the Preface, and these ritual directions were omitted. 


“Certain Notes for the more plain Explication and decent 
Ministration of Things contained in this Book. 

“In the saying or singing of Matins and Evensong, baptizing 
and burying, the Minister, in parish churches and chapels an- 
nexed to the same, shall use a surplice. And in all cathedral 
churches and colleges, the Archdeacons, Deans, Provosts, Masters, 
Prebendaries, and Fellows, being Graduates, may use in the 
quire, beside their surplices, such hood as pertaineth to their 
several degrees, which they have taken in any university within 
this realm. But in all other places, every minister shall be at 
liberty to use any surplice or no. It is also seemly, that Gra- 
duates, when they do preach, should use such hoods as pertaineth 
to their several degrees. 

«@ And whensoever the Bishop shall celebrate the holy Com- 
munion in the church, or execute any other public ministration, 
he shall haye upon him, beside his rochette, a surplice or albe, 
and a cope or vestment; and also his pastoral staff in his hand, 
or else borne or holden by his chaplain. 

«@ As touching kneeling, crossing, holding up of hands, knock- 
ing upon the breast, and other gestures, they may be used or 
left, as every man’s devotion serveth, without blame. 

*©@ Also upon Christmas Day, Easter Day, the Ascension Day, 
Whit-Sunday, and the feast of the Trinity, may be used any 
part of Holy Scripture hereafter to be certainly limited and 
appointed, in the stead of the Litany. 

«4 If there be a sermon, or for other great cause, the Curate, 
by his discretion, may leave out the Litany, Gloria in Excelsis', 


1 The omission of this is not quite so strange as it seems at first: ‘‘Ab 
Adventu Domini usque ad Nativitatem ejus [ab Septuagesima usque in 
Coenam Domini, cap. xlvii.J, Te Deum Laudamus, Gloria in Eacelsis Deo, 
Ite missa est, dimittimus, quia major gloria Novi Testamenti, quam Veteris, 
cujus typum infra Adventum Domini observamus.” Micrologus de Ecc. 
Observat. cap. xxx. It was likewise omitted in Septuagesima and on 
Innocents’ Day. There was also a limitation of its use on Palm Sunday, 
‘tin Ecclesiis in quibus chrisma conficitur, et non in aliis” (Durand. Ration. 
div. off. vi. 75. 2]: and one of the first rubrics in the Sacramentary of St. 
Gregory is, ‘‘Quando vero Litania agitur, neque Gloria in Excelsis Deo, 
neque Alleluia canitur,.” 


OF CEREMONIES. 


‘Some entered into the Church by un- 
discreet devotion, and such a zeal as 
was without knowledge; and for be- 
cause they were winked at in the be- 
ginning, they grew daily to more and 
more abuses, which not only for their 
unprofitableness, but also because they 
have much blinded the people, and 
obscured the glory of God, are wor- 
thy to be cut away, and clean rejected : 
Other there be, which although they 
have been devised by man, yet it is 
thought good to reserve them still, as 
well for a decent order in the Church 
(for the which they were first devised), 
as because they pertain to edification, 
whereunto all things done in the 
Church (as the Apostle teacheth) ought 
to be referred. 

And although the keeping or omit- 
ting of a Ceremony, in itself consi- 
dered, is but a small thing; yet the 
wilful and contemptuous transgression 
and breaking of a common order and 
discipline is no small offence before 
God. Let all things be done among you, 
saith St. Paul, i a seemly and due 
order: The appointment of the which 
order pertaineth not to private men ; 
therefore no man ought to take in 
hand, or presume to appoint or alter 
any publick or common Order in 
Christ’s Church, except he be lawfully 
called and authorized thereunto. 


[21 


And whereas in this our time, the 
minds of men are so diverse, that some 
think it a great matter of conscience 
to depart from a piece of the least of 
their Ceremonies, they be so addicted 
to their old customs; and again on the 
other side, some be so new-fangled, 
that they would innovate all things, 
and so despise the old, that nothing 
can like them, but that is new: It was 
thought expedient, not so much to 
have respect how to please and satisfy 
either of these parties, as how to please 
God, and profit them both. And yet 
lest any man should be offended, whom 
good reason might satisfy, here be 
certain causes rendered, why some of 
the accustomed Ceremonies be put 
away, and some retained and kept 
still. 

Some are put away, because the 
great excess and multitude of them 
hath so increased in these latter days, 
that the burden of them was intolera- 
ble; whereof St. Augustine in his time 
complained, that they were grown 
to such a number, that the estate of 
Christian people was in worse case 
concerning that matter, than were the 
Jews. And he counselled, that such 
yoke and burden should be taken away, 
as time would serve quietly to do it. 
But what would St. Augustine have 
said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of 


the Creed, the Homily, and the Exhortation to the Commu- | 


nion.” * 

There was a rubric printed at the beginning of the Commu- 
nion Service relating to the same subject: and as all three docu- 
ments are of the same date (4.D. 1549), it also is here reprinted, 
so as to bring them under one view : 

“@ Upon the day, and at the time appointed for the minis- 
tration of the holy Communion, the Priest that shall execute the 
holy ministry, shall put upon him the vesture appointed for that 
ministration, that is to say, a white albe plain, with a vestment 
or cope. And where there be many Priests or Deacons, there so 
many shall be ready to help the priest in the ministration, as 
shall be requisite ; and shall have upon them likewise the vestures 
appointed for their ministry, that is to say, albes with tunicles.” 

The subject of Ceremonies being dealt with at large in the 
Ritual Introduction, it is not necessary to go into much detail 
respecting this document; but a few notes are annexed pointing 
out the principles which actuated the Reformers of 1549 as they 
are indicated in their explanation or apology. 

institution of man} The distinction implied in these words 
shows that Archbishop Cranmer and his associates did not con- 
sider themselves at liberty to alter any ceremonies of Divine 
Institution, such as the Laying on of Hands, or the breaking of 
the Bread in the Consecration of the Holy Eucharist. 


turned to vanity and superstition] The primitive love-feasts 
i 


and the kiss of peace are illustrations of this assertion; so also is 
the excessive use of the sign of the Cross, which provoked « 
recoil equally superstitious, leading to the disuse of it altogether. 

Some entered .... by undiscreet devotion] Of such a kind 
were the ceremonies connected with images, and even with 
relics. These ceremonies were prompted, in the first instances, 
by the best of feelings ; but, in the course of time, they became 
perverted into usages which can hardly be distinguished from 
idolatry, and thus “ obscured the glory of God!” instead of pre- 
senting it more clearly to the eyes of His worshippers. 

Some are put away, because the great excess| The minute 
directions given in the rubrics of the old Service-books often 
occupy page after page, while the prayers to which they are 
annexed occupy only a few lines; and it must be a matter of 
grave doubt, whether any more than a small fraction of the cere- 
monies latterly used in the celebration of the Holy Eucharist 
were intelligible to any but experienced priests. Their excess 
had become insupportable both to the clergy and the people, and 
the meaning of many had quite passed away. Nor is there any 
reason to doubt the assertion that many Ceremonies were so 
abused through ignorance on the one hand, and corruption on 
the other, “that the abuses could not well be taken away, the 
thing remaining still ;” a state of things had in fact grown up 


1 Aug. Ep. 55 ad Januarium, ¢. xix. § 35 (al. Ep. 119). 


22] 


late days used among us; whereunto 
the multitude used in his time was not 
to be compared? ‘This our excessive 
multitude of Ceremonies was so great, 
and many of them so dark, that they 
did more confound and darken, than 
declare and set forth Christ’s benefits 
unto us. And besides this, Christ’s 
Gospel is not a Ceremonial Law (as 
much of Moses’ Law was), but it is a 
Religion to serve God, not in bondage 
of the figure or shadow, but in the 
freedom of the spirit; being content 
only with those Ceremonies which do 
serve to a decent Order, and godly Dis- 
cipline, and such as be apt to stir up 
the dull mind of man to the remem- 
brance of his duty to God, by some 
notable and special signification, where- 
by he might be edified. Furthermore, 
the most weighty cause of the abolish- 
ment of certain Ceremonies was, That 
they were so far abused, partly by 
the superstitious blindness of the 
rude and unlearned, and partly by 
the unsatiable avarice of such as 
sought more their own lucre, than 
the glory of God, that the abuses 
could not well be taken away, the 
thing remaining still. 

But now as concerning those per- 
sons, which peradventure will be of- 
fended, for that some of the old Cere- 
monies are retained still: If they con- 
sider that without some Ceremonies it 
is not possible to keep any Order, or 
quiet Discipline in the Church, they 
shall easily perceive just cause to reform 
their judgments. And if they think 
much, that any of the old do remain, 
and would rather have all devised 


OF ‘CEREMONIES. 


anew: Then such men granting some 
Ceremonies convenient to be had, surely 
where the old may be well used, there 
they cannot reasonably reprove the old 
only for their age, without bewraying 
of their own folly. For in such a case 
they ought rather to have reverence 
unto them for their antiquity, if they 
will declare themselves to be more 
studious of unity and concord, than of 
innovations and new-fangleness, which 
(as much as may be with true setting 
forth of Christ’s Religion) is always 
to be eschewed. Furthermore, such 
shall have no just cause with the Cere- 
monies reserved to be offended. For 
as those be taken away which were 
most abused, and did burden mens’ 
consciences without any cause ; so the 
other that remain, are retained for a 
Discipline and Order, which (upon just 
causes) may be altered and changed, 
and therefore are not to be esteemed 
equal with God’s Law. And more- 
over, they be neither dark nor dumb 
Ceremonies, but are so set forth, that 
every man may understand what 
they do mean, and to what use they 
do serve. So that it is not like that 
they in time to come should be abused 
as other have been. And in these our 
doings we condemn no other Nations, 
nor prescribe any thing but to our own 
people only: For we think it conve- 
nient, that every Country should use 
such Ceremonies as they shall think 
best to the setting forth of God’s ho- 
nour and glory, and to the reducing of 
the people to a most perfect and godly 
living, without error or superstition ; 
and that they should put away other 


which required strong measures for its reformation ¥ aashetemor 
things. moreover; to which the present age can never offér.a-parallel ; 
since, although~it-is..possibleoto..conceive...of..a..greatdmerease*in 
thie” ‘ééremonies..used._by..the..Chureh; that-iaereaseeould never 
ri sant 


Fae ope 


Bai a trouble to jhe: erick as the PP caracant aie super- 
stitious use of them had been. The principles here enunciated 
against the enthusiasts who held them are: (1) That some cere- 
monies are absolutely essential to the order and decency of 
Divine Service. (2) That to invent.new ones altogether would 
be as presumptuous as unnecessary. (3) That the old ones which 
were retained under the new system of the Church of England 
were of an edifying kind. (4) That the ceremonies retained 


b> 


were never likely to be abused as those which were set aside had 
been.) 

we condemn no other Nations] This excellent sentence 
strongly illustrates the temperate spirit in which the official 
work of the Reformation of the Church of England was conducted. 
Recognizing the right which a national Church possessed to 
make such changes as may be expedient (subject to the retention 
of Catholic essentials), the Reformers acted uponit; but they also 
recognized it for other Churches as well as for that of England, 
and claimed to be the advocates of change and reconstruction 
only within the bounds of their legitimate jurisdiction. So sound 
a principle deserves the highest respect, and should be acted 
upon at all times, Had it been adhered to by; the foreign party 
as well as by the official guides of the Reformation, a great 
schism would have been prevented. 


THE ORDER OF THE PSALTER, AND OF THE REST OF HOLY SCRIPTURE. 


4 


[23 


things, which from time to time they | ordinances it often chanceth diversely 
perceive to be most abused, as in mens | in divers countries. 


a 


diversely im divers countries] No doubt there are many 
Ceremonies used in the Eastern Church, and in southern countries 
of Europe, which seem unprofitable and even worse to persons 
brought up under a different system, and under different cir- 


cumstances: but to those who use them they may be a true 
vehicle of adoration as regards Him Whom they worship, and of 
wholesome religious emotion as respects themselves. 


“ay 


THE ORDER 
HOW THE PSALTER IS APPOINTED TO BE READ. 


HE Psalter shall be read through 
once every Month, as it is there 
appointed, both for Morning and Even- 
ing Prayer. But in Mebruary it shall 
be read only to the Twenty-eighth, or 
Twenty-ninth day of the Month. 
And, whereas January, March, May, 
July, August, October, and December, 
have One-and-thirty days apiece; It 
is ordered, that the same Psalms shall 
be read the last day of the said months, 
which were read the day before: So 
that the Psalter may begin again the 
first day of the next month ensuing. 


Note, That the Psalter followeth 


And, whereas the exixth Psalm is 
divided into xxii Portions, and is over- 
long to be read at one time; It is so 
ordered, that at one time shall not be 
read above four or five of the said 
Portions. 

And at the end of every Psalm, and 
of every such part of the cxixth Psalm, 
shall be repeated this Hymn, 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son : and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be: world without end. 
Amen, 


the Division of the Hebrews, and the 


Translation of the Great English Bible, set forth and used in the time of King 
Henry the Highth, and Ldward the Sixth. 


[See the Introduction to the Psalter for notes on the subject of the above. | 


THE ORDER 
HOW THE REST OF HOLY SCRIPTURE IS APPOINTED TO BE READ. 


HE Old Testament is appointed 

for the first Lessons at Morning 

and Evening Prayer; so as the most 
part thereof will be’ read every year 
once, as in the Kalendar is appointed. 


iM 
THE LESSONS. 


The old system of the Church of England, in respect to the 
reading of Holy Scripture in Divine Service, was very similar 
throughout all the offices in which it was read, to that now 
retained only in the Communion Service. Short selections were 
made from different books of the Holy Bible, and these were 
read successively (sometimes three, and at others nine), “re- 
sponds,” or short anthems (intended to answer in character. to 
the Lesson read), being sung after each. But the whole of the 


The New Testament is appointed for 
the second Lessons at Morning and 
Evening Prayer, and shall be read over 
orderly every year thrice, besides the 
Epistles and Gospels; except the Apo- 


Lessons of the day were rarely taken from Holy Scripture, 
some being usually extracts from Patristic writings, or the 
Lives of Saints. ; 

The responsory system of reading Holy Scripture is still re- 
tamed in its old form in the case of the Ten Commandments 
when said at the Communion Service: but one of the principal 
changes made in 1549, was the substitution for it of longer and 
continuous lessons,—generally whole chapters,—with responsory 
Canticles, sung at the end only. No doubt this was a return to 
ancient practice, as it is said to be in the original preface to the 


David 


24] 


PROPER LESSONS. 


calypse, out of which there are only 
certain proper Lessons appointed upon 


divers Feasts. 


And to know what Lessons shall be 
read every day, look for the day of the 
Month in the Kalendar following, and 
there ye shall find the Chapters that 
shall be read for the Lessons both at 
Morning and Evening Prayer; Except 
only the Moveable Feasts, which are 
not in the Kalendar, and the Immove- 


able, where there is a blank left in the 
Column of Lessons ; the proper Lessons 
for all which days are to be found in 
the Table of proper Lessons. 

And note, That whensoever proper 
Psalms or Lessons are appointed ; then 
the Psalms and Lessons of ordinary 
course appointed in the Psalter and 
Kalendar (if they be different) shall be 
omitted for that time. 


Note also, that the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel appointed for the Sunday 
shall serve all the week after, where it is not in this Book otherwise ordered. 


{7 PROPER LESSONS 
TO BE READ AT MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER ON THE SUNDAYS, 


AND OTHER HOLIDAYS THROUGHOUT THE YEAR. 


Sundays of Mattins. Evensong. Sundays after Mattins. Evensong. 
Advent. Easter. —— 
The first. Isa, i. Isa. ii. Vv. Deut. viii. Deut. ix. 

ii. v. Xxiv. Sunday after 

iii. EXY, XXVi. Ascension-Day. xii. xiii. 

iv. XXX. XXXii. Whitsunday. 

Sundays after 1 Lesson. xvi. to v. 18. | Isa. xi. 
Christmas. 2 Lesson. Acts x. v. 34. | Actsxix.fov.21. 
The first. XXXVii. XXXVili. Trinity Sunday. 

il. xii. xiii. 1 Lesson. Gen. i. Gen. xviii. 
Sundays after 2 Lesson. Matt. iii. 1 John y. 
the Bpiphany. Sundays after 
The first. xliv. xvi. Trinity. 

ab li. hii. The first. Josh. x. Josh, xxiii. 

iii. ly. lvi. ii. Judges iv. Judges v. 

iv. lvii. lyiii. lii. 1 Sam. ii. 1 Sam. iii. 

v. lix. lxiv. iv. Xil. xiii. 

vi. lxv. Ixvi. v. Xv. xvii. 
Septuagesima. | Gen. i. Gen. ii. vi. 2 Sam. xii. 2 Sam. xix. 

Sexagesima. ill. vi. vii. Xxi. XXxiv. 
Quinquagesima| ix. to v. 20. xii. viii. 1 Kings xiii. | 1 Kings xvii. 
Lent. ix. XViil. xix. 
First Sunday. | xix. Zo v. 30. Xxii. x. S95 Xxil. 

ii. XXVii. Xxxiy. xi. 2 Kings v. 2 Kings ix. 

lil. XXXIX. xlii. xii. x. XViil. 

iv. xiii, xly. xiii. xix. xxiii. 

vy. Exod. iii. Exod. v. xiv, Jere. v. Jere. xxil. 

vi. Xv. XXXY. XXXV1. 

1 Lesson. ix. Xs Xvi. Hzek. ii. Ezek. xiii. 

2 Lesson. Matt. xxvi. Heb. v.fo v.11. XVii. xiv. XViil. 
Laster Day. xviii aX xxiv. 
- 1 Lesson. Exod. xii. Exod. xiv. Seb Dan. iii. Dan. vi. 

2 Lesson. Rom. vi. Acts ii. v. 22. XX. Joel ii. Mice. vi. 
Sundays after XXxi. Hab. ii. Prov. i. 

Easter. Xxil. Prov. ii. iii. 
The first. Numb. xvi. Numb. xxii. Xxiil. xi xe 

ii. Xxiil. xxiv. XXV. XXxiv. xiii. xiv. 

iii. Deut. iv. Deut. v. XXV. xv. xvi. 

iv. vi. vii. XXvi. XVii. xix. 


q LESSONS PROPER FOR SUNDAYS. 


Prayer Book}. The system in use in the fifteenth century (and | we know scarcely any thing of what was in use before then) 


appears to have been the result of attempts to refine the use of 
Scripture in the Offices of the Church to a degree of pointedness 
which it never really attained, and which, perhaps, it was almost 
beyond human skill to give to it. And although such a pointed- 
ness is well adapted for educated and devotionally trained minds, 


1 It would appear from an old rubric that some discretion was left to the 
officiating clergyman with reference to the length of the Lesson, “‘ Then let 
the same clerk who pronounces the Benediction, when enough at his discre- 
tion has been read,” &c, Transl. of Sarum Psalter, p. 48. - 


PROPER LESSONS FOR HOLYDAYS. 


“| LESSONS PROPER FOR HOLYDAYS. 
a 


Mattins. Evensong. 
S. Andrew. | Prov. xx. Proy. xxi. 
S. Thomas the 
Apostle. Xxiil. XXlv. 
Nativity of 
Christ. [to v. 17. 
1 Lesson. Isa. ix. to v. 8.} Isa. vii. v. 10 
2 Lesson. Luke ii.tov.15.} Tit. iii. v. 4 to 
S. Stephen. fgno: 
1 Lesson. Prov. xxviii. Eccles. iv. 
2 Lesson. Acts vi. v. 8, | Acts vii. v. 30 
and ec. vii. to to v. 55. 
v. 80. 
S. John. Z 
1 Lesson. Eccles. v. Eccles. vi. 
2 Lesson. Apoe. i. [v.18. | Apoce. xxii. 
Innocents’ Day.| Jer. xxxi. to | Wisd. i. 
Circumcision. 
1 Lesson. Gen. xvii. Deut. x. v. 12. 
2 Lesson. Rom. ii. Colos. ii. 
Epiphany. 
1 Lesson. Isa. Ix. Tsa. xlix. 
2 Lesson. Lukeiii.tov.23.| John ii.to v.12. 
Conversion of 
S. Paul. 
1 Lesson. Wisd. v. [22.| Wisd. vi. 
2 Lesson. Acts xxii. to v.| Acts xxvi. 
Purification of 
the Virgin 
Mary. Wisd. ix. Wisd. xii. 
S. Matthias. xix. Ecclus. i. 
Annunciation o 
our Lady. | Kcclus. ii. ili. 
Wednesday be- 
Sore Easter, 
1 Lesson. Hosea xiii. Hosea xiv. 
2 Lesson. John xi. v. 45. 
Thursday before 
Haster. 
1 Lesson. Dan. ix. Jerem, xxxi. 
2 Lesson. John xiii. 
Good Friday. |« 
1 Lesson. Gen. xxii. to v.| Isa. li. 
2 Lesson. John xviii. [20.} 1 Pet. ii. 
Easter Even. 
1 Lesson. Zech. ix. Exod. xiii. 
2 Lesson. Luke xxiii.v.50.) Heb. iv. 


it would not produce the effect desired upon mixed congregations, 
and was better fitted-for monastic than for popular use. 

Some changes in the direction of our present Lectionary were 
made in the new and reformed editions of the Salisbury Porti- 
forium, which were printed in 1516 and 1531: and more exten- 
sively by Cardinal Quignonez in his Reformed Roman Breviary 
of 1536. In this latter two lessons were appointed for ordinary 
days, one from the Old and another from the New Testament ; 
and a third, generally from a Patristic Homily, for festivals. 
These were about the length of our Epistles and Gospels, or 
somewhat longer than most of them. 

In the Prayer Book of 1549 our present system of daily and 
Proper Lessons was established, both being indicated in the 
Calendar, except-in the case of the moveable festivals, when the 
chapter and verse for Mattins were referred to before the Introit 
(which preceded the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel of the day), and 
for Evensong after the Gospel. There were no Proper Lessons 
for ordinary Sundays, the books of Holy Scripture being read 
continuously on those as well as on week-days!: nor were there 
so many proper lessons for festivals as there now are. 

When Queen Elizabeth restored the use of the Prayer Book in 


1 It is observable that the Sunday Proper Lessons again break up that 
orderly system of reading the books of Holy Scripture through which is 
spoken of in the Preface. More than a hundred chapters of the Old Testa- 
ment are thus displaced and omitted every year. 


Mattins.., Evensong. 
Monday in 
Easter Week. 
1 Lesson. Exod. xvi. Exod. xvii. 
2 Lesson. Matt. xxviii. Acts iii. 
Tuesday in 
Easter Week. 
1 Lesson. Exod. xx. Exod. xxxii. 
2 Lesson. Luke xxiv.to».| 1 Cor. xv. 
S. Mark. Ecclus. iv. [18.| Ecclus. v. 
S. Philip and 
S. Jacob. 
1 Lesson. vil. ix. 
2 Lesson. John i. v. 43. 
Ascension Day. 
1 Lesson. Deut. x. 2 Kings ii. 
2 Lesson. Lukexxiy.v.44.| Eph.iv.to v.17. 
Monday in 
Whitsun Week. [to v. 30. 
1 Lesson. Gen. xi. tov.10.| Num. xi. v. 16 
2 Lesson. 1 Cor. xii. 1 Cor. xiv. tov. 
Tuesday in : [26. 
Whitsun Week. 
1 Lesson. 1Sam.xix.v.18.] Deut. xxx. 
2 Lesson. 1 Thess. v. v. | 1 John iv. tov. 
S. Barnabas. [12 to v. 24. [14. 
1 Lesson. Eeclus. x. Eeclus. xii. 
2 Lesson. Acts xiv. Acts xv. tov. 36. 
S. John Baptist. 
1 Lesson. Malachi iii. Malachi iv. 
2 Lesson. Matt. iii. Matt. xiv. to v. 
S. Peter. {18. 
1 Lesson. Ecclus. xv. Ecclus. xix. 
2 Lesson. Acts iil. Acts iv. 
S. James. Ecclus. xxi. Ecelus. xxii. 
S. Bartholo- 
mew. XXIV. XXix, 
S. Matthew. XXXV. XXXVill. 
S. Michael. 
1 Lesson. Gen. xxxli. Dan. x. v. 5. 
2 Lesson. Acts xii.tov.20.| Judev.6tov.16. 
S. Luke. Keclus. li. Job i. 
S. Stmon and 
S. Jude. Job xxiv., xxv. xii. 
All Saints. 
1 Lesson. Wisd.iii.tov.10.| Wisd.v.tov.17. 
2 Lesson. Heb. xi. v. 33,| Apoc. xix. to v. 
& ce. xii. to v. 7. pale. 


[25 


1559, the Tables of Proper Lessons were introduced, which were 
nearly identical with those now in the Prayer Book; and they 
were settled in their present form in 1661, all the changes being 
written in the margin of Bishop Cosin’s Durham Prayer Book. 

It is scarcely probable that any thing more was known of the 
primitive mode of reading Holy Scripture, by the Reformers of 
the sixteenth century, than is known by ourselves: yet in the 
Preface Archbishop Cranmer speaks of the manner in which the 
“ancient Fathers” ordered the whole Bible to be read over once 
every year. It has, however, been pointed out that there are 
some coincidences between our modern customs and those of 
primitive times, which seem as if they could hardly be accidental. 
«Thus, during Advent, the lessons for Sundays are selected from 
the book of Isaiah, and the same book was prescribed to be read 
during Advent by the Ordo Romanus. From Septuagesima to the 
Fifth Sunday in Lent, we read the book of Genesis on Sundays. 
St. John Chrysostom preached his homilies on this book at 
Antioch during Lent, and he remarks in several places that 
Genesis was appointed to be read at that season. After Pente- 
cost the books of Samuel and Kings are read; and still later 
the books of Job, Proverbs, and Keclesiastes, while Tobit and 
Judith are read nearer to Advent. The same order may be 
observed in the forms of the Church described by Rupertus 
Tuitensis (A.D. 1100), and in the Ordo Romanus. Coincidences 
may also be pointed out between the ancient lessons for par- 

D 


26] TABLE OF PROPER PSALMS.—THE TABLES AND RULES. 
q PROPER PSALMS ON CERTAIN DAYS. 
Mattins. Hvensong. Mattins. Evensong. 
Christmas Day. | Psalm xix. Psalm Ixxxix. || Haster Day. | Psalm ii. Psalm exiii. 
ele ea ac ars xly. Cx: Se et virtues lvii. cxiv. 
Ixxxv. Goss Iho Soo oD ore xi. cexviii, 
Ash- Wednesday. Psalm vi. Psalm cii. Ascension Day.| Psalm viii. Psalm xxiv. 
46 8 6 Xxxil. CXXX. : at O08 xv. xlvii. 
XXXViil. Oulith low te oo xxi. eviii. 
Ars Jaa, 8 Good Friday. Psalm xxii.1 | Psalm Ixix. Whitsunday. | Psalm xlviii. | Psalm civ. 
2 g. in ows sce g il 
Joann. Hom. Stilo. Gor fe SSoepiellln @ Oo 6 4 Ixviil. exly. 2 Salisb. Missal. 
2eBh BS ayer eect Vv. 


TABLES AND RULES 
FOR THE MOVEABLE AND IMMOVEABLE FEASTS, 


TOGETHER WITH THE 


DAYS OF FASTING AND ABSTINENCE 
THROUGH THE WHOLE YEAR. 


RULES TO KNOW WHEN THE MOVEABLE FEASTS 
AND HOLYDAYS BEGIN. 


EASTER DAY, on which the rest depend, is always the First Sunday 
after the Full Moon which happens upon, or next after the Twenty-first 
Day of March ; and if the Full Moon happens upon a Sunday, Easter Day 


is the Sunday after. 


Advent Sunday is always the nearest Sunday to the Feast of 8. Andrew, 


whether before or after. 


Septuagesima Nine 

Ba: Sunday is ee Weeks before Laster. 
Quinquagesima Seven 

Quadragesima | Six 

Rogation Sunday Five Weeks 

Ascension Day Forty Days 


Whitsunday 
Trinity Sunday 


Seven Weeks 
Eight Weeks 


after Haster. 


ticular feasts mentioned in the latter formulary, and our own. 
Thus at the Nativity, Isaiah, chap. ix., is appointed in both; on 
the feast of St. Stephen, Acts, chap. vi.; on the feast of St. John, 
Apocalypse, chap. i.; at the Epiphany, Isaiah, chap. ix. (which 
was also the custom in the time of Maximus, Bishop of Turin, 
A.D. 450) ; on the feast of St. Peter, Acts, chap. iii’ [Palmer’s 
Origines Liturgicer, i. 254. | 

The cycle of the Sunday Proper Lessons appears to have been 
formed in illustration of Gop’s dealings with the Church of the 
Old Testament, though this idea is sometimes subordinated to the 
season, as in the Lessons for some of the Sundays in Lent. That 
for the other Holydays (with a few exceptions) is made up out of 
the didactic books of the Old Testament and the Apocrypha, and 
is not connected in any way with the Sunday cycle. The acci- 
dental combination of the fixed cycle of Proper Lessons with the 
variable one of the Second Lessons sometimes throws a wonderful 
flood of light upon both the Old and New Testament Scriptures : 
and it may be doubted whether any equal advantage would be 
gained by the substitution of Proper Lessons from the latter for 
the present system of reading it in order. 

TABLE OF PROPER PSALMS. 

The only days for which Proper Psalms were appointed pre- 

viously to 1661, were Christmas Day, Easter Day, Ascension 


Day, and Whitsun Day. Those for Ash-Wednesday and Good 
Friday were then added; and they appear, with the following 
other important additions to the Table, in the margin of the 
Durham Prayer Book of Bishop Cosin. 


§ Additional Proper Psalms proposed by Bishop Cosin. 


Martins. EVENSONG. 

Epiphany occonainncencsnens|| LSE Men OL 180/, Psalm 72. 97, 
Rogation Monday! neo — 12, 13. 107. — 86. 90. 
Rogation Tuesday — 28. 42. — 46.70. 
Rogation Wednesday ......... — 8.19. 33. — 108, 104. 144. 
St. Michael and All peace — 34.80.91. —— 168, 104. 148. 
All Saints’ Day .. soe] —— 1.15, 84. 91. — 112,113. 119, 

Ist part, 145. 149, 


THE TABLES AND RULES. 


These were nearly all of them new insertions at the last revision 
of the Prayer Book tx. 1661, and a large portion of them were 


\In Bp. Cosin's MS. note tite Rogation Psalms are all included under 
Mattins. From a difference in the appearance of the figures which are here 
placed under Evensong, it is evident they were written in afterwards, and 
in the wrong column, by mistake. e others are all written as they 
are printed above, 


THE TABLE OF FEASTS. 


[27 


A 


TABLE OF ALL THE FEASTS 


THAT ARE TO BE OBSERVED IN THE 
CHURCH OF ENGLAND THROUGHOUT THE YEAR. 


All Sundays in the Year. 
The Circumcision of our Lord 
JESUS CHRIST. 
The Epiphany. 
The Conversion of 8. Paul. 
The Purification of the Blessed 


Virgin. 
The |§. Matthias the Apostle. 
wee. The Annunciation of the 
Feasts Blessed Virgin. 


of |S. Mark the Evangelist. 
S. Philip and 8. James the 
Apostles. 
The Ascension of our Lord 
JESUS CHRIST. 
S. Barnabas. 
The Nativity of 8. John Baptist. 


_ 


S. Peter the Apostle. 
S. James the Apostle. 
S. Bartholomew the Apostle. 
S. Matthew the Apostle. 
S. Michael and all Angels. 
S. Luke the Evangelist. 
S. Simon and 8. Jude, Apos- 
tles. 
All Saints. 
S. Andrew the Apostle. 
S. Thomas the Apostle. 
The Nativity of our Lord. 
S. Stephen the Martyr. 
S. John the Evangelist. 
he Holy Innocents. 


The 
Days 
of the 
Feasts 

of 


Monday and Tuesday in Easter Week. 
Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun Week. 


taken out of Bishop Cosin’s Collection of Private Devotions. 
Previous editions of the Prayer Book contained “an Almanack 
for thirty-nine years,” which was the same as’ our “ Table of 
Moveable Feasts ;” a “Table to find Easter for ever;” the list of 
days beginning “Septuagesima,” but without Ascension Day, 
and without any prefix whatever; and a short list of Holydays. 
The general title, “Tables and Rules, &c.,” is in the Durham 
Book in Bishop Cosin’s handwriting: and all the ecclesiastical 
alterations and insertions appear to have been made by him. 
The chronological apparatus of the Calendar was, however, revised 
by Dr. John Pell (a very learned man, and a friend of Vossius !), 
in conjunction with Sancroft as secretary to the Committee of 
Revision. Of this chronological apparatus there is no trace 
whatever in Bishop Cosin’s Prayer Book. In 1752 (24 Geo. IT.) 
an Act for regulating the commencement of the year, and for 
correcting the Calendar,” was passed, and from this the present 
tables of the Prayer Book are printed, not from the Sealed 
Books. 


§ Rules to know when the Moveable Feasts and Holydays 
begin. 


These rules stand exactly as they do in Cosin’s Devotions, as 
published in 1627: except that the day of the month is substi- 
tuted for the words “ Equinoctial of the Spring in March.” The 
rule for finding Easter (founded on a decree of the Council of 
Nicwa) is not quite exactly stated. Instead of “Full Moon” it 
ought to say, “the 14th day of the Calendar Moon, whether 
that day be the actual Full Moon or not.” In some years (as in 
1818 and 1845) the Full Moon and Haster coincide, and this rule 
then contradicts the Tables. 


1 It was the strange fate of this learned man to be so poor that he could 
not get even pens, ink, and paper, and the necessaries of life: and he was 
buried by the charity of Dr. Busby in the Rector’s vault at St. Giles’s in 
the Bields. 


There is a curious old rough and ready rule for finding Easter 
contained in a rhyme found in some old Sarum Missals :— 


“In Marche after the first C [ € or new moon] 
The next prime tell to me. 
The thridde sunday ful I wis 
Paske dai sikir [surely] hit is.” 


This seems as correct as it is easy to use, e.g. :— 


New Moon in March. |} Ist Sunday. | 2nd Sunday. | Easter Day. 
1786 Monday, 27. April 2. April 9, April 16. 
1860 Thursday, 22. March 25. April 1, April 8. 
1861 Monday, 11. March 17. March 24, March 31. 
1862 Sunday, 30. April 6, April 13. April 20. | 
1865 Monday, 27. April 2. Apmil 9. April 16. 


Advent Sunday] To this rule should be added, “or on that 
feast itself,’ as Advent Sunday occurs on November 30th about 
once in every seven years on the average. 


§ The Table of Feasts. 


This Table is not in Cosin’s Devotions, though the days are all 
marked in the Calendar of the volume; but it is in MS. in the 
margin of his Durham Prayer Book. The remarks made by him 
in the Notes on the Fiayer Book published in the fifth volume of 
his works show that he had long wished to see a more complete 
list of the Holydays of the Church printed in the Calendar; and 
that he thought the abbreviated list of former Prayer Books was 
the fault of the printer. 

All the Feasts in this table have their own Collects, Epistles, 
and Gospels, and notices of the days will be found in the foot- 
notes appended to these in their proper places. 

D2 


23] 


A TABLE OF THE VIGILS, FASTS, AND DAYS OF ABSTINENCE. 


A TABLE 


OF THE 


VIGILS, FASTS, AND DAYS OF ABSTINENCE, 
TO BE OBSERVED IN THE YEAR. 


The Nativity of our Lord. 
The Purification of the Blessed 
The Virgin Mary. 
Evens | The Annunciation of the Blessed 
on Virgin. 
Vigils | Baster Day. 
before ; 
Ascension Day. 


Pentecost. 
S. Matthias. 


S. John Baptist. 


S. Peter. 
The |S. James. 
Evens | 8. Bartholomew. 


or <§. Matthew. 


Vigils | 9 Simon and &. Jude. 
before 

S. Andrew. 

S. Thomas. 

All Saints. * 


Note, that if any of these Feast Days fall upon a Monday, then the 
Vigil or Fast Day shall be kept upon the Saturday, and not upon 


the Sunday next before it. 


DAYS OF FASTING, OR ABSTINENCE. 


I. The Forty Days of Lent. 


II. The Ember Days at the Four 
Seasons, being the Wednesday, 
Friday, and Saturday after... 


The First Sunday in Lent. 
The Feast of Pentecost. 
September 14. 

December 13. 


III. The Three Aogation Days, being the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednes- 
day before Holy Thursday, or the Ascension of our Lorp. 
IV. All the Hridays in the Year, except Christmas Day. 


A SOLEMN DAY, 
FOR WHICH A PARTICULAR SERVICE IS APPOINTED. 


The Twentieth Day of June, being the Day on which her Majesty began 
her happy Reign. 


§ The Table of Vigils, Fasts, and Days of Abstinence. 

This, together with the “certain Solemn Days” (now reduced 
to one), originally appeared in Cosin’s Devotions, and is also 
written in the margin of the Durham Prayer Book. At the end 
of the MS. note is written an addition taken from the Devotions, 
but not eventually printed in the Prayer Book : 

“ By the ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, there be some times 
in the year wherein Marriages are not usually solemnized !; viz. 
: amen : } Sanday J eight days after the Epiphany. 
from )) Septuagesima ‘] eee days after Easter. 

L Rogation i une Trinity Sunday.” 


Cosin also wrote, “All the Fridays in the year except the 
twelve days of Christmas.” 

Some notes on the subject of Fasting will be found under the 
head of Lent [p. 90]; the Ember Days are noticed in connexion 
with Ordination Services, and the Rogation Days in the Notes 
to the Fifth Sunday after Easter [p. 110]. 

All Festivals have Evens, including Sundays, but only some 


1 See notes on the Marriage Service. 


have Vigils. The festivals that fall during the seasons of Christ- 
mas, Easter, and Whitsuntide have no vigils, Fridays being the 
only days of Abstinence in those joyous periods. St. Luke’s day 
is without a Vigil, either because the Evangelist is thought to 
have died in peace without martyrdom, or because the minor 
festival of St. Htheldreda occupies the 17th of October. Michael- 
mas Day is without a Vigil, because the Holy Angels had no day 
of trial like the Saints before entering into Heaven: and of this 
the Vigil is a symbolical observance. The use of the words Vigil 
and Even at the time when the Prayer Book was first trans- 
lated is illustrated by the following passage from Cranmer’s answer 
to the Devonshire rebels:—“For as Vigils, otherwise called 
Watchings, remained in the calendars upon certain saints’ evens 
because in old times the people watched all those nights... . but 
now these many years those vigils remained in vain in the books, 
for no man did watch.” [Strype’s Cranmer, ii. 533. ] 

The Vigil was originally that which its name indicates, a night 
spent in watching and prayer. The scandals which arose out of 
these nocturnal Services, however, made it necessary to abolish 
them [Durand. vi.7]; and a fast on the day before was sub- 


A TABLE TO FIND EASTER. 


A TABLE TO FIND EASTER DAY, FROM THE PRESENT TIME 
TILL THE YEAR 1899 INCLUSIVE, ACCORDING TO 
THE FOREGOING CALENDAR. 


Tus Table contains so much of the Calendar as 
is necessary for the determining of Haster ; To find 
which, look for the Golden Number of the year in 
the first Column of the Table, against which stands 
the Day of the Paschal Full Moon; then look in 
the third column for the Sunday Letter, next after 
the day of the Full Moon, and the day of the 
Month standing against that Sunday Letter is 
Easter Day. If the Full Moon happens upon a 
Sunday, then (according to the first rule) the next 
Sunday after is Haster Day. 

To find the Golden Number, or Prime, add one 
to the Year of our Lord, and then divide by 19; 
the remainder, if any, is the Golden Number; but if 
nothing remaineth, then 19 is the Golden Number. 

To find the Dominical or Sunday Letter, accord- 
ing to the Calendar, until the year 1799 ;-—7~——| 
inclusive, add to the Year of our Lord 
its fourth part, omitting fractions ; and 
also the number 1: Divide the sum by 
7; and if there is no remainder, then A 
is the Sunday Letter: But if any num- 
ber remaineth, then the Letter standing 
against that number in the small an- 
nexed Table is the Sunday Letter. 


For the next Century, that is, from the year 1800 
till the year 1899 inclusive, add to the current year 
only its fourth part, and then divide by 7, and pro- 
ceed as in the last Rule. 

Norte, That in all Bissextile or Leap Years, the 
Letter found as above will be the Sunday Letter, 
from the intercalated day exclusive to the end of 
the year. 


ATR WOH O 
BQUEyaPr 


[29 


Golden Day of the Sunday 
Number. Month. Letter. 
XIV March 21 Cc 
Til 22 D 

— 23 E 

XI —. 24 EF 
—— 2 G 

XIX — 26 A 
VIII — 27 B 
— 28 C 

XVI — 29 D 
Vv — 30 E 
— 31 F 

XIII April 1 G 
TEE 2 A 
— 3 B 

x — 4 Cc 
— 5 D 

XVIII — 6 E 
VIl — 7 F 
— 8 G 

XV — 9 A 
IV -——— 10 B 
— ll Cc 

XII el D 
MN — 13 E 
— 14 F 

Ix — 15 G 
— 16 A 

XVIT — 17 B 
VI — 18 C 
— 19 D 

—— 20 E 

— 21 F 

— 22 G 

— 23 A 

— 24 B 

— 25 C 


stituted which still retains the name of Vigil. The Vigil is not 
therefore connected with the Evening Service, but is the day 
before the Festival to which it belongs, and since (according to 
the accustomed habit of the Church) the Festival itself begins on 
the evening previous, the Vigil ends before that Evening service 
(if there is more than one) which is observed as the first Vespers 
of the feast. That, in medieval times, the whole of the day 
before the Festival was observed as the Vigil may be seen by the 
following Rubric for the first Sunday in Advent: “Non dicatur 
etiam per totum annum Te Deum laudamus in Vigiliis, nec in 
quatuor temporibus, nisi in Vigilia Epiphaniz quando in Dominica 
coutigerit, et preterquam in quatuor temporibus hebdomade 
Pentecostes.”” The Te Deum was used at Mattins: the use of it 
here referred to must therefore be at the Mattins of the Vigil. 
Some remarks on the observance of Vigils may be found in 
Tracts for the Times, No. 66, pp. 11, 12. 


The accession of the Sovereign was first observed as a ‘Solemn 
Day” in the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; but no mention of such a 
day was made in the Prayer Book until late in the last century. 
The above notice of the day has not therefore the authority of 
the Sealed Books, nor of the Act of 1752, but is printed in 


deference to Royal Proclamations dated June 21st, 1837, and 
Jan. 17th, 1859. 


§ The Table to find Laster till 1899. 


This Table is an extract from the first three columns of the 
Calendar during the Paschal limits, or the period during which 
Easter Day must alway$ fall. It was substituted in 1752 (with 
the succeeding one) for “a Table to find Easter for ever” which 
had been printed in previous Prayer Books, but which had been 
framed on a mistaken supposition respecting the perpetual appli- 
cation of the cycle of Golden Numbers to fixed days of the 
months. A change in the application of the cycle will be neces- 
sary in the year 1900, (provided for by another Table further 
on,) when the above will be superseded for all future calcula- 
tions. 

The Golden Numbers and the Sunday Letters are explained in 
the notes to the General Tables for finding them. 

These Tables are a solution of a difficulty about the determina- 
tion of Easter Day, which caused considerable trouble to the 
Church when astronomy, and consequently Chronology, was 
imperfectly understood. The Nicene Council (a.d. 325) endea- 


30] 


A TABLE TO FIND EASTER. 


ANOTHER TABLE TO FIND EASTER TILL THE YEAR 
1899 INCLUSIVE. 


SUNDAY LETTERS. 


GOLDEN 
Moitpie! A B C D E BE G 
iL April 16 | —— 17 | — 18} —— 19] —— 20] —— 14] —— 15 
II April 9 | — 3] ——~ 4] — 5] — 6] — 7} — 8 
Ill March 26 | —— 27 | —— 28 | —— 29 | —— 23 | —— 24] —— 25 
IV April 16 | —— 17 | — 11] —— 12 | — 13 14 | —— 15 
W April 2] — 3] — 4 |] — 5 | — 6} March31 | April 1 
VI April 23 | —— 24 | —— 25 | —— 19 | —— 20 21 | —— 22 
Vil April 9 | —— 10 11 | —— 12} — 13] —— 14 8 
VIII April 2 {| —— 3 | March28 | —— 29 |} —— 30 | —— 381 | April 1 
Vids April 16 | —— 17 18 |} —— 19 | —— 20 | —— 21 22 
x April 9 | —— 10] — 11] — 5] — 6] — 7| — 8 
XI March 26 | —— 27 | —— 28 | —— 29 | —— 30} —— 381 | —— 25 
XII April 16 | —— 17 | — 18} —~— 19] —— 13} —— 14] — 15 
XIII April 2/ — 3] — 4] — 5] — 6] — 7] — 8 
XIV March 26 | —— 27 | —— 28 | —— 22 | —— 23 | —— 24] —— 25 
XV April 16 | —— 10} —— 11 | —— 12 — 13} — 14 15 
XVI April 2/— 3] — 4| — 5] March30 | —— 381] April 1 
XVII April 23 | —— 24} —— 18 | —~ 19 20 | —— 21 22 
XVIII April 9 10 | — 11} —— 12 | — 13] —— 7 - 8 
XIX April 2 | March27 | —— 28 | —— 29 | —— 30 | —— 381 | April 1 
To make use of the preceding Table, find the Sunday Letter for the Year in the uppermost 
Line, and the Golden Number, or Prime, in the Column of Golden Numbers, and against the 
Prime, in the same Line under the Sunday Letter, you have the Day of the Month on which 
Easter falleth that year. But Note, that the Name of the Month is set on the Left Hand, 
or just with the Figure, and followeth not, as in other Tables, by Descent, but Collateral. 


voured to settle this difficulty and the Quartodeciman controversy 
[see notes on Easter Day] by the following epistolary decrees :— 

1. That the twenty-first day of March is to be taken as the 
vernal equinox. 

2. That the full moon happening upon or next after the twenty- 
first day of March is to be taken for the full moon of the month 
Nisan. 

3. That the next Lord’s Day after that full moon is to be 
observed as Easter Day. 

4. Unless the full moon happens upon a Sunday, when Easter 
Day is to be the next Sunday. $ 

But to observe these rules it was necessary to ascertain the age 
of the moon: and although this could be done correctly for a 
period by means of a cycle of the moon discovered by Meton, an 
Athenian philosopher, which set forth the change of the moon 
for nineteen years, and which was supposed to repeat itself ad in- 
finitum, yet a more accurate knowledge of astronomy showed that 


this rule was subject to error, and that Easter Day was some- 
times too early and sometimes too late to commemorate our 
Lord’s Resurrection with the accuracy which was intended by 
the Nicene Council. This erroneous system was not corrected, 
however, until the introduction of the “New Style” by Pope 
Gregory XIII. in 1582; and the New Style was not introduced into 
England until 1752, when the Act of Parliament was passed from 
which the present Calendar is printed. 

These Tables for finding Easter, together with those which 
follow, are part of the Act of Parliament referred to [24 Geo. IL. 
c. 23], and have not received the same authority as the Prayer 
Book itself. Nor does there seem to be any practical necessity 
for binding them up with every edition of the Prayer Book as is 
the present custom, since they are of far too recondite a charac- 
ter to be of any use except to highly scientific students; and 
for ordinary use the Table of Moveable Feasts is amply sufficient. 


THE EPACT. 


[31 


A TABLE OF THE 


FOR THE REST OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY, 


MOVEABLE FEASTS 


ACCORDING TO THE FOREGOING CALENDAR. 
; Sun- | Sundays 3 
Pig k Pees : en dey after Bee eee ue ce aster Day Rogation | Ascension | Whitsun Se ned after Advent 
ac - - $ 5 r ° 
Lord. | Number. |“P i 0 ae é Sunday Toni Sunday. Day. Day. inity, Sunday 
1866 V 14 | G | Three | Jan. 28 | Feb. 14 | Apr. 1 | May 6 | May 10 | May 20 Twenty-six Dec. 2 
1867 VI 25 | F | Five | Feb.17 | Mar. 6 21 26 30 | June 9 | Twenty-three al 
1868 VII 6 | ED | Four 9.| Feb. 26 12 | ——17 | —— 21 | May 31 | Twenty-four | Nov. 29 
1869 | VIIL | 17 | C | Two | Jan. 24 10 | Mar. 28 | —— 2 | —— 6 | ~—16| Twenty-six —— 28 
1870 IX 28 | B | Five | Feb.13 | Mar. 2 | Apr. 17 | —— 22 | —— 26 | June 5 | Twenty-three 27 
1871 x 9 | A | Four | —— 5 | Feb. 22 9 | ——14 | ——18 | May 28 | Twenty-five | Dec. 3 
1872 XI 20 | GF | Three | Jan. 28 | —— 14 | Mar. 31 | —— 5 | —— 9 19 | Twenty-six il 
1873 XII 1 | E | Four | Feb. 9 | —— 26 | Apr. 13 | —— 18 | —— 22 | June 1 | Twenty-four | Nov. 30 
1874 | XIII | 12 | D | Three | -— 1 | ——18 5 | ——10 | ——14 | May 24 | Twenty-five | —— 29 
1875 | XIV | 23 | C | Two | Jan. 24 10 | Mar. 28 | —— 2 | —— 6 16 | Twenty-six | —— 28 
1876 XV 4 | BA} Five | Feb.13 | Mar. 1 | Apr. 16 | —— 21 | —— 25 | June 4 | Twenty-four | Dec. 3 
UST eV 15 | G | Three | Jan. 28 | Feb. 14 1 | —— 6 | ——10 | May 20 | Twenty-six — 2 
1878 | XVII | 26 | F | Five | Feb.17 | Mar. 6 | —— 21 | —— 26 | —— 20 | June 9 | Twenty-three | —— 1 
1879 | XVIII 7 | HE | Four 9 | Feb. 26 13 | ——18 | —— 22 1 | Twenty-four | Nov. 30 
1880 | XIX | 18 | DC} Two | Jan. 25 11 | Mar. 28 | —— 2 | —— 6] May 16} ‘Twenty-six | —— 28 
1881 I O | B | Five | Feb.13 | Mar. 2 | Apr. 17 | —— 22 | —— 26 | June 5 | Twenty-three | —— 27 
1882 | . II 11 | A | Four | —— 5 |} Feb. 22 9 14 | ——18 | May 28 | Twenty-five | Dec. 3 
1883 II 2G, Two | Jan. 21 7 | Mar. 25 | Apr. 29 | —— 3 13 | Twenty-seven | —— 2 
1884 IV 3 | FE| Four | Feb.10 | —— 27 | Apr. 13 | May 18 | —— 22 | June 1 | Twenty-four | Nov. 30 
1885 Vv 14 | D | Three 1 | ——18 5 | ——10 14 | May 24 | Twenty-five | —— 29 
1886 Ayal 25 | C Six | ——21 | Mar. 10 25 | —— 30 | June 3 | Junel3 | Twenty-two | —— 28 
1887 Vil 6 | B | Four | —— 6 | Feb. 23 | —— 10 | ——15 | May 19 | May 29 | Twenty-four | —— 27 
1888 | VIII 17 | AG} Three | Jan. 29 | ——15 | —— 1 | —— 6 10 20 Twenty-six | Dec. 2 
1889 Ix 28 | F Five | Feb.17 | Mar. 6 | —— 21 | —— 26 | —— 30 | June 9 | Twenty-three | —— 1 
1890 x 9 | HE | Three 2 | Feb. 19 6 | ——11 | ——15 | May 25 | Twenty-five | Nov. 30 
1891 XI 20 | D| Two | Jan. 25 11 | Mar. 29 | —— 3 | —— 7 17 | Twenty-six | —— 29 
1892 XII 1 | CB] Five | Feb.14 | Mar. 2 | Apr. 17 | —— 22 | —— 26 | June 5 | Twenty-three 27 
1893 | XIII | 12 | A | Three | Jan. 29 | Feb. 15 2 7 | ——11 | May 21 Twenty-six Dec. 3 
1894 | XIV 23 | G | Two 21 7 | Mar. 25 | Apr. 29 | —— 3 13 | Twenty-seven | —— 2 
1895 XV 4 |} F | Four | Feb. 10 | —— 27 | Apr. 14 | May 19 | —— 23 | June 2 | Twenty-four 1 
1896 XVI 15 | ED} Three | —— 2 i) 5 | ——10 | ——14 | May 24 | Twenty-five | Nov. 29 
1897 | XVII | 26 |} C | Five | ——14 | Mar. 3 | ——18 | —— 23 | —— 27 | June 6 | Twenty-three 28 
1898 | XVIII 7 | B | Four 6 | Feb. 23 | —— 10 | ——15 | ——19 | May 29 | Twenty-four | —— 27 
1899 XIX 18 A | Three | Jan. 29 | ——15 | —— 2 | —— 7 | —ll 21 Twenty-six Dec. 3 
1900 I 0} 1G)" Rive Feb. 11>) ——— 28 15 | —— 20 | —— 24 | June 3 | Twenty-four | —— 2 
_] 


[N.B. This Table is only a representative and not a facsimile of the Table in the Act of Parliament. 


The latter extends 


from 1752 to 1804. ] 


THE EPACT. 

The difference between the length of the solar year and that ot 
the lunar year is eleven days ; the solar year being made up of 365 
days, and the lunar year of twelve months or moons, of twenty- 
nine and a half days each, or 354 days in all. The last day of 
the lunar year being the last day of the twelfth moon, and the 
last day of the solar year being the 31st of December, the 
difference between these constitutes the Epact!. In the first year 


of the present cycle the lunar year and the solar year both com- 
menced on the 1st of January; the Epact for the second year was 
therefore 11, for the third 22, for the fourth 33, and so forth ina 
regular succession. The whole months are not reckoned, however, 
and instead of 33, the Epact is taken as 3, instead of 36 as 6, and 
so forth. 

A cycle of nineteen Epacts is thus formed which always runs 
parallel to the nineteen Golden Numbers in the following order : 


8 | 


f Golden Numbers {| 1| 2] 3] 4| 5| 6] 7| 


Epacts | O| 11] 22] 3/14] 25| 6| 


The Epact is used for calculating the age of the Moon on any 
day in any year. To do this, (1) Add together the day of the 
month and the Epact: (2) If the month is one later on in the 
year than March, add also the number of months including 
March and the one for which the calculation is required. The 
result will give the moon’s age within a fraction of a day. 
Thus :— 

1865. October 10th. 

3 The Epact. 


13 
8 months from March to October, inclusive. 


days 21 = Approximate age of the Moon, 


1 ’Enaktat nuépac. Intercalary days, 


17 | 28 | 


9] 10] 11 | 12/13]14]15]16|17/18/ 19 
9/20] 1]12/28| 4|15/26| 7/18 


—~ 


The true age of the moon on Oct. 10, 1865, at noon, being 20 
days and 14 hours. 

The use of the Epacts (in connexion with the Sunday letters), 
for finding out Easter Day, may be thus illustrated for the year 
1887. Find out the moon’s age for some day on which Easter 
can fall, say April 1st. 

1887. April 1 
6 Epact. 
2 March and April inclusive. 


days 9 = age of the moon on April 1. 

The Paschal Full Moon is the 14th day of the Moon’s age, and 
this will be April 6th. (2) Easter Day being the Sunday after 
the Paschal Full Moon, and B being the Sunday letter for 1887, 
the first B after April 6th will show that April 10th is Easter 
Day in that year. 


32] A TABLE OF THE MOVEABLE FEASTS. 


A TABLE 


OF THE 
MOVEABLE FEASTS, 
ACCORDING TO THE SEVERAL DAYS THAT EASTER 


CAN POSSIBLY FALL UPON. 
ast UBC eA aver cians | the First | Rogation scension | Whitsun | Sundays after Advent 
oan Epiphany. eieday. ee x Senday, : Day. Day. Trinity. Sunday. 
Mar. 22] One | Jan. 18 | Feb. 4] Apr. 26 | Apr. 80 | May 10 | Twenty-seven | Noy. 29 
23 One | —~—19 | —— 5 | —— 27| May 1 | ——11 | Twenty-seven | -— 30 
—— 24}! One | —— 20 | —— 6 | —— 28 2 | —— 12 | Twenty-seven | Dec. 1 
— 25| Two | —— 21 |— 7 |— 29 | —— 8 | ——13 | Twenty-seven | —— 2 
26 Two | —— 22 |—— 8 -30 | —— 4 | —— 14 | Twenty-seven | —— 3 
—— 27 | Two | —— 23 |—— 9] May 1]|— 5 |—15] Twenty-six | Nov. 27 
—— 28} Two | —— 24] — 10 2|— 6/|——16| Twenty-six | —— 28 
—— 29} Two | —— 25 | ——11 | —— 3]— 7|-——17| Twenty-six | —— 29 
—— 30 Two | —— 26 | —~—12|—— 4|—— 8|-——18] Twenty-six 30 
31 | Two | —— 27 | —— 138 | —— 5 |— 9}|——19| Twenty-six | Dec. 1 
Apr. 1] Three | —— 28 | —— 14} —— 6 | —~10 | —— 20] Twenty-six 2 
2| Three | —— 29 | —— 15 | —— 7 | ——11 | —— 21] Twenty-six | —— 3 
— 3] Three | —— 80 | —— 16 | —— 8 | ——12 | —— 22| Twenty-five | Nov. 27 
—— 4] Three | —— 81 | —~— 17 | —— 9 | —~— 13 | —— 23 | Twenty-five 28 
—— 5] Three | Feb, 1 | —— 18 | —— 10 | —— 14} —— 24 | Twenty-five | —— 29 
— 6] Three | —— 2 | ——19 | ——11] — 15 25 | Twenty-five | —— 30 
— 7] Three | —— 3 | —— 20} —— 12 | —— 16 | —— 26] Twenty-five | Dec. 1 
—— 8| Four | — 4] —— 21 | ——13 | —— 17 | —— 27] Twenty-five | —— 2 
—  9]| Four | —— 5 | — 22 | ——14|]—18 | —— 28 | Twenty-five 3 
——10} Four | —— 6 | —— 23 | —— 15 | ——19 | —— 29 | Twenty-four | Nov. 27 
——11]| Four | — 7 | — 24 | —— 16 | —— 20 | —— 30] Twenty-four 28 
—~12]| Four | — 8 25 | _—_ 17 | —— 21 | —— 31] Twenty-four | —— 29 
— 13] Four | —— 9} — 26 | —— 18 | —— 22 | June 1] Twenty-four | —— 30 
—— 14} Four | ——10 | —— 27 | ——19 | —— 23 | —— 2] Twenty-four | Dec. 1 
Ths |) De | ae Ih 28 | —— 20 | —— 24 | —— 3] Twenty-four | —— 2 
—16| Five | —— 12] Mar. 1 | —— 21 | —— 25 | —— 4 | Twenty-four | —— 38 
—17| Five | —13 2 22 | —— 26 | —— 5 | Twenty-three | Nov. 27 
—18]| Five | ——14|) — 3] —— 23 | —— 27 | —— 6, Twenty-three | —— 28 
——19| Five | —— 15 | —— 4 | —— 24 | —— 28 | —— 7 | Twenty-three | —— 29 
SS || Eee |) SD) 25 | —— 29 | —— 8 | Twenty-three 30 
——21| Five | ——17 | —— 6} —— 26 | —— 30 | —— 9 | Twenty-three | Dec. 1 
22 Six a LS a | Oe wenby=threes|(———-eo 
23 Six — 19 | —— 8 | —— 28| June 1 | ——11 | Twenty-three | —— 8 
ak Six SOO soo ene 20 | | nt le won WOMl | MNOUR a 
25 Six —, 241 | —— 10 | —— 30 | —— 3) —— 13 | Twenty-two 28 


Nore, that in a Bissextile or Leap Year, the Number of Sundays after Epiphany will be the 
same, as if Haster Day had fallen One Day later than it really does. And for the same 
reason, One Day must, in every Leap Year, be added to the Day of the Month given by 
the Table for Septuagesima Sunday: And the like must be done for the First Day of Lent 
(commonly called Ash-Wednesday), unless the Table gives some Day in the Month of 
March for it; for in that case the Day given by the Table is the right Day. 


—$—<— —$———$——$———<————— 


The order in which this Table follows the others makes its use 
sufficiently evident. The two first Tables being given for the 
purpose of finding the date of the Festival by which all the 
moveable Holydays are regulated, and a third added which sets 
forth all the moveable Holydays for many years to come, this 


Table is given as a means of finding out for any year, past or 
future, the respective dates of these days, according to that of 


Easter. The Note respecting Leap Year must not be overlooked 
when this Table is used. 


~ 


Golden 


Number. 


XIV 
imo 


XI 


A TABLE TO FIND EASTER DAY. 


a 


TABLE TO FIND EASTER DAY 


FROM 


THE YEAR 1900 TO THE YEAR 2199 INCLUSIVE. 


Day of the 


Month. 


= 
9 
8 
3} 
Ss 
bo 
bo 


ETT TT 


> 
Ss 

y 

Es 


Be PORBeMbupi Hera tell hr 


23 


Sunday 
Letters. 


QUPREHEDOMP OE ESP OMPOAEPOnrPORHryenyreasssd 


Tux Golden Numbers in the foregoing Calendar 
will point out the Days of the Paschal Full 
Moons, till the Year of our Lord 1900; at which 
Time, in order that the Ecclesiastical Full Moons 
may fall nearly on the same Days with the real 
Full Moons, the Golden Numbers must be 
removed to different Days of the Calendar, as is 
done in the annexed Table, which contains so 
much of the Calendar then to be used, as is 
necessary for finding the Paschal Full Moons, 
and the Feast of Haster, from the Year 1900, to 
the Year 2199 inclusive. This Table is to be 
made use of, in all respects, as the first Table 
before inserted, for finding aster till the 
Year 1899. 


[38 


This Table is simply for revising the first and third columns of | sibly fall on. It will not come into use beforo the year 1900, 


that portion of the Calendar which extends over the Paschal 


limits, i.e. those days in March and April that Easter can pos- 


and is then applicable for three hundred years. 


34] GENERAL TABLES FOR FINDING THE DOMINICAL LETTER, &c. 


GENERAL TABLES 


FOR FINDING THE DOMINICAL OR SUNDAY LETTER, 
AND THE PLACES OF THE GOLDEN NUMBERS IN THE CALENDAR. 


TABLE I. TABLE II. 
POPES Pe Pee rib inl se Vii see tar, ie Ti. | i. 
WI) Pt as | fe ie en a FY Oo —___—__.,—_—_—_—_—_—_——_ 
Bc Dp: | Baha aes Years of our Lord. Years of our Lord. 
aan eae es rod aay B 1600 0 B 5200 15 
1600}1700|1800 1700 i 5300 16 
1800 1 5400 17 
1900) 51 00] 2200]2200| 9500] 2600) 2200 ei : soecan he 
2000 2400 2800 ” 
B 2000 2 B yak 17 
Dae ee S|! eet | ell ce 2100 2 5700 18 
2900] 3000] y9|3300|3400) 3000 [3700 2200 3 5800 | 18 
2300 4s 5900 19 
3900 4300 
3800 4100|4200 4500|4600|| B 2400 3 B 6000 19 
4000 4400 2500 A 6100 19 
Ove memt a | ered || awl eee [ce 2600 5 6200 20 
4700 5100 5500 r 
4800 4900/5000 5200 5300/5400 5600 2700 5 6300 21 
Sr Fame SA ee | nl PS a B 2800 5 B 6400 20 
5700|5800|2.59 |6100 6200) 629 16500 2900 6 6500 | 21 
3000 6 6600 22 
pee eo | aoa a a as 8100 a 6700 23 
6600/6200 6900/7000] 7590 '7300!7400 
B 3200 “N18 6800 22 
=| aie ae SOCAN ae eee 3300 we | 6900 23 
017700] 7800 | 4p |8100|8200| 8300 3400 8 | 7000 | 24 
3500 9 7100 24, 
8500) &e. B 3600 8 B 7200 24, 
3700 9 7300 25 
3800 10 7400 25 
To find the Dominical or Sunday 3900 10 7500 26 
Letter for any given Year of our 
Lord, add to the year its fourth part, B 4000 10 B 7600 26 
omitting fractions, and also the num- 4100 11 7700 26 
ber, which in Table I. standeth at 4200 12 7800 27 
the top of the column, wherein the 4300 12 7900 28 
number of hundreds contained in 
that given year is found: Divide B 4400 12 B 8000 27 
the sum by 7, and if there is no re- 4500 ey | 8100 28 
mainder, then A is the Sunday Let- 4600 13 8200 29 
ter; but if any number remaineth, 4700 14 8300 29 
then the Letter, which standeth 
under that number at the top of the B 4800 14 B 8400 29 
Table, is the Sunday Letter. 4900 14 8500 0 
5000 15 &e. 
5100 16 
To find the Month and Days of the Month to which the 
Golden Numbers ought to be prefixed in the Calendar, in 
any given Year of our Lord consisting of entire hundred 
years, and in all the intermediate years betwixt that and 
the next hundredth year following, look in the second 
column of Table II. for the given year consisting of entire 
hundreds, and note the number or cypher which stands 
against it in the third column; then, in Table III. look 
for the same number in the column under any given 
Golden Number, which when you have found, guide your 
eye side-ways to the left hand, and in the first column you 
will find the Month and Day to which that Golden Num- 
ber ought to be prefixed in the Calendar, during that 
period of one bundred years. 
The letter B prefixed to certain hundredth years in 
Table II. denotes those years which are still to be ac- 
counted Bissextile or Leap Years in the New Calendar ; 
whereas all the other hundredth years are to be accounted 
only common years. 


seven letters of the alphabet, which are repeated throughout the 
year, beginning with A on the first of January. If the first of 
The second column of the Calendar is occupied by the first | January is on a Sunday, A is the Sunday Letter for that year ; 


§ The Dominical or Sunday Letters. 


THE GOLDEN NUMBERS. 


[35 


TABLE III. 


THE GOLDEN NUMBERS. 


Paschal Sunday 
Full Moon. Letter. | 

: Ln) 2 pO eeae ele Gattee, less Onde LOted tetekee ht Dee fobte ed Sah Guin 7. 1 eh eLe 
March 21 (6) 8 | 19 O-} 11 | 22 8 | 14] 25 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 1 | 12 | 23 4 | 15 | 26 
March 22 D 9/20 | 1| 12] 23) 4] 15 | 26) 71/18) 29] 10| 21] 2/13] 24] 5 | 16 | 27 
March 23 E 10 |} 21 2 | 13 | 24 faye | KS) || By 8 | 19 Ona E22 8 | 14 | 25 Cle aie2s 
March 24 F LT | 22 8 | 240125 6 | 17 | 28 al x0) 1} 12 | 23 4 | 15 | 26 VALS. 29 
March 25 G 12 | 23 4 | 15 | 26 tS. | 29) WOR 20 2) 13 | 24 Bb) ae e277 8 | 19 0 
March 26 A 13 | 24 Sale 16) 27, 8 | 19 0 | 11 | 22 Su nd 4u|eco: 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 af 
March 27 B 14, | 25 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 TO eZ 23 4 | 15 | 26 Tal LSae29r LO wea) 2 
March 28 C 15 | 26 G18 4295) 10) 21 2/13 } 24 5 | 16 | 27 toh jf al) Onis 22, 3 
March 29 D 16 | 27 8 | 19 OWT F227 3°) 14°25 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 1} 12 | 23 A 
March 30 E 17 | 28 9 | 20 TU a bp) 32283 4 | 15 | 26 G LOIS e299) SLO 2h 2 | 18 | 24 5 
March 31 F 18 | 29 | 10 | 21 2) 1S || 24 Bil el Gae2 7: 8 | 19 O } 11 } 22 8 | 14 | 25 6 
April 1 G 19 @) |) abil ai) 4 3 | 14 | 25 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 ik || ater || BB 4 | 15 | 26 "if 
April 2 A 20 Uy [it A, 8} 4 | 15 | 26 TANTS 29") 1020 2/13 | 24 Eu | el PA 8 
April 3 B 21 Da ehse 24: Br | 167 827 8 | 19 OR a S22: 8 | 14 | 25 6) 17-|628 9 
April » 4 Cc 22 8 | 14 | 25 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 TP ae es 4 | 15 | 26 7 | 18 | 29 | 10 
April 5 D 23 4 | 15 | 26 fA aks: |) 2801) Bio || al 27 fs) | 24 5 | 16 | 27 8 | 19 On eel 
April 6 E 24 Dae lO viea7 cs) jj, als) On pea 8 | 14 | 25 6 | 17°) 28 9 | 20 bel ipci 
April 7 F 25 6) 172) 28 9 | 20 1 | 12 | 23 4} 15 | 26 da L831 2ORM1Os eer 2 | 18 
April 8 G 26 TAVENSa E29 MN eLOM Wi 2k: 2) 13 | 24 bal? 165827) 8 | 19 OF PE 22 3 | 14 
April 9 A 27 8 | 19 OF MAS E22 3 | 14 | 25 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 1 || 12} 28 Aye inalicy 
April 10 B 28 9 | 20 1 | 12 | 23 4 | 15 | 26 Ch Ale beh 4) Gag I) ake) be eal 2 | 18 } 24 5 | 16 
April 11 Cc 29 | 10 | 21 21138 | 24 sy oly 27 8 | 19 OF 22 Baie es i 2455 (Mf, Aes 
April 12 D On aaa S22 8 | 14} 25 Cn lelialeZs 9 | 20 hie E2323 4) 15 | 26 7 | 18 
April 13 E TE ae | 8} 4 | 15 | 26 7 \\ 18 | 29 | 10) | 21 2)13 | 24 DailelGn mod, 8 | 19 
April 14 F 2 | 13 | 24 5 | 16 | 27 8 | 19 One E22, 3) |) L425 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 
April 15 G 8} 14) | (25 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 ah |i 4 lh S283 4} 15 | 26 7118 |] 29 | 10 } 21 
April 16 A 4.) 15 | 26 Tole lS s\e290 Os 2b 2|18 | 24 Be D6" 27 8 | 19 OP tls 22 
April 17 B Selle: 27. 8 | 19 et) AML |oeepe Sy 1h, i) Ya) Ones 228 9 | 20 Te AZS E23 
April 17 B Ve lp ales dy PAS ai) 1) Pare 2 | 13 | 24 
April 18 C 6 | 17 | 28 9 | 20 Do i) 238 4 | 15 | 26 
April 18 C 7 | 18 | 29 | 10 | 21 2| 13 | 24 Bin | eG 19 Oo} |) 22 3 | 14 Peay 


if on a Saturday, B is the Sunday Letter, and so on in a 
retrograde order; the letter which indicates the first Sunday in 
the year indicating it throughout, except in Leap Year. In 
Leap Year the letter which indicates the first Sunday of the 
year indicates it up to the end of February only ; and from March 
onward to the end of the year the next letter backward is taken, 
so that if B is the Sunday Letter for January and February in 
Leap Year, A is that for the succeeding months; and G for the 
year following. The days of the year recur on the same days of 
the week throughout only after the lapse of twenty-eight years. 
The cycle of Sunday Letters extends therefore over this period, 
as may be seen in “the Table of Moveable Feasts for the 
remainder of the nineteenth century.” It is sometimes, but 
erroneously, called the “Solar Cycle,” the name having doubt- 
less arisen from “ Dies Solis,” as the cycle has no relation to the 
course of the Sun. 


§ The Golden Numbers. 
This title was given to the Lunar Cycle invented by Meton 
the Athenian [B.c. 432], which was called after him the Me- 
tonic Cycle, and was anciently written in letters of gold, and 


hence received its name. It extends over nineteen years, which 
are numbered respectively from 1 to 19. These were formerly 
marked throughout the year in the first column of the Calendar ; 
but since 1752 they have been inserted only beside those days 
which are included within the Paschal full moon limits, i.e., 
between March 21st and April 25th. At the end of the cycle the 
phases of the moon begin to recur upon the same days of the 
month, in the same succession, with a difference of one hour 
and a half. This difference so far disturbs the application of 
the cycle of Golden Numbers that it will have to be re-adjusted 
in the year 1900, and one of the foregoing Tables is already 
provided for the purpose of making the necessary alteration. 

The Golden Numbers in the Calendar indicate the day on 
which the Keclesiastical Paschal Full Moon occurs; the Sunday 
Letter next after indicating (as has been already shown) the 
Festival of Easter itself. 

The three “ General Tables” are only of use to those who have 
to make historical calculations, and all might well be left to the 
Act of Parliament, and to works on Chronology, but they have 
been printed here in deference to the custom which has placed 
them in all our Prayer Books for some time past. 


AN 


INTRODUCTION TO THE CALENDAR. 


Tut KEcciesiastical Calendar comprises two things: first, a 
table of the order of days in the year ; and, secondly, a catalogue 
of the saints commemorated in the Church. To this, in the 
Book of Common Prayer, there is also annexed a table of the 
daily lessons throughout the year. 

Calendars are known to have been in use at a very early date 
in the Church. One was printed by Bouchier in his Commentary 
on the Paschal Cycle [Antwerp, 1634], which was formed about 
the middle of the fourth century, or perhaps as early as A.D. 336 ; 
and another is given by Mabillon in his Analecta, which was 
drawn up for the Church of Carthage, a.p. 483. Many others 
are preserved of early times, and a number are printed by Mar- 
tene in the sixth volume of his Collection of Ancient Writers. 

The origin of Christian Calendars is clearly coeval with the 
commemoration of martyrs, which began at least as early as the 
martyrdom of Polyearp, a.D. 168. [Euseb. iv. 15.] The names 
of these, and their acts, were carefully recorded by the Church 
in Martyrologies; and Diptychs—tablets of wood or ivory—were 
inscribed with their names, to be read at the time when the 
memorial of the departed was made at the celebration of the 
Holy Eucharist. From one or both of these, lists of names 
would naturally be transcribed for use at other times, and as a 
memorial in the hands of private Christians, the names being 
placed against the day on which the martyrs suffered, or that 

generally the same) on which they were annually commemorated. 

To these two columns of the days of the year and the names of 
the martyrs were afterwards added two others of Golden Num- 
bers and Sunday Letters, the use of which has been explained 
in the notes to the Tables. 

Several very ancient English Calendars exist in our public 
libraries; but the earliest known is one printed by Martene [ Vet. 
Scrip. vi. 635], under the title “‘Calendarium Floriacense,” and 
attributed by him (with apparently good reason) to the Venerable 
Bede, with whose works it was found in a very old MS. at 
Fleury. Bede died at Jarrow, A.D. 735, so that this Calendar 
must date from the earlier half of the eighth century. There is 
a general agreement between this Calendar and the Martyrology 
of Bede which seems to show that it is rightly attributed to him, 
and we may therefore venture to take it as the earliest extant 
Calendar of the Church of England, dating it from the latest year 
of Bede’s life. 

In the course of ages the number of names recorded in the 
Martyrologies of the Church increased to a great multitude, as 
may be seen in the vast folio “Acta Sanctorum,” printed for 
every day of the year by the Bollandists, which was commenced 
two hundred and twenty years ago, and is not yet nearly com- 
plete, though it extends to fifty-eight volumes. The Calendars 
of the Church also began to be crowded, although there was 
always a local character about them which did not belong to the 
Martyrologies. In the twelfth century the original method of 
recording the names of saints (which-was by the Bishop of each 
Diocese in some cases, and in others by a Diocesan Council) was 
superseded by a formal rite of Canonization, which was performed 
only by the Popes; and from this time the names inserted in the 
Calendar ceased to be those of Martyrs or Confessors only. 

The Calendar of the Church of England was always local in its 
character, and one of the eleventh or twelfth century, which is 
preserved in the Durham Chapter Library, seems to differ but 
little from another of the fifteenth century, which is contained in 
an ancient Missal of that Church, or from that which has been 
reprinted from a Missal of 1514, belonging to Bishop Cosin’s 
Library, in the following pages. Comparatively few names were 
added to the English Calendars during the medizval period, 
though many were added to the Roman. 


Some changes were made in the Calendar by the “ Abrogatiom 
of certain Holydays” in the reign of Henry VIII, great in- 
convenience being found to arise from the number of days which 
were observed with a cessation from labour; and the two days 
dedicated to St. Thomas of Canterbury being especially obnoxious 
to the King were altogether expunged, though by very ques- 
tionable authority. 

When the English Prayer Book was set forth in 1549, it was 
thought expedient to insert only the chief of the names which 
had been contained in the Calendar of the Salisbury Use. Two of 
these were taken away (though the erasure of St. Barnabas was 
probably a printer’s error), and four others added in 1552. In 
the following year, 1553, the old Salisbury Calendar was re- 
printed (with three or four omissions) in the Primer of Edward 
VI., and in the “Private Prayers” of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, 
printed in 1584; but not in any Book of Common Prayer. In 
1559 the Calendar of 1552 was reprinted with one omission. 

It seems now to have been felt by persons in authority, that 
greater reverence ought to be shown for the names of those who 
had glorified God in a special manner by their deaths or their 
lives, and in the Latin Prayer Book of 1560 nearly every day of 
the year was marked by the name of a saint, the list beg com- 
piled from the old Salisbury Calendar and the Roman. This 
appears to have led to the appointment of a Commission, which 
met in 1561, and, with a few changes in the Tables and Rules, 
made also a revision of the list of Saints, bringing it into its 
present state, with two exceptions, the names of St. Alban and 
the Venerable Bede having been added since. These successive 
changes (as far as is necessary to illustrate the transition from 
the ancient to the modern Calendar) are represented in the fol- 
lowing Table :— 


§ Transition of the English Calendar, from 1549 to 1559. 


Circumcision. 

Epiphany. 

Conversion of St. Paul. 

Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 
St. Matthias. 

Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 
St. Mark. 

— Philip and St. James. 

— John Baptist. 

— Peter. 


— James. In Calendars 
— Bartholomew. of 


— Matthew. 

— Michael. 1549, 1552, 1559. 
— Luke. 

— Simon and St. Jude. 
All Saints. 

St. Andrew. 

— Thomas. 

Christmas. 

St. Stephen. 

— John Evangelist. 


Innocents. 

St. Mary Magdalen. In Calendar of 1549 only. 

— Clement. ——_—_-——. 1552 only. 

— Barnabas. ree 1549 and 1559. 
— George. 

— Laurence. ba 1552 and 1559. 
Lammas. 


~ 


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE CALENDAR. 


From the early part of Queen Elizabeth’s reign [1561], until 
the present day, only three additions have been made to the Saints 
commemorated by the Church of England; those three being the 
national saints, St. Alban and the Venerable Bede, previously 
mentioned, and St. Enurchus. These three names, together with 
the particular designations by which most of the Saints in the 
Calendar are now distinguished, are to be found in the Calendar 
prefixed to Bishop Cosin’s Devotions: and, as the first published 
edition of that work was printed in 1627, we may conclude 
that they were taken thence into the Book of Common Prayer 
at the Revision of 1661, as some of the Tables and Rules were. 

No records remain to show what was the principle adopted in 


[37 


the re-formation of the Calendar in Queen Elizabeth’s reign : 
but the list of names in itself elucidates that principle to a ccr- 
tain extent, as the following Table will show. It seems a sin- 
gular omission that the names of two of our greatest national 
saints, St. Aidan and St. Cuthbert, should have been overlooked, 
both in 1561 and in 1661. The omission of S¢. Patrick is almost 
as extraordinary; and it might have been expected that St. 
Thomas of Canterbury’s name would have been restored when 
the bitterness of the Tudor times had passed away. The latter 
two names were always inserted in ordinary Almanacks, which 
were not bound up with the Prayer Book, and are also found in 
some Calendars of Queen Elizabeth’s time. 


§ Saints commemorated by the Church of England. 


The Holy Apostles, &c. Martyrs in the Age of Persecutions. 


A.D. 


The Blessed Virgin Mary. St. Nicomede . 90 
St. Michael and all Angels. | St. Clement. . eee LCO, 
All Saints. St. Perpetua ... 203 
St. John the Baptist. St Ceciligny. 6. os |e zo0 
St. Peter. St. Fabian . . > 250 
St. James the Great. St. Agatha Aa 25) 
St. John the Evangelist. St. Lawrence 258 
St. Andrew. St. Cyprian . 4 258 
St. Philip. St. Valentine . . .| 270 
St. Thomas. Sta Deny Gimun mucus) cen |eaae: 
St. Bartholomew. SnJBae 6 6 6 6 | Are 
St. Matthew. St. Margaret . . 278 
St. James the Less. St.luciany 2) 4. 290 
St. Simon Zelotes, St. Faith. . - » | 290 
St. Jude. St. Agnes” . .. . 304 
St. Matthias. St. Vincent . as 304 
St. Paul. firs Watery? oa se MAR Gill set0) 
St. Barnabas. St. Catharine Sh er 
St. Mark. St. Crispin . . . 308 
St. Luke. St. Blasius . . = » 316 
St. Stephen. 


The Holy Innocents. 
St. Mary Magdalen. 
St. Anne. 


In Calendars of the Church of England not printed in the 
Prayer Book, but published by the Stationers’ Company under 
the authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury 1, the following 
names are also to be found :—St. Patrick, St. Thomas of Canter- 
bury, and All Souls. King Charles the First was likewise included 
among the Martyrs in all English Calendars until the special 
Form of Prayer for the 30th of January was given up in 1859. 


It will be seen that the whole number of individual Saints 
commemorated is seventy-three. Of these, twenty-one are espe- 
cially connected with our Blessed Lord; twenty are Martyrs in 
the age of persecutions ; twenty-one are specially connected with 
our own Church; and eleven are either great and learned de- 
fenders of the Faith, like St. Hilary and St. Augustine, or Saints 
of France, whose names were probably retained as a memorial of 
the ancient close connexion between the Churches of France and 
England. 

The Calendar itself was not in any way altered by the Act of 
Parliament of 1752, for the alteration of the style, the present 
tables of the months being a fairly exact reprint of those in the 


1 This authority is not now given, but was up to 1832. 


French and other Saints not in- 
cluded among the preceding. 


Martyrs and other Saints specially 
connected with England, 


A.D. AD, 
St. George, M.. . . 290 | St. Silvester . c 335 
StaAlban, Mois. 0. 3803 | St. Enurchus .. . 340 
St. Nicolas . ATE: 326 | St. Hilary of Poictiers, 368 
St. Benedich. . . . 543 Confessor i 
Sta Davidaa ares ae 544 | St. Ambrose . 397 
St. Machutus Pilee’ SCOR USteMlantine ee cee 397 
St. Gregory. . . .| 604] St. Jerome + Felt 420 
St. Augustine of 604 St. Augustine . . . 430 
Canterbury $ Ste Britidswe on i. 444, 
St. Etheldreda . 670 | St. Remigiuns . . .| 535 
St. Chad. . . 673 | St. Leonard, Confessor 559 
StiGileswreye 6s. 725 | St. Lambert . 709 
Venerable Bede. . 735 
St. Boniface. , 755 
StaSywabthinie.we memes 862 
St. Edmund, K. & M. 870 
St. Edward, K. & M.. 978 
S& Dunstanis = <0. 988 
St. Alphege, M. . . | 1012 
St. Edward, K. & Conf. | 1163 
Sb WANA § 5 oo 4 || WOT 
St. Richard... 1253 
| 


Sealed Books, They are here given from the Act, but are 
inserted after the Tables and Rules as in the Sealed Books. 
This order was evidently adopted with the object of making a 
definite Festival and Ferial division of this part of the Prayer 
Book, instead of confusing the two divisions together as in the 
Act; and while the improved text of the latter has been adopted, 
it has been thought better to take the more convenient and more 
ecclesiastical arrangement (in this respect) of the former. 


In the “ comparative view ” of each of the months, all the names 
in that of Bede, the Salisbury Use of 1814, and the Modern Roman, 
are represented: but a selection only has been made from the 
Oriental Calendar, as the great majority of Eastern Saints are 
unknown to English readers, and their names would convey no 
information whatever. Those selected are chosen for the object 
of illustrating the points of similarity between the Calendars of 
East and West; and they are taken from the Byzantine Calendar 
printed in Neale’s Introduction to the History of the Holy 
Eastern Church, vol. ii. p. 768. Some remarkable coincidences 
may be observed between it and the Calendar of Bede, which 
help to confirm the theory of a direct connexion between England 
and the Oriental Church. 


38] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 


JANUARY hath 31 Days. 


a 


Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 
1 | A | Calende. Circumcision of our Lory. 
2 |b | 4. Non. Gens 1 Matty aS Gon gece Weeoml os 
3 | c¢ | 8. Non. 3 2 4, 2 
4 | d | Prid. Non. 5 3 6 3 
5 | e | None. 7 4 8 4 
he gy ik Epiphany of our Lord. 
© lg \iveild. 3) 5 12 5 
8 | A | 6, Id. Lucian, Priest and Martyr. 13 6 : 14 6 
9) b | 5. Id. 15 7 16 7 
10 | ¢ | 4. Id. 17 8 18 8 
tebeiecden nos kde 19 9 20 9 
We ey as IGE 21 10 22 | - 10 
13 | f | Idus. Hilary, Bishop and Confessor. 23 11 24, iit 
14 | g | 19. Cal. Feb 25 12 26 12 
15 | A | 18. Cal 27 13 28 13 
16 | b | 17. Cal 29 14 30 14 
17 | c | 16. Cal, 31 15 82 15 
ISeieds, | onal: Prisca, Rom. Virgin and Martyr. 33 16 34 16 
19 |e | 14. Cal 35 ily BT SUECor. aL 
20 |. f. | 18. Cal. Fabian, Bishop of Rome and Martyr. 38 18 39 2 
21 | g | 12. Cal. Agnes, Rom. Virgin and Martyr. _ 40 19 41 3 
22 | A | 11. Cal. Vincent, Span. Deacon and Martyr. 42 20 43 4 
23 |b | 10. Cal. 4A 21 45 5 
24 1¢ 9. Cal. 46 22 Aq 6 
25 | d |. 8. Cal. Conbersion of S. Baul. 
26 | e 7. Cal. 48 23 49 7 
27) f | 6.Cal. 50 24 | Exod. 1 8 
28 | g | 5. Cal. Exod. 2 25 3 9 
29) A| 4. Cal. 4 26 5 10 
30 | b | 8. Cal. King Charles’ sMartpryom. +6 27 vi 11 
ole scenisers Cal. 8 28 9 12 
+ Note, that Exod. 6 is to be read only to verse 14. 
Comparative View of the Calendar for JANUARY. 
Bede, A.D. 735. Se eS Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 | Circumcision. Circumcision. Circumcision. Circumcision. St. Basil. 
2 St. Silvester. 
3 Malachi, Prophet. 
4 
5 . St. Edward. St. Telesphorus. 
6 | Epiphany. Epiphany. Epiphany. Theophany of our Lord. 
ts ' St. John Baptist. 
8 St. Lucian. ‘ 
9 
10 | St. Paul the first Hermit. St. Gregory of Nyssa. 
11 - St. Hyginus. 
12 ; 
13 | St. Hilary of Poictiers. 
14 | St. Felix. St. Felix. SS. Hilary and Felix. 
15 St. Maurus, St. Paul the first Hermit. SS. Paul and John. 
16 | St. Marcellus. St. Marcellus. St. Marcellus. St. Peter’s Chains. 
17 | St. Anthony. SS. Sulpicius and Anthony. | St. Anthony. [Prisca. | St. Anthony. 
18 | St. Prisca. St. Prisca. St. Peter’s Chair at Rome and St. | SS. Athanasius and Cyril. 
19 St. Wolstan. SS. Wolstan, Marius, Martha, 
Audifax, and Abachum. 
20 | St. Sebastian. SS. Fabian and Sebastian. | SS. Fabian and Sebastian. 
21 | St. Agnes. St. Agnes. St. Agnes. 
22, | St. Vincent. St. Vincent. SS. Vincent and Anastasius. St. Timothy, Apostle. 
23 Espousals of B. V. Mary. St. 
24, St. Timothy. [ Emerentiana. 
25 Conversion of St. Paul. Conversion of St. Paul. St. Greg. Nazianzen. 
26 St. Polycarp. 4 
27 St. Julian. St. John Chrysostom. Translation of St. Chrysos- 
28 | St. Agnes. St. Agnes. SS. Raymond and Agnes. [ tom. 
29 St. Francis of Sales. Translation of St. Ignatius. 
30 St. Bathilda. St. Martina. 
31 St. Peter Nolasco. 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF JANUARY. 


8] Sr. Luctan is commemorated (like several other Saints of 
the Calendar) as a member of the early French or Gallican 
Church, between which and the early Church of England, with 
which the existing Calendar originated, there was a very close 
spiritual bond. He was originally a Roman nobleman, but being 
ordained priest, he became one of a devoted band of missionaries 
who were sent from Rome into France with St. Denys and St. 
Quintin, about a.D. 245. St. Denys went to the city of Paris, 
St. Quintin to Amiens, and St. Lucian to Beauvais, of which 
cities respectively they probably became the bishops, St. Lucian 
having the episcopal title assigned to him in a martyrology of 
the ninth century. After a bold missionary career of many 
years, St. Lucian was added to the noble army of martyrs, A.D. 
290. He is often called St. Lucian of Beauvais, to distinguish 
him from another Lucian who was a learned predecessor of St. 
Jerome in Biblical criticism. 

13] Sv. Hitary was another French bishop. He was born at 
Poictiers, of heathen parents; and was converted and baptized 
in mature years: after which, in A.D. 350, he became Bishop of 
his native city. St. Hilary entered the lists against Arianism, 
endeavouring to persuade the Emperor Constantius to give up his 
patronage of it. Several French bishops became Arians, and held 
a Synod at Languedoc, where Hilary withstood them, and main- 
tained the Nicene faith. His opposition was for the time in- 
effectual; and he was thrust out of his see, being also banished to 
Phrygia by the Emperor, in A.D. 356. The great majority of 
the Gallican bishops remained stedfast, and it is observable that 
the British bishops are also commended by St. Hilary for 
continuing so in his History of Synods. He returned to France 
about A.D. 360, contending as earnestly as before for that true 
doctrine of our Lord’s Divinity and the Holy Trinity for which 
he had suffered, and about which he had written a learned 
treatise during his exile. After a journey to Italy, St. Hilary 
departed to his rest on Jan. 13, A.D. 368. 

This saint is usually represented in Christian art as treading on 
serpents, in reference to his contest with the venomous heresy of 
Arius; and Numbers xxi. 7, the petition of the Israelites to 
Moses that he would pray for the serpents to be taken from 
them, is annexed as a significant legend. 

“Hilary term” in the law courts used to begin on this festival, 
Advent and Christmas-tide being observed as a vacation of peace ; 
but it now begins on Jan. 11th, extending to Jan. 31st. 

18] Sr. Prisca was a young Roman lady of the third century, 
who “came out of great tribulation” by the sword at a very 
early age. Some true tale of Christian faith, fortitude, and 
suffering underlies the uncertain history which tells us that St. 
Prisca was thrown to the lions in the amphitheatre, that they 
knelt at her feet refusig to harm her, that she was then 
beheaded, and that an eagle watched over her lifeless form until 
it was laid in the grave. In accordance with this legend, St. 
Prisca is represented with a palm branch, or a sword in her hand, 
a lion couching at her feet, and an eagle hovering above her head. 
[Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Heelus. li. 9—12. St. Matt. xiii. 44—62, ] 

20] Sr. Fasran was one of that long series of martyred 
Bishops of Rome by which the church of St. Peter and St. Paul 
was distinguished above all others in the first three centuries. 
Kusebius [vi. 29] says that he was elected in consequence of a 
dove alighting on his head while the election was going on, and 
also of an irresistible unanimity pointing the thoughts of all to 
Fabian. This was in the year 236, when his predecessor had 
died a martyr after a single month’s occupation of the see. A 
similar story to this of the dove is told respecting others; and it 
probably represents in a materializing allegory the idea that the 
promise of the presiding Comforter was fully realized in the 
assembly. St. Cyprian’s ninth Epistle is written to the Roman 
Church respecting the martyrdom of St. Fabian, which occurred 
under the Emperor Decius, a.D. 250. It is also mentioned by 
St. Jerome; and the name is found in very ancient martyrologies. 
In the Eastern Church it is commemorated on Aug. 5th. Chris- 
tian art represents him with the triple crown, holding the sword of 
martyrdom in his hand, and having a dove hovering above him. 
[Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Heb. xi. 883-39. St. Luke vi. 17—23.] 


[39 


21] Sr. Acnezs left a name behind her which was very much 
cherished by the early Church. She was a young Roman lady 
of patrician birth, who was sought—not, probably, in honourable 
marriage—by the son of the Prefect of the city, a.p. 304. Her 
refusal to accede to his desires brought upon her the full force of 
the brutal heathenism which characterized the age of martyr- 
doms. Before the Prefect she made an open confession that she 
was a Christian, making the sign of the Cross, instead of offer- 
ing incense to Vesta, as she was required to do for the renun- 
ciation of Christianity. The holy maiden was then vilely dis- 
robed and tortured on the rack; and after vain endeavours to 
bring about her apostasy, was at last beheaded. The circum- 
stances of her‘death made a great impression upon the Christian 
world, for St. Jerome says that the tongues and pens of all 
nations were employed in praise of her constancy; and her 
memory has ever since his time been greatly venerated. It was 
recorded that while her parents were praying at her tomb (pro- 
bably in the catacombs) she appeared to them in vision, and spoke 
words of comfort to them respecting her rest and peace with her 
Saviour. St. Augustine speaks touchingly of her name: “ Blessed 
is the holy Agnes, whose passion we this day celebrate: for the 
maiden was indeed what she was called; for in Latin Agnes sig- 
nifies a lamb; and in Greek it means pure. She was what she 
was called; and she was found worthy of her crown.” This 
shows the antiquity of the Holyday. 

The symbolical form of her name is used by Christian art in 
representations of St. Agnes, a lamb standing by her side, while 
she bears a palm-branch or a sword in her hand. : 

Several churches are dedicated in the name of St. Agnes in 
England. One built over her resting-place near Rome has 
attained a kind of historical importance, from the Pope going 
there annually to bless the lambs whose fleeces are ultimately to 
form the palls with which he claims to invest all Archbishops. 
Such a pall is seen in the arms of the Archbishop of Canterbury. 
[Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. li. 1—8. St. Matt. xiii. 44-—52.] 

22] Sr. Vincent was a martyr of Spain in that most terrible 
persecution under the Emperor Diocletian, which he comme- 
morated by a coin with the inscription “ Nomine Christianorum 
deleto,” but which only caused the name of Christ to shine more 
brightly in Spain and elsewhere. St. Vincent was a deacon to 
Valerius, Bishop of Saragossa. Both were brought before Datian, 
the Prefect of Spain, and endured much suffering at his hands, 
being nearly starved to death, that they might afterwards be 
added to the number of those who “shall hunger no more, 
neither thirst any more... . for the Lamb which is in the midst 
of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living 
waters.” The Bishop was sent into exile, afterwards to die ‘a 
martyr. Vincent was first tortured on the rack; and being still 
immoyeable in his faith, was then laid on a bed of sharp iron 
bars under which a fire had been lighted. Being removed from 
this before death had ended his sufferings, he departed in peace, 
surrounded by his Christian brethren, on Jan. 22, a.D. 304. 

The account of St. Vincent’s martyrdom, or his “ Acts,” has 
come down to us in an authentic form and with much detail. 
St. Augustine and St. Leo both refer to them; and this holyday 
was probably established very shortly after it occurred. 

St. Vincent is represented with the bed or gridiron on which 
he was tortured; and also with a raven hovering near him, sig- 
nificant of the fact that his body was cast to the beasts of the field 
and the fowls of the air by heathen vengeance. [Sar. Hp. and 
Gosp.: Ecclus. xiv. 20, and xv. 4—6. St. John xii. 2426. ] 

30] This holyday was originally established by a Royal Pro- 
clamation of Charles II. The Service for the day was, however, 
prepared and authorized by Convocation in the same manner as 
the Prayer Book itself. There were three separate editions of 
this Service or “Form of Prayer ;” one issued in 1660, another in 
1661, and a third in 1662, the latter being inserted in the 
Prayer Book in conformity with an order written at the end of the 
Sealed Books, in which it was not printed. The commemoration 
of King Charles the First’s martyr-like death was abolished by a 
Royal Proclamation, dated Jan. 17, 1859, and since that date 
the Service has not been printed in the Prayer Book. 


40] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. . 


FEBRUARY hath 28 Days. 
And in every Leap Year 29 Days. » 


Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. 
11 da | Calende. Fast. | Exod! 10 | Mark ‘1 |’ Exod. 12 | 1 Cor. 13 
2} e | 4. Non. Iurificatton of (Mary. 2 : 14 
8 | f | 3. Non. Blasius, Bishop and Martyr. 12 3 13 15 
4| g | Pr. Non. 14 4, 15 16 
5 | A | None. Agatha, Sicilian Virgin and Martyr. 16 5 IVE PC al 
Gulbe |pcaaes 18 6 19 2 
CEC inl Os 20 ih 21 3 
Salads |kGslds 22 8 23 4 
9 | e | 5. Id. 24 9 32 5 
10} f | 4. Id. 33 10 34 6 
11 | g | 3.Id. Levit. 18 11 | Levit. 19 ai 
HOM eA | eProakd, 20 12 26 8 
13 | b | Idus. Num. 11 13 | Num. 12 9 
| 14 | c | 16. Cal. Mar. Valentine, Bishop and Martyr. 13 14 14 10 
15 | d | 15. Cal. 16 15 17 11 
16 | e | 14. Cal. 20 16 21 12 
Lg eetetedoaCal, 22 | Lu.1to39 23 13 
Sm ecm elo Oal: 24, 1. 39 25 | Galat. 1 
LOM An ae Cals 27 2 30 2 
20.| b | 10. Cal. 31 3 32 3 
PAL il. 9. Cal. 35 4 36 4. 
22 | d 8. Cal. Deut. 1 5 | Deut. 2 5 
23 | e 7, Cal. Fast. 3 6 4, 6 
D4 eaten Osa: S. selatthias, Apostle & Martyr. 7 Ephes. 1 
25 | ¢ 5. Cal. 5 8 6 2 
26 | A | 4. Cal. i 3) 8 3 
at 18) 38. Cal. 9 10 10 4, 
285 ne alperacals 11 11 12 5 
29 13 | Matt. 7 14 | Rom. 12 
Comparative View of the Calendar for FEBRUARY. 
Bede, A.D. 735. pict pag Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 St. Bridget. St. Ignatius. 
2 | Purification of B. V. M. Purification of B. V. M. Purification of Blessed Virgin Mary. | Hypapante of our Lord. 
3 St. Blasius. St. Blase. 
4, St. Andrew Corsini. 
5 | St. Agatha. St. Agatha. St. Agatha. St. Agatha. 
6 SS. Vedast and Amandus. | St. Dorothy. 
"7 St. Romuald. 
8 St. John of Matha. Zachariah the Prophet. 
9 St. Apollonia. 
10 St. Scholastica. St. Scholastica. 
ik Translation of St. Frides- St. Blasius. 
12 [ wide. 
13 ; 
14, | St. Valentine. St. Valentine. St. Valentine. 
15 | SS. Faustinus and Jovita. St. Onesimus, Apostle. 
16 | St. Juliana. St. Juliana. Pamphilus and his Com- 
17 [ panions. 
18 St. Simeon. St. Leo. 
19 St. Archippus, Apostle. 
20 
21 
29, St. Peter’s Chair. St. Peter’s Chair at Antioch. SS. Andronicus and Junia. 
23 St. Peter Damian. St. Polycarp. 
a St. Matthias. \ St. Matthias. \ St. Matthias. 
oO 
26 
27 
28 
29 


[41] 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF FEBRUARY. 


3] Sz. Buasrus was Bishop of Sebaste, now Szivas, of which 
city he is considered to be the tutelar Saint. He is said to have 
been a zealous supporter of the Christians in the Diocletian per- 
secution, and himself to have suffered martyrdom [.D. 316] under 
Licinius, by command of Agricolaus, the local governor. After 
having had his flesh cruelly torn by scourges and an iron wool- 
comb, he was beheaded. He has for ages been esteemed by the 
wool-combers as their patron saint, and they had guilds dedicated 
in his name at Norwich and in several places in Yorkshire and 
elsewhere. There are still some ancient traditional observances in 
the seats of the woollen manufacture, though the primitive occu- 
pation of hand-combing has almost died out. It is not uncom- 
mon there to see “Bishop Blaze” in full episcopal vestments as 
the sign of an inn. There are only three or four churches dedi- 
cated to him in England. His distinguishing emblem is an iron 
wool-comb ; occasionally some or other of the legends connected 
with him are represented, [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Heb. v. 1—6, 
St. Matt. x. 26—32. ] 

5] St. AcarHA was a native of Sicily, of noble birth, and was 
dedicated to God from her earliest years. She received the crown 
of martyrdom at Catania, triumphing over the most infamous 
assaults upon her fortitude and chastity, made at the instigation 
of Quintianus the consul, who availed himself of the edict of 
Decius against the Christians to seize upon both her person and 


her estate, As she was being brought to trial, she wept, and 
prayed for courage and strength on the way, saying, “O Jesu 
Christ, Lord of all, Thou seest my heart, Thou knowest my 
desire, do Thou alone possess all that Iam. Iam Thy sheep, 
make me worthy to overcome the Evil One.” After long endu- 
rance of the most horrible tortures, she fell asleep in Jesus about 
A.D. 251, commending her soul to the Divine keeping. Only three 
churches are dedicated in her name in England. Her distin- 
guishing emblem is a breast held in a pair of pincers, or trans- 
fixed by a sword, and she is also represented with a clasped book 
and a palm-branch. Her name is one of those inserted in the 
canon of the old English Liturgies, and in that of Rome. It is 
also in the most ancient calendars both Hastern and Western. 
[Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Keclus. li. 1—8. St. Matt. xiii. 44—62. | 

14] Sz. VALENTINE was a priest who assisted the martyrs at 
Rome in the persecution under Claudius II. He was beaten 
with clubs, and beheaded after a year’s imprisonment, on the 
14th of February, about a.p. 270. His name occurs in the 
Sacramentary of St. Gregory and other ancient formularies. 
The custom of “choosing Valentines” seems to have had its 
origin in a heathen practice connected with the worship of Juno 
on or about this day; and the association of the popular absur- 
dities with the day appears to be wholly accidental. (Sar. Hp. 
and Gosp.: Hcclus. xxxi. 8—1ll. St. Matt. xvi, 24—28. ] 


42) 


THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 


MARCH hath 31 Days. 


Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 

1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 
1 | d | Calende. David, Archbp. Menev. Deut. 15 | Luke 12 | Deut. 16 | Ephes. 6 
2 e | 6. Non. Cedde or Chad, Bishop of Litchfield. iby 13 18 | Phil. i 
8 | f | 5. Non: HY) 14 20 2 
4} g¢ | 4. Non. 21 15 22 3} 
Bal Ay 3.None 24 16 25 4 
6 | b | Pr. Non. 26 7 27 | Col. 1 
7 | ¢ | None. Perpetua, Maurit, Martyr. 28 18 29 2 
Saiaeses wld. 30 19 31 3 
alk Cu Were dick 32 20 33 4, 
LOB Wet |nOsalde 34 217 Josh. a vetkessaad! 
IL) 4) ph Wels Josh. 2 22 3 2 
12 | A | 4. Id. Gregor. M. B. of Ro. and C. 4 23 5 3 
NEW) yi Shae 6 24 7 4 
HAN ole a LG ES 8 | John af 9 5 
15 | d | Idus. 10 2 23 | 2 Thess. 1 
16 | e | 17. Cal. Apr 24 Sadao sen 2 
7a ete coral. Judg. 2 4 3 3 
18 | g | 15. Cal. Edward, King of West Saxons. A 5 5 | Lime: 
19 | A | 14. Cal. 6 6 7 2,3 
2OW by | 18. Cals 8 Vf 9 A, 
Zl |e 4! 12. Cal: Benedict, Abbot. 10 8 11 5 
22 d | 11, Cal. 12 9 13 6 
23| ‘e 1,10; Cal. : me ba 10 15 | 2Tim. 1 
24k 9. Cal. Fast. 16 ie 17 2 
25 | ¢ |- 8. Cal. Annunctation of %. Virgin Marv. 12 3 
26) A 7. Cal 18 i? 19 4 
27 | b 6. Cal 20 14 PANG fobsS Wrigsyo Ee 
28 | ¢ 5. Cal Ruth 1 15 | Ruth 2 7453) 

29nd 4. Cal 3 16 4 | Philem. 
30) ce 3. Cal 1Sam. 1 17%.) J Samiauizs tele: ail 
Si] £ | Pr. Cal 4 18 4 2 


full Moon, points out Easter Day for that Year. 


The Numbers here prefixed to the several Days, between the twenty-first day of March and the eighteenth day of April, 
both inclusive, denote the Days upon which those full Moons do fall, which happen upon or next after the twenty-first day of 
March, in those years of which they are respectively the Golden Numbers: And the Sunday Letter next following any such 


Year the places of these Golden Numbers will be to be changed, as is hereafter expressed. 


Bede, A.D. 735. 


OMNONKWNH 


The forty holy Martyrs. 


St. Gregory. 


St. Cuthbert. 
St. Benedict. 


Annunciation of B. V. M. 


Salisbury Use, 


Comparative View of the Calendar for MARCH. 


All which holds until the Year of our Lord 1899 inclusive, after which 


MRL Modern Roman. Eastern. 
St. David. St. David. St. Eudocia. 
St. Chad. St. Chad. 
St. Casimir. 


SS. Perpetua and Felicitas. 


St. Gregory. 


St. Patrick. 
St. Edward the Martyr. 


St. Cuthbert. 
St. Benedict. 


Annunciation of B. V. M. 


[ Felicitas. 
SS. Thomas Aquinas, Perpetua, and 
St. Felix. 
St. Francis. 
The Forty Martyrs. 
St. John of God. 
St. Gregory the Great. 


St. Patrick. 

St. Gabriel, Archangel. 
St. Joseph. 

St. Cuthbert. 

St. Benedict. 


Annunciation of B. Virgin Mary. 


St. Theophylact. — [baste. 
The forty Martyrs of Se- 
St. Quadratus and his Com- 

[panions. 


St. Benedict. 


St. Cyril of Jerusalem. 
The Martyrs of Sabbas. 


Annunciation of B. V. M. 
St. Gabriel, Archangel. 


w 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF MARCH. 


1} St. Davin was the son of Xantus, prince of Ceretica, now 
Cardiganshire. He was religiously educated, and after his ordi- 
nation to the priesthood embraced the ascetic life through the 
influence of Paulinus, a pupil of St. Germanus of Auxerre. After 
a long period of retirement in the isle of Vecta (? Wight) he set 
out, like St. Paul from Arabia, and preached the Gospel in Bri- 
tain. He founded a monastery in the vale of Ross, which was 
celebrated for the austerity of its rule. In a.p. 519 he attended 
a synod of Welsh clergy, which met to condemn the then preva- 
lent heresy of Pelagius. Here he so ably defended the truth that 
Dubritius, the aged archbishop of Caerleon, constrained him to 
become his successor: but he removed the see to Menevia, now 
called St. David’s, after him. He is considered to be the patron 
saint of Wales, and he died about A.D. 544, in his eighty-third 
year. He is represented preaching on a hill, with a dove on his 
shoulder. [Sar. Ep.and Gosp.: Ecclus. xliv. 17.20, 21—23; xlv. 
6, 7.15, 16. St. Matt. xxv. 14—23.] 

2] Sr. CHAD, together with his three brothers, Cedd, Bishop 
of London, and the priests, Alin and Cymbel, was ,trained under 
St. Aidan at Lindisfarne. He also studied in Ireland, whence he 
came to preside over a religious house, founded by his brother 
Cedd, in the Yorkshire wolds. He was consecrated to the see of 
York A.D. 666, by two British bishops, but soon resigned it in 
favour of Wilfrid, the two having, in consequence of a misunder- 
standing, been both consecrated to the same see. In A.D. 670, 
he was appointed Bishop of Lichfield, where he died of a plague 
in 673. Lichfield Cathedral, and thirty-one churches in the 
Midland counties, are dedicated in his honour. [Sar. Ep. and 
Gosp.: Keclus. xlv.1—5. St. Mark xiii. 33—37.] 

7| Sr. Perpetua, Sr. Frricrras, and their three companions, 
suffered in the persecution by Severus about a.D. 203, in Africa. 
St. Perpetua was the wife of a man of rank, and was herself of 
good family. At the time of her martyrdom she had an infant 
at the breast. The “ Acts of St. Perpetua’ are supposed to have 
been partly written by herself before her death, and afterwards 
completed by Tertullian. They contain a very remarkable and 
detailed account of her sufferings. She was first tossed by a wild 
cow, which is often represented with her, and then slowly butchered 
by a timorous or unskilful executioner. The day occurs in a 
Roman calendar of the year 354, and the names are commemo- 
rated in the canon of the Roman Liturgy. ([Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: 
1 Cor. vii. 25—34. St. Matt. xxv. 1—13.] 

12] St. GREGoRY, surnamed the Great, was born at Rome, of 
noble and wealthy parents, about a.p. 540. His education was 
of the highest class, and included civil and canon law. At the 
age of thirty-four he was made chief magistrate of Rome, and 
was obliged to live in great pomp and state. But all his sympa- 
thies were with the religious life, and after the death of his father 
he founded and endowed six monasteries in Sicily, out of the 
family estates in that island. He also founded a seventh, dedicated 
to St. Andrew, in his own house in Rome, in which he himself 
assumed the Benedictine habit at the age of thirty-five. Here 
he impaired his constitution by the rigour with which he fasted 
while he was studying. It is to this period of his life that the 
well-known story about the British slaves refers. He actually 
set off on a mission to England, but was recalled by Pope Bene- 
dict I., the whole city being in an uproar at his departure. 
Gregory was soon after this made a Cardinal-Deacon, and took a 
prominent part in public affairs. He was then chosen Abbot of 
the Monastery he had founded, and in a.p. 590 was elected 
Pope, and after having manifested the utmost reluctance was 
consecrated on the 13th of September. It was during the 
monastic period of his life that he wrote the celebrated “ Morals 
on the Book of Job.” In the fifth year of his Pontificate oc- 
curred the controversy regarding the title of Universal Bishop, 
which he regarded as Antichristian. In July, a.p. 596, he again 
took up his scheme for the conversion of England, and sent hither 
St. Augustine with forty companions, to whom, under God, we owe 
the revival of Christianity in the southern parts of our land. 
During the rest of his life St. Gregory gave himself much to study, 
and revised the Divine offices, paying much attention to their 
ancient music, which from this circumstance has acquired the 


[A 


popular designation of Gregorian. He departed in peace, March 
12, A.D. 604, and was buried in St. Peter’s. St. Gregory is 
esteemed as one of the Four Doctors of the Western Church, and 
is represented with the triple crown as a Pope, and with a book 
in his hand, and a dove on his shoulder, as a Doctor aided by the 
Holy Spirit. His festival is kept in the Greek Church on the 
11th of March, but its observance in England on the 12th was 
enjoined on the monasteries as early as A.D. 747, at the Synod of 
Cloveshooe, and on the kingdom generally at the Council of 
Oxford, A.D. 1222. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. xlvii. 8—11. 
St. Matt. xxiv. 42—47.] 

18] Sr. Epwarp rue Kine succeeded his father King Edgar, 
at the age of thirteen, in 4.D. 975. He was celebrated for his 
piety and the amiability of his disposition, which greatly endeared 
him to his subjects. After a reign of three years and a half, he 
was treacherously stabbed, while drinking the stirrup-cup, by 
order of his step-mother Elfrida, her object being to obtain the 
crown for her own son Ethelred. He had gone out of his way 
from hunting to pay her a visit, and to see his brother, whom he 
had always treated with affectionate kindness. He was buried 
deep in a marsh, after which his body was twice re-interred. 
[See June 20.] He is usually represented as a youthful king, 
with a cup in one hand and a dagger or sceptre in the other, 
and often with a falcon, im allusion to his last hunt. [Sar. Ep. 
and Gosp.: Ecclus. xxxi. 8—11. St. Luke xiv. 26—33. ] 

21] Sr. Benepror, the founder of the great Benedictine order 
of Monks, was born of a good family resident at Norsia, in the 
Italian province of Umbria, about a.p. 480. He was educated in 
the great public schools at Rome, but was there so shocked at the 
licentiousness prevailing among the Roman youth, that he secretly 
quitted the city at the age of fifteen, and betook himself to a 
cavern at Subiaco, where he lived as a hermit for three years. 
He had before met with Romanus, a monk, who, during his 
retreat, supplied him with food. It was at this time that, when 
distracted by temptations, he used to roll himself in the briars, a 
circumstance familiar to many through its being mentioned in 
Bishop Taylor’s ‘‘ Holy Living.” He gained such influence over 
the shepherds of the wild region round about, that some were 
persuaded by him to become monks. After much solicitation he 
consented to become Abbot of Vicobarro, near Subiaco, where he 
diligently endeavoured to reform the abuses that he found existing. 
This rendered him so unpopular with some of the inmates that 
they attempted to poison him; and, after praying God to forgive 
them, he returned to his cave. Here he had many disciples, and 
organized twelve religious houses, each containing a Superior 
and twelve monks. These were eventually united in the Monas- 
tery of St. Scholastica, the most ancient of the order, as is sup- 
posed. Having still many enemies, and being a man of peace, he 
again sought retirement, and repaired to Mount Cassino, where 
some of the ancient idolatrous rites still prevailed, and where 
stood an old temple of Apollo and a grove. Here he was the 
means of converting many to the faith of Christ. He overthrew 
the temple and cut down the grove, and upon the site founded 
two oratories. This was the origin of the celebrated Monastery 
of Mount Cassino, whence proceeded the “ Benedictine Rule,” 
and where the present monastic system of Western Europe was 
definitely organized. Towards the close of Benedict’s life, his 
sister Scholastica came to reside near him, with a small commu- 
nity of religious women; where he used to visit her once a year. 
He died of a fever caught in visiting the poor. Feeling that his 
end was drawing near, he ordered his grave to be dug, and, sup- 
ported by the brethren, contemplated it in silence for some time: 
and then being carried into the chapel, there expired on the 
eve of Passion Sunday, 4.D. 543. He is represented in various 
monastic habits, according to circumstances, and often carries 
an open book with the first words of his Rule:—AVSCVLTA 
FILI VERBA MAGISTRI. Others of his distinguishing em- 
blems are, the thorn-bush; a wine-cup, or loaf, with a serpent 
crawling out of it (in allusion to attempts made to poison him) ; 
and a broken sieve. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Hcclus. xxxix. 5—9. 


St. Luke xi. 383—36.] 


F 2 


44] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 
APRIL hath 30 Days. 
Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 1 Lesson. { 2 Lesson. 
13 1} ¢ | Calende. 1Sam. 5 | John 191!1Sam. 6 | Heb. 83 
2 2) A | 4. Non. } , 7 _ 20 8 4 
3 | b | 8. Non. Richard, Bishop of Chichester. 9 21 10 5 
10 4 | c | Pr. Non. S. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan. 11 | Acts 1 12 6 
5 | d | None. 13 2 14 of 
18 | 6] e | 8.Id. 15 3 16 8 
ZEN ON Se erie Gl, 17 4 18 g 
Saleem onde 19 5 20 10 
15 9] A | 5. Id. 21 6 22 11 
4a LOS Debian |*4,ukds 23 7 24 12 
UE [58-48 25 8 26 13 
Tea Te Gk IP Bos Tal 27 9 28 | James 1 
1} 13} e | Idus. 29 10 30 2 
14] f | 18. Cal. Maij 31 11 | 2Sam. 1 3 
OMPUS ee dgeiwals 28am. 2 12 3 4, 
16] A | 16. Cal. 4 13 5 5 
7p el7e | om Los Cal. 6 14, 7 | 1 Pet.) “1 
6] 18] ¢ | 14, Cal. 8 15 9 2 
19 | d } 18. Cal. Alphege, Archbishop of Canterbury. 10 16 ijl 3 
20 | e | 12. Cal. 12 17 13 4 
Yale|ie se | CORE 14 18 |; 15 5 
22 | g@ | 10. Cal. 16 US) | 17 | 2 Pet. 1 
23 | A | 9. Cal. S. George, Martyr. 18 20 19 2 
24 | b 8. Cal. 20 21 21 3 
25 | ¢ Wi. Cal. S. filark, Chang. and jMartpr. 22 1 John 1 
265 dou onal, 22 23 23 2 
27 | e 5. Cal. 24 24 | 1 Kings 1 3 
28 | f 4. Cal. 1 Kings 2 25 3 4 
29 | ¢ 3. Cal. 4 26 5 5 
30 | A | Pr. Cal. 6 27 7 | 2, 3 John 
Comparative View of the Calendar for APRIL. 
Bede, a.p. 735. Seen aia Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 St. Mary of Egypt. 
2, St. Francis of Paula. 
3 St. Richard. St. Richard. 
4 St. Ambrose. St. Isidore. 
5 St. Vincent Ferrer. 
6 St. Eutychius of Constan- 
a [tinople. 
8 
9 | The seven Virgins. SS. Herodion, Agabus, 
. [Rufus, Asyncritus, 
10 [Phlegon, and Hermas. 
11 St. Leo the Great. St. Antipas of Pergamus. 
12 
13 St. Hermenegild. 
14 | SS. Tiburtius, Valerian, | SS. Tiburtius, Valerian, | SS. Tiburtius, Valerian, and Maxi- 
15 {and Maximus. [and Maximus. [mus. | St. Crescens. 
16 
17 St. Anicetus. 
18 
19 St. Alphege. 
20 
21 St. Anselm. St. Januarius and his Com- 
22 | _ SS. Soter and Caius. [panions. 
23 | St. George. St. George. St. George. St. George. 
24 St. Fidelis. 
25 | St. Mark. St. Mark. St. Mark. St. Mark. 
26 SS. Cletus and Marcellinus. [ kinsman. 
27 St. Symeon, the Lord’s 
28 | St. Vitalis. St. Vitalis. [ Apostles. 
29 St. Peter. SS. Jason and Sosipater, 
30 St. Erkenwald. St. James, the brother of 


(John, Apostle. 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF APRIL. 


3] Sr. Ricnarp was Bishop of Chichester about the middle 
of the thirteenth century. His parents, Richard and Alice de 
Wiche, resided on an estate near Worcester, to which he was 
heir. But from his earliest years he showed a strong inclination 
for Study and devotion, and studied successively at Oxford, 
Paris, and Bologna. After having held the Professorship of 
Civil Law at Bologna for a short time, he returned to Oxford, 
and was made Chancellor of the University, and subsequently of 
the diocese of Canterbury, under St. Edmund, with whom he 
went into exile in France. Here he studied for awhile in a 
Dominican convent, and it was not till this period of his life 
that he was ordained priest. Returning again to England, he 
served as a parish priest in the diocese of Canterbury, and re- 
sumed the office of Chancellor under Archbishop Boniface. The 
see of Chichester falling vacant, a.D. 1244, one of those disputes 
between King and Pope, which were then so common, arose about 
the appointment. The chapter elected one Robert Passelaw, 
Archdeacon of Chichester; but the Archbishop declined to con- 
firm the election, as being that of an unfit person. He declared 
the nomination void, and appointed Richard de Wiche to the 
vacant see. The King then confiscated the revenues, anda strong 
party of courtiers and others set themselves against the new 
Bishop. He however appealed to Rome, and got a Papal decision 
in his favour, which naturally incensed the King all the more. 
The Bishop however applied himself diligently to the duties of 
his office, and in his case was fulfilled the text, “ When a man’s 
ways please the Lord, He maketh even his enemies to be at 
peace with him;” for, after two years, the King relented, and 
restored his lands. In s.p. 1253, he was preaching a crusade in 
the south of England, and when at Dover consecrated a church 
there, on Mid-Lent Sunday, in honour of his former patron, 
St. Edmund of Canterbury. While thus engaged he was seized 
with his last illness, and departed during the week following. 
Simon of Tarring, a Sussex gentleman, who had protected him 
during the displeasure of the King, and other friends, were pre- 
sent with him during hislast hours. After lying in state for some 
days, his body was buried before the altar of St. Edmund, in Chi- 
chester Cathedral, and some years afterwards removed to a place 
of greater honour in the same church. He is represented as a 
Bishop, usually with a chalice at his feet; in allusion to a tra- 
dition that, in his old age, falling with the chalice, its contents 
were not spilled. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Hcclus. xliv. 17. 20—28, 
and xly. 6, 7. 15, 16. St. John xv. 1—7.| 

4] St. AMBROSE is commemorated on this, the day of his 
death, in accordance with English usage; but in the Latin and 
Greek Churches his feast is kept on the 7th of December, the day 
of his ordination. He was born about A.D. 340, in Gaul, where 
his father held the office of Preetorian Prefect. Paulinus affirms 
that while he was in his cradle a swarm of bees settled on his 
lips, and that this, as in the case of Plato, was thought to pre- 
dict his future eloquence. After the death of his father he was 
educated at Rome, where he attained to great proficiency in 
Greek and Civil Law, which led to his appointment to the 
Governorship of Liguria. He also practised as an advocate, and 
displayed so much wisdom and judgment in this capacity during 
a severe contest between the orthodox and the Arians, relative to 
an appointment to the see of Milan, that he was, although as yet 
unbaptized, strongly pressed to accept the office himself—the 
whole multitude taking up the cry, ‘‘ Ambrose is Bishop ”—first 
uttered, it is said, by a child. He reluctantly consented, and, 
after baptism, was ordained and consecrated, Dec. 7, A.D. 374. 
Having made over to the church of Milan all his estates, he 
devoted himself to his duties. He had constant difficulties in 
consequence of the prevalence of the Arian and Apollinarian 
heresies, and wrote many theological works, both controversial 
and devotional. St. Ambrose is spoken of with the most affec- 
tionate reverence by St. Augustine in his Confessions, as having 
been greatly instrumental in the work of his conversion. The 
saying, “When Iam at Nome, I do as they do at Rome,” is 
attributed to St. Ambrose, who replied to St. Augustine, when 
he consulted him about the different modes of observing Saturday 
at Rome and Milan: “When I come to Rome I fast on. the 


[45 


Saturdays, as they do at Rome; when I am here I do not fast. 
So likewise you, to whatsoever Church you come, observe the 
custom of that place, if you.mean not either to give or take 
offence.” 

But in matters which involved principle, St. Ambrose did not 
shrink from his duty. It is well known how he excommunicated 
the Emperor Theodosius, for a cruel abuse of power during an 
insurrection at Thessalonica; and how he shut the gates of the 
church of Milan against him, exhorting him with such effect that 
he became a true penitent. He issaid to have introduced metrical 
hymns into the Offices of the Church, and, like St. Gregory, to 
have paid great attention both to the construction of these Offices, 
and to the music used in them, the “ Ambrosian rite” having a 
very distinct character of its own, like the English. He is also 
reckoned as one of the four great doctors of the Western Church. 
He died, a.p. 397, on the 4th of April, and his body still lies 
under the high altar of the basilica dedicated to him at Milan. 
[Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. xlvii. 8—11. St. Matt. xxiv. 
42—47. | 

19] St. ALPHEGE was an English saint. He was born of a 
noble family, about A.D. 954, and while very young retired to a 
monastery, and afterwards became abbot of a house at Bath. 
In 984 he was made Bishop of Winchester, and in 1006 trans- 
lated to Canterbury. In 1011 the Danes broke in upon the city, 
and imprisoned the Archbishop, offering to set him free for the 
treasures of the church. He refused to give them up, and after 
having held out for several months, was stoned, and finally 
slain with a battle-axe, calling upon God, like St. Stephen, to 
receive his soul, and, like Christ, for the forgiveness of his mur- 
derers. This took place on the site of the present parish church 
of Greenwich, which is dedicated to him. His body was buried 
first in the Cathedral of St. Paul in London, but afterwards trans- 
lated to Canterbury. He is represented «s an Archbishop, with 
stones in his vestment, and sometimes with the battle-axe. [Sar. 
Ep. and Gosp.: Heb. xiii, 9-16. St. John xv. 1—7.] 

23] ‘Lhe history of Sr. Gror@s of Cappadocia, the Patron of 
England, has been from time to time mixed up with that of 
George, the Arian bishop of Alexandria, and is so obscure that 
some have doubted his existence. But churches were dedicated 
to him under the first Christian Emperors, and his office is found 
in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory. The Greek Church calls 
him the Great Martyr, and keeps his festival as a holyday of 
obligation. He was born in Cappadocia in the latter half of the 
third century, of noble Christian parents, entered the army, and 
was rapidly advanced by the Emperor Diocletian. He was him- 
self imprisoned, tortured, and beheaded: being, apparently, the 
same young man who tore down the edicts for persecution, as 
related by Lactantius and Eusebius. He was first acknowledged 
as the Patron of England at the Synod of Oxford, a.p. 1220, 
and has been regarded as the patron of military men, partly on 
account of his own profession, and partly because of his alleged 
appearance to Richard Coeur de Lion in his expedition against 
the Saracens. Hence, no doubt, the old battle-cry, “St. George 
for England!” Under his name King Edward the Third [a.p. 
1330] instituted the Order of the Garter, the most ancient and 
most noble order of knighthood in Europe. The stalls and in- 
signia of these knights are at St. George’s Chapel, Windsor, 
where special prayers are offered for them in the Daily Service, 
as well as a special service on “Obit Sunday.” St. George is 
usually represented in conflict with a dragon, in allusion to the 
legend of his having fought with a dragon to save the daughter 
of a king, though it may be better understood of the conflict of 
the Christian soldier with Satan on behalf of the Church. He 
is represented as a young warrior, fully armed, and bearing a 
red cross on his shield or on a banner. ‘This is the famous 
cross of St. George, and is incorporated with that of St. Andrew, 
the patron saint of Scotland, in the national flag called the 
“Union Jack.” There are more than 162 churches of ancient 
foundation dedicated to St. George, and his name was retained in 
the Calendar in the time of Queen Elizabeth, when almost all the 
other “ black-letter” saints had been struck out. [Sar. Ep. and 
Gosp: St. James i, 2—12. St. John xv. 1—7.] 


ii~ 


46] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 
MAY hath 31 Days. 
Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. 
1] b | Calende. .Whilip any Hames, A. and fe. Jude 
21 ec |6.Non. pie 1 Kings 8 | Acts 28 | 1 Kings 9 | Rom. 1 
3 | d | 5. Non. Invention of the Cross. 10 | Matt. 1 oS Vecalis 2 
4 | e | 4 Non. 12 2 13 3 
BS) ae) INS RING 14 3 15 4 
6 | ¢& | Pr. Non. S. John Evangelist, ante Port. Lat. 16 4 ily 5 
7 | A | None. 18 5 19 6 
8 | b | 8. Id. 20 6 21 7 
Sha OP 7k 22 7 | 2 Kings 1 8 
OP Rd a k6s ide 2 Kings 2 8 3 5) 
11} ey) 5. 1d: 4 9 5 10 
TPN Se IGE 6 10 a isl 
Ib |) ei Ghiwe 8 11 9 12 
14} A | Pr. Id. 10 12 11 13 
15 | b | Idus. 12 13 13 14. 
16 | c | 17. Cal. Jun. 14 14 15 15 
7 cones Cale 16 15 17 16 
18 | e | 15. Cal. 18 16 1951 Conse 
19 | £ | 14. Cal. Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury. 20 ily 21 2 
20 | g | 138. Cal. 22 18 23 3 
21 | A | 12. Cal. . 24 19 25 + 
22 | b | 11. Cal. Hzra 20 | Ezra 3 5 
23 | c | 10. Cal. 4 21 5 6 
24) d | 9. Cal. 6 22 7 7 
25 | .e 8. Cal. ' i FE 9 23 | Neh. 1 8 
Zon eee cal. Augustine, first Archbp. of Canterbury. | Neh. 2 24 4 9 
27 | ¢ | 6. Cal. Ven. Bede, Pr. 5 25 6 10 
28 | A 5. Cal. 8 26 9 ila 
29 | b | 4. Cal. King Charles LE. Mat. anv Ret. 10 27 13. 12 
30 | ¢ 3. Cal. Esther 1 28 | Esther 2 13 
31 | d | Pr. Cal. 3 | Mark 1 4, 14, 
Comparative View of the Calendar for MAY. 
Bede, A.D. 735. epee Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 | St. Philip. SS. Philip and James. SS. Philip and James. Jeremiah the Prophet. 
2 St. Athanasius. St. Athanasius. 
3 Invention of the Cross. SS. | Finding of the Holy Cross. SS. 
[ Alexander and Eventius. [Alexander, Eventius, Theodulus, 
A St. Monica. [Juvenal. 
5 St. Catharine of Sienna. 
6 St. John, ante Port. Lat. | St. John at the Latin Gate. Job the Just (Patriarch). 
7 | Invention of the Cross. St. | St. John of Beverley. St. Stanislaus, The Sign of the Cross. 
[Alexander and his com- [and Ey. 
8 | St. Victor. [panions. Apparition of St. Michael, Arch. St. John the Divine, Apostle 
9 Translation of St. Nicolas. | St. Gregory Nazianzen. Isaiah the Prophet. 
10 | St. Gordian. 8S. Gordian and Epimachus.| SS. Antoninus, Gordian, and Epima- | St. Simon Zelotes, Apostle. 
11 St. Pius V. chus. | The birthday of Constanti- 
12 | St. Pancras. SS. Nereus, Achilleus, and | SS. Nereus, Achilleus, Domitilla, and [nople. 
13 [ Pancras. [ Pancratius. 
14 | St. Isidore. St. Boniface. 
15 Gp . 
16 St. John Nepomucen. 
17 Vedutiame * | | St. Paschal Baylon, SS. Andronicus and Junia. 
18 St. Venantius. : 
19 | St. Pudentiana. ig RE. Dunstan] SS. Dunstan, Pudentiana. 
20 | St. Basil. a St. Bernardine. 
21 a St. Peter Celestine. 
22 St. Ubaldus. SS. Constantine and Helena. 
23 (Christians. 
24, \ Feast of the Holy Saviour. | Our Blessed Lady, the Help of 
25 | St. Urban. WS ee ®&, Aldhelm SS. Aldhelm, Bp. of Salisbury, and 
26 pai St. Augustine, Apostle of | St. Augustine. [ Urban. | St. Carpus, Apostle. 
27 7 [the English. | St. Philip Neri. 
28 St. Germanus. St. Gregory VII. 
29 
30 | St. Felix. 
81 | St. Petronilla. St. Petronilla. 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF MAY, 


8] INVENTION oF THE Cross.—This festival commemorates 
the finding the Cross on which our Lord suffered, by the Empress 
Helena, about a.p. 326. At this time the Jews and Pagans 
together had effaced nearly every trace of the scenes of our 
Lord’s Passion and Resurrection, the Holy Sepulchre had been 
payed over, and heathen temples built on the spot. It was sup- 
posed that the crosses of our Lord and of the two thieves were 
buried near the place where they suffered, and after a long and 
difficult search they were found. Macarius, Bishop of Jerusalem, 
in order to distinguish that of our Lord, suggested that the three 
crosses should be carried to a sick lady, and after much prayer ap- 
plied them singly to her. By the touch of one of them the sick lady 
recovered, as those did to whom were brought handkerchiefs and 
aprons from St. Paul’s body. The Empress, full of joy at the 
discovery, enclosed the precious relic in a silver shrine, and built 
on the spot a church in which it might be preserved. She also 
carried a large piece to Rome, and deposited it in a church which 
she had built there in honour of the Holy Cross. [See Sept. 14.] 
This account has not been disproved. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Gal. 
v. 10—12, and vi. 12—14. St. John iii. 1—165.] 

6] St. Jonn ante Porram Latinam.—This festival was 
instituted in memory of the miraculous deliverance of St. 
John from death, when he was cast into a cauldron of boiling 
oil before the Latin Gate of Rome, by order and perhaps 
in the presence of Domitian. Our Lord had promised that 
deadly things should not hurt those who believed in Him, and 
thus His word was fulfilled, as it had been before when St. 
Paul took up the serpent at Melita; and as it had been by 
anticipation when the form of the Son of God was seen walking 
with the three young men in the fiery furnace at Babylon. The 
Emperor attributed the Apostle’s deliverance to the power of 
magic, and banished him to Patmos, where he received and re- 
corded the Apocalypse. There has been a church at Rome on 
the spot where the event above mentioned occurred, ever since 
the time of the first Christian Emperors. The day is kept as 
a great festival at St. John’s College, Cambridge, and at the 
more recent foundation of St. John’s Hurstpierpoint. _[Sar. Ep. 
and Gosp.: Eccl. xv. 1—6. St. John xxi. 19—24.] 

19] St. Dunstan.—This Saxon Saint was born about a.p. 924, 
at Glastonbury, of Christian parents holding a high position in so- 
ciety. He was educated in his native town, under a society of Irish 
monks there resident, and lived for some time with Athelmus, Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, his uncle, who introduced him to the notice 
of King Athelstan. At court he for a time enjoyed the highest fa- 
vours, but some who envied him maligned him to the King, and he 
was banished from the royal presence. He was then urged to take 
monastic vows by Alphege the Bald, Bishop of Winchester, and 
after a time became a monk, and was also ordained priest. He 
served the church at Glastonbury, dwelling in a small cell attached 
thereto. Here he fasted and prayed, and worked at copying and 
illumination, and at the fabrication of vestments, censers, and 
other church furniture. Athelstan was succeeded by his brother 
Edmund, who recalled Dunstan ; but he soon again fell into dis- 
grace at court, and retired to the Benedictine monastery of Fleury 
in France. After a few years he was recalled, and made Superior 
of the house at Glastonbury. Here he refounded the church and 
convent on a larger scale, established a rule based on that of St. 
Benedict, and became himself the first Abbot on the new founda- 
tion, and nineteenth from St. Brithwald. King Edmund after a 
reign of six years and a half was murdered, and his sons, Edwy 
and Edgar, being too young for the throne, his brother Edred 
succeeded him, and followed the advice of St. Dunstan in all 
things. He dying in 955, was succeeded by Edwy, a profligate 
youth, whose vices St. Dunstan was obliged to reprove even on 
the day of his coronation. In revenge he banished the Abbot, 
persecuted the Monks every where, and devastated all the abbeys 
that had been spared by the Danes except Glastonbury and 
Abingdon. After a year’s exile in Flanders, Dunstan was recalled 
by Edgar, who had been placed on the throne instead of Edwy, 
deposed by the Mercians. This young King made Dunstan his 
principal counsellor, and in 4.D. 957 he was made Bishop of 
Worcester, and shortly afterwards of London. Edwy still 


[47 


reigned over the southern provinces for three years longer; but on 
his death Edgar became monarch of all England, and Dunstan 
was raised to the see of Canterbury, being also appointed Papal 
legate by Pope John XII. He exerted himself greatly in the re- 
storation of discipline, and in conjunction with Ethelwold, Bishop 
of Winchester, and Oswald, Archbishop of York, re-established 
most of the chief monasteries. He exercised a rigid control over 
the secular clergy, ejecting many who were married, and enforcing 
celibacy on others. At one time King Edgar having fallen into 
a scandalous crime, he boldly reproved him, and brought him to 
repentance. He went about preaching and instructing the people 
in the churches of his diocese, and would sometimes repair to his 
old retreat at Glastonbury for solitude and contemplation. His 
last sickness came upon him at Canterbury, where, after preaching 
thrice on Ascension Day, A.D. 988, he died on the Saturday fol- 
lowing, and was buried in his own cathedral. Some of his bones 
were said to have been translated to Glastonburyin 1012, but the 
greater part of them were found under his tomb in 1508. His 
distinguishing emblems are a pair of pincers anda harp. Six 
éhurches in Kent, six in Middlesex, and six elsewhere, are dedi- 
cated to him, including the well-known city churches of St. Dun- 
stan near Temple Bar, and St. Dunstan in the East. [Sar. Ep. 
and Gosp.: Eccl. xliv. 47. 20, 21—23; xlv. 6, 7. 15, 16. St. 
Matt. xxv. 14—23. During Easter-tide, St. John xv. 1—7.] 

26] St. Aveustrye, the first Archbishop of Canterbury, has 
been called the Apostle of England, from the great work which he 
accomplished in restoring the Church in the south-east part of 
the country, after the old Clergy had been entirely rooted out by 
the Saxons. Nothing is known of his history until the time when 
he was sent on his mission by Gregory the Great. He was then 
Prior of St. Andrew’s Monastery at Rome. [See March 12.] 
He landed in Kent A.D. 596, and went through the Isle of Thanet 
towards Canterbury, by invitation of King Ethelbert. The man- 
ner in which St. Augustine and his missionary brethren came to- 
wards the heathen King is thus recorded by the Venerable Bede : 
“He came chanting Litanies, and beseeching the Lord for the 
everlasting weal, as well of themselves, as of those for whose sake 
he had come..... And when they drew near that city, they 
chanted the Litany with one accord in these words ;—‘ That it 
may please Thee to turn away the fury of Thy wrath from all 
Thy people, and chiefly from this city, we sinners beseech Thee to 
hear us, O Lord.’ Then being admitted into the royal presence, 
they proclaimed their mission before the King: and he, having 
already some acquaintance with Christianity (through his wife 
Bertha, and her chaplain, Luidhard, Bishop of Senlis), received 
them kindly, and bade them welcome to his city.” Kent had 
returned almost entirely to heathenism, and the coming of these 
missionaries was a great blessing to it. They restored to its 
proper use the old church of St. Martin, and thus made Christian 
worship familiar again to the eyes of the people. They converted 
large numbers of the Saxon conquerors, and eventually the King 
himself, who afterwards laboured earnestly for the perfect esta- 
blishment of the Church among his people, during the twenty 
remaining years of his life. 

But when the new missionaries extended their work into a 
wider circle, they came into contact with the ancient Church of 
England, of which in the conquered part of the island they had 
found only dormant remains. To men of polished education and 
exact ritual habits the ancient Church of the land presented 
features which were distasteful to them: and in their own fervent 
zeal and high prosperity, they seem to have appreciated at too 
low a value the energies of a depressed and persecuted Clergy. 
Augustine endeavoured to enforce a Roman ritual and jurisdic- 
tion upon the native Bishops ; and this they resisted, claiming to 
possess independent Episcopal jurisdiction, ang to have a ritual as 
Apostolic in its origin as that of! Rome itself.” These heart-burn- 
ings lasted until long after the death of St. Augustine, which 
happened .p. 604; and tended in some degree to mar the good 
work which he had so well begun. Yet it cannot be doubted that 
England owes a debt of gratitude to him as a second founder of 
her Church, and the great see of Canterbury is an enduring 
monument of his missionary zeal. Dying on May 26th, 604, 


48] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 
JUNE hath 30 Days. 
Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. 
1 | e | Calendee. Nicomede, Rom. Pr. and M, Esther 5 | Mark 2 | Esther 6 | 1 Cor. 15 
2| f | 4. Non. u 3 8 16 
3 | g | 3. Non. 9 4 | Job le Cor. mmeL 
4 | A | Pr. Non. Job 2 5 . 3 2 
5 | b | None. Boniface, Bishop of Mentz and M. 4 6 5 3 
Gwiteco "8: 1d. 6 7 7 4 
Wo Gk eat 8 8 9 5 
Saleem tomas 10 9 11 6 
OFS fan aael ds 12 10 13 7 
10 | g | 41d. 14 11 15 8 
ta ene eels S. Barnabas, Apostle anv eart, 
TAs Voy Tere 1 16 12 17, 18 9 
13) | xc) ||) Idus: TG he 13 20 10 
14 d | 18. Cal. Julii 21 14 22 11 
T5aine: || Leal. 23 15 24, 25 12 
16} f | 16. Cal. 26, 27 16 28 13 
Wao lelb. Cal. 8. Alban, Martyr. 29 | Luke 1 30 | Galat. 1 
18 | A | 14. Cal. 31 2 32 2 
19 b | 13. Cal. 33 3 34 3 
QO ee | 122iCal, Transl. of Edward, King of West Sax. 35 4 36 4 
21-.| di. |) 11..Cal. 37 5 38 5 
22 | e | 10. Cal. 39 6 40 6 
23 | tf. | 9. Cal. Fast. 41 7 42 | Ephes, 1 
24 | ¢g 8. Cal. Nativity of S. John Waptist. 
25.) A 7. Cal. Prov. * ol Salperovaee 2 
26 | b 6. Cal. 8} 9 4 3 
Pah 5. Cal. 5 10 6 4 
28} da 4. Cal. Fast. 7 et! 8 5 
29 | e | 3. Cal. %. IPeter, Apostle any eMartyr. 
30 ef) Pr. Cal, 9 12 10 6 
Comparative View of the Calendar for JUNE. 
Bede, A.D. 735. acces is Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 St. Nicomede. St. Justin Martyr and his 
2 SS. Marcellinus and Peter [ companions. 
3 [the Martyr. | St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi. 
4 St. Francis Caracciolo. 
5 St. Boniface and his fellow- 
: [ Martyrs. | St. Norbert. 
8 | St. Medard. SS. Medardus & Gildardus. | St. William of York. 
9 | SS. Primus and Felicianus, |} Transl. of St. Ed. the Mart. | SS. Primus and Felicianus. St. Cyril of Alexandria. 
10 | St. Barnabas. [SS. Primus and Felician. | St. Margaret, Queen of Scots. 
hal; St. Barnabas. St. Barnabas. SS. Bartholomew and Bar- 
12 SS. Basilides, Cyrinus, and | SS. John a Facundo, Basilides, Cyri- [nabas, Apostles. 
[ Nabor. {nus, Nabor, and Nazarius. 
13 St. Anthony of Padua. 
14 | St. Vitus. St. Basil. [Crescentia. | St. Basil. Elisha the Prophet. 
15 SS. Vitus, Modestus, and | SS. Vitus, Modestus, and Crescentia. | Amos the Prophet. 
16 Translation of St. Richard. 
17 | SS. Diogenes and Blastus. 
18 | SS. Marcellian and Mark. | SS. Mark and Marcellian. | SS. Mark and Marcellian. 
19 | SS. Gervase and Prothase. | SS. Gervase and Prothase. | SS. Juliana, Falconeri, Gervase, and | St. Jude, Apostle. 
20 Transl. of St. Edw. K. & M. | St. Silverius. [Protase. 
il St. Aloysius Gonzaga. 
22 | St. James the Apostle. St. Alban. SS. Alban and Paulinus. 
23 St. Etheldreda. 
24, | St. John Baptist. Nativity of St. John Bapt. | Nativity of St. John Baptist. Nativity of St. John Bapt. 
25 St. William. 
26 | SS. John and Paul. SS. John and Paul, Martyrs. | SS. John and Paul. 
Wee | 
28 | St. Leo. St. Leo. St. Leo. 8S. Cyrus and John. 
29 | SS. Peter and Paul. SS. Peter and Paul. SS. Peter and Paul. SS. Peter and Paul. 
30 Commemoration of St. Paul. | Commemoration of St. Paul. 


[49] 
THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF MAY (continued). 


St. Augustine was at first buried abroad: but after the completion 
of the Cathedral at Canterbury his remains were translated 
thither, having first reposed for a while in the Church of St. Peter 
and St. Paul in that city. How much of the dust of our great 
churches is the dust of those of whom the Holy Ghost has said, 
“Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of His 
Saints’?! [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. xlvii. 8—11. St. Luke 
x. 1—7. During Easter-tide, St. John xv. 1—7.] 

27] THe VENERABLE BrpE was born A.D. 673 at Jarrow, a 
village in Durham, not far from the mouth of the Tyne. About 
the same time the sister monasteries of St. Peter at Wearmouth, 
and St. Paul at Jarrow, had been founded by a great benefactor 
of Northern England, St. Benedict Biscop. At seven years of 
age, Bede was committed to the care of Ceolfrid, Abbot of Jarrow, 
who built a church there, of which the dedication stone at least, 
and possibly the whole of the chancel, still remain. Here the 
child made great progress in learning and piety, under various 
able masters ; and at the unusually early age of nineteen, was 
ordained deacon by St. John of Beverley, then Bishop of Hexham. 
At thirty he was ordained priest by the same prelate. From 
this time he began to compose and compile books principally, but 
not exclusively, on theological subjects; and he had also a great 
school; similar to that in which he had been himself instructed. 
He paid great attention to the singing in the conventual church 


of Jarrow. A very interesting letter from Cuthbert, one of his 
scholars, addressed to one Cuthwin, a monk who had been his 
fellow-student, gives an affecting account of the last days of their 
old master. He died on the Eve of the Ascension, May 26, 
A.D. 735, and was buried in St. Paul’s Church at Jarrow. In 
1020 his remains were conveyed to Durham Cathedral, and in 
1155 were enclosed in a rich shrine. At the Reformation they 
were buried, and now rest, under a plain tomb in the Galilee, with 
this inscription :— 

HAC SVNT IN FOSSA 

BED VENERABILIS OSSA. 

There is a story told about his shrine, which illustrates the 
wide-spread reputation possessed by Bede in the middle ages. It is 
that a French Bishop on his way to or from Scotland offered a very 
small coin at St. Cuthbert’s shrine, saying, “Sancte Cuthberte, 
si sanctus sis, ora pro me.” But on coming to Bede’s shrine, he 
offered a French crown, saying, “Sancte Beda, quia Sanctus es, 
ora pro me.” His writings are still day by day instructing the 
whole of the Western Church, and probably will ever continue to 
do so. The title of “ Venerable” seems to have been first given 
him about the ninth century, and he has often been styled the 
English Doctor. [No Epistle or Gospel is appointed for this day 
in the later Salisbury Missals, if in any. ] 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF JUNE. 


1] St. NicomEpE is supposed to have been a disciple and 
fellow-labourer of St. Peter. During the persecution of Domitian 
he buried Felicula, a virgin martyr, with Christian rites. Thus 
incurring the displeasure of the heathen authorities, he himself 
was put to the test of being asked to sacrifice to idols. He refused 
to do so, and was accordingly beaten to death with whips loaded 
with lead, or, as some say, with a spiked club. His body was 
thrown into the Tiber, but was recovered by the Christians, and 
_ buried. The day of his martyrdom was Sept. 15th, and is then 
commemorated in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory. He is 
represented with the instruments of his martyrdom. [Sar. Ep. 
and Gosp.: Kcclus. xiv. 20, and xv. 3—6. St. Matt. xvi. 2428. 
During Easter-tide, St. John xv. 1—7.] 

5] Sz. Bonrracs, originally named Winfrid, was of English 
extraction, but by his missionary labours on the Continent earned 
for himself the title of Apostle of Germany. He was born at 
Crediton, in Devonshire, about A.D. 680, and was educated in the 
monastery of Exeter, where also he made his profession as a 
monk: he afterwards studied at that of Nutcell, in the diocese of 
Winchester. Here he made such progress that he was appointed 
by the Abbot to teach others, and at thirty years of age was 
ordained priest. Having long had a desire to preach the Gospel 
to the heathen, in the year 716 he crossed over into Friesland for 
that purpose. Meeting with great opposition from the King, he 
was obliged to return, whereupon he was appointed Abbot of 
Nutcell, much against his will. In the course of two years he 
succeeded in obtaining a release, and in 719 went to Rome, and 
was sent by Pope Gregory II. to Germany, where he baptized 
great numbers of converts, and established the Church system. 
He also laboured with great success in Friesland, Hesse, and 
Saxony, after which the Pope consecrated him Bishop. Re- 
turning to his mission, he boldly cut down an oak consecrated to 
Jupiter, and built a chapel with the timber. He also founded many 
churches, and a monastery, and procured many missionaries from 
England. Having long laboured with great zeal and success, and 
obtained the titles of Archbishop and Primate of all Germany, he 
was martyred near Utrecht at the age of seventy-four. He is re- 
presented as an Archbishop, hewing down the oak, or with it pro- 
strate at his feet, and sometimes with a scourge, or a book pierced 
through with a sword. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: 1 Cor. iv. 9—14. 
St. Matt. x. 23—26. During Haster-tide, St. John xv. 5—7.] 


17] St. Anpan, Marryr.—Our Calendar differs from the 
ancient English Calendar and the Modern Roman, which dedicate 
the 22nd to his memory, in placing St. Alban’s day on the 17th of 
June. St. Alban is the first recorded British martyr, and was born 
at Verulam, near the present town of St. Alban’s, an important 
Anglo-Roman city. It is thought from his name that he was 
born of Roman parents. It is recorded that they were of high 
rank, and sent him to Rome for his education. On his return he 
was one of the chief citizens of Verulam, and, though as yet a 
heathen, was known for his humane and charitable disposition. 
He sheltered a certain priest who was fleeing from persecution, 
and by his example and instructions was won over to the Christian 
faith. The Roman governor, hearing that he was harbouring 
the priest, sent soldiers to seek him, but his host had enabled 
him to escape and continue his work by exchanging clothes with 
him, and then confessed himself a Christian. Refusing to 
sacrifice to’ idols, he was first scourged, and then beheaded. 
On the way to martyrdom, the executioner was converted, it is 
said, by the miracles of the river drying up for them to pass, and 
a fountain springing forth. Both suffered together, and many 
of the spectators being converted also, were put to death, about 
A.D. 303. Upon the spot where they suffered, the great Bene- 
dictine Abbey, and the present town of St. Alban’s, sprang up. 
The Abbot of St. Alban’s held precedence over all the rest because 
of the patron being the first canonized Saint and Martyr of 
Britain. He is represented as a young layman, having a sword 
and long cross or crucifix: sometimes he bears the martyr’s 
palm, or is in armour and coronet, with a sceptre. The priest 
whom he had sheltered, whose name was Amphibalus, fled into 
Wales, and after making many converts, at last received the 
crown of martyrdom himself. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Wisd. iy. 
7—11. 13—15. St. Matt. xvi. 24-—28.] 

20] It is mentioned above (March 18) that after the barbarous 
murder of Edward, King of the West Saxons, at Corfe Castle, his 
body was buried without any solemnity. Three years afterwards, 
however, it was translated by Elferius, Duke of Mercia, to 
Shaftesbury, and there solemnly interred, as being that of a king 
and martyr; and this event is commemorated on the 20th of 
June. [Sar, Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. xxxi. 8--11. St. Luke xiv. 
26—33. ] 


G 


50] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 
JULY hath 31 Days. 
Morning Prayer. Kyvening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. 
1} g | Calende. Prov. 11 | Luke 13 | Prov., 12 | Phil. i 
2] A | 6. Non. Visit. of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 13 14 14 2 
3 | b | 5. Non. 15 15 16 3 
4 | ¢ | 4, Non. Translation of S. Mart. B. and C. ily 16 18 4 
5 d 8. Non. 19 17 20 Colos. 1 
6 | e | Pr. Non. 21 18 22 2 
7 \ £ | None. 23 19 24 3 
8 |) ¢ 48. Td. 25 20 26 oe! 
Sain fev dds 27 21 28 | 1 Thess. 1 
10 | b | 6. Id. 29 22 31 2 
Ue Te wa| oO. ee Eccles. 1 23 | Eccles. 2 3 
12 | d | 4. Id. 3 24 4, 4 
UES Gy [pes IGe Dy sonnet 6 5 
AG tes | Perslde i 2 8 | 2 Thess. 1 
15 | g | Idus. Swithun, B. of Winch. Translation. 9 3 10 2 
16 | A | 17. Cal. Aug. 11 4 12 3 
Ze aban | elGsCal. Jerem. 1 5 | Jerem. 2 | 1Tim. 1 
USB erCe | plon@ale 3 6 4, 2,3 
19 | d | 14. Cal. 5 uf 6 4 
20 | e | 18. Cal. Margaret, V. and M. Antioch. 7 8 8 5 
De cela Cal. 9 9 10 6 
22 | g¢ | 11. Cal. S. Mary Magdalen. if 10 128 eZ) ims eee 
23 | A | 10. Cal. 13 11 14 2 
24 | b 9. Cal. Fast. 15 12 16 3 
25 | ¢ 8. Cal. %. James, Apostle any sMartyr. 13 4, 
26 | d 7. Cal. S. Anne, Mother to B. Virgin Mary. . yf 14 180) Titus 21 
27 | e 6. Cal. 19 15 20 2,3 
28| £ 5. Cal. 21 16 22 | Philem. 
29) \.¢ | 4. Cal. 23 igs 24 | Heb. I 
30 | A 8. Cal. 25 18 26 2 
810) Tb wieer:, Cals 27 ug) 28 3 
Comparative View of the Calendar for JULY. 
Bede, A.D. 735. paleo ee Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 SS. Cosmas and Damian. 
2 1SS. Processus and Mar- | Visitation of B. V. Mary. | Visitation of B. V. Mary. SS. Pro- | Vestment of B. V. Mary. 
3 [tinianus. [cessus and Martinianus. 
4 Transl. and Ordination of 
5 [St. Martin. i 
6 
of Transl. of St. Thomas the | Translation of St. Thomas. 
8 (Martyr. | St. Elizabeth of Portugal. 
9 St. Pancratius., 
10 | The Seven Brethren. The Seven holy Brethren. | Seven Brethren, and SS. Rufina and 
11 Transl. of St. Benedict. St. Pius. [ Secunda. 
1p SS. John Gualbert, Nabor, and Felix. 
13 St. Anacletus. St. Gabriel the Archangel. 
14 St. Bonaventure. . St. Aquila, Apostle. 
15 | St. Cyricus. Transl. of St. Swithun. St. Swithin. 
16 Transl. of St. Osmund. B. Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel. 
17 St. Kenelm. St. Osmund. St. Marina. [Margaret. ] 
18 St. Arnulph. SS. Camillus de Lellis and Sympho- 
[rosa, and her seven sons. 
19 St. Vincent of Paul. St. Jude, Apostle. 
20 St. Margaret. SS. Jerome Emilian and Margaret. | Elijah the Prophet. 
21 St. Praxedes. SS. Henry, Emp., and Praxedes. 
22 St. Mary Magdalen. St. Mary Magdalen. St. Mary Magdalen the 
23 St. Apollinaris. SS. Apollinaris and Liborius. [ Ointment-bearer. 
24. St. Christina. SS. Alexius and Christina. 
25 | St. James, brother of John. | St. James. SS. James, Ap., and Christopher. St. Anne. 
26 St. Anne. St. Anne, Mother of the B. V. Mary. 
27 The Seven Sleepers. St. Pantaleon. {Innocent. 
28 St. Sampson. SS. Nazarius, Celsus, Victor, and | SS.Prochorus, Nicanor, Ti- 
29 | SS. Felix, Simplex, Faus- | SS. Felix and Faustus. SS. Martha, Felix, Simplicius, Faus- | [mon, and Parmenas, App. 
[tinus, and Beatrice. [tinus, and Beatrice: 
80 | SS. Abdon and Sennes. SS. Abdon and Sennes. SS. Abdon and Sennes. ‘| SS. Silas, Silvanus, and 


St. Germanus. 


St. Ignatius of Loyola. 


[their companions, App. 


[61] 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF JULY. 


2] Visrration of THE Biesszp VrrGin Mary.—This minor 
festival of the Blessed Virgin was instituted a.p. 1389, by Pope 
Urban VI., and confirmed at the Council of Basle, A.D. 1431, 
that “she being honoured with this solemnity, might reconcile 
her son, Whois now angry for the sins of men, by her intercession, 
and that she might grant peace and amity among the faithful.” 
The event which it commemorates is the visit of the Blessed 
Virgin to her cousin Elizabeth recorded in the Gospel for the 
day. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Cant. ii. 1—4 and 10—14. St. Luke 
i. 39—47.] 

4] TRANSLATION oF Sr. Martin, Br. ann Conr.—This 
festival commemorates the translation of the relics of St. Martin 
from the place of his burial at Cande, in the diocese of Tours, to a 
basilica dedicated in his honour, immediately adjacent to the 
city of Tours, a.p. 478. The Sarum Calendar also commemo- 
rates his ordination. The keeping of his relics was committed 
to a fraternity which developed into the famous chapter of 
St. Martin, of which the King of France was ea officio head, 
under the title of Abbat. The Huguenots tore down the feretory, 
and burnt the relics, with the exception of some portions which 
were recovered and still exist. [Sar. Hp. and Gosp.: Ecclus. xliy. 
17. 20, 21—23 ; xlv. 6, 7.15, 16. St. Luke xii. 32—34.] 

15] Sr. Swrrnvn, Br. or WincuEstER.—St. Swithun, or 
Swithin, was born in the kingdom of the West Saxons, was 
educated in the monastery attached to Winchester Cathedral, 
and was ordained priest early in the ninth century by Helmstan, 
Bishop of that see, whom he succeeded A.D. 838, having been 
consecrated by Cealnoth, Archbishop of Canterbury. He devoted 
himself with great zeal to the work of his diocese, and was 
celebrated for his humility, as well as his austerity, and works of 
charity. He died July 2, A.D. 862, and was buried at his own 
request outside the church, where men might walk over him, 
and the rain water his grave. In 4.D. 971 the relics were trans- 
lated to a rich shrine within the cathedral ; but it is recorded that 
a most violent rain fell on the destined day, and continued for 
thirty-nine days, whence arose the popular notion that if it rain 
on St. Swithin’s Day, it will for thirty-nine following. The 
festival is kept on the 15th in honour of this translation; and 
Winchester Cathedral, which before had been dedicated to 
St. Peter, was now dedicated also to St. Swithin. When the 
cathedral was rebuilt by Bishop Walkelyn, the relics were placed 
in a more costly shrine, A.D. 1093. More than fifty churches in 
England are dedicated to this saint. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Heb. 
vii. 23—27. St. Luke xii. 35—40.] 

20] Sr. Margaret, V. anp M. or AnTI0ocH.—Little is known 
respecting this saint except that she suffered martyrdom at 
Antioch in Pisidia about a.p. 278, probably in the tenth general 
persecution. The so-called “Acts of St. Margaret” are not at 
all to be depended on, though it is probable, from the great 
popularity of the saint, that they were generally accepted in 
medieval times. In the Greek Church she is called St. Marina, 
and commemorated on the 17th; and it is curious that on an 
old bell at Pittington, near Durham, are the words Sancta 


M#arineta, as if the two forms of the name had been amal- 
gamated. No less than 238 churches are dedicated to St. Mar- 
garet; but it is probable that some of these, especially in the 
North of England, may belong to St. Margaret, Queen of Scotland. 
She is represented with the martyr’s crown and palm ; sometimes 
she stands piercing a dragon with a long cross, or emerges from 
its rent body, while her robe is yet passing through its mouth. 
She was esteemed as the patron of women in childbirth. [Sar. 
Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. li. 9—12. St. Matt. xiii. 44—52. ] 

22] Sr. Mary Magpaten.—The Western Church anciently 
recognized Mary Magdalen, the sister of Lazarus, and “the woman 
that was a sinner,” as one and the same person, while the Hastern 
Church has held them to be distinct. This opinion having been 
to a great extent received in England since the Reformation, the 
special office has been removed from the First Book of Edward VI., 
and the festival has ceased to be a “red-letter day.” In the 
Greek Church she is esteemed as the equal of the Apostles, as 
having been the first witness of the Resurrection. She is sup- 
posed to have retired to Ephesus with the Blessed Virgin and 
St. John, and to have been buried there. Her relics were trans- 
lated to Constantinople by the Emperor Leo the Philosopher, 
and placed in a church dedicated to St. Lazarus, as if under the 
supposition that she was his sister. In Western art she is repre- 
sented with long golden hair, and always having near her the 
alabaster box of ointment. She is often pictured as a penitent, 
in a cave, with a simple cross and a skull, and sometimes she is 
being carried by angels to heaven. The Collect in the First Book 
of Edward VI. was as follows :—‘ Merciful Father, give us grace 
that we never presume to sin through the example of any crea- 
ture; but if it shall chance us at any time to offend Thy Divine 
Majesty, that then we may truly repent and lament the same, 
after the example of Mary Magdalen, and by a lively faith 
obtain remission of all our sins, through the only merits of Thy 
Son our Saviour Christ. Amen.” The Epistle and Gospel were 
from the Salisbury Missal, as here given. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: 
Prov. xxxi. 10—31. St. Luke vii. 36—50.] 

26] Sr. Annu, Moruer or THe B. V. M.—We have no infor- 
mation whatever in Holy Scripture respecting the genealogy of the 
Blessed Virgin, except that she was of the “house and lineage of 
David.’ But St. John Damascene extols the virtue of St. 
Joachim and St. Anna, speaking of them as her parents; and St. 
Anne is frequently represented in the catacombs at Rome, with 
her name in connexion with the figure. She was doubtless 
honoured in the Primitive Church as the parent of the Mother of 
God, and as such retains her place in our Calendar. The Em- 
peror Justinian I. built a church at Constantinople in honour of 
St. Anne, cir. A.D. 550. In the Catacombs and in other early 
representations she has her hands stretched out as in prayer, and 
has near her a dove, with a ring or crown in its beak. In Medi- 
eval times she is figured with a book in her hand, teaching the 
Blessed Virgin to read, and sometimes pointing to the words 
“ Radix Jesse florwit.” [Sar. Ep. and Gosp: Prov. xxxi. 10O—81. 
St. Matt. i. 1—16.] 


G 2 


| 52] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 
AUGUST hath 31 Days. 
| Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. 
i] 1 | c¢ | Calende. Lammas Day. Jerem. 29 | John 20] Jerem. 30 | Heb. 4 
2| a | 4. Non. 31 21 32 5 
| 3 | e | 3. Non. 33 | Acts 1 34 6 
i} 4 £ | -ProsNon: 35 2 36 7 
| 5 | g¢ | None. : 37 3 38 8 
6 | A | 8. Id. Transfiguration of our Lord. 39 4, 40 9 
| Fai eabual¥ feels Name of Jesus. Al 5 42 10 
8 | ¢ | 6. Id. 43 6 4d 11 
\| On edanrocrlds 45, 46 tf 47 12 
| 10 | e | 4. Id. S. Laurence, Archd. of Rome and M. 48 8 49 : 13 
1 an PsP |'S..1e. 50 9 51 | James 1 
| IDE ws Pred. 52 10 | Lam. 1 2 
18 | A | Idus. Lam. 2 11 3 3 
|| 14 | b | 19. Cal. Sept. 4, 12 5 A 
PSs aeCan|L6..Cal- Ezek. 2 13 | Ezek. 3 5 
|| 16 | d | 17. Cal. 6 14 iC | elePeteamet: 
17 | e | 16. Cal. 13 15 14 2 
|| 18 | f | 15: Cal. 18 16 33 3 
|| 19 | g | 14. Cal. 34 17. \eDanwe 4 
20 | A | 18. Cal. Dan. 2 18 3 5 
| 21 | b | 12. Cal. 4 19 5 | 2Pet. 1 
OF es | ddaCal: 6 20 ul 2 
23 | d | 10. Cal. Fast. 8 21 9 3 
24} e 9. Cal. S. Bartholomem, Apostle and Part. 22 1 John 1 
257" iets 8. Cal. 10 23 11 2 
26.| ¢ 7. Cal. 12 24} Hosea 1 3 
27 | A | 6. Cal. Hos. 2,3 25 4 4, 
28 | b 5. Cal. S. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, C. D. 5,6 26 i 5 
|| 29 | c | 4. Cal. Beheading of S. John Baptist. 8 27 9 | 2,3 John 
30 |} d 3. Cal. 10 28 11 | Jude 
| 31 | e | Pr. Cal. 12 | Matt. 1 18 | Bom. Ald 
| 
Comparative View of the Calendar for AUGUST. 
Bede, A.D. 735. Sy eae Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 | The Maccabees. St. Peter’s Chains. St. Peter’s Chains, the Holy Macha- 
bees. 
2 | St. Stephen, Pontiff. St. Stephen, Pope & Mart. | SS. Alphonsus Liguori and ie Translation of St. Stephen, 
3 Invention of St. Stephen, | Finding of St. Stephen, Proto-mart. [Proto-martyr. 
4 [ Proto-martyr. | St. Dominic. [V. M. ad Nives. | The Seven holy Children at 
5 St. Oswald. Dedication of the Church of the B. { Ephesus. 
6 | SS. Xystus, Felicissimus, | Transfiguration. Transfigur. of our Lord, SS. Xystus, | Transfiguration. : 
{and Agapetus. [ Felicissimus, and Agapitus. 
7 Name of Jesus, St. Donatus. | St. Cajetan. 
8 St. Cyriacus and his fellow- | SS. Cyriacus, Largus, & Smaragdus. 
9 St. Romanus. [martyrs. | St. Romanus. St. Matthias, Apostle. 
10 | St. Laurence. St. Laurence. St. Laurence. St. Laurence. 
11 | St. Tiburtius. St. Tiburtius. SS. Tiburtius and Susanna. 
12 [low-martyrs. | St. Clare. ‘ 
13 St. Hippolytus and his fel- | SS. Hippolytus and Cassian. 
14 St. Eusebius. St. Husebius. 
15 | Assumption of St. Mary. Assumption of B. V. Mary. | Assumption of the B. V. Mary. The “falling asleep” of |. 
16 St. Hyacinth. [the B. V. Mary. 
iYy/ 
18 | St. Agapetus. St. Agapetus. 
19 St. Magnus. 
20 St. Bernard. St. Thaddeus, Apostle. 
21 St. Jane Francis. Samuel the Prophet. 
22 | St. Timothy. SS. Timothy, Hippolytus, and Sym- 
23 SS. Timothy & Apollinaris. | St. Philip Benitius. [phorian. 
24, St. Bartholomew. St. Bartholomew. St. Eutyches. 
25 | St. Bartholomew. St. Louis, King. Transl. of St. Bartholomew. 
26 St. Zephyrinus. 
27 St. Rufus. St. Joseph Calasanctius. 
28 | St. Augustine. St. Augustine of Hippo, SS. Augustin and Hermes.  [bina. 
29 | Passion of St. John Baptist. | Behead. of St. John Bapt. | Decollation of St. John Bapt., St. Sa- | Behead. of St. John Bapt. 
30 SS. Felix and Adauctus. SS. Rose of Lima, Felix, & Adauctus. | SS. Alexander, John, and 
31 St. Cuthburga. St. Aidan, Bishop of Lindisfarne. [Paul the younger, Patri- 
L [archs of Constantinople. 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF AUGUST. 


1] Lammas Day.—The observation of this day as a feast of 
thanksgiving for the first-fruits of the corn dates from Saxon 
times, in which it was called Hlaf-messe, or Loaf-mass, from the 
offering at the mass of bread made of the new corn. Other ex- 
planations, e. g. Lamb-mass, have been given, but the above is 
certainly the true one, as appears from old Saxon MSS. This is 
one of the four Cross-quarter days, at which rents were for- 
merly due. 

6] TRANSFIGURATION.—This festival was instituted in the 
Greek Church as early as A.D. 700, and appears to have been ob- 
served at Rome in the time of St. Leo (cir. 450). Pope Ca- 
lixtus the Third issued a bull for its general observance, A.D. 
_ 1457, in remembrance of the deliverance of Belgrade from Maho- 
met the Second. The glorious mystery of the Transfiguration is 
‘related by the three former’ Evangelists; but the festival has 
never ranked with the other festivals of our Lord, probably 
because its theological significance, though great, has appeared to 
be less evident than that of the rest. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: 2 St. 
Pet. i. 16—19. St. Matt. xvii. 1—9.] _ 

7| Name or JESUS.—This commemoration was removed at 
the Reformation from the Second Sunday after the Epiphany, 
but in Saxon times it was observed on the Feast of the Circum- 
cision. The special point which it sets before us is the peculiar 
sanctity of that Name at which every knee should bow, and in the 
power of which countless miracles have been wrought ; a sanctity 
in some respects analogous to that of the Sacred name Jehovah, 
but representing to us the Love of the Saviour as well as the 
Majesty of His Godhead. The acknowledged symbol of this name 
in our Church for many centuries has been {fe or thg; Anglicized 
forms of I.H.C., the first three letters in the Greek form of the 
name JHCOYC. But J.H.S. is a modern alteration originating 
with the Jesuits, whose symbol it is, and representing “Jesus 
Hominum Salvator.” [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Acts iv. 8—12. St. 
Matt. i. 20—23. ] 

10] Sr. Lavrenoz, the Deacon and Martyr, is said to have 
been of Spanish extraction, but nothing is certainly known 
respecting his early years. He was ordained Deacon by St. 
Sixtus II., and soon afterwards appointed chief of the Seven 
Deacons of Rome. The Christians were at this time suffering 
under the eighth general persecution, and the Bishop of Rome 
was led forth to martyrdom in 4.D. 258. Laurence, the Deacon, 
made a most affecting appeal to be allowed to suffer with his 
“father,” whom he had so often assisted in offering the Holy 
Sacrifice. ‘Chis did not come to pass; but within a week he drew 
upon himself the fury of the persecutors by refusing to deliver 
up the property of the Church, and showing instead the poor 
Christians as the real treasures of Christ. He was instantly 
seized, and put to the torture, but could not be compelled to 
deny Christ. He was then laid on an iron frame with bars like 
a gridiron, and slowly burnt to death over live coals. He suf- 
fered with marvellous patience and tranquillity, praying for the 
conversion of Rome. Prudentius, in a beautiful hymn, ascribes 
the final conversion of the city to this martyr’s intercession. 
He is named in the earliest Roman Calendar, A.D. 354, and his 
name has always been in the Canon of the Roman mass. No 
less than 250 churches are dedicated to him in England, and he 
was honoured by a vigil and octave in this country as well as at 
Rome. He is one of the three “Minor” Saints in the Calendar 
of Queen Elizabeth’s reign. His distinguishing emblem is the 
gridiron, and he is represented as a young man in alb and dal- 
matic, carrying a clasped book, or a bag, the latter in allusion to 
the treasure be refused to deliver up. The Palace of the Escu- 
rial, about fifteen miles from Madrid, was built by Philip the 
Second, A.D. 1563, in place of a monastery dedicated to St. Lau- 
rence which he had been obliged to demolish in some military 
It is built on the plan of a gridiron, which form is 
[Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: 2 Cor. ix. 


operations. 
also carried into all the details. 
6—10. St. John xii. 24—26.] 

28] Sr. AuGUSTINE, or Austin, was one of the most iastrious 
of the Fathers, and is honoured as one of the Four Doctors of the 
Western Church. He was born of humble parents, A.D. 354, at 
Togaste, in Numidia. His mother Monica was a Christian ; his 


[b3 


father Patricius, a Pagan. Both paid great attention to the 
education of their son, the mother to his spiritual training, the 
father to that secular education which was the foundation of his 
subsequent fame asa scholar. After being taught at home for a 
while, he was sent to Madaura to be perfected in grammar and 
rhetoric. Returning home at the age of fifteen, he spent a year 
in idleness, and, to the great sorrow of his holy mother, acquired 
dissolute habits. After this he was sent to complete his educa- 
tion at Carthage, and here he plunged still deeper into vice and 
dissipation. He did, however, devote some portion of his time to 
study, and began to read the Holy Scriptures, which, of course, 
he could not at this period of his life appreciate. He then fell 
into the Manichzan heresy, which appears to have accorded but 
too well with his pride of intellect and profligacy of life. St. 
Monica was deeply grieved at the errors of her son, and would 
not even eat with him; but being assured by a holy Bishop that 
the son of so many prayers and tears could not be lost, she 
became reconciled to him again. About this time he began to 
distrust Manicheism, and took to scepticism. Being rhetoric 
professor at Milan in «.D. 384, he was attracted by the Sermons 
of St. Ambrose, through whose influence he was gradually con- 
verted to the Catholic faith, and was baptized a.p. 387. The Ze 
Deum is sometimes called the Hymn of St. Ambrose and St. 
Augustine, from a tradition that it was composed and sung by 
them on this occasion. [See p. 10.] After a diligent study of 
St. Paul’s Epistles and of theology generally under the direction 
of St. Ambrose, he returned to Togaste, where he formed a small 
society of brethren who devoted themselves to a religious life. 
In a.D. 391 he was admitted to Holy Orders by Valerius, Bishop 
of Hippo, whose coadjutor in the episcopate he became in 396, 
having spent the previous four years in retirement. He began 
to write against the Donatists in 394. In 396 he succeeded 
Valerius, and was obliged to occupy the Bishop’s residence, but 
here he also established a community of clergy living by rule, 
which afterwards developed into the Order of Augustinian Canons. 
After an episcopate of thirty-five years he lived to see Hippo 
besieged by the Vandals. Augustine and his clergy earnestly 
prayed for deliverance from the Church’s foes; but in the third 
month of the siege he died of a fever, on August 28th, a.D. 480, 
in his seventy-seventh year, and was buried in the Church of 
St. Stephen. He had been summoned to the third general 
council, but the Emperor’s messenger arrived just too late to find 
him alive. Nearly fifty years afterwards the African Bishops 
carried the body with them to Sardinia, whither they were 
banished by Huneric, and about a.D. 710 it was purchased from 
the Saracens by the Lombards, and solemnly translated to the 
Church of St. Peter at Pavia, where it now rests. His festival 
was observed at Carthage, a century after his death, and is a 
holyday of obligation in the Spanish dominions. The distin- 
guishing emblem of St. Augustine is a child with a shell, in allu- 
sion to his vision of the Infant Jesus pouring water into a hole in 
the sand of the shore, to show him the impossibility of under- 
standing the mystery of the Trinity. Sometimes a heart, or an 
eagle, are represented with him. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. 
xlvii. 8—11. St. Matt. v. 13—19.] 

29] This minor festival of Sx. Joun the Baptist comme- 
morates his being beheaded at the instigation of Herodias, as 
related in Matt. xiv. 1—12. It is probable that the event 
took place shortly before the Passover, A.D. 32; and that it is 
celebrated on the 29th of August as the day on which some 
translation of his relics took place. Portions of his head are said 
to be still kept at Amiens and at Rome. He was held in great 
honour in this country, upwards of 390 churches being dedicated 
to him, and his decollation, and the circumstances connected with 
it, were favourite subjects in medieval representations. The 
nativity of St. John the Baptist (June 24th) is observed as his 
greater festival, probably because of his miraculous birth, and its 
connexion with that of our Blessed Lord. The Agnus Dez is his 
distinguishing emblem, and he is represented clad in skins, 
carrying a vexillum or pennon with the words Hece, agnus Dei. 
[Proy. x. 28—82, and xi, 3. 6,8—11. St. Mark vi. 17—29.] 


54] 


THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 


SEPTEMBER hath 30 Days. 


Morning Prayer. 


Evening Prayer. 


1} f | Calende. 

2/1 ¢ | 4, Non. 

38 | A | 8. Non. 

4 |} b |} Pr. Non. 

5 ce | None. 

Gel) Chistes liek 

Gal eonluce ds 

8 £6. kd’ 

OR omar oe lids 
Oe Ay a Arad: 
IE oy} Beaks 
125 ced serwekd. 
TS) des) dass 
14 | e | 18. Cal. Oct 
aS fl ia Cale 
16 | g | 16. Cal. 
17a) eA Bl oaal. 
18 | b | 14.°Cal. 
TOD lec. ltonal. 
ZOwN A a} Ves Cal: 
PAS e -\*11. Cal. 
22 f | 10. Cal. 
23 | ¢g 9. Cal. 
24) A 8. Cal. 
Done: 7, Cal. 
26 c 6. Cal. 
27 | d 5. Cals 
28 | e 4, Cal. 
29 al ok 8. Cal. 
30 | g | Pr. Cal. 


Giles, Abbot and Confessor. 


Eunurchus, Bishop of Orleans. 


Holy Cross Day. 


1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 
| Hos. 14 | Matt. 2 
Joel 2 fh 3 
Amos 1 4, 
3 BL 
5 6. 
q {é 
9 8 
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary. | Jonah 1 Gy 
4 10 
Micah 2 11 
4 12 
6 13 
WG = 14 
3 15 
aba 62 16 
Zeph. 1 17 
3 18 
Hag. 2 19 
Zech. 2, 3 20 
Fast. 6 21 
S. (Matthew, Ap., Eba., and sHart. 22 
8 23 
10 24: 
12 25 
14 26 
S. Cyprian, Archb. of Carthage and M. | Mal. 2 27 
4 28 
Tobit 2) Mark 1 
*2 
4 3 


Lambert, Bishop and Martyr. 


S. Michacl, any all Angels. 
S. Jerome, Pr. Conf. and Doct. 


* There are proper Second Lessons for both Morning and Evening Prayer, and the ordinary ones were doubtless left’ in 
by mistake. 


Comparative View of the Calendar for SEPTEMBER. 


Bede, A.D. 735. 


Nativity of St. Mary. 


SS. Prothus and Jacinthus. 


SS. Cornelius and Cyprian. 


St. Matthew. ; 
St. Maurice and his fellow- 
[ Martyrs. 


Conception of St. John B. 


SS. Cosmas and Damian. y 


St. Michael. 
St. Jerome. 


Salisbury Use, 
A.D. 1514. 


Modern Roman. 


Eastern. 


Transl. of St. Cuthbert. 
St. Bertinus. 


Nativity of B. V. Mary. 
St. Gorgonius. 


SS. Prothus and Jacinthus. 


Holy Cross Day. SS. Cor- 
{nelius and Cyprian. 


St. Edith. 
St. Lambert. 


SS. Matthew and Laudus. 


St. Maurice and his fellow- 
[ Martyrs. 


St. Thecla. 
St. Firmin. 
SS. Cosmas ‘and Damian. 


St. Michael. 
St. Jerome. 


SS. Raymond Nonnatus, Giles, and 
[the Twelve Brethren. 
St. Stephen, King. 


St. Laurence Justinian. 


Nativity of B. V.Mary. St. Adrian. 
St. Gorgonius. 

St. Nicolas of Tolentinum. 

SS. Protus and Hyacinth. 


Exaltation of the Holy Cross. 

St. Nicomedes. 

SS. Cornelius and Cyprian, Euphemia, 
[Lucey and Geminianus. 

Impression of the 8. wounds of St. 

St. Joseph of Cupertinum. [ Francis. 

St. Januarius and his Companions. 

St. Eustachius and his Companions. 

St. Matthew. 

SS. Thomas of Villanova, Maurice 

[and his Companions. 
SS. Linus and Thecla. 
Blessed Virgin Mary of Mercy. 


SS. Cyprian and Justina. 
SS. Cosmas and Damian. 
St. Wenceslaus. 

St. Michael. 

St. Jerome. 


New Year’s Day. Joshua. 


Moses the Prophet. 
Zacharias, Father of St. 
[John Baptist. 


Nativity of B. V. Mary. 
SS. Joachim and Anna. 


Exaltation of the Holy 
[ Cross. 
St. Euphemia. 


St. Quadratus, Apostle. 


Conception of St. John B. 
St. Thecla. 


1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 
Joel US aor 
3 3 

Amos 2 A, 
4 5 
6 6 

' 8 i 
‘Obadiah. 8 
John 2,3 9 
Micah ‘1° 10 
3: 11 

Di 12 

he 13 

Nah. 2 14 
Hebe: 15 
’ 3 16 
Zeph. » 2, |i Cor. -5 st 
Hag ol 2 
Zechnee L 3 
4, 5 4 

"6 5 

6 

9 7 

11} 8 

13 9 

Mal. il 10 
3 ab 

Tobit 1 12 
3 13 

*14, 

6 15 


a by ahneam ee j\siioe 3 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF SEPTEMBER. 


1] The accounts of the life of Sr. Grrus, or Mgidius, are 
rather confused, on account of there having been an Abbot of 
Arles of the same name in the preceding century. The saint 
commemorated on this day was born at Athens, about the middle 
of the seventh century, and was of noble parentage. When a 
. young man he sold all that he had, and retired into a forest in 
the diocese of Nismes, where he lived in seclusion with one com- 
panion named Veredemus. Here they lived on such food as the 
forest afforded, and were nourished also by the milk of a tame 
hind. The creature having been scented by the King’s dogs, was 
driven to her masters for protection, and thus the King discovered 
St. Giles in his retreat. Here he gave him land for a monastery 
of Benedictine monks, where he ruled as abbot for upwards of 
fifty years, and the spot was called Vallis Flaviana, from the 
name of its founder, Flavius Wamba. In a.p. 720 he had to 
take refuge from the Saracens at Orleans. He was, however, 
enabled to return to his abbey, where he died, a.p. 725. From 
his being said tu have refused to be cured of a lameness, he is 
esteemed as the patron of cripples, and the churches dedicated to 
him, which are numerous both in this country and on the Conti- 
nent, have generally been in the suburbs of cities, in order to 
afford poor and lame travellers a ready opportunity of resorting 
to them, on their entering from the country. [Sar. Hp. and 
Gosp.: Ecclus. xxxix. 5—9. St. Luke xi. 33—36.] 

7| Sr. EunuRcuHvs, or Evortius, Bishop of Orleans, was famous 
in the ancient Western Martyrologies, and hence probably has 
found a place in our Calendar. There are various stories relating 
to him, but no important information of a reliable nature, farther 
than that he flourished about the middle of the fourth century. 
He is said to have been pointed out as a fit person for the office 
of a bishop by a dove alighting on his head; but the story is 
told of others, and is plainly symbolical of his designation for 
that office by the Holy Ghost. 

8] The institution of the Feast of the Nariviry oF THE 
BuESsED VIRGIN has been ascribed to Pope Servius, cir. A.D. 695, 
and was universally celebrated in Medieval times, with octave 
and vigil. We have no other particulars respecting the parentage 
of the Blessed Virgin, than that she was “of the house and 
lineage” of David. Tradition names her father Joachim, and 
her mother St. Anne (see July 26). [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. 
xxiv. 17—22, and Wisd. iv. 1—7. Alternate days during the 
Octave, St. Matt. i. 1—16. The Octave, St. Luke xi. 27, 28.] 

14] Hoty Cross Day.—This is also called the Feast of the 
Exaltation of the Holy Cross; and though it is not in Bede’s 
Calendar, it, as well as the 3rd of May, was called “ Roodmas- 
day” by our Saxon ancestors. It is kept in honour of the public 
exposition of a portion of the Cross, in the basilica erected at 
Jerusalem by the Empress Helena (see May 3). This church 
was solemnly consecrated on Sept. 13, A.D. 335, and on the next 
day, being Sunday, the precious relic was exposed from a lofty 
place within the building. The custom was continued annually, 
and so the festival has been observed on this day ever since, both 
in the East and in the West. This festival also commemorates 
that famous appearance of the “sign of the Son of Man in the 
heavens” which is said to have decided the conversion of the 
Emperor Constantine; and another event connected with it is 
the recovery by Heraclius (A.D. 629) of that portion of the Cross 
which had been carried away from Jerusalem by Chosroes, King 
of the Persians, A.D.614. There areno less than 106 churches in 
England under the designation either of Holy Rood or of St. Cross. 

The Ember Days in September are the Wednesday, Friday, and 
Saturday after Holy Cross Day. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Gal. v. 
10—12, and vi. 12—14. St. John xii. 31—36.] 

17] Sz. Lampert, or Landebert, was born of Christian parents 
of rank and wealth, at Maestricht, where, after a careful educa- 
tion, he was committed to the care of St. Theodard, the Bishop, 
at whose death he succeeded to the see. When Childeric, King 
of France, was dethroned and murdered, in A.D, 673, Lambert, 
who was known to be his friend, was driven into exile. Being 
afterwards restored, he laboured much for the conversion of the 
heathen. In the fortieth year of his episcopate he was mur- 
dered, on the 17th of September, A.D. 709, having incurred. the 


[55 


anger of the King’s officer, Pepin, Lord of Herstal, by boldly re- 
buking vice ; and thus he came to be considered a martyr. Through 
the translation of his relics thither, the village of Liége became 
a city; but the Cathedral of St. Lambert was destroyed at the 
Revolution. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Heb. v.1—6. St. Matt. ix. 
35—88, and x. 7, 8. 16.] 

26] Sv. Cyprian, ARCHBISHOP OF CARTHAGE, AND MArryr. 
—This festival was originally kept, together with that of St. Cor- 
nelius, Bishop of Rome, on the 14th of September, but on account 
of Holy Cross Day, was transferred to the 16th, on which day the 
Eastern and Roman Churches still keep it, as did the Mediaeval 
English Church. In the Sarum and Roman Calendars the 26th 
was devoted to another St. Cyprian, a converted magician of 
Antioch. The famous St. Cyprian, of Carthage, was born in that 
city to the rank of a senator, and for many years he was cele- 
brated for his eloquence, and as a teacher of rhetoric. When 
past middle age he was converted, and having been prepared for 
baptism by a priest named Cecilius, he took from him his Chris- 
tian name. Being ordained priest, he soon after this succeeded 
Donatus in the see of Carthage, a.D. 248. He is described 
as having been a model of what a bishop ought to be. But 
the Decian persecution soon disturbed the Church, and the 
decree reached Carthage, a.D. 250. The heathen furiously raged 
together, crying, “ Cyprianus ad leones ; Cyprianus ad bestias,” 
and also calling him Coprianus in contempt, thus fulfilling lite- 
rally the words of St. Paul (1 Cor. iv. 18). He used the liberty 
which our Lord had given (St. Matt. x. 23) to flee from per- 
secution for the sake of his flock, and after the death of the 
tyrant was enabled to return. Great difficulty was now felt 
respecting the restoration of those who had lapsed, and St. 
Cyprian assembled a synod, at which a wise and moderate con- 
clusion was arrived at. About A.D. 255 arose that famous con- 
troversy with St. Stephen, Bishop of Rome, on the subject of 
heretical baptism, which shows so conclusively that the African 
Church did not consider that the word of the Bishops of Rome at 
once settled any such matter. St. Cyprian held, contrary to the 
opinion which has generally prevailed since, that such baptism, 
even if administered with the right words and the right matter, 
was invalid. He was at last beheaded by the Emperor Galerius, 
Sept. 14, a.D. 258. His works have great value. [Sar. Ep. and 
Gosp.: Wisd. v. 15—19. St. Matt. x. 23—25.] 

80] Sr. Jenomn, Priest, Conressor, and Docror.—-This 
celebrated Father was born at Stridonium (now Sdrigni), in Italy, 
near Aquileia, about. arp. 342. He was educated in his native 
town for some years, and then was sent to Rome to study under 
Donatus and Victorinus, two famous grammarians. Here he 
made great progress, being stimulated by the feeling that the 
Christians were despised as too illiterate to worthily explain their 
tenets. He then travelled through Thrace and the provinces of 
Asia Minor, after which, in disgust at the half-pagan manners of 
the Christians, he retired, at the age of thirty-one, to a desert in 
Syria, where he led a very austere and studious life. Here he 
studied Hebrew with a converted Jew; and after visiting Jerusalem 
and Bethlehem was ordained priest at Antioch, a.p. 378. After 
this he led a very wandering life, studying at all the great seats 
of learning, and living in constant mortification. The latter part 
of his life was mainly occupied in writing against heretics. He 
peacefully departed, Sept. 30, a.p. 420, and was buried in a 
monastery he had founded at Bethlehem, whence his body was 
afterwards translated to the Church of St. Maria Maggiore at 
Rome. His greatest work was the translation of the Scriptures 
into Latin, and he was well fitted for it by his knowledge of 
Eastern languages, localities, manners, and customs. This formed 
the basis of the Latin Vulgate, from which were taken most of 
the portions of Scripture used in the Western Offices, and which 
has been universally received in the Latin Church. 

St. Jerome is represented as an old man engaged in study, 
with a skull near him. He has generally a lion by his side, and 
wears or has near him a broad hat, having cords ending in plain 
tassels, similar to that of a cardinal, but the cords of the latter 
end inasort of network terminating in tassels. [Sar, Ep. and 
Gosp.: Ecclus. xlvii. 8—11. St. Matt. v. 13—19.] 


56] 


THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 


OCTOBER hath 31 Days. 


Morning Prayer. 


Evening Prayer. 


Pee eee 
AOLwnwNrowowm Gounwwe | 


17 


1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 

1} A | Calende. Remigius, Bishop of Rhemes. Tobit 7 | Mark 4.) Tobit 8 | 1 Cor. 16 
21 b | 6. Non. : 9 5 10 | 2Cor. 1 
3 | ¢ | 5. Non. 11 6 12 2 
4 | ad | 4. Non. 13 7 14 3 
5 | e | 8. Non. * Judith 1 8 | Judith 2 A 
G) |gete | er. Non: Faith, Virgin and Martyr. 3 9 4 5 
71 ¢ | None. 5 10 6 6 
8} A | 8. Id. Ff 11 8 v4 
OF | ibe eee S. Denys, Areop. B. and M. 9 12 10 8 
TO WS dil alt 13 12 9 
TH |) Gl essa 13 14 14 10 
12) e | 4. Id. 15 15 16 11 
SMe ceun Lae Translation of King Edward Confessor. | Wisd. 1 16 | Wisd. 2 12 
TAT |e" | Pre id. 3 | Lu.1t039 4, 13 
15 | A | Idus. 5 1 39 6 | Galat. 1 
16} b | 17. Cal. Nov. 7 2 8 2 
jelenc! © L6aCal, Etheldreda, Virg. 9 3 10 3 
Syed |) 15.1Cal, %. Luke, Evangelist. 4 4 
19} e |} 14. Cal. 11 5 12 5 
20 £ | len Cale 13 6 14 6 
2a \eos) 125Cal: 15 i 16 | Ephes. 1° 
22). A} 11. Cal. 17 8 18 2 
23 | b | 10. Cal. 19 9 | Ecclus. 1 3 
24 | ¢ 9. Cal. Eeelus. 2 10 3 4 
25 | d | 8. Cal. Crispin, Martyr. 4 11 5 5 
26} e 7. Cal. 6 12 "f 6 
PME |e se 6. Cal. Fast. 8 13 9 | Phil. a 
28} ¢ 5. Cal. S, Simon & S. Jue, Ap. & sMart. 14 2 
29) A 4. Cal. 10 15 11 3 
30 b 8. Cal. 12 16 13 A 
3 esol bra Cale Fast. 14 17 15 | Colos. 1 

Comparative View of the Calendar for OCTOBER. 
Bede, A.D. 735. Salisbury Use, Modern Roman. Eastern. 


St. Remedius. 


“Passio duorum Heuved- 
[dorum.” 


SS. Marcellinus and Genuus. 
St. Paulinus. 


St. Luke. 


SS. Simon and Jude. 


A.D. 1514. 


SS. Remigius and Melorus. 
SS. Thomas of Hereford 
[and Leger. 


St. Faith. ’ 
SS. Marcus and Marcellian. 


[ Martyrs. 
St. Dionysius and his fellow- 
St. Geron & his fellow-Mart. 
St. Nichasius and his fellow- 
[ Martyrs. 
Transl. of St. Edward Conf. 
St. Calixtus. 
. Wulfran. 
. Michael of the Mount. 
. Etheldreda. 
. Luke. 
. Frideswide. 


The 11,000 Virgins. 


St. Romanus. A 


89 Crispin and Crispinia 
SS. Simon and Jude. 


St. Quintin. 


St. Remigius. 

The Guardian Angels. 

St. Thomas, Bishop of Hereford. 

St. Francis of Assisium. 

SS. Placidus and Companions. 

St. Bruno. 

SS. Mark, Sergius, Bacchus, Mar- 
[cellus, and Apuleius. 

St. Bridget. 

SS. Dionysius, Rusticus, and Eleu- 

St. Paulinus. [therius. 

St. Francis Borgia. 

St. Wilfrid. 

St. Edward, King. 

St. Callistus. 

St. Teresa. 


St. 
St. 
St. 


Hedwiges. 
Luke, Evangelist. { 
Peter of Alcantara. 


SS. Ursula and Companions, and 
[ Hilarion. 

St. John Cantius. 

Feast of our Most Holy Redeemer. 

St. Raphael, Archangel. 

SS. John of Beyerley, Chrysanthus, 

St. Evaristus. [and Daria. 


SS. Simon and Jude. 
Venerable Bede. 


St. Ananias, Apostle. 
SS. Cyprian and Justina. 
St. Dionysius the Areopa- 


[gite. 
St. Thomas, Apostle. 


St. James, son of Alpheus. 
St. Philip the Deacon. 


St. Lucian of Antioch. 

St. Longinus the Centurion. 
Hosea the Prophet. 

St. Luke, Apostle and Hy. 
Joel the Prophet. 


St. James, Apostle and 
[brother of God. 


The Patriarch Abraham. 
[banus, &e. 
SS. Stachys, Amplias, Ur- 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF OCTOBER. 


1] St. Remratus, Bishop or Rurims.—This saint, often 
called St. Remi, the “Apostle of France,” was born about a.D. 439, 
of noble parents, long after their other children, his birth having 
been foretold by a hermit named Montanus. He received an 
education suitable to his station, and was always remarkable for 
_ the holiness of his life. So celebrated was he for his spiritual 
and other qualifications, that he was made Bishop of Rheims in 
the twenty-second year of his age, and was afterwards made 
Primate of Gaul, since which time Rheims has been the 
Metropolitan See of France. He is most known as having been 
instrumental in the conversion of King Clovis, from whom the 
subsequent French kings appear to have derived the titles of 
“Eldest Son of the Church,” and “ Most Christian King.” The 
ampulla with which St. Remi anointed Clovis at his baptism is 
still preserved at Rheims, and has generally been used at the 
coronations of the French kings. He died in the ninety-sixth 
year of his age, and seventy-third of his episcopate, and was 
buried in the Church of St. Christopher at Rheims. His body 
was translated to the Benedictine Abbey, Oct. Ist, 1049, since 
which, Oct. 1st has been his festival instead of Jan. 13th, the day 
of his death. His distinguishing emblem is a dove bearing the 
ampulla. (Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Heb. vii. 23—27. St. Luke xii. 
35—40. ] 

6] Sx. Farrn, V. anp M.—This Virgin Martyr, also called Fides, 
suffered under Datian, the Roman Prefect of Gaul, in the latter 
part of the third century. She was born of Christian parents, 
and while still very young was brought to her trial. Refusing to 
sacrifice to Diana, she boldly confessed Christ, notwithstanding 
the most horrible tortures; endeavouring, as she said, to support 
in reality what her name signified. She was at last beheaded, 
haying been previously beaten with rods, and bound with chains 
to a brazen bed, under which fire was placed; when several of the 
spectators, rebuking the tyrant, and following her example in 
refusing to sacrifice, suffered with her. St. Vincent (see Jan. 
22) endured many tortures under this same Datian, who appears 
to have been one of the greatest monsters of cruelty that the ages 
of persecution ever produced. St. Faith is represented with the 
instruments of her martyrdom, and wears the crown of victory. 
Sixteen churches, including that under the choir of St. Paul’s 
Cathedral, which is now used only for burials, are dedicated to 
her. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Hcclus. li, 9—12. St. Matt. xiii. 
44—52.] 

9] Sr. Denys ARzoP., B. AnD M.—It would seem that in the 
Roman and Sarum Missals this saint has been confounded with 
the Patron of France, for the “companions” of this later St. 
Denys are mentioned together with him in the Calendar, Collect, 
&e., while the Epistle is from the Acts of the Apostles, and relates 
to the conversion of ‘‘ Dionysius the Areopagite,” the “woman 
named Damaris, and others with them ;” an inconsistency which 
remains to this day in the Roman Offices. St. Denys, or Diony- 
sius, was a member of the Upper Council of Athens, which held 
its sittings on “ Mars’ Hill,” and was converted by the preaching 
of St. Paul when the Apostle was brought before that Court. 
Eusebius mentions him as having been first Bishop of Athens, 
where also he is related to have suffered martyrdom under Domi- 
tian, cir. A.D. 96. The celebrated treatise on the Heavenly 
Hierarchies, ascribed to him, is generally considered to be spurious. 
In the Greek Church he is commemorated on the third of 
the month. This saint has no distinguishing emblem, but his 
namesake of France bears a mitred head in his hands, symbolizing 
his death by decapitation. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Acts xvii. 16—34. 
St. Luke vi. 17—23. ] 

13] Trans. or Kine Epwarp Conr.—St. Edward the Con- 
fessor is pre-eminently our national saint, He was born in 
Oxfordshire, and succeeded his father, King Ethelred, a.p. 1041. 
Having suffered much at the hands of the Danes, he had in his 
youth vowed to make a pilgrimage to Rome, and wished to fulfil 
his intention as soon as he became King. But such was the 
danger attending his absence from England, that Leo IX. dis- 
pensed with the performance of the vow on condition that he 
would give to the poor the money the pilgrimage would have 
eost him, and found or re-found a monastery in honour of St. Peter. 


This led to the re establishment of the then ancient Abbey of 
Westminster on a new and magnificent footing, The buildings 
were completed and solemnly dedicated to St. Peter on the Feast 
of the Holy Innocents, a.D. 1065, and considerable portions of 
them remain to this day. The King was unable, through sickness, 
to be present at the dedication, and only just lived to know that 
the work was accomplished, for he died January 5th, a.p. 1066, 
and was buried in the new Abbey Church before the high altar, 
a great concourse of nobles and ecclesiastics attending. His 
tomb was adorned with silver and gold by William the Conqueror, 
and enclosed in a shrine. The body was removed by St. Thomas 
of Canterbury to a richer shrine, Oct. 13th, A.D. 1163, and after 
the rebuilding of the church by Henry III., that monarch had a 
most sumptuous shrine erected, the wreck of which still remains, 
with a superstructure of wood in the debased style of the sixteenth 
century. The former translation, which was probably connected 
with the canonization of the saint, is the one commemorated. 
The touching for the King’s Evil dates from St. Edward, and was 
last performed by Queen Anne, in whose reign a special Office 
was used. The same power was claimed by the Kings of France 
for many ages. A ring given by St. Edward in his last illness to 
the Abbot of Westminster was long preserved as a relic, and 
applied to the cure of nervous diseases. Succeeding kings used to 
bless rings on Good Friday for the same purpose, and these were 
called “ cramp rings.” St. Edward the Confessor is distinguished 
by holding the ring (often disproportionately large) in his hand. 
The arms attributed to him are, 4z. a cross patonce between five 
martlets, Or; but these belong toa much later period. [Sar, Ep. 
and Gosp.: Ecclus. xxxix.5—9. St. Luke xi. 383—36.] 

17] Sv. ErHELDREDA, VIRGIN QuEEN.—St. Etheldreda was 
born in Suffolk, in the seventh century, and was the daughter of 
Anna, King of the East Angles, whose queen was a sister of St. 
Hilda, Abbess of Whitby. Having been religiously brought up, 
she was married to the Prince of the Girvii. Being left a widow, 
she retired to Ely, where she led a solitary and mortified life. 
In a.D. 660 she was married to Egfrid, a Northumbrian prince, 
with whom she lived as a sister rather than a wife for twelve 
years. On his succeeding to the throne she retired toa monastery, 
from which the King attempted to withdraw her, whereupon she 
fled to her old retreat at Ely. Here she founded a convent, over 
which she presided as abbess for some years, and at last died 
during a pestilence, June 23rd, A.D. 679. She was succeeded by 
her sister, St. Sexburga, who translated her remains, and placed 
them in a coffin of white marble, Oct. 17th, a.p. 695. Her 
history is represented in sculptures under the lantern of Ely 
Cathedral, which arose out of the monastery founded by her. 
She is represented as an abbess with pastoral staff, a celestial 
crown on her head, and the insignia of earthly royalty lying 
behind her. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: 2 Cor. x. 17—xi. 2. St. Matt. 
xxy. 1—13.] 

25] Sr. Crispin, Marryr.—In the ancient Calendar, St. Crispin 
was commemorated together with his twin brother Crispinian. 
They were famous in France owing to their having been among 
the companions of St. Denys, together with St. Quintin and 
others who came as missionaries from Rome into Gaul in the 
third century. Fixing their abode at Soissons, they preached 
and instructed the people by day, and when not so engaged, exer- 
cised the trade of shoe-making for a maintenance, supplying the 
poor free of charge. Hence they have been considered the tutelar 
saints or patrons of that craft, and of two famous societies in 
France, called Fyréres Cordonniers. The two brothers were 
beheaded Oct. 25th, a.p. 288, after severe tortures, under Rictius 
Varus, the Roman Governor of Soissons, during the progress of 
the Emperor Maximian through Gaul. In the sixth century a 
church was built and dedicated to them at Soissons, their pro- 
bable place of interment, though there is a curious tradition in 
Kent that they were buried at Stones End, in that county. 
Their emblems are the martyr’s palm and the shoemaker’s awl, 
or knife. There is an interesting reference to the “Feast of 
Crispian” in Shakspeare (Henry V., Act iv. Se. iii.), in connexion 
with the great battle of Agincourt. [Sar.Ep. and Gosp.: 1 Cor. 
iv. 9—14, St. Matt. x. 16—22.] 


ore 


See —SEOOOOOOOooOoOoOoOoooOOoooaoeeS} 


a 


| 53] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 
NOVEMBER hath 30 Days. 
Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 
1 | d | Calende. All Saints’ Bap. 
21 e | 4. Non. Ecclus. 16 | Luke 18 | Ecclus.17 | Colos. 2 
3 | f | 3. Non. 18 19 19 3 
4 | g¢ | Pr. Non. 20 20 21 4, 
5 | A | None. JPapists’ Consptracp. 22 21 23 | 1 Thess. 1 
Gate Daiiesakd. Leonard, Confessor. 24 22 a 25 2 
VN ENE lee 27 23 28 3 
S|  V6nid. 29 24, b 30 4 
On er 1b. Id: OL |. JOHN ae 82 5 
10 f | 4. Id? 33 2 34 | 2 Thess. 1 
IPE ee St 2k S. Martin, Bishop and Confessor. 35 5} 36 2 
aA elred : 37 4, 38 3 
13 | b | Idus. Britius, Bishop. 39 5 40 | 1 Tim. 1 
14 | c | 18. Cal. Dec 41 6 42 2,3 
Vom ele Cale Machutus, Bishop. 43 a 44 4 
16 | e | 16. Cal. 45 8 © 46 5 
La ate jelorCal: Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln. 47 9 48 6 
18 g | 14. Cal. i 49 10 50 | 2 Tim. 1 
1Oe) Aw elo. @al. 51 11 |:Baruch 1 2 
20 | b | 12. Cal. Edmund, King and Martyr. Baruch 2 12 3 3 
21 e | 11. Cal. 4 13 5 4, 
ZONA TON Cals Cecilia, Virgin and Martyr. 6 14 | Hist.ofSusan. | Titus 1 
23 e 9. Cal. S. Clement, I. Bp. of Rome and Mart. | Bell & ye Drag. 15 | Isa. if 2,3 
24) f 8. Cal. Isa. 2 16 3 | Philem. 
ZO Neale deel. Katharine, Virgin and Martyr. 4, 17 5) Heb. cal 
26 | A 6. Cal. 6 18 7 2 
27 | b 5. Cal. 8 19 9 3 
28 c 4. Cal. 10 20 ith 4, 
29 | d 8. Cal. Fast. 12 21 13 5 
30))| e) | Br. Cal, S. Andrew, Apost. anv seart. Acts 1 6 
' f 
Note, that 4 Ecclus. 25 is to be read only to Verse 13. And > Heclus. 30, only to Verse 18. And ¢ Ecclus. 46, only to 
Verse 20. f' 4 ss 
Comparative View of the Calendar for NOVEMBER. 
Bede, A.D. 735. sowie Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 All Saints. All Saints. SS. Cosmas and Damian. 
2 Commemoration of the de- | Commemoration of the departed. 
3 St. Winifred. [parted. | St. Winifred. 
4, SS. Charles Borromeo, Vitalis, and 
5 (Agricola. 
6 St. Leonard. 
7 
8 | The four Crowned Saints. | The four Crowned Martyrs. | The four Crowned Martyrs. SS. Michael and all Angels. 
9 St. Theodore. Dedication of our Saviour’s Church. | St. Onesiphorus. ; 
10 3 SS. Andrew Avellius, Tryphon, Re- | SS. Olympas, Rhodion, So- 
; [spicius, and Nympha. [sipater, &e. 
11 | St. Martin. ) SS. Martin,frd-stmel SS. Martin and Mennas. 
12 it Ay St. Martin, Priest and Martyr. 
13 . “ll St. Britius. St. Didacus. St. John Chrysostom. 
14 Transl. of St. Erkenwald. | St. Erconwald, Bishop of London. St. Philip, Apostle. 
15 St. Machutus. St. Gertrude. 
16 St, Edmund, Archbishop. St. Edmund, Archbishop. St. Matthew, Ap. & Evang. 
17 St. Hugh. St. Hugh. St. Gregory Thaumaturgus. 
18 Dedication of Churches of SS. Peter 
{and Paul. 
19 SS. Elizabeth and Pontianus. Obadiah the Prophet. 
20 St. Edmund, K. and Mart. | St. Edmund, King and Martyr. 
21 Presentation of Blessed Virgin Mary. | Presentation of B. V. Mary. 
22 | St. Cecilia. St. Cecilia. St. Cecilia. SS. Philemon and Cecilia. 
23 | St. Clement. St. Clement. St. Clement. 
24. | St. Crisogonus. St. Crisogonus. SS. John of the Cross, and Chryso- | SS. Clement of Rome and 
25 St. Katharine. St. Catharine. [gonus. [ Peter of Alexandria. 
26 St. Linus. St. Felix Valois. 
27 St. Gregory Thaumaturgus. 
28 
29 | St. Saturninus. SS. Saturninus & Sisinnius. | St. Saturninus. 
30 | St. Andrew. St. Andrew. St. Andrew. St. Andrew. 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF NOVEMBER. 


6] Sr. Leonarp, Deacon ann Conrrssor.—This saint was in 
his youth a nobleman of high station in the court of Clovis L., 
King of France. Being converted by St. Remigius, he resolved 
to embrace the religious life, notwithstanding the earnest impor- 
tunity of the King. After remaining some time in the monastery 
of Micy, near Orleans, he retreated to a hermitage in a forest near 
Limoges, converting many as he went along. He was not allowed 
to remain here in solitude; for many hearing of his fame flocked 
to him, and eventually a monastery arose on the spot, over which 
he presided, and which was endowed by the King with a great 
part of the surrounding forest. He always took a great interest 
in prisoners and captives; and it is said that King Clovis granted 
him the privilege of releasing all whom he deemed worthy. Hence 
he became the patron of prisoners. He died in peace A.D. 599, 
and became very famous both in France and in England. He is 
sometimes represented as a deacon, and sometimes as a Benedic- 
tine abbot, with pastoral staff and book. Often he has chains or 
fetters in his hands, or a prisoner chained near him. [Sar. Ep. 
and Gosp.: Heclus. xxxix.5—9. St. Luke xi. 33—36.] 

11] Sr. Marrin, Bishop AND ConFESSOR.—St. Martin was the 
son of a Roman military tribune in Constantine’s army, and was 
born in Hungary about a.p. 316. He became a catechumen 
while yet a child, and was compelled to enter the army in his 
fifteenth year, but nobly gave away in alms the whole of his pay 
except what he required for his subsistence. The well-known 
story of his dividing his military cloak with his sword, and giving 
half to a poor naked beggar at the gate of Amiens, is recorded by 
St. Sulpicius. It is said that he afterwards saw in a dream our 
Lord in the half of the cloak he had given to the poor man, and 
thought he heard Him say, “ Martin, who is but a catechumen, 
hath covered Me with this garment.” This dream at once deter- 
mined him to receive holy Baptism, being about eighteen years old. 
Two years after this he sought his discharge, but being reproached 
with cowardice, he offered to face the enemy unarmed at the 
head of his troop, protected only by the sign of the Cross. 
Peace ensuing, he was released from further service. He then 
retired into solitude, from which he was withdrawn by St. Hilary, 
Bishop of Poictiers, who wished to ordain him deacon, but he 
would only consent at that time to be an exorcist. While on his 
way to visit his parents he was attacked by robbers, one of whom 
was converted on the spot. His mother and many of his coun- 
trymen were also converted, but his father remained a Pagan. 
He now met with great persecution from the Arians, who being 
at the height of their power, had succeeded in expelling St. 
Hilary from his bishopric, A.D. 356. St. Martin retired into 
solitude near Genoa, but about s.D. 360 rejoined St. Hilary, who 
had been restored to his see, and founded a monastery, said to 
have been the first in Gaul. The see of Tours becoming vacant, 
he was obliged against his will to accept it, but he determined to 
live a hermit’s life notwithstanding. This, as in the case of St. 
Leonard, ended in his gathering around him a large number of 
recluses, which led to the establishment of one of the largest 
abbeys in France. St. Martin died November 8th, a.D. 397, 
and was buried at Cande, a monastery at the extremity of his 
diocese. [See July 4th.] St. Martin’s cope (cappa) used to be 
carried into battle, and kept in a tent where Mass was said; 
hence the origin of the term capella, as applied to places for reli- 
gious services other than parish churches. In process of time, a 
blue banner, divided to represent St. Martin’s cloak, was carried 
instead, until it in turn was eclipsed by the famous Oriflamme, or 
banner of St. Denys. The ancient Gauls held St. Martin in such 
veneration that they even reckoned their years from the day of 
his death. ‘ Martinmas” is still one of the four Cross-quarter 
days, coinciding with the Roman Vinalia; hence, perhaps, the 
origin of Martinmas festivities. There are no less than 160 
churches dedicated to St. Martin in England alone, and he was 
still more popular in France. He is generally represented divid- 
ing his cloak with the beggar. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. xliv. 
17. 20, 21—23; xlv. 6, 7.15, 16. St. Matt. xxv. 14—23.] 

13] Sr. BRiTIUs, Bisuor.—St. Britius, or Brice, was an inmate 
of the religious house presided over by St. Martin, but gave much 
offence by his irregularities of conduct. St. Martin, however, 


[59 


seeing in him the germ of good, ordained him deacon and priest, 
and foretold that he would one day succeed him in the see of 
Tours. Before the death of St. Martin a crisis came about in the 
spiritual life of Britius. Having been severely rebuked by his 
master, he reviled him in return, but soon repented, and bitterly 
lamented his former evil ways. On the death of St. Martin he 
was elected to succeed him, but his former sins were visited on 
him in this world, for he was grossly slandered, and banished 
from his see for seven years. He then returned, and remained in 
quiet possession for seven years more, after which he died, A.D. 
444, He was buried near to St. Martin, in a chapel which he 
had himself built over the tomb of his spiritual father. He is 
represented as a Bishop with a child in his arms, or with burning 
coals in his hands or chasuble, in allusion to the belief that he 
was the first to undergo the Fiery Ordeal which afterwards became 
so general among Northern nations. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Wisd. 
x. 10—14. St. Luke xix. 12—28.] 

15] St. Macuutvs, Bisnop.—This saint, known also as St. 
Malo, (a Welshman,) was baptized and educated by the Irish Abbot 
of a monastery in the valley of Llan Carvan, where he was born. 
During the civil commotions of the age he fled into Brittany, 
and there led an ascetic life in an island, whence he used to go 
and preach to the pagans on the mainland. About A.D. 541 he 
was appointed Bishop of Aleth, but was driven by persecution to 
take refuge in Aquitaine. In his old age he was enabled to 
visit his people again, and give them his blessing. He died A.D. 
564, while on his way to visit St. Leontius, Archbishop of Saintes, 
who had befriended him in his exile. The town of St. Malo is 
named from his body having once rested there. He is represented 
as a Bishop, with a child at his feet. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp. : Kcclus. 
xliv. 17. 20—23 ; xlv. 6, 7.15, 16. St. Luke xix. 12—28.] 

17] Huan, Br. or Lincorn.—St. Hugh, or Hugh de Grenoble, 
was born of a noble Burgundian family, a.p. 1140. Ordained at 
the age of nineteen, he joined the Carthusians, or Reformed Bene- 
dictines, and about a.D. 1181 came to preside over the first Car- 
thusian monastery in Britain, at Witham, in Somersetshire, at the 
request of its royal founder, Henry II. Five years after, the see of 
Lincoln having been long vacant, the King directed the dean and 
chapter to elect a new bishop, and to his great satisfaction they 
decided on the Prior of Witham. He reluctantly accepted his 
new office; but, once consecrated, discharged his episcopal duties 
in a most exemplary manner, yearly retiring, however, to his old 
monastery, aud living as a brother, with no other distinction 
than the episcopal ring. He was overtaken by his last illness on 
his way back, after one of these visits, and died Nov. 17, a.p. 
1200, as the clergy were singing the Compline Nune Dimittis in 
his presence. He was solemnly buried in Lincoln Minster, a great 
part of which had been built under his direction ; and two years 
afterwards his body was translated to the shrine behind the high 
altar. He is represented in the Carthusian habit, with cope, 
mitre, and pastoral staff, and has the swan by his side, or three 
flowers in his hand, or is defended from lightning by an angel. 
It is a curious fact that in some Lincolnshire churchwardens’ 
accounts, of the time of Queen Elizabeth, are frequent entries 
relative to ringing the bells on the 17th of November, the anni- 
versary of her accession, but that it is almost always called S¢. 
Hugh’s Day. In Clee. Church is a venerable memorial of 
St. Hugh in the original dedication inscription: H - ECCL’IA . 
DEDICATA : Eft - IN - HONORE: S’CE : T’NITATI£: ET 
S’CE- MARIE: V’: IITo- N’: MARTII: A: DNO- HVGONE 
LINCOLNIE’SI- EP’?O > ANNO: AB: VPCARNACIONE: DNI: 
M:-C: XC: Ilo ™ TH’PORE: RICARDI: REGIS. [Sar. Ep. 
and Gosp.: Ecclus. xlv.1—5. St. Mark xiii. 33—37.] 

20] Sr. Epmunp, Kine anp Martyr.—This Saxon saint was 
born A.D. 841, and was crowned King of East Anglia in the 
fourteenth year of his age. He lived a most saintly life; and 
restored the churches and monasteries that had been destroyed in 
the recent wars. About A.D. 870, the Danes made an incursion 
on our eastern shores, ravaging churches and monasteries wherever 
they came. Edmund gave them battle, but finding it a hopeless 
case, fled to a church, and earnestly prayed for constancy in the 


sufferings which he saw impending. The Danes dragged him 
TTD 


ns nt 
aS 


60] THE CALENDAR WITH THE TABLE OF LESSONS. 
FE 


DECEMBER hath 31 Days. 


Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. 
1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 1 Lesson. | 2 Lesson. | 
1] f | Calende. Isa. 14 | Acts 2 | Isa. lD>eiHebs: eZ 
21 ¢ | 4, Non. 16 3 7 8 
3 | A | 3. Non. 18 4 19 9 
4 | b | Pr. Non. 20, 21 5 22 10 
5 | c | None. 23 6 24 11 
Colma aS. id. Nicolas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia. 25 | 7 to v. 30 26 12 
LE ee | SAG 27 | 7 30 28 13 
Sul autem Gale Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 29 8 30 | James 1 
9| g |5.Ida. * 31 9 32 2 
10 | A | 4. Id. 33 10 34 3 
Thi besl| sya M3 Ul 35 aul 36 4 
d2aiecermereld. 37 12 38 5 
13 | d | Idus. Lucy, Virgin and Martyr. 39 13 40 | 1Pet. 1 
14} e | 19. Cal. Jan. 41 14 42 2 
15 | f | 18. Cal. 43 15 44 3 
16| g | 17. Cal. O Sapientia. 45 16 46 4 
aA LO. Cal. 47 17 48 5 
18 | b |x15. Cal. 49 18 50 | 2 Pet. 1 
19 |} c¢ | 14. Cal. 51 19 52 2 
20 | d } 18. Cal. . Fast. 53 20 54 3 
21 | e | 12. Cal. S. Thomas, Apostle and Partyr. 21 1 John 1 
22} £ | 11. Cal. 55 22 56 2 
23 | g | 10. Cal, 57 23 58 3 
24 | A | 9. Cal. # At Fast. 59 24 60 4 
O5uleeban| eSeiCaleie an M@hristmas Ban. 
Patol 7. Cal. S. Stephen, the first seMartpr. 
ae Ns al WP a OiNE S. John, Apostle any Coangelist. 
28 | e 5. Cal. Ennoeents’ Bap. 25 5 
29 ee 4. Cal. 61 26 62 | 2 John 
30 | g } 3. Cal. 63 27 64 | 3 John 
81 | A’ | Pr. Cal. Silvester, Bishop of Rome. 65 28 66 | Jude 
Comparative View of the Calendar for DECEMBER. 
On: | 
Bede, a.p. 735. setae Modern Roman. Eastern. 
1 Nahum the Prophet. 
2 | | St. Bibiana. Habakkuk the Prophet. 
3 St. Francis Xavier. Zephaniah the Prophet. 
4, St. Osmund. SS. Peter Chrysologus and Barbara. | SS. Barbara and John Da- 
5 SS. Birinus and Sabbas. St. Sabbas. [mascene. | 
6 St. Nicolas. St. Nicolas. : St. Nicolas. 
7h St. Ambrose. St. Ambrose. 
8 Conception of B. V. Mary. | Conception of B. Virgin Mary. 
a Conception of St. Anne. 
11 | St. Damasus. St. Damasus. 
12 St. Spiridion. 
13 St. Lucy. St. Lucy. St. Lucy. 
14 
15 
16 O Sapientia. St. Eusebius. Haggai the Prophet. 
17 | St. Ignatius. Daniel the Prophet and the 
[three children. 
= Expectation of Blessed Virgin Mary. | St. Pry and his Com- 
anions. 
20 St. Ignatius. Le 
21 | St. Thomas. St. Thomas. St. Thomas. Cee yalianne 
22 
23 | St. Eugenia. 
24 a. We é St. Eugenia. 
25 | Nativity of our Lord. Nativity of our Lord. Nativity of our Lord. Nativity of our Lord. 
26 | St. Stephen. St. Stephen, Proto-martyr. | St. Stephen, Proto-martyr. SS. Mary and Joseph. 
27 | St. John, Evangelist. St. John, Evangelist. St. John, Evangelist. St. Stephen. 
28 | Innocents. Holy Innocents. - | Holy Innocents. 
29 St. Thomas, Abp. of Can- | St. Thomas of Canterbury. Holy Innocents. 
30 [terbury. 
31 | St. Silvester, St. Silvester. St. Silvester. 


[61] 
THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF NOVEMBER (continued). 


forth, and scourged him ; then binding him to a tree, they pierced 
him to death with many arrows, and having cut off his head, cast 
it into a thicket. Here it was found about a year after, and 
placed with his body. In a.p. 903 his remains were translated 
to the place now called Bury St. Edmunds, where an abbey was 
founded. He is represented crowned, clothed, tied to a tree, full 
of arrows, and frequently with the arms of the abbey (az. 3 
crowns or, each pierced with two arrows in saltier of the second): 
By this and the crown he is distinguished from St. Sebastian, 
who is moreover represented almost without clothing. [Sar. Ep. 
and Gosp.: Ecclus, xxxi. 8—11. St. Luke xiv. 26—33.] 

_ 22] Sr.Czornra, Virgin AND Martyr.—The name of St. Cecilia 
has always been dear in connexion with music, of which she is 
considered the patron. Very little, however, is known about her 


personal history, which is much mixed up with legends. Dryden 


alludes to one of these legends in the well-known lines :— 


* He raised a mortal to the skies, 
She drew an angel down.” 


Her husband Valerian had been converted through her, and suf- 
fered martyrdom with her, A.D, 280, or, according to some, about 
fifty years earlier. A church was dedicated to her honour at 
Rome early in the sixth century, and still gives a title to a Car- 
dinal. It appears pretty certain that her body was discovered 
there A.D. 1599. The “Acts of St. Cecilia” describe her as 
having been frequently employed in music, and accordingly she 
is represented singing, and playing on a small organ or other 
instrument. She is also figured as being scalded to death in a 
caldron, or holding a sword as well as a musical instrument. 
[Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. li. 9—12. St. Matt. xiii. 44—52.] 

23] Sv. Crement, BisHop or RoME, AND Martryr.—We know 
very little about the early history of St. Clement, but he has 


always been believed to be the “fellow-labourer ” mentioned by 
St. Paul (Phil. iv. 3) as having his name “ written in the Book of 
Life.” From his having been contemporary with the Apostles, 
he is reckoned among the “Apostolical Fathers,” and is called 
“Clemens Romanus,” to distinguish him from Clement of Alexan- 
dria. In A.D. 91 he was made third Bishop of Rome, where he 
remained through the persecution of Domitian. About a.D. 96, 
the year of this tyrant’s death, St. Clement wrote his First Epistle 
to the Corinthians, which was publicly read in the Churches, and 
for a long time esteemed almost equally with the Canonical Epis- 
tles. He probably suffered under Trajan, about a.p. 100, being 
cast into the sea bound to an anchor, which is his distinguishing 
emblem, as may be seen in several parts of the church and parish 
of St. Clement Danes, in the Strand, London. [Sar. Ep. and 
Gosp.: Phil. iv. 1—3. St. Luke xix. 12—28.] 

25] Sr. Katnarrne, VirGIn AnD Martyr.—There is very little 
reliable information respecting St. Katharine, but she has always 
been highly venerated in both East and West. She is said to 
have been royally descended, and of great learning and ability, 
so that she confuted even heathen philosophers, with whom she 
had to dispute before Maximin the Emperor, and was the means 
of their conversion. They, confessing Christ, were burnt to 
death, but the saintly woman was reserved for a further trial. 
Refusing to sacrifice her chastity to the lust of the tyrant, she 
was first torn on spiked wheels, and then slain with a sword. In 
the eighth century her body was translated to the monastery of 
Mount Sinai by holy monks, who in medieval legends were trans- 
formed into angels. St. Katharine is accounted the patron of 
secular, as St. Jerome is of theological, learning. She is repre- 
sented crowned, with the martyr’s palm, or a book, or sword, in 
her hand, and the spiked wheel by her side. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp. : 
Ecclus. li, 1—8. St. Matt. xiii. 44-52. j 


THE MINOR HOLYDAYS OF DECEMBER. 


6] Sr. Nrconas, BrisHoP AND Conressor.—St. Nicolas was a 
native of Patara, in Asia Minor; and having grown up in the fear 
of God, was appointed abbot of the monastery of the Holy Zion. 
Some time after this he was made Bishop of Myra, in Lycia, and 
here acquired a great reputation for sanctity and deeds of charity. 
He died a.p. 342, and was buried in his church at Myra, whence 
his remains were carried off, in A.D. 1087, to Bari on the Adriatic, 
for fear they should be desecrated by the Mohammedans. This 
was done by some merchants, and St. Nicolas has hence been 
accounted the patron of merchants and seafaring men. Many of 
the churches dedicated to him are at seaport towns. He is also 
considered the patron of children and schoolboys, from his re- 
markable humility and simplicity, and because he took great 
interest in their instruction. He is represented as a Bishop, 
with three golden balls, the original significance of which is not 
known; also with children around him being raised to life from 
a tub, in which their murdered bodies had been concealed ; also 
with an anchor or ship. The medieval ceremonies connected 
with the “ Boy-bishop ” began on St. Nicolas’ day, and lasted till 
Childermas or Holy Innocents’ day. [Sar. Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. 
sliv. 17—23; xlv. 6,7. 15,16. St. Matt. xxv. 14—23.] 

8] Conception oF THE B. V. M.—It appears probable that 
a belief in the “Immaculate Conception ” led to the original 
institution of this festival, though it may be regarded as cele- 
brating the joyful dawn of the Incarnation of our Lord without 
any particular reference to the novel doctrine, Its observation 
began in the East in early times, but did not become general 
in the West till the fifteenth century. Its introduction into 
Britain has been ascribed, on doubtful grounds, to St. Anselm, 
long after whose time the observance of it was optional. [Sar. 
Ep. and Gosp.: Ecclus. xxiv. 17—22. St. Matt. i. 1—16.] 

13] Sr. Lucy, Vinern and Martyr.—st. Lucy was the daughter 
of a Christian lady in Syracuse, named Eutychia, and was born 
in the latter part of the third century. Being asked in marriage 
by a young nobleman of Syracuse, who was a pagan, she declined 
his suit, having made a private vow of celibacy long before. Her 


mother was not aware of this, and wished her to marry the 
youth; but being restored from dangerous sickness at the prayers 
of her daughter, no longer opposed her resolution, of which, 
indeed, she now became aware for the first time. St. Lucy then 
sold all her goods to feed the poor, and openly professed her 
dedication to Christ. The young nobleman now hated her, and 
accused her before the Governor Paschasius, during the Dio- 
clesian persecution. She boldly confessed Christ before her 
judges, and was condemned to what was far worse than death, 
but was delivered by God. After this she was tortured by fire, and 
her flesh torn with hot pincers, soon after which she died in prison, 
without having failed in her most severe trial, about a.p. 304. 
St. Lucy bears the martyr’s palm, a lamp, in allusion to her name, 
and a book, or dish, on which are two eye-balls, while sometimes 
rays of light are emitted from a wound in her throat. She also 
has the pincers fastened on to her breast. The festival of St. 
Lucy regulates the Ember Days in December. [Sar. Ep. and 
Gosp.: Ecclus. li. 9—12. St. Matt, xiii. 44—52.] 

16] O Saprentra.—These words mark the first of the days on 
which the eight Greater Antiphons were sung. [See p. 76.] 

31] Sr. StnvestER, Br. or RomzE, AND CONFESSOR.—St. Silves- 
ter was born at Rome in the latter part of the third century, and 
was ordained priest just before the Dioclesian persecution, during 
which he was well known among the faithful for his zeal and 
piety. He was made Bishop of Rome 4.D. 314, and was sum- 
moned to attend the Councils of Arles and Nice, but was unable 
through weak health to be present in person. Having filled the 
see for nearly twenty-two years, he died, Dec. 31, 4.p. 335, and 
was buried in the cemetery of Priscilla on the Salarian Way, 
whence his remains were removed to a church dedicated in his 
name about the end of the seventh century. There is a tra- 
dition respecting him, that he restored an ox to life which had 
been killed by magic; and the ox is accordingly his distinguish- 
ing emblem. He is represented as a Bishop, holding the cross 
and book, or the portraits of St. Peter and St. Paul. [Sar. Ep. and 
Gosp. : Ecclus. 1. 1. 4, 5—12, 15, 21—23. St. Matt. xxv. 14—23.] 


[62] 


AN INTRODUCTION 


TO 


MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER. 


THe ordinary daily Offices of the Christian Church were de- 
rived from the Jewish economy; the celebration of the Holy 
Eucharist being the distinctive devotional characteristic of Chris- 


tianity. As David sang, “seven times a day do I praise Thee” 


[Ps. cxix. 164]; and as Daniel “kneeled upon his knees three 
times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God” [ Dan. 
vi. 10], so down to that period during which the old and the 
new economy overlapped each other, a constant habit of praise 
and prayer in connexion with the morning and evening sacrifice, 
and at other hours of the day, was maintained in the Temple at 
Jerusalem, and in the Synagogues elsewhere. The Apostles con- 
tinued the practice of devout Jews, and are spoken of in the book 
of their Acts as being in the Temple at the hour of prayer, or as 
offering their prayers elsewhere at the same hour. It was while 
“they were all with one accord in one place” at “the third hour 
of the day” [Acts ii. 1. 15] that the Holy Ghost descended upon 
them: “ Peter went up upon the house-top to pray about the 
sicth hour” (Ibid. x. 9]: “Peter and John went up together 
into the temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour” 
[Ibid. iii. 1]: “at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang 
praises unto God ” [ Ibid. xvi. 25]: and in the early zeal of their 
first love all the believers “continued stedfastly .... in the 
prayers” [Tats mpocevxats] “daily with one accord in the 
Temple” [Ibid. ii. 42. 46], as a regular part of the system of 
that fellowship into which they had been baptized. 

When the habits of the Church began to be settled, it appears 
that the opening and the close of each day were appointed as the 
principal hours of prayer; and that the three intermediate times, 
the third, sixth, and ninth hour, were still recognized, and marked 
by public worship. Tertullian, after giving the Scriptural ex- 
amples cited above, goes on to say that though these “stand 
simply without any precept for their observance, yet let it be 
thought good to establish any sort of presumption which may 
both render more strict the admonition to pray, and, as it were 
by a law, force us away sometimes from our business to this 
service, (even as was the custom of Daniel also, according no 
doubt to the rule of Israel,) that so we should pray at least not 
seldomer than three times a day, we who are debtors to the 
Three, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, exclusive, 
that is, of the regular prayers which are due, without any ad- 
monition, at the beginning of day and night.” |Tert. de Orat. 
ix. 26.] In his treatise on fasting he also calls the third, sixth, 
and ninth hours, “Apostolic hours of prayer.’ St. Cyprian 
refers to the habits of Old Testament saints, and draws the 
rational conclusion that the events of the Gospel gave proof that 
there was a “sacrament,” or mystery, in the ancient practice of 


righteous men offering prayers at these seasons, as if the spi- 
ritual instincts of good men were already moving in the light of 
the Cross. ‘But to us, dearest brethren,” he says, “besides the 
hours of ancient time observed, both seasons and sacraments of 
prayer are increased in number. In the morning we must pray,” 
not waiting, that is, for the third hour, “that the Resurrection 
of the Lord may be commemorated with an early worship. This 
of old the Holy Spirit set forth in the Psalms, saying, ‘My King 
and My God, unto Thee will I cry: My voice shalt Thou hear in 
the morning; in the morning will I stand before Thee, and will 
look up.’ [Ps. v. 2.] And again, by the prophet the Lord saith, 
‘Early in the morning shall they seek Me, saying, Come and let 
us return unto the Lord our God’ [Hosea vi.1.] At sunset- 
ting likewise, and the close of day, needful is it that we should 
again pray. For as Christ is the true Sun and the true Day, 
when at the going down of this world’s sun and light we make 
prayer and petition that the day may again return unto us, we 
are petitioning for that coming of Christ, which will give to us 
the grace of the Light eternal.” [Cyprian. de Orat. Dom. xxii. ] 
In the Apostolical Constitutions the same habit of the Church is 
referred to in very distinct terms: “Ye shall make prayers... . 
In the morning giving thanks, because the Lord hath enlightened 
you, removing the night, and bringing the day: at the third 
hour, because the Lord at that time received sentence from 
Pilate ; at the szath howr, because in it He was crucified; at the 
ninth hour, because all things were shaken when the Lord was 
crucified, trembling at the audacity of the impious Jews, not 
enduring that their Lord should be insulted; at evening giving 
thanks, because He hath given the night for rest from our 
daily labours; at cock-crowing, because that hour gives the glad 
tidings that the day is dawning in which to work the works of 
light.” [Apostol. Constit. viii. 34.] 

No account has come down to us which tells exactly of what 
these Primitive daily Offices consisted; but St. Basil in the 
fourth century speaks of them as being made up of psalmody 
mingled with prayers, and specifies the nineteenth psalm as one 
which was invariably used at the sixth hour. The fifty-first 
psalm is also shown, from him and other writers, to have been 
constantly used in the night service; and the sixty-third was 
called the “ Morning Psalm,” being used at the beginning of the 
early service. The “Gloria in Excelsis” is also spoken of by St. 
Chrysostom as “the Morning Hymn” [see note in Communion 
Service], and the repetition of the Kyrie Hleison many times 
seems to have formed another part of these ancient services. 

The daily Offices of the Eastern Church are of greater anti- 
quity than those of the Western, and there is little doubt that 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER. 


they represent, substantially, the form into which the Primitive 
Offices for the hours of Prayer eventually settled down!. Suffi- 
cient points of resemblance have been traced between these and 
the daily prayers used under the Jewish economy, to make it 
almost certain that the former were originally derived from the 
latter?. But there are also many particulars in which the 
Western daily Offices, and especially those of the English 
Church %, are analogous to those of the East, and although they 
cannot be traced higher, in their familiar form, than the Rule of 
St. Benedict [a.p. 530], it can hardly be doubted that men like 
SS. Benedict and Gregory would build upon the old foundations 
of Primitive Services, such as those now represented by the hours 
of the Eastern Church. In the Ancient Sacramentaries there are 
several series of Collects for daily use: one set of twenty-three in 
that of St. Gregory, being entitled “Orationes de Adventu Do- 
mini quotidianis diebus :” another, of twenty, apparently for Lent, 
being headed “ Orationes pro peccatis :” a third of many more in 
number being called “Orationes quotidian.” There are also 
other sets in the same Sacramentary, “ad Matutinos lucescente 
die,” “Orationes Matutinales,” “ Vespertinales,” and “ad Com- 
pletorium.” What place such Collects occupied in the daily 
Offices is not quite clear, but they plainly show that the Primi- 
tive habit of the Church was kept up, and that daily prayers 
were continually being offered in the Western as well as in the 
Eastern Church. Lessons from Holy Scripture were only read 
in the Synagogue on the Sabbath day; in the Temple none at all 
(except the Decalogue) were ever read. This custom was con- 
tinued throughout the Church even until the time of St. Gregory : 
Epistles and Gospels being read at the Holy Communion, but no 
Lessons at the hours of Prayer. St. Gregory established a system 
which afterwards developed into that of the Breviary Lessons, 
but in the Eastern Church the Primitive practice of reading 
Holy Scripture at the celebration of the Eucharist, and on 
Sunday only at other offices, is still maintained. 

In Medieval times the daily Offices were developed into a very 
beautiful, but a very complex form; being moulded exclusively 
to the capacities of clergy and laity living in communities, sepa- 
rated from the world especially for a work of prayer and praise, 
which was seldom interrupted by the calls of other avocations. 
Those used in England differed in several important respects 
from the Roman Breviary +4, and are supposed to have had the 
same origin as the Communion Office, the lineage of which is 
traced at p. 147 to the Church of Ephesus. Like those of the 
Eastern and Roman Churches, they consisted nominally of seven 
separate services or hours [see p. xxviii], but as in those churches 


1 They are given at length in Neale’s Introd. Hist. of Eastern Church, 
vol. ii. gh. iv. 
2 Archd. Freeman’s Princ. Div. Serv. i. 65. 


3 Tbid. 106. 4 Ibid. 246, 


PRAISED BE THE LORD DAILY: EVEN THE GOD WHO 


Day BY DAY WE MAGNIFY THEE, 


(63 


at the present day these seven hours are aggregated into three, 
or even two services, so it is probable was the case, to a great 
extent, in the Medieval Church of England, and the whole seven 
were only kept by a small number of the most strict among the 
Clergy and religious. The Reformers condensed the seven hours, 
instead of aggregating them, and thus gave us Mattins and 
Evensong, as in the manner shown by the Table at p. xxix. At 
the same time, the publication of Edward VI.’s and Queen 
Elizabeth’s Primers showed that they by no means intended to 
hinder, but rather to encourage those who still wished to observe 
the ancient hours of Prayer: and the Devotions of Bishop Cosin, 
with other Manuals framed on the same model, have given many 
devout souls the opportunity of supplementing the public Mattins 
and Evensong with prayers at other hours that equally breathed 
the spirit of the ancient Church. 

In making this change the Reformers were doubtless endea- 
youring to secure by a modification of the Services what the 
theory of the Church had always required, the attendance of the 
Laity as well as the Clergy at the Daily Offices of Praise and 
Prayer. From very early days the Church of England had en- 
joined the Laity to be present at them, as may be seen in the 
collection of Decrees and Canons on the subject printed by 
Maskell [Mon. Rit. Ang. IJ. xxv.—xxxi.]; but these injunctions 
appear to have been little obeyed, and their constant absence led 
the clergy to deal with the Breviary as if it was intended for 
their own use alone, its structure becoming so complex that none 
but those who had been long used to handle it could possibly 
follow the course of the services day by day. In forming out of 
these complex services such simple and intelligible ones as our 
present Morning and Evening Prayer, a new opportunity was 
offered to the Laity of uniting their hearts and voices with 
that of the Clergy in a constant service of daily praise and 
prayer. 

Churches without such an offering of Morning and Evening 
Prayer are clearly alien to the system and principles of the Book 
of Common Prayer; and to make the offering in the total 
absence of worshippers seems scarcely less so. But as every 
Church receives blessing from God in proportion as it renders to 
Him the honour due unto His Name, so it is much to be 
wished that increased knowledge of devotional principles may 
lead on to such increase of devotional practice as may make the 
omission of the daily Offices rare in the Churches of our land. 
Then indeed might the time come when the Church of England 
could say, “Thou, O God, sentest a gracious rain upon Thine 
inheritance ; and refreshedst it when it was weary.” It might 
look for the development of a perennial vigour springing from 
that “third hour of the day” when the Apostles first went 
forth in the might of their supernatural endowments; and hope 
to meet with answers from on high, as sure as that which 
was given to Elijah ‘about the time of the Evening Sacrifice.” 


HELPETH US, AND POURETH HIs BENEFITS UPON US. 


AND WE worsHie Tuy NAME: EVER WORLD WITHOUT END. 


[64] 


THE ORDER FOR 


MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER 


DAILY TO BE SAID AND USED THROUGHOUT THE YEAR. 


HE Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in the accustomed Place 
of the Church, Chapel, or Chancel; except it shall be otherwise deter- 


mined by the Ordinary of the Place. 
have done in times past. 


And the Chancels shall remain as they 


And here is to be noted, that such Ornaments of the Church, and of the 
Ministers thereof, at all times of their Ministration, shall be retained and be 
in use as were in this Church of Hngland, by the Authority of Parliament, in 
the Second Year of the Reign of King Hdward the Sixth. 


The second part of this important Rubric—the Interpretation 
Clause to the Ritual Law of the Church of England—is fully 
explained and illustrated in the Third Section of the Ritual Intro- 
duction, p. Ixv. 

The first part of it is still exactly in the form in which it was 
printed in the Prayer Book of Queen Elizabeth’s reign [a.D. 1559]. 
In the Second Prayer Book of Edward VI., it stood in this form : 
«*@ The Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in such place 
of the Church, Chapel, or Chancel, andthe Minister shall so turn 
him, as the people may best hear. And if there be any con- 
troversy therein, the matter shall be referred to the Ordinary, 
and he or his deputy shall appoint the place, and the chancels 
shall remain as they have done in times past.” In the Prayer 
Book of 1549 the rubric at the head of Morning Prayer was, 
“The Priest being in the quire, shall begin with a loud voice the 
Lord’s Prayer, called the Pater noster.” 

The “reading-desk” was not invented until after the rubric 
had taken its present form, and the “accustomed place” was the 
“pue” (beginning then to be so called) in which the Clergy and 
singers sat, and which was ordinarily situated on either side of 
the chancel. In the Advertisements of 1565, it was directed 
“that the Common Prayer be said or sung decently and dis- 
tinctly, in such place as the Ordinary shall think meet for the 


largeness and straitness of the church and choir, so that the 
people may be most edified.” [Cardw. Docum. Ann. i. 291.] 
Such lawless bishops as Scambler of Peterborough, who knew no 
rule but “sie volo, sic jubeo,” forbade the service to be said in the 
chancel at all, under the singular plea used against it by the 
foreigner Bucer, that such a practice was “ Antichristian.” Thus 
the erection of reading-desks in the nave became common, the 
‘clerks ” were reduced to one, the authorized mode of Divine 
Worship died out in a vast number of churches during the seven- 
teenth and eighteenth centuries, and instead of the chancels 
remaining as they had done in times past, they were too often 
looked on either as a kind of lumber-room, to be cleared out once 
a quarter for the administration of the Holy Communion; or as 
a part of the church where the most comfortable and honourable 
seats were provided for the richer laity. Such customs have 
tended to obscure the sense of the rubric, and are recalled to 
memory only for the purpose of explaining how it came to be so 
disregarded in modern times. In Griffin v. Dighton, Chief 
Justice Erle decided (on appeal in 1864) that the chancel is the 
place appointed for the Clergyman and for those who assist him 
in the performance of Divine Service; and that it is entirely 
under his control as to access and use, subject to the jurisdiction 
of the Ordinary. 


THE 


ORDER 


FOR 


MORNING PRAYER, 


DAILY THROUGHOUT THE YEAR. 


“Executor offi- Y At the beginning of Morning Prayer the Mi- 

ci,” of Sarum nister shall read with a loud voice some one, 

rubrics. or more of these Sentences of the Scriptures, 

that follow. And then he shall say that 
which is written after the said Sentences. 

HEN the wicked man turneth 

away from his wickedness, that 

he hath committed, and doeth that 

which is lawful and right, he shall 


save his soul alive. 


Ezek. xviii. 27. 


I acknowledge my transgressions, Ps. li. 3. 
and my sin is ever before me. 

Hide thy face from my sins, and Ps. li. 9. 
blot out mine iniquities. 

The Sacrifices of God are a broken Ps. li. 17. 
spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, 
O God, thou wilt not despise. 

Rend your hearts, and not your gar- Joel ii. 13. 
ments, and turn unto the Lord your 


The Order for Morning Prayer] The word “ Order” in the 
sense here intended has almost passed out of use. It simply 
means regulation or ordinance, according to its derivation from 
the Latin word ordo. Morning Prayer was called by the ancient 
popular name of “ Mattins” (abbreviated from Matutine), in the 
original English Prayer Book of 1549; and that name is still 
retained in the three Tables of Proper Lessons and Proper 
Psalms, and also in the Elizabethan Act of Uniformity. 


THE SENTENCES. 

The ancient Mattins of the Church of England began with, “In 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,” 
(and the sign of the Cross,) followed by an inaudible recitation 
of the Lord’s Prayer by the Priest who officiated. Then was 
said, “ O Lord, open Thou my lips: And my mouth shall shew 
forth Thy praise.” This opening of the service was retained in 
the 1549 Prayer Book, but the Lord’s Prayer was directed 
to be said “with a loud voice,” instead of seereto. In the 1552 
Prayer Book, these Sentences, with the Exhortation, Confession, 
and Absolution, were prefixed to Morning Prayer, but not to 
Evening Prayer. This addition was suggested, probably, by the 
second reformed Breviary of Cardinal Quignonez, in which the 
ancient Confession.and Absolution, hereafter given, were placed 
at the beginning of Mattins. But other reasons are also apparent 


for the change. In the first place, the full effect of the dissolu- 
tion of Monasteries was making itself felt by ritualists, and a 
penitential prefix to the service was considered more appropriate 
for a mixed congregation than the previous mode of opening it, 
which was suitable for communities professedly spending nearly 
their whole time in the religious portion of a Christian’s duty. 
And, in the second place, a relaxation of the rule about private 
Confession made it expedient to place a public Confession and 
Absolution within the reach of all, day by day. 

The Sentences themselves (which had nearly all been previously 
in use as Capitula, during Lent) are a reproduction at the 
beginnixg of Divine Service of the Invitatories which were pre- 
fixed to the Venite in the ancient Mattins. In both cases the 
object is to give the key-note to the service which is to follow. 
In the Salisbury use two such Sentences, with a Versicle and 
Collect, were prefixed to Mattins on Easter Day. These were 
still ordered to be “solemnly sung or said” in the same place in 
the 1549 Prayer Book ; but on the appointment of the Sentences 
now in use, the former were directed to be used instead of Venite, 
and are printed before the Easter Collect. It was in this light 
that the Sentences were viewed by Bp. Andrewes, who suggested 
some others in the following note: “ Adde huc, quod ad 
invitandam penitentiam egregia sunt misericordiw et longani- 
mitatis encomia, Ps. Ixxviii. 38. Jer. iii. 7.12. Heb. iv.” 


B 


2 MORNING PRAYER. 


God: for he is gracious, and merciful, 
slow to anger, and of great kindness, 
and repenteth him of the evil. 

To the Lord our God belong mercies 
and forgivenesses, though we have re- 
belled against him: neither have we 
obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, 
to walk in his laws, which he set be- 
fore us. 

O Lord correct me, but with judge- 
ment; not in thine anger, lest thou 
bring me to nothing. 

Repent ye; for the Kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand. 

I will arise and go to my Father, 


Dan. ix. 9, 10. 


Jer. x. 24, 
ARS Sie ls 


Matt. iii. 2. 


Luke xv. 18, 


e and will say unto him; Father, I have 
sinned against Heaven, and before 
thee, and am no more worthy to be 
called thy son. 

Ps. cxliii. 2. Enter not into judgement with thy 


servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall 
no man living: be justified. 

If we say that we have no sin, we 
deceive our selves, and the truth is not 
in us. But, if we confess our sins, he 
is faithful and just to forgive us our 


1 John i. 8, 9. 


sins, and to cleanse us from all un- 
righteousness. 


Phil. iv. 1. 


EARLY beloved brethren, the 
Scripture moveth us in sundry See the above 
places to acknowledge and confess our Lev. v. 5. 
manifold sins and wickedness, and that Josh. vii. 19. 
we should not dissemble nor cloak Prov, xxviti. 13, 
them before the face of Almighty God John xv. 22. 
our heavenly Father, but confess them Matt. vi. 14._ 
with an humble, lowly, penitent, and Ps. li. 3.17. 
obedient heart, to the end that we may Matt, ii. 2 
obtain forgiveness of the same, by his Joe! it 13, 14 
infinite goodness and merey. And == — 
although we ought at all times humbly * Ps. xxviii, 18, 
to acknowledge our sins before God, 14. * 
yet ought we most chiefly so to do, Jocli.14. 
Hos. xiv, 1,2; 
when we assemble, and meet together, 
to render thanks for the great benefits 
that we have received at his hands, to 
set forth his most worthy praise, to 
hear his most holy word, and to ask 
those things, which are requisite and 
necessary, as well for the body as the Deut. xxexi.11, 12. 
Wherefore I pray and beseech 2 chron. vii. 13. 


Isa, lvi. 7. 
you as many as are here present, to Matt. vii. 6. 11. 


2 Chron. vi. 18— 
21, vii. 16. 
Ps.¢74, 
Xxxv. 18. 
1Chron. xvi. 8, 9. 


Psiexlixal,. 
AEX CVn 


soul. 


As Invitatories intended to give the key-note to the Service, 
they may be advantageously used in the following, or some 
similar, order, appropriate to the various days and seasons. 

Advent: “Repent ye.” ‘Enter not.” ‘“O Lord, correct me.” 

Lent: “The sacrifices.” Rend your heart.” 

Fridays and Vigils: “I acknowledge.” 

Wednesdays: ‘“ Hide thy face.” 

Ordinary days: “When the wicked man.” “TI will arise.” 
“Tf we say.” 

Sundays, other holy days, and Eves: “To the Lord our God.” 

There is a well-known traditional practice of singing one of these 
Sentences as an anthem; “I will arise” being very frequently 
so used. Such a practice seems to be in strict keeping with 
their character as Invitatories, and in analogy with the use of 
the Easter Sentences referred to; as also with such a use of the 
Offertory Sentences in the Communion Service. 

Read with a loud voice| This is an ecclesiastical or technical 
phrase, the explanation of which is to be found in a Rubric before 
the Ze Deum in the previous editions of the Prayer Book: 
«‘Then shall be read two Lessons distinctly with a loud voice.” 
“Then shall the Lessons be sung in a plain tune, after the man- 
ner of distinct reading ; and likewise the Epistle and Gospel.” 
It is the clara vow of older ritualists, and presupposes a musical in- 
tonation, with or without inflection, to be the customary way of 
reciting Divine Service. 

In Bishop Cosin’s revision he appended to the word “minister” 
the following note :—* That is, he who at that time ministereth 
or celebrateth Divine Service ;” and although it was not deemed 
necessary at the time to print this note, it is valuable to us now 
as showing the technical meaning which was attached to the 
word Minister, when used in the Rubric. He also added 
Isaiah ly. 6,7, and 1 John i. 9, the latter verse being adopted, 
but not the former; and “or more” after “some one” in the 
Rubric. 

Some may consider that the terms of the Rubric, both here and 
before the Offertory Sentences, strictly limit the recitation of them 


to the clergyman officiating. There is, however, no ritual prin- 
ciple by which they are so limited. 


THE EXHORTATION. 


There is an analogy between this Exhortation and some which 
were used, at the Holy Communion and in Lent, in the ancient 
services of the Church of England. There is also a trace of 
similarity between it and the opening of Pullain’s I’ Ordre des 
Prieres Ecclésiastiques, printed for the use of the German 
refugees at Glastonbury, in 1552. The words of the latter are, 
“ Mes Fréres, qu’un chascun de vous se présente devant la face du 
Seigneur, avec confession de ses fautes et péchez, suyvant de tout 
son cueur mes [pa]rolles!.” But there is too little resemblance 
between our Exhortation and these to give any critical ground for 
supposing that it was founded upon any of them; and it must be 
concluded that those who revised the Prayer Book in 1552 were 
entirely responsible for its composition. 

It has been called a short homily on Divine worship; and may 
also be taken as following up the general Invitatory, as it was 
followed formerly by the Venite. It was probably inserted 
here under the impression that the people at large were extremely 
ignorant of the true nature of Divine worship at the time. Five 
principal parts of worship are mentioned in it. (1) Confession of 
sin ; (2) Absolution ; (3) Thanksgiving and Praise; (4) The hearing 
of God’s Word ; (5) Prayer for spiritual and bodily benefits. In 
this structure also it bears some analogy to the Venite. 

The Minister celebrating Divine Service is directed to “say” 
this Exhortation, “saying” being the ritual term for reciting on 
one musical note, or “monotoning,” as distinguisned from 
“singing,” which is reciting with musical inflections, and from 
“reading,” which is a general term, including both methods. If 
the Exhortation is said from memory, and with the face turned 
towards the congregation, it becomes much more expressive of the 
intention with which it was placed here, than when said as a mere 


1 This book was also printed in Latin, perhaps before it came out in 
French. The French edition seems to be very rare. 


2 Cor. x. 1. 
Acts iv. 24, 
Eccles. vy. 1, 2. 


Ex. xxv. 21, 22, 


Heb. iv. 16. 


Tsa. Lxiii. 16, 
Luke vi. 36. 
Isa. liii. 6. 
Pesexix, 176. 
Jer. xviii. 12. 


Jer. xvii. 9. 
Eph. ii. 2, 3. 
Dan. ix. 9, 10. 
Rom. vii. 12. 


1 John iii. 4. 
Lam. iii. 40. 42. 


MORNING PRAYER. 


accompany me with a pure heart and 
humble voice unto the throne of the 
heavenly grace, saying after me. 


§] A general Confession to be said of the whole 
Congregation ofter the Minister, all kneel- 
ing. 

LMIGHTY, and most merciful 
Father; We have erred, and 
strayed from thy ways like lost sheep. 

We have followed too much the devices 

and desires of our own hearts. We 

have offended against thy holy laws. 

We have left undone those things 

which we ought to have done; And 


we have done those things which we 
ought not to have done; And there is 
no health in us. But thou, O Lord, 
have mercy upon us, miserable of- 
fenders. Spare thou them, O God, 
which confess their faults. Restore 
thou them that are penitent; Ac- 
cording to thy promises declared unto 
mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord. 
And grant, O. most merciful Father, 
for his sake; That we may hereafter 
live a godly, righteous, and sober 
life, To the glory of thy holy Name. 
Amen. 


Isa, Ix. 12, 13. 


Gal. +. 17. 

Ps. xxxviii. 3. 
li. 1—5. 

Luke xviii. 13. 

Prov. xxviii. 13. 


Joel ii. 17. 


Jer. iii, 22. 
Hos. xiv. 1, 2. 
Ps. xxiii. 3. 

Tie 12; 
Matt. i. 21. 
Acts x. 36, 43. 
2 Cor. i. 20. 
1 Johni. 9. 
John xvi. 23, 24. 
Titus ii. 11, 12. 
John xy. 8. 


Eph. iii, 20, 21. 


form for passing away a few seconds, while the congregation is 
settling into a devotional frame of mind. 

The concluding words, “after me,’ were erased by Bishop 
Cosin, for what reason is not apparent, and were restored by the 
Committee of Revision. They define the manner in which the 
Confession is to be said; as also do the words “humble voice,” 
which represent the submissa vox of old rubrics. 


THE GENERAL CONFESSION. 


After the Minister, all kneeling] Bishop Cosin erased the 
word “after” in this Rubric, and substituted “ with;” but 
the original word was carefully restored, showing that a distinc- 
tion was intended between the two words in their ritual use. 
“ After the Minister” means, that each clause is to be said first by 
the Minister alone, and then repeated by “the whole congrega- 
tion” alone—i. e. while the Minister remains silent, as in the 
case of a response after a versicle. ‘“ With” the Minister means 
simultaneous recitation by him and the congregation together, 
and is ordered in the Rubric before the Lord’s Prayer. The word 
“all” was also one of Bishop Cosin’s additions, and is illustrated 
by his note in another volume: “ Kneeling is the most fit gesture 
for humble penitents; and being so, it is strange to see how in 
most places, men are suffered to sit rudely and carelessly on their 
seats all the while this Confession is read ; and others that be in 
church are nothing affected with it. They think it a thing of 
indifferency forsooth, if the heart be right.” This sitting posture 
during public confessions was one of the abuses that scandalized 
the Puritans; and they sought to have a Canon passed, enjoining 
all to kneel. The eighteenth Canon does indeed direct that 
“all manner of persons then present shall reverently kneel upon 
their knees when the general Confession, Litany, and other 
prayers are read... . testifying by these outward ceremonies 
and gestures, their inward humility.” 

The gesture of kneeling here and elsewhere is not only a mark 
of personal humility and reverence, but also one of those acts 
required of every one as an individual component part of the body 
which forms the congregation; and to neglect it is to neglect a 
duty which is owing to God and man in this respect, as well as 
the other. We haye no right to conspicuous private gestures in 
a public devotional assembly; nor are the gestures which we 
there use (in conformity to the rules of the Church) to be neces- 
sarily interpreted as hypocritical because our personal habits or 
feelings may not be entirely consistent with them. As the 
clergy have an official duty in church, irrespective of their per- 
sonal characters, so also have the laity. It may be added, that a 
respectful conformity to rules enjoining such official duties, may 
often lead onward to true personal reverence and holiness. 

As far as present researches show, the general Confession ap- 
pears to be an original composition of some of the revisers of 
1552; but its principal features are, of course, represented in con- 


fessional formularies of the Ancient Church, the ideas being a 
common heritage of every age and country. It has not under- 
gone any alteration since its first introduction into morning 
prayer. 

It has been observed!, that this general Confession appears to 
be founded on Romans vii. 8—25. 


We have followed too much 
the devices and desires of our 
own hearts. 

We have offended against 
Thy holy laws. 


Sin... . wroughtin me all 
concupiscence. 


The law is holy ... . but 
I am carnal, sold under sin. 


We have left undone those 
things which we ought to have 
done. 

We have done those things 
which we ought not to have 
done. 

And there is no health in us. 


The good that I would, I do 
not. 


But the evil which I would 
not, that I do. 


In me dwelleth no good 
thing. O.... the body of 
this death. 

O wretched man that I am, 
who shall deliver me ? 


But Thou, O Lord, have 
mercy upon us miserable offen- 
ders. 

According to Thy promises, 
declared unto mankind in Christ 
Jesu our Lord. 

All the phrases of the Confession have, however, a Scrip- 
tural ring ; and it was very likely compiled almost verbatim from 
some old English version of the Bible, or else freely rendered 
(according to the habit of the day in sermons) from the 
Vulgate Psalms, and other Scriptures indicated above in the 
margin. 

The manner and spirit in which a general confession of sins may 
be made personally and particularly applicable, is pointedly set 
forth in a Rubric which precedes the Confession to be used on 
board ship when there is danger of shipwreck : “ When there is 
imminent danger, as many as can be spared from necessary ser- 
vice in the ship, shall be called together, and make an humble 
Confession of their sin to God, in which every one ought seriously 
to reflect upon those particular sins of which his conscience shall 
accuse him, saying as followeth.” That a confession so made can 
be otherwise than acceptable to the Good Shepherd and Physician 
of our souls it is impossible to doubt. That further and more 
detailed confession is also at times necessary, the provisions made 
by the Church for her penitents, and the private habits of all 
pious Christians, make equally certain. 

The “Amen” is part of the Confession, and is to be’ said by 
both minister and people, as is indicated by the type in which it 


I thank God, through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 


is printed. 


1 Archd. Freeman's ‘‘ Principles of Divine Service,” i. 320. 


B2 


4 MORNING PRAYER. 


{| The Absolution or Remission of sins to be 
pronounced by the Priest alone, standing ; 
the people still kneeling. 


LMIGHTY God, the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who de- 
sireth not the death of a sinner, but 
rather that he may turn from his 
wickedness and live; and hath given 
power and commandment to his Mi- 


2 Cor. i. 3. 
Ezek.xviii. 31,32, 
2 Pet. iii. 9. 
Ezek, xxxiii. 11, 


John xx. 21, 23, 
Luke xxiv. 47. 


2 Cor. ii. 10, nisters to declare and pronounce to his 
Vv. —eU, re . . 
Isa. xliii. 23. people, being penitent, the absolution, 


Ps. Ixxxvi..3. 


and remission of their sins: He par- 
doneth and absolveth all them that 


Acts ii. 38. xiii, 
38, 39. 


THE ABSOLUTION. 

by the Priest alone, standing] This Rubric stood in the form 
“by the Minister alone,” until 1661. Bishop Cosin altered it 
to “by the Minister alone standing, and all the people still 
kneeling,” and his alteration subsequently developed into the 
existing words before the revision was completed. The reason 
for inserting the word “ standing” was that some of the clergy 
had been accustomed to read it on their knees, although, as 
Bishop Andrewes wrote, “because he speaks it authoritative, in 
the name of Christ and His Church, the Minister must not kneel, 
but stand up,” and this posture was observed by the majority. 
The other three words, “the Priest alone,” have a history which 
fixes their meaning. At the Savoy Conference of 1661, the 
Presbyterians’ 11th “exception” to the Prayer Book was to the 
effect that as the word “ Minister” was used in the rubric before 
the Absolution, and not “ Priest,” or “ Curate,” therefore it should 
be used instead of those words throughout the book. To this it 
was replied by the Church of England Commissioners that 
it would be unreasonable to use the word Minister alone, for 
“since some parts of the Liturgy may be performed by a Deacon, 
others by none under the order of a Priest, viz., Absolution, 
Consecration, it is fit that some such word as Priest should be 
used for those officers, and not Minister, which signifies at large 
every one that ministers in that holy office, of what Order 
soever he be.”” The word “ Minister” had formerly been used as 
identical with ‘Priest,’ as may be seen by the 32nd Canon, 
which forbids Bishops to “make any person, of what qualities or 
gifts soever, a Deacon and a Minister both together in one day.” 
This distinctive meaning had now passed away, and “ Ministers” 
was colloquially the name for Dissenting preachers, and for 
Clergymen of every Order. By the insertion of the new word, 
therefore, the whole Rubric was intended to enjoin, not only that 
the congregation are not to repeat the Absolution, as they have 
repeated the Confession, but also that it must not be said by a 
Deacon. If a Deacon says Morning or Evening Prayer, in the 
presence of a Priest, the latter should say the Absolution, and if 
no Priest is present, the Deacon should make a pause, to give 
opportunity for the offering up of a short secret prayer by 
himself and the congregation, and then pass on to the Lord’s 
Prayer. 

The Absolution was composed by the Revisers of 1552, evidently 
with the old form of Absolution, which was used in the Prime and 
Compline Services, before them. There is also some similarity 
between the opening words and those of a Prayer which was 
placed at the end of the Litany in the Primer of 1535; and 
which again, from the prayer, “forgive us now while we have 
time and space,’ seems to have been founded on the ancient 
Absolution, with its “spatium vere penitentie,” though the 
first part is identical with a Lenten Collect of St. Gregory’s 
Sacramentary. 

Some phrases, a good deal like those of our Absolution, are also 
found in the form of prayer got up by John a Lasco, or Laski, a 
Polish refugee, for the German congregation which he was 
allowed to gather together at Austin-friars in London; but the 


[LORD God, which dost not suffer Marshall's Pri- 


s . eke A mer, at end of 
sinners to perish and die in their works, Litany. 


but rather wilt that they shall convert 

and live, we humbly pray Thee to for- 

give us now while we have time and Cf Greg. Sabb. in 
Space «<x. 


. . .Misereatur vestri omnipotens Deus, salisbury Use. 
et dimittat vobis omnia peccata vestra : 


likeness is not such as to make it probable that the English form 
was derived from his Latin one, though it does rather indicate 
that both were in part derived from some such originals as those 
printed in the text above. 

Two questions have been raised with respect to this form 
of Absolution. First, whether those who composed it, and 
placed it where it is, intended it for an Absolution of penitent 
sinners, or merely for a declaration of God’s mercy. Secondly, 
whether, irrespective of their intention, it is so constructed as to 
be effective for the remission of sins. 

(1) The first question is all but decided by the title. Here, in 
the Communion Service, and in the Prayers to be used at Sea, the 
same word, “ Absolution,” is used for designating two different 
forms; and in the Visitation of the Sick, the third form in use by 
the Church of England is spoken of in the direction “the Priest 
shall absolve him.” It seems beyond all probability that this 
designation could have been used of all three forms without any 
verbal distinction, and yet that a real difference of meaning lay 
hidden under the use of it, and that to such an extent as to make 
it in one place contradictory of itself in another place. What the 
word ‘ Absolution” in the rubrical title so far proves, is con- 
firmed by the addition made to it at the Hampton Court Con- 
ference of 1604, when it was altered to the “ Absolution, or 
remission of sins,” clearly showing what opinion the Divines 
there assembled held respecting the intention with which the 
form was inserted fifty-one years before. It is still further 
confirmed by a note of Bishop Andrewes (one already quoted), 
in which, after saying that the Absolution is pronounced authori- 
tative, he adds, “ For authority of Absolution, see Ezek. xxxiii. 
12. Job xxxili, 23. Num. vi. 24. 2 Sam. xii, 138. John 
xx. 23.” An examination of these passages of Scripture will 
show that Bishop Andrewes (one of the most learned theo- 
logians and Scriptural scholars that the Church of England has 
ever had) must certainly have supposed that this was intended 
for an actual Absolution; and that, in his opinion, it was 
such. 

(2) The Absolution itself is constructed on a similar principle 
to that on which Collects are formed ; and as the precatory part 
of a Collect is sometimes very short and condensed!, so here the 
actual words of Absolution are only “ He pardoneth and absolveth 
all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe His holy 
Gospel.” The preceding portion is a statement of the antecedent 
reasons—God’s mercy, and the delegation of His authority—for 
pronouncing Absolution; and what follows is an authoritative 
exhortation to follow up the words of temporary confession and 
absolution with prayer for perseverance and final pardon. The 
words which thus form the essence of the Absolution are of 
a declaratory kind, while those in the old Morning and Evening 
Services of the Church were precatory, as may be seen from the 
original Latin form printed above, and its English translation in 
the note below; but the change has rather strengthened than 
weakened the force of the form adopted. Nor must we be led 


1 See ‘‘ Introduction to the Collects, Epistles, and Gospels.” 


Mark i. 14, 15, 

Acts xx. 21. 

Acts vy. 31. 

2 Cor. vii..10. 

Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 
Die 

Luke xi. 13. 

Eccles: v. 1, 2. 

Ps. xix. 14. 

2 Cor. vii. 21. 

1 Pet.i. 15. iv. 


MORNING PRAYER. 5 


truly repent, and unfeignedly believe 
his holy Gospel. Wherefore let us be- 
seech him to grant us true repentance, 
and his holy Spirit, that those things 
may please him, which we do at this 
present, and that the rest of our life 


2, 3. 
* Ps. xxxviii. 38. 
Matt. xxv. 34, 46, 


hereafter may be pure and holy, so 
Rey. xxii. 12. 14, 


that at the last we may come to his 


eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 


§| The people shall answer here, and at the end 


* Ps. evi. 46. 
Deut. xxvii. 15. 


Revi xized of all other prayers, Amen. 
Acts xx. 36 WY Zhen the Minister shall kneel, and say the 
peek Ngee Lords Prayer with an audible voice; the 


Luke xxii, 4. People also kneeling, and repeating it with 
him, both here, and wheresoever else it is 


used in Divine Service. 


UR Father, which art in Heaven, 
Hallowed be thy Name. Thy 


Matt. vi. 9. 13. 


liberet vos ab omni malo; conservet Cf A tolnta ss 
et confirmet in bono; et ad vitam _ nion. 
perducat eternam. Amen. 
Absolutionem et remissionem om- 
nium peccatorum vestrorum, spatium 
vere pcenitentiz, emendationem vite, 
gratiam et consolationem Sancti Spiri- 
tus, tribuat vobis omnipotens et miseri- 
cors Dominus. Amen. ] 


Ad Matutinas. . . .dicat sacerdos Pater. Noster Salisbury Use. 
et Adve Maria. 


UIITATEP jpav 6 év tots odpavots, Maré. vi. 9.13. 
aytacOntw 7d dvowa cov. °EXOEéTw 1} 


away by the word “declaratory,” so often used to distinguish this 
from the other two forms of Absolution used in the Prayer 
Book ; for to “declare” God’s pardon of sinners is to give effect 
to that pardon, as when the authorized subordinate of an earthly 
sovereign declares pardon in that sovereign’s name. This form is, 
in fact, closely analogous to the formulary of Baptism used in the 
Eastern Church,—“ The servant of God (N.) is baptized in the 
Name of the Father, Amen, and of the Son, Amen, and of the Holy 
Ghost, Amen.” And as these words are undoubtedly sufficient for 
fulfilling our Lord’s words, “ Baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,” so are the 
absolving words of our Absolution sufficient to fulfil His other 
words, “ Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto 
them.” 

The special form in which the Absolution is moulded was pro- 
bably adopted from a careful consideration of the use which was 
to be made of it. It is an Absolution uttered over a mixed con- 
gregation, and yet it can only be efficacious towards those who 
have honestly said the Confession as it is intended to be said. 
The conditions of pardon are therefore distinctly expressed, that 
the impenitent may not be misled, and take to themselves a 
forgiveness to which they have no claim. And as it is a public 
Absolution, ‘‘ He pardoneth and absolveth” is adopted in analogy 
with the “ tribuat vobis omnipotens et misericors Dominus,” rather 
than the positive form, “by His authority I absolve,” as used in 
absolving individual penitents!. 

The effect of this Absolution in the daily services of the Church 
is (1) to reconcile the Church, as a community, daily to her God, 
through the mercies of Christ; (2) to prepare each person present 
for the work of offering praise to Him; (8) to convey pardon of 


1 The ancient form of Confession, Misereatur, and Absolution, was as 
follows, being used in the midst of the preces at Prime and Compline. 

The Priest, looking towards the Altar, 

I confess to God, the Blessed Mary, and all the Saints [turning to the 
choir], and to you, that I have sinned exceedingly in thought, word, and 
deed, of my own fault [looking back to the Altar]. I beseech Holy Mary, 
all the Saints of God, and [looking back to the Choir] ye to pray for me. 

The Choir replies, turning to the Priest, 

Almighty God have mercy upon you, and forgive you all your sins, 
deliver you from all evil, preserve and strengthen you in all goodness, and 
bring you to everlasting life. Amen. 

Then the Choir, turning to the Altar, 

I confess to God . . . . to pray for me. 

Then let the Priest say to the Choir, in the first person, if necessary, 

Almighty God have mercy upon you .. . . everlasting life. Amen. 

The Almighty and merciful Lord grant you Absolution and Remission of 
all your sins, space for true repentance, amendment of life, and the grace 
and consolation ofthe Holy Spirit. Amen, 


sin to an extent correlative with the extent of penitence in those 
over whom it is uttered. As was said in the case of the general 
Confession, that it does not supersede a particular confession ; 
so it must be remembered that the general Absolution does not 
supersede a particular one. But the necessity for absolution is so 
great, that the Church has provided against any one being without 
it by this daily utterance of it, in which it is cast abroad as the 
Sower sowed his seed, or as God sends His rain upon the just and 
the unjust. It is a ministration in close analogy with the con- 
tinual superabundance of the mercies of God in Christ, which flow 
down even to the skirts of our High Priest’s clothing. According 
to the words, “freely ye have received, freely give,’ the Church 
casts her bread upon the waters in faith, believing that God’s 
word of absolution will not return unto Him void. And for its 
efficiency, in the words of a recent writer, “all that is needed is 
that there be fit, i.e. truly repentant recipients of it; that 
secured, wheresoever it touches, it blesses and heals1.” 

The people shall answer] The words “here and at the end of 
all other prayers” were added by Bishop Cosin. He also wished 
to make a marked separation between the portion of the service 
ending with the Absolution, and that beginning with the Lord’s 
Prayer. After the “Amen” to the former he wrote, ‘“ Place 
here a fleuron,” and at the head of the Lord’s Prayer, over leaf, 
he has made a note, “Set here a faire compartment (orna- 
mental page-heading) before this title.’ And although he has not 
erased the previous title before the Sentences, he has here repeated 
it, — An Order for Morning Prayer.” He probably contemplated 
the occasional use of a short service, from which all before the 
Lord’s Prayer was to be omitted. In the first series of his notes 
on the Prayer Book (Works, v. 47), Bishop Cosin has also 
written on the Lord’s Prayer, “ Here begins the service; for that 
which goes before is but a preparation to it, and is newly added 
in King Edward’s Second Book, in imitation of the Liturgy and 
Mass of the Church of Rome. But as their hours begin with the 
Lord’s Prayer, so begins our mattins, and the high service of the 
altar. And they begin as they should do, for this was the ancient 
custom of the Christians, when they were met together to pray ; 
they said that prayer for a foundation and a beginning of all the 
rest, which Christ Himself had taught them.” [Cf. Works ii. 9.] 


THE LORD’S PRAYER. 


Then the Minister] From 1552 to 1661, the Rubric stood, 
“Then shall the Minister begin the Lord’s Prayer with a loud 


voice.” Before 1552, it had been “The Priest being in the 


1 Principles of Divine Service, i. 317 


6 MORNING PRAYER. 


Kingdom come. Thy will be done in 
Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us 
this day our daily bread. And forgive 
us our trespasses, As we forgive them, 
that trespass against us. And lead us 
not into temptation; But deliver us 
from evil: For thine is the Kingdom’, 
the Power, and the Glory, For ever 
and ever. Amen. 


The Irish MS. 
reads, ‘‘And the 
power,”’ but and 
is erased in the 
sealed copies. 


Gf Then likewise he shall say, 


Ps. li 15. O Lord, open thou our lips. 
Answer. 
Ps. xxii. 19. And our mouth shall shew forth thy 
praise. 
Priest. 
Ps. xx. 1. O God, make speed to save us. 
: Answer. 
Manin & O Lord, make haste to help us. 


Bactrela cou yevnOntw To OéAnpa cov, 
ws ev ovpave Kal él THs ys. Tov aptov 
HUOV TOV €TrLovaLOY dos Huy onpwEpor. 
Kal ddes tiv ra oberrnpata jar, os 
Kab nels aplewev Tois operhéraus Hud. 
Kat un eicevéyens tas eis Tespacpov" 
) We s.g5'5! ¢ a rd \ a am tf 
ANNA poas Huas aro TOU Trovnpod. "Ort 

nan? <. / No 8u \ 
cov éotiv ) Bacirela, Kal 7) Svvapis, Kat 
Y| , 

pny. | 


Postea sacerdos incipiat servitium hoe modo: 


» do&a eis Tovs aidvas. 
Salisbury Use. 
Domine, labia mea aperies. 
Chorus respondeat. Et os meum an- 
nuntiabit laudem tuam. 
Sacerdos statim. Deus in adjutorium 
meum intende. 
f. Domine, ad adjuvandum me fes- 
tina. 


quire, shall begin with a loud voice the Lord’s Prayer, called the 
Paternoster.” It was altered to its present form by Bishop 
Cosin. The mattins began here in the Prayer Book of 1549; 
and before that time, the Lord’s Prayer was said secretly by the 
Priest, the public part of the service beginning with the “ Domine, 
labia mea aperies,’ as is shown in the Latin Rubric printed 
before that versicle. 

with him) That is, simultaneously, clause by clause. 

wheresoever it is used in Divine Service] Bishop Cosin 
overlooked the Rubric immediately before the Lord’s Prayer in 
the Communion Service, which directs the priest to say it, with- 
out any direction as to the people. It is not likely that there was 
any intention of overriding that Rubric by this. 

The Doxology was added here in 1661, but not by Bishop Cosin, 
who wrote among some “ Directions to be given to the printer,” 
“Never print the Lord’s Prayer beyond—deliver us from evil. 
Amen.” The Doxology is supposed not to have been in the 
original of St. Matthew, as it is not in St. Luke. In the ancient 
Liturgies of the Hast, after “deliver us from evil” (said, with 
the rest of the prayer, by the people), the priest offers a prayer 
against the evil and the Evil One, called the Embolismus; and 
the Doxology is then sung by the people. Probably this is a 
primitive usage; and the antiphon so sung has crept into the 
text of the Gospel. 

The paraphrase of Bishop Andrewes, in his note on the 
Lord’s Prayer here, is very concise and instructive. 

Our Father. Etsi lesus est, Pater est. 

Which art in Heaven. 

Hallowed be Thy Name. In me, per me, super me. 

Thy Kingdom come. Ut destruatur regnum peccati, per quod 
regnavit mors et diabolus. 

In earth. In me, qui sum terra. 

In heaven. <A sanctis angelis. 

Give us this day our daily. Pro necessitate. 

Bread. Proprium, licite acquisitum, superccelestem et corpo- 
reum. 

Forgive us our trespasses. Talenta dimitte. 

Lead us not. Nec sinas intrare ductos pronosque. 

{ diabolo. 
From evil. Ab authore mali ip ex | mundo. 
intra, nobismetipsis. 
culpe per gratiam. 
A malo } pcene per misericordiam. 


Eminenter, non inclusive. 


Lomni per pacem. 

Its fitness for use in the manner here directed by the Church 
is also beautifully brought out by Sir Richard Baker. “Though 
this prayer is the supplication of the whole body of the Church, 
and of every member thereof; yet each petition seems to have 


some special relation to some peculiar member. For the first 
petition may not unfitly be thought the prayer of angels; the 
second, the prayer of the saints departed; the third, the prayer 
of the faithful living; the fourth, the prayer of all creatures ; the 
fifth, the prayer of penitent sinners; the sixth, the prayer of 
infants.” : 

The various modes in which saints have used this Divine 
prayer with a special intention, are almost infinite ; and it would 
be well for every one to follow their example, by having such a 
special intention in view whenever it is said in the Services of the 
Sanctuary. In this place, at any rate, it should be offered up as 
the complement and crown of the Absolution and Confession, on 
the one hand; and laid hold of, on the other hand, as a media- 
torial key, by which the door of heaven is to he opened for the 
ascent of the Church’s praises to the Throne of God. It is 
a prayer, says the old “Mirroure,” that said in the Unity of 
the Church, is never unsped. 

Some ancient English versions of the Lord’s Prayer will be 
found in the notes to Evening Prayer ; where also will be found 
an exposition and a paraphrase; the one, an ancient one, illus- 
trating the general meaning of the Lord’s Prayer; the other, 
modern, drawing out its fulness as a prayer for the Unity of the 
Church, according to the method of special intention above 
suggested. 

THE VERSICLES. 

O Lord, open Thou] ‘These versicles and responses have been 
used time immemorial as the opening of the daily service of 
praise which the Church continually offers to God. They are 
mentioned in the rule of St. Benedict (the great founder of the 
Benedictine order, which guarded and expressed the devotional 
system of the Church for so many ages, and who died in a.p. 543), 
as the prefatory part of the service; and he probably adopted 
them from the previous custom of the Church ; the two Psalms 
from which they are taken having been used at the beginning of 
the daily Offices in the East from the earliest ages. Taken from 
such a source, with only the change from the singular to the 
plural number in the pronouns!, they form a most fitting prefix 


1 This change of pronouns was made in 1552. A reason for retaining the 
singular is given in an old exposition of the services. ‘And take heed 
that all this verse, both that part that is said of one alone, and that that is 
answered of all together, are said in the singular number; as when ye say 
‘mine,’ or ‘me,’ and not ‘ our,’ or ‘ us,’ in token that ye begin your praising 
and prayer in the person of holy Church, which is one, and not many. For 
though there be many members of holy Church, as there are many Christian 
men and women, yet they make one body, that is holy Church, whereof 
Christ is the Head.” Mirror xli. The same commentary explains, that 
“‘O Lord, open thou my lips,” and its response, were used only at Mattins, 
because all the day after the lips should remain ready for God’s praises. 
[The Mirroure of our Ladye” is a commentary on the daily Services, 
written for the Nuns of Sion, and printed in 1530.] 


MORNING PRAYER. 7 


| Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, 
Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son : and to the Holy Ghost ; 
Answer. 
As it was in the beginning, is now, 


Matt. xxviii, 19. 


Job xxxviii. 7. 


Ps. cxlv. 4. 
civ. 31. and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 
eee Priest. 
&. cl. 6. s 
Rev, xix. 1. 6. Praise ye the Lord. 
Answer. 
Ps. cxiii. 3. 2 : 
ee ys The Lord’s Name be praised. 


2 Chron. xx. 19, 
1 Chron. xvi. 9, 
Eph. v. 19. 
Rev. xv. 3. 


§ Then shall be said, or sung this Psalm follow- 
ing: Except on Easter-Day, wpon which 
another Anthem is appointed ; and on the 
Nineteenth day of every month it is not to 
be read here, but in the ordinary course of 
the Psalms. 


COME, let us sing unto the 
Lord + let us heartily rejoice in 

the strength of our salvation. 
Let us come before his presence with 
thanksgiving t and shew our selves glad 


Venite, exulte- 
mus Domino. 
Ps. 95. 


in him with Psalms. 


(= 


“Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui salisbury Use. 
Sancto. 


Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et 
semper, et in secula seculorum. 


Amen. 


Alleluia [ve/ Laus Tibi, Domine, 


Rex eterne gloriz]. 


Sequatur invitatoriwm hoe modo. Psalinum 


[ Invitatory entire. | 
VENITE, exultemus Domino, jubi- [The version is 
lemus Deo salutari nostro: preoc- Italic.] 
cupemus faciem ejus in confessione, et 


in psalmis jubilemus ei. 


to the Psalmody which is so integral a portion of Divine Service. 
Except the Lord open our lips, we cannot show forth His praise 
with the heart. They are the “Surswm Corda” of the Daily 
Service, and yet have a tone of humility and even penitence, given to 
them by their derivation from the fifty-first and seventieth Psalms. 
It is probably to express this penitential tone that the musical 
note to which the first of them is said by the Priest is always a 
low one, being depressed as much as a fifth from the pitch in 
which the Lord’s Prayer has been recited: and also that we con- 
tinue kneeling till the Gloria Patri. The second versicle is a 
paraphrase of the “ Hosanna,’—Save, Lord, we beseech Thee,— 
with which our Lord was led in triumph to the Temple. 


GLORIA PATRI. 


The beautiful dogmatic anthem which is here used for the first 
time in the service is of primitive origin, and, if not an indepen- 
dently inspired form, is naturally traceable to the angelic hymns in 
Isaiah vi. 3, and Luke ii. 13, the Trinitarian form of it being equally 
traceable to that of the baptismal formula ordained by our Lord 
in Matt. xxviii. 19. Clement of Alexandria, who wrote before the 
end of the second century, refers to the use of this hymn under 
the form, Aivodytes TG udvm warp) iad vid Kal TE ayl@ mvevpart, 
“ giving glory to the one Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost,” and a hymn of about the same date is printed by 
Dr. Routh, in which there is an evident trace of the same custom : 
buvodpev matépa Kal viby, kal Gyioy mvedua cod, “ Praise we the 
Father and Son, and Holy Spirit of God.” It is also referred to 
even earlier by Justin Martyr. The Arian heretics made a great 
point of using Church phraseology in their own novel and heretical 
sense; and they introduced the custom of singing their hymn in 
the form, “ Glory be to the Father, by the Son, and in the Holy 
Ghost,’ which evaded the recognition of each Person. as God. It 
thus became necessary for the Church to adopt a form less capable 
of perversion ; and in ancient liturgies it is found as it is still used 
in the Eastern Church, “ Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, 
and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, world without end.” In 
the Western Church, the second part, “As it was in the begin- 
ning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end,” has been 
used for nearly as long a period, being found ordered in the fifth 
Canon of the Council of Vaison, presided over by Cesarius of 
Arles, in a.p. 529. The use of the hymn in this place, after the 


Domine ad adjuvandim, is also recognized by the rule of St. | 
| the Lord:” “ And upon any Sunday, or Lord’s Day, this com- 


Benedict a few years further on in the sixth century ; and it is 


found so placed in the earliest English services, those which are 
usually called “ Anglo-Saxon.” It also occurs in the same posi- 
tion in the daily offices of the Eastern and the Roman Churches 
at the present day : so that the Church throughout the world opens 
its lips day by day with the same words of faith in the Blessed 
Trinity, and of devout praise to each Person; worshipping one 
God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity. The addition of the 
succeeding versicle and response gives to this unity of praise on 
earth a further likeness to the unity of praise which was revealed 
to St. John: “And a voice came out of the throne, saying, 
Praise our God, all ye His servants, and ye that fear Him, both 
small and great. And I heard as it were the voice of a great 
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of 
mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God omni- 
potent reigneth” (Rey. xix. 6). 

In the Prayer Book of 1549 the old usage of saying the 
« Hallelujah” from Easter to Trinity Sunday in this place was 
continued. It was expunged g]together in 1552; restored in the 
English form, “ Praise ye the Lord,” and for constant use, in the 
Elizabethan revision. The response to it, “The Lord’s Name be 
praised,” is first found in the Scottish Prayer Book of 1637, 
and was inserted here in 1661. The latter represents in an 
unvarying form the variable invitatories which used to precede 
the Venite in the old Latin services. 

There are two old customs still kept up with respect to the 
Gloria Patri. The one is that of turning to the East, as in the 
recitation of a Creed, whenever it is said or sung in Divine 
Service; an usage enjoined in the ancient Psaiter of the Church 
of England, and still observed, e. g. at Manchester Cathedral. 
The other custom is a more general one, that of reverently 
inclining the head during the first half of the hymn, as a humble 
gesture recognizing the Divine glory of each of the Three Persons ; 
and in imitation of the gesture of the angels, who veil their faces 
with their wings when singing to the glory of the Trinity in the 
vision of Isaiah. An old Canon of the Church of England 
enjoins: “ Quotiesque dicitur Gloria Patri et Filio et Spiritui 
Sancto, ad eadem verba Deo humiliter se inclinent.” Wilkins’ 
Cone. iii. 20. And in the “ Mirroure,” there is the direction, 
“ Ye incline ‘at Gloria Patri.” 

Bishop Cosin wished to revive the use of Invitatories on Sun- 
days, having inserted this Rubric in the Prayer Book which was 
laid before the Revisers of 1661, immediately after “ Praise ye 


8 MORNING PRAYER. 


Mal. i 14. For the Lord is a great God + anda 
great King above all gods. 
Al. hands. In his hand are all the corners of 


the earth + and the strength of the 
hills is his also. 


The sea is his, and he made it ¢ and 
his hands prepared the dry land. 

O come, let us worship, and fall 
down + and kneel before the Lord our 
Maker. 

For he is the Lord our God ¢ and 
we are the people of his pasture, and 
the sheep of his hand. 

To day if ye will hear his voice, 
harden not your hearts + as in the pro- 
vocation, and as in the day of tempta- 
tion in the Wilderness ; 

When your Fathers tempted me: 
proved me, and saw my works. 


See Exhort. and 
Gen, Coni. 


memoration of His rising from the dead shall be said or sung. 
Priest, Christ is risen againe, &c. And upon the feast of Easter, 
Christ, our Passover, is offered up for us. Therefore, let us keep 
the feast, &c., wt in die Pasch. Then shall be said or sung,” the 
Venite as we now have it. 

Then shall be said or sung} This Rubric, as altered by 
Bishop Cosin, has great historical value, for the illustration that 
it gives of the mode in which the Psalms were intended to be 
said or sung. It is as follows: “Then shall be said or sung this 
Psalme following (except on Easter Day, when another Anthem 
is appointed), one verse by the priest, and another by the people ; 
and the same order shall be observed in all psalmes and hymns 
throughout this Book. But in colledges, and where there is a 
Quire, the same shall be sung by sides, as hath bin accustomed.” 
In the third series of his notes on the Prayer Book, there are also 
these remarks:on the response, “And our mouth shall shew forth 
Thy praise:” “This is the answer of all the people. In the 
second book of Edward VI. the word ‘Choir’ is every where put for 
our word ‘ Answer ;’ and by making this answer, they promise for 
themselves that they will not sit still to hear the psalms and 
hymns read only to them, as matter of their instruction ; but that 
they will bear a part in them with the priest, and keep up the 
old custom still of smging, and answering verse by verse, as being 
specially appointed for the setting forth of God’s praise; where- 
unto they are presently invited again by the minister, in’ these 
words, ‘ Praise ye the Lord.’ So that our manner of singing by 
sides, or all together, or in several parts, or in the people’s answer- 
ing the priest in repeating the psalms and hymns, is here 
grounded; but if the minister say all alone, in vain was it for 
God’s people to promise God, and to say, that their mouth also 
should shew forth His praise.” [Works, v. 445. ] 


VENITE EXULTEMUS. 


This Psalm has been used from time immemorial as an intro- 
duction to the praises of Divine Service; and was probably 
adopted by the Church from the services of the Temple!. It was 
perhaps such a familiar use of it in both the Jewish and the 
Christian system of Divine Service, which led to the exposition of 
it given in the third chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 


1 In the Eastern Church an epitome of the first three verses is used, but 
in the Latin and English Churches it has always been used entire. 


[Invitatory entire. | 

Quoniam Deus magnus Dominus, 
et Rex magnus super omnes deos: 
quoniam non repellet Dominus plebem quotient secre 
suam, quia in manu ejus sunt omnes 
fines terre, et altitudines montium sae ipsius sunt. 
ipse conspicit. 

(Invitatory, latter half.] 

Quoniam ipsius est mare, et ipse 
fecit illud; et aridam fundaverunt siccam manus | 
manus ejus: venite, adoremus et pro- Vus- 
cidamus ante Deum, ploremus coram 
Domino qui fecit nos; Quia ipse est 
Dominus Deus noster, nos autem popu- 
lus ejus, et oves pascue ejus. Vale: me Eng: 

[Invitatory entire. | 

Hodie, si vocem ejus audieritis, nolite 
obdurare corda vestra, sicut in exacer- ‘rritatione. Vulg. 
batione, secundum diem tentationis in 
deserto: ubi tentaverunt me patres 
vestri, probaverunt, et viderunt opera 
mea. 


where the Apostle is showing the connexion between the two 
dispensations, and the way in which all belief and worship centres 
in our Divine High Priest and perpetual Sacrifice. 

In one of St. Augustine’s sermons he plainly refers thus to the 
ritual use of the Venite: “This we have gathered from the Apos- 
toliclesson. Then we chanted the Psalm, exhorting oneanother, with 
one voice, with one heart, saying, ‘O come, let us adore, and fall 
down before Him, and weep before the Lord who made us.’ In 
the same Psalm too, ‘Let us prevent His face with confession, 
and make a joyful noise unto Him with psalms.’ After these 
the lesson of the Gospel showed us the ten lepers cleansed, and one 
of them, a stranger, giving thanks to his cleanser” (St. Aug. 
Serm. Ben. ed. 176, Oxf. trans.126). Durandus, in his Rationale 
of Divine Offices, says that this psalm was sung at the beginning 
of the service to call the congregation out of the church-yard into 
the church ; and that it was hence called the Invitatory Psalm ; 
but probably this was a local or temporary use of it, and does not 
represent the true spirit of its introduction into the Morning 
Service. It is far more likely that its comprehensive character, 
as an adoration of Christ, was that which moved the Divine 
Instinct wherewith the Church is endowed to place this psalm in 
the forefront of her Service of Praise. 

Until the translation of our Offices into English it was the 
custom to sing the Venite in a different manner from that now 
used; with the addition, that is, of Invitatories. . These were 
short sentences (varied according to the ecclesiastical season) 
which were sung before the first verse, after each of the five 
verses into which it was then divided, and also after the Gloria 
Patri at the end. Thus in Trinity Season, “ ZLaudemus Jesum 
Christum ; quia Ipse est Redemptor omniwm seculorum,” would 
be sung before and after the first, and also after the third and 
fifth of the divisions indicated in the Latin version above. After 
the second, fourth, and Gloria Patri, would be sung “ Quia Ipse 
est Redemptor omniwm seculorum” only ; and at the conclusion 
the whole of the Response, as at the beginning. These Invita- 
tories were altogether set aside, as regards the Venite, in 1549; 
and, as has been already shown, the “Sentences” were substi- 
tuted for them at the commencement of Divine Service in 1552. 
Thus reduced to its psalter simplicity, the Venite Exultemus is 
used before the Psalms every morning, except upon Easter Day, 
when a special Invitatory Anthem is substituted, which is printed 


MORNING PRAYER. 


Forty years long was I grieved with 
this generation, and said + It is a peo- 
ple that do err in their hearts, for 
they have not known my ways. 

Unto whom I sware in my wrath: 
that they should not enter into my rest. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be ¢ world without end. 
Amen. 


§ Then shall follow the Psalms in order as 
they be appointed. And at the end of every 
Psalm throughout the Year, and likewise in 
the end of Benedicite, Benedictus, Magnificat, 
and Nunc dimittis, shall be repeated, 


Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 


Answer. 


Heb. iv. 3. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 


¥ Then shall be read distinctly with an audible 
voice the First Lesson, taken out of the Old 
Testament, as is appointed in the Kalendar, 
(except there be proper Lessons assigned for 
that day:) He that readeth so standing and 
turning himself, as he may best be heard of all 
such as are present. And after that, shall be 
said or sung, in English, the Hymn called Te 
Deum Laudamus, daily throughout the Year. 


{| Note, That before every Lesson the Minister 
shall say, Here beginneth such a Chapter, o7 
Verse of such a Chapter, of such a Book: And 
after every Lesson, Here endeth the First, or 
the Second Lesson. 


[Invitatory, latter half. 

Quadraginta annis proximus fui ofensus. Vulg. 
generationi huic, et dixi, Semper hi 
errant corde: ipsl vero non cognove- 
runt vias meas: quibus juravi in ira 
mea, Si introibunt in requiem meam. 


Utjuravi. Vulg. 


(Invitatory entire. ] 
Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui 
Sancto. 
Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et 
semper, et in seecula seculorum. Amen. 
[Invitatory, (1) latter half, (2) entire.] 


[And all the Clerks who have sung the Psalms 
standing up, turning to the Altar, shall each 
of them say the Gloria, in his station, which 
shall be observed throughout the whole year. | 


Transl. of Sarum 
Psalter, p. 34. 


Salisbury Use. 
(Advent Sunday, 
e. g.) 


Clericus primam lectionem legat hoe modo. 
Lectio prima. Hsaizi. Visio Esai filii Amos, 
&e. &e. 

[The Chapter is said in the midst of the Choir Transl. of Sarum 
by the Priest, without changing his place or Fealer, Daeae, 
vestment, but turned to the Altar, not chanting, 
but reading as in the tone of a reader....| 


before the Collect for the day. On the nineteenth day of every 
month, it is sung in its place as one of the Mattins psalms, so as 
not to be twice used at the same service, which is a continuation 
of the old English usage. 

An old custom lingers (especially in the North of England) of 
making a gesture of reverence at the words, “O come, let us 
worship and fall down ;” which is a relic of the custom of 
actual prostration as it was once made in many churches at these 
words. 

The Rubrics between the Venite and the Te Deum were all re- 
arranged in 1661; and the new arrangement, as we now have it, 
appears in MS., in Bishop Cosin’s Prayer Book. The only 
changes of importance were these. (1) “ He that readeth,” and 
« He shall say,” were substituted for “the minister that readeth,” 
and “the minister shall say,” in the direction about the Lessons. 
(2) This Rubric of the preceding books was erased, “ And to the 
end the people may the better hear in such places where they 
do sing, there shall the lessons be sung in a plain tune, after the 
manner of distinct reading, and likewise the epistle and gospel.” 


THE PSALMS. 
For notes relating to the ritual use of the Psalms, the reader is 
referred to the Introduction to the Psalter. 
After the Psalms have been sung it is customary in many 
churches to play a short voluntary on the organ: this is men- 
tioned by Archbishop Secker as having “long been customary” 


| in his day; and in a letter from Oxford in No. 630 of the 
“Spectator.” Perhaps it may be accounted for by a Salis- 
bury Rubric between the Psalms and Lessons, “ Deinde dicitur 
Paternoster et Credo in Deum a@ toto choro privatim.” So at 
Durham a voluntary has also been substituted for the “Agnus 
Dei,’”’ which was once sung during the Communion of the Laity. 


THE LESSONS. 


For notes relating to the ritual use of Lessons in Divine Service, 
the reader is referred to a note on “The Order how the rest of 
Holy Scripture is appointed to be read,” in the Calendar. 


THE CANTICLES. 


The ritual use of Holy Scripture in Divine Service has always 
been connected with praise and thanksgiving. The short responds 
which were intermingled with the Lessons in the pre-Reforma- 
tion Services were very ancient in their origin, although, no doubt, 
they had increased in number during the development of the 
Services for monastic use. Of a like antiquity is the “Glory be 
to Thee, O Lord” before, and the “Thanks be to Thee, O Lord” 
after the reading of the Gospel in the Communion Service. As 
will be seen in the account given of the Te Deum, the use of 
responsory hymns after the Lessons is also very ancient; and it 
probably arose out of the pious instinct which thus connected the 
idea of thanksgiving with the hearing of God’s revelations to 
man. The Council of Laodicea (a.D. 367) ordered, in its seven- 

C 


10 MORNING PRAYER. 


Te Deum Lauda. 
mus. 

Psalms passim. 
Rev xix. 5. 


E praise thee, O God ¢: we 
acknowledge thee to be the 


Tuan ix. 14, Lord, 
eae ers All the earth doth worship thee + 
ae the Father everlasting. 
Ren is. To thee all Angels cry aloud + the 
Prayer of Manas- FY oavens, and all the Powers therein. 
eee wld OLS Cherubin, and Seraphin + 
1 continually do cry. 
Isa. vi. 3. Holy, Holy, Holy : Lord God of 
Sabaoth ; 
Col. i. 20. Heaven and earth are full of the 
Majesty + of thy glory. 
Rev. iv. 10. The glorious company of the Apos- 
tles + praise thee. 
Bele ease: The goodly fellowship of the Pro- 


phets ¢ praise thee. 


Salisbury Use. 
Cf. Antiphon to 
Athan. Creed. 
“Te Deum Pa- 
trem confitemur.” 


E Deum laudamus : te Dominum 
confitemur. 


Te eternum Patrem : omnis terra 
veneratur. 
Tibi omnes Angeli : tibi cceli et 
universe potestates. 
Tibi Cherubin et Seraphin : incessa- gious ee 
bili voce proclamant, 
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus : Domi- 
nus Deus Sabaoth ; 
Pleni sunt cceli et terra : majestatis 
glorie tue. 


Te gloriosus Apostolorum chorus. St. Cyprian, de 


Mortalitate. 


Te Prophetarum laudabilis numerus, 


teenth Canon, that Psalms and Lessons should be used alternately ; 
and this Canon doubtless refers to a custom similar to ours. 

A leading principle of all the Canticles appears to be that of 
connecting the written with the personal Word of God; and that 
as much in respect to the Old Testament Lessons as to those 
taken out of the Gospel or other parts of the New Testament. 
This is more especially true of those Canticles which are placed 
first of the two in each case, the Te Deum, the Benedictus, the 
Magnificat, and the Nunc Dimittis. The three latter of these 
were inspired hymns spoken at the time when the Eternal Word 
was in the act of taking our nature to redeem and glorify it; and 
the first is, if not inspired, the most wonderful expression of 
praise for the abiding Incarnation of our Lord that uninspired 
lips have ever uttered. It may also be observed that the Can- 
ticles are set where they are, not that they may apply to any par- 
ticular chapters of the Holy Bible, though they often do so in a 
striking manner, but with reference to Divine revelation as a 
whole, given to mankind by God in His mercy and love, and 
therefore a matter for deepest thankfulness, and most exalted 
praise. 

The three New Testament Canticles are all taken from the 
Gospel of St. Luke; the sacrificial and sacerdotal gospel, the 
symbol of which is the “living creature like unto a calf” or “an 
ox ;”? and in which is chiefly set forth our Blessed Lord’s relation 
to the Church as her High Priest offering Himself for sin, and 
originating from His own Person all subordinate ministrations 
of grace. 


TE DEUM LAUDAMUS. 


This most venerable hymn has been sung by the whole Western 
Church “ day by day” on all her feasts from time immemorial. It 
is found in our own Morning Service as far back as the Conquest ; 
and its insertion in the Salisbury Portiforium by St. Osmund was 
doubtless a continuation of the old custom of the Church of 
England. 

Very ancient ecclesiastical traditions represent the Te Deum 
as a hymn antiphonally extemporized by St. Ambrose and St. 
Augustine at the baptism of the latter, A.D. 386. The written 
authority for this tradition is traceable to an alleged work of St. 
Datius, a successor of St. Ambrose in the See of Milan, a.p. 
552. But this work has been proved by Menard, Muratori, and 
Mabillon, to be of much later date. There is also a Psalter in 
the Vienna Library, which was given by the Emperor Charlemagne 
to Pope Adrian I., 4.p. 772, in the Appendix of which the Te 
Deum is found with the title “Hymnus quem Sanctus 
Ambrosius et Sanctus Augustinus invicem condiderunt:” and a 
similar title is found in other ancient copies. The title anciently 
given to it in the Psalter of our own Church was, “Canticum 


Ambrosii et Augustini,” and in 1661 Bishop Cosin wished so far 
to restore this title as to call it “The Hymn of St. Ambrose ;” 
but the ancient rubrical title was as it is at present. In the 
earliest mention that we have of it (i.e., in the rule of St. 
Benedict, framed in the beginning of the sixth century), it has 
the same title as in our present Prayer Book, the words of St. 
Benedict being “Post quartum Responsorium incipit Abbas Ze 
Deum Laudamus, quo predicto legat Abbas lectionem de 
Evangelio ....” It is also named in the rule of St. Casarius 
of Arles about the same date; being ordered to be sung at 
Mattins every Sunday in both systems. There is no reason to 
think that it was then new to the Church; but we may rather 
conclude that it was a well-known hymn which the great founder 
of the Benedictines adopted for the use of his order from the 
ordinary use of the Church at large. 

But the authorship of this divine hymn has been assigned to 
several saints both by ancient and modern authors, the earliest 
being St. Hilary of Poictiers, a.pD. 355, and the latest, Nicetius, 
Bishop of Treves, a.D. 585. Some ancient copies, in the Vatican 
and elsewhere, give it the titles of Hymnus S. Abundii, and 
Hymnus Sisebuti monachi. It has also been attributed to St. 
Hilary of Arles, and to a monk of Lerins, whose name is not 
known, the number of persons named showing how much 
uncertainty has always surrounded the matter. It is scarcely 
possible that so remarkable a hymn should have originated in so 
remarkable a manner as that first referred to, without some trace 
of it being found in the works of St. Ambrose or St. Augustine, 
especially the Confessions of the latter'. It may be that their 
names were connected with it because the one introduced it into 
the Church of Milan, and the other (taught by St. Ambrose) into 
the Churches of Africa. 

For there is reason to think that the Te Deum Laudamus is 
much older than the time of St. Ambrose. So early as A.D. 252 
we find the following words in St. Cyprian’s Treatise “On the 
Mortality ” that was then afflicting Carthage: “ Ah, perfect and 
perpetual bliss! There is the glorious company of the Apostles ; 
there is the fellowship of the prophets exulting; there is the 
innumerable multitude of martyrs, crowned after their victory of 
strife and passion ;” and the striking parallel between them and 
the seventh, eighth, and ninth verses of the Te Deum seems 


' In the latter we do indeed read... ‘‘we were baptized, and anxiety 
for our past life vanished from us. Nor was I sated in those days with the 
wondrous sweetness of considering the depth of Thy counsels concerning 
the salvation of mankind. How did I weep, in Thy Hymns and Canticles, 
touched to the quick by the voices of Thy sweet-attuned Church!” (St, 
Aug., Conf. IX. vi., p. 166, Oxf. Trans.) But this passage seems rather to 
indicate the use of Canticles already well known than the invention of any 
new one. 


MORNING PRAYER. 1] 


Rev. vii. 15. The noble army of Martyrs ¢ praise 
thee. 

Eph, iii, 10. 21, The holy Church throughout all the 
world + doth acknowledge thee ; 

Bs, cxlv, 5. The Father + of an infinite Ma- 

Jude 25. jesty ; 

ee ‘i Thine honourable, true + and only 
Son; 

John xiv. 26. Also the Holy Ghost + the Com- 
forter. 

Rev. xix le, ‘Thou art the King of Glory + O 

Christ. 

ey Thou art the everlasting Son : of 
the Father. 

Leet OL When thou tookest upon thee to 


deliver man + thou didst not abhor 
the Virgin’s womb. 


Te Martyrum candidatus, laudat 
exercitus. 

Te per orbem terrarum ; sancta con- 
fitetur ecclesia. 


Patrem immense majestatis ; Ct Athenee med: 


“ Tmmensus 
Pater,” &c. 


Venerandum tuum verum : et uni- 
cum Filium ; 

Sanctum quoque Paracletum Spiri- 
tum. 

Tu rex glorie : Christe. 


Tu Patris sempiternus es Filius. 
Tu, ad lberandum, suscepturus ho- 


minem : non horruisti Virginis ute- 
rum. 


certainly more than accidental. There are several coincidences 
also between words in the Baptismal and other offices of the 
Eastern Church and particular verses of the Te Deum, and the 
former are supposed to be of extremely ancient date. In the 
Alexandrine MS. of the Scriptures, a work of the fourth or fifth 
century, preserved in the British Museum, there is moreover a 
Morning Hymn which is written at the end of the Psalter, and 
which is still used in the daily services of the Greek Church. 
The following is a translation:— 


Glory to Thee, the giver of light. 

Glory to God on high, and on earth peace, good will towards 
men. 

We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify 
Thee, we give thanks to Thee for Thy great glory. 

O Lord, heavenly King, God, Father Almighty: O Lord, 
only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, and Holy Spirit. 

O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that takest 
away the sin of the world; have mercy upon us, Thou 
that takest away the sin of the world. 

Accept our prayer: Thou that sittest at the right hand of 
the Father, have mercy upon us. 

For Thou only art holy; Thou only Lord Jesus Christ art in 
the glory of God the Father. Amen. 

Day by day I bless Thee, and praise Thy name for ever, and 
for ever and ever. 

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me this day without sin. 

Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers; and praised 
and glorified be Thy name for ever. Amen. 

Lord, let Thy mercy be upon us, as our trust 


is in Thee. Ps. xxxiii. 22. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord: O teach me Thy 

statutes. Ps, cxix. 12. 
Lord, Thou hast been our refuge, from one 

generation to another. Ps. xc. 1. 
I said, Lord, be merciful to me, heal my 

soul, for I have sinned against Thee. Ps, xii. 4. 
Lord, I fly to Thee; teach me to do Thy 

will, for Thou art my God. Ps, exliii. 9, 10. 


For with Thee is the well of life; in Thy 
light shall we see light. 

Show forth Thy mercy to them that know 
Thee. 

O Holy God, O holy Might, O holy Immortal, 
have mercy upon us. Amen. 

The first division of this hymn is identical with the Eucharistic 

Gloria in Excelsis, and the last verse is the Trisagion of the 


Ps. XXXVI. 9. 


Ibid, 10. 


ancient Eastern Liturgies; the remaining portion has clearly a 
common origin with the Te Deum. Verses 8 and 9 are the 
same as the 24th and 26th verses of the latter. The 11th is 
also identical with the last of the Te Deum, but it is taken 
from Psalm xxxiii. 22. Like the Te Deum, this ancient Morning 
Hymn of the Greek Church borrows largely from the Psalms in 
its concluding portion, and the verses chosen are of a supplicatory 
character in both, though otherwise they do not correspond. 

The most probable conclusion to arrive at is, that this noble 
canticle, in its present form, is a composition of the fourth or fifth 
century ; and that it represents a still more ancient hymn, of which 
traces are to be found in St. Cyprian and the Morning Hymn of 
the Alexandrine Manuscript. 


The Te Deum is only known as connected with the ritual of the 
Church. It seems also from the first to have been connected with 
the reading of the Morning Lessons, the expression ‘Keep us 
this day without sin,” being some evidence of this, though not con- 
vincing, as an analogous form is used in “Give us this day our 
daily bread.” In the Salisbury Use, which probably represents 
the more ancient use of the Church of England, it was directed to 
be sung after the last lesson on Sundays and other Festivals, except 
during Advent and the Lenten season from Septuagesima to Easter. 
Quignonez, in his reformed Roman Breviary, directed it to be 
used every day even in Lent and Advent. The Prayer Book of 
1549 ordered it to be used every day, with the exceptions cus- 
tomary according to the older ritual; and as festivals were pre- 
viously almost of daily occurrence, this was practically a con- 
tinuance of the old rule. In 1552 the exceptions were erased, and 
have not since been restored; but as the alternative Canticle, 
Benedicite, remains, some ritualists conclude that it is to be used 
in Lent and Advent as directed by the First Book of Edward 
VI., and not the Te Deum!?. Of ritual customs anciently con- 


1 This is not the ancient practice of the Church, it must be remembered. 
During Advent the following was sung instead of Te Deum on all Festivals 
when the latter would otherwise have been used. It is the last of nine 
Responds (Responsoria) used after the nine Lessons respectively. 

« .9. Letentur cceli, et exultet terra: jubilate montes laudem: quia 
Dominus noster veniet. Et pauperum suorum miserebitur. 


y. Orietur in diebus ejus justitia et abundantia pacis. Et pauperum 


suorum miserebitur. 

Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto: 

Et pauperum suorum miserebitur.” 

The ancient ritual use of the Benedicite was entirely festive; though it 
was not indeed set aside from its place in Lauds during Lent and Advent. 

Admirable substitutes for the Te Deum in Lent and Advent might be 
found in two other of the discontinued Lauds Canticles, the Song of 
Hezekiah (Isaiah xxxviii.) being exactly adapted for Lent, and that of 


C2 


12 


1 Pet. iii. 19. 
Rom. viii. 29. 


When thou hadst overcome the 
sharpness of death + thou didst open 
the Kingdom of Heaven to all be- 
lievers. 

Thou sittest at the right hand of 
God : in the Glory of the Father. 

We believe that thou shalt come + 
to be our Judge. 


Acts vii. 55. 
John xvii. 5. 


Matt. xvi. 27. 


nee We therefore pray thee, help thy 
1 Pet. i. 19: 
servants + whom thou hast redeemed 
with thy precious blood. 
es Make them to be numbered with 


Wisdonv.5. thy Saints + in glory everlasting. 

O Lord, save thy people + and bless 
thine heritage. 

Govern them ¢ and lift them up for 
ever. 

Day by day + we magnify thee. 

And we worship thy Name ¢ ever 
world without end. 

Vouchsafe, O Lord + to keep us this 


day without sin. 


(margin Psalm 
XXvili. 9.) 


2 Chron. xxx. 21. 
Rev. v. 18. vii. 


12. Heb, xiii. 21. 


The Lord’s 
Prayer. 


nected with the singing of this hymn, one still retains a strong 
hold upon English people, viz., that of bowing at the words “ Holy, 
Holy, Holy,” with the same reverent gesture that is used in the 
Creed : a custom derived from the angelic reverence spoken of in 
Isaiah in connexion with the same words. ‘And for bycause 
Angels praise God with great reverence, therefore ye incline when 
ye sing their song,” says the Mirror. 

Besides the use of the Te Deum in the Morning Service, there 
is a well-known custom of singing this triumphal hymn, by itself, 
arranged to elaborate music, as a special service of thanksgiving. 
It is directed to be used in this manner, in “Forms of Prayer to 
be used at Sea, after Victory, or deliverance from an Enemy :” 
and at the conclusion of coronations it is always so used, as it has 
been, time immemorial, over the whole of Europe. The Sovereigns 
of England have been accustomed to go in state to the singing of 
the Te Deum after great victories, and Handel’s “ Dettingen Te 
Deum” was composed for one of these occasions. Custom has 
also established this separate use of the Te Deum on other im- 
portant occasions of thanksgiving. 

The most ancient Christian music known has come down to us 
in connexion with this Canticle; being that known as the ‘“ Am- 
brosian Te Deum,” which is found in a work on Music written by 
Boéthius, a Roman Consul, in 4.D. 487. This is, however, thought 
to be an adaptation of the Temple psalmody of the Jews, like the 
other ancient Church tones. 


A very striking characteristic of this heavenly hymn is the 
strictly doctrinal form in which it is composed, which makes it 
a literal illustration of St. Paul’s words, “I will sing with the 
spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also” (1 Cor. xiv. 
15). It has been thought by some, from the singularity of the 
opening words, Ze Dewm, that it is throughout a hymn to Christ 
as God, representing, or analogous to, that spoken of by Pliny in 
his letter to Trajan. But the English version truly represents the 
Latin form, in which a double accusative is joined to the verb 


Habakkuk (Hab. iii.) being equally suitable for Advent. The Salisbury 
version of the latter (from the Vulgate) had two beautiful renderings of the 
13th and 18th verses: ‘Thou wentest forth for the salvation of Thy 
people: even for salvation with Thy Christ;” and ‘Yet I will rejoice in 
the Lord: I will joy in God my Jesus.” 


MORNING PRAYER. 


Tu devicto mortis aculeo : 
credentibus regna ccelorum. 


aperuisti 


Tu ad dexteram Dei sedes : mn gloria 
Patris. 
Judex crederis esse venturus. 


Te ergo quesumus, famulis tuis 
subveni : quos pretioso sanguine rede- 
misti. 

fiterna fae cum sanctis tuis : glo- 
ria munerari. 

Salvum fae populum tuum, Do- 
mine : et benedic hereditati tue. 

Et rege eos, et extolle illos usque in 
eternum. 

Per singulos dies, benedicimus te. 

Et laudamus nomen tuum : in se- 
culum et in seculum seculi. 


modern reading, 
‘*in gloria nume- 
rart.” 


Vulgate, rege; 
LXX, motpavov. 


Dignare, Domine, die isto : sine 


peccato nos custodire. 


laudamus that could not be otherwise rhythmically translated. 
That the English Church has always considered the earlier verses 
of it to be addressed to the First Person of the Blessed Trinity is 
evidenced by the ancient Salisbury Antiphon to the Athanasian 
Creed, which is “Te Deum Patrem ingenitum, te Filium uni- 
genitum, te Spiritum Sanctum Paracletum, sanctam et ifidividuam 
Trinitatem toto corde et ore confitemur.” It has also been con- 
jectured that the 11th, 12th, and 13th verses have been inter- 
polated, but there is not the slightest ground for this conjecture, 
all ancient MSS. in Latin, Teutonic of the ninth Century, and 
English from the ninth to the fourteenth, reading precisely the 
same: and the hymn being rendered imperfect by their omission. 

The first ten verses are an offering of praise to the Father 
Almighty, with the Scriptural recognition of the Blessed Trinity 
implied in the Ter Sanctus which Isaiah heard the Seraphim sing 
when he beheld the glory of Christ, and spake of Him. In the 
three following verses this implied recognition of the Three in One 
is developed into an actual aseription of praise to each, the Pater 
immense Majestatis, the Unicus Filius, and the Sanctus Para- 
cletus Spiritus. In these thirteen verses the Unity and Trinity 
of the Divine Nature is celebrated in the name of the whole 
Church of God. The Militant Church, the various orders of holy 
Angels with which it has fellowship in the New Jerusalem, the 
Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs of the Old and New Dispensation 
now gathered into the Church Triumphant, all thus adore God 
the Lord, the Lord God of Sabaoth, the Father Everlasting: and 
the holy Church gathers up its praises in a devout acknowledg- 
ment of each Person of the Blessed Trinity as the Object of Divine 
worship. Then begins that part of the Hymn which glorifies God 
for the blessing of the Incarnation: the latter sixteen verses ad- 
dressing themselves to our Lord and Saviour; commemorating 
His Divine Nature and Eternal Existence, His Incarnation, Sacri- 
fice, Ascension, and Session at the right hand of the Father. In 
the last verses, with a mixture of plaintiveness and triumph, the 
hymn follows the line marked out by the angels at the Ascension, 
looking to our Lord’s Second Advent as the true complement of 
His First. This concluding portion is as well fitted to express the 
tone of a Church Militant as the initial portion is to express that 
of a Church Triumphant: and the personal form of the last verse 
is a touching reminder of the individual interest that each of us 


MORNING PRAYER. 13 


Ps. cxxiii. 8. 


Ssnui1s'32,  O Lord, have mercy upon us + have 


mercy upon us. 


O Lord, let thy merey lighten upon 


Isa. xxvi. 3, 4. 
Ps, xxl. 1. 


eek, us ¢ as our trust is in thee. 
aaceatty O Lord, in thee have I trusted + let 
1 Pet. ii. 6. me never be confounded. 
¥ Or this Canticle, Benedicite, Omnia Opera. 
The Song of ALL ye Works of the Lord, 


the three holy 
children 35 — 


bless ye the Lord ¢ praise him, 
ae ,, and magnify him for ever. 
ae oi: O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Heavens, bless ye the Lord : 
praise him, and magnify him for ever. 

O ye Waters, that be above the Fir- 
mament, bless ye the Lord +: praise 
him, and magnify him for ever. 

O all ye Powers of the Lord, bless 
ye the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Sun, and Moon, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Stars of Heaven, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 


Miserere nostri, Domine : miserere 
nostri. 
Fiat misericordia tua, Domine, super 
nos : quemadmodum speravimus in te. 
In te, Domine, speravi : non con- 


fundar in eternum. 


Canticum trium puerorum. Dan. iii. 


ENEDICITE omnia opera Do- 

mini Domino : laudate et super- 
exaltate eum in secula. 

Benedicite Angeli Domini Domino : 
benedicite cceli Domino. 


Salisbury Use. 


Benedicite aque omnes que super 
ecelos sunt Domino : benedicite omnes 
virtutes Domini Domino. 


Benedicite sol et luna Domino 
benedicite stella ecel Domino. 


has in the corporate work of praise and prayer of which Divine 
Service is constituted. Few uninspired compositions give so clear 
an echo of the spirit and depth of Holy Scripture. 


There are three verses of the Te Deum which require special 
notice, with reference to the modern Latin and English in which 
they are given to us at the present day. : 

(1) The ninth verse, “Te Martyrum candidatus, laudat exer- 
citus,” is very insufficiently rendered by “The noble army of 
Martyrs praise Thee.” In pre-Reformation versions it stood,— 
“The, preiseth the white oost of martiris ;” and considering the 
distinct connexion between this verse and Rev. vii. 9. 14, it is 
strange that the Scriptural idea of “white robes” which have 
been “made white in the blood of the Lamb,” should have been 
superseded by the word “noble.” It is possible that the idea of 
something lustrous and pure was more expressed by “noble” in 
the early part of the sixteenth century, than is conveyed by it to 
modern ears!; but the change of the word from the old English 
* white,” and Anglo-Saxon “shining,” has gone far to obliterate 
the true sense of the original in our present version. 

(2) In the sixteenth verse, the ancient and modern English 
versions alike fail to give the full sense of the Latin. The former 
uniformly give, “Thou wert nozt skoymes (squeamish) to take 
the maydenes wombe, to delyver mankynde,” which is little dif- 
ferent in sense from our present version. But it is clear that 
«Tu, ad liberandum, suscepturus hominem” includes a reference 
to the Incarnation, as much as “non horruisti Virginis uterum.” 
The verse would be more literally rendered, “Thou, being about 
to take manhood upon Thee, to deliver it;” but there is an 
almost insurmountable difficulty in the way of matching the point 
and rhythm of the Latin by an equivalent sentence in English. 

(3) The twenty-first verse has been altered both in Roman 
Breviaries and in the English Prayer Book. All Latin MSS. 


1 So gold and silver were called ‘‘noble metals” by the early chymists. 


previously to 1492, read “ Alterna fac cum sanctis Tuis gloria 
munerari :” and the equivalent of munerari is found in every 
known version of the Te Deum up to that time; our own in the 
fourteenth century being, “Make hem to be rewarded with thi 
seyntes, in endles blisse.” The “ mumerari” reading appears to 
be an error of the early printers, arising out of the very slight 
difference presented by mum and num in black letter!. The 
word “i” is a modern insertion of the same date, and probably 
arose from confusion between the twenty-first and the eighteenth 
verses, in the latter of which occurs “7m gloria Patris.” Since 
our Lord said “ Great is your reward in Heaven,” and “ Himself 
shall reward you openly,” the old English rendering of munerari 
is quite Scriptural; but it may be pointed out that the sense of 
the Latin is rather that of free gift than reward, munerari, not 
ve-rmunerari. Perhaps the original may be rendered, “ Make 
them to be awarded with Thy saints: Thy glory everlasting,” 
without departing from the sense of the original, or the familiar 
rhythm of our Prayer Book version. The received version, 
although not faithful to the original, is happily comprehensive ; 
for, to be “numbered with the children of God,” and to have a 
“lot among the saints,” is to receive the “great recompense of 
reward,” the heavenly heritage of those who are joint heirs with 
Christ of His triumphant kingdom. 


THE BENEDICITE. 


There is no doubt that this Canticle is of Jewish origin, 
although its claim to be part of the Canonical Book of Daniel is 


1 It should, however, be mentioned that the Venerable Bede, who was 
almost contemporary with Gregory the Great, records some words of his 
which contain something very like this reading. ‘Sed et in ipsa missarum 
celebratione tria verba maxime perfectionis plena superadjecit, ‘ Diesque 
nostros in tua pace disponas, atque ab eterna damnatione nos eripi, et rm 
electorum tuorum jubeas grege numerari.’”—Bede, Hist. Eccl., lib. 2, c, i. $7. 


14 


Ps. exlviii. 8. O ye Showers, and Dew, bless ye the 
Lord ¢ praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Winds of God, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Fire, and Heat, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Winter, and Summer, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Dews, and Frosts, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Frost, and Cold, bless ye the 
Lord ¢ praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Ice, and Snow, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Nights, and Days, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O ye Light, and Darkness, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Lightnings, and Clouds, bless 
ye the Lord ¢ praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O let the Earth bless the Lord + 
yea, let it praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Mountains, and Hills, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O all ye Green Things upon the 
Earth, bless ye the Lord + praise him, 
and magnify him for ever. 

O ye Wells, bless ye the Lord ¢ 
praise him, and magnify him for ever. 

O ye Seas, and Floods, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 


MORNING PRAYER. 


Benedicite imber et ros Domino : Salisbury Use. 
benedicite omnes spiritus Dei Domino. 


Benedicite ignis et xstus Domino : 
benedicite frigus et estas Domino. 


Benedicite rores et pruina Domino : 
benedicite gelu et frigus Domino. 


Benedicite glacies et nives Domino : 
benedicite noctes et dies Domino. 


Benedicite lux et tenebre Domino : 
benedicite fulgura et nubes Domino. 


Benedicat terra Dominum : laudet 
et superexaltet eum in secula. 


Benedicite montes et colles Domino : 
benedicite universa germinantia in 
terra Domino. 


Benedicite fontes Domino : benedi- 
cite maria et flumina Domino. 


not recognized by the Church of England, which has placed it 
among the books of the Apocrypha. It has a great resemblance 
to the 148th Psalm, and is generally considered to be a paraphrase 
of it. 

Several of the Fathers speak of the Benedicite as being used in 
the Services of the Church. St. Chrysostom especially refers to 
it as “that admirable and marvellous song, which from that day 
to this hath been sung every where throughout the world, and 
shall yet be sung in future generations.” Rufinus speaks of it in 
the same manner, (in defending its Canonical authority against 
Jerome ',) as having been sung by holy confessors and martyrs, 


1 Jt is inserted in the Comes of St. Jerome among the Lections on the 


who would not have been permitted to sing that as Holy Scrip- 
ture which is not so. It was used as one of the Psalms at Lauds 
as early as the time of St. Athanasius, and occupied the same 
position on Sundays in the ancient services of the Church of 
England. When the Psalter was restricted, in 1549, to the hun- 
dred and fifty psalms which go by the general name of the 
Psalms of David, the Song of the Three Children was placed 
after the Te Deum, to be used as a responsory canticle to the 
first lesson, under the title “ Benedicite, Omnia Opera Domini 
Domino.” ‘This use of it was not by any means novel, as it was 


Festival called Statio ad S, Petrum under the title ‘‘Hymnus Trium 
Puerorum,” 


MORNING PRAYER. 15 


O ye Whales, and all that move in 
the Waters, bless ye the Lord + praise 
him, and magnify him for ever. 

O all ye Fowls of the Air, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O all ye Beasts, and Cattle, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Children of Men, bless ye the 
Lord + praise him, and magnify him 
for ever. 

O let Israel bless the Lord : praise 
him, and magnify him for ever. 

O ye Priests of the Lord, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Servants of the Lord, bless ye 
the Lord + praise him, and magnify 
him for ever. 

O ye Spirits, and Souls of the 
righteous, bless ye the Lord ¢ praise 
him, and magnify him for ever. 

O ye holy and humble Men of 
heart, bless ye the Lord ¢ praise him, 
and magnify him for ever. 

O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, 
bless ye the Lord + praise him, and 
magnify him for ever. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 


Ps. exlviii. 10. 


Ps. cxxxiv. 1, 


Ps. cxxxvi. 1. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 

G Then shall be read in like manner the Second 
Lesson, taken out of the New Testament. 
And after that, the Hymn following ; except 
when that shall happen to be read in the 


Chapter for the Day, or for the Gospel on 
St. John Baptist’s Day. 


LESSED be the Lord God of 
Israel + for he hath visited, and 
redeemed his people ; 


Benedictus. 
Luke i. 68. 


Benedicite cete et omnia que mo- Salisbury Use. 
ventur in aquis Domino : benedicite 
omnes volucres cceli Domino. 


Benedicite omnes bestize et pecora 
Domino : benedicite filu hominum 
Domino. 


Benedicat Israél] Dominum ; laudet 
et superexaltet eum in secula. 

Benedicite Sacerdotes Domini Do- 
mino : benedicite servi Domini Do- 
mino. 


Benedicite spiritus et anime justo- 
rum Domino : benedicite sancti et 
humiles corde Domino. 


Benedicite Anania, Azaria, Misaél 
Domino : laudate et superexaltate eum 
in secula. 

Benedicamus Patrem et Filium cum cf. pan. iii. 52. 
Sancto Spiritu : laudemus et super- Sd 
exaltemus eum in secula. 

Benedictus es Domine in firmamento 
celi : et laudabilis, et gloriosus, et 
superexaltatus in secula. 


Canticum Zacharie prophete Luce it. 
ENEDICTUS Dominus Deus salisbury vse. 
Israél : quia visitavit, et fecit 
redemptionem plebis sue. 


said between the lessons (according to Mabillon), in the old 
Gallican ritual which was once common to France and England. 
When first inserted in its present place, this Canticle was 
ruled by the following rubric prefixed to the Te Deum :— 
“ @ After the first lesson shall follow throughout the year (except 
in Lent, all the which time, in the place of Te Dewm, shall be 
used Benedicite Omnia Opera Domini Domino) in English, as 
followeth.” This rubric was altered to its present form in 1552, 
the object of the alteration being probably to allow greater free- 
dom in the substitution. of Benedicite for Te Deum. It was an 
ancient rule to use the former when any portion of the Prophet 
Daniel was read. In more recent times it has been customary to 
sing it on Septuagesima Sunday, when Genesis i. is the first 
lesson ; on the Nineteenth Sunday after Trinity, when Daniel iii. 


is read; and on week-days during Lent and Advent'. The 
ordinary Doxology was substituted for the one proper to the 
psalm, in 1549. The latter is, “O let us bless the Father, and 
the Son, with the Holy Ghost: let us praise Him, and magnify 
Him for ever. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, in the firmament of 
Heaven; worthy to be praised, and glorious, and to be magnified 
for ever? Pope Damasus (A.D. 366) is said to have been its 
author; but it is founded on the verse which precedes the words 
Benedicite Omnia Opera. 
THE BENEDICTUS. 


This prophetic hymn of Zacharias has been used as a responsory 
canticle to the Gospel lessons from very ancient times, being 


1 See, however, note on p. 11. 


16 


And hath raised up a mighty sal- 
vation for us + in the house of his 
servant David ; 

As he spake by the mouth of his 
holy Prophets + which have been since 
the world began ; 

That we should be saved from our 
enemies + and from the hands of all 
that hate us ; 

To perform the mercy promised to 
our forefathers + and to remember his 
holy Covenant ; 

To perform the oath which he sware 
to our forefather Abraham + that he 
would give us; 

That we being delivered out of the 
hands of our enemies + might serve him 
without fear ; 

In holiness and righteousness be- 
fore him + all the days of our life. 

And thou, Child, shalt be called the 
Prophet of the Highest + for thou shalt 
go before the face of the Lord to pre- 
pare his ways; 

To give knowledge of salvation 
unto his people + for the remission of 
their sins, 

Through the tender mercy of our 
God + whereby the Day-spring from 
on high hath visited us ; 

To give light to them that sit in 
darkness, and in the shadow of death + 
and to guide our feet into the way of 
peace. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 


MORNING PRAYER. 


Et erexit cornu salutis nobis : in Salisbury Use. 
domo David pueri sui. 


Sicut locutus est per os sanctorum : 
qui a seeculo sunt, prophetarum ejus. 


Salutem ex inimicis nostris : et de 
manu omnium qui oderunt nos. 


Ad faciendam misericordiam cum 
patribus nostris : et memorari testa- 
menti sui sancti. 

Jusjurandum quod juravit ad Abra- 
ham patrem nostrum : daturum se 
nobis. 

Ut sine timore, de manu inimicorum 
nostrorum liberati : serviamus illi. 


In sanctitate et justitia coram ipso : 
omnibus diebus nostris. 

Et tu, puer, Propheta Altissimi vo- 
caberis : preibis enim ante faciem 
Domini parare vias ejus. 


Ad dandam scientiam salutis plebi 
ejus : in remissionem  peccatorum 
eorum. 

Per viscera misericordize Dei nostri : 
in quibus visitavit nos oriens ex alto. 


Tlluminare his qui in tenebris et in 
umbra mortis sedent : ad dirigendos 
pedes nostros in viam pacis. 


Gloria Patri, et Filio: et Spiritui 
Sancto. 

Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et 
semper, et in seecula seeculorum. Amen. 


spoken of as so used by Amalarius (4.D. 820) ; and perhaps by 
St. Benedict, nearly three centuries earlier, since he speaks of a 
Canticum de Evangelio occurring herein Mattins. In the Salis- 
bury Use it occupied a similar position, but was not so definitely 
connected with the lessons themselves as it now is, being used 
after the Capitulum, at Lauds, on Sundays. It was the only 
Canticle appointed for use after the second morning lesson in 
1549, and the rubric by which it is preceded shows very clearly 
that it is intended to be the ordinary Canticle, the Jubilate being 
an exceptional one, inserted to avoid repetition on St. John 
Baptist’s Day, or whenever the Benedictus occurs in the second 
lesson itself. 

The position of this Canticle makes its ritual meaning self- 
evident. It is a thanksgiving to Almighty God for His mercy 
as exhibited towards mankind in the Incarnation of our Lord, 
whereof the Gospel speaks, and in the foundation of the Church in 
His blood, as recorded in the Acts of the Holy Apostles. 


the last prophecy of the old Dispensation, and the first of the 
new: and furnishes a kind of key to the Evangelical interpreta- 
tion of all prophecies under the one by which they are connected 
with the other. The Benedictus is a continual acknowledgment 
also of the Communion of Saints under the two Dispensations ; 
for it praises God for the salvation which has been raised up for 
all ages out of the house of His servant David, and according to 
the ancient covenant which He made with Abraham, “the father 
of them that believe, though they be not circumcised” (Rom. iv. 
11); whose seed all are if they are Christ’s, and heirs according 
to the promise. (Gal. iii. 29.) The use of the Benedictus by the 
Church indicates to us where we are to find true sympathy and 
communion with God’s ancient people; not in their outward 
relationship to Abraham, “for God can of these stones raise up 
children unto Abraham,” but in their faithful acknowledgment of 
the Lord Jesus, as the Christ whom the Old Testament Scriptures 


It is | predicted. 


MORNING PRAYER. 


¥ Or this Psalm, Jubilate Deo. 
BE joyful in the Lord, all ye 
lands + serve the Lord with glad- 
ness, and come before his presence 
with a song. 

Be ye sure, that the Lord he is 
God + it is he that hath made us, and 
not we ourselves; we are his people, 
and the sheep of his pasture. 

O go your way into his gates with 
thanksgiving, and into his courts with 
praise + be thankful unto him, and 
speak good of his Name. 

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy 
is everlasting +: and his truth endureth 
from generation to generation. 


* Ps. ce. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 


| Then shall be sung or said the Apostles’ 
Creed by the Minister and the people, stand- 
tng: except only such days as the Creed of 
Saint Athanasius ts appointed to be read. 


BELIEVE in God the Father 
Almighty, Maker of heaven and 
earth : 


2 Tim, 1.13, 
Deut. iv. 33, 89. 
Matt. vi. 9. 

Gen. i. 1. xvii. 1. 
John i. 3. 

Matt. i. 18—25. 


17 


Psalmus xcix. 
UBILATE Deo omnis terra ; ser- Salisbury Use. 
vite Domino in letitia. 
Introite in conspectu ejus : in exul- 
tatione. 
Scitote quoniam Dominus, ipse est 
Deus, ipse fecit nos, et non ipsi nos, 


Populus ejus et oves pascue ejus, 
introite portas ejus in confessione : 
atria ejus in hymnis; confitemini illi. 


Laudate nomen ejus; quoniam sua- 
vis est Dominus; in eternum miseri- 
cordia ejus : et usque in generationem 
et generationem veritas ejus. 

Gloria Patri, et Filio : et Spiritui 
Sancto. 

Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et 
semper : et in secula seculorum. 
Amen. 


Symbolum Apostolicwm. 
REDO in Deum Patrem omni- 
potentem, Creatorem cceli et 
Et in Jesum Christum Filium 


Salisbury Use. 


terre. 


THE JUBILATE. 


This was the second of the fixed Psalms at Lands on Sunday ; 
and was adopted as a responsory Canticle in 1552. The object 
of its insertion here was to provide a substitute for the Benedictus 
on days when the latter occurs in the Lesson or Gospel, on the 
same principle which rules the omission of the Venite when it 
occurs in the Psalms of the day. The days on which it should 
be used are therefore the following :— 

February 18th. 
June 17th. 
June 24th [St. John Baptist’s Day]. 
October 15th. 

The general substitution of the Jubilate for the Benedictus is 
very much to be deprecated. There is, however, a prophetic 
reference to the Chief Shepherd of the Church, and to the service 
of praise offered to Him which makes it well fitted for occasional 

.use; and Dean Comber says that it seems to have been used after 
the reading of the Gospel as early as A.D. 450. 


THE APOSTLES’ CREED. 


The use of a Creed in Divine Service is of very ancient origin, 
and the Apostles’ Creed has been used in the daily offices of the 
Church of England as far back as they can be traced. Under the 
old system it followed the Lord’s Prayer, (instead of preceding it,) 
at Prime and Compline, and was recited in the same manner, the 
people joining in only at a repetition of the last two clauses. In 
the Reformed Breviary of Cardinal Quignonez an open recitation 
of the Apostles’ Creed was directed on all days except Sunday : 
and this direction probably suggested our present custom. 

The earliest occurrence of the Apostles’ Creed exactly in the 
form in which we now use it at Morning and Evening Prayer, is 
in a treatise published by Mabillon, from an ancient MS., entitled 


“‘Libellus Pirminii de singulis libris canonicis scarapsus,” or 
“scriptus.” Pirminius died about a.p. 758, and appears to have 
lived some time in France, though he died in Germany. Hence 
it is extremely probable that the Creed contained in two several 
places of his treatise, and in both places in the same words, is the 
old Gallican form of the Apostles’ Creed, identical with that 
afterwards adopted by St. Osmund into the Salisbury Use, from 
the more ancient services of the Church of England. How much 
older than the eighth century this exact form of the Apostles’ 
Creed may be is not known; but it has been so used, without 
variation, in the whole Latin Church, as well as in the Church of 
England, from that time until the present. 

The substance of the Apostles’ Creed is, however, very much 
older. It is extant, very nearly as we now use it, as it was used 
by the Churches of Aquileia and Rome at the end of the fourth 
century, when it was commented upon, and both forms indicated, 
by Rufinus, who was a priest of the former diocese. The two 
forms are here shown side by side, the authority for each being 
Professor Heurtley’s Harmonia Symbolica, pp. 26. 30 :— 


The Creed of the Church of The Creed of the Church of 


Aquileia, cire. A.D, 390. 


Credo in Deum Patrem om- 
nipotentem, invisibilem et im- 
passibilem: Et in Jesum Chris- 
tum, unicum Filium ejus, Do- 
minum nostrum: Qui natus est 
de Spiritu Sancto Ex Maria 
Virgine; Crucifixus sub Pontio. 
Pilato, et sepultus; Descendit 
in inferna; Tertia die resurrexit 
a mortuis; Ascendit in ceelos; 


Rome, circ. A.D. 390. 


Credo in Deum Patrem omni- 
potentem. Et in Jesum Chris- 
tum, unicum Filium ejus, Do- 
minum nostrum; Qui natus est 
de Spiritu Sancto Ex Maria 
Virgine; Crucifixus sub Pontio 
Pilato, et sepultus; Tertia die 
resurrexit a mortuis. Ascendit 
in clos; Sedet ad dexteram 
Patris, Inde venturus est judi- 

D 


18 


Luke ii. 11. 21. 
ii. 1—7, 
Matt. xxvii. 1, 2. 


And in Jesus Christ his only Son 
our Lord, Who was conceived by the 


Mare. = ee Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, 
ee Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was 


Matt. xxviii. 

Ps. xviii. 18. 

Acts i. 9. 

Mark xvi. 19. 

Matt. xxv. 31— 
46. 


crucified, dead, and buried; He de- 
scended into Hell; The third day he 
rose again from the dead, He ascended 
into heaven, And sitteth on the right 
hand of God the Father Almighty ; 
From thence he shall come to judge 
the quick and the dead. 

I believe in the Holy Ghost ; The 
holy Catholic Church; The Com- 


John y. 21—23. 

Acts x. 42, 

Eph. ii. 18—22, 

2 Cor, xiii, 14. 

John xv. 16, 17. 
26. 


Col..4., 32,12. 18, 
Luke xxiv. 47. 


John v. 28, 29. 
nae ele 13. munion of Saints; The Forgiveness 
onn 111, . ra . 
v. 24. of sins; The Resurrection of the body, 
2 Pet intl. 


And the life everlasting. Amen. 


Rev. xxii. 20. 


Sedet ad dexteram Patris. Inde 
venturus est judicare vivos et 
mortuos ; Et in Spiritu Sancto ; 
Sanctam Kcclesiam; Remis- 
sionem peccatorum ; Hujus car- 
nis resurrectionem. 


care vivos et mortuos; Et in 
Spiritu Sancto; Sanctam Kccle- 
siam; Remissionem peccato- 
rum; Carnis resurrectionem. 


At a still earlier period, A.D. 180, Ireneeus wrote his great 
work against heresies; for, even at that early date, these began to 
fulfil the prophecy of our Lord that the Enemy should sow tares 
among the wheat. In this book Irenzus gives the substance of 
Christian doctrine under the name of the “ Rule of Truth,” which 
every Christian acknowledged at his Baptism. This undoubtedly 
represents the Apostles’ Creed, though probably not the exact 
words in which it was recited. 


The Creed as stated by Ireneus, Bishop of Lyons, A.D. 180. 


The Church throughout the world, spread out as she is to the 
ends of the earth, carefully preserves the faith that she received 
from the Apostles and from their disciples :— 

Believing in one God the Father Almighty, Who made Heaven 
and Earth, the seas and all that in them is; and in one Christ 
Jesus, the Son of God, Who was incarnate for our salvation; and 
in the Holy Ghost, Who by the prophets proclaimed the dispen- 
sations and the advents of our dear Lord, Christ Jesus: and His 
birth of a Virgin, and His suffering, and His Resurrection from 
the dead, and His Ascension in the flesh into Heaven, and His 
coming from Heaven in the glory of the Father, to sum up all 
things, and to raise up all fiésh of the whole human race. 

That to Christ Jesus our Lord, and God, and Saviour, and 
King, according to the good pleasure of the invisible Father, 
every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, 
and things under the earth; and that every tongue should con- 
fess Him, and that He should pass righteous judgment upon all. 


In two other parts of the same work there are other summaries 
of the Creed which are plainly based on the same formula as that 
of which the above is a paraphrastic statement. 

Traces of the Creed are also to be found in the writings of 
Justin Martyr, Polycarp, Clemens Romanus, and Ignatius: and 
these approach so near to Apostolic times as to give good reason 
to think that the name by which the Apostles’ Creed has been 
known for many centuries, is one which belongs to it not merely 
because it accurately states the faith held by the Apostles, but 
also because it originated from them. 

A very ancient tradition of the Church, as old as the time of 
Rufinus (A.D. 369—410), describes the Apostles as meeting 
together to consider about a common statement of doctrine, 
before they parted for their several labours. A later tradition 


MORNING PRAYER. 


ejus unicum, Dominum nostrum : qui Salisbury Use. 
conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, natus 
ex Maria Virgine, passus sub Pontio 
Pilato, crucifixus, mortuus, et sepultus: 
descendit ad inferna: tertia die resur- 
rexit a mortuis: ascendit ad ccelos: 
sedet ad dexteram Dei Patris omni- 
potentis: inde venturus est judicare 
vivos et mortuos. Credo in Spiritum 
Sanctum: sanctam Ecclesiam Catho- 
licam : Sanctorum communionem, re- 
missionem peccatorum, carnis resur- 
rectionem, et vitam zternam, Amen. 


(attributed to St. Augustine, but probably of more recent date) 
adds to this statement that each Apostle in succession recited 
one Article of the Creed, implying that it was thus delivered by 
Inspiration. The first of these traditions, written down so near 
to the time of the Apostles, is worthy of great respect: and no 
objections have been made to it, which have not been rationally 
answered. The second is not of high authenticity, but the ob- 
jections brought against it are chiefly founded on the improba- 
bility of such a statement being true: yet if the inspiration of 
the Apostles for the purpose of writing special official letters is 
granted, it is difficult to see what there is improbable in a state- 
ment that implies their collective inspiration for the purpose of 
originating so important a document as the Creed, at a time 
when the New Testament Scriptures had not yet come into 
existence. 

But, apart from these traditions, there is much evidence in the 
early Christian writings that there was a common and well- 
known formula containing the chief articles of Christian faith. 
There are also frequent statements that the tradition of the Faith 
came direct from the Apostles. Combining these facts with the 
supposition that the Apostles would almost certainly provide 
some such formula for the guidance of converts, we may conclude 
that it is far more reasonable to believe the Creed going under 
their name to be substantially of their composition than to believe 
the contrary. In fact the Creed appears to be an absolute neces- 
sity, springing out of the circumstances in which the early Chris- 
tians were placed: when, as regarded themselves, their brethren, 
and the Heathen, such an answer to the question, “ What is 
Christianity ?” resolving itself into a few short replies embody- 
ing the chief facts of our Lord’s life and work, was imperatively 
required. That the Apostles would methodize an authoritative 
form of this reply can hardly be doubted: and that they did so 
is more than suggested by what St. Paul says of a Form of sound 
words in passages like Rom. vi. 17; xvi. 17. Heb. x. 23. Phil. 
iii. 16. 2 Tim. i. 18, the original Greek of which almost neces- 
sitates such an interpretation as that here indicated. 

Although, however, the cumulative force of these arguments is 
so great as to leave scarcely any rational ground for contradicting 
the old belief of the Church, that the Creed came from the 
Apostles substantially as it was handed down to the eighth 
century, it is not sufficient to warrant us in declaring it to be 
inspired. All that we may dare to say on this point is, that the 
Apostles were under a very special guidance of the Holy Ghost, 
were “filled with the Spirit” for the official purposes of their 
work; and, consequently, that very little of the human element 
is likely to have mingled itself with any of the official words 
which they spoke to the Church. If it could be certainly proved 
that the Creed came from the Apostles as we now have it, sound 
reason would require us to believe that the Holy Ghost moved 


MORNING PRAYER. 


them to compose it, and hence that it was inspired. In the 
absence of such evidence it is our duty to compare the doctrines 
handed down to us in the Creed as those of the Apostles, with 
the doctrines contained in the great storehouse of God’s Truth. 


Statements of Apostles, God the God the God O 
’ <i Lord’ 
sere © | Rather, | fon. | Be Holy | simcrngs. 
St. Matthew xxviii. 19 19 19 
; St. Luke xxiv. 49 49 49 46 
: Actsi.4,8. 
St. John xx. 17 17 22 
St. Peter, 
Acts il. 17 Zoos daSes 23 
24, 38 
Acts ili. 13 iy alls “15 
Acts iv. 24 12. 27. 10. 27 
30 
Acts v. 30 31 32 30 
Acts x. 384—36 38 38 39 
St. Stephen, 
Acts vil. 2. 32. 87.| 52. 55 51 52 
55 
St. Paul, 
Acts xiii. V7 Zou coe oos 28 
35 
Heb. vi. i 1.6 4 6 


Such a coincidence goes far towards showing that the Apostles’ 
Creed is a “Form of sound words” handed down to us on the 
very highest authority. It may also convince us that it would 
be an irreverent and uncritical error to speak of it positively as a 
human. composition. 


The central position of the Creed in our Morning and Evening 
Service gives it a twofold ritual aspect. Praise has formed the 
distinctive feature of what has gone before, prayer forms that of 
what is to follow. The confession of our Christian faith in the 
Creed is therefore, (1) like a summing up of the Scriptures that 
have been used for the praise of God and the edification of His 
Church: and by its recitation we acknowledge that it is 


« Him first, Him last, Him midst, and without end,” 


whom we find in Moses, the Prophets, the Psalms, the Gospels, and 
the Epistles. Not only in respect to ourselves, as a fit reminder 
of this great truth, do we thus confess our faith, but also to the 
praise of God; and hence the rubric directs the Creed to be 
“sung” (the word was inserted by Bishop Cosin) if circumstances 
will permit, as the Nicene Creed and the Athanasian Creed always 
have been. And (2) the recitation of the Creed is a confession of 
that objective faith which alone can give full reality to prayer ; 


19 


This is done to some extent in the marginal references above; 
and in the following Table it will be seen how near an agreement 
there is between the statements contained in the Creed and those 
made by the Apostles in their early missionary work} :— 


Our Lord’s Our Lord’s Forgive- 


Our Lord’ Repent- Th 
pe ae’ Moen Son: ete ance. ere “ Bheack: 
10 19, 20 
46 51 AT 47 49 
Acts i. 9. |Actsi.11. Acts i. 8. 
9. 20. 17 Xxi. 22 Skee 21, 23 
28 
[Mark 
xvi. 19.] 
24. 31, 33 38 38 32 
32 
15 21 19—21 19. 26 19 15 
10 
30 31 31 31 32 
40, 41 42 43 41, 42 
55, 56 55, 56 
BUR BBE 38 31 
34, 37 
2 2 1.6 


hence it is a foundation of, and introduction to, the Preces and 
the Collects with which the Service concludes. “ For this reason 
it is, probably, that baptisms were ordered to take place after the 
second lesson ; that so the admission of the newly baptized might 
be followed by liturgical avowal, so to speak, of that Creed, and 
saying of that Prayer, which, as a part of the rite, have already 
been avowed and used 2.” 


There are two customs connected with the recitation of the 
Creed which require notice; the one, that of turning to the Hast, 
or towards the Altar, in saying it; the other, that of bowing at 
the holy Name of Jesus. Both of these customs are relics of 
habits which have only ceased to be universal (in the English 
Church, at least) in very modern times. 

Clergy and people used formerly to look one way throughout 
the prayers and Creeds, that is, towards the Altar. “In some 
Churches,” writes Thorndike %, “the desk for the Prayer Book 
looks towards the Chancel; and for reading of Lessons we are 
directed to look towards the people. As the Jews in their 


1 Harvey on the Creeds, i. 20. 
2 Principles of Divine Service, i. 361. 
3 Religious Assemblies, p. 231. 


D2 


20 


prayers looked towards the Mercy-seat or principal part of the 
Temple (Ps. xxviii. 2), so Christians looked towards the Altar or 
chief part of the Church, whereof their Mercy-seat was but a 
type. Christ in His prayer directs us to Heaven, though God be 
every where ; for Heaven is His throne, and we look toward that 
part of the church which most resembles it. Herein we corre- 
spond to the Jewish practice.” Before reading-desks were erected 
in the naves of Churches, the prayers were said in front of the 
Altar itself, as may be seen in old prints; while the Psalms were 


sung in the choir stalls: and this was a continuation of the | 


ancient practice !, the officiating Clergyman always standing or 
kneeling in the former place to say Creeds and Prayers. When 
pews as well as reading-desks sprang up in Churches, both con- 
gregation and clergy were often placed in any position that suited 
the convenience of the carpenter; but reverence still impelled all 
to turn towards the Altar during the solemn Confession of their 
Faith. Hence this habit became exceptional and prominent 
instead of habitual; and exceptional reasons were alleged in 
support of it, when in fact they applied, with more or less force, 
to the general posture of the worshipper in God’s House, as ex- 
pressed in the preceding extract. Apart, also, from symbolical 
explanations of this custom, it appeals to both the reason and 
the feelings, by forming the congregation into a body of which 
the clergyman is the leader, as when a regiment marches into 
battle, or parades before its Sovereign headed by its officers: and 
there is no part of Divine Service where this relation of priest 
and people is more appropriate than in the open Confession of 
Christian Faith before God and man. 

Bowing at the holy Name of our Lord’s Human Nature is also 
an usage of general application, and was never intended to be 
restricted to the Creed, although its omission there would cer- 
tainly be a more special dishonour to Him than elsewhere. When 
Puritan superstition sprang up in the sixteenth century, the usage 
began to be dropped by many who were seduced by controversy 
into greater respect for doctrines of slighter importance than that 
of our Lord’s Divinity. The Church then made a law on the 
subject of reverent gestures in Divine Service, in the 18th Canon 
of 1603; in which (after ordering that all shall stand at the 
Creed) is the following clause, founded on the 52nd of Queen 
Elizabeth’s Injunctions, issued in 1559 :—*“ And likewise, when in 
time of Divine Service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due 
and lowly reverence shall be done by all persons present, as hath 
been accustomed : testifying by these outward ceremonies and 
gestures their . . . . . due acknowledgment that the Lord Jesus 
Christ, the true and eternal Son of God, is the only Saviour of 
the world, in Whom all the mercies, graces, and promises of God 
to mankind, for this life, and the life to come, are fully and 
wholly comprised.” This general rule of the Church, and the 
explanation thus authoritatively given, has so special an applica- 
tion to the use of this gesture in the Creed that nothing further 
need be added on the subject. 


§. An Expository Paraphrase of the Apostles’ Creed. 
for myself, as personally responsible for my faith to God 
9 and His Church, openly profess, to His glory, that I 
believe, from my heart, with the assent of my reason and the 
submission of my will, 

in God the Father, by a mysterious, unintelligible manner of 
paternity, Father of the uncreated, co-equal, and co-eternal 

‘Son: Father also of all the regenerated, by their adoption 
through His thus only-begotten Son : 

Almighty, so that nothing is beyond His power which is con- 
sistent with goodness; knowing all things past, present, and 
to come; exercising authority over all things and persons, 
and upholding all things by His universal and omnipresent 
Providence: I believe that He was and is the 

Maker, that is, the original Creator of the original matter, and 
the Disposer of that material in fit order, 


1 The exact routine of the ancient practice may be seen in ‘4 Of the 
turning of the Choir to the Altar,” one among several extracts from the 
Consuetudinary of Sarum, printed at the end of Mr. Chambers’ Translation 
of the Sarum Psalter, p. 434, 


MORNING PRAYER. 


of Heaven, which comprehends all that has originally occupied 
space beyond this world, { 

and Earth, which comprehends all organic and inorganic beings 
and substances within the compass of this world. 

And I equally believe 

in Jesus, perfect Man, in all the qualities of human nature, 

Christ, anointed to be the Saviour of the world, the High Priest 
of a new order of priesthood, the King of Kings and Lord of 
Lords, : 

His only Son, eternally begotten, and therefore having such a 
Sonship as none others who call God Father can possess, 

our Lord, being God, the Second Person in the Blessed Trinity, 
as well as Man; Lord of all by His Divine Nature, Lord of 
the Church by His work of Redemption. Thus I believe in 
the Eternal Son of the Eternal Father, in a Saviour Divine 
and Human, 

Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, through a mysterious 
and unintelligible operation, which miraculously superseded 
the ordinary law of nature, so that the Holy Child Jesus 
was 

Born of the Virgin Mary, a holy maiden, who thus miraculously 
became His mother that He, being born of a Virgin and 
not of a wife, might be free from the sin of our common 
origin, which is conveyed from parent to child by natural 
conception. Being thus born in our nature, but without 
our sin, He bore it as His own through infancy, childhood, 
and mature manhood; and when the time was fully come, 
He offered it as a sacrifice for our sins when He 

Suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governor of Judza 
and Jerusalem, and 

Was crucified, by being nailed alive to a cross of wood, set 
upright in the ground. Being thus crucified, His sufferings 
were the greatest that had ever befallen any man, being 
aggravated by the burden of sin which He, though innocent, 
was bearing for our sakes. Not through the intensity of 
His sufferings, but of His own will, He gave up His life 
when all was accomplished that could be by His pains, and 
then was 

dead, through the separation of His soul from His body, in the 
same manner as human beings ordinarily become so. Being 
dead, His holy Body, still the Body of the Son of God, was 
taken down from the cross, 

and buried, with reverence and honour, but as the dead bodies of 
other men are. And while the dead Body of the Son of 
God was in the tomb, with His living Soul 

He descended into Hell, that He might there triumph over 
Satan; proclaim the glad tidings of salvation to all who had 
ever died; entirely release the souls of the righteous dead 
from the power of Satan, and prepare a paradise of rest in 
which they and all other righteous souls may dwell until the 
day of judgment. 

The third day, after the evening of Friday, the whole of Satur- 
day, and a part of Sunday had passed, 

He rose again from the dead, reuniting His soul to His uncor- 
rupted Body, so as to be again ‘perfect Man ” in respect to 
all the qualities that belong to sinless and unsuffering human 
nature. Then 

He ascended into Heaven, after forty days, as a new Person, 
God and Man, 

And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty, 
receiving in His Human Nature, as well as in His Divine 
Nature, the adoration of angels and men; and by His 
presence there making a continual intercession for us, and 
being a Mediator between Divine and human nature for 
ever. 

From thence He shall come, the same holy Jesus who suffered 
and died, 

to judge, with a just, irreversible, and yet merciful judgment, 

the quick, who shall be alive at His coming, 

and the dead, who shall have died at any time from the founda- 
tion of the world. 

1 I believe, also, with equal faith, and equal assent of my reason, 


MORNING PRAYER. « & 


"| And after that, these Prayers following, all 
devoutly kneeling ; the Minister first pro- 
nouncing with a loud voice, 


Ruth ii. 4. ; 
P These, i.16, Loe Lord be with you. 


Ps. exxix. 8. 


3 Tim. iv. 22. Answer. 
8. CXviii. 26, ‘ Cnn 

And with thy spirit. 

Minister. 


Phil. iv. 6. 

Matt. xxvi. 44, 

Po. ¢xxili. 3. 

Matt. xx. 30, 31. 

2 Cor. iii. 17, 18, 
marg. 


{| Let us pray. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. 
Christ, have mercy upon us. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. 


in the Holy Ghost, the third Person of the Blessed Trinity, the 
Comforter of the Church, Who ministers in it the grace 
which the Saviour has gained for it, 

the Holy Catholic Church, which is the whole number of the 
baptized, the mystical Body of Christ; which was founded 
by the twelve Apostles, and is continued in existence by the 
perpetuation of an Episcopal ministry ; which, by the merci- 
ful Providence of the Lord, holds the true Faith; which is 
divided into many separate bodies, all having their own 
bishops, and is yet one by being united to Christ, our 
Spiritual and Ministerial Head. I likewise believe in 

the Communion of Saints, that is, the Union in Christ of all who 
are one with Him, whether they are among the living in the 
Church on earth, the departed in paradise, or the risen 
saints in heaven. JI also believe in 

the Forgiveness of Sins, by the ministration of Christ’s Church 
in Baptism and in Absolution, 

the Resurrection of the body, when it shall be, as now, my own 
very body, and reunited to my soul, 

and the Life Everlasting, wherein the bodies and souls of all who 
have ever lived will live for ever, they that have done good 
in never-ending happiness, and they that have done evil in 
never-ending misery. 

And, lastly, I reiterate my assent to all these truths, in the 
presence of God and man, by solemnly adding 

Amen. ; 

[For notes relating to the use of the Creed at Baptism, and to 
the Forms of it so used, see the Baptismal Service. ] 


THE SUFFRAGES OR PRECES. 


The portion of the daily Service which comes between the Creed 
and the first Collect was translated, with some alterations, from 
the Preces Feriales inserted among the Preces et Memoria Com- 
nuines of the Salisbury Portiforium. In 1552, the Dominus vobis- 
cum and Oremus were prefixed: and the “Clerks and people” 
(meaning, of course, the choristers and people) were directed to 
say the Lord’s Prayer as well as the Minister. 

In the ancient form of the Service the Kyrie Hleison was left 
untranslated in the Greek, like the Alleluia, from a special reve- 
rence for the original words, and also as a sign of the univer- 
sality of the Church’s prayers. They are still said in Greek in the 
Litany used in Convocation. Each Kyrie and Christe was also 
repeated three times. The Lord’s Prayer was said privately by 
the Priest as far as the last clause, which was long the custom of 
the Church, the Et ne nos, &c. being repeated aloud that the 
people might then join. This custom was abolished in 1552. In 
some cases it appears that the whole was said privately by Clergy 
and people ; and then the last two clauses were said again aloud. 
[See Transl. Sar. Psalter, 14, n.] 

The six versicles and their responses are modified from tle 
ancient form; of which the following is a translation, as far as 
the Miserere ! :— 


1 There is enough analogy between the suffrages of the Western Church 
and the Ectene or Great Collect of the Eastern, to lead to the conviction 
that both have a common origin. 


Deinde dicantur Preces Feriales hoe modo. Salisbury Use. 


[Dominus vobiscum. 
Et cum spiritu tuo. 


Oremus. | 
Kyrie eleison. i. 
Christe eleison. i11. 
Kyrie eleison. 111. 


I said, Lord, be merciful unto me. 
Heal my soul, for I have sinned against Thee. 
Turn us then, O God our Saviour, 
And let Thine anger cease from us. 
Let Thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us, 
Like as we do put our trust in Thee. 
Let Thy priests be clothed with righteousness, 
And let Thy saints sing with joyfulness. 
O Lord, save the King. 
And hear us in the day when we call upon Thee. 
Save Thy servants and Thy handmaidens, 
Trusting, O my God, in Thee. 
O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance, 
Rule them, and set them up for ever. 
O Lord, grant us peace in Thy strength, 
And abundance in Thy towers. 
Let us pray for the faithful departed. 
Grant them, O Lord, eternal rest, 
And let perpetual light shine upon them. 
Hear my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto Thee. 
Have mercy upon me, and hear me. 


After which preces, the fifty-first Psalm was said from begin- 
ning to end, and three more versicles, which are given at p. 22. 

It will be observed that the first of our versicles with its re- 
sponse is not found among the above ferial Suffrages. It was 
taken from another set which were used on festivals, and is also 
found at the beginning of a somewhat similar set used every 
Sunday at the Bidding of Prayers. The Latin form of these latter 
is as follows :— 


Ostende nobis, Domine, misericordiam tuam. 
Sacerdotes tui induantur justitiam, 

Domine, salvyum fac regem. 
Salvos fac servos tuos, et ancillas tuas. 

Salvum fac populum, Domine, et benedic hereditati tus. 
Domine, fiat pax in virtute tua. 

Domine, exaudi orationem meam 2, 


The fifth versicle and its response are also different in the exist- 
ing form. In the ancient Prymer this appears in the following 
shape, before the Evening Collect for Peace :— 


Ant. Lord, tyue pees in oure daies, for there is noon othir that 
shal fy}te for us, but thou lord oure god 3. 

Vers. Lord, pees be maad in thi vertu. 

Resp. And plenteousness in thi toures. 


The Latin is :— 
Da pacem, Domine, in diebus nostris. 
Quia non est alius qui pugnet pro nobis 
nisi tu Deus noster. 


2 These are given from Maskell’s Monumenta Ritualia, iii. 343, but the 
people’s responses are omitted. In Chambers’ Translation of the Sarum 
Psalter the complete form has been compiled. 

3 Bishop Cosin altered this versicle to a form which was intended to con- 
ciliate Puritan objectors, writing ‘‘ Because there is none other that saveth 
us from our enemies, but only Thou, O God.” The alteration was not 
approved by the Revision Committee, and was erased, 


{ Then the Minister, Olerks, and people, shall 
say the Lord’s Prayer with a loud voice. 
UR Father, Which art in heaven, 
Hallowed be Thy Name. Thy 
kingdom come. Thy will be done in 
earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us 
this day our daily bread. And forgive 
us our trespasses, As we forgive them 
that trespass against us. And lead us 
not into temptation: But deliver us 
Amen. 


Luke xi, 2--4.. 


from evil. 


@ Then the Priest standing up shall say, 
Ps Ixxxv. 7. O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us. 
Answer. 
And grant us thy salvation. 
Priest. 
O Lord, save the Queen. 


Ps. xx. 9 
(LX xX]. 


The sixth versicle and its response are taken from the fifty-first 
Psalm, which followed the Ferial Preces at Mattins and Vespers. 

It will also be observed that the petition for the Sovereign and 
that for the Ministers of the Church, have exchanged places in the 
course of their adaptation to modern use, This change first ap- 
pears at the end of the Litany in Hilsey’s Primer of 1539. The 
reason why the Prayer for the Sovereign is put before that for the 
Clergy, is, not that the secular power may be honoured above the 
Church, but that the supreme sovereign authority of the realm 
xaay be recognized before the clerical part of the Church }. 

The mutual salutation with which this portion of the daily 
Office begins, is to be said while the people are yet standing, as 
they were during the recitation of the Creed; “the Minister 
first pronouncing” it “with a loud voice,” (and turning to the 
people,) before “all devoutly kneeling,” join in the lesser Litany. 
It is of very ancient ritual use [see Cone. Vas. ¢. v. A.D. 440], 
and is believed by the Eastern Church to have been handed down 
from the Apostles. Its office is to make a transition, in con- 
nexion with the lesser Litany, from the service of praise to that 
of supplication : and also to give devotional recognition to the 
common work in which Priest and laity are engaged, and the 
common fellowship in which it is being done. The same saluta- 
tion is used in the Confirmation Service, after the act of Con- 
firmation, and before the Lord’s Prayer: but in this case the 
lesser Litany is not connected withit. The constant use of this 
mutual Benediction or Salutation should be a continual reminder 
to the laity of the position which they occupy in respect to Divine 
Service: and that, although a separate order of priesthood is essen- 
tial for the ministration of God’s worship, yet there is a priesthood 
of the laity by right of which they take part in that worship, 
assuming their full Christian privilege, and making it a full cor- 
porate offering of the whole Christian body. Nor should we 
forget, in connexion with it, the promise “Lo, I am with you 
alway, even to the end of the world.” 

The lesser Litany is an ancient and Catholic prefix to the Lord’s 
Prayer, which is only used without it in the celebration of the 
Holy Communion, the Administration of Baptism, and in Con- 
firmation, and at the beginning of Morning and Evening Prayer. 
In the latter case its omission is supplied by the Confession : in 
the others the use of the Lord’s Prayer is Eucharistic, as will be 


1 The same order is to be found in old formularies: e. g. in the Sacra- 
mentary of Grimoldus, printed by Pamelius in his Liturgicon, i. 511, where 
there is a Benedictio super Regem tempore Synodi, followed by one for the 
clergy and people. 


MORNING PRAYER. 


Salisbury Use. 
ATER noster, qui es in celis; 
sanctificetur nomen tuum: ad- 
veniat regnum tuum: fiat voluntas 
tua, sicut in ccelo, et in terra. Panem 
nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie: 
et dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et 
nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris: et 
ne nos inducas in tentationem: sed 
libera nos a malo. Amen. 


[Ostende nobis, Domine, misericor- Cr 
. reces. 
diam tuam. 


Et salutare tuum da nobis. | 


Domine, salvum fae regem. 


shown in the notes appended to it in the Communion Service. 
In this part of his Prayer Book, Bishop Cosin added the second 
recitation of each versicle as an “ Answer,’ so as to make the 
lesser Litany here identical with that in the Litany itself. ‘This 
probably represents the proper way of using it in Divine Service, 
as it was thus repeated three times in the Salisbury Use. In its 
original form this lesser Litany consisted of Kyrie Eleison nine 
times repeated: but the Western Church has always used Christe 
Eleison as the second versicle. Its threefold form is analogous 
to that of the Litany, which opens with separate prayers to each 
Person of the Blessed Trinity?. This form renders it a most 
fitting introduction to the Lord’s Prayer: and the Church has so 
distinctly adopted the lesser Litany for that purpose, that we may 
well feel a reverent obligation to use it on all occasions when the 
Lord’s Prayer is said. Such an usage appeals, too, to the instinct 
of Christian humility, which shrinks from speaking to God even 
in the words taught us by our Lord, without asking His mercy 
on our act of prayer, influenced, as it must needs be, by the in- 
firmities of our nature ; and imperfect as it must appear to the 
all-penetrating Hye. 

The Lord’s Prayer, as used in this place, has a different inten- 
tion from that with which it was used at the opening of the Ser- 
vice, and is by no means to be looked upon as an accidental repe- 
tition arising from the condensation of several shorter services 
into one longer. In the former place it was used with reference 
to the Service of Praise and Prayer in which the Church is en- 
gaged. Here it is used with reference to the necessities of the 
Church for the coming day; preceding the detailed prayers of 
the versicles which follow, and of the Collects which make up the 
remainder of the Service. 

Then the Priest standing wp shall say] This Rubric con- 
tinues the ancient practice, applying it to the whole of the 
versicles, instead of only to a portion’, The old Rubric after the 
Miserere, which followed the versicles above given, was ‘ Finito 
Psalmo solus sacerdos erigat se, et ad gradum chori accedat ad 
Matutinas et ad Vesperas, tunc dicendo hos versus :— 

Exurge, Domine, adjuva nos 

Et libera nos propter nomen tuum. 
Domine Deus virtutum, converte nos. 

Et ostende faciem tuam, et salvi erimus. 


‘ 


2 The ‘‘Mirror” also explains the triple repetition of each Kyrie as a 
prayer in each case against sins of thought, word, and deed. 
3 But, as a general rule, ‘‘ Preces ” were said kneeling (except at Christ- 


/ mas, and from Easter to Trinity), and ‘‘ Orationes” were said standing. 


MORNING PRAYER. 23 


Answer. 


And mercifully hear us when we 
eall upon thee. 


; Priest. 
Ps.exxxii. 9.16.  Endue thy ministers with righteous- 
ness, 
Answer. 
And make thy chosen people joyful. 
Priest. 
Ps. 3xviil, 9. O Lord, save thy people. 
Answer. 
And bless thine inheritance. 
Priest. 


2 Kings xx. 19. 
Ps. cxxii. 7. 


Give peace in our time, O Lord. 


Answer. 


oe eae 11. Because there is none other that 


2 Chron. xxxii. 8. fiohteth for us, but only thou, O God. 


Priest. 
Ps. li, 10, 11. O God, make clean our hearts within 
us, 
Answer. 
Eres. And take not thy holy Spirit from 
us. 


{| Then shall follow three Collects ; the first of 
the Day, which shall be the same that is 
appointed at the Communion; the second 
for Peace; the third for Grace to lwe well. 
And the two last Collects shall never alter, 
but daily be said at Morning Prayer 
throughout all the year, as followeth ; all 
kneeling. 


{ Zhe Second Collect, for Peace. 
GOD, who art the author of 
Las peace and lover of concord, in 


John xvii. 3. vil: Knowledge of whom standeth our 


* Ps. Ixviii. 6. 
exxxiii. 1. 


Et exaudi 
verimus te. 


nos in die qua invoca- Salisbury Use. 


Sacerdotes tui induantur justitiam. 


Et sancti tui exultent. 

Salvum fac populum tuum, Domine. 
Et benedic hereditati tue. 

Domine, fiat pax in virtute tua. 


Et abundantia in turribus tuis. 


[Cor mundum crea in me, Domine. (ps. Miserere mei 
Deus.] 


Et Spiritum sanctum tuum ne 
auferas a me. | 


EUS auctor pacis et amator, Salisbury Use. 
uem nosse vivere: cui servir 
quem nosse Vivere: CUl SeIViFe, Gresor andGelas 
regnare est; protege ab omnibus im-  ™88a pro pace. 


Domine, exaudi orationem meam. 
Et clamor meus ad te veniat. 
Dominus vobiscum. 
Et cum spiritu tuo. 
Oremus. 
[Deinde dicitur Oratio propria. . }.” 

From this it appears as if the collect, as well as the versicles, 
were to be said standing; and Bishop Cosin thought this was the 
meaning of our present Rubric. The intention of the Reformers 
seems indeed to have been that, throughout the Prayer Book, the 
Priest should kneel with the people in confessions and penitential 
prayers, but stand, as in the Communion Office, while offering 
all other prayers. The standing posture has been almost uni- 
versally set aside in Morning and Evening Prayer, except during 
the recitation of these versicles; and its revival would be repug- 
nant to natural feelings of humility. But it was originally 
ordered as a sign of the authoritative position which the Priest 
occupied as the representative of the Church ; and official gestures 
ought not to be ruled by personal feeling. At the same time the 
established usage makes a good ritual distinction between the 
prayers of the ordinary offices and those of the Eucharistic 
Service. 

The game great truth as to the priesthood of the Laity, which 


has already been referred to, is again brought out strongly in the 
versicle and response, “‘Endue Thy ministers with righteousness : 
And make Thy chosen people joyful.” It is impossible not to 
identify the latter words, in their Christian sense, with the words 
of St. Peter, “But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, 
an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the 
praises of Him who hath called you out of darkness into His 
marvellous light ;” and in a preceding verse of the same chapter, 
“Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy 
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ.” (1 Pet. ii. 5. 9.) This subject is treated of at 
greater length in the notes on the Confirmation Service; but the 
doctrine, or rather the practice of the doctrine, pervades the 
Prayer Book; the whole system of responsive worship being 
founded upon it. See also a note on the ‘ Amen” of the Laity 
at the consecration of the Blessed Sacrament. 


THE THREE COLLECTS, 


all keneeling| See the preceding remarks on this posture 
in the Preces. It is only necessary here to add that the words, 
“The Priest standing up, and saying, Let us pray. YJ Then the 
Collect of the Day,” followed those of the present Rubric until 


24 


1 John v. 20. 

Matt. xi. 29, 30. 

© Ps poviniy 1. 
lix. 1. * xxvii. 
1.3. exviii. 6— 


eternal life, whose service is perfect 
freedom; defend us thy humble ser- 
vants in all assaults of our enemies ; 
that we surely trusting in thy defence, 
may not fear the power of any adver- 
saries, through the might of Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


9. 
Eph. vi. 10—13. 
Rom. viii. 31. 35. 
37. 
Jer. xi. 5 marg. 


§ The Third Collect, for Grace. 


ae LORD, our heavenly Father, 
eet Almighty and everlasting God, 
pam. 2428. Who hast safely brought us to the be- 


1552, representing the old usage of the Church. As this direction 
was thrown further back, and no direction for the Priest to 
kneel inserted in its place here, the Rubric appears to order the 
same posture at the versicles and the collects, as has been already 
shown. 

§ The First Collect, of the Day. 

The central point of all Divine Worship, towards which all 
other services gravitate, and around which they revolve, like 
planets round a sun, is the great sacrificial act of the Church, the 
offering of the Holy Sacrament. The ordinary services of Mattins 
and Evensong are therefore connected with it ritually by the use 
of the collect “that is appointed at the Communion,” to which 
precedence is given over all other prayers except the Lord’s 
Prayer, and the versicles from Holy Scripture. This collect is 
the only variable prayer of the Communion Office, and it is 
almost always built up out of the ideas contained in the Epistle 
and Gospel appointed for the Sunday or other Holyday to which 
it specially belongs; these latter, again [see Introduction to Col- 
lects, &c.], being selections of most venerable antiquity, intended 
to set a definite and distinctive mark on the day with which they 
are associated. Thus the first collect of Morning and Evening 
Prayer fulfils a twofold office. First, it connects those services 
with the great act of sacrificial worship which the Church intends 
to be offered on every Sunday and Holyday (at least) to her Lord ; 
and, secondly, it strikes the memorial key-note of the season, 
linking on the daily services to that particular phase of our 
Blessed Lord’s Person or Work which has been offered to our 
devotion in the Gospel and Epistle. And as all Divine Worship 
looks first and principally towards Him to Whom it is offered, so 
it must be considered that these orderly variations of the collect 
are not ordained chiefly as a means of directing the tone of 
thought and meditation with which the worshippers approach 
Him ; but as a devotional recognition and memorial before God 
of the change of times and seasons which He Himself has 
ordained both in the natural and the spiritual world. “He hath 
appointed the moon for certain seasons, and the sun knoweth his 
going down.” So the division of our time from week to week 
has been marked out by the Divine Hand in the rest of the 
Creation Sabbath and the triumph of the Resurrection Sunday ; 
and each week of the year is also distinguished by the Church 
with some special reference to acts or teachings of her Divine 
Master, which she commemorates day by day at Mattins and 
Evensong, as well as at her chief service of the week. 

The following rules will be found practically useful as regards 
the use of the first collect, and for convenience those relating to 
Evensong are included, as well as those more properly belonging 
to this page :— 

1. The Sunday Collect is to be said from the Saturday evening 
before to the Saturday morning after, inclusive. 

2. Festival Collects are invariably to be used on the evening 
before the festival, whether it is kept as a vigil or not. When 
the vigil is kept on a Saturday, the festival being on the Monday 
following, the collect of the latter need not be said on Saturday 
evening ; but on Sunday evening it should be said before the 
Sunday collect. 


MORNING PRAYER, 


ioni i ° i Cf. Seneca de 
pugnationibus supplices tuos; ut qui Cf Ser crace 


in defensione tua confidemus, nullius xv. “Deo 
ove . ‘ parere, libertas 
hostilitatis arma timeamus, Per Je- est.’ 


sum Christum Dominum nostrum. 
Amen, 


OMINE sancte, Pater omnipo- 
tens, eterne Deus, qui nos ad 
principium hujus diei pervenire fecisti; 


Salisbury Use. 


Greg. Orationes 
ad Matutinas. 


8. The Sunday collect is ordinarily superseded by the collect of 
any festival which occurs on the Sunday. 

4. But if any festival occurs on any of the following Sundays, 
both collects should be used, that for the Sunday being said 
first. 

Advent Sunday. 
Septuagesima Sunday. 
Sexagesima Sunday. 
Quinquagesima Sunday. 
4th Sunday in Advent. Whit-Sunday. 

1st Sunday in Lent. Trinity Sunday. 

The same rule is applicable to Ash-Wednesday, Maundy Thurs- 
day, Good Friday, Easter Even, and Ascension Day. 

But on other week-days following the above Sundays, a Festival 
Collect should take precedence of the Sunday Collect, as the 
collects of the three days after Christmas take precedence of that 
of Christmas Day. 

5. The following are special usages connected with several 
days and seasons :— 

Advent Sunday is to be used until the morning of Dec. 24 


5th Sunday in Lent. 
6th > 99 
Easter Day. 

Sunday after Easter. 


Christmas Day 3 AA * Dec. 31 

& {Circumcision AA es a Jan. 5 

© j Epiphany x i . Saturday x 
 ( Quinquagesima os “ evening of Tuesday \= 
© \ Ash-Wednesday [alone] » morning of Saturday | 
& e 8 is to be used after all others until the} 


morning of the Saturday before Easter Day 
Ascension Day ,, »» until the morning of Saturday 


§ The Second Collect, for Peace. 


This beautiful prayer is translated from one which was used at 
Lauds in the ancient services, and was also the Post-Communion 
of a special Eucharistic office on the subject of peace. It appears 
in the Sacramentaries of Gelasius and Gregory the Great, and 
has probably been in use among us ever since the time of the 
latter, more than twelve centuries and a half. 

It must be taken as a prayer for the peace of the Church 
Militant, even more than as one for that of the Christian warrior: 
a devout acknowledgment in the ease of both that the events of 
every day are ruled by the Providence of Almighty God, Who 
doeth according to His will in the army of Heaven, and among 
the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay His hand, or 
say unto Him, “ What doest Thou?” The beautiful and terse 
expression, “‘ Whose service is perfect freedom ” (though inferior 
to the “whom to serve is to reign” of the Latin), is a daily 
reminder to us of our position as soldiers of Christ, bound to 
Him as those who have vowed to “continue His faithful soldiers 
and servants unto their lives’ end,” but yet bound by the yoke of 
a loving Captain, whose object is to save us from the slavery of sin 
and carry us on to the eternal freedom of Heaven. There isa 
mixture of humility and confidence in this Collect, which fits it 
well for the lips of those who are faithfully endeavouring to do 
their duty day by day. They “seek peace and pursue it,” yet 
know that spiritual enemies are ever on the watch to assault 
them: they know their danger, yet have no fear for the end 


MORNING PRAYER. . 25 


Pa xelv. 22, ginning of this day; defend us in the 
cre 188. same with thy mighty power, and 
Matt. vi. 13. grant that this day we fall into no sin, 
neither run into any kind of danger ; 

Prov. iii. 5. 23, 


sh but that all our doings may be ordered 
Ps. cxiiii. 8.10. 


by thy governance, to do always that 


XxXXxvii. 23. 
Heb. xiii. 20, 21, +. é : 
Eph is.’ 1S righteous in thy sight, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Sean 4, {| In Quires and Places where they sing, here 


Solloweth the Anthem. 


"| Then these five Prayers following are to be 
read here, except when the Litany 1s read ; 
and then only the two last are to be read, 
as they are there placed. 


{| A Prayer for the Queen’s Majesty. 
Pitot: LORD our heavenly Father, 
a hie high and mighty, King of kings, 
ev xix.16. Lord of lords, the only Ruler of princes, 


Rey. xix. 16. 


tua nos hodie salva virtute ; et concede Salisbury Use. 
ut in hae die ad nullum declinemus . 
peccatum ; nec ullum incurramus peri- 
culum, sed semper ad tuam justitiam 
faciendam omnis nostra actio tuo 
moderamine dirigatur. Per Jesum 
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. 


LORDE Jesu Christe, moste Book of Private 
high, most mightie kyng of RR 
kynges, lorde of lordes, the onely rular 


while the might of Him Who “goes forth conquering and to 
conquer” is given for their defence: of Him Who can say to the 
troubled waves around the ark of His Church, “ Peace, be still.” 


§ The Third Collect, for Grace. 


This Collect occupied a similar position in the Prime office of 
the ancient use of the Church of England as it does in our pre- 
sent Morning Prayer. It is found in the Sacramentaries of 
Gelasius and Gregory the Great, among the Orationes ad Ma- 
tutinas lucescente die; and is, therefore, of as venerable an anti- 
quity as the preceding one. It will be interesting to notice the 
difference between the old English use given above, the Roman 
use, and the ancient form in which the Collect appears in the 
Sacramentary of St. Gregory. 


Gregorian. Roman. 


Deus, qui nos ad principium 
hujus diei pervenire fecisti, da 
nobis hune diem sine peccato 
transire; ut in nullo a tuis 
semitis declinemus ; sed ad tuam 
justitiam faciendam nostra sem- 
per procedant eloquia, Per. 


Domine Deus omnipotens, qui 
ad principium hujus diei nos 
pervenire fecisti; tua nos hodie 
salva virtute, ut in hae die ad 
nwlum declinemus peccatum, 
sed semper ad tuam justitiam 
faciendam nostra procedant elo- 
quia, dirigantur cogitationes et 
opera. Per Dominun. 


The Roman was the same both before and after the reform of 
the Breviary: and the difference between it and our own shows 
the independent character of the English rite; furnishing evi- 
dence also that our own reformers used the Salisbury, and not 
the Roman Breviary, for their translations. 

One of the prayers in the Morning Office of St. Basil also 
bears considerable resemblance to the Collect for Grace, sufficient 
to indicate a common origin. It is thus given by Archdeacon 
Freeman, in his “ Principles of Divine Service,” i. 222 :— 

‘O cds 6 aidvios, 7d kvapxov xa aldiov .... (Ps. xe. 1.) 
xdpioce jmiv ev TH mwapovon juepa edaperreiv cor, diapvddtTwy 
Huas ard maons apaptias kal mdons movnpas mpdtews, puduevos 
juas amb BéAous meTouévou juepas Kal mdons dyrinerpévns 
duvdpews. 

(From Second Prayer) :— 

Td TOV XELpGY NuaY Epya,.... MpaTTEW iuas TA oo) cddpeoTa 
nad plra, evddwaor. 

This Collect was placed here as the end of Mattins in 1549, a 
most appropriate prayer with which to go forth to the work 
which each one has to do. In the rubric it is called a prayer 
“for grace to live well,” and Bishop Cosin wished to insert this 


full title above the collect as a sign of the object for which it is 
offered. In a few terse words it recognizes the dependence of all 
for spiritual strength on the grace of God, our position in the 
midst of temptations to sin, and the power to do good works 
well pleasing to God when our doings are under His governance. 
As a prayer bearing on the daily life of the Christian, it may be 
taken as a devotional parallel to the well-known axiomatic defini- 
tion of Christian practice, that it is “to do my duty in that state 
of life to which it shall please God to call me.” 


The rubrics which follow the three Collects are of more im- 
portance than they have usually been considered. The first 
directs that “f In Quires and places where they sing, here 
followeth the Anthem.” The Anthem itself is spoken of at length 
in another place. All that is necessary to mention here in 
connexion with it is, that (1) although this rubric was not in the 
Prayer Book in the time of Queen Elizabeth, there is historical 
evidence of an Anthem being sung at the conclusion of the Ser- 
vice, of which our modern organ voluntary is probably a tradi- 
tional relic: and (2) that Anthems were clearly not contemplated, 
except in “ Quires and places where they sing,” Cathedrals, Royal 
Chapels, Collegiate Churches, &c. 

This gives considerable force to the word “Then” in the fol- 
lowing Rubric, “ Then these five Prayers following are to be 
used,” &c.; for it is clear that, the two Rubrics being placed 
where they are at the same time, the “Then” of the second 
derives its meaning entirely from the words which immediately 
precede it in the first Rubric. 

From this the conclusion may be drawn that where an Anthem 
does not follow the third Collect, the five remaining prayers are 
not to be said, but the Morning Prayer terminated (as it was for 
a hundred years after the Reformation, by express rule) at the 
third Collect. This view of the second Rubric is confirmed by 
the “as they are there placed” which concludes it. 

An explanation of such an usage may be found in the difference 
of position between ordinary parish churches and the churches 
defined by the expression, ‘‘Quires and places where they sing.” 
The latter are of a more representative character than the former, 
and usually ina more public situation; and in these, the daily 
commemoration of the Sovereign, the Royal Family, and the 
Clergy becomes a public duty, in a higher degree than in village 
churches, or others where the service is usually of a more humble 
character. 

Where the length of Morning and Evening Prayer is therefore 
an obstacle to the use of Daily Service, this Rubric provides 
(accidentally, perhaps, yet effectually) for the difficulty; and 
shows that there is an elasticity about the Prayer Book, here, as 

K 


26 MORNING PRAYER. 


Pe. xxii 18—15. who dost from thy throne behold all 
OU the dwellers upon earth; most heartily 
Ps. Ixxxiv.9. we beseech thee with thy favour to 

behold our most gracious Sovereign 
Acts viti.15. Lady Queen VICTORIA, and so re- 
1 Chron. xxii. 12, plenish her with the grace of thy Holy 


2 Cor. ix. 8. 


1 Kings iii, 9. Spirit, that she may alway incline to 
Ps.ixxii1,2. thy will, and walk in thy way: Endue 


her plenteously with heavenly gifts, 
grant her in health and wealth long 
to live, strengthen her that she may 

Psixx, U2: A : 
xviii. 37.39.48, vanquish and overcome all her enemies; 


1 Chron. xxix. 
12. 28. 


2 Chron. i, 11, 12, 


Re ae and finally after this life, she may 
hate we attain everlasting joy and felicity, 


through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


of princes, the very sonne of god, on 
whose ryghte hande syttyng, dooest 
from thy throne beholde all the dwellers 
upon earth: with mooste lowly hertes 
we beseche the, vouchesafe with fauour- 
able regard to behold our most gracious 
soueraigne lorde Kyng Edwarde the 
syxte, and so replenysshe hym with 
the grace of thy holy spirite, that he 
alway incline to thy wil, and walke in 
thy way. Kepe hym farre of from 
ignoraunce, but through thy gifte, leat 
prudence and knowlage alwaie abound 
in his royall hert. So instructe hym 
(o Lord iesy) ,reygnyng upon us in erth, 
that his humaine majestee, alway obey 
thy divine majestee in feare and drede. 
Indue him plentifully with heauenly 
geftes. Grant him in health and welth 
long toliue. Heape glorie and honoure 
upon hym. Glad hym with the joye 
of thy countenance. So strengthe 
hym, that he maie vanquish and ouer- 
come all his and our foes, and be dread 
and feared of al the ennemies of his 
realme. [And finally, after this life 
that he may attain everlasting joy and 
felicity. Prymer Version.] Amen’. 


elsewhere, which makes it capable of meeting the varied require- 
ments of social life. Perhaps the idea ofan universal Daily Mattins 
and Evensong was dying out when the additions were made to 
the beginning and the end of the Services, or a more distinct 
Rubrical provision would have been made, limiting their general 
use to particular churches on week-days, and ordering it for all 
on Sundays. 


THE FIVE PRAYERS. 


These prayers were inserted in this place in 1661, apparently 
at the suggestion of Bishop Cosin made in his Amended Prayer 
Book. Some of them had been previously in use in the Litany or 
in Occasional Offices. To a certain extent they represent some 
private prayers used by the Clergy, after the public Office was 
over in the ancient system of the Church [ Freeman, i. 371]; but 
this parallel is accidental, as an interval of more than a century 
had elapsed between the cessation of the old custom, and its 
revival in the present form. There are, however, several pages 
of “ Memoria Communes” in the Salisbury Missals, and among 
these may be found the original idea, though not the ipsissima 
verba, of the four intercessory prayers here used, and also of 
several of those called “ Occasional.” The Memoria Communes 
were, in fact, “Prayers and Thanksgivings upon Several Occa- 
sions ;” and the four intercessory prayers now used daily seem 
to have been originally considered as belonging to this class: It 
is noticeable that the ancient structural form of the Collect [see 
Introduction to Collects, &c.] has been carefully adopted in these 
prayers, as it was in the case of the daily Absolution. 


§ Lhe Prayer for the Queen. 

This occurs first in two books of Private Prayers, the one 
entitled “ Psalmes or Prayers taken out of Holye Scripture ” 
(1545—1548), the other, “ Prayers or Meditations ... . collected 
out of holy works by the most virtuous and gracious Princess 


Katherine, Queen of England, France, and Ireland. Anno dni 
1547.” It was also inserted in the Morning Prayer, printed in 
the Prymer of 1553, as the “ Fourth Collect.” In Queen Eliza- 
beth’s reign (1559) it was placed with other prayers and in 
its present shape, before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom at the end 
of the Litany. Our present usage was first adopted in the Form 
of Prayer for March 24, 1604, commemorating the entry of 
James I. into England, It was inserted in the Scottish Prayer 
Book of 1637, and finally settled as we now have it in 1661. 

It is not known who was the author of this fine composition, 
the opening of which is equal in grandeur to any thing of the 
kind in the ancient Liturgies; breathing indeed the spirit of the 
Tersanctus and Trisagion. 

A prayer for the Sovereign is a very ancient part of Divine 
Service, the Apostolic use of it being evidenced beyond doubt by 
the words of St. Paul, in the opening of the second chapter of his 
First Epistle to Timothy, “I exhort therefore that, first of all, 
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and ‘giving of thanks, be 
made for all men: for kings, and for all that are in authority ; 
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and 
honesty.” The “giving of thanks” being simply an expression 
for the offering of the Holy Hucharist, this injunction ought to 


S 

! The final clause of this prayer is taken from the Post-Communion of a 
Missa Quotidiana pro Rege in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory, which is 
as follows :— 

‘““Hec, Domine, oratio salutaris famulum tuum, Ill., ab omnibus tueatur 
adversis, quatenus et Ecclesiastice pacis obtineat tranquillitatem, et post 
istius temporis decursum ad eternam perveniat hereditatem. Per.” 
(Greg. Miss. Quotid. pro Rege. Ad Complendum.] 

The earlier part of it bears some resemblance to the beginning of the 
Consecratio Regis, printed at p. 279 in the Appendix to Menard’s Sacramen- 
tary of St. Gregory. ‘‘Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, Creator et Gubernator 
coeli et terre, Conditor et Dispositor Angelorum et hominum, Rex regum 
et Dominus dominorum, qui... .” &c. 


MORNING PRAYER. 


| A Prayer for the Royal Family. 
LMIGHTY God, the fountain of 
xxii. 1. 


2 Sam. vii. 29. all goodness, we humbly beseech 
1Sam ceria is, thee to bless Albert Edward Prince of 


Job xlii. 2. 
PeoeeExvi. 9 


peas aly. 8 Wales, the Princess of Wales, and all 
the Royal Family: Endue them with 
Rev. iii. 18. aif ; ; 
- Ae thy holy Spirit; enrich them with thy 
23.26. heavenly grace; prosper them with 
ge iv.18. all happiness; and bring them to 
2Pet. i. 11. 


thine everlasting kingdom; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


§| A Prayer for the Clergy and People. 
LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
Acts ii. 17. 11. who alone workest great mar- 
ope er vels; Send down upon our Bishops, 


Pe. xe. 2, xxii: 
18. cxxxvi. 3, 4. 


27 


LMIGHTY. God,, which hast Common Prove: 

promised to bee a Father of 
thine Elect, and of their seed: We 
humbly beseech thee to blesse our 
Noble Prince Charles, Fredericke the 
Prince Elector Palatine, and the lady 
Elisabeth his wife: endue them with 
thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy 
heavenly grace, prosper them with all 
happinesse, and bring them to thine 
everlasting kingdome, through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, salisbury Use. 
qui facis mirabilia magna solus: “‘iseopo vel 


Episcopo vel 
. ti 3 
pretende super famulos tuos Pontifices Gea 


Gelas. 


be taken as containing a reference to the use of such an interces- 
sion at the ordinary prayers of the Church, as well as at the Holy 
Communion. A Missa pro Rege is contained in the Sacra- 
mentary of St. Gregory, as has been shown, as early as the sixth 
century. In the ecclesiastical laws of King Ethelred, a.p. 1012, 
the third chapter contains express directions that a certain 
prayer should be said daily for the king and his people; and the 
practice of the Church of England before the Reformation has 
already been mentioned. 

It may be useful to place in connexion with our now familiar 
Prayer for the Sovereign, one from an Eastern Liturgy, and the 
Memorial of the Salisbury Breviary. 

Lrom the Inturgy of St. Mark. 

*©O Lord, Master and God, the Father of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ; we beseech Thee to preserve our king in peace, 
might, and righteousness. Subdue under him, O God, his foes 
and all that hate him. Lay hold upon the shield and buckler, 
and stand up to help him. Grant victories unto him, O God, 
and that he may be peaceably disposed both towards us and 
towards Thy holy Name; and that we also, in the peace of his 
days, may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and 
honesty, through the grace, mercy, and loving-kindness of Thine 
only begotten Son; through Whom, and with Whom, be glory 
and power unto Thee, with Thine all-holy, good, and life-giving 
Spirit, now and for ever, and unto all eternity. Amen.” 


MEMORIZ PRO REGE ET REGINA. 
(From the Salisbury Missal.) 
Oratio. 

“Deus in cujus manu sunt corda regum: qui es humilium 
Consolator, et fidelium Fortitudo, et Protector omnium in Te 
sperantium: da regi nostro #2. et regine nostre $2. populoque 
Christiano triumphum virtutis tue scienter excolere: ut per Te 
semper reparentur ad veniam. Per Dominum. 

Secreta. 

« Suscipe, quesumus, Domine, preces et hostias ecclesie tux, 
quas pro salute famuli Tui regis nostri et regine et protectione 
fidelium populorum Tuz Majestati offerimus: supplicantes ut 
antiqua brachii tui Te operante miracula, superatis inimicis, se- 
cura tibi serviat Christianorum libertas. Per Dominum. 

Post-Communio. 

“Presta, quesumus, Omnipotens Deus: ut per hee mysteria 
sancta que sumpsimus, rex noster et regina, populusque Chris- 
tianus semper rationabilia meditantes: que tibi placita sunt, et 
dictis exequantur et factis. Per Dominum.” 


These are taken from a Missal of 1514; another set, mention- 


ing the name of Henry VIII., are given by Mr. Maskell in his 
Ancient Liturgy, p. 184. The Post-Communion of the latter 
ends with the words “et post hujus vite decursum ad eternam 
beatitudinem, tua gratia cooperante, perveniat ;” which are evi- 
dently the original of “ And finally after this life, she may attain 
everlasting joy and felicity.” See also the preceding foot-note. 


§ The Prayer for the Royal Family. 

This was placed among the prayers at the end of the Litany in 
1604, by James I. The expression “ the fountain of all goodness” 
was substituted, in 1625 (in the first Form of Occasional Prayers 
issued under Charles I.), for the strong expression used in the 
opening of it under James. The following letter, copied from 
Bishop Cosin’s MSS., led to its final adoption in its present form, 
and serves to illustrate its introduction into the Daily Service :— 


« Charles R. 

“Our will and pleasure is that you forthwith cause this ensuing 
Collect for our Royall Consort to be used in all churches and 
chappels within your province, instead of that which is now used 
for the Royall Progeny. For which this shall be your warrant. 
Given at our Court at Whitehall this 8th day of November, 
1661. 

[Then follows the Collect. | 

“To our right trusty and right well 
beloved, the Most Reverend Father in 
God Acceptus, Lord Archbishop of 
York. 

“ By His Majestie’s Command, 
“EpwarpD NICHOLAS.” 

In this and other prayers for the Sovereign and the Royal 
Family, the necessary changes are made by Royal Proclamation, 
under the following clause in the Act of Uniformity :—“ Provided 
always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that 
in all those Prayers, Litanies, and Collects which do any way 
relate to the King, Queen, or Royal Progeny, the Names be 
altered and changed from time to time, and fitted to the present 
occasion, according to the direction of lawful authority.” What 
the lawful authority is does not clearly appear; but against the 
clause in the Litany, and also against this Prayer, there is a mar- 
ginal note in Cosin’s book, “Such only are to be named as the 
King shall appoint.” 


§ The Prayer for the Clergy and People. 


This Collect is very ancient, being found in the Sacramentary 
of Gelasius. It is also in all the English Prymers, and a version 
of it, as it stood in the fourteenth century, is given in Evening 
It was placed at the end of the first authorized English 

EK 2 


Prayer. 


28 


Titwili5; 16. 

2 Cor. ix. 8. 
Deut. xxxiii. 28. 
Ps. cxxxiii. 3. 


and Curates, and all Congregations 
committed to their charge, the health- 
ful Spirit of thy grace; and that they 


Eph.i.3. iv.8. may truly please thee, pour upon them 
SA ~e ‘the continual dew of thy blessing. 
Grant this, O Lord, for the honour of 
our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus 
Christ. Amen. 
q A Prayer of Saint Chrysostom. 
tee o: LMIGHTY God, who hast given 
Psa xe lie ets tiin, sie a 
Acts i. 14. iv, 24, sl jalon RR ga er cate hae 2? 
Eph. vi. 18. accord to make’ our common supplica- 
Matt. xviii. 19,20. tions unto thee, and dost promise, that 
Acts xii. 12. AG 
Exod. xx.24, When two or three are gathered toge- 
Isa. Ivi. 7. ther in thy Name, thou wilt grant 
Pain oe their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, 
exiv. 18, 19. A Bey 
1 John v. 14,15. the desires and petitions of thy ser- 
Matt. vi 33.  -yants, as may be most expedient for 
1 Tim. ii. 3, 4. Sd tse f2 eaten bana 
John x.97, 98, them; granting us in this world know 


Jer. xi.5, margin. ledge of thy truth, and in the world 


to come life everlasting. Amen. 


2 Cor. xiii. 
HE grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the love of God, and 
the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be 


with us all evermore. Amen. 


MORNING PRAYER. 


et super cunctas congregationes illis 
commissas Spiritum gratie salutaris ; 
et ut in veritate tibi complaceant, per- 
petuum eis rorem tuz benedictionis 
infunde. 


0 tas Kowas TavTas Kal ouppevous deere otet 
nHpwW YaploamLevos TpoaEevyas, O Kab St. Basil. 

S00 Kat Tpicl cuupwvodcow eri TO 

dvomati cov Tas aiTnoEls Trapéyely 
errayyevAdmevos’ avTos Kal voy ‘Tov 

SovAwY gov Ta aiTHMaTa mpos TO 

cuppepov TANPwWooV, yopnyYav nuiv €v 

TO TapovTL aiave THy éeTlyvwow THs 

ons adnOeias, Kat év TO weAXOVTL Cor 

ai@viov yapifomevos. 


Capitulum : ii. Cor. ultimo. 
RATIA Domini nostri Jesu Salisbury Use. 
Christi, et charitas Dei, et com- 
municatio Sancti Spiritus sit semper 
cum omnibus nobis. 


Here endeth the Order of Morning Prayer throughout the Year. 


Litany in 1544, and where it now is in 1661. Bishop Cosin 
wished to meet Puritan objectors. by altering it as follows :— 


“A Prayer for the Clergy and their Charge. 

“ Almighty and Everlasting God, who didst pour out upon Thy 
Apostles the great and marvellous gift of the Holy Ghost, send 
down upon our Bishops, the Pastors of Thy Church, and such 
others as have cure of souls under them, together with all con- 
gregations committed to their charge” .... 

It was also suggested by him to use the phrase “from whom 
all spiritual graces do proceed,” which is nearly that adopted in 
the American Prayer Book; but both changes were rejected by 
the Revision Committee. ‘“ People” was also substituted for 
“their charge,” perhaps to make the title more comprehensive. 

The word “Curates” was objected to at the Savoy Conference, 
when the Bishops and other Clergy replied, ‘The word Curate 
signifying properly all those who are trusted by the Bishops with 
Cure of souls, as anciently it signified, is a very fit word to be 
used, and can offend no sober persons !.” 


§ A Prayer of St. Chrysostom. 

The introduction of this beautiful collect into the Prayer Book 
by the Reformers, shows that they were not unacquainted with 
the Greek Liturgies, if they had thought it expedient to draw 
upon them more freely than they did, It never had a place in 
any European Ritual until 1544, when it was placed at the end 
of the English Litany which had been revised and set forth by 
Archbishop Cranmer and his coadjutors as a first-fruits of their 
work. 

The prayer is found in the Liturgies of St. Basil and St. Chry- 
sostom, but its present position at the end of a Service is a happy 
novelty. It was ordered to be so used in the Scotch Prayer 
Book of 1637, and inserted in the English Revisal of 1661. 


1 Grand Debate between the Bishops and the Presbyterian Divines, 1661, 
p. 79. Cardwell’s Conf. p. 342. 


§ The Benediction. 


This benediction of priest and people by the former is trans- 
lated from the Capitulum which was used at Tierce (the nine 
o’clock Morning Service) in the ancient Church of England, and 
was first inserted after the Litany in 1559. It also begins the 
Anaphora of the three great Oriental Liturgies of St. Chrysostom, 
St. Basil, and St. James, being followed by the versicle, “And 
with thy Spirit,” and the Sursum Corda. In the two former, 
the benedictory form appears as it is in 2 Cor. xiii. 14, “be with 
you all,” but in that of St. James it is in the form “be with ws 
all,” as in our own and in the ancient Tierce Service. As the 
Vulgate also has “sit cum omnibus vobis,” it is improbable that 
the ancient Capitulum was taken from it, especially since the 
word “semper” is no more represented there than it is in the 
Greek of the New Testament; the two being as follows :— 


“H xdpis tov Kuplov “Inoovd Gratia Domini nostri Jesu 
Christi, et charitas Dei, et com- 
municatio Sancti Spiritus sit 


cum omnibus vobis. Amen. 


There is some probability, from these peculiarities, that this 
benediction gives us a lingering trace of prayers more anciently 
used in England than the time of St. Osmund. In St. James’s 
Liturgy, the benediction is, “The love of the Lord and Father, 
the grace of the Lord and Son, the communion and gift of the 
Holy Ghost, be with us all;” and although this is still more 
different from our form than the Bible version, the “ us”’ instead 
of “you” is (under the circumstances) so very distinctive, as to 
lead to the impression that it represents a Liturgy not now 
extant, which was analogous to that of St. James. It has also 
been suggested that this was originally a Liturgical benediction, 
and was adopted, as many other Liturgical expressions were, by 
St. Paul. No doubt its use as a Blessing in Divine Service is of 
primitive antiquity. 


Xpiorod, kal 7 aydmrn Tod Ocod, 
kad 7 Kowwvta Tod aylov mvet- 
MarTos meTa TdvTWY DuaY. aunv. 


THE 


ORDER 


FOR 


EVENING 


P RAH Ry 


DAILY THROUGHOUT THE YEAR. 


§ At the beginning of Evening Prayer the 
Minster shall read with a loud voice some 
one or more of these Sentences of the 
Scriptures, that follow. And then he shall 
say that which is written after the said 
Sentences. 


Haek. xviii. 27. HEN the wicked man turneth 
away from his wickedness, that 

he hath committed, and doeth that 

which is lawful and right, he shall 


save his soul alive. 


Ps. li. 3. I acknowledge my transgressions, 
and my sin is ever before me. 

Ps. li. 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and 
blot out mine iniquities. 

#3. li. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken 


spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, 
O God, thou wilt not despise. 

Joel ii. 13. Rend your hearts, and not your gar- 
ments, and turn unto the Lord your 
God: for he is gracious and merciful, 
slow to anger, and of great kindness, 
and repenteth him of the evil. 

Dan. ix.9,10. 'Tothe Lord our God belong mercies 
and forgivenesses, though we have 
rebelled against him: neither have we 
obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, 
to walk in his laws, which he set be- 
fore us. 

Jer, x. 24. O Lord, correct me, but with judge- 

Ps. vi. 1. A : 
ment; not in thine anger, lest thou 
bring me to nothing. 

Matt. iii. 2. Repent ye; for the Kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand. 

Iukexv.18,19. I will arise and go to my Father, 
and will say unto him; Father, I have 


sinned against Heaven, and before 
thee, and am no more worthy to be 
ealled thy son. 
Enter not into judgement with thy Ps. exliii 2. 
servant, O Lord; for in thy sight 
shall no man living be justified. 
If we say that we have no sin, we 1 Johni. 8, 9. 
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not 
in us. But, if we confess our sins, he 
is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins, and to cleanse us from all un- 
righteousness. 


EARLY beloved brethren, the 
Scripture moveth us in sundry 
places to acknowledge and confess our 
manifold sins and wickedness, and that 
we should not dissemble nor cloak 
them before the face of Almighty God 
our heavenly Father, but confess them 
with an humble, lowly, penitent, and 
obedient heart, to the end that we may 
obtain forgiveness of the same, by his 
infinite goodness and merey. And 
although we ought at all times humbly 
to acknowledge our sins before God, 
yet ought we most chiefly so to do, 
when we assemble and meet together, 
to render thanks for the great benefits 
that we have received at his hands, to 
set forth his most worthy praise, to 
hear his most holy word, and to ask 
those things which are requisite and 
necessary, as well for the body as the 
soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech 


The Order for Evening Prayer] The Evening Service of the 
Book of Common Prayer was formed out of the two Evening Ser- 
vices, Vespers and Compline, of the ancient Order ; a fixed form 
being, however, substituted for variable ones, and the hymns 
being left to the discretion of the Clergy. 


Nothing further need be said here respecting those parts of 
the daily Offices which have been already commented upon under 
Morning Prayer, but some additional illustrations are given in 
the shape of ancient English versions of various parts of the ser- 
vices. These are inserted within brackets when they are placed 


30 EVENING PRAYER. 


you, as many as are here present, to 
accompany me with a pure heart and 
humble voice unto the throne of the 
heavenly grace, saying after me. 


{ A general Confession to be said of the whole 
Congregation after the Minister, all kneel- 


ing. 
LMIGHTY and most merciful 
Father; We have erred and 
strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, 
We have followed too much the devices 
and desires of our own hearts. We 
have offended against thy holy laws. 
We have left undone those things 
which we ought to have done; And 
we have done those things which we 
ought not to have done; And there is 
no health in us. But thou, O Lord, 
have merey upon us, miserable of- 
fenders. Spare thou them, O God, 
which confess their faults. Restore 
thou them that are penitent ; Accord- 
ing to thy promises declared unto 
mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord. 
And grant, O most merciful Father, 
for his sake; That we may hereafter 


live a godly, righteous, and sober life, 
To the glory of thy holy Name. 
Amen. 


{| The Absolution or Remission of sins to be 
pronounced by the Priest alone, standing ; 
the people still kneeling. 


LMIGHTY God, the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who de- 
sireth not the death of a sinner, but 
rather that he may turn from his 
wickedness, and live; and hath given 
power and commandment to his Mi- 
nisters, to declare and pronounce to 
his people, being penitent, the absolu- 
tion and remission of their sins: He 
pardoneth and absolveth all them that 
truly repent, and unfeignedly believe 
his holy Gospel. Wherefore beseech 
we him to grant us true repentance, 
and his holy Spirit, that those things 
may please him, which we do at this 
present ; and that the rest of our life 
hereafter may be pure and holy, so 
that at the last we may come to his 
eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. . 


| Then the Minister shall kneel, and say the 
Lord’s Prayer; the people also kneeling, 
and repeating it with him. 
UR Father, which art in heaven, 
Hallowed be thy Name. Thy 
kingdom come. Thy will be done in 
earth, As it is in heaven. Give us 
this day our daily bread. And forgive 
us our trespasses, As we forgive them, 
that trespass against us. And lead us 
not into temptation; But deliver us 
from evil: For thine is the kingdom, 


“And,” see the power, and the glory, For ever and 
Morning 
Prayer. ever. Amen. 


[ Here begynneth the pater noster. 


URE fadir, that art in heuenes, 
halewid be thi name: thy rewme 
come to thee: be thi wille do as in 
heuene and in erthe: oure eche daies 
breed zyue us to day: and fortyue us 
oure dettis, as and we forjeuen to oure 
dettouris: and ne lede us into tempta- 
cioun: but delyuere us fro yuel. So 
be it.] 


Prymer Version 
of XIVth cen-. 
tury. 


beside the text of the Prayer Book: and it must be understood 
that they are verbal illustrations only, not always coming from 
an office similar to that in which they are now printed. The 
opening versicles of the Service, for example, are taken from the 
Mattins of the Ancient Prymer: at the later services of the day 
the two first do not appear; and at Compline they are replaced 
by “Turn us O God of our salvation. And let Thine anger cease 
from us.” These in the Prymer are “ God our salvacion converte 
us to Thee. And turne fro us Thy wrathe.” 

Evening Prayer began with the Lord’s Prayer and ended with 
the third Collect, from its first translation in 1549 until 1661. 
In the Rubric, before the sentences at Morning Prayer, the Minis- 
ter was directed (from 1552 onwards) to say them and that which 
follows “at the beginning both of Morning and Evening Prayer :” 
but the Puritan criticisms of the Prayer Book and the Clergy 


show that this was rarely, if ever, the practice until the last Revi- 
sion, when the two Services were made alike in this respect. 


THE LORD’S PRAYER. 


The above is a version of the Lord’s Prayer as it was used by 
the people in their daily services, when the prayers of the Church 
were still said in Latin, about the end of the fourteenth century. 
Some earlier versions are here given, which may be taken as 
representatives of those translations into the vulgar tongue which 
were so frequently directed in provincial and diocesan constitu- 
tions. There cannot be a doubt that the Lord’s Prayer was as 
familiar to the people of England in ancient days as it is at 
present. 

The first among the following ancient forms of it is taken from 


EVENING PRAYER. 31 


| Then likewise he shall say, 
O Lord, open thou our lips. 


Answer. 


And our mouth shall shew forth 
thy praise. 
; Priest. 
O God, make speed to save us. 


Answer. 


O Lord, make haste to help us. 


{| Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, 


Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost; 


[ Domine, Labia. 


Lord, thou schalt opyne myn lippis. 


Prymer Version 
of XI1Vth cen- 


tury. 
And my mouth schal schewe thi 
prisyng. 
God, take heede to myn help : 
i.e. “hie.” 


Lord, hije thee to helpe me. 


Glorie be to the fadir and to the 
sone and to the holy goost : 


a gloss on the Evangelists, written by Eadfrid, Bishop of Lindis- 
farne, about a.p. 700. [Cotton MS. Nero D. iv.] 


Fader user thu arth in Heofnas sie gehalgad noma thin to 


cymeth ric thin. sie willo thin sue is in Heofne and in Eortho. 
Hlaf userne oferwistlic sel us to deg, and forgef us scyltha usra 
sue use forgefon scylgum usum. And ne inlead usith in cost- 
nunge. Ah gefrig usich from yfle. 


The next is from Saxon homilies of about the same date: 

Fader ure thu the in heofnum earth, beo gehalgud thin noma. 
Cume to thin rice, weorthe thin willa swa swa on Heofune swile 
on eorthe. Hlaf userne deghwamlican sel us to dwg, and forlete 
us ure scylde, swa swa we ac forleten thaem the scyldigat with us, 
ne geleade in costnunge. Ah gelefe us of yfle. 


The next is from a MS. in the Library of Caius College, 
Cambridge, belonging to the thirteenth century, and printed by 
Mr. Maskell in the Appendix to his Fourteenth Century Prymer, 
Monumenta Ritualia, ii. 2388: 

Fader oure that art in heve, i-halgeed bee thi nome, i-cume thi 
kinereiche, y-worthe thi wylle also is in hevene so be on erthe, 
oure iche-dayes bred }if us to day, and fortif us oure gultes, also 
we forfifet oure gultare, and ne led ows nowth into fondingge, 
auth ales ows of harme. So be it. 


The next is from a MS., No. 142, in St. John’s College Library, 
Cambridge, of the fourteenth century, and is also from Mr. 
Maskell’s Monumenta Ritualia, ii. 239: 

Fader oure that art in heuene, halwed be thi name: come thi 
kyngdom : fulfild be thi wil in heuene as in erthe: oure ech day 
bred }ef vs to day, and forteue vs oure dettes as we forjeueth to 
oure detoures: and ne led vs nou} in temptacion, bote deliuere vs 
of euel. So be it. 


This is from a MS. in the Bodleian Library (Donce, 246, f. 15), 
of the fifteenth century. It also is reprinted from Monumenta 
Ritualia, li. 239: 

Fader oure that art in heuenes, halwed be thy name: thy 
kyngedom come to thee: thy wille be do in erthe as in heuen: 
oure ecbe dayes brede jeue us to daye: and forjeue us oure 
dettes as we forjeue to oure dettoures: and lede us no}te into 
temptacion: bot delyver us from yvel. Amen. 


The last is from the Prymer of 1538. Monumenta Ritualia, 
ii. 239: 

Our father whiche art in heuen, halowed be thy name. Let 
thy kyngdome cum vnto vs. Thy wyll be fulfylled as well in 
erthe, as it is in heuen. Gyue vs this daye our daylye breade. 
And forgyue vs our trespasses, as we forgyue them that trespas 
agaynst vs. And lede vs nat in to temptacyon. But delyuer vs 
from euyll. So be it. 


Many more such ancient English versions are extant, and the 
aboye are only given as specimens which show distinct transitions 
of language from one age to: another. [For others see Reliquiz 
Antique, vol. i.; Lingard’s Anglo-Saxon Church, vol. ii.; 


Maskell’s Monumenta Ritualia, vol. ii.; Chamberlayne’s Oratio 
Dominica. ] 


§ Exposition of the Lord’s Prayer, by St. Cyril of Jerusalem, 
A.D. 347. 


[It may give an additional interest to this to mention the his- 
torical fact, that it was part of a Lecture delivered in the Church 
which had been recently erected over the Holy Sepulchre; and 
to remind the reader that the interval of time between the origi- 
nal delivery of the Divine Prayer to the Apostle and this exposi- 
tion of it by a Bishop of the Holy City was not greater than that 
which has elapsed since the setting forth of the Prayer Book in 
1549.] 


Then, after these things, we say that Prayer which the Saviour 
delivered to His own disciples, with a pure conscience styling God 
our Father, and saying, Our Father, which art in heaven. O 
most surpassing loving-kindness of God! On them who revolted 
from Him and were in the very extreme of misery, has He be- 
stowed such complete forgiveness of their evil deeds, and so great 
participation of grace, as that they should even call Him Father. 
Our Father, which art in heaven; they also too are a heaven who 
bear the image of the heavenly, in whom God is, dwelling and 
walking in them. 

Hallowed be Thy Name. The Name of God is in its own 
nature holy, whether we say so or not; but since it is sometimes 
profaned among sinners, according to the words, Through you 
my Name is continually blasphemed among the Gentiles, we pray 
that in us God’s Name may be hallowed; not that it becomes 
holy from not being holy, but because it becomes holy in us, when 
we become holy, and do things worthy of holiness. 

Thy Kingdom come. The clean soul can say with boldness, 
Thy Kingdom come; for he who has heard Paul saying, Let not 
sin reign in your mortal body, but has cleansed himself in deed, 
thought, and word, will say to God, Thy Kingdom come. 

Thy Will be done as in heaven, soin earth. The divine and 
blessed Angels do the will of God, as David in a Psalm has said, 
Bless the Lord, ye His Angels, that excel in strength, that do His 
Commandments. So then, thou meanest by thy prayer, ‘As Thy 
will is done by the Angels, so be it done on earth also by me, 
Lord.” 

Give us this day our super-substantial bread. This common 
bread is not super-substantial bread, but this Holy Bread is super- 
substantial, that is, appointed for the substance of the soul. For 
this Bread goeth not into the belly and is cast out into the draught, 
but is diffused through all thou art, for the benefit of body and 
soul. But by this day, he means “each day,” as also Paul has 
said, While it is called to-day. 

And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors. For we 
have many sins. For we offend both in word and in thought, and 
very many things do we worthy of condemnation; and if we say 
that we have no sin, we lie, as John says. And we enter into a 
covenant with God, entreating Him to pardon our sins, as we also 


32 EVENING PRAYER. 


Answer. 
As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 


Amen. 
Priest. 
Praise ye the Lord. 
Answer. 


The Lord’s Name be praised. 


{| Then shall be said or sung the Psalms in 
order as they be appointed. Then a Les- 
son of the Old Testament, as is appointed : 
And after that, Magnificat (or the Song of 
the blessed Virgin Mary) in English, as 
followeth. 

Y soul doth magnify the Lord : 


and my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Saviour. 


Magnificat. 
Luke i. 


As it was in the bygynnyng and 


now and euer and in to the worldis of 


worldis. So be it. 


God make us saaf.] In later Prymers, 


Alleluia. 
Psalmus. Ince i. 
AGNIFICAT: anima mea Do- Salisbury Use. 
minum. 


Et exultavit spiritus meus: in Deo 
salutari meo. 


forgive our neighbours their debts. Considering then what we 
receive, and for what, let us not put off, nor delay to forgive one 
another. The offences committed against us are slight and trivial, 
and easily settled; but those which we have committed against 
God are great, and call for mercy such as His onlyis. Take heed, 
therefore, lest for these small and inconsiderable sins against thy- 
self, thou bar against thyself forgiveness from God for thy most 
grievous sins. 

And lead us not into temptation, O Lord. Does then the Lord 
teach to pray thus, viz., that we may not be tempted at all? 
And how is it said elsewhere, “the man who is not tempted is 
unproved ;” and again, My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall 
into divers temptations; or rather, does not the entering into 
temptation mean the being whelmed under the temptation ? For 
the temptation is like a winter-torrent, difficult to cross. Some, 
then, being most skilful swimmers, pass over, not being whelmed 
beneath temptations, nor swept down by them at all; while 
others who are not such, entering into them sink in them. As 
for example, Judas entering into the temptation of covetousness, 
swam not through it, but sinking beneath it was choked both in 
body and spirit. Peter entered into the temptation of the denial ; 
but having entered it, he was not overwhelmed by it, but man- 
fully swimming through it, he was delivered from the temptation. 
Listen again in another place, to the company of unscathed saints, 
giving thanks for deliverance from temptation, For Thou, O God, 
hast proved us; Thou hast tried us like as silver is tried. Thou 
broughtest us into the net; Thou laidest affliction upon our loins. 
Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through 
fire and water ; but Thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place ; 
now their coming into a wealthy place, is their being delivered 
from temptation. 

But deliver us from the evil. If Lead us not into temptation 
had implied the not being tempted at all, He would not have 
said, But deliver us from the evil. Now the evil is the Wicked 
Spirit who is our adversary, from whom we pray to be delivered. 
Then after completing the prayer, Thou sayest, Amen; by this 
Amen, which means, “So be it,” setting thy seal to the petitions 
of this divinely-taught prayer. [St. Cyril’s Catech. Lect, xxiii. 
11—18. ] 


§ Paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer, by the Author of 
“The Christian Year.” 
[The following paraphrase is reprinted} to illustrate the 
devotional use of the Lord’s Prayer in private, on Liturgical 
principles. The “special intention” here shown is also one 


1 From the Preface to ‘‘Sermons, Academical and Occasional, by the 
Rey. John Keble, M.A., 1848.” 


which bears closely upon two objects of this work, that of pro- 
moting the present unity of the Church of Christ, and that of 
showing the unity of the Church of England with the Catholic 
Church of old. ] 


Our Father which art in Heaven: One God, the Father 
Almighty, One Lord Jesus Christ, One Holy Ghost, proceed- 
ing from the Father and the Son; have mercy upon us, Thy 
children, and make us all One in Thee. 

Hallowed be Thy name: Thou who art One Lord, and Thy 
name One; have mercy upon us all, who are called by Thy 
name, and make us more and more One in Thee. 

Thy kingdom come: O, King of Righteousness and Peace, gather 
us more and more into Thy kingdom, and make us both 
visibly and invisibly One in Thee. 

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: Thou, Who hast 
declared unto us the mystery of Thy will, to “gather 
together in One all things in Christ, both which are in 
heaven and which are on earth;” conform us, O Lord, to 
that holy will of Thine, and make us all One in Thee. 

Give us this day our daily bread: Thou in Whom we being 
many are One Bread and One Body; grant that we, being 
all partakers of that One Bread, may day by day be more 
and more One in Thee. 

And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass 
against us: Thou, Who didst say, Futher, forgive them, for 
those who were rending Thy blessed Body, forgive us the 
many things we have done to mar the unity of Thy mystical 
Body, and make us, forgiving and loving one another, to 
be more and more One in Thee. 

And lead us not into temptation: As Thou didst enable Thine 
Apostles to continue with Thee in Thy temptations; so 
enable us, by Thy grace, to abide with Thee in Thy true 
Church, under all trials, visible and inyisible, nor ever to 
cease from being One in Thee. 

But deliver us from evil: from the enemy and false accuser ; 
from envy and grudging; from an unquiet and discon- 
tented spirit; from heresy and schism; from strife and 
debate ; from a scornful temper, and reliance on our own 
understanding; from offence given or taken; and from what- 
ever might disturb Thy Church, and cause it to be less One 
in Thee. 

Goop LorD, DELIVER AND PRESERVE THY SERVANTS FOR 
EVER. 


THE MAGNIFICAT. 


The Hymn of the Blessed Virgin Mary can be traced in use in 
the Daily Service of the Church as far back as the beginning of 
the sixth century. At that time (a.p. 507) it appears in the 


EVENING PRAYER, 


Compare th | 
poe | or he hath regarded + the lowliness 


nah. 1 Kings of his hand-maiden. 

For behold, from henceforth ¢ all 
generations shall call me blessed. 

For he that is mighty hath magni- 

fied me + and holy is his Name. 

And his mercy is on them that fear 
him + throughout all generations. 

He hath shewed strength with his 
arm ¢ he hath scattered the proud in 
the imagination of their hearts. 

He hath put down the mighty from 
their seat + and hath exalted the hum- 
ble and meek. 

He hath filled the hungry with good 
things + and the rich he hath sent 
empty away. 

He remembering his mercy hath 
holpen his servant Israel + as he pro- 
mised to our forefathers, Abraham and 
his seed, for ever. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 


{ Or else this Psalm; except it be on the 
Nineteenth day of the month, when it is 


33 


Quia respexit humilitatem ancille Salisbury Use. 
suze: ecce enim ex hoc beatam me 
dicent omnes generationes. 


Quia fecit mihi magna qui potens 
est : et sanctum nomen ejus. 

Et misericordia ejus a progenie in 
progenies: timentibus eum. 

Fecit potentiam in brachio suo: 
dispersit superbos mente cordis sui. 


Deposuit potentes de sede: et ex- 
altavit humiles. 


Esurientes implevit bonis: et divites 
dimisit inanes. 


Suscepit Israél puerum suum: re- 
cordatus misericordie suze ; 

Sicut locutus est ad patres nostros ; 
Abraham, et semini ejus in secula. 

Gloria Patri, et Filo: et Spiritui 


Sancto. 

Sicut erat in principio, et nune, et 
semper, et in secula seculorum. 
Amen. 


rule of St. Cesarius of Arles, in the office of Lauds. In the 
Eastern Church it is also a Lauds Canticle. But Amalarius 
[a.D. 820] speaks of its use in his time as a Canticle at Vespers ; 
and in the Armenian Church it is used at Compline as well as at 
Lauds. The English Church has used it at Vespers for at least 
eight hundred years; and its present position is analogous to 
that which it occupied in the ancient Service. There are English 
versions of it, of as early a date as 1390—1400. Several attempts 
were made by the Puritans to banish it from the Prayer Book, 
but happily without success. On the other hand, especial 
reverence was shown towards this Canticle and the Benedictus in 
the ceremonial of the ancient Church of England, by the use of 
incense while they were being sung. [See the ceremony in full 
in Transl. of Sar. Psalt. p. 327.] 

Of all Hymns known to the Church this is the most closely 
connected with our Blessed Lord, having been spoken by His 
Virgin Mother, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, at the 
very moment when the Divine overshadowing brought about the 
Incarnation of the Word. She began to be, in that moment, the 
“tabernacle for the Sun” of Righteousness, “ Which cometh 
forth as a Bridegroom out of His chamber, and rejoiceth as a 
giant to run His course.” The appearance and words of the 
Archangel revealed to her the exalted office to which God had 
chosen her, and she knew that from that hour she was to carry in 
her bosom for nine months the Saviour of the world. But though 
so “highly favoured,” and “full of grace,” and conscious of being, 
as Jeremy Taylor says, ‘ superexalted by an honour greater than 
the world ever saw,” all her words are uttered in a spirit of pro- 
found humility as regards herself, even when she declares that 
“all generations shall call me Blessed,” and of the most heavenly 
adoration as regards Him Who had magnified her, 

The Mother of our Lord, and the Church, “which is the 
Mother of us all,’* have always been closely linked together in the 


mind of Christianity. The “Elect Lady,” and the Woman 
“clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon 
her head a crown of twelve stars,” who, “ being with child, cried, 
travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered,’ and who 
“ brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a 
rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to His 
throne,” have seemed, from the different points of view taken by 
different ages, to represent now one and then the other, the 
Mother of our Lord, and the Mother of us all, This community 
of*characteristics is in accordance with the general teaching of 
the New Testament respecting the mystery of the communion 
between our Lord Himself and those who are made members of 
His Body by new birth. And for this reason, “The Song of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary” has a peculiar fitness as the daily song of 
the Church of Christ, since God has honoured it with so great 
honour, in having made it the means by which the work of 
the Incarnation is made effectual to the salvation of souls. The 
Blessed Virgin Mother offered up her thanksgiving to God because 
He had remembered His mercy and His ancient covenant, by 
making His Son incarnate through her; and the Church offers 
up her thanksgiving to Him, because, through her, the mystical 
body of Christ is being continually brought forth to His greater 
glory. 

It is also to be observed of this, as of the other Canticles, that 
it is sung to the praise of the Personal Word, as revealed in the 
Written Word; to the praise of God in Christ, revealed in the 
Old Testament Scriptures as well as in the New. 


CANTATE DOMINO. 


This Psalm was not used in any other way than in its place in 
the Psalter (Mattins, on Saturdays) until 1552, when it was 
inserted here as an alternative responsory to the first lesson, pro- 
bably for the purpose of meeting the objections to the Magnificat 

F 


34: 


read in the 
Psalns. 


SING unto the Lord a new 
song + for he hath done marvel- 
lous things. 

With his own right hand, and with 
his holy arm + hath he gotten himself 
the victory. 

The Lord declared his salvation + his 
righteousness hath he openly shewed 
in the sight of the heathen. 

He hath remembered his mercy and 
truth toward the house of Israel + and 
all the ends of the world have seen the 
salvation of our God. 

Shew yourselves joyful unto the 
Lord, all ye lands ¢ sing, rejoice and 
give thanks. 

Praise the Lord upon the harp : 
sine to the harp with a psalm of 
thanksgiving. 

With trumpets also and shawms ¢ 
O shew yourselves joyful before the 
Lord the King. 

Let the sea make a noise, and all 
that therein is + the round world, and 
they that dwell therein. 

Let the floods clap their hands, and 
let the hills be joyful together before 
the Lord +: for he cometh to judge 
the earth. 

With righteousness shall he judge 
the world + and the people with equity. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 


ordinary course of the 


Cantate Do- 
mino. Ps. 
xevill. 


EVENING PRAYER. 


Psalmus xcvii. 


ANTATE Domino canticum no- Salisbury Use. 
vum: quia mirabilia fecit. 


Salvavit sibi dextera ejus; et bra- 
chium sanctum ejus. 


Notum fecit Dominus salutare suum: 
in conspectu gentium revelavit justi- 
tiam suam. 

Recordatus est misericordiz suze: et 
veritatis suze Domui Israél, 

Viderunt omnes termini terre salu- 
tare Dei nostri: jubilate Deo omnis 
terra: cantate et exultate et psallite. 


Psallite Domino in cithara, in ci- 
thara et voce psalmi: in tubis ductili- 
bus, et voce tube cornez. 

Jubilate in conspectu Regis Domini: 
moveatur mare et plenitudo ejus: orbis 
terrarum et qui habitant in eo. 

Flumina plaudent manu, simul 
montes exultabunt a conspectu Domi- 
nl: quoniam venit judicare terram. 

Judicabit orbem terrarum in justitia: 
et populos in equitate. 


which had been raised by the Puritans. It bears some resem- 
blance, in its latter verses, to the Benedicite Omnia Opera, the 
works of God by land and sea being called upon to join in His 
praise. 

It has also been suggested that there are parallel expressions in 
the Cantate and the Magnificat, which seem to indicate that the 
latter is in some degree founded on the former. These are the 


following :-— 


Magnificat. 

He that is mighty hath mag- 
nified me [or “done to me great 
things ”’]. 

He hath shewed strength 
with His arm : He hath scat- 
tered the proud. . . He hath 
put down the mighty. 

His mercy is on them that 
fear Him : throughout all gene- 
rations. 


Cantate Domino. 
He hath done marvellous 


things. 


With His own right hand 
and with His holy arm : hath 
He gotten Himself the victory. 


The Lord declared His ‘sal- 
vation : His righteousness hath 
He openly shewed in the sight 
of the heathen. 


He hath remembered His 
mercy and truth toward the 
house of Israel. 


He remembering His mercy 
hath holpen His servant Israel. 


Whether this parallel is accidental or not, it may serve to 
show the Evangelical character of the Psalm which is permitted 
to be used as a substitute for the Song of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary. Yet it does not seem as if there was ever any necessity 
for superseding the latter; and, where choice is given, the 
Magnificat may well be preferred as being offered up daily to 
God’s praise by the whole Catholic Church. When Evensong is 
repeated, it may be considered advisable to use the alternative 
Canticle at one of the Services ; but, in that case, the Magnificat 
should always be said at the later Evensong. 


NUNC DIMITTIS 


The “Song of Simeon” is another Canticle in praise of the 
manifestation of the Incarnate Word. It has been used at Com- 
pline or at Vespers throughout the Church from the earliest ages, 
being mentioned in the Apostolical Constitutions (written in the 


EVENING PRAYER. 


] Then a Lesson of the New Testament, as it 
is appointed: And after that, Nunc dimittis 
(or the Song of Simeon) in English, as 
Solloweth, 
ORD, now lettest thou thy ser- 
vant depart in peace + according 
to thy word. 

For mine eyes have seen ¢ thy sal- 
vation. 

: Which thou hast prepared + before 
the face of all people ; 

To be a light to lighten the Gen- 
tiles + and to be the glory of thy 
people Israel. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son : and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 


Nune Dimittis, 
Lake ii. 29, 


{ Or else this Psalm; except it be on the 
Twelfth day of the month. 


Deus Miserea- 


G OD be merciful unto us, and bless 
tur, Ps.\xvii. 


us ¢ and shew us the light 
of his countenance, and be merciful 
unto us. 

That thy way may be known upon 
earth ; thy saving health among all 
nations. ; 

Let the people praise thee, O God + 
yea, let all the people praise thee. 

O let the nations rejoice and be 
glad + for thou shalt judge the folk 
righteously, and govern the nations 
upon earth. 


Canticum Simeonis. Luce ii. 


UNC dimittis servum tuum, Do- Salisbury Use. 
mine: secundum verbum tuum 


in pace. 

Quia viderunt oculi mei: salutare 
tuum. 

Quod parasti: ante faciem omnium 
populorum ; 


Lumen ad revelationem gentium: 
et gloriam plebis tue Israél. 


Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui 
Sancto. 

Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et 
semper, et in secula~ seculorum. 


Amen. 


Psalmus \xyi. 


EUS misereatur nostri, et bene- 
dicat nobis: illuminet vultum 
suum super nos, et misereatur nostri. 


Salisbury Use. 


Ut cognoscamus in terra viam 
tuam: in omnibus gentibus salutare 
tuum. 

Confiteantur tibi populi Deus: con- 
fiteantur tibi populi omnes. 

Letentur et exultent gentes, quo- 
niam judicas populos in equitate, et 
gentes in terra dirigis. 


early part of the fifth century, at the latest) as an Evening 
Canticle. There are English versions of it as early as the four- 
teenth century. 

The Nune Dimittis is so singularly fitted for Evensong, as to 
seem as if written for the purpose. Like the words of David, “I 
will lay me down in peace and take my rest, for it is Thou, Lord, 
only that makest me to dwell in safety ;” it is the aspiration of 
that faith which can behold Christ lightening the darkness of all 
night, and fulfilling the words of the prophet, ‘It shall come to 
pass, that at evening time it shall be light.” As the Gospels of 
the Morning Lessons reveal to us the “ Day-spring” from on 
high “ visiting us,” so the Epistles of the Evening Lessons reveal 
the Light of Christ’s glory enlightening the Gentile as well as 
the Jewish world. 

In the old Evening Services of the Church of England, there 
were touching references to death, and the rest of the departed ; 
and immediately after Nwne Dimittis, in Passion and Holy 
Week, was sung the glorious anthem “ Media vita in morte 
sumus,” which is now used only in the Burial Service. This close 
connexion between the Song of Simeon and the idea of our 
Blessed Lord’s Passion arises out of the occasion on which it was 
first uttered, the Presentation, which was in effect a Sacrifice ; 
and of the words of Simeon which immediately followed, 
“ Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in 
Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; yea, a 
sword shall pierce through thine own soul also, that the thoughts 


of many hearts may be revealed.” [Luke ii. 34, 35.] And such 
a connexion of ideas cannot fail to remind us also of our Lord’s 
own departing words, “Father, into Thy hands I commend My 
Spirit,” when “He saw of the travail of His soul,” as the eyes of 
Simeon saw the salvation of the Lord, “and was satisfied.” 
This calm repose of faith on God,—looking for a present rest on 
the bosom of Jesus, and a future rest in His Paradisal Presence,— 
has always been the tone of Evensong in the Church ; and is one 
that will always be in harmony with the feelings of those whose 
day has been a day of work; who look solemnly, yet not 
gloomily, towards that coming night when no man can work; 
and whose eyes are fixed with hope on that “rest which remaineth 
for the people of God,” through the salvation which Christ has 
prepared. 


DEUS MISEREATUR. 


This Psalm was inserted, like the Cantate Domino, in 1552, 
but was familiar in the older services, being the fourth fixed Psalm 
at Lauds on Sundays. It was also part of the Office of Bidding 
Prayers which was used every Sunday. Although of a more 
jubilant character than the Nune Dimittis, it has several features 
in common with it, besides this connexion with an office in which 
the departed were commemorated. Like that, it praises God for 
the extension of the Gospel: and as Simeon offers thanksgiving 
that his eyes have seen the salvation of God, so David in this 

F 2 


36 


Let the people praise thee, O God + 
yea, let all the people praise thee. 

Then shall the earth bring forth her 
increase ¢ and God, even our own God, 
shall give us his blessing. 

God shall bless us + and all the ends 
of the world shall fear him. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 

q Then shall be said or sung the Apostles’ 
Creed by the Minister and the people, 
standing. 

BELIEVE in God the Father 
Almighty, Maker of heaven and 
earth : 

And in Jesus Christ his only Son 
our Lord, Who was conceived by the 


[See other refer- 
ences in Morn- 
ing Prayer.] 

Heb. x. 23. 

2 Chron. xx. 20. 

Deut. vi. 4, 5. 

Mal. iv. 10. 

Exod. vi. 3. 

John i. 18, 41, 42. 
vi. 69. 


EVENING PRAYER. 


Confiteantur tibi populi Deus, con- Salisbury Use. 
fiteantur tibi populi omnes, terra dedit 
fructum suum. 
Benedicat nos Deus, Deus noster; 
benedicat nos Deus: et metuant eum 
omnes fines terre, 


Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui 


Sancto. 

Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et 
semper, et in secula seculorum. 
Amen, 


[Credo i. 


BILEUVE in god, fadir almy3ti, 
makere of heuene and of erthe: 
and in iesu crist the sone of him, oure 
lord, oon aloone: which is conceyued 
of the hooli gost: born of marie 


Prymer Version 
_ of XIVth cen- 
tury. 


Psalm prays that the Light of His countenance may be shown to 
us, and His saving health known among gail nations. 

Occasions may arise when this Canticle is peculiarly appropriate : 
but for ordinary Evensong (and especially for the later of two ser- 
vices) it is better always to keep to the ancient spirit and practice 
of the Church, and use ‘he Nune Dimittis. 


THE APOSTLES’ CREED. 


A large number of early English versions of the Creed are ex- 
tant. The one in the right-hand column above is taken from the 
ancient Prymer contained in Maskell’s Monumenta Ritualia, The 
others which follow this note are copied from Professor Heurtley’s 
«Harmonia Symbolica,” where several others, of various dates, 
from the ninth to the sixteenth century, are to be found !. 

IXth Century. From a US. (No. 427) im the Lambeth Library. 

Ic gelyfe on God Feder zlmihtigne, Scyppend heofonan and 
eorthan ; And on Helend Crist, Sunu his anlican, Drihten urne ; 
Se the wes geacnod of tham Halgan Gaste, Aceenned of Marian 
tham medene; Gethrowad under tham Pontiscan Pilate, Gerod 
festnad, Dead and bebyrged; He nither astah to hel warum; 
Tham thriddan dege he aras fram deadum; He astah to heofo- 
num; He sit to swythran hand God Feder wes exlmihtigan ; 
Thonan toweard deman tha cucan and tha deadan. Ie gelyfe 
Tha halgan gelathunge riht gelyfdan; Halgana gemenysse; 
And forgyfnysse synna; Flesces eriste; And thet ece lif. Si 
hit swa. 


[The next is of great interest from the illustration it affords of 
the necessity thrust on the Church of England during a part of 
the middle ages, of teaching her people in three different lan- 
guages. It also represents the three principal elements of modern 
English. | 
Circ. A.D. 1125. From a MS. (R. 17) in the Library of Trinity 

College, Cambridge. 
Ic gelefe on Gode Federa zelwealdend, 


Jeo crei en Deu le Perre tut puant, 
Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem, 


Sceppend heofones and eorthan ; 
Le criatur de ciel e de terre ; 
Creatorem cceli et terre ; 


1 The student should compare Professor Heurtley’s book with Walchius’ 
Bibliotheca Symbolica for the earliest forms of the Creed. 


And on Helende Crist, Suna, his anlich, 
E en Jesu Crist, sun Fil unicl, 
Et in Jesum Christum Filium ejus unicum. 


Drihten ure ; 
Nostre Seinur ; 
Dominum nostrum ; 


Syo the akynned is of tham Halig Gaste, 
Ki concevz est del Seint Esprit, 
Qui conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, 


Boran of M[{arian tham meeden ; | 
Nez de Marie la..... 
Natus ex Maria Virgine : 


' 


[Gethrowode under tham Pontiscam] Pilate, 
and on rode ahangen, 

* * *& * * * ntien Pilate crucifiez, 
Passus sub Pontio Pilato, crucifixus. 


Dead and beberiged ; 
Morz, e seveliz ; 
Mortuus, et sepultus ; 


He adun asteh to hella ; 
Descedied as enfers ; 
Descendit ad inferna ; 


Thriddan degge he aras fram deatha ; 
Et tierz jurn relevad de morz ; 
Tertia die resurrexit a mortuis ; 


He astah to heofone; 
Muntad as ciels ; 
Ascendit ad celos ; 


Sit on switran healfe Godes Federes ealmihtig ; 
Siet a la destre de Deu Perre tres tut puant ; 
Sedet ad dexteram Dei Patris omnipotentis ; 


Thanen he is to cumene, and to demenna quiche and deade. 
Diluc est avenir jugier les vis e les morz. 
Inde venturus judicare vivos et mortuos. 


Ie gelefe on Halig Gast ; 
Jeo crei el Seint Espirit ; 
Credo in Spiritum Sanctum ; 


Isa. vii. 14. 

Luke i. 30, 31. 

Mark xv. 15—29, 
24. 46, 

Eph. iv. 9, 10, 

Luke xxiv. 50— 
53 


Acts vii. 55, 56. 
Rom. xiv. 9, 10, 
2 Tim. iv. 1. 

1 John v. 7. 
John xv. 26. 
Matt. iii. 11. 16. 
Eph. v. 27—32. 
1 John i. 3. 7. 
John xi. 23—25, 
1 Cor. xv. 12—19, 
Mark ix. 43—49, 
1 Pet. i. 4, 

Rev. i. 7. 


Luke xi. 2. 


EVENING PRAYER, 


Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, 
Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was 
crucified, dead, and buried; He de- 
scended into hell; The third day he 
rose again from the dead, He ascended 


_ into Heaven, And sitteth on the right 


hand of God the Father Almighty ; 


From thence he shall come to judge | 


the quick and the dead. 

I believe in the Holy Ghost ; The 
holy Catholick Church; The Commu- 
nion of Saints; The Forgiveness of 
sins; The Resurrection of the body, 
And the life everlasting. Amen. 


§ And after that, these Prayers following, all 
devoutly kneeling ; the Minister first pro- 
nouncing with a loud voice, 


The Lord be with you. 
Answer. 
And with thy spirit. 
Minister. 
4 Let us pray. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. 
Christ, have mercy upon us. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. 


| Then the Minister, Clerks, and people, shall 
say the Lord’s Prayer with a loud voice. 


UR Father, which art in heaven, 
Hallowed be thy Name. Thy 
kingdom come. Thy will be done in 
earth, As it is in heaven. Give us 
this day our daily bread. And forgive 
us our trespasses, As we forgive them 
that trespass against us. And lead us 
not into temptation; But deliver us 
from evil. Amen. 


37 


maiden : suffride passioun undir pounce 
pilat : crucified, deed, and biried: he 
wente doun to hellis: the thridde day 
he roos ajen fro deede: he steiz to 
heuenes: he sittith on the rijt syde 
of god the fadir almy3ti: thenus he 
is to come for to deme the quyke and 
deede, I beleue in the hooli goost: 
feith of hooli chirche: communynge 
of seyntis: forsyuenesse of synnes: 
ajenrisyng of fleish, and euerlastynge 


lyf, So be it.] 


: $ Prymer Version 
[Preie we. of XI Vth cen- 
Lord, have merci on us. act 
Crist, have merci on us. 
Lord, have merci on us. | 
(ITATEP ipadv 6 &v Tots ovpavois, Aov. xi. 2. 


€ / b." ” VA b , e 
ayiacOntw TO Ovoud cour édAOéTw 1) 
Bacirkela cour yevnOntwa oO Oérnpa 
cou, 
Tov dptov nuav tov émovovoy didouv 
eer.) \ > € / \ ” Cc oA 
nuiv TO KAP auépavy Kal adeg uiv 
Tas apapTias Huav, Kal yap avTol 
> / Sen OES l cA \ \ 
adiewev Tavtt opelAovTs Huivs Kab pn 
cloeveyKns Huas els Tepacwov, GAG 
pdoat }uas aro Tov Trovnpod. | 


@s év ovpave, Kal éml THS Ys. 


And on halig gesomnunge fulfremede ; 
Seinte Eglise Catholica ; 


Sanctam 


Halegan 


Ecclesiam Catholicam ; 


hiniennesse ; 


La communiun des seintes choses ; 
Sanctorum communionem ; 


Forgyfenysse synna ; 
Remissium des pecchiez ; 
Remissionem peccatorum ; 


Flesces up arisnesse ; 
Resurrectiun de charn ; 
Carnis resurrectionem ; 


Lif eche 


Vie pardurable 
Vitam eternam 


Beo hit swa. 


Seit feit. 
Amen. 


XITIth Century. From a MS. im the British Museum, Cleo- 
patra, B. vi., fol. 201. 


Hi true in God, Fader Hal-michttende, That makede heven 
and herdeth ; And in Jhesu Krist, is ane lepi Sone, Hure Laverd ; 
That was bigotin of the Hali Gast, And born of the mainden 
Marie; Pinid under Punce Pilate, festened to the rode, Ded, and 
dulvun; Licht in til helle; The thride dai up ras fra dede to 
live; Steg intil hevenne ; Sitis on his Fadir richt hand, Fadir al- 
waldand ; He then sal cume to deme the quike an the dede. Hy 
troue hy theli Gast; And hely * * kirke; The samninge of 
halges; Forgifnes of sinnes; Uprisigen of fleyes; And life 
withuten ende. Amen. 


From the Prymer of 1538, Maskell’s Monwmenta Ritualia, 
ii, 241. 

I beleue in god the father almyghty, maker of heuen and 
earthe ; And in Jesu Chryst hys onely sonne, our Lorde; whiche 
was conceyued by the holy ghoste, And borne of the virgyn 
Mary ; which suffred deathe under Pons Pylate, and was crucifyed, 
deade, and buryed; which descendyd to hell; The thyrde day 


38 


"| Then the Priest standing up shall say, 
O Lord, shew thy merey upon us. 
Answer. 

And grant us thy salvation. 
Priest. 

O Lord, save the Queen. 
Answer. 


And mercifully hear us when we 
call upon thee. 


Priest. 
Endue thy Ministers with righte- 
ousness. 
Answer. 


And make thy chosen people joyful. 
Priest. 

O Lord, save thy people. 
Answer. 

And bless thine inheritance. 
Priest. 

Give peace in our time, O Lord. 
Answer. 

Because there is none other that 
fighteth for us, but only thou, O God. 
Priest. 

O God, make clean our hearts with- 
in us. 
Answer. 
And take not thy holy Spirit from 
us. 


G Then shall follow three Collects; the first of 
the Day ; the second for Peace; the third 
for Aid against all Perils, as hereafter 
followeth: which two last Collects shall be 
daily said at Evening Prayer without 
alteration. 


§ The Second Collect at Evening Prayer. 
GOD, from whom all holy de- 


sires, all good counsels, and all 
just works do proceed ; Give unto thy 
servants that peace which the world 
cannot give; that both our hearts may 


Prov. xvi. 1. viii. 


14, 
Phil. ii. 13. 
Isa, xxvi. 12. 
John xiv. 27, 
Deut. v: 29. 
Rev. xxii. 14. 
Luke i. 70, 71. 74, 
75. 


EVENING PRAYER. 


[Lord, shew to us thi merci. Prymer Version 


of XIVth cen- 
tury. 


And 3eue to us thi saluacion.] 


[Lord, syue pees in oure daies, for Prymer Version 
ther is noon othir that shal fy3te for ty: 
us, but thou lord oure god. | 


EUS, a quo sancta desideria, Salisbury Use. 
ane } Greg. and Gelas. 
recta consilia, et justa sunt Missa pro pace. 
opera: da servis tuis lam quam mun- 
dus dare non potest pacem: ut et 
corda nostra mandatis tuis dedita, et, 


rose from death to lyfe; whiche ascendyd into heuen ; and syttheth 
at the ryt hande of God the Father almyghtye; And from thens 
shall come for to judge both the quycke and the deade. I beleue 
in the holy Ghoste ; The holy churche catholike ; The communyon 
of sayntes; The remyssyon of synnes; The resurrectyon of the 
flesshe ; And the lyfe euerlastynge. So be it. 


THE SECOND COLLECT. 
[Prymer Version of XIVth Century. 


Preie we. For the pees. Deus a quo. 
God, of whom ben hooli desiris, rijt councels and iust werkis : 
jyue to thi seruantis pees that the world may not jeue, that in 


our hertis youun to thi commandementis, and the drede of enemyes 
putt awei, owre tymes be pesible thur} thi defendyng. Bi oure 
lord iesu crist, thi sone, that with thee lyueth and regneth in the 
unitie of the hooli goost god, bi all worldis of worldis, So be it. | 

This prayer is the Collect of the same Missa pro pace, of 
which the Morning Collect for Peace is the “ Post-Communion.” 
It also was used at Lauds, at Vespers, and in the Litany in the 
ancient Services: and dates from the Sacramentary of Gelasius, 
A.D. 494. 

Coming as it originally did, at the close of Evensong, it formed 
a sweet cadence of prayer, fitly concluding with the following 
short but touching collect. It follows up very exactly the tone 
of the Nunc Dimittis, and rings with a gentle echo of the peace 


EVENING PRAYER. 


ee eel, 38. be set to obey thy commandments, and 
also that by thee we being defended 
from the fear of our enemies may pass 
our time in rest and quietness; through 
the merits of Jesus Christ our Saviour. 
- Amen. 


"| The Third Collect, for aid against all Perils. 
IGHTEN our darkness, we be- 


2 Sam. xxii. 29. 


PPSiekei D5) 6; 
Retake sis. seech thee, O Lord ; eae a ay 
mpev =~ great mercy defend us from all perils 


and dangers of this night; for the 
love of thy only Son, our Saviour, 
Jesus Christ. Amen, 


| In Quires and Places where they sing, here 
followeth the Anthem. 


| A Prayer for the Queen's Majesty. 
LORD our heavenly Father, 


high and mighty, King of kings, 
Lord of lords, the only Ruler of princes, 
who dost from thy throne behold all 
the dwellers upon earth ; most heartily 
we beseech thee with thy favour to 
behold our most gracious Sovereign 
Lady, Queen VICTORIA ; and so re- 
plenish her with the grace of thy holy 
Spirit, that she may alway incline to 
thy will, and walk in thy way: Endue 
her plenteously with heavenly gifts ; 
grant her in health and wealth long to 
live; strengthen her that she may van- 
quish and overcome all her enemies ; 
and finally, after this life,she may attain 
everlasting joy and felicity ; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


¥ A Prayer for the Royal Family. 
LMIGHTY God, the fountain of 
all goodness, we humbly beseech 
thee to bless Albert Edward Prince of 
Wales, the Princess of Wales, and all 


39 


hostium sublata formidine, tempora Salisbury Use. 
sint tua protectione tranquilla. 


LLUMINA, quesumus, Domine satisbury Use. 
4 Greg. and Gelas. 
Deus, tenebras nostras: et totius — Orat. ad Com- 
. Ss ny an “ pletorium. 
hujus noctis insidias tu a nobis repelle 
propitius. Per Dominum nostrum 
Jesum Christum Filium tuum, qui 
tecum vivit et regnat in unitate Spi- 
ritus Sancti Deus, per omnia sxcula 
seculorum, Amen. 


[9 A Prayer for the Kynge. 


OST merciful father, al we thy 

seruauntes by dutie,and children 
by grace, do beseche thee mooste hum- 
bly, to preserue Edwarde the Syxt thy 
sonne and seruaunte, and oure Kynge 
and gouernour: Sowe in hym good 
Lorde suche seede of vertue now in 
hys yonge age, that many yeares this 
Realme maye enioye much fruite of 
this thy blessynge in hym, throughe 
Jesus Christe our Lorde. Amen.] 


Prymer of 1553. 


that lies beyond this world, as well as of the peace which the 
world cannot give, nor the soul entirely receive while it is in the 
world. In the morning collect the tone of the prayer was that of 
one who asks God of His mercy to bless and co-operate with his 
own in their strife against spiritual foes: but in the evening the 
words are more those of one who is no longer able to strive 
against his enemies, but looks to his Lord God alone to be his 
defence and his shield. 

[Between the second and third Collect at Evening Prayer, 
Bishop Cosin wished to insert the second of the Collects appended 
to the Communion Service, “O Almighty Lord, and everlasting 
God,” under the title of “The Collect for grace and protection,” 
but the alteration was rejected. The idea seems to have been 
taken from the York Litany.] 


THE THIRD COLLECT. 


This prayer is of equal antiquity with the preceding: and is 
expressly appointed to be used at Evening Prayer in the Sacra- 
mentary of Gelasius. It was taken into our Evensong from the 
Compline of the Salisbury Use. Here again the Nune Dimittis 
is followed up in its tone: but the words are taken almost lite- 
rally from the Psalms, which have been the great storehouse of 
Prayer as well as Praise to the Church of all ages. < Consider 
and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes that I sleep not 
in death. Thou also shalt light my candle: the Lord my God 
shall make my darkness to belight. Yea, the darkness is no dark- 
ness with Thee, but the night is as clear as the day : the darkness 
and light to Thee are both alike. He will not suffer thy foot to be 


40 


the Royal Family: Endue them with 
thy holy Spirit ; enrich them with thy 
heavenly grace; prosper them with all 
happiness ; and bring them to thine 
everlasting kingdom; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


{ A Prayer for the Clergy and People. 
LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
who alone workest great mar- 
vels; Send down upon our Bishops, 
and Curates, and all Congregations 
committed to their charge, the health- 
ful Spirit of thy grace; and that they 
may truly please thee, pour upon them 
the continual dew of thy blessing. 
Grant this, O Lord, for the honour of 
our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus 
Christ. Amen. 


§ A Prayer of St. Chrysostom. 
LMIGHTY God, who hast given 
us grace at this time with one 
accord to make our common supplica- 
tions unto thee; and dost promise, 
that when two or three are gathered 
together in thy Name, thou wilt grant 
their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, 
the desires and petitions of thy ser- 
vants, as may be most expedient for 
them; granting us in this world 
knowledge of thy truth, and in the 
world to come life everlasting. Amen. 

2 Cor. xiii. 

HE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and the love of God, and the fel- 
lowship of the Holy Ghost, be with 


us all evermore. Amen. 


EVENING PRAYER, 


Prymer Version 
of XIVth cen- 
tury. 


LMYGHTI god, euerlastynge, 
that aloone doost many wondres, 
schewe the spirit of heelful grace upon 
bisschopes thi seruantis, and vpon alle 
the congregacion betake to hem: and 
zeete in the dewe of thi blessynge that 
thei plese euermore to the in trouthe. 
Bi crist oure lord, So be it. 


Here endeth the Order of Evening Prayer throughout the Year, 


moved: and He that keepeth thee will not sleep, Behold, He that 
keepeth Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord Him- 
self is thy keeper: the Lord is thy defence upon thy right hand. 
So that the sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the moon 
by night. He shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter; 
and from the noisome pestilence. He shall defend thee under 
His wings, and thou shalt be safe under His feathers: His faith- 
fulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt 
not be afraid for any terror by night: nor for the arrow that 
flieth by day: for the pestilence that walketh in darkness: nor 
for the sickness that destroyeth in the noon-day. For Thou art 
my strong rock, and my castle: be Thou also my guide, and 
lead me for Thy Name’s sake. Into Thy hands I commend my 
spirit: for Thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, Thou God of truth. 
I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest; for it is Thou, 
Lord, only that makest me dwell in safety.” 

Such are words from the Psalms of David which may be taken 
as a Scriptural comment upon this short but condensed Collect. 
They show us how literally the latter must be taken if we are 
to enter into its true spirit: how much solemn reference to the 


present and the future may be drawn into the compass of a few 
words of prayer: and what a fulness of devotion is contained in 
even the shortest of those forms which have come down to us 
as the day by day utterances of the Church of God for so many 
ages, 

To meet objections which were made to the words of this prayer, 
Bishop Cosin has altered it in his Durham Book, to “ Lighten 
the darkness of our hearts, we beseech Thee, O Lord, by Thy 
gracious visitation, and of Thy great mercy ..... from all ter- 
rors and dangers of the night .....” Happily the ancient words 
were retained. 

The peculiar fitness of these words to end a Service which is 
really offered in the Evening, is so great, that one cannot wonder 
at the reluctance shown by the Clergy and People to add on the 
Intercessory Prayers which now follow. And, although the 
Rubric directing these prayers to be used after the Anthem is 
not inserted in the Evening Service, its omission by no means 
weakens the force of what has been said in the Notes on Morning 
Prayer as to such a termination of the Daily Service. 


AT MORNING PRAYER, 


§| Upon these Feasts ; Christmas-day, the Epi- 
phany, Saint Matthias, Easter-day, Ascen- 
sion-day, Whitsun-day, Saint John Baptist, 
Saint James, Saint Bartholomew, Saint Mat- 
thew, Saint Simon and Saint Jude, Saint 
Andrew, and upon Trinity-Sunday, shall be 
sung or said at Morning Prayer, instead of 
the Apostles’ Creed, this Confession of our 
Christian Faith, commonly called The Creed 
of Saint Athanasius, by the Minister and 


Quicunque people standing. 

lt. A 
Fano: HOSOEVER will be saved : 
tles’ and 


before all thingss it is necessary 
that he hold the Catholick Faith. 


Nicene Creeds.] 
Mark xvi. 15, 16, 
Jude 3, 20. 


Symbolum Athanasii. 
UICUNQUE vult salvus esse; Salisbury Use. 


ante omnia opus est ut teneat 
cathoheam fidem. 


THE ATHANASIAN CREED. 


It was the ancient usage of the Church of England (from the 
7th century to the 16th) to sing the “ Symbolum Athanasii” 
every day, rather as a kind of Christian Psalm than a Creed, im- 
mediately after the Psalms of the Office, that of Prime. In the 
reformed Breviary of Quignonez it was confined to Sunday use. 
In the first edition of the English Prayer Book (1549) the Atha- 
nasian Creed was directed to be said on six Festivals, those of 
Christmas, Epiphany, Easter, Ascension, Pentecost, and Trinity : 
and seven Saints’ days were added in 1552, so as to make thirteen 
days altogether ; its recitation thus becoming a monthly instead 
of a weekly one, as in the Roman, or a daily one as in the ancient 
English Church. 

In the Durham Prayer Book, Bishop Cosin has substituted for 
the latter words of the Rubric, “one verse by the priest, and 
another by the people, or in Colleges, and where there is a Quire, 
by sides.” 

The English of our present version is substantially identical 
with that of Bishop Hilsey, as printed in the Prymer of 1539: 
and entitled “The Symbole of the great Doctour Athanasius, 
dayly red in the Church.” The Creed does not appear in the 
earlier English Prymers; but vernacular translations of it are 
extant of as ancient a date as the ninth century, and many in 
later English. 

Although this “Confession of our Christian Faith” is “ com- 
monly called the Creed of St. Athanasius,” it cannot be traced 
back to that great champion of “the right Faith,” and is not 
likely to have been written in Greek: no Greek copy of it being 
known which is much more than four centuries old: nor any 
spoken of by any writer earlier than a.p. 1200. It is found in 
Latin as early as A.D. 570, when a commentary was written upon 
it by Venantius Fortunatus, previously to his consecration as 
Bishop of Poictiers!. From such a commentary being written, 
it may be concluded that the subject of it was already in public 
use in Divine Service, as a Confession of Faith, in the Church of 
France; but it was not adopted by the Church of Rome until 
A.D. 930. 

This Confession of Faith is attributed by Waterland to St. 
Hilary of Arles, who died A.D. 449, but by Harvey [History and 
Theology of the Three Creeds, p. 580] to Victricius, Bishop of 
Rouen, fifty years earlier, i. e. at the close of the fourth and the 
beginning of the fifth centuries. Some imputations had been 
cast on the orthodoxy of this Apostolic Bishop and Confessor : 


1 This commentary may be found at the end of Waterland’s History of 
the Athanasian Creed: p. 194 of the Christian Knowledge Society’s edition, 


and there are strong reasons for supposing that he composed it as 
an answer to these charges of false doctrine, and thus expounded 
his belief before Anastasius, who was Bishop of Rome until April, 
A.D. 402. From this circumstance Mr. Harvey considers the pre- 
sent name of the Creed to have arisen through the errors of 
seribes. In a Gallican MS. of the ninth century, it is attributed 
to “ Anasthasius,” the name of Victricius being expunged from 
the title ; anda Commentator entitles it “ Fides Anastasii Pape.” 
Mr. Harvey thinks that the title “ Fides 8. Athanasii,” has been 
substituted by a writer who knew nothing of Anastasius, and 
thought that he was correcting an error rightly instead of 
wrongly : and whose own error was so plausible that it has been 
followed very generally in subsequent ages. The name of Atha- 
nasius is not connected with it in the earliest MSS., nor in the 
Commentary of Venantius Fortunatus, but it is simply entitled 
“ides Catholica :” yet, as early as the Council of Autun, A.D. 
670, it is called “ Fides Sancti Athanasii Presulis,’’ and almost 
always afterwards either by that title or some other,—as ‘‘ Sermo 
Athanasii de Fide,’—in which that saint’s name is included. 

The opinion of Mr. Harvey that it was written by Victricius, 
A.D. 401, is supported by him with evidence of which the follow- 
ing is his own summary, quoted from page 583 of the History 
and Theology of the Three Creeds :—* For four several reasons, 
therefore, it is quite as probable that the authorship of the Creed 
may be assigned to Victricius, as to Hilary. 1. Its careful, well- 
considered terms, are more consistent with the mature age of the 
former, who had attained the honour of Confessor forty years 
before the date now assigned to the Creed in 401, than with the 
youth of the latter, who was only eight and twenty years of age, 
when he is supposed by Waterland to have composed this Creed, 
on his advancement to the episcopate. 2. Its style, though not 
that of an apology in vindication of the writer’s faith, agrees well 
with the supposition, that he was accused of the errors that he 
anathematizes. 8. Its matter is exactly parallel with the sub- 
jects, upon which Victricius, if we may judge from the expressions 
of Paulinus, was called to defend himself. With respect to both 
of these last particulars, the supposition that Hilary should have 
been the author, is singularly unsatisfactory to the judgment. 
His exposition of faith, on entering upon his episcopal office, would 
scarcely have been pointed with anathemas, that the history. of 
his time persuades us were not required. Indeed the Creed can 
only be assigned to Hilary upon the supposition, that Apollina- 
rianism infested the Gallican Church at the date of his appoint- 
ment to the See of Arles; a supposition wholly contrary to fact. 
But since we know, that Pelagian tenets had then taken a firm 
root in the south of France, we know also the direction that any 

G 


42 

Rev eivis,19, Which Faith, except every one do 

eso ~~ keep whole and undefiled + without 
doubt he shall perish everlastingly. 

Mark xii. 32. And the Catholick Faith is this + 


Matt. xxviii. 19, 


That we worship one God in Trinity, 
and Trinity in Unity ; 


Joa Neither confounding the Persons ¢ 
or, Xi. . 
1 John v. 7. nor dividing the Substance. 


For there is one Person of the 
Father, another of the Son + and 
another of the Holy Ghost. 

But the Godhead of the Father, of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is 
all one + the Glory equal, the Majesty 
co-eternal. 

Such as the Father is, such is the 
Son + and such is the Holy Ghost. 

The Father uncreate, the Son un- 
create + and the Holy Ghost uncreate. 

The Father incomprehensible, the 


Matt. iii. 16, 17. 


John i. 1, 14. 
x. 30. xvi, 13—- 


15. 

Cf. Isa. vi. 1, 2; 3, 
with John xii. 
40,41, and Acts 
XXvViii. 25, 26. 


Acts xvii. 24, 28, 
John i. 1. 3, 
Job xxxiii, 4, 


Job xi. 7—9. 
1 Kings viii. 27. 


AT MORNING PRAYER. 


Quam nisi quisque integram, inVi0- Salisbury Use, 
latamque servaverit: absque dubio in 
eternum peribit. 

Fides autem catholica hee est, ut 
unum Deum in Trinitate: et Trini- 
tatem in Unitate veneremur. 

Neque confundentes personas, neque 
substantiam separantes, 

Alia est enim persona Patris, alia 
Filii: alia Spiritus Sancti. 


Sed Patris, et Fili, et Spiritus 
Sancti, una est Divinitas: equalis 
gloria, cozterna majestas. 

Qualis Pater, talis Filius: talis 
Spiritus Sanctus. 

Increatus Pater, increatus Filius, 
increatus Spiritus Sanctus. 

Immensus Pater, immensus Filius : 


inaugural exposition by Hilary must have taken, 4. Again, if 
Hilary had been the author of the Creed, his name must have 
commanded respect, and he would scarcely have met with such 
hard words from Pope Leo I., as may be found in the Epistle to 
the French Bishops, a.D. 445. On the other hand, the highly 
probable communication between Victricius and Anastasius, and 
the preparation of a confession of faith by the Gallican Confessor, 
indicates the process, whereby the name of Athanasius, by assimi- 
lation, may have been placed at length at the head of the Creed. 
For these reasons, therefore, it is considered, that the authorship 
of the Creed may be referred to the Confessor Victricius, Bishop 
of Rouen; and that the date of the production may be assigned 
to the year 401.” 

The question is too large an one to be followed out further in 
these pages; and the reader is referred for more detailed informa- 
tion to Waterland’s History of the Athanasian Creed, and to the 
work just quoted. But it may be stated as a result of the 
critical researches which have been brought to bear on the sub- 
ject, that this Creed must be regarded as of Gallican origin, and 
that it was written as we now have it, not later than the middle 
of the fifth century. 


§ Expository Notes on the Athanasian Creed. 


Whosoever will be saved, fc.| St. Augustine, in his Treatise 
on Faith and Works, says, “ Not only is a good life inseparable 
from Faith, but Faith itself is a good life.” This illustrates the 
assertion of the Creed that “before all things it is necessary to 
hold the Catholic Faith.” For faith necessarily precedes prac- 
tice: “‘ without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that 
cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a Rewarder 
of them that diligently seek Him.” [Heb.xi.6.] Now the belief 
that “ God is,” includes far more than a mere assent to the fact 
of His existence. To a mind capable of logical reflection, many 
corollaries must necessarily hang on to this fundamental axiom; 
the statement of such corollaries forms a more or less developed 
Creed; and thus belief in a Creed as the logical extension of the 
most primary truth, becomes necessary to salvation, or “ coming 
to God,” here and hereafter. 

whole and undefiled| The sin of not keeping the Catholic 
Faith whole and undefiled, can only be committed by those who 
know what it is in its integrity, and wilfully reject some portion 
of it: “every one” must therefore mean every one who has come 
to such a knowledge of the Faith, without asserting any thing 
respecting those who are ignorant of it. This is simply, there- 


fore, a declaration that heresy, or a wilful rejection of any part 
of the Catholic Faith, comes within the condemnation declared by 
our Lord, “He that believeth not shall be damned.” [Mark 
xvi. 16.] Those are in danger of this condemnation who have 
learned that there is a Trinity in Unity, Three Persons in One 
God, and yet wilfully reject the doctrine: but many believe this 
faithfully who have not sufficient education to follow out the 
doctrine into its consequences and necessary corollaries, as after- 
wards stated. On the other hand, those who understand these 
corollaries and reject them run into practical heresy. 

That we worship | The actual sense of this verse may be stated 
in other words as being, “ The Catholic Faith is this, that the 
God whom we worship is One God in Trinity, and Trinity in 
Unity.” Yet it is also true that as the end of all right Belief is 
right Worship, so the worship which alone ean be right is that 
which is founded on the Catholic Faith as here stated. 

Persons—Substance| “Person” is a word which marks the 
individual Unity of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost; ‘* Substance,” a word which marks their collective Unity. 
The latter word, which is synonymous with “ Essence,” or 
“Nature,” comprehends all the essential qualities of Deity, or that 
which God is: Eternity, Uncreatedness, Omnipotence, Omni- 
presence, are some of these essential qualities belonging to 
Deity, and not belonging to any other kind of being. To 
“divide the Substance” is to assert that these essential qualities, 
or any of them, belong to either Person of the Godhead separately 
from, or in a different degree from, the other Persons. 

Sabellius (A.D. 250) originated, in its most definite form, the 
heresy of “ confounding the Persons,” by declaring that Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost were but three names, aspects, or mani- 
festations of one God. Arius (a.D. 320) “ divided the Substance ” 
by alleging that the First Person existed before the other two 
Persons of the Blessed Trinity; thus attributing the essential 
quality of Eternity to One, and denying that it belonged to the 
others. These two errors lie at the root of all others; and the. 
following twenty verses of the Creed are an elaboration of 
the true doctrine, in a strict form of language, as a fence against 
them. 

incomprehensible] This word is represented in modern 
English by the word Omnipresent. In Bishop Hilsey’s transla- 
tion of the Creed, he uses the word “immeasurable,” which 
better answers to the Latin immensus. The word “incompre- 
hensible” has now the disadvantage of a metaphysical as well as 
a physical sense ; but when the Prayer Book was translated, it 


AT MORNING PRAYER. © 


Ps. cxxxix, 7; 
**«Tmmeasur- 
able,” Hilsey’s 
Primer, 1539, 
Isa. xiii. 16. 
Heb. i. 8. ix. 14. 
Rem aeG. ce 


Ghost incomprehensible. 

The Father eternal, the Son eternal + 
and the Holy Ghost eternal. 

And yet they are not three eternals : 

- but one eternal. 

As also there are not three incom- 
prehensibles, nor three uncreated + but 
one uncreated, and one incomprehen- 
sible. " 

So likewise the Father is Almighty, 
the Son Almighty + and the Holy 
Ghost Almighty. 

And yet they are not three Al- 
mighties + but one Almighty. 


Jer, xxiii. 24. 
Isa. vi. 3. 
Exod. iii. 14. 


Job xxxiii. 4. 

Rey. i. §. xv. 3. 
Max: 6. 

Matt. xii. 31, 32. 

Gen. xvii. 1. 


Eee So the Father is God, the Son is 
haan ti 16. God + and the Holy Ghost is God. 
And yet they are not three Gods : 
_ but one God. 
Gea So likewise the Father is Lord, the 
Zou. iil. 17. Son Lord + and the Holy Ghost Lord. 
And yet not three Lords + but one 
Lord. 
For like as we are compelled by the 
Christian verity + to acknowledge every 
Person by himself to be God and Lord ; 
an So are we forbidden by the Catholick 
Religion + to say, There be three Gods, 
or three Lords. 
John v. 26. The Father is made of none + neither 
created, nor begotten. 
eee 2. The Son is of the Father alone + 


not made, nor created, but begotten. 
The Holy Ghost is of the Father, 
and of the Son + neither made, nor 
created, nor begotten, but proceeding. 
So there is one Father, not three 
Fathers; one Son, not three Sons + 


John xiv, 26, 
Xv. 26. 


Son incomprehensible : and the Holy | immensus Spiritus Sanctus. 


43 


Salisbury Use. 


AMternus Pater, eternus 
eternus Spiritus Sanctus. 
Et tamen non tres zeterni sed unus 


Filius, 


eeternus. 

Sicut non tres increati, nec tres im- 
mensi: sed unus increatus, et unus 
immensus. 


Similiter omnipotens Pater, omni- 
potens Filius: omnipotens Spiritus 
Sanctus. 

Et tamen non tres omnipotentes : 
sed unus omnipotens. 

Ita Deus Pater, Deus Filius: Deus 
Spiritus Sanctus. 

Et tamen non tres Dii: sed unus 
est Deus. 

Ita Dominus Pater, Dominus Filius: 
Dominus Spiritus Sanctus. 

Et tamen non tres Domini: 
unus est Dominus. 

Quia sicut singillatim unamquam- 
que Personam Deum et Dominum con- 
fiteri Christiana veritate compellimur : 

Ita tres Deos aut Dominos dicere, 
eatholica religione probibemur. 


sed 


Pater a nullo est factus: nec creatus, 
nec genitus. 

Filius a Patre solo est: non factus, 
nec creatus, sed genitus. 

Spiritus Sanctus a Patre et Filio: 
non factus, nec creatus, nec genitus, 
sed procedens. 

Unus ergo Pater, non tres Patres ; 
unus Filius, non tres Filii; unus Spi- 


probably had only the latter meaning, expressing “that which 
cannot be grasped by, or contained within, any space.” It is 
only a strict form of stating the primary notion that “God is 
every where.” ‘If I climb up into Heaven, Thou art there: if 
I go down into hell, Thou art there also. If I take the wings of 
the morning: and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea; 
Even there also shall Thy hand lead me: and Thy right hand 
shall hold me.” (Ps. exxxix. 7—9.) Yet it is true that a mean- 
ing not intended in the Creed has developed itself through this 
change of language, for the Nature of God is as far beyond the 
grasp of the mind, as it is beyond the possibility of being con- 
tained within local bounds. 

For like as we are compelled, &c.| The Creed here declares 
the Divinity of each several Person of the Blessed Trinity to be 
so clearly set forth in “the Christian Verity,” that is in the 
Canon of Holy Scripture as received by the Church, that there 
is no escape for the reason from such a conclusion ;—we are com- 
pelled to believe, by the force of the evidence which God has 
vouchsafed us in the Holy Bible. It would be easy to show, at 
length, how literally true this is; but the marginal references 
appended to the text are intended to direct the reader to such 


evidence, and to supersede, by his private study, the necessity for 
occupying space here with the details of the Scriptural argu- 
ment. 

So are we forbidden by the Catholick Religion, §c.| (1) The 
evidence of doctrine is contained in the Holy Scriptures; the 
consequences, deductions, and inferences, which may be made from 
the contents of Holy Scripture, must be under the control of the 
Church. The one teaching us clearly that each Person of the 
Blessed Trinity possesses in Himself the inherent essential 
qualities of the Divine Nature, the other forbids us to draw any 
false conclusions from the truth thus revealed. (2) The final in- 
terpretation of Holy Scripture rests not with the individual Chris- 
tian, but with the collective Christian body; and where that 
collective Christian body has set forth an interpretation, the 
individual Christian will be, to say the least, unsafe in adopting, 
or wishing to adopt, any other. (3) The “Catholic Religion ” 
respecting the Unity of the Trinity, had been clearly decided and 
set forth at the General Councils held before this Creed was 
written. 

The Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son] The intro- 
duction of the words e¢ Filio into this Creed, shows that the 

G 2 


44 
one Holy Ghost, not three Holy 
Ghosts. 

a tg ta And in this Trinity none is afore, or 
after other + none is greater, or less 
than another ; 

John viii. 58. But the whole three Persons are co- 


eternal together + and co-equal. 


Hat tv; 10: So that in all things, as is aforesaid + 


2 Thess. iii. 5. 


— the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity 
in Unity is to be worshipped. 

Mark tx, 3t. He therefore, that will be saved : 
must thus think of the Trinity. 

ee te Furthermore, it is necessary to ever- 

1 John iy. 3. 


lasting salvation + that he also believe 
rightly the Incarnation of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

For the right Faith is, that we be- 
lieve and confess + that our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God, is God and 
Man ; 

God, of the substance of the Father, 
begotten before the worlds + and Man, 
of the substance of his Mother, born 
in the world ; 


1 John ii. 23. 
v. 20. 
1 Tim. iii. 16. 


Gal. iv. 4. 
Col. i. 17. ii. 9. 
Luke ii. 6, 7. 11. 


one De. Perfect God, and perfect Man + of 
Heb. i. 8. ii. 14. 
Oe eo aa reasonable soul and human flesh 
uke ii. 52. xxiv. 

39, 


subsisting. 


AT MORNING PRAYER. 


ritus Sanctus, non tres Spiritus Salisbury Use. 
Sancti. 
Et in hac Trinitate nihil prius aut 


posterius: nihil majus aut minus. 


Sed tote tres persone: cozterne 
sibi sunt et cozquales. 

Ita ut per omnia, sicut jam supra 
dictum est, et Unitas in Trinitate: et 
Trinitas in Unitate veneranda sit. 

Qui vult ergo salvus esse: ita de 
Trinitate sentiat. 

Sed necessarium est ad eternam 
salutem: ut incarnationem quoque 
Domini nostri Jesu Christi fideliter 
credat. 

Est ergo fides recta, ut credamus et 
confiteamur: quia Dominus noster 
Jesus Christus, Dei Filius, Deus et 
homo est. 

Deus est ex substantia Patris ante 
secula genitus: et homo est ex sub- 
stantia matris in seculo natus. 


Perfectus Deus, perfectus homo: ex 
anima rationali et humana carne sub- 
sistens. 


doctrine of the Double Procession of the Holy Ghost was received 
at a very early date, although “ Filioque” was not inserted in 
the Nicene Creed until the sixth century. The statement of it 
in this place is of a more general character than in the Nicene 
Creed [q. v.], but it is rejected by the Eastern Church. 

He therefore, that will be saved, must thus think of the 
Trinity| This practical or saving importance of a right Faith in 
the Holy Trinity, may be seen (1) from the manner in which the 
doctrine lies at the foundation of all other doctrine; (2) by the 
fact that our Lord made it the very fountain of spiritual life, 
when He connected the invocation of the Holy Trinity essentially 
with Holy Baptism; and (3) by the place which it occupies in 
moulding all the forms of Christian worship. 

Nevertheless, this verse of the Creed must not be taken as 
meaning that no person can be saved except he has an intel- 
lectual apprehension of the doctrines here set forth about the 
Blessed Trinity. Intellectual apprehension of doctrine is con- 
fined to educated minds, which have the faculty of forming 
opinions about truth, as well as of believing it. In whatever 
degree, then, opinions accompany Faith, they must be consistent 
with the statements here made respecting God, in each several 
Person, and in one Indivisible Trinity. It is one of the responsi- 
bilities attached to the possession of intellect, and its develop- 
ment by education, that it be not suffered to go out of its 
province, professing to discover where it cannot even observe, or 
to reason where it has no premisses.. The highest intellect cannot 
form any opinion about God that can possibly be true, if it is not 
consistent with what He Himself has told us; and the highest 
operation of intellect is to train itself into consistency with the 
Supreme Mind. 

Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation| The 
latter part of the Athanasian Creed may be said to be a logical 
exposition of the second member of the Apostles’ Creed, and 
especially with reference to the two Natures of our Blessed Lord, 
the union of which is called the “ Incarnation.” 


God, of the Substance of the Father] The many heresies 
respecting the Nature of our Blessed Lord entailed on the Church 
a necessity for the greatest strictness of expression ; and whether 
God the Son was of the same Substance with the Father, eternally 
begotten, or whether He was of a similar Substance, and a 
created being, was the great question which had to be decided by 
the Church, time after time, as one form and another of the latter 
opinion arose, throughout the first ages. The voice of the 
Church never faltered, but always declared that the belief here 
expressed was the Faith once for all delivered to the Saints, and 
handed down from the Apostles to later times. It was this con- 
test of heresy with the orthodox faith that originated the 
minute definition into which the Athanasian Creed runs; and 
however unnecessary it may seem to those who willingly receive 
the true doctrine, yet it must be remembered that heresy never 
dies ; and that hence this minute accuracy is a necessary bulwark 
of the truth. Also, that we may be very thankful “the right 
Faith” has not now to be built up, but only to be defended. 

Perfect God, and perfect Man] Our Lord Jesus, in both of 
His two Natures, has all the essential qualities which belong to 
each: Eternity, Uncreatedness, Omnipresence, Almightiness, 
Divine Will, and all other attributes of the Divine Nature; 
Body, Soul, Human Will, and all other attributes belonging to 
the Human Nature. These two Natures are as entirely united in 
the One Person Christ, as the body and the soul are united in the 
one person man. This Union was first effected when the Son of 
God began to be the Son of Man in the womb of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, and it has never been broken since. When the 
Body of the Crucified Saviour was laid in the tomb, it was kept 
from corruption by the continuance of its Union with the Divine 
Nature; and when His Soul descended into hell, the Divine 
Nature was still united to it also, enabling it to triumph over 
Satan and Death ; when the Soul and Body of Christ were united 
together again, and ascended into Heaven, it was in conjunc- 
tion with the Divine Nature that they ascended, to sit as Per- 


AT MORNING PRAYER. 45 


Zech. xiii. 7. Equal to the Father, as touching 
2% his Godhead +: and inferior to the 


Phil. ii. 5—7. : ; 
Father, as touching his Manhood. 


eer Gs Who although he be God and Man: 
yet he is not two, but one Christ ; 

Ee One; not by conversion of the God- 
head into flesh + but by taking of the 
Manhood into God ; 

pe Eh die, One altogether ; not by confusion of 
Substance + but by unity of Person. 

Lae For as the reasonable soul and flesh 

; is one man: so God and Man is one 

Christ ; 

a eee suffered for our salvation + de- 

1 Cer xv.3,4, scended into hell, rose again the third 


day from the dead. 

He ascended into heaven, he sitteth 
on the right hand of the Father, God 
Almighty + from whence he shall come 
to judge the quick and the dead. 

At whose coming all men shall rise 


Luke xxiv. 51, 
AOPet ail. 1,.225 
1 Thess. iv. 16. 
2 Thess. i. 7—10, 


Job xix. 25—27, 
Isa. xxvi. 19. 


Bp orey 10. again with their bodies + and shall 
give account for their own works. 
Matt. xvi. 27. And they that have done good shall 
xxv. 34—46. 
Dan. xii. 2. 


go into life everlasting + and they that 
have done evil into everlasting fire. 

This is the Catholick Faith + which, 
except a man believe faithfully, he 
cannot be saved. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 

As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 


2 Thess. ii. 15. 

Jude 3. 

1 John y. 12. ii. 
23. 

Mark xvi. 16. 


Aqualis Patri secundum Divini- salisbury Use. 
tatem: minor Patre secundum Hu- 
manitatem. 

Qui licet Deus sit et Homo: non 
duo tamen, sed unus est Christus. 

Unus autem, non conversione Divi- 
nitatis in carnem: sed assumptione 
humanitatis in Deum. 

Unus omnino, non confusione sub- 
stantie: sed unitate persone. 

Nam sicut anima rationalis et caro 
unus est homo: ita Deus et Homo unus 
est Christus, 

Qui passus est pro salute nostra, 
descendit ad inferos: tertia die resur- 
rexit a mortuis. 

Ascendit ad ccelos, sedet ad dexte- 
ram Dei Patris omnipotentis: inde 
venturus est judicare vivos et mortuos. 


Al, ad dext. Pa- 
tris, inde.... 


Ad cujus adventum omnes homines 
resurgere habent cum corporibus suis : 
et reddituri sunt de factis propriis 
rationem. 

Et qui bona egerunt ibunt in vitam 
eternam: qui vero mala in ignem 
eternum. 

Hee est fides catholica: quam nisi 
quisque fideliter firmiterque crediderit, 
salvus esse non poterit. 

Gloria Patri, et Filio: et Spiritui 
Sancto. 

Sicut erat in principio, et nunc et 
semper: et in secula seculorum. 


fect God and Perfect Man at the right hand of the Father. And 
in the same two, but united Natures, Christ our Lord will come 
to judge the quick and the dead. 

life everlasting—everlasting fire] These words, awful as the 
latter part of them is, are the words of our Lord, “The King 
shall say unto them on His right hand, Come, ye blessed of My 
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the founda- 
tion of the world.... . also unto them on the left hand, 
Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels .. . . And these shall go away into everlasting 
punishment ; but the righteous into life eternal.” (Matt. xxv. 
34. 41. 46.) 

This is the Catholick Faith: which except a man believe faith- 
fully, he cannot be saved] This verse also is founded on words of 
“our Lord, ‘* He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved ; but 
he that believeth not shall be damned.” (Mark xvi. 16.) And 
these severe words of His are the more striking from the fact of 
their utterance immediately before His Ascension to Heaven, 
lifting up His hands, and blessing His disciples. 

It will be observed that the word fivmeter in this clause is not 
represented in our translation. Waterland says [Critic. Hist. V. 
x.] that our translators followed a Greek copy of the Creed, 
printed at Basle by N icholas Bryling. As this was reprinted by 


eee 


Stephens in 1565, it probably had some weight at the time. These 
words of the clause in this Greek copy are given as Moras 
Other Greek copies follow the Latin. 

It does not become the writer to say any thing that may in the 
least lessen the force of such awful words. In the Creed which has 
been under notice, they are applied in close consistency with our 
Lord’s first use of them, and they must be taken for all that they 
fairly mean. A word of caution may, however, be expedient ; 
reminding the reader of what has been before said about opinion 
and belief. A willing assent may be given to the more obyious 
statements of this Creed, by many who are quite unable to enter 
upon the collateral and inferential statements deduced from 
them; and “a man” may thus “believe faithfully” in the 
substantial truths of the Catholic Faith. With an expanded 
knowledge, an expanded faith is necessary: and all the state- 
ments of the Creed are so bound together, that they whose 
expanded knowledge of it is not thus accompanied, are in fact 
rejecting the fundamental Articles of the Faith, as well as those 
that seem subordinate only. It will be better in the next life for 
the ignorant, if they have believed according to the measure of 
their knowledge, than for those who have known much, but have 
believed little. 


mor evan. 


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE LITANY. 


Tue Greek word Litaneia, meaning Prayer or Supplication, 
appears to have been used in the fourth century for devotions 
public or private ; but it soon came to have a narrower and more 
technical sense as applied to solemn acts of processional prayer. 
Whether St. Basil uses it in this sense, when in his 107th epistle 
he reminds the clergy of Neocwsarea that “the Litanies which 
they now practise” were unknown in the time of their great apostle 
Gregory, and therefore might form a precedent for other salutary 
innovations, is a matter of opinion, on which Bingham and Mr. 
Palmer (the latter more expressly than the former) take the 
affirmative side, the Benedictine Editor and Mr. Keble [note to 
Hooker’s E. P. v. 41. 2] taking the negative. But when we are 
told [Mansi, Concil. iv. 1428] that the aged abbat Dalmatius had 
for many years never left his monastery, though repeatedly re- 
quested by Theodosius II. when Constantinople was visited by 
earthquakes, “to go forth and perform a Litany,” there can be 
no doubt as to the meaning of the statement. 

The history, however, of Litanies, in the proper sense of the 
term, is rather Western than Eastern. We find indeed, in the 
Eastern Liturgy and Offices, some four or five specimens of a 
kindred form of prayer, called Hetene, Synapte, &c., in which the 
Deacon bids prayer for several objects, sometimes beginning with 
«Tn peace let us beseech the Lord,” and the people respond with 
“ Kyrie eleison,” or with “ Vouchsafe, O Lord.” The reader of 
Bishop Andrewes’ Devotions will be familiar with this type of 
prayers [see Oxford edition, pp. 5.92]. And we have it repre- 
sented, in the Western Church, by two sets of “ Preces” in the 
Ambrosian Missal, one used on the first, third, and fifth Sundays 
in Lent, the other on the second and fourth. One of these 
begins, ‘‘ Beseeching the gifts of Divine peace and pardon—we 
pray Thee,” &c., proceeding to specify various topics of interces- 
sion, with the response, ‘‘ Lord, have mercy.” ‘The other is 
shorter, but in its imploring earnestness, (“ Deliver us, Thou who 
deliveredst the children of Israel—with a strong arm and a high 
hand—O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for Thy Name’s 
sake,”) is even more interesting as a link between the Ectene and 
the Litanies of the West, an essential characteristic of which is 
their deprecatory and more or less penitential tone. Somewhat 
similar are the Mozarabic “ Preces” for Lenten Sundays, with 
their burdens of “ Have mercy,” ‘We have sinned,” &. We 
may also observe that “Preces,” like the “ Pacifice” of the 
Ambrosian rite, were anciently sung at Mass in Rome, (at first 
only on days when the Gloria in Excelsis and Alleluia were omit- 
ted,) until the ninth century. They formed an Eastern feature in 
the service, and may be compared with the Preces of the Abbey 
of Fulda, which like a Greek Ectene, intercede for various persons 
and classes, supplicate for a Christian and peaceful end, and 
have for their responses, “ We pray Thee, O Lord, hear and have 
mercy,” “Grant it, O Lord, grant it:’ also with a series of 
invocations, followed by “Tu illum adjuva,” occurring in an old 
form for an Emperor’s coronation in Muratori, Lit. Rom. ii. 463. 

But to confine ourselves to the Western Litany. It became 
common among the Gallic churches in the fifth century, as it was 
in the East, to invoke the Divine mercy in time of excessive rain 
or drought, by means of Rogations or processional supplications. 
But these, according to the testimony of Sidonius Apollinaris 
[v. 14], were often carelessly performed, with lukewarmuess, 
irregularity, and infrequency—devotion, as he expresses it, being 
often dulled by the intervention of meals. The shock of a great 
calamity wrought a change and formed an epoch. The illustrious 
city of Vienne, already famous in Christian history for the per- 
secution under M. Aurelius [Euseb. v. 1], was troubled for about 
a year—probably the year 467-8 [Fleury, xxix. ¢. 38 ]|—with earth- 
quakes. In the touching language of Gregory of Tours [ Hist. 
Francor. ii. 34] the people had hoped that the Easter festival 
would bring a cessation of their distress. ‘ But during the very 
vigil of the glorious night, while Mass was being celebrated,” the 

46 


palace took fire, the people rushed wildly out of the church, and 
the bishop Mamertus was left alone before the altar, entreating 
the mercy of God. He formed then a resolution, which he 
carried out in the three days before the Ascension festival, of 
celebrating a Rogation with special solemnity and earnestness. 
A fast was observed, and with prayers, psalmody, and Scripture 
lessons, the people went forth in procession to the nearest church 
outside the city. Mamertus, says Fleury, had so appointed, 
“voulant éprouver la ferveur du peuple . . . mais le chemin parut 
trop court pour la dévotion des fidéles.” Sidonius imitated this 
“most useful example” in Auvergne, at the approach of the 
Goths. He tells Mamertus [vi. ep. i.] that the Heart-searcher 
caused the entreaties made at Vienne to be a model for imitation 
and a means of deliverance. Gregory of Tours writes that these 
Rogations were “even now celebrated throughout all churches 
with compunction of heart and contrition of spirit ;” and tells 
how St. Quintianus in Auvergne, celebrating one in a drought, 
caused the words “ If the heaven be shut up,” &c. [2 Chron. vi. 26], 
to be sung as an anthem, whereupon at once rain fell; how king 
Guntram ordered a Rogation, with fasting on barley-bread and 
water, during a pestilence [ Hist. Fr. ix. 21]; how St. Gall insti- 
tuted Rogations in the middle of Lent [ib. iv. 5]; how the bishop 
of Paris performed them before Ascension, “ going the round of the 
holy places” [ix.5]. St. Ceesarius of Arles [4.D. 501—542], in his 
Homily “de Letania” (it became usual so to spell the word) 
calls the Rogation days ‘‘ holy and spiritual, full of healing virtue 
to our souls,” and “regularly observed by the Church throughout 
the world ;” and bids his hearers come to church and stay through 
the whole Rogation service, so as to gain the full benefit of this 
“three days’ healing process.” 

In order to estimate the comfort which these services then 
gave, one must take into account not only such afflictions as 
drought or pestilence, but the painful sense of confusion and 
insecurity which in those days brooded over Western Europe, and 
which still speaks in some of our own Collects, imploring the 
boon of peace and safety. We cannot wonder that, while the 
Rogation Mass in the Old Gallican Missal speaks of “sowing in 
tears, to reap in joys,” a Collect in the Gallican Sacramentary 
“in Letanias,” dwells on “the crash of a falling world.” So it 
was that, as Hooker expresses it, “Rogations or Litanies were 
then the very strength, stay, and comfort of God’s Church.” 
Council after Council,—as of Orleans in 511, Gerona in 517, 
Tours in 567,—decreed Rogation observances in connexion with 
a strict fast. But the Spanish Church, not liking to fast in the 
Paschal time, placed its Litanies in Whitsun-week and in the 
autumn, while the Milanese Rogations were in the week after 
Ascension. We learn from the Council of Cloveshoo in 747, 
that the English Church had observed the Rogations before 
Ascension ever since the coming of St. Augustine: and the 
anthem with which he and his companions approached Canter- 
bury, “We beseech Thee (deprecamur te), O Lord, in Thy great 
mercy, to remove Thy wrath and anger from this city, and from 
Thy holy house, for we have sinned, Alleluia,” was simply part 
of the Rogation Tuesday service in the church of Lyons [Martene, 
de Ant. Hecl. Rit. iti. 529]. This urgent deprecatory tone, this 
strong “crying out of the deep,” which expresses so marked a 
characteristic of the Litanies, appears again in another Lyons 
anthem for Rogations, “I have seen, I have seen the affliction of 
My people ;” in the York suffrage, which might seem to be as 
old as the days of the dreaded heathen king Penda, “ From the 
persecution by the Pagans and all our enemies, deliver us ;” and 
yet more strikingly in the Ambrosian, “ Deliver us not into the 
hand of the Heathen: Thou art kind, O Lord, have pity upon 
us; encompass Thou this city, and let Angels guard its walls; 
mercifully accept our repentance, and save us, O Saviour of the 
world; In the midst of life we are in death:” although this 
latter anthem, so familiar to us, was composed on a different 


INTRODUCTION TO THE LITANY. 47 


occasion by Notker of St. Gall [see Notes to Burial Office]. The 
strict rule which forbade in Rogation time all costly garments, 
and all riding on horseback, may be illustrated by the decree of 
the Council of Mayence in 813, that all should “go barefoot and 
in sackcloth in the procession of the Great Litany of three days, 
as our holy fathers appointed.” 

This name, “ Litania Major,” was thus applied in Gaul to the 
Rogations, but in Rome it has always been used (as it now is 
throughout the Roman Church) for the Litany of St. Mark’s day, 
which traces itself to St. Gregory the Great, and of which the 
Ordo Romanus says that it is not “in jejunio.” In order to 
avert a pestilence, Gregory appointed a ‘sevenfold Litany,” 
using the term for the actual processional company, as the Litany 
of clergy, the Litany of laymen, that of monks, of virgins, of 
married women, of widows, of the poor and children; and, in 
fact, the Roman bishops did not adopt the Rogation Litany, 
properly so called, until the pontificate of Leo III., which began 
in 795. This was some fifty years after England, on the other 
hand, had adopted the Litany of St. Mark’s day as that which 
at Rome was called the Greater. 

But although in strictness, as Hugh Menard says, “ Litania ad 
luctum pertinet,” the Litany was not always confined to occasions 
of distress or of special humiliation. As early as the close of the 
fifth century, the Gelasian Sacramentary, in its directions for 
Holy Saturday, had the following [ Muratori, i. 546.568] :—“ They 
enter the sacristy, and vest themselves as usual. And the clergy 
begin the Litany, and the Priest goes in procession, with those 
in holy orders, out of the sacristy. They come before the altar, 
and stand with bowed heads until they say, ‘Lamb of God, who 
takest away the sins of the world’ ”” Then comes the blessing of 
the Paschal taper; and after the series of lessons and prayers 
which follows it, they go in procession with a Litany to the 
fonts, for the baptisms: after which they return to the Sacristy, 
“and in a little while begin the third Litany, and enter the church 
for the Vigil Mass, as soon as a star has appeared in the sky.” 

And so it became natural to adopt a form of prayer which took 
so firm a hold of men’s affections, on various occasions when 
processions were not used. At ordinations, or at consecrations, 
at the conferring of monastic habits, at coronations of Emperors, 
at dedications of churches, &c., it became common for the 
“school,” or choir, to begin, or as it was technically called, to 
“set on” (imponere) the Litany,—for the Subdeacon to “make 
the Litanies,”—for the first of the Deacons to ‘make the Litany,” 
that is, to precent its suftrages, [ Murat. ii. 423. 426, 439, 450. 452. 
458. 467, | beginning with “Kyrie eleison,” or with “ O Christ, hear 
us.” A Litany never came amiss: it was particularly welcome 
as an element of offices for the sick and dying: its terseness, 
energy, pathos, seemed to gather up all that was meant by “‘ being 
instant in prayer.” 

For some time the Litanies were devoid of all invocations of 
Angels and Saints. The Preces of Fulda simply asked God that 
the Apostles and Martyrs might “pray for us.” But about the 
eighth century invocations came in. A few Saints are invoked in 
an old Litany which Mabillon calls Anglo-Saxon, [Vet. Anal. p. 
168, |] and Lingard Armorican [Ang]. Sax. Ch. ii. 386]. Names 
of Angels, with St. Peter or any other Saint, occur in another, 
which Mabillon ascribes to the reign of Charlemagne. The 
Litany in the Ordo Romanus [ Bib. Vet. Patr. viii. 451] hasa string 
of saintly names. As the custom grew, more or fewer Saints 
were sometimes invoked according to the length of the procession ; 
“quantum, sufficit iter,” says the Sarum Processional; and the 
York, “secundum exigentiam itineris.’” The number was often 
very considerable: a Litany said after Prime at the venerable 
abbey of St. Germain des Prés had, Martene says [iv. 49], ninety- 
four saints originally: an old Tours form for visitation of the 
sick has a list of saints occupying more than four columns [ib. 
i. 859]: and a Litany of the ninth century which Muratori prints, 
as “accommodated to the use of the church of Paris,” has one 
hundred and two such invocations [Mur. i. 74]. The invoca- 
tions generally came between the Kyrie, &c. at the beginning, 
and the Deprecations which, in some form or other, constituted 
the most essential element of the Litany. Mr. Palmer thinks 


that the space thus occupied had once been filled by many re- 
petitions of the Kyrie, such as the Eastern Church loved, and 
the Council of Vaison in 529 had recommended; and in conse- 
quence of which St. Benedict had applied the name of Litany to 
the Kyrie, just as, when invocations had become abundant, the 
same name was popularly applied to them, which explains the 
plural form, “ Litanie Sanctorum,” in Roman books. Sometimes 
we find frequent Kyries combined with still more frequent invoca- 
tions, as in a Litania Septena for seven subdeacons on Holy Satur- 
day, followed by a Litania Quina and Terna [Mart. i. 216]. A 
Litania Septena was used on this day at Paris, Lyons, and Soissons. 

The general divisions of Medieval Litanies were, 1. Kyrie, 
and ‘‘ Christ, hear us,” &c. 2. Entreaties to each of the Divine 
Persons, and to the whole Trinity. 3. Invocations of Saints. 
4. Deprecations. 5. Obsecrations, “by the mystery,” &c. 6. 
Petitions. 7. Agnus Dei, Kyrie, Lord’s Prayer. 8. Collects. 

The present Roman Litany should be studied as it occurs in 
the Missal, on Holy Saturday ; in the Breviary, just before the 
Ordo Commendationis Anime ; and in the Ritual, just before the 
Penitential Psalms :—besides the special Litany which forms 
part of the Commendatio. The Litany of Holy Saturday 
is short, having three deprecations and no Lord’s Prayer. 
The ordinary Roman Litany, as fixed in the 16th century, 
names only fifty-two individual Saints and Angels. It is said 
on St. Mark’s day, and during Lent, in choir, and “extra cho- 
rum pro opportunitate temporis.” 

The Litanies of the medieval English Church are a truly 
interesting subject. Mr. Procter, in his History of the Common 
Prayer, p. 251, has printed a Litany much akin to the Litany of 
York, and considered by him to be of Anglo-Saxon date. The 
Breviaries and Processionals exhibit their respective Litanies: and 
the ordinary Sarum Litany used on Easter Eve, St. Mark’s day, 
the Rogations, and every week-day in Lent, (with certain varia- 
tions as to the Saints invoked,) occurs in the Sarum Breviary 
just after the Penitential Psalms. It is easy, by help of the 
Processionals, to picture to oneself the grandeur of the Litany as 
solemnly performed in one of the great churches which followed 
the Sarum or York rites. Take for instance Holy Saturday. 
The old Gelasian rule of three Litanies on that day was still re- 
tained. In Sarum, a “ Septiform Litany ” was sung in the midst 
of the choir by seven boys in surplices; (compare the present 
Roman rubric, that the Litany on that day is to be sung by two 
chanters “in medio chori;”) the York rubric says, seven boys, or 
three where more cannot be had, are to sing the Litany. It was 
called septiform, because in each order of saints, as apostles, 
martyrs, &c., seven were invoked byname. After “All ye Saints, 
pray for us,” five deacons began the “ Quinta-partita Letania” 
in the same place (the York says, “ Letaniam puerorum sequatur 
Letania diaconorum”): but after “St. Mary, pray for us,” the 
rest was said in solemn procession to the font, starting “ex 
australi parte ecclesie.” First came an acolyte as cross-bearer, 
then two taper-bearers, the censer-bearer, two boys in surplices 
with book and taper, two deacons with oil and chrism, two sub- 
deacons, a priest in red cope, and the five chanters of the Litany. 
In these two Litanies the four addresses to the Holy Trinity 
were omitted. After the blessing of the font, three clerks of 
higher degree in red copes began a third Litany, the metrical one 
which, Cassander says, was called Litania Norica, “Rex sanc- 
torum Angelorum, totum mundum adjuva ;” (with which may be 
compared, as being also metrical, what Gibbon, vol. vii. p. 76, calls 
the “fearful Litany” for deliverance from the arrows of Hun- 
garians :) after the first verse was sung, the procession set forth 
on its return. In York, the third Litany was sung by three 
priests, and was not metrical. There were processions every 
Wednesday and Friday in Lent (on other Lenten week-days the 
Litany was non-processional), the first words of the Litany being 
sung “before the altar, before the procession started” [Process. 
Sar. ], and the last invocation being sung at the steps of the choir 
as it returned. In York, on Rogation Tuesday, the choir repeated 
after the chanter, processionally, the Kyrie and Christe eleison 
with the Latin equivalents, “Domine, miserere; Christe, miserere ;” 
then, “Miserere nobis, pie Rex, Domine Jesu Christe.” The 


48 


responses in this Litany were curiously varied. The chanter 
said, for instance, “St. Mary, pray for us ;” and the choir re- 
sponded, “ Kyrie eleison.” Again, “St. Michael, pray for us;” 
the response was, “ Christ, hear us.” The York Litany of Ascen- 
sion Eve has, “ Take away from us, O Lord, our iniquities,” &c., 
the response being a repetition of the first words. Then, ‘ Have 
mercy, have mercy, have mercy, Lord, on Thy people,” &c., the 
response being “Have mercy ;” then “Hear, hear, hear our 
prayers, O Lord:” response, “Hear.” The rubric adds, “ Et 
dicatur Letania per circuitum ad introitum chori.” On the same 
Eve, in Sarum, a metrical invocation to St. Mary was chanted, 
«Sancta Maria, Quesumus, almum Poscere Regem Jure memento; 
Salvet ut omnes Nos jubilantes.” On St. Mark’s day, in Sarum, 
as in the Rogation Litany of York above quoted, the suffrage 
included “pray for us,” and the response was Kyrie. The Sarum 
rule was, “ Whatever part of the Litany is said by the priest 
must be fully and entirely repeated by the choir, as far as the 
utterance of ‘We sinners beseech Thee to hear us” For then 
after ‘That Thou give us peace,’ the choir is to respond ‘We 
beseech Thee, hear us:’ and after each verse, down to ‘Son of 
God.’” So the Processional; the same rule is given, in some- 
what different form, by the Breviary. 

Besides the Latin Litanies for church use, the Primer con- 
tained one (in English) which may be seen in Mr. Maskell’s 
second volume of ‘ Monumenta Ritualia,” where he exhibits a 
Sarum Primer of about a.p. 1400; with two other English 
Litanies from MSS. in the Bodleian. A MS. English Litany of 
the 15th century, somewhat different from these, is in the 
Library of University College, Oxford. 

Coming down to the 16th century, we find the first form of 
our present Litany in that of 1544, probably composed by Cran- 
mer, who would have before him the Litany in the Goodly 
Primer of 1535, and perhaps the Cologne Litany published in 
German 15438, or Luther’s of 1548: and it was imposed on the 
Church by Henry VIII., to be used “in the time of processions.” 
It retains three invocations of created beings: one addressed to 
«St. Mary, Mother of God our Saviour;”’ a second to the “ holy 
Angels, Archangels, and all holy orders of blessed spirits ;” a 
third to the “holy patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, confes- 
sors, virgins, and all the blessed company of heaven.” In Henry’s 
reign there was also a Litany published in the King’s Primer of 
1545. It is curious that “ procession,” in Cranmer’s language 
(see a passage in “ Private Prayers,” Parker Soc., pref. p. 25), 
meant the actual supplication; and so in King Henry’s. In 
1547 the Injunctions of Edward VI. forbade processions (in the 
common sense of the word) ; and, borrowing part of the Sarum 
rule above mentioned as to the Easter Eve Litania Septiformis, 
ordered the priests, with other of the choir, to kneel in the 
midst of the church immediately before High Mass, and sing or 
say the Litany, &c., which Injunction was repeated by Queen 
Elizabeth in 1559, with the alteration of ‘before Communion,” 
&e. In the Prayer Book of 1549 the Litany was ordered to be 
said or sung on Wednesdays and Fridays, and was printed 
after the Communion ; but in the Book of 1552 it was printed in 
its, present place, “to be wsed on Sundays, Wednesdays, Fridays, 
and at other times,” &ce. About Christmas, 1558, Elizabeth 
sanctioned the English Litany nearly as before, for her own 
Chapel (see Cardwell, Docum. Ann. i. 209, and Lit. Services, 
Parker Soc., p. xii) ; it soon came into more general use, and was 
inserted in the Prayer Book of 1559, the rubric of 1552 being 
repeated. The Injunctions of Elizabeth in 1559 ordered the 
Curate to “say the Litany and prayers” in church every Wed- 
nesday and Friday ; but the Litany of the procession, in Roga- 
tion week, was to be continued also, and the custom of “Beating 
the Bounds” of parishes on Ascension Day still in some sort 
represents it. [See Note on Rogation Days. ] 

The fifteenth canon of 1604 provides for the saying of the 
Litany in church after tolling of a bell, on Wednesdays and 
Fridays. In the last review of the Prayer Book, the words “ to 
be sung or said” were substituted for “used,” (both phrases 
having occurred in the Scotch Prayer Book,) and are very carefully 
added,—an erasure being made to give precedence to the word 


INTRODUCTION TO THE LITANY. 


“sung,”—in Cosin’s Durham Book. The Litany was sung by 
two bishops at the coronation of George I. 

With regard to the place for saying or singing the Litany, the 
present Prayer Book in its rubric before the 51st Psalm in the 
Commination, appears implicitly to recognize a peculiar one, 
distinct from that in which the ordinary offices are performed. 
As we have seen, the Injunctions of Edward, followed herein by 
those of Elizabeth, specified the midst of the church : and Bishop 
Andrewes had in his chapel a faldistory (folding-stool) for this 
purpose, between the western stalls and the lectern. So Cosin, 
as archdeacon of the East Riding in 1627, inquired whether the 
church had “a little faldstool or desk, with some decent carpet 
over it, in the middle alley of the church, whereat the Litany may 
be said after the manner prescribed by the Injunctions ;” and in 
his first series of Notes on the Common Prayer he says, ‘The 
priest goeth from out his seat into the body of the church, and 
at a low desk before the chancel door, called the faldstool, kneels, 
and says or sings the Litany. Vide Proph. Joel de medio loco 
inter porticum et altare,’ &c. Compare also the frontispiece to 
Bp. Sparrow’s Rationale, and to the Litany in Prayer Books of 
1662, &e. Cosin gave such a faldstool to Durham Cathedral, 
which is constantly used by two priests; and the rubric of the 
present Coronation office speaks of two bishops kneeling in the 
same manner at a faldstool to say the Litany. The custom 
doubtless signified the deeply supplicatory character of this 
service. Finally, in the Durham Book the Rubric before the 
Litany ends with these words: “the Priest (or Clerks) kneeling 
in the midst of the Quire, and all the people kneeling, and answer- 
ing as followeth.”” 

In the present day there is a disposition to make the Litany 
available as a separate service. Abp. Grindall’s order in 1671, 
forbidding any interval between Morning Prayer, Litany, and 
the Communion Service, was far from generally observed!. At 
Winchester and Worcester Cathedrals the custom of saying the 
Litany some hours after Mattins has prevailed: and we learn from 
Peck’s Desiderata Curiosa, [lib. xii., no. 2], ] that in1730 the mem- 
bers of Ch. Ch. Oxford, on Wednesdays and Fridays, went to 
Mattins at 6, and to Litany at 9. The 15th canon, above referred 
to, recognizes the Litany as a separate office. Freedom of 
arrangement in this matter is highly desirable: and if it be said 
that the Litany ought to precede the Communion, according to 
ancient precedent, instead of being transferred, as it sometimes 
now is, to the afternoon, it may be replied that the Eucharistic 
Ectene of the East is not only much shorter than our Litany, but 
far less plaintive, so to speak, in tone, and therefore more evi- 
dently congruous with Eucharistic joy. The like may be said, 
on the whole, of the “ Preces Pacific” once used at Rome (as 
we have seen) in the early part of the Mass, and at Milan on 
Lenten Sundays: although indeed a Lenten Sunday observance 
could be no real precedent for all the Sundays in the year ?. 
Of the Puritan cavils at the Litany, some will be dealt with in 
the Notes. One, which accuses it of perpetuating prayers which 
had but a temporary purpose, is rebuked by Hooker [v. 4:1. 41], 
and is not likely to be revived. He takes occasion to speak of 
the ‘absolute (i. e. finished) perfection” of our present Litany : 
Bp. Cosin, in his Devotions, uses the same phrase, and calls it “this 
principal, and excellent prayer” (eacellent being, in the English of 
his day, equivalent to matchless) ; and Dr. Jebb describes it as “a 
most careful, luminous, and comprehensive collection of the scat- 
tered treasures of the Universal Church” [Choral Service, p. 423]. 

It has clearly two main divisions: I. From the beginning to 
the last Kyrie, before the Lord’s Prayer. This part, says Bp. 
Sparrow, may be considered as less solemnly appropriated to the 
priest than the second part: and in some choirs a lay-clerk chants 
it along with the priest. II. From the Lord’s Prayer to the 
end. The first part may be regarded as having five, the second 
part four, subdivisions. 


1 In fact there is a direction exactly opposite in an Occasional Service of 
Queen Elizabeth’s reign, exhorting the people to spend a quarter of an hour 
or more in private devotion between Morning Prayer and the Communion. 

2 See also a note on the expanded Kyrie Eleison in the Communion 
Service. 


THE LITANY. 


| Here followeth the Litany, or General Sup- 
plication, to be sung or said after Morn- 
ing Prayer upon Sundays, Wednesdays, and 
Fridays, and at other times when it shall be 
commanded by the Ordinary. 


GOD the Father, of heaven : 


have mercy upon us miserable 


Matt. vi. 9. 14, 
Luke xy. 18, 19. 
Lam. iii, 19, 20. 


Rev. ii. 17, 
sinners. 
O God the Father, of heaven + have 
mercy upon us miserable sinners. 
John v. 23. 


O God the Son, Redeemer of the 

world + have merey upon us miserable 
- sinners. 

O God the Son, Redeemer of the 
world ¢ have mercy upon us miserable 
sinners. 

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding 
from the Father and the Son : have 
mercy upon us miserable sinners. 

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding 
Jrom the Father and the Son +: have 

mercy upon us miserable sinners. 
Matt. wie!” O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, 
Micah vit 1s, 19, three Persons, and one God + have 
mercy upon us miserable sinners. 
O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, 
three Persons, and one God + have mercy 
upon us miserable sinners. 


Isa. xl viii. 17. 
Perse 215.15, 
Luke xvii. 13. 


Acts v. 3, 4. 
John xy. 26. 
Acts ii, 33. 39. 
Rom. viii. 26. 


nee Remember not, Lord, our offences, 
uae nor the offences of our forefathers, 
LPet.a. 18, 19: 


neither take thou vengeance of our 
sins : spare us, good Lord, spare thy 
people, whom thou hast redeemed with 
thy most precious blood, and be not 
angry with us for ever. 

Spare us, good Lord. 


Tso eSsd.g JER 
Mal. iii. 17. 


Deus: miserere Salisbury Use. 


ATER de ccelis 


nobis. 


Fili Redemptor mundi Deus: mise- 
rere nobis. 


Spiritus Sancte Deus 


: muserere 
nobis. ; 


Sancta Trinitas, unus Deus: mise- 
rere nobis. 


Here followed the 
Invocations of 
Saints, with 
the Response, 
“ Ora pro no- 
bis,” after each. 


Ne reminiscaris, Domine, delicta 
nostra, vel parentum nostrorum : neque 
vindictam sumas de peccatis nostris. 
Parce, Domine, parce populo tuo, quem 
redemisti pretioso sanguine tuo: ne in 
eeternum irascaris nobis. 


O God the Father] The old Sarum Litany prefixes to this, 
“Kyrie eleison, Christe eleison:” then, “ Christe, audi nos.” 
The Roman has a complete Kyrie, with “Christe, audi nos; 
Christe, exaudi nos.” The Litany of Ordo Romanus, and the 
Utrecht Litany, have also “Salvator mundi, adjuva nos.” An 
Ambrosian Baptismal Litany has Kyrie thrice, “Domine miserere”’ 
thrice, and “Christe, libera nos” thrice, with the response ‘ Sal- 
vator libera nos.” 

Of heaven] i.e. from heaven, “de ceelis.”’ The phrase comes 
from Luke xi. 18, 0 Mathp 6 ef odpavotd, your Father who heareth 
from heaven. Cf. 2 Chron. vi. 21. “Exaudi....de ccelis,” 
Vulg. 

Miserable sinners| Added in 1544. 

Proceeding from, §e.} Added in 1544. 
“Spiritus Sancte, benigne Deus.” 

O holy, blessed, &c.] The address was thus amplified in 1544, 


The Utrecht has, 


partly from the old Sarum antiphon after the Athanasian Creed, 
for Trinity week : “O beata et benedicta et gloriosa Trinitas, 
Pater et Filius et Spiritus Sanctus.” 

Remember not] Before 1544, these words formed part of the 
antiphon which was added to the Perftential Psalms as prefixed 
to the Litany. In the original, after “ne in xternum,” &c. 
came, “et ne des hereditatem tuam in perditionem: ne in 
eternum obliviscaris nobis.” But there was also, just before the 
special Deprecations, and after the invocations of Saints, ‘ Pro- 
pitius esto: Parce nobis, Domine.” The word “good” was inserted 
in 1544, The sins of fathers may be visited on children in 
temporal judgments. It is much to be observed that the whole 
of what follows down to the Kyrie, is one continuous act of wor- 
ship offered to our Blessed Lord ; and it is this which gives the 
Litany such peculiar value in days when His Divinity is too 


often but faintly realized. 
H 


50 


1 Chron. iv. 10. 
IPS; -xel. 9, 105 Vas 
2 Cor. ii. 11. 
Rom. i. 18. 

2 Thess. i. 7—2. 


From all evil and mischief; from 
sin; from the crafts and assaults of the 
devil; from thy wrath, and from ever- 
lasting damnation, 


Matt. vi. 13. Good Lord, deliver us. 

panes. From all blindness of heart; from 
ei Vis: . 

1 Pet. ii™!, 2. 


pride, vain-glory, and hypocrisy; from 
envy, hatred, and malice, and all un- 
charitableness, 


i John iv. 20. 


2 Cor. i. 10. Good Lord, deliver us. 
1 Cor. vi. 8 9, From fornication, and all other 


Mark iv. 18, 19. 
1 John ii. 16, 17. 
Rev. xii. 9. 


deadly sin; and from all the deceits of 
the world, the flesh, and the devil, 
Good Lord, deliver us. 
ee es From lightning and tempest ; from 
ge 87 plague, pestilence, and famine; from 


REE SO. O.6b SG GF 


From] These Deprecations, which in the old Litanies, as in the 
present Roman, were broken up into separate forms, each relating 
to one topic, were in 1544 combined in groups, as at present ; 
probably in order to give more intensity and energy to the 
“ Deliver us.” The like was done with the Obsecrations. 

All evil| Sarum, York, Hereford, Carthusian, Dominican, and the 
old Ordo Romanus ; Litania Latina in Luther’s Enchiridion, 1543. 

Mischief'| Added to the old form in 1544. 

Sin] Added in 1544, from the Litany in the Primer of 1535. 
The Roman has it, and it is in Hermann of Cologne’s Simplex et 
Pia Deliberatio, translated from German into Latin in 1545; 
his Litany is nearly identical with that of Luther named above. 

Crafts and assaults} Two distinct .modes of diabolic attack, 
secret and open. “Snares of the devil” are in Ordo Romanus, 
&e. Compare 2 Cor. ii. 11. 

Assaults| Not in York nor in Roman, but in Dominican 
[ Brey. Ord. Predic.]. 

Thy wrath] Roman has this; andsothe Ordo Romanus. York 
has, “from the wrath to come.” So it is in the Lyons Rogations, 
and in Carthusian. In Litanies for the Sick it was common to 
deprecate “Thy wrath” [Martene i. 858, &c.]. The Narbonne 
had, “ From Thy wrath greatly to be feared.” 

DLverlasting damnation| Sarum, Hereford, Utrecht, Cistercian, 
Dominican have “perpetual” [compare Roman, “a morte per- 
petua”]. Ifthe force of this Deprecation can be evaded in the 
interests of Universalism, no words can retain any meaning. 
York combines “sudden and eternal death.” 

Blindness of heart) This, which is in Sarum and Utrecht, not 
in York nor Roman, was derived from the Vulgate of Eph. iv. 18, 
“propter cecitatem cordis sui:” but the word mépwow should 
rather be rendered “ hardness,” or “ callousness.” 

Pride] York and Utrecht more emphatically, “the plague of 
pride.” Notin Roman. ‘Hhe Carthusian has, “the spirit of pride.” 

Vain-glory| Shortened from Sarum, “the desire of vain- 
glory.” Not in Roman. 

Hypocrisy] Added in 1544. 

Envy| Added in 1544. We do not specify anger, as Sarum 
and York do. 

Hatred| Here Sarum, York, Roman agree. 

Malice, §e.| Sarum, York, Roman, Utrecht, Dominican, “all 
ill-will.” 

Fornication] Sarum, Roman, Carthusian have “the spirit of 
fornication ;” and Sarum adds, “from all uncleanness of mind 
and body,” which is in Hereford, Utrecht, Carthusian, Dominican ; 


THE LITANY. 


Ab omni malo: Libera nos, Domine. 

Ab insidiis diaboli: Libera... . 

Ab infestationibus demonum: Li- 
era. te 

[A ventura ira: Libera... .] 

A damnatione perpetua: Libera.... 


Salisbury Use. 


(York Use.] 


A cecitate cordis: Libera.... Salisbury Use. 


[A peste superbie : Libera... .] 

Abappetitu inanis gloriz: Libera... 

Ab ira, et odio, et omni mala volun- 
tate: Libera.... 


[York Use.] 
Salisbury Use. 


A spiritu fornicationis: Libera... . 


A fulgure et tempestate: Libera.... 
A subitanea et improvisa morte: Li- 
berate 


so York, “from all uncleannesses....” Sarum further adds, 
“from unclean thoughts ;” so Dominican. 

Deadly sin] In 1544 “all deadly sin.” “Other” added in 
1549. This phrase has been more than once objected to. The 
Committee of the House of Lords, in 1641, suggested “ grievous 
sin,” doubtless from dislike of the Roman distinction of mortal 
and venial sins. The Puritan divines, at the Savoy Conference, 
made a similar suggestion, observing, that the wages of sin, as 
such, were death. The Bishops answered, ‘‘ For that very reason, 
‘deadly’ is the better word.” They therefore must have under- 
stood the phrase to refer to all wilful and deliberate sin, At the 
same time it must be remembered, that among wilful sins there 
are degrees of heinousness. “It would be introducing Stoicism 
into the Gospel, to contend that all sins were equal.” [Dr. 
Pusey’s Letter to Bishop of Oxford, p. liii.] 

Deceits of the world, the flesh] Added in 1544; but York 
has “from fleshly desires.” So Utrecht, Carthusian, “from 
wicked concupiscence.”’ “ Deceits of the devil,” in fact, is a 
repetition of “crafts of the devil,” above. The deceits of the 
world, of course, mean “the vain pomp and glory” of it, the 
hollow splendour, the false attractiveness, the promises of satis- 
faction and of permanence, &c., which, as the Apostle reminds 
us, have no reality. [1 John ii.17. Compare 1 Cor. vii. 31.] 

Lightning and tempest| Sarum, Roman; not York nor Here- 
ford. Hermann has it; and a Poitiers Litany [Mart. iii. 438] 
has, “That it may please Thee to turn away malignitatem tem- 
pestatum.” Thunder-storms impelled St. Chad to repair to church, 
and employ himself in prayer and psalmody; being asked why he 
did so, he cited Ps. xviii, 18. [Bede iv. 3.] There are two 
Orationes “ contra fulgura,” and one “ad repellendam tempesta- 
tem,” in St. Gregory’s Sacramentary, ed. Menard. 

Plague, pestilence} Sarum, York, Hereford, have not this 
deprecation, whichis in Roman. The Litany of 1535 had “ From 
all pestilence.” So also a Tours Litany, “ to remove pestilence or 
mortality from us;” and St. Dunstan’s Litany for Dedication of 
a Church has “ From pestilence.’ 

Famine} Not in Sarum, York, Hereford, but in Roman. 
In 1535, “from pestilence and famine.” Dunstan’s also, “et 
fame.” The Fleury Litany, in Martene, has “from all want and 
famine.” 

Battle] York has, “from persecution by Pagans, and all our 
enemies,” like the Anglo-Saxon Litany. The Roman and 
Dominican deprecate “war? So Primer of 1535, and Hermann. 
Dunstan’s and Fleury mention slaughter. 


THE LITANY. 51 


Eecl. ix.12. battle and murder, and from sudden 
Ps, xxxix. 5. 

death, 
Isa. xlvi. 4. * 

Good Lord, deliver us. 

Ps. lxiv. 5. iti i i 
yt From all sedition, privy conspiracy, 
Gal-v. 19,20. and rebellion ; from all false doctrine, 


eee heresy, and schism; from hardness of 
tas. v.26. heart, and contempt of thy Word and 
Commandment, 
Good Lord, deliver us. 
By the mystery of thy holy Incar- 
nation; by. thy holy Nativity and 


2 Tim. iv. 18. 


Matt. i. 21—23. 
1 Tim. iii. 16, 


Per mysterium sancte Tncarnationis salisbury Use. 
tue: Libera.... 


Murder| Added 1544. Hermann has it. The Latin Book of 
1560 has “ latrocinio.” 

Sudden death] This is in the Sarum, “sudden and unforeseen 
death.” York prefixes “sudden” to “eternal death”? The 
Roman agrees with the Sarum. So Hermann, adding “ evil.” 
The same deprecation is in the Rogations of Lyons. The Puritans 
objected that “the godly should always be prepared to die.” 
Hooker replies, in one of his most beautiful and thoughtful 
chapters [E. P. v. 46], that it is lawful to “prefer one way of 
death before another ;” that it is religion which makes men 
wish for a “leisurable” departure ; that our prayer “importeth 
a twofold desire,” (1) For some “convenient respite;” (2) If 
that be denied, then, at least, “that although death unexpected 
be sudden in itself, nevertheless, in regard of our prepared minds, 
it may not be sudden.” Archbishop Hutton, of York, before the 
Hampton Court Conference was held, explained this as implying 
a condition, “if it be Thy will,” supposing “sudden” were taken 
simply ; but “sudden” might be taken as equivalent to “ giving 
no time for repentance.” ‘The aversion of Lord Brook to this 
deprecation, and his own terrific instantaneous death by a shot 
from the great spire of Lichfield Cathedral, are well known. In 
a Prayer Book in the Bodleian, “worn by the daily use” of 
Bishop Duppa, of Salisbury (while residing at Richmond, between 
the overthrow of Episcopacy and the Restoration), and containing 
marginal notes in his own hand, this comment occurs, “ Vainly 
excepted against, because we should always be prepared for it: 
for by the same reason, we should not pray against any tempta- 
tions.” At the Savoy Conference, the Puritans again raised the 
old objection, and proposed to read, “from dying suddenly and 
unprepared.” The Bishops replied, “ From sudden death, is as 
good as from dying suddenly ; which we therefore pray against, 
that we may not be unprepared.” [Cardwell, Conferences, pp. 
316. 352.] ‘A person,” says Bishop Wilson, Sacra Privata, p. 
358, “ whose heart is devoted to God, will never be surprised by 
death.” 

Sedition] In 1544, from Primer of 1535. Hermann, “a 
seditione et simultate.”’ 

Privy conspiracy] In 1544. After this, in 1549 and 1552, 
came, “from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all 
his detestable enormities,’” which was omitted under Elizabeth ; 
and Cosin, in his First Series of Notes, says that the Puritans (of 
James the First’s time) wished to have it restored. It had been 
in the Primer of 1545, with “abominable” for “ detestable.” 

Rebellion] Added, for obvious reasons, in 1661, by Cosin. 

False doctrine, heresy| In 1544. Hermann, “ab omni 
errore.”” 

Schism] In 1661. The Primer of 1535 had had “schismies.” 

Hardness of heart, and contempt, &e.| In 1544. Compare 
the Third Collect for Good Friday. See Prov. i. 25. The force 
of this deprecation is best seen by remembering that a final 
hardening of the heart is a penal infliction, provoked by habitual 
indifference to Divine love. We may well entreat our Lord to 
save us from repaying His love by coldness, lest the capacity of 
loving Him be justly taken away. We may well implore Him, 
also, to keep us from the terrible possibility of ignoring, and 
practically despising, His revelation and His commands. Com- 


22 


pare the beautiful Parisian Litany of the Holy Name of Jesus, 
“from neglect of Thy inspirations, Jesus, deliver us.”’ 

By the mystery] Here begin the Obsecrations, as they are 
called. They go on the principle that every several act of our 
Lord’s Mediatorial life has its appropriate saving energy ; that 
virtue goes out of each, because each is the act of a Divine 
Person, and has a Divine preciousness. When, therefore, we 
say, “ Deliver us by Thy Nativity, by Thy Temptation,” &c., we 
do not merely ask Him to remember those events of His human 
life, but we plead them before Him as mystically effective, as 
instinct with life-giving grace, as parts of a Mediatorial whole. 
Doubtless, the Death of our Lord is the meritorious cause of our 
salvation; we are redeemed by 7t, not by His Circumcision, or 
His Fasting ; and to efface the distinction between it and all 
other parts of the “ £conomy,” in regard to His office as the 
Lamb of God, would be an indication of theological unsoundness. 
At the same time it is also true that, in St. Leo’s language, all our 
Lord’s acts, as being related to His atoning Passion, are “sacra- 
mental,” as well as ‘exemplary ;” His Nativity is our spiritual 
birth, His Resurrection our revival, His Ascension our advance- 
ment. They are not only incentives and patterns, but efficient 
causes in the order of grace. So St. Bernard, in his second 
Pentecost Sermon, says that His Conception is to cleanse ours, His 
Resurrection to prepare ours, &c. More vividly, St. Anselm, in 
his fifteenth Prayer, “O most sweet Lord Jesus, by Thy holy 
Annunciation, Incarnation .... Infancy, Youth, Baptism, Fast- 
ing... .scourges, buffets, thorny crown,” &c. But the deepest 
and tenderest expression of this principle (surpassing even Bishop 
Andrewes’s obsecrations, “ by Gethsemane, Gabbatha, Golgotha,” 
&e.) is in the medieval Golden Litany, printed by Maskell, Mon. 
Rit. ii. 244, “By Thy great meekness, that Thou wouldst be 
comforted by an angel, so comfort me in every time... . For that 
piteous cry, in the which Thou commendedst Thy soul to Thy 
Father, our souls be commended to Thee,” &c. The coarse and 
heartless fanaticism, which could cavil at these obsecrations as 
“a certain conjuring of God,” was characteristic of John Knox 
and his friends. They so expressed themselves when criticizing 
the Litany (“certain suffrages devised of Pope Gregory”), in a 
letter to Calvin against the Prayer Book of 1552. Bishop Duppa 
writes, “‘ No oath, nor no exorcism.” 

Of Thy holy Incarnation] So Sarum, York, Hereford, Roman, 
Cistercian, Dominican. ‘The mystery ” is doubtless an allusion 
to 1 Tim. iii. 16. The thought which it suggests is that which 
of old made men bow down in adoration at the words in the 
Creed, “et Homo factus est.” “By all the stupendous truths 
involved in Thine assumption of our humanity, wherein Thou, 


‘being true God, becamest true Man, combining two Natures in 


Thy single Divine Person, without confusion, and without 
severance; so that, in the Virgin’s womb, Thou didst bring God 
and man together, undergoing all the conditions of infant life, 
Thyself unchangeably the Creator and Life-giver“’ The Roman 
adds, “By Thine Advent.” Utrecht has “ By Thine Annuncia- 
tion, by Thine Advent and Nativity.” ; 

Thy holy Nativity] After Hereford. Sarum has only “Thy 
Nativity :” so Ordo Romanus. “Holy,” however, is in the 
Sarum Primer [Maskell, ii. 102]. The Latin book of 1560 

H 2 


52 


Luke ii. 7. 11. 21. 
Matt. iii. 13--15. 
iv. 1, 2. 


Cireumcision ; by thy Baptism, Fast- 
ing, and Temptation, 


Good Lord, deliver us. 


Pssixxix. 9, 


Luke xxii. 44. 
Matt, xxvi. 38. 


By thine Agony and bloody Sweat ; 


Philii 8. by thy Cross and Passion; by thy 
Cor. xv. 3, 4. zs 5 
Eph. iv. 8... precious Death and Burial; by thy | 
cts 1, ot e x - 
83, ’ glorious Resurrection and Ascension ; 


and by the coming of the Holy Ghost; 


SPS xliv.o6s 


Good Lord, deliver us. 


John xvi. 33. 


In all time of our tribulation ; im all 
Prov, xxx, 8,9 
Ps. xxxi. 5. 


Be ee time of our wealth; in the hour of 
1 Sam. xvi. 24. death, and in the day of judgment, 
Good Lord, deliver us. 


\ 
i 


THE LITANY. 


[Per sanctam Nativitatem tuam : (Hereford Use.] 
Libera... .] 
Per sanctam Circumcisionem tuam : galisbury Use. 
Dabera > ots 
Per Baptismum tuum: Libera... . 
Per Jejunium tuum: Libera.... 
Per Crucem et Passionem- tuam : 
Tibera next. 
Per pretiosam Mortem tuam: Li- 
Dera «i. sis 
Per gloriosam Resurrectionem tuam: 
Libera, S54 
(admirabilem) Ascensionem 
tuam: Libera.... 
Per adventum Sancti Spiritus (Para- 
eliti) : Libera .°. 2% 
In hora mortis: (Succurre nobis), 
Domine. 
In die judicu: Libera nos, Domine. 


Per 


made “ Nativity, Circumcision,” &c., dependent on “ mysterium.” 
York has no mention of the Nativity. 

Circumcision] Sarum has “holy Circumcision.” It is not in 
the present Roman, but in two old Roman forms in Menard’s 
notes to the Gregorian Sacramentary [741 and 923]. The 
Parisian of the Holy Name places after “Nativity,” “Thine 
infancy, Thy most Divine life, Thy labours.’ Sarum Litany for 
the Dying adds “apparitionem tuam ;” and Utrecht has, “ cir- 
cumcisionem et oblationem tuam.” 

Baptism, Fasting] Sarum, “by Thy Baptism, by Thy Fast- 
ing.” Roman combines “ Baptism and holy Fasting.” Utrecht, 
“Baptism and Fasting’? Sarum Primer, “Thy Baptism and 
much other penance doing.” 

Temptation] 1544. Primer of 1535, and Hermann, “tempta- 
tions.” Golden Litany, in Maskell, “The tempting of the fiend 
in the desert.” 

Agony and bloody Sweat] 1544. So Hermann. Golden 
Litany, “ For that agony in which Thou offeredst Thee wilfully 
to death, obeying Thy Almighty Father; and Thy bloody sweat.” 
Primer of 1535, “Thy painful agony, in sweating blood and 
water.” 

Cross and Passion| So Sarum, Roman, York for Easter Eve, 
and Anglo-Saxon (probably an old York form), in Procter, p. 231, 
and Hermann. Mabillon’s Anglican, or Armorican, Hereford, 
Utrecht, Carthusian, Cistercian, Dominican, have ‘ Passion and 
Cross;” so Sarum for the Dying. This is the more natural 
order. Sarum Primer, “Thy holy Passion.’ The Tours omits 
“Thy Cross,” which forms the only obsecration in the Corbey 
MS. Litany [ Menard, note 380], and in the Litany of the ninth 
century, in Muratori, i. 76. The Golden Litany dwells with 
intense tenderness on all the details of the Crucifixion, and on 
some points which are traditional or legendary. Parisian of the 
Holy Name, “Thine Agony and Passion, Thy Cross and for- 
saking,—languores tuos.” ‘ 

Precious Death] Sarum. So in Sarum Litany for the Dying, 
“‘piissimam mortem tuam.” Sarum Primer, “most piteous 
death.” Ordo Romanus mentions the Cross, Passion, Death. 

Burial] Not in Sarum; but in Sarum Primer, “Thy blessed 
burying.” “Thy Death and Burial,” in Roman, Utrecht, Stras- 
burg, for Easter Eve, Primer of 1535, Hermann, Parisian. 

Thy glorious Resurrection] So Sarum, Hereford, Narbonne, 
Moisac, Cistercian, Carthusian, Dominican, Sarum and Parisian 
Litanies for the Dying. Anglo-Saxon, York, Strasburg, Utrecht, 
Roman, and ordinary Parisian, “holy Resurrection.” 

Ascension] Anglo-Saxon, Sarum, York, Hereford, Roman, 


Moisac, Narbonne, Cistercian, Carthusian, Dominican, Parisian, 
prefix “ admirabilem”’ to “ Ascensionem ;” Strasburg and Utrecht 
have “glorious.” Remiremont, “radiant.” Golden Litany, 
“wonderful and glorious.” Parisian of the Holy Name has, 
after “ Ascension,” “ by Thy joys, by Thy glory.” 

The coming of the Holy Ghost] Sarum, for the Dying, “The 
coming of the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete ;” so Ordo Romanus, 
present Roman, and Hermann. “The Paraclete” was omitted 
in 1544, as in Primer of 1535. Sarum, York, Hereford, Anglo- 
Saxon, Sarum Primer, Cistercian, Dominican, and Benedictine of 
M. Cassino, have “grace,” instead of “coming.” Armorican, 
“by the descent of the Holy Ghost.” Tours and Utrecht simply, 
“by the Spirit, the Paraclete.’ Utrecht and others add an 
obsecration by the Second Advent, e. g. “‘by Thy future 
Advent,” “by the majesty of Thine Advent.” 

In all time of our tribulation.... wealth] 1544. After 
Primer of 1535, “in time of our tribulations, in the time of our 
felicity ;” Hermann, “in all time,” &¢. The Scottish and 
American Books have “ prosperity ” for “wealth.” The suffrage 
seems to refer not only to deliverance out of afflictions, but to 
deliverance from the special moral dangers which attend them. 
[Exod. vi. 9. Jer. v. 3. Hos. vii. 14. Amos iv. 6. See too 
the remarkable case of Ahaz, 2 Chron. xxviii. 22, and the awful 
picture in Rev. xvi. 11.] Suffering often hardens, instead of 
softening the heart; and therefore “not without reason has the 
Church taught all her faithful children to say, Suffer us not... 
for any pains of death to fall from Thee!” [Mill, Univ. Sermons, 
p- 332.] The trials of prosperity [Deut. vili.14. Jer. v.24; and 
Uzziah’s case, 2 Chron. xxvi. 16, &c.] are more commonly recog- 
nized. Even the Greeks knew, as an ethical common-place, that 
it was hard to bear success without insolence and moral deprava- 
tion. [Ar, Eth. iv. 8.] It is the Christian’s wisdom and hap- 
piness to learn the secret of strength against both these forms 
of trial, as St. Paul learned it. [Phil. iv. 12.] 

In the hour of death] So Sarum and Hereford, adding, as the 
response, “Succour us, O Lord.” This suffrage, for which York 
substitutes “from the pains of hell,’ comes before the obsecra- 
tions in Benedictine of M. Cassino. 

In the day of judgment] Sarum, York, Hereford, Roman, 
Ordo Romanus, Utrecht, Dominican, &c. The vernacular 
Litanies in Maskell have, “In the day of doom.” Golden 
Litany, “Succour us, most sweet Jesu, in that fearful day of the 
strict judgment.” Compare the Dies Ire. The following is a 
tabular view of the Deprecations and Obsecrations of the Sarum 
and Roman Litanies. 


1 Kings viii. 30. 
Col. i. 18. 

John x. 16. 

Pa CVs: 7. 


us, O Lord 


THE LITANY. 53 


We sinners do beseech thee to hear 


God; and that it may 


please thee to rule and govern thy holy 
Church universal in the right way ; 


Jonah 1. 14. 


Prov. viii. 15. 
Acts xiii. 22. 
2 Kings xviii. 5, 6. 


We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to keep and 
strengthen in the true worshipping of 


thee, in righteousness and holiness of 
life, thy Servant VICTORIA, our 


most gracious Queen and Governor ; 


Peccatores: Te rogamus, audi nos. Salisbury Use. 
Ut [{sanctam] Ecclesiam tuam [Ca- [York Use) 

* c {Salisbury Celebr, 
tholicam] regere (et defensare) dig- — ord.) 
neris: Te rogamus, audi nos. 

Ut Regi nostro et principibus nos- Salisbury Use. 
tris pacem et veram concordiam atque 
victoriam donare digneris: Te roga- 
mus, audi nos, 


And this may be set against 


Afterwards, in Sarum, Hereford, Do- 


12S cal pee We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
Ps. xvii. 5. That it may please thee to rule her 
Ixxxvi, 11. 5 i 
oe te 42. heart in thy faith, fear, and love,and that 
she may evermore have affiance in thee, 
and ever seek thy honour and glory ; 
Ps. liv. 2. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
Sarum. Roman. Litany of 1544, which joined this with the suffrage for the 
From all evil (also in York and From all eyil. Church, added the word “ God.” 
Hereford). the substitution of “ Lord,” for the original “our God,” in “O 
From the snares of the devil From all sin. Saviour of the world.” 
(Gi Jel minican, come two suffrages, which remind>us of the older “ Paci- 
From everlasting damnation From Thy wrath. 


(H.). 
From perils imminent for our 
sins, 
From assaults of demons. 
From the spirit of fornication. 
From the desire of vain-glory. 


From all uncleanness of mind 
and body (Y. H.). 

From anger and hatred, and all 
ill-will (Y.). 

From unclean thoughts. 

From blindness of heart. 

From lightning and tempest. 

From sudden and unforeseen 
death (Y. sudden). 

By the mystery of Thy holy 
Incarnation (Y. H.). 

By Thy Nativity (H. holy). 

By Thy holy Circumcision, 

By Thy Baptism. 


By Thy Fasting. 

By Thy Cross and Passion (H. 
Passion and Cross). 

By Thy precious Death. 

By Thy glorious Resurrection 
(H. Y. holy). 

By Thy wonderful Ascension 
(Y.H:): 

By the grace of the Holy Ghost 
the Paraclete (Y. H.). 

In the hour of death, succour 
us, O Lord (H.). 

In the day of judgment, deliver 
us, O Lord (Y. H.). 


From sudden and unforeseen 
death. 

From the snares of the devil. 

From the scourge of earthquake. 

From anger and hatred, and all 
ill-will. 


From the spirit of fornication. 
From lightning and tempest. 


From everlasting death. 


From pestilence, famine, and 
war. 

By the mystery of Thy holy In- 
carnation. 

By Thine Advent. 

By Thy Nativity. 

By Thy Baptism and holy Fast- 


ing. 
By Thy Cross and Passion. 


By Thy Death and Burial. 
By Thy holy Resurrection. 


By Thy wonderful Ascension. 
By the coming of the Holy 


Ghost the Paraclete. 


In the day of judgment. 


We sinners] Here begin the Petitions, or Supplications ; 


introduced by a confession of our sinfulness. So in Sarum, 
York, Hereford, Roman, Cistercian, Carthusian, Dominican, &e., 
«© We sinners beseech Thee to hear us.” In some the suffrage is, 
“ We sinners,” and the response, “ Beseech ‘Thee, hear us.” But 
the Dominican makes the reader say the whole, and the choir 
repeat the whole. As we have seen, the Sarum use was for the 
choir to repeat all after the reader, until after this petition. The 


fice,” “That Thou wouldst give us peace... That Thy merey 
and pity may preserve us.” York places the first of these here, 
the second further on. The Roman has three suftrages, “ That 
Thou spare us... That Thou forgive us... That it may please 
Thee to bring us to true repentance.” Utrecht has two, for 
peace and pardon. Cistercian, for peace, only. 

Thy holy Church wmiversal] The Preces of Fulda pray for 
“deepest peace and tranquillity,” and then for “the Holy 
Catholic Church, which is from one end of the earth to the 
other.” Sarum simply, “Thy Church.” So Hereford, Cistercian, 
Dominican. Procter’s, York, and Roman, “Thy holy Church.” 
Sarum at Ordination, “Thy Catholic Church.” Sarum reads, 
“to govern and defend;” so Cistercian. Roman, “to govern 
and preserve.’ The Ordo Romanus, “to exalt Thy Church.” 
The Primer of 1535, “to govern and lead Thy holy Catholic 
Church.” The Book of 1559 has “universally.” The Latin 
Book of 1560, “Catholicam.” The Scottish Book, “Thy holy 
Catholic Church universally.” 

In the right way| This expresses generally, what in the Sarum 
had a special reference to the ecclesiastical state and religious 
orders,—‘* in holy religion... That it may please Thee to pre- 
serve the congregations of all holy persons in Thy service,” or, as 
Hereford, in ‘‘ Thy holy service.” 

That it may please Thee to keep ...| To pray for the Sove- 
reign before the Bishops was not absolutely a novelty at the time 
when our Litany was drawn up. The Sarum, indeed, before the 
separation from Rome, had prayed first for “ Domnum Apostoli- 
cum” (the Pope), “and all degrees of the Church,” then for 
“our Bishops and Abbats,” then for “our King and Princes.” 
York and Hereford had a like order (Hermann’s Litany places 
“ Sovereign” after “Clergy,” and indeed after other classes). 
But the two vernacular Litanies printed by Maskell, place “our 
Kings,” or “our King... and Princes,” before “our Bishops,” 
The York and Hereford read “our Kings.’ So the Dominican. 
The words “and strengthen .... of life” were first added in the 
Queen’s Chapel Litany of 1558. Prayers for the spiritual good 
of the Sovereign had not been usual in old Litanies; that of 
1544 prayed that Queen Catherine might be kept in the Lord’s 
fear and love, with increase of godliness, &c. The present Roman 
prays generally, that Christian kings and princes may have peace 
and true concord. The Ambrosian Preces for First Sunday in 
Lent have, “ for Thy servants, the Emperor N., and the King N., 
our Duke, and all their army.” Fulda, “for the most pious 
Emperor, and the whole Roman army.” 

May evermore have affiance] In 1549 and 1552 the reading 


54 


Ps.exxi.5. = ‘That it may please thee to be her 

7, 8. defender and keeper, giving her the 
victory over all her enemies ; 

Ps. cii. 1, We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 

Ezra vi. 10. That it may please thee to bless and 


2 Sam. vii. 29. 5 
1 Chron. xxix.19. preserve Albert Edward Prince of 


Wales, the Princess of Wades, and all 

the Royal Family ; 

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
Ely That it may please thee to illuminate 
es all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with 
John xvi. 13. true knowledge and understanding of 
Matt. vit. thy Word; and that both* by their 

preaching and living they may set it 
forth, and shew it accordingly ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to endue 
the Lords of the Council, and all the 
Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and 
understanding ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to bless and 
keep the Magistrates, giving them 
grace to execute justice, and to main- 
tain truth ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to bless and 
keep all thy people ; 

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
eels. That it may please thee to give to 
Ps. Ixxii.7—9. gl] nations unity, peace, and concord ; 
Ps. Xvi. 1 We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 


Ps. 1xi. 1. 


Ps. 1xxxiv. 8. 


W Timsii. 1,2: 

Proy. viii. 14—16. 
xv. 22. 

2 Chron, xix. 5, 6, 


Deut. xvi. 18. 
Ezra vii. 25, 26. 
Rom. xiii. 3, 


Ps, Xvii. 6. 


Ps. xxviii. 9. 
John xvii. 11. 


Ps, lxxxvi. 1. 


THE LITANY. 


Ut Episcopos—nostros [et Preelatos (Hereford Use] _ 
nostros], in sancta religione [in tuo [Hereford Use.] 
sancto servitio], conservare digneris: 

Te rogamus, audi nos. 


Ut cunctum populum Christianum 
(pretioso sanguine tuo redemptum) 
conservare digneris: Terogamus. . 

[Ut pacem et concordiam nobis [York Use.] 
dones. | 


was “always.” <Affiance, in the sense of trust, is found in Shake- 
speare. [2nd part of H. VI. iii. 1.] 

Giving her the victory] So Sarum, York, Hereford, ‘peace, 
and true concord, and victory.” The thought probably came 
from Psalm cxliv. 10. The Lyons has, “to preserve our King 
... That Thou grant him life and victory.” Hermann has a 
suffrage, “to give to our Emperor perpetual victory against the 
enemies of God” (i. e. the Turks): Luther’s, ‘* his enemies.” 

Royal Family] In our Medieval Litanies, “our Princes” are 
mentioned. In 1544, beside the suffrage for Queen Catherine, 
there is one for “our noble Prince Edward, and all the King’s 
Majesty’s children.” The Primer of 1535 prayed for Queen 
Anne, and the King’s posterity. Under Edward and Elizabeth, 
there was no suffrage of this kind. James I. inserted the present 
suffrage, in this form, “ . . . and preserve our gracious Queen Anne, 
Prince Henry, and the rest of the King and Queen’s royal issue.” 

Bishops, Priests, and Deacons] Sarum (after a suffrage for 
the Pope, see above) prays for “our Bishops and Abbats.” York, 
“our Archbishop, and every congregation committed to him” 
(as in the York form of our Collect for Clergy and People). 
Hereford, “to preserve in Thy holy service our Bishop and our 
Prelates” (which would include Abbats and Priors, Deans and 
Archdeacons), “and us, the congregations committed to them.” 
Utrecht, “to preserve our Prelate in Thy holy service.” Com- 
pare the Lyons, “to preserve our Pontiff... That Thou wouldest 
grant him life and health;” and it proceeds to pray for the 
Clergy and People. Sq the Ambrosian Preces, “for all their 
Clergy ...and all Priests and Ministers ;” and Fulda, “our 
father the Bishop, all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and the 


whole Clergy.” The whole body of the Clergy were not defi- 
nitely prayed for in our Church Litanies until 1544, when the 
form ran, “ Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of Thy Church” 
(after the pattern of the Primer of 15385), and so continued until 
the last review, when the present form was adopted by way of 
more expressly negativing the ministerial claims of persons not in 
Holy Orders. Hermann’s has, “pastors and ministers,’ and 
also, like the Primer of 1535, prays for the sending of “ faithful 
labourers into the harvest.” 

Lords of the Council... Nobility... Magistrates] 1544. 
The Primer of 1535 has, “ That our ministers and governors may 
virtuously rule Thy people ;” and Hermann’s prays for “ princi- 
pem nostrum cum presidibus suis,” and for “magistratus.” 
Palmer compares an ancient Soissons formula, “ Life and victory 
to the Judges, and the whole army of the Franks.’ The Preces 
of Fulda apparently refer to magistrates in the words, “For all 
who are set in high place.” Our present form certainly points to 
the Tudor government by the Sovereign in his Privy Council. 
« Truth ” means the Faith held by the Church. 

All Thy people| Sarum, York, Hereford, have “to preserve 
the whole Christian people redeemed by Thy precious blood.” 
So a Litany of the ninth century in Murat. i. 77, Carthusian, 
and Dominican. Tours is nearer to our form, “to preserve the 
whole Christian people.” The Corbey MS., “To remove Thy 
wrath from the whole Christian people.” 

To give to all nations unity, peace, and concord] This comes 
partly from the old suffrage, “peace and true concord to our 
King and Princes,” and partly from a shorter Sarum suffrage, 
“That Thou wouldst give us peace;” or the York, “Give us 


THE LITANY. 55 


Deut. xxx. 6, 


That it may please thee to give us 


1 John v. 3. 

Dov vii3 an heart to love and dread thee, and 
diligently to live after thy command- 
ments ; 

Ps. exliti. 1. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 

ae eee That it may please thee to give to 

Gai. 233, all thy people increase of grace, to hear 

ohn xy, 2. 


meekly thy Word, and to receive it 
with pure affection, and to bring forth 
the fruits of the Spirit ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to bring into 
the way of truth all such as have erred 
and are deceived ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to strengthen 
such as do stand, and to comfort and 
Fs. oxlv. 14. , help the weak-hearted, and to raise 
37. up them that fall, and finally to beat 
down Satan under our feet ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to succour, 
help, and comfort, all that are in dan- 
ger, necessity, and tribulation ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 


Ps. cxix. 149. 


Deut. xi. 16. 
Matt. xxii. 29. 
2 Tim. ii. 24—26, 


Ps, xxx. 10. 
Ps. exxxviii. 3. 
Cor. x. 12. 


John xiv. 18. 
Isa. xlii, 3. 


Ps. xliy. 1, 

Heb. ii. 18. 

Deut. iv. 30, 31. 

Peeixexn. 12, 1x, 
11. 

2 Cor. i. 3, 4. vii. 
6, 


PSTrexxK) 1 2. 


Ut miserias pauperum ... . relevare Salisbury Use. 


digneris: Te rogamus, audi nos. 


peace and concord.” See above. Mabillon’s Anglican or Ar- 
morican prays for peace and unity to be given to the whole 
Christian people ; as the Roman does. In our present suffrage, 
“unity” may be understood in a religious or spiritual sense, 
while “peace” would mean freedom from external foes, and 
“concord,” freedom from internal dissension. 

To give us an heart to love, 4c.] 1544. Similar prayers exist 
in ancient Litanies; thus, the Corbey MS., “right faith, and a 
sure hope in Thy goodness, Lord Jesus.” The Fleury, “to give 
us holy love... right faith ... firm hope.” So the Chigi MS., 
in three suffrages for faith, hope, and love. Parisian, for the 
same, in one suffrage. Compare also the Sarum, “That Thou 
wouldest make the obedience of our service reasonable... That 
Thou wouldest lift up our minds to heavenly desires.’ So the 
Dominican. The Sarum Primer, “ordain in Thy holy will our 
days and works.” Roman has also, “to strengthen and keep us 
in Thy holy service.” The Anglican or Armorican, “ Grant us 
perseverance in good works... keep us in true faith and reli- 
gion.” ‘ Dread,” in the sense of holy and reverent fear ; which 
can never be dispensed with by faithful worshippers of the God- 
Man, who will come to be their Judge. “If the Gospel be true, 
if this (Second) Psalm be true, we have great cause to fear Him” 
[Vaughan’s “ Lessons of Life and Godliness,” p. 288]; but with 
“that one most holy and saving fear, the dread of His dis- 
pleasure.” [Arnold’s “ Christian Life,” ii. 229.] Here again is 
a thought much needed in times when our Lord’s Divine Majesty 
is often put out of sight. 

To give to ali Thy people increase of grace] A beautiful com- 
bination of the passage about the good ground in the Parable of 
the Sower, with James i. 21, and Gal. v. 22. Its date is 1544; 
but the Sarum Primer has something like it, ‘‘ Vouchsafe to inform 
us with right-ruled understandings,” from “Ut regularibus dis- 
ciplinis nos instruere digneris,” MS. Lit. of fifteenth century, 
Univ. Coll. The same form is in Cistercian and Dominican, and 
has a monastic import. And the Primer of 1535 has the first 
form of it, “To give the hearers of Thy word lively grace to 
understand it, and to work thereafter, by the virtue of the Holy 
Ghost.” So Hermann, “To give the hearers increase of Thy 


word, and the fruit of the Spirit.” Litanies for the Sick have 
similar topics, “To pour into his heart the grace of the Holy 
Spirit ...to bestow on him grace;” and the Ordo Romanus, 
Utrecht, Carthusian, and Eucharistic Litany in Chigi’s MS., 
have, “to pour into our hearts,” &c. An exquisite Litany in the 
Breviary of the Congregation of St. Maur prays, “That Thou 
wouldest write Thy law in our hearts... wouldest give Thy 
servants a teachable heart... that we may do Thy will with all 
our heart and mind... that we may gladly take on us Thy 
sweet yoke,” &e. 

To bring into the way of truth] In 1544. After 1535, “ That 
all which do err and be deceived, may be reduced into the way of 
verity.” Hermann, “errantes et seductos reducere in viam 
veritatis.” The Church has always prayed for this. ‘Thou 
hearest God’s Priest at the altar, exhorting God’s people to 
pray for the unbelievers, that God would convert them to the 
faith.” ([St.Aug., Ep. 217.] Compare the old Gelasian interces- 
sion on Good Friday, for all heretics and all in error; the 
Mozarabic Preces for the same day, “May forgiveness set right 
those who err from the faith ;” and, still more like our suffrage, 
the Lyons form, “ That Thou wouldest bring back the erring into 
the way of salvation.” Fuldan prays for preservation of the 
holiness and purity of the Catholic Faith. 

To strengthen such as do stand] 1544. Hermann, “stantes 
confortare.” 

The weak-hearted| 1544. Primer of 1535 prays for those who 
are “weak in virtue, and soon overcome in temptation.” Her- 
mann, “pusillanimes et tentatos consolari et adjuvare.” 

That fall] 1544. Compare the old Gelasian prayer at Absolu- 
tion of Penitents, “Succurre lapsis.” Hermann, “lapsos erigere.”” 

Beat down Satan] 1544. From Rom. xvi. 20; a text quoted 
in the Intercessory Prayer of St. Mark’s Liturgy. Primer of 
1535, “That we may the devil, with all his pomps, crush and 
tread under foot.” Hermann, “ Ut Satanam sub pedibus nostris 
conterere digneris.” Strasburg, “That Thou wouldest grant us 
heavenly armour against the devil.’ Ratold’s, Remiremont, 
Moisae, for the Sick, “That Thou wouldest drive away from him 
all the princes of darkness.” 


6 


Ou 


That it may please thee to preserve 
all that travel by land or by water, all 
women labouring of child, all sick per- 
sons and young children, and to shew 
thy pity upon all prisoners and cap- 


Ps. exxxi. $, 
evii. 23, 26—28. 

1 Timi. 15. 

James v. 14, 15, 

Luke xviii. 15, 
16. 

Psalsxuxe lds 


tives ; 
PssxCl 10. 
Jeri. 11s 
1 Tim. v. 5. 
Ps. xxv. 16. cxix. 
134, : 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
That it may please thee to defend 

Ps.exlv.19. and provide for, the fatherless children, 


| Tim. ii.1.3,4 and widows, and all that are desolate 


Matt. v. 45, 

and oppressed ; 
Fs-ext. 6. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
Matt. v. 44. ) : aoe 
Acts vii. 59) 60. That it may please thee to have 
Prov.xvi.7. mercy upon all men; 

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
Le That it may please thee to forgive 
Gen. i. 29. our enemies, persecutors, and slan- 
Ps. Ixy. 9. civ. : 

13—15. derers, and to turn their hearts ; 


Matt. vi. 11. ? 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 


That it may please thee to give and 
preserve to our use the kindly fruits of 


THE LITANY. 


[Ut iter famulorum tuorum in salu- [Hereford Use.) 
tis tue prosperitate disponas: Te ro- 
gamus, audi nos. ] 

[Ut fratribus nostris et omnibus fide- 
libus infirmis sanitatem mentis et cor- 
poris donare digneris: Te rogamus, 
audi nos. | 

Ut miserias .... captivorum in- 
tueri et relevare digneris: Te rogamus, 
audi nos. 


[York Use.] 


Salisbury Use. 


Ut fructus terre dare et conservare 
digneris: Te rogamus, audi nos. 


To succour, help, and comfort] 1544. Primer of 1535 prays 
for “all extreme poverty,” ‘‘ Thy people in affliction or in peril, 
and danger by fire, water, or land.’ Hermann, “afflictos et 
periclitantes.” Sarum and York have, “to look upon and 
relieve the miseries of the poor.” So Dominican. 

All that travel] 1544. Compare Hereford, “that Thou wouldest 
dispose the journey of Thy servants 7m salutis tue prosperi- 
tate” (as in the Collect, “ Assist us mercifully,” originally a 
prayer for one about to travel); and Dominican, “to bring 
to a harbour of safety all faithful persons, nayigantes et itine- 
rantes.’ York has, “to give to our brethren and all faithful 
people who are sick, health of mind and body;” and Sarum 
and York add “ captives” to “the poor,” in the suffrage 
above cited. Compare the entreaty in Primer of 1535, “ that 
teeming women may have joyful speed in their labour,” and for 
“sick people.” So Hermann, “for pregnant women, infants, and 
the sick, and captives.’ Compare also this and the preceding 
and following suffrages of our Litany, with intercessions in St. 
Chrysostom’s Liturgy, “for the young, for those that travel by 
land or by water ;” with St. Basil’s, “Sail Thou with the voyagers, 
travel with the travellers, stand forth for the widows, shield the 
orphans, deliver the captives, heal the sick, remember all who are 
in affliction or necessity . .. . be all things to all men ;” with 
the Gelasian prayer on Good #riday, that God would “ open pri- 
sons, loosen chains, grant a return to travellers, health to the 
sick, a safe harbour to those at sea ;” and with the Ambrosian 
Preces for first Sunday in Lent, “for orphans, captives, ... . 
voyagers, travellers, those placed in prisons, in mines” (at forced 
labour there), “in exile.” Probably, in these ancient interces- 
sions, what was specially before the Church’s mind was unjust 
and cruel imprisonment, so common in hard and lawless times, or 
under a Cesarean despotism. To visit Christian prisoners was the 
delight of St. Leonard, the contemporary of Clovis I.; and St. 
Bathildis, Queen of Clovis II., “remembering her own bondage” 
(she had been a Saxon captive), “set apart vast sums for the 
redemption of captives.” [Milman’s Latin Christianity, ii. 221.] 

The fatherless children, and widows] One of the tenderest 
petitions in the Prayer Book, and full of touching significance, as 


offered to Him who entrusted His Mother to His Apostle. It was 
placed here in 1544 (the words being clearly suggested by such 
passages as Ps. cxlvi. 9; Jer. xlix. 11), but, like other passages of 
that date, is true to the old spirit of Church prayer. St. Mark’s 
Liturgy prays for the widow and the orphan. Hermann, “ ut 
pupillos et viduas protegere et providere digneris.” 

In “all that are desolate and oppressed,” the Church seems 
to sweep tue whole field of the sorrow which comes from “ man’s 
inhumanity to man,” and which no civilization can abolish ; and 
invokes for every such sufferer the help of Him whose sympathy 
is for all at once, and for each as if there were none beside. This 
indeed is one of the most stupendous results of the Incarnation, 
although perhaps but seldom faced in thought: that our Lord’s 
sacred Heart is, so to speak, really accessible at once to all who 
need its inexhaustible compassion: He cares for each, not only 
as God, but as Man, with a special, personal, human tenderness, 
to which His Godhead gives a marvellous capacity of extension. 

Mercy wpon all men] This also is of 1544: the Primer of 
1535 had expressed the same all-comprehending charity: “that 
unto all people Thou wilt show Thy inestimable mercy.” The 
Church has ever prayed for all men. That her prayers do not 
avail for all, is not from any defect in her charity, or in the Divine 
benignity, but from the bar which a rebellious will can oppose to 
the powers of the kingdom of grace. Bp. Duppa’s note is, “ The 
objection against this is answered by what St. Paul saith, 1 Tim. 
ii. 4: the prayer being made in the same sense as God is said to 
will that all men should be saved.” 

Forgive our enemies| 1544: Primer of 1535, “ forgive all 
warriors, persecutors, and oppressors of Thy people, and convert 
them to grace.” Our present form (which is the same as Her- 
mann’s) is certainly preferable, and more like the Anglo-Saxon, 
“to bestow on our enemies peace and love.” Compare St. Chry- 
sostom’s Liturgy: for those who hate and persecute us for Thy 
Name’s sake; for those who are without, and are wandering in 
error” (compare a previous suffrage), “that Thou wouldest con- 
vert them to what is good, and appease their wrath against us.” 

to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits] “ Kindly” 
of course means natural, produced after their kind. See Abp. 


THE LITANY, 57 


Ps.exlii.1. the earth, so as in due time we may 
enjoy them ; 

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
Acts v. 31. That it ma 
Acts. 81. y please thee to give us 
2 Chron. xxx. 18 true repentance ; to forgive us all our 
Ps. xix. 12. ‘sin elo nd i : 
Ps. xix. 12. s, negligences, and ignorances; and 


Jer. xxvi. 13, 
James i. 283—25. 


to endue us with the grace of thy Holy 
Spirit to amend our lives according to 
thy holy Word ; 
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. 
Son of God + we beseech thee to 


mes axX. 7, 


John ‘vi. 68, 69. 
Heb. iv. 14—16, 


hear us. _ 
Son of God : we beseech thee to hear 
us. 
ae ae O Lamb of God + that takest away 


the sins of the world ; 
Grant us thy peace. 


John xvi. 33, 


O Lamb of God + that takest away 
the sins of the world ; 
Luke xvii. 13. 


Have mercy upon us. 


[Ut remissionem omuium peccato- [York Use.] 
rum nobis donare digneris. | 


Fili Dei: Te rogamus audi nos. Salisbury Use. 


Agnus Dei, qui tollis peceata mundi : [ryons.] 
[dona nobis pacem. | 


Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi: salisbury Use. 
miserere nobis. 


Trench, English Past and Present, p. 167. So, “a kindly Scot” 
meant a native Scot; and Ninian Wingate, an able opponent of 
Knox, calls Linlithgow his “kindly town,” i. e. his native town. 
This suffrage may represent to us the oldest Western use of 
Litanies, to avert excessive droughts or rains, and to secure a good 
harvest. The substance of it is in Sarum, York, and Hereford, as 
in Anglo-Saxon, Lyons, Roman, Cistercian, Dominican. York 
adds, “ Ut aeris temperiem bonam nobis dones.” So Ordo Romanus 
and Utrecht. So Tours, “give us the fruit of the earth,... 
serenity of sky .... good temperature of weather.” So the 
Fleury: for “abundance of fruits, serenity of sky, seasonable 
rain.” So in Ambrosian Preces: “ Pro aeris temperie, ac fructu, 
et fecunditate terrarum, precamur te.’ The Sarum Primer asks 
for “ wholesome and reasonable air.’ Compare the anthems sung 
processionally in Sarum for rain or fair weather. “O Lord, 
King, God of Abraham, give us rain over the face of the earth, 
that this people may learn that Thou art the Lord our God, Alle- 
luia. Is there any among the idols of the Gentiles that can give 
rain, but only Thou, O God? or can the heavens give rain except 
Thou willest ?”? [Jer. xiv. 22.] “The waters are come in like a 
flood, O God, over our heads :”” then Psalm Ixix. 1. 

So as in due time, ¥c.] Was added 1544. The whole suffrage 
was never more valuable than at a time like the present, when 
there is a tendency to substitute “laws of nature” for a Living 
God, and to ignore the fact that behind, above, beneath, around 
all “laws” is the absolute sovereign Personality of Him who ‘is 
ever present with His works, one by one, and confronts every 


thing which He has made by His particular and most loving Pro-* 


vidence,” at once the Lord of life and death, of health and sick- 
ness, of rain and drought, of plenty and famine. If men will not 
pray for seasonable weather, they cannot logically pray for reco- 
very from sickness, for escape from shipwreck, or any temporal 
good whatever. 

To give us true repentance, to forgive us] This suffrage, as it 
stands, was framed in 1544, Sarum, York, and Hereford have 
not this petition for repentance, but Roman has it, with prayers 
for pardon, before the suffrage for the Church: see above. York 
has, “ That it may please Thee to give us remission of all our 
sins :” so the Ordo Romanus, which also asks for “ spatium peeni- 
tentiz ;” and Sarum has, “to bring again upon us the eyes of 
Thy mercy.” Carthusian, “ spatium peenitentie et emendationem 
vite :” so the Chigi MS., ‘ That Thou wouldest grant us a place 
of repentance;” and Utrecht asks for “compunction of heart 
and a fountain of tears ;” so Tours; so Fleury, “To give us for- 
giveness of ail our sins, Lord Jesus, we beseech Thee.,... 


That Thou wouldest grant us veram penitentiam agere.’ The 
ordinary Parisian has suffrages for true repentance, for remission 
of all sins, for compunction of heart and a fountain of tears. 
Litanies for the Sick have several suffrages of this kind. Ratold’s 
MS. [in Menard, note 923], “That Thou wouldest grant him com- 
punction of heart . ... a fountain of tears... . space of re- 
pentance, if possible.” Moisae, ‘* To bestow on him fruitful and 
saving repentance .... a contrite and humbled heart... . 
a fountain of tears.” Salzburg, “compunction of heart... 
a fountain of tears.” Narbonne, “ That Thou wouldest give him 
remission of all sins.” Remiremont, “pardon, remission, forgive- 
ness of all his sins,” &c. So in the Sarum Litany of Commenda- 
tion of the Soul, and the Jumiéges Litany : “ Cuncta ejus peccata 
oblivioni perpetue tradere .... remember not the sins and 
ignorances of his youth.’ This, from the Vulgate of our Psalm 
xxv. 7, has supplied our present “sins . ... and ignorances.” 
“Negligentiam” occurs in the Vulgate of Num. v.6. ‘“Negli- 
gences”’ mean careless omissions (compare Hammond’s prayer, 
«Lord, forgive my sins, especially my sins of omission”). ‘“ Igno- 
rances,” faults done in ignorance of our duty, such ignorance being 
itself a fault, because the result of carelessness. 

Among the medizval suffrages omitted in our present Litany 
are, “That Thou wouldest repay everlasting good to our benefac- 
tors—that Thou wouldest give eternal rest to all the faithful 
departed—that it may please Thee to visit and comfort this 
place:” and last of all the petitions came, ‘‘ That it may please 
Thee to hear us;” as now in the Roman. This was omitted in 
1544, as superfluous. 

Son of God] The Sarum rule, in the procession after the 
Mass “ for brethren and sisters,” was that the choir should repeat 
in full “Son of God,’ &c., with the Agnus and the Kyrie. 
Tallis’ Litany shows that this practice was continued by our 
Choirs. 

O Lamb of God] The custom of saying Agnus Dei here is 
referred to in the Gelasian Rubric for Easter Eve. In Sarum, 
York, Hereford, as now in Roman and Parisian, Carthusian, Domi- 
nitan, the Agnus is thrice said. The Sarum responses are, 
«Hear us, O Lord, Spare us, O Lord, Have mercy upon us:” the 
first and second of these are transposed in Roman and Parisian, 
as in York, Hereford, Dominican. The responses in Tours were, 
«Spare us, Give us pardon, Hearus.” The Ordo Romanus has a 
twofold Agnus. Lyons a fourfold, with “Spare us, Deliver us, 
Grant us peace, Have mercy upon us:” so that our present form 
is just the second half of Lyons. The Agnus comes but once in 
the Cistercian. “ Grant us peace ” is the third response in Utrecht, 


I 


58 THE 


O Christ, hear us. 
O Christ, hear us. 
Lord, have merey upon us. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. 
Christ, have merey upon us. 
Christ, have mercy upon us. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. 


Ps. vi, 2. 4. 
Psvexxii. 2,73, 


Ps. iyi. 1. 
Luke xviii. 13. 


{| Then shall the Priest, and the people with 
him, say the Lord’s Prayer. 


UR Father, which art in heaven, 
Hallowed be thy Name. Thy 
kingdom come. Thy will be done in 
earth, As it is in heaven. Give us 
this day our daily bread. And forgive 
us our trespasses, As we forgive them 
that trespass against us. And lead us 
not into temptation; But deliver us 
from evil. Amen. 


Priest. 
Ps. ciii. 10. O Lord, deal not with us after our 
sins. 
Answer. 
Job xi. 6, Neither reward us after our iniquities. 


Let us pray. 
GOD, merciful Father, that de- 


1 John vy. 14, 15. 


2 Chron. xxx. 9. 


O 


2 Cor. i. 3. ; Lake 

PS ie Wo xxxiv. spisest not the sighing of a con- 
18. . QO 

Luke xi. 1. trite heart, nor the desire of such as 


Rom. viii. 26. : ‘ 
Ps.1.is.*xxv. be sorrowful; Mercifully assist our 
iz : 
Luke xxii. 31, 32. prayers that we make before thee in 

Job y. 12, 13. o,¢ 

Ps. xxxiii.10. all our troubles and adversities, when- 

2 Kings xix. 20. ‘ 
32. soever they oppress us; and graciously 

Ps. cxviii. 6, 7. . : . 

2Cor.xi.7—9. hear us, that those evils which the 


LITANY. 


(Christe, audi nos. ] [Hereford Use.] 


Kyrie eleison. Salisbury Use. 


Christe eleison. 


Kyrie eleison. 


ATER noster, qui es in ceelis; 
sanctificetur nomen tuum: ad- 
veniat regnum tuum: fiat voluntas 
tua, sicut in ccelo, et in terra. Panem 
nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie: 
et dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et 
nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris: et 
ne nos inducas in tentationem: sed 
libera nos a malo. Amen. 


Domine, non secundum peccata nos- 
tra facias nobis. 


Neque secundum iniquitates nostras 
retribuas nobis. 


EUS, qui contritorum non despicis 
gemitum, et merentium non 
spernis affectum ; adesto precibus nos- 
tris, quas pietati tuz pro tribulatione 
nostra offerimus: implorantes ut nos 
clementer respicias, et solito pietatis 
tu intuitu tribuas, ut quicquid contra 
nos diabolice fraudes atque humane 


Carthusian, Hermann. The Sarum Litany for the Dying had 
also, “Grant him peace:” the ordinary Sarum Litany had a 
special suffrage for peace, and “grant us peace” was familiar as 
the response to the third Agnus said at Mass, immediately after 
the breaking of the Blessed Sacrament: the Primer of 1535 has, 
«« Have mercy, Have mercy, Give us peace and rest.” The great 
value of this supplication consists in its recognition of our Blessed 
Lord as the Victim that was once indeed slain, but is of perpetual 
efficacy. He took away our sins, in one sense, by His atoning 
Passion: and the Atonement can never be repeated. In another 
sense, He continually fakes away our sins, by appearing for us as 
“the Lamb that was slain,” presenting Himself as such to the 
Father, and pleading the virtue of His death. In this sense, as 
Bp. Phillpotts says [Pastoral of 1851, p. 54], “though once for 
all offered, that Sacrifice is ever living and continuous . . . To 
Him His Church . . . continually cries, Lamb of God. . . not, 
that tookest away, but still takest.” With regard to the peti- 
tion to the Prince of peace, who “is our Peace,” for peace, com- 
pare the second Collect at Evensong. It is Christ’s peace, not 
the world’s: and this is brought out by the addition of “thy” in 
our form. Very touching are the entreaties in the Litany of the 
Abbey of St. Denis for St. Mark’s day [Martene iv. 353], “O be- 
stower of peace, youchsafe us perpetual peace, Have mercy .. . 
O benignant Jesus, receive our souls in peace,” &c. 

O Christ, hear us| Hereford: so too in Sarum Primer, and 
Yoman. The supplication also occurs in Mabillon’s Caroline 


Litany ; after “ Agnus... mundi, Christ hear us; three 
Kyries ; Christ reigns, Christ commands, Christ conquers (thrice), 
Christ hear us.” It also occurs in his Anglican, or Armorican. 
Lyons, Corbey, Tours, have it thrice, Strasburg once. The 
ordinary Ambrosian Litany has thrice, “O Christ, hear our 
voices ;” then thrice, “Hear, O God, and have mercy upon us.” 
Such “repetitions” are not “vain,” unless those in Ps. exxxvi. are 
so: and compare Matt. xxvi. 44, 

Lord, have mercy] Sarum, York, &. This is the only occa- 
sion on which, with us, the people repeat every one of the three 
sentences of the Kyrie after the Minister. Such was the old 
Sarum rule as to this Kyrie. [See also p. 22.] 

Our Father | Here begins the Second Part of the Litany. 

O Lord, deal not with us| In Sarum this verse and response, 
adapted from Psalm ciii. 10, were separated from the Lord’s 
Prayer by “O Lord, show Thy merey—And grant—Let Thy 
mercy come also upon us, O Lord, Even Thy salvation, according 
to Thy word: We have sinned with our fathers, We have done 
amiss and dealt wickedly.” In York only this last verse and 
response intervene. In Roman, “O Lord, deal not,” comes later. 
In the ordinary Parisian, it comes, as with us, immediately 
after the Lord’s Prayer. 

O God, merciful Father] This is very slightly altered from 
the Collect in the Sarum Mass “pro tribulatione cordis :” the 
Epistle being 2 Cor. i. 3—5, the Gospel, John xvi. 20—22. There 
is something pathetically significant in this adoption (1544) into 


THE LITANY. 


Ps xxxv, 18, 
Ixxix. 14, 
Heb. xiii, 15, 


craft and subtilty of the devil or 
man worketh against us, be brought 
to nought; and by the providence of 
thy goodness they may be dispersed ; 
that we thy servants, being hurt by 
“no persecutions, may evermore give 
thanks unto thee in thy holy Church ; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver 
us for thy Name’s sake. 


Pssxil. 5, evi. 7; 
8. 


ee te GOD; we have heard with our 

i ears, and our fathers have de- 
clared unto us, the noble works that 
thou didst in their days, and in the 
old time before them. 

Num, x. 35. O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver 
us for thine honour. 

1 John v. 7. Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 

Answer. 

paket: B30 18, As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be + world without end. 
Amen. 

te From our enemies defend us, O 
Christ. 

Isa. Ixiii, 9. Graciously look upon our afflictions. 


the ordinary Litany of a prayer composed for “ cloudy and dark 
days.” It may remind us of the selection of part of this same 
passage from 2 Cor, i., as the capitulum of the ordinary Sunday 
Vespers in Roman, and Saturday Vespers in Sarum. ‘The lesson 
is obvious—that God is always needed as a Comforter. It may 
be added, that a somewhat different version of this Sarum prayer 
occurs in the Missal published in 1552 by Flaccus Illyricus, and 
supposed to represent the use of Salzburg in the tenth or eleventh 
century. By comparing our English with the Sarum form, it 
will be seen that we have added “ merciful Father,” ‘Thy ser- 
vants,” “evermore,” and made a general reference to “all” 
troubles, “ whensoever they oppress us :”’ omitting a reference to 
God’s “‘ accustomed” loving-kindness,—the clause, ‘‘ but delivered 
from all tribulation and distress,’—and “being comforted” in 
the final clause. Hermann’s and Luther’s form is very like ours, 
but somewhat stronger, “in the afflictions which continually 
oppress us.” 

O Lord, arise] This, the last verse of our Psalm xliv., slightly 
altered, occurs, after several Preces, in the York Litany. It also 
occurs in the Sarum and York rites for Rogation Monday. In 
Sarum, the whole choir in their stalls repeated this “O Lord, 
arise,” with Alleluia. Then was said, “O God, we have heard 
with our ears, our fathers have told us,” that being the whole of 
the first verse of the Psalm according to the Vulgate: and then 
“immediately follows, Gloria.” Then again, “O Lord, arise :” 
after which the procession set forth, the chanter commencing the 
Antiphon, “Arise, ye saints, from your abodes,” &c. Another 
Antiphon began, “ We and all the people will walk in the name 
of the Lord our God.’ In York the first “ Exurge” was an 
anthem, “in eundo cantanda;” then came the first verse of the 
psalm, then a second “ Exurge,” after which the next words of 
the psalm were recited, “ The work which Thou didst,” &c., and 
so on through the whole psalm: “Exurge” being again said at 
the end. Among the processional Antiphons was, “ Kyrie eleison, 
Thou who by Thy precious blood hast rescued the world from the 
jaws of the accursed serpent.” It may be observed, that in 


59 


moliuntur adversitates ad nihilum re- salisbury Use. 
digas, et consilio misericordiae tus 
allidas : quatenus nullis adversitatibus 
lesi, sed ab omni tribulatione et an- 
gustia liberati, gratias tibi im ecclesia 


Per. 


tua referamus consolati. 


Exurge, Domine, adjuva nos, et 
libera nos propter nomen tuum. 


EUS, auribus nostris audivimus, 
patresque nostri annuntiaverunt 
nobis, 
[Opus quod operatus es in diebus 
eorum, et in diebus antiquis. ] 
Exurge, Domine, adjuva nos, et Salisbury Use. 
libera nos propter nomen tuum. 
Gloria Patri, et Filo, et Spiritui 
Sancto. 


[York Use.] 


Sicut erat in principio, et nune, et 
semper, et in seecula seeculorum. Amen. 


Ab inimicis nostris defende nos, 
Christe. 
Afflictionem nostram benignus vide. 


« Exurge” the “ redime” of the Vulgate was altered into 
“Jibera :” and in the second repetition of ‘O Lord, arise,” we 
have altered “ name’s sake” into “ honour.” 

O God, we have heard] An appropriate representative of 
the Psalmody which followed the Litanies. [Jebb’s Choral Ser- 
vice, p. 426.] Inthe ordinary Sarum Litany, as used out of Roga- 
tion-tide, there is no psalm: our Litany, as we have seen, here 
represents the old Rogation use. It also resembles the present 
Roman Litany, inasmuch as the latter has a psalm (our 70th) 
with a Gloria, after the Lord’s Prayer: after the psalm come 
certain Preces, partly intercessory, then ten Collects, and a Con- 
clusion. The ordinary Parisian has Preces before the psalm, and 
twelve collects after it. The order in Sarum, York, Hereford, is, 
Lord’s Prayer, Preces, and Collects:—seven in Sarum, ten in 
York (the York Use has various minute resemblances to the 
Roman), and nine in Hereford. Among the York collects are 
ours for the first and fourth Sundays after Trinity, —the Collect 
for Clergy and People,—for Purity,—‘“O God, whose nature ;” 
“ Assist us; “O God, from whom.” With respect to the forty- 
fourth Psalm, this fragment of it is specially apposite, as suggest- 
ing the true comfort amid despondency: compare Ps. Ixxvii. 10, 
Isa. li. 9, &e. The history of God’s past mercies is a fountain of 
hope for those who own Him as the Rock of ages, the © I Am” 
to all ages of His Church. 

O Lord, arise] In this repetition we have a relic of the old 
use of Antiphons, to intensify the leading idea of the psalm as 
used at the time. See Neale’s Commentary on the Psalms, 
p. 46. 

Glory] This Gloria is an appendage to “O God, we have 
heard.” Coming as it does amid supplications for help, it wit- 
nesses to the duty and the happiness of glorifying God at all 
times and under all circumstances. Compare the end of Psalm 
Ixxxix. “Deo gratias” was in the fourth century a perpetual 
watchword; and the “ Vere dignum” testifies to the duty of 
“ giving thanks always.” Compare Acts xvi. 25. 

From our enemies| These preces, to the end of “ Graciously 

12 


> 


60 THE LITANY. 


Ps. xxv. 16—18, 


Pitifully behold the sorrows of our 


hearts. 

pron tras 16. Mercifully forgive the sins of thy 
people. . 

EOP easel 36, Favourably with mercy hear our 
prayers. 

Matt. ix. 27. O Son of David, have mercy upon us. 

ee Both now and ever vouchsafe to 


hear us, O Christ. 
Graciously hear us, O Christ ; gra- 
ciously hear us, O Lord Christ. 


John xiv. 13, 14, 
1 John y. 14, 15. 


Priest. 
Ps. xxxii. 10. O Lord, let thy mercy be shewed 
upon us ; 
Answer. 


* Ps, xxxiii. 21. As we do put our trust in thee. 


Let us pray. 
Recor tt, W* humbly beseech thee, O 
Pere Wels Father, mercifully to look 


para ix-1, upon our infirmities; and for the glory 
Ps, xxxii 10. of thy Name turn from us all those 
Matt. v. 8. 16. S : 

Tha e. evils that we most righteously have 
) Tim. ii. 5. B “ . 7 
1 John ii, 1,2. deserved ; and grant, that in all our 


troubles we may put our whole trust 
and confidence in thy mercy, and ever- 
more serve thee in holiness and pure- 
ness of living, to thy honour and glory, 
through our only Mediator and Advo- 
cate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


G A Prayer of St. Chrysostom. 

LMIGHTY God, who hast given 

us grace at this time with one 
accord to make our common supplica- 
tions unto thee; and dost promise, 
that when two or three are gathered 
together in thy Name thou wilt grant 
their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, 
the desires and petitions of thy ser- 
vants, as may be most expedient for 
them ; granting us in this world know- 
ledge of thy truth, and in the world 


to come life everlasting. Amen. 


Dolorem cordis nostri respice cle- salisbury Use. 
mens. 


Peccata populi tui pius indulge. 
Orationes nostras pius exaudi. 


Fili (Dei vivi), miserere nobis, 

Hic et in perpetuum nos custodire 
digneris, Christe. 

Exaudi nos, Christe ; exaudi, exaudi 
nos, Christe. 


Fiat misericordia tua, Domine, su- 
per nos. 


Quemadmodum speravimus in te. 


| ee nostram, que- 
sumus, Domine, propitius respice, 
et mala omnia que juste meremur 
(omnium Sanctorum tuorum inter- 
cessionibus) averte. Per. 


hear us,” were sung in procession, according to the use of Sarum, 
on St. Mark’s day, “if it was necessary, in time of war.” The 
choir repeated every verse. They were also in a Litany for the 
Dedication of a church, in the pontifical of St. Dunstan. But 
when they were adopted into the Litany of 1544, “ Son of David” 
was made to represent “ Fili Dei vivi-’ It has been conjectured, 
that this was owing to some misunderstanding of “ Dei vivi,” 
when written in a contracted form. In the St. Denis Litany 
[Martene iy. 353] we have a touching series of entreaties to 
Christ, ““O good Jesu, protect us every where and always. Have 
mercy .. . O our Redeemer, let not Thy Redemption be lost in 
us. Have mercy .... Lord God our King, pardon the guilt 
of us all, Have mercy,” &c. 


O Lord, let Thy mercy] This verse and response, Psalm xxxiii. 
21, are part of the Sarum preces of Prime. In several editions 
of our Litany they were called the Versicle and the Answer. 

We humbly beseech Thee] This is an enlarged and improved 
form of the Sarum Collect in the Memorial of All Saints (among 
the Memorize Communes at the end of Lauds, feria 2), In 1544 
it ran simply, “We humbly ..... and for the glory of Thy 
name sake, turn from us all those evils that we most righteously 
have deserved. Grant this, O Lord God, for our Mediator and 
Advocate, Jesu Christ’s sake ;” and was followed by four other 
collects and the Prayer of St. Chrysostom. In 1549 it took its 
present form, save that “name sake” was still read, and that 
“holiness” was not prefixed to “ pureness” until 1552. 


PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS. 61 


2 Cor. xiii. 
HE grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the love of God, and 
the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be 
with us all evermore. Amen. 


Here endeth the Litany. 


A Prayer of St. Chrysostom] This was added to the end of 
the Litany on its first introduction in its present form, in 1544. 
The Grace of our Lord] Was placed at the end of the Litany, 


after the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, in the Queen’s Chapel Litany 
of 1558. [See note to it, p. 28.] 


PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS 


UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, 


q To be used before the two final Prayers of the Litany, or of Morning and Evening Prayer. 


PRAYERS. 


gq “For Rain. 
GOD, heavenly Father, who by 
thy Son Jesus Christ hast pro- 


Jokn xvi. 23. 

Matt. vi. 31—33. 

1 Kings viii, 35, 
36. 


Job v. 8—10. 1 . 

Pe io. yo, mised to all them that seek thy King- 
civ. 13—15, : a 

ieee dom, and the righteousness thereof, 


all things necessary to their bodily 
sustenance ; Send us, we beseech thee, 
in this our necessity, such moderate 
rain and showers, that we may receive 
the fruits of the earth to our comfort, 
and to thy honour; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


ALMIGHTY. Lord God;s who: toe 
Pet. iii. 20. 
drown all the world, except eight per- 
Hag. ii. 17—19. 
SO Isa. xxvi. 9. 
again; We humbly beseech thee, that ps evi 31. 
waters, yet upon our true repentance 


¥ Lor fair Weather. 
vii. 17. 19. 23. 
for the sin of man didst once , X,Y!" 
Isa. liv. 9. 
Jer. v. 24, 25. 
sons, and afterward of thy great mercy soi 1214. 
didst promise never to destroy it so 7%.°S¥i19: 
xlix. 13, 
although we for our iniquities have 
worthily deserved a plague of rain and 
thou wilt send us such weather, as 
that we may receive the fruits of the 


THE OCCASIONAL PRAYERS. 


This collection of special prayers and thanksgivings was 
appended to Morning and Evening Prayer in 1661, but some of 
the prayers had been in use at an earlier date. Such a collection 
had occupied a place at the end of the ancient Service Books of 
the Church: and the use of prayers similar to these is very 
ancient. 

In a printed Missal of 1514 (which formerly belonged to Bishop 
Cosin, and is now in his Library at Durham), there are Miss and 
Memoriz Communes (among others) with the following titles :— 


Misse. Memoria Communes. 
Missa pro serenitate aéris, Contra aéreas tempestates. 
pluvia. invasores ecclesie. 
tempore belli. adversantes. 
contra smortalitatem ho- paganos. 


minum. 
pro peste animalium. 


But such occasional prayers were not uniformly the same in 
the ancient Service Books; varying at different times according 
to the necessities of the period and of the locality. 

In the first edition of the English Prayer Book, two oocasional 
prayers, the one “for Rain,” and the other “for Fair Weather,” 


were inserted among the Collects at the end of the Communion 
Service. These were the same as those now placed here. Four 
more were added in 1552, the two “in time of Dearth,” and those 
“‘in time of War,” and of “ Plague or Sickness ;” and the whole 
six were then placed at the end of the Litany. Thanksgivings 
corresponding to these were added in 1604: and the remainder, 
both of the prayers and thanksgivings, were added in 1661, when 
all were placed where they now stand. These occasional Prayers 
and Thanksgivings are almost entirely original compositions, 
though they were evidently composed by divines who were 
familiar with expressions used for the same objects in the old 
Services. With several a special interest is connected, but others 
may be passed over without further notice. What few changes 
were made in this collection of occasional prayers are traceable to 
Bishop Cosin, except the important insertion of the Prayer for 
the Parliament, that for all Conditions of Men, and the General 
Thanksgiving. The rubric standing at the head of the prayers 
is Cosin’s; but he would have explained “ occasional” by adding 
“if the time require,’ at the end of it; which words were 
not printed. His revised Prayer Book also contains a rubrical 
heading in the margin, “ For the Parliament and Convocation 
during their sessions,” but no prayer is annexed, Probably the 
Commissioners concluded that as Convocation is part of Parlia- 


62 PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS. 


earth in due season; and learn both 
by thy punishment to amend our lives, 
and for thy clemency to give thee 
praise and glory ; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


{| In the time of Dearth and Famine. 
GOD, heavenly Father, whose 


Matt. vii. 11. 
Jer. v. 24. 


ee ae gift it is, that the rain doth fall, 
oel i. 16—20. : 
a, the earth is fruitful, beasts increase, 
2 Chron. 2 oe och 


and fishes do multiply; Behold, we 
beseech thee, the afflictions of thy 
people; and grant that the scarcity 
and dearth (which we do now most 
justly suffer for our iniquity), may 
through thy goodness be mercifully 


Isa. xxx. 23, 24. 
Rom. viii. 32. 
Eph. iii. 20, 21. 


turned into cheapness and plenty, for 
the love of Jesus Christ our Lord; to 
whom with thee and the Holy Ghost 
be all honour and glory, now and for 


ever. Amen. 
{ Or this. 

2 Kings vi. 25. GOD, merciful Father, who, in 
2 Kings vi. 1. 16. e 3 zd 
Bese: the time of Elisha the prophet, 
er. vill. 14. 
Rom. xv. 4. s ; | - 
oe didst suddenly in Samaria turn great 
Zech. vili, 12. 


Poexe isis, Scarcity and dearth into plenty and 

re cheapness; Have mercy upon us, that 
we, who are now for our sins punished 
with like adversity, may likewise find 
a seasonable relief: Increase the fruits 
of the earth by thy heavenly benedic- 
tion; and grant that we, receiving thy 
bountiful liberality, may use the same 
to thy glory, the relief of those that 
are needy, and our own comfort, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Prov. iii. 9. 
James ii. 15, 16. 
Deut. xvi. 14. 


{| In the time of War and Tumutts. 
ALMIGHTY God, King of all 
eee ts kings, and Governor of all things, 
7 Chron. xx. 4.6. whose power no creature is able to re- 
Ps. oxix. 137. sist, to whom it belongeth justly to 
punish sinners, and to be merciful to 


2 Kings xix. 5. 


1 Sam. vii. 8. 
xii. 10. 


Ps. xviii. 27. 
foprae 13, them that truly repent; Save and de- 
Ps. xeiv, 2”, liver us, we humbly beseech thee, from 


the hands of our enemies ; abate their 1 chron. xxix.11. 
: : : Ps. xeviii. 1. 
pride, assuage their malice, and con- 
found their devices; that we, bemg 
armed with thy defence, may be pre- 
served evermore from all perils, to 
glorify thee, who art the only giver 
of all victory ; through the merits of 
thy only Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. 


Amen. 


S| In the time of any common Plague or 
Sickness. 


ALMIGHTY God, who in thy Bev 
wrath didst send a plague upon he 


ZKV. 9, 
o 5 A 2 Sam, xxiv. 15, 
thine own people in the wilderness 16 
4 ; A F 1 Kings viii. 37— 
for their obstinate rebellion against _ 3% . 
Hosea vi. 1. 


Moses and Aaron; and also, in the Ps.}xxix.8. 


time of king David, didst slay with Num). xvi #7, 


the plague of pestilence threescore and ? $4”, xxiv. 17, 
ten thousand, and yet remembering Ps.x**!*-10. 1% 
thy mercy didst save the rest; Have Exod xxiii. 25. 
pity upon us miserable sinners, who 

now are visited with great sickness 

and mortality ; that like as thou didst 

then accept of an atonement, and didst 

command the destroying Angel to 

cease from punishing, so it may now 

please thee to withdraw from us this 

plague and grievous sickness; through 

Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


{ In the Ember Weeks to be said every day, 
Sor those that are to be admitted into Holy 
Orders. 
LMIGHTY God, our heavenly Eph. iv. 6. 


2 Cor. v. 19. 


ga Acts xx. 28. 
Father, who hast purchased to Acts x= 2 ee 


thyself an universal Church by the Ps.}xxx. 14. 
j 2 Tim. ii. 7. 
precious blood of thy dear Son; Mer- Acts xit.2, 5. 
a +. 1 Tim. v. 22, 
cifully look upon the same, and at this }4".",% 
a ak a 1 Rom. x. 14, 15. 
time so guide and govern the minds ym % i lo 
: ae 5, 6. 
of thy servants the Bishops and Pas- po. 16 99. 
re é 1 Tim. iv. 12. 16. 
tors of thy flock, that they may lay 563" vy 1820, 
hands suddenly on no man, but faith- 1}7™- #3 + 
fully and wisely make choice of fit 
persons to serve in the sacred Ministry 


of thy Church. And to those which 


ment by the constitution of the country, a separate prayer for 
the former was out of place. 
§ In the time of Dearth and Famine. 

The second of these prayers was—for what reason is not appa- 
rent—left out of the Prayer Book in several of the editions pub- 
lished during the reigns of Queen Elizabeth and James I. 
Bishop Cosin wrote it in the margin of his revised Prayer Book, 
and it was re-inserted in 1661, with some slight alterations of his 
making. 

§ In the time of any common Plague or Sickness. 
The collect form which is so strictly preserved in these prayers 


was strengthened in this one by the addition of another Scrip- 
tural allusion in the invocation. This—from “didst send a 
plague” as far as “and also ’?—was inserted by Bishop Cosin, as 
were also the words relating to the atonement offered. The 
general tendency of such alterations by Bishop Cosin was to raise 
the objective tone of the prayers here and elsewhere; making 
our addresses to God of a more reverent and humble character. 


§ The Ember Collects. 
Every Day] The principle laid down in the rubric before the 
Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, applies to the use of these Collects. 
One of them ought, therefore, to be said at Evensong of the 


PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS. 63 


shall be ordained to any holy function, 
give thy grace and heavenly benedic- 
tion; that both by their life and doc- 
trine they may set forth thy glory, 
and set forward the salvation of all 
‘men ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 
¥ Or this. 
LMIGHTY God, the giver of all 
good gifts, who of thy divine 
providence hast appointed divers orders 


James i. 17. 
Luke vi. 12, 13. 
Eph. iv. 8. 11, 12. 
1 Cor. xii. S10. 
Heb. v. 4, 5. 


in thy Church; Give thy grace, we Deut. xxxiii. s. 
humbly beseech thee, to all those who oan xi. 16 7. 
are to be called to any office and ad- 1 Gor. fv. 1, 2 
ministration in the same; and so re- Eph. iv, 216. 
plenish them with the truth of thy “~” 
doctrine, and endue them with inno- 

cency of life, that they may faithfully 

serve before thee, to the glory of thy 

great Name, and the benefit of thy 

holy Church, through Jesus Christ 


our Lord. Amen. 


§ A Prayer that may be said after any of the 
former. 
Exod. xxxiv, 


y fe 


2 Chron. xxxiv. 
2 


GOD, whose nature and pro- 

perty is ever to have mercy and 
to forgive, receive our humble peti- 
tions; and though we be tied and 
“bound with the chain of our sins, yet 
let the pitifulness of thy great merey 
loose us, for the honour of Jesus 
Christ, our Mediator and Advocate. 
Amen. 


Rom. vii. 23, 24. 
2 Pet. ii. 19. 
James v. 11. 
LTim- ii. 3. 
1 John ii. 1. 


. a 7 iseyey] Salisbury Use. 
EUS, cui proprium est miserer @20s?3n 


= ra. Orationes pro 
semper et parcere, suscipe depre estecete 
cationem nostram: ut quos delictorum 
catena constringit, miseratio tus pie- 
tatis absolvat. Per Christum Domi- 


‘um nostrum. 


Saturday before Ember Week, and at Mattins and Evensong 
every day afterwards until the Ordination Sunday. The Even- 
song previous to the latter should be included as being the eve of 
the Sunday itself. 

The first of these Ember Collects is to be found in Bishop 
Cosin’s Collection of Private Devotions, which was first published 
in 16271. It is also found in the margin of the Durham Prayer 
Book, in his handwriting, with a slight alteration made by him 
at the end after it was written in. No trace of it has hitherto 
been discovered in any early collections of prayers or in the ancient 
Services, and therefore it may be concluded that it is an original 
composition of Bishop Cosin’s, to whom we are thus indebted for 
one of the most beautiful and striking prayers in the Prayer 
Book, and one which is not surpassed by any thing in the ancient 
Sacramentaries or the Eastern Liturgies. The second Collect is 
taken from the Ordination Services, and is written into the 
margin of the Durham Prayer Book under the other in the 
nandwriting of Sancroft, having been already inserted at the end 
of the Litany in the Prayer Book for the Church of Scotland, 
printed in 1637. 

Under the old system of the Church there were special masses 
for the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, at all the four Ember 
Seasons ; but the use of a special prayer every day during the 
Ember Weeks is peculiar to the modern Church of England. It 
may be added that the very pointed character of the words used 
is also modern, the older Ember-day Collects and Post-Com- 
munions making little direct reference to the ordainers or those 
to be ordained. 

The Ember-day Collect is a continual witness before God and 
man of the interest which the whole body of the Church has in 
the ordination of the Clergy who are to minister in it. The 
entreaty of St. Paul, “Brethren, pray for us,” is the entreaty 
that continually goes forth to the Church at large from its 
ministry; but never with greater necessity, or with greater force, 
than when the solemn act of Ordination is about to be performed 
by the Bishops, and a nuinber of the future guides and leaders of 


1 An earlier edition was privately printed, but this the writer has not 
seen. 


the Church are about to be empowered and authorized to under- 
take their office. This is, in fact, one of the most valuable of 
our Collects, wielding as it does the strong weapon of general 
prayer throughout the land on behalf of the Bishops, through 
whom all ministerial authority and power is conveyed from our 
Lord, and of the priests and deacons, to whom, from time to 
time, their ministry is delegated. A faithful reliance upon the 
promises of our Blessed Lord respecting prayer will give us 
an assurance that so general a supplication for a special object 
could not be without effect ; and no age ever required that such 
a supplication should be offered more than the present, when the 
Clergy are growing more and more faithful, but when the neces- 
sities of some dioceses lead to a far too promiscuous admission of 
persons who are “fit,” only by some stretch of language, “to 
serve in the sacred ministry of God’s Church.” 

It is worth noticing that “the Bishops and Pastors of Thy 
flock ’’ does not refer to the Bishops and the Priests who with 
them lay their hands on the heads of those who are ordained 
Priests. ‘ Bishop and Pastor” is the expression used in all the 
documents connected with the election and confirmation of a 
Bishop ; and no doubt it is here also used in the same sense, with 
reference to the Bishop as the earthly fountain of pastoral autho- 
rity, ability [2 Cor. ii. 6], and responsibility. 

The times for using one or other: of these Collects are as 


follows :— 
2nd Sunday 
| in Lent 


Trinity Sun- 


in Lent 


From Saturday 


1st Sunday 
to Saturday 


EB 
Evensong Whitsunday + Evensong .- = 
before ; before a = 
Sept. 18th Sept. 25th 3 


Dec. 17th Dec. 24th 


§ A Prayer that may be said, ¥e. 


This ancient prayer, which is one of the “Orationes pro 
Peccatis”’ in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory, comes into our 
Prayer Book through the Litany of the Salisbury Use, and is 
found in all the Primers of the English Church. It occupied its 
ancient place in the Litany of 1544, but was omitted from later 
Litanies until 1559. In 1661 it was transferred to this place. 


| The most ancient English version of it known is that of the 


64 


§ A Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, 
to be read during their Session. 


OST gracious God, we humbly 
beseech thee, as for this King- 
dom in general, so especially for the 


Tam iil, 26 

Prov. xi. 14. 
DOOD EPL 

Deut. xvi. 18. 20. 

1 Chron. xiii. 
1—3. 


eats High Court of Parliament, under our 
Prov. xx. 18. most religious and gracious Queen 
Zech. viii 16, at, this time assembled: That thou 
Ps, Gx 7 wouldest be pleased to direct and pros- 


Ps. exliv. 12—15, 
Phil. iv. 6. 19. 
Rom. ix. 5. 


per all their consultations to the ad- 
vancement of thy glory, the good of 
thy Church, the safety, honour, and 


PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS. 


orm of Prayer 
for the fast days 
in 1625, 1643, 
1644, and 1648. 


OST gracious God, we humbly F 

beseech thee, as for this King- 
dom in general, so especially for the 
High Court of Parliament, under our 
most religious and gracious King 
at this time assembled: That thou 
wouldest be pleased to bless and direct 
all their consultations to the preserva- 
tion of thy glory, the good of thy 
Church, the safety, honour, and wel- 


welfare of our Sovereign, and her 
Dominions ; that all things may be 
so ordered and settled by their endea- 
vours upon the best and surest foun- 
dations, that peace and _ happiness, 
truth and justice, religion and piety 
may be established among us for all 
generations. These and all other 
necessaries for them, for us, and thy: 
whole Church we humbly beg in the 
Name and mediation of Jesus Christ 


“Kingdoms” in 
all Sealed 
Books. 


fare of our Sovereign, and his King- 
doms. Look, O Lord, upon the hu- 
mility and devotion with which they 
are come into thy courts. And they 
are come into thy house in assured 
confidence upon the merits and mercies 
of Christ our blessed Saviour, that 
thou wilt not deny them the grace 
and favour which they beg of thee. 
Therefore, O Lord, bless them with 
all that wisdom, which thou knowest 


our most blessed Lord and Saviour. 
Amen. 


fourteenth century, in Mr. Maskell’s Prymer, which is as fol- 
lows :— 

“God, to whom it is propre to be merciful and to spare euer- 
more, undirfonge” (undertake, “take,” in Hilsey’s Prymer) 
“oure preieris; and the mercifulnesse of thi pitee asoile hem, that 
the chayne of trespas bindith. Bi crist oure Lord. So be it.” 

The proper times for the use of this prayer are seasons of peni- 
tence. All days in Lent, Fridays, the Rogation Days, and the 
days of Ember Weeks, are obviously occasions when it comes in 
with a marked appropriateness; its use “after any of the for- 
mer ” clearly supposing that “the former” collects are accom- 
panied by fasting and humiliation. 

It may also be pointed out as a most suitable prayer for use by 
Clergy and Laity alike after any confession of sins in private 
prayer; or in praying with sick persons, in cases when an 
authoritative absolution is not to be used. 


§ The Prayer for the Parliament. 


There is every reason to think that this prayer, so consonant 
with the constitutional principles of modern times, was composed 
by Archbishop Laud, when Bishop of St. David’s. The earliest 
form in which it is known is that above given, from a Fast-day 
Service printed in 1625 '. It also appears in at least two Forms 
of Prayer which were issued by Laud after he became Archbishop 
of Canterbury, and during the rule of that “Long” Parliament 


1 +A Forme of Common Prayer * * * to be read every Wednesday during 
the present visitation. Set forth by His Majestie’s Authority. Reprinted 
at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the King’s most 
excellent Majestie. Anno 1625.” 


necessary to make the maturity of his 
Majesty’s and their counsels, the hap- 
piness and blessing of this common- 
wealth. These and all other necessa- 
ries for them, for us, and thy whole 
Church, we humbly beg in the Name 
and mediation of Christ Jesus our 
most blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. 


by the influence of which he and the king suffered. It does not 
appear in a folio copy of ‘‘ Prayers for the Parliament,” which is 
bound up at the beginning of Bishop Cosin’s Durham Prayer 
Book, but it was inserted in a Fast-day Service for the 12th of 
June, 1661, and afterwards in its present place. The word 
* Dominions” was substituted for “ Kingdoms” by an Order in 
Council of January Ist, 1801. As, however, the ancient style of 
our kings was “ Rew Anglis, Dominus Hiberniz,” this seems to 
have been a constitutional mistake, as well as a questionable 
interference with the Prayer Book; but probably “dominions” 
was supposed to be the more comprehensive word, and one more 
suitable than “kingdoms” to an empire so extended and of so 
mixed a character as that of the English Sovereigns. 

The phrase “High Court of Parliament” in this prayer 
includes the House of Lords, the House of Commons, the Upper 
and Lower Houses of Convocation; which, together, are the three 
estates of the realm (by representation) assembled under the 
Sovereign. The petition referring to “ the advancement of God’s 
glory, and the good of His Church,” has a special reference to 
Convocation, which was no doubt evident enough at the time 
the prayer was composed, when Convocation was the primary 
assembly for the consideration of all religious questions having a 
national bearing. 

This prayer may have been intended only for use before the 
several Houses of Parliament, when it was inserted here in 1661. 
Yet the remarks made on the Ember Collect apply to it in no 
small degree; and the general prayers of the Church may be 
expected to bring down a blessing upon the deliberations of the 


Parliament, in a higher degree than the local prayers daily used 
in each House. 


PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS. 65 


| A Collect or Prayer for all conditions of men, 
to be used at such times when the Litany is 
not appointed to be said. 


GOD, the Creator and Preserver 

Pris 4 of all mankind, we humbly be- 
Po ary: & Txvil- seech thee for all sorts and conditions 
Gene i 30-82, of men; that thou wouldest be pleased 
ye, oul 6-8. to make thy ways known unto them, 
thy saving health unto all nations. 


Acts xvii. 26. 
Rev. iv. 11. 


John xiv. 16, 17. 
Acts xi. 26. 
Col. i. 9—12. 


be led into the way of truth, and hold 
the faith in unity of spirit, in the 
bond of peace, and in righteousness of 


life. Finally, we commend to thy 
fatherly goodness all those, who are 
: : di * This to be 
any ways afflicted, or distressed, IN 759 when 
mind, body, or estate; [* especially «ny desire 
: the Prayers 
those for whom our prayers are desired,| of the Con- 
that it may please thee to comfort and ee 


; ge by 1 Isa. xlii. 3. 
relieve them, according to their several Isa. xi. 3. 


necessities, giving them patience under Rom. v. 5. 


XKXIv.19. 
their sufferings, and a happy issue out John xvi. 24. 
of all their afflictions. And this we corruption of the 


. . old genitive 
beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. Choate” 


THANKSGIVINGS. 


Tei itis, More especially, we pray for the good 
heb. xiii. 3. estate of the Catholick Church ; that it 
Bs boux. ll. may be so guided and governed by 
thy good Spirit, that all who profess 
and call themselves Christians, may 
G A General Thanksgiving. 
2 Cor. i. 3. LMIGHTY God, Father of all 
ei mercies, we thine unworthy ser- 
eo -vants do give thee most humble and 


hearty thanks for all thy goodness and 
loving kindness to us, and to all men ; 
[* particularly to those who desire now * This to be 


; i said when 
to offer up their praises and thanks- any that 


It may be mentioned that the expression “most great, learned, 
and religious king,” is contained in James the First’s Act for a 
Thanksgiving on the Fifth of November. 


§ Prayer for all Conditions of Men. 


This prayer was composed by Dr. Peter Gunning, afterwards 
Bishop, successively, of Chichester and Ely, and one of the chief 
instruments, under God, in the restoration of the Prayer Book to 
national use in 1662. It has usually been supposed to be a con- 
densed form of a longer prayer, in which he had endeavoured to 
satisfy the objections of the Puritans against the collect form of 
the Five Prayers, by amalgamating the substance of them into 
one. The first idea of it seems, however, to be taken from 
the nine ancient collects for Good Friday, of which we only 
retain three. Dr. Bisse states that when Gunning was Master of 
St. John’s College, Cambridge, he would not allow this prayer to 
be used at Evensong, declaring that he had composed it only 
for Morning use, as a substitute for the Litany. And certainly, 
if it had been intended for constant use, it is strange that it was 
not placed before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom in Morning and 
Evening Prayer, but among the “ Prayers for Several Occasions.” 
The original intention must certainly have been to confine this 
general supplication to occasional use; and the meaning of “to 
be used” is probably identical with “that may be used.” There 
are circumstances under which it may be desirable to shorten the 
Service, and if the omission of this prayer can thus be considered 
as permissible, it will offer one means of doing so. 

The prayer is cast in the mould of that for the Church in the 
Communion Service. Bishop Cosin altered the preface of that 
prayer to, “ Let us pray for the good estate of Christ’s Catholick 
Church,” and the title of the prayer in the Rubric at the end of 
the Communion Service was altered by him in the same way. 
The title was often so printed in the last century, and had ap- 
peared in the same form in a book of Hours printed in 1531. 
[See notes in Communion Service. ] 

The tone and the language of the prayer very successfully 
imitate those of the ancient collects, and the condensation of its 
petitions shows how thoroughly and spiritually the author of it 
entered into the worth of that ancient mode of prayer, as distin- 
guished from the verbose meditations which were substituted for 
it in the Occasional Services of James I. The petition, ‘‘ That 


all who profess and call themselves Christians, may be led into 
the way of truth,” was evidently framed with reference to the 
Puritan Nonconformists, who had sprung up in such large 
numbers during the great Rebellion ; but it is equally applicable 
as a prayer of charity for Dissenters at all times; and no words 
could be more gentle or loving than these, when connected with 
the petitions for unity, peace, and righteousness which follow. 
The concluding petitions have an analogy with the Memorie 
Communes of the Salisbury Use, “ Pro quacunque tribulatione,” 
and “ Pro infirmo.”? In another Memoria, that “Pro amico” 
which comes between these two, the name of the person prayed 
for was. mentioned, which may have suggested the parenthetical 
reference to individuals in this prayer}. 

There was, beside these Common Memorials, a Daily Prayer 
for the Sick in the Service at Prime, as follows :— 


Almighty and everlasting 
God, the eternal salvation of 
them that believe, hear us on 
behalf of those thy servants for 
whom we beseech the help of 
thy mercy; that health being 
restored unto them, they may 
render thanks to thee in thy 
Church ; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


Omnipotens sempiterne Deus: 
salus eterna credentium, exaudi 
nos pro famulis tuis pro quibus 
misericordiz tuz imploramus 
auxilium ; ut reddita sibi sani- 
tate, gratiarum tibi in ecclesia 
tua referant actiones. Per 
Christum. Amen. [Gelas.] 


It is a very excellent practice, when any are known to be 
dying, to commend them to the prayers of the Church (by name, 
or otherwise) before the Prayer for all Conditions of Men is said. 
It is equally applicable to cases of mental or bodily distress, as 
well as to its more familiar use in the case of sick persons ; and 
the afflictions or distresses of ‘mind, body, or estate,” which are 
so tersely but comprehensively named, show clearly that the 
special clause of intercession was not by any means intended to 
be limited to sickness. 


THE OCCASIONAL THANKSGIVINGS. 
These were all placed as they now stand in 1661; but they 
were, with two exceptions, printed at the end of the Litany (by 
1 Bishop Cosin provided a short service to be used in this place for any 


persons desiring the prayers of the Church, See the note at the end of the 
Visitation Office. 


K 


66 


have ee givings for thy late mercies vouchsafed 
2 : 
hee ae unto them.| We bless thee for our 


turn praise. creation, preservation, and all the 
Ps. evii. 21, 22. 


cxxxix. 14. blessings of this life; but above all, 
Rev. iv. 10, 11. 7 < . ° 
Ps. Ixxi.6. ci. for thine inestimable love in the re- 
2—5. . 
John iii, 16. demption of the world by our Lord 
Rev. i. 5, 6. : 
Acts ii. 41,42. Jesus Christ; for the means of grace, 
1 Pet. i. 3, 4. 


Col. i. 8—5. 26, 27. 
1 Sam. xii. 24. 
Pss2i5 5: ixs 
Matt. xii. 34, 35. 


and for the hope of glory. And, we 
beseech thee, give us that due sense of 


eri 1 all thy mercies, that our hearts may 
Bs Mate be unfeignedly thankful, and that we 
ude 26, 27. 


Rom. xvi. 27, shew forth thy praise, not only with 
our lips, but in our lives; by giving 
up our selves to thy service, and by 
walking before thee in holiness and 
righteousness all our days; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with 
thee and the Holy Ghost be all honour 


and glory, world without end. Amen. 


{ For Rain. 
HE AR Coie! GOD our heavenly Father, who 
LR Saget ay by thy gracious providence dost 
Feel i 35, 94, 26, cause the former and the latter rain to 
Ga. Xb yo, descend upon the earth, that it may 
Pe ig | «bring forth fruit for the use of man ; 
We give thee humble thanks that it 
hath pleased thee, in our great neces- 
sity, to send us at the last a joyful 
rain upon thine inheritance, and to 
refresh it when, it was dry, to the great 
comfort of us thy unworthy servants, 
and to the glory of thy holy Name; 
through thy mercies in Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 
¥ For fair weather. 
gee EOC 2 LORD God, who hast justly 
eM ay humbled us by thy late plague 
1 envi 243 Of immoderate rain and waters, and in 
29. xxix. 13. 


thy mercy hast relieved and comforted 
our souls by this seasonable and blessed. 
change of weather; We praise and 


* Ps. ixxix. 14. 


PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS. 


glorify thy holy Name for this thy 
mercy, and will always declare thy 


loving kindness from generation to 
generation ; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 
{| For Plenty. 

MOST merciful Father, who of 2 2 G)* 

thy gracious goodness hast heard 59; Bii'3s— 
the devout prayers of thy Church, and Bact hes 
turned our dearth and scarcity into ” beer eee 
cheapness and plenty ; We give thee eae 
humble thanks for this thy special 
bounty ; beseeching thee to continue 
thy loving kindness unto us, that our 
land may yield us her fruits of increase, 
to thy glory and our comfort ; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


§ For peace and deliverance from our enemies. 
ALMIGHTY God, who art a Ps. Ixia, 
cxXv & 
strong tower of defence unto thy , xeviii.1. 
. “ 2Chron. xx. 28— 
servants against the face of their (30 
. . : Ps. xvili. 6, 7. 48 
enemies; We yield thee praise and —50. exxiy.1 
one Z —7, xxxvi. 10. 
thanksgiving for our deliverance from Lam. iii. 22, 23. 
1 Kings viii. 59, 
60. 
those great and apparent dangers ,°. 9 
wherewith we were compassed: We 
acknowledge it thy goodness that we 
were not delivered over as a prey unto 
them; beseeching thee still to con- 
tinue such thy mercies towards us, 
that all the world may know that thou 
art our Saviour and mighty Deliverer ; 


through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


¥ for restoring publick peace at home. 
ETERNAL God, our heavenly * Po, Lxvilt. 6, 


a 
Father, who alone makest men 2 Sam, xxi 44, 


to be of one mind in a house, and Ps. oxliv. 1, 2. 
Proy. xxiv. 21, 22% 
stillest the outrage of a violent and Ps. exix. 27. 32. 


unruly people; We bless thy holy 1 Tim. i it 1, 20 
Name, that it hath pleased thee to 1/Pet. ii. 13-17. 


Ps. evil, 24,28) 
appease the seditious tumults which He». xiii. 15. 


have been lately raised up amongst 


Royal authority only), after the Hampton Court Conference in 
1606. The particular circumstances under which this liberty 
was taken with the Prayer Book by James I. are mentioned in 
the Historical Introduction. It is unnecessary to add any thing 
further here than that the Occasional Thanksgivings are now 
as entirely a part of the Prayer Book sanctioned by the Church 
as any other prayers. 


§ The General Thanksgiwing. 


This was composed or compiled by Reynolds, Bishop of 
Norwich, for the revision of 1661. The first portion of it 
appears to be borrowed from the following opening of a Thanks- 
giving composed by Queen Elizabeth after one of her progresses, 
and which is printed (from a copy in the State Paper Office) in the 


“Liturgies of Queen Elizabeth” of the Parker Society, p. 667, 
“TI render unto Thee, O Merciful and Heavenly Father, most 
humble and hearty thanks for Thy manifold mercies so abun- 
dantly bestowed upon me, as well for my creation, preservation, 
regeneration, and all other Thy benefits and great mercies 
exhibited in Christ Jesus...” But it is possible that there is 
some older prayer, as yet unnoticed, which was the original of 
both Queen Elizabeth’s and Bishop Reynolds’. 

The remarks which have been made respecting the special 
clause in the “ Prayer for all Conditions of Men,” apply also to 
the special clause in the General Thanksgiving. 


§ For restoring publick peace at home. 


This is to be found in the margin of Cosin’s Durham Prayer Book, 


PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS. 


us; most humbly beseeching thee to 
grant to all of us grace, that we may 
henceforth obediently walk in thy holy 
commandments; and, leading a quiet 
and peaceable life in all godliness and 


- honesty, may continually offer unto 


1 Chron. xxi.1—7, 
Ps. Ixviii, 21. 
Oi. 04 Bs 
Hab. iii. 2. 
Ps. xxx. 3. exvi. 
7, 8. 12. 
Rom. xii. 1. 
Heb. xiii. 15. 
Ps. lxvi. 13, 14. 
Heb. ii. 12. 
Eph. iii. 21. 


thee our sacrifice of praise and thanks- 
giving for these thy mercies towards 
us; through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 


{| For deliverance from the Plague, or other 
common sickness. 


LORD God, who hast wounded 

us for our sins, and consumed us 
for our transgressions, by thy late 
heavy and dreadful visitation; and 
now, in the midst of judgment remem- 
bering mercy, hast redeemed our souls 
from the jaws of death ; We offer unto 
thy fatherly goodness our selves, our 
souls and bodies, which thou hast de- 
livered, to be a living sacrifice unto 
thee, always praising and magnifying 


thy mercies in the midst of thy 
Church ; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 


§ Or this. 

E humbly acknowledge before 

thee, O most merciful Father, 
that all the punishments which are 
threatened in thy law might justly 
have fallen upon us, by reason of our 
manifold transgressions and hardness 
of heart; Yet seeing it hath pleased 
thee of thy tender mercy, upon our 
weak and unworthy humiliation, to 
assuage the contagious sickness where- 
with we lately have been sore afflicted, 
and to restore the voice of joy and 
health into our dwellings; We offer 
unto thy Divine Majesty the sacrifice 
of praise and thanksgiving, lauding 
and magnifying thy glorious Name 
for such thy preservation and provi- 
dence over us; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


in his handwriting ; and is, no doubt, of his composition. 


There 


67 


Deut. xxviii. 15. 
Ps. xcy. 8. 
Prov. xxviii. 14. 
Lam. iii. 22. 
Ps. exlv. 9. 
Ixxix. 8. 
1 Kings xxi. 29. 
2 Chron. vii. 13,14. 
Ps, xxx. 2,11, 12. 
Ps. exviii. 15. 
Neh. ix. 5. 
Isa.xxxviii.18,19. 
Ps, lxix. 30. 
Luke i. 46, 47. 
Heb. xiii. 15. 
Gen. xvii. 1. 
James iv. 6. 
John iii. 19—21. 
Rom. xiii. 12, 13. 
2 Cor. vi. 2. 
Matt. xxi. 5. 
Phil. ii. 5—8. 
Matt. xxv. 31, 32. 
2 Tim. iv. l. 
1 Thess. iv. 16,17. 
Rey. i. 8. xix. 16. 


had suffered so much from the “outrage of a violent and unruly 


are two changes made in the course of writing it, with the 
evident object of moulding it in as charitable a form as possible. 
“Madness of a raging and unreasonable people” was one of the 
original phrases; and, “grant that we may henceforth live in 
peace and unity,” was another; and both are altered in Cosin’s 
own writing. This Thanksgiving offers another illustration of 
the restrained and temperate spirit in which the restoration of 
the Prayer Book and its revision were undertaken by men who 


people,” as Cosin and his coadjutors had suffered for many years. 


Except the General Thanksgiving, none of these Occasional 
Thanksgivings are well adapted to the necessities of present 
times; and the introduction of several new ‘Memorize Com- 
munes” would be a good work of revision, provided they were 
worded in language whose suitableness and dignity made them 


fit to be placed beside more ancient parts of the Prayer Book. 


K2 


AN INTRODUCTION 


TO THE 


COLLECTS, 


Tue Liturgy consists of a fixed and unvarying portion, and of a 
portion which varies at least once a week; the fixed part is 
printed by itself in a later division of the Prayer Book, and the 
variable part is that included under the title of “The Collects, 
Hpistles, and Gospels, to be used throughout the year,” and now 
coming under notice. 

In the early ages of the Church, the Office of the Holy Com- 
munion was contained in several separate volumes, one for the 
Epistles, called the Comes, Lectionarius, or Epistolarium ; another 
for the Gospels, called the Evangelistarium; a third for the 
Anthems, called the Antiphonarius, or Gradual; and a fourth for 
the fixed part of the Service and the Collects, which went by the 
name of the Liber Sacramentorum, or Sacramentary. These four 
separate volumes were eventually united into one, under the 
name of the Missal; and the two portions of the Prayer Book in 
which the varying and unvarying parts of the Communion Ser- 
vice are contained, constitute, in fact, the Missal of the Church of 
England, which is almost universally bound in a separate form for 
use at the Altar. 

The modern arrangement of these variable parts of the 
Liturgy is derived directly from the ancient Missals of the 
Church of England, of which the principal one was that of 
Salisbury. Like the rest of the Prayer Book, it has undergone 
some condensation. Offertory sentences were formerly placed in 
this part of the Liturgy, but are now collected into the unvary- 
ing portion. There was alsoa short Anthem, or Gradual (with its 
response), placed after every Epistle, and a Collect called “ Post- 
communio ',” but both of these have been discontinued. The 
Introit, or Officium, was likewise appointed for every celebration 
of the Holy Communion, and a short Anthem to be sung during 
the Administration. In the first Prayer Book, the Introits 
were taken from the Psalms, and were all printed before the 


1 In the Prayer Book of 1549 a number of Sentences of Scripture were 
appointed for Post-Communions, and printed after the Agnus Dei. 

2 It may be useful to annex a list of the Introits as arranged in the First 
English Prayer Book, as many Ritualists think them better adapted for 
their purpose than hymns :— 


INTROITS. 
Ist Sunday in Advent ......... 1, Sunday next before Easter...Ps. 61 
2nd ,; aS 120 | Good Friday.......s.. Soy 2 
3rd; or 4| Easter Even. Reaertene canny ets) 
4th 5; ; 5 | Easter Day, lst Commu sayy 16 
Christ. Day, 1st Communion the 9 2nd oy % 3 
a 2nd by) 2D 8 | Monday in Easter Week.......,, 62 
F. of St. Stephen ........ », 562]| Tuesday ” nee JUNG 
», St. John, Evangelist .. », ll] Ist Sunday after Easter.. yy 
», the Holy Tnnocents...... » 79} 2nd ” ” pA) 
Sunday after Christmas........,, 121 | 3rd ‘5 an ees 
Circumcision .. 172 | 4th ” ” » 82 
Epiphany...... 96 | 5th ” ” » 84 
Ist Sunday afte 13 | Ascension Day ...... betters YF 
2nd i as r », 14] Sunday after Ascensi aye pa eB} 
3rd ‘3 oh yy », 15 | Whitsunday.. wy Les. 
4th ey Fe) os ns 2 | Monday in Whitsun Week .. sy 10v 
5th “A os x, 20] Tuesday ” ” eee», 101 
6th ” na a », 20] Trinity Sunday ........ GE 
Septuagesima.........oeseee ys, 23 | IstSun, aft. z Ps. 119 “| Beati imma- 
Sexagesima... son ek Trinity .. L culati. 
Quinquagesimé a 48 ond In quo cor- 
Ash-Wednesday .... a 6 a 2 riget? 
Ist Sunday in Lent » 82) 34 Retribue 
2nd ” ” ay alg) ” ” servo 1U0. 
3rd H op weak, Mees 4th eee pa- 
4th ” ” dietaiestny 46 ” ” vimenlo. 
5th an ‘ tavercemssceigy) O41 OUD) yy 97 « Legem pone, 


EPISTLES, 


AND GOSPELS. 


\ 


5, 


Collect ; but Hymns have been generally substituted since their 
omission. The “Communio” was also fixed in the first Prayer 
Book, being the Anthem, “O Lamb of God, which takest away 
the sins of the world, have mercy upon us;” and for this, a soft 
and solemn organ voluntary seems to have been afterwards sub- 
stituted, such as is still to be heard at Durham Cathedral and 
elsewhere during the Administration. 

This arrangement of the variable parts of the Communion 
Service is, however, much more ancient than the Salisbury 
Missal. The selection of the Epistles and Gospels for the Sun- 
days and some of the other Holy Days is attributed to St. Jerome 
in the fourth century; and most of the Collects come to us 
originally from the Sacramentaries of St. Leo, Gelasius, and St. 
Gregory; the last of whom died A.D. 604, 


§ Collects. 


The Collects which are now used in the Communion Service 
appear to be the growth of the fifth and sixth centuries, as is 
stated above; though it is far from being improbable that the 
Sacramentaries of that date were, to a large extent, compilations 
of previously existing forms, rather than original compositions of 
those whose names they bear. These Sacramentaries have the 
appearance of methodizing and rearranging established customs 
and formularies ; and there is an antecedent improbability in the 
statement that SS. Leo, Gregory, or any other single individual, 
invented so large a body of public devotions, and wrought so 
great a revolution in the habits of the Church, as to bring it 
suddenly into use. Cardinal Bona [Rer. Liturg., ii.5; iv.] gives 
some evidence in support of the supposed Apostolic origin of the 
form of prayer known by the name of Collect, though he thinks 
the general tradition of the Christian world a sufficient proof 
that Gelasius and St. Gregory composed those now in use. 

It may be considered an argument against this theory of 
Apostolic origin, that the Collect is a form of prayer unknown in 
the Eastern Church, which has always been so conservative with 
regard to its ancient customs and formularies. But Archdeacon 
Freeman has shown that there is a distinct likeness between 
certain kinds of hymns (called “ Exaposteilaria”) of the Eastern 
Church, and the Collects of the Western, by which a common 


6th Sun. aft 21stSun. aft. 


c . Principes 
Trinity ... t Ps. 119)s.Ht ventat. Trinity . ry Ps. 119 { persecuti. 
7th 7 3) +Jfemor esto. 2ond Appropin- 
8th sy} ; »».Porlio mea, a 4) quet 
oth Bonitatem DOTA yy) We ceuencksurcarcacesecher Ps, 124 
B 22 fecisti. EAD ee A OD 
10th 5, yrs LONUS: Cua) 2Otbia my) ees eked 
lth Defecit ani- | St. Andrew, Apostle .. op eH) 
” He ma. St. Thomas, Apostle .. 3) 128 
12th ee ceter- Conversion of St. Paul . » 138 
fe ” iD num. Purification of St. Mary, Vire. yy 184 
13th {ee di- | St. Matthias, Apostle .........,, 140 
! 2 lexi. Annunciation of the V. eth lok 
14th Lucerna pe- | St. Mark, Evang. ......cccccoeee 9) 141 
We 2 dibus. St. Philip and St. James «..., y» 143 
15th Iniquos St. Barnabas, Apostle .... 9 142 
m we odio. St. John Baptist ....... on Pe) 
16th (a St. Peter, Apostle .. yy 144 
ue am cium. St. James, Apostle.. «9; 148 
Ith. 5, » «AMirabilia. St. Bartholomew, Apostle ...,, 115 
18th ,, yeaa USLUS C8. St. Matthew, Apostle .......,, 117 
9th (Clamavi in | St. Michael and all Angels... ,, 113 
” 2 COLO, St. Luke, Evangelist... i EE 
20th Vide humi- | St. Simon and St. Jude, Apos. yy» 150 
a ” litatem. All Saints.. Asiavecsnuneses a5 nao 


" 


\ 


INTRODUCTION TO THE COLLECTS, EPISTLES, AND GOSPELS. 


origin seems to be indicated; and he gives the following hymns 
at Lauds on Easter Day as an example [Princip. of Div. Serv., i. 
142] :— 

“Thou, O Lord, that didst endure the cross, and didst abolish 
death, and didst rise again from the dead, give peace in our life, 
as only Almighty.” 

«Thou, O Christ, Who didst raise man by Thy resurrection, 
vouchsafe that we may with pure hearts hymn and glorify 
Thee.” 

Although the variable Exaposteilaria in actual use are attri- 
buted to a ritualist of the tenth century, Archdeacon Freeman 
considers that they represent a much older system of precatory 
hymns, and quotes from Dr. Neale, that the aim of them “seems 
originally to have been a kind of énvocation of the grace of 
God,” which is a special feature of Collects. 

It is not quite correct, therefore, to say that such a form of 
prayer is wholly unknown in the Eastern Church; and this 
argument against the primitive antiquity of it cannot be con- 
sidered to have much force. 

There are two, and only two, prayers of the Church given in 
the New Testament. Both of these are in the Acts of the 
Apostles, and both of them have a striking similarity to the 
prayers we now know as Collects. The first is in Acts i. 24, 25, 
«Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, show whether 
of these two Thou hast chosen, that he may take part of this 
ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, 
that he might go to his own place.’ The second is in Acts iv. 
24, “Lord, Thou art God, which hast made heaven, and earth, 
and the sea, and all that in them is: Who by the mouth of Thy 
servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the 
people imagine vain things ? The kings of the earth stood up, and 
the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against 
His Christ. For of a truth against Thy holy Child Jesus, 
Whom Thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, 
with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered 
together, for to do whatsoever Thy hand and counsel deter- 
mined before to be done. And now, Lord, behold their threaten- 
ings: and grant unto Thy servants, that with all boldness they 
may speak Thy word, by stretching forth Thine hand to heal ; 
and that signs and wonders may be done by the name of Thy holy 
Child Jesus.” In both of these prayers, the address, or invoca- 
tion, is a prominent feature ; and in the latter it occupies more 
than two-thirds of the whole prayer ; while the actual supplica- 
tion itself, though in both cases of the highest importance possi- 
ble, is condensed into a few simple words. These Apostolic 
prayers, therefore, bear a great resemblance to Collects, and 
might not unreasonably be spoken of as the earliest on record. 

But the real model of this form of prayer is to be found in a 
still higher quarter, the Lord’s Prayer itself. If we compare 
some of the best of our ancient or modern collects (as, for instance, 
the Collect for Whitsunday, which has been familiarly known to 
the Church in her daily Service for at least twelve centuries and 
a half, or that for the Sunday after Ascension, which is partly of 
Reformation date) with the Prayer of Prayers, we shall find in 
both that the tone is chiefly that of adoration, and subordinately 
that of supplication; and, also, that the human prayer follows 
the Divine pattern in the adoption of a condensed form of 
expression, which is in strict accordance with the injunction, 
“ God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words 
be few.” Such a comparison will bring home a conviction to the 
mind, that when we use this terse form of mixed adoration and 
prayer, we are not far from carrying out, with literal exactness, 
the still more authoritative injunction of Him who gave us His 
own prayer as the type of all others, “After this manner, there- 
fore, pray ye!.” 

The origin of the name “ Collect”’ is uncertain; and various 
meanings have been given to it. Some ritualists have connected 


1 It is an ancient rule of the Church to have an wneven number of Col- 
lects. Micrologus [iv.] says that either one, three, five, or seven are used : 
one from tradition; three, because our Lord prayed thrice in His agony; 
five, because of His fivefold Passion; seven, because there are seven peti- 
tions in the Lord’s Prayer. 


69 


it with the collected assembly ? of the people ; others have inter- 
preted the name as indicating that the prayer so called collects 
together the topics of previous prayers, or else those of the 
Epistle and Gospel for the day. But the most reasonable inter- 
pretation seems to be that which distinguishes the Collect as the 
prayer offered by the priest alone on behalf of the people, while 
in Litanies and Versicles, the priest and the people pray alter- 
nately. This interpretation is found in Bona, Rer. Liturg., ii. 5. 
iii., Durand. iii. 18, and Micrologus, iii.; the words of the latter 
being, “‘Oratio quam Collectam dicunt, eo quod sacerdos, qui 
legatione fungitur pro populo ad Dominum omnium petitiones ea 
oratione colligit atque concludit.” As of Common Prayer, in 
general, so we may conclude especially of the Collect, in par- 
ticular, that it is the supplication of many gathered into one 
by the voice of the priest, and offered up by him to the Father, 
through our Lord and only Mediator 3. 

There is a very exact and definite character in the structure of 
Collects; so exact, that certain rules have been deduced from 
these prayers of the Saints for the construction of others, as rules 
of grammar are deduced from classic writers. 

First, may be mentioned the characteristics which distinguish 
this special form of prayer, and which have been loosely men- 
tioned above :— 

1. A Collect consists of a single period, seldom a long one. 
2. A single petition only is offered in it. 

8. Mention is made of our Lord’s Mediation ; or else 

4. It ends with an ascription of praise to God. 

These features of the Collect at once distinguish it from the 
long and often involved forms of Eastern prayers, and also from 
the precatory meditations which became so familiar to English 
people in the seventeenth century ; and the chastened yet com- 
prehensive character of Collects is owing, in no small degree, to the 
necessities imposed upon the writers of them by this structure. 

This general outline of the Collect developes itself in detail on 
a plan of which the most perfect form may be represented by two 
of our finest specimens, the one as old as the Sacramentary of 
St. Gregory, in the sixth century, the other composed by Bishop 
Cosin, more than a thousand years later. 


Whitsunday. 6th Sunday after Epiphany. 


1. Invocation. GOD, O GOD, 
2. Reason on} Whoas at this time didst} Whose blessed Son was 


which the Peti-}teach the hearts of Thy|manifested that He might 


tion is to be 
founded. 


3, PETITION, 


4, Benefit hoped 
for, 


5. Mention of 
Christ’s Media- 
tion, or Ascrip- 
tion of praise: or 
both. 


i 


faithful people by sending 
to them the light of Thy 
Holy Spirit; 


grant us by the same Spirit 
to have a right judgment 
in all things, 


and evermore to rejoice in 
His holy comfort ; 


through the merits of Christ 
Jesus our Saviour, Who 
liveth and reigneth with 
Thee, in the unity of the 
same Spirit, one Gop, world 
without end. 


destroy the works of the 
devil, and make us the sons 
of God, and heirs of eternal 
life ; 


grant us, we beseech Thee, 
that having this hope, we 
may purify ourselves, even 
as He is pure; 


that when He shall appear 
again with power and great 
glory, we may be made like 
unto Him in His eternal and 
glorious Kingdom, 


where with Thee, O Father, 
and Thee, O Holy Ghost, 
He liveth and reigneth, ever| 
one Gop, world without 
end, 


Thus it will be observed that, “after the Invocation, a founda- 
tion is laid for the petition by the recital of some doctrine, or of 


2 The Holy Communion was once known by the name Collecta. Bona, I. 


3. ii, 


3 So in the old “‘ Mirrour,” or commentary on the Divine Offices, the expla- 


nation of the word is given thus: ‘‘ Yt is as moche as to saye a gatherynge 
togyther, for before thys prayer ye dresse you to god, and gather you in 
onhed to pray in the person of holy chirche, that ye sholde be the soner 
harde.” And with respect to the ending the explanation is very properly 
given: ‘Ye ende all youre orysons by oure lorde Jesu cryste, and in hys 
blyssed name, by cause he sayde in his gospel, that what euer ye aske the 
father in my name, he shall gyue yt you,” fol. 1xxiii, 


70 


some fact of Gospel history, which is to be commemorated. 
Upon this foundation so laid down, rises the petition or body of 
the prayer. Then, in a perfect specimen . . . the petition has the 
wings of a holy aspiration given to it, whereupon it may soar to 
heaven. Then follows the conclusion, which, in the case of 
prayers not addressed to the Mediator, is always through the 
Mediator, and which sometimes involves a Doxology, or ascription 
of praise!” This last member of the Collect has, indeed, 
always been constructed with great care, and according to rules 
which were put into the form of memorial verses, at a period 
when it was the custom to write the Collect in a short form, 
and only to indicate the ending by “per,” “Qui vivis,” “per 
eundem,” or whatever else were its first word or words. One of 
these aids to memory is as follows :— 
««¢ Per Dominum,’ dicas si Patrem Presbyter oras. 

Si Christum memores ‘ per Eundem,’ dicere debes. 

Si loqueris Christo ‘ Qui vivis,’ scire memento ; 

© Qui Tecum,’ si sit collectee finis in Ipso ; 

Si memores Flamen ; ‘ Ejusdem,’ dic prope finem 2.” 

Illustrations of these endings will be found in the Collects for 
the Epiphany, the Nativity, Easter Day, and Whitsunday. 

The number of the variable Collects in the Book of Common 
Prayer is eighty-three. These are all traced to their original 
sources, so far as they have been discovered, in the following 
pages; and it will be observed, that fifty-nine out of the eighty- 
three have come to us through the Sarum Missal, from the 
ancient Sacramentaries ; all but one of that number being con- 
tained in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory. Of the remaining 
twenty-four, the germ and spirit, and often the language, may 
be found in ancient Liturgical forms; and the sixteen of the 
twenty-four, of which no such origin is indicated in the following 
pages, will perhaps be discovered, by future research, to be either 
translations or adaptations. Only one new Collect, that for 
St. Andrew’s Day, was inserted in 1552; and only four in 1661. 
The latter are written in the margin of Bishop Cosin’s Durham 
Book, in his handwriting. That for St. Stephen’s Day he 
adapted from one (in the Scottish Prayer Book) which is attri- 
buted to Archbishop Laud, while those for the Third Sunday in 
Advent, the Sixth Sunday after Epiphany, and Haster Even, are 
either composed by himself, or derived from some ancient 
originals which have not been identified. 

The primary use of the Collect is to give a distinctive tone to 
the Eucharistic Service, striking the key-note of prayer for the 
particular occasion on which the Sacrifice is offered. But by the 
constant use of it in its appointed place in the Daily Mattins and 
Evensong, it also extends this Eucharistic speciality into the 
other public Services of the Church, and carries it forward from 
one celebration to another, linking these offices on to the chief 
Service and Offering which the Church has to render to Almighty 
God. ‘Used after such celebration, the Collect is endued with 
a wonderful power for carrying on through the week the peculiar 
Eucharistic memories and work of the preceding Sunday, or of a 
Festival. Under whatsoever engaging or aweing aspect our Lord 
has more especially come to us then in virtue of the appointed 
Scriptures, the gracious and healthful visitation lives on in 
memory, nay, is prolonged in fact. Or in whatever special 
respect, again, suggested by these same Scriptures, and embodied 
for us in the Collect, we have desired to present ourselves ‘a 


1 Goulburn on the Communion Office, p. 37. 

2 A much longer form may be found at p. 73 of Chambers’ Sarum Psalter, 
with an elaborate note on the subject. The following rules may prove 
sufficient for practical purposes at the present day :— 

1) Collects addressed to God the Father should end:—‘‘ Through Jesus 
Christ our Lord [or if our Lord has been previously mentioned :—‘ Through 
the same Jesus Christ our Lord’], Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and 
the [or if the Holy Ghost has been previously mentioned :—‘ The same’] 
Holy Ghost, one God, world without end, Amen.” 

2) Collects addressed to God the Son should end:—‘‘ Who livest and 
reignest with the Father and the [or ‘the same’] Holy Ghost, one God, 
world without end. Amen.” 

3) Collects addressed to the Blessed Trinity should end :—‘‘ Who livest 
and reignest, one God, world without end. Amen.” 

Some other variations, as ‘‘ Where with Thee,” after the mention of 
Heaven, will suggest themselves. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE 


holy and lively sacrifice? in that high ordinance, the same 
oblation of ourselves do we carry on and perpetuate by it. 
Through the Collect, in a word, we lay continually upon the 
altar our present sacrifice and service, and receive, in a manner, 
from the altar, a continuation of the heavenly gift %.” Thus it 
is a constant memorial before God of the great Memorial which 
jois on the work of the Church on earth to the intercession of 
our Mediator in heaven; and it is also a memorial to the mind 
of every worshipper of the sanctification which is brought upon 
all our days and all our prayers by the Sacramental Presence of 
our Blessed Lord. [See also p. 24. ] 


§ The Epistles and Gospels. 


The Holy Communion was celebrated and received by the 
faithful for nearly twenty years before St. Paul wrote his first 
Epistle, and for nearly thirty years before the first Gospel was 
written by St. Matthew; and none of the Gospels or Epistles are 
likely to have been generally known in the Church until even a 
much later time. The Scriptures of the New Testament did not, 
therefore, form any part of the original Liturgies 4. It has been 
supposed by many ritualists, that portions of the Old Testament 
were read at the time of the celebration: and the gradual intro- 
duction of our present system is indicated by the usage shown in 
an Irish Communion Book of the sixth century, which has one 
unvarying Hpistle and Gospel, 1 Cor. xi., and St. John vi. This 
system is attributed to St. Jerome by the almost unanimous 
voice of ancient writers on the Divine Service of the Church; 
and a very ancient Book of Epistles and Gospels exists, called the 
Comes, which has gone by the name of St. Jerome at least since 
the time of Amalarius and Micrologus, in the ninth and eleventh 
centuries. 

The antiquity of the Comes Hieronymi has been disputed, 
chiefly because the system of Epistles and Gospels which it con- 
tains differs from that of the Roman rite; but there seem to 
be several good reasons for supposing that it really belongs to as 
early a time as that of St. Jerome; and as its system agrees 
with the old and modern English one, where it differs from the 
Roman, the question has a special interest in connexion with the 
Book of Common Prayer. 

This ancient Lectionary, or Comes, was published by Pamelius 
in the second volume of his Liturgicon Ecclesia Latins, under 
the title, Divi Hieronymi presbyteri Comes sive Lectionarius : 
and is also to be found in the eleventh volume of St. Jerome’s 
Works, p. 526. It contains Epistles and Gospels for all the 
Sundays of the year, the Festivals of our Lord, some other Festi- 
vals, and many Ferial days. It is some evidence in favour of its 
great antiquity that no saints are commemorated in it of a later 
date than the time of St. Jerome: and that the Epiphany is 
called by the name of the Theophania, a name which was dis- 
continued not long after in the Western Church. The Comes is 
mentioned in the Charta Cornutiana, a foundation deed belonging 
to a Church in France, and printed by Mabillon [Lit. Gall. Pref. 
vii. ], and this charter is as early as A.D. 471. It is mentioned by 
Amalarius [iii. 40], who wrote A.D. 820; and in Micrologus [ xxv. ], 
a liturgical treatise of about A.D. 1080, it is spoken of as “ Liber 
Comitis sive Lectionarius, quem Sanctus Hieronymus compagi- 
navit:” while about the same time Beleth writes that Pope 
Damasus requested St. Jerome to make a selection of Scriptures 
from the Old and New Testament to be read in the Church. The 
latter statement derives confirmation from the fact, that before 
the time of Damasus [a.D. 366—384] the Fathers cite Scripture 
without giving any indications of such a selection being in use : 
while after that time there are such indications in the writings 
of SS. Ambrose, Augustine, Leo, Salvian, and Cesarius; the 
three latter of whom were accustomed to use St. Jerome’s ver- 
sion of the Scriptures, and not the Septuagint. All this seems to 
show that there is much to be said for the ancient statement, that 


3 Principles of Div. Serv. i. 369. 

4 On the other hand, there are those who believe that many expressions 
in the New Testament Scriptures are derived from Liturgies known to and 
used by the Apostles. See an Essay on Liturgical quotations in Neale’s 
Liturgiology, pp. 411—474, 


COLLECTS, EPISTLES, AND GOSPELS. 71 


St. Jerome first arranged the Epistles and Gospels, and that his 
arrangement is extant in this Lectionary. 

In the Comes there are Scriptures for twenty-five Sundays after 
the Octave of Pentecost, as in our Prayer Book and in the 
ancient Salisbury Use (though in both the latter they are num- 
bered as after Trinity), but the Roman rite has them only as far 
as the twenty-third Sunday after Pentecost. The Epistles and 
Gospels for these twenty-five Sundays and those for Advent 
exactly agree with the ancient and modern English, which (as 
will be seen in the tables annexed to every Sunday in the following 
pages) are quite different in arrangement from the Roman. The 
Comes also contains Epistles and Gospels for Wednesdays and 
Fridays in Epiphany, Easter, and Trinity seasons, which were 
im the Salisbury Missal, but are not in the Roman. It has also 
five Sundays before Christmas (that is, in Advent), instead of four, 
a peculiarity of notation which indicates very early origin, and 
which is reproduced in the “Sunday next before Advent” and 
four Sundays in Advent, of the English Use. These parallel pecu- 
liarities between the Comes and the English arrangement, differ- 
ing as they do from the Roman, form a strong proof that our 
Eucharistic system of Scriptures had an origin quite independent 
of the Roman Liturgy ; or, at least, that it belongs to a system 
which is much older than that now in use in the latter. It may 
be remarked, in conclusion, (and perhaps this is the most impor- 
tant fact in connexion with this diversity,) that the Collects, 
Epistles, and Gospels for Trinity Season are all in harmony in the 
English Missal, while that harmony is entirely dislocated in the 
Roman. 

The principle on which portions of Holy Scripture are selected 
for the Epistles and Gospels is that of illustrating the two great 
divisions of the Christian year, from Advent to Trinity, and from 
Trinity to Advent. In the one, and more emphatic division, our 
Blessed Lord is set before us in a life-like diorama of Gospels, 
which tell us about Him and His work, not as in a past history, 
but with that present force, wherewith the events of His life 
and suffering are pleaded in the Litany. In nothing is the 
graphic action of the Church (sometimes very truly called ‘his- 
trionic’) shown more strongly, than in the way by which the 
Gospels of the season are made the means of our living over again, 
year by year, the time of the Incarnation, from Bethlehem to 
Bethany; while in the long-drawn season of Trinity, we see the 
Church’s continuance by the power of the Pentecostal outpouring 
in the true faith of the Blessed Trinity, and in the faithful follow- 
ing of her Master and Head through a long probationary career. 

The special bearing of each Gospel and Epistle on the day for 
which it is appointed will be shown in the Notes that follow. 
It is sufficient here to say, in conclusion, that the existing arrange- 
ment of them appears to be founded on some more ancient system 


of consecutive reading similar to that in use for our daily Lessons, 
a system still followed out in the East: that the Epistles have 
continued to be used in a consecutive order, but that the Gospels 
have been chosen with the special object of illustrating the season ; 
or, where there is nothing particular to illustrate, of harmonizing 
with their respective Epistles. Whatever changes were made at 
the Reformation may be seen by the tabular arrangement under 
each Collect. In 1661 the only changes made were in the Gos- 
pels for the Holy Week, some of which were shortened by Bishop 
Cosin; in the insertion of those for a Sixth Sunday after Epi- 
phany; and in printing all Gospels and Epistles from the Author- 
ized Version of 1611, instead of from that of 1540. 


[The Introits printed at the end of the Notes for each Sunday 
and other Festivals, are translated from the Salisbury Missal, the 
more familiar name of Introit having been substituted for that 
of “Officium,” by which they are there designated. The Salis- 
bury rubric directs them to be used in the following manner :— 
“« Officium misse usque ad orationem prosequatur sacerdos : vel 
usque ad Gloria in excelsis: guando dicitur. Et post officium et 
psalmum repetatur officium: et postea dicitur Gloria patri et 
Sicut erat. TZertio repetatur officium: sequatur Kyrie.’ Some 
of these Introits are selected with a striking appropriateness to 
the days for which they are appointed, and show a deep appre- 
ciation of the prophetic sense of Holy Scripture. 

The Hymns are also those of the Salisbury Use, which, as is 
well known, it was the intention of Cranmer and his coadjutors 
to have translated into English with the Prayer Book. Most of 
the Hymns are to be found in the original Latin in “Hymni 
Ecclesie,”’ published in 1865 by Macmillan. The references 
appended to each are to translations contained in the following 
well-known Hymn-books :— 

H.N. The Hymnal Noted. Where there is a double reference 
under these initials, it is (1) to the “ Hymnal Noted” 
in two volumes, with the music; and (2) to the “ Words 
of the Hymnal Noted.” 

H. A.M. Hymns Ancient and Modern. 

C.H. The “Congregational Hymn and Tune Book,” edited 

by the Rev. R. R. Chope. 
The “Appendix to the Hymnal Noted” used at St. 
Alban’s Church, Holborn. 

D. H. The “Day Hours of the Church of England.” 

Want of space alone has prevented the Editor from giving the 
Hymns at length in the Notes; but the references thus inserted 
will indicate the ancient custom of the Church of England in 
using them; and may, perhaps, assist in establishing a more 
orderly use of the proper hymns of the Church for their appointed 
days and services. | 


A. A. 


TEE 


COLLECTS, EPISTLES, AND GOSPELS 


TO BE USED THROUGHOUT THE YEAR. 


§ Note, that the Collect appointed for every 
Sunday, or for any Holiday that hath a 
Vigil or Eve, shall be said at the Evening 
Service next before. 

THE FIRST SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 
The Collect. 


LMIGHTY God, give us grace 


See the rules 
given at p. 24. 


[a.p. 1549.] 


DOMINICA I. ADVENTUS DOMINI. 
[ Benedictio. 
MNIPOTENS Deus vos placato [Gteg. Hebd. ii, 


Salisbury Use. 


ante Nat. 
Gen. xvii. 1. aes . ve 
par ae that we may cast away the works vultu respiciat, et in vos donum = Pomn] 
John iii, 19— 1. 7 5 oe hale 
Rom. xiii. 12, 13. of darkness, and put upon us the ar- | sue benedictionis infundat. Amen. 
2 Cor. vi. 2. A 5 4 : C 5 a 5 < live 
Matt. xis.  mour of light, now in the time of this | Et qui hos dies incarnatione Unigeniti 
il. ii. 5—8. : : : ‘ : : ; 
Matt. xxv.3i, 82. mortal life (in which thy Son Jesus | sui fecit solemnes a cunctis presentis 
im. iv. 1. pated ; * . : 
1 Tess. iv. 16, Christ came to visit us in great hu- | et future vite adversitatibus reddat 
Rev. is. xix. mility) ; that in the last day, when he | indemnes. Amen, Ut qui de adventu 
shall come again in his glorious Majesty | Redemptoris nostri secundum carnem 
to judge both the quick and dead, we | devota mente letamini, in secundo, 
may rise to the life immortal, through | cum in majestate venerit, premiis 
him who liveth and reigneth with thee | eternze vite ditemini. Amen.] 
and the Holy Ghost, now and ever. 
Amen. 
§ This Collect is to be repeated every day with 
the other Collects in Advent, until Christ- 
mas Hve. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Rom. xiii. 8—14. Rom. xii. 11—14. Rom. xiii. 11—14. Col. iii, 411. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xxi. 1—13. Matt. xxi. 1—9. Luke xxi. 25—33. Luke xiv. 1—11. 


ADVENT. 


From the first institution of the great Festivals of the Church 
each of them occupied a central position in a series of days; 
partly for the greater honour of the Festival itself, and partly for 
the sake of Christian discipline. Thus Christmas is preceded by 
the Sundays and Season of Advent, and followed by twelve days 
of continued Christian joy which end with Epiphany. 

Under its present name the season of Advent is not to be traced 
further back than the seventh century: but Collects, Epistles, 
and Gospels for five Sundays before the Nativity of our Lord, and 
for the Wednesdays and Fridays also, are to be found in the 
ancient Sacramentaries, and in the Comes of St. Jerome. These 
offer good evidence that the observance of the season was intro- 
duced into the Church at the same time with the observance of 
Christmas: yet there is not, properly speaking, any season of 


Advent in the Kastern Church, which has always carefully pre- 
served ancient customs intact ; though it observes a Lent before 
Christmas as well as before Easter. 

Durandus (a laborious and painstaking writer, always to be 
respected, though not to be implicitly relied upon) writes that St. 
Peter instituted three whole weeks to be observed as a special 
season before Christmas, and so much of the fourth as extended 
to the Vigil of Christmas, which is not part of Advent. [Durand. 
vi. 2.] This was probably a very ancient opinion, but the earliest 
extant historical evidence respecting Advent is that mentioned 
above, as contained in the Lectionary of St. Jerome. Next come 
two homilies of Maximus, Bishop of Turin, 4.D. 450, which are 
headed De Adventu Domini. In the following century are two 
other Sermons of Caesarius, Bishop of Arles [501—542], (for- 
merly attributed to St. Augustine, and printed among his works,) 
and in these there are full details respecting the season and its 


THE SECOND SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 73 


THE SECOND SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 
The Collect. 


[a.p. 1549.] LESSED Lord, who hast caused 
ee Neal all holy Scriptures to be written 
Heb 1, for our learning; Grant that we may 


DOMINICA II., ADVENTUS DOMINI. Salisbury Use. 


observance. In the latter part of the same century St. Gregory 
of Tours writes, that Perpetuus, one of his predecessors, had 
ordered the observance of three days as fasts in every week, from 
the Feast of St. Martin to that of Christmas; and this direction 
was enforced on the Clergy of France by the Council of Macon, 
held a.D.581. In the Ambrosian and Mozarabic liturgies Advent 
Season commences at the same time: and it has also been some- 
times known by the name Quadragesima Sancti Martini: from 
which it seems probable that the Western Churches of Europe 
originally kept six Advent Sundays, as the Eastern still keeps 
a forty days’ Fast, beginning on the same day. But the English 
Church, since the Conquest, at least, has observed four only, 
although the title of the Sunday preceding the first seems to offer 
an indication of a fifth in more ancient days. 

The rule by which Advent is determined defines the first 
Sunday as that which comes nearest, whether before or after, to 
St. Andrew’s Day ; which is equivalent to saying that it is the 
first Sunday after November 26th. December 8rd is conse- 
quently the latest day on which it can occur. 

In the Latin and English Churches the Christian year com- 
mences with the First Sunday in Advent. Such, at least, has 
been the arrangement of the Collects, Epistles, and Gospels for 
many centuries, although the ancient Sacramentaries began the 
year with Christmas Day, and although the Prayer Book (until 
the change of style in 1752) contained an express “ Note, that 
the Supputation of the year of our Lord in the Church of England 
beginneth the Five and Twentieth day of March.’ By either 
reckoning it is intended to number the times and seasons of the 
Church by the Incarnation : and while the computation from the 
Annunciation is more correct from a theological and a chrono- 
logical point of view, that from Advent and Christmas fits in far 
better with the vivid system of the Church by which she repre- 
sents to us the life of our Lord year by year. Beginning the 
year with the Annunciation, we should be reminded by the new 
birth of Nature of the regeneration of Human Nature: beginning 
it with Advent and Christmas, we have a more keen reminder of 
that humiliation of God the Son, by which the new birth of the 
world was accomplished. And as we number our years, not by 
the age of the world, nor by the time during which any earthly 
sovereignty has lasted, but by the age of the Christian Church 
and the time during which the Kingdom of Christ has been esta- 
blished upon earth, calling each ‘‘the Year of our Lord,” or ‘‘ the 
Year of Grace :” so we begin every year with the season when 
grace first came by our Lord and King, through His Advent in 
the humility of His Incarnation. 

In very ancient times the season of Advent was observed as one 
of special prayer and discipline. As already stated, the Council 
of Macon in its ninth Canon directs the general observance by 
the Clergy of the Monday, Wednesday, and Friday fast-days, of 
which traces are found at an earlier period: and the Capitulars 
of Charlemagne also speak of a forty days’ fast before Christmas. 
The strict Lenten observance of the season was not, however, 
general. Amalarius, writing in the ninth century, speaks of it 
as being kept in that way only by the religious, that is, by those 
who had adopted an ascetic life in monasteries, or elsewhere: and 
the principle generally carried out appears to have been that of 
multiplying solemn services}, and of adopting a greater reserve 
in the use of lawful indulgences. Such an observance of the 
season still commends itself to us as one that will form a fitting 
prefix to the joyous time of Christmas: and one that will also 


1 Our own Church had special Epistles and Gospels for the Wednesdays 
and Fridays in Advent, until the Reformation. 


be consistent with that contemplation of our Lord’s Second 
Advent which it is impossible to dissociate from thoughts of His 
First. In the system of the Church the Advent Season is to the 
Christmas Season what St. John the Baptist was to the First, and 
the Christian Ministry is to the Second, Coming of our Lord. 


§ The First Sunday in Advent. 


The four Sundays in Advent set forth, by the Holy Scriptures 
appointed for them, the Majesty of our Lord’s Person and King- 
dom. Christmas is to represent before us the lowliness to which 
the Eternal God condescended to stoop in becoming Man: and 
we begin on that day the detailed observance of each great Act 
in the mystery of the Incarnation. Before coming to Bethlehem 
and seeing the Holy Child in the manger, we are bidden to look 
on the glory which belongs to Him; and, ere we look upon the 
Babe of the humble Virgin, to prepare our hearts and minds for 
the sight by dwelling on the key-note which sounds in our ears 
through Advent, “ Behold, thy King cometh :” a meek and lowly 
Babe, but yet Divine. 

In this spirit the old Introit for the First Sunday was chosen, 
“Unto Thee lift I up mine eyes: O my God, I have put my trust 
in Thee... .” though not without reference also to the humble 
dependence upon His Father with which the Son of God took 
human nature, and all its woes, upon Him. Lifting up our eyes 
to the Holy Child, we behold Him from afar, and “ knowing the 
time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep,” we hear 
the cry, “ Behold, the Bridegroom cometh” to His Church in a 
first Advent of Humiliation and Grace, and a second Advent of 
Glory and Judgment. For each Advent the Church has one song 
of welcome, “ Hosanna to the Son of David: blessed is He that 
cometh in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the Highest ; Even 
so come, Lord Jesus.” 

The Christian year opens, then, on this Sunday with a direct 
re-presentation of our Lord Jesus Christ to us in His Human 
Nature, as wellas His Divine Nature, to be the Object of our 
Adoration. We cannot do otherwise than love the Babe of Bethle- 
hem, the Child of the Temple, the Son of the Virgin, the Com- 
panion of the Apostles, the Healer of the Sick, the Friend of 
Bethany, the Man of Sorrows, the Dying Crucified One: but we 
must adore as well as love; and recognize in all these the 
triumphant King of Glory who reigns over the earthly Sion, and 
over the heavenly Jerusalem. No contemplation of the Humi- 
lity of the Son of Man must divert our eyes from the contempla- 
tion of His Infinite Majesty of Whom the Father saith when He 
bringeth in the First-Begotten into the world, “ Let all the angels 
of God worship Him.” 


Introrr.—Unto Thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul; my God, 
I have put my trust in Thee: O let me not be confounded, neither 
let mine enemies triumph over me. Ps. Show me Thy ways, O . 


Lord, and teach me Thy paths. Glory be. 
Hymns. 
EvEensona. Conditor alme siderum. H.N. 10. 28, H. A.M. 31, 
C. H. 4. 
oe supernum prodiens. H. N. 11. 29, H. A. 
Matrins. Ma S2eCSHe- 7s 


Vox clara ecce intonat. H. A. M. 33, C. H. 3. 
According to the Salisbury Use these Hymns are to be sung 
daily up to Christmas Eve. 
§ The Second Sunday in Advent. 


The note sounded by the Gospel of this Second Sunday is, “ The 
L 


74 THE THIRD SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 


Deut. xxii. 4, in such wise hear them, read, mark, 
learn, and inwardly digest them, that 
by patience, and comfort of thy holy 
Word, we may embrace, and ever hold 
fast the blessed hope of everlasting 
life, which thou hast given us in our 
Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. 


Josh. i. 8. 
Rev. i. 3. iii. 10. 
Heb. vi. :8—20, 


= 


EPISTLE. 


Modern English. 
Rom. xv. 4—13. 


GOSPEL. Luke xxi. 25—383. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 
The Collect. 


[a.p. 1549,] LORD Jesu Christ, who at thy 
Lake ith 7. first coming didst send thy mes- 
Mail. iii. 1. Iv. 


5, 6, with Mate, Senger to prepare thy way before thee ; 
exes 2.5, Grant that the ministers and stewards 
>timivi.” of thy mysteries may likewise so pre- 
Heb. i 6. pare and make ready thy way, by turn- 

ing the hearts of the disobedient to 
the wisdom of the just, that at thy 
second coming to judge the world we 
may be found an acceptable people in 
thy sight, who livest and reignest with 
the Father and the Holy Spirit, ever 
one God, world without end. Amen. 


Salisbury Use. 
Rom. xy. 4—13. 


Luke xxi. 25—33. 


| 
| Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Col. iii. 12—18. 


Luke xiii. 1O—17. 


Rom. xv. 4—13. 
| Matt. xi. 2—10. 


DOMINICA III., ADVENTUS DOMINI. Salisbury Use. 


Modern English. 
1 Cor. iv. 1—5. 


Matt. xi. 2—10. 


| 
| EPISTLE. 
| GOSPEL. 


Salisbury Use. | 
1 Cor. iv. 1—5. 


Matt. xi. 2—10. 


Modern Roman. Hastern. 


Phil. iv. 4—7. 1 Tim. i. 15—17. 


| John i. 19—28. Luke xiv. 16—24. 


Kingdom of God is nigh at hand.” As the Kingdom of Grace it 
is in the midst of us, so that the signs of its summer beauty and 
strength are visible to every eye that will look for them: as the 
Kingdom of the Second Coming, it is nigh at hand to all, for all 
must soon pass out of the one into the other. And what though 
the latter be terrible to contemplate, “‘ men’s hearts failing them 
for fear?” One has arisen to reign even over the Gentiles, and 
in Him shall the Gentiles trust. The patience and comfort of 
God’s Holy Word, the Personal and the written Word, give the 
Church sure faith to look up and lift up its head, knowing that 
its redemption draweth nigh. “Because thou hast kept the 
word of My patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of 
temptation, which shall come upon all the world to try them that 
dwell upon the earth.” [Rev. iii. 10.] 

The continuity of the Church under the Old and New Dispensa- 
tion is strongly shown in both the Epistle and the Gospel for 
this Sunday. In the first, the Monarchy of Christ over each 
Dispensation is set forth: in the second, the Parable of our Lord 
points to the Summer, which was to begin at His passing away. 
“Lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; the flowers 
appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come, 
and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land; the fig-tree 
putteth forth her green figs. Arise, my love, my fair one, and 
come away.” [Cant. ii. 11—18.] It looks, also, beyond to that 
time when the Tree of Life will give its fulness of fruit, and the 
Kingdom of God be known in that phase of its continuous exist- 


ence in which His servants shall serve Him, and they shall see 
His face, Who has been their Redemption. 


IntRoIT.—Behold, O people of Sion, the Lord will come to 
save the nations: and the Lord shall cause His glorious voice to 
be heard, and gladness shall be in your hearts. Ps. Hear, O 
Thou Shepherd of Israel, Thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep. 
Glory be. 


§ The Third Sunday in Advent. 


The Signs of Christ’s Presence with His Church are shown by 
the Scriptures of to-day as a continuation of the truth enunciated 
on the Second Sunday, that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand. 
Whether or not the faith of John the Baptist in the Lamb of 
God was imperfect, there were reasons why the faith of others 
should be made more perfect by means of the message which he 
sent to Jesus, “ Art Thou He that should come, or do we look for 
another ?”? There was no outward show to signify the Infinite 
Glory that was dwelling in the lowly-born and lowly-living Man 
Who was in the midst of them. If indeed this was He that was 
to come, where was the fulfilment of all the well-known prophe- 
cies about the Majesty of the Messiah? For evidence, Christ 
did not transfiguré His human Person before the multitude, and 
exhibit to them an unbearable glory, that would be as convincing 
as the burning bush, or the fire of Sinai: but “in the same hour 
He cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 75 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 


The Collect. 
Isa. li. 9. xl. 29. 
Pa leer. 2, 


LORD, raise up (we pray thee) 
a aida thy power, and come among us, 
Pe, and with ereat might succour us; 
Rom. iil, 2426. that whereas, through our sins and 
wickedness, we are sore let and hin- 
dered in running the race that is set 
before us, thy bountiful grace and 
mercy may speedily help and deliver 
us, through the satisfaction of thy 
Son our Lord; to whom with thee and 
the Holy Ghost be honour and glory, 
world without end. Amen. 


DOMINICA IV., ADVENTUS DOMINI, 
AD MISSAM. 


Oratio. 
XCITA, quesumus, Domine, po- Salisbury Use. 
tentiam tuam et veni, et magna “yn * 
nobis virtute succurre ; ut per auxilium gae30 orat. 
gratia tue quod nostra peccata pre- SADT ae: 
pediunt, indulgentia tus propitiationis 
acceleret. Qui vivis et regnas cum 
Deo Patre. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. Phil. iv. 4—7. 


GosPEL. John i. 19—28. 


Salisbury Use. 
Phil. iv. 4—7. 
John i, 19—28. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Cor. iv. 1—5. Heb. xi. 2. x. 32—40. 


Luke iii. i—6. Matt. i. 1—25. 


spirits ; and unto many that were blind He gave sight” [Luke 
vii. 21]: and when He had done this His answer to the messen- 
gers was, “ Go and show John again those things which ye do hear 
and see.” It was thus the King’s Presence was to be manifested 
among that generation. “Say to them that are of a fearful 
heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with 
vengeance, even God with a recompence: He will come and save 
you. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of 
the deaf shall be unstopped; then shall the lame man leap as an 
hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing; for in the wilderness shall 
waters break out, and streams in the desert.” ([Isa. xxxy. 
4—6.] Itis also in His work of healing that the same Saviour 
mmanifests His continued Presence with His Church. As He sent 
forth His agents then to carry on His work, in the person of 
Apostles, so does He send forth the ministers and stewards of His 
mysteries now. The one and the other both act by His authority, 
are endowed with His power, and do His work. As His ministers 
they have in past generations opened the eyes of the spiritually 
blind, healed spiritual infirmities by the ministration of their 
Master’s grace, and made life-giving streams of Sacramental 
power to spring up in the wildernesses and deserts of the world. 
As, therefore, the Divine power gave evidence of the Divine 
Presence to those who were sent to ask, “Art Thou He that 
should come ?” so the Divine power still gives evidence that the 
promise is fulfilled, “Lo, Iam with you alway, even to the end of 
the world.” The hearts of the disobedient are turned to the 
wisdom of the just, the children of men are made the children of 
God, souls are absolved by the Word of our God and Saviour 
pronounced at His bidding and by His agents, lively stones are 
being continually built up into the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 
which is the Mystical Body of Christ ; and in all these ways the 
perpetual Presence of “ Him that should come” is manifested, 
with as convincing an evidence as if our eyes beheld Him reign- 
ing on a visible Throne of Glory. 2 

This view of these Scriptures shows their connexion with the 
Advent Ordination: and it was this view, doubtless, which led 
Bishop Cosin to compose the Collect that we now use in the place 
of a short one which stood here until 1661, in these words: 
“Tord, we beseech Thee give ear to our prayers, and by Thy 
gracious visitation lighten the darkness of our hearts, by our 
Lord Jesus Christ.” This ancient Collect is erased in the Durham 
Book, and our present one written against it in the margin}, 


1 The first Ember Collect was also composed by Bishop Cosin, 


The Advent Ember Days are the Wednesday, Friday, and 
Saturday after St. Lucy’s Day, which is December 13th. They 
always occur, therefore, in the third week of Advent, and their 
relative position in regard to Advent Sunday is shown by the 
following table :— 


Advent Sunday. Ember Wednesday. 


November 27. December 14. 


» 28. . 15. 
oF 29. a5 16. 
AL 30. 7a 
December 1. ie 18. 
. 2 5 19. 
= 3 5 20. 


As December 17th must thus always come in Ember Week, the 
Ember Collect should always be used from the Saturday Evensong 
preceding the 17th, according to the rule shown at page 63, on 
whatever day of the week the 17th may happen to fall. 


InTRoIr.—Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice. 
Let your moderation be known unto allmen. The Lord is at 
hand. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and 
supplication, let your requests be made known unto God. Ps. And 
the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep 
your hearts and minds. Glory be. 


§ The Fourth Sunday in Advent. 


On this Sunday, the close approach of the King of Glory to 
His kingdom of grace is heralded by Scriptures of which the 
pointed words are, “ The Lord is at hand,” “Make straight the 
way of the Lord.” The Collect has lost its Gregorian pointedness 
by a return to its Gelasian form, which makes the whole a Prayer 
for the Presence of God the Father, instead of what it was 
originally, one for the Coming among us of God the Son. The 
alteration was probably made under a strong impression of the 
truth that all prayer should be addressed to the Father through 
the Son; and also with reference to the words spoken by our 
Lord immediately after He had given the command respecting 
prayer, and had promised a return of His own Presence, “If a 
man love Me, he will keep My words, and My Father will love 

L 2 


76 


THE NATIVITY OF OUR LORD, 
or the Birth-Day of Christ, commonly called 
CHRISTMAS-DAY, 


The Collect. 


[A.D. 1549.] LMIGHTY God, who hast given 
John ili. 16. i. 14, 
Hed. ii. 16, us thy only-begotten Son to take 
Isa. vii. 14, with ‘ . 
Matt. i. 32,23, our nature upon him, and as at this 
John iii. 3—5, : Alera 
i. 12, 13. time to be born of a pure Virgin ; 
Tit. iii, 5. : 
Rev. xi. 15. Grant that we being regenerate, and 


made thy children by adoption and 


him, and We will come unto Him, and make Our abode with 
him.” [John xiv. 23.] In Collect and Scriptures the Church 
sounds her last herald-notes of the season which precedes Christ- 
mas; and we seem to hear the cry of the procession, as it draws 
nearer and nearer, “The Bridegroom cometh; go ye forth to 
meet Him.” It isa cry that should bring peace and joy to her 
children. ‘ Rejoice in the Lord alway,” for “One standeth 
among you,” even now, who brings down from on high “ the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding.” 

A very striking accidental coincidence with this joyous tone of 
the Fourth Sunday in Advent occurs in the First Lesson for 
Christmas Eve, “ Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the 
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, darkness shall 
cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord 
shall arise upon thee, and His glory shall be seen upon thee.” 
The words sound like an answer from heaven to the prayers of 
Advent, that the Light would vouchsafe to come, and illuminate 
the Church with His Presence. Other words which follow are 
equally striking, and offer themselves as a benediction of the 
Christmas decorations which have just been completed: “The 
glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir-tree, the pine-tree, 
and the box together, to beautify the place of My sanctuary ; 
and I will make the place of My feet glorious.” 

The following Antiphons to the Magnificat were formerly sung 
during the third and fourth weeks of Advent. In later times, 
two others were added, one for the Festival of St. Thomas, and 
another in which the name of the Blessed Virgin was used as we 
are not now accustomed to use it. But the original set of 
Antiphons appears to have consisted of these seven, the first 
being sung on December 16th, which is still marked “O Sapientia” 
in the Calendar, and none being used on the Festival of St. Thomas, 
or on Christmas Eve, the latter not being part of the Advent 
season. The dates on which they would thus fall are affixed to 
each Antiphon. References are also appended to the passages 
of Holy Scripture that contain or illustrate the respective titles 
of our Lord on which each Antiphon is founded, as these Antiphons 
are excellent examples of the manner in which Scriptural ideas 
and words may be used in direct acts of Adoration. 


December 16th, [Ecclus. xxiv. 3. Wisd. viii. 1. Cf.1 Cor. i. 24. 
Proy. i.—ix. | 


CHRISTMAS DAY. 


DIES NATIVITATIS DOMINI. 
[ OMINE Jesu Christe, qui ex 
Patre Deus magnus, pro nobis 


Salisbury Use. 

[Mozarabic 
Breviary at 
Lauds. ] 


dignatus es nasci ex homine parvus, ut 
per te factus, per te salvaretur sine 


dubio mundus; propitius 


esto et mise- 


rere nobis; nosque a mundanis con- 


Décember 18th. [Isa. 


O Root of Jesse, which stand- 
est for an ensign of the people, 
before whom kings shall shut 
their mouths, and to whom the 
Gentiles shall seek: Come, that 
Thou mayest deliver us; tarry 
not, we beseech Thee. 


xi. 10. Rev. xxii. 16.] 

O Radix Jesse, qui stas in sig- 
num populorum; super quem 
continebunt reges os suum, 
quem gentes deprecabuntur ; 
veni ad liberandum nos: jam 
noli tardare. 


December 19th. [Isa. xxii. 22. Rev. iii. 7, Isa. xlii. 7.] 


O Key of David, and Sceptre 
of the house of Israel: Thou 
who openest and no man shut- 
teth, who shuttest and no man 
openeth: Come, that Thou 
mayest bring forth from the 
prison-house him that is bound, 
sitting in darkness and in the 
shadow of death. 


December 20th. (Wisd. vii. 


O dawning brightness of the 
everlasting Light, and Sun of 
Righteousness: Come, that 
Thou mayest enlighten those 
who sit in darkness and in the 
shadow of death. 


O Clavis David, et Sceptrum 
domus Israél; qui aperis et 
nemo claudit, claudis et nemo 
aperit ; veni et educ vinctum 
de domo carceris, sedentem in 
tenebris et umbra mortis, 


26. Heb.i.3. Mal. iv. 2.] 


O oriens Splendor lucis zter- 
nz et Sol justitie ; veni et illu- 
mina sedentes in tenebris et 
umbra mortis. 


December 22nd. [Hag. ii. 7.] 


O King and Desire of all na- 
tions, the Corner-Stone uniting 
all in one: Come, that Thou 
mayest save man, whom Thou 
hast formed out of the ground 
by Thy hand. 


December 23rd. (Isa. 


O Emmanuel, our King and 
our Lawgiver, the Expectation 
and the Saviour of the Gentiles: 
Come, that Thou mayest save 
us, O Lord our God. 


O Rex gentium et Desideratus 
earum, lapisque angularis qui 
facis utraque unum; veni, salva 
hominem quem de limo for- 
masti. 


vii. 14, Matt. i. 23.] 

O Emmanuel, Rex et Legifer 
noster, expectatio gentium et 
salvator earum ; veni ad salvan- 
dum nos, Domine Deus noster. 


4 


Inrrort.—Drop down ye heavens from above, and let the skies 


© Wisdom, which didst come 
forth from the mouth of the 
Most High, reaching from the 
one end of all things to the other, 
and ordering them with sweet- 
ness and might: Come, that 
Thou mayest teach us the way 
of understanding. 


December 17th. [Exod. 


O Lord of lords, and Leader of 
the house of Israel, who didst 
appear unto Moses in a flame of 
fire in the bush, and gavest 
Thy law in Sinai: Come, that 
Thou mayest redeem us with 
Thy stretched-out arm. 


O Sapientia quee ex ore Altis- 
simi prodisti, attingens a fine 
usque ad finem, fortiter suavi- 
terque disponeus omnia; veni 
ad docendum nos viam pru- 
dentiz. 


iii. 14, John viii. 58.] 


O Adonai, et dux domus 
Tsraél, qui Moysi in igne flam- 
me rubi apparuisti, et in Sina 
legem dedisti; veni ad redimen- 
dum nos in brachio extento. 


pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring 
forth salvation [germinet Salvatorem]. Ps. And let righteous- 
ness spring up together. I the Lord have created It. Glory be. 


CHRISTMAS DAY. 


The Festival of Christmas was observed at a very early period 
in the Church, as indeed it could hardly but be; for that which 
brought the joy of angels within reach of men’s ears, could not 
but have been devoutly and joyously remembered by Christians, 
year by year, when they came fully to understand the greatness 
of the event. St. Chrysostom, in a Christmas homily, speaks of 
the festival as being even then, in the fourth century, one of 
great antiquity; and, in an Epistle, mentions that Julius I. 
[A.D. 337—352] had caused strict inquiry to be made, and had 
confirmed the observance of it on December 25th. There are 
sermons extant which were preached upon this day by Gregory 


CHRISTMAS DAY. 


grace, may daily be renewed by thy 
Holy Spirit; through the same our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and 
reigneth with thee and the same Spirit, 
ever one God, world without end. 


77 


tagiis munda, et in hoc mundo mun- 
dos nos esse constitue, qui non judicare, 
sed salvare venisti, ut nobis parvulus 
natus, nobisque filius datus, in te et 
regenerationis ortum et adoptionis 


Amen, mereamur consequi donum. Amen. 
Per misericordiam tuam Deus noster. ] 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Bastern. 
i. Titus 1 11—15. Titus ii. 11—15. 
EPISTLE. Heb. i. 1—12. II. Titus iii, 4—7. Titus iii. 4—7. 
AII. Heb. i. 1—13. Heb. i. 1—12. 
[ I. Luke ii. 1—14. Luke ii. 1—14. 71 
GOSPEL. John i, 1—14. Il. Luke ii. 15—20. Matt. i. 18—25. 


IiI. John i. 1—14. 


John i, 1—14. 


Luke ii. ora | 


Nazianzen and St. Basil, in the same century. It is spoken of 
by Clemens Alexandrinus, who died in the beginning of the third 
century, a little more than a hundred years after the death of 
St. John ; and it was on Christmas Day that a whole church full 
of martyrs was burnt by Maximin, in Nicomedia. 

In the primitive age of the Church, this Festival was more 
closely associated with the Epiphany than it has been in later 
times. The actual Nativity of Christ was considered as His first 
Manifestation, and the name “'Theophania ” was sometimes given 
to the day on which it was commemorated, as well as to the 
twelfth day afterwards, when the end of the Christmas Festival is 
celebrated with other memorials of the appearance of God among 
men. Most of the Fathers have left sermons which were preached 
on Christmas Day, or during the continuance of the festival ; and 
secular decrees of the Christian Emperors, as well as Canons of 
the Church, show that it was very strictly observed as a time of 
rest from labour, of Divine Worship, and of Christian hilarity. 

The ancient Church of England welcomed Christmas Day with 
a special service on the Vigil, a celebration of the Holy Com- 
munion soon after midnight, another at early dawn, and a third 
at the usual hour of the mid-day mass. The first two of these 
services were omitted from the Prayer Book of 1549, and the 
third from that of 1552. But an early Communion, as well as 
the usual mid-day one, has always been celebrated in some of the 
greater churches on Christmas Day, and custom has revived the 
midnight celebration also, in addition to the ordinary Evensong 
of Christmas Eve. The midnight celebration commemorates the 
actual Birth of our Lord ; the early morning one its revelation to 
mankind in the persons of the shepherds; that at mid-day the 
Eternal Sonship of the Holy Child Jesus. 

The Collect at the Early Communion in the first Prayer Book 
was that of Christmas Eve in the Salisbury Missal: the Epistle 
and Gospel being the first of the ancient three. 


Early Communion. First Christmas Eve. 
Prayer Book of 1549. Use. 
God, which makest us glad Deus, qui nos redemptionis 
with the yearly remembrance of nostre annua expectatione leti- 
the birth of Thy only Son Jesus ficas: presta: ut Unigenitum 
Christ; grant that as we joy- tuum quem redemptorem leti 
fully receive Him for our Re- suscipimus: venientem quoque 
deemer, so we may with sure judicem securi videamus Do- 
confidence behold Him, when minum nostrum Jesum Chris- 
He shall come to be our Judge, tum Filium tuum. Qui tecum. 
who liveth and reigneth. [Greg. In Vig. Nat. Dom. ad 
Nonam. Gelas. | 
The ancient association of Christmas and Epiphany was main- 
tained in the Collect of the Salisbury Use, dd Missam in galli 
cantu. “Deus, qui hane sacratissimam noctem veri luminis 
fecisti illustratione clarescere : da, queesumus, ut cujus Iucis myste- 
ria in terra cognoyvimus, ejus quoque gaudiis in celo perfruamur. 
Qui tecum.” [Greg. In Vig. Dom. in Nocte. Gelas. | 


Salisbury 


It is most fit that the season so marked out by Angels by songs 
of joy, such as had not been heard on earth since the Creation, 
should also be observed as a time of festive gladness by the 
Church, and in the social life of Christians. Christ Himself 
instituted this festival when He sanctified the day by then first 
revealing His Human Nature to the eyes of mankind. The holy 
Angels witnessed to its separation for ever as a day of days, when 
they proclaimed the Glory that was then offered to God in the 
Highest by the restoration of perfect Manhood in the Virgin-born 
Jesus; and the peace that was brought among men on earth 
through the reunion of their nature to God. The whole world 
has since recognized it as the single point of history in which 
every age, every country, every living man has an interest. It 
is to the Nativity of our Lord that all the pages of the Bible point 
as the centre on which every thing there recorded turns. Kings 
have lived and died; empires have arisen and crumbled away ; 
great cities have been built and destroyed; countries peopled and 
again laid desert : and all this is to us almost as if it had never 
been. Great as past events of history were to the generations 
in which they occurred, to us they are of less practical import- 
ance than the every-day circumstances of our common life. But 
the event which gives us the festival of Christmas was one whose 
interest is universal and unfading: one with which we are as 
much concerned as were the shepherds of Bethlehem: and which 
will be of no less importance to the last generation of men than 
it is to us. For it was in the Birth of Christ that Earth was 
reunited to Heaven, and both made one Kingdom of God above 
and below, as they were at the first Creation. In it, separation 
of man from God was done away, for One appeared Who in His 
own single Person was God, belonging to Heaven, and Man, 
belonging to earth. It was not only the beginning of a new era, 
but it was the Centre of all human history, the point of time to 
which the ages that were gone had looked forward, and to which 
the ages that were to come after must all look back; the one day 
of days which gathered all other times into itself, and stretching 
its influence through every hour of human existence from the 
Fall to the Judgment, makes for itself a history by connexion 
with which only can other histories have an eternal interest. 
And so, even beyond the immediate influence of the Church, it is 
found that the Christmas gladness of the Church is reflected in 
the world around: and a common instinct of regenerated human 
nature teaches that world to recognize in Christmas a season of 
unity and fellowship and goodwill, of happiness and peace. 


Intrroir.—Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, 
and the government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name 
shall be called Wonderful. Ps. Sing unto the Lord a new song, 
for He hath done marvellous things. Glory be. 


Hymns. 


31. 


{Veni Redemptor Gentium. H.N.12. 
A. M. 49, C. H. 24. 


EVENSONG- \ salpator mundi, Domine. H. 


78 SAINT STEPHEN’S DAY. 


S. STEPHEN’S DAY. 
The Collect. 


[a.p. 1661.] RANT, O Lord, that, in all our 
1 Pet. iv. 13, sufferings here upon earth for 
14, 19; 


the testimony of thy truth, we may 
stedfastly look up to heaven, and by 


Acts vii. 55, 56. 
2 Cor. iv. 17, 18, 
Acts vii. 57—60, 


IN DIE SANCTI STEPHANI. 
 Oratio. 
A nobis, queesumus, Domine, imi- Salisbury Use. 
tari quod colimus, ut discamus “'s"siven. 
et inimicos diligere, quia ejus natalitia 
celebramus, qui novit etiam pro perse- 
cutoribus exorare Dominum nostrum 


Matv-4- “faith behold the glory that shall be 
Christe, Redemptor omnium. H.N, 18. 33, H. A. 
Martrins. M. 45, C. H. 21. 


A solis ortus cardine. H.N. 14. 34. 
These hymns are appointed for all days throughout the Octave 
which are not otherwise provided for. 


THE THREE DAYS AFTER CHRISTMAS. 


The position of the three days after Christmas Day is a very 
remarkable one, Easter and Pentecost each have two festive 
days following their principal day, the Sunday: and in this 
respect Christmas, with its three festive days, is placed on a similar 
though a more honoured footing. But at Easter and Pentecost 
the days are connected by name with the festival itself, whereas, 
at Christmas, they are associated with the names of Saints, in 
addition to that continued commemoration of the Nativity which 
belongs to them as to the other days of the Octave. 

Some explanation of this may be found in the vivid convictions 
of the early Church respecting the close union between Christ and 
His people, especially His Martyrs, through tbe virtue of the 
Incarnation. Husebius [viii. 10] speaks of the martyrs of Alex- 
andria as Xpioropédpo1, a name otherwise familiar to us in the 
story of St. Christopher, and in the appellation of Theophorus 
which was given by himself or others to Ignatius: and St. Augus- 
tine, in one of his Sermons on St. Stephen’s Day, seems to adopt 
a strain of thought in accordance with these names, when he says, 
* As Christ by being born was brought into union with Stephen, 
‘so Stephen by dying was brought into union with Christ.” There 
was, moreover, in the early Church (itself so familiar with a life 
of suffering) a profound sense of the continuous martyrdom which 
was involved in the earthly life of our Lord, both from the intensity 
of the humiliation which He underwent in becoming Man [non 
horruisti virginis uterum. Te Dewm], and also from the sorrows 
which were inherent in His human nature as the bearer of all 
human woes. Hence they could not lose sight, in those days, of 
the fact that the Holy Child of Bethlehem was also the Man of 
Sorrows: and it is very probable that this view of our Lord’s 
Incarnation led to the commemoration of the first Martyr who 
suffered on the day succeeding that on which his Master had 
entered on a life of suffering, rather than on the anniversary of 
his martyrdom. In connexion with this view it is very observable, 
that at the first taste of martyrdom, even before the suffering of 
St. Stephen, the Church pleaded the Divine Sonship and human 
Infancy of our Lord: and although few of the Apostles are likely 
to have known their Lord in His childhood, (while His mature 
years and His final work were familiar to all, and His Ascent out 
of their sight as Man vividly fresh in their memory,) yet they 
speak of Him to the Father in their hour of trouble as “Thy 
holy Child Jesus,” and seem thus to: fall back, so to speak, on the 
firs, days of the Incarnation more than a third of a century before, 
rather than on their recent knowledge of Him through whom they 
prayed for strength to do and bear all that was set before them. 
It may well have been that St. Stephen was among them when 
the words of that prayer were used. 

Another explanation is to be found in the Rationale of Du- 
randus [vii. 42]. The substance of this is, that Christ being the 
Head to which all the members are joined, three kinds of 
members are joined to Him by martyrdom: as mystically sig- 
nified in the Song of Songs [v. 10], by the words, “‘ My Beloved 
is white and ruddy, and the chiefest among ten thousand.” The 
first and chief order of martyrs he thus considers to be those who, 
being baptized in blood, suffered both in will and deed: the 


second, those who gave their will up entirely to suffer, but yet 
escaped with life, and so accomplished a white martyrdom: the 
third, those who suffered but had no wills of their own to sacrifice 
to God, as was the case with the Holy Innocents. 

One other view may be named; which is, that as the second 
half of the Christian year represents the Christian life founded on 
the life of Christ, so the three days after Christmas represent the 
three ways of suffering, love, and purity, by which the Incarnation 
bears fruit in the saints of God. St. Stephen was the nearest to 
the King of Saints in His life of suffering, St. John in His life of 
love, the Holy Innocents in His life of purity. The first trod 
immediately in his Master’s footsteps of a Martyr death in its 
most perfect form; the second lying on Jesus’ bosom in close 
communion with Him to the end of His earthly life, followed 
Him closely ever after in His heavenly example ; the third were 
the first-fruits of that holy train whose innocence and purity 
admits them nearest to the Person of their glorified Redeemer, so 
that “they follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.” 


§ St. Stephen. 


Nothing is known of St. Stephen before his martyrdom beyond 
the solitary fact that he was one of the seven deacons ordained 
by the Apostles when they began to divide off the lower portions 
of their ministerial functions, duties, and cares. His eloquence, 
ready knowledge, heroic courage, are strikingly exhibited in the 
account given of his last hours in the seventh chapter of the 
Acts. It may be that he is only a fair and average example of 
those wonderfully endowed men who carried on Christ’s work in 
the Apostolic age; and that the peculiarity of his martyrdom as 
being the first, and as occurring while the Church was still con- 


' fined almost within the walls of Jerusalem, has given it the 


prominence of a Scriptural narrative. There were, doubtless, 
many others in that holy band of Apostolic men, of whom it 
might have been recorded that, “full of faith and power, they did 
great wonders and miracles among the people ;” and many who 
suffered as boldly and as meekly as St. Stephen. Yet it is 
around the head of the Proto-martyr alone that Holy Scripture 
places the nimbus of glory; and however truly it may be the due 
of others also, it is of St. Stephen only that the words are 
written, “And all that sat in the council, looking stedfastly on 
him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.” Hence 
St. Chrysostom calls him the Srépavos or crown of the Church, 
in respect to her martyrdoms. 

The dying words of St. Stephen are also of a most saint-like 
character, whether that character was common to the saintly 
martyrs or not. The last words of his Master’s passion, “ Father, 
forgive them, for they know not what they do,” have a parallel 
in the servant’s, “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge ;” and 
the commendatory prayer, “ Lord Jesus, receive my spirit,” is the 
saint’s version of the Son’s cry, “Father, into Thy hands I 
commend My spirit.” 

Such circumstances as these seem as if they were providentially 
ordered, in part, as a monition to the Church of the honour in 
which the martyrs of Christ were ever after to be held; to show 
her that Christ was to be glorified in His saints, through whom 
the lustre of His own Light was shed around as planets disperse 
the light of the sun when it is beyond our horizon. Nor must it 
be forgotten that the narrative of St. Stephen’s martyrdom is 
given us in that book which is principally made up of the Acts 
of St. Paul, the account of the missionary life and sufferings— 
and how small a part!—of that “young man whose name was 


SAINT JOHN THE EVANGELIST’S DAY. 79 


Heb. ii. 18. vii, revealed; and, being filled with the | Jesum Christum Filium tuum qui 


Holy Ghost, may learn to love and 
bless our persecutors by the example 
of thy first Martyr Saint Stephen, who 
prayed for his murderers to thee, O 
blessed Jesus, who standest at the 
right hand of God to succour all those 
that suffer for thee, our only Mediator 
and Advocate. Amen. 


{| Then shall follow the Collect of the Nativity, 
which shall be said continually unto New- 
year’s Eve. 


tecum vivit et regnat. 


G Alia de Nativitate. 


Modern English. 


2 


EPISTLE. Acts vil. 55—60. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xxiii. 34—39. 


Salisbury Use. 
Acts vi. 8—10. vii. 54—60.| Acts vi. 8—10. vii. 54—60. 
Matt. xxiii. 34—39. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 
Heb. ii. 11—18. 


Matt. xxiii. 34-39. Matt. xxi. 38—48. 


S. JOHN THE EVANGELIST’S DAY. 


The Collect. 
ERCIFUL Lord, we _ beseech 
thee to cast thy bright beams 
of light upon thy Church, that it being 


1 John i. 5. 
dohn viii. 12. 
Rev. i. J. xiv. 6, 
i John i. 83—6, 
John xii. 35. 


IN DIE SANCTI JOHANNIS EVANGE- 
LIST A. 


Oratio. 
CCLESIAM tuam quesumus, salisbury Use. 
: . : % Greg. Nat. 
Domine, benignus illustra; ut "52503" evan. 
beati Joannis apostoli tui et evange- 


Saul,” at whose feet the official “ witnesses” of the cruel and 


sudden death ‘laid down their clothes.” Were all these official 
Mdptupes won over to be martyrs in life and death as that young 
man was? Whether or not such fruit was borne by the first 
martyr’s blood, it is certain that all the members of the then 
existing Church must have had his death keenly engraved on 
their memory; and that, as Christ ordained Christmas Day by 
the very fact of His Nativity, so His holy Martyr must have 
been privileged to originate the observance of Saints’ Days by 
the very circumstances of that Martyrdom whereof the Church, 
and the Apostle of the Gentiles above all, must have said year by 
year, This was the day on which Stephen fell asleep. 

The Collect for St. Stephen’s Day, as it now stands, is first 
found, in Bishop Cosin’s handwriting, in the margin of the 
Durham Prayer Book. Until 1661 it was used in this much 
shorter and less beautiful form,—“ Grant us, O Lord, to learn to 
love our enemies, by the example of Thy martyr, Saint Stephen, 
who prayed for his persecutors to Thee; which livest.” It is 
observable that in both forms of this Collect it follows the 
example given by St. Stephen, of prayer to the second Person of 
the Blessed Trinity. The following passage from the Contestatio 
Misse of the Gallican Mass for St. Stephen’s Day, printed by 
Cardinal Bona [Rer. Liturg. i. 12], is very like the newer portion 
of our Collect,—* Ili pro nobis oculi sublimentur, qui adhue in 
hoc mortis corpore constituti stantem ad dexteram Patris Filium 
Dei, in ipsa passionis hora viderunt. Ile pro nobis obtineat, qui 
pro persecutoribus suis, dum lapidaretur, orabat ad Te Sancte 
Deus, Pater omnipotens.” This was not printed by Bona until 
1676, but it is an interesting illustration of the unity which 
pervades the tone of ancient and sound modern forms of prayer. 


Tyrrorr.—Princes also. did sit and speak against me. They 
persecute me falsely ; be Thou my help, O Lord my God: because 
Thy servant is occupied in Thy statutes. Ps. Blessed are those 
that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the law of the Lord. 
Glory be. 


Hymn. 


Martins and Eyensona. Sancte Dei pretiose. H. N.15. 40. 


§ St. John the Evangelist. 


The beloved disciple of the Holy Child Jesus is known to the 
affection of the Church as the Apostle of Love, to her intellect as 
the @coAdyos, or Divine. There is little recorded of him in Holy 
Scripture, but a large part of the New Testament was revealed 
by God to His servant John; and none of the Apostles, so far as 
we know, except St. Paul, exercised so extensive an influence 


_ over the subsequent ages of the Church. It is not known how 


soon a festival was instituted in honour of this Apostle, but it is 
placed in the ancient Sacramentaries and Lectionary, and is 
therefore of primitive origin. 

St. John the Evangelist was one of the sons of Zebedee and 
Salome, a fisherman like his father, and early called by our 
Blessed Lord to be a fisher of men. With three other of the 
Apostles he stood in a near relationship to the Blessed Virgin, 
which may be best represented by the following table. 


St. Matthew’s St. Luke’s 
legal natural 
genealogy. genealogy. 
Jacob. Heli. 


| 
(St. Joachim = St. Anne. ] | 


| | ee | 
Zebedee = Salome. B.V.M.= Joseph. Cleophas = Mary. 


| | 
St. James Gt. St. John Ev. JESUS. St. James Less. Joses. 


The intimate relationship between the Blessed Virgin Mary 
and her cousin Elizabeth seems to make it probable that the son 
of her sister Salome would become an early disciple of St. John 
the Baptist; and as his follower he was in company with 
St. Andrew when the Baptist bore official witness to the Mission 
of our Lord as “the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of 
the world.” The Evangelist, therefore, was one of the first pair 
of disciples who were called from following the Law to follow the 
Gospel: sharing indeed with St. Andrew in the honour of the 
title TIpwrdxAnros. It would appear to have been some little 
time afterward that St. John was required to give up his ordinary 


80 


Rev. xxi, 10.23, enlightened by the doctrine of thy 


SAINT JOHN THE EVANGELIST’S DAY. 


listee iluminata doctrinis, ad dona per- cf. Aug. in 


: : : : : Joan. ii. 7. 
blessed Apostle and Evangelist Saint | veniat sempiterna. Per Dominum. i 
John may so walk in the light of thy Memoria de Nativitate. Ala de 
truth, that it may at length attain to | Sancto Stephano, 
the light of everlasting life, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
‘a | 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. 1 John i. 1—10. Ecclas. xv. 1—6. Ecclus. xv. 1—6. 1 John iv. 12—19. 
GOSPEL. John xxi, 19—26. John xxi. 19—24. John xxi. 19—24. John xix. 25—29, 


occupation that he might be trained to the office of a fisher of 
men, and become a constant attendant on our Lord: still longer 
before that training had been so far carried on as to qualify him 
in outward knowledge for receiving the commission and power of 
an Apostle. In the appointment of the Apostles, St. John was 
one of the three whom our Lord distinguished by new names: he 
and his brother St. James being then called Boanerges, a title 
which ancient writers connect with the great eloquence of these 
two Apostles, as Demosthenes and Plato were called ‘ tonantes ” 
by old Roman writers. This does not seem quite to explain the 
title: yet in the case of St. John it is easy to see that it might 
have such a prophetic application to him as the last writer of the 
New Testament, who was to proclaim resounding theological 
truths to the world as from a Gospel Sinai after historical 
narratives had done their work in preparing the minds of men 
for their reception. 

The next time St. John’s name occurs in the Gospels is as one 
of the three “elect of the elect” who were chosen by our Lord to 
witness the manifestation of His Divine power in the chamber of 
Jairus’s daughter, and of His Divine glory on the Mount of 
Transfiguration. The same three were also present at the Agony. 
They seem to have been chosen, not for any purpose of sympathy 
needed by Christ, but as a part of their own training. All three 
were afterwards distinguished by special services for their Master, 
and these visions of His Power, His Glory, and His suffering 
were preparing them for their work. Of the two sons of Zebedee, 
St. James was the first martyred Apostle, St. John the latest 
living Apostle. The first miracle of the Church was wrought by 
St. Peter and St. John; they, too, were the first sufferers after 
the Ascension; they were the first Apostles who went beyond 
Judea ; and they were the “pillars” of the Church in its early 
days. If we reckon up the extent of their work in the education 
of the Church, it will be found that far the greatest proportion of 
the New Testament has come from the pens of St. Peter, 
St. Paul, and St. John; the second great Apostle appearing to 
have filled up the vacancy caused by the martyrdom of St. James. 
And as St. Peter exercised a vast external influence over the 
Church of the Future, while St. Paul was its great moral 
teacher, so St. John the Theologian was the Apostle by whom 
the world was to learn more than by any other, those truths 
which lie at the very root of orthodox and true conceptions 
respecting the Blessed Trinity, our Redeemer, and the work of 
the Incarnation in making God and man at one. The Church of 
England traced up its usages in primitive days to the teaching of 
St. John, and there is good reason to think that the influence of 
this Apostle has moulded her Liturgy and her spirit very exten- 
sively ; preparing her, perhaps, for the great struggle against un- 
belief in which she seems destined to bear a prominent part. 

The Blessed Virgin having been committed to the care of St. 
John the Evangelist at the Cross, his office towards her appears 
to have terminated about the year 48, but between that time and 
the later part of the century his history is in obscurity. Possibly 
it was part of the fulfilment of the Lord’s words, “If I will that 
he tarry till I come,” that St, John should really see Jerusalem 


and xxi. 24, 25. 


encompassed with armies, and that he did not leave for Ephesus 
until so late as the year 66, when the siege began: which was 
only a year before the martyrdom of St. Peter and St. Paul. It 
was about this time, certainly, that the Evangelist and Theolo- 
gian began to be the sole remaining Apostolic centre of the Church, 
as he continued to be for about a third of a century. ‘This isola- 
tion of St. John sets him in a position of patriarchal prominence, 
greater even than that of St. Paul had been: and he was doubt- 
less directed to Ephesus, the Metropolis of Asia, the great centre 
of nature-worship, and the commercial port of the one great sea 
of the then known world, as the place where his influence would 
extend farthest and widest during those eventful years in which 
the Church was breaking free from Judaism, and settling into 
definite forms of doctrine and worship. 

The latter part of St. John’s life was marked by two acts which 
fulfilled our Lord’s words, that he should tarry until His Coming. 
A poisoned cup of wine was given to him at Ephesus, but the 
Apostle made over it the sign of the Cross, and partook of it 
without harm; according to the promise, that if the Apostles 
drank of any deadly thing it should not hurt them. He was also 
summoned to Rome, and there cast into a caldron of burning oil 
[see Calendar], but escaped unharmed. Banished to Patmos, 
the visions of the Apocalypse were revealed to him; and when 
his work was done there, his Master’s Providence led him back 
to Ephesus, to contend against the rising heresies of the day, to 
speak loving words about the love of God, and to breathe out his 
spirit in peace at the age of 100 in the midst of his “little 
children,”—those whom he had begotten in Christ. 

Lying on the bosom of his Master, not only in those few 
minutes in the upper chamber of the Institution of the Holy 
Eucharist, but ever after by contact of his spiritual senses with 
the Word of God, this holy Apostle learned things from the Divine 
lips and heart which had been kept secret from the foundation of 
the world; which the angels desired to look into, but could not 
until they were revealed to mankind. As St. John the Baptist, 
the last Prophet of the Old Dispensation, was the Forerunner of 
Christ, so it may be said that St. John the Evangelist, the Pro- 
phet of the New Dispensation, occupies a similar position as the 
Herald of the Second Advent; and for this reason, as well as 
others that have been stated, his Festival is connected so closely 
with Christmas. When He that enlighteneth every man came 
into the world, He cast some of the bright beams of His Light 
upon St. John, that by him the illumination of the world might 
be more perfect, and the Sun of Righteousness which had arisen 
with healing in His beams might shine more gloriously over the 
understandings and the love of His Church. 


Intrort.—In the midst of the Church did he open his mouth ; 
and the Lord filled him with the spirit of wisdom and under- 
standing. He endued him with a robe of glory. Ps. He poured 
out upon him His treasures of joy and gladness. Glory be. 


Hyrmys. 
Martins.—Annue Christe seculorum Domine. 
Evrensona.—LHaultet celum laudibus. 


H. N. 86. 75. 


INNOCENTS’ DAY, 


THE INNOCENTS’ DAY. 


$1 


IN DIE SANCTORUM INNOCENTIUM 
MARTYRUM, 


Officium. 
Ex ore infantium Deus et lactentium 
perfecisti laudem : propter inimicostuos. 


Salisbury Use. 


The Collect. Oratio. 
[a.p. 1661.] ALMIGHTY God, who out of EUS cujus hodierna die pra- Greg. Gelas. Nat, 
CT ia the mouths of babes and suck- conium innocentes martyres, 
meee ia lings hast ordained strength, and | non loquendo sed moriendo, confessi 
noe eee 5 madest infants to glorify thee by their | sunt, omnia in nobis vitiorum mala 
Phi 20, deaths; Mortify and kill all vices in | mortifica, ut fidem tuam, quam lingua 
us, and so strengthen us by thy grace, | nostra loquitur, etiam moribus vita 
that by the innocency of our lives, | fateatur. Qui cum Deo Patre. 
and constancy of our faith even unto Memoria de Nativitate. Alia me- 
death, we may glorify thy holy | moria de Sancto Stephano. Item alia 
Name; through Jesus Christ our | de Sancto Johanne. 
Lord. Amen. 
oI 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Rey. xiv. 1—5. Rev. xiv. 1—5. Rey. xiv. 1—5. Heb. ii. 11—18. 
GOSPEL. Matt. ii. 13—18. Matt. ii. 13—18. Matt. ii. 13—18. Matt. ii. 183—23. 


§ Lhe Holy Innocents. 

The festival of the Innocents is alluded to by St. Irenzeus [Adv. 
Heres. iii. 16], who was himself a martyr, a.D. 202; and by St. 
Cyprian, who went to his Saviour by the same path, A.D. 258. 
In an Epistle (lviii.) which the latter wrote to a community of 
Christians in anticipation of a fearful persecution which he fore- 
saw, he says, “ The Nativity of Christ commenced forthwith with 
the martyrdom of infants, so that they who were two years old 
and under, were put to death for His Name’s sake. An age not 
yet capable of conflict, proved fit for a crown. That it might 
appear that they are innocent who are put to death for the sake 
of Christ, innocent infancy was slain for His Name’s sake. It 
was shown that no one is free from the perils of persecution, when 
even such accomplished martyrdom.” 

These words of the third century plainly show how early the 
memorial day of the Holy Innocents was associated with Christ- 
mas: and allusions of the same kind are to be found in the Ser- 
mons of Origen, St. Augustine, and others. 

The Gospel of this day gives the actual narrative of the slaugh- 
ter of the children of Bethlehem by Herod, an event spoken of 
in Roman history as well as in the Holy Bible. The Epistle sets 
forth the heavenly sequel of that event as told in the mystical 
language of the Apocalypse. In the joining together of these two 
portions of Holy Scripture, we have an exact representation of the 
light in which the martyrdom of the Innocents has always been 
regarded by the Church: and the tender feeling with which these 
first witnesses for the Holy Child Jesus were kept in memory, is 
illustrated by the well-known hymn of Prudentius, written in the 
fourth century, and familiar in the English version, “ All hail! 
ye Infant Martyr flowers.” 

“Not in speaking but in dying,” says the ancient Collect }, 
“have they confessed Christ.” “Stephen,” says St. Bernard, 
““was a martyr among men; John may be considered so in the 
sight of Angels, to whom by spiritual signs his devotion was 
known: but these are martyrs with God; for neither to men 
nor angels is their merit known, but commended to God alone in 
the prerogative of His singular grace.” “Before the use of the 
tongue,” writes St. Leo, “in silence He put forth the power of 


} Used in that form until 1661, 


the Word, as if He were saying already, ‘Suffer little children to 
come unto Me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.’ With a 
new glory He crowned infants, and in His own beginnings con- 
secrated the first-fruits of little children ; that hence we might 
learn that no one among mankind is incapable of a Divine Sacra- 
ment, since even that age was fit for the glory of martyrdom ..... 
Christ loves infancy, which He took on Himself both in mind 
and body: He loves infancy as the mistress of humility, the type 
of innocence, the form of meekness. To infancy He directs the 
manners of elders, and brings back the old. It is to this, the 
similitude of little children, that you, most beloved, are invited 
by the mystery of this day’s festival.” 

In connexion with these holy Innocents, it is impossible not to 
remember the words at the end of the Service for the Baptism 
of Infants, “It is certain by God’s Word, that children which are 
baptized, dying before they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly 
saved.” The writer once met with a strong illustration of the 
comfort wrought by faith in this truth, when looking over a 
country churchyard. A mother had laid underneath two Christian 
babes, and she had written on the stone over them, “They are 
without fault before the throne of God.’ Doubtless, many such 
have been added to the mystical number since St. John wrote 
down his Vision, “ first-fruits unto God and to the Lamb,” taken 
away from the evil to come, and gaining the fullest benefit of the 
Holy Child’s Nativity by the way of Innocence in which they 
have been privileged to follow Him on Earth, that they may 
“follow Him whithersoever He goeth” in Heaven. “So He 
giveth His beloved sleep.” 

The mournful character of this day was anciently kept up in 
England by the use of black vestments and muffled peals. 


InrRoit.—Out of the mouths of very babes and sucklings 
hast Thou ordained strength because of Thine enemies. Ps. O 
Lord our Governor, how excellent is Thy Name in all the world, 
Thou that hast set Thy glory above the heavens. Glory be. 


Hymns. 


f Sanctorum meritis. 

| Rex gloriose martyrum. D. H. p. 26, A. A. 194. 
Evensone. Rex gloriose martyrum, Ditto. 

M 


MATTINS. 


82 THE SUNDAY AFTER CHRISTMAS. 
THE SUNDAY AFTER CHRISTMAS-DAY. SEXTA DIES A NATIVITATE DOMINI Salisbury Use. 
The Collect. SIVE DOMINICA FUERIT SIVE NON. 
[a.d. 1549.] LMIGHTY God, who hast given [ MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, (Greg. in die 
us thy only-begotten Son to take qui hune diem per incarnationem ct 
our nature upon him, and as at this | Verbi tui et partum beate Marie Vir- 
time to be born of a pure Virgin; | ginis consecrasti, da populis tuis in hac 
Grant that we being regenerate, and | celebritate consortium ut qui tua gratia 
made thy children by adoption and | sunt redempti, tua sint adoptione se- 
grace, may daily be renewed by thy | curi. Per eundem.] 
Holy Spirit; through the same our Memoria de Nativtate: de Sancto saiisvwy vse. 
Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and | Stephano: de Sancto Johanne: de In- 
reigneth with thee and the same Spirit, | xocentibus: et de Sancto Thoma. 
ever one God, world without end. 
Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Gal. iv. 1—7. Gal. iv. 1—7. Gal, iv. 1—7. Gal. iii. 11—15. 
GOSPEL. Matt. i. 18—25. Luke ii. 33—40. Luke ii. 33—40. Matt. ii. 13—23. 
THE CIRCUMCISION OF CHRIST. DIES CIRCUMCISIONIS. Salisbury Use. 
The Collect. 
Tae eas LMIGHTY God, who madest [ MNIPOTENS Deus, cujus uni- [creg. sacr. 
Luke ii. 21. . : . . Benedict in 
Gal.iv. 4. | ; thy blessed Son to be cireum- genitus hodierna die, ne legem Oct. Dom. 
Col. ii, 10, 11. cised, and obedient to the law for | solveret quam adimplere venerat, cor- 


1 Pet. ii. 11. 21. 


man; Grant us the true circumcision 
1 John ii. 15, 16, 


of the Spirit; that, our hearts, and 
all our members being: mortified from 
all worldly and carnal lusts, we may 
in all things obey thy blessed will ; 
through the same thy Son Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


poralem suscepit circumcisionem ; spi- 
rituali circumcisione mentes vestras ab 
omnibus vitiorum incentivis expurget ; 
et suam in vos infundet benedictionem. 
Amen. | 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Rom. iv. 8—14. Titus ii, 11—15. Titus ii. 11—15. Col. ii. 8—12. 
GOSPEL. Luke ii. 15—21. Luke ii. 21. Luke ii. 21. Luke ii. 20, 21. 


40—52. 


THE SUNDAY AFTER CHRISTMAS. 


The Lord’s Day within the Octave of Christmas carries on, of 
necessity, the idea of the preceding festival, forming a kind of 
“Low Sunday” to Christmas Day itself. There is no change 
of Collect, but the Epistle and Gospel strike a new chord in the 
harmony of the Eucharistic Scriptures. On Christmas Day they 
memorialized the condescension of the Word of God in becoming 
Son of*Man: on this day they set forth the exaltation of human 
Nature by that condescension. On the one day, the Son of God is 
shown to us becoming the Son of Man: on the other, the sons of 
men are shown to us becoming the sons of God, through the 
Adoption won for them by the Holy Child Jesus. We are “ heirs 
of God through Christ,” because of the fulfilment of the promise 
conveyed by His Name, “He shall save His people from their 
sins.” 

The genealogies were struck out of the Gospel of the Day 
by Bishop Cosin in 1661: and he proposed to insert a note at 
the end of the Gospel, “This Collect, Epistle, and Gospel, are to 
be used only till the Circumcision.” 


Introir.—For while all things were in quiet silence, and that 
night was in the midst of her swift course, Thine Almighty Word 
leaped down from Heaven out of Thy royal throne. Ps. The 
Lord is King, and hath put on glorious apparel: the Lord hath 
put on His apparel, and girded Himself with strength. Glory be. 


THE CIRCUMCISION. 


This day has been observed from the earliest ages of the 
Church as the Octave of the Nativity, and from about the sixth 
century as both the Octave of the Nativity and the Feast of the 
Circumcision. From its coincidence with the Kalends of January, 
on which the riotous and immoral festival of the Saturnalia was 
kept by the Romans, it offered a great difficulty to the Church 
for some centuries, and there were places and periods in which 
the Saturnalia were so mixed up with the Christian feast that the 
observance of the latter was altogether forbidden. 

Of the Circumcision there is no notice whatever in the Comes 
of St. Jerome, the day being called Octava Domini, the Epistle 
being Gal. iii. 23, and the Gospel the same as ours. In St. 
Gregory’s Sacramentary the name of the day is still the Octave 


THE EPIPHANY. 


THE EPIPHANY, OR THE MANIFESTA- 
TION OF CHRIST TO THE GENTILES. 


The Collect. 
GOD, who by the leading of a 
star didst manifest thy only- 
begotten Son to the Gentiles ; Merci- 
fully grant, that we, which know thee 
now by faith, may after this life have 
the fruition of thy glorious Godhead ; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Matt. ii. 1, 2. 7— 
1] 


Luke ii. 30—32. 
John xiv. 7. 9. 
11, xvil.:3; 

1 Cor. xiii. 12/ 
Rey. xxii. 3, 4. 


83 


IN DIE EPIPHANIA, 


Oratio. 
EUS, qui hodierna die unigeni- Salisbury Use. 
tum tuum gentibus, stella duce, “8 '" ¥P?™ 
revelasti; concede propitius, ut qui 
jam te ex fide cognovimus, usque ad 
contemplandum speciem tue celsitu- 
dinis perducamur. Per eundem. 


Modern English. 


Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. Eph. iii. 1—12. Isa. lx. 1—6. 
GOSPEL. Matt. ii, 1—12, Matt. ii. 1—12. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Titus ii. 11—14. 
iii. 4—7. 
Matt. iii. 13—17. 


Isa. lx. 1—9. 
Matt. ii. 1—12. 


of the Lord, and the Circumcision is not noticed in the Collect ; 
but in the proper Preface are the words, “ per Christum Dominum 
nostrum: cujus hodie Circumcisionis diem, et Nativitatis octavum 
celebrantes ;” and the words of the Benediction, as printed above, 
are equally explicit. In the Salisbury Missal the day is named 
as it now is in the Prayer Book, but except in the Gospel there 
is not the slightest allusion to the festival as being connected 
with the Circumcision. In modern times, the tendency has been 
to observe the day as New Year’s Day, overlooking, as far as 
possible, its connexion with the Nativity, as well as with the 
Circumcision. 

The true idea of the day seems to be, that it belongs to Christ- 
mas as its Octave, but that as the three days after-Christmas are 
specially honoured by the Commemoration of Saints, so the Octave 
is supplemented with the Commemoration of our Lord’s Circum- 
cision, to do still greater honour to the day of His Nativity. The 
two are pleaded conjointly in the Litany, “ By Thy holy Nativity 
and Circumcision.” 

The Rubric at the end of the Gospel was inserted by Bishop 
Cosin. It varies in a very important particular from the previous 
Rubric of 1552. 


1552. 


If there be a Sunday between 
the Epiphany and the Circum- 
cision: then shall be used the 
same Collect, Epistle, and Gos- 
pel, at the Communion, which 
was used upon the day of Cir- 
cumcision. 


In the Scottish Prayer Book of 1637 the Rubric stood as in 
that of 1552, with the addition, “So likewise, upon every other 
day from the time of the Circumcision to the Epiphany.” Either 
daily celebration of the Holy Communion was not contemplated 
in 1552, or the omission of any mention of it in this Rubrie was 
an oversight. In 1637 and 1661 it was clearly provided for. 

January 1st was never in any way connected with the opening 
of the Christian year; and the religious observance of this day 
has never received any sanction from the Church, except as the 
Octave of Christmas and the Feast of the Circumcision. The 
spiritual “point”’ of the season all gathers about Christmas: and 
as the modern New Year’s Day is merely conventionally so (New 
Year’s Day being on March 25th until a hundred and ten years 
ago), there is no reason why it should be allowed at all to dim the 
lustre of a day so important to all persons and all ages as Christ- 
mas Day. We ought also to guard against a Judaical tendency 
even in the observance of the Circumcision itself. 


1661. 

The same Collect, Epistle, 
and Gospel, shall serve for 
every day after unto the Epi- 
phany. 


Inrrorr.—Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, 
and the government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name 


shall be called Wonderful. Ps. Sing unto the Lord a new song, 
for He hath done marvellous things. Glory be. 


Hymys. 


Evensone and Marrins.—A solis ortus cardine. H.N.14, 34. 

Marrins.— Christe Redemptor omnium. H.N. 13. 33, H. A. 
M. 45, C. H. 21. 

These hymns are appointed to be sung daily up to the Epiphany, 
except on the octaves of SS. Stephen and John and of the Holy 
Innocents, when the same hymns are appointed as on those 
festivals. 


THE EPIPHANY. 


In its earliest origin, the Epiphany was observed as a phase of 
Christmas in the same way as the Circumcision is now to be so 
regarded : and the intimate association of the two is still marked 
by the custom of the Armenian Christians, who always keep 
their Christmas on the 6th of January, instead of the 25th of 
December. The idea on which the whole cycle of the Festivals - 
of our Lord is founded is that of memorializing before God the 
successive leading points of our Lord’s life and acts: and the 
order in which the Holy Days have been observed is also that in 
which these leading points are pleaded in two clauses of the 
Litany :—‘ By the mystery of Thy holy Incarnation; by Thy 
holy Nativity and Circumcision ; by Thy Baptism, Fasting, and 
Temptation. By Thine Agony and bloody Sweat; by Thy 
Cross and Passion; by Thy precious Death and Burial; by Thy 
glorious Resurrection and Ascension ; and by the coming of the 
Holy Ghost, Good Lord, deliver us.” Hence the Epiphany was 
originally regarded as that part of the Christmas Festival on 
which was commemorated the Baptism of the Lord Jesus by St. 
John the Baptist. Itseems to have acquired a more independent 
position, and to have begun to be observed in memory of our 
Lord’s Manifestation to the Gentile Magi, about the fourth cen- 
tury and in the Western Church: but probably this was never 
more than a development of the original idea; and although it 
may have become the most prominent feature of the festival at 
particular periods, it never superseded the original one altogether. 
The primitive name of the day was Theophany, and this is still 
retained in the Oriental Church. Both Theophania and Epi- 
phania are used in the Comes of St. Jerome, and as late as the 
Sacramentary of St. Gregory: but the former name seems to 
have dropped out of use about the same time that the festival 
began to be connected with the Adoration of the Magi. Even St. 
Jerome himself calls it “ Epiphaniorum dies” in his Commentary 
on Ezekiel, and speaks of it as “venerabilis.” Durandus says, 
that “in codicibus antiquis hac dies Epiphaniarum pluraliter 
intitulatur, et ideo tripliciter nominatur, scilicet Epiphania, 
Theophania, et Bethphania:” the third name being associated 
with our Lord’s Manifestation im the house at the Marriage in 

M 2 


84 
THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER THE 
EPIPHANY. 
' The Collect. 
1 ohn vu. {\ LORD, we beseech thee merei- 
Coit 9-11, a, fully to receive the prayers of 
ee thy people which call upon thee ; and 


THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


DOMINICA I., POST OCTAV. EPIPHANLA, 
AD MISSAM. 


Oratio. 
OTA, quesumus, Domine, sup- Salisbury Use. 
plicantis populi ceelesti pietate “Tks han. 
prosequere; ut et que agenda sunt, 


Cana. The latter name appears to have been little used, but the 
idea it represents is illustrated by the “Gospel for the Second 
Sunday after Epiphany, and by the Second Lesson at Evensong 
on the Festival itself. In the Eastern Church the Theophany is 
also called The Lights, “from the array,” Dr. Neale says, “of 
torches and tapers with which the Benediction of the Waters is 
performed on this day, as they symbolize that spiritual illumina- 
tion to which our Lord, by His Baptism in Jordan, consecrated 
water.” If this name of the festival is ancient (and it seems to 
be as old as Gregory Nazianzen’s time), one might expect to find 
that it originated in the illumination of the world by that “true 
Light, which, coming into the world, enlighteneth every man,” 
and to which the Magi were led by the light of the Star. 

There is a beautiful and very instructive unity about the 
Scriptures used on the Epiphany. The first morning Lesson is 
the 60th chapter of Isaiah, the same which accidentally occurs 
on Christmas Eve: “Arise, shine ; for thy Light is come, and the 
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee .... the Lord shall be unto 
thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy glory .... the Lord 
shall be thine everlasting Light, and the days of thy mourning 
shall be ended.” The same chapter also contains the prophecy 
which began to be fulfilled by the adoration of the Magi as told 
in the Gospel of the Day,“ And the Gentiles shall come to thy 
Light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising:” and the 
Epistle reads like an expansion of this verse, showing how the 
Light of Christ is manifested to the world at large, in and by 
the Church. The first Lesson is the ancient Epistle of the 
Church, as is shown by St. Jerome’s Lectionary, but the Gospel 
was the same as our own. 

In the second morning Lesson (a week-day Gospel of the 
season, In the Comes) we have the original idea of the Festival, 
the Theophany or manifestation of our Lord’s Divine Sonship at 
His Baptism by the Voice from Heaven and the visible descent 
of the Holy Ghost. The First Lesson at Evensong sets forth the 
joy of the Church and the glory that was to come upon it through 
the coming of her Light: “Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O 
Earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains ; for the Lord 
hath comforted His people, and will have mercy upon His afflicted 
....IJ willlift up Mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up My 
standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their 
arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. 
And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy 
nursing mothers...” The Bethphany, or manifestation of our 
Lord’s Divine power at the marriage by turning water into wine 
[see Gospel for Second Sunday ], is illustrated by the Second Lesson 
at Evensong. 

Thus each phase of this great festival is presented to us on the 
day itself; and as will afterwards be shown, the subsequent 
Sundays have a definite and systematic relation to the festival 
after which they are named. 

Some authors have suggested, and it seems not improbable, 
that the “star” which appeared to the Wise Men in the East 
might be that glorious light which shone upon the shepherds of 
Bethlehem when the angel came to give them the glad tidings of 
our Saviour’s birth. At a distance this might appear like a star, 
or, at least, after it had thus shone upon the shepherds, might be 
lifted up on high, and then formed into the likeness of a star. 
According to an ancient commentary on St. Matthew, this star, 
on its first appearance to the Magi, had the form of a radiant 
child bearing a seeptre or cross ; and in some early Italian fres- 
ceoes it is so depicted. 

It has always been the tradition that the Magi were three in 


number, and that the remainder of their lives after the events 
recorded in the Gospel was spent in the service of God. They are 
said to have been baptized by St. Thomas, to have themselves 
preached the Gospel, and to have been crowned with martyrdom 
in confirmation of its truth. Their relics are believed to be 
preserved at Cologne, and are exhibited in the Cathedral there, 
in a costly shrine of silver-gilt, enriched with gems of great 
value. Their names are there given as Gaspar, Melchior, and 
Balthazar, and these names are ascribed to the Magi in medieval 
art and literature. 

In England a striking memorial of their offering is kept up by 
our Sovereigns, who make an oblation of gold, frankincense, and 
myrrh at the altar of the Chapel Royal in the Palace of St. 
James on this festival. Until recently the ceremony was per- 
formed in person. The king coming from his closet, attended as 
usual, proceeded to the Altar at the time of the Offertory, and 
knelt down there, when the Dean or Sub-dean of the Chapels 
Royal received into a golden basin the offerings of gold, frank- 
incense, and myrrh from the king’s hands, and offered them upon 
the altar. The offering is now made by an officer of the royal 
household; but we may venture to hope that the striking 
significance and humility by which it is characterized will cause 
it to be revived in the original form at some future day. 

The Epiphany is a festival which has always been celebrated 
with great ceremony throughout the whole Church: its threefold 
meaning, and its close association with the Nativity as the end 
of Christmas-tide, making it a kind of accumulative festival. 
And such a celebration of it is to be desired: for it will help to 
give us true reverence for the Babe of Bethlehem by eucharistic, 
ritual, homiletic, and mental recognition of His Divine Glory. 
When we are entering with our Lord on the course of His earthly 
humiliation, it is fitting that we should make such a recognition 
of His Divinity: and as the Transfiguration trained the three 
chosen Apostles for the sight of the Agony and the Crucifixion, 
so the Epiphany will set the Church forward in a true spirit 
towards the observance of Lent and Good Friday. 

[Bishop Cosin proposed the insertion of a rubric ;—“ And the 
same Collect, Epistle, and Gospel shall serve till the Sunday next 
following.” He also erased “ to the Gentiles” in the title of the 
day. | 

Inrroit.—Behold, the Lord our Ruler is come {Dominator 
dominus. Cf. Mal. iii. 1], and His Kingdom is in His hand, 
and power and dominion are His. Ps. Give the king thy judg- 
ments, O Lord, and Thy righteousness unto the king’s son. 
Glory be. 

Hymns. 

Evensonea.—AHostis Herodes impie. H.N.17. 42. 

Martrins.—A Patre Unigenitus. A. A. 181, D. H. p. 33. 

These hymns are appointed to be sung daily throughout the 
Octave. 

THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


This Sunday commemorates the manifestation of our Lord’s 
glory for the second time in the Temple. In His infancy that 
glory had been revealed to the faithful souls who waited for the 
loving-kindness of the Lord in the midst of His Temple, and they 
had seen the Epiphany of that Sun of Righteousness whose Light 
was to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of God’s people 
Israel. Twelve years afterwards the childhood of the Holy Child 
Jesus was to reveal the same glory to all who had faith to behold 
it, during that visit to the Temple when He sat among the 
doctors and fulfilled the words, “I have more understanding than 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


grant that they may both perceive 
and know what things they ought to 
do, and also may have grace and power 
faithfully to fulfil the same; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. Rom. xii. 1—5. Rom. xii. 1—5. 
GOSPEL. Luke ii. 41—52. Luke ii. 41—52. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE 
EPIPHANY. 


The Collect. 


Ps. xxii, 28. LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
2 Chron. vi. 21, . . 
Sohn xiv, 27 who dost govern all things in 
il. iv. 6, 7. és 
heaven and earth; Mercifully hear the 
supplications of thy people, and grant 
us thy peace all the days of our life ; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
f 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. Rom. xii. 6—16. Rom. xii. 6—16. 
GOSPEL. John ii. 1—11. John ii. 1—11. 


85 


videant ; et ad implenda que viderint, 
convalescant. 


Per. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Eph. iv. 7—18. 


Luke ii. 42—52. Matt. iv. 18—23. 


DOMINICA II., POST OCTAV. EPIPHANLA. 


Oratio. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, 
qui ccelestia simul et terrena mo- 
deraris, supplicationes populi tui cle- 
menter exaudi, et pacem tuam nostris 
Per Dominum. 


Salisbury Use. 


Greg Dom. ii. 
post Theoph. 


concede temporibus. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 
Rom. xii. 6—16. 


John ii. 1—11. 


My teachers.” Among those teachers may have been Nicodemus 
and Gamaliel, and the rays which were shed from the Light of 
the Divine understanding at which they maryelled, may have 
fallen on their minds with a vivifying power which afterwards 
made the one fit to receive the first full revelation of the truth 
respecting new birth into Christ, and the other to be the teacher 
of St. Paul, by whom the Light of Christ was so marvellously 
spread abroad among the Gentiles. 


InrRort.—I beheld the Son of Man sitting upon a throne 
high and lifted up, and a multitude of the heavenly host wor- 
shipped Him, singing with one voice, Behold Him, the Majesty 
[*numen ;? the Roman Use has ‘nomen’ ] of whose dominion is for 
ever and ever. Ps. O be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands: serve 
the Lord with gladness. Glory be. 


Hymwys. 


From the morrow of the Octave of the Epiphany to the first 
Sunday in Lent, the Ordinary Hymns were sung, as follows :— 
Martins. Primo dierwm omnium. H. N. 8. 5, 
H. A. M. 21. 

Laups. dterne rerum Conditor. 

Evensone. Lucis Creator optime. 
H. A. M. 24. 

ComPuLine. Salvator mundi, Domine. 
49, C. H. 24. 


Ss Somno refectis artubus. 


Sunday. Hale IMs eh Uke 


Jele, ke, WUG 
Laups. Splendor Paterne glorie. H. N. 54.17, 


BRING WE Be 
Evrensone. Linmense cali Conditor. 


Monday. 
H. N. 55. 
Martins. Consors Paterni Luminis, 

H.N. 56. 19. 
TiN: 


Laups. Ales diet nuntius. 


ay Ev pcs Telluris ingens Conditor. 


57. 


Martins. Rerum Creator optime. 
Wednesday. Pree Now et tenebre et nubila. H. N. 58. 2 
ae Celi Deus Sanctissume. H. N. Bs 
Martins. Nox atra rerum contegit. 
Thursday. hoe Inuz ecce surgit awrea. H.N. 60. 23. 
Eypnsone. Magne Deus potentia. HH. N. 61. 
24. 
Martins. Tw Trinitatis Unitas. 
Friday. a Aiterna celi gloria. HH. N. 62. 25. 
Evensone. Plasmator hominis Deus. H.N. 63. 
26. 


Martins. Summe Deus clementia. 

Laups. Aurora jam spargit polum. H. N. 64. 
27. 

Evensong. Deus Creator omnium. D. H.p. elxviii. 
A. A. 115. 


| 


Saturday. | 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


On this day is commemorated that beginning of Miracles by 
which “ Jesus manifested forth His glory,” so that “ His disciples 
believed on Him.” The transmutation of water into wine revealed 
our Lord as possessing the power of a Creator ; and showed that 
it was He Who had once taken of the dust of the earth and 
elevated it in the order of existence, so that by His breathing it 
became a living man. ‘This, therefore, is the Epiphany of Jesus 
as the Lord of a New Creation, by which His former work is to 
be exalted to a much higher place and function in the dispensation 
of His Providence : and in the act which is recorded He prefigured 
that work of re-creation which He now causes to be wrought in 
His Kingdom for the salvation of souls and bodies. Simple ele- 
ments pass silently beneath the power of His blessing: His ser- 
vants bear forth: water becomes generous wine. So Baptism 
exalts the souls and bodies of men from the Kingdom of Nature 
to the Kingdom of Grace, and the Holy Eucharist is the means 


86 THE THIRD AND FOURTH SUNDAYS AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER THE 
EPIPHANY. 


The Collect. 
LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
mercifully look upon our infirmi- 
ties, and in all our dangers and neces- 
sities stretch forth thy right hand to 
help and defend us; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Heb. iv. 15, 16. 

Rom. viii. 26. 

Ps. deco Ti4, 
XXXviii. 39, 40. 


DOMINICA III., POST OCTAV. 
EPIPHANIA. 


- Oratio. 


MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, salisbury Use. 
infirmitatem nostram propitius 
respice, atque ad protegendum nos 
Per 


Greg. Dom. iii. 
post Theoph. 


dexteram tuz majestatis extende. 
Dominum. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Rom. xii. 16—21. Rom. xii. 16—21. Rom. xii. 16—21. 
GOSPEL. Matt. viii. 1—13. Matt. viii. 1—13. Matt. viii. 1—15. 
THE FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER THE DOMINICA IV., POST OCTAV. 
EPIPHANY. EPIPHANLA. 
The Collect. Oratio. 
Boca ae GOD, who knowest us to be set in EUS qui nos in tantis periculis aaa be 
ii. 17. ; y E reg. Dom. iv. 
Mane the midst of so many and great constitutos, pro humana scis post Theoph. 
? Gor xn. 9 dangers, that by reason of the frailty of | fragilitate non posse subsistere: da 
our nature we cannot always stand up- | nobis salutem mentis et corporis, ut 
right; Grant to us such strength and | ea que pro peccatis nostris patimur, te 
protection as may support us in all | adjuvante vincamus. Per Dominum 
dangers, and carry us through all | nostrum. 
temptations ; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 
| Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. | Eastern. 
| EPISTLE. Rom. xiii. 1—7. Rom. xiii. 8—10. Rom. xiii. 8—10. 
| 
| GOSPEL. Matt. viii. 28—34. Matt. viii. 23—27. Matt. viii. 283—27. 


by which our whole nature is built up into the nature of Christ, 
elevated from one step to another, “changed from glory to 
glory.” 

Thus at a marriage supper was revealed the great truth of that 
Union between the Lamb of God and the Bride by which the 
virtue of the Incarnation of the Word is extended to fallen human 
nature. And thus also are we taught, that in the Miracle which 
is being continually wrought by the elevation of lowly elements 
into sacramental substances, and by the regeneration and edifica- 
tion of souls through their operation, Christ is still “ manifesting 
forth His glory” in every generation, and giving cause for His 
disciples to believe in Him. 


Intro1t.—For all the world shall worship Thee, sing of Thee, 
and praise Thy Name, O Thou most highest. Ps. O be joyful in 
God, all ye lands; sing praises unto the honour of His Name, 
make His praise to bé glorious. Glory be. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


The Epiphany of Christ as the Divine Healer of human infirmi- 
ties is commemorated on this Sunday. His all-embracing sym- 
pathy could take in even the leper and the stranger ; and would 
manifest itself to overflowing by touching the one, whom no one 
else would come near, and by healing the servant of the other, 
though he was the Gentile slave of a Gentile centurion. The 
glory of the Good Physician was thus manifested forth, imme- 
diately after He had made His Mission openly known to the 
people, in two remarkable instances. Leprosy was a disease for 
which no human physician could find a cure: yet Christ put 


forth His hand and touched the leper, and at once a regeneration 
of the diseased nature took place, so that he became a new man. 
Palsy or paralysis, again, is a loss of all muscular energy and 
power, so that the afilicted person becomes, in a greater or less 
degree, incapable of moving; and his body, in severe cases, is, in 
one sense, dead. Very rarely indeed is paralysis cured; and 
never, in the case of one “ grievously tormented” with it, as this 
slave was. Yet the will of the Good Physician effected the cure 
in a moment, either by the ministration of one to whom He could 
say, “Go, and he goeth” on his Master’s errand of mercy, or else 
by the immediate operation of His Divine Omnipotence. | 

As Jesus manifested forth His glory by displaying His Power 
over the inanimate Creation when He transubstantiated the water 
into wine, so now He showed it by changing a Leper and a Para- 
lytic into sound and whole men by His touch and His will. 

The ancient Offertory sentence brought out this doctrine very 
beautifully. It was, “The right hand of the Lord hath the pre- 
eminence : the right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty things to 
pass. I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the 
Lord.” The same idea forms the basis of the Collect. 


IntRort.—Worship the Lord, all ye His angels. Sion heard of 
it and rejoiced; the daughters of Judah were glad. Ps. The 
Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof, yea, the multitude 
of the isles may be glad thereof. Glory be. 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


Our Lord Jesus is on this Sunday commemorated as the 
Saviour of all from every danger, as well as the Saviour of the 


THE FIFTH AND SIXTH SUNDAYS AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 87 


THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER THE 
EPIPHANY. 


The Collect. 

LORD, we beseech thee to keep 

thy Church and household con- 
tinually in thy true religion; that they 
who do lean only upon the hope of thy 
heavenly grace may evermore be de- 
fended by thy mighty power; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Isa. xxvii. 3. 
Heb. xiii. 9. 
Prov. iii. 5. 

1 John iv. 4. 
Isa. xxvi. 1. 4. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. Col. iii. 12—17. Col. iii. 12—17. 
Matt. xiii. 24—30. 


| GOSPEL. 


Matt. xiii. 24—30, 


DOMINICA V., POST OCTAV, EPIPHANLE, 


Oratio. 
AMILIAM tuam, quesumus, Do- Salisbury Use. 
* 2 s! + Greg. Dom. v. 
mine, continua pietate custodi; ~ post Theoph 
ut que in sola spe gratie ccelestis in- 
nititur, tua semper protectione munia- 


tur. Per Dominum. 


Modern Rovian, Eastern. 
Col, iii. 12—17. 


Matt. xiii. 24-30. 


THE SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER THE 
EPIPHANY. 


The Collect. 
GOD, whose blessed Son was 
manifested that he might destroy 
the works of the devil, and make us 
the sons of God, and heirs of eternal 


[a.p. 1661.] . 
1 John iii. 8. 
John i. 12, 13. 
Rom. viii. 17. 
1 John ili. 2, 3, 
Matt. xxiv. 30. 
Phil. iii. 21. 
Heb. i. 8. 


[DOMINICA SEXTA POST THEOPHA-  [Greg. Sacr.] 


NIAM.] 
[ EUS, qui ad eternam vitam in (Greg. ‘Alie 
eet A Orationes Pas- 
Christi Resurrectione nos re-  chales,’ ix.] 


paras, imple pietatis tus ineffabile sa- 
cramentum, ut, cum in Majestate sua 


diseased and infirm from the bodily afflictions which happen to 
human nature. It is not now a Leper or a Paralytic, but strong 
and hale men who are in need of His help. And yet, though no 
horrible or painful disease afflicts them, they could not be in any 
more hopeless or helpless condition than when at sea in an open boat 
at the mercy of a tempest. He was, doubtless, revealing to them 
the true source of their safety,—His Presence, which makes an 
Ark of the Church. He was asleep, and they had little faith, and 
the storm was violent; and the ship being “covered with the 
waves,” we may well suppose that the danger was, from a human 
point of view, extreme. Christ reveals to the Apostles that the 
human point of view takes in a very small part of the whole 
prospect by manifesting forth His authority over the winds and 
the waves, and showing them that His Presence could preserve 
them, because it is the Presence of God. 

The miracle of casting out the devils from the two possessed 
Gergesenes, carries on the parabolical teaching of the storm and 
its subjugation, by showing that the power of Christ extends not 
only over natural elements and forces, but over supernatural 
beings. And hence the Lord of the Church is continually declaring 
to us, that though it may be tempest-tossed on the waves of the 
world, He can ensure its safety; and that though evil spirits 
oppose it with all the array of their power, yet “the gates of Hell 
shall not prevail against it.” 

The Epistle for this Sunday was altered in 1549, because it 
coincided with that for the first Sunday in Advent. In the 
Mozarabic rite it is taken from Rom. vii., which, as it is respecting 
the struggle of our two natures, seems once to have been co- 
existent with our Collect. 


InrRort.— Worship the Lord, all ye His angels. Sion heard of 
it and rejoiced; the daughters of Judah were glad. Ps. The 
Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof, yea, the multitude 
of the isles may be glad thereof. Glory be. 


THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


The connexion of this Sunday with the Epiphany season is not 
made so clear in the Gospel of the Tares and the Wheat, as in 
that of those the Gospels of which record the Manifestation of the 
glory of Christ in His acts. Yet it reveals Him as the Lord of 
the Church for its government as well as for its preservation ; and 


shows that even when He seems to be suffering evil that might 
be prevented, His purpose is still full of love for His own, lest 
the wheat should be injured by the destruction of the tares. 
And as, moreover, our Lord Himself has explained that the seed 
is the Word of God, that is, His own Person, this Gospel and 
Sunday must be regarded as setting forth the glory of Christ in 
the increase of His Church, and the development of that King- 
dom on earth which is to form so large a portion of the Eternal 
dominion of the King of kings. It shows also the ultimate 
triumph of the Word in the face of all opposition. Men may 
sleep who should have guarded the field, and the enemy may 
seem to have gained an advantage by which the glory of the 
Word is dimmed; but God waits His time, and when that is 
fulfilled sends forth His servants to undo the work of the Evil 
One; so that the glory of the Redeemer is manifested by the 
gathering in of a large harvest of the redeemed into His hea- 
venly garner. 

The Epistle for this Sunday takes up the course of St. Paul’s 
Epistles from the 24th Sunday after Trinity, and both Gospel 
and Epistle have a relation to the season of Advent, because 
they used frequently to be required to complete that of Trinity. 


Introrr.— Worship the Lord, all ye His angels. Sion heard of 
it and rejoiced; the daughters of Judah were glad. Ps. The 
Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof, yea, the multitude 
of the isles may be glad thereof. Glory be. 


THE SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY. 


From 1549 until 1661 the Church of England reckoned only 
five Sundays after Epiphany, and if a sixth occurred before 
Septuagesima, the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel of the Fifth were 
repeated. The old rubric was, “The sixth Sunday (if there be so 
many) shall have the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel that was upon 
the Fifth Sunday.” To this it was at first proposed to add, 
“« And if there be fewer Sundays than six, yet this Collect, Epistle, 
and Gospel of the Fifth Sunday shall be last:” but this new 
rubric (inserted in the Durham book) was erased, and a sixth 
Sunday added without it?. 


1 The ancient English use was to reckon one Sunday within the Octave 
of Epiphany, and five Sundays ‘‘after the Octave.” 


88 SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY. 


Rom.ix.36  ife; Grant us, we beseech thee, that, | Salvator noster advenerit, quos fecisti 
having this hope, we may purify our- | baptismo regenerari, facias beata im- 
selves, even as he is pure; that, when | mortalitate vestiri. Per eundem.] 
he shall appear again with power and 
great glory, we may be made like unto 
him in his eternal and glorious king- 
dom; where with thee, O Father, and 
thee, O Holy Ghost, he liveth and 
reigneth, ever one God, world without 
end. Amen. 
Saar 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. 1 John iii. 1—8. 1 Thess. i. 2—10. 2 Tim. iii. 10—15. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xxiv. 23—31. Matt. xiii, 31—35. Luke xviii. 1O—14. 
THE SUNDAY CALLED SEPTUAGESIMA, DOMINICA IN SEPTUAGESIMA. 
OR THE THIRD SUNDAY BEFORE 
LENT. 
The Collect. Oratio. 
Eee: LORD, we beseech thee favour- RECES populi tui, quesumus, Salsbury Use. 


JESS: 9. 4 ais (Ai 


ably to hear the prayers of thy 
people; that we, who are justly 
punished for our offences, may be 
mercifully delivered by thy goodness, 
for the glory of thy Name; through 
Jesus Christ our Saviour, who liveth 
and reigneth with thee and the Holy 
Ghost, ever one God, world without 
end. Amen. 


ile 
Eph. iii, 21. 


Domine, clementer exaudi, ut Rees 
qui juste pro peccatis nostris affligimur, nie 

pro tui nominis gloria misericorditer 
liberemur. Per Dominum nostrum 

Jesum Christum Filium tuum. Qui 


tecum vivit et regnat. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. 1 Cor. ix. 24—27. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xx. 1—16. 


Salisbury Use. 


1 Cor. ix. 24—27,. 
x. 1—4. 
Matt. xx. 1—16. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Cor. ix. 24—27. 
x. 1—5. 
Matt. xx. 1—16. 


1 Cor. vi. 12—20. 
Luke xv. 11—32. 


The Collect is written in the margin of the Durham book, and 
appears to be an original composition of Bishop Cosin’s; though 
there is some similarity of expression between it and the above 
Easter Collect of St. Gregory’s Sacramentary, which seems to 
indicate that the one was in part suggested by the other !. 

The Epistle is most aptly chosen asa link between the Epiphany 
Sundays and those near Advent, the whole Service of this day 
being often required for the Twenty-fifth or Twenty-sixth Sunday 
after Trinity. The Collect is founded on the Epistle, and the 
Gospel displays the final Manifestation of the glory of Christ in 
the triumph of His Second Coming. Thus this day falls in with 
the old system of Epiphany Sundays, and forms an admirable 
climax to the whole series ; while, at the same time, it is strikingly 
adapted for transfer to the end of the Trinity Season (if required), 
according to the anciently received practice of our own and other 
branches of the Western Church. 


[There is of course no Introit for this day in the Salisbury Use. 
In the Roman it is the same as on the preceding Sunday ; and the 
words are appropriate whether for Epiphany or before Advent. ] 


1 The Collect of St, Gregory is copied from Bishop Cosin’s own copy of 
the Sacramentary, Menard’s edition of 1642. 


SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY. 


After the conclusion of the season of Epiphany the Sundays 
are reckoned with reference to Easter and its preceding fast. 
The origin of the names which distinguish the three Sundays 
before Lent cannot be historically accounted for, and has received 
various explanations in ancient and modern times. Pamelius 
considers that Septuagesima was so called in commemoration 
of the seventy years’ captivity of Israel in Babylon, and 
that the other two Sundays following were named from it by 
analogy. As it was so much the habit of early Christian writers 
to compare the forty days’ fast of Lent with the forty years’ 
sojourn in the wilderness, this derivation seems a probable one. 
But the more generally received one in modern times is, that the 
fast of Lent being called Quadragesima, and that name being 
especially applied to the first Sunday in Lent, these three pre- 
ceding Sundays were named from analogy, and as representing in 
round numbers the days which occur between each and Faster. 
Septuagesima is, indeed, only sixty-three days distant from 
Easter, but Quinquagesima is forty-nine; and the nearly correct 
character of the appellation in the latter case seems to support 
this theory, The second and more exact titles which were added 
to the old names of these Sundays in 1661 appear for the first 


SEXAGESIMA AND QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAYS. 89 


THE SUNDAY CALLED SEXAGESIMA, OR 
THE SECOND SUNDAY BEFORE LENT. 


The Collect. 
LORD God, who seest that we 
put not our trust in any thing 
that we do; Mercifully grant that by 
thy power we may be defended against 
all adversity, through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


PRuexli, 8. iil, 7, 
8. Ixxix. 17, 18, 
(eb. vii. 25. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. 2 Cor. xi. 19—31. 2 Cor. xi, 19—33. 
xi. 9. 
GOSPEL. Luke viii. 4—15. Luke viii. 4—15. 


DOMINICA IN SEXAGESIMA, 


Oratio. 
EUS qui conspicis quia ex nulla Salisbury Use. 
: i Greg. in LX. 
nostra actione confidimus; con- 
cede propitius, ut contra omnia adversa 
Doctoris gentium protectione munia- 1 Tim. ii.7. 


Per. 


mur. 


Modern Roman, Eastern. 


2 Cor. xi. 19. xii. 9. 1 Cor. viii. 8. ix. 2. 


Luke viii. 4—15. Matt. xxv. 31—46. 


THE SUNDAY CALLED QUINQUAGESIMA, 
OR THE NEXT SUNDAY BEFORE LENT. 


The Collect. 
[A.D. 1549.] 


1 Cor, xiii. 1—3. 


LORD, who hast taught us that 
Mac. xxi 37— all our doings without charity 
east 20;21, are nothing worth; Send thy Holy 


time in Bishop Cosin’s corrected Prayer Book. The ancient 
titles themselves are all three found in the Lectionary of St. 
Jerome, and in the Sacramentaries; but there are not any 
analogous ones in use in the Eastern Church. 

The time and manner of observing Lent varied very much in 
the early Church, and these Sundays are a monument of this 
variation. Hach of them marked the beginning of Lent in com- 
munities which extended it beyond forty days; and Durandus 
states that monastic persons were accustomed to begin the fast at 
Septuagesima, the Greeks at Sexagesima, and the secular clergy 
at Quinquagesima. It is very probable that the names them- 
selves were adopted to mark another variation in the mode of 
keeping Lent. For in some parts of the Church fasting was not 
permitted on Sundays, Thursdays, or Saturdays, and yet the 
Lenten fast was to extend to forty days. The beginning of it 
was therefore thrown back to Septuagesima, the weeks from 
which day to Easter would include forty fasting-days. Other 
churches omitted only Thursdays and Sundays, and began the 
fast on Sexagesima. A third class made no omissions except of 
Sunday, and commenced their season of penitence two days 
before Ash-Wednesday, at Quinquagesima; while a fourth, 
perhaps the largest, limited Lent to thirty-six days, beginning it 
on Quadragesima Sunday !. 

When these various modes of keeping Lent had been all super- 
seded under the reforming hand of St. Gregory the Great by 
our present custom, the Church still retained the penitential 
- tone of the services for these three Sundays, and they thus form 
a link between the joyous seasons of Christmas and Epiphany, 
and the deeply sorrowful one which begins with Ash-Wednesday 
and reaches its climax in the Holy Week. Although some 
customs which were retained with this view in the ancient 
Church of England have been dropped in the modern,—such as 
the omission of the Alleluia at the beginning of Mattins,—the 
Scriptures of the season still mark it as one that leads up to Lent. 

The Gospels and Epistles for the three Sundays are clearly 
appointed with a reference to Christian self-discipline; and they 
seem to have been chosen with the well-known ancient classi- 
fication of virtues in view, as if to show the Christian applica- 
tion of the truths of heathen philosophy. Thus on Septuagesima 
the Epistle of the Christian strife for the mastery represents 


1 So it still is in the Ambrosian rite: and so it was in the Mozarabic 
until the time of Cardinal Ximenes. 


DOMINICA IN QUINQUAGESIMA. 


[4d Completorium in die Pasche. Oratio. 
PIRITUM nobis, Domine, tue salisbury Use. 
charitatis infunde, ut quos sacra- O%%,24"4 vr 
mentis paschalibus satiasti, tua facias 


uno calestt 
pane satiasti. 


Temperantia, the Gospel of the labourers and the penny a day, 
Justitia. On Sexagesima, Fortitudo is illustrated by St. Paul’s 
account of his sufferings for Christ’s sake, and Honestas by the 
Parable of the Sower, some of Whose good seed falls on honest 
and good hearts [év kapdia Kaarq kal ayaf]. Quinquagesima 
illustrates by the Epistle the Christian complement of all natural 
virtue in Charity; the climax of which was reached in the sub- 
mission of the Son of Man to that contumely and persecution 
which He predicts in the Gospel of the day. 


Iyrroit.—The pains of hell came about me, and the snares of 
death overtook me. In my trouble, I called upon the Lord, and 
He heard me out of His holy temple. Ps. I will love Thee, O 
Lord my strength. The Lord is my strong rock, and my defence, 
and my Saviour. Glory be. 


SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY. 


On all three of the Sundays before Lent, the Apostle St. Paul 
is set forth as an illustrious example of self-denial, zeal, and 
suffering for Christ’s sake; and on Quinquagesima his noble 
words as to the valuelessness of all such discipline and zeal 
without love, set the true Christian seal upon asceticism in every 
degree. It is with reference, no doubt, to this application of 
his example, that an allusion was made to the great Apostle of 
the Gentiles in the Collect; but the manner in which it was 
made led to its expulsion altogether in 1549 ; and to the insertion 
of the more reliable expression of being defended by the power of 
God. This day is marked “ad Sanctum Paulum” in the Comes. 


Inrroit.—Up, Lord, why sleepest Thou: awake, and be not 
absent from us for ever. Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face: 
and forgettest our misery and trouble? For our soul is brought 
low, even unto the dust: our belly cleaveth unto the ground. 
Arise and help us: and deliver us for Thy Name’s sake. Ps. We 
have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us. 
Glory be. 


QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAY. 


The ancient Collect for this day had a special reference to the 
practice of Confession on the Tuesday following, which was hence 
called Shrove Tuesday. It was as follows: ‘ Preces nostras, 
quesumus, Domine, clementer exaudi: atque a peccatorum vin- 
culis absolutos ab omni nos adyersitate custodi. Per Dominum 
nostrum.” Our present very beautiful Collect was substituted in 
1549 ; it is formed on the basis of the Epistle, and is evidently 

N 


90 LENT. 


Eph. iv. 3. 
Col iii. 14. 
1 John iii. 14. 
Rev. iii. 1. 


bond of peace and of all virtues, with- 
out which whosoever liveth is counted 
dead before thee: Grant this for thine 


only Son Jesus Christ’s sake. Amen. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. 1 Cor. xiii, 1—18. 


GOSPEL. Luke xviii. 31—43. 


Salisbury Use. 
1 Cor. xiii. 1—18. 
Luke xviii. 31—43. 


Ghost, and pour into our hearts that | pietate concordes. Per Dominum. In 
most excellent gift of charity, the very | unitate. ] 


4 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Cor. xiii. 1—13. Rom. xiii. 11. xiy. 4. 


Luke xviii. 31—48. Matt. vi. 14—21. 


constructed also as a prayer for that Love without which the 
discipline of Lent would be unavailing. 

At the end of the Gospel for Quinquagesima Sunday the fol- 
lowing rubric is inserted in MS. in Cosin’s Durham Prayer 
Book: “This Collect, Hpistle, and Gospel shall serve only till 
the Wednesday following.” 


Inrroit.—Be Thou my strong rock, and house of defence; 
that Thou mayest save me. For Thou art my strong rock and my 
castle: be Thou also my guide, and lead me for Thy Name’s sake. 
Ps. In Thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: let me never be put 
to confusion ; deliver me in Thy righteousness. Glory be. 


LENT. 


A Fast before Easter has been observed from the earliest 
Christian times; but the period of its duration varied in different 
countries and ages down to the seventh century. Of these 
variations Irenzeus wrote in his Epistle to Victor, Bishop of 
Rome, about the close of the second century, when (speaking of 
the varying rules about Easter) he says, “ For the difference of 
opinion is not about the day alone, but about the manner of 
fasting; for some think they are to fast one day, some two, 
some more: some measure their day as forty hours of the day 
and night.” [Iren. in Euseb. v. 24.] 

It is left uncertain, by the words of Irenzus, whether this 
universal primitive Lent of which he writes ever extended to 
forty days: and his words read differently in the several ancient 
texts of Eusebius. In some copies they are, as above, of d¢ 
TecoupdKovTa Spas huepiwas Kal vuKTepidas ovummeTpovor Thy 
jnuépay abtay: but in others, and in Ruffinus, they read, “ For 
some think they are to fast one day, some two, some more, 
some forty days; and they measure their day by the hours of 
the day and night.” Tertullian, a few years later, speaks of 
the practice of the Church as believed with certainty to be 
founded on that passage of the Gospel in which those days were 
appointed for fasting, during which the Bridegroom was taken 
away. This has been thought by some to point to the period of 
forty days during which our Lord was going through His 
Temptation in the wilderness ; but it is far more probable that it 
refers to the time during which His Soul was separated from His 
Body. Some few years later still, however, towards the middle of 
the third century, Origen speaks of forty days being consecrated 
to fasting before Easter. [Hom. x. in Levit.] And at the 
Council of Nicza this period was taken for granted, as if long 
in use. 

But, however early the extension of the Lenten fast to forty 
days may have been, it is certain that they were reckoned in 
several different ways, though always immediately preceding 
Easter. By various Churches the forty days were distributed 
over periods of nine, eight, and seven weeks (that is, from 
Septuagesima, Sexagesima, or Quinquagesima to Easter), by the 
omission of Sundays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, of Sundays and 
Saturdays, or of Sundays alone, from the number of fasting- 
days [see Notes on Septuagesima]; and it would appear that 


Lent was sometimes called by the three names now confined to 
the three Sundays preceding it as well as by the name of Qua- 
dragesima, or Teooapaxoorh. St. Gregory the Great introduced 
our present mode of observance, or sanctioned it with his 
authority, at the end of the sixth century; excluding Sundays 
from the number of fasting-days, and making the thirty-six days 
thus left of the forty-two immediately preceding Easter into an 
exact forty by beginning the Fast on the Wednesday before 
Quadragesima Sunday instead of on the Monday following it. 
This rule seems to have been very readily accepted in the Western 
Church; but the Eastern Lent [MeydAn Nyoreia] begins on the 
Monday after the day which we call Quinquagesima; and the 
rule of fasting is so strict, that although some slight relaxation of 
its rigour is allowed on Sundays and Saturdays, not even the 
former are wholly excluded from the number of fasting-days. 

The primary object of the institution of a fast before Haster 
was doubtless that of perpetuating in the hearts of every gene- 
ration of Christians the sorrow and mourning which the Apostles 
and Disciples felt during the time that the Bridegroom was taken 
away from them. ‘This sorrow had, indeed, been turned into joy 
by the Resurrection, yet no Easter joys could ever erase from the 
mind of the Church the memory of those awful forty hours of 
blank and desolation which followed the last suffermgs of her 
Lord; and she lives over year by year the time from the morning 
of Good Friday to the morning of Easter Day by a re-presentation 
of Christ evidently set forth, crucified among us [Gal. ui. 1). 
This probably was the earliest idea of a fast before Kaster. But 
it almost necessarily followed that sorrow concerning the death of 
Christ should be accompanied by sorrow concerning the cause of 
that Death ; and hence the Lenten fast became a period of self- 
discipline ; and was so, probably, from its first institution in 
Apostolic times. And, according to the literal habit which the 
early Church had of looking up to the Pattern of her Divine 
Master, the forty days of His fasting in the wilderness while He 
was undergoing Temptation, became the gauge of the servants’ 
Lent, deriving still more force as an Example, from the typical 
prophecy of it which was so evident in the case of Moses and 
Elijah. 

St. Chrysostom speaks of great strictness in fasting on the part 
of many in his day, such as is still found in the Eastern Church. 
«There are those,” he says, “who rival one another in fasting, 
and show a marvellous emulation in it; some indeed, who spend 
two whole days without food; and others who, rejecting from 
their tables not only the use of wine, and of oil, but of every 
dish, and taking only bread and water, persevere in this practice 
during the whole of Lent.” [Hom. iy. on Stat.] He also speaks 
in another homily of men being purified, in the days of Lent, by 
prayer and almsdeeds, by fasting, watching, tears, and confession 
of sins, showing that the severe Lents of later ages were only 
such as had been observed in the time of that great Father of 
the Church. The general mode of fasting seems to have been to 
abstain from food until after six o’clock in the afternoon, and 
even then not to partake of animal food or wine. Yet it may be 
doubted whether such a mode of life could bave been continued 


ASH-WEDNESDAY. 91 


THE FIRST DAY OF LENT, COMMONLY 
CALLED ASH-WEDNESDAY. 


The Collect. 

LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
who hatest nothing that thou 
hast made, and dost forgive the sins 
of all them that are penitent; Create 
and make in us new and contrite 
hearts, that we worthily lamenting 
our sins, and acknowledging our 
wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the 
God of all mercy, perfect remission 
and forgiveness; through Jesus Christ 

our Lord. Amen. 


[a.p. 1549.] 
Wisd. xi. 23—26. 
Ez. xxxiii. 14. 
Acts iii. 19, 26. 
Ps.1i.10.17. - 
Luke xviii. 13. 

2 Cor, vii. 10, 11. 
Psvexxx. 4, 7. 

2 Cor, v. 10. 


{| This Collect is to be read every day in Lent, 
after the Collect appointed for the Day. 


FERIA IV., IN CAPITE JEJUNII. Salisbury Use. 


Benedictio Cinerum. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus 
qui misereris omnium et nihil 
odisti eorum que fecisti dissimulans 
peceata hominum propter pceniten- 
tian Pues 


| Modern English. 
EPISTLE. Joel ii. 12—17, 


GOSPEL. Matt. vi. 16—21. 


Salisbury Use. 
Joel ii. 12—19. 
Matt. vi. 16—21. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 
Joel ii. 12—19. 


Matt. vi. 16—21. 


day after day for six weeks by those whose duties called upon 
them for much physical exertion; and it is possible that we 
ought not to interpret so literally as this such allusions to the 
fasting of ordinary Christians as we meet with in early writings. 

Lent was the principal time, in the early Church, for pre- 
paring the Catechumens for Baptism, and a large portion of 
St. Cyril’s Catechetical Lectures were delivered at this season. 
There were also constant daily sermons at the services, as we 
see from expressions used by St. Chrysostom and other fathers. 
Public shows were more or less strictly forbidden ; and works of 
charity were engaged in by all who could undertake them. It 
was a time when sinners were called upon to do outward penance 
as a sign of inward penitence, that they might be received back 
to Communion at Easter. Lent was, in fact, a season of humi- 
liation, abstinence from pleasure, fasting, prayer, penitence, and 
general depression of tone on account of sin ; and was marked, on 
every side, with the sombre tokens of mourning. 

From this short account of the Lenten fast of primitive days, 
we may go on to consider briefly what should be the mode of 
observing it in modern times, so that the ancient and unchanging 
principles of the Catholic Church may be applied to the ever- 
varying habits of the world which those principles are intended 
to leaven. The Church of England has not expressly defined any 
rule on the subject of fasting, but in the Homilies on the subject 
has urged the example of the Early Church as if intending it to 
be followed with a considerable amount of strictness. The work 
that is set before most persons, in the Providence of God, at the 
present day, makes it quite impossible, however, for those who 
have to do it to fast every day for six weeks until evening, or 
even to take one meal only in the day. And the ordinary mode 
of living is so restrained among religious persons, that such a 
custom would soon reduce them to an invalid condition, in which 
they could not do their duty properly in the station of life to 
which God has called them, whether in the world or in the 
sanctuary. And although it may seem, at first, that men ought 
to be able to fast in the nineteenth century as strictly as they did 
in the sixteenth, the twelfth, or the third, yet it should be 
remembered that the continuous labour of life was unknown to 
the great majority of persons in ancient days, as it is at the 
present time in the Eastern Church and in Southern Europe ; 
and that the quantity and quality of the food which now forms a 
full meal is only equivalent to what would have been an ex- 


tremely spare one until comparatively modern days. The problem 
which the modern Christian has to solve, then, in this matter, is 
that of so reconciling the duty of fasting in Lent and at other 
times ordered by the Church, with the duty of properly accom- 
plishing the work which God has set him to do, that he may 
fulfil both duties as a faithful servant of God. 

It is impossible to lay down any general law as to the amount 
of abstinence from food which is thus compatible with modern 
duties ; nor can any one, except a person possessed of much phy- 
siological acumen, determine what is to be the rule for another. 
But the general rules may be laid down, (1) that it is possible 
for all to diminish in some degree the quantity of their food on 
fasting-days without harm resulting; (2) that many can safely 
abstain altogether from animal food for some days in the week ; 
(3) that food should be taken on fasting-days as a necessity, and 
its quality so regulated that it shall not be a luxury; (4) that 
all can deny themselves delicacies on fast-days which may be 
very properly used at other times. 

In the First Homily on Fasting the objects of this discipline 
of the body are well stated thus: (1) “To chastise the flesh that 
it be not too wanton, but tamed and brought in subjection to 
the spirit.” (2) ‘That the spirit may be more fervent and 
earnest in prayer.” (3) “That our fast bea testimony and witness 
with us before God, of our humble submission to His high 
Majesty.” 

Finally, it may be remarked, that as the changed habits of 
life have diminished our capacity for abstaining from food for 
long periods, so they have increased our opportunities of sacrificing 
our pleasures by abstinence from luxuries. “Theatres, balls, 
private parties, novel-reading, mere ornamental pursuits, un- 
necessary delicacies, sumptuous costume,—these are things which 
may well be selected as the subjects of our abstinence, if, in Lent, 
or in our general life, we desire to adopt a stricter Christian 
habit than is commonly necessary.” [Directorium Pastorale, p. 
136.] From time so saved, many an hour can be gained in which 
to attend the Divine Service of the Church day by day, to use 
extra private devotions, and to engage in works of charity. 


§ Ash-Wednesday. 


The ancient ecclesiastical name given to the first day of Lent 
is Caput Jejunii, and the popular name of Ash- Wednesday has 
been acquired by it from the custom of blessing ashes made from 


N 2 


92 


THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT. 
The Collect. 


[a.p. 1549.] LORD, who for our sake didst 
Matt. iv. 1, 2. fe 
1 Pet iv. fast forty days and forty nights ; 
1 Cor. ix. 27. : D 
Eph. iv, 24. 30, Give us grace to use such abstinence, 
1 Cor. vi. 19, 20. . 
Phil. 1.20. that our flesh being subdued to the 
PP il 7 oats 
Spirit, we may ever obey thy godly 
motions in righteousness and true 
holiness, to thy honour and glory, who 
livest and reignest with the Father 
and the Holy Ghost, one God, world 
without end. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. 2 Cor. vi. 1—10. 2 Cor. vi. 1—10. 
GOSPEL. Matt. iv. 1—11. Matt. iv. 1—11. 


the palms distributed on the Palm Sunday of the preceding 
year, and signing the cross with them on the heads of those who 
knelt before the officiating minister for the purpose, while he 
said, “Remember, man, that thou art dust, and unto dust shalt 
thou return.” The Commination Service is an adaptation of 
this rite, as is further shown in the notes to that Office. 

The Penitential Psalms are all used in the services of Ash- 
Wednesday, as they have been time immemorial, the 6th, 32nd, 
and 38th at Mattins, the 51st at the Commination, the 102nd, 
130th, and 148rd at Evensong, The Collect is partly a trans- 
lation of one used at the Benediction of the Ashes, and partly a 
composition of 1549 on the basis of other Collects of the Day. 
The Epistle and Gospel are those of the ancient Lectionary of 
St. Jerome. In the Durham book a rubric is inserted ordering 
that the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel of this day “are to serve 
until the Sunday following.” 


IntRo1r.—Thou, O Lord, hast mercy upon all men, and hatest 
nothing that Thou hast made: hiding Thy face from their sins 
because of their penitence, and sparing them because Thou art 
the Lord our God. Ps. Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful 
unto me, for my soul trusteth in Thee. Glory be. 


THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT. 


Although the Sundays in Lent are not to be observed as fast- 
days, the devotional tone given to them is carefully assimilated to 
that of the season; and a constant memorial of it is kept up by 
the use of the Ash-Wednesday Collect after that of the week on 
Sundays as well as week-days. The ancient Use contained Col- 
lects for Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays in Lent. 

The Collect for this Sunday has not been traced to any ancient 
source, but as it contains the first allusion to fasting, it may 
possibly come down from that distant time when Lent began on 
this day or the day following, instead of on Ash-Wednesday. 
In the ancient Use the Collect for this Sunday was, “O God, who 
dost cleanse Thy Church by the yearly observance of Lent; grant 
unto Thy family that what it strives to obtain from Thee by ab- 
stinence, the same it may perform in good works, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ.” 

The Gospel of the day sets forth the Lord Jesus perfecting His 
sympathy with our nature by undergoing temptation: and the 
first words of the Epistle point to the efficacious power of that 
temptation for the rescue from the Tempter of all who are 
tempted. Our Blessed Lord, as the Originator of a new spiritual 
nature which was to take the place of that lost by Adam, went 
through a similar trial to that of Adam; and that He might have 
perfect sympathy also with us who are open to the assaults of the 


THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT. 


DOMINICA I., QUADRAGESIMZ. Salisbury Use. 


[INVOCAVIT.] 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 

Heb. xi. 24—26. 
32—40. 

John i. 44—52. 


2 Cor. vi. 1—10. 
Matt. iv. 1—11. 


Evil One, “ He was tempted like as we are.” This representative 
character of Christ’s Temptation is observable in the three forms 
which it took. (1) “Command these stones that they be made 
bread,” was a parallel to that temptation of the senses which 
was laid before our first parents when they were invited to eat of 
the tree whose fruit had been forbidden by God. And in this 
primary temptation of sense all others are represented. But He 
Who fed five thousand by a miracle after one day’s fasting, will 
not work a miracle to feed Himself after a fast of forty days: 
nor will He rise above the proper level of His human nature in 
His struggle with the enemy, because His time is not yet come. 
(2) “If Thou be the Son of God, cast Thyself down,” was a 
temptation to make a premature and unnecessary display of His 
Divine Power, similar to the intellectual temptation set before 
our first parents, “Ye shall be as gods.” The substance of it was, 
Can God do this? The answer was, “Thou shalt not tempt the 
Lord thy God!.” (8) The first Adam was tempted to covet the 
gift of a Divine Intelligence, “Ye shall be as gods, knowing 
good and evil,’’ and though God had given him sovereignty over 
the world in His own way, by a delegated authority, to seek it in 
another way, by the possession of Omniscience. So the third and 
strongest temptation offered to Him Who came to draw all men 
unto Him by His lifting up, was contained in the offer—doubtless 
one that could have been, in its way, realized—“ All these things 
will I give Thee.” 

These three forms of temptation are comprehensive types of all 
that the Tempter has to offer,—sensual temptations, the seduc- 
tions of vanity and pride, and the desire to go beyond God’s will. 
Thus the ancient formulary which includes all sin under the 
three heads, “the world, the flesh, and the Devil,” is strictly in 
keeping with the view of sin which is given to us in the Fall of 
the first, and the Victory of the Second Adam: and as we 
acknowledge ourselves to be sinners through our origin from the 
one, so we may see the full force of the prayer to the other, “ By 
Thy Temptation, good Lord, deliver us,” and seek spiritual 
strength in all times of spiritual danger by becoming “fellow- 
workers with Him” through the grace of God. * 

The week which begins with the first Sunday in Lent is one of 
the Ember weeks, the following Sunday being the canonical day 
for Ordinations. 


Inrroit.—He hath called upon Me, and I will hear him. I 
will deliver him and bring him to honour: with long life will I 
satisfy him. Ps. Whoso dwelleth under the defence of the most 
High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Glory be. 


1 It is observable that Simon Magus, who preténded to be divine, met 
his death in an attempt to display his power in this very manner, 


THE SECOND AND THIRD SUNDAYS IN LENT. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT. 


The Collect. 


93 


DOMINICA IT., QUADRAGESIM &. 
{REMINISCERE. ] 


Oratio. 


Ps LMIGHTY God, who seest that EUS, qui conspicis omni nos vir- Salisbury Use. 
Oe Rega we have no power of ourselves tute destitui interius exteriusque “M87 wie 
ps xei.3.7,- 0 help ourselves; Keep us both out- | custodi; ut ab omnibus adversitatibus ws 
Mark vil, 21.23. wardly in our bodies, and inwardly in | muniamur in corpore, et a pravis cogi- 
our souls, that we may be defended | tationibus mundemur in mente. Per 
from all adversities which may happen | Dominum nostrum. 
to the body, and from all evil thoughts 
which may assault and hurt the soul, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. | 
ia ae | 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. 1 Thess. iv. 1—-8. 1 Thess. iv. 1—7. | 1 Thess. iv. 1—7. Heb. i. 10. ii. 3. 
GosPEL. Matt. xv. 2i—28. Matt. xv. 21—28. | Matt. xvii. 1—9. Mark ii. 1—12. 


co 


THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT. 


The Collect. 
E beseech thee, Almighty God, 


Ps, xxxvii, 4. 
Sls: 


DOMINICA III, QUADRAGESIME. 
[OCULI.] 


Oratio. 


UASUMUS, omnipotens Deus, Salisbury Use. 


Greg. Dom. iii. 


eee look upon the hearty desires vota humilium respice, atque ad in XL. 
1 Cor. xv.57. of thy humble servants, and stretch | defensionem nostram dexteram tu 
forth the right hand of thy Majesty | majestatis extende. Per Dominum 
to be our defence against all our | nostrum Jesum Christum Filium tuum. 
enemies, through Jesus Christ our | Qui tecum vivit. 
Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 


EPISTLE. Eph. v. 1—14. 


GOSPEL. Luke xi. 14—28. 


Eph. v. 1—9. 
Luke xi. 14—28. 


Eph. v. 1—9. Heb. iv. 14. v. 6. 


Luke xi. 14—28. Mark viii. 34. ix. 1. 


dl 


HYMNS. 

Evrensone.—Lx more docti mystico. H.N. 75. 47, H. A. M. 
74. 

CoMPLINE.— Christe, qui lux es et dies. 
p. elxxiii, A. A. 116. 

Marrins.— Summi largitor premii. 

Lavups.— Audi, benigne Conditor. 
75, C. H. 63. 

These hymns are appointed for daily use during the first and 
second weeks in Lent. 


H. A. M. 83, D. H. 


H. A. M. 77. 
H. N. 20. 48, H. A. M. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT. 


Our Lord’s triumph in His own Person over Satan is followed 
up on this Sunday by a narrative of one of those cases in which 
He exhibited the same power for the good of others. “ Grievously 
vexed with a devil” is a phrase which seems to point to an utter 
subjugation of the poor victim so afflicted to the power of the 
Evil One; and in that subjugation physical and mental evil were 
doubtless combined. He Who, having been tempted, was now 
able to succour them that are tempted, manifested that ability on 
this occasion by the effect of His will alone, so that without the 
use of any apparent means or any visible act, He caused the Evil 
One to give up his power over the afflicted, and in answer to the 
urgent prayer of the mother, “her daughter was made whole 
from that very hour.” There is, doubtless, a connexion between 


the fact told in the Gospel and the exhortation of the Hpistle, 
the epithet designating the evil spirits who possessed their victims, 
and that by which St. Paul designates impurity, being the same ; 
and several pieces of evidence pointing to extreme impurity of 
life as one result of possession. The Collect is moulded in the 
same lines of thought, acknowledging the power of the Tempter 
to assault the soul by evil thoughts, and our own inability to 
prevail against such assaults without the aid of Him by whom 
the Tempter was, and is overcome. The note of the day and 
week, therefore, so far as Lent looks to discipline, is a call to the 
subjugation of the sensual part of our nature by earnest prayer 
for a participation in the power of Him who was tempted, and 
yet came out of His temptation without sin, that He might 
succour others in His strength. 


IntRo1T.—Call to remembrance, O Lord, Thy tender mercies ; 
and Thy loving-kindnesses, which have been ever of old. Let not 
our enemies triumph over us. Deliver us, O God of Israel, out 
of all our troubles. Ps. Unto Thee, O Lord, will I lift up my 
soul; my God, I have put my trust in Thee, let me not be con- 
founded. Glory be. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT. 


The dangerous sympathy which exists between human nature 
and evil is set forth on this Sunday with fearful intensity of ex- 


pression. Our Lord had cast out another of those evil spirits 


94: 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT. 


The Collect. 
RANT, we beseech thee, Al- 


Ezra ix. 13, 14, 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT. 


DOMINICA MEDIA QUADRAGESIM®. 
[LETARE.] 


Oratio. 
ONCEDE, quesumus, omnipotens Salisbury Use. 


Micah vii. 9 i 
: % : : Greg. Dom. iv. 
Tee ties. mighty God, that we, who for Deus, ut qui ex merito nostre “in XL. 
our evil deeds do worthily deserve to | actionis affligimur, tue gratiz conso- 
be punished, by the comfort of thy | latione respiremus. Per Dominum. 
grace may mercifully be relieved ; 
through our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Gal. iv. 21—31. Gal. iv. 22. v. 1. Gal. iv. 22—81. Heb. vi. 183—20. 
GOSPEL. John vi. 1—14, Jobn vi. 1—14. John vi. 1—15. Mark ix. 17—81. 


rf 


—— 


which were permitted in His time to exercise their utmost power 
over men, that His glory might be shown in overcoming them ; 
and some of those who witnessed the occurrence, finding no other 
way of explaining it, attributed it to “ Beelzebub, the prince of 
the devils.” This foolish and wicked way of accounting for the 
marvel our Lord met by two arguments; (1) Satan would not 
act against himself; (2) If Satan cast out Satan, then “the 
children” of the Jews, i. e. the Apostles to whom “the very 
devils were subject” through Christ’s name, could only have cast 
them out by the same evil power. In the parallel passage, 
Matt. xi. 31, He also goes on to show how this wicked accusa- 
tion was in danger of becoming the unpardonable sin; the 
Jews, in reality, calling the saving work of the Holy Spirit a 
“soul-destroying”’ work, that of the Destroyer of souls. Then 
the Lord declared that it is He alone Who can cast out Satan; 
He being stronger than the strong Evil One. From His words 
we may deduce the truth that all driving out of the Evil One is 
the work of Christ, as all sin is ultimately the work of the 
Enemy. He is the Stronger than the strong who drives evil 
from our nature, by purifying that nature in His own holy and 
immaculate Person; from each individual by the work of the 
same Person through the grace given in sacraments: and His 
power extends over every form of Satan’s power, physical or 
mental infirmity, or spiritual disease. This personal power of 
Christ is illustrated by the words of St. Paul, “O wretched man 
that I am,” through this power of Satan over me, “‘ Who shall 
deliver me?” .... “I thank God, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord.” 

After this comes that awful truth respecting re-possession 
which illustrates so fearfully the abiding sympathy of our nature 
with evil, and the intensification of Satan’s power through every 
unresisted submission to the influence of it. This was spoken 
first of the generation of Jews among whom our Lord had come, and 
has its application to later times in the falling away of churches 
into heresy and worldliness. Satan was driven out from every 
position which he had taken up as soon as Christ appeared for 
the purpose of opposing him. But the sympathies of the nation 
were towards evil, and after their rejection of Christ and His 
Apostles their spiritual condition became far worse than it was 
even in our Lord’s time when He called them a “generation of 
vipers.” The vanquished strong man returned, and the horrors 
of sin among the Jews between our Lord’s Ascension and the 
final destruction of Jerusalem,—the hardness of heart, the blind- 
ness, the cruelty,—were never exceeded. It is probable that the 
sway of Mahometanism in the Hast and in India is a return of 
the “strong man armed,’ with “seven others more wicked than 
himself,” to nations among whom the Church had been received 
as a cleansing and garnishing power for a time, but was after- 
wards rejected when the new unbelief aroused old sympathies 
with evil. 


The application of the same truth to individuals is obvious. 
The sense of Satan’s power was so strong in the early Church 
as to lead it to make exorcism an invariable preliminary of bap- 
tism. Every act of penitence is a kind of exorcism, and every 
Absolution is the conquest of Satan by Christ. But unless the 
swept and garnished soul is pre-occupied with good, evil will 
return to it. In all Lenten discipline, therefore, the occupation 
of the soul by the sevenfold gifts of the Spirit is the true bar to 
the entrance of the seven evil spirits, and works of mercy will 
guard against the dangers and deadly sins to which inactive 
devotion makes it liable. 


Iyrrorr.—Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord; for He 
shall pluck my feet out of the net. Turn Thee unto me and have 
mercy upon me; for I am desolate and in misery. Ps. Unto 
Thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul; my God, I have put my 
trust in Thee, O let me not be confounded. Glory be. 


Hymns. 


Evrensone.—Ecce tempus idoneum. H.N. 19. 49, H. A. M. 76. 

ComMPLine. — Christe, qui lux es et dies. H. A. M. 83, 
D. H. p. clxxiti, A. A. 116. 

Marrins.—Clarum decus jejunit. 

Lavups.—Jesu quadragenaria. U.N. 21. 50. 

These hymns are appointed for daily use during the third and 
fourth weeks of Lent. 


MID-LENT, on REFRESHMENT SUNDAY. 


This day has been called Dominica Refectionis from a very 
ancient period, no doubt from the Gospel in which our Lord is 
set forth as feeding the five thousand by a miracle in the wilder- 
ness'. It has at some times been observed as a day of greater 
festivity than was permitted on any other Sunday in Lent; and 
the Mi-Caréme of the French Church still gives an illustration of 
this usage. In Rome also, the “Golden Rose” is blessed on this 
day, and presented by the Pope to some distinguished person 
who is considered to have done good service to the Church in the 
past year: and the ceremony is accompanied by festive obsery- 
ances which make Mid-Lent Sunday conspicuously different 
from the others of the season. The “comfort” of the Collect, 
the “free Jerusalem” springing out of the bondage of Sinai of the 
Epistle, and the Feast in the midst of the wilderness, all point 
the same way; as also does the ancient Officium or Introit. 

The miracle which gives point to this Sunday exhibits our 
Lord as refreshing men literally by the operation of His Pro- 
vidence, and mystically as their spiritual Refresher. 


1 The first Lesson at Mattins is Genesis xliii., which ends with the 
refreshment of his brethren by Joseph, who was, in so many particulars, a 


| type of our Blessed Lord; 


THE FIFTH SUNDAY IN LENT. 95 


THE FIFTH SUNDAY IN LENT, 


The Collect. 


DOMINICA IN PASSIONE DOMINI. 
[JUDICA.] 


Oratio. 


Prob AL 2, 18s E beseech thee, Almighty God, UASUMUS, omnipotens Deus, salisbury Use. 
s. lik. 1, ; : a Si ete ae ee mere Greg aD Orinaye 
ee aa mercifully to look upon thy familiam tuam propitius respice ; in XL. De 
people; that by thy great goodness | ut te largiente regatur in corpore, et te pomini. 
they may be governed and preserved | servante custodiatur in mente. Per. 
evermore, both in body and _ soul, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
oe 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Heb. ix. 11—15. Heb. ix. 11—15. Heb. ix. 11—15. Heb. ix. 11—14. 
GOSPEL. John viii. 46—59. John viii. 46—59. John viii. 46—59. Mark x. 32—45. 
‘ | 


(1) From the literal point of view the miracle was stupendous, 
and well calculated to show that the Providence of Him “by 
whom all things were made” is able to take care of those whom 
He loves. Cornelius 4 Lapide, calculating from the Roman 
price of a loaf weighing from 8 to 10 ounces, concludes that the 
200 pence named would have purchased 2000 such loaves. The 
average price of bread in England is 13d. a pound, at which rate 
the same money would purchase about 914 pounds, a quantity 
not very far from this estimate. This weight of bread distributed 
among 5000 persons only would give not quite three ounces to 
each, about as much as is ordinarily eaten as an accompaniment 
to other food at dinner. But St. Matthew [xiv. 21] says that 
there were “women and children,” besides “about five thousand 
men,” and if these are reckoned at only 5000 more, the quantity 
of bread provided for each by the 200 pence would have been 
only 14 ounce, literally “a little” as stated by Philip, and quite 
insufficient for satisfymg a hungry person. But the actual 
quantity of bread present was much less than two hundred penny- 
worth, being only such a quantity as a Jad could carry, five 
barley loaves (perhaps ten or twelve pounds in weight alto- 
gether), and in that case enough to give a piece of bread of eight 
or ten grains weight to each person. When Elisha’s servitor 
said of “twenty loaves of barley and full ears of corn in the husk 
thereof,” “ What, should I set this before an hundred men?” it 
is no wonder that the servitor of Christ should say of the five 
barley loaves, “ But what are these among so many,” as ten thou- 
sand men, women, and children? Yet in the course of sub- 
division this small quantity of bread increased so as to be sufli- 
cient for a full meal; the persons so satisfied being evidently in a 
fasting, and therefore hungry condition. For such a full meal 
sixteen ounces of bread is not much, but 10,000 pounds of bread 
amounts to four and a half tons weight, a vast quantity, appa- 
rently a thousandfold exceeding that from which it originated. 
Such a calculation magnifies the miracle in appearance, yet it 
would have been as much an act of Divine power to have 
increased the bread twofold as a thousandfold; and acts of Divine 
power equally stupendous are daily being wrought around us by 
the loving-kindness of our Creator. 

(2) The mystical meaning of the miracle is shown by the 
course of the several acts recorded in the eleventh verse of the 
Gospel; and they are plainly of an Eucharistic character. 

a) The loaves are placed in the hands of Jesus, as an oblation 
is offered to God of the Bread and Wine. 

B) Jesus gave thanks Lebxapiorhoas, cf. Luke xxii. 19] before 
distributing them to the disciples, this eucharistization of the 
loaves endowing them with capacities which they did not pre- 
viously possess. 

y) He distributes to His ministers as to persons receiving 
gifts from Him for the benefit of others. 

5) And by the intervention of these ministers, not by direct 


communication between Jesus and the multitude, the latter 
receive the eucharistized bread by which they are satisfied. 

Thus the mighty work of Christ in the midst of the wilderness 
is set before His Church in the midst of Lent as a sure token 
that the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof; and that 
both fasting and abundance are at His command: and still 
more as an earnest of that Divine gift the “ Bread from Heaven,” 
which He distributes to His people in the wilderness of this 
world, by the hands of ministers, for their spiritual refreshment 
and strength. 


Intrrorr.—Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, 
all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn 
for her; that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of 
her consolations. Ps. I was glad when they said unto me, We 
will go into the house of the Lord. Glory be. 


PASSION SUNDAY. 


The name of Passion Sunday has been given to the second 
Sunday before Good Friday from time immemorial, because on 
that day the Lord began to make open predictions of His coming 
sufferings. The Epistle refers to our Lord’s passion; the Gospel 
narrates the beginning of it in that fearful rejection of Him by 
the Jews; and the first Lessons at Mattins and Evensong are 
clearly prophetic of the redemption wrought by the sufferings of 
Christ. When the last attempt was made to alter the Prayer 
Book in 1688, it was proposed to substitute a Collect more in 
character with the day, which is as follows :—“O Almighty God, 
who hast sent Thy Son Jesus Christ to be an High Priest of good 
things to come, and by His own Blood to enter in once into the 
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us; mercifully 
look upon Thy people, that by the same Blood of our Saviour, 
who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself without spot 
unto Thee, our consciences may be purged from dead works, to 
serve Thee, the living God, that we may receive the promise of 
eternal inheritance, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” 

As the Divine Power of Christ was illustrated on the preceding 
Sunday by the miracle of the loaves and fishes, so on this day 
His Divine Nature is set forth in a conspicuous manner by the 
juxta-position of the Gospel in which He used the words, “ Before 
Abraham was, I am,” with the first Lesson in which God js 
heard saying to Moses, “I AM THATIAM:.... thus shalt 
thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto 
you.” The conduct of the Jews shows that they recognized in our 
Lord’s words an assumption of the incommunicable Name, and in 
that assumption a proclamation that He is God. This open and 
unlimited proclamation of His Divine Nature comes in on Passion 
Sunday, as the several manifestations of the glory of Christ come 
in before Christmas, that through the humiliation of the Cross, as 


96 THE SUNDAY NEXT BEFORE EASTER. 


THE SUNDAY NEXT BEFORE EASTER. 
The Collect. 
LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
who, of thy tender love towards 


James v. 11. 
1 John iv. 9, 10. 
Heb. ii. 9. 14. 16. 


DOMINICA IN RAMIS PALMARUM. 
Oratio. ; 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, Salisbury Use. 


: : SAS Greg., Gelas. 
qui humano generi ad imitandum ~ pom. in ramis 


Phil, ii. 4—8. Wk age anne 
Matt.xi.29. mankind, hast sent thy Son our | humilitatisexemplum, Salvatorem nos- ™ 
Heb. xii,3. Saviour Jesus Christ, to take upon | trum carnem sumere, et crucem subire 
him our flesh, and to suffer death upon | fecisti: concede propitius, ut -et pa- 
the cross, that all mankind should | tientize ipsius habere documenta, et 
follow the example of his great hu- | resurrectionis consortia mereamur. Per 
mility ; “Mercifully grant that we | eundem. 
may both follow the example of his 
patience, and also be made partakers 
of his resurrection; through the same 
Jesus Christ our Lord... Amen. 
Modern English, Salisbury Use, Modern Roman. astern. | 
EPISTLE. Phil. ii. 5—11. Phil. ii. 5—11. Phil. ii. 5—11. Phil. iv. 4—9. 
| GOSPEL. Matt. xxvii. 1—54. Matt. xxvi. and xxvii. Matt. xxvi. and xxvii. John xii. 1—18. 


through that of the manger, we may behold the eternal Son of 
God: and see rays of Divinity shed from His crucified Body. 


Iytroir.—Give sentence with me, O God, and defend my 
cause against the ungodly people: O deliver me from the deceit- 
ful and wicked man, for Thou art the God of my strength. 
Ps. O send out Thy light and Thy truth that they may lead 
me, and bring me unto Thy holy hill, and to Thy dwelling. 
Glory be. 


Hymns. 

Evensone.—Vexilla Regis prodeunt. 
M. 84. 

ComMPLinE.— Cultor Dei memento. 

Marrins.—Pange, lingua, gloriost. H. N, 23.52. 

Lavups.—Lustra sex qui jam peracta. H. N. 24. 53. 

These hymns are appointed for daily use up to Maundy Thurs- 
day ; from which time to the Octave of Easter no hymns were 
sung according to Salisbury Use. 


H.N. 22. 51, H. A. 


D. H. p. elxxiv. 


PALM SUNDAY. 


The last week of Lent has ever been observed by Christians as 
a time of special solemnity; and from the awfully important 
events which occurred in the last week of our Lord’s life, which 
it represents to us, it has been called, from primitive times, the 
Great Week and the Holy Week. During this period there was, 
as early as the days of St. Chrysostom, a general cessation of 
business among the Christian part of the people: fasting was 
observed with greater strictness than in the other weeks of Lent, 
and special acts of mercy and charity were engaged in by all, the 
Emperors (when they had become Christian) setting an official 
example by ceremonies of which our: Royal Maundy is a relic. 

The first day of the Holy Week is called Indulgence Sunday in 
the Lectionary of St. Jerome, and in many other later writers. 
This name has been explained by a custom of the Christian Em- 
perors, who used to set prisoners free and close all courts of law 
during Holy Week. But it seems to have been in use before 
this practice originated, which was not earlier than the end of 
the fourth century. It has also been supposed to be connected 
with the reconciliation of penitents. In the Sacramentary of St. 
Gregory there is the phrase, “Per Quem nobis indulgentia lar- 
gitur,” in the proper preface for this day, and “ut indulgentiam 
percipere mereamur,” in the Collect for Tuesday; from which it 
may be inferred that the name Indulgence Sunday (and In- 
dulgence Week) originally pointed to our Lord’s work of redemp- 


tion, and His great love in going forward willingly on this day to 
meet His sufferings. The day is also called Hosanna Sunday in 
some parts of Europe and the Kast. 

But a far more common name is that by which it is familiarly 
known to us, that of Palm Sunday. It is called Dominica in 
ramis palmarum in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory, and Domi- 
nica in ramis olivarwm in that of St. Ambrose, and in the former 
there is a plain reference to the ceremony of branch-bearing as 
one then in use, as well as to the act of the Jews which originally 
gave the name to the Sunday. The words are in the Benediction 
of the people: “May Almighty God grant unto you, that as ye 
present yourselves before Him with branches of palms and of 
other trees, so after your departure from this life ye may attain 
to appear before Him with the fruit of good works and the palm 
of victory.” In the Ambrosian rite it is not so clear that the 
ceremony was then in use; but St. Chrysostom mentions the 
shaking of the palm-branches [cele 7& Bdia] as one of the 
customs of the day in one of his sermons for the Great Week. 

In the ancient English Church the Benediction of the Palms 
took place before the beginning of the Holy Communion. First 
an Acolyte read Exod. xv. 27—xvi. 10, the narrative of Israel’s 
encamping by the twelve wells and threescore and ten palm-trees 
of Elim. Then a Deacon read John xii. 12—19, the account of 
our Lord’s triumphal entry. After this the palm, yew, or willow 
branches being laid upon the Altar, the Priest (vested in a red 
silk cope) pronounced an exorcism and a blessing over them, 
which were followed by four Collects. A procession then passed 
round the Church, singing Anthems, and distributing the 
branches; after which began the celebration of the Holy Eucha- 
rist. The custom is still represented in some places by decking 
the church with willow-branches on Palm Sunday; and almost 
every where by the country people bearing them in their hands 
as they walk out in the afternoon. 

On this day the Church has always begun to set before God 
and men the Gospel account of the Passion of our Lord. In the 
Lectionary of St. Jerome, and in the ancient missals of the 
Church of England, St. Matthew’s narrative, or “The Passion 
according to St. Matthew,” was fixed for the Gospel on Palm 
Sunday, that of St. Mark on Tuesday, that of St. Luke on Wed- 
nesday, and that of St. John on Good Friday}. Until 1661 the 


1 The Passion was said in a very remarkable manner, and is printed ac- 
cordingly in the Salisbury Missal. Instead of the whole being said by the 
Gospeller, it was apportioned among three persons, apparently choir men. 
Those words which were spoken by the Jews or the disciples had the letter 


MONDAY AND TUESDAY BEFORE EASTER. 97 


MONDAY BEFORE EASTER. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Isa. lxiii. 1—19. 


GosPEL. Mark xiy. 1—72. 


TUESDAY BEFORE EASTER. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Isa. 1. 5—11. 


GOSPEL. Mark xv. 1—39. 


26th and 27th chapters of St. Matthew were still read for the 
Gospel on Palm Sunday, and the 18th and 19th of St. John on 
Good Friday; but a marginal note in Sancroft’s writing is 
appended to both these days in the Durham book, directing the 
first chapter to be left out in each case, because it is appointed to 
be read in the Second Lesson. 

The distinguishing characteristic of this day in the last week 
of our Lord’s life is not represented in any of the Scriptures for 
the day, which are altogether occupied with our Lord’s Passion. 
This arises from the change made in 1549, when the service for 
the Benediction of the Palms was set aside (in which this cha- 
racteristic of the day was fully commemorated), and only the 
Ancient Mass of the day (which was commemorative of the 
Passion) retained. This oversight is to be regretted, as there is 
clearly a connexion between the usage of palm-bearing and the 
Diyine ritual, both of Sinai and the New Jerusalem. One of 
God’s commands to the Jews was, “ Ye shall take you on the first 
day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm-trees, and the 
boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall 
rejoice before the Lord your God seven days” [Levit. xxiv. 40]. 
And in the Revelation St. John writes, “After this, I beheld, 
and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all 
nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the 
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and 
palms were in their hands” [Reyv. vii. 9]. 


Inrrorr.—Be not Thou far from me, O Lord: Thou art my 
succour, haste Thee to help me. Save me from the lion’s mouth: 
Thou hast heard me from among the horns of the unicorns. Ps. 
My God, my God, look upon me; why hast Thou forsaken me ? 
[“ Won dicitur, Gloria Patri.’ ] 


MONDAY IN HOLY WEEK. 


The distinctive memorial of this day is the act of our Blessed 
Lord in destroying the barren fig-tree. Having left Jerusalem 
in the evening of Palm Sunday and retired to Bethany, He 
returned to the city in the morning, and on His way He was 
hungry ; and seeing a fig-tree afar off, having leaves, He came, if 
haply He might find any thing thereon; and when He came to it, 
He found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not yet. 
And Jesus answered and said unto it, “No man eat fruit of thee 
hereafter for ever” [Mark xi. 14]. From thence He went to the 
Temple, and cleansed it from the presence of those who carried 
their merchandise into the very house of God. Both actions are 
compared by ritualist commentators to that separation of the 
firmament from the subjacent waters out of which the earth was 


‘‘a” prefixed, and were directed to be sung or said [cantari aut pronuntiari] 
by an alto voice; the words of our Lord were marked ‘‘d,” and to be sung 
by a bass voice; those of the Evangelist ‘ m,” to be sung by a tenor [media]. 
This singular custom was observed in reading the Passion from each of the 
four Evangelists. 


Salisbury Use. 
Isa. 1. 5—10. 
John xii. 1—36, 


Salisbury Use. 
Jer. xi. 18 —20. 


Mark xiv. and xv. 


FERIA II., POST DOMINICAM IN RAMIS Salisbury Use. 
PALMARUM. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 
Isa. 1. 5—10. 
John xii. i—9. Matt. xxiv. 3—37. 


FERIA III., POST DOMINICAM IN RAMIS Salisbury Use. 
PALMARUM. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Jer. xi. 18—20. 


Matt. xxiv. 36. 
Xxvi. 2. 


Mark xiv. and xv. 


to spring, and which took place on the second day of the week of 
the Creation. As the Almighty Creator separated the waters 
above from the waters beneath, so the righteous Judge of all 
the earth separates the barren tree from the fruitful, the house of 
prayer from the house of covetousness and dishonesty. Thus 
He foreshadowed the result of His Passion, by which the latter 
days of the Lord would be severed from the former days of the 
world ; and His final Judgment, in which the evil, and those who 
have been unfruitful in good works, will be altogether cast out of 
His Kingdom. 


Inrro1t.—Plead Thou my cause, O Lord, with them that 
strive with me; and fight Thou against them that fight against 
me. Lay hand upon the shield and buckler, and stand up to help 
me. Ps. Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them 
that persecute me. 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK. 


This was the last day of our Lord’s public teaching and minis- 
tration. Having retired to Bethany for the night on the even- 
ing of Monday as on that of Sunday, He again returned to the 
city in the morning of this day, and “as they passed by, they 
saw the fig-tree dried up from the roots.” In the Temple, the 
scribes and elders required from our Lord an explanation of the 
authority by which He did the things which He had done there, 
clearing the Temple of buyers and sellers, and claiming it as the 
house of His Father. The events of the day are then recorded 
with much fulness by the Evangelist. Our Lord spoke the 
parables of the Father and his two sons, the Vineyard let out to 
husbandmen, the Marriage feast and the Wedding garment. 
Each sect of the Jews, the Herodians, the Sadducees, and the 
Pharisees, endeavoured to entangle Him into some discourse 
which could be made the ground of an accusation against Him. 
Our Lord pronounced the eight woes, and then departed from 
the Temple to speak nearly His last words to the Jews in the 
parables of the Ten Virgins, the Talents, and the Sheep and the 
Goats. The latest public event of the day appears to be that 
recorded in St. John xii. 28—386, when in reply to the prayer, 
“Father, glorify Thy name,” there came a voice from heayen 
saying, “I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.” 
After this voice our Lord spoke of His “lifting up” upon the 
Cross. He then gave His final words of public warning, “Yet a 
little while is the Light with you. Walk while ye have the 
Light, lest darkness come upon you; for he that walketh in 
darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have light, 
believe in the Light, that ye may be the children of light.” 
[John xii. 85.] As soon as these words were spoken, the public 
teaching of the Light of the world came to an end, and He shone 
no more upon the multitude until He displayed Himself “lifted 
up” for tneir salvation: “These things spake Jesus, and de- 
parted, and did hide Himself from them.” [John xii. 36.] 

O 


98 WEDNESDAY AND THURSDAY BEFORE EASTER. 


WEDNESDAY BEFORE EASTER. 


Modern English. 


Salisbury Use. 


FERIA IV., POST DOMINICAM IN RAMIS Salisbury Use. 
PALMARUM. ‘ 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


EPISTLE. Heb. ix. 16—28. Vsas bsiie LIS ial 7 Isa. Ixii. 11. Lxiii. 7. 
iii, 1—12. lili. 
GOSPEL. Luke xxii. 1-——71. Luke xxii. and xxiii. Luke xxii. and xxiii. _ Matt. xxvi. 6—16. 
THURSDAY BEFORE EASTER. FERIA V., IN CNA DOMINI [vel, EB- Salisbury Use. 
DOMADZ SANCT}]. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. | Eastern. 
EPIstLeE. 1 Cor. xi. 17—34. 1 Cor. xi. 20—82. 1 Cor. xi. 20—382. 1 Cor. xi. 283—382. 
GOSPEL. Luke xxiii. 1—49. John xiii. 1—15. John xiii. 1—15. Matt. xxvi. 2. xxvii. 2. 


=) 


Henceforth He lived to instruct His Apostles concerning their 
office and His, and to suffer. 


InTRoIT.—We ought to glory in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, in Whom is our salvation, life, and resurrection ; by Whom 
also we are ransomed and saved. Ps. God be merciful unto us, 
and bless us, and lift up the light of His countenance upon us, 
and be merciful unto us. 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK. 


The fourth day of the Holy Week marks the actual beginning 
of the events which reached their climax on Good Friday, the 
conspiracy of the Sanhedrim, and the agreement between them 
and Judas; on account of which it is always reckoned the day of 
the Betrayal. It is the first of the week-days for which proper 
lessons are appointed; but singularly enough, no second lessons 
are appointed for Evensong either on Wednesday or Thursday. 
Among the ancient offices of the Church of England for Holy 
Week there was one called Tenebrae, which was used late in the 
evening of this and the two succeeding days; and was, doubtless, 
a relic of the ancient night-watchings which accompanied the 
fastings of this week, and especially the last four days of it, in 
primitive times. The ceremony from which the distinctive name 
of the office was derived consisted of the gradual extinction of 
lights one by one until the Church was left in darkness; when 
this significant memorial of the Crucifixion was heightened in its 
terrible solemnity by the singing of the fifty-first Psalm, the 
same that is said in the Commination Service ?. 

It was on this and the following day that our Blessed Lord 
gave to His Apostles those instructions and encouragements 
which are recorded in the thirteenth and four following chapters 
of St. John’s Gospel. They are given, it is probable, only in the 
form of a summary, yet even in that form they provide the 
Church with a solid foundation of doctrine respecting the con- 
tinual Presence of her Lord, and her true unity through union 
with Him. The day seems to have been spent in the retirement 
of Bethany ; and was apparently concluded by another festival, 
which ended our Lord’s intercourse with the family of Lazarus, 
the next being spent with His Apostles alone. 


InrRoit.—At the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of 
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the 
earth. Because the Lord having become obedient unto death, 
even the death of the Cross; therefore Jesus Christ is Lord, to 
the glory of God the Father. Ps. O Lord, hearken to my 
prayer, and let my cry come unto Thee. 


1 Gunning, in his Lent Fast, states that this day was called ‘‘Tenable 
Wednesday.” Probably this was a popular corruption of Tenebrae Wed- 
nesday. 


MAUNDY THURSDAY. 


The fifth day of Holy Week was honoured by the Institution 
of the Holy Eucharist, and the names by which it has been 
known have almost always been derived from this distinguishing 
feature of the day. As early as the time of St. Augustine [ Ep. 
liv. or exvili. ad Januar.] it is called Dies Coenze Domini; and in 
later times Natalis Eucharistiz, or Natalis Calicis. The English 
name of Maundy Thursday also points to the same holy event, 
being a vernacular corruption of Dies Mandati; the day when 
our Lord commanded His disciples to love one another as He had 
loved them, to wash one another’s feet in token of that love, and 
above all to “ Do This,’—that is, to celebrate the Holy Eucha- 
rist after the pattern which He had shown them,—as the sacra- 
mental bond of the Love which He had commanded. The day 
has also been called Feria mysteriorum, Lavipedium, and peyaAn 
mevtas. In the Durham book, Cosin added a second title to the 
present one, writing it “Thursday before Easter, commonly 
called Mandie Thursday.” 

Our Lord’s act of humility in washing the feet of His disciples 
took a strong and lasting hold upon the mind and affection of the 
Church ; and the terms in which He commanded them to follow 
His example not unnaturally led to a belief that the usage was in 
some manner and degree binding upon their successors. In later 
ages, however, the Church of England has considered the com- 
mandment to follow our Lord’s example in that particular, as 
one which is not of a perpetual obligation; while “Do this in 
remembrance of Me,” is one the unceasing obligation of which 
has never been doubted. 

Our Lord did, in fact, take a local and temporary custom, 
and use it as a practical exponent of His extreme humility, 
according to His words, “I am among you as He that serveth,” 
intensified as they are by St. Peter’s remonstrance, “ Zhow shalt 
never wash my feet.” At His hands the act had doubtless a 
sacramental efficacy, such as followed every touch of His holy 
Person when It came in contact with those who had faith to 
receive His blessifg. But the command with which He accom- 
panied the act related to the humility and love symbolized by it, 
and did not entail a repetition of it by the Apostles or the Church 
of later ages, under circumstances in which the customs of a 
country or of a period had ceased to recognize the literal act as a 
necessity of social life. As a symbolical usage the Church has 
however always, in some parts of the world, retained the cus- 
tom of washing the feet of the poor on Maundy Thursday, Sove- 
reigns, Bishops, and Clergy thus marking their obligation to 
follow their Saviour in humility and love for His poor. It was 
continued by our English Sovereigns until the latter part of the 
17th century, and by the Archbishops of York on their behalf 
until the middle of the last century. The ceremony formed 


GOOD FRIDAY. 99 


GOOD FRIDAY. 
The Collects. 
, LMIGHTY God, we beseech thee 
ee i a graciously to behold this thy 
Tekd ait 4,15, family, for which our Lord Jesus Christ 


Eph. iii. 14, 15. 


FERIA VI, IN DIE PARASCEVES, 
[Ad Completorium. Oratio.] 
ESPICE quesumus, Domine, Salisbury Use. 
super hane familiam tuam, pro 
qua Dominus noster Jesus Christus non 


part of a service, which is still represented (though in an altered 
form) by the “Royal Maundy” office, and was connected with 
special acts of almsgiving on the part of the Sovereign, which 
are likewise retained}. 


1 The following is the Service as now used in the Chapel Royal at White- 
hall, on this day :— 


OFFICE FOR THE ROYAL MAUNDY. 


Exhortation, Confession, Absolution, §c. 
Proper Psalm. Ps. xli. 
First Lesson, St. Matthew xxv. 14—30. 
First Anthem. 
Blessed is he that considereth the poor and needy: the Lord shall de- 
liver him in the time of trouble.—Ps, xli. 1. 


£1 15s. DISTRIBUTED TO EACH WOMAN. 
TO EACH MAN SHOES AND STOCKINGS. 


Second Anthem. 

Hide not Thou Thy face from us, O Lord, and cast not off Thy servants 
in Thy displeasure: for we confess our sins unto Thee, and hide not our 
unrighteousness. 

For Thy mercy’s sake deliver us from all our sins. 


WOOLLEN AND LINEN CLOTHS DISTRIBUTED, 


Third Anthem. 
O Lord, grant the Queen a long life, that her years may endure through- 
out all generations.—Ps. 1xi. 6. 
She shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare Thy loving mercy and 
faithfulness, that they may preserve her.—Ps. Ixi. 7. 
As for her enemies, clothe them with shame: but upon herself let her 
crown flourish.—Ps, cxxxii. 19. 


PURSES DISTRIBUTED. 
Second Lesson, St. Matthew xxv. 31—46. 


Fourth Anthem. 

Who is this that cometh from Edom, that is glorious in his apparel, 
travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, 
mighty to save.—Isa. I xiii. 1. 

Doubtless Thou art our Father, our Redeemer; Thy name is from ever- 
lasting.—-Tsa. lxiti. 16. 

Hosanna to the Son of David; Blessed is he that cometh in the name 
of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest! Amen.—Matt. xxi. 9. 

O Lorp, the Sovereign of the world, we acknowledge that Thine is the 
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; 
for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is Thine. Thine is the king- 
dom, O Lord, and Thou art exalted as head above all; both riches and 
honour come of Thee, and Thou reignest over all. In Thy hand is power 
and might, and in Thy hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto 
all. Now therefore, our God, we thank Thee and praise Thy glorious 
name, that Thou hast not only bestowed greatness and majesty upon our 
Sovereign Lady Queen Victoria, but hast given her a heart also to takecom- 
passion on them that are below her, and show mercy upon the poor and 
needy. Accept, most gracious God, of this tribute, which she pays unto 
Thee, the giver of all good things, and make her still more fruitful and 
abundant in these, and in all other good works, that by mercy and truth she 
may be preserved, and her throne upholden by mercy. And stir up the 
hearts of all those who have now been partakers of her bounty, to be truly 
thankful unto Thee for it, and both to bless and praise Thee continually for 
setting such a pious Princess over us, and also pray most earnestly that 
Thou wouldst reward her charity with along and prosperous reign in this 
world, and with a heavenly kingdom in the world to come; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. 


Most blessed God, who art good and dost good and takest pleasure in 
those that fear Thee and imitate Thy goodness, Jook down from Heayen, 
the throne of Thy glory, upon us Thy servants here prostrate before Thee, 
who thankfully acknowledge that we have nothing but what we have 
received from Thee, and therefore can give Thee nothing but what is Thine 
own. Fill our hearts, we beseech Thee, with the lively sense of Thy fatherly 
goodness, which hath bestowed so many benefits upon us that we are not 
able to number them, and likewise given us to understand the happiness of 
doing good with them; and assist us with the power of Thy holy Spirit, 
that we may be faithful stewards of Thy manifold gifts and graces, following 
the steps of our Lord and Master Christ, whom Thou hast sent into the 
world, to be a pattern to us of humble goodness; unto which we pray Thee 
to quicken us by the consideration that we are but strangers and sojourners 
as all our fathers were, our days on the earth being as a shadow, and there 
is no abiding: That so nothing may tempt us to be high-minded, nor trust 
in uncertain riches, but in Thee, the living God, who givest ys al] things 


In the ancient offices of the Church of England there were 
several special observances on this day. First (after the hour of 
Nones) came the reconciliation of penitents, a custom handed 
down from primitive days. The Holy Communion was celebrated 
at the same time with Vespers, and there was a special reserva- 
tion, the rubric being, “ Ponantur a subdiacono tres hostiew ad 
consecrandum: quarum due reserventur in crastinum, una ad 
percipiendum a sacerdote: reliqua ut ponatur cum cruce in 
sepulchro.” In the evening the altars were washed with wine 
and water, and the Maundy ceremonies performed, two clergy of 
the highest rank present washing the feet of all in the choir, and 
of each other. The rubric in the Salisbury Missal regulating 
these ceremonies begins, “ Post prandium? conveniant clerici ad 
ecclesiam, ad altaria abluenda; et ad mandatum faciendum ; et 
ad completorium dicendum.”” While the pedilavium was going 
on, the Psalms Deus misereatur, Ecce quam bonum, Miserere, 
Beati immaculati, and Audite hec, omnes gentes, were sung ; 
the Antiphon to Deus misereatur being “Mandatum novum do 
vobis: ut diligatis invicem,” from the first word of which the 
ceremony took its name. At its conclusion a sermon was 
preached, and then a “loving cup” (called ‘‘caritatis potum” in 
the rubric) was passed round to all who had taken part in its 
performance. The whole ended with this collect, —“ Adesto 
queesumus, Domine, officio servitutis nostra; et quia Tu pedes 
lavare dignatus es Tuis discipulis; ne despicias opera manuum 
Tuarum, que nobis retinenda mandasti: sed sicut exteriora hic 
abluuntur inquinamenta corporum; sic a Te omnium nostrorum 
interiora mundentur peccata, quod Ipse prestare digneris Qui 
cum Deo Patre et Spiritu Sancto vivis et regnas Deus. Per.” 
A vestige of this ceremony is still retained in the Chapel Royal, 
the Bishop who acts as Almoner, and his assistants, being girded 
with long linen towels during the distribution of the Alms. 

Maundy Thursday is also the day on which the Chrism or 
anointing oil has been consecrated from time immemorial, and in 
all parts of the Church throughout the world. In the Kastern 
Church the Holy Sacrament to be reserved for the sick in the 
ensuing year is also consecrated on this day, the one element 
being saturated with the other, divided into small morsels, and 
carefully dried; after which it is preserved in a receptacle at the 
back of the Altar. [See Notes on Comm. of the Sick. ] 


Inrrort.—We ought to glory in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, in Whom is our salvation, life, and resurrection; by 
Whom also we are ransomed and saved. Ps. God be merciful 
unto us, and bless us, and lift up the light of His countenance 
upon us, and be merciful unto us. 


GOOD FRIDAY. 


This day is not one of man’s institution, but was consecrated 
by our Lord Jesus Christ when He made it the day of His most 
holy Passion. It is impossible that the anniversary of our Lord’s 


richly to enjoy, that we may do good, and be rich in good works, ready to 
distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for ourseives a good 
foundation for the time to come, that we may lay hold on eternal life. And 
we most humbly beseech Thee, in a special manner to bless Her Majesty, 
whom Thou hast set over us; keep this ever in the thoughts of her heart, 
to endeavour to do much good with the power which Thou hast given her, 
and thereby magnify Thee exceedingly in the sight of all the people of 
these Realms, and bestow upon her such royal majesty as hath not been 
on any prince before her: All which we heg for the sake of Jesus Christ, our 
most blessed Lord and Saviour, to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be 
all honour and glory, world without end. dmen. 
Then follows the Prayer for the Queen, and so on to the end. 

2 As early as St. Augustine’s time there appear to have been two cele- 
brations on this day, ‘‘ bis in coena Domini Eucharistia datur, mane propter 
prandentes, ad yesperum propter jejunantes.” [Aug. Ep. 118.] 


O02 


100 


Acts ii, 22, 23, 


dets i. 22 was contented to be betrayed, and 


given up into the hands of wicked 
men, and to suffer death upon the 
cross, who now liveth and reigneth 
with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever 
one God, world without end. Amen. 


LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 

by whose Spirit the whole body 

of the Church is governed and sanc- 
tified ; Receive our supplications and 


1 Cor. xii. 12, 
13. 26. 

Eph. ii. 19—22. 
vi. 18. 

Rom. xii. 5—8. 

Col. iii. 23, 24. 


sufferings could ever have passed by as a common day in those 
times when the memory of them was yet so recent, and when a 
daily fellowship in them [Phil. iii. 10. Col. i. 24] was so con- 
tinually before the eyes of Christians in the martyrdoms of His 
faithful servants. It is spoken of under the name of the Paschal 
Day ! in very early Christian writings [Tert. de Orat. xviii.], but 
in later ages it was chiefly known by the names Mapacxevh, Dies 
Parasceves, the Day of Preparation, or Dies Dominicz Passionis, 
the Day of our Lord’s Passion. In early English times it was 
known as Long Friday [/ilfric’s Can. 37, a.D. 957. A. Sax. 
Chron. A.D. 1137], but its present beautiful appellation is the one 
by which it has now been popularly known for many centuries. 

Very soon after midnight our Blessed Lord was betrayed and 
apprehended ; and about day-dawn He was taken before the 
judicial High Priest Annas, the ceremonial High Priest Caiaphas, 
and the Sanhedrim or great Council of the Jews [Matt. xxvi. 
64. Mark xiv. 62. Luke xxii. 70], where He was accused of 
blasphemy. After that He was sent bound to Pilate, before 
whom He was charged with treason; and by Pilate sent to 
Herod as belonging to his jurisdiction. Having been mocked 
and insulted by Herod, the holy Jesus was sent back by him to the 
Roman governor, declared innocent of all crime against the state, 
yet scourged, to please the Jews, and for the same reason sen- 
tenced to be erucified [Matt. xxvii. 3. 25. Mark xv. 1.14. Luke 
xxiii, 1. 21. John xviii. 28; xix. 6]. Then He was insulted 
with the purple robe, and the reed sceptre, and a corona radiata 
made of thorns; was buffeted and spit upon; and afterwards 
led forth from the Pretorium by the Via Dolorosa to Calvary. 

At the third hour [9 a.m. “Tierce”] our Lord, having borne 
His cross, or a portion of it, until His exhausted Body had 
fainted under the burden, was nailed to it upon Mount Calvary 
without Jerusalem, the two thieves being crucified on either side 
with the intention of adding shame to His sufferings. From the 
Cross He spoke His last words. As they fastened His limbs upon 
it He cried, “ Father, forgive them; for they know not what they 
do” [Luke xxiii. 34]; when the penitent thief prayed for His 
remembrance in His Kingdom, He said, “ Verily, I say unto thee, 
To-day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise” [Luke xxiii. 40]. 
When He beheld His mother and the beloved disciple standing at 
the foot of His Cross, He said to the one, ‘‘ Woman, behold thy 
son,” and to the other, “ Behold thy mother” [John xix. 26]. 

At the sixth hour [Noon, “Sexts”] ensued the darkness, and 
the earthquake; and durimg the three hours which followed 
before the return of light, it is supposed that our Lord’s greatest 
sufferings took place, the veiling of the Father’s Presence, the 
agony of “being made sin for us,” and of having “laid upon 
Him the iniquity of us all.’ The awful mystery of these three 
hours was summed up in an ancient Litany, in the words, “ By 
Thine unknown sufferings, Good Lord, deliver us” [Matt. xxvii. 
45. Mark xv. 33. Luke xxiii. 44]. 

At the ninth hour [3 p.m. “Nones”] the climax of this 
awful period was reached when our Lord spoke the words, “ Eloi ! 


1 Tacxa ctavpwoipoy, the Paschal Day of the Crucifixion, as Easter Day 
was called Naoxa dvacracipov, the Paschal Day of the Resurrection. 


GOOD FRIDAY. 


dubitavit manibus tradi nocentium, et Greg. in fer. iv. 
6 . P & vi. post 

crucis subire tormentum. Qui tecum _ palmas. 

vivit et regnat in unitate. 


Universis ordinibus. Oratio [iil.]. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, Salisbury Use. 
cujus spiritu totum corpus eccle- ps Rage hg 
siz sanctificatur et regitur ; exaudinos ?*%?*?°™- 
pro universis ordinibus supplicantes ; 


Eloi! Lama Sabacthani,” which are the first words of the twenty- 
second Psalm [ Matt. xxvii. 46. Mark xv. 34]. After this He said 
“T thirst” [John xix. 28], and when He had received the vinegar, 
“Tt is finished” [Matt. xxvii. 48. Mark xv. 36. Luke xxiii. 
46. John xix. 30]; for now He knew that “all things were 
accomplished ” of the Sacrifice for sin, and the sufferings of Him 
in whom, sinless, all sinners were then represented before God. 
Then, crying with a loud voice, as with a willing expiration of 
that life which no man could take from Him, He laid it down of 
Himself with the last of His seven words from the Cross, “ Father, 
into Thy hands I commend My Spirit ? [Luke xxiii. 46], which 
are also words uttered by David in the spirit of prophecy in the 
sixth verse of the thirty-second Psalm. 

It must have been shortly after this that the body of our 
Blessed Lord was taken down from the cross, for the Sabbath 
began at six o’clock in the evening, and that Sabbath being “an 
high day,” the Jews entreated Pilate that it might be removed 
from the Cross (to be cast into the pit where the bodies of 
malefactors were thrown) before the legal beginning of the 
festival. Thus on the eve of the Sabbath, after being subjected 
to eighteen hours of mental agony and bodily suffering, the holy 
Jesus fulfilled, in His Body and Soul, the words of the Compline 
Psalm, “I will lay Me down in peace, and take My rest: for it 
is Thou, Lord, only that makest Me to dwell in safety.” 

With this Passion of our dear Lord in view, it has ever been 
the object of the Church to make the devotions of Good Friday 
such as should help Christians to realize the magnitude of the 
Sacrifice that He offered, of the sins by which it was made neces- 
sary, and of the Mercy which moved Him to offer it. “On the 
Paschal Day,” writes Tertullian [de Orat. xviii.], “the strict 
observance of the fast is general, and as it were public,” not 
restricted to those who professed to lead a life of closer devotion 
than others ; works of charity were permitted, even to the extent 
of the rich ploughing the land of the poor, but no other labour 
was engaged in on this holy day. In all Churches the Passion 
of our Lord, as narrated in the Gospels, has ever formed the central 
subject of the day’s meditation and teaching, while psalm and 
prophecy have been gathered around it in saddened and penitent 
tones, the more perfectly to represent before God and man the 
events of this central Day of the world’s history. In the ancient 
services of the Day one was conspicuous, in which the Clergy and 
people showed their veneration for the atoning work of Christ 
by ceremonies which acquired the popular name of “ creeping to 
the Cross ;” in which the image of the Cross was placed in the 
front of the altar, that they might more thoroughly realize the 
spirit of penitents “before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been 
evidently set forth, crucified among them” [Gal. iii. 1], while 
they gave Him the lowliest adoration of their bodies!. During 
this ceremony of prostration before the Cross, the “ Reproaches,” 
followed by the hymns, “Sing, my tongue, the glorious battle,” 
and “The Royal Banners forward go,” were sung to their well- 


1 The popular feeling of reverence towards the Cross never died out. It 
is illustrated even by the Pilgrim’s Progress, in which Christian, standing 
before ‘‘the Image of a Cross,” says, ‘‘ He hath given me rest by His sor- 
rows, and lifz by His death,’ 


GOOD FRIDAY. 


prayers, which we offer before thee for 
all estates of men in thy holy Church, 
that every member of the same, in his 
vocation and ministry, may truly and 
godly serve thee; through our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. 


Wisd xi. 23—26, 
Matt. v. 45. 

Ezra xviii. 30. 
Rom. x. 1. 

2 Cor. iv. 3, 4, 
Hos. iv. 6. 


MERCIFUL God, who hast 
made all men, and hatest nothing 

that thou hast made, nor wouldest the 
pav.24, death of a sinner, but rather that he 
John x.11.14— should be converted and live; Have 
Matt. vi.10—13. mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, 
and Heretics, and take from them all 
ignorance, hardness of heart, and con- 
tempt of thy Word; and so fetch them 
home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that 


101 


ut gratiz tus munere ab omnibus tibi 
gradibus fideliter serviatur. Per Do- 
minum. In unitate ejusdem. 


Pro Hereticis. Oratio [vii.]. Salisbury Use. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, “°%S°'5."" 
qui salvas omnes homines, et Bs ag eee 
neminem vis perire; respice ad animas es 
diabolica fraude deceptas, ut omni 
heretica pravitate deposita, errantium 
corda resipiscant, et ad veritatis tuz 
redeant unitatem. Per Dominum. 
Pro Perfidis Judeis. Oratio [viii] 
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui 
etiam Judaicam perfidiam a tua mise- 


Salisbury Use. 


Greg. Gelas. ut 
supra. 


known strains. The “ Reproaches” are a striking expansion of 
Micah iii. 3, 4, in which the loving-kindness of the Lord is con- 
trasted with the ingratitude of those whom He came to save, 
carrying the idea through each step of the Passion. The follow- 
ing are the versicles used: the responses also being indicated. 
After the first three versicles was sung, “Holy God, Holy and 
Mighty, Holy and Immortal; have mercy upon us;” and after 
the others, “O My people .... answer unto Me,” much as the 
Invitatory to the Venite was sung. 

O My people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I 
wearied thee ? answer unto Me. For I brought thee up out of 
the land of Egypt, and thou hast prepared the cross for thy 
Saviour. [Trisagion. ] 

I led thee forty years in the wilderness, and fed thee with 
manna, and brought thee into a goodly land. [Trisagion. ] 

What more could I have done unto thee that I have not done ? 
I planted thee indeed My choicest Vine, and thou art become 
bitter unto Me; for thou hast given Me vinegar to drink, and 
hast pierced the side of thy Saviour. [Trisagion. | 

For thy sake did I scourge Egypt with its first-born, and thou 
didst deliver up Me to be scourged. [O My people... .] 

I led thee forth out of Egypt, and drowned Pharaoh in the 
Red Sea, and thou didst’ deliver up Me to the chief priests. 
[O My people... .] 

I opened the sea before thee, and thou hast opened My side 
with a spear. [O My people. ...] 

I went before thee to lead thee in a cloudy pillar, and thou 
didst lead Me into the hall of Pilate. [O My people... .] 

I fed thee with manna in the wilderness, and thou didst fall 
upon Me with scourgings and buffetings. [O My people... .] 

I gave thee to drink living water out of the Rock, and thou 
didst give Me gall and vinegar. [O My people... .] 

For thy sake did I smite the kings of the Canaanites, and thou 
didst smite Me on the head with a reed. [O My people... .] 

I gave thee a royal sceptre, and thou gavest to My head a 
crown of thorns. [O My people... .] 

I lifted thee up in great strength, and thou didst lift Me up 
to hang upon the Cross. [O My people... .] 

During this ceremony the red copes and chasuble which were 
worn in the other offices of the day were set aside, and black 
copes alone were used ; the utmost aspect of sorrow and mourn- 
ing for sin being, at the same time, thrown over the church and 
all the instrumenta of Divine Service, by means of black hangings, 
a custom which has never been discontinued. 


It is a very ancient practice of the Church to abstain from 
celebrating the Holy Communion on Good Friday. On Maundy 
Thursday (as has been already shown) a portion of the Sacra- 


ment then consecrated was reserved in one element only, and 
this being placed in a chalice of unconsecrated wine on Good 
Friday, was then received by those who communicated instead 
of elements consecrated on the day itself. This Mass of the 
Pre-sanctified is an institution of very ancient date, being found 
in the Sacramentaries from which our modern offices are so largely 
derived : and since it is traceable, on good evidence, as far back as 
the time of St. Augustine, it seems to represent the practice of the 
Primitive Church. The use of this office has been general in the 
Western Church for the greater part of the time of its existence. 
In the Eastern Church there is no recognition of the Eucharist 
at all on this day', there being in fact almost a total absence of 
prayer altogether, the services consisting chiefly of the reading of 
prophecies and gospels respecting the Passion: and such appears 
also to be the practice of the Ambrosian Rite. ' 

But, although this custom appears to be of primitive origin, 
it has not been preserved in its primitive form, In the Church 
of England before the Reformation the practice had grown up of 
the priest alone receiving on Good Friday the holy Sacrament 
which had been consecrated on Maundy Thursday; and this is 
still the practice of the Latin Church. The Sacramentary of St. 
Gregory clearly indicates that in the early Church others com- 
municated with him as on otherdays. The rubric directs, “ Cum 
dixerint Amen, sumit de sancta, et ponit in calicem, nihil dicens. 
Et communicant omnes cum silentio, et expleta sunt universa.” 
[Menard’s ed., p. 70.] In the tenth century a Canon of the 
Church of England which enjoins the reservation on Holy Thurs- 
day and certain ceremonies to be used on Good Friday, adds respect- 
ing the latter day, “Then let him,” i. e. the priest, “go to housel, 
and whosoever else pleases.” [Johnson’s Canons, i. 404.] In fact, 
Martene proves that Communion of the Laity as well as of the 
priest on this day was the prevailing custom of the Church until 
the tenth century at least ; and there are strong grounds for believ- 
ing that the practice continued down tothe time of the Reformation. 

The exact intention of the English rite is not easy to ascertain. 
The appointment of an Epistle and Gospel is (under the circum- 
stances in which the Prayer Book was set forth) a prima facie 
evidence that Consecration on Good Friday was intended to 
supersede the Mass of the Pre-sanctified which had been hitherto 
used ; and Communion was, of course, intended to follow. On 
the other hand, this was a deviation from the ancient practice of 
the Church, which was not in accordance with the respect for it 
shown by those who set forth our first English Prayer Book. 
Such a deviation can only be accounted for by supposing that 

1 No consecration of the Holy Eucharist is allowed during Lent in the 
Eastern Church except on Saturday and Sunday. The feast of the Annun- 


ciation is the only exception to this rule. Communicants on all other days 
receive the pre-sanctified elements. 


102 


they may be saved among the remnant 
of the true: Israelites, and be made one 
fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ 
our Lord, who liveth and reigneth 
with thee and the Holy Spirit, one 
God, world without end. Amen. 


EASTER EVEN. 


ricordia non repellis: exaudi preces 
nostras quas pro illius populi obceca- 
tione deferimus; ut agnita, veritatis 
tuz luce que Christus est, a suis 
tenebris eruatur. Per eundem Do- 


minum nostrum. 


Pro Paganis.. Oratio [ix.]. 

Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui 
non vis mortem peccatorum, sed vitam 
semper inquiris, suscipe propitius ora- 
tionem nostram ; et libera eos ab idolo- 
rum cultura; et aggrega ecclesiz tus 
sancte ad laudem et gloriam nominis 
tui. Per Dominum. 


Salisbury Use. 


Greg. Gelas. ut 
supra, 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Exod. xii. 11. 


GOSPEL. John xix. 1—37. 


EASTER EVEN. 
The Collect. 
[A.D. 1661.] RANT, O Lord, that as we are 
Sen oe baptized into the death of thy 


Col. ili. 3. 5. : ; 
Tit. ii. 1114. blessed Son our Saviour Jesus Christ, 
Li Corseive 29225 . wate 

Ps. ix. 13. so by continual mortifying our corrupt 
John vi. 39. . : : . 
Rom. xiv.9. affections we may be buried with him ; 


and that through the grave, and gate 
of death, we may pass to our joyful 
resurrection ; for his merits, who died, 
and was buried, and rose again for us, 
thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Salisbury Use. 


Hebe 1-25. { Hosea v. 15. vi. 6. 


John xviil. and xix. 


Modern Roman. astern. 


Hosea vi. 1—6. 
Exod. xii. 1—11. 
John xviii. and xix. 


VIGILIA PASCH A. Salisbury Use. 
[..... Resuscitet vos de vitiorum [Greg. Bene- 
4 ‘ a A dictio in Dom. 
sepulchris, qui Eum resuscitavit a mor- i post Pee 
ct. 
tuis. Amen. Ut cum Eo sine fine 
feliciter vivatis quem resurrexisse a 
mortuis veraciter creditis. Amen. | 


[ MOST gracious God, look upon [4-». 1687.] 
us in mercy, and grant that as 

we are baptized into the death of thy 

Son our Saviour Jesus Christ; so by 


strong reasons against reservation were present to the Reformers, 
but that, at the same time, they did not contemplate depriving 
the Church of Christ’s Sacramental Presence on this Holy Day, 
and therefore enjoined the ordinary service with consecration. 

The practice of the Church of England since the Reformation 
certainly seems to have been to celebrate the Holy Communion on 
this day. On Good Friday in 1564 [March 31] Queen Elizabeth 
openly thanked one of her preachers in her Chapel for his sermon 
in defence of the Real Presence, which seems to show that the 
Holy Eucharist was then celebrated. [Heylin’s Ref. ii. 8317. Eccl. 
Hist. Soc. ed.] And in Bishop Andrewes’ Sermons on the Passion 
there are allusions to it, which put the matter beyond a doubt. 

The conclusions that may be drawn are, (1) that the Church of 
England never intended so far to depart from ancient habits as 
to be without the Sacramental Presence of Christ on the Day 
when His Sacrifice is more vividly brought to mind than on any 
other day in the year: (2) that from the introduction of the 
un-Catholic custom of Communion by the priest alone, or for some 
other reason, it was thought best to disuse the Mass of the 
Pre-sanctified and substitute Consecration: (3) that it is a less 
evil to depart from ancient usage by consecrating on this day 
than to be without the Sacramental Presence of our Lord. 


EASTER EVE. 


The day between Good Friday and Easter Day commemorates 
the Descent of our Blessed Lord’s soul into Hell, and the rest of 
His body in the grave. In the Gospel we are told that this 


Sabbath day was “an high day” in the Jewish ritual. It was 
the day when all were to be present before the Lord [ Exod. xxiii. 
17], and when the sheaf of the first-fruits was to be offered. 
(Ley. xxiii. 10,11.] In the Christian Church it at once acquired 
the name of the ‘‘ Great Sabbath,” being so called in the Epistle 
of the Church of Smyrna respecting the martyrdom of St. Poly- 
carp. The ancient Epistle and Gospel referred to Holy Baptism, 
and to our Lord’s Resurrection : those now appointed were intro- 
duced into the Prayer Book of 1549. The ancient Collect was, 
“O God, who didst illuminate this most holy night by the glory 
of our Lord’s resurrection ; preserve in Thy new-born family the 
spirit of adoption which Thou hast given: that being renewed 
both in body and mind, they may render unto Thee a pure 
service, through the same our Lord.” This was not adopted in 
the translated Offices of the Church (probably because it had 
some reference to the blessing of the new fire and the Paschal 
candle) ; nor was any Collect provided for the day until 1637, 
when that printed above was inserted in the Prayer Book pre- 
pared for Scotland. This is thought to have been the composition 
of Archbishop Laud, and was the foundation of the present 
Collect, which is first found in Cosin’s writing in the margin of 
the Durham book. Even this modern Collect keeps up a memo- 
rial of the primitive custom of the Church in administering 
Baptism on Haster Eve. But the practice haying fallen into 
disuse }, the devotional tone of the day is brought into a more 


1 A Preface to the Baptismal Offices, which was erased from the Prayer 


EASTER DAY. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 1 Pet. iti. 17—22. Col. ii. 1—4. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xxvii. 57—66. 


| 


EASTER DAY. 


§ At Morning Prayer, instead of the Psalm, 
O come, let us sing, de., these Anthems shall 
be sung or said. 


1 Cor. v. 7, 8. HRIST our passover is sacrificed 

for us + therefore let us keep the 
feast. Not with the old leaven, nor 
with the leaven of malice and wicked- 
ness + but with the unleavened bread 
of sincerity and truth. 


fom. vi. J— 


su HRIST being raised from the 


dead dieth no more +: death hath 
no more dominion over him. For in 
that he died, he died unto sin once ¢ 


direct and close analogy with the Holy Week history of our 
Blessed Lord by the commemoration of His burial, in the Gospel, 
and His Descent into Hell, in the Epistle. [See notes to the 
Apostles’ Creed. | 

The Vigil of Easter has always been celebrated with much cere- 
mony, even from primitive times. It is mentioned by Tertullian 
[Ad Uxorem ii. 4], and in the Apostolical Constitutions [v. 20], 
by Eusebius [vi. 9], Lactantius [vii. 19], St. Chrysostom, and 
St. Jerome. St.Gregory Nazianzen [Orat. xlv. in Pasch.] speaks 
of the churches being so lighted up that it seemed like day, and 
this he speaks of as a symbolical usage, (in the spirit of the 
ancient Collect given above,) memorializing the glorious illumina- 
tion brought on the world by the Resurrection of the Sun of 
Righteousness. The services continued until after midnight, to 
welcome the early dawn of the Resurrection; and also from a 
tradition (current among the Jews as well) that the second 
coming of Christ will be in the night of Easter Eve!. At a later 
period, and in the ancient offices of the English Church, the new 
fire, the Paschal candle, and the incense, all received Benedic- 
tion on this day for use in the succeeding year. 


Book in 1661, began: ‘‘It appeareth by ancient writers, that the sacrament 
of Baptism in the old time was not commonly ministered but at two times 
in the year, at Easter and Whitsuntide; . - which custom (now being 
grown out of use), although it cannot,” &c. [See notes to Baptism.] 

1 «Hee est nox, que nobis propter adventum regis, ac Dei nostri per- 
vigilio celebratur: cujus noctis duplex ratio est, quod in ea et vitam tum 
recepit, cum passus est; et postea orbis terre regnum recepturus est. 
Hic est enim Liberator, et Judex, et Ultor, et Rex, et Deus, quem nos 
Christum vocamus,’’—Lactant. vii. 19. 


Salisbury Use. 


Matt. xxviii. 1—7. 


103 


our true and hearty repentance all our 
sins may be buried with him, and we 
not fear the grave; that as Christ was 
raised up from the dead by the glory 
of thee, O Father, so we also may 
walk in newness of life, but our sins 
never be able to rise in judgment 
against us; and that for the merit of 
Jesus Christ, that died, was buried, 


and rose again for us. Amen. ] 
Modern Roman. Eastern. 
Col. ili. 1—4. Rom. vi. 3—11. 


Matt. xxviii. 1—7. Matt. xxviii. 


IN DIE PASCHA. 


¥ Statio et ordo processionis in die Pasche Salisbury Use. 
ante matutinas ewm cruce. Pulsatis omni- 
bus campanis cantetur antiphona. 


[Communio. 
ASCHA nostrum immolatus est 
Christus: Alleluia. Itaque epule- 
mur, in azymis sinceritatis et veritatis. 


Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. ] 


HRISTUS resurgens ex mortuis 
jam non moritur : mors illa ultra 
non dominabitur. Quod enim mortuus 


est, peccata mortuus est semel: quod 


There has ever been something of festive gladness in the cele- 
bration of Easter Eve, which sets it apart from Lent, notwith- 
standing the fast still continues. To the disciples it was a day of 
mourning after an absent Lord ; but the Church of the Resurrec- 
tion sees already the triumph of that Lord over Satan and Death. 
In the promise of the prophetic words, “I will ransom them from 
the power of the grave; I willredeem them from death: O death, 
I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction ” [ Hos. 
xiii. 14], she sees afar off the dawn of the Resurrection, and 
already the words sound in her ears, “ Your sorrow shall be turned 
into joy.” A celebration of the Holy Communion took place on 
this day, as on Maundy Thursday, at the time of Vespers; and 
in the place of the Introit was sung Gloria in Excelsis Deo, 
with its response, Ht in terra pax hominibus, while the bells of 
the church were ringing in the joys of Kaster?. At Milan, “ Ad 
Missam in ecclesia majore,” the announcement of our Lord’s 
Resurrection was thrice made in the words, “ Christus Dominus 
resurrexit,” when the response thrice followed, “ Deo gratias.” 


EASTER DAY. 


They who went about “preaching Jesus and the Resurrec- 
tion,” and who observed the first day of the week as a continual 
memorial of that Resurrection, must have remembered with vivid 
and joyous devotion the anniversary of their Lord’s restoration 
to them. It was kept as the principal festival of the year, there- 
fore, in the very first age of the Church, and Easter had become 


2 This custom is observed on Christmas Eye at Magdalen College, Oxford. 


104 


but in that he liveth, he liveth unto 
God. Likewise reckon ye also your- 
selves to be dead indeed unto sin + but 
alive unto God through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. 


HRIST is risen from the dead : 
and become the first-fruits of 
them that slept. For since by man 
came death + by man came also the 
resurrection of the dead. For as in 
Adam all die + even so in Christ shall 
all be made alive. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son + and to the Holy Ghost ; 


1 Cor. xv. 20 
—22. 


Answer. 
As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall Be + world without end. 
Amen. 


The Collect. 
LMIGHTY God, who through 
1 Pet. ie 3. thine only-begotten Son Jesus 
1 Cor. xv. 57.23. Christ hast overcome death, and opened 


Acts ii. 24. 
John xi. 25. 


EASTER DAY. 


Alleluia, 


autem vivit, vivit Deo. 


Alleluia. 


Oratio. Salisbury Use. 
“FT EUS, qui hodierna die per uni- Sg: Gélas. in 
genitum tuum eternitatis nobis 


Pasche. Cf. 
Pref. in Dom. 
aditum, devicta morte, reserasti; vota 


i. post Asc, 
Domini ‘ per 


long familiar to all parts of the Christian world so early as the 
days of Polycarp and Anicetus, who had a consultation at Rome 
in A.D. 158, as to whether it should be observed according to the 
reckoning of Jewish or Gentile Christians. [Irenzeus in Euseb. v. 
24.] Eusebius also records the fact that Melitus, Bishop of 
Sardis about the same time, wrote two books on the Paschal 
festival [Euseb. iv. 26], and Tertullian speaks of it as annually 
celebrated, and the most solemn day for Baptism. [De Jejun. 14. 
De Bapt. 19.] Cyprian, in one of his Epistles, mentions the 
celebration of Easter solemnities [lvii.]; and in writers of later 
date, the festival is constantly referred to as the “most holy 
Feast,” “ the great Day” [Conc. Ancyra vi.], the Feast of Feasts, 
the Great Lord’s Day, and the Queen of Festivals. [Greg. Naz. 
Orat. in Pasch. | 

The original name of the Festival was one which also included 
Good Friday, Mdcxa, which was derived from the Aramaic form 
of the Hebrew name for Passover. This name was also retained 
in the Latin: and in the time of Leo the Great, when the dis- 
tinction began to be made of the Pascha Dominice Passionis, and 
the Pascha Dominice Resurrectionis, Dies Pasche began to be 
understood chiefly, and soon alone, of Easter. In England the 
game name was also once familiar, perhaps derived from the 
French language, and Haster eggs are still called “ pasque” [or in 
a corrupt form “paste” ] eggs all over the North of England. 
The more familiar name of Easter is, however, traceable as far 
back as the time of the Venerable Bede, who derives it from the 
name of a pagan goddess Kostre, or Ostera, whose festival hap- 
pened about the time of the vernal equinox [De ratione Tem- 
porum, xiii. ], and was observed as a time of general sacrifices, with 
a view toa good harvest. Later, and perhaps more trustworthy 
philologists have derived the word from the old Teutonic wrstan, 
to rise, and wrstand, the Resurrection : and it is significant that 
the idea of sunrise is self-evident in the English name of the 
Festival on which the Sun of Righteousness arose from the dark- 
ness of the grave. The popular name for the day among Oriental 
Christians, is Aaumpd, the Bright Day, in which the same idea is 


to be observed. In old English Calendars Easter is called “the 
uprising of oure Lord,” and “the Ajenrysing of our Lord.” 

The Judaizing habits which caused so much trouble in the 
earliest days of Christianity, long retained a hold upon many 
portions of the Church in respect to the observance of Haster. 
In the Western Church the festival was always kept on the first 
day of the week, as being the actual day which our Lord had con- 
secrated by His Resurrection ; but the Churches of Asia kept it 
on the third day after the 14th of the Jewish month Nisan, what- 
ever day of the week this might be. In the second and third 
centuries there was much controversy respecting this difference 
of computation ; but the first Canon of the Council of Arles [a.p. 
314] ordered Kaster to be celebrated on one day every where, and 
the Council of Nica [a.D. 325] authoritatively ruled that Easter 
was to be kept on the Lord’s Day!. There being also much 
difficulty in determining, without scientific help, which Sunday 
in March or April was the proper one, the same Council directed 
that the Church of Alexandria should send timely notice to other 
principal Churches of the day on which the true Easter would 
occur in the ensuing year, and that thus an uniform practice 
should be maintained throughout the Christian world2. It was 
not, however, until the eighth century that the computation of 
Easter was settled on sufficiently accurate calculations to ensure 
uniformity *; and the Church of England retained, until the time 
of St. Augustine of Canterbury, the Jewish method, which was 


1 There is no Canon of this Council on the subject, but that its decision 
was authoritative may be certainly inferred from the manner in which it is 
recorded in Theodoret i.9, 10, Socrates i 9, and Euseb., Life of Constantine, 
iii. 18. 

2 There is a relic of this practice in the Ambrosian Rite, where the fol- 
lowing proclamation of Easter is directed to be made on the feast of the 
Epiphany :— 

“ Annunciatio diei Paschatis per Diaconum. 

“‘Noverit charitas vestra, fratres charissimi, quod annuente Dei et Domini 
nostri Jesu Christi misericordia, die tali mensis talis Pascha Domini cele- 
brabimus.” 

3 See note on the ‘ Tables to find Easter.” 


MONDAY IN EASTER WEEK, 


Phil. i. 6. ii 


ii. 13. i ife: 
fig #13 unto us the gate of everlasting life ; 


We humbly beseech thee, that, as by 


105 


gloriam Resur- 
rectionis vite 
zterne aditum 


nostra, que preeveniendo aspiras, etiam 
adjuvando prosequere, Per eundem 


i ‘ 3 3 patefecit.’ 
thy special grace preventing us thou | Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum 
dost put into our minds good desires, | Filium tuum. Qui tecum. 
so by thy continual help we may bring 
the same to good effect; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord, who liveth and 
reigneth with thee and the Holy 
Ghost, ever one God, world without 
end. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Col. iii, 1—7. 1 Cor. v. 7, 8. 1 Cor. v. 7, 8. Acts i. 1—8. 
GosPEL. John xx. 1—10. Mark xvi. 1—7. Mark xvi. 1—7. John i. 1—17. 
MONDAY IN EASTER WEEK. FERIA IL, POST PASCHA. Salisbuxy Use. 
The Collect. 
[a.p. 1549.] LMIGHTY God, who through 


thy only-begotten Son Jesus 
Christ hast overcome death, and opened 
unto us the gate of everlasting life ; 
We humbly beseech thee, that, as by 


not wholly banished from the Northern parts of the island until 
A.D. 714. These two methods of computing Haster may be 
shortly explained by adding that the Jewish or “ Quartadeciman” 
computation aimed at observing the very day of our Lord’s Resur- 
rection (as we observe the day of His Nativity) ; while the method 
which ultimately became universal aims at observing that Lord’s 
Day as Easter which comes next after the actual anniversary. 
Each method claimed Apostolic authority from the first: Polycarp, 
who advocated the Jewish system, declared that it was derived 
from St. John, with whom he was contemporary; while the 
Bishops of Rome and others believed themselves to be following 


Oratio. Let us pray. 


Deus, qui pro nobis Filium 
crucis patibulum subire voluisti, 
ut inimici a nobis pelleres po- 
testatem : concede nobis famulis 
tuis ut in resurrectionis ejus 
gaudiis semper vivamus. Per. 


O God, who for our redemp- 
tion didst give Thine only-be- 
gotten Son to the death of the 
cross ; and by His glorious re- 
surrection hast delivered us from 
the power of our enemy; grant 
us so to die daily from sin, that 
we may evermore live with Him 
in the joy of His resurrection ; 


a custom handed down to them from St. Peter and St. Paul. 

The Anthems instead of “ Venite exultemus” represent the pri- 
mitive custom of Easter morning, when the versicle “The Lord is 
risen,” and the response ‘ He is risen indeed,” were the formal 


salutation between Christians. 


In the ancient rite of the Eng- 


lish Church one of these anthems was said in procession before 


Mattins ; and the service was retained in 1549. 


It may be useful 


to the reader to see the Latin and English forms side by side. 


Salisbury Use. 

§ Statio et ordo processionis 
in die Pasche ante matutinas 
cum cruce. Pulsatis omni- 
bus campanis cantetur anti- 
phona. 

Christus ..... vivit Deo. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. 

Y. Dicant nunc Judei quo 
modo milites custodientes sepul- 
chrum perdiderunt regem ad 
lapidis positi ommem quare non 
servabant petram justitize aut 
sepultum reddant aut resurgen- 
tem adorent nobiscum, dicentes, 
Alleluia, Alleluia. 

¥. Surrexit Dominus de se- 
pulchro. 

RY. Qui pro nobis pependit in 
ligno. Alleluia. 


Prayer Book of 1549. 
¥ In the morning afore Matins, 
the people being assembled 
in the Church, these anthems 
shall be first solemnly sung 
or said. 

Christ .... living unto God 
in Christ Jesus our Lord. Hal- 
lelujah, Hallelujah. Christ is 
risen again .... all men shall 
be restored to life. Hallelujah. 


The Priest. 
Shew forth to all nations the 
glory of God, 


The Answer. 
And among all people His 
wonderful works. 


through the same Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 


The present Rubric substituting these Anthems for the Venite 
was introduced in 1552 1. 

In the Salisbury Use there was a celebration at a late hour on 
Easter Eve, probably after midnight ; and in the Prayer Book of 
1549 two celebrations are directed for Easter Day, the Collect, 
Epistle, and Gospel for the first of which are those which are still 
retained; the Epistle being that previously in use on Easter Eve. 
The second celebration had the Collect which is now used (as it 
then was also) for the Octave of Easter Day, and the Epistle and 
Gospel of the ancient Missal. 


IntRo1t.—When I wake up I am present with Thee. Alleluia. 
Thou hast laid Thine hand upon me. Alleluia. Such knowledge 
is too wonderful for me. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. O Lord, Thou 
hast searched me out and proved me. Thou knowest my down- 
sitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


EASTER MONDAY. 


The extension of the Easter festival through seven days is 
mentioned by St. Chrysostom in one of his Easter homilies, by 
St. Augustine in one of his Epistles [lv. ad Januar.], and in the 
Code of Theodosius, which directed a cessation of labour during 
the whole of the week. The Sacramentary of St. Gregory con- 
tains a service for each day, as does also the Salisbury Missal. 
Yet there are many ancient precedents for the course taken in 
the later English rite, which limits the special services to three 


1 See note at p. 1. 


Pp 


106 


thy special grace preventing us thou 
dost put into our minds good desires, 
so by thy continual help we may bring 
the same to good effect; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord, who liveth and 
reigneth with thee and the Holy 
Ghost, ever one God, world without 
end. Amen. 


Modern English, 


EPISTLE, Acts x. 384-—48. 


GOSPEL. Luke xxiv. 183—35. 


TUESDAY IN EASTER WEEK, 
The Collect. 
LMIGHTY God, who through 
thy only-begotten Son Jesus 
Christ hast overcome death, and opened 
unto us the gate of everlasting life; 
We humbly beseech thee, that, as by 
thy special grace preventing us thou 
dost put into our minds good desires, 
so by thy continual help we may bring 
the same to good effect ; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord, who liveth and 
reigneth with thee and the Holy 
Ghost, ever one God, world without 
end. Amen. 


Salisbury Use. 
Acts x. 834—43. 
Luke xxiv. 18—35. 


TUESDAY IN EASTER WEEK.—THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


Modern Roman. astern. 

Acts i. 12—17 and 
21—26. 

John i. 18—28. 


Acts x. 37—43. 


Luke xxiv. 183—35. 


FERIA IIL, POST PASCHA. Salisbury Use. 


Eastern. 


Modern Roman. 


Acts xiii. 26—33. Acts ii. 14—21. 


Luke xxiv. 36—47. Luke xxiv. 12—365. | 


J 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. Acts xiii. 26—41. Acts xiii. 26—33. 
GOSPEL. Luke xxiv. 836—48. Luke xxiv. 36—47. 
fhe 
THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 
The Collect. 
pyle dic LMIGHTY Father, who hast 
Cee ats 4. given thine only Son to die for 


Rom. iv. 24, 25. 


1c. v7.3. Our sins, and to rise again for our jus- 


DOMINICA I., POST PASCHA. Salisbury Use. 


[ ER Christum Dominum nos- prer. antiq. 
trum. Qui innocens pro impiis 
voluit pati, et pro sceleratis indebite 


Dom. in 
Palmis, Feria 
iv. Pamelius 
Liturg. ii. 564. 


days. At the Council of Mayence [4.p. 813] a canon was passed 
which restricted the celebration of Easter to four days. The 
thirty-seventh Canon of Ailfric [4.D. 957] directs the clergy to 
charge their people, that they keep the first four days of Easter 
free from all servile work. A Council of Constance [a.p. 1094] 
enjoined that Pentecost and Master should both be celebrated 
with three festival days; and these tprfuepos mpobecula are spoken 
of even by Gregory Thaumaturgus in the third century. There 
seems, therefore, to have been considerable diversity as to the 
number of days observed, but a general consent in setting apart 
several days after Sunday in special honour of the festival of our 
Lord’s Resurrection. 

In the margin of his Durham Prayer Book, Bishop Cosin 
wrote out for use on this day the Collect, “ O God, who for our 
redemption...... » which had been formerly appointed for the 
procession before Mattins. 


Intrro1t.—The Lord hath brought you into a land flowing 
with milk and honey. Alleluia. Wherefore, let the law of the 
Lord be ever in your mouth. Alleluia. Ps. O give thanks unto 
the Lord, for He is gracious, and His mercy endureth for ever. 
Lord, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Lord, 
have mercy upon us. W, Glory to God in the highest. R, On 
earth peace, good will towards men. 


EASTER TUESDAY. 


Until 1661, the Collect originally appointed for the second cele- 
bration on Easter Day was appointed for use on this day. 


Iytrort.—He shall give him the water of wisdom to drink. 
Alleluia. She shall be established in them, and shall not be 
moved. Alleluia, And shall exalt them for ever. Alleluia. Alle- 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


: Sea 2, 3. 
ee the Jeaven. of malice and wickedness, 
that we may alway serve thee in pure- 
ness of living and truth; through the 
merits of the same thy Son Jesus 


Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE, 1 John vy. 4-12. 
GOSPEL. John xx. 19—23. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 
The Collect. 


Salisbury Use. 


1 John v. 4—10. 
John xx. 19—31. 


107 


tification; Grant us so to put away | condemnari. Cujus mors delicta nos- 


tra detorsit, et resurrectio nobis justi- 
ficationem exhibuit .. . .] 


Modern Roman. astern. 


1 John v. 4—10. Acts v. 12—20. 


John xx. 19—81. John xx. 19—81. 


DOMINICA II, POST PASCHA. Salisbury Use. 


[a.p. 1549.] LMIGHTY God, who hast given 
Hee Guise. thine only Son to be unto us 
oie’ 44, both a sacrifice for sin, and also an 
John xiii. 15. : : 

Heb aii 2 ensample of godly life; Give us grace 
luia. Ps. O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is gracious, and 


His mercy endureth for ever. Glory be. 


LOW SUNDAY, 


All the days between Easter and its Octave have “in Albis” 
added to them in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory, but the 
Sunday after Easter is called Dominica octavas Pasche. From a 
very ancient period, however, it has been called “ Dominica post 
albas,” or (as in the Ambrosian Missal), “‘ Dominica in albis depo- 
sitis,” and shortly, ‘‘ Dominica in albis,” because on this day the 
newly baptized first appeared without the chrisoms or white 
robes which they had worn every day since their baptism on 
Easter Eve. The popular English name of Low Sunday has 
probably arisen from the contrast between the joys of Haster and 
the first return to ordinary Sunday services. On this Sunday, 
or sometimes on the fourth Sunday after Easter, it was the 
custom, in primitive days, for those who had been baptized the 
year before to keep an anniversary of their baptism, which was 
called the Annotine Easter, although the actual anniversary of 
the previous Easter might fall on another day. [Micrologus lvi.] 
The Epistle evidently bears on this custom, and sets forth the 
new birth of Baptism as the beginning of an abiding power of 
overcoming the world through its connexion with the Risen 
Christ, the source of our regeneration. The ancient writer just 
referred to suggests the reflection, that if we celebrate the anni- 
versary of that day when we were born to eternal death through 
original sin, how much rather ought we to keep in memory the 
day when we were new born into eternal life! P 

The Collect appointed for this Sunday in 1549 was that now 
in use, the one originally belonging to the second communion of 
Easter Day. In 1552, when the special service for this second 
communion was discontinued, the Collect at present in use on 
Easter Day was substituted. In both cases Low Sunday was 
regarded as the Octave of Easter, according to the ancient rite ; 
but in 1661 the original Collect of the day was restored at the 
suggestion of Cosin, the change that had removed it from use on 
Easter Day being overlooked, and thus the ritual symmetry of 
the two services was marred. 


Intrort.—When I wake up I am present with Thee. Alle- 
luia. Thou hast laid Thine hand upon me. Alleluia. Such 
knowledge is too wonderful for me, Alleluia. Ps. O Lord, 


1 In the Lectionary of St. Jerome the Pascha Annotinum is set down for 
the third Saturday after Easter, The Epistle js Rev. y., and the Gospel, 
John iii. 


Thou hast searched me out and proved me. Thou knowest my 


downsitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


HYMNS. 
Evensona.— Chorus nove Hierusalem. H. N. 25. 56, 
H. A. M. 106. 
ComPiinE.—Jesu Salvator seculi. H. N. 30. 57, H. A. M. 
118. 


Martins.—Aurora lueis rutilat. H. N. 26. 58, H. A. M. 109. 

Laups.—Sermone blando angelus. H. N. 27. 59, H. A. M. 
109. 

Evrnsonc.— Ad canam Agni providi. 
H. A. M. 111. 

The four last hymns are appointed to be sung daily until 
Ascension Day. But on all feasts of Apostles and Evangelists 
during the Paschal Season, the following :— 

Evensone and Marrins.—TZristes erant Apostoli. 
37.77, H. A. M. 109. 

Lavups.—Claro paschali gaudio. 


H. N. 29. 64, 


H. N. 


H. N. 38. 78, H. A. M. 109. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER, 


The Eucharistic tone of the Scriptures used begins now to 
diverge from the fact of the Resurrection to the results of it, as 
giving to the Church a Saviour abiding with us for ever. In the 
Epistle and Gospel He is set forth as the Chief Pastor, the High 
Priest of the New Dispensation; and His own words, “I am the 
good Shepherd,” are taken up by His chief Apostle when he 
calls Him “the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.” The Col- 
lect is, however, based on the idea of Christ’s holy example as 
referred to in the first part of the Epistle, and neither in the 
modern nor in the ancient service is there any recognition of the 
beautiful parable which our Lord spoke of Himself in the Gospel, 
except that the first words of it were taken for the “Com- 
munio,” or sentence sung during the communion of the laity. 
Durandus states that the Epistle and Gospel concerning the sheep 
and the Shepherd are connected with a Roman custom of holding 
councils on this day ; but if so, the custom must be more ancient 
than the days of St. Jerome, in whose Lectionary they are 
found. It seems probable that Christ’s example to His pastors 
is, however, the idea of the Sunday, not His example to all. 

In both Epistle and Gospel (considering the season at which 
they are used) there must be taken to be a reference to victory 
gained by suffering. The good Shepherd would not win His 
flock by agreeing to the Tempter’s suggestion, “ All these things 
will I give Thee, and the glory of them, if Thou wilt fall down 

ae) 


108 


that we may always most thankfully 
receive that his inestimable benefit, 
and also daily endeavour ourselves to 
follow the blessed steps of his most 
holy life; through the same Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 1 Pet. ii. 19—25. 


GOSPEL. John x. 11—16. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER, 
The Collect. 
‘A LMIGHTY God, who shewest 
a es, to them that be in error the 
Eph. v.8,15—15. light of thy truth, to the intent that 
Eph-iv.1. | they may return into the way of righte- 
ousness; Grant unto all them that are 
admitted into the fellowship of Christ’s 
religion, that they may eschew those 
things that are contrary to their pro- 
fession, and follow all such things as 
are agreeable to the same; through 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. 


Isa, xxix. 24, 
Xxx. 31. 


Modern English. 
1 Pet. ii. 11—17. 


EPISTLE. 


GOSPEL. John xvi. 16—22. 


Salisbury Use. 


1 Pet. ii. 21—25. 
John x. 11—16. 


Salisbury Use. 
1 Pet. ii. 11—19. 
John xvi. 16—22. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Pet. ii. 21—25. ‘Acts vi. 1—7. 


John x. 11—16. Mark xv. 43. xvi. 8. 


DOMINICA III., POST PASCHA. 
Oratio. 


EUS, qui errantibus, ut in viam Salisbury Use. 
Greg.Gelas. Dom, 


ossint redire justitize, veritatis ~ ii. post Oct. 
) 
: : -  Pasche, Leo 
tue lumen ostendis; da cunctis qui in Murat.i. 
301. 


Christiana professione censentur, et 
illa respuere, que huic inimica sunt 
nomini, et ea que sunt apta sectari. 
Per Dominum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Pet. ii. 11—19. Acts ix. 32—42, 


John xvi. 16—22. John vy. 1—15. 


and worship me,” for that would have been no victory at all: 
but He won them by giving up His life for them; and the seem- 
ing extinction of all hope on Good Friday was the step to that 
triumph by which the “kingdoms of this world have become 
the kingdoms of the Lord and of His Christ,” the Shepherd and 
Bishop of our souls. The humble obedience of the Son of Man, 
“even unto death,” has made Him an Example to all ages, the 
Leader of an innumerable army of saints, and the Fountain of 
the pastoral and sacerdotal office, by the ministrations of which 
men are gathered into the one fold of salvation. 


IntROIT.—The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. 
Alleluia. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made. 
Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; 
for it becometh well the just to be thankful. Glory be. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


On this Sunday the risen Saviour is presented to us as the 
strength of the regenerate, the Fountain of spiritual ability for 
all Christians, as well as of pastoral ability for His ministers. 
For the mystical Presence of Christ is the power by which those 
who are admitted into the Christian body are able to eschew 
evil and follow good, and it was this Mystical Presence of which 
Christ spoke in the words of the Gospel. 

During the period which is now being commemorated, the 
Lord Jesus was seen again by His disciples; and yet they must 
have been possessed by a conviction that it was not for long, and 


that their Master was to be taken away from their head as 
Elijah was from Elisha. At such a time, and as their faith grew 
with the Resurrection Life of their Lord, the words He had for- 
merly spoken to them must have recurred to their minds as 
words which had already been in part fulfilled, and of which a 
still more glorious fulfilment was in prospect. Because He was 
going to the Father to present His natural Body as an ever- 
living Intercession, He could not be seen by the bodily eyes of 
His little flock ; but because He was going to the Father to be a 
continual Mediator and Intercessor, the benefits of His Presence 
would be manifestly given to the many, even as if the eyes of all 
the faithful rested upon His visible Person. 

Thus had the good Shepherd comforted His fiock before His 
Death: and thus in the Divine Service of His Church He is ever 
at this season speaking to us, and bidding us look to Him as a 
Saviour present in His Church, and to be beheld by the eyes 
of those who will look for Him in faith. A Presence which 
Christ could speak of in such terms as those of this day’s Gospel 
may well be called Real, and in such a Presence His people may 
well look for that strength of the regenerate which will enable 
them to fulfil the duties of the regenerate. 


Inrrorr.—O be joyful in God, all ye lands. Alleluia. Sing 
praises unto the honour of His Name. Alleluia. Make His 
praise to be glorious. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. Say 
unto God, O how wonderful art Thou in Thy works, through 
the greatness of Thy power. Glory be. 


THE FOURTH AND FIFTH SUNDAYS AFTER EASTER. 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 
The Collect. 


109 


DOMINICA IV., POST PASCHA. 
Oratio. 
EUS, qui fidelium mentes unius Salisbury Use. 
efficis voluntatis, da populis tuis Hees ost 
id amare quod precipis, id desiderare °° Pa? 
quod promittis, ut inter mundanas 
varietates ibi nostra fixa sint corda ubi 


Per. 


vera sunt gaudia. 


nicely ALMIGHTY God, who alone 
ease canst order the unruly wills and 
1 cor. vii 31. affections of sinful men; Grant unto 
Heb. vi. 18-20. thy people, that they may love the 
thing which thou commandest, and 
desire that which thou dost promise ; 
that so, among the sundry and mani- 
fold changes of the world, our hearts 
may surely there be fixed where true 
joys are to be found; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. James i, 17—21. James i. 17—21. 
GOSPEL. John xvi. 5—14. John xvi. 5—15. 


THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 
The Collect. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


James i. 17—21. Acts xi. 19—30. 


John xvi. 5—15. John iv. 5—42, 


DOMINICA V., POST PASCHA, 
Oratio. 


conga LORD, from whom all good EUS, a quo cuncta bona proce- Salisbury Use. 
ae things do come; Grant to us dunt; largire supplicibus tuis TEST ost 
Phira 6.” thy humble servants, that by thy holy | ut cogitemus te inspirante que recta ct Pasche. 
inspiration we may think those things | sunt, et te gubernante eadem faciamus. 
that be good, and by thy merciful | Per Dominum. 
guiding may perform the same; 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. James i. 22—27. James i, 22—27. James i. 22—27. Acts xvi. 16—34. 
GOSPEL. John xvi. 23—33. John xvi. 23—83. ' John xvi. 23—30. John ix. 1—38. 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


The Collect for this day originally, i.e. in 1549, stood in 
English exactly as it stands in the Latin : “ Almighty God, which 
dost make the minds of all faithful men to be of one will..... pe 
Bishop Cosin altered the latter words to “make all men to be of 
one mind,” but the present form was eventually adopted, and 
the idea of unity was thus taken out of the Collect. The omis- 
sion is the more singular, since there is in the Gospel a reference 
to the Holy Spirit by whom this unity is effected. 

The Epistle and Gospel point in the same direction as those of 
the preceding Sunday, viz. to the good and perfect Gift which 
would be bestowed upon the Church after, and through, the 
bodily departure of Christ to heaven. It seemed strange and 
hard to bear that it should be expedient for Him to go away 
who had been the Leader and Benefactor of His disciples and 
all who were willing to receive Him; but He spoke these words 
to them beforehand that they might be comforted with some 
foreshadowing of the glory and blessing of the New Dispensation 
which was to be perfected in His Resurrection and Ascension ; 
and be prepared for perceiving, when the fruit of the Resurrec- 
tion was ripe for gathering, that the departure of Christ to 
heaven was a greater gain to them through His mystical Pre- 
sence than His remaining upon earth could have been. This 
good and perfect gift, the gift which the Spirit of truth bestows 


upon the Church, and through the corporate Church on all its 
individual members, is therefore set before us as we draw near to 
Ascension Day as the true reason why all sorrow, because of 
her Lord’s departure, should be banished from the Church. 
The Comforter will come to bestow the Gift of the Word of God 
engrafted upon human nature, and in that gift to bestow Light, 
Truth, and Salvation. 


Introir.—O sing unto the Lord a new song. Alleluia. For 
He hath done marvellous things. Alleluia. His righteousness 
hath He openly showed in the sight of the heathen. Alleluia. 
Alleluia. Ps. With His own right hand, and with His holy 
arm, hath He gotten Himself the victory. Glory be. 


ROGATION SUNDAY. 


The fifth Sunday after Easter being the first day of the week 
in which the Rogation days occur, has taken its name from them, 
and is usually called Rogation Sunday. The striking appro- 
priateness of the Gospel, which contains our Lord’s words about 
asking in His Name, seems to indicate that it was either chosen 
for this day on account of its position with reference to the 
Rogation days, or that the latter were appointed to be observed 
on the three days following because the Gospel already dis- 
tinguished this as the Sunday concerning Asking. Both the 


110 


THE ASCENSION-DAY. 
The Collect. 
RANT, we beseech thee, Al- 
mighty God, that like as we do 
believe thy only-begotten Son our 


Mark xvi. 19. 
Actsi. 9. 

Ps. xxiv. 7—10. 
Matt. vi. 20, 21. 
Col. iii. 1—4. 
Eph. ii. 4—6. 19, 


Epistle and Gospel are found in the Lectionary of St. Jerome, 
and as the Rogation days are generally said to have been 
instituted in the fifth century, the latter seems the more pro- 
bable theory. The Collect has an evident connexion with the 
purpose of the Rogation days; and so, perhaps, has the latter 
part of the Epistle. Bishop Cosin wished to insert a new rubric 
at the end of the Gospel, “ This Collect, Epistle, and Gospel shall 
be used only upon this day.” 


IntRo1t.—With the voice of singing declare ye, declare ye. 
Alleluia. Utter it even to the end of the earth, say ye that the 
Lord hath redeemed His people. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. O be 
joyful in the Lord, all ye lands. Sing praises unto the honour of 
His Name. Make His praise to be glorious. Glory be. 


THE ROGATION DAYS. 


On the authority of St. Gregory of Tours (who wrote in the 
latter part of the sixth century) the institution of the Rogation 
Days is attributed to Mamertus, Bishop of the French diocese of 
Vienne, A.D. 452. A terrible calamity is said to have occurred 
to the diocese or city of Vienne (by earthquake and fire, and by 
the incursion of wolves and other wild beasts), on account of 
which Mamertus set apart the three days before Ascension Day 
as a solemn fast, during which processions with Litanies were to 
be made throughout the diocese. [See Introduction to the 
Litany.] The custom is supposed to have been taken up by 
other dioceses, and to have extended itself from France to Eng- 
land, but not to have been recognized at Rome until the eighth 
or ninth century. A more probable account is that the Roga- 
tion days were instituted at some earlier period, for the purpose 
of asking God’s Blessing on the rising produce of the earth; and 
that Mamertus chose them as the time for a solemn observance 
in deprecation of God’s anger with reference to the special 
troubles of his day. 

There was a Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for the Rogation 
Days in the Salisbury Missal, but these were not retained in the 
Prayer Book, although there is a Homily in three parts “for the 
days of Rogation week !,” and an “ Exhortation to be spoken to 
such Parishes where they use their Perambulations in Rogation 
week, for the oversight of the bounds and limits of their town.” 
Bishop Cosin proposed to supply this omission, and wrote the 
following in the margin of the Durham Prayer Book:— 


«THE COLLECT. 


« Almighty God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, in whom we live, 
and move, and have our being; who dost good unto all men, 
making Thy sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sending 
rain on the just and on the unjust; favourably behold us Thy 
people, who call upon Thy Name, and send us Thy Blessing from 
heaven in giving us fruitful seasons, and filling our hearts with 
food and gladness; that both our hearts and mouths may be con- 
tinually filled with Thy praises, giving thanks to Thee in Thy 
holy Church through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen 2,” 


1 The title of this Homily, ‘‘ That all good things come from God,” seems 
to be suggested by the Collect for the Sunday, 

2 This Collect first appears in Cosin’s Devotions, originally printed in 
1626. Itis not quite so rhythmical as some others of his composition, and 
perhaps the following form of it is better adapted for intonation :— 

‘ Almighty God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, in whom we live, and move, 
and have our being; who dost cause Thy sun to rise on the evil and on the 
good, and sendest rain both upon the just and the unjust: we beseech Thee, 
favourably to behold Thy people who call upon Thee, and send Thy Blessing 


THE ASCENSION DAY. 


IN DIE ASCENSIONIS DOMINI. 
Oratio. 
ONCEDE quesumus omnipotens Salisbury Use. 
Deus, ut qui hodierna die uni- “S800,/8°"* 
genitum tuum Redemptorem nostrum 


A Collect was also proposed by the Commission of 1689, which 
is worthy of being placed beside that of Bishop Cosin : 

“ Almighty God, who hast blessed the earth that it should be 
fruitful, and bring forth every thing that is necessary for the life | 
of man, and hast commanded us to work with quietness and eat 
our own bread; bless us in all our labours, and grant us such 
seasonable weather that we may gather in the fruits of the 
earth, and ever rejoice in Thy goodness, to the praise of Thy holy 
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.” 

The following table shows the old Epistles and Gospels for the 
three days, those proposed by Cosin, and also those suggested by 
the Commission of 1689. [See also the Table of Proper Psalms. ] 


Cosin, 1689. 


Salisbury Use. 


James v. 16—20. James v. 13—18. | Deut. xxviii. }—9. 
Isa, vii. 1O—15. 
Acts iv. 31—35, 
Luke xi. 5—13. 
Luke i. 26—38. 


John xvii. 1—11. 


EPISTLE. 


Matt. vi. 25 to the 
end, 


GosPEL. Luke xi. 1—10. 


The religious Services of the Rogation Days are not limited to 
the walls of the Church. From very ancient days ‘‘ Perambula- 
tions” around the boundaries of the parish have been made in 
procession, and the Litany, or a portion of it, with the 103rd 
and 104th Psalm sung at various stations, marked by Crosses, 
or still remembered by the parishioners from generation to gene- 
ration, even when the crosses have ceased to mark the spots. It 
is not necessary to occupy space with the details of well-known 
usages connected with these perambulations, but it may be as well 
to set before the reader an extract from the Injunctions of Queen 
Elizabeth, issued in 1559, in which both the secular and the 
religious purpose of the procession is referred to. 

“«...For the retaining of the perambulation of the Circuits 
of Parishes, they shall once in the year at the time accustomed 
with the Curate and the substantial men of the Parish walk 
about the Parishes as they were accustomed, and at their return 
to the Church make their common prayers. 

“ Provided, that the Curate in their said common Perambula- 
tions, used heretofore in the days of Rogations, at certain con- 
venient places, shall admonish the people to give thanks to God, 
in the beholding of God’s benefits, for the increase and abun- 
dance of His fruits upon the face of the earth, with the saying of 
the 103rd Psalm: Benedic, anima mea, &c. At which time also 
the same minister shall inculcate these or such sentences, ‘ Cursed 
be he which translateth the bounds and dolles of his neighbour.’ 
Or such other order of prayers, as shall be hereafter appointed.” 

The “Exhortation” printed as a sequel to the Rogation-day 
Homily begins by saying that the principal object of the Pro- 
cession or Perambulation is that of asking God’s blessing upon 
the land and its fruits, and adds, “Yet have we occasion 
secondarily given us in our walks on these days to consider the 
old ancient bounds and limits belonging to our township,” &e. &c. 
From Bishops’ Articles of Visitation of later periods it appears 
that the ordinary practice was to use the Litany on each of these 
days, and a portion of the Homily. But it is clear that there 


down from heaven to give us a fruitful season: that both our hearts and 
mouths being continually filled with Thy goodness, we may evermore give 
thanks unto Thee in Thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen,” 

In the same volume there is another admirable Collect for the Ember 
Week in September, which would be a most suitable one to use for a Harvest 
Thanksgiving Celebration. 


THE SUNDAY AFTER ASCENSION DAY. 


Lord Jesus Christ to have ascended 
into the heavens; so we may also in 
heart and mind thither ascend, and 
with him continually dwell, who liveth 
and reigneth with thee and the Holy 
Ghost, one God, world without end. 
Amen. 


111 


ad ccelos ascendisse credimus, ipsi quo- 
que mente in celestibus habitemus. 
Per eundem Dominum nostrum. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Acts i. 1—11. Acts i. 1—11. Acts i, 1—11. Acts i. 1—12. 
GOSPEL. Mark xvi. 14-20. Mark xvi. 14—20. Mark xvi. 14—20. Luke xxiv. 36—53. 


SUNDAY AFTER ASCENSION-DAY. 
The Collect. 


Pe XSI « 
Ps. xlvii. 5—-8. 


GOD the King of glory, who 
Phil. i, 9—11. hast exalted thine only Son 
1 ey, eee Jesus Christ with great triumph unto 


was never any settled rule, and that the practice varied accord- 
ing to the piety and liturgical feeling of the day or the parish. 

The Rogation Days and the religious observance of them in 
some such manner as that above indicated are referred to in the 
most ancient records of the Church of England. In the Laws of 
King Alfred and of Athelstan they are called gebeddegas or 
Prayer Days, and also gang degas ; the latter name, “ gang days,” 
being still used in some parts of the north of England. 


: HOLY THURSDAY. 


There is not any very early historical notice of Ascension Day, 
but St. Chrysostom has a homily on the day; St. Augustine 
mentions it in one of his Epistles, and also in a Sermon [261], 
in which he says, “ We celebrate this day the solemnity of the 
Ascension.” St. Gregory of Nyssa has also left a homily on the 
day. St. Augustine calls this one of the festivals which are sup- 
posed to have been instituted by the Apostles themselves [ Hp. 
liv. al. cxviii. ad Januar.], so that it must have been generally 
observed in his time: and Proclus, Archbishop of Constantinople, 
in the same age, speaks of it [Orat. iii.] as one of the days which 
the Lord has made, reverently considering that the great acts of 
our Lord so far consecrated the days on which they occurred 
that no further appointment was needed for their separation 
from common days. Its name has never varied, although popular 
appellations have, of course, been attached to it on account of 
some observances connected with the day. But even these have 
been very few, and are not worth notice, “Holy Thursday” 
being the only vernacular name that has been generally adopted. 

During the Paschal Quinquagesima no festivals have vigils or 
fasting eves except Ascension Day and Whitsunday, the whole 
period being regarded as one of spiritual joy in the Resurrection. 

The ritual provisions of the Prayer Book for this day show 
plainly that it is regarded in the system of our Church as one of 
the very highest class of solemn days set apart in honour of our 
Lord. The proper Lessons and Psalms at Mattins and Evyen- 
song, and the proper preface in the Communion Service place it 
on the same footing as Christmas Day, Easter, or Whitsunday ; 
and there is no day in the year which is so well illustrated by 
these as that of the Ascension. It could hardly have been other- 
wise, for the act which is commemorated on this day was one 
which crowned and consummated the work of the Redeemer’s 
Person, and opened the gate of everlasting life to those whom He 
had redeemed. 

The facts of the Ascension are commemorated in the Epistle 
and Gospel; types of it form the subjects of the first lessons at 


DOMINICA INFRA OCTAY. ASCENSIONIS. 


Antiph. ad Vesp. in die Ascens. 
REX Glorie, Domine virtutum, Salisbury Use. 
qui triumphator hodie super “® 4"*?™ 
omnes ccelos ascendisti, ne derelinquas 


Mattins and Evensong,—Moses in the mount of God for forty 
days receiving the law, and Elijah ascending to heaven in a 
whirlwind. But the fulness of the day’s meaning must be looked 
for in the Psalms, where, as so often, the interpretation of the 
Gospels was given by God beforehand to the Church. And in 
these the Church also celebrates the eternal Victory of the King 
of glory, who had been made a little lower than the angels in the 
humiliation of His earthly life, that He might be crowned with 
the glory and worship of all created things, when seated, still in 
His human nature, on the throne of Heaven. ‘The festival con- 
cludes the yearly commemoration of our Blessed Lord’s life and 
work: which thus leads upward from the cradle at Bethlehem, 
exhibiting before God and man the various stages of His redeem- 
ing work, and following Him step by step until we stand with 
the disciples gazing up after Him as He goes within the ever- 
lasting doors. And thus this half-yearly cycle of days presents 
the holy Jesus to our devotions as perfect Man and perfect God, 
the perfection of His manhood confirmed in the sorrows of Good 
Friday, the perfection of His Divine Nature in the triumph of 
Easter and the Ascension. 


Introrr.—Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into 
heaven? Alleluia. So shall He come as ye have seen Him go 
into heaven, Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. And while they 
looked stedfastly toward heaven as He went up, behold two men 
stood by them in white apparel, which said. Glory be. 


Hyrmys. 


Evensong anp Marrins.—diterne Rea altissime. H.N. 31. 
66, H. A. M. 122. 

CoMPLINE.—Jesu, nostra Redemptio. 
125. 

Laups.—Tu, Christe, nostrum gaudium. 

These hymns are appointed to be sung daily up to Whit- 


sunday. 


H.N. 32. 67, H. A. M. 


SUNDAY AFTER ASCENSION. 


This day was anciently called by the significant name of  Domi- 
nica Expectationis.” Being the only Lord’s Day which intervened 
between the Ascension of our Lord and the Descent of the Holy 
Ghost, it represents that period during which the Apostles were 
obeying the command of their Master, when “He commanded 
them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for 
the promise of the Father.” [Acts i. 4.] 

The Collect for this day is an expansion of the ancient Anti- 


112 


Rom. xv. 13. 1 " . 
pom: xvi 18), thy kingdom in heaven; We beseech 
eae thee, leave us not comfortless; but 
8: = é 
phans.” send to us thine Holy Ghost to com- 


fort us, and exalt us unto the same 
place whither our Saviour Christ is 
gone before, who liveth and reigneth 
with thee and the Holy Ghost, one 
God, world without end. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 1 Pet. ivy. 7—11. 


GOSPEL. John xv. 26. xvi. 4. 


WHITSUNDAY. 
The Collect. 
OD, who as at this time didst 


John xiv. 26, 


Salisbury Use. 


1 Pet. iv. 7—11. 
John xv. 26. xvi. 4. 


WHITSUNDAY. 


nos orphanos, sed mitte promissum 
Patris in nos Spiritum veritatis, Alle- 
luia. 

[Omnipotens Deus Pater gloriz, qui Mozarabie 
Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum 7” 
suscitasti a mortuis, conlocans illum 
ad dexteram tuam super omnem prin- 
cipatum et potestatem, &c.] 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Pet. iv. 7—11. Acts xx. 16—36. 


John xv. 26. xvi. 4. John xvii. 1—18: 


IN DIE PENTECOSTES. 
Oratio. 
EUS, qui hodierna die corda fide- Salisbury Use. 


Acts ii. 1—4, 6, . , 5 hte . ‘ Greg. die Sancto 
pee ps re teach the hearts of thy faithful lium Sancti Spiritus illustratione ~ pentecostes. 
Eph. i. 19-19. people by the sending to them the | docuisti; da nobis in eodem Spiritu, 
Philii1,2, light of thy Holy Spirit; Grant us | recta sapere, et de ejus semper conso- 
by the same Spirit to have a right | latione gaudere. Per Dominum nos- 
judgment in all things, and evermore | trum. In unitate ejusdem. 
to rejoice in his holy comfort ; through 
the merits of Christ Jesus our Saviour, 
who liveth and reigneth with thee, in 
the unity of the same Spirit, one God, 
world without end. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Acts ii, 1—11. Acts x. 34—47. Acts x. 34—47. Acts ii. 1—11. 
GOSPEL. John xiv. 15—31. John xiv. 15—31. John xiv. 23—31. John vii. 37—53. 


viii. 12. 


phon to the Magnificat on Ascension Day; and has a special 
interest in the English Church from the fact recorded in the 
account of the Venerable Bede’s death, that it was among the 
last of the words which he uttered. He died on the Wednesday 
evening about the time of the first Vespers of the Festival, and 
the spirit in which he sang the Antiphon is well expressed by the 
aspiration that concludes the modern Collect. 

The day itself, within the octave of the Ascension, may be pro- 
perly considered as a continuation of that festival, but com- 
memorating especially the session of our Lord at the right hand 
of the Father. 


Inrroit.—Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto 
Thee. Alleluia. My heart hath talked of Thee, Seek ye My face. 
Thy face will I seek. O hide not Thou Thy face from me. Alle- 


luia. Alleluia. Ps. The Lord is my light and my salvation, 
whom then shall J fear? Glory be. 
WHITSUNDAY. 


This great festival commemorates the descent of the Holy 
Ghost upon the Apostles to abide in the Church for ever, accord- 
ing to the promise of Christ. It has been annually observed 
from the very beginning, having at first been engrafted by the 
Jewish Christians on to the festival of Pentecost, but being men- 
tioned as a separate feast of the Church by the earliest writers 
among the Gentile Christians, as Irenwus [Fragm. de Pasch. 


in Justin Mart.] and Tertullian [de Coron. 3, de Idol. 14, de 
Bapt. 19, de Orat. 23], the latter of whom leaves it on record in 
several places that this was one of the principal times for Bap- 
tism in the early Church. Origen also names it in his work 
against Celsus. [viii.] 

The original name of the festival was derived from that given 
by Greek writers in the Septuagint and in the New Testament 
to the Jewish feast, and has precisely the same meaning as 
Quinquagesima, Pentecost being the fiftieth day from the 
morrow of the Passover Sabbath. The English name is sup- 
posed by many to be properly Whitsun Day, not Whit Sunday, 
and to be identical with the name Pentecost through the German 
Pfingsten. Most old writers on the festivals of the English 
Church have, however, considered that the original name was 
White Sunday or Wit Sunday ; in the one case deriving it from 
the chrisoms of the newly baptized; and in the other, from the 
outpouring of wisdom (or, in old English, “ wit”) upon the Church 
by the Holy Ghost on this day. In the Table of Proper Psalms 
it is spelt Whit Sunday, but nowhere else in the Prayer Book. 

The original feast of Pentecost was instituted by God (as it is 
supposed) as a memorial of the day on which He gave the law to 
Moses, and declared the Israelites “a peculiar treasure, a king- 
dom of priests, and an holy nation.” [Exod. xix. 5,6.] But the 
prominent character’ of the day was that of a solemn harvest 
festival. On the morrow of the Passover Sabbath, fifty days 
before, the first cut sheaf of corn was offered to God, waved 


MONDAY AND TUESDAY IN WHITSUN WEEK. 


MONDAY IN WHITSUN WEEK. 
The Collect. 
OD, who as at this time didst 
teach the hearts of thy faithful 
people, by the sending to them the 
light of thy Holy Spirit; Grant us 
by the same Spirit to have a right 
judgment in all things, and evermore 
to rejoice in his holy comfort; through 
the merits of Christ Jesus our Saviour, 
who liveth and reigneth with thee, in 
the unity of the same Spirit, one God, 
world without end. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Acts x. 34—48. 


GosPEL. John iii. 16—21. 


TUESDAY IN WHITSUN WEEK. 
The Collect. 
OD, who as at this time didst 
teach the hearts of thy faithful 
people, by the sending to them the 


Salisbury Use. 
Acts x. 34—47. 
John iii. 16—21. 


113 


FERIA II., POST PENTECOSTES. Salisbury Use. 

[ OD, that taujtist the hertis of Ovi century 
thi feithful seruantis bi the ‘i 

litnynge of the hooli goost: graunte 

us to sauore rijtful thingis in the same 

goost, and to be ioiful euermore of his 

counfort. Bi crist our lorde. So be 

it.] 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Acts x. 42—48. 


Eph. v. 8—19. 


John iii. 16—21. Matt. xviii. 10—20. 


FERIA III, POST PENTECOSTES. Salisbury Use. 


before the altar, with supplication for a blessing on the harvest 
then commenced. On the day of Pentecost two loaves of the 
first bread made from the new corn were offered (with appointed 
burnt-offerings), in thanksgiving for the harvest now ended. 
Each of these objects of the festival has a significant typical 
application. It was on this day that the Holy Ghost descended 
to sanctify a new Israel, that they too might be “a chosen 
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people ” 
{1 Pet. ii. 9]; and this separation of a new Israel from the world 
began to be made when three thousand were added to the Church 
by Baptism on the day of Pentecost. On this day also the 
“Corn of Wheat ” (which had fallen into the ground and died on 
the day of the Passover, and had sprung up a new and perpetual 
sacrifice to God on Easter Day) sent forth the Holy Spirit to 
make those five thousand the “One Bread” [1 Cor. x. 17] of 
the Lord’s mystical Body, a first-fruits offering to God of the 
Church which had been purchased with His Blood. 

The Collect for Whitsunday was formerly used every day at 
Lauds, and was translated into English at least a century and a 
half before the Prayer Book was set forth. It appears in all the 
English Prymers which preceded the Prayer Book, and the 
ancient version given on Whitsun Monday seems to have fur- 
nished some phrases to the translation now in use on this day. 

Whitsun week is one of the canonical Ember seasons, the 
summer Ordinations taking place on Trinity Sunday. 

On Whitsunday (June 9th), in the year of our Lord 1549, 
the Book of Common Prayer in English was first used instead of 
the Latin offices. That day was doubtless chosen (for copies 
were printed and ready some time before) as a devout acknow- 
ledgment that the Holy Ghost was with the Church of England 
in the important step then taken. May He ever preserve these 
devotional offices from the attacks of enmity or unwisdom, and 
continue them in that line of Catholic unity wherein He has 
guided the Church hitherto to keep them. 


Intrrort.—The Spirit of the Lord filleth the world. Alleluia. 
And that which containeth all things hath knowledge of the 
voice. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. Let God arise, and 
let His enemies be scattered; let them also that hate Him flee 
before Him. Glory be. 


Hymns. 

EVENSONG AND Martins.—Jam Christus astra ascenderat. 
H. N. 83. 69, H. A. M. 129. 

Lavps.—Impleta gaudent viscera. 

TrERCE.— Veni, Creator Spiritus. 

Evensone.— Beata vobis gaudia. 

ComPLine.—Alma chorus Domini. 

This last hymn is only to be sung on Whitsunday, and the 
two following days: the rest are sung daily through the week. 


H. A. M. 211. 
H. N. 83. 70. 


WHITSUN MONDAY. 


In the Epistle and Gospel for this day we find a trace of the 
primitive custom of Baptism at Whitsuntide; the one narrating 
the baptism of Cornelius and his household, and the other refer- 
ring to that enlightenment by Christ from which the sacrament of 
Baptism took one of its most primitive names, that of “ Tlumina- 
tion.” This still serves to point out a purpose in the extension 
of the Festival. For the Holy Ghost came into the Church not 
only to inspire the Apostles for their work, which was to be but 
for a generation, but also to abide with the Church in a perpetual 
Ministry derived from those Apostles, and a continual ministra- 
tion of the gift of grace by their means. Hence the days follow- 
ing Whitsunday are a memorial of that abiding of the Comforter 
which our Lord promised, that He might be “the Giver of Life” 
to the world, in the bestowal of union with Christ by Baptism, 
Confirmation, and the Holy Communion. 


Introit.—He fed them also with the finest wheat flour. Alle- 
luia. And with honey out of the stony rock should I have satis- 
fied thee. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. Sing we merrily 
unto God our strength: make a cheerful noise unto the God of 
Jacob. Glory be. 


WHITSUN TUESDAY. 


On the Tuesday of Whitsun Week there is a reference to 
another work of the Holy Ghost, that of Confirmation, the Epistle 
narrating the confirmation of the first Samaritan Christians by 
the Apostles Peter and John, after they had been converted and 
baptized by the Deacon Philip. In primitive times Confirmation 

Q 


114 


hight of thy Holy Spirit; Grant us 
by the same Spirit to have a right 
judgment in all things, and evermore 
to rejoice in his holy comfort; through 
the merits of Christ Jesus our Saviour, 
who liveth and reigneth with thee, in 
the unity of the same Spirit, one God, 
world without end. Amen. 


TRINITY SUNDAY. 


Modern English. 


Salisbury Use. 


Eastern. 


Modern Roman. 
Acts viii. 14—17. Rom. i. 7. 13—17. 


John x. 1—10. Matt. iv. 28. v.13. 


EPISTLE. Acts viii, 1417. Acts viii. 14—17. 
GOSPEL. John x. 1—10. John x. J—10. 
TRINITY SUNDAY. 
The Collect. 
Hs ii. 16,17. LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
2 Gor. xiii 14. who hast given unto us thy ser- 
1 John v. 7. 


Isa. vi. 3. vants grace by the confession of a true 


IN DIE SANCT# TRINITATIS. 
Oratio. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, Salisbury Use. 
. meAe . os Greg. Dom. Oct. 
qui dedisti famulis tuis, in con- “Pentecost. 
fessione vere fidei zterne Trinitatis 


was administered immediately after Baptism, if a Bishop was 
present, as was mostly the case, and at Whitsuntide it would no 
doubt be invariably given to the newly baptized at once, from the 
appropriateness of the season, and the necessary presence of the 
Bishops in their chief Churches for the Ordinations of the follow- 
ing Saturday or Sunday. 

It was doubtless with reference to the preparation of the Can- 
didates for Ordination that the Gospel was selected; pointing 
out, as it does, that there is only one lawful way of entering into 
the Ministry of Christ ; and that those are no true shepherds who 
do not enter in by the Door, the Chief Shepherd Himself, whose 
authority on earth is delegated to the Bishops of His Church. 
The second lesson at Evensong, 1 John iv. 1—13, points in the 
same direction. 

The Whitsun Ember days are of very ancient institution, pro- 
bably Primitive. They are alluded to by St. Athanasius as the 
fasts of the week following Pentecost [De fuga sua], and it is 
plain that no time of the year would be so naturally chosen for 
continuing the gift of the Spirit by Ordination, as that which 
follows immediately upon the day when the Holy Ghost first 
came to inhabit the mystical Body of Christ, for the purpose of 
“making able” the Ministers of His Gospel-truth and Sacraments. 


Inrroir.—Receive ye your joy with glory. Alleluia. Giving 
thanks unto God. Alleluia. Who hath called you into His 
heavenly Kingdom. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. Hear My 
law, O My people. Incline your ear to the words of My mouth. 
Glory be. 


TRINITY SUNDAY. 


The Octave of Pentecost has been observed in honour of the 
Blessed Trinity from a very early age of the Church. In the 
Lectionary of St. Jerome the same Hpistle and Gospel are ap- 
pointed which have always been used in the Church of England ; 
and the Collect is from the Sacramentary of St. Gregory. But 
the name “ Trinity Sunday” was not general until a later period, 
though it has been used in the English Breviary and Missal since 
the time of St. Osmund, and may have been adopted by him 
from still earlier offices of the Church. In the Eastern Church 
this day is the Festival of all holy Martyrs; a festival which 
appears to have been observed at this time in the East, even in 
the days of St. Chrysostom and the Emperor Leo, who have left 
respectively a Homily and an Oration upon it. It appears to 
have been regarded as a separate Festival in the western world 


only by the Church of England, and those Churches of Germany 
which owe their origin to the English St. Boniface, or Wilfred '. 
Both in the ancient English and in the ancient German Office 
books, all the Sundays afterwards until Advent are named after 
Trinity ; whereas, in all offices of the Roman type they are named 
after Pentecost. It seems probable that this distinctive ritual 
mark is arelic of the independent origin of the Church of England, 
similar to those peculiarities which were noticed by St. Augustine, 
and which were attributed by the ancient British bishops to some 
connexion with St. John. In this case it is, at least, significant 
that it was St. John through whom the doctrine of the Holy 
Trinity was most clearly revealed ; and also that the early Church 
of England appears never to have been infested by the heresies on 
this subject which troubled other portions of the Christian 
world. 

The general observance of the day as a separate Festival in 
honour of the Blessed Trinity was first enjoined by a Synod of 
Arles, in 4.D. 1260. In Micrologus it is stated [cap. lx.], that 
the feast was then observed in some parts on the Octave of Pente- 
cost, and in others on the Sunday next before Advent; but that 
the Roman Church had no such custom, for it honoured the 
Blessed Trinity in its daily worship by Doxologies and the Memo- 
ria, our present Collect?. it seems to have become generally 
observed by the Roman as well as other Churches at the end of 
the fourteenth century ; but the Sundays after it are still named 
from Pentecost in all the Catholic Churches of the West, except 
those of England and Germany. 

The significance of the festival, as the end of the cycle of days 
by which our Blessed Lord and His work are commemorated, is 
very great. The beginning of His acts was associated with a 
revelation of the Three Persons of the Trinity, and His last eom- 
mand to His Apostles was a commission to make disciples of all 
nations by baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The perfect revelation of the Holy 
Three in One may also be considered to have been made on the 


1 Gervase of Canterbury asserts that the Feast of Trinity was instituted 
by St. Thomas of Canterbury soon after his consecration to that see in 
A.D. 1162, but there cau be little doubt it was in some English Office books 
before that date. 

2 The Sunday Missa Votiva of Salisbury Use was almost identical with 
the Mass for Trinity Sunday, but the Epistle was Rom. xi. 33—36, and 
2 Cor. xiii. 14; the Gospel being John xv. 26—xvi. 6. 

The Trinity Collect was said as a daily memorial (as well as that of Whit- 
sunday), in the Church of England, until 1549. The alteration of the latter 
part was made by Bishop Cosin in 1661, for what reason is not apparent. 


THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


Rev iv.8. faith to acknowledge the glory of the 
z Pet uit. w7. eternal Trinity, and in the power of 


the Divine Majesty to worship the 
Unity ; We beseech thee that thou 
wouldest keep us stedfast in this faith, 
and evermore defend us from all ad- 
versities, who livest and reignest, one 
God, world without end. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Rey. iv. 1—11. 


GOSPEL. John iii. 1—15. 


THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 
GOD, the strength of all them 
that put their trust in thee, mer- 
cifully accept our prayers; and because 


Ps, ix, 10,. xix. 
14 


Matt. XxXvi. 41. 
John xv. 5. 
Phil. iv. 13. 


day of Pentecost, when to the work expressed by our Lord in the 
words, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work,” was added 
that further operation of the Holy Ghost which was previously 
unknown even to holy men, but has ever since been familiar to 
the whole world. On Whitsunday, therefore, we see the crown- 
ing point of the work of redemption; and the feast of Trinity, 
on the Octave of Pentecost, commemorates the consummation of 
God’s saving work, and the perfect revelation to the Church of 
the Three Persons in One God, as the sole objects of adoration. 
The love of each Person had been commemorated in the separate 
Festivals which memorialize before God and man the Incarnation, 
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord, and the sending 
forth by the Father and the Son of the Blessed Spirit on Whit- 
sunday. In the festival of Trinity all these solemn subjects of 
belief are gathered into one act of worship, as the Church Mili- 
tant looks upward through the door that is opened in Heaven, 
and bows down in adoration with the Church Triumphant, saying, 
“Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, Which was, and is, and 
is to come Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, 
and honour, and power; for Thou hast created all things, and for 
Thy pleasure they are and were created.” 


DEelke tele 


Inrrorr.—Blessed be the holy Trinity, and the indivisible 
Unity. We will give thanks unto Him, because He hath showed 
His mercy towards us. Ps. Let us bless the Father, and the Son, 
with the Holy Ghost. 


HYMNS. 
HVENSONG abt Adesto, Sancta Trinitas. H.N. 35.73. 
Martins, 
CoMPLINE. Salvator mundi, Domine. H. A. M. 49. 
Laups. O Pater Sancte. 


HYMNS FOR TRINITY SEASON. 


From the morrow of Trinity Sunday until the Eve of Advent, 
the ordinary hymns for the week are as follows :— 


Salisbury Use. 


Rev. iv. 1—10. 
John iii. 1—15. 


gloriam agnoscere, et in potentia Ma- 
jestatis adorare Unitatem, quaesumus, 
ut ejusdem fidei firmitate ab omnibus 
semper muniemur adversis. Qui vivis 
et regnas Deus. Per. 


UERLASTYNGE almy3ti god xrvtn century 
[ { that jave us thi seruantis in a 
knowlechynge of verrei feith to knowe 
the glorie of the endeles trinite, and 
in the mijt of mageste to worchipe 
thee in oonhede: we bisechen that bi 
the sadness of the same feith we be 
kept and defendid euermore fro alle 
aduersitiees. Bi crist.] 


“ sad,” from 
settan, to set. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Rom. xi. 33—36. Efebexig oo xilel. 


Matt. xxviii. 18—20. Matt. x. 32, 33. 37, 38. 


xix. 27—30. 


DOMINICA I., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 
EUS in te sperantium fortitudo Salisbury Use. 
adesto propitius invocationibus (8 po tot 


post Pentecos- 
. . . . . a fs 
nostris: et quia sine te nihil potest “" 


Sunpays. Martins. Primo dierum omnium. H.N. 3. 5, 
H. A. M. 21. 
Lavups. Aterne rerwm Conditor. 
Compiine. Salvator mundi, Domine. H. A. M. 
49, C. H. 24. 
Evrnsone. Lucis Creator Optime. A.N. 8.11, 
H. A. M. 24. 
Monpays. Marzins. Somno refectis artubus. H. N. 2. 4. 
Laups. Splendor Paterne gloria. H. N. 54.17, 


HAT Mais: 
Evznsona. Immense celi Conditor. H.N. 55. 18. 
CompuLine. Ze lucis ante terminum. H.N. 9. 16, 
H. A. M. 13. 
This last hymn is said on all Ferial Days between Trinity and 
Advent. “ 
Turspays. Martins. Consors Paterni luminis. 
Laups. Ales diet nuntius. H. N. 56.19. 
Evensone. Telluris imgens Conditor. 
57. 20. 

Wepnespars. Martins. Rerum Creator optime. 
Laups. Now et tenebre et nubila. H.N. 58. 21. 
Evensone. Celi Deus Sanctissime. H. N. 59. 22. 
Martins. Woz atra rerum contegit. 
Laups. Lue ecce surgit aurea. H.N. 60. 28. 
Evensona. Magne Deus potentie. H. N. 61. 24. 
Martins. Zw Trinitatis Unitas. 
Laups. Aterna Celi gloria. H.N. 62. 25. 
Evensone. Plasmator hominis Deus. 
Martins. Summe Deus clementie. 
Laups. Aurora jam spargit polum. H. N. 64. 27. 
Evensone. O Lux beata Trinitas. H.N.1.1. 


H. N. 


THURSDAYS. 


FRIDAYS. 


SATURDAYS. 


THE FIRST SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The Sundays and other Festivals from Advent to Trinity form 
one system of dogmatic illustrations of Christianity : Prayer and 


Q 2 


116 


Heb. iv. 16, xii, through the weakness of our mortal 
20, 21, : : 

nature we can do no good thing with- 
out thee, grant us the help of thy 
grace, that in keeping of thy com- 
mandments we may please thee, both 
in willand deed; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. — 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 1 John iy. 7—21. 


GOSPEL. Luke xvi. 19—81. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Cotlect. 

LORD, who never failest to help 

and govern them whom thou 


Ps, Ixxiii. 1. 23— 
26. 


John xvii. 11. 
Gen. xlviii. 15, 16. 


Salisbury Use. 


1 John iv. 7—21. 
Luke xvi. 19—81. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


mortalis infirmitas, preesta auxilium Gelas. Dom. vi. 
gratie tue; ut in exequendis mandatis Packeon 
tuis, et voluntate tibi et actione place- 

amus. Per Dominum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 John iii. 183—18. Rom. ii. 10—16. 


Luke xiv. 16—24. Matt. iv. 18—23. 


DOMINICA II., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 
ANCTI nominis tui, Domine, ti- Salisbury Use. 


. £ Greg. Hebd. iii. 
morem pariter et amorem fac nos post Pent. 


Matt. x. 29,30. dost bring up in thy stedfast fear and | habere perpetuum; quia nunquam tua Gelas. Dom. post 
eut, x. 12, . ; 3 ote 2 pert Asc, Dom. 
Ps. oxi. 9, love ; Keep us, we beseech thee, under | gubernatione destituis, quos in solidi- 
the protection of thy good providence, | tate tux dilectionis instituis. Per 
and make us to have a perpetual fear | Dominum. 
and love of thy holy Name; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. | 
EPISTLE. 1 John iii. 13—24. 1 John iii. 183—18. 1 Pet. v. 6—11. Rom. v. 1—10. 
GOSPEL. Luke xiv. 16—24. Luke xiv. 16—24. Luke xv. 1—10. Matt. vi. 22—34. 
— 


the words of Holy Scripture all combining to present the memo- 
rial of primary truths before God in acts of worship, and before 
man as words of instruction. The Sundays after Trinity may be 
regarded as a system illustrating the practical life of Christianity, 
founded on the truths previously represented, and guided by the 
example of our Blessed Lord. There is a Rubric given on this 
Sunday in the Salisbury Missal: “Memoria de Trinitate fiat 
omnibus dominicis usque ad adventum Domini.” 

The love of God and the love of man are,—one may almost 
say, of course,—the first subject selected for the Eucharistic 
Scriptures in this system, as shown in St. John’s wonderful 
definition of love, and in the historical parable of the rich man 
and Lazarus. In the Epistle St. John shows that God’s own 
love for mankind is the source and spring of all love towards 
Him, and that all true love towards Him is shown by the evidence 
of charity. The Gospel, independently of the revelation made in it 
concerning the state of the departed, places in the most awful light 
the sin of being without Christian love; and the utter incom- 
patibility of such a condition with a life that will gain the award 
of future happiness. In teaching this truth our Blessed Lord 
also revealed to us the intermediate state. Although the Last 
Judgment was very distant when He told the Jews this history 
of two men who had, perhaps, been known to them, yet He put 
it beyond doubt that the souls which had departed from their 
bodies were as living and conscious as they had ever been, and 
that their condition was already that of those upon whom a pre- 
liminary judgment had been passed; an award of happiness to 
the one, of torment to the other. 


IntRoIt.—My trust is in Thy mercy, and my heart is joyful 
in Thy salvation. I will sing of the Lord, because He hath 
dealt so lovingly with me. Ps. How long wilt Thou forget me, 
O Lord, for ever? How long wilt Thou hide Thy face from me ? 
Glory be. 


THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The present beautiful version of the ancient Collect for this 
day was substituted for the literal translation which had previ- 
ously been used, in 1661. Cosin added “O Heavenly Father ” at 
the end of the old Collect, as if attempting to remedy its abrupt- 
ness ; but the subsequent remoulding of the whole into its present 
form was a happy improvement, giving us one of the finest of our 
English Collects. It will be observed that its tone is in close 
agreement with that of the InrRort. 

The subject of Active Love is again taken up on this Sunday, 
the Epistle coming from a preceding chapter of St. John to that 
used on the previous Sunday, and the Gospel from an earlier 
chapter of St. Luke. 


IntTRoIT.—The Lord was my upholder. He brought me forth 
also into a place of liberty; He brought me forth even because 
He had a favour unto me. Ps. I will love Thee, O Lord my 
Strength; the Lord is my strong rock and my defence, and my 
Saviour. Glory be. 


THE THIRD AND FOURTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 


Ps. xxx. 10. + 
Rom. vii. 26. LORD, we beseech thee merci- 
fore fully to hear us; and grant that 
1 Pet. y. 10, 11. 


we, to whom thou hast given an hearty 
desire to pray, may by thy mighty aid 
be defended and comforted in all dan- 
gers and adversities; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 1 Pet. v. 5—11. 


GosPEL. Luke xy. 1—10. 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 

GOD, the protector of all that 

trust in thee, without whom 
nothing is strong, nothing is holy; 
Increase and multiply upon us thy 
mercy ; that, thou being our ruler and 
guide, we may so pass through things 
temporal, that we finally lose not the 
things eternal: Grant this, O heavenly 
Father, for Jesus Christ’s sake our 
Lord. Amen. 


Ps, xxxvii. 39, 40. 

Isa. xl. 29. 31. 

John xy. 4, 5; 

Jude 2. 

Ps. xlviii. 14. 

Heb. xi. 8—10. 
24—26. 

Ps, Ixxiii. 24, 


Salisbury Use. 


1 Pet. v. 5—11. 
Luke xv. 1—10. 


117 


DOMINICA III., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 


EPRECATIONEM nostram Salisbury Use. 
a gra 


quesumus, Domine, benignus 
exaudi; et quibus supplicandi prestas 
affectum, tribue defensionis auxilium. 


Per. 


Modern Roman. astern. 


Rom. viii. 18—23. Rom. vi. 18—23. 


Luke vy. 1—11. Matt. viii. 5—13. 


DOMINICA IYV., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 
ROTECTOR in te sperantium satisbury Use. 
Deus, sine quo nihil est validum, erat uF 
nihil sanctum; multiplica super nos 
misericordiam tuam, ut te Rectore, te 
Duce, sic transeamus per bona tempo- 
ralia, ut non amittamus eterna. Per 
Dominun. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Rom. viii. 18—23. Rom. viii. 18—23. 1 Pet. iii. 8—15. Rom. x. 1—10. 
GosPeEt. Luke vi. 36—42. Luke vi. 36—42. Matt. v. 20—24. Matt. viii. 28—34, 


THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The Christian virtue of Humility is set forth in the Epistle for 
this Sunday, in the words of St. Peter; and illustrated in the 
Gospel by the example of our Blessed Lord in receiving sinners 
and eating with them. The Collect, however, seems to take its 
tone from the latter portion of the Epistle, which speaks of the 
afflictions and sufferings to which the early Christians were sub- 
jected. The Epistle and the Collect are, in fact, much more 
frequently associated together in tone and language, than the 
Collect and the Gospel; indicating a probability that the Gospels 
were not read in the Communion Service until a later period than 
that in which the Epistles came to be used. 


InrRoIT.—Turn Thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for 
I am desolate and in misery. Look upon my adversity and 
misery ; and forgive me all my sin, O my God. Ps. Unto Thee, 
O Lord, will I lift up my soul; my God, I have put my trust in 
Thee ; O let me not be confounded. Glory be. 


THE FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


In the Gospel for this day, Mercy, another of the Christian 
virtues, is set forth in the words of our Lord, beginning, “ Be ye 
therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful,” enforced by 
the proverbs of the blind leading the blind, the disciple not being 


above his Master, and of the mote and the beam. The Collect 
also refers to the mercy of our heavenly Father, and seems to 
have been suggested by the Gospel. But, as on the preceding 
Sunday, the Epistle seems to have been selected with reference 
to a time when the Church was passing through some great 
tribulation, and when Christians needed frequently to be reminded 
that they had here no continuing city, but must look beyond 
the sufferings of this present time to the glory hereafter to be 
revealed. 

It is possible that the Gospel may have been selected under the 
influence of similar circumstances, an age of martyrdoms suggest- 
ing to those who had so clear a vision of Christ’s example the 
duty of mercy and love towards their persecutors. For them- 
selves they could only look to that future bliss which was to 
outweigh the present suffering : for the Church of succeeding days 
they could leave such a legacy as St. Stephen did, when he 
prayed with his dying lips, “ Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.” 
The Inrrorr for the day seems equally to reflect an age of per- 
secution. 


Inrrorr.—The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom 
then shall I fear: the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom 
then shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even mine enemies, 
and my foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled 
and fell, Ps. Though an host of men were laid against me, yet 
shall not my heart be afraid. Glory be. 


118 
THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 
Cees RANT, O Lord, we beseech thee, 


Luke i. 18.74, 75. that the course of this world 
Isa. xxxii. 17, 18. 


may be so peaceably ordered by thy 


THE FIFTH AND SIXTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


DOMINICA V., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 
A nobis quesumus, Domine, ut et Salisbury Use. 
mundi cursus pacifice nobis tuo OS Pent. 
ordine dirigatur et Ecclesia tua tran- pt NE ETa, 


governance, that thy Church may joy- | quilla devotione letetur. Per Do- 
fully serve thee in all godly quietness ; | minum. . 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. astern. 
EPISTLE. 1 Pet. iii. 8—15. 1 Pet. iii. 8—15. Rom. vi. 3—11. Rom. xii. 6—14. 
GOSPEL. Luke v. 1—11. Luke vy. 1—11. Mark viii. 1—9. Matt. ix. 1—8. 
ne ee 


THE SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 

GOD, who hast prepared for 

them that love thee such good 


Psy xxxi. 19; 
1 Cor, ii. 9. 

2 Thess. ili. 3. 
Matt. xxii. 37, 


2 Pet. i. 3. ine. ? et 
q Rettad things as pass man’s understanding ; 
Pour into our hearts such love toward 
thee, that we, loving thee above all 
things, may obtain thy promises, which 
exceed all that we can desire; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
aa 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. Rom. vi. 3—11. 


GOSPEL. Matt. v. 20—26. 


THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The ancient Leonine Collect for this day seems to have been 
suggested, says Mr. Bright, like several of the same age, by the 
disasters of the dying Western Empire!. It has, however, a plain 
connexion with the Gospel, which was probably selected at an 
earlier date. Like others of our Lord’s Miracles, this one was a 
parable as well, in which He was teaching the Apostles principles 
respecting their future work. The sea is the world, the net is 
the Church, the Apostles are fishers of men, Christ is He Who in 
the spiritual as in the actual world bids them let down the net, 
and also gathers into it the great multitude of fishes. Very 
significant is it, then, that with this parabolic miracle in the Gos- 
pel, the Collect should pray Him Whose Presence was the wealth 
and the safety of the fishermen, that He will so order the waves 
of this troublesome world that the Ark of the Church may ever 
ride over them in peace, and serve. Him by gathering in souls 
into her nets with all godly quietness through the blessing of the 
Saviour’s Presence. The Epistle is in close agreement with this 
tone,—*‘ The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and His 
ears are open unto their prayers... . Who is he that will harm 
you if ye be followers of that which is good?” Like those of the 
preceding Sundays, it reflects a time of persecution, such as was 
passing over the Church when St. Peter wrote; but it also 
breathes the strong faith of him who had said, “Lord, if it be 
Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water,” and whose experi- 
ence had taught him that if Jesus be in the ship, no waves or 
storms can prevail to overwhelm it. 


* Ancient Collects, p. 208. 


Salisbury Use. 
Rom. vi. 3—11. 
Matt. v. 20—24. 


DOMINICA VI., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 
EUS qui diligentibus te bona in- Salisbury Use. 
5, ele Ratey Greg. Hebd. vii. 
visibilia preparasti ; infunde “post Pent. 
cordibus nostris tui amoris affectum ; &¢!4s. iii. 1. 
ut te in omnibus et super omnia dili- 
gentes, promissiones tuas, que omne 
desiderium 


superant, consequamur. 
Per Dominum. 
Modern Roman. astern. 


Rom. vi. 19—23. Rom. xv. 1—7. 


Matt. vii. 15—21. Matt. ix. 27—35. 


Inrroir.—Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I ery unto 
Thee: have mercy upon me, and hear me. Thou hast been my 
succour: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. 
Ps. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom then shall I 
fear P 


THE SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


This day sets forth the principle that the obligation of the old 
law is heightened under the New Dispensation: as also that the 
stricter obligation of the new law is accompanied by a propor- 
tionate increase in the grace by which the duty of obedience to 
God may be fulfilled. Christ’s law extends to the wilful con- 
ception of an act as well as to the act itself, and accounts 
the one a sin as well as the other. But Christ’s death and 
resurrection extend themselves to the sacrament of Baptism, 
making it the means of a death unto sin and a new birth unto 
righteousness: and thus endowing Christians with a power to 
fulfil the requirements of His law which otherwise they could not 
possess. The power of Christ against sin becomes thus not only 
a power external to the soul, but an inward capacity, the practical 
use or disuse of which is at the will of those to whom it is 
given. 


Ivrroit.—The Lord is my strength, and He is the whole- 
some defence of His Anointed. O save Thy people, and give Thy 
blessing unto Thine inheritance ; feed them, and set them up for 
ever. Ps. Unto Thee will I cry, O Lord, my strength; think 
no scorn of me, lest if Thou make as though Thou hearest not, 
I become like them that go down into the pit. Glory be. 


THE SEVENTH, EIGHTH, AND NINTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


THE SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 


2 Chron. xx. 6. i 
esate? ORD of all power and might, 
John xiii. i 
pom et te. who art the author and giver of 
Eph. v. 29. 


all good things; Graft in our hearts 
the love of thy Name, increase in us 
true religion, nourish us with all good- 
ness, and of thy great mercy keep us 
in the same; through Jesus Christ our 


2 Thess, iii, 3, 


119 


DOMINICA VII., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 
EUS virtutum, cujus est totum Salisbury Use. 
quod est optimum ; insere pec- niSdog es oa. 

toribus nostris amorem tui nominis, et las. iii. 2. 
presta in nobis religionis augmentum, 

ut que sunt bona nutrias, ac pietatis 

studio que sunt nutrita custodias. 


Per Dominum. 


Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Rom. vi. 19—23. Rom. vi. 19—23. Rom. viii. 12—17. 1 Cor. i. 1O—17. 


Mark viii. 1—9. 


GOSPEL. 


Mark viii. 1—9. 


Luke xvi. 1—9. Matt. xiv. 14—22. 


THE EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 


DOMINICA VIII., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 


RS GOD, whose never-failing provi- EUS, cujus providentia in sui Salisbury Use. 
xvi. 33. : ease : Greg. Hebd. ix. 
ey 1. dence ordereth all things both dispositione non fallitur, te swp- “post Pent! > 
PSS in heaven and earth; We humbly be- | plices exoramus, ut noxia cuncta sub- elas. iti. 3. 
seech thee to put away from us all | moveas, et omnia nobis profutura con- 
hurtful things, and to give us those | cedas. Per Dominum. 
things which be profitable for us; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. | 
| 
EPISTLE. Rom. viii. 12—17. Rom. viii. 12—17. 1 Cor. x. 6—18. 1 Cor. iii. 9—17. 
GOSPEL. Matt. vii. 15—21. Matt. vii. 15—21. Luke xix. 41—47. Matt. xiv. 22—34. 
THE NINTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. DOMINICA IX., POST TRINITATEM. 
The Collect. Oratio. 
eee RANT to us, Lord, we beseech ARGIRE nobis, queesumus, Do- S@sbuy Use 
ToRaeGe J “2 2 J Greg. Hebd. x. 


thee, the spirit to thik and do 
always such things as be nghtful ; 


Phil. ii. 11. 
Col. iv. 12. 
Heb. xiii. 20, 21. 


mine, semper spiritum cogitandi post Pent. 
Leo, in Murat. 


que recta sunt, propitius, et agendi; “j.’434. 


THE SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The Collect for this day has expressions in it which seem to 
connect its prayer with both the Hpistle and the Gospel. The 
petition, ‘‘ Graft in our hearts the love of Thy Name,” appears to 
be suggested by the idea of good and evil fruit contained in the 
former ; while “ Giver of all good things” and “nourish us with 
all goodness” plainly point out a devotional application of the 
narrative which the Gospel gives of the good Shepherd feeding 
His flock of four thousand with seven loaves and a few small 
fishes. The bondage of sin and the service of Christ are con- 
trasted in the Epistle, which seems to be the source of the 
beautiful expression, “ Whose service is perfect freedom,” in the 
second Collect at Mattins. The same idea may be also found in 
the Gospel, where Christ’s command that the people should sit 
down (though it seemed a mere arbitrary command) was followed 
by the reward of obedience, His bounty. 


Iyrroir.—O clap your hands together, all ye people; O sing 
unto God with the voice of melody. Ps. He shall subdue the 
people under us, and the nations under our feet. Glory be. 


THE EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
The Service of Christ is set forth in the Epistle of to-day as 


no slavery, but a sonship. ‘Those who do the works of a true 
obedience to Him do them by the help of the Spirit of God ; 
those who are led by the Spirit of God are adopted children of 
Him whose Only-begotten received the same Spirit without 
measure ; those who are adopted sons of God are heirs of His 
eternal gifts, joint-heirs with Christ Himself, reigning with Him 
as priests and kings for ever. Such is the course of the Apostle’s 
reasoning and revelation; and it is further illustrated by the 
words of our Lord in the Gospel, which, as the saying of the 
Eternal Word, living and powerful and sharper than any two-edged 
sword, discriminates between those who only say unto Him, “Lord, 
Lord,” by an outward profession, and those whose sonship is made 
evident by their fruits, the doing of the will of God. 


InrRoIT.—We wait for Thy loving-kindness, O God, in the 
midst of Thy temple. O God, according to Thy Name, so is Thy 
praise unto the world’s end; Thy right hand is full of righteous- 
ness. Ps. Great is the Lord, and highly to be praised; in the 
city of our God, even upon His holy hill. Glory be. 


THE NINTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The key-note of the office for this day is struck by our Lord’s 
words in the end of the Gospel, “ Make to yourselves friends of 


120 THE TENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 
that we, who cannot do any thing that | ut qui sine te esse non possumus, se- 
is good without thee, may by thee be | cundum te vivere valeamus. Per Do- 
enabled to live according to thy will; | minum. 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. 1 Cor. x. 1—13. 1 Cor. x. 1—13. 1 Cor. xii. 2—11. 1 Cor. iv. 9—16. 
GOSPEL. Luke xvi. 1—9. Luke xvi. 1—9. Luke xviii. 9—14. Matt. xvii. 14—23. 
THE TENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. DOMINICA X., POST TRINITATEM. 
The Collect. Oratio. 
Neh. i. 11, ET thy merciful ears, O Lord, be ATEANT aures  misericordiz Salisbury Use. 
1 Pet. iii. 12. Gelas. iii. 5. 


1 Chron. i. 11, 12. 
2 Chron, iv. 10, 


open to the prayers of thy hum- 


1Johnv.14. ble servants; and that they may ob- 
tain their petitions make them to ask 
such things as shall please thee; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. 1 Cor. xii. 1—11. 1 Cor. xii, 1—11. 
GOSPEL. Luke xix. 41—47. Luke xix. 41—47. 


tue, Domine, precibus supphi- too ee 
cantium ; et ut petentibus desiderata + 381. 
concedas, fac eos que tibi placita sunt 
postulare. Per Dominum nostrum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Cor. xv. 1—10. 1 Cor. ix. 2—12. 


Matt. xviii. 23-—25. 


Mark vii. 31—37. 


the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may re- 
ceive you into everlasting habitations.’ For by the unjust 
steward in the parable, of which these words give the application, 
is represented the Christian in his way through this life; and the 
children of Israel are represented to us in the Epistle on their 
way through the wilderness. By the temptations to which the 
latter were subjected are set forth as in a living parable the lot 
of the “children of light,” who also must pass through such 
temptations as are “common to man.” The worldly wisdom of 
the steward our Lord uses as an example of the manner in which 
the children of light are to use the temptations of life as a means 
by which they may make friends in heaven among the angels and 
saints. Out of the Mammon of unrighteousness,—the idols of 
this life which men are tempted to fall down and worship,—this 
profit may arise to him who is tempted, that his trial by their 
means is like our Lord’s temptation by Satan, a trial which will 
result in greater perfection and fitness for the further work set 
before him to do, if due use is made of that way of escape by 
which he may be able to bear it. Such temptations were offered 
to the first Israel, and the people gave way before them; they 
are also offered to God’s new Israel, and the words of our Lord 
are an exhortation to them, that as “children of light” they 
should be as wise for spiritual objects as “the children of this 
world” (recklessly irreligious, yet provident and politic, men) are 
for the objects which they set themselves to attain as the desire 
of their life. 


Introrr.— Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them 
that uphold my soul. He shall reward evil unto mine enemies : 
destroy Thou them in Thy truth. Ps. Save me, O God, for Thy 
Name’s sake ; and avenge me in Thy strength. Glory be. 


THE TENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


There is a touching connexion between the Epistle and Gospel 
of this day which seems as if it could hardly be accidental ; or, if 
it is, offers an illustration of the manner in which all Holy Scrip- 


ture gives evidence that it is drawn from one Fountain of truth. 
The Gospel shows our Blessed Lord weeping over Jerusalem, 
because she had failed to recognize the things that belonged to 
her peace. The Prince of Peace had come to her, offering the 
good gifts which are ever the fruits of His Presence, but her eyes 
had been blinded by her wilfulness, those gifts of peace had been 
rejected, and now they were hid from her. Our Lord’s last words 
of warning a few days afterwards were in the same strain, “ Walk 
while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you...... 
While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the 
children of light.” They were the last public words of the Light 
of the world before His Passion began; and when He had spoken 
them, He “departed, and did hide Himself from them” [John 
xii. 36]. With such an experience before the new Israel of God, 
the Apostle St. Paul exhorts them not to be ignorant of the 
spiritual gifts with which they have been blessed: those manifold 
operations of the Holy Ghost on the souls of men, by which they 
are fitted for the work of the ministry, or for that of ordinary 
Christian life. And the association of these two portions of Holy 
Scripture comes as a perennial warning to Churches in their cor- 
porate capacity, and to individual Christians, calling them to 
remember that as Jesus had cause to weep over the neglect of 
His gifts when offered to the Jews, so is such a neglect cause of 
sorrow even now in Heaven, and may be followed by the judg- 
ment which fell upon her of old who knew not the time of her 
visitation. The enemies of the Church are ever ready to dig 
their trenches and compass her around, and lay her even with 
the ground. Her true strength is, that she should ever remember 
and use her spiritual gifts, and know the value of Christ’s Pre- 
sence in the time when He visits her with His salvation. 


InrRort.—When I cried unto the Lord, He heard my voice in 
the battle that was against me: yea, even God that endureth for 
ever shall hear me and cast them down. O cast thy burden 
upon the Lord, and He shall nourish thee. Ps. Hear my prayer, 
O Lord, and hide not Thyself from my petition. Take heed unto 
me, and hear me. Glory be, 


THE ELEVENTH AND TWELFTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


THE ELEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 
GOD, who declarest thy almighty 
power most chiefly in shewing 


Wisd. xii, 16, 
Isa. xiii. 7. 9. 
John xvii. 1, 2, 


Eph. iv. 7. 
1Johni 3s, - Mercy and pity; Mercifully grant unto 
Matt. vi. 20. 


us such a measure of thy grace, that 
we, running the way of thy command- 
ments, may obtain thy gracious pro- 
mises, and be made partakers of thy 
heavenly treasure; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


121 
DOMINICA XI., POST TRINITATEM. 
Oratio. 
EUS, qui omnipotentiam tuam Salisbury Use. 


. . Greg. Hebd. xii. 
parcendo maxime et miserando “post Pent. 


manifestas ; multiplica super nos gra- Gelas. iii. 6. 
tiam tuam, ut ad tua promissa cur- 

rentes, ccelestium bonorum facias esse 
consortes. Per. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 1 Cor. xv. 1—11. 


GOSPEL. Luke xviii. 9-—14. 


THE TWELFTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 
LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
who art always more ready to 
hear than we to pray, and art wont to 
give more than either we desire, or 
deserve; Pour down upon us the 


Isa. lxv. 24, 

IP Samer ds. 

1 Kings iii. 11, 
12 


Luke xv. 20—22. 
Exod. xxiv. 6, 7. 
Ps. cxxx. 3, 4, 
Ixxxiv. 11. 
John xvi. 23. 


Salisbury Use. 
1 Cor. xv. 1—11. 
Luke xviii. 9—14. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


2 Cor. ili. 4—9. 1 Cor. xv. 1—11. 


Luke x. 283—37. Matt. xix. 16—26. 


DOMINICA XII., POST TRINITATEM., 


Oratio. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, Salisbury Use. 


° : : : Greg. Hebd, xiii. 
qui abundantia pietatis tux et “post Pent. 


merita supplicum excedis et vota; elas-iii 7. 
Leo, in Murat. 


effunde super nos misericordiam tuam; i418. 


ut dimittas que conscientia metuit, et 


THE ELEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The subject of this Sunday is the mercy and pity of Almighty 
God in bestowing the power of supernatural grace as a free and 
undeserved gift upon sinners. St. Paul’s “I am the least of the 
Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I 
persecuted the Church of God,” is a parallel to the Publican’s 
“God be merciful to me a sinner:” and our Lord’s declaration, 
that the Publican went down to his house justified because of his 
humility, is a parallel to the inspired words of the Apostle, “ By 
the grace of God I am whatIam..... yet not I, but the 
grace of God which was with me.” 
Augustine and others,” says Isaac Williams, “delight to dwell 
on these words of St. Paul, as so expressive of his sweet, trembling 
humility, fearing to contemplate himself, except in his sins and 
infirmities, and losing all sense of his greatness in God; fearful 
lest he should presume, and so lose by presumption all that crown 
of hope and joy which by humility he had gained.” This tone 
of the holy Apostle, and that of the Publican, is strikingly taken 
up by the Collect, which offers also a fine specimen of the fulness 
of devotion which may be gathered into this form of prayer. 
Short as it is, this Collect contains five several subjects, each of 
which is like the condensation of a volume of devotion. Those 
subjects are (1) the mercy of God; and let it be noted, how 
suggestive is the idea, that this mercy is the chief manifestation 
of Almighty Power ; (2) the grace of God, as His gift, according 
to the measure of our necessities ; (3) obedience, as accomplished 
only by the power of grace; (4) the fulfilment of the Divine 
promises; (5) the “great recompence of reward,” the “heavenly 
treasures,” of which Isaiah and St. Paul wrote, “Eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man 
the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him.” 
Such fulness of meaning approaches very nearly to that of inspira- 
tion, and may well lead us to the belief, that a special blessing 
from God rested upon the intellect and devotional instinct of the 
original writer. 


“ Ancient writers, as St. 


Inrrort.—It is God that maketh men to be of one mind in an 
house. He will give strength and power unto His people. Ps. 
Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered: let them also 
that hate Him flee before Him. . Glory be. 


THE TWELFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The contrast between the Old and New Dispensations is vividly 
set forth in the Gospel and Epistle for this Sunday. Glorious as 
the former was in its origin and in its continuation, it was a 
ministration of condemnation, with sacrifices of atonement, but 
with no sacraments of life. The Incarnation of the Son of God 
was the origin, and the Mystical Presence of Christ the con- 
tinuation of a spiritual life which the world had not before known 
since the Fall. The Church of God had grown deaf, and heard 
not the Voice from Heaven as that Voice had been heard of old ; 
there was an impediment in her speech, so that the word of God 
did not go forth from her lips in prophecy. The Son of God 
came down on earth, and touched her by making Himself one 
with her through His human nature; the sigh of His Passion was 
followed by the “ Ephphatha” of the Resurrection ; and as soon 
as His work was perfected, by the looking up to Heaven of His 
Ascension and Session at the right hand of God, the ears of the 
deaf were unstopped to receive the Inspiration of Pentecost, and 
the tongue of the dumb loosed, so that “their sound is gone out 
into all lands, and their words into the ends of the world.’ The 
same Touch of Christ and communication of grace in the commu- 
nication of that which forms part of His Person, is still the means 
by which the Church as a corporate body, and every individual 
member of it as a living member, is vivified and sustained; and 
He who gives spiritual ability to the ministers of the New Testa- 
ment, that their acts and words may be the means by which His 
Presence is continued in the Church, is making the ministration 
of righteousness, even in the by-places of the earth, to exceed in 
glory the ministration of Moses at the foot of Sinai. 

R 


122 


abundance of thy merey; forgiving 
us those things whereof our conscience 
is afraid, and giving us those good 
things which we are not worthy to 
ask, but through the merits and me- 
diation of Jesus Christ, thy Son, our 
Lord. Amen. ; 


THE THIRTEENTH AND FOURTEENTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


adjicias que oratio non presumit. 
Per Dominum. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPIsTLe. 2 Cor. iii. 4—9. .2 Cor. iii. 4—9. 
GOSPEL. Mark vii. 31—387. Mark vii. 31—37. 


THE THIRTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 


astern. 


Modern Roman. 


Gal. iii. 16—22. 1 Cor. xvi. 13—24. 


Luke xvii. 11—19. Matt. xxi. 33—42. 


DOMINICA XIII, POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 


Prov. tt LMIGHTY and merciful God, of MNIPOTENS et misericors Deus, salisbury Use. 
BENGE eaves 5 : “1+ _ Greg, super 
tea whose only gift it cometh that de cujus munere venit, ut tibi a popu. 
Heb. vil, 12. thy faithful people do unto thee true | fidelibus tuis digne et laudabiliter ser-  yost'Bent. 
Rev. ii, 10. iii, and laudable service; Grant, we be- | viatur, tribue nobis, quesumus, ut ad Jeo, ia Murat. 
seech thee, that we may so faithfully | promissiones tuas sine offensione cur- 
serve thee in this life, that we fail not | ramus. Per Dominum nostrum. 
finally to attain thy heavenly pro- 
mises; through the merits of Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Gal. ii. 16—22. Gal. iii. 16-22, Gal. v. 16—24. 2 Cor. i. 21—ii. 4. 
GOSPEL. Luke x. 23—37. Luke x. 283—37. Matt. vi. 24—33. Matt. xxii. 2—14. 


THE FOURTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 
LMIGHTY and everlasting God, 
give unto us the increase of 
faith, hope, and charity ; and, that we 


1 Cor. xiii. 13, 
Luke xvii. 5° 
Rom. xv. 13. 
2 Pet. i. 5—7, 


Intro1t.—Haste Thee, O God, to deliver me: make haste to 
help me, O Lord. Let them be ashamed that seek after my soul. 
Ps. Let them be turned backward and put to confusion, that 
wish me evil. Glory be. 


THE THIRTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The glory of the New Dispensation is again set forth in the 
Scriptures for this day, but the parable of the good Samaritan 
comes in with singular fitness, since the Thirteenth Sunday after 
Trinity almost always occurs during the harvest (at some time 
between August 17th and September 19th), when the Christian 
charities of social life are a subject that should mingle with our 
thanksgivings for God’s goodness in giving us the fruits of the 
season. The parable sets forth, in its mystical phase, the exceeding 
goodness and charity of the Lord Himself, Who became the good 
Samaritan to human nature at large when it had fallen into the 
hands of spiritual foes, had been stripped of the clothing of original 
righteousness, and left half dead in trespasses and sins. But out 
of the love which Christ bore springs our love both to Him and 
to our neighbour. We love Him because He first loved us; and 
our love for others is the necessary fruit of our love for Him. It 
is the application of this principle which forms the literal teaching 


DOMINICA XIV., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 


MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, S*!sbuy Use 


; 3 7 . . Greg. Hebd. xv. 
da nobis fidei, spei, et charitatis post Pent. 


+ Leo, in Murat. 
augmentum ; et ut mereamur assequl “j.’'374, 


of the parable; the extreme case given being given for that very 
reason to show how extensive is the bond of neighbourliness ; and 
how extensive, in consequence, the character of the duties which 
spring out of it. Ifa Jew and a Samaritan are set forth for our 
example as neighbours in the Christian sense, what Christians are 
not neighbours to each other ? 

The temporal gifts of God’s good Providence suggest, then, an 
awakening of the spirit of kindliness, that those who are among 
the less “ fortunate,” may be looked upon by those who are more 
so as sent to test their practical Christianity: and those who 
read the parable rightly, can hardly fail to find some occasion for 
an active obedience to our Lord’s precept, “Go and do thou 
likewise.” 

Introit.—Look upon Thy covenant. Forsake not for ever 
the souls of the poor. Arise, O Lord, and maintain Thine own. 
cause, and forget not the voice of them that seek Thee. Ps. O 
God, wherefore art Thou absent from us so long: why is Thy 
wrath so hot against the sheep of Thy pasture? Glory be. 


THE FOURTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The Gospel for this Sunday, like the last, is a memorial of 
harvest, setting forth the duty of Christian thanksgiving by the 


THE FIFTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


John xiv. 15, 16, 
19. 21. 23, 
Rey. xxii. 14, 


may obtain that which thou dost pro- 


dost command ; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English, 


EPIstie. Gal. v. 16—24. 


GOSPEL. Luke xyii. 11—19. 


THE FIFTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 


a KEEP, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
cee thy Church with thy perpetual 


Isa. xlviii. 17, 


2 Then iis, ‘mercy: and, because the frailty of man 


without thee cannot but fall, keep us 
ever by thy help from all things hurt- 
ful, and lead us to all things profitable 
to our salvation ; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Gal. vi. 11—18. 


GoOsPEL. Matt. vi. 24—34. 


Salisbury Use. 
Gal. v. 16—24. 
Luke xvii. 11—19. 


Salisbury Use. 
Gal. v. 25—vi. 10. 


Matt. vi. 24—33. 


123 


quod promittis, fac nos amare quod 


mise, make us to love that which thou precipis. Per Dominum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 
2 Cor. iv. 6—15. 


Matt.. xxii. 35—46. 


Gal. v. 25—vi. 10. 
Luke vii. 11—16. 


DOMINICA XV., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 
USTODIL, quesumus, Domine, ec- Salisbury Use. 
° aie Greg. Hebd. xvi. 
clesiam tuam propitiatione per- — post Pent. 
petua; et quia sine te labitur humana ©¢!@s- ti 10. 
mortalitas, tuis semper auxilus et ab- 
strahatur a noxiis, et ad salutaria diri- 


gatur. Per. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Eph. iii. 13—21. 2 Cor. vi. 1—10. 


Luke xiv. 1—11. Matt. xxv. 14—30. 


THE SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 
LORD, we beseech thee, let thy 
continual pity cleanse and de- 
fend thy Church; and because it can- 


Ps. ciii. 13. 

Eph. v. 25—27. 

Ps. cxxvii. 1. 
li. 8. 

1 Thess. v. 23, 


DOMINICA XVI., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 
CCLESIAM tuam, quesumus, Salisbury Use. 
7 . : ‘ Greg. Hebd. xvii. 
Domine, miseratio continuata “host Pent. 


mundet et muniat; et quia sine te non Gelas. iti. 11. 


example of the one leper out of the ten cleansed who returned to 
give glory to God in Christ. Leprosy being incurable, except by 
a miracle, the act of our Lord is typical of that continual wonder- 
working by which He sustains our life, and gives to us the boun- 
ties of His Providence ; and the act of thanksgiving suggests the 
recognition, at this time of the year, of the hand of God prospering 
by its mysterious operation the work of man in producing the 
great necessary of life. Such a recognition involves falling down 
at the feet of God in thankful adoration : the absence of it leads 
men to depart on their way unheedful of the supernatural charac- 
ter which is involved in even the most ordinary provision for the 
necessities of life. 


Inrrort.—Behold, O God, our Defender, and look upon the 
face of Thine Anointed. For one day in Thy courts is better than 
a thousand. Ps. O how amiable are Thy dwellings, Thou Lord 
ot Hosts! Glory be. 


THE FIFTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The Gospel for this Sunday is also a harvest Gospel, pointing 
out that true Christian forethought is that which is intimately 
associated with dependence on the Providence of God. When 
the stores of the principal provision for the year are gathered in, 
then comes the lesson taught by Christ’s own words, that sowing, 
and reaping, and gathering into barns, is not the chief work of a 
Christian’s life; and that God’s bounty, which feeds the birds of 


the air, and clothes the lilies of the field by other means than their 
own toil, is the same bounty which is feeding and clothing us by 
means of our toil. Forethought in respect to such things, should 
therefore be a forethought which is consistent with trust in God, 
and with seeking first the things of His Kingdom. 


Intro1t.—Bow down Thine ear, O Lord, and hear me. My 
God, save Thy servant that putteth his trust in Thee. Be merciful 
unto me, for I will call daily upon Thee. Ps. Comfort the soul 
of Thy servant: for unto Thee do I lift up my soul. Glory be. 


THE SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The compassion of Christ is illustrated by the Gospel of this 
Sunday, which is that narrating the restoration to life of the 
widow’s son; the pity of the Father is besought for the Church ; 
and the earnest prayer of St. Paul in the Epistle exemplifies the 
spirit in which such a prayer should be offered, as well as the 
nature of the blessings to be prayed for. ‘ 

Our Lord’s meeting with the funeral procession at the gate of the 
city may be taken as a beautiful precedent for the custom ordered 
in the second rubric of the Burial Service: and when mourners 
hear Christ’s ministers, on such an occasion, saying, “Iam the 
Resurrection and the Life,” they may remember with thankful 
hope that these are the words of Him Who, saying “Weep not 
... came and touched the bier,” and said also, “Young man, I 


say unto thee, Arise.” 
R2 


124 


not continue in safety without thy suc- 


THE SEVENTEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


potest salva consistere, tuo semper 


cour, preserve it evermore by thy help | munere gubernetur, Per Dominum. 


and goodness; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen, 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. Eph. iii. 13—21. Eph, iii. 13—21, 
GOSPEL. Luke vii, 11—17. Luke vii. 11—16. 


Eastern. 


Modern Roman. 


Eph. iv. 1-6. “2 Cor. vi. 16—vii. 1. 


Matt. xxii. 35—46. Matt. xv. 21—28. 


ie Le EO Ee a ee 


THE SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
® TRINITY. 


The Collect. 
ORD, we pray thee that thy grace 
may always prevent and follow 
us, and make us continually to be 
given to all good works; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Prov. xvi. 3. 
Phil. ii. 8. 
Tit. iii. 8. 
Matt. v. 16. 


DOMINICA XVIL., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 


UA nos, Domine, quesumus, gratia Salisbury Use. 
* Greg. Orationes 
semper et preveniat et sequatur; “ Quotidiane. 
ac bonis operibus jugiter preestet esse 


intentos. Per Dominum. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Eph. iv. 1—6. 


GOSPEL. 


Luke xiv. 1—11. 


THE EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 


Toon is. ORD, we beseech thee, grant thy 
tas Peale people grace to withstand the 
yh 12,10, temptations of the world, the flesh, 


Introit.—Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I will call daily 
upon Thee. For Thou, Lord, art good and gracious, and of 
great mercy unto all them that call upon Thee. Ps. Bow down 
Thine ear, O Lord, and hear me, for Iam poor and in misery. 
Glory be. 


THE SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY, 


The idea of the Epistle and Gospel for this Sunday appears to 
be that of gaining liberty and victory through becoming the 
humble servants of Christ. St. Paul writes out of his prison, “I 
the prisoner of the Lord,” as he writes in another place, “ Re- 
member my bonds :” and one who was in the bonds of an infirmity 
was brought to Christ, “and He took him, and healed him, and 
let him go,” setting him free from his disease on the instant in 
a manner which cannot be explained by physiological science. 
Afterwards our Lord speaks of the humane work of setting free 
on the Sabbath an ox or an ass that had fallen into a pit ; and of one 
being bidden to go up higher through his humility in taking the 
lowest room at a wedding feast. All these may be taken as 
illustrations of the way in which our Lord’s service becomes 
perfect freedom to those who humbly take His yoke upon them. 
They offer also a further illustration of the principle stated in 
the end of the Epistle, “There is one body and one Spirit, even 
as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, 
one baptism, ‘one God and Father of all, who is above all, and 
through all, and in you all.” This principle is of a restrictive 
character: bringing the world out of a free worship of many 
gods to the worship of One; limiting it to one faith, and to one 
only means of initiation into the family of the one God. The 
idea conveyed is one of a bondage to rule and law which leaves 


Salisbury Use. 
Eph, iv. 1—6. 
Luke xiv. 1—11. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


1 Cor. i. 4—8. 2 Cor. ix. 6—11. 


Matt. ix. 1—8. 


DOMINICA XVIII., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 
A, quesumus, Domine, populo tuo Ssbury Use. 


Greg. Hebd. xxi. 


diabolica vitare contagia, et te post Pent. 
] D ° P Gelas. iii. 13. al. 
solum Deum pura mente sectarl. Per. «puro corde.” 


no room for invention or wild development and speculation. 
But, as Christ reigned from His Cross; as St. Paul governed the 
churches of Ephesus and other cities from his prison in Rome; 
as one who sits down in the lowest room will hear the Host say 
to him, “ Friend, go up higher;” so limitations and restrictions 
of this kind are a means of real spiritual freedom, howevet 
much they may seem an irksome bondage to those who regard 
them superficially. The Christian who worships the One God is 
more free than the heathen who worshipped many; and the 
believer in a Faith once for all given is more free than he who is 
continually looking for new developments and open to the bond- 
age of every novel speculation. 


Inrroit.—Righteous art Thou, O Lord, and true is Thy 
judgment. O deal Thou with me according unto Thy mercy. 
Ps. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of 
the Lord. Glory be. 


THE EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


Two comprehensive Christian formule are given in the Gospel 
and the Collect for this Sunday. That in the former sets forth 
the whole duty of the servant of Christ, “Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with 
all thy mind,” and “thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” 
The formula of the English Collect is that familiar one of “the 
world, the flesh, and the devil,” which represents all the tempta- 
tions to which a Christian is liable. To these may also be added 
the words of the Epistle, “waiting for the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,” as an expression which comprehensively states the 
whole object of the Christian life. The duties, the difficulties, 


THE NINETEENTH AND TWENTIETH SUNDAYS, AFTER TRINITY, 


and the devil, and with pure hearts 
and minds to follow thee the only 
God; through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen, 


125 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 1 Cor. i. 4—8. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xxii. 834—46. 


THE NINETEENTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 


John xv. 5. 

Ps. exliii. 10. 
Heb. xiii. 20, 21. 
1 Thess. v. 23. 


GOD, for as much as without thee 

we are not able to please thee; 

Mercifully grant, that thy Holy Spirit 

may in all things direct and rule our 

hearts ; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. Eph. iv. 17—32. 


“GOSPEL. Matt. ix. 1—8, 


THE TWENTIETH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 
ALMIGHTY and most merci- 


ful God, of thy bountiful good- 
ness keep us, we beseech thee, from all 


Migah vii. 18. 
Psi xxxt, 19. 

2 Thess. iii. 3. 
Prov. xxx. 8, 9, 
1 Cor. vi. 20. 
Col. iii. 23. 


and the purpose of the Christian life are thus made the subjects 
of commemoration and prayer; and the connexion of each with 
the grace of God and the Person of Christ is illustrated by the 
words of St. Paul in the Epistle, and of our Lord in His con- 
futation of the unbelievers as narrated in the Gospel. 


Inrroit.—Give peace, O Lord, to them that wait for Thee, 
and let Thy prophets be found faithful. Hear the prayers of 
Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel. Ps. I was glad when 
they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord. 
Glory be. 


THE NINETEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY, 


The forsaking of sins, and the forgiveness of sins, are the sub- 
jects of the Epistle and Gospel for this Sunday. St. Paul writes 
to the Ephesians in much detail concerning the Christian moral 
law, and shows its relation to the newness of nature which 
belongs to those who are new born by Baptism into Christ. 
In the miracle by which our Blessed Lord restored to life the 
dead limbs of a paralytic this change from the old man to the 
new man is vividly illustrated. We also see in the circumstances 
attending this miracle two other illustrations of the relation 
between our Lord and His people. First, in His words, “Thy 
sins be forgiven thee,’ He shows that His forgiveness is the 
highest good that can be desired on earth; and that although 
He may also see fit to say, “ Arise and walk,” it is this blessing 
that is to be sought before all others. Secondly, His peculiar 
expression, “that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive 
sins,” shows that this power, which originates only in the God- 
head (as the Scribes truly thought), extended to the human nature 


Salisbury Use. 
1 Cor. i. 4—8. 


Matt. xxii. 34—46. 


Salisbury Use. 
Eph. iv. 23—28. 
Matt. ix. 1—8, 


Modern Roman, Eastern. 


Eph. iv. 23—28. 2 Cor. xi. 31. xii. 9, 


Matt. xxii. 1—14. 


DOMINICA XIX., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 
IRIGAT corda nostra, quesumus, Salisbury Use. 
= Sy apa Greg. Hebd. xxii, 
Domine, tuz miserationis ope- “Sst Pent. 
ratio; quia tibi sine te placere non Gelas. iii. 14. 


possumus. Per Dominum nostrum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 
Gal. i. 11—19. 


Luke y. 1—11. 


Eph. v. 15—21. 


John iy. 46—53. 


DOMINICA XX., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 
MNIPOTENS et misericors Deus, Salisbury Use. 
: . . Greg. Hebd. xxiii, 
universa nobis adversantia pro- “post Pent. 
pitiatus exclude; ut mente et corpore Gelas. iii. 15. 


of our Lord, that sins might be forgiven on earth as well as at 
the last judgment before the throne of God. These words thus 
contain a statement of the whole principle of Absolution. 


Intro1t.—I am the Saviour of My people, saith the Lord: 
out of whatsoever tribulation they call unto Me, I will hear 
them, and I will be their Lord for ever. Ps. Hear My law, O 
My people: incline your ears unto the words of My mouth. 
Glory be. 


THE TWENTIETH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The prophetic parable of the Marriage Supper of the Only- 
begotten is the subject of the Gospel for this Sunday: and to it 
may be referred the words of the Collect, “that we, being ready 
both in body and soul, may cheerfully accomplish those things 
that Thou wouldest have done.” The Epistle seems to be chosen 
as an illustration of the festivity of Christ’s Kingdom, in which 
the sensual pleasures of heathen rites are superseded by the 
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs of Divine worship, which is 
chiefly made up of singing and making melody to the Lord, and 
is ever consecrated by the “giving of thanks,” or offering of the 
Holy Eucharist, to God the Father, in the Name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Of this latter, as well as of the call of the Jews 
and the Gentiles, and the final marriage supper of the Lamb in 
Heaven, the Gospel ought to be interpreted ; and it is so applied 
in the second Exhortation to the Holy Communion. 


Inrrorr.—lIn all the things that Thou hast brought upon us, 
O Lord, Thou hast executed true judgment; for we have sinned, 
and have not obeyed Thy commandments. Yet give glory to 


126 


things that may hurt us; that we, 
bemg ready both in body and soul, 
may cheerfully accomplish those things 
that thou wouldest have done; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Eph. v. 15—21. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xxii. 1—14. 


THE ONE-AND-TWENTIETH SUNDAY 
AFTER TRINITY. 


The Collect. 


A a RANT, we beseech thee, merciful 
“Ogee any Lord, to thy faithful people par- 
don and peace, that they may be 
cleansed from all their sins, and serve 
thee with a quiet mind; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. Eph. vi. 10—20. Eph. vi. 10—17. 
GOSPEL. John iv. 46—54. John iv. 46—53. 
THE TWO-AND-TWENTIETH SUNDAY 
AFTER TRINITY. 
The Collect. 
Eph. ii. 19. 
te es ORD, we beseech thee to keep thy 
Sa Sey household the Church in con- 
phiio—n,  tinual godliness; that through thy 


Thy Name, and do to us according to the multitude of Thy 
mercies. Ps. Great is the Lord, and highly to be praised: in 
the city of our God, even upon His holy hill. Glory be. 


THE TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


The connexion between the Hpistle for this Sunday, which is 
that beautiful passage wherein St. Paul describes the whole 
armour of God, and the Gospel, in which is given the narrative 
of our Lord healing the nobleman’s son, appears to lie chiefly in 
the words “above all taking the shield of faith.’ The hard, un- 
impressible generation of the Jews, among whom our Lord came, 
would not believe in “signs and wonders” on any evidence but 
that of their senses; and this placed a bar in the way of His 
blessing, so that He sometimes could not do mighty works among 
them, because there was no co-operation of faith on their part 
with power on His. The nobleman whose child was healed at a 
long distance by the will of Christ was a conspicuous illustration 
of the opposite type of character. He believed, in the face of all 
improbabilities, because he knew that the holy Jesus was not one 
to say that which was not true. To such minds Faith in Christ 
is a shield indeed against the fiery darts of the Wicked One ; for 
their belief enables Him to do signs and wonders of a spiritual 
nature, and establishes a power of co-operation between the weak 
servant and the Almighty Lord. Thus not only is Faith a 
defence against the enemy of souls, but it draws down Christ 
Himself to be a “ Defence and a Shield;” so that they can say, 
«The Lord is my Saviour, my God, and my might, in whom I 


Salisbury Use. 
Eph. v. 15—21. 
Matt. xxii. 1—14. 


THE TWENTY-FIRST AND TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 


pariter expediti, que tua sunt liberis 
mentibus exequamur, 


Per Dominum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Eph. vi. 10—17. Gal. ii. 16—20. 


Matt. xviii. 28—385. Luke vi. 31—36. 


DOMINICA XXI., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 
ARGIRE, quesumus, Domine, salisbury Use. 
fidelibus tuis indulgentiam pla- O¥8 pu" 
catus et pacem; ut pariter ab omnibus Gelas. iii. 16. 
mundentur offensis, et secura tibi mente 


deserviant. Per. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Phil. i. 6—11. Gal. vi. 11—18. 


Matt. xxii. 15—21. Luke viii. 5—8, 


9—16. 


DOMINICA XXII., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 


AMILIAM tuam, quesumus, Do- Salisbury Use 
mine, continua pietate custodi ; S78.Sypepepe- 


lum.Hebd.xxv. 
ut a cunctis adversitatibus te protegente P°st Pe 


will trust, my buckler, the horn also of my salvation, and my 
refuge.” As humble service of Christ is the most perfect freedom, 
because it frees from the bondage of the Evil One, so humble 
faith in Christ, the spirit which says not “seeing is believing,” 
but, “ Lord, I believe, help Thou mine unbelief,” is the surest path 
to the revelation of the signs and wonders of His kingdom. 


Introit.—O Lord, the whole world is in Thy power, and there 
is no man that can gainsay Thee. For Thou hast made heaven 
and earth, and all the wondrous things under the heaven. Thou 
art Lord of all. Ps. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who 
walk in the law of the Lord. Glory be. 


THE TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


Christian love is here, as on the first Sunday after Trinity, the 
subject of the Epistle and Gospel; but in the present instance it 
is illustrated by the tender words of St. Paul in his Epistle to the 
Philippians, and by our Lord’s parable of the two debtors, which 
He spoke as a reply to St. Peter’s question, ‘‘ Lord, how oft shall 
my brother sin against me, and I forgive him?” This question 


. was asked by one who was accustomed to the Jewish practice, 


which was ostentatious of its seven times’ forgiveness, but yet 
unforgiving in reality. Our Lord’s law of forgiveness had no 
limits, “ Not until seven times, but until seventy times seven.” 
The forgiveness of the debt of ten thousand talents represents the 
infinite mercy of God, and is given as the true Example and 
Standard towards which His absolved servants should reach 
upward. 


THE TWENTY-THIRD AND TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAYS AFTER TRINITY. 127 
protection it may be free from all ad- | sit libera, et in bonis actibus tuo nomini 
versities, and devoutly given to serve | sit devota. Per Dominum. 
thee in good works, to the glory of 
thy Name ; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 
aes 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPIstLe. Phil. i. 83—11. Phil. i. 6—11.. Phil. iii, 17—21. Eph. ii. 4—10. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xviii. 21—35. Matt. xviii. 23—35. Matt. ix. 18—26. Luke vii. 11—16. 


THE THREE-AND-TWENTIETH SUNDAY 
AFTER TRINITY. 


The Collect. 

GOD, our refuge and strength, 

who art the author of all godli- 
ness; Be ready, we beseech thee, to 
hear the devout prayers of thy Church ; 
and grant that those things which we 
ask faithfully we may obtain effectu- 
ally ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 


Ps. xivi. 1. 11. 

2 Pet.i. 3. 

Jer, xxix, 12— 
14, 

Matt. xxi, 22. 
vii. 11. 

Phil. iv. 19. 


Modern English. | Salisbury Use. 


EPISTLE. Phil. iii. 17—21. 


GosPEL. Matt. xxii. 15—22. 


THE FOUR-AND-TWENTIETH SUNDAY 
AFTER TRINITY. 


The Collect. 
LORD, we beseech thee, absolve 
thy people from their offences ; 
that through thy bountiful goodness 


Num. xiv. 19. 
Ps. cxix. 17. 68. 

Xiolzstos 
Lev. v. 17. 


Introrr.—lIf Thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done 
amiss: O Lord, who may abide it? For there is mercy with 
Thee, O Lord God of Israel. Ps. Out of the deep have I called 
unto Thee; Lord, hear my voice. Glory be. 


THE TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


Our Lord is set forth in the Gospel of this Sunday as teaching 
that duties towards the civil power are part of our heavenly 
citizenship; St. Paul also, in the Epistle, referring to the true 
Christian life on earth as having already many things in common 
with the life of heaven. None ever set a higher example of 
obedience to the laws than He Who is the Eternal Lawgiver and 
Ruler: and He inculcates an honest submission to them even in 
such a case as that on which an appeal was made to Him, where 
the law was that of a conqueror against whom rebellion seemed 
to be a duty. One deduction to be drawn from the words of 
Christ and of His Apostle is that the Church has little to do with 
politics or questions of secular government. The things of 
Cesar and the things of God were confused together by the 
Jews, and they ended by rejecting the Lord, and saying, “We 
have no king but Caesar.” So it has happened at other times, 
that a want of zeal for God in carefully distinguishing what is 
His, has led the Church into bondage to civil rulers until its 


Phil. iii. 17—21. 
Matt. xxii. 15—21. 


DOMINICA XXIII., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 
EUS, refugium nostrum et virtus, Salisbury Use. 
adesto piis Ecclesiae tux preci- wS feo" 
bus, auctor ipse pietatis; et presta, ut 
quod fideliter petimus, efficaciter con- 
sequamur. Per Dominum nostrum 
Jesum Christum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


[Next Sund. before Advent] 


Col. i. 9—14. Eph. ii. 14—22. 


Matt. xxiv. 15—35. Luke viii. 27—39. 


DOMINICA XXIV., POST TRINITATEM. 


Oratio. 


BSOLVE, quesumus, Domine, Salisbury Use. 
Greg. Hebd. xviii. 


tuorum delicta populorum ; et a “post Pent. 


peccatorum nostrorum nexibus, que 


spiritual character has been almost obliterated. The Church of 
England has been mercifully guided into a just discrimination of 
the things of Czesar and the things of God; and while rendering 
strictest obedience to the Sovereign, has not suffered an exces- 
sive loyalty to yield up spiritual rights. Nor does it ever, in 
modern days, seek to interfere in matters of civil government. 
Such a just consideration of the respective duties which are 
owing towards Cesar and towards God, and such a persevering 
determination to render to each their proper dues, is a sure way 
of promoting both the security and the happy progress of Christ’s 
Church. 


Intro1t.—I know the thoughts that I think towards you, 
saith the Lord; thoughts of peace, and not of evil. Ye shall 
call upon Me, and I will hearken unto you. I will turn away 
your captivity, and will gather you from among all nations. Ps. 
Lord, Thou hast become gracious unto Thy land; Thou hast 
turned away the captivity of Jacob. Glory be. 


THE TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


This Sunday offers another illustration of the faith of man 
co-operating with the will and power of Almighty God, in the 
two cases of the ruler whose young daughter was dead, and of the 
woman whose issue of blood was stayed through her faith in 


128 


Rom, vii. 18.28, we may all be delivered from the bands 
23. of those sins, which by our frailty we 
have committed: Grant this, O hea- 

venly Father, for Jesus Christ’s sake, 

our blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPIsTiE. Col. i. 3—12. 


GOSPEL. Matt. ix. 18—26. 


THE TWENTY-FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY. 


The Collect. 


Ps, ox, 3. TIR up, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
Phil. ii, 18. , the wills of thy faithful people ; 
Gavi 9. that they, plenteously bringing forth 


the fruit of good works, may of thee 
be plenteously rewarded ; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. Jer. xxiii. 5—8. 


GOSPEL. John yi. 5—14. 


Salisbury Use. 
Col. i. 9—11. 
Matt. ix. 18—22. 


Salisbury Use. 
Jer. xxiii. 5—8. 


John vi. 5—14. 


THE TWENTY-FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


pro nostra fragilitate contraximus, tua 
benignitate hberemur. Per Dominum. 
fo) 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


[As for one of the 
Sundays 
after Epiphany. | 


Eph. iv. 1—7. 


Luke xvi. 18—13. 


DOMINICA PROXIMA ANTE ADVENTUM. 


Oratio. 
XCITA, quesumus, Domine, tuo- Salisbury Use. 
rum fidelium voluntates: ut Oe 20%, 
divini operis fructum propensius exe- *°"* 
quentes, pietatis tue remedia majora 
percipiant. Per Dominum nostrum, 


Modern Roman. astern. 


[As for one of the 


Sundays 
after Epiphany. ] 


| If there be any more Sundays before Advent-Sunday, the service of some of those Sundays that were omitted after the 
Epiphany shall be taken in to supply so many as are here wanting. And if there be fewer, the overplus may be omitted: 
Provided that this last Collect, Epistle, and Gospel shall always be used upon the Sunday next before Advent. 


touching the hem of our Lord’s garment. “My daughter is 
even now dead,” said the former, “but come and lay Thy hand 
upon her, and she shall live:” “If I may but touch His gar- 
ment,” said the latter, ‘I shall be whole.” These instances of 
recovery from disease and death are devotionally applied in the 
Collect: where the expressive phrase, “the bands of those sins, 
which by our frailty we have committed,” has a double reference : 
first, to the bondage of sin in its spiritual sense ; and, secondly, to 
the physical evils which bind us around with chains that are 
forged by sin. 


Inrro1r.—I know the thoughts that I think towards you, 
saith the Lord; thoughts of peace, and not of evil. Ye shall 
call upon Me, and I will hearken unto you. I will turn away 
your captivity, and will gather you from among all nations, 
Ps. Lord, Thou hast been gracious unto Thy land; Thou hast 
turned away the captivity of Jacob. Glory be. 


THE SUNDAY NEXT BEFORE ADVENT. 


In St. Jerome’s Lectionary twenty-five Sundays after Pentecost 
are provided with Epistles and Gospels. In the Sacramentary of 
St. Gregory there are Collects for twenty-seven Sundays. In 
the Salisbury Missal twenty-four Sundays were reckoned as after 
Trinity, and one as the next before Advent: and there was a 
rubric directing that if there were more than twenty-five Sun- 
days between Trinity Sunday and Advent Sunday, the Office for 
the Twenty-fourth Sunday was to be repeated on each Sunday 
until the last, when that for the Sunday before Advent was to be 
said. In the Prayer Book of 1549 no rubric of this kind was 
provided, but the old usage would, doubtless, be adopted. In 
1552, however, a rubric was inserted to this effect :—“ J If there 


shall be taken the Service of some of those Sundays that were 
omitted between the Epiphany and Septuagesima.” This rubric 
was altered into its present form in the Durham book of Bishop 
Cosin, having already appeared in a similar but more cumbrous 
form in 1637. 

If there are two of these Dominice Vagantes (as they were 
anciently called), the Services for the fifth and sixth Sundays 
after Epiphany should be used; if only one, that for the sixth 
Sunday, which has evidently been appointed with a view to its 
fitness for use on the Sunday next but one to Advent. The rule 
expressed in this rubric is a very ancient one, being found in 
Micrologus, ¢. 62. 

The Office of this day represents that for the fifth Sunday 
before the Nativity of our Lord in the Comes of St. Jerome, 
which appoints the same Epistle and Gospel, and in the Sacra- 
mentary of St. Gregory, though a different Collect is appointed 
for that day in the latter. Its tone is that of Advent rather 
than Trinity, commemorating as it does the first coming of the 
King whose Name is ‘The Lord our Righteousness,” and look- 
ing forward to that second coming when the true restoration of 
Israel will be effected. The Gospel is the same as that for Mid- 
Lent Sunday, where some notes upon it will be found. The 
rationale of its appointment for to-day is to be found in the last 
words of it,—* This is of a truth that Prophet that should come 
into the world.” 


Inrro1r.—I know the thoughts that I think towards you, saith 
the Lord; thoughts of peace, and not of evil. Ye shall call upon 
Me, and I will hearken unto you. I will turn away your. cap- 
tivity, and will gather you from among all nations. Ps. Lord, 
Thou art become gracious unto Thy land; Thou hast turned away 


be any more Sundays before Advent Sunday, to supply the same } the captivity of Jacob. Glory be. 


SAINT ANDREW’S DAY. 


SAINT ANDREW’S DAY. 
The Collect. 


ah id a LMIGHTY God, who didst give 
ac. such grace unto thy holy Apostle 
Rom. 1.5 6. Saint Andrew, that he readily obeyed 
Matt. xvi. 2 4. the calling of thy Son Jesus Christ, 
John xiy. 15. 


and followed him without delay ; 
Grant unto us all, that we, being called 
by thy holy word, may forthwith give 
up our selves obediently to fulfil thy 
holy commandments; through the 
same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


129 


DIES SANCTI ANDRE. Shlisbury Use. 

[ LMIGHTY God, which hast Common Prayet 
given such grace to thy Apostle Ne Pern 

Saint Andrew, that he counted the o¢ pyetat. in 

sharp and painful death of the cross $™fa2k. 

to be an high honour and a great 

glory: Grant us to take and esteem 

all troubles and adversities which shall 

come unto us for thy sake as things 

profitable for us toward the obtaining 

of everlasting life: through Jesus 

Christ our Lord.] 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Rom. x. 9—21. 


GOSPEL. Matt. iv. 18—22. 


SAINT ANDREW. 
. [NovEemMBER 30. ] 


The feast of St. Andrew is one of those for which an Epistle 
and Gospel are provided in the Lectionary of St. Jerome, and 
which has also prayers appointed for it in the Sacramentary of 
St. Gregory. It is therefore of very ancient date in the Church, 
and one of the most ancient of the Apostles’ festivals, only nine 
being named (on six days) in the Lectionary referred to. Its 
position may be at the beginning or at the end of the Christian 
year, according as Advent Sunday happens in November or 
December. It has usually been considered that it comes at the 
beginning, and that it is placed there because the Apostle thus 
commemorated was the first called disciple of our Lord; but 
tradition points out the day as that of his death. 

It may be remarked here, as applicable to all the Apostles, 
that little has been told us of any except St. Peter and St. Paul in 
Holy Scripture; and that what has come down to us in unin- 
spired history does not throw much more light upon their per- 
sonal character or the details of their work. The latter fact 
may, perhaps, be accounted for from the circumstance that most 
of the Apostles, except St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. John, laboured 
among nations of whose records, previous to the quiet settlement 
of the Church, nothing, or next to nothing, remains ; and that in 
the wild and lawless times which accompanied the breaking up 
of the Roman Empire, even lingering traditions about them 
would pass away. With respect to the paucity of details given 
about the Apostles in the New Testament, there seem to be two 
reasons which offer a sufficient explanation. or (1) the purpose 
of Holy Scripture is to set before us the Person of Christ, and 
the Law of Christ; and whatever else enters into the four 
Gospels is merely incidental; and (2) in the Acts of the Apostles 
the object is to show the work of the Church, and not to give 
us the history of individuals; so that the latter also is merely 
incidental. 

Hence, probably, the reason why we gather hardly any par- 
ticulars from Scripture about the life of St. Andrew. He was a 
prother of St. Peter, and therefore a son of Jonas or John; and 
probably younger than St. Peter. The ancients used to give him 
the surname of Protocletos, or First-called, from the circum- 
stances told us in St. John i. 40—42; and, having been a disciple 
of John the Baptist, he was one of those who were prepared to 
receive Christ by the teaching and Baptism of His Forerunner. 
There are only two other circumstances of his life mentioned in 
the Gospels: the first in St. John xii. 21, where it is St. Andrew 
and St. Philip who tell Jesus of the inquiring Greeks; and the 


Salisbury Use. 
Rom. x. 9—18. 
Matt. iv. 18—22. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Rom. x. 10—18. 1 Cor. iv. 9—16. 


Matt. iv. 18—22. John i. 35—51. 


second in St. Mark xiii. 3, where Andrew and his brother, with 
the two sons of Zebedee, are found in close companionship with 
the Lord, asking Him privately respecting the time when Jeru- 
salem should be destroyed. 

Ecclesiastical history records that this Apostle was engaged 
after the dispersion of the Apostles in evangelizing that part of 
the world which is now known as Turkey in Asia, and the portion 
of Russia which borders on the Black Sea: and indeed that he 
was the first founder of the Russian Church, as St. Paul was of 
the English Church. Sinope and Sebastopol are both especially 
connected with the name of St. Andrew. In his later days he 
returned to Europe, consecrated the “beloved Stachys,” first 
Bishop of Constantinople—then named Byzantium—and after 
travelling about Turkey in Europe, eventually suffered martyrdom 
at Patras, a town in the north of the Morea, nearly opposite to 
Lepanto. 

The account of this Apostle’s martyrdom is very affecting. At 
a great age he was called before the Roman viceroy at Patre 
(now Patras), and required to leave off his Apostolic labours 
among the heathen Greeks. Instead of consenting, he proclaimed 
Christ even before the judgment-seat; and after imprisonment 
and submitting patiently to a seven times repeated scourging 
upon his bare back, he was at last fastened to a cross by cords, 
and so left exposed to die. The cross on which he suffered was of 
a different form from our Lord’s, like this X, and is known by 
the name of the cross decussate. It is the distinctive symbol of 
the Scotch order of St Andrew: the Apostle being always espe- 
cially reverenced in connexion with the Scottish, as with the 
Russian Church; and consequently forms a part of the national 
banner of Great Britain. It has also been observed that it is an 


integral part of the monogram of Christ x ; which was so 


familiar to the early Christians. 

“Hail, precious cross!” said the aged Apostle, as he came to it, 
“that hast been consecrated by the Body of my Lord, and 
adorned with His limbs as with rich jewels. I come to thee 
exulting and glad; receive me with joy into thy arms. Oh, good 
cross, that hast received beauty from our Lord’s limbs! I have 
ardently loved thee; long have I desired and sought thee; now 
thou art found by me, and art made ready for my longing soul ; 
receive me into thy arms, taking me from among men, and pre- 
sent me to my Master, that He Who redeemed me on thee may 
receive me by thee.” For two days the dying martyr exhorted 
the people from the cross after His example Who stretched out 
His arms all the day long to an ungodly and gainsaying people. 


130 
¥ SAINT THOMAS THE APOSTLE. 
The Collect. 
ae axe ~LMIGHTY and everliving God, 
Jeter 24— 3). who for the more confirmation of 
aes ars the faith didst suffer thy holy Apostle 
Eph. ii, 18, Thomas to be doubtful in thy Son’s 


resurrection; Grant us so perfectly, 
and without all doubt to believe in 
thy Son Jesus Christ, that our faith 
in thy sight may never be reproved. 
Hear us, O Lord, through the same 
Jesus Christ, to whom, with thee and 
the Holy Ghost, be all honour and 
glory, now and for evermore. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. 


Eph. ii. 19—22. 


GOSPEL. John xx. 24—31. 


Salisbury Use. 
Eph. ii. 19—22. 
John xx. 24—29, 


SAINT THOMAS THE APOSTLE. 


DIES SANCTI THOMA APOSTOLI. Salisbury Use. 


Modern Roman. Hastern. 


Eph. ii. 19—22. Acts v. 12—20. 


John xx. 19—81. John xx. 9—81. 


At the end of that time he prayed to the Crucified One that he 
might now depart in peace, when his prayer was heard, and his 
spirit went home on the day observed as his festival, 4.D. 70. 


Iyrroir.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, O 
God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, 
Thou hast searched me out and known me: Thou knowest my 
downsitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


Hymus. 


Evrensona.—Annue, Christe. H.N. 86. 75. 

Comprine.—Salvator mundi, Domine. H. A. M. 

Marrins.—Annue, Christe. H. N. 86.75. 

Lavps.—Zcultet celum laudibus. A. A. 188. 

These hymns are appointed to be sung on all Feasts of Apostles 
and Evangelists throughout the year, except when superseded by 
the Paschal or other proper hymns. 


SAINT THOMAS. 
[DECEMBER 21.]} 


The Festival of St. Thomas the Apostle is not noticed by any 
writer until Theodoret, who names it with that of St. Peter 
and St. Paul. [De Grec. Affect. vii.] It seems to have been 
generally observed in the time of St. Gregory, who has provided 
for it in his Sacramentary. In the Eastgrn Church it is kept on 
October 6th. Although our Collect is not derived from that 
source, the leading idea of it is found in a Homily of St. Gregory 
[ Hom. in Evang. 26], where he says, that “by this doubting of 
St. Thomas we are more confirmed in our belief than by the faith 
of the other Apostles.” 

There are but four sayings of St. Thomas recorded in the 
Gospels, two just before the death of our Lord, and two just after 
His Resurrection ; but there is a remarkable consistency in these 
sayings, one in each case showing want of faith, and the other a 
warm, zealous, and faithful love. These sayings are as follows :— 

* Lord, we know not whither Thou goest; and how can we 
know the way?” John xiv. 5. 

“Tet us also go, that we may die with Him.” John xi. 16. 

“‘ Except I shall see in His hands the print of the nails, and put 
my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into 
His side, I will not believe.” John xx. 25. 

“ My Lord, and my God.” John xx. 28, 

In these four sayings we have all that Holy Scripture tells us 
of the Apostle’s companionship with our Lord; but they seem to 


give more than the outline of a spiritual character in which there 
were the mingled elements of (1) obstinacy, in not believing, 
though prophets had foretold of the Resurrection, and the other 
Apostles were eye-witnesses of its certainty ; (2) presumption, in 
requiring such a proof, even perhaps in the face of the “Touch 
Me not,” which had been made known by Mary Magdalen; (8) 
of a warm and loving heart, open to the strongest faith as well as 
to despairing doubt; and which could lead the Apostle to that 
full confession of faith contained in the words, “ My Lord, 
and my God.” But it may have been the touch of Christ’s 
wounds which healed the Apostle’s doubt, and made his faith 
what it was. 

It was not granted to St. Thomas to have his loving and 
courageous aspiration fulfilled, by dying with Christ, but the 
servant followed the Master afterwards. It is recorded by Euse- 
bius, that he received a direction from our Lord, after His Ascen- 
sion (as St. Peter in the case of Cornelius), to send Thaddeus, one 
of the seventy disciples, to Abgarus, tributary king of Edessa in 
Mesopotamia, who was thus miraculously cured of a disease, and 
converted, with his subjects, to Christianity. After this St. 
Thomas went to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, and Chaldeans, 
founding the Church of Christ among them until he came to 
India. The Christians of St. Thomas still bear witness to his 
work in that great and populous land in the south, and in the 
north there appear to be relics of the Christian faith mixed up 
with the strange religion of Thibet ; but the diabolical systems of 
Brahma and Buddh, and the Antichristianism of Mahomet, 
have long ago erased all other traces of it; and India appears to 
be one of those unhappy countries which, having wilfully rejected 
the Apostolic ministry, have ceased to be capable of receiving 
Christ and His Gospel. 

St. Thomas was martyred by the Brahmins at Taprobane, now 
called Sumatra. Having been assailed with stones, he was at 
last killed by the thrust of a spear: the manner of his death 
offering a striking comparison with his words, “ Except I thrust 
my hand into His side,” and those of our Lord, “ Reach hither 
thy hand, and thrust it into My side, and be not faithless, but 
believing.” As the Lord said to St. Peter, so were the words 
true of St. Thomas, “Thou canst not follow Me now, but thou 
shalt follow Me afterwards.” 


IntRorrt.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, O 
God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, Thou 
hast searched me out and known me: Thou knowest my down- 
sitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


CONVERSION OF SAINT PAUL.—THE PURIFICATION, 


THE CONVERSION OF SAINT PAUL. 
The Collect. 
GOD, who, through the preach- 
ing of the blessed Apostle Saint 


Col. i. 5, 6. 

Acts xxvi. 9—20, 

Rom, xv. 15—17. 

aon xx. 20, 21. 
27. 


131 


IN CONVERSIONE SANCTI PAULI, 
Oratio. 
EUS, qui universum mundum Sulisbury Use. 
beati Pauli Apostoli tui predi- “Spach ce 


Cena. Paul, hast caused the light of the | catione docuisti: da nobis, quesumus, °™%°™** 
t Thess-1¥.152. Gospel to shine throughout the world; | ut qui ejus hodie conversionem colimus: 
Grant, we beseech thee, that we, having | per ejus ad te exempla gradiamur. Per 
his wonderful conversion in remem- | Dominum. 
brance, may shew forth our thankful- 
ness unto thee for the same, by fol- 
lowing the holy doctrine which he 
taught; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. | Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Acts ix. 1—22. Acts ix. 1—22. Acts ix. 1—22. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xix. 27—30. Matt. xix. 27—30. Matt. xix. 27—29. 


THE PRESENTATION OF CHRIST IN THE 
TEMPLE, COMMONLY CALLED, THE 
PURIFICATION OF SAINT MARY THE 
VIRGIN. 

The Collect. 


Poi ol, 24-27, LMIGHTY and everliving God, 
Lute 22-20, we humbly beseech thy Majesty, 
ere that, as thy only-begotten Son was 
Rev. i. 3. 6. this day presented in the temple in 


IN PURIFICATIONE BEATA MARIA 
VIRGINIS, 


Oratio. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, Salisbury Use. 
Maiestat li Greg. Purif. 
ajestatem tuam supplices ex-  g’Marie v. 
oramus, ut sicut unigenitus Filius tuus 
hodierna die cum nostre carnis sub- 


CONVERSION OF SAINT PAUL. 
[JANUARY 26.] 


This festival does not appear to have been generally observed 
until about the twelfth century, although the Collect for it is 
found in St. Gregory’s Sacramentary. It is said [Laterculum of 
Silvias, a.D. 448] that there was anciently a festival of St. Peter 
and St. Paul on February 22nd (now “Cathedra Petri”), and 
there may have been some connexion between it and the present 
festival, but this is only conjecture. The principal, if not the 
only, day observed to the honour of St. Paul, was that on which 
St. Peter was associated with him, the 29th of June; although, 
on the following day, a “ Commemoration of St. Paul’? was made, 
which is marked in the Salisbury and Roman Calendars, and 
mentioned in the Rubrics of the Missal; and which, in Menard’s 
edition of St. Gregory’s Sacramentary, is called “Natale Sancti 
Pauli.” It is a pious instinct which has led the Church to thank 
God in this festival for the wonderful conversion of the Apostle 
of the Gentiles; but there is something to regret in the loss of 
the ancient custom by which his noble martyrdom was also com- 
memorated, and by which the unity of the two principal Apostles 
was so significantly set forth. 

Both the conversion and the missionary work of St. Paul are 
narrated with much detail in the Acts of the Apostles; and the 
whole of his life and labours has been minutely investigated in 
the well-known work of Conybeare and Howson. To attempt 
even a sketch of so marvellous a career in these notes would be 
to occupy space that carmot be spared; and such a sketch is 
rendered unnecessary by the elaborate but yet very accessible 
work just mentioned. 

Iyrroir.—Let us-all rejoice in the Lord, commemorating this 
day, the day in which the blessed St. Paul adorned the world 
by his conversion. Ps. For the conversion of the blessed St. 


Paul, and for the bright beams of light shed by his preaching, 
Glory be. 


THE PURIFICATION. 
[Frpruary 2.] 


This festival has the same Epistle and Gospel which are now 
in use appointed for it in the Lectionary of St. Jerome, and the 
germ of the present Collect is found in the Sacramentary of 
Gelasius!. St. Cyril of Alexandria, and others of an equally early 
date refer to it; and there is little doubt that it was the first 
festival instituted in memory of the Blessed Virgin. The ancient 
and present name for it in the Kastern Church is the Hypapante 
of our Lord Jesus Christ ; that is, the irayr} or éramrayrh, the 
meeting of our Lord with Simeon and Anna in the Temple. It 
is said to have been observed on the 14th day of February until 
the time of Justinian [4.D. 542], but in the Comes of St. Jerome 
it precedes the festival of St. Agatha, which is dated on the Nones, 
or 5th of February, the day on which that Saint is still comme- 
morated ; and probably it was so observed only by those who kept 
Christmas Day on the 6th of January, as a part of the Eastern 
Church has always done. 

The popular name of this festival (Candlemas Day) perpetuates 
the memory of a very ancient custom, that of walking in pro- 
cession with tapers, and singing hymns. In a Homily on the 
Purification Alcuin says [4.D. 790], “ The whole multitude of the 
city collecting together devoutly celebrate the solemnity of the 
Mass, bearing a vast number of wax lights; and no one enters 
any public place in the city without a taper in his hand.” St. 
Bernard also [A.D. 1153] gives the following description of the 
practice, as carried out in his day :— 


1 Until 1661 the Epistle was that for the Sunday, Bishop Cosin intro- 
duced the one now used. He also prefixed the first title to the day. 
8 2 


1382 


SAINT MATTHIAS’ DAY. 


substance of our flesh, so we may be | stantia in templo est preesentatus, ita 
presented unto thee with pure and | nos facias purificatis tibi mentibus 
clean hearts, by the same thy Son | presentari. Per eundem. 


Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 
Mal. iii. 1—5. 
Luke ii. 22—40. 


EPISTLE. 


GOSPEL. 


SAINT MATTHIAS’ DAY. 

The Collect. 
ALMIGHTY God, who into 
the place of the traitor Judas 

didst choose thy faithful servant Mat- 
thias to be of the number of the twelve 
Apostles; Grant that thy Church, 
being alway preserved from false 
Apostles, may be ordered and guided 
by faithful and true pastors; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


[a.p. 1549.] 


Acts i. 20—26. 
John xvii. 11, 12. 
20 


2 Pet. ii. 1. 
Eph. iv. 11, 12. 
Heb. v. 4, 5. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. Acts i. 15— 26. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xi. 25—30. 


Salisbury Use. 
Mal. iii. 1—4, 
Luke ii. 22—82. 


Salisbury Use. 
Acts 1. 15—26. 
Matt. xi. 25—30. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Heb. vii. 7—17. 


Mal. iti, 1—4, 


Luke ii. 22—32. Luke ii. 22—40. 


SANCTUS MATTHIAS APOSTOLUS. Salisbury Use, 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Acts i. 15—26. Acts i. 12—17. 
21 — 26. 


Matt. xi. 25-30. Luke x. 16—21. 


“We go in procession, two by two, carrying candles in our 
hands, which are lighted, not at a common fire, but at a fire first 
blessed in the church by a Bishop. They that go out first return 
last; and in the way we sing, ‘Great is the glory of the Lord,’ 
We go two by two in commendation of charity and a social life ; 
for so our Saviour sent out His disciples. We carry lights in our 
hands; first, to signify that our light should shine before men ; 
secondly, this we do this day especially in memory of the Wise 
Virgins (of whom this blessed Virgin is the chief) that went to 
meet their Lord with their lampslit and burning. And from this 
usage and the many lights set up in the church this day, it is 
called Candelaria, or Candlemas. Because our works should be 
all done in the holy fire of charity, therefore the candles are 
lit with holy fire. They that go out first return last, to teach 
humility, ‘in honour preferring one another. Because God 
loveth a cheerful giver, therefore we sing in the way. The pro- 
cession itself is to teach us that we should not stand idle in the 
way of life, but ‘go from strength to strength,’ not looking back 
to that which is behind, but reaching forward to that which is 
before.” 

The festival is placed at forty days’ distance from Christmas, as 
that was the interval directed by the law between the day of 
birth and the day when the mother presented herself for readmis- 
sion to the congregation, and her infant son for an offering to 
the Lord. [Lev. xii. 4. Exod. xxii. 29. Num. viii. 17.] It was 
on this occasion that Simeon gave to the Church the Nwne 
Dimittis, in which he proclaimed the glorious and universal 
Epiphany of the Holy Child, when he prophesied of Him as “a 
Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of God’s people 
Israel.” It was then also that the Virgin Mother first learned 
that sorrow as well as joy was in the wonderful lot assigned her ; 
«Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also.” 

The submission of the Blessed Virgin to the ceremony of puri- 
fication, and of her Divine Son to that of presentation in the 
Temple, were each of them an illustration of the perfect humilia- 


tion of our Lord to the likeness of sinful man. The miraculous 
conception of the Virgin had been unattended by that for which 
a ceremonial purification was ordained; and our Blessed Lord, 
having no original sin, needed not to be offered (or presented) 
and bought back again. But, as at His Baptism, so now, for 
Himself and for His holy Mother He says by their acts, “Suffer it 
to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness.” 
In the price of redemption (the representative sacrifice offered in 
the early dawn of the Holy Child’s life, to be followed by a more 
perfect Sacrifice in its eventide) it has been noticed that there 
was a typical meaning, now for the first and only time finding 
its true signification. The two turtle-doves, or young pigeons, 
were expressive of lowliness at all times, as offerings of the poor ; 
but in the offering of one by fire, and the eating of the other by 
the priest, or those who offered it, are now to be seen a type of 
Christ offering Himself for sin, and also giving Himself to be the 
spiritual food and sustenance of His people. 

It is worthy of remark, as a happy token of the unity which is 
possible in spite of disagreement, that although the cultus of the 
Blessed Virgin was and is one principal cause of difference between 
the Church of England and other Catholic Churches of Europe, 
yet we retain old Collects for both the Annunciation and the 
Purification, while nearly all the other Saints’-day Collects are 
modern. 


IytRoit.—We wait for Thy loving-kindness, O God: in the 
midst of Thy temple. O God, according to Thy Name, so is Thy 
praise unto the world’s end: Thy right hand is full of righteous- 
ness. Ps. Great is the Lord, and highly to be praised: in the 
city of our God, even upon His holy hill. Glory be. 


SAINT MATTHIAS. 


[FeBRuary 24.] 


This is not one of the most ancient of the festivals generally 
observed by the Church, as there is no provision for it in the 


THE ANNUNCIATION OF THE VIRGIN MARY. 


THE ANNUNCIATION OF THE BLESSED 
VIRGIN MARY. 


The Collect. 


Heb. xiii. 9. 

rete E beseech thee, O Lord, pour 
Matt. i. 18—21, : 

Heb. il, 9, 10. thy grace into our hearts; 
Pit 20,21.” that, as we have known the incarnation 


of thy Son Jesus Christ by the mes- 
sage of an angel, so by his cross and 
passion we may be brought unto the 
glory of his resurrection ; through the 
same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


133 


IN ANNUNCIATIONE BEATH MARIA, 


Postcommunio. 
RATIAM tuam, quesumus, Do- Salisbury Use. 
mine, mentibus nostris infunde : PORea kant 
ut qui angelo nuntiante Christi Filii Maiam. 
tui incarnationem cognovimus, per 
passionem ejus et crucem ad resurrec- 
tionis gloriam perducamur. Per eun- 
dem. 


ORD, we bisechen helde yn thi X¥Yth century 

grace to oure inwittis, that bi ‘io. 
the message of the aungel we knowe 
the incarnacioun of thi sone iesu crist, 
and by his passioun and cross be ledde 
to the glorie of his resurreccioun. Bi 
the same iesu crist oure lord, that with 
thee lyucth and regneth in oonhede of 
the hooly goost, god, bi alle worldis of 
worldis. So be it. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. astern. 
EPISTLE. Isa. vii. LO—15. Isa. vii. 1O—16. Isa. vii. 1O—15. Heb. ii. 11—18. 
GOSPEL. Luke i. 26—38. Luke i. 26—38. Luke i. 26—38. Luke i. 24—33. 


Lectionary of St. Jerome; but there is a Collect for it in the 
Sacramentary of St. Gregory, and in a German martyrology of 
about the same period. It comes first in order after the Festivals 
of the Incarnation, perhaps because St. Matthias represents the 
earliest independent action of the Church as that spiritual body 
which was to exercise the authority of Christ, and to become the 
substitute, in some measure, for His Visible Presence. But in 
the Eastern Church it is August 9th. 

St. Matthias’ Day was formerly changeable in Leap Year, when 
the intercalated day was added between February 23rd and 24th, 
and the 25th became the festival of St. Matthias. But at the 
revision of the Calendar in 1661, the intercalary day was placed 
at the end of the month, and the festival of St. Matthias fixed 
permanently to the 24th day. This is the day (VI. Kalend. 
Martii) appointed for the Festival in the Sacramentary of St. 
Gregory. 

Nothing more is recorded of St. Matthias in the New Testa- 
ment than that he was chosen to be an Apostle in the place of 
Judas Iscariot, the account of his Ordination to that high Office 
being given in Acts i. 15—26, the Epistle of the day throughout 
the world. The Eastern Gospel contains the same solemn prayer 
of our Lord as that does which is used in the Western Church, 
though taken from a different Evangelist ; and the coincidence is 
a striking illustration of the unity of mind by which the whole 
Catholic Church is pervaded. It is plain also that this Gospel is 
intended to show that the Apostle, on whose day it is used, was 
as much “numbered with” the other Apostles, although ordained 
by men, as any of those were who were ordained by our Lord 
Himself; and thus illustrates the great truth, that the Great 
High Priest Himself declared, “As My Father hath sent Me, 
even so send I you.” 

The tradition of the Church respecting St. Matthias’ Apostolic 
labours is, that after ministering for some years among his coun- 
trymen the Jews, he went to Cappadocia, and was eventually 
crucified there about the year of our Lord 64, The manner of 
his death was not very unlike that of the traitor Judas, but the 


one found the tree on which he hung the way “ to his own place ;” 
the other, his Master’s own road to the Paradise of God. 


Introir.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, O 
God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, 
Thou hast searched me out and known me: Thou knowest my 
downsitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


THE ANNUNCIATION, 
[Marou 25.] 


There is no mention of the festival of the Annunciation in the 
Lectionary of St. Jerome, although there are days in honour of 
the Purification and the Nativity and the Death or Assumption 
of the Blessed Virgin. It is however of very early date, as Pro- 
clus, patriarch of Constantinople, who died a.p. 446, has left a 
Homily on the day, which was preached in the presence of Nes- 
torius, and against his heresy. It is also mentioned by St. 
Athanasius, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and other writers as 
early ; and the Collect is found in the Sacramentary of Gela- 
sius, at the end of the fifth century, as well as in that of 
St. Gregory. In the Council of Toledo, a.D. 656, ‘the first of 
seven Canons orders that the feast of the Annunciation shall, in 
future, be kept on the 18th of December, so as not to interfere 
with the celebration of Good Friday or the observance of Lent. 
But this day was afterwards appropriated to the festival named 
“the Expectation of the Blessed Virgin,” and the old day was 
restored. 

In the Consuetudinary of Sarum this festival is called “Our 
Lord’s Annunciation,” and Bishop Cosin proposed to alter the 
title both here and in the Table of Lessons to “ The Annunciation 
of our Lord to the Blessed Virgin Mary:”’ in both cases his 
alteration was rejected, and the authorized title is “ The Annun- 
ciation of our Lady,” or “The Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary.” 


134 


SAINT MARK’S DAY. 
The Collect. 


SAINT MARK’S DAY. 


SANCTUS MARCUS EVANGELISTA. 
Oratio. 


eo ait. ALMIGHTY God, who hast EUS, qui beatum Marcum evan- Scag Use. 
ae . . ° . Greg. Nat. 
BIOS Wet ie. instructed thy holy Church with gelistam tuum evangelice pra- 's. Mate. Ev. 
1 Reta 20. the heavenly doctrine of thy Evange- | dicationis gratia sublimasti: tribue, 
eb. xiii. 9 ‘ 2 i 7 5 
list Saint Mark; Give us grace, that, | quesumus, ejus nos semper et erudi- 
being not like children carried away | tione perficere et oratione defendi. 
with every blast of vain doctrine, we | Per Dominum. 
may be established in the truth of thy 
holy Gospel, through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Eph. iv. 7—16. Eph. iv. 7—16. Ezek. i. 1O—14. 1 Pet. v. 6—14. 
GOSPEL. John xy. 1—11. John xv. 1—7. Luke x. 1—9. Luke x. 16—21. 


The Church of England commemorates the Mother of our Lord 
on five days in the year, the Annunciation, the Purification, the 
Visitation, the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, and her Conception. 
The three latter are Black Letter Days in July, September, and 
December: the two former, as days which commemorate events 
that associated her with the Person of our Lord and the work of 
our salvation by His human Nature, are provided with special 
services as days of obligation. 

If our Blessed Lord’s Nativity occurred on the 25th of Decem- 
ber, as there are sound chronological reasons for supposing, this 
may be taken as the true time when the angel Gabriel first gave 
to the Church the words, “ Hail, thou that art highly favoured, 
the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women ;” words 
which have been associated with errors in doctrine and practice, 
but which are still words that come from God. It must have 
been about this time also, “in those days,” that the Blessed 
Virgin was inspired to give to the Church the Canticle which 
has ever since been so dear to every generation. The words 
which she was thus inspired to speak respecting herself, and those 
which were spoken of her by the angel “sent from God,” show 
to what an exalted place she was raised by the Providence of 
Almighty God: and her meek reception of the wonderful revela- 
tion shows a holiness in the subjection of her will to the will of 
the Lord, Whose handmaid she was, that no saint ever surpassed. 
Holy in her original character, her holiness was made more perfect 
by that most intimate union with Jesus which existed for nine 
months of her life. Little children were brought to Jesus that 
He might lay His hands on them, and thus sanctify them by the 
touch of a passing moment; but the same Jesus abode long in 
His Mother’s bosom, His spotless Body was formed of her sub- 
stance, and sanctified her both in what He received from her as 
Man, and what He gave to her as God. Not Eve when she was 
in Paradise could have been so holy as the Virgin Mary when she 
became a Paradise herself. Not even the glorified saints who 
have attained to the purity and bliss of Heaven are raised to 
higher blessedness and purity than that saintly maiden was whom 
Elizabeth was inspired to speak of as “the Mother of my Lord.” 

This sanctity of the Blessed Virgin Mary through her associa- 
tion with her Divine Son has always been kept vividly in view by 
the Church: but, while excess of sentiment on the one hand has 
led to an irreverent dishonour of her name by associating it with 
attributes of Deity, so want of faith in the principle of the In- 
carnation has led, on the other hand, to an irreverent depreciation 
of her sanctity. Our two principal and three minor festivals in 
honour of the Virgin and her work in the Incarnation point out 
the true course ; to esteem her very highly above all other saints ; 
but yet so that her honour may be to the glory of God. 


Intro1t.—Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the 


skies pour down righteousness ; let the earth open, and let it bring 
forth salvation. [Alleluia. Alleluia.—If in Easter season.] Ps. 
And let righteousness spring up together; I the Lord have 
created it. Glory be. 


SAINT MARK. 
[APRIL 25. ] 


The festival of St. Mark is provided for in the Sacramentary of 
St. Gregory, although not in the Comes of St. Jerome. Like 
others, it probably began in a local observance by the Church of 
a particular country, (in this case, Egypt,) and was gradually 
extended to all other Churches throughout the world. 

Of the Saint commemorated on this day there can be no doubt; 
but it is not quite certain which of the Marks named in the Acts 
of the Apostles is Saint Mark the Evangelist. It seems most 
probable that he was not the John Mark of Acts xii. 12, and 
Acts xv. 37, (who was the nephew of St. Barnabas, and about 
whose conduct the sharp dissension arose between St. Paul and 
St. Barnabas,) but that the Evangelist was the “Marcus, my 
son,” of whom St. Peter writes, in 1 Pet. i. 13, as being his com- 
panion at Babylon. It was his association with St. Peter which 
led St. Mark to be the writer of the Gospel which goes by his 
name, and which is always connected with the name of St. Peter 
as well as of St. Mark by ancient writers. The later years of his 
ministry were spent at Alexandria, where he founded the Church 
of Christ among the intellectual men of that learned city, and 
originated among them that class of Christian scholars which 
afterwards gave such a prominent place to Alexandria in the 
theological history of the Church. The Evangelist carried the 
knowledge of Christ and the ministry of the Church into less 
civilized parts of Africa, but Alexandria was the central point of 
his labours ; and there he was martyred on a day when the heathen 
feast of Serapis was being observed, and which also appears to 
have been Easter Day, probably April 25th, and perhaps late in 
the first century, after most of the Apostles had gone to their 
rest. He was dragged from his place at the altar through the 
streets of the city, and over the rough cliffs adjoining, to prison ; 
from whence the next morning he was again tortured in the 
same manner until his soul departed to spend a second and 
glorious Easter with his risen and ascended Lord. 

One of the ancient Apostolic Liturgies goes by the name of 
St. Mark ; and his Festival was formerly the day on which the 
Greater Litanies or Processions were said: but these latter origi- 
nated with St. Gregory in the sixth century. [See Introduction 
to Litany, p. 47.] 

It will be observed that the English Epistle and Gospel for 
this day were anciently, as they still are, different from those of 
the Latin and Oriental Churches. 


SAINT PHILIP AND SAINT JAMES.—SAINT BARNABAS. 


SAINT PHILIP AND SAINT JAMES’ DAY. 
The Collect. 


ue ALMIGHTY God, whom truly 

Wisd, xy. 3. to know is everlasting life ; 
xiv. 6—9.. Grant us perfectly to know thy Son 

1 John y, 20. : 

Acts xv. 6.13. Jesus Christ to be the way, the truth, 

Matt. vii. 14. 


and the life ; that, following the steps 
of thy holy Apostles, Saint Philip and 
Saint James, we may stedfastly walk 
in the way that leadeth to eternal life, 
through the same thy Son Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. James i. 1—12. Wisd. v. 1—5. 
GOSPEL. John xiv. 1—14. John xiy. 1—13. 


135 


DIES APOSTOLORUM PHILIPPI ET 
JACOBI. 


Salisbury Use. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Wisd. v. 1—5. Acts vill. 26—39. 


John xiv. 1—13. John i, 44—51. 


SAINT BARNABAS THE APOSTLE. 
The Collect. 


[a.p. 104.5 LORD God Almighty, who didst 
ANN endue thy holy Apostle Barnabas 
Ephiv.§,9. With singular gifts of the Holy Ghost ; 


Introrr.—Hide me, O God, from the gathering together of 
the froward, and from the insurrection of wicked doers. Alleluia. 
Alleluia. Ps. Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer; preserve 
my life from fear of the enemy. Glory be. 


SAINT PHILIP AND SAINT JAMES, 
{May 1.] 


In the Lectionary of St. Jerome and the Sacramentary of St. 
Gregory the names of these two Apostles are associated together 
as they are in the Latin and English Churches of modern times: 
and the day of the Festival is in both cases the same as that now 
observed. But in the Eastern Church St. Philip’s day is Novem- 
ber 14th, and St. James’ day October 23rd. It will also be ob- 
served that the Apostle St. Philip alone is named for May 1st in 
the ancient Calendar of the Venerable Bede, printed in a previous 
page; and in some early Calendars of the English Church, June 
22nd is dedicated to “ Jacobus Alfei.” 

The Epistle for the day in the Eastern Church is the same 
portion of Scripture that was read for the Second Morning 
Lesson in our own Church until 1661: but it seems clear that 
the Philip there mentioned is Philip the Deacon, since St. Peter 
and St. John were sent to Samaria to confirm those whom he had 
baptized, which would not have been necessary in the case of an 
Apostle. It is curious to observe that the same error should have 
occurred in both the Eastern and the English Church ; but there 
seems to have been much confusion among the ancients between 
St. Philip the Apostle and Philip the Deacon and Evangelist, 
arising out of a generally received opinion that the former was 
married [Euseb. v. 24], while it is recorded of the latter in Acts 
xxi. 9 that he had “four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.” 

St. Philip was one of the first of our Lord’s disciples, and is 
thought to have accompanied Him for some time while St. Andrew 
and St. Peter had returned to their occupation of fishing after 
their first call. It may have been this faithful companionship 
which led to the loving rebuke of our Lord recorded in the Gos- 
pel of the day, “Have I been so long time with you, and yet 
hast thow not known Me, Philip?” For the Apostle’s zeal in 
bringing Nathanael and the Greeks to his Master appears to 
indicate a trained faith in the Person of the holy Jesus, as does 
even his aspiration, “Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us!” 


SANCTUS BARNABAS APOSTOLUS. Salisbury Use. 


In the account of the miracle of the loaves and fishes St. Philip 
also seems to have been specially under the loving eye of his 
Master, who sought to “prove him” before He tried the faith 
of the others. After the dispersion of the Apostles, St. Philip 
carried Christ and the Church to Northern Asia, and his name 
has also been connected with the early Church of Russia. St. 
Chrysostom and Eusebius both record that he was crucified and 
stoned on the cross, at Hierapolis, a great stronghold of idolatry, 
in Phrygia; and the tradition of the Church is, that his martyrdom 
took place immediately after he had procured by his prayers the 
death of a great serpent which was worshipped by the people of 
the city. 

St. James the Less was son of Alpheus, or Cleophas, and of 
Mary, and nephew to Joseph the husband of the Blessed Virgin. 
Hence he was, in the genealogical phraseology of the Jews, a 
“brother of our Lord,” as is shown in the table at page 79. 
It was also thought by the ancients that his mother Mary was 
cousin, or as the Hebrews would say “sister,” to the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, and this would establish a double legal affinity 
between James and Joses, her sons, and the holy Jesus. St. James 
the Less is mentioned by Josephus and in the Talmud, being 
well known to the Jews from his position as Apostle of the 
Church of Jerusalem up to the beginning of its last troubles : 
and having won even from them the name of “the just,” a name 
shadowing that of his Master, so often called “ the Righteous ” 
in the Psalms. It is he whose name is several times mentioned 
by St. Paul; and he was the writer of the Catholic Hpistle of St. 
James. He went to his rest by martyrdom [4.D. 62], in Jerusalem, 
being thrown down from a pinnacle or wing of the Temple by 
some of the persecuting Scribes and Pharisees, and slain, as he lay 
bruised on the ground below, with a fuller’s club. 

The only reason that can be suggested for coupling together 
St. Philip and St. James is, that by thus domg the manner in 
which our Lord sent forth His Apostles two and two is illus- 
trated. St. Simon and St. Jude, St. Peter and St. Paul, St. Bar- 
nabas and St. Bartholomew are parallel instances. 


Introrr.—They cried unto Thee in the time of their trouble, 
and Thou heardest them from Heaven. Alleluia. Alleluia. Ps. 
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for it becometh well the just 
to be thankful. Glory be. 


136 


Rom. xii. 6—8, 


Rom. xii. é—8. Leave us not, we beseech thee, desti- 


tute of thy manifold gifts, nor yet of 
grace to use them alway to thy honour 
and glory; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Acts xi. 22—80. 


GOSPEL. John xv. 12—16. 


SAINT JOHN BAPTIS 
The Collect. 


[a.p. 1549.] LMIGHTY God, by whose pro- 
Lae vidence thy servant John Bap- 
Matt, iii. 1—8. 


tist was wonderfully born, and sent to 
prepare the way of thy Son our Saviour, 
by preaching of repentance; Make us 
so to follow his doctrine and holy life, 


xi. 11—14. 
John i. 6, 7. 29, 
x. 47. v. 33. 
Matt. xiv. 3, 4. 
6. 8. 10. 

1 Pet. iv. 19. 


Salisbury Use. 


Eph. ii. 19—22. 
John xv. 12—16, 


SAINT JOHN BAPTIST’S DAY. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


[with St.Bartholomew. ] 


Acts xi. 21—xiii. 3. Acts xi. 19—30. 


Matt. x. 16—22. Luke x. 16—21. 


DIES SANCTI JOHANNIS BAPTISTA. Salisbury Use. 


SAINT BARNABAS. 
[June 11.] 


This festival is not of primitive antiquity, being unnoticed in 
the ancient Lectionaries and Sacramentaries. In the Calendar 
of the Venerable Bede it is the 10th instead of the 11th of June; 
and in the Eastern Church the name of St. Barnabas is associated 
with that of St. Bartholomew, the latter being also commemo- 
rated on August 25th. The day was omitted from the English 
Calendar of 1552, but the Service was retained. In Fothergill’s 
MS. it is stated that the day was not observed because St. Bar- 
nabas was not one of the twelve}. 

The name of St. Barnabas derives its chief lustre from his 
association with St. Paul; yet, independently of this, he was one 
worthy to be ranked among the saints of the Church as an 
Evangelist, Apostle, and Martyr. 

The Apostle St. Barnabas was born at Cyprus, but was 
a Jew of the tribe of Levi, and his original name was Joses 
or Joseph. Some of the Fathers record that he was one of 
the seventy disciples, and that he was brought up with St. 
Paul at the feet of Gamaliel. After our Lord’s Ascension he 
received the name of Barnabas, or “Son of Consolation,” from 
the Apostles ; and showed his zeal for Christ by selling his pro- 
perty that the Apostles might distribute the proceeds among the 
poor; an act which possibly originated the name by which he has 
ever since been known. St. Chrysostom hands down a tradition 
that he was a man of very amiable disposition but commanding 
aspect. Having brought St. Paul to the Apostles he was asso- 
ciated with him for about fourteen years, and on several mis- 
sionary journeys. After their separation nothing further is 
recorded of St. Barnabas in Holy Scripture; but the traditions 
of the Church represent that he spent the remainder of his life 
among his fellow-countrymen at Cyprus, and that he was stoned 
by the Jews at Salamis under circumstances somewhat similar to 
those which brought St. Stephen to his death. What was sup- 
posed to be the body of St. Barnabas was discovered four cen- 
turies after his martyrdom, a Hebrew copy of St. Matthew’s 
Gospel lying next his heart, which was believed to have been 


1 Hence we find Bishop Wren in 1636 giving direction that ‘ministers 
forget not to read the collects, epistles, and gospels appointed for the Con- 
version of St. Paul ...and for St. Barnaby’s Day.” Card. Doc. Ann. ii. 202. 


written by himself. An Epistle is extant, bearing the name of 
St. Barnabas, which is considered by many scholars to be 
authentic. 

The Gospel for the day is evidently selected with reference to 
the act of St. Barnabas in consoling the poor disciples in their 
poverty. He acted upon the command of our Lord in the spirit 
with which the example of the Good Samaritan is commended to 
us, and showed his love by going and doing likewise. 


Inrrort.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, 
O God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, 
Thou hast searched me out and known me: Thou knowest my 
downsitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST. 
[JUNE 24. ] 


This festival is in the Comes of St. Jerome, as also another 
commemorating the Beheading of St. John the Baptist, but the 
date is not indicated in either case. Mabillon says that the 
festival of this day was in the Carthaginian Calendar before a.p. 
484; and it is mentioned [circ. a.D. 400] by Maximus, Bp. of 
Turin, as also by St. Augustine, in several Homilies. In the 
Eastern Church it is kept on January 7th, the day after the 
holy Theophany ; and the festival of the Decollation is also fixed, 
as in the Latin Church and our own, for August 29th. The day 
on which our principal Festival of St. John the Baptist is kept 
has been supposed to be connected with his words, “ He must 
increase, but I must decrease ;” the days of the Bridegroom are 
growing longer, but those of the friend of the Bridegroom are 
beginning to wane. So St. Augustine says [Hom. 287], “ John 
was born to-day, and from to-day the days decrease; Christ was 
born on the eighth of the kalends of January, and from that day 
the days increase.” But the 24th of June is also the proximate 
day of the Baptist’s birth, since he was six months older than our 
Lord. 

Although the martyrdom of St. John Baptist is one of the 
four recorded in Holy Scripture (the other three being those of 
the Holy Innocents, St. Stephen, and St. James), yet the pre- 
sent festival, which commemorates his Nativity, appears to be 
the more ancient of the two dedicated to his name, and the one 
more generally observed. So we may judge from the Sermons 
both of Maximus and St. Augustine, each of whom accounts for 
the custom of observing the Birth and not the Martyrdom of the 


SAINT PETER’S DAY. 


that we may truly repent according to 
his preaching ; and after his example 
constantly speak the truth, boldly re- 
buke vice, and patiently suffer for the 
truth’s sake; through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


137 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman, ' Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Isa. xl. 1—11. Isa. xlix. 1—3. Isa. xlix. 1—7, Rom. xiii, 11. 
, xiv. 1—4., 
GOSPEL. Luke i. 57—80. Luke i. 57-68. Luke i. 57—68. Luke i. 24, 25. 57 
—68. 
SAINT PETER’S DAY. DIES APOSTOLORUM PETRI ET PAULI, Salisbury Use. 
The Collect. 
[a.p. 1549.] 
2 Pet. i. 1. 3, ALMIGHTY God, who by thy 
eee 1615; Son Jesus Christ didst give to 
John xxi. 15 


Autese as,” thy Apostle Saint Peter many excel- 


Heb. xiii. 7. 17. : : 
iPet. v.24. lent gifts, and commandedst him 


Precursor of our Lord as if no other festival in his honour had 
yet been established. ‘ The prophets who had gone before were 
first born, and at a later day prophesied, but St. John Baptist 
heralded the Incarnation of our Lord when His Virgin Mother 
came to visit Elizabeth, and both the Precursor and the Holy 
Child were yet unborn.” 

The miraculous birth of St. John the Baptist, and all that we 
know of his subsequent history, is told us in the opening chapters 
of the four Gospels, in the 11th of St. Matthew, and the 9th of 
St. Luke. By comparing our Lord’s words in Matt. xi, 14, 
those of the angel in Luke i. 16, 17, of Zacharias in Luke ii. 76, 
and those of St. John himself in announcing his mission, with 
preceding prophecies, we see that the prophets had spoken of 
him more than seven hundred years before he was born, and that 
the very last words of the Old Testament, written about four 
hundred years previously, were concerning him. And, com- 
paratively little as is said about St. John in Holy Scripture, 
what is said shows how important his office was, and illustrates 
the words of our Lord, that among all previously born of women, 
none was ever greater than John the Baptist. 

He appears to have spent his childhood, at least, with our 
Blessed Lord and His mother, and it is natural to suppose that 
his parents lived but a few years after his birth. But when the 
time for his ministry came, he adopted the ancient prophetic 
mode of life; such as is indicated in the case of Elijah the Tish- 
bite, who is said [2 Kings i. 8] to have been “an hairy man, and 
girt with a girdle of leather about his loins.” As a prophet, and 
the greatest of all,—the last prophet of the old dispensation, and 
the first of the new,—he assailed the vices of the generation in 
which our Lord came, as Elijah himself had assailed those of 
Ahab and, the Israel of that day; and so doing he brought many 
to repentance, and initiated a new moral life by that ordinance of 
Baptism with which the dispensation of Sinai ended, and that of 
Calvary began. And when by the power of his preaching he had 
prepared the hearts of the people to receive Christ as a blessing, 
and not as one “come to smite the earth with a curse” [Mal. 
iv. 6], the other part of his office was brought into exercise, 
that of baptizing our Lord, and witnessing to the descent of the 
Holy Spirit on His human nature. 

Powerful as the effect of St. John the Baptist’s ministrations 
evidently was, we have very little information given us about it. 
He proclaimed the coming of Christ, rebuked all classes of the 
people for their sins, showed them the way to turn from them, 
and baptized with a Baptism of water which foreshadowed the 
Baptism with the Holy Ghost as well as water. All people seem 


to have come readily to him, for the “offence of the Cross” had 
not yet begun, and the prophet who attracted was no “car- 
penter’s son,” but “a prophet indeed,” the son of a man well 
known among them, a priest of the regular succession of Aaron, 
prophesying as Elijah, Isaiah, or Ezekiel, with the outward 
appearance and habit of a “man sent from God,” and telling of 
that which they longed for, the near approach of their Messiah. 
This is all we learn of the ministry of the Baptist from Holy 
Scripture, and tradition has added little or nothing more. His 
martyrdom appears to have taken place very early in our Lord’s 
ministry, and when St. John himself was only about thirty 
years of age; and since his work was done, we may see in it the 
manner in which the course of even the evil of this world is so 
regulated, that it ministered by a quick death to the rapid 
removal of a saint from the Church on earth to the Church in 
Heaven when the time of his reward was come. 


IntRorT.—The Lord hath called me by name from the womb 
of my mother. He hath made my mouth like a sharp sword. 
In the shadow of His hand hath He hid me: He hath made me 
like a polished shaft, and in His quiver hath He concealed me. 
Ps. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to 
praise Thy Name, O Thou most highest. Glory be. 


SAINT PETER. 
[JUNE 29.] 


This day is one of the oldest of Christian festivals, and one 
that was from the beginning of its institution celebrated with 
great solemnity. Ruinart [617] traces it back as far as the third 
century, and it is probably of even more primitive antiquity. In 
St. Jerome’s Lectionary there are two Gospels and two Epistles, 
the one pair under the name of St. Peter, the other under that 
of St. Paul. As there is only one Vigil, and one Octave, which 
is called the Octave of the Apostles, the day was evidently then 
dedicated to both Apostles, as it was in the English Church 
until the Reformation [a “Commemoration” of St. Paul follow- 
ing on the 30th], and as it still is in the Latin and the Eastern 
Church. It was a very early custom for the Bishops of Rome to 
celebrate the Holy Communion in both St, Peter’s and St. Paul’s 
Churches on this day, a custom which is mentioned [a.p. 348] 
by Prudentius [Peristephano, carm. xii. ], 

Transtyberina prius solvit sacra pervigil sacerdos, 


Mox hue recurrit, duplicatque vota. 
1 


138 


earnestly to feed thy flock; Make, we 
beseech thee, all Bishops and Pastors 
diligently to preach thy holy Word, 
and the people obediently to follow the 
same, that they may receive the crown 
of everlasting glory; through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. 
EPISTLE. Acts xii. 1—11. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xvi. 183—19. 


SAINT JAMES THE APOSTLE. 
The Collect. 


49.) ; 
Se cas G ANT OninercmliGod  thattas 
hoe ae thine holy Apostle Saint James, 
John xiv. 21. 


Rev. xxii. 14. 


leaving his father and all that he had, 


He also speaks of the whole city frequenting each church, gs if 
the festival was kept very generally and with great solemnity. 
St. Augustine, St. Leo, and several others of the Fathers have 
left sermons preached on the day of St. Peter and St. Paul; and 
no doubt the two, from their relative positions as the chief 
Apostles of the Jews and the Gentiles, from their joint ministra- 
tions at Rome, and from their martyrdom together there on the 
same day, have always had this day dedicated in their united 
names. Bishop Cosin restored the title “ Saint Peter’s and Saint 
Paul’s Day” in his Durham Prayer Book, and added to the 
Collect, so that it should read “. . . . commandedst him ear- 
nestly to feed Thy flock, and madest Thy Apostle St. Paul a 
choice vessel to bear Thy name before the Gentiles, make, we 
beseech Thee, all Bishops and all other ministers of Thy Church, 
diligently to preach Thy holy Word... .” He also altered the 
Kpistle to 2 Tim. iv. 1—9; but none of these changes were 
adopted. 

St. Peter was one of the first-called of our Lord’s disciples 
[ John i. 35—42], and as soon as he had come to follow Christ, he 
was marked out by a new name, that of Cephas, the Syriac equi- 
valent of the one by which he has since been so familiarly known 
to the Church. Our Lord did nothing without a meaning, and 
in giving this new name to His disciple, He appears to have pro- 
phetically indicated the strong, immoveable faith in Him which 
that disciple was to exhibit; and the firmness of which is not 
contradicted even by that temporary want of courage which led 
him to try and save his life by denial of his Master in the bitter 
hour of His Passion. Such instances of faith as St. Peter’s 
attempt to walk on the water, and his confession of Christ as the 
Son of the living God, seem to set him at the head of the Apostles, 
as one whom no shock could move from his belief in the Lord; 
and the striking words of our Lord which are recited in the 
Gospel for this day show that a special revelation had been 
vouchsafed to the Apostle to give him that knowledge of Christ 
on which his faith rested. It was, perhaps, because St. Peter’s 
faith was stronger than that of the other Apostles that he had 
to undergo greater temptation. Satan desired to “sift him as 
wheat,” as he had desired to tempt Job; but one look from Jesus 
brought him to himself and counteracted the temptation. A 
similar temptation is said to have assailed him just before his 
martyrdom, as our Lord’s agony was a kind of second temptation. 
St. Peter too desired that the cup might pass from him, and en- 
deayoured to escape from Rome. But as he was leaving the 
city he had such a vision of his Master as St. Paul had on his 
way to Damascus. “Lord, whither goest Thou?” were the 


Salisbury Use. 
Acts xii. 1—11. 
Matt. xvi. 183—19. 


SAINT JAMES THE APOSTLE. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Acts xii, 1—11. 2 Cor. xi. 21—xii. 9. 


Matt. xvi. 13—19. 


Matt. xvi. 13—19. 


DIES SANCTI JACOBI APOSTOLI. Salisbury Use. 


words of the Apostle, and the reply was a question whether that 
Master must go to Rome and again suffer, since His servants 
were afraid to die for His sake. As when Jesus had “looked on” 
the Apostle years before in the hall of Pilate, so now, the trial of 
faith ended in a victory, and the servant returned to follow the 
Master by being girded by another than himself, and led whither 
he would not at the first have gone, to the Cross. At his own 
request he was crucified with his head downwards to make the 
death more ignominious and painful; and as being unworthy to 
suffer the same death as his Lord. This was in the year 63; 
and while St. Peter was being crucified at the Vatican, St. Paul 
was being beheaded at Aque Salvia, three miles from Rome. 

Our Lord’s remarkable words, “I will give unto thee the keys 
of the kingdom of heaven,” do not seem to be wholly explained 
by saying that St. Peter represented all the Apostles, and that 
these words represented the power given to all. But if they 
implied any distinction of authority between St. Peter and his 
brethren, they do not give any foundation whatever to the claims 
which the Bishops of Rome have made as successors of St. Peter: 
for (1) there is no evidence that they are in any special sense 
successors of St. Peter, and (2) if our Lord’s words cannot clearly 
be applied to the other Apostles, much less can they be applied to 
Bishops of later days who were not Apostles. There is nothing 
in the Scriptural account of St. Peter’s Apostolic work which 
gives any explanation of the words; nor does the tradition of 
the Church respecting that work show any thing that at all 
helps to do so. He presided over the Church at Antioch for 
some time,—a fact commemorated by the festival of St. Peter’s 
Chair at Antioch,—assisted, as it appears, in evangelizing Chal- 
dea, and was probably some years at Rome before his death. 
During these years it seems most likely that he was all the 
while acting chiefly as the Apostle of the Circumcision, having 
charge of Jewish Christians: and, while great works were un- 
doubtedly assigned to the other Apostles, there are evident traces 
of a providential disposition of duties by which Jewish Chris- 
tianity became the field of St. Peter’s labours; Gentile Chris- 
tianity that of St. Paul’s (the successor of St. James) ; and the 
general government of the Church, when Jewish and Gentile 
Christianity were merging into one, the work of St. John, when 
the others had passed away from their labours. 


Inrroir.—Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath sent 
His angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and 
from all the expectation of the Jews. Ps. And when Peter was 
come to himself he said. Glory be. 


SAINT BARTHOLOMEW THE APOSTLE. 


without delay was obedient unto the 
calling of thy Son Jesus Christ, and 
followed him; so we, forsaking all 
worldly and carnal affections, may be 
evermore ready to follow thy holy com- 
mandments; through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 


139 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Acts xi, 27. xii. 3. Eph. ii. 19—22. 1 Cor. iv. 9—15. Acts xii. 1—11. 
Matt. xx. 20—28. Matt. xx. 20—23. Matt. xx. 20—23. Luke ix. 1—6. 


| GOSPEL, : 


SAINT BARTHOLOMEW THE APOSTLE. 
The Collect. 


Tohn i, 45—61. ALMIGHTY and everlasting 
Matt. x. 25. God, who didst give to thine 
Eph. i. s—10, Apostle Bartholomew grace truly to be- 


lieve and to preach thy Word; Grant, 


IN DIE S. BARTHOLOMAI APOSTOLI. 
Oratio. 
MNIPOTENS sempiterne Deus, Salisbury Use. 
qui hujus diei venerandam sanc- “§%i*4 °° 
tamque letitiam in beati Bartholomei 
Apostoli tui festivitate tribuisti; Da 


SAINT JAMES THE GREAT, 
[JuLy 25.] 


The festival of St. James, the brother of St. John the Divine, 
is not noticed in the Lectionary of St. Jerome, but has a Collect 
appointed in St. Gregory’s Sacramentary, and is also in the an- 
cient English Calendars of Bede and of King Athelstan’s Psalter. 
In the Eastern Church it is kept on April 30th, but in the Western 
it has always been observed on July 25th. 

St. James being a brother of the beloved disciple, his rela- 
tionship to our Lord may be seen in the table printed under 
that Apostle’s day [p.79]. With St. John he received the appella- 
tion of Boanerges from our Lord, and has always been surnamed 
the Great, or the Greater, by the Church: but neither of these 
designations can be satisfactorily accounted for. Some special 
position was given to St. James and St. John, as well as to 
St. Peter, by their Divine Master; and the request of their 
mother, probably Salome, that they might sit on either hand of 
our Lord in His Kingdom, was doubtless founded on the choice 
thus made by Him, coupled with such a strong faith in His 
Person and Power as was displayed on another occasion, when the 
sons of Zebedee sought authority from Christ to destroy the 
Samaritan city that had rejected Him. [Luke ix. 52.] Their 
Master had told His servants that they should eat and drink at 
His table in His Kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve 
tribes of Israel ; and since He had given to St. Peter the Keys of 
the Kingdom of Heaven, the other two favoured Apostles be- 
sought that to them might be given the two posts of honour and 
suffering next to His Person. 

St. James was the first of the Apostles who suffered Martyr- 
dom, and the only one whose death is recorded in the New Testa- 
ment. The fact of his death is told us in the modern English 
Epistle of the day, but of its circumstances nothing more is 
known than that he suffered through the hatred of Herod 
Agrippa. Tradition says that his accuser repented as the Apostle 
was on his way to the place of execution, and that having re- 
ceived the blessing of the servant of Christ, he professed himself 
a Christian, and was baptized in the blood of martyrdom at the 
same time with St. James. The Apostolic mantle of St. James 
appears to have fallen upon St. Paul, and perhaps we may look 
upon the latter as fulfilling the expectations which must have 
been raised by the place which the elder son of Zebedee occupied 
near the Person of our Lord, and by the title of Boanerges which 


was given to him, 


St. James the Great is the patron saint of Spain, and his 
remains are supposed to be preserved at Compostella. “St. Iago 
of Compostella” holds the same relation to the history of that 
kingdom which St. George does to that of England: and both 
names have been used as the battle-ery of Christian hosts when 
they went forth to stem the torrent of that Mahometan and 
Moorish invasion which once threatened to drive Christianity 
from its throne in Europe as it has driven it from Asia. 


Introit.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, O 
God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, Thou 
hast searched me out and known me: Thou knowest my down- 
sitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


SAINT BARTHOLOMEW. 
[Aveusr 24. ] 


There is no festival of St. Bartholomew in the Lectionary of 
St. Jerome, but it appears in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory. 
In the Eastern Church this Apostle is commemorated on the 
same day with St. Barnabas, as St. Simon and St. Jude are con- 
nected in the Western Church; but on this day there is also a 
commemoration of the Translation of St. Bartholomew. There 
is absolutely nothing but his name recorded of St. Bartholomew 
in the New Testament (though it has usually been supposed that 
Nathanael and Bartholomew are two names for the same person) ; 
but the Gospel of the day perpetuates an old tradition that St. 
Bartholomew was of noble birth, and that hence arose the 
“strife” among the Apostles, “which of them should be ac- 
counted the greatest’ in their Master’s expected kingdom. 

The reasons why Nathanael and Bartholomew are supposed to 
be the same person are as follows. (1) The call of St. Bartholo- 
mew is nowhere mentioned, while that of Nathanael appears to 
be the call of an Apostle. (2) The Evangelists who mention 
Bartholomew do not name Nathanael, while St. John, who tells 
us of the latter, does not name Bartholomew. (3) Bar-Tholmai 
may be only an appellation of Nathanael, as Bar-Jona is of St. 
Peter, since it signifies ‘the son of Tholmai,’ as the latter does 
‘the son of Jonas,’ and as Barnabas means ‘the son of consola- 
tion” But strong as these reasons seem, there is the strong 
testimony of the Fathers against them. St. Augustine, St. 
Chrysostom, St. Gregory Nyssen, and St. Gregory the Great, all 
declare that Nathanael was not one of the twelve: and the 

T2 


140 


we beseech thee, unto thy Church, to 


SAINT MATTHEW THE APOSTLE. 


Ecclesie tue, quesumus, et amare 


love that word which he believed, and | quod credidit, et preedicare quod docuit. 


both to preach and receive the same ; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE, Acts v. 12—16. Eph. ii. 19—22. 
GOSPEL. Luke xxii. 24—30. Luke xxii. 24—30. 


Per Dominum nostrum. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


[See St. Barnabas’ 
Day. |] 


1 Cor. xii. 27—31. 
Luke vi. 12—19, 


SAINT MATTHEW THE APOSTLE. 
The Collect. 


[a.p. 1549.] ALMIGHTY God, who by thy 
Tokens 15: blessed Son didst call Matthew 

23-30, from the receipt of custom to be an 
Matt. xvi. 24— 


26. Apostle and Evangelist ; Grant us 
Tong grace to forsake all covetous desires 
and inordinate love of riches, and to 
follow the same thy Son Jesus Christ, 
who liveth and reigneth with thee and 
the Holy Ghost, one God, world with- 

out end. Amen. 


DIES SANCTI MATTHEI APOSTOLI. Salisbury Use. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. 
EPISTLE. 2 Cor. iv. 1—6. Ezek. i. 1O—14. 
GOSPEL. Matt. ix. 9—18. Matt. ix. 9—13. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Ezek. i. 10—14. 1 Cor. iv. 9—16. 


Matt. ix. 9—13. Matt. ix. 9—13. 


——a ines 


opinion that he was identical with. Bartholomew is first found in 
a Benedictine author named Rupert, who wrote in the twelfth 
century. St. Augustine uses the fact that Nathanael was not an 
Apostle as a proof of his great holiness and ready perception of 
Christ :—“ This was not said to Andrew, nor said to Peter, nor to 
Philip, which is said to Nathanael, ‘ Behold an Israelite indeed, 
in whom is no guile:’”—and assigns his learning and position in 
life as a reason why He Who chose the weak things of the 
world to confound the strong did not make him an Apostle. 

The common tradition of the Church respecting St. Bartholo- 
mew is that he evangelized Northern India, leaving there a 
Hebrew copy. of St. Matthew’s Gospel, which afterwards came 
into the hands of Pantzenus, head of the college of Alexandria, 
about A.D. 190. It is believed that, having once escaped cruci- 
fixion at Hierapolis in Phrygia, through the remorse of his per- 
secutor, St. Bartholomew was afterwards martyred at Albanopolis 
on the Caspian Sea, where the king Astyages ordered him to be 
flayed alive (perhaps on the cross), a mode of punishment not 
uncommon among Oriental nations. 


IntRort.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, O 
God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, 
Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


SAINT MATTHEW. 


[SEPTEMBER 21. | 


The festival of this Apostle has Gospel and Epistle appointed 
for it in the Comes of St. Jerome, but it does not seem to have 
been celebrated in September ; and in the Oriental Church it is 
still observed on November 16th. In his double capacity of 
Apostle and Evangelist, the first who was inspired to write the 
Holy Gospel, and who tells us more than all of our Lord’s human 


life, his name has ever been much honoured in the Church. Of 
the four “living creatures” by whom the Apocalypse is believed 
to symbolize the Evangelists or their Gospels, the “likeness of a 
man” is the one assigned to St. Matthew, as significant of the 
prominence which his Gospel gives to our Lord’s human nature. 

This holy Apostle and Evangelist is first mentioned in his own 
Gospel and by the other Evangelists as a Roman toll-gatherer, 
though he himself was a Jew. His office was to collect tolls and 
customs from those who passed over the sea of Galilee, and it 
appears to have been near Capernaum that he was engaged in 
this duty when he heard the words of Jesus, “ Follow Me” [ Matt. 
ix. 9]. As the sons of Zebedee had left their ships, their nets, 
and their occupation, to obey those words, so did St. Matthew 
give up his profitable employment to do the bidding of Him who 
had “not where to lay His head :” and, as it seems to have been 
immediately afterwards that our Lord made him one of His 
Apostles, the forsaking of all that he had must have been as final 
as it was sudden, showing how entirely obedient he became to 
his Lord. After the dispersion of the Apostles St. Matthew took 
part in the evangelization of Chaldsa, and gave up his life to his 
Master’s service by martyrdom at Nadabar. His Gospel is sup- 
posed to have been written by him originally in Hebrew for the 
Jewish Christians, but the Hebrew version appears to have been 
soon superseded by one in Greek, which was doubtless the work 
of the Evangelist himself, for it has always been received into 
the Canon of Holy Scripture. A copy of the Hebrew text is said 
to have been found in the grave of St. Barnabas A.D. 485, but it 
is not now extant. 


IntRo1T.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, O 
God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, 
Thou hast searched me out and known me: Thou knowest my 
downsitting and mine uprising. 


SAINT MICHAEL AND. ALL ANGELS. 


SAINT MICHAEL AND ALL ANGELS. 


The Collect. 
Gol.i 16, EVERLASTING God, who hast 
ae ordained and constituted the ser- 
hei ly*- — vices of Angels and men in a wonder- 
Het — fal order; Mercifully grant, that as 


thy holy Angels alway do thee service 
in heaven, so by thy appointment they 
may succour and defend us on earth; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


141 


IN FESTO SANCTI MICHAELIS ARCH- 
ANGELI, 


Oratio. 
EUS, qui miro ordine Angelorum Salisbury Use. 
Outs ° s ‘ Greg. Dedicatio 
ministeria hominumque dispen- “pasilice s. 
ace : ++ Arch, Michae- 
sas ; concede propitius, ut quibus tibi jis, 
ministrantibus in ccelo semper assisti- 
tur, ab his in terra vita nostra munia- 


tur. Per Dominum. 
[ OD, that in a merueilous ordre x1vth Century 
< . Prymer ver- 
ordeynedist seruisys of aungels _ sion. 


and of men, graunte thou mercifulli 
that oure lif be defendid in erthe bi 
hem that stonden ny} euermore ser- 
uynge to thee in heuvene. Bi 
erist. | 


Modern English. 


EPISTLE. Rey. xii. 7—12. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xviii. 1—10. 


Salisbury Use. 
Rev. i. 1—5. 
Matt. xviii. 1—10. 


MICHAELMAS DAY. 
[SEPTEMBER 29. | 


There were anciently two days dedicated to St. Michael, May 
8th and September 29th: and in medieval times a third, to St. 
Michael im monte tumba', on October 16th. But the day most 
generally observed was that which we now keep, and which 
appears both in the Lectionary of St. Jerome and in the Sacra- 
mentary of St. Gregory, as the Dedication of the Church of St. 
Michael. This basilica may have been that of Constantine near 
Constantinople, or that of Boniface at Rome, the latter being 
dedicated a.D. 606. In the Eastern Church St. Michael’s day is 
November 8th, July 13th and March 26th being also observed in 
honour of the Archangel Gabriel. These two are the only 
angels or archangels who are made known to us by name in the 
Canonical Scriptures, though Raphael and Uriel are named in 
the book of Tobit and in Esdras. 

The holy angels in general are commemorated by the Church 
from a deeply rooted feeling of their communion with the saints, 
and of their ministrations among mankind on earth. Such a 
feeling is warranted by the words, “Ye are come unto Mount 
Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jeru- 
salem, and to an innumerable company of angels; to the general 
assembly and Church of the Firstborn ...” [Heb. xii. 22]: and, 
“are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for 
them who shall be heirs of salvation ?” [Heb. i. 14.] The holy 
Son of God condescended to be ministered to by angels in His 
Temptation and Agony; they waited upon Him at His Birth 
and Resurrection ; and at His Second Advent He will come with 
“all the holy angels.” St. Peter was set free from prison by an 
angel, and one stood by St. Paul in the ship, thus illustrating 
their ministration to Christ’s servants. Our Lord Himself spoke 
of their rejoicing over penitent sinners; and said of the little ones 
who had passed under His hand and benediction, that “their 


1 Churches dedicated to St. Michael are often on elevated spots, as at St. 
Michael’s Mounts in Normandy and Cornwall. 


Modern Roman. Eastern. 


Rey. i. 1—5. Heb. ii. 2—10. 


Matt. xviii. 1—10. Luke x. 16—21. 


jet ei 


angels do always behold the face of My Father which is in 
heaven,” as if indicating many ministrations to those who are 
His,—some known, and some that are not made evident to sight or 
other sense. It has been a constant tradition of Christianity that 
angels attend at the ministration of Holy Baptism, and at the 
celebration of the Holy Communion; and that as Lazarus was 
the object of their tender care, so in sickness and death they are 
about the bed of the faithful, and carry their souls to the presence 
of Christ in Paradise. 

Without taking into account, therefore, any of the many 
unveilings to our sight of holy angels and their ministrations 
recorded in the Old Testament, we have ample ground for be- 
lieving that they are joined in a very close communion with those 
who have been redeemed by the blood of Christ. But whereas 
the saints were once sinners, and yet God is pleased that we 
should honour Him through them, the angels have never in- 
herited unholiness or fallen from holiness, and still more shall we 
honour Him by venerating these pure and spotless servants of 
His who do His pleasure. And as our Lord has taught us to 
pray that we may do the will of our Father on earth as it is 
done in heaven, so may we take their example as the highest, 
next to His, of perfect submission to the will of God. While in 
respect to our worship on. earth we may reckon it an exalted 
privilege to have such communion with them as to he able to say, 
«Therefore with angels and archangels, and all the company of 
Heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious Name, evermore 
praising Thee, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of hosts, 
heaven and earth are full of Thy glory: Glory be to Thee, O 
Lord most High.” 


Inrrorr.—O praise the Lord, ye angels of His, ye that excel 
in strength: ye that fulfil His commandment, and hearken unto 
the voice of His words. Ps. Praise the Lord, O my soul: and 
all that is within me praise His holy Name. 


Hymn. 


Marrins AND Eyrensone.—TZibi Christe, Splendor Patris. 
H. N. 42. 94. 


142 
SAINT LUKE THE EVANGELIST. 
The Collect. 
oe Pee LMIGHTY God, who calledst 
uke 1, 1—3, Se . 
x. 1. Luke the Physician, whose praise 
Col. iy. 14. aie E 
2 Cor. vii 18. is in the Gospel, to be an Evangelist, 
TOV. XXli. 1, 2. a ; 
1 Tim. vi.3,4. and Physician of the soul; May it 
Ps. cili. 2, 3. 


please thee, that, by the wholesome 
medicines of the doctrine delivered by 
him, all the diseases of our souls may 
be healed; through the merits of thy 
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


S. LUKE THE EVANGELIST.—S. SIMON AND S. JUDE APOSTLES. 


SANCTUS LUCAS EVANGELISTA. Salisbury Use. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
Eprstiz, 2 Tim. iv. 5—15. Ezek. i. 10—14, 2 Cor. viii. 16—24. Col. iv. 5—18. 
GOSPEL. Luke x. 1—7. Luke x. 1—9. Luke x. 16—21. 


Luke x. 1—7. 


SAINT SIMON AND SAINT JUDE 
APOSTLES. 


The Collect. 


een ALMIGHTY God, who hast 
fev. Xx ra built thy Church upon the foun- 


dation of the Apostles and Prophets, 
Jesus Christ himself being the head 
corner-stone ; Grant us so to be joined 
together in unity of spirit by their 
doctrine, that we may be made an holy 
temple acceptable unto thee; through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


xvi. 18. 
Eph. iv. 3—6. 13. 
1 Cor. i. 10. iii. 
16, 17. 
MP etaai. 5; 


DIES APOSTOLORUM SIMONIS ET 
JUD. 


Salisbury Use. 


Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Jude 1—8. Rom. viii. 28—39. Eph. iv. 7—13. Jude. 
GOSPEL, John xy. 17—27, John xv. 17—25. John xv. 17—25. John xiv. 21—24., 


SAINT LUKE. 
[OctozeER 18.] 


A festival was dedicated in honour of St. Luke, as of the other 
Evangelists, at a very early period of Christian history, and is 
found in an ancient Calendar [earlier than a.p. 484] of the 
Church of Carthage. St. Jerome says [De Script. Ecc.] that 
the remains of St. Luke were translated to Constantinople in the 
twentieth year of Constantine the Great, and there laid in the 
magnificent church which he had built in honour of the Apostles ; 
but whether the present festival commemorates this event or not 
there is no evidence to show. 

Little is indicated to us by Holy Scripture of St. Luke’s per- 
sonal history. His native place appears to have been Antioch, 
and as St. Paul calls him “the beloved physician” [Col. iv. 14], 
it seems clear that these words represent his profession. Yet 
ancient traditions have connected him with the art of painting, 
and several portraits exist which are attributed to him, showing 
how general this tradition is. The Evangelist was probably one 
of St. Paul’s converts; for though there is a tradition that he 
was one of the seventy, the dedication of his Gospel seems to 
exclude himself from the number of those who had been eye- 
witnesses of our Lord’s life and works. After the separation 
of St. Paul from St. Barnabas, the Evangelist constantly accom- 
panied the former in his journeyings and missions; and the latter 
half of the Acts of the Apostles records not only what he heard 


from others, but the events which had occurred within his own 
experience while sharing St. Paul’s work and dangers. Hence 
St. Paul speaks of him in affectionate terms as his “fellow- 
labourer,” “the beloved physician,’ and “the brother whose 
praise is in the Gospel throughout all the churches.” He con- 
tinued his missionary labours long after the death of St. Paul, 
and is believed to have reached his rest through martyrdom, 
being crucified upon an olive-tree at eighty years of age. 
IytRo1t.—The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom : 
and his tongue will be talking of judgment. The law of his God 
is in his heart. Ps. Fret not thyself because of the ungodly, 
neither be thou envious against the evil doers. Glory be. 


SAINT SIMON AND SAINT JUDE, 
[OcroBEr 28. ] 


The festival of St. Simon and St. Jude appears in the Lec- 
tionary of St. Jerome, but it is only in the Western Calendars 
that the two Apostles are commemorated on the same day. In 
the Eastern St. Simon Zelotes’ festival is May 10th, and St. 
Jude’s June 19th. They appear to have been sons of Cleophas, 
or Alphzeus, and nephews of Joseph, and hence they are called 
brethren of our Lord,—the word brethren being taken in a wider 
sense among the Jews than with us. 

Of St. Simon we have no notice in Holy Scripture beyond the 
fact that he was surnamed in Hebrew the Cananite, or in Greek 


ALL SAINTS’ DAY. 


ALL SAINTS’ DAY. 
The Collect. 
ALMIGHTY God, who hast 
te xvii. 20, 21. knit together thine elect in one 
32. communion and fellowship, in the 


[a.p. 1549.] 
1 Johni. 3. 


Col. ii. 2.19, : : 

Heb. a 2 mystical body of thy Son Christ our 
Phil. iv. 8, 9. 

1 Cor. ii. 9. Lord; Grant us grace so to follow thy 


Heb. xii 22—24, 


blessed Saints in all virtuous and godly 
living, that we may come to those un- 
speakable joys, which thou hast pre- 
pared for them that unfeignedly love 
thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. 


Amen. 
Modern English. Salisbury Use. Modern Roman. Eastern. 
EPISTLE. Rey. vii. 2—-12. Rev. vii. 2—12. Rey. vii. 2—12. Heb. xi. 33. xii. 1. 
GOSPEL. Maitt.’v. 1—12. Matt. v. 1—12. Matt. v. 1—12. Matt. x. 32, 33. 37, 38. 


Zelotes, both words signifying a zealot; but in what sense is 
not apparent, unless the appellation is given him because he was 
one of a strict sect of Pharisees. 

St. Jude, Judas, Thaddeus, or Lebbeus, calls himself “the 
brother of James,” apparently to distinguish himself from Judas 
Iscariot ; and it is probably for the same reason that these other 
names are put prominently forward, as on one occasion when 
his name Judas is used, a parenthesis is added, “not Iscariot.” 
He was a married Apostle, and Eusebius mentions two of his 
grandsons who were brought before Domitian as confessors for 
Christ’s sake [iii. 20]. St. Jude wrote the Epistle going under 
his name, which is read on this day. 

St. Simon Zelotes is supposed to have ministered chiefly in 
Egypt and parts of Africa adjoining. Some early Greek writers 
state that he visited Britain, and suffered martyrdom there by 
crucifixion. But the more probable account is that he was sawn 
asunder (a mode of martyrdom named in Heb. xi. 37, and that 
by which Isaiah is believed to have suffered) in Persia, at the same 
time with St. Jude, who ministered chiefly in that country, and 
who was martyred by the Magi. 

It may be in illustration of that unity of the faith for which 
the Epistle of St. Jude so strongly contends, that these two 
Apostles, ministering and suffering, are also honoured together. 


Inrroir.—Thy friends are exceeding honourable unto me, O 
God: greatly is their beginning strengthened. Ps. O Lord, 
Thou hast searched me out and known me: Thou knowest my 
downsitting and mine uprising. Glory be. 


ALL SAINTS. 
[Novemper 1. ] 


This festival is not of the highest antiquity. It appears to 
have originated in the Western Church at Rome in the seventh 
century, when the Pantheon was dedicated as a Christian church 
under the name of the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary and 
all Martyrs. This is said to have taken place on November Ist, 
A.D. 608, and the festival to have been kept on that day ever 
since. But in the Martyrology of the Venerable Bede (though 
not in his Calendar) there are two days dedicated to All Saints, 
one on the 18th of May, ‘“ Dedicatio Sanctee Marie ad Mar- 
tyres,” and the other on the Ist of November. In the Eastern 
Church, the festival of All the Martyrs is observed on the octave 
of Pentecost, our Trinity Sunday; and this, as it appears, since 
the time of St. Chrysostom, who has left a homily preached upon 
the day. It may well be concluded that when the number of 
martyrs increased so rapidly as it did in the great persecutions, 
Christian common sense suggested such a feast as that of All 


143 


DIES OMNIUM SANCTORUM. Salisbury Use. 


xix. 27—380. 


Saints, in addition to special days of commemoration for the 
more illustrious martyrs; and that the dedication of the Pan- 
theon took place on a festival already familiar to the Church, 
rather than as the foundation of a new one. In the Sacramentary 
of St. Gregory both days have Collects, &e., provided for them, 
that in May being entitled “‘ Natale Sanctee Marie ad Martyres,” 
and that in November, “‘ Natale Omnium Sanctorum,” the latter 
having also a service provided for its vigil. 

Whatever may have been the origin of the festival, it has 
become one very dear to the hearts of Christians, and is made, 
both by the character of the Service for the day, and by the 
meaning of it, one of the most touching of all holy days; a day 
on which are gathered up the fragments of the ‘‘one bread” of 
Christ’s mystical Body, that nothing be lost of the memory and 
example of His Saints. First among the “cloud of witnesses ” 
are they of the white-robed army of martyrs who are not otherwise 
commemorated, whose names are not noted in the diptychs of 
the Church, but are for ever written in the Lamb’s book of life. 
Next are a multitude of those who were called to wait with St. 
John, rather than to follow their Master with St. Peter, but who 
are not less surely numbered among the children of God, and 
have their lot among the saints. Among that holy company are 
some who are dear to the memory of a whole Church; good 
bishops and priests, whose flocks are around them in the book of 
remembrance; saintly men and women, whose lives have been 
devoted to works of love, although not ministering at the altar; 
hidden saints of God, whose holiness was known within the 
narrowest circle on earth, but who will shine lke stars in the 
firmament before the throne. 

When the Church thanks God on this day for All Saints, many 
an one among them should be remembered by those who are left 
onearth. At the Holy Communion, and in private devotions, 
their names should be used in memorial before God; and prayers 
should be offered by those to whom they are still dear, and with 
whom they are still in one fellowship, that all loved ones departed 
may have more and more of the Light, Peace, and Refreshment 
which the Presence of Christ gives in Paradise. 


IytrRoit.—Rejoice we all in the Lord while we celebrate this 
day the honour of all the saints: for in them the angels have joy 
and give glory to the Son of God. Ps. Rejoice in the Lord, O 
ye righteous: for it becometh well the just to be thankful. 
Glory be. 

Hymn. 


Evensonea.—Jesu Salvator seculr. 
Marrins.—Christe, Redemptor omnium. 
A. M. 45, C. H. 21. 


H. N. 18. 33, H. 


144 


“ From the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same My Name shall be great 
among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto My Name, and a Pure Offering: for 
My Name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lorp of hosts.’—Matacut i. 11. 


“ This do in remembrance of Me.’”—Luke xxu. 19. 


_“ He that eateth Me, even he shall live by Me.”—Joun vi, 57. 


“ In the midst of the throne, and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, stood 
a Lamb, as it had been slain”’—-RnveE.atIon v. 6. 


PRINTED IN U.S.A, 


bBy *) Las . te je 
MNAN yo Tapes : gles ORS 


; 
DStataC 
ey 


GN cots 


peste 


bien 


BS 
oe 


Spe 


