MACMILLAN'S    MAGAZINE. 


VOL.  IX. 


PRINTED  BY   R.    CLAY,    SON,    AND   TAYLOR, 
LONDON. 


EDITED   BY  DAYID  MASSON. 


VOL.  IX. 

NOVEMBER,  1863— APRIL,  1864. 


MACMILLAtf  AND  CO. 

23,  HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN;  AND 


[The  Right  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  is  reserved.] 


v.9 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Coleridge,  Letters  from,  to  William  Godwin 521 

Competition  Wallah,  Letters  from  : — 

Letter    vi.  A  Tiger-Party  in  Nepaul 16 

viz.  About  Calcutta  and  Its  Climate ;  with  Serious  Inferences  117 

Tin.  About  the  Hindoo  Character ;  with  Digressions  Home     .  198 
IX.  British  Temper  towards  India,  before,  during,  and  since 

the  Rebellion 288 

x.  The  "  Anglo-Saxon  "  Party  in  India 392 

XI.  Christianity  in  India 482 

Crimea,  The  Last  Voice  from  the.     By  THOMAS  HUGHES 160 

Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known ;  or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities.     By  the  EDITOR  :  — 

Prologue — Aberdeen  till  Thirty  Years  ago        52 

The  Rev.  Dr.  James  Kidd 143 

The  Aberdeen  Grammar  School — Dr.  James  Melvin 225 

Old  Marischal  College — Dr.  William  Knight — Local  Miscellanea — 

William  Thorn  of  Inverury 325 

Eton,  A  French.     By  MATTHEW  ARNOLD.     Part  n. 343 

Froude's  History  of  England.     Vols.  vn.  and  vni.     By  the  Rev.  Professor  KINGSLEY  211 
Hillyars  and  the  Burtons,  The  :  A  Story  of  Two  Families.     By  HENRY  KINOSLEY, 
Author  of  "AUSTIN  ELLIOT,"  "  RAVENSHOE,"  &c. : — 

Chapters  I. — v 1 

„     vi.— ix, 97 

„      x. — xiu 177 

„  xiv. — xviit 273 

„  xix. — XXIL 369 

„  xxin. — xxvi 449 

Law  and  the  Church,  The.     By  a  LAY  CHURCHMAN 440 

Literature,  Concerning  the  Organization  of 426 

Looking  out  for  Squalla 322 

Maritime  Capture  and  Blockade,  On.     By  LORD  HOBAET 41 

Memorandum    on    a    Story  of    the    Great  Mutiny.      By   MaJor-General    VINCENT 

EIRE,  C.B 445 


i  Contents. 

PAOB 

Mist  on  the  Moor,  The.    By  D'AROY  W.  THOMPSON 504 

"My  Beautiful  Lady" 255 

Neutrality  in  the  American  Contest,  England's.    BY  Professor  J.  E.  CAIRNES  .    .    .     260 

Nickar  the  Soulless.     By  SEBASTIAN  EVANS 47 

One  Day.    By  CHRISTINA  G.  ROSSETTI 159 

Poland,  Russian,  A  Week  in.    By  EDWARD  DICEY     .    .     .    .  • 84 

Political  Economy,  Inaugural  Lecture  on.    By  HENRY  FAWCETT 495 

Portfolio,  A  Gossip  over  My 518 

Renan's  Vie  de  Je'sus,  Christmas  Thoughts  on.     By  the  Rev.  F.  D.  MAURICE    .     .    .     190 

Rome,  Two  Months  in    .    .    .     .  • 506 

Ruskin,  Mr.  on  the  Gold  Question.    By  Professor  CAIRNES 67 

Schools  for  Boys,  Private :  their  Management.    By  ARCHIBALD  MACLAREN,  of  the 

Gymnasium,  Oxford 384 

Shaw,  Robert  Gould.     By  Mrs.  GASKELL 113 

"  Sit  Down  in  the  Lowest  Room."    By  CHRISTINA  G.  ROSSETTI 436 

Sleep  and  Dreams,  On.      By  the  Rev.  JOHN  CUNNINGHAM,  D.D.  Author  of  "  THE 

CHURCH  HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND 473 

Sleepers,  The.    By  ANDREW  WILSON 321 

Son  of  the  Soil,  A  :— 

Chapters  i. — in 69 

„        rv. — VL 163 

„       vn. — ix.       240 

„         x. — xn 305 

„     xm. — xv ' 409 

Spinoza,  A  word  more  about.     By  MATTHEW  ARNOLD 136 

Stratford-on-Avon,  1597.    By  WILMAM  ALLINGHAM 406 

Subscription  no  Security.    By  the  Very  Eev.  the  DEAN  OF  CrmiSTCHtiRCH   ....     465 

Thackeray.     By  H.  K.  and  the  EDITOR 356 

Vigil  of  All  Souls,  The   ...        .    , 135 

Vincenzo ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks.    By  JOHN  RUFFINI,  Author  of  "  LORENZO  BENONI," 
"  DOCTOR  ANTONIO,"  &c. : — 

Chanters  XLVil.  XLVltJ,  and  Conclusion  ......  .    .       31 


ALLINGHAM,  WILLIAM. 
ARNOLD,  MATTHEW. 
CAIRNES,  PROFESSOR  J.  E. 
COMPETITION  WALLAH,  A. 
CUNNINGHAM,  REV.  JOHN,  D.D. 
DEAN  OF  CHRISTCHURCH,  THE. 
DICEY,  EDWARD. 
EVANS,  SEBASTIAN. 
EYRE,  MAJOR-GENERAL,  C.B. 
FAWCETT,  HENRY. 
GARNETT,  RICHARD. 
GASKELL,  MRS. 
HOBART,  LORD. 
HUGHES,  THOMAS. 
KINGSLEY,  REV.  PROFESSOR. 
KINGSLEY,  HENRY. 
LAY  CHURCHMAN,  A. 
MACLAREN,  ARCHIBALD. 
MASSON,  PROFESSOR. 
MAURICE,  REV.  F.  D. 
MULOCK,  MISS. 
ROSSETTI,  CHRISTINA  G. 
RUFFINI,  JOHN. 
THOMPSON,  D'ARCY  W. 
WILSON,  ANDREW. 


MACMILLAN'S   MAGAZINE. 

VOLUMES  I.  TO  IX.,  COMPRISING  NUMBERS  1—54, 
HANDSOMELY  BOUND  IN  CLOTH,  PRICE  7s.  Qd.  EACH. 

Reading  Cases  for  Monthly  Numbers,   One  Shilling. 
Cases  for  Binding  Volumes,  One  Shilling. 

Sold  ly  all  Booksellers  in  Town  and  Country. 


MACMILLAN'S  MAGAZINE. 

NOVEMBEK,  1863. 


THE  HILLYAES  AND  THE  BTJETONS :  A  STOEY  OF  TWO  FAMILIES. 

BY  HENRY  KINGSLEY,  AUTHOR  OF  "AUSTIN  ELLIOT,"  "  RAVENSHOE,"  ETC. 


CHAPTEE  I. 

MR.    SECRETARY   OXTON   THINKS   GERTY 

NEVILLE   LITTLE    BETTER   THAN    A 

FOOL. 

THE  Houses  were  "  up,"  and  the  Colonial 
Secretary  was  in  the  bosom  of  his 
family. 

It  had  been  one  of  the  quietest  and 
pleasantest  little  sessions  on  record. 
All  the  Government  bills  had  slid  easily 
through.  There  had  been  a  little  hitch 
on  the  new  Scab  Bill ;  several  members 
with  infected  runs  opposing  it  lustily  ; 
threatening  to  murder  it  by  inches  in 
committee,  and  so  on :  but,  on  the 
Secretary  saying  that  he  should  not 
feel  it  his  duty  to  advise  his  Excellency 
to  prorogue  until  it  was  passed,  other 
members  put  it  to  the  opposing  mem- 
bers whether  they  were  to  sit  there 
till  Christmas,  with  the  thermometer 
at  120°,  and  the  opposing  members 
gave  way  witli  a  groan ;  so  a  very  few 
days  afterwards  his  Excellency  put  on 
his  best  uniform,  cocked  hat,  sword 
and  all,  and  came  down  and  prorogued 
them.  And  then,  taking  their  boys 
from  school,  and  mounting  their  horses, 
they  all  rode  away,  east,  north,  and 
west,  through  forest  and  swamp,  over 
plain  and  mountain,  to  their  sunny 
homes,  by  the  pleasant  river-sides  of  the 
interior. 

So  the  Colonial  Secretary  was  in  the 
bosom  of  his  family.  He  was  sitting 
in  his  verandah  in  a  rocking-chair, 

No.  49. — VOL.  ix. 


dressed  in  white  from  head  to  foot, 
with  the  exception  of  his  boots,  which 
were  shining  black,  and  his  necktie, 
which  was  bright  blue.  He  was  a  tall 
man,  and  of  noble  presence — a  man  of 
two-and-forty,  or  thereabouts — with  a 
fine  fearless  eye,  as  of  one  who  had 
confronted  the  dangers  of  an  infant 
colony,  looking  altogether  like  the 
highly  intellectual,  educated  man  he 
was ;  and  on  every  button  of  his 
clean  white  coat,  on  every  fold  of  his 
spotless  linen,  in  every  dimple  of  his 
close-shaved,  red-brown  face,  was  written 
in  large  letters  the  word,  Gentleman. 

He  had  come  down  to  one  of  his 
many  stations,  the  favourite  one,  lying 
about  sixty  miles  along  the  coast  from 
Palmerston,  the  capital  of  Cooksland; 
and,  having  arrived  only  the  night 
before,  was  dreaming  away  the  morn- 
ing in  his  verandah,  leaving  the  piles 
of  papers,  domestic  and  parliamentary, 
which  he  had  accumulated  on  a  small 
table  beside  him,  totally  neglected. 

For  it  was  impossible  to  work.  The 
contrast  between  the  burning  streets  of 
Palmerston  and  this  cool  verandah  was 
so  exquisite,  that  it  became  an  absolute 
necessity  to  think  about  that  and  nothing 
else.  Just  outside,  in  the  sun,  a  garden, 
a  wilderness  of  blazing  flowers,  sloped 
rapidly  down  to  the  forest,  whose  top- 
most boughs  were  level  with  your  feet. 
Through  the  forest  rushed  the  river, 
and  beyond  the  forest  was  the  broad, 
yellow  plain,  and  beyond  the  plain  the 
heath,  and  beyond  the  heath  the  gleam- 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


ing  sea  with  two  fantastic  purple  islands 
on  the  horizon. 

The  Colonial  Secretary  had  no  boys 
to  "bring  home  from  school,  for  only  six 
months  before  this  he  had  married  the 
beauty  of  the  colony,  Miss  Seville, 
who  was  at  that  moment  in  the  garden 
with  her  younger  sister  gathering 
flowers. 

The  Secretary  by  degrees  allowed  his 
eyes  to  wander  from  the  beautiful  pro- 
spect before  him,  to  the  two  white 
figures  among  the  flowers.  By  degrees 
his  attention  became  concentrated  on 
them,  and  after  a  time  a  shade  of  dis- 
satisfaction stole  over  his  handsome 
face,  and  a  wrinkle  or  two  formed  on 
his  broad  forehead. 

Why  was  this?  The  reason  was  a 
very  simple  one :  he  saw  that  Mrs. 
Oxton  was  only  half  intent  upon  her 
flowers,  and  was  keeping  one  eye  upon 
her  lord  and  master.  He  said,  "Bother- 
ation." 

She  saw  that  he  spoke,  though  she 
little  thought  what  he  said ;  and  so 
she  came  floating  easily  towards  him 
through  the  flowers,  looking  by  no 
means  unlike  a  great  white  and  crimson 
Amaryllis  herself.  She  may  have  been 
a  thought  too  fragile,  a  thought  too 
hectic — all  real  Australian  beauties  are 
so  ;  she  looked,  indeed,  as  though,  if 
you  blew  at  her,  her  hair  would  come 
off  like  the  down  of  a  dandelion,  but 
nevertheless  she  was  so  wonderfully 
beautiful,  that  you  could  barely  restrain 
an  exclamation  of  delighted  surprise 
when  you  first  saw  her.  This  being 
came  softly  up  to  the  Secretary,  put 
her  arm  round  his  neck,  and  kissed 
him ;  and  yet  the  Secretary  gave  no 
outward  signs  of  satisfaction  whatever. 
Still  the  Secretary  was  not  a  "  brute ; " 
fax  from  it. 

"  My  love,"  said  Mrs.  Oxton. 

"  Well,  my  dear,"  said  the  Secretary. 

"I  want  to  ask  you  a  favour,  my 
love." 

"  My  sweetest  Agnes,  it  is  quite  im- 
possible. I  will  send  Edward  as  sub- 
overseer  to  Tullabaloora ;  but  into  a 
Government  place  he  does  not  go" 

"  My  dear  James " 


"  It  is  no  use,  Agnes ;  it  is  really  no 
use.  I  have  been  accused  in  the  public 
papers  of  placing  too  many  of  my  own 
and  my  wife's  family.  I  have  been 
taunted  with  it  in  the  House.  There 
is  great  foundation  of  truth  in  it.  It 
is  really  no  use,  if  you  talk  till  dooms- 
day. What  are  you  going  to  give  me 
for  lunch  ? " 

Mrs.  Oxton  was  perfectly  unmoved; 
she  merely  seated  herself  comfortably 
on  her  husband's  knee. 

"  Suppose,  now,"  she  said,  "  that  you 
had  been  putting  yourself  in  a  wicked 
passion  for  nothing.  Suppose  I  had 
changed  my  mind  about  Edward.  Sup- 
pose I  thought  you  quite  right  in  not 
placing  any  more  of  our  own  people. 
And  suppose  I  only  wanted  a  little 
information  about  somebody's  antece- 
dents. What  then  1 " 

"Why  then  I  have  been  a  brute. 
Say  on." 

"My  dearest  James.  Do  you  know 
anything  against  Lieutenant  Hillyar  1 " 

"  H'm,"  said  the  Secretary.  "  ISTothing 
new.  He  came  over  here  under  a  cloud ; 
but  so  many  young  men  do  that.  I 
am  chary  of  asking  too  many  questions. 
He  was  very  fast  at  home,  I  believe, 
and  went  rambling  through  Europe  for 
ten  years ;  yet  I  do  not  think  I  should 
be  justified  in  saying  I  knew  anything 
very  bad  against  him." 

"He  will  be  Sir  George  Hillyar," 
said  Mrs.  Oxton,  pensively. 

"  He  will  indeed,"  said  the  Secretary, 
"  and  have  ten  thousand  a  year.  He 
will  be  a  catch  for  some  one." 

"  My  dear,  I  am  afraid  he  is  caught." 

"No!     Who  is  it?" 

"  No  other  than  our  poor  Gerty.  She 
has  been  staying  at  the  Barkers',  in  the 
same  house  with  him  ;  and  the  long 
and  the  short  of  it  is,  that  they  are 
engaged." 

The  Secretary  rose  and  walked  up 
and  down  the  verandah.  He  was  very 
much  disturbed. 

"  My  dear,"  he  said  at  last,  "  I  would 
give  a  thousand  pounds  if  this  were  not 
true." 

"  Why  ?  do  you  know  anything 
against  him  ? " 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


"  Well,  just  now  I  carelessly  said  I 
did  not ;  but  now  when  the  gentleman 
coolly  proposes  himself  for  my  brother- 
in-law  !  It  is  perfectly  intolerable  !  " 

"Do  you  know  anything  special, 
James  1 " 

"No.  But  look  at  the  man,  my 
love.  Look  at  his  insolent,  contra- 
dictory manner.  Look  at  that  nasty 
drop  he  has  in  his  eyes.  Look  at  his 
character  for  profligacy.  Look  at  his 
unpopularity  in  the  force;  and  then 
think  of  our  beautiful  little  Gerty  being 
handed  over  to  such  a  man.  Oh  !  Lord, 
you  know  it  really  is " 

"I  hate  the  man  as  much  as  you  do," 
said  Mrs.  Oxton.  "I  can't  bear  to  be 
in  the  room  with  him.  But  Gerty 
loves  him." 

"Poor  little  bird/' 

"  And  he  is  handsome." 

"  Confound  him,  yes.  And  charming 
too,  of  course,  with  his  long  pale  face 
and  his  dolce  farniente,  insolent  manner, 
and  his  great  eyes  like  blank  windows, 
out  of  which  the  devil  looks  once  a 
day,  for  fear  you  might  forget  he  was 
there.  Oh  !  a  charming  man  ! " 

"  Then  he  will  be  a  baronet,  with  an 
immense  fortune ;  and  Gerty  will  be 
Lady  Hillyar." 

"And  the  most  unfortunate  little 
flower  in  the  wide  world,"  said  the 
Secretary. 

"  I  think  you  are  right,"  said  Mrs. 
Oxton,  with  a  sigh.  "See,  here  she 
comes ;  don't  let  her  know  I  have  told 
you." 

Gertrude  Neville  came  towards  them 
at  this  moment.  She  was  very  like  her 
sister,  but  still  more  fragile  in  form ;  a 
kind  of  caricature  of  her  sister.  The 
white  in  her  face  was  whiter,  and  the 
red  redder ;  her  hair  was  of  a  shade 
more  brilliant  brown ;  and  she  looked 
altogether  like  some  wonderful  hectic 
ghost.  If  you  were  delighted  with  her 
sister's  beauty  you  were  awed  with 
hers ;  not  awed  because  there  was  any- 
thing commanding  or  determined  in  the 
expression  of  her  face,  but  because  she 
was  so  very  fragile  and  gentle.  The 
first  glance  of  her  great  hazel  eyes  put 
her  under  your  protection  to  the  death. 


You  had  a  feeling  of  awe,  while  you 
wondered  why  it  had  pleased  God  to 
create  anything  so  helpless,  so  beautiful,, 
and  so  good,  and  to  leave  her  to  the 
chances  and  troubles  of  this  rough, 
world.  You  could  no  more  have  will- 
ingly caused  a  shade  of  anxiety  to  pass 
over  that  face,  than  you  could  have 
taken  the  beautiful  little  shell  parra- 
keet,  which  sat  on  her  shoulder,  and 
killed  it  before  her  eyes. 

The  Secretary  set  his  jaw,  and  swore, 
to  himself,  that  it  should  never  be ;  but 
what  was  the  good  of  his  swearing  1 

"  See,  James,"  she  said  to  him,  speak-, 
ing  with  a  voice  like  that  of  a  stock- 
dove among  the  deep  black  shadows  of 
an  English  wood  in  June,  "  I  am  going 
to  fill  all  your  vases  with  flowers.  Idle 
Agnes  has  run  away  to  you,  and  has 
left  me  all  the  work.  See  here  ;  I  am 
going  to  set  these  great  fern  boughs 
round  the  china  vase  on  the  centre 
table,  and  bend  them  so  that  they  droop, 
you  see.  And  then  I  shall  lay  in  these 
long  wreaths  of  scarlet  Kennedia  to 
hang  over  the  fern,  and  then  I  shall 
tangle  in  these  scarlet  passion-flowers, 
and  then  I  shall  have  a  circle  of  these 
belladonna  lilies,  and  in  the  centre  of 
all  I  shall  put  this  moss-rosebud — 

For  the  bride  she  chose,  the  red,  red, 

rose, 
And  by  its  thorn  died  she. 

"  James,  don't  break  my  heart,  for  I 
love  him.  My  own  brother,  I  have 
never  had  a  brother  but  you ;  try  to 
make  the  best  of  him  for  my  sake. 
You  will  now,  won't  you  ?  I  know  you 
don't  like  him ;  your  characters  are 
dissimilar ;  but  I  am  sure  you  will  get 
to.  I  did  not  like  him  at  first :  but  it 
came  upon  me  in  time.  You  don't 
know  how  really  good  he  is,  and  how 
bitterly  he  has  been  ill-used.  Come, 
James,  say  you  will  try  to  like  him." 

What  could  the  poor  Secretary  do- 
but  soothe  her,  and  defer  any  decided 
opinion  on  the  matter.  If  it  had  been. 
Mr.  Cornelius  Murphy  making  a  modest 
request,  the  Secretory  would  have  been. 
stern  enough,  would  have  done  what 
he  should  have  done  here — put  his 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


veto  on  it  once  and  for  ever ;  tut  lie 
could  not  stand  his  favourite  little  sister- 
in-law,  with  her  tears,  her  beauty,  and 
her  caresses.  He  temporised. 

But  his  holiday,  to  which  he  had 
looked  forward  so  long,  was  quite  spoilt. 
Little  Gerty  Neville  had  wound  herself 
so  thoroughly  round  his  heart ;  she  had 
been  such  a  sweet  little  confidant  to 
"him  in  his  courtship;  had  brought  so 
many  precious  letters,  had  planned  so 
many  meetings ;  had  been,  in  short, 
such  a  dear  little  go-between,  that  when 
he  thought  of  her  being  taken  away 
from  him  by  a  man  of  somewhat  queer 
character,  whom  he  heartily  despised 
and  disliked,  it  made  him  utterly 
miserable.  As  Gerty  had  been  con- 
nected closely  with  the  brightest  part 
of  a  somewhat  stormy  life,  so  also 
neither  he  nor  his  wife  had  ever  laid 
down  a  plan  for  the  brighter  future 
which  did  not  include  her ;  and  now ! 
— it  was  intolerable. 

He  brooded  for  three  days,  and  then, 
having  seen  to  the  more  necessary  part 
of  his  station  work,  he  determined  to 
go  and  make  fuller  inquiries.  So  the 
big  bay  horse  was  saddled,  and  he  rode 
thoughtfully  away  ;  across  the  paddocks, 
through  the  forest,  over  the  plain,  down 
to  the  long  yellow  sands  fringed  with 
snarling  surf,  and  so  northward  towards 
the  faint  blue  promontory  of  Cape 
"Wilberforce. 

CHAPTEE  II. 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  SHOWS  THE  DIS- 
GRACEFUL LOWNESS  OF  HIS  ORIGIN. 

I  AM  of  the  same  trade  as  my  father — 
a  blacksmith — although  I  have  not  had 
hammer  or  pincers  in  my  hand  this  ten 
years.  And,  although  I  am  not  in  the 
most  remote  degree  connected  with  any 
aristocratic  family,  yet  I  hold  the  title 
of  Honourable.  The  Honourable  James 
Burton  being  a  member  of  the  supreme 
council  of  the  Colony  of  Cooksland. 

As  early  as  I  can  remember,  my 
father  carried  on  his  trade  in  Brown's 
Bow,  Chelsea.  His  business  was  a  very 
good  one — what  we  call  a  good  shoeing 


trade,  principally  with  the  omnibus 
horses.  It  paid  very  well,  for  my  father 
had  four  men  in  his  shop ;  though,  if 
he  had  had  his  choice,  he  would  have 
preferred  some  higher  branch  of  smith's 
work,  for  he  had  considerable  mechanical 
genius,  and  no  small  ambition,  of  a 
sort. 

I  think  that  my  father  was  the  ideal  of 
all  the  blacksmiths  who  ever  lived.  He 
was  the  blacksmith.  A  man  with  a 
calm,  square,  honest  face ;  very  strong, 
very  good-humoured,  with  plenty  of 
kindly  interest  in  his  neighbours'  affairs, 
and  a  most  accurate  memory  for  them. 
He  was  not  only  a  most  excellent  trades- 
man, but  he  possessed  those  social 
qualities,  which  are  so  necessary  in  a 
blacksmith,  to  a  very  high  degree ;  for 
in  our  rank  in  life  the  blacksmith  is  a 
very  important  person  indeed.  He  is 
owner  of  the  very  best  gossip-station, 
after  the  bar  of  the  public-house  :  and, 
consequently,  if  he  be  a  good  fellow  (as 
he  is  pretty  certain  to  be,  though  this 
may  be  partiality  on  my  part,)  he  is  a 
man  more  often  referred  to,  and  con- 
sulted with,  than  the  publican ;  for  this 
reason — that  the  married  women  are 
jealous  of  the  publican,  and  not  so  of 
the  blacksmith.  As  for  my  father,  he 
was  umpire  of  the  ^buildings — the  stop- 
per of  fights,  and,  sometimes,  even  the 
healer  of  matrimonial  differences. 

More  than  once  I  have  known  a 
couple  come  and  "have  it  out"  in  my 
father's  shop.  Sometimes,  during  my 
apprenticeship,  my  father  would  send 
me  out  of  the  way  on  these  occasions  ; 
would  say  to  me,  for  instance,  "  Hallo, 
old  man,  here's  Bob  Chittle  and  his 
missis  a-coming;  cut  away  and  help 
mother  a  bit."  But  at  other  times  he 
would  not  consider  it  necessary  for  me 
to  go,  and  so  I  used  to  stay,  and  hear  it 
all.  The  woman  invariably  began ;  the 
man  confined  himself  mostly  to  sulky 
contradictions.  My  father,  and  I,  and 
the  men,  went  on  with  our  work ;  my 
father  would  throw  in  a  soothing  word 
wherever  he  could,  until  the  woman 
began  to  cry;  upon  which  my  father, 
in  a  low  confidential  growl,  addressing 
the  man  as  "  old  chap,"  would  persuade 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


him  to  go  and  make  it  up  with  her. 
And  he  and  she,  having  come  there  for 
no  other  purpose,  would  do  so. 

My  mother  never  assisted  at  this 
sort  of  scenes,  whether  serious  or  trifling. 
She  utterly  ignored  the  shop  at  such 
times,  and  was  preternaturally  busy  in 
the  house  among  her  pots,  and  pans, 
and  children,  ostentatiously  singing. 
"Whenitwas  all  over  she  used  accidentally 
to  catch  sight  of  the  couple,  and  be  for 
one  moment  stricken  dumb  with  amaze- 
ment, and  then  burst  into  voluble  wel- 
come. She  was  supposed  to  know 
nothing  at  all  about  what  had  passed. 
Sweet  mother !  thy  arts  were  simple 
enough. 

She  was  a  very  tall  woman,  with 
square,  large  features,  who  had  never,  I 
think,  been  handsome.  When  I  begin 
my  story  my  mother  was  already  the 
mother  of  nine  children,  and  I,  the 
eldest,  was  fifteen ;  so,  if  she  had  at 
any  time  had  any  beauty,  it  must  have 
vanished,  long  before;  but  she  was 
handsome  enough  for  us.  When  she 
was  dressed  for  church,  in  all  the  colours 
of  the  rainbow,  in  a  style  which  would 
have  driven  Jane  Clarke  out  of  her 
mind,  she  was  always  inspected  by  the 
whole  family  before  she  started,  and 
pronounced  satisfactory.  And  at  dinner 
my  sister  Emma  would  perhaps  say, 
"  Law  !  mother  did  look  so  beautiful  in 
church  this  morning  ;  you  never ! " 

She  had  a  hard  time  of  it  with  us. 
The  family  specialities  were  health,  good 
humour,  and  vivacity ;  somewhat  too 
much  of  the  last  among  the  junior 
members.  I,  Joe,  and  Emma,  might 
be  trusted,  but  all  the  rest  were  terrible 
pickles;  the  most  unlucky  children  I 
ever  saw.  Y/henever  I  was  at  work 
with  father,  and  we  saw  a  crowd  coming 
round  the  corner,  he  would  say,  "Cut 
away,  old  chap,  and  see  who  it  is ; "  for 
we  knew  it  must  either  be  one  of  our 
own  little  ones,  or  a  young  Chittle.  If 
it  was  one  of  the  young  Chittles,  I  used 
to  hold  up  my  hand  and  whistle,  and 
father  used  to  go  on  with  his  work, 
Eut  if  I  was  silent,  and  in  that  way  let 
father  know  that  it  was  one  of  our  own 
little  ones,  he  would  begin  to  roar  out, 


and  want  to  know  which  it  was,  and 
what  he'd  been  up  to.  To  which  I 
would  have  to  roar  in  return  (I  give 
you  an  instance  only,  out  of  many  such) 
that  it  was  Fred.  That  he  had  fallen 
off  a  barge  under  Battersea  Bridge. 
Had  been  picked  out  by  young  Tom 
Cole.  Said  he  liked  it.  Or  that  it 
was  Eliza.  Had  wedged  her  head  into 
a  gas  pipe.  Been  took  out  black  in  the 
face.  Said  Billy  Chittle  had  told  her 
she  wasn't  game  to  it.  These  were  the 
sort  of  things  I  had  to  roar  out  to  my 
father,  while  I  had  the  delinquent  in 
my  arms,  and  was  carrying  him  or  her 
indoors  to  mother ;  the  delinquent  being 
in  a  triumphant  frame  of  mind,  evi- 
dently under  the  impression  that  he 
had  distinguished  himself,  and  added 
another  flower  to  the  chaplet  of  the 
family  honour. 

I  never  saw  my  mother  out  of  temper. 
On  these,  and  other  occasions,  she 
would  say  that,  Lord  'a  mercy  !  no  wo- 
man ever  was  teased  and  plagued  with 
her  children  as  she  was  (and  there  was 
a  degree  of  truth  in  that).  That  she 
didn't  know  what  would  become  of 
them  (which  was  to  a  certain  extent 
true  also)  ;  that  she  hoped  none  of 
them  would  come  to  a  bad  end  (in 
which  hope  I  sincerely  joined) ;  and 
that  finally,  she  thought  that  if  some  of 
them  were  well  shook,  and  put  to  bed, 
it  would  do  'em  a  deal  of  good,  and  that 
their  Emma  would  never  love  them  any 
more.  But  they  never  cared  for  this 
sort  of  thing.  They  were  not  a  bit 
afraid  of  mother.  They  were  never 
shook ;  their  Emma  continued  to  love 
them ;  and,  as  for  being  put  to  bed,  they 
never  thought  of  such  a  thing  happen- 
ing to  them,  until  they  heard  the  rattle 
of  brother  Joe's  crutch  on  the  floor, 
when  he  came  home  from  the  night 
school. 

Brother  Joe's  crutch.  Yes ;  our  Joe 
was  a  cripple.  With  poor  Joe,  that 
restless  vivacity  to  which  I  have  called 
your  attention  above,  had  ended  very 
sadly.  He  was  one  of  the  finest  child- 
ren ever  seen  ;  but,  when  only  three 
years  old,  poor  Joe  stole  aAvay,  and 
climbed  up  a  ladder — he  slipped,  when 


I 


The  Eillyars  and  the  Burtons : 


some  seven  or  eight  feet  from  the 
ground,  and  fell  on  his  back,  doubling 
one  of  his  legs  under  him.  The  little 
soul  fluttered  between  earth  and  heaven 
for  some  time,  but  at  last  determined  to 
stay  with  us.  All  that  science,  skill, 
and  devotion  could  do,  was  done  for 
him  at  St.  George's  Hospital ;  but  poor 
Joe  was  a  hunchback,  with  one  leg 
longer  than  the  other,  but  with  the 
limbs  of  a  giant,  and  the  face  of  a 
Byron. 

It  is  a  great  cause  of  thankfulness  to 
ine,  when  I  think  that  Joe  inherited 
.the  gentle,  patient  temper  of  his  father 
and  mother.  Even  when  a  mere  boy, 
I  began  dimly  to  understand  that  it 
was  fortunate  that  Joe  was  good-tem- 
pered. When  I  and  the  other  boys 
"would  be  at  rounders,  and  he  would  be 
looking  intently  and  eagerly  on,  with 
bis  fingers  twitching  with  nervous 
anxiety  to  get  hold  of  the  stick,  shout- 
ing now  to  one,  and  now  to  another,  by 
name,  and  now  making  short  runs,  in 
Ms  excitement,  on  his  crutch ;  at  such 
times,  I  say,  it  used  to  come  into  my 
boy's  head,  that  it  was  as  well  that  Joe 
was  a  good-tempered  fellow  ;  and  this 
conviction  grew  on  me  year  by  year,  as  I 
•watched  with  pride  and  awe  the  great 
intellect  unfolding,  and  the  mighty 
restless  ambition  soaring  higher  and 
higher.  Yes,  it  was  well  that  Joe  had 
learned  to  love  in  his  childhood. 

Joe's  unfailing  good  humour,  com- 
bined with  his  affliction,  had  a  wonder- 
ful influence  on  us  for  good.  His 
misfortune  being  so  fearfully  greater 
than  any  of  our  petty  vexations,  and 
his  good  temper  being  so  much  more 
unfailing  than  ours,  he  was  there  con- 
tinually among  us  as  an  example — an 
example  which  it  was  impossible  not  to 
follow  to  some  extent ;  even  if  one  had 
not  had  an  angel  to  point  to  it  for  us. 

For,  in  the  sense  of  being  a  messenger 
of  good,  certainly  my  sister  Emma  was 
an  angel.  She  was  a  year  younger  than 
me.  She  was  very  handsome,  not  very 
pretty,  made  on  a  large  model  like  my 
mother,  but  with  fewer  angles.  Per- 
haps the  most  noticeable  thing  about 
her  was  her  voice.  Whether  the  tone 


of  it  was  natural,  or  whether  it  had  ac- 
quired that  tone  from  being  used  almost 
exclusively  in  cooing  to,  and  soothing, 
children,  I  cannot  say ;  but  there  was 
no  shrillness  in  it :  it  was  perfectly,  nay 
singularly  clear ;  but  there  was  not  a 
sharp  note  in  the  whole  of  sweet 
Emma's  gamut. 

She  was  very  much  devoted  to  all  of 
us ;  but  towards  Joe  her  devotion  was 
intensified.  I  do  not  assert — because  I 
do  not  believe — that  she  loved  him  bet- 
ter than  the  rest  of  us,  but  from  an  early 
age  she  simply  devoted  herself  to  him. 
I  did  not  see  it  at  first.  The  first  hint 
of  it  which  I  got  was  in  the  first  year 
of  my  apprenticeship.  I  had  come  in 
to  tea,  and  father  had  relieved  me  in 
the  shop,  and  all  our  little  ones  had 
done  tea  and  were  talking  nonsense,  at 
which  I  began  to  assist.  We  were 
talking  about  who  each  of  us  was  to 
marry,  and  what  we  would  have  for 
dinner  on  the  auspicious  occasion.  It 
was  arranged  that  I  was  to  marry  Miss 
de  Bracy,  from  the  Victoria  Theatre, 
and  we  were  to  have  sprats  and  gin- 
and-water  ;  and  that  such  a  one  was  to 
marry  such  a  one  ;  but  on  one  thing 
the  little  ones  were  agreed,  that  Emma 
was  to  marry  Joe.  When  they  cried 
out  this,  she  raised  her  eyes  to  mine  for 
an  instant,  and  dropped  them  again 
with  a  smile.  I  wondered  why  then, 
but  I  know  now. 

On  my  fifteenth  birthday  I  was 
bound  to  my  father.  I  think  that  was 
nearly  the  happiest  day  of  my  life. 
The  whole  family  was  in  a  state  of 
rampant  pride  about  it.  I  am  sure  I 
don't  know  what  there  was  to  be  proud 
of,  but  proud  we  were.  Joe  sat  staring 
at  me  with  his  bright  eyes,  every  now 
and  then  giving  a  sniff  of  profound 
satisfaction,  or  pegging  out  in  a  restless 
manner  for  a  short  expedition  into  the 
court.  Emma  remarked  several  times, 
"  Lawk,  only  just  to  think  about  Jim  !" 
And  my  younger  brothers  and  sisters 
kept  on  saying  to  all  their  acquaintances 
in  the  street,  "Our  Jim  is  bound  to 
father,"  with  such  a  very  triumphant 
air,  that  the  other  children  resented  it, 
and  Sally  Agar  said  something  so  die- 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


7 


paraging  of  the  blacksmith-trade  in 
general,  that  our  Eliza  gave  her  a  good 
shove ;  upon  which  Jane  Agar,  the 
elder  sister,  shook  our  Eliza,  and,  when 
JEnima  came  out  to  the  rescue,  put  her 
tongue  out  at  her ;  which  had  such  an 
effect  on  Emma's  gentle  spirit  that  she 
.gave  up  the  contest  at  once,  and  went 
indoors  in  tears,  and  for  the  rest  of 
•the  day  told  every  friend  she  met, 
"  Lawk,  there,  if  that  Jane  Agar  didn't 
take  and  put  her  tongue  out  at  me, 
because  their  Sally  shoved  our  Eliza, 
and  I  took  and  told  her  she  hadn't 
ought  to  it :"  and  they  retailed  it  to 
other  girls  again ;  and  at  last  it  was 
known  all  over  the  buildings  that  Jane 
had  gone  and  put  her  tongue  out  at 
Emma  Burton  ;  and  it  was  unanimously 
voted  that  she  ought  to  be  -ashamed  of 
herself. 

We  were  simple  folk,  easily  made 
happy,  even  by  seeing  that  the  other 
girls  were  fond  of  our  sister.  But  there 
was  another  source  of  happiness  to  us 
on  that  auspicious  fifteenth  birthday 
of  mine.  That  day  week  we  were  to 
move  into  the  great  hou_se. 

Our  present  home  was  a  very  poor 
place,  only  a  six-roomed  house ;  and  that, 
with  nine  children  and  another  appren- 
tice besides  myself,  was  intolerable.  Any 
time  this  year  past  we  had  seen  that 
it  was  necessary  to  move  :  but  there 
had  been  one  hitch  to  our  doing  so — 
there  was  no  house  to  move  into,  ex- 
cept into  a  very  large  house  which 
stood  by  itself,  as  it  were  fronting  the 
buildings  opposite  our  forge  ;  which  con- 
tained twenty-five  rooms,  some  of  them 
very  large,  and  which  was  called  by  us 
indifferently,  Church  Place,  or  Queen 
Elizabeth's  Palace. 

It  had  been  in  reality  the  palace  of 
the  young  Earl  of  Essex ;  a  very  large 
three-storied  house  of  old  brick,  with 
stone-mullioned  windows  and  door- 
ways. Many  of  the  windows  were 
blind,  bricked  up  at  different  times  as 
the  house  descended  in  the  social  scale. 
The  roof  was  singularly  high,  hanging 
somewhat  far  over  a  rich  cornice,  and 
in  that  roof  t there  was  a  single  large 
dormer  window  at  the  north  end. 


The  house  had  now  been  empty  for 
some  time,  and  it  had  always  had  a  great 
attraction  for  us  children.  In  the  first 
place  it  was  empty  ;  in  the  second  place, 
it  had  been  inhabited  by  real  princesses ; 
and  in  the  third,  there  was  a  ghost, 
who  used  to  show  a  light  in  the  afore- 
mentioned dormer  window  the  first 
Friday  in  every  month. 

On  the  summer's  evenings  we  had 
been  used  to  see  it  towering  aloft  be- 
tween us  and  the  setting  sun,  which 
filled  the  great  room  on  the  first  floor 
with  light,  some  rays  of  which  came 
•through  into  our  narrow  street.  Mother 
had  actually  once  been  up  in  that  room, 
and  had  looked  out  of  the  window  west- 
ward, and  seen  the  trees  of  Chelsea  farm 
(now  Cremorne  Gardens).  What  a  room 
that  would  be  to  play  in  !  Joe  pegged 
down  the  back  yard  and  back  again 
with  excitement,  when  he  thought 
of  it.  We  were  going  to  live  there, 
and  father  was  going  to  let  all  the 
upper  part  in  lodgings,  and  Cousin 
Eeuben 

CHAPTER  IIL 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  COUSIN  REUBEN. 

AND  Cousin  Eeuben  had  applied  for 
lodgings  from  the  very  moment  he 
heard  of  our  move,  and  was  actually 
coming  to  live  with  us.  Was  this  as 
satisfactory^  as  all  the  rest  of  it  ?  Why, 
no.  And  that  is  why  I  made  that 
pause  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter. 
We  had  noticed  that  a  shade  had  passed 
over  our  father's  face ;  and,  we  being 
simple  and  affectionate  people,  that 
shade  had  been  reflected  on  ours, 
though  we  hardly  knew  why. 

For  our  Cousin  Reuben  was  a  great 
favourite  with  all  of  us.  He  had  been 
apprenticed  to  a  waterman,  but  had 
won  his  coat  and  freedom  a  few  months 
before  this.  He  was  a  merry,  slangy, 
dapper  fellow,  about  seventeen,  always 
to  be  found  at  street  corners  with  his 
hands  in  liis  pockets,  talking  loud.  We 
had  been  very  proud  of  his  victory ;  it 
was  the  talk  of  all  the  water-side  ;  he 
rowed  in  such  perfect  form,  and  with 


8 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


such  wonderful  rapidity.  The  sporting 
papers  took  him  up.  He  was  matched 
at  some  public-house  to  row  against 
somebody  else  for  some  money.  He 
won  it,  but  there  was  a  dispute  about 
it,  and  the  sporting  papers  had  leading 
articles  thereon.  But  the  more  famous 
Reuben  became,  the  more  my  father's 
face  clouded  when  he  spoke  of  him. 

That  birthday  night  I  was  sleepily 
going  up  to  bed,  when  my  father  stopped 
me  by  saying,  "  Old  man,  you  and  me 
must  have  a  talk,"  whereupon  my  mo- 
ther departed.  "  Jim,"  said  he  as  soon 
as  she  was  gone,  "did  you  ever  hear 
anything  about  your  cousin  Reuben's 
father  1 " 

I  said  quickly,  "  No ;  but  I  had 
often  thought  it  curious  that  we  had 
never  heard  anything  of  him." 

The  time  is  come,  my  boy,  when  you 
must  know  as  much  as  I  do.  It  is 
a  bitter  thing  to  have  to  tell  you  ;  but 
you  are  old  enough  to  share  the  family 
troubles.  And  I  heard  the  following 
story : — 

Samuel  Burton  had  been  a  distant 
cousin  of  my  father's.  When  about 
twelve  years  old,  he  had  expressed  a 
wish  to  go  into  service,  and  his  friends 
had  got  for  him  a  place  as  page  or 
steward-room  boy,  in  the  family  of  an 
opulent  gentleman. 

At  the  time  of  his  going  there  the 
heir  of  the  house  was  a  mere  infant. 
As  time  went  on,  his  father,  anxious  for 
him  to  escape  the  contaminations  of  a 
public  school,  sent  him  to  a  highly  ex- 
pensive private  tutor ;  and  the  boy 
selected  Samuel  Burton,  his  favourite, 
to  accompany  him  as  his  valet. 

The  father  had  been  anxious  that 
his  boy  should  escape  the  contamination 
of  a  public  school — the  more  so,  because, 
at  the  age  of  thirteen,  he  was  a  very 
difficult  and  somewhat  vicious  boy.  The 
father  took  the  greatest  care,  and  mado 
every  possible  inquiry.  The  Rev.  Mr. 
Easy  was  a  man  of  high  classical 
attainments,  and  unblemished  character. 
There  were  only  two  other  pupils,  both 
of  the  most  respectable  rank  in  life — 
one,  the  son  and  heir  of  Sir  James 
Mottesfont ;  the  other,  son  of  the  great 


city  man,  Mr.  Peters.  Nothing  could 
be  more  satisfactory.  Alas  !  the  poor 
father  in  avoiding  Charybdis  had  run 
against  Scylla.  In  avoiding  the  diluted 
vice  of  a  public  school,  he  had  sent  his 
son  into  a  perfectly  undiluted  atmo- 
sphere of  it.  Young  Mottesfont  was  an 
irreclaimable  vicious  idiot,  and  Peters 
had  been  sent  away  from  a  public  school 
for  drunkenness.  In  four  years'  time  our 
young  gentleman  '  was  finished/  and 
was  sent  to  travel  with  a  tutor,  keeping 
his  old  servant,  Samuel  Burton  (who 
had  learned  something  also),  and  began 
a  career  of  reckless  debauchery  of  all 
kinds.  After  two  years  he  was  angrily 
recalled  by  his  father.  Not  very  long 
after  his  return  Samuel  Burton  married 
(here  my  father's  face  grew  darker  still). 
Hitherto  his  character,  through  all  his 
master's  excesses,  had  been  most  blame- 
less. The  young  gentleman's  father  had 
conceived  a  great  respect  for  the  young 
man,  and  was  glad  that  his  wild  son, 
should  have  so  staid  and  respectable 
a  servant  willing  to  stay  with  him. 

A  year  after  Samuel  was  married  a 
grand  crash  came.  The  young  gentle- 
man, still  a  minor,  was  found  to  be 
awfully  in  debt,  to  have  been  raising 
money  most  recklessly,  to  have  been 
buying  jewellery  and  selling  it  again. 
His  creditors,  banding  themselves  toge- 
ther, refused  to  accept  the  plea  of  mino- 
rity ;  two  of  their  number  threatened  ta 
prosecute  for  swindling  if  their  claims 
were  not  settled  in  full.  An  arrange- 
ment was  come  to  for  six  thousand 
pounds,  and  the  young  gentleman  was 
allowanced  with  two  hundred  a  year 
and  sent  abroad, 

Samuel  Burton,  seeing  that  an  end 
was  come  to  a  system  of  plunder  which 
he  had  carried  on  at  his  young  master's 
expense,  came  out  in  his  true  colours. 
He  robbed  the  house  of  money  and 
valuables  to  the  amount  of  thirteen 
hundred  pounds,  and  disappeared — 
utterly  and  entirely  disappeared — leav- 
ing his  wife  and  child  to  the  mercy 
of  my  father. 

This  was  my  father's  account  of  his 
disappearance.  He  concealed  from  me 
the  fact  that  Samuel  Burton  had  been 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


arrested  and    transported  for  fourteen 
years. 

The  poor  mother  exerted  herself  as 
well  as  she  was  able  ;  but  she  had  been 
brought  up  soft-handed  and  could  do 
but  little.  When  Eeuben  was  about 
ten  she  died  ;  my  father  took  the  boy 
home,  and  ultimately  apprenticed  him 
to  a  waterman. 

"And  now,  my  boy,  you  see  why  I 
am  anxious  about  Reuben's  coming  to 
live  with  us.  He  comes  of  bad  blood 
on  both  sides ;  and  his  father  is,  for 
aught  I  know,  still  alive.  Eeuben  ain't 
going  on  as  I  could  wish.  I  don't  say 
anything  against  those  as  row  races, 
or  run  races,  or  ride  races ;  I  only  know 
it  ain't  my  way,  and  I  don't  want  it  to 
be.  There's  too  much  pot'us  about  it 
for  our  sort,  my  boy ;  so  you  see  I  don't 
want  him  and  his  lot  here  on  that 
account.  And  then  he  is  a  dapper  little 
chap  ;  and  our  Emma  is  very  pretty 
and  sweet,  and  there  may  be  mischief 
there  again.  Still,  I  can't  refuse  him. 
I  thought  I  was  doing  a  kind  thing  to 
a  fatherless  lad  in  calling  him  cousin, 
but  I  almost  wish  I  hadn't  now.  So  I 
say  to  you,  keep  him  at  a  distance. 
Don't  let  him  get  too  intimate  in  our 
part  of  the  house.  Good  night,  old 
man." 

"Where  are  you  going  to  put  him, 
father  ? " 

"  As  far  off  as  I  can,"  said  my  father. 
"  In  the  big  room  at  the  top  of  the 
house." 

"  In  the  ghost's  room  ? "  said  I.  And 
I  went  to  bed,  and  dreamt  of  Reuben 
being  woke  in  the  night  by  a  little  old 
lady  in  grey  shot  silk  and  black  mit- 
tens, who  came  and  sat  on  his  bed  and 
knitted  at  him.  For,  when  my  mother 
was  confined  with  Fred,  Mrs.  Quickly 
was  in  attendance  and  told  us  of  such 
an  old  lady  in  the  attic  aloft  there,  and 
had  confirmed  her  story  by  an  appeal 
to  Miss  Tearsheet,  then  in  seclusion,  in 
consequence  of  a  man  having  been 
beaten  to  death  by  Mr.  Pistol  and 
others.  We  were  very  few  doors  from 
Alsatia  in  those  times  ! 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE    COLONIAL    SECRETARY    SEES  SNAKES 
AND    OTHER   VERMIN. 

IT  was  a  hard  hit  in   a  tender  placo 
for  the   Colonial  Secretary.      He   had 
started  in  life  as  the  younger  son  of  a 
Worcestershire  squire,  and  had  fought 
his  way,   inch  by  inch,   up   to   fame, 
honour,  and  wealth.     He  was   shrewd, 
careful  enough  of  the  main  chance,  and 
very  ambitious  ;  but,  besides  this,  he  was 
a  good-hearted  affectionate  fellow ;  and 
one  of  his  objects  of  ambition  had  been 
to  have  a  quiet  and  refined  home,  wherein 
he  might  end  his  days  in  honour,  pre- 
sided over  by  a  wife  who  was  in  every 
way  worthy  of  him.     Perhaps  he  had 
been    too    much    engaged    in    money- 
making,  perhaps   he  had   plunged  too 
fiercely  into  politics,  perhaps  he  had  never 
found  a  woman  who  exactly  suited  him  ; 
but  so  it  was — he  had  postponed  his 
domestic  scheme  to  his  other  schemes, 
until  he  was  two-and-forty,  and  might 
have   postponed  it  longer,  had  he  not 
met  Agnes  Neville,  at  a  geological  picnic, 
in  the   crater   of  Necnicabarla.      Here 
was    everything    to     be    wished    for : 
beauty,   high  breeding,   sweet   temper, 
and   the   highest   connexion.     Four  of 
her  beautiful  sisters  had  married  before 
her,  every  one  of  them  to  one  of  the 
best-bred  and  richest  squatters  in  that 
wealthy  colony.     Mrs.   Morton  of  Jip 
Jip,  Mrs.   Hill  of  Macandemdah,    the 
Honourable  Mrs.  Packenham  of  Langi 
Cal  Cal ;  and  lastly,  the  beautiful  and 
witty  Mrs.   Somerton  of  Lai  Lai  and 
Py  wheitjork.1   He  fell  in  love  with  Miss 
Neville  at  once  ;  their  marriage  was  de- 
layed, principally  on  account  of  trouble- 
some political  reasons,  for  six  months, 
and  in  that  time  he  had  got  to  love, 
like  a  brother,  her  little  sister,  Gerty 
Neville,  and  the  last  and  most  beautiful 
of  the  six  beautiful  sisters.    Even  before 
he  was  married,  he  and  Agnes  had  laid 
out   all   sorts  of  plans   for  her  future 
settlement.     He  had  even  a  scheme  for 

1  One  would  not  dare  to  invent  these  names. 
They  are  all  real. 


10 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


taking  her  to  Paris,  getting  her  properly 
dressed  there,  and  pitching  her  into  the 
London  season,  under  the  auspices  of 
his  mother,  as  a  gauntlet  to  English 
beauty. 

It  was  a  hard  hit  for  him.  He  had 
always  been  so  especially  hard  an  a 
certain  kind  of  young  English  gentle- 
man, who  has  sailed  too  close  to  the 
wind  at  home,  and  who  comes  to  the 
colony  to  be  whitewashed.  He  had 
fulminated  against  that  sort  of  thing  so 
strongly.  From  his  place  in  the  House 
he  had  denounced  it  time  after  time. 
That  his  colony,  his  own  colony,  which 
he  had  helped  to  make,  was  to  become 
a  sewer  or  sink  for  all  the  rubbish  of 
the  old  country  !  How  he  had  .protested 
against  and  denounced  that  principle, 
whether  applied  to  male  or  female  emi- 
grants ;  and  now  Gerty  was  proposing  to 
marry  a  man,  whom  he  was  very  much 
inclined  to  quote  as  one  of  the  most 
offensive  examples  of  it. 

And  another  provoking  part  of  the 
business  was,  that  he  would  have  little 
or  no  sympathy.  The  colony  would 
say  that  the  youngest  Miss  Neville  had 
made  a  great  catch,  and  married  better 
than  any  of  her  sisters.  The  fellow 
would  be  a  baronet  with  10,000/.  a 
year.  There  was  a  certain  consolation 
in  that — a  considerable  deal  of  conso- 
lation; if  it  had  not  been  that  the 
Secretary  loved  her,  that  might  have 
made  him  tolerably  contented  with  her 
lot.  But  he  loved  her;  and  the  man, 
were  he  fifty  baronets,  was  a  low  fellow 
of  loose  character ;  and  it  was  very  hot ; 
and  so  the  Secretary  was  discontented. 

Very  hot.  The  tide  out,  leaving  a 
band  of  burning  sand,  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  broad,  between  sea  and  shore. 
Where  he  had  struck  the  sea  first,  at 
Wooriallock  Point,  the  current,  pouring 
seaward  off  the  spit  of  sand,  had  knocked 
up  a  trifling  surf,  which  chafed  and 
leaped  in  tiny  waves,  and  looked  crisp, 
and  cool,  and  aerated.  But,  now  he  was 
in  the  lone  bight  of  the  bay,  the  sea 
was  perfectly  smooth  and  oily,  deadly 
silent  and  calm,  under  the  blazing  sun. 
The  water  did  not  break  upon  the  sand, 
but  only  now  and  then  sneaked  up  a 


few  feet  with  a  lazy  whisper.  Before  him 
for  twelve  miles  or  more  were  the  long 
level  yellow  sands,  without  one  single 
break  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  ;  on 
his  right  the  glassy  sea,  gleaming  under 
the  background  of  a  heavy  slow-sailing 
thunder  cloud ;  and  on  his  left  the  low 
wall  of  dark  evergreen  shrubs,  which 
grew  densely  to  the  looser  and  drier  sands 
that  lay  piled  in  wind-heaps  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  surf. 

Once  his  horse  shied;  it  was  at  a 
black  snake,  which  had  crept  down 
to  bathe,  and  which  raised  its  horrible 
wicked  head  from  out  its  coils  and  hissed 
at  him  as  he  went  by.  Another  time 
he  heard  a  strange  rippling  noise,  coming 
from  the  glassy  surfless  sea  on  his  right 
It  was  made  by  a  shark,  which,  coming 
swiftly,  to  all  appearance,  from  under 
the  dark  thunder-cloud,  headed  shore- 
ward, making  the  spray  fly  in  a  tiny 
fountain  from  his  back-fin,  which  was 
visible  above  the  surface.  As  he  came 
on,  the  smaller  fish,  snappers  and  such 
like,  hurled  themselves  out  of  water  in 
hundreds,  making  the  sea  alive  for  one 
instant;  but  after  that  the  shark,  and 
the  invisible  fish  he  was  in  pursuit 
of,  sped  seaward  again ;  the  ripple 
they  had  made  died  out  on  the  face  of 
the  water,  and  the  water  in  the  bay  was 
calm,  still,  and  desolate  once  more. 

Intolerably  lonely.  He  pushed  his 
horse  into  a  canter,  to  make  a  breeze  for 
himself  which  the  heavens  denied  bim. 
Still  only  the  long  weary  stretch  of 
sand,  the  sea  on  the  right,  and  the  low 
evergreens  on  the  left 

But  now  far,  far  ahead,  a  solitary  dot 
upon  the  edge  of  the  gleaming  water, 
which,  as  the  good  horse  threw  the 
ground  behind  him,  grew  larger  and 
larger.  Yes,  it  was  a  man  who  toiled 
steadily  on  in  the  same  direction  the 
Secretary  was  going — a  man  who  had 
his  trousers  off,  and  was  walking  bare- 
legged on  the  edge  of  the  sea  to  cool 
his  feet ;  a  man  who  looked  round  from 
time  to  time,  as  if  to  see  who  was  the 
horseman  behind  him. 

The  Secretary  reined  up  beside  him 
with  a  cheery  "Good  day,"  and  the 
man  respectfully  returned  the  salutation. 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


11 


The  Secretary  recognised  his  man  in  an 
instant,  but  held  his  tongue. 

He  was  a  tall  narrow -shouldered 
man,  who  might  have  been  forty  or 
might  have  been  sixty ;  as  with  most 
other  convicts,  his  age  was  a  profound 
mystery.  You  could  see  that  he  had 
been  originally  what  some  people,  hasty 
observers,  would  call  a  good-looking 
young  man,  and  was  even  now  what 
those  same  hasty  observers  would  call  a 
good  -  looking  middle  -  aged  man.  His 
hair  was  grey,  and  he  had  that  won- 
derfully clear  dark-brown  complexion 
which  one  sees  so  continually  among 
old  convicts  who  have  been  much  in  the 
bush.  His  forehead  was  high  and  bald, 
and  his  nose  was  very  long,  delicate,  and 
aquiline — so  much  was  in  his  favour; 
but  then — why,  all  the  lower  part  of 
his  face,  upper  lip,  mouth,  lower  lip 
and  all,  were  pinched  up  in  a  heap 
under  the  long  nose.  When  I  read 
"  Little  Dorrit,"  I  was  pleased  to  find 
that  Mr.  Dickens  was  describing  in 
the  person  of  M.  Eigaud  one  of  our 
commonest  types  of  convict  face,  but 
Frenchified  and  wearing  a  moustache, 
and  was  pleased  also  to  see  that,  with 
his  wonderfully  close  observation,  he  had 
not  committed  the  mistake  of  making 
his  man  a  brave  and  violent  villain, 
but  merely  a  cunning  one. 

The  Secretary  looked  down  on  the 
bald  head  and  the  Satanic  eyebrows, 
which  ran  down  from  high  above  the 
level  of  the  man's  ears  and  nearly  met 
above  his  great  transparent  hook  nose, 
and  said  to  himself,  "  Well,  you  are 
a  more  ill-looking  scoundrel  than  I 
thought  you  the  other  day,  though  you 
did  look  a  tolerable  rogue  then." 

The  man  saw  that  the  Secretary  had 
recognised  him,  and  the  Secretary  saw 
that  he  saw  it ;  but  they  both  ignored 
the  fact.  It  was  so  lonely  on  these 
long  sands,  that  the  Secretary  looked  on 
this  particular  scoundrel  as  if  he  were  a 
rather  interesting  book  which  he  had 
picked  up,  and  which  would  beguile 
the  way. 

"  Hot  day,  my  man." 

"  Very  hot,  your  honour ;  but,  if  that 
thunder-cloud  will  work  up  to  us  from 


the  west,  we  shall  have  the  south  wind 
up  in  the  tail  of  it,  as  cold  as  ice. 
Your  honour  will  excuse  my  walking 
like  this.  I  looked  round  and  saw  you 
had  no  ladies  with  you." 

Not  at  all  an  unpleasant  or  coarse 
voice.  A  rather  pleasing  voice,  belong- 
ing to  a  person  who  had  mixed  with 
well-bred  people  at  some  tune  or 
another. 

"  By  Jove,"  said  the  Secretary,  "  don't 
apologise,  my  man.  I  rather  envy  you. 
But  look  out  for  the  snakes.  I  have 
seen  two  on  the  edge  of  the  salt  water ; 
you  must  be  careful  with  your  bare 
feet." 

"  I  saw  the  two  you  speak  of,  sir,  a 
hundred  yards  off.  I  have  a  singularly 
quick  eye.  It  is  possible,  your  honour, 
that  if  I  had  been  transported  a  dozen 
years  earlier  I  might  have  made  a  good 
bushman.  I  was  too  effeminately  bred 
also,  Mr.  Secretary.  I  was  spoilt  too 
young  by  your  class,  Mr.  Secretary,  or 
I  might  have  developed  into  a  bolder 
and  more  terrible  rogue  than  I  am." 

"  What  a  clever  dog  it  is  ! "  thought 
the  Secretary.  "Knowing  that  he  can't 
take  me  in,  and  yet  trying  to  do  it 
through  a  mere  instinct  of  deceit,  which 
has  become  part  of  his  nature.  And 
his  instinct  shows  him  that  this  care- 
less frankness  was  the  most  likely  dodge 
to  me,  who  know  everything,  and  more. 
By  gad,  it  is  a  wonderful  rogue  ! " 

He  thought  this,  but  he  said :  "Fiddle- 
dedee  about  terrible  rogues.  You  are 
clear  now ;  why  don't  you  mend  your 
ways,  man  1  Confound  it,  why  don't 
you  mend  your  ways  ? " 

"I  am  going  to,"  said  the  other. 
"Not,  Mr.  Colonial  Secretary,  because 
I  am  a  bit  a  less  rogue  than  before,  but 
because  it  will  pay.  Catch  me  tripping 
again,  Mr.  Oxton,  and  hang  me." 

"I  say,"  said  the  Secretary;  "you 
mus'n't  commit  yourself,  you  know." 

"  Commit  myself !  "  said  the  man, 
with  a  sneer ;  "  commit  myself  to  you  ! 
Haven't  I  been  confidential  with  you? 
Don't  I  know  that  every  word  I  have 
said  to  you  in  confidence  is  sacred  ? 
Don't  I  know  that  what  you  choose 
to  call  your  honour  will  prevent  your 


12 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


using  one  word  of  any  private  conver- 
sation against  me  1  Haven't  I  been 
brought  up  among  such  as  you  ?  Haven't 
I  been  debauched  and  ruined  by  such 
as  you  ?  Commit  myself !  I  know  and 
despise  your  class  too  well  to  commit 
myself.  You  daren't  use  one  word  I 
have  said  against  me.  Such  as  I  have 
the  pull  of  you  there.  You  daren't, 
for  your  honour's  sake." 

And,  as  he  turned  his  angry  face 
upon  the  Secretary,  he  looked  so  much 
more  fiendish  than  the  snake,  and  so 
much  more  savage  than  the  shark,  that 
the  Secretary  rode  on,  saying,  "Well, 
my  man,  I  am  sorry  I  said  anything  to 
offend  you ;"  and,  as  he  rode  on,  leaving 
the  solitary  figure  toiling  on  behind 
him,  he  thought  somewhat  like  this  : 

"  Curious  cattle,  these  convicts  !  Even 
the  most  refined  of  them  get  at  times 
defiant  and  insolent,  in  their  way. 
What  a  terrible  rogue  this  fellow  is  ! 
He  saw  I  recognised  him  from  the  first. 
I  hate  a  convict  who  turns  Queen's 
evidence.  I  wonder  where  he  is  going. 
I  wish  I  could  turn  him  over  the 
border.  I  hate  having  convicts  loose 
in  my  little  colony.  It  is  an  infernal 
nuisance  being  so  close  to  a  penal  settle- 
ment ;  but  there  is  no  help  for  it.  I 
wonder  where  that  rogue  is  making  for ; 
I  wish  he  would  make  for  Sydney. 
Where  can  he  be  going]" 

One  cannot  help  wondering  what 
the  Secretary  would  have  said  had  ho 
known,  as  we  do,  that  this  desperate 
rogue  was  bound  on  exactly  the  same 
errand  as  himself.  That  is  to  say,  to 
foregather  with  Mr.  George  Hillyar,  the 
man  who  was  to  be  a  baronet,  and  have 
10,000£.  a  year,  and  who,  God  help  us, 
was  to  marry  Gerty  Neville. 

"  Let  me  see,"  said  the  Secretary. 
"  That  fellow's  real  name  came  out  on 
his  trial.  What  was  it  1  Those  things  are 
worth  remembering.  Samuel  Barker — 
no,  it  wasn't  Barker,  because  that's  the 
name  of  the  Cape  Wilberforce  people. 
Eippon,  that  was  the  name ;  no,  it 
wasn't.  What  is  his  name  ]  Ah !  Eip- 
pon and — Eippon  and  Burton.  Ah  !  for 
the  man's  name  was  Samuel  Burton." 


CHAPTEE  V. 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  THE  GHOST'S  ROOM 
IS  INVADED,  AND  JAMES  PUTS  HIS  FOOT 
THROUGH  THE  FLOOR. 

IN  due  time — that  is  to  say,  a  fortnight 
after  my  fifteenth  birthday — we  moved 
into  the  new  house.  It  was  eight  o'clock 
on  a  bright  summer's  morning  when  my 
father  got  the  key  from  Mr.  Long,  un- 
locked the  gate  in  the  broken  palings 
which  surrounded  the  house,  and  passed 
into  the  yard,  surrounded  by  his  whole 
awe-stricken  family. 

There  was  no  discovery  made  in  the 
yard.  It  was  commonplace.  A  square 
flagged  space,  with  a  broken  waterbutt 
in  one  corner  under  an  old-fashioned 
leaden  gargoyle.  There  was  also  a  grind- 
stone, and  some  odd  bits  of  timber 
which  lay  about  near  the  pump,  which 
was  nearly  grown  up  with  nettles  and 
rye-grass.  In  front  of  me  as  I  stood  in 
the  yard  the  great  house  rose,  flushed 
with  the  red  blaze  of  the  morning  sun; 
behind  were  the  family,  Joe  leaning  on, 
his  crutch,  with  bis  great  eyes  staring 
out  of  his  head  in  eager  curiosity  ;  after 
him  the  group  of  children,  clustered 
round  Emma,  who  carried  in  her  arms 
my  brother  Fred,  a  large-headed  stolid 
child  of  two,  who  was  chronically  black 
and  blue  in  every  available  part  of  his 
person  with  accidents,  and  who  was, 
even  now,  evidently  waiting  for  an  op- 
portunity to  distinguish  himself  in  that 
line. 

Joe  had  not  long  before  made  ac- 
quaintance with  kind  old  Mr.  Faulkner, 
who  had  coached  him  up  in  antiquities 
of  the  house;  and  Joe  had  told  me 
everything.  We  boys  fully  expected  to 
find  Lord  Essex's  helmet  lying  on  the 
stairs,  or  Queen  Elizabeth's  glove  in  the 
passage.  So,  when  father  opened  the 
great  paneled  door,  and  went  into  the 
dark  entry,  we  pushed  in  after  him, 
staring  in  all  directions,  expecting  to 
see  something  or  another  strange  ;  in 
which  we  were  disappointed.  There 
was  nothing  more  strange  than  a  large 
entrance  hall,  a  broad  staircase,  with 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


13 


large  balustrades,  somewhat  rickety  and 
out  of  the  perpendicular,  winding  up 
one  side  of  it  to  the  floor  above,  and 
a  long  nmllioned  window  halfway  up. 
Our  first  difficulty  arose  from  Frank, 
ray  youngest  brother  but  one,  de- 
clining to  enter  the  house,  on  the 
grounds  that  Shadrach  was  hiding  in 
the  cellar.  This  difficulty  being  over- 
come, we  children,  leaving  father  and 
mother  to  inspect  the  ground  floor, 
pushed  upstairs  in  a  body  to  examine 
the  delectable  regions  above,  where  you 
could  look  out  of  window,  over  Shep- 
herd's nursery  ground,  and  see  the  real 
trees  waving  in  the  west. 

On  reaching  the  first  floor,  my  young- 
est brother,  Fred,  so  to  speak,  inaugu- 
rated, or  opened  for  public  traffic,  the 
staircase,  by  falling  down  it  from  the  top 
to  bottom,  and  being  picked  up  black  in 
the  face,  with  all  the  skin  off  his  elbows 
and  knees.  Our  next  hitch  was  with 
Frank,  who  refused  to  go  any  further 
because  Abednego  was  in  the  cupboard. 
Emma  had  to  sit  down  on  the  landing, 
and  explain  to  him  that  the  three  holy 
children  were  not,  as  Frank  had  erro- 
neously gathered  from  their  names, 
ghosts  who  caught  hold  of  your  legs 
through  the  banisters  as  you  went  up- 
stairs, or  burst  suddenly  upon  you  out 
of  closets  ;  but  respectable  men,  who 
had  been  dead,  lawk-a-mercy,  ever  so 
long.  Joe  and  I  left  her,  combating, 
somewhat  unsuccessfully,  a  theory  that 
Meshech  was  at  that  present  speaking 
up  the  chimney,  and  would  immediately 
appear,  in  a  cloud  of  soot,  and  frighten 
us  all  to  death ;  and  went  on  to  examine 
the  house. 

And  really  we  went  on  with  some- 
thing like  awe  upon  us.  There  was  no 
doubt  that  we  were  treading  on  the 
very  same  boards  which  had  been  trod- 
den, often  enough,  by  the  statesmen  and 
dandies  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  Court,  and 
most  certainly  by  the  mighty  woman 
herself.  Joe,  devourer  of  books,  had, 
with  Mr.  Faulkner's  assistance,  made 
out  the  history  of  the  house ;  and  he 
had  communicated  his  enthusiasm  even 
to  me,  the  poor  simple  blacksmith's  boy. 
So  when  we,  too,  went  into  the  great 


room  on  the  first  floor,  even  I,  stupid 
lad,  cast  my  eyes  eagerly  around  to  see 
whether  anything  remained  of  the  splen- 
dour of  the  grand  old  court,  of  which 
I  had  heard  from  Joe. 

Nothing.  ISTot  a  bit  of  furniture.  Three 
broad  windows,  which  looked  westward. 
A  broad  extent  of  shaky  floor,  an  im- 
mense fire-place,  and  over  it  a  yellow 
dingy  old  sampler,  under  a  broken  glass, 
hanging  all  on  one  side  on  a  rusty  nail. 
Joe  pounced  upon  this  at  once,  and 
devoured  it.  "  Oh,  Jim  !  Jim.  !  "  he 
said  to  me,  "just  look  at  this.  I  won- 
der who  she  was  1 " 

"There's  her  name  to  it,  old  rnan," 
I  answered.  "  I  expect  that  name's 
hern,  ain't  it  1  For,"  I  said  hesitatingly, 
seeing  that  Joe  was  excited  about  it, 
and  feeling  that  I  ought  to  be  so  myself, 
though  not  knowing  why — "  for,  old 
man,  if  they'd  forged  her  name,  maybe 
they'd  have  done  it  in  another  coloured 
worsted." 

This  bringing  forth  no  response,  I 
felt  that  I  was  not  up  to  the  occasion  ; 
I  proceeded  to  say  that  worsteds  were 
uncommon  hard  to  match,  which  ask 
our  Emma,  when  Joe  interrupted  me. 

"I  don't  mean  that,  Jim.  I  mean, 
what  was  her  history.  Did  she  write  it 
herself,  or  who  wrote  it  for  her  1  What 
a  strange  voice  from  the  grave  it  is. 
Age  eighteen  ;  date  1686  ;  her  name 
Alice  Hillyar.  And  then  underneath, 
in  black,  one  of  her  beautiful  sisters  has 
worked,  '  She  dyed  3d  December,  that 
yeare.'  She  is  dead,  Jim,  many  a  weary 
year  agone,  and  she  did  this  when  she 
was  eighteen  years  old.  If  one  could 
only  know  her  history,  eh  ?  She  was 
a  lady.  Ladies  made  these  common 
samplers  in  those  times.  See,  here  is 
Emma.  Emma,  dear,  see  what  I  have 
found.  Take  and  read  it  out  to  Jim." 

Emma,  standing  in  the  middle  of  the 
deserted  room,  with  the  morning  sun- 
light on  her  face,  and  with  the  rosy 
children  clustering  round  her,  read  it 
out  to  us.  She,  so  young,  so  beautiful, 
so  tender  and  devoted,  stood  there,  and 
read  out  to  us  the  words  of  a  girl,  per- 
haps as  good  and  as  devoted  as  she  was, 
who  had  died  a  hundred  and  fifty  years 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons : 


before.  Even  I,  dull  boy  as  I  was,  felt 
there  was  something  strange  and  out-of- 
the-way  in  hearing  the  living  girl  read- 
ing aloud  the  words  of  the  girl  who  had 
died  so  long  ago.  I  thought  of  it  then ; 
I  thought  of  it  years  after,  when  Joe 
and  I  sat  watching  a  dim  blue  promon- 
tory for  two  white  sails  which  should 
have  come  plunging  round  before  the 
full  south  wind. 

It  was  but  poor  doggrel  that  Emma 
read  out  to  us.  First  came  the  letters 
of  the  alphabet ;  then  the  numbers ;  then 
a  house  and  some  fir-trees  ;  then — 

"Weep  not,  sweet  friends,  my  early 

doom. 

Lay  not  fresh  flowers  upon  my  tomb ; 
But  elder  sour  and  briony, 
And  yew  bough  broken  from  the  tree. 
My  sisters  kind  and  beautiful ! 
My  brothers  brave  and  dutiful ! 
My  mother  deare,  beat  not  thy  breast, 
Thy  hunchbacked  daughter  is  at  rest 
See,  friends,  I  am  not  loath  to  go ; 
My  Lord  will  take  me,  that  I  know." 

Poor  as  it  was,  it  pleased  Joe  ;  and  as 
I  had  a  profound  belief  in  Joe's  good 
taste,  I  was  pleased  also.  I  thought  it 
somewhat  in  the  tombstone  line  myself, 
and  fell  into  the  mistake  of  supposing 
that  one  was  to  admire  it  on  critical, 
rather  than  on  sentimental  grounds. 
Joe  hung  it  up  over  his  bed,  and  used 
to  sit  up  in  the  night  and  tell  me 
stories  about  the  young  lady,  whom  he 
made  a  clothes-peg  on  which  he  hung 
every  fancy  of  his  brain. 

He  took  his  yellow  sampler  to  kind 
old  Mr.  Faulkner,  who  told  him  that 
our  new  house,  Church  Place,  had  been 
the  family  place  of  the  Hillyars  at  the 
close  of  the  seventeenth  century.  And 
then  the  old  man  put  on  his  hat,  took 
his  stick,  called  his  big  dog,  and,  taking 
Joe  by  the  hand,  led  him  to  that  part 
of  the  old  church  burial-ground  which 
lies  next  the  river;  and  there  he  showed 
him  her  grave.  She  lay  in  that  fresh 
bree2y  corner  which  overlooks  the  flash-; 
ing  busy  river,  all  alone.  "  Alice  Hill- 
yar  ;  born  1668,  died  1686."  Her  beau- 
tiful sisters  lay  elsewhere,  and  the  brave* 
brothers  also ;  though,  by  a  beautiful 


fiction,  they  were  all  represented  on  the 
family  tomb  in  the  chancel,  kneeling 
one  behind  the  other.  It  grew  to  be  a 
favourite  place  with  Joe,  this  grave  of 
the  hunchbacked  girl,  which  overlooked 
the  tide  ;  and  Emma  would  sit  with  him 
there  sometimes.  And  then  came  one  and 
joined  them,  and  talked  soft  and  low  to 
Emma,  whose  foot  would  often  dally 
with  the  letters  of  his  own  surname  on 
the  worn  old  stone. 

The  big  room  quite  came  up  to  our 
expectations.  We  examined  all  the 
other  rooms  on  the  same  floor ;  then  we 
examined  the  floor  above;  and,  lastly, 
Joe  said  : 

"Jim,  are  you  afraid  to  go  up  into 
the  ghost's  room  1 " 

"N — no,"  I  said  ;  "  I  don't  mind  in 
the  day  time." 

"  When  Rube  comes,"  said  Joe,  "  we 
sha'n't  be  let  to  it ;  so  now  or  never." 

We  went  up  very  silently.  The  door 
was  ajar,  and  we  peeped  in.  It  was 
nearly  bare  and  empty,  with  only  a  little 
nameless  lumber  lying  in  one  corner. 
It  was  high  for  an  attic,  in  consequence 
of  the  high  pitch  of  the  roof,  and  not 
dark,  though  there  was  but  one  window 
to  it ;  this  window  being  a  very  large 
dormer,  taking  up  nearly  half  the  narrow 
end  of  the  room.  The  ceiling  was,  of 
course,  lean-to,  but  at  a  slighter  angle 
to  the  floor  than  is  usual. 

But  what  struck  us  immediately  was, 
that  this  room,  long  as  it  was,  did  not 
take  up  the  whole  of  the  attic  story. 
And,  looking  towards  the  darker  end  of 
the  room,  we  thought  we  could  make 
out  a  door.  We  were  afraid  to  go  near 
it,  for  it  would  not  have  been  very- 
pleasant  to  have  it  opened  suddenly, 
and  for  a  little  old  lady,  in  grey  shot 
silk  and  black  mittens,  to  come  popping 
out  on  you.  We,  however,  treated  the 
door  with  great  suspicion,  and  I  kept 
watch  on  it  while  Joe  looked  out  of 
window. 

When  it  came  to  my  turn  to  look 
out  of  window,  Joe  kept  watch.  I 
looked  right  down  on  the  top  of  the 
trees  in  the  Rectory  garden  ;  beyond  the 
Rectory  I  could  see  the  new  tavern, 
the  Cadogan  Arms,  and  away  to  the 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


15 


north-east  St.  Luke's  Church.  It  was 
a  pleasant  thing  to  look,  as  it  were, 
down  the  chimneys  of  the  Black 
Lion,  and  over  them  into  the  Rectory 
garden.  The  long  walk  of  pollard 
limes,  the  giant  acacias,  and  the  little 
glimpse  of  the  lawn  between  the 
boughs,  was  quite  a  new  sight  to  me. 
I  was  enjoying  the  view,  when  Joe 
said  : 

"  Can  you  see  the  Cadogan  Arms  ]" 

"  Yes/' 

"  I  wonder  what  the  Earl  of  Essex 
would  have  thought  if —  " 

At  this  moment  there  was  a  rustling 
of  silk  in  the  dark  end  of  the  room, 
and  we  both,  as  the  Yankees  say,  "  up 
stick  "  and  bolted.  Even  in  my  terror 
I  am  glad  to  remember  that  I  let  Joe 
go  first,  though  he  could .  get  along 
with  his  crutch  pretty  nearly  as  fast  as 
I  could.  We  got  downstairs  as  quick 
as  possible,  and  burst  in  on  the  family, 
with  the  somewhat  premature  intelli- 
gence, that  we  had  turned  out  the 
ghost,  and  that  she  was,  at  that  present 
moment,  coming  downstairs  in  grey 
shot  silk  and  black  mittens. 

There  was  an  immediate  rush  of  the 
younger  ones  towards  my  mother  and 
Emma,  about  whom  they  clustered  like 
bees.  Meanwhile  my  father  stepped 
across  to  the  shop  for  a  trifle  of  a  strik- 
ing hammer,  weight  eighteen  pounds, 
and,  telling  me  to  follow  him,  went 
upstairs.  I  obeyed,  in  the  first  place, 
because  his  word  was  law  to  me,  and, 
in  the  second,  because  in  his  company 
I  should  not  have  Beared  one  halfpenny 
for  a  whole  regiment  of  old  ladies  in 
grey  silk.  We  went  upstairs  rapidly, 
and  I  followed  him  into  the  dark  part 
of  the  room. 

We  were  right  in  supposing  we  had 
seen  a  door.  There  it  was,  hasped — or 
as  my  father  said,  hapsed — up  and 
covered  with  cobwebs.  After  two  or 
three  blows  from  the  hammer  it  came 
open,  and  we  went  in. 

The  room  we  entered  was  nearly  as 
large  as  the  other,  but  dark,  save  for  a 
hole  in  the  roof.  In  one  corner  was 
an  old  tressel  bed,  and  at  its  head  a 
tattered  curtain  which  rustled  in  the 


wind,  and  accounted  for  our  late  panic. 
I  was  just  beginning  to  laugh  at  this, 
when  I  gave  a  cry  of  terror,  for  my 
right  foot  had  gone  clean  through  the 
boards. 

My  father  pulled  me  out  laughing; 
but  I  had  hurt  my  knee,  and  had  to 
sit  down.  My  father  knelt  down  to 
look  at  it ;  when  he  had  done  so,  he 
looked  at  the  hole  I  had  made. 

"An  ugly  hole  in  the  boards,  old 
man ;  we  must  tell  Eube  about  it,  or 
he'll  break  his  leg,  maybe.  What  a 
depth  there  is  between  the  floor  and 
the  ceiling  below  !"  he  said,  feeling  with 
his  hammer ;  "  I  never  did,  surety." 

After  which  he  carried  me  down- 
stairs, for  I  had  hurt  my  knee  some- 
what severely,  and  did  not  get  to  work 
for  a  week  or  more. 

When  father  made  his  appearance 
among  the  family,  carrying  me  in  his 
arms,  there  was  a  wild  cry  from  the 
assembled  children.  My  mother  re- 
quested Emma  to  put  the  door-key 
down  her  back ;  and  then,  seeing  that  I 
was  really  hurt,  said  that  she  felt  rather 
better,  and  that  Emma  needn't. 

Some  one  took  me  from  my  father, 
and  said,  in  a  pleasant  cheery  voice  : 

"  Hallo !  here's  our  Jim  been  a- 
trotting  on  the  loose  atones  without  his 
knee-caps.  Hold  up,  old  chap,  and 
don't  cry  ;  I'll  run  round  to  the  infant- 
school  for  a  pitch-plaster,  and  call  at  the 
doctor's  shop  as  I  go  for  the  fire-engine. 
That's  about  our  little  game,  unless  you 
think  it  necessary  for  me  to  order  a 
marvel  tomb  at  the  greengrocer's.  ]STot 
a-going  to  die  this  bout  1  I  thought  as 
much." 

I  laughed.  We  always  laughed  at 
Reuben — a  sort  of  small  master  in  the 
art  of  cockney  chaff ;  which  chaff  con- 
sisted in  putting  together  a  long  string 
of  incongruities  in  a  smart  jerky  tone 
of  voice.  This,  combined  with  con- 
summate impudence  ;  a  code  of  honour 
which,  though  somewhat  peculiar,  is 
rarely  violated ;  a  reckless,  though  per- 
sistent, courage ;  and,  generally  speak- 
ing, a  fine  physique,  are  those  better 
qualities  of  the  Londoner  ("cockney," 
as  those  call  him  who  don't  care  for 


16 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VI. 


two  black  eyes,  et  cetera),  which  make 
him,  in  rough  company,  more  re- 
spected and  "  let  alone  "  than  any  other 
class  of  man  with  whom  I  am  ac- 
quainted. The  worst  point  in  his  cha- 
racter, the  point  which  spoils  him.  is 
his  distrust  for  high  motives.  His 
horizon  is  too  narrow.  You  cannot  get 
him  on  any  terms  to  allow  the  existence 
of  high  motives  in  others.  And,  where 
he  himself  does  noble  and  generous 
things  (as  he  does  often  enough,  to  my 
knowledge),  he  hates  being  taxed  with 
them,  and  invariably  tries  to  palliate 
them  by  imputing  low  motives  to  himself. 
If  one  wanted  to  be  fanciful,  one  would 
say  that  the  descendant  of  the  old  Lon- 
don 'prentice  had  inherited  his  grand- 
sires'  distrust  for  the  clergy  and  the 
aristocracy,  who  were  to  the  city  folk, 
not  so  intimate  with  them  as  the  country 
folk,  the  representatives  of  lofty  profes- 
sion and  imperfect  practice.  However 
this  may  be,  your  Londoner's  chief 


fault,  in  the  present  day,  is  his  distrust 
of  pretensions  to  religion  and  chivalrous 
feeling.  He  can  be  chivalrous  and  re- 
ligious at  tunes ;  but  you  must  hold 
your  tongue  about  it. 

Eeuben  was  an  average  specimen  of  a 
town-bred  lad  ;  he  had  all  their  virtues 
and  vices  in  petto.  He  was  a  gentle, 
good-humoured  little  fellow,  very  clever, 
very  brave,  very  kind-hearted,  very 
handsome  in  a  way,  with  a  flat-sided 
head  and  regular  features.  The  fault, 
as  regarded  his  physical  beauty,  was 
that  he  was  always  "  making  faces  " — 
"  shaving,"  as  my  father  used  to  call  it. 
He  never  could  keep  his  mouth  still. 
He  was  always  biting  his  upper  lip  or 
his  under  lip,  or  chewing  a  straw,  or 
spitting  in  an  unnecessary  manner.  If 
he  could  have  set  that  mouth  into  a 
good  round  No,  on  one  or  two  occasions, 
and  kept  it  so,  it  would  have^  been 
better  for  all  of  us. 

To  be  continued. 


LETTEES    FROM    A    COMPETITION    WALLAH. 


LETTER  VI :— A  TIGER-PARTY  IN  NEPAUL. 


March  28,  1863. 

MY  DEAR  SIMKIKS, — For  some  time 
past,  "  my  mind  has  been  divided  within 
my  shaggy  breast,"  as  to  whether  I 
should  send  you  an  account  of  our 
tiger-party  in  Nepaul.  I  "was  deterred 
by  doubts  of  my  ability  to  hit  off  that 
peculiar  vein  of  dullness  whichseems  the 
single  qualification  requisite  for  a  sport- 
ing author.  Why  a  pursuit  of  such 
absorbing  interest  should  lose  all  its 
charms  in  the  recital  it  is  hard  to  say. 
Perhaps  men  are  misled  by  the  delights 
of  a  hard  run  or  a  successful  stalk,  and 
imagine  that  a  bare  unadorned  narrative 
will  best  convey  the  idea  of  those  de- 
lights to  their  readers.  But  this  can 
hardly  be  the  cause;  for  accounts  of 
sport,  for  the  most  part,  are  characterised 
by  carefully  elaborated  jocosity  of  a  sin- 


gularly insipid  flavour.  Sometimes  the 
writer  aspires  to  poetry  ;  in  which  case 
he  invariably  talks  about  his  Pegasus, 
and  is  mildly  mythological,  calling  all 
ladies  "Dianas,"  and  speaking  of  the 
sun  as  "  Phcebus."  After  describing  the 
breakfast  at  the  house  of  "the  Amphi- 
tryon," the  meet  on  the  lawn,  and  the 
scene  at  coverside,  he  proceeds  some- 
what in  this  strain : — 

*,Acrpss  the  fields  proud  Reynard  goes, 
Amidst  A  hundred  Tallyhos. 
Our  master  kept  the  Cockneys  back, 
Who  pressed  and  jostled  in  the  track. 
Right  manfully  his  tongue  he  plies, 
And  to  perdition  dooms  their  eyes. 
Three  couple  now  are  on  the  scent !; 
'  Hark,  forrard ! '  and  away  we  went. 
'  Hark,  forrard !   Forrard ! '  is  the  cry ; 
And  like  a  flock  of  birds  we  fly, 
In  breeches,  scarlet-coat,  and  tops, 
Along  the  Dyke  to  Heywood  Copse. 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VI. 


17 


As  down  towards  Barton  Wold  we  sail, 
The  Cockneys  soon  began  to  tail, 
And  all  of  them  were  missing,  rot  'em, 
Ere  yet  we  got  to  Brambly  Bottom. 
The  pace  now  told  on  every  nag, 
Which  proved  the  fox  was  not  a  '  bag.' 
Poor  Captain  Fisher  broke  his  girth, 
And,  like  Antaeus,  came  to  earth, 
Though  with  his  fall,  I  greatly  fear  0, 
Ceased  his  resemblance  to  that  hero. 
Briggs  came  a  cropper ;  and  the  earl 
Experienced  an  unlucky  purl, 
But  towards  the  front  he  showed  again, 
Before  we  entered  Ditton  Lane." 

Who  reads  these  productions  ?  I  had 
the  pleasure  of  living  among  fox-hunters 
in  England,  having  indeed  myself  de- 
scribed parabolas  over  more  than  one 
hedge,  but  their  taste  in  literature  was 
as  good  as  that  of  any  other  class  of 
educated  men.  Again,  there  is  no  want 
of  cultivation  among  cricketers.  My 
friends  who  had  been  in  the  eleven  at 
Harrow  and  Eton  knew  good  writing 
from  bad.  They  laughed  at  Tupper  and 
with  Thackeray,  and  carried  off  their 
full  share  of  honours  in  the  university 
examinations.  It  could  not  be  for  their 
edification  that  such  stuff  as  the  follow- 
ing is  put  on  paper  : 

"United  Victor  Emmanuels  v.  the 
"  Second  Eleven  of  Horley  School  with 
"  Tomkins." 

"  Yon  light  is  not  daylight.  I  know 
it — I."  So  said  Juliet  (in  a  play  com- 
posed by  one  Will  Shakspeare,  who 
might  have  shaken  a  bat  in  uncommon 
pretty  style  had  he  lived  now-a-days), 
and  so  said  the  "Vies,"  when  roused 
from.  "Nature's  sweet  restorer  "  to  catch 
the  early  train  to  Mudford,  which  was 
to  catch  the  early  coach  to  Haverton, 
which  was  to  catch  the  early  drag  to 
Horley,  which  they  were  all  to  catch  it 
from  the  school  captain  for  not  coming 
early  enough  as  it  was,  or  "as  they 
were,"  if  you  like  it  better  so,  my 
gentle  and  painfully  grammatical  reader. 
The  "  Vies  "  won  the  toss,  and  sent  to 
the  wicket  Jones  and  "  the  Novice." 
"  In  I  go,"  Jones  says,  with  his  wonted 
humour  :  but  "Out  you  go,  Jones,"  was 
the  stern  answer  of  the  irresistible 
Touikins,  as  he  levelled  the  off  stump  of 
that  distinguished  architect.  Two  more 
gentlemen,  whose  names  we  suppress 

No.  49. — VOL.  ix. 


out  of  tenderness  for  their  ancestors  who 
come  after  them,  followed,  only  to  lay 
the  wily  duck's  egg.  But,  behold, 
amidst  loud  cheering  from  the  "  Vies," 
the  invincible  Buffle  assumes  the  willow. 
"  Et  fugit  ad  salicem,  sed  se  capit  ante 
videri."  Alas !  poor  Buffle !  What 
might  not  have  been  the  feats  of  that 
conquering  arm  hadst  not  thou  spooned 
up  a  ball,  which  seemed  to  say,  in  an  in- 
viting manner,  "Take  a  'poon,  point." 
Point  made  a  point  of  catching  it,  and 
thou,  0  Buffle,  retiredst  swearing: — 
and  so  forth,  till  even  Bell  cries,  "  Hold ! 
Enough ! " 

Have  you  ever  observed  that  a  man 
always  speaks  of  the  event  which  cut 
short  his  innings  as  a  remarkable  occur- 
rence, out  of  the  ordinary  course  of  the 
game1?  "Are  you  out,  old  fellow]" 
"  Yes,  I  was  beastly  unlucky.  Whizzle- 
white  bowled  me  with  a  shooter :  "  or, 
"  I  hit  at  a  slow  pitched-up  ball  which 
took  my  wicket : "  or,  "  I  was  caught 
at  long-leg  by  a  fluke,"  who,  by-the- 
bye,  generally  happens  to  be  standing 
long-leg  on  such  occasions :  or,  "  The 
ball  came  off  my  pad,  and  just  rolled 
in  :  "  or,  "I  was  run  out : "  or,  worse 
than  all,  "  that  fool  Jobson  ran  me  out." 
No  one  ever  was  known  to  run  himself 
out.  It  is  either  "  That  fool  Jobson," 
or  the  bald  statement,  "  I  was  run  out." 
I  once  asked  a  friend  of  colossal  fame 
as  a  batsman  what  was  the  regular  way 
of  getting  out  to  which  every  other  con- 
stituted an  exception.  The  question 
apparently  opened  to  him  an  entirely 
new  line  of  thought. 

It  is  bad  enough  that  the  athletic 
pursuits  which  are  the  special  glory  of 
England  should  be  made  the  vehicle  for 
such  melancholy  buffoonery ;  but  the 
more  practical  writers  on  sporting  mat- 
ters have  very  crude  notions  of  what  is 
readable.  There  are  no  authors  who  as 
a  class  so  consistently  ignore  the  pre- 
cept of  Horace  which  forbids  to  com- 
mence the  history  of  the  return  of 
Diomede  with  the  decease  of  Meleager, 
and  to  trace  the  Trojan  War  from  the 
double  egg.  Just  as  the  chroniclers  of 
the  Middle  Ages  always  began  with 
Adam,  every  one  who  publishes  a  treatise 

c 


•18 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  VI. 


on  the  habits  and  diseases  of  the  dog 
seems  unable  to  tell  us  what  mash  he 
recommends  for  a  tired  pointer,  and 
whether  he  treats  distemper  with  sweet 
oil  or  mustard  and  water,  unless  he  has 
prefaced  his  remarks  by  informing  us 
that  the  hounds  of  Theseus 

"Were  bred  out  of  the  Spartan  kind, 
So  flew'd,  so  sanded  ; " 

and  that  the  poor  Indian  entertains  the 
hope  that,  when  he  has  been  despatched 
"  to  the  equal  sky,"  by  fire-water,  and 
small-pox,  and  the  other  blessings 
brought  to  the  door  of  his  wigwam  by 
advancing  civilization,  "  his  faithful  dog 
shall  bear  him  company."  "Whether 
this  privilege,  if  extended  to  the  whole 
of  the  canine  race,  would  conduce  to  the 
greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  num- 
ber of  departed  spirits,  may  reasonably 
be  doubted.  There  is  an  officer  residing 
in  our  boarding-house  who  was  the 
spirited  proprietor  of  a  bulldog  which  I 
shot  the  day  before  yesterday  with  a  sa- 
loon-pistol, and  of  which  I  sincerely  trust 
that  I  have  seen  the  last  in  this  world 
and  the  next.  There  is  no  one  who  can 
bring  out  a  work  upon  the  game  of 
cricket  without  introducing  into  his  first 
few  pages  an  allusion  to  the  rhyme — 

"  At  football  or  at  cricket, 
How  neatly  hur  could  prick  it ! " 

Impelled  apparently  by  the  same  myste- 
rious necessity  which,  in  the  case  of  the 
•weak-minded  gentleman  in  "David 
"  Copperfield,"  overruled  his  efforts  to 
keep  King  Charles  the  First  out  of  his 
memorial.  It  is  fortunate  that  this  ten- 
dency is  confined  to  one  department  of 
literature.  Conceive  what  it  would  be 
if  every  medical  publication  commenced 
with  Hezekiah's  poultice  of  figs,  every 
book  on  tactics  or  fortification  with  the 
battle  of  four  kings  against  five,  and 
every  peerage  with  Duke  Ternan,  Duke 
Omar,  Duke  Zepho,  and  Duke  Kenaz. 

Indian  sport  has  perhaps  suffered 
more  in  public  estimation  by  villa- 
nously  bad  writing  than  any  other  branch 
of  the  gentle  craft.  People  have  been 
so  overdone  with  howdahs,  and  bottled 
beer,  and  hair-triggers,  and  hair-breadth 


escapes,  and  griffins  spearing  a  so\v  by 
mistake,  that  they  had  rather  face  a 
royal  Bengal  tiger  in  his  native  jungle 
than  in  the  Sporting  Magazine,  and 
dread  the  name  of  a  pig  more  than  the 
most  scrupulous  Jew  can  abhor  the  re- 
ality. What  reader  of  taste  does  not 
feel  his  heart  sink  within  him  when, 
as  he  flits  through  the  leaves  of  a  peri- 
odical, paper-knife  in  hand,  he  is  aware 
of  a  contribution  headed, 

"  Pigs  and  their  Stickers  ; 

Or,  How  we  keep  it  up  in  the  North-West. 

By  Nimrod,  Junior." 

Mayhap,  as  he  cuts  his  way  through 
Mmrod  Junior's  article,  in  the  haste  of 
an  absorbing  terror,  he  lights  upon  a 
page  commencing  :  "  '  —  your  eyes,  you 
'young  greenhorn,  keep  to  your  own 
'  side,'  and  up  dashes  Major  \V — ,  the 
'  gallant,  the  determined,  his  long  beard 
'  floating  on  the  mid- day  air  ;  his  glance 
'  beaming  as  it  beamed  when  he  led  the 
'stormers  over  the  glacis  at  Mooltan. 
'  Fly,  poor  piggy,  if  tKou  wantest  to  re- 
'  see  thy  porcine  spouse !  But  faster 
'  flies  thy  pursuer,  his  intellectual  brow 
'  knit  with  eagerness,  as  he  just  feels 
'  the  Pelham  pressing  the  mouth  of  his 
'  four-year-old."  I  will  endeavour  to 
steer  clear  of  the  Scylla  of  slang  and 
the  Charybdis  of  bombast,  and  to  set 
down  on  paper  a  simple  unvarnished 
history  of  some  most  pleasant  days 
passed  in  very  good  company. 

The  northern  border  of  the  district,  of 
which  Mofussilpore  is  the  capital,  lies 
some  fifty  miles  distant  from  the  station. 
The  province  is  bounded  in  this  quarter 
by  JSTepaul,  or  rather  by  the  Terai,  a  slip 
of  plain  about  twenty  miles  in  breadth 
along  the  foot  of  the  lower  chain  of  the 
Himalayas,  which  we  have  left  in  the 
possession  of  the  Hillmen.  It  is  culti- 
vated by  Hindoos,  from  whom  their 
masters  exact  a  swingeing  tribute  ;  and, 
as  most  of  their  revenue  is  drawn  from 
this  source,  the  fear  of  losing  it  makes 
even  Ghorkas  shy  of  a  collision  with 
the  British  Government.  The  soil  is 
fertile,  and  intersected  by  numerous 
streams,  which,  fed  by  the  eternal 
snows  of  the  main  chain,  afford  a  more 
certain  supply  of  water  than  the  great 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VI. 


19 


rivers  that  flow  into  the  Ganges  from 
the  South.  The  ground  immediately 
under  the  hills  is,  however,  wild  and 
broken,  and  covered  with  luxuriant 
jungles,  which  swarm  with  wild  animals 
of  every  species,  from  elephants  to  mon- 
keys. It  is  the  custom  of  the  magnates 
of  Mofussilpore  to  make  an  expedition 
thither  in  the  spring  of  every  year  ;  and 
Jung  Bahadur,  the  mayor  of  the  palace 
at  the  court  of  Khatmandoo,  holds  it  in 
high  repute  as  a  shooting  ground.  As 
the  IsTepaulese  have  no  "modified  reso- 
lutions concerning  the  sale  of  waste 
"  lands,"  it  is  probable  that  this  region 
will  long  provide  abundant  sport  alike 
for  civil  servants  and  native  premiers. 
Last  year  the  party  from  the  station 
had  been  a  good  deal  annoyed  by  the 
suspicion  with  which  they  had  been  re- 
garded by  the  local  officials ;  so  Tom 
had  obtained  a  permit  from  the  great 
man  himself,  giving  us  leave  to  shoot 
for  twenty  days.  It  was  attested  by  his 
seal,  which  gave  his  title  at  full  length 
in  English,  "  Jung  Bahadur,  G-.C.B., 
Prime  Minister  of  Nepaul." 

For  months  beforehand  preparations 
had  been  on  foot.  The  arrangements 
for  a  shooting  party  on  a  grand  scale 
demand  no  scant  amount  of  administra- 
tive capacity,  and  require  all  the  per- 
sonal influence  of  a  man  in  authority  to 
be  successfully  carried  out.  Three  ele- 
phants must  be  borrowed  from  one  zemin- 
dar, and  four  from  another;  and  the 
brigadier  at  Dinapore  must  be  requested 
to  lend  the  services  of  a  score  of  his 
hugest  and  most  earth-shaking  beasts, 
and  his  pluckiest  mahouts.  Then  tents 
and  howdahs  must  be  looked  up  and 
repaired ;  and  a  small  commissariat  de- 
partment organized  for  the  provisioning 
of  a  little  army  of  drivers,  grass-cutters, 
and  servants  at  a  distance  from  the 
depots.  Then  communications  must  be 
kept  open  between,  the  station  and  the 
camp,  and  a  daily  dawk  maintained  on  a 
system,  resembling  as  little  as  possible 
that  of  the  General  Post  Office  of  India. 
Finally,  the  comfort  of  the  Sahibs  must 
be  insured  ;  bacon,  cheese,  flour,  sheep, 
fowls,  beer-shrub,  brandy-shrub,  sherry- 
shrub,  Simkin-shrub,  tea-shrub,  belattee- 


pawnee,  meta-pawnee,1  penicka-pawnee,2 
must  be  despatched  on  a-head,  and  a 
double  set  of  horses  be  laid  down  at 
six-mile  stages  along  the  whole  line  of 
road. 

From  the  16th  to  the  19th  of  Feb- 
ruary, elephants  came  to  Mofussilpore  in 
quick  succession  ;  and,  as  fast  as  they 
arrived,  we  presented  each  Mahout  with 
a  rupee  and  a  bag  of  rice,  and  sent  him 
on  to  camp.  On  the  evening  of  the 
20th,  young  Benson,  the  assistant- 
magistrate,  treated  his  brother  hunters 
to  a  bachelor-dinner.  "We  were  four  in 
number:  our  host,  Tom,  myself,'  and 
Mr.  Mildred,  an  indigo-planter  who  re-" 
sided  in  the  vicinity — a  first-rate  spear 
and  a  rough-rider,  a  most  keen  sports- 
man, but  unselfish  enough  to  consider 
the  sport  of  others  as  more  important 
than  his  own.  If  ever  I  am  sent  to 
skirmish  in  open  order,  I  should  like  to 
have  Mildred  for  the  front-rank  man  of 
my  file.  "We  got  uncommonly  jolly, 
under  the  combined  stimulus  of  Simkin 
and  anticipation.  After  dessert  was  re- 
moved, we  spent  the  evening  in  sewing 
up  bullets  in  linen — a  wise  precaution, 
for  it  is  poor  work  fumbling  for  a  patch 
when,  having  just  fired  away  all  your 
ball  at  an  antelope,  you  see  a  streak  of 
yellow  and  black  glancing  through  the 
grass  twenty  yards  in  front  of  your 
elephant. 

The  next  morning  we  rose  at  half- 
after  three,  and  started  off  into  the  dark- 
ness in  two  tumtums,  or  dog-carts. 
Everybody  in  these  parts  keeps  at  least 
three  horses  ;  and  no  one  who  meditates 
a  journey,  feels  any  delicacy  about  asking 
for  the  loan  of  as  many  as  he  requires, 
from  the  factories  and  stations  bordering 
on  his  route.  It  soon  grew  light,  and 
we  bowled  merrily  along  at  the  rate  of 
eight  miles  an  hour,  including  stoppages, 
and  ferries,  and  shyings,  and  boltings, 
and  rearings.  The  road,  not  having 
been  constructed  under  the  auspices  of 
the  Public  Works  Department,  was  in 
excellent  order.  A  grass  causeway  ran 
along  the  centre,  high  and  dry ;  while 
on  either  side  was  a  sort  of  ditch  sacred 
to  bullock  hackeries.  Long  before  each 


1  Lemonade. 


a  Drinking-water. 
02 


20 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  VI. 


set  of  nags  had  lost  their  freshness,  we 
came  in  sight  of  another  pair,  standing 
sometimes  beneath  an  ancient  peepul- 
tree,  sometimes  tinder  the  walls  of  a 
ruined  temple,  sometimes  in  a  grove  of 
mangoes  or  palms.  Mofussil  horses 
behave  in  a  most  fiendish  manner  at 
starting ;  but,  when  once  well  off,  they 
complete  their  stage  with  laudable  zeal 
and  propriety.  Some  are  incorrigible 
planters,  considering  it  essential  to  their 
dignity  to  stand  perfectly  still  for  ten 
minutes  after  they  have  been  put  be- 
tween the  shafts.  Others  jib  violently 
and  back  into  the  cart-track  beneath, 
while  a  cascade  of  gun-cases  slides  over 
the  rear  of  the  tumtum,  and  a  stream  of 
collectors  pours  out  in  front.  In  other 
cases,  the  owner  holds  the  animal's  head 
high  in  air,  to  prevent  him  from  kicking 
the  vehicle  to  pieces  ;  and,  when  the 
harness  has  been  adjusted,  sends  him  off 
at  a  gallop,  and  jumps  up  behind  as  best 
he  may. 

By  eleven  o'clock  we  had  accom- 
plished forty-seven  miles  in  safety,  and 
found  ourselves  at  an  old  military  station 
on  the  borders  of  Nepaul.  During  the 
war  at  the  beginning  of  the  century, 
a  battalion  had  been  quartered  here, 
but  the  place  had  long  been  deserted. 
The  bungalows  were  abandoned  to  the 
jackal  and  the  cobra,  the  compounds 
were  overgrown  with  brushwood,  the 
wells  choked  with  rubbish.  One  ancient 
lady,  a  Mrs.  Grant — whose  husband,  the 
regimental  surgeon,  had  died  and  been 
buried  during  the  period  of  our  occupa- 
tion— lived  on  here  for  many  years  in 
perfect  solitude,  till  she  lapsed  into  semi- 
barbarism,  quarrelling  with  her  native 
servants,  and  keeping  a  number  of  deer 
and  cats  under  her  roof,  from  which  she 
could  not  be  persuaded  to  tear  herself 
even  after  they  had  departed  this  life, 
and  become  too  high  to  be  agreeable  pets. 
The  aspect  of  the  burial-ground  was 
melancholy  and  singular.  Amidst  a 
group  of  trees  enclosed  within  a  ruined 
wall  were  scattered,  fast  crumbling  to 
decay,  those  unsightly  masses  of  brick- 
work which  make  hideous  the  last  home 
of  the  stranger  in  India.  Here,,  as  else- 
where, most  of  the  inscriptions  had  been 


removed  by  the  rustics  of  the  neighbour- 
hood, to  be  used  for  grinding  their 
curry  ;  but  some  few  remained,  of  which 
one,  showing  signs  of  comparatively 
recent  repair,  stated  itself  to  be  "in 
affectionate  memory  of  Dr.  Grant." 
Others  recorded  the  names  of  officers 
hardly  emerged  from  boyhood,  whose 
preconceived  hopes  of  the  excitement 
of  active  service  and  the  gaiety  of 
country  quarters  were  realized  in  ennui, 
brandy  pawnee,  jungle-fever,  and  an 
early  grave.  One  monument  was  erected 
to  a  Waterloo  hero  by  "his  friend,  Lord 
Cornbermere,"  who  has  lived  through 
another  generation  since  his  old  comrade 
was  buried  in  the  wilds  of  Nepaul. 

The  last  vestige  of  practicable  road 
ceased  at  the  frontier.  So  we  alighted, 
unloaded  the  tumtums,  and  packed  our 
guns  and  baggage  on  a  couple  of  elephants. 
As  the  Happy  Hunting-grounds  were 
seven  coss,  or  fourteen  miles,  within  the 
Nepaulese  territory,  we  took  a  few  hours' 
rest  and  a  hearty  tiffin  under  the  shade 
of  a  noble  banyan — a  tree  that  is  to 
other  trees  as  a  patriarchal  clan  to  a 
modern  household.  Just  as,  in  primitive 
times,  every  community  owned  a  com- 
mon father,  whose  memory  formed  an 
indissoluble  tie  long  after  ho  was  dead 
and  gone,  even  when  the  family  had 
increased  into  a  mighty  nation ;  so  the 
banyan  is  a  forest  in  itself,  which,  for 
centuries  after  every  trace  of  the  parent 
trunk  has  disappeared,  grows  outward 
and  upward,  till  whole  battalions  might 
repose  within  the  circuit  of  its  boughs. 
Here  wp  drank  tea,  and  smoked,  and 
did  gymnastics  on  the  branches,  and 
read  Tristram  Shandy  out  loud,  till  three 
in  the  afternoon,  when  we  saddled  the 
horses  and  recommenced  our  march. 

Before  we  had  gone  many  yards,  my 
horse,  a  fiery  young  Cabul  stallion  be- 
longing to  Mildred,  said  Ha,  ha,  and 
pitched  me  over  his  head ;  and  then 
proceeded,  after  their  manner,  to  eat  me 
like  a  radish,  from  the  feet  upwards. 
He  was  not,  however,  destined  to  enjoy 
his  unhallowed  meal  in  peace  ;  for  his 
owner,  who  dismounted  on  the  spot, 
and  to  my  intense  relief  insisted  on 
changing  animals  with  me,  speedily 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VI. 


21 


brought  him  to  reason  with  a  pair  of 
heavy  spurs  and  a  cotton  umbrella.    We 
•were  conducted  by  a  guide  along  a  track, 
far  more  rugged  than  the  fields  on  either 
side,    through   a  rich   country   thickly 
studded  with  villages.     Tom's  eye,  more 
practised  or  more  partial  than  my  own, 
detected  numerous  signs  of  misgovern- 
ment.     He   bade  us   observe  that  the 
tillage   had  perceptibly  fallen  off,  and 
that  the  people  lived  in  wretched  wicker 
huts ;  while,  on  his  side  of  the  border, 
each  man  had  his  excellent  mud  cabin 
thatched  with  straw.     The   population 
was   entirely  Hindoo ;    but  here    and 
there  we  came  across  a  Nepaulese  official, 
clothed  in  skins,  and  invariably  armed 
with  the  heavy  carved  knife  which  the 
native  tribes  far  and  near  dread  as  the 
Tarentines  and  Etrurians   dreaded  the 
broadsword  of  old  Eome.      Our  own 
sepoys,  led  by  British  officers,  could  not 
be  brought  to  stand  the  charge  of  the 
Hill-men  ;  and  on  more  than  one  memor- 
able occasion  even  the\English  bayonets 
gave  way  before  the  Ghorka  blades.   For 
a    whole  year,    the    regular    army"  of 
Nepaul,  a  mere  handful  of  some  12,000 
warriors,  defended  their  extensive  fron- 
tier   against  tremendous    odds.       The 
earlier  engagements  in   the   war  read 
like  Prestonpans  and  Killiecrankie.    At 
length,   when  Ochterlony,  acting  with 
great  caution  and  skill,   had  outman- 
oeuvred the  chiefs  of  these  Highlanders 
of  the  east,  they  avoided  a  Culloden,  by 
signifying  their  agreement  to  an  equit- 
able peace,  the  terms  of  which  have  been 
faithfully  observed  by  both  parties — an 
instance  of  mutual  respect  rare  in  India. 
The  specimens  of  the  race  whom  we 
passed  on  the  road,  to  judge  by  their 
appearance,  would  be  awkward  customers 
in  a  surprise  or  foray.   Short,  with  thick 
firm  limbs,  light  complexions,  long  mat- 
ted hair,  and  an  inexpressibly  humorous 
cast  of  features,  they  looked  ,us  full  in 
the  face,  and  laughed  and  talked  with  a 
freedom  and  dignity  which  had  quite  a 
bracing  effect  on  men  accustomed  to  Ben- 
galee servility  and  effeminacy.     In  fact, 
the  Ghorkas  are  a  military  aristocracy, 
like   the  Spartans  of  blue  blood;    the 
other  ISTepaulese  represent  the  Lakedse- 


monians  or  Periceki  (in  gratitude  to  dear 
Mr.  Grote  for  that  history  which  all 
scholars  love,  and  all  pedants  hate  and 
envy,  I  make  a  point  of  spelling  to  his 
fancy),  while  the  Hindoos  of  the  Terai 
are  little  better  than  Helots. 

In  a  bold  and  singularly  unsuccessful 
attempt  to  take  a  flying  leap  over  a  mud 
wall,  Benson  broke  a  stirrup-leather,  and, 
while  he  stopped  to  mend  it  with  his 
boot-laces,  Tom  took  occasion  to  question 
the  villagers  about  the  system  adopted 
by  the  JSTepaulese  for  getting  in  the 
revenue,  expecting  to  obtain  some  infor- 
mation concerning  the  grades  and  duties 
of  the  collectors,  the  nature  and  amount 
of  the  assessment,  the  permanency  of 
the  settlement,  &c.  His  audience  burst 
out  laughing,  and  replied  that  the  re- 
ceived method  of  collecting  consisted  in 
placing  a  lattee,  which  is  the  name  for 
the  quarter-staff  carried  by  all  Indian 
peasants,  under  the  defaulter's  knee, 
and  raising  his  leg  till  he  became  able 
to  pay  up.  As  to  a  permanent  settle- 
ment, the  Government  officers  some- 
times brought  a  ryot's  elbows  behind 
his  back,  passed  a  lattee  under  them, 
hung  him  by  his  heels  to  a  tree,  and 
settled  him  there  permanently,  unless 
his  quota  was  forthcoming;  but  they 
had  never  heard  of  any  other.  The 
amount  of  the  assessment  seemed  to 
average  about  four  times  the  sum 
that  would  be  exacted  for  the  same 
lands  by  the  English  Treasury,  with  as 
much  more  as  could  be  squeezed  out  of 
the  tenants  by  these  legitimate  means  of 
coercion.  In  return  for  the  tribute,  the 
Imperial  Government  does  not  appear 
to  have  provided  its  subjects  with  cheap 
and  speedy  justice,  or  with  facilities  for 
the  instruction  of  their  children,  or  any 
of  the  other  benefits  by  which  we  seek 
to  compensate  the  natives  for  the  loss 
of  their  independence,  and  salve  our 
own  consciences  ;  while  the  state  of  the 
roads  and  of  the  irrigation  went  to 
show  that  the  Khatniandoo  Department 
of  Public  Works  was  hardly  superior 
in  efficiency  to  our  own.  The  whole 
strength  of  the  Ghorka  administration 
seems  to  be  concentrated  on  their  War 
Office,  and  their  Prime  Ministers  are 


22 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VI. 


tetter  hands  at  shooting  their  uncles 
through  the  back  with  blunderbusses, 
than  at  compiling  codes  or  devising 
sweeping  measures  of  popular  education. 
As  we  went  by  a  miserable  hovel,  a 
man  ran  out,  and,  putting  up  his  hands 
in  the  attitude  of  prayer,  as  is  the 
universal  custom  among  natives  when 
addressing  a  superior,  entreated  Tom  to 
cure  him  of  a  bloody  flux,  from  which 
he  had  suffered  for  the  space  of  two 
years.  Tom  said,  kindly,  that  if  he 
would  come  to  Mofussilpore,  every  at- 
tention should  be  paid  to  his  case  ;  but 
this  was  not  what  the  poor  fellow 
wanted.  He  had  fondly  imagined  that 
the  Sahib  would  make  him  whole  by  a 
word  or  a  touch.  Europeans  are  rarer 
birds  and  more  like  black  swans  in 
these  parts  than  in  the  British  domi- 
nions, and  very  mysterious  notions  exist 
concerning  their  powers  for  good  and 
evil.  This  was  a  fair  instance  of  what 
the  missionary  tracts  call  "  Illustrations 
of  Scripture."  How  sick  one  got  as  a 
child  of  those  little  green  books,  which 
never  tired  of  informing  us  that  the 
Chinese  rice-growers  even  now  cast 
their  bread  on  the  waters  and  find  it 
after  many  days ;  and  that  even  now 
the  Hindoos  take  up  their  beds  and 
walk.  The  similes,  drawn  by  our  Savi- 
our from  the  familiar  scenes  around 
him,  come  home  to  one  with  great  force 
out  here.  Every  week  a  magistrate,  in 
Cutcherry,  disposes  of  cases  which  forci- 
bly remind  one  how  little  twenty  centu- 
ries have  modified  the  immutable  ways 
of  oriental  agricultural  life.  Still,  when 
a  farmer  goes  forth  at  dawn  to  find  his 
boundary  stone  rolled  inwards,  or  his 
crop  choked  with  tares,  he  knows 
that  "  an  enemy  hath  done  this."  Still 
the  unjust  Gomastah  calls  his  lord's 
tenants  unto  him,  and  bids  one  who 
owes  a  hundred  seers  of  indigo  take  his 
bill  and  write  fifty,  and  another  who 
owes  a  hundred  maunds  of  grain  take 
his  bill  and  write  fourscore,  trusting 
wisely  to  the  selfish  gratitude  of  the 
mammon  of  unrighteousness.  Still, 
when  some  strong  man  of  doubtful 
loyalty  has  been  deprived  of  his  wea- 
pons under  the  Disarming  Act,  the 


dacoits  dig  through  the  wall,  and  first 
bind  the  strong  man,  and  then  spoil  his 
house.  The  excessive  aversion  to  pedes- 
trian exercise  that  prevails  among  old 
residents,  and  the  great  difficulty  which 
a  fresh  arrival  experiences  in  obtaining 
a  companion  for  a  walk,  frequently  re- 
calls the  text  which  enjoins  a  special 
manifestation  of  unselfishness.  More 
than  once  have  I  induced  a  good 
Christian  to  go  with  me  a  mile  sorely 
against  his  will,  who,  when  we  have 
accomplished  that  distance,  has  freely 
offered  to  complete  the  twain. 

As  we  approached  the  mountains  the 
crops  became  poorer  and  fewer,  and  the 
patches  of  cultivation  were  surrounded 
with  rude  fences — a  sure  sign  that  we 
were  coming  into  the  region  of  deer. 
At  length  we  entered  upon  a  grass  plain 
sprinkled  with  brushwood,  fringed  on 
three  sides  with  jungle.  It  was  now 
the  cool  of  the  evening,  and  we  put  our 
horses  into  a  gallop,  which  soon  brought 
us  to  the  border  of  a  vast  wood.  After 
winding  about  through  the  trees  for  the 
better  part  of  an  hour,  we  hit  upon  the 
camp  just  before  dark  ;  and  a-  very 
picturesque  scene  it  was.  The  tents 
stood  in  an  open  space  of  an  acre  and 
a  half  or  two  acres,  enclosed  in  the 
primaeval  forest.  Along  the  west  side 
of  the  encampment,  at  the  foot  of  a 
bank  that  went  sheer  down  to  the  depth 
of  thirty  feet,  ran  the  river  Bogmutty 
babbling  over  the  pebbles  like  a  High- 
land burn.  To  use  the  expression  of 
old  Pepys,  it  was  pretty  to  see  the 
excitement  of  my  companions  at  the 
sound  and  aspect  of  a  running  brook. 
Men  who,  for  a  dozen  years,  had  never 
known  anything  but  stagnant  tanks, 
or  wide  sluggish  streams  the  colour  of 
pea-soup,  were  beside  themselves  with 
delight  at  the  tinkling  of  the  water  as 
it  rippled  over  the  shingle,  the  deep, 
clear  pools  "  with  here  and  there  a  lusty 
trout,"  the  peewits  calling  to  each  other 
from  the  brink,  the  rocks  which  aiforded 
so  inviting  a  dressing-room  to  bathers 
who  were  sceptical  on  the  subject  of 
crocodiles.  At  a  distance  of  some  six 
miles  to  the  northward  the  Himalayas 
sprang  straight  up  from  the  plain  to 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VI. 


the  height  of  five  thousand  feet ;  while, 
in  the  far  distance,  we  could  discern  the 
white  line  of  those  mysterious  hills 
beside  which  Monte  Kosa  and  the 
Matterhorn  are  mere  pigmies ;  from 
whose  glaciers  even  Wills  would  turn 
away  in  despair ;  on  whose  summits 
not  even  Tyndall  could  plant  a  ther- 
mometer. 

If  I  live  a  hundred  years  (in  which 
case  the  Government  will  have  made  an 
uncommonly  bad  bargain,  as  I  shall 
have  continued  to  draw  my  pension  for 
half  a  century),  I  shall  never  forget  that 
first  morning  in  the  wilderness.  I  saun- 
tered out  of  the  tent,  after  a  long  cool 
sleep,  into  an  air  as  pure  and  fresh  as 
the  air  of  Malvern.  All  around  the 
jungle-cocks  were  crowing  and  the  pea- 
fowl hooting,  while  every  now  and  then 
was  heard  the  deep  bellow  of  an  ele- 
phant. In  the  space  between  the  tents 
Tom  was  hard  at  work  at  a  little  table, 
signing,  writing,  and  dictating  to  a 
native  subordinate  ;  while  a  sowar,  or 
mounted  policeman,  blazing  in  scarlet 
and  blue,  stood  bridle  in  hand  waiting 
to  escort  the  post  into  British  territory. 
Mildred  had  got  out  his  guns,  and  was 
examining  them  with  that  loving  solici- 
tude which  a  lady  bestows  on  her  gowns, 
jewels,  and  furniture,  but  which  a  man 
is  too  proud  to  show  except  in  the  case 
of  a  favourite  fire-arm,  or  a  decrepid 
salmon-rod  which  has  seen  tougher 
days.  Benson  was  enjoying  his  coffee 
and  toast,  and  between  the  sips  read 
aloud  an  article  in  one  of  the  Calcutta 
papers,  proving  from  Scripture  the 
Divine  origin  of  the  Contract  -Law,  to 
which  Mildred  listened  with  an  occa- 
sional grunt  of  satisfaction.  In  one 
corner  of  the  camp  lay  the  howdahs. 
In  another,  the  cooks  were  making  pre- 
parations for  breakfast,  which,  as  it  was 
we  who  were  going  to  eat  it,  we  took 
good  care  not  to  observe  too  minutely. 
In  the  river  below  lay  a  dozen  elephants ; 
while  others  were  cautiously  descending 
the  steep  bank,  or  mounting  it  again 
after  their  bath.  The  huge  animals 
wallowed  patiently  in  the  stream,  while 
their  mahouts  scrambled  over  their 
bodies  scraping  them  with  a  species  of 


overgrown  curry-comb.  Those  who  had 
been  half  washed  presented  a  most  droll 
contrast  of  colour  between  the  white 
coating  of  dust  and  the  natural  black 
hue  of  their  skin.  We  wandered  forth 
into  the  wood,  where  the  jungle-fowl — 
who  are  neither  more  nor  less  than 
cocks  and  hens  in  a  wild  state,  with 
singularly  beautiful  plumage — ran  and 
fluttered  within  a  few  yards  of  us. 
Every  moment  we  came  upon  a  group  of 
two  or  three  elephants,  standing  amidst 
a  great  heap  of  leaves  and  branches, 
which  they  consumed  very  leisurely 
and  with  an  air  of  profound  reflection. 
Meanwhile  the  drivers  were  grinding 
their  curry  under  an  extempore  tent 
formed  of  pads  propped  up  against 
each  other,  or  saying  the  morning 
prayer  with  then1  faces  turned  towards 
far  Mecca.  Our  horses  were  tethered 
in  the  centre  of  a  lofty  grove  of  ancient 
trees ;  and  near  them  stood  the  four 
howdah-elephants :  noble  beasts,  who 
towered  far  above  their  fellows ;  their 
tusks  ornamented  with  metal  rings,  and 
their  broad  foreheads  painted  in  gro- 
tesque patterns.  Elephants  in  good 
condition  are  very  fat  and  full.  Strange 
stories  these  old  howdah-wallahs  could 
tell  us,  if  they  had  the  gift  of  speech  ! 
They  may  have  dragged  a  gun  into 
action  at  Plassey,  or  groaned  beneath 
the  litter  of  the  Grand  Mogul  when  he 
was  still  sovereign  of 'the  continent  from 
Kepaul  to  Travancore.  Perhaps  this 
sight  of  the  wilderness  reminds  them, 
in  a  dreamy  manner,  of  a  Ceylonese 
forest,  far  back  in  the  depths  of  time, 
where  they  wandered,  and  browzed,  and 
bathed,  and  loved,  and  were  jilted,  and 
fought  (for  their  small  eyes  get  very 
green  on  provocation),  until  some  white 
monkeys  tied  their  legs  together,  and 
carried  them  off  into  a  servitude  which 
they  have  tolerated  ever  since  with 
magnificent  Oriental  indifference.  They 
have  seen  the  empire  of  Delhi  fade 
away,  and  John  Company  come  and 
go.  They  have  beheld  the  President  of 
Council  turn  into  Governor  General,  and 
the  Governor  General  into  Lieutenant 
of  the  Queen  of  India.  They  have 
beheld  a  l-jn;.?  succession  of  deficits. 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VI. 


and  have   attained   to   the   days   of  a 
surplus   palpable   and  tangible.     They 
have  lived  to  wonder  at  the  roar  and 
the    rush    of    a    steam-engine    amidst 
regions  where,  with   Scindia  or  Meer 
Jaffier  on  their  backs,  they  have  stood 
the  roar  and  the  rush  of  many  a  tiger 
and  buffalo.     I  wonder  whether  they 
recollect  their  first  mahout,  and  whether 
they  think  the  rice  now-a-days  as  good 
as  it  was  in  the  heyday  of  youth,  when 
they  were  still  in  their  grand  climacteric. 
After  breakfast  we  started  for  a  point 
about  a  mile  distant,  whence  we  were 
to  begin  shooting ;  and  on  the  way  we 
settled   ourselves   in   our   howdahs   as 
agreeably  as  circumstances  would  allow. 
The  howdah  consists  of  a  box  of  wood 
and  wicker-work,  open  at  top,  with  sides 
three  and  a  half  feet  high.     There  is  a 
tolerably  comfortable  seat  in  front  for 
the  Sahib,  and  a  remarkably  uncomfort- 
able one  behind  for  the  attendant.     On 
either  side  of  the  sportsman  rest  his 
firearms ;    a  double-barrelled  rifle   and 
two  smoothbores  loaded  with  ball,  and 
one  gun  with  a  couple  of  charges  of 
number  four,  or  BB  shot  for  partridge 
and  jungle-fowl.     As  most  of  the  firing 
consists  of  snap-shots  within  fifty  yards, 
a  good  smoothbore   is   every  whit   as 
effective  as   a  grooved   barrel.      In    a 
number  of  little  partitions  in  the  front 
of   the   howdah   the    ammunition    lies 
ready  to  hand.     Here  are  a  couple  of 
dozen  of  well-oiled  bullets  packed  snugly 
in  a  tooth-powder  box.     There  is  the 
leather  shot-belt  which  you  have  carried 
over  Perthshire  moor,  and  Galway  bog, 
and  Somersetshire  stubble,  till  it  has 
grown  limp,  and  black,  and  greasy,  and 
beloved.     In  this   drawer  roll  to  and 
fro,  with  every  jolt  of  your  animal,  the 
remnant  of  a  batch  of  green  cartridges, 
which  the  gamekeeper  at  your  grand- 
father's gave  you  as  a  parting  present  at 
the  end  of  your  last  day's  shooting  on 
English  ground;   the   day  you  wiped 
the   old  gentleman's   eye  four  several 
times,  and  were  rewarded  by  a  tip  of  a 
hundred  pounds  to  buy  hookahs,  accom- 
panied with  an  exhortation  not  to  marry 
a  Begum.    Your  Chuprassie  sits  behind, 
with  an  umbrella  covered  with  white 


linen,  with  which  he  contrives  to  come 
to  the  most  frightful  grief  whenever 
you  get  among  trees.  In  two  holsters 
on  either  side  of  him  swing  a  bottle  of 
lemonade  and  another  of  soda  water, 
while  your  lunch  is  stowed  away  in  the 
well  beneath  your  seat.  Your  dress  is 
simple  :  a  flannel  shirt ;  the  trousers  of 
your  college  boat-club,  the  wash-leather 
lining  of  which  is  very  grateful  towards 
the  close  of  a  hard  day;  a  pair  of 
canvas  shoes,  and  an  enormous  pith 
hat  with  a  thick  pad  hanging  down 
your  back,  which,  combined  with  the 
howdah,  gives  you  the  appearance  of  a 
sporting  mushroom  growing  in  a  flower- 
pot. Your  tout  ensemble  is  not  as  elegant 
as  that  of  a  cockney  on  the  twelfth  of 
August ;  nor  would  it  pass  muster  at  a 
show  meet  in  the  grass-counties.  But, 
as  a  dentist  once  said  to  me,  "  All  is 
not  stopping  that  glitters."  I  dare  say 
Uimrods  leathers  were  of  an  archaic 
cut,  and  yet  he  rode  to  hounds  as  well 
as  most  antediluvians. 

On  arriving  at  the  rendezvous  we  found 
the  pad  elephants,  forty-four  in  number, 
which,  with  the  howdah-wallahs,  gave 
us  a  line  of  four  dozen.  Tom,  whom 
we  had  elected  captain,  deployed  them 
as  well  as  the  difficulties  of  the  ground 
would  admit.  Then  we  advanced,  Mil- 
dred on  the  right  wing,  Tom  and  myself 
in  the  centre,  and  Benson  on  the  left. 
Oh,  the  wild  romantic  charm  of  that 
first  day  in  the  forest !  The  strange 
luxuriant  vegetation ;  the  parasites, 
hanging  in  festoons  from  tree  to  tree; 
the  gaudy  graceful  birds,  not  now  seated 
in  uneasy  attitudes  under  a  glass  case 
in  a  drawing-room,  with  a  wire  through 
their  bodies,  staring  in  ghastly  fashion 
out  of  their  bead  eyes,  but  piping  and 
darting  about  among  their  native  foliage ; 
the  big  baboons  swinging  from  branch 
to  branch,  and  the  lesser  monkeys 
scudding  along  the  cordage  of  knotted 
creepers,  unconscious  of  the  existence 
of  such  beings  as  Savoyard  organ- 
grinders,  the  curse  alike  of  man  and 
ape  ;  the  jungle-cock,  cackling  and  run- 
ning about  among  the  fallen  leaves,  at 
which  I  take  a  deadly  aim,  when,  as 
my  finger  already  contracts  on  the 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VI. 


25 


trigger,  a  timely  heave  of  my  elephant 
flings  the  barrel  ten  degrees  farther 
from  the  horizon  :  the  cry  on  the  far 
right  of  "  Deer  ahead  !  Look  out ! " 
And  in  and  out  of  the  trunks,  comes 
dodging  a  bright  red  animal,  which 
recalls  in  a  second  a  flood  of  Zoological 
Garden  associations.  Trembling  from 
head  to  foot,  I  drop  the  shot-gun,  and 
put  a  rifle  to  my  shoulder,  which — 
"Confound  it!  It's  on  half-cock  !"  At 
last  I  fire,  and  have  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  a  white  mark  appear  on  the 
bark  of  a  sycamore  just  above  the  deer's 
back.  A  fair  shot  enough ;  but,  alas,  a 
miss  is  as  good  as  half  a  coss.  And 
now  my  elephant  is  brushing  through 
the  brambles'  along  the  bottom  of  a 
nullah,  and  Benson  has  wandered  in  a 
vague  manner  away  to  the  left,  drawing 
a  score  of  elephants  after  him ;  and 
Tom,  in  a  state  of  white  rage,  has  gone 
to  bring  him  to  book  ;  and  Mildred, 
who  never  does  anything  without  an 
object,  has  gradually  crept  up  towards 
me,  and  is  marching.,  on  the  bank  above 
with  his  thumb  on  the  hammer  of  his 
fowling-piece,  and — whir-r-r-r,  a  vast 
bird  rises  before  me,  obscuring  one 
whole  quarter  of  the  heaven  with  his 
wings  and  tail,  and  I  give  him  both  my 
barrels,  and  he  reels  and  drops  with  a 
slow  stately  swoop,  and  lies  amidst  the 
tangled  grass,  gorgeous  in  ^leath,  the 
hundred-eyed  favourite  of  the  Queen  of 
Olympus.  Then,  as  the  day  draws  on, 
we  reach  a  part  of  the  wood  where  the 
trees  are  young  and  the  ground  clear  of 
undergrowth.  Leaning  back  in  the 
howdah,  I  fancy  for  the  moment  that  I 
am  passing  through  a  plantation  in  an 
English  county,  and  almost  expect  to 
see  a  board  threatening  to  prosecute 
me  with  the  utmost  rigour,  or  an  old 
keeper  in  a  suit  of  fustian,  with  a 
bunch  of  vermin-traps  hanging  from 
his  shoulder,  or — What  is  that  thing 
tumbling  through  the  trees  a-head  ]  A 
cow  1  A  big  dog  ?  Heavens  and  earth, 
a  huge  black  bear  !  "  Juldee,  mahout ! 
Juldee,  budzart  ! ]  We're  gaining  ! 
We're  gaining  !  No,  no  !  Yes  we  are  ! 
He's  gone.  IsTo ;  there  he  is  again. 
1  Quick,  mahout !  Quick,  base-born  man  ! 


Will  you  look  sharp,  you  beastly 
old  wallah?"  Meanwhile,  far  behind, 
I  hear  Tom  bawling  to  me  to  come 
back  and  be —  No  ;  the  distance  must 
have  deceived  me.  After  a  fruitless 
chase  of  a  mile,  I  obey,  and,  crest- 
fallen and  repentant,  listen  to  a  general 
lecture  on  my  shortcomings,  and  a 
special  order  at  sight  of  bear  or  tiger  to 
call  "  Tallyho/'  and  keep  to  the  line. 
And,  when  no  game  is  in  view,  I  have 
the  amusement  of  observing  the  almost 
human  sagacity  of  my  elephant ;  of 
watching  him  make  his  way,  howdah 
and  all,  through  thickets  which  a  man 
on  foot  could  not  penetrate ;  breaking- 
off  great  branches  and  tearing  down 
creepers  with  his  trunk,  and  pushing 
over  small  trees  with  his  massive  fore- 
head. Then  there  are  thoughts  of  tiffin, 
and  occasional  draughts  of  meta  pawnee, 
and  sweet  anticipations  of  the  lies  I 
shall  tell  when  I  get  back  to  Calcutta, 
and  the  flaming  letter  I  shall  write  to 
the  Scholars'  table  at  Trinity.  Oh  1  it 
is  good  to  tear  oneself  for  awhile  from 
visiting  cards,  and  white  chokers,  and 
swallowtail  coats,  to  a  life  primitive  and 
simple,  without  waistcoat  or  collar,  care 
or  dignity  !  It  is  good  to  tell  the  time 
by  sunrise,  and  noon,  and  evening, 
instead  of  dividing  the  glorious  day  into 
periods  nicknamed  ten,  fifteen,  and  four- 
thirty  ;  to  eat  when  hungry,  and  sleep 
when  weary,  and  meditate  when  you 
feel  thoughtful,  and  talk  when  you  feel 
gushing.  It  is  good  that  your  object 
for  a  time  should  be,  not  to  send  in  a 
Report  that  shall  touch  a  tender  chord 
in  the  heart  of  your  Chief  Commis- 
sioner, but  to  keep  your  portion  of  the 
line  in  faultless  order  by  a  liberal  use  of 
all  the  powers  of  vituperation  which 
Providence  has  allotted  you,  to  shoot 
a  pea-chick  for  soup,  and  a  blue  pigeon, 
whose  feathers  will  complete  the  plume 
which  you  promised  to  that  dear  little 
girl  with  whom  you  danced  the  three 
last  waltzes  at  the  Bengal  Club  Ball. 

During  this  expedition  I  began  to 
realize  the  ruling  principles  of  military 
operations.  In  order  to  appreciate  the 
history  of  a  campaign,  the  reader  must 
constantly  bear  in  mind  that  multitudes 


26 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VI. 


are  always  helpless  and  unwieldy.  A 
single  man,  or  a  dozen  or  score  of  men, 
will  carry  their  packs  and  rifles  across  a 
country  for  months  together,  at  the  rate 
of  twenty  miles  a  day,  procuring  food  as 
they  go  along.  But  ten  thousand  men 
must  be  handled  as  if  they  were  so  many 
women.  Good  roads  must  he  chosen, 
and  plenty  of  them.  The  communica- 
tions must  he  kept  open,  and  provisions, 
clothes,  and  shoes  stored  at  convenient 
points.  The  length  of  the  day's  march 
must  he  such  as  to  allow  the  train  of 
cannon,  waggons,  bullock-carts,  and  bag- 
gage mules  to  keep  up  with  the  fighting 
part  of  the  force.  I  now  began  to  under- 
stand the  problems  which  have  puzzled 
five  hundred  generations  of  schoolboys, 
with  the  exception  possibly  of  Lord 
Macaulay's  genus,  in  the  fourth  form  : 
why  Epaminondas  did  not  advance  on 
Sparta  from  the  battle-field  of  Leuctra  ; 
why  Hannibal  did  not  advance  upon 
Eome  from  the  slaughter  of  Cannae.  We 
never  succeeded  in  moving  our  tents  and 
furniture  to  a  distance  of  more  than  four 
coss  from  the  last  encampment.  The 
country  being  strange,  there  continually 
occurred  some  misunderstanding  about 
the  name  and  direction  of  places.  Our 
guides  lost  their  way,  and  our  wheels 
came  off,  and  our  carters  stopped  to 
bathe  in  the  nullahs.  Sometimes  there 
was  no  track,  and  the  weakest  and  the 
most  insane  of  the  elephants  had  to  be 
left  behind  to  convey  oxir  heavy  pro- 
perty. Then  the  rice  fell  short,  and  the 
oxen  fell  sick,  and  the  mounted  escort 
fell  off,  and  our  servants  fell  to  logger- 
heads with  the  village  people.  Nothing 
but  Tom's  excellence  as  a  quartermaster- 
general  saved  us  from  confusion  a  great 
deal  worse  confounded.  He  shone,  not 
only  as  an  administrator,  but  as  a  tacti- 
cian. It  is  far  easier  work  to  manoeuvre 
a  battalion  of  volunteers,  among  whom 
every  third  man  considers  his  claims  to 
the  colonelcy  overwhelming,  than  to 
bring  a  line  of  half  a  hundred  elephants 
through  a  thorn  jungle  without  club- 
bing them  hopelessly.  As  it  is  impos- 
sible to  see  more  than  ten  yards  to  the 
right  and  left,  a  gap  once  made,  there  is 
every  chance  that  the  array  will  be  split 


up  into  two  fragments,  marching  towards 
opposite  quarters.  The  mahouts  are  a 
lazy  stupid  lot,  with  none  of  the  in- 
terest in  the  sport  displayed  by  English 
beaters,  and  with  a  more  than  ordinary 
Hindoo  faculty  for  going  to  sleep  under 
circumstances  the  most  unsuited  for 
that  pastime.  They  are  very  tender  of 
their  skins,  and,  when  not  strictly 
watched,  are  apt  to  follow  the  houdah 
elephant  through  the  thicket  in  a  long 
string,  instead  of  beating  the  bushes  on 
either  side  of  him.  Consequently  every 
sportsman  has  to  look  very  sharply  after 
his  section  of  the  line.  At  first  I  ex- 
pected to  feel  the  want  of  an  intimate 
acquaintance  with  the  native  terms  of 
abuse  ;  but  a  copious  fount  of  vigorous 
English,  assisted  by  the  signs  that  are 
common  to  all  time,  was  an  excellent 
substitute  for  a  full  Vocabulary  of  ver- 
nacular slang;  the  more  so  as  I  had 
provided  myself  with  one  disparaging 
epithet,  which  seldom  came  amiss,  "Bud- 
zart,  base-born,"  which  has  the  advan- 
tage, rare  in  Hindoo  Billingsgate,  of  not 
embodying  a  painful  and  unscrupulous 
assertion  regarding  the  female  relatives 
of  the  person  addressed.  Probably  the 
mahouts  in  the  army  of  Hannibal  were 
not  over  and  above  familiar  with  collo- 
quial Punic,  and  yet  that  eminent 
general  appears  to  have  had  no  difficulty 
in  explaining  to  them  when  their  animals 
were  to  slide  down  a  glacier  on  their 
hind  quarters,  and  when  they  were  to 
wait  till  the  cruet-stand  was  brought  up 
from  the  rear.  I  adopted  a  simple  plan. 
"Whenever  a  driver  proved  incorrigibly 
sluggish  or  disobedient  I  made  him  take 
his  place  next  me,  within  reach  of  my 
loading-rod.  For  instance,  if  a  fellow 
in  a  turban  loitered  behind  to  steal 
sugar-canes,  I  would  call  out,  "  Hi,  pug- 
ree-wallah  !  Pugree- wallah,  hi  ! "  Here- 
upon was  attracted  the  attention  of  all 
the  men  wearing  pugrees,  who  were 
thus  as  a  class  interested  in  identifying 
the  culprit ;  and,  at  a  Avave  of  my  arm, 
they  would  shove  him  in  front  of  the 
line,  and  pass  him  on  till  he  came  into 
the  place  of  torment.  One  very  drowsy 
old  boy,  with  a  long  white  beard,  passed 
three-fourths  of  every  clay  in  this  un- 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  VI. 


27 


enviable  post.  The  heat  and  the  excite- 
ment of  Indian  shooting  are  a  severe 
trial  to  the  temper.  It  is  especially 
necessary  to  be  careful  with  your  own 
mahout,  as  he  sits  immediately  below, 
within  the  swing  of  your  fist,  and,  as 
both  his  hands  are  occupied,  the  tempta- 
tion to  box  his  ears  is,  on  provocation, 
fearfully  strong.  I  should  like  to  see 
Job  himself  at  the  moment  when,  as  he 
is  loading  for  dear  life,  with  a  leopard  in 
the  reeds  before  him,  the  mahout  takes 
him  under  a  branch  which  sweeps 
the  top  of  the  howdah,  knocks  him 
breathless  on  to  the  seat,  scratches  his 
pet  rifle  from  muzzle  to  breach,  and 
sends  a  charge  of  shot  through  the 
crown  of  his  helmet.  Unfortunately, 
your  orders  are  liable  to  be  mistaken  on 
account  of  the  similarity  between  the 
two  words  which  are  most  often  in  your 
mouth,  "  left  "  and  "  right."  Their 
sound  is  well  enough  represented  by 
"  binah  "  and  "dinah,"  though  a  young- 
gentleman  who  lias  been  pronounced 
"satisfactory"  in  Oordoo  will  not  be 
satisfied  with  anything  under  "bahin&," 
and  "dahina." 

At  two  o'clock  we  came  to  the  skirts 
of  a  wide  plain  of  turf,  with  here  and 
there  a  patch  of  grass  a  foot  or  so  in 
height,  browned  by  the  sirh.  To  an 
English  eye  the  nature  of  the  ground 
showed  poor  promise  of  game.  But  my 
companions  knew  better,  and  agreed 
that  the  cream  of  the  sport  was  still  to 
come.  We  made  a  halt,  and  lunched 
on  plum-cake  and  cold  tea.  No  sensible 
hunter  will  touch  alcohol  in  any  shape 
till  the  day's  work  is  over.  Nothing 
but  the  strictest  temperance  can  avert 
the  dangers  of  the  heat  and  glare.  In- 
deed, total  abstinence  is  the  safest  rule 
for  the  jungle.  The  first  evening  we 
indulged  freely  in  ale  and  sherry  ;  then 
we  came  down  to  claret,  and  from  that 
to  lemonade,  and  a  mixture  of  beer  and 
soda-water,  which  was  very  refreshing 
at  the  price.  The  charms  of  brandy  and 
belattee  pawnee,  a  beverage  which  goes 
by  the  name  of  a  "  peg "  (according  to 
the  favourite  derivation,  because  each 
draught  is  a  "  peg  "  in  your  coffin),  are  far 
too  seductive  and  insidious  for  a  climate 


which  in  itself  finds  more  than  sufficient 
work  for  the  nerves. 

After  tiffin  we  advanced  in  a  half- 
moon,  so  that  the  howdah  elephants  on 
the  wings  formed  bastions,  whence  an 
enfilading  fire  might  sweep  from  right 
to  left.  Our  array  presented  a  most 
impressive  appearance  as  we  moved  over 
the  plain  in  stately  guise.  No  Eastern 
potentate  marching  to  subdue  an  em- 
pire could  present  a  more  formidable 
front  than  this  party  of  civilians  beating 
for  hare  and  partridge.  The  firing  was 
incessant  all  along  the  line.  Besides 
small  game,  the  long  grass  swarmed 
with  hog-deer  and  antelope,  while  now 
and  then  a  majestic  florican  flapped 
away  in  the  distance.  Before  we  had" 
gone  very  far,  one  of  the  pad  elephants, 
who  had  throughout  the  day  shown 
symptoms  of  mild  frenzy,  now  threw 
aside  every  vestige  of  sanity,  and  knocked 
over  three  of  his  smaller  comrades  in 
succession,  not  being  chivalrous  enough 
to  butt  one  of  his  own  size.  Tom,  after 
a  hurried  investigation,  declared  him  to 
be  a  criminal  lunatic,  ordered  him  to  be 
put  into  a  sort  of  straight  pad,  and  told 
off  two  great  tusk-wallahs  to  act  as 
keepers,  who  beat  him  about  with  their 
trunks  until  he  became  tractable.  To- 
wards evening  a  spotted  deer  got  up  in 
front  of  Benson,  who  fired  a  shot  which 
broke  its  leg.  We  started  in  pursuit, 
plying  it  with  ball  and  slug,  but  for  a 
long  time  it  succeeded  in  keeping  about 
eighty  yards  ahead,  till  it  took  sanctuary 
in  a  bush.  When  we  came  up  we  found 
ourselves  in  the  most  ridiculous  plight, 
for  every  one  of  our  thirty  barrels  had 
been  discharged.  At  last  Mildred  loaded 
again,  and  shot  the  animal  dead,  while 
Benson  and  I  gave  it  a  parting  salvo ; 
and,  finally,  the  Mahommedan  mahouts 
jumped  down  and  cut  its  throat,  calling 
upon  Allah,  and  pretending  to  imagine 
that  it  was  still  alive.  By  this  piece  of 
hypocrisy  they  comfort  their  consciences, 
for  they  profess  to  believe  with  the  Jews 
that  God  "  will  set  His  face  against  that 
soul  that  eateth  blood,  and  will  cut  him 
off  from  among  His  people."  A  doc- 
trine which,  since  the  manifesto  of  the 
bishops  against  the  unfortunate  man  of- 


28 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VI. 


Natal,  I  suppose  we  must  all  hold  as 
necessary  to  salvation,  in  common  with 
Hebrew  and  Mussulman.  That  night, 
when  the  game  was  laid  in  state  at  the 
tent-door,  we  counted  fifteen  holes  in 
the  body  of  the  deer.  You  may  be  sure 
we  did  not  dispute  the  possession  of  the 
skin. 

And  several  days  passed  in  like  man- 
ner, as  delightful  as  constant  change  of 
scene,  the  innumerable  chances  of  the 
chase,  and  rare  good  fellowship,  could 
make  them.  We  bathed,  and  hunted, 
and  lunched,  and  hunted  again.  We 
had  our  fair  share  of  incidents.  Tom 
shot  a  peacock  through  the  neck  with  a 
single  ball  at  a  distance  of  two  hundred 
yards,  and  I  hit  an  old  cow  in  the 
stomach  at  a  distance  of  twenty,  under 
the  impression  that  she  was  a  wild 
buffalo.  A  native  thief,  on  being  de- 
tected among  the  tent-ropes,  ran  a  muck 
with  a  beer  bottle,  and  created  a  panic 
among  our  servants,  but  was  eventually 
knocked  down  by  Mildred,  who  executed 
a  rude  justice  on  his  person  with  a  boot- 
jack, and  then  kicked  him  out  of  camp. 
We  played  whist,  we  skinned  birds,  we 
manufactured  and  wore  to  rags  an  end- 
less supply  of  bad  jokes,  which,  in  after 
days,  will  be  the  shibboleth  of  the  ex- 
pedition. We  disputed  by  the  hour  on 
neology,  physiology,  free-thought,  free- 
trade,  free-will,  the  respective  merits 
of  light  and  heavy  charges  of  powder, 
and  the  virtues  of  tobacco  as  a  soporific. 
On  the  Saturday  night  we  held  a  general 
council,  to  consider  the  propriety  of 
shooting  on  the  morrow,  since  there 
were  no  ladies  or  clergymen  to  scanda- 
lize, no  church  to  attend,  and  nothing  to 
do  but  to  read  "Tristram  Shandy,"  which 
can  hardly  be  said  to  come  under  the 
category  of  Sunday  books.  Old  asso- 
ciations prevailed,  and  we  resolved  not 
to  have  out  the  pad  elephants,  but  to 
make  a  detour  to  the  next  camping- 
ground,  and  "  shoot  at  anything  we  came 
across,"  which  comprised  five  pigeons, 
three  hares,  a  jackal,  and  a  wild  cat 
(mad  with  wounds).  At  length,  during 
dinner,  one  evening,  a  cowherd  came 
with  information,  or  kubbur,  concerning 
a  tiger,  which  had  carried  off  a  bullock 


at  a  place  some  six  miles  to  the  east- 
ward. Now  here  was  a  kubbur,  but  the 
momentous  question  was,  "Is  it  pucka1?" 
Tom  thought  it  looked  well,  and,  if  the 
man's  story  was  true,  our  chances  seemed 
very  good ;  for  a  tiger  invariably  lurks 
three  days  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his 
prey. 

We  went  to  bed  in  high  expectation, 
and  the  next  morning  Benson  called  up 
the  whole  party  four  several  times  before 
six  o'clock,  our  usual  hour  for  rising. 
"  You  have  waked  me  t«o  soon,"  as  the 
Irishman  said  when  suspended  animation 
was  restored  during  his  premature  funeral 
rites.  Tom's  native  official  was  very 
anxious  to  be  allowed  to  see  the  sport, 
but  refused  an  offer  of  one  of  the  pad 
elephants,  on  the  ground  that  he  enter- 
tained "  apprehensions  that  inconveni- 
ence would  result  from  the  friction ; " 
so  I  took  him  up  in  my  back  seat,  while 
the  man  who  had  lost  the  bullock  stood 
behind  Tom's  howdah.  The  forest  in 
which  the  tiger  was  supposed  to  be 
lying  was  very  extensive,  which  con- 
siderably decreased  our  hopes.  Our 
captain  gave  strict  orders  to  fire  at 
nothing  except  tiger  and  sambhur,  a 
gigantic  deer  of  the  elk  species.  As 
invariably  happens  in  such  a  case,  the 
less  noble  game  seemed  to  find  pleasure 
in  tantalizing  us.  Antelopes  stood  gazing 
upon  us-  out  of  their  large  eyes  for 
minutes  together.  Great  hogs  trotted 
gravely  away  within  pistol-shot.  Pea- 
fowl and  jungle-hens  scuttled  about  till 
the  ground  beneath  looked  like  a  poultry- 
yard.  At  last  a  very  small  fawn  proved 
too  much  for  my  forbearance.  But  the 
consciousness  of  guilt  unnerved  my 
arm.  I  missed,  and  Tom's  voice  pealed 
down  the  line — 

"  Is  that  a  tiger  ? " 

"No;  a  deer." 

"What?     A  sambhur?" 

"I — I — I'm  not  quite  certain.  I 
think  it  was." 

Soon  after,  a  peacock,  which  had 
strutted  before  my  nose  for  a  quarter  of 
a  mile,  became  irresistible.  I  fired,  and, 
being  now  hardened  in  crime,  not  un- 
successfully. Then  came  the  question — 

"Hullo!     What's  that?" 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VI. 


29 


"  H'm.     My  gun  went  off." 

"I  know  that.     What  did  it  go  off 
at?" 

This  time  I  judiciously  pretended  to 
be  out  of  earshot. 

After  struggling  through  two  miles 
of  frightful  thicket  we  came  to  a  dry 
nullah,  along  which  we  marched,  feeling 
the  bank  with  our  right.  A  conviction 
seemed  to  prevail  that  a  crisis  was  ap- 
proaching. "  Confound  those  mahouts," 
I  said,  "they're  trying  to  sneak  off." 
My  companion  replied,  "  Sire,  they  seem 
bent  upon  absconding."  And  now  we 
reached  a  spot  that  to  a  novice  had 
much  of  horror  and  mystery.  On  the 
brink  of  the  ravine  lay  a  tract  over- 
grown with  rank  coarse  grass,  which, 
overtopped  the  shoulder  of  the  tallest 
elephant.  Every  tree  in  the  neighbour- 
hood was  covered  with  a  swarm  of  foul 
vultures,  who  filled  the  air  with  dis- 
cordant ill-omened  cries.  We  began  to 
perceive  a  strong  smell  of  putrid  flesh, 
which  became  more  oppressive  as  we 
drew  on.  Here,  or  nowhere,  was  the 
tiger's  lair.  The  contrast  which  our 
array  now  presented  to  its  ordinary  ap- 
pearance was  as  marked  as  that  between 
a  battalion  on  parade  and  in  action. 
The  drivers  of  the  smaller  beasts  hung 
back,  and  one  by  one  left  their  places 
in  the  line,  while  the  howdah-bearers 
gradually  converged  towards  the  point 
where  the  stench  and  the  cloud  of  flies 
told  us  that  the  tyrant  of  the  jungle 
could  not  be  far  distant.  Silent  as 
death,  with  finger  on  trigger,  every  nerve 
quivering  with  excitement,  straining  our 
eyes  downwards  to  left  and  right,  we 
advanced  in  a  cluster,  step  by  step, 
through  the  tangled  vegetation.  To  my 
dying  day  I  shall  never  forget  the  look 
on  Mildred's  face  as  he  peered  into  the 
ground  below.  Ten  yards  from  the 
brink  of  the  gully  we  came  upon  the 
mangled  remnant  of  the  bullock,  and 
then  the  grass  was  agitated  as  with  the 
motion  of  some  large  animal,  and,  cast- 
ing back  a  glance  of  scorn  at  the  throng 
of  men  and  brutes,  forth  he  stalked 
from  his  covert,  the  royal  Nepaul  tiger. 
Quick  as  thought  came  the  report  of  all 
our  rifles,  and  more  than  one  red  spot 


appeared  on  his  tawny  flank.  With  a 
roar,  a  flash  of  his  tail,  and  one  tremen- 
dous bound  he  was  among  us.  I  have, 
a  very  dim  recollection  of  what  followed. 
Bullets  were  whizzing  all  around,  Tom 
firing  over  my  shoulder,  and  Benson 
into  my  howdah  ;  the  tiger  at  one  time 
on  the  head  of  Mildred's  elephant,  at 
another  between  the  legs  of  mine ;  our 
beasts  trumpeting,  and  plunging,  and 
rolling ;  the  rank  and  file  scampering 
away  in  ungovernable  terror.  At  the 
end  of  what  seemed  ten  minutes,  and 
was  perhaps  ninety  seconds,  the  tiger 
lay  dead  amidst  the  trampled  grass,  with 
six  balls  in  his  body,  one  in  the  foreleg, 
and  another  through  the  brain. 

We  returned  in  triumph,  shooting  at 
everything  that  presented  itself.  I 
achieved  a  conquest  over  an  ancient 
swine,  which  I  brought  down  as  it 
careered  past  at  a  distance  of  at  least 
fifteen  feet  from  the  muzzle  of  my  gun, 
at  the  rate  of  two  miles  an  hour,  in- 
cluding stoppages.  As  our  Mahommedan 
followers  refused  to  have  anything  to  do 
with  the  unutterable  flesh,  we  forced 
some  Hindoos  to  alight  and  hoist  the 
boar  on  to  an  elephant  as  it  knelt  on 
the  ground.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether 
the  men  or  the  animal  evinced  most 
disgust.  For  a  long  time  the  mahouts 
pretended  that  the  weight  was  more 
than  they  could  manage;  but  at  last 
they  heaved  the  pig  up,  upon  which  the 
elephant  raised  itself  on  its  forelegs, 
shot  off  its  burden  behind,  and  scram- 
bled away  in  this  absurd  attitude,  roaring 
horribly.  After  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
of  this  nonsense,  during  which  I  en- 
deavoured in  vain  to  quicken  the  move- 
ments of  the  group  by  pelting  them 
with  custard-apples  from  an  overhanging 
bough,  I  appeared  among  them  with. 
my  loading-rod,  as  a  diabolus  ex  machina, 
and  the  job  was  done  in  fifty  seconds. 
Tom  offered  to  prepare  the  boar's  scull 
to  be  preserved  as  a  trophy,  which  ex- 
cited the  most  supreme  contempt  in  the 
breast  of  Mildred,  who  remarked,  "  Some 
time  hence,  when  the  whole  thing  has 
been  forgotten,  you  can  say  you  speared 
him." 

We  agreed  to   drink   our  last    two 


30 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  VI. 


bottles  of  Simkin  in  honour  of  our 
signal  victory ;  and,  in  order  to  promote 
the  festivity,  each  of  us  undertook  to 
compose  a  song  as  we  journeyed  home 
to  camp  through  the  gloom  of  the 
evening.  After  dinner  the  fun  became 
uproarious.  Every  glass  added  an  inch 
to  the  length  and  height  of  the  tiger, 
till  at  last  he  assumed  such  monstrous 
proportions  in  Benson's  mouth  that 
Mildred  jotted  down  the  items,  and 
chalked  a  rude  sketch  of  the  animal  on 
the  table.  The  result  was  certainly 
startling.  "  Gad,  sir,"  said  the  artist, 
"  a  young  elephant  is  nothing  to  him." 
At  last  Tom  knocked  down  Mildred  for 
a  song,  who  gave  us  the  following  plain- 
tive ditty,  replete  with  touching  allusion 
to  Government  paper,  in  which  he  had 
lately  taken  a  deep  interest,  with  a  view 
to  future  investment : — 

"  John  Company,  my  Jo,  John, 

When  we  were  first  acquent 
You  borrowed,  like  the  Yankees, 

At  eight  or  ten  per  cent. 
Our  Fours  are  now  at  par,  John  ; 

Our  cash  requirements  low. 
Yet  honour  to  your  old  good  name, 

John  Company,  my  Jo. 

"  John  Company,  my  Jo,  John, 

Those  tight  tight  days  are  past ; 
The  English  budget  system 

A  surplus  shows  at  last. 
In  eighteen  seventy-three,  John, 

To  limbo  you  must  go, 
And  all  your  stock  will  be  redeemed, 

John  Company,  my  Jo." 

Tom  folio  wed  with  a  chanson  a  thought 
too  local  for  English  taste.  Still,  if 
Longfellow  considers  himself  justified 
in  borrowing  the  burden  of  a  song  from 
the  dead  languages,  a  Mofussil  collector 
has  surely  a  right  to  pay  the  same  com- 
pliment to  Oordoo,  the  current  dialect 
in  the  [North  of  India.  "  Juldee  jao  " 
really  does  mean  "  go  quickly; "  whereas 
"  excelsior  "  is  not  "  higher,"  but  simply 
"  taller,"  a  horrid  bit  of  Americanism. 
Pray  observe  that  "  lao,"  which  is  pro- 
nounced like  the  first  three  letters  in 
"  lout,"  is  the  Hindoostanee  for  "  bring ;" 
that  "  qui  hye  "  is  the  ordinary  summons 
to  a  servant ;  that  a  mookhtar  is  a  native 
attorney,  and  a  chokeydar  a  native 


watchman ;  and  that  Mahommed  is  a 
name  as  universal  among  kituiutgars  as 
John  among  London  footmen. 

"  When  from  the  palkee  I  descend, 

Too  weary  to  rejoice, 
At  sight  of  my  Mofussil  friend 

I  cry  with  feeble  voice, 
Ere  yet  within  the  genial  tub 

I  plunge  my  clammy  brow  ; 
'  Qui  hye,  Mahommed,  brandy  shrub, 

Belattee  pawnee  lao  ! ' 

"As  from  Cutcherry  home  I  spin, 

Worn  with  the  ceaseless  rout 
Of  rnookhtars  quarrelling  within 

And  chokeydars  without, 
My  servant  catches  from  afar 

The  mandate,  '  Juldee  jao  ! ' 
'  Hullo,  there  !  Brandy,  kitmutgar ! 

Belattee  pawnee  lao  ! ' 

"  And  when,  a  poor  forsaken  brute, 

On  fevered  couch  I  toss  ; 
No  man  of  medical  repute 

Within  a  hundred  coss  ; 
One  sovereign  remedy  I  know, 

Whose  virtues  all  allow  ; 
'  Qui  hye,  Mahommed,  Brandy  do ! 

Belattee  pawnee  lao  ! '" 

Graham,  with  a  sly  look  at  Mildred, 
gave  us  a  ballad  supposed  to  be  sung 
by  a  planter,  relating  to  the  famous  Act 
which  was  passed  in  1859,  with  the  in- 
tention of  securing  the  rights  of  the 
ryots  ;  but  which,  according  to  a  decision 
of  Sir  Barnes  Peacock,  the  Lord  Chief 
Justice  of  Bengal,  is  capable  of  very 
different '  interpretation.  It  must  be 
premised  that  a  vakeel  is  a  pleader ; 
that  an  overseer  is  called  a  jemmadar ; 
and  that  the  quarrel  between  the  plan- 
ters and  their  tenants  arose  from  the 
objection  of  the  latter  to  grow  indigo. 

"  Should  auld  enactments  be  forgot, 

And  never  called  to  min', 
Although  repealed  upon  the  spot 

By  ten  o'  fifty-nine  ? 
Act  ten  o?  fifty-nine,  Sir  Barnes ; 

Act  ten  o'  fifty-nine  ; 
We'll  put  a  new  construction  yet 

On  ten  o'  fifty-nine. 

"  We  a'  hae  garred  our  ryots  plant 

Without  appeal  or  fine  ; 
But  we've  had  mony  a  weary  suit 

Sin'  ten  o'  fifty-nine. 
We  a'  hae  measured  lands  for  seed, 

Frae  tiffin  until  dine, 
Though  now  wi'  summonses  we're  bored 

Sin  ten  o'  fifty-nine. 


Vincenzo  ;  or,  Sunken  Hocks. 


31 


"  But  here  's  a  fee,  my  bra'  vakeel ! 

I  clearly  see  my  line  : 
Clause  seventeen's  the  clause  for  me 

In  ten  o'  fifty-nine. 
I'll  bid  my  trusty  jemmadar 

Enhance  thae  rents  o'  mine  : 
We'll  put  a  new  construction  yet 

On  ten  o'  fifty-nine." 

As  a  new  arrival,  I  did  not  like  to 
venture  upon  an  Indian  theme,  and 
contented  myself  with,  a  polemical  effu- 
sion of  a  very  elementary  nature. 

i. 

"  Come,  listen  to  my  history, 

For  surely  'twill  amuse  ye 
"Who  seek  to  pierce  the  mystery 

That  hangs  round  Doctor  Pusey. 
I  once  was  great  at  picking  holes 

In  Mother  Church's  skirt,  sir  ; 
Though  on  my  head  she  heaped  hot  coals 

While  1  was  throwing  dirt,  sir. 
I  did  my  best  to  catch  her  all 

Abroad  in  Hebrew  particles, 
And  in  a  sense  non-natural 

I  freely  took  the  Articles. 
But  now  the  modern  German  school 

I  fulminate  my  ban  on, 
And  in  the  Oxford  Senate  rale, 

For  I'm  a  Christchurch  Canon. 

ii. 

"And,  though  I  had  my  own  small  sect 

At  times  not  very  distant, 
Yet  recollect  you  can't  expect 

That  I  should  be  consistent 
'Twas  I  that  nipped  within  the  bud 

The  heresy  that  Jowett 
Had  sown  amid  corruption's  mud 

Before  he  came  to  mow  it. 
For,  when  to  crush  the  Hydra's  brood 

I  saw  no  other  way,  sir, 
With  ninety  other  churchmen  good 

I  dished  him  of  his  pay,  sir. 


For  ne'er  shall  heretic,  or  Turk, 

Or  infidel,  or  Jew,  see 
A  farthing's  wages  for  their  work 

While  it  depends  on  Pusey. 

IIL 

"  The  Queen  desired  there  should  be  found 

A  man  in  statu  clerico, 
Of  tastes  refined  and  doctrine  sound, 

To  take  the  Prince  to  Jericho. 
And  in  an  evil  hour  she  sends 

The  most  esteemed  and  manly 
Of  all  the  Greek  Professor's  friends 

The  Celebrated  Stanley, 
Although  the  world  is  ail  agreed 

As  I  that  none  is  so  fit, 
The  recks  of  Sinai  to  read, 

And  trace  the  vale  of  Tophet — 
For  who  could  be  so  safe  a  guide, 

So  skilled  in  all  the  Musae, 
As  Learning's  and  Religion's  pride, 

The  famous  Doctor  Pusey  ? 


:  Says  I,  ( I'll  punish  England's  heir, 

For  causing  me  vexation. 
I'll  wound  him  through  his  bride  so  fair, 

And  stigmatize  her  nation. 
And,  since  she  dares  to  wed  in  Lent, 

To  better  ways  I'll  bend  her  ; 
That  season  clearly  was  not  meant 

For  changing  glances  tender. 
I'll  drive  her  from  our  Church's  pale, 

And  offer  to  the  Prince,  sir, 
An  insult  that  can  hardly  fail 

To  make  young  Bertie  wince,  sir.' 
Since  Hildebrand  from  earth  has  sped, 

Among  our  priests  you  few  see 
Who  visit  on  a  monarch's  head 

His  sins,  like  Doctor  Pusey." 

Yours  truly, 

H.  BROUGHTON. 


VINCENZO ;  OE,  SUNKEN  EOCKS. 

BY   JOHN   RUFPINI,  AUTHOR   OF    "LORENZO   BENONI,"  "DOCTOR  ANTONIO,"  ETC. 


CHAPTEE  XLVII. 

VINCENZO'S  BARK  STRIKES  ON  SUNKEN 
ROCKS. 


Of 


the 
the 


VINCENZO'S   happy   enjoyment 
present,    and    serene    security    in 
future,  met  with  a  sudden  check. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  second  week 
in  April,  Eose  had  gone  to  Eunielli,  as 


she  said,  for  three  days.  Her  excur- 
sions in  that  direction  had  lately  grown 
very  frequent.  The  monument  to  the 
memory  of  her  father,  which  had  en- 
grossed much  of  her  thoughts  and 
time  during  her  residence  in  Turin, 
being  now  finished,  she  naturally 
enough  wished  herself  to  superintend 
the  erection  of  it  in  the  churchyard  of 
the  village.  This  was  not  an  affair  of 


32 


Vincenzo  ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


an  hour  or  a  day,  and  her  anxiety  to 
make  sure  that  this  mark  of  her  filial 
love  should  be  completed  according  to 
her  intentions  led  to  her  occasionally 
making  a  short  stay  at  the  palace  with- 
out Vincenzo,  though,  of  course,  accom- 
panied by  her  infant,  which  she  was 
nursing.  Well,  then — Rose  had  gone 
to  Rumelli  only  for  three  days,  and 
Vincenzo  was  not  a  little  astonished, 
nay  alarmed,  when,  on  the  day  of  her 
proposed  return,  he  received  a  letter 
instead  of  the  wife  he  expected.  Be- 
fore making  known  the  contents  of  this 
letter,  we  must  premise  a  few  facts  in- 
dispensable to  its  being  thoroughly  un- 
derstood. 

Any  tolerably  well-informed  reader 
will  recollect  that,  not  long  after  send- 
ing an  imposing  corps  d'armes  into 
Piedmont,  France  threw  a  less  con- 
siderable force,  under  the  command  of 
Prince  Napoleon,  into  Tuscany.  The 
immediate  effect  of  this  move  was  the 
evacuation  by  the  Austrians  of  the 
Romagnas,  which  they  had  occupied 
militarily  for  years  past.  The  inhabit- 
ants of  the  Eomagnas,  left  to  them- 
selves, were  not  slack  in  throwing  off 
the  government  of  the  Pope,  and  de- 
claring their  annexation  to  Piedmont. 
This  was  the  origin  of  the  Roman 
question. 

Had  the  Pontifical  subjects  of  the 
•  Romagnas  the  right  to  dispose  of  them- 
selves as  they  thought  fit,  a  right  which 
had  been  exerted,  and  successfully,  by 
the  Greeks  and  the  Belgians,  not  to 
speak  of  the  French  ?  Or  were  they  a 
kind  of  servi  gleboe  of  Catholicity  ?  In 
other  words,  was  the  temporal  power 
(nobody  questioned  the  spiritual,  mind) 
— was  the  temporal  power  of  the  Pope 
liable  to  the  accidents  inherent  to  the 
finite  nature  of  all  earthly  things,  or 
was  it  a  power  sui  generis,  inviolable, 
immutable,  inasmuch  as  a  sine  qua  non 
of  the  free  exercise  of  the  Pope's  spi- 
ritual power  ? 

Opinions  were  and  are  still  divided 
upon  the  point.  Rose  had  heard  the 
subject  much  discussed  during  the  last 
months,  and  however  strongly  her  sym- 
pathies were  enlisted  on  the  side  of  the 


Pope,  she  had  shown  nothing  of  them. 
Signora  Candia  had  determined  not  to 
let  any  difference  of  feeling  upon  this, 
or  any  other  question  of  the  day,  in- 
terfere with  her  domestic  happiness. 
Unfortunately,  events  turned  out  so,  that 
she  no  longer  deemed  herself  justified 
in  persisting  in  this  system  of  outAvard 
neutrality,  and  there  came  a  moment 
when,  short,  as  she  believed,  of  endan- 
gering her  soul,  she  had  no  choice  but 
openly  to  act  up  to  her  secret  convic- 
tions. 

We  said  that  the  Romagnas  had  pro- 
nounced their  annexation  to  Piedmont. 
The  deputation  commissioned  to  carry 
the  wishes  of  those  provinces  to  King 
Victor  Emmanuel  met  with  cordial 
words  of  sympathy,  of  encouragement,  of 
hope  for  the  future,  but  with  none  of 
positive  adhesion.  Diplomatic  diffi- 
culties stood  in  the  way  of  a  formal 
acceptance.  This  occurred  in  the  month 
of  September,  1859.  By  March,  1860, 
these  difficulties  existed  no  longer,  and 
the  earnestly-desired  incorporation  of 
the  Romagnas  with  Piedmont  was  offi- 
cially decreed.  Thereupon  Rome  issued 
a  bull  of  excommunication  against  all 
those  who,  either  as  principals,  abettors, 
or  accessories,  had  in  any  way  contri- 
buted, directly  or  indirectly,  to  the 
spoliation  of  the  Holy  See. 

Armed  with  this  bull,  a  copy  of 
which  he  had  been  one  of  the  first  to 
receive,  Don  Pio  placed  it  before  Sig- 
nora Candia,  and  called  upon  her  to  do 
her  duty.  She  must  either  instantly 
reclaim  her  husband,  or  cut  off  all  in- 
tercourse with  one  excommunicated. 
Don  Pio  was  not  the  man  to  do  things 
by  halves.  Rose  rebelled  against  this 
terrible  award.  Those  times  were  past 
when  Don  Pio  had  only  to  command  to 
be  obeyed.  Other  feelings,  other  in- 
fluences, now  counterbalanced  his  au- 
thority. Rose  loved  her  husband  as 
much  as  it  was  in  her  nature  to  love — he 
was  the  father  of  her  child,  he  was  the 
man  she  most  respected  in  the  world. 
Impossible  to  cast  him  from  her.  On 
the  other  side,  the  Infallible  Head  of 
the  Church,  Christ's  Vicar  upon  earth, 
had  spoken,  and  short  of  unconditional 


Vincenzo ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


33 


submission,  her   eternal   salvation  was 
imperilled. 

Signora  Candia,  when  she  went  to 
reside  in  Turin,  had  had  to  choose  a 
confessor  there ;  and  her  choice  had 
luckily  fallen  upon  a  very  worthy  old 
ecclesiastic.  She  carried  her  anguish  of 
mind  to  his  feet,  and  appealed  to  his 
judgment  against  Don  Pio's  harsh  sen- 
tence. The  old  priest's  views  of  her  duty 
under  the  circumstances  proved  far  less 
absolute  and  much  more  humane  than 
those  of  the  younger  man.  To  get  out 
of  harm's  way,  so  as  neither  to  receive 
nor  countenance  any  scandal,  to  do  this 
and  pray,  continually  pray  for  her  hus- 
band and  the  afflicted  Church,  such  and 
no  other  were  the  directions  she  re- 
ceived. Then  it  was  that,  greatly  re- 
lieved in  her  mind,  yet  with  still  an 
aching  heart,  she  penned  the  following 
letter  to  her  husband  : — 

"Mr  DEAR  VINCENZO, — Nothing  is 
amiss  ;  my  health  is  excellent,  and  so, 
thank  God,  is  that  of  our  darling.  I 
fcegin  with  this  cheering  intelligence, 
•my  dear  husband,  at  once  to  dispel  the 
uneasiness  about  us,  which  you  will 
•certainly  feel  on  receiving  a  letter  in- 
stead of  seeing  baby  and  me,  as  you 
•expected.  Since  it  is  my  fate  to  give 
you  pain,  let  me,  at  least,  give  none 
that  is  unnecessary.  Yes,  my  dear 
Vincenzo,  I  must  give  you  some  pain  ; 
it  cannot  be  avoided ;  and  yet  God,  who 
reads  my  heart,  God  is  my  witness  that 
I  would  willingly  give  up  my  life  to 
make  you  happy.  But  there  are  in- 
terests far  more  precious  than  life,  and 
such  as  I  cannot  sacrifice  even  for  you. 
There  are — but  what  is  the  use  of  all 
this  preamble  but  to  make  you  fancy 
something  still  worse  than  what  I  have 
to  say?  What  I  have  to  say  is,  that  I 
•cannot  return  to  Turin  for  the  present ; 
nor,  indeed,  for  some  time.  I  never 
thought  it  could  be  so  hard  to  write 
these  simple  words.  My  hand  is  all  in 
a  shake  with  the  effort !  .  .  . 

"Now  for  the  reason  which  compels 
me  to  take  this  course.  I  might  have 
hid  it  from  you — I  might  have  easily 
accounted  for  our  remaining  in  the 

Ho.  49. — VOL.  ix. 


country  by  the  fatigue  of  nursing,  or 
the  cutting  of  baby's  teeth — two  are 
just  coming,  poor  little  darling — or  the 
fine  season  at  hand ;  but  I  will  not,  I 
cannot  be  insincere.  I  will  not,  I  can- 
not repay  your  confidence  in  me  with 
duplicity.  No,  I  want  you  to  read  in 
my  heart  as  in  an  open  book.  Well, 
then,  my  reason  for  not  coming  back 
to  you  for  the  present  is — I  scarcely 
know  how  to  go  on.  You  will  do  me 
the  justice,  my  dear  Vincenzo,  to  allow 
that  I  have  tried,  with  all  my  heart, 
lately  to  conform  to  your  ideas  and 
meet  your  wishes.  I  have  taught  my- 
self to  believe  what  you  believe,  to  like 
what  you  like,  and  I  have  so  far  suc- 
ceeded in  the  attempt  as  to  make  you 
contented  with  me.  I  have  approved 
of  the  war,  I  have  willingly  acquiesced 
in  3rour  taking  office,  I  have  been  happy 
and  proud  of  your  success,  and  my 
heartiest  wishes  have  been,  and  are  still 
at  this  moment,  for  the  greatness  and 
the  prosperity  of  our  country.  I  have 
followed  you  thus  far.  Oh,  Vincenzo, 
why  should  there  be  any  point  to  which 
I  cannot  follow  you  1  You  guess  to 
what  I  allude — to  one  of  the  results 
of  the  last  campaign,  for  which  I  was 
quite  unprepared — I  mean  this  deplor- 
able annexation  to  Piedmont  of  part  of 
the  Pontifical  States. 

"  Still,  even  such  an  act  I  might  have 
borne  in  silence  but  for  the  solemn  con- 
demnation passed  upon  it  by  His  Holi- 
ness, which  makes  silence  itself  a  sin. 
Yes,  to  keep  silent  is,  to  a  certain  ex- 
tent, to  countenance ;  and  to  countenance 
what  the  Holy  Fatber  lias  condemned 
is  mortal  sin.  You  must  see,  therefore, 
that,  if  I  were  now  to  return  to  you, 
my  position  would  be  a  most  trying 
one ;  indeed,  it  would  be  downright 
wretchedness.  Almost  all  your  friends 
— the  Del  Palmettos,  Signer  Onofrio, 
&c. — and  you  yourself  being  in  favour 
of  the  annexation,  I  should  have  no 
choice  but  either  to  remain  silent,  and 
thus  load  my  conscience  by  an  appear- 
ance of  acquiescence,  or  to  protest  at 
every  moment,  and  thus  grow  a  bore  to 
every  one,  and,  worse  than  all,  become 
displeasing  to  you. 


Vineenzo ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


"  I  know  what  you  will  say  to  this — 
you  will  say, '  Come,  and  you  shall  have 
no  such  alternative  to  apprehend.  I 
shall  take  good  care  that  the  thorny 
question  be  not  even  so  much  as  alluded 
to  in  your  presence.'  Yes,  but  at  what 
cost?  At  the  cost  of  all  your  intima- 
cies, of  all  freedom  of  communication 
in  your  own  home  1  I  should  hate  and 
despise  myself  if  I  could  only  for  a 
moment  harbour  the  thought  of  wean- 
ing you  from  your  friends,  or  of  burden- 
ing them  and  you  with  the  incubus  of 
a  perpetual  reticence.  JS~o,  my  dear 
Vineenzo,  there  is  but  one  rational  way 
of  meeting  the  difficulty — a  temporary 
separation. 

u  And  now  let  me  beseech  you,  my 
dearest  husband,  not  to  attempt  to 
combat  my  resolution,  nor  to  weaken 
the  grounds  on  which  I  have  taken  it. 
I  know  you  have  plenty  of  cogent 
reasons  to  urge,  plenty  of  respectable 
authorities  to  quote,  against  the  view 
I  take  of  this  question.  I  know  you 
have  a  distinction  ready  between  the 
Pope,  Head  of  the  Church,  and  the 
Pope,  secular  sovereign — between  the 
spiritual  and  temporal  power.  All 
this  I  have  heard  over  and  over  again, 
and  without  being  in  the  least  shaken 
in  my  convictions.  I  suppose  (I  say  so 
in  real  humility)  that  I  am  far  too 
ignorant  to  feel  the  full  force  of  certain 
arguments.  It  is  a  thousand  pities  that 
such  a  clever,  learned  man  as  you  are 
should  have  cast  in  his  lot  with  a 
woman  who  has  such  a  narrow  under- 
standing as  I  am  aware  I  have.  But 
you  will  give  me  credit  for  this,  at  all 
events,  that  I  never  tried  to  conceal 
from  you  any  of  my  shortcomings. 
What  I  am  now  at  twenty-five  I  was 
and  showed  myself  when  a  girl  of 
fourteen. 

"Well,  then,  to  me  the  Holy  Father 
has  always  been  and  always  will  be 
the  representative  of  Jesus  Christ  upon 
earth,  and  what  the  Holy  Father  orders 
I  deem  as  binding  on  me  as  if  the 
Almighty  Himself  had  ordered  it.  I 
was  brought  up  in  this  creed,  it  forms 
part  of  myself ;  I  cannot  alter  it,  nor 
would  I  if  I  could.  You  see,  then, 


that  no  good  could  come  of  your  remon- 
strances, and  evil  might.  Even — to  anti- 
cipate all  possible  cases — even  if  the 
charm  of  your  voice  should  be  able  to 
banish  for  a  time  what  you  consider  my 
scruples,  I  know  myself  well  enough  to 
be  sure  that  deep-rooted  habits  of 
thinking  and  life-long  associations  would 
speedily  reassert  their  power,  and  that 
the  struggle  within  me  would  begin 
afresh,  fiercer  than  ever,  and  make  me 
thoroughly  miserable.  Now,  you  don't 
wish  to  make  your  Rose  miserable,  do 
you]  I  rely,  therefore,  on  your  gene- 
rously acceding  to  my  prayer  not  to 
oppose,  though  only  by  arguments,  the 
course  I  have  decided  on. 

"Even  in  my  sorrow  I  must  consider 
myself  fortunate  that  I  have  no  sadder 
message  to  send,  no  crueller  duty  to 
accomplish,  than  such  as  my  strength  is 
equal  to.  What  if,  as  for  an  instant  I 
had  cause  to  fear,  what  if  I  had  had  to 
break  off  all  intercourse  with  you,  un- 
less ...  It  makes  me  shudder  only  to 
think  what  might  have  been,  and  I 
thank  God  humbly  and  fervently  that 
I  have  been  spared  the  trial  Yes,  my 
dear  Vineenzo,  that  liberty  of  acting  up 
to  the  dictates  of  my  conscience,  which 
I  claim  for  myself,  I  am  happily  em- 
powered to  leave  entire  to  you.  I  have 
no  change  in  the  actual  tenor  of  your 
life  to  exact,  to  entreat,  or  (I  am,  per- 
haps, going  too  far,  but  God,  who  sees 
my  motives,  will  pardon  me  if  I  do) 
to  wish  for.  I  have  acquired  the  convic- 
tion that  regular  work  of  a  certain  kind 
is  absolutely  necessary  for  your  well- 
being.  Go  on,  then,  with  your  present 
task ;  continue  to  be  a  useful  servant  to 
your  country,  and  a  credit  to  yourself 
and  those  who  love  you.  I  should  not 
have  said  this,  but  that  I  know  how 
generously  self-forgetting  you  are,  and 
I  am  anxious  to  put  you  on  your  guard 
against  yourself. 

"  And  now  good-bye,  my  dear,  my 
kind  Vineenzo.  I  need  not  beg  you  to 
write  as  often,  to  come  and  see  us  as 
often,  as  you  can.  I  know  you  will  do 
both  without  being  urged.  As  for  me, 
I  shall  write  and  give  you  a  daily 
account  of  both  your  Roses.  Now,  I 


Vincenzo  ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


35 


have  only  to  ask  your  forgiveness  for 
the  pain  I  give  you  ...  I  am  so  sorry 
for  it — so  very  sorry — but  it  can't  be 
helped.  After  all,  it  is  only  a  tempo- 
rary separation,  you  know.  Matters 
cannot  go  on  long  thus  between  the  King 
and  His  Holiness — some  right  settle- 
ment must  be  made  and  at  no  distant 
period — at  least,  I  hope  so ;  don't  you  ? 
Adieu  !  What  a  pity  that  it  should  have 
come  to  this  !  We  were  so  happy  toge- 
ther— but  I  must  not  murmur.  God 
bless  you,  my  dearest  husband,  and 
believe  me  always 

"Your  affectionate  wife, 

"  KOBE. 

"P.S. — Little  Rose  has  kissed  the 
paper  here  at  this  round  mark,  and  so 
have  I.  Once  again,  adieu  !  " 

Vincenzo  was  as  little  prepared  for 
this  ominous  intelligence  as  the  mariner 
who  has  moored  his  vessel  over-night  in 
a  quiet  haven  is  prepared  for  awaken- 
ing on  the  high  seas  in  the  midst  of 
a  terrific  storm.  Not  the  remotest  idea 
had  even  as  much  as  glanced  across  his 
mind  for  the  last  ten  months,  that  the 
old  half-forgotten  spectre,  which  had  for 
so  long  haunted  his  married  life,  might 
again  rise  and  place  itself  between  him 
and  .his  wife.  And  now,  here  it  was, 
more  threatening  than  ever  !  Vincenzo 
was  utterly  overcome.  He  laid  his  head 
on  the  desk  before  him,  clasped  his 
temples  with  both  hands,  and  strove  to 
collect  his  thoughts. 

Presently  he  took  up  the  letter  to 
re-read  it.  Some  passages,  scarcely 
noticed  on  the  first  perusal,  on  the 
second  touched  him  deeply;  traces  on 
the  paper  of  tears,  overlooked  before, 
now  anxiously  sought  for  and  verified, 
went  straight  to  his  heart.  With  the 
gush  of  sensibility  broke  forth  a  qualm 
of  alarm.  God  alone  could  know, 
thought  Vincenzo,  at  the  cost  of  what 
intense  agony  she  had  kept  up  that 
show  of  composure,  intended  to  spare 
his  feelings.  But  he  was  not  to  be 
duped  by  her  generosity,  not  he ;  he 
felt  the  moral  certainty  that  she  was 
frantic  with  grief,  fairly  heart-broken, 
probably  ill.  .  .  .  We  know  of  old  how 


apt  was  Vincenzo's  imagination,  in 
general  far  from  easily  excited,  to  run 
riot  on  any  subject  connected  with  Rose 
and  her  father. 

He  drove  at  once  to  the  railway,  and 
within  half  an  hour  was  on  his  road 
to  Rumelli — not  to  combat  his  wife's 
resolution,  not  to  argue  or  expostulate 
with  her,  but  to  soothe  and  comfort 
her.  Against  Rose,  exacting,  imperious, 
defiant,  he  had  found  it  in  his  heart  t« 
struggle ;  before  Rose,  tender,  submis- 
sive, unhappy,  he  felt  completely  dis- 
armed. Indeed,  if  indispensable  to  her 
peace,  he  would  lay,  as  a  sacrifice  at  her 
feet,  all  his  plans  of  usefulness,  hi» 
prospects  of  worldly  advancement — yes, 
for  her  peace,  he  would  not  shrink  eve» 
from  that.  .  .  .  But  Cavour  ?  How  ac- 
count to  Cavour  for  his  defection  1  And 
yet  account  for  it  he  must,  or  what 
would  his  kind  employer  think  of  him  ? 
The  locomotive  at  the  head  of  the  train 
did  not  work  harder  than  did  Vincenzo's 
poor  brain,  once  set  on  this  track.  He 
reached  the  Palace  in  a  state  of  feverish 
agitation. 

Rose  was  not  taken  unawares ;  she 
had  contemplated  the  possibility — nay, 
the  probability — of  his  coming,  and  had 
prepared  herself  accordingly.  We  have 
seen  by  her  letter  that  what  Rose  most 
apprehended,  and  most  wished  to  avert, 
was  that,  in  a  fit  of  generosity,  Vincenzo 
should  resign  his  appointment ;  now 
plain  good  sense  told  her  that,  the  more 
calm  and  cheerful  she  appeared  to  him, 
the  less  chance  there  would  be  of  his 
taking  that  extreme  step.  It  was  not, 
however,  without  a  sharp  battle  with 
her  feelings  that  she  managed  to  keep 
her  reception  of  her  husband  within 
the  bounds  of  that  affectionate  cordiality 
to  which  she  had  accustomed  him  of 
late  days.  She  said  that  she  had  ex- 
pected him,  and  how  very  glad  she  was 
he  had  come,  that  they  might  talk  over 
this  momentary  difficulty ;  for,  after  all, 
there  was  nothing  like  a  quiet  talk 
for  settling  things  in  their  true  light. 
Letters  never  answered  in  such  cases; 
they  always  said  too  little  or  too  much. 
Here,  she  feared,  had  alarmed  liim  ; 
had  it  not  ? 

D2 


36 


Vincenzo  ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


Eose's  assumed  equanimity  had  the 
desired  effect.  To  see  her  look,  to  hear 
her  talk  in  that  easy  natural  way,  to 
receive  comfort  and  encouragement  from 
her,  instead  of  having  to  comfort  and 
encourage — in  one  word,  to  find  her 
altogether  so  different  from  what  he  had 
pictured  to  himself — gave  Vincenzo  a 
revulsion  of  feeling  which  instantly 
sobered  him.  Suddenly  divested  of  the 
phantasmagoria  in  which  he  had  clothed 
it,  the  naked  reality,  as  it  stood  before 
hun,  lost  by  contrast  even  somewhat 
of  its  natural  proportions. 

Hose  had  therefore  no  difficulty  in 
getting  him  to  adopt  her  views — the 
views  enforced  in  her  letter.  Safe- 
guarding the  present  as  they  did, 
without  prejudging  the  future,  they 
were,  in  fact,  the  only  rational  ones 
under  the  circumstances ;  and  Vincenzo, 
once  reassured  about  his  wife,  once 
satisfied  that  the  short  trial  at  hand 
was  not  above  her  power  of  endurance, 
could  not  but  acknowledge  their  sound- 
ness. In  short,  Signora  Candia  had 
the  consolation  of  sending  her  husband 
back  to  his  occupations  next  day,  sad — 
how  could  he  be  otherwise  1 — but  toler- 
ably composed  in  mind,  and  heartily 
thankful  for  being  spared  the  struggle 
between  his  duty  to  her  and  that  to  his 
venerated  patron. 

Much  as  the  solitude  of  his  home  in 
Turin  weighed  at  first  on  Vincenzo,  he 
fought  against  despondence  bravely; 
and,  to  help  him  to  do  so  with  less 
effort,  presently  came  the  excitement 
of  that  rush  of  wonderful  events,  which 
opened  with  the  landing  of  Garibaldi 
at  Marsala,  and  closed  with  the  procla- 
mation of  the  Kingdom  of  Italy.  The 
work  of  the  sword  did  not  exclude  the 
work  of  the  pen,  and  that  of  Vincenzo 
had  no  rest  either  by  day  or  by  night. 
Still,  whatever  the  business  in  hand, 
however  important  or  pressing  it  might 
be,  there  would  peep  from  the  paper 
before  him  the  image  of  his  wife  and 
child,  sitting  lonely  and  disconsolate  far 
away,  and  a  sigh  would  conie.  The 
sight  of  his  dear  ones,  whom  he  never 
failed  to  visit  on  Sundays,  generally 
had  the  effect  of  sending  him  back  to 


town  in  low  spirits.  These  were,  how- 
ever, necessarily  fugitive  impressions. 
Vincenzo  was  too  much  in  the  current 
of  exciting  events,  far  too  much  occu- 
pied, to  indulge  long  in  melancholy 
musings. 

But  when,  in  the  lull  of  success,  both 
the  excitement  and  the  press  of  business 
slackened,  and  the  compressed  sensi- 
bilities found  leisure  for  asserting  their 
own ;  when  Vincenzo  measured  the 
length  of  time  since  Eose's  departure, 
and  looked  for  the  chances  of  her  pos- 
sible return,  and  saw  them,  along  with 
the  chances  of  a  settlement  with  Eome, 
daily  recede  and  fade  away  into  an 
indefinite  future ;  then  Vincenzo's  heart 
sickened  with  hope  deferred,  and  he 
was  beset  by  many  misgivings.  What 
came  of  them,  Vincenzo  will  himself 
tell  in  the  next  chapter. 


CHAPTEE  XLVIII. 

STRANDED. 

"  To  SIGNOR  ONOFRIO  AT  NAPLES. 

Rumelli,  June,  1861. 

"  MY  DEAR  FRIEXD, — I  have  sent  in  my 
resignation ;  it  has  been  accepted  with 
some  difficulty  ;  and  here  I  am  again  at 
my  starting  point.  Like  an  ill-fated 
ship,  over  and  over  again  driven  back 
by  contrary  winds,  I  return  disabled  to 
my  moorings,  there  to  lie  and  rot.  It 
was  my  destiny  that  it  should  be  so, 
and  it  is  so  far  accomplished.  .  .  .  But 
I  have  not  taken  up  the  pen  to  com- 
plain. Even  had  I  the  inclination,  the 
moment  would  be  ill  chosen  to  do  so. 
The  insignificant  insect  shorn  of  its 
wings  in  a  cobweb  has  no  right  to  be 
querulous,  when  the  king  of  the  forest 
lies  struck  down  in  all  his  might.  All 
individual  woes  lose  their  claim  even  to 
utterance  in  the  face  of  the  immense 
calamity  which  weighs  down  a  whole 
nation — the  death  of  Cavour.  Pre- 
pared for  it,  as  we  were  for  the  last 
four-and-twenty  hours,  we  could  not  be- 
lieve it — it  could  not  be  realized.  But 
yesterday  we  had  heard  his  voice  in 
parliament ;  but  yesterday  we  had  felt 


Vincenzo ;  or,  Sunken  fioclcs. 


the  impress  of  his  large  mind  on  the 
course  of  European  events  ;  and  that  to- 
day there  should  be  nothing  left  of 
him !  It  seemed  incongruous,  unna- 
tural, impossible,  that,  so  long  as  his 
work  was  not  done,  the  great  workman 
should  be  missing.  Alas  !  it  is  even  so. 
Providence  has  such  thunderbolts  among 
its  ways.  Was  the  task  of  Italian  re- 
demption too  easy  with  such  a  man? 
And  was  he  taken  from  us  that  we 
might  grope  in  the  dark,  and  stumble, 
and  earn,  through  further  suffering,  the 
entrance  into  the  promised  land  ?  This 
is  the  secret  of  the  Almighty — it  only 
remains  for  us  to  bow  our  heads. 

"Happy  you,  my  dear  friend,  who  were 
spared  at  least  the  anguish  of  the  scenes 
which  it  was  my  sad  privilege  to  wit- 
ness. Yet  why  so  1  There  are  sights 
which,  however  heartrending,  still  no 
man  who  loves  his  kind  would  miss,  so 
strongly  do  they  witness  in  favour  of 
human  nature ;  and  the  universal  ho- 
mage of  filial  respect  and  tenderness 
paid  to  Count  Cavour,  during  the  few 
days  of  his  illness,  is  too  honourable  to 
him  who  received,  and  to  the  population 
who  gave  it,  not  to  form  one  of  the 
saddest  and  yet  one  of  the  proudest  re- 
collections associated  with  his  name  and 
with  the  noble  city  wherein  he  was 
born  and  died.  No  one  who  has  not 
seen  the  thick  rows  of  anxious  faces 
thronging  for  days  together  the  halls, 
the  stairs,  the  courtyard  of  the  Hotel 
Cavour,  and  the  street  of  the  Arcives- 
covado — no  one  whose  heart  has  not 
throbbed  in  poignant  communion  with 
the  hearts  of  the  thousands  hanging 
upon  a  word — can  ever  realize  what  he 
was  to  us.  And  when  the  fatal  word 
fell  upon  the  multitude  ;  when  .  .  . 
but  I  must  stop  here.  I  was  there ;  I 
saw  it  all,  I  felt  it  all,  and  still  I  am 
powerless  to  convey  any,  the  faintest, 
idea  of  that  overwhelming  moment. 
All  I  can  say  is,  that  if  peoples  are  un- 
grateful— as  the  common  saying  is — 
the  people  of  Turin,  for  one,  was  not  so. 
A  family  mourning  over  a  beloved 
father,  such,  literally,  was  Turin  on  this 
lamentable  occasion. 

"  You  are  not  to  believe,  my  dear  friend, 


that  I  have  thrown  up  my  appointment 
in  a  fit  of  discouragement  consequent 
upon  the  sad  event.  No  such  thing. 
My  nature,  had  it  been  left  to  itself, 
would  have  prompted  me  rather  to  the 
contrary  course.  It  is  not  when  the 
general  falls  that  the  soldiers  are  to 
leave  their  ranks.  Unfortunately,  I 
was  not  free  to  act  according  to  my 
natural  inclination.  The  fact  is,  that  I 
had  predetermined  for  some  time  to 
seize  upon  the  first  opportunity  for  leav- 
ing office  ;  the  death  of  Count  Cavour 
afforded  this  opportunity,  and  I  seized 
upon  it.  The  forming  of  this  resolution 
was  not  the  work  of  a  day  ;  it  had  been 
forcing  itself  upon  me  inch  by  inch,  as 
it  were,  for  the  last  six  months ;  and 
the  moment  I  acquired  the  conviction 
that  this  unlucky  Eoman  question,  far 
from  narrowing  to  a  solution,  grew 
daily  more  entangled  and  envenomed,  and 
was  likely  to  linger  on  for  years — from 
that  moment,  I  say,  my  resolution  be- 
came irrevocable.  Not  without  a  strug- 
gle, as  you  may  well  believe.  I  clung 
to  my  employment  with  the  energy  of 
despair  .  .  .  but  in  all  struggles  be- 
tween the  interests  of  my  wife  and  mine 
I  am  destined  to  be  the  loser.  It  has 
been  the  blessing  and  the  .  .  .  stum- 
bling-block of  all  my  life,  that  I  should 
receive  so  much  from  that  family  as  to 
make  all  return  on  my  part  still  inade- 
quate to  the  benefit.  I  have  a  kind  of 
superstition  on  this  score. 

"  Well,  then,  it  was  the  old  story  over 
again  —  an  everlasting  contention  of 
mind.  You  recollect  my  flight  to  Turin 
in  1857,  and  the  miserable  failure  in 
which  it  ended  ;  and  yet  I  had  to  sup- 
port me,  at  that  time,  the  sense  of  pro- 
vocation and  of  the  harshness  I  had  been 
writhing  under — while  now  the  case 
was  quite  different,  I  met  with  nothing 
but  affection  and  submission.  How 
could  I  find  it  in  my  heart  to  resist? 
We  could  see  but  little  of  each  other, 
scarcely  once  a  week.  Much  as  I  felt 
this  deprivation,  Rose  felt  it  far  more. 
With  a  man  situated  as  I  was,  that  is, 
busy  from  morning  to  evening,  and, 
when  not  actually  at  work,  constantly 
preoccupied  about  it,  time  flies  quick — 


38 


Vincenzo ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


it  hung  heavy  upon  her,  whose  range  of 
occupation  was  but  limited.  I  saw 
with  a  qualm  the  colour  fade  in  her 
cheeks,  and  her  looks  grow  wan.  .  .  . 
In  short,  one  of  the  two  was  to  be  more 
or  less  sacrificed,  and  I  chose  that  it 
should  not  be  my  wife. 

"  'And  your  duty  to  your  country?'  I 
hear  you  say.  I  have  put  the  objection 
to  myself;  I  have  weighed  it  carefully 
with  the  sincerest  wish  to  find  it  un- 
answerable, and — I  have  not  found  it 
so.  That  a  man's  duty  to  his  country 
be  absolute  and  exclusive  of  all  other 
duties  I  readily  admit,  but  only  in  a 
few  extreme,  and  therefore  exceptional, 
cases.  Let  the  country  be  in  danger, 
the  Austrian  at  the  gate  of  the  city,  or 
Catilina  in  the  streets,  and  no  citizen 
worth  the  name — whatever  his  other 
ties  and  responsibilities — has  a  choice 
but  to  fly  to  the  rescue.  I  would  for 
one,  in  spite  of  everything.  But  that 
in  ordinary  times  and  circumstances — 
when  the  land  has  nothing  to  fear  from 
external  or  internal  foes,  when  order 
and  security  prevail — that  a  man,  I  say, 
irrespectively  of,  or  in  opposition  to 
other  duties  and  inclinations,  should 
owe  himself  quand  ni&me  to  his  country, 
under  penalty  of  leze-patriotism — the 
assumption  is,  evidently,  too  excessive 
to  be  tenable.  It  may  have  held  good 
at  Sparta,  where  the  State  was  all  in 
all ;  but  in  our  modern  society,  where 
family  occupies  so  large  a  place,  it  .is 
out  of  date.  I  lay  it  down,  then,  as  a 
rule,  that — setting  aside  a  few  extreme 
cases — whenever  duty  to  one's  country 
clashes  with  other  duties,  the  decision 
as  to  which  shall  take  precedence  rests 
with  the  individual  conscience.  Now 
my  conscience  tells  me  that  my  with- 
drawal from  office  does  not  the  least 
harm  to  the  State,  while  my  persevering 
in  it  inflicted  a  very  serious  one  upon 
my  family.  It  little  matters  to  my 
country  whether  the  business  I  have 
discharged  up  to  this  day  is  performed 
by  Signor  Candia  or  by  an  equally  or 
far  cleverer  substitute  ;  but  it  mattered 
much  to  my  wife  and  child  whether  I 
should  continue  to  live  apart  from  them, 
or  whether  I  should  live  with  them. 


The  State  has  plenty  of  willing  and 
able  servants  at  its  command ;  my  wife 
and  child  have  only  me.  Could  I 
hesitate  ? 

"  When  I  said  that  my  absence  from 
my  family  was  fraught  with  injurious 
consequences  to  them,  I  did  not  in  the 
least  exaggerate.  Hose,  as  I  was  telling 
you,  was  suffering  in  health  from,  our 
separation.  Her  youthful  looks  and 
liveliness  were  fast  forsaking  her ;  and 
some  words  dropped  maliciously  by  that 
mischievous  monkey,  Marianne,  gave  me 
a  clue  to  the  cause.  My  wife  was  im- 
posing fasts  and  other  penances  upon 
herself,  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  her 
husband,  I  suppose  ;  from,  which  I 
could  not  but  infer  that  time  rather 
sharpened  than  softened  her  absolute 
ways  of  thinking  and  feeling  in  refer- 
ence to  our  difficulties  with  Rome. 
How  could  it  have  been  otherwise,  left 
as  she  was  for  six  out  of  seven  days  to 
the  exclusive  influence  of  Don  Pio  1 
By  the  bye,  there  is  a  rumour  afloat 
that  Don  Pio  is  going  to  leave  us. 
Would  to  God !  To  return :  be  the 
inference  I  drew  above  founded  or 
unfounded,  this  I  must  say,  in  justice  to 
my  wife,  that  I  never  marked  any  al- 
teration in  her  manner  to  me,  and  that 
such  as  she  showed  herself  at  the  begin- 
ning of  this  painful  entanglement — dis- 
creet, attentive,  affectionate,  submissive 
— she  proved  to  the  end. 

"  Then  ...  I  am  going  to  relate  a  cir- 
cumstance which  will  make  you,  an  old 
bachelor,  smile  somewhat  contemptu- 
ously, and  which  has  made  me,  a  young 
father,  nearly  cry  scores  of  times.  My 
weekly  visit  to  the  Palace  had  this  drop 
of  gall  in  it,  that  when  I  left  on  Mon- 
day morning  I  had  to  steal  out  of  the 
house  like  a  thief,  without  taking  leave 
of  my  little  daughter,  Avithout  so  much 
as  kissing  her  in  her  sleep,  for  fear  of 
awakening  her.  This  course  was  forced 
upon  me  from  the  first  by  the  fits  of 
uncontrollable  passion  into  which  she 
would  fty  whenever  she  saw  me  go.  Ah 
me  !  How  the  dear  little  thing  kicked, 
and  wailed,  and  screamed,  until  she 
grew  black  in  the  face !  how  her  tiny 
hands  clove  desperately  to  me  !  To 


Vincenzo ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


39 


avoid  such  painful  scenes — and  espe- 
cially their  recoil  on  her  health — I  had, 
as  I  was  saying,  to  give  up  even  seeing 
her  before  leaving ;  and  you  can  never 
imagine  all  the  bitterness  entailed  upon 
me  by  this  deprivation,  all  the  sad 
misgivings  for  the  future,  which  I  had 
the  ingenuity  to  build  upon  this  appa- 
rent unfeelingness  of  mine.  You  must 
be  a  father,  my  dear  friend,  to  know  by 
how  many  little  tendrils  such  baby 
plants  can  entwine  themselves  round 
a  man's  heart.  J  fancied  that  she  was 
getting  estranged  from  me,  that  she  no 
longer  answered  my  caresses  as  warmly 
as  she  used  to  do,  that  my  voice  had 
lost  its  former  power  over  her.  I 
pictured  her  a  grown-up  girl,  clinging 
passionately  to  her  mother,  and  looking 
at  her  father  with  something  akin  to 
indifference.  .  .  .  That  would  be  a  mis- 
fortune indeed,  the  worst  of  all — not 
only  for  me,  but  for  herself.  I  want 
my  little  Rose  to  love  and  trust  me 
best  after  God ;  I  want  my  voice  to  be 
an  oracle  with  her,  that  she  maybe  happy, 
and  make  others  happy.  I  want  my  sad 
experience  to  be  of  profit  at  least  to  my 
daughter,  and  to  those  whose  lot  in  life 
she  may  be  destined  to  influence  some 
day.  I  have  suffered  too  much  through 
her  mother.  .  .  . 

"  Mind,  my  dear  friend,  that  I  don't 
say  this  in  bitterness.  I  protest  I  have 
not  the  least  shadow  of  a  grudge  against 
my  wife.  How  could  I  ?  It  is  no  fault 
of  hers  if  we  could  not  understand  each 
other  on  certain  points.  She  has  acted 
up  to  what  she  has  been  taught,  poor 
dear  soul ;  and  the  responsibility  of  her 
not  having  been  taught  better  rests 
more  with  the  times  and  the  circum- 
stances of  her  education  than  with  any 
living  creature.  The  fault,  if  any,  lies 
with  me,  who  married  her  with  eyes 
not  blind  to  her  weak  points,  and,  in 
my  youthful  infatuation,  deluded  myself 
into  believing  that  I  might  easily  modify 
her  opinions.  I  presumed  too  much  on 
myself,  and  I  pay  a  just  penalty  for  my 
presumption. 

"  Well,  then,  as  I  was  saying,  I  have 
suffered  too  much  through  the  mother 
not  to  do  my  best  in  order  that  an 


honest  man  should  not  suffer  through 
the  daughter  in  the  same  way.  I  am 
determined  upon  this,  that  my  daughter 
shall  not  be  the  sort  of  clog  in  the  way 
of  the  man  who  casts  In  his  lot  with 
her  which  her  mother  has  been  in 
mine.  This  is  a  duty  of  conscience 
with  me,  and  accomplish  it  I  wilL  I 
am  not  fixed  yet  as  to  the  means 
through  which  I  shall  accomplish  it; 
a  great  deal  must  depend  on  circum- 
stances. I  am  no  theologian;  I  have 
the  best  wish  to  live  and  die  a  good 
Catholic,  and  I  would  fain  interfere  as 
little  as  possible  with  my  daughter's 
religious  education.  My  plan  for  the 
present  is,  to  teach  her  to  love  her 
country  so  well,  to  inspire  her  with  so 
deep  a  sense  of  duty  to  her  country,  as 
may  in  future  serve  her  as  a  corrective 
against  the  too  absolute  notions  that 
she  may  receive  on  other  heads.  Time 
will  show  if  I  am  to  go  further,  and  in 
what  direction.  I  shall  want  no  leisure 
to  study  the  subject  ctfond. 

"Perhaps  you  will  say,  'All  this  is  very 
well,  and  will  come  in  good  time;  but 
your  daughter  is  just  eighteen  months 
old,  and  it  is  rather  early  to  begin  your 
course  of  patriotic  education  with  her/ 
May  be  so,  though  I  am  not  quite  sure 
of  that.  At  all  events,  she  is  not  too 
young  to  receive  and  retain  certain  im- 
pressions, which  sink  into  the  infant 
mind,  take  root  there,  and  become  like 
instincts.  For  instance,  my  little  one's 
teaching  goes  already  thus  far.  When 
she  toddles  along  the  garden-walks, 
holding  by  my  finger,  if  I  say, '  Rosette, 
give  papa  the  Italian  .tricolor/  she  will 
with  earnest  attention  pick  a  red  and  a 
white  flower  with  a  green  leaf,  and  hold 
up  the  posy  triumphantly  to  me.  The 
other  day  she  almost  jumped  out  of  my 
arms  with  excitement  at  the  sight  of 
the  tricolor  banner  borne  by  the  national 
guard,  and  pointed  out  eagerly  the  red, 
the  white,  and  the  green.  She  also 
recognises  quite  well  the  picture  of 
Cavour,  which  hangs  amongst  others  in 
my  study,  and  holds  out  her  baby 
fingers  to  it  when  I  ask  her  which  is 
the  Great  Papa.  And  then,  my  dear 
friend,  can  it  be  ever  too  early  for  me 


40 


Vincenzo  ;  or,  Sunken  Rocks. 


to  lay  the  foundations  of  that  entire 
love  and  confidence  on  which  I  rely, 
in  order  to  enable  me  to  realize  my 
fond  views  for  my  daughter's  happiness 
and  that  of  her  surroundings  ? 

"Even  in  this  small  way  I  fancy  I 
shall  not  be  quite  useless  in  my  genera- 
tion, for  enlightened  female  education 
is  yet  a  great  desideratum,  with  us. 
You,  my  friend,  who  gave  me  timely 
warning  of  the  danger  lurking  in  my 
path,  will  not  gainsay  me  on  this  point. 

"  And  now  that  I  have  laid  bare  my 
heart  to  you,  good-bye  my  dear  and 
noble  friend,  and  God  bless  you.  I 
don't  ask  you  to  write ;  I  know  that 
all  your  time  is  scarcely  enough  for  the 
thousand  duties  and  responsibilities  of 
your  thorny  official  situation;  I  only 
entreat  you  to  come  and  see  me  when- 
ever you  return  home.  It  will  be  an 
act  of  charity.  I  don't  hide  from  my- 
self that,  after  the  habits  of  activity  I 
have  acquired  within  these  two  last 
years,  time  will  hang  heavy  upon  me 
at  the  Palace.  It  does  already,  and  I 
have  not  been  here  quite  a  week.  By- 
the-bye,  do  you  know  that,  not  a  month 
ago,  I  was  offered  a  seat  in  the  House  by 
the  College  of  Ibella — an  offer  which, 
of  course,  I  had  to  decline  ?  It  seemed 
done  on  purpose  to  distract  me.  It  was 
an  awful  wrench.  A  man  does  not 
crush  with  his  own  hand  all  his  pro- 
spects of  usefulness  in  this  world 
without  a  pang.  A  seat  in  Parliament 
was  my  beau  ideal  in  life,  and — shall  I 
say  it  1 — I  felt  qualified  for  it.  Forgive 
me  this  burst  of  self-love.  It  is  my  first, 
and  will  be  my  last.  The  victim  may 
be  allowed  for  once  to  deck  itself  with 
flowers.  .  .  . 

"But  I  promised  not  to  complain. 
What  is  the  use  of  repining  about  what 
is  irreparably  lost?  Let  me  rather 
teach  myself  to  be  grateful  for  that 
which  is  left  me.  I  have  much  to 
thank  Providence  for — a  pure  conscience, 
the  affection  of  my  wife,  the  caresses  of 
my  darling,  some  excellent  friends,  and 
all  the  comforts  imaginable,  comprising 
that  most  precious  of  all,  the  being  able 
to  add  to  the  comforts  of  my  poorer 
neighbours.  With  so  many  good  gifts 


in  my  grasp,  it  may  seem  unnatural 
that  I  should  have  something  to  regret, 
and  yet  ...  it  is  so  ;  I  cannot  help  it. 
I  suppose,  but  for  that  one  forbidden 
fruit,  my  lot  would  have  been  too 
happy ;  and  perfect  happiness  is  not  a 
flower  of  this  world.  Upon  which 
Christian  sentiment  I  hasten  to  close 
my  already  too  long  letter,  and  remain, 
my  dear  Onofrio,  with  best  wishes, 

"  Yours,  ever  affectionate, 

"  VINCENZO  CANDIA." 


CONCLUSION. 

MORE  than  two  years  have  elapsed  since 
the  date  of  the  above,  and  still  the 
contention  of  feeling  under  which  it 
was  written  continues  to  this  day. 
With  the  best  endeavour  to  rest  con- 
tented with  the  present,  Vincenzo 
regrets  the  past ;  with  the  best  wish 
to  be  happy,  and  to  make  his  wife 
happy,  Vincenzo  succeeds  in  neither, 
and  is  conscious  that  he  does  not. 
There  is  a  void  in  his  existence  which 
not  all  his  love  for  his  wife,  not  all  his 
wife's  love  for  him,  not  all  the  endear- 
ing ways  of  his  daughter,  not  even  her 
great  progress  under  his  tuition,  can 
fill  up.  Vincenzo  misses  the  stimulus 
of  a  regular  homogeneous  occupation, 
misses  the  satisfaction  of  one  of  the 
necessities  of  his  nature — expansion  in 
a  certain  direction.  He  guards  his 
secret  as  jealously  as  he  would  the 
deadliest  poison — guards  it  from  his 
wife,  from  his  best  friends,  would  fain 
guard  it  from  himself.  Never  a  word 
escapes  his  lips  which  the  most  sus- 
picious touchiness  could  construe  into 
regret  or  disappointment.  See  him  of 
an  evening,  sitting  with  little  Eose  in 
his  lap,  serene,  talkative,  cheerful ; 
mark  the  affectionate  gentleness  of  his 
tones  whenever  he  addresses  liis  wife, 
who,  on  the  sofa  opposite,  lulls  to  sleep 
on  her  bosom  tiny  Urbano,  just  four 
months  old.  Captain,  now  Major,  del 
Palmetto  and,  perhaps,  the  new  curate 
(Don  Pio  is  gone,  thank  God,  and  has 
been  succeeded  by  a  tolerant,  elderly 
priest,  who  acts  up  to  the  adage  "Live 


On  Maritime  Capture  and  Blockade. 


41 


and  let  lire ") — well,  Del  Palmetto  and 
the  new  curate,  while  sipping  their 
tea,  contribute  their  quota  of  news  and 
pleasant  chat.  If  there  is  a  happy 
man  under  heaven,  could  you  not  swear 
to  that  man  being  Vincenzo  Candia  1 

But  see  him  without  a  mask — see 
him  in  the  privacy  of  his  own  study, 
or  taking  a  solitary  walk  on  the  terrace 
late  at  night — and  your  estimate  of  his 
happiness  will  sadly  abate.  Out  of  the 
dejected  gait,  out  of  the  listless  eye, 
oozes  his  secret,  weariness,  ennui.  The 
assaults  from  this  old  enemy,  frequent 
and  intense  in  winter-time,  grow  less  so 
with  the  fine  season,  especially  during 
the  three  months  that  the  Del  Pal- 
mettos spend  regularly  at  the  Castle; 
but  they  never  cease  altogether. 

Need  we  say  that  Rose  is  not  the 
dupe  of  her  husband's  kindly  meant 
imposition  ?  Even  had  she  not  that 
kind  of  divination  which  affection  gives, 
even  had  she  not  heard  his  broken 
words  in  his  sleep,  she  would  have  read 
his  secret  in  the  premature  look  of  age 
which  has  come  over  him  within  the 
last  two  years.  Vincenzo  at  two-and- 
thirty  has  the  appearance  of  a  man  of 
forty-five ;  his  hair  is  going  fast,  his 


beard  is  all  grizzly.  Eose  knows  full 
well  the  nature  of  Vincenzo's  ailment — 
knows  that  it  is  her  own  work — and 
feels  powerless,  alas !  to  undo  it ;  for 
his  determination  not  to  live  apart  from, 
his  family  is  irrevocable.  She  is  fully 
aware  of  this ;  and  follow  him  to  Turin 
she  cannot — her  conscience  forbids  her ; 
and  not  even  for  her  husband  can  she 
endanger  her  soul.  Nothing  remains 
for  her  but  to  swallow  her  tears  in 
secret  and — look  happy. 

And  thus  they  sit,  face  to  face,  each 
acting  a  part  for  the  benefit  of  the  other, 
each  pretending  not  to  know  that  the 
other  is  doing  the  same.  Sad,  thrica 
sad,  is  it  not,  that  the  schooling  and 
sobering  of  ten  years  should  abut  upon 
a  semblance  instead  of  a  reality  1  Would 
to  God,  at  least,  that  the  case  of  the 
Candias  were  an  isolated  one  !  But  no  ; 
there  is  scarcely  any  corner  in  Italy, 
scarcely  any  corner  in  Europe,  that  does 
not  exhibit  plenty  of  such,  and  worse. 
God  alone  knows  the  number  of  fami- 
lies whose  domestic  peace  has  been, 
of  late  years,  seriously  damaged,  or 
has  gone  to  wreck  altogether,  on  those 
very  rocks  which  have  proved  so  fatal 
to  Vincenzo. 


ON  MARITIME  CAPTURE  AND  BLOCKADE. 


BY  LORD  HOBART. 


BY  the  Declaration  of  Paris  in  1856, 
most  important  changes  were  (as  is  well 
known)  made  in  regard  to  the  trade  of 
belligerents  with  neutrals  or  between 
themselves.  Before  that  Declaration  it 
had  been  held  that  the  property  of  an 
enemy  might  be  captured  on  the  high 
seas  in  whatever  ships  it  was  conveyed. 
Thus  the  ships  or  goods  of  an  enemy 
were  in  all  cases  and  without  qualifi- 
cation liable  to  capture  at  sea ;  and  his 
trade  with  a  neutral  or  with  the  hostile,, 
country  was  absolutely  prevented,  so  far 
as  it  could  be  prevented  by  means  of 
maritime  capture.  Since  that  Declara- 
tion^ the  rule  which  may  be  considered 


to  have  been  established  is  as  follows. 
The  ships  of  an  enemy  are  still  liable 
to  capture,  without  qualification,  on  the 
high  seas ;  but  the  goods  of  an  enemy 
are  liable  to  such  capture  only  in  one 
case,  i.  e.  if  they  are  conveyed  in  enemy's 
ships.  Thus,  at  one  stroke,  the  trade  of 
a  belligerent  with  neutrals  or  with  the 
enemy  was  (so  far  as  liability  to  capture 
on  the  high  seas  is  concerned)  set  free  ; 
the  only  condition  being,  that  it  should 
be  carried  on  in  the  ships  of  neutrals. 

It  must  be  carefully  borne  iu  mind, 
however,  that  the  Congress  of  Paris 
did  not  attempt  to  call  in  question  or 
to  alter  the  general  rule  or  principle 


42 


On  Maritime  Capture  and  Blockade. 


of  International  Law  under  which  the 
property  of  an  enemy  is  liable  to  cap- 
ture at  sea.  That  general  rule  or 
principle  remained  unchallenged  and 
untouched.  What  the  Declaration  of 
Paris  did,  was  to  establish  an  exception 
to  the  rule ;  that  exception  being,  that 
the  goods  of  an  enemy,  if  carried  in 
the  ship  of  a  neutral,  should  be  free. 
The  exception  was,  it  is  true,  of  such 
a  nature  as,  in  practice,  to  nullify  to 
a  great  extent  the  rule ;  for  its  effect, 
as  has  just  been  observed,  was  no  less 
than  to  set  free  (so  far  as  regards 
voyages  upon  the  high  seas)  the  trade 
of  an  enemy,  provided  only  that  it  was 
carried  on  in  neutral  vessels.  But  still 
it  was  only  an  exception — an  exception 
which  had  become  practically  expedient 
on  account  of  the  increasing  power  of 
neutrals,  and  the  difficulties  which  had 
long  been  experienced  in  the  appli- 
cation of  the  rule  to  cases  in  which  an 
enemy's  property  was  carried  in  the 
ships  of  neutral  States. 

The  important  change  thus  intro- 
duced respecting  the  rights  of  belli- 
gerent nations,  combined  with  the 
terrible  effects  upon  trade  of  the  civil 
war  in  America,  has  brought  into 
prominent  notice  and  discussion  the 
whole  question  of  maritime  capture  and 
blockade,  with  regard  to  which,  though 
for  different  reasons,  almost  every  one 
seems  to  consider  that  the  law  in  its 
present  condition  is  unsatisfactory. 

And  first,  with  respect  to  maritime 
capture.  It  is  held  by  some  persons 
that  the  Declaration  of  Paris  went  too 
far  in  the  way  of  concession ;  by  others, 
that  it  did  not  go  far  enough. 

The  former  of  these  opinions  there 
is  little  need  to  discuss.  It  is  based 
upon  extreme  views  as  to  the  rights 
of  belligerents ;  and  such  views,  even 
supposing  that  they  were  sound,  are  so 
obviously  and  steadily  losing  ground 
with  the  progress  of  civilization,  that  it 
would  be  mere  waste  of  time  to  advo- 
cate or  oppose  them.  It  is  not  to  be 
imagined  that  the  maxim,  "free  ships, 
free  goods,"  having  once  been  estab- 
lished, will  ever,  in  the  face  of  the 
progressive  development  of  commerce, 


and  the  increasing  importance  of  the  con- 
cession to  neutral  nations,  be  reversed. 

By  those  who  hold  the  opinion  that 
the  Declaration  of  Paris  did  not  go  far 
enough,  it  is  contended  that  all  private 
property  ought  to  be  exempt  from 
molestation  in  time  of  war,  unless  its 
capture  or  destruction  is  necessary  for 
military  purposes ;  and  that  this  prin- 
ciple is  admitted  in  the  established 
immunity  during  war  of  private  pro- 
perty on  land. 

It  will  be  seen  from  what  has  been 
said  that  the  Declaration  of  Paris  did 
not  attempt  to  deal  with  the  question 
thus  raised.  It  proceeded  upon  the 
assumption  that  the  general  rule  which 
subjects  to  capture  the  property  of  an 
enemy  at  sea  was  to  remain  in  force. 
Whether  this  rule  ought  or  ought  not 
to  be  maintained  is,  however,  a  ques- 
tion well  worthy  of  consideration.  The 
statement  that  private  property  on  land 
is  exempt  from  plunder  during  war  is 
certainly  true  in  the  sense  intended. 
The  commander  of  a  military  or  naval 
force  would  be  held  justified  in  seizing 
or  destroying  on  land  the  private  pro- 
perty of  an  enemy,  so  far  as  such 
seizure  or  destruction  was  necessary  for 
strategic  purposes ;  but  no  further.  He 
would  not,  in  the  present  day,  be  held 
justified  in  destroying  or  injuring  a 
purely  commercial  town,  or  in  plunder- 
ing on  land  the  property  of  private 
individuals,  unless  such  a  proceeding 
was  directly  conducive  to  some  military 
object ;  nor  would  he  be  justified  in 
seizing  enemy's  goods  in  transitu  by 
land  to  some  other  country. 

There  is  indeed  one  case,  and  only 
one,  in  which  (as  it  would  appear)  a 
belligerent  would  claim  the  right  to 
seize  the  private  property  of  an  enemy 
on  land  ;  and  that  is  when  the  property 
is  under  conveyance  to  the  country 
of  the  belligerent  itself.  There  is  a 
traditional  rule  that  with  the  declaration 
of  war  (subject,  however,  to  exception 
by  special  licence  from  the  Crown)  it 
becomes  unlawful  to  trade  with  an 
enemy :  and  under  this  rule  the  goods 
of  an  enemy  would  (it  is  presumed)  be 
seized  at  the  frontier  custom-houses. 


On  Maritime  Capture  and  Blockade. 


43 


In  this  case,  011  land  as  well  as  at  sea, 
the   immunity  of  private   property,  as 
a  general    rule,    during    war,   may  be 
supposed  to  be  outweighed  by  the  con- 
flicting rule  that  trade  with  an  enemy 
is  unlawful.     This  rule,  however,   has 
of  late  been  very  partially  acted  upon, 
and   appears   to   be   singularly  absurd. 
It  is   unfortunately   necessary  that,  in 
endeavouring     to     injure     an     enemy 
during  war,  a  nation  should  do  much 
that  will    more   or  less    injure   itself. 
But  the  idea  of  a  rule  upon  which  it 
is  absolutely  impossible  for  a  nation  to 
act  without  inflicting  in  every  instance 
precisely   the    same   amount  of  injury 
upon  itself  as  it  inflicts  upon  the  enemy, 
is  simply  ridiculous.     The  blunder  had 
doubtless  its  origin  in  the  old  notion 
that  the  export  trade  of  a  country  is 
more   valuable   to   it   than   its   import 
trade.      To   seize   a    cargo   of    French 
goods   bound    for    an  English   market 
causes   to  England  precisely  the  same 
loss    as   it   causes   to   France.      Those 
goods  (unless  we  are   to  suppose  that 
they  are  sent  to  England  for  the  mere 
chance  of  a  market)   are  ordered  and 
must  be  paid  for — they  may  possibly 
have  been  already  paid  for — by  an  Eng- 
lish merchant ;  and  the  loss  is  no  more 
French  than  it  is  English.     It  would  be 
a  strange  kind  of  warfare  which  should 
be   carried   on  between   two   countries 
with    the    certain    knowledge    that   it 
could  by  no  possibility  in  any  length 
of  time  give  any  advantage  either  to 
one  side  or  to  the  other. 

Is  there,  then,  any  valid  distinction  be- 
tween private  property  at  sea  and  private 
property  on  land  which  would  make  rea- 
sonable the  exemption  of  the  former,  and 
the  non-exemption  of  the  latter,  from 
plunder  during  war?  So  far  as  the 
goods  of  an  enemy  are  concerned,  it  is 
impossible  to  discover  any  such  dis- 
tinction. It  has  sometimes  been  con- 
tended that  the  immunity  of  private 
property  on  land  is  not  founded  on 
any  general  principle  of  international 
equity  or  humanity,  but  is  a  matter  of 
military  expediency,  the  disadvantage 
to  the  plundering  army  from  the  ex- 
asperation of  the  occupants  of  the 


country  being  greater  than  its  advantage 
from  the  plunder.  But  this  assertion, 
besides  being  contrary  to  the  facts  of 
the  case  (for  it  is  certain  that  no 
general  serving  a  civilized  State  could 
allow  his  troops  to  plunder  in  an 
enemy's  country  without  being  held 
guilty,  not  of  bad  generalship,  but  of 
moral  delinquency),  is  obviously  in- 
applicable to  the  exemption  from  injury 
by  a  naval  force  of  a  commercial  sea- 
port town.  As  regards  the  ships  and 
their  crews,  the  case  is  different.  It  is 
argued,  and  with  some  reason,  that  the 
merchant  ships  of  an  enemy,  with  their 
crews,  are  the  "  raw  material "  of  his 
military  marine,  and  that  to  capture 
them  is  directly  to  cripple  his  naval 
power ;  so  directly,  at  least,  as  to  bring 
their  capture  fairly  within  the  category 
of  hostile  measures  which  may  be  taken 
against  him.  This  cannot  be  said  of 
private  property,  or  of  private  persons 
taken  on  land.  Indirectly,  no  doubt, 
to  seize  the  private  property  of  an 
enemy's  subjects  on  land,  or  to  seize 
the  subjects  themselves,  though  en- 
gaged in  peaceful  occupations,  tends  to 
diminish  his  military  power;  but  it 
does  this  so  indirectly  as  to  have  be- 
come in  modern  times  unlawful. 

It  may  be  admitted,  then,  that  with 
respect  to  the  ships  and  crews  of  an 
enemy  there  is  at  present  a  not  un  fail- 
reason  for  treating  them  as  liable  to 
capture,  which  reason  does  not  exist  in 
the  case  of  private  property  on  land. 
It  is  a  reason,  however,  of  which  the 
force  has  been  much  diminished  by  the 
recent  inventions  of  science,  and  will 
be  more  and  more  diminished  as  the 
difference  between  a  merchant  vessel 
and  a  vessel  of  war,  both  as  to  con- 
struction and  as  to  the  qualities  required 
for  its  navigation,  becomes  more  and 
more  marked.  As  regards  the  goods  of 
an  enemy  being  private  property,  and 
on  the  high  seas,  there  is  absolutely  no 
such  reason.  Consistency  requires  that 
such  goods  should  be  exempt  from  cap- 
ture, and  that  if  found  on  board  enemy's 
ships  they  should  be  restored  to  their 
owners. 

The  admission,  implied  in  the  immu- 


On  Maritime  Capture  and  Blockade. 


nity  accorded  to  private  property  on 
land,  of  the  principle  upon  which  it  is 
proposed  to  extend  that  immunity  to 
private  property  at  sea  renders  it  prac- 
tically unnecessary  to  discuss  the  justice 
or  expediency  of  that  principle.  But  it 
is  to  be  observed,  that  there  is  much 
stronger  reason  for  exempting  an  enemy's 
goods  from  plunder  at  sea,  as  well  as 
on  land  when  in  transitu,  than  for  so 
exempting  them  in  his  own  country. 
Such  goods,  if  they  are  bound  for  a 
neutral  country,  are,  in  a  certain  sense, 
the  property  of  persons  in  that  country ; 
and  to  subject  them  to  capture  is,  to 
that  important  extent,  a  direct  and  fla- 
grant interference  with  the  obvious 
rights  of  neutrals.  It  is,  in  fact,  a 
denial  to  neutrals  of  the  power  of  trad- 
ing, so  far  as  their  imports  are  con- 
cerned, with  a  belligerent  State  ;  and 
this,  not  for  any  military  purpose,  but 
for  the  sake  of  the  mere  injury  to  the 
enemy's  trade.  Such  a  prohibition  is 
opposed  to  the  plainest  dictates  of 
equity.  That  either  of  two  nations, 
which  for  any  cause,  however  frivolous, 
should  think  fit  to  go  to  war  with  each 
other,  should  have  power  to  intercept 
the  trade  of  the  other  with  countries 
which  are  friendly  to  it,  unjustifiable 
from  the  first,  has  become  simply  into- 
lerable now  that  commercial  intercourse 
has  been  freed  from  most  of  its  tram- 
mels and  nations  are  for  the  most 
part  dependant  upon  each  other  for  the 
comforts  and  necessaries  of  life.  That 
the  Northern  States  of  America,  because 
they  happen  to  have  a  quarrel  with  the 
Southern  States,  should  have  had  the 
power — not  incidentally  upon  the  neces- 
sary operations  of  war,  but  deliberately 
and  directly — to  cut  off  from  England 
supplies  necessary  to  the  existence  of 
a  great  part  of  her  population,  is  in 
accordance  certainly  with  international 
law,  but  in  complete  opposition  to  reason 
and  right. 

It  appears  then,  from  what  has  been 
said,  that  the  rule  of  international  law 
which  subjects  the  private  property  of 
an  enemy  to  capture  at  sea  ought  to  be 
reversed  ;  but  that  for  the  present,  at 
least,  an  exception  to  the  general  immu- 


nity might  not  unjustly  be  made  in 
the  case  of  an  enemy's  ships  and  their 
crews.  Thus  the  goods  of  an  enemy 
would  be  free  in  whatever  ships  they 
were  conveyed ;  while  his  ships,  with 
their  crews,  would  still  remain  liable  to 
capture. 

As  regards  the  effect  of  such  a  change 
upon  the  interests  of   merchants   and 
shipowners  :  it  has  been  seen  that  by 
the  Declaration  of  Paris,  the  trade  of 
neutrals  has  been  (so  far  as  maritime 
capture  is  concerned)  already  in  practice 
set   free ;    because,    unless    carried    in 
enemy's    ships,  enemy's  goods   are    no 
longer  liable  to  capture.     To  the  mer- 
cantile, as   distinct  from  the   shipping 
interest,  in  belligerent  States  which  have 
assented  to  that  Declaration,  the  change 
would  therefore  be  of  far  less  importance 
than  it  would  have  been  before  the  De- 
claration.    It  would,  nevertheless,  be  a 
measure   of   great  importance   to   that 
interest,  not  only  as  placing  n.t  its  dis- 
posal  the    national  mercantile  marine, 
at  no  other  disadvantage,  when   com- 
pared with  neutral  shipping,  than  the 
loss  and  inconvenience  of  delay  in  case 
the  ship  were  captured,  but  as   estab- 
lishing  on  an  intelligible  and  rational 
basis  the  freedom  of  private  property 
from  plunder  during  war.     As  respects 
the  shipowners  of   a   belligerent    State, 
the   change   would  at  once  remove  in 
great  part  an  objection  which  has  been 
earnestly  pressed   on  behalf  of  British 
shipping   to  the  Declaration  of  Paris, 
viz.    that,    in    the    event    of   England 
being  engaged  in  war,  its  effect  will  be 
to    throw   the   carrying   trade    of    the 
country   into   the    hands    of    neutrals. 
That    objection,    which     is     avowedly 
based  on  the  interest  of  one  particular 
industry,   is    obviously  inadmissible  as 
an  argument  against  a  measure  intended 
for  the  advantage   of  the   State   as   a 
whole,  and  of  the   general  community 
of    nations.      Nor   does   it    appear    at 
all  clear  that,  on  the  whole,  the  altera- 
tion   effected    by    the    Declaration    of 
Paris  would   be   injurious   to  that   in- 
dustry.    By  the  change,  however,  now 
proposed  the  objection  must  in  a  great 
measure   be   obviated,  since   the  main 


On  Maritime  Capture  and  Blockade. 


object  of  the  complainants — the  equal 
treatment  of  an  enemy's  goods,  whether 
conveyed  in  his  own  ships  or  in  those  of 
a  neutral — would  be  attained.  There 
would  remain  the  comparatively  small 
disadvantage,  on  the  s^de  of  the  ships 
of  a  belligerent,  of  the  temporary  deten- 
tion of  the  enemy's  goods  which  they 
conveyed. 

With  respect  to  blockade,  the  law, 
which  in  principle  remained  unaltered 
by  the  Declaration  of  Paris,  seems  in 
its  present  condition  singularly  inde- 
fensible. 

There  is  no  general  rule  of  inter- 
national law  more  clearly  established 
than  this  : — that  a  neutral  has  the  right 
of  trading  on  his  own  account  with 
either  belligerent  during  war.  Sir  E. 
Phillimore,  in  his  "Commentaries  on 
International  Law,"  says : 

"  There  is  no  more  unquestionable  proposi- 
tion of  International  Law  than  the  proposition 
that  neutral  states  are  entitled  to  carry  on, 
upon  their  own  account,  a  trade  with  a  belli- 
gerent." 

and  whoever  will  refer  to  the  principal 
authorities  on  the  subject  will  find  the 
statement  amply  confirmed.  Great 
Britain,  he  goes  on  to  say,  has  in  two 
or  three  instances  attempted  to  enforce 
a  contrary  doctrine ;  but  in  the  first  of 
those  instances  Great  Britain,  with  her 
accomplice  Holland,  afterwards  confessed 
that  she  was  wrong ;  and  in  the  other 
two  she  rested  her  case,  such  as  it  was, 
upon  a  highly  exceptional  state  of 
thing?,  which  was  held  to  warrant  a 
temporary  departure  from  that  which 
she  admitted  to  be  a  general  principle 
of  law. 

But  to  this  rule  there  are  necessary 
exceptions ;  and  one  of  these  is  "  the 
right,"as  Sir  E.  Phillimore  expresses  it, 
"  to  prohibit  the  commerce  of  the  neu- 
•"  tral  with  all  besieged  and  blockaded 
"  places  ;  and  the  duty  of  the  neutral 
"  to  abstain  from  all  intercourse  with 
"  them."  1  Now  what  is  the  ground  on 

1  "Wheaton  expresses  it  as  follows : — 
"  Another  exception  to  the  general  freedom  of 
neutral  commerce  in  time  of  war  is  to  be  found 
in  the  trade  to  ports  or  places  besieged  or 
blockaded  by  one  of  the  belligerent  powers." 
(Part  iv.  c.  3). 


which   this    exception    is    justifiable? 
Simply  the  necessity  of  allowing  na- 
tions which  are   at  war  to   carry  on 
against  each  other  military  operations, 
among  which  is  the  siege  or  investment 
of    ports   or  places  belonging  to    the 
enemy.     There  are  military  operations 
in  which  it  is  an  object  to  cut  off  the 
supply  of  provisions   or  munitions  ol 
war  from  the  enemy ;  and  these  opera- 
tions, if  nations  are  permitted  to  make 
war  upon  each  other  at  all,  they  cannot 
be  prevented  from  conducting,  notwith- 
standing that  in  so  doing  they  are  acting 
in  opposition  to  the  general  rule.     In 
other  words,  the  case  is  one  in  which  • 
the  admitted  right  of  neutrals  to  trade 
with  a  belligerent  conflicts  with  and  is 
made  inoperative  by  the  admitted. right 
of  belligerents  to  carry  on  hostile  opera- 
tions against  each  other.     Such  being 
the  case,  it  is  surprising  that  the  right 
of  excluding  the  commerce  of  neutrals 
by   blockade   should  have  been    con- 
sidered to  hold  good  where  the  blockade 
is  what  is  termed  "commercial" — that 
is,  where  it  is  established  for  the  ex- 
press and  single   object   of  excluding 
that  commerce,  and  not  for  any  purpose 
which  can  be  termed  military.     To  say 
that  neutrals  have  a  right  to  trade  with 
a  belligerent,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
say  that  a  belligerent  may  place  at  the 
entrance  of  any  port  of  the  enemy  an 
armed  force,  for  the  sole  and  ultimate 
object    of    preventing    neutrals    from 
trading  with  him,  is  a  mere  contradic- 
tion in  terms.    In  the  case  of  a  military 
blockade,  the  exclusion  of  neutral  com- 
merce is  a  secondary  object :  the  ulti- 
mate object  is  to  gain  a  military  advan- 
tage.    The  secondary  object  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  principle  of  law  which 
prescribes   freedom   of    trade  between 
neutrals  and  belligerents  :  but  the  ulti- 
mate object  is  to  do  that  which,  in  the 
interest  of  all  nations,  belligerents  are 
authorised  to  do  during  war ;  and  this 
last  consideration  prevails.     In  the  case 
of  a  "commercial"  blockade,  the  ulti- 
mate object  is  to  exclude  the  trade  of 
neutrals,  i.e.,  to  do  the  very  thing  which 
the   law   of   nations   proclaims   to    be 
illegal.     There  is  no  conflict  in  this 


46 


On  Maritime  Capture  and  Blockade. 


case  of  principles  or  of  rights.  The 
thing  done  is  done  in  simple  and  direct 
contravention  of  a  great  legal  principle, 
and  not  in  virtue  of  any  "other  legal 
principle  which  conflicts  with  it.  To 
lay  down  the  general  proposition  that 
the  trade  of  neutrals  with  belligerents 
is  free,  and  at  the  same  time  to  legalise 
"commercial"  blockades,  is  as  absurd 
as  it  would  be  to  say  that  a  man  has  no 
right  to  take  the  law  into  his  own 
hands,  but  that  any  man  may  on  any 
occasion  knock  another  man  down. 
Either,  then,  the  general  rule  must  be 
reversed,  or  the  exception,  so  for  as  it 
respects  "commercial"  blockades,  must 
cease.  Happily,  there  seems  no  sort  of 
probability  that  the  former  alternative 
will  be  adopted.  It  is  not  in  that,  but 
in  the  opposite  direction,  that  future 
changes  in  the  law  of  nations  must  be 
expected  to  tend.  The  monstrous  doc- 
trine which  has  been  already  referred 
to,  that  either  of  two  nations  which 
choose  to  quarrel  with  each  other  may 
intercept  the  trade  of  the  other  with  a 
friendly  state,  having  oncebeenshattered, 
to  the  extent  of  allowing  neutral  goods 
to  be  freely  conveyed  to  the  enemy,  it 
is  not  likely  that  the  breach  will  ever 
be  repaired. 

Thus  far  with  respect  to  "com- 
mercial "  blockade,  considered  as  ex- 
cluding the  merchandise  of  neutrals 
from  the  ports  of  the  hostile  country. 
Considered  as  preventing  the  egress  of 
enemy's  goods,  it  is  open  to  precisely 
the  same  objections  as  those  which  have 
been  urged  in  this  paper  to  the  capture 
of  an  enemy's  goods  at  sea.  It  is 
equally  irreconcileable  with  the  recog- 
nised immunity  of  private  property  on 
land,  and,  as  giving  to  any  two  quarrel- 
some nations  an  undue  power  of  injuring 
third  countries,  equally  opposed  to  the 
dictates  of  common  sense  and  common 
humanity.  And  it  is  open  to  these  ob- 
jections in  a  degree  by  so  much  the 
greater,  as  blockade  is  a  more  effective 
instrument  than  maritime  capture  for 
the  suppression  of  trade. 

In  so  far,  again,  as  commercial  block- 
ade operates  to  prevent  the  interchange 
of  commodities  between  the  belligerent 


countries,  it  is  liable  to  the  same  objec- 
tion as  that  above  noticed,  to  the  legal 
theory  by  which  such  a  trade  is  pro- 
hibited. In  this  effect  of  it,  commercial 
blockade  cannot  under  any  conceivable 
circumstances  be  of  any  possible  advan- 
tage either  to  one  side  or  to  the  other. 

A  blockade,  then,  to  be,  as  it  is  termed, 
"  binding,"  ought  not  only  (in  the  words 
of  the  Declaration  of  Paris)  to  be  "  effec- 
tive," but  established  for  military  pur- 
poses. And  it  ought  to  be  so,  not  in 
any  vague  or  indirect  manner,  but 
directly  and  in  the  fullest  sense  part  of 
a  strategic  plan.  That  no  consideration 
as  to  its  indirect  effect  in  diminishing 
the  enemy's  military  power  by  cutting 
off  from  his  people  their  sources  of 
wealth,  is  sufficient  to  justify  blockade, 
is  implied  in  the  very  rule  which  allows 
neutrals  to  trade  with  him.  A  blockade, 
to  constitute  an  exception  to  this  rule, 
should  be  clearly  shown  to  have  for  its 
object  direct  military  disadvantage  to 
the  enemy,  or,  in  other  words,  direct 
military  advantage  to  the  blockading 
State.  Thus  a  blockade  forming  part 
of  a  plan  of  siege  or  investment,  or  for 
the  purpose  of  preventing  supplies  from 
reaching  a  hostile  army,  or  intended  to 
prevent  the  egress  of,  or  to  injure  in 
any  manner  consistent  with  the  laws  of 
war,  an  enemy's  fleet,  would  be  entitled 
to  observance  by  neutral  States.  As  to 
what  did  or  did  not  constitute  a  "  mili- 
tary" blockade,  within  the  meaning  of 
the  rule,  difficulties  would,  of  course, 
arise ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  they  would  be  either  greater  or 
more  numerous  than  those  which  attend 
the  interpretation  of  many  other  rules 
of  international  law. 

The  assertion  that  the  abolition  of 
"  commercial "  blockades  would  be  un- 
fairly disadvantageous  to  this  country,  as 
a  great  maritime  power,  is  open  to  much 
discussion.  It  is  surely  matter  for  doubt 
whether  the  profit  which  England  would 
derive  from  it  as  a  neutral  State  with 
the  greatest  commercial  navy  in  the 
world,  would  not  exceed  any  loss  which 
it  would  inflict  upon  her  as  a  belligerent 
State  with  the  greatest  military  navy 
in  the  world ; — for  doubt,  which  the 


Nickar  the  Soulless.  4,7 

fearful  calamity  sustained  by  her  in  the  ation.     A  legal  doctrine  which  declares 

former  capacity  on  account  of  the  present  that  neutral  trade  with  a  belligerent  is 

civil  war  in  America  may  help  to  re-  free,  and  at  the  same  time  declares  that 

move.     But  if  the  assertion  were  true,  the  whole  'coast  of  an  enemy  may  be 

it  would  be  a  reason  (so  far  as  it  went)  closed  against  neutral  trade  with  the 

not  for  maintaining  in  its  present  state  direct  and  ultimate  object  of  excluding 

the  law  of  maritime  capture  and  block-  that  trade,  is  self-condemned. .  The  only 

ade,  but  for  abolishing  the  rules  of  law  possible  mode  of  rectifying  the  anomaly, 

with   which   the   right   of  commercial  except  the  abolition  of  "  commercial " 

blockade  is  irreconcileable.    There  is  no  blockade,   is  one  which   (as   has  been 

need  to  insist  on  the  suggestion  that  a  already  said)  is  little  likely  to  be  adopted 

code  of  international  law  which  is  in-  — a  step  backward  to  the  principles  and 

consistent    with   itself    requires   alter-  practice  of  a  barbarous  age. 


NICK.AE    THE    SOULLESS. 

BY    SEBASTIAN   EVANS. 

[OF  Nickar,  alias-  Nicker,  Neckar,  Neck— etymological  parent  of  "  old  Nick,"  and  subject  of 
the  following  poem — more  were  to  be  premised  were  he  not  already  xmiversally  known,  thanks 
to  Grimm  and  others,  as  a  somewhat  melancholy  water-sprite,  human  to  all  outward  appearance, 
but  without  a  soul — much  given  to  dolorous  chanting  on  river  margins  with  instrumental 
accompaniment.  Of  Saint  Patrick  and  his  Purgatory,  also,  all  that  need  be  said  has  been  said 
already  by  Mr.  Thomas  Wright,  in  his  little  volume  on  the  subject,  to  which  the  reader  is 
referred,  if  he  does  not  prefer  to  consult  the  "  Aurea  Legenda,"  or  the  veridical  pages  of  Roger 
of  Wendover. 

Those  acquainted  with  the  dates  of  Nickar's  final  departure  from  this  world,  and  the  first 
appearance  in  these  islands  of  evil-disposed  wanderers  in  grey,  chaffering  for  men's  soul's,  may 
possibly  convict  me  of  anachronism  in  introducing  both  as  contemporaries  of  St.  Patrick,  who, 
as  critics  are  well  aware,  died  at  the  age  of  122,  just  at  the  close  of  the  fifth  century.  This 
objection,  however,  together  with  certain  topographical  difficulties  connected  with  the  Poem, 
I  leave  to  be  disposed  of  by  any  benevolent  reader  who  may  take  an  interest  in  tracing  the 
gradual  degradation  of  the  superstitions  of  one  age  into  the  nursery  tales  of  the  other.] 

Where  by  the  marishes  "  Wherefore  thus  sorrowful 

Boometh  the  bittern,  Sitt'st  thou  and  sighest  1 

Mckar  the  soulless  One  Oft  when  it  furthest  seems, 

Sits  with  his  ghittern.  Succour  is  nighest." 

Sits  inconsolable,  "  Friend,"  quoth  the  soulless  One. 

Friendless  and  foeless,  "  Friend  of  the  friendless, 

Wailing  his  destiny,  Vain  are  all  comforters, 

Mckar  the  soulless.  Sorrow  is  endless  ! 

Footing  the  treacherous  "  Mine,  0  to  make  her  mine  ! 

Marish  untrodden,  Mine,  and  for  ever  ! 

Glides  by  a  Wanderer  Why  did  I  gaze  on  her  ? 

Hooded  in  hodden ;  Mine  she  is  never  1 

Grey  is  his  gaberdine,  Down  by  the  river-aits 

Grey  are  his  hosen  :  Walked  she  at  day-rise, 

Track  that  he  travels  by  Beautiful,  bright  as  a 

!N"o  man  had  chosen.  Child  of  the  Faeries ; 


Nickar  the  Soulless. 


"  Kirtled  right  maidenly, 

Broidered  her  bodice, 
Belted  with  emeralds 

Fit  for  a  Goddess, 
Came  where  the  whispering 

Aspen-leaves  quiver, 
Just  where  the  silver  mere 

Spreads  from  the  river, 

"  Came  for  a  morning  bath, 

Lovely  and  lonely, 
Oman  the  swan-breasted, 

Oman  the  only  ! 
Came,  and  the  silken  fret 

Deftly  untwining, 
Let  fall  the  golden  locks, 

Bipple-like  shining. 

"  Laid  by  her  aumoner, 

Unclasped  her  brooches, 
Loosened  her  carcanet, 

Starry  with  ouches, 
Doffed  the  rich  baudekin 

Broidered  with  myrtle, 
Unlooped  the  ruby  knops 

Loosing  her  kirtle — 

•"  Kirtle  of  cramoisie, 

Glist'ning  with  bezants, 
Samite  the  purfled  sleeve, 

Slashed  into  crescents. 
Down  from  her  girdlestead, 

Paistling  and  gleaming, 
Fall  the  rich  webs  and  gold, 

Fountain-like  streaming ; 

•"  Snow-white  the  corset  is, 

Snow-white  the  camise  ; 
Snow-white  herself  as  the 

Swans  of  the  Thamise. 
Beautiful,  fair  as  the 

Swan  when  she  stretches 
Wings  and  neck  over  her 

Nest  in  the  sedges, 

*'  Stands  she  in  midst  of  her 

Jewels  and  vesture  ; 
0  for  the  pride  in  her 

Maidenly  gesture ! 
0  those  blue  eyne  of  hers, 

Glancing  so  keenly ! 
0  those  fair  limbs  of  hers, 

Fashioned  so  queenly ! 


"  Down  to  the  mere  she  steps, 

Where  by  the  margent 
Brightly  the  morning-red 

Glints  on  the  argent ; 
Stands  there  a  moment  in 

Womanhood  peerless, 
Then  like  a  Mermaiden 

Plunges  in  fearless  ! 

"  Bright  the  hair  follows  her 

Swimming  and  plashing, 
Bright  as  the  walk  of  light 

Sunsetward  flashing ; 
Ah,  what  a  lunacy 

Thus  to  behold  her, 
Watching  the  ripples  kiss 

Softly  her  shoulder ! 

"  Watching  the  snowy  limbs 

Cleaving  the  waters, 
'  Is  she  indeed,'  methought, 

'  One  of  earth's  daughters  ? ' 
Mine,  0  to  make  her  mine, 

Mine  and  for  eveT  ! 
Why  did  I  gaze  on  her  ? 

Mine  she  is  never  !  < 

"  Never  on  woe  like  mine 
Beameth  redressing  ! 
Never,  0  Wanderer, 

Dawneth  the  blessing  !  " 
"Tush  !"  quoth  the  Wanderer, 
"  Fondly  thou  sighest ! 
Oft  when  it  furthest  seems, 
Succour  is  nighest ! 

"  Had  but  the  maiden  thus 

Pledged  me  her  clothing, 
She  had  not  won  them  back 

Certes,  for  nothing  ! 
Would  she  have  drowned  herself, 

Think  you,  to  spy  you  1 
Would  her  white  arms  have  donned 

Swan- wings  to  fly  you? 

"  Conic,  for  a  bargain,  now, 

Such  as  I  trade  in  ! 
What  wilt  thou  give  an  I 

Grant  thee  the  maiden  ]  " 
"  Give  ? "  quoth  the  soulless  One, 

"  What  should  I  give  thee  ? 
Gift  have  I  none,  even 
Could  I  believe  thee  ! 


Nickar  the  Soulless. 


49 


"  None,  save  the  ghittern  here, 

Friend  of  my  weeping, 
This,  which  the  Mermaidens 

Gave  me  in  keeping. 
Often  men  heark  to  its 

Harping  impassioned, 
Little  they  reck  the  while 

Whence  it  was  fashioned  ! 

"  Look  you,  how  white  it  is, 

Polished  and  slender  j 
Once  a  heart  beat  in  it, 

Eoyally  tender  ! 
'Tis  the  breast-bone  of  an 

Emperor's  daughter, 
One  whom  a  sister's  hand 

Slew  under  water ! 


Nickar  the  soulless  One, 

Nickar  the  crafty, 
Thrummed  on  his  ghittern-strings, 

Inwardly  laughed  he  ! 
"  Say,  if  I  barter  it, 

Thou,  canst  thou  take  it  ? 
Ill  were  a  covenant 

Made  but  to  break  it. 

"  Look  you,  this  soul  of  mine 

Clings  so  about  me, 
He  is  not  born  that  can 

Drag  it  without  me  ! 
Trust  me,  so  straitly  the 

Life-blood  hath  tied  us, 
Death  the  divider's  self 

Cannot  divide  us  ! " 


"Famous  the  history, 

Molten  in  metre, 
Long  ere  the  Aser  gods 

Fled  before  Peter. 
Look  at  the  runes  on  it, 

Finger  the  strings,  too  ! 
Sweeter  its  tone  than  aught 

Minstrel  e'er  sings  to  ! " 

"  Pardon,"  quoth  Evil-eye, 

"  Truly,  no  bungler 
Fashioned  your  ghittern,  but 

I  am  no  jongleur  ! 
Gift  so  imperial 

Seems  me  moreover, 
Guerdon  too  costly  for 

Blessing  a  lover ! 

"  Thee  of  thine  only  wealth 

Shame  'twere  to  rifle, 
All  that  I  ask  for  is 

Just  a  mere  trifle  ! 
Death  shoots  at  humankind, 

Hits  me  or  hits  thee, 
Only  just  give  me  thy 

Soul  when  it  quits  thee  ! 

"  Tush  !     A  man's  soul,  my  friend, 

Trust  me,  in  fact  is 
Great  but  in  theory, 

Nothing  in  practice  ! 
Only  souls  hap  to  be 

That  which  I  trade  in  ; 
Come,  give  me  thine,  my  friend  ! 

Thine  is  the  maiden  ! " 
No.  49. — VOL.  ix. 


"  Aye  ?  "  quoth  the  Wanderer, 

"  Is  it  so  fast  in  ? 
Haply  'twill  loose  in  the 

Grave  thou  art  cast  in. 
I,  I  can  sever  it 

Ev*n  were  it  faster ; 
In  my  own  handicraft, 

Trust  me,  I'm  master. 

"  Come,  now,  to  please  thee,  I'll 

Bargain,  my  brother, 
If  I  don't  take  it,  to 

Find  thee  another. 
If  I  should  fail  in  it, 

Will  I,  or  nill  I, 
Tours  is  another  soul 

Clean  as  a  lily ! " 

Nickar  the  soulless  One, 

Nickar  the  crafty, 
Thrummed  on  his  ghittern-strings,. 

Inwardly  laughed  he ! 
"  If  to  a  covenant," 

Then  quoth  the  Dark  One, 
"  Name  you've  not  learnt  to  sign, 
Still  you  can  mark  one. 

"  Pardon ! "     He  lifted  the 

Hand  of  the  singer, 
Swift  with  a  needle-point 

Pricked  he  his  finger ! 
Nickar  the  parchment-scroll 

Lifted  unshudd'ring ; — 
Handed  it  back  to  him 

Marked  with  a  blood-ring. 


50 


Nickar  the  Soulleas. 


Peal  the  bells  merrily, 

Ringers  of  Thrif  holm  ! 
Nickar  the  soulless  One 

Bringeth  a  wife  home  ! 
Oman  the  swan-breasted, 

Oman  the  wader, — 
Bring  forth  the  bridal-dress, 

Girls,  that  ye  made  her  ! 

Anlaf  the  Bishop  his 

Blessing  delivers, 
Nickar  the  soulless  One 

Blanches  and  shivers ! 
Swiftly  the  winter  flies, 

Springtide  and  summer, 
White  are  the  cradle-swathes 

For  the  new  comer  ! 

Toll  the  bell  solemnly, 

Eingers  of  Thrif  holm  ! 
Nickar  the  soulless  One 

Beareth  his  wife  home  ! 
Cold  in  the  God's  acre 

Sadly  he  lays  his 
Bride  and  her  little  one 

Under  the  daisies ! 

Where  by  the  marishes 

Boometh  the  bittern, 
Nickar  the  soulless  One 

Sits  with  his  ghittern  : — 
Sits  inconsolable, 

Friendless  and  foeless, 
Wailing  his  destiny, 

Nickar  the  soulless. 

Footing  the  treacherous 

Marish  untrodden, 
Glides  by  a  Wanderer 

Hooded  in  hodden. 
Grey  is  his  gaberdine, 

Grey  are  his  hosen, 
Track  that  he  travels  by 

No  man  had  chosen. 

"  Wherefore  thus  sorrowful 

Sitt'st  thou,  forlorn  One  ? 
Did  not  I  win  for  thee 

Swan-breasted  Oman  ? " 
Nickar  the  soulless  One 

Speaks  without  turning  : — 
"  Wherefore  1     Thou  knowest  well 
Whom  I  am  mourning ! 


"  Yet  what  myself  am,  thou 
Seemest  to  know  less  : — 
Look  on  me  !     Recognise 

Nickar  the  soulless ! " 
Fiercely  the  Wanderer 

Glares  on  the  speaker  : — 
"  Fool  that  I  was,  to  be 
Fooled  by  a  Nickar  ! " 

Where  by  the  marishes 

Boometh  the  bittern, 
Nickar  the  soulless  One 

Sinks  with  his  ghittern  ! 
Drowned  in  the  marishes, 

Grey-Hood  beside  him ; 
Where  is  the  soul  that  he 

Vowed  to  provide  him  1 

Forth  to  the  green-sodded 

Wilds  of  lerne, 
Shiplessly,  steedlessly 

Takes  he  his  journey. 
Straight  to  the  Holy  Lough 

Derg,  where  the  hoary 
Patric  the  bishop  still 

Dwells  in  his  glory ; 

Dwells  in  the  cavernous 

Islet,  to  mortals 
Where  the  dread  Spirit- world 

Opens  his  portals. 
There  the  red  Hell-river 

Bellows  and  hisses, 
Plunging  in  flame  to  the 

Shrieking  abysses. 

There  on  the  brink  of  the 

Dolorous  river, 
Smoke  Purgatorial 

Rises  for  ever  : — 
There  with  a  glow,  as  of 

Gold  in  the  coppel, 
Glimmers  Earth-paradise 

Girdled  with  opal. 

There  at  the  gates  of  the 

Weird  spirit-haven, 
Crosiered  St.  Patric  stands, 

Old  as  a  raven. 
Speaks  the  grey  Wanderer, 
"  Tell  me,  0  Warden, 
What  shall  I  give  for  a 

Soul  from  thy  garden  ?  " 


Nickar  the  Soulless. 


51 


Keenly  the  hoary  Saint 

Eyes  the  grey  pedlar  : 
"  Fiend,  thou  wast  ever  an 

Impudent  meddler  ! 
Off !  ere  I  ban  thee  with 

Bell,  book,  and  candle, 
Home  for  thy  taskmaster 

Moloch  to  handle  !  " 

Quaking,  the  Wanderer 

Kneels  interceding  : 
"  Mercy,  O  mighty  One, 

Hark  to  my  pleading  ! 
Not  for  myself,  0  saint, 

Ask  I  the  favour, 
Once  in  my  life  I'm  not 

Slayer,  but  saver  ! 

"  Nickar,  the  soulless  One, 

Pitiful  Pixie, 
Foully  hath  won  of  me 

Wager  too  tricksy  ! 
I,  who  but  struck  it  to 

Humour  his  follies, 
Wagered  no  less  than  a 

Soul  to  the  soulless  ! 

"  Wagered  and  lost  it ! — Ah, 

Saint,  if  thou  aid  not, 
Think  of  my  doom  for  the 

Wager  that's  paid  not ! 
Sure  thou  canst  find  him  a 

Soul  to  inherit  ? 
Any  will  do  for  him, 

So  'tis  a  spirit ! 

"  Just  a  mere  idiot's, 

Say,  or  a  baby's  1 
Either  would  suit  for  him, 

Grossest  of  gabies  ! 
What  ?   In  the  Limbo,  there, 

Out  of  the  many 
Unbaptized  little  ones, 

Hast  thou  not  any  ? 

"  Pity  that  all  of  them 

Thus  should  be  wasted  ! 


Surely  at  least  by  one 

Bliss  may  be  tasted  ] 
See  !  Here's  a  Prodigal's 

Spirit  I'll  cede  thee  ; 
Damned  is  it  evermore, 

Elsewise,  I  rede  thee  ! 

"Look  you  !"  He  draws  forth  the 

Soul  from  his  pocket, 
Flimsily  tied,  with  its 

Date  on  a  docket ; 
Smooths  out  its  gossamer 

Inwardly  muttering  ; 
Holds  it  up  chapmanlike, 

Temptingly  fluttering, 

"  Fiend !"  quoth  the  Saint,  "  not  oft 

Art  thou  caught  sleeping  ! 
Give  me  thy  Prodigal's 

Soul  to  my  keeping, 
Since  for  him,  dreeing  the 

Dole  of  Purgation, 
Prayer  may  avail  even 

Yet  to  salvation. 

"  Spirit  for  Spirit's  not 

Mine  to  return  thee ; 
Nathless  one  favour  thy 

Pleading  shall  earn  thee  ! 
Oman  the  Beautiful 

Here  still  abideth, 
Till  the  dread  Hand  her  soul 

Heavenward  guideth  ; 

"  Here,  too,  her  little  one 

Wanders  for  ever, 
Like  as  his  father  wont, 

Down  by  the  river. 
Fiend,  when  the  Beautiful 

Winneth  to  glory, 
With  her  the  child  shall  go 

Bearing  thy  story ; 

"  He,  who  fain  heavenward 
All  men  would  gather, 
Haply  shall  take  the  Child 
In  for  the  Father  !" 


E  2 


52 


DEAD  MEN  WHOM  I  HAVE  KNOWN ;  OE,  EECOLLECTIONS 
OF  THEEE  CITIES. 


BY  THE  EDITOR. 


PROLOGUE. 

So  far  as  I  yet  know,  the  title  I  have 
given  to  the  series  of  articles  which  I 
now  begin  indicates  pretty  exactly  what 
they  are  to  be.  It  has  been  my  lot 
hitherto  to  live  successively  in  three  of 
our  British  cities  —  Aberdeen,  Edin- 
burgh, and  London.  In  each  of  these 
cities  I  have  chanced  to  know  a  few 
men,  now  no  more  among  the  living, 
who  were  either  so  remarkable  in  them- 
selves, or  made  so  remarkable  to  me  by 
the  absence  from  my  limited  neighbour- 
hood of  others  that  might  have  been 
more  remarkable,  that  the  recollection 
of  them  always  accompanies  me,  and  I 
find  myself  often,  in  my  hours  of  reverie, 
summoning  them,  one  by  one,  back  from 
the  ranks  of  the  dead,  and  reperusing 
their  habits  and  physiognomies. 

How  it  may  be  with  others  I  know 
not ;  but  the  recollections  of  the  persons 
I  have  known  seem,  with  few  excep- 
tions, to  surpass,  in  durability,  any 
recollections  that  I  have  of  scenes  and 
events.  Perhaps  it  would  be  more  correct 
to  say  that  in  my  recollections  of  persons 
I  find  involved  and  summed  up,  in  most 
cases,  all  that  seems  particularly  worth 
remembering  of  either  events  or  scenes. 
There  are,  of  course,  exceptions.  Bits  of 
absolute  Nature,  with  my  first  or  with 
repeated  visions  of  which  the  thought 
of  no  man,  living  or  dead,  was  specially 
mingled — tracts  of  brown  and  solitary 
moorland,  great  sea-glimpses  broken  by 
islands  and  promontories,  depths  of 
Highland  wildness  in  the  clasp  of  tor- 
rent-seamed mountain-masses,  rich  green 
sweeps  of  English  meadow  and  wood- 
land— these  do  recur  powerfully  enough. 
Now  and  again  I  can  catch  the  photo- 
graphs loosening  themselves  from  among 
the  stored  millions  in  theunder-memory, 


passing  the  partition  for  some  unknown 
end,  and  flashing  unbidden  into  the 
conscious  currents  of  thought.  Then, 
also,  of  the  hum  of  that  little  portion  of 
human  affairs  in  general  that  one  has 
passed  through — of  flitting  crowds  of 
indiscriminate  town-faces  to  the  right 
and  the  left,  of  the  transactions  that 
went  on  among  these  crowds,  and  of  the 
rumours  of  other  transactions  that  were 
ever  brought  ceaselessly  thither  from 
far  and  near — one  cannot  but  retain  some 
continuous  recollection.  .  Still,  in  the 
main,  the  m«st  precious  and  intimate 
possession  of  each  man's  memory  is  his 
series  of  recollected  portraits  and  bio- 
graphies of  the  persons  he  has  indi- 
vidually known.  A  peculiar  sacredness 
attaches  to  these  recollections  of  persons 
when  they  themselves  are  dead.  Abie- 
runt  ad  plures,  "  They  have  gone  over 
to  the  majority,"  was  the  striking  Eoman 
phrase  in  speaking  of  the  departed .  We, 
the  living  whom  the  Earth  now  bears, 
what  are  we  but  a  small  minority,  com- 
pared with  the  generations  that  have  gone 
before,  and  whom  we  fancy  as  removed 
into  wider,  unfeatured  realms,  a  great 
company  which  no  man  can  number? 
But  of  this  majority,  whose  overwhelm- 
ing relation  to  us  we  all  feel  in  one  way 
or  another,  it  is  still  those  that  have 
gone  over  last  that  stand  nearest  to  us, 
and  have  left  the  sense  of  their  having 
been  before  us  keenest  and  most  vivid. 
In  that  vision  of  unnumbered  multi- 
tudes, the  assembled  by-gone  of  all  ages, 
peopling  the  plains  of  the  dead  to  the 
farthest  horizon  of  time,  it  is  but  here 
and  there,  in  the  extreme  distances,  that 
the  eye  can  single  out  for  a  moment  a 
face  that  the  world's  memory  can  now 
recognise.  The  rest  are  unnamed,  un- 
known, a  mere  promiscuous  tumult  or 
sea  of  surging,  close-pressed  shapes.  As 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  Known, 


53 


the  distance  diminishes  the  figures  of 
whom  some  tradition  still  remains  in 
the  world  become  more  numerous.  But, 
let  History  and  Biography  do  what  they 
will  to  keep  our  eyes  fixed  on  these 
distinguishable  figures  among  the  more 
distant  dead,  and  on  the  search  for  more 
of  them,  it  is  still  the  latest  dead — 
those  of  the  dead  that  the  existing 
generation  of  the  living  can  actually 
remember,  and  whose  hands  they  have 
grasped — that  are  least  alien  from  us 
and  claim  our  most  frequent  regards. 
Every  living  man  or  woman  can  reckon 
up  those  select  of  the  dead  who  are 
most  memorable  to  him.  or  to  her ;  and 
sometimes  there  may  be  a  duty,  or  at 
least  an  impulse,  that  one  should  speak 
to  others  of  the  dead  whom  he  re- 
members, and  of  whom  they  know  little 
or  nothing.  As,  in  a  quiet  evening  hour, 
one  may  take  out  a  few  valued  minia- 
tures from  their  repositories,  and,  show- 
ing them  to  friends  with  whom  one  can 
talk  freely,  say,  "  This  was  So-and-so,  a 
most  singular  character,"  or  "  Youallknow 
who  this  is ;  but  it  gives  but  a  poor 
idea  of  his  noble  face  as  I  remember  it," 
or  "  Here  is  a  man  of  whom  you  never 
heard ;  but  ah !  if  you  knew  what  a 
man  he  was,  and  what  he  was  and  is 
to  me  I" — as,  in  a  quiet  evening  hour, 
one  may  do  so  and  prattle  so,  without 
offence,  and  possibly  with  profit,  so  it 
may  be  even  if  the  sketches  have  to  be 
done,  and  the  little  explanations  made, 
through  the  medium  of  writing. 

I  do  not  profess  that  the  persons  about 
whom  I  am  to  speak  in  these  papers  were 
all  of  them  more  notable  in  their  lives 
than  others  whom  most  of  my  readers 
may  remember  for  themselves  and  about 
whom  they  might  speak  to  me.  One  or 
two  of  those  about  whom  I  mean  to 
fipeak  were,  indeed,  celebrated  men, 
whose  names  already  figure  in  well- 
known  books,  and  are  held  in  honour 
•by  the  whole  British  nation,  or  even 
beyond  its  bounds.  Nor  will  any  one 
of  those  of  whom  I  shall  speak,  other- 
wise than  incidentally,  be  a  person  that, 
according  to  the  best  knowledge  of  men 
and  their  varieties  I  yet  have,  I  should 
allow  to  have  been  insignificant.  But, 


of  my  worthies,  some  were  merely  local 
worthies,  of  whom  the  greater  part  of  my 
readers  can  never  have  heard,  so  that, 
in  what  I  shall  say  respecting  them,  I 
shall  not  have  the  advantage  of  any  pre- 
liminary interest  in  their  names  or  their 
doings.  Altogether,  including  both  the 
more  known  and  the  less  known,  there 
may  be  about  a  dozen  that  I  shall  think 
it  worth  while  to  make  the  subjects  of 
express  sketches ;  and  these  I  shall  intro- 
duce as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  order  of  the 
time  in  which  they  are  circumstanced  in 
my  memory.  But  I  must  be  allowed  to 
range  as  I  like,  and  to  preface  or  inter- 
rupt my  sketches  of  persons,  when- 
necessary,  with  little  histories  of  things 
and  places. 

ABERDEEN  TILL   THIRTY   TEARS  AGO. 

Aberdeen,  some  thirty  years  ago,  was 
a  city  of  about  60,000  inhabitants — the 
fourth  town  in  Scotland,  for  population, 
as  it  still  is,  after  Glasgow,  Edinburgh, 
and  Dundee.  From  these  larger  towns 
— the  last  only  slightly  larger — Aber- 
deen differs  in  one  obvious  geographical 
respect,  which  may  not  have  been  with- 
out importance  in  forming  its  peculiar 
character  among  the  chief  Scottish  towns. 
It  is  not  built  within  the  shelter  of  any 
firth,  or  ingoing  reach  of  sea,  but  stands 
bleak  and  strong  in  the  middle  of  that 
very  outmost  shoulder  of  Scotland  to 
the  east  which  receives  the  full  broad- 
side of  the  German  Ocean.  It  is  the 
largest  Scottish  town  so  pitilessly  situ- 
ated— although,  north  of  it,  and  within 
the  shire  of  Aberdeen,  the  same  brunt 
of  the  unbroken  sea  is  borne,  nearer  the 
extreme  bend  of  the  shoulder,  by  the 
smaller  towns  of  Peterhead  and  Fraser- 
burgh,  and,  in  the  other  coast-counties 
to  the  south,  as  far  as  the  Firth  of  Forth, 
Stonehaven,  Bervie,  Montrose,  Arbroath, 
and  St.  Andrews,  fear  not  to  imitate  the 
brave  example.  It  must  be  fancy,  I 
suppose  ;  but  I  think  I  have  never  seen 
anywhere  else  so  vast  an  arch  of  open 
sea  as  from  the  beach  near  Aberdeen. 
Eastward  you  gaze ;  not  an  island  or 
a  headland  interrupts  the  monotony  of 
waters  to  the  far  sky-line ;  and  you 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  Known  ; 


know  that,  beyond  that  sky-line,  you 
might  sail  and  sail,  still  without  inter- 
ruption, till  you  reached  Denmark  or 
Norway.  This  also  is  worth  noting — 
that  Aberdeen,  though  a  British  city,  is 
actually  nearer,  by  measured  distance, 
to  either  Norway  or  Denmark  than  to 
London. 

The  time  may  have  been  when  this 
greater  nearness  of  the  Aberdeenshire 
coast  to  the  Scandinavian  countries  than 
to  London  was  a  greater  nearness  not 
only  in  measured  map-distance,  but  also 
for  all  practical  purposes.  Certain  it  is 
that — although  Aberdeen,  as  the  name 
implies,  must  have  been  a  native  Celtic 
settlement  in  the  original  Celtic  times  of 
North  Britain,  and  although  there  are 
traces  that  as  late  as  the  twelfth  century 
Gaelic  was  in  use  but  a  few  miles  inland 
from  Aberdeen,  and  although  to  this 
day  the  western  and  mountainous  parts 
of  Aberdeenshire  are  fastnesses  of  the 
Gaelic — yet,  as  far  back  as  memory  can 
go,  Aberdeen  itself  and  the  adjacent 
tracts  of  coast  must  have  been  about 
the  most  thoroughly  Scandinavianized 
portion  of  all  Scotland.  The  submerged 
Celtic  influence,  I  doubt  not,  exists 
there,  as  I  believe  it  exists  throughout 
all  Scotland,  and  all  England  to  boot,  to 
an  extent  that  has  never  yet  been  suffi- 
ciently appreciated ;  but,  in  some  re- 
spects, it  must  be  more  submerged  there, 
or  more  disguised,  than  in  most  other 
districts  of  the  Scottish  Lowlands.  In 
that  colonization,  however,  whether 
purely  Scandinavian  or  not,  which  sub- 
merged or  disguised  or  all  but  oblite- 
rated the  aboriginal  North  British  Celts 
in  this  part  of  the  Scottish  coast,  there 
must  have  been  some  now  unascertain- 
able  peculiarity.  The  Aberdeen-men, 
including  the  men  of  the  Lowland  part 
of  the  shire  as  well  as  of  the  town,  are 
and  have  always  been,  since  there  has 
been  talk  of  them  at  all,  a  breed  diifering 
in  some  respects  from  the  rest  of  the 
Scottish  Lowlanders.  For  one  thing, 
the  rest  of  Scotland,  though  it  makes 
much  of  them  exoterically,  almost  dis- 
owns them  esoterically,  on  account  of 
their  dialect.  There  is  no  end  to  the 
jokes  among  the  Scotch  generally  as  to 


the  pronunciation  of  the  Aberdonians  ; 
and  one  of  the  best  of  the  jokes  is  that 
every  Aberdonian  who  has  left  Aberdeen 
has  a  firm  persuasion  that  it  has  been 
given  to  him  in  particular  to  leave  his 
dialect  behind  him.  "There  was  never 
a  man  that  ever  came  out  of  Aberdeen 
that  lost  the  Aberdeen  accent  except 
myself ;  Sandy  Davidson  left  Aberdeen 
at  the  same  time  that  I  did,  and  he 
speaks  like  a  sow  yet " — such  is  one 
of  the  legends  of  an  Aberdonian  in 
Edinburgh,  every  word  being  pronouncd 
Aberdonice,  in  a  way  that  no  spelling 
could  indicate.  This  is  exaggeration; 
but  it  is  certain  that  a  line  could  be 
drawn  comprehending  an  irregular  cir- 
cuit of  country  round  Aberdeen,  all  the 
ruder  natives  of  which  pronounce  every 
wh  as  /  and  every  oo  as  ee,  while  even 
the  civilized  natives,  who  are  emanci- 
pated from  these  oddities  and  use  the 
formal  English,  retain  a  broad  Doric 
tone,  by  which  other  Scots,  themselves 
far  enough  from  the  Southern  standard, 
can  at  once  recognise  them.  How  this 
problem  of  the  origin  of  the  Aberdeen 
dialect  is  to  be  settled  ethnology  has 
never  yet  shown,  and,  probably,  will 
never  show.  Was  there  any  part  of  the 
Scandinavian  region,  or  of  the  allied 
Teutonic — for  they  say  Flemings  came 
to  Aberdeenshire  as  well  as  Scandina- 
vians— from  which  the  peculiarities  of/ 
for  wh  and  ee  for  oo  could  have  been 
imported  ready-made  ]  Or,  after  all,  was 
it  the  retiring  Gaels,  in  their  anger,  that 
left  these  peculiarities  as  a  fatal  bequest 
to  their  Scandinavian  spoilers,  as  well 
as  their  town  of  Aberdeen,  and  some 
stray  Celtic  words  which  may  still  be 
picked  out  in  the  Aberdonian  vocabu- 
lary, and  are  found  nowhere  else  among 
the  Scotch — as,  for  example,  the  verb 
conach,  meaning  "  to  spoil  ?  " 

Scandinavians,  Flemings,  or  whatever 
they  were  that  first  planted  the  present 
Aberdonian  breed  among  Ptolemy's 
Taixaloi  in  those  parts,  they  must  have 
found  the  site  of  their  chief  town  al- 
ready fixed  for  them.  There  is  a  point 
on  the  coast  at  which  two  Aberdeen- 
shire rivers — the  Dee  and  the  Don — 
discharge  themselves  into  the  sea  quite 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


55 


close  to  each  other,  after  long  separate 
courses  from  the  west  and  from  the 
north-west.  There  is  a  diiference  be- 
tween the  look  and  character  of  these 
two  rivers,  exactly  like  that  which  the 
terrible  old  rhyme  commemorates  be- 
tween the  two  rivers  of  the  Border — 
the  Tweed  and  the  Till  :— 

"  Tweed  says  to  Till, 
'  "What  gars  you  rin  sae  still  ?' 
Till  says  to  Tweed, 
'  Though  ye  rin  wi'  speed, 
And  I  rin  slaw, 
Yet,  whare  ye  drown  ae  man,' 
I  drown  twa.'" 

The  Dee,  rising  far  in  the  Highlands 
of  the  west,  and  in  the  upper  parts  of 
its  course  flowing  and  falling  through 
some  of  the  most  magnificent  scenery 
in  Scotland,  is  a  rapid  river  throughout, 
and  even  in  the  lowest  and  tamest  part 
of  fts  course  has  a  gay,  sprightly, 
ingenuous  look.  The  Don,  of  snorter 
course,  and  taking  its  rise  from  a  high 
peatland  rather  than  from  a  real  moun- 
tain-range, is,  in  the  latter  part  of  its 
course,  a  solemn,  dark,  malignant-looking 
river,  with  some  gloomily  -  romantic 
spots  on  its  banks.  The  distance  be- 
tween the  mouths  of  the  two  rivers  is 
about  two  miles ;  but  the  tradition  is 
that  at  one  time  the  distance  was  much 
less,  and  that  the  Don  has  changed  the 
spot  of  its  outlet.  Between  these  two 
rivers  is  the  site  of  Aberdeen — this,  its 
more  usual  name,  literally  meaning  in 
Celtic  "the  mouth  of  the  Dee,"  while 
the  alternative  "  Aberdon,"  sometimes 
found  in  old  writings,  and  still  pre- 
served in  the  adjective  form,  may  imply 
equally  "the  mouth  of  the  Don."  It 
is  to  the  Dee,  however,  that  the  town 
principally  belongs — only  straggling,  by 
means  of  its  northern  suburbs,  to  the 
Don,  where  these  suburbs  end  in  a 
special  little  town,  called  "  Old  Aber- 
deen" for  distinction's  sake,  and  be- 
cause it  is  now  the  more  venerable  in 
appearance,  though  it  is  really  the  true 
' '  Aberdon,"  and  a  later  formation  of 
Scottish  history  than  the  main  town  on 
the  Dee.  But  the  name  Aberdeen,  in 
ordinary  usage,  always  includes  the 
smaller  town  as  well  as  the  larger. 


Had   the  Aberdonians  of  old  times 
been  ambitious  to  build  their  town  of 
stone,  they  had  the  hardest  and  most 
durable  building-stone  in  the  world — 
the    now  famous   Aberdeen   granite — 
under  their  very  feet.     Almost  wher- 
ever you  quarry  in  Aberdeenshire,  you 
come  upon  the  primitive  granite — either 
the  grey  kind,  of  which  there  are  great 
masses  close  to  Aberdeen  itself,  or  th« 
red  kind,  which  is  common  near  Peter- 
head.     But  the  granite,    though   thus 
native  and  'offering  itself,   must  have 
been  too   obdurate   a   material  for  all 
save  the  clumsiest  rough-work  of  those 
times ;   and  hence   the  first  Aberdeen 
that  heaves  into  the  sight  of  history — 
say.  about  the  eleventh  century — is,  as 
far  as   the   eye  can  discern  it,  not  a 
prototype  of  the  present  granite-city  at 
all,  but  a  town  of  rubble,   woodwork 
and  thatch,  with  some  church,  or  other 
large   edifice,   here   and  there,    of  im- 
ported   ashlar    or    freestone.      If   any 
edifice    was    built    completely   of    the 
native  granite,   it  may  have  been  the 
Castle — a  building  which  once  existed, 
and  which  has  bequeathed  its  name  to 
the  site  on  which  it  stood,  but  of  which 
no  vestige  has  remained  within  the  last 
five   hundred  years.      It   was   a  great 
thing  for  Aberdeen  when  the  Scottish 
king,  Alexander  I.,  in  1122,  made  it  a, 
cathedral  town,   by  transferring  to  it 
the    seat   of    one    of    the    old    Celtic 
bishoprics.     It  was  perhaps   a  greater 
thing  still  when  William  the  Lion  fa- 
voured the  town  by  sometimes  keeping 
his  court  there,  and  by  giving  it  certain 
charters  of  privilege  (1179).     Thence- 
forward we  hear  of  it  more  and  more 
as   the   most  important  burgh  of  the 
Scottish  north-east.     In  the  time  of  the 
Wars   of   Independence,    Wallace   was 
here,    stirring    up    the    north,    giving 
despatches  in  behalf  of  trade  with  the 
Hanse  towns  to  some  Aberdeen  skippers, 
and  hanging  some  Aberdeen  burgesses 
for  deficient  patriotism  ;  near  to  Aber- 
deen  Robert  Bruce  gained  one  of  his 
early  victories  over  the  English  (1306)  ; 
and   so   long  and   so  grievously,  after 
Bruce' s  accession,  did  an  English  gar- 
rison   hold    the    Castle    of    Aberdeen 


56 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  Known; 


aforesaid,  that,  when  the  citizens  won 
it  back,  they  determined  to  have  no 
temptation  of  a  castle  among  them  any 
more,  and  razed  the  tyrannous  fabric 
to  the  ground.  In  1320  was  begun  the 
building,  with  ashlar  stone,  and  with 
the  help  of  the  best  architectural  skill 
that  Scotland  could  then  command,  of 
the  Cathedral  of  Old  Aberdeen,  which 
it  took  more  than  a  century  to  com- 
plete, and  which  still  exists,  the  most 
venerable  antiquity  of  the  place.  In 
1333  there  was  a  burning  by  an  in- 
vading English  fleet  of  all  of  the  ancient 
town  that  could  be  burnt.  A  relic 
from  those  old  days  of  contest  with  the 
English  invasion,  and  an  express  com- 
memoration of  the  zeal  of  the  Aber- 
donians  in  the  cause  of  the  Bruce 
kings,  is  that  French  motto  of ^  "  Bon- 
Accord,"  which  figures  in  the  arms  of 
the  town  to  this  day,  and  is  even  a 
fancy  name  for  the  town  itself.  The 
year  1411  was  a  memorable  year  in  the 
history  of  the  town ;  for  in  that  year  it 
was  that  the  great  Celtic  chieftain, 
Donald  of  the  Isles,  raging  southward, 
with  all  the  north-west  of  Scotland  at 
his  back,  to  overturn  the  government 
and  reconvert  the  country  into  a  Gaelic 
chaos,  resolved  to  take  Aberdeen  on 
his  way.  According  to  the  old  local 
ballad, 

"  To  hinder  this  proud  enterpryse, 

The  stout  and  niichtie  Earl  of  Mar, 
With  all  his  men  in  arms,  did  ryse, 

Even  frae  Crugarf  to  Craigievar  ; 

And  down  the  side  of  Don  richt  far 
Angus  and  Mearns  did  a'  convene 

To  fecht.  or  Donald  cam  sae  nar 
The  royal  bruch  of  Abirdene." 

Foremost  among  these  opposing  forces, 
as  in  duty  bound,  were  the  citizens  of 
the  threatened  town,  under  their  provost, 
Sir  Eobert  Davidson.  They  met  the 
tremendous  Celt  at  a  place  called  Harlaw 
on  Donside,  about  fourteen  miles  from 
Aberdeen  ;  and  there  they  thrashed  him, 
smashed  him,  and  drove  him  into  flight 
and  ruin  —  saving  Scotland  from  the 
Celtic  relapse,  and  gaining  a  victory 
which  was  for  that  small  country  the 
counterpart  of  what  Charles  Martel's 
victory  over  the  Saracens'  had  been  for 


all  Europe.  But  it  cost  the  Aberdonians 
dear ;  and  to  this  day  Harlaw  is  a  word 
to   stir  their  memories.      Among  the 
many  slain  was   their  brave   provost, 
Davidson.     Because  he  died  there,  his 
name  yet  lives  and  is  associated  with 
Harlaw.     I  have  myself  stood  by  his 
tomb   in  old  St.  Nicholas  Church  in 
Aberdeen,  ere  that  ancient  fabric  was 
pulled  down — and,  when  it  was  pulled 
down,  such  walls,  for  thickness,  and  for 
the  tenacity  against  pickaxe  of  the  cement 
and  concrete  in  the  middle  of  them,  no 
mason  of  our  degenerate  days  even  in 
that  granite  district  had  ever  seen — and 
I  have  fancied  his  skeleton  still  lying 
underneath,  as  I  doubt  not  it  did,  with 
the  fatal  clefts  from  Harlaw  on  its  ribs 
or  skulL     Mr.  Hawthorne,  I  see,  has 
been  remarking  on  the  absence  of  very 
antique  tombstones  in  the  churches  and 
churchyards  of  this  country,  and   has 
mentioned  it  as  surprising  to  him  that  he 
has  seen  perhaps  as  old  monuments  of  that 
sort  in  Puritan  New  England  as  in  Great 
Britain.      He  is  unaccountably  wrong. 
In  the  common  churchyard-wall  of  that 
same  St.  Nicholas  Church  in  Aberdeen 
I  have  deciphered  with  my  own  eyes 
a  tombstone-inscription  which  was  cut 
in  hard  blue  stone  fifty  years  before 
Columbus  discovered  America. 

Even  before  Harlaw  was  fought,  the 
little  coast-town  between  the  Dee  and 
the  Don  had  somehow  won  the  fancy  of 
such  rude  muses  as  then  cared  to  seek  a 
settlement  in  Scotland,  and  were  looking 
about  in  it  for  a  suitable  spot  or  two. 
The  poet  Barbour — Chaucer's  contem- 
porary, and  the  earliest  man  of  letters 
of  whom  Scotland  can  distinctly  boast — 
had  been  Archdeacon  of  Aberdeen. 
Many  of  those  who  fought  at  Harlaw 
must  have  remembered  him  well  But 
it  was  after  the  little  town  of  Old  Aber- 
deen added  an  actual  University  to  its 
Cathedral  —  King's  College  and  Uni- 
versity, founded  in  1494  by  noble 
Bishop  Elphinstone,  who  got  queer  old 
Hector  Boece  of  Dundee,  that  exces- 
sively Scotch  Herodotus,  to  come  and 
be  its  first  Principal — it  was  then  that 
Aberdeen  began  to  give  bed  and  board 
to  the  Muses.  It  is  no  difficult  thin" 


Or,  Eecollections  of  Three  Cities. 


57 


thenceforward  to  imagine  the  nourishing 
little  community,  already  organized  into 
more  than  the  mere  embryo  of  all  that 
Aberdeen  has  been  since — in  the  first 
place,  the  detached  little  subsidiary  town, 
with  its  Cathedral  and  its  fine  arch-roofed 
College,  its  quiet  ecclesiastical  and  aca- 
demic look,  and  its  farmings  and  Don 
salmon-fishings  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Cathedral  and  College  revenues  ;  and, 
apart  from  this  by  a  mile,  but  for  all 
purposes  really  keeping  hold  of  it,  the 
main  commercial  burgh  of  Dee-mouth — 
a  nest  df  streets  along  the  Dee,  and  now 
straggling  in  wood  and  granite  over  the 
convenient  hills  and  grounds  adjacent — 
accommodating  its  population  of  David- 
sons, Menzieses,  Lesleys,  Duns,  Chal- 
merses, Collisons,  Lawsons,  Mallisons, 
Grays,  Eeids,  Eosses,  Eutherfords,  Jacks, 
Forbeses,  Watsons,  Eobertsons,  Cullens, 
Cruickshanks,  Burnetts,  Jaffrays,  Leyses, 
Keiths,  Gordons,  Inneses,  Skenes,  Jamie- 
sons,  Johnstones,  Strachans,  and  others 
of  similar  and  still  as  familiar  names,  all 
having  their  definite  relations  to  each 
other  as  bailies  of  the  town,  tradesmen- 
burgesses,  and  what  not,  and  some  of 
them  relations  also  with  the  country 
round  as  themselves  Iair4s  or  kinsmen 
of  lairds,  but  all  doing  their  best  collec- 
tively to  keep  up  the  leisurely  prosperity 
of  the  town,  and  especially  that  shipping- 
trade  with  France,  with  the  Low-Coun- 
tries, with  Norway,  Denmark,  and  in- 
deed all  parts  of  the  North  Sea  and  the 
Baltic,  for  which  Aberdeen  had  had  a 
great  name  from  time  immemorial,  and 
which  gave  it  the  timber,  the  tar,  the 
little  iron  and  the  casks  of  wine  it 
needed,  in  exchange  for  its  wool,  its 
matchless  hand-knit  woollen  hose,  its 
hides,  its  grain,  its  cured  fish,  its  bits  of 
granite,  and  its  other  saleable  odds  and 
ends.  In  this,  the  larger  town,  there 
were  excellent  stone  churches  and  other 
buildings,  a  great  market  square,  and  a 
fine  town-cross — houses  also  of  Grey 
Friars,  Black  Friars,  and  Carmelites ; 
but  the  headquarters  of  the  Aberdonian 
muses  were  as  yet  over  in  the  Cathedral 
suburb.  Two  things  were  wanted  in 
the  sixteenth  century  to  change  the 
structure  of  the  Aberdeen  of  the  fifteenth 


into  that  of  the  seventeenth  and  of 
the  tune  subsequent.  These  were  the 
Eeformation,  and  the  foundation  of 
Marischal  College  in  the  main  town. 
Both  came  in  due  tune — the  second, 
indeed,  as  a  consequence  of  the  first. 
Somehow  or  other  Aberdeen  got  its 
Eeformation  as  well  as  the  rest  of  Scot- 
land ;  and  there  must  have  been  a  day 
when  the  Vatican  heard,  with  an  amount 
of  emotion  proportionate  to  the  moment- 
ousness  of  the  occasion,  that  Dee-mouth 
and  the  district  round  had  "cuistaff" 
the  Italian  connexion.  But  the  process 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  one  of  great 
agony  to  the  natives.  They  did  what 
was  necessary  in  the  way  of  destruction, 
and  no  more — leaving  considerable  re- 
mains of  latent  Eoman  Catholicism  in 
the  shire ;  and  we  hear  of  poor  old 
fellows  who  had  been  White  Friars  or 
Grey  Friars  till  they  were  turned  adrift, 
lingering  out  their  lives  peacefully  as 
"servants"  in  the  houses  of  well-to-do 
citizens.  One  effect  of  the  Eeformation, 
such  as  it  was,  must  have  been  to  make 
the  Cathedral  suburb  less  important 
relatively  to  the  main  burgh  than  it 
had  been.  And  the  old  equilibrium  was 
even  more  disturbed  when,  in  1593, 
George  Keith,  Earl  Marischal,  founded 
for  the  burgh  a  new  College — Marischal 
College  and  University— intended  to 
proceed  more  according  to  the  new  Pro- 
testant lights  than  was  expected  of  the 
neighbouring  College  of  the  old  Bishop. 
From  that  day  till  but  a  year  or  two  ago, 
Aberdeen  had  the  extraordinary  distinc- 
tion of  requiring  for  itself,  apart  from 
the  other  Scottish  towns,  as  many  Uni- 
versities as  served  for  the  whole  of 
England  —  to  wit,  two  Universities, 
within  twenty  minutes  of  each  other. 
So  vast  are  the  intellectual  appetencies 
of  a  population  that  lives  on  the  grey 
granite!  But  the  "new  lights"  of 
Marischal  College  at  the  time  of  its 
foundation  were  of  the  strangest.  Among 
them  were  witch-burnings.  Aberdeen, 
in  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  and 
the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth,  seems 
to  have  been  the  witch-burningest  place 
in  the  whole  world.  In  the  single  year 
159G-7  twenty-three  women  and  one 


58 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  Known  ; 


man  were  burnt  there  for  witchcraft. 
The  man's  name  was  Thomas  Leys;  and 
the  "  dittay  and  accusation "  against 
him  ran  thus  : — "  Upon  Halloween  last 
"  bypast,  at  twelve  hours  at  even  or 
• "  thereby,  thou,  the  said  Thomas  Leys, 
"  accompanied  with  umwhile  Janet  Wish- 
"art,  Isobel  Cocker,  Isobel  Monteith, 
"Katharine  Mitchell,  sorcerers  and 
"  witches,  with  ane  great  number  of 
"  ither  witches,  cam  to  the  market  and 
"  fish  cross  of  Aberdeen,  under  the  con- 
"  duct  and  guiding  of  the  Devil,  present 
"  with  you  all  in  company,  playing 
"  before  you  on  his  kind  of  instruments. 
"  Ye  all  dansit  about  baith  the  said 
"  cross  and  the  meal-market  ane  lang 
"  space  of  time ;  in  the  whilk  devil's- 
"  dance  thou,  the  said  Thomas,  was 
"  foremost  and  led  the  ring,  and  dang 
"the  said  Katharine  Mitchell  because 
"  she  spoilt  your  dance  and  ran  not  so 
"  fast  about  as  the  rest — testifiet  by  the 
"  said  Katharine  Mitchell,  wha  was 
"  present  with  thee  at  the  time  foresaid, 
"  dansin  with  the  Devil."  It  cost  the 
town  21.  13s.  4d.  (Scots  money)  in 
peats,  tar-barrels,  fir  and  coals,  including 
the  fee  of  John  Justice,  the  hangman, 
to  burn  Leys,  and  nearly  121.  to  burn 
Janet  Wishart  and  Isobel  Cocker — part 
of  this  last  sum,  however,  being  spent 
in  "four  fadoms  of  tows"  (i.e.  ropes), 
required  at  the  same  time  for  trailing 
through  the  streets  the  '  dead  body  of 
Isobel  Montaith,  who  had  hanged  her- 
self in  prison.  All  this  and  much  more 
of  the  same  sort  occurred  but  a  few 
years  before  the  accession  of  James  VI. 
of  Scotland  to  the  English  throne  as 
James  I. ;  and  it  is  a  speculation  of 
Mr.  Charles  Knight  that  if — as  he  sees 
ground  for  believing — Shakespeare  was 
in  Aberdeen  in  October  1601,  along 
with  that  company  of  his  fellow-actors 
and  partners  from  London  who  are 
known  to  have  then  visited  the  town, 
and  to  have  been  entertained  by  the 
authorities,  he  may  have  caught  up 
some  of  the  haggard  particulars  of  these 
local  witchcraft  trials,  and  interwoven 
them  with  those  other  curiously  accurate 
impressions  of  that  whole  Scottish  region 
which  appeared  immediately  afterwards 


in  his  play  of  Macbeth.  Shakespeare, 
however,  did  not  need  to  go  so  far  from 
home  for  his  witchcraft.  There  was 
plenty  of  it,  if  not  quite  of  the  extreme 
"  blasted-heath  "  type,  in  contemporary 
England.  It  is,  therefore,  on  the  ground 
of  a  wider  interest  that  the  question 
whether  Shakespeare  was  ever  in  Aber- 
deen is  felt  to  be  so  thrillingly  impor- 
tant. Is  it  not  the  tendency  of  our 
time  to  withdraw  one  extraordinary 
phenomenon  after  another  from  the 
sphere  of  the  miraculous,  by  showing 
how  in  each  case  a  perfectly  natural 
explanation  may  be  found  ]  "What  argu- 
ment, then,  could  be  stronger  for  the 
probability  of  Shakespeare's  visit  to 
Aberdeen  than  that,  by  this  supposition, 
we  should  solve  the  problem  of  his 
marvellous  genius  and  bring  it  at  once 
on  this  side  of  the  miraculous  ?  If 
Shakespeare  was  in  Aberdeen,  he  could 
not  choose  but  attend  a  lecture  or  two 
at  Marischal  College.  At  all  events  he 
must  have  stood  in  the  middle  of  the 
Castle-gate  and  looked  amazedly  round 
him. 

The  seventeenth  century  was  a  trou- 
blous time  for  Aberdeen.  The  city  had 
settled  down,  after  the  Eeformation,  into 
decent  substantial  Presbyterian  ways,  as 
they  were  then  nationally  arranged.  With 
these  first  Presbyterian  and  Calvinistic 
ways  the  Aberdonians  would  probably 
have  remained  content ;  but,  when 
James,  after  his  accession  to  the  English 
throne,  began  gradually  to  introduce 
changes  into  the  model  of  the  Scottish 
Kirk,  so  as  to  bring  it  into  the  form  of 
a  modified  Episcopacy,  there  seems  to 
have  been  something  in  the  dispositions 
of  the  Aberdonians — or,  perhaps,  some- 
thing in  that  double  charge  of  the 
academical  element  which  was  so  im- 
portant a  peculiarity  in  the  social  struc- 
ture of  the  place — that  disposed  Aber- 
deen and  its  neighbourhood  to  acquiesce 
in  the  change  more  easily  and  heartily 
than  most  of  the  rest  of  Scotland. 
Aberdeen  got  back  its  Bishop ;  and 
round  this  bishop  of  moderate  powers 
there  clustered,  more  as  his  cronies  than 
as  his  inferiors,  the  city-clergy,  and  the 
professors  of  the  two  Colleges,  now 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


59 


harmonious  enough,  among  themselves, 
forming  a  small  influential  and  scholarly 
body,  partly  helping  the  magistrates  in 
the  strict  official  discipline  of  the  town, 
partly  venting  their  didactic  energy  on 
large  audiences  from  their  pulpits  and 
lecturing-chairs,  and  partly  cultivating 
in  private,  in  extremely  good  Latinity, 
and  with  the  help  of  a  local  printing- 
press,  the  theological  and  other  Dutch- 
built  Muses.  Ah  !  if  you  would  enjoy 
the  true  otium  cum  dignitate,  you  should 
have  lived  in  the  earlier  half  of  the 
seventeenth  century  and  been  one  of 
those  "  Aberdeen  Doctors  "  of  whom 
the  whole  Scottish  world  at  home  heard 
so  much,  and  the  fame  of  whom  stray 
Scots  in  London  would  then  try  to  force 
down  the  throats  of  unbelieving  English- 
men in  some  circles  when  the  talk  be- 
came irritatingly  monotonous  about 
Oxford  and  Cambridge.  How  would 
you  like  to  have  been  Dr.  William 
Forbes,  or  Dr.  John  Forbes  of  Corse, 
or  Dr.  Robert  Barron,  or  Dr.  William 
Lesley,  or  Dr.  James  Sibbald,  or  Dr. 
Alexander  Scroggie — round  which  and 
other  theological  doctors,  and  meeting 
them  every  day  in  the  cosy  streets  or  in 
their  college- walks,  were  still  other  local 
luminaries  of  law,  medicine,  mathe- 
matics, and  philosophy,  with  whose 
names  I  will  not  trouble  you,  but  who 
were,  almost  to  a  man,  Doctors  too  1 
For  one  who  would  have  a  leisurely, 
massive  enjoyment  of  life,  with  enough 
of  occupation  but  not  at  high-pressure, 
and  with  only  the  drawback  of  an 
Aberdeen  accent,  it  must  have  been  no 
bad  society  to  live  in.  Sometimes  there 
would  arrive  from  London,  on  a  brief 
visit  to  his  native  place,  and  bringing 
with  him  a  budget  of  welcome  London 
gossip,  one  of  those  Aberdonians  whom 
a  hard  fate  or  irrepressible  philanthropic 
motives  had  removed  from  the  quiet 
pastures  of  their  youth  and  led  into  exile 
in  the  far  southern  Babylon.  Such  a 
one  was  the  king's  physician  Arthur 
Johnstone,  the  famous  Latin  poet  of  his 
day ;  and  such  a  one  was  that  hardly 
less  famous  Alexander  Ross,  the  king's 
chaplain,  whose  numerous  works  had 
been  read  over  by  the  "ancient  sage 


philosopher"  in  Hudibras,  and  by  no 
mortal  else.  Nay,  and  resident  in  the 
town,  and  one  of  the  most  respected  and 
well-to-do  of  its  natives,  was  the  only 
man  in  all  Scotland  who  then  called 
himself,  or  would  now  be  called,  an 
Artist  —  the  portrait-painter  George 
Jarnesone,  a  pupil  of  Rubens.  What- 
ever noble  or  other  distinguished  person 
in  the  land  wanted  to  have  his  portrait 
painted  had  to  send  for  Jamesone  ;  and, 
if  one  may  judge  by  the  number  of 
portraits  from  his  hand  that  survive, 
he  must  have  painted  at  one  tune  or 
another  nearly  all  the  eminent  Scotch- 
men of  his  age.  He  and  the  doctors 
of  the  two  Colleges  must  have  been  on 
the  best  of  terms ;  he  would  go  to  their 
houses  of  an  evening,  and  they  would 
drop  in  at  his  of  a  morning,  and  see  him 
brush  and  pallet  in  hand.  NOT  can  the 
town-clerk  Spalding,  whose  graphic  re- 
gisterings,  in  his  own  homely  language, 
of  the  occurrences  of  his  time  are  now 
so  much  prized  by  antiquarians,  have 
been  other  than  personally  among  his 
fellow-citizens ;  a  most  interesting  and 
well-liked  man.  In  short,  in  those  days, 
Aberdeen,  for  a  town  in  so  Hyperborean 
a  latitude  and  so  exposed  to  the  east 
winds,  must  have  been  an  exceptionally 
comfortable  place.  The  English  satirist 
Cleveland's  couplet  about  Scotland,  writ- 
ten not  long  afterwards  in  the  fury  of 
his  Royalist  detestation  of  the  Scotch  for 
what  they  had  done  to  Charles,  is,  or 
ought  to  be,  well-known  : 

"Had   Cain   been   Scot,   God  would   have 

changed  his  doom- 
Not  forced  him  wander,  but  compelled  him 
home." 

From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  couplet  would  have  been  totally 
inapplicable  to  Aberdeen  at  the  time 
when  Cleveland  began  to  write.  All  in 
all,  that  was  the  golden  age  of  the  town 
of  Bon- Accord. 

But  the  convulsion  came.  When,  on 
the  signal  given  by  Jenny  Geddes,  the 
pent-up  Presbyterian  and  Calvinistic 
zeal  of  the  Scottish  nation  blazed  forth 
against  the  Liturgy,  and  that  Episcopacy 
more  stringent  than  the  Anglican,  and 
that  Arminian  theology  which  Laud 


60 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  Known  ; 


and  Charles  were  resolved  to  force  upon 
them,  and  when  the  Covenant  of  resis- 
tance to  the  death  was  sworn  at  Edin- 
burgh and  throughout  the  land,  and  the 
Scots  tore  up  by  the  roots  even  such 
Episcopacy  as  they  had  till  then  put  up 
with,  and  flung  the  roots  over  the 
border,  and  faced  Charles  in  open  war 
rather  than  one  of  them  should  be 
brought  back  again,  there  never  was 
poor  town  in  such  an  unhappy  predica- 
ment as  Aberdeen.  More  stubbornly 
than  any  other  town  and  shire,  the  town 
and  shire  of  Aberdeen  stood  out  against 
the  Covenant ;  and  when,  by  dint  of 
deputations,  finings,  and  dragoonings, 
the  bulk  of  the  population  were  brought 
into  the  general  movement  of  their 
countrymen,  there  was  a  break-up  of 
the  "  happy  family  "  of  the  place,  and  a 
scattering  to  the  winds  of  the  Aberdeen 
Doctors.  The  first  blood  shed,  the  first 
meeting  of  men  and  horse  with  men  and 
horse,  in  the  great  struggle  which  ulti- 
mately involved  the  three  kingdoms,  took 
place  in  those  remote  northern  parts.  The 
Aberdeen  Doctors  having  been  silenced 
and  dispersed,  and  Presbyterianism  ha- 
ving triumphed  in  Scotland,  and  not 
only  assumed  the  rule  there,  but  roused 
by  example  and  contagion  the  Puritan- 
ism of  England  for  its  larger  and  more 
complex  English  movement,  Aberdeen 
did  distinguish  itself  as  a  bond  Jide 
Presbyterian  town — with  men  in  it,  such 
as  Provost  Jaffray,  capable  of  being  of 
some  note,  even  to  Cromwell,  in  the 
management  of  North  British  affairs. 
But  there  remained  a  strong  residuum  of 
Royalism  and  Episcopacy  in  the  shire  ; 
and  so,  after  the  Restoration,  there  was 
an  easier  adaptation  there  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  relapse  than  in  the 
south  and  west  of  Scotland.  We  do 
not  hear  of  many  Aberdeenshire  mar- 
tyrdoms, like  those  of  Ayr,  Eenfrew, 
and  Galloway,  for  "  Christ's  Crown  and 
Covenant,"  and  the  right  of  conventicles. 
The  more  the  pity  !  I,  for  one,  whether 
I  were  to  speak  in  the  interests  of  Pres- 
byterianism or  of  the  best  and  broadest 
Anythingarianism  I  could  find,  should 
be  glad  to  be  able  to  reckon  up  even 
now,  with  the  full  fear  of  Mr.  Mark 


Napier  before  my  eyes,  a  few  of  those 
rudely  carved  gravestones  of  old  ecstatics 
scattered  over  the  Aberdeenshire  moors. 
But  the  cause  of  the  deficiency  of  such 
monuments  may  have  partly  been  that 
there  was  no  Aberdeenshire  Claverhouse 
to  make  them  necessary. 

At  last,  at  the  accession  of  William 
III.,  Scotland,  leaving  the  period  of  her 
actual  life-and-death  troubles  about  Re- 
ligion behind  her,  though  trailing  a  cloud 
of  powerful  recollections  therefrom,  en- 
tered on  the  undisturbed  possession  of 
her  Shorter  Catechism,  and  of  that  Pres- 
byterian system  of  parish  Kirk-sessions, 
district  Presbyteries,  periodical  Provin- 
cial Synods,  and  annual  General  Assem- 
blies for  which  she  had  fought  so  hard. 
Save  that  a  remnant  of  the  old  Scot- 
tish Episcopalians  remained  within  her 
bounds  to  experience  their  turn  of 
hard  usage  for  a  time,  and  save  that  the 
Presbyterian  body  itself  at  length  gave 
off  little  moons  or  secessions,  and  save 
that,  within  the  last  generation  or  two, 
the  Scottish  aristocracy,  almost  to  a  man, 
have  detached  themselves  from,  the  Kirk 
of  their  ancestors  and  gone  over  with- 
out noise  to  the  more  softly-cushioned 
Church  of  England — it  is  the  system 
which  has  continued  to  grip  and  regu- 
late the  collective  social  life  of  Scotland 
down  to  the  present  day.  Aberdeenshire 
started  on  the  career  of  the  eighteenth 
century  pretty  much  in  the  same  condi- 
tion in  these  respects  as  the  rest  of  Scot- 
land— though  with  a  more  than  average 
proportion  of  the  Episcopalian  remnant, 
and  of  the  still  older  Roman  Catholic 
remnant,  in  her  population.  How  the 
town  fared  in  the  earlier  part  of  this 
lazy,  worldly,  unenthusiastic,  but  very 
substantial  century — which,  say  what 
Scotchmen  will  against  it,  was  somehow 
the  birth-time  of  the  most  splendid  men 
of  all  sorts  that  Scotland  has  given  to 
the  world — can  be  seen  only  hazily.  A 
scrap  or  a  glimpse  here  and  there  is  all 
we  have — Provosts  and  Bailies  pottering 
about  the  streets  or  quays,  meeting  for 
their  suppers  of  crab-claws  and  Einnan 
haddocks,  and  keeping  well  in  their 
hands,  under  dependence  on  higher 
powers,  the  business  of  the  close  bo- 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities* 


61 


rough;  the  trade  with  the  Dutch  in- 
creasing, so  that  on  the  one  hand  young 
Aberdonians  go  over  to  Leyden  and 
Kotterdam,  and  on  the  other  Dutch 
families  settle  in  Aberdeen ;  the  city- 
clergy  preaching  to  their  flocks,  and  ex- 
ercising them  in  the  Shorter  Catechism, 
but  gradually,  like  the  rest  of  their 
brethren,  falling  into  that  theology  of 
"cauld  morality"  which  characterized 
the  century,  and  the  coming  prevalence 
of  which,  in  lieu  of  the  true  Evangel  of 
the  better  days,  David  Deans  had  fore- 
seen ;  and,  lastly,  the  two  Colleges,  as 
before,  with  clergymen  chiefly  for  their 
professors,  working  obscurely  on  from  ses- 
sion to  session.  But,  about  the  middle  of 
the  century — whether  owing  to  the  com- 
mercial enlargementwhich  Scotland  then 
began  to  feel  from  the  union  with  Eng- 
land, or  owing  to  more  local  causes — Aber- 
deen again  comes  in  sight  more  roundly 
and  luminously.  To  this  time,  for  exam- 
ple, or  rather  to  a  time  just  a  little  earlier, 
belongs  the  legend — far  from  unimpor- 
tant in  the  history  of  Aberdeen — of  the 
rise  of  the  Hadden  family.  There  was 
a  young  Aberdonian,  named  Alexander 
Hadden,  living  in  the  Windmill-Brae. 
He  was  a  lad  of  pushing  spirit ;  but, 
after  various  trials,  finding  no  opening 
for  him  in  Aberdeen,  he  resolved  to  go 
south  to  seek  his  fortunes.  So,  one 
morning,  he  set  out  with  his  staff  and 
his  bundle,  bidding  farewell  to  Aber- 
deen, But,  when  he  had  got  as  far  as 
the  Bridge  of  Dee,  about  two  miles  on 
his  way,  and  found  himself  on  the  borders 
of  another  county,  he  began  to  waver. 
Some  sound  equivalent  to  the  famous 
"Turn  again,  Whittington"  rang  in 
his  ears.  So,  recollecting  the  oldfreit 
or  superstition  that,  when  you  are 
in  doubt  which  way  to  go,  you  should 
throw  your  staff  as  far  from  you  as  you 
can,  and,  whichever  way  the  head  of  the 
staff  points,  that  is  the  way  you  ought 
to  follow,  he  flung  his  staff  forward  on 
the  Toad  he  was  going.  Lo  !  when  he 
came  up  to  it,  the  head  of  the  staff 
pointed  back  to  Aberdeen.  Back  to 
Aberdeen  he  went,  but  with  rather  a 
heavy  heart,  and  not  sure  but  his  neigh- 
bours mmht  think  him  a  fool.  But  one 


of  his  neighbours  did  not  think  him  a 
fool.  She  was  a  good  old  woman,  also 
of  the  Windmill-Brae,  who  had  five 
pounds  of  her  own.  She  lent  the  young 
man  the  five  pounds,  and  told  him  to 
be  sure  to  be  at  the  market  on  the  Green 
very  early  the  next  Friday  morning,  so 
as  to  catch  the  country-people  on  their 
first  arrival  there  with  their  week's 
supply  of  woollen  hose  for  the  dealers. 
The  hose-trade  was  then  still  the  leading 
business  in  Aberdeen ;  and  this  part  of  it 
— the  purchase  of  the  stockings  from 
the  country-wives  who  had  woven  them 
— was  conducted  by  chaffering  in  the 
open  air  of  a  large  space  of  low  level; 
then  still  called  "  the  Green,"  though  it 
was  enclosed  within  old  houses.  The 
next  Friday  morning,  accordingly,  he 
was  on  the  Green  at  what  he  thought  an 
early  hour.  But  he  had  not  been  early 
enough ;  for  "  old  Bailie  Dingwall  had 
been  there  before  him,"  and  the  hose 
were  all  bought  up.  But,  the  next 
Friday,  he  knew  better,  and,  being  in 
the  market  very  early,  he  had  done  a 
good  stroke  in  hose  before  Bailie  Ding- 
wall  came.  And  so  from  this  beginning 
he  grew  and  he  grew  till,  marrying  well 
— I  think  it  was  the  wide-awake  Bailie 
Dingwall's  daughter  that  he  married — 
he  became  the  most  powerful  and  pros- 
perous public  man  of  the  place,  and  the 
founder  of  that  family  of  the  Haddens 
whose  names  for  three  generations  were 
household-words  in  Aberdeen,  whose 
marriages  and  intermarriages  grasped 
the  undisputed  government  of  the  mu- 
nicipality till  the  time  of  the  Eeform 
Bill,  and  by  whose  enterprise,  even  be- 
fore the  last  century  closed,  Aberdeen 
had  mills  and  manufactories  and  smoking 
chimney-stalks.  Two  of  the  sons  of  thalj 
original  autocthonous  Hadden,  I  remem- 
ber well  as  very  old  men — old  Provost 
James  Hadden  and  his  brother,  Provost 
Gavin  Hadden,  who  had  been  Provosts 
of  the  town  in  and  out  during  all  living 
memory  ;  but  the  legend  of  the  rise  of 
the  family  came  to  me  not  so  very  long 
ago,  at  the  time  of  a  commercial  crash 
which  befell  its  third  and  fourth  genera- 
tions, and  under  which  Aberdeen  shook 
and  staggered.  It  came  to  me  in  the 


62 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  Known  ; 


form  of  a  little  twopenny  tract  then  put 
forth  by  an  aged  butler  who  had  been  a 
servant  of  the  family  all  his  life,  and 
whose  agony  at  a  catastrophe  which  was 
to  him  as  if  the  heavens  had  fallen, 
made  him  garrulous  as  to  what  he  re- 
membered or  had  heard  of.  I  wish  I 
could  lay  my  hands  on  the  tract  now, 
for  I  think  it  was  the  best  bit  of  his- 
torical literature  on  a  small  scale  I  have 
ever  met  with. 

It  was  during  the  first  generation  of 
the  Hadden  dynasty  in  Aberdeen — cor- 
responding with  the  period  of  the  Dun- 
das  despotism  for  Scotland  in  general — 
that  the  town  and  the  two  colleges 
twinkled  with  a  second  cluster  of  intel- 
lectual lights,  perhaps  a  little  better 
known  now,  because  of  their  nearness 
to  our  own  time,  than  their  predecessors, 
the  forementioned  "  Aberdeen  Doctors  " 
of  the  seventeenth  century.  Scotland, 
indeed,  had  begun,  though  rather  later 
after  the  Union  than  might  have  been 
expected,  to  take  a  conscious  share,  on 
her  own  ground,  in  the  thought  and 
literature  of  Great  Britain  as  a  whole. 
Edinburgh,  as  all  know,  had  become  an 
important  literary  metropolis  for  the 
northern  part  of  the  island,  distinct  from 
London  and  four  hundred  miles  distant, 
and  containing — in  Hume,  Adam  Smith, 
Dr.  Eobertson,  and  others,  permanently 
or  chiefly  resident  there — a  group  of  men 
that  could  not  but  attract  the  eye  even 
after  it  had  rested  on  the  larger  contem- 
porary London  group  in  the  midst  of 
which  stood  Dr.  Johnson.  But  all  the 
new  intellectual  activity  of  North  Britain 
was  not  concentrated  in  Edinburgh. 
Glasgow  had  a  little  group  of  her  own  ; 
and  there  was  a  third  little  group  in 
Aberdeen.  Interchanges  of  men,  in- 
deed, took  place  between  the  three  cities, 
in  the  form  of  occasional  transferences 
of  Professors  from  one  University  to 
another ;  but,  on  the  whole,  the  three 
groups  existed  apart.  By  far  the  most 
important  man  in  the  Aberdeen  group, 
until  he  was  removed  to  Glasgow  in 
1764,  was  Dr.  Thomas  Eeid  the  meta- 
physician— at  first  minister  of  New 
Machar  parish,  within  a  few  miles  of  the 
town,  and  then  Professor  of  Moral 


Philosophy  in  King's  College.  It  was 
in  Aberdeen  that  Eeid  meditated  and 
matured  that  rich  and  sober  system  of 
philosophy,  in  reply  to  Hume,  which  he 
carried  with  him  to  Glasgow,  and  which, 
as  put  forth  subsequently  in  his  works, 
and  expounded  by  Dugald  Stewart,  and 
imported  into  France  by  Eoyer  Collard, 
has  become  known  among  the  meta- 
physicians of  Europe  as  the  philosophy 
of  the  Scottish  School  While  he  was  still 
in  Aberdeen,  Eeid  gathered  round  him, 
in  a  sort  of  Deipnosophistic  or  philo- 
sophico-convivial  club,  which  met  in 
taverns,  a  number  of  kindred  souls — 
mostly  his  fellow-professors  of  one  or 
other  of  the  two  colleges.  Many  a  jolly 
evening  they  had,  with  Eeid  in  the 
midst  of  them,  of  essays,  and  discus- 
sions, and  savoury  eating,  and  port- 
wine,  and  punch  and  tobacco ;  and,  even 
after  Eeid  removed  to  Glasgow,  the 
club  continued  to  be  an  institution  of  the 
place.  "With  the  names  of  some  of  these 
Aberdeen  Deipnosophists  —  Gregory, 
Gordon,  Ogilvy,  the  two  Skenes,  Ear- 
quhar,  and  even  Dr.  Alexander  Gerard 
— none  but  grubbers  in  forgotten  litera- 
ture can  be  expected  to  be  familiar ; 
but  two  of  them  have  still  left  their 
names  in  men's  mouths.  One  of  these 
'  was  Dr.  George  Campbell,  Principal  of 
Marischal  College,  an  acute  theologian 
and  Kirk-leader  of  his  day,  and  whose 
"  Ecclesiastical  History  "  and,  yet  more, 
his  "  Philosophy  of  Ehetoric,"  still  find 
publishers  and  readers.  The  other,  and 
the  best  known  now  after  Eeid,  if  not 
better  known  to  many,  was  the  poet 
James  Beattie,  Professor  of  Philosophy 
in  Marischal  College  since  1760,  and 
with  as  high  a  reputation  throughout 
the  country  then  for  his  "  Essay  on 
Truth,"  of  which  no  one  thinks  any- 
thing now,  as  for  his  "Minstrel"  and 
other  poems  that  may  still  be  read  with 
pleasure.  As  one  reads  them,  and 
realizes  what  a  tender-natured  man,  if 
not  strong,  Beattie  must  have  been, 
and  with  what  a  vein  of  the  softer 
genius  he  was  touched,  one  cannot  help 
thinking  of  Beattie  among  the  Aber- 
donians  as  a  somewhat  unusual  accident 
of  the  time. 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


63 


"  At  the  close  of  the  day,  when  the  hamlet  is 

still, 
And   mortals  the   sweets  of  forgetfulness 

prove, 
When  nought  but  the  torrent  is  heard  on 

the  hill, 
And  nought  but  the  nightingale's  song  in 

the  grove, 
'Twas  thus,  by  the  cave  of  the  mountain 

afar. 
While  his  harp  rung  symphonious,  a  hermit 

began : 

No  more  with  himself  or  with  nature  at  war, 
He  thought  as  a  sage,  though  he  felt  as  a 

man. 

*         *          *          * 

"  '  'Tis  night,  and  the  landscape  is  lovely  no 
more ; 

I  mourn  ;  but,  ye  woodlands,  I  mourn  not 
for  you  ; 

For  Morn  is  approaching,  your  charms  to 
restore, 

Perfumed  with  fresh  fragrance,  and  glitter- 
ing with  dew : 

Nor  yet  for  the  ravage  of  Winter  I  mourn  : 

Kind  Nature  the  embryo  blossom  will  save  ; 

But  when  shall  Spring  visit  the  mouldering 
urn? 

0,  when  shall  Day  dawn  on  the  night  of  the 
grave?'" 

Artificially  expressed  these  verses,  of 
course,  as  all  British  verses  then  were  ! 
"We  may  be  permitted,  in  particular,  to 
ask  where  near  Aberdeen  Beattie  found 
his  nightingale.  Mavises  are  there, 
and  larks,  and  blackbirds,  and  yellow- 
yorlings,  and  linties  in  plenty,  but  no 
nightingales.  Doubtless  Beattie  found 
the  nightingale  where  he  also  found  the 
"harp  ringing  symphonious" — that  is, 
in  his  own  musical  fancy  and  his  re- 
collections of  books.  But  no  one  can 
read  the  verses,  or  anything  else  of 
Beattie's,  without  finding  real  feeling 
and  sweetness  beneath  the  rhetorical 
artifice.  "Poor  Edwin  was  no  vulgar 
boy ; "  and  that  he  lived  among  the 
tougher-fibred  Aberdonians  so  long,  and 
loved  them  so  well,  and  was  respected 
by  them,  and,  in  his  later  days  of 
despondency  under  domestic  affliction, 
pitied  and  caressed  by  them,  is  credit- 
able to  him  and  to  them.  He  was  not 
a  native  of  Aberdeen,  but  had  come 
thither  in  early  life  from  the  district 
of  the  same  east  coast,  a  little  farther 
south,  where  he  had  been  born. 

Two  visits  of  distinguished  strangers, 
Avhich  Aberdeen  received  while  Camp- 


bell and  Beattie  and  others  of  Reid's 
Deipnosophists  were  its  social  nota- 
bilities, are  duly  recorded  in  its  annals 

Dr.  Johnson's  visit,  along  with  Bozzy, 
when  he  was  on  his  northern  tour  in 
1773;  and  a  flying  visit  of  Burns  in 
1787.  Both  were,  in  their  way,  failures. 
Every  honour  was  shown  to  Johnson, 
and  they  made  him  a  freeman  of  the 
town;  but  the  Deipnosophists  were 
afraid  of  him,  and,  though  they  gathered 
round  him  and  invited  him  to  their 
houses,  were  shy  to  speak  in  his  pre- 
sence. "We  sat  contentedly  at  our 
inn,"  says  Bozzy,  speaking  of  their  last 
night  in  the  town,  "and  Dr.  Johnson 
'  then  became  merry,  and  observed  how 
'  little  we  had  either  heard  or  said  at 
'  Aberdeen — that  the  Aberdonians  had 
'  not  started  a  single  mawkin  (i.e.  hare) 
'  for  us  to  pursue."  I  am  glad  to  be 
able  to  give  a  hitherto  unpublished 
anecdote  of  Johnson's  visit  to  Aberdeen, 
which  partly  redeems  the  credit  of  the 
town,  thus  lowered  by  the  pusillanimity 
of  its  big- wigs.  While  Johnson  was  in 
the  town,  there  was  a  house  in  Huck- 
ster Row  undergoing  the  process  of 
being  "  harled  " — i.  e.  whitewashed  out- 
side with  a  mixture  of  lime  and  gravel. 
Either  because  the  process  interested 
him,  or  because  he  was  in  an  absent  fit, 
the  Doctor,  passing  that  way,  stopped 
underneath  the  ladder  on  which  the 
man  who  was  doing  the  work  stood  with 
his  bucket  of  "harl"  and  his  trowel. 
He  stood  a  long  while — the  man  politely 
ceasing  his  work  so  as  not  to  splash  so 
grand-looking  a  stranger.  But,  being 
short-tempered,  the  man  at  length  got 
tired,  and,  on  Johnson's  perceiving  his 
impatience,  and  calling  up  to  him,  "  I 
hope  I  am  not  in  your  way,  my  man," 
answered  at  once,  "  Fient  a  bit  are 
"  you  in  my  way,  gin  you're  nae  in  your 
"  ain  (Devil  a  bit  are  you  in  my  way,  if 
"  you're  not  in  your  own),"  at  the  same 
resuming  his  work,  and  sending  a  splash 
of  the  "  harl "  from  his  trowel  against 
the  wall,  so  as  to  give  the  Doctor's  coat 
the  benefit  of  the  droppings.  The  anec- 
dote is  no  bad  metaphor  of  the  entire  his- 
tory of  Johnson's  visit  to  those  outlandish 
parts.  But  Burns — who  might  have 


6-4 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  Known  ; 


expected  a  heartier  reception,  and  whose 
father  had  come  from  that  East-Coast 
region,  and  had  left  relatives  there — 
seems  to  have  found  himself  equally  "  in 
his  own  way"  among  the  Aberdonians 
fourteen  years  later.  He  speaks  of  meet- 
ing Mr.  Chalmers,  the  printer,  whom  he 
calls  "  a  facetious  fellow,"  Mr.  Eoss,  "a 
fine  fellow,  like  Professor  Tytler,"  Mr. 
Marshall,  "one  of  the  poetical  minores" 
Mr.  Sheriffs,  "author  of  Jamie  and  Bess, 
a  little  decrepit  body,  with  some  abili- 
ties," Professor  Gordon,  "a  good-natured, 
jolly-looking  Professor,"  and,  above  all, 
the  non-juring  or  Episcopalian  Bishop 
Skinner,  who  was  interesting  to  him  as 
the  son  of  the  author  of  Tullochgorum. 
But  he  does  not  seem  to  have  met  so 
much  hospitality  as  Johnson  among  the 
big- wigs;  and,  with  this  parting  entry 
in  his  journal — "  Aberdeen  a  lazy  town  " 
— he  went  his  way. 

Beattie's  death  occurred  in  1803.  It 
is  about  this  time  that,  for  those  Aber- 
donians whose  own  recollections  can 
date  from  thirty  years  ago,  the  Aber- 
deen of  the  past  may  be  considered  to 
have  come  to  an  end,  and  a  new  and 
more  familiar  Aberdeen  to  have  begun 
its  existence.  For,  thirty  years  ago,  the 
generation  that  had  in  their  youth  known 
Beattie  and  Campbell  and  the  rest  of 
the  eighteenth  century  set,  were  still 
alive  (as,  indeed,  some  stray  survivors 
may  be  alive  yet),  and  through  the 
medium  of  their  memory  the  whole  in- 
tervening period  was  accessible  as  a 
living  tradition.  The  changes  had  been 
many  and  rapid  in  that  period.  Going 
through  the  town,  and  surveying  it  with 
a  view  to  discriminate  the  old  from  the 
new,  one  could  still,  indeed,  pick  out,  by 
the  names  of  streets  and  their  looks, 
the  remaining  skeleton  of  the  old  borough 
as  it  had  been  in  the  eighteenth  century, 
or  even  in  the  preceding  centuries  back 
to  the  days  of  Bruce — the  Windmill- 
Brae,  the  Green,  the  Correction  Wynd, 
the  Netherkirkgate,  the  Broadgate,  the 
Guestrow,  the  Gallowgate,  the  Upper- 
kirkgate,  the  Schoolhill,  the  Woolman- 
hill,  the  spacious  Castlegate  with  its 
cross,  Huckster  Row,  the  Ship  Row, 
Justice  Port,  &c.  &c. — some  of  them 


still  useful  thoroughfares  and  full  of 
shops  among  the  best  in  the  town ;  but 
others  hideous  in  the  squalor  into  which 
they  had  degenerated,  as  the  old  parts 
of  towns  do,  and  doubly  hideous  in  the 
moral  putridity  of  bloated,  bare-armed, 
blaspheming  town -women,  wrangling 
with  drunken  beasts  of  men  at  the 
mouths  of  their  narrow  courts.  To 
go  through  Justice  Port,  even  in  the 
daytime,  was  to  hear,  or  even  to 
have  discharged  upon  you,  within 
one  or  two  minutes,  full  excerpts 
from  that  fetid  wealth  of  anatomical 
and  physiological  words  in  the  British 
vocabulary  which  dictionaries  never 
print;  and  even  Justice  Port  was  as 
nothing  to  a  long  narrow  lane  called  the 
Vennel,  in  whose  double  row  of  ghastly 
houses,  their  windows  stuffed  with  rags 
and  old  hats,  guilt  was  only  more  quiet 
because  more  murderous.  In  no  unfit 
moral  association  with  these  images  of 
the  physically  gruesome  bits  of  the  old 
town,  another  relic  of  a  now  utterly 
past  state  of  society  may  be  mentioned, 
as  having  lingered  longer  into  our  own 
days  in  Aberdeen  than  in  most  other 
towns.  It  is  no  feat  of  memory  with 
many  a  middle-aged  Aberdonian  now 
to  remember  the  last  of  the  Aberdeen 
hangmen.  He  lived  in  a  steep,  stony 
declivity  of  the  town,  off  the  Castlegate, 
called,  from  old  times,  "  the  Hangman's 
Brae,"  from  its  containing  the  hang- 
man's house  ;  and  here,  in  the  long  in- 
tervals of  the  special  acts  of  his  pro- 
fession required  of  him  in  his  old  age, 
he  sold  fish.  Among  the  perquisites 
of  his  office,  in  addition  to  the  salary, 
was  the  right  of  taking  a  fish  gratis  out 
of  every  fish-wife's  creel  on  market- 
days —  a  right  which  the  fish-wives, 
superstitious  of  his  touching  their  creels, 
are  said  to  have  respected  by  always 
heaving  him,  when  he  approached,  one 
of  the  best  fishes  they  had.  But  he 
eluded  observation  as  much  as  possible  ; 
and  there  are  stories  of  respectable 
citizens  encountering,  in  their  morning 
walks  in  the  suburbs,  a  venerable  old 
man,  of  meditative  gait,  and  dressed  in 
black,  with  whom  they  would  hold  pious 
communings  for  a  mile  or  two  without 


Or,  a  Story  of  Three  Cities. 


G5 


knowing  that  it  was  the  hangman.  In 
that  poor  soul's  memory,  too,  as  in  the 
memories  of  many  of  those  among 
whom  he  slunk  about  superannuated, 
must  have  lived  the  recollections  of 
the  rapid  changes  that  had  transmuted 
the  Aberdeen  in  which  he  had  be- 
gun his  craft  in  full  strength  in  front  of 
the  gaol,  into  the  modern  city  in  which 
he  was  hardly  recognisable.  What  ex- 
tension of  building,  in  the  first  place — 
new  piers  and  quays ;  wide  new  streets 
in  all  directions,  the  clean  hard  granite 
of  which,  squarely  dressed  by  the  pick, 
contrasted  with  the  dingier  and  quainter 
granite  of  the  old  parts  of  the  town 
which  they  crossed  and  enclosed  ;  and, 
above  all,  the  splendid  length  of  TJnion- 
street,  running  from  the  Castlegate  west- 
wards for  three-quarters  of  a  mile,  and 
carried  in  the  middle  straight  over  a  great 
dell  by  a  magnificent  bridge  of  one  span  ! 
And  this  extension  of  building  but  in- 
dicated the  increased  population,  the 
increased  trade  and  commerce,  and  the 
increased  wealth,  which  the  city  had  to 
accommodate.  Aberdeen,  as  we  have 
said,  was  now  a  city  of  60,000  inhabi- 
tants. It  contained  mills  and  manu- 
factories, iron-foundries,  brass-foundries, 
comb-works,  rope-works,  and  an  agglo- 
meration of  all  the  minor  trades  that 
can  be  carried  on  in  shops ;  along  its 
quays  and  jetties  was  a  long  range  of 
shipping,  from  coal-smacks  and  fruit- 
smacks  to  whaling  -  ships  and  large 
steamers,  always  lading  and  unlading 
with  the  clank  of  chains,  and  giving  in- 
quisitive boys  their  first  lessons  in  the 
miscellaneousness  of  things  ;  and  at  one 
part  of  the  harbour  were  great  dockyards, 
from  which  every  now  and  then  one  of 
the  peerless  fast-sailing  Aberdeen  clippers 
slipped  down  the  greased  ways,  a  splen- 
did launch.  The  city  was  now  so  large 
that  even  to  roving  and  inquisitive  boys 
many  parts  of  it,  away  from  their  "  ain 
gate-end  "(which  was  the  local  expression 
for  the  vicinity  of  their  own  homes),  re- 
mained comparatively  unfamiliar.  Cause- 
way-end and  Cleave-the-Wind  were,  to 
the  juvenile  imagination  of  the  Woolman 
Hill  or  Dee  Street,  very  out-of-the-way 
parts.  For,  in  the  walks  beyond  the  toAvn, 
Xo.  40. — VOL.  ix. 


which  both  juniors  and  elders  took,  there 
were  certain  favourite  directions.    There 
was  one  walk  out  to  Rubislaw  Quarries 
and  the  Bleachfields,  with  a  large  option  of 
cross-roads  and  ramifications.     Another, 
in  which  there  was  a  choice  through 
different  suburbs  of  villas  and  cottages 
with  gardens,   was   to   the   Bridge    of 
Dee,  or  to  nearer  or  more  distant  spots 
of  the  river's  steep  and  cheerful  banks. 
Then  there  were  the  long  Sands  of  the 
sea-shore,  stretching  from  the  pier-head, 
against  which,  at  high  tide  or  at  low 
tide,  there  was  generally  a  savage  dash 
of  foam  and  breakers,  away  to  the  stake- . 
nets  and  Don-mouth,  with  the  continued 
coast-line  visible  as  far  as  Peterhead ;  and, 
fringing  these  Sands,  the  spacious  Links, 
or  range  of  sand-flats  and  sand-hillocks, 
covered  with  sea-grass  and  furze,  where 
golfers  in  red  coats  plied  their  stately 
game,  with  the  massive  Broad  Hill  and 
ploughed  fields  between  them  and  the 
town.     Or   out  King-street  you  might 
go — if  it  was  in  the  evening,  listening  on 
your  right,  through  the  gloom,  to  the 
eternal  roar  of  the  sea,  which,  though  a 
mile  off,  seemed  to  be  tearing  towards 
you   over  the   dark  intervening  flats; 
or,  if  it  was  in  the  day  (in  which  case, 
however,  your  route  in   the    same   di- 
rection would  probably  have  been  by 
the  old  narrow  road  through  the  Gal- 
lowgate  and  the  Spital),  making  for  the 
picturesque  Old  Town  and  the  hoary 
cathedral    and    its  tombs   overhanging 
the  Don,  and  ending  at  the  wizard  Brig 
of  Balgownie,  the  antiquity  of  which  no 
man  knows,  spanning  the  Don  at  one 
of  its  darkest  pools.      All  in  all,  this 
Brig  of  Balgownie,  celebrated  by  Byron, 
for  itself  and  for  the  legendary  rhyme 
attached   to    it,  is,  perhaps,  the   most 
romantic    spot    near    Aberdeen.     But, 
within  the  town  itself,  the  main  length 
of  Union-street,  from  its  more  bustling 
end,   where  the  chief  inns  and  shops 
are  congregated,  out  to  its  quiet  wes- 
tern  extreme   of    dwelling-houses   and 
mansions,  afforded — more  especially  of 
clear,  starry  nights,  when  the  granite 
almost  glittered,  and  the  long  rows  of 
lamps  were  seen  rising  and  fulling  in 
picturesque    perspective  — a    sni 

F 


Dead  Men  that  I  have  Known. 


saunter  to  and  fro.  In  that  northern 
latitude  the  nights  are  perceptibly 
keener  and  longer  in  winter,  and 
shorter  in  summer,  than  in  Eng- 
land. The  Aurora  Borealis,  or  Merry 
Dancers — so  rare  a  phenomenon  in  the 
south  of  England  that  the  news- 
papers record  any  very  conspicuous 
occurrence  of  it — used,  at  certain  sea- 
sons of  the  year,  to  he  an  almost  nightly 
sight.  And  from  those  Polar  Regions, 
of  the  comparative  nearness  to  which 
these  twinkling  streamers  in  the  northern 
sky  at  night  were  a  mysterious  sign, 
Aberdeen  sailors  that  one  knew  had 
brought,  in  Aberdeen  whaling-ships,  the 
arrival  of  which  at  their  season  was 
always  looked  for  with  some  excitement, 
the  very  oil  that  lit  the  town.  For,  as 
yet,  the  town  was  lit  with  oil,  though  gas 
was  coming  in.  A  curious  sight,  also 
characteristic  of  Aberdeen  to  exactly 
the  same  effect,  was,  that,  in  not  a  few 
places  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  one 
saw  the  bones  of  a  whale  placed  arch- 
wise at  the  entrance  to  some  field,  so  as 
to  form  a  gateway.  Such  whalebone- 
gateways,  I  should  suppose,  have  now 
disappeared,  or  are  fast  disappearing. 

As  the  Aberdonians  are  a  breed  of 
North  Britons  of  peculiar  dialect,  so,  in 
the  semi-comic  representations  of  themby 
their  fellow-countrymen,  they  invariably 
figure  as  a  breed  peculiar  in  some  re- 
spects of  make  and  character.  They 
are  said  to  be,  in  the  main,  an  unusually 
large-boned  race  ;  to  which  phrenologists 
have  added,  on  the  authority  of  statis- 
tics, the  more  specific  statement  that 
they  are  a  large-headed  race — the  Aber- 
deen hatters  having  to  keep  in  stock,  for 
common  native  demand,  two  sizes  of 
made  hats  larger  than  are  required  in  any 
other  town.  As  to  the  truth  of  this, 
or  what  it  may  imply  if  true,  I  know 
nothing ;  1  only  know  that  the  town 
contained  smallish-headed  and  small- 
boned  men!  n  sufficient  abundance,  some 
of  whom  were  about  the  ablest  men  in 
the  place  ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  town,  while  it  also  had  able  men  of 
large  build  and  large  heads,  never  seemed 
to  me  to  be  more  deficient  than  others 
in  big-brained  blockheads.  But  there 


is  another,  and  more  negative,  estimate 
of  the  Aberdonians  among  their  country- 
men. All  those  qualities  which  the 
English  are  in  the  habit  of  attri- 
buting to  the  Scotch  generally,  the 
Scotch  generally,  discussing  matters 
among  themselves,  are  in  the  habit 
of  handing  over  —  the  worse  qualities 
especially — to  the  credit  of  the  Aber- 
deen-men. Are  low  shrewdness,  unima- 
ginative hard-headedness,  and  plodding 
perseverance  Scottish  characteristics  ? 
Then,  in  these  respects,  according  to  the 
opinion  of  their  countrymen,  the  Aber- 
donians are  Scotissimi  Scotorum,  the 
Scotchest  of  the  Scotch.  Is  caution  a 
Scottish  characteristic  ?  Then,  according 
to  the  rest  of  the  Scotch,  Aberdeen 
caution  is  ordinary  Scotch  caution  raised 
to  the  fourth  power.  And  so  on  through 
the  other  qualities  in  the  list.  Now, 
although  aware  of  the  necessary  fal- 
laciousness of  such  general  impressions 
respecting  communities,  one  might  have 
a  recollected  sense  of  something  in  the 
intellectual  habit  of  the  Aberdonians, 
as  contrasted  with  some  other  Scottish 
cities,  to  which  one  could  suppose  that 
the  popular  estimate  referred.  If  I  were 
to  say  that  the  Aberdonians  were  a  hard- 
headed  people,  but  that,  with  some 
exceptions,  there  was  a  sensation  as  of  a 
flattening-down  of  the  general  being  of 
the  place,  and  of  the  prevalence  of  cold 
laboriousness  and  a  suspiciousness  of 
disposition,  this  might  be  one  way  of 
expressing  it.  If  I  were  to  say  that  they 
were,  in  intellectual  respects,  a  population 
of  Saturday  Reviewers  in  the  crude  state, 
and  without  the  culture  and  exquisite 
refinement  of  the  well-known  article- 
writers,  that  would  be  another  way  of  ex- 
pressing the  matter.  If  I  were  to  say 
that  they  were  such  a  people  that  the  last 
kind  of  mind  that  would  have  been  expect- 
ed to  appear  among  them,  or  that  could 
have  sustained  itself  among  them  un- 
less clothed  in  thunder,  would  have  been 
a  mind  of  the  Shelley-type,  this  might 
be  a  third  vague  expression  of  what  I 
mean.  But,  on  the  whole,  I  prefer  a  less 
offensive  form  of  expression,  and  will  sim- 
ply say  that  the  Aberdonian  intellect  was 
perhaps  more  statical  than  dynamical.' 


Mr.  Euskin  on  the  Gold  Question. 


67 


And  yet,  at  the  time  of  which  I 
speak,  there  were  appearances  of  a  dy- 
namical stirring,  whether  native  or  im- 
ported, among  the  Aberdonians.  They 
were  in  a  state  of  extraordinary  excite- 
ment about  the  Reform  Bill,  which  was, 
among  other  things,  to  raise  their  town 
from  the  position  of  a  mere  member  of 
a  group  of  Parliamentary  boroughs  to 
that  of  a  single  Parliamentary  borough, 
having  a  representative  all  to  itself. 
Enthusiastic  crowds  shouting  political 
cries,  and  prearranged  pageants  and  pro- 
cessions of  the  trades  along  the  streets, 
were  more  frequent  than  usuaL  And 
this  prevalent  whiggism  was  but  the 
outcome  in  the  secular  direction  of  a 
spirit  which  had  long  held  possession  of 
the  majority  of  them  in  religious  matters. 
While  the  shire  of  Aberdeen  remained, 
ecclesiastically,  an  almost  unbroken  mass 
of  eighteenth-century  Moderatism — so 
that,  in  the  great  votes  on  the  Non- 


intrusion question  then  approaching  in 
the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk,  the 
Aberdeenshire  clergy  and  the  Dumfries- 
shire clergy  formed  together  the  strength 
or  vast  ballast  of  the  Moderate  party — 
the  clergy  and  the  people  of  the  city 
were  in  the  main  of  that  "  Evangelical " 
party  in  theology  and  in  kirk-politics 
the  gradual  growth  of  which,  in  the 
first  generation  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
from  the  position  of  a  small  minority  to 
that  of  a  national  majority,  is  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  phenomena  in  the 
recent  history  of  Scotland.  Now,  the 
man  of  whom,  besides  that  he  was 
singular  in  other  ways,  it  may  be  fairly 
said  that  he  had  exercised  the  greatest 
influence  in  bringing  Aberdeen  into  this 
state  of  spirit,  was  the  man  of  whom, 
should  the  reader  care  to  follow  me,  I 
propose  first,  in  this  series  of  papers,  to 
give  some  account.  He  was  not  a  native 
Aberdonian,  but  a  naturalized  Irishman. 


MR  EUSKIN  ON  THE  GOLD  QUESTION. 


ME.  EUSKIN  has  spoken.  On  the  remote 
sides  of  Mont  Blanc  the  echoes  of  the 
gold  controversy  reached  him,  and  he 
hastens,  ere  it  closes,  to  interpose  the 
decisive  word.  Henceforth  the  problem 
for  economists  will  be,  not  what  are  the 
effects  of  the  gold  discoveries,  but  what 
is  the  purport  of  Mr.  Euskin's  reve- 
lation. Let  me  attempt,  with  reverent 
humility,  to  expound  the  pregnant 
words. 

"The  market  value  of  a  'pound,'" 
says  this  great  authority,  "  depends  less 
"  on  the  supply  of  gold  than  on  the 
"  extravagance  or  economy  of  the  per- 
"  sons  holding  documentary  currency 
"  (that  is  to  say,  claim  to  goods).  Sup- 
"  pose,  for  instance,  that  I  hold  stock 
"  to  the  value  of  5001.  a  year ; — if  I 
"  live  on  a  hundred  a  year  and  lay  by 
"  four  hundred,  I  (for  the  time)  keep 
"  down  the  prices  of  all  goods  to  the 
"  distributed  amount  of  ±001.  a  year, 
"  or,  in  other  words,  neutralize  the 
"  effect  on  the  market  of  400  pounds 


"  in  gold  imported  annually  from  Aus- 
"  tralia." 

And  first,  let  us,  if  we  can,  under- 
stand the  language  of  our  oracle.  What 
is  meant  by  "  laying  by  ? "  People  talk 
of  laying  money  by  when  they  lodge  it 
in  bank  or  invest  it;  but  this  is  not 
Mr.  Euskin's  sense  of  the  words. 
Money  lodged  in  bank  or  invested  as 
certainly  reaches  the  hands  of  pro- 
ducers as  if  employed  by  its  owner 
directly  in  an  industrial  operation  :  it 
is  only  on  this  condition  that  it  can 
yield  interest :  and  the  case  of  produc- 
tively employing  money  is  considered 
by  Mr.  Euskin  under  another  head. 
"Laying  by,"  therefore,  in  Euskinese, 
can  only  mean  simple  hoarding — laying 
by,  for  example,  in  an  old  stocking. 
Then,  again,  "  documentary  currency  " 
— what  does  this  mean  ?  "  Claim 
to  goods,"  we  are  told.  Not  surely 
bills  of  lading,  dock-warrants,  and  the 
like.  These  are  "  claim  to  goods ; "  but, 
then,  no  one  has  ever  heard  of  such 

F2 


68 


-Mr.  Ruskin  on  the  Gold  Question. 


documents  being  "  laid  by."  Mr.  Ens- 
kin's  gift,  apparently,  does  not  extend 
to  definition.  What  he  means  by 
"  documentary  currency  "  is,  it  is  pretty 
plain,  neither  more  nor  less  than 
what  mortals  call  bank-notes  ;  which, 
however,  are  not  "  claim  to  goods," 
but  claim  to  gold.  By  "  laying  by 
documentary  currency "  Mr.  Euskin 
means  simply  hoarding  bank-notes ; 
and  his  assertion  is  that  a  given  sum 
in  bank-notes  thus  disposed  of  will 
neutralize  an  equal  sum  in  gold  im- 
ported from  Australia ;  than  which, 
while  the  statement  is  confined  to  bank- 
notes in  the  United  Kingdom,  nothing, 
I  imagine,  can  be  more  true ;  for  the 
relation  between  bank-notes  and  gold 
is,  in  the  United  Kingdom,  fixed  by 
law,  so  that  for  every  note  issued  over 
a  certain  amount  (which  is  always  in 
practice  exceeded)  there  must  be  a 
sovereign  to  represent  it  in  the  bank. 
Hoarding  bank-notes  in  England  is 
thus  in  all  respects  tantamount  to 
hoarding  sovereigns.  Mr.  Euskin's  an- 
nouncement comes  in  short  to  this,  that 
if  gold  be  buried  in  this  country  as 
fast  as  it  is  unburied  in  Australia,  the 
result  will  be  nil.  Such  is  the  first 
utterance  of  the  voice  from  Chamounix ! 
But  if  scoffers  say,  as  perhaps  they 
will  say,  that  there  is  here  a  failure 
in  what  theologians  call  the  economy  of 
miracle,  that  the  grand  and  fruitful 
doctrine  that  a  —  a  =  o  was  not 
beyond  the  reach  of  the  unassisted 
reason  of  man,  what  follows  at  all 
events  must  stop  their  mouths. 

"  If,  instead  of  laying  by  this  sum 

in  paper,  I  choose  to  throw  it  into 

bullion  (whether  gold  plate  or  coin 

does   not  matter),  I   not   only  keep 

down  the  price  of  goods  but  raise  the 

price   of  gold  as  a  commodity,  and 

"  neutralise  800  pounds'  worth  of  im- 

"  ported  gold." 

It  seems  that  the  mere  act  of  "  throw- 
"  ing  documentary  currency  into  bul- 
"  lion  "  (Olympic,  I  presume,  for  getting 
gold  for  notes  over  the  counter  of  a 
bank),  is  sufficient  to  neutralize  an 
amount  of  gold  twice  as  great  imported 
from  Australia.  A  man,  for  example, 


imports  400  sovereigns  from  Australia, 
lodges  them  in  the  Bank  of  England, 
then  draws  them  out  in  "  documen- 
tary currency,"  next  day  returns  to 
the  Bank  and  demands  his  400  sove- 
reigns in  exchange  for  the  documentary 
currency  whic^h  he  had  received  the 
day  before.  The  effect  of  this  proceed- 
ing is,  not  merely  to  render  the  influence 
of  the  imported  sovereigns  on  price 
nugatory,  but  to  neutralize  400  more 
• — to  neutralize  "800  pounds'  worth  of 
imported  gold"  in  all.  AVho  will,  after 
this,  slight  the  King  of  Spain's  ma- 
noeuvre of  marching  up  the  hill  and 
down  again  ?  It  will  not  be  denied, 
that  now,  at  least,  we  are  on  transcen- 
dental ground. 

"  But  if  I  annually  spend  my  entire 
"  5001.  (unproductively),  I  annually  raise 
"  the  price  of  goods  by  that  amount, 
"  and  neutralize  a  correspondent  diini- 
"  nution  in  the  supply  of  gold.  If  I 
"spend  my  500Z.  productively,  that  is 
"  to  say,  so  as  to  produce  as  much  as, 
"  or  more  than  I  consume,  I  either 
"  leave  the  market  as  I  found  it,  or 
"  by  the  excess  of  production  increase 
"  the  value  of  gold." 

Here  are  sayings  hard  to  be  under- 
stood. The  first  utterance  might  well 
have  baffled  us  ;  but  the  second,  with  its 
pendant  -doctrine,  that  "  an  increased 
supply  of  bullion  "  may  excite  lf  an  ab- 
"  solutely  parallel  force  of  productive 
"  industry,"  has  a  more  familiar  ring.  I 
seem  to  have  heard  this  before,  and 
fear  Mr.  Euskin  may  have  to  adjust  his 
claims  as  a  discoverer  with  Mr.  T.  Craw- 
furd.  Alas  !  that  the  vox  dei  should 
after  all  prove  but  the  echo  of  the  vox 
populi  1 

But  the  capital  disclosure  remains : — 
"  The  lowered  value  of  money  is  often 
"  (and  this  is  a  very  curious  case  of  eco- 
"  nomical  back  current)  indicated,  not 
'  so  much  by  a  rise  in  the  price  of 
'  goods,  as  by  a  fall  in  that  of  labour. 
•  The  household  lives  as  comfortably 
'  as  it  did  on  a  hundred  a  year,  but  the 
'  master  has  to  work  half  as  hard  again 
<  to  get  it." 

Curious,  indeed  !  The  increased  fa- 
cility of  producing  gold  and  its  increased 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


60 


abundance   are   to   lead   (through,    the 
agency  of  "  economical  back  current " — 
whatever  this  mysterious  Euripus  may 
be)  to  the  result,  that  people  "  have  to 
work  half  as  hard  again  to   get   it;" 
while,    notwithstanding    the    increased 
difficulty  of  attainment,  it  continues  to 
be  exchanged  on  the  same  terms    for 
other  things  as  before.      The  upshot  of 
the  whole,  then,  is  that  the  gold  dis- 
coveries will  render  gold,  at  one  and 
the  same  time,  cheaper,  dearer,  and  ab- 
solutely unchanged  in  value.     It  seems 
there  is  to  be  a  catastrophe  after  all, 
though  not  of  that  coarse-  kind  which 
the  Times   was   taught   to   apprehend. 
'  No  chasm  opens  into  the  abyss  through 
'  the  London  clay  ;  no  gilded  victim  is 
'  asked  of  the  Guards  ;  the  Stock  Ex- 
'  change  falls  into  no  hysterics  ;  and 
'  the   old  lady  of  Threadneedle-street 
'  does  not  so  much  as  ask  for  '  my  fan, 
'  '  Peter  ;'  "  but  there  is  to  be  a  moral 
earthquake,  nevertheless— a  revolution 


in  our  economical  notions.  Hencefor- 
ward depreciation  of  gold  will  appear 
as  increased  difficulty,  as  the  result  of 
increased  facility,  in  getting  it,  both  co- 
existing, well  understood,  with  con- 
stancy of  price. 

The  application  of  these  simple  prin- 
ciples to  practice  is  too  obvious  to  need 
elucidation.  J.  E.  C. 

P.S.  I  had  almost  omitted  one  dictum 
of  our  oracle.  Mr.  Ruskin  confirms  the 
statement  of  the  Times  as  to  "  the  in- 
"  sufficiency  of  the  evidence  hitherto 
"  offered  on  the  depreciation  of  gold." 
The  judgment  demands  our  deference 
the  more  that  it  manifestly  does  not 
proceed  on  grounds  of  human  reason ; 
it  being  scarcely  conceivable  that  Mr. 
Ruskin  should  have  seen  the  evidence 
of  which  he  here  appraises  the  value ; 
unless,  indeed,  we  are  to  suppose  that 
he  carries  with  him  a  copy  of  Mr. 
Jevons's  recently  published  catalogue  of 
prices  for  Alpine  reading. 


A    SON    OF    THE    SOIL. 


PART  I. 


CHAPTER  I. 


"  I  SAY,  you  boy,  it  always  rains  here, 
doesn't  it  1 — or  '  whiles  snaws ' — as  the 
aborigines  say.  You're  a  native,  arnt 
you  1  When  do  you  think  the  rain 
will  go  off  1 — do  you  ever  have  any  fine 
weather  here  1  I  don't  see  the  good  of 
a  fine  country  when  it  rains  for  ever 
and  ever  !  What  do  you  do  with  your- 
selves, you  people,  all  the  year  round  in 
such  a  melancholy  place  1 " 

"  You  see  we  know  no  better  " — said 
the  farmer  of  Ramore,  who  came  in  at 
the  moment  to  the  porch  of  his  house, 
where  the  young  gentleman  was  stand- 
ing, confronted  by  young  Colin,  who 
would  have  exploded  in  boyish  rage 
before  now,  if  he  had  not  been  restrained 
by  the  knowledge  that  his  mother  was 
within  hearing — "and,  wet  or  dry,  the 
country-side  comes  natural  to  them  it 


belongs  to.  If  it  werena  for  a  twinge 
o'  the  rheumatics  noo  and  then — and 
my  lads  are  owre  young  for  that — it's  a 
grand  country.  If  it's  nae  great  comfort 
to  the  purse,  it's  aye  a  pleasure  to  the 
e'e.  Come  in  to  the  fire,  and  take  a 
seat  till  the  rain  blows  by.  My  lads," 
said  Colin  of  Ramore,  with  a  twinkle  of 
approbation  in  his  eye,  "  take  little  heed 
whether  it's  rain  or  shine." 

"  I'm  of  a  different  opinion,"  said  the 
stranger,  "  I  don't  like  walking  up  to 
the  ankles  in  those  filthy  roads." 

He  was  a  boy  of  fifteen  or  so,  the  same 
age  as  young  Colin,  who  stood  opposite 
him  breathing  hard  with  opposition,  and 
natural  enmity ;  but  the  smart  Etonian 
considered  himself  much  more  a  man  of 
the  world  and  of  experience  than  Colin 
the  elder,  and  looked  on  the  boy  with 
calm  contempt. 

"  I'll  be  glad  to  dry  my  boots  if  you'll 


70 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


let  me,"  he  said,  holding  up  a  foot  which 
beside  young  Colin's  sturdy  hoof  looked 
preternaturally  small  and  dainty. 

"  A  fit  like  a  lassie's  ! "  the  country 
boy  said  to  himself  with  responsive  dis- 
dain. Young  Colin  laughed  half  aloud 
as  his  natural  enemy  followed  his  father 
into  the  house. 

"  He's  feared  to  wet  his  feet,"  said  the 
lad,  with  a  chuckle  of  mockery,  holding 
forth  his  own,  which  to  his  conscious- 
ness were  never  dry.  Any  moralist,  who 
had  happened  to  be  at  hand,  might 
have  suggested  to  Colin  that  a  faculty 
for  acquiring  and  keeping  up  wet  feet 
during  every  hour  of  the  twenty-four 
which  he  did  not  spend  in  bed  was 
no  great  matter  to  brag  of:  but  then 
moralists  did  not  flourish  at  Earn  ore. 
The  boy  made  a  rush  out  through  the 
soft-falling  incessant  rain,  dashed  down 
upon  the  shingly  beach  with  an  impetu- 
osity which  dispersed  the  wet  pebbles 
on  all  sides  of  him,  and  jumping  into 
the  boat,  pushed  out  upon  the  loch,  not 
for  any  particular  purpose,  but  to  relieve 
a  little  his  indignation  and  boyish,  dis- 
comfiture. The  boat  was  clumsy  enough, 
and  young  Colin's  "style"  in  rowing 
was  not  of  a  high  order,  but  it  caught 
the  quick  eye  of  the  Eton  lad,  as  he 
glanced  out  from  the  window. 

"  That  fellow  can  row,"  he  said  to 
himself,  but  aloud,  with  the  nonchalance 
of  his  race,  as  he  went  forward,  passing 
the  great  cradle  which  stood  on  one 
side  of  the  fire,  to  the  chair  which  the 
farmer's  wife  had  placed  for  him.  She 
received  with  many  kindly  homely  in- 
vitations and  welcomes  the  serene  young 
potentate  as  he  approached  her  fireside 
throne. 

"  Come  awa — come  in  to  the  fire. 
The  roads  are  past  speaking  o'  in  this 
soft  weather.  Maybe  the  young  gentle- 
man would  like  to  change  his  feet,"  said 
the  soft-voiced  woman,  who  sat  in  a 
wicker-work  easy  chair,  with  a  very 
small  baby,  and  cheeks  still  pale  from 
its  recent  arrival.  She  had  soft,  dark, 
beaming  eyes,  and  the  softest  pink  flush 
coming  and  going  over  her  face,  and 
was  wrapped  in  a  shawl,  and  evidently 
considered  an  invalid — which,  for  the 


mother  of  seven  or  eight  children,  and 
the  mistress  of  Ramore  Farm,  was  an 
honourable  but  inconvenient  luxury. 
"I  could  bring  you  a  pair  of  my  Colin's 
stockings  in  a  moment.  I  daresay 
they're  aboiit  your  size — or  if  you  would 
like  to  gang  ben  the  house  into  the 
spare  room,  and  change  them " 

"  Oh,  thanks  ;  but  there  is  no  need  for 
that,"  said  the  visitor,  with  a  slight  blush, 
being  conscious,  as  even  an  Eton  boy 
could  not  help  being,  of  the  humorous 
observation  of  the  farmer,  who  had  come 
in  behind  him,  and  in  Avhose  eyes  it  was 
evident  the  experienced  "  man "  of  the 
fifth  form  was  a  less  sublime  personage 
than  he  gave  himself  credit  for  being.  "  I 
am  living  down  at  the  Castle,"he  added, 
hastily  ;  "  I  lost  my  way  on  the  hills, 
and  got  dreadfully  wet ;  otherwise  I  don't 
mind  the  rain."  And  he  held  the  dainty 
boots,  which  steamed  in  the  heat,  to  the 
fire. 

"But  you  maunna  gang  out  to  the 
hills  in  such  slight  things  again,"  said 
Mrs.  Campbell,  looking  at  them  com- 
passionately, "  I'll  get  you  a  pair  of  my 
Colin's  strong  shoes  and  stockings  that'll 
keep  your  feet  warm.  I'll  just  lay  the 
wean  in  the  cradle,  and  you  can  slip 
them  off  the  time  I'm  away,"  said  the 
good  woman,  with  a  passing  thought  for 
the  boy's  bashfulness.  But  the  farmer 
caught  her  by  the  arm  and  kept  her  in 
her  chair. 

"  I  suppose  there's  mair  folk  than  you 
about  the  house,  Jeanie  1"  said  her  hus- 
band, "  though  you're  so  positive  about 
doing  everything  yoursel'.  I'll  tell  the 
lass  ;  and  I  advise  you,  young  gentleman, 
no  to  be  shamefaced,  but  take  the  wife's 
advice.  It's  a  great  quality  o'  hers  to 
ken  what's  good  for  other  folk." 

"  I  ken  by  mysc-l',"  said  the  gentle- 
voiced  wife,  with  a  smile — and  she  got 
up  and  went  softly  to  the  window, 
while  the  young  stranger  took  hercounsel. 
"  There's  Colin  out  in  the  boat  again,  in  a 
perfect  pour  of  rain,"  she  said  to  herself, 
with  a  gentle  sigh — "  he'll  get  his  death 
o'  cauld  ;  but,  to  be  sure,  if  he  had  been 
to  get  his  death  that  gate,  it  would  have 
come  afore  now.  There's  a  great  deal 
of  rain  in  this  country  you'll  be  think- 


A  Son  of  the  Soil 


71 


ing? — a'  the  strangers  say  sae";  but  I 
canna  see  that  they  bide  away,  for  a' 
that,  though  they're  aye  grumbling. 
And  if  you're  fond  o'  the  hills,  you'll 
get  reconciled  to  the  rain.  I've  seen 
mony  an  afternoon  when  there  was 
scarce  an  hour  without  two  or  three 
rainbows,  and  the  mist  liftin'  and  drop- 
pin'  again,  as  if  it  was  set  to  music.  I 
canna  say  I  have  any  experience  mysel', 
but  so  far  as  ane  can  imagine,  a  clear 
sky  and  a  shining  sun,  day  after  day, 
would  be  awfu'  monotonous — like  a  face 
wi'  a  ,°et  smile.  I  tell  the  bairns  it's  as 
guid  as  a  fairy-tale  to  watch  the  clouds — 
and  it's  no  common  sunshine  when  it 
does  come,  but  a  kind  o'  wistful  light, 
as  if  he  couldna  tell  whether  he  ever 
might  see  you  again ;  but  it's  awfu'  when 
the  crops  are  out,  as  they  are  the  noo — 
the  Lord  forgive  me  for  speaking  as  if  I 
liked  the  rain  !  " 

And  by  this  time  her  boy-visitor, 
having  succeeded,  much  to  his  comfort 
and  disgust,  in  replacing  his  wet  chaus- 
sures  by  Colin's  dry,  warm  stockings  and 
monstrous  shoes,  Mrs.  Campbell  came 
back  to  her  seat  and  lifted  her  baby 
again  on  her  knee.  The  baby  was  of 
angelic  disposition,  and  perfectly  dis- 
posed to  make  itself  comfortable  in  its 
cradle,  but  the  usually  active  mother 
evidently  made  it  a  kind  of  excuse  to 
herself  for  her  compulsory  repose. 

"  The  wife  gets  ea?y  to  her  poetry," 
said  the  farmer,  with  a  smile,  u  Avhich 
is  pleasant  enough  to  hear,  though  it 
doesn't  keep  the  grain  from  sprouting. 
You're  fond  o'  the  hills,  you  Southland 
folk  1  You'll  be  from  level  land  your- 
sel',  I  reckon  1 — where  a'  the  craps  were 
safe  housed  afore  the  weather  broke  1 
We  have  nae  particular  reason  to  com- 
plain yet,  if  we  could  but  make  sure  o' 
a  week's  or  twa's  dry  weather.  It'll  be 
the  holidays  still  with  you  I  " 

"Yes,"  said  young  Frankland,  slightly 
disgusted  at  being  so  calmly  set  down 
as  a  schoolboy. 

"  I  hear  there's  some  grand  schools  in 
England,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell ;  "  no' 
that  they're  to  compare  wi'  Edinburgh, 
I  suppose  ?  Colin,  there's  some  sherry 
wine  in  the  press ;  I  think  a  glass 


wouldna'  harm  the  young  gentleman 
after  his  waiting.  He'll  take  some- 
thing any-way,  if  you  would  tell  Jess. 
Its  hungry  work  climbing  our  hills  for 
a  laddie  like  you,  at  least  if  I  may 
reckon  by  my  ain  laddies  that  are  aye 
ready  at  meal-times,"  said  the  farmer's 
wife,  with  a  gracious  smile  that  would 
not  have  misbecome  a  duchess.  "  You'll 
be  at  ane  o'  the  great  schools,  I  suppose  ? 
I  aye  like  to  learn  what  I  can  when 
there's  ony  opportunity.  I  would  like 
my  Colin  to  get  a'  the  advantages,  for 
he's  well  worthy  o'  a  guid  education, 
though  we're  rather  out  of  the  way  of 
it  here." 

"I  am  at  Eton,"  said  the  English 
boy,  who  could  scarcely  refrain  from  a 
little  ridicule  at  the  idea  of  sharing 
"  a'  the  advantages "  of  that  distin- 
guished foundation  with  a  colt  like 
young  Colin  ;  "  but  I  should  think  you 
would  find  it  too  far  off  to  send  your 
son  there,"  he  added,  all  his  good  breed- 
ing being  unable  to  smother  a  slight 
laugh  as  he  looked  round  the  homely 
apartment  and  wondered  what  "  all  the 
fellows"  would  say  to  a  schoolfellow 
from  Eamore. 

"  Nae  occasion  to  laugh,  young  gen- 
tleman," said  Colin  the  elder  ;  "  there's 
been  Lord  Chancellors  o'  England,  and 
generals  o'  a'  the  forces,  that  have  come 
out  of  houses  nae  better  than  this.  I 
am  just  as  ye  find  me,  but  I  wouldna'  say 
what  might  befall  our  Colin.  In  this 
country  there's  nae  law  to  bind  a  man 
to  the  same  line  o'  life  as  his  fathers. 
Despise  naebody,  my  man,  or  you  may 
live  to  be  despised  in  your  turn." 

"  I  beg  your  pardon,"  said  young 
Frankland,  blushing  hotly,  and  feeling 
Colin's  shoes  weigh  upon  his  feet  like 
lead ;  "  I  did  not  intend " 

"  No,  no,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell,  sooth- 
ingly ;  "  it's  the  maister  that  takes  up 
fancies  ;  but  nae  doubt  Eton  is  far  ower 
expensive  for  the  like  of  us,  and  a  bit 
callant  like  you  may  laugh  without  ony 
offence.  When  Colin  comes  to  bo  a 
man  he'll  make  his  ain  company,  or  I'm 
nii.staen  ;  but  I've  no  wish  to  pit  him 
among  lords  and  gentlemen's  sons  that 
would  jeer  at  his  homely  ways.  And 


72 


A  Son  of  tlie  Soil 


they  tell  me  there's  schules  in  Edin- 
burgh far  afore  anything  that's  kent 
in  England — besides  the  college,"  said 
the  mother  with  a  little  pride ;  "  our 
Colin's  done  with  his  schuling.  Edu- 
cation takes  longer  wi'  the  like  of  you. 
After  Martinmas  he's  gaun  in  to  Glasgow 
to  begin  his  course." 

To  this  proud  intimation  the  young 
visitor  listened  in  silence,  not  being 
able  to  connect  the  roughshod  lad  in 
the  boat,  with  a  University,  whatever 
might  be  its  form.  He  addressed  him- 
self to  the  scones  and  butter  which  Jess 
the  servant,  a  handsome  powerful  wo- 
man of  five  feet  ten  or  so,  had  set  before 
him  on  the  table.  Jess  lingered  a  little 
ere  she  left  the  room,  to  pinch  the 
baby's  cheeks,  and  say,  "El ess  the 
lamb  !  eh,  what  a  guid  bairn ! "  with 
patriarchal  friendly  familiarity.  Mean- 
while the  farmer  sat  down  with  a 
thump  which  made  it  creak,  upon  the 
large  old  haircloth  sofa  which  filled  up 
one  end  of  the  room. 

"  I've  heard  there's  a  great  difference 
between  our  colleges  and  the  colleges 
in  England,"  said  Colin.  "Wi'  you 
they  dinna  train  a  lad  to  onything  in 
particular  ;  wi'  us  it's  a'  for  a  profession, 
— the  kirk,  or  the  law,  or  physic,  as  it 
may  be, — a  fair  mair  sensible  system. 
I'm  no  sure  it's  just  civil,  though,"  said 
the  farmer,  with  a  quaint  mingling  of 
Scotch  complacency  and  Scotch  polite- 
ness, "  to  talk  to  a  stranger  of  naething 
but  the  inferiority  o'  his  ain  country. 
It  may  be  a'  true  enough,  but  there's 
pleasanter  topics  o'  discourse.  The 
Castle's  a  bonnie  situation  1  and  if 
you're  fond  o'  the  water,  yachting,  and 
boating,  and  that  kind  o'  thing,  there's 
grand  opportunity  amang  our  lochs." 

"  We've  got  a  yacht,"  said  the  boy, 
who  found  the  scones  much  to  his 
taste,  and  began  to  feel  a  glow  of  com- 
fort diffusing  itself  through  his  inner 
man — "  the  fastest  sailer  I  know.  Wre 
made  a  little  run  yesterday  "down  to 
the  Kyles  ;  but  Sir  Thomas  prefers  the 
grouse,  though  it's  awfully  hard  work,  I 
can  tell  you,  going  up  those  hills.  [It's 
so  beastly  wet,"  said  the  young  hero, 
"  I  never  was  down  here  before  ;  but 


Sir  Thomas  comes  every  year  to  the 
Highlands — he  likes  it — he's  as  strong 
as  a  horse — but  I  prefer  the  yacht,  for 
my  part." 

"  And  who's  Sir  Thomas,  if  ane  may 
speer — some  friend?"  said  the  farmer's 
wife. 

"  Oh — he's  my  father  ! "  said  the 
Etonian ;  and  a  natural  flush  of  shame- 
facedness  at  acknowledging  siich  a  re- 
lationship rose  upon  the  countenance  of 
the  British  boy. 

"Your  father?"  said  Mrs.  Campbell, 
with  some  amazement,  "  that's  an  awfu' 
queer  way  to  speak  of  your  father  ;  and 
have  you  ony  brothers  and  sisters  that 
you're  this  lang  distance  off  your  lane, 
— and  your  mamma  maybe  anxious  about 
you?"  continued  the  kind  mother,  with 
a  wistful  look  of  inquiry.  She  was 
prepared  to  be  sorry  for  him,  conclud- 
ing that  a  boy  who  spoke  of  a  father  in 
such  terms,  must  be  motherless,  and  a 
neglected  child.  It  was  the  most  ten- 
der kind  of  curiosity  which  animated 
the  good  woman.  She  formed  a  theory 
about  the  lad  on  the  spot,  as  women 
do,  and  concluded  that  his  cruel  father 
paid  no  regard  to  him,  and  that  the 
boy's  heart  had  been  hardened  by 
neglect  and  want  of  love.  "  Figure  our 
Colin  ca'ing  the  maister  Mr.  Camp- 
bell !"  she  said  to  herself,  and  looked 
very  pitifully  at  young  Frankland,  who 
ate  his  scone  without  any  consciousness 
of  her  amiable  imaginations.  ?9 

"  Oh,  I'm  not  afraid,"  said  the  calm 
youth,  "  She  knows  better ;  there's 
ten  of  us,  and  some  one  of  the  family 
comes  to  grief  most  days,  you  know. 
She's  used  to  that.  Besides,  I'll  get 
home  long  before  Sir  Thomas.  It's 
only  four  now,  and  I  suppose  one  could 
walk  down  from  here — how  soon  ? " 
All  this  time  he  went  on  so  steadily  at 
the  scones  and  the  milk,  that  the  heart 
of  the  farmer's  wife  warmed  to  the  pos- 
sessor of  such  a  frank  and  appreciative 
appetite. 

"  You  might  put  the  horse  in  the  gig 
and  drive  the  young  gentleman  down," 
said  the  soft-hearted  woman,  "  or  Colin 
could  row  him  in  the  boat  as  far  as  the 
pier.  It's  a  lang  walk  for  such  a  cal- 


'  A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


73 


lant,  and  you're  no  thrang.  It's  awfu' 
to  think  o'  the  rain  how  it's  taking  the 
bread  out  of  us  poor  folk's  mouths  ;  but 
to  be  sure  it's  the  Lord's  will — if  it  be 
na,':  said  the  homely  speculatist,  "  that 
the  weather's  ane  of  the  things  that  has 
been  Permitted,  for  wise  reasons,  to  fa' 
into  Ither  Hands  ;  and  I'm  sure,  judging 
by  the  way  it  comes  just  when  it  is  no' 
wanted,  ane  might  think  so,  mony  a 
time  in  this  country  side.  But  ah  !  its 
sinfu'  to  speak, — and  look  at  yon  bonnie 
rainbow,"  she  continued,  turning  to  the 
window  with  her  baby  in  her  arms. 
Young  Frankland  got  up  slowly  as  he 
finished  his  scone.  He  was  only  par- 
tially sensible  of  the  extreme  beauty  of 
the  scene  before  him,  but  the  farmer's 
wife  stood  with  her  baby  in  her  arms, 
with  hidden  lights  kindling  in  her  soft 
eyes,  expanding  and  beaming  over  the 
lovely  landscape.  It  did  her  good  like 
a  cordial ;  though  even  Colin,  her  sensi- 
ble husband,  looked  on  with  a  smile 
upon  his  good-humoured  countenance, 
and  was  a  little  amused  and  much  puz- 
zled, as  he  had  been  a  hundred  times 
before,  seeing  his  wife's  pleasure  in 
those  common  and  every-day  processes  of 
nature,  to  know  why. 

Young  Colin  in  the  boat  understood 
better, — he  was  lying  on  his  oars 
gazing  at  it  the  same  moment ;  arrested 
in  his  petulant  boyish  thoughts,  as  she 
had  been  in  her  anxieties,  the  lad  came 
out  of,  and  lost  himself  in  the  scene. 
The  sun  had  come  out  suddenly  upon 
the  noble  range  of  hills  which  stretched 
across  the  upper  end  of  the  loch — that 
wistful  tender  sun  which  shone  out, 
dazzling  with  pathetic  gleams  of  sudden 
love  in  this  country,  "as  if  he  coiddna 
tell  whether  he  might  ever  see  you 
again,"  as  Mrs.  Campbell  said — and  just 
catching  the  skirts  of  the  rain,  had  flung 
a  double  rainbow  across  the  sheltered 
lovely  curve  of  the  upper  banks.  One 
side  of  the  arch  stooping  over  the 
heathery  hillside,  lighted  it  up  with  an 
unearthly  glory,  and  the  other  came 
down  in  stately  columns,  one  grand 
shaft  within  the  other,  with  a  solid 
magnificence  and  steadiness,  into  the 
Avater.  Young  Frankland  at  the  win- 


dow, could  not  help  thinking  within 
himself,  what  a  beautiful  picture  it 
would  make,  "  if  any  of  those  painter 
fellows  could  do  a  rainbow"  ;  but  as  for 
young  Colin  in  the  boat,  the  impulse  in 
his  heart  was  to  dash  up  to  those 
heavenly  archways,  and  embrace  the 
shining  pillar,  and  swing  himself  aloft 
half-boy,  half-poet,  to  the  celestial  world, 
where  fiery  columns  could  stand  fast  upon 
moving  waters — and  all  was  true,  but 
nothing  real.  'The  hills,  for  their  share, 
lay  very  quiet,  taking  no  part  in  the 
momentary  drama  of  the  elements ; 
standing  passive,  letting  the  sudden 
light  search  them  over  and  over,  as  if 
seeking  for  hidden  treasure.  Just  in 
the  midst  of  the  blackness  of  the  rain, 
never  was  light  and  joy^  so  sweet  and 
sudden.  The  farmer's  wife  came  away 
from  the  window  with  a  sigh  of  pleasure, 
as  the  baby  stirred  in  her  arms ;  "  Eh, 
but  the  world's  bonnie,  bonnie  !"  she 
said  to  herself,  with  a  feeling  that  some 
event  of  joyful  importance  had  jusfc 
been  enacted  before  her.  As  for  the 
boy  on  the  loch,  who,  being  younger, 
was  more  abstracted  from  common 
affairs,  his  dream  was  interrupted  loudly 
by  a  call  from  the  door :  "  Come  in 
wi'  the  boat ;  I've  a  message  to  gie  ye 
for  the  pier,"  cried  the  farmer,  at  the 
top  of  his  voice  ;  and  the  country  boy 
started  back  to  himself,  and  made  a 
dash  at  his  oars,  and  pulled  inshore 
as  violently  and  unhandsomely  as  if  the 
nature  of  his  dreams  had  been  found 
out,  and  he  was  ashamed  of  himself. 
Colin  forgot  all  the  softening  influences 
of  the  scene,  and  all  the  fine  thoughts 
that  had,  unconscious  to  himself,  come 
into  his  head,  when  he  found  that 
the  commission  his  father  meant  to  give 
him,  was  that  of  rowing  the  stranger 
boy  as  far  as  the  pier,  which  was  about 
three  miles  farther  down  the  loch.  If 
disobedience  had  been  an  offence  under- 
stood at  Rarnore,  possibly  he  might  have 
refused ;  but  neither  boy  nor  man,  how- 
ever well-inclined,  is  likely  to  succeed 
in  doing,  the  first  time  of  trying,  a  kind 
of  sin  with  which  he  has  no  acquaint- 
ance. To  give  Colin  justice,  he  did  his 
best,  and  showed  a  cordial  inclination  to 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


make  himself  disagreeable.  He  came 
in  so  clumsily  that  the  boat  grounded 
a  yard  or  two  off  shore,  and  would  not 
by  any  coaxing  be  persuaded  to  ap- 
proach nearer.  And  when  young 
Frankland,  much  to  his  amazement, 
leapt  on  board  without  wetting  his  feet, 
as  the  country  lad  maliciously  intended, 
and  came  against  Colin  with  such  force 
as  almost  to  knock  him  down,  the  young 
boatman  thrust  his  passenger  forward 
very  rudely,  and  was  as  near  capsizing 
the  boat  as  pride  would  permit  him. 
"  Sit  forrit  in  the  stern,  sit  forrit.  Were 
ye  never  in  a  boat  afore,  that  ye  think  I 
can  row,  and  you  sitting  there  1"  said 
the  unchristian  Colin,  bringing  one  of 
the  oars  heavily  against  his  adversary's 
shins. 

"Wiiat  the  deuce  do  you  mean  by 
that ;  give  me  the  oar  ?  We  don't  row 
like  that  on  the  Thames,  I  can  tell  you," 
said  the  stranger ;  and  the  brief  skir- 
mish between  them  for  the  possession 
of  the  oar  having  terminated  abruptly 
by  the  intervention  of  Colin  the  elder, 
who  was  still  within  hearing,  the  two 
boys  set  off,  sullenly  enough,  down  the 
loch.  The  rainbow  was  dying  off  by 
this  time,  and  the  clouds  rolling  up 
again  over  the  hills  ;  and  the  celestial 
pillars  and  heavenly  archways  had  no 
longer,  as  may  be  supposed,  since  this 
rude  invasion  of  the  real  and  disagree- 
able, the  least  morsel  of  foundation  in 
the  thoughts  of  young  Colin  of  Eamore. 


CHAPTER  IT. 

"  YE  saw  the  young  gentleman  safe  to 
the  pier — he's  a  bonnie  lad,  though 
maybe  no  as  weel- mannered  as  ane  would 
like  to  see,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell.  "  Keep 
me !  such  a  way  to  name  his  father — 
Bairns  maun  be  awfu'  neglected  in  such 
a  grand  house — aye  left  wi'  servants, 
and  never  trained  to  trust  their  bits  of 
secrets  to  father  or  mother.  Laddies," 
said  the  farmer's  wife,  with  a  little 
solemnity,  looking  across  the  sleeping 
baby  upon  the  four  heads  of  different 
sizes  which  bent  over  their  supper  at 
the  table  before  her,  "mind  you  aye, 


that,  right  or  wrong,  them  that's  rnaist 
interested  in  whatever  befalls  you  is  them 
that  belongs  to  you. — maist  ready  to 
praise  if  ye've  done  weel,  and  excuse 
you  if  ye've  done  wrang.  I  hope  you 
were  civil  to  the  strange  callant,  Colin, 
my  man?" 

"  Oh,  ay,"  said  young  Colin,  not  with- 
out a  movement  of  conscience ;  but  he 
did  not  think  it  necessary  to  enter  into 
details. 

"  When  a  callant  like  that  is  pridefu', 
and  looks  as  if  he  thought  himself  better 
than  other  folk,  I  hope  my  laddies  are 
no  the  ones  to  mind,"  said  the  mistress 
of  Ramore.  "It  shows  he  hasna  had 
the  advantages  that  might  have  been 
expected.  It's  nae  harm  to  you,  but  a 
great  deal  of  harm  to  him.  Ye  dinna 
ken  how  weel  off  you  are,  you  boys,"  said 
the  mother,  making  a  little  address  to 
them  as  they  sat  over  their  supper ;  little 
Johnnie,  whose  porridge  was  too  hot 
for  him,  turned  towards  her  the  round 
wondering  black  eyes,  which  beamed  out 
like  a  pair  of  stray  stars  from  his  little 
freckled  face,  and  through  his  wisps  of 
flaxen  hair,  bleached  white  by  rain  and 
sun  ;  but  the  three  others  went  on  very 
steadily  with  their  supper,  and  did  not 
disturb  themselves ;  "  there's  aye  your 
father  at  hand  ready  to  tell  ye  whatever 
you  want  to  ken  —  no  like  yon  poor 
callant,  that  would  have  to  gang  to  a 
tutor,  or  a  servant,  or  something  worse  ; 
no  that  he's  an  ill  laddie — but  I'm  aye 
keen  to  see  ye  behave  yoursels  like  gentle- 
men, and  yon  wasna  ony  great  specimen, 
as  it  was  very  easy  to  see.ft 

After  this  there  was  a  pause,  for  none 
of  the  boys  were  disposed  to  enter  into 
that  topic  of  conversation.  After  a  little 
period  of  silence,  during  which  the  spoons 
made  a  diversion,  and  filled  up  the 
vacancy,  they  began  to  find  their  tongues 
again. 

"  It's  awfu'  wet  up  on  the  hill,''  said 
Archie,  the  second  boy,  "and  they  say 
the  glass  is  aye  falling,  and  the  corn  on 
the  Barnton  fields  has  been  out  this 
three  weeks,  and  Dugald  Mac  far  lane, 
he  says  its  sprouting — and  oh,  mother  !" 

"What  is  it,  Archie?" 

"  The  new  minister  came  by  when  I 


A  Son  of  the  Soft. 


was  down  at  the  smiddy  with  the  brown 
mare.  You  never  saw  such  a  red  head. 
It  is  red  enough  to  set  the  kirk  on  fire. 
They  were  saying  at  the  smiddy  that 
naebody  would  stand  such  a  colour  of 
hair — it's  waur  than  no  preaching  weel 
— and  I  said  I  thought  that  too,"  said 
the  enterprising  Archie ;  "  for  I'm  sure 
I  never  mind  ony  o'  the  sermon,  but  I 
couldna  forget  such  red  hair." 

"  And  I  saw  him  too,"  said  little 
Johnnie,  "  he  clapped  me  on  the  head, 
and  said  how  was  my  mamma w,  and  I 
said  we  never  ca'ed  onybody  mammaw, 
but  just  mother ;  and  then  he  clapped 
me  again,  and  said  I  was  a  good  boy. 
What  for  was  I  a  good  boy?"  said 
Johnnie,  who  was  of  an  inquiring  and 
philosophical  frame  of  mind,  "because 
I  said  we  didna  say  mammaw  ?  or  just 
because  it  was  me  1" 

"  Because  he's  a  kind  man,  and  has  a 
kind  thought  for  even  the  little  bairns," 
said  Mrs.  Campbell,  "and  it  wasna'  like 
a  boy  o'  mine  to  say  an  idle  word  against 
him.  Do  you  think  they  know  better  at 
the  smiddy,  Archie,  than  here  1  Poor  gen- 
tleman," said  the  good  woman,  "to  be 
a'  this  time  wearyin'  and  waitin',  and 
his  heart  yearnin'  within  him  to  get  a 
kirk,  and  do  his  Master's  work;  and 
then  to  ha'e  a  parcel  of  haverels  set  up, 
and  make  a  faction  against  him  because 
he  has  a  red  head.  It  makes  ane  think 
shame  o'  human  nature  and  Scotch  folk 
baith." 

"  But  he  canna  preach,  mother,"  said 
Colin,  breaking  silence  almost  for  the 
first  time ;  "  the  red  head  is  only  an 
excuse." 

"  I  dinna  like  excuses,"  said  his 
mother,  "  and  I  never  kent  before  that 
you  were  a  judge  o'  preaching.  You 
may  come  to  ken  better  about  it  your- 
sel  before  a'  's  done.  I  canna  but  think 
there's  something  wrang  when  the  like 
o'  that  can  be,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell; 
"  he's  studied,  and  he's  learned  Latin 
and  Greek,  and  found  out  a'  the  ill  that 
can  be  said  about  Scripture,  and  a'  the 
lies  that  ever  have  been  invented  against 
the  truth  ;  and  he's  been  brought  up  to 
be  a  minister  a'  his  days,  and  knows 
what's  expected.  But  as  soon  as  word 


gangs  about  that  the  Earl  has  promised 
him  our  kirk,  there's  opposition  raised. 
No'  that  onybody  kens  ony  ill  of  him; 
but  there's  the  smith,  and  the  wright, 
and  Thomas  Scott  o' Lintwearie,  maun  lay 
their  heads  thegether,  and  first  they  say 
he  canna  preach,  and  then  that  he'll  no' 
visit,  and  at  least,  if  a' thing  else  fails,  that 
he  has  a  red  head.  If  it  was  a  new 
doctor  that  was  coming,  wha  would  be 
heeding  about  the  colour  o'  his  hair  1 
but  it's  the  minister  that's  to  stand  by 
our  deathbeds,  and  baptize  our  bairns, 
and  guide  us  in  the  right  way  ;  and 
we're  no  to  let  him  come  in  peace,  or  sit 
down  in  comfort.  If  we  canna  keep" 
him  from  getting  the  kirk,  we  can  make 
him  miserable  when  he  does  get  it. 
Eh,  bairns ;  I  think  shame  !  and  I'm 
no'  so  sure  as  I  am  in  maist  things," 
said  the  farmer's  wife,  looking  up  with 
a  consciousness  of  her  husband's  pre- 
sence ;  "  that  the  maister  himsel — " 

"Weel  I'm  aye  for  popular  rights," 
said  Colin  of  Ramore.  He  had  just  come 
in,  and  had  been  standing  behind  taking 
off  his  big  coat,  on  which  the  rain  glis- 
tened, and  listening  to  all  that  his  wife 
said.  "  But  if  Colin  was  a  man  and  a 
minister,"  said  the  farmer,  with  a  gleam 
of  humour,  as  he  drew  his  chair  towards 
the  fire,  "  and  had  to  fight  his  way  to 
a  kirk  like  a'  the  young  men  now-a- 
days,  I  wouldna  say  I  would  like  it. 
They  might  object  to  his  big  mouth ;  and 
you've  ower  muckle  a  mouth  yourself, 
Jeanie,''  continued  big  Colin,  looking 
admiringly  at  the  comely  mother  of  his 
boys.  "  I  might  tell  them  wha'  he 
took  it  from,  and  that  if  he  had  as  grand 
a  flow  of  language  as  his  mother,  there 
would  be  nae  fear  o'  him.  As  for  the 
red  head,  the  Earl  himsel's  a  grand  ex- 
ample, and  if  red  hair's  right  in  an  earl, 
it  canna  be  immoral  in  a  minister ;  but 
Jeanie,  though  you're  an  awfu'  revolu- 
tionary, ye  maunna  meddle  with  the  kirk, 
nor  take  away  popular  rights." 

"  I'm  no  gaun  to  be  led  into  an  ar- 
gument," said  the  mistress,  with  a 
slightly  vexed  expression ;  "  but  I'm  far 
from  sure  about  the  kirk.  After  you've 
opposed  the  minister's  coming  in,  and 
holden  committees  upon  him,  and 


76 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


offered  objections,  and  done  your  best 
to  worry  the  life  out  o'  him,  and  make 
him  disgusted  baith  at  hi  nisei'  and  you, 
do  you  think  after  that  ye  can  attend  to 
him  when  you're  weel,  and  send  for  him 
when  you're  sick,  wi'  the  right  feelings  ? 
But  I'm  no  gaun  to  speak  ony  mair 
ajbout  the  minister.  Is  the  corn  in  yet, 
Colin,  from  the  East  Park  ?  Eh,  bless 
me !  and  it  was  cut  before  this  wean 
was  born ! " 

"  We'll  have  but  a  poor  harvest  after 
a',"  said  the  farmer ;  "  it's  a  disappoint- 
ment, but  it  canna  be  helpit.  It's  strange 
how  something  aye  comes  in,  to  keep 
a  man  down  when  he  thinks  he's  to 
have  a  bit  margin;  but  we  must  jog 
on,  Jeanie,  my  woman.  As  long  as  we 
have  bread  to  eat,  let  us  be  thankful 
And  as  for  Colin,  it  needna  make  ony 
difference.  Glasgow's  no  so  far  off,  but 
he  can  still  get  his  parritch  out  of  the 
family  meal ;  and  as  long  as  he's  careful 
and  diligent  we'll  try  and  fend  for  him. 
It's  hard  work  getting  bread  out  of  our 
hillside,"  said  big  Colin ;  "  but  ye  may 
have  a  "different  life  from  your  father's, 
lad,  if  ye  take  heed  to  the  opportunities 
in  your  hands." 

"  A'  the  opportunities  in  the  world," 
Said  Colin  the  younger,  in  a  burst, 
"  wouldna  give  me  a  chance  like  yon 
English  fellow.  Everything  comes  ready 
to  him.  It's  no  fair.  I'll  have  to  make 
up  wi'  him  first,  and  then  beat  him — and 
so  I  would,"  said  the  boy,  with  a  glow 
on  his  face,  and  a  happy  unconsciousness 
of  contradicting  himself,  "  if  I  had  the 
chance." 

"Well,"  said  big  Colin,  "that's  just 
ane  o'  the  things  we  have  to  count  upon 
in  our  way  of  living.  It's  little  credit 
to  a  man  to  be  strong,"  said  the  farmer, 
stretching  his  great  arms  with  a  natural 
consciousness  of  power,  "  unless  he  has 
that  to  do  that  tries  it.  It's  harder 
work  to  me,  you  may  be  sure,  to  get  a 
pickle  corn  off  the  hillside,  than  for  the 
English  farmers  down  in  yon  callant's 
country  to  draw  wheat  and  fatness  out 
o'  their  furrows.  But  I  think  myself 
nane  the  worse  a  man,"  continued  Colin 
of  Eamore,  with  a  smile  ;  "  Sir  Thomas, 
as  the  laddie  ca's  him,  gangs  wading 
over  the  heather  a'  day  after  the  grouse 


and  the  paitricks  ;  he  thinks  he's  playing 
himsel',  but  he's  as  hard  at  work  as  I 
am.  We're  a'  bluid  relations,  though 
the  family  likeness  whiles  lies  deep  and 
is  hard  to  find.  A  man  maun  be  fighting 
wi'  something.  If  it's  no  the  dour  earth 
that  refuses  him  bread,  it's  the  wet 
bog,  and  the  heather  that  comes  atween 
him  and  his  sport,  as  he  ca's  it.  Never 
you  mind  wha's  before  you  011  the  road. 
Make  up  to  him,  Colin.  Many  a  day 
he'll  stray  out  o'  the  path  gathering 
straAvs  to  divert  himself,  when  you've 
naething  to  do  but  to  push  on.'* 

"  Eh,  but  I  wouldna  like  a  laddie  of 
mine  to  think,"  interrupted  his  mother, 
eagerly,  "  that  there's  nae  guid  but  getting 
on  in  the  world.  I'll  not  have  my  bairns 
learn  ony  such  lesson ;  laddies,"  said  the 
farmer's  wife,  in  all  the  solemnity  of  her 
innocence,  "mind  you  this  aboon  a'. 
You  might  be  princes  the  morn,  and  no  as 
good  men  as  your  father.  There's  nae 
Sir  Thomases,  nor  earls,  nor  Lord  Chan- 
cellors I  ever  heard  tell  o',  that  was 
mair  thought  upon  nor  wi'  better 
reason — " 

At  this  moment  Jess  entered  from  the 
kitchen,  to  suggest  that  it  was  bedtime. 

"And  lang  enough  for  the  mistress  to 
be  sitting  up,  and  she  so  delicate,"  said 
the  sole  servant  of  the  house.  "If  ye 
had  been  in  your  ain  room  wi'  a  fire  and 
a  book  to'  read,  it  would  have  been  wiser- 
like,  than  among  a'  thae  noisy  laddies, 
wi'  the  wean  and  a  seam  as  if  ye  were  as 
strong  as  me.  Maister,  I  wish  you  would 
speak  to  Colin ;  he's  awfu'  masterfu' ;  in- 
stead of  gaun  to  his  bed,  like  a  civilized 
lad,  yonder  he  is  awa'  ben  to  the  kitchen 
and  down  by  the  fire  to  read  his  book, 
till  his  hair's  like  a  singed  sheep's  head, 
and  his  cheeks  like  burning  peats.  Ane 
canna  do  a  hand's-turn  wi'  a  parcel  o' 
callants  about  the  place  day  and  nicht," 
said  Jess  in  an  aggrieved  tone. 

"  And  just  when  Archie  Candlish 
has  suppered  his  horses  and  come  in  for 
half  an  hour's  crack,"  said  the  master. 
"  I'll  send  Colin  to  his  bed ;  but  dinna 
have  ower  muckle  to  say  to  Archie,  he's 
a  rover,"  continued  the  good-tempered 
farmer,  who  "made  allowances"  for  a 
little  love-making.  He  raised  himself 
out  of  his  arm-chair  with  a  little  hesita- 


.  A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


tion,  like  a  great  mastiff  uncoiling  itself 
out  of  a  position  of  comfort,  and  went 
slowly  away,  moving  off  through  the 
dimly  lighted  room  like  an  amiable 
giant  as  he  was. 

"  Eh,  keep  me  ! — and  Archie  Candlish 
had  just  that  very  minute  lookit  in  at 
the  door/'  said  Jess,  lifting  her  apron 
to  her  cheeks  which  were  glowing  with 
blushes  and  laughter.  "No  that  I 
wanted  him ;  but  he  came  in  wi'  the 
news  aboot  the  new  minister,  and  noo  I'll 
never  hear  an  end  o't,  and  the  maister 
will  think  he's  aye  there." 

"If  he's  a  decent  lad  and  means 
weel,  its  nae  great  matter,"  said  the 
mistress  ;  "  but  I  dinna  approve  of  ower 
mony  lads.  Ye  may  gang  through  the 
wood  and  through  the  wood  and  take 
but  a  crooked  stick  at  the  end." 

"  There's  naebody  I  ken  o'  that  the 
mistress  can  mean,  but  Bowed  Jacob," 
said  Jess  reflectively,  "and  ane  might 
do  waur  than  take  him  though  he's  nae 
great  figure  of  a  man.  The  siller  that 
body  makes  is  a  miracle,  and  it  would 
be  grand  to  live  in  a  twa-storied  house, 
and  keep  a  lass ;  but  he's  an  awfu' 
establishment  man,  and  he  micht  in- 
terfere wi'  my  convictions,"  said  the 
young  woman  with  a  glimmer  of  humour 
which  found  no  response  in  the  mis- 
tress's serious  eyes  ;  for  Mrs.  Campbell, 
being  of  a  poetical  and  imaginative 
temperament,  took  most  things  much  in 
earnest,  and  was  slow  to  perceive  a 
joke. 

"You  shouldna  speak  about  convic- 
tions in  that  light  way,  Jess,"  said  the 
farmer's  wife.  "  I  wouldna  meddle  wi' 
them  mysel',  no  for  a'  the  wealth  o'  the 
parish  ;  but  though  the  maister  and  me 
are  strong  Kirk  folk,  ye  ken  ye  never 
were  molested  here." 

"  To  hear  Archie  Candlish  about  the 
new  minister  ! "  cried  Jess,  whose  quick 
ear  had  already  ascertained  that  her 
master  had  paused  in  the  kitchen  to 
speak  to  her  visitor,  "  ye  would  laugh ; 
but  though  it's  grand  fun  for  the  folk, 
maybe  it's  no  so  pleasant  for  the  poor 
man.  We  put  down  our  names  for  the 
man  we  like  best,  us  Free  Kirk  folks,  but 
its  different  in  the  parish.  There's 
Tamiuas  Scott,  he  YO\VO  he'll  object  to 


every  presentee  the  Earl  puts  in.  I'm  no 
heeding  for  the  Earl,"  said  Jess  ;  "he's 
a  dour  tory  and  can  fecht  for  himseP  ; 
but  eh  I  wouldna  be  that  poor  minister 
set  up  there  for  a'  the  parish  to  object 
to.  I'd  rather  work  at  a  weaver's  loom 
or  sell  herrings  about  the  country-side,  if 
it  was  me  ! " 

"Weel,  weel,  things  that  are  hard 
for  the  flesh  are  guid  for  the  spirit — or 
at  least  folk  say  so,"  cried  the  mistress 
of  Eamore. 

"  I  dinna  believe  in  that  for  my  part," 
said  the  energetic  Jess,  as  she  lifted 
the  wooden  cradle  in  her  strong  arms. 
"  Leave  the  wean  still,  mistress,  and  draw 
your  shawl  about  ye.  I  could  carry 
you  too,  for  that  matter.  Eh  me,  I'm 
no  o'  that  way  o'  thinking ;  when  ye're 
happy  and  weel  likit,  ye're  aye  good  in 
proportion.  No  to  gang  against  the 
words  o'  Scripture,"  said  Jess,  setting 
down  the  big  cradle  with  a  bump  in 
her  mistress's  bedroom,  and  looking 
anxiously  at  the  sleeping  baby,  which 
with  a  little  start  and  gape,  resisted  this 
attempt  to  break  its  slumbers ;  "  but  eh, 
mistress,  it's  aye  my  opinion  that  the 
happier  folk  are  the  better  they  are.  I 
never  was  as  happy  as  in  this  house," 
continued  the  grateful  handmaiden,  fur- 
tively pursuing  a  tear  into  the  corner  of 
her  eye,  with  a  large  forefinger,  "no 
that  I'm  meaning  to  say  I'm  guid; 
but  yet — " 

"  You  might  be  waur,"  said  the  mis- 
tress, with  a  smile.  "  You've  aye  a  kind 
heart  and  a  blythe  look,  and  that  gangs 
a  far  way  wi'  the  maister  and  me.  But 
it's  time  Archie  Candlish  was  hame  to 
his  mother.  When  there's  nae  moon 
and  such  heavy  roads,  you  shouldna 
bring  a  decent  man  three  mile  out  of  his 
way  at  this  hour  o'  the  nicht  to  see 
you." 

"Me?  as  if  /  was  wanting  him," 
said  Jess,  "  and  him  no  a  word  to  say  to 
me  or  ony  lass,  but  about  the  beasts  and 
the  new  minister.  I'll  be  back  in  half 
a  minute ;  I  wouldna  waste  my  time 
upon  a  gomeril  like  yon." 

While  Jess  sallied  forth  through  the 
chilly  passages  to  which  the  weeping 
atmosphere  had  communicated  a  sensa- 
tion of  universal  damp,  the 


78 


A  Sen  of  the  Soil 


knelt  down  to  arrange  her  infant  more 
comnxodiously  in  its  homely  nest.  The 
red  firelight  made  harmless  glimmers 
all  over  her  figure,  catching  now  and 
then  a  sidelong  glance  out  of  her  eyes 
as  she  smoothed  the  little  pillow,  and 
laid  the  tiny  coverlet  over  the  small 
unconscious  creature  wrapt  closely  in 
webs  and  bands  of  sleep.  When  she 
had  done,  she  still  knelt  watching  it  as 
mothers  will,  with  a  smile  upon  her 
face.  After  a  while  the  beaming  soft 
dark*  eyes  turned  to  the  light  with  a 
natural  attraction,  to  the  glimmers  of 
the  fire  shooting  accidental  rays  into  all 
the  corners,  and  to  the  steady  little 
candle  on  the  mantel-shelf.  The  mis- 
tress looked  round  on  all  the  familiar 
objects  of  the  homely  low-roofed  cham- 
ber. Outside,  the  rain  fell  heavily  still 
upon  the  damp  and  sodden  country, 
soaking  silently  in  the  dark  into  the 
forlorn  wheat-sheaves,  which  had  been 
standing  in  the  fields  to  dry  in  ineffec- 
tual hopefulness  for  weeks  past.  Mat- 
ters did  not  look  promising  on  the  farm 
of  Eamore,  and  nothing  had  occurred 
to  add  any  particular  happiness  to  its 
mistress's  lot.  But  happiness  is  perverse 
and  follows  no  rule,  and  Jess's  senti- 
ment found  an  echo  in  Mrs.  Campbell's 
mind.  As  she  knelt  by  the  cradle,  her 
heart  suddenly  swelled  with  a  conscious- 
ness of  the  perfection  of  life  and  joy  in 
her  and  around  her.  It  was  in  homely 
words  enough  that  she  gave  it  expression 
— "A'  weel,  and  under  ae  roof,"  she  said 
to  herself  with  exquisite  dews  of  thank- 
fulness in  her  eyes.  "  And  the  Lord  have 
pity  on  lone  folk  and  sorrowful,"  added 
the  tender  woman,  with  a  compassion 
beyond  words,  a  yearning  that  all  might 
be  glad  like  herself ;  the  pity  of  happi- 
ness, which  is  of  all  pity,  the  most 
divine.  Her  boys  were  saying  abrupt 
prayers,  one  by  one,  as  they  sank  in 
succession  into  dreamless  slumber.  The 
master  had  gone  out  in  the  rain  to  take 
one  last  look  over  his  kyne  and  his  farm- 
yard, and  see  that  all  was  safe  for  the 
night,  and  Archie  Candlish  had  just 
been  dismissed  with  a  stinging  jest 
from  the  kitchen  door,  which  Jess 
bolted  and  barred  with  cheerful  din, 
singing  softly  to  herself  as  she  went 


about  the  house  putting  up  the  innocent 
shutters,  which  could  not  have  resisted 
the  first  touch  of  a  skilful  hand.  The 
rain  was  falling  all  over  the  wet  silent 
country ;  the  Holy  Loch  gleamed  like 
a  kind  of  twilight  spot  in  the  darkness, 
and  the  house  of  Eamore  stood  shut 
up  and  hushed,  no  light  at  all  to  be 
seen  but  that  from  the  open  door, 
which  the  farmer  suddenly  extin- 
guished as  he  came  in.  But  when 
solitary  light  died  out  from  the  in- 
visible hillside,  and  the  darkness  and 
the  rain  and  the  whispering  night  took 
undisturbed  possession,  was  just  the 
moment  when  the  mother  Avithin,  kneel- 
ing over  her  cradle  in  the  firelight, 
was  surprised  by  that  sudden  conscious 
touch  of  happiness. — "  Happiness  ?  oh, 
ay,  weel  enough ;  we've  a  great  deal  to 
be  thankfu'  for,"  said  big  Colin,  with  a 
little  sleepy  surprise  ;  "  if  it  werna  for 
the  sprouting  corn  and  the  broken 
weather ;  but  I  dinna  see  onything  par- 
ticular to  be  happy  about  at  this  minute, 
and  I'm  gaun  to  my  bed." 

For  the  prose  and  the  poetry  did  not 
exactly  understand  each  other  at  all 
times,  even  in  the  primitive  farm-house 
of  Eamore. 

CHAPTEE  III. 

THE  internal  economy  of  a  Scotch  parish 
is  not  so  clearly  comprehensible  now-a- 
days  as  it  was  in  former  times.  Civiliz- 
ation itself  has  made  countless  inroads 
upon  the  original  unities  everywhere, 
and  the  changes  that  have  come  to  pass 
within  the  recollection  of  the  living 
generation  are  almost  as  great  though 
very  different  from  those  which  made 
Scotland  during  last  century  so  pictu- 
resque in  its  state  of  transition.  When 
Sunday  morning  dawned  upon  the  Holy 
Loch,  it  did  not  shine  upon  that  pretty 
rural  picture  of  unanimous  church-going 
so  well-known  to  the  history  of  the  past. 
The  groups  from  the  cottages  took  dif- 
ferent ways — the  carriage  from  the  Castle 
swept  round  the  hill  to  the  other  side  of 
the  parish,  where  there  was  an  "English 
Chapel."  The  reign  of  opinion  and 
liking  was  established  in  the  once 
primitive  community.  Half  of  the 


A  Son  of  the  Soil 


79 


people  ascended  the  hillside  to  the  Free 
Church,  while  the  others  wound  down 
the  side  of  the  loch  to  the  Kirk,  which 
had  once  accommodated  the  whole  parish. 
This  state  of  affairs  had  hecome  so  usual 
that  even  polemical  feeling  had  ceased 
to  a  great  extent,  and  the  two  streams 
of  church-going  people  crossed  each 
other  placidly  without  recriminations. 
This  day,  for  a  wonder,  the  sun  was 
shining  brightly,  notwithstanding  a 
cloudy  stormy  sky,  which  now  and  then 
heaved  forward  a  rolling  mass  of  vapour, 
and  dispersed  it  sharply  over  the  hills 
in  a  flying  mist  and  shower.  The  parish 
church  lay  at  the  lower  end  of  the  loch, 
a  pretty  little  church  built  since  the 
days  when  architecture  had  penetrated 
even  into  Scotland.  Colin  of  Ramore 
and  his  family  were  there  in  their  pew, 
the  boys  arranged  in  order  of  seniority 
between  Mrs.  Campbell,  who  sat  at  the 
head,  and  the  farmer  himself  who  kept 
the  seat  at  the  door.  Black-eyed  Johnnie 
with  his  hair  bleached  white  by  constant 
exposure,  and  his  round  eyes  wandering 
over  the  walls  and  the  pews  and  the 
pulpit  and  the  people,  sat  by  his  mother's 
side,  and  the  younger  Colin  occupied 
his  post  of  seniority  by  his  father.  They 
were  all  seated,  in  this  disposition,  when 
the  present  occupant  of  the  Castle,  Sir 
Thomas  Frankland,  lounged  up  the  little 
aisle  with  his  son  after  him.  Sir  Thomas 
was  quite  devout  and  respectable,  a  man 
who  knew  how  to  conduct  himself  even 
in  a  novel  scene — and  after  all  a  Pres- 
byterian church  was  no  novelty  to  the 
sportsman — but  to  Harry  the  aspect  of 
everything  was  new,  and  his  curiosity 
was  excited.  It  was  a  critical  moment 
in  the  history  of  the  parish.  The  former 
minister  had  been  transferred  only  a  few 
weeks  before  to  a  more  important  station, 
and  the  Earl,  the  patron,  had,  according 
to  Scotch  phraseology,  "  presented "  a 
new  incumbent  to  the  living.  This  un- 
happy man  was  ascending  the  pulpit 
when  the  Franklands,  father  and  son, 
entered  the  church.  For  the  Earl's 
presentation  by  no  means  implied  the 
peaceable  entrance  of  the  new  minister; 
he  had  to  preach,  to  give  the  people  an 
opportunity  of  deciding  whether  they 
liked  him  or  not ;  and  if  they  did  not 


like  him,  they  had  the  power  of  "  object- 
ing," that  is,  of  urging  special  reasons 
for  their  dislike  before  the  Presbytery, 
with  a  certainty  of  making  a  little  noise 
in  the  district,  and  a  reasonable  proba- 
bility of  disgusting  and  mortifying  the 
unlucky  presentee,  to  the  point  of  throw- 
ing up  his  appointment.  All  this  was 
well  known  to  the  unfortunate  man,  who 
rose  up  in  the  pulpit  as  Sir  Thomas 
found  a  seat,  and  proceeded  to  read 
the  psalm  with  a  somewhat  embarrassed 
and  faltering  voice.  He  was  moderately 
young  and  well-looking,  with  a  face,  at 
the  present  moment,  more  agitated  than 
was  quite  harmonious  with  the  position 
in  which  he  stood :  for  he  was  quite 
aware  that  everybody  was  criticizing 
him,  and  that  the  inflections  of  his 
voice  and  the  fiery  tint  of  his  hair  were 
being  noted  by  eager  commentators  bent 
upon  finding  ground  for  an  "objection" 
in  everything  he  said.  Such  a  con- 
sciousness naturally  does  not  promote 
ease  or  comfort.  His  hair  looked  red- 
der than  ever,  as  a  stray  ray  of  sun- 
shine gleamed  in  upon  him,  and  his 
voice  took  a  nervous  break  as  he  looked 
over  the  many  hard  unsympathetic 
faces  which  were  regarding  him  with 
the  sharp  curiosity  and  inspection  of 
excited  wits.  While  Harry  Frankland 
made,  as  he  thought,  "an  ass  of  him- 
self" on  every  occasion  that  offered — 
standing  bolt  upright  when  the  congre- 
gation began  to  sing,  which  they  did 
at  their  leisure,  seated  in  the  usual  way 
— and  kicking  his  heels  in  an  attempt 
to  kneel  when  everybody  round  him 
rose  up  for  the  prayer,  and  feeling 
terribly  red  and  ashamed  at  each  mis- 
take, Colin  the  younger,  of  Eamore, 
occupied  himself,  like  a  heartless  young 
critic  as  he  was,  in  making  observations 
on  the  minister.  Colin,  like  his  father, 
had  a  high  opinion  of  "  popular  rights." 
It  was  his  idea,  somehow  drawn  in 
with  the  damp  Highland  air  he  breathed, 
that  the  right  of  objecting  to  a  presentee 
was  one  of  the  most  important  privileges 
of  a  Scotch  Churchman.  Then,  he  was 
to  be  a  minister  himself,  and  the  con- 
sciousness of  this  fact  intensified  the 
natural  opposition  which  prompted  the 
boy's  mind  to  resist  anything  and  every- 


80 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


thing  that  threatened  to  "be  imposed  on 
him.  Colin  even' listened  to  the  prayer, 
which  was  a  thing  not  usual  with  him, 
that  he  might  find  out  the  objectionahle 
phrases.  And  to  be  sure  there  were 
plenty  of  objectionable  phrases  to  mar 
the  real  devotion ;  the  vainest  of  vain 
repetitions,  well-known  and  familiar  as 
household  words  to  every  Scotch  ear, 
demonstrated  how  little  effect  the  ab- 
sence of  a  liturgy  has  in  promoting 
fervent  and  individual  supplications. 
The  congregation  in  general  listened, 
like  young  Colin,  standing  up  in  easy 
attitudes,  and  observing  everything  that 
passed  around  them  with  open-eyed  com- 
posure. It  did  not  look  much  like 
common  supplication,  nor  did  it  pretend 
to  be — for  the  people  were  but  listening 
to  the  minister's  prayer,  which,  to  tell 
the  truth,  contained  various  expository 
and  remonstrative  paragraphs,  which 
were  clearly  addressed  to  the  congrega- 
tion ;  and  they  were  all  very  glad  to  sit 
down  when  it  was  over,  and  clear  their 
throats,  and  prepare  for  the  sermon, 
which  was  the  real  business  of  the  day. 

"I  dinna  like  a'  that  new-fangled 
nonsense  to  begin  with,"  said  Eben 
Campbell,  of  Barnton,  as  he  walked 
home  after  church,  with  the  party  from 
Ramore  ;  "  naebody  wants  twa  chapters 
read  at  one  diet  of  worship.  The  Bible's 
grand  at  hame,  but  that's  no  what  a 
man  gangs  to  the  kirk  for ;  that,  and  so 
mony  prayers — it's  naething  but  a  great 
offput  of  time." 

"  But  we  never  can  have  ower  muckle 
o'  the  word  of  God,"  said  Colin  of  Ea- 
inore's  wife. 

"  I'm  of  Eben's  opinion,"  said  another 
neighbour.  "  We  have  the  word  o'  God 
at  hame,  and  I  hope  we  make  a  good 
use  o'  it ;  but  that's  no  what  we  gang 
to  the  kirk  to  hear.  When  ye  see  a 
man  that's  set  up  in  the  pulpit  for 
anither  purpose  a'thegether,  spending 
half  his  time  in  reading  chapters  and 
ither  preliminaries,  I  aye  consider  it's  a 
sure  sign  that  ho  hasna  muckle  o'  his 
ain  to  say." 

They  were  all  walking  abreast  in  a 
leisurely  Sunday  fashion  up  the  loch ; 
the  children  roaming  about  the  skirts  of 
the  older  party,  some  in  front  and  some 


behind,  occasionally  making  furtive  in- 
vestigations into  the  condition  of  the 
brambles,  an  anti-Sabbatical  occupation 
which  was  sharply  interrupted  when 
found  out  —  the  women  picking  their 
steps  along  the  edges  of  the  muddy 
road,  with  now  and  then  a  word  of 
pleasant  gossip,  while  the  men  trudged 
on  sturdily  through  the  puddles,  dis- 
cussing the  great  subject  of  the  day. 

"  Some  of  the  new  folk  from  the 
Castle  were  in  the  kirk  to-day,"  said  one 
of  the  party, — "  which  is  a  respect  to 
the  parish  the  Earl  doesna  pay  himself. 
Things  are  terrible  changed  in  that 
way  since  my  young  days.  The  auld 
Earl,  this  ane's  father,  was  an  elder  in 
the  Kirk ;  and  gentle  and  simple,  we  a' 
said  our  prayers  thegether — " 

"  I  dinna  approve  of  that  expression," 
said  Eben  of  Barnton.  "To  speak  of 
saying  your  prayers  in  the  kirk  is  pure 
papistry.  Say  your  prayers  at  hame, 
as  I  hope  we  a'  do,  at  the  family  altar, 
no  to  speak  of  private  devotions,"  said 
this  defender  of  the  faith,  with  a  glance 
at  the  unlucky  individual  who  was  un- 
derstood not  to  be  so  regular  in  the 
article  of  family  prayer  as  he  ought  to 
have  been.  "We  gang  to  the  kirk  to 
have  our  minds  stirred  up  and  put  in 
remembrance.  I  dinna  approve  of  the 
English  fashion  of  putting  everything 
into  the  prayers." 

"  Weel,  weel,  I  meant  nae  harm,"  said 
the  previous  speaker.  "  We  a'  gaed  to 
the  Kirk,  was  what  I  meant  to  say ;  and 
there's  the  Queen,  she  aye  sets  a  grand 
example.  You'll  no  find  her  driving 
off.  three  or  four  miles  to  an  English 
Chapel.  I  consider  it's  a  great  respect 
to  the  parish  to  see  Sir  Thomas  in  the 
Castle  pew." 

"  I  would  rather  see  him  respect  the 
Sabbath  day,"  said  Eben  Campbell, 
pointing  out  a  little  pleasure-boat,  a 
tiny  little  cockle-shell,  with  a  morsel  of 
snow-white  sail,  which  just  then  ap- 
peared in  the  middle  of  the  loch,  rushing 
up  beautifully  before  the  wind,  through 
the  placid  waters,  and  lighting  up  the 
landscape  with  a  touch  of  life  and 
motion.  Young  Colin  was  at  Eben's 
elbow,  and  followed  the  movement  of 
his  baud  with  keen  eyes.  A  spark  of 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


81 


jealousy  had  kindled  in  the  boy's  breast 
— he  could  not  have  told  why.  He  was 
not  so  horrified  as  he  ought  to  have 
been  at  the  sight  of  the  boat  disturbing 
the  Sunday  quiet ;  but,  with  a  swell  of 
indignation  and  resentment  in  his  boyish 
heart,  he  thought  of  the  difference 
between  himself  and  the  young  visitor  at 
the  Castle.  It  looked  symbolical  to  Colin. 
He,  trudging  heavily  over  the  muddy, 
lengthy  road ;  the  other,  flying  along  in 
that  dainty,  little,  bird-like  boat,  with 
those  white  wings  of  sail,  which  pleased 
Colin' s  eye  in  spite  of  himself,  carrying 
him  on  as  lightly  and  swiftly  as  heart 
could  desire.  Why  should  one  boy 
have  such  a  wonderful  advantage  over 
another?  It  was  the  first  grand  pro- 
blem which  had  puzzled  and  embittered 
Colin's  thoughts. 

"  There  they  go  ! "  said  the  boy.   "  It's 
fine  and  easy,  running  like  that  before 
the  wind.     They'll  get  to  the  end  o* 
the  loch  before  we've  got   over  a  mile. 
That  makes  an  awi'u'  difference,"  said 
Colin,   with   subdued  wrath ;   he  was 
thinking  of  other  things  besides  the  long 
walk  from  church  and  the  muddy  road. 
"  We'll  may  be  get  home  as  soon,  for 
all  that,"  said  his  father,  who  guessed 
the  boy's  thoughts ;  for  the  elder  Colin's 
experienced  eye  had  already  seen  that 
mists    were    rising    among    the    hills, 
and  that  the  fair  breeze  would  soon  be 
fair  no  longer.     The  scene  changed  as  if 
by  enchantment  while  the  farmer  spoke. 
Such  changes  come  and  go  like  breath 
over  the   Holy   Loch.      The   sunshine 
which  had  been  making  the  whole  land- 
scape into  a  visible  paradise,  vanished 
suddenly  off  the  hills  and  waters  like  a 
frightened  thing,  and  a  visible  darkness 
came    brooding    over    the    mountains, 
dropping  lower   every  moment  like   a 
pall  of  gloom  over  the  lower  banks  and 
the  suddenly  paled  and  shivering  loch. 
The  joyous  little  sail,  which  had  been 
careering  on  as  if  by  a  natural  impulse  of 
delight,  suddenly  changed  its  character 
along  with  all  the  other  details  of  the 
picture.     The  spectators  saw  its  white 
sail,  fluttering  like  an  alarmed  seabird, 
against  the  black  background  of  cloud. 
Then  it  began  to  tack  and  waver  and 
•      No.  49. — VOL.  ix. 


make  awkward  tremulous  darts  across 
the  darkened  water.-  The  party  of 
pedestrians  stood  still  to  watch  it,  as 
the  position  became  dangerous.  They 
knew  the  loch  and  the  winds  too  well 
to  look  on  with  composure.  As  for 
young  Colin  of  Eamore,  his  heart 
began  to  leap  and  swell  in  his  boyish 
bosom.  Was  that  his  adversary,  the 
favoured  rival  whom  he  had  recognised 
by  instinct,  who  was  fighting  for  his 
life  out  there  in  midwater,  with  the 
storm  gaining  on.  him,  and  his  little 
vessel  staggering  in  the  wind  ?  Colin 
did  not  hear  the  remarks  of  the  other 
spectators.  He  felt  in  his  heart  that 
he  was  looking  on  at  a  struggle  which 
was  for  life  or  death,  and  his  contempt 
for  the  skill  of  the  amateur  sailor, 
whose  unused  hands  were  so  manifestly 
unable  to  manage  the  boat,  was  mingled 
with  a  kind  of  despair  lest  a  stronger 
power  should  snatch  this  opponent  of 
his  own  out  of  the  future  strife,  in 
which  Colin  had  vowed  to  himself  to  be 
victorious. 

"  You  fool !  take  in  the  sail,"  he 
shouted,  putting  both  his  hands  to  his 
mouth,  forgetting  how  impossible  it  was 
that  the  sound  could  reach ;  and  then 
scarcely  knowing  what  he  was  about, 
the  boy  rushed  down  to  the  beach,  and 
jumped  into  the  nearest  boat.  The  sound 
of  his  oars  furiously  plashing  through 
the  silence  was  the  first  indication  to 
his  companions  of  what  he  had  done. 
And  he  did  not  even  seo  nor  hear  the 
calls  and  gestures  with  which  he  was 
summoned  back  again.  His  oars,  and 
how  to  get  there  at  a  flight  like  a  bird, 
occupied  his  mind  entirely.  Yet  even 
in  his  anxiety  he  scorned  to  ask  for 
help  which  would  have  carried  him  so 
much  sooner  to  the  spot  he  aimed  at. 
At  the  sound  of  his  oars  dashed  and 
echoed  through  the  profound  silence, 
various  outcries  came  from  the  group  on 
the  bank. 

"  It's  tempting  Providence,"  cried 
Eben  Campbell.  "  Yon's  a  judgment 
on  the  Sabbath-breaker, — and  what  can 
the  laddie  do]  Come  back,  sir,  this 
moment,  come  back  !  Ye'll  never  win 
there  in  time." 

a 


82 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


As  for  the  boy's  mother,  after  his  first 
start  she  clasped  her  hands  together, 
and  watched  the  boat  with  an  interest 
too  intense  for  words.  "  He's  in  nae 
danger,"  she  said  to  herself  softly ;  and 
it  would  have  been  hard  to  tell  whether 
she  was  sorry  or  glad  that  her  boy's  enter- 
prise was  attended  by  no  personal  peril. 

"  Let  him  be,"  said  the  farmer  of 
Ramore,  pushing  aside  his  anxious 
neighbour,  who  was  calling  Colin  in- 
effectually but  without  intermission. 
Colin  Campbell's  face  had  taken  a 
sudden  crimson  flush  which  nobody 
could  account  for.  He  went  off  up  the 
beach  with  heavy  rapid  steps,  scattering 
the  shingle  round  his  feet,  to  a  spot 
exactly  opposite  the  struggling  boat, 
and  stood  there  watching  with  wonderful 
eagerness.  The  little  white  sail  was  still 
fluttering  and  struggling  like  a  distressed 
bird  upon  the  black  overclouded  water. 
'Now  it  lurched  over  till  the  very  mast 
seemed  to  touch  the  loch — now  recovered 
itself  for  a  tremulous  moment — and 
finally,  shivering  like  a  living  creature, 
gave  one  wild  sudden  stagger,  and  dis- 
appeared. When  the  speck  of  white 
vanished  out  of  the  black  landscape,  a 
cry  came  out  of  all  their  hearts ;  and 
hopeless  as  it  was,  the  very  man  who 
had  been  calling  Colin  back,  rushed  in 
his  turn  to  a  boat  and  pushed  off 
violently  into  the  loch.  The  women 
stood  huddled  together,  helpless  with 
terror  and  grief.  "  The  bit  laddie ! 
the  bit  laddie ! "  cried  one  of  them 
— "  some  poor  woman's  bairn."  As 
for  Mrs.  Campbell,  the  world  grew 
dark  round  her  as  she  strained  her  eyes 
after  Colin's  boat.  She  did  not  faint, 
for  such  was  not  the  habit  of  the  Holy 
Loch ;  but  she  sank  down  suddenly  on 
the  wet  green  bank,  and  put  up  her 
hand  over  her  eyes  as  if  to  shade  them 
from  some  imaginary  sunshine,  and  gazed, 
not  seeing  anything,  after  her  boy.  To 
see  her,  delicate  as  she  was,  with  the 
woman  weakness  which  they  all  under- 
stood, seating  herself  in  this  wild  way 
on  the  wet  bank,  distracted  the  attention 
of  her  kindly  female  neighbours,  even 
from  the  terrible  event  which  had  just 
taken  place  before  their  eyes. 


"  Maybe  the  lad  can  swim,"  said  Eben 
Campbell's  wife — "  onyway  yonder's 
your  Colin  running  races  with  death  to 
save  him.  But  you  maunna  sit  here — 
come  into  Dugald  Macfarlane's  house. 
There's  my  man  away  in  another  boat 
and  some  mair.  But  we  canna  let  you 
sit  here." 

"  Eh,  my  Colin,  I  canna  see  my 
Colin,"  said  the  mistress  of  Eamore ; 
but  they  led  her  away  into  the  nearest 
cottage,  notwithstanding  her  reluctance. 
There  they  all  stood  clustering  at  the 
window,  aiding  the  eyes  which  had 
failed  her  in  her  weakness.  Colin's 
mother  sat  silent  in  the  chair  where 
they  had  placed  her,  trembling  and 
rocking  herself  to  and  fro.  Her  heart 
within  her  was  praying  and  crying  for 
the  boys — the  two  boys  whom  in  this 
moment  of  confused  anxiety  she  could 
not  separate — her  own  first-born,  and 
the  stranger  who  was  "  another  woman's 
bairn."  God  help  all  women  and 
mothers  ! — though  Colin  was  safe,  what 
could  her  heart  do  but  break  at  the 
thought  of  the  sudden  calamity  which 
had  shut  out  the  sunshine  from  another. 
She  rocked  herself  to  and  fro,  ceasing 
at  last  to  hear  what  they  said  to  her, 
and  scarcely  aware  of  anything  except 
the  dull  clank  of  the  oars  against  the 
boat's  side  ;  somebody  coming  or  going, 
she  knew  not  which — always  coming  or 
going  —  never  bringing  certain  news 
which  was  lost  and  which  saved. 

The  mistress  of  Ramore  was  still  in 
this  stupor  of  anxiety,  when  young 
Harry  Frankland,  dripping  and  all  but 
insensible,  was  carried  into  Dugald 
Macfarlane's  cottage.  The  little  room 
became  dark  instantly  with  such  a  cloud 
of  men  that  it  was  difficult  to  make  out 
how  he  had  been  saved,  or  if  there  was 
indeed  any  life  left  in  the  lad.  But 
Dugald  Macfarlane's  wife,  who  had  the 
ferry-boat  at  Struan,  and  understood 
about  drowning,  had  bestirred  herself  in 
the  meantime,  and  had  hot  blankets  and 
other  necessities  in  the  inner  room  where 
big  Colin  Campbell  carried  the  boy. 
Then  all  the  men  about  burst  at  once 
into  the  narrative.  "  If  it  hadna  been 
for  little  Colin  o'  Eamore — "  was  about 


A  Son  of  the  Soil 


83 


all  Mrs.  Campbell  made  out  of  the  tale. 
The  cottage  was  so  thronged  that  there 
was  scarcely  an  entrance  left  for  the 
doctor  and  Sir  Thomas  who  had  both 
been  summoned  by  anxious  messengers. 
By  this  time  the  storm  had  come  down 
upon  the  loch,  and  a  wild  sudden  tem- 
pest of  rain  was  sweeping  black  across 
hill  and  water,  obliterating  every  line 
of  the  landscape.  Half-way  across, 
playing  on  the  surface  of  the  water  was 
a  bit  of  spar  with  a  scarlet  rag  attached 
to  it,  which  made  a  great  show  glisten- 
ing over  the  black  waves.  That  was  all 
that  was  visible  of  the  pleasure-boat  in 
which  the  young  stranger  had  been 
bounding  along  so  pleasantly  an  hour 
before.  The  neighbours  dropped  off 
gradually,  dispersing  to  other  adjacent 
houses  to  talk  over  the  incident,  or 
pushing  homeward  with  an  indifference 
to  the  storm  that  was  natural  to  the 
dwellers  on  the  Holy  Loch  ;  and  it  was 
only  when  she  was  left  alone,  waiting  for 
her  husband,  who  was  in  the  inner 
room  with  Sir  Thomas  and  the  saved 
boy,  that  Mrs.  Campbell  perceived 
Colin' s  bashful  face  gleaming  in  fur- 
tively at  the  open  door. 

"  It's  no  so  wet  as  it  was  ;  come  away, 
mother,  now,"  said  Colin,  "there's  nae 
fears  o'  him."  And  the  lad  pointed  half 
with  an  assertion,  half  with  an  inquiry, 
towards  the  inner  room.  It  was  an 
unlucky  moment  for  the  shy  hero,  for 
Just  then  big  Colin  of  Ramore  appeared 
with  Sir  Thomas  at  the  door. 

"  This  is  the  boy  that  saved  my  son," 
said  Harry's  father.  "  You  are  a  brave 
fellow;  neither  he  nor  I  will  ever  forget 
it.  Let  me  know  if  there  is  anything 
I  can  serve  you  in,  and  to  the  best  of 
my  exertions  I  will  help  you  as  you 
have  helped  me.  What  does  he  say  1 " 

"  I  say,"  said  Colin  the  younger,  A\*ith 
fierce  blushes,  "  that  it  wasna  me.  I've 
done  naething  to  be  thanked  for.  Yon 
fellow  swims  like  a  fish,  and  he  saved 
himself." 

And  then  there  came  an  answering 
voice  from  the  inner  room — a  boy's 
voice  subdued  out  of  its  natural  falsetto 
into  feminine  tones  of  weakness,  "  He's 
telling  a  lie,  that  fellow  there,"  cried  the 


other  from  his  bed ;  "  he  picked  me  up 
when  I  was  about  done  for.  I'll  fight 
him  if  he  likes  as  soon  as  I'm  able. 
But  that's  a  lie  he  tells  you  ;  that's 
him — that  Campbell  fellow  there." 

Upon  which  young  Colin  of  Kamore 
clenched  his  fists  in  his  wet  pockets 
and  faced  towards  the  door,  which 
Dugald  Macfarlane's  wife  closed  softly, 
looking  out  upon  him,  shaking  her 
head  and  holding  up  a  finger  to  impose 
silence ;  the  two  fathers  meanwhile 
looked  in  each  other's  faces.  The 
English  baronet  and  the  Scotch  farmer 
both  broke  into  a  low,  unsteady  laugh, 
and  then  with  an  impulse  of  fellowship 
mutually  extended  their  hands. 

"  We  have  nae  reason  to  think  shame 
of  our  sons,"  said  Colin  Campbell  with 
his  Scotch  dignity ;  "  as  for  service  or 
reward  that  is  neither  here  nor  there ; 
what  my  boy  did  your  boy  would  do  if  he 
had  the  chance,  and  there's  nae  mair  to 
be  said  that  I  can  see." 

"  There's  a  great  deal  more  to  be 
said,"  said  Sir  Thomas  ;  "  Lady  Frank- 
land  will  call  on  Mrs.  Campbell,  and 
thank  that  brave  boy  of  yours  ;  and  if 
you  think  I  can  forget  such  a  service, — 
I  tell  you  there's  a  great  deal  more  to 
be  said,"  said  the  sportsman,  breaking 
down  suddenly  with  a  little  effusion,  of 
which  he  was  half  ashamed. 

"  The  gentleman's  right,  Colin,"  said 
the  mistress  of  Bamore.  "  God  be 
thanked  for  the  twa  laddies  !  My  heart 
was  breaking  for  the  English  lady.  God 
be  thanked  !  That's  a'  there  is  to  say. 
But  I'll  be  real  glad  to  see  that  open- 
hearted  callant  when  he's  well,  and  his 
mother  too,"  said  the  farmer's  wife, 
turning  her  soft  eyes  upon  Sir  Thomas, 
with  a  gracious  response  to  the  over- 
flowing of  his  heart.  Sir  Thomas  took 
off  his  hat  to  her  as  respectfully  as  he 
would  have  done  to  the  Queen,  when  she 
took  her  husband's  strong  arm,  and 
followed  Colin,  who  by  this  time,  with 
his  hands  in  his  pockets  and  his  heart 
beating  loudly,  was  halfway  to  Kamore  ; 
and  now  they  had  other  topics  besides 
that  unfailing  one  of  the  new  minister 
to  talk  of  on  the  way. 

To  l>e  continued. 

G'2 


84- 


A  WEEK  IN  RUSSIAN  POLAND. 


BY    EDWARD   DICEY. 


IN  the  middle  of  last  September  I  left 
London  for  Poland.  Owing  to  private 
circumstances,  the  time  that  I  could 
afford  to  be  away  from  London  was 
extremely  limited.  Numbers  of  people 
assured  me  that,  in  the  first  place,  I 
should  never  get  to  Warsaw ;  that,  in 
the  second,  I  should  be  arrested  or  sent 
to  Siberia,  or  stabbed  by  some  patriotic 
assassin  if  I  ever  did  get  there ;  and, 
thirdly,  that  if  I  did  escape  these  mis- 
adventures, I  should  not  see  anything 
worth  the  trouble  I  had  taken.  How- 
ever, I  did  accomplish  the  journey 
without  incurring  the  calamities  prog- 
nosticated, and  saw  a  good  deal  which 
to  me  at  any  rate  was  very  new  and 
strange,  and  therefore  worth  the  seeing. 
About  the  journey  itself,  let  me  say  in 
passing,  there  is  no  difficulty  whatever. 
If  you  can  stand  two  consecutive  nights 
of  very  luxurious  railway  travelling,  you 
can  take  an  early  breakfast  to-day  in 
London,  and  dine  at  six  in  Warsaw  the 
day  after  to-morrow ;  and  yet,  I  will 
venture  to  say,  you  will  see  a  stranger 
spectacle  that  any  journey  of  a  similar 
length  can  afford  you  at  the  present 
day.  It  would  be,  of  course,  absurd  to 
attempt,  from  a  week's  hasty  view,  to 
discuss  the  Polish  question.  All  I  wish 
to  do,  all  I  shall  attempt  to  do,  is  to 
convey  to  my  readers  the  impression 
left  upon  my  mind  by  that  railway 
scamper  of  mine  through  the  length 
and  breadth  of  Poland. 

The  one  train  in  the  four-and-twenty 
hours  from  Berlin  to  Warsaw  starts 
very  near  midnight.  I  may  state  for 
the  benefit  of  intending  travellers,  that 
the  fare  in  the  second-class  carriages — • 
which  are  as  luxurious  as  our  own 
Great  Western  first — is  under  two 
pounds,  and  the  time  occupied  by  the 
journey,  including  innumerable  stop- 
pages, is  less  than  twenty  hours.  A 
long  night's  sleep,  and  I  woke  up  in 
the  grey  morning  light,  as  the  train 
came  snorting  into  the  town  of  Brom- 


berg.  There,  for  the  first  time,  I  saw  a 
Polish-  peasant  in  real  life.  Anything" 
more  squalid  and  wretched-looking  I 
never  looked  upon.  Clad  in  a  long 
grey  coat  hanging  in  tatters  about  his 
bare  dirt-begrimed  feet,  his  dark  matted 
hair  clustering  in  tangled  wisps  from 
underneath  a  greasy  cap,  crouching  and 
shivering  in  the  cold  morning  air,  with 
a  hang-dog  look  and  gait,  he  seemed 
more  like  a  scarecrow  set  up  in  the 
fields  to  frighten  the  birds  than  a  living 
human  being.  I  had  thought  before 
that  the  back  slums  of  London  and 
Liverpool  had  a  monopoly  of  this  type 
of  human  misery,  but  a  creature  so 
haggard,  hungry-looking,  and  helpless, 
never  caught  my  eye  out  of  Poland. 
Before  the  day  had  passed  I  had  seen 
hundreds  like  him,  along  the  route  of 
my  journey,  but  he  remains  fixed  in 
my  mind  with  the  vividness  of  a  first 
impression. 

At  Bromberg  we  left  the  Posen  train, 
and  turned  eastwards  towards  the  Rus- 
sian frontier  through  Russian  Poland. 
No  country  in  the  world  looks  cheerful 
seen  through  the  haze  of  drizzling  mist 
and  rain,  but  I  doubt  whether  an  Italian 
sunlight  would  have  made  the  scenery 
we  passed  through  anything  but  cheer- 
less. The  pine  forests,  which  give  a 
grim  picturesqueness  to  Russian  Poland, 
were  here  almost  wanting,  and  instead 
we  had  nothing  but  bare  dreary  fields 
on  either  side.  The  harvest  was  all 
gathered  in,  and  it  seemed  hard  to 
realize  that  anything  ever  could  have 
grown  on  that  damp  dun-coloured  soil. 
Except  the  roadside  stations,  not  a 
house  was  to  be  seen  for  miles,  and 
even  the  curiosity  of  seeing  a  neAV 
country  would  hardly  induce  me  to  keep 
looking  out  at  that  monotonous  succession 
of  fields  and  fallow  land.  Happily,  I 
was  not  without  society  in  my  carriage. 
In  the  first  place,  I  had,  for  a  short 
time,  the  company  of  a  German  "  Guts- 
Besitzerin,"  who  possessed  the  merit  of 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


85 


being  the  most  communicative  specimen 
of  German  womanhood — and  that  is 
saying  a  good  deal — that  I  ever  came 
across.  In  the  space  of  half  an  hour  she 
told  me  the  history  of  her  marriage,  the 
circumstances  of  her  husband's  death, 
the  amount  of  property  he  had  left  her 
— (the  "grosse  Erbschaft,"  as  she  de- 
scribed it,  consisting  of  ten  thousand 
thalers'  worth  of  landed  estate),  the 
diseases  that  her  children  had  had,  and 
her  own  intentions  with  regard  to  a 
second  marriage.  She  also  volunteered 
details  of  the  rapidity  with  which  her 
different  confinements  had  followed  one 
another,  of  a  nature  not  commonly 
dilated  upon.  My  part  in  the  conversa- 
tion was  confined  to  saying,  "  So,"  and 
"  1st  es  mb'glich  ? "  whenever  I  thought 
politeness  required  that  I  should  say 
anything.  Any  vanity  I  might  have 
felt  at  having  been  selected  as  the  object 
of  such  confidence  was  destroyed  by  the 
fact  that,  as  soon  as  she  had  poured 
forth  her  troubles  and  adventures  into 
my  ears,  she  turned  to  some  ladies 
in  the  carriage,  and  repeated  the  same 
story  with  equal  frankness  to  them.  I 
may  add,  without  impoliteness,  that 
hands  and  feet  of  such  size  as  were 
possessed  by  my  travelling  acquaintance 
I  never  saw  before,  and  hope  never  to 
see  again. 

The  ladies  who  shared  with  me  the 
confessions  of  this  German  widow  were 
Poles,  with  whom  I  had  journeyed  from 
Berlin.  The  party  consisted  of  two 
elderly  ladies — sisters,  as  far  as  I  could 
gather — who  were  travelling  back,  to- 
gether with  their  children,  to  some 
Polish  town  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Wilna.  In  the  early  part  of  our  journey 
I  had  interchanged  a  few  remarks  with 
them  in  German;  and  as  their  knowledge 
of  that  language  was  not  very  perfect, 
and  as  my  remarks  were  very  short,  they 
took  me  for  a  Prussian,  and,  though 
perfectly  civil,  did  not  seem  disposed  to 
enter  upon  conversation.  However,  it 
happened  that  one  of  the  ladies  com- 
plained to  me  about  the  incivility  she 
had  received  from  some  Prussian  guard 
on  the  line  ;  and  my  repudiation  of  any 
responsibility  for  German  breeding  dis- 


closed the  fact  that  I  was  not  a  member 
of  the  Fatherland.     Let  me  repeat,  that 
my   acquaintance's    knowledge  of   the 
German  language  was  extremely  limited, 
or  else  my  nationality  would  have  been 
discovered  long  before  this.     As  it  was, 
the  mere  fact  that  I  was  not  a  German, 
and,  therefore,  not  necessarily  an  enemy 
of  Poland,  changed  civility  at  once  into 
cordiality.     A  similar  fact  I  noticed  re- 
peatedly throughout  my  stay  in  Poland. 
Foreigners  are  rare  as  visitors  in  that 
most  unattractive  of  countries,  and  the 
people  have  not  yet  learnt  to  distinguish 
the  peculiarities  by  which  our  country- 
men are  known  at  once  in  other  parts 
of  the   Continent.     Thus,  at  Warsaw, 
if  you  speak  to  anybody  in  German,  he 
will  probably  understand  you,  but  he 
will  treat  you  to  the  curtest  of  answers 
consistent   with  bare   civility;   if  you 
speak  in  French,  the  chances  are,  unless 
the  person  you  address  is  of  the  educa- 
ted classes,  he  will  not  understand  you, 
but  he  will  treat  you  with  the  utmost 
civility,  and  use  most  laudable  efforts 
to  guess  at  your  meaning.     There  is, 
however,   to    my  mind,    one    extreme 
drawback  to  the  pleasure  of  conversa- 
tion with  any  casual  Polish  acquaint- 
ances.    With  no  fault  of  your  own,  you 
feel  yourself  an  impostor  while  listening 
to  their  recitals  of  their  sufferings  and 
receiving  their  civilities.     You  see   so 
clearly  that  they  have  an  idea  you  can 
be  of  some  service  to  them  in  influencing 
English  policy  in  their  behalf,  and  you 
know  so  perfectly  well  that  you  have  as 
much  chance  of  influencing  the  policy 
of  the  Lama  of  Thibet.     The  fact  that 
you  are  a  private  individual,  travelling 
for  your  own  amusement,  and  with  no 
political   power  whatever,  is  one   that 
the  Polish  mind  finds  it  very  hard  to 
realize. 

This  experience  held  good  on  the 
present  occasion.  The  discovery  of  my 
being  an  Englishman  opened  the  hearts 
of  my  fellow-travellers,  who  forthwith 
began  to  expatiate  on  the  miseries  to 
which  their  country  was  subjected.  In- 
deed, our  intimacy  increased  with  a 
rapidity  somewhat  alarming  to  myself. 
AVe  were  fast  approaching  the  Russian 


86 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


frontier,  and  my  new  friends  proposed 
that  we  should  represent  ourselves  as 
travelling  together,  and  also  that  I  should 
pass  an  extremely  bulky  cigar-case 
through  the  custom-house  in  my  own 
pockets.  To  the  first  proposal,  I  re- 
gret to  say  for  my  own  gallantry,  I 
returned  a  distinct  negative ;  the  second 
I  accepted  on  the  positive  assurance  that 
the  case  contained  nothing  but  cigarettes. 
The  assurance  was  given  with  extreme 
readiness,  but  I  know  that  the  cigar-case 
was  very  heavy,  and  the  sides  felt  sus- 
piciously thick  and  crisp,  as  if  they  were 
stuffed  with  papers.  I  am  afraid  that 
my  manner  did  not  imply  implicit  con- 
fidence ;  for,  after  being  entrusted  with 
the  mysterious  case,  I  was  deprived  of 
it  before  arriving  at  the  custom-house, 
in  favour  of  a  Polish  Jew  who  was 
standing  on  the  platform.  I  did  every- 
thing in  my  power  by  assisting  in  the 
transport  of  cloaks  and  luggage  and 
children  to  atone  for  this  inevitable 
want  of  complaisance,  but  I  fear  greatly 
I  never  quite  recovered  the  ground  that 
I  had  lost. 

A  custom-house  is  not  a  lively  place 
at  the  best  of  times,  and  the  process  of 
being  searched  is  not  exhilarating ;  but 
I  never  remember  a  scene  more  dismal 
than  that  of  the  Otloczyn  station  on 
that  grey  chilly  morning.  A  long  low 
shed  standing  in  the  midst  of  a  grey 
expanse  of  bare  sandy  moorland,  a  crowd 
of  ragged  blear-eyed  beggars  loitering 
about  listlessly,  a  detachment  of  grey- 
coated  heavy-looking  Russian  soldiers 
drawn  up  upon  the  platform  waiting  to 
receive  us,  a  few  roadside  hovels,  and  a 
deserted  Cossack  camp,  are  all  the  ob- 
jects that  I  can  recall  as  breaking  the 
monotony  of  the  scene.  Personally  the 
custom-house  officers  were  civil  to  me, 
as,  indeed,  were  all  the  Eussian  officials 
that  I  came  across.  Everything  that  I 
had  was  subjected  to  a  most  minute 
search.  Nothing,  however,  could  be 
more  innocent  than  my  luggage,  with 
one  single  exception.  In  packing  my 
trunk  I  had  wrapped  up  a  pair  of  boots 
in  the  first  newspaper  that  came  to  hand. 
As  ill-luck  would  have  it,  this  newspaper 
was  an  old  copy  of  the  Illustrated  Lon- 


don News,  which  happened  to  contain 
a  picture  of  some  episode  in  the  Polish  in- 
surrection. The  paper  was  passed  gravely 
from  one  official  to  another,  and  at  last 
I  was  informed  it  must  be  sent  on  to 
Warsaw.  I  assured  my  examiners  that 
the  paper  was  absolutely  worthless  to 
me,  and  that  they  were  welcome  to 
burn  it  on  the  spot ;  but  no  argument  I 
could  use  was  of  the  slightest  avail 
The  paper  and  all  the  books  in  my  pos- 
session must,  I  was  told,  be  laid  before 
the  Imperial  Censorship  at  Warsaw. 
My  travelling  library  consisted  of  five 
volumes  —  "  Goethe's  Correspondence 
with  Karl  August,"  in  German  ;  G.  H. 
Lewes's  "  Life  of  Goethe,"  and  an  Eng- 
lish "  Bradshaw."  I  pleaded  hard  for  the 
last-named  volume,  which  I  valued  more 
than  all  the  rest,  but  to  no  purpose. 
Strange  to  say,  the  Eussian  officials 
overlooked  a  French  novel,  which  I 
found  afterwards  in  a  corner  of  my  bag  ; 
and  yet  the  title,  "Jeme  tuerai  demain," 
was  one  which  might  well  have  been 
considered  to  have  a  hidden  reference  to 
the  present  state  of  Poland.  I  recon- 
ciled myself  as  best  I  could  to  the  loss 
of  my  books,  and  had  taken  my  seat  in 
the  carriages  for  Warsaw,  when  I  was 
summoned  back  to  the  presence  of  a 
higher  official  who  enjoyed  a  private 
room  of  his  own.  This  gentleman  in- 
formed me  that  the  expense  of  trans- 
mitting my  books  to  Warsaw  would  be 
some  unintelligible  number  of  copecks. 
I  expostulated  on  the  unreasonableness 
of  requiring  me  to  pay  for  the  transport 
of  my  own  books  in  order  that  the  Go- 
vernment censors  might  have  the  plea- 
sure of  perusing  them.  I  had  no  hopes 
that  my  expostulations  would  be  suc- 
cessful, but  I  dreaded  the  alternative  of 
having  to  pay  an  unknown  sum  of 
money.  Finding  this  plea  of  no  avail, 
I  produced  a  Prussian  thaler,  in  return 
for  which  the  official  had  the  grace  to 
hand  me  some  minute  debased  copper 
coins.  I  made  out  afterwards  that,  in 
giving  me  change,  he  probably  appro- 
priated some  two  shillings  out  of  the 
thaler  for  himself,  but,  as  he  might  per- 
fectly well  have  given  me  nothing,  or  even 
have  asked  for  more,  I  feel  grateful  to 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


87 


him  for  his  forbearance.  In  return  I 
received  a  receipt  in  Russian,  and  was 
told  that  if  I  sent  up  to  the  censorship 
in  two  days'  time  I  should  duly  receive 
back  my  books,  if  found  unobjectionable. 
I  never  saw  the  books  again.  I  sent 
time  after  time,  and  was  always  told  that 
the  books  had  not  yet  been  revised ;  and 
I  had  to  leave  Warsaw  finally  before  the 
censors  even  made  up  their  minds  as 
to  the  political  tendency  of  Goethe's  life 
and  letters,  and  of  Bradshaw's  figures. 
My  case  was  not  an  exceptional  one, 
as  nobody  is  allowed  to  introduce 
foreign  books  into  Poland  without 
permission.  Before  I  leave  the  subject 
of  the  custom-house,  let  me  record 
one  other  trait  of  Russian  management 
which  struck  me  as  eminently  charac- 
teristic. My  luggage  was  registered 
through  from  Berlin  to  Warsaw,  and 
therefore  was  entirely  out  of  my  care 
and  possession.  As  I  have  stated,  it 
was  examined  carefully  at  Otloczyn,  and 
replaced  in  the  luggage  vans.  I  thought 
the  whole  bother  was  now  over  ;  but  it 
was  examined  a  second  time  at  a  roadside 
station  some  thirty  miles  beyond  the 
frontier,  and  again  at  Warsaw  itself. 
No  conceivable  object  could  be  assigned 
for  the  unnecessary  delay  and  trouble 
occasioned  by  this  threefold  examination 
of  objects  all  of  which  were  under  the 
sole  custody  of  the  railway  officials,  and 
to  which  their  owners  had  no  access 
whatever  during  the  journey.  The  only 
credible  explanation  that  I  heard  given 
for  the  practice  was,  that  it  was  intended 
as  a  check  on  the  possible  dishonesty 
of  the  custom-house  searchers.  Owing 
to  the  almost  universal  corruption  of  the 
Russo-Polish  officials,  smuggling  is  car- 
ried on  to  such  an  extent  that  the  Go- 
vernment is  obliged  to  resort  to  the 
most  elaborate  expedients  in  order  to 
secure  some  kind  of  supervision. 

The  mode  in  which  our  journey  com- 
menced was  not  calculated  to  remove 
any  apprehensions  of  a  nervous  traveller. 
Our  train  was  a  short  one  of  half-a- 
dozen  carriages.  Immediately  behind 
the  tender  was  a  long  open  car  of  that 
extinct  order  of  railway  carriages  which 
used  to  be  called  a  "  tub  "  in  the  early 


days  of  English  railroads,  but  which 
has  now  disappeared  from  use.  This 
tub,  which  was  not  even  provided  with 
benches  or  seats  of  any  kind,  was  filled 
with  some  forty  Russian  soldiers  with 
fixed  bayonets,  ready  to  fire  at  once  at 
any  insurgents  that  might  make  their 
appearance  on  the  line.  Behind  the 
break- van  there  was  a  second  tab  filled 
in  the  same  manner,  so  that  an  escort 
of  nearly  a  hundred  men  was  considered 
necessary  to  secure  the  safety  of  the 
train.  JSTor  was  this  precaution  uncalled 
for.  But  a  couple  of  days  before  that 
on  which  I  made  the  journey,  the 
Grand  Duke  Constantino  had  passed 
over  the  same  line  on  his  way  to  Berlin. 
His  train,  besides  the  usual  escort,  was 
preceded  and  followed  at  a  short  dis- 
tance by  special  trains  filled  with  sol- 
diers ;  and  yet,  in  spite  of  these  pre- 
cautions, the  insurgents  approached  so 
near  that  the  Grand  Duke  could  see 
their  pickets  from  his  carriage  win- 
dows. On  the  return  of  his  escort  they 
were  attacked  by  the  insurgents,  and 
achieved  one  of  those  indecisive  victories 
which  the  Russian  troops  have  rarely 
failed  in  winning  whenever  they  come 
into  contact  with  any  large  body  of 
Poles.  This  skirmish,  however,  had 
cleared  the  country  for  the  time,  and 
nothing  was  to  be  seen  of  the  insur- 
gents as  we  passed  along. 

The  distance  from  the  frontier  to 
Warsaw  is  213  wersts,  and  we  took 
about  nine  hours  in  doing  it.  The  rate 
of  travelling  was  by  no  means  slow 
for  the  Continent,  but  the  stoppages 
at  the  roadside  stations  were  wearisomely 
long.  We  were  always  stopping  to 
take  up  or  put  down  soldiers,  and 
our  passports  were  constantly  being 
overhauled.  No  one  was  allowed  to 
leave  the  carriage  at  any  station  till  he 
had  exhibited  his  papers  ;  and  at  every 
stopping-place  files  of  soldiers  were 
drawn  up,  before  whom  any  one  leav- 
ing the  train  was  obliged  to  pass.  Al- 
together the  journey  was  a  dreary  one. 
The  sky  had  that  pallid,  leaden-coloured 
hue  so  common  in  northern  climates, 
and  to  me  so  inexpressibly  depressing. 
The  country  in  itself  had  .  nothing  to 


88 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


repay  looking  at.  We  passed  one  town, 
Kutno,  which  seemed  in  the  distance  to 
have  a  handsome  church  picturesquely 
placed  on  the  bend  of  a  river ;  we 
caught  a  glimpse,  at  Skiernewich,  of 
a  tumbledown  shooting-box  of  the 
Imperial  family,  which,  with  its  ponds 
and  bosquets  and  pagodas,  bore  some 
faint  resemblance  to  the  Petit  Trianon. 
But,  with  these  two  exceptions,  each 
stage  of  our  journey  was  the  exact 
counterpart  of  any  other.  Every  few 
miles  or  so  the  train  plunged  into  a 
pine  forest.  All  over  Poland,  at  any 
rate  at  that  season  of  the  year,  the 
bark  of  the  pines  seemed  to  have  peeled 
off  at  about  two-thirds  of  their  height. 
It  was  impossible  at  first  to  avoid  the 
impression  that  the  sun  had  broken 
out  in  the  low  horizon  and  was  light- 
ing up  faintly  the  tops  of  the  lofty 
trees  ;  but  as  soon  as  you  emerged  from 
the  wood,  you  found  out  that  you  had 
been  subject  to  an  optical  delusion,  and 
that  the  dull,  grey  sky  was  as  unbroken 
as  ever.  Every  now  and  then  in  the 
midst  of  these  forests  you  saw  encamp- 
ments of  mounted  Cossacks,  the  horses 
fastened  to  the  stumps  of  the  pines, 
which  had  been  cut  down  in  order 
to  make  a  clearing,  and  the  soldiers 
sleeping  on  the  ground,  or  crouching 
round  camp  fires.  Then  you  come 
out  into  the  open  country.  It  is  not 
ilat  like  the  western  prairies,  so  that 
you  have  not  even  the  satisfaction  of 
gazing  over  a  vast  expanse.  The  extent 
of  country  you  could  see  at  any  single 
moment  was  not  large.  You  passed 
through  one  series  after  another  of 
long,  low,  bare  hillocks,  till  you  got 
absolutely  impatient  at  never  coming  to 
any  break  in  the  monotony.  The  land 
itself  struck  me  as  rich,  but  the  cul- 
tivation was  of  the  poorest  order.  The 
few  scattered  farm-houses  that  we 
passed  were  all  covered  with  thatch, 
and  looked  singularly  wretched  and 
lonely.  In  front  of  each  house  stood 
that  most  primitive  of  water -raising 
machines,  which  consists  of  a  long  pole 
balanced  on  the  top  of  another,  with  a 
bucket  at  one  end  and  a  heavy  stone 
at  the  other.  It  was  Sunday,  but  there 


were  a  good  number  of  peasants  work- 
ing in  the  fields,  all  miserably  dressed, 
and  almost  all  barefooted.  The  roads 
that  our  line  crossed  were  little  better 
than  tracks ;  and  there  was  no  indication 
of  any  money  having  been  spent  upon 
the  country,  except  for  the  construction 
of  the  railroads,  for  the  last  century. 
My  Polish  companions  several  times 
called  my  attention  to  what  they  con- 
sidered the  beauty  of  the  scenery 
through  which  our  road  lay.  I  tried 
to  simulate  some  expression  of  admira- 
tion, at  the  expense  of  strict  veracity ; 
but  I  own  the  whole  aspect  of  the 
country  seemed  to  me  exactly  expressed 
by  the  one  American  epithet  of  "  God- 
forsaken." 

At  every  road-side  station  there  was 
a  crowd  collected.  Very  few  of  the 
bystanders  were  expectant  passengers. 
As  far  as  I  could  gather,  they  had 
assembled  together  partly  because  they 
had  a  vague  idea  of  seeing  some  ac- 
quaintance arrive  or  depart,  still  more 
because  they  had  absolutely  nothing 
else  to  do.  Of  local  costume  there  was 
little  to  be  seen.  Beyond  the  fact  that 
everybody  was  dirty  and  wretched-look- 
ing and  squalid  to  a  degree  I  never  saw 
elsewhere,  there  was  nothing  to  distin- 
guish the  crowd  from  any  assemblage  of 
ordinary  German  peasants  and  mecha- 
nics. The"  one  vestige-  of  picturesqueness 
lay  in  the  costume  of  the  Jews,  whose 
number  was  enormous.  They  all  wore 
long  black  or  drab-coloured  coats  reach- 
ing down  to  their  ankles,  and  resembling 
closely  dilapidated  Noah's-ark  coats  of 
the  type  which  were  in  fashion  in 
London  some  six  years  ago.  They  all 
had  top-boots  of  a  cross  between  a 
Blucher  and  a  Hessian ;  and  they  all 
had  their  hair  twisted  into  two  cork- 
screw ringlets  hanging  down  either 
cheek.  Their  look  was  somewhat  less 
hungry,  and  their  dress,  if  possible, 
somewhat  greasier  than  that  of  the 
ordinary  Pole ;  but,  beyond  this,  there 
was  not  a  pin  to  choose  between  Jew 
and  Gentile.  The  whole  population — • 
I  am  speaking  laterally,  not  meta- 
phorically— had  a  scrofulous  look,  and 
the  quantity  of  blear-eyed  children  that 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


89 


I  saw  hanging  about  was  something  in- 
credible. There  were,  too,  so  it  seemed 
to  me,  an  unusual  proportion  of  cripples 
and  idiots  loitering  about  the  platforms. 
It  may  be,  that,  like  the  traveller  who 
formed  a  theory  as  to  the  colour  of  hair 
in  France  from  one  red-haired  woman 
he  saw  in  Calais,  I  generalize  too  much 
from  one  particular  experience  ;  I  only 
know  that  every  day  of  the  few  I  passed 
in  Poland  confirmed  my  first  impression 
of  the  utter  squalor  and  misery  of  the 
population. 

Nobody,  according  to  the  German 
saying,  except  madmen  and  Englishmen, 
ever  travel  first-class.  Certainly,  as  far 
as  comfort  is  concerned,  there  can  be  no 
reason  why  anybody  should  pay  half  as 
much  again  for  the  sake  of  sitting  on  a 
seat  lined  with  red  velvet  instead  of  grey 
cloth :  but  on  these  Polish  railroads  there 
is  a  third  description  of  mankind,  besides 
the  two  named  above,  which  travels  first. 
The  Russian  officers  occupy  the  velvet- 
covered  carriages  in  solitary  state. 
They  do  so  for  the  simple  reason,  that 
travelling  in  mixed  company  is  ex- 
tremely unpleasant  to  them.  No  Pole 
will  speak  to  them,  or  enter  into  any 
sort  of  communication  with  them.  In 
our  carriage,  there  was  a  very  quiet 
and  well-bred  young  Russian  lieutenant, 
almost  a  lad,  who  made  several  attempts 
at  conversation,  which  were  received  in 
the  most  frigid  silence,  till  at  last  his 
courage  gave  way,  and  he  betook  himself 
back  to  an  empty  first-class  carriage. 
I  observed  that,  in  his  presence,  my 
friends  professed  to  be  absolutely  ignorant 
of  Russian,  and  incapable  even  of  telling 
me  the  meaning  of  an  inscription  on  my 
luggage-receipt.  As  soon,  however,  as 
he  was  gone,  their  recollection  of  Russian 
returned,  and  they  proceeded  to  translate 
a  number  of  Russian  regulations  for  my 
benefit,  adding  at  times,  I  fear,  glosses 
of  their  own.  For  instance  :  they  in- 
formed me  that  a  very  short  printed 
notice  stuck  up  on  the  side  of  the 
carriage,  was  an  intimation  that  no 
traveller  was  to  look  out  of  the  win- 
dow on  approaching  Warsaw,  under 
pain  of  being  subject  to  military  execu- 
tion. I  felt  that,  it'  the  statement  was  cor- 


rect, Russian  must  be  a  language  gifted 
with  the  power  of  expressing  a  great 
deal  in  very  few  words;  and  I  found 
afterwards,  as  I  suspected,  that  the  no- 
tice was  simply  of  the  ordinary  order, 
warning  travellers  against  the  danger  of 
putting  their  heads  out  of  the  windows. 
The  names  of  the  stations,  I  may  add, 
were  written  up  both  in  Polish  and 
Russian,  but  the  latter  language  seemed 
to  be  employed  on  every  occasion  when 
it  was  possible  to  do  so  without  occasion- 
ing practical  inconvenience  to  the  admi- 
nistration of  the  railroad. 

It  was  growing  dusk  when  I  reached 
Warsaw.  As  we  came  nearer,  I  per- 
ceived that  my  companions  grew  less 
and  less  communicative,  and  I  saw 
clearly  their  feeling  was,  that  a  chance 
acquaintance,  which  was  all  very  well 
travelling,  was  not  safe  under  the  pre- 
sent state  of  things  in  the  capital.  So, 
on  arriving  at  the  station,  they  bade  me 
a  hasty  good-bye,  and  I  was  left  to  my 
own  energies  to  find  my  way.  I  ex- 
perienced there  a  sensation  which  to  me 
was  a  novelty,  but  not  a  pleasing  one.  For 
the  first  time  for  many  years  I  was  in  a 
place  where  everybody  spoke  a  language 
utterly  unintelligible  to  me.  However, 
I  have  a  great  faith  in  all  travelling  diffi- 
culties being  easily  surmounted,  if  you 
take  them  quietly;  and  time  was  of  very- 
little  object.  For  upwards  of  an  hour 
I  was  kept  at  that  miserable  station. 
In  the  first  place,  I  had  to  have  my 
passport  visaed,  and  was  asked  innumer- 
able questions,  in  broken  German,  about 
why  I  came  to  Warsaw,  whom  I  knew 
there,  and  what  i  intended  to  do  there. 
Then  my  pockets  were  searched  in  a 
way  very  galling  to  British  pride,  and  a 
long  discussion  was  held  over  a  letter  I 
had  with  me,  sealed  with  the  stamp  of 
the  Foreign  Office.  Finally,  the  officials 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  was  not  a 
spy,  though  I  saw  clearly  they  adopted 
the  even  less  flattering  one,  that  I  was  a 
madman,  or  else  I  should  never  have 
come  to  Warsaw  at  all.  Then  I  wqg 
handed  over  to  the  custom-house  officers, 
who  overhauled  my  luggage  carefully 
and  scrupulously  ;  then  I  was  detained 
in  a  waiting-room  for  a  lengthened 


90 


A  WeeJc  in  Russian  Poland* 


period,  for  no  conceivable  reason  that  I 
could  ever  discover,  during  which  period 
I  consoled  myself  with  tasting  a  sort  of 
potato  brandy,  called  Wodka,  not  alto- 
gether contemptible  ;  then  I  was  turned 
loose  amidst  a  howling  multitude  of 
Jew  commissionaires,  each  of  whom 
had  marked  me  for  his  own,  and  was 
resolved  to  carry  me  off  to  some  obscure 
hotel ;  and,  finally,  after  paying  every- 
body for  doing  nothing,  I  got  safely  into 
a  droschky,  and  was  driven  through  the 
half-lit  streets  to  what  was  then  the 
chief  inn  of  Warsaw,  the  Hotel  de 
TEurope. 

Within  a  few  days  of  my  visit,  a  spy 
was  killed  in  this  very  house,  and  the 
hotel  was  forthwith  shut  up,  and  is  now 
confiscated  for  the  use  of  the  Russian 
Government.  The  gloom  of  its  impend- 
ing fate  seems  to  me  to  have  hung  over 
the  house  when  I  was  there.  Everybody 
was  civil  enough,  but  there  was  an  air  of 
listlessness  and  insolvency  about  the 
whole  establishment.  The  building  was 
an  immense  one,  and  the  solitary  porter 
who  received  me  at  the  doors  led  me 
through  a  series  of  vast,  empty  corridors, 
till  at  last  he  ushered  me  into  a  room 
large  enough  to  have  housed  a  family. 
By  asking,  and  repeated  ringing,  you 
could  get  what  you  wanted,  after  a  time ; 
but  nobody  volunteered  anything,  and  it 
appears  to  me  that  if  I  had  chosen  to  go 
to  bed  and  remain  there  till  the  present 
hour,  not  a  soul  would  have  entered  the 
room  to  see  whether  I  was  alive  or  dead. 
I  recollect  meeting  with  a  very  similar 
reception  about  a  year  ago,  when  I  esta- 
blished myself  at  the  St.  Clair  Hotel,  at 
Nashville,  soon  after  the  occupation  of 
that  town  by  the  Federal  troops.  I  had 
no  incivility  to  complain  of,  but  nobody 
seemed  to  care — what  shall  I  say  1 — a 
"  cuss "  whether  I  came  or  not,  or 
whether  I  spent  anything  in  the  house. 
On  that  occasion  I  was  accompanied  by 
a  worthy  New  Englander,  who,  like 
myself;  was  new  to  the  town.  "  Well, 
stranger,"  I  can  recall  his  saying,  "  I 
don't  know  what  you  think,  but  I 
reckon  this  is  a  hard  place."  So,  I  own, 
it  struck  me  then  that  Warsaw  was  an 
eminently  hard  place,  and  that  opinion 


I  retain  to  the  present  hour.  At  the 
Hotel  '  de  1'Europe,  as  II  believe  at 
most  Polish  hotels,  you  take  your  meals 
at  a  restaurant  attached  to  the  house, 
but  not  under  the  same  management — 
the  result  of  which  arrangement  is,  that 
you  have  to  pay  on  the  spot  for  every 
meal  you  take ;  a  plan  which,  to  the 
traveller,  is  more  economical  than  plea- 
sant. I  dined  in  a  vaulted  room,  closely 
resembling  the  prison  in  which  Manrico 
is  confined  in  the  "  Trovatore,"  and 
feebly  lit  up  by  the  two  candles  on  my 
solitary  table.  Then,  it  being  by  that 
time  about  nine  o'clock,  I  resolved  to 
stroll  out  and  look  about  me.  As  I  was 
leaving  the  house,  however,  the  porter 
rushed  up  and  implored  me  not  to  go 
out  without  a  lantern,  for,  in  case  I  did, 
I  might  get  arrested,  or  stabbed,  or 
shot.  Of  course,  there  were  no  lanterns 
to  be  had  in  the  hotel — there  never 
was  anything  to  be  had  there — and  all 
the  shops  were  closed,  so  there  was 
nothing  to  be  done  except  to  stop  in- 
doors. The  only  amusement  I  could 
devise  was  to  smoke  my  cigar  on  the 
steps  of  the  hotel,  which  looked  out  on 
the  great  "  Place  de  Saxe,"  where  there 
was  not  a  soul  to  be  seen  except  the 
Russian  sentries.  Every  half-hour  a 
patrol  of  soldiers  marched  by  with  a 
dull,  heavy  tramp,  and  about  as  often 
some  belated  passenger  stole  stealthily 
along,  holding  up  his  lantern  before  his 
face,  and  looking  around  him  at  every 
moment.  But  in  half  an  hour's  time 
the  city  appeared  to  have  gone  to  sleep. 
After  ten  o'clock  no  human  being  is 
allowed  to  be  about  the  streets  except 
on  public  duty,  and,  as  soon  as  it  grows 
dark,  every  one  is  obliged,  under  heavy 
penalties,  to  carry  a  lantern  with  him. 
The  effect  of  this  custom  is  very  peculiar 
and  picturesque.  The  whole  street,  in  the 
early  part  of  the  evening,  appears  to  be 
alive  with  gigantic  fire-flies.  As  the  gas 
burns  very  dimly  at  the  best,  and  as 
everybody  is  in  black,  you  hardly  see  the 
walkers  themselves,  and  the  lamps  ap- 
pear to  flicker  up  and  down  as  if  they 
were  carried  by  some  monster  moth. 

In  fact,  at  night,  the  main  streets  of 
the  city  bear  something  of  the  look  of  a 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


91 


Venetian  carnival  on  the  stage.  Then 
and  then  only  is  there  anything  cheer- 
ful in  the  aspect  of  Warsaw.  The 
universality  of  the  mourning  attire  is  in 
itself  depressing.  Man,  woman,  and 
child  are  dressed  -in  black.  Every 
now  and  then  you  see  some  very 
poverty  -  stricken  -  looking  peasant  in 
coloured  clothes,  but  even  then  there  is 
almost  always  some  black  ribbon  about 
his  dress  to  mark  the  mourning.  The 
very  women  who  walk  the  streets  of 
Warsaw  are  dressed  in  black.  In  fact, 
I  doubt  whether  anybody,  with  whom 
poverty  was  not  an  absolute  excuse, 
could  walk  safely  about  the  town  in 
light  colours.  During  the  first  day  of 
my  sojourn  I  wore  an  ordinary  English 
hat.  I  was  perfectly  astonished  at  the 
scowls  of  bitter  hatred  with  which  I 
found  myself  greeted,  from  time  to  time, 
by  passers-by,  whose  faces  I  had  never 
seen  before  ;  till  at  last,  on  inquiry,  I 
found  that  a  hat  was  considered  a 
symbol  of  a  Russian  partisan.  On  ex- 
amining, afterwards,  the  head-gear  of  the 
population,  I  do  not  think  I  saw  a 
dozen  hats  in  the  whole  city.  There  is 
no  doubt  that  this  universal  practice 
of  wearing  black  is  due  partly  to  the 
almost  unanimous  hatred  to  the  Russians, 
but  partly  to  the  fear  of  disobeying  the 
National  Government. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  describe,  day 
by  day,  what  I  saw  in  Warsaw.  The 
days  pass  there,  I  should  say,  slowly 
and  monotonously  for  a  stranger.  I  had 
introductions  to  the  Consulate,  where  I 
was  received  with  a  courtesy  to  which 
all  English  visitors  to  Warsaw  will,  I 
am  sure,  bear  testimony.  Nor  can  I 
lose  this  opportunity  of  recording  my 
gratitude  to  our  vice-consul,  Mr.  White, 
who  probably  knows  more  about  Polish 
affairs  than  any  resident  in  Warsaw,  and 
who  is  possessed  of  a  quality — rare  I 
think,  among  English  diplomatists — a 
readiness  to  impart  information  as  well 
as  to  acquire  it.  Thanks  to  the  hospi- 
tality of  our  representatives,  and  to  the 
fact  that  I  met  an  old  friend  and  fellow- 
traveller  at  Warsaw,  my  stay  there  was 
made  pleasant  enough ;  but  of  the  place 
itself,  the  impression  left  upon  me  is  a 


very  dismal  one.  Amusements  there  are 
absolutely  none,  if  you  except  a  theatre, 
open  two  or  three  nights  a  week,  and 
attended  solely  by  the  Russian  officers. 
You  can  drive  in  the  Lazienki  Park, 
which  the  guide  book  describes  as  a  "Pro- 
menade delicieuse,  d'une  vaste  entendue." 
Yery  pretty  indeed,  it  is,  and  very  like 
the  Cascine  at  Florence,  without  the 
views  of  Fiesole  mountains;  but  the 
grounds  have  that  dreary  look  inseparable 
from  neglect  and  decay ;  and  the  presence 
of  half  a  dozen  carriages  is  not  sufficient 
to  create  anything  of  the  gaiety  of  a 
promenade.  Then,  towards  sunset,  you 
can  walk  in  the  gardens  of  the  Saski" 
Palace,  where  the  Russians  still  allow 
the  Poles  to  congregate  in  groups  of 
three  or  four  together.  But  a  crowd  of 
people  dressed  in  deep  mourning,  and 
moving  about  silently  like  mourners  at  a 
funeral,  is  not  an  exhilarating  spectacle. 
If  you  dine  out,  you  have  to  leave  the 
table  at  nine,  in  order  to  be  safely  housed 
before  the  prohibited  hours ;  and,  in  fact, 
as  soon  as  the  night  comes  on,  a  gloom 
seems  to  sink  over  the  whole  city — the 
patrols  come  out  in  force,  and  the  little 
lamps  are  lit,  as  the  passengers  hurry 
homewards.  For  my  own  part,  I  always 
found  it  impossible  to  divest  my  mind 
of  the  idea  that,  when  I  carried  my  lamp 
about,  I  looked  exactly  like  a  stage  con- 
spirator. Moreover,  there  is  an  art  in 
using  a  lantern,  as  in  most  things,  and 
I  found  that  my  candle  had  a  way  of 
guttering  down  and  going  out  suddenly, 
from  which  lamps  in  the  hands  of  Poles 
appeared  to  be  wonderfully  free.  I 
recollect  my  lantern  getting  blown  out 
suddenly  in  the  centre  of  a  long,  dark 
street,  which  I  was  coming  down  alone. 
I  had  no  matches,  and  there  was  nothing 
for  it  but  to  make  for  a  light  which 
I  could  see  flickering  in  a  distant  shop- 
window  at  the  end  of  the  street.  Hap- 
pily, I  arrived  there  before  any  Rus- 
sian patrol  came  up;  but,  after  that,  I 
always  took  the  precaution  of  carrying 
matches  with  ine.  However,  even  the 
novelty  of  being  obliged  to  carry  a 
lantern  palls  upon  you  after  a  time, 
and,  with  this  exception,  there  is  no 
amusement  in  Warsaw. 


92 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


Let  me  r  try  and  recall  some  of  the 
scenes  that  I  saw  during  my  visit  there, 
which  remain  most  strongly  impressed 
on  my  rnind.     It  is  a  cold  wintry  after- 
noon, and  the  sun  is  struggling  feebly  to 
make  its  way  through  great  hanks  of 
watery  clouds.     I  have   strolled  down 
with   a  friend,  to  whom  Russian  and 
Polish  are  almost  better  known  than 
Ms  native  tongue,  to  see  the  view  of 
Warsaw.     "We  pass  by  the  long  dilapi- 
dated-looking   palace     where    the    old 
kings   of  Poland  used  to   dwell,    and 
come  out  upon  the  great  iron  railway 
bridge,  the  one  work  which,  in  case  of 
their    expulsion,   the   Russians   would 
leave  as  a  reminiscence  of  their  rule 
in  the  Polish  capital.     A  score  of  men 
are  working  listlessly,  tinkering  up  the 
girders  of  the  half-finished  bridge,  al- 
ready rust-eaten    and  weather-stained. 
Beneath  us  is  the  wide  sandy  bed  of 
the  Vistula,     A  few  straggling  shallow 
rills  of  water  are  all  that  is  left  for  the 
time  of  the  torrent  river  ;  a  raft  of  logs 
floating  down  the  broadest  of  these  rills, 
going  Dantzig-wards,  a  couple  of  puny 
steamers,  stranded  high  upon  the  banks, 
are  the  only  signs  of  traffic  to  be  seen. 
The  river  is  so  low  that  the  bridge  of 
boats,  crossing  the  Vistula  a  little  above 
the  railway  viaduct,  lies  resting  upon 
the  sand-banks,  raised  up  and  down  at 
all  sorts  of  angles.     In  the  centre  of 
the  widest  of  the  water-channels  a  dead 
horse  has   been   stranded   on  its  back, 
months  before,  and  shows  no  signs  of 
moving,  though    the    water  has  worn 
away  the  flesh  from  off  its  legs.     Close 
by,  a  gun-boat  is  moored,  with  its  one 
gun  placed  so  as  to  sweep  the  bridge. 
Below  us  lies  the  suburb  of  Praga — a 
collection  of  wood  sheds,  and  railway 
works,  and  low  one-storied,  thatched, 
poverty-stricken  houses ;    and  beyond 
that  stretches   the   dead  dreary   plain, 
over   which  the  line  runs  towards  St. 
Petersburg!!.     On  the  other  side  is  the 
steep,  sandy  cliff  on  which  Warsaw  is 
placed.     The  position  is  a  fine  one,  or 
rather  might  be  a  fine  one,  if  the  town 
had  not  turned  its  back  as  it  were  on 
the  river.     As  it  is,  looking  from  the 
Vistula,  you  gaze  upon  a  series  of  narrow 


back  streets  running  up  the  side  of  the 
cliff,  and  beyond  that  is  the  dead  long 
level  line  of  the  city,  broken  only  by 
the    gilded    cupolas  of  the   cathedral. 
Far  away  to  the  right  stands  the  citadel, 
to  enter  which,  except  as  a  prisoner,  is 
no  easy  task,  and  where  the  guns  are 
always  pointed  towards  the  city.     I  was 
at  Naples  at  the  time  when  the  cannon 
of  Sant  Elmo  were  turned  towards  the 
town,  and  when  it  was  believed  that, 
sooner  than   allow  Garibaldi  to  enter, 
the  timid  king  would  -  summon  '  up  a 
remnant  of  courage  and  fire  upon  his 
capital.     But,  there,  where  everything 
was  so  bright,  and  joyous,  and  full  of 
life,  it  was  impossible  to   realize   that 
such  a  danger  could  ever  exist  in  truth. 
Ko  man,  not  even  a   Bourbon,  could 
have  the  heart  to  destroy  Naples.   Here 
the  impression  was  altogether  different. 
Everything  was  so  dreary,  so  sad,  and 
so  hopeless,  that  if  the  Russians,  in  sheer 
weariness   of  heart,  were  to  shell  the 
devoted    city  from   their    impregnable 
fortress,  it  would  be,  speaking  artisti- 
cally,  the   fitting   end  to   the   fate  of 
Warsaw.      To   finish  with  the   whole 
dismal  task   of    subduing    Poland   for 
once  and  for  all,  is  a  thought  which, 
I  should   think,  must  have  a  strange 
attraction   for   the    half -savage    Tartar 
mind.     What  Suwarrow  did  at  Praga, 
why  should  not  Mouravieff  do  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  Vistula  ? 

Such  was  the  thought  that  passed 
through  my  mind  as  I  stood  upon  the 
bridge  gazing  over  that  dull  expanse  of 
broken  plain,  which  ought,  in  the  fitness 
of  things,  to  be  ended  by  the  sea.  "  A 
few  more  steps,"  my  friend  said  to 
me,  "  and  you  will  be  in  the  midst  of 
Asia."  Wondering  what  his  words 
meant,  I  followed  him,  and  passing  to  the 
opposite  shore,  and  then  crossing  a  low 
hillock,  we  found  ourselves  in  the  heart 
of  a  Cossack  camp.  The  scene,  indeed, 
was  more  like  a  great  gipsy  encamp- 
ment than  anything  I  could  liken  it  to. 
A  number  of  coarse,  ragged  tents  were 
pitched  haphazard  upon  the  field  j 
little,  sturdy,  shaggy  ponies  were  brows- 
ing on  the  scant,  trodden-down  grass, 
fastened  with  ropes  by  their  hind  legs 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


93 


to  stakes  stuck  in  the  ground ;  a  score 
or  so  of  carts  filled  with,  pots,  and 
pans,  and  old  harness,  were  drawn 
up  in  a  sort  of  rough  circle  ;  kettles, 
suspended  on  three  sticks  leaning 
against  each  other,  were  simmering 
over  fires  made  up  of  broken  palings; 
and  lying  round  these  fires  were  swarms 
of  wild-looking  soldiers,  whose  worn 
grey  coats  were  almost  the  colour  of 
the  earth  on  which  they  were  stretched. 
A  troop  of  mounted  Cossacks,  with 
lances  longer  than  themselves  and  their 
horses  put  together,  were  just  riding  in 
from  a  foraging  expedition,  with  great 
bundles  of  hay  piled  upon  their  horses' 
"backs ;  in  one  corner  a  file  of  soldiers 
were  bringing  in  great  iron  cauldrons 
filled  with  some  most  unsavoury  mix- 
ture of  soup  and  meat ;  in  another,  a 
lot  of  half-  drunken  Cossacks  were 
quarrelling  hi  some  rough  horse-play ; 
but  the  great  mass  of  the  troops  were 
crouching  upon  the  ground.  Between 
men  and  officers  there  was  little  ap- 
parent difference.  Possibly  the  former 
were  a  shade  less  grimy  ;  but  that  was 
all.  Their  low  foreheads,  high  cheeks, 
broad  mouths,  lank  hair,  and  copper- 
like  skin,  seemed  to  belong  to  a  different 
race  from  those  of  western  Europe.  As 
soon  as  my  friend  spoke  to  them  in 
Russian,  the  men  crowded  round  us, 
and  stared  at  us  with  a  childish, 
but  good-natured  wonder.  They  were 
mostly  peasant  farmers  from  the  Don, 
who  had  been  forced  to  leave  their 
homes  aud  families  to  come  and  serve 
for  three  years.  The  one  idea  they 
seemed  to  have  was,  that  this  was  the 
fault  of  the  Poles,  who  ought  to  be 
punished,  not  only  as  the  enemies  of 
the  Czar,  but  as  having  inflicted  a  per- 
sonal injury  upon  themselves.  As 
soldiers,  I  should  doubt  their  having 
discipline  enough  to  be  of  much  service, 
but  as  marauders  they  must  be  very 
terrible  when  their  blood  is  up.  Just 
by  their  camp  we  met  a  Galliciau 
peasant,  who  had  taken  a  raft  down 
to  Dantzig,  and  was  walking  home  bare- 
footed, with  a  great  loaf  of  black  bmixl 
beneath  his  arm.  The  man  was  crying 
liko  a  child,  and,  on  my  friend's  asking 


him  what  was  the  matter,  he  said  that 
these  Cossacks — these  "  wicked  foreign- 
ers" as  he  called  them — had  fallen 
upon  him  and  beaten  him  with  their 
sticks  as  he  was  walking  past.  Thou- 
sands of  such  cases  doubtless  occur 
daily;  and  it  is  easy  to  understand 
what  the  state  of  Warsaw  must  be, 
with  a  score  of  Cossack  regiments  en- 
camped in  every  open  space  near  the 
city.  The  Russian  Government  is  not 
directly  to  blame  for  these  acts  of 
brutality;  but  the  Poles,  reasonably 
enough,  detest  a  rule  under  which  such 
acts  can  be  perpetrated  with  impunity.  . 
A  little  further  on,  within  a  stone's 
throw  of  the  camp,  stood  a  round  white- 
washed building.  It  was  the  synagogue 
of  the  poor  Jews  at  "Warsaw,  and  the 
day  happened  to  be  one  of  high  festival — 
the  first  day,  I  believe,  of  the  Jewish 
year.  We  entered  the  building,  which 
was  literally  crammed.  It  was  with  the 
utmost  difficulty  we  could  force  an  en- 
trance. Every  person  within  the  syna- 
gogue was  singing  to  himself  at  the 
highest  pitch  of  his  voice.  Singing  is 
hardly  the  proper  word ;  for  the  prayer, 
as  I  took  it  to  be,  was  a  sing-song  repe- 
tition of  a  number  of  texts.  Everybody 
had  a  book  in  his  hand,  filled  with 
Hebrew  characters,  and  seemed  to  be 
reciting  from  it  aloud.  The  object  of 
each  worshipper  appeared  to  be  to  out- 
sing  every  one  else.  The  excitement 
depicted  on  their  faces  was  really  painful 
to  witness.  Their  bodies  swayed  to  and 
fro  in  harmony  with  the  rise  and  fall  of 
the  doleful  chant ;  the  veins  in  their 
necks  were  swollen  with  the  efforts  they 
were  making  to  raise  their  voices.  Be- 
hind the  gratings  of  the  gallery  which 
went  round  the  church  jrou  could  see 
the  dark  eyes  of  the  women  glisten- 
ing brightly;  ragged  little  urchins,  of 
two  years  old  and  upwards,  crawled 
between  the  legs  of  the  worshippers, 
and  kept  on  chanting  like  their  parents, 
except  when  they  were  engaged  in  fight- 
ing with  each  other.  Old  men,  Avho 
looked  so  feeble  that  you  wondered  how 
they  held  themselves  up,  kept  on  shout- 
ing, and  swinging  to  and  fro  with  ;i 
modic  vigour.  The  whole  congregation 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


were  clad  in  the  dress  common  to  the 
Polish  Jews,  of  which  I  have  before 
spoken.  The  heat  was  awful,  and  the 
worshippers  were  addicted  to  primitive 
methods  both  of  spitting  and  blowing 
their  noses,  which  made  close  proximity 
anything  but  attractive.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  was  a  look  of  earnest  devo- 
tion about  the  service  I  never  saw 
equalled  elsewhere.  Every  man  prayed 
as  though  some  awful  danger  were  at 
hand,  to  be  averted  by  the  fervour  of 
his  prayers.  A  rabbi  in  rich-coloured 
vestments,  standing  on  a  raised  plat- 
form, appeared  in  some  way  to  direct 
the  service ;  but  the  congregation  ap- 
parently paid  but  little  heed  to  him, 
each  prayingafter  his  own  fashion.  Fresh 
worshippers  came  passing  in  constantly  ; 
and  passing  out,  we  met  group  after 
group  of  Jews  hastening  to  the  synagogue, 
men  and  women  walking  mostly  apart 
— the  women  with  false  hair  covering 
their  shaven  foreheads,  and  the  men 
leading  little  boys  by  the  hand,  who, 
with  their  high  boots  and  long  coats, 
looked  the  very  counterpart  of  the  old 
wooden  figures  of  Noah  and  his  sons, 
which  I  remember  as  the  inmates  of  the 
Ark  of  one's  childhood.  Along  the 
banks  of  the  Vistula  you  could  see  long 
files  of  Jews  walking  slowly  down,  one 
by  one,  to  the  water's  edge,  gazing 
steadily  at  the  running  stream,  and  then 
turning  slowly  backwards.  Some  of 
the  older  men  bowed  their  heads  till 
they  touched  the  sand,  but  the  generality 
contented  themselves  with  gazing  at  the 
water.  As  far  as  I  could  learn,  the 
river  was  supposed  to  represent  the 
waters  of  Babylon,  and  the  Jews,  as 
they  gazed  upon  it,  were  expected  to 
remember  Zion  in  the  days  of  their 
captivity.  But  in  that  dreary  scene, 
under  that  grey,  cold  sky,  there  was 
something  inexpressibly  mournful  about 
the  ceremony  ;  and  the  thought  would 
force  itself  upon  me,  that  they  were 
come  forth  to  mourn  over  the  approach- 
ing ruin  of  their  adopted,  home.  Why, 
I  have  often  wondered,  is  it  that  the 
Jews  choose  a  place  like  Warsaw,  or  the 
Ghetto  at  Rome,  for  their  especial  home  1 
They  are  miserably  poor  in  Poland ; 


little  money  is  to  be  made  there  at  the 
best,  and  they  have  been,  till  lately, 
cruelly  ill-treated  by  every  successive 
Polish  Government ;  yet  they  hang  on 
there  with  a  strange  tenacity,  and,  what 
is  more,  increase  and  multiply.  At 
the  present  day,  at  least  a  ninth  part  of 
the  whole  Polish  population  is  of  Jew- 
ish race,  and  that  part  represents  fully 
half  the  wealth  and  intelligence  of  the 
country. 

There  is  little  about  Warsaw  itself  to 
distinguish  it  from  any  large  North 
German  town.  The  main  street — the 
Krak  Przed — is  one  of  fair  pretensions ; 
and  there  are  several  public  buildings  of 
good  second-rate  merit ;  but  beyond  this 
there  is  little  that  is  distinctive  about 
the  city.  As  soon  as  you  get  into  the 
suburbs,  you  come  upon  long,  broad, 
straggling  streets  of  one-storied  houses  ; 
and,  in  fact,  it  is  difficult  to  define  where 
the  village  ends  and  the  town  begins. 
The  whole  city  has  that  painful  air, 
familiar  to  persons  acquainted  with 
Pisa  or  Venice,  of  being  too  large  for 
its  inhabitants.  Everything,  with  the 
exception  of  the  official  buildings,  ap- 
pears to  be  left  to  decay.  The  best 
houses  are  half  shut  up ;  the  court- 
yards of  even  the  best  mansions  are 
filled  with  mounds  of  earth,  or  pools 
of  water,  or  heaps  of  planks  and  broken 
bricks.  The  idea  of  using  paint  or 
stucco  to  repair  the  dilapidated  look  of 
the  house-fronts  seems  to  have  been 
abandoned  long  ago.  As  anything  falls 
out  of  repair,  nobody  has  the  heart  to 
mend  it;  the  pavement  of  the  streets 
is  villanous ;  and  ups  and  downs, 
which  are  enough  to  break  the  knees 
or  backs  of  any  but  Polish  horses,  and 
which  a  day's  work  might  set  in  order, 
are  to  be  seen  even  in  the  main 
thoroughfares.  The  one  trade  which 
flourishes  is  that  of  the  droshky- drivers  ; 
the  poorer  a  population  is,  the  fonder, 
I  have  always  observed,  they  are  of 
riding.  But  otherwise  every  trade  was 
paralysed.  Owing  to  the  festival  I 
have  alluded  to,  all  the  Jewish  shpps 
were  shut ;  and  a  very  large  proportion 
of  the  shops  of  every  description  be- 
long to  the  Jews.  But  even  in  those 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


95 


that  were  open  no  business  was  doing, 
and  the  shopmen  looked  astonished  if 
you  offered  to  buy  anything.  During 
the  last  day  of  my  stay  in  Warsaw, 
not  one  shop  in  ten  was  open.  Large 
patrols  of  soldiers  were  going  round 
with  the  tax-collectors  to  levy  the  dues 
for  the  Russian  Government ;  and  in 
order  to  escape  payment  the  owners 
had  closed  their  stores.  In  one  or  two 
that  I  went  into  on  that  day,  I  found 
the  women  crying — the  families  sit 
frequently  in  the  Warsaw  shops,  as 
they  do  in  some  parts  of  Italy — and 
an  air  of  indescribable  depression  was 
visible  everywhere.  The  National 
Government  had  forbidden  payment  of 
the  taxes,  and,  though  it  was  not  be- 
lieved that  the  order  could  be  enforced, 
it  was  still  an  anxious  time  for  all  who 
had  not  the  courage  or  power  to  close 
their  establishments.  Small  groups  of 
people  followed  the  soldiers  on  their 
rounds,  but  as  soon  as  they  came  too 
close  they  were  driven  back  by  the 
troops.  Permission  was  required  to 
pass  the  barriers  of  the  town,  and  it 
required  very  urgent  solicitation  before 
I  could  get  an  order  from  the  police 
authorities  to  drive  outside  the  town  for 
a  couple  of  hours.  That  an  emeute 
was  feared,  I  cannot  believe ;  no  in- 
surrection is  possible  in  a  town  where 
the  number  of  regular  troops  is  equal 
to  that  of  the  able-bodied  men  of  the 
city,  especially  when,  as  in  the  present 
instance,  the  latter  are  unprovided  with 
arms  and  unacquainted  with  their  use. 
But  the  ostentatious  display  of  troops 
on  that  day,  at  every  corner  of  the 
town,  looked  as  if  the  Government 
thought  it  desirable  to  convince  the 
inhabitants  of  the  hopelessness  of  any 
resistance. 

The  churches  were  fuller  than  usual, 
and  very  full  they  were  always.  I  sus- 
pect that  under  the  shelter  of  the  church 
the  Poles  can  meet  with  less  danger 
than  elsewhere.  But,  also,  the  devotion 
of  the  congregation  is  very  striking. 
Constantly  you  would  see  men  and 
women  stretched  flat  upon  the  pavement, 
with  outspread  arms,  before  some  shrine 
or  altar,  and  praying  aloud  with  a  fer- 


vour that  could  not  be  feigned.  All 
over  the  town  there  are  crosses,  and  pic- 
tures of  the  Virgin ;  and  it  is  rare  to  see 
a  Pole  pass  them  without  raising  his 
cap  in  honour  of  the  sacred  image.  The 
churches  themselves  were  barer  of  orna- 
ment, and  more  simple  in  their  decqra- 
tions,  than  the  shrines  of  Southern 
Europe,  and  the  number  of  priests 
visible  about  the  streets  was  much 
smaller  than  in  most  Catholic  countries. 
The  beggars,  however,  were  as  numer- 
ous and  as  decrepit-looking  as  in  Rome 
itself. 

Throughout  the  whole  of  my  stay  in 
Warsaw  my  abiding  feeling  was  a  wish 
to  get  away  from  it.  I  was  comfortable 
enough  there  in  every  respect ;  but  the 
air  of  dejection  and  melancholy,  and  I 
might  almost  say  despair,  which  was 
visible  on  every  face  you  met,  was  op- 
pressing to  a  degree  I  cannot  hope  to 
convey  to  those  who  have  not  expe- 
rienced it.  Probably  most  persons  in 
their  lives  have  been  thrown  accidentally 
into  contact  with  some  household  over- 
whelmed with  the  approach  of  a  great 
calamity.  I  had  a  like  feeling  while  I 
stopped  in  Warsaw.  I  was  in  the  midst 
of  a  great  sorrow,  which  I  could  in  no 
wise  alleviate  or  aid,  and  I  felt  as  if  my 
presence  as  an  indifferent  observer  jarred 
upon  the  misery  I  saw  on  every  side.  I 
know  that  I  was  heartily  glad  when  the 
morning  came  on  which  I  had  settled  to 
quit  Warsaw.  My  route  lay  along 
the  Cracow  line,  which,  after  many  weeks' 
suspension,  had  been  reopened  for 
passenger  traffic  only  four  days  before. 
The  morning  was  chilly  and  wet,  and  I 
left  Warsaw  as  I  had  entered  it,  with  a 
gloomy  pall  of  cloud  hanging  over  it. 
On  this  occasion  —  I  understood  for 
the  first  time  that  year— our  train  was 
allowed  to  run  without  a  military  escort. 
The  trains  that  we  passed,  travelling 
northwards,  were  accompanied  by  large 
bodies  of  troops,  who  were  being  brought 
back  to  Warsaw  from  the  districts  lately 
cleared  of  the  insurgents.  But  the  ordi- 
nary course  of  traffic  was  in  the  act  of 
resumption.  Our  passports  were  no 
longer  required  on  leaving  or  entering 
the  carriages,  and,  except  for  the  files  of 


96 


A  Week  in  Russian  Poland. 


soldiers  with  fixed  bayonets  still  drawn 
up  on  every  platform,  there  was  nothing 
unusual  in  the  fashion  of  our  travelling. 
The  train  was   chiefly  filled  with  the 
representatives  of  German   commercial 
houses,  who  had  returned  on  the  resto- 
ration of  tranquillity  to  look  after  their 
business  relations  in  Poland.    Of  course 
they  were  not  friendly  to  the  cause  of 
the  insurrection  ;  but,  judging  from  their 
conversation,  it  was  clear  that  in  their 
opinion  the  revolt  was  at  an  end,  as  far 
as  this  district  of  Poland  was  concerned. 
The  country  was  the  exact  counterpart 
of  that  which    I    have    attempted   to 
describe   already  on  my  journey  from 
Otloczyn  to  Warsaw.     I  had  been  told 
that  on  this  line  I  should  see  the  real 
traces   of  the  war  in  the  number   of 
villages  destroyed  and  burnt  along  the 
road.     I  can  truly  say  that  I  did  not 
see  a  single  house  which  bore  outward 
evidence    of    having    been    sacked   or 
set  on  fire.     I  do  not,  for  one  moment, 
mean  to  assert  that  the  Eussians  have 
not  burnt  down  villages;   I  only  say 
that  on  this  particular  road  I  saw  no 
indication  of  it     However  there  were 
traces  enough  of  the  disturbed  state  of 
the  country.     There  was  not  a  bridge 
we  passed  which  had  not  recently  been 
repaired,  and  which  was  not  still  guarded 
by  a  picket  of  Russian  soldiers.    Wher- 
ever  the    railroad    passed    through    a 
forest — and    I    should    think    of    the 
couple  of  hundred  miles  between  War- 
saw and  the  Austrian  frontier  fully  sixty 
must  lie  through  forests — the  trees  were 
being  cut  down  to  the  distance  of  a  hun- 
dred yards  or  so  on  either  side  of  the 
line.     Immense  gangs  of  peasants,  es- 
corted   by   detachments    of    Cossacks, 
were  at  work  all  along  the  forest  parts 
of  the  line,  hewing  down  the  pine-trees. 
Probably  the  presence  of  these  troops 
was  considered  a  sufficient  protection  for 
the  train,  without  the  necessity  of  any 
military  escort.    We  travelled,  however, 
with  a  rapidity  which  seemed   to    as- 
tonish my  fellow-travellers,  and  I  fancy 
the  railway  officials  were  not  sorry  to 
get  the  journey  over  in  safety. 

There  was  a  long  delay  at  the  Eussian 


frontier  town  of  Szezakowa,  where  our 
luggage  was  overhauled,  and  our  pass- 
ports scrutinized  most  carefully.     Then 
we  were  placed  in  another  train,  where, 
to  my  immense  satisfaction,  the  guard 
asked  for  the  tickets,  in  German  ;  and  a 
short  ride  of  a  quarter-hour  led  us  over 
a  narrow  stream,  past  the  last  Cossack 
encampment,  into  Austrian  ground.     I 
am  no  admirer  of  Austria,  but  I  must 
own,  in  honesty,  that  I  have  seldom  ex- 
perienced such  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  as 
when  I  found  myself  again  under  the  do- 
minion of  the  Kaiser.  A  German  fellow- 
traveller  of  mine,  who  had  been  residing 
for  two  years  in  Poland,  remarked  to  me 
that  he  felt  able  to  breathe  for  the  first 
time  since  he  had  left  Germany  ;  and  I 
perfectly  understood  his  feeling.     The 
atmosphere   of  gloom  and   terror  and 
dismay  which  had   seemed   to   me   to 
hang  over  Poland  had  vanished,  as  if 
by  magic.     There  were  no  soldiers  to 
receive  you  at  the  station ;  you  could 
walk  about  where  you  liked  ;  your  pass- 
ports were  hardly  looked  at,  or  your 
luggage  opened,  and  every  official  was 
good-humoured   and   obliging.     Papers 
were  selling  on  the  platform,  the  walls 
were  covered  with  advertisements,  and 
the  peasants  who  were  standing  about 
were,  compared  with  those  of  Eussian 
Poland,  ,clean    and    well-dressed,    and 
healthy-looking.     So  it  was   along  the 
line.     The  fields  were  well  cultivated, 
the  houses  substantial,  and  the  country 
prosperous.    'No  troops  were  to  be  seen  ; 
and  the  one  token  of  the  insurrection 
was  a  notice  on  the  station- walls,  in  Ger- 
man and  Polish,  warning  Austrian  subjects 
against  taking  any  part  in  the  struggle.    I 
have  no  doubt  that  the  Polish  subjects  of 
Austria  have  cause  enough  of  complaint : 
all  I  assert  is,  that  in  passing  from  the 
kingdom  into  Gallicia,  you  seem  to  have 
come  at  once  into  a  higher  and  happier 
form  of  civilization.     Any  one,  who  has 
been  struck  by  the  instantaneous  change 
in  passing  from  the  Papal  States  into 
the  territory  of  the   Italian  Kingdom, 
will  understand  the  sentiment  I  have 
sought  to  convey. 


MACMILLAN'S  MAGAZINE. 


DECEMBER,  1863. 


THE  HILLYAKS  AND  THE  BURTONS :  A  STOEY  OF  TWO  FAMILIES. 

BY  HENRY  KINGSLEY,  AUTHOR  OF  "AUSTIN  ELLIOT,"  "RAVENSHOE,"  ETC. 


CHAPTEE  VI. 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  THE  PRELIMI- 
NARIES TO  THE  MOMENTOUS  EXPEDITION 
TO  STANLAKE. 

THAT  same  year  also,  Joe  and  I  made  a 
new  acquaintance,  in  this  manner  : — 

It  had  become  evident  to  me,  who  had 
watched  Joe  so  long,  that  his  lameness 
was  to  some  slight  extent  on  the  mend. 
I  began  to  notice  that,  in  the  case  of  our 
getting  into  a  fight  in  the  street  (no 
uncommon  case  among  the  Chelsea 
street-children,  even  in  this  improved 
age,  as  I  am  given  to  understand),  and 
being  driven  to  retreat,  he  began  to 
make  much  better  weather  of  it.  I  was 
pleased  to  find  this,  for  nothing  on  earth 
could  have  prevented  his  following  me 
at  a  certain  distance  to  see  how  1  was 
getting  on.  The  first  time  I  noticed  a 
decided  improvement  was  this.  We 
(  Church  Street  —  Burtons,  Chittles, 
Holmeses,  Agers,  &c.)  were  at  hot  feud 
with  Danvers  Street  on  the  west  side 
of  us,  and  Lawrence  Street  on  the  east. 
Lawrence  Street  formed  a  junction  with 
Danvers  Street  by  Lombard  Street ;  and 
so,  when  we  went  across  the  end  of  the 
space  now  called  Paulton  Square,  we 
came  suddenly  on  the  enemy,  three  to 
one.  The  affair  was  short,  but  decisive. 
Everything  that  skill  and  valour  could 
do  was  done,  but  it  was  useless.  We 
fled  silent  and  swift,  and  the  enemy  fol- 
lowed, howling.  When  round  the  first 
corner,  to  my  astonishment,  there  was 

JSTo.  50. — VOL.  ix. 


Joe,  in  the  thick  and  press  of  the  dis- 
ordered ranks,  with  his  crutch  over  his 
shoulder,  getting  along  in  a  strange 
waddling  way,  but  at  a  most  respectable 
pace.  The  next  moment  my  fellow- 
apprentice  and  I  had  him  by  his  arms 
and  hurried  him  along  between  us,  until 
the  pursuit  ceased,  the  retreat  stopped, 
and  we  were  in  safety. 

I  thought  a  great  deal  about  this  all 
the  rest  of  the  day.  I  began  to  see  that, 
if  it  were  possible  to  strengthen  the  poor 
lad's  leg  by  gradual'  abandonment  of  the 
crutch,  a  much  brighter  future  was  before 
him.  I  determined  to  try. 

"  Joe,  old  fellow,"  I  said  as  soon  as 
we  were  in  bed,  "  have  you  got  a  story 
for  us  ? " 

"No,"  he  said,  "I  haven't.  I  am 
thinking  of  something  else,  Jim." 

"  What  about  1 " 

"  About  the  country.  The  country  is 
here  within  three  miles  of  us.  I  been 
asking  Eube  about  it.  He  says  he  goes 
miles  up  the  river  into  it  in  his  lighter. 
Eeal  country,  you  knows — stiles,  and 
foot-paths,  and  cows,  and  all  of  it.  You 
and  me  has  never  seen  it.  Lets  we  go." 

"But,"  I  said,  "what's  the  good? 
That  there  crutch  of  yourn  (that's  the 
way  I  used  to  talk  in  those  old  time?) 
would  prevent  you  getting  there  ;  and, 
when  you  got  there,  old  chap,  you 
couldn't  get  about.  And,  if  the  cows 
was  to  run  after  you,  you  couldn't  hook 
it  over  the  gates  and  stiles,  and  such  as 
you  talks  on.  Therefore  I  ask  you, 
What's  the  good?" 


98 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


11  But  the  cows,"  urged  Joe,  "  don't 
allus  come  rampaging  at  you,  end  on, 
do  em  1 "  (That  is  the  way  our  orator 
used  to  speak  at  twelve  years  old.) 

"Most  times  they  does,  I  reckon," 
I  replied,  and  turned  myself  over  to 
sleep,  almost  afraid  that  I  had  already 
said  too  much  "  about  that  there  crutch 
of  hisn."  I  had  become  aware  of  the 
fact  that  crutches  grew,  ready  made,  in 
Shepherd's  nursery- ground,  in  rows  like 
gooseberry  trees,  and  was  on  the  eve 
of  some  fresh  discoveries  in  the  same 
line,  when  Joe  awoke  me. 

"  Jim,"  he  said,  "  Rube's  barge  goes 
up  on  the  tide  to-morrow  morning  ;  let 
us  see  whether  or  no  we  can  get  a 
holiday  and  go." 

I  assented,  though  I  thoiight  it 
doubtful  that  my  father  would  give  us 
leave.  A  month  or  so  before  he  would 
have  refused  our  request  point-blank. 
Indeed,  I  should  not  have  taken  the 
trouble  to  ask  him,  but  I  had  noticed 
that  he  had  softened  considerably  to- 
wards Eeuben.  Eeuben  was  so  gentle 
and  affectionate,  and  so  respectful  to  my 
father  and  mother,  that  it  was  impos- 
sible not  to  yield  in  some  way  ;  and  so 
Reuben  was  more  and  more  often  asked 
into  our  great  kitchen  on  the  ground 
floor,  when  he  was  heard  passing  at 
night  up  to  his  solitary  chamber  in  the 
roof. 

At  this  time  I  began  first  to  notice  his 
singular  devotion  to  my  sister  Emma — 
a  devotion  which  surprised  me,  as  coming 
from  such  a  feather-headed  being  as 
Reuben,  who  was  by  no  means  addicted 
to  the  softer  emotions.  I  saw  my  father 
look  rather  uneasily  at  them  sometimes, 
but  his  face  soon  brightened  up  again. 
It  was  only  the  admiring  devotion  of  a 
man  to  a  beautiful  child.  Reuben  used 
to  consult  her  on  every  possible  occa- 
sion, and  implicitly  follow  her  advice. 
He  told  me  once  that,  if  you  came  to 
that,  Emma  had  more  head-piece  than 
the  whole  lot  of  us  put  together. 

My  father  gave  us  his  leave;  and  at 
seven  o'clock,  on  the  sweet  May  morning, 
we  started  on  our  first  fairy  voyage  up 
the  river,  in  a  barge  full  of  gravel,  navi- 
gated by  the  drunken  one-eyed  old  man 


who  had  been  Rube's  master.  It  was 
on  the  whole  the  most  perfectly  delight- 
ful voyage  I  ever  took.  There  is  no 
craft  in  the  world  so  comfortable  as  a 
coal  barge.  It  has  absolutely  no  motion 
whatever  about  it ;  you  glide  on  so  im- 
perceptibly that  the  banks  seem  mov- 
ing, and  you  seem  still.  Objects  grow 
slowly  on  the  eye,  and  then  slowly  fade 
again  ;  and  they  say,  "  We  have  passed 
so  and  so,"  when  all  the  time  it  would 
seem  more  natural  to  say,  "  So  and  so 
has  passed  us." 

This  was  the  first  voyage  Joe  and  I 
ever  took  together.  We  have  made  many 
voyages  and  journeys  since,  and  have 
never  found  the  way  long  while  we  were 
together ;  we  shall  have  to  make  the  last 
journey  of  all,  separate,  but  we  shall 
meet  again  at  the  end  of  it. 

Oh,  glorious  and  memorable  May- 
day !  New  wonders  and  pleasures  at 
every  turn.  The  river  swept  on 
smoothly  without  a  ripple,  past  the  trim 
villa  lawns,  all  ablaze  with  flowers  ;  and 
sometimes  under  tall  dark  trees,  which 
bent  down  into  the  water,  and  left  no 
shore.  Joe  was  in  a  frantic  state  of 
anxiety  to  know  all  the  different  kinds 
of  trees  by  sight,  as  he  did  by  name. 
Reuben,  the  good-natured,  was  nearly  as 
pleased  as  ourselves,  and  at  last  "fin- 
ished" Joe  by  pointing  out  to  him  a 
tulip-tree  in  full  bloom.  Joe  was  silent 
after  this.  He  kept  recurring  to  this 
tulip-tree  all  the  rest  of  the  day  at  inter- 
vals ;  and  the  last  words  I  heard  that 
night,  on  dropping  to  sleep,  were,  "  But 
after  all  there  was  nothing  like  the 
tulip-tree." 

In  one  long  reach,  I  remember,  we 
heard  something  coming  towards  us  on 
the  water,  with  a  measured  rushing 
noise,  very  swiftly  ;  and,  before  we  could 
say,  What  was  it?  it  was  by  us,  and 
gone  far  away.  We  had  a  glimpse  of  a 
brown  thin-faced  man,  seated  in  a  tiny 
outrigger,  which  creaked  beneath  the 
pressure  of  each  mighty  stroke,  skimming 
over  the  water  like  a  swallow,  with  easy 
undulations,  so  fast  that  the  few  swift 
runners  on  the  bank  were  running  their 
hardest.  "Robert  Coombes  training," 
said  Reuben,  with  bated  breath;  and  we 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


looked  after  the  flying  figure  with  awe 
and  admiration,  long  after  it  was  gone 
round  the  bend,  and  the  gleaming  ripples 
which  he  had  made  upon  the  oily  river 
had  died  into  stillness  once  more. 

I  hardly  remember,  to  tell  the  truth, 
how  far  we  went  up  with  that  tide  ;  I 
think,  as  far  as  Kew.  When  the  kedge 
was  dropped,  we  all  got  into  a  boat,  and 
went  ashore  to  a  public  house.  I  re- 
member perfectly  well  that  I  modestly 
asked  the  one-eyed  old  man,  lately 
Eube's  master,  whether  he  would  be 
pleased  to  take  anything.  He  was 
pleased  to  put  a  name  to  gin  and  cloves, 
which  he  drank  in  our  presence,  to  Joe's 
intense  interest,  who  leant  on  his  crutch, 
and  stared  at  him  intently  with  his 
great  prominent  eyes.  Joe  had  heard 
of  the  old  man's  extraordinary  per- 
formances when  in  liquor,  and  he 
evidently  expected  this  particular  dram 
to  produce  immediate  and  visible  effects. 
He  was  disappointed.  The  old  man 
assaulted  nobody  (he  probably  missed 
his  wife),  ordered  another  dram,  wiped 
his  mouth  on  the  back  of  his  hand, 
swore  an  ingenious  oath  perfectly  new 
to  the  whole  of  his  audience,  lit  his 
pipe,  and  sat  down  on  a  bench  fronting 
the  river. 

Then,  after  a  most  affectionate  fare- 
well with  Reuben,  we  turned  to  walk 
homewards — Joe  walking  stoutly  and 
bravely  with  his  crutch  over  his  shoul- 
der. We  enjoyed  ourselves  more  on 
shore  than  on  the  river,  for  Joe  said 
that  there  were  wild  tulips  on  Kew 
Green,  and  wanted  to  find  some.1  So 
we  hunted  for  them,  but  without  suc- 
cess. The  tulip-tree  at  Fulham  had 
given  me  incorrect  ideas,  and  I  steadily 
looked  up  into  the  limes  and  horse- 
chestnuts  for  them.  Then  we  pushed  on 
again,  and  at  the  turnpike  on  Barnes 
Common  we  took  our  first  refreshment 
that  day.  We  had  some  bread  and 
treacle  in  a  cotton  pocket-handkerchief, 
and  Ave  bought  two  bottles  of  ginger 
beer;  and,  for  the  first  time  in  our  live?, 

1  Joe  was  to  a  certain  extent  right.  The 
common  Fritillaria  did  grow  there — fifty  years 
before  Joe  was  born.  He  had  seen  the  locality 
quoted  in  some  old  botany-bool$. 


we  "pic-nic'd."  We  sat  on  the  short 
turf  together,  and  ate  our  bread  and 
treacle,  and  drank  our  ginger-beer. 

Last  year,  when  Joe  and  I  came  over 
to  the  Exhibition  as  Commissioners,  we, 
as  part  of  our  duty,  were  invited  to 
dine  with  one  of  the  very  greatest  men 
in  England.  I  sat  between  Mrs.  Oxton 
and  a  Marchioness.  And  during  dinner, 
in  a  low  tone  of  voice,  I  told  Mrs. 
Oxton  this  story  about  the  bread  and 
treacle,  and  the  ginger-beer.  And,  to 
my  surprise,  and  rather  to  my  horror, 
as  I  must  confess,  Mrs.  Oxton,  speaking 
across  me,  told  the  whole  story  over 
again  to  the  Marchioness,  of  whom  -I 
was  in  mortal  terror.  But,  after  this, 
nothing  could  be  more  genial  and  kind 
to  me  than  was  that  terrible  Mar- 
chioness ;  and  in  the  drawing-room,  I  saw 
her,  with  my  own  eyes,  go  and  tell  the 
whole  horrid  truth  to  her  husband,  the 
Marquis.  Whereupon  he  came  over  at 
once,  and  made  much  of  me,  in  a  corner. 
Their  names,  as  I  got  them  from  Mrs. 
Oxton,  were  Lord  and  Lady  Hainault. 

Then  we  (on  Putney  Common  twenty 
years  ago)  lay  back  and  looked  at  the 
floating  clouds,  and  Joe  said,  "  Reuben 
is  going  to  marry  our  Emma,  and  I  am 
glad  of  it." 

"But  he  musn't,"  Isaid;  "it  won't  do." 

"Why  not?" 

"  Father  won't  hear  on  it,  I  tell  you. 
Rube  ain't  going  on  well." 

"  Yes,  he  is  now,"  said  Joe,  "  since 
he's  been  seeing  so  much  of  Emma. 
Don't  you  notice,  Jim  1  He  hasn't 
sworn  a  oath  to-day.  He  has  cut  all 
that  Cheyne  Walk  gang.  I  tell  you  she 
will  make  a  man  of  him." 

"I  tell  you,"  I  said,  "father  won't 
hear  tell  on  it.  Besides,  she's  only  four- 
teen. And,  also,  who  is  fit  to  marry 
Emma  1  Go  along  with  you." 

And  so  we  went  along  with  us.  And 
our  first  happy  holiday  came  to  an  <>n<! 
by  my  falling  asleep  dog-tired  at  supper, 
with  my  head  in  my  father's  lap  ;  while 
Joe,  broad-awake,  and  highly  excited, 
was  telling  them  all  about  the  tulip-tree. 
I  was  awakened  by  the  screams  incident 
Fred  having  fallen  triumphantly  into 
the  fire,  off  his  cluir,  and  having  to  be 

ii  2 


100 


TJte  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


put  out — •which,  being   done,  we  went 
to  bed. 

After  this  first  effort  of  ours,  you 
might  as  well  have  tried  to  keep  two 
stormy  petrels  at  home  in  a  gale  of 
wind,  as  to  keep  Joe  and  me  from  ramb- 
ling. My  father  "  declined  " — I  can 
hardly  use  such  a  strong  word  as 
"  refuse "  about  him — any  more  holi- 
days ;  but  he  compromised  the  matter 
by  allowing  us  to  go  an  expedition  into 
the  country  on  Sunday  afternoon — pro- 
viding always  that  we  went  to  church 
in  the  morning  with  the  rest  of  the 
family — to  which  we  submitted,  though 
it  cost  us  a  deal  in  omnibuses. 

And  now  I  find  that,  before  I  can 
tell  you  the  story  of  our  new  acquaint- 
ance in  an  artistic  manner,  I  shall 
have  to  tell  you  what  became  of  that 
old  acquaintance  of  ours — Joe's  crutch  ; 
because,  if  we  had  not  got  rid  of  the 
one,  we  never  should  have  made  ac- 
quaintance with  the  other. 

On  every  expedition  we  made  into 
the  country,  Joe  used  his  crutch  less 
and  less.  I  mean,  used  it  less  in  a 
legitimate  manner  ;  though,  indeed,  we 
missed  it  in  the  end,  as  one  does  miss 
things  one  has  got  used  to.  He  iised  it 
certainly  to  the  last.  I  have  known 
him  dig  out  a  mole  with  it ;  I  have 
known  him  successfully  defend  him- 
self against  a  dog  with  it  in  a  farm- 
yard at  Eoehampton  ;  I  have  seen  it 
flying  up,  time  after  time,  into  a  horse- 
chestnut  tree  (we  tried  them  roasted  and 
boiled,  with  salt  and  without,  but  it 
wouldn't  do)  until  it  lodged,  and  we 
wasted  the  whole  Sabbath  afternoon  in 
pelting  it  down  again.  Latterly,  I  saw 
Joe  do  every  sort  and  kind  of  thing 
with  that  crutch,  except  one.  He  never 
used  it  to  walk  with.  Once  he  broke 
it  short  in  two  getting  over  a  stile;  and 
my  father  sent  it  to  the  umbrella-men- 
der's and  had  it  put  together  at  a  vast 
expense  with  a  ferrule,  and  kept  Joe 
from  school  till  it  was  done.  I  saw  that 
the  thing  was  useless  long  before  the 
rest  of  the  family.  But,  at  last,  the 
end  of  it  came,  and  the  old  familiar 
sound  of  it  was  heard  no  more. 

One  Sunday  afternoon  we  got  away 


as  far  as  Penge  Wood,  where  the  Crystal 
Palace  now  stands  ;  and  in  a  field,  be- 
tween that  and  Norwood,  we  found 
mushrooms,  and  filled  a  handkerchief 
with  them.  When  we  were  coming 
home  through  Eattersea,  we  sat  down 
on  a  bank  to  see  if  any  of  them  were 
broken ;  after  which  we  got  up  and 
walked  home  again.  And  then  and 
there  Joe  forgot  his  crutch,  and  left  it 
behind  him  on  the  bank,  and  we  never 
saw  it  any  more,  but  walked  home 
very  fast  for  fear  we  should  be  late  for 
supper.  That  was  the  last  of  the  crutch, 
unless  the  one  Joe  saw  in  the  marine 
storekeeper's  in  Battersea  was  the  same 
one,  which  you  may  believe  or  not  as 
you  like.  All  I  know  is,  that  he  never 
got  a  new  one,  and  has  not  done  so 
to  this  day. 

We  burst  in  with  our  mushrooms. 
Father  and  mother  had  waited  for  us, 
and  were  gone  to  bed  ;  Emma  was  sit- 
ting up  for  us,  with  Harry  (of  whom 
you  will  know  more)  on  her  knee;  and, 
as  Joe  came  towards  her,  she  turned  her 
sweet  face  on  me,  and  said,  "Why, 
where  is  Joe's  crutch  ? " 

"  It's  two  miles  off,  sweetheart,"  I 
said.  "  He  has  come  home  without  it. 
He'll  never  want  no  crutch  this  side  of 
the  grave." 

I  saw  her  great  soul  rush  into  her 
eyes  as  .she  turned  them  on  me ;  and 
then,  with  that  strange  way  she  had, 
when  anything  happened,  of  looking 
out  for  some  one  to  praise,  instead  of, 
as  many  women  do,  looking  out  for 
some  one  to  blame  and  fall  foul  of,  she 
said  to  me — 

"  This  is  your  doing,  my  own  brother. 
May  God  bless  you  for  it." 

She  came  up  to  bed  with  Harry,  after 
us.  As  soon  as  she  had  put  him  to 
bed  in  the  next  room,  I  heard  him 
awake  Frank  his  bedfellow,  and  tell 
him  that  Jesus  had  cured  our  Joe  oi' 
his  lameness. 

Now,  having  got  rid  of  Joe's  crutch, 
we  began  to  go  further  afield.  Our 
country  rambles  were  a  great  and  ac- 
knowledged success.  Joe,  though  terri- 
bly deformed  in  the  body,  was  growing 
handsome  and  strong.  What  is  more, 


A  Star y  of  Two  Families. 


101. 


Joe  developed  a  quality,  which  even  I 
should  hardly  have  expected  him  to 
possess.  Joe  was  got  into  a  corner  one 
day  by  a  Danvers  Street  bully,  and  he 
there  and  then  thrashed  that  bully. 
Reuben  saw  it,  and  would  have  inter- 
fered, had  he  not  seen  that  Joe,  with 
his  gigantically  long  arms,  had  it  all  his 
own  way ;  and  so  he  left  well  alone. 

We  began  to  go  further  afield — some- 
times going  out  on  an  omnibus,  and 
walking  home  ;  sometimes  walking  all 
the  way ;  Joe  bringing  his  book-learn- 
ing on  natural  objects  to  bear,  and  re- 
cognising things  which  he  had  never 
seen  before.  Something  new  was  dis- 
covered in  this  manner  every  day  ;  and 
one  clay,  in  a  lonely  pond  beyond  Clap- 
ham,  we  saw  three  or  four  white  flowers 
iloating  on  the  surface. 

"Those,"  said  Joe,  "must  be  white 
water-lilies.  I  would  give  anything  for 
one  of  them." 

In  those  days,  before  the  river  had 
got  into  its  present  filthy  condition — in. 
the  times  when  you  could  catch  a  punt 
full  of  roach  at  JBattersea  Bridge,  in  the 
turn  of  a  tide — nearly  every  Chelsea 
boy  could  swim. 

I  very  scon  had  my  clothes  off,  and 
the  lilies  were  carried  home  in  triumph. 

"Ah,  mother  ! "  said  my  father,  "  do 
you  remember  the  lilies  at  Stanlake  ?  " 

"  Ah,  father  !  "  said  my  mother. 

"Acres  on  'em,"  said  my  father,  look- 
ing round  radiantly ;  "  hundreds  on 
'cm.  Yallah  ones  as  well.  Waterfalls, 
and  chancy  boys  being  poorly  into 
cockleshells,  and  marvel  figures  danc- 
ing as  naked  as  they  was  born,  and 
blowing  tunes  on  whilk  shells,  and 
winkles,  and  such  like  Eh,  mother  ! " 

Mother  began  to  cry. 

"  There,  God  bless  me ! "  said  my 
father ;  "  I  am  a  stupid  brute  if  ever 
there  were  one.  Mother,  old  girl,  it 
were  so  many  years  agone.  Come,  now  ; 
it's  all  past  and  gone,  dear." 

Fred,  at  this  moment,  seeing  his  mo- 
ther in  tears,  broke  out  in  a  stentorian, 
but  perfectly  tearless,  roar,  and  cast  his 
bread  and  butter  to  the  four  winds. 
Emma  had  to  take  him  and  walk  up 
and  down  with  him,  patting  him  on  the 


back,  and  singing  to  him  in  her  soft 
cooing  voice. 

There  was  a  knock  at  the  room-door 
just  when  she  was  opposite  it — she 
opened  it,  and  there  was  Eeuben  ;  and 
I  saw  my  father  and  mother  look  sud- 
denly at  one  another. 

"  May  I  come  in,  cousin  ? "  he  said 
to  my  mother,  in  his  pleasant  voice. 
"  Come,  let's  have  a  game  with  the 
kids  before  I  go  up  and  sleep  with  the 
ghost." 

"You're  welcome,  Rube,  my  boy," 
said  my  father  ;  "  and  you're  welcomer 
every  day.  We  miss  you,  Rube,  when 
you  don't  come ;  consequently,  you're 
welcome  when  you  do,  which  is  "in. 
reason.  •  Therefore,"  said  my  father, 
pursuing  his  argument,  "there's  tho 
place  by  the  fire,  and  there's  your 
backer,  and  there's  the  kids.  So,  if 
mother's  eyes  is  red,  it's  with  naught 
you've  done,  old  boy.  Leave  alone," 
I  heard  my  father  growl  to  himself  (for 
I,  as  usual,  was  sitting  next  him) ;  "  is 
the  sins  of  the  fathers  to  be  visited  on, 
the  tables  of  kindred  and  affinity  1  No. 
In  consequence,  leave  alone,  I  tell  you. 
He  didn't,  any  how.  And  there  was 
worse  than  his  father — now  then." 

In  a  very  short  time  we  were  all  com- 
fortable and  merry,  Reuben  making  the 
most  atrocious  riot  with  the  "kids," 
my  younger  brothers.  But  I  saw  that 
Joe  was  distraught ;  and,  with  that  pro- 
found sagacity  which  has  raised  me  to 
my  present  eminence,  I  guessed  that  he 
was  planning  to  go  to  Stanlake  the  very 
next  Sunday. 

Tho  moment  we  were  in  bed,  I  saw 
how  profoundly  wise  I  was.  Joe  broke 
out.  He  must  see  the  "  yallah  "  water- 
lilies  ;  the  chancy  boys  and  the  marvel 
figures  were  nothing ;  it  was  the  yal- 
lah lilies.  I,  who  had  noticed  more 
closely  than  he  my  mother's  behaviour 
when  the  place  was  mentioned,  and  the 
look  she  gave  my  father  when  Rube 
came  in,  had  a  sort  of  fear  of  going 
there,  but  Joe  pleaded  and  pleaded 
until  I  was  beaten ;  at  last,  I  happily 
remembered  that  we  did  not  know  in 
which  of  the  fifty-two  counties  of 
England  Stanlake  was  situated.  I 


102 


The  Hillyar  s  and  the  Burtons  : 


mentioned  this  little  fact  to  Joe.  He 
suggested  that  I  should  ask  my  father. 
I  declined  doing  anything  of  the  sort ; 
and  so  the  matter  ended  for  the  night. 

But  Joe  was  not  to  be  beaten.  He 
came  home  later  than  usual  from  after- 
noon school  next  day.  The  moment 
we  were  alone  together,  he  told  me  that 
he  had  been  to  see  Mr.  Faulkner.  That 
he  had  asked  him  where  Stanlake  was  ; 
and  that  the  old  gentleman — who  knew 
every  house  and  its  history,  within  twenty 
miles  of  London — had  told  him  that  it 
was  three  miles  from  Croydon,  and  was 
-the  seat  of  Sir  George  Hillyar. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

THE   BATTLE    OF   BARKER'S    GAP. 

THE  Secretary  rode  steadily  on  across 
the  broad  sands  by  the  silent  sea,  think- 
ing of  Gerty  Neville,  of  how  hot  it 
was,  of  George  Hillyar,  of  the  convict 
he  had  left  behind,  of  all  sorts  of 
things,  until  Cape  Wilberforce  was  so 
near  that  it  changed  from  a  dull  blue 
to  a  light  brown,  with  gleams  of  green  ; 
and  was  no  more  a  thing  of  air,  but  a 
real  promontory,  with  broad  hanging 
lawns  of  heath,  and  deep  shadowed  re- 
cesses among  the  cliffs.  Then  he  knew 
that  the  forty-mile  beach  was  nearly 
past,  and  that  he  was  within  ten  miles 
of  his  journey's  end  and  dinner.  He 
whistled  a  tune,  and  began  looking  at 
the  low  wall  of  evergreen  shrubs  to  his 
right. 

At  last,  dray- tracks  in  the  sand,  and  a 
road  leading  up  from  the  shore  through 
the  tea-scrub,  into  which  he  passed  in- 
land. Hotter  than  ever  here.  Piles  of 
drifted  sand,  scored  over  in  every  direc- 
tion with  the  tracks  of  lizards  of  every 
sort'  and  size ;  some  of  which  slid  away, 
with  a  muscular  kind  of  waddle,  into 
dark  places;  while  others,  refusing  to 
move,  opened  their  mouths  at  him,  or 
let  down  bags  under  their  chins,  to 
frighten  him.  A  weird  sort  of  a  place 
this,  very  snaky  in  appearance  ;  not  by 
any  means  the  sort  of  place  to  lie  down 
and  go  to  sleep  in  on  a  hot  night  in 
March  or  September,  when  the  wicked 


devils  are  abroad  at  night.  Did  any 
one  of  my  readers  ever  lie  down,  dog- 
tired,  on  Kanonook  Island,  and  hear 
the  wretches  sliding  through  the  sand 
all  night,  with  every  now  and  then  a 
subdued  "  Hish,  hish,  hish  1 "  As  the 
American  gentleman  says  in  "  Martin 
Chuzzlewit,"  "  Darn  all  manner  of 
vermin ! " 

At  nightfall,  he  came  to  a  little  cattle- 
station,  where  he  slept.  It  was  owned 
by  a  little  grey-headed  Irish  gentleman, 
who  played  the  bassoon,  and  who  had 
not  one  grievance,  but  fifty ;  who  had 
been  an  ill-used  man  ever  since  he  was 
born — nay,  even,  like  Tristram  Shandy, 
before.  He  had  beeu  unfortunate,  had 
this  Irish  gentleman,  in  love,  in  litera- 
ture, in  commerce,  and  in  politics ;  in 
his  domestic  relations,  in  his  digestion  ; 
in  Ireland,  in  India,  in  the  Cape,  and  in 
New  Zealand;  still  more  unfortunate, 
according  to  his  own  showing,  in  Cooks- 
land.  He  told  all  his  grievances  to  the 
Secretary,  proving  clearly,  as  unsuccessful 
Irish  gentlemen  always  can  do,  that  it 
was  not  his  own.  fault,  but  that  things 
in  general  had  combined  against  him. 
Then  he  asked  for  a  place  in  the  Customs 
for  his  second  son.  Lastly,  he  essayed 
to  give  him  a  tune  on  his  bassoon  ;  but 
the  mason-flies  had  built  their  nests  in 
it,  and  he  had  to  clean  them  out  with 
the  worm-end  of  a  ramrod  ;  and  so  there 
was  another  grievance,  as  bad  as  any  of 
the  others.  The  Secretary  had  to  go  to 
bed  without  his  music,  and,  indeed,  had 
been  above  an  hour  asleep  before  the 
Irish  gentleman  succeeded  in  clearing 
the  instrument.  Then,  after  several 
trials,  he  managed  to  get  a  good  bray 
out  of  it,  got  out  his  music-books,  and 
set  to  work  in  good  earnest,  within  four 
feet  of  the  Secretary's  head,  and  nothing 
but  a  thin  board  between  them. 

The  country  mended  as  he  passed 
inland.  He  crossed  a  broad  half-salt 
creek,  within  a  hundred  yards  of  the 
shore,  where  the  great  bream  basked  in 
dozens ;  and  then  he  was  among  stunted 
gum-trees,  looking  not  so  very  much  un- 
like oaks,  and  deep  braken  fern.  After 
this  he  came  to  a  broad  plain  of  yellow 
grass,  which  rolled  up  and  up  before 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


103 


him  into  a  down ;  and,  when  he  came, 
after  a  dozen  miles,  to  the  top  of  this,  lie 
looked  into  a  broad  bare  valley,  through 
which  wound  a  large  creek,  fringed  by  a 
few  tall  white-stemmed  trees,  of  great 
girth. 

Beneath  him  were  three  long,  low 
grey  buildings  of  wood,  placed  so  as  to 
form  three  sides  of  a  square,  fronting 
the  creek ;  and  behind,  stretching  up 
the  other  side  of  the  valley,  was  a  large 
paddock,  containing  seven  or  eight  hne 
horses.  This  was  the  police-station,  at 
which  Lieutenant  Hillyar  had  been  quar- 
tered for  some  time — partly,  it  was  said, 
in  punishment  for  some  escapade,  and 
partly  because  two  desperate  escaped 
convicts  from  Van  Diemen's  Land  were 
suspected  to  be  in  the  neighbourhood. 
Here  George  Hillyar  had  been  thrown 
into  the  society  of  the  Barkers,  at  whose 
house  he  had  met  Gerty  Neville. 

The  Secretary  reined  his  horse  up  in 
the  centre  of  the  little  quadrangle,  .and 
roared  out,  Hallo  !  Whereupon  a  horse 
neighed  in.  the  paddock,  but  no  other 
effect  was  produced. 

He  then  tried  a  loud  Cooe  !  This 
time  the  cat  jumped  up  from  where  she 
lay  in  the  sun,  and  ran  indoors,  and  the 
horses  in  the  paddock  began  galloping. 

"  Hallo  !  Hi !  Here  !  Stable  guard  ! 
Where  the  deuce  have  you  all  got  to  1 
Hallo  ! " 

It  was  evident  that  there  was  not 
a  soul  about  the  place.  The  Secretary 
was  very  angry.  "  I'll  report  him  ;  as 
sure  as  he's  born,  I'll  report  him.  It 
is  too  bad.  It  is  beyond  anything  I 
ever  heard  of — to  leave  his  station  with- 
out a  single  man." 

The  Secretary  got  off  his  horse,  and 
entered  the  principal  room.  He  looked 
round  in  astonishment,  and  gave  a  long 
whistle.  His  bushman's  eye  told  him, 
in  one  instant,  that  there  had  been  an. 
alarm  or  emergency  of  some  kind,  im- 
mediately after  day  Dreak,  while  the  men 
were  still  in  bed.  The  mattresses  and 
clothes  were  not  rolled  neatly  up  as 
usual,  but  the  blankets  were  lying  in 
confusion,  just  as  the  men  had  left  them, 
when  they  had  jumped  out  to  dress. 
The  carbines  and  swords  were  gone  from 


the  rack.  He  ran  hurriedly  out,  and 
swung  himself  on  to  his  horse,  exclaim- 
ing, just  as  he  would  have  done  four- 
and-twenty  years  before  at  Harrow, 

"  Well !     Here  is  a  jolly  row." 

It  was  a  bare  mile  to  the  Barkers' 
Station.  In  a  few  minutes  he  came 
thundering  into  their  courtyard,  and 
saw  a  pretty  little  woman,  dressed  in 
white,  standing  in  front  of  the  door, 
with  a  pink  parasol  over  her  head, 
holding  by  the  hand  a  child,  with 
nothing  on  but  its  night-shirt. 

"  My  dear  creature,"  cried  the  Secre- 
tary, "  what  the  dickens  is  the  matter  ?" 

"Five  bushrangers,"  cried  Mrs.  Bar- 
ker. "They  appeared  suddenly  iast 
night,  and  stuck  up  the  O'Malleys' 
station.  There  is  nobody  killed.  There 
was  no  one  in  the  house  but  Lesbia 
Burke — who  is  inside  now — old  Miles 
O'Malley,  and  the  housekeeper.  They 
got  safe  away  when  they  saw  them 
coming.  They  spared  the  men's  huts, 
but  have  burnt  the  house  down." 

"Bad  cess  to  them,"  said  a  harsh, 
though  not  unpleasant  voice,  behind 
her ;  and  out  came  a  tall,  rather  grey- 
headed woman,  in  age  about  fifty,  but 
with  remains  of  what  must  have  been 
remarkable  beauty.  "  Bad  cess  to  them, 
I  say,  Mr.  Oxton  dear.  'Tis  the  third 
home  I  have  been  burnt  out  of  in  twenty 
years.  Is  there  sorra  a  statesman 
among  ye'  all  can  give  a  poor  old 
Phoenix  beauty  a  house  where  she  may 
die  in  peace  ?  Is  this  your  model  colony, 
Secretary  ?  Was  it  for  this  that  I  keened 
over  the  cold  hearthstone  at  Garoopna, 
when  we  sold  it  to  the  Brentwoods,  before 
brave  Sam  Buckley  came  a-wooing  there, 
to  win  the  beauty  of  the  world  1  Take 
me  back  to  Gippsland  some  of  ye,  and 
let  me  hear  old  Snowy  growling  through 
his  boulders  again,  through  the  quiet 
summer's  night;  or  take  me  back  to 
Old  Ireland,  and  let  me  sit  sewing  by 
the  Castle  window  again,  watching  the 
islands  floating  on  Corrib,  or  the  mist 
driving  up  from  the  Atlantic  before  the 
west  wind.  Is  this  your  model  colony  ? 
Is  there  to  be  no  pillow  secure  for  the 
head  of  the  jaded,  despised  old  Dublin 
flirt,  who  has  dressed,  and  dizened,  and 


104 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


painted,  and  offered  herself,  till  she 
became  a  scorn  and  a  by-word  1  A  curse 
on  all  your  colonies  !  Old  Ireland  is  worth 
more  than  all  of  them.  A  curse  on 
them ! " 

"  My  dear  Miss  Burke !  My  dear 
Lesbia  ! "  pleaded  the  Secretary. 

"Don't  talk  to  me.  Hav'nt  I  been 
burnt  out  three  times,  by  blacks  and  by 
whites  ?  Hav'nt  I  had  to  fight  for  my 
life  like  a  man  1  Don't  I  bear  the  marks 
of  it  1  There  is  no  rest  for  me.  I  know 
the  noise  of  it  too  well;  I  heard  it  last 
night.  Darkness,  silence,  sleep,  and 
dreams  of  rest.  Then  the  hoofs  on  the 
gravel,  and  the  beating  at  the  door. 
Then  the  awakening,  and  the  terror,  and 
the  shots,  stabs,  blows,  and  curses. 
Then  murder  in  the  drawing-room,  worse 
in  the  hall  Blood  on  the  hearthstone, 
and  fire  on  the  roof-tree.  Don't  I  know 
it  all,  James  Oxton  ? " 

"  Dear  Lesbia,"  said  the  good-natured 
Secretary,  "old  friend,  do  be  more  calm." 

"  Calm,  James  Oxton,  and  another 
home  gone  1  Tell  me,  have  you  ever 
had  your  house  burnt  down  ?  Do  Agnes 
or  Gerty  know  what  it  is  to  have  their 
homes  destroyed,  and  all  their  little 
luxuries  broken  and  dispersed,  their 
flowers  trampled,  and  their  birds  killed  ? 
Do  they  know  this  1 " 

"  Why,  no,"  said  the  Secretary. 

"  And,  if  it  were  to  happen  to  them, 
how  would  you  feel  1 " 

"  Well,  pretty  much  as  you  do,  I 
suppose.  Yes,  I  don't  know  but  what 
I  should  get  cross." 

"  Then,  vengeance,  good  Secretary, 
vengeance  !  Honour  and  high  reAvards 
to  the  vermin-hunters ;  halters  and 
death  for  the  vermin." 

And  so  Miss  Burke  went  in,  her 
magnificently-shaped  head  seeming  to 
float  in  the  air  as  she  went,  and  her 
glorious  figure  showing  some  new  curve 
of  the  infinitely  variable  curves  of 
female  beauty  at  every  step.  And  it  was 
high  time  she  should  go  in ;  for  the  kind, 
good,  honest  soul  was  getting  too  much 
excited,  and  was  talking  more  than  was 
good  for  her.  She  had  her  faults,  and 
was,  as  you  see  above,  very  much  given 
to  a  Celtic-Danish-Milesian-Norman  way 


of  expressing  herself,  which  is  apt  to  be- 
classified,  on  this  side  of  St.  George's 
Channel,  as  Irish  rant.  But  her  rant 
had  a  good  deal  of  reason  in  it — which 
some  Irish  rant  has  not — and,  moreover, 
was  delivered  with  such  magnificent  ac- 
cessories of  voice  and  person,  that  James 
Oxton  himself  had  been  heard  to  declare 
that  he  would  at  any  time  walk  twenty 
miles  to  see  Lesbia  Burke  in  a  tantrum. 
Even,  also,  if  you  are  heathen  enough 
to  believe  that  the  whole  art  of  rhetoric 
merely  consists  in  plausibly  overstating 
your  case,  with  more  or  less  dishonesty, 
as  the  occasion  demands,  or  your  con- 
science will  allow,  yet  still  you  must 
admit  that  her  rhetoric  was  successful — 
for  this  reason  :  it  produced  on  the  Co- 
lonial Secretary  exactly  the  effect  she 
wished ;  it  made  him  horribly  angry. 
Those  taunts  of  hers  about  his  model 
colony  were  terribly  hard  hitting.  Had 
not  His  Excellency's  speech  at  the  open- 
ing of  the  Houses  contained — nay, 
mainly  consisted  of — a  somewhat  offen- 
sive comparison  between  Cooksland  and 
the  other  five  colonies  of  the  Australian 
group ;  in  which  the  perfect  security  of 
life  and  property  at  home  was  contrasted 
with  the  fearful  bushranger-outrages  in 
New  South  Wales.  And  now  their  turn 
had  come — Cooksland's  turn — the  turn 
of  James  Oxton,  who  had  made  Cooks- 
land,  and  who  was  Cooksland,  And  to 
meet  the  storm  there  were  only  four 
troopers  and  cadets  in  command  of 
Lieutenant  Hillyar,  the  greatest  fool  in 
the  service. 

"Oh,  if  that  fellow  will  only  bear 
himself  like  a  man  this  one  day  ! "  said 
the  Secretary,  as  he  rode  swiftly  along. 
"  Oh  for  Wyatt,  or  Malone,  or  Maclean, 
or  Dixon,  for  one  short  hour !  Oh,  to 
get  the  thing  snuffed  out  suddenly  and 
sharply,  and  be  able  to  say,  '  That  is  the 
way  tve  manage  matters.5  " 

One,  two,  three — four — five — six, 
seven,  eight  shots  in  the  distance,  sound- 
ing dully  through  the  dense  forest.  Then 
silence,  then  two  more  shots  ;  and  mut- 
tering, half  as  a  prayer,  half  as  an 
exclamation,  "  God  save  us  ! "  he  dashed 
through  the  crowded  timber  as  fast  as. 
his  noble  horse  would  carry  him. 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


105 


He  was  cutting  off  an  angle  in  the 
Toad,  and,  soon  after  he  joined  it  again, 
he  came  on  the  place  where  the  shots 
had  been  fired.  There  were  two  men — 
neither  of  them  police — wounded  on  the 
grass,  and  at  first  he  hoped  they  were 
two  of  the  bushrangers;  but,  unluckily, 
they  turned  out  to  be  two  of  Barker's 
stockmen.  Two  lads,  who  attended  to 
them,  told  him  that  the  bushrangers 
had  turned  on  the  party  here,  and 
shown  fight ;  that  no  one  had  been 
wounded  but  these  two ;  that  in  re- 
treating they  had  separated,  three  having 
gone  to  the  right,  and  two  to  the  left ; 
that  Lieutenant  Hillyar  had  ordered 
Mr.  Barker's  men,  and  three  troopers, 
to  go  to  the  right ;  while  he,  attended 
only  by  Cadet  Simpson,  had  followed 
the  two  who  were  gone  to  the  left,  with 
the  expressed  intention  of  riding  them 
down,  as  they  were  the  best  mounted  of 
the  five  robbers. 

"I  hope,"  thought  the  Secretary,  "that 
he  will  not  make  a  fool  of  himself.  The 
fellow  is  showing  pluck  and  resolution, 
though — a  deal  of  pluck  and  resolution. 
He  means  to  make  a  spoon  or  spoil  a 
horn  to-day." 

So,  armed  only  with  a  hunting-whip, 
he  put  his  horse  at  a  canter,  and  hurried 
on  to  overtake  Hillyar.  Soon  after  he 
heard  several  shots  ahead,  and  began  to 
think  that  he  might  as  well  have  had 
something  better  in  his  hand  than  a 
hunting-whip.  Then  he  met  a  riderless 
horse,  going  large  and  wild,  neighing 
and  turning  his  head  from  side  to  side, 
and  carrying,  alas  !  a  government  saddle. 
Then  he  came  on  poor  Simpson,  lying 
by  the  side  of  the  road,  looking  very 
ghastly  and  wild,  evidently  severely 
wounded. 

Mr.  Oxton  jumped  off,  and  cried, 
"  Give  me  your  carbine,  my  poor  lad. 
Where's  Hillyar?" 

"  Gone  after  the  other  two,"  said 
Simpson,  feebly. 

"  Two  to  one  now,  eh  1 "  said  Mr. 
Oxton.  "  This  gets  exciting." 

So  he  rode  away,  with  the  carbine  on 
his  knee  ;  but  he  never  had  occasion  to 
use  it.  Before  he  had  ridden  far  he 
came  on  the  body  of  one  of  the  convict?, 


lying  in  a  heap  by  the  roadside  ;  and,  a 
very  short  time  afterwards,  he  met  a 
young  gentleman,  in  an  undress  light- 
dragoon  uniform,  who  was  riding  slowly 
towards  him,  leading,  handcuffed  to  his 
saddle,  one  of  the  most  fiendish-looking 
ruffians  that  eye  ever  beheld. 

"  Well  done,  Hillyar  !  Bravely  done, 
sir  ! "  cried  Mr.  Oxton.  "  I  am  under 
personal  obligations  to  you.  The  colony 
is  under  personal  obligations  to  you,  sir. 
You  are  a  fine  fellow,  sir  ! " 

"  Recommend  me  to  these  new  Ame- 
rican revolvers,  Mr.  Secretary,"  replied 
the  young  man.  "  These  fellows  had 
comparatively  no  chance  at  me  with  their 
old  pistols,  though  this  fellow  has  un- 
luckily hit  poor  Simpson.  When  we 
eame  to  close  quarters  I  shot  one  fellow, 
but  this  one,  preferring  hanging  (queer 
taste),  surrendered,  and  here  he  is." 

This  Lieutenant  Hillyar,  of  whom  we 
have  heard  so  much  and  seen  so  little, 
was  certainly  a  very  handsome  young 
fellow.  Mr.  Oxton  was  obliged  to  con- 
fess that.  He  was  tall  and  well-made, 
and  his  features  were  not  rendered  less 
attractive  by  the  extreme  paleness  of 
his  complexion,  though  one  who  knew 
the  world  as  well  as  the  Secretary  could 
see  that  the  deep  lines  in  his  face  told 
of  desperate  hard  living  ;  and  yet  now 
(whether  it  was  that  the  Secretary  was 
anxious  to  make  the  best  of  him,  or  that 
George  Hillyar  was  anxious  to  make  the 
best  of  himself)  his  appearance  was  cer- 
tainly not  that  of  a  dissipated  person. 
He  looked  high-bred  and  handsome,  and 
lolled  on  his  horse  with  an  air  of  easy 
languor,  not  actually  unbecoming  in  a 
man  who  had  just  done  an  act  of  such 
unequivocal  valour. 

"  Revolvers  or  not,  sir,"  said  Mr. 
Oxton,  "  there  is  no  doubt  about  your 
courage  and  determination.  I  wonder 
if  the  other  party  will  have  fared  as  well 
as  you." 

"  Undoubtedly,"  said  Hillyar  ;  "  tho 
other  three  fellows  were  utterly  out- 
numbered. I  assure  you  I  took  great 
pains  about  this  business.  I  was  de- 
termined it  should  succeed.  You  see, 
I  have,  unfortunately,  a  rather  biting 
tongue,  and  have  made  myself  many 


106 


Tie  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons: 


enemies  ;  and  I  have  been  an  objectless 
man  hitherto,  and  perhaps  have  lived  a 
little  too  hard.  Now,  however,  that  I 
have  something  to  live  for,  I  shall  change 
all  that.  I  wish  the  colony  to  hear  a 
different  sort  of  report  about  me ;  and, 
more  than  that,  I  wish  to  rise  in  the 
esteem  of  the  Honourable  James  Oxton, 
Chief  Secretary  for  the  Colony  of  Cooks- 
land,  and  I  have  begun  already." 

"  You  have,  sir,"  said  the  Secretary, 
frankly.  "  Much  remains  ;  however, 
we  will  talk  more  of  this  another  time. 
See,  here  lies  poor  Simpson ;  let  us 
attend  to  him.  Poor  fellow  !"' 

CHAPTEE  VIIL 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  THE  IMMEDIATE 
RESULTS  OP  THE  EXPEDITION  TO  STAN- 
LAKE. 

I  HAD  a  presentiment  that  our  proposed 
Sunday  expedition  to  Stanlake  would 
lead  to  something ;  and  I  was  anxious. 
I  noticed  that  my  mother  had  cried  at 
the  mention  of  the  place.  I  saw  the 
look  that  my  father  and  mother  inter- 
changed when  Eeuben  came  in ;  and  I 
had  overheard  my  father's  confidential 
growl  about  the  sins  of  the  fathers 
being  visited  on  the  children,  and  so 
on.  Therefore  I  felt  very  much  as  if  I 
•was  doing  wrong  in  yielding  to  Joe's 
desire  to  go  there,  without  telling  my 
father.  But  I  simply  acquiesced,  and 
never  mentioned  my  scruples  (after  my 
first  feeble  protest  in  bed)  even  to  Joe. 
And  I  will  confess  why.  I  had  a  great 
curiosity  to  see  the  place.  I  was  only 
a  poor  stupid  blacksmith-lad ;  but  my 
crippled  brother  had  given  me  a  taste 
for  beautiful  things,  and,  from  my 
father's  description,  this  was  the  most 
beautiful  place  in  the  world.  Then 
there  was  the  charm  of  secrecy  and 
romance  about  this  expedition — but 
why  analyse  the  motives  of  a  boy  ?  To 
put  it  shortly,  we  deceived  our  good 
father  and  mother  for  the  first  time 
when  we  went  there;  and  we  reaped 
the  consequences. 

The  consequences  !  But,  had  the  con- 
sequences been  shown  to  me  in  a  glass, 
on  that  bright  Sunday  morn  when  we 


started  to  Stanlake,  should  I  have  paused? 
I  have  asked  myself  that  question  more 
than  once,  and  I  have  answered  it  thuvS. 
If  I  had  seen  all  the  consequences  which 
were  to  follow  on  that  expedition  then, 
1  would  have  thrown  myself  off  Batter- 
sea  Bridge  sooner  than  have  gone.  But 
I  was  only  a  blind,  ignorant  boy  at  that 
time.  Now,  as  a  man,  I  begin,  dimly 
and  afar  off,  to  understand  why  we 
were  let  go.  I  don't  see  it  all  yet, 
but  I  begin  to  see  it. 

I  think  that,  if  I  had  been  the  same 
man  that  morning  as  I  am  now,  I  would 
have  said  a  prayer — and  gone. 

Now,  what  seems  almost  like  accident, 
were  there  such  a  thing,  favoured  us 
that  Sunday  morning.     An  affair  which 
had  been  growing  to  a  head  for  some 
time   came  to  its  crisis  that  morning. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  A  very  had  taken 
our  first  floor,  and  Bill  himself  was  not 
going  on  at  all  well.     Mrs.  Bill  had  a 
nasty  tongue,  and   he  was   much   too 
"  handy  with  his  hands."     So  it  came 
about  that  Bill  was  more  and  more  at 
the  "  Black  Lion,"  and  that  my  father, 
who  had  contrived  to  sawder  up  every 
man-and-wife   quarrel  in  the  buildings, 
was   fairly   puzzled   here.      This   very 
Saturday-evening  the  crash  came.     We 
had  heard  him   and  his  wife  "at  it" 
all  the  evening ;  and  heavy  things,  such 
as  chairs,  had  been   falling   overhead, 
whereat  niy  mother  had  said,  "There! 
Did  you  ever  1 "     But  at  eight  o'clock, 
Emma,  taking  Fred  up  the  broad  old 
stairs  to  bed,  in  his  nightgown,  leading 
him  with  one  hand,  holding  a  lighted 
candle  in  the  other,  and  slowly  crooning 
out  "  The  Babes  in  the  Wood "  in  her 
own  sweet   way,  was  alarmed  by   the 
Averys'  door  being  burst  open,  and  by  the 
awful  spectacle  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Avery 
fighting  on  the  landing.    Instantly  after, 
whether  on  purpose  or  by  accident  I 
cannot  say,  the  poor  woman  was  thrown 
headlong  down  stairs,  on  to  the  top  of 
Emma  and  Fred.     The  candle  behaved 
like  a  magnificent  French  firework  ;  but 
Mrs.  Bill,  Emma,  and  Fred,  came  down 
in  a  heap  on  the  mat,  the  dear  child, 
with  his  usual  luck,  underneath. 

After  this,  William  Avery,  holding 
the  landing,  and  audibly,  nay,  loudly, 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


107 


expressing  his  desire  to  see  the  master 
blacksmith  who  would  come  upstairs 
and  offer  to  interfere  between  a  man 
and  his  wife,  it  became  necessary  for 
Mrs.  Avery  to  be  accommodated  below 
for  the  night.  The  next  morning,  after 
the  liquor  had  died  out  of  him,  William 
Avery  was  brought  to  task  by  my 
father ;  and  during  the  imbroglio  of  re- 
criminations which  ensued,  which  ended 
in  an  appeal  to  the  magistrate,  we  boys 
dared  to  do  what  we  had  never  dared 
to  do  before — to  escape  church,  take  the 
steamer  to  London  Bridge,  and  get  on 
to  Croydon  by  the  atmospheric  railway, 
reaching  that  place  at  half-past  twelve. 

It  was  September,  but  it  was  summer 
still.  Those  who  live  in  the  country, 
they  tell  me,  can  see  the  difference 
between  a  summer-day  in  September 
and  a  summer  day  in  June  ;  but  we 
town-folks  cannot.  The  country-folks 
have  got  tired  of  their  flowers,  and  have 
begun  to  think  of  early  fires,  and  short- 
ening days,  and  turnips,  and  deep  cover, 
and  hollies  standing  brave  and  green 
under  showering  oak-leaves,  which  fall 
on  the  swift  wings  of  flitting  woodcocks ; 
but  to  town-folks  September  is  even  as 
June.  The  same  deep  shadows  on  the 
grass,  the  same  tossing  plumage  on  the 
elms,  the  same  dull  silver  on  the  willows. 
More  silence  in  the  brooks  perhaps,  and 
more  stillness  in  the  woods ;  but  the 
town-bred  eye  does  not  recognise  the 
happy  doze  before  the  winter's  sleep. 
The  country  is  the  country  to  them,  and 
September  is  as  June. 

On  a  bright  September  day,  Joe  and 
I  came,  well  directed,  to  some  park- 
palings,  and  after  a  short  consultation 
we — in  for  a  penny  in  for  a  pound, 
demoralized  by  the  domestic  differences 
of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bill  Avery —  climbed  over 
them,  and  stood,  trespassing  flagrantly 
in  the  park  which  they  enclosed. 
We  had  no  business  there.  We  knew 
we  were  doing  wrong.  We  knew  that 
•we  ought  to  have  gone  to  church  that 
morning.  We  were  guilty  beings  for,  I 
really  think,  the  first  time  in  our  lives. 
William  Avery's  having  thrown  his  wife 
down  stairs  on  to  the  top  of  Emma 
and  Fred  had  been  such  a  wonderful 
disturbance  of  old  order  and  law,  that 


•we  were  in  a  revolutionary  frame  of 
mind.  We  knew  that  order  would  be 
once  more  restored,  some  time  or  another, 
but,  meanwhile,  the  barricades  were  up, 
and  the  jails  were  burning ;  so  we  were 
determined  to  taste  the  full  pleasure 
derivable  from  a  violent  disturbance  of 
the  political  balance. 

First  of  all  we  came  on  a  bright  broad 
stream,  in  which  we  could  see  brown 
spotted  fish,  scudding  about  on  the 
shallows,  which  Joe  said  nmst  be  trout. 
And,  after  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to 
increase  the  measure  of  our  sins  by 
adding  poaching  to  trespass,  we  passed 
on  towards  a  dark  wood,  from  which 
the  stream  issued. 

It  was  a  deep  dark  wood  of  lofty 
elms,  and,  as  we  passed  on  into  it,  the 
gloom  grew  deeper.  Far  aloft  the  sun 
gleamed  on  the  highest  boughs ;  but, 
beneath,  the  stream  swept  on  through 
the  shadows,  with  scarcely  a  gleam  of 
light  upon  the  surface.  At  last  we  came 
on  a  waterfall,  and,  on  our  climbing  the 
high  bank  on  one  side  of  it,  the  lake 
opened  on  our  view.  It  was  about  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  long,  hemmed  in  by 
wood  on  all  sides,  with  a  boathouse, 
built  like  a  Swiss  chalet,  halfway 
along  it. 

The  silence  and  solitude  were  pro- 
found ;  nothing  seemed  moving  but  the 
great  dragon-flies  ;  it  was  the  most  beau- 
tiful place  we  had  ever  seen ;  nothing 
would  have  stopped  us  now  short  of  a 
policeman. 

We  determined  to  wait,  and  go  further 
before  we  gathered  the  water-lilies ; 
then,  suddenly,  up  rose  a  great  red-and- 
black  butterfly,  and  Joe  cried  out  to 
me  for  heaven's  sake  to  get  it  for  him. 
Away  went  the  butterfly,  and  I  after  it, 
headlong,  not  seeing  where  I  went,  only 
intent  on  the  chace.  At  one  time  I 
clambered  over  a  sunk  fence,  and  found 
myself  out  of  the  wood  ;  then  I  vaulted 
over  an  iron  hurdle,  then  barely  saved 
myself  from  falling  into  a  basin  of 
crystal  water,  with  a  fountain  in  the 
middle ;  then  I  was  on  a  gravel  walk, 
and  at  last  got  my  prize  under  my 
cap,  in  the  middle  of  a  bed  of  scarlet 
geranium  and  blue  lobelia. 

"  Hang  it,  I  thought,  I  must  be  out 


108 


Tlie  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons : 


of  this  pretty  quick.  This  won't  do, 
We  shan't  get  through  this  Sunday  with- 
out a  blessed  row,  I  know." 

A  voice  behind  me  said,  with  every 
kind  of  sarcastic  emphasis — 

"  Upon  my  veracity,  young  gentle- 
man. Upon  my  word  and  honour. 
Xow  do  let  me  beg  and  pray  of  you, 
my  dear  creature,  to  make  yourself 
entirely  at  home.  Trample,  and  crush, 
and  utterly  destroy,  three  or  four  more 
of  my  flower-beds,  and  then  come  in  and 
have  some  lunch.  Upon  my  word  and 
honour ! " 

I  turned,  and  saw  behind  me  a  very 
handsome  gentleman,  of  about  fifty-five 
or  so,  in  a  blue  coat,  a  white  waistcoat, 
and  drab  trousers,  exquisitely  neat,  who 
stood  and  looked  at  me,  with  his  hands 
spread  abroad  interrogatively,  and  his 
delicate  eyebrows  arched  into  an  ex- 
pression of  sarcastic  inquiry.  "  He 
wont  hit  me,"  was  my  first  thought ;  and 
so  I  brought  my  elbows  down  from  above 
my  ears,  rolled  up  my  cap  with  the  but- 
terfly inside  it,  and  began  to  think  about 
flight. 

I  couldn't  take  my  eyes  off  him.  He 
was  a  strange  figure  to  me.  So  very 
much  like  a  perfect  piece  of  waxwork. 
His  coat  was  so  blue,  his  waistcoat  so 
white,  his  buttons  so  golden,  his  face  so 
smoothly  shaven,  and  his  close-cropped 
grey  hair  so  wonderfully  sleek.  His 
hands  too,  such  a  delicate  mixture  of 
brown  and  white,  with  one  blazing 
diamond  on  the  right  one.  I  saw  a 
grand  gentleman  for  the  first  time,  and 
this,  combined  with  a  slightly  guilty 
conscience,  took  the  edge  oft'  my  London 
prentice  audacity,  and  made  me  just 
the  least  bit  in  the  world  afraid. 

I  had  refinement  enough  (thanks  to 
my  association  with  Joe,  a  gentleman 
born)  not  to  be  impudent.  I  said — "  I 
am  very,  very  sorry,  sir.  The  truth  is, 
sir,  I  wanted  this  butterfly,  and  I  fol- 
lowed it  into  your  grounds.  I  meant 
no  harm,  indeed,  sir.  (As  I  said  it, 
in  those  old  times,  it  ran  something  like 
this — "  I  wanted  that  ere  butterfly,  sir, 
and  I  follered  of  it  into  your  little 
place,  which  I  didn't  mean  no  harm,  I 
do  assure  you)." 

"Well!     well!     well!"      said    Sir 


George  Hillyar,  "  I  don't  say  you  did. 
When  I  was  at  Eton,  I  have  bee-hunted 
into  all  sorts  of  strange  places.  To  the 
very  feet  of  royalty,  on  one  occasion. 
Indeed,  you  are  forgiven.  See  here, 
Erne  :  here  is  a  contrast  to  your  lazy 
style  of  life  ;  here  is  a " 

"  Blacksmith,"  I  said. 

"  Blacksmith,"  said  Sir  George,  "  I 
beg  your  pardon  ;  who  will — will — do 
all  kinds  of  things  (he  said  this  with 
steady  severity)  in  pursuit  of  a  butter- 
fly. An  example,  my  child." 

Taking  my  eyes  from  Sir  George 
Hillyar,  for  the  first  time,  I  saw  that  a 
boy,  about  my  own  age  apparently  (I 
was  nearly  sixteen),  had  come  xip  and 
was  standing  beside  him,  looking  at 
me,  with  his  arm  passed  through  his 
father's,  and  his  head  leaning  against 
his  shoulder. 

Such  a  glorious  lad.  As  graceful  as 
a  deer.  Dark  brown  hair,  that  wandered 
about  his  forehead  like  the  wild  boughs 
of  a  neglected  vine  ;  features  regular 
and  beautiful ;  a  complexion  well-toned, 
but  glazed  over  with  rich  sun-brown  ;  a 
most  beautiful  youth,  yet  whose  beauty 
was  extinguished  and  lost  in  the  blaze 
of  two  great  blue-black  eyes,  which 
forced  you  to  look  at  them,  and  which 
made  you  smile  as  you  looked. 

Sol  saw  him  first.  How  well  I  re- 
member his  first  words,  "  Who  is 
this?"  • 

I  answered  promptly  for  myself.  I 
wanted  Joe  to  see  him,  for  we  had 
never  seen  anything  like  him.  before, 
and  Joe  was  now  visible  in  the  dim  dis- 
tance, uncertain  what  to  do.  I  said,  "  I 
hunted  this  butterfly,  sir,  from  the 
corner  of  the  lake  into  this  garden ;  and, 
if  you  will  come  to  my  brother  Joe,  he 
will  confirm  me.  May  I  go,  sir  ? " 

"  You  may  go,  my  boy,"  said  Sir 
George ;  "  and,  Erne,  you  may  show  him 
off  the  place,  if  you  please.  This  seems 
an  honest  lad,  Erne.  You  may  walk 
with  him  if  you  will." 

So  he  turned  and  went  towards  the 
house,  which  I  now  had  time  to  look  at. 
A  bald,  bare,  white  place,  after  all ; 
with  a  great  expanse  of  shadeless  flower- 
garden  round  it.*  What  you  would  call 
a  very  great  place,  but  a  very  melancholy 


A  Story  of  Two  Families, 


103 


one,  which,  looked  as  though,  it  must  be 
very  damp  in  winter.  The  lake  in  the 
wood  was  the  part  of  that  estate  which 
pleased  me  best. 

Erne  and  I  walked  away  together, 
towards  the  dark  inscrutable  future,  and 
never  said  a  word  till  we  joined  Joe. 
Then  we  three  walked  on  through  the 
wood,  Joe  very  much  puzzled  by  what 
had  happened  j  and  at  last  Erne  said  to 
me — 

"  What  is  your  name  ? " 
"Jim." 

"I  say,  Jim,  what  did  you  come 
here  for,  old  fellow  1 " 

"  We  came  after  the  water-lilies."  I 
said,  "  We  were  told  there  were  yellow 
ones  here." 

"  So  there  were,"  he  said  ;  "  but  we 
have  rooted  them  all  up.  .  If  you  will 
come  here  next  Sunday,  I  will  get  you 
some." 

"  I  am  afraid  we  can't,  sir,"  I  said. 
"  If  it  hadn't  been  for  Bill  Avery  hitting 
his  missis  down  stairs,  we  couldn't  have 
come  here  to-day.  And  we  shall  catch 
it  DOW." 

"  Do  you  go  to  school  ?  "  said  Erne. 
"  No,  sir ;  I  am  apprenticed  to  father. 
Joe  here  does." 

"  Do  the  fellows  like  you,  Joe  ?  Have 
you  got  any  friends  1 " 

Joe  stopped,  and  looked  at  him.  He 
said : 

"Yes,  sir.  Many  dear  friends,  God 
be  praised !  though  I  am  only  a  poor 
hunchback.  Have  you  many,  sir  1 " 

"  Not  one  single  one,  God  help  me, 
Joe.  Not  one  single  one." 

It  came  on  to  rain,  but  he  would  not 
leave  us.  We  walked  to  the  station 
together;  and,  as  we  walked,  Joe,  the 
poet,  told  us  tales,  so  that  the  way 
seemed  short.  Tales  of  sudden  friend- 
ships made  in  summer  gardens,  which 
outlive  death.  Of  long-sought  love  ;  of 
lands  far  off ;  lands  of  peace  and  wealth, 
where  there  was  no  sorrow,  no  care  ; 
only  an  eternal,  dull,  aching  regret  for 
home,  never  satisfied  ;  and  of  the  great 
heaving  ocean,  which  thundered  and 
burst  everlastingly  on  the  pitiless  coast, 
and  sent  its  echoes  booming  up  the 
long-drawn  corridors  of  the  dark  storm- 
shaken  forest  capes. 


Did  Joe  tell  us  all  these  stories,  or 
has  my  memory  become  confused  ?  I 
forget,  good  reader,  I  forget ;  it  is  so 
long  ago. 

We  had  to  wait,  and  Erne  would  sit 
and  wait  with  us  in  the  crowded  waiting- 
room,  and  he  sat  between  Joe  and  me. 
Ha  asked  me  where  I  lived,  and  I  told 
him,  "Church  Place,  Church  Street, 
Chelsea."  Somehow  we  were  so  crowded 
that  his  arm  got  upon  my  shoulder,  just 
as  if  he  were  a  school-fellow  and  an 
equal.  The  last  words  he  said  were — 

"  Come  back  and  see  me,  Jim.  I  have 
not  got  a  friend  in  the  world." 

Joe,  in  the  crush  before  the  train 
started,  heard  the  station-master  say 
to  a  friend :  "  It's  a  queer  thing :  it 
runs  in  families.  There's  young  Erne 
Hillyar  is  going  the  same  way  as  his 
brother.  I  seen  him,  with  my  own 
eyes,  sitting  in  the  second-class  waiting- 
room,  with  his  arm  on  the  shoulder  of  a 
common  young  cad.  He  has^took  to 
low  company,  you  see ;  and  he  will  go 
to  the  devil,  like  his  brother." 

If  the  station-master  had  known 
what  I  thought  of  him  after  I  heard 
this,  he  would  not  have  slept  the 
better,  I  fancy.  Low  company,  for- 
sooth. Could  the  Honourable  James 
Burton,  of  the  Supreme  Council  of 
Cooksland,  Colonial  Commissioner  for 
the  Exhibition  of  1862,  ever  have  been 
justly  described  as  "low  company?" 
Certainly  not.  I  was  very  angry  then. 
I  am  furious  now.  Intolerable  ! 

This  Sunday's  expedition,  so  impor- 
tant as  it  was,  was  never  inquired  into 
by  my  father.  When  we  got  home  we 
found  that  our  guilty  looks  were  not 
noticed.  The  affair  between  William 
Avery  and  his  wife  had  complicated 
itself,  and  got  to  be  very  serious,  and 
sad  indeed.  When  we  got  home  we 
found  my  father  sitting  and  smoking 
opposite  my  mother ;  and,  on  inquiry, 
we  heard  that  Emma  had  been  sent  up 
to  bed  with  the  children  at  seven 
o'clock. 

I  thought  at  first  that  we  were  going 
to  "catch  it."  I,  who  knew  every  atti- 
tude of  theirs  so  well,  could  see  that 
they  were  sitting  in  j  udgment ;  and  I 
thought  it  was  on  us.  This  was  the 


110 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


first  time  we  had  ever  done  any  great 
wrong  to  them ;  and  I  felt  that,  if 
we  could  have  it  out,  there  and  then, 
we  should  be  happier.  And  so  I  went 
to  my  father's  side,  put  my  arm  on  his 
shoulder,  and  said  : 

"  Father,  I  will  tell  you  all  about 
it." 

"  My  old  Jim,"  he  answered,  "  what 
can  you  tell,  any  more  than  we  have 
heard  this  miserable  day  1  We  know 
all  as  you  may  have  heard,  my  boy. 
Little  Polly  Martin,  too.  Who  would 
have  thought  it?" 

My  mother  began  to  cry  bitterly.  I 
began  to  guess  that  William  Avery  had 
quarrelled  with  his  wife  on  the  grounds 
of  jealousy,  and,  also,  that  my  father 
and  mother  had  sifted  the  evidence  and 
pronounced  her  guilty.  I  knew  all 
about  it  at  once  from  those  few  words, 
though  I  was  but  a  lad  of  sixteen. 

I  knew  now,  and  I  had  suspected  be- 
fore, that  young  Mrs.  Avery  was  no 
longer  such  a  one  as  my  father  and 
mother  would  allow  to  sit  down  in  the 
same  room  with  Emma, 

She  had  been,  before  her  marriage,  a 
dark-eyed  pretty  little  body,  apparently 
quite  blameless  in  every  way,  and  a 
great  favourite  of  my  mother's.  But 
she  married  William  Avery,  a  smart 
young  waterman,  rather  too  much  given 
to  "potting,"  and  she  learnt  the  ac- 
cursed trick  of  drinking  from  him.  And 
then  everything  went  wrong.  She  could 
sing,  worse  luck  ;  and  one  Saturday 
night  she  went  marketing,  and  did  not 
come  home.  And  he  went  after  her, 
and  found  her  singing  in  front  of  the 
Six  Bells  in  the  King's  Road,  having 
spent  all  his  money.  And  then  he  beat 
her  for  the  first  time  ;  and  then  things 
went  on  from  bad  to  worse,  till  the  last 
and  worst  crash  came,  on  the  very  week 
when  Joe  and  I  ran  away  to  Stanlake. 

William  was  fined  by  Mr.  Paynter 
for  beating  his  wife ;  and  soon  after 
his  end  came.  He  took  seriously  to 
drinking.  One  dark  night  he  and  his 
mate  were  bringing  the  barge  down  on 
the  tide — his  mate,  Sam  Aga'r,  with 
the  sweeps,  and  poor  Avery  steering— 
and  she  (the  barge)  wouldn't  behave. 
Sam  knew  that  poor  Avery  was  drunk, 


and  rectified  his  bad  steering  with  the- 
sweeps,  as  well  as  he  was  able.  But, 
approaching  Battersea  Bridge,  good  Sam 
saw  that  she  was  broadside  to  the  tide, 
and  cried  out :  "  Starboard,  Bill !  Star- 
board, old  boy,  for  God's  sake  ;"  but 
there  was  no  answer.  She  struck  the 
Middlesex  pier  of  the  main  arch  heavily, 
and  nearly  heaved  over  and  went  down, 
but  righted  and  swung  through.  When 
Sam  Agar  found  himself  in  clear  water, 
he  ran  aft  to  see  after  Bill  Avery.  But 
the  poor  fellow  had  tumbled  over  long 
before,  and  the  barge  had  been  steering 
herself  for  a  mile.  His  body  came 
ashore  opposite  Smith's  distillery,  and 
Mr.  Wakley  delivered  himself  of  a  phi- 
lippic against  drunkenness  to  the  jury 
who  sat  upon  him. 

And  his  wife  went  utterly  to  the  bad. 
I  thought  we  had  heard  the  last  of  her, 
but  it  was  not  so.  My  mother's  face, 
when  she  turned  up  again,  after  so  many 
years,  ought  to  have  been  photographed 
and  published.  "  Well,  now,  you  know, 
this  really  is,"  was  what  she  said.  It 
was  the  expression  of  her  face,  the 
look  of  blank  staring  wonder  that 
amused  Joe  and  me  so  much. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

SIR    GEORGE    HILLYAR. 

ONE  morning  in  September,  Sir  George 
Hillyar  sat  in  his  study,  before  his 
escritoire,  very  busy  with  his  papers; 
and  beside  him  was  his  lawyer,  Mr. 
Compton. 

Sir  George  was  a  singularly  handsome, 
middle-aged  gentleman,  with  a  square 
ruddy .  face,  very  sleek  close-cropped 
grey  hair,  looking  very  high-bred  and 
amiable,  save  in  two  points.  He  had  a 
short  thick  neck,  like  a  bulldog,  and  a 
very  obstinate-looking  and  rather  large 
jaw.  To  give  you  his  character  in  a  few 
words,  he  was  a  just,  kind  man,  of  not 
very  high  intellect,  in  spite  of  his  high 
cultivation ;  of  intensely  strong  affec- 
tions, and  (whether  it  was  the  fault  of 
his  thick  neck,  or  his  broad  jaw,  I 
cannot  say),  as  obstinate  as  a  mule. 

"  Are  you  really  going  to  renew  this 
lease,  Sir  George  ? "  said  Mr.  Compton. 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


Ill 


"  Why,  yes,  I  think  so.  I  promised 
Erne  I  would." 

"  Will  you  excuse  me,  Sir  George,  if 
I  ask,  as  your  confidential  friend  of 
many  years'  standing,  what  the  deuce 
my  young  friend  Erne  has  to  do  with 
the  matter1?" 

"Nothing  in  the  world,"  said  Sir 
George ;  "  but  they  got  hold  of  him 
when  we  were  down  there,  and  he  got 
me  to  promise.  Therefore  I  must,  don't 
you  see." 

"  No,  I  don't.  This  widow  and  her 
sons  are  ruining  the  farm  ;  you  propose 
to  give  them  seven  years  longer  to 
complete  their  work.  How  often  have 
you  laid  it  down  as  a  rule,  never  to 
renew  a  lease  to  a  widow  ;  and  here  you 
are  doing  it,  because  that  young  gaby, 
Erne,  has  been  practised  on,  and  asks 
you." 

"  I  know  all  that,"  said  Sir  George, 
"  but  I  am  quite  determined." 

"  Very  well,  then,"  said  Mr.  Compton, 
rather  nettled,  "  let's  say  no  more.  I 
know  what  that  means." 

"  You  see,  Compton,  I  will  not  dis- 
appoint that  boy  in  anything  of  this 
kind.  I  have  kept  him  here  alone  with 
me,  and  allowed  him  to  see  scarce  any 
one.  You  know  why.  And  the  boy 
has  not  seen  enough  of  the  outside 
world,  and  has  no  sympathies  with  his 
fellow-men  whatever.  And  I  will  not 
baulk  him  in  this.  These  are  the  first 
people  he  has  shown  an  interest  in, 
Compton,  and  he  shan't  be  baulked." 

"  He  would  have  shown  an  interest 
in  plenty  of  people,  if  you  would  have 
let  him,"  said  the  lawyer.  "  You  haye 
kept  him  mewed  up  here  till  he  is 
fifteen,  with  no  companion  but  his 
tutor,  and  your  grey-headed  household. 
The  boy  has  scarcely  spoken  with  a 
human  being  under  fifty  in  his  lifetime. 
Why  don't  you  let  him  see  young  folks 
of  his  own  age  ? " 

"  Why !"  said  Sir  George  angrily. 
"  Have  I  two  hearts  to  break  that  you 
ask  me  this  1  You  know  why,  Compton. 
You  know  how  that  woman  and  her 
child  broke  my  heart  once.  Do  you 
want  it  broken  again  by  this,  the  child 
of  my  old  age,  I  may  say — the  child  of 
my  angel  Mary?" 


"You  will  have  your  heart  broken 
if  you  don't  mind,  Hillyar,"  said  the 
lawyer.  "  I  will  speak  out  once  and 
for  all.  If  you  keep  that  boy  tied  up 
here  in  this  unnatural  way,  he  will  play 
the  deuce  some  day  or  another.  Upon 
my  word,  Hillyar,  this  fantigue  of  yours 
approaches  lunacy.  To  keep  a  noble 
high-mettled  boy  like  Erne  cooped  up 
among  grey-headed  grooms  and  footmen, 
and  never  to  allow  him  to  see  a  round 
young  face  except  in  church.  It  is  rank 
madness." 

"  I  have  had  enough  of  young 
servants,"  said  Sir  George.  "  I  will 
have  no  more  Samuel  Burtons,  if  you 
please." 

"  Who  the  deuce  wants  you  to  ? 
Send  the  boy  among  lads  in  his  own 
rank  in  life." 

"  I  have  done  it  once.  They  bore 
him.  He  don't  like  'em." 

"  Because  you  don't  let  him  choose 
them  for  himself." 

"  Let  him  have  the  chance  of  choosing, 
in  his  ignorance,  such  ruffians  as  young 
Mottesfont  and  young  Peters,  for  in- 
stance," said  Sir  George,  scornfully. 
"No  more  of  that,  thank  you,  either. 
You  are  a  sage  counsellor,  upon  my 
word,  Compton.  Let  us  change  the 
subject." 

"  Upon  my  honour  we  had  better," 
said  the  lawyer,  "  if  I  am  to  keep  my 
temper.  You  are,  without  exception, 
the  most  wrong-headed  man  I  ever  saw. 
This  I  will  say,  that,  as  soon  as  Erne  is 
released  from  this  unnatural  restraint, 
as  he  must  be  soon,  he  will  make 
friends  with  the  first  young  man,  and 
fall  in  love  with  the  first  pretty  face,  he 
sees.  You  have  given  him  no  selection; 
and,  by  Jove,  you  have  given  him  a 
better  chance  of  going  to  the  deuce 
than  ever  you  did  his  half-brother." 

Obstinate  men  are  not  always  ill- 
tempered  ;  Sir  George  Hillyar  was  not 
an  ill-tempered  man.  His  obstinacy 
arose  as  much  perhaps  from  self-esteem, 
caused  by  his  having  been  from  his 
boyhood  master  of  ten  thousand  a  year, 
as  from  his  bull-neck  and  broad  jaw. 
He  was  perfectly  good-tempered  over 
this  scolding  of  his  kind  old  friend ;  he 
only  said — 


112          The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  :  A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


"  Now,  Corupton,  you  know  me.  I 
have  thought  over  the  matter  more 
than  you  have.  I  am  determined.  Let 
us  get  on  to  business." 

"  Very  well !"  said  the  lawyer;  "these 
papers  you  have  signed;  I  had  better 
take  them  to  the  office." 

"  Yes ;  put  'em  in  your  old  japanned 
box,  and  put  it  on  the  third  shelf  from 
the  top,  between  Viscount  Saltire  and 
the  Earl  of  Ascot ;  not  much  in  his 
box,  is  there,  hey?" 

"  A  deal  there  shouldn't  be,"  said 
the  lawyer.  "  Is  there  nothing  else  for 
me  to  put  in  the  tin  box  of  Sir  George 
Hillyar,  Bart,  on  the  third  shelf  from 
the  top?" 

"  No  !  hang  it,  no,  Compton.  I'll 
keep  it  here.  I  might  alter  it.  Things 
might  happen;  and,  when  death  looks 
in  between  the  curtains,  a  man  is  apt  to 
change  his  mind.  I'll  keep  it  here." 

He  pointed  to  the  tall  fantastically- 
carved  escritoire  at  which  he  was 
sitting,  and,  tapping  it,  said  once  again, 
"  I'll  keep  it  here,  Compton ;  I'll  keep 
it  here,  old  friend." 

Sir  George  Hillyar's  history  is  told  in 
a  very  few  words.  His  first  marriage 
was  a  singularly  unfortunate  one.  Lady 
Hillyar  sold  herself  to  him  for  his 
wealth,  and  afterwards  revenged  herself 
on  him  by  leading  him  the  lii'e  of  a  dog. 
She  was  an  e,vil-tempered  woman,  and 
her  ill- temper  improved  by  practice. 
They  had  one  son,  the  Lieutenant 
Hillyar  we  have  already  seen  in  Aus- 
tralia, and  whose  history  we  have  heard ; 
whose  only  recollections  of  a  mother 
must  have  been  those  of  a  restless  dark 
woman  who  wrangled  and  wept  per- 
petually. Sir  George  Hillyar's  consti- 
tutional obstinacy  did  him  but  little 
good  here  ;  his  calm  inflexibility  was 
more  maddening  to  his  fierce  wild  wife 
than  the  loudest  objurgation  would  have 
been.  One  night,  when  little  George 
was  lying  in  his  cradle,  she  kissed  him 
and  left  the  house ;  left  it  for  utter 
ruin  and  disgrace ;  unfaithful  more  from 
temper  than  from  passion. 
.  In  two  years  she  died.  She  wore  her 
fierce  heart  out  at  last  in  ceaseless  re- 
proaches on  the  man  with  whom  she 
had  fled,  the  man  whom  she  had  jilted 


that  she  might  marry  Sir  George 
Hillyar.  A  dark  wild  story  all  through  ; 
which  left  its  traces  on  the  obstinate 
face  of  Sir  George  Hillyar,  and  on  the 
character  and  life  of  his  poor  boy. 

Dark  suspicions  arose  in  his  mind 
about  this  boy.  He  never  loved  him, 
but  he  was  inexorably  just  to  him. 
His  suspicions  about  him  were  utterly 
groundless  ;  his  common  sense  told  him 
that,  but  he  could  not  love  him,  for  he 
had  nearly  learnt  to  hate  his  mother. 
He  was  more  than  ordinarily  careful 
over  his  education,  and  his  extra  care 
led  to  the  disasters  we  know  of. 

But  there  was  a  brief  glimpse  of 
sunshine  in  store  for  Sir  George  Hillyar. 
He  was  still  a  young,  and,  in  spite  of 
all  appearances,  a  warm-hearted  man. 
And  he  fell  in  love  again. 

He  went  down  into  Wiltshire  to 
shoot  over  an  outlying  estate  of  his, 
which  he  seldom  visited  save  for  sport- 
ing purposes,  keeping  no  establishment 
there,  but  lodging  with  his  bailiff.  And 
it  so  happened  that  the  gamekeeper's 
daughter  came  down  the  long  grass  ride, 
between  the  fallowing  hazel  copse,  under 
the  October  sun,  to  bring  them  lunch. 
And  she  was  so  divinely  beautiful  that 
he  shot  badly  all  the  afternoon,  and  in 
the  evening  went  to  the  keeper's  lodge 
to  ask  questions  about  the  pheasants, 
and  saw  her  again.  And  she  was  so 
graceful,  -so  good,  and  so  modest,  that 
in  four  days  he  asked  her  to  marry 
him ;  and,  if  ever  there  was  a  happy 
marriage  it  was  this ;  for  truth  is 
stranger  than  fiction,  as  many  folks 
know. 

They  had  one  boy,  whom  they 
christened  Erne,  after  an  Irish  family; 
and,  when  he  was  two  years  old,  poor 
Lady  Hillyar  stayed  out  too  late  one 
evening  on  the  lake,  too  soon  after  her 
second  confinement.  She  caught  cold, 
and  died,  leaving  an  infant  who  quickly 
followed  her.  And  then  Sir  George 
transferred  all  the  love  of  his  heart  to 
the  boy  Erne,  who,  as  he  grew,  showed 
that  he  had  inherited  not  only  his 
mother's  beauty,  but  all  the  yielding 
gentleness  of  her  disposition. 

To  be  continued. 


113 


ROBERT  GOULD  SHAW. 


BY   MRS.  GASKELL. 


I  SHOULD  like  some  of  the  readers  of 
Macmillan  to  remember  the  name  of 
the  late  Colonel  Robert  Gould  Shaw 
as  the  name  of  one  who  gave  up  his 
life  for  what  he  believed  to  be  right — 
deliberately  risked,  and  cheerfully  laid 
down,  a  prosperous,  happy,  beloved,  and 
loving  life. 

Forgive  me,  dear  American  friends, 
if  I  seem  to  trench  a  little  too  much  on 
what  is  personal !  Before  I  end  my 
narrative  I  think  you  will  understand 
why  I  do  it. 

My  first  acquaintance  with  the  Shaw 
family  was  in  Paris,  in  the  year  1855. 
Mrs.  Shaw  and  her  young  daughters  were 
spending  the  winter  there ;  Mr.  Shaw 
had  gone  to  America  to  superintend  the 
building  of  a  large  family  house  on 
Staten  Island,  that  pleasant  suburb  of 
New  York.  There  was  only  one  son, 
Robert  Gould  Shaw,  and  he  was  absent 
from  Paris  at  this  time — studying  in 
Germany,  I  think.  The  family  had 
been  for  nearly  five  years  in  Europe, 
travelling  in  Italy  and  Egypt,  and  stop- 
ping where  they  liked,  after  the  manner 
of  wealthy  Americans,  and  educating 
their  children  not  after  the  usual  manner 
of  wealthy  people.  I  remember  the 
large  pleasant  suite  of  rooms,  looking 
into  the  Tuileries  gardens,  occupied  by 
Mrs.  Shaw  and  her  daughters ;  the 
pretty,  thoughtful,  original  girls,  cluster- 
ing round  their  sweet,  loving  mother; 
the  birds  and  pet  animals,  which  she 
taught  them  to  care  for  and  attend  to. 
I  recollect  scraps  of  the  conversation  of 
those  days :  how  Mrs.  Shaw  spoke  of 
her  husband  as  the  true  and  faithful 
descendant  of  one  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers 
who  had  left  everything  for  conscience' 
sake  ;  how  anxious  she  was  that,  while 
her  daughters  benefited  in  every  way 
by  the  real  advantages  which  Paris 
offered  in  the  way  of  intellectual  educa- 
tion, they  should  not  be  tainted  by  the 

No.  £0.— VOL.  ix. 


worldliness  and  the  love  of  dress  so  often 
fostered  by  a  residence  there.  She  spoke 
of  the  pity  it  was  that  the  American  girls 
in  general  were  so  encouraged,  by  the 
wealth  of  their  parents,  tp  spend  great 
sums  of  money  on  themselves,  so  that 
this  habit  of  expenditure  always  pro- 
duced a  self-indulgent  character,  and 
really  often  became  an  obstacle  to  mar- 
riages of  true  love ;  and  then  she  went  on 
to  say  how  much  she  and  her  husband 
feared  the  adoption  of  riches  as  a  com- 
parative standard  of  worth.  But,  again, 
she  was  fully  alive  to  the  real  advantages 
that  might  be  derived  from  wealth. 
One  of  her  daughters  drew  well,  and 
loved  animals;  she  had  lessons  from 
Rosa  Bonheur.  The  house  at  Staten 
Island  was  to  be  a  home  not  merely  for 
their  children,  but  for  their  children's 
friends  ;  each  child  was  to  have  a  sitting- 
room  and  bedroom,  and  an  extra  bed- 
room opening  into  the  sitting-room,  for 
a  friend.  These  plans  came  lightly  to 
the  surface  of  conversation ;  and  every 
now  and  then  I  had  glimpses,  uncon- 
sciously to  my  friend,  of  what  she  and 
her  husband  felt  to  be  the  deeper  re- 
sponsibilities of  their  position. 

Well,  this  happy,  prosperous  family 
returned  to  America  the  next  year. 
From  time  to  time  I  gave  English 
friends  going  to  New  York  introductions 
to  the  Shaws  ;  and  one  and  all  spoke  of 
the  kind  hospitality  which  was  shown 
to  them  —  the  bright  home,  full  of 
treasures  of  European  art,  collected 
during  their  five  years'  travel ;  the  up- 
right, honourable  father,  the  sweet 
mother,  the  eldest  daughter,  now 
married  and  living  at  home  with  her 
husband — (I  thought  how  well  the  edu- 
cation had  answered  that  had  led  to  a 
"  marriage  of  true  minds,"  to  which  no 
want  of  riches  on  the  distinguished 
husband's  part  had  proved  "impedi- 
ment")— the  pretty,  elegant  daughters 


114 


Robert  Gould  Shaw. 


playing  at  croquet  on  the'  lawn,  before 
the  game  was  so  common  in  England — 
the  noble,  handsome,  only  son,  with 
both  his  parents'  characters  blended  in 
his,  and  a  sunny  life  of  prosperity  before 
him. 

That  was  the  last  picture  I  had  of 
the  home  on  Staten  Island  before  the 
war  broke  out. 

I  knew  that  my  friends  were  deeply 
impressed  with  the  sin  of  slavery  ;  they 
were  thoughtful  Abolitionists,  and  had 
taken  part  in  all  political  questions 
bearing  upon  the  subject  both  before 
and  after  their  residence  in  Europe.  I 
had  letters  on  the  subject  of  the  war,  as 
likely  to  affect  slavery,  within  a  month 
or  two  after  the  affair  at  Fort  Sumter. 
They  were  not  the  fanatical  letters  of 
new  converts  to  an  opinion ;  still  less 
were  they  the  letters  of  people  taking 
up  a  great  moral  question  as  a  party 
cry.  They  were  the  letters  of  men  and 
women  deeply  impressed  with  the  sense 
of  a  great  national  sin,  in  which  they 
themselves  were,  to  a  certain  degree, 
implicated;  and,  without  too  much 
casting  stones  at  others,  they  spoke  of 
slavery  as  a  crime  which  must  be  done 
away  with,  and  for  the  doing-away  of 
which  they  were  not  merely  willing,  but 
desirous,  to  make  their  own  personal 
sacrifices.  The  sacrifice  has  been  made, 
and  is  accepted  of  God. 

Presently  I  heard  that  Robert  Gould 
Shaw,  the  only  son,  had  entered  the  7th 
New  York  Lancers,  the  crack  regiment 
into  which  all  the  young  men  of  the 
"upper  ten  thousand"  entered  ;  a  dash- 
ing corps,  splendidly  horsed  and  arrayed. 
I  remember  well  how  I  used  to  look  for 
any  mention  of  this  7th  Lancers !  By- 
and-by,  perhaps  before  the  war  had 
deepened  to  grim,  terrible  earnest,  Mrs. 
Shaw  sent  me  word  how,  unable  almost 
to  bear  the  long  separation  from  her 
only  boy,  she  and  his  sisters  had  gone 
to  camp  (I  forget  where)  to  see  him. 
And  then  he  was  at  home  on  leave  ; 
and  then  he  was  engaged  to  a  sweet, 
pretty  young  lady ;  and  then — he  had 
left  the  gay  regiment  of  the  7th  Lancers, 
and  had  gone  to  live  with,  and  train  and 
teach,  the  poor  forlorn  coloured  people, 


"  niggers,"  who  were  going  to  fight  for  the 
freedom  of  their  brothers  in  the  South. 
The  repugnance  of  the  Northerners  to 
personal  contact  with  black  or  coloured 
people  has  been  repeatedly  spoken  of 
by  all  travellers  in  America.  Probably 
Colonel  Shaw  had  less  of  this  feeling 
than  a  Northerner  would  have  had  who 
had  been  entirely  brought  up  in  America ; 
but  still  it  must  have  required  that  deep 
root  of  willingness  to  do  God's  will  out 
of  which  springs  the  truest  moral  courage, 
to  have  enabled  him  to  march  out  of 
New  York  at  the  head  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts 54th,  all  black  or  coloured 
men,  amidst  the  jeers  and  scoffings  of 
the  "roughs,"  and  the  contemptuous 
pity  of  many  who  should  have  known 
better.  Yet  this  did  Colonel  Shaw,  one 
day  this  last  spring,  with  a  brave  trustful 
heart,  leaving  home,'  leaving  mother, 
leaving  new-made  wife,  to  go  forth  and 
live  amongst  his  poor  despised  men,  the 
first  regiment  of  niggers  called  into  the 
field,  and  to  share  their  hardships,  and 
to  teach  them  the  deepest  and  most 
precious  knowledge  that  he  had  himself. 
Two  months  afterwards  he  was  with 
them  before  Fort  Wagner,  "sitting  on 
"  the  ground  and  talking  to  his  men," 
says  an  eyewitness,  "  very  familiarly  and 
"  kindly.  He  told  them  how  the  eyes 
"  of  thousands  would  look  on  the  night's 
"  work  on  which  they  were  about  to 
"  enter;  and  he  said,  'Now,  boys,  I  want 
'  you  to  be  men  ! '  He  would  walk 
'  along  the  line,  and  speak  words  of 
'  cheer  to  his  men.  We  could  see  that 
'  he  was  a  man  who  had  counted  the 
'  cost  of  the  undertaking  before  him,  for 
'  his  words  were  spoken  so  ominously," 
(remember  the  Confederates  had  openly 
threatened  to  make  an  especial  aim  of 
every  white  officer  leading  coloured 
troops),  "  his  lips  were  compressed,  and 
'  now  and  then  there  was  visible  a 
'  slight  twitching  of  the  corners  of  the 
'  mouth,  like  one  bent  on  accomplishing 
'  or  dying.  One  poor  fellow,  struck  no 
'  doubt  by  the  Colonel's  determined 
'  bearing,  exclaimed  as  he  was  passing 
'  him,  '  Colonel,  I  will  stay  with  you 
'  till  I  die  ; '  and  he  kept  his  word ;  he 
'  has  never  been  seen  since." 


Robert  Gould  Shaw. 


115 


The  54th  coloured  Massachusetts 
regiment  held  the  right  of  the  storming 
column  that  attacked  Fort  Wagner  on 
the  18th  of  July  last.  It  went  into 
action  650  strong,  and  came  out  with  a 
loss  of  a  third  of  the  men,  and  a  still 
larger  proportion  of  officers,  but  eight 
out  of  twenty-three  coming  out  un- 
injured. The  regiment  was  marched  up 
in  column  by  wings,  the  first  being  under 
the  command  of  Colonel  Shaw.  When 
about  1,000 .  yards  from  the  fort,  the 
enemy  opened  upon  them  with  shot, 
shell,  and  canister.  They  pressed  through 
this  storm,  and  cheered  and  shouted  as 
they  advanced.  When  within  a  hundred 
yards  from  the  fort,  the  musketry  from 
it  opened  with  such  terrible  effect  that 
the  first  battalion  hesitated — only  for  an 
instant.  Colonel  Shaw  sprang  forward, 
and,  waving  his  sword,  cried,  "  Forward, 
my  brave  boys,"  and,  with  another  cheer 
and  shout,  they  rushed  through  the  ditch, 
gained  the  parapet  on  the  right,  and 
were  soon  hand  to  hand  with  the  enemy. 
Colonel  Shaw  was  one  of  the  first  to 
scale  the  walls.  He  stood  erect  to  urge 
forward  his  men,  and,  while  shouting  to 
them  to  press  forward,  he  was  shot  dead, 
and  fell  into  the  fort.  His  body  was 
found  with  twenty  of  his  men  lying 
dead  around  him,  two  lying  on  his  own 
body.  In  the  morning  they  were  all 
buried  together  in  the  same  pit. 

I  must  not  forget  to  name  one  of  Colonel 
Shaw's  men — one  of  "  his  niggers  "  (as 
the  Confederates  called  them  ;  when  the 
Federals  asked  for  his  body  the  day  after 
the  fight,  "  Colonel  Shaw !  "  they  said, 
"  we  buried  him  below  his  niggers  !  ") 
— One  of  his  niggers  was  a  Sergeant 
William  Carney,  who  caught  the  colours 
from  a  wounded  colour-bearer,  and  was 
the  first  man  to  plant  the  stars  and 
stripes  on  Fort  Wagner.  As  he  saw 
the  men  falling  back,  himself  severely 
wounded  in  the  breast,  he  brought  the 
colours  off,  creeping  on  his  knees,  press- 
ing his  wound  with  one  hand,  and  with 
the  other  holding  up  the  banner,  the 
sign  of  his  freedom.  The  moment  he 
was  seen  crawling  into  hospital  with  the 
flag  still  in  his  possession,  his  wounded 
companions,  both  black  and  white,  rose 


from  the  straw  on  which  they  were 
lying  and  cheered  him  until,  exhausted, 
they  could  cheer  no  longer.  In  response 
to  this  reception  the  brave  wounded 
standard-bearer  said,  "  Boys,  I  but  did 
"  my  duty ;  the  dear  old  flag  never 
"  touched  the  ground." 

And  now  Eobert  Gould  Shaw  is  dead ; 
the  rich  prosperous  young  man,  who 
might  have  lived  at  his  ease  ia  the 
beautiful  home  on  Staten  Island,  is 
dead.  He,  who  might  have  fought 
gallantly  in  splendid  uniform  on  a  noble 
charger  among  his  fellows  in  riches  and 
station,  is  dead — fighting  among  the  de- 
spised coloured  people,  amongst  whom 
the  last  months  of  his  life  were  passed — 
buried  beneath  his  niggers  with  contempt 
and  insult. 

It  makes  my  heart  burn  when  I  read 
the  false  statements  sometimes  put  out 
by  English  papers,  to  the  effect  that  the 
higher  classes  of  Northerners  shirk  their 
part  of  sacrifice  and  suffering,  and  that, 
in  fact,  the  Federal  regiments  are  filled 
with  mercenaries,  German  or  Irish.  I, 
one  English  individual,  know,  of  my 
own  personal  knowledge,  of  three  only 
sons,  of  'rich  parents,  living  in  happy 
homes,  full  of  gladness  and  hope,  who 
have  left  all — I  will  say  it — to  follow 
Christ ;  and  have  laid  down  their  lives, 
for  no  party  object,  for  no  mere  political 
feeling ;  but  to  see  if  their  lives  might 
avail,  if  ever  so  little,  to  set  the  captive 
free.  And  the  mother  of  one  of  these 
dead  sons  is  giving,  her  friends  fear  far  too 
liberally,  to  procure  comforts,  and  even 
luxuries  for  the  Confederate  prisoners 
in  Fort  la  Fayette. 

And  now,  dear  mourning  friend,  let 
me  quote  some  of  your  words  : — 

"  Yes,  my  darling,  precious,  only  son 
'  has  joined  the  host  of  young  martyrs 
'  who  have  given  their  lives  to  the  cause 
*  of  right  in  the  last  two  years.  He 
'  and  I  had  thought  and  talked  of 
'  what  might  happen  to  him,  and  I 
'  thought  I  was  ready  for  the  blow  when 
'  it  should  come ;  but  when  can  a  mother 
'  be  ready  to  give  up  her  child  ?  It  has 
'  been  a  terrible  struggle,  and  no  relief 
'  comes  to  me  but%  from  prayer.  I  do 
'not  mean  that  I  would  have  had  it 


116 


Robert  Gould  Shaw. 


"otherwise,  for  it  was  a  fitting  end 
"  for  his  noble  and  most  beautiful  life. 
"  Ah  !  dear  friend,  when  I  think  of  the 
"  agony  that  has  torn  the  hearts  of 
"  mothers  and  wives  in  this  country, 
"North  and  South,  I  feel  sure  that 
"  God  is  performing  a  mighty  work  in 
•"  the  land,  and,  purified  from  our  curse 
"  of  slavery,  our  descendents  will  reap 
"  the  reward  of  our  suffering." 

I  will  now  copy  out  some  extracts 
from  an  American  newspaper,  to  show 
that  my  strong  feeling  about  Colonel 
-Shaw  is  participated  in  by  others  not 
•of  kin  to  him. 

"COLONEL  ROBERT  GOULD  SHAW. 


"  When  John  Brown  was  led  out  of 
"the  Charlestown  jail  on  his  way  to 
""execution,  he  paused  a  moment,  it 
•"  will  be  remembered,  in  the  passage- 
"  way,  and,  taking  a  little  coloured  child 
"  in  his  arms,  he  kissed  and  blessed  it. 
"  The  dying  blessing  of  the  martyr  will 
"  descend  from  generation  to  generation, 
"and  a  whole  race  will  cherish  the 
•"  memory  of  that  simple  caress,  so  de- 
"  grading  as  it  seemed  to  the  slave- 
"  holders  around  him.  .  .  . 

. "  Only  those  who  knew  Colonel  Shaw 
"  can  understand  how  fitting  it  seems, 
"  when  the  purpose  of  outrage  is  put 
"  aside  and  forgotten,  that  he   should 
"  have  been  laid'  in  a   common  grave 
with  his  black  soldiers.    The  relations 
between    coloured  troops   and    their 
officers,  if  these  are  good  for  anything 
and  fit  for  their  places,  must  needs  be, 
from  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
41  very  close  and  peculiar.     They  were 
"  especially  so  with  Colonel  Shaw  and 
"  his  regiment.     His  was  one  of  those 
'  natures  which  attract  first  through  the 
affections.       Most    gentle  -  tempered, 
'  sympathetic,    full    of   kindness,    un- 
'  selfish,  unobtrusive,  and  gifted  with 
1  great  personal  beauty  and   a  noble 
"  bearing,  he  was  sure  to  win  the  love, 
"  in  a  very  marked  degree,  of  men  of  a 
"  race  peculiarly  susceptible  to  influence 
"  from  such  traits.     First   they  loved 
"  him  with   a    devotion  which   could 
"  hardly  exist  anywhere  else  than  in 


the  peculiar  relation  which  he  held  to 
them  as  commander  of  the  first  regi- 
ment of  free  coloured  men  permitted 
to  fling  out  a  military  banner  in  this 
country — a  banner    that,   so    raised, 
meant  to  them  so  much.     But  then 
came  closer  ties.    They  found  that  this 
young  man,  with  education  and  habits 
that  would    naturally  lead    him   to 
choose  a  life  of  ease,  with  wealth  at 
his  command,  with  peculiarly  happy 
social  relations — one  most  tender  ono 
just   formed — accepted    the    position 
offered   to  him,   in  consideration  of 
his  soldierly  as  well  as  moral  fitness, 
because  he  recognised  a  solemn  duty 
to   the  black  man,   because   he  was 
ready  to  throw  all  that  he  had,  all 
that  he  was,  all  that  the  world  could 
give  him,  for  the  negro  race  !     Be- 
neath that  gentle  and  courtly  bearing 
which  so  won    upon    the    coloured 
people  of  Boston  when  the  54th  was 
in  camp ;    beneath  that  kindly  but 
unswerving    discipline    of   the   com- 
manding officer;  beneath  that  stem, 
but  always  cool  and  cheerful  courage 
of  the  leader  in  the  fight,  was  a  clear 
and  deep  conviction  of  a  duty  to  the 
blacks.     He  hoped  to  lead  them,  as 
one  of  the  roads  to  social  equality,  to 
fight  their  way  to  true  freedom,  and 
herein  he  saw  his  path  of  duty.     Of 
the  battle  (two  days  before  that  in 
which  he  fell,  and  in  which  his  regi- 
"  ment,  by  their  bravery,  won  the  right 
"  to  lead  the  attack  on  Fort  Wagner), 
"  he  said,  '  I  wanted  my  men  to  fight 
"  by  the  side  of  whites,  and  they  have 
"  done  it ; '  thinking  of  others,  not  of 
"  himself ;     thinking    of     that    great 
"  struggle   for  equality  in   which  the 
"  race  had  now  a  chance  to  gain  a  step 
"  forward,  and  to  which  he  was  ready 
"  to  devote  his  life.    Could  it  have  been 
"  for  him  to   choose   his  last  resting- 
"  place,  he  would  no  doubt  have  said, 
"  '  Bury  me  with  my  men,  if  I  earn  that 
"  '  distinction.' 

The  following  is  the  address  of  the 
Military  Governor  of  South  Carolina 
to  the  people  of  colour  in  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  South. 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VII* 


117 


"  Beaufort,  S.C.  July  27,  1863. 

"  To  the  coloured  soldiers  and  freed- 
men  in  this  Department. 

"  It  is  fitting  that  you  should  pay  a 
last  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory  of 
the  late  Colonel  Robert  Gould  Shaw, 
Colonel  of  the  54th  regiment  of  Massa- 
chusetts Volunteers.  He  commanded 
the  first  regiment  of  coloured  soldiers 
from  a  Free  State  ever  mustered  into 
the  United  States'  service. 

"  He  fell  at  the  head  of  his  regiment, 
while  leading  a  storming  party  against 
a  rebel  stronghold  You  should 
cherish  in  your  inmost  hearts  the 
memory  of  one  who  did  not  hesitate 
to  sacrifice  all  the  attractions  of  a 
high  social  position,  wealth,  and  home, 
and  his  own  noble  life  for  the  sake  of 
humanity — another  martyr  to  your 
cause  that  death  has  added — still 
another  hope  for  your  race.  The 
truths  and  principles  for  which  he 
fought  and  died  still  live,  and  will  be 
vindicated.  On  the  spot  where  he 
fell,  by  the  ditch  into  which  his 
mangled  and  bleeding  body  was 
thrown,  on  the  shores  of  South  Caro- 
lina, I  trust  that  you  will  honour 
yourselves,  and  his  gallant  memory, 
by  appropriating  the  first  proceeds 


"  of  your  labour  as  free-men  towards 
"  erecting  an  enduring  monument  to 
"the  hero,  soldier,  martyr  —  Eobert 
"  Gould  Shaw. 

"  E.  SAXTON, 

11 Brigadier-General  and  Military  Governor.1' 


We 


TOGETHER. 
have    buried    him  with 


his 


niggers. 

Reply  to  the  request  for  Colonel 
Shaw's  body. 

Oh  !  fair-haired  Northern  hero  ! 
With  thy  guard  of  dusky  hue, 
Up  from  the  field  of  battle  ! 
liise  to  the  last  Eeview  ! 

Sweep  downward,  welcoming  angels, 
In  legions  dazzling  bright 
Bear  up  these  souls  together 
Before  Christ's  throne  of  light ! 

The  Master,  who  remembers 
The  cross,  the  thorns,  the  spear, 
Smiles  on  these  risen  freedmen 
As  their  ransomed  souls  appear. 

And  thou,  young  generous  spirit, 
What  shall  thy  greeting  be  ] 
"  Thou  hast  aided  the  down-trodden  ; 
Thou  hast  done  it  unto  Me." 


LETTEES    PEOM    A    COMPETITION    WALLAH. 

LETTER  YII :— ABOUT  CALCUTTA  AND  ITS  CLIMATE ;  WITH  SERIOUS 

INFERENCES. 


CALCUTTA,  April  12,  1863. 
DEAR  SIMKINS, — The  hot  weather  has 
set  in.  These  words  may  convey  to 
you  no  very  definite  idea,  beyond  the 
general  one,  of  punkahs  and  iced  cham- 
pagne ;  but  to  us  they  are  the  earnest 
of  miseries  which  are  unutterable. 
The  amenities  of  life  are  over  for  the 
year.  The  last  waltz  has  been  danced 
in  the  assembly-rooms  ;  the  last  wicket 
has  been  pitched  on  the  cricket-ground  ; 
the  last  tiffin  eaten  in  the  Botanical 
gardens  ;  the  last  couple  married  in  the 


cathedral,  at  the  very  sensible  and  un- 
canonical  hour  of  half-past  five  in  the 
afternoon.  People  have  settled  them- 
selves down  to  be  clammy,  and  gloomy, 
and  hepatic  for  six  grilling  months. 
The  younger  and  more  vigorous  effloresce 
with  a  singularly  unpleasant  eruption, 
known  as  "  prickly  heat " — a  condition 
which  is  supposed  to  be  a  sort  of  safety- 
valve  for  feverish  tendencies,  and  which, 
therefore,  excites  the  envy  of  all  who 
are  not  so  blessed.  Conceive  a  climate 
such  that  an  exquisitely  painful  cu- 
taneous disorder  is  allowed  to  be  a  fair 


118 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VII. 


subject  of  congratulation  !  And  in  such 
a  plight,  amidst  a  temperature  of  97°  in 
the  shade,  and  anything  ranging  from 
headache  to  apoplexy  in  the  sun,  men  are 
supposed  to  transact  official  work  from 
morn  till  stewy  eve.  Is  it  fair  to  ex- 
pect high  efficiency  under  such  circum- 
stances? Are  enlarged  views  compati- 
ble with  enlarged  livers  ?  No  strain  is 
put  upon  the  reflective  powers  of  Stras- 
bourg geese.  Their  most  active  mental 
exercise  is  a  vague  consciousness  of  an 
increasing  weight  under  the  right  wing. 
And  why  should  English  gentlemen  be 
debarred  from  a  privilege  extended  to 
Alsatian  fowls  ?  It  required  the  trans- 
cendent genius  of  Milton  to  imagine  for 
the  lost  angels  this  aggravation  of  their 
punishment,  that  they  should  carry  on 
public  business  amidst  the  burning 
marie,  and  beneath  the  torrid  clime 
vaulted  with  fire.  The  second  book  of 
"  Paradise  Lost "  reads  like  the  pro- 
ceedings during  the  meeting  of  a  Su- 
preme Council  to  decide  on  the  question 
of  peace  and  war  with  Burmah  or 
Nepaul,  in  which  the  aggressive 
schemes  of  Moloch,  the  first  ordinary 
member,  are  opposed  by  Mammon,  the 
financial  member,  who  is  nervous  about 
his  surplus,  and  who  thinks  that  the 
country  needs  "  repose "  in  order  that 
her  resources  may  be  developed  by  ju- 
dicious, but  hearty  aid  from  Govern- 
ment. 

"  This  desert  soil 

Wants  not  her  hidden  lustre,  gems  and  gold  ; 
Nor  want  we  skill  or  art,  from  whence  to 

raise 
Magnificence.    And  what  can  Heaven  show 

more?" 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Mammon 
was  adverse  to  an  annexation  policy  ^ 
And  yet  the  poet  does  not  inflict  upon 
the  fallen  cherubim  any  heavier  task 
than  that  of  making  and  listening  to 
speeches,  a  labour  which  he  justly  con- 
sidered to  be  quite  severe  enough  for 
such  an  atmosphere.  There  were  no 
reports  to  be  written,  no  accounts  to  be 
kept,  no  "  bokkuses  "  to  be  worked  off 
and  passed  on.  Thammuz  would  find 
his  annual  wound  a  very  different  thing 
from,  an  annual  estimate  of  the  net  pro- 


duce of  the  sales  when  opium  was  at 
1423  rupees  a  chest ;  and  Astoreth 
would  soon  have  worried  herself  into  an 
attack  of  dysentery,  if  the  Sidonians, 
instead  of  paying  her  "  their  vows  and 
songs,"  had  paid  five  per  cent,  on 
Madapollams  tariffed  at  ninepence,  and 
disposed  of  in  the  market  at  one-and- 
fourpence  the  pound.  Why,  I  ask, 
should  the  condition  of  enlightened 
public-spirited  civilians  be  worse  than 
than  that  of  Eimmon  and  Beelzebub  ? 

Take  your  map  of  India,  and  find,  it 
you  can,  a  more  uninviting  spot  than 
the  town  whose  name  stands  at  the 
head  of  this  letter.  Placed  in  the  burn- 
ing plain  of  Bengal,  on  the  largest  delta- 
in  the  world,  amidst  a  network  of  slug- 
gish, muddy  streams,  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  jungles  and  marshes  of  the 
Sunderbunds,  and  yet  so  distant  from 
the  open  sea  as  to  miss  the  benefits  of 
the  breeze  which  consoles  Madras  for 
the  want  of  a  cold  season  and  a  perma- 
nent settlement — it  unites  every  condi- 
tion of  a  perfectly  unhealthy  situation. 
If  the  Government  were  in  want  of  a 
site  for  a  convalescent  hospital,  they 
could  not  pray  for  one  more  to  their 
taste.  The  place  is  so  bad  by  nature 
that  human  efforts  could  do  little  to 
make  it  worse  ;  but  that  little  has  been 
done  faithfully  and  assiduously.  "  God 
made  the  country"  evidently  without  a 
view  to  its  becoming  a  European  colony; 
and  "man  made  the  town,"  and  the 
municipal  council  made  the  drains.  The 
combined  effect  is  overwhelming.  Sta- 
tistics cannot  express  the  state  of  the 
native  streets.  The  unassisted  genius 
for  manufacturing  smells  displayed  by 
the  Hindoo  becomes  stupendous  when 
aided  by  the  sanitary  measures  of  the 
local  authorities.  A  walk  in  Dhurruni- 
tollah  Lane  would  prove  too  much  for  a 
City  Missionary,  and  would  try  the 
stomach  of  a  Spitalfields  costermonger. 
During  the  hot  months,  the  English 
aristocracy  live  entirely  among  the  lofty 
mansions  fringing  the  Maidan,  the  vast 
plain  of  turf  which  forms  the  Hyde 
Park  of  Calcutta.  Here  they  lead  an 
artificial  life  amidst  gardens,  and  veran- 
dahs, and  spacious  saloons  alive  with 


About  Calcutta  and  its  Climate. 


119 


punkahs,  and  would  as  soon  think  of 
walking  as  of  taking  their  carriages 
fifty  yards  within  the  limits  of  the 
Black  Town.  In  fact,  we  have  at  our 
doors  a  region  which  we  dare  not  enter 
under  the  penalty  of  a  headache,  or  of 
feeling  like  a  French  juryman  return- 
ing from  the  Exhibition  vid  Folkestone 
and  Dieppe.  It  is  only  necessary  to  make 
an  hour's  journey  up  or  down  the  river 
in  order  to  appreciate  the  atmosphere 
of  Calcutta  at  Barrackpore.  Where 
the  average  rate  of  mortality  does  not 
much  exceed  that  in  the  Irish  quarter 
of  Liverpool  during  a  typhus  fever  in 
the  haymaking  season,  the  air  appears 
balmy  and  genial  to  a  visitor  from  the 
capital 

A  soldier  might  go  through  three 
battles  of  Waterloo  with  no  greater  risk 
of  life  than  he  incurs  during  a  residence 
of  a  year  in  Fort  William.  Out  of 
every  thousand  soldiers  quartered  in 
Bengal,  sixty-five  die  in  the  course  of  every 
twelvemonth.  And  these  not  old  Qui- 
hyes,  with  clogged  livers  and  shattered 
nerves,  but  picked  men  in  the  very 
spring  and  prime  of  life,  sent  forth  from 
home  sound  in  wind  and  limb,  with 
open  chests,  and  arched  feet,  and  broad, 
straight  backs.  Of  soldiers'  wives  forty- 
four  die  yearly  in  the  thousand  ;  and,  of 
their  children,  eighty-eight  in  the  thou- 
sand. As  an  old  surgeon  said,  in  1672, 
of  the  Europeans  in  Bombay,  "They 
reckon  that  they  walk  in  charnel-houses. 
In  five  hundred  one  hundred  survive 
not."  The  European  army  in  Bengal 
has,  hitherto,  disappeared  in  every  ten 
and  a-half  years.  This  computation  of 
course  includes  the  men  who  have  been 
invalided.  The  yearly  mortality  among 
the  officers  rises  from  nine  to  the  thou- 
sand in  London  to  twenty-four  to  the 
thousand  in  Bengal.  The  civilians,  by 
dint  of  horse-exercise,  and  ice,  and  cool 
rooms,  and  trips  to  Simla,  and  furloughs 
to  Europe,  and  (a  better  medicine  than 
any)  constant  and  interesting  occupa- 
tion, keep  down  their  average  to  some- 
thing over  seventeen  in  the  thousand. 
But  a  hard-worked  official  finds  no  lack 
of  indications  that  he  is  not  at  Malvern 
or  Torquay.  After  his  first  year  in  Cal- 


cutta, an  Englishman  can  no  longer 
sleep  as  he  once  slept,  or  eat  as  he  once 
ate,  and  it  is  lucky  if  he  drinks  no  more 
than  he  once  drank.  If  you  asked  him 
to  run,  he  would  laugh  in  your  face.  I 
sometimes  think  that  our  uniform  suc- 
cess in  Indian  warfare  may  be  partially 
due  to  the  fact  that  our  countrymen, 
by  long  disuse,  lose  the  power  of  run- 
ning away.  Above  all,  the  mental  fa- 
culties deteriorate  surely  and  rapidly  in 
this  hateful  climate.  The  mind,  like 
the  body,  becomes  languid  and  flabby 
and  nerveless.  Men  live  upon  the 
capital  of  their  energy  and  intellect, 
backed  by  occasional  remittances  from 
home,  or  from  the  hills.  While  this 
sudarium  continues  to  be  the  seat  of 
government,  the  public  interests  do  not 
suffer  only  under  the  head  of  sick  al- 
lowances and  pensions  ;  the  work  done 
here  by  the  servants  of  the  Crown  is 
far  inferior  in  quality  and  quantity  to 
what  it  would  be  in  a  more  congenial 
air.  This  may  be  clearly  seen  in  the 
case  of  literary  composition,  which  I 
take  to  be  the  most  thorough  strain  on 
the  mind — a  sort  of  moral  gymnastics, 
the  greatest  exercise  for  the  greatest 
number  of  intellectual  powers.  At 
home,  on  a  pinch,  a  man  may  write  his 
very  best  for  five  hours  in  the  day,  and 
for  months  on  end.  Perhaps  "Ask 
Mamma"  might  be  produced  at  the  rate 
of  eight  hours  a  day,  and  "Aurora 
Floyd  "  at  the  rate  of  twelve,  while  the 
accomplished  author  of  "  Proverbial 
Philosophy "  may  have  spent  weeks  to- 
gether in  the  sweet  throes  of  creative 
travail.  Poor  old  Tupper  !  thou  art,  as 
it  were,  the  village  donkey,  at  whom 
every  one  has  a  shy  as  he  passes  onward 
to  his  daily  work.  Blessed,  for  thee, 
will  be  the  hour  in  which  a  new  Mont- 
gomery may  take  his  place  beside  thee 
on  the  green,  at  whom  wayward  youth- 
may  discharge  the  potato  of  satire  ;  to 
whose  tail  fastidious  middle  life  may 
attach  the  tin-kettle  of  hostile  criticism. 
Sweet  it  is  to  lie  on  the  rosewood  tables 
in  a  Clapham  drawing-room  !  Sweet  to 
be  quoted  in  households  where  even 
Cowper  may  not  penetrate,  where  even 
Pollok  is  held  to  be  profane  and  worldly  ' 


120 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  VII. 


But  these  joys  may  be  too  dearly  pur- 
chased. Do  they  compensate  thee  for 
the  ruthless  raillery  of  the  Saturday 
Review  ?  For  the  clumsy  mockery  of 
the  Press,  kicking,  not  a  sick  lion,  but 
a  prostrate  brother!  Do  they  repay 
thee  for  the  misery  of  seeing  thy  divine 
name  popularly  quoted  at  the  opposite 
end  of  the  poetic  scale  from  that  of  the 
Swan  of  Avon  ?  What  Beview,  weekly 
or  quarterly,  metropolitan  or  provincial, 
canst  thou  open  without  lighting  upon 
that  baleful,  yet  familiar  phrase,  "  all 
bards  from  Shakespeare  to  Tupper  ?"  Or 
that  sentence,  which  thou  believest  to 
be  a  translation  from  Sophocles,  which 
speaks  of  thee  in  connexion  with  gods, 
and  men,  and  columns  1 

But  to  return  to  our  muttons,  as  sport- 
ing authors  say  when  they  mean  to  be 
funny.  Three  consecutive  hours  of 
original  composition  on  a  summer-day 
in  Calcutta,  is  a  sufficient  task  for  the 
strongest  brain.  Woe  to  him  who  ven- 
tures to  court  the  muse  in  the  first 
watch  of  the  night,  the  hour  when  she 
lends  the  kindest  ear  to  her  votaries. 
When  he  tears  himself  from  the  pleas- 
ing labour,  it  is  with  nerves  in  high 
excitement,  and  a  sensation  in  his  head 
as  if  all  the  vessels  and  cellules  in 
which  thought  lies  were  in  a  state  of 
rabid  red  inflammation.  A  sleepless 
couch  is  the  certain  penalty  for  his 
presumption ;  and  sleep  is  even  more  a 
necessary  of  life  here  than  in  England. 
So  that,  after  fancying  that  he  has 
wrested  some  hours  of  study  from  the 
unwilling  night,  he  finds  himself  in  the 
position  of  the  Emperor  Titus.  I  some- 
times think  that  the  classical  idea  of 
departed  spirits,  shadows  pursuing 
shadowy  occupations,  hunting  incor- 
poreal game,  mining  for  immaterial 
treasures,  tending  visionary  sheep,  must 
have  been  suggested  by  the  experiences 
of  the  day  that  succeeds  a  sleepless 
night.  You  go  about  your  ordinary 
cares  without  interest;  you  eat  and 
drink  without  gratification ;  venison 
seems  tasteless,  and  champagne  insipid  ; 
you  read  without  reflection,  and  talk 
without  animation ;  your  actions  are 
prompted  by  habit,  not  by  choice  ;  you 


seem  to  live,  but  life  is  neither  painful 
nor  pleasant.  I  cannot  conceive  a  man, 
who  knows  in  what  the  value  of  writing 
consists,  after  having  completed  one 
book  whilst  resident  in  this  climate, 
deliberately  and  in  cold  blood  commen- 
cing another ;  and  I  believe  that  no 
one,  who  had  lived  and  toiled  here  for 
ten  years,  would  be  capable  of  producing 
a  first-class  work.  Even  Anthony  Trol- 
lope  would  succumb  to  the  exhalations 
of  the  Lai  Bazaar.  Even  Dr.  Stanley 
would  become  as  Gumming,  and  Tenny- 
son as — no,  requiescat. 

"  Allusions  sore  unmoved  he  bore, 
And  watched  his  books  attain, 

By  his  foes'  admission, 

The  seventieth  edition, 
Like  '  The  Rights  of  Man/  by  Paine." 

Surely  this  simple  epitaph  would  well 
suit  one  who  fondly  imagined  that  he 
was  writing  poetry  when  he  addressed 
the  Princess  Alexandra  thus  : — 

10,000,000  welcomes  ! 

100,000,000  welcomes  ! 

1,000,000,000  welcomes ! 

Farewell,  my  Tupper ! 
1,000,000,000,000,000,000  farewells ! 

Hear  Dr.  Moore,  of  the  Bombay 
Medical  Service,  a  most  able  and  obser- 
vant officer — 

"In  Indian  hill  ranges  it  is  not  the 
"  terrestrio-miasmatic  causes  of  disease 
"  alone  which  are  partially  escaped ;  it 
"  is  the  absence  of  intense  heat,  the 
"  lowering  of  the  temperature  some  ten 
"  or  fifteen  degrees,  which  allows  the 
"  European  to  recover  his  elasticity  of 
"  vital  and  physical  powersrs-which  the 
"  fervid  heat  of  the  plains  depresses  to 
"  the  lowest  existing  point — which  allows 
"  him  to  obtain  a  moderate  quantity  of 
"  exercise,  without  undue  fatigue  and 
"  exhaustion,  and  which  conduces  to  his 
"  obtaining  rest  and  sleep  by  night,  free 
"  from  the  forbidding  causes  of  the  plain 
"  — heat  and  mosquitoes. 

"  As  a  natural  consequence,  the  body 
"  not  only  becomes  invigorated  and  in- 
l'  spirited,  but  the  mind  also  is  more 
"  active,  and  capable  of  greater  and  sus- 
"  tained  action. 

"  A  clear  intellect,  and  a  temperature 
"  of  88°  Fahrenheit,  are  almost  incom- 


About  Calcutta  and  its  Climate. 


121 


"  patibilities,  when  long  and  continual 
<:  intellectual  exertions  are  required ; 
"  and  it  may  be  stated,  that  the  capa- 
"  bilities  of  any  individual  as  regards 
"  the  latter  vary  inversely  as  the  heat 
"  of  the  climate.  Intense  application 
"  and  deep  thought  never'  prospered 
"  long  together  where  the  body  is  always 
"  on  the  qui  vive  to  keep  itself  cool. 
"  The  hands,  perhaps,  may  be  taxed, 
"  but  not  the  head.  The  latter,  after  a 
"  certain  time,  either  fails  or  performs 
"  its  work  unsatisfactorily. 

"  Hence,  in  hill  stations,  whether  for 
"  good  or  evil,  there  is  generally  a  fresher, 
"  more  energetic,  and,  it  perhaps  may 
"  be  added,  more  intellectual  tone  than 
"  is  met  with  among  the  dwellers  on  the 
"  plains.  There  is  not  the  heat  to  feel 
"  and  talk  about,  and  the  climate  seems 
"  to  instil  a  new  life  into  both  mind  and 
"  body.  It  gives  a  greater  elasticity, 
"  and  enables  Europeans  to  undergo 
"  more  than  they  could  possibly  endure 
"under  the  'punkah'  and  'tatties,'  or 
"  exposed  to  the  heat  without  those 
"  necessaries.  It  is  the  circumstance  of 
"  a  hill  climate  being  a  sanitarium  for 
"  the  mind  as  well  as  the  body  which 
"  adds  so  immensely  to  its  value." 

But,  besides  sanitary  defects,  there 
are  other  objections  to  Calcutta  as  the 
seat  of  the  Central  Government ;  for,  as 
long  as  that  Government  remains  here, 
it  can  be  central  only  in  name.  At  pre- 
sent the  chief  city  is  poked  up  in  an 
angle  of  the  empire,  with  nothing  to  the 
East  of  it  except  part  of  our  Burmese 
dominions.  It  lies  at  a  distance  of  nearly 
five  hundred  miles  (as  the  crow  and 
General  Pope  fly)  from  Allahabad,  the 
capital  of  the  North- West ;  six  hundred 
miles  from  Lucknow,  the  capital  of  the 
Chief  Commissionership  of  Oude,  and 
from  Xagpore,  the  capital  of  the 
Chief  Commissionership  of  that  Ilk ; 
more  than  eight  hundred  miles  from 
Delhi,  the  focus  of  native  interests ; 
nine  hundred  from  Madras  ;  more  than 
one  thousand  from  Bombay ;  and 
between  eleven  and  twelve  hundred 
miles  from  Lahore.  During  the  crisis 
of  the  Mutiny  the  people  on  the  scene 
of  action  were  left  to  manage  as  they 


best  might,  without  orders  from  head- 
quarters, and  with  small  chance  of  making 
their  position  known  to  the  supreme 
authorities.  Sir  John  Lawrence  fought 
his  province  as  a  brave  captain  fights  his 
vessel  when  he  finds  himself  surrounded 
by  the  hostile  fleet  in  a  fog  which  pre- 
vents him  from  discerning  his  admiral's 
signals.  It  is  fortunate  for  England 
that  our  officers  acted  in  the  spirit  of 
Nelson's  golden  rule — "  When  a  com- 
mander is  in  doubt  what  to  do,  he  can- 
not be  in  the  wrong  if  he  lays  his  ship 
alongside  the  nearest  enemy."  But  it 
is  not  only  while  great  events  are  in 
progress  that  the  inconveniences  of  the 
hole-and-corner  situation  of  Calcutta  are 
severely  felt.  In  the  most  piping  times 
of  peace  (why  are  times  of  peace  piping  ?) 
the  expense  and  delay  in  the  transmis- 
sion of  despatches  constitute  a  very 
serious  public  eviL  When  instructions 
from  the  India  Office  at  Home,  relating 
to  the  Punjab,  arrive  at  Bombay,  they 
are  within  nine  hundred  miles  of  the 
Government  to  which  they  refer  ;  but,  as 
they  must- be  submitted  to  the  Supreme 
Authorities,  before  they  reach  their  des- 
tination they  will  have  made  a  journey 
of  two  thousand  two  hundred  miles  in  a 
direct  line  :  and  a  journey  of  two  thou- 
sand two  hundred  miles  in  India  is  no 
joke. 

But  the  Imperial  Government  should 
not  only  be  locally  central.  It  must 
likewise  be  morally  central.  As  long  as 
the  Viceroy,  the  Council,  and  the  Secre- 
tariat are  settled  in  the  capital  of  a  Pre- 
sidency, that  Presidency  will  always 
rule  the  rest  of  India.  To  this  day  Bom- 
bay and  Madras  are  familiarly  spoken  of 
as  "  the  Minor  Presidencies,"  while  the 
north-west  provinces,  with  their  thirty 
millions  of  inhabitants,  and  the  Pun- 
jab, with  its  sixteen  millions,  are  re- 
garded as  mere  dependencies  of  Bengal. 
And  how  should  it  be  otherwise  1  From 
the  time  that  our  Eastern  dominions 
were  united  under  the  superintendence 
of  one  supreme  authority,  that  authority 
has  been  located  at  Calcutta.  As  long 
as  this  state  of  things  lasts,  Bengal  in- 
fluences and  Bengal  habits  of  thought 
will  direct  or  modify  every  measure  of 


122 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  VII. 


the  Supreme  Government.     There  is  no 
danger  lest  the  servants  of  the  favoured 
Presidency  should  use  their  power  for 
their  own  selfish  advantage.     But  it  is 
not  good  that  the  officials  of  Bombay 
and  the  Punjab  should  have  no  voice  in 
matters  which  are  of  special  moment  to 
themselves,  or  which  concern  the  general 
interests  of  the  empire.    It  may  be  said, 
without  exaggeration,  that  a  young  fellow 
who  begins  his  career  in  the  Southern 
Presidencies  has  no  hope  of  ever  taking 
part  in  the  general  administration   of 
the  country.     A  man  might  count  the 
Madras  and   Bombay  officers  who   are 
employed  in  the  Supreme  Administra- 
tion on  the  fingers  of  one  hand,  even  if 
he  had  passed  some  time  in  the  esta- 
blishment of  Adoni-bezek,  in  company 
with  the  threescore  and  ten  unfortunate 
royal   personages  who    gathered    their 
meat  under  the  table  of  that  remarkably 
unpleasant  monarch.      The  knowledge 
of  this  has  the  most  depressing  effect  on 
the  morale  of  the  services  which  are 
thus  virtually  excluded  from  high  and 
honourable    office.     This    objection  to 
Calcutta  as  the  official  capital  is  so  strong 
as  to  outweigh  all  others.     It  is  abso- 
lutely essential  that  the  Supreme  Go- 
vernment should  be  impartial,  unbiassed 
by  local  prejudices  or  associations, — in  a 
word,  imperial ;  and,  while  India  is,  to  a 
certain   extent,  misgoverned  from  this 
cause,  Bengal  is  over-governed.  Zealous 
and  able  Councillors  and  Secretaries  of 
State,  who  watch  things  going  wrong 
under  their  nose,  would  be  more  than 
official  if  the  temptation  to  direct  inter- 
ference did  not   sometimes   prove  too 
strong  for  their  forbearance.     The  local 
powers  are  hampered,  and  trammelled, 
and  fretted  by  the  constant  presence  of 
a  superior  authority.     No  one  would  be 
more  heartily  glad  to  see  the  backs  of 
the  members  of  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment than  the  magnates  of  the  Presidency 
of  Bengal. 

The  expense  of  changing  house  is,  of 
course,  the  strongest  argument  against 
moving  the  seat  of  Government  from 
Calcutta  to  some  less  enervating  and 
pestilential  climate  ;  and  undoubtedly  it 
would  cost  no  trifle  to  found  a  new 


official  metropolis  for  a  country  of  more 
than  four  times  the  area  of  Great  Britain 
and  France  together.  But,  when  we  look 
the  matter  in  the  face,  many  of  the  diffi- 
culties vanish.    From  the  circumstances 
under  which  our  Eastern  empire  came 
into  existence,  a  large  share  of  power  re- 
mained in  the  hands  of  the  provincial 
authorities.      It  was  long   before   the 
Southern  Presidencies  could  be  brought 
to  acknowledge  what  Mr.  Grote  would 
call  the  Hegemony  of  Bengal ;  and  even 
now  the  idea  of  centralization  is  repug- 
nant to  the  Indian  official  mind.     At 
Madras   and    Bombay,   Allahabad   and 
Lahore,  Kagpore,  Lucknow,  'and  Ran- 
goon, much  public  business  is  carried  on 
which  in  a  European  State  would  be 
transacted  at  the  capital  city.     Conse- 
quently,  the   staff  of    public   servants 
stationed  at  Calcutta,  and  attached  to  the 
Supreme  Government,  is  not  so  large  as 
to  render  the  removal  of  that  Govern- 
ment a  work  of  extraordinary  labour 
and  cost.     A  very  large  proportion  of 
the  employes  resident  in  the  capital  be- 
long to  the  Government  of  Bengal,  and 
would  therefore  stay  where   they  are. 
It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  whole 
legal  staff  come  under  this  head — judges, 
barristers,  attorneys,  clerks,    registrars, 
and   false  witnesses.     Even   the   High 
Court  is  a  Bengal  tribunal ! 

In  the  case  of  an  empire  which  can 
trace  the  history  of  its  growth  through 
long  centuries,  the  associations  which 
gather  round  the  chief  city  form  a  tie 
which  few  Utilitarians  could  find  it  in 
their  heart  to  break.  Even  in  that 
fearful  year  when  the  Thames  gave  up 
his  dead  cats,  when  volumes  of  foul 
vapours  rolled  in  at  every  one  of  Barry's 
mullioned  windows,  when  honourable 
members  sat  gloomy  and  silent  in  the 
smoking-room,  or  lay  on  their  backs  on 
the  floor  of  the  dressing-closets  in  the 
agonies  of  nausea,  when  Pain  became 
sobered  and  Bright  pale  and  pensive, 
when  there  was  only  a  basin  between 
Spooner  and  Eternity,  not  then  did  it 
cross  the  niind  of  the  most  qualmish 
legislator  to  suggest  that  the  English 
Curia  should  be  transferred  from  the 
sacred  soil  of  Westminster.  That 


About  Calcutta,  and  its  Climate. 


123 


august  ally  of  ours,  though,  he  care- 
fully demolishes  every  relic  of  the  old 
regime  and  of  the  great  events  which 
have  placed  a  gulph  between  the 
eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries, 
aims  only  at  adorning  the  ancient  site, 
and  has  no  thought  of  creating  a  new 
Paris  in  a  distant  department.  Such, 
at  least,  I  presume  to  be  his  intentions  ; 
for  the  Imperial  secrets,  if  Mr.  Tenny- 
son is  to  be  believed,  are  entrusted  only 
to  a  single  confidant  of  very  question- 
able reputation. 

"  True  that  we  have  a  faithful  ally  ; 
But  only  the  d knows  what  he  means." 

Even  the  Yankees  seem  unwilling  to 
abandon  those  sacred  walls  within 
whose  precinct  they  and  their  fathers 
have  talked  bunkum  for  a  couple  of 
generations — those  classic  haunts,  hal- 
lowed by  the  recollections  of  Daniel 
Webster,  and  the  bodily  presence  of 
Mister  Chase,  and  of  General  Fremont, 
who  "planted  the  stars  and  stripes  on 
"  the  highest  summit  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
"  tains ;  "  x  that  sublime  Capitol,  towards 
which  their  legions  have  fled  in  dire 
confusion  from  many  a  field  of  victory — 
which  not  even  the  cackling  of  Cassius 
Clay,  nor  the  Camillus  who  found  a 
Veii  in  Richmond,  will  save  from  the 
clutches  of  the  barbarians  from  the 
South  ;  that  rostrum  on  which,  in  years 
to  come,  the  heroes  who  solicit  the 
suffrages  of  their  countrymen  will  bare 
their  backs  and  display  the  scars  which 
testify  to  their  prowess  on  more  than 
one  hard-run  day  of  battle.  In  the 
case  of  Calcutta  there  is  no  reason  to 
entertain  scruples  on  this  score.  As  I 
am  curious  about  the  scenes  and  circum- 
stances of  notable  events,  immediately 
on  my  arrival  I  instituted  an  inquiry 
into  the  existing  associations  of  the 
place,  and  got  together  the  following 
collection,  which  is  not  so  rich  that  it 
deserves  to  have  much  weight  when 

1  The  orators  of  his  party  never  weary  of 
alluding  on  every  possible  occasion  to  this  feat 
of  their  beloved  champion ;  but  it  seems 
rather  a  mysterious  proceeding  to  an  un- 
imaginative Old  World  mind. 


the  expediency  of  changing  the  seat  of 
Government  comes  to  be  considered. 

1.  A  Baboo  was  alive  some  years  ago, 
who  stated  himself  to  have  been  the 
native   secretary  of   Warren  Hastings, 
and  who  pointed  out   the   tree  under 
which  the  duel  took  place.     According 
to  his   own   account,  he  was   at   hand 
when   that    sahib   of  chequered   fame 
fought  with  Francis  Sahib,  "to  decide 
which  should  be  Governor-General — "  a 
theory  not  wholly  devoid  of  truth ;  for, 
if  Hastings  had  been  killed,  his  adver- 
sary would  assuredly  have  seized   the 
reins.     The  value  of   this  old  gentle- 
man's  testimony   was    somewhat    im- 
paired by  the  fact  that  his  presence,  on 
the  occasion  in  question,  did  not  form 
a  feature  in  the  earlier  editions  of  the 
story,  and  is  strongly  suspected  to  have 
been  an  afterthought.' 

2.  There  are  those  still  living  who 
have  often  talked  with  an  ancient  lady 
who  remembered,  as  a  very  young  girl, 
during  an  early  ride   on  the   Maidan, 
seeing  a  gentleman  carried  across  the 
grass.     On  asking  his   name,  she  was 
informed  that  he  was  Mr.  Francis,  sup- 
posed by  Mr.  Macaulay  and  Lord  Stan- 
hope to  be  the  author  of  the  letters  of 
Junius,    England's    lasting   fame,    and 
that   he   was  returning,  with  a  bullet 
through  his   body,  from   an  interview 
with  the  Governor-General. 

3.  The  Black  Hole  was   somewhere 
in   Tank   Square,  though   some   think 
that  it  is  a  certain  room  at  the  office  of 
the  Board  of  Examiners. 

4.  Enthusiastic   antiquarians   profess 
to  find  traces  of  the  Mahratta  Ditch 
in   the  neighbourhood   of   Ballygunge. 
Others  are  of  opinion  that  these  faint 
indentations  in  the  soil   are   an   early 
effort  of  the  Public  Works  Department 
in  the  canal-making  line. 

Wherever  a  great  mass  of  public 
buildings  and  private  residences  has  been 
accumulated  in  a  long  course  of  time, 
the  removal  of  the  personnel  and  para- 
phernalia of  Government  would  occa- 
sion much  individual  distress  and  a  con- 
siderable loss  to  the  State.  When  Con- 
stantine  resolved  on  founding  a  new 
Imperial  capital  on  the  shore  of  the  Los- 


124 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VII. 


porus,  it  must  have  cost  a  bitter  pang 
to  many  an  old  official  when  he  was 
hidden  to  surrender  "the  smoke,  the 
pomp,  the  din  of  favoured  Home  ; "  to 
turn  his  back  for  ever  on  the  temples, 
and  arches,  and  theatres  of  the  glorious 
city ;  the  long  succession  of  echoing 
squares,  fringed  with  stately  colonnades  ; 
the  colossal  baths  where  he  had  per- 
spired, and  sipped  negus,  and  betted,  and 
talked  scandal  ever  since  he  came  to 
man's  estate ;  the  Mint,  under  the  Capi- 
tol, where  he  sat  as  qusestor  during  his 
first  and  proudest  year  of  public  life  ; 
the  causeway  of  Appius,  along  which 
he  drove,  through  the  tombs  of  his 
ancestors,  to  take  possession  of  his  pro- 
vince ;  and  the  portico  under  which, 
after  his  return,  he  stood  to  &e  congra- 
tulated on  his  acquittal  from  the  charge 
of  extortion  and  oppression,  on  the  day 
when  he  so  triumphantly  established 
his  innocence  at  the  rate  of  a  hundred 
thousand  sesterces  to  each  judge,  and  a 
Venus  Victrix,-  by  Scopas,  to  the  Prsetor. 
It  must  have  been  a  terrible  blow  to 
him  when  the  gorgeous  Basilica,  where 
he  had  listened  to  the  eloquence  of  the 
great  pleaders  of  the  day,  was  turned 
into  a  little  Bethel  for  Christians,  and 
when  his  pretty  house-property  on  the 
edgejgfj/he  Esquiline  Hill,  where  two 
Augurs  and  the  Emperor's  barber  lived 
within  four  doors,  went  down  fifty  per 
cent,  in  value  on  the  publication  of  the 
fatal  edict  which  announced  that  Byzan- 
tium was  henceforward  to  be  the  mis- 
tress of  the  world. 

Calcutta,  however,  is  not  Home ; 
though  old  Job  Charnock,  the  Quirinus 
of  the  town,  when  he  pitched  his 
tent  under  a  fine  banyan-tree  that  grew 
where  Fort  William  now  stands,  would 
probably  have  been  considerably  as- 
tonished had  he  been  told  that  he 
was  the  nucleus  of  a  population  that 
would  one  day  exceed  four  hundred 
thousand  souls.  Still,  the  servants  of 
the  Indian  Government  will,  on  their 
departure,  have  but  little  reason  to 
regret  the  board-rooms  they  leave  be- 
hind them.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say 
that  there  is  nothing  here  which  answers 
to  a  public  office  in  London.  The  busi- 


ness of  the  State  is  transacted  in  private 
houses  hired  or  bought  for  the  purpose. 
The  lobby  of  the  Treasury  is  a  dirty 
closet  with  a  whitewashed  wall,  daubed 
with  specimens  of  native  art,  and  open- 
ing into  an  untidy  back-yard.  Out  here 
the  Horse  Guards  would  be  regarded  as 
an  elegant  and  commodious  pile  of  archi- 
tecture, and  the  National  Gallery  as  the 
model  of  a  chaste  and  classic  style.  The 
only  building  which  can  properly  be 
said  to  belong  to  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment is  the  palace  of  the  Viceroy  ;  and 
this  would  not  be  wasted,  as  the  want 
of  accommodation  for  the  Courts  of  Law 
is  a  crying  evil,  and  Government  House, 
from  the  peculiarity  of  its  form,  is  ad- 
mirably suited  for  judicial  purposes. 
Twelve  halls  of  justice  might  be  pro- 
vided— for  the  worst  of  which  the 
judges  at  Westminster  would  pull 
wigs — with  ventilation  that  would  win 
a  smile  of  approval  from  Baron  Bram- 
well,  or,  as  I  suppose  I  ought  to  say,  the 
late  Baron  Bramwell,  since  long  before 
this  reaches  you  he  will  probably  have 
fallen  a  victim  to  the  outraged  relatives 
of  expatriated  garotters.  The  result  of 
the  proposed  change  would  be  that  a 
couple  of  dozen  of  the  finest  mansions 
in  Calcutta  would  be  thrown  into  the 
market — a  most  timely  supply,  as  the 
scarcity  of  house-room  is  already  pain- 
fully felt.  They  would  be  immediately 
snatched  at  by  the  families  who  are  now- 
living  in  discomfort  and  publicity  at 
hotels  and  boarding-establishments,  be- 
cause respectable  and  convenient  dwell- 
ings are  not  to  be  had  at  any  price.  No 
perceptible  effect  would  be  produced 
upon  society  by  the  departure  of  the 
Viceroy ;  for  it  may  be  confidently  as- 
serted that  no  one  resides  at  Calcutta 
because  it  is  fashionable.  In  India 
everybody  lives  within  reach  of  his 
business ;  and,  when  he  has  got  money, 
he  goes  to  spend  it  in  England. 

Some  hold  that  there  is  danger  in  re- 
moving the  Government  from  a  bustling 
populous  city,  where  the  healthy  breezes 
of  public  opinion  circulate  freely,  to 
a  solitude  where  it  will  be  surrounded 
by  an  impenetrable  official  atmosphere. 
But  on  this  point  men  are  misled  by 


About  Calcutta  and  its  Climate. 


125 


European  analogies.  It  is  idle  to  en- 
deavour to  find  a  counterpart  out  here 
for  every  English  institution,  from  Magna 
Charta  down  to  the  skating  club.  If  I 
dared,  I  would  say  that  the  state  of  feel- 
ing on  Indian  matters  that  prevails 
among  the  great  majority  of  our  coun- 
trymen at  home  has  far  more  in  com- 
mon with  the  public  opinion  of  the  Civil 
Service  than  with  that  of  our  small 
and  peculiarly  constituted  non-official 
society  : — 

d\\cl  fj.d\*  auvtas 
al5(o/j.ai  TpcDas  xal  TptoaSor  f\K«rtireir\ovs  ; 

I  am  in  a  mortal  fright  of  the  Calcutta 
gentlemen,  and  of  the  very  pretty  Cal- 
cutta ladies  with  wide  crinolines. 

Next  comes  the  choice  of  a  perma- 
nent site ;  for  the  Supreme  Government 
must  not  go  cruising  about  like  a  re- 
turned Indian,  who  cannot  make  up 
his  mind  whether  to  settle  in  a  Chelten- 
ham villa,  or  a  Brighton  Crescent,  or  at 
Rugby  to  educate  his  sons,  or  in  London 
to  dispose  of  his  daughters.  For  some 
time  subsequently  to  the  Mutiny,  Delhi 
was  generally  talked  of.  There  was 
much  of  the  romantic  in  the  notion  of 
enthroning  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Crown 
in  the  palace  of  the  Mogul  It  was 
supposed  that  the  native  mind  would 
transfer  to  the  representative  of  the 
Empress  of  India  the  prestige  attached 
to  the  line  of  Baber  and  Aurengzebe. 
But  Delhi  is  neither  much  more  central 
nor  much  more  healthy  than  the  present 
capital.  It  lies  almost  as  far  to  the 
North  as  Calcutta  to  the  East.  The 
air,  taking- the  whole  year  round,  is  as 
hot ;  and  the  drainage  would,  doubtless, 
very  soon  be  as  bad.  It  is  worth  while 
to  incur  expense  and  trouble  for  the 
sake  of  a  change  to  a  hill  climate,  and 
to  a  hill  climate  only. 

Fortunately,  a  region  exists  which 
unites  all  the  conditions  desirable  for 
the  official  capital  of  a  great  empire. 
On  the  new  line  of  railway  from  Alla- 
habad to  Bombay,  in  latitude  23°  7'  1ST. 
and  longitude  79°  57'  E.  stands  Jubbul- 
pore,at  an  elevation  above  the  sea  of  near 
fifteen  hundred  feet.  The  Washington 
of  the  East  might  spring  up  on  these 


high  table-lands,  amidst  the  park-like 
undulating  scenery  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  town — and  in  India  vicinity  means 
anything  within  fifty  miles.  A  branch 
line  from  Jubbulpore  would  bring  de- 
spatches to  hand  twenty-four  hours  sub- 
sequent to  their  arrival  at  Bombay,  and 
in  twenty-two  days  after  their  departure 
from  England.  The  spot  is  the  very 
centre  and  (y/0a\oc  of  the  continent.  It 
lies  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  Nag- 
pore,  two  hundred  from  Allahabad,  three 
hundred  from  Lucknow,  something  over 
five  hundred  from  Calcutta,  something 
under  six  hundred  from  Bombay,  and 
about  seven  hundred  miles  from  Madras 
in  the  far  south  and  Lahore  in  the  ex- 
treme north.  The  public  opinion  of 
the  whole  of  India  would  be  applied 
equably  and  in  due  proportion  to  all  the 
measures  of  the  Supreme  Government, 
which  would  no  longer  be  swayed  by 
the  influences  of  a  single  Presidency. 
The  high  officials  would  be  drawn  from 
all  quarters,  would  reflect  the  feelings 
and  interests  of  many  different  provinces, 
and  would  bring  to  the  service  of  the 
Crown  a  great  variety  of  ideas  and  ex- 
periences. A  representative  element 
would  thus  be  introduced  into  the  con- 
stitution. 

One  most  beneficial  result  would 
ensue,  which  is  not  evident  at  first 
sight.  The  removal  of  the  seat  of 
Government  to  the  table-lands  of  the 
Central  Provinces  would  have  the  effect 
of  a  gigantic  scheme  of  colonization,  as 
far  as  colonization  is  practicable  in 
India.  With  reference  to  this  question, 
much  has  of  late  been  talked  and  written. 
Most  people  who  know  anything  about 
the  country  have  a  pretty  decided 
opinion  on  the  subject.  It  is  impossi- 
ble to  induce  men  to  work  in  a  climate 
worse  than  that  of  Jamaica,  for  less 
than  half  the  wages  earned  by  a  Dorset- 
shire peasant.  Skilled  labour  of  the 
highest  class  will  always  find  its  price 
out  here.  Clerks,  and  factors,  and  er- 
gineers  will  never  have  any  difficulty  in 
earning  a  livelihood ;  but  poor  people, 
without  capital  or  education,  could  not 
find  employment  in  any  considerable 
number.  Besides,  colonization  is"  hope- 


126 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VII. 


less  unless  the  colonist  can  manage  to 
live  himself,  and  rear  his  children  and 
grandchildren.  On  this  point  Dr.  Moore 
speaks  very  positively  : — 

"It  is  the  fashion  now,  in  some 
"  quarters,  to  declare  that  the  dangers 
"  of  Indian  residence  and  service  have 
"  been  deeply  overrated,  and  that  there 
"  is  little  or  nothing  in  the  exceptional 
"  character  of  the  climate  of  India  to 
"  render  it  necessary  that  special  in- 
"  ducements  should  be  held  out  to 
"  persuade  people  to  reside  therein,  and 
"  this,  too,  in  the  face  of  so  many  stern 
"  facts  which  have  confronted  us  within 
'  the  last  few  years.  How  many  more 
'  victims  must  be  added  to  the  list  of 
'  those  killed  by  climate,  before  the 
'  dangers  of  a  tropical  residence  become 
'  appreciated  1 

"  If  colonization,  as  America  and 
"  Australia  have  been  colonized,  were 
"  possible  in  this  country,  some  instances 
"  of  the  kind  would  already  have  oc- 
"  curred.  But  the  melancholy  truth  is, 
"  that  the  European  race  dies  out.  Of 
"  the  numerous  pensioners  who  have 
"  settled  at  our  principal  military  sta- 
"  tions,  how  many  have  been  colonists  ? 
"  There  is  not  one  single  instance ! 
"  There  is  not  a  great-grandchild,  or 
"  grandchild  of  these  pensioners  retain- 
"  ing  their  European  characteristics. 
"  An  infusion  of  native  blood  is  essential 
"  to  the  continuance  of  the  race. 

"  The  fact  is,  for  the  white  man  or  his 
"  offspring,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  accli- 
"  matisation  in  India.  As  a  rule,  Eu- 
"  ropeans  enjoy  the  best  health,  and 
"  suffer  less  from  heat,  during  their 
"  first  years  of  residence  in  this  country. 
"  Acclimatisation,  as  regards  an  Indian 
'  sun,  is  simply  impossible.  Exposure, 
'  instead  of  '  hardening '  the  system, 
'  actually  has  the  contrary  effect,  and, 
1  the  longer  Europeans  remain  in  this 
1  country,  the  more  they  feel  the  effects  of 
1  the  vertical  sun.  When  Europeans 
'  urge  that  they  have  exposed  them- 
'  selves  to  the  sun  for  years,  and  have 
'  never  felt  any  evil  effects,  it  is  only 
'  saying  that  the  losing  battle  betAveen 
'  the  sun  and  their  constitution  is  not 
'  yet  over ;  butj  every  day's  exposure 


'  brings  them  nearer  to  the  final  tri- 
'  umph  of  their  solar  adversary.  The 
'  lamented  fate  of  that  gallant  sun- 
'  defier,  Colonel  Jacob,  who  advised 
'  young  officers  not  to  mind  the  sun,  as 
1  it  '  would  only  tan  their  cheeks,'  is  an 
'  apropos  example  of  the  foregoing." 

Colonization,  in  the  usual  sense  of  the 
word,  is,  therefore,  impracticable.  But, 
if  a  modified  system  can  succeed  any- 
where, or  under  any  circumstances,  it 
will  be.  in  the  event  of  the  settlement 
of  the  Supreme  Government  on  a  new 
and  salubrious  site.  At  present,  all  our 
large  European  communities  are  planted 
in  and  about  ancient  and  important 
native  towns,  already  civilized  up  to  a 
certain  point.  Our  example  has  pro- 
duced no  perceptible  change  in  the 
manners,  ways  of  thought,  and  religion 
of  the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  of  Cal- 
cutta, Madras,  or  Delhi.  But,  when 
the  Governor-General,  in  all  his  glory, 
with  a  couple  of  European  regiments 
and  a  great  staff  of  officials,  comes  down 
like  a  god  from  Olympus,  among  a  sparse 
and  wild  population,  there  is  every  hope 
that  a  Christian  and  Anglified  colony 
will  gradually  be  formed  in  the  very 
heart  of  India. 

One  objection  remains  to  be  answered. 
It  is  maintained  that,  in  case  of  another 
mutiny,  the  position  of  the  Government, 
many  hundred  miles  from  the  sea,  and 
in  the  midst  of  hardy,  warlike  tribes, 
will  be  alarming  in  the  extreme.  To 
this  I  answer,  that  our  power  is  now, 
humanly  speaking,  absolutely  secure 
from  an  internal  shock.  In  the  fatal 
spring  of  1857,  the  European  force  in 
India  was  barely  twenty  thousand 
strong.  Vile  roads,  and  treacherous 
rivers,  were  the  only  channels  of  com- 
munication. The  artillerymen,  the 
skilled  labourers  of  the  army,  whose 
training  is  a  work  of  much  time  and 
expense,  and  whose  services  are  abso- 
lutely essential  to  the  success  of  military 
operations,  were  for  the  most  part 
natives,  and  sworn  foes  to  our  rule. 
At  present  seventy  thousand  English 
soldiers  are  distributed  over  the  three 
Presidencies.  The  whole  continent  is 
covered  with  a  network  of  telegraph 


About  Calcutta  and  its  Climate. 


127 


wires.  Eailways  already  completed,  or 
in  rapid  process  of  construction,  con- 
nect all  the  chief  cities  ;  and  light  tram- 
ways are  being  pushed  out  in  every 
direction  from  the  grand  trunk  lines. 
Excepting  one  or  two  local  corps,  posted 
in  savage  and  unhealthy  districts,  there 
is  not  a  black  gunner  or  driver  within 
the  borders  of  the  empire.  Every 
battery  is  worked  exclusively  by  Euro- 
peans. Forewarned,  forearmed.  Fifty 
General  Lloyds  would  find  it  difficult  to 
bungle  us  into  another  crisis.  The  con- 
dition of  the  Punjab  is  undoubtedly 
critical,  but  the  distance  between  that 
province  and  Jubbulpore  is  greater  than 
that  between  Paris  and  Vienna. 

Something  must  be  done,  and  that 
soon.  At  home,  Calcutta  is  regarded  as 
a  city  of  the  plague.  When  a  man  sails 
from  Southampton,  his  friends  bid  him 
farewell,  with  the  same  look  on  their 
faces  as  the  secretary  of  the  Church 
Missionary  Society  wears  when  he  sends 
out  a  supplementary  batch  of  African 
bishops,  of  whom  not  one  in  six  is  des- 
tined to  return  to  convulse  the  episcopal 
bench  with  problems  propounded  by 
sceptical  Zulus  and  latitudinarian  Bos- 
jesrnen.  And  no  wonder ;  for,  of  the 
distinguished  Englishmen  who  for  many 
years  have  gone  forth  in  mature  life  to 
bear  high  office  in  Bengal,  most  have 
found  their  graves  on  the  banks  of  the 
Hooghly,  or,  with  shattered  health  and 
blighted  hopes,  have  returned  to  die. 
Splendid,  indeed,  were  the  prospects 
which  induced  Lord  Dalhousie  and 
Lord  Canning  to  surrender  the  joys,  the 
comforts,  the  manifold  interests  of  Eng- 
lish life.  It  was  a  noble  position  which 
tempted  them  to  these  shores  ;  but  the 
conditions  of  the  tenure  of  that  position 
were  hard  indeed,  for  it  was  written  on 
their  lease  that  they  were  never  to  hold 
another.  But,  sadder  still,  the  Nemesis, 
which,  if  the  old  Greek  poets  are  to  be 
believed,  attends  upon  high  fortune, 
.was  not  to  be  contented  with  one  sacri- 
fice. Lady  Dalhousie,  prostrated  by  the 
effects  of  the  deadly  atmosphere  of  the 
capital,  sank  and  died  during  the  home- 
ward voyage  ;  and  an  exquisitely  simple 
and  beautiful  monument,  strewn  daily 


with  fresh  flowers,  in  the  sweetest  nook 
of  the  viceregal  gardens  at  Barrackpore, 
marks  the  spot  where  Lady  Canning 
best  loved  to  linger  away  the  evening 
hours  during  her  splendid  exile.  Poor 
Mr.  Wilson,  who  came  out  in  the  cold 
season  full  of  vigour  of  mind,  but  at  an 
age  when  a  man  cannot  with  impunity 
begin  taking  a  vapour-bath  daily  and  all 
day  long,  at  first  used  to  talk  of  the 
climate  with  good-humoured  approba- 
tion ;  but,  when  the  terrible  summer 
came  upon  him  during  the  severe  la- 
bours of  the  first  Indian  budget,  he 
ceased  to  joke,  though  he  stood  to  his 
post  to  the  death  with  truly  admirable 
courage  and  devotion. 

This  view  of  the  subject  deserves 
most  serious  consideration,  for  it  is  im- 
possible to  over-estimate  the  benefit  to 
India  that  is  derived  from  the  influence 
and  labours  of  statesmen  and  jurists 
who  are  already  famous  at  home.  The 
advantage  does  not  end  here;  for,  on 
his  return,  a  man  of  established  English 
reputation  can  do  much  to  excite  the 
interest  of  the  public  in  the  affairs  of 
our  eastern  empire.  We  venture  to 
say  that  three-fourths  of  the  knowledge 
of  Indian  matters  possessed  by  a  young 
fellow  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge  is  de- 
rived from  Lord  Macaulay's  Essays  on 
Clive  and  Warren  Hastings.  The  ser- 
vice, and  the  nation  at  large,  owe  much 
to  the  efforts  and  example  of  such  a 
man  as  Macaulay,  fresh  from  the  lobby 
of  the  Commons  and  the  drawing-room 
of  Holland  House ;  of  such  men  as 
Mr.  Wilson,  Mr.  Laing,  the  present  fi- 
nancial minister,  and  the  accomplished 
scholar  and  jurisconsult,  who  now 
holds  the  office  of  Legal  Member  of 
Council.  The  introduction  of  the  Eng- 
lish budget,  with  all  Mr.  Gladstone's 
recent  improvements,  is  alone  an  in- 
calculable blessing.  Measures  are  being 
taken  for  the  despatch  of  subordinate 
officials  trained  in  the  Home  Treasury 
and  Audit  office — a  step  that  promises 
to  be  of  great  advantage  to  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  public  departments  in  this 
country.  But  the  evil  repute  which  is 
attached  to  the  air  of  Calcutta  will  be 
fatal  to  any  extensive  system  of  mutual 


128 


Letters  from,  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VII. 


accommodation  in  intellect  and  expe- 
rience between  the  mother-country  and 
her  greatest  dependency. 

There  are  few  public  men  who  would 
not  be  pleased  with  the  idea  of  spending 
two  or  three  years  in  a  most  interesting 
land,  amidst  an  ancient  and  peculiar 
society,  a  mysterious  and  wide- spread 
system  of  idolatry,  with  unbounded 
powers  of  effecting  good  in  his  genera- 
tion, a  noble  income,  an  eminent  posi- 
tion, and  every  opportunity  for  keeping 
his  name  in  the  mouths  of  his  country- 
men. It  is  exactly  what  would,  at  one 
time,  have  appeared  most  fascinating 
.to  the  late  Sir  George  Cornewall  Lewis. 
Such  would  be  the  case  if  the  seat  of 
Government  were  planted  amidst  high 
table-lands,  and  in  a  bracing  air,  where 
an  Englishman  would  miss  nothing 
except  the  east  winds  in  March  and 
the  fogs  in  November.  As  it  is,  he 
exchanges  the  excitements  and  ameni- 
ties of  London  and  country-house  life; 
the  long  cool  sleep,  the  breakfast  sea- 
soned by  a  fresh  appetite  and  the  Times 
newspaper,  the  afternoon  ride  in  the 
park,  the  chat  in  the  smoking-room  at 
his  club,  cut  short  by  a  telegraphic 
summons  to  a  division  on  the  Irish 
Drainage  Bill,  the  speech-day  at  Harrow, 
where  he  sees  his  firstborn  quarrel  with 
Cassius  and  cringe  before  Sir  Anthony 
Absolute  as  he  quarrelled  and  cringed 
a  quarter  of  a  century  before,  the 
heather  in  August,  the  run  with  Lord 
Fitzwilliam  purchased  at  the  price  of 
a  wigging  from  the  Treasury  whip,  a 
night  in  the  train,  and  a  breakfast  in 
the  refreshment-room  at  the  Shoreditch 
Station — he  exchanges  all  this,  for 
what?  For  the  privilege,  at  forty  or 
fifty  years  of  age,  of  entering  upon  a 
life  of  compulsory  hypochondria  and 
inevitable  valetudinarianism ;  measur- 
ing his  food  by  ounces,  and  his  drink 
by  gills;  abstaining  from  fruit  by  the 
advice  of  one  old  Indian,  and  from 
ice-pudding  at  the  warning  of  another  ; 
rising  six  times  in  the  night  to  kick 
his  punkah-bearer  awake  ;  issuing  forth, 
after  fevered  broken  slumbers,  for  a 
dreary  objectless  constitutional ;  grow- 
ing weak,  thin,  languid,  and  still  slaving 


on  till  a  definite  malady  overtakes  him ; 
then,  tossing  outside  the  Sandhead  in 
a  dirty,  comfortless  pilot-brig,  in  the 
vain  hope  of  staving  off  the  inevitable  ; 
returning  to  the  hateful  city  to  work 
again,  to  droop,  to  despair,  to  rally 
once  during  the  short  winter  months, 
and  then  to  sicken  for  the  last  time. 
Eight  thousand  a  year  and  the  title 
of  Honourable  are  dear  indeed  at  such 
a  price. 

The  other  day  we  made  up  a  party 
to  go  to  a  ball  at  the  town- hall,  the 
last  of  the  long  succession  of  brilliant 
entertainments  which  have  enlivened 
ouf,  short  and  cherished  winter.  During 
the  past  cold  season  fancy-balls  were 
the  rage.  This  ball,  however,  was  no 
fancy,  but  the  sternest  reality.  You 
probably  never  waltzed  in  full  evening 
dress  round  the  inner  chamber  of  a 
Turkish  bath,  and  therefore  can  have 
no  conception  of  the  peculiar  charms  of 
the  dance  in  this  climate.  Terpsichore 
is  a  muse  who  loves  shade,  and  zephyrs, 
and  running  streams  ;  but  not  shade 
in  which  the  thermometer  stands  at 
93°,  where  the  zephyrs  are  artificial, 
and  the  only  running  streams  those  on 
the  faces  of  her  votaries.  The  waste 
of  tissue  during  a  galoppe,  with  a 
partner  in  high  training  just  landed 
from  England,  is  truly  frightful.  The 
natives  understand  these  things  better. 
They  let  the  ladies  do  their  dancing 
for  them,  and  content  themselves  with 
looking  on.  I  sometimes  think  that 
Orientals  agree  to  consider  women  as 
chattels,  in  order  to  avoid  the  trouble 
of  paying  attentions  to  the  sex.  It 
cannot  be  denied,  however,  that  this 
is  very  hard  upon  the  women.  Making 
love  is  no  joke  out  here;  though,  in 
one  sense,  Indian  lovers  may  all  be 
said  to  be  ardent.  It  is  all  very  well 
in  a  humid  northern  atmosphere  to 
talk  of  the  torch  of  Cupid,  and  the 
flames  which  dart  from  the  eyes  of 
your  mistress,  and  the  genial  glow  of 
mutual  affection  ;  but  on  the  Tropic  of 
Cancer  these  images  acquire  a  horrible 
significance.  Talk  of  dying  for  your 
sweetheart !  But  what  if  you  were 
comfortably  ensconced  on  the  breezy 


About  Calcutta  and  its  Climate. 


129 


side  of  the  punkah,  within  reach  of 
an  ice-pudding — would  you  cross  over 
to  where  she  sits  panting  between  a 
fat  brigadier  and  a  fatter  chaplain  1 
If  after  supper  you  were  to  swear  to 
her  that  you  had  looked  for  her  in  vain, 
it  would  surely  be  one  of  those 

"  Lover's  perjuries, 
At  which  they  say  Jove  laughs." 

There  is  no  fear  of  her  testing  your 
devotion  like  the  lady  at  the  court  of 
King  Francis,  who  flung  her  glove  into 
the  arena  among  fighting  lions,  for 
here  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  doff  a  glove 
on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  from  causes 
that  do  not  'require  explanation.  Per- 
haps a  little  quiet  dalliance  inside  a 
retired  tatty1  is  the  most  tolerable  form 
of  flirtation  ;  though  even  in  this  case 
you  are  liable  to  interruption  by  step- 
ping upon  a  plateful  of  mangoes,  or  a 
bottle  of  claret  which  the  kitmutgar 
has  deposited  there  to  be  cooled. 

Sweet  Emily  E ,  most  piquante 

and  wayward  of  all  step-daughters  of 
Deputy- Assistant  Income-tax  Commis- 
sioners, hast  Jbhou  yet  forgotten  thy 
favourite  Competition  Wallah  ]  Didst 
thou  ever  deign  to  wonder  what  secret 
cause  estranged  that  much-enduring 
snub-nosed  youth,  who  once  was  the 
most  submissive  of  the  captives  who 
were  dragged  at  the  wheels  of  thy 
buggy  ?  Perchance,  in  thy  vexation, 
thou  didst  accuse  the  wiles  of  the  black- 
eyed  sister  of  the  Joint  Magistrate  of 
Bogglegunge.  Perchance  thou  didst 
imagine  that  the  approaching  examina- 
tion in  Persian  allowed  thy  swain  no 
leisure  for  the  more  grateful  but  not 
less  perilous  ordeal  of  courtship.  Yet 
my  heart  owned  not  the  sway  of  any 
other  dame.  The  snare  of  the  Siren  of 
Bogglegunge  was  in  vain  spread  in  the 
sight  of  at  least  one  civilian.  I  should 
not  have  been  deterred  from  plucking  a 
feather  for  my  cap  out  of  the  wing  of 

1  A  tatty  is  a  framework  placed  over  the 
window,  stuffed  with  scented  grass,  which  is 
kept  constantly  wet.  The  air  from  the  out- 
side, after  passing  through  this  erection,  is 
supposed  to  give  coolness  to  the  room,  and 
undoubtedly  does  give  lumbago  to  the  people 
who  sit  hi  it. 

No.  50. — VOL.  IX. 


Cupid  by  any  fear  of  being  plucked  in 
the  tongue  of  the  children  of  Cyrus. 
The  motive  for  my  coldness  was  far 
other.  Dost  thou  remember  how,  at 
the  United  Service  Club,  we  pulled  a 
cracker  which  contained  a  scroll  bearing 
these  tender  lines  : — 

"  As  when  a  roaming  busy  bee 

Inflicts  its  sting  upon  my  knee, 

So  thou,  0  fair,  within  my  heart 

Hast  caused  a  wound  that  makes  me  smart." 

Next  morning  I  awoke  from  a  late 
sleep,  during  which  I  dreamed  alter- 
nately that  I  had  been  appointed  Secre- 
tary of  State  for  India  on  condition  of 
taking  you  to  wife,  and  that  I  was  being 
kicked  by  the  aide-de-camp  from  Govern- 
ment House,  to  whom  thou  didst  give 
all  the  round  dances  after  supper.  I 
found  on  my  dressing-table  that  hal- 
lowed slip  of  paper,  sticky  and  sweet 
with  the  remains  of  the  bonbon  which 
it  had  enveloped.  Dreadful  to  relate, 
it  now  formed  the  rendezvous  for  two 
long  armies  of  white  ants,  which  as- 
cended and  descended  the  opposite  legs 
of  the  article  of  furniture  in  question. 
One  string  passed  across  the  carpet  into 
the  cupboard  where  I  kept  my  pickles 
and  soda-water,  while  the  other  filed 
in  unbroken  order  over  the  matting,  up 
the  bed-post,  round  the  edge  of  my 
mattress,  and  thence  on  to  the  shelves 
where  my  Eadley  and  Cambridge  prize- 
books  stand,  a  glittering  row ;  thence- 
forward those  two  colonies  have  planted 
themselves,  the  one  among  my  litera- 
ture, and  the  other  amidst  my  condi- 
ments, being  apparently  desirous  of 
settling  the  problem  of  white  colonisa- 
tion in  India.  Prom  that  fatal  morn  I 
have  never  seen  thee  without  thinking 
of  white  ants  ;  never  listened  to  the 
accents  of  thy  voice  without  feeling  a 
tickling  as  of  an  insect  meditating  a 
bite  ;  never  heard  thy  once-adored  name 
without  experiencing  an  irresistible  in- 
clination to  scratch  the  calf  of  my  leg. 
What  love  could  hold  out  against  such 
a  connexion  of  ideas  ?  Certainly  not 
that  of  a  young  civilian  in  his  first  year 
of  residence. 

A  serious  drawback  to  the  enjoyment 


130 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VII. 


of  an  English  ball  is  the  impossibility 
of  getting  at  any  accurate  information 
concerning  your  partners  or  your  rivals. 
If  your  attention  is  attracted  to  any 
stranger  by  his  taste  in  dress  or  style 
of  dancing,  or  his  ugliness,  or  his 
equanimity  and  self-reliance  when  his 
quadrille  has  fallen  into  inextricable 
confusion,  your  inquiries  about  him  will 
probably  be  answered  by  the  assurance 
that  he  seems  "  a  devilish  cool  fler,"  or 
that  he  is  "  a  fler  with  lots  of  money ;" 
or  you  will  be  told  something  about  his 
father,  or  his  elder  brother,  who  meets 
with  the  qualified  approbation  of  being 
"  not  a  bad  sort  of  fler."  You  are  struck 
by  the  appearance  of  some  debutante, 
and  request  an  introduction.  Your 
good-natured  hostess  presents  you  to 
each  other  with  some  cabalistic  words, 
amidst  which  you  distinguish  your  own 
titles  clearly  enough,  but  can  catch  no 
part  of  the  lady's  name  except  the  last 

syllable,   which   sounds   like  son. 

"  The  next  lancers  ?  Can  she  favour 
you  ?  "Well,  then  the  galoppe  1  Num- 
ber six,  you  believe."  The  first  round 
proves  to  you  that  she  dances  very 
prettily ;  and  during  the  last  quadrille 
before  supper  you  learn  that  she 
talks  and  listens  nicely,  and  that 
she  can  preserve  an  equal  mind  in 
the  awful  crisis  when  one  couple  is 
dancing  "  Trelise,"  and  another  "  Pasto- 
rale," and  the  rest  are  standing  still  in 
despair,  or  vaguely  dodging  about  in  a 
sort  of  spontaneous  "  Chaine  Anglaise." 
A  very  minute  allowance  of  champagne 
has  the  most  genial  effect.  Having  dis- 
covered that  she  has  been  on  the  Con- 
tinent, you  make  the  remark  which 
never  fails  to  elicit  a  symptom  of  in- 
terest from  the  haughtiest  or  stupidest 
of  belles,  "What  very  objectionable 
persons  one  does  meet  abroad."  From 
this  common  ground  you  gradually  ap- 
proach the  subject  which  forms  the 
staple  of  ball-room  conversation,  the 
extreme  shyness  of  ordinary  people. 
If  you  stand  within 'ear-shot  of  a  couple 
talking  behind '  a  curtain,  or  on  the 
landing-place,  it  is  ten  to  one  that  you 
will  find  them  discussing  this  mental 
phenomenon — the  gentleman  indulging 


in  a  mild  imitation  of  the  ethical  small- 
print  articles  in  the  Saturday  Review, 
firing  off,  from  time  to  time,  the  epithet 
"  self-conscious  "  ;  while  the  lady  draws 
her  illustrations  from  individuals  among 
the  company  then  present.  After  supper, 
you  induce  your  partner  to  coax  her 
chaperone  to  stay  out  one  more  waltz  ; 
and  then,  as  you  re-ascend  the  stairs, 
after  having  paid  her  the  last  offices, 
you  resolve  to  call  next  day  and  show 
her  that  passage  of  Robert  Browning, 
whom  she  owned  never  to  have  read, 
and  of  whom  you  strongly  suspect  that 
she  has  never  heard.  But  on  reflection 
you  begin  to  be  aware  that  you  have  no 
conception  who  she  is  or  where  she  lives. 
All  you  know  about  her  is,  that  she  has 
black  eyes,  that  her  aunt  disapproves 
of  theatres,  but  that  she  has  witnessed 
the  moving  panorama  of  the  Mississippi, 
that  she  has  a  brother  in  the  49th,  and 
that  she  hates  men  who  hop  in  the 
polka.  You  apply  to  your  hostess,  who, 
inasmuch  as  she  has  brought  together 
nearly  five  hundred  pairs  in  the  course 
of  one  evening,  naturally  wonders  what 
young  lady  you  can  possibly  refer  to, 
but  thinks  she  may  have  been  a  distant 

relation  whom  Mrs. Chose  asked 

leave  to  bring.  Now,  there  is  nothing 
of  this  sort  in  India.  Your  curiosity 
regarding  a  cavalier  will  not  be  satis- 
fied with  a  statement  concerning  his 
dress  or  manners,  or  his  merits  and 
demerits  as  a  "  fler,"  but  by  the  solid 
palpable  fact  of  his  being  the  acting 
Sub-Inspector  General  of  Opium  Go- 
downs  : l  for  everybody  here  is  some- 
thing as  well  as  somebody.  If  you 
want  to  know  the  name  of  the  brunette 
who  is  standing  up  with  the  man  in 
Windsor  uniform,  the  reply  will  be, 
"  Brunette !  I  should  rather  think  she 
is  !  There's  a  strong  touch  of  the 
tar-brush  '  in  that  quarter.  Why  her 
father  was  old  Joe  Collins,  once  Com- 
missioner of  Pollyghaiit,  who  went  off 
the  other  day  after  being  eight-and- 
forty  years  in  the  service.  For  the 
last  part  of  his  life  he  gave  into  native 
ways.  He  married  her  a  few  years 
before  his  death.  The  mother,  I  mean. 
1  Storehouses. 


About  Calcutta  and  its  Climate. 


131 


She's  alive  now,  somewhere  up  in 
Oude,  and  is  supposed  to  have  made 
away  with  a  deal  of  Joe's  property. 
His  grandson  is  coming  out  by  the 
next  boat  to  look  into  the  matter. 
The  girl  is  a  good  girl,  and  lives  with 
her  uncle,  the  Sudder  Judge." 

Besides  the  facility  of  identifying 
everybody  one  meets,  there  are  other 
signs  of  the  strong  official  element  in 
the  composition  of  society.  Nowhere 
are  the  rules  of  precedence  so  rigorously 
observed  as  in  Calcutta.  I  have  heard 
a  Member  of  Council  complain  that  for 
a  whole  fortnight  he  always  took  the 
same  lady  in  to  dinner ;  and,  inasmuch 
as  I  am  a  very  minor  Sahib,  I  have 
never  had  the  pleasure  of  descending 
the  stairs  in  other  company  than  that 
of  male  personages  of  my  own  calibre. 
Fortunately,  the  English  character  is 
entirely  free  from  any  bias  toward 
bureaucratic  exclusiveness  or  conceit. 
Civilians  who  draw  salaries  as  large  as 
twenty  insolent  Prussian  Directors-Ge- 
neral or  pompous  French  Sub-prefects, 
always  bear  in  mind  that  they  or  their 
companions  are  English  gentlemen.  It 
is  impossible,  however,  long  to  forget 
that  you  are  in  the  midst  of  a  commu- 
nity of  public  servants.  For  instance, 
a  person  in  ill  health  is  always  spoken 
of  as  being  "  sick  " — a  term  which  has  a 
curious  effect  till  it  becomes  familiar  to 
the  ear.  The  employment  of  it  arises 
from,  the  peculiar  constitution  of  society. 
When  a  member  of  the  service  hears 
that  another  member  has  been  taken  ill, 
his  first  ideas  are  not  those  of  doctors, 
or  nurses,  or  lawyers,  or  clergymen,  or 
undertakers.  They  run  in  the  line  of 
sick-leave  and  sick-allowances.  Some 
time  ago  I  was  much  puzzled  a\  hearing 
nothing  talked  of  except  the  probability 
of  a  gentleman  in  mature  life  being 
"  confirmed."  Everybody  took  the 
deepest  interest  in  his  approaching 
confirmation.  The  conversation  of  Cal- 
cutta was  so  full  of  the  rite  in  ques- 
tion that  it  sounded  like  oiie  of  Miss 
SewelTs  novels.  To  add  to  my  bewilder- 
ment, our  excellent  bishop  was  on  a 
pastoral  tour,  and  was  not  expected  back 
for  some  weeks  to  come.  Having  a  dim 


notion  that  Anglo-Indian  society  was 
somewhat  Pagan,  I  presumed  that  the 
religious  education  of  this  person  had 
been  lamentably  neglected.  It  turned 
out  that  he  performed  temporary  duty 
in  the  place  of  an  employe,  who  was 
absent  on  sick-leave,  and  whose  recovery 
was  so  doubtful  that  there  was  every 
prospect  of  his  substitute  being  perma- 
nently "  confirmed "  ha  the  office.  The 
gentle  sex  take  a  deep  interest  in  this 
branch  of  public  affairs.  I  love  to  hear 
a  pair  of  pretty  lips  pronounce  on  the 
chance  of  the  Acting  Appointment  held 
by  Miss  Meta  Pornideau's  betrothed  ba- 
coming  "  pucka,"  or  declaiming  against 
the  iniquity  of  the  authorities  in  having 
banished  into  the  Mofussil  young  Sir 
Henry  Currey,  Bart.,  whose  family  have 
enjoyed  the  loaves  and  mango-fishes  of 
Calcutta  ever  since  his  great-grand- 
father was  chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Directors  during  the  trial  of  Warren 
Hastings.  The  ladies  manage  the  affairs 
of  the  charities  of  the  town  with  a 
knowledge  of  the  forms  of  official  busi- 
ness which  would  delight  the  heart  of 
Sir  Gregory  Hardlines.  They  form  com- 
mittees, and  distribute  the  superinten- 
dence of  the  various  departments,  and 
send  round  reports — which  the  older 
hands  supplement  with  copious  minutes, 
while  the  less  experienced  content  them- 
selves with  a  bare  expression  of  appro- 
bation or  disapproval ;  just  as  a  new 
Member  of  Council  "  concurs  in  the 
"  compromise  sanctioned  by  his  col- 
"  leagues." 

You  may  remember  that  in  an  early 
letter  I  remarked  upon  the  absence  of 
"  Dundreary."  At  first  there  was  relief 
in  the  thought  that  so  many  thousand 
miles  of  sea  foamed  between  myself 
and  that  polished  but  simple  nobleman. 
Time,  however,  has  led  me  to  think 
otherwise.  The  great  want  in  India  is 
a  diversity  of  minor  subjects  of  conver- 
sation— novels,  plays,  reviews,  heretical 
books,  sensation-histories  of  the  Crimean 
War,  trials  de  Lunatico  Inquirendo  cost- 
>ing  five  hundred  pounds  a  day,  interna- 
tipnal  prize-fights,  Leotards,  Blondins, 
officers  in  the  Black  Watch  betting 
freely  on  questions  of  orthography — in 


132 


Letters  from  a  Competition  WallaJi:  Letter  VII. 


short,  all  those  petty  interests  which, 
may  be  summed  up  under  the  generic 
head  of  "  Lord  Dundreary."  "We  sadly 
need  some  yeast  to  keep  society  from 
becoming  doughy.  As  an  education, 
nothing  can  be  better  than  the  early 
years  of  a  civilian's  career.  It  is  a  great 
thing  to  live  in  a  community  where 
every  one  has  work  to  do,  and  where 
almost  every  one  does  it  with  a  will ; 
where  intolerance  and  bigotry  are  at  a 
ruinous  discount;  where  broad  liberal 
unselfish  views  are  as  plentiful  as  black- 
berries at  the  bottom  of  a  Surrey  valley. 
But,  after  a  time,  symptoms  appear 
which  show  that  the  mind  needs  the 
stimulus  of  variety.  You  begin  to  per- 
ceive that  the  drones  of  this  world 
have  their  use  as  well  as  the  bees. 
However  much  mischief  Satan  may 
find  still  for  idle  hands  to  do,  those 
idle  hands  certainly  provide  a  great 
deal  for  busy  people  to  talk  about. 
This  state  of  things  is  painfully  felt — as 
is  proved  by  the  avidity  with  which  we 
seize  on  any  scandal  from  Simla,  any 
trumpery  squib  in  the  daily  journals, 
any  question  about  the  desirability  of 
excluding  pigs  from  the  agricultural 
show  in  deference  to  native  preju- 
dices. But  all  this  is  very  poor  mental 
food  for  men  who  have  received  a  first- 
rate  home  education.  A  civil  servant, 
who  neglects  to  keep  up  a  lively  interest 
in  general  subjects  by  a  conscientious 
perusal  of  the  English  newspapers  and 
periodicals,  by  a  certain  modicum  of 
standard  reading,  and  by  a  furlough 
judiciously  spent  in  London  society  and 
Continental  travel,  is  in  danger  of  laps- 
ing into  an  honourable  and  public-spi- 
rited bore.  Unless  he  takes  unremitting 
care  of  his  intellectual  health,  he  can  no 
more  expect,  on  his  return,  to  enter 
kindly  into  English  interests  and  En- 
glish conversation,  than  he  can  hope  to 
enjoy  roast-beef  and  plum-pudding  with 
his  digestion  impaired  by  hot  curries 
and  Manilla  cheroots. 

Happily,  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
men  to  bring  home  at  the  end  of  their 
term  of  service  a  vigorous  constitution 
both  of  mind  and  body.  The  habits  of 
our  countrymen  in  India  have  long  been 


in  steady  course  of  improvement.  It 
has  generally  been  found  that  a  manly 
valiant  race,  which  has  imposed  its 
yoke  upon  an  effeminate  and  unwarlike 
people,  in  course  of  time  degenerates 
and  becomes  slothful  and  luxurious. 
Thus  the  Persians  adopted  the  manners 
of  Medes,  and  the  Macedonians  the 
manners  of  Persians.  Thus  Marc  An- 
tony— or,  as  some  people  spell  him, 
Mark  Anthony — and  his  followers  be- 
came half  Egyptians  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  lovely  Begum  of  Alex- 
andria ;  and  the  sun  was  reduced  to 
the  painful  predicament  of  beholding, 
among  the  military  standards  a  base 
canopy ;  while  the  Roman  soldier,  alas  ! 
(0  posterity,  you  will  deny  it)  was 
bound  to  the  service  of  a  woman.  With 
the  English  in  the  East  precisely  the 
opposite  result  has  taken  place.  The 
earliest  settlers  were  indolent,  dissipated, 
grasping,  almost  Orientals  in  their  way 
of  life,  and  almost  heathens  in  the 
matter  of  religion.  But  each  generation 
of  their  successors  is  more  simple,  more 
hardy,  more  Christian  than  the  last. 
Mrs.  Sherwood's  pictures  of  a  Mofussil 
station,  of  a  merchant's  household  in 
Calcutta,  of  an  indigo  factory  among  the 
jungles  in  the  days  when  Lord  Wel- 
lesley  was  Governor-General,  are  well 
worthy  of  careful  study.  Our  knowledge, 
derived,  from  other  sources,  fully  bears 
out  her  vivid  descriptions  of  the  splendid 
sloth  and  the  languid  debauchery  of 
European  society  in  those  days — Eng- 
lish gentlemen,  overwhelmed  with  the 
consequences  of  extravagance,  hampered 
by  liaisons  with  Hindoo  women  and  by 
crowds  of  olive-coloured  children,  with- 
out either  the  will  or  the  power  to  leave 
the  shores  of  India ;  English  ladies  liv- 
ing in  a  separate  establishment  from 
their  husbands,  in  semi-oriental  retire- 
ment, drinking  largely  of  beer  and  claret, 
smoking  hookahs,  abandoning  their 
little  ones  to  the  fatal  blighting  bestial 
influence  of  native  conversation  and  ex- 
ample, maintaining  not  even  the  pre- 
tence of  religious  belief  or  practice, 
having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world.  Great  men  rode  about  in  state 
coaches,  with  a  dozen  servants  running 


About  Calcutta  and  its  Climate. 


133 


before  and  behind  to  bawl  out  their 
titles  ;  and  little  men  lounged  in  palan- 
quins, or  drove  a  chariot  for  which 
they  never  intended  to  pay,  drawn  by 
horses  which  they  had  bullied  or  cajoled 
out  of  the  stables  of  wealthy  Baboos. 
Writers  not  yet  within  years  of  man's 
estate  gave  champagne  dinners,  ran  race- 
horses, and  put  together  a  pretty  nest- 
egg  of  debt  before  they  had  passed  the 
examination  which  qualified  them  for 
public  employ.  As  a  natural  result, 
there  were  at  one  time  near  a  hundred 
civilians  of  more  than  thirty-five  years' 
standing  who  remained  out  here  in 
pledge  to  their  creditors,  poisoning  the 
principles  of  the  younger  men,  and 
blocking  out  their  betters  from  places 
of  eminence  and  responsibility.  The 
amount  of  bribery  and  extortion  was 
something  stupendous.  A  worthy,  of 
the  name  of  Paul  Benfield,1  at  a  timo 
when  he  was  drawing  a  few  hundred 
rupees  a  month  as  a  junior  servant  of 
the  company,  petitioned  the  Madras 
Council  to  assist  him  in  getting  in  a  sum 
of  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds 
owed  to  him  by  a  single  native  prince. 
From  this  chaos  of  profligacy  and  cor- 
ruption emerged,  from  time  to  time, 
that  jaundiced  purse-proud  Nabob,  who 
roused  the  indignation  of  our  forefathers 
by  his  insolence,  his  ignorance  of  every- 
thing English,  his  effeminate  habits 
transplanted  to  a  clime  where  men  lead 
a  manly  life,  his  curries  and  spices,  his 
fans  and  cushions,  the  crowd  of  shivering 
helpless  dark-faced  beings  who  hung 
about  the  corridors  of  the  hotel  in 
which  he  occupied  the  choicest  suite  of 
rooms. 

Things  are  changed  now,  thank  God  ! 
Many  stations  boast  a  chaplain  and  a 

1  When  Cicero  was  chief-commissioner  of 
the  non-regulation  province  of  Cilicia,  he  com- 
plained bitterly  in  his  private  letters  of  the 
rapacity  of  the  celebrated  Brutus,  who  plun- 
dered the  wretched  Baboos  of  Cyprus  through 
the  agency  of  one  Scaptius.  Brutus  was  very 
importunate  with  Cicero  to  make  Scaptius  a 
collector,  with  full  powers  of  a  magistrate. 
Lord  Macaulay,  who  had  no  love  for  the 
oligarchical  party  in  those  days,  says  in  a 
marginal  note  in  his  favourite  well-thumbed 
letters  to  Atticus :  "  This  patriot  seems  to 
have  been  little  better  than  a  Paul  Benfield." 


pretty  little  parish  church,  where  the 
punkahs  surging  to  and  fro  recal  the 
swing  of  the  censers  in  a  Roman  Catholic 
temple.  In  other  places  the  coolest  room 
in  the  cutcherry  or  the  Government 
school  is  swept  and  garnished  every 
Sunday  morning,  and  the  collector,  as- 
sisted by  his  joint  magistrate,  performs 
the  service,  with  now  and  then  a  sermon 
from  the  works  of  his  favourite  standard 
divine ;  while  the  superintendent  of  police, 
who  has  an  ear  for  music,  plays  the  harmo- 
nium and  leads  the  choir.  It  is  a  ques- 
tion whether  the  congregation  do  not 
benefit  by  the  substitution  of  the  official 
for  the  clerical  element,  since  the  clergy- 
men who  can  be  induced  to  take  duty 
in  India  are,  as  a  rule,  no  cleverer  than 
they  should  be.  One  Sunday,  at  Mo- 
fussilpore,  the  chaplain  of  a  neighbour- 
ing cantonment  offered  to  drive  over  and 
officiate.  We  were  disappointed,  since 
Torn  and  his  colleagues  chant  Gregorians 
in  a  style  which  excites  the  admiring 
envy  of  the  whole  division,  and  the 
reverend  gentleman  was  known  to  dis- 
approve of  this  interference  of  the  laity. 
He  gave  us,  according  to  his  usual  cus- 
tom, a  sermon  which  he  had  written  for 
a  military  audience.  In  this  particular 
discourse  he  addressed  himself  to  wives. 
He  exhorted  them  to  endure  ill-treat- 
ment with  meekness,  even  if  their  hus- 
bands should  beat  and  starve  them. 
Above  all,  he  warned  them  against  be- 
taking themselves,  in  despair,  to  drink, 
or  evil  courses.  He  then  drew  a  pathetic 
picture  of  the  horrors  of  delirium  tremens, 
and  the  other  temporal  consequences 
of  gross  sin  :  an  admonition  which  was 
all  very  well  when  directed  to  soldiers' 
wives,  whose  lot  is  as  hard  and  perilous 
as  that  of  any  class  of  women,  but  which 
savoured  of  the  absurd  when  addressed 
to  a  congregation  among  whom  the  only 
matroris  present  were  the  ladies  of  the 
judge  and  the  collector.  Nowadays,  at 
any  rate,  the  natives  cannot  taunt  us 
with  being  ashamed  of  our  religion.  In 
fact,  the  English  societies  here  are  so 
small,  and  the  goings  out  and  comings 
in  of  every  one  so  well  known  to  his 
neighbours,  that  men  attend  public  wor- 
ship more  regularly  here  than  at  home, 


134 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VII. 


If  it  were  only  to  avoid  giving  offence  to 
their  weaker  official  brethren. 

The  days  of  corruption  have  long 
passed  away.  The  hands  of  a  civil  ser- 
vant are  as  pure  and  white  as  his  summer 
trousers.  Men  have  learned  to  resist 
the  temptations  to  indolence  and  dissi- 
pation. They  drive  dog-carts  instead  of 
being  driven  in  coaches,  and  very  much 
prefer  a  gallop  across  country  to  snoozing 
about  in  a  palanquin.  They  walk  up 
partridges,  and  ride  down  hogs,  and  no 
longer  relax  their  minds  with  hazard 
and  cock-fighting.  Honest  dancing  has 
driven  out  the  vicarious  nautch,  an 
amusement  the  moral  tendency  of  which 
might  be  called  in  question.  A  quiet 
pipe  in  the  verandah  after  dinner  has 
succeeded  to  the  eternal  omnipresent 
hookah,  and  habitual  indulgence  in 
brandy-pawnee  is  no  longer  allowed  to 
be  respectable.  Did  you  not  always 
imagine  brandy-pawnee  to  be  a  drink 
compounded  of  many  ingredients,  a  sort 
of  tropical  dog's  nose,  like  sangaree,  or 
those  abominations  in  the  American  re- 
freshment-room at  the  Great  Exhibition, 
which  sapped  the  health  of  the  more 
curious  and  foolhardy  among  the  visitors? 
It  is  merely  brandy  and  water,  or,  as  it 
is  usually  pronounced,  brar-r-ry  war-r-rer, 
the  most  simple  and  handy  agent  for 
any  one  who  has  a  mind  to  derange  his 
liver  and  destroy  the  coats  of  his  stomach 
in  the  shortest  possible  time.  Sobriety 
and  decency  have  had  their  ordinary 
effect  upon  the  intellect  of  society.  Book 
clubs  have  been  established  all  over  the 
continent,  which  are  well  supplied  from 
home  with  all  the  new  publications,  in- 
cluding the  chief  reviews  and  magazines. 
The  Evening  Mail,  each  copy  containing 
the  pith  of  two  numbers  of  the  Times, 
is  taken  in  at  many  stations.  A  man 
finds  it  uphill  work  still  to  keep  himself 
au  courant  with  European  matters  ;  but 
it  is  no  longer  a  struggle  in  which  suc- 
cess is  hopeless.  The  tune  has  already 
gone  by  when  returned  Indians  could 
talk  of  nothing  but  lacs  and  jaghires, 
which  people  at  home  took  to  be  a  sort 
of  leopard,  and  the  time  is  fast  going  by 
when  they  can  talk  of  nothing  but  the 
Amalgamation  Act  and  the  Eyotwar 
Settlement. 


With  reference  to  the  subject  treated 
of  at  the  commencement  of  this  letter,  I 
venture  to  insert  a  song,  composed  by  a 
friend  who  is  passionately  devoted  to 
the  study  of  the  laws  of  sanitation  and 
mortality.  He  carries  his  enthusiasm 
on  the  subject  so  far  as  to  tinge  with 
it  his  view  of  every  conceivable  matter, 
religious,  political,  and  literary.  He  once 
wrote  an  anonymous  letter  to  the  Lau- 
reate, commenting  on  the  lines  in  the 
"  Vision  of  Sin  "— 

"  Every  moment  dies  a  man — 
Every  moment  one  is  born." 

He  observed,  with  great  truth,  that  if 
this  statement  were  correct  the  popula- 
tion of  the  world  would  remain  stationary, 
and  urged  the  poet  to  alter  the  lines 
thus — 

"  Every  moment  dies  a  man, 
And  one  and  one-sixteenth  is  born." 

He  owned  that  the  exact  figure  was  one, 
decimal  point,  ought,  six,  four,  seven ; 
but  (as  he  said)  some  allowance  must  be 
made  for  metre. 

ODE  TO  CALCUTTA. 
I. 

Fair  city,  India's  crown  and  pride, 
Long  may'st  thou  tower  o'er  Hooghley's  tide, 
Whose  hallowed,  but  malarious  stream, 
The  peasant's  god,  the  poet's  theme, 

Rplls  down  the  dead  Hindoo  ; 
And  from  whose  wave,  a  stagnant  mass 
Replete  with  sulphuretted  gas, 

Our  country  beer  we  brew  : 
As  o'er  a  pulse  physicians  stand, 
Intent  upon  the  second-hand, 

Determined  not  to  miss  ticks, 
I  watch  thy  sanitary  state, 
Jot  down  of  deaths  the  annual  rate, 
And  each  new  epidemic  greet, 
Until  iny  system  I  complete 

Of  tropical  statistics. 

II. 

Of  those  with  whom  I  laughed  away 
On  Lea's 1  fair  banks  the  idle  day, 
Whose  love  would  ne'er  my  breast  allow 
To  hold  concealed  the  thoughts  that  now 

Within  my  heart  are  pent, 
Who  hung  upon  my  every  breath, 
Of  those  dear  friends  I  mourn  the  death 

Of  forty-five  per  cent : 

1  The  old  East  Indian  College  stood  within 
a  mile  and  a  half  of  this  river. 


The  Vigil  of  All- Souls. 


135 


And  Cecil  Gray,  my  soul's  delight, 
The  brave,  the  eloquent,  the  bright, 

The  versatile,  the  shifty, 
Stretched  hopeless  on  his  dying  bed, 
With  failing  strength  and  aching  head, 
In  cholera's  malignant  phase, 
Ah !  woe  is  me,  will  shortly  raise 

The  average  to  fifty. 

III. 

And  when,  before  the  rains  in  June, 
The  mercury  went  up  at  noon 
To  nine-and-ninety  in  the  shade, 
I  every  hour  grew  more  afraid 

That  doctor  Fayrer  right  is 


In  hinting  to  my  wife  that  those 
Inflammatory  symptoms  rose 

From  latent  hepatitis. 
I'll,  'ere  another  week  goes  by, 
For  my  certificate  apply, 

And  sail  home  invalided. 
Since,  if  I  press  an  early  bier, 
The  deaths  from  Liver  in  the  year, 
Compared  with  those  produced  by  Sun, 
Will  (fearful  thought !)  have  then  by  one 

Their  ratio  exceeded ! 

Yours  truly, 

H.  BROUGHTON. 


THE  VIGIL  OF  ALL-SOULS. 
TO  MY  FRIEND  ON  HIS  WEDDING-NIGHT. 

TO-DAY  for  thee,  and  to-morrow  for  me ; 

I  have  said  God  bless  thee,  o'er  and  o'er, 
And  there  is  not  a  joy  awaiting  thee 

But  I  wish  it  double  and  more. 
Oh  friend !   I  pause  on  thy  bridal-night, 

I  pause  from  my  toil  to  wish  thee  all 
Fair  and  pure  and  honest  and  bright, 

That  to  mortal  lot  can  fall, 
And  upon  thy  head  no  touch  of  sorrow. 
To-day  for  thee;  and  for  me  to-morrow. 

The  sun  shone  fair,  and  the  moonlight  now 

Has  crowned  the  darkness  with  silver  gleams ; 
God  send  thy  life  be  as  bright,  and  thou 

As  glad  as  a  bridegroom's  dreams. 
But  on  me  the  household  lamp  lets  fall 

A  light  subdued — and  thy  hour  of  pride 
Is  the  vigil  of  a  Festival 

To  us  on  life's  other  side. 
To-day  on  the  living  all  joy  be  shed ; 
But  to-morrow  is  for  the  Blessed  Dead. 

To-morrow  for  me,  but  to-day  for  thee ; 

Thus  are  the  lots  of  our  living  cast, 
And  the  cheerful  lamp  sheds  over  me 

A  light  that  shines  out  of  the  past. 
Thine  be  the  future,  oh  friend !   I  greet 

In  thee  life's  promise  all  bright  and  brave, 
But  the  sunshine,  though  fair  it  smiles,  and  sweet, 

Falls  to  me  over  cross  and  grave. 
Bright  be  thy  path  and  untouched  by  sorrow, 
To-day  for  thee;  and  for  me  to-morrow. 


3lst  October. 


136 


A  WOED  MOEE  ABOUT  SPINOZA. 


"  By  the  sentence  of  the  angels,  by 
'  the  decree  of  the  saints,  we  anathe- 
'  matize,  cut  off,  curse,  and  execrate 
'  Baruch  Spinoza,  in  the  presence  of 
'  these  sacred  books  with  the  six  hun- 
'  dred  and  thirteen  precepts  which  are 
'  written  therein,  with  the  anathema 
'  wherewith  Joshua  anathematized 
'  Jericho  ;  with  the  cursing  wherewith 
'  Elisha  cursed  the  children,  and  with 
'  all  the  cursings  which  are  written  in 
'  the  Book  of  the  Law :  cursed  be  he 
'  by  day,  and  cursed  by  night ;  cursed 
'  when  he  lieth  down,  and  cursed  when 
'  he  riseth  up ;  cursed  when  he  goeth 
'  out,  and  cursed  when  he  cometh  in ; 
'  the  Lord  pardon  him  never ;  the 
'  wrath  and  fury  of  the  Lord  burn 
'  upon  this  man,  and  bring  upon  him 
'  all  the  curses  which  are  written  in 
'  the  Book  of  the  Law.  The  Lord 
(  blot  out  his  name  under  heaven.  The 
'  Lord  set  him  apart  for  destruction 
'  from  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  with  all 
'  the  curses  of  the  firmament  which 
'  are  written  in  the  Book  of  this  Law. 
' .  .  .  There  shall  no  man  speak  to  him, 
'  no  man  write  to  him,  no  man  show 
'  him  any  kindness,  no  man  stay  under 
'  the  same  roof  with  him,  no  man  come 
'  nigh  him." 

With  these  amenities,  the  current 
compliments  of  theological  parting,  the 
Jews  of  the  Portuguese  synagogue  at 
Amsterdam  took  in  1656  (and  not  in 
1660  as  has  till  now  been  commonly 
supposed)  their  leave  of  their  erring 
brother,  Baruch  or  Benedict  Spinoza. 
They  remained  children  of  Israel,  and  he 
became  a  child  of  modern  Europe. 

That  was  in  1656,  and  Spinoza  died 
in  1677,  at  the  early  age  of  forty -four. 
Glory  had  not  found  him  out.  His  short 
life — a  life  of  unbroken  diligence,  kind- 
liness, and  purity — was  past  in  seclusion. 
But  in  spite  of  that  seclusion,  in  spite 
of  the  shortness  of  his  career,  in  spite 
of  the  hostility  of  the  dispensers  of  re- 
nown in  the  18th  century, — of  Voltaire's 


disparagement  and  Bayle's  detraction, — 
in  spite  of  the  repellent  form  which 
he  has  given  to  his  principal  work,  in 
spite  of  the  exterior  semblance  of  a 
rigid  dogmatism,  alien  to  the  most  essen- 
tial tendencies  of  modern  philosophy, 
in  spite,  finally,  of  the  immense  weight 
of  disfavour  cast  upon  him  by  the  long- 
repeated  charge  of  atheism,  Spinoza's 
name  has  silently  risen  in  importance, 
the  man  and  his  works  have  attracted  a 
steadily  increasing  notice,  and  bid  fair 
to  become  soon  what  they  deserve  to 
become, — in  the  history  of  modern 
philosophy,  the  central  point  of  interest. 
An  avowed  translation  of  one  of  his 
works  at  last  makes  its  appearance  in 
English  —  his  "  Tractatus  Theologico- 
Politicus,"  of  which  I  spoke  here  some 
months  ago,  just  before  the  English 
translation  of  it  appeared.  It  is  the 
principal  work  which  Spinoza  published 
in  his  lifetime ;  his  book  on  ethics, 
the  work  on  which  his  fame  rests,  is 
posthumous. 

The  English  translator  has  not  done 
his  task  well.  Of  the  character  of  his 
version  there  can,  I  arn  afraid,  be  no 
doiibt ;  one  such  passage  as  the  follow- 
ing is  decisive  : — 

"  I  confess  that,  while  with  them  (the 
'  theologians)  /  have  never  been  able 
'  sufficiently  to  admire  the  unfathomed 
'  mysteries  of  scripture,  I  have  still  found 
1  them  giving  utterance  to  nothing  but 
'  Aristotelian  and  Platonic  speculations, 
'  artfully  dressed  up  and  cunningly  ac- 
'  commodated  to  Holy  Writ,  lest  the 
1  speakers  should  show  themselves  too 
'  plainly  to  belong  to  the  sect  of  the 
'  Grecian  heathens.  Nor  ^vas  it  enough 
f  for  these  men  to  discourse  with  the 
1  Greeks ;  they  have  further  taken  to 
1  raving  with  the  Hebreiv prophets" 

This  professes  to  be  a  translation  of 
these  words  of  Spinoza  : — "  Fateor,  eos 
"  nunquam  satis  mirari  potuisse  Scrip- 
"  turse  profundissima  mysteria  ;  attamen, 
"  prceter  Aristotelicorum  vel  Platoni- 


A  Word  more  about  Spinoza. 


137 


"  corum    speculationes    nihil    docuisse 
"  video,  atque  his,  ne  gentiles  sectari 
"  viderentur,    Scripturani    accommoda- 
"  verunt.      Non    satis    his    fuit    cum 
"  Gratis  insanire,  sed   prophetas   cum 
<f  iisdem  deliravisse  voluerunt."     After 
one   such   specimen    of    a    translator's 
force,  the  experienced  reader  has  a  sort 
of  instinct  that  he  may  as  well  close 
the  book  at  once,  with  a  smile  or  a  sigh, 
according  as  he  happens  to  be  a  follower 
of    the   weeping  or    of   the    laughing 
philosopher.     If,   in   spite   of  this   in- 
stinct, he  persists  in  going  on  with  the 
English  version  of  the  "  Tractatus  Theo- 
logico-Politicus,"    he    will    find    many 
more  such  specimens.     It  is  not,  how- 
ever, my  intention  to  fill  my  space  with 
these,    or   with    strictures    upon   their 
author.     I  prefer  to   remark   that   he 
renders  a  service  to  literary  history  by 
pointing  out  in  his   preface  how  "to 
"  Bayle  may  be  traced  the  disfavour  in 
"  which  the   name   of  Spinoza  was  so 
"  long  held  ; "  that  in  his  observations 
on  the  system  of  the  Church  of  England 
he  shows  a  laudable  freedom  from  the 
prejudices  of  ordinary  English  Liberals 
of  that  advanced  school   to  which  he 
clearly  belongs  ;  and,  lastly,  that,  though 
he  manifests  little  familiarity  with  Latin, 
he   seems   to   have   considerable   fami- 
liarity with  philosophy,  and  to  be  well 
able  to  follow  and   comprehend  specu- 
lative reasoning.     Let  me  advise  him.  to 
unite  his  forces  with  those  of  some  one 
who  has  that  accurate  knowledge  of  Latin 
which  he  himself  has   not,  and   then, 
perhaps,  of  that   union   a   really  good 
translation  of  Spinoza  will  be  the  result. 
And,  having  given  him  this  advice,  let 
me   again   return,  for  a   little,   to  the 
"  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus  "  itself. 
This  work,  as  I  have  already  said,  is 
a  work  on  the  interpretation  of  Scrip- 
ture,— it   treats   of   the   Bible.     What 
was  it  exactly  which  Spinoza  thought 
about   the   Bible   and   its   inspiration? 
That  will  be,  at  the  present   moment, 
the   central  point   of  interest   for   the 
English  readers  of  his  Treatise.     Now  I 
wish  to  observe — what  it  was  irrelevant 
to  my  purpose  to  observe  when  I  before 
spoke  of  the  "Tractatus  Theologico-Poli- 


ticus " — that  just  on  this  very  point  the 
Treatise,  interesting  and  remarkable  as 
it  is,  will  fail  to  satisfy  the  reader.  It 
is  important  to  seize  this  notion  quite 
firmly,  and  not  to  quit  hold  of  it  while 
one  is  reading  Spinoza's  work.  The 
scope  of  that  work  is  this  : — Spinoza 
sees  that  the  life  and  practice  of  Christian 
nations,  professing  the  religion  of  the 
Bible,  are  not  the  due  fruits  of  the  reli- 
gion of  the  Bible  ;  he  sees  only  hatred, 
bitterness,  and  strife,  where  he  might 
have  expected  to  see  love,  joy,  and  peace 
in  believing ;  and  he  asks  himself  the 
reason  of  this.  The  reason  is,  he  says, 
that  these  people  misunderstand  their 
Bible.  Well,  then,  is  his  conclusion, 
I  will  write  a  "Tractatus  Theologico-Poli- 
ticus." I  will  show  these  people  that, 
taking  the  Bible  for  granted,  taking  it 
to  be  all  which  it  asserts  itself  to  be, 
taking  it  to  have  all  the  authority  which 
it  claims,  it  is  not  what  they  imagine  it 
to  be,  it  does  not  say  what  they  imagine 
it  to  say.  I  will  show  them  what  it 
really  does  say,  and  I  will  show  them 
that  they  will  do  well  to  accept  this 
real  teaching  of  the  Bible,  instead  of 
the  phantom  with  which  they  have  so 
long  been  cheated.  I  will  show  their 
Governments  that  they  will  do  well  to 
remodel  the  National  Churches,  to  make 
of  them  institutions  informed  with  the 
spirit  of  the  true  Bible,  instead  of  insti- 
tutions informed  with  the  spirit  of  this 
false  phantom. 

Sucli  is  really  the  scope  of  Spinoza's 
work.  He  pursues  a  great  object,  and 
pursues  it  with  signal  ability  ;  but  it  is 
important  to  observe  that  he  does  not 
give  us  his  own  opinion  about  the  Bible's 
fundamental  character.  He  takes  the 
Bible  as  it  stands,  as  he  might  take  the 
phenomena  of  nature,  and  he  discusses 
it  as  he  finds  it.  Eevelation  differs 
from  natural  knowledge,  he  says,  not  by 
being  more  divine  or  more  certain  than 
natural  knowledge,  but  by  being  con- 
veyed in  a  different  way  ;  it  differs  from 
it  because  it  is  a  knowledge  "  of  which 
"  the  laws  of  human  nature  considered 
"  in  themselves  alone  cannot  be  the 
"  cause."  What  is  really  its  cause,  he 
says,  we  need  not  here  inquire  (verum 


138 


A  Word  more  about  Spinoza. 


nee  noois  jam  opus  est  propheticce  cogni- 
tionis  causam  scire),  for  we  take  Scrip- 
ture, which  contains  this  revelation,  as  it 
stands,  and  do  not  ask  how  it  arose 
(documentorum  causas  nihil  curamus). 

Proceeding  on  this  principle,  Spinoza 
leaves  the  attentive  reader  somewhat 
baffled  and  disappointed,  clear  as  is  his 
way  of  treating  his  subject,  and  remark- 
able as  are  the  conclusions  with  which 
he  presents  us.  He  starts,  we  feel, 
from  what  is  to  him  a  hypothesis,  and 
we  want  to  know  what  he  really  thinks 
about  this  hypothesis.  His  greatest 
novelties  are  all  within  limits  fixed  for 
him  by  this  hypothesis.  He  says  that 
the  voice  which  called  Samuel  was  an 
imaginary  voice  ;  he  says  that  the  waters 
of  the  Red  Sea  retreated  before  a  strong 
wind ;  he  says  that  the  Shunammite's 
son  was  revived  by  the  natural  heat  of 
Elisha's  body  ;  he  says  that  the  rainbow 
which  was  made  a  sign  to  Noah  ap- 
peared in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature. 
Scripture  itself,  rightly  interpreted,  says, 
he  affirms,  all  this.  But  he  asserts  that 
the  Voice  which  uttered  the  Command- 
ments on  Mount  Sinai  was  a  real  voice, 
a  vera  vox.  He  says,  indeed,  that  this 
voice  could  not  really  give  to  the 
Israelites  that  proof  which  they  ima- 
gined it  gave  to  them  of  the  existence 
of  God,  and  that  God  on  Sinai  was 
dealing  with  the  Israelites  only  accord- 
ing to  their  imperfect  knowledge.  Still 
he  asserts  the  voice  to  have  been  a  real 
one;  and  for  this  reason,  that  we  do 
violence  to  Scripture  if  we  do  not  admit 
it  to  have  been  a  real  one  (nisi  Scrip- 
tures vim  inferre  velimus,  omnino  conce- 
dendum  est,  Israelites  veram  vocem 
audivisse).  The  attentive  reader  wants 
to  know  what  Spinoza  himself  thought 
about  this  vera  vox  and  its  possibility ; 
he  is  much  more  interested  in  knowing 
this  than  in  knowing  what  Spinoza 
considered  Scripture  to  affirm  about  the 
matter. 

The  feeling  of  perplexity  thus  caused 
is  not  diminished  by  the  language  of 
the  chapter  on  miracles.  In  this  chap- 
ter Spinoza  broadly  affirms  a  miracle  to 
be  an  impossibility.  But  he  himself 
contrasts  the  method  of  demonstration 


a  priori,  by  which  he  claims  to  have 
established  this  proposition,  with  the 
method  which  he  has  pursued  in  treat- 
ing of  prophetic  revelation.  "This 
'  revelation,"  he  says,  "  is  a  matter  out 
'  of  human  reach,  and  therefore  I  was 
bound  to  take  it  as  I  found  it.  Mo- 
1  nere  volo,  me  alidprorsus  methodo  circa 
'  miracula  processisse,  quam  circa  pro- 
'  phetiam  .  .  .  quod  etiam  consulto  fed, 
'  quia  de  propJietia,  quandoquidem  ipsa 
'  captum  humanum  super  at  et  qucestio 
( mere  theologica  est,  nihil  affirmare, 
'  neque  etiam  scire  poteram  in  quo  ipsa 
'  potissimum  constiterit,  nisi  ex  funda- 
*  mentis  revelatis."  The  reader  feels 
that  Spinoza,  proceeding  on  a  hypo- 
thesis, has  presented  him  with  the 
assertion  of  a  miracle,  and  afterwards, 
proceeding  d,  priori,  has  presented  him 
with  the  assertion  that  a  miracle  is  im- 
possible. He  feels  that  Spinoza  does 
not  adequately  reconcile  these  two  as- 
sertions by  declaring  that  any  event 
really  miraculous,  if  found  recorded  in 
Scripture,  must  be  "  a  spurious  addition 
made  to  Scripture  by  sacrilegious  men." 
Is,  then,  he  asks,  the  vera  vox  of  Mount 
Sinai  in  Spinoza's  opinion  a  spurious 
addition  made  to  Scripture  by  sacri- 
legious men ;  or,  if  not,  how  is  it  not 
miraculous  ? 

Spinoza,  in  his  own  mind,  regarded 
the  Bible  as  a  vast  collection  of  mis- 
cellaneous 'documents,  many  of  them 
quite  disparate  and  not  at  all  to  be 
harmonized  with  others  ;  documents  of 
unequal  value  and  of  varying  applica- 
bility, some  of  them  conveying  ideas 
salutary  for  one  time,  others  for  another. 
But  in  the  "  Tractatus  Theologico-Poli- 
ticus "  he  by  no  means  always  deals 
in  this  free  spirit  with  the  Bible.  Some- 
times he  chooses  to  deal  with  it  in 
the  spirit  of  the  veriest  worshipper  of 
the  letter ;  sometimes  he  chooses  to 
treat  the  Bible  as  if  all  its  parts  were 
(so  to  speak)  equipollent ;  to  snatch  an 
isolated  text  which  suits  his  purpose, 
without  caring  whether  it  is  annulled 
by  the  context,  by  the  general  drift  of 
Scripture,  or  by  other  passages  of  more 
weight  and  authority.  The  great  critic 
thus  voluntarily  becomes  as  uncritical  as 


A  Word  more  about  Spinoza. 


139 


Exeter  Hall.  The  epicurean  Solomon, 
whose  Ecclesiastes  the  Hebrew  doctors, 
even  after  they  had  received  it  into 
the  canon,  forbade  the  young  and  weak- 
minded  among  their  community  to  read, 
Spinoza  quotes  as  of  the  same  authority 
with  the  severe  Moses  ;  he  uses  promis- 
cuously, as  documents  of  identical 
force,  without  discriminating  between 
their  essentially  different  character, 
the  softened  cosmopolitan  teaching  of 
the  prophets  of  the  captivity,  and  the 
rigid  national  teaching  of  the  instruc- 
tors of  Israel's  youth.  He  is  capable 
of  extracting,  from  a  chance  expres- 
sion- of  Jeremiah,  the  assertion  of  a 
speculative  idea  which  Jeremiah  cer- 
tainly never  entertained,  and  from 
which  he  would  have  recoiled  in  dis- 
may— the  idea,  namely,  that  miracles 
are  impossible ;  just  as  an  ordinary 
Englishman  can  extract  from  God's 
words  to  Noah,  Be  fruitful  and  multiply, 
an  exhortation  to  himself  to  have  a 
large  family.  Spinoza,  I  repeat,  knew 
perfectly  well  what  this  verbal  mode  of 
dealing  with  the  Eible  was  worth  ;  but 
he  sometimes  uses  it  because  of  the  hy- 
pothesis from  which  he  set  out ;  because 
of  his  having  agreed  "to  take  Scripture  as 
it  stands,  and  not  to  ask  how  it  arose." 
No  doubt  the  sagacity  of  Spinoza's 
rules  for  biblical  interpretation,  the 
power  of  his  analysis  of  the  contents  of 
the  Bible,  the  interest  of  his  reflections 
on  Jewish  history,  are,  in  spite  of  this, 
very  great,  and  have  an  absolute  worth 
of  their  own,  independent  of  the  silence 
or  ambiguity  of  their  author  upon  a 
point  of  cardinal  importance.  Few 
candid  people  will  read  his  rules  of  in- 
terpretation without  exclaiming  that 
they  are  the  very  dictates  of  good  sense, 
that  they  have  always  believed  in 
them;  and  without  adding  after  a 
moment's  reflection,  that  they  have 
passed  their  lives  in  violating  them. 
And  what  can  be  more  interesting  than 
to  find  that  perhaps  the  main  cause  of 
the  decay  of  the  Jewish  polity  was  one 
of  which  from,  our  English  Bible,  which 
entirely  mistranslates  the  26th  verse  of 
the  20th  chapter  of  Ezekiel,  we  hear 
nothing, — the  perpetual  reproach  of  im- 


purity and  rejection  cast  upon  the  mass 
of  the  Hebrew  nation  by  the  exclusive 
priesthood  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  ?  What 
can  be  more  suggestive,  after  Mr.  Mill 
and  Dr.  Stanley  have  been  telling  us 
how  great  an  element  of  strength  to  the 
Hebrew  nation  was  the  institution  of 
prophets,  than  to  hear  from  the  ablest 
of  Hebrews  how  this  institution  seems  to 
him  to  have  been  to  his  nation  one  of  her 
main  elements  of  weakness  ?  No  in- 
telligent man  can  read  the  "Tractatus 
Theologico-Politicus  "  without  being  pro- 
foundly instructed  by  it ;  but  neither 
can  he  read  it  without  feeling  that,  as  a 
speculative  work,  it  is,  to  use  a  French 
military  expression,  in  the  air  ;  that,  in 
a  certain  sense,  it  is  in  want  of  a  base 
and  in  want  of  supports  ;  that  this  base 
and  supports  are,  at  any  rate,  not  to  be 
found  in  the  work  itself,  and,  if  they 
exist,  must  be  sought  for  in  other 
works  of  the  author. 

The  genuine  speculative  opinions  of 
Spinoza,  which  the  "Tractatus  Theo- 
logico-Politicus" but  imperfectly  reveals, 
may  in  his  Ethics  and  in  his  Letters  be 
found  set  forth  clearly.  It  is,  however, 
the  business  of  criticism  to  deal  with 
every  independent  work  as  with  an  in- 
dependent whole,  and — instead  of  estab- 
lishing between  the  "Tractatus  Theo- 
logico-Politicus," and  the  Ethics  of 
Spinoza,  a  relation  which  Spinoza 
himself  has  not  established — to  seize, 
in  dealing  with  the  "  Tractatus  Theo- 
logico-Politicus," the  important  fact  that 
this  work  has  its  source,  not  in  the 
axioms  and  definitions  of  the  Ethics, 
but  in  a  hypothesis.  The  Ethics  are 
not  yet  translated  into  English,  and  I 
have  not  here  to  speak  of  them.  Then 
will  be  the  right  time  for  criticism  to 
try  and  seize  the  special  character  and 
tendencies  of  that  remarkable  work, 
when  it  is  dealing  with  it  directly.  The 
criticism  of  the  Ethics  is  far  too  serious 
a  task  to  be  undertaken  incidentally, 
and  merely  as  a  supplement  to  the  cri- 
ticism of  the  "Tractatus  Theologico- 
Politicus."  Nevertheless,  on  certain 
governing  ideas  of  Spinoza  which  re- 
ceive their  systematic  expression,  indeed, 
in  the  Ethics,  and  on  which  the  "  Trac- 


140 


A  Word  more  about  Spinoza, 


tatus  Theologico-Politicus "  is  not  for- 
mally based,  but  which  are  yet  never 
absent  from  Spinoza's  mind  in  the  com- 
position of  any  work,  which  breathe 
through  all  his  works,  and  fill  them 
with  a  peculiar  effect  and  power,  I  wish, 
before  concluding  these  remarks,  to  say 
a  few  words. 

A  philosopher's  real  power  over  man- 
kind resides  not  in  his  metaphysical 
formulas,  but  in  the  spirit  and  tendencies 
which  have  led  him  to  adopt  those 
formulas.  Spinoza's  critic,  therefore, 
has  rather  to  bring  to  light  that  spirit 
and  those  tendencies  of  his  author,  than 
to  exhibit  his  metaphysical  formulas. 
Propositions  about  substance  pass  by 
mankind  at  large  like  the  idle  wind, 
which  mankind  at  large  regards  not ;  it 
will  not  even  listen  to  a  word  about 
these  propositions,  unless  it  first  learns 
what  their  author  was  driving  at  with 
them,  and  finds  that  this  object  of  his 
is  one  with  which  it  sympathizes,  one, 
at  any  rate,  which  commands  its  atten- 
tion. And  mankind  is  so  far  right  that 
this  object  of  the  author  is  really,  as  has 
been  said,  that  which  is  most  important, 
that  which  sets  all  his  work  in  motion, 
that  which  is  the  secret  of  his  attraction 
for  other  minds,  which,  by  different 
ways,  pursue  the  same  object. 

Mr.  Maurice,  seeking  for  the  cause  of 
Goethe's  great  admiration  for  Spinoza, 
thinks   that  he   finds   it   in   Spinoza's 
Hebrew  genius.     "He  spoke  of  God," 
says  Mr.  Maurice,  "as  an  actual  being, 
to  those  who  had  fancied  him  a  name 
in  a  book.     The  child  of  the  circum- 
cision had  a  message  for  Lessing  and 
Goethe  which  the  pagan  schools  of 
philosophy   could   not   bring."     This 
seems  to  me  fanciful     An  intensity  and 
impressiveness,  which  came  to  him  from 
his  Hebrew  nature,  Spinoza  no  doubt 
has ;  but  the  two  things  which  are  most 
remarkable  about  him,  and  by  which,  as 
I  think,  he  chiefly  impressed  Goethe, 
seem  to  me  not  to  come  to  him  from, 
his  Hebrew  nature  at  all — I  mean  his 
denial  of  final  causes,  and  his  stoicism, 
a  stoicism  not  passive,  but  active.     For 
a   mind    like   Goethe's — a    mind   pro- 
foundly impartial  and  passionately  as- 


piring after  the  science,  not  of  men 
only,  but  of  universal  nature  —  the 
popular  philosophy  which  explains  all 
things  by  reference  to  man,  and  regards 
universal  nature  as  existing  for  the  sake 
of  man,  and  even  of  certain  classes  of 
men,  was  utterly  repulsive.  Unchecked, 
this  philosophy  would  gladly  maintain 
that  the  donkey  exists  in  order  that  the 
invalid  Christian  may  have  donkey's 
milk  before  breakfast ;  and  such  views 
of  nature  as  this  were  exactly  what 
Goethe's  whole  soul  abhorred.  Creation, 
he  thought,  should  be  made  of  sterner 
stuff;  he  desired  to  rest  the  donkey's 
existence  on  larger  grounds.  More  than 
any  philosopher  who  has  ever  lived, 
Spinoza  satisfied  him.  here.  The  full 
exposition  of  the  counter-doctrine  to  the 
popular  doctrine  of  final  causes  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Ethics ;  but  this  denial  of 
final  causes  was  so  essential  an  element 
of  all  Spinoza's  thinking  that  we  shall, 
as  has  been  said  already,  find  it  in  the 
work  with  which  we  are  here  concerned, 
the  "  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus," 
and,  indeed,  permeating  that  work  and 
all  his  works.  From  the  "Tractatus 
Theologico-Politicus  "  one  may  take  as 
good  a  general  statement  of  this  denial 
as  any  which  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Ethics  : — 

"  Deus  naturam  dirigit,  prout  ejus 
"  leges  uniyersales,  non  autem  prout 
"  humanse  naturae  particulares  leges  exi- 
"  gunt,  adeoque  Deus  non  solius  humani 
"  generis,  sed  totius  naturae  rationem 
"  habet.  (God  directs  nature,  accord- 
"  ing  as  the  universal  laws  of  nature, 
"  but  not  according  as  the  particular 
"  laws  of  human  nature  require  ;  and  so 
"  God  has  regard,  not  of  the  human 
"  race  only,  but  of  entire  nature.)" 

And,  as  a  pendant  to  this  denial  by 
Spinoza  of  final  causes,  comes  his 
stoicism  : — 

"  ISfon  studemus,  ut  natura  nobis,  sed 
"  contra  ut  nos  nature  pareamus.  (Our 
"  desire  is  not  that  nature  may  obey  us, 
"  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  we  may  obey 
"  nature.)" 

Here  is  the  second  source  of  his  at- 
tractiveness for  Goethe ;  and  Goethe  is 
but  the  eminent  representative  of  a  whole 


A  Word  more  about  Spinoza. 


141 


order  of  minds  whose  admiration  has 
made  Spinoza's  fame.  Spinoza  first  im- 
presses Goethe  and  any  man  like 
Goethe,  and  then  he  composes  him ; 
first  he  fills  and  satisfies  his  imagination 
by  the  width  and  grandeur  of  his  view 
of  nature,  and  then  he  fortifies  and  stills 
his  mobile,  straining,  passionate,  poetic 
temperament  by  the  moral  lesson  he 
draws  from  his  view  of  nature.  And  a 
moral  lesson  not  of  mere  resigned  ac- 
quiescence, not  of  melancholy  quietism, 
but  of  joyful  activity  within  the  limits 
of  man's  true  sphere  : — 

"Ipsa  hominis  essentia  est  conatus 
"  quo  unusquisque  suum  esse  conservare 
"  conatur.  .  .  .  Yirtus  hominis  est  ipsa 
"  hominis  essentia,  quatenus  a  solo  conatu 
"  suum  esse  conservandi  definitur.  .  .  . 
"  Felicitas  in  eo  consistit  quod  homo 
"  suum  esse  conservare  potest.  .  .  . 
"  Lsetitia  est  hominis  transitio  ad 
"  majorem  perfectionem.  .  .  .  Tristitia 
"  est  hominis  transitio  ad  minorem  per- 
"  fectionem.  (Man's  very  essence  is  the 
"  effort  wherewith  each  man  strives  to 
"  maintain  his  own  being.  .  .  .  Man's 
"  virtue  is  this  very  essence,  so  far  as  it  is 
"  defined  by  this  single  effort  to  maintain 
"  man's  being.  .  .  .  Happiness  consists 
"  in  a  man's  being  able  to  maintain  his 
"  own  being.  .  .  .  Joy  is  man's  passage 
"  to  a  greater  perfection.  .  .  .  Sorrow 
"  is  man's  passage  to  a  lesser  perfec- 
"  tion.) " 

It  seems  to  me  that  by  neither  of  these, 
his  grand  characteristic  doctrines,  is 
Spinoza  truly  Hebrew  or  truly  Christian. 
His  denial  of  final  causes  is  essentially 
alien  to  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament, 
and  his  cheerful  and  self-sufficing  stoicism 
is  essentially  alien  to  the  spirit  of  the 
New.  The  doctrine  that  "  God  directs 
nature,  not  according  as  the  particular 
laws  of  human  nature,  but  according  as 
the  universal  laws  of  nature  require,"  is 
at  utter  variance  with  that  Hebrew  mode 
of  representing  God's  dealings,  which 
makes  the  locusts  visit  Egypt  to  punish 
Pharaoh's  hardness  of  heart,  and  the 
falling  dew  avert  itself  from  the  fleece 
of  Gideon.  The  doctrine  that  "  all  sor- 
row is  a  passage  to  a  lesser  perfection  " 
is  at  utter  variance  with  the  Christian 


recognition  of  the  blessedness  of  sorrow, 
working  "  repentance  to  salvation  not  to 
be  repented  of;"  of  sorrow  which,  in 
Dante's  words,  "remarries  us  to  God." 
Spinoza's  repeated  and  earnest  assertions 
that  the  love  of  God  is  man's  summum 
bomtm  do  not  remove  the  fundamental 
diversity  between  his  doctrine  and  the 
Hebrew  and  Christian  doctrines.  By 
the  love  of  God  he  does  not  mean  the 
same  thing  as  the  Hebrew  and  Christian 
religions  mean  by  the  love  of  God.  He 
makes  the  love  of  God  to  consist  in  the 
knowledge  of  God ;  and,  as  we  know 
God  only  through  his  manifestation  of 
himself  in  the  laws  of  nature,  it  is -by 
knowing  these  laws  that  we  love  God, 
and  the  more  we  know  them  the  more 
we  love  him.  This  may  be  true,  but 
this  is  not  what  the  Christian  means  by 
the  love  of  God.  Spinoza's  ideal  is  the 
intellectual  life  ;  the  Christian's  ideal  is 
the  religious  life.  Between  the  two 
states  there  is  all  the  difference  which 
there  is  between  the  being  in  love, 
and  the  following,  with  delighted  com- 
prehension, a  demonstration  of  Euclid. 
For  Spinoza,  undoubtedly,  the  crown  of 
the  intellectual  life  is  a  transport,  as  for 
the  saint  the  crown  of  the  religious  life 
is  a  transport ;  but  the  two  transports 
are  not  the  same. 

This  is  true  ;  yet  it  is  true,  also,  that 
by  thus  crowning  the  intellectual  life 
with  a  sacred  transport,  by  thus  retaining 
in  philosophy,  amid  the  discontented 
murmurs  of  all  the  army  of  atheism, 
the  name  of  God,  Spinoza  maintains  a 
profound  affinity  with  that  which  is 
truest  in  religion,  and  inspires  an  inde- 
structible interest.  "  It  is  true,"  one  may 
say  to  the  wise  and  devout  Christian, 
"  Spinoza's  conception  of  beatitude  is 
not  yours,  and  cannot  satisfy  you ;  but 
whose  conception  of  beatitude  would 
you  accept  as  satisfying?  Not  even 
that  of  the  devoutest  of  your  fellow- 
Christians.  Era  Angelico,  the  sweetest 
and  most  inspired  of  devout  souls,  has 
given  us,  in  his  great  picture  of  the 
'  Last  Judgment,'  his  conception  of 
beatitude.  The  elect  are  going  round 
in  a  ring  on  long  grass  under  laden  fruit 
trees;  two  of  them,  more  restless  than 


142 


A  Word  more  about  Spinoza. 


the  others,  are  flying  up  a  battlemented 
street — a  street  blank  with  all  the  ennui 
of  the  Middle  Ages.  Across  a  gulf  is 
visible,  for  the  delectation  of  the  saints, 
a  blazing  caldron  in  which  Beelzebub 
is  sousing  the  damned.  This  is  hardly 
more  your  conception  of  beatitude  than 
Spinoza's  is.  But  'in  my  Father's 
house  are  many  mansions ;'  only,  to 
reach  any  one  of  these  mansions,  are 
needed  the  wings  of  a  genuine  sacred 
transport,  of  an  '  immortal  longing.' " 
These  wings  Spinoza  had ;  and  because 
he  had  them  he  horrifies  a  certain 
school  of  bis  admirers  by  talking  of 
"God"  where  they  talk  of  "forces," 
and  by  talking  of  "  the  love  of  God  " 
where  they  talk  of  "  a  rational  curi- 
osity." 

One  of  these  admirers,  M.  Van 
Vloten,  has  recently  published  at  Am- 
sterdam a  supplementary  volume  to 
Spinoza's  works,  containing  the  interest- 
ing document  of  Spinoza's  sentence  of 
excommunication,  from  which  I  have 
already  quoted,  and  containing,  besides, 
several  lately  found  works  alleged  to  be 
Spinoza's,  which  seem  to  me  to  be  of 
doubtful  authenticity,  and,  even  if  au- 
thentic, of  no  great  importance.  M.  Van 
Vloten  (who,  let  me  be  permitted  to  say 
in  passing,  writes  a  Latin  which  would 
make  one  think  that  the  art  of  writing 
Latin  must  be  now  a  lost  art  in  the 
country  of  Lipsius)  is  very  anxious 
that  Spinoza's  unscientific  retention  of 
the  name  of  God  should  not  afflict  his 
reader  with  any  doubts  as  to  his  perfect 
scientific  orthodoxy. 

"  It  is  a  great  mistake,"  he  cries — 
"  to  disparage  Spinoza  as  merely  one 
"  of  the  dogmatists  before  Kant.  By 


"  keeping  the  name  of  God,  while  he 
"  did  away  with  his  person  and  cha- 
"  racter,  he  has  done  himself  injustice. 
"  Those  who  look  to  the  bottom  of 
"  things  will  see  that,  long  ago  as  he 
"  lived,  he  had  even  then  reached  the 
"  point  to  which  the  post-Hegelian 
"  philosophy  and  the  study  of  natural 
"  science  has  only  just  brought  our  own 
"  times.  Leibnitz  expressed  his  appre- 
"  hension  lest  those  who  did  away 
"  with  final  causes  should  do  away  with 
"  God  at  the  same  time.  But  it  is  in 
"  his  having  done  away  with  final 
"  causes,  and  with  God  along  with  them, 
"  that  Spinoza's  true  merit  consists." 

Now,  it  must  be  remarked,  that  to 
use  Spinoza's  denial  of  final  causes  in 
order  to  identify  him  with  the  Coryphaei 
of  atheism  is  to  make  a  false  use  of 
Spinoza's  denial  of  final  causes,  just  as 
to  use  his  assertion  of  the  all-import- 
ance of  loving  God  to  identify  him 
with  the  saints  would  be  to  make  a 
false  use  of  his  assertion  of  the  all- 
importance  of  loving  God.  He  is  no 
more  to  be  identified  with  the  post- 
Hegelian  philosophers  than  he  is  to  be 
identified  with  St.  Augustine.  Nay, 
when  M.  Van  Vloten  violently  presses 
the  parallel  with  the  post-Hegelians, 
one  feels  that  the  parallel  with  St. 
Augustine  is  the  far  truer  one.  Com- 
pared with  the  soldier  of  irreligion 
M.  Van  Vloten  would  have  him  to  be, 
Spinoza  is  religious.  His  own  language 
about  himself,  about  his  aspirations 
and  his  course,  are  true  :  his  foot  is  in 
the  vera  vita,  his  eye  on  the  beatific 
vision. 

MATTHEW  ARXOLD. 


143 


DEAD  MEN  WHOM  I  HAVE  K^OWN;   OE,  RECOLLECTION 
OF  THEEE  CITIES. 


BY  THE   EDITOR. 


THE  REV.  DR.  JAMES  KEDD. 


THIRTY  years  ago  there  was  to  be  seen 
walking  slowly  almost  at  any  time  every 
day  through  the  streets  of  Aberdeen  a 
venerable  old  grey-headed  man,  of  mas- 
sive build  and  peculiarly  dignified  ap- 
pearance, in  handsome  clerical  costume 
ending  in  fine  black-silk  stockings,  very 
erect  in  gait,  and  looking  before  him,  or 
to  the  right  and  left,  as  he  advanced, 
with  an  air  of  authority  and  portly 
courage.  Had  you  followed  him,  you 
would  have  seen,  by  the  respectful  de- 
meanour of  those  whom  he  met,  that 
his  authority  was  recognised.  You 
would  have  seen  hats  touched  to  him, 
frankly  or  sheepishly,  according  to  the 
rank  and  character  of  the  owners;  you 
would  have  seen  heads  turned  to  look 
after  him ;  occasionally,  if  your  powers 
of  observation  had  been  very  sharp, 
you  would  have  noticed,  in  some  street- 
group  of  the  idler  and  more  lowering 
sort,  a  look  of  uneasiness  at  beholding 
him  approaching,  a  disposition  to  break 
up  and  turn  down  any  convenient  court 
or  cross-street  so  as  to  avoid  him,  or,  if 
that  could  not  be,  a  feeling  of  relief 
when  he  had  passed  and  had  not  ad- 
ministered to  them  a  gratuitous  blow- 
ing-up. Among  the  children,  on  the 
contrary,  you  would  have  seen  a  wonder- 
ful attraction  towards  him,  a  wonderful 
habit  of  finding  out  by  rumour  among 
themselves  when  he  was  anywhere  near, 
and  of  gathering  from  the  side-streets 
or  even  from  the  houses  so  as  to  place 
themselves  in  his  way.  Their  manner, 
or  at  least  that  of  the  boys,  was  to  place 
themselves,  three  or  four  together,  a 
few  feet  in  advance  of  him  on  the  pave- 
ment, and  to  wait  stock-still  with  their 
caps  off  till  he  came  up,  Avhen  invariably 
he  put  his  hand  on  each  little  waiting 


head  with  this  word  of  blessing,  "Be 
all  good,"  "Be  all  good."  In  any  of 
the  more  crowded  thoroughfares  his 
walk  was  a  regular  succession  of  these 
kindly  Be-all-goods  and  pattings  -of 
young  heads ;  and  such  mystic  virtue 
was  supposed  to  lie  in  the  Doctor's 
blessing  and  head-patting  that  little 
rogues  have  been  known  to  secure  a 
double  share  of  it  fraudulently  by  bolting 
off  after  the  first  Be-all-good,  running 
hastily  round  a  few  streets,  and  placing 
themselves  a  second  time  in  the  Doctor's 
way,  with  all  imaginable  gravity,  so  as 
to  be  Be-all-gooded  over  again.  But 
this  was  felt  to  be  a  bold  act;  and 
what  might  be  the  consequences  if  the 
Doctor,  who  was  very  wide-awake, 
should  detect  one  filching  a  second 
blessing  from  him  on  false  pretences, 
was  a  thought  of  some  alarm. 

The  title  of  "The  Doctor,"  which  I 
have  already  given  to  this  local  worthy, 
was  one  specially  his.  Doctors  of  various 
kinds  were  plentiful  enough  in  the  town, 
then  as  now ;  but,  if  you  had  spoken  of 
"  The  Doctor,"  then,  unless  the  context 
had  implied  that  you  were  speaking  of 
the  particular  medical  man  attending 
some  case,  you  would  have  been  under- 
stood— at  least  in  that  large  quarter  of 
the  town  which  saw  most  of  him — to 
mean  the  Rev.  Dr.  Kidd.  By  that 
fuller  designation  which  he  himself 
liked  to  use  on  formal  occasions,  he  was 
"James  Kidd,  D.D.,  L.L.O.O.P."  ;  and 
portraits  of  him,  in  his  clerical  gown 
and  bands,  with  this  designation  under- 
neath, in  facsimile  of  his  own  elegant 
and  flowing  handwriting,  were  common 
enough  in  the  booksellers'  windows  in 
the  town,  and  in  the  houses  of  private 
families.  Copies  of  these  portraits, 


144 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


either  by  themselves,  or  prefixed  to 
certain  books  which  the  doctor  had 
written,  had  even  travelled  out  of  Aber- 
deen into  parts  where  the  rumour  of 
him  had  spread;  and,  latterly,  local 
sculpture  took  possession  of  him,  and 
produced  a  life-size  bust,  copies  of  which 
in  plaster  were  bought  by  even  poor 
people  out  of  affection  for  the  original. 
I  remember  one  of  these  busts  which, 
to  prevent  the  effects  of  dust  upon  it  in 
its  pure  white  state,  the  family  possess- 
ing it  had  caused  to  be  painted  jet- 
black.  The  "D.D.,  L.L.O.O.P."  did 
not  appear,  of  course,  on  the  busts,  but 
only  in  the  engraved  portraits.  The 
last  five  letters  of  this  designation  ex- 
pressed (according  to  the  device  in  such 
cases  of  signifying  a  plural  by  the  re- 
duplication of  a  letter)  one  of  the  two 
official  capacities  in  which  the  Doctor 
was  and  had  long  been  known  in  Aber- 
deen— -Linguarum  Orientalium  Pro- 
fessor, or  Professor  of  Oriental  Lan- 
guages in  Marischal  College.  But,  though 
actually  fulfilling  the  duties  of  this 
office,  and  teaching  Hebrew  every  winter- 
session  to  considerable  classes  of  di- 
vinity-students congregated  in  Marischal 
College  from  the  whole  north  of  Scot- 
land, Dr.  Kidd  was  far  better  known  to 
the  community  at  large  in  his  other  and 
more  popular  capacity  as  minister  of 
Gilcomston  Chapel — a  very  large,  plain, 
square-built  place  of  worship  in  the 
north-west  of  the  town,  and  the  centre 
of  what  was  in  fact  a  large  parish, 
although  nominally  it  had  not  then  the 
full  rights  of  a  parish,  but  was  an  eccle- 
siastical district  cut  out  of  the  vast 
parish  of  Old  Machar.  Though,  as  minis- 
ter of  such  a  "  chapel  of  ease  "  to  one  of 
the  parishes  of  the  Presbytery,  Dr.  Kidd 
had  not  a  seat  in  the  Presbytery,  he 
was,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  co- 
Presbyter  of  the  city-clergy,  and,  in 
popular  repute,  more  illustrious  in  his 
way,  more  a  king  in  the  place,  than  all 
the  rest  put  together.  For  one  thing, 
the  congregation  of  Gilcomston  Chapel 
was  the  largest  in  the  neighbourhood, 
perhaps  the  largest  in  the  whole  of 
Scotland  ;  and,  as  minister  of  this  con- 
gregation, even  though  it  consisted 


mainly  of  the  poorer  and  respectable 
middle  sort — as  holding  it  together  by 
his  influence,  and  giving  it  celebrity  far 
and  near  by  the  wonderful  three  ser- 
mons with  which  he  roused  it  every 
Sabbath,  and  of  which  stray  comers 
might  have  the  benefit  if  they  did  not 
object  to  standing  in  the  passages  among 
the  red-cloaked  old  women  and  the  poor 
old  men  who  statedly  occupied  the 
stools  and  benches  there  and  hung  on 
the  Doctor's  lips — if  only  as  minister 
of  such  a  congregation,  Dr.  Kidd  was 
no  ordinary  local  power,  but  the  head 
of  a  constituency  whose  enthusiasm  for 
him  would,  if  necessary,  have  swamped 
the  rest  of  the  town  in  his  behalf.  But 
there  was  no  such  necessity.  Although 
it  was  the  Gilcomston  district  that  mus- 
tered immediately  round  him  and  swore 
by  him  daily  in  all  things,  the  whole 
town  looked  at  him  fondly  in  the  streets, 
and  felt  a  kind  of  property  in  him.  In 
other  parts  of  the  country  he  was  known 
as  "  Dr.  Kidd  of  Aberdeen  "  ;  and,  had 
the  dimensions  of  Gilcomston  Chapel 
and  the  distances  of  the  town  allowed 
it,  I  verily  believe  that  the  reality  would 
have  corresponded  with  the  name,  and 
that  at  least  the  whole  populace  of  the 
place — using  that  word  to  exclude  the 
wealthy,  the  fastidious  in  habit,  and  the 
lovers  of  theology  only  in  its  cold- 
drawn  forms — would  have  belonged  to 
Kidd's  congregation.  At  all  events,  the 
children  all  through  the  town,  no  matter 
in  what  parish  or  locality,  gathered 
round  his  footsteps  for  his  well-known 
blessing.  To  young  and  old  no  living 
figure  in  the  town  was  so  familiar  as  his. 
No  man  was  perhaps  ever  known  by 
sight  to  all  London  except  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  whose  nose  and  face  of 
white  bone  proclaimed  him  even  where 
he  had  never  been  seen  before.  By  no 
such  inference  from  his  portraits,  but 
by  repeated  actual  vision  of  his  portly 
figure  and  his  handsome  silk-stockings, 
his  white  face  that  must  have  once  had 
much  of  the  sanguine  in  it,  and  that 
even  in  his  old  age  was  full  and  well- 
fleshed  rather  than  bony,  his  amorphous 
rather  than  aquiline  nose,  his  white  hair 
now  thinned  to  baldness  at  and  over  the 


Or,  Recollections  of  TJiree  Cities. 


145 


temples,  and  his  rich  Irish  eyes,  every 
soul  in  Aberdeen  that  knew  anything  at 
all  knew  Dr.  Kidd. 

His  rich  Irish  eyes  !  I  see  them  now 
as  such  in  a  portrait  before  me  ;  in  which 
also  I  seem  to  recognise  a  something 
Irish  in  the  general  cast  of  the  face — 
though  no  such  thing  occurred  to  me  in 
those  almost  infant  days  when  I  first 
gazed  upon  the  Doctor  in  his  pulpit  or 
elsewhere.  Irish,  English,  and  Scotch 
were  then  all  one  to  me,  I  suppose ;  and 
I  had  not  heard  of  the  doctrine  of 
races.  But  now  it  seems  to  me  as  if  I 
could  sum  up,  to  my  own  satisfaction, 
a  good  deal  of  what  I  remember  of 
Kidd's  peculiar  power,  and  of  the  nature 
of  his  influence,  by  recollecting  that  he 
•was  an  Irishman  among  the  Aberdo- 
niaris.  Such,  in  fact,  he  was. 

Born  in  County  Down,  in  1761,  of 
poor  Protestant  parents — who,  though 
they  were  probably  of  Scottish  or 
English  descent,  had  become  Irish 
enough  by  naturalization  in  all  save 
religion — Kidd  had  been  tossed  about 
the  world  for  thirty-two  years  of  his 
life,  a  resolute  Irish  adventurer,  before 
that  fate  which  makes  such  odd  mar- 
riages of  men  with  the  places  where 
they  are  needed,  planted  him  in  hard- 
headed  Aberdeen.  Till  his  twenty- 
third  year  he  had  remained  in  Ireland 
— in  his  childhood,  left  to  the  care  of 
his  poor  pious  mother,  who  had  removed 
with  him  and  his  two  brothers  to  her 
own  county  of  Antrim,  and  of  whose 
first  instructions  of  him  in  the  Bible  he 
had  a  warm  memory  to  the  last ;  then, 
in  his  boyhood,  struggling  into  Latin 
with  the  help  of  what  chance-schooling 
could  be  had  for  a  poor  widow's  son, 
and  looking  forward  to  the  time  when 
he  might  attain  the  height  of  his  ambi- 
tion and  be  a  preacher  ;  then,  in  youth, 
while  still  eager  for  self-improvement, 
and  especially  for  a  grasp  of  English 
grammar  and  elocution,  himself  setting 
up  a  poor  sort  of  school  for  farmers' 
children,  and,  in  a  short  time,  a  more 
flourishing  one,  on  the  strength  of  which 
he  married  a  farmer's  daughter.  It  was 
a  very  early  marriage  ;  and,  the  outlook 
in  Ireland  being  but  meagre,  Kidd  and 

Kb.  50. — VOL.  ix. 


his  wife,  with  what  litttle  money  they 
had,  emigrated  to  America  in  1784. 
His  stay  in  the  United  States,  where  he 
landed  without  a  single  letter  of  intro- 
duction, extended  over  some  years. 
During  these  years — forming  the  second 
or  American  period  of  his  life — he 
shifted  about  a  good  deal  as  he  could 
find  employment  in  teaching  ;  but  at 
length  he  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where 
he  first  opened  an  academy  of  his  own, 
and  afterwards  was  attached  as  usher  to 
Pennsylvania  College,  eking  out  a  live- 
lihood for  his  family  by  acting  at  the 
same  time  as  corrector  of  the  press 
for  a  printer  in  good  business.  It 
was  the  sight  of  the  Hebrew  charac- 
ter in  the  course  of  his  duties  in 
the  printing-office  that  first  set  him 
upon  learning  Hebrew.  "With  such 
passion  did  he  take  to  the  study 
that,  one  day,  going  to  buy  a  new  suit 
of  clothes  which  he  much  wanted 
and  for  which  he  had  painfully  saved 
the  money,  the  recollection  of  a  Hebrew 
Bible  he  had  often  looked  at  wistfully 
in  a  Dutch  bookseller's  shop- window 
proved  too  much  for  him,  the  bookseller 
baulked  the  tailor,  and  the  new  suit 
was  postponed  indefinitely  in  favour  of 
the  Bible.  What  with  private  labour, 
what  with  the  help  of  a  Portuguese 
Jew  (who  fleeced  him  awfully  for  his 
lessons),  and  what  with  incessant  at- 
tendance on  Friday  evenings  in  the 
Jewish  synagogue  in  Philadelphia,  he 
seems  really  at  this  time  to  have  ac- 
quired an  unusual  practical  fluency  in 
the  Hebrew  tongue,  if  not  the  kind  of 
acquaintance  with  it  that  would  now 
satisfy  a  sound  orientalist.  A  certain 
restlessness  ensued  from  the  new  pos- 
session. His  mind  was  divided  between 
two  projects — the  project  of  a  journey 
in  Syria  and  the  East  generally,  that  he 
might  plunge  more  deeply  into  the 
Oriental  tongues ;  and  the  project  of  a 
migration  for  a  time  to  Scotland,  to 
qualify  himself  for  the  ministry  by  the 
study  of  Divinity  under  the  then  cele- 
brated biblical  commentator,  Dr.  John 
Brown  of  Haddington.  But,  by 
this  time,  Kidd  had  made  friends  in 
America.  I  think  he  knew  Jefferson ; 

L 


146 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


at  all  events,  he  knew  Dr.  Benjamin 
Bush,  the  celebrated  physician  and  poli- 
tician; among  the  clergy  and  college- 
men  of  Pennsylvania  and  other  States 
he  had  not  a  few  acquaintances ;  and 
among  the  pupils  he  had  trained  in 
Philadelphia  was  at  least  one  whose 
name  the  Americans  remember — Com- 
modore Decatur,  afterwards  killed  in  a 
duel.  These  friends  remonstrated  with 
Kidd.  Why  should  he  quit  America  ? 
Dr.  Rush  succeeded  in  driving  one  of 
his  projects — that  of  a  visit  to  the  East 
— out  of  his  head.  "  I  think  I  see 
'  you,"  he  said  to  the  young  Irishman, 
'  returned  to  America  after  your  tour 
'  in  Asia,  and  doing  what  1 — lecturing 
'  to  empty  benches.  A  tour  in  Asia  1 
1  No,  no !  Study  men  and  things 
'  where  you  are."  But  the  other  pro- 
ject, of  a  visit  to  Scotland,  to  learn 
Presbyterian  theology  at  the  fountain- 
head,  was  not  given  up.  Leaving  his 
wife  and  children  in  America,  he  did 
recross  the  Atlantic,  carrying  with  him 
letters  from  Dr.  Eush  to  some  of  the 
Edinburgh  notables.  By  their  advice, 
or  on  his  own  motion,  he  began  now, 
when  about  thirty  years  of  age,  to  make 
up  his  leeway  in  regular  academic 
training  by  attending  the  principal 
classes  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh 
— Hill's  Latin  lectures,  Dalzell's  Greek, 
Dugald  Stewart's  in  Moral  Philosophy, 
and  even  Black's  in  Chemistry  and 
Monro's  in  Anatomy — supporting  him- 
self the  while  by  setting  up,  with  some 
tclat,  extra -collegiate  classes  in  the 
Oriental  languages.  Dr.  John  Brown 
being  dead — instruction  under  whom 
would  have  implied  attachment  to  one 
of  the  bodies  of  Presbyterian  Dissenters 
in  Scotland — Kidd  had  so  far  changed 
his  mind  on  that  subject  as  to  enter 
himself  also  in  the  theological  classes 
of  the  University,  in  training  for  the 
ministry  of  the  Established  Scottish 
Church.  It  was  still  probably  his  in- 
tention, when  this  training  should  have 
been  completed,  to  return  to  America. 
But  the  Aberdonian  Fates  were  on  the 
look-out  for  him.  There  chanced  to 
die  a  certain  Dr.  Donaldson,  who  was 
Professor  of  Oriental  Languages  in 


Marischal  College,  Aberdeen ;  the  pa- 
tronage of  this  office,  according  to  the 
curious  habits  of  those  days,  chanced  to 
belong  to  a  private  Scottish  gentleman, 
Sir  Alexander  Eanisay  of  Balmain ; 
Hebraists  were  probably  then  not  nu- 
merous in  Scotland ;  and,  Kidd  having 
been  recommended  to  Sir  Alexander  by 
the  Edinburgh  people,  the  chair  was 
his.  Sending  to  America  for  his  wife 
and  children,  he  went  to  Aberdeen,  in 
October,  1793,  when  he  was  just  thirty- 
two  years  of  age.  He  began  his  duties 
as  L.L.O.O.P.  in  Marischal  College  that 
winter,  still  as  a  layman ;  but — the  due 
amount  of  attendance  on  the  theological 
lectures  of  his  colleague,  Principal 
Campbell,  of  Marischal  College,  and  of 
Dr.  Gerard,  of  King's,  having  com- 
pleted his  theological  courses  begun  in 
Edinburgh — he  was  licensed  by  the 
Presbytery  of  Aberdeen,  and  became  a 
preacher  as  well  as  a  professor.  For 
some  years  he  held  the  post  of  Evening 
Lecturer  in  Trinity  Chapel,  a  newly- 
built  chapel  in  the  Shiprow ;  but,  in 
1801,  the  congregation  of  Gilcomston 
Chapel  invited  him  to  be  their  pastor, 
and  thus  brought  him,  at  the  age  of 
forty,  into  the  exact  place  fore-ordained 
for  him,  though  he  had  reached  it  by  so 
long  a  circumbendibus.  It  was  not  till 
1818  that  his  American  friends,  with 
whom  he  still  kept  up  a  correspondence, 
sent  him 'over  a  D.D.  from  the  College 
of  New  Jersey  to  add  to  his  L.L.O.O.P., 
and  so  changed  him,  in  popular  nomen- 
clature, from  the  Rev.  Professor  into 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Kidd. 

I  can  hardly  conceive  a  greater  in- 
congruity of  a  bit  of  fresh  substance 
with  a  pre-existing  element  into  which 
it  had  been  suddenly  intruded,  than 
must  have  been  presented  by  Kidd's 
first  appearance  among  the  Aberdonians. 
Everything  must  have  been  against  him. 
He  was  Irish ;  and,  if  there  is  any 
portion  of  Great  Britain  the  population 
of  which  is  the  reverse  of  Irish,  and 
where  one  might  say  d,  priori  that  no 
Irish  need  apply,  or  would  find  them- 
selves at  home  if  they  did  apply, 
it  is  Aberdeen  and  its  neighbourhood. 
Then  he  was  not  only  an  Irishman, 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


147 


but,  as  it  seemed,  a  restless  Irishman 
— one  who  had  not  gone  through  a 
regular  education  for  the  ministry  in 
the  routine  way  and  at  the  usual  age, 
but  had  been  in  America,  colleaguing 
with  Portuguese  Jews,  and  doing  no- 
body knew  what,  and  had  been  flung 
back  again  almost  in  mature  man- 
hood to  be  polished  up  in  the  ologies  and 
turned  into  a  parson.  Now  the  Aber- 
donians  have  faith  in  routine  :  they  like 
all  things  done  decently  and  in  order ; 
and,  where  they  have  not  the  means  of 
satisfying  themselves  by  actual  inquiry, 
they  are  apt  to  suspect  that  things  may 
be  wrong.  To  set  against  these  difficul- 
ties in  Kidd's  way  there  was  certainly 
in  his  favour  the  fact  that  Sir  Alexander 
Ramsay  of  Balmain  had  promoted  him 
to  the  Hebrew  Professorship.  A  Pro- 
fessor in  Aberdeen  is  a  somebody  socially, 
I  can  tell  you,  whatever  he  is  Professor 
of ;  and,  as  to  the  Professorship  of 
Oriental  Languages — why,  it  was  hardly 
to  be  expected  in  those  days  that  a  man 
could  be  found  for  that  post  who  had 
not  been  going  to  and  fro  on  the  earth, 
and  who  had  not  some  bee  in  his  bonnet 
So,  in  his  Professorship  of  Hebrew  in 
Marischal  College,  Kidd  did  have  a  start 
among  the  Aberdonians.  As  far  as  I 
know,  however,  it  was  not,  in  any  great 
degree,  by  his  activity  in  this  capacity 
that  he  wove  himself  forward  into  that 
extraordinary  and  all-dominant  popu- 
larity in  the  town  which  he  ultimately 
attained,  and  which  he  had  exercised 
long  before  I  knew  him  in  his  old  age. 
He  is  said,  indeed,  to  have  given  a 
stimulus  to  the  study  of  Hebrew  in  the 
North  of  Scotland  ;  but,  from  what  I 
have  heard  from,  students  of  his  in  the 
later  days  of  his  Professorship,  I  should 
infer  that  he  had  never  been  of  the  pro- 
foundest  or  most  accurate  as  an  Oriental 
scholar,  and  that,  though  he  may  have 
talked  quaintly  and  with  alax  enthusiasm 
to  his  classes  on  points  of  Hebrew  gram- 
mar and  Biblical  interpretation,  he  had 
by  that  time  been  left  behind,  as  a 
Hebraist,  by  younger  pioneers.  But,  in 
truth,  Kidd  as  a  teacher  of  Hebrew, 
Kidd  among  the  points,  was  not  the 
Kidd  about  whom  the  community  cared, 


and  in  whose  influence  they  came  to 
revel.  It  was  by  his  powers  of  pulpit- 
oratory,  first  brought  to  bear  by  him  on 
the  town  in  his  five  years  of  probationary 
evening-lecturing  in  Trinity  Chapel,  and 
then  transferred,  in  1801,  to  that  great 
congregation  of  Gilcomston  Chapel  with 
which  his  name  was  permanently  asso- 
ciated— it  was  by  these  powers  of  pulpit- 
oratory,  exercised  through  a  period  of 
forty  years,  and  by  the  force  at  the  same 
tune  of  a  most  vigorous  and  original 
personality,  exerted  in  a  thousand  ways, 
and  at  first  against  violent  opposition,  on 
the  miscellaneous  economy  of  the  town, 
that  he  had  become  the  venerable  and 
much-loved  Dr.  Kidd  whom  I  remember. 
He  was  then  past  his  seventieth  year, 
though  still  hale  and  in  unabated  energy. 
He  was  far  from  rich  in  worldly  goods,  and 
had  had  his  losses  and  difficulties  ;  but, 
on  the  whole,  he  had  made  the  ends 
meet.  He  had  had  sore  family  troubles, 
which  were  still  matters  of  hushed 
rumour  ;  but  his  buoyant  spirit  had  sur- 
mounted them,  and,  save  among  the 
brutal  who  have  their  snouts  always 
among  such  personalities,  no  reproach 
had,  on  this  account,  attached  to  him. 
And  so,  taking  him  as  I  remember  him, 
let  me  mention  some  of  the  causes 
which,  as  I  conceive,  may  have  been 
concerned  in  transmuting  the  Irish 
stranger,  who  had  arrived  in  Aberdeen 
in  the  old  days  of  Beattie  and  Gerard 
and  Campbell,  into  that  venerable  figure 
in  whom  the  whole  enlarged  modern 
town  felt  a  property,  whose  very  blow- 
ings-up  seemed  native  Aberdonian 
breezes,  and  whose  Irish  origin  had 
been  so  forgotten  that  he  was  identified 
with  the  town,  and  people  in  the  other 
counties,  when  he  went  among  them  on 
Communion-occasions  to  assist  their 
parish-ministers,  spoke  of  him  and 
thought  of  him  as  Dr.  Kidd  of  Aber- 
deen. 

Moderatism  and  Evangelicalism  have 
been  terrible  words  in  Scotland  for 
more  than  a  generation.  Guelph  and 
Ghibelline  in  mediaeval  Italy  did  not 
denote  a  more  necessary  distinction 
•  than  Moderate  and  Evangelical  did  re- 
cently in  Scotland.  It  was  a  natural 


148 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


polarization.  If  you  "were  not  a  Mo- 
derate you  were  an  Evangelical,  and  if 
you  were  not  an  Evangelical  you  were 
a  Moderate ;  and  not  the  less  were  you  the 
one  or  the  other,  although  you  might  not 
yourself  know  which  you  were.  To  my 
shame  be  it  said,  it  was  not  till  I  was 
older  than  I  ought  to  have  been  at  the 
time  of  my  enlightenment  as  to  the 
meaning  of  this  important  distinction — 
not,  in  fact,  till  Xidd  was  several  years 
dead — that  I  first  heard  of  the  distinc- 
tion. How  I  escaped  the  knowledge  so 
long  is  now  a  mystery  to  me,  for  I  was 
not  uninquisitive,  and,  though  the 
names  were  unrevealed  to  me,  I  must 
have  been  in  the  middle  of  the  double- 
bodied  actuality.  But  so  it  was.  I  first 
heard  the'  words  "Moderate"  and 
11  Evangelical,"  in  their  party  sense, 
when  I  joined  a  debating-society,  the 
discussions  in  which  were  often,  though 
not  exclusively,  theological.  The  first 
evening  of  my  membership,  one  of  the 
older  members,  anxious  for  a  new  vote 
on  his  side  in  the  terrific  divisions  that 
took  place  on  the  theological  questions, 
sat  down  beside  me,  as  a  recruiting-ser- 
geant might,  and  asked  coaxingly,  "  Are 
you  an  Evangelical  or  a  Moderate  ? " 
It  was  a  trying  moment  for  a  youngster 
anxious  not  to  appear  more  green  than 
his  neighbours  when  he  had  just  been 
elected  to  an  august  body.  I  remember 
I  tried  back  mentally  among  the  ety- 
mologies of  the  two  adjectives,  to  see  if 
any  light  could  be  got  by  that  process. 
But  no  light  came.  It  seemed  a  de- 
cidedly good  thing,  even  a  splendid 
thing,  to  be  an  "  Evangelical ;"  but  it 
did  not  seem  a  bad  thing  to  be  a  "  Mo- 
derate," and  I  could  not  see  why  the 
virtue  involved  in  this  respectable  ad- 
jective should  be  excluded  by  an  affec- 
tion for  the  other.  So  I  had  presence 
of  mind  to  extricate  myself,  more  Scotico, 
by  putting  my  mouth  close  to  the  ear 
of  my  questioner,  and  whispering  em- 
phatically "  Which  are  you  ?  "  He  told 
me  right  off,  and  with  some  passion,  that 
he  was  a  Moderate,  as  all  sensible  people 
were  ;  and,  as  I  knew  him  slightly,  and 
had  then  a  concrete  specimen  of  Modera- ' 
tism  at  my  elbow,  a  glimmering  dawned 


upon  me,  as  I  looked  at  him,  of  what 
Moderatism  in  the  abstract  might  be. 
Not  that  I  should  not  have  been  wrong 
if  I  had  concluded  that  I  knew  the 
physiognomy  of  a  Moderate  once  and 
for  ever  from  this  one  instance.  This  very 
person  became  afterwards  an  intense 
Evangelical,  and  even  died  a  martyr,  in 
some  sense,  to  the  service  of  his  views 
of  Evangelicism.  He  was  one  of  the 
younger  Eree-Church  ministers  at  the 
disruption  ;  and,  his  charge  then  lying 
in  a  part  of  Dumfriesshire  where  the 
hostility  of  the  landed-proprietors  to 
the  Free-Church  denied  building-sites 
to  the  outgoing  congregations,  and  com- 
pelled them,  to  worship  for  some  time 
in  the  open  air,  he  caught  his  death 
from,  exposure  to  rain  and  sleet  in  per- 
forming his  duties. 

Perhaps  I  have  come  to  understand 
better  since  that  time  why  there  should 
have  been  this  distinction  between 
Evangelical  and  Moderate,  why  so  much 
was  made  of  it  in  the  small  region  of 
North  Britain,  and  with  what  perennial 
polarity  in  the  constitution  of  men  and 
things  on  a  broader  scale  it  corresponded. 

Whether  a  man's  view  of  the  uni- 
verse includes  mainly  the  solids  and  the 
liquids,  or  whether  it  takes  account  also 
of  the  gases  and  the  imponderables — or, 
to  state  the  thing  less  unfairly,  whether 
a  man's  principles  of  life  are  the  best 
and  surest  conclusions  he  can  form 
from  what  is  within  the  sphere  of  his 
sensible  and  reasonable  ken,  or  whether 
he  imports  among  them  mysteries  of  a 
higher  metaphysics,  which  he  calls  in- 
tuitions, but  which  his  critics  may 
perhaps  call  phantasies  or  hallucinations 
— this  has  always  been,  according  to 
philosophers,  a  constitutional  difference 
among  human  beings  at  large,  as  well  as 
among  philosophers  themselves.  In  an 
article  in  the  Saturday  Review  the 
other  day,  there  was  an  ingenious 
attempt  to  make  the  nature  of  the 
difference  plain  by  transferring  it  to  the 
world  of  dogs.  Which  would  be  the 
wiser  dog,  the  writer  virtually  asked — 
a  dog  that  had  formed  his  principles 
carefully  and  soundly  from  all  the  facts 
within  his  dog-experience;  or  another 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


149 


dog  that  somehow  brought  into  his 
consciousness  and  principles  of  action 
some  vehement  intuitions  or  averments 
respecting  the  real  nature  and  relations 
of  that  superior  world  of  man  which  he 
dimly  perceived  as  a  boundless  grandeur 
above  him  ]  Knowing  as  we  do  what 
a  much  vaster  arch  of  things  the  world 
of  man  comprehends  than  that  of  a  dog, 
we  should  necessarily  conclude,  the 
writer  seemed  to  hint,  that  the  more 
sensible  dog  might  be  by  no  means  the 
wiser.  In  part,  this  was  begging  the 
question.  If  the  so-called  intuitions 
of  the  Transcendentalist  dog  respecting 
the  higher  world  of  man  did  not  corre- 
spond with  the  truth,  but  were  only 
hallucinations,  then  their  possession 
would  not  be  wisdom  for  the  poor  dog, 
but  only  confusion.  Kay, -unless  there 
were-  in  the  dog-mind,  or  in  the  minds 
of  some  dogs,  a  special  organ  for  such 
apprehensions  of  a  higher  sphere,  the 
so-called  intuitions,  it  might  be  argued, 
could  hardly  fail  to  le  hallucinations. 
But  though,  according  to  the  writer's 
putting  of  the  case,  it  might,  therefore,  be 
too  much  to  call  the  one  dog  wiser  than 
the  other,  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  say 
which  would  be  the  more  powerful  dog, 
the  more  perturbing  and  exciting  as  a 
force  among  his  fellows.  While  the 
dog  of  sound  judgment  might  look  con- 
templatively over  his  paws,  and  be  firm 
in  the  sufficiency  of  his  own  views  of 
things,  the  strange  beliefs  that  had  taken 
possession  of  the  other  dog,  even  though 
they  might  be  hallucinations,  would 
send  him  skurrying  among  his  fellows, 
and  raising  such  a  commotion  that,  if 
they  did  not  at  once  put  an  end  to  him 
for  his  troublous  ways,  he  would  pro- 
bably gain  over  great  numbers  of  them 
to  his  own  exaltation  of  spirit.  Kow, 
leave  behind  what  is  absurd  in  such 
a  fancied  analogy  from  the  dog-world, 
and  the  real  point  of  the  analogy  would 
help  you — so  the  writer  seemed  to  think 
— to  a  clearer  intelligence  of  the  nature 
of  the  distinction  which  has  always 
prevailed  among  men  in  respect  of  the 
amount  of  their  affection  for  the  super- 
natural or  metaphysical.  In  the  history 
of  human  thought  such  oppositions  as 


Aristotelianism  and  Platonism,  Real- 
ism and  Idealism,-  the  Kantian  Under- 
standing and  the.Kantian  Eeason,  have 
been  varying  forms  of  the  distinction. 
Whether  the  higher  wisdom  shall  be 
said  to  be  with  the  one  mode  of 
thought  or  with  the  other  will  depend 
on  the  answer  that  may  be  given  to  the 
question,  whether  there  is  in  the  struc- 
ture of  the  human  mind,  or  of  some 
human  ininds,  an  organ  of  metaphysical 
truth ;  but  as  to  which  of  the  two 
modes  of  thought  has  been  historically 
the  most  exciting  and  rapturous  there 
is  little  room  for  doubt.  Wherever  the 
souls  of  men  collectively  on  any  large 
scale  are  seen  to  have  been  roused  and 
made  to  glow,  the  fervour  has  come 
from  some  outburst  or  inburst  of  Ideal- 
ism. As  if  only  by  a  blast  from  beyond 
itself  could  the  world  be  dynamically 
affected,  every  powerful  excitement  or 
movement  of  the  general  spirit  of 
humanity  has  been  the  action  of  some 
diffusive  faith,  involving  a  fresh  asser- 
tion or  imagination  respecting  man's 
relations  to  the  supernatural. 

We  are  less  concerned  here  with  the 
distinction  in  its  broadest  form  than 
with  the  fact  that  a  modification  of  the 
distinction  is  always  visible  even  within 
the  pale  of  societies  which  are  founded 
on  the  conclusion  that  supernatural 
truth  is  not  only  possible,  but  actually 
in  possession.  Within  the  bounds  of 
any  Church  we  see  invariably  a  certain 
number,  few  or  many,  who  have  a  more 
intense  fascination  than  others  for  what 
may  be  called  the  extreme  spiritual 
peculiarities  of  the  system  of  doctrine 
which  all  alike  profess,  and  who  work 
these  peculiarities  more  incessantly  and 
fervently.  J^ot  to  go  farther  back  than 
the  last  century  in  England,  every  one 
knows  what  a  powerful  movement  in 
the  Church  of  England  was  then  caused 
by  the  preaching  of  Wesley  and  White- 
field.  The  Church  generally  was  ortho- 
dox enough.  It  was  not  rejecting  any 
of  its  doctrines;  all  clergymen  alike 
used  habitually  and  believingly  such 
phrases  as  "  Our  Lord,"  "Our  Saviour ;" 
all  administered  the  rites  of  the  Church, 
and  applied  its  ethics,  and  exercised  its 


150 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


authority — some  in  really  the  most 
devout  spirit.  But  Wesley  and  White- 
field  roused  this  Church,  and  the  popular 
mind  of  the  land  all  round  this  Church ; 
and  they  did  so  by  fetching  out  of  the 
middle  of  the  Articles  of  the  Church 
those  peculiar  and  secret  items  which,  as 
it  seemed  to  them,  constituted  the  real 
difference  between  the  Gospel  and  such 
a  mere  system  of  excellent  moral  views 
as  man's  reason  might  have  devised  in 
any  age  for  itself.  They  seized  these 
items  as  the  things  of  divinest  worth 
and  surest  potency  over  the  human 
spirit ;  they  developed  them ;  they 
refulminated  them ;  wherever  they 
went,  they  held  them  up  in  their  hands 
over  the  heads  of  listening  crowds,  pro- 
claiming, "This  is  the  good  news,  the 
real  Gospel  of  Christ."  And  the  com- 
mon people  heard  them  gladly ;  and 
that  Evangelical  movement  was  begun 
in  England  which  has  not  died  out  to 
this  day,  and  in  the  course  of  which 
the  preaching  of  England,  and  the  re- 
ligious literature  of  England,  became 
full  once  more  of  those  phrases — "  Come 
to  Jesus,"  "Believe  in  Jesus,"  and  a 
thousand  others  taken  warm,  from  the 
very  vitals  of  Scripture,  or  expressing 
deep  points  of  the  Calvinistic  meta- 
physics— of  which  prior  theology  had 
been  rather  ashamed,  and  in  the  recep- 
tion of  which  by  men  of  the  world  we 
are  told,  even  now,  to  see  the  truth  of 
that  declaration  of  the  Gospel  about  itself, 
that,  though  the  power  of  God  and  the 
wisdom  of  God,  it  would  be  to  the  Jews 
a  stumbling-block  and  to  the  Greeks 
foolishness.  England  is  now  in  a  crisis 
;n  which  Evangelicalism  is  no  longer  to 
the  national  soul  what  it  was  ;  and  there 
have  been  other  notable  recent  forms  of 
Idealism  in  the  English  Church  besides 
Evangelicalism.  But  the  national  import- 
ance of  the  English  Evangelical  move- 
ment, towards  the  end  of  the  last 
century  and  the  beginning  of  the  pre- 
sent, is  now  universally  recognised. 
Now,  in  Scotland  there  was  a  corre- 
sponding movement — with  this  differ- 
ence, that,  there  having  been,  in  that 
smaller  country  of  Presbyterian  habits, 
no  extensive  form  of  religious  Idealism 


to'  compete  with  the  Calvinistic  Evange- 
licalism, the  nation  became  more  self- 
conscious  of  the  movement,  made  more 
of  it  rhetorically,  and  invented,  as  it 
went  along,  more  definite  terms  for  the 
facts  and  circumstances  of  it.  It  is 
known  to  all  Scotchmen,  almost  as  a 
lesson  taught  in  their  school-histories, 
that  the  last  century  was  "  the  reign  ot 
Moderatism"  in  Scotland,  when  the 
clergy,  among  whom  there  were  many 
able  and  serious-minded  men,  had  let 
go  in  theory  the  strong  points  of  their 
inherited  system  of  Calvinistic  theo- 
logy, and,  while  retaining  the  formulas 
of  that  system,  administered  but  a 
washed-out  version  of  it  to  the  con- 
sciences of  the  people.  It  is  equally 
well-known  that  this  "  reign  of  Mode- 
ratism "  was  broken  up  by  a  revival  of 
Evangelicalism,  which,  gradually  extend- 
ing itself,  and  gaining  over  more  and 
more  of  the  clergy,  at  last  overspread 
the  land  and  almost  extinguished  Mode- 
ratism .-•in  its  theological  sense,  though 
Moderatism  survived  as  the  Tory  form 
of  Kirk-politics.  The  change  may  be 
said  to  have  reached  its  consummation 
in  1843 — since  which  time,  in  Scotland 
as  in  England,  there  have  been  new 
theological  developments,  enfeebling 
Evangelicalism  and  making  it  no  longer 
what  it  once  was  to  the  general  mind  of 
the  country.  But  in  the  half  century 
between  1790  and  1843  the  Evangelical 
movement  in  Scotland  was  really  a  phe- 
nomenon for  careful  historical  study. 
From  the  more  complete  way  in  which 
all  classes  were  whirled  along  in  the 
movement ;  from  the  extraordinary 
didactic  energy  which  it  called  forth, 
and  which  is  inseparable  from  Calvinism ; 
and,  above  all,  from  the  identification  of 
the  theological  struggle  with  what  may 
be  called  the  real  Parliamentary  or 
public  life  of  Scotland  (for  Scotland  had 
a  complete  Parliamentary  apparatus  in 
her  democratic  church-courts) — from 
these  things  it  certainly  happened  that 
latterly  the  Evangelicalism  of  Scotland 
had  elements  of  intellectual  strength  in 
it  which  were  wanting  in  the  contem- 
porary Evangelicalism  of  England.  So 
at  least  Dr.  Chalmers  thought.  Though 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


151 


it  was  to  the  Evangelical,  or  Low 
Church,  party  in  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land that  he  was  drawn  by  his 
theological  sympathies,  he  had  come  to 
form  an  opinion  of  the  prevalent  state 
and  standard  of  intellect  in  that  body, 
which  he  expressed  by  saying  that, 
whenever  he  was  among  the  English 
Evangelicals,  he  found  himself  thinking 
of  that  text  of  Scripture,  "The  conies 
are  a  feeble  folk."  Perhaps,  if  there 
was  any  such,  greater  play  of  general 
intellect  latterly  among  the  Scottish 
Evangelicals,  it  was  owing  to  nothing  so 
much  as  to  their  having  Dr.  Chalmers 
himself  in  the  midst  of  them.  A  Mode- 
rate in  his  youth,  and  a  massive  partisan 
of  Moderatisia,  he  had  passed  over  to 
the  Evangelical  ranks  in  1810,  in  con- 
sequence of  a  change  then  wrought  in 
his  whole  theory  of  Religion.  Thence- 
forward he  was  a  leader  among  the 
Evangelicals  in  their  contests  with  the 
Moderates,  both  theological  and  poli- 
tical ;  and  from  1834,  onwards  to  the 
epoch  of  the  Disruption  and  the  Free 
Church,  he  was  their  champion,  their 
statesman,  their  spokesman,  their  gene- 
ralissimo. He  was,  in  fact  and  by  genius, 
a  great  deal  more  than  this  in  his  gene- 
ration, but  he  was  this  by  the  way. 

While  Chalmers  was  yet  among  the 
Moderates,  nay,  before  he  was  a  parish- 
minister  at  all,  there  were  scattered  up 
and  down  in  Scotland  ministers  of  the 
Evangelical  sort,  keeping  alive  within 
the  Established  Church  that  more  fervid 
style  of  theological  doctrine  which  had 
never  ceased  to  be  dear  to  the  people 
Avhere  they  could  get  it,  for  the  main- 
tenance of  which  many  of  them  had 
even  separated  themselves  from  the  Esta- 
blishment, and  which  was  again  after  a 
while  to  be  in  the  ascendant  alL  through 
the  land.  Among  these  pioneers  of 
Evangelicalism  in  the  days  of  prevailing 
Moderatism,  I  recognise  Dr.  Kidd.  By 
his  Irish  nature,  by  the  abiding  recol- 
lection of  the  form  of  Christianity  he 
had  learnt  in  his  childhood,  or  by  what- 
ever else  of  deeper  influence  may  have 
operated,  Kidd,  as  soon  as  he  began  to 
preach,  could  preach  nothing  else  than 
a  kind  of  Whitefieldism,  and  even  a 


very  warm  and  rich  kind  of  White- 
fieldism. It  mattered  not  that  he  was 
in  the  city  of  Campbell  and  Gerard,  and 
that  these  had  been  his  instructors  in 
theology.  Only  this  kind  of  doctrine 
could  he  preach  if  he  preached  at  all 
Anywhere  in  Scotland  a  mode  of  Evan- 
gelical preaching  so  rich,  hearty,  and 
warm  as  Kidd's  must  have  been  from 
the  first,  would  probably  have  then  been 
an  innovation  ;  but  in  that  Aberdonian 
region  it  must  havft  been  a  marveL 
Nowhere  in  Scoltand  was  there  such  a 
vast  stone-bed  of  uninterrupted  Mode- 
ratism. Among  the  nativt  clergy  of  the 
shire  there  were  many  specimens  of 
Moderatism  at  its  best — excellent  and 
strong-headed  men  of  great  natural  piety, 
controlling  the  manners  of  their  neigh- 
bourhoods most  creditably,  and  preach- 
ing sermons  of  good  shrewd  matter.  But 
uniformly  the  theology  had  come  to  be 
of  the  cold-drawn  kind ;  and,  in  many 
parishes,  the  doctrine  expounded  had  come 
to  have  so  faint  a  tincture  of  theology  of 
any  sort  in  it  that,  but  for  a  few  phrases 
and  forms,  any  decent  pagan  who  had  read 
Marcus  Aurelius  would  have  answered 
for  the  parson.  It  would  have  aston- 
ished the  late  Mr.  Buckle,  in  his  strange 
notion  of  Scotland  as  a  country  where 
theology  had  always  been  hissing-hot, 
to  hear  some  of  the  many  stories  still 
current  about  the  theology  of  the  Aber- 
deenshire  lairds  and  the  Aberdeenshire 
Moderate  ministers.  "  My  friends,"  said 
one  worthy  to  his  little  congregation  of 
rustics  from  the  pulpit,  "  we're  told  that 
it  is  a  wrong  thing  to  tell  a  lee ;  and  I'll 
no  deny,  in  a  general  way,  that  it  is ; 
but  there's  one  thing  that  I'm  sure  of, 
and  that  is,  that  there  can  be  nae  ill  in 
tellin'  a  lee  if  it's  to  haud  down  din" 
(i.e.  to  prevent  scandal  or  disturbance). 
A  doctrine  this  which  might  have  some- 
thing to  say  for  itself;  but  hardly  the 
kind  of  doctrine  that  it  was  necessary 
to  set  up  a  Church  for,  or  that  it  re- 
quired the  events  of  Juda?a  to  bring 
A\rithin  the  reach  of  the  human  under- 
standing !  I  remember  another  story 
of  an  Aberdeenshire  minister,  whose  life- 
long peculiarity  it  was,  that  he  never 
could  get  an  egg  boiled  hard  enough  for 


152 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


his  taste.  "  "Well,  is  your  egg  boiled 
hard  enough  this  morning,  sir  1 "  said 
his  man  to  him  one  morning  at  break- 
fast. "  Oh,  no ;  not  nearly  hard  enough, 
John,"  was  the  reply.  "  Then  I  dinna 
ken  how  we  can  ever  contrive  to  please 
you,  sir,"  said  the  servitor ;  "  for  that 
egg  that  you're  eating  has  been  on  boil- 
ing a'  nicht  wi'  the  horse-meat"  (i.e. 
with  some  mess  for  the  horses).  Why 
this  story  should  seem  representative  to 
me  of  an  Aberdeenshire  Moderate  minis- 
ter I  hardly  know,  seeing  that  there  is 
nothing  contrary  to  Evangelicism  in 
liking  a  hard-boiled  egg  ;  but  so  it  is, 
that  this  perpetual  quest  of  the  hard 
and  the  still  harder  in  the  way  of  nu- 
triment does  seem  characteristic  to  me 
of  Aberdeenshire  Moderatism  as  it  was 
seventy  years  ago.  Now  the  Irish  Kidd 
came  into  the  very  midst  of  all  that. 
Among  clergymen  passionately  in  quest 
of  hard-boiled  eggs,  and  judiciously  ad- 
vising their  flocks  that,  though  it  might 
be  sin  in  a  general  way  to  tell  a  lie,  it 
could  be  no  sin  to  tell  a  lie  if  it  were 
to  prevent  disturbance  and  keep  the 
peace,  he  stood  up  in  the  pulpit  as  a 
force  of  a  new  kind,  speaking  to  men  of 
such  mysteries  as  the  person  and  the 
offices  of  Christ,  of  original  sin,  of  God's 
grace  to  mankind,  of  a  future  state  of 
eternal  reprobation  for  the  wicked,  and 
a  heaven  in  God's  presence  for  the 
saints.  "  The  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh 
away  the  sins  of  the  world,"  "Come 
unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy-laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest" — 
these  and  a  thousand  other  Biblical 
texts  he  quoted  and  again  quoted,  he 
expounded,  he  exhausted  of  their  mar- 
row. And  they  heard  him,  these  hard- 
headed  Aberdonians  heard  him.  Even 
for  them  these  transcendentalisms, 
warmly  uttered  by  the  Irishman,  had  a 
subtle  softness  that  disintegrated  their 
moral  granite.  First,  crowds  of  the  poorer 
sort  flocked  to  hear  him  in  his  evening 
lectures  in  Trinity  Chapel;  and  then 
the  great  congregation  of  Gilcomston 
Chapel,  still  mainly  of  the  poorer  sort, 
elected  him  as  the  man  from  whom  they 
could  hear  a  really  moving  Gospel 
And  among  them  for  thirty  years  he 


laboured — thrice  every  Sabbath  adminis- 
tering to  them,  with  warm  Irish  vehe- 
mence, some  special  bit  of  Biblical  narra- 
tive or  doctrine,  which  he  had  ruminated, 
collated,  methodized  into  heads,  alle- 
gorized into  occult  meanings,  and  always 
melted  into  intense  applicability  to  the 
needs  and  uses  of  those  whom  he  ad- 
dressed. And,  ere  long,  the  taste  for 
this  style  of  preaching  spread  beyond 
his  own  congregation,  till  the  whole 
city  became  in  the  main  Evangelical  in 
its  notions  of  doctrine,  and  the  other 
pulpits  in  it  were  filled  with  men  sup- 
plying similar  doctrine  after  their  various 
native  fashions,  and  only  in  the  country 
round  did  Moderatism  still  prevail, 
though  even  there  largely  modified.  All 
this  was  not  owing  to  Kidd,  for  the 
Zeit-geist  was  at  work ;  but  much  of  it 
was  owing  to  him.  He  was  a  flame  at 
which  many  lit  their  candles.  And  it 
was  probably  because,  in  the  city  and 
all  around  Kidd,  Evangelicalism  had  so 
come  to  be  normal  thirty  years  ago, 
that  the  notion  of  any  formal  contrary 
in  theological  sentiment  remained  then 
unknown  to  me,  and  it  was  not  till  a 
debating-society  brought  me  into  con- 
tact with  specimens  of  young  Moderatism 
from  the  shire  that  I  knew  of  the  fact 
of  such  a  tremendous  polarization  of 
North-British  human  beings  as  that  into 
Moderates  and  Evangelicals. 

But  what  Kidd  did  was  not  accounted 
for  simply  by  his  i>eing  an  Evangelical 
and  an  Irishman.  There  might  have 
been  many  an  Evangelical,  Irish  or 
Scotch,  from  whose  similar  activity  in 
the  circumstances  no  such  results  would 
have  come.  There  were  extraordinary 
points  about  Kidd.  He  had  a  good 
strong  head  on  his  shoulders,  full  of  a 
kind  of  confused  lore  of  his  own.  He 
had  a  great  avidity  for  information  and 
new  lights  on  all  subjects,  and  every 
now  and  then  would  be  seized  with 
some  speculative  maggot,  or  a  fit  of 
enthusiasm  for  some  research — as  when 
he  betook  himself,  after  his  sixtieth  year, 
to  Dr.  Thomas  Brown's  system  of  Moral 
Philosophy,  and,  again,  some  years  later, 
to  Political  Economy,  and  had  private 
classes  at  his  own  house,  or  public 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities, 


153 


lectures,  on  these  subjects.  Hence  lie 
was  always  refreshing  himself  with  new 
matter  and  new  imagery ;  and,  biblical 
to  the  core  as  his  sermons  were,  and 
with  chains  of  text  running  through 
them,  there  would  frequently  come  into 
a  sermon  a  stroke  of  capital  moral 
philosophy  for  the  million,  or  a  flash 
of  unexpected  secular  illustration.  He 
had  a  rich  and  ready  wit ;  he  had  an 
abundant  flow  of  simple  and  perspi- 
cuous, yet  choice  English — never  bom- 
bastic, but  often  of  fine  poetic  elevation, 
or  flushed  with  a  sudden  accession  of 
colour ;  and  he  had  a  beautiful,  or  even 
consummate,  Irish  elocution.  This  last 
must  have  given  him,  among  the  Aber- 
donians,  something  of  the  power  of 
an  artist.  To  them  he  was  a  real 
Chrysostom.  His  slow  and  impressive 
reading  of  the  Psalms  was,  I  remember, 
a  never-failing  source  of  admiration  and 
delight ;  and  I  remember  as  a  particular 
treat  his  peculiar  Irish  pronunciation  of 
the  possessive  personal  pronoun  Jier. 
From  his  mouth  it  was  a  rich  hur,  in 
which  both  the  aspirate  and  the  rough 
consonant  had  full  justice  done  them. 
But,  above  all,  Kidd  knew  men  and 
things.  His  wandering  and  residence  in 
America,  his  early  adventures  in  quest 
of  a  livelihood,  and  his  acquaintanceship 
with  different  classes  of  men,  must  have 
left  in  his  mind  a  fund  of  various  and 
shrewd  recollections  more  considerable 
than  usual.  And  Dr.  Eush's  advice  to 
him,  "Study  men  and  things,"  had  been 
followed.  Though  childish-hearted  and 
full  of  impulse,  he  was  very  wide-awake, 
could  see  through  people  as  well  as  most, 
was  a  master  of  all  the  little  duplicities 
and  vanities  of  ordinary  good  people,  and 
would  have  scented  a  humbug  or  a  hypo- 
crite at  the  first  look  of  him.  He  was  a 
man  of  the  world — if  not  in  the  sense  of 
being  able  always  to  manage  his  own 
affairs,  at  least  in  the  sense  of  knowing 
how  affairs  were  to  be  managed.  Espe- 
cially he  had  the  condition  and  habits  of 
the  poor  at  his  fingers'  ends.  I  know  not 
any  respect  in  which  Christianity,  ac- 
cording to  the  primitive  interpretation 
of  it,  seems  so  wholly  to  have  vanished 
from  the  world,  seems  to  be  so  utterly 


extinct  in  fact,  nay,  so  utterly  gone  out 
of  the  conceptions  of  men,  as  in  respect 
of  that  love  of  the  society  of  the  poor 
and  abject,  that  passion  for  companion- 
ship with  them  rather  than  with  the 
well-to-do,  that  habit  of  seeking  them 
out  and  sitting  down  with  them — not 
patronizingly,  but  out  of  love  for  them  as 
the  greater  number,  and  even  from  a 
belief  in  social  abjectness  itself  as  a 
state  of  thousand-fold  richer  spiritual 
capability  than  upliftedness — of  all  which 
there  is  such  a  continuous  example  in 
the  life  of  Christ.  Philanthropy  we 
have,  Magdalen  Associations  we  have, 
district- visiting  we  have ;  never  ~was 
Christianity  so  rife  in  such  activity ; 
the  very  ground  all  round  us  cracks  and 
splits  with  the  strain  of  such  immense 
leverage  for  "raising  the  sunken  masses ;" 
but  the  essential  Christian  spirit  itself — 
of  personal  preference  for  the  society  of 
the  poor  and  wretched  and  unrespect- 
able,  of  reverence  for  them  raised  or  not 
raised,  of  feeling  towards  them  in  their 
depressed  multitudinousness  as  towards 
the  real  ocean-depths  of  the  world's 
spirit  where  mighty  forces  may  be  stir- 
ring, and  creative  changes  preparing  that 
shall  overtop  the  high-built  pinnacles 
and  make  the  existing  order  a  sediment 
— this  we  see  almost  nowhere.  But 
in  the  character  of  Kidd  there  was  much 
of  this.  How  he  went  about  in  his 
great  pastoral  district  of  over  10,000 
souls,  chiefly  of  the  middle  and  poorer 
classes  !  How  he  passed  the  thresholds  of 
the  poorest,  and  knew  their  household 
ways — their  pots,  their  porringers,  their 
hearts,  their  humours,  their  domestic 
troubles,  and  their  besetting  vices  !  How 
he  watched  the  incidents  of  the  streets, 
and  reproduced  them  in  his  sermons, 
with  comments  that  went  home  !  How 
he  had  his  pockets  full  of  sweetmeats 
for  crying  little  ones  in  entries  !  How, 
at  one  time,  at  a  humble  marriage  in 
the  house  of  one  of  his  parishioners,  he 
would  make  the  bride  happy  by  wait- 
ing a  little  after  the  ceremony,  sitting 
down  at  the  table,  and  drinking  a  glass 
of  porter  to  her  health — which  strange 
nuptial  beverage  had,  by  a  stroke  of 
inventive  genius,  been  got  ready  before- 


154 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


hand  as  the  likeliest  to  suit  the  Doctor 
in  case  he  should  so  honour  the  occa- 
sion !  How,  at  another  time,  with  a  poor 
woman  just  out  of  a  fever  leaning  on 
his  arm,  he  would  be  seen  in  some 
mean  neighbourhood,  making  a  round 
of  the  shops !  Thus  he  had  come  to 
know  the  poor  intellectually,  and  it 
was  no  vague  grasp  of  them  that  he 
took  from  the  pulpit,  but  the  grasp  of 
one  who  had  all  the  chords  at  his 
touch.  His  style,  as  I  have  said,  was 
wonderfully  perspicuous.  I  do  not  be- 
lieve that  he  ever  preached  a  sermon 
without  being  thoroughly  understood  by 
his  poorest  hearers. 

Still  I  find  I  have  not  imaged  Kidd 
to  others  up  to  my  own  full  recollec- 
tion of  him.     One  all-prevailing  quality 
of  his,  at  which  I  hsve  already  hinted, 
must  be  further  brought  forward.    Good- 
humoured,    and     even     so     habitually 
humoursome,  that  most  times,  he  carried 
laughter  with  him  wherever  he  broke 
in  upon  a  week-day  company  (though 
it  behoved  always  to  be  laughter  of  his 
own  making,  and,  had  there  been  an 
attempt  to  laugh  at  him,  his  majesty 
would   pretty    soon   have    turned    the 
tables), — with  all    this,   his    dominant 
quality  was  courage,     Nor  was  it  pas- 
sive courage.     It  was  very  active  cou- 
rage— the   courage   of  a   constitutional 
pugnacity,   that  considered  fighting    a 
man's    business,   and    looked   out    for 
objects  of  attack.     "  "Wherever  you  see 
a  head,   hit    it "    is    the    well-known 
advice   of  the  Irishman  to  his  friend ; 
and,  if  by  the  noun  "  head  "  we  under- 
stand "  anything  unlikeable,"  Kidd  was 
a  model  Irishman  in  this  too.     If  there 
was  anything  he  did  not  like  he  soon 
let  the  fact  be  known.    Take  the  follow- 
ing  opening   passage   from    a    sermon 
of  his,    preached  April   3,    1797 — i.e. 
while  he  was  not   yet  member  of  Gil- 
comston  chapel,  but  only  evening  lec- 
turer in  the  Shiprow  chapel — on  the 
text,  Ecdes.  v.  5,  "  Better  it  is  that  thou 
"  shouldst    not    vow    than    that    thou 
"  shouldst  vow  and  not  pay  :  " — 

"  MY  BRETHREN.— It  never  was,  nor  is  it, 
my  desire  to  make  the  pulpit  a  scorner's  chair, 
or  to  gratify  private  resentment,  by  taking  an 


unmanly  advantage  of  the  place  where  I  stand ; 
and  yet  I  suspect  there  is  an  individual  here 
this  evening,  against  whom,  I  promptly  de- 
clare, I  have  composed  the  discourse  which  I 
am  now  about  to  deliver.  Now,  that  it  may 
not  be  said  that  I  have  deviated  from  candour, 
honesty  and  fidelity,  or  that  I  have  brought 
'a railing  accusation'  against  any  one,  I  call 
upon  you,  aged  fathers !  and  upon  you,  dis- 
cerning men  and  brethren !  and  upon  you,  ye 
female  part  of  my  audience,  whom  I  should 
have  named  first !  to  ponder  well  what  I  shall 
say — to  weigh,  with  Christian  impartiality,  the 
force  of  my  arguments— and  to  declare  the 
truth,  when  ye  leave  this  house.  'Ye  are 
witnesses  of  these  things.'  I  cast  nyse^  upon 
the  whole  cf  this  assembly,  and  tor  once  re- 
quest attention,  without  the  disturbance  of 
coughing  or  throat-clearing,  which  so  frequently 
obstructs  both  speaking  and  hearing.  As  in 
the  Divine  presence,  then,  we  shall  proceed." 

Against  what  flagrant  scandal  of  back- 
sliding, or  of  breach  of  promise,  in 
Aberdeen,  sixty-seven  years  ago,  Kidd 
thus  spoke  out,  I  do  not  know ;  nor 
can  it  be  gathered  in  the  least  from  the 
sermon.  One  can  fancy  some  skulking 
culprit  in  one  of  the  pews,  the  cynosure 
of  the  thoughts  of  all,  and  with  what 
cold  shivering  he  sat  the  sermon  out.1 
But  I  have  quoted  the  passage  to  sug- 
gest that  characteristic  of  Kidd  which — 
already  possessed  by  him,  as  the  passage 
proves,  in  his  early  manhood — accom- 
panied him  through  life,  and  even  grew 
by  thirty  years  of  practice,  in  the  pulpit 
and  out  of  it,  till  it  was  abnormally 
developed,  and,  in  his  elderly  years,  he 
was  a  very  Turk  for  explosive  irasci- 
bility. We  have  seen  what  kind  of 
steam  was  in  the  man,  and  it  may  now 
be  added  that  he  went  about  with  the 
steam  always  fully  up.  He  was  the 
incarnation  of  the  opposite  of  our  sweet 
modern  principle  of  Non-interference. 
Whatever  he  did  not  like  he  spoke  out 
against,  and  at  once  and  loudly.  And 
it  so  chanced  that  there  were  a  great 
many  things,  both  small  and  great,  that 
he  did  not  like.  He  did  not  like  to  see 
people  loitering  about  the  church-door — 
indeed,  it  was  one  of  his  habits  to  be  in 
the  pulpit  always  when  the  bell  began  to 
ring,  and  to  watch  the  people  taking  their 

1  I  am  not  sure  but  that  the  passage  may  have 
been  only  a  solemn  stroke  of  Kidd's  wit,  to 
arrest  the  attention  of  all,  and  make  every  one 
think  himself  the  particular  scoundrel  aimed  at. 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


155 


places  during  the  half-hour  before  service; 
and,  on  coining  up  once  to  a  small  group 
who  chanced  to  be  at  the  church-door 
very  early,  and  were  innocently  exchang- 
ing salutations  and  a  little  neighbourly 
gossip,   he    dispersed  it  roughly   with 
"  What  Devil's  Committee  are  you  hold- 
ing here  1  Get  in,  get  in."     I  knew  one 
old  lady  who  was  of  the  group  ;  and, 
though  she  had  never  forgotten  the  cir- 
cumstance,    she    had    no    resentment 
against  the  Doctor  on  account  of  it,  but 
only  a  regret  that  the  Doctor  should 
have  supposed  she  could   be  one  of  a 
"Devil's   Committee."     Again,  he  had 
a  particular  aversion  to  seeing  persons 
asleep  in  church — a  thing  which  would 
sometimes   happen  in   drowsy  weather 
even  in  his  audience  ;  and,  as  he  had 
the  eye  of  a  hawk  for  any  culprit  in 
this   respect  in  his  vast   congregation, 
every  third   or    fourth    Sunday   there 
would  be  an  interruption  of  the  sermon 
for  an  explosion  on  somebody.     "  "Wake 
up,  sir;   wake  up;    there  will  be  no 
sleeping  in  Hell,"  was  common  enough ; 
and  once,  by  way  of  variation,   I  re- 
member something  to  this  effect,  "  You, 
sir,  ISTo.  3  in  the  second  seat  from  the 
front  in  the  top-loft,  what  are  you  asleep 
for  ?     Rouse   him   up,   rouse   him   up. 
Wbn't  he  wake  1     Put  your  thumb  into 
him,  his  next  neighbour."     There  would 
be  an  arrest  of  the  attention  of  the  con- 
gregation   at    such    moments — even    a 
titter,  when  the  oddity  of  the  incident 
was  greater  than  usual;  but  straightway 
all    would    be    solemnity    again ;    nor 
at  his  greatest  oddities  was  the  feeling 
other  than  that  of  awe  at  the  outbreaks 
of  a  royal  Lear.     In  his  earlier  days  in 
Aberdeen  he  must  have  had  vehement 
personal  critics  and  enemies.    But  he  had 
tossed  and  gored  them,  or  they  had  died 
off  or  gone  into  corners  ;  and  one  heard 
of  them   chiefly  in   connexion  with  a 
Gilcomston  legend  that  no  one  that  had 
ever  resisted  the  Doctor  had  prospered. 
So,  in  his  later  years,  his  combativeness 
was  left  free  for  impersonal  antagonists 
— for  Abefdonian  evils,  and  wild  beasts 
at  Ephesus.     As  a  true  Irish  Protestant, 
he  had  an  especial  detestation  of  Papacy 
and  Popery  in  all  thsir  manifestations  ; 


and  there  were,  of  course,  opportunities, 
even  away  from  his  pulpit,  when  this 
blazed  forth.  The  story  is  that,  during 
one  anti-Popery  paroxysm  of  the  town, 
when  meetings  were  being  held  and 
squibs  were  flying,  he  chanced  to  meet 
the  Eoman  Catholic  priest  in  the  School- 
hill,  and,  being  on  good  enough  terms 
with  him  save  where  religion  was  con- 
cerned, saluted  him  thus,  two  yards  off, 
"Hillo!  Priest  Eraser;  tell  me  this; 
what  difference  is  there  between  Christ's 
mother  and  my  mother  1 "  Only  on  this 
one  occasion,  if  the  story  be  true,  was  the 
Doctor  ever  known  to  be  vanquished ; 
for  the  priest,  coming  up  to  him/ had 
said  quietly,  "  I  don't  know,  Doctor ;  but 
the  difference  is  very  great  between  the 
sons."  But  the  story  rasy  not  be  true  :, 
for,  even  in  his  lifetime,  many  myths 
had  gathered  round  Kidd.  and  many  tales 
that  I  have  heard  told  of  him  I  have  since 
found  to  be  floating  Rowland-  Hillisms, 
or  what  not,  that  had  been  fathered  on 
Kidd  in  the  ITorth,  from  a  feeling  of 
their  verisimilitude.  Yet  the  abso- 
lutely authentic  stories  of  Kidd's  eccen- 
tricities— all  of  them,  so  far  as  I  have 
investigated,  instances  of  his  fearless 
courage,  his  humorous  irascibility,  his 
sudden  discharges  of  steam — would 
make  a  sufficiently  large  collection. 
Under  the  head  of  his  fightings  with 
wild  beasts  at  Ephesus — that  is,  of  his 
outbreaks  against  things  offensive  to 
him  which  were  far  enough  off,  in  all 
conscience,  from  any  power  of  Gilcoms- 
ton or  of  Aberdeen  to  lay  hold  of  them 
or  mend  them — may  be  reckoned,  in 
addition  to  his  furies  against  the  Papacy, 
his  denunciations  of  Socinianism.  A 
live  Socinian  in  Gilcomston  was  a  phy- 
sical impossibility;  but  every  man 
must  have  his  pastimes,  and  one  of 
Kidd's  was  to  fore-exercise  the  Gil- 
comstonians  against  every  conceivable 
invasion  of  the  anti-Trinitarian  heresy. 
Coming  more  home  to  them,  perhaps — 
though  any  practical  application  was 
also  a  long  way  off — was  his  vehement 
ecclesiastical  Whiggism,  showing  itself 
in  his  Anti-patronage  philippics,  and 
what,  had  he  lived  a  little  longer,  would 
have  been  called  his  Xon-Intrusionisui. 


156 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


But  he  was  a  Whig  also  in  secular  poli- 
tics, and  affected  no  concealments  even 
here.  On  the  occasion  of  the  accession 
of  George  IV.  he  had  prayed  openly  for 
him  in  this  wise  :  "  Grant,  0  Lord,  that 
he  may  he  a  hetter  King  than  he  has  been 
a  Prince-Eegent ;  "  and  when,  even  in 
Kidd's  privileged  case,  the  local  autho- 
rities— who  were  mostly  Tories,  and 
rabid  against  Queen  Caroline — thought 
themselves  obliged,  in  loyalty,  to  make 
some  inquiry  respecting  so  seditious  an 
utterance,  Kidd's  answer  had  non- 
plussed them  : — "  And  where's  the  man 
that  can't  improve  ? "  In  short,  in  this, 
as  in  everything  else  at  last,  he  was 
best  let  alone.  Eut  it  was  as  an  angry 
old  lion  who  would  let  nobody  else 
alone.  Non-intervention  I  Pshaw  \  you 
should  have  known  Dr.  Kidd!  Take 
him  even  in  his  walks  within  the 
bounds  of  Aberdeen,  and  he  was,  in  his 
own  person,  worth  a  police-force  to  the 
town.  At  the  time  when  vaccination 
was  coming  in,  the  popular  prejudice 
being  strongly  against  it  in  Aberdeen, 
Kidd  had  not  only  lectured  on  the  sub- 
ject from  the  pulpit,  and  employed  a 
medical  man  to  vaccinate,  at  intimated 
times,  those  whom  he  had  thus  per- 
suaded, but,  finding  this  not  enough, 
had  compelled  hundreds  into  his  own 
house,  like  sheep,  and  vaccinated  them 
himself.  Vaccination  by  his  hands  must 
be  free  from  harm  !  Latterly,  I  believe, 
even  a  kick  from  him  .would  have 
seemed  a  sacred  thing  to  many.  I  do 
not  know  that  he  ever  came  to  kicks, 
for  he  was  stalwart  in  the  upper  part  of 
his  body,  and  would  have  preferred 
his  arm.  Were  there  a  fray  in  the 
streets  as  he  was  passing,  he  was  in  the 
middle  of  it  in  a  moment.  Not  if  it 
were  a  legitimate  fray — for,  when  the 
students,  throwing  snowballs  in  the  Col- 
lege court-yard,  would  stop  to  let  him 
through  the  midst  of  them,  and  also 
because  it  was  against  College  rule  and 
a  Professor  might  fine  them,  his  good- 
humoured  "  Heave  away,  my  lads;  never 
mind  me ! "  would  be  received  with  a 
cheer.  But,  if  it  were  a  brutish  fray, 
with  Aberdeen  savagery  in  it,  then,  I 
say,  he  would  be  in  the  middle  of  it, 


a  white-haired  justice.  And,  where  his 
tongue  failed  on  such  occasions — which 
it  rarely  did — his  umbrella  would  be  in 
requisition.  The  scamps  knew  their  man, 
and  would  make  off  loweringly,  their 
heads  bent,  and  their  hands  deep  in 
their  fustian  pockets.  Even  Alcohol — the 
chief  fiend  of  Aberdeen,  as  of  all  the 
rest  of  Scotland — was  no  match  for  the 
Doctor.  He  has  been  seen  driving  all 
the  way  before  him  up  Skene  Street  a 
drunken  parishioner  on  whom  he  had 
pounced,  and'  whom  he  was  bent  on 
seeing  home — the  man  going  as  meekly 
as  a  lamb,  in  spite  of  the  volleys  of 
epithets  from  all  Irish  parts  of  the 
vocabulary  with  which  the  Doctor  was 
pursuing  him,  and  the  occasional  thwack 
of  the  Doctor's  umbrella  on  his  drunken 
back.  Let  a  drunken  beast  have  been 
beating  his  wife,  and  the  rumour  of  the 
Doctor's  coming,  or  the  mere  threat  of 
sending  for  him,  would  have  been  the 
most  potent  thing  in  Aberdeen,  short  of 
an  actual  cudgel  in  the  hands  of  a  con- 
venient six-foot  man  on  the  spot,  to  cow 
and  quiet  the  brute.  But  it  was  not  only 
drunkenness  and  its  consequences  that 
brought  out  the  irascibility  of  the  Doctor. 
Anything  might  do  it — any  meanness, 
or  cruelty,  or  (and  here  was  his  excess) 
any  unlovely  thing  whatever  that  encoun- 
tered him  inauspiciously.  One  story,  be- 
yond my  own  memory,  has  been  reported 
tome — how,  as  he  was  going,  one  Fast-day 
morning,  through  a  part  of  the  town 
where  there  were  gardens  and  hedges, 
he  came  upon  a  well-known  professional 
bird-catcher,  plying  his  vagabond  craft, 
with  his  limed  twigs  and  lines  all  in 
operation  and  the  cages  waiting  for  the 
produce,  and  how,  his  soul  starting  up  in 
loathing  at  such  a  blasphemy  on  Nature's 
quiet,  he  dashed  at  the  lines  and  traps, 
liberated  the  already  captive  linnets, 
broke  the  cages,  and  chased  the  scared 
offender,  as  incapable  of  resistance  as  if 
it  had  been  Michael  the  Archangel  that 
was  after  him,  for  a  full  quarter  of  a 
mile.  Habitually,  and  to  the  very  last, 
there  was  one  thing  that  moved  him  to 
his  most  violent  indignation — the  sight 
of  a  savage  mother  misusing  her  little 
ones  by  her  own  street-door,  and  giving 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


157 


them  over  to  the  Devil  with  impreca- 
tions. "Woe  to  the  woman  whom  the 
Doctor  came  upon  in  his  walks  so  en- 
gaged !  There  was  nothing  for  her,  if 
she  would  escape  the  torrent  of  his 
wrath,  hut  to  rush  to  her  door — up- 
stairs, downstairs,  or  on  the  ground- 
floor — and  bolt  herself  in,  and  the 
Doctor  out.  Such  horrors  must  have 
been  frequent  in  mean  neighboiirhoods 
in  Aberdeen,  or  must  have  made  a  par- 
ticular impression  on  him.  Often,  in 
his  sermons — or,  more  especially,  in  his 
addresses  to  the  parents  who,  after  every 
service,  stood  up  in  the  lectern,  under 
the  white-clothed  christening-basin,  to 
have  their  month-old  infants  baptized 
before  the  whole  congregation,  three  or 
four  at  a  time  (for  Gilcomston  was  pro- 
lific)— he  would  allude  to.this  cursing  of 
children  by  their  parents,  and  make  an 
extraordinary  text  of  it.  But  everything 
that  the  Doctor  saw  was  turned  to  ac- 
count in  his  pulpit ;  and  his  love  for 
children,  and  for  the  young  generally, 
was  his  ruling  softness. 

Kidd's  eccentricities  were  the  talk  of 
the  town.  One  never  heard  the  last  of 
them.  What  he  might  say  or  do  next, 
nobody  knew.  That  he  did  sometimes 
outrage  propriety,  and  that,  though  his 
own  adoring  congregation  forgave  him 
•everything,  there  were  outstanding  por- 
tions of  the  more  cultured  opinion  of 
the  town  that  regarded  him,  even  at  the 
last,  only  as  a  splendid  popular  eccentric, 
are  facts  within  my  cognisance.  But, 
remembering  him  all  in  all,  I  cannot 
allow  that  the  stories  of  his  eccentri- 
cities— a  whole  budget  of  which,  I  sup- 
pose, might  still  be  collected  in  Aberdeen 
— adequately  represent  him  or  his  in- 
fluence. While  writing  this  sketch  of 
him,  I  have  looked  into  one  of  his 
published  volumes,  which — attracted  by 
his  name,  and  the  vision  of  thirty  years 
ago  which  it  called  up — I  picked  up 
for  threepence  at  a  London  book-stall. 
His  printed  remains  are  not  numerous. 
What  may  be  called  his  miscellaneous 
writings  are — a  volume  of  his  Gil- 
comston Sermons,  printed  by  him 
in  his  life-time ;  another  volume  of 


sermons,  or  rather  of  skeletons  of 
sermons,  posthumously  printed ;  a  pam- 
phlet 011  the  Eights  and  Liberties  of 
the  Church  against  the  Usurpation  of 
Patronage ;  a  Catechism  for  the  Young 
on  approaching  the  Communion-Table 
for  the  First  Time ;  and  a  Treatise  on 
Infant-Baptism.  In  the  uttermost 
depths  of  the  British  Museum,  I  believe, 
you  would  look  in  vain  for  copies  of 
these  productions.  But  his  opera  magna, 
into  which  he  threw  his  whole  literary 
strength,  were  these  two — (1)  "An 
Essay  on  the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity, 
attempting  to  prove  it  by  Season  and 
Demonstration,  founded  upon  Duration 
and  Space,  and  upon  some  of  the  Divine 
Perfections,  some  of  tlie  powers  of  the 
Human  Soul,  the  language  of  Scripture, 
and  Tradition  among  all  nations  ;  "  (2) 
"  A  Dissertation  on  the  Eternal  Sonship 
of  Christ"  The  first  was  published  in 
1815;  the  second  in  1822.  I  should 
like  to  have  got  hold  of  Kidd  on 
the  Trinity,  for  the  sake  of  its  Gilcoms- 
tonian  metaphysics.  I  should  fancy  it  a 
queer  book — a  book  that  would  not  now 
bite  anywhere  into  contemporary  intel- 
ligence, but  would  seem  the  action  of  an 
ingenious  Irish  mind  whirling  in  vacuo. 
But  it  so  chanced  that  it  was  the  Trea- 
tise on  the  Eternal  Sonship  that  I 
picked  up  for  threepence.  I  cannot  say 
that  there  is  any  intellectual  bite  in  this 
treatise  either — a  laboriously-reasoned 
argument  as  it  is  against  a  subtle  form 
of  Arianism  or  semi-Arianisin.  The 
Doctor,  I  have  said,  did  a  good  deal  in 
the  way  of  fighting  with  wild  beasts  at 
Ephesus.  But  this  I  noticed  in  the 
treatise,  almost  to  my  own  surprise — a 
singular  finish  of  style,  an  elegance  and 
neatness  in  the  concatenation  of  thoughts 
and  clauses  in  which  the  keenest  knife- 
edge  could  hardly  detect  a  flaw.  And 
so,  going  back  upon  the  Doctor  as  he 
lived,  I  am  surer  than  ever  that,  even  in 
resthetic  respects,  he  must  have  been  a 
god-send  among  the  Aberdonians.  I 
can  see  now  how,  with  that  finish  of 
style  and  his  rich  Irish  elocution,  added 
as  external  graces  to  all  his  hot  energy 
as  a  moral  messenger,  he  must  have  been 


158 


Dead  Men  ichoni  I  have  known. 


as  a  kind  of  local  Aaron  and  Moses  in 
one,  and  how  that  happened  which  did 
happen  - —  that  his  vast  squab-built 
chapel  on  Gilcomston  heights  became,  in 
addition  to  all  else  that  it  was,  a  kind  of 
intellectual  and  aesthetic  gymnasium  for 
the  inhabitants  of  Aberdeen.  In  minute 
respects,  as  well  as  in  greater,  the  old 
Irishman  Kidd  was  a  dynamic  power 
among  the  Aberdonians.  There  they 
sat  on  Sundays,  in  daylight  or  in  candle- 
light, a  densely-packed  mass  of  between 
two  and  three  thousand  human  beings 
— old  red-cloaked  women  and  decrepit 
poor  men  in  the  passages  or  on  the 
pulpit-stairs,  and  a  general  congregation 
of  young  and  old  in  the  ground-pews  or 
the  gallery-pews,  including  men  in  as 
large  proportion  as  women,  and  as  con- 
siderable a  sprinkling  of  tough-headed 
old  fellows  among  the  men  as  you  would 
be  likely  to  find  anywhere — and  all  this 
miscellaneous  audience  hung,  in  reve- 
rence, on  the  Doctor's  lips.  Their  week- 
day life  might  have  been  hard  and 
meagre  ;  but  here  at  least  they  were 
above  penury,  here  their  souls  could 
be  set  a-glow,  here  they  heard  of 
things  unearthly,  here  they  were  in 
a  world  of  ideas,  here  they  felt  the 
glimmering  of  the  Celestial  City.  And 
strangers  would  be  there,  attracted  by 
the  fame  of  the  Doctor's  oratory,  and 
divinity-students,  anxious  to  catch  hints 
as  to  the  way  in  which  to  address  a 
congregation.  And  what  mattered  it 
if  the  doctor  would  go  off  now  and  then 
into  his  Trinitarian  metaphysics,  and 
Ms  visionary  interpretations  of  the 
Apocalypse  ?  Man  cannot  live  by  bread 
alone,  and  the  Aberdonians  were  sus- 
ceptible to  flights  of  Idealism.  Even 
in  such  matters  Kidd  made  himself  in- 
telligible ;  and  for  the  hardest-headed 
old  fellow,  who  had  haggled  over  his 
bargain  to  a  penny  yesterday,  and  would 
haggle  to  a  halfpenny  to-morrow,  there 
was  a  temporary  expansion  of  being  in 
knowing  all  about  the  Millennium. 
What  it  was  to  be  the  Doctor  hardly 
ventured  to  say  ;  but  about  the  time 
when  it  was  due  he  had  no  doubt.  He 
should  not  live  to  see  it,  he  often  said, 


but  many  then  hearing  him  would  !  It 
was  to  be  in  186 — ;  unfortunately,  I 
forget  the  last  digit.  And  Gilcomston 
believed  him,  because  he  believed  it 
himself.  I  should  like  also  an  affidavit 
to  be  taken  in  Aberdeen  as  to  another 
prophecy  of  the  Doctor's.  Unless  I  am 
mistaken,  there  are  many  now  alive  who 
could  attest  what  I  can  attest  myself — 
that  he  used  to  say  over  and  over  again, 
about  the  years  1 830 — 1 834,  that  Europe 
was  to  have  another  terrible  Napoleon,  of 
the  same  name,  treading  in  the  footsteps 
of  the  first.  How  on  earth  he  had 
worked  out  this  conjecture  I  do  not 
know.  But  Aberdeen,  thirty  years  ago,  had 
this  opportunity,  I  can  vouch,  of  being 
wiser  than  all  the  rest  of  the  world. 

What  a  mourning  there  was  in  the 
town  when  the  Doctor  died  !  The 
event  was  sudden.  He  had  been  ailing 
for  a  day  or  two  ;  but,  on  Tuesday,  the 
23d  D'ecember,  1834,  he  persisted  in 
going  out  to  meet  his  Hebrew  class  in 
Marischal  College.  On  his  return  home 
he  fell  down  in  apoplexy.  The  news 
ran,  like  a  shock,  through  the  town  ; 
and  the  next  day  Aberdeen  knew  that 
it  had  lost  Dr.  Kidd.  His  body  lay  in 
state  for  a  week  ;  and  the  immense 
length  of  the  funeral-procession  that 
followed  it  to  the  grave  remains  in  my 
memory  as  a  mourning-pageant  the 
equal  of  which  I  have  never  seen  since. 
I  remember  looking  down  into  his 
grave  before  the  interment.  It  was 
solidly  cased  with  brick.  Accustomed 
as  I  had  been  to  the  sight  only  of 
graves  of  earth,  this  struck  me  as  a 
peculiarity.  They  would  save  all  that 
remained  of  such  a  man  from  the  worms 
and  corruption  as  long  as  they  could  ! 
And  they  did  right.  In  Aberdeen  there 
are  still  many,  past  their  prime,  who 
remember  more  of  him  than  I  can, 
and  many  middle-aged  whose  heads  he 
patted  when  they  were  children,  and 
not  a  few,  justly  reckoned  among  the 
foremost  minds  of  the  town  in  every  thing, 
(but,  after  this  lapse  of  time,  not  a  whit 
more  Evangelical  than  they  should  be) 
who  trace  back  their  first  intellectual 
stirrings  to  Kidd  and  Gilcomston  Chapel. 


One  Day.                                               159 

And  I,  too,  at  this  distance,  would  fain  ham,  people  might  not  have  objected 

build  my  little  brick  wall  around  the  to  hear  of  him.     But  he  was  only  a 

moral  remains  of  the  first  man  I  knew  real  man,  and  an  Evangelical  minister, 

in  this  world  that  I  can  think  of  now  as  of  Irish  birth,  who  lived  thirty  years 

a  man  of  mark  and  influence.    But  what  ago  in   the  North   of  Scotland.     And 

is  the  use  1    Had  he  been  the  imaginary  some  people  are  so  much  in  the  habit 

hero  of  some  novel,  the  scene  of  which  of  making  all  their  geese  into   swans 

was  laid  in  Kamtschatka  or  in  Chelten-  whenever  they  speak  about  them  ! 


ONE  DAY. 

I  WILL  tell  you  when  they  met : 

In  the  limpid  days  of  spring; 

Elder  boughs  were  budding  yet, 

Oaken  boughs  looked  wintry  still, 

But  primrose  and  veined  violet 

In  the  mossful  turf  were  set, 

While  meeting  birds  made  haste  to  sing 

And  build  with  right  good  will. 

I  will  tell  you  when  they  parted  : 

When  plenteous  autumn  sheaves  were  brown, 

Then  they  parted  heavy-hearted  ; 

The  full  rejoicing  sun  looked  down 

As  grand  as  in  the  days  before  ; 

Only  they  had  lost  a  crown; 

Only  to  them  those  days  of  yore 

Could  come  back  nevermore. 

When  shall  they  meet?     I  cannot  tell, 
Indeed,  when  they  shall  meet  again, 
Except  some  day  in  Paradise  : 
For  this  they  wait,  one  waits  in  pain. 
Beyond  the  sea  of  death  love  lies 
For  ever,  yesterday,  to-day ; 
Angels  shall  ask  them,  "Is  it  -well?'' 
And  they  shall  answer,   "Yea." 

CHRISTINA  G.  ROSSETTI. 


160 


"THE  LAST  VOICE  FROM  THE  CRIMEA." 

BY  THOMAS  HUGHES. 


A  VALUABLE  pamphlet  entitled  "The 
Crimean  War,"  has  just  been  published 
by  Dr.  Shrimpton,  an  Englishman 
practising  as  a  physician  at  Paris,  and 
late  Surgeon-in-chief  of  Field  Hospitals 
in  Algeria.  Looking  through  the  eyes 
of  a  surgeon-major  of  the  French  army, 
who  is  nevertheless  still  English  to  the 
core,  we  get  a  new  and  very  interesting 
point  of  view  of  that  drama,  which  will 
never  fail  deeply  to  move  the  heart  of 
England,  at  least  until  the  grave  has 
closed  over  our  generation.  Dr.  Shrimp- 
ton  is  chiefly  occupied,  of  course,  with 
the  health  of  the  Allied  Armies,  and 
of  the  British  in  particular.  But  the 
health  of  an  army  involves  all  manner 
of  other  efficiency,  and  we  get  side- 
glimpses  of  every  branch  of  the  service 
while  following  him  about  the  hospitals. 
The  main  object  of  the  writer  is  to  con- 
trast the  sanitary  state  of  the  English 
army  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the 
siege,  and  to  point  out  the  share  which 
Miss  Nightingale  had  in  the  almost 
incredible  change  which  was  effected  in 
one  year.  Incidentally  he  speaks  of  the 
French  troops  also,  and  gives  the  clue 
to  the  extraordinary  mortality  which 
prevailed  amongst  them  after  the  time 
when  the  English  camp  had  become 
more  healthy  than  barracks  at  home. 

Nothing  can  add  to  the  force  of  the 
simple  facts  put  side  by  side  ;  and  they 
cannot  be  too  often  set  before  the  eyes, 
and  dinned  into  the  ears,  of  the  nation. 
In  the  early  months  of  1855  the  British 
soldiers  in  the  Crimea  there  died,  of  dis- 
eases alone — over  and  above  those  who 
were  killed  in  battle,  or  died  of  wounds — 
at  the  rate  of  sixty  per  cent,  per  annum  ; 
that  is  to  say,  as  Miss  Nightingale 
vividly  puts  it,  at  an  annual  rate  greater 
than  that  of  deaths  in  time  of  pestilence 
out  of  the  sick.  In  the  early  months 
of  1856  (from  January  to  May)  the 
rate  of  mortality  had  been  reduced  to 


1.15  per  cent,  per  annum  on  the  whole 
force,  while  amongst  the  sick  the  rate 
was  two-thirds  only  of  what  it  is  amongst 
troops  on  home  service.  I  suppose  it 
would  be  quite  impossible  to  match 
these  figures,  or  indeed  to  produce  any- 
thing like  a  parallel  case,  from  the  re- 
cords of  any  army  which  ever  fought 
on  the  face  of  this  earth.  Of  these 
sixty  per  cent,  of  our  soldiers  who  died 
in  the  worst  months  of  1855,  out  of 
every  hundred  ninety-six  died  of  hospital 
diseases  commonly  classed  as  prevent- 
ible.  Of  the  70,000  English  soldiers 
who  embarked  for  the  East,  we  lost 
22,000— of  whom  at  least  14,000  might 
have  been  saved  to  the  nation,  for  they 
died  of  diseases  which,  during  the  last 
six  months  of  the  campaign,  had  ab- 
solutely disappeared  from  our  camps. 

The  contrast  between  the  French  and 
English  armies  is  very  remarkable  and 
instructive.  During  the  winter  of 
1854-5,  the  military  administration  of 
the  French  army  was  admirable.  Not 
only  did  it  suffice  for  their  own  needs, 
but  in  the  most  critical  times  it  came  to 
our  relief  with  a  promptness  and  gene- 
rosity which  should  never  be  forgotten. 
After  Inkerman,  when  the  remnant  of 
our  army  were  slowly  carrying  off  the 
wounded  from  the  field  on  stretchers, 
the  French  train  des  equipages  came  to 
our  aid  with  500  mules.  Between  the 
1st  of  December  1854  and  the  20th  of 
January  1855,  8,000  English  sick  were 
carried — on  litieres,  lent  by  the  French 
administration — from  the  camp  before 
Sebastopol  down  to  Balaclava.  It  would 
seem  that  during  the  first  year  the  sani- 
tary condition  of  the  French  army  stood 
out  in  as  marked  and  as  favourable  con- 
trast to  ours  as  their  general  adminis- 
trative arrangements.  During  the  second 
year  of  the  siege,  however,  the  tables 
were  turned.  In  the  month  of  February 
1856,  20,800  sick  were  taken  to  the 


"  The  Last  Voice  from  the  Crimea" 


161 


French,  hospitals,  almost  all  of  whom 
died.  A  few  months  later  there  were 
73,422'  men  in  hospital  out  of  a 
force  of  142,391.  Typhus  fever  was 
raging  in  their  camps,  while  ours  were 
wholly  free  from  this  disease.  On  the 
whole  our  allies  lost  75,000  out  of  the 
309,000  men  who  went  to  the  war;  and 
from  Dr.  Shrimpton's  account  it  is  evi- 
dent that  the  average  who  died  of  pre- 
ventible  diseases  was  at  least  as  large 
as  it  was  amongst  our  troops. 

The  disasters  of  the  French  were, 
however,  not  directly  caused  by  any  short- 
comings in  their  military  administration, 
though  the  hospital  organization  seems 
at  last  to  have  broken  down.  The  ab- 
solute horror  of  pure  fresh  air,  with 
which  Dr.  Shrimpton  charges  the  whole 
French  nation,  mischievous  when  the 
troops  were  under  canvas,  became  fatal 
when  they  were  hutted.  "  Their  huts," 
the  doctor  says,  "  were  built  by  choice 
"  on  low  ground ;  pits  were  often  dug 
"  to  receive  them,"  and  every  possible 
precaution  was  taken  to  exclude  fresh 
air.  Even  the  hospital  huts  had  no 
ventilators,  and  only  three  windows  on 
one  side,  and  a  door,  with  a  small  win- 
dow above  it,  at  one  end,  all  of  which 
were  generally  kept  closed.  Both  huts 
and  hospitals  were  overcrowded,  and 
the  consequence  was  that  half  the  force 
was  laid  up  with  hospital-diseases  during 
the  last  six  months  of  the  war. 

The  English  huts,  on  the  contrary, 
were  placed  on  elevated  spots,  isolated 
from  each  other,  and  provided  with 
moveable  boarded  floors ;  they  were 
perfectly  ventilated,  and  never  over- 
crowded ;  and  in  them  the  British  army 
enjoyed  such  health  as  has  seldom  fallen 
to  the  lot  of  soldiers  in  a  campaign. 

Dr.  Shrimpton  preaches  earnestly  on 
the  text  that  "ventilation  is  the  only 
"  preventive  of  hospital  diseases,"  but 
does  not  seem  to  think  that  the  French 
military  authorities  have  yet  recognised 
the  fact.  The  evidence  of  the  Italian 
war,  however,  would  go  to  prove  that 
our  neighbours  have  not  forgotten  their 
Crimean  lesson.  In  that  campaign 
larger  powers  were  given  to  the  Physi- 
cian-in-chief  of  the  army  than  ever 

No.  50. — VOL.  ix. 


before,  and,  consequently,  the  sick  and 
wounded,  instead  of  being  crowded  in  a 
few  large  ill-ventilated  hospitals,  were 
distributed  in  a  number  of  smaller  ones. 
In  the  town  of  Brescia  alone  there  were 
thirty-eight  of  these.  The  result  was, 
as  the  Gazette  Medicate  avers,  that  there 
were  no  traces  of  hospital  diseases  in 
the  French  army  during  the  Italian 
Campaign. 

Let  us  see  how  we  have  profited  by 
our  Crimean  lesson.  At  the  beginning 
of  that  war  we  had  simply  no  military 
administration ;  but  times  are  changed 
since  then.  We  have  had  one  really 
searching  trial  of  the  machinery  which 
the  War  Office  has  organized  since  1855. 
Two  years  ago  our  Government  was  sud- 
denly called  upon  largely  to  reinforce  our 
army  in  Canada.  It  was  mid-winter. 
The  War  Office  had  scarcely  time  to  send 
off  a  small  staff  of  officers  in  advance, 
before  the  transports  sailed  from  our 
ports.  At  1.30  P.M.  on  January  3d,  1862, 
the  Australian,  with  General  Kumley 
and  staff,  the  1st  battalion  of  the  "Rifle 
Brigade,  and  a  battery  of  artillery,  on 
board,  arrived  off  St.  John  in  the  Bay 
of  Fundy,  the  spot  chosen  for  disem- 
barcation;  and  by  6.15  P.M.  all  the 
troops,  with  their  light  baggage,  were 
landed  and  housed.  St.  John  is  319 
miles  from  Riviere  du  Loup,  the  nearest 
point  of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway.  The 
tracks  were  in  several  places  almost 
impassable  when  first  visited  by  the 
officers  who  planned  the  route.  On  the 
10th  of  January  the  first  detachment 
started,  in  sleighs  holding  eight  men 
each.  The  route  for  each  detachment 
occupied  thirteen  days,  the  5th  and  10th 
of  which  were  spent  at  the  halt.  At 
the  eleven  stations  not  only  had  comfort- 
able sleeping  accommodation  been  pro- 
vided, but  also  commissariat  depots,  hos- 
pitals, and  telegraph  offices,  in  charge  of 
officers  of  the  military  train,  so  that  the 
slightest  delay  or  break- down  was  known 
at  once  along  the  whole  route,  and  all 
chance  of  crowding  at  any  station 
avoided.  So  perfect  was  the  organiza- 
tion along  the  route,  that  extra  warm 
clothing  was  circulated  along  the  line, 
each  detachment  being  provided  with  it 


162 


"  The  Last  Voice  from  the  Crimea" 


in  turn,  and  returning  it  into  store  at 
certain  stations,  from  whence  it  was 
sent  back  to  meet,  and  comfort,  fresh 
relays  of  men.  Day  by  day,  up  to  the 
12th  of  February,  the  detachments 
passed  along  the  route  without  inter- 
ruption, when  a  break  of  two  days 
occurred,  as  there  were  no  troops  left  at 
St.  John.  On  the  14th  the  route  was 
resumed.  On  the  20th,  in  consequence 
of  a  heavy  snow  fall  and  storm,  one 
detachment  had  to  return,  and  was  de- 
tained till  the  22d.  On  the  3d  of 
March  the  last  detachment  left  St.  John; 
and  with  its  arrival  at  Eiviere  du  Loup 
the  operation  of  moving  the  army  across 
New  Brunswick  was  finished. 

These  troops,  be  it  remembered,  had 
come  straight  from  the  life  of  English 
garrison  towns,  and  of  London,  into  the 
midst  of  a  Canadian  winter.  They  were 
moved  by  a  route  which  for  hundreds 
of  miles  ran  close  along  the  United 
States  frontier ;  yet  there  were  only  five 
casualties  and  eight  desertions.  There 
is  no  space  here  to  go  into  details.  The 
broad  results  only  can  be  stated.  But 
let  any  reader  think  for  a  moment  of 
the  difficulties  which  had  to  be  met  in 
this  case,  and  then  of  our  landings  at 
Malta,  at  Gallipoli,  and  at  Eupatoria, 
in  1854 — of  the  infinite  confusion  and 
helplessness,  of  the  want  of  all  proper 
stores,  of  doctors  having  to  make  them- 
selves personally  responsible  for  the 
blankets  required  for  the  sick,  of  soldiers 
obliged  to  kill  the  bullocks  of  the  arabas 
which  brought  their  baggage  or  to  go 
without  food — and  I  think  he  will  need 
no  further  evidence  of  the  value  of  an 
efficient  military  administration. 

This  is  the  one  lesson  of  the  Crimean 
war  which,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  has  been 
well  burnt  into  the  English  mind.  The 
French  service  of  administration,  pro- 
bably the  best  that  has  ever  been  seen, 
comprises  distinct  branches  for  pro- 


visions, forage,  transport,  hospital,  en- 
campment. All  of  these,  however,  are 
under  one  chief,  the  Intendant  General, 
himself  an  officer  of  high  rank,  respon- 
sible for  the  whole  military  adminis- 
tration, but  responsible  only  to  the  very 
highest  military  authority.  We  on  the 
other  hand  have  a  divided  Govern- 
ment in  our  military  affairs,  and,  while 
this  is  so,  are  never  likely  to  reach  the 
point  of  thorough  efficiency,  in  which 
the  whole  power  of  the  nation  could  be 
put  out  on  the  shortest  notice.  But 
the  expedition  to  Canada  in  mid- winter 
has  at  least  proved,  that  now  we  have 
an  administration  that  does  not  break 
down  and  bring  us  to  shame  in  the  face 
of  all  Europe.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that 
we  shall  never  again  drop  back  into  the 
ante-Crimean  state  of  helplessness.  It 
is  a  mere  costly  and  cruel  sham  to 
pretend  to  keep  up  an  army  without 
an  effective  commissariat,  and  hospital 
and  transport  staff  and  machinery.  We 
have  no  right  to  send  brave  men  into 
the  field  to  fight  our  battles,  whom  we 
can  neither  feed,  nor  clothe,  nor  shelter, 
nor  tend  in  sickness.  Ours  are  not 
times  in  which  any  reduction  of  the 
army  is  possible,  or  likely  to  be  called 
for.  But,  if  such  times  should  come, 
the  experience  of  the  last  ten  years 
ought  at  any  rate  to  have  taught  us 
that  10,000  men  thoroughly  well  found 
are  equal  to  four  times  that  number 
left  to  shift  for  themselves.  The  most 
earnest  financial  reformer,  if  he  has  any 
honest  patriotism  in  him,  will  never,  by 
paring  down  a  branch  of  the  service 
which  is  the  foundation  of  all  military 
efficiency,  put  his  country  in  peril  of 
losing  her  soldiers  in  the  field  at  the 
rate  of  60  per  cent,  per  annum,  and 
so  renew  the  bitter  national  repentance 
and  wild  penitential  extravagance  which 
followed  in  England  on  the  winter  of 
1854-5. 


163 


A  SON  OF  THE  SOIL. 
PART  II. 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

NOVEMBER  weather  is  not  cheerful  on 
the  Holy  Loch.  The  dazzling  snow  on 
the  hills  when  there  is  sunshine,  the 
sharp  cold  blue  of  the  water,  the  withered 
ferns  and  heather  on  the  banks,  give 
it,  it  is  true,  a  new  tone  of  colour 
unknown  to  its  placid  summer  beauty  ; 
but,  when  there  is  no  sunshine,  as  is  more 
usual,  when  the  mountains  are  folded 
in  dark  mists,  and  the  rain  falls  cold, 
and  the  trees  rain  down  a  still  heavier 
and  more  melancholy  shower  of  per- 
petually falling  leaves,  there  is  little  in 
the  landscape  to  cheer  the  spirits  of  the 
inhabitants,  who,  fortunately  for  them- 
selves, take  it  very  calmly,  like  most 
people  accustomed  to  such  a  climate. 
The  farmer's  wife  of  Eamore,  however, 
was  not  of  that  equable  mind.  When 
she  looked  out  from  her  homely  parlour- 
window,  it  oppressed  her  heart  to  miss 
her  mountains,  and  to  see  the  heavy 
atmosphere  closing  in  over  her  own 
little  stretch  of  hill-side.  She  was  busy, 
to  be  sure,  and  had  not  much  time  to 
think  of  it ;  but,  when  she  paused  for  a 
moment  in  her  many  occupations,  and 
looked  wistfully  for  signs  of  "  clearing," 
the  poetic  soul  in  her  homely  bosom  fell 
subdued  into  an  unconscious  harmony 
with  the  heavy  sky.  If  the  baby  looked 
pale  by  chance,  the  mother  took  gloomy 
views  of  the  matter  on  such  days,  and 
was  subject  to  little  momentary  failures 
of  hope  and  courage,  which  amazed, 
and  at  the  same  time  amused,  big  Colin, 
who  by  this  time  knew  all  about  it. 

"  You  were  blythe  enough  about  us 
a'  yesterday,  Jeanie,"  he  would  say  with 
a  smile,  "  and  nothing's  happened  to 
change  the  prospect  but  the  rain.  It's 
just  as  weel  for  the  wean  that  the 
doctor's  a  dozen  miles  off;  for  it's  your 


e'en  that  want  physic,  and  a  glint 
o'  sunshine  would  set  a'  right."  He 
was  standing  by  her,  hovering  like  a 
great  good-humoured  cloud,  his  eyes 
dwelling  upon  her  with  that  tender 
perception  of  her  sacred  weakness,  and 
admiring  pride  in  her  more  delicate 
faculties, which  are  of  the  highest  essence 
of  love. 

"  I  hope  you  dinna  think  me  a  fool 
altogether,"  the  mistress  would  answer, 
with  momentary  offence  ;  "  as  if  I  was 
thinking  of  the  rain,  or  as  if  there 
was  onything  but  rain  to  be  lookit  for  ! 
but  when  I  mind  that  my  Colin  gangs 
away  the  morn —  " 

Arid  then  she  took  up  her  basket  of 
mended  stockings,  and,  with  a  little  im- 
patience, to  hide  a  chance  drop  on  her 
eyelash,  carried  them  away  to  Colin's 
room,  where  his  chest  stood  open  and 
was  being  packed  for  the  journey.  It 
was  not  a  very  long  journey,  but  it  was 
the  boy's  first  outset  into  independent 
life;  and  very  independent  life  was 
that  which  awaited  the  country  lad  in 
Glasgow,  where  he  was  going  to  the  Uni- 
versity. On  such  a  day  dark  shadows 
of  many  a  melancholy  story  floated 
somehow  upon  the  darkened  atmosphere 
into  Mrs.  Campbell's  mind. 

"  If  we  could  but  have  boarded  Mm 
in  a  decent  family,"  she  said  to  herself, 
as  she  packed  her  boy's  stockings.  But 
it  had  been  "  a  bad  year  "  at  Raniore, 
and  no  decent  family  would  have  re- 
ceived young  Colin  for  so  small  a  sum 
as  that  on  which  he  himself  and  various 
more  wise  advisers  considered  it  possible 
for  him  to  live,  by  the  help  of  an  occa- 
sional hamper  of  home-produce,  in  a 
little  lodging  of  his  own.  Mrs.  Camp- 
bell had  acceded  to  this  arrangement  as 
the  best ;  but  it  occurred  to  her  to 
remember  various  wrecks  she  had  en- 
countered even  in  her  innocent  life ; 

M2 


164 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


and  her  heart  failed  her  a  little  as  she 
leaned  over  Colin's  big  "  kist." 

Colin  himself  said  very  little  on  the 
subject,  though  he  thought  of  nothing 
else  ;  but  he  was  a  taciturn  Scotch  boy, 
totally  unused  to  disclose  his  feelings. 
He  was  strolling  round  and  round  the 
place  with  his  hands  in  his  pockets, 
gradually  getting  soaked  by  the  per- 
sistent rain,  and  rather  liking  it  than 
otherwise.  As  he  strayed  about — having 
nothing  to  do  that  day  in  consideration  of 
its  being  hislastdayathome — Colin's  pre- 
sence was  by  no  means  welcomed  by  the 
other  people  about  the  farm.  Of  course, 
being  unoccupied  himself,  he  had  the 
sharpest  eyes  for  every  blunder  that  was 
going  on  in  the  stable  or  the  byre,  and 
announced  his  little  discoveries  with  a 
charming  candour.  But  in  his  heart, 
even  at  the  moment  when  he  was  driv- 
ing Jess  to  frenzy  by  uncalled-for  re- 
marks touching  the  dinner  of  the  pigs, 
Colin  was  all  a-blaze  with  anticipation 
of  the  new  life  that  was  to  begin  to- 
morrow. He  thought  of  it  as  some- 
thing grand  and  complete,  not  made  up 
of  petty  details  like  this  life  he  was 
leaving.  It  was  a  mist  of  learning, 
daily  stimulation  and  encounter  of  wits, 
with  glorious  prizes  and  honours  hang- 
ing in  the  hazy  distance,  which  Colin 
saw  as  he  went  strolling  about  the  farm- 
yard in  the  rain,  with  his  hands  in  his 
pockets.  If  he  said  anything  articulate 
to  himself  on  the  subject,  it  was  com- 
prised in  one  succinct,  but  seemingly 
inapplicable,  statement.  "Eton's  no  a 
college,"  he  said  once,  under  his  breath, 
with  a  dark  glow  of  satisfaction  on  his 
face  as  he  stopped  opposite  the  door, 
and  cast  a  glance  upon  the  loch  and  the 
boat,  which  latter  was  now  drawn  up 
high  and  dry  out  of  reach  of  the  wintry 
water ;  and  then  a  cloud  suddenly  lowered 
over  Colin's  face,  as  a  sudden  doubt  of 
his  own  accuracy  seized  him  —  a  tor- 
turing thought  which  drove  liim  indoors 
instantly  to  resolve  his  doubt  by  re- 
ference to  a  wonderful  old  Gazetteer 
which  was  believed  in  at  Eamore.  Colin 
found  it  recorded  there,  to  his  great 
mental  disturbance,  that  Eton  ^vas  a 
college ;  but,  on  further  inquiry,  derived 


great  comfort  from  knowing  that  it  cer- 
tainly was  not  a  university,  after  which 
he  felt  himself  again  at  liberty  to  issue 
forth  and  superintend  and  aggravate  all 
the  busy  people  about  the  farm. 

That  night  the  family  supper-table 
was  somewhat  dull,  notwithstanding  the 
excitement  of  the  boys,  for  Archie  was 
to  accompany  his  father  and  brother  to 
Glasgow,  and  was  in  great  glee  over  that 
unusual  delight.  Mrs.  Campbell,  for 
her  part,  Avas  full  of  thoughts  natural 
enough  to  the  mother  of  so  many  sons. 
She  kept  looking  at  her  boys  as  they 
sat  round  the  table,  absorbed  in  their 
supper.  "This  is  the  beginning,  but 
wha  can  tell  what  may  be  the  end  ?"  she 
said  half  to  herself;  "they'll  a'  be 
gane  afore  we  ken  what  we're  doing." 
Little  Johnnie,  to  be  sure,  was  but 
six  years  old ;  but  the  mother's  imagi- 
nation leapt  over  ten  years,  and  saw  the 
house  empty,  and  all  the  young  lives 
out  in  the  world.  "  Eh  me  !  "  said  the 
reflective  woman,  "  that's  what  we  bring 
up  our  bairns  for,  and  rejoice  over  them 
as  if  they  were  treasure  ;  and  then  by 
the  time  we're  auld  they're  a'  gane  ;" 
and,  as  she  spoke,  not  the  present  sha- 
dow only,  but  legions  of  vague  desola- 
tions in  the  time  to  come  came  rolling 
up  Like  mists  upon  her  tender  soul. 

"  As  lang  as  there's  you  and  me,  we'll 
fend,  Jeanie,"  said  the  farmer,  with  a 
smile ;  "  twa's  very  good  company  to  my 
way  o'  thinking ;  but  there's  plenty  of 
time  to  think  about  the  dispersion 
which  canna  take  place  yet  for  a  year  or 
twa.  The  boys  came  into  the  world  to 
live  their  ain  lives  and  serve  their 
Maker,  and  no'  just  to  pleasure  you  and 
me.  If  you've  a'  done,  ye  can  cry  on 
Jess,  and  bring  out  the  big  Bible, 
Colin.  We  maunna  miss  our  prayers 
to-night." 

To  tell  the  truth,  Colin  of  Ramore 
was  not  quite  so  regular  in  his  discharge 
of  this  duty  as  his  next  neighbour,  Eben 
Campbell  of  Barnton,  thought  neces- 
sary, and  was  disapproved  of  accordingly 
by  that  virtuous  critic  ;  but  the  homely 
little  service  was  perhaps  all  the  more 
touching  on  this  special  occasion,  and 
marked  the  "night  before  Colin  went 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


165 


first  to  the  college,"  as  a  night  to  be 
remembered.  When  his  brothers 
trooped  off  to  bed,  Colin  remained  be- 
hind as  a  special  distinction.  His 
mother  was  sitting  by  the  fire  -without 
even  her  knitting,  with  her  hands 
crossed  in  her  lap,  and  clouds  of  trou- 
bled, tender  thought  veiling  her  soft 
eyes.  As  for  the  farmer,  he  sat  looking 
on  with  a  faint  gleam  of  humour  in  his 
face.  He  knew  that  his  wife  was  going  to 
speak  out  her  anxious  heart  to  her  boy, 
and  big  Colin's  respect  for  her  judg- 
ment was  just  touched  by  a  man's  smile 
at  her  womanish  solemnity,  and  the 
great  unlikelihood  that  her  innocent 
advices  would  have  the  effect  she  ima- 
gined upon  her  son's  career.  But,  not- 
withstanding the  smile,  big  Colin,  too, 
listened  with  interest  to  all  that  his 
wife  had  to  say. 

"  Come  here  and  sit  down,"  said  Mrs. 
Campbell ;  "  you  needna'  think  shame  of 
iny  hand  on  your  head,  though  you  are 
gaun  to  the  college  the  morn.  Eh !  Colin, 
you  dinna  ken  a'  the  temptations  nor 
the  trials.  Ye've  aye  had  your  ain  way 
at  hame — " 

Here  Colin  made  a  little  movement 
of  irrepressible  dissent.  "  I've  aye  done 
what  I  was  bidden,"  said  the  honest 
boy.  He  could  not  accept  that  gentle 
fiction  even  when  his  heart  was  touched 
by  his  mother's  farewell. 

"  Weel,  weel,"  said  the  farmer's  wife, 
with  a  little  sigh  ;  "  you've  had  your  ain 
way  as  far  as  it  was  good  for  you.  But 
its  awfu' different,  living  among  strangers, 
and  living  in  your  father's  house.  Ye'll 
have  to  think  for  yoursel'  and  take  care 
of  yourse?  now.  I'm  no  one  to  give 
many  advices,"  said  the  mother,  putting 
up  her  hand  furtively  to  her  eyes,  and 
looking  into  the  fire  till  the  tears  should 
be  re-absorbed  which  had  gathered  there. 
"But  I  wouldna  like  my  firstborn  to 
leave  Ramore  and  think  a"  was  as  fair  in 
the  world  as  appears  to  the  common  e'e. 
I've  been  real  weel  off  a'  my  days,"  said 
the  mistress,  slowly,  letting  the  tears 
which  she  had  restrained  before  drop 
freely  at  this  reminiscence  of  happiness ; 
"  a  guid  father  and  mother  to  bring  me 
up,  and  then  him  there,  that's  the  kindest 


man  ! — But  you  and  me  needna  praise 
your  father,  Colin ;  we  can  leave  that  to- 
them  that  dinna  ken,"  she  Avent  on,  re- 
covering herself  ;  "but I've  had  ae  trouble 
for  a'  so  weel  as  I've  been,  and  I  mean 
to  tell  you  what  that  is  afore  you  set 
out  in  the  world  for  yoursel'." 

"Nothing  about  poor  George,"  said 
the  farmer,  breaking  in — 

"  Oh,  ay,  Colin,  just  about  poor  George ; 
I  maun  speak,"  said  the  mistress.  "  He- 
was  far  the  bonniest  o'  our  family,  and 
the  best-likit ;  and  he  was  to  be  a 
minister,  laddie,  like  you.  He  used  to 
come  hame  with  his  prizes,  and  bring 
the  very  sunshine  to  the  auld  house. 
Eh  !  but  my  mother  was  proud  ;  and 
for  me,  I  thought  there  was  nothing  in 
this  world  he  mightna'  do  if  he  likit. 
Colin,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell,  with  solemn 
looks,  "  are  ye  listening  ]  The  last  time 
I  saw  my  brother  was  in  a  puir  place 
at  Liverpool,  a'  in  rags  and  dirt,  with 
an  auld  coat  buttoned  to  his  throat,  that 
it  mightna'  be  seen  what  was  wantin', 
and  a'  his  wild  hair  hangin'  about  his- 
face,  and  his  feet  out  o'  his  shoon,  and 
hunger  in  his  eye — " 

"  Jeanie,  Jeanie,  nae  mair,"  said  big 
Colin  from  the  other  side  of  the  fire. 

"  But  I  maun  say  mair ;  I  maun  tell 
a',"  cried  his  wife,  with  tears.  "  Hunger 
in  his  bonnie  face,  that  was  ance  the 
blythest  in  the  country-side — no  hunger 
for  honest  meat  as  nature  might  crave, 
but  for  a'  thing  that  was  unlawfu',  and 
evil,  and  killin'  to  soul  and  body.  He 
had  to  be  watched  for  fear  he  should 
spend  the  hard-won  silver  that  we  had 
a'  scraped  together  to  send  him  away. 
Him  that  had  been  our  pride,  we  couldna 
trust  him,  Colin,  no  ten  minutes  out  o' 
our  sight  but  he  was  in  some  new 
trouble.  It  was  to  Australia  we  sent 
him,  where  a'  the  unfortunates  go.  Eh, 
me  !  the  like  o'  that  ship  sailing !  If 
there  was  a  kind  o'  hope  in  our  breasts 
it  was  the  hope  o'  despair.  It  wasna'  my 
will,  for  what  is  there  in  a  new  place  to 
make  a  man  reform  his  ways  ]  And  that 
was  how  your  Uncle  George  went  away." 

"  And  then  ?  "  cried  the  boy,  whose 
interest  was  raised,  and  who  had  heard 
mysteriously  of  this  Uncle  George  before. 


166 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


"  We've  heard  no  word  from,  that  day 
to  this,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell,  drying  her 
eyes.  "  Listen  till  I  tell  you  a'  that  his 
pleasurings  brought  him  to.  First,  and 
greatest,  to  say  what  was  not  true,  Colin 
— to  deceive  them  that  trusted  him.  If 
the  day  should  ever  dawn  that  I  couldna 
trust  a  bairn  o'  mine — if  it  should  ever 
come  sickening  to  my  heart  that  e'e  or 
tongue  was  false  that  belonged  to  me — 
if  I  had  to  watch  my  laddies,  and  to 
stand  in  doubt  at  every  word  they  said — 
eh  !  Colin,  God  send  I  may  be  in  my 
grave  afore  such  an  awfu'  fate  should 
come  to  me." 

Young  Colin  of  Eamore  answered  not 
a  word ;  he  stared  into  the  fire  instead, 
making  horrible  faces  unawares.  He 
could  not  have  denied,  had  he  been 
taxed  with  it,  that  tears  were  in  his 
eyes ;  but  rather  than  shed  them  he 
would  have  endured  tortures ;  and  any 
expression  of  his  feelings  in  words  was 
more  impossible  still 

"No  as  if  I  was  a  better  woman 
than  my  mother,  or  worthy  o'  a  better 
fate,"  said  the  thoughtful  mistress  of 
Ramore ;  "  for  she  was  ane  o'  the  ex- 
cellent of  the  earth,  as  a'body  kens ;  and, 
if  ever  a  woman  won  to  her  rest  through 
great  tribulations,  she  was  ane ;  and,  if 
the  Lord  sent  the  cross,  He  would  send 
the  strength  to  bear  it.  But  oh  !  Colin, 
my  man,  it  would  be  kind  to  drown 
your  mother  in  the  loch,  or  fell  her  on 
the  hill,  sooner  than  bring  upon  her 
such  great  anguish  and  trouble  as  I 
have  told  you  of  this  night." 

"Now,  wife,"  said  the  fanner,  inter- 
fering, "you've  said  your  part.  Nae 
such  thought  is  in  Colin's  head.  Gang 
you  and  look  after  his  kist,  and  see  that 
a'  thing's  right;  and  him  and  me  will 
have  our  crack  the  time  you're  away. 
Your  mother's  an  innocent  woman," 
said  big  Colin,  after  a  pause,  when  she 
had  gone  away  ;  "  she  kens  nae  mair  of 
the  world  than  the  bairn  on  her  knee. 
"When  you're  a  man  you'll  ken  the 
benefit  of  taking  your  first  notions  from 
a  woman  like  that.  No  an  imagination 
iu  her  mind  but  what's  good  and  true, 
It's  hard  work  fechting  through  this 
•world  without  marks  o'  the  battle,"  said 


big  Colin  with  a  little  pathos ;  "  but  a 
man  wi'  the  like  o'  her  by  his  side 
maun  be  ill  indeed  if  he  gangs  very  far 
wrang.  It  mightna'  be  a'  to  the  pur- 
pose," continued  the  farmer,  with  a  little 
of  his  half-conscious  common-sense  su- 
periority, "as  appeals  to  the  feelings 
seldom  are  ;  but,  Colin,  if  you  take  my 
advice,  you'll  mind  every  word  of  what 
your  mother  says." 

Colin  said  not  a  syllable  in  reply.  He 
had  got  rid  of  the  tears  safely,  which 
was  a  great  deal  gained :  they  must 
have  fallen  had  the  mistress  remained 
two  seconds  longer  looking  at  him  with 
her  soft  beaming  eyes  ;  but  he  had  not 
quite  gulped  down  yet  that  climbing 
sorrow  which  had  him  by  the  throat. 
Anyhow,  even  if  his  voice  had  been  at 
his  own  command,  he  was  very  un- 
likely to  have  made  any  reply. 

"  Ye'll  find  a'  strange  when  ye  gang 
to  Glasgow,"  continued  the  farmer. 
"  I'm  no  feared  for  any  great  temptation, 
except  idleness,  besetting  a  callant  like 
you ;  but  a  man  that  has  his  ain  bread 
and  his  ain  way  to  make  in  the  world 
has  nae  time  for  idleness.  You've  guid 
abilities,  Colin,  and  if  they  dinna  come 
to  something  you'll  have  but  yoursel'  to 
blame  :  and  I  wouldna'  put  the  reproach 
on  my  Maker  of  having  framed  a  useless 
soul  into  the  world,  if  I  were  you,"  said 
big  Colin.  "  There's  never  ony  failures 
that  I  can  see  among  the  lower  creation, 
without  some  guid  reason ;  but  it's  the 
privilege  o'  men  to  fail  without  ony 
cause  o'  failure  except  want  o'  will  to 
do  weel.  When  ye  see  the  like  of 
George  for  instance,  ye  ask  what  the 
Lord  took  the  trouble  to  make  such  a 
ne'er-do-weel  for  ] "  said  the  homely 
philosopher  ;  "I  never  could  help 
thinking,  for  my  part,  that  it  was  labour 
lost,  though  nae  doubt  Providence  kent 
better ;  but  I  wouldna'  be  like  that  if  I 
could  help  it.  There's  110  a  silly  sheep 
on  the  hill,  nor  horse  in  the  stable,  that 
isna'  a  credit  to  Him  that  made  it.  I 
would  take  good  heed  no  to  put  mysel' 
beneath  the  brute  beasts,  if  I  were 
you." 

"I'm  no  meaning,"  cried  Colin,  with 
ungrammatical  abruptness  and  a  little 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


167 


offence ;  for  he  was  pricked  in  his  pride 
by  this  address,  which  was  not,  according 
to  his  father's  ideas,  any  "  appeal  to  his 
feelings/'  but  a  cabin  and  common-sense 
way  of  putting  an  argument  before  the 
boy. 

"  I  never  said  you  were,"  said  the 
farmer.  "  It'll  cost  us  hard  work  to 
keep  ye  at  your  studies,  and  I  put  it  to 
your  honour  no  to  waste  your  time ; 
and  you'll  write  regular,  and  mind  what 
kind  o'  thoughts  your  mother's  thinking 
at  home  in  Ramore  ;  and  I  may  tell  you, 
Colin,  I  put  confidence  in  you,"  said 
the  father,  laying  his  big  hand  with  a 
heavy  momentary  pressure  upon  the 
lad's  shoulder.  "  Now,  good-night,  and 
go  to  your  bed,  and  prepare  for  the 
morn." 

Such  were  the  parting  advices  with 
which  the  boy  was  sent  out  into  the 
world.  His  mother  was  in  his  room, 
kneeling  before  his  chest,  adding  the 
last  particulars  to  its  store,  when  Colin 
entered  the  homely  little  chamber — but 
what  they  said  to  each  other  before  they 
parted  was  for  nobody's  ear ;  and  the 
morning  was  blazing  with  a  wintry 
brightness,  and  all  the  hills  standing 
white  against  the  sky,  and  the  heart  of 
the  mistress  hopeful  as  the  day,  when 
she  wiped  off  her  tears  with  her  apron, 
and  waved  her  farewell  to  her  boy,  as 
he  went  off  in  the  little  steamer  which 
twice  a  day  thrilled  the  loch  with  com- 
munications from  the  world.  "He'll 
come  back  in  the  spring,"  she  said  to  her- 
self, as  she  went  about  her  homely  work, 
and  ordered  her  household.  And  so 
young  Colin  went  forth,  all  dauntless 
and  courageous,  into  the  great  battlefield, 
to  encounter  whatsoever  conflicts  might 
come  to  him,  and  to  conquer  the  big 
world  and  all  that  was  therein,  in  the 
victorious  dreams  of  his  youth. 

CHAPTEE  V. 

THE  first  disappointment  encountered 
by  the  young  hero  was  the  wonderful 
shock  of  finding  out  that  it  was  not  an 
abstract  world  he  had  to  encounter  and 
fight  with,  but  that  life  was  an  affair  of 
days  and  hours  exactly  as  at  Ramore, 


which  was  about  his  first  real  mental 
experience  and  discovery.  It  was  a 
strange  mortification  to  Colin,  who  was, 
like  his  mother,  a  poet  in  his  soul,  to 
find  out  that  there  was  nothing  abstract 
in  his  new  existence,  but  that  a  per- 
petually recurring  round  of  lessons  to 
learn,  and  classes  to  attend,  and  meals  to 
eat,  made  up  the  days,  which  were 
noways  changed  in  their  character  from 
those  days  which  he  had  already  known 
for  all  the  fifteen  years  of  his  life. 
After  the  first  shock,  however,  he  went 
on  with  undiminished  courage — for  at 
fifteen  it  is  so  easy  to  think  that  those 
great  hours  are  waiting  for  us  somewhere 
in  the  undisclosed  orb  of  existence. 
Certainly  a  time  would  come  when  every 
day,  of  itself  a  radiant  whole  and  com- 
plete unity,  would  roll  forth  majestic 
like  the  earth  in  the  mystic  atmosphere. 
He  had  missed  it  this  time,  but  after  a 
while  it  must  come ;  for  the  future,  like 
the  past,  works  wonders  iipon  the  aspect 
of  time ;  and  still  it  is  true  of  the 
commonest  hours  that  they — 

"win 

A  glory  from  their  being  far, 
And  orb  into  the  perfect  star 
We  saw  not  when  we  walked  therein." 

So  thought  Colin,  looking  at  them  from 
the  other  side,  and  seeing  a  perfection 
which  nobody  ever  reached  in  this 
world.  But  of  course  he  did  not  know 
that — so  he  postponed  those  grand  days 
and  barred  them  up  with  shining 
doors,  on  which  was  written  the  name 
and  probable  date  of  the  next  great 
change  in  his  existence ;  and,  contenting 
himself  for  the  present  with  the  or- 
dinary hours,  went  light-hearted  enough 
upon  his  boyish  way. 

A  little  adventure  which  occurred  to 
the  neophyte  on  his  first  entrance  upon 
this  new  scene,  produced  results  for  him, 
however,  which  are  too  important  to 
be  omitted  from  his  history.  Every- 
body who  has  been  in  that  dingiest  of 
cities  knows  that  the  students  at  the 
University  of  Glasgow,  small  as  their 
influence  is  otherwise  upon  the  charac- 
ter of  the  town,  are  bound  to  do  it  one 
superficial  service  at  least.  Custom 


168 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


has  ordained  that  they  should  wear  red 
gowns ;  and  the  fatigued  traveller,  weary 
of  the  universal  leaden  grey,  can  alone 
appreciate  fully  the  sense  of  gratitude 
and  relief  occasioned  by  the  sudden 
gleam  of  scarlet  fluttering  up  the  long 
unlovely  street  on  a  November  day. 
But  that  artistic  sense  which  penetrates 
but  slowly  into  barbarous  regions  has 
certainly  not  yet  reached  the  students  of 
Glasgow.  So  far  from  considering  them- 
selves public  benefactors  through  the 
medium  of  their  red  gowns,  there  is  no 
expedient  of  boyish  ingenuity  to  which 
the  ignorant  youths  will  not  resort  to 
quench  the  splendid  tint,  and  reduce 
its  glory  as  nearly  as  possible  to  the 
sombre  hue  of  everything  around.  Big 
Colin  of  Eamore  was  unacquainted 
with  the  tradition  which  made  a  new 
and  brilliant  specimen  of  the  academic 
robe  of  Glasgow  as  irritating  to  the 
students  as  the  colour  is  supposed  to  be 
to  other  animals  of  excitable  temper  ; 
and  the  good  farmer  naturally  arrayed 
his  son  in  a  new  gown,  glorious  as  any 
new  ensign  in  the  first  delight  of  his 
uniform.  As  for  Colin,  he  was  far  from 
being  delighted.  The  terrible  thought 
of  walking  through  the  streets  in  that 
blazing  costume  seriously  counter- 
balanced all  the  pleasure  of  indepen- 
dence, and  the  pride  of  being  "  at 
college."  The  poor  boy  slunk  along  by 
the  least  frequented  way,  and  stole 
into  his  place  the  first  morning  like  a 
criminal.  And  it  was  not  long  before 
Colin  perceived  that  his  new  com- 
panions were  of  a  similar  opinion. 
There  was  not  another  gown  so  brilliant 
as  his  own  among  them  all.  The  greater 
part  were  in  the  last  stage  of  tatters 
and  dinginess,  though  among  a  com- 
pany, which  included  a  number  of 
lads  of  Colin's  own  age,  it  was  evident 
that  there  must  be  many  who  wore  the 
unvenerated  costume  for  the  first  time. 
Dreams  of  rushing  to  the  loch,  which 
had  been  his  immediate  resource  all  his 
life  hitherto,  and  soaking  the  obnoxious 
wrapper  in  the  salt-water,  confused  his 
mind;  but  he  was  not  prepared  for 
the  summary  measures  which  were  in 
contemplation.  As  soon  as  Colin  emerged 


out  of  the  shelter  of  the  class-room, 
his  persecution  commenced.  He  was 
mobbed,  hustled,  pelted,  until  his  spirit 
was  roused.  The  gown  was  odious 
enough ;  but  Colin  was  not  the  lad  to 
have  even  the  thing  he  most  wanted 
imposed  upon  him  by  force.  As  soon 
as  he  was  aware  of  the  meaning  of  his 
tormentors,  the  country  boy  stood  up 
for  his  gown.  He  gathered  the  glow- 
ing folds  round  him,  and  struck  out 
fiercely,  bringing  down  one  of  his  adver- 
saries. Colin,  however,  was  alone  against 
a  multitude  ;  and  what  might  have  hap- 
pened either  to  himself  or  his  gown  it 
would  have  been  difficult  to  predict, 
had  not  an  unexpected  defender  come 
in  to  the  rescue.  Next  to  Colin  in  the 
classroom  a  man  of  about  twice  his  age 
had  been  seated  —  a  man  of  thirty, 
whose  gaunt  shoulders  brushed  the  boy's 
fair  locks,  and  whose  mature  and 
thoughtful  head  rose  strangely  over  the 
young  heads  around.  It  was  he  who 
strode  through  the  ring  and  dispersed 
Colin's  adversaries. 

"For  shame  o'  yourselves,"  he  said 
in  a  deep  bass  voice,  which  contrasted 
wonderfully  with  the  young  falsettoes 
round  him.  "  Leave  the  laddie  alone ; 
he  knows  no  better.  I'll  lick  ye  a'  for 
a  set  of  schoolboys,  if  you  don't  let 
him  be.  Here,  boy,  take  off  the  red 
rag  and  throw  it  to  me,"  said  Colin's 
new  champion ;  but  the  Campbell  blood 
was  up. 

"I'll  no  take  it  off,"  cried  Colin; 
"  it's  my  ain,  and  I'll  wear  it  if  I  like  ; 
and  I'll  fell  anybody  that  meddles  with 
me!" 

Upon  which,  as  was  natural,  a  won- 
derful scuffle  ensued.  Colin  never  knew 
perfectly  how  he  was  extricated  from 
this  alarming  situation ;  but,  when  he 
came  to  himself,  he  was  in  the  streets 
on  his  way  home,  with  his  new  friend 
by  his  side — very  stiff,  and  aching  in 
every  limb,  with  one  sleeve  of  his  gown 
torn  out,  and  its  glory  minished  by 
the  mud  which  had  been  thrown  at  it, 
but  still  held  tightly  as  he  had  gathered 
it  round  him  at  the  first  affray.  When 
he  recovered  so  far  as  to  hear  some 
sound  besides  his  own  panting  breath, 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


169 


Colin  discovered  that  the  gaunt  giant 
by  his  side  was  preaching  at  him  in  a 
leisurely  reflective  way  from  his  eminence 
of  six  feet  two  or  three.  Big  Colin  of 
Ramore  was  but  six  feet,  and  at  that 
altitude  two  or  three  inches  tell.  The 
stranger  looked  gigantic  in  his  lean 
length  as  the  boy  looked  up,  half-won- 
dering, half-defiant,  to  hear  what  he 
was  saying.  What  he  said  sounded 
wonderfully  like  preaching,  so  high  up 
and  so  composed  was  the  voice  which 
kept  on  arguing  over  Colin's  headfc  with 
an  indifference  to  whether  he  listened 
or  not,  which,  in  ordinary  conversation, 
is  somewhat  rare  to  see. 

"It  might  be  right  to  stand  up  for 
your  gown ;  I'll  no  commit  myself  to 
say,"  was  the  first  sentence  of  the  dis- 
course which  fell  on  Colin's  ear;  "for 
there's  no  denying  it  was  your  own,  and 
a  man,  or  even  a  callant,  according  to 
the  case  in  point,  has  a  right  to  wear 
what  he  likes,  if  he's  no  under  lawful 
authority,  nor  the  garment  offensive  to 
decency,  but  it  would  have  been  more 
prudent  on  the  present  occasion  to  have 
taken  off  the  red  rag  as  I  advised.  It's 
a  remnant  of  superstition  in  itself,  and 
I'm  no  altogether  sure  that  my  conscience, 
if  it  was  put  to  the  question,  would  ap- 
prove of  wearing  gowns  at  all,  unless, 
indeed,  it  had  ceased  to  be  customary 
to  wear  other  garments  ;  but  that's  an 
unlikely  case,  and  I  would  not  ask  you 
to  take  it  into  consideration,"  said  the 
calm  voice,  half  a  mile  over  Colin's 
head.  "It's  a  kind  of  relic  of  the 
monastic  system,  which  is  out  of  accord- 
ance with  modern  ideas  ;  but,  as  you're 
no  old  enough  to  have  any  opinions — " 
"  I  have  as  good  a  right  to  have 
opinions  as  you, "  exclaimed  Colin, 
promptly,  glad  of  an  opportunity  to  con- 
tradict and  defy  somebody,  and  get  rid 
of  the  fumes  of  his  excitement. 

"That's  no  the  subject  under  dis- 
cussion," said  the  stranger.  "  I  never 
said  any  man  had  a  right  to  opinions  ; 
I  incline  to  the  other  side  of  that  ques- 
tion mysel'.  The  thing  we  were  arguing 
was  the  gown.  A  new  red  gown  is  as 
aggravating  to  the  students  of  Glasgow 
University  as  if  they  were  so  many  bulls 


— no  that  I  mean  to  imply  that  they're 
anything  so  forcible.  You'll  have  to 
yield  to  the  popular  superstitions  if  you 
would  live  in  peace." 

"I'm  no  heeding  about  living  in 
peace/'  interrupted  Colin.  "  I'm  no 
feared.  It's  naebody's  business  but  my 
ain.  My  gown  is  my  gown,  and  I'll  no 
change  it  if — " 

"  Let  me  speak,"  said  his  new  friend  ; 
"  you're  terrible  talkative  for  a  callant. 
Where  do  you  live  ?  I'll  go  home  with 
ye  and  argue  the  question.  Besides, 
you've  got  a  knock  on  the  head  there 
that  wants  looking  to,  and  I  suppose 
you're  in  Glasgow  by  yourself?  You 
needna'  thank  me,  it's  no  necessary," 
said  the  stranger,  with  a  bland  move- 
ment of  the  hand. 

"I  wasna'  meaning  to  thank  you. 
I'm  living  in  Donaldson's  Land,  and  I 
can  take  care  of  myself,"  said  Colin. 
But  the  boy  was  no  match,  for  his  ex- 
perienced classfellow,  who  went  on 
calmly  preaching  as  before,  arguing  all 
kinds  of  questions,  till  the  two  arrived 
at  the  foot  of  the  stairs  which  led  to 
Colin's  humble  lodging.  The  stair  was 
long,  narrow,  and  not  very  clean.  It 
bore  stains  of  spilt  milk  on  one  flight, 
and  long  droppings  of  water  on  another ; 
and  all  the  miscellaneous  smells  of  half 
a  dozen  different  households,  none  of 
them  particularly  dainty  in  their  habits, 
were  caught  and  concentrated  in  the 
deep  well  of  a  staircase,  into  which  they 
all  opened.  Colin's  abode  was  at  the 
very  top.  His  landlady  was  a  poor 
widow,  who  had  but  three  rooms,  and 
a  host  of  children.  The  smallest  of 
the  three  rooms  was  let  to  Colin,  and 
in  the  other  two  she  put  up  somehow 
her  own  sons  and  daughters,  and  did 
her  mantua-making,  and  accomplished 
her  humble  cookery.  The  rooms  had 
sloping  roofs  and  attic  windows ;  and 
two  chairs  and  a  slip  of  carpet  made 
Colin's  apartment  splendid.  Colin  led 
the  way  for  his  "  friend,"  not  without  a 
slight  sentiment  of  pride,  which  had 
taken  the  place  of  his  first  annoyance. 
After  all,  it  was  imposing  to  his  imagina- 
tion to  have  his  society  sought  by  another 
student,  a  man  so  much  older  than  him.- 


170 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


self ;  and  Colin  was  not  unaware  of  the 
worship  which  it  would  gain  for  him  in 
the  eyes  of  his  hostess,  who  had  looked 
on  him  dubiously  on  the  day  of  his 
arrival,  and  designated  him  "little 
mair  than  a  bairn."  Colin  was  very 
gracious  in  doing  the  honours  of  his 
room  to  his  unsolicited  visitor,  and  spoke 
loud  out  that  Mrs.  Fergus  might  hear. 
"  You'll  have  to  stoop  when  you  go  in 
at  tlvat  door,"  said  the  boy,  already 
learning  with  natural  art  to  shine  in 
reflected  glory.  But  Colin  was  less 
complacent  when  they  had  entered  the 
room,  half  from  natural  shyness,  half 
from  an  equally  natural  defiance  and 
opposition  to  the  grown-up  and  experi- 
enced person  who  had  escorted  him 
home. 

"  "Well,"  said  this  strange  personage, 
stooping  grimly  to  contemplate  himself 
in  the  little  square  of  looking-glass 
which  hung  over  Colin's  table ;  "  you 
and  me  are  no  very  like  classfellows ; 
but  I  like  a  laddie  that  has  some  spirit 
and  stands  up  for  his  rights.  Of  course 
you  come  from  the  country;  but  first 
come  here,  my  boy,  before  you  answer 
any  questions,  and  let  me  see  that  knock 
on  your  head." 

"I  had  nae  intention  of  answering 
any  questions ;  and  I  can  take  care  of 
myself,"  answered  Colin,  hanging  back 
and  declining  the  invitation.  The 
stranger,  however,  only  smiled,  stretched 
out  his  long  arm,  and  drew  the  boy  to- 
wards him.  And  certainly  he  had  re- 
ceived a  cut  on  the  head  which  required 
to  be  attended  to.  Reluctant  as  he  was, 
the  lad  was  too  shy  to  make  any  active 
resistance,  even  if  he  had  possessed 
moral  courage  enough  to  oppose  suc- 
cessfully the  will  of  a  man  so  much 
older  than  himself.  He  submitted  to 
have  the  cut  bathed  and  plastered  up, 
which  his  new  friend  did  with  the  ut- 
most tenderness,  delivering  a  slow  and 
lengthy  address  all  the  while  over  his 
head.  When  the  operation  was  over, 
Colin  was  more  and  more  perplexed 
what  to  do  with  his  visitor  ;  though  a 
little  faint  after  his  fight  and  excite- 
ment, he  was  still  well  enough  to  be 
very  hungry,  but  the  idea  of  asking  this 


unknown  friend  to  share  his  dinner  did 
not  occur  to  him.  He  had  never  done 
anything  beyond  launching  the  boat,  or 
mounting  the  horses  on  his  own  respon- 
sibility before,  and  he  could  not  tell  what 
Mrs.  Fergus  would  think  of  his  wound 
or  his  visitor.  Altogether,  Colin  was 
highly  perplexed  and  not  over  civil, 
and  sat  down  upon  the  edge  of  a  chair 
facing  the  intruder  with  an  expression 
of  countenance  very  plainly  intimating 
that  he  thought  hfm  much  in  the 
way. 

But  the  stranger  was  much  above 
any  consideration  of  Colin's  counten- 
ance. He  was  very  tall,  as  we  have  said, 
very  gaunt  and  meagre,  with  a  long, 
pale  face  surmounted  by  black  locks, 
thin  and  dishevelled.  He  had  a  black 
beard,  too — a  thing  much  less  common 
at  that  time  than  now — which  increased 
his  general  aspect  of  dishevelment. 
His  eyes  were  large,  and  looked  larger 
from  the  great  sockets  hollowed  out 
by  something  more  than  years,  from 
which  they  looked  out  as  from  two  pale 
caverns  ;  and,  with  all  this  gauntness  of 
aspect,  his  smile,  when  he  smiled,  which 
was  seldom,  threw  a  wonderful  light 
over  his  face,  and  reminded  Colin  some- 
how, he  could  not  tell  how,  of  the 
sudden  gleam  of  the  sun  over  the  Holy 
Loch  when  the  clouds  were  at  the 
darkest,  and  melted  the  boy's  heart  in 
spite  of  himself. 

"  I  was  saying  we  were  not  very  like 
classfellows,"  said  the  stranger  ;  "  that's 
a  queer  feature  in  our  Scotch  colleges  ; 
there's  you,  a  great  deal  too  young,  and 
me  a  great  deal  too  old ;  and  here  we 
meet  for  the  same  purpose,  to  learn  two 
dead  languages  and  some  sciences  that 
are  only  half  living ;  and  that's  the  only 
way  for  either  you  or  me  to  get  our- 
selves made  ministers.  The  English 
system's  an  awful  deal  better,  I'm  mean- 
ing in  theory — as  for  the  practice,  that's 
neither  here  nor  there.  Nothing's  right 
in  practice.  It's  a  great  thing  to  have 
a  right  idea  at  the  bottom  if  you  can." 

"  Are  you  to  be  a  minister  1 "  said 
Colin,  not  well  knowing  what  to  say. 

"When  I  was  like  you  I  thought 
so,"  said  his  new  friend ;  "  it's  a  long 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


171 


time  since  then  ;  but,  when  I  get  a  good 
grip  of  an  idea,  it's  no'  easy  to  get  it 
out  of  my  head  again.  This  is  my 
second  session  only,  for  all  that,"  he 
said,  after  a  momentary  pause ;  "  many 
a  thing  I  little  thought  of  has  stood  in 
my  way.  I'm  little  further  on  than  you, 
though  I  suppose  I'm  twice  your  age ; 
but  to  be  sure  you're  far  too  young  for 
the  college  ;  that's  what  the  Greek  pro- 
fessor in  Edinburgh  is  aye  havering  about ; 
he  might  turn  to  the  other  side  of  the 
question  if  he  knew  me."  And  the 
stranger  interrupted  his  own  monologue 
to  give  vent  to  a  long-drawn  breath,  by 
way  of  a  sigh,  which  agitated  the  atmo- 
sphere in  Colin' s  little  room,  as  if  it 
had  been  a  sudden  breeze. 

"  Mr.  Hardie's  son  was  only  thirteen 
when  he  went  to  the  college  ;  and 
that's  two  years  younger  than  me,"  said 
Colin,  with  some  indignation.  The 
lad  heard  a  sound,  as  of  knives  and 
plates,  outside,  and  pricked  up  his  ears. 
He  was  hungry,  and  his  strange  visitor 
seemed  rooted  upon  his  hard  rush- 
bottomed  chair.  But,  just  as  Colin's 
mind  was  framing  this  thought,  his  com- 
panion suddenly  gathered  himself  up, 
rising  in  folds,  as  if  there  was  never  to 
be  an  end  of  him. 

"  You  want  your  dinner  1 "  he  said  ; 
"  come  with  me,  it  will  do  you  good. 
What  you  were  to  have  will  keep  till 
to-morrow ;  tell  the  decent  woman  so, 
and  come  with  me.  I'm  poor,  but  you 
shall  have  something  you  can  eat,  and 
I'll  show  you  what  to  do  when  you  are 
tired  of  her  provisions ;  so  come  along." 

"  I  would  rather  stay  at  home,"  said 
Colin ;  "  I  don't  know  you,  I  don't 
know  even  your  name,"  he  added  a 
minute  after,  feeling  that  he  was  about 
to  yield  to  the  strong  influence  which 
was  upon  him,  and  doing  what  he 
could  to  save  himself. 

"  My  name's  Lauderdale  ;  that's  easy 
settled,"  said  the  stranger ;  "  tell  the 
honest  woman  ;  what's  her  name  ? — I'll 
do  it  for  you.  Mrs.  Fergus,  my  young 
friend  here  is  going  to  dinner  with  me. 
He'll  be  back,  by-and-by,  to  his  studies; 
and,  in  the  meantime,"  said  Colin's  self- 
constituted  guardian,  putting  the  lad 


before  him,  and  pausing  in  the  passage 
to  speak  to  the  widow,  who  regarded  his 
great  height  and  strange  appearance 
with  a  little  curiosity,  "  take  you  charge 
of  his  gown  ;  put  it  up  the  chimney, 
or  give  it  a  good  wash  out  with  soap 
and  soda ;  it's  too  grand  for  Glasgow 
College";  the  sooner  it  comes  to  be  like 
this,"  said  the  gigantic  visitor,  holding 
up  his  own,  which  was  of  a  dingy  port- 
wine  colour,  "  the  better  for  the  boy." 

And  then  Colin  found  himself  again 
walking  along  the  Glasgow  streets,  in 
the  murky,  early  twilight  of  that  No- 
vember afternoon,  with  this  strange 
unknown  figure  which  was  leading  him 
he  knew  not  whither.  "Was  it  a  good 
or  a  bad  angel  which  had  thus  taken 
possession  of  the  fresh  life  and  unoccu- 
pied mind  ?  Colin  could  not  resist  the 
fascination  which  was  half  dislike  and 
half  admiration.  He  went  along  quietly 
by  the  side  of  the  tall  student,  who 
kept  delivering  over  his  head  that  flood 
of  monotonous  talk.  The  boy  grew  in- 
terested even  in  the  talk  before  they 
had  gone  far,  and  went  on,  a  little 
anxious  about  his  dinner,  but  still  more 
curious  concerning  the  companion  with 
whom  Fate  had  provided  him  so  soon. 


CHAPTEE  VI. 

"ISTo  that  I  mean  to  say  I  believe  in 
fate,"  said  Lauderdale,  when  they  had 
finished  their  meal ;  "  though  there  is 
little  doubt  in  my  mind  that  what 
happens  is  ordained.  I  couldna  tell 
why,  for  my  part,  though  I  believe  in 
the  fact — for  most  things  in  life  come 
to  nothing,  and  the  grandest  train  of 
causes  produce  nae  effect  whatever ; 
that's  my  experience.  Indeed,  it's  often 
a  wonder  to  me,"  said  the  homely  phi- 
losopher, who  was  not  addressing  him- 
self particularly  to  Colin,  "what  the 
Almighty  took  the  trouble  to  make 
man  for  at  a'.  He's  a  poor  creature  at 
the  best,  and  gives  an  awfu'  deal  of 
trouble  for  very  little  good.  Con- 
sidering all  things,  I'm  of  opinion  that 
we're  little  better  than  an  experiment, 
— and  very  likely  we've  been  greatly 


172 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


improved  upon  in  mair  recent  creations. 
Are  you  pleased  with  your  dinner? 
You're  young  now,  and  canna'  have 
much  standing  against  you  in  the  great 
hooks.  Do  you  ever  think,  laddie,  of 
what  you  mean  to  he  1" 

"  I  mean  to  be  a  minister,"  said  Colin, 
with  a  furious  hlush.  His  thoughts  on 
the  subject,  if  he  could  hut  have  ex- 
pressed them,  were  magnificent  enough, 
but  nothing  was  more  impossible  to  the 
shy  country  lad,  than  to  explain  the 
ambition  which  glowed  in  his  eager, 
visionary  mind.  He  would  have  sa- 
crificed a  finger  at  any  time,  rather  than 
talk  of  the  vague  but  splendid  inten- 
tions which  were  fermenting  secretly  in 
absolute  silence  within  his  reserved 
Scotch  bosom.  His  new  friend  looked 
with  a  little  curiosity  at  the  subdued 
brightness  of  the  boy's  eyes,  which 
spoke  more  emphatically  than  his  words. 

"  They  a'  mean  to  be  ministers,"  said 
Lauderdale,  in  his  reflective  way ;  "  half 
of  them  would  do  far  better  to  be 
cobblers;  but  nae  fool  could  ever  be 
persuaded.  As  for  you,  I  think  there's 
something  in  you,  or  I  wouldna  have 
fashed  my  head  about  you  and  your 
gown.  You've  got  a  fair  start,  and  nae 
drawbacks.  I  would  like  to  see  you  go 
straight  forward,  and  be  good  for  some- 
thing in  your  generation.  You  needna 
look  glum  at  me;  I'll  never  be  good 
for  much  mysel'.  You  see  I've  learnt 
to  be  fond  of  talking,"  ho  said,  philo- 
sophically ;  "  and  a  man  that  takes  up 
that  line  early  in  life  seldom  comes  to 
much  good  ;  though  I  grant  you  there's 
exceptions,  like  Macaulay,  for  example. 
I  was  just  entered  at  college,  when  my 
father  died,"  he  continued,  falling  into 
a  historical  strain.  "  I  was  only  a 
laddie  like  yoursel',  but  I  had  to  give 
up  that  thought,  and  work  to  help  the 
rest.  Now  they  are  all  scattered,  and 
my  mother  dead,  and  I'm  my  own 
master.  !N"o  that  I'm  much  the  better 
for  that ;  but,  you  see,  after  I  got§  this 
situation  " 

"  What  situation  ? "  said  Colin, 
quickly. 

"  Oh,  an  honourable  occupation," 
said  his  tall  friend,  with  a  gradually 


brightening  smile.  "  There's  ane  of 
the  same  trade  mentioned  with  com- 
mendation in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
Him  and  St.  Paul  were  great  friends. 
But  you  see  I'm  free  for  the  most  part 
of  the  day ;  and,  it  being  a  fixed  idea 
in  my  mind  that  I  was  to  go  to  the 
college  some  time  or  other,  it  was  but 
natural  that  I  should  enter  mysel'  as 
soon  as  I  was  able.  I  may  go  forward, 
and  I  may  not ;  it  depends  on  the 
world  more  than  on  me.  So  your 
name's  Colin  Campbell'? — the  same  as 
Sir  Colin ;  but,  if  you're  to  be  a  minister, 
you  can  never  be  anything  mair  than  a 
minister.  In  any  other  line  of  life  a 
lad  can  rise  if  he  likes,  but  there's  nae 
promotion  possible  to  a  minister.  If  I 
were  you,  and  fifteen,  I  would  choose 
another  trade." 

To  this  Colin  answered  nothing ;  the 
suggestion  staggered  him  considerably, 
and  he  was  not  prepared  with  anything 
to  say.  He  looked  round  the  shabby 
room,  and  watched  the  shabby  tavern- 
waiter  carrying  his  dinner  to  some  other 
customer ;  and  Colin's  new  unaccus- 
tomed eyes  saw  something  imposing  even 
in  the  aspect  of  this  poor  place.  He 
thought  of  the  great  world  which 
seemed  to  surge  outside  in  a  ceaseless 
roar,  coming  and  going  —  the  world 
in  which  all  sorts  of  honours  and 
powers  seemed  to  go  begging,  seeking 
owners  worthy  to  possess  them  :  and 
he  was  pursuing  this  splendid  chain  of 
possibilities,  when  Lauderdale  resumed 
his  monologue  : — 

"The  Kirk's  in  a  queer  kind  of 
condition  a'thegither,"  said  the  tall  stu- 
dent, "  so  are  most  Kirks.  Whenever 
you  hit  upon  a  man  that  kens  what 
he  wants,  all's  well;  but  that  happens 
seldom.  It's  no  my  case  for  one. 
And  as  for  you,  you're  no  at  the  age 
to  trouble  ^our  head  about  doctrine. 
You're  a  young  prince  at  your  year? — 
you  don't  know  your  privileges  ;  you  be- 
lieve everything  you've  been  brought  up 
to  believe,  and  are  far  more  sure  in  your 
own  mind  what's  false  and  what's  true 
than  a  college  of  doctors.  I  would 
rather  be  you  than  a'  the  philosophers 
in  the  world." 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


173 


"I'm  no  a  fool  to  believe  every- 
thing," said  Colin,  angrily  rousing 
himself  up  from  his  dreams. 

"  No,"  said  his  companion,  "  far  from 
a  fool ;  it's  true  wisdom,  if  you  could 
but  keep  it.  But  the  present  temper 
of  the  world,"  said  the  philosopher 
calmly,  "is  to  conclude  that  there's 
nothing  a'thegither  false,  and  few  things 
particularly  true.  When  you're  tired 
of  the  dinners  in  Donaldson's  Land," 
he  continued,  without  any  change  of 
tone,  "  and  from  the  looks  of  the  honest 
woman  I  would  not  say  much  for  the 
cookery,  you  can  come  and  get  your 
dinner  here.  In  the  meantime,  I'll  take 
ye  up  to  Buchanan  Street,  if  you  like. 
It's  five  o'clock,  and  the  shop-windows 
are  lighted  by  this  time.  I'm  very 
fond  of  the  lights  in  the  shop-windows 
inysel'.  When  I've  been  a  poor  laddie 
about  the  streets,  the  lights  aye  looked 
friendly,  which  is  more  than  the  folk 
within  do  when  you've  no  siller.  Come 
along ;  it's  no  trouble  to  me,  and  I  like 
to  have  somebody  to  talk  to,"  said 
Lauderdale. 

Colin  got  up  very  reluctantly,  feeling 
himself  unable  to  resist  the  strange  per- 
sonal fascination  thus  exercised  over 
him.  The  idea  of  being  only  somebody 
to  talk  to  mortified  the  boy's  pride, 
but  he  could  not  shake  himself  free  from 
the  influence  which  had  taken  posses- 
sion of  him.  He  was  only  fifteen,  and 
his  companion  was  thirty ;  and  the  shy 
country  lad  had  no  power  to  enfranchise 
himself.  He  went  after  the  tall  figure 
into  the  street  with  very  mingled  feel- 
ings. The  stream  of  talk,  which  kept 
flowing  on  above  him,  stimulated  Colin's 
niind  into  the  most  vigorous  action. 
Such  talk  was  not  incomprehensible  to 
a  boy  who  had  been  trained  at  Ra- 
more  ;  but  the  philosophers  of  the  Holy 
Loch  were  orthodox,  and  this  specimen 
of  impartial  though tfulness  roused  all 
the  fire  of  youthful  polemics  in  Colin' a 
bosom.  He  set  down  his  companion 
unhesitatingly,  of  course,  as  a  "sceptic," 
perhaps  an  infidel ;  and  was  almost 
longing  to  rush  in  upon  him,  with  arbi- 
trary boyish  zeal  and  disdain,  to  make 
an  end  on  the  spot  of  his  mistaken 


opinions.     As  for  Colin  himself,  he  was 
very  sure  of  everything,  as  was  natural  to 
his  years,  and  had  never  entertained  any 
doubts  that  the  Shorter  Catechism  was 
as  infallible  a  standard  of  truth,  as  it 
was  a  terrible  infliction  upon  the  youth- 
ful   memory.      Colin  went    along  the 
murky  streets,  by  his  companion's  side, 
thinking  within  himself  that,  perhaps, 
his  own  better  arguments   and  higher 
reason    might    convert    this   mistaken 
man,  and  so  listened  to  him  eagerly  as 
they  proceeded  together  along  the  long 
line  of  the  Trongate,  much  excited  by 
his  own  intentions,  and  feeling  some- 
how,  in  his  boyish  heart,   that    this 
universal     stimulation    of    everything, 
within  and  without,  was  a  real  begin- 
ning of  life.     For  everything  was  new 
to  the  country  boy,  who  had  never  in 
his  life  before  been  out  of  doors  at  night 
anywhere,  save   in   the   silent   country 
roads,  through  darkness  lighted  by  the 
moon,  or,  when  there  was  no  moon,  by 
the  pale  glimmer  of  the  loch.    Now  his 
eyes  were  dazzled  by  the  lights,  and  all 
his  senses  kept  in  exercise  by  the  neces- 
sity of  holding  his  own  way,  and  resist- 
ing the  pressure  of  the  human  current 
which  flowed  past  him  ;  while  Lauder- 
dale kept  talking  of  a  hundred  things 
which  were  opposed  to  the  belief  of  the 
lad,  and  which,  amid  all  this  unaccus- 
tomed hubbub,  he  had  to  listen  to  with  all 
his  might  lest  he  should  lose  the  thread 
of  the  argument — a  loose  thread  enough, 
certainly,  but  still  with  some  coherence 
and  connexion.     All  this  made  Colin's 
heart  thrill  with  a  warmer  consciousness 
of  life.  He  was  only  in  Glasgow,  among 
floods  of  dusky  craftsmen  going  home 
from  their  work ;    but  it  appeared  to 
his  young  eyes  that  he  had  suddenly 
fallen  upon  the  most  frequented  ways 
of  life  and  into  the  heart  of  the  vast 
world. 

"  I'm  fond  of  a  walk  in  the  Trongate 
mysel',  especially  when  the  lamps  are 
lighted,"  said  Lauderdale ;  "  I  never 
heard  of  a  philosopher  but  was.  No  that 
I  am  a  philosoper,  but — .  It's  here  ye 
see  the  real  aspect  of  human  affairs. 
Here,  take  the  shopwindows,  or  take  the 
passengers,  there's  little  to  be  seen  but 


174 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


what's  necessary  to  life  ;  but  yonder," 
said  the  reflective  student,  pointing 
over  Colin' s  head  to  the  street  they 
were  approaching,  "  there's  nothing  but 
luxury.  We  spend  a  great  deal  of 
siller  in  Glasgow — we're  terrible  rich, 
some  of  us,  and  like  the  best  of  every- 
thing— but  there's  no  so  much  difference 
as  you  would  think  I  have  no  pleasure 
in  this  side  of  wealth  for  my  part] 
there's  an  awful  suggestion  of  eating 
and  drinking  in  everything  about  here. 
Even  the  grand  furniture  and  the  pic- 
tures have  a  kind  of  haze  about  them, 
as  if  ye  could  only  see  them  through  a 
dinner.  I  don't  pretend  to  have  any 
knowledge  for  my  own  part  of  rich 
men's  feasts ;  but  it's  no  pleasant  to 
think  that  Genius  and  Art,  no  to  speak 
of  a  great  deal  of  skilful  workmanship, 
should  be  all  subservient  to  a  man's 
pleasure  in  his  dinner,  and  that  thafs 
what  they're  here  for.  Hallo,  laddie,  1 
thought  you  had  no  friends  in  Glasgow  ? 
there's  somebody  yonder  waving  their 
hands  to  you.  What  do  you  hang  back 
for  ?  it's  a  lady  in  a  carriage.  Have 
you  no  respect  for  yoursel'  that  you're 
so  slow  to  answer  ? "  cried  Colin's  moni- 
tor, indignantly.  Colin  would  gladly 
have  sunk  through  the  pavement,  or 
darted  up  a  friendly  dark  alley  which 
presented  itself  close  by,  but  such  an 
escape  was  not  possible.  It  was  Lady 
Frankland  who  was  making  signals  to 
him  out  of  the  carriage- window ;  and 
in  all  his  awkwardness,  he  was  obliged 
to  obey  them. 

As  for  Lauderdale,  whose  curiosity 
was  considerably  excited,  he  betook 
himself  to  the  window  of  a  printshcfp 
to  await  his  protege,  not  without  some 
surprise  in  his  mind.  He  knew  pretty 
nearly  as  much  about  Colin  by  this  time 
as  the  boy  himself  did,  though  Colin 
was  quite  unaware  of  having  opened  up 
his  personal  history  to  his  new  friend  ; 
but  he  had  heard  nothing  about  young 
Frankland,  that  being  an  episode  in  his 
life  of  which  the  country  lad  was  not 
proud.  Lauderdale  stood  at  the  print- 
shop-window  with  a  curious  kind  of 
half-pathetic  egotism  mingling  with  his 
kindly  observation.  No  fair  vision  of 


women  ever  gleamed  across  his  firma- 
ment. He  was  just  about  shaking 
hands  with  youth,  and  no  lady's  face 
had  ever  bent  over  him  like  a  star  out 
of  the  firmament,  as  the  gracious  coun- 
tenance of  the  English  lady  was  just 
then  bending  over  the  farmer's  son  from 
Eamore.  "  It's  maybe  the  Duchess," 
said  Lauderdale  to  himself,  thinking  of 
the  natural  feudal  princess  of  the  lochs  ; 
and  he  looked  with  greater  interest  still, 
withdrawn  out  of  hearing,  but  near 
enough  to  see  all  that  passed.  Colin 
for  his  part  did  not  know  in  the  least 
what  to  say  or  to  do.  He  stood  before 
the  carriage  looking  sulky  in  the  excess 
of  his  embarrassment,  and  did  not 
even  take  off  his  cap  to  salute  the  lady, 
as  country  politeness  and  his  anxious 
mother  had  taught  him.  And,  to  aggra- 
vate the  matter,  there  was  a  bewildering 
little  girl  in  the  carriage  with  Lady 
Frankland — a  creature  with  glorious 
curls  over  her  shoulders,  and  a  won- 
derful perfection  of  juvenile  toilette, 
which  somehow  dazzled  Colin's  unused 
and  ignorant  eyes.  In  the  midst  of  his 
awkwardness  it  occurred  to  the  boy  to 
note  this  little  lady's  dress,  which  was 
a  strange  thing  enough  for  him,  who 
did  not  know  one  article  of  feminine 
attire  from  another.  It  was  not  her 
beauty  so  much  as  the  delicacy  of  all 
her  little  equipments  which  amazed 
Colin,  and  prevented  him  from  hearing 
what  Lady  Frankland  had  to  say. 

"So  you  have  gone  to  the  Univer- 
sity 1 "  said  that  gracious  lady.  "  You 
are  ever  so  much  further  advanced  than 
Harry,  who  is  only  a  schoolboy  as  yet ; 
but  the  Scotch  are  so  clever.  You  will 
be  glad  to  hear  that  dear  Harry  is  quite 
well,  and  enjoying  himself  very  much 
at  Eton,"  continued  Harry's  mother, 
who  meant  to  be  very  kind  to  the  boy 
who  had  saved  her  son's  life.  Now 
the  very  name  of  Harry  Frankland  had, 
he  could  not  have  told  how,  a  certain 
exasperating  effect  upon  Colin.  He 
said  nothing  in  answer  to  the  gracious 
intelligence,  but  unconsciously  gave  a 
little  frown  of  natural  opposition, 
which  Lady  Frankland's  eyes  were 
not  sufficiently  interested  to  see. 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


175 


"  He  doesn't  care  for  Harry,  aunt," 
said  the  miniature  woman  by  Lady 
Frankland's  side,  darting  out  of  the 
dusky  twilight  a  sudden  flash  of  percep- 
tion, under  which  Colin  stood  convicted. 
She  was  several  years  younger  than 
he,  but  a  world  in  advance  of  him  in 
every  other  respect.  A  little  amuse- 
ment and  a  little  offence  were  in  the 
voice,  which  seemed  to  Colin,  with  its 
high-bred  accent  and  wonderful  "  Eng- 
lish," like  the  voice  of  another  kind  of 
creature  from  any  he  had  encountered 
before.  Was  she  a  little  witch,  to  know 
what  he  was  thinking?  And  then  a 
little  laugh  of  triumph  rounded  off  the 
sentence,  and  the  unfortunate  boy  stood 
more  speechless,  more  awkward,  more 
incapable  than  before. 

"  Nonsense,  Matty  ;  when  you  know 
we  owe  Harry's  life  to  him,"  said  bland 
Lady  Frankland.  "You  must  come 
and  dine  with  us  to-morrow ;  indeed  you 
must.  Sir  Thomas  and  I  are  both  so 
anxious  to  know  more  of  you.  Sir 
Thomas  would  be  so  pleased  to  forward 
your  views  in  any  way  ;  but  the  Scotch 
are  so  independent,"  she  said,  with  her 
most  flattering  smile.  "Was  that  your 
tutor  who  was  walking  with  you,  that 
very  tall  man  ?  I  am  sure  we  should  be 
delighted  to  see  him  too.  I  suppose  he 
is  something  in  the  University.  Oh  ! 
here  comes  my  husband.  Sir  Thomas, 
this  is — Oh !  I  am  sure  I  beg  your  pardon ; 
I  forget  your  name — the  dear,  brave, 
excellent  boy  who  saved  Harry's  life." 

Upon  which  Sir  Thomas,  coming  out 
of  one  of  the  shops,  in  that  radiance  of 
cleanness  and  neatness,  perfectly  brushed 
whiskers,  and  fresh  face,  which  distin- 
guishes his  class,  shook  hands  heartily 
with  the  reluctant  Colin. 

"  To  be  sure,  he  must  dine  with  us 
to-morrow,"  said  the  good-humoured 
baronet,  "  and  bring  his  tutor  if  he  likes ; 
but  T  thought  you  had  no  tutors  at  the 
Scotch  Universities.  I  want  to  know 
what  you're  about,  and  what  your  ideas 
are  on  a  great  many  subjects,  my  fine 
fellow.  Your  father  is  tremendously 
proud,  and  so  are  you,  I  suppose ;  but 
he's  a  capital  specimen  of  a  man,  and  I 
hope  you  allow  that  I  have  a  right  to  re- 


collect such  an  obligation.  Good-bye,  my 
boy,"  said  Sir  Thomas.  "  Seven  to- 
morrow— but  I'll  probably  be  at  your 
college  and  see  you  in  the  morning. 
And  mind  you  bring  the  tutor,"  he  cried, 
as  the  carriage  drove  off.  Lady  Frank- 
land  shed  a  perfect  blaze  of  smiles  upon 
Colin,  as  she  waved  her  hand  to  him, 
and  the  creature  with  the  curls  on  the 
other  side  gave  the  boy  a  little  nod  in  a 
friendly  condescending  way.  He  made 
a  spring  back  into  the  shade  the  minute 
after,  wonderfully  glad  to  escape,  but 
dazzled  and  excited  in  spite  of  himself ; 
and,  as  he  retired  rapidly  from  the  scene 
of  this  unexpected  encounter,  he  came 
sharp  up  against  Lauderdale,  who  was 
coming  to  meet  him,  with  his  curiosity 
largely  excited. 

"  It  was  me  he  took  for  the  tutor,  I 
suppose  1 "  said  the  strange  Mentor  who 
had  thus  taken  possession  of  Colin ;  and 
the  tall  student  laughed  with  a  kind  of 
quaint  gratification.  "  And  so  I  might 
have  been  if  I  had  been  bred  up  at 
Oxford  or  Cambridge,"  he  added,  after  a 
moment ;  "  that  is  to  say,  if  it  had  been 
my  lot  to  be  bred  up  anywhere  ;  but 
they've  a  grand  system  in  these  English 
universities.  That  was  not  the  Duke," 
he  said  interrogatively,  looking  at  Colin, 
whose  blood  of  clansman  boiled  at  the 
idea. 

"  That  the  Duke  ! "  exclaimed  the  boy 
with  great  disdain ;  "  no  more  than  I 
am.  It's  one  of  the  English  that  are 
aye  coming  and  making  their  jokes 
about  the  rain;  as  if  anybody  wanted 
them  to  come,"  said  Colin,  with  an  out- 
break of  scorn  ;  and  then  the  boy  re- 
membered that  Archie  Candlish  had  just 
bought  a  house  in  expectation  of  such 
visitors,  and  stopped  abruptly  in  full 
career.  "  I  suppose  the  English  are 
awfu'  fond  of  grouse,  or  they  wouldna' 
come  so  far  for  two  or  three  birds,"  he 
continued,  in  a  tone  of  milder  sarcasm. 
But  his  companion  was  not  to  be  so 
easily  diverted  from  his  questions. 

"  Grouse  is  a  grand  institution,  and 
helps  in  the  good  government  of  this 
country,"  said  Lauderdale,  "and,  through 
this  country,  of  the  world — which  is  a 
fine  thought  for  a  bit  winged  creature, 


176 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


if  it  had  the  sense  to  ken.  Yon's  an- 
other world,"  he  said,  after  a  little  pause, 
"  no  Paradise  to  be  sure,  but  something 
as  far  removed  from  this  as  Heaven 
itself ;  farther,  you  might  say,  for  there's 
many  a  poor  man  down  below  here 
that's  hovering  on  the  edge  of  heaven. 
And  how  came  you  to  have  such  grand 
friends  ? "  asked  the  self-constituted 
guardian,  stooping  from  his  lofty  height 
to  look  straight  into  Colin's  eyes.  After 
a  time,  he  extracted  the  baldest  narrative 
that  ever  was  uttered  by  a  hero  ashamed 
of  his  prowess  from  the  half-indignant 
boy,  and  managed  to  guess  as  clearly  as 
the  wonderful  little  lady  in  the  car- 
riage the  nature  of  Colin's  sentiments 
towards  the  young  antagonist  and  rival 
whom  he  had  saved. 

"I  wouldna  have  let  a  dog  drown," 
said  the  aggrieved  Colin ;  "  there  was 
nothing  to  make  a  work  about.  But 
you  would  have  laughed  to  see  that 
fellow,  with  his  boots  like  a  lassie's  and 
feared  to  wet  his  feet.  He  could  swim, 
though,"  added  the  boy,  candidly  ; 
"  and  I  would  like  to  beat  him,"  he 
said,  after  a  moment ;  "  I'd  like  to  run 
races  with  him  for  something,  and  win 
the  prize  over  his  head." 

This  was  all  Colin  permitted  himself 
to  say  ;  but  the  vehement  sentiment  thus 
recalled  to  his  mind  made  him,  for  the 
moment,  less  attentive  to  Lauderdale, 
who,  for  his  part,  was  considerably 
moved  by  his  young  companion's  excite- 
ment. "  I'm  not  going  to  see  your 
fine  friends,"  he  said,  as  he  parted  from 
the  boy  at  the  "stairfoot"  which  led  to 
Colin's  lodging  ;  "  but  there's  many  a 
true  word  spoken  in  jest,  and,  my  boy, 
you  shall  not  want  a  tutor,  though 
there's  no  such  thing  in  our  Scotch 
colleges." 


When  he  had  said  so  much,  hastily,  as 
a  man  does  who  is  conscious  of  having 
shown  a  little  emotion  in  his  words,  Co- 
lin's new  friend  went  away,  disappear- 
ing through  the  misty  night,  gaunt  and 
lean  as  another  Quixote.  "  I  should  like 
to  have  something  to  do  with  the  making 
of  a  new  life,"  he  said  to  himself,  mut- 
tering high  up  in  the  air  over  the  or- 
dinary passengers'  heads,  as  he  mused 
on  upon  his  way.  And  Colin  and  his 
story  had  struck  the  rock  in  the  heart 
of  the  lonely  man,  and  drawn  forth 
fresh  streams  in  that  wilderness.  He 
was  more  moved  in  his  imaginative,  re- 
flective soul,  than  he  could  have  told 
any  one,  with,  half-consciously  to  him- 
self, a  sense  of  contrast,  which  was  na- 
tural enough,  considering  all  things, 
and  which  coloured  all  his  thoughts, 
more  or  less,  for  that  night. 

As  for  Colin — naturally,  too — he 
thought  no  more  of  Lauderdale,  nor  of 
his  parting  words,  and  found  himself  in 
no  need  of  any  tutor  or  guide,  but  fell 
asleep  in  the  midst  of  his  Greek,  as  was 
to  be  expected,  and  dreamt  of  that 
creature  with  the  curls  nodding  at  him 
out  of  gorgeous  Lord  Mayor's  coaches, 
in  endless  procession.  And  it  was  with 
this  wonderful  little  vision  dancing 
about  his  fancy  that  the  Scotch  boy 
ended  his  first  day  at  the  University, 
knowing  no  more  what  was  to  come  of 
it  all  than  the  saucy  sparrow  which 
woke  him  next  morning  by  loud  chirp- 
ing in  the  Glasgow  dialect  at  his  quaint 
little  attic  window.  The  sparrow  had 
his  crumbs,  and  Colin  had  another  ex- 
citing day  before  him,  and  went  out 
quite  calmly  to  lay  his  innocent  hands 
upon  the  edge-tools  which  were  to  carve 
out  his  life. 

To  be  continued. 


MACMILLAN'S  MAGAZINE 


JANUAKY,  1864. 


THE  HILLYAES  AND  THE  BUBTONS :  A  STORY  OF  TWO  FAMILIES. 

BY  HENRY  KINGSLEY,  AUTHOR  OP    "  AUSTIN  ELLIOT,"  "  RAVENSHOE,"  ETC. 


CHAPTEE  X. 

ERNE  MAKES   HIS   ESCAPE   FROM   THE 
BRAZEN   TOWER. 

AFTER  his  wife's  death,  Sir  George 
Hillyar  transferred  all  the  love  of  his 
heart  from  the  dead  mother  to  the 
living  child.  He  was  just  to  his  eldest 
son ;  but  George  Hillyar  could  not  but 
see  that  he  was  as  naught  compared  to 
his  younger  half-brother — nay  more, 
could  not  but  see  that  there  was  some- 
thing more  than  mere  indifference  in 
his  father's  feeling  towards  him  ;  there 
was  dislike.  Carefully  as  Sir  George 
concealed  it,  as  he  thought,  the  child 
discovered  it,  and  the  boy  resented  it. 
And  so  it  fell  out  that  George  Hillyar 
never  knew  what  it  was  to  be  loved 
until  he  met  Gertrude  Neville.  By  his 
father's  mistaken  policy,  with  regard  to 
his  education,  he  was  thrown  among 
vicious  people,  and  became  terribly 
vicious  himself.  He  went  utterly  to 
the  dogs.  He  grew  quite  abandoned  at 
one  time  ;  and  was  within  reach  of  the 
law.  But,  perhaps,  the  only  wise  thing 
his  father  ever  did  for  him,  was  to  stop 
his  rambles  on  the  Continent,  and, 
partly  by  persuasion,  partly  by  threats, 
induce  him  to  go  to  Australia.  He 
got  a  cadetship  in  the  police,  partly  for 
the  pay,  partly  for  the  uniform,  partly 
for  the  sake  of  the  entree — the  recognised 
position  it  would  give  him  in  certain 
quarters.  So  he  raised  himself  some- 
what. He  found,  at  first,  that  it  paid 
No.  51. — VOL.  ix. 


to  be  respectable.  Then  he  found  that 
it  was  pleasant  to  be  in  society  ;  and 
his  old  life  appeared,  at  times,  to  be 
horrible  to  him.  And,  at  last,  he  fell 
in  love  with  Gerty  Neville  ;  and,  what 
is  stranger  still,  she  fell  in  love  with 
him.  At  this  time  there  is  a  chance 
for  him.  As  we  leave  him  with  good 
Mr.  Oxton,  looking  after  his  wounded 
comrade,  his  fate  hangs  in  the  balance. 

After  his  terrible  fiasco,  Sir  George 
would  have  no  more  of  schools  or  young 
servants.  He  had  been  careful  enough 
with  his  firstborn  (as  he  thought  then) ; 
he  .would  lock  Erne  up  in  a  brazen 
tower.  He  filled  his  house  with  grey- 
headed servants ;  he  got  for  the  boy, 
at  a  vast  expense,  a  gentle,  kind  old 
college  don  as  tutor — a  man  who  had 
never  taken  orders,  with  a  taste  for 
natural  history,  who  wished  to  live 
peaceably,  and  mix  with  good  society. 
The  boy  Erne  was  splendidly  educated 
and  cared  for.  He  was  made  a  little 
prince,  but  they  never  spoiled  him.  [He 
must  have  friends  of  his  own  age,  of 
course  ;  Lord  Edward  Bellamy  and  the 
little  Marquis  of  Tullygoram  were  Se- 
lected, and  induced  to  come  and  stay 
with  him,  after  close  inquiries,  and  some 
dexterous  manoeuvring  on  the  part  of 
Sir  George.  But  Erne,  did  not  take  to 
them.  They  were  nice,  clever  lads,  but 
neither  of  them  had  been  to  school, 
Erne  objected.  He  wanted  to  know 
fellows  who  had  been  to  school ;  nay, 
rebelliously  wanted  to  go  to  school  him- 
self— which  was  not  to  be  thought  of. 

N 


178 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


In  short,  at  fifteen,  Erne  was  a  very 
noble,  sensitive,  well-educated  and  clever 
lad,  without  a  single  friend  of  his  own 
age  ;  and,  becoming  rebellious,  he  began 
to  cast  about  to  find  friends  for  himself. 
It  was  through  Providence,  and  not  Sir 
George's  good  management,  that  he  did 
not  do  worse  in  that  way,  than  he  did, 
poor  lad. 

Sir  George  Hillyar  and  Mr.  Compton 
met  in  the  dining-room  at  the  second 
gong.  Sir  George  rang  the  bell  and 
asked  if  Mr.  Erne  was  come  in.  He 
was  not. 

"We  will  have  dinner,  though.  If 
the  boy  likes  his  soup  cold,  let  him  have 
it  so."  And  so  they  went  to  dinner. 

But  no  Erne.  Claret  and  abuse  of 
Lord  John ;  then  coffee  and  abuse  of 
Sir  Robert ;  but  no  Erne.  They  began 
to  get  uneasy. 

"  He  has  never  gone  out  like  this 
before,"  said  Sir  George.  "  I  must 
really  make  inquiries." 

But  no  one  could  answer  them.  Erne 
was  not  in  his  bedroom.  His  horse  was 
in  the  stable.  Even  Mr.  Compton  got 
anxious. 

Obstinate  men  are  pretty  sure  to 
adopt  the  counsels  they  have  scornfully 
declined,  as  soon  as  they  can  do  so 
without  being  observed.  Old  Compton 
knew  obstinate  men  well;  and  knew, 
therefore,  that  what  he  had  said  about 
Erne's  being  kept  in  solitude,  would, 
after  a  decent  lapse  of  time,  lead  to 
Erne's  being  treated  in  a  more  rational 
way.  He  knew  well  that  no  people 
are  more  easily  managed  than  obstinate 
people,  (by  those  whom  they  thoroughly 
respect),  if  a  sharp  attack  is  made  on 
them,  and  then  silence  preserved  on  the 
subject  ever  after.  He  knew  that  the 
slightest  renewal  of  the  subject  would 
postpone  the  adoption  of  his  advice 
indefinitely,  for  he  knew  that  obstinacy 
was  only  generated  by  conceit  and  want 
of  determination.  Therefore  he  was  very 
anxious. 

"Erne  has  bolted,"  he  thought, 
"  and  ruined  all.  There  is  no  chance 
of  knocking  sense  into  his  father's  head 
this  next  ten  years." 

But  8ir  George  walked  iineaaily  tip 


and  down,  thinking  of  far  other  things. 
His  terror  took  a  material  form.  Some- 
thing must  have  happened  to  Erne.  He 
had  gone  out  alone,  and  something  had 
befallen  him  ;  what,  he  could  not  con- 
ceive, but  he  vowed  that,  if  he  ever  got 
him  back  again,  he  should  choose  what 
companion  he  would,  but  should  never 
go  out  alone  any  more.  By  daylight  he 
was  half  crazy  with  anxiety,  and  just 
afterwards  frantic.  The  head  keeper 
came  in,  and  reported  that  one  of  the 
boats  was  loose  on  the  lake. 

They  dragged  it  madly,  from  end  to 
end.  The  country  people  heard  that 
young  Erne  Hillyar  was  drowned  in 
Stanlake  pool,  and  were  kind  enough  to 
come  in  by  hundreds.  It  was  the  best 
thing  since  the  fair.  The  gypsies  moved 
up  in  a  body,  and  told  fortunes.  The 
country  folks  came  and  sat  in  rows  on 
the  wire  fences,  like  woodpigeons  on 
ash  trees  in  autumn.  The  young  men 
and  boys  "  chivied  "  one  another  through 
the  flower-garden,  turned  on  the  foun- 
tains, and  pushed  one  another  into  the 
marble  basins ;  and  the  draggers  dragged 
in  the  lake,  and  produced  nothing  but 
waterlily  roots  ;  which,  being  mistaken 
for  rare  esculents  by  the  half-cockney 
population,  were  stolen  by  the  thousand, 
and,  after  abortive  attempts  to  eat  them, 
were  (politically  speaking)  thrown  in  the 
teeth  of  Sir  George  Hillyar,  at  the  next 
election,  by  a  radical  cobbler  who  com- 
pared him  to  Eoulon. 

At  five  o'clock,  the  body  not  having 
been  found,  Sir  George  Hillyar,  having 
pre- determined  that  his  son  was  drowned, 
gave  orders  for  the  cutting  of  the  big 
dam,  not  without  slight  misgivings  that 
he  was  making  a  fool  of  himself.  Then 
the  fun  grew  fast  and  furious.  This 
was  better  than  the  fair  by  a  great  deal. 
They  brought  up  beer  in  large  stone 
bottles  from  the  public-house,  and  en- 
joyed themselves  thoroughly.  By  a 
quarter  to  six  the  lake  was  nearly  dry, 
and  nearly  everybody  was  drunk.  At 
this  time  the  first  fish  was  caught ;  a 
young  man  ducked  into  the  mud,  and 
brought  out  a  ten- pound  carp  by  his 
gills,  exclaiming,  "  Here's  the  body, 
Bill ! "  which  expression  passed  into  the 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


179 


joke  of  the  evening.  Every  time  a 
fresh  carp,  tench,  or  pike,  was  thrown 
out  kicking  into  the  gravel,  the  young 
men  would  roar  out,  "  Here's  the  body, 
Bill,"  once  more.  At  last  the  whole 
affair  approached  very  nearly  to  a  riot. 
Women,  who  had  come  after  their 
husbands,  were  heard  here  and  there 
scolding  or  shrieking.  There  were  two 
or  three  fights.  There  had  been  more 
beer  ordered  than  was  paid  for.  A 
policeman  had  been  pushed  into  the 
mud.  But  no  body. 

The  butler,  coming  into  the  library  at 
ten  o'clock  to  see  the  windows  shut 
against  the  loose  characters  who  were 
hanging  about,  discovered  the  body  of 
Erne  Hillyar,  Esquire,  in  an  easy  chair, 
reading  Blackwood's  Magazine  by  a  bed- 
room candlestick.  And  the  body  said, 
"  I  say,  Simpson,  what  the  deuce  is 
all  that  row  about  down  by  the  lake  ?" 

"  They  have  cut  the  dam,  and  let  off 
the  water  to  find  your  body,  sir,"  replied 
Simpson,  who  prided  himself  on  not 
being  taken  by  surprise. 

"  What  fools,"  said  Erne.  "  Is  the 
Governor  in  a  great  wax  ?" 

"  I  fancy  not  sir,  at  present,"  replied 
Simpson. 

"  Tell  him  I  wish  to  speak  to  him, 
will  you,"  said  Erne,  turning  over  a 
page.  "  Say  I  should  be  glad  of  a  word 
with  him,  if  he  will  be  good  enough  to 
step  this  way."  And  so  he  went  on 
unconcernedly  reading ;  and  Simpson, 
who  had  a  profound  belief  in  Erne,  went 
to  Sir  George,  and  delivered  the  mes- 
sage exactly  as  Erne  had  given  it. 

Sir  George  came  raging  into  the  room 
in  a  very  few  minutes.  Erne  half-closed 
his  book,  keeping  his  finger  in  the  place, 
and,  quietly  looking  up  at  his  father,  said, 

"  I  am  afraid  you  expected  me  home 
last  night,  my  dear  father." 

Sir  George  was  too  much  astounded 
by  Erne's  coolness,  to  do  more  than 


"  I  hope  I  have  not  caused  you  any 
anxiety.  But  the  fact  is  this ;  I  went 
into  town  by  the  five  o'clock  train,  to 
see  the  Parkers  at  Brompton ;  and  they 
offered  me  a  bed  (it  being  late),  which  I 
accepted.  I  went  for  a  ramble  this 


morning,  which  ended  in  my  walking 
all  the  way  home  here ;  and  that  is 
what  makes  me  so  late." 

"  You  seem  to  have  a  good  notion 
of  disposing  of  your  own  time,  without 
notice,  sir,"  said  Sir  George,  who  had 
been  so  astounded  by  his  reception, 
that  he  had  not  yet  had  time  to  lay  his 
hand  upon  his  wrath  bottle. 

"  Yes,  I  like  having  an  impromptu 
ramble  of  this  kind.  It  is  quite  a  new 
experience  do  you  know,  dad,"  said 
Erne,  speaking  with  a  little  more  ani- 
mation, and  laying  aside  his  book  for 
the  first  time.  "  I  would  have  given  a 
hundred  pounds  for  you  to  have  been 
with  me  to-day.  iTew  scenes  and  new 
people  all  the  way  home.  As  new  to 
me — nay,  newer  and  fresher — than,  the 
Sandwich  Islands  would  be.  I  wish 
you  had  been  there." 

"  Doesn't  it  strike  you,  sir,  that  you 
are  taking  this  matter  somewhat  coolly1?' 
said  Sir  George,  aghast. 

"  No  !  am  I  ?"  said  Erne.  "  That  is 
a  compliment,  coming  from  you,  dad. 
How  often  have  you  told  me,  that  you 
hated  a  man  without  self-possession. 
See  how  I  have  profited  by  your 
teaching." 

"  Hold  your  tongue,  sir,"  said  Sir 
George,  finding  his  wrath  bottle,  and 
drawing  the  cork.  "Are  you  aware, 
sir,  that  the  dam  has  been  cut  to  find 
your  body  ?  Are  you  aware  of  that,  sir  ? 
Do  you  know,  sir,  that  the  populace  have, 
in  the  excitement  consequent  on  your 
supposed  death,  overrun  my  pleasure- 
grounds,  trampled  on  my  flower-beds, 
broken  my  statues,  and  made  faces  at 
my  lawyer  through  my  drawing-room 
window  V 

If  ever  you  try  a  torrent  of  invective, 
for  heaven's  sake  steer  clear  of  details, 
lest  in  the  heat  of  your  speech  you  come 
suddenly  across  a  ridiculous  or  homely 
image,  and,  rhetorically  speaking,  ruin 
yourself  at  once,  as  did  Sir  George  • 
Hillyar  on  this  occasion.  As  he  thun- 
dered out  this  last  terrible  consequence 
of  Erne's  absence,  Erne  burst  out  laugh- 
ing, and  Sir  George,  intensely  delighted 
at  getting  him  back  again  on  any  terms, 
and  also  dying  for  a  reconciliation,  burst 

N2 


180 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


out  laughing  too,  and  held  out  his  arms. 
After  which  the  conversation  took 
another  tone  ;  as  thus — 

"Why  did  you  go  away,  and  never 
give  me  notice,  my  boy  1 " 

"  I  won't  do  it  again.     I  will  tell  you 
next  time."     And  all  that  sort  of  thing. 
*  *  *  * 

"What  on  earth  has  come  over  the 
boy  ? "  said  Sir  George  Hillyar  to  him- 
self as  soon  as  he  was  in  bed,  lying  on 
his  back,  with  his  knees  up,  which  is 
the  best  attitude  for  thinking  in  bed. 
"  He  will  make  a  debater,  that  boy,  sir, 
mark  my  words.  I  tell  you,  sir,"  con- 
tinued he,  angrily,  and  somewhat  rudely 
contradicting  himself,  "  that  you  have 
been  a  fool  about  that  boy.  The  cool 
way  in  which  he  turned  on  you  to-day, 
sir,  and,  partly  by  calculating  on  your 
affection  for  him,  and  partly  by  native 
tact  and  self-possession,  silenced  you, 
sir  —  got  his  own  way,  established  a 
precedent  for  going  out  when  he  chose, 
and  left  you  strongly  disinclined  to  risk 
another  battle — was,  I  say,  sir,  masterly." 

After  a  time,  having  sufficiently  con- 
tradicted and  bullied  himself,  he  turned 
over  on  his  side,  and  said,  as  he  was 
falling  to  sleep — 

"  The  boy  is  wonderfully  changed  in 
one  day.  He  shall  go  again  if  he  chooses. 
I  never  saw  such  a  change  in  my  life. 
He  never  showed  fight  like  this  before. 
What  can  be  the  matter  with  him  ? " 

The  old  complaint,  Sir  George.  The 
T)oy  has  fallen  in.  love.  Nothing  else. 

CHAPTER  XL 

THE   SECRETARY   SEES  NOTHING   FOR   IT 
BUT  TO   SUBMIT. 
/ 

THE  talk  of  the  colony,  for  a  week  or  so, 
turned  upon  nothing  else  but  the  gallant 
exploit  of  Lieutenant  Hillyar  with  the 
bushrangers.  He  became  the  hero  of 
the  day.  His  orderly  persuaded  him  to 
have  his  hair  cut ;  and  the  locks  went  off 
like  smoke  at  half-a-crown  apiece  ;  so 
fast,  indeed,  that  the  supply  fell  short 
of  the  demand,  and  had  to  be  supplied 
from  the  head  of  a  young  Danish  trooper, 
who,  after  this,  happening  to  get  drunk 


in  Palmerston,  while  in  plain  clothes, 
and  not  being  recognised,  was  found  to 
be  so  closely  cropped,  that  it  was  neces- 
sary to  remand  him  for  inquiries,  as  it 
was  obvious  to  the  meanest  capacity  that 
he  hadn't  been  out  of  jail  more  than 
a  couple  of  days. 

The  papers  had  leading  articles  upon 
it.  The  Palmerston  Sentinel  (Squatter1 
interest,  conservative,  aristocratic),  said 
that  this  was  your  old  English  blood, 
and  that  there  was  nothing  like  it.  The 
Mohawk  (progress  of  the  species  and 
small  farm  interest),  said,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  this  Lieutenant  Hillyar  was 
one  of  those  men  who  had  been  unjustly 
hunted  out  of  his  native  land,  by  the 
jealousy  of  an  accursed  and  corrupt 
aristocracy,  in  consequence  of  his  liberal 
tendencies,  and  his  fellow-feeling  for 
the  (so-called)  lower  orders.  And  this 
abominable  Mohawk,  evidently  pos- 
sessed of  special  knowledge,  in  trying 
to  prove  the  habitual  condescension  of 
George  Hillyar  towards  his  inferiors,  did 
so  rake  up  all  his  old  blackguardisms 
that  Mr.  Secretary  Oxton  was  as  near 
niad  as  need  be. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that, 
when  poor  little  Gerty  Neville  heard  the 
news,  George  Hillyar  was,  to  her,  trans- 
formed from  a  persecuted,  ill-used,  mis- 
understood man,  into  a  triumphant  hero. 
She  threw  herself  sobbing  into  her 
sister's  arms,  and  said — 

"  Now,  Aggy  !  Now,  who  was  right  ? 
Was  not  I  wiser  than  you,  my  sister? 
My  noble  hero  !  Two  to  one,  Agnes, 
and  he  is  so  calm  and  modest  about  it. 
Why,  James  and  you  were  blind.  Did 
not  /  see  what  he  was  ;  am  7  a  fool  ? " 

Mrs.  Oxton  was  very  much  inclined 
to  think  she  was.  She  was  puzzled  by 
this  undoubted  act  of  valour  on  George 
Hillyar's  part.  She  had  very  good 
sense  of  her  own,  and  the  most  profound 

1  The  "squatters"  of  Australia  are  the  great 
pastoral  aristocrats,  who  lease  immense  tracts 
from  government  for  pasturage.  Some  or 
them  are  immensely  wealthy.  I  speak  from 
recollection,  when  I  say  that  one  of  Dr. 
Kerr's  stations,  on  the  Darling  downs,  when 
sold  in  1854,  contained  102,000  sheep,  whose 
value  at  that  time  was  about  25s.  a  piece.  An 
improvement  on  Saville  Row,  decidedly. 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


181 


belief  in  one  of  the  cleverest  men  in  the 
world — her  husband.  Her  husband's 
distrust  of  the  man  had  reacted  on  her; 
so,  in  the  midst  of  Gerty's  wild  enthu- 
siasm, she  could  only  hope  that  things 
would  go  right,  though  she  tried  to  be 
enthusiastic  for  Gerty's  sake. 

Things  were  very  near  going  right 
just  now.  The  Secretary  and  his  wife 
knew  too  little  of  their  man.  The  man's 
antecedents  were  terribly  bad,  but  the 
man  had  fallen  in  love,  and  become  a 
hero  within  a  very  few  months.  The 
Secretary  knew  men  well  enough,  and 
knew  how  seldom  they  reformed  after 
they  had  gone  as  far  as  (he  feared)  Lieu- 
tenant Hillyar  had  gone.  Both  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Oxton  were  inclined  to  distrust 
and  oppose  him  still,  in  spite  of  his  act 
of  heroism. 

But  the  man  himself  meant  well. 
There  was  just  enough  goodness  and 
manhood  left  in  him  to  fall  in  love 
with  Gerty  Seville :  and  a  kind  of  reck- 
less, careless  pluck  which  had  been  a 
characteristic  of  him  in  his  boyhood, 
had  still  remained  to  him.  It  had  been 
latent,  exhibiting  itself  only  in  causeless 
quarrels  and  headlong  gaming,  until  it 
had  been  turned  into  a  proper  channel 
by  his  new  passion,  the  only  serious  one 
of  his  life.  The  one  cause  combined 
with  the  other  ;  golden  opportunity 
came  in  his  way :  and  suddenly  he,  who 
had  been  a  distrusted  and  despised  man 
all  his  life,  found  himself  a  hero,  be- 
loved by  the  beauty  of  the  community, 
with  every  cloud  cleared  away  from  the 
future  ;  a  man  whose  name  was  men- 
tioned by  every  mouth  with  enthusiastic 
praise.  It  was  a  glimpse  of  heaven. 
His  eye  grew  brighter,  his  bearing  more 
majestic,  his  heart  softer  towards  his 
fellow-creatures.  He  was  happy  for  the 
first  time  in  his  life.  As  the  poor  god- 
less fellow  put  it  to  himself,  his  luck  had 
turned  at  last. 

But  we  must  go  a  little  way  back  in 
our  story.  While  he  and  Mr.  Oxton 
were  still  trying  to  make  the  wounded 
cadet  comfortable,  assistance  arrived,  and 
it  was  announced  that  the  other  bush- 
rangers were  captured.  (The  cadet  re- 
covered, my  dear  madam,  and  is  now 


the  worthy  and  highly  respected  chief 
commissioner  of  police  for  Cooksland.) 
So  the  Secretary  and  the  lieutenant  rode 
away  together. 

"  I'll  tell  you  what  I  would  do, 
Hillyar,"  said  the  Secretary ;  "  I  should 
ride  down  to  Palmerston  as  quick  as  I 
could,  and  report  this  matter  at  head 
quarters ;  you  will  probably  get  your 
inspectorship — I  shall  certainly  see  that 
you  do.  And  I  tell  you  what,  I  shall  go 
with  you  myself.  I  must  talk  over  this 
with  the  Governor  at  once.  "We  can  get 
on  to  my  house  to-night,  and  I  shall  be 
pleased  to  see  you  as  my  guest." 

"That  is  very  kind  of  you,"  said 
Hillyar. 

"I  cannot  conceal  from  you,"  said  the 
Secretary,  with  emphasis,  "that  I  am 
aware  of  your  having  proposed  yourself 
for  my  brother-in-law." 

"  I  supposed  you  would  know  it  by 
this  time.  I  have  laid  my  fortune  and 
my  title  at  Miss  Neville's  feet,  and  have 
been  accepted." 

"  Oh  Lord ! "  said  the  secretary,  as  it 
he  had  a  sudden  twinge  of  toothacne, 
"  I  know  all  about  it.  It  is  not  your 
fortune  nor  your  title  I  want  to  talk 
about.  What  sort  of  a  name  can  you 
give  her  \  Can  you  give  her  an  unsullied 
name  ?  I  ask  you  as  a  man  of  the  world, 
can  you  do  that  1 " 

"  As  a  man  of  the  world,  hey  1 "  said 
the  lieutenant;  "then,  as  a  man  of  the 
world,  I  should  say  that  Miss  Gertrude 
Neville  had  made  a  far  better  catch  than 
any  of  her  sisters  ;  even  a  better  catch, 
saving  your  presence,  than  her  sister 
Agnes.  Such  is  the  idiotic  state  of  Eng- 
lish society,  that  a  baronet  of  old  creation 
with  ten  thousand  a  year,  and  a  hand- 
some lady-like  wife,  will  be  more  re- 
pandu  in  London  than  a  mere  colonial 
official,  whose  rank  is  so  little  known  in 
that  benighted  city,  that  on  his  last  visit, 
the  mayor  of  Palmerston  was  sent  down 
to  dinner  before  him  at  Lady  Noahs- 
ark's.  If  you  choose  to  put  it  as  a  man 
of  the  world,  there  you  are." 

"The  fellow  don't  want  for  wit," 
thought  the  Secretary.  "I  have  got 
the  dor  this  time."  But  he  answered 
promptly — 


182 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  ; 


"  That  is  all  very  tine,  Hillyar  ;  but 
you  are  under  a  cloud,  you  know." 

"  I  must  request  you,  once  and  for 
ever,  sir,  not  to  repeat  that  assertion.  I 
am  under  no  cloud.  I  was  fast  and 
reckless  in  England,  and  I  have  been 
fast  and  reckless  here.  I  shall  be  so  no 
longer.  I  have  neglected  my  police 
duties  somewhat,  though  not  so  far  as 
to  receive  anything  more  than  an  admo- 
nition. What  man,  finding  himself  an 
heir-expectant  to  a  baronetcy  and  a  for- 
tune, would  not  neglect  this  miserable 
drudgery.  What  young  fellow,  receiv- 
ing an  allowance  of  three  hundred  a 
year,  would  have  submitted  to  the 
drudgery  of  a  cadetship  for  fourteen 
months  1  Answer  me  that,  sir  1 " 

The  Secretary  couldn't  answer  that, 
but  he  thought — "I  wonder  why  he 
did  it?  I  never  thought  of  that  be- 
fore." He  said  aloud,  "Your  case 
certainly  looks  better  than  it  did.  Hill- 
jar." 

"  Now  hear  me  out,"  said  George 
Hillyar.  "  My  history  is  soon  told. 
When  I  was  seven  years  old  my 
mother —  Well,  sir,  look  the  other 
way — she  bolted." 

"  Oh,  dear,  dear  me,"  said  the  Secre- 
tary. "  Oh,  pray  don't  go  on,  sir.  I 
am  so  very  sorry,  Hillyar." 

"  Bolted,  sir,"  repeated  George  with 
an  angry  snarl,  "  and  left  me  to  be 
hated  worse  than  poison  by  my  father 
in  consequence.  How  do  you  like 
that?" 

There  was  a  mist  in  the  good  Secre- 
tary's eyes;  and  in  that  mist  he  saw 
the  dear,  happy  old  manor-house  in 
"Worcestershire ;  a  dark,  mysterious, 
solemn  house,  beneath  the  shadowing 
elms;  the  abode  of  gentle,  graceful,  do- 
mestic love  for  centuries.  And  he  saw 
a  bent  figure  with  a  widow's  cap  upon 
her  grey  hair,  which  wandered  still 
among  the  old  flower-beds,  and  thought 
for  many  an  hour  in  the  autumn  day, 
whether  her  brave  son  would  return 
from  Ids  honour  and  wealth,  in  far  off 
Australia,  and  give  her  one  sweet  kiss, 
before  she  lay  down  to  sleep  beside  his 
father,  in  the  quiet  churchyard  in  the 
park 


"  No  more,  sir  ! "  said  the  Secretary. 
"  Not  another  word.  I  ask  your  pardon. 
Be  silent." 

George  would  not. 

"  That  is  my  history.  The  reason  I 
stayed  in  the  police  at  all,  was  that  I 
might  stand  well  with  my  father  ;  that 
he  might  not  think  I  had  gone  so 
utterly  to  the  devil  as  he  wished  :  for 
he  married  again — married  a  milkmaid, 
or  worse — to  spite  me.  And  the  son 
he  had  by  her  is,  according  to  all 
accounts,  idolized,  while  I  am  left  here 
to  fight  my  way  alone.  I  hate  that 
boy,  and  I  will  make  him  feel  it." 

His  case  would  have  stood  better 
without  this  last  outbreak  of  temper, 
which  jarred  sharply  on  the  Secretary's 
sentimental  mood.  But  he  had  made 
his  case  good.  The  fight  was  over. 
That  night  he  was  received  at  the 
Secretary's  station  as  an  accepted  suitor. 
The  next  he  dined  at  Government 
House,  and  sat  all  the  evening  in  a 
corner  with  Lady  Rumbolt  (the  Gover- 
nor's wife),  and  talked  of  great  peo- 
ple in  England,  about  whom  he  knew 
just  enough  to  give  her  Ladyship  an 
excuse  for  talking  about  taem,  which 
she  liked  better  than  anything  in  the 
world,  after  gardening  and  driving. 
So  nothing  could  be  more  charming ; 
and  the  Secretary,  seeing  that  it  was  no 
use  to  struggle,  gave  it  up,  and  deter- 
mined to  offer  no  opposition  to  the 
marriage  of  his  sister-in-law  to  a  man 
who  would  be  a  wealthy  baronet  in 
England. 

And  this  is  what  made  him  so  exces- 
sively mad  about  those  abominable, 
indiscreet  leaders  in  the  Mohawk,  in 
praise  of  the  gallant  lieutenant.  He 
had  used  strong  language  about  the 
Mohawk  continually,  ever  since  the  first 
number  appeared,  in  the  early  days  of 
the  colony,  printed  on  whitey -brown 
sugar-paper,  with  a  gross  libel  upon 
himself  in  the  first  six  lines  of  its 
leader.  But  it  was  nothing  to  the  lan- 
guage he  used  now.  Mr.  Edward  Fitz- 
gerald Emmet,  the  editor  of  the  Mohaivk, 
found  out  that  he  was  annoying  the 
Secretary,  and  continued  his  allusions 
in  a  more  offensive  form.  Until,  so 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


183 


says  report,  Miss  Lesbia  Burke  let  him 
know  that,  if  he  continued  to  annoy 
James  Oxton,  she  would  horsewhip 
him.  Whereupon  the  Mohawk  was 
dumb. 

CHAPTER  XIL 

DISPOSES  OF  SAMUEL  BURTON  FOE  A  TIME. 

THE  evening  after  the  fight  with  the 
bushrangers,  the  affair  was  getting  noisily 
discussed  in  the  principal  men's  hut  at 
the  Barker's.  The  large  room,  earth- 
floored,  with  walls  and  roof  of  wood, 
coloured  by  the  smoke  to  a  deep  ma- 
hogany, was  lit  up  by  the  mighty  blaze 
of  a  wood  fire  in  the  great  chimney  at 
one  end,  for  the  south  wind  had  come 
up,  and  the  night  was  chilly.  Five  or 
six  men  were  seated  on  logs  and  stools 
round  the  chimney,  eating  their  supper, 
and  one,  who  had  finished  his,  had  got 
into  bed,  and  was  comfortably  smoking 
and  joining  in  the  conversation.  They 
were  anhonest,  good-looking  set  of  fellows 
enough,  for  in  Cooksland  and  South 
Australia,  the  convict  element  is  very 
small ;  and  the  appearance  of  rude 
plenty  and  honest  comfort  which  was 
over  the  whole  scene,  was  pleasant 
enough  to  witness  by  a  belated  and 
wearied  traveller. 

Such  a  one  came  to  the  door  that 
evening,  and  brought  his  evil  face 
among  them.  It  was  the  convict  that 
the  Secretary  had  passed  on  the  sands  ; 
it  was  Samuel  Burton. 

The  cattle  and  sheep  dogs,  which  lay 
about  in  the  yard,  bayed  him  furiously, 
but  he  passed  through  them  unheeding, 
and,  opening  the  door,  stood  in  the 
entry,  saying  : 

"  Can  I  stay  here  to-night,  mates  1 " 

"Surely,"  said  the  old  hut-keeper, 
shading  his  face  with  his  hand.  "  You 
must  be  a  stranger  to  Barker's,  to  ask 
such  a  question.  Come  in,  lad." 

The  young  man  who  was  sitting  in 
the  best  place  by  the  fire,  got  up  to  give 
it  to  him.  Each  one  of  the  men  mur- 
mured a  welcome  to  him  as  he  came 
towards  the  fire  ;  and  then,  as  the  fire- 
light fell  upon  his  face,  they  saw  that 
he  was  a  convict. 


iTow  and  then  you  will  find  a  jail- 
bird who  will,  in  appearance,  pass  muster 
among  honest  men ;  but  in  this  case 
the  word  u  Old  hand  "  was  too  plainly 
written  on  the  face  to  be  mistaken. 
They  insensibly  altered  their  demeanour 
towards  him  at  once.  To  their  kind 
hospitality,  which  had  been  offered  to 
him  before  they  saw  what  he  was,  was 
now  added  respectful  deference,  and  a 
scarcely  concealed  desire  to  propitiate. 
Seven  honest  good  fellows,  were  respect- 
fully afraid  of  one  rogue  ;  and  the  rogue 
was  perfectly  aware  of  the  fact,  and 
treated  them  accordingly ;  much  as  a 
hawk  would  treat  a  cote-full  of  pigeons, 
if  he  found  it  convenient  to  pass  the 
night  among  them.  The  penniless,  tat- 
tered felon  was  a  sort  of  lord  among 
them. 

Attribute  it  to  what  you  will,  it  is  so. 
A  better  set  of  fellows  than  the  honest 
emigrants,  generally,  don't  exist ;  but 
their  superstitious  respect  for  an  old 
convict  is  almost  pitiable.  I  fancy,  if 
the  Devil  were  to  take  it  into  his  head 
to  make  thirteenth  at  a  dinner-party, 
that  we  should  be  studiously  polite  to 
him,  till  we  had  got  rid  of  him ;  and  be 
careful  not  to  wound  his  feelings  by  any 
allusion  to  the  past. 

They  put  food  and  tea  before  him, 
and  he  ate  and  drank  voraciously.  The 
hut-keeper  did  not  wait  to  ask  him  if 
he  had  tobacco :  to  extort  from  him  what 
is  the  last,  most  humiliating  confession 
of  destitution  in  the  bush ;  but,  seeing 
him  look  round,  put  a  fig  and  a  pipe  in 
his  hand.  After  he  had  lit  it,  he  began 
to  talk  for  the  first  time. 

"  I  suppose,"  he  said,  "  none  of  you 
chaps  know  the  names  of  the  fellows 
who  got  bailed  up  by  young  Hillyar 
this  morning  ? " 

The  hut-keeper  answered, — a  quiet, 
gentle  old  man,  whom  the  others  called 
Daddy— 

"Ikn^w  two  on  'em.  There  was 
Mike  Tiernay.  He  was  assigned  to 
Carstairs  on  the  North  Esk  one  time, 
I  mind." 

"  Hallo  !  "  said  Burton.  "  Are  you, 
Stringy  bark  1 " 

"  I   am   from  Yan  Diemen's  Land," 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


said  the  old  man,  quietly.       "  But  an 
emigrant." 

The  convict  gave  a  grunt  of  disap- 
pointment. 

"The  other  one  I  knew,"  continued 
the  old  man,  "  was  "Wallaby  Thompson." 

It  is  curious  that  the  old  man  had, 
"before  the  arrival  of  Burton,  been  eiiter- 
taining  the  young  men  with  the  lives 
and  crimes  of  these  abominable  black- 
guards. Now,  before  the  representative 
of  their  class,  he  spoke  as  though  it 
were  a  liberty  to  mention  the  gentle- 
men's names. 

"  Wallaby  Thompson,  eh  ?  "  said  the 
convict.  "  He  was  an  honest,  good  fel- 
low, and  I  am  sorry  for  him.  I  never 
knew  that  fellow  do  a  bad  action  in  my 
life.  He  was  as  true  as  steel.  Old 
Carboys  sent  his  mate  for  trial,  and  old 
Carboys  was  found  in  the  bush  with  his 
throat  cut.  That's  what  /  call  a  man." 

Burton  was  showing  off  before  these 
emigrants  for  purposes  of  his  own. 
Cutting  throats  was  not  his  special 
temptation ;  and  he,  probably,  never 
saw  Wallaby  Thompson,  Esq.  in  his 
life ;  in  fact,  his  claiming  acquaintance 
with  that  gentleman  was  strong  evi- 
dence that  he  knew  nothing  about  him ; 
he  being  a  mere  liar  and  rogue,  not  dange- 
rous unless  desperate.  But  he  took 
these  simple  emigrants  in  by  a  clever 
imitation  of  a  bushranger's  ferocity,  and 
they  believed  in  him. 

"Is  young  Hilly ar  at  the  station 
here,  or  at  the  barracks,  to-night  ? "  he 
asked. 

"  The  Lieutenant  is  gone  down  to 
Palmerston,  this  morning,  with  the 
secretary,"  was  the  answer. 

Burton  was  evidently  staggered  by 
this  intelligence.  He  kept  his  counte- 
nance, however,  and  asked,  as  coolly  as 
he  could,  when  he  was  expected  back. 

"Back?"  said  the  old  man;  "Lord 
love  you,  he'll  never  come  back  here  no 
more.  At  any  rate,  he'll  be  made  in- 
spector for  this  job  ;  and  so  you  won't 
see  him  fare  again," 

"  How  far  is  it  to  Palmerston  ? " 
asked  Burton. 

"  Two  hundred  and  thirty  miles." 
He  said  nothing  in  answer  to  this. 
He   sat  and    thought  as  he    smoked. 


Two  hundred  and  thirty  miles !  He 
penniless  and  shoeless,  not  in  the  best 
of  health,  having  the  dread  of  a  return 
of  dysentery  !  It  could  not  be  done — 
it  could  not  be  done.  He  must  take 
service,  and  then  it  could  not  be  done 
for  six  months  ;  he  could  not  sign  for 
less  time  than  that.  He  could  have 
cursed  his  ill  luck,  but  he  was  not  giving 
to  cursing  on  occasions  where  thought 
was  required.  He  made  his  determina- 
tion at  once,  and  acted  on  it ;  in  spite  of 
that  curious  pinched-up  lower  jaw  of 
his ;  with  quite  as  much  decision  as 
Avould  his  old  master  and  enemy,  Sir 
George  Hillyar,  with  his  broad  bull- 
dog jowl. 

"Are  there  any  of — my  sort — here 
about?"  he  asked,  with  an  affectedly 
surly  growl. 

There  is  no  euphemism  invented  yet 
for  the  word  "  convict,"  which  is  avail- 
able among  the  labouring  class  of  Aus- 
tralia, when  a  convict  is  present.  Those 
who  think  they  know  something  of 
them,  might  fancy  that  "old  hand," 
"  Vandemonian,"  or  even  "  Sydney 
Sider,"  were  not  particularly  offensive. 
Those  who  know  them  better  know 
that  the  use  of  either  three  expressions, 
in  the  presence  of  one  of  these  sensi- 
tive gentlemen,  means  instant  assault 
and  battery.  None  of  the  hands  in  hut 
would  have  ventured  on  anything  of 
the  kind  for  worlds,  but  now  Burton 
had  put  it  in  his  own  form,  and  must  be 
answered. 

It  appeared  that  there  was  a  hoary 
old  miscreant  of  a  shepherd,  who  was, 
if  the  expression  might  be  allowed, 
"  Stringy  Bark,"  and  who  had  quarrelled 
with  his  hut-keeper.  Burton  said  he 
would  see  about  it,  and  did  so,  the  next 
day.  Barker  pe"re,  a  fine  old  fellow, 
was  of  opinion  that,  if  you  were  unfor- 
tunate enough  to  have  one  convict  on 
the  place,  it  was  better  that  you  should 
catch  another  to  bear  him  company. 
He  therefore  was  not  sorry  to  avail 
himself  of  Samuel  Burton's  services,  in 
the  capacity  of  hut-keeper  to  the  old 
convict  shepherd,  he  had  on  the  run 
already. 

"Confound  'em,"  said  old  Barker; 
"  shut  'em  up  together,  and  let  'em  cor 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


185 


rupt  one  another.  I  am  glad  this 
scoundrel  has  come  to  ask  for  work.  I 
should  have  had  to  send  old  Tom  about 
his  business  if  he  hadn't,  and  old  Tom 
is  the  best  shepherd  I've  got ;  but  I 
never  could  have  asked  an  honest  man 
to  cook  for  old  Tom.  jSTo.  The  appear- 
ance of  this  fellow  is  a  specialprovidence. 
I  should  have  had  to  send  old  Tom  to 
the  right-about." 

So  Samuel  Burton,  by  reason  of  the 
badness  of  his  shoes,  and  a  general  seedi- 
nees  of  character,  had  to  take  service 
with  Mr.  Barker.  He  had  met  with  a 
disappointment  in  not  meeting  with 
George  Hillyar,  but  on  the  whole  he 
was  not  sorry  to  get  a  chance  of  lying 
by  for  a  little.  The  fact  was  that  he  had, 
six  weeks  before  this,  lost  his  character, 
and  travelling  was  not  safe  for  a  time. 
He  had  been  transported  and  reconvicted 
in  the  colony,  but  his  character  had  been 
good  until,  as  I  say,  six  weeks  before 
this,  when  he  turned  Queen's  evidence 
on  the  great  bank-forgery  case.  That 
act  not  only  ruined  his  character  (among 
the  convicts  I  mean,  of  course),  but  ren- 
dered travelling  in  lonely  places,  for  a 
time,  before  men  had  had  time  to  forget, 
a  dangerous  business.  Therefore  he  ac- 
cepted Mr.  Barker's  service  with  alacrity, 
and  so  George  Hillyar  heard  nothing  of 
him  for  six  peaceful  months. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

JAMES    BURTON'S    STORY  :    THE   GOLDEN 
THREAD  BEGINS  TO  RUN  OFF  THE  REEL. 

COULD  one  ever  have  been  happy  in 
such  a  squalid  unromantic  place  ?  Among 
such  sounds,  such  smells,  such  absence 
of  fresh  air  and  sunshine,  with  poverty 
and  vulgarity  in  its  grossest  forms  on 
every  side  of  one — shrill  Doll  Tear- 
sheet,  distinctly  and  painfully  audible 
round  the  corner,  telling  the  nuthook 
that  he  had  lied,  and  that  sort  of  thing, 
all  day  long ;  and  Pistol,  the  cutpurse, 
ruflling  and  bullying  it  under  the  gas- 
lamp  by  the  corner,  from  cockshoot  to 
curfew,  at  which  latter  time  we  used 
to  be  rid  of  him  for  an  hour  or  so  ? 
Could  any  one  have  had  a  happy  home 
amidst  all  this  squalor  and  blackguard- 


ism ?  And  could  any  one,  having  gamed 
wealth  and  honour,  ever  feel  a  longing 
kindness  for  the  old,  for  the  cramped 
horizon,  and  the  close  atmosphere,  of 
the  place  one  once  called  home? 

Yes.  I  often  feel  it  now.  The  other 
day  the  summer  wind  was  still,  and  the 
summer  clouds  slept  far  aloft,  above  the 
highest  boughs  of  the  silent  forest ;  and 
peace  and  silence  were  over  everything 
as  I  rode  slowly  on  among  the  clustering 
flowers.  And  then  and  there  the  old 
Chelsea  life  came  back  into  my  soul 
and  pervaded  it  completely,  and  the  past 
drove  out  the  present  so  utterly  and 
entirely  that,  although  my  mortal  body — 
which,  when  no  longer  useful,  must 
perish  and  rot,  like  one  of  the  fallen 
logs  around  me — was  passing  throughthe 
glorious  Australian  forest,  yet  the  im- 
mortal part  of  me  had  travelled  back 
into  the  squalid  old  street,  and  I  was 
there  once  again. 

Dear  old  place  !  I  can  love  it  still.  I 
were  but  an  ingrate  if  I  could  not  love 
it  better  than  all  other  places.  After 
we  had  been  out  here  ten  years,  Joe  went 
back  on  business,  and  went  to  see  it. 
A  certain  change,  which  we  shall  hear 
of,  had  taken  place  ;  the  old  neighbours 
were  gone,  and  Chelsea,  so  far  as  we 
cared  about  it,  was  desolate.  But,  as 
Joe  leant  lonely  against  the  railings  in 
the  neAv  Paulton  Square,  he  heard  a  cry 
coming  from  towards  the  river,  which 
thrilled  to  his  heart  as  he  came  nearer 
and  nearer.  What  was  it,  think  you 
It  was  old  Alsop,  the  fishmonger,  bawl- 
ing out,  as  of  old,  the  audacious  falsehood 
that  his  soles  were  alive.  It  was  nothing 
more  than  that,  but  it  was  the  last  of  the 
old  familiar  Chelsea  sounds  which  was 
left.  When  Joe  told  us  this  story  we  w?re 
all  (simple  souls)  very  much  moved.  My 
father  said,  huskily,  that  "  there  were 
worse  chaps  than  Bill  Alsop,  mind  you, 
though  he  did  not  uphold  him  in  all 
things,"  which  I  was  glad  to  hear.  As 
for  my  mother,  she  dissolved  into  such 
a  flood  of  tears  that  the  recently-in- 
vented pocket-handkerchief  was  aban- 
doned as  useless,  and  the  old  familiar 
apron  was  adopted  instead.  Such  is  the 
force  of  habit,  that  my  mother  cannot 
cry  comfortably  without  an  apron.  The 


186 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


day  I  was  married,  Emma  had  a  deal  of 
trouble  with  her  on  this  account.  It 
was  evident  that  she  wanted  to  wipe  her 
eyes  on  her  horribly  expensive  mauve 
satin  gown,  and  at  last  compromised  the 
matter  by  crying  into  her  black  lace 
shawl,  which  was  of  about  as  much  use 
as  a  fishing  net,  God  bless  her. 

I  have,  as  I  have  said,  an  affection 
for  the  old  place  still;  and,  when  I 
think  of  it  at  its  brightest,  when  I  love 
it  best  of  all,  it  comes  back  to  me  on  a 
fine  September  evening,  on  the  evening 
after  Joe  and  I  met  with  our  wonderful 
adventures  at  Stanlake. 

I  think  I  have  mentioned  before 
that  my  father  used  to  relieve  me  in  the 
bhop  when  he  had  done  his  tea  ;  and 
so  I  used  to  have  my  tea  after  all  the 
others  had  done— at  which  times  my 
sister  and  I  used  to  have  a  pleasant 
talk,  while  she  waited  on  me. 

Latterly  I  had  always  had  a  com- 
panion. It  was  an  unfortunate  business, 
but  my  brother  Harry  had  acquired  a 
sort  of  habit  of  getting  kept  in  at 
school,  nearly  every  day.  My  mother 
contrived  a  meeting  with  the  school- 
master, and  asked  him  why.  The 
answer  was,  that  he  was  a  good  little 
fellow,  but  that  he  would  draw  on  his 
slate.  The  evening  next  after  she  had 
gained  this  intelligence,  we,  all  sitting 
round  the  fire  and  expecting  to  hear 
the  story  of  how  my  father  came  home 
tipsy  the  night  the  Reform  Bill  was 
passed,  were  astonished  to  find  that  my 
mother  had  composed,  and  was  prepared 
with,  an  entirely  new  story,  in  the 
awful-example  style  of  fiction,  which 
she  there  and  then  told  us.  It  appeared 
tliat  she  knew  a  little  girl  (mark  how 
she  wrapped  it  up)  as  drew  on  her 
elate,  and  was  took  with  the  chalkstone 
gout  in  the  jints  of  her  fingers.  And, 
while  that  child  was  a  droring,  the 
chalkstones  kep'  dropping  from  her 
knuckles,  and  the  children  kep'  picking 
on' em  up  and  drawing  devils  on  the 
desks.  Harry  was  at  the  time  both 
alarmed  and  distressed  at  this  story. 
But  it  had  no  effect.  The  next  day  he 
drew  a  devil  so  offensive  that  he  was 
not  only  kept  in,  but  caned. 

So    Harry,  being    late  from   school, 


was  my  companion  at  tea,  and  sat  be- 
side me.  Frank,  who  adored  Harry 
because  Harry  used  to  morphise  Frank's 
dreams  for  him  on  slates  and  bits  of 
paper,  stayed  with  him.  Fred,  the  big- 
headed,  who  was  brought  into  the  world 
apparently  to  tumble  down  stairs,  and 
to  love  and  cuddle  everybody  he  met, 
sat  on  my  knee  and  pulled  my  hair  in  a 
contemplative  way ;  Avhile  Emma  sat 
beside  me  sewing,  and  softly  murmured 
out  the  news  of  the  day,  carefully 
avoiding  any  mention  of  the  Avery 
catastrophe. 

Mr.  Pistol  and  Mr.  Bardolph  had 
been  took  by  the  police  for  a  robbery  in 
the  Fulham  Road,  and  Mrs.  Quickly 
was  ready  to  swear,  on  her  Bible  oath, 
that  they  were  both  in  bed  and  asleep 
at  the  time.  Polly  Ager  had  been  kep 
in  at  school  for  pinching  Sally  Holmes. 
Tom  Cole  was  going  to  row  for  Dogget's 
coat  and  badge.  &c.  &c. 

Frank  told  us,  that  the  evening 
before  last  he  had  walked  on  to  Batter- 
sea  Bridge  with  Jerry  Chittls,  and  to 
the  westward  he  had  seen  in  the  sky, 
just  at  sunset,  an  army  of  giants, 
dressed  in  purple  and  gold,  pursuing 
another  army  of  giants  dressed  in  grey, 
who,  as  the  sun  went  down,  seemed  to 
turn  on  their  pursuers.  He  said  that 
the  thunderstorm  which  happened  that 
night  was  no  thunderstorm  at  all,  but 
the  battle  of  these  two  armies  of  giants 
over  our  heads.  He  requested  Harry 
to  draw  this  scene  for  him  on  his  slate, 
which  Harry  found  a  difficulty  in  doing. 

I  was  thinking  whether  or  no  I 
could  think  of  anything  to  say  concern- 
ing this  giant  story,  and  was  coming  to 
the  conclusion  that  I  couldn't,  when  I 
looked  up  and  saw  Erne  Hillyar  and 
Joe  in  the  doorway. 

I  saw  Erne's  noble  face  light  up  as 
he  saw  me.  "Here  he  is"  was  all  he 
said  ;  but,  from  the  way  he  said  it,  I 
knew  that  he  had  come  after  me. 

I  stood  up,  I  remember,  and  touched 
my  forehead,  but  he  came  quickly  to- 
wards me  and  took  my  hand.  "  I  want 
to  be  friends  with  you,  Jim,"  he  said ; 
"  I  know  you  and  I  shall  suit  one 
another.  Let  me  come  and  see  you 
sometimes." 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


187 


I  did  not  know  what  to  say,  at 
least  not  in  words ;  but,  as  he  took  my 
hand,  niy  eyes  must  have  bid  him  wel- 
come, for  he  laughed  and  said,  "  That  is 
right.  I  knew  you  would  like  me,  I 
saw  it  yesterday." 

And  then  he  turned  on  Emma,  who 
was  standing,  respectful  and  still,  beside 
me,  with  her  hands  closed  before  her, 
holding  her  work.  And  their  eyes  met ; 
and  Erne  loved  her,  and  has  never  loved 
any  other  woman  since. 

"  This  must  be  your  sister,"  said 
Erne.  "  There  is  no  doubt  about  that. 
Jim's  sister,  will  you  shake  hands  with 
me?" 

She  shook  hands  with  him,  and 
smiled  her  gentlest,  kindest  smile  in  his 
face. 

"  I  am  so  glad,"  she  said,  "  that  you 
want  to  make  friends  with  Jim.  You 
cannot  have  a  better  friend  than  he, 
sir." 

Here  Joe  came  back,  and  whispered 
to  me  that  he  had  been  to  father,  and 
told  him  that  a  young  gentleman  had 
come  to  see  me,  and  that  father  had  said 
I  was  to  stay  where  I  was.  So  there 
we  children  sat  all  together;  Erne  on 
one  side  of  me,  and  Emma  on  the  other, 
talking  about  such  things  as  children 
(for  we  were  but  little  more)  will  talk 
about — Erne  sometimes  leaning  over  me 
to  speak  to  Emma,  and  waiting  eagerly 
for  her  answer.  Fred  got  on  his  knee, 
and  twined  his  little  fingers  into  his 
curling  hair,  and  laid  his  big  head  upon 
Erne's  shoulder.  Frank  and  Harry 
drew  their  stools  to  his  feet,  and  lis- 
tened. We  were  a  happy  group.  Since 
the  wild,  petulant  earl,  had  built  that 
great  house,  nigh  three  hundred  years 
before,  and  had  paced,  and  fumed,  and 
fretted  up  and  down  that  self-same 
floor,  there  never  had  been  gathered,  I 
dare  swear,  a  happier  group  of  children 
under  the  time-stained  rafters  of  that 
room,  than  were  we  that  night  in  the 
deepening  twilight. 

Joe  and  Erne  talked  most.  Joe  spoke 
of  the  wonderful  old  church  hard  by, 
a  city  of  the  mighty  dead,  and  their 
monuments,  where  there  were  innu- 
merable dark,  dim  recesses,  crowded  by 
tombs  and  effigies.  Here  lay  the  head- 


less trunk  of  Sir  Thomas  More — not 
under  the  noble  monument  erected  by 
himself  in  the  chancel  before  his  death, 
but  "neare  the  middle  of  the  south 
wall," — indebted  to  a  stranger  for  a 
simple  slab  over  his  remains.  In  this 
chapel,  too,  knelt  the  Duchess  of  Nor- 
thumberland, with  her  five  daughters, 
all  with  clasped  hands,  praying  for  the 
soul  of  their  unhappy  father.  One  of 
them,  Joe  could  not  tell  which,  must 
have  married  Arthur  Pole.  Here  lay 
Lord  and  Lady  Dacre,  with  their  dogs 
watching  at  their  feet,  under  their  many- 
coloured  canopy ;  and  last,  not  least, 
here  knelt  John  Hillyar,  Esq.,  father  of 
the  first  baronet,  with  his  three  simple- 
looking  sons  in  ruffs,  opposite  his  wife 
Eleanor,  with  her  six  daughters,  and  her 
two  dead  babies  on  the  cushion  before 
her. 

"  Four  hundred  years  of  memory," 
continued  Joe,  "are  crowded  into  that 
dark  old  church,  and  the  great  flood  of 
change  beats  round  the  walls,  and 
shakes  the  door  in  vain,  but  never 
enters.  The  dead  stand  thick  together 
there,  as  if  to  make  a  brave  resistance 
to  the  moving  world  outside,  which  jars 
upon  their  slumber.  It  is  a  church  of 
the  dead.  I  cannot  fancy  any  one  being 
married  in  that  church — its  air  would 
chill  the  boldest  bride  that  ever  walked 
to  the  altar.  No  ;  it  is  a  place  for  old 
people  to  creep  into,  and  pray,  until 
their  prayer  is  answered,  and  they,  sleep 
with  the  rest." 

"  Hallo  /"  I  said  to  myself,  "  Hal-lo  ! 
this  is  the  same  young  gentleman  who 
said  of  Jerry  Chittle  yesterday,  '  That 
it  worn't  no  business  of  his'n,'  and 
would  probably  do  so  again  to-morrow 
if  necessary."  Both  Emma  and  I  had 
noticed  lately  that  Joe  had  two  distinct 
ways  of  speaking  ;  this  last  was  the 
best  example  of  his  later  style  that  we 
had  yet  heard.  The  young  eagle  was 
beginning  to  try  his  wings. 

Then  Erne  began  to  talk.  "  Did  you 
know,  Jim  and  Joe,  that  this  Church 
Place  belonged  to  us  before  the  Sloane 
Stanleys  bought  it  1 " 

Joe  had  been  told  so  by  Mr.  Faulkner. 

"  It  seems  so  very  strange  to  find  you 
living  here,  Jim.  So  very  strange.  Do 


188 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


you  know  that  iny  father  never  will 
mention  the  name  of  the  house." 

"  Why  not,  sir  ?  "  I  asked  wondering. 

"Why,  my  gentle  Hammersmith,  it 
has  been  such  a  singularly  unlucky 
house  to  all  who  have  lived  in  it.  Do 
you  know  why  1 " 

I  could  not  guess. 

"  Church  property,  my  boy.  Built  on 
the  site  of  a  cell  of  Westminster,  granted 
by  Henry  to  Essex  in  1535.  Tom.  Crom- 
well got  it  first  and  lost  it ;  and  then 
Walter  Devereux  bought  it  back  for 
name's  sake,  because  it  had  belonged  to 
an  Essex  once  before,  I  suppose  ;  and 
then  Robert  built  the  house  in  one  of 
his  fantastic  moods.  Pretty  luck  tJiey 
had  with  it — Devereux  the  younger  will 
tell  you  about  that.  Then  we  got  it,  and 
a  nice  mess  we  made  of  it — there  was 
never  a  generation  without  a  tragedy. 
It  is  a  cursed  place  to  the  Hillyars.  My 
father  would  be  out  of  his  mind  if  he 
knew  I  were  here.  The  last  tragedy  was 
the  most  fearful." 

Frank  immediately  got  up  on  Emma's 
lap.  Erne  did  not  want  to  be  asked  to 
tell  us  all  about  it. 

"In  1686,"  he  said,  "it  was  the 
dower  house  of  Jane,  Dowager  Lady 
Hillyar.  Her  son,  Sir  Cheyne  Hillyar, 
was  a  bigoted  papist,  and,  thinking  over 
the  misfortunes  which  had  happened  to 
the  family  lately,  attributed  them  to  the 
possession  of  this  church  property,  and 
determined  that  it  should  be  restored 
forthwith  to  the  Church,  even  though 
it  were  to  that  pestilent  heretic  Adam 
Littleton,  D.D.,  the  then  rector  of  Chel- 
sea ;  hoping,  however,  says  my  father,  to 
see  the  same  reverend  doctor  shortly 
replaced,  by  an  orthodox  gentleman  from 
the  new  Jesuit  school  in  the  Savoy.  But 
there  was  a  hitch  in  the  proceedings,  my 
dear  Jim.  There  was  a  party  in  the 
bargain  who  had  not  been  sufficiently 
considered  or  consulted.  Jane,  Lady 
Hillyar,  was,  though  a  strong  Catholic, 
a  very  obstinate  old  lady  indeed.  She 
refused,  in  spite  of  all  the  spiritual  artil- 
lery that  her  son  could  bring  to  bear 
upon  her,  to  have  the  transfer  made 
during  her  lifetime  ;  and,  while  the  dis- 
pute was  hot  between  them  her  son,  Sir 
Cheyne  died. 


"  Then  the  old  lady's  conscience  began 
to  torment  her.  She  believed  that  the 
house  ought  to  be  restored  to  the 
Church  ;  but  her  avarice  was  opposed  to 
this  step,  and  between  her  avarice  and 
superstition  she  went  mad. 

"  All  her  children  had  deserted  her, 
save  one,  a  hunchbacked  grand-daughter, 
who  came  here  and  lived  with  her  for 
three  months,  and  who  died  here.  After 
this  poor  girl's  death,  the  old  woman 
kept  no  servants  in  the  house  at  night, 
but  used  to  sleep  in  a  room  at  the  top 
of  the  house,  with  her  money  under  her 
bed.  Is  there  such  a  room  ? " 

"  Yes,"  I  said,  "  and  her  ghost  walks 
there  now." 

"  It  should,"  said  Erne,  "  by  all 
reasons,  for  she  was  murdered  there. 
They  found  her  dead  in  the  morning, 
on  the  threshold  between  two  rooms. 
She  had  not  been  to  bed,  for  she  was 
dressed — dressed  in  her  old  grey  silk 
gown,  and  even  had  her  black  mittens 
on." 

Nothing  could  shake  my  faith  in  the 
ghost  after  this.  The  fact  of  Erne  and 
ourselves,  having  both  heard  the  same 
silly  story,  from  apparently  different,  but 
really  from  the  same  sources,  confirmed 
it  beyond  suspicion  in  my  mind.  The 
dread  I  had  always  had  of  that  room  at 
the  top  of  the  house,  in  which  Reuben 
lived,  now  deepened  into  horror — into 
a  horror  which  was  only  intensified  by 
what  happened  there  afterwards.  Even 
now,  though  the  room  has  ceased  to 
exist,  the  horror  most  certainly  has  not. 

"  But  come,"  said  Erne,  "  let  me  see 
this  house,  which  has  been  so  fatal  to 
my  family.  The  weird  cannot  extend 
to  me,  for  we  own  it  no  longer.  What 
do  you  say,  Emma  ;  has  the  luck  turned  ?" 

"  I  fear  I  must  keep  you  ten  years, 
or  perhaps  fifty,  waiting  for  an  answer," 
she  said.  "  But  even  then,  I  could  only 
tell  you  what  I  can  now,  that  your  fate 
is  to  a  very  great  extent  in  your  own 
hands." 

"  You  don't  believe  in  destiny,  or 
anything  of  that  sort,  then  ?  "  said  Erne. 

"Not  the  least  in  the  world,"  she 
said. 

"  Then  you  are  no  true  mussul- 
woman,"  said  Erne.  "  Let  us  come  up 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


189 


stairs,  and  see  the  haunted  mansion. 
Come  on,  Emma." 

So  we  went  into  the  empty  room 
npstairs,  and  Emma  showed  him  the 
view  westward.  "While  they  stood  to- 
gether at  the  window,  the  sun  smote 
upon  their  faces  with  his  last  ray  of 
glory,  and  then  went  down  behind  the 
trees ;  so  that,  when  Erne,  Joe,  and  I 
started  together  up  stairs  to  see  Eeuben's 
room,  it  grew  darker  and  darker  each 
step  we  went. 

"A  weird,  dull  place,"  said  Erne, 
looking  around.  "  There  is  another 
room  inside  this,  and  the  old  lady  was 
murdered  on  the  threshold.  Does  your 
cousin  live  here  all  alone  1 " 

"  All  alone." 

"  He  must  be  rather  dull." 

"  The  merriest  fellow  alive." 

When  we  came  downstairs,  we  found 
my  father  and  mother  awaiting  us.  My 
mother  seemed  very  much  delighted  at 
my  having  picked  up  such  a  fine  ac- 
quaintance ;  and  my  father  said, 

"  Sir,  you  are  welcome.  I  am  glad 
to  see,  sir,  that  my  boy  Jim  is  appre- 
ciated by  gentlemen  as  well  able  to 
judge  as  yourself."  And  then  my  father 
proceeded  to  define  the  principal  excel- 
lences of  my  character.  I  am  sure  I 
hope  he  was  right.  My  crowning 
virtiie,  it  appeared — the  one  that  con- 
tained the  others,  and  surpassed  them — 
was  that  I  was  "all  there."  My  father 
assured  Erne  that  he  would  find  that  to 
be  the  case.  That  no  one  had  ever  ven- 
tured to  say  that  it  was  not  the  case. 
That,  if  any  one  did  say  so,  and  was 
in  anyways  prepared  to  maintain  his 
opinion,  he  would  be  glad  to  hear  his 
reasons,  and  so  on ;  turning  the  original 
proposition,  about  my  being  "  all  there," 
over  and  over,  and  inside  out,  a  dozen 
times.  Erne  had  no  idea  what  he  meant, 
but  he  knew  it  was  something  highly 
complimentary  to  me,  and  so  he  said  he 
perfectly  agreed  with  my  father,  and, 
that  he  had  taken  notice  of  that  par- 
ticular point  in  my  character  the  very 
moment  he  saw  me,  which  was  carrying 
a  polite  fiction  somewhat  dangerously 
far.  At  last  he  said  he  must  go,  and, 
turning  to  my  father,  asked  if  he  might 
come  again.  My  father  begged  he  would 


honour  him  whenever  he  pleased,  and 
then  he  went  away,  and  I  walked  with 
him. 

"  I've  run  away,  Jim,"  he  said,  as 
soon  as  we  were  in  the  street.  "  I  ran 
away  to  see  you." 

I  ventured  to  express  a  wish  that, 
at  some  future  time,  he  might  be  induced 
to  go  back  again. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "I  shall  go  back  to- 
morrow. I  sleep  at  a  friend's  house 
here  in  Chelsea,  and  I  shall  go  back  to- 
morrow, but  I  shall  come  again.  Often, 
I  hope." 

When  I  got  home  my  father  was 
sitting  up  alone  smoking.  I  sat  down 
opposite  to  him,  and  in  a  few  minutes 
he  said — 

"  A  fine  young  chap  that,  old  man  ! " 

"Very,  indeed,"  I  said,  slightly 
anxioiis  about  the  results  of  the  inter- 
view. 

"  Yes !  A  fine,  handsome,  manly 
lad,"  continued  he.  "  What's  his  name, 
by-the-bye  1 " 

I  saw  the  truth  must  come  out. 

"  His  name  is  Hillyar,"  I  said. 

"  Christian  name  ?  " 

«  Erne." 

"  Then  you  went  to  Stanlake  yester- 
day?" 

"  Yes,"  I  said.  "  We  wanted  to  see 
it  after  what  you  said,  and  so  we  went." 

My  father  looked  very  serious,  and 
sat  smoking  a  long  time ;  at  last  he  said — 

"  Jim,  you  mind  the  night  you  was 
bound?" 

"  Yes." 

"  And  what  I  told  you  about  Samuel 
Burton  and  his  young  master,  that 
carried  on  so  hard  1 " 

I  remembered  every  word. 

"This  young  Erne  Hillyar  is  his 
brother.  That's  why  your  mother  cried 
when  Stanlake  was  spoke  of;  and  all 
this  has  come  out  of  those  dratted 
waterlilies." 

And  so  we  went  to  bed  ;  but  I  coxxld 
not  sleep  at  first.  I  lay  awake,  think- 
ing of  my  disobedience,  and  wondering 
what  complication  of  results  would  fol- 
low from  it.  But  at  last  I  fell  asleep, 
saying  to  myself,  "  Will  he  come  again 
to-morrow  I  when  will  he  come  again  ] 
To  be  continued. 


190 


CHRISTMAS  THOUGHTS  ON  RENAN'S  VIE  DE  JESUS. 


BY    THE    REV.  F.  D.  MAURICE. 


FEW  persons  who  have  ever  read  Jean 
Paul  Rich  tor's  "Rede  des  todten  Christus 
von  "Weltgebaude  herab,  dass  kein  Gott 
sei,"  or  any  version  of  it,  will  entirely 
forget  it.  In  a  corner  of  the  memory  it 
will  lie  hidden,  till  some  experience  in 
their  own  lives,  or  some  event  in  the 
history  of  the  times,  bring  it  to  light. 
Many  years  have  papsed  since  I  first 
felt  the  force  of  it.  I  thought  it  had 
perished  amidst  the  crowd  of  present 
interests  and  recent  utterances.  M. 
Renan's  book  has  given  it  the  power, 
not  of  a  dream  only,  but  of  a  prophecy. 
I  shall  make  no  apology  for  recalling  it 
to  the  readers  of  Macmillaris  Magazine. 
The  author  made  a  distinct  protest 
against  the  polished  Parisian  form  in 
which  Mde.  de  Stae'l  presented  his 
barbarous  German.1  An  English  scholar, 
who  sympathised  with  him  in  that  com- 
plaint, and  who  had  very  strict  notions 
of  the  obligations  of  any  one  professing 
to  make  his  countrymen  acquainted 
with  the  thoughts  of  a  great  man, — 
who  entered  into  them,  and  let  them 
enter  into  him,  before  he  clothed  them 
in  words, — made  a  translation  of  this 
Vision  of  a  Godless  World,  more  than 
twenty -five  years  ago. 

It  appeared  in  a  journal,  which  has 
become  popular  since,  but  which  was 
obscure  then.  Other  versions  may  have 
been  put  forth.  I  am  not  aware  this 
has  ever  been  republished.  I  propose 
to  give  some  extracts  from  it : 2 — 

"  I  was  lying  once  on  a  summer  even- 
"  ing,  in  the  sun,  upon  a  hill,  and  fell 
"  asleep.  Then  I  dreamt  I  awoke  in  a 
"  churchyard.  The  rolh'ng  wheels  of  the 

1  See  the  review  of  UAllemagne  in  the  col- 
lection of  Richter's  Reviews.     Fourth  volume 
of  his  works,  p.  652. 

2  The  original  will  be  found  in  "Blumen- 
Frucht-  und  Dornenstiicke  (Siebenkiis)."  Werke, 
2e.  Band,  p.  143.     Paris  Edition. 


"  clock  in  the  tower,  that  was  striking 
"  eleven,  had  awakened  me.    I  searched 
"  through  the  dark  empty  sky  for  the 
'  sun,  for  I  imagined  that  an  eclipse 
'  had  drawn  the  veil  of  the  moon  over 
'  it.   All  the  graves  were  open,  and  the 
'  iron  doors  of  the  charnel-house  were 
'  swung  to  and  fro  by  invisible  hands  ; 
'  along  the  walls  shadows  were  flitting, 
'  which  no  one  cast,  and  other  shadows 
'  were  walking  upright   through    the 
'  naked  air.     In  the  open  coffins,  no- 
'  thing   continued  to   sleep,  save    the 
"  children.      In    the    sky,    there    was 
"  nought  but  a  grey  sultry  cloud  hang- 
"  ing  in  massy  folds,  and  a  huge  shadow 
"  kept  drawing  it  in  like  a  net,  nearer, 
"  and  closer,  and  hotter.     Above  me,  I 
"  heard  the  distant  falls  of  avalanches; 
"  below  me,  the  first  tread  of  an  illimit- 
"  able  earthquake.     The  church  heaved 
"  up  and  down,  shaken  by  two  ceaseless 
"  discords,  which  were  warring  against 
"  each  other  within,  and  vainly  striving 
"  to  blend  into  a  concord.     At  times,  a 
"  grey  gleam,  leapt  up  on  the  windows, 
"  and   at  its  touch  the  lead  and   iron 
"  melted  and  ran  down.      The  net  of 
"  cloud,  and  the  reeling  of  the  earth, 
"  drove  me  toward  the   porch,  before 
"  which  two  fiery  basilisks  were  hatch- 
"  ing  their  venomous  broods.     I  passed 
"  along   amid  unknown   shadows   that 
"  bore  the  marks  of  every  century  since 
"  the  beginning    of    things.      All   the 
"  shadows   were   standing   around   the 
"  altar,  and  in  each  there  was  a  quiver- 
"  ing  and  throbbing  of  the  breast  in- 
"  stead   of  the  heart.     One  dead  man 
"  alone  who  had  been  newly  buried  in 
"  the   church  was    still   lying   on   his 
"  couch,  without  any  quivering  of  his 
"  breast,  and  his  face  was  smiling  be- 
"  neath  the  light   of  a  happy  dream. 
"  But  when  one  of  the  living  entered, 
"  he  awoke  and  smiled  no  more ;  toil- 


Christmas  Thoughts  on  Renaris  Vie  de  Jesus. 


191 


"  somely  he  drew  up  his  heavy  eyelid, 
"  but  no  eye  was  within,  and  his  beating 
"  breast,  instead  of  a  heart,  contained  a 
"  wound.  He  lifted  Tip  his  hands,  and 
"  clasped  them  for  prayer,  but  the  arms 
"  lengthened,  and  lowered  themselves 
"  from  his  body,  and  the  clasped  hands 
"  dropt  off.  Over  head,  in  the  vault  of 
"  the  church,  stood  the  dial-plate  of 
"  Eternity,  on  which  no  number  was  to 
"  be  read,  nor  any  characters  except  its 
"  own  name  ;  only  there  was  a  black 
"  hand  pointing  thereat,  on  which  the 
"  dead  said  they  saw  Time. 

"  At  this    moment,    a  tall  majestic 
"  form  with  a  countenance  of  imperish- 
"  able  anguish  sank  down  from  on  high 
"  upon  the  altar,  and  all  the  dead  cried, 
"  '  Christ,  is  there  no  God  ? ' 
"  He  answered,  '  There  is  none.' 
"  The    shadow   of   every   dead  man 
"  trembled    all    over,    not    his    breast 
"  merely ;  and,  one  after  another,  their 
"  trembling  dispersed  them. 

"  Christ    spake   on  :  '  I    have   gone 
"  through  the  midst  of  the  worlds,  I 
"  mounted  into  the  suns,  and  flew  with 
"  the  milky  way  across  the  wilderness 
"  of  heaven ;  but  there  is  no  God.      I 
"  plunged  down  as  far  as  being  flings 
its  shadow,  and  pried  into  the  abyss, 
and  cried,  '  Father,  where  art  Thou  1 ' 
but  I  heard  only  the  everlasting  tem- 
pest which  no  one  sways  ;    and  the 
glittering  rainbow  of  beings  was  hang- 
ing, without  a  sun.  that  had  formed 
it,  over  the  abyss,  and  trickling  down 
into  it.  And,  when  I  looked  up  towards 
the  limitless  world  for  the  eye  of  God, 
the  world  stared  at  me  with  an  empty 
bottomless    eye-socket,    and    eternity 
was  lying  upon  chaos,  and  gnawing  it 
"  to   pieces,   and   chewing   the   cud  of 
"  what  it  had  devoured.    Scream  on,  ye 
"  discords  !    Scatter  these  shades  with 
"  your  screaming ;  for  He  is  not ! ' 

"  The  shades  grew  pale  and  dissolved, 
"  as  white  vapour  that  the  frost  has 
"  given  birth  to  is  melted  by  a  breath 
"  of  warmth;  and  the  whole  church  be- 
"  came  empty.  Then — Oh,  it  was  ter- 
"  rible  to  the  heart !  The  dead  children 
"  who  had  awaked  in  the  churchyard,  ran 
"  into  the  church,  and  threw  themselves 


"  before  the  lofty  Form  upon  the  altar, 
"  and  said, '  Jesus,  have  we  no  Father  ] ' 
"  and  He  answered,  with  tears  streaming 
"  down,  'We  are  all  orphans,  I  and  you; 

"  we  are  without  a  Father.' 

*  *  *  * 

"  And  when  Christ  saw  the  crashing 
"  throng   of    worlds,  the   torch    dance 
of  the  heavenly  ignes  fatui,  and  the 
coral   banks  of  beating  hearts  ;    and 
when  He  saw  how   one   globe  after 
another   poured    out  its   glimmering 
souls  upon  the  dead  sea,  as  a  water 
balloon  strews  its  floating  lights  upon 
the  waves,  then,  with  a  grandeur  which 
betokened  the  highest  of  finite  beings, 
He  lifted  up  his  eye  toward  the  no- 
thingness, and  toward  the  infinite  void 
above  him  and  said,  '  Moveless  and 
voiceless  Nothing  !  Cold  eternal  Neces- 
sity !    Can  ye,  or  any  of  ye,  tell  me  ? 
when  do  you  dash  to  pieces  the  build- 
ing and  me  ?  Dost  thou  know  it,  0, 
Chance  !  even  thou,  when  thou  stridest 
with  thy  hurricanes  athwart  the  snow- 
"  dust  of  the  stars,  and  puffest  out  one 
"  sun  after  another,  while  the  sparkling 
"  dew  of  the  constellations  is  parched 
"  up  as  thou  passest  along.     How  deso- 
"  late  is  every  one  in  the  vast  catacomb 
"  of  the  universe  !  There  is  none  beside 
"  me  save  myself !    Oh,  Father,  Father, 
"  where  is  thy  world -sustaining  breast 
"  that  I  may  rest  on  it  1  Alas  !  if  every 
"  being  is  its  own  father  and  creator, 
"  why  may  it  not  become  its  own  destroy- 
"  ing  angel  1 '  ' 

*  *  *  * 

I  may  seem  to  have  quoted  too 
largely,  but  I  have  left  out  much  which 
would  explain,  perhaps,  more  clearly 
what  I  mean  by  saying  that  M.  Renan 
has  converted  a  dream  into  a  prophecy. 
The  cry  to  the  moveless  nothing,  to 
eternal  necessity,  to  frantic  chance — this 
has  been  often  heard.  It  has  ascended 
from  voices  scientific  and  unscientific 
through  many  generations.  But  that 
Jesw  should  utter  the  words,  "  Children, 
you  have  no  Father,"  this  gave  the  horror 
to  the  vision  of  the  German,  and  this, 
I  think,  is  the  simple  outcome,  the 
faithful  summary,  of  the  Frenchman's 
biography. 


192 


Christmas  Thoughts  on  Renaris  Vie  de  Jesus. 


There   are,   indeed,   enormous  differ- 
ences.      There    was    an    imperishable 
anguish    in  the    face   of    Him.   whom 
Eichter  saw  descending  upon  the  altar. 
His  eyes  streamed  with  tears  as  He  gave 
out  the  fearful   tidings.      There   is   an 
awful  determination  to  utter  the  truth, 
whatever  it  is :  that  has  not   deserted 
"  the    highest  of    finite  .beings."     All 
these  signs  are  entirely  wanting  in  him 
whom  M.  Eenan  has  introduced  to  us. 
There  is  in  him  the  most  perfect  gaiety 
of  heart.     Sadness  seems  foreign  to  his 
"  charming "   and   "  delicious  "    nature. 
His  gaiety,  indeed,  depends  much  upon 
circumstances — upon  the  beauty  of  the 
Galilean  scenery — upon  the  support  of 
its  friendly  peasants.     When  he  comes 
into  Judaea  he  loses  the  command  of 
himself.      He  is  so  discontented  with 
the  success  of  his  mission,  that  he  be- 
comes violent  and  passionate.     But  still 
the  word  Paradise,  which  he  never  used 
— as   we   have  supposed — except  in  a 
moment  of  unutterable  agony,  expressed 
the  object  which  he  was  always  contem- 
plating and  setting  before  his  disciples. 
It  represented  un  jardin  delicieux  ou  Von 
continuait  ajamais  la  vie  charmante  que 
Fonmenait  id  bos  (p.  193,  9th  edition). 
In  the  act  of  commending  a  man  as  an 
Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  was  no  guile, 
this  delightful  dreamer  practised  an  inno- 
cent artifice ;  what  we,  in  England,  should 
call  a  deliberate  falsehood.     Why  not  1 
Was   not   his  whole  life  a  falsehood  ? 
Did  not  he  assume  a  connexion  with 
the  Supernatural  as  the  very  ground  of 
his  life,  when  there  was  no  such  con- 
nexion, and  could  be   none  ?     Did  he 
not  '•'  create  a  religion "  (p.  446)  by  his 
wonderful  genius,  when  he  pretended  to 
be   revealing  that  which   actually  is  ] 
Did  he  not  call  God  his  Father,  and  say 
that  he  had  come  to  claim  men  as  his 
brothers,  when  in  no  real  sense  God  was 
his  Father — when  he  had  no  right  to  tell 
men  that  they  were  the  children  of  God 
in    him  ]      And  seeing,    according  to 
M.  Eenan  (p.  1 8),  "  this  incomparable 
"  man  caused  religion  to  take  a  step  to 
"  which  no  other  can  be  compared,  and 
"  to  which  no  future  one,  perhaps,  will 
"  be  worthy  to  be  compared,"  what  did 


he  accomplish,  but  the  mighty  task  of 
proving  that  heaven  and  earth  are  hope- 
lessly separated?  Did  he  not  say,  in 
effect,  without  a  tear,  rather  with  the 
most  contemptuous  levity,  to  the  sons 
of  men,  "  Children,  you  have  no 
Father!" 

If  these  remarks  were  made  for  the 
purpose    of  fixing  a  charge  upon  M. 
Eenan,  they  would  be  unnecessary,  they 
would  be  even  unjust.    I  do  not  be- 
lieve that  he  means  to  encourage  false- 
hood, to  rob  mankind  of  any  treasure 
which  it  has  possessed,  to  diminish  the 
honour  which  it  has  bestowed  on  the 
"  noble  initiateur."     I  am  satisfied  that 
he  feels   himself  to  be  a  champion  of 
truth,  of  humanity,  of  the   honour  of 
Jesus.     I  do  not  see  the  least  reason  to 
doubt  that  his  visit  to  Palestine  had  all 
the  effect  which  he  attributes  to  it.     I 
can  conceive  that  in  that  visit  he,  for 
the  first  time,  came  to  a  clear  conviction 
that  there  ever  was  such  a  person  as  the 
one  who  had  been  presented  to  him  in 
images  and  pictures,  whose  name  he  had 
associated  with  a  multitude  of  decep- 
tions.    That  which  he  had  thought  of 
only  as  the  creation  of  painters,  rose  up 
before  him  clothed  with   actual   flesh. 
That  which  had  pursued  him  as  a  dark 
shadow,  which  he  was  called   upon  to 
love,  and  in  which  he  could  see  nothing 
distinct  enough  to  love;   which,  when 
it    did  become  definite,  often  assumed 
a   look   of   terror — smiled    upon    him 
through  the  beautiful  Galilean   scenes 
which  he  describes  not  seldom  with  the 
affectation  of  a  Chateaubriand,  sometimes 
with  genuine  freshness  and  sympathy. 
It  is  most  satisfactory  to  think  that  all 
these  associations  were   deepened   and 
hallowed  by  that  event  in  his  domestic 
history,  to  which  no  reviewer  could  dare 
to    allude   if  his   dedication    had    not 
given  it  to  us  as  a  human  tie,  which 
his  book  certainly  does  not  strengthen 
but    cannot    break      Let    us    thank- 
fully   assure     ourselves,    and    frankly 
acknowledge,  that  M.  Eenan's  concep- 
tion may  be  to  him  an  ascent  out  of 
utter  confusion,  not  a  descent  into  it. 
The  image  of  a  living  Christ  may  be 
coming  forth  out  of  the  grave-clothes  of 


Christmas  Thoughts  on  Renaris  Vie  de  Jisus, 


193 


one  who  for  him  had  been  utterly  dead. 
If  the  dialect  of  the  boudoir  seems  to  us 
a  dreadful  substitute  for  the  dialect  of 
the  Evangelists,  it  may  be  his  first  step 
to  the  apprehension  of  a  language  which 
is  meant  for  human  beings,  and  not  for 
doctors.  If  as  yet  he  can  only  trans- 
late a  "Son  of  God,"  into  "one  who 
takes  a  great  step  in  religion,"  he  may 
be  advancing  to  the  conviction  that 
human  relations  are  the  true  images  of 
the  divine — are  the  means  by  which  we 
are  raised  from  the  adoption  of  a  reli- 
gion to  faith  in  a  God. 

I  could  not  have  used  the  strong 
language  in  which  I  have  expressed  my 
convictions  of  the  meaning  and  nature 
of  the  book,  without  also  using  this  lan- 
guage respecting  its  author.  One  does 
not,  in  my  judgment,  qualify  the  other; 
each  strengthens  the  other.  The  voice 
which  says,  "Children,  you  have  no 
Father,"  rises  to  me  out  of  every  page 
in  the  "  Vie  de  J6sus."  If  I  believed 
it  to  be  the  Vie  de  J6sus,  I  should  be 
sure  those  words  were  coming  from  Him. 
But  He  may  be  speaking  other  words 
through  this  very  book.  Have  the 
numerous  readers  of  M.  Kenan's  "  Vie 
de  Je"sus"  in  France  or  Italy  ever 
thoroughly  believed  that  the  Paternoster 
means  what  it  says?  Have  they  not 
thought  that  the  only  person  really 
entitled  to  the  name  of  Father  over 
them  all,  dwells  in  the  City  of  Rome ; 
a  vicar  of  Christ  perhaps,  certainly  not 
one  from  whom  He  came  ?  I  do  not 
presume  to  say  what  influences  are  most 
likely  to  act  upon  them,  how  they  may 
be  best  fitted  to  bear  the  shock  which 
has  come  upon  so  many  of  them  when 
they  have  been  obliged  to  contemplate 
the  earthly  father  as  the  incubus  upon 
their  moral,  their  political,  their  spiri- 
tual life,  and  the  shock  which  WILL 
come  upon  them  if  all  reverence  for 
that  father  should  depart,  if  they  shoxild 
be  left  to  feel  that,  so  far  as  he  is  con- 
cerned, they  are  orphans.  But  I  must 
confess  a  strong  doubt,  whether  Protes- 
tant preaching  or  Protestant  examples, 
however  edifying,  will  avail  them  the 
least  in  that  great  crisis.  I  fear  there  is 
very  little  in  our  divided  societies  which 

No.  51,— VOL.  ix. 


can  suggest  to  those  who  have  dreamt  of 
a  universal  family  and  a  universal  father, 
the  thought  that  we  acknowledge  either. 
I  am  afraid  there  is  much  in  our  theo- 
logical language  which  may  lead  them 
to  suppose  that  we  regard  Christ  as  a  veil 
between  us  and  siich  a  Father,  not  as 
One  who  has  undrawn  the  veil  and 
shown  Him  to  man  as  He  is.  I  do  not 
think  we  have  any  right  to  say  through, 
what  instruments  the  necessity  of  such 
a  revelation  may  be  made  known  to  the 
people  of  the  South,  by  what  strange 
methods  they  may  be  brought  actually 
to  confess  a  true  sense  in  the  words 
which  they  have  uttered  daily  with  their 
lips.  If  we  believe  that  those  words 
are  true — that  the  children  have  a 
father — His  ways  of  making  that  rela- 
tion known  to  them  may  not  be 
at  all  like  our  ways.  M.  Kenan  may 
awaken  the  inquiry  which  he  cannot 
satisfy.  His  Jesus,  who  died  1800  years 
ago  in  Jerusalem  and  never  rose  again, 
can  tell  them  of  no  Father,  can  lead, 
them  to  none.  They  may  be  driven  to 
ask  heaven  and  earth  if  there  is  One 
who  can. 

But  the  more  we  cherish  this  hope, 
the  more  have  we  a  right  to  demand  of 
M.  Renan,  What   is  that   phrase  Fils 
de   Dieu    which     we    meet    with    so 
continually  in  your  pages  ?     Sometimes 
it  appears  to  be  profoundly  important 
You  call  out,  "  Then  he  was  a  Fih  de 
Dieu   indeed."     When   he  spoke  of  a 
God  who  was  not  worshipped  in  Jeru- 
salem  or    Gerizim    to    the    Samaritan 
woman,  He   had  a  right  to  the  name. 
Sometimes  it   seems   to  be  the  merest 
delusion.    He  fancies  himself  to  be  that 
which  he  is  not ;  the  name  indicates  his 
enthusiasm ;  he  is  the  victim  of  an  idea. 
'Now,  M.  Renan  has  told  us  (p.  252), 
'  Pour    nous,   races   profonde"ment   se"- 
'  rieuses,  la  conviction   signifie  la  sin- 
'  cerit6   avec   soi-meme.     Mais  la  sin- 
'  cerite"  avec  soi-meme,  n'a  pas  beaucoup 
'  de  sens  chez  les  peuples  orientaux  peu 
'  habitudes  aux  delicatesses  de  1'esprit 
'  critique.     Bonne  foi  et  imposture  sont 
'  des  mots   qui   dans  notre  conscience 
'  rigide,  s'opposent  comme  deux  termes 
'  inconciliables.    En  Orient,  il  y  a  de 

o 


'194 


Christmas  Thoughts  on  Renaris  Vie  de  JesuS. 


"  1'un   a   1'autre   mille   fuites   et  mille 
"  detours."     I  take  this  statement  as  I 
find  it.  Belonging,  like  M.  Renan,  to  one 
of  those  western  races  which  produced 
Jesuitism — having  been  taught  to  hate 
all   which    we    represent   to    ourselves 
under   the   name   of    Jesuitism   by  an 
oriental — one  who  is  a  special  object  of 
M.  Kenan's  dislike — one  who  said  "that 
"no   lie   is  of  the   truth;"   who  said 
"  that  there  is  no  greater  joy  than  to 
"  hear  of  those  who  walk  in  the  truth  ; " 
whose  Master  told  Pontius  Pilate  that 
"  for   this   end  He  was  born,  and  for 
"  this  cause   He  came  into  the  world, 
'"  that  He  might  bear  witness   of  the 
"  Truth" — I  cannot  with  a  very  clear 
conscience   accept  the   compliment  for 
my  people  or  for  myself.     But,   since 
M.  Renan  feels   that   he  has   a  right 
to    it,    he    must    understand    that    he 
lays  himself  under  a  very   strict  obli- 
gation.   He  represents  "  the  profoundly 
serious  races."     He  embodies  in  him- 
self "the  delicacies  of  the  critical  spi- 
rit," in  which  the    unhappy  Orientals 
are  go  deficient.     However,  then,  they 
may   palter   with    words   in   a   double 
sense,  he  must  do  no  such  thing.     Let 
them    idealise,  or   materialise,   as  they 
please,  this  expression,  Son  of  God,  to 
him  it  must  import  the  divinest  truth 
or  the  most   dreadful  lie.     Mists  may 
belong  to  the  eastern  atmosphere.     M. 
Renan  assures  us  that  the  bright  sun  of 
western  criticism  scatters  them  all.     I 
call  upon  him  to  exhibit  conviction  in 
its  clear  occidental  sense.  I  beseech  him 
to  instruct  me  by  an  example  of  perfect 
sincerite    avec    soi-meme.      I    am    sure 
that  we  all  need  it.    I  am  thankful  that 
he  is  putting  us  all  to  teets  and  trials 
which  make  such  sincerity  absolutely  in- 
dispensable. I  do  not,  indeed,  think  that 
we  should  advance  the  interests  of  sin- 
cerity by  trying  to  provide  a  definition 
of    the   phrase    which  he   employs  so 
loosely  and  variously.     I  do  not  know 
that  relations  can  be  defined.     If  they 
exist  they  must  be  lived  in.     The  child 
must  know  its  father,  not  find  terms  to 
describe  what  his  name  imparts.     But 
we  must    not    be   more    careless,    less 
rigorous,  when  we  speak  of  that  which 


concerns  the  whole  of  humanity,  than 
when  we  speak  of  that  which  concerns  our 
own  separate  households.  This  language 
is  the  language  of  the  God  of  Truth,  or 
it  is  hateful  to  Him.  It  sustains  human 
relations,  or  it  mocks  them,  and  pro- 
claims them  to  be  unreal 

I  have  hinted  at  the  effects  which  this 
book  may  produce  in  the  southern  coun- 
tries of  Europe,  where  it  has  already 
found   such   acceptance.      I  am  much 
more  interested  in  the  inquiry — "  What 
influence  is  it  likely  to   have  in  Eng- 
land ? "     Now  that  it  comes  forth  in  an 
authorized  translation,  that  question  may 
reasonably  engage  some  of  our  thoughts. 
To  one  class  of  our  countrymen  and 
countrywomen  this  last  circumstance  will 
make   no   difference.      The   book  will 
have  found  its  way  in  its  original  cos- 
tume to  drawing-room  tables ;    it   will 
lie   on   them  beside  sensation  novels,; 
it  will  supply  a  topic  for  agreeable  con- 
versation  where    they  fail    to    supply 
one.     How  will  it  be  received  in  this 
circle  1     I  have  too  little  acquaintance 
with  the  class  to  be  capable  of  judging, 
even  perhaps  of  guessing.      There    is 
one  suggestion  upon  the  subject  which 
will  occur  to  some  of  my  readers.     It 
will  be  said    "A  biography  which    so 
summarily  disposes  of  the  supernatural  as 
incredible,  as  impossible,  will  encounter 
much  resistance  from  the  spiritualistic 
and  table-turning  tendencies  of  refined 
people.     They  are  flying  to  strange  and 
unwonted  methods  of  obtaining  commu- 
nications from  the  unseen  world ;  they 
will   hardly  be   prepared  to   say   that 
the  communication  which  Christendom 
assumes  as  the  ground  of  its  existence 
has   no   reality."       The     statement     is 
plausible;  nevertheless  I  entirely  distrust 
it.  A  temper  or  state  of  mind  cannot  be 
tried  by  rules  of  logic  :  you  may  argue, 
"if  this  is  so,  then  that  at  all  events 
may   be  so,"  but   such  arguments  will 
have  no  weight,  they  will  breed  no  con- 
viction.    The   anxious  longing  for  the 
touch  of  an  infant's  finger,  or  an  ugly 
scrawl,  to  assure  us  that  we  are  not  abso- 
lutely cut  off  from  all  who  once  dwelt  on 
earth,  may  issue  at  last  no  doubt  in  the 
confession  of  a  substantial  bond  of  union 


Christmas  Thoughts  on  Eenan's  Vie  de  Jesus. 


195 


between  us  and  them.  The  sense  of  the 
vanity  of  charms  and  Babylonian  num- 
bers did  drive  men  of  old  to  seek  for  One 
who  is  the  same  yesterday  and  to-day,  and 
for  ever.  Weariness  of  table-turning  may 
be  a  way  back  to  that  conviction  ;  no  one 
can  telL  But  to  say  that  the  frivolous 
temper,  the  restless  longing  for  signs 
(and  such  signs  !)  can  of  itself  dispose 
any  one  to  believe  in  the  Christ  of  the 
New  Testament,  or  to  disbelieve  in  the 
charming  rose-water  substitute  for  him 
which  M.  Kenan  has  provided,  is  not 
reasonable. 

Will  our  scientific  men  accept  M. 
Eenan  as  their  apostle  1  Not,  surely,  if 
science  means  what  I  take  it  to  mean,  a 
reverence  for  that  which  is  ;  for  the  per- 
manent ;  for  laws  which  live  on  through 
a  multitude  of  changes,  and  direct  these 
changes.  All  the  dislike  which  they 
have  expressed  for  what  they  have  called 
the  thaumaturgy  of  priests  and  religious 
men,  must  be  directed  in  full  force  against 
the  object  of  M.  Eenan's  admiration.  He 
affected  to  change  laws.  When  he  spoke 
of  the  permanent  and  the  eternal  he  did 
not  in  the  least  understand  himself.  His 
highest  praise  is  that  he  was  an  idealist 
Facts  were  nothing  to  him.  Yet  I  dare 
not  say  that  the  scientific  man,  so  far  as 
he  feels  himself  merely  the  member  of  a 
caste  which  has  an  interest  opposed  to 
that  of  the  priestly  caste,  may  not 
welcome  a  man  who  he  supposes  will 
give  that  caste  some  trouble,  who  will 
throw  discredit  on  some  of  its  theories. 
I  cannot  say  that  the  compliments  which 
M.  Eenan  bestows  upon  the  wisdom  and 
truthfulness  of  our  age,  and  the  patron- 
age with  which  he  looks  back  upon  the 
innocent  ignorance  of  former  ages,  may 
not  have  an  attraction  for  men  who  have 
dwelt  more  upon  our  progress  in  dis- 
covery than  upon  the  thought  that 
the  highest  discovery  only  shows  us 
what  is  not  of  to-day  or  of  yesterday. 
There  is  a  superficial  phraseology  which 
belongs  to  every  class  of  men  as  a  class, 
which  becomes  a  portion  of  its  social 
dialect,  even  though  its  members  are 
engaged  in  the  deepest  inquiries.  In 
this  current  conventional  dialect  of 
science  M.  Eenan  is  an  adept;  he 


speaks  it  easily  and  gracefully.  He 
exchanges  tokens  of  freemasonry  with 
scientific  men  as  a  member  of  one  of 
their  lodges.  It  is  quite  possible  that 
these  signs  may  be  recognised  and 
returned  by  some  who  belong  to  the 
English  lodge. 

What  will  our  men  of  letters  say  to 
the  book  ?  I  must  think  that  those  of 
them  who  are  real  artists,  who  are 
able  to  conceive  a  character  or  to  ex- 
hibit one,  will  discover  in  M.  Eenan's 
hero  a  most  incoherent  jumble  of 
qualities  which  never  could  co-exist, 
which  never  could  form  a  real  man  at 
all,  to  say  nothing  of  an  "  incomparable  " 
man.  If,  for  instance,  I  might  venture 
to  speak  of  one  remarkable  artist,  from 
whom  I  have  learnt  the  deepest  lessons, 
the  authoress  of  "Silas  Marner"  and 
"  Eomola,"  I  think  she  must  recognise 
in  this  portrait  the  strangest  combina- 
tion of  strength  and  feebleness,  of  reality 
and  unreality;  such  a  combination  as 
might  be  produced  if  her  own  Adam 
Bede  and  Tito  were  thrown  into  the 
same  cauldron,  and  a  monstrous  tertium 
quid  arose  out  of  the  mixture.  But 
remembering  how  skilfully  M.  Eenan 
has  played  with  the  words  "  idealist," 
"realist,"  "democrat,"  with  those  forms 
of  speech  which  most  commend  them- 
selves to  the  tastes  and  habits  of  lite- 
rary men  in  our  day ;  still  more,  when 
I  think — oh,  with  what  shame  and  hu 
miliation — of  the  unreal  form,  neither 
divine  nor  human,  but  with  a  certain 
dream  of  divinity  to  make  the  human 
unapproachable,  with  a  certain  dream  of 
humanity  to  make  the  divine  fictitious, 
not  awful,  which  we  have  continually 
set  before  the  minds  of  our  countrymen, 
and  invested  with  the  sacred  name  of 
the  Son  of  Man  and  the  Son  of  God — 
I  cannot  determine  how  much  accep- 
tance may  be  given  by  the  class  which 
he  understands,  and  which  we  have 
alienated,  to  a  caricature,  perhaps  not 
more  distorted  than  many  of  those 
which  we  have  drawn. 

Once  more,  I  would  fain  hope  that 
there  is  in  our  English  people,  as  such, 
that  which  will  not  be  pleased  or  flat- 
tered with  the  kind  of  patronage  which 

02 


196 


Christmas  Thoughts  on  Benan's  Vie  de  Jesus. 


M.  Renan  bestows  upon  a  Galilean  pea- 
sant, and  with  the  kind  of  sympathy 
which  he  expresses  for  the  religion  of  the 
poor.  I  trust  that  the  sense  of  truth  and 
reality,  which  is  the  result  of  actual  en- 
durance, will  reject  the  dream  of  one 
who  pretended  to  establish  a  kingdom 
of  God,  who  cheated  men  into  the  be- 
lief of  it  by  exhibitions  of  imaginary 
power.  Can  men  of  hard  heads  and 
stout  hearts  suppose  that  such  a  one 
was  capable  of  inaugurating  a  great 
moral  or  political  revolution  in  which 
they  have  an  interest?  But  on  this 
point  also  I  am  afraid  to  express  a  con- 
fident opinion.  Our  clerical  notions  of 
the  kingdom  of  God  have  been  so  con- 
fused, we  have  so  little  made  our  people 
understand  whether  they  are  under  such 
a  kingdom  or  not — whether  it  has  any- 
thing to  do  with  either  heaven  or 
earth — whether  it  is  not  merely  some 
cloud-land  floating  between  them — that 
it  is  quite  possible  M.  Kenan's  picture 
of  this  kingdom,  vague  and  indistinct 
as  it  is,  may  come  before  them  as  a 
welcome  refuge  from  one  that  holds  out 
more  definite  promises  to  the  heart  of 
all  human  beings,  and  often  seems  to 
belie  them  more. 

Indeed,  it  is  the  part  of  M.  Eenan' s 
book  that  concerns  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  in  which  I  have  discovered  most 
causes  of  reproach  to  us — I  will  add  most 
excuses  for  sympathy  with  him.  His 
contradictions  on  the  subject  are  more 
numerous  than  on  any  other,  but  they 
are  instructive  contradictions  ;  they  are 
far  more  valuable  than  the  passages 
which  look  symmetrical  and  satisfactory. 
He  believes  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
must  have  been  a  kingdom  over  the 
spirit  of  man ;  therefore  the  young  Gali- 
lean fell  into  one  of  his  usual  delusions 
when  he  spoke  of  it  as  about  to  be  esta- 
blished on  the  earth.  Yet  he  intimates 
that  the  ideal  kingdom  must  have  a 
place  on  the  earth  ;  that  it  must  be  for 
actual  men,  for  poor  men  ;  that  it  must 
affect  all  their  relations  to  their  fellows, 
all  their  relations  to  their  superiors. 
Whilst  he  regards  it  as  the  greatest  sign 
of  enthusiasm  and  self-deception,  that 
Jesus  declared  the  kingdom  of  heaven 


would  be  manifested  before  that  genera- 
tion passed  away — whilst,  with  what  I 
cannot     call    a    delicatesse     de     Vesprit, 
critique,  he  adopts  the  false  translation 
of  "  world  "  for  "  age,"  in  the  passages 
wherein  Christ  and  the  Apostles  speak 
of  that  which  was  departing,  and  that 
which  was  to  come  ;  whilst  he  assumes, 
on  the  strength  of  this  false  translation, 
that  they  expected  the  earth  to  be  de- 
stroyed in  their  day,  though  the  changes 
of  which  they  speak  (and  none  more 
than  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse)  must 
be  changes  affecting  the  earth  ; — whilst 
he  does  all  this,  he  yet  intimates,  very 
clearly,  that  a   mighty  revolution   has 
been  produced  in  the  condition  of  the 
earth  and  its  inhabitants,  by  the  coming 
of  Christ — a  change  which  did  begin  to 
operate  when  He  said  it  would  begin  to 
operate.     And  he  utters  a  just  protest 
against  those   writers   on  New   Testa- 
ment prophecy  who   have  refused  to 
take  words   in  their  exact   and  literal 
sense  ;  who  have  assumed  that  our  Lord 
and  his  Apostles  played  tricks  with  their 
hearers,    or  were  ignorant  themselves ; 
who  have,  therefore,  transferred  to  an 
indefinitely  distant  period  what   they 
affirmed  was  close  at  hand.     These,  I 
repeat  it,  are  inconsistencies  of  incom- 
parable value,  not  for  the  confutation  of 
M.  Renan,  far  more  for  the  confutation 
of  ourselves.    He  is  right  that  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  does,  according  to  the 
New  Testament,  contain  all  those  ele- 
ments of  past,  present,  future,  of  divine 
and  human,  of  transcendant  and  most 
common  and  earthly,  which  he  sets  in 
apposition  to  each  other.     He  is  right, 
that  if  Christmas-day  does  not  import 
the  beginning  of  a  new  heaven  and  a 
new  earth,  it  is  not  what  our  fathers 
took  it  to  be ;  it  has  been  an  imposition 
upon  the  universe.    He  is  right  in  com- 
plaining of  the  members  of  the  Church, 
in  one  age  or  another,  for  not  proclaim- 
ing the  great  message  to  humanity  which 
that   day   proclaims.     He   is   right   in 
calling  us  to  account  for  these  misdeeds, 
in  reminding  us  that  another  than  he 
will  call  us  to  account  for  them     I  will 
not  part   from  him  without  thanking 
him  in  my  own  name,  and  in  the  name 


Christmas  Thoughts  on  Eenan's  Vie  de  Jfous. 


197 


of  all  who  have  taken  upon  them  the 
vows  which  I  have  taken  upon  me,  for 
giving  us  these  warnings ;  for  calling  us  to 
the  repentance  which  must  be  demanded 
of  us,  as  it  was  of  the  Jews  of  old,  if  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  so  near  as  they 
were  told  it  was,  as  we  profess  to  think 
that  it  is.  To  whatever  other  class  the 
"Vie  de  J&sus"  may  not  be  of  service,  to 
us  it  may  be  of  the  greatest.  It  may  teach 
us  how  unspeakable  has  been  the  benefit 
to  us  of  those  Jewish  teachers  of  the  old 
world,  from  whom  M.  Renan  seeks  to 
separate  us,  with  whom  he  says  Chris- 
tianity has  nothing  to  do.  If  the  mes- 
sage of  the  I  AM  was  not  a  real  mes- 
sage—  if  the  Jews  only  held  a  dry 
dogma  about  Monotheism — the  Jesus  of 
the  New  Testament  was  the  vague 
dreamer  about  something  divine,  which 
might  be  only  an  apotheosis  of  the 
human,  of  something  human,  which  was 
after  all  as  much  an  imagination  as  the 
other — that  M.  Eenan  supposes  him  to 
have  been.  If  the  message  was  true, 
He  either  was  the  perfect  image  of 
Him  whom  He  called  His  Father,  or 
He  deserved  the  name  which  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees  bestowed  on  Him.1  In 

1  In  reference  to  this  point  I  may  be  per- 
mitted, perhaps,  to  set  myself  right  with  Mr. 
Arnold,  who  has  imputed  to  me  in  the  last 
number  of  this  magazine  a  very  "fanciful" 
opinion  about  the  influence  of  Spinoza  on 
Leasing  and  Goethe.  It  would  have  been 
worthy  of  that,  or  a  more  contemptuous  name, 
if  I  have,  as  Mr.  Arnold  supposes,  attributed 
any  weight  to  the  "  Hebrew  nature  "  of  Spinoza. 
The  "  Hebrew  nature "  was  (I  derive  my 
judgment  from  the  only  books  which  I  know 
about  it,  those  which  might  be  most  likely 
to  exalt  the  Hebrew  above  other  people)  just 
as  idolatrous  as  the  nature  of  any  Greek,  or 
any  Dutchman,  or  any  Englishman.  If  the 
Hebrew  ever  believed  in  an  I  AM,  it  was  by 
a  struggle  with  his  nature,  by  a  victory  over  it. 
Through  all  the  metaphysics  of  Spinoza  I  per- 
ceive the  impression  which  this  awful  Name 
made  upon  him.  It  is  this  which  led  him  to 
Being  as  the  ground  of  all  his  thoughts.  It  is 
this  which  made  his  Pantheism  not  only  unlike 
the  Greek  Pantheism,  but  the  very  reverse  of 
it.  Pantheism  it  was — a  Pantheism  which 


that  case,  then,  He  was  the  great  deceiver 
of  mankind — the  greatest  of  all  atheists. 
But  most  of  all,  the  clergy,  the  English 
clergy,  have  this  lesson  to  learn  fro 
M.  Eenan.  He  considers  the  most 
wonderful  step  in  human  progress  is 
to  convince  us  that  Jesus  was  born  1800 
years  ago,  that  He  had  no  life  before,  or 
has  had  since.  It  has  been  our  tendency 
to  fall  into  this  same  habit  of  „  mind  not 
from  a  desire  of  progress,  but  because 
we  have  thought  we  were  only  safe 
in  going  back.  Every  pious  fraud,  every 
denial  of  a  common  humanity,  which 
ecclesiastical  history  or  common  history 
records,  has,  I  think  it  will  be  found, 
sprung  from  the  disposition  to  glorify 
the  past,  or  the  present,  or  the  future,  at 
the  expense  of  the  other  ;  to  deny  the 
Eternal  in  which  they  meet.  Every 
great  reformation,  every  assertion  of  the 
true  glory  of  our  race,  every  overthrow 
of  imposture  and  fraud,  has  had  its 
root  in  the  conviction  that  there  is  a 
direct  relation  between  the  God  of 
Heaven  and  His  creatures  on  earth. 
If  we  would  cast  down  the  thrones  of 
the  oppressor,  civil  or  spiritual — if  we 
would  really  believe  the  progress  of  our 
species — being  content  to  part  entirely 
with  the  fame  and  honour  of  believing 
it ;  if  we  would  be  in  the  true  sense 
humanists,  being  willing  to  be  denounced 
as  bigots  by  those  who  usurp  the  title, 
we  shall  speak  of  a  Living  Christ — of 
One  who  is,  and  was,  and  is  to  come  ; 
we  should  declare  that  from  the  highest 
throne  of  all,  whether  it  sound  from 
any  altar  on  earth  or  not,  a  voice  is 
saying,  "  Children,  you  have  a  Father. 
I  am  the  way  to  Him." 

swallowed  up  all  Humanity  and  all  Nature  in 
God.  It  did  not  swallow  up  God  in  Nature  or 
in  Humanity.  God  was  the  first  confession  in 
Spinoza's  mind ;  amidst  all  his  theories  of  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures,  amidst  all  his  strange 
ethical  conceptions,  it  remained  so  to  the  last. 
This  I  said  a  year  ago,  this  I  hold  more 
strongly  now,  to  have  been  the  secret  of  his 
power  over  the  Hellenized  Germans. 


198 


LETTERS  FKOM  A  COMPETITION  WALLAH. 

LETTER  VIII.— ABOUT  THE  HINDOO  CHARACTER ;  WITH  DIGRESSIONS 

HOME. 


CALCUTTA,  April  17,  1863. 
DEAR  SIMKINS, — One  morning,  at  the 
beginning  of  this  month,  as  I  lay  be- 
tween sleeping  and  waking,  near  the 
open  window,  I  began  to  be  aware  of  a 
hideous  din  in  an  adjacent  street.  At 
first  the  sound  of  discordant  music,  and 
a  confused  multitude  of  voices,  impressed 
me  with  a  vague  idea  that  a  battalion  of 
volunteers  were  passing  by  in  marching 
order,  headed  by  their  band.  This  no- 
tion, however,  was  dispelled  by  the 
appearance  of  my  bearer  with  the  tea- 
tray,  who  informed  ine  that  this  was  the 
festival  of  Cali,  the  goddess  of  destruc- 
tion, and  that  all  the  Hindoo  people  had 
turned  out  to  make  holiday.  I  imme- 
diately sallied  forth  in  the  direction  of 
the  noise,  and  soon  found  myself  amidst 
a  dense  crowd  in  the  principal  thorough- 
fare leading  to  the  shrine  of  the  deity. 
During  a  few  minutes  I  could  not  be- 
lieve my  eyes  ;  for  I  seemed  to  have 
been  transported  in  a  moment  over  more 
than  twenty  centuries,  to  the  Athens  of 
Cratinus  and  Aristophanes.  If  it  had 
not  been  for  the  colour  of  the  faces 
around,  I  should  have  believed  myself 
to  be  on  the  main  road  to  Eleusis  in 
the  full  tide  of  one  of  the  Dionysiac 
festivals.  The  spirit  of  the  scene  was 
the  same,  and  at  each  step  some  well- 
known  feature  reminded  one  irresistibly 
that  the  Bacchic  orgies  sprung  from  the 
mysterious  fanaticism  of  the  far  East. 
It  was  no  unfounded  tradition  that  pic- 
tured Dionysus  returning  from  con- 
quered India,  leopards  and  tigers 
chained  to  his  triumphal  car,  escorted 
from  the  Hyphasis  to  the  Asopus  by 
bands  of  votaries  dancing  in  fantastic 
measure  to  the  clang  of  cymbals.  It 
was  no  chance  resemblance  this,  be- 
tween an  Hindoo  rite,  in  the  middle  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  and  those  wild 
revels  that  stream  along  many  a  Grecian 
bas-relief,  and  wind  round  many  an 


ancient  Italian  vase  ;  for  every  detail  por- 
trayed in  those  marvellous  works  of  art 
was  faithfully  represented  here.  If  one 
of  the  life-like  black  figures  in  the 
Etruscan  chamber  of  the  British  Mu- 
seum could  have  walked  down  off  the 
back-ground  of  red  pottery  into  the 
midst  of  the  road  conducting  to  Cali 
Ghaut,  he  would  not  have  attracted  the 
notice  of  the  closest  observer.  Every 
half-minute  poured  by  a  troop  of  wor- 
shippers. First,  came  boys  stark  naked, 
and  painted  from  head  to  foot  in  imita- 
tion of  leopards  and  tigers,  while  others 
guided  them  with  reins  of  thin  cord. 
Then  followed  three  or  four  strange 
.  classic  figures,  wearing  the  head-dress 
which  is  familiar  to  us  from  the  exist- 
ing representations  of  bacchanalian  pro- 
cessions, dancing  in  an  attitude  which 
recalled,  spontaneously  and  instantly, 
the  associations  of  Smith's  "  Dictionary 
of  Antiquities."  The  only  circumstance 
which  was  not  in  common  between 
Tolly's  "Nullah"  and  the  Cephisus, 
was  the  censer  of  live  charcoal  which 
these  men  carried  before  them,  sup- 
ported by  wires  passed  through  the  flesh 
under  their  armpits.  Into  this,  from 
time  to  time,  they  throw  a  powder, 
which  produced  a  sudden  flash  and  a 
most  infernal  smell.  Behind  them,  his 
brows  crowned  profusely  with  foliage, 
was  led  in  mimic  bonds,  the  chief  per- 
sonage of  the  company,  who  was  sup- 
posed to  be  under  the  direct  influence 
of  the  god.  All  around  him,  musicians 
were  beating  tomtoms  and  clashing  tam- 
bourines, like  the  satellites  of  Evius,  on 
the  day  when  he  leapt  from  his  car 
into  the  arms  of  the  forsaken  Ariadne  : 
as  he  still  leaps  on  the  glowing  canvas 
of  Titian.  All  was  headlong  licence 
and  drunken  frenzy.  After  struggling 
through  the  throng  for  a  mile  and  a 
half  of  dusty  street,  I  came  to  a  narrow 
slum  which  descended  to  the  Ghaut,  or 


About  the  Hindoo  Character ;  with  Digressions 


199 


landing-place,  of  Cali,  which  lies  on  the 
nullah  of  the  mythical  hero  Toll 3-,  who, 
perhaps,  was  the  Atys  of  this  Oriental 
Cybele.      From  this  lane,  a  passage  a 
yard  or  two  in  breadth  opened  on  to  a 
dirty   court   in  which   stood  the  sanc- 
tuary,    whence     Calcutta    derives    its 
name  ;  which  was  an  object  of  awe  and 
reverence   to   the   surrounding  popula- 
tion for  ages  before  the  first  ship,  laden 
with  Feringhee  wares,  was  warped  up 
the  neighbouring  river.     It  seemed  im- 
possible to  pierce  the  mob  of  devotees, 
and  penetrate  to  the*  holy  place  ;  but 
not  even   religious   madness,   not  even 
the  inspiration  of  bang  and  toddy,  could 
overcome  the  habitual  respect  paid  to  a 
white  face  and  a  pith  helmet.     A  couple 
of  policemen  cleared  a  passage  for  me 
to  within  a  few  feet  of  the  sacred  image. 
It  appeared  to  be  a  rude  block,  orna- 
mented with  huge  glass  beads  ;  but  I 
dare  say  the  Palladium,  which  fell  from 
heaven,  was  not  a  very  elaborate  device  ; 
and,  yet  it  saved  the  reputation  of  a 
young  Roman  lady,  and  gave  a  sytfonym 
to    an   English  jury.     I  wonder   what 
Mr.  Edwin  James  conceived  to  be  the 
origin   of   the   expression,  on  the  nu- 
merous occasions  when  he  appealed  to 
that  institution,  as  the    "  Playdium  of 
Brish  Liberty."     He  probably  supposed 
it  to  be  the  Latin  for  "bulwark,"   or 
"  effective  guarantee."     Before  I  reached 
home,  what  with  the  jostling,  and  hub- 
bub, and  stench,  I  was  very  glad  to  get 
back  to  the  society  of  cleaJi,  fragrant 
Christians.     As  I  grew  every  moment 
more    tired    and    hot,    the    exhibition 
seemed  to  savour  less  of  the  classical, 
and  more  of  the  diabolical.     At  last,  I 
came  to  the  ill-natured  conclusion,  that 
Satan  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole 
business,     and    not    the    golden-haired 
Dionysus.     The  remarkably  unpleasant 
Moenads  around  mo  suggested  the  idea 
of  perspiration  rather  than  inspiration, 
and  I  felt  inclined  to  exclaim, — 

Dea,  magna  domina  Tolli,  Calie  dea  domina, 
Prpcul  a  meo  sit  omnis  tuus  ore,  precor,  odor ! 
Alios  age  hinc  olentes.    Alios  age  putridos. 

This  singular  system  of  idolatry,  so 
perfect  in  organization,  so  venerable  in 


its   extreme    antiquity,    already    shows' 
evident  marks  of  decay.     The  study  of 
the  history  of  creeds  teaches  us,  that  the 
laws  which  govern  the  religious  opinions 
of    mankind    may    be    ascertained    as 
surely  as  the  laws  which  govern  their 
political  and  social  opinions.     A   rude 
nation  is  content  with  an  absurd,  irra-. 
tional    superstition  ;    while    a    highly 
civilized  community  requires  a  logical 
and  consistent   faith.       You   might   as 
soon  expect,  in  the  England  of  the  nine- 
teenth  century,   to    find   Ptolemy  the 
great  astronomical  authority,  and  Galen 
the  great  medical  authority,  as  to  meet 
with  tenets  such  as  those  of  the  Church 
of  Rome  in  the  dark  ages.     Men  who 
are  accustomed  to  examine   with   care 
the  principles  of  constitutional  govern- 
ment, of  commercial   policy,    of  inter- 
national law,  of  personal  rights  ;  men 
who  will  not  admit  the  existence  of  the 
most   insignificant   fact   in   geology   OT 
physiology,  without  a  rigorous  investi- 
gation, are  not  likely  to  be  indifferent 
concerning  truth  or  error  in  matters  to 
which  the  interests  of  this  world  are  as 
nothing    in    the    balance.     The    same 
causes   that   set   John    Stuart    Mill   at 
work  iipon  the  questions  of  small  hold- 
ings   and   limited   liability,  which   led 
Maclure   in   quest   of    the   North-west 
Passage,  and  Sir  Charles  Lyell  in  search 
of  flint-knives  and  pre-historic  men — 
these  very  causes  incite  adventurers  of 
another  class  to  seek  a  reason  for  the 
faith  that  is  in  them,  amidst  perils,  to 
which   polar  bears  and  icebergs  are   a 
trifle.      Yet,  incredible  as  it  may  seem, 
instead  of  bidding  them  God-speed,  we 
prosecute  them,  and  sequester  them  and 
backbite  them,  and  take  away  their  good 
name  and  their  fellowships.     When  a 
savant,  after  a  faithful  and  diligent  in- 
quiry, arrives  at  a  conclusion  with  which 
Ave  disagree,  we  are  none  the  less  pleased 
that  the  subject  has  been  sifted,  and  we 
buy  his  book,  and  tack  some  mystical 
letters  to  the  end  of  his  name.     "When 
a   theological   writer    follows   this    ex- 
ample, we  say  that  his  number  is  six 
hundred  threescore  and  six,  and  trounce 
him  of  about  as  many  pounds  a  year. 
It  is  very  easy  for  us  to  tell  him  to 


200 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VIII. 


believe  and  not  to  doubt ;  but  it  is  not 
so  easy  to  answer  the  plaintive  question, 
"  How  shall  I  know  what  I  am  to  be- 
lieve 1 "  If  we  bid  him  continue  in 
the  faith  in  which  he  was  brought  up, 
without  doubt  or  cavil,  he  naturally 
suggests  that  on  this  principle  the 
children  of  Papists  will  be  Papists,  the 
children  of  Buddhists,  Buddhists,  the 
children  of  Mormons,  polygamists,  the 
children  of  Mr.  Prince,  love-birds,  and 
the  children  of  Mr.  Home,  media,  till 
the  end  of  time. 

There  was  some  sense  and  consistency 
in  the  intolerance  of  Philip  the  Second 
and  his  spouse,  who,  as  you  observed  in 
a  prize  declamation,  attached  the  epithet 
of  "  bloody  "  to  the  loveliest  of  English 
names.  They  held  that  the  Church 
which  traced  back  an  unbroken  descent 
to  the  day  when  Peter  received  the 
keyb  from  the  hand  of  her  Master  and 
Founder,  >vas  infallible  and  omniscient. 
Whatever  the  Church  ordained  to  be 
essential  for  salvation — prayer,  penance, 
or  indulgence — she  must  be  obeyed,  or 
the  consequence  would  be  eternal  death. 
Men  who  acted  under  this  impression 
really  meant  well  by  you  when  they 
screwed  you  up,  and  flayed  you  alive, 
and  roasted  you,  and  confiscated  your 
property.  But  for  Protestants,  whose 
creed  is  founded  upon  freedom  of 
thought — who,  if  thought  be  not  free, 
are,  one  and  all,  in  a  state  of  reproba- 
tion— for  Protestants,  on  account  of 
honest  difference  of  opinion,  to  ban,  and 
browbeat,  and  mulct,  and  indite  each 
other,  and  gratuitously  forbid  each  other 
to  preach  in  their  respective  dioceses,  is 
an  idea  to  the  last  degree  monstrous 
and  incongruous.  Will  any  one  pre- 
tend to  say,  that  there  exists  no  fault  or 
blemish  in  our  Church  1  If  the  insti- 
tution is  not  perfect,  if — like  everything 
else  in  the  construction  of  which  man 
has  borne  a  part — reformation  is  needed, 
from  what  quarter  is  the  reforming 
movement  to  begin  ?  When  laymen 
take  up  the  matter,  the  cry  is,  "  Hands 
"  olf !  the  Church  of  England  is  not  a 
"  public  office,  or  a  government  dock- 
"  yard.  In  the  name  of  Heaven,  do  not 
"  allow  our  liturgy  to  get  amidst  the 


"  godless   House   of    Commons  ! "      If 

clergymen  step  into  the  breach^  the  cry 

rises  to  a  shriek  :  "  How  dare  you,  who 

'  eat  the  bread  of  the  Church,  revile 

'  her  service  and  impugn  her  belief? 

'  Traitors !  impostors  !   perjured   swind- 

'  lers  !   ill  birds !  pack  up  and  begone 

'  from  the  nest  you  have  fouled  ! " 

But  I  have  wandered  far  enough  from 
Cali  Ghaut.  You  may  well  imagine 
that  such  a  scene  of  idolatrous  barbar- 
ism as  I  have  described  must  seem 
shocking  and  absurd  to  natives  educated 
in  European  literature,  and  versed  in 
European  habits  of  thought  and  busi- 
ness. The  schoolmaster  has  long  been 
abroad,  and  the  rationalist  generally 
treads  on  the  heels  of  that  functionary. 
The  introduction  of  Western  learning 
and  science  has  produced  upon  the 
Hindoo  religion  the  same  effect  that 
was  produced  upon  the  ancient  classical 
creeds  by  the  progress  of  civilization. 
As  Cicero  said  of  the  augurs  of  his  day, 
it  is  hard  to  conceive  how  one  Brahman 
can  look  another  in  the  face  without  a 
smile.  There  are  some  who  admire  the 
great  men  of  Greece  and  Home,  because 
they  united  philosophy  to  the>  conduct 
of  public  affairs.  How  beautiful  to  be- 
hold Pericles  learning  from  Anaxagoras 
that  the  universe  in  general,  and  Aspa- 
sia  in  particular,  was  composed  of  homo- 
geneous atoms  !  Cato,  on  the  eve  of 
death,  assuring  Plato  that  he  reasoned 
well !  Cicero,  in  the  intervals  of  self- 
glorification,  writing  academic  treatises, 
and  receiving  consolatory  letters  from 
people  who  had  sailed  from  /Egina  and 
Megara.  There  would  be  just  as  much 
sense  in  praising  Bright  for  being  a 
Protestant  as  well  as  a  demagogue,  or 
Pelissier  for  being  a  Roman  Catholic  as 
well  as  a  Marshal.  A  man  must  have  a 
belief,  or  disbelief,  of  some  sort  or  kind ; 
and  when,  as  in  the  case  of  Jupiter  and 
Vishnu,  the  national  religion  is  too  ab- 
surd for  an  enlightened  man  to  swallow, 
he  must  profess  himself  something,  if  it 
were  only  an  atheist  The  earliest  and 
most  natural  heresy  is  an  attempt  to 
rationalise  the  irrational,  and  extract 
from  the  follies  of  the  old  faith  a  con- 
sistent system  of  morality  and  divinity. 


About  the  Hindoo  Character;  with  Digressions  Home. 


201 


Towards  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century,  Earn  Mohun  Roy  (no  relation 
to  Lord  Stanhope),  struck  with  the  idea 
of  divine  unity,  which  he  had  learnt 
from  the  Bible  and  the  Koran,  with 
much  audacity  and  ingenuity  under- 
took to  trace  out  an  underlying  current 
of  Monotheism  in  the  four  books  of  the 
Vedas,  the  most  sacred  of  the  Hindoo 
Scriptures.  During  a  residence  in  Eng- 
land, he  regularly  attended  a  Unitarian 
place  of  worship.  His  sect  went  by  the 
name  of  "  Vedantists ; "  in  fact,  the 
"  Evangelicals"  of  the  East  The  ortho- 
dox Pundits  took  alarm,  and  declared 
him  a  heretic,  but  r.ot  before  they  had 
most  clearly  shown  that  he  had  entirely 
failed  to  explain  away  the  polytheist 
character  of  the  Hindoo  theology.  It 
never  occurred  to  them  to  assert  that 
this  pretended  new  idea  had  been  ex- 
ploded as  far  back  as  the  reign  of  Shah 
Jehan. 

When,  however,  European  principles 
of  criticism  were  applied  to  the  Vedas, 
grave  doubts  began  to  spring  up  con- 
cerning their  divine  origin.  One  book 
was  evidently  the  primary  basis  of  the 
other  three,  Avhich  were  little  more  than 
a  confused  liturgy.  The  Vedantists  now 
began  to  talk  about  "  natural  religion." 
They  refused  any  longer  to  acknowledge 
the  high  authority  of  the  writings  from 
which  their  sect  received  its  first  name, 
and  professed  to  believe  only  in  the 
pure  and  eternal  God,  or  Brahma.  By 
a  strange  inconsistency,  they  still  use 
the  old  Vedic  ritual,1  the  hymns  of 
which  they  sing  to  the  best  music  that 
can  be  procured  in  Calcutta,  which  is 
not  saying  very  much  for  it. 

With  such  an  element  of  discord  as 
the  proud  and  bigoted  Mahommedan 
population  scattered  throughout  the 
country,  it  is  greatly  to  the  credit  of 
our  Government  that  religious  disturb- 
ances are  of  such  rare  occurrence.  If  you 
can  conceive  the  Catholics  and  Orange- 
men of  Ireland,  each  multiplied  by 

1  These  speculative  philosophers  who  stick 
to  their  old  ritual,  resemble  Alcibiades,  who, 
according  to  Mr.  Grote,  was  '•'  celebrated  alike 
for  hia  theories  aud  his  liturgy." — (Note  by 
Mr.  8i  miring.) 


twenty,  and  planted  under  a  zone  where 
the  passions  are  at  blood-heat,  you  will 
have  an  idea  what  the  state  of  things, 
out  here  would  be  if  it  were  not  foi 
the  heavy  hand  of  English  authority 
In  all  sectarian  squabbles,  our  magis- 
trates behave  with  the  same  cold  justice 
and  magnificent  indifference  that  wa.< 
displayed  by  the  provincial  officers  01 
old  Eome  in  the  days  of  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas, and  I  have  no  doubt  but  what 
they  get  the  same  hard  measure  from 
the  enthusiasts  whom  they  prevent  from 
tearing   each  other  in  pieces.      In  all 
probability,  the  records  and  traditions  of 
the  respective  creeds  preserve  the  nanie 
of  more  than  one  judge  or  collector,  who 
was  rewarded  for  having  saved  the  life 
of  some  bold  preacher,  by  being  handed 
down  to  posterity  as  the  impersonifica- 
tion  of  "carelessness."     There  are  few 
personages  in  history  who  have  been  so 
unjustly  used  as  these  Roman  deputies 
and  chief  captains.     They  seem,  to  have 
borne  themselves  with  rare  courage  and 
judgment,  to  have  stood  on  every  occa- 
sion between  the  persecutors  and  their 
prey,    and   to    have    given    way   only 
when  nothing  short  of  concession  could 
avert  a  general  uprising  of  a  fierce  and 
determined  nation  of  fanatics.    The  con- 
duct of  Lycias  and  Festus  seems  to  have 
been  eminently  just  and  prudent ;  and, 
after  all,  poor  Gallio's  fault  simply  con- 
sisted in  this,  that  when  he  found  no 
mention  in  the  revised  code,  of  the  crime 
charged  against  Paul,  he  bundled  both 
parties  out  of  his  cutcherry.     And  dur- 
ing  the    most   awful    and   melancholy 
scene  that  the  world  has  ever  witnessed, 
— when  the  earth  trembled  with  horror, 
and  the  kindly  sun  veiled  his  face  before 
the  cruelty  of  man — after  the  Divine 
victim,  and  those  women  whose  perfect 
love  cast  out  their  fear,  the  character 
who  most  deserves  our  pity  is  the  timid, 
feminine,     compassionate     ruler,    who 
pleaded  hard  for  that  sacred  life  against 
the  murderous  and  turbulent  mob  of  Je- 
rusalem ;  who  yielded  at  last  in  an  agony 
of  remorse  and  shame ;  and  who  restored 
to  His  disciples  the  body  of  their  Muster  in 
the  teeth  of  those  implacable  bigots,  who 
desired  to  pursue  their  revenge  beyond 


202 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah-:  Letter 


the  limits  of  the  grave.  His  cowardice 
seems  far  more  venial  than  the  dastardly 
desertion  of  those  men  who,  after  living 
in  daily  intercourse  with  our  Saviour  for 
the  space  of  three  years,  hanging  on  His 
words,  eating  with  Him  at  the  same  table, 
sleeping  at  His  side,  sharing  His  every 
toil  and  privation  (made  light,  indeed, 
by  so  blessed  a  presence,  and  so  deep  an 
affection),  at  the  first  sight  of  sword  or 
staff,  "  forsook  Him  and  fled."  The  con- 
duct of  Judas,  of  Caiaphas,  of  Herod, 
of  Pilate,  may  be  explained  by  (alas !) 
ordinary  human  motives.  But  who  can 
account  for  the  conduct  of  Peter  and 
James,  Andrew  and  Philip  1  In  the 
most  stormy  tumult,  with  outrage  and 
massacre  staring  them  in  the  face,  a 
faithful  band  of  followers  and  ad- 
mirers always  stuck  by  Paul  to  the  last. 
On  the  day  when  "  the  best  of  men  who 
knew  not  God"  -vfas  mobbed  by  deadly 
enemies  before  a  prejudiced  tribunal, 
Plato  and  Crito,  Apollodorus  and  Crito- 
buhis  stood  around  their  companion  and 
teacher,  pressed  him  with  loving  im- 
portunity to  accept  their  money  and 
their  services,  and,  at  the  risk  of  their 
lives,  schemed  his  escape  from  prison, 
loth  to  acquiesce  in  his  fixed  determi- 
nation to  submit  to  the  laws  of  his 
country,  however  tin  justly  they  might 
have  been  wrested  by  his  adversaries  to 
ensure  his  destruction.  And  yet  Paul 
and  Socrates,  great  and  noble  as  they 
were,  were  nothing  more  than  men. 
How  then  could  those  who  had  been 
permitted  to  call  themselves  the  friends 
of  a  Divine  and  perfect  being  stoop  to  a 
baseness  from  which  ordinary  men  of 
the  world  would  be  preserved  by  senti- 
ments of  honour  and  self-respect?  It 
indeed  required  a  life  as  long  as  that  of 
John,  and  a  fate  as  painful  as  the  fate 
of  James  and  Peter,  to  wipe  out  such  a 
stain  from  their  own  conscience  and 
from  the  memory  of  mankind. 

You  urge  me,  in  all  your  letters,  to 
tell  you  something  about  the  aborigines 
of  India.  You  write  as  if  you  were 
making  inquiries  about  a  set  of  savages, 
their  bread-fruit,  their  canoes,  their 
clubs,  and  the  pahs  from  which  they 
carry  on  a  desultory  Mars,  I  have  not 


hitherto  gratified  your  wish,  because  1 
am  one  of  those  who  think  that  the 
people  of  India  deserve  more  than  cur- 
sory observation,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
the  most  important  class  in  India,  for 
whose  benefit  we  hold  the  country,  and 
to  whom  we  shall  have  one  day  to  ac- 
count for  the  manner  in  which  we  go- 
vern it.  Extraordinary  as  this  opinion 
may  seem  to  some  people,  it  is  backed 
by  the  high  authority  of  Sir  Charles 
Wood  and  Lord  Stanley,  Sir  Charles 
Trevelyan,  Sir  John  Peter  Grant,  and 
the  vast  majority  of  the  Civil  Service. 
I  hate  the  "damned  nigger"  style. 
One  requires  more  than  a  few  months  to 
form  a  correct  set  of  opinions  and  im- 
pressions concerning  an  ancient  and 
wealthy  society,  with  a  singular  and 
complicated  organization  ;  whose  habits, 
instincts,  and  ways  of  thought,  to  a 
European  eye,  form  "  a  mighty  maze," 
which,  nevertheless,  if  it  be  closely 
examined,  will  be  found  to  be  "  not 
without  a  plan." 

In  order  to  lay  a  foundation  for  a 
conception  of  the  native  character,  it  is 
essential  first  to  clear  away  all  our  pre- 
conceived notions  of  what  that  character 
ought  to  be.  It  is  impossible  to  judge 
a  Hindoo  by  any  other  known  standard. 
He  is  not,  like  the  Xorth  American 
Indian,  a  barbarian  with  a  few  sound 
ideas  about  the  bearings  of  the  stars  and 
the  habits  of  deer,  and  a  few  crude  ideas 
about  the  Great  Spirit  and  the  future 
condition  of  his  faithful  dog.  He  is 
not,  like  the  European  of  the  middle 
ages,  the  member  of  a  community,  rude 
indeed  as  yet,  and  undeveloped,  but 
replete  with  the  germs  of  a  vigorous 
civili/ation.  The  institutions  of  his 
country,  though  grotesque  enough  in 
our  point  of  view,  are  elaborate  and 
mature  as  any  recorded  in  history.  He 
belongs  to  a  social  order,  which  dates 
far  back  into  the  depths  of  time,  with 
innumerable  well-defined  grades  and 
classes,  with  titles  which  were  borne  by 
his  forefathers,  when  the  ancestors  of 
English  dukes  still  paddled  about  in 
wicker  canoes,  when  wild  in  woods  the 
marquis  ran,  when  the  Williams  of  the 
period  sported  a  suit  of  blue  paint,  on 


About  the  Hindco  Character  ;  icith  Digressions  Home. 


203 


the  principle  that  wiscounts,  "  when 
unadorned,"  are  "adorned  the  most." 
He  professes  a  religion  compared  with 
which  all  other  creeds  are  mere  par- 
venus ;  which  looks  down  on  the  vene- 
rable faith  of  Buddhism  as  a  vulgar 
modern  heresy,  and  watches  the  varying 
fortunes  of  Mahommedanism  with  the 
same  contemptuous  curiosity  as  that 
with  which  the  Church  of  England 
regards  the  progress  of  the  Eevival 
movement.  He  still  may  recognise  at 
every  turn  the  traces  of  a  system  of 
government,  justice,  and  finance,  as  com- 
prehensive and  minute,  though  not  so 
philosophical,  as  that  which  we  have 
founded  in  its  place.  His  countrymen 
were  bankers,  and  merchants,  and  shop- 
keepers, long  before  the  renaissance  era 
of  European  commerce  ;  ere  Venice  had 
yet  supplanted  Amphitrite  in  the  affec- 
tions of  Neptune ;  ere  Britain  was 
aware  of  the  charter  which  had  been 
drawn  up  for  her  benefit  on  the  occasion 
of  her  rising  from  the  azure  main  amidst 
a  flattering  but  somewhat  monotonous 
chorus  of  guardian  angels.  Broking, 
and  discounting,  and  forestalling,  and 
retailing  were  going  on  briskly  along 
either  bank  of  the  Ganges  while  Gurney 
and  Overend  were  squabbling  over  the 
skin  of  a  badger  which  they  had  trapped 
on  the  ground  where  the  Exchange  now 
stands ;  while  Fortnum  and  Mason  were 
driving  a  bouncing  trade  in  acorns,  and 
Swan  and  Edgar  were  doing  a  good 
thing  in  woad  ;  while  Eothschild  was 
compounding  for  his  last  grinder  with 
some  fierce  chieftain  in  Franconia.  Who 
can  wonder  that  the  member  of  such  a 
society  should  differ  radically  from  a 
Frenchman  or  a  German  ;  not  as  a 
savage  differs  from  a  civilized  man,  but 
as  one  man  differs  from  another  who  has 
been  brought  up  amidst  an  entirely  dis- 
similar set  of  ideas,  scenes,  associations, 
and  influences  1  The  day  has  long 
passed  when  the  Bengalee  could  be  dis- 
posed of  by  being  termed  a  "mild  Hin- 
doo," and  I  trust  that  it  will  not  be 
long  before  he  will  cease  to  be  disposed 
of  by  being  called  a  "  damned  nigger." 

In  the  constitution  of  the  native  mind, 
the  fundamental  characteristic  is  want  of 


stamina,  and  this  defect  is  the  favourite 
text  of  the  abuse  levelled  against  the 
Hindoo  by  his  enemies.  The  secret  of 
our  rapid  conquest  and  secure  tenure  of 
the  country  is  the  absence  of  energy 
among  the  inhabitants.  In  every  action 
of  his  life,  the  Bengalee  makes  it  mani- 
fest that  he  is  entirely  without  the  ear- 
nestness of  purpose  which  a  Briton 
carries  into  his  business,  his  pleasures, 
even  his  vices.  Your  native  is  perfectly 
contented  to  glisten  and  bask  in  the  sun 
for  days  and  weeks  together,  dozing, 
waking  to  scratch  his  arms,  and  turn  over, 
and  dozing  again.  Conceive  a  Scotch- 
man, not  under  the  influence  of  whisky 
and  unprovided  with  tobacco,  lying  on 
his  back  for  two  hours  of  daylight !  He 
would  never  be  able  to  recover  his  lost 
ground  and  catch  up  his  brother  Scotch- 
men in  the  race  of  life.  John  Stuart  Mill 
has  shown  that  "  the  standard  of  com- 
fort indispensable  in  the  opinion  of  the 
labouring  classes  "  is  the  ruling  principle 
of  social  progress.  Now,  in  India  that 
standard  is  lamentably  low.  A  penny 
or  twopence  a  day  will  provide  a  man 
with  rice  enough  to  produce  a  pleasing 
sense  of  plethora  ;  a  single  coarse  cotton 
garment,  a  mat,  and  a  brass  lotah  re- 
quire no  large  outlay.  He  digs  a  great 
hole  in  the  ground,  and  makes  a  dirt- 
pie,  which  he  calls  a  house.  He  grinds 
his  curry  on  a  stone  prigged  from  an 
English  graveyard,  cooks  his  rice  in 
an  extempore  oven  on  a  fire  of  dried 
cow-dung,  and  eats  till  he  "  swells 
visibly  before  your  very  eyes."  One 
good  fit  of  dyspepsia,  tempered  by  a 
pipe  and  a  siesta,  suffices  for  his  suste- 
nance. The  great  mass  of  the  popula- 
tion will  do  just  as  much  work  as  will 
earn  them  their  simple  but  flatulent 
dinner,  and  not  a  stroke  more.  The 
distinctive  traits  of  the  Oriental  and  the 
Frank  are  strongly  marked  in  their 
respective  methods  of  limiting  their 
exertions  to  their  wants.  An  English 
navvy  will  work  like  a  horse  for  four 
days  out  of  the  seven,  and  spend  the 
other  three  in  an  Elysium  of  beer,  bird's- 
eye,  pugilism  and  bull-terriers.  A  ryot 
lounges  and  snoozes  over  his  business 
every  day  and  all  day  long,  except  on 


204 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  VIII. 


some  high  festival,  when  he  splotches 
his  turban  with  pink  paint,  and  sets  off 
to  drink  the  water  of  the  holy  river  in 
an  exalted  state  of  piety  and  bang,  in 
the  company  of  twenty  or  thirty  of  his 
neighbours,  a  tomtom,  and  two  females 
of  bad  reputation. 

The  ordinary  Hindoo  has  no  feeling 
about  the  sacredness  of  toil.  Honest, 
faithful  performance  you  will  expectfrom 
him  in  vain.  A  drunken,  debauched 
mechanic  in  our  own  country  will  turn 
out  what  work  he  does,  in  first-rate  style. 
A  knavish,  dissipated  groom  will  bring 
your  horse  to  the  door  in  perfect  con- 
dition, with  not  a  hair  out  of  place,  as 
fresh  as  he  himself  was  the  evening  be- 
fore. A  native,  on  the  contrary,  must  be 
watched  from  morning  till  night.  He 
has  no  sense  of  shame  in  the  matter  of 
laziness,  and  considers  himself  horribly 
ill-used  if  he  is  kept  to  his  duty.  I 
learnt  this  fact  during  my  first  night  on 
these  shores.  After  half  an  hour's  sleep, 
I  began  to  dream  that  I  was  Dante,  and 
that  I  was  paying  a  visit  to  the  Infernal 
realms  under  tbe  guidance  of  Martin 
Tupper.  Protected  by  his  divine  pre- 
sence, I  traversed  the  regions  of  torment, 
escaping  with  difficulty  from  the  clutches 
of  minor  demons,  who  bore  a  strong  re- 
semblance to  the  Lascars  in  the  service 
of  the  P.  and  0.,  until  we  arrived  at'the 
sanctum  of  the  Father  of  Lies,  who 
received  us  very  cordially.  The  atmo- 
sphere was  hot,  very  hot ;  so  hot  that  I  had 
begun  to  think  of  negotiating  a  retreat, 
when  an  imp  came  up  to  his  majesty, 
touched  his  horns  respectfully,  and  said, 
"  More  coals,  please  sir,  for  General 
Butler."  At  this  moment  I  awoke  in  a 
fearful  state  of  perspiration  to  see  the 
punkah  hanging  motionless  overhead. 
I  sallied  forth,  and  there  was  the  bearer 
rolled  up  in  his  blanket,  fast  asleep  ; 
and  this  fellow  had  absolutely  nothing 
else  to  do  besides  pulling  a  string  for 
three  hours  and  a  half  every  night  :  the 
rest  of  the  twenty-four  he  had  at  his 
own  disposal.  If  you  go  to  sleep  on  a 
journey,  nothing  is  more  usual  than  to 
find  your  palanquin  on  the  ground  at 
the  side  of  the  road,  while  half  the  men 
are  gone  to  a  village  a  mile  off  for  a 


drink  of  water,  and  the  other  half  are 
smoking  in  a  circle  and  listening  to  a 
disquisition  of  the  torch-carrier,  who  has 
just  pronounced  to  the  satisfaction  of  his 
audience  that  you  are  of  a  lower  caste  than 
the  Sahib  at  the  last  dawk  bungalow,  be- 
cause he  wore  a  collar  and  waistcoat, 
while  you  travel  without  those  badges 
of  rank.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how 
any  business  was  done  before  we  came 
into  the  country — how  any  one  ever 
made  a  road,  or  a  boat,  or  a  journey. 
The  other  day  I  was  on  a  visit  at  the 
house  of  a  Maharaja.  We  were  to  set 
off  at  three  in  the  morning,  in  palan- 
quins, to  catch  a  train  at  a  distant 
station.  Most  minute  arrangements  had 
been  made  over  night.  Our  servants 
were  to  start  on  an  elephant  at  one  A.M., 
our  baggage  on  the  heads  of  coolies  an 
hour  after  that,  while  we  were  to  find 
breakfast  ready  at  a  quarter  before  three. 
At  five  minutes  before  three  I  awoke  by 
chance,  and,  out  of  a  household  of  a  hun- 
dred and  more,  not  a  soul  was  stirring. 
They  had  all  gone  to  bed,  not  with  a  de- 
termination to  oversleep  themselves,  but 
absolutely  indifferent  whether  they  over- 
slept themselves  or  not.  This  utter  want 
of  conscience  in  everything  that  concerns 
industry  is  very  trying  to  men  who  em- 
ploy natives  in  large  numbers ;  and  a 
natural  indignation  is  too  apt  to  render 
such  men. oblivious  of  the  fact  that  the 
most  idle,  worthless,  servile,  timid  ryot 
is  the  equal  of  the  Viceroy  himself  in 
his  rights  of  man  and  citizen. 

Unfortunately,  this  want  of  truthful- 
ness leavens  the  whole  being  of  the  Ben- 
galee. And  here,  though  I  use  the 
language  of  the  most  cruel  foes  of  the, 
native,  I  entreat  you  to  believe  that  the 
same  language  may  be  employed  with 
very  different  ends.  Facts  are  facts. 
The  deduction  to  be  drawn  from  them 
is  the  vital  point.  Is  a  firm  friend  of 
the  Hindoo,  a  devout  believer  in  the 
destinies  of  the  race,  to  blink  his  eyes 
to  grand  faults  of  the  Hindoo  character, 
because  those  faults  form  a  pretext  for 
those  who  desire  to  lower  the  peasant- 
proprietor  to  the  condition  of  a  serf  ?  Let 
us  boldly  take  the  native  as  he  is,  com- 
pare him  with  what  he  was,  and  we  shall 


About  the  Hindoo  Character  ;  with  Digressions  Home. 


205 


find  no  reason  for  despair  as  to  what  he 
will  be.     It  is  not  too  much  to  assert 
that  the   mass  of  Bengalees   have   no 
notion  of  truth  and  falsehood.     During 
the  earliest  weeks  of  Indian  life  one  is 
amused  or  irritated,  as  the  case  may  he, 
by  the  transparency  or  ingenuity  of  the 
lies  which  meet  one  at  every  turn.    The 
first  Mof  nssil  town  at  which  I  spent  any 
time   was   Patna.     When  my   servant 
heard  that  we  were  going  thither,  he 
appeared  to  he  in  high  glee,  and  said 
that   he   had  a  papa   and   mamma  at 
Patna.     Pleased   at  his  filial  piety,  I 
gave  him  some  hours'  leave  in  the  course 
of  every  day,  little  dreaming  that  his 
parents  were  represented  by  a  hideoxis 
venal    sweetheart    of    eight-and-thirty. 
At  Mofussilpore  his  papa  and  mamma 
were  succeeded  by  his  brother  and  sister, 
at  Chupra  by  his  uncle  and  aunt.     As 
we  went  from  station  to  station  he  had 
reason  to  regret  that  he  had  been  so 
extravagant  with  his  relations  at  first 
setting  out.     By  the  time  we  came  to 
Gya  he  had  exhausted  the.  whole  con- 
nexion, and  was  reduced  to  the  clumsy 
expedient  of    transporting  the   author 
and  authoress  of  his  being  from  Patna 
in   search    of    employment.     You    are 
obliged  to  engage  a  servant  with  your 
eyes  shut.     It  is  a  hundred  to  one  that 
the   testimonials  which  he  brings  for 
your  inspection  refer  to    some    other 
man.     A  lady  told  me  that  three  ayahs 
applied  to  her  consecutively,  one  dirtier 
than  another,  with  precisely  the  same 
set  of  testimonials.  But,  however  deeply 
engrained  in  the   Hindoo   nature   are 
habits    of    mendacity,    there    is    good 
ground  for  believing  that  those  habits 
may  be  corrected  or  modified  in  time. 
Under  favourable  circumstances  a  native 
can  refrain  from  saying  the  thing  that 
is  not.    Powerful  Kajahs  and  high-born 
Zemindars  are  too  proud  and  indepen- 
dent to  lie  and  cozen.     There  are  abun- 
dance  of  signs   which   must   convince 
those  who  do  not  in  their  heart  of  hearts 
wish  their  dark  brethren   to   continue 
"  always  liars,  evil  beasts,  slow  bellies," 
that  the  Hindoo  is  capable  of  speaking 
the  truth,  just  as  he  is  capable  of  reading 
Gibbon,  wearing  peg-top  trousers,  and 


•\v 


drinking  bottled  ale.  Bengalees  who  have 
received  an  English  education,  and  who 
mix  much  with  Englishmen,  have  learnt 
to  appreciate  the  English  feeling  about 
veracity.  The  Jemmadar,  or  headman 
of  a  factory,  who  is  high  in  the  confi- 
dence and  much  in  the  company  of  his 
master,  is  often  every  whit  as  trust- 
worthy as  a  Norfolk  or  Yorkshire  bailiff. 
Who  can  doubt,  then,  that  among  the  U 
many  blessings  which  England  will  have  i 
conferred  upon  India  truth  will  not  be 
wanting  ?  At  present  she  is  certainly 
lying  with  Hope  at  the  bottom  of  the 
tank  in  Short's  bazaar. 

The   love  of  gain  is   strong  in  the 
Hindoo,  but  not  so  strong  as  to  counter- 
act his  aversion  for  what  an  Englishman 
would  call  work.    His  covetousness  dis- 
plays itself  in   a  penchant  for  saving 
money  that  almost  amounts  to  a  mania, 
and  in  the  popularity  of  all  occupations 
which  afford  an  opportunity  for  turning 
two-thirds  of  an  anna  without  any  great 
exertion  of  mind  or  body.     Your 'Ben- 
galee dearly  loves  a  contract.    He  is  the 
ideal  contractor,  as  far  as  his  own  in- 
terests are  concerned.    He  will  spare  no 
trouble  or  time  to  buy  the  article  at  an 
absurdly  low  price,  and  of  the  worst 
quality  that  can  by  any  possibility  pass 
muster.      If  there  is   any  quiet  little 
knavery  practicable,  he  marks  it  with 
the  glance  of  a  vulture.     The  universal 
"  dustoorie"  is  a  singular  monument  of 
the  petty  peculation  which  has  been 
going  on  throughout  Bengal  for  thou- 
sands of  years.     Every  agent  employed 
to   make   a  purchase,   great   or  small, 
pockets  a  commission  unknown  to  his 
principal.      This   commission  is  called 
"  dustoorie,"  or  "the  customary  sum  ;" 
the  amount  being  regulated  by  the  im- 
pudence of  the  buyer,  and  the  anxiety  of 
the  seller  to  dispose  of  his  goods.     A 
native  prince,  who  agreed  to  take  the 
house   and   furniture   of    a  gentleman 
about  to  leave  the  country,  claimed  to 
make  a  deduction  from  the  price,  on 
the  ground  that  he  was  his  own  agent. 
The  rascality  and  acuteness  of  the  ser- 
vants in  European  families  are  something 
stupi  iidous.     A  bad  servant  cheats  you 
right  and  left.     A  good  servant  takes 


206 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VIIL 


less  and  less  every  year  that  lie  lives 
with  you,  but  he  will  always  take  some- 
thing.    He  could  not  reconcile  it  with 
his  conscience  to  impugn  the  institution 
of  the  dustoorie.    If  you  give  your  man 
a  rupee  to  pay  a  cab,  he  puts  the  coin  in 
his  pouch,  and  arranges  the  matter  when 
your  back  is  turned.     If  you  bid  him 
throw  a  few  pice  into  a  beggar's  lap,  he 
takes   his   percentage  after    a   bargain 
made  at  great  length  and  with  much 
heat     But  it  never  occurs  to-  the  cab- 
man or  the  beggar  to  dispute  his  right 
to   a   commission.     The   other   day,   a 
treasury    messenger   was   sent   to   buy 
some  stamps.      Not  being  aware  that 
this    commodity    is    supplied    by   the 
Government,  which  is  more  apt  to  take 
dustoories   than  to  give  them,  he  de- 
manded his  discount,  which  was  sum- 
marily disallowed  by  the  clerk.    Shocked 
and  scandalised  by  a  refusal  which  ap- 
peared to  him.  monstrous  and  unreason- 
able,   he    jumped    over    the    counter, 
knocked  the  functionary  on  the  head 
with  his  own  official  ruler,  and  carried 
off  the  ledger  in  triumph  as  a  hostage 
back  to  the  treasury.   A  lady,  who  lately 
set  up  house  here,  paid  the  wages  of 
twelve  bearers  into  the  hands  of  the 
Sirdar   or  headman    during    the    first 
month.     At  the  end  of  that  time,  she 
held  a  review  of  all  the  establishment, 
a  step  which  disconcerted  the  policy  of 
the  Sirdar,  who  was   able  to  produce 
only  nine  bearers,  of  whom  two  were 
evidently  coolies,  got  in  for  the  occasion 
from  a  neighbouring  bazaar.     The  same 
man  offered  the  steward  ten  shillings  a 
month   for  the  privilege  of  supplying 
the  lamps  with  oil.     Yet  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe  that  he  is  honest,  as 
Sirdar-bearers  go.     The  following  com- 
munication to  the  Englishman  will  give 
you  a   notion   of    the  universality   of 
"  dustoorie,"  and  is  likewise  a  fair  speci- 
men of  a  native*  letter.    You  must  know 
that  Messrs.  Thacker  and  Spink  publish 
a  Post-office  Directory,  prefaced  by  an 
almanac.     "  Chota,"  as  you  will  proba- 
bly discover  by  your  unassisted  genius, 
signifies  "  little." 


"  THAKKUR  AND  SPINK'S  EKLIPS. 
"  To  the  Edditur  of  the  Englishman. ' 

"  SIR, — I  beg  to  trubble  on  your 
"  honnor's  benificense  for  shameless 
"  neglekt  of  Messrs.  Thakkur  and 
"  Sphinx  not  keep  there  words  about 
"  Ekklips  of  mune.  I  buy  Thakkur 
"  and  Spink's  Post  ofice  dirrektions 
"  which  say  ekklips  of  mune  1st  Joone 
"  at  8-45  with  diskount  and  kommishun 
"  for  redy  rupees.  What  for  my  rupees 
"  all  gone  and  no  Ekklips  ?  Not  my 
"  rupees,  but  master's.  I  very  good 
"  man,  get  edukating  in  Mission  Skul, 
"  while  Mission  Sahib  smoke  cheroots, 
'  and  Mission  Sahib  buy  Thakker  and 
'  Spink's  for  Society,  which  give  me 
'  commisshun  and  diskount  very  small 
'  pice.  I  very  fond  of  Ekklipses,  and 
'  I  sit  up  to  see  Ekklips  with  Mem 
'  Sahib's  ayah,  and  she  say  I  know 
"  nothing,  and  she  not  turn  Kristian, 
"  and  very  angry,  and  I  give  her  chota 
"  drop  out  of  master's  bottle,  make  her 
"  very  glad,  and  turn  anything.  Then 
"  master  he  come  out,  and  look  at  mune, 
"  and  say  '  dam  Thakkur  and  Sphinx,' 
"  and  throw  him  in  tank,  and  send  me 
"  to  fish  out  Post  ofice  Direkshions  to 
"  curl  chota  Mem  Sahib's  hair.  But  I 
"  think  master  all  rong.  Thakker  and 
"  Sphinx  very  good  gentlemens,  and 
"  give  dishkount,  and  its  the  Post  ofice 
"  and  Elekrik  Telegrenips  what  made 
"  Ekklips  come  rong  day ;  and  if  you 
"  will  put  it  in  your  paper  Post  ofice 
"  peoples  very  mad,  and  tare  wigs,  and 
"  kick  punka-Avallah,  but  erklips  come 
"  all  right  yesterday  after  rumpus. 

"  I  pour  native  boy  rite  butiful  Eng- 
"  lish,  and  rite  good  Sirkulars  for  Mate- 
"  land  Sahib  and  Chamber  of  Kommerce 
"  very  cheap,  and  ^gives  one  rupee  eight 
"  annas  per  diem,  but  new  man  say  he 
"  make  betterer  English,  and  put  it  all 
"  rong,  and  only  give  one  rupee  ;  so  I 
u  leave  the  gentlemen's  and  come  to  you 
"  if  you  will  give  two  eight  per  diem. 
"  I  can  make  potery  and  country  korrus- 
"  pondance. 

"  Yours  trully, 

"  MOFUSSIL." 


About  the  Hindoo  Character;  loith  Digressions  Home.  207 


Of  all  avenues  to  wealth,  that  most 
peculiar  to  this  country  is  the  tortuous 
path  of  litigation.  The  native  regards  a 
court  of  law,  not  as  the  bulwark  of  the 
innocent,  and  the  refuge  of  the  wronged, 
but  as  a  prize-ring,  which  affords  a  fair 
field  and  no  favour ;  a  stock-exchange, 
where  fortunes  are  to  be  made  by  clever- 
ness and  industry,  and  lost  by  careless- 
ness and  stupidity;  where  all  men  have 
an  equal  chance,  and  no  one  must  rely 
on  th§  justice  of  his  cause,  or  the  blame- 
lessness  of  his  life,  or  any  such  natural 
advantage  which  he  may  possess  over 
his  fellows.  The  wealthiest  and  most 
respected  man  in  a  district  will  often 
be  one  who  dates  his  prosperity  from 
a  suit  which,  as  everybody  is  well 
aware,  was  brought  to  a  successful  ter- 
mination by  unlimited  perjury,  and  a 
document  discovered  at  the  bottom  of  a 
chest  in  the  Zenana,  just  in  time  to  be 
produced  in  court.  His  neighbours 
speak  of  him  as  the  society  of  an  Eng- 
lish provincial  town  speaks  of  a  man 
who  began  life  under  a  counter  and  ends 
it  in  the  parlour  of  the  county  bank, 
whither  he  has  pushed  his  way  by  dint  of 
prudence  and  frugality.  Great  families 
carry  on  their  feuds  in  the  cutcherries 
and  the  Zillah  courts  instead  of  in  the 
tented  field.  Accusations  and  counter 
accusations  of  murder,  violence,  fraud, 
writs  of  ejectment  and  trespass,  appeals, 
summonses,  false  wills,  false  witnesses, 
false  dates — such  are  the  weapons  which 
are  familiar  to  the  Percies  and  Douglases, 
the  Capulets  and  Montagues  of  Bengal 
and  Bahar.  A  planter  confessed  to  a 
friend  of  mine,  that  he  had  been  reduced 
to  the  verge  of  ruin  by  a  rajah,  who 
trumped  up  three  actions  in  succession, 
and  gained  them  all.  The  Englishman, 
however,  eventually  won  back  the  ground 
which  he  had  lost  in  a  suit,  the  facts  of 
which  had  been  invented  and  arranged 
by  his  agent  and  zeminadar.  Amidst 
such  an  entagled  mass  of  chicane,  false- 
hood, and  inaccuracy,  a  judge  requires  a 
local  experience  of  many  years,  and  con- 
siderable natural  discernment,  to  arrive 
with  any  certainty  at  a  conclusion,  and 
even  with  these  advantages  he  is  often 
misled.  A  Hindoo  never  sticks  at  a 


lie,  but  in  the  witness-box  he  surpasses 
himself.     Even  if  there  is  no  intention 
to  deceive,  the  native  has  not  yet  been 
found  who  can  stand  the  cross-examina- 
tion of  an  English  barrister.     A  bold 
big  lawyer  will  make  a  ryot  contradict 
himself  ten  times  in  as  many  sentences. 
The  testimony  of  a  single  one  of  our 
countrymen  has  more  weight  with  the 
court  than  that  of  any  number  of  Hin- 
doos, a  circumstance  which  puts  a  terri- 
ble instrument  of  power  into  the  hands 
of  an  unscrupulous  and  grasping  Eng- 
lishman.    It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
a  rich  native  to  purchase  an  estate  in 
the  name  of  a  dependent,  who  farms  it 
for  his  master's  profit,  partly  from  an 
innate  dislike  of  open  dealing,  partly 
from  an  ancient  prejudice  against  pre- 
senting to  the  world  an  appearance  of   / 
wealth — the  relic  of  a  lawless  age,  when    \ 
none  but  the  poor  were  safe.     On  one 
occasion,  a  zeminadar  bought  some  val- 
able  indigo  works,  without  taking  the 
precaution  of  binding  by  a  document 
the  agent  to  whom  the  factory  was  no- 
minally to  belong.     An  Englishman  in 
in  the  neighbourhood  got  the  ear  of  the 
agent,  and  bribed  and  bullied  him  into 
making  over  the  whole  concern  to  him-  \ 
self,  knowing  well  that,  in  the  absence  I 
of  written  evidence,  the  word  of  a  Euro-  I 
pean  would  carry  the  day.     And  small  \ 
wonder,  when  every  week  a  dozen  cases   \ 
come  into  court  in  which  a  plain  fact,     \ 
asserted  on  oath  by  a  score  of  men,  is 
denied  on  oath  by  another  score. 

India  is  the  country  for  those  con- 
scientious barristers  who  have  doubts 
about  the  morality  of  advocating  a  cause 
which  they  believe  to  be  unfounded. 
If  Felis  Graham  came  out  here  he  would 
lead  the  bar  within  five  years,  and  his 
pretty  wife  would  be  a  charming  addi- 
tion to  Calcutta  society.  He  would  be 
utterly  unable  to  make  out  whether  his 
client  was  the  wronged  or  the  wronger, 
guilty  or  not  guilty.  He  might  say  to 
himself,  "  Wo  employ  perjury,  it  if 
*  true,  but  the  other  side  employ  both 
'  perjury  and  forgery.  We  bring  for- 
ward fifteen  witnesses,  who  would  not 
'  speak  truth  if  they  could,  but  the 
'  other  side  brings  forward,  as  many 


208 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  VIII. 


"  who  could  not  speak  truth  if  they 
"  would."  Last  month,  at  Mofussilpore, 
I  witnessed  a  case  which  came  hefore 
Benson,  and  which  he  referred  to  Tom. 
A  shopkeeper  complained  that,  as  he 
was  walking  across  the  street,  one  of 
his  neighbours  fell  on  him,  knocked 
him  down  with  a  cudgel,  and,  as  he  lay 
insensible  on  the  ground,  robbed  him 
of  thirteen  rupees.  He  produced  seven 
witnesses,  who  confirmed  circumstan- 
tially his  whole  statement.  It  even- 
tually turned  out  that  the  prisoner 
struck  the  prosecutor  on  the  back  with 
a  light  switch,  and  that  the  rupees  and 
the  insensibility  were  an  episode  which 
had  no  foundation  in  fact  The  pro- 
ceedings in  a  case  where  natives  are 
concerned  always  remind  me  of  the 
scene  at  a  public  school,  when  a  dis- 
puted point  occurs  during  an  interest- 
ing match.  Last  winter,  I  witnessed  a 
game  of  football  at  Harrow  between 
two  boarding-houses,  in  which  twelve 
boys  of  known  probity  (that  is  to  say, 
the  eleven  players  and  their  umpire), 
swore  that  the  ball  had  blown  midway 
through  the  base;  while  twelve  other 
boys,  of  equally  known  probity,  swore 
that  it  had  touched  one  of  the  poles. 
What  would  Paley  say  to  this  1  Which 
of  these  two  pre-judications  would  he 
find  himself  unable  to  resist  ? 

Mildred,  my  Mofussil  friend,  who  has 
lived  for  twenty  years  in  constant  com- 
munication with  the  people  of  the  coun- 
try, at  times  seeing  none  but  black  faces 
for  six  months  on  end,  has  a  very  low 
opinion  of  native  evidence.  He  is  a 
credible  authority  on  this  point,  inas- 
much as  he  is  a  real  friend  of  the  Hin- 
doo, and  is  adored  by  the  population  of 
the  neighbourhood.  Ryots,  who  have  a 
suit  in  court,  are  very  importunate  to 
have  him  called  as  a  witness  in  their 
favour.  A  man  lately  entreated  the 
magistrate  to  summon  my  friend  to  tes- 
tify to  his  character.  On  being  asked 
whether  he  had  ground  for  believr 
ing  that  Mildred  knew  anything  about 
him,  he  replied  that  the  Sahib  had  once 
fined  him  ten  rupees  for  cattle  stealing ! 
When  Mildred  was  a  very  young  man, 
he  bought  a  village  from  a  zeminadar, 


who  sold  it  cheap,  because  the  inhabit- 
ants had  for  some  years  past  refused  to 
pay  a  pice  of  rent.  As  the  new  pro- 
prietor was  well  aware  that  his  tenants 
enjoyed  a  very  evil  reputation  for  theft, 
dacoity,  and  manslaughter,  lie  called  his 
friends  and  neighbours  together,  and 
rode  over  with  some  force  to  collect  the 
arrears.  It  happened  that  cholera  was 
rife  in  the  village ;  so  the  party  en- 
camped for  the  night  on  a  spot  about  a 
mile  distant.  Late  in  the  evening,  the 
head  man,  accompanied  by  six  or  seven 
others,  came  to  Mildred,  and  told  him 
that,  unless  he  cleared  off  in  the  course 
of  the  morrow,  they  would  bring  the 
corpse  of  a  ryot  who  had  died  of  the 
epidemic,  cut  the  throat,  throw  it  into 
the  camp,  and  go  in  a  body  to  the 
magistrate,  to  accuse  the  Sahibs  of  a 
murder ! 

On  another  occasion,  Mildred,  in  com- 
pany with  two  planters  of  his  acquaint- 
ance, drove  over  to  visit  a  friend,  who 
lived  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the 
station.  They  had  given  him  no  pre- 
vious intimation  to  expect  them,  but 
people  in  India  can  be  hospitable  on 
very  short  notice,  and  he  soon  set  be- 
fore them  curry,  and  fowls,  and  beer, 
and  cheroots.  As  they  were  chatting 
over  their  tobacco,  after  a  jolly  tiffin, 
they  heard  the  howl  of  a  jackal  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  bungalow,  and  it  was 
proposed-  to  sally  forth  and  have  a  shot 
at  him.  The  firearms  in  a  planter's 
house  are  always  in  condition  for  imme- 
diate use  ;  so  the  host  loaded  a  rifle,  and 
went  out  with  one  of  his  guests,  while 
Mildred  and  the  other  remained  among 
the  soda-water  bottles.  After  some 
time  a  shot  was  heard,  and  soon  after 
the  pair  returned,  pale  and  agitated.  The 
master  of  the  house  said,  "Mildred,  I 
believe  I  have  shot  a  man,  but  we  did 
not  dare  to  go  and  look."  It  appears 
they  could  not  find  the  jackal ;  so,  in  the 
wantonness  of  men  who  were  full  of 
meat,  and  drink,  and  smoke,  they  took 
a  shot  at  a  sheep  which  was  feeding 
about  a  furlong  off.  As  the  gun  was 
fired,  a  man  sprang  up  out  of  the  grass 
behind  the  animal,  'and  dropped  again 
before  he  was  well  on  his  feet,  Mildred 


About  the  Hindoo  Character  /  with  Digressions  Home.  209 


went  to  the  spot,  and  found  a  peasant 
stone  dead,  with  a  ball  through  the 
heart.  Now  for  the  sequel  The  rela- 
tions of  the  poor  fellow  prosecuted  the 
planter  for  murder,  and  more — that  he 
had  tied  the  deceased  to  a  tree,  beaten 
him  cruelly,  outraged  him  in  the  most 
foul  manner,  and  finally  put  him  out  of 
his  misery  by  deliberately  firing  at  him 
from  the  distance  of  a  few  yards.  This 
vindictive  wicked  lie  was  supported  in 
every  particular  by  a  number  of  the 
villagers.  The  presence  of  his  three 
countrymen,  a  happy  chance,  and  no- 
thing more,  alone  saved  the  prisoner 
from  condemnation.  "  From  that  day 
"  forward "  (such  was  the  conclusion 
which  Mildred  drew  from  the  circum- 
stance) "  I  resolved,  if  ever  I  was  on  a 
"  jury,  never  to  convict  a  European  of  a 
"  capital  crime,  on  native  testimony." 
I  endeavoured  to  show  him  that  his  re- 
solution was  illogical,  and  that  the  con- 
sequences of  it  would  be  most  disastrous ; 
\that,  if  we  rejected  the  evidence  of 
\Hindoos  when  the  life  of  an  English- 
pian  was  in  question,  we  must  refuse  to 
admit  it  on  any  other  occasion  Avhatso- 
ever ;  the  result  of  which  would  be 
that,  instead  of  providing  the  people  of 
India  with  justice  of  superior  quality  to 
that  dealt  out  by  their  own  country- 
men, we  should  banish  law  and  order 
from  the  land,  until  an  insulted  Provi- 
dence sent  us  about  our  business.  He 
was  not  convinced. 

By  the  most  scrupulous  care  our 
officers  cannot  prevent  their  names  being 
used  for  purposes  of  the  grossest  corrup- 
tion. For  instance,  a  native  gentleman 
calls  on  the  magistrate,  and  then  goes 
straight  to  the  house  of  some  one  who 
has  a  suit  pending,  and  says  :  "  I  sit 
down  in  the  presence  of  the  Sahib. 
He  has  a  greater  respect  for  me  than 
for  the  sub-inspector  of  police,  and 
loves  me  better  than  he  loves  a  lieu- 
tenant and  two  ensigns  in  the  canton- 
ments, and  he  will  soon  love  me 
better  than  one  of  the  captains.  Give 
me  five  hundred  rupees."  And,  though 
the  poor  fool  must  know  that  if  he 
gave  away  his  whole  fortune  in  pre- 
sents he  would  not  alter  a  tittle  of 
ISTo.  51. — VOL.  ix. 


the  magistrate's  verdict,  he  pays  the 
money  under  a  hazy  conviction  that 
some  benefit  will  ensue.  Rich  baboos 
will  vie  with  each  other  for  the  post  of 
deputy-treasurer,  which  is  worth  fifty 
or  sixty  rupees  per  mensem,  and  will 
gladly  deposit  eighty  or  a  hundred 
thousand  rupees  as  security  for  the 
faithful  discharge  of  the  functions. 
They  are  attracted,  not  so  much  by 
the  honour  of  being  in  the  service  of 
Government,  as  by  the  knowledge  that 
an  official  position  will  enable  them  to 
drive  harder  bargains,  to  obtain  higher 
interest,  to  oppress  their  poorer  neigh- 
bours, and  intimidate  their  equals.  And 
yet  every  dealer  in  the  town  knows 
that  if  he  was  to  come  to  the  English 
authorities,  and  say  :  "  Baboo  Chunder 
Boss,  the  deputy-treasurer,  told  me 
yesterday  that  if  I  refused  to  let  him 
have  my  saltpetre  at  his  own  price  I 
should  repent  it,"  Baboo  Chunder  Boss 
would  not  be  deputy-treasurer  another 
twenty-four  hours.  They  know  this, 
but  they  cannot  act  upon  it.  Habit  is 
too  strong  for  reason.  Besides,  your 
native  positively  likes  to  fee  Jacks- 
iu-office.  During  the  progress  of  a 
Governor  through  his  province,  all  the 
rajahs  and  zemindars  who  come  to  pay 
their  respects  to  the  great  man  are 
never  content  unless  they  pay  their 
rupees  to  his  servants.  They  would 
not  enjoy  their  interview  thoroughly  if 
they  got  it  gratis.  The  sirdar-bearer 
or  the  head  messenger  of  a  member  of 
council  makes  a  wonderfully  good  thing 
of  his  place.  Out  of  his  pay  of  a 
pound  a  month  he  manages  to  dress 
well,  feed  of  the  best,  and  maintain  a 
sufficiency  of  wives  and  parasites.  It' 
he  hears  of  a  good  investment  on  a 
small  scale  he  can  generally  come  down 
with  a  fat  bag  of  rupees.  Surely  the 
fellow's  clients  and  patrons  can  hardly 
imagine  that  he  has  the  ear  of  his 
master.  Their  munificence  is  dictated 
by  "  dustoor,"  or  custom,  the  most 
powerful  of  all  the  motives  which 
actuate  the  conduct  of  a  native. 

Dustoor  is  the  breath  of  a  Hindoo's 
nostrils,  the  mainspring  of  his  actions, 
the  staple  of  his  conversation.  A  ryot 

p 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  VIII. 


is  never  so  happy  as  when  he  is  squatted 
amidst  a  circle  of  neighbours,  smoking 
a  mixture  in  which  powdered  dung  is 
the  most  fragrant  ingredient,  and  talk- 
ing about  dustoor.  The  spirit  of  con- 
servatism, powerful  everywhere  except 
among  the  conservative  leaders  in  the 
English  House  of  Commons,  is  rabid 
in  the  East.  In  European  countries 
men  keep  up  old  practices  and  habits 
which  reason  cannot  approve  because 
familiarity  has  rendered  them  attractive. 
In  India  men  do  things  which  they 
know  to  be  absurd,  and  which  they 
excessively  dislike,  because  custom  so 
enjoins.  An  English  family,  an  hour 
after  their  usual  bedtime,  perform  an 
elaborate  toilette,  and  start  off  to  dance 
and  flirt  themselves  into  a  state  of  un- 
natural wakefulness.  The  son  is  routed 
out  from  a  quiet  corner,  where  he  has 
been  employed  over  a  surreptitious  cigar, 
and  hounded  up  to  his  dressing-room  with 
threats  and  execrations.  A  daughter, 
who  is  on  ordinary  occasions  a  model  of 
piety,  rudely  tears  the  kerchief  from  the 
iace  of  her  sleeping  father,  and  rouses 
him  from  sweet  visions  of  middling  fair 
Pernambuco  and  ditto  transfer  stock,  to 
the  fearful  reality  of  a  four  hours' 
lounge  in  a  back  drawing-room,  sweet- 
ened by  fine  supper-sherry  at  twenty- 
eight  and  six.  And  yet  they  go  forth 
to  the  sacrifice  a  troop  of  willing  victims, 
proud  of  the  fillet,  and  in  fond  expecta- 
tion that  they  will  enjoy  the  rite.  A 
shopkeeper  or  clerk,  when  club-night 
comes  round,  duly  pays  half-crowns 
which  he  can  ill  afford,  and  swallows 
four  times  as  much  liquor  as  he  can 
well  digest.  But,  while  he  is  seated  at 
midnight  in  the  midst  of  a  noisy,  boozy 
company,  with  an  incipient  headache 
and  the  prospect  of  a  crapulous  colic, 
smoking  his  fourteenth  pipe  and  sipping 
his  ninth — no,  tenth — no,  eleventh — 
brar-r-ry  war-r-rer,  he  is  all  the  time 
under  the  impression  that  he  is  doing 
something  uncommonly  jolly  and  Bac- 
chanalian. Now  this  is  not  the  case 
with  the  Hindoo.  Groaning  and  repent- 
ing, he  follows  whithersoever  dustoor 
may  lead  him.  This  thrifty,  temperate 
race,  who  deny  themselves  every  pleasure 


and  comfort  without  a  sigh,  at  the 
command  of  fashion  fling  away  sums 
which  would  keep  them  and  theirs  in 
luxury  for  a  lifetime.  To  procure  these 
sums  they  are  forced  to  have  recourse 
to  money-lenders,  who  are  the  bugbears 
of  Indian  social  life.  A  sepoy,  whose 
pay  is  seven  rupees  a  month,  has  often 
been  known  to  sell  himself,  body,  soul, 
and  pension,  to  a  baboo,  in  order  to 
spend  three  hundred  rupees  on  a  marriage 
feast.  The  other  day,  an  ayah,  whose 
wages  are  those  of  a  London  servant-of- 
all-work,  invited  a  European  lady's-maid 
to  a  dinner  where  covers  were  laid  for 
thirty  guests,  with  champagne  and  beer 
d,  discretion.  Mildred  told  me  that 
native  gentlemen  frequently  came  to 
him  to  borrow  some  thousands  of  pounds 
on  the  security  of  a  great  slice  of  their 
estate.  He  would  say :  "  My  good 
fellow,  I  am  well  aware  what  you  want 
this  loan  for ;  and  you  are  well  aware 
that  you  will  never  be  able  to  pay  it, 
and  that  you  will  have  ruined  yourself 
and  your  descendants  in  order,  once  in 
a  way,  to  cut  a  figure  in  the  district. 
You  will  gain  much  more  respect  by 
being  known  to  be  able  to  spend  all 
your  rents."  The  zemindar  would  own 
the  truth  of  everything  my  friend  stated, 
shrug  his  shoulders,  and  go  off  mutter- 
ing something  about  "  dustoor."  A  few 
days  after,  the  land  would  be  in  the 
clutches  of  some  harpy  from  Patna. 

A  curious  instance  of  the  pernicious 
effect  of  "dustoor"  is  afforded  by  the 
fortunes  of  the  family  of  my  friend  the 
Maharaja.  His  ancestors  were  enor- 
mously wealthy,  and  were,  besides,  the 
purest  of  pure  Bralimans,  and  at  the 
head  of  the  religious  community  for  a 
hundred  miles  round.  If  Lord  Fitz- 
william  were  likewise  Archbishop  of 
York,  his  position  in  the  country  would 
be  much  that  of  the  old  Maharajas  of 
Kishenagur,  in  the  tract  which  lies 
along  the  left  bank  of  the  Hooghly. 
The  grandfather  of  the  present  man 
brought  himself  to  the  brink  of  ruin 
by  the  most  reckless  and  aimless  ex- 
travagance. On  one  occasion  he  sold 
the  battle-ground  of  Plassey  for  two 
lacs  (20,000£),  and  expended  the  pro- 


Froudes  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


211 


ceeds  on  gold  and  silver  cups,  which  he 
scattered  broad  cast  among  the  mob 
from  the  summit  of  his  sacred  car 
during  the  procession  on  a  solemn  feast- 
day.  The  father  received  the  estate 
much  involved  and  reduced  to  very 
small  dimensions.  Nevertheless  he 
spent  thirty  thousand  rupees  on  the 
marriage  of  his  son.  Happily  that  son 
had  received  an  English  education,  and 
had  acquired  a  taste  for  English  habits 
and  society.  He  lives  freely,  keeps 
open  house  from  year's  end  to  year's 
end,  and  is  very  popular  with  the  resi- 
dents at  the  station ;  and  meanwhile 
he  has  paid  off  debts  to  the  tune  of 
seventeen  thousand  pounds,  has  cleared 
the  property,  and  intends  to  indulge 
himself  in  a  visit  to  England  next 
March,  as  a  reward  for  his  sense  and 
forethought.  He  has  much  more  fun 
for  his  money  than  ever  his  grandfather 
had,  and  yet  he  manages  to  eat  his 
chupatty,  and  have  it  too.  When  he 
had  once  emancipated  himself  from  the 
toils  of  "dustoor,"  prosperity  followed 
as  a  natural  consequence.  Being  so 
very  exalted  a  Brahmin,  he  may  eat 
and  drink  in  the  company  of  Europeans 


without  blame  or  stain.  Nay,  hundreds 
and  hundreds  of  natives  come  to  him  in 
the  course  of  the  year  to  have  their 
caste  restored  for  a  price.  It  is  the  old 
story.  I  fancy  Pio  Nono  gets  his  in- 
dulgences uncommon  cheap.  There 
are  some  who  say  that,  if  we  left 
India  to-morrow,  the  only  traces  of  our 
occupation  would  be  the  empty  beer 
bottles ; x  just  as  there  are  some  who 
say  that  it  is  all  over  with  the  army 
since  the  amalgamation,  and  who  make 
other  affirmations  of  about  equal  value 
with  the  statement  that  Balbus  is  build- 
ing a  wall.  Let  no  one  assert  that  we 
have  ruled,  and  fought,  and  panted,  and 
perspired,  and  permanently  settled  in 
vain,  as  long  as  we  have  taught  one 
Maharaja  the  absurdity  of  "  dustoor." 

Yours  ever, 

H.  BROUGHTON. 

1  It  would  be  a  good  thing  if  empty  beer 
bottles  were  all.  Patriotic  and  intelligent 
natives  bitterly  complain  that  we  have  deluged 
the  country  with  full  gin  bottles.  I  fear  that 
some  day  we  may  have  reason  to  wish  for  a 
millstone  and  a  plunge  into  the  depths  of  the 
Bay  of  Bengal. 


FROUDE'S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  VOLS.  VII.  &  VIII. 


THOSE  who  watch,  not  without  anxiety, 
the  national  taste,  should  be  comforted 
by  the  great  success  of  this  book,  and 
rejoice  to  hear  that  a  whole  edition  has 
been  sold  off  before  the  public  had 
even  seen  it,  simply  on  the  authority  of 
Mr.  Froude's  name,  and  of  a  very  able 
ante-natal  review  in  the  Quarterly. 

It  appears  that  the  English  literary 
appetite  is  not  permanently  injured  by 
periodic  literature,  nor  even  by  sensation 
novels ;  that,  however  it  may  have 
disported  itself  (not  over-wholesomely) 
with  tiny  French  kickshaws,  wherein 
unclean  beasts  are  cunningly  disguised 
by  sauce  piquante,  it  has  still  stomach 
enough  left  for  the  good  old  English 
piece  de  resistance  when  it  appears  ;  and 
can  devour  (and  we  will  trust  digest) 


two  very,  ponderous  tomes,  with  an 
honest  belief  that  it  will  feel  the  better 
after  it. 

The  truth  is,  that  there  is  as  great 
a  demand  as  ever  in  Britain,  and,  we 
doubt  not,  in  France,  Germany,  and 
America,  for  honest  literary  work,  faith- 
fully done,  founded  on  fact,  and  worked 
out  in  a  truly  human  and  humane  spirit. 

Founded  on  fact :  whatever  may  be 
the  faults  of  this  generation,  there  never 
was  one  in  the  world's  history  which 
was  so  greedy  after  facts,  and  especially 
the  facts  of  the  past.  It  is  not  quite 
satisfied  with  the  old  answers  to  the 
three  great  human  questions,  by  virtue 
of  asking  which  a  man  is  a  man,  and 
not  a  hairless  gorilla — Whence  did  we 
come?  Where  are  we?  Whither  are 


212 


Fronde's  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


we  going  1  It  suspects  that,  for  the  last 
lifty  years  at  least,  attention  has  been 
too  exclusively  directed  to  the  last  of 
these  three  questions,  to  the  exclusion 
of  the  two  former,  which  surely  must  be 
answered,  more  or  less,  ere  the  third  can 
be  solved.  It  is  asking,  therefore,  more 
and  more  earnestly,  Whence  did  we 
come  ?  It  asks  of  Darwinian  speculators, 
of  discoverers  of  flint  arrow-heads  and 
kitchen-middens,  of  antiquaries,  of 
monk-chroniclers,  of  historic  romancers. 
Even  Eugene  Sue  and  his  "Fils  de  Joel" 
are  welcome,  if  he  can  tell  anything  of 
the  great  question,  How  came  we  hither? 
This  generation  is  getting  a  whole- 
some philosophical  instinct,  that  only  by 
knowing  the  past  can  one  guess  at  the 
future ;  that  the  future  is  contained 
in  the  past,  and  the  child  father  to  the 
man ;  that  one  generation  reaps  what 
its  forefathers  have  sown  ;  that  Nature  in 
nations,  as  in  all  other  things,  non  agit 
per  saltum ;  that  "  through  the  ages  one 
increasing  purpose  runs."  It  has  learnt 
from  antiquaries  that  we  are  the  same 
people  that  we  were  1,500  years  ago ; 
that  we  brought  the  germs  of  our  lan- 
guage, our  laws,  our  liberty,  with  us  oif 
the  Holstein  moors.  It  has  learnt  from 
the  High-Church  party  (and  all  true 
Englishmen  should  gratefully  acknow- 
ledge that  debt)  that  there  Avas  an 
England  before  the  Reformation  ;  that 
we  had  our  patriots  and  our  lawyers, 
our  sages  and  our  saints,  in  the  Middle 
Ages,  as  well  as  in  the  times  of  Tudors 
or  of  Stuarts ;  and  it  desires  more  and 
more  to  know  what  manner  of  men  they 
were,  these  ancestors  of  ours — so  unlike 
us  in  garb  and  thought ;  so  like  us,  it 
now  appears,  in  heart  and  spirit.  More- 
over, men  feel — and  Heaven  grant  that 
they  may  feel  more  and  more — the  awful- 
ness  of  Britain's  greatness — a  greatness 
not  so  much  won  as  thrust  upon  her — 
fortuitous,  incoherent,  and  without  plan 
or  concentration ;  spread  and  dotted 
dangerously,  if  not  weakly,  over  the 
Avhole  world.  They  themselves  are  so 
small  :  and  yet  their  country  is  so  great 
— they  know  not  how — and  she,  as  a 
collective  whole,  seems  not  to  know 
either ;  nor  how  to  wield  her  greatness, 
save  from  hand  to  mouth — 


"  Oppressed 

With  the  burden  of  an  honour 
Unto  which  she  was  not  bom." 

It  is  a  wholesome  frame  of  mind,  that, 
and  a  safe  one,  just  because  it  is  a 
humble  one  :  and  we  will  thank  even' 
one,  from  Mr.  Bright  at  home  to  French 
and  Prussian  journalists  abroad,  who 
will  keep  that  mind  alive  in  us,  and 
abuse  us,  and  rate  us,  and  tell  us  that  we 
may  be  a  monstrous  incoherence  while 
we  fancy  ourselves  a  compact  organism  ; 
that  we  maybe  going  on  the  utterly  wrong 
path,  while  we  think  ourselves  on  the 
utterly  right  one  ;  and  toppling  to  ruin, 
while  we  fancy  ourselves  omnipotent. 
Let  them  exaggerate  our  faults  and  our 
weaknesses  as  they  will ;  the  public  will 
be  only  too  likely  to  exaggerate  on  the 
opposite  and  less  safe  side. 

But  for  this  very  cause,  the  public 
now  welcome  anything  like  good  English 
History. 

Only,  it  demands  that  the  history 
shall  be  human.  The  many  are  no  be- 
lievers in  the  theories  of  Mr.  Buckle. 
They  do  not  put  themselves  in  the  same 
category  with  wheat  and  potatoes, 
sparrows  and  tadpoles,  or  any  other 
things  whose  fate  is  determined  by  soil, 
climate,  supply  of  food,  and  competition 
of  species.  They  have  a  strong  and 
wholesome  belief  that  mankind  is  not 
an  abstraction,  but  signifies  the  men 
and  women  who  have  lived  or  do  live, 
and  that  the  history  of  England  is  the 
history  of  the  men  and  women  of 
England,  not  of  its  soil,  plants,  and 
animals.  And  therefore  they  crave  for 
a  history  of  the  hearts  and  characters 
of  those  same  men  and  women,  and  not 
a  mere  history  of  statistics,  events, 
principles.  They  do  not  deny  the  value 
of  those  latter ;  but  they  rationally 
and  fairly  ask  for  them  as  they  oc- 
curred in  fact.  The  statistics  must  bo 
set  forth  in  the  weal  or  woe  of  the  human 
beings  who  were  the  better  or  the  worse 
for  them  ;  the  events  in  the  deeds  of 
the  men  who  acted  them  ;  the  principles 
in  the  lives  of  those  who  worked  them 
out,  fought  for  them,  died  for  them. 
The  things  did  not  do  themselves  ;  men 
of  old  did  them  :  and  therefore  the  men 


Froudes  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII, 


213 


now  of  to-day  must  see  the  men  doing 
them.  That  only  will  they  call  history. 
If  history  is  to  be  written  on  Mr. 
.Buckle's  plan,  they  simply  will  not  read 
it.  It  is  to  them  no  history  at  all.  They 
ask  for  historic  truth,  holding  that  (and 
rightly)  to  be  identical  with  dramatic 
truth.  Therefore  they  will  read  their 
Bible  (though  every  number  in  it  were 
demonstrated  to  be  wrong)  and  get  his- 
tory therefrom,  because  it  is  infinitely 
dramatic  and  human.  They  will  get 
their  English  history  from  Shakspeare, 
and  understand  and  remember  it,  be- 
cause he  is  dramatic  and  human.  They 
will  not  read,  understand,  or  remember 
the  modern  Constitutional  Histories, 
Philosophies  of  History,  and  such  like 
(excellent  and  instructive  to  the  scholar 
as  they  are),  because  they  are  not  dra- 
matic and  human.  They  will  not  read 
M.  Guizot,  they  will  not  read  Sismondi 
(to  take  no  example  nearer  home),  be- 
cause they  are  not  dramatic  and  human. 
Men  wish  to  know  about  men  of  like 
passions  with  themselves,  and  to  hear 
of  them  from  a  writer  who  has  human 
sympathies  and  dramatic  power. 

That  last  is  a  necessary  qualification. 
To  write  of  men,  the  writer  must  be 
himself  a  man.  When  Johnson  parodied 
poor  Henry  Brooke's  line  in  "  Gustavus 

V    ciScl         —— — 

"Who  rales  o'er  freemen  must  himself  be 
free," 

by 

"Who  drives  fat  bullocks  must  himself  be 
fat," 

he  spake,  as  wise  men  are  wont,  more 
truth  than  he  thought  for.  For  is  it 
not  true  1  From  whence  come  mad 
bulls,  and  all  the  terrors  of  Smithfield, 
save  from  this — that  drovers,  like  too 
many  historians,  are  notably  and  visibly 
a  lean  race ;  and,  having  no  sympathy 
with  the  pangs  of  obesity,  do  over-drive, 
hurry,  and  altogether  misunderstand  and 
abuse  their  quadruped  charges,  as  his- 
torians their  biped  ones,  sinning  per- 
petually against  the  time-honoured  law — 
"  Hurry  no  man's  cattle,  specially  your 
own." 

As  it  would  be  good,  therefore,  for 


the  public  safety,  if  no  man  were  allowed 
to  exercise  the  craft  and  mystery  of  a 
drover,  unless  he  weighed  by  scale  full 
sixteen  stone,  so  would  it  be  good  for 
the  public  knowledge  that  no  one  should 
exercise  the  craft  and  mystery  of  a  his- 
torian, unless  he  had  had  his  fair  share 
of  the  sorrows  and  joys — nay  also,  per- 
haps, of  the  weaknesses  of  humanity. 
One  might  go  further,  and  say  that  the 
model  historian  ought  to  have  been  in 
at  least  one  conspiracy ;  to  have  com- 
manded an  army  in  battle ;  to  have  run 
away  therefrom ;  to  have  committed  a 
murder  ;  to  have  had  the  appointing  of 
half  a  dozen  bishops ;  to  have  divorced 
a  wife  or  two ;  to  have  spent  the  best 
years  of  his  life  in  prison  strong ;  and 
finally,  to  have  been  hanged,  or,  still 
better,  burnt  alive.  But  perfection  is 
impossible  in  this  life. 

Certainly,  it  is  not  enough  to  eschew 
principles  and  theories,  and  write  ex- 
clusively of  human  beings  and  their 
deeds,  without  a  large  and  deep  human 
sympathy.  One  has  seen  examples  of 
that  kind  of  history,  which  have  de- 
generated into  mere  inventories  of  old 
clothes,  or  bills  of  indigestible  fare  ;  and. 
it  is  not  important  to  the  human  race  to 
know  the  exact  day  on  which  Queen 
Adeliza  Johanna  Maud  wore  a  green 
boddice  over  a  blue  kirtle,  or  on  which 
Abbot  Helluo  do  Voragine  cooked  five 
porpoises  whole  for  a  single  feast.  But  the 
most  notable  instance  of  a  historic  failure, 
from  mere  want  of  humanity,  is  per- 
haps, Machiavelli's  History  of  Florence. 
'No  book  can  be  more  free  from  theory, 
principle,  or  moral  of  any  kind — not 
even  a  sensation  novel.  It  is  not  even, 
like  such  a  novel,  inhuman — i.e.  drawing- 
humanity  in  monstrous  and  impossible 
forms  ;  it  is  simply  extra-human,  draw- 
ing it  not  at  all.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
entirely  occupied  with  men  and  their 
deeds ;  it  is  written  as  fluently,  grace- 
fully, vividly  as  book  need  be  ;  it  is 
crammed  with  incident — with  strata- 
gems, and  treasons  dire,  with  battle,  mur- 
der, sudden  death,  plague,  pestilence, 
and  famine ;  and  yet  the  effect  of  the 
whole  is  utter  weariness,  confusion,  and 
disgust.  There  is  no  delineation  of 


214 


•Froudes  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


character ;  there  is  no  feeling  for,  or 
with,  any  actor.  As  might  be  expected 
from  the  cynic  author  of  the  "  Principe," 
his  men  are  not  men,  but  stronger  and 
cunninger  beasts  of  prey.  And  there- 
fore the  effect  of  the  book  is  confusion, 
weariness,  disgust.  It  is  no  better 
sport  than  to  look  at  the  insects  de- 
vouring each  other  in  a  drop  of  water  : 
not  even  as  good ;  for  Machiavelli's 
insects  are  all  of  the  same  kind,  shape, 
and  colour,  and  one  cannot  even  learn 
from  them  a  lesson  on  the  competition 
of  species. 

If  all  this  be  true  (and  true  surely 
it  is  in  the  main),  it  is  easy  to  under- 
stand the  steadily  increasing  success  of 
Mr.  Froude's  History  of  the  Tudors. 

When  his  first  volumes  appeared,  his 
capabilities  for  writing  history  were  al- 
together unknown  save  to  a  few  who 
had  read  in  the  Westminster  Review  and 
Fraser's  Magazine  his  admirable  essays 
on  "  Mary  Tudor,"  "  England's  For- 
gotten Worthies,"  "The  Morals  of  Queen 
Elizabeth,"  &c. 

They  could  not  tell  that  he  pos- 
sessed what  Mr.  Carlyle  makes  the  very 
definition  of  genius — "  the  infinite  capa- 
city of  taking  trouble."  That  he  has 
that,  his  subsequent  volumes  have  well 
proved.  But  one  thing  the  public 
knew  of  him,  that  genius  he  had,  of  a 
kind  which  interests  the  many  far  more 
than  the  genius  of  taking  trouble — the 
genius  of  human  sympathy.  Whatever 
they  thought,  or  were  told  to  think, 
about  his  earlier  books,  they  knew  from 
them  this — that  he  had  the  power  of 
seeing  things  in  men  and  women  which 
the  mass  could  not  see ;  of  saying  things 
of  them  which  the  mass  dared  not  say  ; 
and  of  finding  words  for  his  thought 
which  the  mass  could  not  find.  The 
public  calls  that  genius — geniality — the 
gift  of  sympathy  and  insight ;  and  on 
the  strength  of  that  one  gift  they  ex- 
pected eagerly,  and  accepted  gladly,  an 
account  of  any  part  of  English  history 
which  came  from  a  man  who  could 
tell  them  about  the  heart  of  man. 

They  did  wisely,  and  were  not  dis- 
appointed. They  expected  that  he 
would  solve  for  them  puzzles  concerning 


persons'  rather  than  concerning  things, 
and  they  found  him  at  once  attempting 
to  explain  a  personage  perhaps  the  most 
Titanic,  perhaps  the  most  important, 
certainly  the  most  unintelligible,  in  the 
long  list  of  English  sovereigns.  Henry 
the  Eighth,  to  the  many,  had  as  yet 
been  comprehensible  under  no  law  save 
that  popular  one  of  Goldsmith's  (by 
which,  indeed,  most  historical  problems 
are  to  this  day  solved) — 

"  The  dog,  to  serve  his  private  ends, 
Went  mad,  and  bit  the  man." 

But  what  the  dog's  private  ends  for  such 
a  suicidal  course  might  be,  they  had  in 
vain  as  yet  surmised.  Mr.  Froude  had 
his  theory,  discarding  for  the  most  part 
the  said  private  ends,  and  substituting 
for  them  public  ones.  The  critics  re- 
calcitrated. If  it  had  been  so,  would 
they  not  have  said  it  themselves  long 
ago  ?  Is  it  not  their  business  to  know 
all  about  everything1?  The  instructors 
of  youth  recalcitrated.  It  would  un- 
settle the  minds  of  the  rising  generation. 
It  would  require  too  many  schoolbooks 
to  be  written  over  again.  Beside,  might 
it  not  injure  the  tender  conscience  of 
youth  to  be  informed  that  one  unworthy 
personage  less  than  they  had  previously 
supposed  had  sat  on  the  throne  of 
England,  and  helped  to  build  up  her 
wealth  and  greatness  ? 

The  public,  obedient  to  its  leaders, 
recalcitrated  likewise  as  bidden,  but 
read  the  book  nevertheless  ;  not  with- 
out a  secret  suspicion,  by  plain  John 
Bull  common  sense,  that  if  the  once 
pious,  wise,  and  virtuous  Henry  the 
Eighth  did  suddenly,  in  his  later  years 
transform  himself  from  the  likeness 
of  a  Christian  man  into  that  of  a 
horned  satyr  of  the  woods,  he  might 
have  compassed  his  wicked  pleasures 
most  safely  and  easily  by  the  same 
method  as  his  porcine  friend,  Francis 
the  First,  and  most  carnal  men  since 
his  time,  instead  of  endangering  his 
crown,  his  country,  and  (as  he  held) 
his  immortal  soul,  by  marrying  wife 
after  wife.  Moreover,  the  public,  as 
they  read,  found  wake  up  in  them 
something  of  the  old  English  respect 


Froude's  History  of  England,  Vote.  VII.  &  VIII. 


215 


and  love  for  the  man  who,  amid  what- 
ever confusions,  and  even  crimes,  of 
thought,  feeling,  and  actions,  first  dared 
to  face  and  fight  like  a  man  the  giant 
lie  of  a  thousand  years,  and  throw  off, 
once  and  for  all,  the  incubus  which  had 
weighed  on  England  ever  since  Offa,  in 
a  fatal  day,  sent  the  first  Peter's  penny 
of  Borne-scot  to  "  the  old  Italian  man 
"  who  called  himself  a  God,  upon  the 
"  strength  of  his  wonder-working  hoard 
"  of  rags  and  bones." 

For  the  public,  intensely  Protestant — 
as  all  who  are  not  such  have  discovered, 
and  will  discover  to  the  end — saw  this  at 
least,  that  Mr.  Froude  was  intensely 
Protestant  likewise  :  and  yet,  that  he 
justified  their  Protestantism  to  them 
not  by  one-sided  and  unjust  fanaticism, 
but  by  fairly  seeing  and  setting  forth, 
from  a  human  point  of  view,  the  faith, 
the  struggles  of  conscience,  the  martyr- 
doms of  the  heroes  of  the  old  faith — of 
More,  of  Fisher,  of  the  poor  monks  of 
the  Charterhouse. 

They  found  the  darkest  puzzles  on 
their  own  side  of  the  question  explained 
by  Mr.  Froude's  knowledge  of  the  other 
side  ;  and  learnt  from  him — probably  for 
the  first  time—  to  understand  the  deep 
discontent  of  Edward  the  Sixth's  reign, 
and  the  subsequent  revulsion  to  Popery 
under  Mary,  on  some  human  and  na- 
tural explanation,  beside  the  old  one  of 
the  rage  and  malice  of  the  devil  and  his 
imps. 

These  volumes,  even  more  than  the 
earlier  ones,  showed  the  advantage  of 
having  our  history  written  by  students 
of  human  nature.  The  delineations  of 
Somerset  and  Seymour,  in  Vol.  V.,  were 
as  masterly  in  -themselves  'as  they  were 
pregnant  with  causes  for  the  course 
which  affairs  took  during  that  confused 
reign.  The  delineation  of  Mary  Tudor 
was,  as  it  ought  to  be,  even  more  carefully 
worked  out,  and  with  the  most  complete 
success.  For  the  first  time,  people  in 
general  could  see  in  that  hapless  C^ueen, 
not  a  monstrous  fury,  but  a  woman,  whose 
deepest  sorrows  and  blackest  crimes 
sprang  out  of  her  own  warped  and  mad- 
dened womanhood.  If  Mr.  Froude  had 
done  no  more  for  English  history  than 


the  figure  of  Mary  Tudor  alone,  he 
would  have  deserved  the  thanks  of  all 
who  love  truth. 

It  was  no  wonder,  then,  that  Mr. 
Froude's  seventh  and  eighth  volumes 
were  anxiously  expected,  and  greedily 
bought  up.  What  would  he,  so  subtle 
an  analyst  of  character,  and  especially  of 
the  character  of  women,  make  of  the 
great  Elizabeth  ]  Perhaps  the  first  feel- 
ing of  the  many  was  one  of  disappoint- 
ment. There  seems  to  be  a  feeling  abroad 
that  Mr.  Froude  ought  to  have  intro- 
duced the  English  heroic  age  and  its 
heroine  with  some  set  flourish  of  trum- 
pets (in  the  old  Elizabethan  sense  of 
that  phrase,  which  involved  no  ridi- 
culous notion);  that  he  should  have 
begun  with  a  proem,  indicating  both 
from  what  point  England  was  starting, 
and  at  what  goal  she  would  arrive. 

But  Mr.  Froude  has  not  done  this.  He 
has  confined  himself  strictly  to  his  me- 
thod of  drawing  the  time  by  drawing 
its  personages,  their  conversations,  their 
letters ;  by  letting  the  action  explain 
itself,  without  any  explanatory  comment 
from  a  chorus.  It  is  wisest,  perhaps,  to 
believe  that  Mr.  Froude  knows  best  how 
to  tell  his  own  story.  He  has  spent 
years  of  thought  and  labour  on  these 
volumes ;  and  he  ought,  in  fairness,  to 
have  the  benefit  of  Goethe's  paradoxical 
but  true  rule,  that  our  first  impression 
of  a  work  of  high  art  is  one  of  disap- 
pointment, almost  of  dislike.  It  is  so 
different  from  what  we  should  have 
made  ourselves.  Not  till  we  have  looked 
at  it  again  and  again  do  we  become  re- 
conciled to  its  unexpected  form  and  pro- 
portions. And  though  it  would  be  too 
much  to  claim  for  this  history  the  honour 
of  a  perfect  work  of  art,  it  is  not  too 
much  to  ask  that  we  should  not  judge  of 
its  value  till  we  have  read  it  more  than 
once — perhaps  till  we  have  read  the 
volumes  which  will  follow,  and  have 
seen  Mr.  Froude's  picture  of  Elizabeth 
and  her  times  as  a  whole. 

Certainly,  we  must  not  till  then  judge 
of  his  portrait  of  Elizabeth  herself.  Mr. 
Froude,  in  these  volumes,  treats  of  a 
period  which  has  been  too  much  slurred 
over  by  her  biographers,  and  which  is 


216 


Froude  s  History  of  England,  Vols,  VII.  &  VIII. 


painful  enough  to  those  who  (as  English- 
men did  once,  and  should  once  more) 
admire  and  love  her  in  spite  of  all  her 
faults.  She  came  to  the  throne,  as  he 
shows,  crippled  on  every  side  ;  crippled 
"by  debts  incurred  by  her  sister,  which 
she  was  trying  honourably  to  pay,  thereby 
bringing  on  herself  the  odium  of  stingi- 
ness ;  crippled  by  her  inability  to  trust 
the  statesmen  who  had  brought  Eng- 
land to  the  brink  of  ruin  during  her 
sister's  and  her  brother's  reign ;  crippled 
by  her  reasonable  dissatisfaction  with 
extreme  negative  Protestantism,  and 
the  revolutionary  and  fanatical  forms 
which  it  was  assuming  on  the  Con- 
tinent ;  crippled  by  the  knowledge  that 
at  least  half  her  subjects  were  still  Ro- 
manists,  ready  to  dethrone  her — some 
of  them  to  murder  her — and  put  Mary 
Stuart  in  her  place ;  'crippled  by  the  in- 
trigues of  Erance  and  Spain,  which  she 
had  no  power  to  resist  by  force  of  arms, 
and  which  she  was  compelled — or  rather 
fancied  herself  compelled — to  meet,  after 
the  fashion  of  all  princes  in  those  days, 
by  paltry  and  disingenuous  counter- 
intrigues;  crippled,  last  of  all,  as  Mr. 
Eroude  freely  allows,  by  an  affection  for 
Lord  Robert  Dudley,  which  all  but 
alienated  from  her  the  hearts  of  her 
people,  and  brought  her  at  one  time  to 
.the  brink  of  ruin. 

Mr.  Froude  has  seen  all  these  excuses 
for  her;  but  it  is  a  question  whether  he 
has  brought  them  before  his  readers 
with  sufficient  prominence.  He  reite- 
rates contemptuously  charges  of  avarice 
against  her,  which  may  be  permissible 
in  a  republican  author,  like  Mr.  Motley, 
but  do  not  come  so  consistently  from 
Mr.  Froude,  who  has  confessed  that  she 
was  trying  to  pay  honestly  her  sister's 
debts.  Surely,  there  were  great  excuses 
for  her  shrinking  from  throwing  good 
money  after  bad,  whether  into  Scotland 
or  into  the  Netherlands.  There  were 
great  excuses  for  her  shrinking  from 
armed  assistance  to  foreign  powers,  while 
she  had  no  certainty  but  that  her  arma- 
ments and  her  honour  would  not  be 
fooled  away  by  incapable  commanders, 
as  they  had  been  in  the  preceding  reigns. 
There  were  great  excuses  for  her  vacil- 


lating in  her  assistance  both  to  Scots 
and  to  Netherlander,  while  neither 
Scots  nor  Netherlander  clearly  knew 
what  they  wanted,  and  while  she,  of 
course,  knew  still  less.  She  had  a  vast 
and  unexampled  part  to  play,  in  an  ago 
in  which  all  that  was  old  was  rocking  to 
its  ruin,  all  that  was  new  was  unformed 
and  untried.  Can  we  wonder  that  she 
took  years  in  learning  that  part — that 
she  made  more  than  one  ugly  mistake 
in  her  lesson?  Let  it  suffice  that  she 
did  learn  it;  that  from  the  first,  with 
that  fine  instinct  for  choosing  great  and 
good  servants  which  was  her  safeguard 
in  after  life,  she  chose  the  noble  Cecil, 
and  not  merely  used,  but,  on  the  whole, 
obeyed  him ;  and  that,  at  last,  she  con- 
quered, leaving  England  as  strong  and 
glorious  as  she  found  it  weak  and  dis- 
graced. 

As  for  her  falsehoods ;  they  brought 
their  own  punishment,  so  swiftly  and  so 
often,  that  they  cured  themselves.  She 
began  on  the  wrong  path,  after  the 
fashion  of  the  then  world,  when  every 
one  seems  to  have  lied  over  public 
matters.  It  is  enough  that  she  left  that 
path  in  time  to  save  England  and 
herself. 

Moreover,  we  must  remember  the 
morality  of  the  time  was  low.  If  it 
had  not  been  low,  there  would  have 
been  no.  Reformation,  because  none 
would  have  been  needed.  All  true  re- 
formations, which  lay  hold  of  the  hearts 
of  the  people,  as  this  one  did  of  the 
heart  of  England,  arc  moral,  not  doc- 
trinal, reformations.  As  long  as  the 
old  Creed  is  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and 
makes  men  consciously  better  men,  they 
will  cling  to  it,  be  it  never  so  ragged  and 
shaky ;  for,  say  they,  and  truly,  the  grace 
of  God  is  still  present  in  it.  But  when 
the  grace  of  God  is  found  to  be  gone 
out  of  it,  so  that  it  no  longer  makes 
men  better,  but  rather  worse,  then  the 
Creed  is  but  too  likely  to  go  the  way  of 
"  the  salt  which  has  lost  its  savour." 

And  the  Roman  religion  had,  for 
some  time  past,  been  making  men  not 
better  men,  but  worse.  We  must  face, 
we  must  conceive  honestly  for  our- 
selves, the  deep  demoralization  which 


Fronde's  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII,  &  VIII. 


217 


had  been  brought  on  in  Europe  by  the 
dogma  that  the  Pope  of  Rome  had  the 
power  of  creating  right  and  wrong  ;  that 
not  only  truth  and  falsehood,  but  morality 
and  immorality,  depended  on  his  setting 
his  seal  to  a  bit  of  parchment.  From, 
the  time  that  indulgences  were  hawked 
about  in  his  name,  which  would  insure 
pardon  for  any  man,  "  etsi  matrem  Dei 
violavisset"  the  world  in  general  began  to 
be  of  that  opinion.  But  the  mischief 
was  older  and  deeper  than  those  indul- 
gences. It  lay  in  the  very  notion  of 
the  dispensing  power.  A  deed  might 
be  a  crime,  or  no  crime  at  all — like 
Henry  the  Eighth's  marriage  of  his 
brother's  widow — according  to  the  will  of 
the  Pope.  If  it  suited  the  interest  or 
caprice  of  the  old  man  of  Rome  not  to 
say  the  word,  the  doer  of  a  certain  deed 
would  be  burned  alive  in  hell  for  ever. 
If  it  suited  him,  on  the  other  hand,  to 
say  it,  the  doer  of  the  same  deed  would 
go,  sacramentis  munitus,  to  endless  bliss. 
What  rule  of  morality,  what  eternal  law 
of  right  and  wrong,  could  remain  in  the 
hearts  of  men  born  and  bred  under  the 
shadow  of  so  hideous  a  deception  1 

And  the  shadow  did  not  pass  at  once 
when  the  Pope's  authority  was  thrown 
off.  Henry  VIII.  evidently  thought 
that  if  the  Pope  could  make  right  and 
wrong,  perhaps  he  could  do  so  likewise. 
Elizabeth  seems  to  have  fancied,  at  one 
weak  moment,  that  the  Pope  had  the 
power  of  making  her  marriage  with 
Leicester  right,  instead  of  wrong. 

Moreover  when  the  moral  canon  of 
the  Pope's  will  was  gone,  there  was 
for  a  while  no  canon  of  morality  left. 
The  average  morality  of  Elizabeth's 
reign  was  not  so  much  low  as  capricious, 
self-Avilled,  fortuitous  ;  magnificent  one 
day  in  virtue,  terrible  the  next  in 
vice.  It  was  not  till  more  than  one 
generation  had  grown  up  and  died 
with  the  Bible  in  their  hands,  that 
Englishmen  and  Germans  began  to  un- 
derstand (what  Frenchmen  and  Italians 
did  not  understand)  that  they  were  to 
be  judged  by  the  everlasting  laws  of  a 
<  lod  who  was  no  respecter  of  persons. 

So,  again,  of  the  virtue  of  truth. 
Truth,  for  its  own  sake,  had  never  been 


a  virtue  with  the  Roman  clergy.  Father 
Newman  informs  us  that  it  need  not, 
and  on  the  whole  ought  not  to  be  ;  that 
cunning  is  the  weapon  which  Heaven 
has  given  to  the  saints  wherewith  to 
withstand  the  brute  male  force  of  the 
wicked  world  which  marries  and  is  given 
in  marriage.  Whether  his  notion  be  doc- 
trinally  correct  or  not,  it  is  at  least  his- 
torically so. 

Ever  since  Pope  Stephen  forged  an 
Epistle  from  St.  Peter  to  Pepin,  king  of 
the  Franks,  and  sent  it  with  some  filings 
of  the  saint's  holy  chains,  that  he  might 
bribe  him  to  invade  Italy,  destroy  the 
Lombards,  and  confirm  to  him  the  "  Pat- 
rimony of  St.  Peter;"  ever  since  the 
first  monk  forged  the  first  charter  of 
his  monastery,  or  dug  the  first  heathen 
Anglo-Saxon  out  of  his  barrow,  to  make 
him  a  martyr  and  a  worker  of  miracles, 
because  his  own  minster  did  not "  draw" 
as  well  as  the  rival  minster  ten  miles 
off; — ever  since  this  had  the  heap 
of  lies  been  accumulating,  spawning, 
breeding  fresh  lies,  till  men  began  to 
ask  themselves  whether  truth  was  a 
thing  worth  troubling  a  practical  man's 
head  about,  and  to  suspect  that  tongues 
were  given  to  men,  as  claws  to  cats  and 
horns  to  bulls,  simply  for  purposes  of 
offence  and  defence. 

The  court  of  Rome  had  been  for  cen- 
turies, by  the  confession  not  merely  of 
laymen  and  heretics,  but  of  monks, 
bishops,  canonized  saints,  beatified  pro- 
phetesses, the  falsest  spot  on  earth, 
as  well  as  the  foulest.  "  Omnia  Romse 
venalia"  had  been  a  taunt,  not  of  the 
Reformation-time,  but  of  five  centuries' 
standing.  The  court  policy  of  Rome 
had  been  that  of  Machiavel's  Principe, 
"  Divide  et  impera."  Its  example  had 
debauched  its  vassal  kings  throughout 
Christendom.  The  courts  of  Europe 
were  Italianized.  The  old  Teutonic 
"Biederkeit  und  Tapferkeit,"  the  once- 
honoured  motto,  "  Treu  und  fest,"  had 
withered  beneath  the  upas-shade  of 
ultramontane  falsehood  and  chicane ; 
the  Teuton,  whether  English,  Spanish, 
or  German,  tried  to  make  up  for  the 
loss  of  honesty,  by  clumsy  efforts  to  out- 
lie  Italian  legates  and  bishops,  in  which 


218 


Frondes  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


rivalry  the  Franks  alone,  the  Luegen- 
elder,  liars  from  the  beginning,  had  any 
tolerable  success. 

We  must  remember  these  things,  ere 
we  judge  Elizabeth  and  her  heroes. 
They  were  born  in  a  demoralized  time, 
with  the  vices  of  that  time  clinging 
thick  upon  them ;  having  lost  the  old 
popish  rule  of  right  and  wrong,  wretched 
as  it  was,  and  having  as  yet  no  new 
Gospel  rules  to  guide  them  :  but  they 
were  growing  more  and  more  conscious 
of  that  new  rule,  of  the  Bible,  of  free 
thought,  of  the  sanctity  of  national  life  ; 
and  by  the  lights  thereof  they  were  work- 
ing their  way  out  of  the  slough  wherein 
they  were  bom,  to  a  higher,  purer,  nobler, 
more  useful  type  of  humanity  than  the 
world  had  seen  for  many  a  hundred 
years.  Giants  half  awakened  out  of 
sleep,  soiled  with  many  an  ugly  fall, 
wearied  and  crippled  in  many  a  fearful 
fight,  and  yet  victorious  after  all — we 
are  not  the  men  to  judge  them  harshly, 
we  who  stand  safe  on  the  firm  ground 
which  their  struggles  won. 

Of  Elizabeth's  attachment  to  Dudley, 
Mr.  Eroude  has  no  doubt.  Neither  has 
he  of  the  purity  (in  act  at  least)  of  that 
attachment.  She  asserted  it  at  a  mo- 
ment when  she  believed  herself  dying  ; 
and  there  is  not  a  jot  of  evidence  in  the 
opposite  direction,  save  in  the  foul 
imaginations  of  Jesuits  like  Parsons, 
who  could  conceive  of  no  love  which 
was  not  after  the  model  of  Paris,  Venice, 
and  Eome.  What  Mr.  Eroude  says  on 
the  miserable  and  scandalous  Amy  Rob- 
sart  tragedy  is  worthy  of  most  careful 
reading  :  but  let  the  reader  always  keep 
in  mind,  that  if  Elizabeth  and  Dudley 
had  been  only  willing  (as  they — at  least 
he — seem  to  have  been  for  awhile)  to 
submit  themselves  to  the  Holy  Father 
at  Rome,  that  Holy  Father  would  have 
been  both  able  arid  willing  to  grant 
Dudley  a  divorce  from  Amy  Robsart, 
and  permission  to  marry  the  Queen. 

Mr.  Froude  writes  angrily  and  con- 
temptuously of  this  atfection  toward 
Dudley  ;  and  there  is  cause  enough  for 
his  so  doing.  He  likes  Elizabeth  too 
well  to  allow  her  a  licence  which  he  can 
allow  to  Mary  Stuart.  But  he  should 


have  remembered,  that  while  Mary  took 
that  licence,  Elizabeth  did  not.  Mean- 
while, after  Elizabeth  has  been  so  long 
represented  as  utterly  cold,  heartless, 
the  slave  of  vanity  and  ambition,  it 
ought  rather  to  raise  her,  than  lower 
her,  in  our  eyes  to  find  her  from  her 
youth  a  true  Avoman,  capable — as  her 
after  life  showed  abundantly  to  those 
who  have  eyes  to  see — of  deep  and  true 
affection. 

The  key  to  Elizabeth's  strange  con- 
duct during  these  early  years  seems  to 
be,  over  and  above  her  debt  and  poverty, 
and  her  pardonable  ignorance  that  her 
true  safety  lay  in  putting  herself  at  the 
head  of  the  Reformed  party,  this  very 
simple  and  human  fact — that  she  was 
honestly  and  deeply  in  love  with  a  man 
who  had  been  the  friend  of  her  youth, 
and  the  companion  of  her  dangers  ;  that 
she  felt  she  must  not  marry  him,  while 
woman-like  she  could  not  give  up  the 
hope.  That  she  amused  others,  and 
perhaps  herself,  with  plans  of  marrying 
this  person  and  that  instead  ;  and  in 
order  to  put  off  the  evil  day,  and  escape 
as  long  as  possible  the  loathed  necessity, 
vacillated  and  lied,  till  she  herself,  and 
England  likewise,  was  half-mad  with 
suspense.  That  after  all,  she  nobly  re- 
signed herself  to  the  stern  logic  of  facts  ; 
and  confessed — a  truly  noble  confession 
for  that  proud  spirit—"  that  she  would 
"  have  married  my  Lord  Robert,  but 
"  her  subjects  would  not  permit  her." 

As  for  her  love  having  been  mis- 
placed :  what  it  is  which  produces  in 
any  pair  of  human  beings,  raised  above 
the  mere  appetites  of  the  animal,  that 
mysterious  attraction,  is  altogether  so 
unknown  and  miraculous,  that  it  is 
impossible  for  a  student  of  human 
nature  to  say  what  bizzare  and  unex- 
pected matches  may  not  be  made  any 
day,  among  people  whose  characters  he 
fancies  he  knows  most  thoroughly.  Have 
we  never  seen  noble  women  throw  them- 
selves away  on  knaves  and  fools  ]  Have 
AVC  never  seen  them,  too,  after  they  have 
found  out  their  own  mistake,  justify 
and  sanctify  it  to  themselves  by  devo- 
tion the  more  intense  as  the  object 
thereof  is  more  unworthy?  TJnfathom- 


Frondes  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


219 


able  is  the  heart  of  woman.  It  is  not 
for  man,  at  least,  to  speak  rudely  of  its 
weakness,  when  that  weakness  so  often 
brings  to  them  undeserved  blessings.  It 
is  not  for  women,  either,  to  speak  rudely 
of  that  weakness,  when — as  in  Queen 
Elizabeth's  case — it  has  been  conquered ; 
conquered,  as  usual,  not  without  fear- 
ful struggles,  which  scar  and  cripple  the 
whole  character  for  the  rest  of  life  :  but 
conquered  still,  by  the  simple  sense  of 
duty. 

It  may  fairly  be  questioned,  whether 
Mr.  Froude  has  not  indulged  too  much 
that  subtle  power  with  which  he  can 
unweave  the  tangled  skein  of  human 
motives — a  power  which  would  have 
made  him,  had  he  chosen  so  to  waste 
it,  one  of  our  very  best  novelists.  Cer- 
tainly page  after  page  of  the  first  of 
these  two  volumes  leave  on  us  a  sense 
of  confusion  and  bewilderment.  We 
have  got  not  into  one  spider's  web,  but 
into  four  or  five  at  once,  spun,  or  rather 
in  the  act  of  being  spun,  through  and 
across  each  other,  all  competing  for  the 
possession  of  the  one  fly — while,  to 
make  confusion  worse  confounded,  the 
fly  fancies  itself  a  spider  likewise,  and 
begins  trying  to  spin  its  web  in  self- 
defence,  with  results  so  painful  and 
ludicrous  that  Mr.  Froude  loses  his 
temper  a  little,  and  has  no  pity  for  the 
poor  fly,  forgetting  how  hard  the  times 
were,  and  how  great  the  temptation  to 
a  lone  woman  like  Elizabeth,  to  try  if 
she  could  not  meet  cunning  with  cun- 
ning. The  complication  of  affairs  is 
well  likened  by  the  Quarterly  Eeviewer 
to  the  famous  "  Niece-nephew  and 
Beef-eater  dead-lock"  in  the  Critic. 
But  Mr.  Froude  is  not  content  with 
simply  showing  us  the  dead-lock.  He 
takes  the  puzzle  to  pieces,  bit  by  bit, 
puts  it  together  again,  suggests  possible 
methods  of  rearrangement  thereof,  and 
ultimately  confuses  somewhat,  not  him- 
self— for  he  seems  as  much  at  home  in 
plots  as  De  Quadra  or  Philip — but  his 
readers. 

In  that  strange  intrigue,  for  instance, 
which  ended  in  Mary  Queen  of  Scots 
selling  herself,  body  but  not  soul,  to  the 
miserable  Darnley,  half  out  of  cool- 


blooded  policy,  half  out  of  bravado 
against  Queen  Elizabeth  (who  seems, 
in  these  early  years,  to  have  borne  with 
her  kindly,  and  advised  her  wisely),  we 
find  Elizabeth  entreating  Mary  to  marry 
Lord  Robert  Dudley  (Leicester);  on 
which  Mr.  Froude  well  says,  p.  72  : — 

"  Even  in  the  person  whom  in  her 
"  heart  she  desired  Mary  to  marry, 
"  Elizabeth  was  giving  an  evidence  of 
"  the  sincerity  of  her  intentions.  Lord 
"  Robert  Dudley  was  perhaps  the  most 
"  worthless  of  her  subjects  ;  but  in  the 
"  loving  eyes  of  his  mistress  he  was  the 
"  knight  sans  peur  et  sans  reproche : 
"  and  she  took  a  melancholy  pride  in 
"  offering  her  sister  her  choicest  jewel, 
"  and  in  raising  Dudley,  though  she 
"  could  not  marry  him  herself,  to  the 
"  reversion  of  the  English  throne." 

Well  said  of  Mr.  Froude ;  and  nobly 
done  of  Queen  Elizabeth  :  but  if  so,  why 
do  we  find,  fifteen  pages  afterwards,  this 
very  shrewd,  but  rather  unsatisfactory, 
passage  ? 

"It  is  possible  that  the  communica- 
"  tions  from  Lord  Robert  to  the  Spanish 
"  ambassador  were  part  of  a  deliberate 
"  plot  to  lead  Philip  astray  after  a  will- 
"  o'-the-wisp,  to  amuse  him  with  hopes 
"  of  recovering  Elizabeth  to  the  Church, 
"  while  she  was  laughing  in  her  sleeve 
"  at  his  credulity.  If  Lord  Robert  was 
"  too  poor  a  creature  to  play  such  a  part 
"  successfully,  it  is  possible  that  he  too 
"  was  Elizabeth's  dupe.  Or  again,  it 
"  may  have  been  that  Elizabeth  was  in- 
"  sincere  in  her  offer  of  Lord  Robert  to 
"  the  Queen  of  Scots,  while  she  was 
"  sincere  in  desiring  the  recognition  of 
"  Mary  Stuart's  title — because  she  hoped 
"  that,  to  escape  the  succession  of  a 
"  Scottish  princess,  one  party  or  other 
"  would  be  found  in  England  to  tolerate 
"  her  marriage  with  the  only  person 
"  whom  she  would  accept.  If  the  Queen 
"  was  playing  a  false  game,  it  is  hard  to 
"  say  which  hypothesis  is  the  more  pro- 
•'<  bable  ;  yet  on  the  one  hand  it  will  be 
"  seen  that  Cecil,  Randolph — every  one 
"  who  has  left  an  opinion  on  record — 
"  believed  that  she  was  in  earnest  in 
"  desiring  Mary  Stuart  to  accept  Lord 
"  Robert ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand, 


220 


Fronde's  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


"  the  readiness  with  which  the  Spanish 
"  Court  listened  to  Lord  Kobert's  over- 
"  tures,  proves  that  they  at  least  believed 
"  that  he  had  a  real  hold  on  Elizabeth's 
"  affections  ;  and  it  is  unlikely,  with 
"  the  clue  to  English  State  secrets 
"  which  the  Spanish  Ministers  un- 
"  doubtedly  possessed,  that  they  would 
"  have  been  deceived  a  second  time  by 
"  a  mere  artifice.  The  least  subtle  ex- 
"  planations  of  human  things  are  usually 
"  the  most  true.  Elizabeth  was  most 
"  likely  acting  in  good  faith  when  she 
"  proposed  to  sacrifice  Dudley  to  the 
"  Queen  of  Scots.  Lord  Eobert  as  pro- 
"  bably  clung  to  his  old  hopes,  and  was 
"  sincere — so  far  as  he  could  be  sincere 
"  at  all — in  attempting  to  bribe  Philip 
"  to  support  him  in  obtaining  his 
"  object."  .  .  . 

No  doubt,  "  the  least  subtle  explana- 
"  tions  of  human  things  are  usually  the 
"most  true."  And  Mr.  Eroude  had 
given  such  an  explanation  in  page  72. 
But  if  so,  cui  bono  this  whole  passage  ? 
It  only  adds — unnecessarily,  surely — to 
that  sense  of  bewilderment  which  cer- 
tainly seizes  the  reader  during  the 
perusal  of  much  of  the  first  volume. 

But  in  as  far  as  he  omits  surmises, 
and  confines  himself  to  the  facts,  how- 
ever complicated,  has  not  Mr.  Froude 
a  right  to  say  to  us  critics,  who  earn  our 
money  by  telling  the  world  how  things 
ought  to  have  been  done,  instead  of 
doing  them  ourselves,  "  How  otherwise 
would  you  have  had  me  draw  the  period, 
so  as  to  give  you  a  just  notion  of  it  ? 
Take  care  that  your  very  blame  be  not 
praise,  proving  that  I  have  drawn  from 
the  life,  and  to  the  life.  Call  this  part 
of  my  book  the  worst  names  you  will ; 
say  that  it  is  tedious — so  was  the  time. 
Confused,  mean,  irritating — so  was  the 
time.  I  have  tried  to  draw  it  as  it  was ; 
and  let  it  produce  in  the  reader  the  same 
effect  which  it  produced  on  the  whole 
English  people.  Had  I  made  the  period 
interesting,  I  should  have  made  it  just 
what  it  was  not.  Had  I  compressed  it, 
I  should  have  given  you  the  false  notion 
that  it  was  a  short  and  unimportant 
episode  in  Elizabeth's  reign,  instead  of 
Avhat  it  was — a  long  suspense  and  con- 


fusion, which  tormented  people  and 
statesmen  alike  into  all  but  despair  and 
rebellion,  which  endangered  Elizabeth's 
throne,  which  permanently  damaged  her 
reputation,  and  gave  a  handle  for  Father 
Parsons,  and  the  rest  of  the  Jesuit 
slanderers  and  plotters,  to  pour  out  their 
foul  '  Leicesters,  Commonwealths,'  and 
other  vomissemens  du  diable.  I  have 
been  tedious  and  irritating  ?  If  you  had 
lived  in  those  days,  you  would  have 
found  them  infinitely  more  tedious  and 
irritating  than  I  have  been." 

The  fact  is,  Mr.  Froude  has  been  in 
the  case  of  one  who  has  to  represent  on 
the  stage  a  peat-bog — a  foul,  quaking, 
bottomless  morass,  stretching  for  weary 
miles.  And  how  should  he  have  done 
it,  save  by  representing  it  as  it  was? 
He  might  have  made  it,  for  scenic  pur- 
poses, look  very  pretty — deck  it  over 
with  roses  and  gilly-flowers,  and  stuck 
a  maypole  in  the  midst,  with  swains 
and  nymphs  dancing  round  it,  on  soil 
of  questionable  security.  But,  on  the 
whole,  the  impossible  is  not  likely  to  bo 
the  correct. 

Or  he  might  have,  for  dramatic  pur- 
poses likewise,  only  indicated  his  peat- 
bog, after  the  method  of  Bully  Bottom 
and  Snug  the  joiner,  and  cause  one  to 
enter  with  a  spade  over  his  shoulder 
and  a  turf  in  his  hand,  and  say — 

"  This  turf  of  peat,  "which  in  my  hand  I  hold. 
Doth  bog  present,  both  naked,  deep,  and 

cold, 
Where  snipe  and  duck  do  breed ;" 

and  so  forth. 

After  which  he  must  say,  of  course, 
"  But  sweet  ladies,  or  fair  ladies,  if  you 
think  I  am  truly  and  indeed  a  bog,  you 
be  too  hard  on  me.  I  am  no  bog,  but 
honest  John  Heathcropper,  at  your  ser- 
vice. So  you  must  not  be  afraid  of 
falling  into  me;  no,  nor  of  filing  the 
soles  of  your  feet  through  and  of 
my  bog : ''  &c.  &c. — a  method  not  un- 
known to  various  writers  of  history, 
who  have  taken  on  themselves  to  tell 
the  story  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots, 
Francis  the  First,  and  other  model 
sovereigns,  with  all  the  naughtiness  left 
out  for  special  reasons. 

Mr.  Froude   has   taken   the   simpler 


Froudes  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


221 


(and  on  the  whole  juster)  plan  of  send- 
ing John  Heathcropper  on  the  stage  to 
confess  that  the  bog  is  a  very  dangerous 
bog,  a  naughty  bog,  and  must  be  crossed 
nevertheless  ;  but  that  he  has  crossed  it 
himself,  and  come  back  with  a  lanthorn ; 
and  that  any  lady  or  gentleman  who 
chooses  to  step  from  this  tummock  to 
that  tuffet,  and  so  on,  may  in  time  get 
across ;  but  that  if  they  do  slip  in,  he 
Avill  find  them  a  lanthorn,  but  cannot 
iind  them  legs. 

In  drawing  the  character  of  Mary 
Queen  of  Scots,  Mr.  Froude  has  been 
more  successful  than  he  has  as  yet  been 
in  drawing  Elizabeth.  The  task,  indeed, 
is  easier.  The  incidents  of  her  life  are 
so  brilliant  and  dramatic,  that,  honestly 
told,  they  are  enough  to  reveal  the 
woman  herself  throughout :.  besides, 
the  character  is  a  shallower  one  than 
Elizabeth's — shallow  from  want  of  prin- 
ciple, though  not  from  want  of  intellect 
or  passion ;  a  true  panther  nature — beau- 
tiful and  swift,  crafty  and  cruel,  with 
the  panther's  stealthy  crouch,  the  pan- 
ther's sudden  spring.  Mr.  Eroude's  ad- 
mirable description  of  her  ought  to 
abolish,  once  and  for  all,  the  senti- 
mental notion  of  her  injured  innocence, 
which  prompts  even  Mr.  Charles  Knight 
to  talk  of  her  trial  for  her  life,  in  1586, 
as  "an  unequal  encounter  "  between  "the 
most  adroit  statesmen  of  her  age  "  and 
"  an  inexperienced  woman."  Inexpe- 
rienced] Burleigh  and  his  compeers 
knew  too  well  that,  since  she  had  landed 
in  Scotland,  she  had  had  six-and-twenty 
years  of  perpetual  experience  in  state 
craft  and  intrigue.  They  knew,  too, 
that  she  had  come  into  Scotland — as 
John  Knox  saw  at  his  first  glance — 
hardly  needing  that  additional  experi- 
ence, so  trained  had  she  been  in  the 
ways  of  the  craftiest  court  of  Europe, 
and  also — alas  for  her — in  the  morals 
and  language  of  a  society  which — if  we 
are  to  believe  Brantome,  who  adored 
her — can  hardly  find  a  parallel  now  in 
the  lowest  purlieus  of  St.  Giles'.  Be 
merciful  to  her  faults,  considering  the 
simply  infernal  atmosphere  which  she 
breathed  in  her  girlhood ;  but  talk  no 
more  of  her  inexperience,  lest  you  pro- 


voke the  laughter  of  all  who  know  any- 
thing of  the  facts. 

One  famous  personage  at  least — Eizzio 
— comes  before  us  in  these  volumes  in 
a  light  quite  new  to  the  man.  We  must 
abolish  henceforth  (at  least  for  our  chil- 
dren's sake)  those  sentimental  pictures 
in  which  the  harmless  minstrel  lies 
thrumming  melodiously  at  the  feet  of  his 
mistress,  who,  in  her  turn,  looks  lang- 
uishing into  the  infinite  serene,  as  she 
dreams  of  La  Belle  Erance  ;  and  substi- 
tute for  them  a  dark  and  able  Machiavel, 
crouched  serpent-like  at  the  ear  of  an 
Evo  whose  lowering  brow,  curling  lip, 
and  flashing  eye  show  that  she  can  not  - 
only  listen  to,  but  sympathise  with,  the 
dark  hints  of  the  tempter.  Eizzio, 
doubtless,  was  a  fiddler,  thruinmer  on 
the  lute,  or  other  maker  of  pleasant 
noises ;  but  he  was,  over  and  above,  a 
true  sixteenth  century  Italian  ;  wily,  un- 
scrupulous, talcing  to  intrigue  as  to  his 
natural  element.  And — what  is  not 
generally  known — he  was  at  his  death 
the  most  powerful  man  in  Scotland. 
Within  two  or  three  years  of  the  time 
when  he  slept,  for  want  of  better  bed, 
on  the  very  chest  in  the  lodge  at  Holy- 
rood,  on  which  his  corpse  was  flung,  he 
had  become  Mary's  confidant,  secretary, 
practical  prime  minister.  He  had  en- 
tered into,  and  fomented,  all  her  plots. 
He  had  caused  her  deadly  and  insane 
hatred  toward  her  brother,  and  only 
wise  and  good  counsellor,  Murray.  He 
was  about  to  be  invested  with  the  Chan- 
cellorship of  which  Murray  had  been 
deprived,  and  of  the  lands  which  were 
to  be  taken  from  him.  He  was  already 
ruling  the  nobles  of  Scotland ;  he — au 
unknoAvn  foreigner.  He  was  just  about 
to  be  exalted  above  them  all.  The 
nobles,  after  the  time-honoured  custom 
of  the  ancient  Scots,  got  rid  summarily 
of  the  intruder.  Why  not?  It  had 
been  the  fashion  ever  since  the  day 
when  Bruco  stabbed  the  Eed  Comyn  ; 
indeed,  since  Macbeth  did  the  same  by 
Duncan  ;  or  even  earlier.  When  there 
is  no  law  in  a  country,  every  man  must 
needs  be  a  law,  if  not  to  himself,  at  least 
to  his  enemies.  So  Eizzio  was  abolished  ; 
only  the  stupid  and  brutal  boy  Darnley 


222 


Froude  s  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &,  VIII. 


would  have  him  torn  out  of  the  very 
chamber  of  the  Queen,  instead  of  seizing 
him  at  his  own  lodgings.  But  Darnley 
believed — or  at  least  maked  all  Scotland 
believe — that  Eizzio  was  Mary's  para- 
mour. Mr.  Froude  believes  that  he  was 
not,  on  the  sound  ground  that  no  one  can 
credit  a  word  which  Darnley  said  on 
any  matter.  But  the  slander,  if  slander 
it  was,  did  its  work.  It  justified  Eizzio's 
death  in  the  eyes  of  the  Scotch,  who, 
years  after,  shouted  to  poor  James, 
"  Come  out,  thou  son  of  Signer  Davie  ! " 
and  gave  occasion  to  at  least  one  bitter 
jest — that  the  said  James  was  the 
Solomon  of  England  in  this  at  least, 
that  he  was  the  son  of  David. 

One  cannot  pity  Eizzio.  He  played 
for  all  or  nothing,  and  lost.  One  might 
have  pitied  him,  if  he  had  turned  to 
bay  valiantly  at  last.  Fox  as  he  was, 
he  might  at  least  have  died  like  the 
fox — dumb  and  game,  biting  as  long  as 
two  limbs  are  left  together.  But  he 
did  not.  The  upstart  who,  five  mi- 
nutes before,  had  been  sitting  at  supper 
with  the  Queen,  while  noble  Scotch- 
men stood  in  waiting  behind  his  chair, 
screamed  with  pain  like  a  girl,  clung 
to  his  mistress,  then  to  her  bed,  and 
was  dragged  out,  howling  for  mercy,  to 
die  like  the  false  cur  that  he  was. 

"  Here  is  his  destiny,"  moralized  an 
old  porter,  as  he  stood  by,  and  saw  his 
corpse  flung  on  the  chest  in  the  lodge  ; 
"  for  on  this  chest  was  his  first  bed 
"  when  he  came  to  this  place,  and  there 
"  now  he  lieth,  a  very  niggard  and  mis- 
"  known  knave." 

It  is,  in  fact,  the  belief  in  Eizzio's 
guilt  with  Mary  which  explains  the  ex- 
treme brutality  of  the  conspirators  to 
Mary  herself.  Mere  political  jealousy 
of  her  favourite  would  not  have  vented 
itself  in  gratuitous  insults  to  her.  They 
believed  Darnley's  story,  and  were,  in  so 
far,  his  dupes.  It  was  this,  perhaps, 
which  enabled  Mary  so  far  to  thrust 
aside  her  own  feelings  as  to  pardon 
them,  that  she  might  the  more  securely 
wreak  her  vengeance  on  him. 

Of  her  guilt  with  Bothwell,  and  her 
complicity  in  Darnley's  murder,  Mr. 
Froude's  pages  leave  simply  no  doubt. 


He  has  made  use  of  the  famous  "  Casket- 
letters."  But  it  is  clear,  from  his  own 
account,  that  they  are  no  more  needed 
to  enable  us  to  judge  of  her  guilt  than 
they  were  needed  at  the  time.  Scotland, 
England,  and  France,  made  up  their 
minds  at  once,  years  before  these  letters 
were  found,  and  we  may,  if  needful,  do 
the  same. 

As  to  the  letters   themselves,  their 
authenticity,  as  is  well  known,  has  been 
again  and  again  denied  of  late  years ; 
so,  indeed,  has  Mary's  guilt  of  any  kind. 
It  has  been  considered  right,  perhaps 
because  it  was  necessary,  to  ignore  even 
the  one  broad  fact,  worth   any  dozen 
others,  that  within  a  few  days  of  Darn- 
ley's  death,  Mary  was  honouring,  caress- 
ing, playing  garden  games  with  the  man 
who    had    indubitably    murdered    her 
husband,  and,  as   the  public  were  in- 
formed, abducted  and  dishonoured  her. 
"  But,"  says   Mr.  Froude,    "  the   so- 
"  called  certainties  of  history  are  •  but 
"  varying  probabilities  ;  and  when  wit- 
"  nesses  no  longer  survive  to  be  cross- 
"  questioned,  those  readers  and  writers 
"  who  judge  of  the  truth  by  their  emo- 
"  tions  can  believe  what  they  please.  To 
'  assert  that  documents  were  forged,  or 
'  that  witnesses  were  tampered  with, 
'  costs  them  no  effort ;  they  are  spared 
'  the  trouble  of  reflection  by  the  ready- 
'  made  assurance  of  their  feelings." 

"  The  story  in  the  text,"  Mr.  Froude 
says,  in  a  note,  "  is  taken  from  the  de- 
"  positions  of  Anderson  and  Pitcairn  ; 
"  from  the  deposition  of  Crawford 
"  in  the  Eolls'  House ;  and  from  the 
"  celebrated  Casket-letters  of  Mary 
"  Stuart  to  Bothwell."  Out  of  these 
materials,  Mr.  Froude  has  constructed  a 
story,  which  for  clearness,  pathos,  and 
grace  of  style,  will  remain  a  KTrj^a. 
eg  det,  as  one  of  the  most  perfect  speci- 
mens of  writing  in  the  whole  range 
of  our  literature.  Of  the  letters,  he 
says  : — "  Their  authenticity  will  be  dis- 
"  cussed  in  a  future  volume,  in  con- 
"  nexion  with  their  discovery,  and 
"  with  the  examination  of  them  which 
"  then  took  place.  Meantime,  I  shall 
"  assume  the  genuineness  of  documents 
"  which,  without  turning  history  into  a 


Froudes  History  of  England,  Vots.  VII.  &  VIII. 


223 


"  mere    creation   of    imaginative   sym- 

"  pathies,  I  do  not   feel  at  liberty  to 

"  doubt.    They  come  to  us,  after  baving 

"  passed  tbe  keenest  scrutiny  both  in 

"  England  and  Scotland.      The  hand- 

"  writing  was    found    to   resemble   so 

"  exactly  that  of  the  Queen,  that  the 

"  most  accomplished  expert  could  detect 

"  no  difference.     One  of  these  letters 

1  could  have  been  invented  only  by  a 

'  genius  equal  to  that  of  Shakspeare ; 

'  and    that    one,    once    accomplished, 

'  would  have  been  so  overpoweringly 

'  sufficient    for   its    purpose,  that    no 

'  forger  would    have    multiplied    the 

'  chances  of  detection  by  adding  the 

'  rest.  The  inquiry  at  the  time  appears, 

'  to  me,  to  supersede  authoritatively  all 

'  later  conjectures.     The  English  Coun- 

'  cil,  among  whom  were  many  friends 

'  of  Mary  Stuart,  had  the  French  ori- 

'  ginals   before   them,  while  we   have 

"  only   translations,  or  translations   of 

"  translations." 

But  even  those,  it  seems  to  me,  are 
enough.  Read  that  one  letter,  of  which 
Mr.  Froude  well  says,  "  that  it  could 
"  have  been  invented  only  by  the  genius 
"  of  a  Shakspeare ;"  and  judge  whether 
it  could  have  been  written  by  any 
human  being  save  by  a  woman,  "at 
"  that  strange  point  where  her  criminal 
"  passion  becomes  almost  virtue  by  its 
"  self-abandonment."  : — 

"  I  must  go  forward  with  my  odious 
"  purpose.  You  make  me  dissemble  so 
"  far  that  I  abhor  it.  If  it  were  not  to 
"  obey  you,  I  had  rather  die  than 

"  do  it. 

*  *  *  * 

"  Have  no  evil  opinion  of  me  for  this, 
'  for  you  yourself  are  the  cause  of  it. 
'  For  niy  own  private  revenge,  I  would 
'  not  do  it  to  him.  Seeing,  then,  that 
'  to  obey  you,  my  dear  love,  I  spare 
'  neither  honour,  conscience,  hazard, 
"  nor  greatness,  I  pray  you  take  it  in 
"  good  part." 

"  Have  no  evil  opinion  of  me  for  this." 
What  man,  villain  enough  to  have 
forged  letters  in  Mary's  name,  would 
have  had  also  human  sympathy,  insight, 
genius,  enough  to  have  forged  that  one 
sentence ;  to  have  thrown  in  that  exqui- 
site touch  of  mingled  tenderness  and 


shame;  to  have  made  Mary's  highest 
object,  not  the  gratification  of  her  own 
pleasure,  but  Both  well's  good  opinion ; 
to  have  represented  her,  and  not  him, 
as  the  suppliant  and  the  slave  1  One 
can  imagine — because  one  knows  the 
drama  of  those  days — what  sort  of  stuff 
a  forger  would  have  put  into  Mary's 
mouth — stuff  worthy  of  a  stage  Semi- 
ramis  or  Messalina  :  but  instead,  we 
find  words  such  as  no  man — perhaps 
not  even  Shakspeare — could  invent  or 
imagine ;  words  which  prove  their  own 
authenticity,  by  their  most  fantastic 
and  unexpected,  yet  most  simple  and 
pathetic,  adherence  to  human  nature. 
Those  who  doubt  the  terrible  fact  of 
Mary's  having  written  that  letter,  must 
know  as  little  of  the  laws  of  internal 
evidence  as  of  the  tricks  of  the  human 
heart. 

It  can  be  no  pleasure  to  go  into  such 
matters ;   no    pleasure    to   believe  any 
woman  an  adulteress  and  a  murderess. 
But  as  often  as  the  relation  of  Elizabeth 
and    Mary    is  brought   before    us,    so 
often,  at  least  for  some  years  to  come, 
will  it  be  necessary  to  recollect  clearly 
what  it  was.     The  whole  matter,  ever 
since  Mr.  Hume  wrote   his   history — 
has  been  overlaid  with  misstatements, 
caused,  probably,  by  mere  sentimentality, 
but  just  as  dangerous  as  if  they  had 
been  spread  about  by  Father  Parsons 
and  the  Jesuits  themselves,  for  the  ex- 
press purpose  of  putting  into  the  minds 
of  men  an  entirely  false  view   of  the 
case.     The   sixteenth    century  Jesuits, 
however  (with  some  show  of  sense,  as 
from  their  point  of  view),  spoke  of  Mary 
as   a  martyr,  dying  in  defence  of  the 
Holy  Roman  faith  :  it  was  reserved  for 
modern  Protestants  to  broach  the  mon- 
strous theory  that  she  was  sacrificed  to 
the  jealousy  of  Elizabeth.     That  notion 
might,  indeed,   have   something   tragic 
and  terrible  about  it,  false  as  it  is,  if  it 
could  only  be  proved  that  the  two  great 
Queens  were  in  love  with  the  same  man 
at  the  same  moment,  and  fought  Tita- 
nically  for  the  prize.  But  as  the  favoured 
personage  required  by  that   hypothesis 
has  not  yet  been  discovered  in  history,  it 
remains  that  Elizabeth  could  have  been 
jealous  merely  of  Mary's  superior  beauty 


224 


Froude  s  History  of  England,  Vols.  VII.  &  VIII. 


— and,  indeed,  one  has  seen  the  case  ac- 
tually so  put,  by  some  wiseacre  who  had 
probably   never  taken   the    trouble  to 
consider  what  a  deliberate  and  diabolical 
wickedness,  extending  over  many  years, 
he  was  imputing  to  the  English  Queen. 
Certainly,  if  such  people  had  wished 
to  further  the  influence  of  the  Romish 
Church  over  the  public  mind,  they  could 
have  devised  no  method  of  treating  his- 
tory better  calculated  to  do  so,  than  to 
represent  this  long  and  internecine  battle 
between  Protestantism   and  Popery  as 
merely  the  private  quarrel  of  two  hand- 
some and  ambitious  women.  And,  there- 
fore, it  is  necessary  to  repeat  again  and 
again,  that  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  was 
not  merely  heir  to  the  throne  of  Eng- 
land, but  that  she  considered  and  de- 
clared herself  the  rightful  queen  thereof 
during  the  lifetime  of  Elizabeth.     That 
she  was  the  hope  and  mainstay  of  the 
Popish  party,  both  in  England  and  in 
Scotland,  and  the  wily  and  unscrupulous 
foe  of  that  Protestant  cause  which  has 
been  the  strength  and  the  glory  ol  both 
countries   alike.      That    for  that   very 
reason  Elizabeth  shrank  from  acknow- 
ledging her  as  her  heir,  because   she 
knew  (as  Mr.  Froude  well  shows)  that 
to   do  so   was   to  sign  her  own  death- 
warrant  ;    that   she   would   have    been 
shortly  murdered    by   some    of   those 
fanatics,  who  were   told  by  the  Pope 
and  the  Jesuits  that  her  assassination 
was  a  sacred  duty.     That  Mary,  by  her 
crimes,  alienated  from  her  not  her  own 
subjects — they  had  had  too  much  reason 
to  hate  her  already — but  her  Catholic 
friends  in  France,  Spain,  and  England ; 
and  thus  enabled   Elizabeth  to  detain 
her  in  captivity  as   the  only  security 
against  one  who  was   an  open  conspi- 
rator, and  pretender  to  the  throne  during 
her  life  ;  and  finally,  on  the  discovery 
of  fresh  plots  against  her   crown,  and 
the  liberties  and  religion  of  England, 
which  had  by  then   become  identified 
with  the  Protestant  cause,  to  bring  her 
to  the  scaffold.     The  justice  or  injustice 
of  that  sentence  will,  no  doubt,  be  dis- 
cussed by  Mr.  Fronde  in  a  future  volume, 
as  ably  and  fairly  as  he  has  in  these 
volumes  discussed  Mary's  original  guilt ; 
«nd  if  he  shall  give  his  verdict  against 


Queen  Elizabeth — and  therefore  against 
the  Lords  and  Commons  of  England, 
1  who  concurred  with  her  in  the  sentence 
— we  are  bound  to  listen  patiently  to  his 
decision.  No  one  can  come  clean- 
handed out  of  such  a  long  and  fearful 
struggle ;  and  the  party  which  are  in 
the  right  are  but  too  certain,  ere  their 
work  is  done,  to  have  likened  themselves 
more  than  once  to  the  party  which  is  in 
the  wrong. 

But  that  Elizabeth  and  her  party  were 
in  the  right,  and  Mary  and  her  party  in 
the  wrong,  is  to  be  remembered  by  every 
man  who   calls   himself  a  Protestant ; 
and  any  one  who  has  observed  the  deep 
denationalization  of  mind  now  prevalent 
— not  in  the  loyal,  hereditary  Catholics 
of  these  realms — but  in  those  who  have 
lately  joined,  or  are  inclined  to  join,  the 
Church  of  Borne  ;  their  dissatisfaction 
with  the  whole  course  of  English  history 
since  the  Conquest,  and  of  Scotch  history 
since  the  days  of  great  John  Knox,  for 
what,  thank  Heaven,  it  is — a  perpetual 
rebellion  against  ultramontane  tyranny  : 
their  outspoken  contempt  for  all  feel- 
ings  and  institutions  which   are   most 
honoured   by  English   or   by   Scotch  : 
those,  I  say,   who  have  observed  this, 
will  never  lose  an  opportunity  of  re- 
minding  their  fellow-countrymen,   and 
especially  the  young,   that   they  must, 
in  justice   to  their  native   land,    keep 
unstained  and  clear  their  broad  sense  of 
right  and  wrong ;  and   remember  that 
the  cause  which  Elizabeth  (with  what- 
ever   inconsistencies    and   weaknesses) 
espoused,  was  the  cause  of  freedom  and 
of  truth,  which  has  led  these  realms  to 
glory ;    the   cause    which    Maiy   (with 
whatever    excuses   of  early   education) 
espoused,  was  the  cause  of  tyranny  and 
of  lies,  which  would   have   led   these 
realms  to  ruin  ;  and  that  after  all — 

Victrix  Causa  Diis  placuit,  et  victa  pueDis. 

What  Mr.  Froude  will  have  to  say  on 
this  subject,  we  shall  wait  patiently  and 
hopefully  to  hear.  But  that  he  will 
take,  in  the  main,  the  same  view  as  has 
been  taken  in  this  last  page,  no  one  can 
doubt,  who  has  read  his  already  pub- 
lished volumes.  C.  K. 


225 


DEAD  MEX  WHOM  I  HAVE  KNOWN;  OK,  KECOLLECTIONS 
OF  THEEE  CITIES. 


BY   THE   EDITOR. 

THE  ABERDEEN  GRAMMAR-SCHOOL— D>R.  JAMES  MELVItf. 


THE  Schoolhill  in  Aberdeen,  a  street  of 
oldish  houses,  derived  its  name  from  its 
containing  the  public  Grammar  School  of 
the  town.  There  had  been  a  Grammar 
School  in  the  burgh,  on  or  near  this 
same  site,  for  centuries ;  and  in  the 
records  of  the  town  frequent  mention  is 
made  of  this  School,  and  of  the  names  of 
its  masters.  Its  most  noted  benefactor, 
in  later  days,  had  been  Dr.  Patrick  Dun, 
Principal  of  Marischal  College,  in  the 
iirst  half  of  the  seventeenth  century. 
How  many  successive  buildings  of  older 
make  had  served  for  the  school  before 
Dr.  Dun's  time,  or  what  sort  of  building 
it  was  lodged  in  when  he  took  interest 
in  it,  I  can  only  vaguely  guess  through 
fancy,  and  through  such  occasional  en- 
tries in  the  burgh  accounts  as  that  of  a 
sum  of  38£.  5s.  Qd.,  in  or  about  the  year 
1597,  for  "thecking  the  Grammar  School 
with  hedder."  The  School  in  my  time 
Avas  a  plain,  dingy  building,  which  had 
been  erected,  I  believe,  in  1757,  and 
which,  if  it  was  superior  to  some  of  its 
predecessors  in  not  being  thatched  with 
]  leather,  but  slated  and  quite  weather- 
tight,  Avas  certainly  nothing  to  look  at 
architecturally.  Within  a  gateway  and 
iron-railed  wall,  separating  the  School 
from  the  street,  and  forming  a  very 
limited  playground  in  front,  you  saw  a 
IOAV  main  building  of  a  single  storey 
parallel  with  the  street,  and  having  a 
door  with  stone  steps  in  the  middle,  and 
windows  at  the  sides  ;  and  from  this 
main  building  there  projected  toAvards 
the  street  tAVO  equally  low  Avings,  form- 
ing the  two  junior  class-rooms.  TAVO 
similar  Avings,  Avhich  you  could  not  Avell 
see  from  the  street,  projected  from  the 
main  building  behind,  and  accommodated 
the  senior  classes.  The  only  entrance  to 
N'j.  .?!. — VOL.  ix. 


the  two  back  class-rooms  was  through  the 
public  school ;  the  tAvo  front  class-rooms 
might  also  be  entered  through  the  public 
school,  but  had  separate  doors  from  the 
front  playground.  The  arrangements 
inside  were  simple  enough.  Each  of 
the  four  oblong  class-rooms  had  a  raised 
desk  for  the  master  in  one  angle  and  two 
rows  of  "  factions  "  as  they  were  called — 
i.  e.  wooden  seats,  Avith  narrow  sloping 
writing  benches  in  front  of  them — along 
the  two  sides  of  the  oblong,  so  as  to 
leave  a  free  passage  of  some  AAidth  in  the 
middle  for  the  master,  when  he  chose  to 
walk  from  end  to  end.  Each  "faction" 
was  constructed  to  hold  four  boys,  so 
that  the  look  of  a  full  class-room  was 
that  of  a  company  of  boys  seated  in  tAvo 
parallel  subdivisions  of  fours  along  the 
Avails.  In  the  public  school,  where 
meetings  of  all  the  classes  together  took 
place  for  general  purposes,  the  main 
desk,  a  wooden  structure  of  several  tiers, 
was  in  the  middle  of  the  long  side  of  the 
oblong,  immediately  opposite  the  main 
door,  and  there  were  four  sets  of  some- 
Avhat  larger  "  factions,"  where  the  several 
classes  sat  on  such  occasions,  all  looking 
inwards.  The  entire  accommodation  in- 
ternally, as  Avell  as  the  look  externally, 
was  of  the  dingiest ;  nor  was  it,  perhaps, 
very  creditable  to  the  toAvn  that,  even 
in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
they  should  not  have  risen  to  a  some- 
what loftier  idea  of  the  sort  of  building 
suitable  for  a  School  that  Avas  already 
historical  among  them,  and  Avas  still 
likely  to  be  of  importance.  ••But  boys 
think  little  of  these  things  ;  and  the  low 
dingy  building  had  for  them  many  snug, 
and  some  venerable,  associations.  In 
these  roAVS  of  "factions,"  Avhich  they 
thumped  energetically  Avith  sticks  an4 


226 


fists  at  every  meeting,  making  an  uproar 
till  the  masters  appeared,  and  over  which 
at  other  times  they  leaped  in  a  thousand 
fashions  of  chase  and  mutual  fight,  roar- 
ing out  such  tags  of  traditional  school- 
doggrel  as — 

"  Qui  loupavit  ower  the  factions 
Solvet  down  a  saxpence," 

they  could  not  but  Have  a  dim  idea 
that  generations  of  young  Aberdonians, 
either  long  defunct  and  in  their  graves, 
or  scattered  abroad  in  mature  living 
manhood,  had  sat  and  made  uproar 
before  them.  The  very  tags  of  doggrel 
they  shouted  had  come  down  to  them 
from  these  predecessors  ;  and  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  "  factions "  themselves, 
all  slashed  and  notched  and  carved  over 
with  names  and  initials  of  various  dates 
deeply  incised  into  the  hard  wood,  there 
was  a  provocation  to  some  degree  of 
interest  in  the  legends  of  the  school.  It 
was  not  in  the  nature  of  boyish  anti- 
quarianism  to  go  back  to  the  times  of 
those  older  heather-thatched  school- 
buildings,  ancestors  of  the  present,  in 
which  the  Cargills  and  Wedderburns,  and 
other  early  Scottish  Latinists  of  note,  had 
walked  as  masters;  but  some  of  the  tradi- 
tions of  the  existing  fabric  in  the  days 
of  recent  masters,  whose  names  and  cha- 
racters were  still  proverbial,  were  within 
the  reach  of  the  least  inquisitive.  Among 
these  traditions  by  far  the  most  fasci- 
nating was  that  of  Lord  Byron's  con- 
nexion with  the  school.  When,  in  1792, 
Byron's  mother  had  separated  from  her 
husband,  the  profligate  Captain  Byron 
of  the  Guards,  she,  being  by  birth  a 
Miss  Gordon  of  Gicht  in  Aberdeenshire, 
had  retired  to  Aberdeen  with  her  little 
lame  London-born  boy,  then  not  quite  five 
years  old,  and  with  about  130?.  a  year 
saved  from  her  fortune  which  her  hus- 
band had  squandered.  The  little  fellow, 
living  with  his  mother  in  the  Broad- 
gate,  and  catching  up  the  Aberdeen 
dialect,  which  he  never  quite  forgot, 
learnt  his  first  lessons  from  two  or  three 
private  tutors  in  succession,  the  last  of 
whom  he  mentions  as  "  a  very  serious, 
saturnine,  but  kind  young  man,  named 
Patterson,"  the  son  of  his  shoemaker, 


but  a  good  scholar.  "With  him,"  he 
says,  "  I  began  Latin  in  Ruddiman's 
Grammar,  and  continued  till  I  went  to 
the  Grammar  School  (Scotice  '  Schule,' 
Aberdonice  '  Squeel'),  where  I  threaded 
all  the  classes  to  the  fourth,  when  I  was 
recalled  to  England,  where  I  had  been 
hatched,  by  the  demise  of  my  uncle." 
The  fact  thus  lightly  mentioned  by 
Byron  was,  as  may  be  supposed,  no 
small  splendour  in  the  annals  of  Aber- 
deen. There  were  many  alive  in  the 
town  who  remembered  the  lame  boy 
well,  and  some  who  had  been  his 
schoolfellows.  We  used  to  fancy  the 
"  faction  "  in  which  he  had  oftenest  sat ; 
and  there  was  no  small  search  for  his 
name  or  initials,  reported  to  be  still 
visible,  cut  by  his  own  hand,  on  one  of 
the  "  factions  " — always,  I  believe,  with- 
out success.  One  school-legend  about 
him  greatly  impressed  us.  It  was  said 
that,  on  his  coming  to  school  the  first 
morning  after  his  accession  to  the  peer- 
age was  known,  and  on  the  calling  out 
of  his  name  in  the  catalogue  no  longer 
as  "  Georgi  Gordon  Byron "  but  as 
"  Georgi,  Baro  de  Byron"  he  did  not 
reply  with  the  usual  and  expected  "Ad- 
sum"  but,  feeling  the  gaze  of  all  his 
schoolfellows,  burst  into  tears  and  ran 
out.  But  there  are  half  a  hundred 
Aberdeen  myths  about  Byron,  and  this 
may  be  one  of  them. 

The  School  was  a  grammar-school  in 
the  old  sense  of  the  term  as  understood 
in  England  as  well  as  in  Scotland. 
It  was  exclusively  a  day-school  for 
classical  education  in  preparation  for 
the  University.  In  fact,  down  to  my 
time,  it  was  all  but  entirely  a  Latin 
school.  The  rudiments  of  Greek  had 
recently  been  introduced  as  part  of  the 
business  of  the  higher  classes  ;  but,  with 
this  exception,  and  with  the  farther  ex- 
ception that,  in  teaching  Latin,  the 
masters  might  regale  their  classes  with 
whatever  little  bits  of  history  or  of 
general  lore  they  could  blend  with  their 
Latin  lessons,  the  business  of  the  School 
was  Latin,  Latin,  Latin.  Since  that 
time  there  have  been  changes  in  the 
constitution  of  the  seminary  to  suit  it 
to  the  requirements  of  more  modern 


'Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


'227 


tastes  in  education.  There  is  now  more 
of  Greek,  and  express  instruction  in 
Geography,  History,  and  I  know  not 
what  all ;  but  in  those  days  it  was 
Latin,  nothing  but  a  four  or  five  years' 
perseverance  in  Latin,  within  those 
dingy  old  walls.  Although  the  usual 
age  at  which  boys  entered  the  School 
"was  from  eight  to  twelve,  it  was  as- 
sumed that  the  necessary  preliminary 
learning  in  matters  of  English,  and  in 
writing  and  arithmetic,  had  been  gone 
through  beforehand ;  and,  though  there 
were  public  schools  for  writing,  draw- 
ing, and  mathematics,  equally  under  the 
charge  of  the  city-authorities  with  the 
Grammar  School,  and  which  the  pupils 
of  the  Grammar  School  might  attend  at 
distinct  hours  for  parallel  instruction  in 
those  branches,  these  schools  were  not 
attached  to  the  Grammar  School,  and 
attendance  at  them  was  quite  optional. 
So,  on  the  whole,  if  you  were  an  Aber- 
deen boy,  getting  the  very  best  educa- 
tion known  in  the  place,  you  were 
committed,  at  the  age  of  from  nine  to 
eleven,  to  a  four  or  five  years'  course  of 
drilling  in  Latin,  five  hours  every  day, 
save  in  the  single  vacation-month  of 
July — tipped  only  with  a  final  touch  of 
Greek ;  and,  this  course  over,  you  were 
expected,  at  the  age  of  from  thirteen  to 
sixteen,  either  to  walk  forward  into  the 
University,  or,  if  that  prospect  did  not 
then  suit,  to  slip  aside,  a  scholar  so  far, 
into  the  world  of  business.  A  four  or 
five  years'  course,  I  have  said ;  for, 
though  the  full  curriculum  was  five 
years,  it  was  quite  customary  for  readier 
or  more  impatient  lads  to  leap  to  the 
University  from  the  fourth  class. 

This  exclusive,  or  all  but  exclusive, 
dedication  of  the  School  to  Latin  was 
partly  a  matter  of  fidelity  to  tradition  ; 
but  there  was  a  special  cause  for  it  in 
the  circumstances  of  the  intellectual 
system  of  the  town,  and,  indeed,  of  that 
whole  region  of  the  North  of  Scotland 
of  which  the  town  was  the  natural 
capital.  The  School  was  the  main  feeder 
of  the  adjacent  Marischal  College  and 
University  of  the  City  of  Aberdeen,  and 
it  also  sent  pupils  annually,  though  not 
in  such  great  numbers,  to  the  other 


neighbouring  University  of  King's  Col- 
lege, Old  Aberdeen.  These  two  Uni- 
versities, now  united  into  one,  were  the 
Universities  to  which,  for  geographical 
reasons,  all  the  scholarly  youths  of  that 
northern  or  north-eastern  region  of 
Scotland  which  lay  beyond  the  ranges 
of  attraction  of  the  other  three  Scottish 
Universities  of  Glasgow,  Edinburgh,  and 
St.  Andrew's,  were  naturally  drawn. 
Whatever  young  man  looked  forward  to 
a  University  education  in  this  extensive 
region — of  which  Aberdeenshire  itself  and 
the  adjacent  county  of  Kincardine  formed 
the  heart,  but  which  had  Forfarshire, 
Banffshire,  Morayshire,  Invernesshire, 
Eosshire,  and  even  more  distant  northerly 
parts  for  its  fringes — thought  of  Aber- 
deen, and  of  one  or  other  of  its  two 
Universities,  as  his  destination  while 
that  education  should  be  going  on.  The 
tendency  from  the  Highland,  and  gene- 
rally from  the  more  northerly  districts, 
was  rather  to  King's  College,  while  from 
Aberdeen  itself,  the  eastern  and  lowland 
parts  of  Aberdeenshire,  and  from  Kincar- 
dineshire  and  Forfarshire,  the  tendency 
was  rather  to  Marischal  College.  But, 
to  whichever  of  the  two  Universi- 
ties the  predisposition  might  be,  the 
possibility  of  giving  effect  to  it  was,  for 
many  who  cherished  it,  a  matter  of  long 
preliminary  anxiety.  There  were  in 
that  region  of  North  Britain  many  well- 
to-do  families,  perfectly  able  to  send 
their  sons  to  either  of  the  two  Aber- 
donian  Colleges,  or  even,  if  they  so  pre- 
ferred, to  Edinburgh  or  either  of  the 
English  Universities  ;  but  in  that  region, 
more  perhaps  than  in  any  other  even  of 
North  Britain,  there  has  always  been  a 
numerous  class  of  whom  it  may  be  said, 
in  Sydney's  Smith's  sense,  Musam  tenui 
meditantur  avend,  "  They  cultivate  the 
"  Muse,  or  the  best  rough  Muse  they 
"  find  accessible,  on  a  little  oatmeal." 
In  other  words,  the  ambition  after  a 
University  education  existed  among  a 
wider  and  poorer  class  in  that  region 
than  is  found  to  cherish  a  similar  ambi- 
tion elsewhere.  The  town  of  Aberdeen 
is  included  in  this  statement.  The  notion 
of  a  University  education  as  possible 
descended  very  far  down  indeed  among 


228 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  / 


the  ranks  of  that  community — far  below 
the  level  of  those  families  who  could 
sustain  by  their  own  means  the  very 
moderate  expense  that  was  necessary 
with  the  University  actually  at  their 
doors.  To  what  is  this  to  be  attributed  ? 
Partly,  if  you  so  choose,  to  the  breed  of 
the  folk ;  but  considerably,  at  least,  to  a 
more  palpable  social  cause.  This  desire 
for  a  University  education  exists  there 
so  widely,  penetrates  there  so  deep  down 
in  society,  because  in  that  region,  more 
than  in  any  other  part  of  Great  Britain, 
the  means  have  existed  from  time 
immemorial  for  gratifying  the  desire. 
That  part  of  Scotland  has  long  had 
a  peculiarity,  of  which  I  have  often 
thought  that  the  whole  British  world 
ought  to  hear,  despite  its  natural 
antipathy  to  overabundant  information 
respecting  uncouth  Scottish  matters. 
That  peculiarity  is  its  Bursary  System. 
I  say  is,  for  I  hope  it  still  exists.  But 
what  is  a  bursary,  and  what  is  or  was 
the  Bursary  System  of  that  Aberdonian 
region  of  Scotland  ?  A  bursary,  in 
Scottish  academic  phraseology,  is  what 
a  scholarship  or  exhibition  is  in  English 
— a  small  annual  stipend  granted  to  a 
young  man  going  to  college  out  of 
funds  bequeathed  for  the  purpose,  and 
tenable  by  him  while  he  is  at  college. 
All  the  Scottish  Universities  have  such 
bursaries  at  their  disposal,  founded  by 
lovers  of  learning  in  past  centuries  ; 
but  the  two  Aberdeen  Universities  were 
peculiar  in  this  (St.  Andrew's  alone,  I 
think,  coming  near  them  in  the  prac- 
tice) that  the  greater  number  of  the 
bursaries  were  put  up  annually  for  open 
competition  to  all  comers.  There  were 
more  private  bursaries  in  the  gift  of  cer- 
tain families,  or  of  the  professors,  and 
bestowable  by  favour,  or  on  the  bearers 
of  certain  names ;  but  each  of  the  two 
colleges — King's  and  Marischal — had 
about  twenty  public  bursaries  to  be 
disposed  of  every  October  by  open 
competition.  The  bursaries  were  of 
small  amounts,  ranging  from  51.  a  year 
to  201.  a  year ;  but,  invariably,  by  the 
terms  of  the  foundation,  each  bursary 
more  than  covered  all  the  expenses  of 
the  college  classes.  Now,  it  was  this 


Bursary  System — as  familiarly  known 
over  the  whole  region  concerned  as 
the  Aurora  Borealis  in  its  nightly  sky 
— it  was  this  Bursary  System  that  had 
generated  and  that  sustained  there  a 
habit  of  looking  forward  to  a  University 
education  among  classes  in  which  other- 
wise such  a  habit  could  have  hardly 
been  possible.  Though  the  well-to-do 
youths  in  the  town  or  in  the  coun- 
try around  might  not  care  for  a  bur- 
sary, save  for  the  honour — and  it  was 
reputed  an  honour,  and,  when  obtained, 
was  kept  as  such  by  many  to  whom 
it  could  have  been  of  no  substantial 
consideration — yet  for  a  scholarly  boy 
of  poor  family  in  one  of  the  third-rate 
streets  of  Aberdeen,  or  for  a  poor  far- 
mer's son  on  Donside,  following  his 
father's  plough  and  dreaming  of  a  college 
life  as  the  furrow  came  to  the  field's 
edge,  the  thought  that  would  murmur 
to  his  lips  would  still  be  "  A  bursary  : 
0  for  a  bursary  ! "  With  many  their 
going  or  not  going  to  college  depended 
on  their  winning  or  not  winning,  at 
the  proper  tune,  this  coveted  prize. 
One  can  see  what  influence  such  au 
agency  might  have  been  made  to  exer- 
cise over  the  schooling  and  intellectual 
activity  of  the  region  within  which  it 
operated — how,  just  as  the  India  and 
Civil  Service  Competitions  have  affected 
the  education  of  the  whole  country  in 
these  days,  and  swayed  it  in  particular 
directions  according  to  the  subjects  set 
for  the  competitions,  so,  on  a  smaller 
scale,  even  the  frugal  Bursary  System 
of  the  North-east  of  Scotland  might 
have  been  managed  so  as  to  stimulate, 
within  its  range  of  action,  not  one  but 
many  kinds  of  study.  After  the  time 
of  which  I  now  speak,  there  ivas  a 
change  to  this  effect  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  bursaries,  and  they  were 
conferred  after  an  examination  testing 
proficiency  of  different  kinds.  But 
down  to  the  time  with  which  I  have 
here  to  do,  the  competition  for  bursa- 
ries at  both  colleges  was  solely  in  Latin, 
and  even  mainly  in  one  peciiliar  practice 
of  Latin  scholarship — that  of  turning  a 
piece  of  English  into  Latin.  The  com- 
petition took  place  with  great  ceremony 


Or,  Recollections  of  T/iree  Cities. 


229 


every  October  in  the  halls  of  the  two 
colleges.  All  who  chose  might  come, 
and  no  questions  were  asked.  A  lad 
from  Cornwall  or  from  Kent,  who  had 
never  been  in  Aberdeen  before,  might 
have  entered  the  hall  on  competition- 
day,  taken  his  place  with  the  rest,  and 
fought  for  a  bursary  with  whatever 
force  of  Cornwall  Latin  or  of  Kent 
Latin  was  in  him.  The  temptation 
was  not  such,  however,  as  to  attract 
many  such  outsiders ;  and  it  was  gene- 
rally some  forty  Aberdeenshire,.  Kincar- 
dineshire,  Eorfarshire,  BanfFshire,  or 
Highland  lads,  out  of  about  160  who 
had  assembled  in  Aberdeen  for  the 
competition,  that  were  made  happy  by 
obtaining  the  bursaries  of  the  year. 
But,  as  it  was  by  skill  in  Latin  that 
the  feat  was  to  be  done,  one  can  see 
what  a  powerful  premium  was  thus  put 
on  Latinity  all  over  the  territory  in- 
terested. Even  the  common  parish- 
schools  of  the  region  gave  some  atten- 
tion to  Latin,  and  any  parish-school 
that  had  within  twelve  years  or  so 
sent  two  or  three  lads  to  Aberdeen  who 
had  been  successful  in  obtaining  bur- 
saries had  celebrity  on  that  account. 
Katurally,  however,  even  if  a  country 
lad  began  his  Latin  with  his  own 
parish  schoolmaster,  he  would,  if  possi- 
ble, finish  with  a  year  or  two  at  the 
grammar-school  of  the  nearest  town. 
There  were  several  such  grammar 
schools  of  some  distinction  in  that  far- 
north  region ;  and  old  Aberdeen  had 
a  grammar-school  of  its  own,  acting 
more  expressly  as  a  feeder  to  King's 
College.  But  Aberdeen  Grammar  School 
proper,  the  grammar-school  of  the  main 
city,  was  the  school  of  greatest  note. 
And  so,  on  the  whole,  if  the  School 
had  been  aboriginally  a  Latin  school, 
this  influence  of  the  Bursary  System, 
in  the  centre  of  which  it  was  situated, 
had  helped  to  make  it"  more  and  more 
tenacious  of  its  original  character.  It 
was  a  case,  I  doubt  not,  partly  of  cause 
and  partly  of  eifect. 

How  far  back  in  time  the  influence 
of  the  Bursary  System  had  been  in 
operation  in  the  territory  I  do  not 
know;  but  I  should  not  wonder  if 


it  were  to  turn  out,  on  investigation, 
that  some  form  of  the  influence  had 
to  do  with  what  is,  at  all  events,  the 
fact — that  for  more  than  two  cen- 
turies Aberdeen  and  the  region  around 
had  had  a  special  reputation  in  Scotland 
for  eminence  in  Latinity.  The  greatest 
Scottish  Latinist,  or  at  least  Latin  poet, 
after  Buchanan,  had  been  Arthur  John- 
ston, born  near  Aberdeen  in  1587,  and 
educated  at  Marischal  College  ;  his 
Parerga,  Epigmmmata,  and  other  Latin 
poems  were  first  given  to  the  world,  be- 
tween 1 628  and  1 632,  from  the  Aberdeen 
printing-press ;  and  among  his  fellow- 
contributors  to  the  famous  Delitice  Poet- 
arum  Scotorwn,  or  collection  of  Latin 
poems  by  living  or  recently-deceased 
Scottish  authors,  printed  at  Amsterdam 
in  1 637,  several  of  the  best,  after  himself, 
were  also  Aberdonians  and  Marischal 
College  men.  From  that  time  Aberdeen 
had  kept  up  the  tradition  of  Latin 
scholarship. 

My  readers  may  like  to  know  what 
was  the  expense  of  education  at  this 
Aberdeen  Grammar  School  about  which 
and  its  connexions  with  a  paltry  bit 
of  the  land  of  oatmeal  I  have  been 
making  so  absurd  a  fuss.  Ten  shillings 
and  sixpence  a  quarter  for  each  boy — 
that  was  the  expense.  Even  that  was 
grumbled  at  by  some  as  too  dear,  and  it 
was  a  rise  from  what  had  formerly  been, 
the  rate.  Ten  shillings  and  sixpence 
a  quarter  for  the  very  best  classical 
school-education  that  was  to  be  had,  for 
love  or  money,  in  all  that  area  of  Scot- 
land !  The  wealthiest  and  most  aristo- 
cratic parent,  if  he  kept  his  son  on  the 
spot,  could  not,  by  any  device,  do  better 
for  him  in  the  way  of  schooling  than 
send  him  to  precisely  this  school — the 
historical  school  of  the  place.  The  sons 
of  all  classes,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest,  were  there  mixed — all  on  the 
equal  platform  of  ten  and  sixpence  a 
quarter  ;  save  that,  if  a  boy  was  lucky 
enough  to  be  called  Dun,  he  paid  nothing. 
Add  six  and  sixpence  a  quarter  for 
attendance  at  Mr.  Craigmyle's  writing- 
school,  and  six  and  sixpence  a  quarter 
for  attendance  at  Mr.  James  Gordon's 
mathematical  school  —  at  which  two 


230 


Dead  Men  whom  I  nave  known  ; 


public  schools  it  was  usual  for  the  Gram- 
mar School  boys  to  take  instruction  at 
separate  hours — and  you  have  the  almost 
total  school-expense  for  each  boy  as 
under  five-and-twenty  shillings  a  quarter. 
Extras,  such  as  French,  German,  Fencing, 
Music,  and  other  kickshaws,  were  then 
very  rare  indeed  in  Aberdeen  ;  they 
were  to  be  had,  I  know,  but  it  was 
as  turtle  and  champagne  were  to  be  had. 
As  for  Dancing,  Heaven  only  knows 
how  Aberbeen  boys,  whom  I  have  since 
seen  reel-dancing  magnificently  as  full- 
grown  men  in  Hanover  Square  Eooms, 
came  by  the  rudiments  of  that  accom- 
plishment. I  believe  it  was  done  by 
many  at  dead  of  night,  on  creaky  floors 
in  out-of-the-way  places  in  the  Gallow- 
gate,  with  scouts  on  the  look-out  for  the 
clergy.  The  only  difference,  in  the  mat- 
ter of  expense,  between  the  wealthier  and 
the  poorer  boys  attending  the  Grammar 
School  was  that  the  former  generally 
had  private  tutors,  who  went  to  their 
houses  in  the  evening  to  assist  them  in 
preparing  their  lessons.  Such  supple- 
mentary private  tuition  was  cheap  enough. 
A  guinea  a  quarter  for  each  evening  hour 
so  spent  was  what  many  a  Divinity  stu- 
dent was  glad  to  get ;  and  two  guineas  a 
quarter  was  the  maximum.  It  is  a 
curious  illustration  what  differences  of 
tariff  there  might  be  in  those  pre-railway 
days  between  portions  of  the  country 
not  far  distant  from  each  other,  that  the 
rate  of  payment  for  exactly  the  same 
kind  of  private  tuition  in  Edinburgh 
was  then  two  guineas  a  month,  or  three 
times  the  Aberdeen  rate.  By  a  migra- 
tion from  Aberdeen  to  Edinburgh,  if  it 
could  be  managed  and  pupils  bespoken, 
an  Aberdonian  dependent  on  teaching 
might  at  once  triple  his  income.  This 
attraction  did  operate,  among  other 
things,  in  luring  Aberdonians  south- 
wards— an  unfortunate  thing  for  Eng- 
land ;  for,  once  in  Edinburgh,  the  Pict 
might  not  stop  there. 

But  my  hero  is  waiting.  A  word  or 
two  more  from  Byron  shall  introduce 
him.  "The  Grammar  School,"  says 
Byron  in  his  reminiscences  of  his  Aber- 
deen boyhood,  "might  consist  of  a 
hundred  and  fifty  of  all  ages  under  age. 


It  was  divided  into  five  classes,  taught 
by  four  masters,  the  chief  teaching  the 
fourth  and  fifth  himself."  Save  that  the 
total  number  of  pupils  had  increased  to 
two  hundred,  or  even  latterly  to  be- 
tween two  hundred  and  three  hundred, 
this  succinct  description  of  the  Aberdeen 
Grammar  School  in  Byron's  time  holds 
true  of  it  at  the  time  over  which  my 
recollection  extends.  The  three  under- 
masters  then  were  Mr.  "Watt,  Mr. 
Forbes,  and  Mr.  John  Dun.  Watt  and 
Forbes,  or,  as  they  were  called  ir- 
reverently, "Wattie"  and  "Chuckle," 
were  two  old  men — the  one  white- 
haired  and  feeble,  the  other  tougher, 
leaner,  and  with  a  brown  wig — whose 
days  of  efficiency,  which  may  have  begun 
with  the  century,  were  now  over.  As 
each  of  the  under-masters  carried  his 
class  on  for  three  years  continuously, 
and  then  handed  it  over  as  the  fourth 
class  to  the  care  of  the  chief  master  or 
Rector,  himself  going  back  to  receive 
the  new  entrants,  it  was  not  uncommon 
for  careful  parents  to  keep  back  their 
boys  till  it  was  Mr.  Dun's  turn  to 
assume  the  first  class.  He  was  a  much 
younger  man  than  the  other  two,  kept 
splendid  order,  and  was,  indeed,  a  most 
excellent  teacher.  His  class  was  usually 
twice  or  three  times  as  large  as  that  of 
Forbes  or  Watt — commencing  at  eighty 
or  ninety  strong  in  the  first  year,  and 
always  debouching  at  the  end  of  the 
third  year  into  the  Rector's  charge  not 
only  well  kept  up  in  numbers,  but  so 
well-trained  that  each  third  year's  wave 
of  "  Dun's  scholars,"  as  they  were  called, 
was  welcomed  by  the  Rector  as  his  most 
hopeful  material. 

The  name  of  this  Rector  of  the 
Aberdeen  Grammar  School,  was  Dr. 
James  Melvin.  For  some  years  of  his 
connexion  with  the  school  he  had  been 
but  James  Melvin,  A.M.  ;  but  the 
degree  of  LL.D.  -had  been  conferred  on 
him  by  Marischal  College.  He  was  also 
a  licentiate  of  the  Church  of  Scotland, 
and  on  rare  occasions  would  occupy  the 
pulpit  for  one  of  his  friends  ;  but  he  did 
not  usually  figure  as  a  clergyman  or 
place  the  designation  "  The  Rev."  before 
his  name.  Living  in  Belmont  Street, 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


231 


close  by  the  Grammar  School,  with  his 
good  old  mother  and  his  devoted  sister 
presiding  over  his  bachelor  household — 
a  very  conspicuous  member  of    which 
was  a,splendid  and  sagacious  Newfound- 
land dog  called  Csesar — he  stepped  over 
to    the    school    every   morning,   Ca3.sar 
bounding   before    him    as    far   as   the 
school-gate  ;  there  he  spent  three  hours 
every   forenoon   and   again   two   hours 
every   afternoon   in   teaching   the   two 
senior  classes  in  the   right-hand  back 
class-room ;    and,  during   each   winter- 
session   at   Marischal  College,  he    did 
additional   duty   as   Lecturer  in   Latin 
("  Lecturer    in    Humanity "    was    the 
official  title,  according   to  that  strange 
hyperbole    of    our    forefathers    which 
viewed  Latin  as  "  Literae  Humaniorum," 
the    literature   of    the    more    civilised 
folks) — a  post  to   which  he  had  been 
appointed  in  consequence  of  there  being 
at  that  time  no  regular  or  endowed  Latin 
chair  among  the  College  professorships. 
In   this    simple    but    not  unlaborious 
round   of    duties— from    his   house   in 
Belmont  Street  to  the  School,  from  the 
School  to  the  College,  from  the  College 
or  School  back  to  his  house  in  Belmont 
Street,  where  he  would  generally  have 
the  evenings  all  to  himself  in  his  library 
— was  Melvin's  life  passed.     And  yet  it 
is   in   this   man,   thus    plainly-circum- 
stanced in  his  native  place,  and  whose 
name  can  hardly  have  reached  England, 
though  some  fame  of  him  since  his  death 
has  spread  into  the  south  of  Scotland, 
that  I  would  seek  to  interest  the  reader. 
My  best  reason  is  that  he  is  still  of 
unique  interest  to  me.     I  have  known 
many  other  men  since  I  knew  him — • 
men   of    far   greater    celebrity   in   the 
world,  and  of  intellectual  claims  of  far 
more  rousing  character  than  belong  to 
Latin  scholarship  ;  but  I  have  known 
no  one  and  I  expect  to  know  no  one  so 
perfect  in  his  type  as  Melvin.     Every 
man     whose      memory      is     tolerably 
faithful  can  reckon  up  those  to  \vhom 
he  is  himself  indebted  ;  and,  trying  to 
estimate  at   this   moment    the  relative 
proportions    of     influences,   from    this 
man  and  from  that   man   encountered 
by  me,  which  I  can  still  feel  running 


in  my  veins,  it  so  happens  that  I  can 
trace  none  more  distinct,  however  it 
may  have  been  marred  and  mudded, 
than  that  stream  which,  as  Melvin  gave 
it,  was  truly  "honey-wine."  It  is  long, 
at  all  events,  since  I  vowed  that  some 
time  or  other  I  would  say  something 
publicly  about  Melvin.  For  I  know  no 
other  notion  of  historical,  or  any  litera- 
ture, worth  a  farthing,  than  that  which 
rules  that  the  matter  of  which  it  consists 
Shall  always  be  matter  interesting  to  the 
writer,  and  previously  unknown  to  the 
reader. 

Melvin,  it  is  now  the  deliberate  con- 
viction of  many  besides  myself,  was  at 
the  head  of  the  Scottish  Latinity  of  his 
day.  How  he  had  attained  to  his  con- 
summate mastery  in  the  Latin  tongue 
and  literature — how,  indeed,  amid  the 
rough  and  hasty  conditions  of  Scottish 
intellectual  life,  there  could  be  bred  a 
Latin  scholar  of  his  supreme  type  at  all 
— is  somewhat  of  a  mystery.  In  Eng- 
land, with  her  longer  classical  school- 
drilling,  protracted  to  a  later  age  than  in 
Scotland,  and  then  with  her  system  of 
University  Residence,  and  her  apparatus 
of  College  Fellowships  to  bring  scholar- 
ship to  its  rarest  flower,  the  development 
and  maintenance  of  a  style  of  profound 
and  exact  scholarship  which  Scotland 
cannot  rival,  save  in  a  few  exceptional 
instances,  is  to  be  expected.  And  the 
fact,  more  especially  in  Greek  learning, 
corresponds  with  the  expectation.  But 
there  are  exceptional  instances — in- 
stances of  Scotchmen,  and  not  Scotch- 
men only  that  have  been  at  the  English 
Universities,  who,  by  private  labour 
aiding  a  natural  bent  of  genius,  have, 
in  Latinity  at  least,  carved  themselves 
up  to  even  the  English  standard  of 
exquisiteness,  albeit  something  of  a 
national  type  may  still  be  discerned  in 
the  cast  of  their  Latinity,  and  it  may 
be  recognised  as  the  Latinity  of  the 
countrymen  of  Buchanan,  Johnston,  and 
liuddiman.  In  later  times  the  bent  of 
natural  genius  that  could  in  any  case 
lead  to  such  a  result  must  have  been 
very  decided,  and  the  labour  great  and 
secret.  In  the  case  of  Melvin  I  can 
suppose  nothing  else  than  that  the  tra- 


232 


Dead  Men  idiom  I  have  Jcnown  ; 


ditional  muse  of  Aberdonian  Latinity, 
still  hovering  about  the  region  and  loth 
to  quit  it,  became  incarnate  in  him  at 
his  birth,  by  way  of  securing  a  new 
lease  of  residence.  The  ascertainable 
incidents  of  his  life,  at  least,  are  no 
sufficient  explanation.  Born  in  Aber- 
deen, of  poor  parents,  in  1794,  he  had 
passed  through  the  Grammar  School  a 
lew  years  after  Byron  had  left  it — his 
teachers  there  being  a  Mr.  Mcoll  and 
the  then  rector,  Mr.  Cromar;  he  had 
gone  thence  to  Marischal  College  as  the 
first  bursar  of  his  year;  and,  after 
leaving  College,  he  had  been  usher  at 
a  private  academy  at  ITdny,  near  Aber- 
deen, and  then  under-master  in  Old 
Aberdeen  Grammar  School,  where  the 
chief  master  was  a  Mr.  McLauchlan,  of 
some  note  as  a  Celtic  and  classical  scholar. 
In  1822  he  had  been  invited  by  his  old 
master,  Mcoll,  then  in  declining  health, 
to  be  his  assistant  in  the  Aberdeen 
Grammar  School ;  and,  on  Mcoll's 
death,  he  had  been  appointed  to  succeed 
him,  after  a  public  competition  in  which 
he  distanced  the  other  candidates  and 
won  extraordinary  applause  from  the 
judges.  The  Eector,  Cromar,  dying  in 
1826,  Melvin,  though  the  youngest 
under-master,  had  again,  in  public  com- 
petition, won  the  unanimous  appoint- 
ment ;  and  on  the  24th  of  April  in 
that  year — in  one  of  those  assemblies  of 
the  city-magistrates,  city-clergy,  college- 
professors,  and  other  dignitaries,  not 
forgetting  the  red-coated  town's  officers, 
which  took  place  in  the  main  school- 
room, to  the  great  delight  of  the  boys, 
on  gala-days,  and  always  at  the  annual 
Visitation  and  distribution  of  prizes — 
he  was  installed,  at  the  age  of  thirty- 
two,  into  the  post  which  was  to  be  his 
till  death.  The  office  may  have  been 
Avorth  250?.  a  year.  His  appointment 
to  the  Latin  lectureship  in  Marischal 
College,  which  may  have  been  worth 
SQL  a  year  more,  came  soon  afterwards. 

Whatever  start  he  may  have  had  in 
the  lessons  of  Mcoll  and  Cromar, 
and  whatever  firmer  grasp  of  rudi- 
mentary Latin  he  may  have  got  in 
teaching  it  at  Udny  and  under 
McLauchlan  in  Old  Aberdeen,  Melvin's 


scholarship  must  have  been  the  result 
of  an  amount  of  reading  for  himself 
utterly  unusual  in  his  neighbourhood. 
The  proof  of  this  exists  in  the  superb 
library,  one  of  the  wonders  of  Aberdeen, 
which,  even  with  his  moderate  means, 
he  had  managed  to  collect  around  him. 
There  was  nowhere  in  that  part  of 
Scotland,  probably  nowhere  in  all  Scot- 
land, such  another  private  library  of  the 
classic  writers  and  of  all  commentaries, 
lexicons,  scholiasts  and  what  not,  apper- 
taining to  them.  To  see  him  in  his 
large  room  in  Belmont  Street,  every  foot 
of  the  wall-space  of  which,  from  the 
floor  to  the  ceiling,  and  even  over  the 
door  and  between  the  windows,  was 
occupied  with  books  filling  the  exactly- 
fitted  book-shelves,  was  at  once  a  treat 
and  a  revelation  to  a  native  of  those 
parts.  And  the  collection  of  this  library 
must  have  been  begun  early  in  his  life. 
His  surviving  sister,  who  was  consider- 
ably his  junior,  says  that  her  first  recol- 
lections are  "  not  so  much  recollections 
of  him.  as  of  books  and  him."  From 
the  first  he  had  catalogues  of  books  sent 
to  him  from  all  quarters,  and  he  was 
always  purchasing.  He  had  complete 
sets  of  the  fine  old  editions  of  the  Latin 
classics,  Dutch  and  English,  with  some 
of  the  later  German ;  and  his  collec- 
tion of  Mediaeval  Latin  literature  was 
probably  the  cornpletest  in  Scotland. 
The  most  obscure  and  out-of-the-way 
names  were  all  represented.  In  Greek 
literature  his  collection  was  nothing  like 
so  full ;  there  were  even  extraordinary 
gaps  in  it.  Among  the  Latins,  he 
abounded  most  in  editions  of  Horace — 
having,  as  he  once  told  a  friend,1  a  copy 
of  Horace  for  every  day  in  the  year. 
And  so,  among  these  Latin  classics,  and 
the  commentators  and  grammarians  of 
all  ages  illustrating  them,  he  had  read 
and  read,  till,  at  the  time  of  his  appoint- 
ment to  the  Grammar  School  Rector- 
ship,  his  knowledge  of  Latinity  Avas 

1  Professor  Qeddes,  now  of  the  University 
of  Aberdeen,  and  formerly  Melvin's  successor 
in  the  Rectorship  of  the  Grammar  School ;  to 
whom  I  am  indebted  for  various  particulars 
in  the  present  paper,  supplied  either  privately 
or  through  a  copy  of  a  notice  of  Melvin  which 
he  wrote  at  the  time  of  his  death. 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


233 


probably  already  more  extensive,  origi- 
nal, deep,  subtle,  and  delicate  than  that 
of  any  other  scholar  within  the  limits 
of  North  Britain. 

A  slight  monument  of  the  style  of 
Melvin's  Latin  scholarship  and  espe- 
cially, as  a  competent  critic  has  said,  of 
the  curiosa  diligentia  in  minute  matters 
for  -which  he  was  remarkable,  remains 
in  a  Latin  Grammar  which  he  compiled 
for  the  School  soon  after  his  appoint- 
ment to  it,  and  which  was  used  in  the 
•School  incessantly,  from  the  lowestclasses 
upwards,  as  supplementary  to  the  Rudi- 
ments. This  Grammar,  which  went 
through  three  editions,  consists,  in  the 
first  place,  of  a  series  of  rules  in  Ety- 
mology and  Prosody,  all  in  Latin  Hexa- 
meters, partly  made  by  Melvin,  partly 
mended  and  borrowed  by  him  from  pre- 
ceding grammars  of  the  kind  —  the 
whole  of  which  had  to  be  got  by  heart 
gradually  by  the  boys.  The  Latin  rules, 
however,  are  bedded  in  an  explanatory 
English  text  elucidating  obscure  points 
and  giving  additional  information.  Then 
— at  least  in  the  edition  now  before  me 
— there  are  occasional  critical  footnotes, 
correcting  or  questioning  the  views  of 
former  grammarians  as  to  the  genders, 
declensions,  quantities,  &c.  of  particular 
words.  From,  these  footnotes  I  will 
cull  a  few  morsels  that  seem  especially 
Melvinian : — 

Gender  of  Homo. — "  The  authority  of  Plautus 
lias  been  alleged  to  prove  that  Homo  may  be 
used  with  a  feminine  adjective  ;  Hominis 
mitercB  miscreri,  Cist.  IV.  2.  21.  But  the  pas- 
sage thus  quoted  is  corrupt.  Correct  editions 
have,  Homines  miscre  miseri.  1  should  not 
have  mentioned  this  mistake,  which  has  long 
ago  been  exposed  by  Vossius,  had  it  not  found 
its  way  into  Ainsworth's  Dictionary,  and  been 
suffered  to  remain  in  the  latest  editions.  It 
is  much  to  be  regretted  that  a  book  in  such 
general  use  should  abound,  as  it  does,  with 
such  inaccuracies.  But  even  the  best  Dictio- 
naries— those  of  Gesner,  Forcellini,  Scheller, 
&c. — though  certainly  they  do  not  deceive  the 
unwary  consulter  by  such  citations,  are  not  in 
every  instance  correct  in  marking  the  genders 
of  nouns.  In  justice  to  Ainsworth,  it  must 
be  added,  that  the  original  edition  of  his 
Dictionary,  in  1736,  the  only  one  that  he 
superintended,  is  not  disgraced  by  the  erro- 
neous quotation  here  noticed,  and  is  also  free 
from  several  of  the  other  blunders  which  sub- 
sequent editions,  though  otherwise  improved, 
are  found  to  contain/' 


The  word  Pollen.  —  "  After  the  most  diligent 
research,  I  have  not  been  able  to  determine 
with  certainty  either  the  termination  or  the 
gender  of  pollen.  Ruddiman  quotes  pollen  as 
used  by  Celsus  (V.  19.  §  4)  ;  and  so  indeed 
some  editions  have  it  ;  but  in  others,  and 
those  the  most  correct,  there  is  no  such  word. 
Prisciau  says  that  Probus  and  Caesar  declined 
it  poUcn,-inis,  neut.  Charisius,  according  to 
the  same  Priscian,  makes  it  pollis,-inis,  fern.  ; 
but  Phocas  says  it  is  pollis,-inis,  masc.,  like 
sanguis.  In  Isidorus  (XX.  2.),  we  find  polles, 
which  seems  to  be  a  mistake,  but  whether  for 
pollen,  or  pollis,  is  uncertain.  Some  of  the 
ancient  Glossaries  have  it  pollinis,-is,  masc. 
Cato,  Pliny,  and  Mela,  use  pollinem  as  the 
accusative,  but  in  what  gender,  or  from  what 
nominative,  cannot  be  known.  Serenus,  a 
poet  of  little  authority,  has  madida  polline." 

Ablative  singular  of  Par.  —  "  Vossius,  Mes-~ 
sieurs  de  Port  Royal,  Ruddiman,  and  many 
others,  say  that  the  masc.  or  fern,  substantive 
par  has  in  the  abl.  pare  only  ;  in  proof  of 
which,  two  poetical  authorities  are  produced. 
Some  also  confound  par,  com.  gen.  (an  equal, 
a  mate,  &c.)  with  par,  neut.  (a  pair).  But 
they  are  two  distinct  words  ;  and,  in  prose, 
have  both  pari.  Thus  ;  Cum  illo  tuo  part, 
Cic.  Pis.  8.  §  18.  Sine  pari,  Plin.  VIII.  21. 
§  33.  In  ejusmodi  pari,  Cic.  Pis.  12.  §  2?.  &c. 
But  the  com.-gen.  word  has  sometimes  E  ;  as, 
Cum  pare  contendere,  Sen.  de  Ira,  II.  34. 
§1." 

Spondaic  Alcmanian  Tetrameters  in  Horace. 
—"This  ["Mensorem  cohibent  archyta"]  is 
the  only  instance  in  Horace  of  a  Spondee  for 
the  third  foot  of  the  Alcmanian  Tetrameter  ; 
though  unskilful  Prosodiaus  find  another  in 
the  following  line  of  the  same  poet,  (Od.  I. 
28.  24.) 

Ossibus  et  capiti  inhumato. 

But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  first  two 
syllables  of  inhumato  are  short,  and  that  the 
verse  is  to  be  scanned  without  eliding  the  i  of 
capiti;  thus, 

ossibtis    et  cap\-  |  -tl  Znhii-  [  -mdlo." 


Scanning  of  Latin  Sapphics.  —  "  As  the 
division  of  a  simple  word  often  occurs  between 
the  third  Sapphic  and  the  Adonic,  Dr.  Carey 
conceives  that  the  stanza  was  intended  to  con- 
sist only  of  three  lines,  the  Adonic  being  added 
to  the  third  Sapphic,  with  the  fifth  foot  of  the 
long  verse  either  a  spondee  or  a  trochee.  To 
this  union,  however,  there  exists  this  objection, 
that  final  vowels,  and  even  final  m  with  its 
accompanying  vowel,  will  thus  be  frequently 
preserved  from  elision  ;  in  Horace's  Sapphic 
Odes,  for  example,  four  several  times.—  (Od.  I. 
2.  47.—  I.  12.  7.—  ibid.  31.—  I.  22.  15.)— 
Now,  there  is  no  instance  of  neglected  elision 
in  any  other  part  of  Horace's  Sapphics  ;  and 
but  three  unqtiestionable  examples  of  such 
neglect  in  all  his  other  Odes,  and  no  example 
where  m  is  concerned,  the  asynartetic  verse 
(No.  32)  in  Epode  XL  not  being  taken  into 
account." 


234. 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


During  our  three  years  in  the 
under-classes  we  saw  Melvin  only 
incidentally  and  on  the  weekly  gather- 
ings of  the  whole  school  in  the 
public  schoolroom,  when  the  fact  that 
he  wore  a  gown  and  kept  his  hat  on, 
while  the  other  three  masters  were 
without  gowns  and  had  their  hats  off, 
greatly  impressed  the  young  ones.  His 
authority  over  the  other  masters  was 
never  made  in  the  least  apparent,  but 
it  was  felt  to  exist;  and  there  was 
always  an  awful  sense  of  what  might 
be  the  consequences  of  an  appeal  to 
him  in  a  case  of  discipline.  No  such 
appeal,  in  my  day,  from  Watt  or  Forbes 
(Mr.  Dun  required  to  make  none)  ever 
ended  in  anything  more  serious  than 
a  public  verbal  rebuke  ;  but  that  was 
terrible  enough.  For  the  aspect  of  the 
man — then  in  the  prime  of  manhood, 
lean,  but  rather  tall  and  well-shouldered, 
and  with  a  face  of  the  pale-dark  kind, 
naturally  austere,  and  made  more  stern 
by  the  marks  of  the  small-pox — was 
unusually  awe-compelling.  The  name 
"  Grim,"  or,  more  fully,  "  Grim  Pluto," 
had  been  bestowed  upon  him,  after  a 
phrase  in  one  of  the  lessons,  by  one  of 
his  early  classes ;  and  this  name  was 
known  to  all  the  School.  When  he 
entered  the  school-gate,  the  whisper  in 
the  public-school  would  be  "  Here's 
Grim  "  ;  and,  as  he  walked  through  the 
School  into  his  own  class-room,  looking 
neither  right  nor  left,  with  his  gold 
watch-chain  and  seals  dangling  audibly 
as  he  went,  all  would  be  hushed.  And 
yet,  with  all  this  fear  of  him,  there  was 
affection,  and  a  longing  to  be  in  his 
classes,  to  partake  of  that  richer  and 
finer  instruction  of  which  we  heard 
such  reports. 

When  one  did  pass  into  the  Sector's 
immediate  charge,  one  came  to  know 
him  better.  The  great  awe  of  him 
still  remained.  Stricter  or  more  perfect 
order  than  that  which  Melvin  kept  in 
the  two  classes  which  he  taught  simul- 
taneously it  is  impossible  to  conceive. 
But  it  was  all  done  by  sheer  moral  im- 
pressiveness,  and  a  power  of  rebuke, 
either  by  mere  glance  or  by  glance  and 
word  together,  in  which  he  was  mas- 


terly. As  a  born  ruler  of  boys,  Arnold 
himself  cannot  have  surpassed  Melvin. 
And,  though  there  were  wanting  in 
Melvin' s  case  many  of  those  incidents 
that  must  have  contributed  to  the  com- 
plete veneration  with  which  the  Rugby 
boys  looked  at  Arnold — the  known 
reputation  of  the  man,  for  example,  in 
the  wide  world  of  thought  and  letters 
beyond  the  walls  of  the  school — yet, 
so  far  as  personal  influence  within  the 
school  was  concerned,  there  was  in 
Melvin  some  form  of  almost  all  those 
things  that  we  read  of  in  Arnold  as 
tending  to  blend  love  more  and  more, 
on  closer  intimacy,  with  the  first  feeling 
of  reverence.  Integrity  and  truthful- 
ness, conjoined  with  a  wonderful  con- 
siderateness,  were  characteristic  of  all 
he  said  and  did.  His  influence  was  so 
high-toned  and  strict  that,  even  had  he 
taught  nothing  expressly,  it  would  have 
been  a  moral  benefit  for  a  boy  to  have 
been  within  it.  It  did  one  good  even 
to  look  at  him  day  after  day  as  he  sat 
and  presided  over  us.  As  he  sat  now, 
in  his  own  class-room,  always  with  his 
hat  off,  one  came  to  admire  more  and 
more,  despite  his  grim  and  somewhat 
scarred  face,  the  beauty  of  his  finely- 
formed  head,  the  short  black  hair  of 
which,  crisping  close  round  it,  defined*- 
its  shape  exactly,  and  made  it  more 
like  an  ideal  Roman  head  than  would 
have  been  found  on  any  other  shoulders 
in  a  whole  Campus  Martius  of  the 
Aberdonians.  One  un-Roman  habit  he 
had — that  of  snuff-taking.  But,  though 
he  took  snuff  in  extraordinary  quan- 
tities, it  was,  if  I  may  so  say,  as  a 
Roman  gentleman  would  have  taken  it 
— with  all  the  dignity  of  the  toga,  and 
every  pinch  emphatic. 

In  that  teaching  of  Latin  which  Mel- 
vin perseveringly  kept  to  as  his  particular 
business,  a  large  portion  of  the  work  of 
his  classes  consisted,  of  course,  of  read- 
ings in  the  Latin  authors  in  continuation 
of  what  had  been  read  in  the  junior 
classes.  Here,  unless  perchance  he 
began  with  a  survey  of  the  Grammar,  to 
see  how  we  were  grounded,  and  to  rivet 
us  afresh  to  the  rock,  we  first  came  to 
perceive  his  essential  peculiarities.  Ac- 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities, 


235 


curacy  to  the  last  and  minutest  word 
read,  and  to  the  nicest  shade  of  distinc- 
tion  between   two  apparent  synonyms, 
was  what  he  studied  and  insisted  on, 
and   this   always   with  a  view   to  the 
cultivation   of    a  taste    for    pure   and 
classic,   as   distinct    from.   Brummagem 
Latinity.     The  authors  chosen  were  few 
and    select — chiefly    Csesar    and    Livy 
among   the   prose  writers,   and   Virgil, 
Horace,  and  Buchanan's  Psalms  among 
the  poets.     The  quantity  read  was  not 
large — seldom  more  than  a  page  a  day. 
But  every  sentence  was  gone  over  at 
least  five  times — first  read  aloud  by  the 
boy  that  might  be  called  on ;  then  trans- 
lated, word  for  word,  with  the  utmost 
literality,  each  Latin  word  being  named 
as  the  English  equivalent  was  fitted  to 
it ;  then  rendered  as  a  whole  somewhat 
more  freely  and  elegantly,  but  still  with 
no  permission  of  that  slovenly  and  soul- 
ruining  practice  of  translation  which  is 
called  "  giving  the  spirit  of  the  original ;" 
then  analysed  etymologically,  each  im- 
portant verb  or  noun  becoming  the  text 
for  an  exercise  up  and  down,  backwards 
and  forwards,  in  all  appertaining  to  it;  and 
lastly  construed,  or  analysed  in  respect 
of  its  syntax  and  idiom,  the  reasons  of  its 
moods,  cases,  and  what  not.    In  the  case 
of  a  poetical  reading  there  was,  of  course, 
the  farther  process  of  the  scanning,  in 
which  Melvin  was,  above  all,  exacting. 
To  the  common  reproach  against  Scottish 
scholarship,  that   Scotchmen    have    no 
grounding  in  quantities,  and  say  vectigal 
or  vectigal,  just  as  Providence  may  direct 
them   at   the   moment — the   Aberdeen 
Grammar  School,  at  least,  was  not  liable. 
A  false  quantity  was  even  more  shameful 
in'Melvin's  code  than  a  false  construction, 
and  it  was  not  his  fault  if  we  did  not 
turn  out  good  Prosodians.     Of  course, 
in  the  readings,  whether  from  the  prose 
writers  or  the  poets,  occasion  was  taken 
by  Melvin  to  convey  all  sorts  of  minute 
pieces  of  elucidative  historical  and  bio- 
graphical   information,   in   addition   to 
what  the  boys   were  expected  to  have 
procured  for  themselves  in  the  act  of 
preparation ;    and  in  this  way  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  curious  lore — about 
the  Roman  calendar,  the  Roman  wines 


and  the  ways  of  drinking  them,  &c. — 
was  gradually  and  accurately  acquired. 
Never,  either,  did  Melvin  leave  a  passage 
of  peculiar  beauty  of  thought,  expres- 
sion, or  sound,  without  rousing  us  to  a 
sense  of  this  peculiarity,  and  impressing 
it  upon  us  by  reading  the  passage  him- 
self, eloquently  and  lovingly,  so  as  to  give 
effect  to  it.  Over  a  line  like  Virgil's 
description  of  the  Cyclopes  working  at 
the  anvil, 

"  Illi  inter  sese  magna,  vi  brachia  tollunt," 

he  would  linger  with  real  ecstasy,  re- 
peating it  again  and  again  with  some- 
thing of  a  tremble  of  excitement  in  his 
grave  voice.  Perhaps,  however,  it  was  in 
expounding  his  favourite  Horace  that  he 
rose  oftenest  to  what  may  be  called  the 
higher  criticism.  It  was  really  beautiful 
to  hear  him  dissect  a  passage  in  Horace, 
and  then  put  it  together  again  thrillingly 
complete.  Once  or  twice  he  would 
delight  us  by  the  unexpected  familiarity 
of  an  illustration  of  a  passage  in  Horace 
by  a  parallel  passage  from  Burns.  The 
unexpected  familiarity  I  have  called  it ; 
for,  though  his  private  friends  knew 
how  passionately  fond  he  was  of  Burns, 
how  he  had  his  poems  by  heart,  and 
often  on  his  lips,  and  was  moreover 
learned  in  Scottish  poetry  and  the  old 
Scottish  language  generally,  this  was 
hardly  known  in  the  School,  and  it  gave 
us  a  start  to  hear  our  Rector  suddenly 
quoting  Scotch.  It  gave  him  a  pleasure, 
I  believe,  which  he  could  not  have* 
resisted  at  the  moment,  though  the  glee 
of  the  class  had  become  uproar,  to  link 
his  darling  Horace  with  his  darling 
Burns,  and  to  remind  us  that,  if  Horace, 
in  his  "  0  Fons  Bandusise,"  had  said 

"  Fies  nobilium  tu  quoque  fontium, 
Me  dicente  cavis  impositam  ilicem 
Saxis,  unde  loquaces 

Lymphse  desiliunt  tuse," 

the  Scottish   Bard,  Avithout   consulting 
Horace,  had  had  the  same  thought : 

"  The  Ilissus,  Tiber,  Thames,  and  Seine, 
Glide  sweet  in  mony  a  tunefu'  line  ; 
But,  Willie,  set  your  fit  to  mine, 

And  cock  your  crest  ; 
We'll  gar  our  streams  and  burnies  shine 
Up  wi'  the  best." 


236 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


On  the  Avhole,  however,  Melvin's  teach- 
ing of  Latin  was  strictly  philological. 
He  did  not  lead  us  over  a  great  deal  of 
ground  in  our  readings,  and  he  kept 
carefully  to  the  track  of  what  we  did 
read.  He  did  not  belabour  us  with 
vast  masses  of  lax  information  about  the 
liomans,  nor  branch  out  into  speculative 
disquisitions  on  the  philosophy  of  litera- 
ture and  things  in  general.  His  aim 
was,  by  the  intense  accuracy  of  our  read- 
ing in  a  well-arranged  course  of  progres- 
sive difficulty,  both  to  drill  us  to  accuracy 
in  all  intellectual  matters  whatever,  and 
to  put  us  in  perfect  possession  of  the  in- 
strument of  Latin,  should  we  care  after- 
wards to  use  it  for  ourselves. 

To  test  the  degree  in  which  we  pos- 
sessed the  instrument,  there  was  in  the 
Aberdeen  Grammar  School  an  amount 
of  practice  in  Latin  composition  such 
as,  I  believe,  was  known  at  that  time 
in  no  other  school  in  North  Britain. 
Almost  from  the  first  class  we  were 
practised  in  making  Latin  sentences, 
and  even  in  constructing  sentences  to  be 
turned  into  Latin,  with  which  publicly 
to  puzzle  each  other.  And  very  soon, 
in  addition  to  the  printed  Exercise-Books 
of  this  kind  which  we  used,  there  came 
into  play  the  agency  of  what  were  called 
11  Versions  " — i.  e.  pieces  of  English  ex- 
pressly prepared  by  the  Master  to  be 
dictated  to  us  in  the  class-room  and 
there  turned  into  Latin.  But  it  was  in 
Melvin's  classes  that  this  practice  of 
Version-making — having  reference,  no 
doubt,  to  the  peculiar  arrangements  of 
that  competition  for  the  Bursaries  of  the 
two  Universities  of  which  I  have  spoken 
— attained  its  fullest  development.  He 
did  not  tax  us  much  in  the  way  of  Latin 
versification — which  was  reserved  rather 
for  his  Marischal  College  classes  ;  but 
our  practice  in  Latin  prose-composition 
was  incessant.  Two  entire  days  in  every 
week  were  regularly  devoted  to  "the 
Versions  ; "  and  these  were  the  days  of 
keenest  emulation.  In  anticipation  of 
them,  it  was  our  habit  to  jot  down  in 
note-books  of  our  own,  divided  alpha- 
betically, and  with  index-margins  for 
the  leading  words,  any  specialities  of 
phrase  or  idiom — any  niceties  about  Ut, 


Quum,  Quod  and  Quiet,  Hie  and  Isle, 
Uter  and  Quis,  Suus  and  Ejus,  Plerique 
and  Plurimi,  and  the  like — upon  which 
Melvin  dwelt  in  the  course  of  our  read- 
ings. With  these  manuscript  "  phrase- 
books  "  or  "  idiom-books "  (containing, 
doubtless,  much  that  might  have  been 
found  in  print,  but  precious  as  compiled 
by  ourselves),  and  with  Ainsworth's 
Dictionary  for  our  authorised  guide 
under  certain  rather  numerous  cautions 
and  restrictions,  we  assembled  on  the 
morning  of  every  Version-Day  ;  and, 
sure  enough,  in  the  piece  of  English 
which  Melvin  then  dictated  to  us — 
which  was  always  a  model  of  correct 
style  and  punctuation,  and  generally  not 
uninteresting  in  matter — there  were 
some  of  the  traps  laid  for  us  against 
which  he  had  been  recently  warning  us. 
We  sat  and  wrote  the  versions — those 
who  were  done  first  (generally  the  first- 
faction  boys)  going  up  to  Melvin's  desk 
to  have  them  examined  ;  after  which, 
they  became  his  assistants  in  examining 
the  other  versions,  so  as  to  clear  them 
all  off  within  the  day.  In  these  versions 
into  Latin,  as  in  the  translations  from 
the  Latin,  closeness  to  the  original  was 
imperative — no  fraudulent  "giving  of  the 
spirit  of  the  original,"  so  as  to  elude  the 
difficulty  presented  by  the  letter,  was  tole- 
rated for  a  moment.  The  system  of  mark- 
ing was .  peculiar.  You  were  classed,  not 
by  your  positive  merits  of  ingenuity,  ele- 
gance, or  such  like,  but,  as  in  the  world 
itself,  by  your  freedom  from  faults  or 
illegalities.  There  were  three  grades 
of  error — the  minimus,  or  as  we  called 
it,  the  minie,  which  counted  as  1,  and 
which  included  misspellings,  wrong 
choices  of  words,  &c.  ;  the  medius  or 
medie,  which  counted  as  two,  and  in- 
cluded false  tenses  and  other  such  slips  ; 
and  the  maximus  or  maxie,  which  counted 
as  4,  and  included  wrong  genders,  a 
glaring  indicative  for  a  subjunctive,  &c. 
There  might,  in  a  single  word,  be  even 
(horrible  event !)  a  double  maxie,  or  a 
combination  of  maxie  and  medie,  or  maxie 
and  minie.  On  a  maxie  in  the  version 
of  a  good  scholar  Melvin  was  always 
cuttingly  severe.  "  Ut  ....  dixit " 
he  would  say,  underscoring  the  two 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


287 


words,  in  a  sentence  where  the  latter 
should  have  heen  diceret — "  Ut  .  .  .  . 
dixit,"  he  would  repeat,  refreshing  his 
frown  with  a  pinch  of  snuff — "  Ut 
.  .  .  dixit,"  he  would  say  a  third  time, 
with  a  look  in  the  culprit's  face  as  if  he 
had  murdered  his  father,  "  Oh,  William, 
William,  you  have  been  very  giddy  of 
late;"  and  William  would  descend 
crest-fallen,  and  be  miserable  for  half  a 
day.  So  thoroughly  was  this  gradation 
of  maxie,  medie,  and  minie  worked  into 
us,  that  I  believe  it  became  identified 
permanently  with  our  notions  of  the 
nature  of  things,  and  I  question  whether 
there  is  a  Melvinian  abroad  in  the  world 
now  that  does  not  classify  sins  and 
social  crimes  as  minies,  medics,  and 
maxies.  On  our  versions,  at  all  events, 
the  sum-total  of  the  errors,  so  graduated, 
was  marked  at  the  top  ;  and  we  took 
our  places  accordingly.  Only  between 
two  versions  coequal  in  respect  of  free- 
dom from  fault  was  any  positive  merit  of 
elegance  allowed  to  decide  the  superiority; 
and  if,  among  two  or  three  versions 
of  the  first-faction  boys  that  were  passed 
as  sine  error  e,  one  was  declared  sine 
error e,  elegantissime,  you  may  fancy 
whether  the  top-boy  that  owned  it  did 
not  feel  like  a  peacock.  But,  when 
Melvin  dictated  his  own  Latin  next 
day,  to  be  written  in  our  version-books 
after  the  English,  then  the  difference 
between  our  best  and  his  ordinary  would 
be  at  once  apparent. 

In  preparing  the  "  Versions "  for  his 
classes  Melvin  was  most  conscientious. 
.Nothing  vexed  him  more  than,  through 
some  rare  press  of  engagements,  to  be 
obliged  to  dictate  an  old  version  a  second 
time.  They  used  to  see,  at  home,  by 
his  face,  when  this  was  the  case.  Every 
year  he  prepared  about  a  hundred  ver- 
sions, so  that  altogether  he  must  have  left 
in  manuscript  between  two  and  three 
thousand.  The  fame  of  them  had  gone 
abroad  through  Scotland  in  his  lifetime, 
and  some,  taken  from  stray  Version- 
Books  of  his  old  pupils,  were  unscru- 
pulously appropriated  and  printed  with- 
out acknowledgment  in  his  later  years.1 

1  Specimens  of  Melvin's  Versions  to  the 
number  of  231  in  all,  honestly  compiled  and 


From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  be 
seen  how  it  was  that  the  sole  objection 
ever  made  to  Melvin's  method  of  teach- 
ing by  those  who  were  acquainted  with 
it,  took  the  form  of  a  question  whether 
it  was  not  too  narrow,  too  pertina- 
ciously old-fashioned,  too  little  accord- 
ing to  the  newest  lights.  For  myself, 
though  I  can  conceive  another  method 
or  other  methods  of  teaching  Latin  than 
Melvin's,  which  should  be  also  good,  I 
am  persuaded  that  not  only  was  his 
method  admirably  perfect  for  its  end, 
but  also  that  no  method  that  did  not 
aim  as  resolutely  at  the  same  end  by  a 
considerable  use  of  the  same  means 
would  be  worth  much  in  the  long  run. 
At  all  events,  Melvin's  method  was  de- 
liberately adopted  by  him,  and,  though 
in  accordance  with  his  nature,  yet  not, 
perhaps,  without  some  cost  of  self- 
repression.  The  Melvin  that  we  came 
afterwards  to  know  in  his  own  house 
and  library,  for  example,  had  many 
tastes  and  interests  of  an  intellectual 
kind  that  one  could  hardly  have  sur- 
mised in  the  Melvin  of  the  Grammar 
School.  I  have  already  mentioned  his 
fondness  for  old  Scottish  poetry,  and 
his  expertness  in  the  Scottish  dialect ; 
and  I  find  that,  as  early  as  1825,  when 
he  was  still  only  under-master  in  the 
School,  he  had  rendered  such  services 
to  Jamieson,  in  connexion  with  the  two- 
volume  Supplement  to  his  Dictionary 
of  the  Scottish  Language  published  in 
that  year,  as  to  obtain  rather  dis- 
tinguished notice  among  the  acknow- 
ledgments of  help  in  the  Preface  to 
that  work.  But  as  he  kept  to  him- 
self to  the  last,  as  one  of  his  private 
recreations,  this  knowledge  of  Scottish 
philology,  so  even  of  his  Latin  philo- 
logy it  was  but  a  sifting  of  the  purest 
wheat  that  he  gave  to  his  pupils. 

acknowledged,  may  be  found  in  a  volume  en- 
titled "Latin  Exercises  as  Dictated  by  the  lato 
James  Melvin,  LL.D."  (Edinburgh,  Maclachlau 
and  Stewart :  London,  Simpkin  and  Marshall)  ; 
put  forth  by  the  Rev.  Peter  Caldor,  A.  M.  Rector 
of  the  Grammar  School,  Grantown,  N.B.  This 
volume,  the  second  edition  of  which  bears  date 
1SG2,  is  worth  looking  after  by  teachers  of 
Latin.  There  is  a  supplementary  volume,  by 
way  of  Key. 


238 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


Though,  in  instructing  them,  he  drew 
Latin  only  from  what  he  considered  the 
wells  of  Latin  undefiled,  his  own  erudi- 
tion was  vast  in  the  Latin  literature  of 
all  styles  and  epochs.  He  had  in  his 
library,  as  I  have  said,  an  extraordinary 
collection  of  the  Mediseval  Latinists ; 
and  though,  in  the  class-room,  we  had 
come  to  regard  Plautus,  poor  fellow,  as 
little  better  than  an  abomination,  on 
account  of  his  perpetually  misleading 
us  in  the  matter  of  deponent  verbs,  I 
have  no  doubt  that,  by  himself,  Melvin 
enjoyed  Piautus  as  much  as  any  one. 
Then  his  excursions  among  the  Gram- 
marians and  in  the  History  of  modern 
Latinity  were,  on  the  whole,  unknown  to 
us.  We  had  the  results,  but  of  the 
masses  of  material  we  heard  but  little. 
Of  his  admiration  for  Buchanan  we  were 
made  fully  aware,  because  Buchanan's 
Psalms  chanced  to  be  amongst  the  books 
read,  and  the  beauty  of  his  Latinity 
became  a  subject  of  comment;  but  of 
Arthur  Johnston,  the  Aberdonian,  whom 
he  also  admired,  we  heard  only  inci- 
dentally ;  and  I  do  not  think  we  could 
have  guessed  in  the  class-room,  what  was 
nevertheless  the  fact,  that  the  modern 
scholar  of  whom  his  admiration  was  most 
profound  was  the  English  Bentley.  In 
all  this  there  must  have  been  self- 
repression,  and  a  resolute  recollection  of 
the  maxim  that  it  is  biscuit,  rather 
than  strong  meat,  that  suits  a  beginner. 
That  so  much  of  Melvin's  scholarship 
died  with  him,  uncommemorated  either 
by  any  work  from  his  pen  in  addition  to 
his  grammar,  or  by  any  sufficient  tradi- 
tion among  his  pupils,  is  a  matter  for 
regret.  Towards  a  Latin  Dictionary,  on 
which  he  was  reported  to  be  engaged,  and 
which  was  certainly  thought  of  by  him  as 
a  worthy  labour  of  his  life,  I  know  not 
whether  he  left  any  materials.  The 
passion  for  acquisition,  I  fancy,  had  con- 
quered in  him  the  desire  for  production. 
A  living  scholar  who  knew  him  well 
has  expressed  his  regret  that  he  did 
not,  at  least,  give  to  the  world  an  edition 
of  some  classic  author  which  might  have 
preserved  some  of  "  those  fruits  of  ripe 
"  scholarship  and  those  exquisite  morsels 
"  of  keen  and  delicate  criticism  which 


"he  had  gathered  in  his  long  experi- 
"  ence  ;"  and  the  same  scholar  suggests 
that  Statius,  "  who  is  in  want  of  such  a 
service,"  might  have  suited  the  purpose. 
There  was,  however,  a  third  way  in 
which  more  of  Melvin  might  have  been 
brought  out  than  could  be  educed  by 
the  work  of  a  Grammar  School.  As 
he  had  been  Lecturer  in  Humanity  in 
Marischal  College  for  some  ten  years 
before  the  institution  and  endowment  in 
that  University  of  a  regular  Humanity 
Professorship,  and  as  in  that  post  he 
had  given  effect  to  some  of  the  higher 
developments  of  Latinity,  it  was  ex- 
pected, in  1839,  when  the  Professorship 
was  actually  established  and  endowed, 
that  his  promotion  to  that  post,  relieving 
him  from  the  drudgery  of  his  School- 
Eectorship,  would  begin  a  new  era  in 
his  life.  But  the  Whigs,  then  in  office, 
knew  nothing  of  Melvin  ;  and  so  there 
was  appointed  to  the  new  post,  instead 
of  Melvin,  one  of  his  old  pupils,  then 
an  Edinburgh  barrister — a  man  to  whom 
the  only  objection  even  then  was  that  he 
had  obtained  what  had  been  popularly 
destined  for  Melvin,  and  of  whom  it  has 
to  be  said  since  that  he  has  stirred 
Scotland  in  many  ways  by  his  eccen- 
tricities and  his  genius.  And  thus, 
for  another  spell  of  years,  Melvin,  his 
connexion  with  Marischal  College  at 
an  end,  went  between  his  house  in 
Belmont  Street  and  the  School,  faith- 
fully doing  the  duties  of  his  Rectorship. 
But,  again,  when  he  was  far  on  in  his 
fifties,  the  Professorship  became  vacant 
by  the  transference  of  its  first  holder 
to  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  This 
time  Melvin's  friends  made  sure  that 
he  would  be  appointed.  Many  of  his 
pupils  were  now  grown-up  and  men  of 
local  influence,  and  every  exertion  was 
made  in  his  behalf.  But  again  he  was 
set  aside.  I  think  it  was  the  Con- 
servatives— Melvin's  own  party,  so  far 
as  he  belonged  to  one — that  were  then 
in  power.  He  said  little  and  went  on 
as  before  ;  but  it  was  a  cruel  blow, 
and  they  say  he  never  recovered  it. 
Testimonials  from  old  pupils  and  other 
public  demonstrations,  attested  the  sym- 
pathy felt  for  him  and  the  desire  to 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


239 


compensate,  as  far  as  possible,  for  his 
disappointment.  The  last  testimonial, 
being  a  sum  of  300£  in  a  silver  snuff- 
box, was  presented  to  him  on  the  18th 
of  June,  1853,  by  a  deputation,  headed 
by  the  Lord  Provost  of  Aberdeen,. who 
waited  on  him  in  his  own  house.  He 
thanked  them  feelingly,  but  was  in  too 
feeble  health  to  say  much.  He  had 
persevered  in  teaching  his  classes  as 
usual,  but  was  hardly  able  to  move  to 
and  from  the  school;  and  his  friends 
were  looking  forward  to  the  approaching 
holiday-month  of  July,  during  which,  as 
in  previous  years,  he  might  go  into 
the  country  to  recruit.  The  'boys,  re- 
specting his  weakness,  were  less  noisy 
than  usual  as  the  holiday-time  drew 
near,  and,  if  they  were  preparing  for  the 
usual  decorations  of  the  "  factions  "  and 
school- walls  with  green  branches  of  trees 
and  crowns  and  festoons  of  flowers, 
made  their  preparations  in  quiet.  He 
spoke  of  this  careful  kindliness  of  the 
boys  with  much  pleasure  and  gratitude. 
On  Monday,  the  28th  of  June,  he  was 
in  his  place  in  the  school ;  but  on  that 
day  he  fainted  from  exhaustion,  and  had 
to  be  carried  home.  The  next  day, 
Tuesday  the  29th,  he  died  in  his  house 
in  Belmont  Street,  aged  fifty-nine  years. 
There  is  a  poem  of  Browning's  which 
I  read  often  because  it  reminds  me  of 
Melvin.  It  is  entitled  "  A  Grammarian's 
Funeral,"  and  is  supposed  to  be  the  song 
sung  by  the  disciples  of  a  great  scholar, 
shortly  after  the  Revival  of  Learning  in 
Europe,  as  they  are  carrying  the  dead 
body  of  their  master  up  from  the  plain 
to  the  high  mountain-pinnacle  where 
they  mean  to  bury  him.  First  they  tell 
why  they  select  this  lofty  eminence  for 
his  burying-place — why  his  honoured 
body  should  not  repose  in  the  valley ; 
then,  marching  slowly  on  to  the  moun- 
tain-side, they  chaunt — 


"Step  to  a  tune,  square  chests,  erect  the 
head, 

'Ware  the  beholders ! 
This  is  our  master,  famous,  calm,  and  dead, 

Borne  on  our  shoulders. 
Sleep,  crop  and  herd  !  sleep  darkling  thorpe 
and  croft, 

Safe  from  the  weather ! 
He  whom  we  convoy  to  his  grave  aloft, 

Singing  together, 

He  was  a  man  born  with  thy  face  and 
throat, 

Lyric  Apollo ! 

Long  he  lived  nameless  :  how  should  spring 
take  note 

Winter  would  follow?" 

And  so,  toiling  on  and  up,  carrying 
their  burden,  they  wend  at  last  to  the. 
peak  which  is  their  destination,  still 
chaunting  their  master's  praises,  and 
telling  how  to  the  last,  in  illness  and 
paralysis,  he  had  never  ceased  learning 
and  labouring. 

"  So,  with  the  throttling  hands  of  Death  at 
strife 

Ground  he  at  grammar  ; 
Still,  through  the  rattle,  parts  of  speech 
were  rife : 

While  he  could  stammer 
He  settled  Notts  business — let  it  be  ! — • 

Properly  based  Oun, 
Gave  us  the  doctrine  of  the  enclitic  De, 

Dead  from  the  waist  down. 
Well,  here's  the  platform,  here's  the  proper 
place. 

Hail  to  your  purlieus, 
All  ye  highfliers  of  the  feathered  race, 

Swallows  and  curlews ! 
Here's  the  top-peak  !  the  multitude  below 

Live?  for  they  can,  there. 
This  man  decided  not  to  Live  but  Know — 

Bury  this  man  there  ? 

Here — here's  his  place,  where  meteors  shoot, 
clouds  form? 

Lightnings  are  loosened, 
Stars  come  and  go  !  let  joy  break  with  the 
storm, 

Peace  let  the  dew  send 
Lofty  designs  must  close  with  like  effects  : 

Loftily  lying, 

Leave  him— still   loftier   than    the  world 
%  suspects? 

Living  and  dying." 


240 


A  SON  OF  THE  SOIL. 


PART  III. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


WONDERS  come  natural  at  fifteen ;  the 
farmer's  son  of  Karnore,  though  a  little 
dazzled  at  the  moment,  was  by  no  means 
thrown  off  his  balance  by  the  flattering 
attentions  of  Lady  Erankland,  who  said 
everything  that  was  agreeable  and  forgot 
that  she  had  said  it,  and  went  over  the 
same  ground  again  half  a  dozen  times, 
somewhat  to  the  contempt  of  Colin,  who 
knew  nothing  about  fine  ladies,  but  had 
all  a  boy's  disdain  for  a  silly  woman. 
Thanks  to  his  faculty  of  silence,  and 
his  intense  pride,  Colin  conducted  him- 
self with  great  external  propriety  when 
he  dined  with  his  new  friends.  ISTobody 
knew  the  fright  he  was  in,  nor  the  strain 
of  determination  not  to  commit  himself, 
which  was  worthy  of  something  more 
important  than  a  dinner.  But  after  all, 
though  it  shed  a  reflected  glory  over  his 
path  for  a  short  time,  Sir  Thomas  Frank- 
land's  dinner  and  all  its  bewildering 
accessories  was  but  an  affair  of  a  day, 
and  the  only  real  result  it  left  behind 
was  a  conviction  in  the  mind  of  Lauder- 
dale  that  his  young  protege  was  born  to 
better  fortune.  From  that  day  the  tall 
student  hovered,  benignly  reflective,  like 
a  tall  genie  over  Colin's  boyish  career. 
He  was  the  boy's  tutor  so  far  as  that  was 
possible  where  the  teacher  was  himself 
but  one  step  in  advance  of  the  pupil ; 
and  as  to  matters  speculative  and  philo- 
sophical, Lauderdale's  monologue,  de- 
livered high  up  in  the  air  over  his  head, 
became  the  accompaniment  and  perpe- 
tual stimulation  of  all  Colin's  thoughts. 
The  training  was  strange,  but  by  no 
means  unnatural,  nor  out  of  harmony 
with  the  habits  of  the  boy's  previous 
life,  for  much  homely  philosophy  was 
current  at  Ramore,  and  Colin  had  been 
used  to  receive  all  kinds  of  comments 
upon  human  affairs  with  his  daily  bread. 
Naturally  enough,  however,  the  senti-  . 


ments  of  thirty  and  those  of  fifteen 
were  not  always  harmonious,  and  the 
impartial  and  tolerant  thoughtfulness  of 
his  tall  friend  much  exasperated  Colin 
in  the  absolutism  of  his  youth. 

"  I'm  a  man  of  the  age,"  Lauderdale 
would  say  as  they  traversed  the  crowded 
streets  together  ;  "  by  which  I  am  claim- 
ing no  superiority  over  you,  callant,  but 
far  the  contrary,  if  you  were  but  wise 
enough  to  ken.  I've  fallen  into  the 
groove  like  the  rest  of  mankind,  and 
think  in  limits  as  belongs  to  my  cen- 
tury— which  is  but  a  poor  half-and-half 
kind  of  century,  to  say  the  best  of  it — 
but  you  are  of  all  the  ages,  and  know 
nothing  about  limits  or  possibilities. 
Don't  interrupt  me/'  said  the  placid 
giant ;  "  you  are  far  too  talkative  for  a 
laddie,  as  I  have  said  before.  I  tell  you 
I'm  a  man  of  the  age :  I've  no  very 
particular  faith  in  anything.  In  a  kind 
of  a  way,  everything's  true ;  but  you 
needna  tell  me  that  a  man  that  believes 
like  that  will  never  make  much  mark  in 
this  world  or  any  other  world  I  ever 
heard  tell  of.  I  know  that  a  great  deal 
better  than  you  do.  The  best  thing  you 
can  do  is  to  contradict  me  ;  it's  good  for 
you,  and  it  does  me  no  harm." 

Colin  acted  upon  this  permission  to 
the  full  extent  of  all  his  youthful 
prowess  and  prejudices,  and  went  on 
learning  his  Latin  and  Greek,  and  dis- 
cussing all  manner  of  questions  in 
heaven  and  earth,  with  the  fervour  of 
a  boy  and  a  Scotsman.  They  kept  toge- 
ther, this  strange  pair,  for  the  greater 
part  of  the  short  winter  days,  taking 
long  walks,  when  they  left  the  Univer- 
sity, through  the  noisy  dirty  streets, 
upon  which  Lauderdale  moralized ; 
and  sometimes  through  the  duller 
squares  and  crescents  of  respectability 
which  formed  the  frame  of  the  picture. 
Sometimes  their  peregrinations  con- 
cluded in  Colin's  little  room,  when  they 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


241 


renewed  their  arguments  over  the  oat- 
cakes and  cheese  which  came  in  period- 
ical hampers  from  Eamore  ;  and  some- 
times Lauderdale  gave  his  protege  a 
cheap  and  homely  dinner  at  the  tavern 
where  they  had  first  broken  bread  toge- 
ther. But  not  even  Colin,  much  less 
any  of  his  less  familiar  acquaintances, 
knew  where  the  tall  Mentor  lived,  or 
how  he  managed  to  maintain  himself  at 
college.  He  said  he  had  his  lodging 
provided  for  him,  when  any  inquiry  was 
made,  and  added,  with  an  odd  humour- 
ous look,  that  his  was  an  honourable 
occupation ;  but  Lauderdale  afforded 
no  further  clue  to  his  own  means  or 
dwelling-place.  He  smiled,  but  he  was 
secret  and  gave  no  sign.  As  for  his 
studies,  he  made  but  such  moderate  pro- 
gress in  them  as  was  natural  to  his  age 
and  his  character.  No  particular  spur 
of  ambition  seemed  to  stimulate  the 
man  whose  habits  were  formed  by  this 
time,  and  who  found  enjoyment  enough, 
it  appeared,  in  universal  speculation. 
When  he  failed,  his  reflections  as  to 
the  effect  of  failure  upon  the  mind  of 
man,  and  the  secondary  importance 
after  all  of  mere  material  success,  "which 
always  turns  out  more  disappointing  to 
a  reflective  spirit  than  an  actual  break- 
down," the  philosopher  would  say, 
"  being  aye  another  evidence  how  far 
reality  falls  short  of  the  idea,"  became 
more  piquant  than  usual ;  and  when  he 
succeeded,  the  same  sentiments  mode- 
rated his  satisfaction.  "Oh  ay,  I've 
got  the  prize,"  he  said,  holding  it  on  a 
level  with  Colin's  head,  and  regarding 
its  resplendent  binding  with  a  smile  ; 
"which  is  to  say,  I've  found  out  that 
it's  only  a  book  with  the  college  arms 
stamped  upon  it,  and  no  a  palpable  satis- 
faction to  the  soul  as  I  might  have 
imagined  it  to  be,  had  it  been  yours, 
boy,  instead  of  mine." 

But  with  all  this  composure  of  feeling 
as  respected  his  own  success,  Lauder- 
dale was  as  eager  as  a  boy  about  the 
progress  of  his  pupil.  When  the  prize 
lay  in  Colin's  way,  his  friend  spared  no 
pains  to  stimulate  and  encourage  and 
help  him  on  ;  and  as  the  years  passed, 
and  the  personal  pride  of  the  elder 

No.  51. — VOL.  ix. 


became  involved  in  the  success  of  the 
younger,  Lauderdale's  anxieties  awoke 
a  certain  impatience  in  the  bosom  of 
his  protege.  Colin  was  ambitious  enough 
in  his  own  person,  but  he  turned  natu- 
rally with  sensitive  boyish  pride  against 
the  arguments  and  inducements  which 
had  so  little  influence  upon  the  speaker 
himself. 

"  You  urge  me  on,"  said  the  country 
lad,  "  but  you  think  it  does  not  matter 
for  yourself."  And  though  it  was  Colin's 
third  session,  and  he  reckoned  himself  a 
man,  he  was  jealous  to  think  that  Lau- 
derdale urged  upon  him  what  he  did 
not  think  it  worth  his  while  to  practise 
in  his  own  person. 

"  When  a  thing's  spoilt  in  the  making, 
it  matters  less  what  use  ye  put  it  to," 
said  the  philosopher.  It  was  a  bright 
day  in  March,  and  they  were  seated  on  the 
grass  together  in  a  corner  of  the  green, 
looking  at  the  pretty  groups  about,  of 
women  and  children  —  children  and 
women,  perhaps  not  over  tidy,  if  you 
looked  closely  into  the  matter,  but  pic- 
turesque to  look  at — some  watching  the 
patches  of  white  linen  bleaching  on  the 
grass,  some  busily  engaged  over  their 
needlework,  and  all  of  them  occupied  : — 
it^was  comfortable  to  think  they  could 
escape  from  the  dingy  "closes"  and 
unsavoury  "lands"  of  the  neighbour- 
hood. The  tall  student  stretched  his 
long  limbs  on  the  grass,  and  watched 
the  people  about  with  reflective  eyes. 
"  There's  nothing  in  this  world  so  im- 
portant to  a  man  as  a  right  beginning," 
he  went  on.  "  As  for  me,  I'm  all  astray, 
and  can  never  win  to  any  certain  end — 
no  that  I'm  complaining,  or  taking  a 
gloomy  view  of  things  in  general ;  I'm 
just  as  happy  in  my  way  as  other  folk 
are  in  theirs — but  that's  no  the  ques- 
tion under  discussion.  When  a  man 
reaches  my  years  without  coming  to 
anything  he'll  never  come  to  much  all 
his  days  ;  but  you're  only  a  callant,  and 
have  all  the  world  before  you,"  said 
Lauderdale.  He  did  not  look  at  Colin 
as  he  spoke,  but  went  on  in  his  usual 
monotone,  looking  into  the  blue  air,  in 
which  he  saw  much  that  was  not  visible 
to  the  eager  young  eyes  which  kept 


242 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


gazing  at  him.  "  When  I  was  like  you," 
he  continued,  with  a  half-pathetic, 
half-humorous  smile,  "it  looked  like 
misery  and  despair  to  feel  that  I  was 
not  to  get  my  own  way  in  this  world — 
I'm  terrible  indifferent  now-a-days — 
one  kind  of  life  is  just  as  good  as 
another  as  long  as  a  man  has  something 
to  do  that  he  can  think  to  be  his  duty  ; 
but  such  feelings  are  no  for  you,"  said 
Colin's  tutor,  waking  up  suddenly.  "  For 
you,  laddie,  there's  nothing  grand  in  the 
•world  that  should  not  be  possible.  The 
lot  that's  accomplished  is  aye  more  or 
less  a  failure  ;  but  there's  always  some- 
thing splendid  in  the  life  that  is  to 
come." 

"  You  talk  to  me  as  if  I  were  a 
child/'  said  Colin,  with  a  little  indig- 
nation ;  "  you  see  things  in  their  true 
light  yourself,  but  you  treat  me  like  a 
baby.  What  can  there  be  that  is 
splendid  in  my  life  1 — a  farmer's  son, 
with  perhaps  the  chance  of  a  country 
church  for  my  highest  hope — after  all 
kinds  of  signings,  and  confessions,  and 
calls,  and  presbyteries.  It  would  be 
splendid,  indeed,"  said  the  lad,  with 
boyish  contempt,  "  to  be  plucked  by  a 
country  presbytery  that  don't  know  six 
words  of  Greek,  or  objected  to  by  a 
congregation  of  ploughmen— that's  all  a 
man  has  to  look  for  in  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  and  you  know  it,  Lauderdale, 
as  well  as  I  do." 

Colin  broke  off  suddenly,  with  a  great 
deal  of  heat  and  impatience.  He  was 
eighteen,  and  he  was  of  the  advanced 
party,  the  Young  Scotland  of  his  time. 
The  dogmatic  Old  Scotland,  which  loved 
to  bind,  and  limit,  and  make  confessions, 
and  sign  the  same,  belonged  to  the  past 
centuries.  As  for  Colin's  set,  they  were 
"viewy"  as  the  young  men  at  Oxford 
used  to  be  in  the  days  of  Froude  and 
Newman.  Colin's  own  "  views  "  were 
of  a  vague  description  enough,  but  of 
the  most  revolutionary  tendency.  He 
did  not  believe  in  Presbytery,  nor  in 
that  rule  of  Church  government  which 
in  Scotland  is  known  as  Lord  Aber- 
deen's Act ;  and  his  ideas  respecting 
extempoi'e  worship  and  common  prayers 
were  much  unsettled.  But  as  neither 


Colin  nor  his  set  had  any  distinct  model 
to  fall  back  upon,  nor  any  clear  percep- 
tion of  what  they  wanted,  the  present 
result  of  their  enlightenment  was  simply 
the  unpleasant  one  of  general  discontent 
with  existing  things,  and  a  restless  con- 
tempt for  the  necessary  accessories  of 
their  lot. 

"Plucked  is  no  a  word  in  use  in 
Scotland,"  said  Lauderdale ;  "  it  smacks 
of  the  English  universities,  which  are 
altogether  a  different  matter.  As  for  the 
Westminster  Confession,  I'm  no  clear 
that  I  could  put  my  name  to  that  myself 
as  my  act  and  deed — but  you  are  but  a. 
callant,  and  don't  know  your  own  mind 
as  yet.  Meaning  no  offence  to  you,"  he 
continued,  waving  his  hand  to  Colin, 
who  showed  signs  of  impatience,  "  I 
was  once  a  laddie  myself.  Between 
eighteen  and  eight-and-twenty  you'll 
change  your  ways  of  thinking,  and 
neither  you  nor  me  can  prophesy  what 
they'll  end  in.  As  for  the  congregation 
of  ploughmen,  I  would  be  very  easy 
about  you  if  that  was  the  worst  danger. 
Men  that  are  about  day  and  night  in 
the  fields  when  all's  still,  cannot  but 
have  thoughts  in  their  minds  now  and 
then.  But  it's  no  what  you  are  going 
to  be,  I'm  thinking  of,"  said  Colin's 
counseller,  raising  himself  from  the 
grass  with  a  spark  of  umisual  light  in 
his  eyes,  "but  what  you  might  be, 
laddie.  •  It's  no  a  great  preacher,  far 
less  what  they  call  a  popular  minister, 
that  would  please  me.  What  I'm  think- 
ing of  is,  the  Man  that  is  aye  to  be 
looked  for,  but  never  comes.  I'm  speak- 
ing like  a  woman,  and  thinking  like  a 
woman,"  he  said,  with  a  smile ;  "  they 
have  a  kind  of  privilege  to  keep  their 
ideal.  For  my  part,  I  ought  to  have 
more  sense,  if  experience  counted  for 
anything ;  but  I've  no  faith  in  experi- 
ence. And,  speaking  of  that,"  said  the 
philosopher,  dropping  back  again  softly 
on  the  greensward,  "  what  a  grand  out- 
let for  what  I'm  calling  the  ideal  was 
that  old  promise  of  the  Messias  who 
was  to  come !  It  may  still  be  so  for 
anything  I  can  tell,  though  I  cannot  say 
that  I  put  much  trust  in  the  Jews.  But 
aye  to  be  able  to  hope  that  the  next 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


243 


new  soul  might  be  the  one  that  was 
above  failure  must  have  been  a  wonder- 
ful solace  to  those  that  had  failed  and 
lost  heart.  To  be  sure,  they  missed  Him 
when  He  came,"  continued  Lauderdale  ; 
"  that  was  natural.  Human  nature  is 
aye  defective  in  action  ;  but  a  grand  idea 
like  that  makes  all  the  difference  be- 
tween us  and  the  beasts,  and  would 
do,  if  there  were  a  hundred  theories  of 
development,  which  I  would  not  have 
you  put  faith  in,  laddie,"  continued  the 
volunteer  tutor.  "  Steam  and  iron  make 
awful  progress,  but  no  man —  " 

"That  is  one  of  your  favourite 
theories,"  said  Colin,  who  was  ready  for 
any  amount  of  argument ;  "  though 
iron  and  steam  are  dead  and  stationary, 
but  for  the  Mind  which  is  always  de- 
veloping. What  you  say  is  a  kind  of 
paradox  ;  but  you  like  paradoxes,  Lau- 
derdale." 

"  Everything's  a  paradox,"  said  the 
reflective  giant,  getting  up  slowly  from 
the  turf ;  "  the  grass  is  damp,  and  the 
wind's  cold,  and  I  don't  mean  to  sit  here 
and  haver  nonsense  any  longer.  Come 
along,  and  I'll  see  you  home.  What  I 
like  woman  for  is,  that  they're  seldom 
subject  to  the  real,  or  convinced  by  what 
you  callants  call  reason.  Reason  and  re- 
ality are  terrible  fictions  at  the  bottom. 
I  more  believe  in  facts,  for  my  part.  The 
worst  of  it  is,  that  a  woman's  ideal  is 
apt  to  look  a-  terrible  idiot  when  she  sets 
it  up  before  the  world,"  continued  Lau- 
derdale, his  face  brightening  gradually 
with  one  of  his  slow  smiles.  "  The  ladies' 
novels  are  instructive  on  that  point 
But  there's  few  things  in  this  world  so 
pleasant  as  to  have  a  woman  at  hand 
that  believes  in  you,"  he  said,  suddenly 
breaking  off  in  his  discourse  at  an  utterly 
unexpected  moment.  Colin  was  startled 
by  the  unlooked-for  silence,  and  by  the 
sound  of  something  like  a  sigh  which 
disturbed  the  air  over  his  head,  and 
being  still  but  a  boy,  and  not  superior 
to  mischief,  looked  up,  with  a  little 
laughter. 

"  You  must  have  once  had  a  woman 
who  believed  in  you,  or  you  would  not 
speak  so  feelingly,"  said  the  lad,  in  his 
youthful  amusement ;  and  then  Colin, 


too,  stopped  short,  having  encountered 
quite  an  unaccustomed  look  in  his  com- 
panion's face. 

"  Ay,"  said  Lauderdale,  and  then  there 
was  a  pause.  "  If  it  were  not  that  life  is 
aye  a  failure,  there  would  be  some  cases 
harder  than  could  be  borne,"  he  con- 
tinued, after  a  moment ;  "no  that  I'm 
complaining  ;  but  if  I  were  you,  laddie, 
I  would  set  my  face  dead  against  for- 
tune, and  make  up  my  mind  to  win. 
And  speaking  of  winning,  when  did  you 
hear  of  your  grand  English  friends,  and 
the  callant  you  picked  out  of  the  loch  '( 
Have  they  ever  been  here  in  Glasgow 
again  ? " 

At  which  question  Colin  drew  him- 
self to  his  full  height,  as  he  always  did 
at  Harry  Frankland's  name ;  he  was 
ashamed  now  to  express  his  natural  an- 
tagonism to  the  English  lad  in  frank 
speech  as  he  had  been  used  to  do,  but 
he  insensibly  elevated  his  head,  which, 
when  he  did  not  stoop,  as  he  had  a 
habit  of  doing,  began  to  approach  much 
more  nearly  than  of  old  to  the  altitude 
of  his  friend's. 

"  I  know  nothing  about  their  move- 
ments," he  said,  shortly.  "  As  for  win- 
ning, I  don't  see  what  connexion  there 
can  be  between  the  Eranklands  and  any 
victory  of  mine.  You  don't  suppose  Miss 
Matilda  believes  in  me,  do  you  ? "  said 
Colin,  with  an  uneasy  laugh  ;  "for  that 
would  be  a  mistake,"  he  continued,  a 
moment  after.  "  She  believes  in  her 
cousin." 

"  Maybe,  said  Lauderdale,  in  his 
oracular  way,  "  it's  an  uncanny  kind  of 
relationship  upon  the  whole ;  but  I 
Avould  not  be  the  one  to  answer  for  it, 
especially  if  it's  him  she's  expected  to 
believe  in.  But  there  were  no  Miss 
Matildas  in  my  mind,"  he  added,  with 
a  smile.  "  I'll  no  ask  what  she  had  to 
do  in  yours,  for  you're  but  a  callant,  as 
I  have  to  remind  you  twenty  times  in  a 
day.  But  such  lodgers  are  no  to  be 
encouraged,"  said  Colin's  adviser,  Avith 
seriousness ;  "  when  they  get  into  a 
young  head  it's  hard  to  get  them  out 
again ;  and  the  worst  of  them  is,  that 
they  take  more  room  than  their  fair 
share.  Have  you  got  your  essay  well 

R2 


244 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


in  hand  for  the  Principal  1  That's  more 
to  the  purpose  than  Miss  Matilda ;  and 
now  the  end  of  the  session's  drawing 
near,  and  Fin  a  thought  anxious  about 
the  philosophy  class.  Yon  Highland 
colt  with  the  red  hair  will  run  you  close, 
if  you  don't  take  heed.  It's  no  prizes 
I'm  thinking  upon,"  said  Lauderdale ; 
"  it's  the  whole  plan  of  the  campaign. 
I'll  come  up  and  talk  it  all  over  again, 
if  you  want  advice ;  but  I've  great 
confidence  in  your  own  genius."  As  he 
said  this,  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the 
lad's  shoulder  and  looked  down  into  his 
-eyes.  "  Summer's  the  time  to  dream," 
said  the  tall  student,  with  a  smile  and 
a  sigh.  Perhaps  he  had  given  un- 
due importance  to  the  name  of  Miss 
Matilda.  He  looked  into  the  fresh 
young  face  with  that  mixture  of  affec- 
tion and  pathos— ambition  for  the  lad, 
.mingled  wi'oh  a  generous,  tender  envy  of 
him — which  all  along  had  moved  the 
•elder  man  in  his  intercourse  with  Colin. 
The  look  for  once  penetrated  through 
.the  mists  of  custom  and  touched  the 
boy's  heart. 

"  You  are  very  good  to  me,  Lauder- 
dale," he  said,  with  a  little  effusion ;  at 
the  sound  of  which  words  his  friend 
grasped  his  shoulder  affectionately  and 
w'ent  off,  without  saying  anything  more, 
into  the  dingy  Glasgow  streets.  Colin 
himself  paused  a  minute  to  watch  the 
^all,  retreating  figure  before  he  climbed  his 
own  tedious  stair.  "  Summer's  the  time 
to  dream,"  he  repeated  to  himself,  with 
a  certain  brightness  in  his  face,  and 
went  up  the  darkling  staircase  three 
steps  at  a  time,  stimulated  most  pro- 
bably by  some  thoughts  more  exciting 
than  anything  connected  with  college 
prizes  or  essays.  It  was  the  end  of 
March,  and  already  now  and  then  a 
•chance  breeze  whispered  to  Colin  that 
-the  primroses  had  begun  to  peep  out 
about  the  roots  of  the  trees  in  all  the 
soft  glens  of  the  Holy  Loch.  It  had 
only  been  in  the  previous  spring  that 
primroses  became  anything  more  to 
Colin  than  they  were  to  Peter  Bell ; 
but  now  the  youth's  eyes  were  anointed, 
\he  had  begun  to  write  poetry,  and  to 
ianto  the  delights  of  life.  Though  he 


had  already  learned  to  turn  his  verses 
with  the  conscious  deception  of  a 
Moore,  it  did  not  occur  to  Colin  as 
possible  that  the  life  which  was  so 
sweet  one  year  might  not  be  equally 
delightful  the  next,  or  that  anything 
could  occur  to  deprive  him  of  the  com- 
panionship he  was  looking  forward  to. 
He  had  never  received  any  shock  yet  in 
his  youthful  certainty  of  pleasure,  and 
did  not  stop  to  think  that  the  chance 
which  brought  Sir  Thomas  Frankland's 
nursery,  and  with  it  his  pretty  miss,  to 
the  Castle,  for  all  the  long  spring  and 
summer,  might  never  recur  again.  So 
he  went  upstairs  three  steps  at  a  time, 
in  the  dingy  twilight,  and  sat  down  to 
his  essay,  raising  now  and  then  trium- 
phant, youthful  eyes,  which  surveyed 
the  mean  walls  and  poor  little  room 
without  seeing  anything  of  the  poverty, 
and  making  all  his  young,  arrogant, 
absolute  philosophy  sweet  with  thoughts 
of  the  primroses,  and  the  awaking  waters, 
and  the  other  human  creature,  the  child- 
Eve  of  the  boy's  Paradise.  This  was 
how  Colin  managed  to  compose  the 
essay,  which  drew  tears  of  mingled 
laughter  and  emotion  from  Lauderdale' s 
eyes,  and  dazzled  the  professor  himself 
with  its  promise  of  eloquence,  and  se- 
cured the  prize  in  the  philosophy  class. 
The  Highland  colt  with  the  red  hair, 
who  was  Colin' s  rival,  was  very  much 
sounder  in  his  views,  and  had  twenty 
times  more  logic  in  his  composition  ; 
but  the  professor  was  dazzled,  and  the 
class  itself  could  scarcely  forbear  its 
applause.  Colin  went  home  accordingly 
covered  with  glory.  He  was  nearly 
nineteen  ;  he  was  one  of  the  most  pro- 
mising students  of  the  year;  he  had 
already  distinguished  himself  sufficiently 
to  attract  the  attention  of  people  in- 
terested in  college  successes ;  and  he 
had  all  the  long  summer  before  him, 
and  no  one  could  tell  how  many  rambles 
about  the  glens,  how  many  voyages 
across  the  loch,  how  many  researches 
into  the  wonders  of  the  hills.  He  bade 
farewell  to  Lauderdale  with  a  momentary 
seriousness,  but  forgot  before  the  smoke 
of  Glasgow  was  out  of  sight  that  he  had 
ever  parted  from  anybody,  or  that  all 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


245 


his  friends  were  not  awaiting  him  in 
this  summer  of  delight. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

"  COME  away  into  the  fire ;  it's  bonnie 
weather,  but  it's  sharp  on  the  hillside," 
said  the  mistress  of  Eaniore.  "  I  never 
wearied  for  you,  Colin,  so  much  as  I've 
done  this  year.  No  that  there  was  ony 
particular  occasion,  for  we've  a'  been  real 
weel,  and  a  good  season,  and  baith  bairns 
and  beasts  keeping  their  health ;  but  the 
heart's  awfu'  capricious,  and  canna  hear 
reason.  Come  in  bye  to  the  fire." 

"There's  been  three  days  of  east  wind," 
said  the  farmer,  who  had  gone  across 
the  loch  to  meet  his  son,  and  bring  him 
home  in  triumph,  "  which  accounts  for 
your  mother's  anxiety,  Colin.  When 
there's  plenty  of  blue  sky,  and  the  sun 
shining,  there's  naething  she  hasna 
courage  for.  What's  doing  in  Glasgow  1 
or  rather  what's  doing  at  the  college  ? 
or  maybe,  if  you  insist  upon  it,  what  are 
you  doing  1  for  that's  the  most  important 
to  us." 

To  which  Colin,  who  was  almost  as 
shy  of  talking  of  his  own  achievements 
as  of  old,  gave  for  answer  some  bald 
account  of  the  winding  up  of  the  session 
and  of  his  own  honours.  "  I  told  you 
all  about  it  in  my  last  letter,"  he  said, 
hurrying  over  the  narrative  ;  "  there  was 
nothing  out  of  the  common.  Tell  me 
rather  all  the  news  of  the  parish.  Who 
is  at  home  and  who  is  away,  and  if  any 
of  the  visitors  have  come  yet  ? "  said  the 
lad,  with  a  conscious  tremor  in  his  voice. 
Most  likely  his  mother  understood  what 
he  meant. 

"  It's  ower  early  for  visitors  yet,"  she 
said,  "  though  I  think  for  my  part  there's 
nothing  like  the  spring,  with  the  days 
lengthening,  and  the  light  aye  eking  and 
eking  itself  out.  To  be  sure,  there's  the 
east  winds,  which  is  a  sore  drawback, 
but  it  has  nae  great  effect  on  the  west 
coast.  The  castle  woods  are  wonderful 
bonnie,  Colin;  near  as  bonnie  as  they 
were  last  year,  when  a'  those  bright 
English  bairnies  made  the  place  look 
cheerful.  I  wonder  the  Earl  bides  there 
so  seldom  himself.  He's  no  rich,  to  be 


sure,  but  it's  a  moderate  kind  of  a  place. 
If  I  had  enough  money  I  would  rather 
live  there  than  in  the  Queen's  parlour, 
and  so  the  minister  says.  You'll  have 
to  go  down  to  the  manse  the  morn,  and 
tell  him  a'  about  your  prizes,  Colin," 
said  his  proud  mother,  looking  at  him 
with  beaming  eyes.  She  put  her  head 
upon  her  boy's  shoulder,  and  patted  him 
softly  as  he  stood  beside  her.  "He 
takes  a  great  interest  in  what  you're 
doing  at  the  college,"  she  continued ; 
"he  says  you're  a  credit  to  the  parish, 
and  so  I  hope  you'll  aye  be,"  said  Mrs. 
Campbell.  .  She  had  not  any  doubt  oik 
the  subject  so  far  as  her  own  convictions 
went. 

"  He  does  not  know  me,"  said  the 
impatient  Colin  ;  "  but  I'll  go  to  the 
manse  to-morrow  if  you  like.  It's  half- 
way to  the  castle,"  he  said,  under  his 
breath,  and  then  felt  himself  colour, 
much  to  his  annoyance,  under  his 
mother's  eyes. 

"  There's  plenty  folk  to  visit,"  said  the 
farmer.  "  As  for  the  castle,  it's  out  of 
our  way,  no  to  say  it  looked  awfu' 
doleful  the  last  time  I  was  by.  The 
pastor  would  get  it  but  for  the  name  of 
the  thing.  We've  had  a  wonderful  year,, 
take  it  a'  thegither,  and  the  weather  is 
promising  for  this  season.  If  you're  no- 
over-grand  with  all  your  honours,  I 
would  be  glad  of  your  advice,  as  soon  as 
you've  rested,  about  the  Easter  fields. 
I'm  thinking  of  some  changes,  and 
there's  nae  time  to  lose." 

"  If  you  would  but  let  the  laddie  take 
breath ! "  said  the  farmer's  wife.  "  New 
out  of  all  his  toils  and  his  troubles,  and 
you  canna  refrain  from  the  Easter  fields. 
It's  my  belief,"  said  the  mistress,  with  a 
little  solemnity,  "  that  prosperity  is  awfu' 
trying  to  the  soul.  I  dinna  think  you 
ever  cared  for  siller,  Colin,  till  now ; 
but  instead  of  rejoicing  in  your  heart 
over  the  Almighty's  blessing,  I  hear  no- 
thing, from  morning  to  night,  but  about 
mair  profit.  It's  no  what  I've  been  used 
to,"  said  Colin's  mother,  "and  there's 
mony  a  thing  mair  important  that  I 
want  to  hear  about.  Eh  !  Colin,  it's  my 
hope  you'll  no  get  to  be  over-fond  of 
this  world  ! " 


246 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


"  If  this  world  meant  no  more  than  a 
fifty  pound  or  so  in  the  bank,"  said  big 
Colin,  Avith  a  smile  ;  "  but  there's  no 
denying  it's  a  wonderful  comfort  to  have 
a  bit  margin,  and  no  be  aye  from  hand 
to  mouth.  As  soon  as  your  mother's 
satisfied  with  looking  at  you,  you  can 
come  out  to  me,  Colin,  and  have  a  look 
at  the  beasts.  It's  a  pleasure  to  see 
them.  Apart  from  profit,  Jeanie,"  said 
the  farmer,  with  his  humorous  look, 
"  if  you  object  to  that,  it's  grand  to  see 
such  an  improvement  in  a  breed  of  living 
creatures  that  you  and  me  spend  so 
much  of  our  time  among.  Xext  to 
bonnie  bairns,  bonnie  cattle's  a  reason- 
able pride  for  a  farmer,  no  to  say  but  that 
making  siller  in  any  honest  way  is  as 
laudable  an  occupation  as  I  ken  of  for  a 
man  with  a  family  like  me." 

"If  it  doesna  take  up  your  heart," 
said  the  mistress.  "  But  it's  awfu'  to  hear 
folk  how  they  crave  siller  for  siller's 
sake  ;  especially  in  a  place  like  this, 
where  there's  aye  strangers  coming  and 
going,  and  a'  body's  aye  trying  how  much 
is  to  be  got  for  everything.  I  promised 
the  laddies  a  holiday  the  morn  to  hear 
a'  Colin's  news,  and  you're  no  to  take 
him  off  to  byres  and  ploughed  land  the 
very  first  day,  though  I  dinna  say  but  I 
Afould  like  him  to  see  Gowan's  calf," 
said  the  farmer's  wife,  yielding  a  little 
in  her  superior  virtue.  As  for  Colin,  he 
sat  very  impatiently  through  this  con- 
versation, vainly  attempting  to  bring  in 
the  question  which  he  longed,  yet  did 
not. like,  to  ask. 

"  I  suppose  the  visitors  will  come 
early,  as  the  weather  is  so  fine  1 "  he  ven- 
tured to  say  as  soon  as  there  was  a 
pause. 

"  Oh,  ay,  the  Glasgow  folks,"  said 
Mrs.  Campbell ;  and  she  gave  a  curious 
inquiring  glance  at  her  son,  who  was 
looking  out  of  the  window  with  every 
appearance  of  abstraction.  "Do  you 
know  anybody  that's  coming,  Colin?" 
said  the  anxious  mother ;  "  some  of 
your  new  friends  1 "  And  Colin  was  so 
sensible'  of  her  look,  though  his  eyes 
wore  turned  in  exactly  the  opposite 
direction,  that  his  face  grew  crimson  up 
^o  the  great  waves  of  brown  hair  which 


were  always  tumbling  about  his  fore- 
head. He  thrust  his  heavy  lovelocks  off 
his  temples  with  an  impatient  hand,  and 
got  up  and  went  to  the  window  that  his 
confusion  might  not  be  visible.  Big 
Colin  of  Rarnore  was  at  the  window 
too,  darkening  the  apartment  with  his 
great  bulk,  and  the  farmer  laid  his  hand 
on  his  son's  shoulder  with  a  homely 
roughness,  partly  assumed  to  conceal  his 
real  feeling. 

"  How  tall  are  you,  laddie  1  no  much 
short  of  me  now,"  he  said.  "  Look  here, 
Jeanie,  at  your  son."  The  mistress  put 
down  her  work,  and  came  up  to  them, 
defeating  all  Colin's  attempts  to  escape 
her  look  ;  but  in  the  meantime  she,  too, 
forgot  the  blushes  of  her  boy  in  the 
pleasant  sight  before  her.  She  was  but 
a  little  woman  herself,  considered  in  the 
countryside  rather  too  soft  and  delicate 
for  a  farmer's  wife ;  and  with  all  the 
delicious  confidence  of  love  and  weak- 
ness, the  tender  woman  looked  up  at  her 
husband  and  her  son. 

"  Young  Mr.  Frankland's  no  half  so 
tall  as  Colin,"  said  the  proud  mother ; 
"no  that  height  is  anything  to  brag 
about  unless  a'  things  else  is  conform- 
able. He's  weel  enough,  and  a  strong- 
built  callant,but  there's  agreat  difference, 
though,  to  be  sure  ;  his  mother  is  just  as 
proud,"  said  the  mistress,  bearing  her 
conscious  superiority  with  meekness ; 
"  it's  a  grand  thing  that  we're  a'  best 
pleased  with  our  ain." 

"  When  did  you  see  young  Frank- 
land  1 "  said  Colin,  hastily.  The  two  boys 
had  scarcely  met  since  the  encounter 
which  had  made  a  link  between  the 
families  without  awaking  very  friendly 
sentiments  in  the  bosoms  of  the  two 
persons  principally  concerned. 

"  That's  a  thing  to  be  discussed  here- 
after," said  the  farmer  of  Rarnore.  "  I 
didna  mean  to  say  onything  about  it  till 
I  saw  what  your  inclinations  were,  but 
women-folk  are  aye  hasty.  Sir  Thomas 
has  made  me  a  proposition,  Colin.  He 
would  like  to  send  you  to  Oxford  with 
his  own  son  if  you  and  me  Avere  to  con- 
sent. We're  to  gie  him  an  answer  when 
Ave've  made  up  our  minds.  ISrae  doubt 
he  has  heard  that  vou  were  like  enough 


! 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


247 


to  be  a  creditable  protejee,"  said  Big 
Colin,  with  natural  complacency.  "A 
lad  of  genius  gies  distinction  to  his  pa- 
tron, if  ye  can  put  up  with  a  patron, 
Colin." 

"  Can  you  ?  "  cried  his  son.  The  lad 
was  greatly  agitated  by  the  question. 
Ambitious  Scotch  youths  of  Colin's  type, 
in  the  state  of  discontent  which  was 
common  to  the  race,  had  come  to  look 
upon  the  English  universities  as  the 
goal  of  all  possible  hopes.  Not  that 
Colin  would  have  confessed  as  much 
had  his  fate  depended  on  it,  but  such 
was  the  fact  notwithstanding.  Oxford, 
to  his  mind,  meant  any  or  every  possi- 
bility under  heaven,  without  any  limit 
to  the  splendour  of  the  hopes  involved. 
A  different  kind  of  flush,  the  glow  of 
eagerness  and  ambition,  came  to  his  face. 
But  joined  with  this  came  a  tumult  of 
vague  but  burning  offence  and  contra- 
diction. While  he  recognised  the  glo- 
rious chance  thus  opened  to  him,  pride 
started  up  to  bolt  and  bar  those  gates  of 
hope.  He  turned  upon  his  father  with 
something  like  anger  in  his  voice,  with 
a  tantalizing  sense  of  all  the  advantages 
thus  nourished  wantonly,  as  he  thought, 
before  his  eyes.  "Could  you  put  up 
with  a  patron  ? "  he  repeated,  looking 
almost  fiercely  in  the  farmer's  face ; 
"  and  if  not,  why  do  you  ask  me  such  a 
question  1 "  Colin  felt  injured  by  the 
suggestion.  To  be  offered  the  thing  of 
all  others  he  most  desired  in  the  world 
by  means  which  made  it  impossible  to 
accept  the  offer  would  have  been  galling 
enough  under  any  circumstances,  but 
just  now,  at  this  crisis  of  his  youthful 
ambition  and  excitement,  such  a  tanta- 
lizing glimpse  of  the  possible  and  the  im- 
possible was  beyond  bearing.  "  Are  we 
his  dependents  that  he  makes  such  an 
offer  to  me ?"  said  the  exasperated  youth  ; 
and  Big  Colin  himself  looked  on  with  a 
little  surprise  at  his  son's  excitement, 
comprehending  only  partially  what  it 
meant. 

"  I'll  no  say  I'm  fond  of  patronage," 
said  the  farmer,  slowly  ;  "  neither  in  the 
kirk  nor  out  of  the  kirk.  It's  my  opinion 
a  man  does  aye  best  that  fights  his  own 
way,  but  there's  aye  exceptions,  Colin. 


I  wouldna  have  you  make  up  your 
mind  in  any  arbitrary  way.  As  for  Sir 
Thomas,  he  has  aye  been  real  civil  and 
friendly — no  one  of  your  condescending 
fine  gentlemen — and  the  son — " 

"What  right  have  I  to  any  favour 
from.  Sir  Thomas  1 "  said  the  impatient 
Colin.  "  He  is  nothing  to  me.  I  did 
no  more  for  young  Frankland  than  I 
would  have  done  for  any  dog  on  the 
hillside,"  he  continued,  with  a  contemp- 
tuous tone ;  and  then  his  conscience 
reproved  him.  "I  don't  mean  to  say 
anything  against  him.  He  behaved  like 
a  man,  and  saved  himself,"  said  Colin,, 
with  haughty  candour.  "  As  for  all  this 
pretence  of  rewarding  me,  it  feels  like 
an  insult.  I  want  nothing  at  their 
hands." 

"  There's  no  occasion  to  be  violent," 
said  the  farmer.  "  I  dinna  expect  that 
he'll  use  force  to  make  you  accept  his 
offer,  which  is  weel  meant  and  kind, 
whatever  else  it  may  be.  I  canna  say  I 
understand  a'  this  fury  on  your  part; 
and  there's  no  good  that  I  can  see  in 
deciding  this  very  moment  and  no  other. 
I  would  like  you  to  sleep  upon  it  and 
turn  it  over  in  your  mind.  Such  an. 
offer  doesna  come  every  day  to  the  Holy 
Loch.  I'm  no  the  man  to  seek  help," 
said  Big  Colin,  "  but  there's  times  when 
it's  more  generous  to  receive  than  to 
give." 

The  mistress  had  followed  her  son 
wistfully  with  her  eyes  through  all  his 
changes  of  countenance  and  gesture. 
She  was  not  simply  surprised  like  her 
husband,  but  looked  at  him  with  uncon- 
scious insight,  discovering  by  intuition 
what  was  in  his  breast — something,  at 
least,  of  what  was  in  his  heart — for 
the  anxious  mother  was  mistaken,  and 
rushed  at  conclusions  which  Colin  him- 
self was  far  from  having  reached. 

"There's  plenty  of  time  to  decide," 
said  the  farmer's  wife  ;  "and  I've  that 
confidence  in  my  laddie  that  I  ken  he'll 
do  nothing  from  a  poor  motive,  nor  out 
of  a  jealous  heart.  There  never  were 
ony  sulky  ways,  that  ever  I  saw,  in  ony 
bairn  of  mine,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell ; 
"  and  if  there  was  one  in  the  world 
thai  was  mair  fortunate  than  me,  I 


248 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


wouldna  show  a  poor  spirit  towards 
him,  because  he  had  won,  whiles  it's 
mair  generous  to  receive  than  to  give, 
as  the  maister  says  ;  and  whiles  it's  mair 
noble  to  lone  than  to  win,"  said  the 
mistress,  with  a  momentary  faltering  of 
emotion  in  her  voice.  She  thought  the 
bitterness  of  hopeless  love  was  in  her 
boy's  heart,  and  that  he  was  tempted  to 
turn  fiercely  from  the  friendship  of  bis 
successful  rival.  And  she  lifted  her 
soft  eyes,  which  were  beaming  with  all 
the  magnanimous  impulses  of  nature, 
to  Colin's  face,  who  did  not  comprehend 
the  tenderness  of  pity  with  which  his 
mother  regarded  him.  But,  at  least,  he 
perceived  that  something  much  higher 
and  profounder  than  anything  he  was 
thinking  of  was  in  the  mistress's 
thoughts;  and  he  turned  away  some- 
what abashed  from  her  anxious  look. 

*'  I  am  not  jealous  that  I  am  aware 
of,"  said  Colin  ;  "  but  I  have  never  done 
anything  to  deserve  this,  and  I  should 
prefer  not  to  accept  any  favours  from — 
any  man,"  he  concluded  abruptly.  That 
was  how  they  left  the  discussion  for  that 
tune  at  least.  When  the  farmer  went 
out  to  look  after  his  necessary,  business, 
his  wife  remained  with  Colin,  looking  at 
him  often,  as  she  glanced  up  from  her 
knitting,  with  eyes  of  wistful  wonder. 
Had  she  been  right  in  her  guess,  or 
was  it  merely  a  vague  sentiment  of 
repulsion  which  kept  him  apart  fron 
young  Frankland  ?  But  all  the  mother's 
anxiety  could  not  break  through  the 
veil  which  separates  one  mysterious  indi- 
viduality from  another.  She  read  his 
looks  with  eager  attention,  half  right 
and  half  wrong,  as  people  make  out  an 
unfamiliar  language.  He  had  drifted 
off  somehow  from  the  plain  vernacular 
of  his  boyish  thoughts,  and  she  had  not 
the  key  to  the  new  complications.  So 
it  was  with  a  mixed  and  doubtful  joy 
that  the  mistress  of  Eamore,  on  the  first 
night  of  his  return,  regarded  her  son. 

"  And  I  suppose,"  said  Colin,  with  a 
smile  dancing  about  his  lips,  "that  I 
am  to  answer  this  proposal  when  they 
come  to  the  castle  ?  And  they  are 
coming  soon  as  they  expected  last  year  ? 
or,  perhaps,  they  are  there  now?"  he 


said,  getting  up  from  his  chair  again  and 
walking  away  towards  the  door  that  his 
mother  might  not  see  the  gleams  of 
expectation  in  his  face. 

"  But,  Colin,  my1  man,"  said  the  mis- 
tress, who  did  not  perceive  the  blow  she 
was  about  to  administer,  "  they're  no 
coming  to  the  castle  this  year.  The 
young  lady  that  was  delicate  has  got 
well,  and  they're  a'  in  London  and  in 
an  awfu'  whirl  o'  gaiety  like  the  rest 
of  their  kind ;  and  Lady  Mary,  the 
earl's  sister,  is  to  have  the  castle  with 
her  bairns  ;  and  that's  the  way  Sir 
Thomas  wants  our  answer  in  a  letter,  for 
there's  none  of  the  family  to  be  here 
this  year." 

It  did  not  strike  the  mistress  as 
strange  that  Colin  made  no  answer. 
He  was  standing  at  the  door  looking 
out,  and  she  could  not  see  his  face.  And 
when  he  went  out  of  doors  presently, 
she  was  not  surprised — it  was  natural 
he  should  want  to  see  everything  about 
the  familiar  place  ;  and  she  called  after 
him  to  say  that,  if  he  would  wait  a 
moment,  she  would  go  herself  and  show 
him  Gowan's  calf.  But  he  either  did 
not  hear  her,  or,  at  least,  did  not  wait 
the  necessary  moment ;  and  when  she 
had  glanced  out  in  her  turn,  and  had 
perceived  with  delight  that  the  wind 
had  changed,  and  that  the  sun  was 
going  down  in  glorious  crimson  and 
gold  behind  the  hills, /the  mistress  re- 
turned with  a  relieved  heart  to  prepare 
the  family  tea,  "  It'll  be  a  fine  day 
to-morrow,"  she  said  to  herself,  rejoicing 
over  it  for  Colin's  sake  ;  and  so  went  in 
to  her  domestic  duties  with  a  lightened 
heart. 

At  that  moment  Colin  had  just  pushed 
forth  into  the  loch,  flinging  himself 
into  the  boat  anyhow,  disgusted  with 
the  world  and  himself  and  everything 
that  surrounded  him.  In  a  moment, 
in  the  drawing  of  a  breath,  an  utter 
blank  and  darkness  had  replaced  all 
the  lovely  summer  landscape  that  was 
glowing  by  anticipation  in  his  heart. 
In  the  sudden  pang  of  disappointment, 
the  lad's  first  impulse  was  to  fling  him- 
self forth  into  the  solitude,  and  escape 
the  voices  and  looks  which  were  hateful 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


249 


to  him  at  that  moment.      Xor  was  it 
simple  disappointment  that  moved  him  ; 
his  feelings  were  complicated  by  many 
additional   shades   of  aggravation.       It 
had  seemed  so  natural  that  everything 
should  happen  this  year  as  last  year, 
and  now  it  seemed  such  blind  folly  to 
imagine  that  it  could  have  been  possible. 
Not  only  were  his  dreams  all  frustrated 
and    turned    to   nothing,  but    he    fell 
ever  so  many  degrees  in  his  own  es- 
teem, and  felt  so  foolish  and  vain  and 
unkind,  as  he  turned  upon  himself  with 
the  acute  mortification  and  sudden  dis- 
gust of  youth.     What  an  idiot  he  had 
been  !     To  think  she  would  again  leave 
all  the  brilliant  world  for  the  loch  and 
the  primroses,  and  those  other  childish 
delights  on  which  he  had  been  dwelling 
like  a  fool !     Very  bitter  were  Colin's 
thoughts,  as   he   dashed   out  into   the 
middle  of  the  loch,  and  there  laid  up 
his  oars  and  abandoned  himself  to  the 
buffetings  of  excited  fancy.     What  right 
had  he  to  imagine  that  she  had  ever 
thought  of  him  again,  or  to  hope  that 
such  a  thread  of  gold  could  be  woven 
into  his  rustic  and  homely  web  of  fate  ? 
He  scoffed  at  himself,  as  he  remembered, 
with  acute  pangs  of  self-contempt,  the 
joyous  rose-coloured   dreams   that   had 
occupied  him  only   a  few   hours   ago. 
What  a  fool  he  was  to  entertain  such 
vain,  complacent  fancies  !    He,  a  farmer's 
son,  whose  highest  hope  must  be,  after 
countless  aggravations  and  exasperations, 
to  get  "placed"  in  a  country  church  in 
some  rural  corner  of  Scotland.      And 
then  Colin  recalled  Sir  Thomas  Frank- 
land's   proposal,  and  took  to   his   oars 
again  in  a  kind  of  fury,  feeling  it  im- 
possible  to   keep  still      The  baronet's 
kind  offer  looked  like  an  intentional  in- 
sult to  the  excited  lad.      He  thought  to 
himself  that  they  wanted  to  reward  him 
somehow  by  rude,  tangible  means,   as 
if  he  were  a  servant,  for   what   Colin 
proudly  and    indignantly    declared   to 
himself  was  no  service — certainly  no  in- 
tentional  service.     On  the   whole,    he 
had  never  been  so  wretched,  so  down- 
cast, so  fierce  and  angry  and  miserable, 


in  all  his  life.     If  he  could  but,  by  any 
means,   by   any   toil,  or   self-denial,  or 
sacrifice,  get  to  Oxford,  on  his  own  ac- 
count, and  show  the  rich  man  and  his 
son  how  little  the  Campbells  of  Kamore 
stood  in  need  of  patronage  !     All  the 
glory   had  faded    off  the   hills   before 
Colin  bethought  himself  of  the  necessity 
of  returning  to  the  homely  house  which 
he  had  greeted  with  so  much  natural 
pleasure    a    few    hours    before.      His 
mother  was  standing  at  the  door  look- 
ing out  for  him  as  he  drew  towards  the 
beach,  looking  at  him  with  eyes  full  of 
startled  and  anxious  half-comprehension. 
She  knew  he  was  disturbed  somehow, 
and  made  guesses,  right  in  the  main,  but 
all    wrong  in    the    particulars,  .  which 
were,  though  he  tried  hard  to  repress  all 
signs    of    it,  another    exasperation    to 
Colin.     This  was  how  the  first  evening 
of  his  return  closed  upon  the  student  of 
Rainore.    He  could  not  take  any  pleasure 
just  then  in  the  fact  of  being  at  home, 
nor  in  the  homely  love  and  respect  and 
admiration  that  surrounded  him.     Like 
all  the  rest  of  the  world,  he  neglected 
«the  true  gold  lying  close  at  hand  for  the 
longing  he  had  after  the  false  diamonds 
that   glittered   at   a   distance.     It   was 
hard  work  for  him  to  preserve  an  or- 
dinary appearance  of  affection  and  in- 
terest in  all  that  was  going  on,  as  he 
sat,    absent    and    preoccupied,    at    his 
father's  table.    "  Colin's  no  like  you  idle 
laddies  ;  he  has  ower  much  to  think  of 
to  laugh  and  make  a  noise,  like  you," 
the  mistress  said  with  dignity,  as  she 
consoled    the    younger    brothers,    who 
were  disappointed  iu  Coliu.     And  she 
half  believed  what  she  said,  though  she 
spoke  with  the  base  intention    of  de- 
luding  "  the    laddies,"  who    knew  .no 
better.     The  house,  on  the  whole,  was 
rather  disturbed  than  brightened  by  the 
return  of  the  firstborn,  who  had   thus 
become  a  foreign  element  in  the  house- 
hold life.     Such  was  the  inauspicious 
beginning  of  the  holidays,  which  had 
been  to  Colin,  for  months  back,  the  sub- 
ject of  so  many  dreams. 


250 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


IT  was  some  time  before  Colin  reco- 
vered his  composure,  or  found  it  possible 
to  console  himself  for  the  failure  of  his 
hopes.     He  wrote  a  great  deal  of  poetry 
in  the  meantime — or  rather  of  verses 
which  looked  wonderfully  like  poetry, 
such  as  young  men  of  genius  are  apt  to 
produce  under  such  circumstances.    The 
chances  are,  that  if  he  had  confided  them 
to   any   critic   of  a  sympathetic  mind, 
attempts  would  have  been  made  to  per- 
suade Colin  that  he  was  a  poet.     But 
luckily  Lauderdale  was  not  at  hand,  and 
there  was  no  one  else  to  whom  the  shy 
young   dreamer   would  have   disclosed 
himself.     He  sent  some  of  his  musings 
to  the  magazines,  and  so  added  a  little 
excitement   and   anxiexty   to   his   life. 
But  nobody  knew  Colin  in  that  little 
world  where,  as  in  other  worlds,  most 
things  go  by  favour,  and  impartial  ap- 
preciation  is   comparatively  unknown. 
The  editors  most  probably  would  have 
treated  their  unknown  correspondent  in 
exactly  the  same  manner  had  he  been  a 
young  Tennyson.     As  it  was,  Colin  did 
not  quite  know  what  to  think  about  his 
repeated  failures  in  this  respect.    When 
he  was  .despondent  he  became  disgusted 
with  his  own  productions,  and  said  to 
himself   that   of  course  such  maudlin 
verse  could  be  procured  by  the  bushel, 
and  was  not  worthy  of  paper  and  print. 
But  in  other  moods  the  lad  imagined  he 
must  have  some  enemy  who  prejudiced 
the   editorial  world,  and   shut   against 
him  the  gates  of  literary  fame.  In  books 
all  the  heroes,  who  could   do  nothing 
else,  found  so  ready  a  subsistence   by 
means  of  magazines,  that  the  poor  boy 
was  naturally  puzzled  to  find  that  all 
his  efforts  could  not  gain  him  a  hearing. 
And  it  began  to  be  rather  important  to 
him  to  find  something  to  do.     During 
the   previous    summers   Colin  had   not 
disdained  the  farm  and  its  labours,  but 
had  worked  with  his  father  and  brothers 
without  any  sense  of  incongruity.     But 
now  matters  were  changed.     Miss  Ma- 
tilda, with  her  curls  and  her  smiles,  had 
bewitched  the  boy  out  of  his   simple 
innocent  life.     It  did  not  seem  natural 


that  the  hand  which  she  consented  to 
touch  with  her  delicate  fingers  should 
hold  the  plough  or  the  reaping  hook, 
or   that    her    companion    in    so    many 
celestial   rambles   should  plod  through 
the  furrows  at  other  times,  or  go  into 
the    rough     drolleries   of    the    harvest 
field.     Colin  began  to  think  that  the 
life  of  a  farmer's  son  at  Eamore  was 
inconsistent  with  his  future  hopes,  and 
there  was  nothing  else  for  it  but  teach- 
ing, since  so  little  was  to  be  made  of  the 
magazines.    When  he  had  come  to  him- 
self and  began  to  see  the  surrounding 
circumstances  with  clearer  eyes,  Colin, 
who  had  no  mind  to  be  dependent,  but 
meant  to  make  his  own  way  as  was 
natural   to  a  Scotch   lad   of  his  class, 
bethought  himself  of  the  most  natural 
expedient.     He  had  distinguished  him- 
self at  college,  and  it  was  not  difficult 
to    find    the    occupation    he    wanted. 
Perhaps  he  was  glad   to   escape   from 
the  primitive  home,  from  the  mother's 
penetrating  looks,  and  all  the  homely 
ways  of  which  the  ambitious  boy  began 
to  be  a  little  impatient.  He  had  come- to 
the  age  of  discontent.     He  had  begun 
to  look  forward  no  longer  to  the  vague 
splendours  of  boyish  imagination,  but  to 
elevation  in  the  social  scale,  and  what 
he  heard  people  call  success  in  life.     A 
year  or  two  before  it  had  not  occurred 
to  Colin  to  consider  the  circumstances 
of  his  own  lot — his  ambition  pointed 
only  to  ideal  grandeur,  unembarrassed 
by  particulars — and  it  was  very  possible 
for  the  boy  to  be  happy,  thinking  of 
some  in  coherent  greatness  to  come,  while 
engaged  in  the    humblest   work,  and 
living  in  the  homeliest  fashion.  But  the 
time  had  arrived  when  the  pure  ideal 
had    to    take    to    itself     some    human 
garments,  and  when   the  farmer's  son 
became  aware  that  a  scholar  and  a  gen- 
tleman   required   a   greater    degree   of 
external  refinement  in  his  surroundings. 
His  young  heart  was  wounded  by  this 
new    sense,   and    his    visionary    pride 
offended   by    the    thought    that   these 
external  matters  could  count  for  any- 
thing in  the  dignity  of   a  man.      But 
Colin  had  to  yield  like  every  other.     He 
loved  his  family  no  less,  but  he  was  less 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


251 


at  home  among  them.  The  inevitable 
disniption  was  commencing,  and  already, 
with  the  quick  insight  of  her  susceptible 
nature,  the  mistress  of  Ramore  had  dis- 
covered that  the  new  current  was  setting 
in,  that  the  individual  stream  of  Colin's 
life  was  about  to  disengage  itself,  and 
that  her  proud  hopes  for  her  boy  were 
to  be  sealed  by  his  separation  from  her. 
The  tender-hearted  woman  said  nothing 
of  it,  except  by  an  occasional  pathetic 
reflection  upon  things  in  general,  which 
went  to  Colin's  heart,  and  which  he 
understood  perfectly  ;  but  perhaps, 
though  no  one  would  have  confessed 
as  much,  it  was  a  relief  to  all  when 
the  scholar-son,  of  whom  everybody  at 
Ramore  was  so  proud,  went  off  across 
the  loch,  rowed  by  two  of  his  brothers, 
with  his  portmanteau  and  the  first  even- 
ing coat  he  had  ever  possessed,  to  Ard- 
martin,  the  fine  house  on  the  opposite 
bank,  where  he  was  to  be  tutor  to  Mr. 
Jordan's  boys,  and  eat  among  strangers 
the  bread  of  his  own  toil. 

The  mistress  stood  at  her  door  shading 
her  eyes  with  her  hand,  and  looking 
after  the  boat  as  it  shot  across  the  bright 
water.  Never  at  its  height  of  beauty 
had  the  Holy  Loch  looked  more  fair. 
The  sun  was  expanding  and  exulting  over 
all  the  hills,  searching  into  every  hollow, 
throwing  up  unthought-of  tints,  heaps 
of  moss,  and  masses  of  rock,  that  no  one 
knew  of  till  that  moment ;  and  with  the 
sunshine  went  flying  shadows  that  rose 
and  fell  like  the  lifting  of  an  eyelid. 
The  gleam  of  the  sun  before  she  put  up 
her  hand  to  shade  her  face  fell  upon  the 
tear  in  the  mistress's  eye,  and  hung  a 
rainbow  upon  the  long  lash,  which  was 
wet  with  that  tender  dew.  She  looked 
at  her  boys  gliding  over  the  loch 
through  this  veil  of  fairy  colours,  all 
made  out  of  a  tear,  and  the  heart  in  her 
tender  bosom  beat  with  a  corresponding 
conjunction  of  pain  and  happiness. 
"  He'll  never  more  come  back  to  bide  at 
home  like  his  father's  son,"  she  said  to 
herself,  softly,  with  a  pang  of  natural 
mortification  ;  "  but,  eh,  I'm  a  thankless 
woman  to  complain,  and  him  so  weel 
and  so  good,  and  naething  in  faut  but 
nature,"  added  the  mother,  with  all  the 


compunction  of  true  love  ;  and  so  stood 
gazing  till  the  boat  had  gone  out  of 
hearing,  and  was  just  touching  upon 
that  sweet  shadow  of  the  opposite  bank, 
projected  far  into  the  loch,  which  plunged 
the  whole  landscape  into  a  dazzling  un- 
certainty, and  made  it  a  doubtful  matter 
which  was  land  and  which  was  water. 
Colin  himself,  touched  by  the  loveliness 
of  the  scene,  had  paused  just  then  to  look 
down  the  shining  line  to  where  this  bea- 
tified paradise  of  water  opened  out  into 
the  heaven  of  Clyde.  And  to  his  mother's 
eyes  gazing  after  him,  the  boat  seemed 
to  hang  suspended  among  the  'sweet 
spring  foliage  of  the  Lady's  Glen,  which 
lay  reflected,  every  leaf  and  twig,  in 
the  sweeter  loch.  When  somebody 
called  her  indoors  she  went  away  with  a 
sigh.  Was  it  earth,  or  a  vision  of  Para- 
dise, or  "some  unsubstantial  fairy  place"? 
The  sense  of  all  this  loveliness  struck 
intense,  with  almost  a  feeling  of  pain, 
upon  the  gentle  woman's  poetic  heart. 

And  it  was  in  such  a  scene  that  Colin 
wrote  the  verses  which  borrowed  from 
the  sun  and  the  rain  prismatic  colours 
like  those  of  his  mother's  tears,  and  were 
as  near  poetry  as  they  could  possibly  be 
to  miss  that  glory.  Luckily  for  him, 
he  had  no  favourite  confidant  now  to 
persuade  him  that  he  was  a  poet,  so  the 
verse-making  did  him  nothing  but  good, 
providing  a  safety-valve  for  that  some- 
what stormy  period  of  his  existence.  i 

Mr.  Jordan  was  very  rich  and  very 
liberal,  and,  indeed,  lavish  of  the  money 
which  had  elevated  him  above  all  his 
early  friends  and  associations.  He  had 
travelled,  he  bought  pictures,  he  prided 
himself  upon  his  library,  and  he  was 
very  good  to  his  young  tutor,  who,  he 
told  everybody,  was  "  a  lad  of  genius  ;  " 
but  naturally,  with  all  this,  Colin's  exist- 
ence was  not  one  of  unmingled  bliss. 
As  soon  as  he  had  left  Ramore  he  began 
to  look  back  to  it  with  longing,  as  was 
natural  to  his  years.  The  sense  that  he 
had  that  home  behind  him,  with  every- 
body ready  to  stand  by  him  whatever 
trouble  he  might  fall  into,  and  every 
heart  open  to  hear  and  sympathise  in  all 
the  particulars  of  his  life,  restored  the 
young  man  all  at  once  to  content  and 


252 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


satisfaction  with  the  homely  household 
that  loved  him.  AVhen  he  was  there 
life  looked  gray  and  sombre  in  all  its 
sober-coloured  garments  ;  but  when  he 
looked  across  the  loch  at  the  white  house 
on  the  hillside,  that  little  habitation 
had  regained  its  ideal  character.  He  had 
some  things  to  endure,  as  was  natural, 
that  galled  his  high  spirit,  but,  on  the 
whole,  he  was  happier  than  if  he  had 
still  been  at  Kamore. 

And  so  the  summer  passed  on.  He 
had  sent  his  answer  to  Sir  Thomas 
without  any  delay — an  answer  in  which, 
on  the  whole,  his  father  concurred — 
written  in  a  strain  of  lofty  politeness 
which  would  not  have  misbecome  a 
young  prince.  "He  was  destined  for  the 
Church  of  Scotland,"  Colin  wrote,  "  and 
such  being  the  case,  it  was  best  that  he 
should  content  himself  with  the  train- 
ing of  a  Scotch  university."  '  "Less 
perfect,  no  doubt,"  the  boy  had  said, 
with  a  kind  of  haughty  humility ;  "  but, 
perhaps,  better  adapted  to  the  future 
occupations  of  a  Scotch  clergyman." 
And  then  he  went  on  to  offer  thanks 
in  a  magnificent  way,  calculated  to  over- 
whelm utterly  the  good-natured  baronet, 
who  had  never  once  imagined  that  the 
pride  o£  the  farmer's  son  would  be 
wounded  by  his  proposal.  The  answer 
had  been  sent,  and  no  notice  had  been 
taken  of  it.  It  was  months  since  then, 
and  not  a  word  of  Sir  Thomas  Frank- 
land  or  his  family  had  been  heard  about 
the  Holy  Loch.  They  seemed  to  have 
disappeared  altogether  back  again  into 
their  native  firmament,  never  more  to 
dazzle  the  eyes  of  beholders  in  the  west 
country.  It  was  hard  upon  Colin  thus 
to  lose,  at  a  stroke,  not  only  the  hope  on 
which  he  had  built  so  securely,  but  at 
the  same  time  a  great  part  of  the  gene- 
ral stimulation  of  his  life.  !Not  only 
the  visionary  budding  love  which  had 
filled  him  with  so  many  sweet  thoughts, 
but  even  the  secret  rivalry  and- opposi- 
tion which  no  one  knew  of,  had  given 
strength  and  animation  to  his  life,  and 
both  seemed  to  have  departed  together. 
He  mused  over  it  often  with  wonder, 
asking  himself  if  Lauderdale  was  right ; 
if  it  was  true  that  most  things  come  to 


nothing ;  and  whether  meetings  and 
partings,  which  looked  as  if  they  must 
tejl  upon  life  for  ever  and  ever,  were, 
after  all,  of  not  half  so  much  account 
as  the  steady  routine  of  existence  1  The 
youth  perplexed  himself  daily  with  such 
questions,  and  wrote  to  Lauderdale  many 
a  long  mysterious  epistle  which  puzzled 
still  more  his  anxious  friend,  who  could 
not  make  out  what  had  set  Colin's 
brains  astray  out  of  all  the  confident 
philosophies  of  his  years.  When  the 
young  man,  in  his  hours  of  leisure, 
climbed  up  the  woody  ravine  close  by, 
to  where  the  burn  took  long  leaps 
over  the  rocks,  flinging  itself  down  in 
diamonds  and  showers  of  spray  into  the 
heart  of  the  deep  summer  foliage  in  the 
Lady's  Glen,  and  from  that  height  looked 
down  upon  the  castle  on  the  other  side, 
seated  among  its  leaves  and  trees  on  the 
soft  promontory  which  narrowed  the 
entrance  of  the  loch,  Colin  could  not 
but  feel  this  unexpected  void  which  was 
suddenly  made  in  his  life.  The  Frank- 
land  family  had  been  prominent  objects 
on  his  horizon  for  a  number  of  years. 
In  disliking  or  liking,  they  had  been 
always  before  him ;  and  even  at  his 
most  belligerent  period,  there  was  some- 
thing not  disagreeable  to  the  lad's  fancy, 
at  least,  in  this  link  of  connexion  with 
a  world  so  different  from  his  own — a 
world  in  which,  however  commonplace 
might  be  the  majority  of  the  actors, 
such  great  persons  as  were  to  be  had 
in  the  age  might  still  be  found.  And 
now  they  had  gone  altogether  away  out 
of  Colin's  reach  or  ken  ;  and  he  was 
left  in  his  natural  position  nowise 
affected  by  his  connexion  with  them. 
It  was  a  strange  feeling,  and  notwith- 
standing the  scorn  with  which  he 
rejected  the  baronet's  kindness  and 
declined  his  patronage,  much  disap- 
pointment and  mortification  mingled 
with  the  sense  of  surprise  in  Colin's 
mind.  "  It  was  all  as  it  ought  to  be," 
he  said  to  himself  many  times  as  he 
pondered  over  it ;  but,  perhaps,  if  it 
had  been  quite  as  he  expected,  he  would 
not  have  needed  to  impress  that  senti- 
ment on  his  mind  by  so  many  repe- 
titions. These  reflections  still  recurred 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


253 


to  him  all  the  summer  through  whenever 
he  had  any  time  to  himself.  Cut  Colin's 
time  was  not  much  at  his  own  disposdu 
Mature  had  given  to  the  country  lao. 
a  countenance  which  propitiated  the 
world.  Not  that  it  was  handsome  in 
the  abstract,  or  could  bear  examina- 
tion feature  by  feature,  but  there  were 
few  people  who  could  resist  the  mingled 
shyness  and  frankness  of  the  eyes  with 
which  Colin  looked  out  upon  the  miracu- 
lous universe,  perceiving  perpetual  won- 
ders. The  surprise  of  existence  was  still 
in  his  face,  indignant  though  he  would 
have  been  had  anybody  told  him  so  • 
and  tired  people  of  the  world,  who  knew 
better  than  they  practised,  took  comfort 
in  talking  to  the  youth,  who,  whatever 
he  might  choose  to  say,  was  still  looking 
as  might  be  seen,  with  fresh  eyes  at 
the  dewy  earth,  and  saw  everything 
through  the  atmosphere  of  the  morning. 
This  unconscious  charm  of  his  told 
greatly  upon  women,  and  most  of  all 
upon  women  who  were  older  than  him- 
self. The  young  ladies  were  not  so  sure 
of  him,  for  his  fancy  was  preoccupied  ; 
but  he  gained  many  friends  among  the 
matrons  whom  he  encountered,  and  such 
friendships  are  apt  to  make  large  inroads 
upon  a  young  man's  time.  m  And  their 
hospitality  reigns  paramount  on  those 
sweet  shores  of  the  Holy  Loch.  Mr. 
Jordan  filled  his  handsome  house  with 
a  continual  succession  of  guests  from 
all  quarters ;  and  as  neither  the  host 
nor  hostess  was  in  the  least  degree 
amusing,  Colin's  services  were  in  con- 
stant requisition.  Sometimes  the  com- 
pany was  good,  often  indifferent  ;  btit, 
at  all  events,  it  occupied  the  youth,  and 
kept  him  from  too  much  inquisition 
into  the  early  troubles  of  his  own 
career. 

His  life  went  on  in  this  fashion  until 
September  brought  sportsmen  in  flocks 
to  the  heathery  braes  of  the  loch.  Colin, 
whose  engagement  was  but  a  temporary 
one,  was  beginning  to  look  forward  once 
again  to  his  old  life  in  Glasgow — to  the 
close  little  room  in  Donaldson's  Land, 
and  the  long  walks  and  longer  talks 
with  Lauderdale,  which  were  almost  his 
only  recreation.  Perhaps  the  idea  was 


not  so  agreeable  to  him  as  in  former 
years.  Somehow,  he  was  going  back 
with  a  duller  prospect  of  existence, 
with  his  radiance  of  variable  light  upon 
his  horizon ;  and  in  the  absence  of 
this  fairy  illumination  the  natural  cir- 
cumstances became  more  palpable,  and 
struck  him  with  a  sense  of  their  poverty 
and  meanness  such  as  he  had  never  felt 
before.  He  had  to  gulp  down  a  little 
disgust  as  he  thought  of  his  attic,  and 
even,  in  the  involuntary  fickleness  of 
his  years,  was  not  quite  so  sure  of  en- 
joying Lauderdale's  philosophy  as  he 
had  once  been. 

He  was  in  this  state  of  mind  when 
he  heard  of  a  new  party  of  visitors 
who  were  to  arrive  the  day  after  at 
Ardmartin — a  distinguished  party  of 
visitors,  fine  people,  whom  Mr.  Jordan 
had  met  somewhere  in  the  world,  and 
who  had  deigned  to  forget  his  lack  of 
rank,  and  even  of  interest,  in  his  wealth, 
and  his  grouse,  and  the  convenient 
situation  of  his  house ;  for  Colin's  em- 
ployer was  not  moderately  rich — a  con- 
dition which  does  a  man  no  good  in 
society — but  had  heaps  upon  heaps  of 
money,  or  was  supposed  to  have  such, 
which  comes  to  about  the  same,  and 
was  respected  accordingly.  Colin  lis- 
tened but  languidly  to  the  scraps  of 
talk  he  heard  about  these  fine  people. 
Tfyere  was  a  dowager  countess  among 
them,  whose  name  abstracted  the  lady 
of  the  house  from  all  her  important  con- 
siderations. As  for  Colin,  he  was  still 
too  young  to  care  for  dowagers ;  he 
heard  without  hearing  of  all  the  pre- 
parations that  were  to  be  made,  and  the 
exertions  that  were  thought  necessary  in 
order  to  make  Ardmartin  agreeable  to 
so  illustrious  a  party,  and  paid  very 
little  attention  to  anything  that  -was 
going  on,  hoping  within  himself  to  make 
his  escape  from  the  fuss  of  the  recep- 
tion, and  have  a  little  time  to  himself. 
On  the  afternoon  on  which  they  were 
expected  he  betook  himself  to  tho  hills, 
as  soon  as  his  work  with  his  pupils  was 
over.  It  had  been  raining  as  usual,  and 
everything  shone  and  glistened  in  the 
sun,  which  blazed  all  over  the  braes 
with  a  brightness  which  did  not  neu- 


254 


A  Son  of  the  Soil 


tralize  the  chill  of  the  wind.  The  air 
was  so  still  that  Colin  heard  the  crack 
of  the  sportsman's  gun  from  different 
points  around  him,  miles  apart  from 
each,  other,  and  could,  even  on  the 
height  where  he  stood,  discriminate  the 
throb  of  the  little  steamer  which  was 
progressing  through  the  loch  at  his 
feet,  reflecting  to  the  minutest  touch, 
from  its  pennon  of  white  steam  at  the 
funnel  to  the  patches  of  colour  among 
its  passengers  on  the  deck,  in  the  clear 
water  on  which  it  glided.  The  young 
man  pursued  his  walk  till  the  shadows 
began  to  gather,  and  the  big  bell  of 
Ardmartin  pealed  out  its  summons  to 
dress  into  all  the  echoes  as  he  reached 
the  gate.  The  house  looked  crowded  to 
the  very  door,  where  it  had  overflowed 
in  a  margin  of  servants,  some  of  whom 
were  still  importing  the  last  carriage  as 
Colin  entered.  He  pursued  his  way  to 
his  own  room  languidly  enough,  for  he 
was  tired,  and  he  was  not  interested 
either.  As  he  went  up  the  grand  stair- 
case, however,  he  passed  a  door  which 
was  ajar,  and  from  which  came  the 
sound  of  an  animated  conversation. 
Colin  started  as  if  he  had  received  a 
blow,  as  one  of  these  voices  fell  on  his 
ear.  He  came  to  a  dead  pause  in  the 
gallery  xipon  which  this  room  opened, 
and  stood  listening,  unconscious  of  the 
surprised  looks  of  somebody's  maid,  who 
passed  him  with  her  lady's  dress  in  her 
arms,  and  looked  very  curiously  at  the 
tutor.  Colin  stopped  short  and  lis- 
tened, suddenly  roused  up  into  a  degree 
of  interest  which  brought  the  colour  to 
his  cheek  and  the  light  to  his  eye.  He 
thought  all  the  ladies  of  the  party  must 
be  there,  so  varied  was  the  pleasant  din 
and  so  many  the  voices ;  but  he  had 
been  standing  breathless,  in  the  most 
eager  pose  of  listening,  for  nearly  half 
the  time  allowed  for  dressing,  before  he 
heard  again  the  voice  which  had  arrested 
him.  Then,  when  he  began  to  imagine 
that  it  must  have  been  a  dream,  the 
sound  struck  his  ear  once  more — a  few 
brief  syllables,  a  sweet,  sudden  laugh, 
and  again  silence.  Was  it  her  voice  1 
or  was  it  only  a  mock  of  fancy  ?  While 
he  stood  lingering,  wondering,  straining 


his  ear  for  a  repetition  of  the  sound,  the 
door  opened  softly,  and  various  white 
figures  in  dressing-gowns  flitted  off  up- 
stairs and  downstairs,  some  of  them 
littering  little  exclamations  of  fright  at 
sight  of  the  alarming  apparition  of  a 
man.  It  was  pretty  to  see  them  dis- 
persing, like  so  many  white  doves,  from 
that  momentary  confabulation  ;  but  she 
was  not  among  them.  Colin  went  up 
to  his  room  and  dressed  with  lightning 
speed,  chafing  within  himself  at  the 
humble  place  which  he  was  expected  to 
take  at  the  table.  When  he  went  into 
the  dining-room,  as  usual,  all  the  rest 
of  the  party  were  taking  their  places. 
The  only  womankind  distinctly  within 
Colin's  sight  was  one  of  •fifty,  large 
enough  to  make  six  Matildas.  He 
could  not  see  her  though  he  strained 
his  eyes  up  and  down  through  the  long 
alley  of  fruits  and  flowers.  Though  he 
was  not  twenty,  and  had  walked  about 
ten  miles  that  afternoon  over  the  whole- 
some heather,  the  poor  young  fellow 
could  not  eat  any  dinner.  He  had  been 
placed  beside  a  hoary  old  man  to  amuse 
him,  whom  his  employer  thought  might 
be  useful  to  the  young  student ;  but 
Colin  had  not  half  a  dozen  words  to 
spend  upon  any  one.  Was  she  here  ? 
or  was  it  mere  imagination  which  brought 
down  to  him  now  and  then,  through  the 
pauses  of  the  conversation,  a  momentary 
tone  that  was  like  hers  \  When  the 
ladies  left  the  room  the  young  man 
rushed,  though  it  was  not  his  office,  to 
open  the  door  for  them.  Another  mo- 
ment and  Colin  was  in  paradise — the 
paradise  of  fools.  How  Avas  it  possible 
that  he  could  have  been  deceived  1  The 
little  start  with  which  she  recognised 
him,  the  moment  of  surprise  which  made 
her  drop  her  handkerchief  and  brought 
the  colour  to  her  cheek,  rapt  the  lad 
into  a  feeling  more  exquisite  than  any 
he  had  known  all  his  life.  She  smiled; 
she  gave  him  a  rapid,  sweet  look  of 
recognition,  which  was  made  complete 
by  that  start  of  surprise.  Matilda  was 
here,  under  the  same  roof — she  whom 
he  had  never  hoped  to  see  again.  Colin 
fell  headlong  into  the  unintended  swoon. 
He  sat  pondering  over  her  look  and  her 


"  My  Beautiful  Lady" 


255 


startled  movements  all  the  tedious  time, 
while  the  other  men  drank  their  wine, 
without  being  at  all  aware  what  divine 
elixir  was  in  his  cup.  Her  look  of 
sweet  wonder  kept  shining  ever  brighter 
and  brighter  before  his  imagination. 
Was  it  wonder  only,  or  some  dawning 
of  another  sentiment  ?  If  she  had  spoken, 


the  spell  might  have  been  less  powerful 
A  crowd  of  fairy  voices  kept  whispering 
all  manner  of  delicious  follies  in  Colin' s 
ear,  as  he  sat  waiting  for  the  moment 
when  he  could  follow  her.  Imagination 
did  everything  for  him  in  that  moment 
of  expectation  and  unlooked-for  delight. 


"  MY  BEAUTIFUL  LADY." 


THIS  is  the  quaint  title — and  there  is 
much  in  a  title- — of  a  volume  of  poetry, 
nay,  we  may  conscientiously  say  a  poem, 
which,  even  if  less  note-worthy  in  itself, 
would  have  been  remarkable  for  the  cir- 
cumstances of  its  production.  It  is 
not  one  of  the  innumerable  "lays," 
"verses,"  "lyrics" — the  weak,  crude 
efforts  of  some  young  scribbler  thirsting 
for  reputation,  but  the  one  work,  the  con- 
centrated, deli  berate  labour  of  love,  given, 
as  the  fruit  of  many  years,  by  a  man 
whose  life-labour  in  another  art  has 
earned  for  him  a  reputation  high  enough 
to  make  poetical  renown  of  very  secondary 
value.  Thomas  Woolner,  the  sculptor, 
has  no  need  of  the  fame  of  a  poet.  And 
though  when  he  leaves  the  chisel  for  the 
pen,  he  must  necessarily  be  judged 
among  pen-labourers,  just  as  severely 
and  accurately  as  if  his  marble-poems 
had  never  existed, — still  it  is  curious 
to  trace  in  this  additional  instance  a  con- 
firmation of  the  fact,  that  genius  has  but 
one  common  root,  and  that  its  develop- 
ment into  one  of  the  three  branches 
of  the  sister  arts  is  often  a  mere  acci- 
dent. We  could  name  many  living  men 
of  mark,  or  whom  chance  alone  appears 
to  have  decided  whether  they  should 
be  poets,  artists,  or  musicians.  And 
we  need  not  go  so  far  back  as  Da 
Vinci  or  Michael  Angelo  to  find  some 
who  have  excelled  in  all  the  various 
subdivisions  into  which  branches  that 
strange  gift  which  we  call  the  creative 
faculty  ;  who  have  been  at  once  pain- 
ters, sculptors,  engravers,  architects,  musi- 
cians, poets.  Though,  except  in  rarest 
instances,  this  is  a  fatal  excellence.  A 


man  is  far  safer  in  having  one  single 
settled  purpose  in  his  life,  unto  which 
all  his  study,  observation,  and  experi- 
ence ought  to  tend.  It  is  highly  to  Mr. 
Woolner's  credit — and  doubtless  to  the 
great  benefit  of  his  fame  as  a  sculptor — 
that,  with  all  this  facility  of  versification, 
and  the  intense  delight  which  all  who 
read  his  book  must  be  convinced  the 
author  took  therein,  he  has  allowed  him- 
self to  be,  Rumour  says,  from  ten  to 
fifteen  years,  in  perfecting,  unpublished, 
"My  Beautiful  Lady." 

And  he  has  his  reward.  Seldom  does 
a  critic  rest  with  such  complete  satisfac- 
tion on  a  book,  which,  whatever  level 
of  literary  merit  it  may  attain,  cannot 
but  be  regarded  as  being,  of  its  kind, 
a  pure  work  of  art,  careful,  conscien- 
tious, complete  :  in  which  nothing  is 
done  slovenly,  or  erratically,  or  hastily. 
Earnest,  too — and  though  strictly  im- 
personal in  its  character — yet  retaining 
the  vivid  impression  of  the  author's  in- 
dividuality, that  is,  his  individuality 
transfused  through  his  imagination,  so 
as  to  be  able  to  generalize,  concentrate, 
and  elevate  accidental  fact  into  universal, 
poetic  truth.  In  plain  words,  no  one 
would  ever  suspect  Mr.  Woolner  of  being 
the  hero  of  his  own  poem,  yet  by  the 
power  which  genius  alone  possesses, 
he  has  been  able  so  thoroughly  to  iden- 
tify himself  with  his  conception,  that 
every  one  who  reads  his  pathetic  story 
of  "  love  which  never  found  its  earthly 
close,"  will  feel  at  once  that  it  is  in  one 
sense  absolutely  true ;  that  sublimation 
of  literal  fact,  out  of  which  the  poet 
creates  a  universal  verity. 


-256 


"  My  Beautiful  Lady." 


This  fervid  and  touching  realism  lifts 
the  book  in  some  degree  out  of  the 
level  of  ordinary  criticism.  .Reviewers, 
trained  and  eager  to  dart  with  "flaw- 
seeking  eyes,  like  needle-points,"  upon 
faulty  expressions,  fancied  plagiarisms, 
tumid  common-places,  might  no  doubt 
discover  such  in  this  volume  ;  but  the 
mere  reader,  who  reads  for  his  own  de- 
light, will  be  carried  along,  heart-warm, 
by  the  mere  impetus  of  that  delight, 
nor  pause  to  criticise  till  he  has  ceased 
to  feeL 

Strongly  emotional — yet  with  both, 
passion  and  fancy  made  subordinate  to 
its  ethical  purpose,  the  book  stands  out 
distinctly  among  all  poems  of  late  years, 
as  the  deification  of  Love.  Love,  re- 
garded neither  as  the  "  Venus  Victrix"  of 
the  ancients,  nor  treated  with  the  senti- 
mental chivalry  of  mediaeval  times — or 
the  fantastic,  frivolous  homage  of  a  later 
age,  under  which  lay  often  concealed  the 
lowest  form  of  the  passion  which  can 
degrade  manhood  or  insult  womanhood  ; 
but  love,  the  consoler,  the  refiner,  the 
purifier,  the  stimulator  to  all  that  is 
high  and  lovely  and  of  good  report 
Love,  not  spread  abroad  among  many 
objects — the  "  episode  in  man's  life," 
as  Byron  terms  it — (alas  !  he  spoke  but 
as  he  knew) — or  the  dream  of  mere 
fancy,  like  Shelley's  : — 

"  In  many  mortal  forms  I  rashly  sought 
The  shadow  of  this  idol  of  my  thought ;" 

but  love,  strong,  human,  undivided,  and 
from  its  very  singleness  the  more  pas- 
sionately pure ; — the  devotion  of  the 
individual  man  to  the  individual  woman, 
who  is  to  him  the  essence  of  all  woman- 
hood, the  satisfaction  of  all  his  being's 
need ;  from  whom  he  learns  every- 
thing, and  to  whom  he  teaches  every- 
thing of  that  secret  which  is  the  life- 
blood  of  the  universe,  since  it  flows  from 
the  heart  of  God  Himself — the  Love 
Divine. 

This  doctrine,  the  Christian  doctrine 
of  love,  is,  even  in  our  Christian  times, 
so  dimly  known  and  believed  in,  that 
we  hail  thankfully  one  more  poet,  one 
more  man,  who  has  the  strength  to  be- 
lieve in  it,  and  the  courage  to  declare  it. 


For,  God  knows,  it  is  the  only  human 
gospel  which  in  this  fast  corrupting 
age  will  have  power  to  save  men  and 
elevate  women.  Coventry  Patmore 
preached  it  in  his  "  Angel  in  the  House," 
which,  with  all  its  quaintnesses  and  pe- 
culiarities, stands  alone  as  the  song  of 
songs,  wherein  is  glorified  the  pure 
passion,  which,  if  it  is  to  be  found  any- 
where in  the  world,  is  to  be  found  at 
our  English  firesides  —  conjugal  love. 
And  though  "My  Beautiful  Lady," 
attains  not  that  height — fate  forbidding 
that  the  love  of  betrothal  should  ever 
become  the  perfect  love  of  marriage — 
still  it  breathes  throughout  the  same 
spirit.  Such  books  as  these  are  the  best 
barrier  against  that  flood  of  foulness 
which  seems  creeping  in  upon  us,  borne 
in,  wave  after  wave,  up  to  our  English 
doors  by  the  tide  of  foreign  literature  ; 
French  novels,  with  their  tinsel  clever- 
ness, overspreading  a  mass  of  inner 
corruption ;  and  German  romances,  con- 
fusing the  two  plain  lines  of  right  or 
wrong  with  their  sophistical  intellec- 
tualities and  sentimental  affinities  :  or, 
worse  than  either,  being  a  cowardly  com- 
promise between  the  two,  that  large  and 
daily  increasing  section  of  our  own  po- 
pular writing,  which  is  called  by  the 
mild  term,  "  sensational." 

"  My  Beautiful  Lady J'  is,  of  course, 
a  love  poem ;  divided  into  sections — 
call  them  cantos — of  varied  style  and 
rhythm,  after  the  manner  of  "  Maud." 
Kay,  there  are  many  critics  who  will 
aver  that  had  "Maud"  never  been 
written  neither  would  Mr.  Woohier's 
poem.  But  besides  the  fact,  that  the 
latter  was  planned  and  partly  executed 
before  the  former  appeared — the  differ- 
ences are  great  enough  to  prevent  all 
suspicion  of  plagiarism  beyond  a  certain 
occasional  Tennysonian  ring,  which  per- 
vades most  of  our  modern  verses,  mark- 
ing the  involuntary  influence  of  the 
master-poet  on  all  the  poetry  of  our  age. 
It  is  the  history  of  a  holy,  happy, 
mutual  love — crowned,  not  by  fruition, 
but  loss  :  yet  still  complete.  For  death, 
at  first  the  ruthless  divider,  afterwards 
only  perfects,  into  the  perfectness  of  a 
noble,  resigned,  useful  and  not  unhappy 


"  My  Beautiful  Lady" 


257 


if e ,  this   passion  of  the   soul — which 
had  it  been  a  merely  human  passion, 

"  Would  at  once,  like  paper  set  on  fire, 
Burn  —  and  expire. 

The  story  is  simplicity  itself:  there 
being  no  characters  except  the  two — 
hero  and  heroine :  no  incidents  save 
those  of  love  and  death.  Few  descrip- 
tions;— even  the  portrait  of  "  My  Lady  " 
is  projected,  or  rather  reflected,  less  by 
her  own  corporeal  identity  than  by  the 
mental  influence  which  she  exercises 
over  the  imagination  of  her  lover.  Not 
many  poets,  who,  while  they  pretend  to 

"...    despise 
Lovely  cheeks,  or  lips,  or  eyes," 

yet  prate  of  them  incessantly  as  the  best 
realities  of  love,  have  drawn  with  such 
purely  spiritual  and  yet  vivid  touches 
a  more  life-like  portrait  than  this  : 

"  I  love  my  lady,  she  is  very  fair, 

;.  Her  brow  is  wan,  and  bound  by  simple  hair ; 
Her  spirit  sits  aloof  and  high, 
But  glances  from  her  tender  eye 
In  sweetness  droopingly. 

"As  a  young  forest  while  the  wind  drives 

through, 
My  life  is  stirred  when  she  breaks  on  my 

view  ; 

Her  beauty  grants  my  will  no  choice 
But  silent  awe,  till  she  rejoice 
My  longing  with  her  voice. 

"  Her  warbling  voice,  though  ever  low  and 

mild, 
Oft  makes  me  feel  as  strong  wine  would  a 

child ; 

And  though  her  hand  be  very  light 
Of  touch,  it  moves  me  with  its  might, 
As  would  a  sudden  fright. 

"  A  hawk,  high  poised  in  air,  whose  nerved 

wing-tips 
Tremble  with  might  suppressed,  before  lie 

(lips, 

In  vigilance,  scarce  more  intense 
Than  I,  when  her  voice  holds  my  sense 
Contented  in  suspense. 

"  Her  mention  of  a  thing,  august  or  poor, 
Makes  it  far  nobler  than  it  was  before : 

As  where  the  sun  strikes  life  will  gush, 
And  what  is  pale  receives  a  flush, 
Rich  hues,  a  richer  blush." 

Huch   a  woman,  we   feel,  was   worthy 
of  the  following  pocrn,  or  rather  psalm, 
of  lover-like  rapture  over  the  love  won  : 
~No.  51. — VOL.  ix. 


DAWN. 

"  0  lily,  with  the  sun  of  heaven's 
Prime  splendour  on  thy  breast, 
My  scattered  passions  toward  thee  run, 
Poising  to  awful  rest. 

"  The  darkness  of  our  universe 

f  mothered  my  soul  in  night : 
Thy  glory  shone  ;  whereat  the  curse 
Passed  molten  into  light. 

"  Raised  over  envy,  freed  from  pain, 

Beyond  the  storms  of  chance, 
Blest  king  of  my  own  world  I  reign, 
Controlling  circumstance." 

"Noon"and/' Night" — two  other  carols 
— rich  and  rosy  with  the  atmosphere  of 
full  delight  and  contented  love,  carry 
forward  the  story  through  its  brief  sun- 
shine into  the  shadow  of  the  fate  which 
is  to  come.  "Her  Garden"  gives  the 
first  sign  : 

"  In  walking  forth,  I  felt  with  vague  alarm 
Heavier  than  wont  her  pressure  on  my  arm, 
As  through  morn's  fragrant  air  we  sought 

what  harm 
That  eastern  wind's  despite  had  done  the 

garden's  growth, 
Where  much  lay  dead  -or  languished  low 

for  drouth. 

"  Her  own  parterre  was  bounded  by  a  red 
Old  buttressed  wall  of  brick,  moss-broidered, 
Where  grew,  mid  pink  and  azure  plots,  a 

bed 
Of  shining  lilies,  intermixed  hi  wondrous 

light- 
She  called  them  "  Radiant  spirits  robed  in 

whire." 


"  My  Lady  dove-like  to  the  lily  went, 
Took  in  curved  palnis  a  cup,  and  forward 

leant, 

Deep  draining  to  the  gold  its  dreamy  scent. 
(I  see  her  now,  pale  beauty,  as  she  bending 

stands, 
The   wind-worn    blossom    resting    in   her 

hands.) 

"  Then  slowly  rising,  she  in  gazing  trance 
Affrayed,  long  pored  on  vacancy.    A  glance 
Of  chilly  splendor  tinged  her  countenance, 
And  told  the  saddened  truth  that  stress  of 

blighting  weather 
Had  made  her  lilies  and  My  Lady  droop 

together." 

"Tolling  Bell"  is  beautiful,  despite 
some  jarring  faults,  an  exaggeration  of 
diction,  and  a  didactic  lengthiness.  Both 
matter  and  stylo  should  have  been  per- 
fectly simple,  with  that  solemn  severity 

s 


258 


';  My  Beautiful  LadyT 


of  art  which  Tennyson  indicates  when 
he  says  : 

"  In  words,  like  weeds,  I'll  wrap  me  o'er 

Like  coarsest  clothes  against  the  cold  ; 
But  that  large  grief  which  these  enfold 
Is  felt  in  outline  and  no  more." 

The  lover  has  come  to  see  his  mistress, 
who  has  recovered  from  temporary  ill- 
ness, hut  is  still  under  the  warning 
shadow  which  foretells  her  slow- 
advancing  doom  : 

"  I  watched  in  awkward  wonder  for  a  time 
While  there  she  listless  lay  and  sang  iny 

rhyme, 

Wrapped  up  in  fabrics  of  an  Indian  clime, 
And  looked  a  bird  of  Paradise 
Languid  from  the  traversed  skies. 

"A  dawn-bright  snowy  peal?   her  smile. — 

Strange  I 

Should  dawdle  near  her  grace  admiringly 
When  love  alarmed  and  challenged  sym- 
pathy : 

Unnerved  in  chills  of  creeping  fear, 
Danger  surely  threatening  near. 

"  I  shrank  from  searching  the  abyss  I  felt 
Yawned  by :  whose  verge  voluptuous  blos- 
soms belt 
With  dazzling  hues.  She  speaks  !  I  fall  and 

melt, 

One  sacred  moment  drawn  to  rest, 
Deeply  weeping  on  her  breast. 

"  Our  visions  met,  when  pityingly  she  flung 
Her   passionate    arms    about    me,  kissing 

clung, 

Close  kisses,  stifling  kisses,  till  each  wrung 
With  welded  mouths,  the  other's  bliss 
Out  in  one  long  sighing  kiss. 

"  Love-flower  that  burst  in  kisses  and  sweet 

t3£irs, 

Ser.tterir^   its    roseate    dream-flakes,  dis- 
appears 

In  coM  truth  :  for  loud,  with  brazen  jeers, 
That  bell's  toll,  clanging  in  my  brain 
Beat  me,  loath,  to  earth  again." 

Finely  painted,  with  a  pencil  of  awful 
reality,  is  the  man's  agony  of  despair, 
stung  by  the  woman's  resignation  into 
impious  outcries  against  Providence,  and 
even  bitter  reproaches  against  herself, 
until  he  is  calmed  by  the  angelic  calm  of 
the  loving  spirit  already  bound  for  the 

'•  desolation,  dark,  unknown, 
Whose  limits,  stretclied  from  mortal  sight 
Touch  the  happy  hills  of  light." 

The  description  of  his  yet  unconquer- 
able anguish,  of  her  soothing,  of  'their 


.  peaceful  reading  together,  of  the  tem- 
porary parting ;  after  which,  crushed  by 
the  sense  of  what  is  coming  upon  him, 
he  rushes  out  in  the  wild  night,  wan- 
dering wearily,  he  "knew  not  where," 
till  morning ; — all  this  it  is  nearly  im- 
possible to  criticise.  One's  cool  ap- 
praisement of  the  literary  valne  of  the 
poetry  sinks  dumb  before  the  pathetic 
human-ness  of  the  subject.  We  follow 
the  story  through  three  more  portions 
— "Will- o'- the -Wisp,"  "Given  Over," 
"Storm,"  to  "My  Lady  in  Death"; 
of  which  it  is  the  highest  tribute  that 
can  be  paid  to  the  author  to  say  that 
its  intense  reality  almost  makes  us  feel, 
in  reading,  as  if  we  had  no  right  to  read 
— or  he  to  write  of  such  things.  It 
commences  thus  . 

"  All  is  but  coloured  show.    I  look 

Up  through  the  green  hues  shed 

By  leaves  above  my  head, 
And  feel  its  inmost  worth  forsook 

My  being  when  she  died. 

This  heart,  now  hot  and  dried, 
Halts,  as  the  parched  course  where  a  brook 

Mid  flowers  was  wont  to  flow, 

Because  her  life  is  now 
No  more  than  stories  in  a  printed  book.   ; 

"  Grass  thickens  proudly  o'er  that  breast, 
Clay  cold,  and  sadly  still 
My  happy  fece  felt  thrill. 

How  much  her  dear,  dear  mouth  expressed ! 
And  now  are  closed  and  set 
Lips  that  my  own  have  met : 

Her  eye-lids  by  the  damp  earth  pressed, 
Damp  earth  weighs  on  her  eyes, 
Damp  earth  shuts  out  the  skies. 

My  Lady  rests  her  heavy,  heavy  rest. 

"  To  see  her  high  perfection  sweep 
The  favoured  earth,  as  she 
With  welcoming  palms  met  me  ! 

How  can  I  but  recall  and  weep  1 
Her  hands'  light  charm  was  such 
Care  vanished  at  their  touch. 

Her  feet  spared  little  things  that  creep  ; 
u  For  stars  are  not,"  she'd  say, 
"  More  wonderful  than  they." 

And  now  she  sleeps  her  heavy,  heavy  sleep. 

His  fancy  then  recalls  two  scenes  : 
one,  than  which  few  poets  have  written 
a  sweeter,  of  the  lovers  sitting  together, 
in  the  hush  of  a  summer  wood,  fondly 
anticipating  their  near-at-hand  marriage- 
day  ; — the  other,  the  day  of  death,  while 
"  My  Lady's"  soul  departs — 


"  My  Beautiful  Lady" 


"  Oblivion  strack  me  like  a  mace, 
And  as  a  tree  that's  hewn 
I  dropped  in  a  dead  swoon, 
And  lay  a  long  time  cold  upon  my  face. 

"  Earth  had  one  quarter  turned  before 

My  miserable  fate, 

Pressed  down  with  its  whole  weight. 
My  sense  came  back,  and,  shivering  o'er, 

I  felt  a  pain  to  bear 

The  sun  s  keen,  cruel  glare — 
Which  shone  not  warm  as  heretofore — 

And  never  more  its  rays 

"Will  satisfy  my  gaze. 
No  more,  no  more  ;  oh,  never  any  more." 

After  this  comes  to  the  lover  the  death- 
in-life,  the  mortal  torpor  of  loss,  followed 
by  that  desperate  craving  for  some  token 
of  love  beyond  the  grave,  out  of  whose 
awful  silence  proceeds  no  answer,  until 
at  last  the  voice  of  Divine  Mercy,  speak- 
ing through  a  vision,  conjured  up  in  the 
night-time  beside  "  My  Lady's  "  moon- 
lit grave,  convinces  the  bereaved  heart 
through  the  strength  of  its  own  love,  of 
the  immortality  of  that  for  which  it 
mourns  and  craves.  The  lover  is  thereby 
taught  the  lesson  of  reproof  and  sub- 
mission, that,  softened  by  the  chastise- 
ment of  pain,  he  may  stretch  out  in  the 
higher  life  where  Love  is  sublimed  into 
Duty,  and  Hope  loses  itself  in  Faith. — 
"the  evidence  of  things  not  seen." 

A  subject  so  noble  would  raise  even 
the  plainest  prose  to  a  certain  level  of 
poetry — while  the  highest  poetry  would 
scarcely  be  commensurate  with  the 
grandeur  of  the  theme.  When  we  say 
that  in  "  My  Lady's  Voice  from  Heaven" 
Mr.  AVoolner  has  failed  in  making  his 
execution  equal  to  his  conception,  it  is 
only  saying  that  he  has  failed  where 
almost  any  poet,  save  a  Dante  or  a 
Milton,  would  have  failed.  Neverthe- 
less, the  moral  beauty  of  the  whole,  and 
the  artistic  beauty  of  the  fragments, 
compensate  for  a  degree  of  disappoint- 
ment which  the  reader  feels  in  what 
should  have  been  the  climax  of  the 
poem.  Something  of  this  may  be  owing 
to  the  stiff,  short  lilt  of  the  rhythm,  and 
to  a  certain  aroma,  so  to  speak,  which 
reminds  one  of  the  "Poet's  Vow"  of 
Mrs.  Browning.  Yet  it  has  exquisite 
passages.  "Witness  this,  when  the  lover 
is  sitting  by  the  midnight  tomb  : — 


"  —  A  wind  came,  blown  o'er  distant  sheaves, 
That  hissing,  tore  and  lashed  the  leaves, 
And  lashed  the  undergrowth. 

"  It  roared  and  howled,  it  raged  about 

With  some  determined  aim  ; 
And  storming  up  the  night,  brought  out 
The  moon,  that,  like  a  happy  shout, 
Called  forth  My  Lady's  name, 

"  In  sudden  splendour  on  the  stone ; 

Then,  for  an  instant,  I 
Snatched  and  heaped  up  my  past,  bestrown 
With  hopes  and  kisses,  struggling  moan, 

And  pangs  :  as  suddenly, 

"Oppressed  with  overwhelming  weight 

Down  fell  the  edifice  ; 
When  touched  as  by  the  hand  of  Fate 
My  gloom  was  gone.     I  felt  my  state 

So  light,  I  sobbed  for  bliss." 

Part  Ill/of  "  My  Beautiful  Lady  "  con- 
sists of  two  blank- verse  poems,  "  Years 
After,"  and  "Work."  The  first,  sup- 
posed to  be  written  ten  years  subsequent 
to  "  My  Lady's  "  death,  contains  tender 
memory-pictures  of  her  home,  her  pa- 
rents, her  own  childhood  and  maiden- 
hood, her  sweet  household  words  and 
ways.  It  seems  as  if  grief — as  grief 
often  will  do — had  gone  backward  with 
a  desperate  leap  over  the  chasm  of  de- 
spair into  the  pleasant  fields  of  fond 
remembrance,  where  love  in  fancy 
could  still  walk  hand  in  hand  with 
the  lost  beloved,  and  feel  no  more  any- 
thing of  the  past,  except  love.  And  in 
the  last  poem,  "  Work,"  shines  out  the 
final  sanctification  of  all  this  anguish 
— the  wisdom  won  out  of  sorrow,  the 
large  patience  and  universal  loving- 
kindness  taught  by  the  bitterness  of 
personal  pain.  Duty,  endurance,  faith 
— all  these  hidden  seeds  of  eternal  life 
which  never  spring  up  in  the  human 
heart  till  the  rough  ploughshare  of 
affliction  has  passed  over  it — arise  in 
the  heart  of  this  man,  to  make  green 
and  lovely  the  existence  that  was  once 
so  black  and  bare. 

Amidst  much  to  the  same  purport 
towards  the  close,  he  speaks  as  follows  : 

"  I,  craving  gracious  aid  of  heaven,  straight- 
way 
Began  the  work  which  shall  be  mine  till 

death. 

And  if  'tis  granted  that  I  may  disroot 
Some  evil  deeds,  or  plant  a  seed  which  time 
Shall  nourish  to  a  tree  of  pleasant  shade, 
s  2 


?60 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


To  wearied  limbs  a  boon,  and  fair  to  view— 
I  then  shall  know  the  Hand  that  struck  ^ne 

down, 

Has  been  my  guide  unto  the  paths  of  truth. 
And  she,  my  lost  adored  one,  where  is  she  1 
Where  has  she  been  throughout  these 

dragging  years 
Of  labour  1 

She  has  been  my  light  of  life ! 
The  lustrous  dawn  and  radiance  of  the  day 
At  noon — and  she  has  burned  the.  colors  in 
To  richer  depths  across  the  sun  at  setting  : 
And  my  tired  lips  she  closes ;  then,  in  dreams 
Descends  a  shaft  of  glory  barred  with  stairs, 
And  leads  my  spirit  up  where  I  behold 
My  dear  ones  lost.  And  thus  through  sleep, 

not  death, 

Remote  from  earthly  cares  and  vexing  jars, 
I  taste  the  stillness  of  the  life  to  come. 

Thus,  in  that  peaceful  completeness — 
which  should  be  the  aim  and  crown  of 
all  true  poetry,  of  all  imaginative  writing 
of  every  sort — closes  "My  Beautiful 
Lady."  It  is  its  highest  praise.  No 
poet — no  author  of  any  kind — has  a 
right  to  torture  the  world  with  his  own 
distempered  fancies,  useless  griefs,  un- 
satisfied doubts,  and  unrepeuted  sins. 
We  all  suffer  alike,  we  that  sing  and  we 


that  are  dumb ;  let  none  of  tts  add  the 
weight  of  his  own,  wantonly,  to  his 
brother's  burthen.  The  genius  which, 
so  far  from  striving  with  the  clear-eyed 
power  which  genius  especially  possesses, 

"  To  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men," 

— by  its  own  wilfulness  seeks  to  involve 
them  in  double  darkness — has  been  false 
to  the  highest  gift  which  God  can  be- 
stow. Therefore,  above  many  greater  and 
more  perfect  poets,  do  we  rate  this  poet, 
because  in  this  sense,  he  has  been  true 
to  his  Divine  calling.  Being — as  all  real 
authors  are — a  creator,  he  has  created 
not  a  monster,  but  a  man ;  a  human 
shape,  complete,  pure,  noble,  and 
life-like,  as  one  of  his  own  marble 
images.  Whether  he  ever  writes  an- 
other book  or  not — perhaps,  genius  itself 
having  its  limits  of  power,  and  art  being 
long  and  life  short,  he  had  better  not — 
it  may  henceforward  be  truthfully  said 
of  Thomas  Woolner,  "  that  he,  can  do 
two  things — he  can  make  a  statue,  and 
he  can  make  a  poem." 


ENGLAND'S    NEUTRALITY    IN    THE    AMEEICAN    CONTEST 
REGARDED  FROM  THE  FEDERAL  POINT  OF  VIEW. 


Tins  series  of  essays1  on  the  neutral 
relations  of  England  and  the  United 
vStates  originated,  as  we  learn  from  the 
prefatory  note,  in  a  private  corre- 
spondence. It  had  been  stated  to  Mr. 
Loving  that,  among  a  considerable  sec- 
tion of  the  English  people,  a  disposition 
prevailed  to  regard  the  American  civil 
struggle  in  a  purely  legal  light,  and, 
apart  from  the  merits  of  the  contest, 
looking  simply  to  the  honour  of  England, 
to  discharge  impartially  and  faithfully 
the  duties  of  a  strict  neutrality;  and 
this  appears  to  have  suggested  to  him 
the  idea  of  treating  the  subject  of  neu- 
tral relations  with  a  view  to  meet  this 
mode  of  looking  at  the  case.  The  pre- 
sent brochure,  therefore,  though  pub- 

1  "  The  Neutral  Relations  of  England  and 
the  United  States,"  by  Charles  G.  Loring. 
Wm.  V.  Spencer,  Boston. 


lished  in  America,  is  to  be  regarded  as 
addressed  to  Englishmen,  and  more  par- 
ticularly to  those  Englishmen  in  whom 
anxiety  for  their  country's  honour,  as  a 
neutral  in  the  present  contest,  prevails 
over  their  sympathies,  whether  with 
aristocracy  or  democracy,  with  slavery 
or  freedom.  It  is,  in  short,  an  appeal 
by  an  American  to  English  respect  for 
law  and  sense  of  justice.  We  will  add 
that  it  claims  our  attention  not  less  on 
grounds  of  interest,  than  on  those  of 
honour.  The  position  which  Federal 
America  now  occupies  as  a  belligerent, 
is  that  which  England  must  occupy  in 
any  future  war  in  which  she  may  be 
engaged.  At  present  we  are  neutrals, 
and  are,  therefore,  liable  to  look  too 
exclusively  at  the  neutral  side  of  inter- 
national questions  :  not  only  this — an 
influential  section  of  our  population 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


261 


entertains  feelings  strongly  and  avowed- 
ly hostile  to  that  combatant  whose  place 
in  the  contest  and  whose  interest  in 
belligerent  rights  correspond  with  what 
our  own  will  be  when  war  again  over- 
takes us,  and  it  shall  be  once  more  our 
turn  to  assert  those  rights.  Under  such 
circumstances,  there  is  no  small  danger 
that  we  may  give  our  sanction  to  prin- 
ciples which  may  prove  inconvenient 
or  even  disastrous  in  our  day  of  trial ; 
and  it  is,  therefore,  of  no  slight  advan- 
tage that  we  should  have  this  subject 
of  neutral  rights  discussed  for  us  by 
those  who  occupy  what  will  one  day  be 
our  own  position.  For  reasons  of 
national  self-interest,  then,  no  less  than 
of  national  honour,  we  cordially  welcome 
this  able  and  timely  production. 

It  is  rather  overstating  the  scope  of 
these  essays  to  describe  them  as  a  dis- 
cussion of  neutral  rights :  in  truth,  the 
author  confines  himself  to  the  examina- 
tion of  a  single  topic — a  tflpic,  however, 
to  which  all  others  in  connexion  with 
this  subject  have,  for  the  time,  become 
subordinate — the  question  of  building 
ships  of  war  by  a  neutral  for  a  bellige- 
rent power.  Mr.  Loring  contends  for 
two  points  :  1.  That  such  transactions 
— taking  the  actual  cases  of  this  kind 
which  have  occurred — are  illegal ;  and 
2.  That,  in  permitting  them,  the  English 
Government  has  been  guilty  of  a  dere- 
liction of  neutral  duty — a  dereliction 
such  as  renders  the  country  responsible 
— to  Avhat  extent  is  not  here  considered 
— for  the  consequences  which  have 
followed  from  the  illegal  acts,  and  as 
would  justify  the  United  States  in  de- 
manding indemnification. 

As  regards  the  legal  question,  we  are 
•disposed  to  think  that  Mr.  Loring  has, 
in  a  certain  sense,  made  out  his  case  : 
he  has,  at  all  events,  shown  that  his 
view  of  the  law  is  favoured  by  the  deci- 
sions of  American  courts,  and  by  the 
practice  alike  of  English  and  American 
Governments.  Whether  our  Foreign 
Enlistment  Act,  properly  construed,  will 
bear  out  the  interpretation  which  Mr. 
Loring  has  placed  upon  it,  is  a  question 
on  which,  with  the  expressed  opinion 
of  the  Ix>rd  Chief  Baron  to  the  contrary, 
and  with  an  appeal  from  this  judgment 


pending  in  the  Court  of  Error,  we  do 
not  of  course  presume  to  oiler  an 
optnion.  On  the  other  question — the 
degree  of  blame  which,  looking  at  the 
subject  in  its  political  aspects,  attaches 
to  our  Government  in  consequence  of 
what  has  occurred,  and  what  must  bo 
commensurate  with  this1 — the  extent  of 
our  responsibility  to  the  injured  nation 
— on  this  portion  of  the  case  we  think 
that  sufficient  allowance  has  not  been 
made  by  Mr.  Loring  for  the  extreme 
difficulty,  theoretical  as  well  as  practical, 
of  the  problem  with  which  our  Govern- 
ment was  called  upon  to  deal. 

It  is  too  much  the  habit  with  writers 
on  international  law  to  discuss  its  pro- 
blems as  if  the  key  to  their  solution  were 
necessarily,  in  all  cases,  to  be  found  in 
that  collection  of  treaties,  decisions,  and 
maxims  of  various  nations,  which  form 
what  may  be  called  the  corpus  of  the 
international  code.  It  was  an  old  hypo- 
thesis that  the  law,  when  non-existent 
everywhere  else,  remained  in  gremio 
magistrate* :  this  notion  has  been  eli- 
ded from  our  municipal  jurisprudence, 
but  something  like  it  seems  still  to  hold 
its  ground  in  the  domain  of  international 
law.  Whatever  may  be  the  novelty  or 
complexity  of  the  incident  which  may 
arise  for  adjudication,  it  rarely  seems  to 
occur  to  international  lawyers  that  the 
case  may  be  one  entirely  outside  the 
purview  of  any  principle  which  inter- 
national usage  has  established :  it  is 
almost  invariably  assumed  that  a  rule 
exists  somewhere  adequate  to  a  satis- 
factory solution,  could  it  only  be  found. 
It  will  scarcely,  however,  be  denied  by 
any  one  conversant  with  the  juridical 
controversies  of  the  last  few  years,  that 
in  many  of  its  most  important  branches 
international  jurisprudence  is  still  in 

1  On  the  principle  laid  down  by  Jefferson 
(iu  his  correspondence  with  the  French  Am- 
bassador in  1793,  on  the  occasion  of  complaints 
from  the  Government  of  Great  JJrituiu  similar 
in  character  to  those  which  aro  now  urged  by 
the  Federal  Government  agaiust  ourselves), 
that  restitution  should  be  made  '"'  if  ifc  can  be 
•effected  by  any  means  in  our  power,"  and 
where  all  the  means  in  our  power  for  giving 
restitution  have  not  been  employed,  tLeu  iu 
such  cases  "compensation." 


262 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


a  state  very  far  from  maturity.  Its 
present  condition,  in  truth,  is  one  of 
rapid  growth — growth,  however,  mainly 
through  a  process  which  to  other  incon- 
veniences adds  this  one,  that  it  has 
the  effect  of  concealing  the  develop- 
ment of  law  in  the  promotion  of  which 
it  aids.  We  shall  render  our  mean- 
ing plain  by  saying  that  every  fresh 
decision  which  takes  place  in  a  prize 
court,  though  purporting  merely  to 
give  effect  to  pre-existing  law,  in 
reality  becomes  itself  a  constituent  ele- 
ment of  the  law,  furnishing  a  new  datum 
which,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  is  des- 
tined to  influence  all  future  decisions  to 
which  the  principle  involved  in  the  case 
may  be  applicable.  International  law 
has  thus,  as  is  well  known,  been  largely 
created  by  Lord  Stowell ;  although  in 
each  particular  case  with  which  he  was 
required  to  deal,  that  learned  judge  was 
supposed,  and  perhaps  supposed  himself, 
to  be  merely  giving  effect  to  a  law  exist- 
ing already.  International  law  is  thus 
being  constantly  built  np  in  the  prize 
courts  of  civilized  nations,  by  what  has 
been  well  called  by  our  ablest  living 
writer  on  jurisprudence,  the  method  of 
"  Fiction" — a  method  which  is  not  the 
less  real  or  effective  because  it  for  the 
most  part  eludes  observation.  "We  are 
not,  therefore,  to  take  it  for  granted  that 
in  every  question  which  arises  for  settle- 
ment between  nations,  a  solution  is  to  be 
found  in  the  actual  international  code, 
such  as  the  expediency,  the  justice,  or 
the  necessity  of  the  case,  after  full  con- 
sideration, would  prescribe ;  more  par- 
ticularly we  are  not  to  take  this  for 
granted  when  the  question  at  issue  is 
connected  with  rapidly  growing  interests 
or  with  new  modes  of  warfare.  Now, 
the  question  at  present  pending  between 
England  and  the  United  States  is  one  in 
which  both  these  conditions  are  con- 
spicuous, and  we  think  it  will  not  be 
difficult  to  show  that  what  the  recent 
exigency  required  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment was  not  to  give  effect  to  the  law, 
but  to  make  the  law — not  to  administer 
legal  rules,  but  to  legislate— a  consider- 
ation which  it  is  very  necessary  to  bear 
in  mind  in  awarding  praise  or  blame  to 
its  conduct,  and  in  estimating  the  ex- 


tent of  responsibility  which  it  has  en- 
tailed on  the  nation. 

It  appears  to  us  that  two  positions 
bearing  upon  the  building  of  armed  ves- 
sels in  neutral  ports  may  be  regarded 
as  now  established.  It  is  held,  in  the 
first  place,  that  neutral  trade  in  contra- 
band of  war  with  either  belligerent  by 
private  persons  of  the  neutral  state  is 
no  violation  of  neutrality,  and  is  there- 
fore not  an  act  which  the  neutral  govern- 
ment is  in  any  way  bound  directly  to 
restrain.  The  proper  remedy  for  a  bel- 
ligerent aggrieved  by  such  acts  is  cap- 
ture in  trav.situ  of  the  contraband  goods  ; 
and  the  neutral  sufficiently  discharges 
his  duty  when  he  simply  abstains  from 
interfering  with  this  process.  And, 
secondly,  it  seems  equally  decided  that 
the  position  of  neutrality  imposes  upon 
the  neutral  state  the  obligation  of  either 
freely  admitting  both  belligerents  to  his 
territory  for  warlike  purposes,  or  else  of 
rigidly  excluding  both  :  the  territory  of 
the  neutral  must  not  be  placed  at  the 
disposal  of  either  belligerent  to  be  used 
as  a  "  vantage  ground "  against  his  foe. 
It  may  easily  be  shown  that  these  doc- 
trines are  founded  in  the  primary  neces- 
sities of  international  relations.  To 
control  the  commerce  of  its  subjects  so 
as  to  prevent  trading  in  contraband  of 
war  would  be  a  task  beyond  the  power 
of  any  government :  "  it  would  be  hard 
in  principle,  and  impossible  in  practice." 
This  task  is,  therefore,  of  necessity  re- 
mitted to  those  who  are  interested  in  its 
performance,  i.  e.  the  belligerents.  On 
the  other  hand,  for  a  neutral  to  place 
his  territory  at  the  disposal  of  one  of 
the  contending  parties  for  the  purpose 
of  organizing  expeditions  against  his 
enemy,  is  a  proceeding  which  no  nation 
injured  by  it,  and  in  a  position  to  resent 
it,  would  for  a  moment  tolerate.  It 
would  be  better  for  the  nation  so  attacked 
at  once  to  declare  war  against  the  conniv- 
ing neutral :  it  would  thus,  at  least,  com- 
pel him  to  declare  himself,  and  at  worst 
substitute  an  open  for  a  secret  foe.  The 
rule,  therefore,  which  proliibits  the  using 
of  neutral  territory  as  a  position  from 
which  to  attack  an  enemy  is  simply  in- 
dispensable to  the  existence  of  neutrality. 
Without  it  a  war  between  any  two  states 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


263 


must  rapidly  draw  into  its  vortex  the 
whole  world. 

These  principles,  then,  may  be  re- 
.garded  as  beyond  dispute ;  nor,  so  long 
as  actual  cases  admit  of  being  brought 
under  the  exclusive  domain  of  either, 
does  it  seem  that  much  difficulty  can 
arise  in  their  practical  application.  But 
the  facts  do  not  always  square  with  this 
proviso.  A  transaction  may  assume 
.such  a  form  that  it  may  be  doubtful 
to  which  principle  it  belongs,  or  that 
it  may  be  governed  at  once  by  both. 
It  may  be  a  strictly  commercial  trans- 
action, in  the  sense  that  it  is  undertaken 
by  those  who  have  charge  of  it  from 
simple  motives  of  gain ;  while  it  may  at 
the  same  time  be  a  hostile  enterprise 
issuing  from  a  neutral  shore.  Now, 
where  this  occurs,  the  question  arises 
which  of  the  two  doctrines  above  stated 
is  the  subordinate,  and  which  the  para- 
mount, one.  Looking  to  the  ultimate 
ground  of  international  law — the  wel- 
fare and  harmonious  intercourse  of  inde- 
pendent nations — the  question  is  one 
which  there  may  not  perhaps  be  much 
difficulty  in  answering  ;  but  what  we 
maintain  is,  that  the  answer  to  it  is  not  to 
be  found  in  any  doctrines  of  international 
law  as  yet  authoritatively  declared.  Both 
doctrines  in  all  their  breadth  have  been 
frequently  laid  down  by  the  highest 
authorities  ;  but  no  authority  that  we 
.know  of  has  yet  told  us  which,  when 
they  come  in  conflict,  is  to  give  way.1 

Now,  it  is  just  here,  as  it  seems  to  iis 
— in  this  conflict  of  two  principles  the 
relative  importance  of  which  has  not 
yet  been  ascertained — that  the  real 
difficulty  lies  of  dealing  with  the  trans- 
actions which  have  occasioned  this  con- 
troversy. The  essential  facts  involved 
in  those  transactions  may,  we  think, 
without  much  hesitation,  be  taken  to  be 
these  : — Certain  English  shipbuilders 
have  entered  into  contracts  with  the 
agents  of  the  Confederate  Government 
to  build  ships  adapted  for  war.  These 

1  There  are  no  doubt  decided  cases  in  which 
the  two  characters  of  commerce  and  hostility 
seem  to  concur,  in  which,  therefore,  it  might 
appear  that  the  relative  force  of  the  two  prin- 
ciples had  been  ascertained;  but  it  will  be 
found  that  in  such  cases  the  concurrence  is 
seeming  only. 


ships  sail  from  England  partially  armed,; 
it  being  arranged  that  the  completion 
of  their  armament  shall  take  place  at 
some  neutral  port  previously  decided 
on,  outside  the  jurisdiction  of  England  ; 
and  the  materials  for  the  purpose  are 
sent  thither  in  other  ships  also  des- 
patched from  England.  The  ships,  when 
their  equipment  is  completed,  are  handed 
over  to  a  Confederate  officer  with  a  com- 
mission from  the  Confederate  Govern- 
ment, who  forthwith  proceeds  to  employ 
them  in  making  depredations  on  the 
marine  of  the  United  States.  Now, 
taking  this  as  a  correct  statement  of 
what  has  occurred,  and  assuming  it  to 
be  all  capable  of  proof,  we  think  it  is 
apparent  that  the  transaction  partakes  of 
the  double  character  we  have  described, 
that  it  is  at  once  a  commercial  adven- 
ture and  a  hostile  enterprise.  It  is  a 
commercial  adventure  ;  for  we  have  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  those  who  organ- 
ized that  portion  of  the  expedition 
which  was  prepared  on  English  ground 
wereactuated  by  other  motives  than  those 
of  gain  :  they  received  a  lucrative  order 
from  a  foreign  government ;  they  exe- 
cuted it,  and  were  paid  for  their  trouble. 
The  case,  therefore,  under  this  aspect  of 
it,  comes  within  the  law  as  laid  down  by 
Judge  Story  in  the  case  of  the  Santis- 
sima  Trinidad  : — 

"  There  is  nothing  in  our  laws  or  in  the  law 
of  nations  that  forbids  our  citizens  from  send- 
ing armed  vessels,  as  well  as  munitions  of  war, 
to  foreign  ports  for  sale.  It  is  a  commercial 
adventure  which  no  nation  is  bound  to  pro- 
hibit, and  which  only  exposes  the  persons 
engaged  in  it  to  the  penalty  of  confiscation." 

Equally  clear  is  it,  nevertheless,  that 
the  transaction  bears  the  impress  of  a 
hostile  enterprise.     It  is  true  the  ele- 
ments of  the  expedition  were  combined 
beyond  the  pale  of  English  jurisdiction, 
and  Mr.  Canning,  in  a  passage  quoted, 
and  apparently   adopted  by    "  Histori- 
cus,"  has  laid  down  the  doctrine  that 
'  it  is  only  when  the  elements  of  arnia- 
'  ments  are  combined  that    they  come 
'  within  the  provisions  of  the  law,  and 
'  if   that    combination    does   not   take 
'  place  till  they  have  left  the  country, 
'  we  have  no   right    to   interfere  with 
'  them."     But  a  higher  authority  has 
distinctly  negatived  this  view.     In  the 


England 's  'Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


case  of  the  Bolivar  (U.S.  v.  Quincey, 
quoted  by  Mr.  Loring),  it  was  decided 
by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States  that  it  was  not  necessary  that 
the  jury  should  find  that  the  Bolivar, 
when  she  left  Baltimore  and  when  she 
arrived  at  St.  Thomas,  and  during  the 
voyage,  was  armed,  or  in  a  condition  to 
commit  hostilities :  it  was  sufficient  if 
a  fixed  intention,  to  employ  her  in  a 
hostile  manner  could  be  shown  to  be 
entertained  before  she  left  the  United 
States. 

The  cases  just  referred  to  are  those 
which  seem  to  furnish  the  best  clue  for 
guiding  us  through  our  recent  compli- 
cations. The  misfortune  is  that,  while 
both  cases  seem  about  equally  analogous 
to  those  under  discussion,  they  each 
enjoin  an  opposite  course  of  action. 
Take  the  case  of  Jbhe  Alabama :  as  be- 
tween the  case  of  that  vessel  and  that 
of  the  Santissima  Trinidad  there  are 
these  points  of  difference  :  1.  That  the 
Alabama  was  built,  as  it  is  believed, 
tinder  a  positive  contract  with  a  power 
engaged  in  hostilities  with  a  nation  with 
which  we  were  -at  peace ;  while  the 
Santissima  Trinidad,  though  built  for 
belligerent  purposes  and  for  sale,  was 
yet,  at  least  originally,  not  destined  for 
the  services  of  any  particular  State  ; 
and  2.  That  the  latter  was  transferred 
to  the  belligerent  purchaser  in  his  own 
port ;  while  in  the  former  case  the 
transference  took  place  in  the  port  of 
the  neutral,  the  vessel  having  never 
been  brought  within  belligerent  terri- 
tory. These  points  of  difference  un- 
questionably place  the  building  and  sale 
of  the  Alabama  more  distinctly  within 
the  category  of  hostile  actions  than  if 
the  case  corresponded  in  all  its  parts 
with  that  with  which  it  has  been  com- 
pared ;  but  it  must  at  least  be  admitted 
that  the  dividing  line  is  a  narrow  one. 
Moreover,  the  incidents  in  question, 
however  they  may  establish  the  charac- 
ter of  hostility,  do  not  yet  deprive  the 
transaction  of  its  commercial  character. 
If  the  doctrine  laid  down  by  Chief 
Justice  Story  be  taken,  as  it  is  expressed, 
without  qualification,  that  "  a  commer- 
"  cial  adventure"  is  one  which  "no 
*'  nation  is  bound  to  prohibit/'  we  think 


it  must  be  admitted  that  there  is  some 
point  in  the  question  of  the  Lord  Chief 
Baron  : — "  If  a  man  may  build  a  vessel 
"  for  the  purpose  of  offering  it  for  sale 
"  to  either  of  the  belligerent  parties, 
"  may  he  not  execute  an  order  for  it ? " 
On  the  other  hand,  the  comparison  of 
the  Alabama  with  the  Bolivar  case 
brings  out  a  correspondence  not  less 
close,  though  here,  too,  there  is  a  differ- 
ence at  least  as  important  as  that  in  the 
comparison  which  has  just  been  made. 
In  the  Bolivar  case  the  defendant,  who 
had  fitted  out  the  vessel  and  taken  it 
out  of  port,  was  also  the  commander 
who  had  fought  it ;  whereas  in  the  case 
of  the  Alabama  these  functions  were 
kept  distinct :  the  warlike  element  was 
introduced  into  the  enterprise  by  one 
set  of  men  outside  English  jurisdiction  ; 
the  commercial  part  of  it  was  performed 
within  English  jurisdiction  by  another. 

If  this  be,  as  we  believe  it  to  be,  a 
fair  statement  of  the  position  of  the 
question,  so  far  as  it  admits  of  solution 
on  the  rules  deducible  from  the  records 
of  decided  cases,  then  it  seems  to  follow 
that  the  materials  for  a  decision  on  the 
grounds  of  existing  law  really  do  not 
exist.  While  no  rule  precisely  meeting 
the  actual  case  is  adducible,  those  which 
do  exist,  and  which  come  nearest  to  the 
case  in  hand,  bear  with  about  equal 
weight  in  opposite  directions.  The  actual 
case,  in  short,  to  repeat  our  former  state- 
ment, embodies  two  opposite  principles, 
and  no  authority  has  yet  told  us,  when 
this  happens,  which  principle  must  give 
way. 

Yet  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  a 
decision  should  be  made,  and  further, 
the  moment  we  extend  our  view  beyond 
the  bounds  of  the  strictly  legal  horizon, 
there  can  scarcely  be  a  doubt  as  to  what 
that  decision  should  be.  Is  it  to  be  sup- 
posed that  a  belligerent,  undisputed 
master  of  the  sea,  his  enemy's  fleet 
swept  from  the  ocean,  his  enemy's  ports 
blockaded,  will  endure  to  see  that 
enemy  deliberately  contrive  a  scheme 
to  convert  the  ports  of  a  neutral  power 
into  dockyards  for  his  use,  appropriate 
funds  for  the  purpose,  appoint  agents  in 
the  neutral  territory,  and,  after  his 
proper  fleet  has  been  annihilated,  quietly 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View.  2G5 


proceed,  under  the  protection  of  a  neutral 
flag,  to   build  a  new  one,  destined  to 
issue  from  the  neutral  ports  fully  armed 
to  depredate  and  to  destroy  ?     This  is  a 
question  which,  it  seems  to  us,  admits 
of  but  one  answer ;  and,  when  matters 
have  reached  this  pass,  whatever  may  be 
the  doctrine  of  lawyers,  for  statesmen 
the  real   problem  is — if,  indeed,    neu- 
trality is  what  they  desire — simply  by 
what  means  such  practices  may  best  be 
put  down.     The  interest  of  non-comba- 
tant   States   and  the  freedom  of  trade 
must  of  course  be  kept  in  view ;  but, 
even  with  a  view  to  these  very  ends, 
effectual  prevention  is  the  primary  need. 
The  mode  hitherto  adopted  for  this 
purpose — for   reconciling   the   interests 
of  neutral  trade  with  the  preservation 
of  neutrality — we  have  just  seen  ;    it 
sought  its  end  by  distinguishing   com- 
mercial  adventure   from   hostile  enter- 
prise.    Experience  has  proved  that  this 
distinction,    clear    enough    in   abstract 
statement,  fails  to  meet  the  exigencies  of 
actual  events  :  in  practice  the  commer- 
cial and  hostile  characters   frequently 
concur   in   the   same   act.     It  is   thus 
necessary  to  seek  a  more  stringent  for- 
mula.    This  has  been  attempted  in  the 
recent  discussion  :  it  has  been  suggested 
that  the  question  of  legality  should  be 
made  to  turn,  not  simply  on  the  com- 
mercial nature  of  the  transaction,  but 
upon  this  in  connexion  with  a  further 
condition — the  transport,  namely,  of  the 
contraband  article  to  a  belligerent  port 
before   being   employed   in   belligerent 
operations.     A  park  of  artillery,  so  the 
case  is  put,  may  without  any  violation  of 
neutrality  be  sold  to  a  belligerent  by  the 
subjects  of  a  neutral  nation,  because  a 
park   of  artillery  cannot  be  employed 
against  the  enemy   of  that  belligerent 
till  it  is  first  transferred  to  belligerent 
territory.    The  belligerent  against  whom 
the  contraband  is  intended  to  be  used 
has  here  his  proper  remedy — he  may,  if 
he  can,  intercept  it  by  capture  in  tran- 
sits.    On  the  same  principle  the  build- 
ing, and  even  complete  equipment,  of  a 
vessel  of  war  for  a  -belligerent  ought 
not   to   be   regarded   as  a  violation  of 
neutrality,  provided  it  conforms  to  the 
same  rule — provided  it  is  placed  in  bel- 


ligerent territory  before  it  is  employed 
in  belligerent  operations.  But,  when  a 
vessel  built  in  neutral  territory  proceeds 
at  once  to  operate  against  its  enemy  from 
the  basis  of  a  neutral  shore,  the  ordinary 
belligerent  remedy  against  trade  in  con- 
traband no  longer  applies  :  in  this  case 
the  neutral  territory  becomes  a  "  vantage 
'•'  ground "  for  one  of  the  belligerents, 
and  here  accordingly  neutrality  is  vio- 
lated. 

The  distinction  is  in  theory  sufficiently 
clear,  and  may,  we  believe,  be  defended 
on  general  grounds  ;  our  objection  to  it 
is   that  it  could   never  be   a  working 
principle.     The   legality  of  the   trans- 
action  is  made   to   depend    upon    the 
destination  of  the  vessel  after  she  has 
left  neutral  jurisdiction.     Now  this  is  a 
point  which,  it  seems  to  us,  could  rarely, 
if  ever,  be  established  by  evidence  until 
evidence  was  forestalled  by  the  accom- 
plished fact.     It   may  be   possible   to 
infer,   in    a    general   way,   commercial 
motives  from  overt  acts  ;  but  from  sucli 
data  to  pronounce  upon  the  destination, 
in  a  geographical  sense,  of  a  vessel  still 
in  neutral  territory — to  decide  whether 
a  fully  armed  vessel  of  war  was  about 
to  sail  for  a  belligerent  port  or  to  engage, 
in  immediate  operations — would    be    a 
feat   of  interpretative  skill,  which  no- 
thing would  render  possible  but  such 
gross  and  stupid  blundering  on  the  part 
of  the  violators  of  the  law  as  certainly 
nothing  in  our  recent  experience  gives 
us  the  least  reason  for  calculating  on. 
After  the  illegal  end  had  been  defini- 
tively accomplished,  after  the  mischief 
had  been  done,   the  violation  of  neu- 
trality would  be  sufficiently  plain  ;  but 
where  then  would  be  the  remedy  I   And 
what  can  be  conceived  more  calculated 
to  keep  alive  a  chronic  irritation  between 
belligerent    and    neutral    nations  —  to 
promote  that  state  of  feeling  which  if 
long  continued  almost  inevitably  leads 
to  war — than  a  rule  which  would  indeed 
be  effective  if  carried  out,  but  which  in 
practice   never   could   be    carried    out, 
which  would  permit  a  real  injury  to  bo 
inflicted,  while  it  always  provided   for 
this  injury  a  technical  justification? 

To  render  neutrality  real,  it  seems  to 
us  plain  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  go  a, 


266 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


step  further  than  any  scheme  we  have 
yet  considered,  and  to  place  the  dis- 
tinction neither  in  the  quality  of  the 
transaction,  nor  in  the  destination  of 
the  enterprise,  but  in  the  kind  of  the 
.commodity.  The  line,  in  short,  must  be 
drawn  between  ships  and  other  contra- 
band goods ;  l  and  for  this  we  think  it 
can  be  shown  that  there  is  solid  ground 
in  the  nature  of  the  case.  We  repu- 
diate, indeed,  the  doctrine  which  we 
have  lately  seen  advanced,  that  a  ship  is 
a  portion  of  the  territory  of  the  country 
to  which  it  belongs — a  doctrine,  in  our 
judgment,  at  once  artificial,  question- 
able, and  inadequate.  We  place  the 
distinction  for  which  we  contend  upon 
the  plain  fact,  that  an  armed  ship,  or 
ship  prepared  for  armour,  is  a  form  of 
contraband,  and  the  only  form,  which 
admits  of  being  used  directly  from  a 
neutral  shore.  That  a  ship  admits  of 
being  so  used  affords  a  sufficient  pre- 
sumption that,  when  the  temptation 
offers,  it  will  be  so  used ;  and  since,  as 
we  have  shown,  it  is  impossible  in  prac- 
tice to  distinguish  a  legitimate  from  an 

1  A  writer,  to  whom  the  country  is  not  a 
little  indebted  for  an  admirable  and  timely 
exposition  of  the  branch  of  international  law 
bearing  upon  neutral  rights,  has  in  terms 
repudiated  this  distinction.  In  the  preface  to 
his  latest  publication  he  asks : — "  Why  are 
ships  to  be  prohibited  rather  than  cannon,  or 
rifles,  or  gunpowder,  with  which  the  illegal 
recruit  is  equally  to  be  armed]  Such  a 
distinction  is  obviously  illogical  and  unsus- 
tainable." ..."  It  cannot  be  denied,  how- 
•ever,"  he  adds,  "  that  the  present  state  of  the 
Foreign  Enlistment  Act  is  unsatisfactory.  The 
statute  goes  either  too  far  or  not  far  enough." 
(Additional  Letters  of  Historicus,  p.  xiii.)  In 
a  later  letter,  however,  in  the  Times,  in  reply 
to  the  same  question  which  had  been  put  to 
him  by  Mr.  Lindsay,  he  replies : — "  An  English 
merchant  may  manufacture  cannon  and  all 
other  munitions  of  war  for  a  belligerent 
because  there  is  no  law  to  prevent  it.  An 
English  shipbuilder  may  not  equip  a  vessel  of 
•war  or  a  transport  for  a  belligerent,  because 
there  happens  to  be  an  English  Act  of  Par- 
liament which  expressly  prohibits  his  doing 
so."  We  understand  from  this  that  the 
writer's  view  is,  that  the  Foreign  Enlistment 
Act  draws  the  line  between  ships  of  the  kind 
described  and  other  contraband  goods ;  and  as 
his  most  recent  writing  has  tended  towards 
this  result  en  general  grounds,  we  conclude 
that  his  present  view  of  the  policy  of  the 
question  would  not  differ  from  that  stated  in 
the  text. 


illegitimate  destination,  the  one  effec- 
tual remedy  which  remains  is  simply 
to  proscribe  this  form  of  contraband 
trading  altogether.  The  nature  of  the 
manufacture  would  render  the  enforce- 
ment of  the  prohibition  easy ;  and  we 
do  not  believe  that  it  would  interfere 
with  any  important  interest.  It  would 
still  be  open  to  the  shipbuilder,  where 
the  destination  of  the  vessel  was  a  legal 
one,  to  satisfy  the  Government  of  this, 
on  which  he  might  obtain  a  license  to 
proceed  with  his  work. 

To  the  principle,  however,  of  dis- 
tinguishing between  ships  and  other 
contraband  it  is  objected  (no  longer, 
indeed,  by  the  Times,  whose  patriotism, 
let  us  do  it  justice,  has  proved  stronger 
than  its  hatred  of  a  kindred  nation)  that 
the  rule  would  in  practice  operate  un- 
equally, that  it  is  unfair,  for  example, 
to  permit  the  Federals  free  access  to  our 
manufactories  of  guns  and  ammunition, 
while  we  shut  out  the  Confederates 
from  our  dockyards  which  provide  that 
species  of  contraband  of  which  they 
stand  in  need.  Those  who  employ  this 
argument  apparently  suppose  that  it  is 
the  artisans  of  the  Southern  States  who 
have  manufactured  all  the  guns  and 
gunpowder  which  have  been  expended 
by  the  Confederates  in  the  present 
contest ;  and  yet  they  are  not  ignorant — 
on  the  contrary,  they  are  never  tired 
reminding  us  of  the  number  of  vessels 
which,  despite  of  the  "  mock  blockade," 
are  constantly  entering  the  Southern 
ports.  With  what,  let  us  ask,  do  they 
suppose  the  blockade-runners  to  be 
freighted  ]  The  truth  is  the  gain  to  the 
South  from  the  neutral  trade  in  centra- 
brand,  keeping  in  view  the  relative 
abilities  of  the  two  parties  to  provide 
themselves  from  native  resources,  is  im- 
measurably greater  than  any  which  has 
been  reaped  by  the  2\Torth.  The  actual 
exports  of  contraband  to  Northern  ports 
may,  for  aught  we  know,  be  larger  than 
those  which  have  passed  through  the 
blockade ;  but  have  they  been  of  the 
same  importance  to  the  receivers  1  Which 
belligerent  could  with  least  detriment 
have  dispensed  altogether  with  a  foreign 
market?  It  is  obvious  that,  while  for 
the  North,  with  its  great  mechanical 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


267 


and  manufacturing  resources,  the  neutral 
trade  in  contraband  lias  never  been 
more  than  a  convenience,  it  has  for  the 
South  been  nothing  short  of  a  vital 
necessity. 

So  far  as  the  present  war  is  concerned, 
there  is  thus  a  plain  answer  to  the  objec- 
tion in  the  facts  of  the  case.  But  we 
think  that  it  admits  also  of  a  more 
general  answer  on  the  ground  of  prin- 
ciple. Grant  that  the  rule  may  in  cer- 
tain cases  fall  with  more  severity  on  one 
of  the  combatants  than  on  the  other, 
does  it  follow  that  this  result  is  properly 
chargeable  on  the  rule  ?  We  think  not. 
Where  it  can  be  shown,  as  in  the  pre- 
sent case  it  may  be  shown,  that  a  rule 
is  adopted  on  general  grounds,  without 
reference  to  the  condition^  of  any  par- 
ticular contest,  and  that  it  is  called  for 
by  the  necessities  of  the  case,  it  seems 
to  us  that  the  requirements  of  interna- 
tional impartiality  have  been  fulfilled  : 
any  inequality  which  may  afterwards 
result  is  properly  attributable  to  the 
circumstances  which  have  given  to  the 
operation  of  the  rule  this  one-sided 
effect — for  example  to  the  superiority 
at  sea  of  one  of  the  combatants — a 
superiority  which  it  is  no  part  of  the 
neutral's  business  to  annul. 

We  have  argued  this  question  on  the 
assumption  that  what  the  neutral  has  a 
right  to  require  from  one  belligerent  in 
relation  to  the  other,  he  is  under  an  obli- 
gation to  require  ;  that  there  are  neutral 
duties  as  well  as  neutral  rights.     If  not 
the  reverse  of  this   position,   at   least 
something  in  terms   extremely  like  it 
has,  however,  lately  been  maintained  by 
learned  writers.     It  has  been  contended 
'  that  the  right  which  is  injured  by  the 
'  act  of   the   offending  belligerent  [in 
'  such   violations  of  neutrality  as   we 
'  have  been  considering]  is  the  right  of 
'  the  neutral  government,  and  not  that 
'  of  the  other  belligerent "  :  from  which 
the   "  important    consequence "   is   de- 
duced "  that  it  is  the  neutral,  and  not 
'  the  belligerent,  who  is  strictly  entitled 
'  to  claim  and  to  enforce  the  remedy"  ... 
'  Statutes,  like  the  Foreign  Enlistment 
'  Act,  are  [thus]  purely  municipal  enact- 
'  nients  for  the  protection  and  benefit  of 
. '  the  neutral  state,  and  not  laws  in  further- 


"  ance  of  any  international  obligation." J 
Having  regard,  however,  to  the  qualify, 
ing  admissions  which  those  who  have 
maintained  this  position  have  made,  we 
are  disposed  to  agree  with  Mr.  Loring 
that,  "  notwithstanding  all  the  learning 
"  and  ability  employed  in  maintaining 
"  these  theses,  they  are,  for  the  most 
"  part,  mere  abstractions  [and,  we  will 
"  add,  misleading  abstractions]  in  the 
"  practical  applications  of  the  rules  of 
"  duty  to  the  faithful  observance  of 
"  neutral  obligations." 

It  is  not  denied  by  those  who  take 
this  ground  that  the  neutral  is  bound  by 
the  law  of  "  impartiality "  as  between 
the  contending  parties.  On  the  con- 
trary the  doctrine  of  Kent  is  quoted 
and  adopted,  "  that  the  neutral  is  to 
"  carry  himself  with  perfect  equality 
"  between  both  belligerents,  giving 
"  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  any 
"  advantage."  If  this  be  so,  it  would 
seem  to  follow  that  we,  as  neutrals, 
are  bound  toward  each  belligerant  to 
enforce  as  against  the  other  our  neutral 
rights,  unless  indeed  we  are  prepared  to 
adopt  the  other  alternative  of  neutrality 
— to  set  free  our  people  to  take,  as  each 
feels  inclined,  a  side  in  the  quarrel,  to 
place  our  ports  without  reservation  at 
the  disposal  of  both  belligerents  alike, 
and,  in  a  word,  to  inaugurate  civil  war 
at  home.  "  Permission  or  sufferance 
"  [on  any  other  terms  than  these]  is," 
to  adopt  the  words  of  Mr.  Loring, 
"  virtual  connivance  with  the  enemy, 
"  and  converts  the  professing  neutral 
"  into  an  ally  whom  the  offended  belli- 
"  gerent  may  justly  treat  as  such." 

And  all  this  is  admitted,  but  a  dis- 
tinction is  taken.  The  doctrine  "that 
"  it  is  not  only  the  right  but  the  duty 
"  of  neutral  states  to  insist  on  the  im- 
"  niunity  to  which  they  are  entitled, 
"  and  to  punish  and  redress  all  inva- 
"  sions  of  their  territory  or  their  laws," 
"is  only  "sound"  when  "properly 
"  limited  and  explained."  "  The  duty 
"  [in  question]  is  not  a  duty  on  the 
"  part  of  the  neutral  corresponding  to 
"  any  right  vested  in  the  belligerent, 
"  and  is  consequently  at  most  what 
"jurists  call  a  duty  of  imperfect  obli- 
1  Letters  of  Historicus,  pp.  152-155. 


268 


England  s  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


"  gation."  l  The  neutral  on  general 
grounds  of  morality  is  bound  to  be 
impartial ;  but  this  obligation  is  like 
the  obligation  of  charity  :  it  does  not 
correspond  with  any  "right"  residing 
in  the  belligerent  who  is  injured  by 
its  infraction ;  and,  if  the  neutral 
choose  to  disregard  the  obligation,  the 
suffering  belligerent  has  no  more 
"right"  to  call  him  to  account,  than 
has  the  pauper  to  exact  alms  from  the 
uncharitable  rich. 

With  extreme  deference  for  the.  able 
writer  who  has  advanced  this  argument, 
we  must  take  leave  to  say  that  the  dis- 
tinction for  which  he  contends  appears 
to  us,  in  the  case  with  which  we  are 
concerned,  to  be  a  distinction  without 
a  difference.     The   distinction  between 
duties  of  perfect  and  those  of  imperfect 
obligation   can  only  have  place  where 
"  law  "  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term 
is  contrasted  with  morality.  Now,  inter- 
national law  is  not  law  in  the  proper 
sense  :   it  is   "  law "  only  analogically. 
International  law  is  not  promulgated  by 
any  determinate  superior — it  is  not  en- 
forced by  any  regular  system  of  sanc- 
tions— it  is,  in  short,  a  law  of  public 
opinion,  or,  to  adopt  the  accurate  lan- 
guage of  the  late  Mr.  Austin,  "  positive 
morality."     It  is  true  that  certain  por- 
tions  of   this   international    "  positive 
morality "  have  been  submitted  to  the 
manipulation   of  courts  of  justice,  and 
have   been   brought   into   the  form  of 
definite  formulas  ;  that  they  thus  offer 
externally  a  closer  resemblance  to  posi- 
tive law  than  other  portions  of  the  same 
moral  code  which   have   not   been  re- 
duced   into    formal    shape.     But    the 
difference  here  is  a  difference  in  form 
merely :    in  principle   the   two  classes 
of  international  duties   are   essentially 
the    same,    springing    from    the    same 
source  in  the  moral  sense  of  the  civi- 
lized world,  and  upheld  by  the  same 
sanctions — the    force    which     civilized 
opinion  or  the  indignation  of  particular 
nations    wields.      An  incident   in   the 
blockade  will  enable  us  at  once  to  test 
and  illustrate  this  position.     When  the 
Peterho/  was   seized    by  the    Federal 
cruisers,   and   her   owners   in   England 
1  Letters  of  Historicus,  p.  15 tf. 


made  application  to  the  Government  to 
procure   her  restoration,   Lord   Russell 
refused  to  interfere.     International  law 
required  that  the  neutral  country  should 
submit  its  suspected  vessels  to  the  adju- 
dication  of  a   belligerent   prize   court. 
Had  we  refused   to  comply  with  this 
rule,  it  would  have  been  a  casus  belli 
for  the  Federal  States.     But  supposing 
the  decision  of  the  Federal  courts  proved 
to  be  in  our  opinion  a  manifestly  unjust 
one,  should  we  be  bound  to  submit  (as 
an  individual   in  the    analogous    case 
under  municipal  law  would  be  bound  to 
submit)  because  it  had  been  obtained 
through    the    recognised    international 
tribunals  in   the   formally   legal  way1? 
Lord   Eussell   distinctly  intimated  the 
contrary.     It  would  still  be  open  to  us 
to  demur  to  this  decision  on  the  score 
of  a  miscarriage  of  justice,  and,  in  the 
event    of  our  failing   to   obtain  satis- 
faction, to  have  recourse  to  the  ultima 
ratio  of  nations.     In   other  words,  for 
the  violation  of  a  perfectly  vague  and 
undefined  duty — the  duty  of  adminis- 
tering justice  according  to  the  evidence 
— the   recognised   remedy   in    interna- 
tional law  is  the  same   as  where  the 
obligation  infringed  is  the  strictly  de- 
fined one  of  submitting  suspected  vessels 
to  the  adjudication  of  a  prize  court.     It 
seems,  then,  that  in  the  sphere  of  inter- 
national relations,  however  obligations 
may  differ  in  the- greater  or  less  degree 
of  precision  with  which  they  are  capable 
of  being   determined,  in  the   essential 
points — the    source   from   which    they 
emanate  and   the   sanctions   by  which 
they  are  enforced — all  stand  alike  upon 
the  same  footing.     The  difference,  how- 
ever, to  which  we  have  adverted  may, 
for  the  purpose  of  the  immediate  argu- 
ment, be  disregarded.     The  duty  of  the 
neutral   to  insist  on  the   immunity  to 
which  he  is  entitled  is  an  obligation  no 
less  definite  than  that  of  the  belligerent 
to  concede  to  him  that  immunity  :  the 
subject-matter  of  the  two  obligations  is 
the   same.     Neither  on  the  ground  of 
form  then,  nor  on  that  of  its  essential 
character,  can  the  distinction  which  is 
contended  for  be  made  out.     We  have 
entered   with    some   fulness    into    this 
question,  because,  though  in  appearance 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


269 


a  purely  theoretical  one,  we  conceive  it 
might  easily  become  one  of  practical 
importance.  Factitious  distinctions  are 
generally  productive  of  factitious  con- 
fusion ;  and  confusion  of  ideas  as  to 
the  cogency  of  our  international  obliga- 
tions might  readily,  in  the  present  state 
of  the  public  mind,  be  productive  of 
serious  results.1 

The  foregoing  observations  have  been 
directed  towards  two  points  : — the  lega- 
lity of  the  proceedings  in  the  case  of 
the  Alabama  and  her  companions,  and 
the  nature  of  our  duties  as  neutrals  in 
enforcing  the  immunity  from  belligerent 
operations  to  which  we  are  entitled. 
There  remains  the  further  question  as 
to  what  our  conduct  should  be  with 
reference  to  the  vessels  which  have 
escaped.  It  is  very  important  that 
Englishmen  should  understand  the  light 
in  which  this  matter  is  viewed  by  the 
Northern  people — not,  be  it  observed, 
by  the  "  mob,"  or  by  party  politicians, 
but  by  the  whole  people  of  the  Nor- 
thern States,  including  the  most 
thoughtful,  moderate,  and  cultivated 
men  whom  the  country  contains.  It  is, 
beyond  question,  that  the  universal 
feeling  on  this  subject  is  one  of  pro- 
found indignation  and  resentment — 

1  In  his  last  letter  to  the  Times  (Nov.  7, 
1863)  "  Historicus"  has  thus  expressed  him- 
self : — "  That  it  is  the  right,  and,  in  some 
sense,  the  duty  of  a  neutral  State,  to  prevent 
its  soil  from  being  made  the  base  of  hostile 
operations  against  either  belligerent  is  ad- 
mitted on  all  hands,  and  a  culpable  slackness 
or  indifference  in  the  Executive  as  to  such 
transactions  would  be  justly  regarded  by  the 
injured  belligerent  as  evidence  of  a  fraudulent 
neutrality  which  he  would  be  entitled  to 
construe  as  a  connivance  at  and  participation 
in  the  schemes  of  his  enemy.  Such  conduct 
would  amount  to  an  alliance  or  complicity 
with  the  enemy,  equivalent  to  hostility,  and 
justly  treated  as  such."  Substantially,  there- 
fore, we  have  no  difference  with  this  writer. 
If  it  be  admitted  that  neglect  to  enforce  our 
neutral  rights  where  this  neglect  i.s  prejudicial 
to  one  of  the  belligerents  may  justly  be 
treated  as  hostility,  and  bring  down  on  us  a 
declaration  of  war,  then  there  is  no  real 
question  in  dispute.  An  international  duty 
thus  sanctioned  may  be  a  ''  duty  of  imperfect 
obligation,"  but  we  are  unable  to  see  by  what 
stronger  sanction  those  international  duties 
can  be  enforced  of  which  it  is  alleged  that  the 
obligation  is  perfect. 


indignation  and  resentment  such  as  only 
spring  from  a  galling  sense  of  wrong. 
Such  a  feeling  pervading  a  great  people, 
however  exaggerated  or  mistaken  it  may 
be  deemed,  is  not  one  which  a  wise 
nation  will  treat  with  levity  or  disdain. 
It  may  be  well,  therefore,  to  present 
to  ourselves  this  matter  as  it  is  viewed 
by  those  who  conceive  themselves 
wronged  by  us.  We  avail  ourselves- 
for  this  purpose  of  Mr.  Loring's  power- 
ful statement. 

"  The  recognition  [of  the  Southern  States] 
must  have  been  upon  the  implied  condition 
that  the  rebels  as  an  acknowledged  belligerent 
would  conform  to  the  law  of  nations  as  gene- 
rally understood,  and  as  avowed  and  acted  upon 
by  England  and  by  the  United  States.  By- 
one  of  those  laws,  now  almost  universally  in- 
sisted upon  by  all  nations,  and  entirely  settled 
by  statute  and  judicial  decision  in  England 
and  in  the  United  States,  neutral  goocls  on 
board  an  enemy's  vessel  are  exempt  from  con- 
fiscation, and,  although  the  vessel  may  be 
condemned,  the  cargo  is  to  be  restored  to  the 
neutral  owner,  and  conversely,  although  an 
enemy's  goods  on  board  of  a  neutral  vessel  may- 
be condemned  as  good  prize,  the  vessel  is  not 
liable  to  confiscation,  but  must  he  restored. . . . 
-(P.  66.) 

"  Another  of  the  laws  of  nations,  believed 
to  be  now  generally  recognized  and  acted  upon, 
and  certainly  established  as  between  England 
and  the  United  States  (as  appears  by  their 
statutes  and  judicial  decisions),  is,  that  the 
ownership  of  enemy's  property  captured  at  sea 
is  not  changed,  and  does  not  vest  in  the  captor, 
by  the  mere  seizure,  but  remains  in  abeyance- 
until  sentence  of  condemnation,  as  lawful 
prize,  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  ; 
which  court,  with  a  few  occasional  exceptions,, 
under  treaties  or  arrangements  with  allies, 
can  only  be  lawfully  held  in  the  country  of 
the  captors —(P.  67.) 

"  Until  the  capture,"  says  Kent,  "becomes 
invested  with  the  character  of  prize  by  a  sen- 
tence of  condemnation,  the  right  of  property  is 
in  abeyance,  or  in  a  state  of  legal  sequestration. 
It  cannot  lie  alienated  or  disposed  of ;  but  the 
possession  of  it  by  the  Government  of  the 
captor  is  a  trust  for  the  benefit  of  those  who 
may  be  ultimately  entitled.  This  salutary 
rule,  and  one  so  necessary  to  check  irregular 
conduct  and  individual  outrage,  has  been  long 
established  in  the  English  Admiralty  ;  and  it 
is  now  every  where  recognized  as  the  law  and 
practice  of  nations.  ...  I.  Kent's  Com.  pp.  100- 
102.— (Pp  67-68.) 

"Now  it  is  notorious  to  the  whole  world 
that  the  rebels  are  carrying  on  this  parricidal 
war  in  utter  arid  avowed  defiance  of  this  law  ; 
that,  having  no  ports  into  which  they  can  take 
vessels  captured  by  them  for  adjudication, 
they,  after  plundering  from  their  cargoes  all 


270 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  Vieiv. 


that  can  be  taken  on  board  of  their  own  ships, 
immediately  burn  or  sink  the  captured  vessels 
with  the  remainder ;  that  this  is  done  by  the 
orders,  and  under  an  arrangement,  of  the  Rebel 
Government,  by  which  it  has  agreed  to  pay  to 
the  captors  one  half  part  of  the  value  of  all 
vessels  and  cargoes  belonging  to  the  citizens  of 
the  United  States  thus  destroyed ;  and  that 
such  destruction  has,  in  repeated  instances, 
involved  that  of  neutral  property. 

"  It  does,  indeed,  seem  marvellous  that  this 
gross  and  public  defiance  of  one  of  the  most 
sacred  laws  of  war  has  been  suffered  to  pass 
unchallenged,  and  without  protestation,  or 
attempt  at  suppression  by  the  self-styled 
Mistress  of  the  Sea,  whose  assumption  of  that 
position  might  reasonably  seem  to  demand  of 
her  some  watch  and  ward  over  the  observance 
of  its  laws,  and  especially  of  one  of  which  she 
was  the  principal  author.  And  this  while  she 
knows  that  from  her  own  ports  and  by  her 
own  citizens  were  furnished  all  the  means  and 
opportunities  for  these  outrages,  and  that  they 
are  perpetrated  principally  by  her  own  sub- 
jects, and  often  under  her  own  flag  ;  perpe- 
trated, too,  not  in  behalf  of  honest  men 
struggling  to  free  themselves  from  tyranny  or 
oppression,  but  by  rebels  seeking  the  subversion 
of  the  freest  government  the  sun  ever  shone 
upon  (of  which  they  had  themselves  almost 
entire  political  control)  in  order  to  substi- 
tute a  despotism  founded  on  chattel-slavery. 
Above  all,  it  is  marvellous  that,  when  a  word 
from  her  of  revocation  or  threatened  revocation, 
of  her  recognition  of  them  as  a  lawful  belli- 
gerent, would  instantly  suppress  these  atrocities, 
or  render  their  future  perpetration  impossible — 
instead  of  uttering  that  word  she  receives  the 
perpetrators  with  open  arms  into  her  ports, 
with  national  salutes  and  official  feastings, 
and  with  all  the  manifestations  of  sympathy 
with  their  cause  and  their  brigaudism  which 
could  be  bestowed  upon  the  Bayards  and  Sid- 
neys in  a  noble  warfare  for  the  dearest  of 
human  rights —(Pp.  68-69.) 

We  do  not  quote  these  passages  as 
adopting  every  assumption  of  law,  ex- 
pressed and  latent,  which  they  contain. 
Our  object  is  to  place  before  our  readers 
the  case  of  the  Northern  people  as  it  is 
regarded  by  the  best  minds  amongst 
them ;  and  we  think  no  candid  reader 
of  the  above  extracts  will  deny  that, 
they  have  at  least  a  strong  prima  fade 
grievance  to  present. 

There  is  one  doctrine,  however,  ad- 
vanced by  Mr.  Loring  in  the  passage 
just  quoted,  on  which,  as  it  has  been 
somewhat  violently,  and  we  think  too 
unreservedly,  denounced  by  a  learned 
writer  here,  we  will  venture  a  few  words. 
Mr.  Loring  lays  it  down  on  the  authority 
of  Kent  that,  "until  the  capture  becomes 


"  invested  with  the  character  of  prize 
"  by  a  sentence  of  condemnation,  the 
"  right  of  property  is  in  abeyance,  or 
"  in  a  state  of  legal  sequestration.     It 
"  cannot  be  alienated  or  disposed  of;  but 
"  the  posession  of  it  by  the  government 
"  of  the  captor  is  a  trust  for  the  benefit 
"  of  those  who  may  be  ultimately  en- 
"  titled.     This  salutary  rule,  and  one  so 
"  necessary  to  check  irregular  conduct 
"  and  individual  outrage,  has  been  long 
"  established  in  the  English  Admiralty; 
"  and  it  is  now  everywhere  recognized 
"  as  the  law  and  practice  of  nations." 
(1  Kent's  Com.  100,  102);— a  doctrine 
which  he  reinforces  by  the  authority  of 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States 
in  the  case  of  Jecker  v.  Montgomery  (13 
Howard's  Eep.   516):— "This  act    [of 
"  capture]  merely  enforces  the  perform- 
"  ance    of  a   duty   imposed   iipon   the 
"  captor  by  the  law  of  nations,  which 
"  in  all  civilized  countries  secures  to  the 
"  captured  a  trial  in  a  court  of  competent 
"jurisdiction     before  he  can  finally  be 
"  deprived   of  his  property."     Against 
this,  however,  it  has   been  contended, 
that  "  the  rule  of  bringing  a  captured 
"  vessel  before  a  prize  court  is  intro- 
"  duced  in  favour  of  neutrals  and  not 
"  of  belligerents."  ..."  If  the  vessel 
"  were  brought  before  a  prize  court,  the 
"  enemy   could  have   no   locus   standi, 
"  and  he   cannot  allege  any  grievance 
"  upon    the    loss    of    an    adjudication 
"  upon   which  he   could   not   possibly 
"  have   been  heard."  x     Now,  without 
stopping  to  inquire  how  far  the  latter 
assumption  is  true  in  the  case  of  the 
escaped  war-ships — respecting  which  it 
is    admitted    by   the   same    writer    in 
another  passage  of  the  same  letter  that, 
should  they,  having  been  determined  to 
have  been  equipped  in  violation  of  our 
laws,   come   within   our   ports   with   a 
prize,  "  their    prizes    should   be   taken 
"  from  them  and  restored  to  the  original 
"  owner" — without  stopping  to  inquire 
how   far   this    obligation    on   the   part 
of  the   neutral  to  make  restitution  of 
prizes  to  the  belligerent  owner  is  con- 
sistent with  the  doctrine  in  the  absolute 
form  in  which  it  has  been  laid  down, 
that  the  enemy  would  in  no  case  have 
1  "  Historicus"  in  the  Times. 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


271 


a  locus  standi  in  a  prize  court  in  an 
adjudication  consequent  upon  such  cap- 
tures— it  at  least  cannot  be  denied  that 
where  neutral  property  is  the  subject  of 
these  irregular  proceedings,  the  neutral 
is  on  impregnable  ground  in  demanding 
an  adjudication.  Now  it  is,  we  believe, 
a  matter  of  fact  that  British  property 
has  in  several  instances  been  disposed  of, 
in  the  manner  described,  lay  these  Con- 
federate vessels.  Mr.  Loring  mentions 
one  "  notable  instance  within  the  im- 
"  mediate  knowledge  of  the  people  of 
"  this  city  [Boston]  ;  being  the  case  of 
"  the  ship  Nora,  belonging  to  Messrs. 
"  George  B.  Upton  and  Son,  eminent 
"  merchants  of  Boston,  which  was  burned 
"  at  sea  by  the  rebel  commander  and 
"  crew  of  the  Alabama,  with  a  valuable 
' '  cargo  belonging  exclusively  to  British 
"  subjects,  and  regularly  documented  as 
"  such,  and  about  the  ownership  of 
"  which  there  could  be  no  reasonable 
"  pretence  of  doubt." 

This  being  so,  what  is  the  position  of 
Great  Britain  in  overlooking  such  pro- 
ceedings 1  Assuming  it  to  be  the  fact, 
that  the  Confederate  Government  has 
compensated  the  owners  of  these  cargoes 
(and  if  this  has  not  been  done,  the  case 
is  simply  without  palliation),  is  there 
not  some  point  in  Mr.  Loring's  inquiry 
— whether  "this  is  all  England's  duty 
'  in  the  matter  1  Is  the  recovery  of 
'  money  all  she  owes  to  her  dignity  and 
'  self-respect,  and  all  she  owes  to  the 
'  world  ?  Is  she  to  condone  piracy 
'  committed  on  her  citizens,  in  gross 
"  violation  of  a  sacred  law  of  nations, 
"  which  if  observed,  would  have  pre- 
"  vented  it."  Nor  does  it  diminish 
the  force  of  these  home  thrusts,  that 
the  mere  assertion  of  her  unques- 
questionable  rights  in  this  matter,  would 
of  itself  go  far  to  remedy  the  injury 
which  has  been  done — done — can  we 
deny  it  1  in  some  degree  through  our 
own  remissncss.  Let  us  endeavour  to 
represent  to  ourselves  this  episode  in 
our  history,  as  it  will  bo  regarded  by  an 
impartial  posterity.  During  a  great 
civil  strife  between  two  branches  of  a 
kindred  nation — into  the  merits  of  the 
cause  at  issue  we,  for  the  moment,  for- 
bear to  enter — in  which  strife  we  pro- 


fess to  observe  a  strict  neutrality,  three 
formidable  vessels,  in  defiance  of  our 
authority,  and  in  disregard  at  all  events 
of  the  spirit  of  international  law,  have 
issued  from  our  ports.  These  vessels, 
built  in  English  dockyards,  equipped 
and  armed  by  English  artisans,  paid  for 
by  a  loan  raised  in  the  English  money- 
market,  in  part  manned  by  English 
sailors — "an  English  navy  in  all  but 
the  name  and  the  flag  " — now  roani  the 
ocean,  plundering  and  burning  the- 
property  of  their  adversaries,  and,  in 
some  instances,  our  own.  The  English 
Government,  by  simply  asserting  an 
unquestionable  right,  has  it  in  its  power, 
if  not  at  once  to  arrest  their  career,  at 
all  events  greatly  to  curtail  their  capacity 
for  mischief;  but  this  assertion  of  its 
right  it  omits  to  make.  When  svith 
this  omission  are  coupled  the  facts,  that 
a  portion  of  the  English  people  has 
loudly  proclaimed  its  sympathy  with  the 
cause  of  the  depredators,  and  that 
English  shipping  is  largely  a  gainer 
through  its  comparative  immunity  from 
the  risks  incurred  by  the  belligerent 
marine,  and,  lastly,  that  shameful  in- 
cident— the  cheers  which  in  the  English 
Parliament  greeted  the  announcement, 
made  by  the  principal  violator  of  the 
law,  of  the  magnitude  of  the  depreda- 
tions— when  these  facts  are  disclosed  on 
the  impartial  record  of  history,  what 
will  be  the  judgment  of  posterity? — 
will  the  page  be  one  which  future 
Englishmen  will  read  without  a  blush  1 
Nor  will  posterity  fail  to  contrast  our 
neutrality  with  the  bearing  of  another 
neutral  under  circumstances  precisely 
analogous  to  ours.  We  will  let  Mr. 
Loring  tell  the  story  : — 

"  The  first  call  made  upon  [the  United 
kStates]  was  a  crucial  test,  for  it  was  made  by 
England,  her  recent  oppressor  and  enemy,  for 
protection  against  the  violation  of  neutral 
relations  within  her  territories  by  or  in  behalf 
of  the  subjects  of  France,  her  ally  and  friend, 
by  whom  she  had  been  aided  in  the  war  with 
England,  and  towards  whom  the  United  States 
felt  and  acknowledged  the  strongest  ^obliga- 
tions. 

"  In  the  great  war  then  raging  between 
England  and  France  the  English  Government 
entertained,  very  naturally  and  with  good 
reason,  apprehensions  that  privateers  would 
be  fitted  out  in  the  United  States  to  prey 
upon  English  commerce  under  the  French 


272 


England's  Neutrality  from  the  Federal  Point  of  View. 


Hag  ;  and,  their  apprehensions  being  commu- 
municated  to  our  Government,  President 
Washington  in  1793  issued  a  proclamation 
forbidding  all  such  violations  of  neutrality, 
and  stating  that  instructions  had  been  given 
to  Ike  officers  of  tlie  United  States  to  cause  pro- 
secutiotts  to  be  instituted  against  all  persons 
who  should  violate  the  law  of  nations  with 
respect  to  the  powers  at  war  or  any  other.  .  . . 
— (T.  15.) 

•'  At  the  same  time  the  Governors  of  States 
were  called  upon  to  cause  vessels  to  be  arrested 
if  about  to  depart  on  any  such  service  ;  and 
several  were  so  arrested  and  prevented  from 
sailing.  Prizes  which  had  been  taken  by  such 
privateers,  fitted  out  and  sailing  from  ports  in 
the  United  States,  were  restored  to  the  British 
OAvner.? ;  and  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  proclaimed  that  it  held  itself  responsible 
to  indemnify  for  such  captures.1 

"  All  this  was  done  under  a  sense  of  duty 
as  imposed  by  the  law  of  nations,  no  Enlistment 
Act  having  then  been  passed.  But,  in  1794, 
Congress,  with  an  earnest  desire  to  preserve 
the  strictest  fidelity,  enacted  a  statute  on  this 
subject  for  the  purpose  of  compelling  the  ob- 
servance of  an  entire  neutrality  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  United  States.  And  in  the 
same  year  a  treaty  was  made  with  England, 
in  which  one  clause  provided  that  the  United 
States  should  make  indemnity  to  British 
owners  for  vessels  which  had  been  previously 
captured  by  privateers  that  had  been  fitted  out 
in  the  United  States.  This  Act  of  1794  ivas 
made  immediately  after  the  application  of  the 
JJritis/t  Government  upon  this  subject,  and  for 
flic  purpose  of  insuring  the  immediate  obser- 
vance of  a  strict  neutrality,  as  was  expressly 
admitted  and  stated  by  Mr.  Canning  in  Parlia- 
ment. And  yet  we  are  now  coolly  told  by  Lord 
Palmerstou  and  Earl  Russell  that  England 
cannot  alter  her  municipal  laws  to  suit  other 
Governments.  .  . . — (P.  16.) 

"  The  next  occasion  for  the  elucidation  of 
the  principles  of  our  Government  on  this  sub- 
ject was  in  the  war  of  1854-55  between  Russia 
on  one  side,  and  England  and  France  on 
the  other.  And  here,  again,  the  test  was  a 
stringent  one,  as  the  utmost  cordiality  had 
always  existed  between  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment and  that  of  the  United  States. . .  . 
—(Pp.  13-19.) 

"Nor  has  it  been  left  to  conjecture  how 
the  British  Government  would  think  it  proper 
to  construe  their  requisition,  or  how  the  United 
States  would  interpret  their  promise  to  comply 
with  it.  During  that  war  the  bark  Mauri/, 
of  New  York,  a  mere  merchant  ship,  was  fitting 
out  in  New  York  for  a  voyage  to  China,  and  a 
suspicion  having  arisen  in  the  minds  of  tiie 
British  Consul  and  some  English  residents 
that  she  was  taking  in  arms  and  munitions  of 
war  to  be  used  in  the  service  of  Russia,  and 

1  There  is  a  slight,  but  material,  omission 
here  :  the  captures  for  which  the  United 
States  Government  undertook  to  indemnify 
were  captures  brouykt  within  its  jurisdiction. 


the  Consul  having  communicated  his  suspicions 
to  the  British  Minister  at  Washington,  and 
he  having  made  complaint  to  the  Government 
of  the  United  States— though  the  evidence 
submitted  on  which  it  was  founded  was  of  the 
feeblest  and  most  unsatisfactory  character— 
the  vessel  and  cargo  were  immediately  seized 
by  officers  of  the  United  States,  without  the 
slightest  previous  notice  to  the  owners,  and 
were  detained  until  the  British  Consul  and 
those  instigating  the  seizure  were  perfectly 
satisfied  that  the  suspicions  where  wholly 
erroneous  ;  and  for  these  he  afterwards  made  a 
public  apology  in  one  of  the  Gazettes  in  that 
city."— (Pp.  19-20.) 

Mr.  Loring  is  proud  of  these  passages 
in.  the  history  of  his  country,  and  he 
may  well  he  so.  They  should  not  he 
forgotten  by  the  English  people;  and, 
though  for  a  time  a  cloud  seems  to  have 
passed  over  our  memory,  let  us  hope 
that  they  are  but  obscured  to  us,  not 
obliterated.  That  a  section  of  English 
society  cherishes  a  rancour  towards  the 
Free  States  of  America,  at  once  so  violent 
and  so  blind  that,  to  gratify  it,  it  is  pre- 
pared to  sacrifice,  not  only  the  good 
faith  and  honour  of  the  country,  but 
even  its  plainest  and  most  vital  interests, 
is  what,  we  fear,  cannot  be  denied — for, 
if  ever  interest  and  honour  were  coinci- 
dent, it  is  here.  I  Jut  such  passions 
have,  we  believe,  no  place  in  the  minds 
of  the  English  people  ;  and  we  are  sure 
that  the  history  of  international  inter- 
course with  the  United  States,  when 
under  the  guidance  of  those  earlier 
Federal  Statesmen,  whose  traditions  it 
is  the  aim  of  the  present  leaders  in  the 
North  to  restore,  needs  only  to  be  better 
known  in  order  to  call  forth  in  this 
country  a  spirit  of  justice  and  concilia- 
tion towards  the  people  of  the  Northern 
States. 

Into  the  question  of  restitution  and 
compensation  wo  have  not  entered :  in 
its  practical  form  it  will  doubtless  pre- 
sent points  of  some  difficulty  and  nicety 
for  adjustment ;  but  witli  the  precedent 
of  1793-4  to  guide  us — a  precedent  to 
which  neither  Federal  nor  English 
statesmen  can  refuse  to  defer — it  will 
indeed  be  strange  if  we  cannot  arrive  at 
a  satisfactory  settlement.  Of  this  at 
least  we  are  certain,  that  a  spirit  of 
mutual  fairness  and  moderation  is  all  that 
is  needed  to  accomplish  this  result. 
J.  E.  CAIUNKS. 


MACMILLAN'S  MAGAZINE. 


FEBEUAEY,  1864. 


THE  HILLYAES  AND  THE  BUETONS :  A  STOEY  OF  TWO  FAMILIES. 

BY  HENRY  KINGSLEY,  AUTHOR  OF    "  AUSTIN  ELLIOT,"  "  RAVENSHOE,"  ETC. 


CHAPTEE  XIV. 

THE   GLEAM   OF  THE  AUTUMN   SUNSET. 

«  ON  the  27th,  at  the  Cathedral,  by  the 
Eight  Eeverend  the  Bishop  of  Palmers- 
ton,  assisted  by  the  Very  Eeverend 
Dean  Maberly,  of  N.S.W.,  and  the  Eev. 
Minimus  Smallchange  of  St.  Micros, 
Little  Creek,  George  Hillyar,  Esq.,  In- 
spector of  Police  for  the  Bumbleoora 
district,  eldest  son  of  Sir  George  Hillyar, 
of  Stanlake,  England,  to  Gertrude, 
sixth  and  last  remaining  daughter  of 
the  late  James  Neville,  Esq.  of  Neville's 
Gap." 

That  was  the  way  the  Sentinel  an- 
nounced it — "  last  remaining  daughter." 
In  England,  one  would  have  thought 
that  all  the  other  daughters  were  dead ! 
Australians  understood  the  sentence 
better.  It  merely  meant  that  all  the 
other  sisters  were  married ;  that  the 
Miss  Nevilles  were  exhausted ;  that 
there  wern't  any  more  of  them  left ; 
that,  if  you  wanted  to  marry  one  of 
these  ever  so  much  now,  you  couldn't 
do  it ;  and  that  the  market  was  free  to 
the  most  eligible  young  ladies  next  in 
succession.  That  was  all  the  Sentinel 
meant.  Dead  !  Quotha  1 

Some  of  the  young  ladies  said :  Their 
word — they  were  surprised.  That,  if 
you  had  gone  down  on  your  knees  now, 
and  told  them  that  Gerty  was  ambitious 
and  heartless,  they  would  not  have 
believed  it.  That,  if  you  had  told  them 
that  she  was  a  poor  little  thing  with  no 

No.  52. — VOL.  ix. 


manners;  that  she  never  could  dress 
herself  in  colours,  and  so  stuck  to  white ; 
that  she  was  the  colour  of  a  cockatoo 
when  she  sat  still,  and  got  to  be  the 
colour  of  a  king-parrot  the  moment  she 
began  to  dance  ;  that  she  was  a  for- 
ward little  thing,  and  a  shy  little  thing, 
and  a  bold  little  thing,  and  an  artful 
little  thing,  and  that  her  spraining  her 
ankle  at  the  ball  at  Government  House 
was  all  an  excuse  to  get  on  the  sofa 
beside  Lord  Edward  Staunton — they 
would  have  believed  all  this.  But  they 
never,  never,  could  have  believed  that 
she  would  have  sold  herself  to  that 
disreputable,  smooth-faced  creature  of  a 
Hillyar,  for  the  sake  of  his  prospective 
title. 

But  other  young  ladies  said  that  Gerty 
was  the  sweetest,  kindest,  best  little 
soul  that  ever  was  born.  That,  if  In- 
spector Hillyar  did  anything  to  make 
her  unhappy,  he  ought  to  be  torn  to 
pieces  by  wild  horses.  But  that  there 
must  be  something  good  in  him,  or 
Gerty  could  never  have  loved  him  as 
she  did. 

The  Secretary,  who  was  cross  and 
uneasy  over  the  whole  matter,  on  being 
told  by  his  wife  about  this  young-lady 
tattle,  said  that  the  detractors  were  all 
of  them  the  daughters  of  the  trades- 
men and  small  farmers — the  female  part 
of  the  Opposition.  But  this  was  not 
true,  for  Gerty  had  many  friends  even 
among  the  opposition.  Miss  Hurtle, 
daughter  of  the  radical  member  for  North 
Palmerston  (also  an  ironmonger  in  Banks 

T 


274 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


Street),  behaved  much  like  Miss  Swartz 
in  Vanity  Fair.  She  was  so  overcome 
at  the  wedding  that  she  incautiously 
began  to  sob ;  her  sobs  soon  developed 
themselves  into  a  long  discordant  bellow, 
complicated  with  a  spasmodic  tattoo  of 
her  toes  against  the  front  of  the  pew. 
The  exhibition  of  smelling  salts  only 
rendering  her  black  in  the  face;  they 
had  to  resort  to  stimulants.  And,  as  the 
procession  went  out,  they  were  met  by 
the  sexton,  with  brandy-and- water.  The 
Secretary  laughed  aloud,  and  his  wife 
was  glad  to  hear  him  laugh,  for  he  had 
been,  as  she  expressed,  "as  black  as 
thunder  "  all  the  morning. 

Yes,  for  good  or  for  evil,  it  was  all 
over  and  done  ;  and  one  might  as  well 
laugh  as  cry.  Gerty  Neville  was  Mrs. 
Hillyar,  and  the  best  must  be  made 
of  it. 

The  best  did  not  seem  so  very  bad. 
The  Hillyars  came  and  stayed  with  the 
Oxtons  at  the  Secretary's  house  near 
town,  after  spending  their  honeymoon 
in  Sydney,  and  every  day  they  stayed 
there  the  Secretary's  brow  grew  smoother, 
and  he  appeared  more  reconciled  to  what 
had  happened. 

Gerty  seemed  as  bright  as  the  morning 
star.  A  most  devoted  and  proud  little 
wife,  proud  of  herself,  proud  of  her  fore- 
sight and  discretion  in  making  such  a 
choice,  and,  above  all,  proud  of  her  cool, 
calm,  gentlemanly  husband.  Her  kind 
little  heart  was  overflowing  with  happi- 
ness, which  took  the  form  of  loving- 
kindness  for  all  her  fellow-creatures, 
from  the  Governor  down  to  the  meanest 
native  who  lay  by  the  creekside. 

"  She  afraid  of  her  terrible  father-in- 
law,"  she  would  say,  laughing;  "let 
him  meet  her  face  to  face,  and  she  would 
bring  him  on  his  knees  in  no  time."  She 
was  so  very  lovely,  that  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Oxton  really  thought  that  she  might  assist 
to  bring  about  a  reconciliation  between 
father  and  son,  though  George,  who 
knew  more  than  they,  professed  to  have 
but  little  hopes  of  any  change  taking 
place  in  his  father's  feelings  towards 
him. 

A  great  and  steady  change  for  the 
better  was  taking  place  in  George  him- 


self. There  could  be  no  doubt  that  he 
was  most  deeply  and  sincerely  in  love 
with  his  wife ;  and  also  that,  with  her, 
this  new  life  did  not,  as  the  Secretary- 
had  feared,  bore  and  weary  him.  It 
was  wonderfully  pleasant  and  peaceful. 
He  had  never  had  reposs  before  in  his 
life;  and  now  he  began  to  feel  the  full 
beauty  of  it. 

The  Secretary  saw  all  this;  but  his 
dread  was  that  this  new  state  of  being, 
had  come  to  him  too  late  in  life  to 
become  habitual.  There  was  the  danger. 

Still  the  improvement  was  marked.  • 
He  lost  the  old  impatient  insolent  fall 
in  the  eyes  when  addressed ;  he  lost  his 
old  contradictory  manner  altogether ; 
his  voice  grew  more  gentle,  and  his 
whole  air  more  cheerful ;  and,  lastly,  for 
the  first  time  in  his  life,  he  began  to 
pay  little  attentions  to  women.  He 
began  to  squire  Mrs.  Oxton  about,  and 
to  buy  flowers  for  her,  and  all  that  sort 
of  thing,  and  to  show  her,  in  a  mute  sort 
of  way,  that  he  approved  of  her;  and 
he  made  himself  so  agreeable  to  all  his 
wife's  friends  that  they  began  to  think 
that  she  had  not  done  so  very  badly 
after  all. 

He  very  seldom  laughed  heartily. 
Indeed,  what  little  humour  he  had  was 
dry  and  caustic,  and  he  never  unbent 
himself  to,  or  was  easy  and  confidential 
with,  any  human  being — unless  it  were 
his  wife,  when  they  were  alone.  His 
treatment  of  the  Secretary  was  respect- 
ful, nay,  even  for  him,  affectionate ;  but 
he  was  never  free  with  hini.  He  would 
talk  over  his  affairs  with  him,  would 
discuss  the  chances  of  a  reconciliation 
with  his  father,  and  so  on ;  yet  there 
was  no  warmth  of  confidence  between 
them.  Neither  ever  called  the  other 
"  old  fellow,"  or  made  the  most  trifling 
joke  at  the  other's  expense.  If  you 
had  told  the  Secretary  that  he  still  dis- 
trusted George  Hillyar,  he  would  have 
denied  it.  But,  generous  and  freehearted 
as  the  Secretary  was,  there  was  a  grain 
of  distrust  of  his  brother-in-law  in  his 
heart  still. 

Thus,  even  at  his  best,  but  one  human 
being  loved  the  poor  fellow,  and  that  one 
being  was  his  wife,  who,  for  some  reason, 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


275 


adored  him.  It  is  quite  easy  to  see  that 
in  the  times  before  his  marriage  he  may 
have  been  a  most  unpopular  person. 
Here  he  is  before  us  now,  for  the  six 
months  succeeding  his  marriage,  a  tall, 
handsome  man,  of  about  thirty-one,  with 
a  rather  pale,  hairless  face,  somewhat 
silent,  somewhat  reserved,  but  extremely 
self-possessed ;  very  polite  and  attentive 
in  small  things,  but  yet  unable  to  prevent 
your  seeing  that  his  politeness  cost  him 
an  effort, — a  man  striving  to  forget  the 
learning  of  a  lifetime. 

Shortly  after  his  marriage  he  wrote'  to 
his  father  : 

"  MY  DEAR  SIR, — "We  have  been  so 
long  and  so  hopelessly  estranged  that  I 
have  considerable  difficulty  in  knowing 
in  what  terms  I  ought  to  address  you. 

"Since  I  left  Wiesbaden,  and  re- 
quested you  in  future  to  pay  the  annual 
sum  of  money  you  are  kind  enough  to 
allow  me  into  the  bank  at  Sydney, 
none  but  the  most  formal  communica- 
tions have  passed  between  us.  The 
present  one  shall  be  as  formal  as  pos- 
sible, but  I  fear  will  trench  somewhat 
on  family  matters. 

"  I  have  been  four  years  in  the  police 
service  of  this  colony,  and  have  at  last, 
by  a  piece  of  service  of  which  I  decline 
to  speak,  raised  myself  to  the  highest 
rank  obtainable  in  it. 

"  In  addition  to  this  piece  of  intelli- 
gence, I  have  to  inform  you  that  I  have 
made  a  most  excellent  marriage.  Any 
inquiries  you  may  make  about  the  future 
Lady  Hillyar  can  only  be  answered  in 
one  way. 

"  Hoping  that  your  health  is  good, 
I  beg  to  remain, 

"  Your  obedient  son, 

"  GEORGE  HILLYAR." 

The  answer  came  in  time,  as  follows : — 

"  MY  DEAR  GEORGE — I  had  heard  of 
your  brilliant  gallantry,  and  also  of 
your  marriage,  from  another  source, 
before  your  letter  arrived.  I  highly 
approve  of  your  conduct  in  both  cases. 

"  In  the  place  of  the  300£.  which  you 
have  been  receiving  hitherto  from  me, 
you  will  in  future  receive  1,000^.  annu- 
ally. I  hope  the  end  has  come  at  last 


to  the  career  of  vice  and  selfish  dissi- 
pation in  which  you  have  persisted  so 
long. 

"  I  confess  that  I  am  very  much 
pleased  at  what  I  hear  of  you  this  last 
six  months  (I  am  well-informed  about 
every  movement  you  make) :  I  had  utterly 
given  you  up.  The  way  to  good  fame 
seems  to  be  plainly  before  you.  I  wish 
I  could  believe  that  none  of  this  enor- 
mous crop  of  wild  oats,  which  you  have 
so  diligently  sown  for  the  last  eighteen 
years,  would  come  up  and  bear  terrible 
fruit.  I  wish  I  could  believe  that. 

"  Meanwhile,  if  your  duties  call  you 
to  England,  I  will  receive  you  and  your 
wife.  But  take  this  piece  of  advice 
seriously  to  heart.  Make  friends  and 
a  career  where  you  are.  Mind  that. 
"  Your  affectionate  father, 

"  GEORGE  HILLYAR." 

A  cold,  cruel,  heartless  letter.  Not 
one  word  of  tender  forgiveness ;  not 
one  word  of  self-blame  for  the  misera- 
ble mistakes  that  he  had  made  with 
his  son  in  times  gone  by  :  the  hatred 
which  he  felt  for  him  showing  out  in 
the  prophecies  of  unknown  horrors 
in  what  seemed  a  brighter  future.  The 
devil,  which  had  not  looked  out  of 
George  Hillyar's  eyes  for  six  months 
past,  looked  out  now,  and  he  swore 
aloud. 

"  'Make  friends  and  a  career  where 
you  are.'  So  he  is  going  to  disinherit 
me  in  favour  of  that  cursed  young  toad 
Erne." 

CHAPTEE  XY. 

IN   WHICH   THE    SNAKE   CREEPS   OUT   OF 
THE   GRASS. 

THE  place  in  which  he  had  received  this 
letter  was  the  post-office  at  Palroerston, 
one  of  the  principal  public  buildings  of 
that  thriving  capital — a  majestic  and  im- 
posing pile  of  galvanized  iron,  roofed 
with  tin,  twenty  feet  long,  surmounted 
by  a  pediment,  the  apex  of  which  rose 
fifteen  feet  from  the  level  of  Banks 
Street,  and  carried  a  weathercock. 

The  mail  was  just  in,  and  the 
place  was  crowded.  Eoaring  for  his 


276 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


orderly  was  of  very  little  use  j  it  only 
raised  a  few  eager  eyes  impatiently 
from  their  letters,  or  made  a  few  disap- 
pointed idlers  wonder  what  the  inspector 
was  hollering  after.  His  orderly  had 
probably  got  a  letter,  and  was  reading 
it  in  some  secret  corner.  He  would  wait 
for  him. 

The  devil  had  been  in  him  a  few 
minutes  ago ;  but,  as  he  stood  and  waited 
there,  in  the  sweltering  little  den  called 
the  post-office,  with  all  the  eager  readers 
of  letters  around  him,  the  devil  began 
to  be  beat  out  again.  There  was  an 
atmosphere  in  that  miserable  little  hot 
tin-kettle  of  a  post-office  which  the 
devil  can't  stand  at  all — the  atmosphere 
of  home.  Old  loves,  old  hopes,  old 
friends,  old  scenes,  old  scents,  old 
sounds,  are  threads  which,  though  you 
draw  them  finer  than  the  finest  silk, 
are  still  stronger  than  iron.  Did  you 
ever  hear  the  streams  talk  to  you  in 
May,  when  you  went  a-fishing?  Did 
you  ever  hear  what  the  first  rustle  of 
the  summer  leaves  said  to  you  in  June, 
when  you  went  a-courting?  Did  you 
ever  hear,  as  a  living  voice,  the  south- 
west wind  among  the  bare  ash-boughs 
in  November,  when  you  were  out  a- 
shooting?  If  you  have  imagination 
enough  to  put  a  voice  into  these  senseless 
sounds  of  nature,  I  should  like  to  stand 
with  you  in  the  Melbourne  post-office  on 
a  mail  day,  and  see  what  sort  of  voice 
would  speak  to  you  out  of  the  rustling 
of  a  thousand  fluttering  letters,  held  by 
trembling  fingers,  and  gazed  on  by  faces 
which,  however  coarse  and  ugly,  let  the 
news  be  good  or  bad,  grow  more  soft 
and  gentle  as  the  news  is  read. 

Poor  George  Hillyar.  His  letter  had 
no  hope  or  comfort  in  it ;  and  yet,  by 
watching  the  readers  of  the  other  let- 
ters, and  seeing  face  after  face  light  up, 
he  got  more  quiet,  less  inclined  to  be 
violent  and  rash,  less  inclined  to  roar 
for  his  orderly,  and  make  a  fool  of  him- 
self before  Gerty.  He  leant  against  an 
iron  pillar,  and  fixed  his  attention  on  a 
good-natured-looking  young  man  before 
him,  who  was  devouring  an  ill- written, 
blotted  letter  with  an  eagerness  and  a 
delight  which  made  his  whole  face 


wreathe  itself  into  one  very  large 
smile. 

He  was  pleased  to  look  at  him,  and 
looked  at  him  more  earnestly.  But, 
while  he  looked  at  him,  he  found  that 
he  could  not  concentrate  his  attention 
on  him.  He  tried  to  do  so,  for  this 
young  fellow,  by  reason  of  a  deficient 
education,  was  enjoying  his  letter  amaz- 
ingly ;  he  was  reaping  all  the  pleasures 
of  anticipation  and  fruition  at  one  and 
the  same  time.  When  he  began  a  sentence, 
following  the  words  with  a  grimy  fore- 
finger, he  grinned  because  he  felt  certain 
that  something  good  was  coming ;  when 
he  had  spelt  through  it  he  grinned  wider 
still,  because  it  surpassed  his  expecta- 
tions. Once,  after  finishing  one  of  these 
hard-spelt  sentences,  he  looked  round 
radiantly  on  the  crowd,  and  said  con- 
fidentially :  "  I  told  you  so.  I  knoVd 
she'd  have  him ! " 

At  this  gushing  piece  of  confidence  to 
an  unsympathising  crowd,  poor  George 
Hillyar  felt  as  if  he  would  have  liked  to 
meet  this  young  man's  eyes  and  smile 
at  him.  But  he  could  not.  Somehow, 
another  pair  of  eyes  came  between  him 
and  everything  else  —  eyes  which  he 
could  not  identify  among  the  crowd,  yet 
which  he  could  feel,  and  which  produced 
a  sensation  of  sleepy  petulance  with 
which  he  was  very  familiar.  He  had 
read  some  account  of  the  fascination  of 
snakes,  and,  because  it  seemed  a  bizarre, 
and  rather  wicked  sort  of  amusement, 
he  had  tried  it  for  himself.  He  used  to 
go  out  from  the  barracks  on  Sunday 
afternoon,  find  a  black  snake  among  the 
stony  ridges,  engage  its  attention,  and 
stare  at  it.  The  snake  would  lie  mo- 
tionless, with  its  beady  eyes  fixed  on 
him.  The  fearful  stillness  of  the  hor- 
rible brute,  which  carried  instant  death 
in  its  mouth,  would  engage  him  deeply ; 
and  the  wearying  attention  of  his  eye, 
expecting  some  sudden  motion  of  the 
reptile,  would  begin  to  tell  upon  the 
brain,  and  make  the  watcher,  as  I  have 
said  before,  petulant  and  dull.  At  length 
the  snake,  gathering  confidence  from  his 
stillness,  would  gleam  and  rustle  in  every 
coil,  stretch  out  its  quivering  neck,  and 
attempt  flight.  Then  his  suppressed 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


277 


anger  would  break  forth,  and  he  would 
arise  and  smite  it,  almost  careless,  for 
the  moment,  whether  he  died  himself 
or  no.1 

He  passed  out  of  the  crowd,  and  came 
into  the  portico  ;  the  people  were  stand- 
ing about,  still  reading  their  letters,  and 
his  own  orderly  was  sitting,  with  his 
feet  loose  in  his  stirrups,  nearly  doubled 
up  in  his  saddle,  reading  his  letter  too, 
while  he  held  the  rein  of  George  Hill- 
yar's  horse  loosely  over  his  arm.  The 
flies  were  troublesome,  and  sometimes 
the  led  horse  would  give  such  a  jerk 
witn  his  head  as  would  nearly  pull  the 
letter  out  of  the  orderly's  hand;  but  he 
did  not  notice  it.  He  sat  doubled  up  on 
his  saddle,  with  a  radiant  eager  smile  on 
his  face,  and  read. 

Time  was  when  poor  Hillyar  would 
have  sworn  at  him,  would  have  said 
that  the  force  was  going  to  the  devil, 
because  a  cadet  dared  to  read  a  letter  on 
duty.  But  those  times  were  gone  by  for 
the  present.  George  Hillyar  had  been  a 
bully,  but  was  a  bully  no  longer.  He 
waited  till  his  orderly  should  have 
finished  his  letter,  and  waited  the  more 
readily  because  he  felt  that  those  two 
strange  eyes,  of  which  he  had  been 
clearly  conscious,  were  plaguing  him  no 
more. 

So  he  waited  until  his  orderly  had 
done  his  letter  before  he  approached 
him.  The  orderly,  a  gentle-looking 
English  lad,  with  a  kind,  quiet  face, 
looked  on  his  advance  with  dismay. 
He  had  committed  a  slight  breach  of 
discipline  in  reading  his  sister's  letter 
while  on  duty  in  the  public  streets  ; 
and  Bully  Hillyar,  the  man  who  never 
spared  or  forgave,  had  caught  him.  It 
was  a  week's  arrest. 

Nevertheless,  he  looked  bright,  pushed 
the  letter  into  his  breast,  and  wheeled 

1  This  is  my  theory  about  snake-fascination. 
The  above  are  the  only  results  I  ever  arrived 
at  (except  a  creeping  in  the  calves  of  my  legs, 
and  an  intense  desire  to  run  away).  Dr. 
Holmes  don't  quite  agree.  But  I  will  pub- 
licly retract  all  I  have  said,  if  he  will  promise 
not  to  try  any  further  experiments  with  his 
dreadful  crotuli.  The  author  of  "  Elsie  Venner  " 
is  far  too  precious  a  person  for  that  sort  of 
thing. 


the  led  horse  round  ready  for  the  in- 
spector to  mount.  He  knew,  this  saga- 
cious creature,  that  he  was  going  to 
catch  it,  and,  so  to  speak,  put  up  a 
moral  umbrella  against  the  storm  of 
profane  oaths  which  he  knew  would 
follow. 

Will  you  conceive  his  astonishment 
when  the  inspector,  instead  of  blas- 
pheming at  him,  took  his  curb  down 
a  link,  and  said  over  the  saddle,  pre- 
paring to  mount,  "  What  sort  of  news, 
Dickenson  ?  Good  news,  hey  ? " 

Judging  by  former  specimens  of 
George  Hillyar's  tender  mercies,  the 
orderly  conceived  this  to  be  a  kind  of 
diabolical  chaff  or  irony,  preparatory  to 
utter  verbal  demolition  and  ruin.  He 
feebly  said  that  he  was  very  sorry. 

"Pish,  man!  I  am  not  chaffing. 
Have  you  got  good  news  in  your  letter, 
hey  1 " 

The  astonished  and  still-distrusting 
orderly  said,  "Very  good  news,  sir, 
thank  you." 

"Hah!"  said  George  Hillyar.  "I 
haven't.  What's  your  news?  Come, 
tell  us." 

"  My  mother  is  coming  out,  sir." 

"  I  suppose  you  are  very  fond  of  your 
mother,  arn't  you  ?  And  she  is  fond  of 
you,  hey  ? " 

"  Yes,  sir." 

"She  don't  play  Tom-fool's  tricks, 
does  she  ?  She  wouldn't  cut  away  with 
a  man,  and  leave  you,  would  she  ?  " 

"  No,  sir." 

"  If  she  were  to,  should  you  like  her 
all  the  same,  eh  1 " 

"  I  cannot  tell,  sir.  You  will  be 
pleased  to  close  the  conversation  here, 
sir.  My  mother  is  a  lady,  and  I  don't 
allow  any  discussion  whatever  about 
her  possible  proceedings." 

"  I  didn't  mean  to  make  you  angry," 
said  Bully  Hillyar,  the  inspector,  to1 
quiet  Dickenson,  the  cadet ;  "I  am 
very  sorry.  I  am  afraid  my  manner 
must  be  unfortunate ;  for  just  now,  on 
my  honour,  I  was  trying  to  make  a 
friend  of  you,  and  I  have  only  suc- 
ceeded in  making  you  angry." 

Young  Dickenson,  not  a  wise  being 
by  any  means,  remembered  this  conver- 


278 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


sation  all  his  life.  He  used  to  say 
afterwards  that  Bully  Hillyar  had  had 
good  points  in  him,  and  that  he  knew 
it  When  George  Hillyar  was  con- 
demned, he  used  to  say,  "  Well,  well ! 
this  was  had,  and  that  was  had,  but  he 
was  a  good  fellow  at  bottom."  The  fact 
is,  that  George  unbent,  and  was  his 
better  self  before  this  young  man.  He 
had  been  slowly  raising  himself  to  a 
higher  level,  and  was  getting  hopeful. 
When  he  felt  those  eyes  fixed  upon 
him,  as  he  read  his  letter — which  eyes 
gave  him  a  deadly  chill,  though  he 
had  not  recognised  them — the  vague 
anxiety  which  possessed  him  had 
caused  him  to  be  confidential  with  the 
first  man  he  met. 

So  he  rode  slowly  home  to  the  bar- 
racks and  sat  down  in  his  quarters  to 
business,  for  he  had  taken  the  business 
off  the  hands  of  the  Palmerston  inspec- 
tor, and  had  so  given  him  a  holiday. 
The  office  was  a  very  pleasant  place, 
opening  on  the  paddock — at  this  time 
of  year  a  sheet  of  golden  green  turf, 
shaded  by  low  gum-trees,  which  let 
sunbeams  through  their  boughs  in  all 
directions,  to  make  a  yellow  pattern  on 
the  green  ground.  The  paddock  sloped 
down  to  the  river,  which  gleamed  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  off  among  the  tree- 
stems. 

It  was  a  perfectly  peaceful  day  in  the 
very  early  spring.  The  hum  of  the 
distant  town  was  scarcely  perceptible, 
and  there  was  hardly  a  sound  in  the 
barracks.  Sometimes  a  few  parrots  would 
come  whistling  through  the  trees ;  some- 
times a  horse  would  neigh  in  the  pad- 
dock ;  sometimes  a  lazily-moved  oar 
would  sound  from  the  river ;  but  quiet 
content  and  peace  were  over  every 
thing. 

Even  the  two  prisoners  in  the  yard 
had  ceased  to  talk,  and  sat  silent  in 
the  sun.  A  trooper  going  into  the 
stable,  and  two  or  three  horses  neighing, 
to  him  was  an  event.  George  Hillyar 
sat  and  thought  in  the  stillness,  and  his 
thoughts  were  pleasant,  and  held  him 
long. 

At  length  he  was  aroused  by  voices 
in  the  yard — one  that  of  a  trooper. 


"  I  tell  you  he's  busy." 

"But  I  really  must  see  him,"  said 
the  other  voice.  "I  bring  important 
imformation." 

George  listened  intently. 

"  I  tell  you,"  said  the  trooper,  "  he 
is  busy.  Why  can't  you  wait  till  he 
comes  out  1 " 

"  If  you  don't  do  my  message,  mate, 
you'll  repent  it." 

"  You're  a  queer  card  to  venture  within 
a  mile  of  a  police-station  at  all ;  leave 
alone  being  cheeky  when  you  are  in 
the  lion's  jaws." 

"Never  you  mind  about  that,"  said 
the  other.  "  You  mind  your  business 
half  as  well  as  I  mind  mine,  and  you'll 
be  a  man  before  your  mother  now. 
What  a  pretty  old  lady  she  must  be,  if 
she's  like  you.  More  moustache  though, 
ain't  she  ?  HoVs  pussy  1  I  was  sorry 
for  the  old  gal  getting  nabbed,  but — " 

As  it  was  perfectly  evident  that  there 
would,  in  one  instant  more,  be  a  furious 
combat  of  two,  and  that  George  would 
have  to  give  one  of  his  best  troopers  a 
week's  arrest,  he  roared  out  to  know 
what  the  noise  was  about. 

"A  Sydney  sider,  sir,  very  saucy, 
insists  upon  seeing  you." 

"  Show  him  in  then.  Perhaps  he 
brings  information." 

The  man  laid  George's  revolver  on 
the  table,  put  the  newspaper  carelessly 
over  it,  saluted,  and  withdrew.  Directly 
afterward  the  evil  face  of  Samuel  Burton 
was  smiling  in  the  doorway,  and  George 
Hillyar's  heart  grew  cold  within  him. 

CHAPTEE  XVI 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STOUT  :  ERNE  AND 

EMMA. 

MY  dear  father's  religious  convictions 
were,  and  are,  eminently  orthodox.  He 
had  been  born  and  bred  under  the 
shadow  of  a  great  Kentish  family,  and 
had  in  his  earlier  years — until  the  age 
of  manhood,  indeed — contemplated  the 
act  of  going  to  church  anywhere  but  at 
the  family  church  in  the  park  as  some- 
thing little  less  than  treason.  So  when, 
moved  by  ambition,  he  broke  through 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


279 


old  routine  so  far  as  to  come  to  London 
and  establish  himself,  he  grew  fiercer 
than  ever  in  his  orthodoxy  ;  and,  having 
made  such  a  desperate  step  as  that,  he 
felt  that  he  must  draw  a  line  somewhere. 
He  must  have  some  holdfast  to  his  old 
life  ;  so  his  devotion  to  the  Establish- 
ment was  intense  and  jealous.  The 
habit  he  had  of  attending  church  in  all 
weathers  on  Sunday  morning,  and  care- 
fully spelling  through  the  service,  got 
to  be  so  much  a  part  of  himself  that, 
when  our  necessities  compelled  us  to 
render  ourselves  to  a  place  where  you 
couldn't  go  to  church  if  you  wished  it, 
the  craving  after  the  old  habit  made  my 
father  most  uneasy  and  anxious,  as  far 
on  in  the  week  as  Tuesday  afternoon  ; 
about  which  time  the  regret  for  the 
churchless  Sunday  just  gone  by  would 
have  worn  itself  out.  But  then  the 
cloud  of  the  equally  churchless  Sunday 
approaching  would  begin  to  lower  down 
about  Thursday  afternoon,  and  grow 
darker  as  the  day  approached;  so  that 
_  for  the  first  six  months  of  our  residence 
in  our  new  home,  our  Saturday  evenings 
were  by  no  means  what  they  used  to  be. 
And  yet  I  can  hardly  say  that  my  father 
was  at  this  time  a  devout  man.  I  think 
it  was  more  a  matter  of  custom. 

Of  political  convictions,  my  father  had 
none  of  any  sort  or  kind  whatever.  He 
sternly  refused  to  qualify  himself,  or  to 
express  any  opinion  on  politics,  even 
among  his  intimates  at  the  Black 
Lion  on  Saturday  evening.  The  reason 
he  gave  was,  that  he  had  a  large  family, 
and  that  custom  was  custom.  Before 
you  condemn  him  you  must  remember 
that  he  had  never  had  a  chance  in  his 
life  of  informing  himself  on  public 
affairs,  and  that  he  showed  a  certain 
sort  of  dogged  wisdom  in  refusing  to  be 
led  by  the  nose  by  the  idle  and  igno- 
rant chatterboxes  against  whom  he  was 
thrown  in  the  parlour  of  the  public- 
house. 

I  wish  he  had  shown  half  as  much 
wisdom  with  regard  to  another  matter, 
and  I  wish  I  and  Joe  had  been  a  few 
years  older  before  he  went  so  far  into 
it.  Joe  and  I  believed  in  him,  and 
egged  him  on,  as  two  simple,  affectionate 


boys  might  be  expected  to  do.  The 
fact  is,  as  I  have  hinted  before,  that 
my  father  had  considerable  mechanical 
genius,  and  was  very  fond  of  inventing  ; 
but  then  he  was  an  utterly  ignorant 
man,  could  scarcely  read  and  write,  and 
knew  nothing  of  what  attempts,  and  of 
what  failures,  had  been  made  before  his 
time. 

As  ill  luck  would  have  it,  his  first 
attempt  in  this  line  was  a  great  success. 
He  invented  a  centrifugal  screw-plate, 
for  cutting  very  long  and  large  male 
screws  almost  instantaneously.  He  pro- 
duced the  handles  of  an  ordinary  screw- 
pi  ate  (carrying  a  nut  two  inches  diameter) 
two  feet  each  way,  and  weighted  them 
heavily  at  the  ends.  This,  being  put  on 
a  lathe,  was  made  to  revolve  rapidly,  and 
by  means  of  an  endless  screw,  approached 
the  bar  of  iron  to  be  operated  on  when 
it  was  spinning  at  its  extreme  velocity. 
It  caught  the  bar  and  ran  up  it  as  though, 
it  were  wood,  cutting  a  splendid  screw. 
A  large  building  firm,  who  needed  these 
great  screws  for  shores,  and  centres  of 
arches,  and  so  on,  bought  the  patent 
from  my  father  for  seventy  pounds. 

This  was  really  a  pretty  and  useful 
invention.  My  mother  went  blazing 
down  the  street  to  church  in  a  blue  silk 
gown  and  a  red  bonnet,  and  the  gold 
and  marqueterie  in  Lord  Dacres'  great 
monument  paled  before  her  glory.  It 
was  all  very  well,  and  would  have  been 
better  had  my  father  been  content  to 
leave  well  alone. 

But  he  wasn't.  I  never  knew  a  man 
worth  much  who  was.  The  very  next 
week  he  was  hard  at  work  on  his  new 
treadle- boat.  "We  were  saved  from  that. 
The  evil  day  was  staved  off  by  Erne 
Hillyar. 

Joe,  among  other  benefits  he  was 
receiving  as  head  boy  at  the  parochial 
school,  was  getting  a  fair  knowledge  of 
mechanical  drawing;  so  he  had  under- 
taken to  make  the  drawings  for  this  new 
invention.  I  had  undertaken  to  sit 
next  him  and  watch,  keeping  Fred  quiet; 
my  father  sat  on  the  other  side  ;  Frank 
lay  on  his  back  before  the  fire  singing 
softly ;  and  the  rest  were  grouped  round 
Harry.  Emma  went  silently  hither  and 


280 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


thither  about  housework,  only  coming 
now  and  then  to  look  over  Joe's  shoul- 
der ;  while  my  mother  sat  still  beside 
the  fire  with  her  arms  folded,  buried  in 
thought.  She  had  been  uneasy  in  her 
mind  all  the  evening ;  the  greengrocer 
had  told  her  that  potatoes  would  be  dear 
that  autumn,  and  that  "Now  is  your 
time,  Mrs.  Burton,  and  I  can't  say  no 
fairer  than  that."  She  had  argued  the 
matter,  in  a  rambling,  desultory  way, 
with  any  one  who  would  let  her,  the 
whole  evening,  and  was  now  arguing  it 
with  herself  But  all  of  a  sudden  she 
cried  out,  "  Lord  a  mercy ! "  and  rose 
up. 

It  was  not  any  new  phase  in  the 
potato-question  which  caused  her  ex- 
clamation ;  it  was  Erne  Hillyar.  "  I 
knocked,  Mrs.  Burton,"  he  said,  "  and 
you  did  not  hear  me.  May  I  come  in  1" 

"We  all  rose  up  to  welcome  him,  but 
he  said  he  would  go  away  again  if  we 
did  not  sit  exactly  as  we  were ;  so  we 
resumed  our  positions,  and  he  came  and 
sat  down  beside  me,  and  leant  over  me, 
apparently  to  look  at  Joe's  drawing. 

" I  say,  Jim,"  he  whispered,  "I  have 
run  away  again." 

I  whispered,  "Wouldn't  his  pa  be 
terrible  anxious  ?" 

"  Not  this  time  he  won't.  He  will  get 
into  a  wax  this  time.  I  don't  want  him 
to  know  where  I  come.  If  I  go  to  the 
Parker's,  they  will  tell  him  I  don't 
spend  all  the  time  with  them.  I  shall 
leave  it  a  mystery." 

I  was  so  glad  to  see  him,  that  I  was 
determined  to  make  him  say  something 
which  I  liked  to  hear.  I  said,  "  Why 
do  you  come  here,  sir?" 

"  To  see  you,  gaby,"  he  said ;  and  I 
laughed.  "And  to  see  Emma  also: 
so  don't  be  conceited.  What  are  you 
doing?" 

My  father  and  Joe  explained  the 
matter  to  him,  and  his  countenance  grew 
grave,  but  he  said  nothing.  Very  soon 
afterwards  Emma  and  he  and  I  had 
managed  to  get  into  a  corner  together 
by  the  fire,  and  were  talking  together 
confidentially. 

Erne  told  Emma  of  his  having  run 
away,  and  she  was  very  angry  with  him. 


She  said  that,  if  he  came  so  againr 
she  would  not  speak  one  word  to  him. 
Erne  pleaded  with  her,  and  defended 
himself.  He  said  I  was  the  only  friend 
he  had  ever  made,  and  that  it  was  hard 
if  he  was  never  to  see  me.  She  said 
that  was  true,  but  that  he  should  not 
do  it  in  an  underhand  way.  He  said 
he  must  do  it  so,  or  not  do  it  at  all.  She 
said  that  her  brother  was  not  one  that 
need  be  run  away  to,  or  sought  in  holes 
and  corners.  He  said  that  she  knew 
nothing  of  the  world  and  its  prejudices, 
and  that  he  should  take  his  own  way. 
She  said  it  was  time  for  Fred  to  go  to 
bed,  and  she  must  wish  him  good-night ; 
so  they  quarrelled,  until  Fred's  artificial 
shell — pinafore,  frock,  and  all  the  rest  of 
it — was  unbuttoned  and  unhooked,  and 
nothing  remained  but  to  slip  him  out  of 
it  all,  and  stand  him  down,  with  nothing 
on  but  his  shoes  and  stockings,  to  warm 
his  stomach  by  the  fire.  When  this 
was  done  Erne  came  round  and  hoped 
she  wasn't  angry  with  him.  He  said  he 
would  always  try  to  do  as  she  told  him, 
but  that  he  must  and  would  come  and 
see  us.  And  she  smiled  at  him  again, 
and  said  she  was  sure  that  we  three 
would  always  love  one  another,  as  long 
as  we  lived ;  and  then,  having  put  on 
Fred's  nightgown,  she  carried  him  up 
to  bed,  singing  as  she  went. 

When  Erne  had  done  looking  after 
her,  he  turned  to  me,  and  said : 

"  Jim,  she  is  right.  I  must  not  come 
sneaking  here.  I  must  have  it  out 
with  the  governor.  I  have  told  old 
Compton  about  it,  and  sworn  him  to 
secrecy.  Now  for  some  good  news.  Do 
you  remember  what  you  told  me  about 
the  Thames?" 

"  Do  you  mean  how  it  was  getting  to 
stink  ] " 

"No,  you  great  Hammersmith.  I 
mean  about  sailing  up  it  in  a  boat,  as  Joe 
and  you  and  your  cousin  did ;  and  all 
the  tulip-trees  and  churches  and  tea- 
gardens."  I  dimly  perceived  that  Erne 
wished  me  to  take  the  testhetical  and 
picturesque  view  of  the  river,  rather 
than  the  sanitary  and  practical.  By  way 
of  showing  him  I  understood  him,  I 
threw  in: 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


281 


"  All !  and  the  skittle-alleys  and 
flag-staffs." 

"  Exactly,"  he  said.  "  It's  a  remark- 
able fact,  that  in  my  argument  with  my 
father  I  dwelt  on  that  very  point — 
that  identical  point,  I  assure  you.  There's 
your  skittles  again,  I  said ;  there's  a  manly 
game  for  you.  He  didn't  see  it  in  that 
light  at  first,  I  allow ;  because  he  told 
me  not  to  be  an  ass.  But  I  have  very 
little  doubt  I  made  an  impression  on 
him.  At  all  events,  I  have  gained  the 
main  point :  you  will  allow  that  I 
triumphed." 

I  said  "  Yes ;  "  I  am  sure  I  don't  know 
why.  I  liked  to  have  him  there  talking 
to  me,  and  would  have  said  "Yes"  to  any- 
thing. We  two  might  have  rambled  on 
for  a  long  while,  if  Joe,  who  had  come 
up,  and  was  standing  beside  me,  had 
not  said, 

"  How,  sir,  may  I  ask  ?" 

"Why,  by  getting  him  to  take  a 
house  at  Kew.  I  am  to  go  to  school  at 
Dr.  Mayby's,  and  we  are  going  to  keep 
boats  and  punts  and  things.  And  I 
am  going  to  see  whether  that  pleasant 
cousin  of  yours,  of  whom  you  have  told 
me,  can  be  induced  to  come  up  and  be 
our  waterman,  and  teach  me  to  row. 
Where  is  your  cousin,  by-the-bye  1 " 

He  was  out  to-night,  we  said.  He 
might  be  in  any  moment.  Erne  said, 
"  No  matter.  Now,  Mr.  Burton,  I  want 
to  speak  to  you,  and  to  Joe." 

My  father  was  all  attention.  Erne 
took  the  drawings  of  the  treadle-boat 
from  my  father,  and  told  him  that  the 
thing  had  been  tried  fifty  times,  and 
had  failed  utterly  as  compared  with  the 
oar ;  that,  with  direct  action,  you  could 
not  gain  sufficient  velocity  of  revolution ; 
and  that,  if  you  resorted  to  multiplying 
gear,  the  loss  of  power  sustained  by 
friction  was  so  enormous  as  to  destroy 
the  whole  utility  of  the  invention.  He 
proved  his  case  clearly.  Joe  acquiesced, 
and  so  did  my  father.  The  scheme  was 
abandoned  there  and  then ;  and  I  was 
left  wondering  at  the  strange  mixture 
of  sound  common  sense,  knowledge  of 
the  subject,  and  simplicity  of  language, 
which  Erne  had  shown.  I  soon  began 
to  see  that  he  had  great  talents  and  very 


great  reading,  but  that,  from  his  hermit- 
like  life,  his  knowledge  of  his  fellow- 
creatures  was  lower  than  Harry's. 

He  had  got  a  bed,  it  appeared,  at  the 
Cadogan  Hotel  in  Sloane  Street,  and  I 
walked  home  with  him.  I  was  sur- 
prised, I  remember,  to  find  him,  the 
young  gentleman  who  had  just  put  us 
so  clearly  right  on  what  was  an  im- 
portant question  to  us,  and  of  which 
we  were  in  the  deepest  ignorance,  asking 
the  most  simple  questions  about  the 
things  in  the  shop-windows  and  the 
people  in  the  streets — what  the  things 
(such  common  things  as  bladders  of 
lard  and  barrels  of  size)  were  used  for, 
and  what  they  cost  1  The  costermongers 
were  a  great  source  of  attraction  to  him, 
for  the  King's  Eoad  that  night  was 
nearly  as  full  of  them  as  the  New  Cut. 
"  See  here,  Jim,"  he  said ;  "  here  is  a 
man  with  a  barrow  full  of  the  common 
murex;  do  they  eat  them?"  I  replied 
that  we  ate  them  with  vinegar,  and 
called  them  whelks.  Periwinkles  he 
knew,  and  recognised  as  old  friends, 
but  tripe  was  a  sealed  book  to  him.  I 
felt  such  an  ox-like  content  and  com- 
placency in  hearing  his  voice  and  having 
him  near  me,  that  we  might  have  gone 
on  examining  this  world,  so  wonderfully 
new  to  him,  until  it  was  too  late  to  get 
into  his  hotel ;  but  he  luckily  thought 
of  it  in  time.  I,  remembering  the 
remarks  of  a  ribald  station-master  on 
a  former  occasion,  did  not  go  within 
reach  of  the  hotel-lights.  We  parted 
affectionately,  and  so  ended  his  second 
visit. 


CHAPTER    XVII. 

ERNE  AND  REUBEN. 

THE  next  morning  my  father  and  I 
were  informed  that  Mr.  Compton  would 
be  glad  to  speak  to  us;  and,  on  going 
indoors,  there  he  was,  as  comfortable  and 
as  neat  as  ever. 

"Well,  Burton,"  he  said,  cheerily, 
"  how  does  the  world  use  you  ?  As 
you  deserve  apparently,  for  you  haven't 
grown  older  this  fifteen  years." 

My  father  laughed,  and  said,  "  Better, 


282 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons : 


he  was  afeared.    His  deservings  weren't 
much.     And  how  was  Mr.  Compton  ?" 

"Well,  thankee.  Anything  in  my 
way  ?  Any  breach  of  patent,  eh  ]  Re- 
member me  when  your  fortune's  made. 
What  a  hulking  great  fellow  Jim  is 
getting  !  What  do  you  give  bim  to  eat, 
hey,  to  make  him  grow  so  ? " 

My  father  was  delighted  to  give  any 
information  to  his  old  friend.  He  began 
to  say  that  sometimes  T  had  one  thing 
and  sometimes  another  —  maybe,  one 
day  beef  and  another  mutton.  "  Jints, 
you  understand,"  said  my  father;  "none 
of  your  kag-mag  and  skewer  bits — " 

"  And  a  pretty  good  lot  of  both,  I'll 
be  bound.  Was  Erne  here  last  night, 
Jim?" 

You  might  have  knocked  me  down 
with  a  feather.  I  had  not  the  wildest 
notion  that  Mr.  Compton,  a  very  old 
acquaintance  of  my  father,  knew  any- 
thing about  the  Hillyars.  I  said,  "  Yes." 

"  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  it,"  he  said. 
"  There's  a  devil  of  a  row  about  him  at 
home.  I  hope  he  has  gone  back." 

I  said  that  he  was  gone  back. 

My  father  said,  "  Look  here,  Mr. 
jCompton.  I  cannot  say  how  glad  I  am 
you  came  to-day,  of  all  men.  I  and  my 
wife  are  in  great  trouble  about  Master 
Erne  and  his  visits,  and  we  don't  rightly 
know  what  to  do." 

"  I  am  in  trouble  also  about  the  boy," 
said  Mr.  Compton ;  "but  I  do  know  what 
to  do." 

"  So  sure  am  I  of  that,  sir,"  said  my 
father,  "that  I  was  going  to  look  you 
up,  and  ask  your  advice." 

"  And  I  came  down  to  consult  with 
you  ;  and  so  here  we  are.  How  much 
does  Jem  know  about  all  this  V 

"  A  good  deal,"  said  my  father ;  "  and, 
if  you  please,  I  should  wish  him  to  know 
everything." 

"Very  well,  then,"  continued  Mr. 
Compton,  "  I  will  speak  before  him  as 
if  he  was  not  here.  You  know  this 
young  gentleman  has  not  been  brought 
up  in  an  ordinary  way— that  he  knows 
nothing  of  the  world ;  consequently  I 
was  terribly  frightened  as  to  where  he 
might  have  run  away  to.  When  he  told 
me  where  he  had  been,  I  was  easy  in 


my  mind,  but  determined  to  come  and 
speak  to  you,  whom  I  have  known  from 
a  child.  What  I  ask  you  is,  Encourage 
him  here,  Barton  and  Jim,  but  don't  let 
any  one  else  get  hold  of  him.  He  can 
get  nothing  but  good  in  your  house,  I 
know.  By  what  strange  fatality  he 
selected  your  family  to  visit,  I  cannot 
conceive.  It  was  a  merciful  accident." 

I  told  him  about  the  yellow  water- 
lilies. 

"  Hah,"  he  said,  "  that  removes  the 
wonder  of  it.  Now  about  his  father." 

"I  should  think,"  said  my  father, 
•''  that  Sir  George  would  hardly  let  him 
come  here,  after  hearing  our  name  1 " 

"  He  does  not  know  that  you  are  any 
connexion  with  our  old  friend  Samuel. 
I  don't  see  why  we  should  tell  him — I 
don't, 'indeed.  It  is  much  better  to  let 
bygones  be  bygones." 

"  Do  you  know  that  his  son  lives  with 
us  now  ? " 

"  Yes.  You  mean  Reuben.  How  is 
he  going  on  1 " 

"  Capital — as  steady  and  as  respectable 
as  possible." 

"Well,  then,"  said  Mr.  Compton, 
"  for  his  sake  we  should  not  be  too  com- 
municative. Sir  George  knows  nothing 
of  you.  He  only  knows  your  name 
from  my  father's  having  unfortunately 
recommended  Samuel  to  him.  I  think, 
if  you  will  take  my  advice,  we  will  keep 
our  counsel  Good-bye,  old  friend." 

Mr.  Compton  and  my  father  were 
playfellows.  The  two  families  came 
from  the  same  village  in  Kent,  and  Mr. 
Compton  had,  unfortunately,  recom- 
mended Samuel  Burton  to  Sir  George 
HiUyar. 

Three  days  afterwards  Erne  came  in, 
radiant.  "  It  was  all  right,"  he  said; 
"he  was  to  come  whenever  he  could 
get  away." 

"  We  had  an  awful  row  though,"  he 
continued  ;  "  I  got  old  Compton  to  come 
home  with  me.  '  Where  have  you  been, 
sir  1 '  my  father  said  in  an  awful  voice, 
and  I  said  I  had  been  seeing  my  friends, 
the  Burtons,  who  were  blacksmiths — at 
least,  all  of  them  except  the  women  and 
children — in  Church  Place,  Chelsea. 
He  stormed  out  that,  if  I  must  go 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


283 


and  herd  with  blackguards,  I  might 
choose  some  of  a  less  unlucky  name, 
and  frequent  a  less  unlucky  house.  I 
said  I  didn't  name  them,  and  that  there- 
fore that  part  of  the  argument  was  dis- 
posed of ;  and  that,  as  for  being  black- 
guards, they  were  far  superior  in  every 
point  to  any  family  I  had  ever  seen; 
and  that  their  rank  in  life  was  as  high 
as  that  of  my  mother,  and  therefore 
high  enough  for  me.  He  stood  aghast 
at  my  audacity,  and  old  Compton  came 
to  my  assistance.  He  told  me  afterwards 
that  I  had  showed  magnificent  powers 
of  debate,  but  that  I  must  be  careful 
not  to  get  a  habit  of  hard-hitting — Lord 
knows  what  he  meant.  He  told  my 
father  that  these  Burtons  were  really 
everything  that  was  desirable,  and  went 
on  no  end  about  you.  Then  I  told 
him  that  I  had  his  own  sanction  for  my 
proceedings,  for  that  he  himself  had 
given  me  leave  to  make  your  acquaintance. 
He  did  not  know  that  it  was  you  I  had 
been  to  see,  and  was  mollified  somewhat. 
I  was  ordered  to  leave  the  room.  When 
I  came  back  again,  I  just  got  the  tail  of 
the  storm,  which  was  followed  by  sun- 
shine. To  tell  you  the  truth,  he  came 
to  much  easier  than  I  liked.  But  here 
we  are,  at  all  events." 

We  sat  and  talked  together  for  a 
short  time  ;  and,  while  we  were  talking, 
Reuben  came  in.  Erne  was  sitting  with 
his  back  towards  the  door;  Eeuben 
advanced  towards  the  fire  from  behind 
him,  and,  seeing  a  young  gentleman 
present,  took  off  his  cap  and  smoothed 
his  hair.  How  well  I  can  remember 
those  two  faces  together.  The  contrast 
between  them  impressed  me  in  a  vague 
sort  of  way  even  then ;  I  could  not 
have  told  you  why  at  that  time,  though 
I  might  now.  Men  who  only  get  edu- 
cated somewhat  late  in  life,  like  myself, 
receive  impressions  and  recognise  facts, 
for  which  they  find  no  reason  till  long 
after :  so  those  two  faces,  so  close  to- 
gether, puzzled  me  even  then  for  an 
instant,  for  there  was  a  certain  similarity 
of  expression,  though  probably  none  in 
feature.  There  was  a  look  of  reckless 
audacity  in  both  faces — highly  refined 
in  that  of  Erne,  and  degenerating  into 


mere  devil-may-care,  cockney  impudence 
in  that  of  Eeuben.  Joe,  who  was  with 
me,  remarked  that  night  in  bed,  that 
either  of  them,  if  tied  up  too  tight,  would 
break  bounds  and  become  lawless.  That 
was  true  enough,  but  I  saw  more  than 
that.  Among  other  things,  I  saw  that 
there  was  far  more  determination  in 
Erne's  beautiful  set  mouth  than  in  the 
ever-shifting  lips  of  my  cousin  Eeuben, 
I  also  saw  another  something,  to  which, 
at  that  time,  I  could  give  no  name. 

Eeuben  came  and  leant  against  the 
fireplace,  and  I  introduced  him.  Erne 
immediately  shook  hands  and  made 
friends.  We  had  not  settled  to  talk 
when  Emma  came  in,  and,  after  a  kind 
greeting  between  Erne  and  her,  sat 
down  and  began  her  work. 

"You're  a  waterman,  are  you  not, 
Eeuben  1 "  said  Erne. 

Eeuben  was  proud  to  say  he  was  a 
full  waterman. 

"  It  is  too  good  luck  to  contemplate," 
said  Erne ;  "  but  we  want  a  waterman,  in 
our  new  place  at  Kew,  to  look  after 
boats  and  attend  me  when  I  bathe, 
to  see  I  don't  drown  myself.  I  suppose 
you  wouldn't — eh  ] 

Eeuben  seemed  to  think  he  would 
rather  like  it.  He  looked  at  Emma. 

"Just  what  I  mean,"  said  Erne. 
"  What  do  you  say,  Emma  ? " 

Emma  looked  steadily  at  Eeuben, 
and  said  quietly  : 

"  If  it  suits  Eeuben,  sir,  I  can  answer 
for  him.  Answer  for  him  in  every  way. 
Tell  me,  Eeuben.  Can  I  answer  for  you  ]  " 

Eeuben  set  his  mouth  almost  as 
steadily  as  Erne's,  and  said  she  might 
answer  for  him. 

"  Then  will  you  come  ? "  said  Erne. 
"That  will  be  capital.  Don't  you 
think  it  will  be  glorious,  Emma  ?  " 

"I  think  it  will  be  very  nice,  sir. 
It  will  be  another  link  between  yon 
and  my  brother." 

"  And  between  myself  and  you." 

"That  is  true  also,"  said  Emma. 
"  And  I  cannot  tell  you  how  glad  I  am 
of  that,  because  I  like  you  so  very,  very 
much.  Next  to  Jim,  and. Joe,  and 
Eeuben,  I  think  I  like  you  better  than 
any  boy  I  know." 


284 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


CHAPTEE  XVIII. 

JAMES   BURTON'S  STORY  :  REUBEN   AND 
SIR  GEORGE  HILLYAR. 

GOLDEN  hours,  which  can  never  come 
back  any  more.  Hours  as  peaceful  and 
happy  as  the  close  of  a  summer  Sab- 
bath, among  dark  whispering  elm- woods, 
or  on  quiet  downs,  aloft  above  the  mur- 
muring village.  Was  it  on  that  evening 
only,  or  was  it  on  many  similar  evenings, 
that  we  all  sat  together,  in  a  twilight 
which  seemed  to  last  for  hours,  before 
the  fire,  talking  quietly  together  ?  "Why, 
when  at  this  distance  of  time  I  recall 
those  gatherings  before  the  fire,  in  the 
quaint  draughty  old  room,  do  I  always 
think  of  such  things  as  these  1 — of  dim, 
vast  cathedrals,  when  the  service  is 
over,  and  the  last  echoes  of  the  organ 
seem  still  rambling  in  the  roof,  trying 
to  break  away  after  their  fellows  to- 
wards heaven — of  quiet  bays  between 
lofty  chalk  headlands,  where  one  lies 
and  basks  the  long  summer  day  before 
the  gently  murmuring  surf — of  very 
quiet  old  churches,  where  the  monu- 
ments of  the  dead  are  crowded  thick 
together,  and  the  afternoon  sun  slopes 
in  on  the  kneeling  and  lying  effigies 
of  men  who  have  done  their  part  in  the 
great  English  work,  and  are  waiting, 
without  care,  without  anxiety,  for  their 
wages  ?  Why  does  my  rambling  fancy, 
on  these  occasions,  ever  come  back  again 
to  the  long  series  of  peaceful  and  quiet 
images — to  crimson  sunsets  during  a 
calm  in  mid  ocean — to  high  green  capes, 
seen  from  the  sea,  the  sides  of  whose 
long-drawn  valleys  are  ribbed  with 
grey  rocks — to  curtains  of  purple  dolo- 
mite, seen  from  miles  away  across  the 
yellow  plain,  cut  in  the  centre  by  a 
si  Iver  waterfall — to  great  icebergs  floating 
on  the  calm  blue  sea — to  everything,  in 
short,  which  I  have  seen  in  rny  life 
which  speaks  of  peace  1  And  why,  again, 
do  I  always  come  at  last  to  the  wild 
dim  blue  promontory,  whose  wrinkled 
downs  are  half  obscured  by  clouds  of 
wind-driven  spray  1 

How  many  of  these  evenings   were 
there  ?     There  must  have  been  a  great 


many,  because  I  remember  that  Reuben 
came  home  for  the  winter  one  dead 
drear  November  night,  and  Erne  accom- 
panied him  and  stayed  for  an  hour.  I 
cannot  say  how  long  they  lasted.  A 
year  or  two,  first  and  last. 

What  arose  out  of  them  that  is 
noticeable  is  soon  told.  In  the  first 
place,  this  period  constituted  a  new  era 
in  Joe's  life.  Erne's  books  and  Erne's 
knowledge  and  assistance  were  at  his 
service,  and  he  soon,  as  Erne  told  me, 
began  to  bid  fair  to  be  a  distinguished 
scholar.  "  He  not  only  had  perseverance 
and  memory,  but  genius  also,"  said  Erne. 
"  He  sees  the  meaning  of  a  thing  quicker 
than  I  do.  Joe  is  far  cleverer  than  L" 

At  first  I  had  been  a  little  anxious 
about  one  thing,  though  I  have  never 
named  my  anxiety  to  any  one.  I  was 
afraid  lest  Reuben  should  become  jealous 
of  Erne,  and  stay  away  from  us.  It  was 
not  so.  Reuben  grew  devoted  to  Erne, 
and  seemed  pleased  with  his  admiration 
of  Emma.  I  began  to  see  that  Emma's 
influence  over  Reuben,  great  as  it  was, 
arose  more  from  a  sincere  respect  and 
esteem  on  his  part  than  anything  else. 
I  was  therefore  glad  to  find  that  nothing 
was  likely  to  interfere  with  it.  As  for 
Erne,  he  had  fallen  most  deeply  in  love 
with  her,  and  I  had  seen  it  from  the 
beginning. 

I,  for  my  part,  in  my  simplicity,  could 
see  no  harm  in  that.  In  fact,  it  seemed 
to  me  an  absolutely  perfect  arrangement 
that  these  two  should  pass  their  lives  in 
a  fool's  paradise  together.  As  for  my 
father  and  mother,  they  looked  on  us 
all  as  a  parcel  of  children,  and  nothing 
more ;  and,  besides,  they  both  had  the 
blindest  confidence  in  Emma,  child  as 
she  was.  At  all  events,  I  will  go  bail 
that  no  two  people  ever  lived  less  ca- 
pable of  any  design  on  Erne's  rank  or 
property.  I  insult  them  by  mentioning 
such  a  subject. 

Whether  it  was  that  I  had  repre- 
sented Sir  George  Hillyar  to  Reuben 
as  a  very  terrible  person,  or  whether  it 
was  that  Reuben's  London  assurance 
would  not  stand  the  test  of  the  chilling 
atmosphere  of  the  upper  classes,  I  can- 
not say ;  but  Reuben  was  cowed.  When 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


285 


the  time  came  for  him  to  fulfil  his  en- 
gagement to  go  to  Kew  and  take  care 
of  Sir  George  Hillyar's  boats,  he  grew 
anxious  and  fidgetty,  and  showed  a 
strong  tendency  to  back  out  of  the 
whole  business. 

"  I  say,  Emma,  old  woman,"  he  said, 
the  night  before  I  was  to  go  with  him 
and  introduce  him,  "  I  wish  I  was  well 
out  of  this  here." 

"  Well  out  of  what,  Eeuben  dear  1 " 
said  Emma. — "And  nobody  but  the 
child  and  the  two  angels  knew  as  the 
crossing-sweeper  boy  was  gone  to  hea- 
ven j  but,  when  they  got  up  there,  he 
was  a-waiting  for  'em,  just  as  the  angel 
in  blue  had  told  the  angel  in  pink  silk 
and  spangles  he  would  be."  (This  last  was 
only  the  tail  of  some  silly  story  which 
she  had  been  telling  the  little  ones  ;  it 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Plot). 

"Why,  well  out  of  going  up  to  Kew, 
to  look  after  these  boats.  The  old  co — 
gentleman,  I  should  say,  is  a  horrid  old 
painted  Mussulman.  When  he  do  go  on 
the  war-train,  which  is  twenty-four  hours 
a  day — no  allowance  for  meals — he  is 
everlastingly  a-digging  up  of  his  tommy- 
awk.  All  the  servants  is  prematurely 
grey  ;  and,  if  the  flowers  don't  blow  on 
the  very  day  set  down  in  the  gardening 
column  of  Bell's  Life,  he's  down  on  the 
gardeners,  till  earthquakes  and  equinoc- 
tials is  a  fool  to  him." 

"Ain't  you  talking  nonsense,  Eeuben 
dear  1 "  said  Emma. 

"  May  be,"  said  Eeuben,  quietly. 
"  But,  by  all  accounts,  he  is  the  most 
exasperating  bart  as  ever  was  since 
barts  was,  which  was  four  years  afore 
the  first  whycount  married  the  heiress 
of  the  great  cod  liver-oil  manufacturer 
at  Battersea.  It  flew  to  his  lower  ex- 
tremities," continued  Eeuben,  looking 
in  a  comically  defiant  manner  at  Emma, 
and  carefully  putting  the  fire  together ; 
"  and  he  drank  hisself  to  death  with  it. 
He  died  like  a  bus-horse,  in  consequence 
of  the  grease  getting  into  his  heels. 
Now  ! " 

"  Have  you  quite  done,  Eeuben  ?  " 
asked  Emma. 

Eeubeu  said  he  had  finished  for  the 
present. 


"Then,"  said  Emma,  "let  me  tell 
you  that  you  are  very  foolish  in  preju- 
dicing yourself  against  this  gentleman 
from  what  you  have  heard  at  the  water- 
side, since  he  came  to  Kew.  However, 
I  am  not  altogether  sorry,  for  you  will 
find  him  quite  different — quite  different, 
I  assure  you." 

It  was  bed- time,  and  we  all  moved 
upstairs  together  in  a  compact  body,  on 
account  of  Frank.  That  tiresome  young 
monkey  Harry,  in  an  idle  hour — when,  as 
Dr.  Watts  tells  us,  Satan  is  ready  to  find 
employment — had  told  Frank  that  the 
Guy  Fawkeses  lived  under  the  stairs,  and 
had  produced  the  most  tiresome  com- 
plications. The  first  we  heard  of  it 
was  one  day  when  Frank  was  helping 
Fred  downstairs.  Fred  was  coming 
carefully  down  one  step  at  a  time,  suck- 
ing his  thumb  the  while,  and  holding 
on  by  Frank,  when  Frank  suddenly 
gave  a  sharp  squeal,  and  down  the  two 
came,  fifteen  stairs,  on  to  the  mat  at 
the  bottom.  To  show  the  extraordinary 
tricks  which  our  imaginations  play  with 
us  at  times — to  show,  indeed,  that  Mind 
does  sometimes  triumph  over  Matter — I 
may  mention  that  Frank  (the  soul  of 
truth  and  honesty)  declared  positively 
that  he  had  seen  an  arm  clothed  in  blue 
cloth,  with  brass  buttons  at  the[  wrist, 
thrust  itself  through  the  banisters,  and 
try  to  catch  hold  of  his  leg.  On  observ- 
ing looks  of  incredulity,  he  added  that 
the  Hand  of  the  Arm  was  full  of  brim- 
stone matches,  and  that  he  saw  the 
straw  coming  out  at  its  elbows.  After 
this  a  strong  escort  was  necessary  every 
night,  when  he  went  to  bed.  He  gene- 
rally preferred  going  up  pick-a-back  on 
Eeuben's  broad  shoulders,  feeling  pro- 
bably safer  about  the  legs. 

How  well  I  remember  a  little  trait  of 
character  that  night.  Fred  conceived 
it  more  manly  to  walk  up  to  bed  with- 
out the  assistance  even  of  Emma.  When 
we  were  half-way  up  the  great  staircase, 
Eeuben,  carrying  Frank,  raised  an  alarm 
of  Guy  Fawkeses.  We  all  rushed 
screaming  and  laughing  up  the  stairs, 
and,  when  we  gained  the  landing,  and 
looked  back,  we  saw  that  we  had  left 
Fred  behind,  in  the  midst  of  all  the 


286 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


dreadful  peril  which  we  had  escaped. 
But  the  child  toiled  steadily  and  slowly 
on  after  us,  with  a  broad  smile  on  his 
face,  refusing  to  hurry  himself  for  all 
the  Guy  Fawkeses  in  the  world.  When 
he  got  his  Victoria  Cross  at  Delhi  for 
staying  behind,  that  he  might  bring 
poor  Lieutenant  Tacks  back  on  his 
shoulders,  to  die  among  English  faces, 
I  thought  of  this  night  on  the  stairs  at 
Chelsea.  He  hurried  no  faster  out  of 
that  terrible  musketry  fire  in  the  nar- 
row street  than  he  did  from  the  Guy 
Fawkeses  on  the  stairs.  Among  all 
Peel's  heroes,  there  was  no  greater  hero 
than  our  big-headed  Fred.  The  post- 
captain  who  has  got  Frederick  Burton 
for  his  boatswain  is  an  envied  and 
lucky  man  to  this  day. 

Reuben,  who  had  to  toil  upstairs  to 
his  lonely  haunted  room  at  the  top  of 
the  house,  asked  me  to  come  with  him. 
Of  course  I  went,  though,  great  lubberly 
lad  as  I  was,  I  remember  having  an  in- 
distinct dread  of  coming  down  again 
by  myself. 

There  was  a  dull  fire  burning,  and 
the  great  attic  looked  horribly  ghostly  j 
and,  as  I  sat  before  the  fire,  strange 
unearthly  draughts  seemed  to  come  from 
the  deserted  and  still  more  ghostly 
room  beyond,  which  struck,  now  on  this 
shoulder  and  now  on  that,  with  a  chill, 
as  if  something  was  laying  its  hand  on 
me.  Reuben  had  lit  a  candle,  but 
that  did  not  make  matters  better,  but  a 
great  deal  worse  ;  for,  when  I  looked  at 
his  face  by  the  light  of  it,  I  saw  that 
he  looked  wild  and  wan,  and  was  ashy 
pale. 

He  took  a  letter  from  the  pocket  of  his 
pea  jacket,  and  burnt  it.  Before  it  was 
quite  consumed  he  turned  to  me,  and  said : 

"  Jim,  Jim,  dear  old  chap,  you  won't 
desert  me,  will  you,  when  it  comes,  and 
I  can't  see  or  speak  to  Emma  or  the  kids 
any  more  ?  You  will  go  between  us 
sometimes,  and  tell  her  and  them  that 
I  am  only  stupid  old  Reuben,  as  loves 
'em  well,  by  G —  ;  and  that  I  ain't 
changed  in  spite  of  all  1 " 

I  was  infinitely  distressed.  The  fact 
is,  that  I  loved  my  cousin  Reuben — 
in  a  selfish  way,  of  course.  I  had  a 


certain  quantity  of  rough,  latent 
humour,  but  no  power  of  expression. 
Reuben,  on  a  mere  hint  from  me  of 
some  gross  incongruity,  would  spin  out 
yard  after  yard  of  verbose,  fantastic 
nonsense  to  the  text  which  I  had  given 
him.  He  was  necessary  to  me,  and  I 
was  fond  of  him  in  consequence. 

"  Reuben,  old  boy,"  I  said,  "  I'll  go 
to  death  with  you.  I'll  never,  never 
desert  you,  I  tell  you.  If  you  have 
been  led  away,  Reuben,  why,  you  may 
be  led  back  again."  I  took  his  hand, 
and  felt  that  I  was  as  pale  as  he.  "  Is 
it — is  it — anything  that  will  take  you 
for  long,  Rube  1  Shall  you  go  abroad, 
Rube  ?  "  And  here,  like  a  young  fool, 
I  burst  out  crying. 

"  Lord  bless  his  faithful  heart ! "  said 
Reuben,  in  his  old  manner,  "  /  haven't 
been  doing  of  nothink.  But,  Jim,  what 
was  it  you  said  just  now  ? " 

I  said,  "What  did  he  mean?  'that  I 
could  follow  him  to  death '  ?  " 

He  said,  "  Yes  ;  that  is  what  I  meant. 
And,  Jim,  old  chap,  it  runs  to  that.  Not 
for  me,  but  for  others.  In  my  belief, 
Jim,  it  runs  to  that.  Joe  could  tell  us, 
but  we  musn't  ask  Joe.  Joe's  a  chap 
as  is  rising  fast,  and  musn't  be  pulled 
down  by  other  folk's  troubles.  Lawyers 
could  tell  us — but,  Lord  love  you,  we 
musn't  ask  no  lawyers.  We'd  best  know 
nothing  about  it  than  ask  they.  And 
you  musn't  know  nothing  either ;  only 
don't  desert  me,  old  Jim." 

I  said  again  that  I  would  not.  And, 
if  ever  I  kept  my  word,  I  kept  that 
promise. 

"  I  know  you  won't,"  he  said,  with 
that  strange  mixture  of  shrewdness, 
rough  honour,  and  recklessness  which 
one  finds  among  Londoners;  "but  then, 
Jim,  if  you  are  true  to  me,  you  will 
have,  may  be,  to  know  and  not  to  know 
at  one  and  the  same  time,  to  go  with 
a  guilty  breast  among  the  little  ones, 
and  before  Emma.  Better  leave  me, 
Jim  ;  better  leave  me  while  you  can." 

I  declared  I  would  not ;  but  that  I 
would  stick  by  him  and  give  him  a 
good  word  when  he  wanted  it.  And 
then,  at  his  solicitation,  I  stayed  with 
him  all  night.  Once  he  woke  and  cried 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


287 


out  that  the  barge  had  got  too  far  down 
the  river,  and  was  drifting  out  to  sea. 
Then  that  the  corpses  of  all  the  people 
who  had  committed  suicide  on  the 
bridges  were  rising  up  and  looking  at 
us.  I  slept  but  little  after  this,  and 
was  glad  when  morning  dawned. 

But  the  next  morning  Eeuben  was  as 
bright,  as  brisk,  and  as  nonsensical  as 
ever.  He  defied  Emma.  She  ventured 
to  hope  that  he  would  be  steady,  and 
not  attend  to  every  thing  he  heard 
about  people  without  inquiry.  He  said 
he  was  obliged  to  her,  and  wouldn't ; 
that  he  had  left  three  or  four  pair  of 
old  boots  upstairs,  and,  if  she'd  be  good 
enough  to  send  'em  to  the  beadle  and 
get  'em  darned,  he'd  thank  her.  The 
passion  and  earnestness  of  last  night 
was  all  gone  apparently.  Nothing  was 
to  be  got  from  him,  even  by  Emma,  but 
chaff  and  nonsense.  The  true  London 
soul  revolted  from,  and  was  ashamed  of, 
the  passion  of  last  night.  Even  with 
me  he  seemed  half  ashamed  and  half 
captious. 

"We  were  not  very  long  in  getting  to 
Kew.  Early  as  we  were,  the  servants 
had  to  inform  us  that  Sir  George  and 
Mr.  Erne  had  gone  out  riding.  "We 
waited  in  the  servants'  hall,  in  and 
out  of  which  grey-headed  servants  came 
now  and  then  to  look,  it  would  seem, 
at  the  strange  sight  of  two  round  young 
faces  like  ours.  About  nine  o'clock, 
the  butler  came  and  asked  us  to  come 
to  prayers,  and  we  went  up  into  a  great 
room,  where  breakfast  was  laid,  and 
made  the  end  of  a  long  row  of  ser- 
vants, sitting  with  our  backs  against  a 
great  sideboard,  while  a  grey-headed 
old  gentleman  read  a  very  long  prayer. 
The  moment  we  were  alone  together 
Eeuben,  who  was  in  a  singularly  ner- 
vous and  insolent  mood,  objected  to 
this  prayer  in  language  of  his  own, 
which  I  shall  not  repeat.  He  objected 
that  three-quarters  of  it  was  consumed 
in  conveying  information  to  the  Deity, 
concerning  our  own  unworthiness  and 
His  manifold  greatness  and  goodness ; 
and  that  altogether  it  was  as  utterly 
unlike  the  Lord's  Prayer  or  any  of  the 
Church  prayers  as  need  be. 


I  was  very  anxious  about  him.  I 
dreaded  the  meeting  between  him  and 
the  terrible  old  baronet.  I  was  glad 
when  things  came  to  a  crisis.  We  saw 
Sir  George  come  riding  across  the  park 
on  a  beautiful  swift-stepping  grey  cob, 
accompanied  by  Erne  on  a  great,  nearly 
thorough -bred  chestnut.  They  were 
talking  merrily  together  and  laughing. 
They  were  certainly  a  splendid  couple, 
though  Erne  would  have  looked  to 
better  advantage  on  a  smaller  horse. 
They  rode  into  the  stable-yard,  where 
we  were  instructed  to  wait  for  them, 
and  dismounted. 

"  That,"  said  Sir  George  Hillyar,  ad- 
vancing and  pointing  sternly  at  me  with 
his  riding- whip,  "is  the  boy  Burton. 
I  have  seen  him  before." 

This  previous  conviction  was  too 
damning  to  be  resisted.  I  pleaded 
guilty. 

"And  that?"  said  he,  turning  almost 
fiercely  upon  Eeuben. 

Erne  stood  amused,  leaving  us  to 
fight  our  own  battle.  I  said  it  was 
Eube. 

"Who?"  said  Sir  George. 

"  Eeuben,  my  cousin,"  I  said,  "  that 
was  come  to  take  care  of  his  honour's 
boats." 

Sir  George  looked  at  Eeuben  for  full 
a  minute  without  speaking,  and  then  he 
said,  "  Come  here,  you  young  monkey." 

As  Eeuben  approached,  utterly  puz- 
zled by  this  style  of  reception,  I  noticed 
a  look  of  curiosity  on  Sir  George's  face. 
When  Eeuben  stood  before  him,  quick 
as  light  Sir  George  turned  and  looked 
at  Erne  for  one  second,  and  then  looked 
at  Eeuben  again.  Steadily  gazing  at 
him,  he  pointed  the  handle  of  his 
riding -whip  towards  him,  and  said, 
" Look  here,  sirrah,  do  you  hear?  You 
are  to  have  fifteen  shillings  a  week,  and 
are  to  put  three  half-crowns  in  the 
savings' -bank.  You  are  to  get  up  at 
seven,  to  say  your  prayers,  to  clean  the 
boats,  and  offer  to  help  the  gardener. 
If  he  is  fool  enough  to  accept  your  offer, 
you  may  tell  him  that  you  weren't  hired 
to  work  in  the  garden.  If  Mr.  Erne 
bathes,  you  are  to  row  round  and  round 
him  in  a  boat,  and  try  to  prevent  his 


288 


Letters  from  a  Com/petition  Wallah  :  Letter  IX. 


drowning  himself.  If  lie  does,  you  are 
to  send  a  servant  to  me,  informing  me 
of  the  fact,  and  go  for  the  drags.  If 
such  a  casualty  should  occur,  you  are 
to  consider  your  engagement  as  termi- 
nated that  day  week.  I  object  to 
skittles,  to  potting  at  public-houses,  and 
to  running  along  the  towing-path  like 
a  lunatic,  bellowing  at  the  idiots  who 
row  boat-races.  Any  conversation  with 
my  son  Erne  on  the  subjects  of  pigeon- 
shooting,  pedestrianism,  bagatelle,  all- 
fours,  toy -terriers,  or  Nonconformist 
doctrines,  will  lead  to  your  immediate 
dismissal.  Do  you  understand  V 

I  did  not ;  but  Erne  and  Eeuben  did. 
They  understood  that  the  old  man  had 


taken  a  fancy  to  Eeuben,  and  was 
making  fun.  They  both  told  me  this, 
and  of  course  I  saw  they  were  right  at 
once.  Still,  I  was  puzzled  at  one  thing 
more.  "Why,  after  he  had  turned  away, 
did  the  old  gentleman  come  back  after 
a  few  steps,  and  lay  his  hands  on 
Reuben's  shoulders,  looking  eagerly  into 
his  face  ?  Could  he  see  any  likeness  to 
his  father — to  the  man  who  had  used 
him  so  cruelly — to  Samuel  Burton  ?  I 
could  not  think  so.  It  must  have  been 
merely  an  old  man's  fancy  for  Reuben's 
handsome,  merry  countenance ;  for  Sir 
George  pushed  him  away  with  a  smile, 
and  bade  him  go  about  his  business. 
To  be  continued. 


LETTERS  FROM  A  COMPETITION  WALLAH. 

LETTER  IX.— BRITISH  TEMPER  TOWARDS  INDIA,  BEFORE,  DURING,  AND 

SINCE  THE  MUTINY. 

dash  of  illusion.  But  the  same  may  be 
said  of  every  successive  stage  in  the 
progress  of  knowledge  and  civilization. 
Philanthropists  are  a  sanguine  class ; 
and  it  is  well  for  them  that  they  are 
so.  The  generation  which  was  deter- 
mined to  show  that  Englishmen  came 
to  India  with  other  ends  than  that  of 
making  money,  and  swaggering  about 
the  "great  Anglo-Saxon  race,"  might 
well  be  forgiven  for  over-rating  the 
merits  of  Sanskrit  poetry  or  the  attain- 
ments of  a  Bengalee  Bachelor  of  Arts. 
Once  every  week,  Marshman,  the  editor 
of  the  Friend  of  India,  would  come 
down  from  Serampore  for  a  conversa- 
tion with  the  Secretary  to  Bengal ;  and 
the  salutary  fruits  of  this  close  under- 
standing between  the  executive  power 
and  the  press  were  evident,  both  in  the 
acts  of  the  Government  and  the  articles 
in  the  Friend.  Public  measures  were 
dictated  by  a  spirit  of  enlightened 
philosophy,  and  the  suggestions  and 
disquisitions  in  the  journal  were  prac- 
tical and  temperate,  and  acquired  ad- 
ditional value  from  the  fact  that  they 
were  understood  to  represent  the  views 
of  men  in  power.  A  noisy  and  en- 


CALCUTTA,  May  11, 1863. 
DEAR  SIMKINS, — I  lately  read  through 
a  file  Of  the  Friend  of  India,  for  1836, 
with  great  pleasure,  not  unmingled  with 
regret.  The  value  of  such  a  paper  in 
these  days  would  be  incalculable.  The 
tone  of  the  articles  indicated  the  exist- 
ence in  Anglo-Indian  society  of  a  spirit 
which  has  passed  away  and  left  but 
faint  traces.  In  those  times  the  well- 
being  of  the  Hindoo  was  the  first  and 
dearest  care  of  our  leading  civilians. 
Their  successors  honestly  do  their  duty 
by  the  native  population ;  but  that  duty 
is  no  longer  a  labour  of  love.  Thirty 
years  ago  the  education  of  the  people  of 
the  country  was  the  favourite  subject 
of  conversation  in  the  best  circles,  and 
occupied  the  spare  time  of  men  who 
had  little  enough  of  that  commodity. 
Hindoo  history,  Hindoo  literature,  Hin- 
doo social  life,  were  discussed  with 
inexhaustible  ardour;  and  the  hopes 
entertained  concerning  the  future  of  the 
race  were  proportionate  to  the  interest 
which  it  excited.  Of  course  this  feel- 
ing, like  all  that  is  noble  and  unselfish 
in  the  mind  of  man,  partook  of  a  strong 


British  Temper  towards  India. 


thusiastic  breakfast-party  frequently 
met  to  discuss  the  subject  which  was 
next  their  hearts.  Of  these  men,  some 
are  still  doing  good  work  well,  while 
others  have  passed  away,  leaving  their 
mark  more  or  less  deeply  impressed 
on  their  generation.  There  was  Sir 
Edward  Eyan,  then  Chief  Justice  of 
Bengal,  now  President  of  the  Civil 
Service  Commission,  whose  hearty  ad- 
dress and  kindly  advice  are  among  the 
most  agreeable  associations  which  a 
young  civilian  carries  from  the  shores 
of  England.  I  remember  well,  that, 
on  emerging  from  his  pleasant  presence, 
I  remarked  in  the  hall  a  bust  of  Dwar- 
kanath  Thakur,  a  Hindoo  gentleman 
for  whom.  Sir  Edward  entertained  a 
strong  regard.  For  our  officers  were 
then  not  ashamed  to  call  a  native  by 
the  name  of  "friend,"  and  would  have 
been  very  much  ashamed  to  talk  of  him 
by  the  appellation  of  "nigger,"  even 
without  the  customary  prefix.  Then 
there  was  young  Trevelyan,  very  vigorous 
and  earnest,  and  very  proud  of  "Dwarky" 
having  eaten  a  mutton-chop  in  his 
house.  "When  Sir  Charles  returned  to 
Calcutta,  after  the  lapse  of  five-and- 
twenty  years,  he  was  mobbed  by  Hin- 
doos, Mussulmans,  and  Parsees,  with 
whom  in  old  days  he  had  hunted  and 
travelled  and  disputed  about  Persian. 
poetry  and  jurisprudence,  and  whom! 
the  most  excellent  Indophilus  treated! 
with  a  courtesy  and  familiarity  which  a 
young  assistant-magistrate  of  modern 
days  would  scorn  to  show  towards  the 
proudest  zemindar.  There  was  yoiang 
Colvin,  whose  destiny  was  to  die  sick 
and  weary  in  the  darkest  hoiir  of  the 
great  mutiny,  at  a  time  when  his 
authority  as  governor  of  the  North- West 
Provinces  was  confined  to  the  space 
commanded  by  the  guns  of  the  fort  of 
Agra  :  Sir  Benjamin  Malkin,  an  able 
judge  and  a  ripe  scholar,  a  man  emi- 
nently distinguished  "by  public  spirit, 
"  ardent  and  disinterested,  yet  always 
"  under  the  guidance  of  discretion  : " 
Ross  Mangles,  who,  when  chairman  of 
the  Court  of  Directors  during  that 
eventful  year  1857,  could  never  be  con- 
vinced that  the  mass  of  the  population 
Ko.  52. — VOL.  ix. 


of  India  had  been  suddenly  transformed 
into  felons  and  rebels,  preordained  by 
Providence  to  afford  food  for  powder 
and  the  gallows.  Last,  but  not  most 
silent,  there  was  Macaulay,  in  high 
delight  at  finding  himself  in  a  country 
where  so  much  was  to  be  learned,  keep- 
ing the  company  far  on  towards  noon 
over  the  cold  curries  and  empty  tea- 
cups, until  the  consciousness  of  accumu- 
lating bones  drove  them  one  by  one 
to  their  respective  offices.  Now-a-days 
such  a  reunion  would  be  reviled  in  the 
local  papers  as  a  parcel  of  conspirators 
assembled  to  hatch  dark  plots  against 
the  English  name,  the  planting  interest, 
and  the  development  of  the  resources 
of  the  country.  Under  the  auspices  of 
Lord  Dalhousie,  the  harvest  which  had 
been  sown  by  these  men  and  those  who 
thought  with  them  was  reaped  in  a 
series  of  wise  and  beneficent  reforms. 
But  during  the  reign  of  the  next  viceroy 
things  took  a  fatal  turn. 

At  the  commencement  of  1857,  hu- 
manity and  philanthropy  were  the  order 
of  the  day.  We  had  just  brought  to 
an  end  the  Eussian  war,  which  had 
been  fought  throughout  in  a  spirit  of 
generous  chivalry,  in  spite  of  the  efforts 
of  those  who  endeavoured  to  turn  a 
contest  waged  to  preserve  the  balance 
of  power  into  a  murderous  struggle  of 
embittered  nations.  It  was  not  many 
years  since  we  had  put  down,  in  a 
cheery,  off-hand  style,  an  Irish  rebel- 
lion, which  would  have  furnished  our 
forefathers  with  a  welcome  excuse  for 
barbarous  severity  and  prolonged  and 
increased  oppression.  In  1798,  the 
victorious  Orangemen  could  not  be  in- 
duced to  spare  the  lives  of  a  parcel  of 
clever  schoolboys,  who  talked  a  little 
too  much  about  Brian  Boru,  and  Har- 
modius,  and  Aristogiton.  In  1848  we 
transported  the  leader  of  the  revolt  for 
a  few  years,  rather  because  we  did  not 
know  what  else  to  do  with  him,  than 
from  any  desire  to  make  him  suffer  for 
his  presumption.  When  Smith  O'Brien 
was  sentenced  to  be  hanged,  drawn,  and 
quartered,  any  one  who  knew  the  temper 
of  the  nation  was  perfectly  aware  that 
the  value  of  the  life  of  the  condemned 


290 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  IX. 


rebel,  in  an  annuity  office,  was  as  good 
as  that  of.  any  other  man  of  his  age  in 
the  three  kingdoms. 

Then  came  the  tidings  of  the  out- 
break at  Meerut ;    of  the  massacre  at 
Delhi.     The  first  impression  produced 
by  the  intelligence  was  curiosity  mingled 
with   pity,  and   surprise  that   any  in- 
teresting thing  could  come  out  of  India. 
But  as  every  mail  brought  a  fresh  story 
of    horror   and   disaster,   a    significant 
change  came  over  the  face  of  society. 
If  the   sympathy  and   indignation  in- 
spired by  an  outrage  is  intense  in  pro- 
portion to  the  faculty  of  suffering  in 
the  victim,  here  was  a  case  in  which 
indignation  and  sympathy  could  know 
no  bounds  ;  for  the  victims  belonged  to 
the  most  refined  and  enlightened  class 
of  the  first  nation  in  the  world.    Ladies, 
bred  and  nurtured  amidst  all  that  wealth 
and  affection  could  afford,  were  dragged 
along,  under  a  June  sun,  in  the  ranks 
of  the  mutineers,  in  hourly  expectation, 
and   soon   in   hourly  hope,    of   death. 
Officers,  who  had  been  trained  to  the 
duties  of  government  by  the  best  edu- 
cation which  the  mother-country  could 
supply,    judges,    magistrates,    men    of 
science,  men  of  letters,  were  pelted  to 
death  with  brickbats,  or  hung,  amidst 
shouts  of  laughter,  after  a  mock  trial. 
Then  from  the   lowest   depths  of  our 
nature  emerged  those  sombre,  ill-omened 
instincts,  of  whose  very  existence  we 
had  ceased  to  be  aware.     Intense  com- 
passion, intense  wrath,  the  injured  pride 
of  a  great  nation — those  combative  pro- 
pensities against  which  Mr.  Bright  has 
so   often   testified  in  vain — surged   in 
upon  the  agitated  community.     It  was 
tacitly  acknowledged  that  mercy,  charity, 
the  dignity  and  sacredness  of  human 
life — those   great  principles   which,  at 
ordinary  times,  are  recognised  as  eter- 
nally true — must  be  put  aside  till  our 
sway  was  restored  and  our  name  avenged. 
It  is  well  that  nations,  as  men,  should 
pray  to  be  delivered  from  temptation. 
Two  years  of  civil  war  have  changed 
the  people  who  boasted  themselves  to 
be  ahead  of  the  universe  in  the  march 
of  progress,  into  a  society  of  combatants, 
without  habeas  corpus,  or  .free-trade,  or 


decency,  or  self-respect,  or  gold,  or  a 
single  friend  and  admirer,  except  some 
ignorant  mechanics,  and  a  few  men  of 
thought,  who  have  pinned  their  repu- 
tation to  the  cause  of  the  United  States. 
Two  months  of  Nana  Sahib  brought 
about  an  effect  on  the  English  character 
at  the  recollection  of  which  Englishmen 
at  home  have  already  learned  to  blush, 
but  the  lamentable  consequences  of 
which  will  be  felt  in  India  for  genera- 
tions yet  unborn  or  unthought  of. 

Who  does  not  remember  those  days, 
when  a  favourite  amusement  on  a  wet 
afternoon,  for  a  party  in  a  country 
house,  was  to  sit  on  and  about  the 
billiard-table  devising  tortures  for  the 
Nana ;  when  the  palm  was  given  to 
that  ingenious  gentleman  who  proposed 
that  he  should  be  forced,  first,  to  swallow 
a  tumbler  of  water  in  which  all  the 
blue  papers  in  a  seidlitz-powder  box  had 
been  emptied,  and  then  a  tumbler  with 
the  contents  of  all  the  white  papers  in 
a  state  of  solution  ?  when  every  one 
chuckled  to  hear  how  General  Neill 
had  forced  high  Brahmans  to  sweep  up 
the  blood  of  the  Europeans  murdered 
at  Cawnpore,  and  then  strung  them  in 
a  row,  without  giving  them  the  time 
requisite  for  the  rites  of  purification  ? 
It  is  singular  that  he  imitated  in  every 
particular  the  conduct  of  Telemachus 
towards  the  maid-servants  who  had  lent 
too  kind  an  ear  to  those  suitors  who 
were  content  to  fly  at  low  game,  with  a 
view,  I  presume,  to  keep  their  hands  in 
during  the  intervals  of  their  more  am- 
bitious courtship.  Every  one  chuckled, 
with  the  exception  of  a  certain  evan- 
gelical paper,  which  remonstrated  with 
the  General  for  depriving  these  poor 
men  of  their  chances  of  salvation ! 
"  Have  you  heard  the  news  1 "  said  a 
celebrated  author  to  an  acquaintance,  as 
they  stood  together  under  the  porch  of 
the  Athenaeum.  "The  Sepoys  have 
taken  to  inflicting  the  most  exquisite 
cruelties  upon  the  Sikhs,  and  the  Sikhs 
in  return  swear  that  they  will  cut  the 
throat  of  every  Sepoy  who  comes  in 
their  way.  These  are  the  sort  of  tidings 
that  now-a-days  fill  every  heart  in  Eng- 
land with  exultation  and  thankfulness." 


British   Temper  towards  India. 


191 


During  the  first  debate  at  the  Union 
Society,  in  my  first  term,  an  orator 
wound  up  with  these  remarkable  words  : 
When  the  rebellion  has  been  crushed 
out  from  the  Himalayas  to  Comorin ; 
'  when  every  gibbet  is  red  with  blood  ; 
'  when  every  bayonet  creaks  beneath  its 
'  ghastly  burden  ;a  when  the  ground  in 
'front  of  every  cannon  is  strewn  with 
'  rags,  and  flesh,  and  shattered  bone  ; — 
'then  talk  of  mercy.  Then  you  may 
'find  some  to  listen.  This  is  not  the 
'time."  This  peroration  was  received 
with  a  tumult  of  applause  by  an  as- 
sembly whose  temper  is  generally  charac- 
terised by  mild  humanity,  modified  by 
an  idolatrous  attachment  to  the  memory 
of  Archbishop  Laud.  If  you  turn  over 
the  volume  of  Punch  for  the  latter  half 
of  1857,  you  will  probably  open  on  a 
picture  representing  a  big  female,  with 
a  helmet  and  a  long  sword,  knocking 
about  a  black  man,  in  appearance  some- 
thing between  a  gorilla  and  a  soldier  in 
one  of  our  West  Indian  regiments,  who 
is  standing  over  a  dead  woman  and 
child.  Two  palm-trees  in  the  back- 
ground mark  the  locality,  and  the  whole 
production  is  labelled  "  Justice,"  or 
"  Nemesis,"  or  "  0  God  of  Battles,  steel 
my  soldiers'  hearts  ! "  What  must  have 
been  the  fury  of  the  outburst  which 
could  transport  to  such  lengths  that 
good-natured  and  sensible  periodical, 
which  so  admirably  reflects  the  opinions 
of  a  good-natured  and  sensible  nation  ! 
Such  was  the  feeling  in  England ; 
and,  being  such,  it  was  only  the 
faint  shadow  of  the  state  of  things  in 
India.  For  out  here  men  were  in- 
fluenced, not  only  by  pity  and  wrath, 
intensified  by  the  immediate  presence 
of  the  objects  of  those  passions,  but  by 
shame,  by  the  bitterness  of  bereavement 
and  ruin,  by  an  ever-present  fear,  by 
the  consciousness  of  an  awful  risk  which 
they  had  barely  escaped,  and  of  innu- 
merable perils  'still  to  come.  History 
shudders  at  the  recollection  of  the  terrible 
"Spanish  fury"  which  desolated  Antwerp 
in  the  days  of  William  the  Silent ;  but 
the  "English  fury"  was  more  terrible 
still.  With  the  grim  determination  and 
1  Sic  iu  oris. 


the  dogged  pertinacity  of  their  race,  men 
went  forth  over  the  face  of  the  land  to 
shoot,  and  sabre,  and  hang,  and  blow 
from  guns,  till  the  work  should  be  ac- 
complished. It  was  generally  understood 
that  no  one  would  be  called  in  question 
for  having  erred  on  the  side  of  severity. 
Many  a  one  of  those  good-humoured 
agreeable  civilians  with  whom  you  canter 
along  the  course,  or  play  billiards  at  the 
club,  who  are  so  forgiving  when  you 
revoke  palpably  and  inexcusably,  and  so 
ready  with  their  letters  of  introduction 
and  offers  of  hospitality — many  a  one  of 
them  has  witnessed  strange  scenes,  and 
could  tell  strange  tales.  He  could  tell 
how  he  has  ridden  into  some  village  in 
Shahabad  or  the  Dooab,  with  a  dozen 
troopers  at  his  heels  ;  how  he  has  called 
for  a  drink  of  milk,  and  taken  his  seat 
under  a  tree,  pistol  in  hand,  while  his 
men  ferreted  out  •  the  fugitive  mutineers 
who  had  found  their  way  home  to  seek 
concealment  and  sustenance  among  their 
relations  and  neighbours ;  how  very 
short  a  trial  sufficed  to  convict  those 
who  were  accused  of  housing  and  abet- 
ting the  rebels  ;  and  how,  as  he  left  for 
the  next  camping-ground,  he  pretended 
not  to  observe  his  followers  stealing 
back  to  recover  their  picket-ropes.  There 
is  a  degree  of  mutual  terror  which  almost 
necessitates  mutual  extermination.  At 
a  time  when  the  safety  of  India  depended 
on  the  Punjab,  and  the  safety  of  the 
Punjab  hung  on  a  single  hair  (and, 
thank  God,  that  single  hair  was  a  strong 
one,  for  it  was  Sir  John  Lawrence),  a 
native  regiment  quartered  in  that  pro- 
vince, unable  to  resist  the  epidemic  of 
sedition,  mutinied  and  left  the  canton- 
ments. An  energetic  civil  officer  started 
off  in  pursuit  with  the  slender  force  of 
sixty-six  policemen,  brought  the  muti- 
neers to  bay,  and,  by  a  rare  display  of 
audacity  and  craft,  captured  them  to  a 
man.  It  is  more  easy  to  blame  what 
followed  than  to  say  how  he  should  have 
acted  under  the  circumstances.  It  would 
have  been  madness  to  send  off  a  compact 
and  numerous  force  with  tickets  of  leave 
to  recruit  the  rebel  garrison  of  Delhi. 
At  the  same  time,  Sir  Joshua  Jebb  him- 
self would  have  hesitated  before  he 

u2 


292 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  IX. 


undertook  to  guard  a  battalion  of  regular 
troops  with  a  handful  of  native  police- 
men, who  were  themselves  at  that 
moment  on  the  eve  of  an  outbreak. 
One  course  remained.  There  is  a  closer 
prison  than  a  Government  jail :  a  surer 
sentry  than  a  Punjabee  chokedar. 

When  first  I  came  out  there  were  two 
gentlemen  here  who  were  considered  the 
most  welcome  addition  to  Calcutta  society. 
One  was  a  jolly  comical-looking  chap,  an 
excellent  officer,  and  a  capital  man  for  a 
small  dinner-party.  The  other  was  most 
refined  and  intelligent,  with  a  remark- 
ably courteous  and  winning  address.  It 
was  said  that  these  two  had  hung  more 
people  than  any  other  men  in  India. 
The  jolly  fellow  was  supposed  to  have 
been  somewhat  too  indiscriminate  in  his 
choice  of  subjects,  while  it  was  generally 
allowed  that  the  other  had  turned  off  no 
one  who  did  not  richly  deserve  it.  Mr. 
Hume,  of  Etawah,  who  was  blamed  by 
many  for  excess  of  leniency,  but  who  so 
bore  himself  that  no  one  could  blame 
him  for  want  of  courage,  distinguished 
himself  by  keeping  down  the  number  of 
executions  in  his  district  to  seven,  and 
by  granting  the  culprits  a  fair  trial. 
These  he  treated  with  fatherly  tender- 
ness, for  he  invented  a  patent  drop  for 
their  benefit ;  so  that  men  prayed — 
first,  that  they  might  be  tried  by  Mr. 
Hume,  and  next,  that,  if  found  guilty, 
they  might  be  hanged  by  him.  One 
morning  I  was  lounging  in  the  room  of 
a  very  good  friend  of  mine,  one  of  the 
youngest  captains  in  the  army,  who  went 
through  as  much  rough-and-tumble 
fighting  as  could  be  squeezed  into  twelve 
months,  and  who  came  out  of  the  busi- 
ness with  the  reputation  of  being  a  first- 
rate  cavalry  officer.  We  were  overhaul- 
ing his  collection  of  guns,  trying  the 
locks,  and  criticizing  the  grooving,  as 
men  do  on  such  occasions,  when  I  re- 
marked, suspended  in  the  place  of/ 
honour,  an  archaic  rickety  revolver,  and/ 
an  old  cut-and-thrust  sword,  with  a  brighfj 
notched  blade,  and  a  well-worn  leathern! 
handle.  Those  were  not  holiday  weapons.  \ 
Once,  when  charging  a  couple  of  h«n-| 
dred  of  the  famous  Dinapore  mutineers, 
he  left  that  sword  in  the  body  of  a  1 


sepoy.  While  dismounting  to  recover 
it  he  was  separated  from  his  squadron, 
and  surrounded  by  a  party  of  desperate 
Pandies,  who,  being  perfectly  aware  that 
their  last  hour  was  come,  were  desirous 
of  opening  to  themselves  the  gates  of 
the  celestial  Zenana  by  the  sacrifice  of  so 
redoubted  a  Sahib.  My  friend  sheltered 
himself  as  best  he  could  behind  his 
horse's  neck,  and  kept  the  assailants  off 
with  his  revolver,  till  two  faithful  Pun- 
jabees  galloped  back  to  his  assistance. 
Meanwhile,  he  had  shot  three  men  dead 
on  the  spot,  each  with  a  bullet  through 
the  brain.  He  took  part  in  the  pursuit 
of  Goer  Sing  from  Lucknow  to  the 
Ganges.  On  the  night  before  that  old 
warrior  succeeded  in  passing  the  river, 
a  picket  was  posted  to  keep  watch  upon 
the  rebels,  who  were  quartered  in  and 
near  a  populous  village.  From  time  to 
time  the  country-people  came  in  with 
the  intelligence  that  the  enemy  were 
still  there,  until  their  importunate  desire 
to  give  information  roused  a  suspicion 
that  all  was  not  right.  We  advanced 
cautiously,  and  found  that  Goer  Sing 
had  stolen  away,  and  was  already  well 
on  his  road  towards  the  ferry.  After 
the  affair  had  terminated  in  the  escape  of 
the  mutineers,  our  commanding  officer 
sent  back  his  cavalry,  with  orders  to 
take  signal  vengeance  on  the  peasants 
whose  treachery  had  foiled  his  carefully- 
concerted  plan.  The  regiment  sur- 
rounded the  village,  set  the  roofs  on 
fire,  looted  the  dwellings  of  what  cloth 
and  grain  they  contained,  stripped  the 
women  of  their  bangles  and  anklets,  and 
put  all  the  males  to  the  edge  of  the  sword. 
This  was  only  one  among  many  like 
deeds,  deeds  of  which  every  one  approves 
at  the  time,  but  which  afterwards  no 
one  cares  to  justify  or  to  discusss.  We 
little  dream  what  a  dire  and  grim  signi- 
/ficance  is  attached  by  many  a  widow  and 
orphan  in  Oude  or  Bahar  to  the  names 
of  some  who  appear  to  us  the  mildest 
and  most  lovable  of  human  beings.  In 
the  eyes  of  only  too  many  Roman 
matrons  Caasar  was  the  most  attractive 
and  insinuating  among  the  young  swells 
of  his  day;  whether  amiability  and 
tenderness  formed  the  leading  features 


British  Temper  towards  India. 


293 


of  his  character,  as  conceived  by  a 
Helvetian  or  a  Servian,  may  reasonably 
be  doubted. 

Things  had  now  come  to  a  terrible 
pass.  During  the  first  weeks  of  the 
mutiny  the  murders  were  perpetrated  by 
the  "budzarts,"  or  black  sheep,  of  the 
regiment,  with  a  view  to  implicate  their 
comrades  beyond  the  hope  of  pardon  ; 
to  place  between  themselves  and  their 
former  condition  of  life  a  gulf  filled 
with  English  blood.  Their  scheme  met 
with  entire  success.  The  minds  of  our 
countrymen  were  so  agitated  and  dis- 
torted by  anger  and  uneasiness,  that  even 
those  battalions  which  remained  true  to 
their  salt  began  to  be  apprehensive  for 
their  safety  whenever  they  found  them- 
selves in  the  same  cantonment  with 
European  troops.  In  a  station  where 
this  state  of  things  existed,  suspicion 
and  dislike  reigned  supreme.  The  officers 
of  the  native  corps  slept  in  the  European 
lines  with  loaded  revolvers  under  their 
pillows  ;  the  guns,  unlimbered  and 
charged  to  the  muzzle  with  grape,  faced 
the  quarters  of  the  sepoys ;  a  strong 
force  was  at  all  times  under  arms,  and 
the  very  air  seemed  heavy  with  an  im- 
pending storm.  Under  such  circum- 
stances an  outbreak  would  have  been 
regarded  rather  as  a  relief  than  as  a 
misfortune.  But  if  our  people  were 
anxious,  the  wouldn't-be  mutineers  had 
far  more  reason  to  be  nervous.  On 
occasions  of  this  description  there  is 
nothing  which  men  so  constantly  under- 
rate as  the  terror  which  they  themselves 
inspire  in  the  breasts  of  others.  During 
a  town  and  gown  row,  I  always  used  to 
think  that  the  hostile  column  looked 
most  formidable  and  impressive,  while 
I  was  only  too  conscious  that  the  fight- 
ing power  of  our  own  array  was  lament- 
ably defective.  Who  could  depend  on 
Screwington,  who  had  descended  by 
hebdomadal  steps  from  the  second  to 
the  sixth  boat,  until  he  finally  retired 
into  the  illimitable  ?  on  Dufferly,  who 
cried  three  weeks  before  he  left  school, 
when  the  fags  mutinied  and  pelted  him 
with  penny-rolls  1  on  Tiinkins,  who 
had  never  taken  a  walk  a  mile  long  since 
he  spent  the  day  at  Shelford  to  escape 


being  condoled  with  after  missing  his 
scholarship?  And  yet  the  effect  pro- 
duced on  the  imagination  of  the  town 
by  our  onward  charge  was,  doubtless, 
very  demoralizing.  A  cloud  of  tall 
forms,  in  square  caps  and  flowing  gowns, 
bearing  down  through  the  fog,  must 
test  the  courage  of  the  hardiest  Barn- 
well  cooley,  or  the  most  vindictive  college 
kitmudgar,  burning  to  take  out  his  un- 
paid wages  in  undergraduate  gore.  Once, 
or  more  than  once,  it  befell  that,  when 
the  suspected  troops  were  ordered  out 
to  be  disarmed  or  discharged,  the  loaded 
cannon,  the  lighted  matches,  the  line  of 
frowning  white  faces,  proved  too  much 
for  their  nerves.  Convinced  that  they 
had  been  assembled  to  be  butchered,  the 
poor  devils  broke  and  took  to  their  heels, 
under  a  crashing  fire  of  shrapnel  and 
canister.  By  the  time  it  came  to  this, 
the  only  chance  of  existence  for  the  one 
party  lay  in  the  utter  destruction  of  the 
other.  Quarter  was  nqt  given,  and,  in- 
deed, hardly  could  be  said  to  be  worth 
the  asking.  An  Englishman  knew  well 
that,  though  one  set  of  Pandies  were  to 
spare  his  life,  the  next  lot  who  came 
across  him  would  cut  his  throat ;  and  a 
sepoy  knew  well  that,  if  his  captors  took 
the  trouble  to  drag  him  about  in  their 
train  for  a  few  days,  the  magistrate  at 
-  the  first  station  on  the  road  would  in- 
fallibly hang  him  before  the  officer  in 
command  of  the  party  had  finished  his 
dinner. 

The  presence  of  a  military  officer, 
however,  seldom  afforded  much  comfort 
to  a  prisoner.  None  of  their  persecutors 
were  so  dreaded  by  the  natives  as  the 
royal  troops  lately  arrived  from  England. 
No  civilian  armed  with  the  thunderbolts 
of  the  law,  able  to  ascertain  at  a  glance 
whether  the  culprit  was  a  pensioned 
sepoy,  a  Mahommedan  fanatic,  or  a 
peaceable  cultivator,  was  half  so  terrible 
a  judge  as  a  beardless  subaltern,  fresh 
from  the  depot  at  Chatham,  whose  ex- 
perience of  the  population  was  summed 
up  in  the  statements  that  "  niggers  were 
all  blasted  liars,"  and  that,  "when  a 
feller  said  he  was  a  ryot,  he  was  sure  to 
be  the  greatest  scoundrel  unhung  : "  a 
distraction  which  he  was  not  likely  long 


294 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  IX. 


to  retain.    The  knowledge  of  the  servants 
of  the   Company  was  far  less   formid- 
able  than   the   ignorance    of  the    ser- 
vants of  the  Crown.     ISTo  Sikh  burning 
to  avenge  Aliwal  and  Sobraon  on  the 
revolted  mercenaries  who  had  been  used 
by  the  Eeringhees  as  tools  to  accomplish 
the   humiliation   of  his   race,   inspired 
such  horror  in  the  souls  of  the  village 
people,  as  the  British  private  who  saw 
a  probable  murderer,  and  an  undoubted 
subject  for   "loot,"  in   every  "Moor" 
who  came  in  his  way — for  in  those  days 
the  rank  and  file  of  our  army  always 
spoke  of  the  inhabitants  of  India  by  the 
appellation  of  "Moors."      As  the  men 
landed  at  Bombay,  they  expressed  vexa- 
tion and  disappointment  at  not  being 
allowed  to  go  in  at  the  Moors  who  were 
taking  their  siesta  upon  the  beach.  They 
had  been  brought   all   the  way  from 
England  to  kill  Moors,  and  why  should 
they  not  begin  at  once  1     One  Moor  in 
the  hand  was  worth  two  in  the  bush,  or 
rather  the  jungle.     At  one  time  it  be- 
came necessary  to  double  the  guards  at 
Fort  "William,  in  order  to  prevent  the 
soldiers  from  sallying  forth  at  night  to 
avenge  the  atrocities  committed  in  Oude 
and  Eohilcund,  upon  the  sycees  of  Chow- 
ringhee,  and  the  palkee-bearers  of  the 
China-bazaar.     A    corporal,    who    had 
travelled  up  with  a  party  from  Bombay 
to  join   his  regiment   in  the  field,   on 
his  arrival  at  head-quarters  reported  that 
in  the  course  of  the  journey  a  mutiny 
had   taken   place    among  the   bullock- 
drivers.     On  inquiry,  it  appeared  that 
the  hero  of  the   affair  was  an  honest 
fellow,  who  had  disembarked  with  his 
head  full  of  the  Nana  and  the  fatal  well. 
His  story  was   simple  : — "  I  seed  two 
'  Moors  talking  in  a  cart.     Presently  I 
'  heard  one  of  'em  say  '  Cawnpore.'     I 
'  knowed  what  that  meant ;  so  I  fetched 
'  Tom  Walker,  and  he  heard  'em  say 
'  'Cawnpore,'  and    he    knowed    what 
'  that  meant.  So  we  polished  'em  both 
"  off." 

At  Buxar,  which,  you  may  remember, 
is  on  the  Ganges,  a  little  above  Arrah, 
there  lived  a  native,  well  known  to  all 
the  residents  by  the  name  of  "  Coony 
Baboo,"  who  was  employed  by  the 


Government  in  a  subordinate  capacity. 
He  was  a   Bengalee,  and  as  such  had 
just  as  much  reason  to  be  alarmed  for 
his  safety  as   any  Englishman   at  the 
station.     One  day  he  was  pursuing  his 
avocation  at  a  wharf  on  the  river,  armed 
with  a  pistol,  which  he  kept  to  protect 
his  life  and  property  against  the  stray 
mutineers,    and    other    vagrants,    who 
swarmed  in  those  troubled  regions,  when 
a  steam-flat  came  up  the  stream  carrying 
a  detachment  of  English  troops.     The 
^commanding  officer  sent  a  boat  to  com- 
municate with  the  authorities  on  shore. 
The  crew,  seeing  a  man  who,  to  their 
eyes,  presented  a  suspicious  appearance, 
hanging  about  the  jetty,  took  it  into 
their  heads  that  he  might  just  as  well 
hang  on  board  their  steamer,  and  accor- 
dingly seized  him  and  searched  his  per- 
son.     "When  the  pistol  came  to  light, 
they  made  no  doubt  but  that  he  was  a 
mutineer  who  had  in  some  unaccount- 
able manner  been  delivered  into  their 
hands.      They  forthwith  took  him  on 
board,  where,  after  a  short  but  satisfac- 
tory investigation,  the  poor  Baboo  was 
ordered  for  immediate  execution.     Hap- 
pily, in  the  nick  of  time,  a  civil  officer 
appeared  on  the  scene,  who,  when  he 
saw  the  prisoner,  exclaimed,  "  Why,  it 
is    Coony    Baboo  !      What    are    they 
doing  to  you,   Coony  ? "     It  was  with 
great  difficulty  that  the  captors  could  be 
induced  to  believe  the  assurances  of  the 
civilian,  whom  they  evidently  regarded 
as  an  emissary  of  Lord  Canning,  and  a 
representative  of  that  clemency  policy 
which  was  the  bugbear  of  the  day. 

At  a  place  hundreds  of  miles  distant 
from  the  seat  of  war,  some  brinjarries,  or 
corn-dealers,  came  into  the  camp  of  a 
regiment  which  had  been  a  very  short 
while  in  the  country.  The  men  on 
guard  observed  that  the  heads  of  the 
strangers  were  shaved,  and  knew  by 
instinct  that  they  must  be  sepoys.  A 
hastily-constituted  tribunal  took  cogni- 
zance of  the  matter,  and  called  in  a 
serjeant  who  had  the  reputation  of  a 
profound  knowledge  of  India.  Pleased 
at  being  consulted,  he  cocked  liis  eye, 
and  after  due  inspection,  pronounced 
that  the  prisoners  were  undoubtedly 


IfritisJi  Temper  towards  India. 


295 


sepoys.  A  civilian,  who  was  present, 
remonstrated  most  vehemently,  but  was 
answered  with  the  primd  facie,  or  rather 
primo  capite  argument,  "  You  see  their 
heads  are  shaved  !  They  must  be 
sepoys."  At  length  his  importunity 
prevailed,  and  the  colonel  ordered  the 
soldiers  to  take  the  brinjarries  to  the 
outskirts  of  the  camp  and  let  them  go. 
These  orders  were  obeyed  to  the  letter. 
The  men  were  led  beyond  the  tents,  set 
free,  and  shot  down  as  they  ran  away. 
The  events  of  those  times  have  left  their 
trace  in  our  military  vocabulary.  During 
the  year  and  a  half  which  followed  the 
outbreak  at  Meerut,  to  "loot"  and  to 
"polish  off"  became  household  verbs  in 
the  British  army.  The  sterling  qualities 
of  that  army  alone  rescued  it  from  utter 
demoralization.  No  other  soldiers  in 
the  world  could  have  preserved  their 
self-respect  amidst  so  fearful  an  ordeal. 
Eighteen  months  in  such  a  school  would 
have  turned  the  French  regiments  into 
Zouaves,  the  Zouaves  into  Turcos,  and 
the  Turcos  into  cannibals. 

After  all,  however,  the  best  hope  of 
the  miserable  natives  lay  in  the  justice 
and  moderation  of  official  men.  The 
stern  and  cold  animosity  of  the  civilians, 
the  reckless  and  unscrupulous  retribu- 
tion dealt  out  by  the  military,  were  as 
nothing  to  the  rabid  ferocity  of  the  non- 
official  community.  These  men  had 
come  to  the  shores  of  India  for  the  sole 
purpose  of  making  money.  They  were 
under  no  professional  obligation  of  pro- 
viding for  the  prosperity  and  happiness 
of  the  population,  and  indeed  were  too 
apt  to  regard  their  dark  fellow-subjects 
simply  as  tools  for  promoting  their  own 
ends.  Now  that  their  lives  and  fortunes 
were  brought  to  the  extreme  of  jeopardy, 
in  consequence  of  a  wide-spread  and 
most  formidable  revolt  of  the  despised 
race,  their  fury  and  hatred  knew  no 
measure.  In  one  or  two  instances  the 
Government  was  constrained  by  the 
pressure  of  circumstances  to  place  power 
in  the  hands  of  men  of  this  class.  In 
a  place  where  the  outbreak  had  been 
accompanied  by  deeds  of  peculiar  atro- 
city, some  such  persons  were  vested 
with  authority.  The  unhappy  place  was 


delivered  over  to  a  Reign  of  Terror. 
Whatever  misery  could  be  inflicted  by 
cupidity,  private  malice,  and  vulgar  bar- 
barity, was  endured  to  the  full  by  the 
wretched  natives. 

The  tone  of  the  press  was  horrible. 
Never  did  the  cry  for  blood  swell  so 
loud  as  among  these.  Christians  and 
Englishmen  in  the  middle  of  the  nine- 
teenth century.  The  pages  of  those 
brutal  and  grotesque  journals  published 
by  Hubert  and  Marat  during  the  agony 
of  the  French  Revolution,  contained 
nothing  that  was  not  matched  and  sur- 
passed in  the  files  of  some  Calcutta 
papers.  Because  the  pampered  Bengal 
sepoys  had  behaved  like  double-dyed 
rascals,  therefore  every  Hindoo  and 
Mussulman  was  a  rebel,  a  traitor,  a 
murderer ;  therefore,  we  were  to  pray 
that  all  the  population  of  India  might 
have  one  neck,  and  that  all  the  hemp 
in  India  might  be  twisted  into  one  rope. 
It  would  be  wearisome  to  quote  speci- 
mens of  the  style  of  that  day.  Every 
column  teemed  with  invectives  which 
at  the  time  seemed  coarse  and  tedious, 
but  which  we  must  now  pronounce  to 
be  wicked  and  blasphemous.  For  what 
could  be  more  audacious  than  to  assert 
that  Providence  had  granted  us  a  right 
to  destroy  a  nation  in  our  wrath  1 — to 
slay,  and  burn,  and  plunder,  not  in  the 
cause  of  fcrder  and  civilization,  but  in 
the  name  of  our  insatiable  vengeance, 
and  our  imperial  displeasure  ?  The 
wise  ruler,  whose  comprehensive  and 
impartial  judgment  preserved  him  from 
the  contagion  of  that  fatal  frenzy,  was 
assailed  with  a  storm  of  obloquy  for 
which  we  should  in  vain  seek  a  prece- 
dent in  history.  To  read  the  news- 
papers of  that  day,  you  would  believe 
that  Lord  Canning  was  at  the  bottom 
of  the  whole  mutiny  ;  that  upon  his 
head  was  the  guilt  of  the  horrors  of 
Cawnpore  and  Allahabad  ;  that  it  was 
he  who  had  passed  round  the  chupatties 
and  the  lotahs,  and  spread  the  report 
that  the  Russ  was  marching  down  from 
the  north  to  drive  the  English  into  the 
sea.  After  all,  the  crime  charged  against 
him  was,  not  that  he  had  hindered  the 
butchery,  but  that  his  heart  was  not  in 


296 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  IX. 


the  work.  No  one  had  the  face  to  say, 
or,  at  any  rate,  no  one  had  the  weakness 
to  "believe,  that  Lord  Canning  had  par- 
doned any  considerable  number  of  con- 
demned rebels.  His  crying  sin  was  this, 
that  he  took  little  or  no  pleasure  in  the 
extermination  of  the  people  whom  he  had 
been  commissioned  by  his  Sovereign  to 
govern  and  protect. 

After  Lord  Canning,  Sir  John  Peter 
Grant  had  the  gratification  of  being  the 
personage  most  profusely  and  fiercely 
maligned  by  the  enemies  of  the  native  ; 
which  honourable  position  he  long  re- 
tained, until  of  late  Sir  Charles  Wood 
put  in  his  claim,  a  claim  which  has  been 
instantly  and  fully  recognised.  A  cer- 
tain journal  made  the  brilliant  sugges- 
tion that  Sir  John  Peter,  had  he  dared, 
would  very  likely  have  released  the 
sepoys  whom  General  Neill  had  ordered 
for  execution,  and  then  proceeded  to 
abuse  him  as  if  he  had  actually  so  done. 
This  hypothetical  case  soon  grew  into  a 
fact.  It  was  stated  positively  in  all 
quarters,  that  Sir  John  Peter  Grant  had 
set  free  the  murderers  of  Cawnpore, 
with  a  bombastic  proclamation,  contain- 
ing the  words  "  in  virtue  of  my  high 
authority,"  an  expression  which  at  once 
discredited  the  story  in  the  estimation 
of  all  who  knew  the  man.  Sir  John 
and  his  high  authority  were  reviled  and 
ridiculed  in  the  daily  and  wee*kly  papers 
of  England  and  India,  in  conversation, 
on  the  stage,  and  on  the  hustings. 
Meanwhile,  with  native  laziness  and 
good  humour,  he  said  nothing,  and 
allowed  the  tempest  to  whistle  about 
his  ears  without  moving  a  muscle.  At 
length  the  Home  Government  wrote  out 
to  the  Governor-General,  directing  him 
to  take  cognisance  of  the  affair ;  and  he 
accordingly  requested  the  accused  party 
to  explain  how  the  matter  stood.  Then 
Sir  John  spoke  out,  and  affirmed  that 
the  report  was  a  pure  fabrication  ;  that 
he  never  enlarged  a  single  sepoy ;  and 
that,  had  he  desired  to  thwart  General 
K"eill,  such  interference  would  have 
been  entirely  out  of  his  power.  Here- 
upon, the  press  in  general  proceeded  to 
make  amends  in  a  full  and  satisfactory 
manner.  One  newspaper,  however,  had 


no  intention  of  letting  him  off  so  easily, 
and  put  forward  an  apology  which  was 
exquisitely  characteristic,  and  which 
probably  diverted  the  object  quite  as 
much  as  it  was  designed  to  vex  him. 
The  gist  of  it  was,  that  Sir  John  had 
undoubtedly  been  falsely  charged  in 
this  particular  instance,  but  that  he  was 
such  a  confirmed  and  abandoned  friend 
of  the  native  as  quite  to  deserve  every- 
thing he  had  got,  and  that  no  contumely, 
whether  rightly  or  wrongly  bestoAved 
on  him,  could  by  any  possibility  come 
amiss. 

And  now  who  can  wonder  that  among 
a  generation  which  has  gone  through 
such  a  crisis  philanthropy  is  somewhat 
at  a  discount  ]  It  is  unjust  to  blame 
men  who  have  lost  their  fortunes  and 
friends  and  health  'in  the  desperate 
struggle,  because  the  moment  the  victory 
is  decided  they  cannot  set  to  work  heart 
and  soul  at  concocting  and  promoting 
plans  for  the  benefit  of  their  conquered 
foe  !  That  struggle  irresistibly  reminded 
us  that  we  were  an  imperial  race,  hold- 
ing our  own  on  a  conquered  soil  by  dint  of 
valour  and  foresight.  Cantonments  and 
arsenals,  field  batteries  and  breaching 
batteries  seemed  more  essential  to  the 
government  of  the  country  than  courts 
of  law,  normal  schools,  and  agricultural 
exhibitions.  The  questions  of  the  day 
were,  not  whether  Sanskrit  should  be 
taught  at  the  Presidency  College,  or  to 
what  extent  the  pure  mathematics  of 
Hindoo  men  of  science  were  borrowed 
from  European  sources,  but  whether 
artillery  might  safely  be  posted  at  a 
station  where  no  English  cavalry  were 
quartered,  whether  the  advantages  of 
massing  troops  at  central  points  com- 
pensated for  the  sanitary  dangers  of 
that  measure.  As  long  as  human  nature 
remains  what  it  is,  men  who  have  just 
made  a  great  and  successful  effort  will 
ask  themselves  whether  they  and  theirs 
are  not  to  profit  by  their  exertions. 
Had  we  poured  forth  our  blood  like 
water  in  order  that  the  children  of 
sepoys  might  receive  a  better  education 
than  they  would  have  obtained  in  the 
event  of  their  fathers  having  overturned 
the  British  supremacy  ?  In  order  that 


British  Temper  towards  India, 


297 


the   disaffected  -Eajpoots  of  Shahabad 
might  reap  the  advantages  of  a  more 
speedy  and  equitable  administration  of 
justice  than  they  would  have  enjoyed 
under  the  rule  of  Goer   Sing?     What 
was  England  to  gain  in  return  for  her 
millions   of  money  and  thousands   of 
lives  ?     Did  she  not  merit  some  more 
substantial  recompense  for  having  re- 
covered   India,   than  the  privilege  of 
governing  the   Indians   in  a  spirit  of 
wisdom  and  unselfishness?     Echo  and 
the  planters  answered  "  yes  !  "  though 
equity  and  humanity  steadily  continued 
to  assert  that  the  events  of  1857  and 
1858  had  not  altered  a  whit  our  position 
in    India — that    our  reconquest   could 
be  justified  in  the  sight  of   God  and 
Europe  only  by  the  same  conditions  as 
had  justified  our  original  conquest.   We 
must  still  govern  the  land  in  the  interest 
of  the  inhabitants.     We  must  still  pro- 
vide them  with  everything  that  is  essen- 
tial to  their  well-being  and  happiness. 
We  must  still  pay  rent  and  taxes,  keep 
the  roof  tight  and  the  drains  open,  or 
out  we  must  turn  as  unprofitable  and 
dishonest  tenants.     It  is  greatly  to  the 
credit  of  the  civilians  that  they  hearkened ' 
to  the  voice  of  equity  and  humanity. 
The  natives  cannot  accuse  their  governors 
of  neglect  or  injustice.     They  have  no 
reason  to  regret  having  exchanged  Munro 
and  Elphinstone  for  Grant  and  Beadon. 
Most  of  our  officers  would  do  all  and 
suffer  all  rather  than  betray  their  trust. 
Some  have   already  done    much,    and 
suffered  not  a  little.    But  the  new  order 
of  things  is  not  as  the  old.     The  chil- 
dren of  the  spil  are  no  longer  regarded 
with  the  lively  interest,  the  credulous 
partiality  of  yore.      Those   are   plants 
which  do  not  nourish  amidst  the  rank 
weeds  and  rushes,  the  sand  and  rubble 
that  overspread  the    land  which  was 
lately  submerged  by  the  deluge  of  civil 
strife.     Men  cannot  at  will  cast  aside 
the  recollection  of  those  times  when  all 
was  doubt  and  confusion  and  dismay  ; 
when  a  great  fear  was  thejr  companion, 
day  and  night ;  when  the  mother  and 
children  were  in  sanctuary  at  the  head- 
quarters  of  the   division;    when    the 
husband  worked  with  a  loaded  revolver 


among  his  papers,  a  horse  standing 
saddled  in  the  stable,  his  feet  resting 
upon  a  pair  of  saddle-bags  crammed 
with  his  most  valuable  property.  The 
distrust  and  dislike  engendered  by  such 
an  experience  are  too  deeply  rooted  to 
be  plucked  up  by  an  act  of  volition. 

Though  the  civilians  do  not  allow  the 
impressions  left  by  the  events  of  the 
mutiny  to  influence  their  opinions  and 
their  conduct,  the  case  is  fa*r  other  with 
the  non-official  society.      And  here  I 
may  remark  that  there  is  some  difficulty 
in  finding  an  appellation  for  the  mem- 
bers of  that  society.     They  themselves 
insist  upon  it  that  the  civilians  have 
given  them  the  name  of  "  interlopers," 
and  grow   extremely  wroth   over  this 
imaginary   grievance.     I   solemnly   de- 
clare that  I  never  heard  the  word  used 
in  conversation  by  a  civilian,  and  never 
saw  it  in  print,  except  when  it  occurs 
in  the   effusions  of  the  "interloping" 
party.     On   occasions,   when  they  are 
very  angry  indeed,   they  will  have  it 
that    they   are    called    "  adventurers." 
Perhaps  "settlers"  is  the  least  objec- 
tionable and  most  comprehensive  title. 
Well,  the  European  settlers  in  India 
speedily  acquired  that  contempt  for  the 
Bengalees  which  it  is  a  law  of  nature 
that  the  members  of  a  conquering  race 
should  entertain  for  the  subject  popula- 
tion among  whom  they  live.     As  the 
Norman    baron    regarded    the    Saxon 
churl,  as  the  Dutch  boer  regarded  the 
Hottentot,  so  it  was  inevitable  that  the 
English  planter  should  regard  the  ryot 
and  the   cooly.     No  one  can  estimate 
very  highly  the  moral  and  intellectual 
qualities  of  people   among  whom    he 
resides  for  the  single  purpose  of  turning 
them  to  pecuniary  account.     But  in  the 
course  of  time  a  new  element  was  added 
to  the   feelings  which  the  settler  dis- 
played   towards    the    Hinoo.     Dislike 
appeared  by  the  side  of  disdain.     The 
Dutchman  might  treat  the  Hottentot  as 
he   pleased,  without   the   interposition 
of  government,   as   represented  by   as 
numerous    and    able    body   of  public 
servants  paid   to   protect    and  cherish 
the  ancient  population  of  the  country. 
Eront-de-Bceuf  and  Brian  Bois  de  Guil- 


298 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  IX. 


bert  did  what  was  right  in  their  own 
eyes,  without  fear  of  being  charged  with 
dacoity  and  abduction  under  the  revised 
penal  code  before  the  civil  and  sessions 
judge  of  the  district.  But  the  English 
settler  became  aware  that  he  must 
behave  towards  the  Bengalee  as  towards 
a  fellow-citizen  and  fellow-subject,  or 
the  local  magistrate  and  the  Supreme 
Court  would  know  the  reason  why. 
This  discovery  did  not  raise  his  opinion 
of  the  natives,  but  caused  him  to  look 
on  them  in  the  light  of  enemies,  pos- 
sessed of  rights  and  privileges  whereto 
they  had  no  just  claim,  and  which,  as 
time  went  on,  they  might  be  tempted 
to  employ  against  him  as  weapons  of 
annoyance.  His  state  was  much  that 
of  a  boy  at  school  who  is  prevented  by 
an  wholesome  dread  of  the  monitors 
from  fagging  a  stupid,  cowardly  fellow 
in  the  same  bed-room  with  himself  to 
the  extent  which  the  eternal  fitness  of 
things  appears  to  him  to  demand — a 
position  which  is  not  calculated  to 
foster  the  most  kindly  sentiments  of 
our  nature. 

At  the  period  of  the  mutiny  the  feel- 
ing of  aversion  was  intensified  into 
deadly  hatred.  For  a  season  this  hatred 
was  shared  by  the  entire  mass  of  our 
countrymen.  Invectives  against  the 
treacherous,  blood-thirsty  Mussulman, 
ironical  sneers  about  the  "mild  Hin- 
doo," were  nuts  alike  to  the  civilian  and 
the  planter.  The  latter  rejoiced  to  hear 
the  world  acknowledge  that  his  esti- 
mate of  the  native  had  been  correct 
throughout.  But  this  glimpse  of  happi- 
ness was  too  bright  to  last.  This  sweet 
vision  of  a  Utopia  of  rampant  Anglo- 
Saxons  and  "  damned  niggers  "  melted 
away  as  swiftly  as  it  had  arisen,  and 
disclosed  the  stern  reality  in  all  its 
horrid  nakedness  :  a  land  flowing  indeed 
with  ghee  and  indigo,  but  peopled  by  a 
race  of  free  peasants,  possessed  of  an 
ancient  interest  in  the  soil,  and  by  an 
oppressed  and  disheartened  community 
of  Englishmen,  whose  unnatural  mother- 
country  refused  to  recognise  any  distinc- 
tion in  civic  rights  between  a  nigger 
doomed  to  everlasting  torment  and  a 
white  man  in  a  state  of  salvation.  At 


home  the  reaction  against  a  severe  and 
retributive  policy  set  in  with  irresistible 
strength.  People  fell  to  repenting  their 
recent  excesses,  in  sackcloth  and  ashes ; 
or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  in  pam- 
phlets and  May  meetings.  The  official 
society  out  here  soon  followed  suit,  and 
the  unfortunate  settler  found  himself 
in  the  plight  of  a  colonial  Abdiel, 
"  faithful  only  he  "  to  the  great  princi- 
ples of  the  debasement  of  the  native, 
the  domination  of  the  Anglo-Saxon, 
and  the  "  development  of  the  resources 
of  India "  into  English  pockets.  Al- 
ways sore  upon  the  question  of  the 
social  and  political  condition  of  the 
native,  he  now  became  positively  raw 
and  festering.  The  events  of  the  last 
few  years  have  certainly  not  been  of  a 
nature  to  soothe  his  injured  soul.  His 
morbid  detestation  of  the  Bengalee,  as 
displayed  in  the  pages  of  the  local 
journals,  would  be  ludicrous,  if  there 
could  be  a  ludicrous  side  to  a  pheno- 
menon so  painful  and  ill-omened.  One 
unfortunate  correspondent,  who  hap- 
pened to  make  use  of  the  expression, 
"  our  native  brethren,"  was  lately  treated 
to  a  column  of  indignant  remonstrance 
and  ill-tempered  satire.  A  certain  great 
man,  in  answer  to  an  affectionate  address 
presented  to  him  by  a  large  number  of 
wealthy  and  influential  Hindoos,  spoke 
of  "the  two  great  races"  who  occupy 
India.  Next  morning  he  was  taken  to 
task  firmly  but  respectfully  for  having 
been  weak  enough  to  call  the  natives  a 
"  great  race,"  and  place  them,  by  impli- 
cationj  on  an  equality  with  Englishmen. 
As  if  this  gentleman,  in  order  to  gratify 
the  vanity  and  spite  of  any  class  in 
existence,  would  have  chosen  to  insult 
a  body  of  worthy  men  who  had  assem- 
bled to  give  him  a  mark  of  respect  and 
devotion,  by  reminding  them  that  they 
belonged  to  an  inferior  and  subject 
people ! 

It  is  only  natural  that  the  protectors 
of  the  native  should  come  in  for  a  share 
of  odium.  Though  the  great  majority 
of  planters  live  on  the  most  cordial 
terms  with  the  officials  in  their  neigh- 
bourhood, it  cannot  be  denied  that  the 
meneurs  of  the  party  have  worked  them- 


British  Temper  towards  India. 


299 


selves  up  into  a  state  of  violent  excite- 
ment against  the  very  name  of  civilian. 
I  said  above  that  the  events  of  the  last 
few  years  have  not  been  of  a  nature  to 
calm  the  agitation  of  the  public  mind. 
In   fact,  from  the    day  that  law  and 
order  were  restored  throughout  the  land, 
one  vexed  question  has  followed  another 
in  swift  and  baneful  succession.     First 
came  the  great  indigo  row.    Now,  if  you 
cannot  touch  pitch  without  being  de- 
nied, you  certainly/  cannot  touch  indigo 
without  being  made  to  look  uncommon 
blue.     Besides,  I  am  not  one  of  those 
who,  like  Mr.  Kinglake,  enjoy  walking 
"  through  fires  placed  under  the  crafty 
cinder ;  "  so  I  will   confine   myself  to 
stating  baldly  that  the  ryots  (excited, 
as  some  think,  by  the  general  up-turning 
of  society  occasioned  by  the  rebellion) 
objected  to  grow  indigo,  on  the  ground 
that  other  crops  paid  them  better.  Then 
followed  a  good  deal  of  confused   and 
angry  cross-fighting,  in  which,  generally 
speaking,  the  civilians  found  themselves 
opposed  to  the  planters — the  most  me- 
morable incident  in  the  melee  being  the 
imprisonment  of  an  English  clergyman 
for  libel,  after  a  scene  in  court  which 
recalled  irresistibly  the  political  trials 
of  the  seventeenth  century.    Close  upon 
the  heels  of  the  indigo  row  came  the 
rent  dispute.     Some  planters,  who   at 
the  same  time  were  landholders,  raised 
the  rents  of  their  tenantry,  on  the  prin- 
ciple of   doing  what   they  liked  with 
their   own ;    while  the   civilians,   as   a 
class,  maintained  that  the  ryots  had  an 
undefined  but  undoubted  right  in  the 
land,  which  had  been  confirmed  by  Act 
Ten  of  '59.    This  complication  was  not 
calculated  to  throw  oil  on  the  troubled 
pools,  or  rather  vats.     When  the  mat- 
ter  was   laid  before    the    Lord   Chief 
Justice  of  Bengal,  he  decided  broadly 
and  roundly  against  the  ryot ;  a  decision 
which,   if    carried    into    effect,    would 
reduce  millions  upon  millions  of  pea- 
sant  proprietors   to   the    condition    of 
Irish    cottier    tenants,   ground   to   the 
earth   by  a  rack-rent,  and   a  sense  of 
humiliating  dependence  without  aim  or 
hope.      The    civilian    magistrates    and 
judges,  however,  so  arrange  matters  that 


the  planters  have  got  very  scant  satis- 
faction from  this  decision  of  the  Chief 
Justice.  Then  came  the  renewed  de- 
mand for  a  criminal  contract  law,  a  sub- 
ject with  regard  to  which  a  planter  is 
as  touchy  as  a  Buckinghamshire  farmer 
in  the  matter  of  Free  Trade  and  Protec- 
tion. The  modification  of  the  resolu- 
tions concerning  the  sale  of  waste  lands 
did  not  tend  to  heal  the  breach;  and 
the  ringleaders  of  the  European  settlers 
now  regard  the  civilians  as  their  sworn 
foes,  and  have  firmly  persuaded  them- 
selves that,  in  their  public  acts,  our 
officers  are  influenced  by  an  inveterate 
hatred  of  all  English  capitalists  and 
Zemindars.  Read  the  following  extracts 
from  the  writings  of  one  of  the  shining 
lights  of  what  he  himself  calls  the 
"  interloping  "  party  : — 

"I  feel  compelled  to  protest  against 
"  the  supineness  on  the  part  of  inter- 
"  lopers,  which  has  been  permitting  the 
"  Government,  now,  as  formerly,  under 
"  the  rule  of  the  Traditional  Policy 
11  Party,  to  undo  all  that  has  been  done, 
"  and  to  return  by  degrees  to  the  state 
"  of  things  which  prevailed  before  the 
"  mutinies.  Not  two  years  ago,  inter- 
"  lopers  had  conquered  and  dismissed  a 
"  lieutenant-governor,  had  overcome  the 
"  prejudices  which  the  governor-general 
"  had  been  imbibing  for  five  years  from 
"  his  civilian  advisers,  and  had  seen 
"  their  old  enemy,  Mr.  Cecil  Beadon, 
"  introducing  that  horror  of  civilians, 
"  a  Contract  Act,  into  the  Legislative 
"  Council.  I  shall  not  call  to  your 
"  recollection  at  present  the  minor  cir- 
u  cumstances  of  their  triumph,  such  as 
"  the  discomfiture  of  Mr.  Seton-Karr 
"  and  others.  Not  two  years  ago  inter- 
"  lopers  were  in  the  zenith  of  their 
"  power ;  but,  having  attained  to  that 
"  proud  eminence,  they  seemed  to  have 
"  lain  down  and  slept  there,  till  their 
"  old  enemies,  recovering,  ventured  to 
"  give  them  a  shove,  and  sent  them 
"  down  the  hill  much  faster  than  they 
"  climbed  it." 

Then  follows  a  jeremiad  on  the 
falling-off  of  Mr.  Beadon,  who  appears 
to  have  "  relapsed  into  the  pure 
"  civilian  which  he  had  always  been, 


SCO 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  IX. 


"  guided  by  the  principles  and  maxims 
"  of  civilianism,  which  had  become 
"  his  second  nature."  Happily,  what- 
ever may  be  the  second  nature  of  that 
worthy  successor  of  Sir  John  Peter 
Grant,  his  first  nature  is  as  noble  and 
genial  as  any  being  on  earth  is  blessed 
with.  After  this  comes  a  description  of 
"the  civilian  policy,  which  never  dies, 
*'  but  is  handed  down  from  one  genera- 
"  tion  to  another,  more  than  a  match  for 
"  the  tactics  of  a  society  whose  members 
"are  ever  changing,  and  whose  leaders 
"are  even  now  scattered,  though  but 
"such  a  short  time  has  elapsed  since 
"the  date  of  their  greatest  victories; 
"  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  we  have  but 
"  little  chance  of  seeing  them  reunited, 
'or  of  seeing  another  band  of  men 
'  fighting  like  them,  until  civilian  mis- 
'rule  again  destroys  a  great  industry, 
'  or  inflicts  some  unbearable  oppression 
'upon  a  race  which  is  but  too  long- 
"  suffering."  And  so  on,  and  so  on, 
usque  ad  nauseam.  There  is  plenty 
more  of  this  to  be  had  at  the  same 
shop.  It  is  wearisome  work,  morning 
after  morning  wading  through  huge 
masses  of  balderdash,  in  which  her 
Majesty's  servants  are  held  up  to 
execration  because  they  prevent  one 
class  of  her  subjects  from  oppressing 
and  enslaving  another  class. 

The  theory  that  the  native  is  his 
equal  in  the  eyes  of  the  law  is  of  itself 
sufficiently  aggravating  to  the  European 
settler ;  but,  when  the  occasion  comes 
for  that  theory  to  be  put  in  practice, 
when  justice  demands  that  one  of  our 
countrymen  should  be  brought  to  ac- 
count for  outrage  or  oppression,  then 
class  hatred  breaks  forth  into  a  paroxysm 
of  illogical  fury  ;  then  is  the  great  Anglo- 
Saxon  spirit  neither  to  hold  nor  to  bind ; 
then  are  the  "  English  name,"  and  the 
"development  of  the  resources  of  India," 
unlimbered,  and  trundled  out  to  over- 
awe the  civilian  magistrates  and  the 
judges  of  the  High  Court.  It  was  bad 
enough  not  to  be  permitted  to  hang 
natives  at  discretion,  but  what  if  it 
came  to  hanging  a  member  of  the 
imperial  race?  Last  year,  one  Eudd, 
who  was  in  the  service  of  a  Mr.  Jellicoe, 


was  desired  by  his  master  to  procure  a 
sheep  for  the  use  of  the  household.  He 
accordingly  selected  one  from  the  flock 
of  a  shepherd  of  the  name  of  Fazfr,  who 
objected  to  his  choice,  saying,  "  Sir,  do 
not  take  the  sheep;  she  is  with  young, 
and  I  will  give  you  another."  To  this 
piece  of  Indian  perversity  Eudd  replied 
by  carrying  off  the  animal  m  et  armis. 
The  owner  followed  him  to  the  bunga- 
low, and  appealed  to  Mr.  Jellicoe,  who, 
after  hearing  the  story,  gave  back  the 
sheep,  and  reproved  his  servant  for  his 
want  of  consideration.  The  weak  and 
un-English  behaviour  of  his  master 
gave  great  offence  to  Eudd,  whose 
righteous  and  Anglo-Saxon  soul  was 
vexed  to  such  a  point  that  he  could 
vent  his  indignation  by  no  milder  mea- 
sure than  that  of  pelting  Fazil  with 
stones,  and  kicking  him  in  the  loins — 
a  proceeding  which  excited  sympathy 
rather  than  surprise  among  the  by- 
standers, who  were  probably  acustomed 
to  Eudd's  method  of  conducting  a  purely 
commercial  transaction.  Apparently 
imagining  that  enough  had  not  been 
done  to  avenge  the  English  name  upon 
this  insolent  nigger,  our  countryman 
soon  afterwards  took  a  gun  from  the 
house  and  fired  in  the  air,  over  Fazil's 
head  ;  and  then,  having  brought  out 
another  gun,  shot  the  poor  fellow 
through  the  back  as  he  ran  away.  The 
murderer  returned  to  the  bungalow 
"  very  pale  ; "  a  pallor  which  was  much 
insisted  on  by  his  admirers  as  a  proof  of 
the  kindliness  of  his  disposition.  His 
victim  died  soon  after,  and  Eudd  was 
put  upon  his  trial,  and  overwhelmed  by 
a  mass  of  evidence,  native  and  English, 
which  could  leave  no  doubt  of  his  guilt 
on  the  minds  of  the  most  indulgent  jury. 
Sir  Charles  Jackson  (who,  by  the  way, 
has  never  been  forgiven  for  the  part 
which  he  played  on  this  occasion),  in 
spite  of  his  evident  compassion  for  the 
prisoner,  summed  up  like  a  true  English 
judge  who  does  not  fear  what  man  or 
the  Calcutta  press  can  do  unto  him. 
Eudd  was  convicted  of  wilful  murder — 
murder  all  the  more  horrible  from  the 
wanton  brutality  which  considered  no 
punishment  too  severe  for  a  native  who 


British  Temper  towards  India. 


301 


dared  to  have  a  voice  in  the  disposal  of 
his  own  property. 

Then  the  Bengal  Hurkaru  spoke  out : 
1  We  discern  signs  that  Calcutta  will  be 
1  stirred  to  its  utmost  depths  in  a  day  or 
'two,  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men 
'  banding  together  for  a  common  object, 
'to  achieve  the  gain  of  a  human  life,  an 
'  existence  which  is  forfeit  to  the  public 
'strangler.     Marvellous,  indeed,  is  the 
'power    of    the    instinct    of    mercy. 
'  Mightier  and  holier  the  wish  to  save 
'than  the  yearning  to  destroy."     And 
this  was  the  very  journal   which   but 
three  short  years  before  cried  the  loudest 
and  longest  for  blood,  and   yet  more 
blood !  which  howled  at  Lord  Canning 
as  a  traitor,  because  he   displayed  no 
marked  satisfaction  at  the  consciousness 
that  more  natives  had  been  hung  during 
his  reign   than  under   all  the  former 
Viceroys  together  !    which  called  down 
fire  from  heaven  upon   every   civilian 
who  refused  to  degrade  himself  from  a 
judge  into  a  "  public  strangler !"   "  Mar- 
"  vellous  indeed  was  the  power  of  the 
"  instinct  of  mercy  "  in  the  months  that 
followed  the  mutiny.     That  quality,  as 
far  as  the  sepoys  were   concerned,  was 
certainly  strained  uncommonly  fine.  The 
relation  between  the  might  and  holiness 
of  the  wish  to  save  and  the  yearning  to 
destroy,  in  the  year  1862,  was  exactly 
what  it  had  been  in  the  year  1857.  This 
talk  about  "human  life,"  and  "marvel- 
lous instincts,"  and  "holy  wishes,"  ill 
became  those  who  had  so  lately  been  the 
foremost  to  hound  on   the  slayer.     It 
would  have  been  more  honest  to  have 
refrained  from  these  generalisations,  and 
boldly  to  have  declared  that  the  sen- 
tence of  the  law  must  not  be  carried  out 
because,  villain  as  he  might  be,  Eudd 
belonged   to   the   Anglo-Saxon   race — 
because  the  murdered  man  was  no  better 
than  a  damned  nigger. 

When  such  was  the  state  of  feeling 
in  the  European  community  there  was 
no  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  vast  number 
of  signatures  to  a  petition  urging  the 
Governor-General  to  commute  the  sen- 
tence. Naturally  enough,  the  educated 
Hindoos,  who  had  but  just  now  been 

accustomed  to  see  multitudes  of  inno- 


cent natives  hung  simply  because  they 
were  natives,  were  scandalised  at  the 
notion  that  a  guilty  Englishman  must 
be  spared,  simply  because  he  was  an 
Englishman.  One  of  these  men  ex- 
pressed the  sentiments  of  his  class  in  a 
temperate  and  well  written  article,  con- 
taining the  following  passage  : — "  If 
"  the  offender  has  deserved  the  extreme 
"penalty  of  the  law,  in  the  name  of 
"justice  and  humanity  let  the  forfeit 
"be  extorted.  Let  blood  be  shed  for 
"  blood.  To  attempt  in  such  a  case  to 
"  mitigate  the  punishment  is  to  attempt 
"  to  pervert  justice,  to  shake  the  staple 
"  foundations  upon  which  society  rests." 
These  expressions,  in  the  eyes  of  the 
HurTcaru,  savoured  of  blasphemy  and 
ferocity,  and  called  forth  an  invective, 
of  which  the  following  lines  are  a  speci- 
men : — "  The  editor  is  a  sable  Christian — 
"  one  who  has  grafted  upon  the  traditional 
"  mildness  of  the  Hindoo  character  the 
'charitable  tendencies  of  the  GospeL 
'  Christian  Cali  desires  blood,  and  de- 
'nounces  the  immorality  which  would 
'  afford  a  criminal  the  chance  of  sobbing 
1  out  his  life  in  ignominy  and  pain." 

What  would  this  humane  gentleman 
have  said  if  Sir  John  Peter  Grant,  in 
virtue  of  his  high  authority,  had  packed 
off  General  Neill's  prisoners  to  "sob 
out  their  lives  in  ignominy  and  pain" 
on  the  shores  of  the  Andamans?  To 
my  mind  the  writer  had  better  have 
thought  twice  before  he  accused  his 
neighbours  of  impiety.  Another  state- 
ment in  the  same  columns  is  only  saved 
from  being  revolting  by  its  extreme 
absurdity  : — "  The  Mosaic  dispensation 
"is  dispensed  with  by  the  Christian 
"  era.  A  mightier  than  Moses  is  Prince 
"of  Justice."  Does  this  mean  that  it 
was  under  the  Law  that  we  hung  ryots 
in  1857,  and  that  in  obedience  to  the 
Gospel  we  are  to  spare  murderers  in 
1862  ?  Was  the  Mosaic  dispensation 
in  force  during  the  mutiny,  and  was  the 
Christian  era  coincident  with  the  paci- 
fication of  India  1  After  puzzling  over 
the  matter  for  some  time,  I  at  length 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  writer 
was  of  opinion  that  the  Mosaic  dispen- 
sation went  out  with  the  old  Company, 


302 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  IX. 


and  that  the  Indian   Council  and  the 
Evangelists  came  in  together. 

The  Governor-General,  to  his  infinite 
credit,  refused  to  use  his  prerogative  of 
pardon,  and,  as  a  natural  consequence, 
the  people  who  had  reviled  Lord  Can- 
ning for  saving  from  the  gallows  one  out 
of  a  thousand  condemned  natives,  now 
reviled  Lord  Elgin  for  sending  to  the 
gallows  a  single  Englishman.  The 
Viceroy,  however,  was  proof  against 
that  outcry,  to  which  even  the  stern 
spirit  of  his  predecessor  at  length 
yielded — a  concession  that  produced 
such  lamentable  results  during  the  last 
months  of  his  otherwise  spotless  ad- 
ministration. So,  finding  that  he  was 
not  likely  to  he  frightened  into  com- 
pliance or  repentance  hy  any  amount  of 
bluster — conscious,  too,  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  deprive  Sir  Charles  Wood  of 
the  honour  of  being  the  enemy  par 
excellence  of  the  English  name,  and 
invest  Lord  Elgin  with  that  title  on  so 
short  a  notice — the  votaries  of  Rudd 
changed  their  tack,  and  fell  foul  of  the 
native  community  for  having  investi- 
gated the  martyrdom  of  their  saints. 

"  Give  him  "  (the  native)  "  an  English 
"  life.  His  forefathers  offered  up  human 
"  sacrifices  to  ensure  good  harvests,  and 
"  their  descendants  ask  that  the  gallows 
"  and  the  cord  may  aid  in  the  same 
"  good  work  of  promoting  Bengalee  hap- 
"  piness." 

"The  convict  Rudd  is  to  be  hanged 
"  in  spite  of  the  earnest  prayers  of  more 
"  than  3,000  people.  Well,  when  the 
"  gods  are  to  be  propitiated,  it  is  well 
"  to  have  a  victim  at  hand,  and  the 
"  offering  will  be  all  the  more  accept- 
"  able  if  they  are  not  angry  at  the 
"  moment  of  sacrifice.  Rudd  will  die 
"  because  he  is  an  Englishman." 

"  We  hesitate  not  to  say  that  nine- 
"  tenths  of  those  who  vote  for  the  public 
"  strangling  of  the  unhappy  wretch  have 
"  done  so  because  if  Rudd  is  not  hanged 
"  the  native  population  will  be  dis- 
"  satisfied.  They  will  do  injustice  if 
"  the  heavens  threaten  to  fall." 

And  here  occurs  an  interesting 
speculation.  Why  is  a  native  always 
"polished  off,"  and  an  Englishman 


"publicly  strangled?"     The   operation 
is  the  same  in  both  cases. 

Unfortunately,  within  the  last  few 
months,  circumstances  have  taken  place 
which  have  called  forth  those  bad  passions 
that  had  slept  since  the  execution  of 
Rudd.  An  English  family,  who  possess 
a  large  and  thriving  estate  in  the  Delta 
of  the  Ganges,  had  long  been  desirous 
of  purchasing  a  village  which  would 
have  conveniently  rounded  off  their 
property.  The  inhabitants,  however, 
stoutly  refused  to  sell.  The  servants  of  the 
disappointed  landholders  did  their  best 
to  annoy  and  terrify  these  poor  people 
into  acquiescence.  On  one  occasion 
they  made  an  attack  on  the  village,  and 
got  a  sound  thrashing  for  their  pains. 
They  were  now  irritated  to  such  a 
degree  that  they  resolved  to  take  a 
signal  revenge  on  these  obstinate  pea- 
sants, and  especially  on  the  head  man 
of  the  place,  a  Bengalee  Naboth,  called, 
as  far  as  I  can  remember,  Raneemoollee. 
Be  it  observed  that  the  employers  of 
this  pack  of  rascals  had  no  cognizance 
whatever  of  these  iniquitous  proceed- 
ings. They  are  universally  acknow- 
ledged to  be  kind-hearted,  loyal  English 
gentlemen.  One  night  a  strong  force 
assailed  the  village,  brutally  ill-used 
the  ryots,  murdered  Raneemoollee,  and 
carried  off  two  women  of  his  family.  It 
was  strongly  suspected  that  a  young 
Irishman  of  the  name  of  Dennis  Hely 
had  been  the  ringleader.  He  disappeared 
immediately  after  the  affair,  and  the 
police  long  searched  for  him  in  vain. 

Now  here  was  an  occurrence  which, 
one  would  think,  should  have  stirred 
the  compassion  and  indignation  of  every 
honest  man  in  Bengal  and  Behar.  Op- 
pression, violence,  abduction,  murder, 
brutal  satellites,  innocent  peasants 
slaughtered  for  refusing  to  sell  the 
homesteads  of  their  fathers — no  element 
of  horror  and  villany  was  wanting.  On 
what  conditions  do  we  hold  India  1 
What  is  the  strongest  plea  by  which  we 
may  justify  our  occupation  of  the  country 
in  the  eyes  of  rival  nations  and  impartial  / 
posterity  ?  Surely,  that  we  have  en-  I  \ 
throned  order  and  the  law  where  rapine  I  I 
and  the  sword  once  reigned  supreme  ;  1  \ 


British   Temper  towards  India. 


303 


that  we  have  banished  from  the  land,  to 
the  best  of  our  power,  the  curse  of  bri- 
gandage and  dacoity.  But  what  gang  of 
dacoits  ever  committed  a  more  flagrant 
outrage  than  this  atrocity,  which  had 
been  perpetrated  under  the  supposed 
instigation  of  one  of  our  countrymen? 
The  sin  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  was  a  trifle 
to  it,  for  they,  at  any  rate,  preserved  the 
forms  of  justice,  and  forbore  to  take  the 
law  into  their  own  hands.  Would  not 
the  first  sentiment  of  every  true  English- 
man be  profound  pity,  and  an  earnest 
desire  that  Hely  might  be  brought  to. 
account,  in  order  that  if  guilty  he  might 
expiate  his  crime,  and  if  guiltless  might 
establish  his  innocence,  and  wipe  off  a 
foul  suspicion  from,  the  English  name  ? 

"What,  then,  was  the  view  of  the  sub-  - 
ject  taken  by  the  anti-native  portion  of 
the  Calcutta  press  1  "What  was  the 
theme  upon  which  they  especially  de- 
lighted to  dwell ?  Pity  for  the  sufferers  1 
No,  indeed.  Solicitude  for  the  honour 
of  our  rule  and  nation?  Far  from  it. 
The  fear  lest  Hely  should  be  condemned 
by  the  machinations  of  the  friends  of 
the  Hindoo,  and  the  deduction  that  the 
Bengalees  were  damneder  niggers  than 
ever,  occupied  their  thoughts  so  entirely, 
that  no  room  was  left  for  more  noble  or 
humane  sentiments.  Hely  was  at  last 
secured,  and  put  to  trial  on  a  charge 
such  that  no  jury  in  the  world  would 
have  convicted  him.  Instead  of  indict- 
ing him  as  having  been  present  at  and 
engaged  in  a  murderous  riot,  the  prose- 
cutor undertook  to  prove  that  the  fatal 
shot  had  been  fired  by  the  prisoner's 
own  hand.  The  hopeless  confusion  of 
a  night  attack,  and  the  confusion,  far 
more  hopeless,  of  native  evidence,  would 
have  prevented  such  a  charge  from  being 
substantiated  had  the  accused  been  ten 
times  guilty.  The  jury  declined  to  hear 
the  defence,  and  at  once  returned  a 
verdict  in  his  favour.  Then  appeared  a 
series  of  leading  articles  from  which  we 
have  selected  the  following  extract : — 

"  The  Conciliation  Policy,  Lord  Can- 
"  ning's  great  stumbling-block  and  in- 
"  fatuation,  pensively  declined  to  cut  the 
"  cords  which  bound  the  victim  to 
"  the  altar,  lest  the  native  population 


'  should  be  baulked  of  the  wished-for 

'  immolation.     Their  instinctive   anti- 

'  pathy  to  the  Feringhee  might,  it  is 

'  presumed,  be  dangerously  excitedwith- 

'  out  that  sacrifice.   An  annual  tragedy, 

'  with  a  European  to  do  the  death-scene, 

'  is  a  capital  contrivance  for  obviating 

'  rebellion.     The   tranquillizing   enter- 

'  tainment  can  hardly  now  be  discon- 

'  tinued.     Cerberus  must  have  his  sop, 

'  or  the  infernal  regions  will  become  in- 

'  tolerable  from  his  hungry  howlings." 

Now  I  do  not  hesitate  to  brand  the 

expression,  "  an  annual  tragedy,"  as  a 

foul  mis-statement.     From  the  columns 

of  this  very  journal  I  learn  that  the  last 

Englishman  who  suffered  the  extreme 

penalty  of  the  law  in  Calcutta,  was  a 

soldier,  who  was  executed  as  far  back  as 

1858  for  the  murder  of  a  comrade  and  a 

countryman.    Since  Eudd,  no  European 

has  died  on  the  gallows. 

It  is  satisfactory  to  be  enabled  to 
add  that  on  both  these  occasions  the 
Englishman,  though  virulently  "  Anglo- 
Saxon,"  steadily  maintained  that  party- 
spirit  should  not  be  allowed  to  interfere 
with  the  administration  of  justice. 

I  have  some  thoughts  of  publishing 
a  translation  of  the  Odes  of  Horace 
adapted  to  the  use  of  Indian  readers. 
Here  are  three  samples.  If  they  meet 
your  approbation  I  will  set  to  work  in 
earnest. 

LIB.  III.  CARTK.  7. 

Quidfles,  Asterie,  quern  tibi  candidi 
Primo  restituent  rere  Favonii  f 

I. 

My  dear  Miss  White,  forbear  to  wee]) 
Because  the  North-West  breezes  keep 

At  anchor  off  Rangoon 
That  youth  who,  richer  by  a  lac, 
May  safely  be  expected  back 

Before  the  next  monsoon. 

II. 

Beneath  his  close  mosquito  nets, 
With  love  and  prickly-neat  he  frets 

On  Irawaddy's  water, 
Nor  heeds  a  dame  on  board  the  ship, 
Who  lets  no  fair  occasion  slip 

For  praising  np  her  daughter. 

III. 

She  talks  of  maiden's  heart  so  tru3. 
And  angry  brothers  six  foot  two 
Demanding  satisfaction ; 


304 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  IX. 


And,  as  a  last  resource,  throws  out 
Hints  very  palpable  about 
A  breach-of-promise  action. 

IV. 

She  tells  how  Pickwick's  glance  of  fire 
Quailed  'neath  an  angry  woman's  ire  ; 

But  let  not  that  alarm  ye  ; 
He  still  remains  as  deaf  as  those 
Who  govern  India  to  the  woes 

Of  Bengal's  ill-used  army. 

V. 

Fear  not  for  him.    But,  thou,  beware ! 
'Tis  whispered  (though  I  hardly  dare 

To  credit  the  assertion),  . 
How  very  kind  an  ear  you  lend 
To  some  young  Civil  Service  friend 

Who  lately  passed  in  Persian — 

VI. 

Than  whom  no  other  wallah  steers, 
With  less  excruciating  fears, 

His  buggy  down  the  course ; 
Or  chooses  out  a  softer  place, 
And  with  a  more  seductive  grace 

Drops  off  a  shying  horse. 

LIB.  IV.  CAEM.  8. 

D&narem  pateras  grataque  commodus, 
Censorine,  meis  cera  sodalibus. 

If  all  my  "  woulds,"  dear  Jones,  were  changed 

to"coulds," 

I'd  deck  thy  bungalow  with  Europe  goods  ;  ' 
With  bronzes  which  the   awe-struck  Baboo 

stops 

To  gape  and  stare  at  in  Chowringhee  shops ; 
With  flagons  such  as  either  Ross  has  won 
In  many  a  hard-fought  match  at  Wimbledon  ; 
With  Brett's  cJiefs  d'ceuvre  that  Ruskins  buy 

and  praise 

Amidst  the  scorn  of  petulent  R.  A's  ; 
With  Woollier5  s  busts  which,  in  an  anile  huff, 
Our  dons  rejected,  spite  of  Palgrave's  puff. 
Brave  presents  these,  but  how  can  I  dispense 

'em, 

With  some  four  hundred  odd  rupees'per  men- 
sem? 

One  potent  gift  I  boast,  one  treasure  dear, 
The  access  to  an  editorial  ear. 
Not  full-length  portraits,  frame  and  all  com- 
plete, 

Nor  yet  ovations  at  his  country-seat, 
Nor  presentation  swords,  nor  statues,  shed 
Such  deathless  lustre  round  his  glorious  head, 
Who,  when  'gainst  fearful  odds  the  English 

van 

Bore  up  the  battle  in  the  grim  Redan, 
Undaunted,  from  the  cloud  of  dust  and  flame, 
Straight   back   to  camp    for   reinforcements 
came, 


As  that  small  squad  whom  once  the  hero  sent 
To  pitch  our  Special  Correspondent's  tent. 
What  gives  old  Time  the  lie,  and  keeps  alive 
In  school-boys'  mouths  the  mighty  name  of 

Clive; 

Preserves  great  Hastings  from  oblivion's  flood, 
And  daubs  poor  Impey  with  perennial  mud  ? 
Why,  just  two  articles  hi  that  review 
Where  tawdry  yellow  strives  with  dirty  blue. 
Ne'er  will  the  man  on  whom  the  press  has 

smiled 

Pine  in  collectorates  remote  and  wild  ; 
'Tis  not  for  him  the  beaten  path  to  trudge, 
From  sub-assistant  up  to  Zillah  judge  ; 
And,  when,  persuaded  by  his  wife  to  give  her 
The  best  advice  in  London  for  her  liver, 
He  chooses  a  convenient  month  to  start  in, 
And  hurries  home  to  see  Sir  Ranald  Martin, 
These  magic  words  perchance  may  thrill  his 

breast, 
"  Sir  Charles  and  Lady  Mary  Wood  request 

LIB.  I.  CABM.  11. 

Tu  ne  qucesieris  (scire  nefas)  quern  mihi,  quern 

tibi, 

Finem  Dt  dederint,  Leuconoe,  nee  Babylonios, 
Tentaris  numeros. 

Matilda,  will  you  ne'er  have  ceased  apocalyptic 
summing,1 

And  left  the  number  of  the  beast  to  puzzle 
Dr.  Gumming  ? 

'Tis  vain  to  rack  your  charming  brains  about 
(confusion  take  her) 

The  Babylonian  Lament,  the  pretty  dragon- 
breaker. 

What  can't  be  cured  must  be  endured.  Per- 
chance a  gracious  heaven 

May  spare  us  till  the  fated  year  of  eighteen 
sixty-seven.3 

Perchance  Jove's  board  of  public  works  the 
dread  decree  has  passed,  *** 

And  this  cold  season,  with  its  joys,  is  doomed 
to  be  our  last. 

Let's  to  the  supper-room  again,  though  kit- 
mutgars  may  frown, 

And  in  Lord  Elgin's  dry  champagne  wash  all 
these  tremors  down : 

And  book  me  for  the  fifteenth  walse :  there, 
just  beneath  my  thumb  ; 

No,  not  the  next  to  that,  my  girl ;  the  next 
may  never  come. 

Yours  ever, 

H.  BROUGHTON. 

1  Sic  Jovis  interest  optatis  epulis. 

2  This  is  the  date  fixed  by  Dr.  Gumming 
for  the  end  of  all  things,  including  the  sale  of 
his  books. 


305 


A    SON    OF    THE    SOIL. 


PART  IV. 


CHAPTER  X. 


MR.  JORDAN  had  invited  a  large  party 
of  people  to  meet  the  Dowager  Coun- 
tess ;  but  the  greatness  of  the  leading 
light,  which  was  to  illustrate  his  house, 
had  blinded  him  to  the  companion  stars 
that  were  to  tremble  in  her  company. 
The  principal  people  about  had  con- 
sented graciously  to  be  reviewed  by  her 
ladyship  who,  once  upon  a  time,  had 
been  a  very  great  lady  and  fashionable 
potentate.  A  very  little  fashion  counts 
for  much  on  the  shores  of  the  Holy 
Loch,  and  the  population  was  moved 
accordingly.  But  the  young  ladies, 
who  accompanied  the  dowager,  were 
less  carefully  provided  for.  When  Miss 
Erankland,  who  was  unquestionably  the 
beauty  of  the  party,  cast  a  glance  of 
careless  but  acute  observation  round 
her,  afjer  all  the  gentlemen  had  re- 
turned to  the  drawing-room,  she  saw 
nobody  whom  she  cared  to  distinguish 
by  her  notice.  Most  of  the  men  about 
had  a  flavour  of  conventionality  in  their 
talk,  or  their  manner,  or  their  whiskers. 
Most  of  them  were  rich,  some  of  them  were 
very  well  bred  and  well  educated,  though 
the  saucy  beauty  could  not  perceive  it ; 
but  there  was  not  an  individual  among 
them  who  moved  her  curiosity  or  her 
interest,  except  one  who  stood  rather  in 
the  background,  and  whose  eyes  kept 
seeking  her  with  wistful  devotion. 
Colin  had  improved  during  the  last 
year.  He  was  younger  than  Miss 
Frankland,  a  fact  of  which  she  was 
aware,  and  he  was  at  the  age  upon 
which  a  year  tells  mightily.  Looking 
at  him  in  the  background,  through 
clouds  of  complacent  people  who  felt 
themselves  Colin's  superiors,  even  an 
indifferent  spectator  might  have  distin- 
guished the  tall  youth,  with  those  heaps 
of  brown  hair  overshadowing  the  fore- 
head which  might  have  been  apostro- 
No.  52. — VOL.  ix. 


phized  as  "domed' for  thought"  if  any- 
body could  have  seen  it ;  and  in  his 
eyes  that  gleam  of  things  miraculous, 
that  unconscious  surprise  and  admira- 
tion which  would  have  given  a  touch  of 
poetry  to  the  most  commonplace  coun- 
tenance. But  Miss  Matilda  was  not 
an  indifferent  spectator.  She  was 
fond  of  him  in  her  way  as  women 
are  fond  of  a  man  whom  they  never 
mean  to  love — fond  of  him  as  one  is 
fond  of  the  victim  who  consents 
to  glorify  one's  triumph.  As  she 
looked  at  him,  and  saw  how  he  had 
improved,  and  perceived  the  faith- 
ful allegiance  with  which  he  watched 
every  movement  she  made,  the  heart  of 
the  beauty  was  touched.  Worship  is 
sweet,  even  when  it  is  only  a  country 
boy  who  bestows  it — and  perhaps  this 
country  boy  might  turn  out  a  genius  or 
a  poet — not  that  Matilda  cared  much 
for  genius  or  poetry,  but  she  liked 
everything  which  bestows  distinction, 
and  was  aware  that  in  the  lack  of  other 
titles,  a  little  notability,  even  in  society, 
might  be  obtained  if  one  was  brave,  and 
knew  how  to  manage  it,  by  these  means. 
And  besides  all  this,  honestly,  and  at 
the  foundation,  she  was  fond  of  Colin. 
When  she  had  surveyed  all  the  com- 
pany, and  had  made  up  her  mind  that 
there  was  nobody  there  in  the  least 
degree  interesting,  she  held  up  her  fan 
with  a  pretty  gesture,  calling  him.  to 
her.  The  lad  made  his  way  through  the 
assembly  at  that  call  with  a  smile  and 
glow  of  exultation  which  it  is  impossible 
to  describe.  His  face  was  lighted  up 
with  a  kind  of  celestial  intoxication. 
"Who  is  that  very  handsome  young 
man  ]"the  Dowager  Countess  was  moved 
to  remark  as  he  passed  witlu'n  her  lady- 
ship's range  of  vision,  which  was  limited, 
for  Lady  Hallamshire  was,  like  most 
other  people,  shortsighted.  "  Oh,  he 
is  not  a  handsome  young  man,  he  is  only 


306 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


the  tutor,"  said  one  of  the  ladies  of  the 
Holy  Loch;  but,  notwithstanding,  she 
too  looked  after  Colin,  with  aroused 
curiosity.  "  I  suppose  Matty  Frankland 
must  have  met  him  in  society,"  said  the 
dowager,  who  was  the  most  comfortable 
of  chaperones,  and  went  on  with  her  talk, 
turning  her  eyeglass  round  and  towards 
her  pretty  charge.  As  for  the  young 
men,  they  stared  at  Colin  with  mingled 
consternation  and  wrath.  What  was  he  ? 
a  fellow  who  had  not  a  penny,  a  mere 
Scotch  student,  to  be  distinguished  by 
the  prettiest  girl  in  the  room  ?  for  the 
aspiring  people  about  the  Holy  Loch,  as 
well  as  in  the  other  parts  of  Scotland, 
had  come  to  entertain  that  contempt  for 
the  national  universities  and  national 
scholarships  which  is  so  curious  a  feature 
in  the  present  transition  state  of  the 
country.  If  Colin  had  been  an  Oxford 
man  the  west-country  people  would  have 
thought  it  quite  natural,  but  a  Scotch 
student  did  not  impress  them  with  any 
particular  respect. 

"  I'm  so  glad  to  meet  you  again ! " 
said  Matty,  with  the  warmest  cordiality, 
"  but  so  surprised  to  see  you  here.  What 
are  you  doing  here  ?  why  have  you  come 
away  from  that  delicious  Eamore,  where 
I  am  sure  I  should  live  for  ever  and  ever 
if  it  were  mine  1  What  have  you  been 
doing  with  yourself  all  this  time1? 
Come  and  tell  me  all  about  it,  and  I 
do  so  want  to  know  how  everything  is 
looking  at  that  dear  castle  and  in  our 
favourite  glen.  Don't  you  remember 
that  darling  glen  behind  the  church, 
where  we  used  to  gather  basketfuls  of 
primroses — and  all  the  lovely  moors  1 
I  am  dying  to  hear  about  everything 
and  everybody.  Do  come  and  sit  down 
here,  and  tell  me  all." 

"Where  shall  I  begin?"  said  Colin, 
who,  utterly  forgetful  of  his  position, 
and  all  the  humilities  incumbent  on 
him  in  such  an  exalted  company,  had 
instantly  taken  possession  of  the  seat 
she  pointed  out  to  him,  and  had  placed 
himself  according  to  her  orders  directly 
between  her  and  the  companj7,  shutting 
her  into  a  corner.  Miss  Matty  could 
see  very  well  all  that  was  going  on  in 
the  drawing-room,  but  Colin  had  his 


back  to  the  company,  and  had  forgotten 
everything  in  the  world  except  her  face. 

"  Oh,  with  yourself,  of  course,"  said 
Matty.  "  I  want  to  know  all  about  it ; 
and,  first  of  all,  what  are  you  doing 
among  these  sort  of  people  ? "  the  young 
lady  continued,  with  a  little  more  of 
her  face  towards  the  assembled  multi- 
tude, some  of  whom  were  quite  within 
hearing. 

"  These  sort  of  people  have  very 
little  to  say  to  me,"  said  Colin,  who 
suddenly  felt  himself  elevated  over 
their  heads;  "I  am  only  the  tutor;" 
and  the  two  foolish  young  creatures 
looked  at  each  other,  and  laughed,  as  if 
Colin  of  Ramore  had  been  a  prince  in  dis- 
guise, and  his  tutorship  an  excellent  joke. 

"  Oh,  you  are  only  the  tutor  1 "  said 
Miss  Matty — that  is  charming.  Then 
one  will  be  able  to  make  all  sorts  of 
use  of  you.  Everybody  is  allowed  to 
maltreat  a  tutor.  You  will  have  to 
row  us  on  the  loch,  and  walk  with  us 
to  the  glen,  and  carry  our  cloaks,  and 
generally  conduct  yourself  as  becomes  a 
slave  and  vassal.  As  for  me,  I  shall 
order  you  about  with  the  greatest  free- 
dom, and  expect  perfect  obedience," 
said  the  beauty,  looking  with  her  eyes 
full  of  laughter  into  Colin's  face. 

"  All  that  goes  without  saying,"  said 
Colin,  who  did  not  like  to  commit 
himself  to  the  French.  "  I  almost 
think  I  have  already  proved  my  perfect 
allegiance." 

"  Oh,  you  were  only  a  boy  last  year," 
said  Miss  Matty,  with  some  evanescent 
change  of  colour,  which  looked  like  a 
blush  to  Colin's  delighted  eyes.  Now 
you  are  a  man  and  a  tutor,  and  we  shall 
behave  to  you  accordingly.  How  lovely 
that  glen  was  last  spring,  to  be  sure," 
continued  the  girl,  with  a  little  quite 
unconscious  natural  feeling  ;  "  do  you 
remember  the  day  when  it  rained,  and 
we  had  to  wait  under  the  beeches,  and 
when  you  imagined  all  sorts  of  things 
in  the  gathering  of  the  shower?  Do 
you  write  any  poetry  now  1  I  want  so 
much  to  see  what  you  have  been  doing 
since,"  said  the  siren,  who,  half-touched 
by  nature  in  her  own  person,  was  still 
perfectly  conscious  of  her  power. 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


307 


"  Since  ! "  Colin  repeated  the  word 
over  to  himself  with  a  flush  of  happiness 
which,  perhaps,  no  such  good  in  existence 
could  have  equalled.  Poor  boy !  if  he 
could  but  have  known  what  had  hap- 
pened "since"  in  Miss  Matty's  expe- 
rience— but,  fortunately,  he  had  not  the 
smallest  idea  what  was  involved  in  the 
season  which  the  young  lady  had  lately 
terminated,  or  in  the  brilliant  winter  cam- 
paign in  the  country,  which  had  brought 
adorers  in  plenty,  but  nothing  worthy  of 
the  beauty's  acceptance,  to  Miss  Matty's 
feet.  Colin  thought  only  of  the  bea- 
tific dreams,  the  faithful  follies  which 
had  occupied  his  own  juvenile  imagina- 
tion "  since."  As  for  the  heroine  her- 
self, she  looked  slightly  confused  to  hear 
him  repeat  the  word.  She  had  meant 
it  to  produce  its  effect,  but  then  she  was 
thinking  solely  of  a  male  creature  of  her 
own  species,  and  not  of  a  primitive, 
innocent  soul  like  that  which  looked  at 
her  in  a  glow  of  young  delight  out  of 
Colin's  eyes.  She  was  used  to  be  ad- 
mired and  complimented,  and  humoured 
to  the  top  of  her  bent,  but  she  did  not 
understand  being  believed  in,  and  the 
new  sensation  somewhat  fluttered  and 
embarrassed  the  young  woman  of  the 
world.  She  watched  his  look,  as  he 
replied  to  her,  and  thereby  added  double, 
though  she  did  not  mean  it,  to  the  effect 
of  what  she  had  said. 

"  I .  never  write  poetry,"  said  Colin, 
"  I  wish  I  could — I  know  how  I  should 
use  the  gift ;  but  I  have  a  few  verses 
about  somewhere,  I  suppose,  like  any- 
body else.  Last  spring  I  was  almost 
persuaded  I  could  do  something  better ; 
but  that  feeling  lasts  only  so  long  as 
one's  inspiration  lasts,"  said  the  youth, 
looking  down,  in  his  turn,  lest  his  mean- 
ing might  be  discovered  too  quickly  in 
his  eye. 

And  then  there  ensued  a  pause — a 
pause  which  was  more  dangerous  than 
the  talk,  and  which  Miss  Matty  made 
haste  to  break. 

"Do  you  know  you  are  very  much 
changed?"  she  said.  "You  never  did 
any  of  this  society-talk  last  year.  You 
have  been  making  friends  with  some 
ladies  somewhere,  and  they  have  taught 


you  conversation.  But.  as  for  me,  I  am 
your  early  friend,  and  I  preferred  you 
when  you  did  not  talk  like  other  people," 
said  Miss  Matty,  with  a  slight  pout. 
"  Tell  me  who  has  been  forming  your 
mind  1  " 

Perhaps  it  was  fortunate  for  Colin  at 
this  moment  that  Lady  Hallamshire  had 
become  much  bored  by  the  group  which 
had  gathered  round  her  sofa.  The 
dowager  was  clever  in  her  way,  and  had 
written  a  novel  or  two,  and  was  accus- 
tomed to  be  amused  by  the  people  who 
had  the  honour  of  talking  to  her. 
Though  she  was  no  longer  a  leader  of 
fashion,  she  kept  up  the  manners  and 
customs  of  that  remarkable  species  of 
the  human  race,  and  when  she  was 
bored,  permitted  her  sentiments  to  be 
plainly  visible  in  her  expressive  counte- 
nance. Though  it  was  the  member  of 
the  county  who  was  enlightening  her 
at  the  moment  in  the  statistics  of  the 
West  Highlands,  and  though  she  had 
been  in  a  state  of  great  anxiety  five 
minutes  before  about  the  emigration 
which  was  depopulating  the  moors,  her 
ladyship  broke  in  quite  abruptly  in  the 
midst  of  the  poor-rates  with  a  totally 
irrelevant  observation — 

"  It  appears  to  me  that  Matty  Frank- 
land  has  got  into  another  flirtation ;  I 
must  go  and  look  after  her,"  said  the 
Dowager ;  and  she  smiled  graciously  upon 
the  explanatory  member,  and  left  him 
talking,  to  the  utter  consternation  of 
their  hostess.  Lady  Hallamshire  thought 
it  probable  that  the  young  man  was 
amusing  as  well  as  handsome,  or  Matty 
Frankland,  who  was  a  girl  of  discretion, 
would  not  have  received  him  into  such 
marked  favour.  "  Though  I  daresay 
there  is  nobody  here  worth  her  trouble," 
her  chaperone  thought  as  she  looked 
round  the  room  ;  but  anyhow  a  change 
was  desirable.  "  Matty,  mignonne, 
I  want  to  know  what  you  are  talking 
about,"  she  said,  suddenly  coming  to 
anchor  opposite  the  two  young  people ; 
and  a  considerable  fuss  ensued  to  find 
her  ladyship  a  seat,  during  which  time 
Colin  had  a  hundred  minds  to  run  away. 
The  company  took  a  new  centre  after 
this  performance  on  the  part  of  the  great 

x2 


308 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


lady,  and  poor  Colin,  all  at  once,  began 
to  feel  that  he  was  doing  exactly  the 
reverse  of  what  was  expected  of  him. 
He  got  up  with  a  painful  blush  as  he 
met  Mr.  Jordan's  astonished  eye.  The 
poor  boy  did  not  know  that  he  had  been 
much  more  remarked  before  :  "  flirting 
openly  with  that  dreadful  little  coquette 
Miss  Frankland,  and  turning  his  back 
upon  his  superiors,"  as  some  of  the  in- 
dignant bystanders  said.  Even  Colin's 
matronly  friends,  who  pitied  him  and 
formed  his  mind,  disapproved  of  his  be- 
haviour. "  She  only  means  to  make  a 
fool  of  you,  and  you  ought  not  to  allow 
yourself  to  be  taken  in  by  it,"  said  one 
of  these  patronesses  in  his  ear,  calling 
him  aside.  But  Fate  had  determined 
otherwise. 

"  Don't  go  away,"  said  Lady  Hallani- 
shire.  "I  like  Matty  to  introduce  all 
her  friends  to  me  ;  and  you  two  look  as 
if  you  had  know  each  other  a  long 
time,"  said  the  dowager,  graciously,  for 
she  was  pleased,  like  most  women,  by 
Colin's  looks.  "  One  would  know  him 
again  if  one  met  him,"  she  added,  in  an 
audible  aside  ;  "  he  doesn't  look  exactly 
like  everybody  else,  as  most  young  men 
do.  Who  is  he,  Matty?"  And  Miss 
Fiankland'scJiaperone  turned  the  light  of 
her  countenance  full  upon  Colin,  quite 
indifferent  to  the  fact  that  he  had  heard 
one  part  of  her  speech  quite  as  well  as 
the  other.  When  a  fine  lady  consents 
to  enter  the  outer  world,  it  is  to  be  ex- 
pected that  she  should  behave  herself  as 
civilized  people  do  among  savages,  and 
the  English  among  the  other  nations  of 
the  world. 

"  Oh,  yes  !  we  have  known  each  other 
a  long  time,"  said  Matty,  partly  with  a 
generous,  partly  with  a  mischievous,  in- 
stinct. "  My  uncle  knows  Mr.  Camp- 
bell's father  very  well,  and  Harry  and 
lie  and  I  made  acquaintance  when  we 
were  children.  I  am  sure  you  must 
have  heard  how  nearly  Harry  was 
drowned  once  when  we  were  at  Kilchain 
Castle.  It  was  Mr.  Campbell  who  saved 
his  life. 

"  Oh  ! "  said  Lady  Hallamshire;  "but 
I  thought  that  was" — and  then  she 
stopped  short.  Looking  at  Colin  again, 


her  ladyship's  experienced  eye  perceived 
that  he  was  not  arrayed  with  that  per- 
fection of  apparel  to  which  she  was 
accustomed ;  but  at  the  moment  her 
eye  caught  his  glowing  face,  half  pleased, 
half  haughty  with  that  pride  of  lowli- 
ness which  is  of  all  pride  the  most  de- 
fiant. "I  am  very  glad  to  make  Mr. 
Campbell's  acquaintance," — she  went  on 
so  graciously  that  everybody  forgot  the 
pause.  "  Harry  Frankland  is  a  very  dear 
young  friend  of  mine,  and  we  are  all 
very  much  indebted  to  his  deliverer." 

It  was  just  what  a  distinguished 
matron  would  have  said  in  the  circum- 
stances in  one  of  Lady  Hallamshire's 
novels  ;  but,  instead  of  remaining  over- 
come with  grateful  confusion,  as  the 
hero  ought  to  have  done,  Colin  made  an 
immediate  reply. 

"  I  cannot  take  the  credit  people  give 
me,"  said  the  lad,  with  a  little  heat. 
"  He  happened  to  get  into  my  boat 
when  he  was  nearly  exhausted — that  is 
the  whole  business.  There  has  been 
much  more  talk  about  it  than  was 
necessary.  I  cannot  pretend  even  to 
be  a  friend  of  Mr.  Frankland,"  said 
Colin,  with  the  unnecessary  explana- 
toriness  of  youth,  "  and  I  certainly  did 
not  save  his  life." 

With  which  speech  the  young  man 
disappeared  out  of  sight  amid  the  won- 
dering assembly,  which  privately  desig- 
nated him  a  young  puppy  and  a  young 
prig,  and  by  various  other  epithets, 
according  to  the  individual  mind  of  the 
speaker.  As  for  Lady  Hallamshire,  she 
was  considerably  disgusted.  "Your 
friend  is  original,  I  dare  say  ;  but  I  am 
not  sure  that  he  is  quite  civil,"  she  said 
to  Matty,  who  did  not  quite  know 
whether  to  be  vexed  or  pleased  by 
Colin's  abrupt  withdrawal.  Perhaps  on 
the  whole  the  young  lady  liked  him 
better  for  having  a  mind  of  his  own, 
notwithstanding  his  devotion,  and  for 
preferring  to  bestow  his  worship  with- 
out the  assistance  of  spectators.  If  he 
had  been  a  man  in  the  least  possible 
as  a  lover,  Miss  Frankland  might  have 
been  of  a  different  opinion ;  but,  as  that 
was  totally  out  of  possibility,  Matty 
liked,  on  the  whole,  that  he  should  do 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


309 


what  was  ideally  right,  and  keep  up 
her  conception  of  him.  She  gave  her 
head  a  pretty  toss  of  semi-defiance,  and 
went  across  the  room  to  Mrs.  Jordan, 
to  whom  she  was  very  amiable  and 
caressing  all  the  rest  of  the  evening. 
But  she  still  continued  to  watch  with 
the  corner  of  her  eye  the  tall  boyish 
tigure  which  was  now  and  then  to  be 
discerned  in  the  distance,  with  those 
masses  of  brown  hair  heaped  like  clouds 
upon  the  forehead,  which  Colin's  height 
made  visible  over  the  heads  of  many 
very  superior  people.  She  knew  he  was 
watching  her  and  noted  every  move- 
ment she  made,  and  she  felt  a  little 
proud  of  the  slave,  who,  though  he  was 
only  the  tutor  and  a  poor  farmer's  son, 
had  something  in  his  eyes  which  no- 
body else  within  sight  had  any  inkling 
of.  Matty  was  rather  clever  in  her 
way,  which  was  as  much  different  from 
Colin's  as  light  from  darkness.  No  man 
of  a  mental  calibre  like  hers  could  have 
found  him  out;  but  she  had  a  little 
insight,  as  a  woman,  which  enabled  her 
to  perceive  the  greater  height  when  she 
came  within  sight  of  it.  And  then 
poor  Colin,  all  unconsciously,  had  given 
her  such  an  advantage  over  him.  He 
had  laid  his  boy's  heart  at  her  feet,  and, 
half  in  love,  half  in  imagination,  had 
made  her  the  goddess  of  his  youth.  If 
she  had  thought  it  likely  to  do  him  any 
serious  damage,  perhaps  Matty,  who  was 
a  good  girl  enough,  and  was  of  some 
use  to  the  rector  and  very  popular  among 
the  poor  in  her  OAVII  parish,  might  have 
done  her  duty  by  Colin,  and  crushed 
this  pleasant  folly  in  the  bud.  But 
then  it  did  not  occur  to  her  that  a 
"  friendship "  of  which  it  was  so  very 
evident  nothing  could  ever  come,  could 
harm  anybody.  It  did  not  occur  to  her 
that  an  ambitious  Scotch  boy,  who  knew 
no  more  of  the  world  than  a  baby,  and 
who  had  been  fed  upon  all  the  tales  of 
riches  achieved  and  glories  Avon  which 
are  the  common  fare  of  many  a  homely 
household,  might  possibly  entertain  a 
different  opinion.  So  Matty  asked  all 
kinds  of  (questions  about  him  of  Mrs. 


Jordan,  and  gave  him  now  and  then  a 
little  nod  when  she  met  his  eye,  and 
generally  kept  up  a  kind  of  special 
intercourse  far  more  flattering  to  the 
youth  than  ordinary  conversation.  Poor 
Colin  neither  attempted  nor  wished  to 
defend  himself.  He  put  his  head  under 
the  yoke,  and  hugged  his  chains.  He 
collected  his  verses,  poor  boy  !  when  he 
went  to  his  own  room  that  night — 
verses  which  he  knew  very  well  were 
true  to  him,  but  in  which  it  would 
be  rather  difficult  to  explain  the  fatal 
stroke — the  grievous  blow  on  which  he 
had  expatiated  so  vaguely  that  it  might 
be  taken  to  mean  the  death  of  his  lady 
rather  than  the  simple  fact  that  she  did 
not  come  to  Kilchain  Castle  when  he 
expected  her.  How  to  make  her  under- 
stand that  this  was  the  object  of  his 
lamentations  puzzled  him  a  little ;  for 
Colin  knew  enough  of  romance  to  be 
aware  that  the  true  lover  does  not 
venture  to  address  the  princess  until 
he  has  so  far  conquered  fortune  as  to 
make  his  suit  with  honour  to  her  and 
fitness  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  The 
young  tutor  sat  in  his  bare  little  room 
out  of  the  way,  and,  with  eyes  that 
glowed  over  his  midnight  candle,  looked 
into  the  future,  and  calculated  visionary 
dates  at  which,  if  all  went  with  him  as 
he  hoped,  he  might  lay  his  trophies  at 
his  lady's  feet.  It  is  true  that  Matty 
herself  fully  intended  by  that  time  to 
have  daughters  ready  to  enter  upon  the 
round  of  conquest  from  which  she  should 
have  retired  into  matron  dignity;  but 
no  such  profanity  ever  occurred  to 
Colin.  Thus  the  two  thought  of  each 
other  as  they  went  to  their  rest — the 
one  with  all  the  delusions  of  heroic 
youthful  love,  the  other  with  no  de- 
lusions at  all,  but  a  half  gratitude,  half 
affection — a  woman's  compassionate  fond- 
ness for  the  man  who  had  touched  her 
heart  a  little  by  giving  her  his,  but 
whom  it  was  out  of  the  question  ever 
to  think  of  loving.  And  so  the  coils 
of  Fate  began  to  throw  themselves 
around  the  free-born  feet  of  young 
Colin  of  Eamore, 


310 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


CHAPTEE  XL 


LADY  HALLAMSHIRE  was  a  woman  very 
accessible  to  a  little  judicious  flattery, 
and  very  sensible  of  good  living.  She 
liked  Mr.  Jordan's  liberal  house,  and 
she  liked  the  court  that  was  paid  to  her ; 
and  was  not  averse  to  lengthening  out 
her  visit,  and  converting  three  days  into 
a  fortnight,  especially  as  her  ladyship's 
youngest  son,  Horace  Fitz- Gibbon,  who 
was  a  lieutenant  in  the  navy,  was  ex- 
pected daily  in  the  Clyde — at  least  his 
ship  was,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing. 
Horace  was  a  dashing  young  fellow 
enough,  with  nothing  but  his  handsome 
face,  (he  had  his  mother's  nose,  as  every- 
body acknowledged,  and,  although  now 
a  dowager,  she  had  been  a  great  beauty 
in  her  day),  and  the  honourable  prefix 
to  his  name  to  help  him  on  in  the 
world.  Lady  Hallamshire  had  heard 
of  an  heiress  or  two  about,  and  her 
maternal  ambition  was  stimulated  ;  and, 
at  the  same  time,  the  grouse  were  be- 
witching, and  the  cooking  most  credit- 
able. The  only  thing  she  was  sorry 
for  was  Matty  Frankland,  her  ladyship 
said,  who  never  could  stay  more  than 
a  week  anywhere,  unless  she  was  flirting 
with  somebody,  without  being  bored. 
Perhaps  the  necessary  -conditions  had 
been  obtained  even  at  Ardmartin,  for 
Matty  bore  up  very  well  on  the  whole. 
8he  fulfilled  the  threat  of  making  use  of 
the  tutor  to  the  fullest  extent;  and  Colin 
gave  himself  up  to  the  enjoyment  of  his 
fool's  paradise  without  a  thought  of  fly- 
ing from  the  dangerous  felicity.  They 
climbed  the  hills  together,  keeping  far 
in  advance  of  the  companions,  who 
overtook  them  only  to  find  the  mood 
change,  and  to  leave  behind  in  the 
descent  the  pair  of  loiterers,  whose  pace 
no  calls  nor  advices,  nor  even  the  fre- 
quent shower,  could  quicken  ;  and  they 
rowed  together  over  the  loArely  loch, 
about  which,  Matty  having  much  fluency 
of  language,  and  the  adroitness  of  a 
little  woman  of  the  world  in  appropriat- 
ing other  people's  sentiments,  showed 
even  more  enthusiasm  than  Colin.  Per- 
haps she  too  enjoyed  this  wonderful 


holiday  in  the  life  which  already  she 
knew  by  heart,  and  found  no  novelty 
in.     To  be  adored,  to  be  invested  with 
all  the  celestial  attributes,  to  feel  herself 
the   one   grand    object    in  somebody's 
world,  is  pleasant  to  a  woman.     Matty 
almost  felt  as  if  she  was  in  love,  with- 
out the  responsibility  of  the  thing,  or 
any  need   for  troubling  herself  about 
what  it  was  going  to  come  to.     It  could 
come  to  nothing — except  an  expression 
of  gratitude  and  kindness  to  the  young 
in  an  who   had  saved  her  cousin's  life. 
When  everything  wr  s  so  perfectly  safe, 
there  could  be  no  harm  in  the  enjoy- 
ment; and  the  conclusion  Matty  came  to, 
as  an  experimental  philosopher,  was,  that 
to  fall  in  love  really,  excepting  the  re- 
sponsibilities, would  be  an  exciting  but 
highly  troublesome  amusement.  She  could 
not  help  thinking  to  herself  how  anxious 
she   should  be  about   Colin  if  such  a 
thing  were  possible.     How  those  mis- 
takes which  he  could  not  help  making, 
and  which  at   present  did  not  disturb 
her  in  the  least,  would  make  her  glow 
and  burn  with  shame,  if  he  were  really 
anything   to   her.     And   yet   he  was  a 
great  deal  to  her.     She  was  as  good  as 
if  she  had  been  really  possessed  by  that 
love    on    which    she    speculated,    and 
almost  as  happy  ;  and  Colin  was  in  her 
mind   most   of   the   hours   of  the   day 
when  she  was  awake,  and  a  few  of  those 
in  which  she  slept.     The  difference  was, 
that  Matty  contemplated  quite   calmly 
the  inevitable  fact  of  leaving  Ardmartin 
on  Monday,  and  did  not  think  it  in  the 
least  likely  that  she  would  break  her 
heart  over  the  parting ;  and  that,  even 
in  imagination,  she  never  for  a  moment 
connected   her   fate   with    that   of  her 
young  adorer.     As  for  the  poor  youth 
himself,  he  went  deeper  and  deeper  into 
the  enchanted  land.     He  went  without 
any  resistance,  giving  himself  up  to  the 
sweet  fate.     She  .had  read  the  poems  of 
course,  and  had  inquired   eagerly   into 
that  calamity  which  occupied  so  great  a 
part  in  them,  and  had  found  out  what  it 
was,  and  had  blushed  (as  Colin  thought), 
but  was  not  angry.     What  could  a  shy 
young  lover,  whose  lips  were  sealed  by 
honour,    but   who   knew   his    eyes,  his 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


311 


actions,  his  productions  to  be  alike 
eloquent,  desire  more  1  Sometimes  Lady 
Hallainshire  consented  to  weigh  down 
the  boat,  which  dipped  hugely  at  the 
stern  tinder  her,  and  made  Colin's  task 
a  hard  one.  Sometimes  the  tutor,  who 
counted  for  nobody,  was  allowed  to 
conduct  a  cluster  of  girls,  of  whom  he 
saw  but  one,  over  the  peaceful  water. 
Lessons  did  not  count  for  much  in  those 
paradisaical  days.  Miss  Frankland 
begged  holidays  for  the  boys ;  begged 
that  they  might  go  excursions  with  her, 
and  make  pic-nics  on  the  hillside,  and 
accompany  her  to  all  sorts  of  places,  till 
Mrs.  Jordan  was  entirely  captivated 
with  Matty.  She  never  saw  a  young 
lady  so  taken  up  with  children,  the 
excellent  woman  said ;  and  prophesied 
that  Miss  Matty  would  make  a  wonder- 
ful mother  of  a  family  when  her  time 
came.  As  for  the  tutor,  Mrs.  Jordan 
too  took  him  for  a  cipher,  and  ex- 
plained to  him  how  improving  it  was 
for  the  boys  to  be  in  good  society,  by 
way  of  apologizing  to  Colin.  At  length 
there  occurred  one  blessed  day  in  which 
Colin  and  his  boys  embarked  with  Miss 
Frankland  alone,  to  row  across  to  Eamore. 
"  My  uncle  has  so  high  an  opinion  of 
Mr.  Campbell,"  Matty  said,  very  de- 
murely ;  "I  know  he  would  never 
forgive  me  if  I  did  not  go  to  see  him." 
As  for  Colin,  his  blessedness  was  tem- 
pered on  that  particular  occasion  by  a 
less  worthy  feeling.  He  felt,  if  not 
ashamed  of  Ram  ore,  at  least  apologetic 
of  it  and  its  accessories,  which  apology 
took,  as  was  natural  to  a  Scotch  lad  of 
his  years,  an  argumentative  and  defiant 
tone. 

"  It  is  a  poor  house  enough,"  said 
Colin,  as  he  pointed  it  out,  gleaming 
white,  upon  the  hillside,  to  Miss  Matty, 
who  pretended  to  remember  it  perfectly, 
but  who  after  all  had  not  the  least  idea 
which  was  Eamore — "  but  I  would  not 
change  with  anybody  I  know.  "We  are 
better  off  in  the  cottages  than  you  in 
the  parlours.  Comfort  is  a  poor  sort  of 
heathen  deity  to  be  worshipped  as  you 
worship  him  in  England.  As  for  us, 
we  have  a  higher  standard,"  paid  the 
lad,  half  in  sport  and  more  than  half  in 


earnest.  The  two  young  Jordans,  after 
a  little  gaping  at  the  talk  which  went 
over  their  heads  (for  Miss  Matty  was 
wonderfully  taken  up  with  the  children 
only  when  their  mother  was  present), 
had  betaken  themselves  to  the  occupa- 
tion of  sailing  a  little  yacht  from  the 
bows  of  their  boat,  and  were  very  well- 
behaved  and  disturbed  nobody. 

"  Yes,"  said  Matty,  in  an  absent  tone. 
"  By  the  way,  I  wish  very  much  you 
would  tell  me  why  you  rejected  my 
uncle's  proposal,  about  going  to  Oxford. 
I  suppose  you  have  a  higher  standard ; 
but  then  they  say  you  don't  have  such 
good  scholars  in  Scotland.  I  am  sure 
I  beg  your  pardon  if  I  am  wrong." 

"  But  I  did  not  say  you  were  wrong," 
said  Colin,  who,  however,  grew  fiery 
red  and  burned  to  prove  his  scholarship 
equal  to  that  of  any  Eton  lad  or  Christ- 
church  man.  "  They  say,  on  the  other 
side,  that  a  man  may  get  through  with 
out  disgrace,  in  Oxford  or  Cambridge, 
who  doesn't  know  how  to  spell  English," 
said  the  youth,  with  natural  exaspera- 
tion, and  took  a  few  long  strokes  which 
sent  the  boat  flying  across  the  summer 
ripples,  and  consumed  his  angry  energy. 
He  was  quite  ready  to  sneer  at  Scotch 
scholarship  in  his  own  person,  when  he 
and  his  fellows  were  together,  and  even 
to  sigh  on  the  completer  order  and  pro- 
founder  studies  of  the  great  Universities 
of  England ;  but  to  acknowledge  the 
inferiority  of  his  country  in  any  particular 
to  the  lady  of  his  wishes,  was  beyond 
the  virtue  of  a  Scotchman  and  a  lover. 

"  I  did  not  speak  of  stupid  people," 
said  Miss  Matty  ;  "  and  I  am  sure  I  did 
not  mean  to  vex  you.  Of  course  I 
know  you  are  so  very  clever  in  Scotland ; 
everybody  allows  that.  I  love  Scotland 
so  much,"  said  the  politic  little  woman  ; 
"  but  then  every  country  has  its  weak 
points  and  its  strong  points ;  and  you 
have  not  told  me  yet  why  you  rejected 
my  uncle's  proposal.  He  wished  you 
very  much  to  accept  it ;  and  so  did  I," 
said  the  siren,  after  a  little  pause,  lifting 
upon  Colin  the  half-subdued  light  of 
her  blue  eyes. 

"  Why '  did  you  wish  it  ? "  the  lad 
asked,  as  was  to  be  expected,  bending 


312 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


forward    to   hear    the    answer    to   his 
question. 

"  Oh,  look  there !  little  Ben  will  be 
overboard  in  another  minute,"  said 
Matty,  and  then  she  continued  lower, 
"I  can't  tell  you,  I  am  sure ;,  because  I 
thought  you  were  going  to  turn  out  a 
great  genius,  I  suppose." 

"But  you  don't  believe  that?"  said 
Colin ;  "  you  say  so  only  to  make  the 
Holy  Loch  a  little  more  like  Paradise  ; 
and  that  is  unnecessary  to-day,"  the  lad 
went  on,  glancing  round  him  with  eyes 
full  of  the  light  that  never  was  on  sea 
or  land.  Though  he  was  not  a  poet,  he 
had  what  was  almost  better,  a  poetic 
soul.  The  great  world  moved  for  him 
always  amid  everlasting  melodies,  the 
morning  and  the  evening  stars  singing 
together  even  through  the  common  day. 
Just  now  his  cup  was  about  running 
over.  What  if,  to  crown  all,  God,  not 
content  with  giving  him  life  and  love, 
had  indeed  visibly  to  the  sight  of 
others,  if  not  to  his  own,  bestowed 
genius  also,  the  other  gift  most  prized 
of  youth.  Somehow,  he  could  not  con- 
tradict that  divine  peradventure.  "If 
it  were  so,"  he  said  under  his  breath, 
"  if  it  were  so  ! "  and  the  other  little 
soul  opposite,  who  had  lost  sight  of 
Colin  at  that  moment,  and  did  not 
know  through  what  bright  mists  he 
was  wandering,  strained  her  limited 
vision  after  him,  and  wondered  and 
asked  what  he  meant. 

"If  it  were  so,"  said  Matty,  "what 
then?"  Most  likely  she  expected  a 
compliment — and  Colin' s  compliments 
being  made  only  by  inference,  and  with 
a  shyness  and  an  emotion  unknown  to 
habitual  manufacturers  of  such  articles, 
were  far  from  being  unpleasant  offerings 
to  Miss  Matty,  who  was  slightly  blase  of 
the  common  coin. 

But  Colin  only  shook  his  head,  and 
bent  his  strong  young  frame  to  the  oars, 
and  shook  back  the  clouds  of  brown 
hair  from  his  half- visible  forehead.  The 
boat  flew  like  a  swallow  along  the  crisp 
bosom  of  the  loch.  Miss  Matty  did 
not  quite  know  what  to  make  of  the 
silence,  not  being  in  love.  She  took 
off  her  glove  and  held  her  pretty  hand 


in  the  water  over  the  side  of  the  boat, 
but  the  loch  was  cold,  and  she  withdrew 
it  presently.  What  was  he  thinking  of, 
she  wondered?  Having  lost  sight  of 
him  thus,  she  was  reluctant  to  begin 
the  conversation  anew,  lest  she  might 
perhaps  say  something  which  would 
betray  her  non-comprehension,  and 
bring  her  down  from  that  pedestal 
which,  after  all,  it  was  pleasant  to 
occupy.  Feminine  instinct  at  last 
suggested  to  Matty  what  was  the  very 
best  thing  to  do  in  the  circumstances. 
She  had  a  pretty  voice,  and  perfect  ease 
in  the  use  of  it,  and  knew  exactly  what 
she  could  do,  as  people  of  limited 
powers  generally  can.  So  she  began 
to  sing,  murmuring  to  herself  at  first  as 
she  stooped  over  the  water,  and  then 
rising  into  full  voice.  As  for  Colin, 
that  last  touch  was  almost  too  much 
for  him ;  he  had  never  heard  her  sing 
before,  and  he  could  not  help  marvel- 
ling as  he  looked  at  her  why  Provi- 
dence should  have  lavished  such  endow- 
ments upon  one,  and  left  so  many 
others  unprovided — and  fell  to  rowing 
softly,  dropping  his  oars  into  the  sun- 
shine with  as  little  sound  as  possible, 
to  do  full  justice  to  the  song.  When 
Matty  had  come  to  the  end  she  turned 
on  him  quite  abruptly,  and,  almost 
before  the  last  note  had  died  from  her 
lips,  repeated  her  question.  "  Kow  tell 
me  why  did  you  refuse  to  go  to  Oxford  ?" 
said  the  little  siren,  looking  full  into 
Colin's  face. 

"  Because  I  can't  be  dependent  upon 
any  man,  and  because  I  had  done  nothing 
to  entitle  me  to  such  a  recompense," 
said  Colin,  who  was  taken  by  surprise  ; 
"you  make  a  mistake  about  that  busi- 
ness," he  said,  with  a  slight  sudden 
flush  of  colour,  and  immediately  fell  to 
his  oars  again  with  all  his  might. 

"  It  is  very  odd,"  said  Miss  Matilda. 
"Why  don't  you  like  Harry?  He  is 
nothing  particular,  but  he  is  a  very 
good  sort  of  boy,  and  it  is  so  strange 
that  you  should  have  such  a  hatred  to 
each  other — I  mean  to  say,  he  is  not  at 
all  fond  of  you,"  she  continued,  with  a 
laugh.  "  I  believe  he  is  jealous  because 
we  all  talk  of  you  so  much,  and  it  must 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


313 


be  rather  hard  upon  a  boy  after  all  to 
have  his  life  saved,  and  to  be  expected 
to  be  grateful ;  for  I  don't  believe  a 
word  you  say,"  said  Miss  Matty.  "I 
know  the  rights  of  it  better  than  you 
do — you  did  save  his  life." 

"  I  hope  you  will  quite  release  him 
from  the  duty  of  being  grateful,"  said 
Colin  ;  "  I  don't  suppose  there  is  either 
love  or  hatred  between  us.  We  don't 
know  each  other  to  speak  of,  and  I  don't 
see  any  reason  why  we  should  be  fond 
of  each  other ;"  and  again  Colin  sent 
the  boat  forward  with  long,  rapid  strokes, 
getting  rid  of  the  superfluous  energy 
which  was  roused  within  him  by  hearing 
Frankland's  name. 

"  It  is  very  odd,"  said  Matty  again. 
"  I  wonder  if  you  are  fated  to  be  rivals, 
and  come  in  each  other's  way.  If  I 
knew  any  girl  that  Harry  was  in  love 
with,  I  should  not  like  to  introduce  you 
to  her,"  said  Miss  Matilda,  and  she 
stopped  and  laughed  a  little,  evidently 
at  something  in  her  own  mind.  "  How 
odd  it  would  be  if  you  were  to  be  rivals 
through  life,"  she  continued;  "I  am 
sure  I  can't  tell  which  I  should  most 
wish  to  win — my  cousin,  who  is  a  very 
good  boy  in  his  way,  or  you,  who  puzzle 
me  so  often,"  said  the  little  witch,  look- 
ing suddenly  up  into  Colin's  eyes. 

"How  is  it  possible  I  can  puzzle 
you  ? "  he  said  ;  but  the  innocent  youth 
was  flattered  by  the  sense  of  superiority 
involved.  "  There  can  be  very  little 
rivalry  between  an  English  baronet  and 
a  Scotch  minister,"  continued  Colin. 
"  We  shall  never  come  in  each  other's 
way." 

"  And  must  you  be  a  Scotch  minister  ? " 
said  Miss  Matty,  softly.  There  was  a 
regretful  tone  in  her  voice,  and  she  gave 
an  appealing  glance  at  him,  as  if  she 
were  remonstrating  against  that  ministry. 
Perhaps  it  was  well  for  Colin  that  they 
were  so  near  the  shore,  and  that  he  had 
to  give  all  his  attention  to  the  boat,  to 
secure  the  best  landing  for  those  delicate 
little  feet.  As  he  leaped  ashore  himself, 
ankle-deep  into  the  bright  but  cold 
water,  Colin  could  not  but  remember 
his  boyish  scorn  of  Henry  Frankland, 
and  that  dislike  of  wet  feet  which  was 


so  amusing  and  wonderful  to  the  country 
boy.    Matters  were  wonderfully  changed 
now-a-days    for    Colin ;     but   still    he 
plunged  into  the  water  with  a  certain 
relish,  and  pulled  the  boat  ashore  with 
a  sense  of  his  strength  and  delight  in  it 
which  at  such  a  moment  it  was  sweet 
to  experience.     As  for  Miss  Matty,  she 
found  the  hill  very  steep,  and  accepted 
the  assistance  of  Colin's  arm  to  get  over 
the  sharp  pebbles  of  the  beach.     "  One 
ought  to  wear  strong  boots,"  she  said, 
holding   out    the    prettiest   little   foot, 
which  indeed   had   been  perfectly   re- 
vealed before   by  the  festooned   dress, 
which  Miss  Matty  found  so  convenient 
on  the  hills.     When  Colin's  mother  saw 
from  her  window  this  pair  approaching 
alone  (for  the  Jordan  boys  were  ever  so 
far  behind,  still  coquetting  with  their 
toy  yacht,)  it  was  not  wonderful  if  her 
heart   beat   more   quickly   than  usual. 
She  jumped,  with  her  womanish  ima- 
gination, at  all  kinds  of  incredible  re- 
sults,  and  saw   her   Colin   happy   and 
great,  by  some  wonderful  conjunction 
of  his  own  genius   and  the  favour   of 
others,  which  it  would  have  been  hope- 
less to  attempt  any  comprehension  of. 
The   mistress    altogether   puzzled    and 
overwhelmed  Miss  Matty bythe  greeting 
she  gave  her.     The  little  woman  of  the 
world  looked  in  utter  amazement  at  the 
poor  farmer's  wife,  whom  she  meant  to 
be  very  kind  and  amiable  to,  but  who 
to  her  consternation,  took  the  superior 
part  by  right  of  nature  ;  for  Mrs.  Camp- 
bell, having  formed  her  own  idea,  was 
altogether  obtuse  to  her  visitor's  con- 
descensions.    The   parlour   at   JRamore 
looked  dingy  certainly  after  the  drawing- 
rooms  of  Ardmartin,  and  all  the  business 
of  the  farm  was  manifestly  going  on  as 
usual ;  but  even  Colin,  sensitive  as  he 
had   become   to   all   the   differences  of 
circumstances,  was  puzzled,  like  Matty, 
and  felt  his  mother  to  have  suddenly 
developed  into    a    kind    of    primitive 
princess.    Perhaps  the  poor  boy  guessed 
why,  and  felt  that  his  love  was   ele- 
vating not  only  himself  but  everybody 
who  belonged  to  him ;  but  Miss  Matty, 
who  did  not  understand  how  profound 
emotion  could  affect  anybody's  manners, 


314- 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


nor  how  her  young  admirer's  mother 
could  be  influenced  by  his  sentiments, 
was  entirely  in  the  dark,  and  could  not 
help  being  immensely  impressed  by  the 
bearing  and  demeanour  of  the  mistress 
of  Eamore. 

"  I'm  glad  its  such  a  bonny  day," 
said  Colin' s  mother ;  "  it  looks  natural 
and  seemly  to  see  you  here  on  a  day 
like  this.  As  for  Colin,  he  aye  brings 
the  light  with  him,  but  no  often  such  sun- 
shine as  you.  I  canna  lay  any  great  feast 
before  you,"  said  the  farmer's  wife  with  a 
smile,  "  but  young  things  like  you  are 
aye  near  enough  heaven  to  be  pleased 
with  the  common  mercies.  After  a',  if 
I  was  a  queen  I  couldna  offer  you  any- 
thing better  than  the  wheat-bread  and 
the  fresh  milk,"  said  the  mistress  ;  and 
she  set  down  on  the  table,  with  her  own 
tender  hands,  the  scones  for  which 
Eamore  was  famous,  and  the  abundant 
overrunning  jug  of  milk,  which  was  not 
to  be  surpassed  anywhere,  as  she  said. 
Matty  sat  down  with  an  odd  invo- 
luntary conviction  that  Mr.  Jordan's 
magnificent  table  on  the  other  side  of 
the  loch  offered  but  a  poor  hospitality 
in  comparison.  Though  she  laughed  at 
herself,  we  know,  after,  it  was  quite  im- 
possible at  that  moment  to  feel  other- 
wise than  respectful.  "I  never  saw 
anybody  with  such  beautiful  manners," 
she  said  to  Colin  as  they  went  back  to 
the  boat.  She  did  not  take  his  arm  this 
time,  but  walked  very  demurely  after 
bim  down  the  narrow  path,  feeling  upon 
her  the  eyes  of  the  mistress,  who  was 
standing  at  her  door  as  usual  to  see  her 
son  go  away.  Matty  could  not  help 
a  little  natural  awe  of  the  woman,  whose 
fierce  eyes  were  watching  her.  She 
could  manage  her  aunt  perfectly,  and 
did  not  care  in  the  least  for  Lady  Hal- 
lamshire,  who  was  the  most  accommo- 
dating of  chaperones,  but  Mrs.  Campbell's 
sweet  looks,  and  generous  reception  of 
her  son's  enslaver  somehow  overwhelmed 
Matty.  The  mistress  looked  at  the  girl 
as  if  she  considered  her  capable  of  all 
the  grand  and  simple  emotions,  and 
Matty  was  half-ashamed  and  half-fright- 
ened, and  did  not  feel  able  at  the 
moment  to  pursue  her  usual  amusement. 


The  row  back,  to  which  Colin  had  been 
looking  with  a  thrill  of  expectation,  was 
silent  and  grave,  in  comparison  with  all 
their  former  expeditions,  notwithstanding 
that  this  was  the  last  time  they  were 
likely  to  see   each  other  alone.     Poor 
Colin   thought  of  Lauderclale  and  his 
philosophy,  for  the  first  time  for  many 
days,  when  he  had  to  stop  behind  to 
place  the  boat  in  safety  on  the  beach, 
even  Matty,  who  generally  waited  for 
him,  skipping   up   the   avenue  as  fast 
as  she  could  go,  with  the  little  Jordans 
beside    her.      Never    yet    was   reality 
which  came  truly  up  to  the  expectation. 
Here  was  an  end  of  his  fool's  paradise  ; 
he  vexed  himself  by  going  over  and 
over  all  that  had  passed,  wondering  if 
anything   had   offended  her,  and   then 
thought  of  Eamore  with  a  pang  at  his 
heart ;  a  pang  of  something  nobler  than 
the  mere  bitterness  of  contrast,  which 
sometimes    makes    a    poor    man  over- 
ashamed  of  his  home.    But  all  this  time 
the  true  reason  for  this  new-born  reserve 
— which  Miss  Matty  kept  up  victoriously 
until  about  the  close   of  the   evening, 
when,  being   utterly  bored,  she  forgot 
her  good  resolution  and  called  him  to 
her  side  again — was  quite  unsuspected  by 
Colin.     He  could  not  divine  how  sus- 
ceptible to  the  opinion  of  women  was 
the  woman's  heart,  even  when  it  retained 
but  little  of  its  first  freshness.     Matty 
was  not  startled  by  Colin's  love,  but 
she  was  by  his  mother's  belief  in  it  and 
herself ;  it  stopped  her  short  in  her  care- 
less career,  and  suggested  endings  that 
were  not  pleasant  to  think  of.     If  she 
had  been  left  in  amazement  for  a  day  or 
two  after,  it  might  have  been  well  for 
Colin,  but  being  bored  she  returned  to 
her  natural  amusement,  and  this  inter- 
ruption did  him  no  good  in  the  end. 

CHAPTEE  XII. 

THE  parting  of  the  two  who  had  been 
thrown  so  much  together,  who  had 
thought  so  much  of  each  other,  and  who 
had,  notwithstanding,  so  few  things  in 
common,  was  as  near  an  absolute  parting 
as  is  practicable  in  this  world  of  constant 
commotion,  where  everybody  meets  every- 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


315 


body  else  in  the  most  unlikely  regions. 
Colin  dared  not  propose  to  write  to  her  ; 
dared  not,  indeed — being  withheld  by 
the  highest  impulses  of  honour — venture 
to  say  to  her  what  was  in  his  heart ;  and 
Miss  Matty  herself  was  a  little  silent — 
perhaps  a  little  moved — and  could  not. 
utter  any  commonplaces  about  meeting 
again,  as  she  had  intended  to  do.  So 
they  said  good-bye  to  each  other  in  a 
kind  of  absolute  way,  as  if  it  might  be 
for  ever  and  ever.  As  for  Matty,  who 
was  not  in  love,  but  whose  heart  was 
touched,  and  who  had  a  vague,  in- 
stinctive sense  that  she  might  never 
more  meet  anybody  in  her  life  like  this 
country  lad — perhaps  she  had  enough 
generosity  left  in  her  to  feel  that  it 
would  be  best  they  should  not  meet 
again.  But  Colin  had  no  such  thoughts. 
He  knew  in  his  heart  that  one  time — how 
or  when  he  knew  not — he  should  yet  go 
to  her  feet  and  offer  what  he  had  to 
offer  :  everything  else  in  the  world  ex- 
cept that  one  thing  was  doubtful  to 
Colin,  but  concerning  that  he  was  confi- 
dent, and  entertained  no  fear.  And  so 
they  parted  ;  she,  perhaps,  for  half  an 
hour  or  so,  the  most  deeply  moved  •  of 
the.  two.  Miss  Matty,  however,  was 
just  as  captivating  as  usual  in  the  next 
house  they  went  to,  where  there  were 
one  or  two  people  worth  looking  at,  and 
the  company  in  general  was  more  inter- 
esting than  at  Ardmartin;  but  Colin, 
for  his  part,  spent  most  of  the  evening 
on  the  hill-side,  revolving  in  the  silence 
a  hundred  tumultuous  thoughts.  It 
was  the  end  of  September,  and  the 
nights  were  cold  on  the  Holy  Loch. 
There  was  not  even  a  moon  to  enliven 
the  landscape,  and  all  that  could  be  seen 
was  the  cold,  blue  glimmer  of  the  water, 
upon  which  Colin  looked  down  with  a 
kind  of  desolate  sense  of  elevation — 
elevation  of  the  mind  and  of  the  heart, 
which  made  the  grief  of  parting  look 
like  a  grand  moral  agent,  quickening 
all  his  powers,  and  concentrating  his 
strength.  Henceforward  the  strongest 
of  personal  motives  was  to  inspire  him 
in  all  his  conflicts.  He  was  going  into 
the  battle  of  life  with  his  lady's  colours 
on  his  helmet,  like  a  knight  of  romance, 


and  failure  was  not  to  be  thought  of  as 
a  possibility.  As  he  set  his  face  to  the 
wind  going  back  to  Ardmartin,  the  pale 
sky  lightened  over  the  other  side  of  the 
loch,  and  underneath  the  breaking  clouds, 
which  lay  so  black  on  the  hills,  Colin 
saw  the  distant  glimmer  of  a  light,  which 
looked  like  the  light  in  the  parlour  window 
at  Rarnore.  Just  then  a  sudden  gust  swept 
across  the  hill-side,  throwing  over  him  a 
shower  of  falling  leaves,  and  big  rain- 
drops from  the  last  shower  which  had  been 
hanging  on  the  branches.  There  was  not 
a  soul  on  the  road  but  Colin  himself, 
nor  anything  to  be  seen  far  or  near, 
except  the  dark  tree-tops  in  the  Lady's 
Glen,  which  were  sighing  in  the  night 
wind,  and  the  dark  side  of  Ardmartin, 
where  all  the  shutters  were  closed,  and 
one  soft  star  hanging  among  the  clouds 
just  over  the  spot  where  that  little 
friendly  light  in  the  farmhouse  of 
Ramore  held  up  its  glimmer  of  human 
consolation  into  the  darkness.  It  was 
not  Hero's  "torch  to  light  his  love — was 
it,  perhaps,  a  sober  gleam  of  truth  and 
wisdom  to  call  the  young  Leander  back 
from  those  bitter  waters  in  which 
he  could  but  perish?  All  kinds 
of  fancies  were  in  Colin's  mind  as  he 
went  back,  facing  the  wind,  to  the  dull, 
closed  up  house,  from  which  the  enchant- 
ment had  departed ;  but  among  them 
there  occurred  no  thought  of  discourage- 
ment from  this  pursuit  upon  which  now 
his  heart  was  set.  He  would  have 
drowned  himself  could  he  have  imagined 
it  possible  that  he  could  cease  to  love — 
and  so  long  as  he  loved  how  was  it  pos- 
sible to  fail  ? 

"  And  must  you  be  a  Scotch  minister?" 
When  Colin  went  home  a  fortnight  later 
to  make  his  preparations  for  returning  to 
the  University,  he  was  occupied,  to  the 
exclusion  of  almost  all  other  questions, 
by  revolving  this.  It  is  true  that  at  his 
age,  and  with  his  inexperience,  it  was 
possible  to  imagine  that  even  a  Scotch 
minister,  totally  unfavoured  by  fortune, 
might,  by  mere  dint  of  genius,  raise 
himself  to  heights  of  fame  sufficient  to 
bring  Sir  Thomas  Franklin's  niece  within 
his  reach — but  the  thing  was  unlikely, 
even  to  the  lively  imagination  of  twenty. 


316 


A  Son  of  the  Soil 


And  it  was  the  fact  that  Colin  had  no 
special  "vocation"  towards  the  profes- 
sion for  which  he  was  being  trained.  He 
had  been  educated  and  destined  for  it 
all  his  life,  and  his  thoughts  had  a  natural 
"balance  that  way.  But  otherwise  there 
was  no  personal  impulse  in  his  mind 
towards  what  Mrs.  Jordan  called  "the 
work  of  the  ministry."  Hitherto  his 
personal  impulses  had  been  neither  for 
nor  against.  Luckily  for  Colin,  and 
many  of  his  contemporaries,  there  were 
so  many  things  to  object  to  in  the  Church 
of  Scotland,  so  many  defects  of  order  and 
external  matters  which  required  reforma- 
tion, that  they  were  less  strongly  tempted 
to  become  sceptical  in  matters  of  faith 
than  their  fellows  elsewhere.  As  for 
Colin  himself,  he  had  fallen  off  no  doubt 
from  the  certainty  of  his  boyhood  upon 
many  important  matters ;  but  the  lad, 
though  he  was  a  Scotsman,  was  happily 
illogical,  and  suffered  very  little  by  his 
doubts.  Nothing  could  have  made 
him  sceptical,  in  any  real  sense  of  the 
word,  and  accordingly  there  was  no 
repulsion  in  Colin' s  mind  against  his 
future  profession.  But  now  !  He  turned 
it  over  in  his  mind  night  and  day 
in  the  interval  between  Matty's  de- 
parture and  his  own  return  to  Eamore. 
"What  if,  instead  of  a  Scotch  minister, 
incapable  of  promotion,  and  to  whom 
ambition  itself  was  unlawful,  he  were  to 
address  himself  to  the  Bar,  where  there 
were  at  least  chances  and  possibilities  of 
fame?  He  was  occupied  with  this 
question,  to  the  exclusion  of  any  other, 
as  he  crossed  the  loch  in  the  little 
stream,  and  landed  on  the  pier  near 
Eamore,  where  his  young  brothers  met 
him,  eager  to  carry  his  travelling-bag, 
and  convey  him  home  in  triumph. 
Colin  was  aware  that  such  a  proposal  on 
'his  part  would  occasion  grievous  disap- 
pointment at  home,  and  he  did  not  know 
how  to  introduce  the  subject,  or  disclose 
his  wavering  wishes.  It  was  a  wonder- 
ful relief,  as  well  as  confusion  to  him, 
when  he  entered  the  Eamore  parlour, 
to  find  Lauderdale  in  possession  of  the 
second  arm-chair,  opposite  the  mistress's, 
which  was  sacred  to  visitors.  He  had 
arrived  only  the  evening  before,  having 


left  Glasgow  "  for  a  holiday,  like  any- 
body else,  in  the  saut-water  season," 
said  the  gentle  giant,  "  the  first  I  ever 
mind  of  having  in  my  life.  But  I'm 
very  well  off  in  my  present  situation," 
he  said,  breaking  off  suddenly,  with  a 
twinkle  of  mirth  in  his  eye,  as  was  usual 
when  he  referred  to  his  occupation,  the 
nature  of  which  was  unknown  even  to 
his  dearest  friends. 

"  It's  ower  cauld  to  have  much  good 
of  the  water,"  said  the  mistress ;  "  the 
boat's  no  laid  up  yet,  waiting  for  Colin, 
but  the  weather's  awfu'  winterly — no  to 
say  soft,"  she  added,  with  a  little  sigh, 
"for  its  aye  soft  weather  among  the 
lochs,  though  we've  had  less  rain  than 
common  this  year." 

And  as  the  mistress  spoke,  the  fami- 
liar, well-known  rain  came  sweeping 
down  over  the  hills.  It  had  the  usual 
effect  upon  the  mind  of  the  sensitive 
woman.  ""We  maun  take  a' the  good 
we  can  of  you,  laddie,"  she  said,  laying 
her  kind  hand  on  her  boy's  shoulder, 
"  it's  only  a  sight  we  get  now  in  passing. 
He's  owre  much  thought  of,  and  made  of, 
to  spend  his  time  at  hame,"  said  the 
mistress,  turning,  with  a  half-reproach- 
ful pride  to  Lauderdale ;  "  I'll  be  awfu1 
sorry  if  the  rain  lasts,  on  your  account. 
But,  for  myself,  I  could  put  up  with  a 
little  soft  weather,  to  see  mair  of  Colin  ; 
no  that  I  want  him  to  stay  at  hame 
when  he  might  be  enjoying  himself," 
the  mother  added,  with  a  compunction. 
Soft  weather  on  the  Holy  Loch  signified 
rain  and  mist,  and  everything  that  was 
most  discouraging  to  Mrs.  Campbell's 
soul,  but  she  was  ready  to  undergo 
anything  the  skies  could  inflict  upon 
her,  if  fortified  by  the  society  of  her 
son. 

It  was  the  second  night  after  this 
before  Colin  could  make  up  his  mind 
to  introduce  the  subject  of  which  his 
thoughts  were  full.  Tea  was  over  by 
that  time,  and  all  the  household  as- 
sembled in  the  parlour.  The  farmer 
himself  had  just  laid  down  his  news- 
paper, from  which  he  had  been  reading 
to  them  scraps  of  country  gossip,  some- 
what to  the  indignation  of  the  mistress, 
who,  for  her  part,  liked  to  hear  what  was 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


317 


going  on  in  the  world,  and  took  a  great 
interest  in  Parliament  and  the  foreign  in- 
telligence. "  I  canna  say  that  I'm  heed- 
ing about  the  muckle  apple  that's  "been 
grown  in  Clydesdale,  nor  the  new  bailies 
in  Greenock,"  said  the  farmer's  wife. 
"If  you  would  read  us  something  wise- 
like  about  the  poor  oppressed  Italians,  or 
what  Louis  Napoleon  is  thinking  about 
— I  canna  excuse  him  for  what  they  ca' 
the  coo-deta,"  said  Mrs.  Campbell ;  "  but 
for  a'  that,  I  take  a  great  interest  in 
him ; "  and  with  this  the  mistress  took 
up  her  knitting  with  a  pleasant  antici- 
pation of  more  important  news  to  come. 

"  There's  naething  in  the  Herald 
about  Louis  Napoleon,"  said  the  farmer, 
"  nor  the  Italians  neither — no  that  I 
put  much  faith  in  those  Italians ;  they'll 
quarrel  amang  themselves  when  there's 
naebody  else  to  quarrel  wi' — though 
Tin  no  saying  onything  against  Cavour 
and  Garibaldi.  The  paper's  filled  full 
o'  something  mair  immediately  interest- 
ing— at  least,  it  ought  to  have  mair 
interest  to  you  wi'  a  son  that's  to  be  a 
minister.  Here's  three  columns  mair 
about  that  Dreepdaily  case.  It  may  be 
a  grand  thing  for  popular  rights,  but  it's 
an  awfu'  ordeal  for  a  man  to  gang 
through,"  said  big  Colin,  looking  rue- 
fully at  his  son. 

"  I  was  looking  at  that,"  said  Lauder- 
dale.  "It's  his  prayers  the  folk  seem 
to  object  to  most — and  no  wonder.  I've 
heard  the  man  mysel',  and  his  sermon 
was  not  bad  reasoning,  if  anybody 
wanted  reasoning ;  but  it's  aye  a  won- 
derful thing  to  me  the  way  that  new 
preachers  take  upon  them  to  explain 
matters  to  the  Almighty,"  said  Colin's 
friend  reflectively.  "  So  far  as  I  can 
see,  we've  little  to  ask  in  our  worship  ; 
but  we  have  an  awfu'  quantity  of  things 
to  explain." 

"  It  is  an  ordeal  I  could  never  submit 
to,"  said  Colin,  with  perhaps  a  little 
more  heat  than  was  necessary.  "  I'd 
rather  starve  than  be  set  up  as  a  target 
for  a  parish.  It  is  quite  enough  to 
make  a  cultivated  clergy  impossible  for 
Scotland.  Who  would  submit  to  expose 
one's  life,  all  one's  antecedents,  all  one's 
qualities  of  mind  and  individualities  of 


language  to  the  stupid  criticism  of  a  set 
of  boors  ?  It  is  a  thing  I  never  would 
submit  to,"  said  the  lad,  meaning  to 
introduce  his  doubts  upon  the  general 
subject  by  this  means. 

"  I  dinna  approve  of  such  large  talk- 
ing," said  the  farmer,  laying  down  his 
newspaper.  "  It's  a  great  protection  to 
popular  rights.  I  would  sooner  run  the 
risk  of  disgusting  a  fastidious  laird  now 
and  then,  than  put  in  a  minister  that 
gives  nae  satisfaction  •  and  if  you  canna 
submit  to  it,  Colin,  you'll  never  get  a 
kirk,  which  would  be  worse  than  criti- 
cism," said  his  father,  looking  full  into 
his  face.  The  look  brought  a  conscious 
colour  to  Colin's  cheeks. 

"  Well,"  said  the  young  man,  feeling 
himself  driven  into  a  corner,  and  taking 
what  courage  he  could  from  the  emer- 
gency, "one  might  choose  another  pro- 
fession ; "  and  then  there  was  a  pause, 
and  everybody  in  the  room  looked  with 
alarm  and  amazement  on  the  bold 
speaker.  "After  all,  the  Church  is 
not  the  only  thing  in  Scotland,"  said 
Colin,  feeling  the  greatness  of  his  te- 
merity. "Nobody  ventures  to  say  it 
is  in  a  satisfactory  state.  How  often  do 
I  hear  you  criticising  the  sermon  and 
finding  fault  with  the  prayers  1  and,  as 
for  Lauderdale,  he  finds  fault  with  every- 
thing. Then,  look  how  much  a  man 
has  to  bear  before  he  gets  a  church  as 
you  say.  As  soon  as  he  has  his  presen- 
tation the  Presbytery  comes  together 
and  asks  if  there  are  any  objections  ; 
and  then  the  parish  sits  upon  the 
unhappy  man;  and,  when  everybody 
has  had  their  turn,  and  all  his  pecu- 
liarities and  personal  defects  and  family 
history  have  been  discussed  before  the 
Presbytery,  and  put  in  the  newspapers, 
if  they  happen  to  be  amusing,  then  the 
poor  wretch  has  to  sign  a  confession 
which  nobody — " 

"Stop  you  there,  Colin,  my  man," 
said  the  farmer,  "  that's  enough  at  one 
time.  I  wouldna  say  that  you  were 
a'thegither  wrong  as  touching  the  ser- 
mon and  the  prayers.  Its  awfu'  to  go 
in  from  the  like  of  this  hillside  and 
weary  the  very  heart  out  of  you  in  a 
close  kirk,  listening  to  a  man  preaching 


318 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


that  has  nothing  in  this  world  to  say. 
I  am  whiles  inclined  to  think,"  said  big 
Colin,  thoughtfully — "laddies,  you  may 
as  well  go  to  your  beds.  You'll  see 
Colin  the  morn,  and  ye  canna  under- 
stand what  we're  talking  about.  I  am 
whiles  disposed  to  think,"  he  continued 
after  a  pause,  during  which  the  younger 
members  of  the  family  had  left  the 
room,  after  a  little  gentle  persuasion  on 
the  part  of  the  mistress,  "  when  I  go 
into  the  kirk  011  a  bonnie  day,  such  as 
we  have  by  times  on  the  loch  baith  in 
summer  and  winter,  that  its  an  awfu' 
waste  of  time.  You  lose  a'  the  bonnie 
prospect  and  you  get  naething  but  weari- 
ness for  your  pains.  I've  aye  been  awfu' 
against  set  prayers  read  out  of  a  book  ; 
but  I  canna  but  allow  the  English 
chapel  has  an  advantage  there,  for  nae 
fool  can  spoil  your  devotion  as  I've 
heard  it  done  many  and  many's  the 
time.  I  ken  our  minister's  prayers  very 
near  as  well  as  if  they  were  written 
down,"  said  the  farmer  of  Eamore, 
"  and  the  maist  part  of  them  is  quite 
nonsense.  Ony  little  scraps  o'  real  sup- 
plication there  may  be  in  them,  you 
could  get  through  in  five  minutes  ;  the 
rest  is  a'  remarks,  that  I  never  can 
discriminate  if  they're  meant  for  me  or 
for  the  Almighty ;  but  my  next  neibor 
would  think  me  an  awfu'  heathen  if  he 
heard  what  I'm  saying,"  he  continued, 
with  a  smile ;  "  and  I'm  far  from  sure 
that  I  would  get  a  mair  merciful  judg- 
ment from  the  wife  herself." 

The  mistress  had  been  very  busy  with 
her  knitting  while  her  husband  was 
speaking  ;  but,  notwithstanding  her  de- 
votion to  her  work,  she  was  uneasy  and 
could  not  help  showing  it.  "If  we 
had  been  our  lane  it  would  have  been 
naething,"  she  said  to  Colin,  privately  ; 
"but  afore  yon  man  that's  a  stranger 
and  doesna  ken !"  With  which  sentiment 
she  sat  listening,  much  disturbed  in  her 
mind.  "  It's  no  a  thing  to  say  before 
the  bairns,"  she  said,  when  she  was  thus 
appealed  to,  "  nor  before  folk  that  dinna 
ken  you.  A  stranger  might  think  you 
were  a  careless  man  to  hear  you  speak," 
said  Mrs.  Campbell,  turning  to  Lauder- 
dale  with  a  bitter  vexation,  "  for  a'  that 


you  hanna  missed  the  kirk  half  a  dozen 
times  a'  the  years  I  have  kent  you,  and 
that's  a  long  time,"  said  the  mother, 
lifting  her  soft  eyes  to  her  boy.  When 
she  looked  at  him  she  remembered  that 
he  too  had  been  rash  in  his  talk. 
"  You're  turning  awfu'  like  your  father, 
Colin,"  said  the  mistress,  taking  up  the 
same  thoughtless  way  of  talking.  "  But 
I  think  different  for  a'  you  say.  Our 
ain  kirk  is  aye  our  ain  kirk  to  you  as 
well  as  to  me,  in  spite  o'  your  speaking. 
I'm  well  accustomed  to  their  ways,"  she 
said,  with  a  smile,  to  Lauderdale,  who, 
so  far  from  being  'the  dangerous  ob- 
server she  thought  him,  had  gone  off  at 
a  tangent  into  his  own  thoughts. 

"  The  Confession  of  Faith  is  a  real 
respectable    historical   document,"   said 
Lauderdale.     "  I    might    not    like    to 
commit  myself  to  a'  it  says,  if  you  were 
to  ask  me ;  but  then  I'm  not  the  kind 
o'  man  that  has  a  heart  to  commit  my- 
self to  anything  in  the  way  of  intel- 
lectual truth.     I  wouldna  bind  myself 
to  say  that  I  would  stand  by  any  docu- 
ment a  year  after  it  was  put  forth,  far 
less  a  hundred  years.    There's  things  in 
it  naebody  believes — for  example,  about 
the  earth  being  made  in  six  days ;  but 
I  would  not  advise  a  man  to  quarrel 
with  his  kirk  and  his  profession  for  the 
like  of  that.     I  put  110  dependence  on 
geology  for  my  part,  nor  any  of  the 
sciences.    How  can  1  tell  but  somebody 
might  make  a  discovery  the  morn  that 
would  upset  all  their  fine  stories  1  But,  on 
the  whole,  I've  very  little  to  say  against 
the  Confession.     It's  far  more  guarded 
about  predestination  and  so  forth  than 
might  have  been  expected.     Every  man 
that  has  a  head  on  his  shoulders  believes 
in  predestination ;  though  I  would  not 
be  the  man  to  commit  myself  to  any 
statement  on  the  subject.     The  like  of 
me  is  good  for  little,"  said  Colin's  friend, 
stretching  his  long  limbs  towards   the 
fire,  "  but  I've  great  ambition  for  that 
callant.     He's  not  a   common   callant, 
though  I'm  speaking  before  his  face," 
said  Lauderdale  ;  "  it  would  be  terrible 
mortifying  to  me  to  see  him  put  him- 
self in  a  corner  and  refuse  the  yoke." 
"  If  I  cannot  bear  the  yoke  conscien- 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


319 


tiously,  I  cannot  bear  it  all,"  said  Colin, 
with  a  little  heat.  "  If  you  can't  put 
your  name  to  what  you  don't  believe, 
why  should  I  ? — and  as  for  ambition," 
said  the  lad,  "  ambition  !  what  does  it 
mean  1 — a  country  church,  and  two  or 
three  hundred  ploughmen  to  criticise 
me,  and  the  old  wives  to  keep  in  good 
humour,  and  the  young  ones  to  drink 
tea  with — is  that  work  for  a  man  ? " 
cried  the  youth,  whose  mind  was  agi- 
tated, and  who  naturally  had  said  a  good 
deal  more  than  he  intended  to  say.  He 
looked  round  in  a  little  alarm  after  this 
rash  utterance,  hot  knowing  whether  he 
had  been  right  or  wrong  in  such  a  dis- 
closure of  his  sentiments.  The  father 
and  mother  looked  at  each  other,  and 
then  turned  their  eyes  simultaneously 
upon  their  son.  Perhaps  the  mistress 
had  a  glimmering  of  the  correct  mean- 
ing which  Colin  would  not  have  be- 
trayed wittingly  had  it  cost  him  his  life. 

"  Eh,  Colin,  sometime  ye'll  think 
better,"  she  cried  under  her  breath — 
"  after  a'  our  pride  in  you  and  our 
hopes  !  "  The  tears  came  into  her  eyes 
as  she  looked  at  him.  "It's  mair 
honour  to  serve  God  than  to  get  on  in 
the  world,"  said  the  mistress.  The  dis- 
appointment went  to  her  heart,  as  Colin 
could  see ;  she  put  her  hands  hastily  to 
her  eyes  to  clear  away  the  moisture 
which  dimmed  them.  "It's  may -be 
naething  but  a  passing  fancy — but  it's 
no  what  I  expected  to  hear  from  any 
bairn  of  mine,"  she  said  with  momentary 
bitterness.  As  f°r  the  farmer,  he  looked 
on  with  a  surprised  and  inquiring  coun- 
tenance. 

"There  has  some  change  come  over 
you,  Colin — what  has  happened  ?  "  said 
his  father.  "  I'm  no  a  man  that  de- 
spises money,  nor  thinks  it  a  sin  to  get 
on  in  the  world,  but  it's  only  fools  that 
quarrel  wi'  what's  within  their  reach  for 
envy  of  what  they  can  never  win  to. 
If  ye  had  displayed  a  strong  bent  any 
other  way  I  wouldna  have  minded,"  said 
big  Colin — "  but  it's  aye  appeared  to  me 
that  to  write  in  a  kind  of  general  way 
on  whatever  subject  might  chance  to 
turn  up  was  mair  the  turn  of  your 
mind  than  ony  other  line,  which  is  a 


sure  sign  you  were  born  to  be  a  minis- 
ter. It's  the  new-fangled  dishes  at  Ard- 
martin  that  have  spoiled  the  callant's 
digestion,"  said  the  farmer  with  a  twinkle 
of  humour  in  his  eye — "  they  tell  me 
that  discontent  and  meesery  of  a'  kinds 
proceeds  no  from  the  mind  but  from  the 
mucous  membrane.  He'll  come  back  to 
his  natural  inclination  when  he's  been 
at  home  for  a  day  or  two.  I  would  na' 
say  but  Gregory's  mixture  was  a  great 
moral  agent  according  to  the  new  philo- 
sophy," said  big  Colin,  laying  his  large 
hand  on  his  son's  shoulder  with  a 
pressure  which  meant  more  than  his 
words;  but  the  youth  was  vexed,  and 
impatient,  and  imagined  himself  laughed 
at,  which  is  the  most  dreadful  of  in- 
sults at  Colin' s  age,  and  in  his  circum- 
stances. He  paid  no  attention  to  his 
father's  looks,  but  plunged  straightway 
into  vehement  declaration  of  his  senti- 
ments, to  which  the  elder  people  around 
him  listened  with  many  complications 
of  feeling  unknown  to  Colin.  The  lad 
thought,  as  was  natural  at  his  years, 
that  nobody  had  ever  felt  before  him 
the  bondage  of  circumstance,  and  that 
it  was  a  new  revelation  he  was  making 
to  his  little  audience.  If  he  could  have 
imagined  that  both  the  men  were  looking 
at  him  with  the  half  sympathy,  half  pity, 
half  envy  of  their  maturer  years,  remem- 
bering as  vividly  as  if  it  had  occurred 
but  yesterday  similar  outbreaks  of  impa- 
tience and  ambition  and  natural  resist- 
ance to  all  the  obstacles  of  life,  Colin 
would  have  felt  deeply  humiliated  in  his 
youthful  fervour  ;  or,  if  he  could  but  have 
penetrated  the  film  of  softening  dew  in 
his  mother's  eyes,  and  beheld  there  the 
woman's  perennial  spectatorship  of  that 
conflict  which  goes  on  for  ever.  Instead 
of  that,  he  thought  he  was  making  a 
new  revelation  to  his  hearers ;  he  thought 
he  was  cruel  to  them,  tearing  asunder 
their  pleasant  mists  of  illusion,  and  dis- 
enchanting their  eyes ;  he  had  not  an 
idea  that  they  knew  all  about  it  better 
than  he  did,  and  were  watching  him 
along  the  familiar  path  which  they 
all  had  trod  in  different  ways,  and 
of  which  they  knew  the  inevitable 
ending.  Colin,  in  the  heat  and  im- 


320 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


patience  of  his  youth,  took  full  advan- 
tage of  his  moment  of  utterance.  He 
poured  forth  in  his  turn  that  flood  of 
immeasurable  discontent  with  all  con- 
ditions and  restrictions,  which  is  the 
privilege  of  his  years.  To  be  sure,  the 
restrictions  and  conditions  surrounding 
himself  were,  so  far  as  he  knew,  the 
sole  objects  of  that  indignation  and 
scorn  and  defiance  which  came  to  his 
lips  by  force  of  nature.  The  mistress 
listened,  for  her  part,  with  that  mortifi- 
cation which  is  always  the  woman's 
share.  She  understood  him,  sympa- 
thised with  him,  and  yet  did  not  under- 
stand nor  could  tolerate  his  dissent  from 
all  that  in  her  better  judgment  she  had 
decided  upon  on  his  behalf.  She  was 
far  more  tender,  but  she  was  less  tolerant 
than  the  other  spectators  of  Colin's  out- 
burst; and  mingled  with  all  her  per- 
sonal feeling  was  a  sense  of  wounded 
pride  and  mortification,  that  her  boy 
had  thus  betrayed  himself  "before  a 
stranger."  "  If  we  had  been  our  lane, 
it  would  have  been  less  matter,"  she 
said  to  herself,  as  she  wiped  the  furtive 
tears  hurriedly  from  the  corners  of  her 
eyes. 

When  Colin  had  come  to  an  end 
there  was  a  pause.  The  boy  himself 
thought  it  was  a  pause  of  horror  and 
consternation,  and  perhaps  was  rather 
pleased  to  produce  an  effect  in  some 
degree  corresponding  to  his  own  excite- 
ment. After  that  moment  of  silence, 
however,  the  farmer  got  up  from  his 
chair.  "  Its  very  near  time  we  were 
a'  gauii  to  our  beds,"  said  big  Colin. 
"  I'll  take  a  look  round  to  see  that  the 
beasts  are  comfortable,  and  then  we'll 
have  in  the  hot  water.  You  and  me 
can  have  a  talk  the  morn,"  said  the 
farmer  to  his  son.  That  was  all  the 
reply  which  the  youth  received  from 
the  parental  authorities.  When  the 
master  went  out  to  look  after  the  beasts, 
Lauderdale  followed  to  the  door,  where 
Colin  in  another  moment  strayed  after 
him,  considerably  mortified,  to  tell  the 
truth  ;  for  even  Ms  mother  addressed 
herself  to  the  question  of  "  hot  water," 
which  implied  various  other  accessories 
of  the  homely  supper-table;  and  the 


young  man,  in  his  excitement  and  ele- 
vation of  feeling,  felt  as  if  he  had  sud- 
denly tumbled  down  out  of  the  stormy 
but  lofty  firmament,  into  which  he  was 
soaring — down,  with  a  shock,  into  the 
embraces  of  the  homely  tenacious  earth. 
He  went  after  his  friend,  and  stood  b}' 
Lauderdale's  side,  looking  out  into  a 
darkness  so  profound  that  it  made 
his  eyes  ache  and  confused  his  very 
mind.  The  only  gleam  of  light  visible 
in  earth  or  heaven  was  big  Colin's 
lantern,  which  showed  a  tiny  gleam 
from  the  door  of  the  byre  where  the 
farmer  was  standing.  All  the  lovely 
landscape  round  the  loch  and  the  hills, 
the  sky  and  the  clouds,  lay  unseen — 
hidden  in  the  night.  "Which  is  an 
awfu'  grand  moral  lesson,  if  we  had 
true  sense  to  discern  it,"  said  the  voice 
of  Lauderdale  ascending  half  way  up 
to  the  clouds ;  "  for  the  loch  has  na' 
vanished,  as  might  be  supposed,  but  only 
the  light.  As  for  you,  callant,"  said  the 
philosopher,  "  you  hae  neither  the  light 
nor  the  darkness  as  yet,  but  are  aye 
seeing  miraculous  effects  like  yon  man 
Turner's  pictures,  Northern  Streamers, 
or  Aurora  Borealis,  or  whatever  ye  may 
call  it.  And  it's  but  just  you  should 
have  your  day ; "  with  which  words 
Lauderdale  heaved  a  great  sigh,  which 
moved  the  clouds  of  hair  upon  Colin's 
forehead,  and  even  seemed  to  disturb 
for  a  moment,  the  profound  gloom  of 
the  night. 

"  What  do  you  mean  by  having  my 
day  ? "  said  Colin,  who  was  affronted  by 
the  suggestion.  "You  know  I  have 
said  nothing  that  is  not  true.  Can  I 
help  it  if  I  see  the  difficulties  of  my 
own  position  more  clearly  than  you  do, 
who  are  not  in  my  circumstances?" 
cried  the  lad  with  a  little  indignation. 
Lauderdale,  who  was  watching  the 
lantern  gliding  out  and  in  through  the 
darkness,  was  some  time  before  he  made 
any  reply. 

"I'm  no  surprised  at  yon  callant 
Leander,  when  one  comes  to  think  of 
it,"  he  said  in  his  reflective  way ;  "  it's 
a  fine  symbol,  that  Hero  in  her  tower. 
May  be  she  took  the  lamp  from  the 
altar  and  left  the  household  god  in 


321 


darkness,"  said  the  calm  philosopher; 
"  but  that  makes  no  difference  to  the 
story.  I  would  na'  say  but  I  would 
swim  the  Hellespont  myself  for  such 
an  inducement — or  the  Holy  Loch — its 
little  matter  which — but  whiles  she  lets 
fall  the  torch  before  you  get  to  the 
end—" 

"What  on  earth  do  you  mean?  or 
what  has  Hero  to  do  with  me  1 "  cried 
Colin,  with  a  secret  flush  of  shame  and 
rage,  which  the  darkness  concealed  but 
which  he  could  scarcely  restrain. 

"  I  was  not  speaking  of  you — and 
after  all,  it's  but  a  fable,"  said  Lau- 
derdale ;  "  most  history  is  fable,  you 
know ;  it's  no  actual  events,  (which  I 
never  believe  in,  for  my  part,)  but  the 
instincts  o'  the  human  mind  that  make 
history,  and  that's  how  the  Heros  and 
Leanders  are  aye  to  be  accounted  for. 
He  was  drowned  in  the  end  like  most 
people,"  said  Lauderdale,  turning  back 
to  the  parlour  where  the  mistress  was 
seated,  pondering  with  a  troubled  coun- 
tenance upon  this  new  aspect  of  her 
boy's  life.  Amid  the  darkness  of  the 
world  outside  this  tender  woman  sat  in 
the  sober  radiance  of  her  domestic  hearth, 
surrounded,  and  enshrined  by  light ;  but 
she  was  not,  like  Hero,  on  the  tower. 


Colin,  too,  came  back,  following  his  friend 
with  a  flush  of  excitement  upon  his 
youthful  countenance.  After  all,  the 
idea  was  not  displeasing  to  the  young 
man.  The  Hellespont,  or  the  Holy 
Loch,  was  nothing  to  the  bitter  waters 
which  he  was  prepared  to  breast  for  the 
sake  of  the  imaginary  torch  held  up  in 
the  hand  of  that  imaginary  woman  who 
was  beckoning  Colin,  as  he  thought, 
into  the  unknown  world.  Life  was  be- 
ginning anew  in  his  person,  and  all 
the  fables  had  to  be  enacted  over  again ; 
and  what  did  it  matter  to  the  boy's 
heroic  fancy,  if  he  too  should  go  to 
swell  the  records  of  the  noble  martyrs, 
and  be  drowned,  as.  Lauderdale  said, 
like  most  people  in  the  end. 

There  was  no  more  conversation  upon 
that  important  subject  until  next  morn- 
ing, when  the  household  of  Ramore  got 
up  early,  and  sat  down  to  breakfast 
before  it  was  perfect  daylight;  but 
Colin's  heart  jumped  to  his  mouth,  and 
a  visible  thrill  went  through  the  whole 
family,  when  the  farmer  came  in  from 
his  early  inspection  of  all  the  byres  and 
stables,  with  another  letter  from  Sir 
Thomas  Frankland  conspicuous  in  his 
hand. 

To  be  continued. 


THE  SLEEPEES. 

Lo  !    night  upon  the  mighty  city,  night 

Has  spread  its  robe  of  misty,  drizzling  air, 
Broke  only  by  the  dull  lamp's  yellow  light, 

And  by  the  drunkard's  streaming  temple-glare. 
Night !  and  the  faintly  murmur' d  sounds  of  prayer 

Can  scarcely  struggle  upwards  through  the  din, 
Drowned  by  the  ceaseless  sighs  of  weary  care, 

And  reckless  shouts  of  revelry  and  sin. 

Yet  nothing  but  a  long-drawn  sob  of  pain 

Breaketh  the  sleep  of  these  two  children  there, 
Stretch' d,  clasp'd  so  close,  each  other's  heat  to  gain, 

Upon  that  ancient  church's  cold  stone  stair. 
The  younger's  head  is  on  his  brother's  breast, 

The  elder  has  his  arms  around  him  thrown — 
A  clasp  of  love  which  makes  their  slumber  blest, 

And  softens  through  the  night  their  couch  of  stone. 
Xo.  52. — VOL.  ix. 


322  Looking  out  for  Squalls. 

Ay !  when  so  many  children  sunk  to  sleep 

Lull'd  by  a  tender  mother's  love-tun'd  song, 
These  homeless  wand'rers  turn'd  themselves  to  weep 

Within  each  other's  bosoms,  while  along, 
Through  many  a  crowded  street,  their  mother-city 

Pour'd  on  their  ears  her  voices  all  unblest; 
Lest  they  should  die,  she  gave,  in  bitter  pity, 

Her  stony  bosom  as  a  place  of  rest. 

Strange  are  the  shapes  the  mystery  of  life 

Must  take  before  them;   strange  their  glances  cast 
On  man  and  this  fair  earth.     Want,  pain,  and  strife 

Have  been  the  coloured  windows  of  their  past. 
Some  children  know  each  spot  by  joyance  o'er : 

"  Here,"  these  may  say,  "  our  bleeding  feet  once  stain'd 
The  pavement ;  there  our  limbs  could  move  no  more  ; 

Here  we  sat  shiv'ring  while  it  blew  and  rain'd." 

Yet  we  should  know  that  through  the  vault  of  heaven 

The  broken  sobs  of  children  sound  more  loud 
Than  all  the  thunder  from  our  cannon  driven, 

Than  all  the  laughs  of  fashion's  thoughtless  crowd, 
Than  all  the  noisy  din  of  busy  labour, 

Than  all  stupidity's  self-commendation, 
Than  every  sounding  brass  and  hollow  tabor 

Which  Waft  our  prayers  and  hymns  of  self-laudation. 

Would  that  some  thunder-voice,  our  dull  sleep  breaking, 

Might  cry  through  burgher  streets,  and  lordly  towers, 
That  social  wheels  are  all  of  our  own  making, 

And  every  victim  ground  to  dust  is  ours. 
Yainly  our  altars  raise  their  smoke  to  heaven, 

When  brother's  blood  is  steaming  on  the  sod  ; 
Vainly  our  light  prayers  beat  the  gates  of  heaven 

When  groans  of  children  pierce  the  ear  of  God. 

Sleep,  hapless  ones  !  rocked  on  life's  moaning  wave. 

Your  mother,  Earth,  will  yet  give  dreamless  sleep. 
Ye  will  not  clasp  each  other  in  the  grave  ; 

Ye  will  not  turn  yourselves  to  moan  and  weep. 
Still  through  this  cloudy  depth  of  sin  and  woe 

May  your  love's  light  before  your  footsteps  glide, 
Till,  in  the  mantle  of  the  winter  snow, 

Death  wraps  you  sleeping  calmly  side  by  side.  A.  WILSON. 


LOOKING  OUT  FOE  SQUALLS. 

who  are  at  all  acquainted  with  the  formed  by  the   meeting   of    the  back 

coast  of  Sussex  but  know  that  low  gra-  waters  of  Chichester  and  Pagham  har- 

velly  point  of  land  running  far  out  into  hours,  and  that  its  original  name  was 

the  sea,  called  "  Selsey  Bill."     Tradition  Seal  Sea  Island,  from  the  fact  that  seals 

saith  that  Selsey  was  formerly  an  island  were  occasionally  found  upon  its  shores. 


Looking  out  for  Squalls. 


323 


Something  better  than  tradition  also  de- 
clares that  it  was  the  seat  of  the  first 
Bishop  of  Chichester,  who,  many  hun- 
dred years  ago,  made  it  his  episcopal 
capital. 

Standing,  at  this  day,  upon  that 
shingly  beach,  and  looking  round  upon 
the  dreary  flat,  with  only  a  small 
straggling  village,  and  a  few  scattered 
farm-houses,  and  an  unpretending  little 
church  far  away  among  the  trees,  one 
can  scarcely  believe  that  it  ever  could 
have  been  the  paradise  of  holy  men  who 
had  the  credit  of  always  selecting  the 
snuggest  nooks  in  England  as  their 
abiding-places  ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  we 
cannot  now  form  any  opinion  as  to  the 
eligibility  of  the  actual  site,  because 
that  has  long  since  -disappeared.  The 
sea  has  encroached  so  much  upon  that 
shore,  that  the  cathedral  or  monastery 
(or  whatever  it  was)  has  been  long  since 
entirely  submerged,  and  small  vessels 
now  find  an  anchorage,  with  three  fa- 
thoms water,  in  what  is  still  known  as 
"  the  Park,"  doubtless  from  having 
been  at  some  remote  period,  before  the 
sea  swept  over  it,  part  of  the  episcopal 
domain.  Perhaps,  where  the  little 
coaster  now  casts  her  anchor,  a  few  hun- 
dred yards  from  the  beach,  once  roamed 
the  deer,  under  the  shadow  of  the  trees, 
or  even  the  cathedral  or  palace- wall  it- 
self. The  remains  of  ancient  buildings, 
nigh  buried  in  the  sand,  are,  it  is  said, 
to  be  still  seen  at  low  water. 

But  to-day  we  have  cause  more  to  re- 
joice over  the  present,  than  to  mourn  the 
past.  This  Selsey  Bill,  with  its  belong- 
ings, is  a  most  dangerous  locality  for 
the  unwary  shipman.  Look  out  sea- 
ward, and  you  will  descry  —  scarcely, 
however,  without  the  help  of  a  glass — 
a  light-ship  pitching  in  the  troubled 
waters.  She  seems  hull-down,  she  is 
so  far  from  shore — some  seven  miles 
away.  That  is  called  the  Owers'  Light, 
off  Selsey  Bill.  She  is  moored  on  the 
very  elbow  of  a  shoal,  and  between  her 
and  the  shore  on  which  we  are  standing 
it  is  scarcely  safe  for  vessels  to  pass. 
There  are  intricate  channels  known  to 
the  skilful  pilot,  but  the  good  old 
Bishop's  domain  is  yet  too  near  the 


surface  of  the  water  to  make  it  any- 
thing but  very  hazardous  for  a  stranger 
to  get  inshore  of  the  Owers'  Light.  In- 
deed, even  now  at  half  ebb,  the  breakers 
are  very  plainly  seen,  while,  at  low 
water,  much  of  the  rocks  is  dry.  ISTow 
the  shoals  and  reefs,  extending  so  far 
out  to  sea  (in  fact  nearly  seven  miles 
from  the  shore),  are,  consequently,  very 
treacherous.  Lying  as  they  do  in  the 
direct  course  of  vessels  coming  through 
Spithead  and  bound  to  the  Thames,  or 
even  in  the  way  of  vessels  coming  up 
channel  round  the  back  of  the  Wight, 
and  vice  versa,  they  have  been  the  de- 
struction of  many  a  brave  ship.  From 
the  stout  nian-of-war,  running  for  Ports- 
mouth to  the  collier-brig  standing  north- 
ward, many  a  sad  tale  is  told  of  their 
perishing.  Caught  in  a  south-west  or 
south-easterly  gale,  and  too  near  in  shore, 
the  wind  and  current  carried  them 
hopelessly  in  on  the  Owers  (now  one 
sheet  of  foam,  because  of  the  furious 
surf  that  breaks  there),  and  they  soon 
went  to  pieces. 

It  is  because  of  this  very  going  to 
pieces,  and  the  hapless  case  of  many 
a  gallant  heart,  that  we  are  down  at 
Selsey  Bill  to-day.  Lcok  at  that  large, 
new-looking  building,  much  resembling 
a  comfortable,  good-sized  carriage -house. 
It  stands  facing  the  sea,  at  about  150 
yards  from  high  watermark,  and,  with  its 
flagstaff  and  ensign,  is  conspicuously  seen. 
Around  its  open  doors  are  grouped  a 
number  of  boatmen,  and  preventive  men 
from  the  neighbouring  station,  and  the 
excitement  amongst  them  evidently  be- 
tokens something  unusual.  And  so 
there  is.  A  glance  within  those  open 
doors  explains  it  all.  It  is  the  life  boat- 
house  of  the  Royal  National  Institution, 
and  there,  high  upon  her  launching- 
carriage,  rests  the  life-boat.  We  walk 
round  her.  Beautifully  built,  and  as 
strong,  and  as  complete  as  she  can  be 
put  together,  she  looks  fit  for  any 
weather.  And  then  the  name  era- 
blazoned  on  her  bows,  "  Friend  "  (in 
commemoration  of  a  handsome  donation 
given  to  the  Institution  by  members  of 
the  Society  of  Friends),  seems  so  appro- 
priate. But  this  is  the  occasion  of  her 

Y2 


324 


Looking  out  for  Squalls. 


quarterly  exercise,  and  we  shall  see  her 
better  presently.  She  has  everything 
on  board — oars,  masts,  sails,  rudder 
shipped  and  all,  and  is  ready  to  run 
down  to  the  water's  edge  at  a  moment's 
notice.  And  they  do  not  wait  long  for 
that.  Watch  in  hand,  to  note  the  time 
so  occupied,  the  gallant  chairman  of  the 
local  committee  gives  the  word  to  run 
her  out,  and  launch  her.  In  an  in- 
stant, twice  a  score  of  stalwart  arms  are 
hauling  at  the  ropes  with  a  will.  The 
boat  and  carriage  together  weigh  some 
five  tons ;  but  this  is  nothing  in  such 
hands,  and  with  a  cheer  she  runs  out 
upon  the  turf,  and  is  soon  ploughing 
through  the  deep  shingle-bank  beyond. 
One  has  now  only  to  imagine  a  stranded 
vessel  out  there  upon  the  reef,  with  the 
distress-signal  in  her  rigging,  and  the 
great  breakers  beating  so  furiously  over 
her  that  she  cannot  hold  together  per- 
haps an  hour  longer.  One  has  only  to 
imagine  the  sheets  of  Spray  so  blinding 
the  whole  horizon,  that  we  can  scarcely 
make  her  out,  and  the  gale  blowing  so 
madly  that  not  another  sound  can  be 
heard ;  and,  if  then  we  add  to  this  the 
utter  uselessness  of  any  ordinary  boat 
attempting  to  put  out  to  rescue,  and  the 
sad  looks  of  the  fishermen,  as  they  stand 
helpless  on  the  beach,  unable  to  render 
the  slightest  aid  to  their  fellows  perish- 
ing out  there  among  the  breakers — one, 
I  say,  has  only  to  picture  this,  and  then 
his  heart  will  go  with  the  life-boat, 
hurrying  to  the  water's  edge.  And  she 
is  soon  there.  Those  strong  and  willing 
arms  force  her  through  the  heavy 
shingle,  until  they  reach  the  declivity 
of  the  beach.  Then  she  runs  down  by 
her  own  weight;  her  crew  leap  in  and 
take  the  oars  ;  the  carriage  runs  partly 
into  the  sea,  and,  at  a  word,  the  pin  is 
withdrawn,  the  carriage  tilts  up,  and  the 
boat  glides  off  swiftly  into  the  water. 
The  men  give  way  at  the  oars,  and  she 
is  off.  Only  seven  minutes  have  elapsed 
from  the  time  she  quitted  the  boat- 
house  until  she  is  afloat. 


But  the  skies  are  clear  and  bright, 
and  the  sea  is  smooth  to-day,  and  so  she 
will  only  pull  a  little  and  cruise  a  little, 
and  then  come  back  to  watch  for  a  real 
need.  And  she  presents  a  pretty  sight. 
Every  one  of  her  crew  (and  she  pulls 
twelve  oars a)  has  his  life-belt  on ;  and 
somehow  this,  taken  in  connexion 
with  the  unusually  buoyant  appearance 
of  the  boat  herself,  as  she  goes  bound- 
ing along,  occasions  a  wonderful  con- 
fidence in  her.  Besides,  she  looks  strong 
for  the  very  wildest  sea.  Everything 
about  her  is  the  best  that  can  be  used, 
put  together  with  the  knowledge  that 
precious  lives  depended  on  the  work. 

But  now  she  is  making  sail.  Her 
build  is  not  perhaps  favourable  for  sail- 
ing to  windward,  but  yet  she  really 
makes  her  way  upon  a  wind  surprising- 
ly. Her  coxswain  understands  her 
capabilities,  and  knows  just  what  she 
can  do. 

Ashore  they  are  preparing  for  her 
return.  A  capstan  is  rigged  out  on  the 
higher  part  of  the  beach  ;  a  line  of  por- 
table skids  is  laid  down,  and,  as  soon  as 
the  boat  touches  the  shingle,  a  purchase- 
tackle  is  hooked  on,  the  capstan  manned, 
and  the  boat  will  be  gradually  drawn 
up  until  it  reaches  the  carriage — which 
is  presently  done.  After  an  hour's 
cruise  she  steers  homeward.  A  little 
trouble  to  place  her  stem  on  the  skid, 
and  the  windlass  does  the  rest.  The 
carriage  tilts  up  the  reverse  way  now, 
and  becomes  an  inclined  plane  up  which 
the  life-boat  is  drawn ;  the  forewheels  are 
connected,  and  she  travels  to  her  house 
again,  ready  for  the  next  summons. 

We  return  home,  thankful  that  such 
a  good  work  is  going  on  :  for  the  hu- 
manity that  prompted  it — for  the  gene- 
rosity that  carries  it  out.  The  lives  of 
those  poor  fellows  to  whom  we  owe  so 
many  of  our  luxuries  are  surely  worth 
our  caring  for;  and  England,  we  feel 
sure,  will  never  refuse  to  hold  out  a  hand 
to  succour  them  in  an  hour  of  peril 
1  With  a  coxswain  and  a  bowman. 


325 


DEAD  MEN  WHOM  I  HAVE  KNOWN";  OE,  EECOLLECTIONS 
OF  THEEE  CITIES. 

BY   THE   EDITOR. 

OLD  MARISCHAL  COLLEGE— DR.  WILLIAM  KNIGHT— LOCAL  MISCELLANEA 
—WILLIAM  THOM  OF  INVERURY. 


"Br  St.  Andrew,"  says  Dugald  Dal- 
getty  in  the  "Legend  of  Montrose," 
when  the  seeming  serving-man  of  Lord 
Menteith  declines  to  help  him  to  un- 
buckle the  armour  which  he  is  feeling 
somewhat  tight  around  his  portly  person 
after  the  feast  in  the  Highland  castle, 
'  here's  a  common  fellow,  a  stipendiary 
'  with  four  pounds  a  year  and  a  livery- 
'  cloak,  thinks  himself  too  good  to  serve 
'  Eitt-master  Dugald  Dalgetty  of  Drum- 
'  thwacket,  who  has  studied  humanity 
'  at  the  Marischal  College  of  Aberdeen, 
1  and  served  half  the  princes  of  Europe." 
And  all  through  the  story  the  valiant 
Eitt-master  keeps  reminding  those  about 
him  of  this  fact  of  his  having  studied 
at  Marischal  College  as  one  of  his  chief 
distinctions.  Even  in  that  tremendous 
moment  when,  in  the  dungeon  at  Inver- 
ary,  he  astutely  recognises  the  spy  who 
has  secretly  entered  to  talk  with  him  as 
being  no  other  than  the  great  Argyle 
himself,  and,  springing  on  his  wily  lord- 
ship, brings  him  to  the  ground,  and, 
pinning  him  there  by  main  strength, 
throttles  him  into  capitulation — even  in 
that  tremendous  moment  the  thought  of 
the  dear  Alma  Mater  in  the  north 
country  flashes  through  his  stalwart 
mind,  and  it  is  with  a  quotation  of 
Marischal  College  Latin  that  he  nego- 
tiates with  the  prostrate  Marquis.  Bless- 
ings on  thy  memory,  if  only  for  Alma 
Mater's  sake,  thou  shrewd  and  doughty 
Sir  Dugald ;  and  may  thy  last  days  have 
been  peaceful,  with  the  widow  Strachan 
for  thy  spouse,  in  thy  regained  paternal 
estate  of  Drumthwacket !  Great  as  is 
my  veneration,  on  historical  grounds, 
for  the  Presbyterian  Marquis,  whom 
men  called  Gillespie  Grumach  on  account 
of  the  cast  in  his  eye,  I  confess  I  can 


never  read  how  thou  didst  pin  him  in 
his  own  dungeon  without  forgetting 
altogether  that  it  was  the  cause  of 
Presbyterianism  that  was  imperilled, 
and  feeling  my  heart  leap  with  glee  that 
my  fellow- collegian  was  uppermost. 

As  Marischal  College  was  founded  in 
1593,  and  as  Dalgetty  left  it  at  the  age 
of  eighteen,  to  carry  the  learning  whilk 
he  had  acquired  there,  and  his  gentle 
bluid  and  designation,  together  with  his 
pair  of  stalwart  arms,  and  legs  conform, 
into  the  German  wars,  it  is  a  matter  of 
easy  calculation  that  this  most  celebrated 
of  all  the  sons  of  Marischal  College  must 
have  left  its  cloisters  about  1620,  and 
must  have  belonged  to  the  latter  end  of 
its  first  generation  of  students.  It  is 
not  creditable  to  the  academic  anti- 
quarianism  of  the  place  that  there  has 
never  been  a  search  in  the  college-books 
for  his  matriculation-entry.  But  I  would 
fain  here  rouse  the  academic  anti- 
quarianism  of  the  place  to  a  larger 
labour  than  this.  Why  have  we  not 
a  history  of  Marischal  College  and 
University,  or,  at  least,  an  Athence  et 
Fasti  of  that  venerable  institution? 
Though  the  Eitt-master  Dalgetty  may  be 
her  most  celebrated  alumnus,  and  though 
she  may  have  been  chiefly  heard  of  over 
the  world  at  large  in  association  with 
his  name,  yet,  even  before  Sir  Dugald 
sat  at  her  bursars'  table  and  there  learnt 
that  art  of  rapid  mastication  which  he 
found  so  useful  to  him  in  after  life,  she 
had  sent  forth  one  or  two  sons  of  some 
note;  and,  if  to  these  were  added  the 
much  longer  list  of  her  eminent  alumni 
from  Sir  Dugald's  days  down  to  the 
present  time — ending,  let  us  say,  with 
that  Sir  James  Outram,  the  Bayard  of 
India,  whom  Sir  Dugald  himself  would 


326 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


have  respected,  albeit  Outram's  soldier- 
ship was  of  a  more  dashing  and  irregular 
type  than  that  which  Sir  Dugald 
favoured,  and  his  famous  refusal  of 
Indian  prize-money  would  have  seemed 
to  Sir  Dugald  a  piece  of  needless 
punctiliousness — then  the  roll  of  the 
notabilities  of  Marischal  College  might 
seem  not  an  insignificant  one.  At  all 
events,  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  any 
Anthony  Wood  that  may  be  living  now 
in  Aberdeen  to  do  his  best  to  draw  it 
up,  imbedding  it  in  such  a  text  of  the 
general  history  of  the  College  as  he  can 
prepare.  Or,  if  there  is  no  one  Anthony 
Wood  to  do  the  work,  then  let  some 
local  antiquarian  society  put  their  heads 
together,  and  at  least  give  us  a  volume 
of  Marischal  College  dates,  documents, 
and  lists  of  names,  such  as  the  King's 
College  people  have  already  executed 
for  their  institution.  For,  alas !  the 
historj  may  now  be  rounded  off  and 
complete.  Marischal  College  and  Uni- 
versity exists  no  longer  in  its  separate 
identity.  It  was  fused,  a  year  or  two 
ago,  along  with  King's  College,  into 
the  single  University  of  Aberdeen. 
There  is  still  a  fine  granite  building 
called  Marischal  College,  in  which  a 
portion  of  the  work  of  the  united 
University  is  carried  on ;  but  the  real 
antique  establishment — Dugald  Dal- 
getty's  Marischal  College  and  mine — is 
no  longer  in  rerum  naturd.  All  is 
apt,  therefore,  for  the  writing  of  its 
history. 

Ah  !  the  massive  old  pile  in  the  great 
space  of  ground  entered  by  the  old  gate- 
way from  the  Broadgate,  how  well  I 
can  see  it  yet !  Not  the  fine  modern 
building  which  visitors  to  Aberdeen  now 
look  at,  and  which  was  finished  about 
1842,  at  a  cost  of  some  £21,000  ;  but 
its  predecessor  on  the  same  site — a  great, 
square,  hulking,  yet  lofty,  ancient  lump 
of  a  building,  impressive  by  its  amor- 
phous gray  massiveness  even  in  the  day- 
light, but  in  winter-nights  quite  weirdly 
to  look  at  in  the  dark  space  that  en- 
shrined it,  Avith  the  few  lights  twinkling 
in  some  of  its  small  windows,  •  and  the 
stars  seeming  to  roll,  soliciting  astro- 
logical watch,  over  the  battlements  of 


its  high  observatory  !  There  it  had 
stood,  the  main  part  of  it,  the  same 
through  all  the  years  since  Dugald 
Dalgetty  had  seen  it ;  and,  mayhap,  on 
the  battlements  of  its  left  tower,  as- 
trologers, in  the  shape  of  mantled  old 
professors,  had  watched,  and,  groping 
up  the  turret-stairs  in  the  dark,  one 
might  encounter  their  professorial  ghosts. 
And  then  the  class-rooms  as  we  sat  in 
them  by  day — all  old  and  quaint,  though 
some  older  and  quainter  than  others — 
and  the  great  common  hall,  stretching 
the  'whole  width  of  the  main  building 
in  the  first  storey,  with  its  old  chimney- 
piece  in  the  middle,  on  which  were 
carved  the  arms  of  the  Earls  Marischal, 
with  their  noble  motto  of  scorn  for 
public  opinion  ("  A  iunt :  Quid  aiunt  ? 
Aiant;"  or,  in  English,  "They  say: 
What  say  they?  Let  them  say"),  and 
its  wainscoted  walls  hung  with  many 
old  portraits  of  historical  interest  by 
George  Jamesone  and  others.  Among 
these  was  a  portrait  of  Descartes,  which 
I  could  never  cease  gazing  at — it  was 
such  a  queer,  puckered  old  face.  The 
hair  came  down  over  the  forehead,  and 
the  eyebrows  were  arched  up  to  meet 
the  hair,  so  that,  between  the  two,  the 
forehead,  which  was  broad  enough,  had 
not  an  inch  of  visible  height.  But  he 
looked  a  terribly  determined  intellectual 
little  devil  for  all  that ;  and,  though  I 
knew  little  about  him,  and  rather  won- 
dered at  first  how  any  mortal,  wherever 
he  was  born,  could  have  had  a  name  that 
seemed  so  like  the  plural  of  a  wheeled 
vehicle,  he  and  I  took  a  fancy  for  each 
other.  There  were  other  portraits,  some 
of  them  of  old  Aberdonians,  or  other 
Scotchmen,  that  interested  me ;  but 
none,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  so  much  as 
this.  And  so,  for  four  years,  often  in 
this  public  hall,  but  often  er  still  in  the 
class-rooms  where  we  were  taught  all 
that  Marischal  College  had  to  teach, 
we  wore  the  red  gowns  and  the  red  vel- 
vet collars  which  were  the  compulsory 
costume  of  the  Students  of  Arts,  till 
one  early  spring-day  we  were  ranged 
ceremoniously  in  the  public  hall,  some 
eighteen  or  twenty  of  us  Avho  had  com- 
pleted the  curriculum  out  of  a  class 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


327 


originally  seventy  strong,  and  there, 
clad  all  uncouthly  in  black  silk  gowns, 
which  the  college-beadles  had  begged, 
borrowed,  or  stolen  from  the  city-clergy 
for  the  occasion,  were  made  to  repeat 
the  words  of  a  Latin  oath,  and,  having 
been  dabbed  on  the  head  individually 
by  the  Principal  with  a  sacred  bit  of 
black  velvet,  were  created  and  admitted 
Masters  of  Arts.  When  I  think  what 
Magister  Artium  implies  according  to 
the  English  standard,  and  then  recollect 
what  a  flock  of  fledglings  we  were  (the 
youngest  of  us  exactly  sixteen  years  and 
four  months  old)  that  flew  off  into  the 
world  from  that  northern  nursery  of 
learning,  feathered  legally  with  the  fine 
designation,  the  thing  does  seem  rather 
absurd.  Matters,  however,  have  been 
considerably  mended  of  late  in  the  Scot- 
tish system  in  this  respect ;  and  it  is 
right  to  say  that,  even  in  those  days,  in 
some  of  the  Scottish  universities — at  all 
events,  in  that  of  Edinburgh— the  de- 
gree of  A.M.  was  a  much  rarer  honour, 
won  only  by  a  very  few  every  year  after 
a  very  special  examination. 

The  regular  college-session  was  in 
winter  only,  or  from  the  beginning  of 
November  to  the  end  of  March.  It 
was  during  these  five  winter  months 
that  the  red  gowns  of  the  "  Colliginers," 
as  they  were  called  by  the  town's- 
people,  made  the  streets  of  Aberdeen 
picturesque.  The  bright  new  gowns 
of  the  freshmen,  or  first  year's  students, 
marked  them  out  for  persecution  by 
their  seniors  ;  and  it  was  considered 
desirable  to  get  the  velvet  collars  ink- 
stained  and  the  sleeves  and  body  toned 
down  in  colour  as  soon  as  possible.  The 
fourth  year's  students,  or  "Magistrands," 
were  easily  recognised  by  the  superior 
tatteredness  and  discoloration  of  their 
scarlet  garb.  It  was  only  the  Arts' 
students,  who  may  have  numbered 
about  250  in  all,  that  wore  this  flaring 
costume ;  the  less  numerous  students  of 
the  other  three  faculties — to  wit,  Law,  . 
Medicine,  and  Theology — wore  no  pecu- 
liar dress.  In  general  the  iour  facul- 
ties had  little  interconnexion — the 
students  of  each  attending  their  own 
set  of  professors  in  their  own  part  of 


the  college ;  but  there  was  always  one 
period  of  the  college-session  when  all 
were  brought  together  pell-mell.  This 
was  the  period  at  Avhich  the  students  of 
all  the  faculties  exercised  in  common 
the  grand  privilege,  which  belonged  to 
them  by  charter,  of  electing  their  Lord 
Hector  for  the  year.  Sometimes  English 
readers  may  note  a  paragraph  in  the 
London  newspapers  stating  that  Lord 
So-and-so,  or  tne  Earl  of  So-and-so, 
or  the  Duke  of  So-and-so,  or  at  least 
some  Baronet  or  Right  Honourable — 
almost  invariably  one  of  the  most  con- 
spicuous statesmen  of  the  kingdom — 
has  been  elected  Lord  Eector  of  the 
University  of  Aberdeen,  or  has  lost  the 
election  in  competition  with  some  other 
public  man,  equally  well  known.  But 
if  only  the  English  reader  of  such  a 
casual  paragraph  could  have  got  inside 
the  vast  local  uproar  and  excitement  of 
which  the  paragraph  was  the  condensed 
result !  Talk  of  the  Saturnalia  of  a 
contested  election  !  The  humours  of 
the  wildest  and  noisiest  election  of 
a  member  of  Parliament  for  an  English 
borough  could  not  be  richer  than  those 
which  I  recollect  as  attending  our 
annual  election  of  a  Lord  Rector  for 
old  Marischal  College.  It  was  an  affair 
of  some  three  weeks.  First  there  were 
the  meetings  of  the  separate  classes,  in 
which  all  sorts  of  persons,  likely  and 
unlikely,  were  proposed ;  then  there 
were  the  aggregate  meetings,  in  which 
the  three  or  four  candidates  that  had 
by  this  time  been  pitched  upon  by 
general  agreement,  were  upheld  and 
discussed  ;  and,  lastly,  there  was  the 
grand  meeting  in  the  hall  on  election- 
day,  most  of  the  professors  being 
present,  when  the  two  or  perhaps  the 
three  candidates  that  it  had  been  re- 
solved finally  to  pit  against  each  other, 
were  formally  nominated  and  seconded 
amid  cheers  and  yellings  from  the 
multitude — after  which  the  whole  body 
of  the  electors  retired  to  vote  indi- 
vidually in  the  four  "  nations "  into 
which  they  were  distributed.  Each 
"  nation  "  included  all  who  were  natives 
of  a  particular  region  of  Scotland  tra- 
ditionally marked  out — one  of  the 


328 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


"  nations,"  however,  including  all  stray 
comers  from  non-Scottish  parts  of  the 
earth ;  and  it  was  ultimately  decided, 
not  by  the  absolute  majority  of  indi- 
vidual votes,  but  by  the  majority  of 
the  collective  votes  of  the  "nations,"  who 
was  the  successful  candidate.  When 
the  votes  of  the  "nations"  stood  as 
2  to  2,  so  as  to  require  a  casting-vote 
from  the  out-going  Eector  (which  might 
easily  happen),  or  when  the  candidate 
elected  by  the  majority  of  the  "nations" 
had  not  the  majority  of  the  individual 
votes  (which  might  also  happen)  there 
would  be  a  perfect  phrenzy  of  mutual 
protests  and  upbraidings,  and  the  very 
professors,  if  they  interfered,  would  be 
bearded  and  defied.  And  0  the  oratory, 
the  oratory,  at  those  meetings !  The 
speakers  at  the  aggregate  meetings 
were,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  older 
students — generally  students  of  divi- 
nity— we  the  red-gowned  youngsters 
contenting  ourselves  with  our  humbler 
duty  of  roaring  and  counter-roaring, 
hissing  and  counter-hissing,  and  laugh- 
ing till  our  sides  ached.  We  were  a 
remorseless  audience,  and  we  knew  good 
speeches  from  bad.  Some  realty  good 
speeches  were  made,  and  we  were  always 
fair  enough  to  give  them  a  hearing  on 
whatever  side  they  chanced  to  be ;  but 
no  mercy  was  shown  to  any  poor  wretch 
that  gave  us  a  chance,  by  any  oddity  of 
manner  or  physiognomy,  or  any  blunder 
of  utterance,  of  shrieking  him  down. 
"I  care  not  for  the  hiss  of  the  ser- 
pent, nor  for  the  sardonic  laugh  of  the 
hyena,"  said  one  speaker,  when  our 
demonstrations  were  going  against  him 
— a  poor  timid  creature,  as  we  all  knew, 
whom  a  moderately  fierce  duck  would, 
at  any  other  time,  have  driven  to  flight 
— and  there  and  then  the  serpents  and 
the  hyenas  extinguished  him.  "  Is  Dr. 
Abercromby  going  to  make  a  moniply 
of  it  ? "  asked  one  Highland  orator,  on 
an  occasion  when  it  was  proposed  that 
the  existing  Lord  Eector,  Dr.  Aber- 
cromby, the  distinguished  physician  of 
Edinburgh,  should  be  re-elected ;  and, 
when,  irritated  by  the  burst  of  laughter 
which  followed  his  mispronunciation 
of  the  word  "monopoly,"  he  told  us 


farther,  in  his  Highland  accents,  that 
we  "  might  as  well  attempt  to  stem  the 
Atlantic  with  a  straa"  as  to  put  him 
down,  you  should  have  seen  how  the 
straw  did  stem  the  Atlantic.  "  This 
proposition  has  been  nipped  in  the  bud 
— I  may  say,  strangled  in  the  womb," 
said  a  dapper  medical  Irishman,  who 
had  somehow  impressed  his  party  as 
a  master  of  rhetoric,  fit  to  be  put  for- 
ward as  their  spokesman  on  the  great 
election-day ;  and  I  never  saw  anything 
neater  than  the  way  in  \vhich  the  exact 
kind  of  strangulation  specified  was  per- 
formed, that  same  instant,  on  his  speech. 
All  in  all,  I  would  not  for  the  world 
that  these  occasions  of  rollick,  and  of 
college-liberty  broken  loose,  should  be 
done  away  with.  Except  that  there 
was  far  more  of  the  nonsense  of  Whig- 
and-Tory  antagonism  in  the  Eectorial 
contests  than  befitted  their  nature,  the 
elections,  I  fancy,  were  honest  and  judi- 
cious enough.  Besides,  it  is  well  that 
among  the  customs  of  university  life  there 
should  be  some  that,  if  they  have  no 
other  purpose,  shall  at  least  be  the 
means  of  accumulating,  in  extra  abun- 
dance at  particular  points,  reminiscences 
of  fun  for  future  years. 
.  The  Arts'  curriculum  of  four  years 
was  so  arranged  that  in  each  year  there 
was  one  principal  or  dominant  class, 
called  the  Eegent's  class,  and  other 
secondary  or  attached  classes.  The 
attendance  on  the  Eegent's  class  was 
for  three  hours  daily,  except  on  Wed- 
nesdays and  Saturdays,  which  were  half- 
holidays  ;  and  for  each  of  the  other 
classes  there  was  generally  a  distinct 
daily  hour.  The  following,  with  the 
omission  of  an  incidental  item  or  two  of 
weekly  general  lecture  in  Divinity  or 
in  the  Evidences  of  Christianity,  is  a 
scheme  of  the  complete  curriculum  : — 

FIRST  YEAR  :  Regent's  Class,  Greek ;  Addi- 
tional Class,  Latin  or  Humanity. 

SECOND  YEAR  :  Regent's  Class,  Natural  and 
Civil  History  (a  most  extraordinary  con- 
junction of  subjects  according  to  our  modern 
ideas,  though  theoretically  more  justifiable 
than  may  at  first  appear,  and  once  perhaps 
practically  valid  and  convenient) ;  Addi- 
tional Classes,  Greek,  Latin,  Mathematics, 
and  (optionally)  Chemistry. 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


329 


THIRD  YEAK  :  Regent's  Class,  Natural  Phi- 
losophy; Additional  Classes,  Mathematics, 
Extra  Greek,  and  (optionally)  Chemistry. 

FOURTH  YEAR  :  Regent's  Class,  Moral  Phi- 
losophy and  Logic ;  Additional  Classes, 
Extra  Mathematics,  and  Double  Extra  Greek; 
both  optional. 

It  has  been  my  experience  that  in  every 
educational  institution  a  certain  propor- 
tion of  the  teachers,  varying  from  one- 
fourth  to  one-third  of  the  whole  number, 
are  always,  either  by  natural  incapacity 
or  by   debilitation  from  old  age  (but 
chiefly,  I  think,  from  the  first  cause), 
very  unfit  for  their  work.     Eesuming 
my  recollections  now  of  dear  old  Maris- 
chal  College,  I  cannot,  in    conscience, 
declare  that  it  was  an  exception  to  this 
rule.     Let  me  not  mince  matters.     We 
had  among  our  professors  two  old  men, 
who  ought  either  never  to  have  been 
there,   or  to   have  been  superannuated 
long  before  I  and  my  coevals  became 
acquainted  with  them.     Strike  out  the 
Civil  History  from  the  business  of  the 
Regent's  class  of  the  second  year,  so  as 
to  leave  only  the  Natural  History ;  and, 
seeing  that  we  met  compulsorily  in  the 
class  three  hours  a  day  for  five  months, 
there  was  certainly  a  possibility  that  we 
should  then  and  there  have  been  put  in 
possession  of  such  a  general  smattering 
of    Mineralogy,    Hydrology,    Geology, 
Meteorology,  Botany,  and   Zoology   as 
would  have  been  useful  to  all  of  us  in 
our  subsequent  lives,  and  as  might  have 
determined  beneficially  the  whole  future 
direction  of  the  lives  and  studies  of  some. 
That  is  the  use  of  compulsory  attend- 
ance on  a  course  of  professorial  lectures. 
It  is  physical  detention  at  an  impres- 
sible period  of  life  in  a  room  where 
certain  orders  of  ideas  are  kept  sounding 
and  circulating  in   the  air;   a  certain 
tincture  of  them  must  perforce  be  im- 
bibed by' all,  and  in  some  the  effect  may 
be  that  passionate  intellectual  tastes  are 
awakened,  and  deep  latent  capabilities 
reached.     Alas !   the   Natural   History 
that  ^ve  got  was  such  a  five  months' 
drivel  about  miscellaneous  matters  un- 
interesting to  the  soul  of  man  or  horse, 
that  how  we  listened  to  it  at  all  is  a 
marvel  only  explained  by  the  submis- 
siveness  of  those  who  feel  themselves 


liable  to  pains  and  penalties.  Mineralogy, 
Botany,  or  Zoology  we  had  none  ;  and, 
as  for  the  rest,  the  sole  bit  of  the  course 
over  which,  in  my  memory,  there  rests 
yet  a  gleam  of  light  was  a  long  account, 
introduced  somewhere,  of  the  draining 
of  Blair  Drummond   Moss.     When  I 
think  of  the  course  now,  I  see  a  great 
bog,  in  which  some  men  are  digging 
ditches,  and  others  carting  away  the  wet 
peat ;  I  know  that  this  bog  was  some- 
where in  the  middle  of  the  course,  but 
all  round  it  I  recall  nothing  but  mist. 
Poor  old  gentleman !    let   me  not  be 
too  hard  upon  him !     He  had  been-  a 
favourite  pupil  of  the  great  Black,  so 
that  there  must  have  been  every  reason 
to  think,  at  the  time  of  his  appoint- 
ment, that  he  would  do  well ;  and  to 
the  last,  I  am  told,  he  used  to  amuse 
himself  very  expertly  with  geometrical 
problems.      But  by  the   time   he  de- 
scended to  us,  bringing  the  Blair  Drum- 
mond Moss  with  him,  he  was  old  and 
feeble,  and  incapable  of  doing  justice 
even  to  that  fascinating  feat  of  drainage. 
We  used  him  very  ill.     I  have  seen  his 
tall  and  thin  body  rolling  in  the  snow 
in  the  college-yard  by  the  accident  of  a 
slip  when  he  turned  to  arrest  some  rascal 
that  had  thrown  a  snow-ball  at  him ; 
and,  though  we   did  pick  him  up  with 
reverence   and  pity  then,  we   showed 
him    little    mercy  in    the    class-room. 
While   he  was  lecturing,   snatches   of 
song  would  sometimes  rise  from  an  in- 
scrutable part  of  the  room,  captivating 
additional  voices,  till  the  whole   class 
was  in  chorus.     Or,  more  ingeniously, 
we  would  extract  amusement  from  him 
by  gravely   putting  to   him   the  most 
absurd  questions.    "  Is  it  true,  Doctor," 
one  student  is  reported  to  have  asked, 
mimicking  his  mode  of  pronunciation  to 
his  face,  "that  the  moon  is  made  of 
green  cheese  ? "  "  0,  no,"  was  the  reply, 
"  it  is  a  vulgar  fallacy."   Think  of  that, 
and  conceive  our  Professor  of  Natural 
History.   His  companion  in  senility  was 
the  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy — a 
man  who  had  been  of  some  power  in 
his   earlier   days,  and  who  retained  a 
kind  of  sternness  of  look  which  helped 
to  keep  order  in  his  class,  but  whose 


330 


diluted  dictations  from  Eeid  and  Beattie 
were  poor  nutriment  for  our  young 
powers  of  speculation.  Although  he 
could  frown  from  his  desk,  it  was  from 
habit  and  from  a  general  notion  that 
something  wrong  must  be  going  on,  and 
not  from  any  knowledge  where  or 
what  the  wrong  was.  The  chief  form 
of  wrong,  so  far  as  I  recollect,  was  that 
four  or  five  of  the  students,  who  had 
constituted  themselves  into  what  they 
called  a  Pro  Bono  Publico  Club,  used 
frequently  to  disappear  during  the  lec- 
ture into  the  dark  hollow  space  under- 
neath the  rising  tiers  of  benches,  and 
there  hold  their  secret  club-meetings 
with  bottled  porter  and  mutton  pies, 
bobbing  up  now  and  then  to  see  that 
all  was  right  and  the  Moral  Philosophy 
going  on.  One  incident  in  the  class  I 
shall  never  forget.  The  aged  man  was 
lecturing,  and  he  had  come  to  the  phrase 
in  his  manuscript  "  Study  sedulously " 
without  any  change  in  his  usual  manner. 
"  Study  sed — "  he  uttered  in  his  usual 
hard  voice,  but  he  got  no  farther  than  the 
last  syllable.  "  Sed — sed — sed — r-r— " 
he  repeated  or  gurgled  once  or  twice, 
and  then,  articulating  no  more,  looked 
vacantly  round.  For  the  time  all  his 
powers  of  articulation  and  memory  were 
utterly  gone,  and  it  was  as  if  a  black 
curtain  had  fallen  between  his  con- 
sciousness and  the  outer  world.  He  was 
carried  home,  and  was  able  to  return 
and  resume  duty  the  next  day ;  but  we 
were  always  in  expectation  of  a  recur- 
rence of  the  ghastly  incident,  and  occa- 
sionally it  did  recur. 

There  is  real  pain  in  setting  down 
such  things  as  these,  but  I  hold  it  to  be 
a  duty.  When  I  think  what  youth  is — 
how  eager,  how  docile  by  right  matter 
and  by  right  measures — when  I  re- 
member that  splendid  distinction  of  the 
young  which  the  poet  has  celebrated 
when  he  says — 

"  Still  are  they  fit  alike  for  weeping  and  for 

laughter ; 
The  flight  they  still  admire,  the  flash 

with  pleasure  see ; 

"Who  finished  is,  is  scarce  worth  looking  after ; 
The  growing  one  will  always  thankful 
be.  — 

then,  just  because  youth  itself  is  so  little 


critical  and  so  easily  pleased,  it  seems  to 
me  that  society  is  bound  to  be  doubly 
critical  and  exacting  in  its  behalf.  That, 
by  the  great  age  or  the  incapacity  of  the 
holder  of  an  academic  post,  a  generation 
of  young  men,  in  any  particular  neigh- 
bourhood, should  go  forth  into  the 
world  deprived  of  all  that  they  might 
have  learnt,  and  would  gladly  have 
learnt,  had  the  reality  corresponded  with 
the  appearance,  is  a  very  serious  matter. 
I  suppose  the  most  practical  form  of 
remedy,  next  to  increased  care  and 
conscientiousness-  in  election  to  posts,  is 
in  that  plan  of  superannuation  with 
regulated  retiring-allowances,  which  I 
believe  is  part  of  the  new  Scottish 
University  system. 

But  I  have  put  the  worst  first.  Among 
our  professors  were  some  admirable  and 
most  efficient  men,  in  thinking  of  whom, 
and  of  the  style  in  which  they  did  their 
work,  I  can  now  see  that  old  Marischal 
College,  at  the  time  under  notice,  was 
unusually  fortunate  in  its  staff.  It  was 
not  flashy  work,  perhaps  ;  but  it  was 
real  sound  teaching,  in  conformity  with 
the  needs  and  habits  of  that  granite 
region.  I  could  name  three  men  yet 
alive  who,  in  the  honourable  retirement 
into  which  they  have  withdrawn  since 
the  union  of  King's  and  Marischal 
Colleges,  and  the  consequent  superan- 
nuation of  some  of  the  professors,  can 
look  back  on  lives  of  duty  well  done, 
and  can  never  be  mentioned  by  me,  or 
by  hundreds  of  others,  without  affection 
and  respect.  But  it  is  chiefly  of  the  dead 
that  I  have  purposed  to  speak  in  these 
papers  ;  and  of  these  dead  there  are 
also  .some  associated  gratefully  in  my 
memory  with  old  Marischal  College. 
One  was  that  noble  Melvin,  of  whom.  I 
have  already  given  some  account,  and 
who,  in  my  days,  still  held,  along  with 
the  Rectorship  of  the  Grammar  School, 
the  Marischal  College  Lectureship  in 
Humanity.  Passing  him,  I  will  say  a 
few  words  about  one  of  the  professors, 
dead  some  years  before  Melvin,  who 
was  also  excellent  in  his  way,  and  the 
fashion  of  whose  influence  on  the  young 
gens  togata  that  passed  through  his 
hands  was  somewhat  subtle  and  singular. 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


331 


DR.  WILLIAM  KNIGHT. 

It  was  in  the  third  year  that  we  came 
into  the  charge  of  Dr.  Knight,  who  was 
our  Professor   of  Natural   Philosophy. 
Within  the  first  day  or  two,  I  remember 
well,  we  felt  ourselves  in  a  new  kind  of 
professorial  presence.     The  class  was  an 
unusually  full   one,    as   it  was   always 
attended  by  some  "  private  students,"  of 
riper  years,  from  the  town,  in  addition 
to  the  regular  red-gowned  students  who 
had  to  go  through  the  college-classes  in 
a  certain  fixed  order.     Lecturing  to  this 
class — either  from  his  desk,  where  he 
would  read  continuously  from  the  manu- 
script through  a  gold-mounted  double 
eye-glass,  held  lightly  between  his  fore- 
finger and  thumb,  and  often  removed  so 
that  he  could  survey  the  class   freely, 
and  yet  not  lose  the  thread  of  his  read- 
ing ;  or  else  from  the  floor,  to  which  he 
would  frequently  descend  so   as  to  be 
near  the  apparatus-table,  and  where  he 
would  generally  speak  extempore,  with- 
out book  or  eye-glass — lecturing  to  us 
thus,  we   saw  a  man  in  the  prime  of 
mature  life,  of  middle  height,  of  fairish 
or   pale  complexion,   with   a  fringe  of 
scant,  fair  hair  about  the  temples  and 
round  by  the  ears,  but  bald  a-top,   so 
that  his  head  looked   of  the  laterally 
compressed  type,  long  from  back  to  front, 
rather  than  round,  broad,  or  high.     On 
the  whole  it  was  a  handsome  enough 
face,  but  with  a  curious  air  of  lurking 
irony  about  the  corners  of  the  mouth. 
But  his  greatest  personal  peculiarity — 
a  peculiarity  known  to  us  before  from 
his  appearances  in  the  public  hall,  but 
now  noted  more  particularly — was  his 
voice.      Though,  as  we  came  to  know 
afterwards,  he  was  an  unusually  mus- 
cular man — so  that,  in  an   experiment 
testing  the  degree  of  force  necessary  to 
pull   asunder   two   metal   hemispheres, 
he   could    easily,    planting    firmly   his 
somewhat  out-bowed  legs,  pull  towards 
him  or  across  the  room,  with  his  left 
hand  only,  the  strongest  student  selected 
to  pull  against  him — his  voice  was  re- 
markably  feeble    and   of    high    pitch. 
One  of  his  favourite  phrases  was  "  so  to 
speak  ";  it  occurred  in  every  second  or 


third  sentence  when  he  talked  extem- 
pore ;  and  the  students,  in  allusion  to 
his  vocal  peculiarity,  tised  to  translate 
•  it  into  "  so  to  squeak."  But  this  was 
doing  him  injustice ;  for  his  voice, 
though  feeble,  had  a  quiet  determina- 
tion in  it,  and  was  audible  through  the 
class  by  another  quality  than  shrillness. 
It  was  such  a  voice  as  I  believe  Charle- 
magne had — if  the  reader  is  ingenious 
enough  to  infer  anything  about  my 
Natural  Philosophy  professor  from  that 
magnificent  analogy.  He  was  a  Charle- 
magne among  us,  I  can  tell  you,  and, 
for  all  his  feeble  voice,  governed  us 
tightly,  and  now  and  then  tongued  us 
with  a  sarcastic  scurrility  which  no 
other  professor  ventured  on,  and  which 
was  far  from  pleasant. 

The  matter  of  his  lectures  was  good, 
and,  for  students  at  our  stage,  rich  in  a 
new  sort  of  interest.  They  had  been 
very  carefully  prepared,  and  were  written 
out  in  a  neat  small  hand  in  octavo  note- 
books, made  of  the  fine  thick  old  What- 
man paper  which  we  never  see  now-a- 
days — blank  spaces  being  left  for  addi- 
tions as  they  might  be  suggested.  First 
of  all  we  had  an  introductory  set  of 
lectures,  extending  over  about  a  fort- 
night, on  the  partitions  of  human 
knowledge,  on  the  scope  of  Natural 
Philosophy,  on  the  prominent  facts  in 
its  history,  on  the  phases  of  philo- 
sophical method,  and,  above  all,  on  Bacon 
and  his  inductive  system.  A  kind  of 
abstract  was  given  of  parts  of  Bacon's 
De  Augmentis  and  his  Novum  Organum  ; 
and  I  got  an  inkling  of  what  my  queer- 
visaged  friend,  Descartes,  had  been 
driving  at,  though  I  was  told  to  consider 
it  a  very  hopeless  kind  of  anti- Aristo- 
telian whirl,  or  rotation  after  one's  own 
tail,  as  compared  with  that  splendid 
shifting  of  the  wheels  of  the  human 
mind  into  the  eternally  right  road  which 
Bacon  had  effected.  Altogether,  I  sup- 
pose I  should  now  find  the  matter  of 
these  lectures  to  have  been  rather  popu- 
lar, and  of  a  kind  that  would  now  be 
superseded ;  but  the  presentation  of  it 
was  singularly  lucid,  and  it  was  all  then 
very  stimulating  and  new.  We  had 
glimpses  of  new  wonders  of  knowledge, 


332 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


and  of  a  kind  of  activity  of  mind  dif- 
ferent from  that  exhibited  either  in 
classical  erudition,  or  in  mathematical 
problems,  and  dealing  with  Mature  her- 
self on  a  large  scale.  We  first  came  to 
have  a  notion  what  thinking  or  specu- 
lating might  be.  And  then,  when 
passing  from  such  preliminary  matter, 
Knight  led  us,  in  a  leisurely  and  orderly 
manner,  through  these  seven  successive 
divisions  of  his  course — (1)  Somatology, 
(2)  Dynamics,  (3)  Mechanics,  (4)  Hydro- 
dynamics (subdivided  into  Hydrosta- 
tics, Hydraulics,  Aerostatics,  and  Pneu- 
matics), (5)  Electricity,  including  Mag- 
netism, (6)  Optics,  and  (7)  Astronomy — 
although  we  frequently  lost  sight  of  the 
thinking  faculty  in  its  philosophical 
mode,  yet  every  now  and  then  we  saw 
it  spurt  up  again,  and  we  had  the  re- 
sults of  its  supposed  circuitous  action  in 
the  masses  of  scientific  information, 
under  each  division,  that  were  spread 
out  before  us.  Knight's  deficiency, 
according  to  the  Cambridge  standard  of 
a  Natural  Philosophy  professor,  was  in 
the  shallowness  of  his  mathematics.  His 
course  was  one  rather  of  rich  and  mis- 
cellaneous descriptive  information,  than 
of  mathematical  investigation  and  de- 
monstration. He  introduced  formulae 
and  calculations  now  and  then  ;  but  his 
lectures  were  rather  like  an  exceedingly 
interesting  and  well-arranged  scientific 
encyclopaedia  for  moderately  mathema- 
tical readers.  As  he  was,  however,  a 
neat  experimenter,  and  had  at  his  com- 
mand an  excellent  collection  of  appa- 
ratus, models,  &c.,  he  taught  us  a  great 
deal  more  than  it  would  have  been  easy 
to  acquire  by  any  possible  course  j  of 
private  reading,  while,  for  those  who 
chose  to  avail  themselves  of  it,  there 
was  a  special  library  of  standard  books 
in  Natural  Philosophy,  attached  to  the 
class.  And,  what  was  best  of  all,  he 
made  us  give  him  in  every  week  a 
written  essay  on  some  subject  recently 
discussed  in  the  class,  compelling  us  to 
punctuality  by  a  fine  in  case  of  default. 
The  essays  were  all  returned  to  us  at  the 
end  of  the  session — whether  read  by 
him  or  not  (for  there  were  some  fifty  or 
sixty  every  week)  may  be  left  to  con- 


jecture. He  had  read  samples  of  them, 
at  least ;  for  he  had  a  pretty  shrewd 
idea  who  could  write  best. 

Apart  from  that  benefit  from  Knight's 
Natural  Philosophy  course  which  con- 
sisted in  the  superficial  fertilizing  of  our 
minds  by  a  large  quantity  of  useful  and 
well-administered  information,  and  in. 
the  occasional  stimulus  of  an  example 
of  beautiful  generalization  taken  from 
the  history  of  science,  there  was  a  cer- 
tain pungent  and  insinuating  influence, 
of  the  nature  of  which  we  were  too 
little  aware  to  be  able  to  give  a  name  to 
it,  though  the  effects,  I  now  can  see, 
were  wholesome.  I  have  mentioned  the 
expression  of  constant  irony  that  lurked 
about  the  corners  of  Knight's  mouth, 
interfering  with  the  otherwise  placid 
expression  of  his  face,  and  that  sometimes 
flashed  over  the  whole  face,  till  there 
came  a  look  of  dangerous  malice  in  the 
eye,  and  the  feeble  voice  would  vitu- 
perate stingingly,  if  need  were,  in  a  select 
kind  of  Billingsgate.  In  truth,  I  believe 
that  Knight  lived  and  walked  in  Aber- 
deen in  a  perpetual  relation  of  secret 
irony  to  everything  around  him,  and 
especially  to  popular  and  clerical  opinion. 
It  was  whispered  among  us,  as  a  matter 
of  tradition,  that  Knight  was  a  sceptic, 
and  that  he  had  written  books  the  copies 
of  which  he  had  carefully  bought  up  so 
as  to  suppress  them.  One  of  his  books, 
I  believe,  was  entitled,  "A  Theory  of 
the  Earth  ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  was 
this  book  which  he  had  bought  up. 
What  was  its  nature  I  do  not  know, 
never  having  seen  it ;  but  I  fancy  there 
must  have  been  queer  matter  in  it,  for 
Dr.  Chalmers,  who  seemed  to  know  it, 
and  to  have  formed  his  idea  of  the  author 
from  it,  revealed  that  idea  to  me  once 
with  an  expressive  smile  when  I  men- 
tioned Knight's  name  to  him.  But  the 
book  which  Knight  certainly  tried  to 
suppress,  and  of  which,  nevertheless,  I 
did  once  contrive  to  see  a  stray  copy, 
was  a  small  volume,  bearing  the  quaint 
title  of  "The  First  Day  in  Heaven." 
Unless  my  memory  fails  me  after  so 
many  years,  the  opening  sentence  of  this 
curious  production  was  as  follows : — 
"  Emaciated,  pale,  and  cadaverous,  at 


Or,  "Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


333 


"  the  age  of  twenty-one,  I  lay  upon  my 
"  bed,   awaiting  the    approach   of  the 
"  Angel  of   Death."      The    Angel    ot 
Death  does  come  to  the  bedside  of  the 
emaciated  youth ;  the  youth  dies ;  and 
the  volume  goes  on  to  narrate,  by  some 
means,  the  first  experiences  of  the  youth 
in  the  new  world  into  which  he  has  been 
ushered.     In  the  act  of  death,  he  feels 
himself  borne,    in  a  kind   of  blissful 
swoon,   through    a   violet    atmosphere, 
on  the  dissolution  of  which  from  around 
him  he  opens  his  eyes  in  the  realm  of 
Heaven,  and  sees — I  forget  what  all ; 
but  I  remember  distinctly  that  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  the   happiness   of 
Heaven  was    made   to   consist   in  the 
rapid  or  intuitive  acquisition  of  a  kind 
of  knowledge  that  did  not  seem  very 
unlike  a  sublimation  of  Knight's  own 
lectures  en  Natural  Philosophy.     I  can- 
not recall  any  particular  scepticism  in  the 
book,  beyond  what  might  be  implied  in 
its  singular  title,  and  in  this  substitution 
of  Natural  Philosophy,  to  so  large  an  ex- 
tent, for  the  more  orthodox  pleasures  of 
the  future  state.    But,  in  those  days  and 
in  that  latitude,  the  merest  colourable 
suspicion   of  heterodoxy  went  a  great 
way  in  the  popular  gossip  about  a  man  ; 
and  the  notion  had  come  down  among 
us  young  fellows,  that  Knight  had  queer 
opinions,  and  that,  as  he  walked  in  the 
streets,  he  laughed  in  his  sleeve   at  a 
good  deal  of  the  pomposity  around  him. 
Most  of  us  liked  him  the  better,  I  be- 
lieve, on  this  account.     He  had,  indeed, 
now  learnt  to  keep  very  much  to  him- 
self any  speculations  he  may  have  for- 
merly entertained   of  a  kind    directly 
discordant  with  the  Aberdonian  medium 
in  which  he  moved ;  and,  in  his  inter- 
course   with  us,    there  were   cases  in 
which,    so    far    from   encouraging   any 
juvenile  affectation  of  eagerness  after  the 
forbidden  fruit  of  which  he  was  sup- 
posed to  have  eaten  so  largely  himself, 
he  seemed  to  take  a  malicious  pleasure 
in  snubbing  it.  Once,  when  he  was  acting 
as  the  college-librarian,  and  a  very  young 
student    asked    for   Hume's   Essays, — 
"Haven't  got  it,  master,"   said  Knight 
coolly,  with  the  faintest  twitch  of  sarcasm 
on  one  side  of  his  mouth ;  "  we  don't 


keep  such  books  in  this  college,  my  lad  " 
— the  book,  as  no  one  knew  better,  being 
at  that  moment  within  a  few  feet  of 
him.     Then,  in  all  matters   of  public 
politics    or    college-procedure,    Knight 
was  a  stickler  for  authority  and  existing 
regulation.     A  Tory  by  profession,  he 
had  more  than  the  usual  Tory  amount 
of  the  odi  profanum,  vulgus  feeling — of 
contempt  for  democracy  and  mob-opi- 
nion.    And  yet,  with  all  this  secretive- 
ness  of    manner  and   conservatism   of 
method,   the    lurking    Mephistopheles 
in     Knight     would     break    out.       It 
would  break  out  in  his  class-room,  not 
only  in  the  very  free  rhetoric  of  vitupe- 
ration which  he  permitted  himself  when 
the  behaviour  of  some  student  did  not 
please  him — "  There  are  blackguards  in 
every  class,  my  lad,  and  you're  one  of 
the    blackguards    in    this" — but    also 
in  the  satirical  tone  of  his  references 
in  his  lectures  to  some  popular  living 
celebrities.     But  perhaps  it  was  out  of 
his  class-room,  in  meeting  two  or  three 
of  his  students  at  supper,  or  in  encoun- 
tering  one  of  them   by  himself  in  a 
suburb  of  the  town — and  on  such  an  oc- 
casion he  would  walk  half  a  mile  or  so 
with  the  student,  and  chat  away  more 
familiarly  than  most  of  the  other  pro- 
fessors were  known  to  do — it  was  then 
that  these  little  Mephistophelic  felicities 
of  Knight,  which  we  remembered  and 
quoted  to  one  another,  were  most  apt  to 
occur.    An  Aberdonian  by  birth,  he  had 
been  in  the  same  class  with  Lord  Byron 
at  the  Aberdeen  Grammar  School,  so  that 
he  had  a  very  vivid  recollection  of  the 
boyhood  of  the  future  poet ;  and  this  is 
how  he  once  brought  it  in,  when  Byron 
was  mentioned  :  "  He  had  a  most  dam- 
nable disposition,  Byron — a  most  damna- 
ble disposition.    I  remember  his  cutting 
the  buttons  off  my  coat  as  he  sat  beside 
me  in  the  Grammar  School ;  and  I  gave 
him  a  good  hiding  for  it.     He  had  a 
most  damnable  disposition.     He  said  he 
hated  a  dumpy  woman.      He  needn't 
have  said  that.     His  own  mother  was 
the  dumpiest  woman   I   ever   saw    in 
my  life."     On  another  occasion,  walk- 
ing up  Marischal  Street  with  a  student, 
in  a  terribly  disagreeable  day  of  wind 


334 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known; 


and  rain,  which  dashed  direct  against 
their  faces  in  that  street,  he  replied  thus 
to-  some  highly-intellectual  remark  of 
his  companion  about  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury :  "I  don't  know  about  the  fifteenth 
century ;  all  I  know  is,  that  this  is  a 
d — d  bad  day,  whatever  century  it  be 
in."  Another  time,  walking  and  chat- 
ting with  a  student  in  a  pleasant  out- 
skirt  of  the  town — it  being  the  week  of 
the  half-yearly  meeting  of  the  Provincial 
Synod  of  the  Clergy  in  Aberdeen,  when 
there  was  always  a  good  deal  of  ecclesi- 
astical bustle  for  the  townspeople  to  go 
and  partake  in — "  Have  you  been  at  the 
Synod  to-day,  master,  to  hear  the  clergy 
debating  ?  "  asked  Knight ;  and,  on  the 
reply  being  in  the  negative,  "  You  should 
go,"  added  he,  "you  should  go  once. 
See  everything  once,  master  ;  see  every- 
thing once,  while  you're  young ;  when 
you're  older,  you  won't  care  so  much 
about  it."  A  good  many  more  memo- 
rabilia of  Knight  might  be  collected,  all 
consisting  of  such  little  satirical  out- 
breaks tending  to  the  disintegration  of 
one's  juvenile  reverence  for  conventional 
beliefs  and  customs.  Altogether,  I  can 
look  back  upon  him  now  as  a  man  of 
far  more  than  average  ability,  who  per- 
formed the  duties  of  his  post  with  beau- 
tiful regularity  and  efficiency,  gave  us 
much  delightful  matter  that  we  were 
likely  to  get  from  no  one  else,  and  did 
us  good  even  by  those  seemingly-mali- 
cious twitchings  to  the  surface  of  some 
fund  of  unexpressed  thought  which  cir- 
cumstances compelled  him  to  carry  pla- 
cidly to  his  grave.  I  have  since  noticed, 
that  that  feeble  and  high  quality  of  voice 
which  was  Knight's  greatest  personal 
peculiarity  is  an  almost  constant  sign  of 

a  fanatical  or  sceptical  mind. 

*  *  *  * 

Here,  throwing  off  the  red  gown,  and 
leaving  old  Marischal  College  to  the 
ruthless  masons  whom  I  have  watched 
for  a  year  or  two  pulling  down  parts  of 
it,  and  raising  in  its  stead  bits  of  that 
new  granite  building  to  which,  in  its 
completed  state,  my  memory  owes  no 
allegiance,  let  me  stroll  through  the 
town  on  the  chance  of  a  recollection  or 
two  of  a  less  academic  nature.  I  shall 


not  attend  to  dates,  but  will  take  things 
as  they  come. 

A    memorable    incident  was    "  The 
Burning  of  the  Burking  -House."     The 
story  might  be  worth  telling  at  length, 
were  this  the  place  for  it.     Suffice  it  to 
say  that   "The  Burking  House,"  as  it 
was  popularly  named,  was  an  anatomical 
school  or  dissecting-room,  which,  with  a 
culpable  carelessness  of  public  prejudice 
— especially  at  a  time  when  the  recol- 
lection of  the  Burke-and-Hare  murders 
was  rife,  and  it  was  believed  by  the  poor 
and   ignorant   in   Scottish   towns   that 
secret  burking  to  procure  subjects  for 
dissection  was  a  regular  practice  in  the 
medical  profession — had  been  erected  in 
an  open  part  of  the  town,  near  the  In- 
firmary,  and  in  the  midst  of  common 
dwelling-houses,   inhabited  by  artisans 
and  their  families.     For  some  time  the 
house  had  been  a  horror  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood.    Children  or  servant-girls,  if 
they  had  to  pass  that  way  in  the  dark, 
would  keep  on  the  other  side  of  the 
street,   and,  when  they  came  opposite 
the  awful  tenement,  within  which  they 
fancied   skeletons    hung    up    and    the 
sheeted  dead  lying  on  tables,  would  run 
as   hard   as  they  could  in  more  than 
mortal    fear.     At   last    things    became 
worse.     It  was  rumoured  that  dogs  had 
been  seen  coming  out  of  the  backyard 
of  the  premises  with  bones — and  what 
bones  1 — in  their  mouths.     Some  such 
rumour,  running  through  the  households 
and  workshops  of  that  quarter  of  the 
town,   stirred  up   elements    in    human 
1  nature  deeper  than  obedience  to  law,  and 
banded  together  a  number  of  determined 
spirits  among  the  younger  workmen  for 
an  act  of  popular  wrath.     Not  a  whisper 
of  what   was  intended  had  got   about, 
when,  one  afternoon,  in  broad  daylight, 
the  building  being  then  full  of  medical 
students  and  others  attending  the  regu- 
lar lecture,  it  was  besieged  by  a  body  of 
men  who  had  met  on  purpose,  and  who, 
first  driving  or  pulling  out  all  who  were 
within  it,  then  deliberately  set  it  on  fire. 
The  Dr.  Knight  of  whom  I  have  just 
spoken  chanced  to  be  among  those  pre- 
sent in  the  building,  and  was  one  of  the 
few  who  showed  fight  to  the  rioters ; 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities, 


335 


and  the  story  of  his  personal  prowess  on 
this  occasion,  and  how  in  particular  he 
had  grappled  with  two  of  the  biggest 
rioters  at  the  doorway,  and  hurled  them 
back  into  the  street,  was  among  our 
college-legends  of  his  strength.  But 
this  was  several  years  before  I  knew 
him  ;  and  all  I  recollect  of  the  incidents 
of  the  riot  is  a  muffled  rumour,  "  The 
Burking  House  is  on  fire,"  that  reached 
the  Grammar  School  during  lesson-hours, 
and  our  pelting  down  Blackfriars  Street, 
after  we  were  dismissed,  to  the  scene  of 
the  uproar,  where  by  that  time  the  police 
were  in  force.  Strangely  enough,  I  forget 
what  became  of  those  who  were  arrested, 
or  whether  the  real  ringleaders  were 
among  them  ;  but  I  believe  there  was  a 
disposition  not  to  press  matters  too  hard 
in  a  case  where  public  sympathy  with 
the  motives  of  the  rioters  was  so  general ; 
and  I  have  since  had  reason  to  suspect 
that  among  the  ringleaders  were  some 
young  mechanics  of  superior  character 
and  intelligence,  afterwards  well  known. 
Clergymen  figure  rather  numerously 
among  my  Aberdonian  reminiscences. 
Some  of  them  were  not  members  of  the 
Established  Scottish  Church,  but  of  one 
or  other  of  those  dissenting  bodies  which 
(the  Free  Church  not  then  existing) 
formed  a  respectable  minority  of  the  Scot- 
tish people.  Among  these  was  Henry 
Angus,  a  man  of  stately  presence  and  of  a 
noble  cast  of  head  and  countenance,  who 
was  minister  of  a  small  congregation  that 
were  much  attached  to  him,  but  the 
really  high  character  of  whose  powers 
was,  I  think,  a  discovery  of  a  few  stu- 
dents who,  having  chanced  to  hear  him. 
once  or  twice,  and  caring  little  for  eccle- 
siastical denominations  and  distinctions, 
provided  they  could  obtain  what  they 
called  •'  ideas,"  went  to  his  chapel  again 
and  again.  Perhaps  because  he  had 
become  aware  of  this  fact,  and  it  roused 
the  indolence  of  a  naturally  powerful 
mind  that  had  been  thrown  too  much 
into  a  quiet  corner  for  its  full  develop- 
ment, they  did  get  "ideas"  for  their 
pains,  and  were  delighted  now  and  then 
by  flashes  of  imagination  and  expression 
beyond  the  usual  popular  range.  Almost 
at  the  other  pole  among  the  preachers 


of  the  town,  and  differing  from  Angus 
as  rich  farce  differs  from  severe  tragedy, 
was  Patrick  Robertson,  usually  styled 
"  of  Craigdam,"  after  the  country  place 
where  he  had  been  minister  before 
settling  in  Aberdeen.  His  congregation 
in  Aberdeen  was  a  chance  gathering  of 
the  poorest  of  the  poor,  but  was  over- 
flowing on  Sunday  evenings.  He  was 
a  gray-haired  veteran,  whose  natural 
genius,  I  should  say,  was  mainly  that  of 
a  humourist,  and  who  carried  something 
of  the  comic  with  him  into  the  pul- 
pit, where  he  spoke  a  dialect  not  far 
removed  from  vernacular  Scotch,  but 
where  he  was  very  shrewd,  very  fer- 
vid, and  very  evangelical.  Passionate 
searchers  after  "  ideas  "  as  some  of  us 
were,  we  were  willing  to  try  what  even 
Patrick  Robertson  could  do  for  us  in  that 
commodity,  and  occasionally  dropped  in 
upon  his  Sunday-evening  lecture.  It 
was  really  racy  matter.  Not  only  did 
he  give  us  what  we  were  willing  to  call 
"  ideas,"  but  I  once  heard  from  him  what 
I  can  only  call  an  idea  respecting  "ideas." 
It  came  in  this  wise  : — "  And  now,  my 
friends,"  he  said,  beginning  a  new 
section  of  his  discourse,  and  speaking  in 
his  habitual  semi-Scotch,  which  spelling 
will  hardly  indicate — "and  now,  my 
friends,  I  am  goin'  to  give  you  an 
idea  (pronounced  eedaia).  This  idea 
that  I  am  goin'  to  give  you  is  not  of 
so  much  use  in  itself  as  it  will  be  of 
use  in  niakin'  way  in  your  minds  for 
anither  idea,  that  I  mean  to  give  you  after- 
wards, but  which  you  wouldna  be  sae 
likely  to  understand  if  I  didna  give  you 
this  idea  first.  There  are  lots  of  pairs 
of  ideas,  my  brethren,  that  are  con- 
nectit  in  this  way  :  you  may  ca'  them 
needle-and-thread  ideas."  What  the 
two  ideas  were,  and  which  was  the 
needle  and  which  the  thread  on  the 
occasion,  I  have  quite  forgotten ;  but, 
though  I  have  read  Whately,  and  other 
books  of  Rhetoric,  I  do  not  know  that 
any  phrase  in  them  has  stuck  to  me  as 
better  worth  remembering  than  Patrick 
Robertson's  "needle-and-thread  ideas," 
with  the  maxim  which  it  involves,  that 
one  ought  to  take  care  always,  in  dis- 
coursing, to  put  the  needle  first. 


336 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  / 


Patrick  Robertson  had  some  enthu- 
siastic admirers.  Among  these  was  a 
sturdy  little  old  man  named  George 
Legg,  whose  occupation  in  life  was  that 
of  going  about  with  a  wheelbarrow,  a 
"broom  and  a  shovel,  and  (not  to  put  too 
fine  a  point  upon  it)  scavengering  in  the 
streets.  But  the  Muses  had  visited 
George  among  his  shovels.  He  printed 
a  small  collection  of  his  poems,  of  which 
I  could  repeat  scraps  yet.  One  was  an 
ode  to  his  favourite  preacher,  beginning 
thus  : — 

;"Mr.  Patrick  Robertson, 

Who  long  did  serve  the  Lamb, 
In  that  department  of  his  Church 
In  Tarves  at  Craigdam." 

Another  poem  was  autobiographic, 
and  contained  this  touching  stanza  : — 

"  I  once  was  young,  and  now  am  old, 

Just  in  my  seventieth  year  ; 
Yet  ne'er  a  woman  I  beguiled, 
As  I  can  safely  swear." 

Why,  after  George  Legg,  I  should 
think  of  Peter  Kerr,  I  hardly  know ; 
for  Peter  was  a  man  of  conspicuous  civic 
standing,  well-to-do,  and  of  rather  impres- 
sive appearance.  He  was  the  sexton,  or 
head  grave-digger  of  St.  Nicholas'  Church- 
yard— called  the  Town's  Churchyard,  as 
being  the  chief  burying-ground  of  the 
city.  But  Peter  also  had  his  character- 
istic notions,  one  of  which  I  once  heard 
him  thus  expound  : — "  The  ministers 
speak  a  great  deal  about  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body.  Now  that  is  a  sub- 
ject about  which  I  may  naturally  be 
allowed  to  ken  something ;  and  I  have 
an  argument  of  my  own  about  it 
that  nane  o'  them  kens  o'.  In  the 
course  of  years,  after  bodies  are  buried, 
the  bones  become  lichter  and  lichter ; 
but  that  is  not  always  the  case.  After 
a  time,  I  have  noticed  that  some  very 
auld  bones  begin  to  grow  heavier.  It's 
very  curious ;  is  it  not  1 "  Evidently, 
Peter's  notion  was  that  he  had  detected 
some  in  his  domain  beginning  to  come 
round  again.  At  last  Peter  himself 
died. 

"  Age,  with  his  stealing  steps, 

Hath  clawed  him  in  his  clutch, 
And  hath  shipp'd  him  intill  the  land, 
As  if  he  had  never  been  such." 


Ah  !  Death,  Death,  we  may  grin  at 
thee,  we  may  grin  at  thee ;  but  thou 
wilt  have  thy  revenge  in  full  of  our 
utmost  mockery.  Thy  universality  we 
have  learnt  to  submit  to  ;  but  cruellest 
of  all,  most  inscrutable  of  all,  seems  the 
caprice  of  thy  selections.  That  the  old 
should  go — those  who,  walking  feebly 
over  the  earth,  and,  knocking  on  it 
early  and  late  with  the  staves  by 
which  they  support  themselves,  seem 
to  say,  as  Chaucer  has  it,  "Dear 
mother,  let  me  in  " — this,  though  sad, 
is  not  unnatural.  That  those  should  go 
who,  even  if  not  aged,  have  done  their 
work,  or  have  done  some  work  in  the 
world,  can  cause  our  reflections  but  a 
moderate  perplexity.  But  why  the 
young,  the  strong,  the  fair,  the  hopeful 
should  be  called  —  those  who,  hardly 
having  tasted  life,  have  only  accumu- 
lated, as  it  were,  in  riper  and  more  beau- 
tiful promise  than  others,  the  faculty 
of  expected  living — this  is  the  problem 
on  which,  in  every  fresh  instance  of 
such  bereavement,  the  reason  of  the  sur- 
viving will  return  in  vain.  It  seems  so 
hard,  so  purposeless,  such  a  violation  of 
every  principle  of  continuity  or  economy. 
To  make  the  fairest  commencement  and 
then  to  cancel ;  to  create  a  power  and 
to  destroy  it  ere  it  can  work ;  to  tend, 
with  the  utmost  solicitude,  some  rare 
plant  to  the  moment  of  its  rosy  budding, 
and  then  to  dabble  it  down  in  the  black 
earth ;  to  mould  some  Greek  vase  of  ex- 
quisite form  and  colour,  and  then  to 
break  it  ere  it  has  well  been  seen  !  Age, 
the  hoary  head,  the  tottering  frame, 
activity  fulfilled — these,  0  Death,  we 
yield  thee  lingeringly  as  thy  due  ;  what 
we  recollect  most  bitterly  to  the  last 
against  thee  are  those  instances,  of 
which  each  of  us  can  reckon  up  so 
many,  in  which  thou  didst  deal  thy 
stroke,  unlooked-for,  on  the  young,  the 
dauntless,  the  brilliant,  the  peerless  ones 
of  the  stag  eyes  and  the  golden  locks. 

Several  such  premature  deaths,  that 
seemed  so  cruel  and  unaccountable, 
recur  to  me  yet  as  I  think  of  my  once 
most  familiar  companions  in  this  the 
first  stage  of  my  life's  recollections. 
Why  should  they  have  been  taken 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


337 


and  we  others,  the  less  worthy,  left  ? 
Ah !  on  any  of  those  poor  principles 
which  we  persist  in  transferring  from 
ourselves  to  Mature,  it  is  the  same 
baffling  mystery  for  ever.  But,  leaving 
that  little  group  of  youthful  and  un- 
named graves  which  only  my  fancy  can 
see,  let  me  call  up  a  reminiscence  or  two 
of  a  man  of  whom  the  world  does  know 
something — an  Aberdonian  of  whom, 
though  he  was  then  twice  the  age  of 
those  buried  youths  when  they  and  I 
walked  together,  none  of  us  had  then 
so  much  as  heard,  but  of  whom,  when 
he  afterwards  flashed  out  into  a  brief 
British  celebrity,  I  had,  with  others, 
a  few  casual  glimpses. 

WILLIAM  THOM  OF  INVERURY. 

I  was  away  from  Aberdeen,  in  lodg- 
ings in  another  city,  when,  one  night  in 
January,  1841,  I  was  reading  an  Aber- 
deen newspaper  that  had  been  sent  me. 
After  looking  at  the  local  paragraphs 
with  the  kind  of  interest  one  has  in 
the  doings  of  a  place  well-known  to  one, 
I  turned  to  the  Poet's  Corner  and  read 
as  follows  : — 

THE   BLIND   BOY'S   PRANKS. 

["  The  following  beautiful  Stanzas  are  by  a 
correspondent,  who  subscribes  himself '  A  Serf,1 
and  declares  that  he  has  to  weave  fourteen 
hours  out  of  the  four-and-twenty.  We  trust 
his  daily  toil  will  soon  be  abridged,  that  he 
may  have  more  leisure  to  devote  to  an  art  in 
which  he  shows  so  much  natural  genius  and 
cultivated  taste."] 

"I'll  tell  some  ither  time,  quo'  he, 
How  we  love  an'  laugh  in  the  north  countrie." 

Lee/end. 

"Men  grew  sae  cauld,  maids  sae  unkind, 

Love  kentna  whaur  to  stay. 
Wi'  fient  an  arrow,  bow,  or  string, — 
Wi'  droopin'  heart  an'  drizzled  wing, 

He  fought  his  lonely  way. 

;    "  Is  there  nae  mair,  in  Garioch  fair, 

Ae  spotless  harne  for  me '/ 
Hae  politics,  an'  corn,  an'  kye, 
Ilk  bosom  stappit  ?    Fie,  0  tie  ! 

I'll  swithe  me  o'er  the  sea." 

He  launched  a  leaf  o'  jessamine, 

On  whilk  he  daured  to  swim, 
An'  pillowed  his  head  on  a  wee  rosebud  ; 
Syne  slighted  Love  awa'  did  scud 

Down  Ury's  waefu'  stream. 

No.  52. — VOL.  ix. 


The  birds  sang  bonnie  as  Love  drew  near, 

But  dowie  when  he  gaed  by  ; 
Till,  lull'd  wi'  the  sough  o'  raony  a  sang, 
He  sleepit  fu'  soun'  as  he  sailed  alang 

'Jfteath  Heaven's  gowden  sky  ! 

'Twas  whaur  the  creeping  Ury  greets 

Its  mountain  cousin  Don, 
There  wandered  forth  a  weelfaur'd  dame, 

Wha  listless  gazed  on  the  bonnie  stream, 
As  it  flirted  an'  played  with  a  sunny  beam 

That  flickered  its  bosom  upon. 

Love  happit  his  head,  I  trow,  that  time 

The  jessamine  bark  drew  nigh  ; 
The  lassie  espied  tba  wee  rosebud, 
An'  aye  her  heart  gae  thud  for  thud, 
An'  quiet  it  wadna  lie. 

"  0  gin  I  but  had  yon  wearie  wee  flower 

That  floats  on  the  Ury  sae  fair ! " 
She  lootit  her  hand  for  the  silly  rose-leaf, 
But  little  wist  she  o'  the  pawkie  thief 
That  was  lurkin'  an'  laugliin'  there  ! 

Love  glower'd  when  he  saw  her  bonnie  dark 
e'e, 

An'  swore  by  Heaven's  grace 
He  ne'er  had  seen,  nor  thought  to  see, 
Since  e'er  he  left  the  Paphian  lea, 

Sae  lovely  a  dwallin'  place  ! 

Syne,  first  of  a',  in  her  blythesome  breast 

He  built  a  bower,  I  ween  ; 
An'  what  did  the  waefu'  devilick  neist, 
But  kindled  a  gleam  like  the  rosy  east 

That  sparkled  frae  baith  her  een  ? 

An'  then  beneath  ilk  high  e'e-bree 

He  placed  a  quiver  there. 
His  bow  ?    What  but  her  shinin'  brow  ? 
An'  0  sic  deadly  strings  he  drew 

Frae  out  her  silken  hair. 

God  be  our  guard  !  sic  deeds  were  done    . 

Roun'  a'  our  countrie  then  ; 
An'  rnony  a  hangin'  lug  was  seen 
'Mang  farmers  fat,  an' lawyers  lean, 

An'  herds  o'  common  men  ! " 

These  verses  struck  me  more  then 
than,  I  suppose,  they  would  do  now, 
though  I  do  not  suppose  that  even  now 
I  could  meet  with  such  a  graceful  and 
fantastic  lilt,  prefaced  with  such  a  note 
respecting  the  author,  without  being 
interested.  Who  could  he  be  1  I  fancied 
some  very  young,  pale-faced,  and  eager- 
eyed  weaver,  not  without  a  passion  for 
books  even  in  his  serfdom — for  I  could 
not  explain  the  niceness  of  the  ex- 
pression, not  to  speak  of  the  reference 
to  the  "  Paphian  lea,"  without  supposing 
some  culture.  What  if  he  were  one  who 
might,  longo  intervallo,  come  after  Burns 

z 


338 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


— one  who,   belonging  to  another  part 
of  Scotland  than  Burns's,  and  writing 
in  a  slightly  different  dialect,  might  one 
day  be  the  supplementary  Scottish  poet 
of  his  peculiar  district,  and  tell  "  how 
they  love    and    laugh    in    the    north 
countrie"  ?     Not  from  any  morsel   of 
power  to  be  of  use,   but  out  of  mere 
curiosity,  I  wrote  to  a  friend  in  Aberdeen 
making  inquiries.     But  many  more  were 
already   on    the   alert;    many   of    the 
Scottish  newspapers  quoted  the  verses  ; 
and,  within  a  week  or  two,  a  certain 
Mr.  Gordon  of  Knockespock  in  Aberdeen- 
shire,  possessing  property  also  in  Eng- 
land,  stepped   out  from   the  crowd  of 
empty-handed  admirers,  and  forwarded 
to  the  author,  through  a  secure  channel, 
a  present   of  five  pounds.      A  certain 
"  George  Galloway,"  of  Inverness,  I  find 
from  an  incidental  subsequent  statement 
of  Thorn's  own,  had  previously  sent  him 
half  a  sovereign.     And  so  gradually  the 
unknown  was  found.     Alas !  it  was  not 
the   very  young   pale-faced  weaver   of 
my  imagination,  who  might  one  day  be 
»a    supplement  to   Burns,    but  a    man 
already  five  years  older  than  Burns  was 
when  they  buried  him.     We  began  to 
hear  of  him  as  William  Thorn,  a  hand- 
loom  weaver,  then  living  in  the  country- 
town  of  Inverury,   some   fifteen  miles 
from    Aberdeen  —  a   small,    fair-haired 
man,   with    one    of   his    feet    slightly 
clubbed,   forty-two   years   of   age,   and 
with  three  surviving  children  left  him 
by  his  wife,  then  recently  dead. 

Thorn's  life  up  to  this  point  of  his 
sudden  flashing  into  notoriety  is  best 
told  in  the  little  Autobiography  which 
he  wrote  to  be  prefixed  to  an  edition  of 
his  Poems,  and  which,  though  much  is 
doubtless  omitted  in  it  and  much  slurred 
over,  is,  I  venture  to  say,  as  pathetic  a 
bit  of  prose  literature  as  there  is  in  the 
language,  and  written  with  a  more 
intense  and  exquisite  power  than  most 
of  his  poems.  Should  it  be  reprinted,  all 
that  would  be  necessary  to  make  it 
perfect,  even  in  point  of  literary  correct- 
ness, would  be  that  the  printer's  reader 
should  amend  the  punctuation  some- 
what, and  correct  a  slip  of  syntax 
here  and  there.  The  weaver  that,  at 


forty-two,  could  write  such  a  bit  of  prose 
narrative,  must  have  had  latent  in  him, 
all  through  his  life  at  the  loom,  the 
express  genius,  perfect  save  in  a  tittle 
or  two,  of  a  born  man  of  letters.  The 
marvel  is  that  the  loom  detained  him  so 
long — that  he  had  not,  in  youth,  Avhen 
the  tittle  or  two  that  were  wanting 
might  have  been  easily  acquired,  burst 
away  from  the  weaving -trade,  and 
wriggled  himself  somehow  or  other 
into  a  place  in  the  composite  craft  of 
authorship.  In  this  respect  Thorn's  case  is 
exceptional.  In  most  cases  the  honest 
advice  of  a  critic  would  be  that  a  young 
man,  brought  up  to  the  loom  or  to  any 
other  handicraft,  should  abide  by  it  rather 
than  follow  a  miserable  delusion  and  ad- 
dict himself  either  to  poetry  or  to  prose  ; 
but,  in  Thorn's  case,  the  clear  decision 
must  be  that  literature  ought  to  have  had 
possession  of  him  as  early  as  possible,  and 
that  it  must  have  been  owing  to  some 
singular  weakness  and  lack  of  effort  on 
his  own  part  that  he  had  not  done 
what  far  inferior  men  had  done,  and 
sung  himself  or  written  himself  before 
he  was  thirty  into  something  higher 
than  hand-loom  weaving.  When  the 
possibility  of  a  release  from  the  loom  did 
come,  it  was  too  late  for  new  habits  by 
at  least  a  dozen  years. 

What  a  life  Thorn's  had  been !  If 
we  take  only  his  own  account,  and  do 
not  seek  to  fill  in  from  other  informa- 
tion which  might  make  the  representa- 
tion worse,  nothing  ever  conceived  or 
heard  of  could  well  be  more  abject. 
The  early  life  of  Burns  was  that  of  a 
gentleman  compared  with  it.  The  Ayr- 
shire ploughman,  at  least,  trod  the 
healthy  earth  and  walked  erect  in  the 
fresh  air  of  heaven,  and  he  had  in  his 
father's  house,  poor  though  it  was,  a 
training  and  example  in  all  that  was 
manly.  Poor  Thorn's  life  had  been 
more  like  the  lives  of  some  of  those 
among  whom  Burns  afterwards  moved 
as  their  superior,  using  them  as  subjects 
for  his  satires,  and  making  poetry  of 
their  humours — those  far-famed  weavers 
of  Kilmarnock  ;  or  rather  (for  the  wea- 
vers of  those  days  were  a  well-paid 
class),  those  wretched  tinkers  and  gan- 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


339 


grel-bodies  of  "The  Jolly  Beggars," 
whoso  originals  he  saw  at  Poosie 
Nancy's.  When,  in  1809,  Thoni,  a  little 
lint-haired  boy  of  ten,  who  had  been 
lamed  on  one  foot  by  an  accident  from 
a  carriage-wheel  in  his  infancy,  was 
sent  by  his  poor  widowed  mother  to  an 
Aberdeen  factory,  it  was  as  if  he  had 
been  flung  out  into  the  streets.  After 
four  years  of  apprenticeship,  the  result 
was  that  he  found  himself,  at  the  age  of 
fourteen,  in  another  factory,  of  between 
three  and  four  hundred  hands,  male 
and  female,  in.  the  character  of  a  jour- 
neyman-weaver, earning  never  more, 
even  when  in  full  work,  than  from  five 
to  nine  shillings  a  week.  His  descrip- 
tions of  the  moral  horrors  of  factory-life 
at  that  time,  and  of  that  Aberdeen  fac- 
tory in  Belmont  Street  in  particular,  are 
terribly  real.  And  yet  here  he  remained 
seventeen  years,  or  from  his  fifteenth 
year  to  his  thirty-second,  partaking  of 
the  miseries,  and,  as  he  hints,  of  the 
dissipations  of  the  place,  and  only,  like 
the  rest,  snatching  such  notions  of  a 
higher  existence  as,  through  song  and 
sociability,  the  buoyant  temperament  of 
man  can  reach  from  almost  any  set  of 
conditions.  "  I  would  I  were  a  wea- 
"  ver,"  says  Falstaff ;  "  I  could  sing 
"  psalms  or  anything "  ;  and,  though 
Falstaff  had  never  seen  a  factory -weaver, 
something  of  that  glorious  faculty  of 
making  everything  relevant,  that  neces- 
sity of  some  song,  but  no  matter  what, 
to  accompany  the  movement  of  the  feet 
and  the  shuttle,  which  Falstaff  had  de- 
tected as  the  characteristic  of  the  wea- 
ver of  his  days,  had  come  down  to  the 
weaver  of  Thorn's.  There  was  jest  and 
hilarity,  "  psalms  or  anything,"  within 
the  Aberdeen  factory  ;  and,  out  of  it, 
there  were  the  Waverley  Novels  and 
Byron's  poetry  to  be  read  by  such  as 
could  get  hold  of  them,  and  Scotch 
songs  in  abundance,  and  lax  love- 
making,  and  ruinously  cheap  convivi- 
ality. Besides  occasional  reading,  Thorn 
had  a  special  source  of  enjoyment  in  his 
delight  in  song  ami  music.  "I  play 
"  the  German  flute  tolerably  in  general 
"  subjects,"  he  afterwards  wrote  ;  "  but, 
"  in  my  native  melodies,  lively  or  pa- 


"  thetic,  to  few  will  I  lay  it  down. 
"  have  every  Scotch  song  that  is  wori.L 
"  singing  ;  and,  though  my  vocal  eapa- 
"  bility  is  somewhat  limited,  I  can  con- 
"  vey  a  pretty  fair  idea  of  what  a  Scotcli 
"  song  ought  to  be."  He  was,  indeed,  a 
beautiful  flute-player — the  finest  known, 
it  was  thought,  in  strathspeys  ;  and, 
within  a  limited  compass,  he  sang  very 
expressively  in  a  mournful  voice  of  very 
low  pitch.  And  these  accomplishments 
he  must  have  had  in  his  factory-days. 
Indeed,  he  had  then  written  a  Scotch 
song  or  two  himself  to  airs  that  he 
could  sing,  and  had  not  only  sung  them 
and  heard  them  sung  in  the  factory,  but 
had  even  seen  one  of  them  in  print. 
Still,  such  attempts  seem  to  have  been 
singularly  few,  and  hardly  to  have  been 
thought  of  by  himself  as  capable  of 
leading  to  anything.  Till  1831  he 
remained  in  the  Aberdeen  factory  ;  and, 
when  in  that  year  weaving  in  Aberdeen 
had  become,  as  he  says,  "an  evendown 
"  waste  of  life,  a  mere  permission  to 
"  breathe,"  still  the  only  change  resolved 
on  was  a  migration  southwards  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  Dundee  to  try  the 
chances  of  weaving  there.  For  some 
years,  in  this  new  neighbourhood,  there- 
seems  to  have  been  a  slight  comparative 
prosperity  ;  and  it  was  during  this  time., 
we  are  given  to  understand,  that  Thoni 
married  his  Jean,  and  became  the 
father  of  three  children.  But  in  1837 
there  comes  a  commercial  erash,  silencing, 
in  one  week  six  thousand  looms  in  Ditn- 
dee  and  its  dependencies,  and  spreading 
dismay  through  the  county  of  Forfar. 
Thorn  clings  to  his  weaving  till  it  can 
be  clung  to  no  more  ;  and  then,  through 
sinking  gradations  of  raggedness,  the 
pawning  of  rags  themselves  for  bread, 
starvation  and  despair,  we  follow  him 
and  his  family  to  the  lowest  life  of  all 
— that  of  tramps  or  beggars,  strolling 
through  the  country  by  day,  and  sleep- 
ing at  night  in  outhouses,  or  under 
hedges,  or  in  haunts  like  Poosie 
Nancy's.  All  this  he  tells  himself ;  and 
let  the  strongest  man  try  to  read  the 
story  aloud,  and  I  hardly  think  he  will 
get  through  it  without  a  choking  of  the 
voice.  He  tried  itinerant  flute-playing 

2  z 


340 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known  ; 


and  made  something  Toy  it,  but  does  not 
seem  to  have  continued  even  that.  One 
child  died  and  was  left  buried  in  a 
churchyard  which  the  trampers  chanced 
to  pass  on  their  weary  way.  And  so 
Thorn  came  back  once  more  to  Aberdeen, 
bringing  his  little  colony  of  strangers 
with  him.  Thence,  after  a  while,  to 
Inverury,  as  a  convenient  place  for 
employment  in  "  customary  "  or  house- 
hold weaving,  which  was  better  paid 
than  factory  work.  Here  his  Jean  dies 
in  child-birth,  adding  a  third  to  the  two 
surviving  children.  In  the  winter  of 
1840-41  customary  work  fails  ;  and,  not 
knowing  what  else  to  do,  he  writes  the 
poem  we  have  quoted  above,  and  sends 
it  to  the  Aberdeen  Herald.  It  appears 
there,  and  that  is  something ;  it  is 
-copied  into  other  papers,  and  that  is 
something  more  ;  but  how  are  he  and 
his  children  to  live  ?  They  are  on  the 
move  from  Inverury  to  the  Aberdeen 
House  of  Eefuge  when  Knockespock's 
five  pounds  arrive. 

Knockespock's  kindness  to  Thorn  did 
not  stop  at  the  five  pounds.    After  vari- 
ous inquiries  by  letter,  with  a  view  to 
ascertain  more  exactly  what  manner  of 
person  Thorn  was,  and,  in  particular, 
whether  there  was  any  fitness  in  him 
for  being  turned  into  a  schoolmaster, 
the  worthy  laird  concluded  that  it  might 
at  least  be  a  good  thing  to  give  Thorn 
the  treat  of  a  visit  to  London.    Accord- 
ingly, he  had  him  up  to  town,  with  one 
of  his  children ;  drove  him  about  in  his 
carriage  ;   let  him  see  the  sights ;  and 
introduced  him  to  some  of  the  cele- 
brities.    After  four  months  so  spent — 
during  which,  as  I  guess,  his  patron  had 
come  naturally  to  the  opinion  that  there 
might  be  inconveniences  in  having  such 
a  shrimp  of  genius  permanently  attached 
to  him — Thorn  returned  to  Inverury  and 
to  his  loom,  in  much  better   circum- 
stances than  before,  not  only  through 
the   continued  assistance   of  Knockes- 
pock,  but   also  in  consequence  of  the 
interest  with  which  he  was  now  regarded 
by  people  round  about  him.    For  nearly 
four  years,  or  from  the  spring  of  1841 
to  the  end  of  1844,  he  continued  to 
make  Inverury  his  head-quarters — paying 


frequent  visits,  however,  to  Aberdeen, 
where  he  had  now  a  new  class  of  friends 
and  acquaintances.  This  was,  I  should 
think,  the  most  comfortable  period  of 
his  life.  It  was  certainly  the  most  pro- 
ductive. He  had  already  followed  up 
the  lyric  which  had  brought  him.  so 
suddenly  into  notice  with  one  or  two 
more,  of  less  merit,  under  the  same 
title  of  "  The  Blind  Boy's  Pranks  "  ; 
and  now  from  time  to  time  he  sent 
a  Scotch  song  or  other  trifle  to  one 
or  other  of  the  Aberdeen  newspapers. 
These,  together  with  a  scrap  or  two  of 
older  composition  which  he  had  by  him, 
were  published  collectively,  in  a  thin 
volume,  together  with  some  portion  of 
the  autobiographic  prose  sketch  of  which 
I  have  already  spoken ;  and  the  volume 
reached  a  second  edition,  in  which  addi- 
tional pieces  were  inserted.  Of  the 
poetical  pieces  in  the  volume  (surpris- 
ingly few  in  number,  but  forming  all, 
or  nearly  all,  as  it  happened,  that  the 
world  was  ever  to  have  from  Thorn), 
most  were  disappointing — with  a  some- 
thing uncommon  or  weirdly  in  the  cTm- 
ception,  perhaps,  that  one  could  recognise 
as  Thorn's,  but  slovenly  in  execution, 
and  not  readable  twice.  About  half-a- 
dozen,  however,  were  excellent — either 
little  tissues  of  a  graceful  narrative 
fancy,  or  snatches  of  mournful  melody 
ranging  back  from  simple  heart-touching 
pathos  to  the  borders  of  a  haggard  woe. 
Such  are  "  Autumn  "Winds,"  "  One  of 
the  Heart's  Struggles,"  "  Ye  Dinna  Ken 
Yon  Bower,"  the  Address  to  his  Son 
"Willie  on  the  death  of  his  mother, 
"  Dreamings  of  the  Bereaved,"  "  The 
Mitherless  Bairn,"  and  the  following 
mysterious  little  ditty,  entitled  "Did 
They  Meet  Again  1  "— 

"  Awa',  ye  weary  licht ! 
Nae  moon  nor  starnie  bricht ! 
Oh !  for  thy  midwatch,  Nicht, 

And  rayless  hour ; 
When  I  may  gang  alane, 
Unmarked  by  mortal  een, 
And  meet  my  bosom's  queen 

In  her  murky  bower. 

"  I  ken  she's  waitin'  there  : 
She's  faithfu'  as  she's  fair  : 
I'll  twine  her  raven  hair 

Round  her  snawy  brow, 


Or,  Recollections  of  Three  Cities. 


341 


And  vow,  by  earth  and  sea, 
How  dear  she's  been  to  me  ; 
And  tliou,  lone  Benachie, 
Maun  hear  that  vow. 

"  We  loved — alas  !  sae  leal ; 
But  this  sad  nicht  maun  seal 
The  lang,  the  last  fareweel 

'Tween  her  and  me. 
Whaure'er  my  fate  may  guide,   ; 
Or  weel  or  woe  betide, 
I'll  mind  wha  dwalls  beside 

Dark  Benachie." 

It  was  during  these  three  or  four 
years  of  Thorn's  residence  at  Inverury, 
as  a  recently  discovered  local  celebrity, 
that,  having  meanwhile  returned  to 
Aberdeen,  I  had  my  few  glimpses  of 
him.  The  first  occasion  of  my  seeing 
him  was  a  kind  of  public  dinner  or 
supper  (I  forget  which)  given  in  his 
honour  in  the  Royal  Hotel  by  a  number 
of  the  most  respectable  townsmen.  He 
was  neatly  dressed,  in  a  peculiarly  cut 
blue  coat  with  bright  buttons,  and 
home-made  check  waistcoat,  as  a  weaver 
of  the  old  times  of  good  weaving  might 
have  been  attired  on  a  holiday.  As 
he  moved  about  on  his  first  coming 
in,  a  tight,  small  figure,  with  short 
light  hair,  one  noted  the  slight  lameness 
of  his  gait,  but  most  of  all  his  face — 
which  was  creased,  and  wrinkled  all 
over  wherever  a  wrinkle  could  be,  and 
had  an  expression  at  once  shrewd, 
humorous,  insinuating,  and  woe-begone. 
Nothing  could  be  easier  or  in  more 
perfect  tact  than  his  manner :  and  in 
the  little  speeches  ho  made  from  his 
place  at  table  we  had  a  specimen  of  a 
power  which  some  who  knew  him  best 
afterwards  have  told  me  he  possessed 
consciously  in  a  wonderful  degree,  espe- 
cially with  women  —  that  of  fluent, 
happy,  and  most  persuasive  talk.  "  What 
a  tongue  the  creature  had ! "  is  the 
phrase  in  which  one  who  knew  him 
very  intimately  has  conveyed  to.  .me  his 
impression  of  this  power  of  Thorn's ; 
"  if  he  had  your  ear  for  five  minutes, 
he  charmed  you."  He  certainly,  on  this 
occasion,  even  before  a  considerable 
audience,  spoke  admirably  and  readily. 
Telling,  I  remember,  of  his  first  venture 
on  song- writing  in  his  juvenile  weaving- 
days,  and  how,  having,  with  fear  and 


trembling,  dropped  his  song  into  the 
letter-box  of  the  Aberdeen  Journal, 
he  went,  with  another  boy,  on  the 
next  Wednesday  morning,  on  the  chance 
of  getting  an  early  sight  of  the  newly- 
published  paper,  in  which  he  hardly 
dared  hope  his  song  might  be — telling: 
this  in  a  very  interesting  manner, 
he  was  interrupted  by  some  one  who, 
in  a  strange  fit  of  oblivion  as  to  the 
publishing-day  from  time  immemorial 
of  the  oldest  Aberdeen  newspaper,, 
called  out  "  Thursday  morning,  Mr. 
Thorn  ;  Thursday  morning  " — by  way 
of  correcting  him.  "Wednesday,  since 
ever  I  mind,"  said  Thorn,  instantly, 
"was  the  day  that  God  ordeened  the 
Aberdeen  Journal  to  come  out  upon." 
Then,  finishing  his  story,  he  told  us  how  at 
the  door  of  the  newspaper  office  the  early 
purchasers  of  the  paper  all  declined  the 
request  of  the  two  ragged  boys  for  a  sight 
of  it,  till,  at  last,  an  errand-boy  of  their 
own  size  coming  out  with  a  paper,  they 
overmastered  him,  and,  whipping  the 
paper  all  wet  from  his  hands,  Thorn, 
turning  to  the  Poet's  Corner,  saw — 0  ! 
ecstasy  ! — his  own  song.  "It  was  the 
proudest  day  of  my  life,  gentlemen," 
wound  up  the  dexterous  little  rheto- 
rician, "  except  (here  a  pause) — except 
this"  Altogether,  Thom's  appearance 
on  the  occasion  was  such  as  to  give  one 
an  interest  in  him  as  a  man  from  whom 
there  might  be  far  more  to  come,  on  due 
stimulus,  than  had  yet  been  heard  of. 
Afterwards  I  saw  him  more  quietly — 
both  in  his  little  weaving-place  at 
Inverury  for  a  few  minutes,  where  there 
was  a  tall,  dark,  sensible-looking  man 
acting  as  his  assistant  at  the  loom,  and 
evidently  exercising  a  tender  and  ad- 
miring care  over  him ;  and  also  in 
Aberdeen,  on  his  occasional  visits.  In 
these  visits,  I  fancy,  he  avoided  general 
society  and  had  his  particular  haunts 
among  a  few  choice  spirits  that  suited 
him  best  in  every  way,  and  among 
whom  he  was  always  welcome.  There 
was  a  considerable  element  then  in 
certain  quarters  of  Aberdeen  of  that 
kind  of  tavern-conviviality,  streaked 
with  uncultivated  literary  enthusiasm 
and  imitative  ambition,  which  the  Nodes 


3*2 


Dead  Men  whom  I  have  known. 


Amhrosiance  of  Wilson  had  generated. 
Though  he  found  this  element  most  to 
his  taste,  and  had  a  place  of  power,  if 
not  the  presidency,  accorded  to  him  in 
the  niidst  of  it,  my  notion  is  that  Thorn 
cared  supremely  little  about  the  ex- 
pressly literary  topics  of  its  colloquies — 
what  a  man  Christopher  North  was,  or 
what  any  other  big-wig  in  the  world  of 
letters  was  doing  or  not  doing.  A 
strathspey  on  his  flute,  a  Scotch  song 
sung  or  listened  to,  and  the  unsought 
humours  and  suggestions  for  talk  and 
banter,  on  the  spot,  were  his  sufficient 
enjoyment.  Nor  do  I  think  that, 
beyond  a  kind  of  Chartism  by  mere 
position,  he  cared  an  atom  about 
politics. 

Into  the  sad  remainder  of  poor  Thorn's 
life  I  can  follow  him  only  through  re- 
port.     An   article   in   the    Westminster 
Review,  a  paragraph  in  Punch,  and  other 
notices,   had   spread  his  fame   far   and 
wide ;    Scotchmen  in   India   and   else- 
where had  begun  subscriptions  for  him  ; 
the  loom  at  Inverury  did  not  pay  ;  and, 
in  the  end  of  1844,  he  was  moved  to 
•come  to  London.     Ostensibly  his  plan 
was  to  see  whether  he  could  not  make  _ 
•&  tolerable  livelihood  in  London  by  a 
trade  in  home-made  Scotch  stuffs,  such 
as  he  had  been  accustomed  to  weave  and 
could  still  obtain  on  order  or  commis- 
sion —  table-cloths,   napkins,   and  the 
like  ;  but  there  mingled  with  this  some 
vague  ideas  of  opportunities  of  a  literary 
kind.     For  a  time  all   was   glory  and 
prosperity  with  the  weaver-poet  in  the 
.great  Babylon.     Pressure  round  him  of 
.the  Scotchmen  in  London  with  kind- 
ness and  applause  ;  invitations  to  the 
houses    of    English    patrons    and    pa- 
tronesses of  literature  of  all  ranks,  in- 
cluding Lady  Blessington,  the  Howitts, 
Douglas   Jerrold,  and   others    as    well 
known ;  a  public  dinner  at  the  Crown  and 
Anchor  Tavern,  February  26,  1845,  at 
which  Mr.  W.  J.  Fox  presided  ;  another 
dinner  in  his  honour  by  the  working- 
classes,  at  which  Dr.  Bowring  presided  ; 
comparisons  in  speeches  and  in  print  with 
Burns,  and  a  universal  desire  to  make  up, 
by  exuberance  of  recognition  in  the  case 
of  the  small  fair-haired  Inverury  poet, 


for  all  the  supposed  neglect,  by  a  former 
hard-hearted  generation,  of  the  swarthy 
and  massive  bard  of  Ayrshire  ;  nay, 
(what  was  most  substantial  of  all)  a  sum 
of  500Z.,  coming  in  all  at  once  by  way  of 
testimonial-subscriptions  from  India  and 
the  colonies — could  there  possibly  be  a 
more  encouraging  enlargement  1  Alas  ! 
it  was  but  for  a  season.  A  London 
edition  of  his  "  Rhymes  and  Recollec- 
tions," which  had  been  in  preparation 
at  the  time  of  his  first  welcome  among 
the  Londoners,  but  had  been  delayed,  in 
order  that  it  might  receive  antiquarian 
and  philological  notes  by  Knockespock, 
was  not  published  till  1847  ;  and  by 
that  time  the  tide  had  turned,  and  the 
demand  for  the  book  was  small.  With 
a  portion  of  the  500£.  something  had 
been  done  for  the  three  children,  and 
especially  for  the  elder  boy  Willie. 
But  there  was  now  a  second  Jean,  and 
more  children.  And  so  from  around 
.Thorn — living  somewhere  near  King's 
Cross,  and  finding  his  speculation  of  a 
trade  in  Scotch  stuffs  a  visionary  affair,' 
if  indeed  it  had  ever  been  assiduously 
tried — the  means  of  living,  the  recog- 
nition of  the  great,  the  relations  even  of 
ordinary  acquaintance  with  the  faces  of 
his  fellow-creatures,  began  to  ebb  and 
recede.  Some  I  know  and  could  name 
who  were  kind  to  him  to  the  last ;  but 
even  their  kindnsss  passed  into  the 
phase  of  pity,  not  unmingled  with 
impatience  and  blame.  The  real  genius 
of  the  strange  little  soul  would  flash 
out,  I  am  told,  even  in  those  days  of 
his  desertion  by  almost  all  in  the  vast 
London  world  ;  and,  limping  along  the 
New  Road,  at  night,  with  some  faith- 
ful friend  who  still  adhered  to  him 
and  would  take  a  walk  with  him  that 
way,  he  would  go  up  to  any  little  mob 
gathered  in  dispute  and  mutual  chaff 
round  a  cabman,  and,  listening  for  a 
moment  on  its  skirts  with  his  shrewd 
wrinkled  face  upturned  in  the  gaslight, 
would  catch  the  keynote  of  the  disturb- 
ance, strike  in  with  voluble  mock-sym- 
pathy, and  amaze  the  audience  and  make 
it  roar  with  a  wit  they  could  enjoy, 
though  the  mode  of  it  was  beyond  their 
calculus.  But  he  wrote  nothing,  or 


A  French  Eton :  Part  II. 


343 


nothing  that  was  printed — his  care  for 
producing  lyrics,  never  very  diligent, 
seeming  utterly  gone.  Matters  soon 
reached  the  worst,  and  he  would  cry  as  a 
heart-broken  man,  and  talk  miserably  of 
the  prospects  of  his  children.  London 
at  last  had  nothing  in  it  to  detain 
him,  and  he  disappeared  back  into  the 
Scottish  weaving-world,  and  was  heard 
of  no  more.  Yes,  it  was  known  that  he 
had  gone  to  Dundee  ;  and,  some  time  in 
1850,  a  notice  ran  through,  the  news- 
papers that  Thorn,  the  Inverury  Poet, 
had  died  and  was  buried  in  that  town. 
The  moral  of  his  fate  seems  to  be — But 


why  attempt  a  moral,  if  the  narrative 
does  not  convey  it  ? 

«•  *  *  * 

By  this  time  my  readers,  I  doubt  not, 
are  wishing  to  bid  farewell  to  Aberdeen. 
It  is  exceedingly  ungracious  of  them  ;  but 
I  will  do  violence  to  my  own  feelings, 
and  comply.  And  so,  like  that  "  uncouth 
swain,"  of  whom  my  readers  may  have 
heard,  who  had  also  "  warbled  his  Doric 
lay  "  for  a  good  while, 

"  At  last  I  rise,  and  twitch  my  mantle  blue  : 
To-morrow  to  fresh  woods  and  pastures 
new." 


A  FRENCH  ETON. 


PART   II. 


FEBRUARY  is  beginning  ;  in  a  day  or  two 
Parliament  will  assemble  ;  the  report  of 
the  Public  School  Commissioners  will, 
it  is  said,  be  presented  almost  imme- 
diately ;  and  then  all  the  world  will  have 
before  them  Eton,  Harrow,  Rugby,  and 
the  rest  \>f  the  dissected  nine.  The 
probable  results  of  that  autopsy  I  am 
not  going  to  discuss  here.  I  am  sure 
the  exhibition  will  be  very  interesting  ; 
I  hope  it  will  prove  very  useful.  But, 
for  the  champions  of  the  true  cause  of 
secondary  instruction,  for  those  inte- 
rested in  the  thorough  improvement  of 
this  most  important  concern,  the  centre 
of  interest  is,  I  repeat  it,  not  there.  At 
this  last  hour,  before  the  English  mind, 
always  prone  to  throw  itself  upon  de- 
tails, has  completely  thrown  itself  upon 
what,  after  all,  in  this  great  concern  of 
secondary  instruction,  is  only  a  detail,  I 
return  to  the  subject,  in  order  to  show, 
with  all  the  clearness  and  insistance  I 
can,  where  the  centre  of  interest  really 
lies. 

•  Let  me  take  for  granted  that  the 
reader  has  still  in  his  mind  the  account 
which  I  gave  of  the  Toulouse  Lyceum 
and  of  the  Soreze  College  ;  or  that,  if 
he  has  not,  he  will  do  me  the  honour  to 
cast  his  eye  over  it.  Then  I  say,  for 


the  serious  thinker,  for  the  real  student 
of  the  question  of  secondary  instruction, 
the  knot  of  that  question  is  here  : — Why 
cannot  we  have  throughout  England,  as 
the  French  have  throughout  France,  as 
the  Germans  have  throughout  Germany, 
as  the  Swiss  have  throughout  Switzer- 
land, as  the  Dutch  have  throughout 
Holland,  schools  where  the  children  of 
our  middle  and  professional  classes  may 
obtain,  at  the  rate  of  from  20/.  to  50£. 
a  year,  if  they  are  boarders,  at  the  rate 
of  from  51.  to  151.  a  year,  if  they  are 
day-scholars,  an  education  of  as  good 
quality,  with  as  good  guarantees,  social 
character,  and  advantages  for  a  fu- 
ture career  in  the  world,  as  the  educa- 
tion which  French  children  of  the  cor- 
responding class  can  obtain  from,  insti- 
tutions like  that  of  Toulouse  or  Soreze  1 
There  is  the  really  important  ques- 
tion. It  is  vain  to  meet  it  by  proposi- 
tions which  may,  very  likely,  be  true, 
but  which  are  quite  irrelevant.  "  Your 
French  Etons,"  I  am  told,  "  are  no  Etons 
at  all ;  there  is  nothing  like  an  Eton  in 
France."  I  know  that.  Very  likely 
France  is  to  be  pitied  for  having  no 
Etons,  but  I  want  to  call  attention  to 
the  substitute,  to  the  compensation. 
The  English  public  school  produces  the 
finest  boys  in  the  world  ;  the  Toulouse 
Lyceum  boy,  the  Soreze  College  boy,  is 


344 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


not  to  be  compared  with  them.  Well, 
let  me  grant  all  that  too.  But  then 
there  are  only  some  five  or  six  schools 
in  England  to  produce  this  specimen- 
toy  ;  and  they  cannot  produce  him 
cheap.  Rugby  and  Winchester  produce 
him  at  about  120?.  a  year ;  Eton  and 
Harrow  (and  the  Eton  school-boy  is  per- 
haps justly  taken  as  the  most  perfect 
type  of  this  highly-extolled  class)  can- 
not produce  him  for  much  less  than  200?. 
a  year.  Tantce  molis  erat  Romanam  con- 
dere  gentem — such  a  business  is  it  to 
produce  an  article  so  superior.  But  for 
the  common  wear  and  tear  of  middling 
life,  and  at  rates  tolerable  for  middling 
people,  what  do  we  produce  ?  What  do 
we  produce  at  30?.  a  year  ?  What  is 
the  character  of  the  schools  which  un- 
dertake for  us  this  humbler,  but  far 
more  widely-interesting  production  ? 
Are  they  as  good  as  the  Toulouse  Lyceum 
and  the  Sor6ze  College  ?  That  is  the 
question. 

Suppose  that  the  recommendations  of 
the  Public  School  Commissioners  bring 
about  in  the  great  public  schools  all  the 
reforms  which  a  judicious  reformer 
could  desire; — suppose  that  they  pro- 
duce the  best  possible  application  of 
endowments,  the  best  possible  mode  of 
election  to  masterships ;  that  they  lead 
to  a  wise  revision  of  the  books  and 
subjects  of  study,  to  a  reinforcing  of 
the  mathematics  and  of  the  modern 
languages,  where  these  are  found  weak ; 
to  a  perfecting,  finally,  of  all  boarding 
arrangements  and  discipline  ; — nothing 
will  yet  have  been  done  towards  pro- 
viding for  the  great  want — the  want  of 
a  secondary  instruction  at  once  reason- 
ably cheap  and  reasonably  good.  Sup- 
pose that  the  recommendations  of  the 
Commissioners  accomplish  something 
even  in  this  direction — suppose  that  the 
cost  of  educating  a  boy  at  Rugby  is 
reduced  to  about  100?.  a  year,  and  the 
cost  of  educating  a  boy  at  Eton  to 
about  150?.  a  year — no  one  acquainted 
with  the  subject  will  think  it  practi- 
cable, or  even,  under  present  circum- 
stances, desirable,  to  effect  in  the  cost  of 
education  in  these  two  schools  a  greater 
reduction  than  this.  And  what  will 


this  reduction  amount  to  ?  A  boon — in 
some  cases  a  very  considerable  boon — to 
those  who  now  frequent  these  schools. 
But  what  will  it  do  for  the  great  class 
now  in  want  of  proper  secondary  instruc- 
tion ?  Nothing :  for  in  the  first  place  these 
schools  are  but  two,  and  are  full,  or,  at 
least,  sufficiently  full,  already ;  in  the 
second  place,  if  they  were  able  to  hold 
all  the  boys  in  England,  the  class  I  speak 
of  would  still  be  excluded  from  them — 
excluded  by  a  cost  of  100?.  or  150?., 
just  as  much  as  by  a  cost  of  1201.  or 
200?.  A  certain  number  of  the  pro- 
fessional class,  with  incomes  quite  in- 
adequate to  such  a  charge,  will,  for 
the  sake  of  the  future  establishment  of 
their  children,  make  a  brave  effort,  and 
send  them  to  Eton  or  Rugby  at  a  cost  of 
150?.  or  100?.  a  year.  But  they  send 
them  there  already,  even  at  the  existing 
higher  rate.  The  great  mass  of  middling 
people,  with  middling  incomes,  not  hav- 
ing for  their  children's  future  establish- 
ment in  life  plans  which  make  a  public 
school  training  indispensable,  will  not 
make  this  effort,  will  not  pay  for  their 
children's  schooling  a  price  quite  dispro- 
portionate to  their  means.  They  demand 
a  lower  school-charge — a  sclfool-charge 
like  that  of  Toulouse  or  Soreze. 

And  they  find  it.    They  have  only  to 
open  the  Times.     There  they  read  ad- 
vertisement upon  advertisement,  offer- 
ing   them,    "  conscientiously   offering  " 
them,  in  almost  any  part  of  England 
which  suits  their  convenience,  "  Educa- 
'  tion,  201.  per  annum,  no  extras.     Diet 
'  unlimited,  and  of  the  best  description. 
'  The  education  comprises  Greek,  Latin, 
'  and    German,  French   by  a  resident 
'  native,  mathematics,  algebra,  mapping, 
'  globes,  and  all  the  essentials  of  a  first- 
'  rate  commercial  education."  Physical, 
moral,   mental,    and  spiritual,   all   th* 
wants  of  their  children  will  be  sedu- 
lously cared  for.     They  are  invited  to 
an  "Educational  Home,"  where  "disci- 
'  pline  is  based  upon  moral  influence  and 
'  emulation,  and  every  effort  is  made  to 
'  combine  home-comforts  -with  school- 
'  training.     Terms  inclusive  and  mode- 
'  rate.3'     If  they  have  a  child  with  an 
awkward   temper,  and   needing  special 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


345 


management,  even  for  this  particular 
child  the  wonderful  operation  of  the 
laws  of   supply   and   demand,  in   this 
great  commercial  country,  will  be  found 
to  have  made  perfect  provision.     "  Un- 
'  manageable  boys  or    youths   (up    to 
'  twenty    years)    are    made    perfectly 
'  tractable  and  gentlemanly  in  one  year 
1  by  a   clergyman    near   town,   whose 
'  peculiarly  persuasive  high  moral  and 
'  religious   training   at  once  elevates," 
&c.      And  all  this,  as  I  have  said,  is 
provided  by  the  simple,  natural  opera- 
tion of  the  laws  of  supply  and  demand, 
without,  as  the  Times  beautifully  says, 
"  the   fetters   of   endowment   and   the 
interference  of  the  executive."     Happy 
country  !  happy  middle  classes  !     Well 
may  the  Times  congratulate  them  with 
such   fervency;    well  may  it  produce 
dithyrambs,  while   the   newspapers   of 
less-favoured    countries    produce  only 
leading   articles;   well  may  it  declare 
that  the  fabled  life  of  the  Happy  Islands 
is  already  beginning  amongst  us. 

But  I  have  no  heart  for  satire,  though 
the  occasion  invites  it.  No  one,  who 
knows  anything  of  the  subject,  will 
venture  to  affirm  that  these  "  educational 
homes"  give,  or  can  give,  that  which 
they  "  conscientiously  offer."  No  one, 
who  knows  anything  of  the  subject, 
will  seriously  affirm  that  they  give,  or 
can  give,  an  education  comparable  to 
that  given  by  the  Toulouse  and  Soreze 
schools.  And  why  ?  Because  they  want 
the  securities  which,  to  make  them  pro- 
duce even  half  of  what  they  offer,  are 
indispensable — the  securities  of  super- 
vision and  publicity.  By  this  time  we 
know  pretty  well  that  to  trust  to  the 
principle  of  supply  and  demand  to  do 
for  us  all  that  we  want  in  providing 
education,  is  to  lean  upon  a  broken 
reed.  We  trusted  to  it  to  give  us  fit 
elementary  schools  till  its  impotence 
became  conspicuous  ;  we  have  thrown 
it  aside,  and  called  upon  State-aid,  with 
the  securities  accompanying  this,  to 
give  us  elementary  schools  more  like 
what  they  should  be ;  we  have  thus 
founded  in  elementary  education  a  sys- 
tem still,  indeed,  far  from  perfect,  but 
and  living  fruitful — a  system  which  will 


probably  survive  the  most  strenuous 
efforts  for  its  destruction.  In  secondary 
education  the  impotence  of  this  prin- 
ciple of  supply  and  demand  is  as  signal 
as  in  elementary  education.  The  mass 
of  mankind  know  good  butter  from 
bad,  and  tainted  meat  from  fresh,  and 
the  principle  of  supply  and  demand 
may,  perhaps,  be  relied  on  to  give  us 
sound  meat  and  butter.  But  the  mass 
of  mankind  do  not  so  well  know  what 
distinguishes  good  teaching  and  train- 
ing from  bad ;  they  do  not  here  know 
what  they  ought  to  demand,  and,  there- 
fore, the  demand  cannot  be  relied  on 
to  give  us  the  right  supply.  Even  if 
they  knew  what  they  ought  to  demand, 
they  have  no  sufficient  means  of  test- 
ing whether  or  no  this  is  really  sup- 
plied to  them.  Securities,  therefore,  are 
needed.  The  great  public  schools  of 
England  offer  securities  by  their  very 
publicity  ;  by  their  wealth,  importance, 
and  connexions,  which  attract  general 
attention  to  them ;  by  their  old  reputa- 
tion, which  they  cannot  forfeit  without 
disgrace  and  danger.  The  existence  of 
the  Eoyal  Commission  now  sitting  is  a 
proof,  that  to  these  moral  securities  for 
the  efficiency  of  the  great  public  schools 
may  be  added  the  material  security  of 
occasional  competent  supervision.  I 
will  grant  that  the  great  schools  of  the 
Continent  do  not  offer  the  same  moral 
securities  to  the  public  as  Eton  or 
Harrow.  They  offer  them  in  a  certain 
measure,  but  certainly  not  in  so  large 
measure  :  they  have  not  by  any  means 
so  much  importance,  by  any  means  so 
much  reputation.  Therefore  they  offer, 
infar  larger  measure,  the  other  security — 
the  security  of  competent  supervision. 
With  them  this  supervision  is  not  occa- 
sional and  extraordinary,  but  periodic 
and  regular ;  it  is  not  explorative  only ; 
it  is  also,  to  a  considerable  extent, 
authoritative. 

It  will  be  said  that  between  the 
"  educational  home  "  and  Eton  there  is 
a  long  series  of  schools,  with  many 
gradations ;  and  that  in  this  series  are 
to  be  found  schools  far  less  expensive 
than  Eton,  yet  offering  moral  securities 
as  Eton  offers  them,  and  as  the  "  educa- 


346 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


tional  home "  does  not.     Cheltenham, 
Bradfield,    Marlborough,    are    instances 
which  will  occur  to  every  one.     It  is 
true  that  these  schools  offer  securities  ; 
it  is  true  that  the  mere  presence,  at  the 
head  of   a  school,   of  a   distinguished 
master   like   Mr.  Bradley,   is,   perhaps, 
the  best  moral  security  which  can  be 
offered.     But,  in  the  first  place,  these 
schools   are  thinly  scattered   over  the 
country ;    we    have    no    provision    for 
planting  such   schools  where  they  are 
most    wanted,  or  for    insuring   a    due 
supply  of  them.      Cheltenham,    Brad- 
field,  and  Marlborough  are  no  more  a 
due    provision    for    the    Northumber- 
land boy  than  the  Bordeaux   Lyceum 
is  a  due  provision  for  the  little  Alsatian. 
In  the  second  place,  Are  these  schools 
cheap  ]     Even  if  they  were  cheap  once, 
does    not  their   very   excellence^    in   a 
country  where  schools  at  once  good  and 
cheap  are  rare,  tend  to  deprive  them  of 
their  cheapness  ]     Marlborough  was,  I 
believe — perhaps  it  still  is — the  cheapest 
of  them  ;  Marlborough  is  probably  just 
now  the  best-taught  school  in  England; 
and  Marlborough,  therefore,  has  raised 
its    school-charge.       Marlborough  was 
quite  right  in  so  doing,  for  Marlborough 
is  an  individual  institution,   bound   to 
guard  its  own  interests  and  to  profit  by 
its  own  successes,  and  not  bound  to  pro- 
vide for  the  general  educational  wants 
of  the  country.     But  what  makes  the 
school-charge  of  the  Toulouse  Lyceum, 
remain  moderate,  however  eminent  may 
be  the  merits  of  the  Toulouse  masters, 
or  the  successes  of  the  Toulouse  pupils  ? 
It  is   that  the  Toulouse  Lyceum  is   a 
public  institution,  administered  in  view 
of   the    general    educational   wants  of 
France,  and  not  of  its  own  individual  pre- 
ponderance. And  what  makes  (or  made, 
alas  !)  the   school-charge  of  the  Soreze 
College  remain  moderate,  even  with  a 
most  distinguished  and  attractive  direc- 
tor, like  Lacordaire,  at  its  head  ?  It  was 
the  organization  of  a  complete  system 
of  secondary  schools  throughout  France, 
the    abundant    supply    of    institutions 
with  at  once  respectable  guarantees  and 
reasonable    charges,    fixing    a    general 
mean  of  school-cost  which  even  the  most 


successful  private  school  cannot  venture 
much  to  exceed. 

After  all,  it  is  the  "  educational  home," 
and  not  Bradfield  or  Marlborough,  which 
supplies  us  with  the  nearest  approach  to 
that  rate   of  charges  which  secondary 
instruction,  if  it  is  ever  to  be  organized 
on  a  great  scale,  and  to  reach  those  who 
are  in  need  of  it,  must  inevitably  adopt. 
People  talk  of  the  greater  cheapness  of 
foreign  countries,  and  of  the  dearness  of 
this  ;   everything  costs  more  here,  they 
say,  than  it  does  abroad  ;  good  education 
like  everything  else.     I  do  not  wish  to 
dispute,  I  am   willing  to   make   some 
allowance  for  this  plea ;    one  must  be 
careful  not  to  make  too  much,  however, 
or  we  shall  find  ourselves  to  the  end  of 
the  chapter  with  a  secondary  instruction 
failing  just  where  our  present  secondary 
instruction  fails — a  secondary  instruc- 
tion which,  out  of  the  multitude  needing 
it,  a  few,  and  only  a  few,  make  sacrifices 
to   get ;  the    many,   who  do  not   like 
sacrifices,  go  without  it.     If  we  fix  a 
school-charge  varying  from  251.  to  50?. 
a  year,  I  am  sure  we  have  fixed  the  out- 
side rate  which  the  great  body  of  those 
needing  secondary  instruction  will  ever 
pay.     Sir  John  Coleridge  analyses  this 
body  into  "  the  clergy  of  moderate  or 
"  contracted  incomes  "  (and  that  means 
the  immense  majority  of  the   clergy), 
"  officers  of  the  army  and  navy,  medical 
"  men,    solicitors,  and  gentry  of  large 
"  families  and  small  means."  Many  more 
elements  might  be  enumerated.     Why 
are  the  manufacturers  left  out  1  The  very 
rich,  among  these,  are  to  be  counted  by 
ones,  the  middling  sort  by  hundreds. 
And  when  Sir  John  Coleridge  separates 
"  tenant-farmers,  small  landholders,  and 
"  retail  tradesmen,"  into  a  class  by  them- 
selves,  and  proposes   to   appropriate  a 
separate  class  of  schools  for  them,  he 
carries  the  process  of  distinction   and 
demarcation  further  than  I  can  think 
quite  desirable.      But  taking  the  con- 
stituent parts  of  the  class  requiring  a 
liberal   education   as  he  assigns  them, 
it  seems  to  me  certain  that  a  sum  rang- 
ing from  251.  to  50/.  a  year,  is  as  much 
as  those  whom  he  enumerates  can  in 
general  be  expected  to  pay  for  a  son's 


A  French  Eton :  Part  II. 


347 


education,  and  as  much  as  they  need  be 
called  upon  to  pay  for  a  sound  and 
valuable  education,  if  secondary  instruc- 
tion were  organized  as  it  might  be. 
It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that 
a  reduced  rate  of  charge  for  boarders, 
at  a  good  boarding-school,  is  not  by  any 
means  the  only  benefit  to  the  class  of 
parents  in  question — perhaps  not  even 
the  principal  benefit — which  the  organ- 
ization of  secondary  instruction  brings 
with  it.  It  brings  with  it  also,  by 
establishing  its  schools  in  proper  num- 
bers, and  all  over  the  country,  facilities 
for  bringing  up  many  boys  as  day- 
scholars  who  are  now  brought  up  as 
boarders.  At  present  many  people 
send  their  sons  to  a  boarding-school 
when  they  would  much  rather  keep 
them  at  home,  because  they  have 
no  suitable  school  within  reach.  Opi- 
nions differ  as  to  whether  it  is  best 
for  a  boy  to  live  at  home  or  to  go  away 
to  school,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt 
which  of  the  two  modes  of  bringing 
him  up  is  the  cheapest  for  his  parents  ; 
and  those  (and  they  are  many)  who 
think  that  the  continuation  of  home- 
life  along  with  his  schooling  is  far  best 
for  the  boy  himself,  would  enjoy  a 
double  benefit  in  having  suitable  schools 
made  accessible  to  them. 

But  I  must  not  forget  that  an  institu- 
tion, or  rather  a  group  of  institutions, 
exists,  offering  to  the  middle  classes,  at 
a  charge  scarcely  higher  than  that  of 
the  20£.  "  educational  home,"  an  educa- 
tion affording  considerable  guarantees 
for  its  sound  character.  I  mean  the 
College  of  St.  Nicholas,  Lancing,  and 
its  affiliated  schools.  This  institution 
certainly  demands  a  word  of  notice  here, 
and  no  word  of  mine,  regarding  Mr. 
Woodard  and  his  labours,  shall  be 
wanting  in  unfeigned  interest  and  respect 
for  them.  Still,  I  must  confess  that,  as 
I  read  Mr.  Woodard's  programme,  as 
I  listened  to  an  excellent  sermon  from 
the  Dean  of  Chichester  in  recommenda- 
tion of  it,  that  programme  and  that  ser- 
mon seemed  to  me  irresistibly  to  lead  to 
conclusions  which  they  did  not  reach, 
and  that  the  conclusions  which  they  did 
reach  were  far  from  satisfying.  Mr. 


Woodard  says  with  great  truth  :  "  It 
"  may  be  asked,  Why  cannot  the  shop- 
"  keeper-class  educate  their  own  chil- 
"  dren  without  charity  ]  It  may  be 
"  answered,  Scarcely  any  class  in  the 
"  country  does  educate  its  own  children 
"  without  some  aid.  Witness  the  enor- 
"  mous  endowments  of  our  Universities 
"  and  public  schools,  where  the  sons  of 
"  our  well-to-do  people  resort.  Witness 
"  our'national  schools  supported  by  State 
"  grants,  and  by  parochial  and  national 
"  subscriptions.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
"  lower  middle  class"  (Mr.  Wroodard 
might  quite  properly  have  said  the 
middle  class  in  general),  "  politically  a 
"  very  important  one,  is  dependent  to  a 
"  great  extent  for  its  education  on  pri- 
•  vate  desultory  enterprise.  This  class, 
'  in  this  land  of  education,  gets  nothing 
'  out  of  the  millions  given  annually  for 
'  this  purpose  to  every  class  except 
themselves."  In  his  sermon  Dr.  Hook 
spoke,  in  his  cordial,  manly  way,  much 
to  the  same  effect. 

This  was  the  grievance ;  what  was  the 
remedy  ?  That  this  great  class  should 
be  rescued  from  the  tender  mercies  of 
private  desultory  enterprise  1  That,  in 
this  land  of  education,  it  should  hence- 
forth get  something  out  of  the  millions 
given  annually  for  this  purpose  to  every 
class  except  itself]  That  in  an  age 
when  "  enormous  endowments," — the 
form  which  public  aid  took  in  earlier 
ages,  and  taking  which  form  public  aid 
founded  in  those  ages  the  Universities 
and  the  public  schools  for  the  benefit, 
along  with  the  upper  class,  of  this  very 
middle  class  which  is  now,  by  the  irre- 
sistible course  of  events,  in  great  measure 
.excluded  from  them — that  in  an  age,  I 
say,  when  these  great  endowments,  this 
medieval  form  of  public  aid,  have  ceased, 
public  aid  should  be  brought  to  these 
classes  in  that  simpler  and  more  ma- 
nageable form  which  in  modern  societies 
it  assumes — the  form  of  public  grants, 
with  the  guarantees  of  supervision  and 
responsibility  1  The  Universities  re- 
ceive public  grants ;  for — not  to  speak 
of  the  payment  of  certain  professors l  by 

n  i  These  professors  are  now  nominally  paid 
by  the  University ;  but  the  University  pays 


348 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


the   State — that   the  State  regards  the 
endowments  of  the  Universities  as  in 
reality  public  grants,  it  proves  by  as- 
suming to  itself  the  right  of  interfering 
in  the  disposal  of  them ;  the  elementary 
schools  receive   public    grants.     Why, 
then,  should  not  our  secondary  schools 
receive  public  grants  1     But  this  ques- 
tion Mr.  Woodard  (I  do  not  blame  him 
for  it,  he  had  a  special  function  to  per- 
form) never  touches.     He  falls  back  on 
an  Englishman's   favourite    panacea — • 
a  subscription.     He  has  built  a  school 
at  Lancing  and  a  school  at  Shoreham, 
and  he  proposes  to  build  a  bigger  school 
than  either  at  Balcombe.     He  asks  for 
a  certain  number  of  subscribers  to  give 
him  contributions  for  a  certain  number 
of  years,  at  certain  rates,  which  he  has 
calculated.     I  cannot  see  how,  in  this 
way,  he  will  be  delivering  English  se- 
condary instruction  from  the  hands  of 
"  private  desultory  enterprise."     What 
English  secondary  instruction  wants  is 
these  two  things  :  sufficiency  of  provi- 
sion of  sound   schools ;    sufficiency   of 
securities  for  their  fitness.     Mr.  Wood- 
ard proposes  to  establish  one  great  school 
in  Sussex,  where  he  has  got  two  already. 
What  sort  of  a  provision  is  this  for  that 
need  which  is,  on  his  own  showing,  so 
urgent  ?      He  hopes,  indeed,   that  "  if 
"  the  public  will  assist  in  raising  this 
"  one  school,  it  will  lead  to  a  general 
"  extension  of  middle  class  education 
"  all   over    England."      But    in    what 
number  of  years  1     How  long  are  we  to 
wait  first  ?     And  then  we  have  to  con- 
sider the  second  great  point — that  of 
securities:       Suppose     Mr.     Woodard's 
hopes  to  be  fulfilled — suppose  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Balcombe  school  to  have 
led  to  the  establishment  of  like  schools 
all  over  England — what  securities  shall 
we  have  for  the  fitness  of  these  schools  1 
Sussex  is  not  a  very  large  and  populous 
county,  but,  even  if  we  limit  ourselves 
to  the  ratio  adopted  for  Sussex,  of  three 
of  these  schools  to  a  county,  that  gives 

them  in  consideration  of  the  remission  to  her, 
by  the  State,  of  certain  duties  of  greater 
amount  than  the  salaries  which  the  State  used 
to  pay  to  these  professors.  They  are  still, 
therefore,  in  fact,  paid  by  the  State. 


us  120  of  them  for  England  proper  only, 
without  taking  in  Wales.  I  have  said 
that  the  eminence  of  the  master  may  be 
in  itself  a  sound  security  for  the  worth 
of  a  school ;  but,  when  I  look  at  the 
number  of  these  schools  wanted,  when  I 
look  at  the  probable  position  and  emolu- 
ments of  their  teachers,  I  cannot  think  it 
reasonable  to  expect  that  all  of  them,  or 
anything  like  all,  will  be  provided  with 
masters  of  an  eminence  to  make  all 
further  guarantees  unnecessary.  But, 
perhaps,  they  will  all  be  affiliated  to  the 
present  institution  at  Lancing,  and,  in 
some  degree,  under  its  supervision  ? 
Well,  then,  that  gives  us,  as  the  main 
regulative  power  of  English  secondary 
instruction,  as  our  principal  security  for 
it,  the  Provost  and  Fellows  of  St.  Nicho- 
las College,  Lancing.  I  have  the  great- 
est, the  most  sincere  respect  for  Mr. 
Woodard  and  his  coadjutors — I  should 
be  quite  ready  to  accept  Mr.  Woodard's 
name  as  sufficient  security  for  any  school 
which  he  himself  conducts  —  but  I 
should  hesitate,  I  confess,  before  accept- 
ing Mr.  Woodard  and  his  colleagues,  or 
any  similar  body  of  private  persons,  as 
my  final  security  for  the  right  manage- 
ment of  a  great  national  concern,  as  the 
last  court  of  appeal  to  which  the  inte- 
rests of  English  secondary  instruction 
were  to  be  carried.  Their  constitution 
is  too  close,  their  composition  too  little 
national.  Even  if  this  or  that  individual 
were  content  to  take  them  as  my  security, 
the  bulk  of  the  public  would  not.  We 
saw  this  the  other  day,  when  imputa- 
tions were  thrown  out  against  Lancing, 
and  our  proposed  security  had  to  find 
security  for  itself.  It  had  no  difficulty 
in  so  doing;  Mr.  Woodard  has,  it  cannot 
be  repeated  too  often,  governed  Lancing 
admirably;  all  I  mean-  is — and  Mr. 
Woodard  himself  would  probably  be  the 
first  to  agree  with  me — that,  to  com- 
mand public  confidence  for  a  great  na- 
tional system  of  schools,  one  needs  a 
security  larger,  ampler,  more  national, 
than  any  which,  by  the  very  nature  of 
things,  Mr.  Woodard  and  his  friends  can 
quite  supply. 

But  another  and  a  very  plausible  se- 
curity has  been  provided  for  secondary 


A  French  Eton :  Part  II. 


349 


instruction  by  the  zeal  and  energy  of 
Mr.  Acland  and  Dr.  Temple ;  I  mean, 
the  Oxford  and  Cambridge  middle  class 
examinations.     The  good  intentions  and 
the  activity  of  the  promoters  of  these 
examinations  cannot  be  acknowledged 
too  gratefully  ;  good  has  certainly  been 
accomplished  by  them  :  yet  it  is  ttnde- 
niable  that  this  security  also  is,  in  its 
present  condition,  quite  insufficient.     I 
write  not  for  the  professed  and  prac- 
tised educationist,  but  for  the  general 
reader  ;  above  all,  for  the  reader  of  that 
class  which  is  most  concerned  in  the 
question  which  I  am  raising,  and  which  • 
I  am  most  solicitous  to  carry  with  me — 
the  middle  class.     Therefore,  I  shall  use 
the    plainest   and  most  unprofessional 
language  I  can,  in  attempting  to  show 
what  the  promoters  of  these  University 
examinations  try  to  do,  what  they  have 
accomplished,  wherein  they  have  failed. 
They  try  to  make  security  do  for  us  all 
that  we  want   in  the  improvement  of 
our  secondary  education.     They  accept 
the    "  educational   homes "   at  present 
scattered  all  over  the  country  ;  they  do 
not  aim  at  replacing  them  by  other  and 
better  institutions  ;  they  do  not  visit  or 
criticise  them ;  but  they  invite  them  to 
send  select  pupils  to  certain  local  centres, 
and  when   the   pupils   are  there,  they 
examine   them,    class   them,   and    give 
prizes  to  the  best  of  them.   Undoubtedly 
this  action  of  the  Universities  has  given 
a  certain  amount  of  stimulus  to  these 
schools,  and  has  done  them  a  certain 
amount  of  good.     But  any  one  can  see 
how  far  this  action  falls,  and  must  fall, 
short  of  what  is  required.     Any  one  can 
see  that  the  examination  of  a  few  select 
scholars  from  a  school,  not  at  the  school 
itself,  not  preceded  or  followed  by  an 
inspection  of  the  school  itself,  affords  no 
solid  security  for  the  good  condition  of 
their  school.     Any  one  can  see  that  it 
is  for  the  interest  of  an  unscrupulous 
master  to  give  all  his  care  to  his  few 
cleverest  pupils,  who  will  serve  him  as 
an  advertisement,  while  he  neglects  the 
common  bulk  of  his  pupils,  whose  back- 
wardness there  will  be  nobody  to  expose. 
I  will  not,  however,  insist  too  strongly 
on  this  last  mischief,  because  I  really 


believe  that,  serious  as  is  its  danger,  it 
has  not  so  much  prevailed  as  to  counter- 
balance the  benefit  which  the  mere 
stimulus  of  these  examinations  has  given. 
All  I  say  is,  that  this  stimulus  is  an 
insufficient  security.  Plans  are  now 
broached  for  reinforcing  University  ex- 
amination by  University  inspection. 
There  we  get  a  far  more  solid  security: 
And  I  agree  with  Sir  John  Coleridge, 
that  a  body  fitter  than  the  Universities 
to  exercise  this  inspection  could  not  be 
found.  It  is  indispensable  that  it  should 
be  exercised  in  the  name,  and  on  the 
responsibility,  of  a  great  public  body ; 
therefore  the  Society  of  Arts,  which  de- 
serves thanks  for  its  readiness  to  help 
in  improving  secondary  instruction,  is 
hardly,  perhaps,  from  its  want  of  weight, 
authority,  and  importance,  qualified  to 
exercise  it :  but  whether  it  is  exercised 
by  the  State,  or  by  great  and  august 
corporations  like  Oxford  and  Cambridge, 
the  value  of  the  security  is  equally  good ; 
and  learned  corporations,  like  the  Uni- 
versities, have  a  certain  natural  fitness 
for  discharging  what  is,  in  many  respects, 
a  learned  function.  It  is  only  as  to  the 
power  of  the  Universities  to  organize, 
equip,  and  keep  working  an  efficient 
system  of  inspection  for  secondary 
schools,  that  I  am  in  doubt ;  organization 
and  regularity  are  as  indispensable  to 
this  guarantee  as  weight  and  authority. 
Can  the  Universities  organize  and  pay  a 
body  of  inspectors  to  travel  all  over  Eng- 
land, to  visit,  at  least  once  in  every 
year,  the  four  or  five  hundred  endowed 
schools  of  this  country,  and  its  unnum- 
bered "  educational  homes  ; "  can  they 
supply  a  machinery*  for  regulating  the 
action  of  these  gentlemen,  giving  effect 
to  the  information  received  from  them, 
printing  their  reports,  circulating  them 
through  the  country  ?  The  French  Uni- 
versity could  ;  but  the  French  Univer- 
sity was  a  department  of  State.  If  the 
English  Universities  cannot,  the  security 
of  their  inspection  will  be  precarious ;  if 
they  can,  there  can  be  no  better. 

No  better  security.  But  English 
secondary  instruction  wants,  I  said, 
two  things  :  sufficient  provision  of  good 
schools,  sufficient  security  for  these 


350 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II, 


schools  continuing  good  Granting  that 
the  Universities  may  give  us  the  second, 
I  do  not  see  how  they  are  to  give  us  the 
first.  It  is  not  enough  merely  to  pro- 
vide a  staff  of  inspectors  and  examiners, 
and  still  to  leave  the  children  of  our 
middle  class  scattered  about  through  the 
numberless  obscure  endowed  schools  and 
"  educational  homes  "  of  this  country, 
some  of  them  good,  many  of  them  mid- 
dling, most  of  them  bad ;  but  none  of 
them  great  institutions,  none  of  them 
invested  with  much  consideration  or 
dignity.  What  is  wanted  for  the  Eng- 
lish middle  class  is  resected  schools,  as 
well  as  inspected  ones.  I  will  explain 
what  I  mean. 

The  education  of  each  class  in  society 
has,  or  ought  to  have,  its  ideal,  deter- 
mined by  the  wants  of  that  class,  and 
by  its  destination.  Society  may  be 
imagined  so  uniform  that  one  education 
shall  be  suitable  for  all  it  members  ;  we 
have  not  a  society  of  that  kind,  nor  has 
any  European  -country.  We  have  to 
regard  the  condition  of  classes,  in  deal- 
ing with  education;  but  it  is  right  to 
take  into  account  not  their  immediate 
condition  only,  but  their  wants,  their 
destination — above  all,  their  evident 
pressing  wants,  their  evident  proximate 
destination.  Looking  at  English  society 
at  this  moment,  one  may  say  that  the 
ideal  for  the  education  of  each  of  its 
classes  to  follow,  the  aim  which  the  educa- 
tion of  each  should  particularly  endea- 
vour to  reach,  is  different.  Mr.  Hawtrey, 
whose  admirable  and  fruitful  labours  at 
St.  Mark's  School  entitle  him  to  be  heard 
with  great  respect,  lays  it  down  as  an 
absolute  proposition  that  the  family  is 
the  type  of  the  scJtool.  I  do  not  think 
that  is  true  for  the  schools  of  all 
classes  alike.  I  feel  sure  my  father, 
whose  authority  Mr.  Hawtrey  claims  for 
this  maxim,  would  not  have  laid  it 
down  in  this  absolute  way.  For  the 
wants  of  the  highest  class — of  the  class 
which  frequents  Eton,  for  instance — not 
xchool  a  family,  but  rather  school  a  little 
world,  is  the  right  ideal.  I  cannot  con- 
cede to  Mr.  Hawtrey  that,  for  the  young 
gentlemen  who  go  to  Eton,  our  grand 
aim  and  inspiration  should  be,  in  his  own 


words,  "  to  make  their  boyhood  a  joyous 
"  one,  by  gentle  usage  and  friendly  con- 
"  fidence  on  the  part  of  the  master."  Let 
him  believe  me,  the  great  want  for  the 
children  of  luxury  is  not  this  sedulous 
tenderness,  this  smoothing  of  the  rose-leaf 
for  them ;  I  am  sure  that,  in  fact,  it  is  not 
by  the  predominance  of  the  family  and 
parental  relation  in  its  school-life  that 
Eton  is  strongest :  and  it  is  well  that 
this  is  so.     It  seems  to  me  that,  for  the 
class  frequenting  Eton,  the  grand  aim  of 
education  should  be  to  give  them  those 
good  things  which  their  birth  and  rear- 
ing are  least  likely  to  give  them  ;  to  give 
them  (besides  mere  book-learning)  the 
notion  of  a  sort  of  republican  fellowship, 
the  practice  of  a  plain  life  in  common, 
the  habit  of  self-help.     To  the  middle 
class,  the  grand  aim  of  education  should 
be  to  give  largeness  of  soul  and  personal 
dignity ;    to   the  lower   class,   feeling, 
gentleness,  humanity.    Here,  at  last,  Mr. 
Hawtrey' s  ideal  of  the  family,  as  the 
type  for  the  school,  conies  in   its  due 
place  ;  for  the  children  of  poverty  it  is 
right,  it  is  needful  to  set  oneself  first  to 
"  make  their  boyhood  a  joyous  one,  by 
"  gentle  usage  and  friendly  confidence  on 
"  the  part  of  the  master  ; "  for  them  the 
great  danger  is  not  insolence  from  over- 
cherishing,  but  insensibility  from  over- 
neglect.     Mr.  Hawtrey's  labours  at  St. 
Mark's  have  been  excellent  and  fruitful, 
just  because  he  has  here   applied  his 
maxim  where  it  was  the  right  maxim  to 
apply.     Yet  even  in   this  sphere  Mr. 
Hawtrey's  maxim  must  not  be  used  too 
absolutely  or  too  long.     Human  dignity 
needs  almost  as  much  care  as  human 
sensibility.      First,   undoubtedly;   you 
must  make  men  feeling  ;  but  the  mo- 
ment you  have  done  that,  lose  no  time 
in  making   them  magnanimous.      Mr. 
Hawtrey  will  forgive  me  for  saying  that 
perhaps  his  danger  lies  in  pressing  the 
spring  of  gentleness,  of  confidence,   of 
child-like  docility,  of  "  kindly  feeling  of 
'•'  the  dependent  towards  the  parent  who 
"  is  farthering  his  well-being"  a  little  too 
far.     The  energy  and  manliness,  Avhich 
he  values  as  much  as  any  one,  run  per- 
haps some  little  risk  of  etiolating.     At 
least,  I  think  I  can  see  some  indications 


A  French  Eton :  Part  II. 


351 


of  this  danger  in  tlie  reports — pleasing, 
as,  in  most  respects,  they  axe — of  his 
boys'  career  in  the  world  after  they  have 
left  school.  He  does  so  much  for  them 
at  St.  Mark's,  that  he  brings  them  to 
the  point  at  which  the  ideal  of  education 
changes,  and  the  prime  want  for  their 
culture  becomes  identical  with  the  prime 
want  for  the  culture  of  the  middle 
classes.  Their  fibre  has  been  suppled 
long  enough  ;  now  it  wants  fortifying. 

To  do  Eton  justice,  she  does  not  follow 
Mr.  Hawtrey's  ideal ;  she  does  not  supple 
the  fibre  of  her  pupils  too  much  ;  and, 
to  do  the  parents  of  these  pupils  justice, 
they  have  in  general  a  wholesome  sense 
of  what  their  sons  do  really  most  want, 
and  are  not  by  any  means  anxious  that 
school  should  over-foster  them.  But  I 
am  afraid  our  middle  classes  have  not 
quite  to  the  same  degree  this  just  per- 
ception of  the  true  wants  of  their  off- 
spring. They  wish  them  to  be  com- 
fortable at  school,  to  be  sufficiently 
instructed  there,  and  not  to  cost  much. 
Hence  the  eager  promise  of  "  homo 
comforts  "  with  school  teaching,  all  011 
"  terms  inclusive  and  moderate,"  from 
the  conscientious  proprietor  of  the  edu- 
cational home.  To  be  sure,  they  do 
not  get  what  they  wish.  So  long  as 
human  nature  remains  what  it  is,  they 
never  will  get  it,  until  they  take  some 
better  security  for  it  than  a  prospectus. 
But  suppose  they  get  the  security  of 
inspection  exercised  by  the  Universities, 
or  by  any  other  trustworthy  authority. 
Some  good  such  an  inspection  would 
undoubtedly  accomplish ;  certain  glaring- 
specimens  of  charlatanism  it  might  pro- 
bably expose,  certain  gross  cases  of 
mishandling  and  neglect  it  might  put 
a  stop  to.  It  might  do  a  gpod  deal  for 
the  school  teaching,  and  something  for 
the  home  comforts.  It  can  never  make 
these  last  what  the  prospectuses  pro- 
mise, what  the  parents  who  believe  the 
prospectuses  hope  for,  what  they  might 
even  really  have  for  their  money ;  for 
only  secondary  instruction  organized  on 
a  great  and  regular  scale  can  give  this 
at  such  cheap  cost,  and  so  to  organi/e 
secondary  instruction  the  inspection  we 
are  supposing  lias  no  poAver.  But  even 


if  it  had  the  power,  if  secondary  in- 
struction were  organized  on  a  great  and 
regular  scale,  if  it  were  a  national 
concern,  it  would  not  be  by  insuring  to 
the  offspring  of  the  middle  classes  a 
more  solid  teaching  at  school,  and  a 
larger  share  of  home-comforts  than  they 
at  present  enjoy  there  (though  certainly 
it  would  do  this),  that  such  a  secondary 
instruction  would  confer  upon  them  the 
greatest  boon.  Its  greatest  boon  to 
the  offspring  of  these  classes  would  bt 
its  giving  them  great,  honourable,  public 
institutions  for  their  nurture — institu- 
tions conveying  to  the  spirit,  at  the 
time  of  life  when  the  spirit  is  most 
penetrable,  the  salutary  influences  of 
greatness,  honour,  and  nationality — 
influences  which  expand  the  soul,  libe- 
ralise the  mind,  dignify  the  character. 

Such  institutions  are  the  great  public 
schools  of  England  and  the  great  Uni- 
versities ;  with  these  influences,  and 
some  others  to  which  I  just  now  pointed, 
they  have  formed  the  upper  class  of 
this  country — a  class  with  many  faults, 
with  many  shortcomings,  but  imbued 
on  the  whole,  and  mainly  through  these 
influences,  with  a  high,  magnanimous, 
governing  spirit,  which  has  long  enabled 
them  to  rule,  not  ignobly,  this  great 
country,  and  which  will  still  enable 
them  to  rule  it  until  they  are  equalled 
or  surpassed.  These  institutions  had 
their  origin  in  endowments ;  and  the 
age  of  endowments  is  gone.  Beautiful 
and  venerable  as  arc  many  of  the 
aspects  under  which  it  presents  itself, 
this  form  of  public  establishment,  with 
its  limitations,  its  preferences,  its  eccle- 
siastical character,  its  inflexibility,  its 
inevitable  want  of  foresight,  proved,  as 
time  rolled  on,  to  be  subject  to  many 
inconveniences,  to  many  abuses.  On 
the  Continent  of  Europe  a  clean  sweep 
has  in  general  been  made  of  this  old 
form  of  establishment,  and  new  institu- 
tions have  arisen  upon  its  ruins.  In 
England  we  have  kept  our  great  school 
and  College  foundations,  introducing 
into  their  system  what  correctives  and 
palliatives  were  absolutely  necessary. 
Long  may  we  so  keep  them  ;  but  no 
such  palliatives  or  correctives  will  ever 


352 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


make  the  public  establishment  of  educa- 
tion which  sufficed  for  earlier  ages 
suffice  for  this,  nor  persuade  the  stream 
of  endowment,  long  since  failing  and 
scanty,  to  flow  again  for  our  present 
needs  as  it  flowed  in  the  middle  ages. 
For  public  establishments  modern  socie- 
ties have  to  betake  themselves  to  the 
State ;  that  is,  to  themselves  in  their 
collective  and  corporate  character.  On 
the  Continent,  society  has  thus  betaken 
itself  to  the  State  for  the  establishment 
of  education.  The  result  has  been  the 
formation  of  institutions  like  the  Lyceum 
of  Toulouse — institutions  capable  of 
great  improvement,  by  no  means  to  be  ex- 
tolled absolutely,  by  no  means  to  be  imi- 
tated just  as  they  are ;  but  institutions 
formed  by  modern  society,  with  modern 
modes  of  operation,  to  meet  modern 
wants ;  and  in  some  important  respects, 
at  any  rate,  meeting  those  wants.  These 
institutions  give  to  a  whole  new  class — 
to  the  middle  class  taken  at  its  very 
widest — not  merely  an  education  for 
whose  teaching  and  boarding  there  is 
valid  security,  but  something — not  so 
much  I  admit,  but  something — of  the 
same  enlarging,  liberalising  sense,  the 
sense  of  belonging  to  a  great  and 
honourable  public  institution,  which 
Eton  and  our  three  or  four  great  public 
schools  give  to  our  upper  class  only, 
and  to  a  small  fragment  broken  off  from 
the  top  of  our  middle  class.  That  is 
where  England  is  weak,  and  France, 
Holland,  and  Germany  are  strong. 
Education  is  and  must  be  a  matter  of 
public  establishment.  Other  countries 
have  replaced  the  defective  public  es- 
tablishment made  by  the  middle  ages 
for  their  education  with  a  new  one, 
which  provides  for  the  actual  condition 
of  things.  We  in  England  keep  our 
old  public  establishment  for  education. 
That  is  very  well ;  but  then  we  must 
not  forget  to  supplement  it  where  it 
falls  short.  "We  must  not  neglect  to 
provide  for  the  actual  condition  of 
things. 

I  have  no  pet  scheme  to  press,  no 
crotchet  to  gratify,  no  fanatical  zeal  for 
giving  this  or  that  particular  shape  to 
the  public  establishment  of  our  secondary 


instruction.  All  I  say  is,  that  it  is  most 
urgent  to  give  to  the  establishment  of  it 
a  wider,  a  truly  public  character,  and 
that  only  the  State  can  give  this.  If  the 
matter  is  but  once  fairly  taken  in  hand, 
and  by  competent  agency,  I  am  satisfied. 
In  this  country,  we  do  not  move  fast ; 
we  do  not  organize  great  wholes  all  in  a 
a  day.  But  if  the  State  only  granted 
for  secondary  instruction  the  sum 
which  it  originally  granted  for  primary 
— 20,000£.  a  year — and  employed  this 
sum  in  founding  scholarships  for  se- 
condary schools,  with  the  stipulation 
that  all  the  schools  which  sent  pupils 
to  compete  for  these  scholarships  should 
admit  inspection,  a  beginning  would 
have  been  made ;  a  beginning  which  I 
truly  believe  would,  at  the  end  of  ten 
years'  time,  be  found  to  have  raised  the 
character  of  secondary  instruction  all 
through  England.  If  more  than  this 
can  be  attempted  at  first,  Sir  John 
Coleridge,  in  his  two  excellent  letters 
on  this  subject  to  the  Guardian,  per- 
fectly indicates  the  right  course  to  take  : 
indeed,  one  could  wish  nothing  better 
than  to  commit  the  settlement  of  this 
matter  to  men  of  such  prudence,  modera- 
tion, intelligence,  and  public  character  as 
Sir  John  Coleridge.  The  four  or  five 
hundred  endowed  schools,  whose  col- 
lective operations  now  give  so  little 
result,  -should  be  turned  to  better  ac- 
count ;  amalgamation  should  be  used, 
the  most  useful  of  these  institutions 
strengthened,  the  most  useless  sup- 
pressed, the  whole  body  of  them  be 
treated  as  one  whole,  destined  har- 
moniously to  co-operate  towards  one 
end.  What  should  be  had  in  view  is 
to  constitute  in  every  county  at.  least 
one  great  centre  of  secondary  instruction, 
with  low  charges,  with  the  security  of 
inspection,  and  with  a  public  character. 
These  institutions  should  bear  some  such 
title  as  that  of  Royal  /Schools,  and  should 
derive  their  support,  mainly,  of  course, 
from  school-fees,  but  partly,  also,  from 
•endowments — their  own,  or  those  ap- 
propriated to  them — and  partly  from 
scholarships  supplied  by  public  grants. 
Wherever  it  is  possible,  wherever,  that 
is,  their  scale  of  charges  is  not  too  high, 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


353 


or  their  situation  not  too  unsuitable, 
existing  schools  of  good  repute  should 
be  adopted  as  the  Royal  Schools.  Schools 
such  as  Mr.  Woodard's,  such  as  King 
Edward's  School  at  Birmingham,  such 
as  the  Collegiate  School  at  Liverpool,  at 
once  occur  to  one  as  suitable  for  this 
adoption;  it  would  confer  upon  them, 
besides  its  other  advantages,  a  public 
character  which  they  are  now  without. 
Probably  the  very  best  medicine  which 
could  be  devised  for  the  defects  of  Eton, 
Harrow,  and  the  other  schools  which 
the  Koyal  Commissioners  have  been 
scrutinizing,  would  be  the  juxtaposition, 
and,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  competition, 
of  establishments  of  this  kind.  No 
wise  man  will  desire  to  see  root-and- 
branch  work  made  with  schools  like 
Eton  or  Harrow,  or  to  see  them  diverted 
from  the  function  which  they  at  present 
discharge,  and,  on  the  whole,  usefully. 
Great  subversive  changes  would  here  be 
out  of  place ;  it  is  an  addition  of  new 
that  our  secondary  instruction  wants, 
not  a  demolition  of  old,  or,  at  least,  not 
of  this  old.  But  to  this  old  I  cannot 
doubt  that  the  apparition  and  operation 
of  this  desirable  new  would  give  a  very 
fruitful  stimulus ;  as  this  new,  on  its 
part,  would  certainly  be  very  much 
influenced  and  benefited  by  the  old. 

The  repartition  of  the  charge  of  this 
new  secondary  instruction,  the  mode  of 
its  assessment,  the  constitution  of  the 
bodies  for  regulating  the  new  system, 
the  proportion  and  character  .of  func- 
tions to  be  assigned  to  local  and  to 
central  authority  respectively,  these  are 
matters  of  detail  and  arrangement  which 
it  is  foreign  to  my  business  here  to 
discuss,  and,  I  hope,  quite  foreign  to  my 
disposition  to  haggle  and  wrangle  about. 
They  are  to  be  settled  upon  a  due  con- 
sideration of  circumstances,  after  an 
attentive  scrutiny  of  our  existing  means 
of  operation,  and  a  discriminating  review 
of  the  practice  of  other  countries.  In 
general,  if  it  is  agreed  to  give  a  public 
and  coherent  organization  to  secondary 
instruction,  few  will  dispute  that  its 
particular  direction,  in  different  loca- 
lities, is  best  committed  to  local  bodies, 
properly  constituted,  with  a  power  of 

Xo.  52. — VOL.  ix. 


supervision  by  an  impartial  central 
authority,  and  of  resort  to  this  authority 
in  the  last  instance.  Of  local  bodies, 
bad  or  good,  administering  education, 
we  have  already  plenty  of  specimens  in 
this  country ;  it  would  be  difficult  for 
the  wit  of  man  to  devise  a  better  govern- 
ing body  for  its  purpose  than  the  trustees 
of  Rugby  School,  or  a  worse  governing 
body  than  the  trustees  of  Bedford 
School.  To  reject  the  bad  in  the  ex- 
amples offering  themselves,  to  use  the 
good,  and  to  use  it  with  just  regard  to 
the  present  purpose,  is  the  thing  need- 
ful. Undoubtedly  these  are  important 
matters,  but  undoubtedly,  also,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  settle  them  properly;  not 
difficult,  I  mean,  for  ordinary  good  sense 
and  ordinary  good  temper.  The  intelli- 
gence, fairness,  and  moderation  which, 
in  practical  matters,  our  countrymen 
know  so  well  how  to  exercise,  make  one 
feel  quite  easy  in  leaving  these  com- 
mon-sense arrangements  to  them. 

I  am  more  anxious  about  the  danger 
of  having  the  whole  question  miscon- 
ceived, of  having  false  issues  raised 
about  it.  One  of  these  false  issues  I 
have  already  noticed.  People  say,  After 
all  your  Toulouse  Lyceum  is  not  so 
good  as  Eton.  But  the  Toulouse  Lyceum 
is  for  the  middle  class,  Eton  for  the 
upper  class.  I  will  allow  that  the  upper 
class,  amongst  us,  is  very  well  taken  care 
of,  in  the  way  of  schools,  already.  But 
is  the  middle  class  1  The  Lyceum  loses, 
perhaps,  if  compared  with  Eton  ;  but 
does  it  not  gain  if  compared  with  the 
"  Classical  and  Commercial  Academy  ? " 
And  it  is  with  this  that  the  comparison 
is  to  be  instituted.  Again,  the  French 
Lyceum  is  reproached  with  its  barrack 
life,  its  want  of  country  air  and  exercise, 
its  dismalness,  its  rigidity,  its  excessive 
supervision.  But  these  defects  do  not 
come  to  secondary  instruction  from  its 
connexion  Avith  the  State  ;  they  are  not 
necessary  results  of  that  connexion ; 
they  come  to  French  secondary  instruc- 
tion from  the  common  French  and  con- 
tinental habitudes  in  the  training  of 
children  and  school-boys ;  habitudes 
that  do  not  enough  regard  physical 
well-being  and  play.  They  may  be  re- 

A  A 


354 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


mediod  in  France,  and  men's  attention 
is  now  strongly  drawn  to  them  there  • 
there  has  even  been  a  talk  of  moving 
the  Lyceums  into  the  country,  though 
this  would  have  its  inconveniences.  But, 
at  any  rate,  these  defects  need  not  attend 
the  public  establishment  of  secondary 
instruction  in  England,  and  assuredly, 
with  our  notions  of  training,  they  would 
not  attend  them.  Again,  it  is  said 
that  France  is  a  despotically  governed 
country,  and  that  its  Lyceums  are  a  part 
of  its  despotism.  But  Switzerland  is  not 
a  despotically  governed  country,  and  it 
has  its  Lyceums  just  as  much  as  France. 
Again  it  is  said  that  in  France  the 
Lyceums  are  the  only  schools  allowed 
to  exist,  that  this  is  monopoly  and 
tyranny,  and  that  the  Lyceums  them- 
selves suffer  by  the  want  of  competition. 
Tli  ere  is  some  exaggeration  in  this  com- 
plaint, as  the  existence  of  Sordze,  and 
other  places  like  Soreze,  testifies  ;  still 
the  restraints  put  upon  private  enter- 
prise in  founding  schools  in  France,  are, 
no  doubt,  mischievously  strict ;  the 
refusal  of  the  requisite  authorization  for 
opening  a  private  school  is  often  vexa- 
tious ;  the  Lyceums  would  really  be 
benefited  by  the  proximity  of  other, 
and  sometimes  rival  schools.  But  who 
supposes  that  any  check  would  ever  be 
piit,  in  England,  upon  private  enterprise 
in  founding  schools  ?  who  supposes  that 
the  authorization  demanded  in  France 
for  opening  a  private  school  would  ever 
bo  demanded  in  England,  that  it  would 
ever  bo  possible  to  demand  it,  that  it 
would  ever  be  desirable  ?  Who  sup- 
poses that  all  the  benefits  of  a  public 
establishment  of  instruction  are  not  to 
be  obtained  without  it.  It  is  for  what 
it  does  itself  that  this  establishment  is 
so  desirable,  not  for  what  it  prevents 
others  from  doing.  Its  letting  others 
alone  does  not  prevent  it  from  itself 
having  a  most  useful  work  to  do,  and  a 
work  which  can  be  done  by  no  one  else. 
The  most  zealous  friends  of  free  instruc- 
tion upon  the  Continent  feel  this.  One 
of  the  ablest  of  them,  M.  Dollfus,  lately 
published  in  the  Revue  G'ermanique  some 
most  interesting  remarks  on  the  defects 
of  the  French  school  system,  as  at  present 


regulated.  He  demands  freedom  for 
private  persons  to  open  schools  without 
any  authorization  at  all.  But  does  he 
contest  the  right  of  the  State  to  have  its 
own  schools,  to  make  a  public  establish- 
ment of  instruction  1  So  far  from  it, 
he  treats  this  as  a  right  beyond  all  con- 
testation, as  a  clear' duty.  He  treats  as 
certain,  too,  the  right  of  the  State  to 
inspect  all  private  schools  once  opened, 
though  he  denies  the  right,  and  the 
good  policy,  of  its  putting  the  present 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  opening  them. 

But  there  is  a  catchword  which,  I 
know,  will  be  used  against  me.  England 
is  the  country  of  cries  and  catchwords  ; 
a  country,  where  public  life  is  so  much 
carried  on  by  means  of  parties,  must  be. 
That  English  public  life  should  be  car- 
ried on  as  it  is  I  believe  to  be  an  excel- 
lent thing ;  but  it  is  certain  that  all 
modes  of  life  have  their  special  incon- 
veniences, and  every  sensible  man. 
however  much-  he  may  hold  a  particular 
way  of  life  to  be  the  best,  and  may  be 
bent  on  adhering  to  it,  will  yet  always 
be  sedulous  to  guard  himself  against  its 
inconveniences.  One  of  these  is,  cer- 
tainly, in  English  public  life,  the  preva- 
lence of  cries  and  catchwords,  which  are 
very  apt  to  receive  an  application,  or  to 
be  used  with  an  absoluteness,  which  do 
not  belong  to  them ;  and  then  they 
tend  to  narrow  our  spirit  and  to  hurt 
our  practice.  It  is  good  to  make  a 
catchword  of  this  sort  come  down  from 
its  stronghold  of  commonplace,  to  force 
it  to  move  about  before  us  in  the  open 
country,  and  to  show  us  its  real  strength. 
Such  a  catchword  is  this  :  The  State  had 
better  leave  things  alone.  One  constantly 
hears  that  as  an  absolute  maxim ;  now, 
as  an  absolute  maxim,  it  has  really  no 
force  at  all.  The  absolute  maxims  are 
those  which  carry  to  man's  spirit  their 
own  demonstration  with  them ;  such 
propositions  as,  Duty  is  the  law  of 
human  life,  Man  is  morally  free,  and  so 
on.  The  proposition,  The  State  had 
better  leave  things  alone,  carries  no  such 
demonstration  with  it ;  it  has,  therefore, 
no  absolute  force  ;  it  merely  conveys  a 
notion  which  certain  people  have  gene- 
ralized from  certain  facts  which  have- 


A  French  Eton  :  Part  II. 


355 


come  under  their  observation,  and 
which,  by  a  natural  vice  of  the  human 
mind,  they  are  then  prone  to  apply 
absolutely.  Some  things  the  State  had 
better  leave  alone,  others  it  had  better 
not.  ]*s  this  particular  thing  one  of 
these,  or  one  of  those  ? — that,  as  to  any 
particular  thing,  is  the  right  question. 
N"ow,  I  say,  that  education  is  one  of 
those  things  which  the  State  ought  not 
to  leave  alone,  which  it  ought  to  esta- 
blish. It  is  said  that  in  education  given, 
wholly  or  in  part,  by  the  State,  there 
is  something  eleemosynary,  pauperising, 
degrading ;  that  the  self-respect  and 
manly  energy  of  those  receiving  it  are 
likely  to  become  impaired,  as  I  have 
said  that  the  manly  energy  of  those 
who  are  too  much  made  to  feel  their 
dependence  upon  a  parental  benefactor, 
is  apt  to  become  impaired.  Well,  now, 
is  this  so  1  Is  a  citizen's  relation  to  the 
State  that  of  a  dependent  to  a  parental 
benefactor  1  By  no  means  ;  it  is  that 
of  the  member  in  a  partnership  to  the 
whole  firm.  The  citizens  of  a  State, 
the  members  of  a  society,  are  really  a 
partnership  ;  "  a  partnership,"  as  Burke 
nobly  says,  "  in  all  science,  in  all  art, 
in  every  virtue,  in  all  perfection." 
Towards  this  great  final  design  of  their 
connexion,  they  apply  the  aids  which 
co-operative  association  can  give  them. 
This  applied  to  education  will,  un- 
doubtedly, give  the  middling  person 
a  better  schooling  than  his  own  indi- 
vidual unaided  resources  could  give 
him  ;  but  he  is  not  thereby  humiliated, 
he  is  not  degraded ;  he  is  wisely  and 
usefully  turning  his  associated  condition 
to  the  best  account.  Considering  his 
end  and  destination,  he  is  bound  so  to 
turn  it ;  certainly  he  has  the  right  so 
to  turn  it.  Certainly  he  has  a  right 
— to  quote  Burke  again — "to  a  fair 
"  portion  of  all  which  society,  with  all 
"  its  combinations  of  skill  and  force,  can 
"  do  in  his  favour."  Men  in.  civil 
society  have  the  right — to  quote  Burke 
yet  once  more  (one  cannot  quote  him 
too  often),  as  "  to  the  acquisitions  of 
"  their  parents  and  to  the  fruits  of  their 
"  own  industry,"  so  also  "  to  tlie  im- 
"  provenient  of  their  offspring,  to  in- 


"  struction  in  life,  and  to  consolation  in 
"  death." 

How  vain,  then,  and  how  meaning- 
less, to  tell  a  man  who,  for  the  instruc- 
tion of  his  offspring,  receives  aid  from 
the  State,  that  he  is  humiliated.  Humi- 
liated by  receiving  help  for  himself  as 
an  individual  from  himself  in  his  corpo- 
rate and  associated  capacity  !  help  to 
which  his  own  money,  as  a  tax-payer, 
contributes,  and  for  which,  as  a  result  of 
the  joint  energy  and  intelligence  of  the 
whole  community  in  employing  its 
powers,  he  himself  deserves  some  of 
the  praise  !  He  is  no  more  humiliated 
than  one  is  humiliated  by  being  on  the 
foundation  of  the  Charterhouse,  or  at 
"Winchester,  or  by  holding  a  scholarship 
or  fellowship  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge. 
Nay  (if  there  be  any  humiliation  here), 
not  so  much.  For  the  amount  of  benefac- 
ion,the  amount  of  obligation,  the  amount 
therefore,  I  suppose,  of  humiliation, 
diminishes  as  the  public  character  of 
the  aid  becomes  more  undeniable.  He 
is  no  more  humiliated  than  when  he 
crosses  London  Bridge,  or  walks  down 
the  King's  Eoad,  or  visits  the  British 
Museum.  But  it  is  one  of  the  extra- 
ordinary inconsistencies  of  some  English 
people  in  this  matter,  that  they  keep 
all  their  cry  of  humiliation  and  degra- 
dation for  help  which  the  State  offers. 
A  man  is  not  pauperized,  is  not  de- 
graded, is  not  oppressively  obliged,  by 
taking  aid  for  his  son's  schooling  from 
Mr.  "Woodard's  subscribers,  or  from  the 
next  squire,  or  from  the  next  rector,  or 
from  the  next  ironmonger,  'or  from  the 
next  druggist;  he  is  only  pauperized 
when  he  takes  it  from  the  State,  Avhen 
he  helps  to  give  it  himself ! 

This  matter  of  State-intervention  in 
the  establishment  of  public  instruction 
is  so  beset  with  misrepresentation  and 
misconception,  that  I  must  return  to  it 
again.  I  want  the  middle  classes  (it  is 
for  them,  above  all,  I  write),  the  middle 
classes  so  deeply  concerned  in  this 
matter,  so  numerous,  so  right-inten- 
tioned,  so  powerful,  to  look  at  the  thing 
with  impartial  regard  to  its  simple 
reason  and  to  its  present  policy. 

MATTHEW  ARNOLD. 

A  A  2 


356 


THACKEEAY. 

"COME  CHILDREN,  LET  US  SHUT  UP  THE  BOX  AND  THE  PUPPETS,   FOR   OUR  PLAY 

IS   PLAYED    OUT." 


DOES  any  one  remember  the  words  which 
form  the  title  to  this  article  1  They  are 
the  concluding  words  of  "  Vanity  Fair." 
Beneath  them  is  a  vignette  as  suggestive 
and  as  pathetic  as  the  best  of  Bewick's. 
A  boy  and  a  girl  are  looking  into  a 
box  of  puppets,  which  one  knows  are 
the  puppets  which  formed  the  cha- 
racters of  "  Vanity  Fair."  Dobbin  and 
Amelia  are  standing  up  wishing  us 
"  Good-bye ; "  Lord  Steyne  has  tumbled 
out  on  the  floor ;  and  the  boy  has  his 
hand  on  the  lid,  on  which  is  inscribed 
"  Finis,"  ready  to  shut  it  down.  Now 
it  is  shut  down  for  ever  :  And,  alas  !  the 
master  is  shut  in  with  his  puppets. 

How  was  it  that  we  first  came  to 
know  him  1  In  recalling  a  lost  friend 
to  our  memory,  what  is  the  first  thing 
we  think  of?  Almost  always  we  try  to 
bring  back  our  first  interview  with  him. 
How  naturally  it  comes  to  our  tongue  to 
say,  "Well,  I  remember  the  day  I  first 
saw  him."  Let  us  try  to  do  this  with 
the  great  one  who  is  gone. 

Does  any  one  remember  the  time 
when  one  began  to  hear  such  sentences 
as  these  flying  from  mouth  to  mouth — 
"It  is  wonderfully  clever."  "It  is 
so  very  strange."  "  One  don't  know 
whether  to  laugh  or  cry  at  it."  "Is 
his  name  really  TitmarsbJ"  "No,  his 
real  name  is  Thackeray,  and  he  wrote 
'  Cornhill  to  Grand  Cairo  ! '  Not  a  very 
young  man  either,  you  say ;  how  strange 
it  is  his  bursting  on  us  with  such  stuff 
as  this.  Tie  frightens  one  at  times." 

And  so  on.  If  you  find  in  some  long 
neglected  Barathrum  of  waste  paper  a 
yellow-coloured  pamphlet,  on  the  tattered 
covers  of  which  is  printed  "Vanity 
Fair ;  or,  Pen  and  Pencil  Sketches  of 
English  Society,"  you  may  remember 
that  these  were  the  sort  of  remarks 
which  went  about  among  non-literary 
men  when  the  educated  world  was  taken 


by  storm  with  the  most  remarkable  novel 
in  the  English -|  language  ;  coming  from 
the  pen  of  a  man,  known  certainly  to 
some  extent^  but  who  was  thought  to- 
have  had  sufficient  trial,  and  to  have 
found  his  metier  as  a  clever  magazine 
writer. 

Some  knew  better,  but  the  general 
world  did  not.  "  Vanity  Fair  "  took  the 
world  by  surprise.  Its  appearance  was 
a  kind  of  era  in  the  lives  of  men  whose 
ages  were  at  that  time  within  four  or  five 
years  of  twenty;  and,  for  aught  we  know, 
in  the  lives  of  men  older  and  wiser. 

One's  most  intimate  and  dearest 
friends  before  this  era  were  probably 
Hamlet,  Don  Quixote,  Eobinson  Crusoe, 
My  Uncle  Toby,  or,  probably,  for  tastes 
vary,  Mr.  Tom  Jones,  or  Mr.  Peregrine 
Pickle.  Latterly,  also,  we  had  got 
to  love  Mr.  Pickwick,  the  Brothers 
Cheeryble,  and  dear  old  Tom  Pinch ; 
and  were  conceiving  an  affectionate  ad- 
miration of  Eddard  Cuttle,  mariner ;  but 
when  these  wonderful  yellow  numbers 
were  handed  eagerly  from  hand  to  hand, 
to  be  borrowed,  read,  re-read,  and  dis- 
cussed, it  became  evident  that  the  circle 
of  our  acquaintances  had  been  suddenly 
and  singularly  enlarged ;  that  we  were 
becoming  acquainted  with  people — 
strange  people,  indeed  ! — who  forced 
themselves  on  our  notice,  and  engaged 
our  attention,  to  a  degree  which  none  of 
our  former  acquaintances  had  ever  suc- 
ceeded in  doing. 

These  wonderful  new  people,  too> 
were  so  amazingly  common-place.  They 
were  like  ourselves  in  detail.  There  was 
nothing  whatever  about  them  except 
that  we  could  not  get  them  out  of  our 
heads ;  that  we  discussed  their  proceed- 
ings as  we  would  those  of  the  real  people 
our  neighbours  ;  that  we  were  amused 
with  their  foolishness,  and  intensely  angry 
at  some  of  their  proceedings.  Any  fool 


Thackeray. 


357 


«ould  have  written  about  such  people  as 
these :  there  was  nothing  worthy  of  notice 
in  the  book  at  all,  except  that  it  had 
taken  entire  possession  of  us,  and  of  the 
world.  Through  the  exquisite  perfection 
of  the  art,  the  art  itself  was  not  only 
ignored,  but  indignantly  denied. 

How  melancholy  it  is  to  look  back  at 
the  long  line  of  our  sweethearts,  loved 
so  dearly  for  a  time,  then  neglected,  then 
cast  off,  and  only  remembered  by  their 
names,  and  by  a  dull  regretful  wonder 
at  that  having  been  so  dear  to  us  at  any 
time.  Were  we  ever  so  silly  as  to  have 
wept  over  the  death  of  Virginia,  our 
first  lady-love,  when  she  was  ship- 
wrecked in  the  Mauritius  1  and  how 
soon  after  were  we  furiously  indignant 
at  the  treatment  of  Rosamund  by  her 
papa  about  the'  purple  jar  and  the  new 
shoes  1  Then  it  was  that  impertinent 
espiegle  little  thing,  Julia  Mannering ; 
then  Flora  M'lvor,  and,  then  by  a  na- 
tural reaction  from  such  overstrained 
sentimentalisni,  Evelina  Burney.  And 
so  we  went  on  from  one  imaginary  young 
lady  to  another,  until  we  became  so 
Hose,  so  used  to  the  storms  of  the  great, 
passion,  that  we  could  love  no  more,  at 
least,  not  in  the  old  degree.  "We  under- 
stood women.  "We  had  been  through 
too  much  :  when  at  last  that  queer  old- 
fashioned,  dear  little  body,  Jane  Eyre, 
married  Fairfax  Rochester,  we  merely 
said  that  the  girl  was  a  fool,  and  lit  our 
cigar.  We  could  love  no  more. 

Fools  that  we  were  !  we  were  just  on 
the  eve  of  a  crisis  in  our  lives,  of  the 
greatest  passion  of  all  (for  an  unworthy 
object  certainly)  —  a  passion  different 
from,  and  more  profound  than,  all  which 
had  gone  before.  At  the  time  that  these 
yellow  numbers  began  to  appear,  we 
made  acquaintance  with  one,  Miss  Re- 
becca Sharp,  and  from  the  moment  she 
threw  her  "dixonary"  out  of  the  window, 
we  loved  as  we  had  never  loved  before. 
We  were  fully  alive  to  that  young  lady's 
faults  ;  indeed  she  did  not  take  any  vast 
trouble  to  conceal  them ;  but  in  spite  of 
this  she  simply  gave  a  whisk  of  her 
yellow  hair,  and  an  ogle  with  her  green 
eyes,  took  us  by  the  nose,  and  led  us 
whithersoever  she  would. 


And  did  ever  woman  lead  man  such  a 
dance  as  she  led  us  ?  Never,  since  Pe- 
tronius  wrote  the  first  novel  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago.  There  was  one 
Ulysses,  and  there  is  one  Becky  Sharp, 
the  woman  of  many  experiences  and 
many  counsels,  the  most  of  them  far 
from  satisfactory.  There  is  no  killing 
or  shelving  her ;  she  always  rises  to  the 
occasion,  save  once,  and  that  one  time 
is  the  only  time  on  which  she  was  really 
guilty.  Then  she  is  prostrated  for  a 
period,  and  shows  you  accidentally  what 
you  were  hardly  inclined  to  believe,  that 
she  had  some  sort  of  a  heart. 

Is  there  anything  like  the  rise,  the 
fall,  and  the  rise  of  this  woman,  in 
literature?  It  is  hard  to  say  where. 
Many  other  characters  in  prose  fiction, 
and  often,  though  far  less  often,  in 
poetry,  grow  and  develop  ;  but  we  know 
of  none  which  enlarges  and  decreases 
again,  like  that  of  Becky  Sharp — which, 
alters  in  quantity  and  degree,  but  never  in 
quality,  by  the  breadth  of  a  hair.  False, 
clever,  shifty,  and  passionately  fond  of 
admiration  in  her  father's  studio,  she 
carries  those  qualities  and  no  others 
with  her,  using  them  in  greater  or  less 
degree,  according  to  her  opportunities, 
through  her  life.  One  finds  her  sipping 
gin  and  water  in  her  father's  studio,  and 
imitating  Miss  Pinkerton;  one  finds 
her  entertaining  a  select  audience  of 
Lord  Steyne  and  Lord  Southdown,  with 
a  wonderful  imitation  of  the  Dowager 
Lady  Southdown ;  and  one  finds  her  at 
last  with  the  plate  of  sausages  and  the 
brandy  bottle,  entertaining  two  German 
students  with  an  imitation  of  Jos.  Sed- 
ley,  in  the  later  and  not  so  prosperous 
times  when  she  lived  at  iNumero  Katter- 
vang  doose.  But  it  is  Becky  Sharp  stilL 
Her  mind,  her  tact,  her  power,  enlarge 
according  to  her  circumstances,  but  her 
character  never  develops ;  the  pupils 
of  her  green  cat's-eyes  may  expand  and 
contract  according  to  the  light,  but 
they  are  cat's-eyes  stilL  Becky  Sharp 
was  crystallized  and  made  perfect  by 
her  drunken  disreputable  father  and 
mother  in  early  years ;  and  whether 
you  find  her  among  drunken  art-stu- 
dents, talking  their  slang,  or  among  the 


358 


Thackeray. 


dwellers  in  the  gardens  of  the  west, 
where  the  golden  apples  grow,  talking 
their  slang — whether  she  does  battle 
with  a  footman  or  a  marquis — she  is  still 
the  same  dexterous,  unprincipled,  bril- 
liant, and  thoroughly  worthless  Becky 
Sharp  of  old.  Any  apprentice  can 
make  a  more  or  less  successful  attempt 
to  develop  a  character  by  circumstances ; 
to  make  it  "  grow  under  his  hand,"  as 
the  slang  goes.  It  required  the  hand 
of  an  almost  perfect  master  to  draw  a 
character  which  politely  declined  to  de- 
velop on  any  terms  whatever.  A  sort 
of  Lot's  wife  cf  a  character,  who,  though 
changed  into  a  pillar  of  salt,  persisted 
in  looking  back  to  Sodom,  and,  what  is 
more,  succeeded  in  the  end  in  getting 
back  there — if  not  to  the  old  place  itself, 
at  least  to  the  most  fashionable  quarter 
of  Zoar. 

Yes,  Eebecca  Sharp,  although  she 
pitched  one  overboard  for  the  next  man 
she  came  across,  although  she  debauched 
one's  moral  sense,  and  played  the  deuce 
with  one's  property,  still  holds  the  first 
place  among  one's  ideal  lady  -  loves. 
Competing  even  with  the  last  and  no- 
blest of  them  all,  with  Maggie  Tulliver  : 
the  girl  who  wore  dark  night  on  her 
head  for  a  diadem. 

And  while  one  made  acquaintance 
with  this  woman,  one  began  to  make 
acquaintance  with  other  people  quite  as 
remarkable  as  she ;  with  people  of 
whom  one  had  never  seen  the  like 
exactly,  and  yet  people  who  were 
evidently  real,  and  yet  could  not  be 
sketched  from  life — with  Lord  Steyne, 
for  instance. 

Some  said  that  Lord  Steyne  was  a 
sketch  from  life  of  Lord  A,  others  of 
Lord  B  ;  the  character  suited  neither. 
Lord  A  was  accused  of  being  the  wicked 
nobleman,  because  his  house  was  in  a 
certain  square,  and  Lord  B,  goodness 
only  knows  why.  The  fact  was  that 
Lord  Steyne  was  a  result  of  English 
History.  He  may  have  been  as  infi- 
nitely better  than  Lord  A,  as  he  was 
infinitely  worse  than  Lord  B.  But  he 
was  the  result  of  ever  increasing  wealth 
which  passed  without  disturbance  from 
generation  to  generation  ;  of  five  or  six 


centuries  of  family  tradition — tradition 
which  said  that  the  human  race  was 
divided  into  men,  women,  and  the 
British  Peerage.  It  is  perfectly  impos- 
sible that  Lord  Steyne  could  ever  have 
existed ;  absolutely  perfect  characters 
do  not  exist.  Mr.  Pitt  must  have  had 
his  failings  (one  says  nothing  of  the 
port  wine  and  water  ;  that  was  a  neces- 
sity), but  they  have  not  come  down  to 
us.  Marat  must  have  had  his  virtues, 
though  we  have  not  heard  of  them. 
There  are  no  perfect  characters  in  the 
world.  Lord  Steyne  is  a  masterly  cre- 
ation, but  he  is  too  perfect  a  character 
ever  to  have  existed ;  he  is  so  perfect, 
that  we  have  to  argue  ourselves  out  of 
the  belief  that  he  is  drawn  from  life. 
The  details  are  too  probable — the  bow 
legs,  the  red  hair,  the  buck  teeth  ;  all 
telling  of  latent  scrofula  ;  his  snarling 
godless  scorn,  telling  of  his  familiarity 
with  the  delightfully  choice  spirits  of 
the  aristocratic  revolutionary  party  of 
France — of  the  men  who  encouraged  the 
revolution,  pour  s'amuser,  and  perished 
in  it,  with  a  smile  of  cynical  good 
•humour  on  their  faces,  as  if  their  own 
ruin  was  the  best  joke  of  all ;  his  in- 
tense admiration  for  Becky's  lying,  even 
when  it  was  directed  against  himself. 
All  these  things,  and  many  others,  mark 
Lord  Steyne  as  the  imaginary  represen- 
tative of  all  the  vices  which  proceed 
from  irresponsible  wealth,  without  one 
of  the  virtues  which  come  from  the  de- 
sire to  keep  a  great  name  spotless ;  able, 
sensual,  witty,  and  heartless,  without 
God  in  this  world,  not  even  dreading 
the  Devil  in  the  next.  People  have 
tried  to  represent  the  wicked  nobleman 
often  enough.  Let  them  try  the  more. 
Lord  Steyne  is  in  the  field. 

If  Eebecca  Sharp  is  a  perfectly  origi- 
nal character,  and  if  Lord  Steyne  has 
been  often  tried,  but  only  now  accom- 
plished, we  wish  to  ask  you  whether 
there  is  not  another  character  in  the 
book  as  wonderful  in  its  .way  as  either 
of  the  two  others.  We  allude  to  the 
Dowager  Lady  Southdown. 

There  never  was  anything  like  this 
old  lady.  Every  one  appreciated  her ; 
to  those  who  were  indignant  that  such 


Thackeray. 


359 


people  as  our  dear  Becky  Sharp,  and 
Lord  Steyne,  should  ever  be  mentioned, 
Lady  Southdown  appeared  respectable, 
inimitably  ridiculous,  and,  on  the  whole, 
good  :  those  enjoyed  the  fun  of  Lady 
Southdown  who  had  never  spoken  to  a 
Countess  in  their  lives.  Some  might 
fancy  that  one-half  of  the  amusement 
one  gets  out  of  her  proceeds  from  her 
pompous  "  fagons  de  parler ;"  but  it  is 
not  so.  People  recognised  Lady  South- 
down, who  couldn't  in  the  least  appre- 
ciate such  sentences  as  "  Jane,  I  forbid 
you  to  put  pen  to  paper ;"  "I  will 
have  my  horses  to-morrow  morning;" 
they  delighted  in  Lady  Southdown  on 
her  own  merits  entirely.  Other  men 
might  have  known  the  habits  of  the 
British  aristocracy  as  well  as  Thackeray, 
who  was  brought  up  among  them,  but 
it  is  Thackeray  only  who  has  taken  one 
of  the  most  peculiarly  aristocratic  of 
them — one  of  them  whose  every  word 
and  every  thought  was  exclusive — and 
made  her  a  character  to  be  understood 
by  every  class  and  for  all  time. 

And,  besides  the  originality  of  these 
three  great  characters,  any  one  of  which 
would  form  the  nucleus  of  a  successful 
novel,  there  was  another  fact  about  this 
most  wonderful  story,  which  no  man  of 
humour  can  ever  forget — we  mean  the 
names  which  the  author  gives  his  cha- 
racters. There  was  an  infinite  field  of 
fun  and  suggestive  humour  opened  to 
us  by  those  wonderful  names.  Each 
name  in  Vanity  Fair  suggests  a  history. 

Marquis  of  Steyne,  for  instance.  K"ot 
Earl  of  Steyne — that  would  be  too  Saxon ; 
not  Duke — that  would  be  too  personal,' 
for,  although  there  are  more  Dukes  than 
Marquises,  yet  they  are  better  known. 
Marquis,  a  title  like  Viscount,  with  a 
slight  French  smack  about  it,  corre- 
sponding to  his  amateur  rose-water 
whiggery ;  and  then  Steyne,  a  name 
which  rings  on  the  ear  as  true  as  Buck- 
ingham or  Bedford,  and  yet  one  which 
instantly  suggests  to  one  Brighton,  the 
Pavilion,  George  the  Fourth  and  all  his 
set.  Then  Lord  Southdown,  gentlest  of 
beings,  brought  into  the  world  to  be 
shorn ;  second  title  LordWolseyj  family 
name  Sheepshanks ;  seats,  Southdown, 


and  Trotterrnore.  Again,  that  gaunt 
and  dreadful  person,  Lady  Grizzle  Mac- 
beth, daughter  of  Lord  Grey  of  Glowry ; 
and  the  wonderful- German  dancer  whom 
Becky  dances  off  his  legs,  the  Count 
Springbok  von  Hauhen-laufen.  If  one 
began  to  point  out  the  fun  of  the  names 
in  "Vanity  Fair,"  one  could  write  a 
book  as  big  as  "Vanity  Fair"  itself. 
Take  the  names  of  the  exceedingly 
doubtful  ladies,  with  whom  Becky  has 
to  make  it  up  in  her  fall,  after  having 
cut  them  in  her  prosperity,  when  she 
was  attempting  the  to  her  impossible 
task  of  being  good  without  three  thou- 
sand a  year.  Here  they  are — the  Mar- 
quise de  la  Cruche-cassee,  Lady  Cracken- 
bury,  and  Mrs.  Washington  White. 
Were  there  ever  three  such  names  for 
slightly  unfortunate  ladies  ? 

To  follow  him  through  the  wild  jun- 
gle of  fun  into  which  he  gets  when  he 
takes  us  to  the  German  Court  of  Pum- 
pernickel, with  all  the  infinitely  sugges- 
tive absurdity  of  the  names  which  it 
pleases  him  to  use,  would  be  impossible. 
The  crowning  point  of  this  unequalled 
nonsensical  wisdom,  is  the  triumph  of 
British  diplomacy,  in  arranging  the 
marriage  between  the  Prince  of  Pumper- 
nickel with  the  Princess  Amelia  von 
Hutnburg  Schlippen-Schloppen  —  the 
French  candidate  Princess  Potztausend' 
Donnerwetter  having  been  pitched  tri- 
umphantly overboard,  to  the  confusion 
of  M.  de  Macabau  the  French  minister. 
Schlippen-Schloppen  must  have  been 
sister,  one  would  think,  to  our  own  poor 
dirty,  down-at-heels,  Queen  Caroline  ; 
and  Princess  Potztausend  Donnerwetter 
(Deviltakeyou  Thunder-and-lightning,  it 
might  be  very  loosely  rendered),  what 
sort  of  a  lady  was  she  1 

Another  point  about  this  wonderful 
book — a  point  which  we  cannot  pass 
over — is  the  way  in  which  the  author  has 
illustrated  it.  For  the  first  time  Ave 
found  a  novelist  illustrating  his  own 
books  well.  At  times,  nay  very  often, 
we  could  see  that  the  great  brain  which 
guided  the  hand,  in  its  eagerness  to  fix 
the  images  on  the  paper,  made  that 
h;iud  unsteady  ;  that,  in  seeking  after 
the  end  also,  there  had  been  some  impn- 


360 


Thackeray. 


tient  neglect  of  the  means :    in  other 
words,  that  Thackeray  sometimes  drew 
correctly,  but  more  often  did  not.     But, 
notwithstanding    this,   there   are   very 
few  of  the  vignettes  in  "  Vanity  Fair," 
which,  when  once  seen,  can  be  forgotten. 
One  begins  to  wonder,    on  looking 
once  more  on  these  vignettes,  whether 
Thackeray  knew  Bewick,  the  inventor  of 
these  tale-telling  wood  blocks.     Bewick 
writes  you  the  natural  history  of  the 
cock-robin,  and  either  the  master  him- 
self, or  Luke  Clennel,  the  great  pupil, 
at  the  end  puts  you  in,  apropos  des  bottes, 
a  little,  exquisitely  finished,  inch-and-a 
half  vignette  of  a  man  who  has  hanged 
himself,  in  the  month  of  June,  on  an 
oak  bough,  stretching  over  a  shallow 
trout    stream,     which     runs     through 
carboniferous  limestone.     You  can  see, 
by  the  appearance  of  the  hanging  corpse, 
that  everything  has  gone  wrong  with 
him.     The  very  body  has  a  dissipated 
and  hopeless  look  ;  he  has  laid  his  hat 
and  stick  at  the  foot  of  the  tree,  and  his 
dog  is  whining  to  get  at  him.  We  cannot 
help  wondering  whether  Thackeray  took 
his  idea  of  introducing  suggestive  vig- 
nettes into  "  Vanity  Fair  "  from  having 
studied  Bewick,  and  noticed  the  effects 
these  "  tail  pieces  "  in  Bewick  had  upon 
those  who  took  up  a  book  upon  snipes 
and  cock  robins,  and  found  themselves 
face  to  face  with  a  small  school  of  great 
humourists  ;  with  the  men  who  show  us 
more  of  the  domestic  agricultural  life  at 
the  end  of  the  last  century  than  any 
others.     He  most  probably  saw  this — 
he  most  probably  got  from  Bewick  the 
idea  of  small  pictures,  which,  from  the 
very  absence  of  any  title,  force  one  to 
think  of  them,  and   puzzle  them  out. 
If  he  got  the'  idea  from  them,  he  used 
it  in  a  way  different  from  their' s.     He 
used  these  wonderful  woodcuts,  as  most 
novelists  use  the  titles  to  their  chapters, 
as  a  key  to  the  text — as  a  means  of 
forcing  home  his  moral,  not  only  on  the 
ear  but  on  the  eye. 

There  is  one  of  them  lying  before  us 
now,  and,  as  an  illustration  of  what  we 
mean,  we  will  make,  if  the  reader  will 
allow  us,  a  quotation — the  only  one  we 
will  trouble  him  -with. 


The  great  Lord  Steyne,  the  short, 
bow-legged  man  of  fierce  animal  passions, 
the  man  with  the  bald  head,  the  red 
hair,  and  the  prominent  scrofulous  buck 
teeth,. had,  as  Dr.  Elliotsou  or  Dr.  Buck- 
nil!  would  have  told  you,  the  instant 
they  looked  at  him,  a  tendency  to 
hereditary  madness.  He  knew  it,  and 
it  was  a  spectre  to  him  :  he  carried  his 
remedy  about  with  him,  and  defied 
death.  The  destroying  angel  had,  for 
some  inscrutable  reason,  passed  over  his 
head  without  striking,  leaving  him  re- 
sponsible for  his  own  wickedness  ;  but 
had  striken  down  Lord  George  Gaunt, 
his  innocent  son,  who  went  to  a  mad- 
house. Lord  George  Gaunt  had  chil- 
dren, on  whom,  in  all  probability,  the 
curse  would  fall.  Now  read  what  fol- 
lows, and  say  where  you  will  find  such 
stuff  elsewhere. 

"  Twice  or  thrice  in  a  week,  in  the 
"  earliest  morning,  the  poor  mother  went 
'  for  her  sins  and  saw  the  poor  invalid. 
'  Sometimes  he  laughed  at  her  (and  his 
'  laugh  was  more  pitiable  than  to  hear 
'  him  cry) ;  sometimes  she  found  the 
'  brilliant  dandy  diplomatist  of  the 
'  Congress  of  Vienna  dragging  about 
1  a  child's  toy,  or  nursing  the  keeper's 
'  baby's  doll.  Sometimes  he  knew  her, 
'  and  father  Mole,  her  director  and 
'  companion ;  oftener  he  forgot  her,  as 
"  he  had  done  wife,  children,  love, 
"  ambition,  vanity.  But  he  remembered 
"  his  dinner-hour,  and  used  to  cry  if  his 
"  wine-and- water  was  not  strong  enough. 


"The  absent  Lord's  children  mean- 
while prattled  and  grew  on,  quite 
unconscious  that  the  doom  was  over 
them  too.  First  they  talked  of  their 
father,  and  devised  plans  against  his 
return.  Then  the  name  of  the  living 
dead  man  was  less  frequently  in  their 
mouths — then  not  mentioned  at  all. 
But  the  stricken  old  grandmother 
trembled  to  think  that  these  too  were 
the  inheritors  of  their  father's  shame, 
as  well  as  of  his  honours  ;  and  watched 
sickening  for  the  day,  when  the  awful 
ancestral  curse  should  come  down  on 
them." 
This  is  terrible  enough,  but  it  does 


Thackeray. 


361 


iK>t  satisfy  Thackeray ;  lie  must  use  both 
pen  and  pencil  to  drive  his  moral  home. 
He  must  draw  us  a  picture  in  illustration 
of  his  awful  words  ;  here  it  is  : — 

Lord  George  Gaunt' s  children,  a  pretty, 
highbred-looking  pair,  are  crouched 
with  their  happy  heads  together,  on  the 
floor  against  the  old  oak  wainscot,  in  a 
long-dra\vn  corridor,  talking  merrily  over 
a  great  picture-book,  which  they  hold 
together  on  their  knees.  They  have 
taken  their  place  by  some  accident,  under 
an  old  trophy  of  armour,  under  a  cuirass 
and  four  straight  cavalry  swords,  pro- 
bably of  Cavalier  and  Roundhead  times. 
But  the  swords — the  ancestral  swords 
— the  swords  of  Damocles,  hang  point 
downwards  over  the  heads  of  the  un- 
conscious prattling  innocents  below. 

What  wonder  is  it  that  we,  trying'in 
our  poor  way,  to  lay  our  wreath  on  the 
grave  of  the  great  man  just  dead,  should 
begin  our  work  by  trying  to  bring  before 
you  some  points  of  excellence  in  his 
first  great  work.  After  all,  "Vanity 
Fair "  is  the  book  by  which  he  intro- 
duced himself  to  us — the  book  which 
first  made  us  love  him.  We  remember, 
in  a  later  book,  "  The  Xewcome's,"  meet- 
ing dear  old  Dobbin  at  a  party  at 
Colonel  Newcome's,  with  young  Eawdon 
Crawley  ;  it  was  like  meeting  a  dear  and 
honoured  old  friend. 

Our  task  is  well-nigh  done.  It  remains 
for  others  to  write  his  biography  ;  we 
only  wish  to  speak  of  him  as  we. knew 
him.  We  knew  him  first  through  his 
greatest  work ;  and  so  we  have  affection- 
ately recalled  it.  Of  his  later  works  we 
have  nothing  to  say.  No  man  could 
possibly  be  expected  to  write  two 
"  Vanity  Fairs  ; "  and  yet  "  Pendennis  " 
and  "The  Xewcomes"  are  not  much 
inferior.  The  highest  compliment  to 
his  beautiful,  singular  style,  lies  in  the 
fact  that  it  became  a  necessity  to  the 
public.  They  demanded  of  him  that  he 
should  write  them  something — anything, 
only  they  must  have/mtt.  He  complied 
with  their  demands.  He  latterly  wrote 
the  "  Roundabout  Papers  ;  "  sat  down 
and  wrote  the  first  thing  that  came  into 
his  head,  apparently.  Many  of  them 
are  about  nothing,  or  next  to  nothing — 


for  instance  the  first ;  but  they  are 
exceedingly  charming  ;  every  word  of 
them  is  read  and  admired  by  his  thorough- 
going admirers ;  and  certainly  the  worst 
of  them  is  a  pleasanter  stop-gap  for  an 
idle  quarter  of  an  hour  than  one  can 
easily  find  elsewhere. 

The  great  accusation  against  him 
has  been  cynicism  and  hardness.  In 
that  charge  most  of  us  from  time  to 
time  have  joined.  But,  going  into  the 
more  solemn  and  careful  account  which 
we  must  make  with  the  dead,  we  think 
that  charge  should  be  withdrawn.  The 
charge  has  been  made  and  sustained, 
because  in  his  fierce  campaign  against 
.  falsehood,  meanness,  and  vulgarity,  he 
did  his  work  only  too  thoroughly,  and 
hunted  those  vices  high  and  low,  into 
every  hole  and  corner  where  they  had 
taken  refuge.  If  he  found  a  mere 
soupgon  of  one  of  them  in  his  own 
favourite  characters;  if,  following  out 
inexorably  his  own  line  of  thought,  he 
discovered  in  one  of  his  own  creations, 
one  of  his  own  pet  children,  what  should 
not  be  there,  he  dragged  it  to  the  light ; 
and  then  the  world,  or  part  of  it,  said, 
"  The  man  cannot  understand  a  perfect 
character."  It  was  because  he  under- 
stood what  a  perfect  character  should  be 
so  well  that  the  charge  was  made  against 
him. 

The  charge  cannot  be  sustained.  To 
repeat  it  would  be  to  say  that  the  large 
majority  of  common-place  people  are 
without  faults  ;  or  else  to  say  that  the 
pointing  out  of  minor  vices,  the  detection 
of  a  snake  in  the  verandah,  or  a  scorpion 
in  the  wood-basket,  is  the  sign  of  a 
cynical  and  bitter  mind.  His  private 
life  is  public  enough  just  now;  in  that  is 
the  answer.  His  having  fought  bravely 
against  poverty,  after  having  been 
brought  up  in  luxury,  is  no  secret,  for 
the  Times  has  alluded  to  it.  Other 
afflictions  which  he  might  have  had  are 
not  the  property  of  the  public  ;  but 
those  who  accuse  him  of  cynicism  and 
bitterness  little  think  that  they  are 
accusing  a  man  whose  life  was  one  long, 
splendid  effort  of  unselfish  devotion. 
He  seems  never  to  have  lost  a  friend, 
and  not  to  have  left  one  single  enemy. 


362 


Thackeray, 


How  we  devoured  with  amazed  admi- 
ration this  new  view  of  life,  "Vanity 
Fair."  How  we  wondered  what  kind 
of  man  it  was  who  had  written  these 
wonderful  words — who  had  poured  out 
a  flood  of  sucli  strange  experiences  ?  To 
a  raw  boy  of  eighteen,  we  can  remem- 
ber that  William  Makepeace  Thackeray 
was  an  awful  and  mysterious  personage 
— a  man  whose  very  clothes  would  have 
been  interesting,  even  if  he  himself  had 
not  been  inside  them. 

We  remember  a  raw  lad  of  this  sort 
being  asked  to  dine  and  meet  the  great 
man,  by  one  who  is  gone  also — the  good 
and  kind  John  Parker ;  and  even  now 
that  lad  remembers  the  day  he  was  asked 
to  meet  him  as  a  red-letter  day.  There 
was  Goethe  Bobespierre  ;  there  was  the 
Waterloo  Chaplain  ;  there  was  the  Sani- 
tary King  ;  and  there  was  somebody 
else  entitled  to  great  veneration;  and, 
last  of  all,  there  was  Thackeray.  But 
this  lad  had  no  eyes  for  the  great  men 
named  first,  though  any  one  of  them 
would  have  been  a  wonder  to  him  at 
another  time.  There,  before  him,  was 
the  great  man  himself,  at  last ;  there 
was  the  head  of  hair  so  familiar  after- 
wards, though  not  so  grey  sixteen  years 
ago  ;  there  were  the  spectacles,  and  the 
wonderful  up-looking  face.  There  was 
an  equal  of  the  great  man's  at  table, 
but  this  lad  engaged  himself  entirely  in 
watching  Thackeray,  and,  as  he  did  so, 
he  came  to  this  conclusion — that  the 
man  who  had  written  the  most  remark- 
able tale  he  had  ever  read  had  the  most 
remarkable  face  he  had  ever  seen. 

And  we  shall  never  look  on  that  kind 
good  face  again  !  Just  now,  while  we 
were  writing  this  poor  tribute  to  him,  we 
were  turning  over  the  leaves  of  "  Vanity 
Fair,"  and,  coming  across  the  wonderful 
vignette  of  Lady  Southdown  bringing 
in  the  black  dose  to  Becky  Sharp,  we 
burst  into  a  roar  of  laughter ;  but  it  was 
checked  in  an  instant,  for  we  remem- 
bered that  the  hand  which  had  drawn 
it  was  cold  and  still 'for  ever,  and  the 
noble  head  which  had  designed  it  was 
bowed  down  to  rise  no  more. . 

Yes,  William  Thackeray  is  dead.  He 
was,  as  it  were  yesterday,  in  the  prime 


of  life,  full  of  new  projects,  surrounded 
by  friends,  quite  unexpectant  of  any 
change.  But  in  the  dull  winter's  night, 
while  he  was  alone  in  his  chamber,  the 
Messenger  came  for  him,  and  he  arose 
and  followed  it.  He  has  passed  quietly 
from  among  us,  without  a  word  of  fare- 
well, and  the  riddle  of  this  painful  earth 
is  redd  to  him  at  last. 

And  those  who  loved  him  are  left 
lamenting  because  he  is  gone,  and  be- 
cause they  missed  the  few  last  priceless 
words  which  he  might  have  spoken. 
We  honour  their  grief,  but  let  them 
remember  that  it  is  shared  by  others — 
that  William  Makepeace  Thackeray  has 
seventy  millions  of  mourners. 

Just  now  the  mails  are  going  out. 
A  hundred  splendid  steamships  are 
speeding  swiftly  over  every  sea,  east, 
west,  and  north,  from  the  omphalos  called 
London,  to  carry  the  fortnight's  instal- 
ment of  British  history  and  British 
thought  into  every  land  where  the 
English  language  is  spoken.  But  the 
saddest  news  they  carry — sadder  news 
than  they  have  carried  for  many  a  month 
— is  the  announcement  of  the  death  of 
William  Thackeray. 

It  will  come  first  to  Xew  York, 
where  they  loved  him  as  we  did. 
And  the  flaneurs  of  the  Broadway,  and 
even  the  busy  men  in  Wall-street,  will 
stay  their  politics,  and  remember  him. 
They  will  say,  "  Poor  Thackeray  is 
dead."  Though  they  may  refuse  to  hear 
the  truth — though  they  choose  to  insult 
us  beyond  endurance,  at  stated  times — 
let  us  keep  one  thing  in  mind  :  the 
Hags  at  jSTew  York  were  hung  half-mast 
high  when  Havelock  died.  Let  us  re- 
member that. 

And  so  the  news  will  travel  south- 
ward. Some  lean,  lithe,  deer-eyed, 
quadroou  lad  will  sneak,  run  swiftly, 
pause  to  listen,  and  then  hold  steadily 
forward  across  the  desolate  war-wasted 
space,  between  the  Federal  lines  and 
the  smouldering  watchlires  of  the  Con- 
federates, carrying  the  news  brought  by 
the  last  mail  from  Europe,  and  will 
come  up  to  a  knot  of  calm,  clear-eyed, 
lean-faced  Confederate  officers  (Oh ! 
that  such  men  should  be  wasted  in  such 


Thackeray. 


363 


a  quarrel,  for  the  sin  was  not  theirs 
after  all) ;  and  one  of  these  men  will 
run  his  eye  over  the  telegrams,  and  will 
say  to  the  others,  "Poor  Thackeray  is 
dead."  And  the  news  will  go  from 
picket  to  picket,  along  the  limestone 
ridges,  which  hang  above  the  once  happy 
valleys  of  Virginia,  and  will  pass  south, 
until  Jefferson  Davis — the  man  so  like 
Stratford  de  Eedcliffe — the  man  of  the 
penetrating  eyes  and  of  the  thin  close- 
set  lips — the  man  with  the  weight  of  an 
empire  on  his  shoulders — will  look  up 
from  his  papers  and  say,  with  heartfelt 
sorrow,  "  The  author  of  'The  Virginians ' 
is  dead." 

High  upon  the  hill-side  at  Simla, 
there  will  stand  soon  a  group  of  English, 
Scotch,  and  Irish  gentlemen,  looking 
over  the  great  plain  below,  and  remark- 
ing to  one  another  how  much  the 
prospect  had  changed  lately,  and  how 
the  grey-brown  jungle  has  been  slowly 
supplanted  by  the  brilliant  emerald  green 
of  the  cotton  plant,  and  by  a  thousand 
threads  of  silver  water  from  the  irri- 
gation trenches.  They  will  be  hoping 
that  Lawrence  will  succeed  poor  Lord 
Elgin,  and  that  he  will  not  be  sacrificed 
in  that  accursed  Calcutta ;  they  will  be 
wondering  how  it  fares  Avith  Crawley. 
Then  a  dawk  will  toil  up  the  hill-side 


with  the  mail ;  and  in  a  few  minutes 
they  will  be  saying,  ;<  Lawrence  is  ap- 
pointed ;  Crawley  is  acquitted  ;  but  poor 
Thackeray  is  dead." 

The  pilot,  when  he  conies  out  in  his 
leaping  whaleboat,  and  boards  the  mail 
steamer,  as  she  lies-to  off  the  heads 
which  form  the  entrance  gates  to  our 
new  Southern  Empire,  will  ask  the  news 
of  the  captain  •  and  'he  will  be  told, 
"Lord  Elgin  and  Mr.  Thackeray  are 
dead."  That  evening  they  will  know  it 
in  Melbourne,  and  it  will  be  announced 
at  all  the  theatres  ;  the  people,  dawdling 
in  the  hot  streets  half  the  night  through, 
waiting  for  the  breaking  up  of  the 
weather,  will  tell  it  to  one  another, 
and  talk  of  him.  The  sentence  which 
we  have  repeated  so  often  that  it  has 
half  lost  its  meaning,  will  have  meaning 
to  them.  "William  Thackeray  is  dead  !" 

So  the  neAvs  will  fly  through  the 
seventy  million  souls  who  speak  the 
English  language.  And  he  will  lie  cold 
and  deaf  in  his  grave,  unconscious,  after 
all  his  Avork,  of  his  greatest  triumph ; 
unconscious  that  the  great,  so-called, 
Anglo-Saxon  race  little  kneAV  hoAV  well 
they  loved  him  till  they  lost  him. 
Vanitas  Aranitatmn  !  "  Let  us  shut  up 
the  box  and  the  puppets,  for  the  play 
is  played  out."  H.  K. 


WHILE  thinking  it  most  fit  that  the  duty  of  paying  some  tribute  to  the  memory 
of  the  noble  Thackeray  should  be  performed  by  a  contributor,  qualified  for  the 
duty  no  less  by  his  practised  perception  in  the  subtleties  of  that  species  of  litera- 
ture in  Avhich  Thackeray  was  a  master  than  by  his  great  reverence  for  the  deceased, 
I  cannot  bring  myself  to  part  altogether  Avith  the  right,  which  I  may  assume  in 
these  pages,  of  saying  a  word  or  two,  in  my  own  name,  respecting  a  man  whom  it 
was  my  privilege  to  know  personally  of  late  years,  Avhose  Avritings  had  been 
familiar  to  me  long  before  I  saAv  his  kingly  form  or  shook  his  cordial  hand,  and 
the  latest  scraps  from,  whose  pen  in  the  numbers  of  the  Comhill  were  read  by  me 
with  something  of  that  punctual  avidity  with  which  some  scribbler  in  ancient 
Eome  may  be  supposed  to  have  bent  over  the  inimitable  Latin  of  each  last- 
published  copy  of  verses  from  Horace. 

Thackeray's  special  place  in  British  literature  is  that  of  a  star  of  the  first 
magnitude,  but  of  a  colour  and  mode  of  brilliancy  peculiarly  its  own,  in  the 
composite  cluster  known  as  our  Novelists,  our  Humourists5,  our  ImaginatiA'e 
Prose-writers.  As  this  is,  however,  a  very  numerous  cluster,  including  Avriters  of 
all  degrees  of  importance,  from  the  smallest  up  to  some  so  great  that  Ave  rank 
them  among  the  chiefs  of  our  total  literature,  and  are  not  afraid  to  cite  them  as 
our  British  equivalents  to  such  names  of  a  larger  Avorld  as  Cervantes,  Eabelais, 
and  Jean  Paul,  so  there  are  many  Avays  in  which,  on  our  examining  the  cluster,  it 
Avill  resolve  itself  into  groups.  More  especially,  there  is  one  Avay  of  looking  at 


364  Thackeray. 

this  large  order  of  writers,  according  to  which  they  shall  seem  to  part,  not  so 
much  into  groups  as  into  two  great  divisions,  each  including  names  of  all  degrees 
of  magnitude.  Now,  although,  if  we  view  the  cluster  entire,  without  seeking  to 
resolve  it  at  all,  Thackeray  Avill  strike  us  simply  by  his  superior  magnitude,  and 
although,  on  the  other  hand,  hqwever  minutely  we  may  analyse  the  cluster,  we 
shall  find  none,  precisely  like  Thackeray,  and  he  will  continue  to  strike  us  still  by 
bis  intense  peculiarity  of  hue,  yet,  if  we  do  persuade  ourselves  to  attend  to  such 
a  general  subdivision  of  the  cluster  into  two  main  classes  as  has  been  hinted  at, 
Thackeray  will  then,  on  the  whole,  seem,  to  range  himself  rather  with  one  of 
the  classes  than  with  the  other. 

While  all  writers  of  fiction  make  it  their  business  to  invent  stories,  and  by 
the  presentation  of  imaginary  scenes,  imaginary  actions,  and  imaginary  characters, 
to  impart  to  the  minds  of  their  fellows  a  more  prompt,  rousing,  and  impassioned 
kind  of  pleasure  than  attends  the  reading  either  of  speculative  disquisitions  or  of 
laborious  reproductions  of  real  history,  and  while  most  of  them,  in  doing  so,  strew 
a  thousand  incidental  opinions  and  fancies  by  the  way,  and  deviate  into  delight- 
ful and  humorous  whimsies,  a  considerable  number  of  such  writers  are  found 
to  differ  from  the  rest  in  respect  of  the  constant  presence  in  their  fictions  of  a 
certain  heart  of  doctrine,  the  constant  ruling  of  their  imaginations  by  a  personal 
philosophy  or  mode  of  thinking.  It  is  not  always  in  the  fictions  of  those 
novelists  respecting  whom  we  may  know  independently  that  they  were  themselves 
men  of  substantial  and  distinct  moral  configuration,  of  decided  ways  of  thinking 
and  acting,  that  we  find  this  characteristic.  Scott  is  an  instance.  He  was  a  man 
of  very  solid  and  distinct  personality ;  and  yet,  at  the  outset  of  his  fictions,  we  see 
him  always,  as  it  were,  putting  on  a  dreaming-cap,  which  transports  him  away  into 
realms  far  removed  from  his  own  personal  position  and  experience,  and  from  the 
direct  operation  of  his  own  moralities.  And  so  with  others.  When  they  begin  to 
invent,  they  put  on  the  dreaming-cap ;  and  many  cases  might  be  cited  in  which  this 
extraordinary  power  of  the  dreaming-cap  might  appear  to  have  been  all  that  the  writers 
possessed — in  which,  apart  from  it,  they  might  seem  toliave  had  no  substantial  per- 
sonality at  all.  Whether  Shakespeare,  the  greatest  genius  of  the  dreaming-cap  that 
ever  lived,  had  any  coequal  personality  himself,  of  the  features  of  which  a  glimpse 
is  now  recoverable,  is,  as  all  know,  one  of  the  vexed  questions  of  literary  history. 
We  have  an  opinion  of  our  own  on  this  matter.  In  every  case,  we  hold,  there  is  an 
unseverable  relation  between  the  personality  and  the  poetic  genius,  between  what 
a  man  is  and  what  he  can  imagine.  Dreams  themselves  are  fantastic  constructions 
out  of  the  debris  of  all  the  sensations,  thoughts,  feelings,  and  experiences,  remem- 
bered or  not  remembered,  of  the  waking-life  ;  all  that  any  power  of  the  dreaming- 
cap,  however  extraordinary,  can  do,  is  to  remove  one  into  remoter  wastes  of  the 
great  plain  of  forgetfulness  whereon  this  debris  lies  shimmering,  and  to  release  one 
more  and  more  from  the  rule  of  the  waking  will  or  the  waking  reason  in  the 
fantasies  that  rise  from  it,  and  flit  and  melt  into  each  other.  Yet,  just  as  some 
dreams  are  closer  in  their  resemblance  to  waking  tissues  of  thought,  and  more 
regulated  by  the  logic  of  waking  reason,  than  others,  so,  though  uin  all  cases 
the  imaginations  of  a  writer,  the  creations  of  his  literary  genius,  are  related 
by  absolute  necessity  to  his  personal  individuality,  there  are  many  cases  in 
•which  the  relation  is  so  much  more  subtle  and  occult  than  in  others,  that  we  find 
it  convenient  in  these  cases  to  suppose  it  non-existing,  and  to  think  of  the  imagina- 
tion as  a  kind  of  special  white- winged  faculty  that  can  float  off  at  any  moment 
from  its  poise  on  the  personality,  move  to  any  distance  whithersoever  it  listeth, 
and  return  again  at  its  own  sweet  will.  Hence,  for  example,  among  our  writers  of 
prose-fiction,  we  distinguish  such  a  writer  as  Scott  from  such  a  writer  as  Swift. 
The  connexion,  in  Swift's  case,  between  his  fictions  and  his  personal  philosophy 
and  mode  of  thought  is  direct  and  obvious.  In  his  inventions  and  fancies  he'  does 


Thackeray.  365 

not  move  away  from  himself ;  he  remains  where  he  is,  in  his  fixed  and  awful  habit 
of  mind — expressing  that  habit  or  its  successive  moods  in  constructions  fantastic  in 
form,  but  of  regulated  and  calculated  meaning,  and  capable  at  once  of  exact  inter- 
pretation. Even  his  Islands  of  Lilliput  and  Brobdingnag,  his  Laputa,  and  his 
country  of  the  Houynhmns  and  Yahoos,  are  not  so  much  visions  into  which  he  has 
been  carried  by  any  power  of  the  dreaming-cap,  as  fell  Swiftian  allegories  of  the 
stationary  intellect.  And,  though  Swift  is  almost  unique  among  British  writers 
in  respect  of  the  degree  to  which  he  thus  made  imagination  a  kind  of  architect- 
contractor  for  fixed  moods  of  the  reason,  he  may  yet  stand  as,  in  this  respect,  an 
exaggerated  exemplar  of  a  whole  class  of  our  writers,  of  fiction.  In  other  words,  as 
has  been  already  said,  there  is  a  class  of  our  writers  of  prose-fiction,  including 
writers  of  as  great  total  power  as  are  to  be  found  in  the  class  that  arrive  at  their 
fancies  by  means  of  the  dreaming-cap,  but  differing  from  that  class  by  the  presence 
in  their  fictions  of  a  more  constant  element  of  doctrine,  a  more  distinct  vein  of 
personal  philosophy. 

Thackeray  was,  on  the  whole,  of  the  latter  class.  That  he  may  be  considered 
as  belonging  to  it  is  one  reason  the  more  for  maintaining  its  co-ordinate  importance 
with  the  other  class,  and  for  not  giving  that  other  class,  as  has  sometimes  been 
proposed,  a  theoretical  superiority  as  being  more  entitled,  in  virtue  of  their  power 
with  the  dreaming-cap,  to  the  high  designation  of  creative  or  imaginative  writers. 
One  reason  the  more,  we  say — for  might  it  not  have  been  recollected  that  even 
Goethe,  whose  range  of  dream  was  as  wide  as  that  of  most  men,  made  his  imagi- 
nation but  a  kind  of  architect-contractor  for  his  reason  in  his  great  prose-novel, 
and  that,  if  we  rank  among  our  highest  British  artists  a  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds,  we 
do  not  put  our  Hogarth  beneath  him  ?  A  creative  writer  !  "Who  shall  say  that 
Thackeray  did  not  give  us  creations  ?  What  reader  of  these  pages,  at  all  events-, 
will  say  it,  after  his  memory  has  been  refreshed  by  our  contributor  with  those 
recollections  of  a  few  of  the  wondrous  creations  that  took  flight  from  the  single 
novel  of  "Vanity  Fair"  into  that  vast  population  of  ideal  beings  of  divers© 
characters  and  physiognomies  with  which  the  genuis  of  imaginative  writers  has 
filled  the  ether  of  the  real  world?  Nay,  on  the  question  whether  Thackeray 
should  be  so  decidedly  attached  to  the  class  of  writers  of  fiction  with  which 
at  first  sight  we  associate  him,  there  may  be  some  preliminary  hesitation. 
In  his  smaller  pieces,  for  example — some  of  his  odd  whims  and  absurdities 
in  prose  and  verse — did  he  not  break  away  into  a  riot  of  humour,  a  law- 
lessness of  sheer  zanyism,  as  exquisitely  suggestive  of  genius  making  faces 
at  its  keeper  as  anything  we  have  seen  since  Shakespeare's  clowns  walked 
the  earth  and  sang  those  jumbled  shreds  of  sense  and  nonsense  which  we 
love  now  as  so  keenly  Shakespearian,  and  would  not  lose  for  the  world  ?  The 
dreaming-cap ! — why,  here  we  have  the  dreaming-cap,  and  bells  attached  to  it. 
He  moves  to  any  distance  out  of  sight,  and  still,  by  the  tinkle,  we  can  follow  him 
and  hear  "  the  fool  i'  the  forest."  We  are  not  sure  but  that  in  some  of  these  small 
grotesques  of  Thackeray  we  have  relics  of  a  wilder  variety  of  pure  genius  than 
in  his  more  elaborate  fictions.  But,  again,  even  in  some  of  these  larger  and 
more  continuous  constructions  of  his  genius  in  fiction,  we  have  examples  of  a 
power  which  he  possessed  of  going  out  of  himself,  and  away  from  the  habits  and 
humours  of  his  own  time  and  circumstances,  into  tracts  where  the  mere  act  of  pro- 
ducing facsimiles  or  verisimilitudes  of  what  he  had  directly  seen  and  known  was 
not  sufficient,  and  he  had  to  move  with  the  stealthy  step  of  a  necromancer,  recall- 
ing visions  of  a  vanished  life.  When  we  think,  for  instance,  of  his  "  Esmond," 
and  of  passages  in  his  other  novels  where  he  gives  play  to  his  imagination  in  the 
historic,  and  assumes  so  easily  a  certain  quaintness  of  conception  and  of  phraseology 
to  correspond,  we  seem  even  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  what  that  marvellous  dreaming- 
power  of  the  so-called  creative  writers  may  after  all  in  part  consist  in — to  wit,  a 


366  Thackeray. 

wide  range  of  really  historic  interest  in  their  own  waking  persons,  and  a  habit  of 
following  out  their  trains  of  historic  speculation  and  enthusiasm,  rather  than  their 
passing  observations  and  experiences,  in  their  dreams.  Thackeray,  at  all  events, 
had  a  remarkable  historic  faculty  within  a  certain  range  of  time,  which  it  was 
perhaps  owing  to  the  more  paying  nature  of  fiction  than  of  history  in  these 
days  tha  he  did  not  more  expressly  use  and  develop.  The  Life  of  Talleyrand, 
which  he  once  had  in  contemplation,  before  the  days  of  his  universal  celebrity  as 
a  novelist,  would  have  been,  if  done  as  Thackeray  could  have  done  it,  a  master- 
piece of  peculiar  eighteenth-nineteenth-century  biography.  Nor  is  the  story, 
jocularly  spread  by  himself  some  years  ago,  that  he  meant  to  continue  Macaulay^s 
unfinished  History  of  England,  taking  it  up  at  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,  without 
a  certain  significance.  One  of  the  many  distinctions  among  men  is  as  to  the 
portion  of  the  past  by  which  their  imaginations  are  most  fondly  fascinated  and 
with  which  they  feel  themselves  most  competent  to  deal  in  recollection.  Macaulay's 
real  and  native  historic  range  began  where  he  began  his  History — in  the  interval 
between  the  Civil  Wars  and  the  Revolution  of  1688.  Thackeray's  began  a  little 
later — at  the  date  of  Queen  Anne's  accession,  and  the  opening  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  And,  as  within  this  range  he  would  have  been  a  good  and  shrewd 
historian,  so  within  this  range  his  imagination  moves  easily  and  gracefully  in 
fiction.  A  man  of  the  era  of  the  later  Georges  by  his  birth  and  youth,  and 
wholly  of  the  Victorian  era  by  his  maturity  and  literary  activity,  he  can  go  as  far 
back  as  to  Queen  Anne's  reign  by  that  kind  of  imaginative  second-sight  which 
depends  on  delight  in  transmitted  reminiscence. 

As  a  Victorian,  however,  taking  for  the  matter  of  most  of  his  fictions  life  as  he 
saw  it  around  him,  or  as  he  could  recollect  it  during  his  own  much-experienced 
and  variously-travelled  career  from  his  childhood  upwards,  Thackeray  ivas  one  of 
those  novelists  whose  writings  are  distinguished  by  a  constant  heart  of  doctrine, 
a  permanent  vein  of  personal  philosophy.  Our  long  and  now  hackneyed  talk  about 
him  as  a  Realist,  and  our  habit  of  contrasting  him  perpetually  with  Dickens,  as 
more  a  novelist  of  the  Fantastic  or  Romantic  School,  are  recognitions  of  this.  It 
would  ill  become  us  here  and  now  to  resort  again  to  the  full  pedantry  of  this  con- 
trast ;  but,  in  a  certain  sense,  as  none  knew  better  than  Thackeray  himself,  there 
was  a  kind  of  polar  opposition  between  his  method  and  Dickens's  in  their  art  as 
humourists  and  writers  of  fiction.  With  extraordinary  keenness  of  perception, 
with  the  eye  of  a  lynx  for  the  facts,  physiognomies,  and  humours  of  real  life,  and 
taking  the  suggestions  of  real  life  with  marvellous  aptness  for  his  hints,  Dickens 
does  move  away  with  these  suggestions  into  a  kind  of  vacant  ground  of  pure  fancy, 
where  the  relations  and  the  mode  of  exhibition  may  be  ideal,  and  there  shapes  such 
tales  of  wonder  and  drollery,  and  holds  such  masques  and  revels  of  imaginary 
beings,  as  (witness  how  we  use  them,  and  how  our  talk  and  our  current  literature 
are  enriched  by  references  to  them)  no  genius  but  his  has  produced  in  our  day. 
In  him  we  do  see,  after  a  fashion  entirely  his  own,  that  particular  kind  of 
power  which  we  have  called  the  power  of  the  dreaming-cap,  and  which  is 
oftenest  named  ideality.  Thackeray,  on  the  other  hand,  is  sternly,  ruthlessly  real. 
Men  and  women  as  they  are,  and  the  relations  of  life  as  he  has  actually  seen  and 
known  them,  or  in  as  near  approach  to  facsimile  of  reality  as  the  conditions  of 
invention  of  stories  for  general  reading  will  permit — these  are  what  Thackeray 
insists  on  giving  us.  Fortunate  age  to  have  had  two  such  representatives  of  styles 
of  art  the  co-existence  of  which — let  us  not  call  it  mutual  opposition — is  ever- 
lastingly possible  and  everlastingly  desirable !  Fortunate  still  in  having  the  one 
master-artist  left ;  unfortunate  now,  as  we  all  feel — and  that  artist  more  than  most 
of  us — in  having  lost  the  other !  For  in  Thackeray  we  have  lost  not  only  our 
great  master  of  reality  in  the  matter  of  prose-fiction,  but  also  the  spokesman  of  a 
strong  personal  philosophy,  a  bracing  personal  mode  of  thought,  which  pervaded 


TJtackeray.  367 

all  he  wrote.  Thackeray,  it  has  been -well  said,  is  best  thought  of,  in  some  respects, 
as  a  sage,  a  man  of  experienced  wisdom,  and  a  conclusive  grasp  of  the  world  and 
its  worth,  expressing  himself,  partly  by  accident,  through  the  particiilar  modes  of 
story- writing  and  humorous  extravaganza.  And  what  was  his  philosophy  1  To 
tell  that  wholly,  to  throw  into  systematic  phrase  one  tithe  even  of  the  characteristic 
and  recurring  trains  of  thought  that  passed  through  that  grave  brain,  is  what  no 
man  can  hope  to  do.  But  the  essential  philosophy  of  any  mind  is  often  a  thing  of 
few  and  simple  words,  repeating  a  form  of  thought  that  it  requires  no  elaborate 
array  of  propositions  to  express,  and  tliat  may  have  been  as  familiar  to  an  ancient 
Chalda?an  making  his  camel's  neck  his  pillow  in  the  desert  as  it  is  to  a  sage  in 
modern  London.  It  is  that  elementary  mode  of  thought  which  comes  and  goes 
oftenest,  and  into  which  one  always  sinks  when  one  is  meditative  and  alone.  And 
so  may  we  not  recognise  Thackeray's  habitual  philosophy  in  a  peculiar  variation 
of  these  words  of  the  Laureate,  which  he  makes  to  be  spoken  by  the  hero  of  his 
"Maud"?— 

"  We  are  puppets,  Man  in  his  pride,  and  Beauty  fair  in  her  flower  : 
Do  we  move  ourselves,  or  are  moved  by  an  unseen  hand  at  a  game 
That  pushes  us  off  the  board,  and  others  ever  succeed  ? 
Ah  yet,  we  cannot  be  kind  to  each  other  here  for  an  hour  ; 
We  whisper,  and  hint,  and  chuckle,  and  grin  at  a  brother's  shame  ; 
However  we  brave  it  out,  we  men  are  a  little  breed. 

A  monstrous  eft  was  of  old  the  Lord  and  Master  of  Earth  ; 
For  him  did  his  high  sun  flame,  and  his  river  billowing  ran, 
And  he  felt  himself  in  his  force  to  be  Nature's  crowning  race. 
As  nine  months  go  to  the  shaping  an  infant  ripe  for  his  birth, 
So  many  a  million  of  ages  have  gone  to  the  making  of  man  : 
He  now  is  the  first,  but  is  he  the  last  ?  is  he  not  too  base  ? 

The  man  of  science  himself  is  fonder  of  glory,  and  vain, 
An  eye  well-practised  in  nature,  a  spirit  bounded  and  poor  ; 
The  passionate  heart  of  the  poet  is  whirled  into  folly  and  vice. 
I  would  not  marvel  at  either,  but  keep  a  temperate  brain  ; 
For  not  to  desire  or  admire,  if  a  man  could  learn  it  were  more 
Than  to  walk  all  day  like  the  sultan  of  old  in  a  garden  of  spice." 

Such,  in  some  form,  though  not,  perhaps,  precisely  in  this  high-rolled  and  semi- 
geologic  form,  was  Thackeray's  philosophy,  breathed  through  his  writings.  That 
we  are  a  little  breed — poets,  philosophers,  and  all  of  us — this  is  what  he  told  us. 
Nature's  crowning  race  1 — Oh  no  ;  too  base  for  that !  Many  stages  beyond  the 
Eft,  certainly  ;  but  far  yet  from  even  the  ideal  of  our  own  talk  and  our  pretensions 
to  each  other.  And  so  he  lashed  us,  and  dissected  us,  and  tore  off  our  disguises. 
He  did  it  in  great  matters  and  he  did  it  in  small  matters  ;  and,  that  he  might  draw 
a  distinction  between  the  great  matters  and  the  small  matters,  he  generalised  the 
smaller  kinds  of  baseness  and  littleness  of  our  time,  against  which  he  most  per- 
sistently directed  his  satires,  under  the  mock-heroic  title  of  Snobbism.  Anti- 
Snobbism  was  his  doctrine  as  applied  to  many  particulars  of  our  own  and  of  recent 
times — Victorian  or  Georgian.  But  he  took  a  wider  range  than  that,  and  laid 
bare  the  deeper  blacknesses  and  hypocrisies  of  our  fairly-seeming  lives.  And  we 
called  him  a  cynic  in  revenge.  A  cynic  !  No  more  will  that  word  be  heard 
about  Thackeray.  How,  in  these  few  weeks  since  he  was  laid  in  Kensal  Green, 
have  his  secret  deeds  of  goodness,  the  instances  of  his  incessant  benevolence 
and  kindheartedness  to  all  around  him,  leapt  into  regretful  light.  A  cynic  ! 
We  might  have  known,  while  we  used  it,  that  the  word  was  false.  Had  he 
not  an  eye  for  the  piety  and  the  magnanimity  of  real  human  life,  its  actually 
attained  and  incalculable  superiorities  over  the  Eft ;  and  did  he  not  exult, 
to  the  verge  of  the  sentimental,  in  reproductions  of  these  in  the  midst  of  his 
descriptions  of  meannesses'?  And  did  he  not  always,  at  least,  include  himself 


368  Thackeray. 

for  better  or  for  worse  in  that  breed  of  men  of  which,  the  judgment  must  be 
so  mixed?  Not  to  desire  or  admire,  but  to  walk  all  day  like  a  sultan  in  his 
garden,  was  a  dignity  of  isolation  to  which  he  had  never  attained.  He  did  not 
hold  himself  aloof.  Ah  !  how  he  came  among  us  here  in  London,  simply,  quietly, 
grandly,  the  large-framed,  massive-headed,  and  grey-haired  sage  that  he  was — com- 
porting himself  as  one  of  us,  though  he  was  weightier  than  all  of  us ;  listening 
to  our  many-voiced  clamour,  and  dropping  in  his  wise  occasional  word ;  nay, 
not  forbidding,  but  rather  joining  with  a  smile,  if,  in  hilarity,  we  raised  his  own 
song  of  evening  festivity : — 

Here  let  us  sport, 
Boys  as  we  sit, 
Laughter  and  wit 
Flashing  so  free: 
Life  is  but  short ; 
When  we  are  gone, 
Let  them  sing  on 
Round  the  old  tree. 

Ah  !  the  old  tree  remains,  and  the  surviving  company  still  sits  round  it,  and  they 
will  raise  the  song  in  the  coming  evenings  as  in  the  evenings  gone  by.  But  the 
chair  of  the  sage  is  vacant.  It  will  be  long  before  London,  or  the  nation,  or  our 
literature,  shall  see  a  substitute  for  the  noble  Thackeray. 

D.  M. 


To  the  Editor  of  Macmillan's  Magazine. 

SIR, — In  your  last  number  I  made  certain  allegations  against  the  teaching 
of  Dr.  John  Henry  Newman,  which  I  thought  were  justified  by  a  Sermon  of  his 
entitled  "  Wisdom  and  Innocence,"  (Sermon  20  of  "  Sermons  Bearing  on  Subjects 
of  the  Day").  Dr.  Newman  has  by  letter  exprest,  in  the  strongest  terms,  his 
denial  of  the  meaning  which  I  have  put  upon  his  words.  It  only  remains,  there- 
fore, for  me  to  express  my  hearty  regret  at  having  so  seriously  mistaken  him. 

Yours  faithfully, 

CHARLES  KINGSLEY.    • 
EVEESLET,  Jan.  14,  1864. 


MACMILLAN'S  MAGAZINE 


MAECH,  1864. 


THE  HILLYAES  AND  THE  BUETONS :  A  STOEY  OF  TWO  FAMILIES. 

BY  HENRY  KINGSLEY,  AUTHOR  OP    "  AUSTIN  ELLIOT,"  "  BAVENSHOE,"  ETC. 


CHAPTEE  XIX. 

SAMUEL  BURTON  GOES  INTO  THE  LICENSED 
^  VICTUALLING  LINE. 

As  Samuel  Burton  came,  hat  in  hand, 
with  bent  and  cringing  body,  into 
George  Hillyar's  office  in  the  barracks 
at  Palmerston,  George  Hillyar  turned 
his  chair  round  towards  him  ;  and  when 
the  door  was  shut  behind  him,  and  the 
trooper's  footfall  had  died  away,  he  still 
sat  looking  firmly  at  him,  without 
speaking. 

George  could  not  turn  pale,  for  he  was 
always  pale  ;  he  could  not  look  anxious, 
for  he  had  always  a  worn  look  about 
his  eyes.  He  merely  sat  and  stared 
steadily  at  the  bowing  convict,  with  a 
look  of  inquiry  in  his  face.  The  con- 
vict spoke  first : 

"  I  have  not  seen  your  honour  for 
many  years." 

"  Not  for  many  years,"  said  George 
Hillyar. 

"  I  have  been  in  trouble  since  I  had 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  your  honour." 

"  So  I  understand,  Samuel,"  said 
George. 

"  Thank  you,  Master  George,  for 
that  kind  expression.  You  have  not 
forgot  me.  Thank  you,  sir." 

"  You  and  I  are  not  likely  to  forget 
one  another,  are  we?"  said  George 
Hillyar. 

"  I  have  noticed,"  said  the  convict, 
"  in  a  somewhat  chequered  career,  that 

No.  53. — VOL.  ix. 


the  memories  of  gentlefolks  were  weak, 
and  wanted  jogging  at  times — " 

"  Look  here,"  said  George  Hillyar, 
rising  coolly,  and  walking  towards  the 
man.  "  Let  me  see  you  try  to  jog 
mine.  Let  me  see  you  only  once 
attempt  it.  Do  you  hear1?  Just  try. 
Are  you  going  to  threaten,  hey  ?  D — n 
you ;  just  try  it,  will  you.  Do  you 
hear?" 

He  not  only  heard,  but  he  minded. 
As  George  Hillyar  advanced  towards 
him,  he  retreated,  until  at  last,  being 
able  to  go  no  further,  he  stood  upright 
against  the  weather-boards  of  the  wall, 
and  George  stood  before  him,  pointing 
at  him  with  his  finger. 

"  Bah  ! "  said  George  Hillyar,  after  a 
few  seconds,  going  back  to  his  chair. 
"  Why  do  you  irritate  me  ?  You  should 
know  my  temper  by  this  time,  Samuel. 
I  don't  want  to  quarrel  with  you." 

"  I  am  sure  you  don't,  sir,"  said 
Burton. 

"  Why  are  you  sure  I  don't  ? " 
snarled  George,  looking  at  him  angrily. 
"  Why,  eh  ?  Why  are  you  sure  that  I 
don't  want  to  quarrel  with  you,  and  be 
rid  of  you  for  ever  1  Hey  1 " 

"  Oh  dear !  I  am  sure  I  don't  know, 
sir.  I  meant  no  offence.  I  am  very 
humble  and  submissive.  I  do  assure 
you,  Mr.  George,  that  I  am  very  sub- 
missive. I  didn't  expect  such  a  re- 
ception, sir.  I  had  no  reason  to.  I 
have  been  faithful  and  true  to  you, 
Mr.  George,  through  everything.  I  am 

B  B 


370 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


a  poor  miserable  used-up  man,  all  alone 
in  the  world.  Were  I  ever  such  a 
traitor,  Mr.  George,  I  am  too  old  and 
broken  by  trouble,  though  not  by  years, 
to  be  dangerous." 

The  cat-like  vitality  which  showed 
itself  in  every  movement  of  his  body 
told  another  story  though.  George 
Hillyar  saw  it,  and  he  saw  also,  now 
that  he  had  had  an  instant  for  reflection, 
that  he  had  made  a  sad  mistake  in  his 
way  of  receiving  the  man.  The  con- 
sciousness of  his  terrible  blunder  came 
upon  him  with  a  sudden  jar.  He  had 
shown  the  man,  in  his  sudden  irritation, 
that  he  distrusted  and  hated  him  ;  and 
he  had  sense  to  see,  that  no  cajolery  or 
flattery  would  ever  undo  the  mischief 
which  he  had  made,  by  his  loss  of 
temper,  and  by  a  few  wild  words.  He 
saw  by  the  man's  last  speech,  that  the 
miserable  convict  had  some  sparks  of 
love  left  for  his  old  master,  until  he  had 
wilfully  trampled  them  out  in  his  folly. 
He  saw,  now  it  was  too  late,  that  he 
might  have  negotiated  successfully  on 
the  basis  of  their  old  association ;  and 
at  the  same  time  that  he,  by  a  few 
cruel  words,  had  rendered  it  impossible. 
The  poor  wretch  had  come  to  him  in 
humility,  believing  him  to  be  the  last 
person  left  in  the  world  who  cared  for 
him.  George  had  rudely  broken  his 
fancy  by  his  causeless  suspicion,  and 
put  the  matter  on  a  totally  different 
footing. 

He  clumsily  tried  to  patch  the  matter 
up.  He  said,  "  There,  I  beg  your 
pardon ;  I  was  irritated  and  nervous. 
You  must  forget  all  I  have  said." 

"  And  a  good  deal  else  with  it,  sir,  I 
am  afraid,"  said  Burton.  "  .Never  mind, 
sir ;  I'll  forget  it  all  I  am  worse  than 
I  was." 

"  Now  don't  you  get  irritated,"  said 
George,  "because  that  would  be  very 
ridiculous,  and  do  no  good  to  any  one. 
If  you  can't  stand  my  temper  after  so 
many  years,  we  shall  never  get  on." 

"  I  ani  not  irritated,  sir.  I  came  to 
you  to  ask  for  your  assistance,  and  you 
seem  to  have  taken  it  into  your  head 
that  I  was  going  to  threaten  you  with 
old  matters.  1  had  no  intention  of 


anything  of  the  sort.  I  merely  thought 
you  might  have  a  warm  place  left  in 
your  heart  for  one  who  served  you  so 
well,  for  evil  or  for  good.  I  am  very 
humble,  sir.  If  I  were  ungrateful 
enough  to  do  so,  I  should  never  dare  to 
try  a  game  of  bowls  with  an  inspector 
of  police,  in  this  country,  sir.  I  only 
humbly  ask  for  your  assistance." 

"Samuel,"  said  George  Hillyar,  "we 
have  been  mistaking  one  another." 

"  I  think  we  have,  sir,"  said  Burton. 

And,  although  George  looked  up 
quickly  enough,  the  sly  scornful  expres- 
sion was  smoothed  out  of  Burton's  face, 
and  he  saw  nothing  of  it. 

"I  am  sure  we  have,"  continued 
George.  "Just  be  reasonable.  Sup- 
pose I  did  think  at  first,  that  you  were 
going  to  try  to  extort  money  from  me  : 
why,  then,  it  all  comes  to  this,  that  I 
was  mistaken.  Surely  that  is  enough 
of  an  apology." 

"  I  need  no  apologies,  Mr.  George. 
As  I  told  you  before,  I  am  only  sub- 
missive. I  am  your  servant  still,  sir. 
Only  your  servant." 

"  What  am  I  to  do  for  you,  Samuel  ? 
Anything  ? " 

"I  came  here  to-day,  sir,  to  ask  a 
favour.  The  fact  is,  sir,  I  came  to  ask 
for  some  money.  After  what  has  passed, 
I  suppose,  I  may  go  away  again.  Never- 
theless, sir,  you  needn't  be  afraid  of 
refusing.  I  haven't — haven't — Well, 
never  mind ;  all  these  years  to  turn 
Turk  at  last,  with  such  odds  against 
me,  too." 

"  How  much  do  you  want,  Samuel?" 
said  George  Hillyar. 

"I'll  tell  you,  sir,  all  about  it.  A 
man  who  owes  me  money,  an  old  mate 
of  mine,  is  doing  well  in  a  public-house 
at  Perth,  in  West  Australia.  He  has 
written  to  me  to  say  that,  if  I  "will 
come,  I  shall  go  into  partnership  for  the 
debt.  It  is  a  great  opening  for  me  ;  I 
shall  never  have  to  trouble  you  again. 
Thirty  pounds  would  make  a  gentleman 
of  me  just  now.  I  say  nothing  of  your 
getting  rid  of  me  for  good — " 

"  You  need  pay  nothing  more,  Samuel," 
said  George.  "1  will  giveyou  the  money. 
What  ship  shall  you  go  by  ?  " 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


371 


"The  Windsor  sails  next  week,  sir, 
and  calls  at  King  George's  Scmnd.  That 
would  do  for  me." 

"  Very  well,  then,"  said  George ;  "  here 
is  the  money ;  go  by  her.  It  is  better 
that  we  separate.  You  see  that  these 
confidences,  these  long  tete-a-tete s,  be- 
tween us  are  not  reputable.  I  mean  no 
unkindness ;  you  must  see  it." 

"  You  are  right,  sir.  It  shall  not 
happen  again.  I  humbly  thank  you, 
sir.  And  I  bid  you  good  day." 

He  was  moving  towards  the  door, 
when  George  Hillyar  turned  his  chair 
away  from  him,  as  though  he  was  going 
to  look  out  of  window  into  the  paddock, 
and  said,  "  Stop  a  moment,  Samuel." 

The  convict  faced  round  at  once.  He 
could  see  nothing  but  the  back  of 
George's  head,  and  George  seemed  to 
be  sitting  in  profound  repose,  staring 
at  the  green  trees,  and  the  parrots  which 
were  whistling  and  chattering  among 
the  boughs.  Burton's  snake-like  eyes 
gleamed  with  curiosity. 

"You  watched  me  to-day  in  the  Post- 
office,"  said  George. 

"Yes,  sir;  but  I  did  not  think  you 
saw  me." 

"No  more  I  did.  I  felt  you,"  an- 
swered George.  "  By  the  bye,  you 
got  fourteen  years  for  the  Stanlake 
business,  did  you  not  ?  " 

"  Yes,  sir ;  fourteen  weary  years,"  said 
Burton,  looking  inquiringly  at  the  back 
of  George's  head,  and  madly  wishing 
that  he  could  see  his  face. 

"Only  just  out  now,  is  it?"t  said 
George. 

"  1  was  free  in  eight,  sir.  Then  I 
got  two.  I  should  have  got  life  over 
this  last  bank  robbery,  but  that  I  turned 
Queen's  evidence." 

"  I  hope  you  will  mend  your  ways," 
said  George,  repeating,  unconsciously, 
Mr.  Oxton's  words  to  the  same  man 
on  a  former  occasion.  "  By  George, 
Samuel,  why  don't  you  1  " 

"  I  am  going  to,  sir,"  replied  Burton, 
hurriedly  ;  and  still  he  stood,  without 
moving  a  muscle,  staring  at  the  back  of 
George  Hillyar's  head  so  eagerly  that 
he  never  drew  his  breath,  and  his 
red-brown  face  lost  its  redness  in  his 
anxiety. 


At  last  George  spoke,  and  he  smiled 
as  though  he  knew  what  was  coming. 

"  Samuel,"  he  said,  "  I  believe  your 
wife  died  ;  did  she  not  1 " 

"  Yes,  sir,  she  died." 

"  How  did  she  die  ?  " 

"  Cold.     Caught  in  Court." 

"  I  don't  mean  that.  I  mean,  what 
was  her  frame  of  mind — there,  go  away, 
for  God's  sake;  there  will  be  some  infer- 
nal scandal  or  another  if  we  stay  much 
longer.  Here  !  Guard  !  See  this  man. 
out.  I  tell  you  I  won't  act  on  such 
information.  Go  along  with  you.  Un- 
less you  can  put  your  information  toge- 
ther better  than  that,  you  may  tell 
your  story  to  the  marines  on  board  the 
Pelorus.  Go  away." 

Samuel  Burton  put  on  the  expression 
of  a  man  who  was  humbly  assured 
that  his  conclusions  were  right,  and 
only  required  time  to  prove  it.  It 
was  an  easy  matter  for  those  facile, 
practised  features  to  twist  themselves 
into  any  expression  in  one  instant 
There  is  no  actor  like  an  old  convict. 
He  sneaked  across  the  yard  with  this 
expression  on  his  face,  until  he  came  to 
the  gate,  at  which  stood  five  troopers, 
watching  him  as  he  passed. 

He  couldn't  stand  it.  The  devil  was 
too  strong  in  him.  Here  were  five  of 
these  accursed  bloodhounds,  all  in  blue 
and  silver  lace,  standing  looking  at 
him  contemptuously,  and  twisting  their 
moustaches  :  five  policemen — men  who 
had  never  had  the  pluck  to  do  a  dis- 
honest action  in  their  lives — standing 
and  sneering  at  him,  who  knew  the 
whole  great  art  and  business  of  crime 
at  his  fingers'  ends.  It  was  intolerable. 
He  drew  himself  up,  and  began  on  them. 
It  was  as  if  a  little  Yankee  Monitor, 
steaming  past  our  fleet  of  great  iron-clad 
frigates,  should  suddenly,  spitefully,  and 
hopelessly  open  fire  on  it. 

I  can  see  the  group  now.  The  five 
big,  burly,  honest,  young  men,  standing 
silently  and  contemptuously  looking  at 
Samuel,  in  the  bright  sunlight ;  and  the 
convict  sidling  past  them,  rubbing  his 
hands,  with  a  look  of  burlesqued  polite- 
ness in  his  face. 

"  And  good  day,  my  noble  captains," 
BBl 


372 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


lie  began,  with  a  sidelong  bow,  his 
head  on  one  side  like  a  cockatoo's,  and 
•his  eye  turned  up  looking  nowhere. 
"  Good  day,  my  veterans,  my  champions. 
My  bonny,  pad-clinking,1  out-after-eight- 
o'clock-parade,  George  Street  bucks. 
Good  day.  Does  any  one  of  you  know 
.aught  of  one  trooper  Evans,  lately 
/quartered  at  Cape  Wilberforce  ? " 

"  Ah  ! "  said  the  youngest  of  the  men, 
.  a  mere  lad ;  "  why,  he's  my  brother." 

"No,"  said  Samuel,  who  was  per- 
fectly aware  of  the  fact.  "  Well,  well ! 
It  seems  as  if  I  was  always  to  be  the 
bearer  of  bad  news  somehow." 

",What  d'ye  mean,  old  man  ?"  said  the 
-young  fellow,  turning  pale.  "  There's 
nothing  the  matter  with  Bill,  is  there  1 " 

Samuel  merely  shook  his  head  slowly. 
'3is  enjoyment  of  that  look  of  concern, 
which  he  had  brought  upon  the  five 
honest  faces,  was  more  intense  than 
anything  we  can  understand. 

"  Come :  cheer  up,  Tom,"  said  the 
oldest  of  the  troopers  to  the  youngest. 
"  Speak  out,  old  man ;  don't  you  see 
our  comrade's  in  distress  ? " 

"I  should  like  to  have  broke  it  to 
him  by  degrees,"  said  Samuel ;  "  but 
it  must  all  come  out.  Bear  up,  I  tell  you. 
Take  it  like  a  man.  Your  brother's 
been  took ;  and  bail's  refused." 

"That's  a  lie,"  said  Tom,  who  was 
no  other  than  George  Hillyar's  orderly. 
"  If  you  tell  me  that  Bill  has  been  up 
to  anything,  I  tell  you  it's  a  lie." 

"  He  was  caught,"  said  Samuel, 
steadily,  "boning  of  his  lieutenant's 
pomatum  to  ile  his  moustachers.  Two 
Blacks  and  a  Chinee  seen  him  a-doing 
on  it,  and  when  he  was  took  his  'ands 
was  greasy.  Bail  was  refused  in  conse- 
quence of  a  previous  conviction  again 
him,  for  robbing  a  blind  widder  woman 
of  a  Bible  and  a  old  possum  rug  while 
she  was  attending  her  husband's  funeral. 
The  clerk  of  the  bench  has  got  him  a- 
digging  in  his  potato-garden,  now  at 
this  present  moment,  waiting  for  the 
sessions.  Good-bye,  my  beauties.  Keep 
out  of  the  sun,  and  don't  spile  your 
complexions.  Good-bye." 

1  Alluding  to  the  clinking  of  tlieir  spurs. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  REUBEN  ENTER- 
TAINS MYSTERIOUS  AND  UNSATISFAC- 
TORY COMPANY. 

I  WAS  doubtful,  at  this  time,  whether  or 
no  Sir  George  Hillyar  knew  or  guessed 
that  we  were  relations  of  Samuel  Burton, 
the  man  who  had  robbed  him.  I  think 
even  now  that  he  did  not  know;  if  he 
did,  it  was  evident  that  he  generously 
meant  to  ignore  it.  Mr.  Compton,  who 
had  recommended  Samuel,  told  us  to 
say  nothing  about  it;  and  we  said 
nothing.  Emma  surprised  Joe  and  me 
one  night,  when  we  were  alone  together, 
by  firing  up  on  the  subject,  and  saying 
distinctly  and  decidedly  that  she  thought 
we  were  all  wrong  in  not  telling  him. 
I  was  rather  inclined  to  agree  with  her ; 
but  what  was  to  be  done  ?  It  was  not 
for  us  to  decide. 

The  relations  between  the  two  families 
were  becoming  very  intimate  indeed. 
Sir  George  Hillyar  had  taken  a  most 
extraordinary  fancy  for  Reuben,  which 
he  showed  by  bullying  him  in  a  petu- 
lant way  the  whole  day  long;  and  by 
continually  giving  him  boots  and  clothes, 
as  peace-offerings.  Reuben  would  take 
everything  said  to  him  with  the  most 
unfailing  good  humour,  and  would 
stand  quietly  and  patiently,  hat  in 
hand,  before  Sir  George,  and  rub  his 
cheek,  or  scratch  his  head,  or  chew  a 
piece  of  stick,  while  the  "jobation" 
was  going  on.  He  took  to  Sir  George 
Hillyar  amazingly.  He  would  follow 
him  about  like  a  dog,  and  try  to  an- 
ticipate his  wishes  in  every  way.  He 
did  not  seem  to  be  in  the  least  afraid  of 
him,  but  would  even  grin  in  the  middle 
of  one  of  Sir  George's  most  furious 
tirades.  They  were  a  strange  couple ; 
so  utterly  different  in  character;  Sir 
George  so  ferociously  obstinate,  and 
Reuben  so  singularly  weak  and  yielding ; 
and  yet  they  had  a  singular  attraction 
for  one  another. 

"Erne,"  Sir  George  would  roar  out 
of  window,  "where  the  devil  is  that 
tiresome  monkey  of  a  waterman  ?  " 

•"I  haven't  seen  him  to-day,"  Erne 


A  Story  of  Tico  Families. 


would  reply.  "He  has  been  missing 
since  last  night  The  servants  think 
he  has  drowned  himself  after  the  row- 
ing you  gave  him  last  night  /  think 
that  he  has  merely  run  away.  If  you 
like,  I  will  order  the  drags." 

"Don't  you  be  a  jacknapes.  Find 
him." 

Eeuben  would  be  produced  before 
the  window. 

"May  I  take  the  liberty  of  asking 
how  you  have  been  employing  your 
time,  sir  ?  The  boats  are  not  cleaned." 

"  Cleaned  'em  by  nine  this  morning, 
sir." 

"You  have  not  fetched  home  that 
punt-pole,  sir,  as  you  were  expressly 
ordered." 

"  Fetched  it  home  last  night,  sir." 

"  And  why  was  it  not  fetched  home 
before,  sir!" 

"The  old  cove  as  had  the  mending 
on  it,"  Eeuben  would  answer,  going  off 
at  score  in  his  old  way,  "  has  fell  out 
with  his  missis,  and  she  hid  his  shoes 
in  the  timber-yard,  and  went  off  to 
Hampton  fair  in  a  van,  along  with 
Mrs.  Scuttle,  the  master-sweep's  lady; 
and  he  had  to  lie  in  bed  till  she  come 
back,  which  wasn't  soon,  for  she  is 
fond  of  society  and  calculated  to  adorn 
it;  and,  when  she  come,  she  couldn't 
remember  where  the  shoes  was  put  to, 
and  so — " 

"  What  do  you  mean,  sir  I "  Sir 
George  would  interrupt^  "  by  raking  up 
all  this  wretched  blackguardism  before 
my  son  Erne?" 

Eeuben  would  say,  that  he  had  been 
asked,  and  supposed  that  he  did  right 
in  answering ;  and  by  degrees  the  storm 
would  blow  over,  and  Eeuben  would  in 
some  way  find  himself  the  better  for  it 
"When  Erne  told  me  that  he  had  seen 
his  father  sit  on  a  bench  and  watch 
Eeuben  at  his  work  for  an  hour  toge- 
ther :  I  began  to  think  that  Sir  George 
had  a  shrewd  guess  as  to  who  Eeuben 
was  ;  and  also  to  have  a  fancy  that  there 
might  be  two  sides  to  Samuel  Burton's 
story ;  and  that  it  was  dimly  possible 
that  Sir  George  might  wish  to  atone  for 
some  wrong  which  he  had  done  to  our 
cousin.  But  I  said  nothing  to  any  one, 


and  you  will  see  whether  or  no  I  was 
right  by-and-by. 

However,  Reuben's  success  with  Sir 
George  was  quite  notorious  in  our  little 
circle.  My  mother  said  that  it  was  as 
clear  as  mud  that  Sir  George  intended 
to  underswear  his  personalities  in  Eeu- 
ben's  favour.  I  might  have  wondered' 
what  she  meant,  but  I  had  given  up 
wondering  what  my  mother  meant, 
years  ago,  as  a  bad  job. 

I  saw  Eeuben  very  often  during  his 
stay  at  Stanlake,  and  he  was  always  the 
very  Eeuben  of  old  times — reckless, 
merry,  saucy,  and  independent — ready 
to  do  the  first  thing  proposed,  without 
any  question  or  hesitation.  The  dark 
cloud  which  had  come  over  him  the 
night  I  went  up  and  slept  with  him  in 
the  ghost-room  had  apparently  passed 
away.  Twice  I  alluded  to  it,  but  was 
only  answered  by  a  mad  string  of  Cock- 
ney balderdash,  like  his  answers  to  Sir 
George  Hillyar,  one  of  which  I  have 
given  above  as  a  specimen.  The  third 
time  I  alluded  to  the  subject,  he  was 
beginning  to  laugh  again,  but  I  stopped 
him. 

"  Eube,"  I  said,  looking  into  his  face, 
"I  don't  want  you  to  talk  about  that 
night  I  want  you  to  remember  what  I 
said  that  night  I  said,  Eube,  that,  come 
what  would,  I  would  stick  by  you. 
Eemember  that." 

"I'll  remember,  old  Jim,"  he  said, 
trying  to  laugh  it  off.  But  I  saw  that 
I  had  brought  the  cloud  into  his  face 
again,  and  I  bided  my  time. 

When  the  boating  season  was  over, 
the  Hillyars  went  back  into  the  great 
house  at  Stanlake,  and  Eeuben  came 
home  and  took  up  his  quarters  once 
more  in  the  ghost's-room,  at  the  top  of 
the  house ;  and  then  I  saw  that  the 
cloud  was  on  his  face  again,  and  that 
it  grew  darker  day  by  day. 

I  noticed  the  expression  of  poor 
Eeuben's  face,  the  more,  perhaps,  be- 
cause there  was  something  so  pitiable  in 
it — a  look  of  abject,  expectant  terror.  I 
felt  humiliated  whenever  I  looked  at 
Eeuben.  I  wondered  to  myself  whe- 
ther, under  any  circumstances,  my  face 
could  assume  that  expression.  I  hoped 


374 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


not.  His  weak,  handsome  face  got  an 
expression  of  eager,  terrified  listening, 
most  painful  to  witness.  Mr.  Faulkner 
had  lent  Joe  "Tom  and  Jerry,"  and 
among  other  pictures  in  it,  was  one  of 
an  effeminate,  middle-aged  forger,  just 
preparing  for  the  gallows,  by  George 
Cruikshank  ;  and,  when  I  saw  that  most 
terrible  picture,  I  was  obliged  to  confess 
that  Reuben  might  have  sat  for  it. 

A  very  few  nights  after  his  return, 
just  when  I  had  satisfied  myself  of 
all  the  above-mentioned  facts  about 
j&euben,  it  so  happened  that  Fred,  being 
started  for  a  run  in  his  night-shirt,  the 
last  thing  before  going  to  bed,  had  in- 
continently run  into  the  back  kitchen, 
climbed  on  to  the  sink  to  see  his 
brothers,  Harry  and  Frank,  pumping 
the  kettle  full  for  the  next  morning, 
slipped  up  on  the  soap,  come  down  on 
one  end,  and  wetted  himself  My 
mother  was  in  favour  of  airing  a  fresh 
night-gown,  but  Emma  undertook  to  dry 
him  in  less  time ;  so  they  all  went  to 
bed,  leaving  Fred  standing  patiently  at 
Emma's  knees,  with  his  back  towards 
the  fire,  in  a  cloud  of  ascending  steam. 

I  had  caught  her  eye  for  one  instant, 
and  I  saw  that  it  said  •<"  Stay  with  me." 
So  I  came  and  sat  down  beside  her. 

"Jim,  dear,"  she  said  eagerly,  "you 
have  noticed  Reuben  :  I  have  seen  you 
watching  him." 

"  What  is  it,  sweetheart1?"  I  answered. 
."  Can  you  make  anything  of  it  ?  " 

"  Nothing,  Jim,"  she  said.  "  I  am 
fairly  puzzled.  Has  he  confided  to  you  ? " 

I  told  her  faithfully  what  had  passed 
between  us  the  night  I  stayed  in  his 
room. 

"He  has  done  nothing  wrong;  that 
is  evident,"  she  said.  "I  am  glad  of 
that  I  love  Reuben,  Jim.  I  wouldn't 
hare  any  evil  happen  to  Reuben  for 
anything  in  the  world.  Let  us  watch 
him  and  save  him,  Jim ;  let  us  watch 
him  and  save  him." 

I  promised  that  I  would  do  so,  and 
I  did.  I  had  not  long  to  watch.  In 
theer  days  from  that  conversation,  the 
look  of  frightened  expectation  in  Reu- 
ben's face  was  gone,  and  in  its  place 
there  was  one  of  surly  defiance.  I  saw 


that  what  he  had  expected  had  come  to 
pass.  But  what  was  that  ?  I  could  not 
conceive.  I  could  only  remember  my 
promise  to  him,  to  stick  by  him,  and 
wait  till  he  chose  to  tell  me.  For  there 
was  that  in  his  eyes  which  told  me  that 
I  must  wait  his  time ;  that  I  must  do 
anything  but  ask. 

He  left  off  coming  in  to  see  us  of  an 
evening,  but  would  only  look  in  to  say 
"  Good  night,"  and  then  we  would  hear 
him  toiling  up  the  big  stairs  all  alone. 
Two  or  three  times  Emma  would  waylay 
him  and  try  to  tempt  him  to  talk,  but  he 
would  turn  away.  Once  she  told  me  he 
laid  his  head  down  on  the  banisters  and 
covered  his  face  ;  she  thought  he  was 
going  to  speak,  but  he  raised  it  again 
almost  directly,  and  went  away  hur- 
riedly. 

The  house  was  very  nearly  empty  just 
now.  The  lodgers,  who  had,  so  to  speak, 
flocked  to  my  father's  standard  at  first, 
had  found  the  house  dull,  and  had  one 
by  one  left  us,  to  go  back  into  the  old 
houses,  as  buildings  which  were  not 
so  commodious,  but  not  so  intolerably 
melancholy.  The  house  was  not  so  bad 
in  summer ;  but,  when  the  ISTovember 
winds  began  to  stalk  about  the  empty 
rooms,  like  ghosts,  and  bang  the  shut- 
ters, in  the  dead  of  night — or  when  the 
house  was  filled  from  top  to  bottom 
with  the  November  fog,  so  that,  when 
you  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  great 
room  at  night  with  a  candle,  the  walls 
were  invisible,  and  you  found  yourself, 
as  it  were,  out  of  sight  of  land  ;  then  it 
became  a  severe  trial  to  any  one's  nerves 
to  live  above  stairs.  They  dropped  off 
one  by  one ;  even  the  Agars  and  the 
Holmeses,  our  oldest  friends.  They 
plainly  told  us  why ;  we  could  not 
blame  them,  and  we  told  them  so. 

It  used  to  appear  to  me  so  dreadfully 
desolate  for  Reuben,  sleeping  alone  up 
there  at  the  very  top  of  the  house,  sepa- 
rated from  everything  human  and  life- 
like by  four  melancholy  storeys  of  empty 
ghost-haunted  rooms.  I  thought  of  it 
in  bed,  and  it  prevented  my  sleeping. 
I  knew  that  some  trouble  was  hang- 
ing over  his  head,  and  I  thought  that 
there  was  something  infinitely  sad  and 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


ST5 


pathetic  in  the  fact  of  that  one  weak, 
affectionate  soul  lying  aloft  there,  so  far 
away  from  all  of  us,  brooding  in  solitude. 
Alone  in  the  desolate  darkness,  with 
trouble — nay,  perhaps  with  guilt. 

One  night  I  lay  awake  so  long  think- 
ing of  this,  that  I  felt  that  my  judgment 
was  getting  slightly  unhinged — that,  in 
short,  I  was  wandering  on  the  subject. 
I  awoke  Joe.  He  had  never  been  taken 
into  full  confidence  about  Reuben  and 
his  troubles.  Reuben  was  a  little  afraid 
of  him,  and  had  asked  me  not  to  speak 
to  him  on  the  subject,  but  I  had  long 
thought  that  we  were  foolish,  ir  not 
having  the  advice  of  the  soundest  head 
in  the  house  ;  so,  finding  my  own  judg- 
ment going,  I  awoke  him  and  told  him 
everything. 

"  I  have  been  watching  too,"  said 
Joe,  "  and  I  saw  that  he  had  asked  you 
and  Emma  to  say  nothing  to  me.  Mind 
you  never  let  him  know  you  have.  I'll 
tell  you  what  to  do,  old  man.  What 
time  is  it  ? " 

It  was  half-past  eleven,  by  my  watch. 
"  Get  up  and  put  on  some  clothes ; 
go  up  stairs  and   offer  to   sleep   with 
him." 

"  So  late,"  I  said.  "  Won't  he  be 
angryj  " 

"Never  mind  that.  He  oughtn't  to 
be  left  alone  brooding  there.  He'll — 
he'll — take  to  drink  or  something.  Go 
up  now,  old  man,  and  see  if  he  will  let 
you  sleep  with  him." 

It  was  the  cold  that  made  my  teeth 
chatter.  I  feel  quite  sure  that  it  was 
not  the  terror  of  facing  those  endless 
broad  stairs  in  the  middle  of  a  Novem- 
ber night,  but  chatter  they  did.  I  had 
made  my  determination,  however ;  I 
was  determined  that  I  would  go  up  to 
poor  Reuben,  and  so  I  partly  dressed 
myself.  Joe  partly  dressed  himself  too, 
saying  that  he  would  wait  for  me. 

Oh,  that  horrible  journey  aloft,  past 
the  long  corridors,  and  the  miserable 
bare  empty  rooms,  up  the  vast  empty 
staircases,  out  of  which  things  looked 
at  me,  and  walked  away  again  with 
audible  footsteps  !  Bah !  it  makes  me 
shudder  to  think  of  it  now. 

But,  at  last,  after  innumerable  terrors, 


I  reached  Reuben's  room -door,  and 
knocked.  He  was  snoring  very  loud 
indeed — a  new  trick  of  his.  After  I  had 
knocked  twice,  he  suddenly  half- opened 
the  door,  and  looked  out  before  I  Jiad 
heard  him  approach  it.  It  was  dark, 
and  we  could  not  see  one  another. 
Reuben  whispered,  "  Who's  there  ? " 
and  I  answered, 

"  It's  only  me,  Rube.  I  thought  you 
were  so  lonely,  and  I  came  up  to  sleep 
with  you." 

He  said,  "That's  like  you.  Don't 
come  in,  old  fellow  ;  the  floor's  damp  : 
let  me  come  down  and  sleep  with  you 
instead.  Wait." 

I  waited  while  Reuben  found  his 
trousers,  and  all  the  while  he  kept 
snoring  with  a  vigour  and  regularity 
highly  creditable.  At  last,  after  a  few 
moments  indeed,  I  made  the  singularly 
shrewd  guess  that  there  was  some  one 
else  sleeping  in  Reuben's  room — some 
one  who  lay  on  his  back,  and  the 
passages  of  whose  nose  were  very  much 
contracted. 

Reuben  came  downstairs  with  me  in 
the  dark.  He  said  it  was  so  kind  of  me 
to  think  of  him.  He  confided  to  me 
that  he  had  a  "  cove  "  upstairs,  a  great 
pigeon-fancier,  to  whom  he,  Reuben, 
owed  money  ;  but  which  pigeon-fancier 
was  in  hiding,  in  consequence  of  a  mis- 
take about  some  turbits,  into  which  it 
would  be  tedious  to  go.  I  thought  it 
was  something  of  that  kind,  and  was 
delighted  to  find  that  I  was  right.  I 
took  occasion  to  give  Rube  about  three- 
halfpennyworth  of  good  advice  about 
low  company,  but  he  cut  it  short ;  for 
he  rolled  sleepily  into  our  room,  where 
a  light  was  burning,  and  tumbled  into 
my  bed  with  one  of  his  old  laughs,  and 
seemed  to  go  to  sleep  instantly. 

I  was  glad  of  this,  for  I  was  in  mortal 
fear  lest  he  should  notice  one  fact :  Joe 
was  not  in  the  room,  and  Joe's  bed  was 
empty.  Joe  had  been  following  me  to 
see  me  through  my  adventure,  as  he 
always  did  ;  but,  if  Reuben  had  seen 
that  Joe  had  been  watching  us.  I  know 
he  would  never  havo  forgiven  him,  and 
so  it  was  just  as  well  as  it  was.  I  put 
the  light  out,  and  in  a  few  minutes  I 


376 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


heard  Joe  come  into  the  room  and  get 
into  bed.  Although  I  was  very  tired 
after  a  hard  day's  work,  I  determined  to 
think  out  the  problem  of  Eeuben's 
visitor.  I  had  scarcely  made  this  deter- 
mination, when  it  became  clear  to  me 
that  he  was  no  other  than  Eobinson 
Crusoe,  who  had  come  to  insist  that  all 
Childs'  and  Chancellor's  omnibus-horses 
were  to  be  roughed  in  three  minutes,  in 
consequence  of  the  frost.  I  then  pro- 
ceeded down  the  Thames  in  a  barge,  by 
the  Croydon  atmospheric  railway  ;  and 
then  I  gave  it  up  as  a  bad  job,  and  went 
on  the  excursion  which  we  all,  1  hope, 
go  at  night.  May  yours  be  a  pleasant 
one  to-night,  my  dear  reader — pleasanter 
than  any  which  Eeuben's  friend,  the 
pigeon-fancier,  is  at  all  likely  to  make. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

GEBTT   GOES  ON  THE  WAR  TRAIL. 

BELOW  the  city  of  Palmerston,  which 
was  situated  just  at  the  head  of  the 
tideway,  the  river  Sturt  found  its  way 
to  the  sea  in  long  reaches,  which  were 
walled  in,  to  the  very  water's  edge,  by 
what  is  called  in  the  colony  teascrub — 
a  shrub  not  very  unlike  the  tamarisk, 
growing  dense  and  thick,  about  fifteen 
feet  high,  on  the  muddy  bank,  eaten 
out  by  the  wash  of  many  steamboats. 
But,  above  the  tideway,  the  river  was 
very  different.  If  you  went  up,  you  had 
scarcely  passed  the  wharfs  of  the  city 
before  you  found  yourself  in  a  piece  of 
real  primeval  forest,  of  nearly  two  thou- 
sand acres,  left  by  James  Oxton  from  the 
very  first;  which  comprised  a  public 
park,  a  botanic  garden,  and  the  paddock 
of  the  police-station.  This  domain 
sloped  gently  down  to  the  river  on  either 
side,  and  the  river  was  no  sooner  relieved 
from  the  flat  tideway  than  it  began  to 
run  in  swift  long  shallows  of  crystal 
water,  tinder  hanging  woodlands — in 
short,  to  become  useless,  romantic,  and 
extremely  beautiful. 

Passing  upward  beyond  the  Govern- 
ment Reserve,  as  this  beautiful  tract  was 
called,  you  came  into  the  magnificent 
grounds  of  the  Government  House.  The 


house  itself,  a  long,  white,  castellated 
building,  hung  aloft  on  the  side  of  a  hill 
overhead,  and  was  backed  by  vast  sheets 
of  dark  green  woodland.  From  the  win- 
dows the  lawn  stooped  suddenly  down,  a 
steep  slope  into  the  river,  here  running 
in  a  broad  deep  reach,  hugging  the  rather 
lofty  hills,  on  the  lower  range  of  which 
the  house  was  situated. 

Immediately  beyond  the  Government 
House,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  river, 
was  a  house  of  a  very  different  character. 
The  river,  keeping,  as  I  said,  close  to  the 
hills,  left  on  the  other  side  a  great  level 
meadow,  which,  in  consequence  of  the 
windings  of  the  stream,  was  a  mere  low 
peninsula,  some  five  hundred  acres  in 
extent,  round  which  it  swept  in  a  great 
still,  deep,  circle.  At  the  isthmus  of  the 
peninsula,  on  a  rib  of  the  higher  land 
behind,  a  ridge  of  land  ran  down,  and, 
forming  the  isthmus  itself,  was  lost 
at  once  in  the  broad  river-flat  below : 
there  stood  the  residence  of  our  friend 
the  Hon.  James  Oxton. 

It  was  a  typical  house — the  house  of 
a  wealthy  man  who  had  not  always  been 
wealthy,  but  who  had  never  been  vulgar 
and  pretentious.  It  was  a  perfectly 
honest  house  ;  it  meant  something.  It 
meant  this  :  that  James  Oxton  required 
a  bigger  house  now  that  he  was  worth  a 
quarter  of  a  million  than  he  did  when 
he  was  merely  the  cadet  of  an  English 
family,  sent  here  to  sink  or  swim  with 
the  only  two  thousand  pounds  he  was 
ever  likely  to  see  without  work.  'And 
yet  that  house  showed  you  at  a  glance 
that  the  owner  did  not  consider  himself 
to  have  risen  in  the  social  world  one 
single  step.  He  had  always  been  a  gentle- 
man, said  the  house,  and  he  never  can 
be  more  or  less.  Ironmongers  from  Bass 
Street  might  build  magnificent  Italian 
villas,  as  an  outward  and  visible  proof 
that  they  had  made  their  fortunes,  and 
had  become  gentlemen  beyond  denial  or 
question.  James  Oxton  still  lived  com- 
fortably between  weather-board,  and 
under  shingle,  just  as  in  the  old  times 
when  ninety-nine  hundredth^  of  the 
colony  was  a  howling  wilderness  ;  he 
could  not  rise  or  fall. 

Yet  his  house,  in  its  peciiliar  way,  was 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


a  very  fine  one  indeed.  Strangers  in 
the  colony  used  to  mistake  it  for  a  great 
barracks,  or  a  great  tan-yard,  or  some- 
thing of  that  sort.  Fifteen  years  before 
he  had  erected  a  simple  wooden  house 
of  weather-board,  with  a  high-pitched 
shingle  roof.  As  he  had  grown,  so  had 
his  house  grown.  As  he  had  more 
visitors,  he  required  more  bedrooms ;  as 
he  kept  more  horses,  he  required  more 
stables,  consequently  more  shingle  and 
weather-boards  :  and  so  now  his  house 
consisted  of  three  large  gravelled  quad- 
rangles, surrounded  by  one-storied  build- 
ings, with  high-pitched  roofs  and  very 
deep  verandahs.  There  was  hardly  a 
window  in  the  whole  building ;  nothing 
but  glass  doors  opening  to  the  ground, 
which  were  open  for  five  or  six  months 
in  the  year. 

An  English  lady  might  have  objected 
to  this  arrangement.  She  might  have 
said  that  it  was  not  convenient  to  come 
in  and  find  a  tame  kangaroo,  as  big  as  a 
small  donkey,  lying  on  his  side  on  the 
hearthrug,  pensively  tickling  his  stomach 
with  his  fore  paws  ;  or  for  six  or  eight 
dogs,  large  and  small,  to  come  in  from 
an  expedition,  and,  finding  the  kangaroo 
in  possession  of  the  best  place,  dispose 
themselves  as  comfortably  as  circum- 
stances would  allow  on  ottomans  and 
sofas,  until  they  rose  up  with  one  accord 
and  burst  furiously  out,  barking  madly, 
on  the  most  trivial  alarm,  or  even  on 
none  at  all.  An  English  lady,  I  say, 
might  have  objected  to  this  sort  of 
thing,  but  Aggy  Oxton  never  dreamt  of 
it.  Mrs.  Quickly  objected  to  it,  both 
on  the  mother's  account  and  on  that 
of  the  blessed  child,  not  to  mention  her 
own  ;  but  Mrs.  Oxton  never  did.  It 
was  James's  house,  and  they  were  James's 
dogs.  It  must  be  right. 

I  mentioned  Mrs.  Quickly  just  this 
moment.  I  was  forced  to  do  so.  The 
fact  of  the  matter  is,  that  at  this  time — 
that  is  to  say,  on  the  very  day  on  which 
George  Hilly ar  had  his  interview  with 
Samuel  Burton  in  his  office — the  whole 
of  these  vast  premises,  with  their  in- 
habitants, were  under  her  absolute  do- 
minion, with  the  exception  of  the  dogs, 
who  smelt  her  contemptuously,  won- 


dering what  she  wanted  there ;  and  the 
cockatoo,  who  had  delivered  himself 
over  as  a  prey  to  seven  screaming  devils, 
and,  having  bit  Mrs.  Quickly,  had  been 
removed  to  the  stables,  rebellious  and 
defiant. 

For  there  was  a  baby  now.  James 
Oxton  had  an  heirfor  his  honours  and  his 
wealth.  The  shrewd  Secretary,  the  hard- 
bitten man  of  the  world,  the  man  who 
rather  prided  himself  at  being  thoroughly 
conversant  with  all  the  springs  of  men's 
actions,  had  had  a  new  lesson  these  last 
few  days.  There  was  a  sensation  under 
his  broad  white  waistcoat  now,  so  very, 
very  different  from  anything  he  had  ever 
felt  before,  and  so  strangely  pleasant. 
He  tried  to  think  what  it  was  most  like. 
It  was  nearest  akin  to  anxiety,  he  thought. 
He  told  his  wife  that  he  felt  it  in  the 
same  place,  but  that  it  ?was  very  dif- 
ferent. After  all,  he  did  not  know,  on 
second  thoughts,  that  it  was  so  very  like 
anxiety.  He  thought,  perhaps,  that  the 
yearning  regret  for  some  old  friend,  who 
had  died  in  England  without  bidding 
him  good-bye,  was  most  like  this  won- 
derful new  sensation  of  child-love. 

But,  whatever  it  was  most  like,  there 
it  was.  All  the  interlacing  circles  of 
politics,  ambition,  business,  and  family 
anxiety  had  joined  their  lines  into  one ; 
and  here,  the  centre  of  it  all,  lay  his 
boy,  his  first-born,  heir  to  150,000  acres, 
on  his  pale  wife's  knee. 

He  was'  an  anxious  man  that  day. 
The  party  which  was  afterwards  to  rise 
and  sweep  him  away  for  a  time,  the 
party  of  the  farmers  and  shopkeepers, 
recruited  by  a  few  radical  merchants 
and  some  squatters,  smarting  under  the 
provisions  of  James  Oxton's  Scab  Act, 
and  officered,  as  the  ultra-party  in  a 
colony  always  is,  by  Irishmen — the 
party  represented  in  the  House  by  Mr. 
Phelim  O'Eyan,  and  in  the  press  by 
the  Mohawk— had  shown  their  strength 
for  the  first  time  that  day  ;  and,  as  a 
proof  of  their  patriotism,  had  thrown 
out,  on  the  third  reading  (not  having 
been  able  to  whip  in  before),  the  Govern- 
ment district  -  building  -  surveyor's  -  bill, 
the  object  of  which  was  to  provide  that 
the  town  should  be  built  with  some 


378 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


pretensions  to  regularity,  and  that  every 
man  should  get  his  fair  money's  worth 
out  of  the  bricklayer.  It  was  thrown 
out,  wholesome  and  honest  as  it  was,  as 
a  first  taste  of  the  tender  mercies  and 
good  sense  of  a  party  growing  stronger 
day  by  day.  James  Oxton  had  cause  to 
be  anxious  ;  he  saw  nothing  before  him 
but  factious  opposition,  ever  growing 
stronger  to  every  measure  he  proposed  ; 
no  business  to  be  comfortably  done 
until  they,  the  Mohawks,  were  strong 
enough  to  take  office,  which  would  be 
a  long  while.  And,  when  they  were 
— Oh  heavens  !  Phelim  O'Kyan,  Brian 
O'Donoghue  !  It  wouldn't  do  to  think 
of. 

And  George  Hillyar?  About  this 
proposition  of  his  going  to  England 
The  Secretary  was  strongly  of  opinion 
that  he  ought  to  go,  and  to  make  it  up 
with  his  father,  and  to  set  things  right, 
and  to  give  Gerty  her  proper  position 
in  the  world  ;  but  George  wouldn't  go. 
He  was  obstinate  about  it.  He  said 
that  his  father  hated  him,  and  that  it 
was  no  use.  "He  is  a  short-necked 
man,"  argued  James  Oxton  to  himself, 
"  and  is  past  sixty.  He  may  go  off  any 
moment ;  and  there  is  nothing  to  pre- 
vent his  leaving  three-quarters  of  his 
property  to  this  cub  Erne — the  which 
thing  I  have  a  strong  suspicion  he  has 
done  already.  In  which  case  George 
and  Gerty  will  be  left  out  in  the  cold, 
as  the  Yankees  say.  Which  will  be 
the  deuce  and  all  :  for  George  has 
strong  capabilities  of  going  to  the  bad 
left  in  him  still.  I  wish  George  would 
take  his  pretty  little  wife  over  to  Eng- 
land, and  make  his  court  with  the  old 
man  while  there  is  time.  But  he  won't, 
confound  him  !" 

The  poor  Secretary,  you  see,  had 
cause  enough  for  anxiety.  And,  when 
he  was  in  one  of  what  his  wife  chose 
to  call  his  Sadducee  humours,  he  would 
have  told  you  that  anxiety  was  merely 
a  gnawing  sensation  behind  the  third 
button  of  your  waistcoat,  counting  from 
the  bottom.  When,  however,  he  came 
into  the  drawing-room,  and  saw  his  boy 
on  his  wife's  lap,  and  Gerty  kneeling 
before  her,  the  sensation,  though  still 


behind  the  same  button,  was  not  that 
of  anxiety,  but  the  other  something 
spoken  of  above. 

The  baby  had  being  doing  prodigies. 
He  was  informed  of  it  in  a  burst  of 
excited  talk.  It  had  wimmicked.  Not 
once  or  twice,  but  three  times  had  that 
child  wimmicked  at  its  aunt  as  she 
knelt  there  on  that  identical  floor  under 
your  feet.  Mrs.  Oxton  was  confirmed 
in  this  statement  by  Gerty,  and  Gerty 
by  Mrs.  Quickly.  There  was  no  doubt 
about  it.  If  the  child  went  on  at  this 
pace,  it  would  be  taking  notice  in  less 
than  a  month ! 

This  was  better  than  politics — far 
better.  Confound  O'Ryan  and  all  the 
rest  of  them.  He  said,  there  and  then, 
that  he  had  a  good  mind  to  throw  poli- 
tics overboard  and  manage  his  property. 
"  Will  you  have  the  goodness  to  tell  me, 
Gerty,"  he  said,  "  what  prevents  my 
doing  so  1  Am  I  not  poorer  in  office  ? 
Is  it  not  unendurable  that  I,  for  merely 
patriotically  giving  up  my  time  and 
talents  to  the  colony,  am  to  be  abused 
by  an  Irish  adventurer  ;  have  my  name 
coupled  with  Lord  Castlereagh  s  (the 
fool  meant  to  be  offensive,  little  dream- 
ing that  I  admire  Lord  Castlereagh 
profoundly) ;  and  be  unfavourably  com- 
pared to  Judas  Iscariot  ?  I'll  pitch  the 
whole  thing  overboard,  take  old  George 
into  partnership,  and  let  them  ruin 
the  colony  their  own  way.  Why 
shouldn't  1 1 " 

Gerty  didn't  know.  She  never  knew 
anything.  She  thought  it  would  be 
rather  nice.  Mrs.  Oxton  remarked 
quietly,  that  three  days  before  he  had 
been  furiously  abusing  the  upper  classes 
in  America,  as  cowardly  and  unprin- 
cipled, for  their  desertion  of  politics, 
and  their  retirement  into  private  life. 

"  There,  you  are  at  it  now,"  said  the 
Secretary.  "  How  often  I  have  told  you 
not  to  reckauffer  my  opinions  in  that 
way,  and  bring  them  up  unexpectedly. 
You  are  a  disagreeable  woman,  and  I  am 
very  sorry  I  ever  married  you." 

"  You  should  have  married  Lesbia 
Burke,  my  love,"  said  Mrs.  Oxton. 
"  We  always  thought  you  would.  Didn't 
we,  Gerty  1 " 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


379 


"  No,  dear,  I  think  not,"  said  simple 
Gerty  ;  "  I  think  you  forget.  Don't  you 
remember  that  poor  mamma  always 
used  to  insist  so  positively  that  Mary 
was  to  marry  Willy  Morton ;  that  you 
were  to  marry  James  ;  and  that  I  was 
to  marry  either  Dean  Maberly,  or  Lord 
George  Staunton,  unless  some  one  else 
turned  up  1  I  am  sure  I  am  right,  be- 
cause I  remember  how  cross  she  was  at 
your  walking  with  Willy  Morton  at  the 
Nicnicabarla  picnic.  She  said,  if  you 
remember,  that  you  were  both  wicked 
and  foolish — wicked,  to  spoil  your  eldest 
sister's  game,  and  more  foolish  than 
words  could  say  if  you  attempted  to 
play  fast  and  loose  with  James.  I  re- 
member how  frightened  I  was  at  her. 
'if  you  think  James  Oxton  is  to  be 
played  the  fool  with,  you  little  stupid,' 
she  said — " 

"  The  girl  is  mad,"  said  Mrs.  Oxton, 
blushing  and  laughing  at  the  same  time. 
"  She  has  gone  out  of  her  mind.  Her 
memory  is  completely  gone." 

"  Dear  me  !  "  said  Gerty,  looking  fool- 
ishly round  ;  "  I  suppose  I  oughtn't  to 
have  told  all  that  before  James.  I  am 
terribly  silly  sometimes.  Bat,  Lord 
bless  you,  it  won't  make  any  difference 
to  him." 

Not  much,  judging  from  the  radiant 
smile  on  his  face.  He  was  intensely  de- 
lighted. He  snapped  his  fingers  in  his 
wife's  face.  "  So  Willy  Morton  was  the 
other  string  to  her  bow,  hey  ]  Oh  Lord ! " 
he  said,  and  then  burst  into  a  shout  of 
merry  laughter.  Mrs.  Oxton  would 
not  be  put  down.  She  said  that  it  was 
every  word  of  it  true,  and  that,  idiot  as 
Willy  Morton  was,  he  would  never  have 
snapped  his  fingers  in  his  wife's  face. 
Gerty  couldn't  understand  the  fun.  She 
thought  they  were  in  earnest,  and  that 
she  was  the  cause  of  it  all.  Mrs.  Oxton 
saw  this,  and  pointed  it  out  to  the 
Secretary.  He  would  have  laughed  at 
her  anxiety,  but  he  saw  she  was  really 
distressed  ;  so  he  told  her  in  his  kind, 
quiet  way,  that  there  was  such  love  and 
confidence  between  him  and  her  sister 
as  even  the  last  day  of  all,  when  the 
secrets  of  all  hearts  should  be  known, 
could  not  disturb  for  one  instant. 


She  was,  possibly,  a  little  frightened 
by  the  solemnity  with  which  he  said 
this,  for  she  stood  a  little  without  an- 
swering ;  and  Mr.  Oxton  and  his  wife, 
comparing  notes  that  evening,  agreed 
that  her  beauty  grew  more  wonderful 
day  by  day. 

For  a  moment  she  stood,  with  every 
curve  in  her  body  seeming  to  droop  the 
one  below  the  other,  and  her  face  vacant 
and  puzzled  ;  but  suddenly,  with  hardly 
any  outward  motion,  the  curves  seemed 
to  shift  upwards,  her  figure  grew  slightly 
more  rigid,  her  head  was  turned  slightly 
aside,  her  lips  parted,  and  her  face 
flushed  and  became  animated. 

"  I  hear  him,"  she  said  ;  "  I  hear  his 
horse's  feet  brushing  through  the  fern. 
He  is  coming,  James  and  Aggy.  I 
know  what  a  pity  it  is  I  am  so  silly — " 

"My  darling — "  broke  out  Mr. 
Oxton. 

"  I  know  what  I  mean,  sister  dear. 
He  should  have  had  a  cleverer  wife  than 
me.  Do  you  think  I  am  so  silly  as  not 
to  see  that  1  Here  he  is." 

She  ran  out  to  meet  him.  "  By 
George,  Aggy,"  said  the  Secretary,  kiss- 
ing his  wife,  "  if  that  fellow  does  turn. 
Turk  to  her—" 

He  had  no  time  to  say  more,  for  GeorgB 
and  Gerty  were  in  the  room,  and  the 
Secretary  saw  that  George's  face  was 
haggard  and  anxious,  and  began  to  grow 
anxious  too. 

"  I  arn  glad  we  are  all  here  together 
alone,"  said  George.  "I  want  an  im- 
portant family  talk.  Mrs.  Quickly,  would 
you  mind  going  ?  " 

Mrs.  Quickly  had,  unnoticed,  heard 
all  that  had  passed  before,  and  seemed 
inclined  to  hear  more.  She  minced,  and 
ambled,  and  bridled,  and  said  some- 
thing about  the  blessed  child,  where- 
upon Mrs.  Oxton,  like  a  shrewd  body, 
gave  her  the  baby  to  take  away  with 
her,  reflecting  that  if  she  tried  to  listen 
at  the  keyhole  the  baby  would  probably 
make  them  aware  of  the  fact. 

"  I  look  pale  and  anxious,  I  know," 
said  George.  "  I  am  going  to  tell  you 
why.  Has  Gerty  told  you  what  she 
told  me  last  week  ? " 

Yes,  she  had. 


380 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


u  I  have  been  thinking  over  the  mat- 
ter all  day,  all  day,"  said  George,  wea- 
rily, "  and  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  that  circumstance  makes  an  im- 
mense difference.  Don't  you  see  how, 
Oxton  T 

"  I  think  I  do,"  said  the  Secretary. 

George  looked  wearily  and  com- 
posedly at  him,  and  said,  "  I  mean  this, 
my  dear  Oxton;  I  steadily  refused  to 
pay  court  to  my  father  before,  partly 
because  I  thought  it  useless,  and  partly 
because  my  pride  forbade  me.  This 
news  of  Gerty's  alters  everything.  For 
the  sake  of  my  child,  I  must  eat  my 
pride,  and  try  to  resume  my  place  as 
the  head  of  the  house.  Therefore,  I 
think  I  will  accede  to  your  proposal, 
and  go  to  England." 

"  My  good  George,"  said  Mrs.  Oxton, 
taking  him  by  both  hands,  "  my  wise, 
kind  George,  we  are  so  sure  it  will  be 
for  the  best." 

"  My  boy,"  said  the  Secretary,  "  you 
are  right.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  de- 
lighted I  am  at  your  decision.  I  wish 
I  was  going.  Oh  heavens  !  if  I  could 
only  go.  And  you  will  go,  and  actually 
see  old  Leecroft,  and  Gerty  shall  take  a 
kiss  to  my  mother.  Hey,  Gerty  ?  She 
would  know  you  if  she  met  you  in  the 
street,  from  my  description  ?  Shall  you 
be  in  time  to  get  off  by  the  Windsor  ?  " 

"  Oh  Lord,  no,"  said  George,  speaking 
fast  for  an  instant ;  "  we  couldn't  pos- 
sibly go  by  that  ship.  No ;  we  could 
not  be  ready  by  then." 

"  I  suppose  you  couldn't,"  said  the 
Secretary.  "I  was  thinking  for  a  mo- 
ment, George,  that  you  were  as  impa- 
tient as  I  should  be."  y 

"Hardly  that,"  said  George.  "My 
errand  home  is  a  different  sort  of  one 
from  yours." 

So  George  got  leave  of  absence,  and 
went  home ;  partly  to  see  whether  or 
no  he  could,  now  a  family  was  in  pro- 
spect, get  on  some  better  terms  with 
his  father,  and  partly  because,  since  he 
had  the  interview  with  Samuel  Burton, 
everything  seemed  to  have  grown  duller 
and  blanker  to  him.  His  first  idea  was 
to  put  sixteen  thousand  miles  of  salt 
water  between  him  and  this  man,  and 


his  purpose  grew  stronger  every  time 
he  remembered  the  disgraceful  tie  that 
bound  them  together. 

So  they  went.  As  the  ship  began  to 
move  through  the  green  water  of  the 
bay,  Gerty  stood  weeping  on  the  quar- 
ter-deck, clinging  to  George's  arm.  The 
shore  began  to  fade  rapidly  ;  the  happy, 
happy  shore,  on  which  she  had  spent 
her  sunny,  silly  life.  The  last  thing 
she  saw  through  her  tears  was  the 
Secretary,  standing  at  the  end  of  the 
pier,  waving  his  hat,  and  Aggy  beside 
him.  When  she  looked  up  again,  some 
time  after,  the  old  familiar  shore  was 
but  a  dim  blue  cloud,  and,  with  a  sudden 
chill  of  terror,  she  found  herself  sepa- 
rated from  all  who  knew  her  and  loved 
her,  save  one — alone,  on  the  vast,  heav- 
ing, pitiless  ocean,  with  George  Hillyar. 

For  one  instant,  she  forgot  herself. 
She  clutched  his  arm  and  cried  out, 
"  George,  George  !  let  us  go  back.  I 
am  frightened,  George.  I  want  to  go 
back  to  Aggy  and  James.  Take  me 
back  to  James  !  Oh,  for  God's  sake, 
take  me  back  ! "  » 

"It  is  too  late  now,  Gerty,"  said 
George  coldly.  "You  and  I  are  launched 
in  the  world  together  alone,  to  sink  or 
swim.  The  evening  gets  chili  Go  to 
your  cabin." 

The  Secretary  stamped  his  foot  on 
the  pier,  and  said,  "  God  deal  with  him 
as  he  deals  with  her  ! "  But  his  wife 
caught  his  hands  in  hers,  and  said, 
"  James,  James  !  don't  say  that.  Who 
are  we  that  we  should  make  impre- 
cations? Say,  God  help  them  both, 
James." 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

JAMES  BUBTON'S  STORY  :  VEBY  LOW 
COMPANY. 

EEUBEN'S  friend,  the  pigeon  -  fancier, 
never  showed  in  public.  I  asked  Eube, 
after  a  day  or  two,  whether  he  was  there 
still,  and  Eube  answered  that  he  was 
there  still,  off  and  on.  I  was  very  sorry 
to  hear  it,  though  I  could  hardly  have 
told  any  one  why. 

Eeuben  never  came  in  of  a  night  now ; 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


381 


at  least,  never  came  to  sit  with  us. 
Sometimes  he  would  come  in  for  a  few 
minutes,  with  his  pockets  always  full 
of  bulls'-eyes  and  rock  and  such  things, 
and  would  give  them  to  the  children, 
looking  steadily  at  Emma  all  the  while, 
and  then  go  away  again.  He  would  not 
let  me  come  up  to  his  room.  He  seemed 
not  at  all  anxious  to  conceal  the  fact, 
that  there  was  some  one  who  came  there 
who  was,  to  put  it  elegantly,  an  ineligible 
acquaintance.  My  father  became  ac- 
quainted with  the  fact,  and  was  seriously 
angry  about  it.  But  Keuben  had  cor- 
rectly calculated  on  my  father's  good 
nature  and  disinclination  to  act.  Reuben 
knew  that  my  father  would  only  growl ; 
he  knew  he  would  never  turn  him  out. 
Very  early  in  my  story  I  hinted  that 
Alsatia  was  just  round  the  corner  from 
Brown's  Eow.  Such  was  the  fact.  In 
Danvers  Street  and  Lawrence  Street, 
west  and  east  of  us,  might  be  found 
some  very  queer  people  indeed  ;  and,  as 
I  have  an  objection  to  give  their  names, 
I  shall  give  them  fictitious  ones.  I 
have  nothing  whatever  to  say  against 
Mrs.  Quickly,  or  of  the  reasons  which 
led  to  her  emigration.  She  hardly 
comes  into  question  just  now,  for  she 
emigrated  to  Cooksland  not  long  after 
Fred  was  born.  I  repeat  that  I  person- 
ally have  nothing  to  say  against  Mrs. 
Quickly  ;  she  was  always  singularly  civil 
to  me.  That  she  was  a  foolish  and  weak 
woman,  I  always  thought,  but  I  was  sur- 
prised at  the  singular  repugnance  which 
Emma  showed  towards  her.  And  Mrs. 

C m  again.    What  could  have  made 

her  fly  out  at  the  poor  woman  in  that 
way,  and  fairly  hunt  her  out  of  Sydney  ? 
And  will  you  tell  me  why,  in  the  end, 

not  only  Emma  and  Mrs.  C m,  but 

also  my  mother,  had  far  more  tender- 
ness and  compassion  for  that  terrible 
unsexed  termagant  Mrs.  Bardolph  (nee 
Tearsheet),  than  for  the  gentle,  civi], 
soft-spoken  Mrs.  Quickly  1  I  asked  my 
wife  why  it  was  the  other  day,  and  she 
told  me  that  nothing  was  more  difficult 
to  answer  than  a  thoroughly  stupid 
question. 

At  the  time  of  which  I  am  speaking 
Mrs.  Quickly  had  gone  to  Australia, 


and  the  house  she  had  kept  in  Lawrence 
Street  was  kept  by  Mrs.  Bardolph  and 
Miss  Ophelia  Flanagan.  Miss  Flanagan 
was  a  tall  raw-boned  Irish  woman,  mar- 
ried to  a  Mr.  Malone.  Mrs.  Bardolph 
was  a  great  red-faced  coarse  Kentish 
woman,  with  an  upper  lip  longer  than 
her  nose,  and  a  chin  as  big  as  both, 
as  strong  as  a  man,  and  as  fierce  as  a 
tiger. 

This  winter  she  had  returned  from  a 
short  incarceration.  There  had  been  a 
fatal  accident  in  her  establishment. 
Nobody — neither  the  dozen  or  fourteen 
gentlewomen,  nor  ]Nym,  nor  Bardolph, 
nor  Pistol — had  anything  to  do  with  it. 
The  man  had  fallen  downstairs  and 
broken  his  neck  accidentally,  but  neither 
the  Middlesex  Magistrates  nor  the 
Assistant-Judge  could  conceal  from 
themselves  the  fact,  that  Mrs.  Bardolph 
kept  a  disorderly  house,  and  so  she  had 
to  go  to  Holloway.  She  had  now  re- 
turned, louder,  redder,  and  angrier  than 
before. 

Not  many  days  after  the  night  on 
which  I  had  gone  up  into  Eeuben's 
room,  I  had  some  business  in  Cheyne 
Row,  and  when  it  was  done  I  came 
whistling  and  sauntering  homewards. 
As  I  came  into  Lawrence  Street,  I  was 
thinking  how  pleasant  and  fresh  the  air 
came  up  from  the  river,  when  I  was 
attracted  by  the  sound  of  people  talking 
loudly  before  me,  and,  looking  up,  I  saw 
at  the  corner  of  the  passage  which  leads 
by  the  Dissenting  chapel  into  Church 
Street,  this  group — 

Miss  Flanagan  and  Mrs.  Bardolph, 
leaning  against  the  railings  with  their 
arms, folded;  Mr.  ISTym,  Mr.  Bardolph, 
and  Mr.  Pistol  (I  know  who  I  mean  well 
enough) ;  a  dozen  or  fourteen  gentle- 
women, Bill  Sykes,  Mrs.  Gamp,  Moll 
Flanders,  and  my  cousin  Reuben.  There 
was  a  man  also,  who  leant  against  a  post 
with  his  back  towards  me,  whose  face  I 
could  not  see. 

As  I  came  near  them,  they  stopped 
talking,  every  one  of  them,  and  looked 
at  me.  ,  To  any  lad  of  nearly  eighteen, 
not  born  in  London,  or  one  of  the  chief 
towns  in  Australia,  this  would  have  been 
confusing ;  to  me  it  was  a  matter  of  pro- 


382 


The  HiUyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


found  indifference.  I  was  passing  them 
with  a  calm  stare,  by  no  means  ex- 
pressive of  curiosity,  when  Mrs.  Bar- 
dolph  spoke : 

"Hallo,  young  Bellus  -  and  -  tongs  ! 
What's  up  ? " 

I  replied  to  her,  not  in  many  words. 
There  was  a  roar  of  laughter  from  the 
whole  gang ;  she  looked  a  little  angry 
for  a  moment,  but  laughed  good-na- 
turedly directly  afterwards.  Then  1  was 
sorry  for  what  I  had  said.  But  you  had 
to  keep  your  tongue  handy  in  those 
times,  1  assure  you. 

"  Never  you  mind  the  stirabout,  you 
monkey,"  she  said;  "my  constitution 
wanted  reducing ;  I  was  making  a  deal 
too  much  flesh.  Take  your  cousin  home 
and  mind  him,  you  cheeky  gonoff ;  don't 
you  see  that  the  devil  has  come  for 
him  ? " 

There  was  another  laugh  at  this,  and 
I  turned  and  looked  at  the  gentleman 
who  was  leaning  against  the  corner-post, 
and  who  was  laughing  as  loud  as  any 
one.  I  was  not  impressed  in  this  gentle- 
man's favour  ;  but  I  was  strongly  im- 
pressed with  the  idea  that  this  was  the 
gentleman  who  had  snored  so  loud  one 
night  he  had  slept  in  Reuben's  room. 
But  1  only  laughed  too.  I  said  to  Mrs, 
Bardolph,  that  Eube  knew  his  home  and 
his  friends  a  good  deal  better  than  she 
could  tell  him,  and  so  I  went  on  my 
way,  and,  as  I  went,  heard  Miss  Flanagan 
remark  that  I  was  a  tonguey  young 
divvle,  but  had  something  the  look  of 
my  sisther  about  the  eyee. 

I  was  glad  that  Erne  came  to  see  me 
that  night,  for  I  was  terribly  vexed 
and  ill  at  ease  at  finding  Reuben  in 
such  company — in  company  so  ut- 
terly depraved  that  I  have  chosen, 
as  you  pee,  to  designate  them  by 
Shakespearian  names.  It  was  not  be- 
cause 1  wished  to  confide  in  him 
that  I  was  glad  to  see  him.  I  had  no 
intention  of  doing  that.  If  I  had,  in 
the  first  place  I  should  have  been  be- 
traying lleubcn  ;  in  the  second,  1  should 
have  tieen  ashamed  ;  and  in  the  third, 
I  should  have  been  telling  the  difficulty 
to  a  person  as  little  likely  to  ririderstand 
it  and  assist  one  out  of  it  as  any  one  I 


know.  Erne's  childish  simplicity  in 
all  worldly  matters  was  a  strange  thing 
to  see. 

No.  It  was  for  this  reason  I  was 
glad  to  see  Erne.  I  was  vexed,  and  the 
fact  of  his  sitting  beside  me  soothed  me 
and  made  me  forget  my  vexation.  Why  ? 
you  ask.  Well,  that  I  cannot  tell  you, 
I  have  not  the  very  least  idea  in  the 
world  why.  I  only  know  that  when 
Erne  was  sitting  with  me  I  had  a  feel- 
ing  of  contentment  which  I  never  had 
at  other  times.  We  never  spoke  much 
to  one  another ;  hardly  ever,  unless  we 
were  alone,  and  then  only  a  few  words ; 
nothing  in  themselves,  but  showing  that 
we  understood  one  another  thoroughly. 
Erne's  powers  of  conversation  were  en- 
tirely reserved  for  Emma  and  Joe.  But 
they  told  me  that  if  I  was  out  when  he 
came,  he  was  quite  distraught  and  ab- 
sent ;  that  he  would  never  talk  his  best 
unless  I  was  present — though  he  would, 
perhaps,  only  notice  my  coming  by 
taking  my  hand  and  saying,  "  How 
do,  old  fellow  1 "  A  curious  fact  these 
boy-friendships  !  A  wise  schoolmaster 
told  me  the  other  day  that  he  should 
not  know  what  to  do  without  them, 
and  that  he  had  to  utilise  them.  They 
are,  I  think,  all  very  well  until  Ferdi- 
nand meets  Miranda.  After  that,  they 
must  take  their  chance.  At  this  time, 
it  was  only  child  Erne  who  was  in  love 
with  child  Emma.  As  yet,  I  was  the 
centre  round  which  Erne's  world  re- 
volved. I  had  not  gone  to  the  wall 
as  yet. 

"  Hallo  ! "  said  Erne,  when  he  burst 
in.  "  I  say,  is  Jim  here  ?  I  say,  old 
fellow,  I  want  to  talk  to  you  most 
particularly.  Where's  Emma,  old  fellow  ? 
Fetch  Emma  for  me  ;  1  want  to  have  a 
talk  about  something  very  particular 
indeed.  A  regular  council  of  war,  Joe. 
You  Hammersmith,  you  needn't  say 
anything ;  you  listen,  and  reserve  your 
opinion.  l)o  you  hear  1 " 

I  remember  that  he  shook  hands  with 
me,  and  I  remember  smiling  to  see  his 
white  delicate  fingers  clasped  in  my  own 
black  hand.  Then  Emma  came  sweeping 
in,  and  her  broad  noble  face  shaped 
itself  into  one  great  smile  to  welcome 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


him ;  and  he  asked  her  to  give  him  a 
kiss,  and  she  gave  him  one,  and  you 
must  make  the  best  of  it  you  can,  or 
the  worst  that  you  dare.  And  then 
she  passed  on  to  her  place  by  the  fire 
with  Frank  and  Harry,  and  Fred  hanging 
to  her  skirts,  and  sat  down  to  listen. 

The  court  vas  opened  by  Erne.  He 
said,  "  My  elder  brother  is  come  home." 
There  were  expressions  of  surprise  from 
Joe  and  Emma. 

"  Yes/'  said  Erne.  "  He  is  come 
home.  Emma,  I  want  to  ask  you  this  : 
If  you  had  a  brother  you  had  never 
seen,  do  you  think  you  could  love  him  ? " 

Emma  said,  "  Yes.  That  she  should 
certainly  love  him,  merely  from  being 
her  brother." 

"  But  suppose,"  said  Erne,  "  that 
you  had  never  heard  anything  but  evil 
about  him.  Should  you  love  him  then  V 

"  Yes,"  said  Emma ;  "  I  wouldn't 
believe  the  evil.  And  so  I  should  be 
able  to  love  him." 

"  But,"  said  Erne,  "  that  is  silly 
nonsense.  Suppose  that  you  were 
forced  to  believe  every  thing  bad  against, 
him?" 

"  I  wouldn't  without  proof,"  said 
resolute  Emma. 

"  But  suppose  you  had  proof,  you 
very  obstinate  and  wrong-headed  girl. 
Supposing  the  proofs  of  his  ill  behaviour 
were  perfectly  conclusive.  Suppose 
that." 

"  Supposing  that,"  said  the  un- 
daunted Emma,  "  is  supposing  a  good 
deal.  Suppose  that  I  was  to  suppose, 
that  you  had  taken  the  whole  character 
of  your  brother  from  second-hand,  and 
had  never  taken  the  trouble  or  had 
the  opportunity  to  find  out  the  truth. 
Suppose  that." 


383 

"  "Well,"  said  Erne,  after  a  pause, 
"  that  is  the  case,  after  all.  But  you 
needn't  be  so  aggravating  and  deter- 
mined ;  I  only  asked  your  opinion.  I 
wanted  you  to — " 

"  To  hound  you  on  till  you  formed 
the  faction  against  your  brother,  eh  1 " 
said  Emma.  "  Now,  you  may  be  offended 
or  not ;  you  may  get  up  and  leave  this 
room  to-night ;  but  you  shall  hear  the 
truth.  Joe  and  I  have  talked  over  this 
ever  since  you  told  us  that  your  brother 
was  expected  a  fortnight  ago,  and  I  am 
expressing  Joe's  opinion  and  my  own. 
Every  prejudice  you  take  towards  that 
man  lowers  you  in  the  estimation  of 
those  who  love  you  best.  You  sit  there, 
I  see,  like  a  true  gentleman,  without 
anger ;  you  encourage  me  to  go  on  to 
the  end  and  risk  the  loss  of  your  ac- 
quaintance by  doing  so  (it  is  Joe  who 
is  speaking,  not  I);  but  I  tell  you 
boldly,  that  your  duty,  as  a  gentleman, 
is  to  labour  night  and  day  to  bring 
your  brother  once  more  into  your  father's 
favour.  It  will  ruin  you,  in  a  pecuniary 
point  of  view,  to  do  so ;  but,  if  you 
wish  to  be  a  man  of  honour  and  a 
gentleman,  if  you  Avish  to  be  with  us 
all  the  same  Erne  Hillyar  that  we 
have  learnt  to  love  so  dearly,  you  must 
do  so." 

"  I  have  two  things  more  to  say,"  con- 
tinued Emma,  whose  colour,  heightened 
during  her  speech,  was  now  fading  again. 
"Jim,  your  dear  Hammersmith  knew 
nothing  whatever  of  this  speech  I  have 
made  you.  It  was  composed  by  Joe, 
and  I  agree  with  every  word,  every 
letter  of  it ;  and  that  is  all  I  have  to 
say,  Erne  Hillyar." 

To  be  continued. 


384 


PRIVATE  SCHOOLS  FOE  BOYS  :   THEIR  MANAGEMENT. 

BY  ARCHIBALD  MACLAREN,  OF  THE  GYMNASIUM,  OXFORD. 


"Ai  what  age  ought  a  boy  to  go  to 
school?"  This  question  can  no  more 
be  answered  definitely  than  "At  what 
age  ought  he  to  leave  it?"  Circum- 
stances of  many  kinds  will  direct  both, 
and  determine  both ;  but  we  will  view 
as  the  time  for  the  private  school,  with 
a  free  and  indefinite  margin  on  either 
side,  the  five  years  lying  between  the 
ages  of  nine  and  fourteen. 

The  close  superintendence  which  a 
master  is  able  to  extend  to  a  limited 
number  of  pupils  embraces  all  the  ad- 
vantages of  home-teaching,  and  avoids 
some  of  its  disadvantages  ;  it  secures 
the  good  government  without  granting 
the  undue  indulgence.  It  is  pro- 
verbial that  the  health  of  a  boy  is 
better  at  school  than  at  home :  and  I 
have  known  many  a  pale  and  weakly 
child,  whom  his  mother  sent  forth  in 
fear  and  trembling,  return  in  six  months 
a  ruddy  and  healthy  boy.  This  may 
doubtless  be  attributed  in  a  great 
measure  to  the  regularity  of  school  life 
— regularity  in  hours  of  study,  recreation, 
meals,  rising  and  going  to  bed — and  also 
to  the  increased  mental  activity  which 
he  experiences  in  his  enlarged  sphere  of 
life,  in  the  number  of  his  companions, 
in  the  novelty  and  variety  of  his  occu- 
pations, and  the  earnestness  and  energy 
with  which  he  engages  in  them. 

If  the  nursery  training  has  been  good, 
the  boy  will  enter  upon  school-life  with  a 
fair  prospect  of  a  free  and  unbroken  ad- 
vance. There  is  no  portion  of  life's  race 
so  dangerous  as  that  which  he  has  just 
cleared,  and  none  more  safe  than  that 
on  which  he  is  just  entering :  with 
judicious  management  he  may  so  hus- 
band his  strength  as  to  come  in  fit  for 
the  next  portion — again  a  trying  one. 
The  irritability  of  the  nervous  system, 
accompanying  early  childhood  is  in  a 
great  measure  past ;  several,  if  not  all, 
of  the  ailments  incidental  to  that  period 


of  life  have  been  encountered  and  over- 
come ;  the  dangers  arising  from  the 
abuse  of  some  of  the  agents  of  growth 
are  greatly  lessened,  and  opportunities 
for  a  freer  use  of  others  presented. 

Almost  without  exception,  indeed,  are 
the  agents  of  growth  and  development 
more  fully  and  sensibly  administered  at 
school  than  at  home.  This  is,  perhaps, 
especially  the  case  with  that  of  diet. 
It  is  remarkable  how  soon  the  pampered 
appetite  of  a  petted  child  becomes 
adapted  to  the  plainer,  but  more  whole- 
some, fare  of  school.  Let  the  schoolboy's 
diet  be  sufficiently  varied  and  abundant, 
and  the  hours  between  the  meals  not 
too  far  apart,  and  he  will  not  quarrel 
with  the  cooking ;  for  the  extreme  ac- 
tivity of  every  organ  during  his  waking 
hours  necessitates  a  large  and  regular 
supply  of  nutriment.  Observe  the 
quantity  of  food  he  consumes,  and  it 
will  be  found  sufficient  for  a  full-grown 
labouring  man  ;  and  rightly  so,  for  there 
is  no  labourer  in  England,  in  field  or  at 
forge,  in  smithy  or  at  loom,  who  will 
undergo  so  much  exertion,  in  the  form 
of  voluntary  muscular  movement,  as  a 
healthy  schoolboy. 

And  yet  there  is  need  of  supervision 
on  the  other  side.  At  school,  where 
the  wholesome,  well-prepared  food  is 
unaccompanied  by  any  artificial  provoca- 
tives in  the  shape  of  sauces  or  seasonings, 
or  similar  inducements  to  eat  after  the 
appetite  is  satisfied,  there  is  little  risk  of 
eating  too  much ;  but,  where  the  drink 
provided  is  beer,  many  boys  drink  much 
more  than  is  needed,  to  the  acquirement 
of  a  taste  that  will  inevitably  "  grow  by 
what  it  feeds  on."  Another  pernicious 
practice,  which  might  advantageously  be 
restricted,  is,  the  wasteful  weekly,  if  not 
daily,  expenditure  of  pocket-money  and 
allowances  upon  the  trash  and  abomi- 
nations vended  by  confectioners.  Many 
a  respectable  family  in  England  subsists 


Private  Schools  for  Boys:  Their  Management. 


385 


upon  a  smaller  income  than  is  spent  in 
this  manner  by  self-indulgent  school- 
boys ;  and  its  injurious  effect  upon  the 
health  is  far  greater  than  is  generally 
imagined. 

Fully  appreciating  the  importance  of 
this  agent,  schoolmasters  have  given  to 
it  a  share  of  attention  greater  than  to 
any  other  affecting  the  material  comfort 
of  their  pupils.  While  I  have  never 
observed  any  neglect  or  abuse  of  this 
one  to  warrant  serious  remark,  on  the 
other  hand  I  have  frequently,  on  enter- 
ing a  school  dormitory,  been  painfully 
impressed  with  the  defective  arrange- 
ments for  ventilation.  That  which  is  to 
be  secured  by  a  liberal  expenditure  of  the 
hard-earned  fees  is  liberally  supplied; 
but  that  which  is  equally  important  to 
the  health  of  the  pupils — Air — is  doled 
out  to  them  in  the  most  meagre  allot- 
ments. That  which  encompasses  the 
whole  earth  in  one  vast  ocean,  of  a  depth 
greater  than  ever  plummet  sounded — 
that  which  we  rightly  call  the  freest  of 
all  free  things — is  forbidden  entrance  to 
the  place  where  our  children  spend  their 
days  and  their  nights :  that  which  a 
merciful  Creator  has  so  constituted  that 
it  will  rush  with  horse-power  into  every 
square  foot  of  space  from  which  it  has 
been  excluded,  if  we  will  grant  it  but 
entrance — so  constituted  that,  when 
unfit  for  our  use,  it  will  rise  above  our 
heads,  if  we  will  only  build  our  dwellings 
lofty  enough  to  give  it  space,  and  rush 
up  our  chimneys  and  out  of  our  windows, 
if  we  will  only  leave  them  open  for  its 
passage — is  "cabined,  cribbed, confined," 
until  its  very  nature  is  changed. 

But,  independently  of  the  admission 
of  air,  the  detail  of  ventilating  the  dormi- 
tory is  not  sufficiently  understood  or 
practised.  It  is  not  enough  that  its 
every  door  and  window  should  be  opened 
when  it  is  vacated  by  its  inmates.  They 
might  remain  so  all  day,  and  still  the 
air  in,  under  and  around  the  bed,  be 
impure — charged  with  the  expired  and 
excreted  particles  of  the  sleeper,  exhaled 
from  lungs  and  skin — lurking  in  the 
folds  of  the  bed  "  furniture,"  and  linger- 
ing between  blanket,  and  mattress,  and 
pillow.  The  only  real  and  effective 

No.  53. — VOL.  ix. 


mode  of  bedroom  ventilation  is  to  ex- 
pose each  article  of  bed  gear,  as  soon 
as  the  bed  is  empty,  to  the  action  and 
influence  of  the  atmosphere,  admitted 
through  the  channels  just  named ;  and 
this  should  be  done  regularly,  daily,  in 
summer  and  winter. 

The  same  necessity  for  complete  ven- 
tilation exists  in  the  schoolroom,  if 
possible,  even  more  urgently;  for  pure 
air  is  also  a  valuable  stimulus  to  mental 
activity — not  the  stimulus  to  undue 
exertion,  but  the  agent  chiefly  condu- 
cive to  the  natural  condition  of  per- 
fect cerebral  activity,  which  foul  air 
deadens  and  retards.  And  yet,  how  often 
do  we  see  master  and  pupil  bending 
over  their  desks  -with  flushed  temples 
and  aching  brows,  with  dizziness  in  the 
brain  and  nausea  in  the  stomach,  irri- 
tation in  the  nerves  and  fever  in  the 
blood — all  arising  simply  from  the  fact 
that,  from  carelessness  or  custom,  they 
are  content  to  breathe  an  impure  instead 
of  a  pure  atmosphere.  The  foul  air  is 
pressing  up  against  the  ceiling  to  get 
out ;  the  pure  air  is  rushing  round  the 
building,  trying  to  get  in ;  but  the  exit 
of  the  one,  and  the  entrance  of  the 
other,  are  prevented  by  the  closing  of 
every  known  aperture.  Strictly  speak- 
ing, every  schoolroom  should  be  built 
specially  for  the  purpose,  with  a  well- 
defined  and  carefully-arranged  system  of 
warming,  lighting,  and  ventilating  (for 
the  larger  proportion  of  inmates  to  the 
space  calls  for  a  much  larger  provision 
in  these  respects  than  any  ordinary 
dwelling-room) :  and  the  time  is  not  far 
distant  when  parents  will  be  unwilling 
to  trust  their  children  to  any  other. 
But  much  of  the  existing  evil  arising 
from  defective  ventilation  may  be  ob- 
viated by  profiting,  to  the  fullest  extent, 
by  the  ordinary  channels  of  doors  and 
windows  and  flues,  in  the  manner  I 
have  already  recommended  when  speak- 
ing of  the  nursery ;  *  and,  where  the 
pupils  are  numerous,  and  the  schoolroom 
large,  by  having  ordinary  ventilating 
windows  opened  in  places  where  they 
would  act  most  effectively. 

1  Article  "Management  of  the  Nursery,"' 
in  Macmittan's  Magazine,  No.  30. 

C  C 


386 


Private  Schools  for  Boys :   Their  Management. 


In  England,  water  is  almost  as  plen- 
tiful and  as  easily  obtained  for  all 
sanitary  purposes  as  air,  but  it  must 
be  confessed,  is  almost  as  much  neglected 
as  an  agent  of  health.  How  seldom  do 
•vre  find  a  school  with  proper  provision 
for  bathing.  From  the  beginning  of 
the  half-year  to  the  end  of  it — too  often 
from  one  year's  end  to  another — does 
the  schoolboy  dress  himself,  day  after 
day,  without  any  attempt  to  cleanse  his 
skin  from  the  impurities  which  are 
hourly  accumulating  upon  it.  In  some 
schools  the  younger  boys  are  washed  in 
warm  water  once  a  week,  while  the  elder 
are  left  to  their  own  inclinations ;  and, 
provided  their  hands  and  faces  are  clean, 
nothing  more  is  expected,  nothing  more 
is  desired,  and  for  nothing  more  has  pro- 
vision been  made.  Is  it  not  possible  to 
have  a  lavatory  attached  to  every  school, 
to  which  the  boys  could  go  straight 
from  their  dormitories,  returning  thence 
after  their  rapid  and  brief  immersion'? 
The  time  would  be  altogether  incon- 
siderable ;  a  few  minutes  would  suffice 
for  the  entire  operation.  The  trouble 
•would  be  equally  so;  for  the  single 
attendant,  to  see  that  the  established 
rules  and  regulations  for  its  government 
were  duly  observed,  might  be  one  of  the 
ordinary  domestics  of  the  establishment ; 
and  the  expense  would  almost  be  limited 
to  the  original  expense  of  the  bath. 

Where  a  river  or  inland  stream  is 
situated  at  a  convenient  distance  from 
the  school,  open-air  bathing  may  be 
carried  on  in  the  summer  months  with 
great  advantage.  The  freshness  of  the 
water,  the  pleasantness  of  its  tempera- 
ture, and  the  freedom  of  motion  both  in 
the  stream  and  on  its  banks,  are  all 
advantages  over  the  house-bath.  "With 
young  boys,  however,  the  bulk  of  water, 
the  difficulty  of  maintaining  a  footing, 
and  the  natural  fear  of  drowning,  are 
all  apt  to  be  difficulties  at  first,  and 
Trill  sometimes  call  for  much  care  and 
patience.  In  taking  a  boy  to  the  river 
the  first  object  should  be  to  give  him 
confidence;  let  him  be  sure  that  no 
tricks  will  be  played  him ;  and,  where 
several  boys  are  bathing  together,  this 
will  require  watchfulness.  With  these 


precautions,  a  boy  may  be  taken  to  the 
river  at  a  very  early  age,  and  may 
learn  to  swim  not  very  long  after  he  has 
learned  to  walk.  This  is  a  great  gain 
in  other  points  of  view  than  the  sanitary 
one ;  for  swimming  is  an  art,  a  difficult 
art— an  art  requiring  much  time,  and 
much  practice,  and  much  attention — and, 
unless  learned  in  boyhood,  is  seldom  or 
never  well  learned ;  and,  besides  the 
safety  and  comfort  which  the  power  of 
swimming  with  ease  bestows,  it  is  one  of 
those  exercises  which  cultivate  courage 
and  self-confidence  in  a  high  degree.  I 
have  myself  succeeded  in  teaching  boys 
to  swim,  and  swim  well,  as  early  as  the 
sixth  or  seventh  year. 

Speaking  in  general  terms,  there  is  no 
fault  to  be  found  with  the  dress  of  the 
schoolboy ;  it  gives  sufficient  warmth, 
and  admits  of  complete  freedom  of  move- 
ment Indeed,  it  is  only  in  the  nursery 
that  much  evil  from  improper  clothing 
is  incurred.  Get  the  child  out  of  the 
nursery,  get  him  away  from  mamma, 
and  he  is  safe.  Whence  the  danger  ?  It 
arises  from  the  most  amiable  of  qualities 
— the  love  and  pride  of  the  parent  in 
and  for  her  darling ;  the  ever-living 
solicitude  for  the  comfort  and  beauty  of 
the  child,  without  perceiving  in  this 
respect  what  constitutes  either  the  one 
or  the  other ;  the  unsubduable  desire  to 
dress  it,  decorate  it,  beautify  it,  up  to 
and  beyond  the  received  standard  of 
fashion,  that  it  may  outshine  and  eclipse 
all  other  children,  and  become  the  ob- 
served of  all  child-observers — although 
such  fashion  be  the  unmeaning  device 
of  some  ignorant  tailor  or  milliner.  But 
the  schoolboy  is  emancipated  from  this 
slavery ;  the  tailor  has  no  powers  in  the 
playground.  No  man-milliner  holds 
jurisdiction  in  nook  or  corner  of  that 
little  healthy  republic.  Let  him  make 
the  essay,  let  him  hang  on  any  boy's 
back  a  coat,  in  shape,  colour,  or  material, 
chosen  for  ornament  and  not  for  use, 
and  it  will  soon  be  laid  where  Raleigh's 
was — in  the  mud. 

The  allotment  of  the  hours  of  study 
is,  in  general,  well-chosen,  well-distri- 
buted, and  not  exceeding  the  capacity  of 
a  healthy  boy.  In  summer  an  hour's 


Private  Schools  for  Boys:  Their  Management. 


387 


study  before  breakfast  may  be  safely 
undertaken,  but  in  winter  it  should  not 
be  attempted.  Let  the  body  be  invigo- 
rated by  the  morning  meal,  and  warmed 
by  a  favourite  game  before  the  brain- 
work  begins.  For  this  is  to  be  the  effort 
of  the  day :  two  or  three  consecutive 
hours  are  to  be  given  to  mental  toil, 
unbroken,  uninterrupted,  save  by  such 
break  and  interruption  as  maybe  obtained 
in  passing  fijom  one  kind  of  lesson  to 
another,  and  in  alternating  the  difficult 
and  irksome  with  the  easy  and  pleasant 
— an  important  point  which  should  never 
be  lost  sight  of.  Some  time  should  be 
given  to  recreation  before  dinner,  and  a 
clear  hour,  at  the  least,  should  invariably 
be  allowed  to  elapse  after  dinner  before 
the  lessons  are  resumed.  The  drowsi- 
ness so  often  felt  during  the  afternoon 
lessons  arises  entirely  from  the  fact  that 
digestion  is  still  being  actively  carried 
on.  The  master  must  use  the  large  dis- 
cretionary power  reposed  in  him  for 
directing  the  evening's  occupations.  Five 
or  six  hours  of  mental  task- work  is  as 
much  as  any  young  brain  can  with 
advantage  undergo  ;  but — inasmuch  as 
mere  idleness  is  as  fatiguing  and  as  in- 
jurious as  labour — when  the  work  of 
the  day  is  considered  ended  with  the 
afternoon  lessons,  pursuits  may  be  devised 
and  encouraged  which  will  give  occu- 
pation to  the  mental  faculties  without 
straining  them  ;  care  being  taken  when 
they  are  followed  by  artificial  light, 
that  it  is  abundant  and  well-placed. 
Nothing  is  so  destructive  to  young  eyes 
as  feeble,  uncertain,  or  badly-distributed 
light. 

In  an  excellent  school,  with  which  I 
am  acquainted,  the  work  begins,  summer 
and  winter,  at  eight  o'clock,  and  is  car- 
ried on  till  one,  an  interval  of  an  hour 
being  given  from  ten  till  eleven.  A 
single  hour  is  given  to  study  in  the 
afternoon,  and  an  hour  and  a  half  in  the 
evening  completes  the  day's  work.  The 
younger  boys  are  forbidden  access  to  the 
schoolroom  except  during  the  school- 
hours — an  arrangement  which  goes  far 
to  ensure  the  proper  employment  of 
the  play-time,  and,  as  there  is  plenty  of 
competition  going  on,  very  much  in- 


creases the  attention  and  energy  which 
the  little  fellows  bestow  upon  their  work 
at  the  appointed  hours.  The  half-holi- 
days, with  both  seniors  and  juniors,  are 
devoted  entirely  to  recreative  exercises. 
We  sometimes  find  a  master  permit- 
ting, and  parents  encouraging,  a  child 
to  devote  himself  entirely  to  his  studies, 
and  stimulating  bim  by  every  means 
in  their  power  to  do  so,  even  during 
the  hours  set  apart  for  relaxation  and 
exercise.  The  folly  of  this  is  so  blind, 
the  sin  of  it  so  great,  that  I  would  say 
it  ought  to  be  viewed  as  a  delinquency 
punishable  by  law,  did  it  not  so  surely 
bring  of  itself  a  punishment  upon  all 
concerned,  more  severe  than  any  judicial 
court  would,  for  pity,  inflict.  The  dis- 
comfiture of  the  master's  expectations, 
the  annihilation  of  the  parents'  hopes, 
and  the  utter  helplessness  and  hopeless- 
ness of  the  poor  boy's  break-down — for 
break  down  he  must  and  will,  and,  once 
down,  be  ever  after  liable  to  a  like 
fall,  however  firmly  he  may  seem  to 
have  regained  his  feet — are  most  piti- 
able. Not  unfrequently  the  coming 
disaster  is  perceived  before  it  reaches 
actual  catastrophe,  and  then  parents,  in 
consternation,  are  very  apt  to  fly  to  the 
opposite  extreme.  The  boy  is  hurriedly 
taken  from  school,  all  books  are  removed, 
all  study  is  forbidden ;  from  that  which 
was  his  sole  occupation  he  is  entirely 
debarred.  What  is  he  to  do  1  Lounge 
about,  listless,  purposeless,  regretful,  a 
weariness  and  trouble  to  himself  and 
to  every  one  about  him.  This  error 
is  scarcely  less  than  the  first.  If  we 
have  gone  astray  we  must  retrace  our 
steps  footmark  by  footmark,  and  they 
will  bring  us  again  to  the  right  track. 
If  on  the  first  indication  of  the  boy's 
health  giving  way  he  had  been  gently, 
but  firmly,  led  to  apply  the  hours  set 
apart  for  recreation  and  exercise ;  and, 
had  these,  as  they  became  palatable, 
been  augmented,  the  lost  balance  might 
have  been  restored.  Parents  are  neces- 
sarily most  anxious  for  their  children's 
education;  a  boy's  future  career,  his 
whole  course  of  life,  probably  depends 
upon  it,  but  this  is  not  the  way  to 
secure  it.  Bend  the  bow  till  the  string 
co2 


388 


Private  Schools  for  Soys :  Their  Management. 


touch  the  ear,  but  when  the  arrow  is 
sped  let  the  bow  be  unstrung,  or  the 
flight  of  the  next  arrow  will  be  feeble, 
and  the  next  more  feeble  still,  for  the 
elasticity  and  spring  of  the  bow  itself  has 
been  impaired  by  your  neglect ;  neither 
let  us  forget  that  it  was  fashioned  from 
a  green  and  but  a  sapling  yew. 

Let  it  not  be  from  this  inferred  that 
I  would  undervalue  the  purely  mental 
work  of  schools,  nor  let  it  be  for  a 
moment  imagined  that  I  would  advocate 
a  less  active,  a  less  earnest,  pursuit  of  it. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  because  I  value 
it  at  its  highest  price,  and  because  I 
would  sustain  in  their  most  ardent  eiforts 
its  youthful  votaries,  and  enable  them 
in  the  aftertime  to  reap  to  the  full  the 
fruit  of  their  labours,  that  I  plead  for  a 
more  discriminating  indulgence  in  occu- 
pations purely  mental  and  sedentary  at 
this   period   of  life.     For  there  is  no 
error  more  profound,  or  productive  of 
more  evil,  than  that  which  views  the 
bodily  and  mental  .powers  as  antithetical 
and  opposed,  and  which  imagines  that 
the  culture  of  the  one  must  be  made  at 
the  expense  of  the  other.     The  truth  is 
precisely  the  reverse  of  this.     In  the 
acquirement  of  bodily  health,  mental 
occupation  is  a  helpful,  indeed  a  neces- 
sary, agent.     And  so  impressively  has 
this  been  proved  to  me  that,  in  cases 
where  the  acquisition  of  bodily  health 
and  strength  was  the  all  in  all  desired  by 
the  parent,  and  the  one  thing  longed  for 
by  the  child  (and  in  some  cases  almost 
despaired  of  by  myself),  I  have  been 
careful  to  allot  and  mark  out  a  propor- 
tion of  mental  with  bodily  occupation. 
For  what  task,  what  toil,  is  so  dreary 
as  play,  play,  and  only  play,  to  an  in- 
telligent child  ?     What  boy  can,  so  to 
speak,  amuse  himself  for  ever  ?  Nothing 
is  more  true  than  the  old  adage  that 
"  All  work  and  no  play  makes  Jack  a 
dull  boy,"  unless  it  be  its  own  counter- 
part, that  "  All  play  and  no  work  makes 
him  duller  still." 

^  The  little  colourless  bookworm  stands 
high  in  a  leading  form — a  form  seldom 
reached  by  a  well-grown  healthy  lad  of 
his  years — --and  master  and  usher  unite 
in  holding  him  up  as  an  example  to  the 


school,  and  point  him  out  with  pride  to 
every  visitor.  But  every  sensible  man 
feels  for  him  but  commiseration,  and 
views  him  but  as  a  warning;  for  he 
looks  from  the  boy  to  the  man,  and  from 
the  schoolroom  to  the  outer  world,  with 
its  rude  encounter  and  its  stern  prolonged 
struggle,  and  he  sees  how  unfit  are  such 
a  form  and  such  habits  for  the  task.  A 
warning,  too,  which  urges  less  consi- 
derate minds  to  an  opposite  extreme  ! 
"  My  boy  shall  cultivate  his  body,"  says 
an  astonished  but  not  admiring  Pater- 
familias ;  and  the  resolve  is  a  wise  one, 
for  well  worth  cultivating  are  the  varied 
powers  of  the  human  body ;  and  beau- 
tiful it  is,  and  wonderful  as  beautiful, 
to  watch  the  fair  and  free  development 
of  the  frame  of  a  vshapely  child ;  but  the 
emphasis  on  the  terminating  word  was 
meant  to  indicate  that  an  exclusive  cul- 
ture should  be  given  to  the  body,  and 
that  its  twin-sister,  its  co-ordinate  com- 
panion, the  mind,  would  be  left  to  shift 
for  herself — disowned,  excluded  from, 
her  rightful  share  in  the  educational 
inheritance. 

Now  this  must  be  all  error — error 
arising  from  ignorance  of  our  very  selves. 
Mind  and  body  should  be  viewed  as 
the  two  well-fitting  halves  of  a  perfect 
whole,  designed  in  true  accord  mutually 
to  sustain  and  support  each  other,  and 
each  worthy  of  our  unwearied  care  and 
unstinted  attention ;  to  be  given  with  a 
fuller  faith  and  more  reverent  trust  than 
those  which  would  argue  that  He  who 
united  in  us  our  twofold  nature  made 
them  incompatible,  inharmonious,  op^ 
posed.  No,  no ;  even  blind  and  blunder- 
ing man  does  not  yoke  two  oxen  to- 
gether to  pull  against  each  other ;  mind 
and  body  can  pull  well  together  in  the 
same  team. 

But  it  is  not  alone  in  this  negative 
form,  by  exemption  from  extreme  mental 
efforts,  that  the  growth  and  develop- 
ment of  the  schoolboy  is  secured.  Active 
bodily  exercise  at  regular  and  frequent 
intervals  must  be  obtained,  and  for  this 
special  provision  must  be  made,  with 
as  serious  a  purpose  as  for  any  school 
duty.  It  must  be  at  once  admitted  that 
the  importance  of  exercise  is,  broadly 


Private  Schools  for  Boys  :  Their  Management. 


389 


speaking,  fully  recognised  by  school- 
masters ;  and,  if  ample  accommodation 
has  not  yet  been  provided  for  it,  this  is 
to  be  attributed  rather  to  the  as  yet  but 
partially  comprehended  nature  of  the 
requirement  than  to  any  lack  of  will  to 
meet  it.  They  know  from  the  best  of  all 
sources,  practical  experience,  that,  un- 
less boys  have  abundant  play-time  and 
play-space  the  tone  and  energy  of  mind 
and  body  sink,  and  the  school-work 
suffers ;  and  therefore  an  ample  play- 
ground and  a  liberal  allowance  of  play- 
hours  are  held  as  important  as  a  com- 
modious schoolhouse,  a  well-supplied 
table,  or  a  good  system  of  teaching. 

The  staple  of  the  half-holiday  school 
exercises  are  football  and  cricket,  the 
one  dividing  the  year  with  the  other. 

Football,  for  the  healthy  and  strong, 
is  an  excellent  exercise;  but  for  the 
young  or  weak  it  is  altogether  unsuit- 
able and  dangerous — not  only  when  they 
are  mingled  in  the  same  game  with  the 
strong,  but  absolutely  so  when  playing 
by  themselves  ;  for  the  exertion,  the 
effort,  the  strain,  is  where  they  are  least 
able  at  this  age  to  sustain  it — in  the 
abdomen,  groin  and  loins.1  And  where 
strong  and  weak,  light  and  heavy,  are 
mingled  together,  the  evil  is  greatly  in- 
creased; for  if  the  player  be  but  fairly 
endowed  with  what  we  all  believe  to  be 
the  birthright  of  our  boys — pluck — the 
weakness  of  his  muscles,  the  looseness 
of  his  joints,  and  the  exposedness  of  his 
shin-bones,  will  never  be  taken  into  his 
reckoning  when  the  ball  is  in  view ; 
indeed,  his  rashness  will  probably  be  in 
an  inverse  ratio  to  his  strength,  as  his 

1  Among  the  numerous  cases  of  hernia 
which  have  come  under  my  notice,  caused  by 
this  game,  I  have  traced  the  greatest  number, 
not  to  over-exertion,  or  to  any  collision  or 
bodily  encounter  with  an  antagonist,  but  to 
the  circumstance  of  missing  the  ball,  of  hitting 
nothing,  on  a  violently  aimed  kick ;  the  strain 
on  the  lower  region  of  the  abdomen  being,  in 
such  cases,  very  severe  and  closely  localized, 
and  altogether  unexpected.  The  shock  is 
analogous  to  that  experienced  in  making  a 
false  step  down  a  stair — with  this  difference, 
that  in  the  latter  instance  it  is  a  step  made 
without  effort,  and  in  the  former  it  is  a  blow 
made  with  the  whole  concentrated  force  of 
the  body. 


nervous  excitability  will  be  to  his  mus- 
cular development.  This  game,  when 
played  by  young  boys,  should  always  be 
under  the  superintendence  of  a  master 
or  monitor,  because  of  its  comparatively 
inartistic  and  skilless  character,  causing 
it  to  depend  mainly  on  the  strength, 
weight,  and  daring  of  the  player. 

Cricket  is  an  exercise  of  a  very  dif- 
ferent character.  Strength,  daring,  and 
weight,  are  not  among  its  requisites  ; 
the  strong  and  the  weak  may  here  safely 
enter  the  lists  together ;  it  is  altogether 
a  game  of  skill  and  dexterity — quick 
eye,  ready  hand,  and  fleet  foot.  It 
would  be  difficult  to  devise  a  game  better 
fitted  for  half-holiday  recreation ;  and,  as 
I  have  had  occasion  before  to  remark, 
the  man  who  invented  cricket  as  surely 
deserves  a  statue  to  his  memory  as  he 
who  won  "Waterloo.  For  the  grand  old 
warrior,  in  the  evening  of  his  days,  with 
a  glistening  eye  and  trembling  lip,  con- 
fessed, as  he  watched  the  Eton  boys 
scoring  their  innings  in  their  field — the 
field  that  led  to  his — "  It  was  here  that 
Waterloo  was  won." 

It  is  delightful  to  see  with  what  ap- 
titude and  love  cricket  has  been  adopted 
by  our  schools  of  all  degrees,  in  town 
and  country.  It  contains  just  that 
amount  of  exertion,  diluted  by  that 
amount  of  rest,  which  it  is  desirable  to 
give  to  boys  in  a  sport  extending  over 
several  hours,  with  just  sufficient  vague- 
ness in  its  laws  and  regulations  to  free 
them  from  irksomeness  in  their  obser- 
vance, to  give  justification  to  their  semi- 
fulfilment,  and  yet  to  have  the  law  "o' 
our  side ;"  with  an  ample  margin  for 
that  necessary  ingredient  in  all  boys' 
pastimes — disputation.  It  is  pleasant 
to  see  the  real  skill  and  undoubted  dex- 
terity with  which  the  "big  fellows" 
knock  the  balls  about  in  a  cricket-match ; 
but  I  love  still  better  to  witness  the 
early  efforts  of  the  little  embryo  cricketer 
— the  exuberant  display  of  unrequited 
resources — the  prodigal  expenditure  of 
strength  on  acts  rightly  requiring  the 
slightest  effort — the  uncheckable  and 
unsubduable  enthusiasm  at  the  slender- 
est point  gained — the  redoubled  resolu- 
tion, heroic  and  defiant,  to  retrieve  all 


390 


Private  Schools  for  Boys :   Their  Management. 


disasters  and  mishaps  at  the  next  in- 
nings. A  man  may  get  but  little  real 
exercise  from  cricket,  but  a  boy  will 
have  exercise  out  of  it  in  one  form  or 
another :  he  runs  when,  for  all  pur- 
poses of  the  game,  he  might  be  walking 
— jumps  when  he  might  be  standing 
still — is  practising  leap-frog  with  the 
nearest  fielder  when  he  should  be"  keep- 
ing a  look-out  for  a  catch.  On  the 
slightest  occasion  for  approval,  condem- 
nation, or  applause,  his  voice  is  ready. 
In  bowling  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  he 
aims  at — the  wicket  or  its  keeper's  legs, 
and  as  he  enjoys  the  hitting  of  the  one 
as  much  as  the  other,  it  would  be  un- 
charitable to  suppose  he  has  any  par- 
tiality either  way.  In  batting,  if  he 
does  not  swing  himself  off  his  legs,  or 
throw  away  his  bat  in  the  uncontrolled- 
ness  of  his  effort,  he  will  get  a  good  six 
runs  for  his  blow.  But  fielding  is  his 
forte.  What  a  slogan,  what  a  war-dance, 
accompanies  a  catch  !  And  the  throw 
in — let  his  side  be  well  content  if  the 
ball  goes  no  farther  beyond  the  wicket, 
than  the  distance  from  which  he  has 
thrown  it ;  let  them  look  sharp,  too, 
about  recovering  it,  for  he  issues  his 
orders  to  that  effect  with  the  prompt- 
ness and  decision  of  a  sea-captain  in  a 
gale  of  wind. 

Hare  and  hounds,  and  paper-chases, 
are  also  excellent  recreative  half-holiday 
pastimes  ;  but  in  these  it  is  well  for 
the  master  to  form  one  of  the  pack. 
He  should  approve,  if  not  select  the 
ground — should  determine  the  length  of 
the  race,  and  the  pace  at  which  it  is  to 
be  run — should  be  ready  to  check  un- 
due effort,  to  stimulate  the  lazy  or  care- 
less, to  sustain  the  interest  and  to  give 
importance  to  the  whole.  That  master 
knows  but  one  phase  of  the  character  of 
his  boys  who  only  sees  them  in  school ; 
he  does"  but  one  half  of  his  duty  who 
only  directs  their  studies :  he  who 
would  know  his  boys  entirely  must 
be  with  them  in  all  their  undertakings. 

But  even  these,  in  a  climate  so  vari- 
able as  ours,  form  but  an  inadequate 
and  precarious  provision  for  wants  so 
important,  and  of  such  regular  and 
frequent  occurrence.  The  seasons  and 


states  of  weather  which  drive  boys  from 
their  playground  and  deprive  them  of 
their  exercise,  are  precisely  those  in 
which  they  need  it  most,  i.e.  in  rainy 
or  snowy  weather,  when  the  ground  is 
wet  and  everything  on  which  the  hand 
can  be  laid  is  cold  and  repellent.  The 
close  relation  which  the  human  body 
bears  to  surrounding  objects  is  at  no 
time  more  clearly  shown  than  now ;  for, 
while  the  cold  surfaces  with  which  it 
comes  in  contact  check  the  pleasurable 
action  of  the  nerves,  and  retard  circula- 
tion, the  dampness  of  the  air  alike 
impedes  respiration  by  the  lungs,  and 
transpiration  by  the  skin;  all  the  or- 
gans supporting  the  vital  powers  labour 
under  the  same  want  for  that  which  is 
necessary  at  all  times,  but  urgently  so 
amid  va"pour  and  damp  —  exercise. 
These,  too,  are  the  times  when  colds  are 
caught — while  the  boys  crowd  together 
in  the  doorways  and  windows,  unem- 
ployed, restless,  irritated,  missing  the 
physical  employment  expected,  render- 
ing themselves  unfit  for  the  mental 
ones  yet  to  be  performed. 

What  is  wanted  for  every  school,  in 
addition  to  its  ordinary  playground  and 
field  for  summer  half-holiday  sports,  is 
a  covered-in  playground  proportionate 
in  size  to  the  extent  of  the  school. 
Such  a  structure  might  be  erected  at  a 
trifling  expense,  with  an  asphalte  or 
gravel  floor,  wooden  walls  and  felt  roof, 
fit  alike  for  the  hot  midday  of  summer,  the 
dripping  afternoon  of  autumn,  and  the 
long  winter  evening.  Let  no  attempt 
be  made  to  fit  it  up  with  any  form  of 
gymnastic  apparatus ;  nothing  can  be 
put  up  in  it  which  would  be  either 
useful  or  safe  without  an  efficient 
master.  I  hope  in  a  future  paper  to 
show  how  a  properly  organized  system 
of  bodily  training  may  be  safely  intro- 
duced into  every  private  school  in  the 
kingdom ;  but,  in  the  meantime,  I  would 
caution  every  -one  against  the  promis- 
cuous use  of  any  form  of  fixed  appa- 
ratus whatever.  I  do  so  with  an 
earnestness  which  I  could  only  feel, 
and  with  an  emphasis  which  I  could 
only  use,  where  the  good  to  be  obtained 
was,  at  best,  trifling  and  uncertain,  and 


Private  Schools  for  Boys :  Their  Management. 


391 


the  evil  to  be  hazarded  great  and  un- 
doubted. For  what  but  evil  can  accrue 
from  the  untaught,  undirected  efforts  of 
a  group  of  boys — strong  and  weak,  indis- 
criminately mingled — gathered  around 
the  cluster  of  perilous  machines  some- 
times erected  in  a  playground,  and 
styled  a  gymnasium  ;  the  strong  impro- 
vising tricks  which  have  nothing  to 
recommend  them  but  their  danger,  the 
weak  emulating  the  strong.  And  the  evil 
which  is  most  to  be  dreaded,  namely, 
STRAINS,  is  precisely  the  very  evil  that 
should  not  occur — the  very  evil  which, 
with  properly  administered  gymnastics, 
could  not  occur ;  which,  in  my  entire 
experience,  and  with  the  thousands  of 
young  and  old,  weak  and  strong,  who 
have  passed  through  my  hands,  has  never 
in  the  smallest  degree  occurred — the  very 
evil,  in  fact,  which  should  be  prevented 
from  occurring  in  other  exercises  by  the 
resultant  benefits  of  these  ;  because  by 
them  the  parts  liable  to  injury  would 
be  strengthened,  and  an  inherited  lia- 
bility removed.  For  the  universal  law 
regulating  growth  and  development  is 
paramount  here— the  natural  and  suit- 
able exercise  strengthens,  the  false  or 
undue  exertion  weakens  and  injures. 
I  repeat — falls  and  broken  bones  are 
not  the  evils  to  be  dreaded  from  these 
hazardous  exertions.  Falls  are  seen,  and 
broken  bones  are  mended ;  the  thing  to 
be  feared  is  the  strain  from  sudden,  un- 
regulated, or  over- stimulated  effort,  an 
evil  which  at  the  time  of  its  actual 
occurrence  may  never  be  known,  or,  if 
known,  concealed,  for  the  young  have  a 
dread  of  such  incapacitating  injuries ; 
but  which,  concealed  or  avowed,  under- 
stood or  misapprehended,  felt  late  or 
soon,  will  surely  appear — it  may  be  to 
mar  the  hope,  and  the  happiness,  and 
the  usefulness  of  all  the  life  to  come. 

I  am  urged  to  speak  thus  strongly  on 
this  point,  because  scarcely  a  week — 
sometimes,  indeed,  for  weeks  together, 
scarcely  a  day  passes — without  bringing 
me  letters  seeking  to  be  informed  of  the 
cost  of  such  apparatus,  and  requesting 
information  to  guide  a  carpenter  in  their 
construction ;  but  amongst  all  these 
letters  there  is  scarcely  one  in  ten  which 


desires  to  be  informed  as  to  what  exer- 
cises should  be  done  upon  them  when 
erected,  or  how  these  should  be  admi- 
nistered. The  plastic  frames,  of  growing 
boys  must  not  be  treated  in  this  fashion ; 
they  are  not  things  for  amateurs  to 
play  with. 

A  very  different  view  of  the  nature 
of  such  exercises  was  taken  by  the 
Military  Authorities  on  adopting  them 
into  the  army,  where,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, the  learners  are  all  full-grown,  able- 
bodied  men,  who,  after  repeated  medical 
inspection,  have  been  reported  free  from 
flaw  in  constitution  and  physical  or- 
ganization. It  is  not  on  a  few  frail 
open-air  erections  that  these  men  are 
receiving  their  physical  education,  but 
in  schools  constructed  with  the  utmost 
care  to  embrace  every  sanitary  advantage 
— dry,  clean,  warm,  roomy,  lofty,  per- 
fectly lighted,  perfectly  ventilated — with 
the  soft  prepared  floor  to  receive  thenr 
on  every  slip  or  mishap.  For  the  con 
struction  of  these  buildings  forms  an 
integral  part  of  the  system,  and  has 
received  from  me,  in  all  the  minutiae  of 
their  design,  as  much  care,  and  has  been 
carried  out  with  as  much  method  and 
solicitude,  as  I  have  given  to  the  pre- 
paration of  the  exercises  themselves, 
or  of  the  code  of  regulations  and 
directions  for  their  instruction  and 
practice.  There,  in  these  gymnasia, 
the  learners,  at  stated  hours  on  stated 
days,  assemble,  and  divide  into  small 
squads  or  classes  of  about  a  dozen  men 
each;  and  each  class,  led  by  its  certi- 
fied instructor  or  monitor,  the  whole 
under  the  direction  of  an  officer-super- 
intendent, is  conducted  through  a  lesson, 
which,  while  it  may  be  varied  daily, 
ranges  within  one  of  the  graduated 
courses  of  exercises  composing  the 
system ;  in  which  the  difficulty  of 
execution  steadily  increases,  and  cul- 
minates in  the  last :  thus  yielding  to 
every  learner  exercise  suited  to  his 
powers — thus  ensuring  that,  while  the 
instructor  adheres  to  his  book  of  in- 
structions, neither  teacher  nor  learner 
can  err. 

For,  if  in  our  day  gymnastics  mean 
anything — that  is,  anything  worth  the 


392 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  X. 


serious  thought  of  parent,  teacher  or 
child — they  mean  a  gradual,  progressive 
system  of  physical  exercises,  so  con- 
ceived, so  arranged,  and  so  administered, 
that  it  will  naturally  and  uniformly  call 
forth  and  cultivate  the  latent  powers  and 
capacities  of  the  body,  even  as  the  mental 
faculties  are  developed  and  strengthened 
by  mental  exercises  and  occupations — 
such  a  system  as  is  carried  out  at  Radley 
and  at  Magdalen  College  School — in 
which  the  exercises  in  their  different 
stages  of  difficulty  can  be  rendered  alike 
suitable  to  the  weak  and  to  the  strong, 
to  the  delicate  and  to  the  hardy  ;  which 
will  provide  varied  and  suitable  em- 
ployment for  the  whole  body,  and  for 
the  whole  body  equally.  The  mere 
enumeration  of  these  qualities  shows 
at  the  same  time  the  good  obtain- 
able from  such  a  system,  and  the  use- 
lessness  of  the  pseudo-gymnastics  of, 
which  I  have  been  speaking,  where 
neither  system  nor  discipline,  teaching 
nor  learning,  teacher  nor  learner,  exists. 
I  say  again,  let  every  schoolmaster 
forbid  all  such  erections  on  his  premises. 
The  least  artistic,  the  least  attractive, 
the  least  valued  of  our  playground  games, 
yields  a  greater  and  a  more  certain  good ; 
all  the  recreative  exercises  put  together 
do  not  aggregate  a  tithe  of  its  dangers. 
I  know  that  boys  laugh  at  the  word 
danger ;  I  have  never  been  able  to  con- 


vince boys  that  there  is  danger  in 
anything — and  it  is  well  for  Old  Eng- 
land that  it  is  so ;  but  it  only  in- 
creases the  responsibility  of  those  to 
whose  charge  they  are  committed — to 
whose  keeping  their  future  usefulness 
and  happiness  are  entrusted. 

Therefore,  the  covered  playground 
which  I  have  been  speaking  of  is  for  a 
playground  only,  and  is  to  be  devoted 
to  playground  games  alone.  These  have 
been  invented  by  an  intelligence  as  un- 
erring as  instinct,  and  are  cultivated 
with  a  devotion  which  no  other  exercise 
can  inspire,  and  with  an  energy  which 
no  other  exercise  will  call  forth,  and 
which  only  boys  of  this  age  can  exert 
or  sustain.  Who  shall  tell  the  time,  or 
place,  or  origin  of  these  games,  which 
are  never  old,  always  attractive,  always 
gratifying,  practised  through  the  years 
of  schooltime,  remembered  from  gene- 
ration to  generation ;  possessing  little  of 
art — little  at  any  rate  that  a  bystander 
would  perceive  or  appreciate — yet  defying 
science  to  produce  or  combine  anything 
to  supplant  them  or  become  substitutes 
for  them.  A  woeful  day  for  England 
would  be  that  which  saw  their  abandon- 
ment. The  conflagration  of  her  finest 
city,  the  wreck  of  her  noblest  fleet,  the 
loss  of  her  richest  colony,  would  not  tell 
so  sadly  on  her  destiny  as  the  loss  of 
her  playground  games. 


LETTEES    EEOM    A    COMPETITION    WALLAH. 
LETTER  X.-THE  "ANGLO-SAXON"  PARTY  IN  INDIA. 


May  24,  1863. 

DEAR  SIMKINS, — You  gentlemen  of 
England  who  stay  at  home  in  ease  and 
a  temperature  of  45°,  how  little  do  you 
appreciate  the  full  weight  of  the  words, 
"  contract  law."  You  may  have  heard 
some  bilious  old  gentleman  in  the  warm 
corner  of  a  railway-carriage  descanting 
on  the  increased  necessity  for  a  contract 
law  in  India,  with  a  vehemence  and 
acrimony  which  appeared  to  you  exces- 
sive and  uncalled  for.  Perhaps  at  the 


time  you  imagined  that  some  personal 
motive  induced  him  to  advocate  a  more 
stringent  act  of  breach  of  promise,  in 
order  to  bind  those  young  ladies  who 
come  out  to  Calcutta  under  the  express 
understanding  that  they  are  to  marry 
one  man,  but  with  the  secret  intention 
of  marrying  another.  To  us,  however, 
who  live  and  move  in  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  the  Development  of  the 
Kesources  of  India,  these  baleful  sylla- 
bles have  a  far  other  significance.  When 


The  "Anglo-Saxon"  Party  in  India. 


393 


the  passions  of  men  are  stirred  and 
their  interests  at  stake,  they  are  seldom 
long  about  finding  a  subject  on  which 
to  quarrel.  The  Anglo-Saxon  party, 
who  consider  it  essentially  English  to 
oppress  the  native,  and  the  Anglo- 
Indian  party,  who  consider  it  essentially 
English  to  protect  him,  have  discovered 
a  most  convenient  battle-ground  in  the 
question  of  a  criminal  contract  law. 
The  matter  in  dispute  may  be  summed 
tip  in  a  few  words.  Among  all  nations, 
which  enjoy  the  benefit  of  an  en- 
lightened and  philosophical  system  of 
law,  redress  for  the  breach  of  a  contract 
must,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  be 
sought  by  means  of  a  civil  suit.  The 
Anglo-Saxon  party  ardently  desire  an 
act  which  shall  punish  breach  of  con- 
tract as  a  crime,  which  shall  deal  with 
the  defaulter  as  if  he  were  a  thief  or 
a  smuggler.  Their  opponents  are  of 
opinion  that  no  reason  exists  for  sub- 
verting the  principles  of  jurisprudence 
which,  in  their  eyes,  hold  good  in  India 
as  in  old  times  they  held  good  in 
Athens,  in  Rome,  in  Byzantium;  as 
they  now  hold  good  in  Germany,  in 
France,  in  England. 

Now  the  clamour  for  a  criminal  con- 
tract law  arose  out  of  the  Indigo  distur- 
bances, and  the  result  of  such  a  law 
would  be  'to  give  the  planter  a  hold 
upon  the  ryots  which  would  in  practice 
render  them  little  better  than  his  slaves. 
For,  unfortunately,  the  Hindoo  mind  is 
not  firm  enough  to  resist  the  temptation 
of  a  few  ready  rupees  ;  and  the  peasant 
proprietor,  in  consideration  of  a  small 
advance  in  cash,  will  engage  himself  to 
supply  indigo  at  a  price  which  cannot 
adequately  repay  his  labour  and  outlay. 
The  poor  wretch  soon  begins  to  be  aware 
that  he  has  made  a  most  disadvan- 
tageous bargain  ;  and,  after  a  great  deal 
of  grumbling  and  hesitation,  he  sows 
his  land  with  other  crops,  the  produce 
of  which  will  keep  his  family  from 
starving.  When  the  time  comes  for 
fulfilling  his  part  of  the  contract  he 
brings  in  no  indigo  at  all,  or  less  than 
the  stipulated  amount,  trusting  that  the 
landlord  will  be  deterred  from  seeking 
redress  by  the  expense  and  annoyance 


of  a  civil  suit.  Hereupon  the  planter, 
naturally  enough,  considers  himself  a 
very  ill-used  man,  abuses  Sir  Charles 
Wood,  Sir  John  Peter  Grant,  and  the 
majority  of  the  supreme  council,  and 
declares  that  he  and  his  class  have  been 
sacrificed  to  the  laziness  and  cupidity  of 
the  nigger.  It  never  occurs  to  him  that 
the  root  of  all  the  evil  is  his  own  eager- 
ness to  make  money,  which  will  not 
permit  him  to  offer  the  ryot  a  fair  price 
for  his  commodities.  In  the  district  of 
Shahabad,  on  a  rough  computation, 
there  are  not  less  than  fifty  thousand 
ryots  who  grow  opium.  The  collector 
and  magistrate  of  the  district  informed 
me  that  during  his  tenure  of  that  office 
only  one  of  these  fifty  thousand  had 
been  brought  before  him  for  having 
neglected  to  fulfil  his  contract,  and  that 
one  was  acquitted.  Is  it  not  as  plain 
as  a  proposition  of  Euclid,  and  a  great 
deal  plainer  than  some,  that  the  ryots 
who  undertake  to  grow  opium  fulfil 
their  engagements  because  the  Govern- 
ment pays  them  a  remunerative  price 
for  their  opium ;  and  that  the  ryots 
who  undertake  to  grow  indigo  fail  in 
their  engagements  because  the  planter 
pays  them  for  their  ,indigo  a  price 
which  is  not  remunerative  ?  Why 
do  the  peasants  regard  as  a  blessing 
the  privilege  of  sowing  opium,  and  the 
obligation  to  sow  indigo  as  a  curse  ? 
Because  they  cultivate  the  former  crop 
to  the  profit  both  of  themselves  and 
the  Government,  and  the  latter  to  the 
profit  of  the  planter  and  their  own 
most  certain  loss. 

An  able  writer,  in  the  Indian  Empire, 
makes  the  following  very  just  remarks  : 
'  The  ryot  deals  fairly  with  the  Euro- 
'  pean  in  everything  but  indigo.  The 
'  planter  has  only  to  make  indigo  as 
'  profitable  to  the  ryot  as  he  has  already 
'  made  silk  and  sugar,  and,  if  he  then 
*  finds  the  ryot  dishonest,  if  he  then 
'  finds  that  the  ryot  takes  advances 
'  only  for  the  purpose  of  defrauding 
'  the  planter,  he  may  then,  and  not  till 
'  then,  fairly  come  to  Government  for 
'  protection,  and  ask  for  a  contract  law. 
'  We  know  well  the  planter's  answer, 
'  for  we  have  had  it  made  to  us  more 


394 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  X. 


'  than  once :  '  It  will  not  pay  us  to  offer 
'  better  terms  for  indigo.'  In  other 
'  words,  indigo,  to  pay  the  planter, 
'  must  be  ruinous  to  the  ryot.  Indigo, 
'  to  pay  the  planter,  must  be  grown  at 
'  the  ryot's  own  proper  risk,  and  sold  to 
'  the  planter  at  a  price  about  three  or 
'  four  hundred  per  cent,  below  its  mar- 
'  ketable  value.  Indigo,  in  short,  to 
'  pay  the  planter,  must  yield  a  profit 
'  unknown  to  other  speculations ;  whilst 
'  all  that  it  yields  to  the  ryot  is  ruin, 
'  oppression,  and  despair." 

The  ryot  keeps  faith  towards  the  silk- 
planter  and  the  sugar-planter,  towards 
the  opium-agent,  towards  the  trader  in 
jute  and  safflower.  In  the  case  of 
indigo,  and  of  indigo  alone,  he  is  a  dis- 
honest, rascally,  greedy  nigger.  If  he 
does  not  deserve  these  epithets,  it  would 
surely  be  the  height  of  cruelty  to  pass 
a  law  for  the  special  purpose  of  oppress- 
ing and  degrading  him.  If  he  is,  indeed, 
such  as  the  planters  describe — if  the 
peasant  who  grows  indigo  necessarily 
becomes  a  knave  and  a  liar,  then  what 
can  be  more  unjust  and  immoral  than 
to  put  into  the  hands  of  the  very  men 
whose  unscrupulous  love  of  gain  has 
made  him  what  he  is,  a  weapon  by 
which  they  may  visit  on  him  those  vices 
and  shortcomings,  for  the  existence  of 
which  they  have  only  themselves  to 
thank  ?  A  special  act  for  the  enforce- 
ment of  indigo  contracts,  under  the 
criminal  law,  would  bear  most  severely 
on  a  class  who  are  already  sufficiently 
miserable  from  the  consequences  of  their 
short-sighted  folly,  and  from  the  hard 
dealing  of  men  who  are  enabled  by 
shrewdness,  prudence,  and  the  posses- 
sion of  a  little  capital  to  turn  that  folly 
to  their  own  advantage. 

The  Anglo-Saxon  party  are  perfectly 
aware  that  it  would  be  vain  to  ask  for  a 
special  law  relating  to  indigo  contracts. 
They  know  well  that  such  a  suggestion 
would  not  be  entertained  for  a  moment 
by  a  generation  which  has  read  Bentham 
and  John  Stuart  Mill  They,  therefore, 
take  a  wider  ground.  They  demand  a 
penal  act  which  shall  enforce  the  fulfil- 
ment of  all  contracts,  of  whatsoever 
nature,  and  they  base  that  demand  upon 


the  low  state  of  morality  among  the 
Hindoos,  which,  in  commercial  dealings, 
destroys  all  confidence  between  man  and 
man.  In  fact,  they  advocate  an  enact- 
ment of  which  the  preamble  is  to  be  a 
declaration,  that  honesty  and  self-respect 
are  at  such  a  discount  in  this  country 
that  the  law  must  watch  over  the  farmer 
and  the  artizan  as  at  home  it  watches 
over  the  garotter  and  the  skittle-sharper. 
More  than  one  old  fable  tells  how  the 
gods  loved  to  punish  the  presumption  of 
mortals  by  granting  their  prayers  to  the 
letter.  Let  the  Anglo-Saxon  party  have 
what  they  ask,  and  make  the  most  of  it. 
Give  them  their  criminal  contract  law, 
and  let  them  enjoy  it  to  the  full. 

"  Evertere  dornos  totas  optantibus  ipsis 
Di  faciles." 

Some  of  the  greatest  houses  in  Calcutta 
would  be  the  first  to  cry  out  against  the 
iniquity  of  a  statute  which  applied  to 
commercial  transactions  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  a  rude  and  barbarous 
system  of  restrictions  and  penalties. 

For  observe  what  the  nature  of  such 
a  statute  must  be.  If  one  of  the  con- 
tracting parties  has  received  a  conside- 
ration and  subsequently  fails  wilfully  to 
perform  his  part  of  the  contract,  he  is 
liable  to  be  punished  as  a  criminal.  An 
ensign  orders  a  suit  of  clothes.  He 
obtains  the  goods,  and  in  so  doing 
receives  a  consideration.  As  time  goes 
on  the  tailor  duns  him  without  success, 
and  at  length,  in  a  moment  of  irrita- 
tion, determines  to  have  recourse  to  the 
strong  arm  of  the  law.  He  ascertains 
that  the  young  spark  has  bought  a  race- 
horse or  paid  a  debt  of  honour  with  the 
money  which  should  have  gone  towards 
discharging  his  account.  The  wilful 
breach  of  contract  is  thus  established  to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  court,  and  the 
unfortunate  officer  has  his  hair  cropped, 
and  is  put  on  a  course  of  rice  and  hard 
labour.  An  insolvent  debtor  must  have 
been  cautious  indeed  if  his  creditor 
could  not  find  means  to  convict  him  of 
wilful  breach  of  contract.  If  such  a 
law  were  to  come  into  action,  the  com- 
munity would  be  agitated  by  a  series  of 
petty  acts  of  social  tyranny.  The  prisons 


The  "  Anglo-Saxon  "  Party  in  India. 


395 


would  be  gorged  "with  clergymen  and 
captains  and  esquires.  Convicts,  with 
the  Victoria  Cross  on  their  breast,  would 
be  breaking  stones  along  the  Grand 
Dawk  Roads ;  collectors  and  commis- 
sioners, during  their  visits  to  the  district 
reformatories,  would  be  pestered  by  their 
predecessors  with  complaints  of  the  bad 
ventilation  of  the  cells,  and  the  stu- 
pidity and  importunity  of  the  chaplain  ; 
and  jail  inspectors  would  learn,  by  ex- 
perience, whether  the  alimentary  and 
fat-producing  elements  in  grain  are  in 
the  proportion  of  15  or  14.37892872. 
Nor  would  this  be  all.  Such  a  law 
would,  in  the  hands  of  rival  speculators 
and  merchants,  become  a  terrible  engine 
of  mutual  annoyance  and  molestation. 
No  one,  who  observes  the  bitter  jealou- 
sies so  frequent  in  the  commercial  world, 
can  doubt  that  there  are  times  when  men 
would  stick  at  nothing  which  could 
damage  or  ruin  a  trader  or  company  of 
traders  whose  interests  are  directly  op- 
posed to  their  own.  Calcutta  has  but 
lately  been  convulsed  with  the  feuds 
and  scandals  which  seem  indigenous  to 
all  transactions  in  Turkey  red  yarn. 

"  Delirant  reges,  plectuntur  Achivi." 

The  Turkey  red  yarn  establishments  are 
at  war,  and'  the  Anglo-Indians  of  Chow- 
ringhee  are  to  suffer  for  it.  Conceive 
such  a  trenchant  sword  as  a  criminal 
contract  law  in  the  grasp  of  the  hostile 
Paladins  of  Dhurrumtollah  and  the  Old 
Court  House  Road  !  Heaven  preserve 
us  from  such  a  reign  of  commercial 
terror  !  Heaven  preserve  us  from  such 
a  device  for  restoring  confidence  between 
man  and  man  !  Could  the  dispossessed 
ryot  pray  for  a  more  complete  and 
appropriate  retribution  than  that  the 
great  Anglo-Saxon  race  should  expe- 
rience for  some  six  months  the  blessings 
of  a  criminal  contract  law  of  their  own 
devising  1 

Another  very  serious  objection  to  the 
proposed  act  is  the  increased  expense 
which  would  thereby  be  thrown  upon 
the  public  resources.  For,  whereas  the 
costs  of  a  civil  suit  come  from  the 
pockets  of  the  individual  litigants,  the 
costs  of  a  criminal  trial  are  defrayed  by 


the  State.  Now  the  public  money  is  well 
spent  in  repressing  crimes  of  theft  and 
violence  ;  but  it  may  be  questioned  whe- 
ther it  might  not  be  put  to  a  better  use 
than  that  of  frightening  young  civilians 
into  paying  for  their  buggies,  and  enabling 
Baboo  Matterjee  Bookerjee  the  money- 
lender to  wreak  his  vengeance  upon 
Baboo  Kissory  Mullick  the  horse-dealer, 
or  upon  Muggins  and  Box  the  tobacco- 
nists, appraisers,  and  general  dealers  in 
ironmongery  and  bijouterie  on  the  north 
side  of  Tank  Square.  Above  all,  it  is 
not  well  that  the  proceeds  of  the  land- 
tax  which  has  been  paid  by  the  sweat 
of  the  ryots  of  Bengal  should  be  ex- 
pended to  assist  their  landlord  and 
employer  to  fling  them  into  gaol  by 
whole  villages  at  a  time. 

So  blind  is  rapacity,  so  short-sighted 
is  the  hatred  of  class  against  class,  that 
the  men  who  most  eagerly  push  forward 
the  contract  law  do  not  perceive  that 
such  a  law  would  entirely  defeat  the 
end  which  they  have  most  at  heart. 
Their  aim  and  object  is  to  procure  indigo 
at  an  unnaturally  low  price,  by  forcing 
the  ryots  to  fulfil  a  contract  in  which 
all  the  advantage  is  on  one  side.  Those 
who  best  understand  the  native  cha- 
racter, who  have  studied  that  character 
by  other  lights  than  those  of  covetous- 
ness  and  prejudice,  are  convinced  that 
the  effect  of  a  criminal  contract  law 
must  inevitably  be  that  the  peasants  will 
refuse  to  make  any  engagement  what- 
soever. The  Hindoo  is  constitutionally 
timid  and  suspicious,  and  has  a  most 
religious  horror  of  any  transaction  which 
can  bring  him  within  the  grasp  of  the 
Penal  Code.  However  favourable  the 
terms  may  be,  he  will  steadily  refuse  to 
bind  himself  to  any  agreement  the  viola- 
tion of  which  will  entail  instant  and 
certain  punishment.  The  planter  will 
find  to  his  cost  that  a  contract  partially 
fulfilled  is  better  than  no  contract  at  all. 
The  imperfect  civilization  of  India,  the 
poverty  of  the  ryots,  the  want  of  a  class 
of  trustworthy,  substantial  middlemen, 
render  indispensable  the  system  of 
petty  contracts  and  small  advances  in 
cash.  The  Government  cannot  get 
opium  unless  it  advances  a  portion  of 


396 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  X. 


the  price  ;  and,  until  the  condition  of 
Bengal  and  Bahar  is  very  different  from 
what  it  is  at  present,  the  planter  must 
go  without  his  indigo,  unless  he  can 
induce  the  peasant-proprietor  to  conclude 
an  engagement  to  supply  a  certain 
quantity  of  the  commodity  in  considera- 
tion of  a  few  rupees  paid  down  on  the 
nail.  Now  upon  an  engagement  of  that 
nature  no  genuine  Bengalee,  in  his 
wildest  dreams,  will  dare  to  enter,  if 
once  a  criminal  contract  act  com.es  into 
effect.  Should  our  rulers  be  cajoled 
or  bullied  into  passing  such  an  act,  the 
indigo-planters  themselves  would  be  the 
first  to  suffer.  But  the  evil  would  not 
stop  with  them.  There  would  ensue  a 
rapid  and  complete  demoralisation  of 
the  whole  community.  Confidence  and 
good  faith  would  soon  disappear  under 
the  influence  of  an  untoward  and  in- 
auspicious law  which  thought  fit  to 
ignore  their  existence ;  and,  when  con- 
fidence and  good  faith  had  been  expelled 
the  land,  it  would  go  hard  indeed  with 
the  development  of  the  resources  of 
India. 

The  Anglo-Saxon  party  take  good 
care  to  bring  into  prominent  notice  the 
fact  that  some  ancient  Acts  of  the  nature 
of  a  criminal  contract  law  are  still  in 
force  in  England.  They  lay  most  stress 
upon  the  statute  which,  under  certain  cir- 
cumstances, gives  a  magistrate  the  right 
of  sending  to  prison  for  a  short  period 
agricultural  labourers  who  have  broken 
an  engagement  with  their  employers. 
Now  it  is  true  enough  that  such  a  statute 
exists,  but  it  is  as  obsolete  as  the  statute 
which  forbids  Oxonians  to  wear  any 
clothes  but  those  of  a  subfusc  hue.  Some 
six  or  eight  years  ago  two  countrymen  in 
the  employment  of  a  country  parson 
(whose  name  may  have  been  Trulliber, 
and  may  not),  were  tempted  from  their 
work  by  a  review  in  a  neighbouring 
town.  The  magistrates  put  the  law  in 
force  against  these  unlucky  clodhoppers, 
and  were  rewarded  by  being  laughed  at 
and  abused  in  every  newspaper,  from  the 
Times  downwards.  Public  opinion  ex- 
pressed itself  in  such  unmistakeable 
terms  that,  since  that  day,  no  justice 
kas  been  found  "Shallow"  or  bucolic 


enough  to  revive  the  odious  enact- 
ment. Nevertheless,  the  vast  and  silent 
strength  of  the  landed  interest  has 
hitherto  succeeded  in  obtaining  that  the 
law  shall  not  be  expunged  from  the 
Statute-book.  Because,  however,  a  bad 
law  in  England,  which  has  already  been 
virtually  abrogated  by  general  consent, 
has  not  been  annulled  by  Act  of  Parlia- 
ment, is  that  any  reason  for  enacting  a 
still  worse  law  in  India  ?  Because  the 
Statute-book  at  home  is  not  always  as 
wise  as  the  voice  of  the  people,  is  that 
any  reason  for  defacing  the  noble  and 
philosophical  Penal  Code — the  greatest 
and  most  undoubted  benefit  of  all  which 
we  have  conferred  upon  our  Eastern 
possessions. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  in 
those  cases  in  which  breach  of  contract  is 
still  visited  as  a  crime  by  English  law, 
the  defaulters  are  supposed  to  have  com- 
promised the  general  weal.  Thus  sailors 
who  desert  from  a  merchant-vessel  are 
liable  to  punishment,  because  the  safety 
of  the  ship,  the  crew,  and  the  cargo  is 
endangered  by  their  dereliction  of  duty. 
The  law  relating  to  agricultural  labourers 
traces  its  origin  to  a  time  when  the 
idea  prevailed  that  the  existence  of  the 
country  depended  on  the  supply  of  food  ;  & 
when  it  was  supposed  that  a  strike 
among  her  ploughmen  and  hedgers 
would  be  as  fatal  to  England  as  a  mutiny 
among  her  seamen  to  an  East-Indiaman 
or  a  Greenland  whaler.  Now,  could  the 
editor  of  the  Kurka.ru  himself  lay  his 
hand  on  his  Anglo-Saxon  heart,  and 
declare  that  the  well-being  and  security 
of  our  Eastern  dominions  are  in  peril 
because  European  landholders  must  go 
into  open  market  for  their  indigo  ? 
Have  we  fought  Plassey  and  Sobraon  in 
vain,  and  in  vain  besieged  Bhurtpore 
and  Mooltan,  as  long  as  the  planters  of 
Jessore  are  forced  to  give  the  ryot  an 
honest  price  for  his  crop  ?  Let  them 
imitate  their  brethren  of  Tirhoot,  and 
deal  justly  and  kindly  by  the  native 
cultivators,  instead  of  whining  and  blus- 
tering because  the  Government  will  not 
help  them  to  buy  indigo  cheap  and  sell 
it  at  an  extravagant  profit. 

The  anti-native  press  is  very  fond  of 


The "  Anglo-Saxon"  Party  in  India. 


397 


insinuating  that  our  countrymen  at 
home  are  in  full  enjoyment  of  that 
criminal  contract  law  which  has  been 
so  heartlessly  denied  to  oppressed  and 
slighted  India.  They  do  not  dare  directly 
to  affirm  that  this  great  hoon  has  been 
granted  to  the  British  Isles,  but  their 
columns  teem  with  statements  which 
can  only  be  explained  on  such  a  sup- 
position. For  instance  : — 

"Thomas  Jones,  builder,  of  Padding- 
"  ton,  must  stand  by  his  contract,  or 
"  the  law  of  England  will  want  to  know 
"  the  reason  why  ;  but  Gopaul  Goorkee- 
"  wallah,  of  Burdwan,  is  of  a  different 
"  order,  and  requires  different  treatment. 
"  He  has  no  intention  of  defrauding 
"  anybody.  He  takes  money  in  the 
"  innocence  of  his  heart  for  the  express 
"  purpose  of  performing  certain  work, 
"  and  then,  in  equal  innocence,  spends 
"  it  in  other  ways.  But  he  means  no 
"  harm :  it  is  all  innocence,  and  any 
"  interference  with  him  would  be  ty- 
"  ranny  in  the  eyes  of  the-  Kev.  Mr. 
"  Blowhard  Stiggins,  who  has  just  sued 
"  the  Congregational  Synod  for  salary 
"  agreed  upon,  but  not  paid." 

Now  if  this  precious  extract  means 
anything  at  all,  it  implies  that  the  con- 
dition of  a  defaulting  contractor  in  Pad- 
dington  is  different  from  that  of  a  default- 
ing contractor  in  Burdwan.  Unless  the 
whole  paragraph  is  utter  nonsense,  it 
signifies  that  Thomas  Jones  may  be 
punished  as  a  criminal  for  breaking  his 
engagement,  while  Gopaul  Goorkeewal- 
lah  can  only  be  touched  by  means  of  a 
civil  suit.  Either  the  writer  must  be 
strangely  ignorant,  or  he  must  have  a 
very  low  opinion  of  the  good  sense  of 
his  readers.  Again,  why  drag  in  the 
private  circumstances  of  Mr.  Blowhard 
Stiggins?  If  the  poor  man  has  been 
hardly  used  by  the  Congregational  Synod, 
he  surely  has  a  right  to  bring  a  civil 
action  against  that  body,  whatever  his 
opinions*  may  be  concerning  the  advisa- 
bility of  punishing  breach  of  contract  by 
a  criminal  law.  Happily  the  subscribers 
to  the  Calcutta  journals  are  not  quite 
such  fools  as  the  editors  seem  to  imagine. 

The  supporters  of  the  contract  law 
are  for  ever  harping  on  a  string  which 


is  singularly  rotten  and  unmelodious. 
They  affirm  that  the  predilection  for 
the  Hindoo  population  at  home  is  sup- 
ported by  "  the  restless  intrigues  of  a 
"  few  angry  missionaries  touting  for  the 
"  signatures  of  benevolent  noblemen  and 
"  gentlemen,  and  working  Exeter-hall/' 
They  sang  a  triumphant  "  Te  Diabolum  " 
in  anticipation  of  the  misery  which  was 
about  to  be  inflicted  upon  our  Oriental 
fellow-subjects  by  a  vote  of  the  Impe- 
rial Parliament.  Sir  Charles  Wood  was 
to  be  bullied  and  snubbed  as  an  example 
to  all  future  Indian  Ministers.  "  His 
"  refusal  of  a  law  for  the  punishment 
"  criminally  of  fraudulent  breaches  of 
"  contract,"  was  to  be  "  combated  in  Par- 
"  liament,  after  the  Easter  recess,  by  a 
"  powerful  opposition,  supported  by  the 
"  whole  mercantile  community "  (in- 
cluding, of  course,  the  Kinnairds  and 
the  Buxtons,  and  other  great  houses 
which  have  been  so  distinguished  by 
their  consistent  hatred  and  contempt  for 
everything  with  a  black  skin),  "  and  by 
"  every  man.who  has  any  knowledge  of 
"  India  and  her  true  wants  ; "  that  is  to 
say,  by  Sir  John  Lawrence,  Sir  Edward 
Eyan,  and  John  Macpherson  Macleod. 
We  all  know  what  this  came  to.  There 
is  just  as  much  likelihood  that  the 
Commons  of  England  will  stigmatize 
Sir  Charles  Wood  for  setting  his  veto 
on  the  Contract-law,  as  that  they  will 
censure  Lord  Hartington  for  neglecting 
to  have  every  private  in  the  British 
army  flogged  once  a  week.  In  spite  of 
all  the  jokes  about  thin  Houses,  and 
counting  out,  and  tedious,  returned 
nabobs,  the  fact  is  that  the  people  of 
England  take  a  good  working  interest 
in  Indian  matters.  But  that  interest  in 
the  mass  of  our  countrymen  is  confined 
to  two  points.  There  exists  a  strong 
desire  to  witness  the  vast  productive 
resources  of  the  East  developed  to  the 
highest  possible  point,  and  a  fixed 
determination  to  do  our  duty  by  the 
children  of  the  soil.  And  the  latter 
sentiment  is,  in  the  long  run,  the 
mightier  of  the  two.  Englishmen 
would  be  very  glad  to  see  the  quays  of 
Liverpool  heaped  with  bales  of  Bombay 
cotton,  but  they  had  far  rather  behold 


398 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  X. 


the  continent  of  India  covered  with 
a  thriving,  intelligent,  free  population, 
who  owe  to  our  just  and  enlightened 
sway  the  blessings  of  civilization,  of 
education,  of  liberty.  Those  who  need 
sympathy  in  their  struggle  against  the 
rights  of  the  Hindoo,  must  go  else- 
where than  to  St.  Stephen's  or  to  the 
hustings.  They  should  learn  to  apply 
at  the  right  places  ;  at  the  Vatican, 
for  instance,  or  the  palace  at  Potsdam, 
or  the  board  at  St.  Petersburgh,  which 
takes  into  consideration  the  affairs  of 
Poland.  There  are  plenty  of  people 
of  their  way  of  thinking,  if  they  only 
knew  where  to  look. 

And  herein  Mr.  Laing  made  a  great 
mistake.  He  appears  to  have  imagined 
that  materials  existed  in  England  from 
which  a  party  might  be  formed  power- 
ful enough  to  oppose  with  success  the 
traditional  policy  of  the  Home  Govern- 
ment— that  policy  of  which  protection 
to  the  native  forms  the  leading  prin- 
ciple. During  his  residence  in  Calcutta 
he  had  been  accustomed  to  hear  the 
Hindoo,  and  the  friends  of  the  Hindoo, 
spoken  of  with  contempt  and  dislike  by 
the  press  and  amongst  the  non-official 
society.  Whenever  he  opened  a  news- 
paper or  dined  with  a  merchant,  he  was 
told  that  the  prosperity  of  India  was 
incompatible  with  any  great  display  of 
tenderness  towards  the  population  of 
India.  And  so  he  gradually  came  to 
be  convinced  that  in  England,  as  out 
here,  the  official  men  and  the  mission- 
aries were  loud  and  eager  enough  in 
the  cause  of  philanthropy,  but  that  the 
commercial  world  in  general  had  pretty 
well  made  up  its  mind  that  the  interests 
of  the  Hindoo  were  in  direct  opposition 
to  the  interests  of  trade  and  manufac- 
ture. At  any  rate,  if  he  was  not  fully 
convinced  of  this,  the  planters  and  their 
friends  were  fully  convinced  of  it  for 
him.  These  gentlemen  regarded  Mr. 
Laing  as  their  chosen  warrior,  sent 
home  to  do  battle  in  the  holiest  and 
most  profitable  of  causes  To  read 
their  effusions  you  would  have  supposed 
that  all  the  capitalists  of  the  Northern 
counties  were  ready  and  eager  to  place 
themselves  at  the  disposal  of  Mr.  Laing ; 


that  Lancashire  had  been  yearning  for 
the  news  of  his  arrival  on  British  shores 
as  the  Sicilians  yearned  for  the  coining 
of  Garibaldi  in  1860.  The  moment  he 
set  foot  in  the  House  of  Commons  terror 
and  dismay  were  to  spread  through 
the  ranks  of  the  philanthropists.  Lord 
Stanley  was  to  collapse  at  once ;  Mr. 
Baring  was  to  shake  in  his  official  shoes ; 
and  Sir  diaries  Wood  himself,  that 
brazen  colossus  which  has  one  foot  in 
Westminster  and  another  in  Chow- 
ringhee,  was  to  topple  over  at  the  first 
breath  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  champion, 
and  crush,  in  its  fall,  the  fond  hopes  of 
every  damned  nigger  from  the  Dooab 
to  the  Sunderbunds. 

Mr.  Laing  himself,  who  knew  some- 
thing more  than  did  his  ardent  clients 
of  the  temper  of  the  English  people 
and  the  English  senate,  was  well  aware 
that  there  was  something  ludicrous  in 
the  notion  of  the  planting  interest,  un- 
supported and  alone,  marching  to  attack 
Sir  Charles  Wood  in  his  own  strong- 
hold. It  would  be  idle  to  stand  on  the 
floor  of  the  House,  and  bawl  about  the 
"English  name"  and  the  "Traditional 
Policy  of  the  Civil  Service."  These 
arguments  were  all  very  well  in  Cossi- 
tollah,  but  there  was  grave  reason  to 
fear  that  men  who  listened  twice  a  week 
to  Gladstone  might  fail  to  perceive  their 
force.  Indigo,  after  all,  was  a  weak  card, 
and  it  became  necessary  to  strengthen 
his  hands  unless  he  was  willing  to  throw 
up  the  game  at  once.  The  public  mind 
being  at  the  time  absorbed  in  the  distress 
of  the  Lancashire  operatives,  and  ready 
to  adopt  any  suggestion  for  their  relief, 
why  not  judiciously  contrive  to  mix 
up  the  contract  law  with  the  cotton 
question1?  Why  not  point  out  to  the 
sufferers  that  some  part,  at  least,  of  their 
misery  arose  from  the  unpatriotic  ob- 
stinacy of  the  Secretary  of  State  for 
India,  who  refused  to  sanction  an  Act 
on  which  depended  the  supply  of  cotton 
from  Bombay  ?  Why  not  rouse  against 
the  friends  of  the  favoured  Hindoo  the 
indignation  of  the  friends  of  the  starving 
Englishman  ?  Why  not  enlist  under  the 
righteous  blue  banner  of  the  planters 
all  the  best  as  well  as  all  the  worst 


The  "  Anglo-Saxon  "  Party  in  India. 


399 


passions  of  the  human  heart  ?  The  idea, 
however  little  else  it  had  to  recommend 
it,  was  at  least  ingenious,  and  Mr. 
Laing  at  once  proceeded  to  carry  it  into 
effect.  If  he  could  succeed  in  con- 
vincing the  Manchester  men  that  their 
dearest  interests  were  wrapped  up  in 
the  success  of  the  Criminal  Contract 
Law,  he  would  at  once  obtain  the 
hearty  services  of  a  most  efficient  and 
numerous  body  of  allies.  In  his  cele- 
brated pamphlet,  entitled  "England's 
Mission  in  the  East,"  he  says,  under  the 
head  of  "  Contract  Law  "  : — 

"The  question  of  Criminal  Contract 
"  Law  was  raised  with  little  reference 
"  to  that  of  indigo — which,  as  I  have 
"  explained,  had  already  passed  into  a 
"  different  phase,  that  of  rent — but 
"  much  more  with  reference  to  the  im- 
"  pending  cotton  crisis.  It  was  felt  that 
"  the  more  direct  contract  of  the  Euro- 
"  pean  buyer  with  the  native  dealer 
"  was  the  one  thing  needful  to  accele- 
"  rate  a  large  production  of  Indian 
"  cotton,  and  that  some  effort  should  be 
"  made  by  Government  to  remedy  a 
"  state  of  things  which  raised  almost 
"  insuperable  obstacles  to  the  introduc- 
"  tion  of  such  a  system." 

Again  :— 

"  As  far  as  India  is  concerned,  it  is, 
"  perhaps,  of  little  importance,  for  it  is 
"  only  a  question  of  a  few  years,  more  or 
"  less,  and  ready  money  will  ultimately 
'•'  make  its  way.  But  it  cannot  be  denied 
"  that  Lancashire  has  suffered,  for  it  is 
"  clearly  proved  that  the  establishment 
"  of  European  agencies  in  the  interior, 
"  some  months  ago,  to  make  advances 
"  for  the  cotton  crop  now  growing,  would 
"  have  been  the  only  practical  means 
"  of  greatly  accelerating  the  period  of 
"  a  large  supply  of  Indian  cotton ;  and 
"  it  is  equally  clear,  after  such  a  decla- 
"  ration  as  that  of  the  Hon.  Mr.  Scott, 
"  one  of  the  first  merchants  in  Bombay, 
"  in  the  Legislative  Council : — '  That 
"  his  firm  had  tried  the  experiment  for 
"  eight  years,  and  given  it  up  after  a 
"  heavy  loss,  owing  to  the  impossibility 
"  of  enforcing  contracts ; '  that  the 
"  Liverpool  and  Manchester  merchants 
"  cannot  justly  be  blamed  for  failing  to 


"  do   what   a   better  law  of  contracts 
"  could  alone  have  rendered  possible." 

Observe  the  peculiar  nature  of  this 
reasoning :  "  As  far  as  India  is  con- 
"  cerned," — Mr.  Laing  admits  that  there 
exists  no  necessity  for  overthrowing  the 
fundamental  principles  of  jurisprudence 
"  — it  is  only  a  question  of  a  few  years, 
"  more  or  less,  and  ready-money  will 
"  ultimately  make,  its  way  " — that  is  to 
say,  in  India,  as  everywhere  else,  men 
will  get  the  commodities  of  the  land  if 
they  choose  to  offer  a  just  and  fair  price. 
"  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  Lanca- 
shire has  suffered " — alas  !  indeed  it 
cannot.  But  are  we,  on  that  account, 
to  inflict  upon  the  whole  continent  of 
India  a  coercive  law  which,  three  lines 
above,  the  most  able  supporter  of  that 
law  has  declared  to  be  unnecessary  ? 
And  an  unnecessary  coercive  law  is 
among  the  most  fatal  scourges  under 
which  a  country  can  suffer.  Mr.  Laing 
recommends  us,  as  a  remedy  for  the 
temporary  distress  of  Lancashire,  to 
pass  a  measure  which  otherwise  is  not 
required,  and  which  is  inconsistent  with 
true  theories  of  government  and  com- 
merce. Can  Mr.  Laing,  on  his  faith  as 
a  political  economist,  as  the  countryman 
of  Adam  Smith  and  Macculloch,  as  the 
successor  of  Wilson,  declare  that  he  is 
of  opinion  that  it  is  the  duty  of  a  ruler, 
in  time  of  pressure,  to  have  recourse  to 
measures  which  are  inconsistent  with 
those  theories?  Is  he,  in  the  three 
capacities  above  mentioned,  prepared  to 
say  that  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety, 
in  the  agony  of  the  French  Revolution, 
were  right  when  they  named  a  minimum 
price  for  grain,  and  forced  all  farmers  to 
empty  their  barns  before  a  certain  date  ? 
Is  he,  in  those  three  capacities,  prepared 
to  say  that  the  Plantagenets  were  right 
when,  in  order  to  encourage  the  declin- 
ing home  manufacture  of  cloth,  they 
forbade,  under  terrible  penalties,  the 
exportation  of  English  wool?  Unless 
he  will  go  as  far  as  this,  unless  he  is 
willing  to  swallow  restrictive  laws  and 
fixed  prices,  and  temporary  measures  by 
the  bushel,  I  do  not  see  how  he  is 
justified  in  advising  us  to  palliate  the 
present  crisis  by  an  enactment  in  itself 


400 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  X. 


harsh,  impolitic,  and  illogical — nay,  to 
make  the  matter  worse,  to  palliate  a 
crisis  in  the  affairs  of  Lancashire  by 
an  enactment,  the  melancholy  conse- 
quences of  which  will  fall  entirely  upon 
India.  Does  Mr.  Laing  imagine  that 
the  commerce  and  agriculture  of  the 
East  are  governed  by  other  laws  than 
the  commerce  and  agriculture  of  Euro- 
pean nations  ? — that  the  spirit  of  com- 
petition is  dead  beyond  the  Persian 
Gulf  ? — that  high  prices  have  no  charms 
along  the  banks  of  the  Jumna? — that, 
amidst  the  cotton  plantations  of  Central 
India  and  the  Vats  of  Bengal  proper,  the 
supply  no  longer  tends  to  proportion 
itself  to  the  effective  demand  with  that 
creditable  zeal  which  it  displays  in  the 
coal  districts  of  the  Tyne  and  the  facto- 
ries of  Blackburn  ? 

However,  it  is  not  the  case  that  "  the 
"  question  of  a  contract  law  was  raised 
"  with  little  reference  to  that  of  indigo, 
"  but  much  more  with  reference  to  the 
"  impending  cotton  crisis."  When  there 
is  an  agitation  in  favour  of  a  particular 
measure,  how  do  we  ascertain  what  is 
the  class  with  reference  to  which  the 
question  of  that  measure  was  raised? 
Surely  by  observing  to  what  order  of 
men  belong  the  majority  of  the  eager 
supporters  of  the  proposed  law,  and 
with  reference  to  the  interests  of  what 
order  of  men  the  advisability  of  that 
law  is  most  frequently  discussed.  Now, 
nine  out  of  ten  of  the  most  prominent 
advocates  of  a  criminal  contract  law  are 
indigo  planters,  or  friends  of  indigo 
planters,  or  men  personally  concerned 
in  the  prosperity  of  indigo  planters. 
They  are  all  more  or  less  blue,  though 
the  blueness  of  some  may  be  of  a  faint 
and  almost  celestial  tint.  Again,  in 
nine  out  of  ten  of  the  leading  articles 
in  which  the  question  of  a  criminal 
contract  law  is  debated,  allusion  is  made 
almost  exclusively  to  the  effect  of  such 
a  law  upon  the  fortunes  of  indigo. 
Every  man  who,  to  use  the  favourite 
expression  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  party, 
"  has  any  knowledge  of  India  and  her 
true  wants,"  is  perfectly  aware  that  we 
might  as  well  say  that  the  question  of 
protection  had  little  reference  to  the 


farming  interest  as  that  the  question  of 
a  contract  law  has  little  reference  to  the 
indigo  interest.  Does  Mr.  Laing  him- 
self believe  that,  if  he  succeeded  in 
obtaining  a  criminal  contract  law  in 
which  a  special  exception  was  made  in 
favour  of  the  ryots  engaged  in  the  cul- 
tivation of  indigo,  he  would  meet  with 
any  overwhelming  amount  of  gratitude 
from  the  non-official  society  of  India? 
Would  he  not  at  once  become  the  most 
deadly  and  treacherous  of  all  the  enemies 
of  the  English  name?  Would  he  not 
almost  supplant  Sir  Charles  Wood  in 
his  character  of  Philindus,  and  quite 
supplant  him  in  his  character  of  Miso- 
Britannicus  ? 

It  is  necessary  to  accept  Mr.  Laing's 
authority  on  these  matters  with  the 
most  extreme  circumspection.  In  this 
same  pamphlet  he  commits  an  error  so 
gross,  so  palpable,  and  fraught  with  such 
singular  consequences,  that  it  is  impos- 
sible to  receive,  with  confidence,  such  a 
statement  as  that  which  he  has  put 
forward  concerning  the  connexion  be- 
tween the  contract  law  and  indigo.  I 
quoted  his  remark  that  the  indigo  ques- 
tion "  had  already  passed  into  a  different 
phase,  that  of  rent."  He  had  explained 
this  at  length  under  the  heading  "  Rent 
and  Indigo  Questions."  His  account 
is  as  follows  : — The  English  planter  had 
once  been  "  carelesss  about  rents,  and 
"  let  the  ryot  sit  at  the  old  and  almost 
"  nominal  rates,  on  the  condition  that 
"  he  should  grow  indigo  at  a  certain 
"  price."  Then  came  the  disturbances. 
The  ryot  proceeded  to  repudiate  his 
contracts,  and  refused  to  grow  indigo. 
Hereupon  the  affair  "  passed  into  a  new 
"  and  more  important  phase,  that  of 
"  rent.  The  planters  generally  gave 
"  up  their  old  contracts  and  advances 
"  as  lost,  and  sought  to  indemnify  them- 
"  selves  by  raising  their  rent.  The 
"  ryots,  on  the  other  hand,  encouraged 
"  by  their  victory  in  the  case  of  the 
"  indigo  contracts,  combined  to  resist 
"  all  increase  of  rent."  "  In  this  state 
"  of  things,"  he  proceeds  to  say,  "  the 
"  party  in  the  Bengal  Government, 
"  favourable  to  the  ryot,  passed  an  act 
"known  as  ActX.  of  1860,  with  a  view 


The  "Anglo-Saxon"  Party  in  India. 


401 


c<  to  strengthen*  his  position,  defining 
"  more  exactly  his  proprietary  title." 
'•'  Was  there  ever  a  prettier  story ;  one 
more  neat  and  perfect  in  all  its  parts  ; 
one  which  it  would  be  a  greater  pity  to 
spoil  by  bringing  to  bear  upon  it  the 
irresistible  battery  of  fact1?  What 
should  you  say  if  I  told  you  that  this 
famous  statute  was  not  Act  X.  of  1860, 
but  Act  X.  of  1859  :  that  it  became 
law,  not  "in  this  state  of  things,  when 
"  the  indigo  question  had  already  passed 
"  into  a  different  phase,  that  of  rent," 
but  in  the  mid-heat  and  confusion  of 
the  indigo  troubles  1  Yet  so  it  is.  This 
is  no  slip  of  the  pen ;  no  trifling  con- 
fusion of  dates.  The  whole  gist  of  this 
important  mass  of  statements  depends 
on  the  substitution  of  '60  for  '59.  Is 
not  such  carelessness  almost  incredible  ] 
Here  is  a  man  who  took  a  foremost  part 
in  the  government  of  India  during  the 
years  1861  and  1862  ;  not  only  a  states- 
man and  financier,  but  a  lawyer  of  some 
note,  who  writes  pages  of  weighty  matter 
on  the  supposition  that  the  most  cele- 
brated and  momentous  statute  of  1859 
was  passed  in  1860  !  And  on  such  a 
hook  as  this  he  hangs  a  chain  of  reason- 
ing with  which  he  expects  to  refute  the 
members  of  the  Civil  Service  who 
know  Act  X.  by  heart  with  all  its  ins 
and  outs,  the  causes  which  motived  its 
introduction,  and  the  consequences 
which  it  produced.  More  extraordinary 
still,  the  real  Act  X.  of  1860  ought  to 
have  been  as  familiar  to  Mr.  Laing  as  the 
27th  Article  to  the  Bishop  of  Exeter; 
for  that  Act  related  to  the  Customs' 
duties  upon  various  articles,  and  must 
have  been  frequently  consulted  by  him 
as  financial  member  of  council  when 
engaged  in  the  composition  of  his  bud- 
gets. A  writer,  who  has  been  betrayed 
into  so  flagrant  an  inaccuracy,  and  who 
has  grounded  upon  that  inaccuracy  the 
tenor  of  his  remarks  upon  the  rent 
question,  must  not  be  surprised  if  we 
hesitate  to  receive,  as  Gospel,  his  dictum 
concerning  the  contract  law  and  the 
indigo  question. 

However  much  we  may  be  disgusted 
and  alienated  by  the  unreasonable  vio- 
lence of  the  supporters  of  a  contract 

!No.  53. — VOL.  ix. 


law,  we  must  not,  however,  forget  that 
there  is  a  grievance  at  the  bottom  of 
every  wide-spread  agitation.  A  large 
body  of  men  never  agree  to  fill  the  uni- 
verse with  their  complaints  unless  they 
have  some  genuine  wrong  to  complain 
of.  If  we  look  closely  into  the  matter, 
we  shall  find  that  the  planters  are  not 
without  serious  and  undoubted  ground 
for  discontent  In  a  country  where  the 
poverty  of  the  cultivators  necessitates 
a  system  of  petty  advances,  it  is  most 
essential  that  every  facility  should  be 
afforded  to  those  who  are  obliged  to  have 
recourse  to  a  court  of  law  in  order  to 
bring  to  account  a  lazy  or  fraudulent 
neighbour  and  dependent.  An  indigo- 
planter  who  has  dealings  with  several 
hundred  ryots,  as  a  matter  of  course,  is 
constantly  hampered  by  the  idleness 
and  improvidence  of  some  of  their  num- 
ber, and  the  knavery  of  others.  Is  he 
to  take  every  individual  case  before  a 
tribunal  sitting  in  a  station  from  which 
he  is  divided  by  sixty  or  eighty  miles 
of  road,  which  was  in  decent  order  be- 
fore the  Central  Government  took  it  in 
hand  ?  He  can  spare  neither  the  time, 
nor  the  money,  nor  the  temper.  He 
prefers  to  submit  to  the  loss,  and  to 
reimburse  himself  the  next  season  by 
driving  harder  bargains  than  ever  all 
round  the  list  of  his  tenants.  Such 
being  the  case,  the  English  settlers  are 
justified  in  thinking  themselves  hardly 
used.  Unfortunately,  as  men  are  apt  to 
do  under  the  circumstances,  instead  of 
endeavouring  to  obtain  a  natural  and 
legitimate  redress,  they  claim  to  be 
allowed  to  right  themselves  by  wrong- 
ing others.  The  watchword  of  their 
party  should  be,  "  Cheap  and  Speedy 
Justice."  It  is  "  a  Criminal  Contract 
Law,  and  damn  the  niggers  ! "  The 
state  of  things  in  the  Mofussil  is  not 
unlike  that  which  existed  in  England 
before  the  institution  of  county  courts. 
Then  the  proceedings  for  the  recovery 
of  small  debts  were  so  tedious  and  ex- 
pensive that  tradesmen  frequently  pre- 
ferred to  lose  their  money,  and  compen- 
sate themselves  by  charging  exorbitant 
prices.  The  solvent  customers  thus 
suffered  for  the  shortcomings  of  the  in- 

D  D 


402 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  X. 


solvent,  just  as  an  honest  ryot  gets  a 
lower  price  for  his  indigo  because  his 
worthless  neighbour  broke  faith  with 
their  common  employer.  If  small-cause 
courts  were  scattered  broadcast  over 
Bengal  and  Bahar,  the  planters  would 
find  to  their  surprise,  and  perhaps  a 
little  to  their  disappointment,  that  the 
difficulties  of  their  position  had  been 
obviated  by  a  remedy  very  different 
from  that  panacea  for  which  they  had 
clamoured  so  long  and  so  loudly:  the 
sting  would  be  taken  out  of  the  excite- 
ment for  the  contract  law ;  men  would 
at  times  forget  that  they  were  members 
of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race ;  Sir  John  Peter 
Grant  would  become  a  shade  less  black, 
and  Sir  Mordaunt  Wells  a  shade  less 
blue. 

With  reference  to  this  subject,  "Eng- 
land's Mission  in  the  East "  contains  the 
following  passage  : — "  The  more  simple 
"  and  summary  legislation  can  be  made 
"  in  such  matters,  the  better  suited  it 
"  is  for  India.  The  people  are  naturally 
"  litigious,  and  the  introduction  of  the 
"  intricacies  of  English  law  too  often 
"  tends  to  foster  this  spirit,  and  to  raise 
u  up  a  race  of  pettifogging  village  attor- 
"  neys,  who  do  infinite  mischief.  Per- 
"  jury  prevails  to  a  frightful  extent,  and 
u  the  law  is  too  often  looked  upon  as  an 
"  instrument  for  enabling  a  man  to  resist 
"just  claims  by  special  pleading  and 
"  subornation  of  evidence.  To  meet 
"  these  evils,  laws  in  Eastern  countries 
"  should  be  as  far  as  possible  simple 
"  and  direct,  and,  above  all  things,  con- 
"  sonant  to  the  plain  common  sense  and 
((  moral  feeling  of  the  community.  Dis- 
"  honesty,  when  palpable,  should  be 
"  punished  criminally,  and  not  left  to 
"  the  chance  of  a  tedious  civil  proce- 
"  dure." 

Nothing  can  be  more  just  than  these 
premises,  and  nothing  more  unsound 
than  this  conclusion.  The  people  of 
India  are  naturally  litigious.  They  do 
take  most  kindly  to  the  dirty  part  of 
English  law.  Perjury  does  prevail  to  a 
frightful  extent,  and  law  is  too  often 
looked  upon  as  an  instrument  whereby 
a  man  may  resist  just  claims.  Therefore 
legislation  should  be  simple,  summary, 


and  consistent  with  the  moral  feeling 
of  the  community  ;  and  such  the  rulerg 
of  our  Eastern  dominions  are  doing  their 
very  best  to  make  it.  India  is  blessed 
with  a  criminal  code,  and  codes  of 
criminal  and  civil  procedure,  which  make 
a  plain  Englishman's  mouth  water ;  and 
there  is  every  prospect  that  before  many 
years  have  elapsed  she  will  possess  a 
civil  code,  such  as  would  satisfy  even 
the  author  of  "  Orley  Farm."  But  the 
remedy  for  a  national  tendency  to  (liti- 
gation  and  perjury  is  not  the  criminal 
punishment  of  palpable  dishonesty.  A 
man  who  forswears  himself  in  a  civil 
suit  will  not  speak  the  truth  when  he  is 
placed  at  the  bar  as  a  criminal.  Because 
Hindoo  witnesses  lie  and  shuffle,  there 
is  no  reason  that  English  legislators 
should  neglect  the  principles  of  juris- 
prudence. "  The  intricacies  of  English 
law "  may,  perhaps,  have  raised  up  "  a 
race  of  pettifogging  village  attorneys  ; " 
but  a  criminal  contract  law,  introduced 
in  defiance  of  the  dictates  of  justice  and 
good  sense,  would  soon  raise  up  a  race 
of  grinding  village  tyrants.  Truly  a 
noble  and  philosophical  idea  this  of 
elevating  the  debased  moral  sense  of  a 
great  people  by  means  of  an  enactment 
which  will  degrade  them  below  the  level 
of  the  population  of  any  civilized  country, 
ancient  or  modern  !  Thank  God,  there 
are  those  who  have  formed  quite  another 
conception  of  England's  Mission  in  the 
East !  Thank  God,  there  are  those  who 
have  a  higher  opinion  of  our  Indian 
fellow-subjects  than  to  imagine  that  their 
commerce  and  agriculture  must  be  regu- 
lated, not  by  the  great  principles  of  free 
competition  and  individual  industry  and 
self-respect,  but  by  the  hulks,  the  jail, 
and  Dr.  Mowatt's  last  revised  system  of 
prison  diet ! 

By  this  time,  my  dear  Simkins,  you 
probably  hate  the  name  of  "contract 
law"  as  much  as  the  most  constant 
reader  of  the  Bengal  HurJcaru.  In 
order,  however,  that  you  may  be  enabled 
to  appreciate  to  the  full  the  feelings 
of  that  individual  of  awful  experiences, 
you  must  be  initiated  in  the  mysteries 
of  "waste  lands."  Know,  then  (and 
here  again  I  take  the  liberty  of  quoting 


The,  "  Anglo-Saxon  "  Party  in  India. 


4oa 


Mr.  Laing,  the  most  clear  and  concise 
of  pamphleteers),  that,  "  taken  roughly, 
"  we  may  say  that  one-third  of  the  area 
"  of  British  India  is  waste  land  in  the 
"  fullest  sense  of  the  word,  which  has 
"  never  been  colonized  and  occupied  by 
"  the  Hindoo  or  any  other  civilized  race. 
"  This  is  the  great  area  which  is  destined 
u  to  become  one  of  our  chief  sources 
"  of  supply  for  tea,  coffee,  and  other 
"  valuable  colonial  produce,  benefitting 
"  vastly  the  native  labourer  as  well  as 
"  the  English  capitalist,  by  the  exten- 
"  sion  of  trade  and  the  employment 
"  given  at  high  wages." 

By  Lord  Canning's  resolution  a  cer- 
tain price  per  acre  was  fixed  for  all  waste 
land,  whatever  the  quality.  A  capitalist 
who  wished  to  buy  any  portion  gave 
notice  of  his  intention.  The  Govern- 
ment then  announced  that  such  and 
such  lands  were  to  be  disposed  of,  and 
after  the  lapse  of  a  month  the  purchaser 
paid  his  money,  and  took  possession  of 
the  lot.  Now  the  defects  of  this  method 
of  procedure  are  obvious.  As  all  lands, 
bad  and  good,  were  sold  at  the  same 
price,  people  bought  up  all  the  valuable 
soils  at  a  price  much  below  what  they 
would  have  fetched  in  open  market,  and 
left  the  inferior  lots  on  the  hands  of  the 
state.  Worse  than  this,  a  vast  propor- 
tion of  the  best  tracts  were  taken  by 
land-jobbers,  who  afterwards  disposed  of 
them  at  their  own  price.  Europeans, 
therefore,  who  were  desirous  of  settling 
in  India  gained  nothing  but  the  very 
questionable  advantage  of  paying  to 
speculators  the  purchase-money,  which 
ought  to  have  gone  into  the  pockets  of 
the  public.  Again,  the  one  month's 
notice  was  not  long  enough  to  satisfy  the 
demands  of  equity.  It  often  happened 
that  persons  who  had  an  interest  in  lands 
advertised  for  sale  were  unable  to  put 
in  their  claim  in  time  to  prevent  the 
alienation  of  their  rights.  A  native  pro- 
prietor who  happened  to  be  absent  on 
business  at  Cocanda  or  Tanjore  might 
receive  the  pleasing  intelligence  that  a 
sharp  broker  from  Calcutta  or  Delhi  had 
applied  six  weeks  previously  for  a  couple 
of  thousand  acres  on  the  frontiers  of 
Oude,  over  which  the  cattle  of  his  fathers 


had  browsed  for  generations  past ;  and 
he  might  solace  himself  during  his  re- 
turn home  with  the  anticipation  of  find- 
ing a  stranger  comfortably  in  possession, 
perhaps  with  Mr.  Eudd  himself  as  his 
bailiff  and  right-hand  man. 

Sir  Charles  "Wood  was  deeply  im- 
pressed with  the  evils  which  had  re- 
sulted, and  were  likely  to  result,  from  so 
faulty  a  system.  He  accordingly  modified 
the  resolutions  of  Lord  Canning  in  a 
manner  which,  to  unprejudiced  eyes, 
displayed  equal  regard  to  the  interests 
of  the  Treasury,  the  native  population, 
and  the  European  settler.  For  the  fixed 
price  he  substituted  sale  by  auction  in 
open  market,  and  thereby  gave  the  land- 
jobbers  a  slap  in  the  face  which  they  can 
neither  forgive  nor  forget.  He  extended 
the  period  of  the  notice  from  one  month 
to  three,  and  in  so  doing  opened  an 
additional  account  of  hatred  with  those 
who  saw  in  his  conduct  only  another 
proof  of  his  partiality  for  the  nigger. 
And,  because  he  has  obeyed  the  imperious 
demands  of  humanity  and  sound  policy, 
because  he  has  acted  as  every  disinterested 
and  judicious  statesman  must  have  acted 
in  the  same  conjuncture,  he  is  reviled  by 
the  Calcutta  papers  in  terms  which  would 
be  harsh  and  shocking  if  applied  to  such 
rulers  as  Sejanus  and  Strafford.  The 
editors  of  those  papers  seem  to  consider 
his  behaviour  in  this  matter  as  too 
palpably  iniquitous  to  need  any  demon- 
stration. Any  allusion  to  "  waste  lands  " 
is  the  text,  not  for  argument  and  illus- 
tration, but  for  vulgar  abuse  and  con- 
temptible slander. 

Here,  again,  a  grievance  actually 
exists,  which  will  doubtless  be  speedily 
removed,  and  which  would  have  been 
removed  long  before  this  if  the  aggrieved 
parties  had  made  their  complaint  in  a 
rational  and  intelligible  strain,  instead 
of  scolding  like  old  women  whenever 
the  subject  is  mentioned.  By  the  Mo- 
dified Eesolutions  lands  cannot  be  sold 
until  they  have  been  surveyed,  and  the 
Government  survey  proceeds  so  slowly 
that  persons  who  desire  to  purchase 
certain  lots  get  those  lots  surveyed  at 
their  own  expense.  It  sometimes 
happens  that  at  the.  auction  another 

DD  2 


404 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  X. 


capitalist  outbids  them,  and  the  expense 
of  the  survey  thus  becomes  a  dead  loss. 
This  oversight  on  the  part  of  the  Go- 
vernment is,  however,  hardly  grave 
enough  to  justify  the  non-official  society 
in  joining  the  crusade  of  the  land- 
jobbers  against  the  home  authorities. 
When  men  are  blinded  by  their  pas- 
sions it  is  marvellous  how  low  they  will 
stoop  for  allies. 

And  now  you  have  both  the  heads  of 
the  indictment  brought  by  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  party  against  Her  Majesty's  Sec- 
retary of  State  for  India — that  he  has 
vetoed  the  contract  law,  and  that  he 
has  modified  Lord  Canning's  resolutions 
concerning  the  sale  of  waste  lands. 
Now  you  have  the  substance  of  the 
preamble  to  that  bill  of  attainder 
which,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  Cal- 
cutta press,  will  one  day  be  unani- 
mously voted  by  the  Commons  House 
of  Parliament.  Now  you  know  why 
Sir  Charles  Wood  is  the  most  tyran- 
nical, the  most  treacherous,  the  most 
unpatriotic  •  of  all  the  great  English 
.  statesmen  who  have  had  to  do  with 
India.  And  yet  he  is  not  alone  in  his 
.shame.  There  are  two  rulers  whom  in 
•their  day  the  same  men  hated  with  the 
same  hate,  and  reviled  with  the  same 
unsparing  ferocity.  There  are  two  names 
that  share  his  infamy,  and  diminish  the 
load  of  execration  with  which  he  is  to 
be  pursued  through  generations  yet  un- 
born, and  those  are  the  names  of  Lord 
Macaulay  and  Lord  Canning.  The  first 
was  guilty  of  the  black  and  abominable 
design  of  raising  the  Hindoo  to  the 
rank  of  our  fellow-citizen  by  equal 
laws  equally  administered.  The  second, 
traitor  that  he  was,  when  the  sword 
of  vengeance  was  drawn  and  whetted, 
stepped  forward  to  prevent  the  exter- 
mination of  the  accursed  race.  Sir 
Charles  is  a  worthy  member  of  such  a 
triumvirate.  He  must  console  himself 
with  the  reflection  that,  as  he  partakes 
the  aversion  with  which  his  two  col- 
leagues are  still  regarded  by  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  party,  so  he  holds  the  same  place 
as  they  in  the  hearts  of  the  native  po- 
pulation of  India,  in  the  good  opinion 
-ef  the  misguided  and  ignorant  people 


of  England.  But  all  honour  to  that  dis- 
cerning and  enlightened  faction  which 
did  not  fail  to  unmask  and  hold  up  to 
eternal  reprobation  the  true  characters 
of  Macaulay  and  Canning  ! 

Each  member  of  this  trio  is  arraigned 
at  the  bar  of  public  opinion  on  a  sepa- 
rate indictment.  Each  is  accused  of  a 
crime  peculiarly  his  own.  The  special 
charge  brought  against  Sir  Charles  Wood 
is,  that  he  offers  every  impediment  to 
the  development  of  the  resources  of 
India.  Now  it  so  happens  that  of  all 
Indian  ministers  Sir  Charles  Wood  has 
applied  himself  most  eagerly  and  most 
exclusively  to  the  advancement  of  the 
material  prosperity  of  the  country  en- 
trusted to  his  charge.  The  sums  now 
appropriated  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
productive  public  works  far  exceed 
those  expended  by  his  predecessors. 
And  yet  his  call  is  still  for  more.  More 
roads,  more  canals,  more  tramways,  more- 
Sir  Arthur  Cottons.  Open  more  rivers ; 
connect  more  trunk-lines  ;  detach  more 
engineers  to  this  undertaking,  and  lay 
out  more  lacs  on  that  other.  All  the 
daughters  of  the  horse-leech  together 
do  not  cry  "  Give  !  give  ! "  louder  than 
Sir  Charles  when  the  question  is  one 
which  concerns  the  productive  powers 
of  our  Eastern  dominions.  And  this  is 
the  statesman  the  principle  of  whose 
policy  is  hostility  to  the  development 
of  the  resources  of  India.  This  is  the 
ruler  but  for  whose  determined  opposi- 
tion Bombay  would  be  a  second  Caro- 
lina and  Bahar — a  more  productive 
Jamaica.  Satire  itself  is,  generally 
speaking,  careful,  in  the  portraits  which 
it  etches,  to  preserve  some  resemblance 
to  the  originals.  Though  often  unjust, 
it  seldom  is  ludicrously  and  monstrously 
absurd.  If  the  marked  feature  in  the 
character  of  Cleon  had  been  modesty 
the  "Knights  "  would  have  been  hooted 
off  the  stage.  If  Shaftesbury  had  been 
a  timid  unenterprising  politician,  Dry- 
den  would  hardly  have  ventured  to  call 
him 

"  A  daring  pilot  in  extremity." 

Punch  does  not  give  Louis  Napoleon  a 
snub  nose,  or  adorn  Victor  Emmanuel 


The  "  Anglo-Saxon  "  Party  in  India, 


405 


with  the  beak  of  an  eagle.  But  the 
literary  champions  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
party  are  not  bound  by  the  laws  which 
regulate  the  ebullitions  of  satire,  and 
even  of  burlesque.  Their  genius  soars 
far  above  the  realms  of  verisimilitude, 
and  scorns  the  feeble  bonds  of  proba- 
bility. 

Perhaps  the  strongest  feeling  in  Ma- 
caulay's  breast — so  strong  as  almost  to 
amount  to  a  prejudice — was  an  intense 
love  and  admiration  of  his  native  land. 
He  was  pre-eminently  an  Englishman. 
In  every  page  of  his  writings  peeps  out 
the  proud  consciousness  that  he  was 
born  and  bred  a  Briton.  Eapacity, 
cruelty,  falsehood,  he  could  forgive  any- 
thing to  a  great  Englishman  who  truly 
loved  his  country.  His  last  and  greatest 
work  was  a  noble  prose  epic  composed 
for  the  glorification  of  England.  Nor 
was  this  mere  idle  talk.  What  he  said 
of  Lord  Chatham  was  true  of  himself  to 
tbe  letter: — "He  was  in  the  strictest 
"  sense  a  patriot.  He  loved  England 
"as  an  Athenian  loved  the  City  of 
"  the  Violet  Crown,  as  a  Eoman  loved 
"  the  City  of  the  Seven  Hills."  Those 
who  hold  Lord  Macaulay  in  the  lowest 
esteem  as  a  statesman ;  those  who  were 
most  irreconcileably  opposed  to  him  on 
all  vital  questions,  readily  admit  that 
he  never  allowed  place,  pelf,  or  popu- 
larity to  count  in  the  balance  against 
the  duty  which  he  owed  to  England. 
And  what  he  showed  himself  in  his 
public  life,  such  he  was  at  all  times  and 
on  all  occasions.  He  loved  to  dwell  on 
every  fresh  symptom  of  the  increasing 
wealth  and  power  and  fame  of  Eng- 
land. He  hailed  with  delight  every 
event  which  gave  the  lie  to  those 
croakers  who  maintain  that  she  is 
already  in  the  course  of  decay.  When 
on  foreign  travel,  he  would  descant  on 
the  pleasure  which  he  felt  in  reflecting 
that  he  was  the  citizen  of  no  mean  city, 
but  of  a  mighty  nation  which  knew  how 
to  make  her  sons  respected  in  every 
corner  of  the  inhabited  world.  Such 
was  Macaulay,  and,  being  such,  what 
was  the  high  crime  and  misdemeanour 
charged  against  him  by  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  party  of  his  day?  What'  was 


his  besetting  sin  in  the  judgment  of 
the  bitter  foes  of  the  native  population 
of  India?  This — that  he  hated  England 
with  a  deadly  hatred ;  that  his  heart's 
desire  and  prayer  was  that  it  might  be 
permitted  to  him  in  his  generation  to 
inflict  some  grievous  blow,  some  indeK- 
ble  disgrace  upon  the  English  name. 
Sir  Charles  Wood  may  very  well  be 
content  to  be  an  enemy  to  the  material 
prosperity  of  India  in  the  same  sense 
that  Lord  Macaulay  was  an  enemy  to  the 
glory  and  well-being  of  England. 

It  appears,  then,  that  Lord  Macaulay 
and  Sir  Charles  Wood  will  be  acquitted 
by  posterity  of  the  indictments  pre- 
ferred against  them.  But  it  is  far  other- 
wise with  Lord  Canning.  His  crying  . 
sin  is  such  as  to  admit  of  no  defence. 
He  was  accused  of  mercy,  of  benevo 
lence,  of  philanthropy  ;  and  his  fondest 
admirers  must  allow  that  the  accusation 
was  well  grounded.  Time  will  only  con- 
firm the  decision  of  the  Calcutta  press, 
which,  after  a  fair  hearing,  convicted- 
him  of  humanity  and  clemency,  of  hav- 
ing slaughtered  with  reluctance,  and 
pardoned  with  pleasure.  He  may  by 
this  time  have  been  found  guilty  of 
these  crimes  before  quite  another  judg- 
ment seat. 

Sir  Charles  Wood  takes  all  that  the 
Hurkaru  gives  him  with  great  equa- 
nimity, and  appears  to  imagine  that  the 
affection  of  the  native  population,  the 
esteem  of  the  civil  servants  of  the 
Crown,  and  the  approbation  of  public 
opinion-  at  home  compensate  for  the 
hostility  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  party.. 
Extraordinary  to  relate,  he  believes  it 
to  be  part  of  his  duty  to  consult  the  in- 
terests of  the  hundred  and  eighty  mil- 
lions of  our  dark  fellow  subjects ;  andr 
more  extraordinary  still,  he  is  desirous 
of  winning  their  regard,  and  expresses 
great  satisfaction  at  the  consciousness  that 
his  services  are  appreciated  by  the  most 
cultivated  and  the  least  damned  among  the 
niggers.  He  was  especially  gratified  by 
the  address  which  was  lately  presented 
to  him  by  the  British  Indian  Associa- 
tion. At  a  public  meeting  in  Calcutta, 
thronged  by  all  the  most  respectable  and 
enlightened  Bengalee  gentlemen,  this 


406 


Old  Master  Grunsey  and  Goodman  Dodd. 


address  was  carried  unanimously,  after  a 
Series  of  speeches,  all  of  which  acknow- 
ledged Sir  Charles  to  be  in  the  foremost 
tank  of  the  benefactors  of  India.  On 
this  occasion  Moulvee  Abdool  Luteef,  a 
'Mahommedan  magistrate,  said  with  per- 
fect truth : 

"  It  is  doubtless  a  unique  instance  in 
"  the  history  of  popular  assemblies,  and, 
"  particularly  of  popular  assemblies  in 
"  India,  that  we  are  met  not  to  com- 
"  plain  of  grievances,  or  to  murmur 
"  forth  wrongs  sustained  at  the  hands 
'"  of  inconsiderate  rulers.  Our  purpose 
"  is  one  which  must  commend  itself  to 
"  the  favour  of  all  rulers  as  tending  to 
"  promote  good  will  and  understanding 
"  between  governors  and  governed,  and 
"  should  convince  the  people  of  England 
"  that  we  are  able  to  judge  for  our- 
• "  selves  in  matters  affecting  our  material 
-"  interests. 

"  This  purely  voluntary  manifestation 
"  of  native  feeling  should  be  in  the 
'"  highest  degree  pleasing  to  every  in- 
"  genuous  Englishman,  and  I  have  no 
"  hesitation  whatever  in  expressing  my 
"  conviction  that  it  will  meet  with  ready 
"  appreciation  in  the  most  intelligent 
"  circles  in  England. 

"To  Sir  Charles  Wood  belongs  the 
"  peculiar  credit,  that  under  his  guid- 
"  ance  a  real  and  earnest  endeavour  has 
"  sprung  up  on  the  part  of  our  rulers  to 
"  render  themselves  as  understood  as 
"  possible  by  us,  a  sincere  desire  that 
"  we  should  have  an  insight  into  the 
"  principles  and  mode  of  Government 
"  set  over  us." 


One  paragraph  of  the  address  especi- 
ally  deserves  to   be  quoted :    "  As  an 
'  illustration  of  the  beneficial  effect  of 
'  the  controlling  power  in  England  over 
'  Indian  affairs,  we  need  not  but  advert 
'  to  your  now  celebrated  despatches  to 
'  his  Excellency  the  Viceroy  and  Go- 
'  vernor- General  in  Council  regarding 
the  Breaches  of  Contract  Bill,  and  the 
"  sale  of  Waste  Lands,  and  the  exten- 
"  sion  of  the  Permanent  Settlement.  By 
"  your  emphatic  expression  of  opinion 
"  on  the  first-named  subject,  the  people 
"  of   India  have  been  freed  from  the 
"  effects  of  a  project  of  law,  opposed  to 
"  the   principles   of  civilized  jurispru- 
dence,   exceptional  in  its  aims   and 
character,  and  calculated  to  prove  an 
efficacious  engine  of  injustice,  hardship, 
and  oppression,  under  the  peculiar  ad- 
ministrative machinery  of  India." 
These  expressions  were  echoed  on  the 
shores  of  England  by  the  vast  majority 
of    those   who   view   the  present   and 
future  of  India  through  another  medium 
than  the  halo  of  selfish  greed  and  party 
prejudice.      Such  men,    at   home   and 
abroad,   unite   to    regard    the    present 
Secretary  of    State    as    a    ruler    who 
thoroughly    understands    the   true   in- 
terests of  our  Eastern  Dominions,  and 
who  faithfully,  courageously,  and  labori- 
ously strives  to  further  those  interests 
to  the  extent  of  the  powers  to  him  com- 
mitted. 

Yours  sincerely, 

H.  BROUGHTON. 


G. 
D. 

G. 
D. 


OLD  MASTEE  GEUNSEY  AND  GOODMAN  DODD. 

(Stratford-on-Avon,  A.D.  1597.) 
BY     WILLIAM     ALLINGHAM. 

God  save  you,  Goodman  Dodd ! — a  sight  to  see  you ! 
Gramercy,  Master  Grunsey ! — Sir,  how  be  you  1 
Middlish,  thank  heav'n.     Eare  weather  for  the  wheat. 
Farms  will  be  thirsty,  after  all  this  heat. 


Old  Master  Grunsey  and  Goodman  Dodd,  407 

G.    And  so  is  we.     Sit  down  on  this  here  bench : 

We'll  drink  a  pot  o'  yale,  mun.     Hither,  wench  ! 

My  service — ha  !  I'se  well  enough,  i'fegs, 

But  for  this  plaguey  rheum  i'  both  my  legs. 

Whiles  I  can't  hardly  get  about :  0  dear  ! 
D.    Thou  see'st,  we  don't  get  younger  every  year. 
Gs  Thou'rt  a  young  fellow  still.     What,  "  nigh  three-score," — 

I  be  thy  elder  fifteen  year  and  more. 
.    Hast  any  news  ? 
D.  Not  much.    New-Place  be  sold, 

And  Willy  Shakespeare's  bought  it,  so  I'm  told. 
G.    What,  little  Willy  Shakespeare  bought  the  Place  ! 

Lord  bless  us,  how  young  folk  gets  on  apace  ! 

Sir  Hugh's  great  house  beside  the  grammar-school! — 

This  Shakespeare's  (take  my  word  upon't)  no  fooL 

I  minds  him  sin'  he  were  so  high's  my  knee ; 

A  stirrin'  little  mischief  chap  were  he; 

One  day  I  cotch'd  him  peltin'  o'  my  geese 

Below  the  church  :  "  you  let  'en  swim  in  peace, 

"Young  dog!"  I  says,  "or  I  shall  fling  thee  in." 

Will  was  on  t'other  bank,  and  did  but  grin, 

And  call  out,  "  Sir,  you  come  across  to  here  ! " 
D.    I  knows  old  John  this  five  and  thirty  year. 

In  old  times  many  a  cup  he  made  me  drink  ; 

But  Willy  weren't  aborn'd  then,  I  don't  think, 

Or  might  a'  been  a  babe  on's  mother's  arm, 

When  I  should  cart  'en  fleeces  from  our  farm. 

I  went  a  coortin'  then,  in  Avon-Lane, 

And,  tho'  bit  further,  I  were  always  fain 

To  bring  my  cart  thereby,  upon  a  chance 

T,o  catch  some  foolish  little  nod  or  glance, 

Or  "  meet  me,  Mary,  won't  'ee  ?     Charlcote  way, 

"  Or  down  at  Clopton  Bridge,  next  holiday  ? " — 

Health,  Master  Grunsey. 
G.  Thank'ee  friend.     'Tis  hot. 

We  might  do  warse  than  call  another  pot. 

Good  Mistress  Nan  !        Will  Shakespeare,  troth,  I  knew  ; 

A  nimble  curly-pate,  and  pretty  too, 

About  the  street ;  he  growM  an  idle  lad, 

And  like  enough,  'twas  thought,  to  turn  out  bad ; 

I  don't  just  fairly  know,  but  folk  did  say 

He  vex'd  the  Lucys,  and  so  fleed  away. 
D.    He's  warth  as  much  as  Tanner  Twigg  to-day ; 

And  all  by  plays  in  Lunnon. 
G.  Folk  talks  big  : 

Will  Shakespeare  warth  as  much  as  Tanner  Twigg — 

Tut  tut !  Be  Will  a  player-man  by  trade  ? 

D.   0'  course  he  be,  o'  course  he  be  ;  and  made 

A  woundy  heap  o'  money  too,  and  bought 

A  playhouse  for  himsen  like,  out  and  out ; 

And  makes  up  plays,  beside,  for  'en  to  act ; 

Tho'  I  can't  tell  thee  rightly,  for  a  fact, 

If  out  o'  books  or  his  own  head  it  be : 

We'se  other  work  to  think  on,  thee  and  me. 

They  say  Will's  doin'  finely,  howsomever. 


408  Old  Master  Grunsey  and  Goodman  Dodd. 

G.   Why,  Dodd,  the  little  chap  were  always  clever. 
I  don't  know  nothing  now  o'  such-like  toys; 
New  fashions  plenty,  mun,  sin'  we  were  boys ; 
We  used  to  ha'  rare  mummings,  puppet-shows, 
And  Moralties, — they  can't  much  better  those; 
The  Death  of  Judas  were  a  pretty  thing, 
"  So-la  !  so-la ! "  the  Divil  used  to  sing ;  i 
But  time  goes  on,  for  sure,  and  fashion  alters. 

D.  Up  at  the  Crown,  last  night,  says  young  Jack  Walters, 
"Willy's  a  great  man  now!" 

G.  A  jolterhead 

What  do  it  count  for,  when  all's  done  and  said? 

Ah!  who'll  obey,  let  Will  say  "Come"  or  "Go"? 

Such-like  as  him  don't  reckon  nmch,  I  trovfl 

Sir,  they  shall  travel  first,  like  thee  and  me, 

See  Lunnon,  to  find  out  what  great  men  be, 

Ha,  neighbour  Dodd  ? — Good  Saints  !  to  see  the  Court 

Take  water  down  to  Greenwich  ;  there's  fine  sport ! 

Her  Highness  in  her  frills  and  puffs  and  pearls, 

Wi'  dukes,  and  lords,  and  chamberlains,  and  earls, 

So  thick  as  midges  round  her, — look  at  such 

An  thou  would' st  talk  of  greatness  !     why,  the  touch 

Be  on  their  stewards  and  lackeys,  Goodman  Dodd, 

Who'll  hardly  answer  Shakespeare  wi'  a  nod, 

And  let  him  come,  doff'd  cap  and  bended  knee. 

We  knows  a  trifle,  neighbour,  thee  and  me. 

D.  We  may,  Sir,     This  be  grand  old  Stratford  brew ; 
"No  better  yale  in  Lunnon,  search  it  through. 
New-Place  ben't  no  such  bargain,  when  all's  done ; 
'Twas  dear,  I  knows  it. 

G.  Thou  bought'st  better,  mun, 

At  Hoggin  Fields :  all  ain't  alike  in  skilL 

D.  Thanks  to  the  Lord  above  !     I've  not  done  ill. 
No  more  has  thee,  friend  Grunsey,  in  thy  trade. 

G.   So-so.     But  here's  young  Will  wi'  money  made, 
And  money  saved ;  whereon  I  sets  him  down, 
Say  else  who  likes,  a  credit  to  the  town ; 
Tho'  some  do  shake  their  heads  at  player-folk.  ,' 

D.  A  civil  man  he  be,  to  chat  and  joke  ; 
I've  ofttimes  had  a  bit  o'  talk  wi'  Will. 

G.   How  doth  old  Master  Shakespeare? 

D.  Bravely  still. 

And  so  doth  Madam  too,  the  comely  dame. 

G.    And  Willy's  wife — what  used  to  be  her  name? 

D.  Why,  Hathaway,  fro'  down  by  Shottery  gate. 
I  don't  think  she's  so  much  about  o'  late. 
Their  son,  thou  see'st,  the  only  son  they  had, 
Died  last  year,  and  she  took  on  dreadful  bad; 
And  so  the  fayther  did  awhile,  I'm  told. 
This  boy  o'  theirs  were  nine  or  ten  year  old. 
— Willy  himsen  may  bide  here  now,  mayhap. 

G.   He  always  were  a  clever  little  chap. 

I'm  glad  o's  luck,  an  'twere  for  old  John's  sake. 
Your  arm,  sweet  sir.     Oh,  how  my  legs  do  ache  ! 


409 


A    SON    OF    THE    SOIL. 


PART  Y. 


CHAPTEE  XIIL 


"THE  question  is,  will  ye  go  or  will 
je  stay  T'  said  tig  Colin  of  Bamore ; 
"  but  for  this,  you  and  me  might  have 
had  a  mair  serious  question  to  discuss. 
I  see  a  providence  in  it  for  my  part. 
You're  but  a  callant;  it  will  do  you  nae 
harm  to  wait;  and  you'll  be  in  the  way 
of  seeing  the  world  at — what  do  they 
call  the  place  ?  If  your  mother  has  nae 
objections,  and  ye  see  your  ain  way  to 
accepting,  I'll  be  very  well  content.  It's 
awfu'  kind  o'  Sir  Thomas  after  the  way 
ye've  rejected  a'  his  advances — but,  no 
doubt  he's  heard  that  you  got  on  gey 
weel,  on  the  whole,  at  your  ain  college," 
said  the  farmer,  with  a  little  compla- 
cency. They  were  sitting  late  over  the 
breakfast  table,  the  younger  boys  look- 
ing on  .with  eager  eyes,  wondering  over 
Colin's  wonderful  chances,  and  feeling 
severely  the  contrast  of  their  own  lot, 
who  had  to  take  up  the  ready  satchel 
and  the  "piece,"  which  was  to  occupy 
their  healthful  appetites  till  the  even- 
ing, and  hurry  off  three  miles  down  the 
loch  to  school.  As  for  Archie,  he  had 
been  long  gone  to  his  hard  labour  on 
the  farm,  and  the  mother  and  father 
and  the  visitor  were  now  sitting — a 
little  committee — upon  Colin's  prospects, 
which  the  lad  himself  contemplated 
with  a  mixture  of  delight  and  defi- 
ance wonderful  to  see. 

"  It's  time  for  the  school,  bairns,"  said 
the  farmer's  wife  ;  "  be  good  laddies,  and 
dinna  linger  on  the  road  either  coming 
or  going.  Ye'll  get  apples  a-piece  in 
the  press.  I  couldna  give  ony  advice, 
if  you  ask  me,"  said  the  Mistress,  look- 
ing at  her  son  with  her  tender  eyes : 
"  Colin,  my  man,  it's  no  for  me  nor  your 
father  either  to  say  one  thing  or  another 
—it's  you  that  must  decide — it's  your 
ain  well-being  and  comfort  and  happi- 
ness  ."  Here  the  Mistress  stopped 


short  with  an  emotion  which  nobody 
could  explain ;  and  at  which  even  Colin, 
who  had  the  only  clue  to  it,  looked  up 
out  of  his  own  thoughts,  with  a  momen- 
tary surprise. 

"Hoot,"  said  the  farmer;  "you're  aye 
thinking  of  happiness,  you  women.  I 
hope  the  laddie's  happiness  doesna  lie 
in  the  power  of  a  year's  change  one  way 
or  another.  I  canna  see  that  it  will  do  him 
any  harm — especially  after  what  he  was 
saying  last  night — to  pause  awhile  and 
take  a  little  thought;  and  here's  the 
best  opportunity  he  could  well  have.  But 
he  doesna  say  anything  himself — and  if 
you're  against  it,  Colin,  speak  out.  It's 
your  concern,  most  of  all,  as  your 
mother  says." 

"  The  callant's  in  a  terrible  swither," 
said  Lauderdale,  with  a  smile,  "  he'll 
have  it,  and  he'll  no  have  it.  For  one 
thing,  it's  an  awfu'  disappointment  to 
get  your  ain  way  just  after  you've  made 
up  your  mind  that  you're  an  injured 
man;  and  he's  but  a  callant  after  all, 
and  kens  no  better.  For  my  part," 
said  the  philosopher,  "  I'm  no  fond  of 
changing  when  you've  once  laid  your 
plans.  No  man  can  tell  what  terrible 
difference  a  turn  in  the  path  may  lead 
to.  It's  aye  best  to  go  straight  on. 
But  there's  aye  exceptions,"  continued 
Lauderdale,  laying  his  hand  on  Colin's 
shoulder.  "  So  far  as  I  can  see,  there's 
no  reason  in  this  world  why  the  callant 
should  not  stand  still  a  moment  and 
taste  the  sweetness  of  his  lot.  He's 
come  to  man's  estate,  and  the  heavens 
have  never  gloomed  on  him  yet.  There's 
no  evil  in  him,  that  I  can  see,"  said 
Colin's  friend,  with  an  unusual  trem- 
bling in  his  voice ;  "  but  for  human 
weakness,  it  might  have  been  the  lad 
Michael  or  Gabriel,  out  of  heaven,  that's 
been  my  companion  these  gladsome 
years.  It  may  be  but  sweetness  and 
blessing  that's  in  store  for  him.  I 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


know  no  reason  why  he  shouldna  pause 
while  the  sun's  shining,  and  see  God's 
meaning.  It  cannot  be  but  good." 

The  lad's  friend  who  understood  him 
best  stopped  short,  like  his  mother, 
with  something  in  his  throat  that 
marred  his  utterance.  Why  was  it  ? 
Colin  looked  up  with  the  sunshine  hi 
his  eyes,  and  laughed  with  a  little  an- 
noyance, a  little  impatience.  He  was 
no  more  afraid  of  his  lot,  nor  of  what 
the  next  turn  in  the  path  would  bring, 
-than  a  child  is  who  knows  no  evil. 
Life  was  not  solemn,  but  glorious ;  a 
thing  to  be  conquered  and  made  beau- 
tiful, to  his  eyes.  He  did  not  understand 
what  they  meant  by  their  faltering  and 
their  fears. 

"I  feel,  on  the  whole,  disposed  to 
accept  Sir  Thomas's  offer,"  said  the 
young  prince.  "  It  is  no  favour,  for  I 
.am  quite  able  to  be  his  boy's  tutor,  as 
he  says ;  and  I  see  nothing  particularly 
serious  in  it  either,"  the  young  man 
went  on ;  "  most  Scotch  students  stop 
short  sometime  and  have  a  spell  of 
teaching.  I  have  been  tutor  at  Ard- 
martin ;  I  don't  mind  being  tutor  at 
Wodensbourne.  I  would  not  be  de- 
pendent on  Sir  Thomas  Frankland  or 
any  man,"  said  Colin  ;  "  but  I  am  glad 
to  labour  for  myself,  and  free  you,  father. 
I  know  you  have  been  willing  to  keep 
me  at  college,  but  you  have  plenty  to 
do  for  Archie  and  the  rest ;  and  now  it 
is  my  turn;  I  may  help  myself  and 
them  too,"  cried  the  youth,  glad  to  dis- 
guise in  that  -view  of  the  matter  the 
thrill  of  delight  at  his  new  prospects, 
•which  came  from  a  very  different  source. 
"It  will  give  us  a  little  time,  as  you 
say,  to  think  it  all  over,"  he  continued, 
after  a  momentary  pause,  and  turned 
upon  his  mother  with  a  smile.  "Is 
there  anything  to  look  melancholy 
about  ?"  said  Colin,  turning  back  from 
his  forehead  the  clouds  of  his  brown 
hair. 

"  Oh,  no,  no,  God  forbid ! "  said  the 
Mistress,  "nothing  but  hope  and  the 
blessing  of  God ;"  but  she  turned  aside 
from  the  table,  and  began  to  put  away 
some  of  the  things  by  way  of  concealing 
.the  tears  that  welled  up  to  her  tender 


eyes,  though  neither  she  nor  any  one 
for  her  could  have  told  why. 

"  Never  mind  your  mother,"  said  the 
farmer,  "  though  it's  out  of  the  commoa 
to  see  a  cloud  on  her  face  when  there's 
no  cloud  to  speak  of  on  the  sky.  But 
women  are  aye  having  freits  and  fancies. 
I  think  it's  the  wisest  thing  ye  can  do 
to  close  with  Sir  Thomas's  proposal, 
mysel'.  I  wouldna  say  but  you'll  see 
a  good  deal  o'  the  world,"  said  the 
farmer,  shrewd  but  ignorant;  "not 
that  I'm  so  simple  as  to  suppose  that 
an  English  gentleman's  country-seat 
will  bring  you  to  onything  very  extra- 
ordinary in  the  way  of  company ;  but 
still,  that  class  of  folk  is  wonderfully 
connected,  and  ye  might  see  mair  there 
in  a  season  than  you  could  here  in  a 
lifetime.  It's  time  I  were  looking  after 
Archie  and  the  men,"  said  big  Colin; 
"  it's  no  often  I'm  so  late  in  the  morn- 
ing. I  suppose  you'll  write  to  Sir 
Thomas  yourself,  and  make  a'  the  ar- 
rangements. Ye  can  say  we're  quite 
content,  and  pleased  at  his  thoughtful- 
ness.  If  that's  no  to  your  mind,  Colin, 
I'm  sorry  for  it;  for  a  man  should  be 
aye  man  enough  to  give  thanks  when 
thanks  are  due."  With  this  last  ad- 
monition big  Colin  of  Eamore  took  up 
his  hat  and  went  off  to  his  fields.  "  I 
wish  the  callant  didna  keep  a  grudge," 
( he  said  to  himself,  as  he  went  upon  his 
cheerful  way.  "  If  he  were  to  set  up 
in  rivalry  wi'  young  Frankland  ! "  but 
with  the  thought  a  certain  smile  came 
upon  the  father's  face.  He  too  could 
not  refrain  from  a  certain  contempt  of 
the  baronet's  dainty  son ;  and  there 
was  scarcely  any  limit  to  his  pride  and 
confidence  in  his  boy. 

The  Mistress  occupied  herself  in 
putting  things  to  rights  in  the  parlour 
long  after  her  husband  had  gone  to  the 
fields.  She  thought  Lauderdale  too 
wanted  to  be  alone  with  Colin;  and, 
with  natural  jealousy,  could  not  permit 
the  first  word  of  counsel  to  come  from 
any  lips  but  her  own.  The  mistress 
had  no  baby  to  occupy  her  in  these 
days ;  the  little  one  whom  she  had  on 
her  bosom  at  the  opening  of  this  his- 
tory, who  bore  her  own  name  and  her 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


'own  smile,  and  was  the  one  maiden 
-blossom  of  her  life,  had  gone  back  to 
God  who  gave  her;  and,  when  her 
boys  were  at  school,  the  gentle  woman 
was  alone.  There  was  little  doing  in 
the  dairy  just  then,  and  Mrs.  Campbell 
had  planned  her  occupations  so  as  to 
have  all  the  time  that  was  possible  to 
enjoy  her  son's  society.  So  she  had  no 
special  call  upon  her  time  this  morning, 
and  lingered  over  her  little  businesses, 
till  Lauderdale,  who  would  fain  have 
said  his  say,  strayed  out  in  despair, 
finding  no  room  for  him.  "When 
you've  finished  your  letter,  Colin,  you'll 
find  me  on  the  hill,"  he  said,  as  he 
went  out ;  and  could  not  refrain  from 
a  murmur  in  his  own  mind  at  the 
troublesome  cares  of  "  thae  -women." 
"  They're  sweet  to  see  about  a  house, 
and  the  place  is  hame  where  they  are," 
said  the  philosopher  to  himself  with  a 
sigh ;  "  but  oh,  such  fykes  as  they 
ware  their  hearts  on  ! "  The  mistress's 
"  fykes,"  however,  were  over  when  the 
stranger  left  the  house.  She  came 
softly  to  Colin' s  table,  where  he  was 
writing,  and  sat  down  beside  him.  As 
for  Colin,  he  was  so  much  absorbed  in 
.his  letter  that  he  did  not  observe  his 
mother ;  and  it  was  only  when  he  lifted 
,his  head  to  consider  a  sentence,  and 
found  her  before  him,  that  he  woke  up, 
with  a  little  start,  out  of  that  more 
agreeable  occupation,  and  asked,  "  Do 
you  want  me  1 "  with  a  look  of  annoy- 
ance which  went  to  the  mistress's  heart. 
"Yes,  Colin,  I  want  you  just  for  a 
moment,"  said  his  mother.  "  I  want 
to  speak  to  you  of  this  new  change  in 
your  life.  Your  father  thinks  nothing 
.but  it's  Sir  Thomas  Frankland  you're 
going  to,  to  be  tutor  to  his  boys ;  but, 
oh,  Colin,  I  ken  better  !  It's  no  the 
.fine  house  and  the  new  life  that  lights 
such  light  in  my  laddie's  eye.  Colin, 
listen  to  me.  She's  far  above  you  in 
>this  world,  though  it's  no  to  be  looked 
for  that  I  could  think  ony  woman  was 
'above  you ;  but  she's  a  lady  with  niony 
wooers,  and  you're  but  a  poor  man's 
son.  Oh,  Colin,  my  man  !  dinna  gang 
near  that  place,  nor  put  yourself  in  the 
way  of  evil,  if  you  havena  some  con- 


fidence either  in  her  or  yoursel'.  Do 
you  think  you  can  see  her  day  by  day 
and  no  break  your  heart ;  or  do  you 
think  she's  worthy  of  a  heart  to  be 
thrown  away  under  her  feet  1  Or,  oh, 
my  laddie  !  tell  me  this  first  of  a' — do 
you  think  you  could  ask  her,  or  she 
could  consent,  to  lose  fortune  and 
grandeur  for  your  sake  1  Colin,  I'm 
no  joking ;  it's  awfu'  earnest  whatever 
you  may  think.  Tell  me  if  you've  ony 
regard  for  your  mother,  or  wish  her  ony 
kind  of  comfort  the  time  you're  away  ? " 

This  Mrs.  Campbell  said  with  tears 
shining  in  her  eyes,  and  a  look  of 
entreaty  in  her  face,  .which  Colin  had 
hard  ado  to  meet.  But  the  lad  was 
full  of  his  own  thoughts,  and  impatient 
of  the  interruption  which  detained  him. 

"  I  wish  I  knew  what  you  meant,"  he 
said  pettishly.  "  I  wish  you  would  not 
talk  of — people  who  have  nothing  to  do 
with  my  poor  little  concerns.  Surely, 
I  may  be  suffered  to  engage  in  ordinary 
work  like  other  people,"  said  Colin. 
"  As  for  the  lady  you  speak — " 

And  here  the  youth  paused,  with  a 
natural  smile  lurking  at  the  corners  of 
his  lips — a  smile  of  youthful  confidence 
and  self-gratulation.  Not  for  a  kingdom 
would  the  young  hero  have  boasted  of 
any  look  or  word  that  had  inspired  him ; 
but  he  would  not  deny  himself  the  de- 
licious consciousness  that  she  must  have 
had  something  to  do  with  this  proposal 
— that  it  must  have  been  her  sugges- 
tion, or  at  least  supported,  seconded  by 
her.  Only  through  her  intimation  could 
her  uncle  have  known  that  he  was  tutor 
at  Ardmartin,  and  the  thought  that  it 
was  she  herself  who  was  taking  what 
maidenly  means  she  could  for  their 
speedy  reunion  was  too  sweet  to  Colin's 
heart  to  be  breathed  in  words,  even  if 
he  could  have  done  it  without  a  betrayal 
of  his  hopes. 

"  Ay,  Colin, the  lady,"  said  his  mother ; 
"  you  say  no  more  in  words,  but  your 
eye  smiles  and  your  mouth,  and  I  see 
the  flush  on  your  cheek.  She's  bonnie 
and  sweet  and  fair-spoken,  and  I  canna 
•think  she  means  ony  harm  ;  but,  oh, 
Colin,  my  man,  mind  what  a  difference 
in  this  world  !  You've  nothing  to  offer 


412 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


her  like  what  she's  been  used  to,"  said 
the  innocent  woman,  "  and  if  I  was  to 
see  my  son  come  back  breaking  his 
heart  for  ane  that  was  above  his  reach, 
and  that  mightna  be  worthy  ! — "  said 
the  Mistress,  with  her  eyes  full  of  tears. 
She  could  not  say  any  more,  partly  be- 
cause she  had  exhausted  herself,  partly 
because  Colin  rose  from  the  table  with 
a  flush  of  excitement,  which  made  his 
mother  tremble. 

"  Worthy  of  me  !  "  said  the  young 
man,  with  a  kind  of  groan,  "  worthy  of 
me !  Mother,  I  don't  think  you  know 
•what  you  are  saying.  I  am  going  to 
Wodensbourne  whatever  happens.  It 
may  be  for  good  or  for  evil;  I  can't  tell ; 
but  I  am  going,  and  you  must  ask  me 
no  further  questions — not  on  this  point. 
I  am  to  be  tutor  to  Sir  Thomas  Frank- 
land's  boy,"  said  Colin,  coming  back 
with  the  smile  in  his  eyes.  "  Nothing 
more — and  what  could  happen  better  to 
a  poor  Scotch  student  ?  He  might  have 
had  a  Cambridge  man,  and  he  chooses 
me.  Let  me  finish  my  letter,  mother, 
dear." 

"He  wouldna  get  many  Cambridge 
men,  or  ony  other  men,  like  my  boy," 
said  the  mother,  half  reassured  ;  and 
she  rearranged  with  her  hands,  that 
trembled  a  little,  the  writing-desk, 
which  Colin's  hasty  movements  had 
thrust  out  of  the  way. 

"Ah,  mother,  but  a  Scotch  Univer- 
sity does  not  count  for  the  same  as  an 
English  one,"  said  Colin,  with  a  smile 
and  a  sigh  ;  "  it  is  not  for  my  gifts  Sir 
Thomas  has  chosen  me,"  he  added,  a  little 
impatiently  taking  up  his  pen  again. 
"What  was  it  for  ?  That  old  obligation 
of  Harry  Frankland's  life  saved,  which 
Colin  had  always  treated  as  a  fiction  1 
or  the  sweet  influence  of  some  one  who 
knew  that  Colin  loved  her  1  Which 
was  it  1  If  the  youth  determined  it 
should  be  the  last,  could  anybody  won- 
der 1  He  bent  his  head  again  over  his 
paper,  and  wrote,  with  his  heart  beating 
high,  that  acceptance  which  was  to  re- 
store him  to  her  society.  As  for  the 
Mistress,  she  left  her  son,  and  went 
about  her  homely  business,  wiping  some 
tears  from  her  eyes.  "  I  kenna  what 


woman  could  close  her  heart,"  she  said 
to  herself,  with  a  little  sob,  in  her 
ignorance  and  innocence.  "  Oh,  if  she's 
only  worthy!"  but,  for  all  that,  the 
mother's  heart  was  heavy  within  her, 
though  she  could  not  have  told  why. 

The  letter  was  finished  and  sealed  up 
before  Colin  joined  his  friend  on  the 
hillside,  where  Lauderdale  was  straying 
about  with  his  hands  in  his  pockets, 
breathing  long  sighs  into  the  fresh  air, 
and  unable  to  restrain,  or  account  for, 
his  own  restlessness  and  uneasiness. 
One  of  those  great  dramas  of  sunshine 
and  shadow,  which  were  familiar  to  the 
Holy  Loch,  was  going  on  just  then 
among  the  hills,  and  the  philosopher 
had  made  various  attempts  to  interest 
himself  in  those  wonderful  alternations 
of  gloom  and  light,  but  without  avail 
Nature,  which  is  so  full  of  interest 
when  the  heart  is  unoccupied,  dwindles 
and  grows  pale  in  presence  of  the  poorest 
human  creature  who  throws  a  shadow 
into  her  sunshine.  Not  all  those  won- 
derful gleams  of  light — not  all  those 
clouds,  driven  wildly  like  so  many 
gigantic  phantoms  into  the  solemn  hol- 
lows, could  touch  the  heart  of  the  man 
who  was  trembling  for  his  friend.  Lau>- 
derdale  roused  himself  up  when  Colin 
came  to  him,  and  met  him  cheerfully. 
"  So  you've  written  your  letter  ?"  he 
said,  "and  accepted  the  new  turn  in 
your  fortune]  I  thought  as  much,  by 
your  eye." 

"You  did  not  need  to  consult  my 
eye,"  said  Colin,  gaily.  "  I  said  as 
much.  But  I  must  walk  down  the  loch 
a  mile  or  two  to  meet  the  postman. 
Will  you  come  1  Let  us  take  the  good 
of  the  hills,"  said  the  youth,  with  his 
heart  running  over.  "  Who  can  tell 
when  we  may  be  here  again  together  ? 
I  like  this  autumn  weather,  with  its 
stormy  colours  ;  and  I  suppose  now  my 
fortune,  as  you  call  it,  will  lead  me  to  a 
flat  country — that  is,  for  a  year  or  two 
at  least." 

"Ay,"  said  Lauderdale,  with  a  kind 
of  groan  ;  "  that  is  how  the  world  ap- 
pears at  your  years.  Who  can  tell  when 
AVC  may  be  here  again  together  ?  Who 
can  tell,  laddie,  what  thoughts  may  be 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


413 


in  our  hearts  when  we  are  here  again  ? 
I  never  have  any  security  myself,  when 
I  leave  a  place,  that  I'll  ever  dare  to 
come  back,"  said  the  meditative  man. 
"  The  innocent  fields  might  have  a  cruel 
aspect,  as  if  God  had  cursed  them,  and, 
for  anything  I  know,  I  might  hate  the 
flowers  that  could  bloom,  and  the  sun 
that  could  shine,  and  had  no  heart  for 
my  trouble.  No  that  you  understand 
what  I'm  meaning,  but  that's  -the  way  it 
affects  a  man  like  me." 

"  What  are  you  thinking  of  1 "  cried 
Colin,  with  a  little  dismay;  "one  would 
fancy  you  saw  some  terrible  evil  ap- 
proaching. Of  course  the  future  is  un- 
certain, but  lam  not  particularly  alarmed 
by  anything  that  appears  to  me.  What 
are  you  thinking  of,  Lauderdale  1  Your 
own  career  1 " 

"Oh,  ay,  just  my  ain  career,"  said 
Lauderdale,  with  a  smile  ;  "  such  a 
career  to  make  a  work  about !  though 
I  am  just  as  content  as  most  men.  I 
mind  when  my  ain  spirit  was  whiles 
uplifted  as  yours  is,  laddie ;  it's  that 
that  makes  a  man  think.  It  comes 
natural  to  the  time  of  life,  like  the 
bright  eye  and  the  bloom  on  the  cheek," 
said  Colin's  friend ;  "  and  there's  no 
sentence  of  death  in  it  either,  if  you 
come  to  that,"  he  went  on  to  himself 
after  a  pause.  "  Life  holds  on — it  aye 
holds  on — a  hope  mair  or  less  makes 
little  count.  And  without  the  agony 
and  the  struggle,  never  man  that  was 
worth  calling  man  came  to  his  full 
stature."  All  this  Lauderdale  kept 
saying  to  himself  as  he  descended  the 
hillside,  leaping  here  and  there  over  a 
half-concealed  streamlet,  and  making  his 
way  through  the  withered  ferns  and  the 
long  tangled  streamers  of  the  bramble, 
which  caught  at  him  as  he  passed.  He 
was  not  so  skilful  in  overcoming  these 
obstacles  as  Colin,  who  was  to  the 
manner  born ;  and  he  got  a  little  out  of 
breath  as  he  followed  the  lad,  who, 
catching  his  monologue  by  intervals  in 
the  descent,  looked  at  the  melancholy 
philosopher  with  his  young  eyes,  which 
laughed,  and  did  not  understand. 

"  I  wonder  what  you  are  thinking  of," 
said  Colin.     "  Not  of  me,  certainly;  but 


I  see  you  are  afraid  of  something,  as  if 
I  were  going  to  encounter  a  great  danger. 
Lauderdale,"  said  the  lad,  stopping  and 
laying  his  head  on  his  friend's  arm  for 
one  confidential  moment,  "whatever 
danger  there  is,  I  Jiave  encountered  it. 
Don't  be  afraid  for  me." 

"  I  was  saying  nothing  about  you, 
callant, "  said  Lauderdale,  pettishly. 
"  Why  should  I  aye  be  thinking  of  you  ? 
A  man  "has  more  things  to  consider  in 
this  life  than  the  vagaries  of  a  slip  of  a 
laddie,  that  doesna  see  where  he's  bound 
for.  I'm  thinking  of  things  far  out  of 
your  way,"  said  the  philosopher ;  "  of 
disappointments  and  heart-breaks,  and 
a'  the  eclipses  that  are  invisible  to  com- 
mon e'en.  I've  seen  many  in  my  day. 
I've  seen  a  trifling  change  that  made  no 
difference  to  the  world  quench  a'  the 
light  and  a'  the  comfort  out  of  life. 
There's  more  things  in  heaven  or  earth 
than  were  ever  dreamt  of  at  your  years. 
And  whiles  a  man  wonders  how,  for 
very  pity,  God  can  stay  still  in  His 
heavens  and  look  on — " 

Colin  could  not  say  anything  to  the 
groan  with  which  his  friend  broke  off. 
He  was  troubled  and  puzzled,  and  could 
not  make  it  ouf  TJiey  went  on  together 
along  the  white  line  of  road,  on  which, 
far  off  in  the  distance,  the  youth  already 
saw  the  postman  whom  he  was  hasten- 
ing to  meet ;  and,  busy  as  he  was  with 
his  own  thoughts,  Colin  had  already 
forgotten  to  inquire  what  his  companion 
referred  to,  when  his  attention,  which 
had  wandered  completely  away  from 
this  perplexing  tale,  was  suddenly  re- 
called again  by  the  voice  at  his  side. 

"  I'm  speaking  like  a  man  that  cannot 
see  the  end,"  said  Lauderdale,  "which 
is  clear  to  Him,  if  there's  any  meaning 
in  life.  You're  for  taking  your  chance 
and  posting  your  letter,  laddie  1  and  you 
ken  nothing  about  any  nonsense  that  an 
old  fool  like  me  may  be  maundering  ? 
For  one  thing,  there's  aye  plenty  to 
divert  the  mind  in  this  country,"  said 
the  philosopher,  with  a  sigh,  and  stood 
still  at  the  foot  of  the  long  slope  they 
had  just  descended,  looking  with  a 
wistful  abstract  look  upon  the  loch  and 
the  hills;  at  which  change  of  mood 


414 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


Colin  could  not  restrain  himself,  but 
with  ready  boyish  mirth  laughed  aloud. 

"What  has  this  country  to  do  with 
it  all  1  You  are  in  a  very  queer  mood  to- 
day, Lauderdale — one  moment  as  solemn 
and  mysterious  as  if  you  knew  of  some 
great  calamity,  and  the  next  talking  of 
the  country.  What  do  you  mean  I  won- 
der?" said  the  lad.  His  wonder  was  not 
very  deep,  but  stirred  lightly  in  the  heart 
which  was  full  of  so  many  wishes  and 
ambitions  of  its  own.  With  that  letter 
in  his  hand,  and  that  new  life  before 
him,  how  could  he  help  but  look  at  the 
lonely  man  by  his  side  with  a  half- 
divine  compassion  ? — a  man  to  whom 
life  offered  no  prizes,  and  scarcely  any 
hopes.  He  was  aware  in  his  heart  that 
Lauderdale  was  anxious  about  himself, 
and  the  thought  of  that  unnecessary 
solicitude  moved  Colin  half  to  laughter. 
Poor  Lauderdale — upon  whom  he  looked 
down  from  the  elevation  of  his  young 
life  with  the  tenderest  pity  ! ,  He  smiled 
upon  his  friend  in  his  exaltation  and 
superiority.  "  You  are  more  inexplicable 
than  usual  to-day.  I  wonder  what  you 
mean1? "  said  Colin,  with  all  the  sunshine 
of  youth  and  ^oy,  defying  evil  fore- 
bodings in  his  eyes.  ,; 

"  It  would  take  a  wise  man  to  tell," 
said  Lauderdale  ;  "  I  would  not  pretend, 
for  my  own  part,  to  fathom  what  any 
fool  might  mean — much  less  what  I 
mean  myself,  that  have  glimmerings  of 
sense  at  times.  Yon  sunshine's  awfu' 
prying  about  the  hills.  Light's  aye 
inquisitive,  and  would  fain  be  at  the 
bottom  of  every  mystery,  which  is,  may- 
be, the  reason,"  said  the  speculative 
observer,  "  why  there's  nae  grandeur  to 
speak  of,  nor  meaning,  according  to 
mortal  notions,  without  clouds  and 
darkness.  Yonder's  your  postman,  cal- 
lant.  Give  him  the  letter  and  be  done 
with  it.  I  whiles  find  myself  wonder- 
ing how  it  is  that  we  take  so  little 
thought  to  God's  meanings — what  ye 
might  call  His  lighter  meanings — His 
easy  verses  and  such-like,  that  are  thrown 
about  the  world,  in  the  winds  and  the 
sky.  To  be  sure,  I  ken  just  as  well  as 
you  do  that  it's  currents  of  air,  and 
masses  of  vapour  and  electricity,  and  all 


the  rest  of  it.  It's  awfu'  easy  learning 
the  words,  but  will  you  tell  me  there's 
no  meaning  to  a  man's  heart  and  soul  in 
the  like  of  that  ? "  said  Colin's  com- 
panion stopping  suddenly  with  a  sigh 
of  impatience  and  vexation,  which  had 
to  do  with  something  more  vital  than, 
the  clouds.  Just  then,  nature  truly 
seemed  to  have  come  to  a  pause,  and  to 
be  standing  still,  like  themselves,  looking 
on.  The  sky  that  was  so  blue  and  broad 
a  moment  since  had  contracted  to  a 
black  vault  over  the  Holy  Loch.  Black- 
ness that  was  positive  and  not  a  mere 
negative  frowned  out  of  all  the  half- 
disclosed  mysterious  hollows  of  the  hills. 
The  leaves  that  remained  on  the  trees 
thrilled  with  a  spasmodic  shiver,  and 
the  little  ripples  came  crowding  up  on 
the  beach  with  a  sighing  suppressed 
moan  of  suspense  and  apprehension. 
So,  at  least,  it  seemed  to  one  if  not  both 
of  the  spectators  standing  by. 

"  It  means  a  thunderstorm,  in  the  first 
place,"  said  Colin  ;  "  look  how  it  begins 
to  come  down  in  a  torrent  of  gloom  over 
Loch  Goil.  We  have  just  time  to  get 
under  shelter.  It  is  very  well  for  us 
we  are  so  near  Eamore." 

"Ay — "  said  Lauderdale.  He  re- 
peated the  syllable  over  again  and  again 
as  they  hurried  back.  "  But  the  time 
will  come,  when  we'll  no  be  near  Ea- 
more," he  said  to  himself  as  the  storm 
reached  him  and  dashed  in  his  face  not 
twenty  yards  from  the  open  door.  Colin's 
laugh,  as  he  reached  with  a  bound  the 
kindly  portal,  was  all  the  answer  which 
youth  and  hope  gave  to  experience.  The 
boy  was  not  to  be  discouraged  on  that 
sweet  threshold  of  his  life. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

WODENSBOURNE  was  as  different  from 
any  house  that  Colin  had  ever  seen  be- 
fore, as  the  low  flat  country,  rich  and 
damp  and  monotonous,  was  unlike  the 
infinitely  varied  landscape  to  which  his 
eye  had  been  accustomed  all  his  life. 
The  florid  upholstery  of  Ardmartin  con- 
trasted almost  strangely  with  the  sober 
magnificence  of  the  old  family-house  in 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


415 


which,  the  Franklands  had  lived  and  died 
for  generations,  as  did  the  simple  little 
rooms  to  which  Colin  had  been  accus* 
tomed  in  his  father's  house.  Perhaps, 
on  the  whole,  Eamore,  where  everything 
was  for  use  and  nothing  for  show,  was 
less  unhannonious  with  all  he  saw  about 
hitn  than  the  equipments  of  the  bran 
new  castle,  all  built  out  of  new  money, 
and  gilded  and  lackered  to  a  climax  of 
domestic  finery.  Colin's  pupil  was  the  in- 
valid of  the  family  ;  a  boy  of  twelve,  who 
could  not  go  to  Eton  like  his  brothers, 
but  whom  the  good-natured  baronet 
thought,  as  was  natural,  the  cleverest  of 
his  family. — "  That's  why  I  wanted  you 
so  much,  Campbell,"  Sir  Thomas  said, 
by  way  of  setting  Colin  at  ease  in  his 
new  occupation ;  "  he's  not  a  boy  to  be 
kept  to  classics  isn't  Charley — there's 
nothing  that  boy  wouldn't  master — and 
shut  up,  as  he  has  to  be,  with  his 
wretched  health,  he  wants  a  little 
variety.  I've  always  heard  you  took  a 
wider  range  in  Scotland  ;  that's  what  I 
want  for  my  boy."  It  was  with  this 
that  the  new  tutor  was  introduced  to  his 
duties  at  Wodensbourne.  But  a  terrible 
disappointment  awaited  the  young  man, 
a  disappointment  utterly  unforeseen. 
There  was  nobody  there  but  Sir  Thomas 
himself,  and  Charley,  and  some  little 
ones  still  in  the  nursery.  "  We're  all  by 
ourselves,  but  you  won't  mind,"  said  the 
baronet,  who  seemed  to  think  it  all  the 
better  for  Colin;  "my  lady  and  Miss 
Matty  will  be  home  before  Christmas, 
and  you  can  get  yourself  settled  comfort- 
ably in  the  meantime.  Lady  Frankland 
is  with  her  sister,  who  is  in  very  bad 
health.  I  don't  know  what  people 
mean  by  getting  into  bad  health — 
women,  too,  that  can't  go  in  for  free 
living  and  that  sort  of  thing,"  said 
Sir  Thomas.  "  The  place  looks  dreary 
without  the  ladies,  but  they'll  be  back 
before  Christmas,"  and  he  went  to  sleep 
after  dinner  as  usual,  and  left  the  young 
tutor  at  the  other  side  of  the  table 
sitting  in  a  kind  of  stupified  amazement 
and  mortification  in  the  silence,  wonder- 
ing what  he  came  here  for,  and  where 
his  hopes  and  brilliant  auguries  had  gone 
to.  Perhaps  Colin  did  not  know  what 


he  himself  meant  when  he  accepted 
Sir  Thomas  Frankland's  proposal.  He 
thought  he  was  coming  to  live  in  Matty's 
society,  to  be  her  companion,  to  walk 
with  her  and  talk  with  her,  as  he  had 
done  at  Ardmartin  ;  but,  when  he  arrived 
to  find  Wodensbourne  deserted,  with 
nothing  to  be  seen  but  Sir  Thomas  and 
a  nursery  governess,  who  sometimes 
emerged  with  her  little  pupils  from  the 
unknown  regions  upstairs  and  was  very 
civil  to  the  new  tutor,  Colin's  disappoint- 
ment was  overwhelming.  He  despised 
himself  with  a  bitterness  only  to  be 
equalled  by  the  brilliancy  of  those  vain 
expectations  over  which  he  laughed  in 
youthful  rage  and  scorn.  It  was  not  to 
be  Matty's  companion  he  had  come  ;  it 
was  not  to  see,  however  far  oft',  any  por- 
tion of  the  great  world  which  he  could 
not  help  imagining  sometimes  must  be 
visible  from  such  an  elevation.  It  was 
only  to  train  Charley's  precocious  in- 
tellect, and  amuse  the  baronet  a  little  at 
dinner.  After  dinner  Sir  Thomas  went 
to  sleep,  and  even  Charley  was  out  of 
the  way,  and  the  short  winter  days 
closed  down  early  over  the  great  house, 
on  the  damp  woods  and  silent  park, 
which  kept  repeating  themselves,  day  by 
day,  upon  Colin's  wearied  brain.  There 
was  not  even  an  undulation  within  sight, 
nothing  higher  than  the  dull  line  of 
trees,  which  after  a  while  it  made  him 
sick  to  look  at.  To  be  sure,  the  sun- 
shine now  and  then  caught  upon  the 
lofty  lantern  of  Earie  Cathedral,  and  by 
that  means  woke  up  a  gleam  of  light  on 
the  flat  country ;  but  that,  and  the  daily 
conflict  with  Charley's  sharp  invalid  un- 
derstanding, and  the  sight  of  Sir  Thomas 
sleeping  after  dinner,  conveyed  no  exhila- 
ration to  speak  of  to  lighten  the  dismal 
revulsion  of  poor  Colin's  thoughts.  His 
heart  ro'se  indignant  sometimes  ;  which 
did  him  more  good.  This  was  the  gulf  of 
dismay  he  tumbled  into  without  defence 
or  preparation  after  the  burst  of  hope 
and  foolish  youthful  delight  with  which 
he  left  Eamore. 

As  for  the  society  at  Wodensbourne, 
it  was  at  the  present  moment  of  the 
most  limited  description.  Colin,  who 
was  inexperienced,  roused  up  out  of  his 


416 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


dullness  a  little  when  he  heard  that 
two  of  the  canons  of  Earie  were  coming 
to  dinner  one  evening.  The  innocent 
Scotch  lad  woke  himself  up,  with  a 
Kttle  curiosity  about  the  clerical  digni- 
taries, of  whom  he  knew  nothing,  and 
a  good  deal  of  anxiety  to  comport  him- 
self as  became  the  representative  of  a 
Scotch  University,  about  whom  he  did 
not  doubt  the  visitors  would  be  a  little 
curious.  It  struck  Colin  with  the 
oddest  surprise  and  disappointment,  to 
find  that  the  canons  of  Earie  were 
perfectly  indifferent  about  the  Scotch 
student.  The  curate  of  the  parish, 
indeed,  who  was  also  dining  at  Wodens- 
bourne  that  day,  was  wonderfully  civil 
to  the  new  tutor.  He  told  him  that  he 
understood  the' Scotch  mountains  were 
very  near  as  fine  as  Switzerland,  and 
that  he  hoped  to  see  them  some  day, 
though  the  curious  prejudices  about 
Sunday  and  the  whisky-drinking  must 
come  very  much  in  the  way  of  closer 
intercourse ;  at  which  speech  Colin's 
indignation  and  amusement  would  have 
been  wonderful  to  see,  had  any  one 
been  there  who  cared  to  notice  how  the 
lad  was  looking.  On  the  Sundays, 
Colin  and  his  pupil  went  along  the 
level  ways  to  the  quaint  old  mossy 
church,  to  which  this  same  curate  was 
devoting  all  his  time  and  thoughts  by 
way  of  restoration.  The  Scotch  youth 
had  never  seen  anything  at  once  so 
homely  and  so  noble  as  this  little 
church  in  the  fen-country.  He  thought 
it  nothing  less  than  a  poem  in  stone, 
a  pathetic  old  psalm  of  human  life  and 
death,  uttering  itself  for  ever  and  ever, 
in  the  tenderest,  sad  responses,  to  the 
worship  of  heaven.  Never  anywhere 
had  he  felt  so  clearly  how  the  dead 
were  waiting  for  the  great  Easter  to 
come,  nor  seen  Christianity  standing 
so  plainly  between  the  two  comings ; 
but  when  Colin,  with  his  Scotch^  ideas, 
heard  the  curious  little  sermons  to 
which  his  curate  gave  utterance  under 
that  roof,  all  consecrated  and  holy  with 
the  sorrows  and  hopes  of  ages,  it  made 
the  strangest  anti-climax  in  the  youth's 
thoughts.  He  laughed  to  himself  when 
lie  came  out,  not  because  he  was  dis- 


posed to  laughter,  but  because  it  was 
the  only  alternative  he  had;  and  Sir 
Thomas,  who  had  a  glimmering  per- 
ception that  this  must  be  something 
new  to  his  inexperienced  guest,  gave  a 
doubtful  sort  of  smile,  not  knowing 
how  to  take  Colin's  strange  looks. 

"You  don't  believe  in  saints'  days, 
and  such  like,  in  Scotland  ? "  said  the 
perplexed  baronet ;  "  and  of  course  the 
sermon  does  not  count  for  so  much 
with  us." 

"  JS"o,"  said  Colin  ;  and  they  did  not 
enter  further  into  the  subject. 

As  for  the  young  man  himself,  who 
had  still  upon  his  mind  the  feeling  that 
he  was  to  be  a  Scotch  minister,  the 
lesson  was  the  strangest  possible  ;  for, 
being  Scotch,  he  could  not  help  listening 
to  the  sermon  according  to  the  usage  of 
his  nation.  The  curate,  after  he  had 
said  those  passages  which  are  all  but 
divine  in  their  comprehension  of  the 
wants  of  humanity,  told  his  people  how 
wonderfully  their  beloved  Church  had 
provided  for  all  their  wants  ;  how  sweet 
it  was  to  recollect  that  this  was  the 
day  which  had  been  appointed  the 
Twentieth  Sunday  after  Trinity,  and 
how  it  was  their  duty  to  meditate  a 
fact  so  touching  and  so  important. 
Colin  thought  of  the  Holy  Loch,  and 
the  minister's  critics  there,  and  laughed 
to  himself,  perhaps  a  little  bitterly. 
He  felt  as  if  he  had  given  up  his  own 
career — the  natural  life  to  which  he  was 
born — and  at  this  distance  the  usual 
enchantments  of  nature  began  to  work, 
and  in  his  heart  he  asked  himself  what 
he  was  to  gain  by  transferring  his  heart 
and  hopes  to  this  wealthier  country, 
where  so  many  things  were  fairer,  and 
after  which  he  had  been  hankering  so 
long.  The  curate's  sermons  struck  him 
as  a  kind  of  comical  climax  to  his  dis- 
appointments— the  curate  who  looked 
at  himself  much  as  he  might  have 
looked  at  a  South-Sea  Islander,  and 
spoke  of  the  Scotch  whisky  and  Scotch 
Sabbaths.  Poor  curate  !  He  knew  a 
great  deal  more  than  Colin  did  about 
some  things,  and,  if  he  did  not  under- 
stand how  to  preach,  that  was  not  the 
fault  of  his  college;  neither  did  they 


A  Son  of  the  Soil 


417 


convey  much  information  at  that  seat 
of  learning  about  the  northern  half  of 
the  British  island — no  more  than  they 
did  at  Glasgow  about  the  curious  speci- 
men of  humanity  which  is  known  as 
a  curate  on  the  brighter  side  of  the 
Tweed. 

All  these  things  went  through  Colin's 
mind  as  he  sat  in  the  dining-room  after 
dinner  contemplating  Sir  Thomas's  nap, 
which  was  not  of  itself  an  elevating 
spectacle.  He  thought  to  himself  at 
that  moment  that  he  was  but  fulfilling 
the  office  of  a  drudge  at  Wodensbourne, 
which  anybody  could  fill.  It  did  not 
require  those  abilities  which  had  won 
with  acclamation  the  prize  in  the  philo- 
sophy class  to  teach  Charley  Frankland 
the  elements  of  science ;  and  all  the 
emulations  and  glories  of  his  college 
career  came  back  to  Colin's  mind.  The 
little  public  of  the  University  had  begun 
to  think  of  him — to  predict  what  he 
would  do,  and  anticipate  his  success  at 
home;  but  here,  who  knew  anything 
about  him?  All  these  thoughts  came 
to  rapid  conclusions  as  the  young  man 
sat  watching  the  fire  gleam  in  the 
wainscot,  and  calculating  the  recurrence 
of  that  next  great  snore  which  would 
•wake  Sir  Thomas,  and  make  him  sit 
up  of  a  sudden  and  look  fiercely  at  his 
companion  before  he  murmured  out  a 
"  Beg  your  pardon,"  and  went  to  sleep 
again.  Not  an  interesting  prospect 
certainly.  Should  he  go  home  ?  should 
he  represent  to  the  baronet,  when  he 
woke  up  for  the  night,  that  it  had  all 
been  a  mistake,  and  that  his  present 
office  was  perfectly  unsuited  to  his  am- 
bition and  his  hopes?  But  then  what 
could  he  say?  for  after  all  it  was  as 
Charley  Frankland's  tutor  simply,  and 
•with  his  eyes  open,  that  he  came  to 
Wodensbourne,  and  Sir  Thomas  had 
said  nothing  about  the  society  of  his 
niece,  or  any  other  society,  to  tempt 
him  thither.  Colin  sat  in  a  bitterness 
of  discontent,  which  would  have  been 
incredible  to  him  a  few  weeks  before, 
pondering  these  questions.  There  was 
not  a  sound  to  be  heard,  but  the 
dropping  of  the  ashes  on  the  hearth, 
and  Sir  Thomas's  heavy  breathing  as 

Ko.  53. — VOL.  ix, 


he  slept.  Life  went  on  velvet  slippers 
in  the  great  house  from  which  Colia 
would  gladly  have  escaped  (he  thought) 
to  the  poorest  cottage  on  the  Holy 
Loch.  He  could  not  help  recalling  his 
shabby  little  room  in  Glasgow,  and 
Lauderdale's  long  comments  upon  life, 
and  all  the  talk  and  the  thotights  that 
made  existence  bright  in  that  miserable 
little  place,  which  Sir  Thomas  Frank- 
land's  grooms  would  not  have  conde- 
scended to  live  in,  but  which  the 
unfortunate  young  tutor  thought  of 
with  longing  as  he  sat  dreary  in  the 
great  dining-room.  What  did  it  matter 
to  him  that  the  floor  was  soft  witk 
Turkey  carpets,  that  the  wine  on  the 
table  was  of  the  most  renowned  vin- 
tages, and  that  his  slumbering  companion 
in  the  great  easy-chair  was  the  head  of 
one  of  the  oldest  commoner  families 
in  England — a  baronet  and  a  county 
member  ?  Colin  after  all  was  only  a 
son  of  the  soil ;  he  longed  for  his 
Glasgow  attic,  and  his  companions  who 
spoke  the  dialect  of  that  remarkable 
but  unlovely  city,  and  felt  bitterly  in 
his  heart  that  he  had  been  cheated. 
Yet  it  was  hard  to  say  to  any  one — 
hard  even  to  put  in  words  to  himself — 
what  the  cheat  was.  It  was  a  decep- 
tion he  had  practised  on  himself,  and 
in  the  bitterness  of  his  disappointment 
the  youth  refused  to  say  to  himself  that 
anybody's  absence  was  the  secret  of  his 
mortification.  What  was  she  to  him-? 
— a  great  lady  as  far  out  of  his  reach  as 
the  moon  or  the  stars,  and  who  EK> 
doubt  had  forgotten  his  very  name. 

These  were  not  pleasant  thoughts  to 
season  the  solitude  ;  and  he  sat  hugging 
them  for  a  great  many  evenings  before 
Sir  Thomas  awoke,  and  addressed,  as 
he  generally  did,  a  few  good-humoured, 
stupid  observations  to  the  lad  whom,  to- 
be  sure,  the  baronet  found  a  consider- 
able bore,  and  did  not  know  what  to  do 
with.  Sir  Thomas  could  not  forget  his 
obligations  to  the  young  man  who  saved 
Harry's  life ;  and  thus  it  was,  from  pure 
gratitude,  that  he  made  Colin  miserable 
— though  there  was  no  gratitude  at  all, 
nor  even  much  respect,  in  the  summary 
judgment  which  the  youth  formed  o£ 

E  E 


418 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


the  heavy  'squire.     This  was  how  mat- 
ters were  going  on  when  Wodensbourne 
and  the  world,  and  everything  human, 
suddenly,  all  at  once,  sustained  again  a 
change   to  Colin.     He  had  been  thus, 
for  six  weary  weeks — during  which  time 
he  felt  himself  getting  morose,  ill-tem- 
pered,   and    miserable — writing    sharp 
letters  home,  in  which  he  would  not 
confess  to  any  special  disappointment, 
but  expressed  himself  in  general  terms 
of  bitterness  like  a  young  misanthrope, 
and  in  every  respect  making  himself, 
and  those  who  cared  for  him,  unhappy. 
Even  the  verses,  which  did  very  well  to 
express  the  tender  griefs  of  sentiment, 
had  been  thrown  aside  at  this  crisis  ; 
for  there  was  nothing  melodious  in  his 
feelings,  and  he  could  not  say  in  sweet 
rhymes  and  musical  cadences  how  angry 
and  wretched  he  was.      He    was   sit- 
ting so  one  dreary  December  evening 
when  it  was  raining  fast   outside  and 
everything   was  silent  within — as  was 
natural   in  a  well-regulated   household 
where  the   servants   knew  their   duty, 
and  the  nursery  was  half  a  mile  away 
through  worlds  of  complicated  passages. 
Sir  Thomas  was  asleep  as  usual,  and, 
with  his  eyes  shut  and  his  mouth  open, 
the  excellent   baronet  was  not,  as  we 
have   already  said,   an   elevating   spec- 
tacle ;   and,  at   the   other   end  of  the 
table,  sat  Colin,  chafing  out  his  young 
.soul  with  such  thoughts  of  what  was 
not,  but  might  have  been,  as  youth  does 
not  know  how  to  avoid.     It  was  just 
then,  when  he  was  going  over  nis  long 
succession  of  miseries — and  thinking  of 
his  natural   career   cut   short   for  this 
dreary  penance  of  which  nothing  could 
ever  come — that  Colin  was  startled  by 
the  sound   of  wheels   coming  up   the 
wintry  avenue.     He  could  not  venture 
to  imagine  to  himself  what  it  might  be, 
though  he  listened  as  if  for  life  and 
death,   and  heard    the    sounds   of  an 
arrival  and  the  indistinct  hum  of  voices 
which  he  could  not  distinguish,  without 
feeling  that  he  had  any  right  to  stir 
from    the    table    to    inquire    what   it 
meant ;   and  there  he  sat  accordingly, 
with  his  hair  thrust  back  from  his  fore- 
.head  and  his  great  eyes  gleaming  out 


from   the   noiseless   atmosphere,    when 
the  door  opened  and  a  pretty  figure,  all 
eager  and  glowing  with  life,  looked  into 
the    room.     Colin  was  too   much   ab- 
sorbed, too  anxious,  and  felt  too  deeply 
how  much  was  involved  for  himself  to 
be  capable  even  of  rising  up  to  greet 
her  as  an  indifferent  man  would  have 
done.     He  sat  and  gazed  at  her  as  she 
darted  in  like  a  fairy  creature,  bringing 
every  kind  of  radiance   in  her  train. 
"  Here  they  are,  aunty  ! "   cried   Miss 
Matty  ;  and  she  came  in  flying  in  her 
cloak,  with  the  hood  still  over  her  head 
and  great   raindrops  on  it,  which   she 
had  caught  as  she  jumped  out  of  the 
carriage.     While   Colin   sat  gazing   at 
her,  wondering  if  it  was  some  deluding 
apparition,  or,  in  reality,  the  new  reve- 
lation of  life^ind  love  that  it  seemed  to 
be,  Matty  had  thrown  herself  upon  Sir 
Thomas  and  woke  the  worthy  baronet 
by   kissing  him,   which  was   a  pretty 
sight  to  behold.     "  Here  we  are,  uncle  ; 
wake  up !  "  cried  Matty  ;  "  my  lady  ran 
to  the  nursery  first,  but  I  came  to  you, 
as  I  [always  do."     And  the  little  witch 
looked  up  with  a  gleam  at  Colin,  under 
which  heaven  and  earth  changed  to  the 
lad.     He  stumbled  to  his  feet,  while 
Sir  Thomas  rubbed  his  astonished  eyes. 
What  could  Colin  say  1    He  stood  wait- 
ing for  a  word,  seeing  the  little  figure 
in  a  halo  of  light  and  fanciful  glory. 
"  How  do  you  do  ?     I  knew  you  were 
here,"  said  Miss  Matty,  putting  out  two 
fingers  to  him  while  she  still  hung  over 
her  uncle.     And  presently  Lady  Frank- 
land  came  in,  and  the  room  became  full 
of  pleasant  din  and  commotion  as  was 
inevitable.     When  Colin  made  a  move 
as  if  to  leave  them,  fearful  of  being  in 
the  way,  as  the  sensitive  lad  naturally 
was,  Miss  Matty  called  to  him,  "Oh, 
don't  go,  please  ;  we  are  going  to  have 
tea,  and  my  lady  must  be  served  with- 
out giving  her  any  trouble,  and  I  want 
you  to  .help  me,"  said  Matty ;  and  so 
the  evening  that  had  begun  in  gloom 
ended  in  a  kind  of  subdued  glory  too 
sweet  to  be  real.     Lady  Frankland  sat 
talking  to  her  husband  of  their  reason 
for  coming   back  so   suddenly  (which 
was  sad  enough,  being  an  unexpected 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


death,  in  the  house :  but  that  did  not 
make  much  difference  to  the  two  women 
who  were  coming  home) ;  Matty  kept 
coming  and  going  between  the  tea-table 
and  the  fire,  sending  Colin  on  all  sorts 
of  errands,  and  making  comments  to 
him  aside  on  what  her  aunt  was  saying. 
"  Only  fancy  the  long  dreary  drive  we 
have  had,  and  my  uncle  and  Mr.  Camp- 
bell making  themselves  so  cozy,"  the 
little  syren  said,  kneeling  down  before 
the  fire  with  still  one  drop  of  rain 
sparkling  on  her  bright  locks.  And  the 
effect  was  such  that  Colin  lost  himself 
altogether,  and  could  not  have  affirmed, 
had  he  been  questioned  on  his  oath,  that 
he  had  not  enjoyed  himself  greatly  all 
the  evening.  He  took  Lady  Frankland 
her  tea,  and  listened  to  all  the  domestic 
chatter  as  if  it  had  been  the  talk  of 
angels  ;  and  was  as  pleased  when  the 
mistress  of  the  house  thanked  him  for 
his  kindness  to  Charley,  as  if  he  had 
not  thought  Charley  a  wretched  little 
nuisance  a  few  hours  ago.  He  did  not 
in  the  least  know  who  the  people  were 
"about  whom  the  two  ladies  kept  up 
such  an  unceasing  talk,  and,  perhaps, 
under  other  circumstances  would  have 
laughed  at  this  sweet-coined  gossip,  with 
all  its  lively  comments  upon  nothing 
and  incessant  personalities ;  but,  at  the 
present  moment,  Colin  had  said  good- 
bye to  reason,  and  could  not  anyhow 
defend  himself  against  the  sudden  happi- 
ness which  seized  upon  him  without  any 
notice.  While  Sir  Thomas  and  his  wife 
sat  on  either  side  of  the  great  fire,  and 
Matty  kept  'darting  in  and  out  between 
them,  Colin  sat  behind  near  the  im- 
promptu tea-table,  and  listened  and  felt 
that  the  world  was  changed.  If  he 
could  have  had  time  to  think,  he  might 
have  been  ashamed  of  himself,  but  then 
he  had  no  time  to  think,  and  in  the 
meantime  he  was  happy,  a  sensation  not 
to  be  gainsaid  or  rejected ;  and  so  fled 
the  few  blessed  hours  of  the  first  evening 
of  Matty's  return. 

When  he  had  gone  up  stairs,  and 
had  heard,  at  a  distance,  the  sound  of 
the  last  good-night,  and  was  fairly 
shut  up  again  in  the  silence  of  his 
own  room,  the  youth,  for  the  first 


time,  began  to  realize  what  he  was 
doing.  He  paused,  with  a  little  con- 
sternation, a  little  fright,  to  question 
himself.  For  the  first  time,  he  saw 
clearly,  without  any  possibility  of  self- 
delusion,  what  it  was  which  had  brought 
him  here,  and  which  made  all  the  dif- 
ference to  him  between  happiness  and 
misery.  It  was  hard  to  realize  now  the 
state  of  mind  he  had  been  in  a  few 
hours  before ;  but  he  did  it,  by  dint  of 
a  great  exertion,  and  saw,  with  a  dis- 
tinctness which  alarmed  him,  how  it 
was  that  everything  had  altered  in  his 
eyes.  It  was  Matty's  presence  that  made 
all  the  difference  between  this  subdued 
thrill  of  happiness  and  that  blank  of 
impatient  and  mortified  misery.  The 
young  man  tried  to  stand  still  and  con- 
sider the  reality  of  his  position.  He 
had  stopped  in  his  career,  arrested  him- 
self in  his  life  ;  entered  upon  a  species 
of  existence  which  he  felt  in  his  heart 
was  not  more,  but  less,  noble  (for  him) 
than  his  previous  course — and  what  was 
it  for  ?  All  for  the  uncertain  smile, 
for  the  society — which  might  fail  him 
any  time — of  a  woman  so  far  out  of  his 
way,  so  utterly  removed  from  his  reach, 
as  Matilda  Frankland  ]  For  a  moment, 
the  youth  was  dismayed,  and  stopped 
short,  Wisdom  and  Truth  whispering  in 
his  ear.  Love  might  be  fair,  but  he 
knew  enough  to  know  that  life  must 
not  be  subservient  to  that  witchery; 
and  Colin's  good  angel  spoke  to  him  in 
the  silence,  and  bade  him  flee.  Better 
to  go  back,  and  at  once,  to  the  grey  and 
sombre  world,  where  all  his  duties 
awaited  him,  than  to  stay  here  in  this 
fool's  paradise.  As  he  thought  so  he 
got  up,  and  began  to  pace  about  his 
room,  as  though  it  had  been  a  cage. 
Eest  to  flee — it  might  hide  all  the  light 
out]  of  his  life  and  break  his  heart,  but 
what  else  had  he  to  look  for  sooner  or 
later  1  He  sat  up  half  the  night,  still 
pacing  about  his  room,  hesitating  upon 
his  fate,  while  the  December  storm  raged 
outside.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  When 
he  dropped  to  sleep  at  last,  his  heart 
betrayed  him,  and  strayed  away  into 
celestial  worlds  of  dreaming.  He  woke, 
still  .undecided,  as  he  thought,  to  see  the 

E  E  2 


420 


A  Son  of  the  Soil 


earliest  wintry  gleam  of  sunshine  steal- 
ing in  through  his  shutters.  What  was 
he  to  do  ?  But  already  the  daylight  made 
him  feel  his  terrors  as  so  many  shadows. 
His  heart  was  a  traitor,  and  he  was  glad 
to  find  it  so,  and  the  moment  of  inde- 
cision settled  more  surely  than  ever  the 
"bondage  in  whieh  he  seemed  to  have 
entangled  his  life. 


CHAPTEE    XY. 

FROM  that  day  life  flew  upon  celestial 
wings  for  Charley  Frankland's  tutor. 
It  was  not  that  any  love-making  proved 
possible,  or  that  existence  at  Wodens- 
bourne  became  at  all  what  it  had  been 
at  Ardmartin.  The  difference  was  in  the 
atmosphere,  which  was  now  bright  with 
all  kinds  of  gladsome  charms,  and  per- 
vaded by  anticipations — a  charm  which, 
at  Colin's  age,  was  more  than  .reality. 
He  never  knew  what  moment  of  delight 
might  come  to  him  any  day — what 
words  might  be  said,  or  smiles  shed 
upon  him.  Such  an  enchantment  could 
not,  indeed,  have  lasted  very  long  ;  but, 
in  the  meantime,  was  infinitely  sweet, 
and  made  his  life  like  a  romance  to  the 
young  man.  There  was  nobody  at 
Wodensbourne  to  occupy  Miss  Matty, 
or  withdraw  her  attention  from  her 
young  worshipper  ;  and  Colin,  with  his 
poetic  temperament  and  his  youthful 
genius,  and  all  the  simplicities  and  in- 
experience which  rendered  him  so  dif- 
ferent from  the  other  clever  young  men 
who  had  been  seen  or  heard  of  in  that 
region,  was  very  delightful  company, 
even  when  he  was  not  engaged  in  any 
acts  of  worship.  Lady  Frankland  her- 
self acknowledged  that  Mr.  Campbell 
was  a  great  acquisition.  "  He  is  not  the 
least  like  other  people,"  said  the  lady 
of  the  house  ;  "  but  you  must  take  care 
not  to  let  him  fall  in  love  with  you, 
Matty ;"  and  both  the  ladies  laughed 
softly  as  they  sat  over  their  cup  of  tea. 
As  for  Matty,  when  she  went  to  dress 
for  dinner,  after  that  admonition,  she 
put  on  tartan  ribbons  over  her  white 
dress,  partly,  to  be  sure,  because  they 
were  in  the  fashion;  but  chiefly  to 


please  Colin,  who  knew  rather  less  aboui 
tartan  than  she  did,  and  had  not  the 
remotest  idea  that  the  many-coloured 
sash  had  any  reference  to  himself. 

"I  love  Scotland,"  the  little  witch 
said  to  him,  when  he  came  into  the 
drawing-room,  to  which  he  was  now 
admitted  during  Sir  Thomas's  nap — and, 
to  tell  the  truth,  Lady  Frankland  her- 
self had  just  closed  her  eyes  in  a  gentle 
doze,  in  her  easy  chair — "but,  though 
you  are  a  Scotchman,  you  don't  take  the 
least  notice  of  my  ribbons ;  I  am  very 
fond  of  Scotland,"  said  Matty; — "and 
the  Scotch,"  the  wicked  little  girl  added, 
with  a  glance  at  him,  which  made 
Colin's  heart  leap  in  his  deluded  breast. 

"  Then  I  am  very  glad  to  be  Scotch," 
said  the  youth,  and  stooped  down  ovei 
the  end  of  the  sash  till  Matty  thought 
he  meant  to  kiss  it,  which  was  a  more 
decided  act  of  homage  than  it  would  bo 
expedient,  under  the  circumstances,  to 
permit. 

"  Don't  talk  like  everybody  else,"  said 
Miss  Matty  ;  "  that  does  not  make  any 
difference — you  were  always  glad  to  be 
Scotch.  I  know  you  all  think  you  are 
so  much  better  and  cleverer  than  we  are 
in  England.  But,  tell  me,  do  you  still 
mean  to  be  a  Scotch  minister  1  I  wish 
you  would  not,"  said  Matty,  with  a 
little  pout.  And  then  Colin  laughed 
— half  with  pleasure  at  what  he  thought 
her  interest  in  him,  and  half  with  a 
sense  of  the  ludicrous  which  he  could 
not  restrain. 

"  I  don't  think  I  could  preach  about 
the  twentieth  Sunday  after  Trinity,"  he 
said  with  a  smile ;  which  was  a  speech 
Miss  Matty  did  not  understand. 

"  People  here  don't  preach  as  you  do 
in  Scotland,"  said  the  English  girl,  with 
a  little  offence.  "  You  are  always  preach- 
ing, and  that  is  what  renders  it  so  dull. 
But  what  is  the  good  of  being  a  minister] 
There  are  plenty  of  dull  people  to  be 
ministers — you  are  so  clever — ." 

"Am  I  clever  ?"  said  Colin.  "  I  am 
Charley's  tutor — it  does  not  require  a 
great  deal  of  genius — "  but  while  he 
spoke,  the  eyes — which  Matty  did  not 
compiehend,  which  always  went  leagues 
further  than  one  could  see — kindled  up 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


421 


a  little.  He  looked  a  long  way  past  her, 
and  no  doubt  he  saw  something ;  but  it 
piqued  her  a  little  not  to  be  able  to 
follow  him,  nor  to  search  out  what  he 
meant 

"  If  you  had  done  what  I  wished, 
and  gone  to  Oxford,  Campbell,"  said 
Sir  Thomas,  whose  repose  had  been 
interrupted  earlier  than  usual ;  "  I  can't 
say  much  about  what  I  could  have  done 
myself,  for  I  have  heaps  of  boys  of  my 
own  to  provide  for  ;  but,  if  you're  bent 
on  going  into  the  Church,  something 
would  certainly  have  turned  up  for  you. 
I  don't  say  there's  much  of  a  course  in 
the  Church  for  an  ambitious  young 
fellow,  but  still,  if  you  do  work  well 
and  have  a  few  friends — .  As  for  your 
Scotch  Church,  I  don't  know  very  much 
about  it,"  said  the  baronet,  candidly. 
"  I  never  knew  any  one  who  did.  What 
a  bore  it  used  to  be  a  dozen  years  ago, 
when  there  was  all  that  row  j  and  now, 
I  suppose,  you're  all  at  sixes  and  sevens, 
ain't  you  V  asked  the  ingenuous  legis- 
lator. "I  suppose  whisky  and  contro- 
versy go  together  somehow."  Sir  Thomas 
got  himself  perched  into  the  corner  of  a 
sofa  very  comfortably,  as  he  spoke,  and 
took  no  notice  of  the  lightning  in 
Colin's  eyes. 

"  Oh,  uncle !  don't,"  said  Miss  Matty ; 
"didn't  you  know  that  the  Presby- 
terians are  all  going  to  give  up  and  join 
the  Church  1  and  it's  all  to  be  the  sama 
both  in  England  and  Scotland?  You 
need  not  laugh.  I  assure  you  I  know 
quite  well  what  I  am  saying,"  said  the 
little  beauty,  with  a  look  of  dignity.  "  I 
have  seen  it  in  the  papers — such  funny 
papers  ! — with  little  paragraphs  about 
accidents,  and  about  people  getting  silver 
Bnuff  boxes  ! — but  all  the  same,  they  say 
what  I  tell  you.  There's  to  be  no  Pres- 
byterians and  no  precentors,  and  none  of 
their  wicked  ways,  coming  into  church 
with  their  hats  on,  and  staring  all  round 
instead  of  saying  their  prayers  ;  and  all 
the  ministers  are  to  be  made  into  cler- 
gymen— priests  and  deacons,  you  know ; 
and  they  are  going  to  have  bishops  and 
proper  service  like  other  people.  Mr. 
Campbell,"  said  Matty,  looking  up  at 
him  with  a  little  emphasis,  to  mark 


that,  for  once,  she  was  calling  him  for- 
mally by  his  name — "  knows  it  is  quite 
true." 

"Humph,"  said  Sir  Thomas.  "I 
know  better;  I  know  how  Campbell, 
there,  looked  the  other  day  when  he 
came  out  of  church.  I  know  the  Scotch 
and  their  ways  of  thinking.  Go  and 
make  the  tea,  and  don't  talk  of  what 
you  don't  understand.  But,  as  for  you, 
Campbell,  if  you  have  a  mind  for 
the  University  and  to  go  in  for  the 
Church—" 

But  this  was  more  than  Colin,  being 
twenty,  and  a  Scotchman,  could  bear. 

"  I  am  going  in  for  the  Church,"  said 
the  lad,  doing  all  he  could  to  keep  down 
the  excitement  at  which  Sir  Thomas 
would  have  laughed,  "  but  it  did  not  in 
the  least  touch  my  heart  the  other  day 
to  know  that  it  was  the  twentieth 
Sunday  after  Trinity.  Devotion  is  a 
great  matter,"  said  the  young  Scotch- 
man. "  I  grant  you  have  the  advantage 
over  us  there,  but  it  would  not  do  in 
Scotland  to  preach  about  the  Church's 
goodness,  and  what  she  had  appointed 
for  such  or  such  a  day.  We  preach 
very  stupid  sermons,  I  dare  say ;  but  at 
least  we  mean  to  teach  somebody  some- 
thing— what  God  looks  for  at  their 
hands,  or  what  they  may  look  for  at 
His.  It  is  more  an  occupation  for  a 
man,"  cried  the  young  revolutionary, 
"than  reading  the  sublimest  of  prayers. 
I  am  going  in  for  the  Church — but  it  is 
the  Church  of  Scotland,"  said  Colin. 
He  drew  himself  up  with  a  grand  youth- 
ful dignity,  which  was  much  lost  on 
Sir  Thomas,  who,  for  his  part,  looked 
at  his  new  tutor  with  eyes  of  sober 
wonderment,  and  did  not  understand 
what  this  emotion  meant. 

"  There  is  no  occasion  for  excitement," 
said  the  baronet ;  "  nobody  now-a-days 
meddles  with  a  man's  convictions  ;  in- 
deed, Harry  would  say,  it's  a  great  thing 
to  have  any  convictions.  That  is  how 
the  young  men  talk  now-a-days,"  said  Sir 
Thomas ;  and  he  moved  off  the  sofa 
again,  and  yawned,  though  not  uncivilly. 
As  for  Miss  Matty,  she  came  stealing 
up  when  she  had  made  the  tea,  with 
her  cup  in  her  hand. 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


"  So  you  do  mean  4o  be  a  minister  ? " 
she  said,  in  a  half  whisper,  with  a  depre- 
cating look.  Lady  Frankland  had  roused 
up,  like  her  husband,  and  the  two  were 
talking,  and  did  not  take  any  notice  of 
Matty's  proceedings  with  the  harmless 
tutor.  .The  young  lady  was  quite  free 
to  play  with  her  mouse  a  little,  and 
entered  upon  the  amusement  with  zest, 
as  was  natural.  "You  mean  to  shut 
yourself  up  in  a  square  house,  with  five 
windows,  like  the  poor  gentleman  who 
has  such  red  hair,  and  never  see  anybody 
but  the  old  women  in  the  parish,  and 
nave  your  life  made  miserable  every 
Sunday  by  that  precentor." 

"  I  hope  I  have  a  soul  above  precen- 
tors," said  Colin,  with  a  little  laugh, 
which  was  unsteady  still,  however,  with 
a  little  excitement;  "and  one  might 
mend  all  that,"  he  added  a  minute  after, 
looking  at  her  with  a  kind  of  wistful 
inquiry  which  he  could  not  have  put 
into  words.  What  was  it  he  meant  to 
ask  with  his  anxious  eye  ?  But  he  did 
not  himself  know. 

"  Oh  yes/'  said  Matty,  "  I  know  what 
you  would  do  :  you  would  marry  some- 
body who  was  musical,  and  get  a  little 
organ  and  teach  the  people  better;  I 
know  exactly  what  you  would  do,"  said 
the  young  lady  with  a  piquant  little  touch 
of  spite,  and  a  look  that  startled  Colin ; 
and  then  she  paused,  and  hung  her  head 
for  a  moment  and  blushed,  or  looked  as 
if  she  blushed.  "  But  you  would  not  ? ;' 
said  Matty,  softly,  with  a  sidelong  glance 
at  her  victim.  "  Don't  marry  anybody  ; 
no  one  is  any  good  after  that.  I  don't 
approve  of  marrying,  for  my  part,  espe- 
cially for  a  priest.  Priests  should  always 
be  detached,  you  know,  from  the  world." 

"  Why  ? "  said  Colin.  He  was  quite 
content  to  go  on  talking  on  such  a  sub- 
ject for  any  length  of  time.  "As  for 
marrying,  it  is  only  your  rich  squires 
and  great  people  who  can  marry  when 
they  please  ;  we  who  have  to  make  our 
own  way  in  the  world — "  said  the  young 
man,  with  a  touch  of  grandeur,  but 
was  stopped  by  Miss  Matty's  sudden 
laughter. 

"  Oh,  how  simple  you  are  !  As  if  rich 
squires  and  great  people,  as  you  say, 


could  marry  when  they  pleased — as  if 
any  man  could  marry  when  he  pleased  1 " 
cried  Miss  Matty,  scornfully.  "  After  all, 
we  do  count  for  something,  we  poor 
Avomen  ;  now  and  then,  we  can  put  even, 
an  eldest  son  out  in  his  calculations.  It 
is  great  fun  too,"  said  the  young  lady, 
and  she  laughed,  and  so  did  Colin,  who 
could  not  help  wondering  what  special 
case  she  might  have  in  her  eye,  and 
listened  with  all  the  eagerness  of  a  lover. 
"  There  is  poor  Harry — "  said  Miss 
Matty  under  her  breath,  and  stopped 
short  and  laughed  to  herself  and  sipped 
her  tea,  while  Colin  lent  an  anxious 
ear.  But  nothing  further  followed  that 
soft  laughter.  Colin  sat  on  thorns, 
gazing  at  her  with  a  world  of  questions 
in  his  face,  but  the  siren  looked  at  him 
no  more.  Poor  Harry  ! ,  Harry's  natural 
rival  was  sensible  of  a  thrill  of  jealous 
curiosity  mingled  with  anxiety.  What 
had  she  done  to  Harry? — this  witch 
who  had  beguiled  Colin — or  was  it,  not 
she  who  had  done  anything  to  him,  but 
some  other  as  pretty  and  as  mischievous  ? 
Colin  had  no  clue  to  the  puzzle,  but  it 
gave  him  a  new  access  of  half-conscious 
enmity  to  the  heir  of  Wodensbourne. 

After  that  talk  there  elapsed  a  few 
days  during  which  Colin  saw  but  little 
of  Matty,  who  had  visits  to  pay,  and 
some  solemn  dinner-parties  to  attend  in 
Lady  Frankland's  train.  He  had  to 
spend  the  evenings  by  himself  on  these 
occasions  after  dining  with  Charley,  who 
was  not  a  very  agreeable  companion; 
and,  when  this  invalid  went  to  his  room, 
as  he  did  early,  the  young  tutor  found 
himself  desolate  enough  in  the  great 
house,  where  no  human  bond  existed 
between  him  and  the  little  community 
within  its  walls.  He  was  not  in  a  state 
of  mind  to  take  kindly  to  abstract  study 
at  that  moment  of  his  existence,  for 
Colin  had  passed  out  of  that  uncon- 
scious stage  in  which  he  had  been  at 
Ardmartin.  Then,  however  much  he 
had  wished  to  be  out  of  temptation,  he 
could  not  help  himself,  which  was  a 
wonderful  consolation  ;  but  now  he  had 
come  wilfully  and  knowingly  into  the 
danger,  and  had  become  aware  of  the 
fact-— and  far  more  distinctly  than  ever 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


423 


"before — of  the  difference  between  him- 
self and  the  object  of  his  thoughts. 
Though  he  found  it  very  possible  at 
times  to  comfort  himself  with  the 
thought  that  this  was  a  very  ordinary 
interruption  of  a  Scotch  student's  work, 
and  noways  represented  the  Armida's 
garden  in  which  the  knight  lost  both 
his  vocation  and  his  life,  there  were 
other  moments  and  moods  which  were 
less  easily  manageable ;  and,  on  the 
whole,  he  wanted  the  stimulus  of  per- 
petual excitement  to  keep  him  from 
feeling  the  false  position  he  was  in, 
and  the  expediency  of  continuing  here. 
Though  the  feeling  haunted  him  all 
day,  at  night,  in  the  drawing-room — 
which  was  brightened  and  made  sweet 
by  the  fair  English  matron  who  was 
kind  to  Colin,  and  the  fairer  maiden 
who  was  the  centre  of  all  his  thoughts 
— it  vanished  like  an  evil  spirit,  and 
left  him  with  a  sense  that  nowhere  in 
the  world  could  he  have  been  so  well ; 
but,  when  this  mighty  stimulus  was 
withdrawn,  the  youth  was  left  in  a  very 
woeful  plight,  conscious,  to  the  bottom 
of  his  heart,  that  he  ought  to  be  else- 
where, and  here  was  consuming  his 
strength  and  life.  He  strayed  out  in 
the  darkness  of  the  December  nights 
through  the  gloomy  silent  park  into 
the  little  village  with  its -feeble  lights, 
where  everybody  and  everything  was 
unknown  to  him  ;  and  all  the  time  his 
demon  sat  on  his  shoulders  and  asked 
what  he  did  there.  While  he  strayed 
through  the  broken,  irregular  village- 
street,  to  all  appearance  looking  at  the 
dim  cottage-windows  and  listening  to 
the  rude  songs  from  the  little  ale-house, 
the  curate  encountered  the  tutor.  Most 
probably  the  young  priest,  who  was  not 
remarkable  for  wisdom,  imagined  the 
Scotch  lad  to  be  in  some  danger ;  for 
he  laid  a  kindly  hand  upon  his  arm  and 
turned  him  away  from  the  vociferous 
little  tavern,  which  was  'a  vexation  to 
the  curate's  soul.  "I  should  like  you 
to  go  up  to  the  Parsonage  with  me,  if 
you  will  only  wait  till  I  have  seen  this 
sick  woman,"  said  the  curate  ;  and  Colin 
went  in  very  willingly  within  the  cot- 
tage porch  to  wait  for  his  acquaintance, 


who  had  his  prayer-book  under  his  arm. 
The  young  Scotchman  looked  on  with 
wondering  eyes  while  the  village  priest 
knelt  down  by  his  parishioner's  bedside 
and  opened  his  book.  Naturally  there  was 
a  comparison  always  going  on  in  Colin's 
mind.  He  was  like  a  passive  experi- 
mentalist, seeing  all  kinds  of  trials  made 
before  his  eyes,  and  watching  the  result. 
"I  wonder  if  they  all  think  it  is  a 
spell,"  said  Colin  to  himself;  but  he 
was  rebuked  and  was  silent  when  he 
heard  the  responses  which  the  cottage 
folk  made  on  their  knees.  When  the 
curate  had  read  his  prayer  he  got  up 
and  said  good-night,  and  went  back  to 
Colin ;  and  this  visitation  of  the  sick 
was  a  very  strange  experience  to  the 
young  Scotch  observer,  who  stood  re- 
volving everything,  with  an  eye  to 
Scotland,  at  the  cottage-door. 

"  You  don't  make  use  of  our  Common 
Prayer  in  Scotland  1 "  said  the  curate ; 
"  pardon  me  for  referring  to  it.  One 
cannot  help  being  sorry  for  people  who 
shut  themselves  out  from  such  an  in- 
estimable advantage.  How  did  it  come 
about?" 

"I  don't  know,"  said  Colin.  "I 
suppose  because  Laud  was  a  fool,  and 
King  Charles  a " 

"  Hush,  for  goodness  sake,"  said  the 
curate  with  a  shiver.  "What  do  you 
mean  1  such  language  is  painful  to 
listen  to.  The  saints  and  martyrs 
should  be  spoken  of  in  a  different  tone. 
You  think  that  was  the  reason]  Oh, 
no  ;  it  was  your  horrible  Calvinism,  and 
John  Knox,  and  the  mad  influences  of 
that  unfortunate  Eeformation  which  has 
done  us  all  so  much  harm,  though  I 
suppose  you  think  differently  in  Scot- 
land," he  said  with  a  little  sigh,  steering 
his  young  companion,  of  whose  morality 
he  felt  uncertain,  past  the  alehouse 
door. 

"  Did  you  never  hear  of  John  Knox's 
liturgy?"  said  the  indignant  Colin; 
"  the  saddest,  passionate  service  !  You 
always  had  time  to  say  your  prayers  in 
England,  but  we  had  to  snatch  them  as 
we  could.  And  your  prayers  would 
not  do  for  us  now,"  said  the  Scotch 
experimentalist ;  "  I  wish  they  could  • 


424 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


•but  it  would  be  impossible.  A  Scotch 
[peasant  would  have  thought  that  an 
incantation  you  were  reading.  When 
you  go  to  see  a  sick  man,  shouldn't  you 
like  to  say,  God  save  him,  God  forgive 
Mm,  straight  out  of  your  heart  without 
,a  book  1 "  said  the  eager  lad  ;  at  which 
question  the  curate  looked  up  with 
wonder  in  the  young  man's  face. 

"  I  hope  I  do  say  it  out  of  my  heart," 

said   the  English  priest,  and   stopped 

short,  with  a  gravity  that  had  a  great 

effect    upon    Colin; — "but    in   words 

3SO.OIQ  sound  than  any  words  of  mine," 

-the  curate  added  a  moment  after,  which 

.v  dispersed  the  reverential  impression  from 

..-the  Scotch  mind  of  the  eager  boy. 

•"  I  can't  see  that,"  said  Colin,  quickly, 
• M  in  the  church  for  common  prayer, 
•yes ;  at  a  bedside  in  a  cottage,  no.  At 
least,  I  mean  that's  how  we  feel  in 
Scotland,  though  I  suppose  you  don't 
•care  much  for  our  opinion,"  he  added 
with  some  heat,  thinking  he  saw  a  smile 
.on  his  companion's  face. 

"  Oh,  yes,  certainly ;  I  have  always 
^understood  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
intelligence  in  Scotland,"  said  the  curate, 
courteous  as  to  a  South-Sea  Islander. 
**  Eut  people  who  have  never  known 
this  inestimable  advantage  ?  I  believe 
preaching  is  considered  the  great  thing 
in  the  JSbrth?"  he  said  with  a  little 
curiosity.  "  I  wish  society  were  a  little 
more  impressed  by  it  among  ourselves  ; 
but  mere  information  even  about  spiritual 
matters  is  of  so  much  less  importance  ! 
though  that,  I  daresay,  is  another  point 
on  which  we  don't  agree  ? "  the  curate 
continued,  pleasantly.  He  was  just 
-opening  the  gate  into  his  own  garden, 
which  was  quite  invisible  in  the  -dark- 
less, but  which  enclosed  and  surrounded 
a  homely  house  with  some  lights  in  the 
windows,  which,  it  was  a  little  comfort 
to  Colin  to  perceive,  was  not  much 
.kandsomer  nor  more  imposing  in  ap- 
pearance than  the  familiar  manse  on  the 
borders  of  the  Holy  Loch. 

"  It     depends    on    what    you     call 

.spiritual  matters,"   said  the  polemical 

youth.     "I   don't    think    a  man    can 

possibly  get  too  much  information  about 

Jbis  relations  with  God,  if  only  anybody 


could  tell  him  anything ;  but  certainly 
about  ecclesiastical  arrangements  and 
the  Christian  year,"  said  the  irreverent 
young  Scotchman,  "  a  little  might 
suffice ; "  and  Colin  spoke  with  the 
slightest  inflection  of  contempt,  always 
thinking  of  the  twentieth  Sunday  after 
Trinity,  and  scorning  what  he  did  not 
understand,  as  was  natural  to  his  years." 
"  Ah,  you  don't  know  what  you  are 
saying,"  said  the  devout  curate.  "  After 
you  have  spent  a  Christian  year,  you 
will  see  what  comfort  and  beauty  there 
is  in  it.  You  say,  '  if  anybody  could 
tell  him  anything.'  I  hope  you  have 
not  got  into  a  sceptical  way  of  thinking. 
I  should  like  very  much  to  have  a  long 
talk  with  you,"  said  the  village  priest, 
who  was  very  good  and  very  much 
in  earnest,  though  the  earnestness  was 
after  a  pattern  different  from  anything 
known  to  Colin ;  and,  before  the  youth 
perceived  what  was  going  to  happen,  he 
found  himself  in  the  curate's  study, 
placed  on  a  kind  of  moral  platform,  as 
the  emblem  of  Doubt  and  that  pious 
unbelief  which  is  the  favourite  of  modern 
theology.  Now,  to  tell  the  truth,  Colin, 
though  it  may  lower  him  in  the  opinion 
of  many  readers  of  his  history,  was  not 
by  nature  given  to  doubting.  He  had, 
to  be  sure,  followed  the  fashion  of  the 
time  enough  to  be  aware  of  a  wonder- 
ful amount  of  unsettled  questions,  and 
questions  which  it  did  not  appear 
possible  ever  to  settle.  But  somehow 
these  elements  of  scepticism  did  not 
give  him.  much  trouble.  His  heart  was 
full  of  natural  piety,  and  his  instincts 
all  fresh  and  strong  as  a  child's.  He 
could  not  help  believing,  any  more  than 
he  could  help  breathing,  his  nature 
being  such ;  and  he  was  half-amused  and 
half -irritated  by  the  position  in  which 
he  found  himself,  notwithstanding  the 
curate's  respect  for  the  ideal  sceptic, 
whom  he  had  thus  pounced  upon.  The 
commonplace  character  of  Colin's  mind 
was  such,  that  he  was  very  glad  when 
his  new  friend  relaxed  into  gossip,  and 
asked  him  who  was  expected  at  the 
Hall  for  Christmas ;  to  which  the  tutor 
answered  by  such  names  as  he  had 
heard  in  the  ladies'  talk,  and  remem- 


A  Son  of  the  Soil. 


425 


bered  with  friendliness  or  with  jealousy, 
according  to  the  feeling  with  which 
Miss  Matty  pronounced  them — which 
was  Colin's  only  guide  amid  this  crowd 
of  the  unknown. 

"  I  wonder  if  it  is  to  be  a  match," 
said  the  curate,  who,  recovering  from  his 
dread  concerning  the  possible  habits  of 
his  Scotch  guest,  had  taken  heart  to 
share  his  scholarly  potations  of  beer 
with  his  new  friend.  "  It  was  said  Lady 
Frankland  did  not  like  it,  but  I  never 
believed  that.  After  all  it  was  such  a 
natural  arrangement.  I  wonder  if  it  is 
to  be  a  match  1 " 

"  Is  what  to  be  a  match?"  said  Colin, 
who  all  at  once  felt  his  heart  stand  still 
and  grow  cold,  though  he  sat  by  the 
cheerful  fire  which  threw  its  light  even 
into  the  dark  garden  outside.  "  I  have 
heard  nothing  about  any  match,"  he 
added,  with  a  little  effort.  It  dawned 
upon  him  instantly  what  it  must  be,  and 
his  impulse  was  to  rush  out  of  the  house 
or  do  anything  rash  and  sudden  that 
would  prevent  him  from  hearing  it  said 
in  words. 

"  Between  Henry  Frankland  and  his 
cousin,"  said  the  calm  curate ;  "  they 
looked  as  if  they  were  perfectly  devoted 
to  each  other  at  one  time.  That  has 
died  off,  for  she  is  rather  a  flirt,  I  fear ; 
but  all  the  people  hereabouts  had  made 
up  their  minds  on  the  subject.  It  would 
be  a  very  suitable  match  on  the  whole. 
But  why  do  you  get  up  ?  you  are  not 
going  away  1 " 

"  Yes  ;  I  have  something  to  do  when 
I  go  home,"  said  Colin,  "  something  to 
prepare,"  which  he  said  out  of  habit, 
thinking  of  his  old  work  at  home, 
without  remembering  what  he  was 
saying  or  whether  it  meant  anything. 
The  curate  put  down  the  poker  which 
he  had  lifted  to  poke  the  fire,  and  looked 
at  Colin  with  a  touch  of  envy. 

"  Ah  !  something  literary,  I  suppose  ?" 
said  the  young  priest,  and  went  with  his 
new  friend  to  the  door,  thinking  how 
clever  he  was,  and  how  lucky,  at  his  age, 
to  have  a  literary  connexion ;  a  thought 
very  natural  to  a  young  priest  in  a 
country  ciiracy  with  a  very  small  endow- 
ment. The  curate  wrote  verses,  as  Colin 


himself  did,  though  on  very  different 
subjects,  and  took  some  of  them  out  of 
his  desk  and  looked  at  them,  after  he 
had  shut  the  door,  with  affectionate 
eyes,  and  a  half  intention  of  asking  the 
tutor  what  was  the  best  way  to  get 
admission  to  the  magazines,  and  on 
the  whole  he  thought  he  liked  what 
he  had  seen  of  the  young  Scotch- 
man, though  he  was  so  ignorant  of 
church  matters,;  an  opinion  which  Colin 
perfectly  reciprocated,  with  a  more 
distinct  sentiment  of  compassion  for  the 
English  curate,  who  knew  about  as  much 
of  Scotland  as  if  it  had  lain  in  the 
South  Seas. 

Meanwhile  Colin  walked  home  to 
"Wodensbourne  with  fire  and  passion  in 
his  heart.  "  It  would  be  a  very  suit- 
able match  on  the  whole,"  he  kept 
saying  to  himself,  and  then  tried  to  take 
a  little  comfort  from  Matty's  sweet 
laughter  over  "Poor  Harry!"  Poor 
Harry  was  rich,  and  fortunate,  and  in- 
dependent, and  Colin  was  only  the 
tutor;  were  these  two  to  meet  this 
Christmas -time  and  contend  over  again 
on  this  new  ground?  He  went  along 
past  the  black  trees  as  if  he  were  walking 
for  a  wager ;  but,  quick  as  he  walked,  a 
dogcart  dashed  past  him  with  lighted 
lamp  gleaming  up  the  avenue.  When, 
he  reached  the  Hall-door,  one  of  the 
servants  was  disappearing  up  stairs  with 
a  portmanteau,  and  a  heap  of  coats  and 
wrappers  lay  in  the  hall 

"  Mr.  Harry  just  come,  sir — a  week 
sooner  than  was  expected,"  said  the 
butler,  who  was  an  old  servant  and 
shared  in  the  joys  of  the  family.  Colin 
went  to  his  room  without  a  word ;  shut 
himself  up  there  with  feelings  which 
he  would  not  have  explained  to  any 
one.  He  had  not  seen  Harry  Frankland 
since  they  were  both  boys  ;  but  he  had 
never  got  over  the  youthful  sense  of 
rivalry  and  opposition  which  had  sent 
him  skimming  over  the  waters  of  the 
Holy  Loch  to  save  the  boy  who  was  his 
born  rival  and  antagonist.  Was  this 
the  day  of  their  encounter  and  conflict 
which  had  come  at  last  ? 

To  be  continued. 


426 


CONGESTING  THE  OEGANIZATION  OF  LITEEATUEE. 


THE  chronicles  of  the  year  1863  record 
two  incidents  little  noticed  by  the  public 
or  its  instructors  of  the  press,  but  which 
possess  a  certain  importance,  from  their 
relation  to  what  is  called  the  Organiza- 
tion of  Literature.  In  one  of  these  inci- 
dents, the  publication  of  the  remodelled 
programme  of  the  Guild  of  Literature 
and  Art,  lurks  the  admission  of  a  failure, 
or  at  least  of  the  inability  of  its  pro- 
moters to  perform  the  most  important  of 
the  promises  contained  in  their  original 
plan.  The  other  incident  exhibits  the 
germ  of  a  new  and  fruitful  project,  which 
also  aims  at  introducing  an  organic  prin- 
ciple into  the  literary  chaos.  It  is  Lord 
Stanhope's  speech  at  the  dinner  of  the 
Literary  Fund,  when  he  deplored  the 
present  isolation  of  men  of  letters  from 
each  other,  the  absence  among  them  of 
class-combination  and  concert,  and  when 
he  indicated  the  desirability  of  organizing 
out  of  them  an  English  body  more  or 
less  resembling  the  French  Academy. 

The  Guild  of  Literature  and  Art  was 
founded  in  or  about  1851,  more  than 
twelve  years  ago.  Its  founders  were  pro- 
minent authors  and  artists  ;  Sir  Edward 
Bulwer-Lytton  was  and  is  its  President, 
with  Mr.  Charles  Dickens  for  Yice- 
President.  Its  members  were  to  consist 
of  persons  following  Literature  or  the 
Fine  Arts  as  a  profession,  and  mere 
membership  was  to  be  easily  attainable. 
When  the  needful  funds  had  been 
raised,  the  Guild  was  to  be  organized  in 
quasi-collegiate  fashion.  There  was  to 
be  a  garden,  with  a  house  and  a  salary 
of  2001.  a  year,  presiding  over  two 
classes  of  recipients  of  the  bounty  of  the 
Guild.  One  class  was  to  consist  of 
"  members  for  life,"  elected  by  the  Coun- 
cil from  the  ordinary  members  ;  they 
were  to  be  persons  who  had  achieved 
some  distinction  in  Literature  or  Art, 
and  each  was  to  receive  an  annuity  of 
200?.  without  a  house,  or  of  17  Ql.  with 
it.  The  other  class,  also  elected  by  the 


Council,  was  to  consist  of  "Associates," — 
men  rather  of  literary  or  artistic  promise 
than  of  distinction   or  note  ;   each  of 
these  was  to  receive  an  annuity  of  100^., 
for  life,  or  for  a  term  of  years,  according 
to  circumstances.     As  a  condition  atten- 
dant on  the  receipt  of  his  annuity,  each 
Life  Member  was  to  deliver  annually 
three  Lectures  at  Mechanics'  Institutions 
in  town  and  country ;  the  Associates, 
again,  were  to  employ  a  portion  of  their 
time  "  in  gratuitous  assistance  to  any 
'  learned  bodies,  societies  for  the  difiu- 
'  sion  of  useful  knowledge,  &c.,  or,  as 
'  funds  increase,  and  the  utilities  of  the 
'  Institution  develop  themselves,  in  co- 
'  operating   towards   works  of  national 
'  interest  and  importance,  but  on  subjects 
'  of  a  nature  more  popular,  and  at  a 
'  price  more  accessible,  than  those  which 
'  usually     emanate      from      professed 
'  Academies."1      Such  was  the  original 
scheme  of  the  Guild  of  Literature  and 
Art. 

Now,  let  us  suppose  that  the  needful 
funds  had  been  collected  for  carrying 
out,  on  a  scale  of  tolerable  magnitude, 
this  well-meant  project.  What,  in  that 
case,  would  have  been  the  new,  impor- 
tant, fruitful,  principle  in  the  scheme, 
distinguishing  it  from  all  others  in  ope- 
ration, and  claiming  for  it  the  sympathy 
and  support  of  the  public?  Certainly 
not  that  involved  in  the  granting  of 
annuities  to  authors  and  artists  of  some 
distinction  ;  for,  out  of  funds  provided 
by  Parliament,  the  State,  through  the 
Pension-fund,  already  grants  such  an- 
nuities to  such  persons.  I  am  speaking 
of  the  principle  merely,  as  one  already 
recognised  and  acted  on  by  the  State. 
I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  every  author 
and  artist  of  merit  who  both  needs  and 
deserves  a  pension,  receives  one  ;  but 
simply,  that  in  granting  pensions,  the 
Government  does  so  befriend  such  per- 

1  Prospectus  of  the  Guild  of  Literature  and 
Art.  1851. 


Concerning,  the  Organization  of  Literature. 


sons,  and  that  there  was,  therefore, 
nothing  novel  in  this  part  of  the  scheme 
of  the  Guild  of  Literature  and  Art, 
which  simply  proposed  to  do,  with  its 
own  nlachinery  and  funds,  what  the 
State  already  attempted  to  do  through 
the  Government  of  the  day,  by  the  ap- 
plication of  a  parliamentary  grant.  The 
striking  and  original  item  in  the  project 
of  the  Guild  of  Literature  and  Art,  was 
its  proposal  to  pension  the  more  pro- 
mising of  younger  authors  and  artists, 
and  to  require  from  them  in  return,  use- 
ful and  honourable  labour,  with  pen 
or  pencil,  on  "  works  of  national  inte- 
rest and  importance."  This,  and  this 
alone,  removed  the  aid  to  be  given  by 
the  Guild  from  the  category  to  which 
belongs  the  eleemosynary  bounty  of  the 
Pension  Fund,  and  of  the  Eoyal  Literary 
.Fund.  It  thus  became  to  them,  in  some 
measure,  what  a  system  of  reproductive 
employment  is  to  the  operatives  of  the 
New  Poor  Law.  In  return  for  slender, 
but  acceptable  pecuniary  assistance,  the 
juniors  of  Literature  and  Art  were  to 
perform  profitable  and  worthy  tasks, 
prescribed  to  them  by  their  more  expe- 
rienced seniors  ;  and  here,  at  last,  it 
might  be  fondly  hoped,  was  a  kind  of 
Organization  of  Literature. 

Alas,  it  is  precisely  this  and  its  kin- 
dred items  which  make  no  appearance 
in  the  remodelled  programme  of  the 
Guild  of  Literature  and  Art !  The  Guild 
received  its  charter  of  incorporation  in 
1854;  and  after  nine  years  of  a  delay, 
caused,  it  is  said,  by  some  legal  difficulty 
or  obstruction,  its  matured  scheme  of 
operations,  to  be  executed  at  early  con- 
venience, was  shaped  and  published  a 
few  months  ago.  The  warden  has  dis- 
appeared, and  with  him  the  old  classifi- 
cation of  members  and  associates.  We 
see  and  hear  nothing  now  of  lectures  to 
be  delivered  at  mechanics'  institutions, 
nothing  of  "gratuitous  aid  to  learned 
societies,"  nothing  of  "  co-operation  in 
the  production  of  works  of  national 
interest  or  importance."  In  the  re- 
modelled programme,  under  the  rubric 
of  "Objects,"  there  are  two  paragraphs 
which  thus  define  the  present  aims  of 
the  Association  : — "  The  Guild  shall,  in 


"  the  first  instance,  confine  its  operations 
"  to  the  foundation  and  endowment  of 
"  an  institution  to  be  called  the  '  Guild 
"  Institution.' "  And  then  :  —  "  The 
"  Guild  shall  grant  annuities,  to  which 
"professional  members  of  either  sex, 
"  and  the  widows  of  professional  mem- 
"  bers,  shall  be  eligible.  It  will  also 
"  erect  a  limited  number  of  free  resi- 
'  dences,  on  land  to  be  presented  for 
'  this  purpose  by  Sir  Edward  Bulwer- 
'  Lytton,  and  which  will  be  occupied 
'  by  members  elected  on  this  founda- 
tion. The  several  annuitants  shall  be 
'  elected  by  the  Council,"  &c.  &c.  This 
is  alL  The  members  of  the  Guild  are 
now  in  number  fifty.  After  twelve 
years  or  so  its  funds  amount  to  .£3,694, 
of  which  .£3,334  were  "received  for 
"  copyright  and  performance  of  Sir  E. 
"  Bulwer-Lytton's  play  of  '  Not  so  Bad 
"  as  we  Seem.'"  When  the  free  residences 
have  been  built,  and  a  few  slender  an- 
nuities awarded,  what  is  there  to  make 
the  public  or  men  of  letters  zealously 
promote  the  further  working  of  the 
scheme1?  Duly  recognising  the  disin- 
terestedness and  kindly  motives  of  its 
founders,  one  may  predict,  with  some- 
thing very  like  certainty,  that  the  world 
is  not  destined  to  hear  much  more  of 
the  Guild  of  Literature  and  Art. 

I  turn  now  to  Lord  Stanhope's  pro- 
posal for  the  formation  of  an  English 
Academy  or  Institute,  somewhat  resem- 
bling the  famous  Academic  Frangaise. 
Lord  Stanhope  is  entitled  to  a  hearing, 
were  it  only  as  a  man  of  letters,  who 
has  done  good  service  to  his  untitled 
order.  Kecently  the  parliamentary  ori- 
ginator of  the  National  Portrait  Gallery, 
it  was  he  who  conducted,  years  ago, 
through  the  House  of  Commons  the 
Literary  Copyright  Act,  on  which  the 
relations  between  authors  and  publishers 
are  still  based.  His  career  has  been 
one  of  considerable  official  as  well  as  of 
continuous  literary  labour.  He  is  a 
man  of  business,  and  not  merely  a  man 
of  letters  ;  no  young  enthusiast,  but  an 
experienced  legislator,  he  is  not  likely 
to  make  a  practical  suggestion  without 
having  weighed  all  difficulties  of  execu- 
tion and  detail.  There  needs  no  demon- 


428 


Concerning  the  Organization  of  Literature. 


stration  of  the  truth  of  his  assertion 
respecting  the  unorganized  state  of  lite- 
rature and  its  cultivators  in  England. 
The  fact  is  patent  to  all  the  world.  But 
what,  it  may  be  asked,  could  be  gained 
by  the  foundation  in  England  of  an 
Academy,  or  Institute,  resembling  the 
Academic  Frangaise  ?  It  will  be  partly 
answering  the  question  to  give  some 
account  of  the  constitution  and  functions 
of  the  French  Academy.  First,  how- 
ever, a  few  words  on  the  composition 
of  the  French  Institute,  of  which  the 
French  Academy  forms  but  a  single 
section. 

Five  smaller  bodies,  with  very  dif- 
ferent aims  and  occupations,  make  up 
the  French  Institute,  to  belong  to  which 
is  considered  a  high  honour  by  men  of 
letters  and  science  throughout  Europe. 
These  five  bodies  are  (1)  the  Academie 
Frangaise,  (2)  the  Academie  des  Inscrip- 
tions et  Belles  Lettres,  (3)  the  Academie 
des  Sciences,  (4)  the  Academie  des  Beaux 
Arts,  (5)  the  Academie  des  Sciences 
Morales  et  Politiques.  The  oldest  of 
them,  the  Academie  Frangaise,  was 
founded  by  the  great  Cardinal  Riche- 
lieu, with  the  special  function  of  watch- 
ing over  the  condition  of  the  French 
language,  in  consonance  with  which 
trust  the  well-known  Dictionary  of  the 
Academy  has  been  produced  by  it.  The 
Academie  des  Inscriptions  deals  with 
archeology  and  philology.  Students  of 
Gibbon  may  remember  how  frequently 
its  Memoires — "Transactions,"  as  we 
should  say — are  cited  in  the  notes  of  the 
"  Decline  and  Fall."  The  Academie  des 
Beaux  Arts,  of  course,  devotes  itself  to 
the  fine  arts ;  the  Academie  des  Sciences 
to  the  physical  sciences ;  the  Academie 
des  Sciences  Morales  et  Politiques  to  ethics, 
philosophy,  and  politics,  but,  above  all, 
to  that  wide  department  of  things  which 
in  this  country  we  call  Social  Science. 
Each  of  these  five  bodies  has  a  spe- 
cial organization  of  its  own,  governs 
itself,  and  is  perfectly  independent  of 
its  neighbours.  Together,  however,  they 
compose  the  Institute,  and  a  member  of 
any  one  of  them  is  a  member  of  the 
Institute,  which  also  in  its  collective 
capacity  has  a  constitution  and  office- 


bearers. They  have  all  of  them  ana- 
logues in  England.  If  an  attempt  were 
made  to  realize  what  is  understood  to 
have  been  at  one  time  a  project  of  the 
late  Prince  Consort,  namely  to  collect 
the  accredited  "  Societies "  of  London 
under  one  roof,  and,  while  leaving  each 
its  independence,  to  organize  them  into 
one  body,  for  the  purposes  of  general 
utility,  the  five  bodies  which  compose 
the  French  Institute  would  thus  find 
analogues  in  England : —  The  Eoyal 
Society  would  be  the  analogue  of  the 
Academie  des  Sciences ;  the  Eoyal  Aca- 
demy, of  the  Academie  des  Beaux  Arts; 
the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  of  the 
Academie  des  Inscriptions ;  the  modern 
Social  Science  Association,  of  the  also 
modern  Academie  des  Sciences  Morales  et 
Politiques ;  and,  with  a  slight  stretch  of 
imagination,  the  Eoyal  Society  of  Litera- 
ture might  pass  for  the  analogue  of  the 
Academie  Frangaise — the  French  Aca- 
demy itself. 

Analogy,  however,  is  one  thing ; 
identity,  another.  These  five  English 
Societies  and  those  five  French  Acade- 
mies may  be  analogous,  but  they  lack 
anything  like  identity  of  constitution. 
The  English  Societies  are  composed  of 
members  paying  subscriptions,  and, 
virtually,  not  limited  as  to  number.  I 
suppose  that  any  person  of  respectable 
position  and  attainments,  with  fair  social 
connexions,  may  become  a  member  of 
any  of  the  learned  societies  of  London, 
if  he  is  prepared  to  pay  the  needful  en- 
trance fee  and  subscription.  It  is  not 
so  with  the  French  Academies.  The 
number  of  members  in  the  case  of  each 
of  them  is  strictly  limited,  and  no  new 
member  is  elected  but  to  fill  up  a 
vacancy  caused  by  death.  The  expenses 
of  the  French  Academies  are  not  de- 
frayed by  the  subscriptions  of  the  mem- 
bers, but  by  the  State,  which,  while 
leaving  them  complete  self-government, 
adopts  them  as  National  Institutions. 
Instead  of  making  an  annual  payment, 
every  member  of  the  Institute  receives 
an  annual  salary  of  1,500  francs,  which 
marks  his  connexion  with  the  State, 
but  is  not  large  enough  to  make  him 
feel  himself  dependent  on  its  bounty. 


Concerning  the  Organization  of  Literature, 


429 


Generally,  I  believe,  the  French,  budget 
contains  an  allocation  of  a  sum  of 
money  to  be  devoted  to  medals  and  other 
prizes  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  In- 
stitute, or  to  defray  the  expenses  of 
such  of  its  members  as  are  sent  on 
scientific  and  literary  missions  by  the 
Government.  Possessing,  from  the  in- 
contestable eminence  and  high  character 
of  their  members,  the  confidence  of  the 
nation,  the  Institute  and  the  Academies 
Avhich  compose  it  have  acquired  large 
corporate  funds,  the  result  of  the  be- 
quests and  donations  of  private  indivi- 
duals, and  applied  to  the  specific  pur- 
poses named  by  the  testators  and 
donors.  Of  these,  more  hereafter.  Suf- 
fice it  for  the  present  to  say  that  the 
funds  thus  acquired  by  the  Academies 
•which  make  up  the  Institute  yielded 
in  1848  an  annual  revenue,  now  doubt- 
less much  increased,  of  upwards  130,000 
francs,  say  52,000^.1  Even  in  England 
this  would  be  no  inconsiderable  sum  to 
be  devoted  yearly  to  prizes  for  literary 
merit  and  scientific  achievement. 

To  indicate  more  clearly  the  differ- 
ence between  the  London  "  Societies  " 
and  the  French  Academies  of  the  Insti- 
tute, let  me  compare  the  constitution 
and  functions,  the  status  and  condition 
of  the  Academic  Frangaise  with  those  of 
what  I  have  called  its  English  analogue, 
the  Eoyal  Society  of  Literature.  This 
Society  was  founded,  in  the  words  of 
its  own  prospectus,  "  to  promote  litera- 
"  ture  in  its  most  important  branches, 
"  with  a  special  attention  to  the  improve- 
"  ment  of  the  English  language,"  and 
it  was  incorporated  by  Eoyal  Charter  in 
1825.  His  Majesty  George  IV.  gave  it 
annually,  out  of  his  private  purse,  the 
sum  of  eleven  hundred  guineas.  A 
thousand  of  these  were  to  be  divided 
among  Associates  "  of  approved  learn- 
ing ; "  the  remaining  hundred  went 
to  purchase  two  gold  medals,  present- 
able to  the  authors  of  new  and  distin- 
guished works — Hallam  and  Washing- 
ton Irving  were,  I  think,  the  last,  or 
about  the  last  recipients  of  them.  The 
Royal  Society  of  Literature,  says  a 

1  Annuaire  des  Societes  Savantes  de  la 
Prance,  &c.  1846,  (Published  by  authority.) 


sympathetic  chronicler  of  its  cause,2 
'  has  the  merit  of  rescuing  the  last; 
'  years  of  Coleridge's  life  from  complete 
'  dependence  on  a  friend,  and  of  placing 
'  the  learned  Dr.  Jamieson  above  the 
'  wants  and  necessities  of  a  man  fast 
{  sinking  to  the  grave."  But  unfor- 
tunately the  sympathetic  chronicler  is 
obliged  to  add : — "  The  annual  grant  of 
"  1,100  guineas  was  discontinued  by 
"  William  IV.,  and  the  Society  has 
"  since  sunk  into  a  Transaction  Society, 
"  with  a  small  but  increasing  library." 
Let  me  add,  however,  that  even  in  its 
decadence,  it  contributed  to  a  useful 
result.  The  liberality  of  some  of  its 
members  enabled  Mr.  Thomas  Wright 
to  produce  and  to  publish  two  volumes, 
comprehending  the  Anglo-Saxon  and 
Anglo-Gorman  periods,  of  his  learned 
and  accurate  Ewgraphia  Britannica 
Liter  aria.  But  that  useful  enterprise 
has  gone  no  further.  The  Eoyal  Society 
of  Literature  "has  sunk  into  a  Transac- 
tion Society."  It  publishes  an  occasional 
volume  of  Transactions,  containing 
papers  on  all  sorts  of  subjects,  from 
Hellenic  inscriptions  to  the  breed  of 
Merino  sheep.  That  is  all  it  does.  The 
world  knows  little  and  hears  nothing 
of  it. 

Contrast  this  state  of  things  with 
that  presented  by  the  French  Academy. 
It  consists  of  forty  members  only.  Any 
vacancy  which  death  causes  in  its  ranks 
is  filled  up  by  a  careful  vote  of  the  sur- 
vivors. The  honour  of  belonging  to  it 
is  coveted  by  the  highest  in  the  land 
— if  report  speak  truly,  by  the  present 
Emperor  himself.  It  contains  a  small 
proportion  of  men  of  rank  and  dignified 
ecclesiastics — a  Duke  de  Broglie,  aDuko 
de  Nbailles,  a  Bishop  of  Orleans ;  but 
even  members  of  those  classes  must  have 
done  something  in  authorship.  Tho 
list  of  its  forty  members  in  1862  con- 
tained the  following  twenty  names  : — 
Villemain,  Barante,  Lamartine,  Thiers, 
Guizot,  Mignet,  Victor  Hugo,  Saint 
Marc  Girardin,  Sainte  Beuve,  Meri- 
niee,  Alfred  de  Vigny,  Charles  do 
Eemusat,  Ampere,  D.  Nisard,  Monta- 

8  Mr.  Peter  Cunningham,  Handbook  of  Lon- 
don (1850).  §  Royal  Society  of  Literature. 


430 


Concerning  the  Organization  of  Literature. 


lembert,  S.  de  Sacy,  Legouve",  Pon- 
sard,  Emile  Augier,  Jules  Sandeau 
— the  flower  of  French  literature,  his- 
torical, aesthetic,  critical,  journalistic. 
Men  like  these  are  entitled  to  sit  in 
judgment  on  the  literary  performances 
of  their  juniors  and  contemporaries, 
to  praise  here,  and  to  reward  there. 
This  is  exactly  what  the  French  Academy 
does.  The  English  public  knows  it 
chiefly  as  a  body,  admission  into  which 
is  keenly  sought  and  is  accompanied 
by  great  glorification  of  the  dead  and 
of  the  living;  each  new  member  on 
taking  his  seat  bestowing  a  formal  eulo- 
gium  on  his  predecessor,  and  receiv- 
ing in  return  an  elaborate  address  of 
congratulation  and  praise  from  some  one 
of  his  new  colleagues.  There  are,  how- 
ever, other  and  much  more  important 
functions  than  this  discharged  by  the 
French  Academy.  I  do  not  attach  so 
much  importance  to  the  two  prizes  of 
2,000  francs  (or  so)  each,  which,  ap- 
parently from  funds  supplied  by  the 
State,  are  annually  awarded  by  the 
Academy  to  the  authors  of  two  pieces  of 
prose  and  verse  on  subjects  named  be- 
forehand, the  competition  being  open  to 
all  comers, — I  attach  more  to  the  result 
of  the  Academy's  vigilant  inspection  of 
the  current  literature  of  France,  with  the 
view  of  distinguishing  those  published 
works  in  which  a  high  or  pure  ethical 
element  is  directly  or  indirectly  pro- 
minent. Once  a  year,  at  the  great  annual 
meeting  of  the  Academy  in  May,  an 
elaborate  report  is  read  by  its  perpetual 
Secretary.  This  document  contains, 
among  other  things,  the  names  and 
characteristics  of  some  of  the  works 
recently  published  most  remarkable  for 
their  ethical  tone  or  moral  usefulness. 
Money-prizes  or  medals,  varying  in 
amount  and  value  (generally  from  2,000 
to  3,000  francs  each)  are  awarded  to  the 
authors,  and  their  works  are  said  to  be 
"  crowned  "  by  the  Academy — itself  an 
honourable  and  welcome  distinction  in 
a  country  singularly  jealous  of  social 
inequalities,  but  enthusiastically  cogni- 
sant of  the  gradations  of  proved  intel- 
lectual ability.  The  deficiencies,  over- 
sights, and  caprices  of  newspaper  and 


periodical  criticism  are  to  some  extent 
compensated  for  and  corrected  by  the 
elaborate  examination  to  which  the 
Academy  subjects  the  literature  of  the 
day,  and  many  a  worthy  book  of  an 
obscure  and  modest  author  has  thus 
attention  pointed  to  its  merits.  These 
prizes  are  defrayed  out  of  the  proceeds 
of  a  legacy  left  by  the  Baron  de  Mont- 
hyon  to  be  devoted  to  rewarding  the 
works  of  French  authorship  "most 
useful  to  morals;"  and,  in  the  survey 
made  by  the  Academy  before  awarding 
them,  it  includes  all  departments  of 
literature.  The  famous  "  prize  of  virtue  " 
was  also  bequeathed  by  the  Baron  de 
Monthyon  (1733—1820),  a  distin- 
guished member  of  the  noblesse  of  the 
gown  in  the  pre-revolutionary  period, 
and  a  munificent  benefactor  to  more 
than  one  of  the  Academies  which  com- 
pose the  Institute.  The  Monthyon 
prize  of  virtue,  too,  is  awarded  by  the 
French  Academy ;  but,  as  it  is  not  con- 
nected with  literature,  it  does  not  fall 
within  the  scope  of  my  present  article. 
Otherwise  is  it  with  the  prix  Gobert, 
which  the  Academy  likewise  awards. 
This  was  founded  by  Baron  Gobert 
(1807 — 1833),  and  amounts  annually  to 
upwards  of  11,000  francs,  say  45  01. ; 
nine-tenths  to  be  given  to  the  author 
of  the  best,  one-tenth  to  the  author  of 
the  second  best,  work  in  French  History, 
actually  and  recently  published.  In 
awarding  this  historical  prize,  the 
Academy  exerts  a  certain  discretion  of 
its  own,  and  prolongs  the  principal 
grant  for  a  series  of  years  to  the  author 
of  one  and  the  same  work,  if  the  non- 
appearance  of  any  better  or  greater  one 
seems  to  authorize  such  a  continuance. 
It  is  evident  of  what  assistance  a  grant 
like  this  may  be  to  a  historical  writer, 
of  limited  means,  during  the  composi- 
tion of  some  long,  elaborate  work.  The 
prix  Gobert  was  held  for  many  years 
by  Augustine  Thiery,  one  of  the  founders 
of  the  Modern  French  Historical  school. 
After  his  death,  it  was  awarded  for  two 
years  to  M.  Poirson,  the  author  of  a 
well-known  history  of  Henri  Quatre. 
It  has  now  been  held  for  years,  I  believe, 
by  Henri  Martin,  the  author  of  the  best 


Concerning  the  Organization  of  Literature. 


recent  history  of  France — at  least  the 
best  produced  by  any  French  writer  not 
of  the  Institute,  whose  members  volun- 
tarily debar  themselves  from  competing 
for  such  prizes.  These,  then,  are  some 
of  its  functions  discharged  by  the  French 
Academy,  and  I  may  add  that  no  mur- 
mur of  complaint,  or^whispered  charge  of 
partiality,  is  ever  heard  to  throw  a  doubt 
on  the  sense  or  justice  of  its  verdicts 
and  awards. 

Had    the     French    Academy    been 
founded    in    modern    times,    under    a 
political   system   of  even  comparative 
freedom,  in  an  age  full  of  social  pro- 
blems calling  for  discussion  and  solu- 
tion, very  probably  it  would  have  been 
so  constituted  as  to  include  what  now 
forms  a  separate  section  of  the  Institute — 
the  Academie    des  Sciences  Morales  et 
Politiques.     This  body,  for  the  discus- 
sion of  political  and  ethical  questions, 
more  especially  those  belonging  to  the 
large  domain  of  Social  Economy,  was 
founded  in  the  time  of  the  First  French 
Republic.     It  was   suppressed  by  the 
first  Napoleon,  in  his  hatred  of  ideolo- 
gists and  of   the  public  discussion  of 
matters  bearing   on  the  action  of  the 
State.     After  the  Revolution  of  1830, 
it  was   resuscitated  by   Guizot,    when 
Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  and  it 
.has  since  been  one  of  the  most  quietly 
useful  departments  of  the  Institute.     It 
consists  of  forty  French  members,  and 
is  divided  into  five  sections.     The  sec- 
tion of  Philosophic  included    in   1862 
Cousin,     Damiran,      Barthelemy,     St. 
Hilaire,  and  Charles  de  Remusat ; — that 
of  Morale,  Villenne,  Gustave  de  Beau- 
mont,  and  Louis    Reybaud ; — that  of 
Economic,  Politigue  etStatistique,  Charles 
Dupin,  Passy,  Duchatel,  Michel  Che- 
valier, Wolowski,  and  Le"once   de   La- 
vergne; — that  of  Histoire   Generate  et 
Philosophique,  Guizot,  Mignet,  Michelet, 
Thiers,   and  Amedee  Thierry; — Schel- 
ling  was,  Lord  Brougham  and  Leopold 
Ranke  are,  among  its  foreign  members. 
It  publishes  copious  Transactions  ;  and, 
since  its  resuscitation,  various  of  its  mem- 
bers have  been  commissioned  by  itself 
and  by  successive  governments  to  inves- 
tigate,  at  home  and  abroad,  the  con- 


ditions of  special  sections  of  industrial 
populations.  It  was  through  this  Aca- 
demy that,  in  earlier  years,  Blanqui 
prosecuted  his  remarkable  inquiries  into 
the  state  of  the  manufacturing  popu- 
lations of  the  Continent,  and  that, 
in  recent  years,  M.  Louis  Reybaud 
(known  to  English  readers  chiefly  as 
the  author  of  the  amusing  Jerome 
Paturot)  was  stimulated  to  produce  bis 
social  monographs  on  the  condition 
of  the  operatives  employed  in  the  silk 
and  cotton  manufactures  of  France. 
It  is  seemingly  from  the  State  chiefly 
that  the  Academie  des  Sciences  Morales 
et  Politiques  derives  the  funds  to 
provide  for  its  rather  numerous 
prizes.  These  are  given  not  so  much 
to  the  authors  of  works  already  pub- 
lished, as  in  the  case  of  the  Academie 
Frangaise,  but  rather  to  the  successful 
competitors  in  the  composition  of  Essays 
on  subjects  proposed  by  the  Academy. 
Dipping  casually  into  the  Comptes  Ben- 
dus  of  the  Academie  des  {Sciences  Morales 
et  Politiques,  I  find  that  in  one  par- 
ticular year  the  following  were  the  sub- 
jects given  out  to  the  competing 
essayists  : — in  the  section  of  "  Philo- 
sophy," (1)  a  critical  examination  of 
the  Scholastic  Philosophy,  (2)  an  in- 
vestigation of  the  influence  exercised 
on  the  morality  of  a  nation  by  the  pro- 
gress and  the  love  of  material  well- 
being  ;  in  the  section  of  "  Legislation, 
Public  Law,  and  Jurisprudence, "  the 
Theory  and  Principles  of  Life  Assur- 
ance, its  History,  and  the  useful  appli- 
cations of  which  it  is  susceptible ;  in 
the  section  of  "Political  Economy," 
the  Laws  that  ought  to  regulate  the 
proportionate  relations  of  note-circula- 
tion to  a  metallic  currency,  so  that  the 
State  may  enjoy  all  the  advantages  of 
credit  without  suffering  from  its  abuses ; 
in  the  section  of  "  General  and  Phi- 
losophical History,"  to  show  how  the 
progress  of  Criminal  Justice  in  the  pro- 
secution and  punishment  of  offences 
against  the  person  and  property  follow 
and  mark  the  progress  of  civilization 
from  the  savage  state  to  that  of  the  best 
governed  nations.  These  are  all  sub- 
jects more  or  less  interesting  and  impor- 


432 


Concerning  the  Organization  of  Literature. 


tant ;  and  the  elucidation  of  them  is  at 
least  as  profitable  to  society  as  the  pro- 
duction of  "  sensation  novels,"  so  abun- 
dantly encouraged,  without  prizes,  on 
both  sides  of  the  Channel.  The  money- 
value  of  the  prizes  awarded  to  the  suc- 
cessful competitors  averages  1,500  francs 
each.  Small  as  is  this  amount,  the 
adjudicating  sections  are  very  critical 
and  not  easily  pleased.  Sometimes, 
year  after  year,  I  observe,  the  same  sub- 
ject is  declared  still  open  to  competition, 
the  essays  sent  in  having  fallen  short  of 
the  standard  required  by  the  adjudi- 
cators. This  Academy  publishes  Trans- 
actions of  considerable  worth,  consisting 
of  disquisitions  contributed  by  its  emi- 
nent members.  Its  peculiar  influence 
on  the  intellectual  culture  of  France 
must  be  valuable.  Should  a  British 
Academy  ever  be  founded,  certainly  it 
would  be  well  to  combine  in  it  the 
functions  of  both  of  these  French 
Academies,  the  Academic  Franyaise  and 
the  Acadernie  des  Sciences  Morales  et  Poli- 
tiques.  In  a  practical  country  like  ours, 
an  Academy  which  included  men  of 
eminence  in  social,  legislative,  econo- 
mical, and  political  science  would  have 
more  weight  and  greater  prospects  of 
•usefulness  than  one  composed  exclu- 
sively of  poets,  novelists,  critics,  and 
historians. 

But  do  these  French  Academies,  then, 
embody  in  their  constitution  and  func- 
tions principles  generally  applicable, 
true  and  valuable  in  England  as  in 
France  ?  Surely  yes !  There  is  the 
principle  that  in  the  world  of  intellect 
differences  of  capacity  and  power  of 
labour  exist,  and  that,  when  these  are 
proved  by  their  results,  the  upper  and 
the  under  should  be  formally  recognised 
and  duly  ranked.  There  is  the  prin- 
ciple that  the  young  and  aspiring  de- 
serve reward  and  encouragement  when, 
through  talent  and  toil,  they  have 
achieved  success,  and  that  none  are  so 
well  fitted  as  the  more  wise  and  more 
experienced  of  their  own  order  to 
reward  and  to  encourage.  The  literary 
and  socio-economical  criticism  of  the 
periodical  and  newspaper  press  does 
much;  but,  from  the  very  nature  of 


the  case,  it  must  be  hurried,  or  perfunc?- 
tory,  or  limited.     It  Avould  be  some- 
thing   to    have,    in    one  Academy   in 
England,  as  France  has  in  these  two 
Academies,  the    men    of   the    highest 
proved  and  realized  intellect  collected, 
and  formed  into  a  conspicuous,  honour- 
able,  and   honoured    body — after    tho 
heat    of  the    battle  and   a  victorious 
struggle,  taking  their  seats  in  a  House 
of  Peers  of  their  own.     It  would  be 
something  to  have  them,  as  in  France, 
judging,  rewarding,  encouraging,  guid- 
ing, their  younger  or  less   experienced 
brethren,  when  these  did  not  disdain  to 
be   so   subordinated.     The   proud  and 
self-sufficing  might  hold   aloof,   while 
the  modest,  yet  aspiring  would  profit 
alike  by  encouragement  and  by  discou- 
ragement.    If  it  were  thought  desirable 
to  copy  the  prize-systems  of  France,  the 
small  funds  needful  would  not  long  be 
wanting,  were  the  body  once  extant  to 
which  they  could   b'e  safely  entrusted. 
The  wealthiest  and  most  generous  of 
nations  has   not  less  than  France  its 
Monthyons  and  Goberts,  but  it  has  no 
Institute  to  receive,  to  accumulate,  and 
to  apply  their  thoughtful  bounty.   Ones 
let  there  exist  a  British  Institute,  com- 
prising the  most  eminent  men,  as  do 
the  two  French  Academies  which  have 
been   sketched — and  with  a  guarantee 
in  its  constitution  that  only  the  distin- 
guished can  succeed  the  distinguished 
— all  the  rest  will  follow.     There  are 
even  important  national  objects  which 
such  an  Institute  might  subserve  and 
which   would    make    a    wise    premier 
thankful  for  its   existence  and  advice. 
It  would  be  a  body  which  he   might 
consult  in   the   disposal,  for  instance, 
of  the  Pension  Fund ;  and  its  counsel 
would  preserve  him  from  becoming  the 
official  patron  of  a  Poet  Close.     Tho 
time  must  arrive,  too,  when  our  purely 
party-antagonisms — now   fast    dying — 
will    be   dead,   buried,   and   forgotten. 
Then  governments  will  be  able,  as  well 
as  willing,  to  prosecute,  with  concen- 
trated   energy    the    work    of  internal 
reform — social,  legal,  educational.  Then 
will  be  undertaken  [extensive  inquiries 
into  the  state  of  our  population  at  home 


Concerning  the  Organization  of  Literature. 


433 


and  throughout  our  vast  empire,  and 
into  what  can  be  learned  from  or  sug- 
gested by  foreign  nations.  For  such 
a  task,  men  of  trained  intelligence  and 
the  gift  of  clear  and  vivid  expression 
will  be  needed ;  and  it  may  be  that  to 
a  National  Institute  an  English  govern- 
ment will  turn  to  supply  then,  just  as 
successive  French  governments  have  so 
applied  to  the  French  Institute,  and 
more  particularly  to  the  Academic  des 
Sciences  Morales  et  Politiques.  Even  as 
it  is,  compare  a  report  by  Mr.  Tremen- 
here — brief,  lucid,  suggestive,  conclusive 
— on  a  mining  district  or  a  baking  trade 
with  an  average  blue-book — rudis  indi- 
gestaque  moles — entombing  the  thousands 
upon  thousands  of  questions  and  an- 
swers produced  by  a  select  committee  of 
the  House  of  Commons  and  the  cloud 
of  witnesses  which  it  examines — the 
useful  and  the  useless  jumbled  together 
in  inextricable  confusion,  and  yielding 
frequently  no  result  of-  any  kind — for 
how  often  is  the  committee's  report 
rendered  colourless  and  neutral  by  the 
disagreement  of  its  members  ?  Tell  me 
in  what  parliamentary  or  official  docu- 
ment or  statement — and  there  have 
been  very  many  tons  of  them  printed 
— the  relations  between  Europeans  and 
natives  in  our  Indian  empire  have  re- 
ceived as  much  light  and  been  made 
as  clearly  and  generally  intelligible  as 
in  the  few  letters  which  Mr.  Wingrove 
Cook  despatched  from  Bengal  when 
returning  home  from  his  newspaper- 
mission  to  China,  or  in  the  communi- 
cations with  which  a  "Competition  Wal- 
lah" at  once  entertains  and  instructs 
the  readers  of  Macmillan's  Magazine. 

Such  possible  results,  however,  of  the 
existence  of  a  National  Institute,  recog- 
nized and  honoured  by  the  State,  perhaps 
belong  to  a  rather  distant  future.  Per- 
haps, too,  even  although  the  suggestion 
of  it  comes  from  Lord  Stanhope,  a 
British  Institute  will  not  be  founded 
until  after  many  years.  Yet  even  now, 
and  without  the  creation  of  any  new 
body,  the  claims  of  eminent  men  of 
letters  could  be  partly  recognised  by 
entrusting  them  with  useful,  honour- 
able, and  dignified  functions,  which 

No.  53. — VOL.  ix. 


might  in  time  develop  into  a  govern- 
ment and  direction  of  their  distinguished 
juniors.     Some  years  ago  an  Edinburgh 
Ee viewer,  discussing  the  subject  of  an 
Order   of    Merit,  for   the   reward   and 
recognition  of  men  eminent  in  literature 
and  science,  made  the  following  remarks, 
which,  from  one  point  of  view,  have  a 
certain  truth    and   pertinence  : — "  An 
"  order  created  solely,"  he   said,  "  for 
'  men  of  science  and  letters,  as  has  been 
'  more    than    once    suggested,   would 
'  wholly  fail  in  its  object.     There  is  no 
'  reason  why  they  should  be  separated 
'  from  others  who  deserve  well  of  their 
'  country.     On  the   contrary,  it  is  to 
'  amalgamate  them  with  their  fellow- 
'  citizens  in  honours  as  in  labours  that 
'  we  desire,  and  to  suffer  them  to  rank 
'  (when   their  reputation    so    entitles 
'  them)  with  whomsoever  be  the  other 
'  claimants     to     social     consideration. 
'  There  is  not  a  city  knight  who  would 
'  not  jest  at  an  order  consisting  only  of 
'  authors,  to  whose  united  rent-roll  he 
'  would  prefer  even  half-a-dozen  rail- 
'  way   debentures.      If    any   practical 
'  honours  ever  be  accorded  to  authors, 
'  philosophers,  or  artists,  agreeably  to 
'  the  usual  principles  of  our  aristocratic 
'  monarchy,  we  fear,  strange  though  it 
'  may  appear  to  say,  that  they  must  be 
"  honours  shared  with  dukes  and  earls, 
"  ambassadors   and    generals."  *     Now, 
there  is  one  body,  fulfilling  all  the  re- 
quirements of  the  Edinburgh  Eeviewer, 
and  to  which  eminent  men  of  letters 
have    belonged,    do    belong,    and     are 
entitled  to  belong  in  much  more  con- 
siderable numbers  than  at  present.     I 
mean  the  Board  of   so-called  Trustees 
which  governs  our  great  national  insti- 
tution, the  British  Museum. 

The  British  Museum  is  supported 
wholly  by  the  British  nation,  and  the 
British  Parliament  possesses  the  right, 
rarely  exercised  hitherto,  of  supreme 
control  over  its  affairs.  The  grant  of 
money  annually  voted  by  Parliament  for 
the  support  of  the  Museum,  amounts  to 
100,000/.  ;  10,0001.  seems  to  be  the 
amount  of  the  ordinary  annual  grant  for 

1  Edinburgh  Review,  Iviii.  220  (July,  1848 
Art.  Goldsmith). 

FF 


434 


Concerning  tlie  Organization  of  Literature. 


the  department  of  printed  books  alone. 
The  Parliamentary  grant  and  the  whole 
affairs  of  the  Museum  are  administered 
by  the  Board  of  Trustees,  at  present 
fifty  in  number,  and  in  which  there  are 
four  constituent  elements.  One  section 
of  them  is  hereditary,  and  consists  of 
what  are  called  "Family  Trustees," 
representing  the  families  of  personages 
who  have  made  magnificent  bequests  of 
collections  of  various  kinds  to  the  Mu- 
seum. These  are  the  Sloane,  Cotton, 
Harley,  Townley,  Elgin,  and  Knight 
families.  The  Family  Trustees  are  nine 
in  number,  and  among  them  is  the  pre- 
sent Earl  of  Derby.  One  trustee,  called 
the  Royal  Trustee,  is  appointed  by  the 
Sovereign,  in  recognition  of  George  IV.'s 
gift  of  the  Royal  Library  to  the  Museum 
and  the  nation.  Then  there  are  twenty- 
five  Trustees  who  are  members  of  the 
Board,  ex  officio.  These,  called  Official 
Trustees,  include  the  chief  dignitaries  of 
the  State  and  Church,  from,  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  and  the  First  Lord 
of  the  Treasury  to  the  Solicitor-General, 
while  with  them  are  associated  the  Presi- 
dents of  the  Royal  Society,  the  College  of 
Physicians,  the  Society  of  Antiquaries, 
and  the  Royal  Academy.  We  have  now 
thirty -five  out  of  the  fifty  Trustees.  The 
remaining  fifteen  are  called  Elected 
Trustees,  and  are  chosen  by  the  thirty- 
five.  The  elected  trustees  are  trustees 
for  life,  and,  with  one  important  excep- 
tion, share  all  the  rights  and  privileges 
of  their  colleagues.  This  important 
exception  is  that,  when  a  vacancy  occurs 
in  their  own  number,  they  have  no  voice 
or  vote  in  filling  it  up.  The  choice  of  a 
new  elected  Trustee  is  made  by  the 
thirty-five  without  the  intervention  of 
the  Trustees  already  elected. 

In  the  existence  of  a  body  of  Elected 
Trustees,  we  seem  to  have  a  provision 
for  the  recognition  of  some  of  the  claims 
of  men  eminent  in  literature,  archaeology, 
and  science.  The  honour  of  a  seat  at 
the  Board  is  one  which  they  would 
share,  as  the  Edinburgh  Reviever  ex- 
pressed it,  "  with  dukes  and  earls,  am- 
bassadors and  generals."  Eminent  men 
of  letters,  moreover,  are  precisely  the 
persons  best  fitted  to  superintend  the 


management  of  a  vast  library  of  books 
and  manuscripts,  kept  up  and  augmented 
chiefly  for  the  sake  of  the  very  class  to 
which  they  belong :  as  elected  trustees 
they  would  be  called  on  to  perform, 
with  advantage  to  the  public,  functions 
pleasant  to  themselves.  Accordingly, 
the  elective  trusteeship  of  the  British 
Museum  has  been  termed  "  the  Blue 
Riband  of  Literature,"  and  as  such  it 
was  bestowed  on  Hallam  and  on  Macau- 
lay.  Let  us  note,  however,  the  collective 
results  of  a  system  which  throws  the 
choice  of  the  fifteen  Elected  Trustees 
exclusively  into  the  hands  of  the  nine 
Family  Trustees,  of  the  Royal  Trustee,  and 
of  the  thirty-five  Official  Trustees.  You 
have  seen  that  out  of  the  forty  members 
of  the  French  Academy,  in  1862,  at 
least  twenty — one-half  of  the  whole — 
were  among  the  most  eminent  men  of 
letters  in  France.  Here  is  the  list  of 
the  Elected  Trustees  of  the  British 
Museum  as  it  stood  at  the  beginning  of 
1863  : — The  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  Sir 
David  Dundas,  Sir  Philip  Egerton,  the 
Duke  of  Somerset,  Sir  Roderick  Murchi- 
son,  Dean,  Hilman,  Earl  Russell,  Mr. 
Gladstone,  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  Mr.  Wai- 
pole,  Lord  Eversley,  Mr.  Grote,  Lord 
Taunton,  the  Duke  of  Northumberland, 
and  Sir  Thomas  Phillips.  In  this  list, 
the  claims  of  literature  and  science  are 
represented  by  one-fifth  of  the  body — 
Sir  Roderick  Murchison,  Dean  Milman, 
and  Mr.  Grote.  It  may  be  said  that  Sir 
G.  C.  Lewis  was  an  author,  and  that  Earl 
Russell  and  Mr.  Gladstone  are  authors, 
of  more  or  less  note.  But  when  it  is 
observed  that  with  them  are  associated, 
as  Elected  Trustees,  officials  and  ex-offi- 
cials— the  Duke  of  Northumberland, 
Lord  Taunton,  Lord  Eversley,  Mr.  Wai- 
pole — who  have  no  such  pretensions,  one 
is  led  to  surmise  that  they  would  have 
been  elected  Trustees  had  Mr.  Gladstone 
never  written  on  Homer,  Earl  Russell 
on  the  History  of  Europe  in  the  eigh- 
teenth century,  or  the  late  Sir  G.  C. 
Lewis  on  the  Credibility  of  Early  Roman 
History.  The  hardship  is  that  official 
personages  like  the  Duke  of  Somerset, 
Earl  Russell,  and  Mr.  Gladstone,  are  at 
this  moment  trustees  in  virtue  of  then: 


Concerning  the  Organization  of  Literature. 


435 


respective  offices,  and  that  by  sitting  as 
Elected  Trustees  they  simply  displace 
men  intellectually  eminent,  but  without 
high  political  position.  To  such  an  ex- 
tent has  this  accumulation  of  the  same 
honours  on  the  same  head  been  carried, 
that  from  the  evidence  given  before  the 
Royal  Commission,  appointed  in  1850 
to  inquire  into  the  management  of  the 
Museum,  the  late  Lord  Aberdeen,  it 
appears,  was  once  a  Trustee  in  a  three- 
fold capacity.  He  was  a  Trustee  as 
Secretary  of  State,  a  Trustee  as  President 
of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  and  he 
was  also  an  Elected  Trustee  !  It  is  worth 
noting  that  Her  Majesty  has  set  the 
electing  Trustees  of  the  Museum  an 
example  which  they  might  lay  to  heart 
Until  recently,  the  solitary  Royal  Trustee 
had  always  been  one  of  the  highest  per- 
sonages in  the  kingdom,  generally  a 
member  of  the  Royal  Family.  The  royal 
trusteeship  was  held  by  the  late  Duke 
of  Cambridge  at  his  death  in  1850. 
Lately,  however,  it  has  been  conferred 
by  the  Crown  on  Dr.  Cureton,  who  is, 
at  least,  an  eminent  Syriac  scholar,  and 
who,  having  been  formerly  an  officer  of 
the  Museum,  has  a  practical  acquaint- 
ance with  the  details  of  the  establishment 
which  he  is  called  upon  to  co-operate  in 
governing. 

The  Royal  Commission  of  1850  saw 
the  injustice  and  the  evils  of  the  present 
system,  and  recommended  a  sweeping 
change  in  the  government  of  the  Museum. 
According  to  the  scheme  of  the  Com- 
mission, the  government  of  the  Museum 
was  to  be  entrusted  to  an  Executive 
Council,  consisting  of  a  chairman  and 
six  members.  The  Trustees  were  to 
elect  from  their  own  body  four  mem- 
bers of  the  Board  of  Government ;  the 
Crown  was  to  appoint  the  chairman, 
with  the  two  remaining  members  of  the 
Board — one  of  them  to  be  distinguished 
for  his  literary  attainments,  the  other 
for  his  attainments  in  natural  history. 
No  action  has  been  taken  upon  this 
Report,  and  the  constitution  and  govern- 
ment of  the  Museum  remain  in  1863 
much  the  same  as  they  were  in  1850. 
The  leaders  of  the  two  great  political 
.  •  parties  in  the  State  have  been  adroitly 


conciliated  and  gained  over  by  being 
chosen  Elected  Trustees,1  and  no  organic 
change  will  be  proposed  by  them.  It  is 
to  the  House  of  Commons  that  we  must 
look  for  a  reform :  and,  strange  to  say, 
in  the  matter  of  the  National  Collections, 
literary,  artistic,  and  scientific,  the  House 
of  Commons  has  more  than  once  of  late 
years  shown  a  singular  independence, 
and  refused  to  follow  the  advice  of  its 
accredited  party-leaders.  It  has  rejected 
by  large  majorities  the  proposal,  sup- 
ported by  the  leaders  of  parties  on  both 
sides  of  the  House,  to  break  up  the 
Museum  and  scatter  its  collections.  It 
remains  for  the  House  of  Commons  to 
make  amends  for  the  inertia  displayed 
by  successive  Governments,  whether 
Liberal  or  Conservative,  in  carrying 
into  effect  neither  the  spirit  nor  the 
letter  of  the  recommendations  of  the 
Royal  Commission  of  1850.  The  House 
of  Commons  could  easily  pass  a  resolution 
recommending  that  all  vacancies  among 
the  Elected  Trustees  should  be  filled  up 
from  men  eminent  in  literature,  scholar- 
ship, archaeology,  and  science,  and  that 
the  Elected  Trustees  should  themselves 
have  a  voice  in  the  election  of  their 
colleagues.  As  the  whole  constitution 
of  the  Museum  depends  on  the  will  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  which  votes  the 
funds  for  its  support,  such  a  resolution, 
though  merely  recommendatory,  would, 
doubtless,  have  the  force  of  a  com- 
mand. Parliamentary  and  public  opinion 
steadily  operating,  we  should  in  course 
of  time  have  in  the  Elected  Trustees  of 
the  British  Museum  a  British  Institute, 
comprehending  the  intellectual  nota- 
bilities of  the  country,  possessing  the 
confidence  of  the  nation,  appealing  suc- 
cessfully for  funds  to  Parliaments  and 
Governments,  and  worthy  to  be  ap- 
pointed the  executors  of  the  British 
Monthyons  and  Goberts.  They  would 
find  the  objects  of  the  Institution  which 
they  governed  capable  of  being  expanded 
and  varied.  Presiding  over  the  State 
Paper  and  the  Record  ^Offices,  the 
Master  of  the  Rolls  has  developed  enter- 
prises wider  than  the  customary  calen- 

1  Mr.   Disraeli  has  been   lately   elected   a 
trustee. 

F  F2 


436 


Sit  Doion  in  the  Lowest  Room. 


daring  and  cataloguing,  useful  and  in- 
dispensable as  they  are.  We  owe  to 
him,  among  other  benefits  conferred, 
the  publication,  at  an  expense  insig- 
nificant to  the  country,  of  the  series  of 
"  Chronicles  and  Memorials  of  Great 
"  Britain  and  Ireland  during  the  Middle 
"  Ages";  important  contributions,  which 
could  or  would  never  have  been  made 
by  private  publishing  enterprise,  to  the 
political,  ecclesiastical,  social — nay,  to 
the  intellectual  and  scientific  history  of 
mediaeval  England,  for  the  series  includes 
a  careful  edition  of  the  works  of  Eoger 
Bacon.  Men  of  originality  and  intelli- 
gence, of  experience  and  energy,  placed 
at  the  head,  or  in  the  headship,  of  the 
Museum,  with  that  vast  library  of  books 
and  manuscripts  under  their  care,  might 
soon  find  the  example  of  the  Master  of 
the  Bolls  worthy  of  imitation,  and 
Government  as  ready  in  their  case  as  in 
his  to  give  the  needful  preliminary  aid. 
What  "  Materials  for  English  History  " 
of  the  post-mediaeval  ages  Lie  buried  in 
the  manuscript  masses  of  the  Museum 
that  might  be  made  to  yield  new  gold 
to  skilful  "  prospectors  "  wisely  directed 
and  suitably  equipped  !  As  regards  the 
reproduction  of  books,  take  but  a  single 


instance.  If  the  student  wishes  to- 
consult  a  collection  of  the  memoirs, 
illustrating  the  history  of  the  great  civil 
war  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and 
edited  with  even  a  glimmer  of  modern 
light,  he  must  betake  himself  to  the 
twenty-six  volumes  of  the  French  trans- 
lation of  them,  which  Guizot  published 
forty  years  ago  !  Such  a  collection, 
edited  by  competent  Englishmen,  would 
not  only  be  a  boon  to  the  student,  but 
would  enrich  the  historic  literature  of 
the  country,  and  claim  the  aid  of  a 
parliamentary  grant  surely  not  less 
strongly  than  the  chronicles  of  medi- 
asval  England.  Many  are  the  enter- 
prises of  this  kind,  from  which  the  ordi- 
nary publisher  naturally  holds  aloof, 
that  would  reward  the  encouragement 
of  the  State,  and,  if  well-managed — 
wisdom  above  directing  intelligent  in- 
dustry below — would  entail  but  slight, 
if  any,  pecuniary  loss  in  the  long  run. 
Thus  a  reform  in  the  government  of  the 
Museum  might  be  the  precursor  of  an 
important  step  towards  the  solution  of 
the  hard  problem  with  which  this  article 
started — the  organization  of  literature 
itself. 


SIT  DOWN  IN  THE  LOWEST  EOOM. 


LIKE  flowers  sequestered  from  the  sun 

And  wind  of  summer,  day  by  day 
I  dwindled  paler,  whilst  my  hair 
Showed  the  first  tinge  of  grey. 

"  Oh  what  is  life,  that  we  should  live  ? 
Or  what  is  death,  that  we  must  die  ? 
A  bursting  bubble  is  our  life  : 
I  also,  what  am  I  ? " 

"What  is  your  grief  1   now  tell  me, 

sweet, 

That  I  may  grieve,"  my  sister  said  ; 
And  stayed  a    white    embroidering 

hand 
And  raised  a  golden  head  : 

,  Her  tresses  showed  a  richer  mass, 
Her  eyes  looked  softer  than  my  own, 


Her  figure  had  a  statelier  height, 
Her  voice  a  tenderer  tone. 

"  Some  must  be  second  and  not  first ; 

All  cannot  be  the  first  of  all : 
Is  not  this,  too,  but  vanity  1 
I  stumble  like  to  fall. 

"  So  yesterday  I  read  the  acts 

Of  Hector  and  each  clangorous  king 
With  Avrathful  great  ^Eacides  : — 
Old  Homer  leaves  a  sting." 

The  comely  face  looked  up  again, 
The   deft  hand  lingered    on    the 

thread  : 

"  Sweet,  tell  me  \vliat  is  Homer's  stingr 
Old  Homer's  sting?"  she  said. 


Sit  Down  in  the  Lowest  Room. 


437 


"  He  stirs  my  sluggish  pulse  like  wine, 
He  melts  me  like  the  wind  of  spice, 
Strong  as  strong  Ajax'  red  right  hand, 
And  grand  like  Juno's  eyes. 

"  I  cannot  melt  the  sons  of  men, 

I  cannot  fire  and  tempest-toss  : — 
Besides,  those. days  were  golden  days, 
Whilst  these  are  days  of  dross." 

She  laughed  a  feminine  low  laugh, 

Yet  did  not  stay  her  dexterous  hand : 
"  Now  tell  me  of  those  days,"  she  said, 
"  "When  time  ran  golden  sand." 

"Then  men  were  men  of  might  and 

right, 
Sheer  might,  at  least,  and  weighty 

swords ; 

Then  men,  in  open  blood  and  fire, 
Bore  witness  to  their  words, 

"  Crest-rearing    kings    with   wKistling 

spears ; 

But  if  these  shivered  in  the  shock 
They  wrenched  up    hundred-rooted 

trees, 
Or  hurled  the  eifacing  rock. 

*'  Then  hand  to  hand,  then  foot  to  foot, 
Stern  to  the  death-grip  grappling 

then, 

Who  ever  thought  of  gunpowder 
Amongst  these  men  of  men  ] 

"  They  knew  whose  hand  struck  home 

the  death, 
They  knew  who  broke  but  would 

not  bend, 
Could  venerate  an  equal  foe 

And  scorn  a  laggard  friend. 

"  Calm  in  the  utmost  stress  of  doom, 
Devout    toward     adverse    powers 

above, 

They  hated  with  intenser  hate 
And  loved  with  fuller  love. 

"  Then  heavenly  beauty  could  allay 

As   heavenly    beauty    stirred  the 

strife  : 

By  them  a  slave  was  worshipped  more 
Than  is  by  us  a  wife." 

She  laughed  again,  my  sister  laughed, 
Made    answer    o'er    the   laboured 
cloth  : 


"  I  rather  would  be  one  of  us 

Than  wife,  or  slave,  or  both." 

"  Oh  better  then  be  slave  or  wife 

Than  fritter  now  blank  life  away  : 
Then  night  had  holiness  of  night, 
And  day  was  sacred  day. 

"  The  princess  laboured  at  her  loom, 
Mistress  and  handmaiden  alike  ; 
Beneath  their  needles  grew  the  field 
With  warriors  armed  to  strike ; 

"  Or,  look  again,  dim  Dian's  face 

Gleamed  perfect   through  the  at- 
tendant night ; 

Were  such  not  better  than  those  holes 
Amid  that  waste  of  white  ? 

"  A  shame  it  is,  our  aimless  life  : 

I  rather  from  my  heart  woxild  feed 
From  silver  dish  in  gilded  stall 

With  wheat  and  wine  the  steed — 

"  The  faithful  steed  that  bore  my  lord 
In  safety  through  the  hostile  land, 
The   faithful  steed  that   arched  his 

neck 
To  fondle  with  my  hand." 

Her  needle  erred  ;  a  moment's  pause, 

A  moment's  patience,  all  was  well 

Then  she  :    "  But  just   suppose  the 

horse, 
Suppose  the  rider  fell  ? 

"  Then  captive  in  an  alien  house, 

Hungering  on  exile's  bitter  bread, — 
They  happy,  they  who  won  the  lot 
Of  sacrifice,"  she  said. 

Speaking  she  faltered,  while  her  look 
Showedforthherpassionlikeaglass : 
With  hand  suspended,  kindling  eye, 
Flushed  cheek,  how  fair  she  was ! 

"  Ah  well,  be  those  the  days  of  dross ; 

This,  if  you  will,  the  age  of  gold  : 

Yet  had  those  days  a  spark  of  warmth, 

While  these  are  somewhat  cold — 

"Are  somewhat  mean  and   cold  and 

slow, 

Are  stunted  from  heroic  growth  : 
We  gain  but  little  when  we  prove 
The  worthlessness  of  both. " 


438 


Sit  Down  in  the  Lowest  Room. 


"  But  life  is  in  our  hands,"  she  said  : 
"  In  our  own  hands  for  gain  or  loss  : 
Shall  not  the  Sevenfold  Sacred  Fire 
Suffice  to  purge  our  dross  ] 

"  Too  short  a  century  of  dreams, 

One  day  of  work  sufficient  length  : 
Why   should   not  you,  why  should 

not  I 
Attain  heroic  strength  1 

"  Our  life  is  given  us  as  a  blank  ; 

Ourselves  must  make  it  blest   or 

curst : 

"Who  dooms  me  I  shall  only  be 
The  second,  not  the  first? 

"  Learn  from  old  Homer,  if  you  will, 
Such  wisdom  as  his   Books   have 

said  : 

In  one  the  acts  of  Ajax  shine, 
In  one  of  Diomed. 

"  Honoured    all    heroes    whose    high 

deeds 
Thro'  life  till  death  enlarge  their 

span  : 
Only  Achilles  in  his  rage 

And  sloth  is  less  than  man." 

"  Achilles  only  less  than  man  1 

He  less  than  man  who,  half  a  god, 
Discomfited  all  Greece  with  rest, 
Cowed  Ilion  with  a  nod  ? 

"  He  offered  vengeance,  lifelong  grief 

To  one  dear  ghost,  uncounted  price  : 
Beasts,  Trojans,  adverse  gods,  himself, 
Heaped  up  the  sacrifice. 

"  Self-immolated  to  his  friend, 

Shrined  in  world's  wonder,  Homer's 

page, 

Is  this  the  man,  the  less  than  men, 
Of  this  degenerate  age  ] " 

"  Gross  from  his  acorns,  tusky  boar 
Does  memorable  acts  like  his ; 
So  for  her  snared  offended  young 
Bleeds  the  swart  lioness." 

But  here  she  paused ;  our  eyes  had 

met, 

And  I  was  whitening  with  the  jeer  ; 
She  rose  :  "I  went  too  far,"  she  said ; 
Spoke  low  :  "  Forgive  me,  dear. 


"  To  me  our  days  seem  pleasant  days, 

Our  home  a  haven  of  pure  content ; 
Forgive  me  if  I  said  too  much, 
So  much  more  than  I  meant. 

"  Homer,  tho'  greater  than  his  gods, 
With  rough-hewn  virtues  was  suf- 
ficed 
And  rough-hewn  men  :  but  what  are 

such 
To  us  who  learn  of  Christ  1 " 

The  much-moved  pathos  of  her  voice, 
Her  almost  tearful  eyes,  her  cheek 
Grown  pale,  confessed  the  strength  of 

love 
Which  only  made  her  speak  : 

For  mild  she  was,  of  few  soft  words, 

Most  gentle,  easy  to  be  led, 
Content  to  listen  when  I  spoke 
And  reverence  what  I  said  ; 

I  elder  sister  by  six  years  ; 

Not  half  so  glad,  or  wise,  or  good  : 
Her  Avords  rebuked  my  secret  self 
And  shamed  me  where  I  stood. 

She  never  guessed  her  words  reproved 

A  silent  envy  nursed  within, 
A  selfish,  souring  discontent 
Pride-born,  the  devil's  sin. 

I  smiled,  half  bitter,  half  in  jest  : 

"  The  wisest  man  of  all  the  wise 
Left  for  his  summary  of  life 
'  Vanity  of  vanities.' 

"  Beneath  the  sun  there's  nothing  new  : 
Men  flow,  men  ebb,  mankind  flows 

on  : 

If  I  am  wearied  of  my  life, 
Why  so  was  Solomon. 

"  Vanity  of  vanities  he  preached 

Of  all  he  found,  of  all  he  sought  : 
Vanity  of  vanities,  the  gist 

Of  all  the  words  he  taught. 

"  This  in  the  wisdom  of  the  world, 

In  Homer's  page,  in  all,  we  find  : 
As  the  sea  is  not  filled,  so  yearns 
Man's  universal  mind. 

"  This  Homer  felt,  who  gave  his  men  * 
With  glory  but  a  transient  state  : 
His  very  Jove  could  not  reverse 
Irrevocable  fate. 


Sit  Down  in  the  Lowest  Room. 


439> 


"  Uncertain  all  their  lot  save  this — 
Who   wins   must  lose,   who  lives 

must  die  : 

All  trodden  out  into  the  dark 
Alike,  all  vanity." 

She  scarcely  answered  when  I  paused, 

But  rather  to  herself  said  :  "  One 
Is  here/'  low- voiced  and  loving,  "Yea, 
Greater  than  Solomon." 

So  both  were  silent,  she  and  I  : 

She  laid  her  work  aside,  and  went 
Into  the  garden- walks,  like  spring, 

All  gracious  with  content, 
A  little  graver  than  her  wont, 

Because  her  words  had  fretted  me  j 
Not  warbling  quite  her  merriest  tune 

Bird-like  from  tree  to  tree. 
I  chose  a  book  to  read  and  dream  : 

Yet  all  the  while  with  furtive  eyes 
t    Marked  how  she  made  her  choice  of 

flowers 
Intuitively  wise, 

And   ranged   them  with  instinctive 

taste 
Which  all  my  books  had  failed  to 

teach ; 
Fresh  rose  herself,  and  daintier 

Than  blossom  of  the  peach. 
By  birthright  higher  than  myself, 

Tho'  nestling  of  the  self-same  nest : 
No  fault  of  hers,  no  fault  of  mine, 
But  stubborn  to  digest. 

I  watched  her,  till  my  book  unmarked 

Slid  noiseless  to  the  velvet  floor  ; 
Till  all  the  opulent  summer-world 
Looked  poorer  than  before. 

Just  then  her  busy  fingers  ceased, 

Her  fluttered  colour  went  and  came ; 
I  knew  whose  step  was  on  the  walk, 
Whose  voice   would   name   her 

name. 
*  *  *  * 

Well,  twenty  years  have  passed  since 

then  : 

My  sister  now,  a  stately  wife 
Still  fair,  looks  back  in  peace  and  sees 
The  longer  half  of  life — 

The  longer  half  of  prosperous  life, 
With  little  grief,  or  fear,  or  fret : 
She  loved,  and,  loving  long  ago, 
Is  loved  and  loving  yet. 


A  husband  honourable,  brave, 

Is  her  main  wealth  in  all  the  world  : 
And  next  to  him  one  like  herself, 
One  daughter  golden-curled  ; 

Fair  image  of  her  own  fair  youth, 

As  beautiful  and  as  serene, 
With  almost  such  another  love 
As  her  own  love  has  been. 

Yet,  tho'  of  world- wide  charity, 

And  in  her  home  most  tender  dove. 
Her  treasure  and  her  heart  are  stored 
In  the  home-land  of  love  : 

She  thrives,  God's  blessed  husbandry ; 

She  like  a  vine  is  full  of  fruit; 
Her  passion-flower  climbs  up  toward 

heaven 
Tho'  earth  still  binds  its  root. 

I  sit  and  watch  my  sister's  face  : 

How  little  altered  since  the  hours 
When  she,  a  kind,  light-hearted  girl, 
Gathered  her  garden  flowers ; 

Her  song  just  mellowed  by  regret 

For  having  teased  me  with  her  talk; : 
Then  all-forgetful  as  she  heard 
One  step  upon  the  walk. 

While  I  ?     I  sat  alone  and  watched 

My  lot  in  life,  to  live  alone, 
In  mine  own  world  of  interests, 
Much  felt  but  little  shown. 

Not  to  be  first :  how  hard  to  learn 
That  lifelong  lesson  of  the  past ; 
Line   graven  on  line  and  stroke  on< 

stroke ; 

But,  thank  God,  learned  at  last 
So  now  in  patience  I  possess 

My  soul  year  after  tedious  year, 
Content  to  take  the  lowest  place, 
The  place  assigned  me  here. 

Yet  sometimes,  when  I  feel  my  strength 
Most  weak,  and  life  most  burden- 
some, 
I  lift  mine  eyes  up  to  the  hills 

From   whence   my     help    shall 
come : 

Yea,  sometimes  still  I  lift  my  heart 

To  the  Archangelic  trumpet-burst, 
When  all  deep  secrets  shall  be  shown,. 
And  many  last  be  first. 

CHRISTINA  G.  UOSSETTI. 


440 


THE  LAW  AND   THE   CHUECH. 


BY   A   LAY   CHURCHMAN. 


THE  great  case  of  the  "  Essays  and  Ee- 
views  "  has  at  last  reached  its  termina- 
tion, and  no  matter  of  equal  importance 
has  been  decided  by  an  English  court 
of  justice  for  a  great  length  of  years. 
The  charges  against  Dr.  Williams  and 
Mr.  Wilson  were  scotched  before 
Dr.  Lushington;  they  have  been  fairly 
killed  by  the  Committee  of  Council,  and, 
notwithstanding  the  tone  taken  by  the 
greater  part  of  the  public  press,  the 
gravity  of  this  step  cannot  be  overrated. 
The  tone  which  it  is  fashionable  to 
take  upon  the  subject — the  tone  of  the 
Times,  which  in  this  instance  is  oddly 
enough  at  one  with  the  Record  and  the 
Guardian — is,  that  the  defendants  escap- 
ed "by  the  skin  of  their  teeth," — an 
expression,  by  the  way,  which  is  also  to 
be  found  in  the  observations  of  that  im- 
portant organ,  the  Morning  Post — that 
they  have  won  a  merely  legal  victory, 
that  the  significant  abstinence  of  the 
Court  from  expressing  any  opinion  on 
the  merits  of  the  "  Essays-  and  Eeviews," 
and  the  dissent  of  the  two  Archbishops 
from  the  judgment  on  the  subject  of  the 
Scriptures  give  the  moral  victory  to  the 
prosecutors ;  that,  in  short,  a  verdict  of 
not  proven  has  been  returned,  and  that 
the  defendants  ought  to  make  a  good 
use  of  their  *escape  by  taking  care  not  to 
repeat  their  offence.  In  short,  the 
general  tone  of  the  press  is,  "  Not  guilty, 
but  do  it  not  again."  The  writer  in  the 
Times,  indeed,  goes  a  little  further  than 
this.  He  tells  us  that  the  fact  remains 
that  the  defendants  have  established 
their  right  to  criticise  the  Bible  freely, 
but  this  is  rather  by  the  way.  The  promi- 
nent part  of  the  article  is  the  rebuke  to 
the  prisoners  who  have  had  such  a 
fortunate  escape,  and  the  exhortation 
to  them  not  to  presume  upon  their  good 
luck  for  the  future.  All  this  may  be 
soothing  and  satisfactory  to  people  who, 
above  all  things,  hate  to  have  cherished 


convictions  disturbed,  and  who,  what- 
ever may  be  their  own  faith,  have  no 
belief  at  all  that  the  great  bulk  of  man- 
kind will  ever  have  their  creed  based  on 
reasonable  conviction.  It  is  the  natural 
language  of  those  who  are  orthodox  from 
idleness,  or  who  affect  orthodoxy  because 
they  are  hopelessly  sceptical. 

To  people  who  really  believe  that 
there  is  any  truth  in  religion  at  all,  and 
that  that  truth  is  to  be  discovered  in  the 
same  way  as  truth  on  other  subjects, 
namely,  by  free  and  patient  inquiry,  the 
judgments  in  question  will  bear  alto- 
gether a  different  aspect.  In  the  first 
place  they  will  observe,  that  the  tone  of 
lecture  and  grave  rebuke  which  is 
adopted  towards  the  defendants  is  alto- 
gether out  of  place.  If  there  had  been 
any  question  of  fact  in  the  case,  if  the 
defendants  had  been  acquitted  because 
there  was  a  difficulty  in  proving  publi- 
cation, or  because  there  might  be  a  doubt 
as  to  the  precise  meaning  of  their  ex- 
pressions (and  this,  no  doubt,  was  the 
cage  as  to  one  of  the  charges,  and  espe- 
cially as  to  one  of  the  defendants,  Dr. 
Williams),  there  might  have  been  some 
propriety  in  the  language  used,  but  with 
respect  to  the  really  important  part  of 
the  charges  it  is  simply  childish  to  speak 
in  this  way.  Mr.  Wilson  clearly  dis- 
sented from  the  widely  spread  belief 
that  every  word  in  the  Bible  is  true  in 
fact  and  sound  in  morals.  He  spoke 
of  "the  dark  crust  of  human  error" 
which  surrounded  the  "  bright  centre  of 
spiritual  truth."  He  also  expressly  de- 
nied his  belief  in  the  eternity  of  future 
punishments,  in  the  common  meaning 
of  the  word  eternal  The  question  be- 
fore the  Court  was  whether  or  not  this 
was  legal — in  both  cases  the  Court  held 
broadly  that  it  was.  The  material  part 
of  the  judgment  is  comprised  in  a  very 
few  lines,  but  they  are  lines  which  form 
the  Magna  Charta  of  honest  inquiry  in 


The  Law  and  the  Church. 


441 


the  Church.  "  The  question  is,  whether 
"  in  them "  (i.  e.  the  6th  and  20th  of 
the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  the  Ordination 
Service,  and  the  Nicene  Creed)  "  the 
Church  has  affirmed  that  "  every  part 
"  of  every  book  of  Scripture  was  written 
"  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy 
"  Spirit  and  is  the  word  of  God  ?  " 

"  Certainly  this  doctrine  is  not  in- 
"  volved  in  the  statement  of  the  5th 
"  Article,  that  Holy  Scripture  containeth 
"  all  things  necessary  to  salvation.  But 
"  inasmuch  as  it  doth  so  "  (i.  e.  inasmuch 
as  Holy  Scripture  does  contain  all  things 
necessary  to  salvation)  "  from  the  revela- 
"  tions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Bible 
"  may  well  be  denominated  '  Holy,'  and 
"  said  to  be  <  the  Word  of  God,'  '  God's 
"  "Word  written,'  or  '  Holy  Writ,'  terms 
"  which  cannot  be  affirmed  to  be  clearly 
"  predicated  of  every  statement  and  re- 
"  presentation  contained  in  every  part 
"  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 

"  The  framers  of  the  Articles  have  not 
"  used  the  word  inspiration  as  applied 
"  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  nor  have  they 
"  laid  down  anything  as  to  the  nature, 
"  extent,  or  limits,  of  that  operation  of 
"  the  Holy  Spirit." 

This  is  the  net  result  of  the  whole 
controversy  relating  to  the  Bible.  It 
has  established  beyond  the  possibility  of 
doubt  that,  as  far  as  legal  penalties  go, 
the  clergy  are  fully  at  liberty  to  criticise 
every  part  of  the  Bible,  and  to  inquire 
into  not  merely  the  truth  of,  but  the 
morality  of  any  part  which  may  to  them 
appear  doubtful.  The  legality  of  what 
have  often  been  stigmatized  as  rationalistic 
views  of  the  Bible  is  now  legally  estab- 
lished. The  right  of  clergymen  hold- 
ing these  views  to  a  place  in  the  Church 
of  England  stands  on  the  same  footing 
as  the  right  of  the  opponents  and  main- 
tainers  of  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  rege- 
neration. The  judgment  on  the  "Essays 
and  Reviews"  completes  the  work  which 
was  begun  by  the  judgment  on  Mr. 
Gorhani  and  the  Bishop  of  Exeter. 

It  is  easy  enough  for  the  Times 
and  other  journals  to  depreciate  the  im- 
portance of  such  an  event.  Radically 
sceptical  minds  may  feel  a  pleasure  in 
asking  whether  anybody  will  care  to 


follow  out  such  speculations  as  those  of 
the  "Essays  and  Reviews,"  or  of  Dr. 
Colenso,  after  the  excitement  of  doing 
an  illegal  act  has  been  removed ;  but 
the  cynical  and  blase  view  of  the  matter 
is  in  reality  absurdly  shallow.  It  springs 
from  ignorance  or  forgetfulness  of  the 
fact  that  the  religious  faculties  form  a 
part  of  human  nature,  and  one  of  its 
most  important  and  most  deeply-seated 
parts  ;  that  these  faculties  never  can,  or 
will,  or  ought,  to  be  satisfied  until  they 
have  been  brought  into  harmony  with 
the  other  faculties,  and  especially  with 
those  of  the  intellect;  and  that  this 
cannot  be  until  it  has  been  ascertained 
by  the  application  of  appropriate  methods 
what  is  the  truth  respecting  the  object 
of  these  faculties,  or  what,  if  truth  is 
not  obtainable,  is  the  most  probable 
view.  Depreciate  the  seven  Essayists, 
still  this  fact  remains,  and  will  remain, 
that  the  bulk  of  the  people  of  England 
have  always  been  accustomed  to  believe 
that  the  Bible  is  all  equally  true ;  that 
these  writers  have  attracted  their  atten- 
tion to  arguments  of  the  most  pointed 
kind,  but  not  generally  known  to  or- 
dinary people  till  very  lately,  to  prove 
that  this  is  a  vulgar  error ;  that  the 
public  are  anxious  and  uneasy  on  the 
subject,  and  are  rapidly  becoming  more 
anxious  and  more  uneasy,  and  that  that 
anxiety  and  uneasiness  will  not  and 
cannot  and  ought  not  to  be  set  at  rest 
until  the  whole  truth  is  fairly  stated, 
and  the  matter  discussed  to  the  very 
bottom. 

To  those  who  care  to  be  honest  and 
consistent  in  their  own  eyes  ;  to  those 
who  have  to  educate  children,  and  to 
take  the  responsibility  of  putting  the 
Bible  into  their  hands,  with  instructions 
as  to  its  character;  to  those  who  feel 
that  there  is  a  vital  connexion  between 
morality  and  theology,  and-  that  a  false 
theology  cannot  lead  to  a  true  morality; 
to  those  who  attach  deep  importance  to 
prayer,  public  and  private,  and  cannot 
bear  to  go  before  their  God  with  a  lie 
in  their  mouths ;  to  every  one,  in  a 
word,  to  whom  religion  is  a  matter  of 
solid  and  awful  importance  —  and  of 
such  persons  the  great  bulk  of  the 


442 


The  Law  and  the  Church. 


nation  is  composed — it  is,  and  ought  to 
be,  an  a\vful  and  even  a  horrible  thing 
to  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  to 
turn  away  from  truth  because  it  disturbs 
cherished  convictions,  and  to  disown 
obligations  to  those  who,  in  fact,  have 
been  their  teachers,  by  the  paltry  as- 
sertion that  all  that  was  to  be  said 
on  the  subject  was  known  to  others 
long  before,  or  by  the  false  assertion 
that  they  knew  it  themselves.  The 
bulk  of  the  English  nation  will  say  to 
this  contemptuous  minority,  "  If  you 
really  knew  all  this,  which  we  very 
much  doubt,  the  more  shame  to  you  for 
never  telling  us.  It  is  new  to  us,  if  it 
is  old  to  you  ;  and,  however  you  may 
make  light  of  the  importance  of  truth, 
or  of  the  possibility  of  attaining  it,  we 
feel  that  we  must  know  how  these 
matters  stand,  if  our  religion  is  to  be  of 
any  practical  use  at  alL" 

To  persons  of  this  mind  the  judg- 
ment  of  the  Privy  Council  ought  to  be 
a  great  relief.  The  plain  common 
sense  of  the  matter,  which  has  also 
been  declared  by  the  highest  authority 
to  be  the  law,  is,  that  at  the  time  when 
the  Articles  were  settled  these  questions 
had  not  arisen,  and  were  therefore  not 
decided  by  those  who  framed  the  Articles. 
If  they  had  framed  an  Article  on  the 
question  in  iiieir  tlwn  state  of  knowledge, 
no  doubt  they  would  have  affirmed  the 
truth  of  the  whole  Bible  equally.  Pro- 
bably with  our  lights  they  would  have 
done  no  such  thing,  at  all  events ;  most 
happily  for  every  one  who  cares  either 
for  truth  or  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
Church  of  England,  they  did  nothing 
of  the  kind.  The  legal  effects  of  this 
are  now  decided,  but  the  public  at  large 
will  say  with  reason,  We  look  more  to 
the  moral  than  to  the  legal  aspect  of 
the  case ;  and  is  a  clergyman  morally 
justified  in  criticising,  with  this  degree 
of  freedom,  what  has  hitherto  been  held 
to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  criticism,  and 
what  all  the  principal  dignitaries  of  the 
Church  still  view  in  that  light  1 

The  answer  is,  that  not  only  is  he 
morally  justified  in  doing  so,  but  he  is 
under  the  strongest  moral  obligation  to 
do  so,  according  to  his  lights  and  oppor- 


tunities. No  one  who  has  anything  like  a 
competent  acquaintance  with  the  history 
and  tenets  of  the  Church  of  England 
can  fail  to  know  that  great  difference  of 
opinion  has  been  tolerated  amongst  the 
clergy  ever  since  its  first  establishment. 
Lutherans  and  Calvinists ;  men  who  dif- 
fered from  Rome  principally  on  points 
of  Church  government;  men  who  differed 
from  Socinians  only  by  a  line  not  very 
easily  traceable ;  Hooker  and  Cartwright : 
Laud,  Chillingworth,  and  Baxter ;  Beve- 
ridge  and  Tillotson ;  Samuel  Clarke, 
Hoadly,  Waterland,  Middleton,  and 
Warburton ;  Venn,  Wesley,  Herbert 
Marsh,  and  Horsley  ;  Dr.  Pusey,  Dr. 
Stanley,  and  Dr.  M'Neile,  are,  or  have 
been,  ministers  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land. It  is  not  unfrequently  said  that 
these  and  other  eminent  divines  differed 
only  on  secondary  points,  and  that  in 
essentials  they  were  agreed ;  but  this  is 
a  complete  delusion.  They  agreed  in 
the  practical  inference  that  the  form  of 
worship  in  the  Common  Prayer-book 
was  one  which  ought  to  be  used,  and 
each  would  probably  have  said  in  general 
terms  that  he  believed  in  a  certain  set  of 
doctrines ;  but,  wh  en  they  came  to  explain 
their  views,  and  state  more  particularly 
the  sense  which  they  attached  to  the 
doctrines,  it  would  be  found  that  each 
man  had  an  entirely  different  view 
of  his  own,  and  that  the  systems 
formed  by  putting  together  their  dif- 
ferent opinions  differed  in  important 
particulars,  and  still  more  in  the  propor- 
tion between  the  parts  and  in  the  general 
eifect  and  result  of  the  whole. 

Can  any  two  systems  relating  to 
the  same  subject-matter  differ  more 
widely  than  the  Calvinistic  and  semi- 
Romanist  doctrines  1  They  differ  in 
their  views  of  God,  in  their  views  of 
man,  and  in  their  views  of  the  relation 
between  God  and  man ;  and  these 
three  subjects  make  up  collectively  the 
whole  of  religion.  So,  too,  the  creed 
of  such  men  as  Bishop  Tillotson,  War- 
burton,  and  Paley  (who  differed  widely 
amongst  themselves),  differs  irrecon- 
cilably both  from  the  High  Church 
and  the  Low  Church  theology.  In 
short,  the  phraseology  and  the  doc- 


The  Law  and  the  Church. 


trine  of  the  Church  of  England — 
and  the  same  might  be  said  of  the 
Church  of  Koine — is  wide  enough  to 
cover  fundamental  differences.  Human 
nature  is  too  strong  for  dogmas.  So 
long  as  there  are  many  men,  there  will 
be  many  minds,  in  theology  as  well  as 
in  everything  else.  It  is  the  great 
merit  of  the  Church  of  England,  that 
for  a  great  length  of  time  it  has  been 
in  the  habit  of  doing  openly  what  all 
ecclesiastical  bodies  have  been  obliged 
to  do,  and  what  most  of  them  have 
done  secretly.  It  has  avowedly  allowed 
great  differences  of  opinion  amongst  the 
clergy ;  but,  if  this  is  so,  what  con- 
scientious obligation  lies  upon  any 
clergyman  to  adopt  the  opinions  of  any 
other  clergyman  or  set  of  clergymen? 
Would  any  one,  a  few  years  ago,  have 
cared  to  know  whether  Dr.  Williams 
and  Mr.  Wilson  agreed  or  differed  with 
Dr.  Longley  and  Dr.  Thompson,  and 
what  difference  is  made  in  the  intrinsic 
value  of  the  men,  by  the  fact  that  the 
Prime  Minister  appointed  the  two  last- 
named  doctors  to  be  Archbishops  of 
Canterbury  and  York  ?  No  one  is  spe- 
cially troubled  at  the  difference  between 
the  Archbishops  and  the  Bishop  of 
London,  and  it  is  highly  probable,  if 
that  is  a  matter  of  any  importance, 
that,  if  the  Archbishops  were  separately 
cross-examined  as  to  their  own  private 
opinions  on  the  Bible,  and  as  to  their 
reasons  for  holding  them,  they  would 
be  found  to  ditfer  widely  from  each 
other. 

What,  then,  is  the  conscientious 
obligation  of  a  clergyman  who  has  no 
formularies  to  guide  him,  no  general 
consent  of  eminent  divines,  and  who 
is  not  in  any  way  bound  to  respect 
or  share  in  the  opinions  of  any  con- 
temporary authority  whatever?  Any 
one  who  faces  the  question  candidly 
will  be  obliged  to  own  that  it  is  ab- 
solutely impossible  to  discover  any  other 
test  than  that  of  legality.  A  clergyman 
no  doubt  is  bound  to  teach  the  doctrines 
which  he  has  promised  to  teach.  At 
any  rate  he  is  bound  not  to  contradict 
them ;  but  what  has  he  promised  to 
teach  or  not  to  contradict  ?  The  Thirty- 


nine  Articles.  And  who  is  to  say  what 
they  mean?  In  the  last  resort  the 
Queen  in  Council,  for  it  must  never  be 
forgotten  that  the  supremacy  of  the 
Crown  in  all  causes,  civil  and  eccle- 
clesiastical — that  is,  in  the  present  case, 
the  supremacy  of  the  Judicial  Com- 
mittee of  the  Privy  Council — is  itself 
one  of  the  Articles  of  the  Church  of 
England.  It  is  in  this  sense  perfectly 
true,  as  Mr.  Wilson  said  —  and  the 
Bishop  of  St.  David's  has  since  said  the 
same  thing — that  the  legal  obligation 
is  the  measure  of  the  moral  obligation. 
The  phrase  may  sound  harsh,  and  to 
inaccurate  observers  it  no  doubt  has 
a  harsh  appearance.  It  sounds  as  if 
those  who  used  it  meant  to  say  that 
they  cared  nothing  for  the  moral  cha- 
racter of  their  conduct,  that  they  paid 
no  attention  to  the  degree  in  which 
they  might  deviate  from  the  standard 
which  they  were  bound  in  honour  and 
conscience  to  maintain,  that  they  feared 
nothing  but  legal  punishment,  and  would 
submit  to  no  compulsion  less  rough  than 
that  of  an  ecclesiastical  court  and  the 
legal  process  at  its  disposal.  In  fact, 
the  phrase  in  question  seenis  by  many 
persons  to  have  been  understood  as  if 
those  who  used  it  had  said,  "  No  doubt, 
in  honour  and  conscience,  I  owe  you 
2QL  ;  but,  as  you  have  no  memorandum 
in  writing  to  satisfy  the  Statute  of" 
Frauds,  I  will  not  pay,  and  you  cannot 
make  me  ;  '  the  legal  obligation  is  the 
measure  of  the  moral  one.'  " 

This  is  an  entire  misapprehension.  The 
meaning  of  the  phrase  in  question  is, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  specify  any  sot 
of  opinions  which  a  clergyman  is  uiul-r 
any  obligation  whatever  to  hold,  except 
those  contained  in  the  Thirty  -  nine 
Articles — a  document  which,  as  even- 
one  knows,  is  in  many  parts  incom- 
plete. To  what,  then,  is  he  bound. 
as  to  the  ambiguous  and  incomplete 
parts  of  this  document?  He  is  bou:;:i 
to  that  which  the  highest  authority 
(declared  by  the  document  itself  to 
be  the  Judicial  Committee  of  th»> 
Privy  Council)  shall  decide  to  be  i 
meaning.  As  to  matters  which  the 
document  so  interpreted  does  not  decide, 


444 


The  Law  and  the  Church. 


he  is  in  the  position  of  an  independent 
inquirer  into  truth,  and  is  under  a  moral 
obligation  to  discover  and  uphold  it  by 
-every  means  in  his  power.  It  is  in  this 
sense  that  the  legal  measures  the  moral 
obligation.  This  often  happens  in  private 
life,  and  in  matters  unconnected  with 
theology.  A  family  finds  that  a  distant 
relation  has  left  a  large  property  amongst 
them  by  a  will,  of  which  the  meaning  is 
altogether  obscure,  and  which  was  obvi- 
ously made  in  ignorance  or  forgetfulness 
of  the  state  of  the  family,  and  of  the 
chronology  of  the  births  and  deaths  of 
its  members.  What  would  the  most 
united  and  affectionate  family  do  under 
the  circumstances,  if  they  wished  to  act 
with  the  most  perfect  regard  to  honour 
and  morality?  Would  they  not  say, 
"  No  one  of  us  has  more  claim  to  this 
property,  apart  from  the  will,  than  any 
other,  and,  honestly,  we  do  not  know 
what  the  will  means.  Let  us  take  the 
opinion  of  eminent  lawyers,  or,  if  neces- 
sary, of  the  Court  of  Chancery,  as  to 
the  legal  effect  of  the  will,  and  be  bo;md 
by  the  result;  'the  legal  obligation  is 
the  measure  of  the  moral  obligation.'  " 
The  moral  obligation  imposed  on  a 
clergyman  with  respect  to  his  belief 
arises  from  his  subscription,  from  his 
individual  promise,  and  the  exact  mean- 
ing of  this  can  be  decided  only  by  a 
court  of  law. 

If  this  view  is  the  true  one,  it  hardly 
admits  of  a  doubt  that  the  judgment  is  a 
great  happiness  for  every  honest  member 
of  the  Church  of  England.  Let  any  one 
consider  for  a  moment  what  would  have 
been  the  result  of  an  opposite  decision. 
Suppose  it  had  been  decided  that  the 
clergy  were  to  be  excluded  from  all 
bond  fide  criticism  of  the  Bible ;  that 
they  were  not  to  be  allowed  to  say  this 
or  that  statement  is  not  accurate ;  this 
or  that  book  has  usually  been  assigned  to 
a  wrong  author,  or  to  a  different  period 
from  that  at  which  in  fact  it  was  written. 
Such  a  decision,  of  course,  would  have  been 
a  great  triumph  for  the  stricter  classes  of 
the  clergy.  They  would  have  been  able 
to  say,  with  perfect  truth,  to  the  liberal 
party  in  the  Church,  "You  may  be  right, 
or  you  may  be  wrong,  but  honest  pro- 


fessors of  your  real  opinions  you  are  not, 
and  cannot  be,  so  long  as  you  retain 
your  preferment."  This  most  formidable 
of  all  weapons  is  now  taken  out  of  their 
hands,  and,  if  the  clergy  are  but  true  to 
themselves,  they  have  the  power  of  dis- 
cussing, as  it  never  has  yet  been  dis- 
cussed, at  least  in  this  country,  with 
perfect  freedom,  and  in  the  calmest  and 
most  deliberate  way,  one  of  the  most 
interesting  questions  that  ever  engaged 
human  attention — the  question,  namely, 
What  is  the  Bible  really?  This,  of 
course,  will  lead  by  degrees  to  a  free 
and  full  re-examination  of  much  of 
our  existing  theology,  and,  it  may  be 
hoped  without  any  extreme  rashness, 
to  its  settlement  on  a  sound  basis. 
That  this  will  have  to  be  done  some 
time  is  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday ; 
that  it  had  better  be  done  by  friendly 
hands  in  the  Church  than  by  rough 
and  unfriendly  critics  outside  of  it,  must 
be  obvious  to  every  one  who  can  in  the 
least  degree  appreciate  the  difference 
between  reform  and  revolution. 

The  conduct  of  those  who  are  most 
bitterly  opposed  to  the  recent  decisions 
affords  an  instructive  and  conclusive 
proof  of  the  fact,  that  they  agree  with 
the  general  principle  that  the  question 
is,  after  all,  a  legal  one  ;  and  that,  like 
it  or  like  it  not,  room  cannot  be  denied 
to  those  who  have  now  established 
their  right  to  a  standing-ground  in 
the  Church.  If  the  archbishops  who 
dissented  from  the  judgment  of  the 
Privy  Council,  and  the  bishops  who 
joined  in  condemning  the  "  Essays  and 
Reviews,"  had  been  able  to  go  further, 
if  they  had  firmly  believed  in  any 
coherent  system  of  their  own,  based  on 
grounds  which  challenged  inquiry  and 
would  command  the  assent  of  the  reason- 
able and  devout,  their  course  would  have 
been  clear.  They  would  have  said,  The 
law  has  decided  against  us.  We  bow 
to  its  decision,  but  we  will  use  that 
freedom  which  is  open  to  us  as  to  all 
other  English  subjects.  We  will  throw 
off  from  the  Church  that  which  makes 
it  appear  to  sanction  what  we  know, 
and  can  prove,  to  be  damnable  errors, 
destructive  of  the  souls  of  those  who 


Memorandum  on  a  "  Story  of  the  Great  Mutiny." 


445 


entertain  them.  We  will  lay  down  our 
mitres,  we  will  resign  our  palaces,  our 
incomes,  and  our  seats  in  the  House  of 
Lords ;  we  will  set  up  the  pure  and  true 
doctrine  of  the  Church  independently 
of  all  State  trammels,  and  leave  the 
Judicial  Committee  to  rule  over  willing 
and  degraded  slaves.  They  do  not 
say  this,  or  anything  like  it.  As 
yet  we  have  heard  nothing  of  seces- 
sion, and  why  not  ? x  Is  it  "because  of 
an  ignohle  preference  of  place,  power, 
and  money  over  truth  and  the  Gospel  1 
To  answer  yes  would  be,  to  the  last 
degree,  unjust  and  untrue.  There  is  no 
reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  the 
accomplished  and  pious  men  who  hold 
the  high  offices  of  the  Church  are 
mercenary  or  incapable  of  making  sacri- 
fices in  a  good  cause.  They  have,  in 

1  See  however  a  letter  from  Dr.  Pusey  to 
the  Editor  of  the  Record  (Feb.  19,  1864), 
which  looks  in  the  direction  indicated. 


a  high  degree,  the  honourable  qualities 
of  Christians  and  gentlemen.  Many  of 
them  have  given  strong  proofs  of  disin- 
terested zeal  in  all  good  and  charitable 
causes.  The  late  Bishop  of  London  gave 
away  what  might  have  constituted  a 
princely  fortune  for  his  family.  The  late 
Bishop  of  Durham,  who  was  attacked 
with  the  most  vindictive  acrimony  for 
giving  a  living  to  his  son-in-law,  died 
poor.  No  man  in  his  senses  could 
charge  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  with  caring 
for  money ;  nor  has  any  one  a  right  to 
suppose  that  the  members  of  the  Bench 
would  shrink  from  any  duty  which  con- 
science distinctly  -.imposed  upon  them. 
"What,  then,  does  their  acquiescence 
prove]  It  proves  that  they  have  no 
strong  convictions  on  the  points  settled 
by  the  Privy  Council,  no  clear,  plain 
system  of  doctrine  on  which  they  can 
appeal  to  the  country  against  the  law  as 
now  established.  * 


MEMOEANDUM  ON  A  «  STOEY  OF  THE  GEEAT  MUTINY."1 

COMMUNICATED   BY   MA  JOB-GENERAL  VINCENT  EYRE,  C.B., 
LATE    ROYAL    ARTILLERY  (BENGAL). 


IT  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  able  and 
entertaining  writer  of  the  above  "  story" 
should  not  have  been  content  to  accept 
the  plain,  unvarnished  tale  of  the  "Eelief 
of  Arrah  "  as  originally  delivered  in  offi- 
cial despatches  published  at  the  time, 
and  the  truth  of  which  has  never  been 
impugned,  but  has  wandered  into  the 
uncertain  regions  of  romance  in  quest  of 
"  telling  incidents  "  wherewith  to  season 
a  pleasant  dish  for  the  public  palate, 
not,  perhaps,  duly  considering  the  inju- 
rious tendency  of  these  dangerous  em- 
bellishments, as  far  as  they  are  calculated 
to  affect  the  soldierly  reputations  of  the 
principal  actors. 

That  he  must  be  acquitted  of  any 
mains  animus  against  anybody  concerned 
is  sufficiently  evident  from  the  pervading 
tone  of  the  writer's  graphic  sketches  of 

1  See  Macmillan's  Magazine,  for  September, 
pp.  351,  352. 


men  and  things  in  India  generally, 
which  betoken  the  generous,  high- 
minded  English  gentleman,  whose  main 
object  it  is  to  inspire  a  kindly  interest  for 
the  land  of  his  adoption  in  the  minds 
of  his  countrymen  at  home. 

It  is,  therefore,  in  no  unfriendly  spirit 
that  I  feel  myself  imperatively  called 
upon,  at  the  earliest  practicable  moment 
after  my  return  from  India,  to  correct 
the  statement  made  in  the  following 
extract,  descriptive  of  the  crisis  of  the 
struggle  between  Major  Eyre's  small 
band  of  British  soldiers  and  the  formid- 
able host  of  mutineers  and  rebels  who 
opposed  their  progress  to  the  relief  of 
Arrah,  on  the  2nd  of  August,  1857. 

The  "  Competition  Wallah "  writes 
thus  : — "  Our  troops  began  to  be  dis- 
"  heartened,  and  to  be  painfully  aware 
"  of  the  overwhelming  odds  against 
"  which  they  were  contending.  It  was 


Memorandum  on  a  "  Story  of  the  Great  Mutiny." 


"  trying  work  receiving  twenty  bullets 

"  for  every  one  they  fired.     At  such  a 

"  moment  the  man  of  sterling  stuff  feels 

"  that  things  cannot  go  well  unless  he 

"  personally  exerts  himself  to  the  utmost. 

"  It  is  this  state  of  mind  that  wins  foot- 

"  ball  matches,  and  boat-races,  and  battles. 

'  A  young  officer,  by  name  Hastings, 

'  not  relishing    the    idea  of   standing 

'  still   to   be  shot  down,  ran  forward, 

'sword    in    hand,   towards  the   point 

1  where  the  enemy  stood  thickest,  with 

'  a  dozen  volunteers,  and  twice  as  many 

'  soldiers  at  his  heels.     This  appeared 

"  to  the  sepoys  a  most  unaccountable 

"  proceeding,  but  they  were  ignorant  of 

"  the  great  military  truth,  that  when  two 

"  hostile  parties  find  themselves  on  the 

"  same  ground,  one  or  the  other  must 

"  leave   it ;    and,  as  Hastings  and  his 

'  companions  kept  coming  nearer  and 

'  nearer,  with  the  expression  on  their 

'  faces  which  the  Sahibs  always  wear 

'  when  they  don't  intend  to  turn  back, 

'  they  had  no  choice  but  to  run  for  it. 

'  That    charge   saved   Arrah.      When 

'  once  the  natives  have  given  way  it  is 

'  almost  impossible  to  bring  them  again 

'  to  the  scratch.     Goer  Sing  retreated, 

'  leaving  on  the  ground  six  hundred  of 

'  his  followers,  most  of  whom  had  been 

'  killed  in  the  attack  upon  the  battery, 

'  and  our  poor  little  force,  which  he 

'  had    expected   to    devour,    gathered 

'  together  the  wounded,  limbered  up 

'  the  guns,  and  with  lightened  hearts 

"  pressed  forward  on  the  mission  of  de- 

"  liverance." 

The  reader  of  this  story  must  naturally 
wonder  what  Captain  L'Estrange  and 
the  other  officers  of  the  5th  Fusileers 
were  about,  when  a  young  stranger  thus 
assumed  the  command  of  their  men  and 
led  them  to  the  charge  in  this  abrupt 
and  disorderly  manner,  and  why  Major 
Eyre  did  not  place  himself  at  the  head 
of  the  force  at  so  critical  a  moment  ? 

Now,  it  is  curiously  illustrative  of  the 
obstinate  vitality  of  error,  that  Captain 
Hastings,  the  hero  of  the  above  plea- 
santly-told tale,  and  who  was  the 
officiating  staff-officer  of  the  Force, 
actually  took  the  trouble  to  address  a 
letter  to  qne  of  the  leading  Calcutta 


papers,  wherein  he  publicly  and  em- 
phatically denied  having  acted,  on  the 
above  occasion,  otherwise  than  in  strict 
obedience  to  the  orders  of  his  immediate 
superior,  viz.  Major  Eyre,  whose  per- 
sonal presence,  it  must  be  remembered, 
was,  at  that  critical  moment,  absolutely 
indispensable  with  the  guns,  there  being 
no  other  artillery  officer  in  the  field. 
The  great  object  of  the  enemy  through- 
out the  action  had  been  to  gain  posses- 
sion of  these  guns,  and  twice  had  the 
sepoys  charged  most  desperately  almost 
to  their  very  muzzles,  but  had  been 
driven  back  with  great  slaughter. 
Our  ammunition  was,  however,  fall- 
ing alarmingly  short,  and  it  was 
necessary  jealously  to  husband  every 
round  until  the  proper  moment  arrived 
for  delivering  fire  with  effect.  In  the 
excitement  of  action,  nothing  is  more 
difficult  than  to  restrain  gunners  from 
wasting  their  ammunition  in  mere  ran- 
dom shots.  Had  these  guns  been  taken, 
we  were  all  doomed  men,  and  all  hope 
of  relieving  the  Arrah  garrison  was  for 
ever  gone.  Hence  it  was  that  Major 
Eyre,  though  commanding  the  whole 
party,  felt  that  his  own  proper  post  was, 
just  then,  with  his  guns ;  feeling  as  he 
did  every  confidence  in  the  ability  of  his 
second  in  command,  Captain  L'Estrange 
of  the  5th  Fusileers  (than  whom  a  braver 
or  better  officer  never  existed),  to  carry 
out  his  wishes  with  regard  to  the  in- 
fantry portion  of  the  force,  consisting 
simply  of  160  men  (first-rate  marksmen 
all)  of  his  own  admirable  regiment, 
distributed  in  skirmishing  order  along  a 
front  of  300  yards. 

Now,  Captain  L'Estrange's  opera- 
tions being  partially  concealed  by  trees 
and  by  the  nature  of  the  ground, 
Major  Eyre  was  obliged  to  employ 
his  staff-officer,  Captain  Hastings,  who 
was  well  mounted,  to  maintain  com- 
munication with  the  second  in  command 
during  the  action.  At  the  critical  period 
alluded  to  by  a  "  Competition  Wallah," 
Hastings  had  galloped  across  the  field 
with  a  message  from  L'Estrange,  to  the 
effect  that  he  feared  his  men  could  not 
much  longer  retain  their  present  ground, 
and  requesting  fresh  instructions  how  to 


Memorandum  on  a"  Story  of  the  Great  Mutiny." 


447 


act  in  such  case.  Major  Eyre's  reply  to 
this  was  an  order  to  collect  his  men  forth- 
with in  line,  and  charge  the  enemy,  while 
he  himself  would  support  the  movement 
with  a  brisk  cannonade.  At  this  very 
moment  the  two  guns  on  the  left  flank 
were  themselves  in  imminent  peril  from 
a  line  of  sharpshooters,  who  had  gradu- 
ally crept  up  under  cover  of  the  rough 
ground  and  thick  bushes,  and  within  a 
radius  of  eighty  yards  were  deliberately 
aiming  at  the  gunners,  while  a  fresh 
column  of  sepoys  stood  ready  to  rush 
forward  to  another  attack.  Therefore  not 
a  moment  was  to  be  lost.  What  took  place 
is  accurately  recorded  in  the  despatch 
penned  by  Captain  L'Estrange  on  the 
following  morning.  He  writes  : — 

"Our  line  was  then  about  300  yards 
*  in  length,  and  the  enemy  came  pour- 
'  ing  down  on  us  in  large  numbers.  At 
'  this  time  we  were  in  imminent  danger, 
'  when  Major  Eyre  ordered  us  to  charge 
'  the  enemy.  The  movement  was  per- 
'  fectly  successful,  and,  our  line  advanc- 
'  ing  at  the  charge,  the  mutineers  fled 
'  from  the  woods,  from  whence  emerg- 
'  ing,  Major  Eyre  opened' on  them  with 
'  grape,  and  the  enemy  cleared  off  in  all 
'  directions." 

Major  Eyre's  own  account  of  the 
matter,  as  communicated  to  Govern- 
ment, ran  as  follows  f— 

"Finding  at  length  that  the  enemy 
"  grew  emboldened  by  the  superiority 
'  of  their  numbers  and  the  advantage 
'  of  their  position,  I  determined  on 
;  trying  the  effect  of  a  general  charge 
'  of  infantry,  and  sent  the  Hon.  E.  P. 
'  Hastings  to  Captain  L'Estrange,  with 
'  orders  to  that  effect.  Promptly  and 
'  gallantly  he  obeyed  the  order,"  &c. 

With  regard  to  the  personal  bearing 
exhibited  by  Captain  Hastings,  in  carry- 
ing out  the  orders  he  had  received,  it  is 
unnecessary  to  add  a  word  to  the  very 
cordial  recognition  of  his  bravery,  al- 
ready rendered  by  Major  Eyre  in  his 
public  despatch.  But  Hastings  himself 
would  have  been  the  very  last  to  sanc- 
tion the  version  of  the  affair  now  given 
by  the  "Competition  Wallah,"  after  a 
lapse  of  six  years,  whereby  an  invi- 
dious attempt  is  made  to  exalt  that 


ofHcer's  reputation  at  the  expense  of 
his  responsible  superiors.  It  may  be 
safely  asserted  that  Captains  L'Estrange 
and  Scott,  of  the  5th  Fusileers,  were 
quite  capable  of  leading  their  own 
men  at  such  a  crisis ;  yet  no  men- 
tion is  made  of  those  officers  in  the 
"  Story."  Like  most  fictions,  however, 
this  one  seems  to  have  been  founded  on 
a  basis  of  fact.  Mixed  up  with  our 
fortunes  on  this  occasion  were  about  a 
dozen  British  volunteers,  chiefly  railway 
officials  and  merchants,  who  had,  from 
generous  and  patriotic  motives,  accom- 
panied the  force  from  Buxar,  and  who 
looked  to  Hastings  (himself  a  volunteer 
from  the  same  locality)  as  their  natural 
chief.  In  galloping  along  the  line  to 
transmit  the  order  to  L'Estrange,  it  is 
undoubtedly  true  that  Hastings  waved 
his  sword  and  shouted  to  the  volunteers 
and  skirmishers  to  prepare  for  a  charge, 
and  nothing  could  be  more  natural  than 
that  one  of  them,  in  writing  to  his  friends 
in  Calcutta,  should  make  Hastings  his 
prominent  hero.  But  Hastings  was  far 
too  thorough-bred  a  soldier  and  gentle- 
man to  accept  the  well-meant,  though 
dubious  compliment,  and  lost  not  a 
moment  in  stating  the  exact  truth  in 
the  most  public  und  unmistakable 
manner. 

It  would  seem  as  though  the  "  Com- 
petition Wallah  "  had,  in  the  course  of 
his  travels,  come  across  this  old  piece  of 
gossip,  which  savoured  too  much  of  ro- 
mance to  be  resisted.  My  sole  object  in 
noticing  it  thus  seriously  is  to  prevent 
what  is,  in  reality,  an  incomplete  and  in- 
jurious statement  from  being  accepted  as 
reliable  material  for  history.  Happily, 
both  Major  Scott  and  Captain  Oldfield,  of 
the  5th  Fusileers,  still  survive,  and  are 
now  in  England,  to  corroborate,  if  need 
be,  the  facts  I  have  stated.  They  can 
also  state  whether,  at  the  most  critical 
period  of  the  battle,  their  men  were 
really  like  a  flock  of  frightened  sheep, 
without  a  leader  of  their  own,  as  repre- 
sented, or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  the 
utmost  order  and  calmness  had  not  pre- 
vailed among  all  ranks  from  first  to  last 
of  that  trying  day.  Our  struggle,  be  it 
remembered,  had  been  carried  on,  at  in- 


448 


Memorandum  on  a  "  Story  of  the  Great  Mutiny." 


tervals,  from  daybreak  until  nearly  the 
dusk  of  evening,  during  which  we  had 
made  good  our  advance  towards  Arrah 
several  miles,  in  the  face  of  all  oppo- 
sition. Our  band  consisted  of  160  of 
H.  M.  5th  Fusileers,  13  volunteers, 
and  36  gunners  with  three  field  guns  ; 
while  opposed  to  us  were  an  armed 
multitude  having  three  of  the  best 
fighting  regiments  in  the  native  army 
for  their  nucleus.  It  was  no  easy  matter 
to  succeed  in  such  an  enterprise;  yet 
more  easy,  perhaps,  and  certainly  far 
more  to  a  soldier's  taste,  than  battling  in 
the  field  of  literature,  as  I  am  now 
doing,  in  defence  of  whatever  reputation 
may  have  been  (I  hope  not  undeservedly) 
acquired  by  myself  and  coadjutors. 

It  happened,  a  few  days  after  this 
battle,  that  the  course  of  events  took 
the  same  force,  under  the  same  leader, 
to  encounter  one  of  the  most  formidable 
chiefs  of  the  mutiny,  in  his  jungle 
stronghold  at  Jugdespore,  and,  in  re- 
porting the  successful  result  of  our  ope- 
rations, Captain  L'Estrange  expressed 
himself  as  follows : — "  Under  all  the 
"  circumstances,  a  feeling  of  doubt,  if 
"  not  of  apprehension,  as  to  the  success 


"  of  our  expedition,  might  have  pervaded 
"  troops  less  confident  than  ours  were 
"  in  the  judgment,  talent,  and  courage 
"  of  our  leader." 

Had  the  "Competition  Wallah's" 
story  been  literally  true,  such  a  feeling 
of  confidence  as  that  here  described 
could  scarcely  have  existed. 

Should  these  explanations  be  found 
inconveniently  long,  it  may  be  urged  in 
extenuation  that, 'while  it  requires  only 
a  very  few  words  to  make  an  erroneous 
assertion,  it  can  seldom  be  refuted  ef- 
fectually without  entering  into  minute 
details.  A  soldier's  best  and  often  his 
only  wealth  is  his  reputation,  which 
must  be  beyond  suspicion.  Probably 
few  military  men,  with  their  correct 
ideas  of  discipline,  will  have  been  mis- 
led in  this  matter ;  and  I  hope  that 
those  of  my  friends  who  deemed  some 
explanation  desirable  may  now  be  satis- 
fied, and  that  the  general  reader  will 
not  grudge  the  space  occupied  by  so 
stale  a  topic. 

V.  E. 
ATHEN^IUM  CLUB, 

January  8th,  1864. 


MACMILLAN'S  MAGAZINE. 


APEIL,  1864. 


THE  HILLYARS  AND  THE  BURTONS :  A  STORY  OF  TWO  FAMILIES. 

BY  HENRY  KINGSLEY,  AUTHOR  OP    "  AUSTIN  ELLIOT,"  "  RAVENSHOE,"  ETC. 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  THE  HILLYARS 
AND  THE  BURTONS  AMONG  THE  TOMBS. 

MY  brother  Joe  had  at  one  time  made 
a  distinct  request  to  my  father  that  he 
should  learn  the  trade,  in  which  he  was 
backed  up  by  my  mother,  for  the  rather 
inscrutable  reason  that  any  trade  was 
better  than  coopering.  It  was  a  perfectly 
undeniable  proposition,  but  was  some- 
what uncalled-for,  because  the  question 
with  Joe  was  not  between  srnithwork 
and  cooper-work,  but  between  hand-work 
and  head-work — whether  he  should  be- 
come an  artizan  or  a  scholar. 

It  was  that  busybody  Emma  that  per- 
suaded him  in  the  end,  of  course,  by 
quietly  depreciating  me,  and  by  flattering 
Joe's  intellect.  During  the  time  that  the 
matter  was  in  debate,  she  assumed  a 
pensive  air,  and  used  to  heave  little  sighs 
when  she  looked  at  Joe,  and  was  so  mis- 
guided once  as  to  dust  a  chair  I  had  been 
sitting  in.  After  this  I  was  taken  with 
a  sudden  affection  for  her,  and,  having 
made  my  face  seven  times  dirtier  than 
usual,  had  embraced  her  tenderly.  I  also 
put  a  cinder  in  he?  tea,  which  brought 
matters  to  a  crisis,  for  we  both  burst  out 
laughing ;  and  I  called  her  a  stuck-up 
humbug,  which  thing  she  acknowledged 
with  graceful  humility,  and  before  I  had 
time  to  turn  round  had  made  me  pro- 
mise to  add  my  persuasion  to  hers,  and 
persuade  Joe  to  become  a  scholar. 

I  did  so,  and  turned  the  scale.    Joe 

~No,  54. — VOL.  ix. 


continued  at  school,  first  as  pupil,  and 
secondly  as  an  underteacher,  until  he  was 
sixteen,  at  which  time  it  became  appa- 
rent to  Mr.  Faulkner  that  Joe  was  giving 
promise  of  becoming  a  very  first-rate 
man  indeed. 

He  expressed  this  opinion  to  Mr. 
Compton,  who  called  upon  him  one  daj 
for  the  purpose  of  asking  him  his  opinion 
of  Joe.  A  very  few  days  after  he  came 
to  my  father,  and  said  that  Sir  George 
Hillyar  begged  to  take  the  liberty  of 
advising  that  Mr.  Joseph  Burton  should 
remain,  where  he  was  a  short  time  longer ; 
after  which  Sir  George  "would  have 
great  pleasure  in  undertaking  to  pro- 
vide employment  for  those  extraordi- 
nary talents  which  he  appeared  to  be 
developing/' 

"  Well,"  said  Joe,  with  a  radiant  face  ; 
"  if  this  ain't — I  mean  is  not — the  most 
ex-tra-awcfanary,  I  ever." 

I  said  that  I  never  didn't,  neither. 

My  father  whistled,  and  looked  seri- 
ously and  inquiringly  at  Mr.  Coinpton. 

"  I  don't  know  why,"  answered  Mr. 
Compton,  just  as  if  my  father  had 
spoken.  "Erne's  ,  I  mean,"  con- 
tinued he,  with  a  stammer,  at  which 
Miss  Emma  got  as  red  as  fire,  "  I  mean 
Erne's  friend's  brother  there,  Reuben's 
cousin — Law  bless  you !  fifty  ways  of 
accounting  for  it.  But,  ;is  for  knowing 
anything,  I  don't,  and,  what  is  more,  old 
Morton  the  keeper  don't  know,  and, 
when  he  don't  know,  why,  you  know, 
who  is  to  1 " 

"  Certainly,  sir,"  said  my  father.  "  So 
Q  a 


450 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


old  Morton  he  don't  know  no  think, 
don't  he?  Well!  Well ! " 

However,  this  was  very  good  news 
indeed.  We  should  have  Joe  with  us 
for  some  time  longer,  and  the  expecta- 
tion of  the  first  loss  to  the  family  circle 
was  lying  somewhat  heavy  on  our  hearts. 
And  then,  when  he  did  leave  us,  it  would 
be  with  such  splendid  prospects.  My 
mother  said  it  would  not  in  the  least 
surprise  her  to  see  Joe  in  a  draper's  shop 
of  his  own — which'  idea  was  scornfully 
ecouted  by  the  rest  of  us,  who  had  already 
made  him  prime  minister.  In  the  mean- 
time I  was  very  anxious  to  see  Erne  and 
thank  him,  and  to  know  why  Miss 
Emma  should  have  blushed  in  that  way. 

Erne  evidently  wanted  to  see  me  for 
some  purpose  also,  for  he  wrote  to  me 
to  ask  me  to  meet  him  at  the  old  place 
the  next  Sunday  afternoon. 

The  "  old  place  "  was  a  bench  which 
stood  in  front  of  Sir  Thomas  More's 
monument,  close  to  the  altar  rails  of  the 
old  church.  We  promised  that  we 
Would  all  come  and  meet  him  there. 

It  is  so  long  ago  since  we  began  to  go 
to  the  old  church,  on  Sunday  afternoon 
in  winter,  and  in  the  evening  in  summer, 
that  I  cannot  attempt  to  fix  the  date. 
It  had  grown  to  be  a  habit  when  I  was 
very,  very  young,  for  I  remember  that 
church  with  me  used  at  one  time  to 
mean  the  old  church,  and  that  I  used  to 
consider  the  attendance  on  the  new  St. 
Luke's,  in  Robert  Street,  more  as  a  dis- 
sipation, than  an  act  of  devotion. 

My  mother  tells  me  that  she  used 
first  to  take  me  there  about  so  and  so — 
meaning  a  period  when  I  was  only  about 
fourteen  months  old.  My  mother  is  a 
little  too  particular  in  her  dates,  and  her 
chronology  is  mainly  based  on  a  system 
of  rapidly  -  recurring  eras  :  a  system 
which,  I  notice,  is  apt  to  spread  confu- 
sion and  dismay  among  the  ladies  of  the 
highly-genteel  rank  to  which  we  have 
elevated  ourselves.  However,  to  leave 
mere  fractions  of  time,  of  no  real  im- 
portance, to  cake  care  of  themselves,  she 
must  have  taken  me  to  the  old  church 
almost  as  soon  as  my  retina  began  to 
carry  images  to  ray  brain,  for  I  can  re- 
member Lord  and  Lady  Dacre,  with 


their  dogs  at  their  feet,  before  I  can 
remember  being  told  by  Mrs.  Quickly, 
that  the  doctor  had  been  for  a  walk 
round  the  parsley  bed,  and  had  brought 
me  a  little  brother  from  among  the 
gooseberry  bushes  :  which  was  her  meta- 
phorical way  of  announcing  the  fact  of 
my  brother  Joe's  birth. 

At  first,  I  remember,  I  used  to  think 
that  all  the  statues  were  of  the  nature 
of  Guy  Fawkes,  and  were  set  up  there 
to  atone  for  sins  committed  in  the  flesh. 
From  this  heretical  and  pagan  frame  of 
mind  I  was  rescued  by  learning  to  read ; 
and  then  I  found  that  these  images  and 
monuments  were  not  set  up  for  warning, 
but  for  example.  I  began  to  discover 
that  these  people  who  had  died,  and  had 
their  monuments  set  up  here,  were,  by 
very  long  odds,  the  best  people  who 
ever  lived.  I  was,  for  a  time,  puzzled 
about  those  who  had  their  epitaphs 
written  in  Latin,  I  confess.  Starting  on 
the  basis,  that  every  word  in  every  epi- 
taph was  strictly  true,  I  soon  argued 
myself  into  the  conclusion  that  the  Latin 
epitaphs  were  written  in  that  language 
for  the  sake  of  sparing  the  feelings  of 
the  survivors ;  and  that  they  were  the 
epitaphs  of  people  about  whom  there 
was  something  queer,  or,  at  all  events, 
something  better  reserved  for  the  deci- 
sion of  the  scholastic  few  who  under- 
stood Latin.  At  a  very  early  age  I  be- 
came possessed  with  the  idea  that  when 
Mrs.  Quickly  died  it  would  become  neces- 
sary, for  the  sake  of  public  morality,  to 
write  her  epitaph  in  Latin.  I  can't  tell 
you  how  I  came  to  think  so.  I  never 
for  a  moment  doubted  that  such  an  ex- 
cellent and  amiable  woman  would  have 
a  very  large  tomb  erected  to  her  by  a 
grateful  country  •  but  I  never  for  a 
moment  doubted  that  it  would  become 
necessary  to  have  a  Latin  inscription 
on  it. 

But  conceive  how  I  was  astonished 
by  finding,  when  I  was  a  great  fellow, 
that  the  Latin  inscriptions  were  quite 
as  complimentary  as  the  English.  Joe 
translated  a  lot  of  them  for  me.  It  was 
quite  evident  that  such  people  as  the 
Chelsea  people  never  lived.  So  far  from 
Latin  being  used  with  a  view  of  hiding 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


451 


any  little  faux  pas  of  the  eminent  de-1 
ceased  from  the  knowledge  of  the  ten- 
pound  householders,  it  appeared  that 
the  older  language  had  been  used  merely 
because  the  miserable  bastard  patois, 
which  Sakespeare  was  forced  to  use, 
but  which  Johnson  very  properly  re- 
jected with  decision,  was  utterly  unfit  to 
express  the  various  virtues  of  these  won- 
derful Chelsea  people,  of  whom,  with 
few  exceptions,  no  one  ever  heard.  It 
used  to  strike  me,  however,  that,  among 
the  known  or  the  unknown,  Sir  Thomas 
More  was  the  most  obstinately  deter- 
mined that  posterity  should  hear  his 
own  account  of  himself. 

My  opinion  always  was,  that  the 
monuments  which  were  in  the  best 
state  were  those  of  the  Hillyars  and 
of  the  Duchess  of  Northumberland. 
There  are  no  inscriptions  on  these, 
with  the  exception  of  the  family  names. 
The  members  of  the  family  are  merely 
represented  kneeling  one  behind  the 
other  with  their  names — in  the  one 
case  above  their  heads,  in  the  other,  on 
a  brass  beneath.  The  Dacres,  with 
their  dogs  at  their  feet,  are  grand  ;  but, 
on  the  whole,  give  me  the  Hillyars, 
kneeling  humbly,  with  nothing  to  say 
for  themselves.  Let  the  Dacres  carry 
their  pride  and  their  dogs  to  the  grave 
with  them  if  they  see  fit ;  let  them  take 
their  braches,  and  lie  down  to  wait 
for  judgment.  Honest  John  Hillyar 
will  have  no  dogs,  having  troubles 
enough  beside.  He  and  his  family 
prefer  to  kneel,  with  folded  hands, 
until  the  last  trump  sound  from  the 
East,  or  until  Chelsea  Church  crumble 
into  dust. 

I  always  loved  that  monument  better 
than  any  in  Chelsea  Old  Church.  'Tis 
a  good  example  of  a  mural  monument 
of  that  time,  they  say,  but  they  have 
never  seen  it  on  a  wild  autumn  after- 
noon, when  the  sun  streams  in  on  it 
from  the  south-west,  lights  it  up  for  an 
instant,  and  then  sends  one  long  ray 
quivering  up  the  wall  to  the  roof,  and 
dies.  What  do  they  know  about  the 
monument  at  such  a  time  as  that?  Still 
less  do  they  know  of  the  fancies  that 
a  shock-headed,  stupid  blacksmith's  boy 


— two  of  whose  brothers  were  poets, 
and  whose  rant  he  used  to  hear — used 
to  build  up  in  his  dull  brain  about  it, 
as  he  sat  year  after  year  before  it,  until 
the  kneeling  figures  became  friends  to 
him. 

For  I  made  friends  of  them  in  a  way. 
They  were  friends  of  another  world.  I 
found  out  enough  to  know  that  they 
were  the  images  of  a  gentleman  and  his 
family  who  had  lived  in  our  big  house 
in  Church  Street  three  hundred  years 
ago ;  and,  sitting  by  habit  in  the  same 
place,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  they  became 
to  me  real  and  actual  persons,  who  were 
as  familiar  to  me  as  our  neighbours^ 
and  yet  who  were  dead  and  gone  to 
heaven  or  hell  three  hundred  years 
before — people  who  had  twenty  years* 
experience  of  the  next  world  to  show^ 
where  I  had  one  to  show  of  this  present 
life;  people  who  had  solved  the  great 
difficulty,  and  who  could  tell  me  all 
about  it,  if  they  would  only  turn  their 
heads  and  speak.  Yes,  these  Hillyars 
became  real  people  to  me,  and  I,  in  a 
sort  of  way,  loved  them. 

I  gave  them  names  in  my  own  head. 
I  loved  two  of  them.  On  the  female  side 
I  loved  the  little  weer  child,  for  whom 
there  was  very  small  room,  and  who 
was  crowded  against  the  pillar,  kneeling 
on  the  skirts  of  the  last  of  her  big 
sisters.  And  I  loved  the  big  lad  who 
knelt  directly  behind  his  father,  be- 
tween the  knight  himself,  and  the  two. 
little  brothers,  dressed  so  very  like 
blue-coat  boys,  such  quaint  little  fel» 
lows  as  they  were. 

I  do  not  think  that  either  Joe  or 
Emma  ever  cared  much  about  this  tomb 
or  its  effigies.  Though  we  three  sat 
there  together  so  very  often  for  several' 
winters,  I  do  not  think  it  ever  took 
their  attention  very  much  ;  and  I,  being 
a  silent  lad,  never  gave  loose  to  my 
fancies  about  that  family  monument' 
even  to  them.  I  used  to  find,  in  the 
burst  of  conversation  which  always  fol- 
lows the  release  of  young  folks  from 
church,  that  we  all  three,  like  most 
young  people,  had  not  attended  to  the 
sermon  at  all ;  but  that  our  idle  fnn>; 
cies,  on  those  wild  winter  afternoons, 
G  Q  2 


452 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


had  rambled  away  in  strangely  different 
directions.  I  always  used  to  sit  be- 
tween the  two  others,  upright,  with  my 
head  nearly  against  the  little  shield 
which  carries  the  date,  "Anno,  1539." 
Soon  after  the  sermon  had  begun  I  used 
to  find  that  Joe's  great  head  was  heavy 
on  one  shoulder,  while  Emma  had  laid 
her  cheek  quietly  against  the  other,  and 
had  stolen  her  hand  into  mine.  And 
so  we  three  would  sit,  in  a  pyramidal 
group,  of  which  I  was  the  centre, 
dreaming. 

I  used  to  find  that  Joe  would  be 
building  fancies  of  the  dead  who  lay 
around  us,  of  what  they  had  done,  and 
of  what  they  might  have  done,  had 
God  allowed  them  to  foresee  the  conse- 
quences of  their  actions ;  but  that 
Emma  had  been  listening  to  the  rush 
of  the  winter  wind  among  the  tombs 
outside,  and  the  lapping  of  the  winter 
tide  upon  the  shore — thinking  of  those 
who  were  tossed  far  away  upon  stormy 
seas,  only  less  pitiless  than  the  iron 
coast  on  which  they  burst  in  their 
cruel  fury. 

I  cannot  tell  how  often,  or  how  long, 
we  three  sat  there.  But  I  know  that 
the  monument  had  a  new  interest  to 
me  after  I  made  Erne  Hillyar's  acquaint- 
ance, and  began  to  realize  that  the 
kneeling  figures  there  were  his  ances- 
tors. I  tried  then  to  make  Erne  the 
living  take  his  place,  in  my  fancy, 
among  the  images  of  his  dead  fore- 
fathers and  uncles  ;  but  it  was  a  failure. 
He  would  not  come  in  at  all.  So  then 
I  began  trying  to  make  out  which  of 
them  he  was  most  like ;  but  he  wasn't 
a  bit  like  any  one  of  them.  They  none 
of  them  would  look  round  at  you  with 
their  heads  a  little  on  one  side,  and 
their  great  blue-black  eyes  wide  open, 
and  their  lips  half-parted  as  though  to 
wait  for  what  you  were  going  to  say. 
These  ancestors  of  his  were  but  brass 
after  all,  and  knelt  one  behind  the  other 
looking  at  the  backs  of  one  another's 
heads.  Erne  would  not  fit  in  among 
them  by  any  means. 

But  one  day,  one  autumn  afternoon, 
»3  I  sat  with  Emma  on  one  side,  and 
Joe  on  the  other,  with  my  back  to  Sir 


Thomas  More's  tomb  and  my  face  to 
Sir  John  Hillyar's,  thinking  of  these 
things,  I  got  a  chance  of  comparing  the 
living  with  the  dead.  For,  when  the 
sermon  was  half  way  through,  I  heard 
the  little  door,  which  opens  straight  from 
the  windy  wharf  into  the  quiet  chancel, 
opened  stealthily ;  and,  looking  round, 
I  saw  that  Erne  had  come  in,  and  was 
sending  those  big  eyes  of  his  ranging 
all  over  the  church  to  look  for  some- 
thing which  was  close  by  all  the  time. 
I  saw  him  stand  close  to  me,  for  a 
minute,  moving  his  noble  head  from  side 
to  side  as  he  peered  about  him,  like  an 
emu  who  has  wandered  into  a  stock- 
yard ;  but,  as  soon  as  he  had  swept  the 
horizon,  and  had  brought  his  eyes  to 
range  nearer  home,  he  saw  me.  And 
then  he  smiled,  and  I  knew  that  he 
had  come  to  find  us. 

And  after  service  we  walked  out 
together.  And  the  sexton  let  us  into 
that  quiet  piece  of  the  churchyard  which 
overlooks  the  river,  and  we  stood  there 
long  into  the  twilight,  talking  together 
as  we  leant  against  the  low  wall  Erne 
stood  upon  the  grave  of  the  poor  Hillyar 
girl  who  had  died  in  our  house,  as  his 
habit  was,  talking  to  me  and  looking 
.at  Emma.  The  time  went  so  quick  that 
it  was  dark  before  we  got  home ;  but  we 
all  discovered  that  it  was  a  very  capital 
way  of  having  a  talk  together,  and  so, 
without  any  arrangement  at  all,  we 
found  ourselves  there  again  veiy  often. 
Once  Emma  and  I  went  along  with 
Frank ;  but  Frank,  having  eaten  a  dinner 
for  six,  went  to  sleep,  and  not  only 
went  to  sleep  but  had  the  nightmare, 
in  a  manner  scandalously  audible  to  the 
whole  congregation,  in  the  first  lesson. 
Emma  had  to  take  him  out,  and,  when 
I  came  out  at  the  end  of  the  service,  I 
found  that  Erne  and  Emma  were  toge- 
ther by  the  river- wall,  and  no  one  else 
but  Frank.  He  had  seen  her  coming 
out,  and  had  stayed  with  her  for  com- 
pany. It  was  very  kind  of  him,  and  I 
told  him  so.  He  called  me  an  old  fooL 

The  Sunday  afternoon  on  which  we 
were  to  meet  Erne  was  a  wild  and 
gusty  one,  the  wind  sweeping  drearily 
along  the  shore,  and  booming  and  rush- 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


ing  among  the  railings  around  the  tombs. 
My  sister  and  I  went  alone,  and  sat  on 
the  old  bench  :  but  no  Erne  made  his 
appearance,  and  soon  I  had  ceased  to 
think  much  of  him. 

For  there  came  in  and  sat  opposite  to 
me — directly  under  the  Hillyar  monu- 
ment— the  most  beautiful  lady  I  had 
ever  seen.  She  was  very  young,  with 
a  wonderfully  delicate  complexion,  and 
looked  so  very  fragile,  that  I  found 
myself  wondering  what  she  did  abroad 
in  such  wild  weather.  She  was  dressed 
in  light  grey  silk/  which  gave  her  a 
somewhat  ghostly  air ;  and  she  looked 
slightly  worn  and  anxious,  though  not 
enough  to  interfere  with  her  almost  pre- 
ternatural beauty.  When  I  say  that  I 
had  never  seen  such  a  beautiful  woman 
as  she  was,  I  at  once  find  that  I  can  go 
farther,  and  say,  that  I  have  never  since 
seen  any  one  as  beautiful  as  she  by  a 
long  interval.  My  wife  was  singularly 
handsome  at  one  time.1  Mrs.  Oxton, 
when  I  first  saw  her,  was  certainly 
beautiful.  Lady  Hainault,  my  name- 
sake, as  I  reminded  her  once,  was,  and 
is,  glorious ;  but  they  none  of  them 
could  ever  have  compared,  for  an  instant, 
with  that  young  lady  in  grey  silk,  who 
came  and  sat  on  the  bench,  under  the 
Hillyar  monument,  opposite  my  sister 
and  me,  on  that  wild  autumn  afternoon. 

She  came  in  by  the  little  side  door 
which  opens  from  the  chancel  on  to 
the  river.  She  sat  down  on  the  bench 
opposite  me,  beside  a  poor  cracked  old 
semptress,  whose  devotions  were  dis- 
turbed every  five  minutes  by  her  having 
to  put  down  her  prayer-book  and  hunt 
spiders,  and  old  Smith  the  blind  man, 
who  used  to  say  his  responses  in  a  surly, 
defiant  tone  of  voice,  as  if  every  re- 
sponse was  another  item  in  a  bill  against 
heaven,  which  had  already  run  too  long, 
and  ought  to  have  been 'paid  long  ago. 

But  she  sat  down  in  this  fantastic 
company,  and  seemed  glad  to  rest. 
Mrs.  Smith,  the  pew-opener,  the  blind 
man's  wife,  caught  sight  of  a  strange 
sail  in  the  offing,  bore  down,  and  would 

1  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Burton  presents  her  com- 
pliments to  the  Editor,  and  begs  to  inform 
him  that  this  is  the  first  she  ever  heard  of  it. 


have  brought  her  into  a  pew.  But  the 
strange  lady  said  that  she  was  tired,  and 
would  sit  where  she  was. 

There  was  a  gentleman  with  her,  by- 
the-bye.  A  tall  gentleman,  very  pale, 
rather  anxious-looking,  without  any  hair 
on  his  face.  He  asked  her,  wasn't  she 
afraid  of  the  draught  ?  And  she  said, 
"No.  Please,  please  dear,  let  me  sit 
here.  I  want  rest,  dear.  Do  let  me 
sit  here."  And  when  she  said  this  two 
ideas  came  into  my  head.  The  first 
was  that  the  beautiful  lady  was,  for 
some  reason,  afraid  of  the  pale,  anxious 
gentleman ;  and  the  second  was  that 
they  were  Americans,  because — although, 
they  both  spoke  perfectly-good  English, 
yet  they  seemed  to  have  no  hesitation 
about  speaking  out  loud  in  church.; 
which  they  most  decidedly  did,  and 
which,  as  I  am  informed  now,  the  Ameri- 
cans, as  a  general  rule,  do  not. 

No  Erne  made  his  appearance.  Emma 
and  I  sat  on  our  accustomed  bench,  witk 
the  beautiful,  weary  lady  opposite.  The 
wind  rattled  at  the  old  casements,  and. 
when  the  sermon  began  a  storm  of  sleet 
came  driving  along  from  the  westward, 
and  made  the  atmosphere  freezing  cold... 
The  strange  beautiful  lady  seemed  to 
cower  under  it,  to  draw  herself  together 
and  to  draw  her  shawl  closer  and  closer 
around  her,  with  a  look  almost  of  terror 
on  her  face.  The  poor  lunatic  woman, 
who  sat  beside  her,  put  up  her  umbrella. 
The  pew-opener  saw  her,  and  came  up 
and  fought  her  for  it,  with  a  view  to 
making  her  put  it  down  again.  The 
cracked  woman  was  very  resolute,  and 
Mrs.  Smith  was  (as  I  think)  unneces- 
sarily violent,  and  between  them  they, 
drove  one  of  the  points  of  the  umbrella, 
into  Smith's  eye ;  which,  as  Smith  wa» 
blind  already,  didn't  matter  much,  but 
which  caused  him  a  deal  of  pain,  and 
ended  in  shovings  and  recriminations 
between  Mrs.  Smith  and  the  cracked 
woman.  And  the  beautiful  lady,  in  the 
middle  of  it  all,  finding  no  rest  any- 
where, came  across  wearily  and  feebly 
and  sat  beside  Emma.  She  did  not 
faint  or  make  any  scene ;  but  when  I 
looked  round  soon  after  I  saw  her  head 
on  Emma's  shoulder,  and  Emma's  arm 


454 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


round  her  waist.     She  was  very  poorly, 
but  the  pale  gentleman  did  not  see  it. 

After  service  she  took  his  arm,  and 
•while  the  people  were  crowding  out  of 
.church  I  kept  near  them.  I  heard  her 
say— 

"  I  cannot  stay  to  look  at  the  monu- 
ment to-day,  dear ;  I  am  very  tired." 

"  Well,"  said  the  gentleman,  "  the 
carriage  won't  be  long.  I  told  them  to 
meet  us  here." 

She  stood  actually  cowering  in  the 
cold  blast  which  swept  off  the  river 
round  the  corner  of  the  church.  She 
crouched  shuddering  close  to  the  pale 
man  and  said — 

"  What  a  dreadful  country,  love.  Is 
it  always  like  this  in  England  1  I  shall 
die  here  I  am  afraid,  and  never  see 
Aggy  any  more,  and  poor  James  will  be 
so  sorry.  But  I  am  quite  brave  and 
resolute,  George.  I  would  not  change 
my  lot  with  any  woman,"  she  continued 
rather  more  hastily  ;  "  only  there  is  no 
sun  here,  and  it  is  so  very  dark  and 
ugly." 

I  was  glad  to  hear  him  speak  kindly 
to  her  and  soothe  her,  for  I  could  not 
help  fancying  that  she  would  have  been 
•glad  of  a  gentler  companion.  But  I  had 
little  time  to  think  of  this,  for  Erne, 
•coming  quickly  out  the  open  gate  of  the 
-churchyard,  came  up  to  them  and  said — 
,  "  Mr.  George  Hillyar  ? "  I  think. 

George  Hillyar  bowed  politely,  and 
said,  "Yes." 

"We  ought  to  know  one  another," 
said  Erne,  laughing  ;  "  in  fact,  I  am 
your  brother  Erne." 

I  did  not  like  the  look  of  George 
Hillyar' s  face  at  all;  he  had  an  ugly 
scowl  handy  for  any  one  who  might 
require  it,  I  could  see.  But  Erne  was 
attracted  suddenly  by  his  sister-in-law's 
beauty,  and  so  he  never  saw  it ;  by  the 
time  he  looked  into  his  brother's  face 
again  the  scowl  had  passed  away,  and 
there  was  a  look  of  pleased  admiration 
instead.  Poor  Mrs.  Hillyar  seemed  to 
brighten  up  at  the  sight  of  Erne.  They 
stood  talking  together  affectionately  for 
a  few  minutes,  and  then  the  George 
Hillyars  drove  away,  and  left  Erne  and 
me  standing  together  in  the  churchyard. 


"  What  a  handsome  distingue-looking 
fellow,"  said  Erne.  "I  know  I  shall 
like  him." 

I  hoped  their  liking  might  be  mutual, 
but  had  strong  doubts  on  the  point. 

CHAPTEE  XXIV. 

HOMEWABD       BOUND. 

SECRETARY  OXTON  was  a  wise  and  clever 
fellow,  but  he  was  liable  to  err,  like  the 
rest  of  us.  Secretary  Oxton  was  an 
affectionate,  good-hearted,  honourable 
man,  a  gentleman  at  all  points,  save 
one.  He  was  clever  and  ambitious,  and 
in  the  grand  fight  he  had  fought  against 
the  world,  in  the  steady  pluckily-fought 
battle,  the  object  of  which  was  to  place 
him,  a  younger  son,  in  a  position  equal 
to  that  of  his  elder  brother,  to  found  a 
new  and  wealthy  branch  of  the  Oxton. 
family,  he  had  contracted  a  certain  fault, 
from  which  his  elder  brother,  probably 
from  the  absence  of  temptation,  was 
free. 

He  had  seen  that  wealth  was  the  key 
to  the  position.  He  had  seen  early  in 
the  struggle,  that  a  fool  with  wealth  was 
often  of  more  influence  than  a  wise  man 
without  it.  And  so  he  had  won  wealth 
as  a  means  to  the  end  of  power.  But 
the  gold  had  left  a  little  of  its  dross 
upon  him,  and  now  he  was  apt  to  over- 
value it. 

Acting  on  this  error,  he  had  put  be- 
fore him,  as  a  great  end,  with  regard  to 
George  and  Gerty  Hillyar,  that  George 
should  go  to  England  and  win  back  his 
father's  favour.  His  wife,  good  and 
clever  as  she  was,  was  only,  after  all,  a 
mirror  to  reflect  her  husband's  stronger 
will ;  consequently  there  was  no  one  to 
warn  him  of  the  folly  he  was  commit- 
ting, when  he  urged  George  so  strongly 
to  go  to  England — no  one  to  tell  him 
of  the  danger  of  allowing  such  a  wild 
fierce  hawk  as  George  to  get  out  of  the 
range  of  his  own  influence ;  of  the  ter- 
rible peril  he  incurred  on  behalf  of  his 
beloved  Gerty,  by  sending  him  far  away 
from  the  gentle  home  atmosphere,  which 
had  begun  to  do  its  work  upon  him  so 
very  well,  and  throwing  him  headlong 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


455 


among  his  old  temptations,  with  no 
better  guide  than  a  silly  little  fairy  of  a 
wife. 

He  could  not  see  all  this  in  his  blind- 
ness. He  did  not  calculate  on  the 
amount  of  good  which  had  been  wrought 
in  George's  character  by  his  wife's  gentle 
influence  and  his  own  manly  counsel. 
He  was  blinded  by  the  money  question. 
He  did  not  see  that  it  would  be  better 
for  Gerty's  sake,  and  for  all  their  sakes, 
to  keep  Sir  George  Hillyar  near  him 
with  two  thousand  a  year,  a  busy,  happy 
man,  than  to  have  him  living  in.  Eng- 
land without  control,  amongst  all  his 
old  temptations.  He  could  not  bear  the 
idea  of  that  odd  eight  or  nine  thousand 
a  year  going  out  of  the  family.  He  had 
worked  at  money-getting  so  long  that 
that  consideration  outweighed,  nay,  ob- 
scured every  other. 

And  so  he  encouraged  George  to  go 
to  England.  And,  when  the  last  grand 
forest  cape  was  passed,  and  they  were 
rushing  on  towards  Cape  Horn  before 
the  west  wind,  and  the  dear  peaceful 
old  land  had  died  away  on  the  horizon, 
and  was  as  something  which  had  never 
been  ;  and  when  Gerty  got  penitent, 
and  sea-sick,  and  tearful,  and  frightened, 
and  yellow  in  the  face,  and  everything 
but  cross — then  all  the  good  influences 
of  James  and  Agnes  Oxton  were  needed, 
but  were  not  at  hand ;  and  such  mischief 
was  done  as  would  have  made  the  Secre- 
tary curse  his  own  folly  if  he  could  have 
seen  it.  And  there  was  no  one  to  stay 
the  course  of  this  mischief,  but  tearful 
silly  sea- sick  Gerty. 

Poor  little  child  of  the  sun !  Poor 
little  bush  princess  !  brought  up  without 
a  thought  or  a  care  on  the  warm  hill -side 
at  Neville's  Gap,  in  the  quiet  house  which 
stood  half-way  up  the  mountain,  with  a 
thousand  feet  of  feathering  woodland 
behind,  and  fifty  miles  of  forest  and 
plain  before  and  below.  Brought  up  in 
a  quiet  luxurious  home,  among  birds 
and  flowers  and  pet  dogs ;  a  poor  little 
body,  the  cares  in  whose  life  were  the 
arrivals  of  the  pianoforte-tuner  on  his 
broken-kneed  grey,  supposed  to  be  five 
hundred  years  old ;  who  had  never 
met  with  but  two  adventures  in  her  life 


before  marriage,  the  first  of  which  she 
could  barely  remember,  and  the  second 
when  James  and  Aggy  carried  her  off 
in  a  steamer  to  Sydney,  and  Aggy 
chaperoned  her  to  the  great  ball  at 
Government  House,  and  she  had  won- 
dered why  the  people  stared  at  her  so 
when  she  walked  up  the  room  following 
in  Agg^s  wake,  as  she  sailed  stately  on 
before  towards  the  presence,  until  she 
was  told  next  morning  that  James  had 
won  5001.  on  her  beauty,  for  that 
Lady  Gipps  had  pronounced  her  to  be 
more  beautiful  than  young  Mrs.  Buckley 
nee  Brentwood,  of  Garoopna,  in  Gipps- 
land. 

But  here  was  a  change.  This  low 
sweeping  grey  sky,  and  the  wild  heaving 
cold  grey  sea,  and  then  the  horrible  cliffs 
of  bitter  floating  ice,  at  whose  base  the 
hungry  sea  leaped  and  slid  up,  gnawing 
caverns  and  crannies,  yet  pitifully  smooth- 
ing away,  with  their  ceaseless  wash,  a 
glacis,  to  which  the  finger  of  no  drown- 
ing man  might  hope  to  clutch  that  he 
might  prolong  his  misery.  The  sun 
seemed  gone  for  ever,  and  as  they  made 
each  degree  of  southing,  Gerty  got  more 
shivering  and  more  tearful,  and  seemed 
to  shrink  more  and  more  into  her  wrap- 
pers and  cloaks. 

But  all  this  had  a  very  different  effect 
on  Mrs.  IsTalder.  On  that  magnificent 
American  woman  it  had  a  bracing  effect; 
it  put  new  roses  into  her  face,  and  made 
her  stand  firmer  on  her  marine  continua- 
tions— had  I  been  speaking  about  an 
English  duchess  I  should  have  said  her 
sea  legs.  She  wasn't  sick,  not  she ;  but 
N  alder  was,  and  so  it  fell  to  George's 
lot  to  squire  Mrs.  balder,  an  employ- 
ment he  found  to  be  so  charming  that 
he  devoted  himself  to  it.  Mrs.  Nalder 
got  very  fond  of  George,  and  told  her 
husband  so  ;  whereupon  Mr.  Nalder  re- 
plied that  he  was  uncommon  glad  she 
had  found  some  one  to  gallivant  her 
round,  for  that  he  was  darned  if  he  rose 
out  of  that  under  forty  south.  And,  when 
forty  south  came,  and  Gerty  made  her 
appearance  on  deck  with  Mrs.  Nalder,  she 
found  that  dreadful  Yankee  woman  call- 
ing George  about  here  and  there,  as  if  he 
belonged  to  her.  Gerty  got  instantly 


456 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


jealous,  although  Mrs.  balder  was  kind 
and  gentle  to  her,  and  would  have  been 
a  sister  to  her.  Gerty  repulsed  her. 
Mrs.  Nalder  wondered  why.  The  idea 
of  anybody  being  sufficiently  insane  to 
be  jealous  of  her  never  entered  into  her 
honest  head.  She  asked  her  husband, 
who  didn't  know,  but  said  that  Ostrel- 
lyan  gells  were,  as  a  Jennie  rule,  whim- 
sical young  cusses. 

No.  Gerty  would  have  nothing  to  do 
with  the  kind-hearted  American  woman, 
for  she  was  bitterly  jealous  of  her.  And 
Mr.  Nalder  frightened  her,  that  honest 
tradesman,  with  his  way  of  prefacing  half 
his  remarks  by  saying  "  Je-hoshaphat," 
which  frightened  her  out  of  her  wits  for 
what  was  coming.  His  way  of  thwacking 
down  his  right  or  left  bower  at  eucre, 
his  calling  the  trump  card  the  deck- 
head,  his  way  of  eating  with  his  knife, 
and  his  reckless  noisy  bonhommie,  were 
all  alike,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  disgusting 
to  her ;  nothing  he  could  do  was  right ; 
and,  after  all,  balder  was  a  good  fellow. 
George  got  angry  with  her  about  her 
treatment  of  these  people,  and  scolded 
her ;  and  he  could  not  scold  by  halves  ; 
he  terrified  her  so  that  he  saw  he  must 
never  do  it  again.  He  put  a  strong  re- 
straint on  himself;  to  do  the  man  justice, 
he  did  that ;  and  was  as  tender  and 
gentle  with  her  as  he  could  be  for  a 
time.  But  his  features  had  been  too 
much  accustomed  to  reflect  violent  pas- 
sion to  make  it  possible  for  him  to  act 
his  part  at  all  times.  Her  dull  fearful 
submission  irritated  him,  and  there  came 
times  when  that  irritation,  unexpressed 
in  words  and  actions,  would  show  itself 
too  faithfully  in  his  face ;  and  so  that 
look  of  pitiable  terror  which  had  come 
into  Gerty's  great  eyes  the  first  time  he 
had  sworn  at  her,  that  restless  shifting 
of  the  pupil  from  side  to  side,  accom- 
panied by  a  spasmodic  quivering  of  the 
eyelids,  never,  never  wholly  passed  away 
any  more.  "  That  he  could  have  cursed 
her,  that  he  could  have  snarled  at  her, 
and  cursed  her.  It  was  too  horrible. 
Could  James  have  been  right?  And 
Neville's  Gap  so  many  thousand  miles 
away,  and  getting  further  with  every 
bound  of  the  ship  !  " 


George  saw  all  this,  and  it  made  him 
mad.  He  found  out  now  that  he  had 
got  a  great  deal  fonder  of  beautiful  Mrs. 
Nalder  than  he  had  any  right  to  be,  and 
after  a  week's  penitential  attention  to 
Gerty  he  went  over  to  Mrs.  Nalder,  and 
begun  the  petits  soins  business  with  her 
once  more.  But,  unluckily  for  him, 
Mrs.  Nalder  had  found  him  out.  George, 
poor  fool,  thought  that  the  American 
woman's  coolness  towards  him  arose 
from  jealousy  at  his  having  returned  to 
his  wife.  He  found  his  mistake.  The 
brave  Illinois  woman  met  him  with  a 
storm  of  indignation,  and  rated  him 
about  his  treatment  of  his  wife.  She 
had  no  tact,  or  she  would  not  have  done 
so,  for  she  only  made  matters  worse. 

Of  all  the  foolish  things  which  James 
Oxton  ever  did,  this  was  the  worst : 
sending  these  two  out  of  the  range  of 
his  own  and  his  wife's  influence. 

Gerty  revived  a  little  in  the  tropics. 
The  sun  warmed  her  into  something 
like  her  old  self.  But  all  Mrs.  Nalder's 
kindness  failed  to  win  her  over.  She 
suspected  her  and  was  jealous  of  her ; 
and,  besides,  the  great  handsome  woman 
of  the  Western  prairies  was  offensive  to 
the  poor  little  robin  of  a  creature.  She 
was  coarse  and  loud,  and  her  hands 
were  large,  and  she  was  so  strong.  She 
couldn't  even  make  Gerty  comfortable 
on  a  bench  without  hurting  her.  And, 
besides,  Gerty  could  see  through  all  thia 
affected  attention  which  she  showed  her. 
Gerty,  like  most  silly  women,  thought 
herself  vastly  clever.  Mrs.  Nalder  was 
a  most  artful  and  dangerous  woman. 
All  this  assumed  affection  might  blind 
her  poor  husband,  but  could  never  blind 
her. 

But  the  good  ship  rolled  and  blundered 
on,  until  it  grew  to  be  forty  north,  in- 
stead of  forty  south,  and  the  sunny 
belt  was  passed  once  more,  and  Gerty 
began  to  pine  and  droop  again.  George 
would  land  at  Dover;  and  he  landed 
in  a  steamer  which  came  alongside. 
And  the  last  of  the  old  ship  was  this — 
that  all  the  crew  and  the  passengers 
stood  round  looking  at  her.  And  Mrs. 
JS"alder  came  up  and  kissed  her,  and  said, 
very  quietly,  "  My  dear,  we  may  neve* 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


457 


meet  again,  but,  when  we  do,  you  will 
know  me  better  than  you  do  now." 
Then  Gerty  broke  into  tears,  and  asked 
Mrs.  Nalder  to  forgive  her,  and  Mrs. 
Nalder,  that  coarse  and  vulgar  person, 
called  her  a  darling  little  sunbeam,  and 
wept  too,  after  the  Chicago  style  (and 
when  they  do  things  at  Chicago,  mind 
you,  they  do  'em  with  a  will).  Then 
Gerty  was  on  the  deck  of  the  little 
steamer,  and,  while  she  was  wondering 
through  her  tears  why  the  sides  of  the 
ship  looked  so  very  high,  there  came 
from  the  deck  a  sound  like  a  number 
of  glass  bells  ringing  together  and 
ceasing  at  once ;  then  the  sound  came 
again,  louder  and  clearer ;  and  as  it  came 
the  third  time,  George  raised  her  arm, 
and  said — "  Wave  your  handkerchief, 
Gerty;  quick,  don't  you  hear  them 
cheering  you  ? " 

And,  directly  afterwards,  they  stood 
on  the  slippery,  slimy  boards  of  the  pier 
at  Dover,  on  the  dull  English  winter 
day ;  and  she  looked  round  at  the  chalk 
cliffs,  whose  crests  were  shrouded  in 
mist,  and  at  the  muddy  street,  and  the 
dark  coloured  houses,  and  she  said, 
"  Oh,  dear,  dear  me.  Is  this,  this 
England,  George  ?  What  a  nasty,  cold, 
ugly,  dirty  place  it  is." 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

GERTY'S  FIRST  INNINGS. 

A  VERY  few  days  before  Sir  George 
Hillyar  received  the  note  which  told 
him  of  his  son's  arrival  in  England,  he 
happened  to  be  out  shooting  alone,  and 
his  keeper  saw  that  he  was  very  anxious 
and  absent,  and  shot  very  badly  indeed. 
He  conceived  that  it  was  Sir  George's 
anxiety  about  his  son's  arrival,  and 
thought  little  about  it ;  but,  as  the 
day  went  on,  it  became  evident  that  Sir 
George  wanted  to  broach  some  subject, 
and  had  a  hesitation  in  doing  so. 

At  last  he  said — "  What  state  are  the 
boats  in,  Morton  ? " 

"They  are  in  very  good  repair,  Sir 
George." 

"  I  think  I  shall  have  them  painted." 


"They  were  painted  last  week,  Sir 
George." 

"I  shall  get  new  oars  for  them,  I 
fancy." 

"  The  new  oars,  which  you  ordered 
while  staying  at  Kew,  came  home  last 
Thursday,  Sir  George." 

"  H'm.  Hey.  Then  there  is  no 
work  for  a  waterman  about  the  lake, 
is  there?" 

"  None  whatever,  Sir  George." 

"  Morton,  you  are  a  fool.  If  I  had 
not  more  tact  than  you  I  would  hang 
myself  before  I  went  to  bed." 

"  Yes,  Sir  George." 

"  Send  for  the  young  waterman  that 
we  had  at  Kew,  and  find  him  some  work 
about  the  boats  for  a  few  days." 

"  Yes,  Sir  George." 

"  You  know  whom  I  mean  ? " 

«  No,  Sir  George." 

"Then  why  the  devil  did  you  say 
you  did?" 

"  I  did  not,  Sir  George." 

"  Then  you  contradict  me  ?  " 

"  I  hope  I  know  my  place  better,  Sir 
George.  But  I  never  did  say  I  knew 
who  you  mean,  for  I  don't ;  in  conse- 
quence I  couldn't  have  said  I  did. 
Maark  !  caawk  !  Awd  drat  this  jawing 
in  cover,  Sir  George !  Do  hold  your 
tongue  till  we're  out  on  the  heth  agin. 
How  often  am  I  to  tell  you  on  it  ? " 

So  he  did.  At  the  next  pause  in 
the  sport  old  Morton  said,  "  Now,  Sir 
George,  what  do  you  want  done  ?  " 

"  I  want  that  young  man,  Eeuben 
Burton,  whom  we  had  at  Kew,  fetched 
over.  I  want  you  to  make  an  excuse 
for  his  coming  to  mend  the  boats. 
That's  what  I  want." 

"Then  why  couldn't  you  have  said 
so  at  once?"  said  old  Morton  to  his 
face. 

"  Because  I  didn't  choose.  If  you 
get  so  impudent,  Morton,  I  shall  be 
seriously  angry  with  you." 

"Ah!  I'll  chance  all  that,"  said 
Morton  to  himself;  "you're  easy  enough 
managed  by  those  as  knows  you.  I 
wonder  why  he  has  taken  such  a  fancy 
to  this  young  scamp.  I  wonder  if  he 
knows  he  is  Sam  Burton's  son.  I  sus- 
pect he  do." 


458 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


But  old  Morton  said  nothing  more, 
and  Reuben  was  sent  for  to  Stanlake. 

Sir  George  was  going  out  shooting 
again  when  Eeuben  came.  The  old 
butler  told  him  that  the  young  water- 
man was  come,  and  Sir  George  told  him 
that  he  must  wait ;  but,  when  Sir 
George  came  out,  he  had  got  a  smile  on 
his  face  ready  to  meet  the  merry  young 
rascal  who  had  amused  him  so  much. 

"Hallo!  you  fellow,"  he  began, 
laughing ;  but  he  stopped  suddenly, 
for  the  moment  he  looked  at  Reuben 
Burton  he  saw  that  there  was  a  great 
change  in  him.  Reuben  had  lost  all 
iis  old  vivacity,  and  had  a  painfully 
worn,  eager  look  on  his  face. 

"  Why,  how  the  lad  is  changed  !  "  said 
Sir  George.  "  You  have  been  falling  in 
love,  you  young  monkey.  Go  and  see 
to  those  boats,  and  put  ihem  in  order." 

Reuben  went  wearily  to  work  ;  there 
was  really  nothing  to  do.  Sir  George 
merely  had  him  over  to  gratify  a  fancy 
for  seeing  him  again.  It  may  have 
•been  that  he  was  disappointed  in  find- 
ing the  merry  slangy  lad  he  had  got  to 
like  looking  so  old  and  anxious,  or  it 
may  have  been  that  his  nervous  anxiety 
for  the  approaching  interview  with  his 
son  put  Reuben  out  of  his  head ;  but, 
however  it  was,  Sir  George  never*  went 
near  Reuben  after  the  first  time  he  had 
looked  at  him,  and  had  seen  the  change 
in  him.  No  one  will  ever  know  now 
what  was  working  in  Sir  George's  heart 
towards  Reuben  Burton.  The  absence 
of  all  inquiries  on  his  part  as  to  who 
Reuben  was  decidedly  favours  James 
.Burton  the  elder's  notion,  that  Sir 
George  guessed  he  was-  the  son  of 
Samuel  Burton,  and  that  he  did  not, 
.having  conceived  a  strange  affection  for 
the  lad,  wish  to  push  his  inquiries  too 
far.  It  may  have  been  this,  or  it  may 
have  been  merely  an  old  man's  fancy ; 
but  even  now,  when  he  seemed  to  have 
passed  the  lad  by  himself,  he  made 
Erne  go  and  see  him  every  morning. 

"  Erne,"  he  said,  "  that  boy  is  in 
trouble.  In  secret  trouble.  Find  his 
secret  out,  my  child,  and  let  us  help 
him." 

But  kind  and  gentle  Erne  couldn't 


do  that.  Reuben  went  as  far  as  telling 
hkn  that  he  was  in  trouble ;  but  also 
told  him  that  he  could  say  nothing 
more,  for  the  sake  of  others. 

"  I  say,  old  Rube,"  said  Erne,  as  he 
sat  lolling  against  the  side  of  a  boat 
which  Reuben  was  mending,  "  I  have 
found  out  the  whole  of  the  business 
from  beginning  to  end." 

"  Have  you,  sir  1 "  said  Reuben,  with 
a  ghost  of  a  smile.  "  I  am  glad  of  it." 

"  You  have  been  getting  into  bad 
company,"  said  Erne. 

"  Very  bad,"  said  Reuben. 

"  And  you  are  innocent  yourself?  " 

"  Yes,"  said  Reuben.  "  Come.  I 
couldn't  say  as  much  to  every  one, 
Master  Erne  ;  but  I  know,  when  I  say 
a  thing  to  you,  that  it  won't  go  any 
further.  Therefore  I  confide  this  to 
your  honour,  for  if  you  betray  me  I  am 
lost.  I  am  innocent." 

Erne  laughed.  "  That  is  something 
like  your  old  familiar  nonsense,  Reuben. 
Tell  me  all  about  it." 

"  It  would  be  awkward  for  you  if  I 
did,  sir." 

"  Well  !  well  !  "  said  Erne.  "  I 
believe  in  you,  anyway.  I  say,  does 
Emma  know  about  it  1 " 

"  God  bless  you,  no,"  said  Reuben. 
"  Don't  tell  her  nothing,  for  God's  sake, 
Master  Erne." 

"  You  haven't  told  me  anything, 
Reuben ;  «o  how  could  I  tell  her  ? " 

"I  mean,  don't  let  her  know  that 
Sir  George  noticed  how  I  was  altered. 
I  should  like  her  to  think  the  best  of 
me  to  the  last.  If  trouble  comes,  the 
bitterest  part  of  it  will  be  the  being 
disgraced  before  her.  Don't  say  any- 
thing to  lier" 

"  Why  should  I  be  likely  to?"  said 
Erne. 

"  Why,"  said  Reuben,  "  I  mean,  when 
you  and  she  was  sitting  together  all 
alone,  courting,  that  you  might  say 
this  and  that,  and  not  put  me  in  the 
best  light.  Lord  love  you,  master,  I 
know  all  about  that  courting  business. 
When  the  arm  is  round  the  waist  the 
tongue  won't  keep  between  the  teeth." 

"  But  I  am  not  courting  Emma," 
said  Erne.  "  At  least — 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


459 


"At  least  or  at  most,  master,  you 
love  the  ground  she  walks  on.  Never 
mind  what  your  opinion,  about  your 
own  state  of  mind  is.  Only  be  honour- 
able to  her.  And,  when  the  great 
smash  comes,  keep  them  in  mind  of 
me." 

"  Keep  who  in  mind  1 "  said  Erne. 

"  Jim  and  Emma.  Help  'em  to  re- 
member me.  I  should  be  glad  to  think 
that  you  three  thought  of  me  while  I 
was  there." 

"  While  you  are  where  1 "  said  Erne, 
in  a  very  low  voice. 

"  In  Coldbath  Fields,  master,"  said 
Keuben.  "Now  YOU'VE  got  it." 

One  need  not  say  that  Erne  was  dis- 
tressed by  the  way  in  which  Eeuben 
spoke  of  himself.  He  was  very  sorry 
for  Eeuben,  and  was  prepared  to  die  for 
him ;  but— 

He  was  seventeen,  and  Eeuben  had 
accused  him  of  his  first  love.  Poor 
Eeuben,  by  a  few  wild  words,  had  let  a 
flood  of  light  in  on  to  his  boy's  heart. 
Eeuben  was  the  first  who  had  told  him 
that  he  was  in  love.  One  has,  in 
chemistry,  seen  a  glass  jar  full  of  crystal 
clear  liquid,  clear  as  water,  yet  so  satu- 
rated with  some  salt  that  the  touch  of 
any  clumsy  hand,  will  send  the  spiculas 
quivering  through  it  in  every  direction, 
and  prove  to  the  sense  of  sight  that 
the  salt,  but  half  believed  in  before,  is 
•there  in  overpowering  quantities.  So 
Eeuben's  words  crystallized  Erne's  love  ; 
and  he  denied  it  to  himself  no  longer. 
And  in  this  great  gush  of  unutterable 
happiness  poor  Eeuben's  trouble  and 
•disgrace  were  only  a  mere  incident — a 
tragical  incident,  which  would  be  a  new 
bond  in  their  love. 

So  Erne,  leaving  poor  Eeuben  tinker- 
ing at  the  boats,  walked  on  air.  He 
had  determined,  as  he  walked  through 
the  wood,  that  the  first  thing  he  would 
do  would  be  to  go  off  to  Chelsea — to 
get  Jim  Burton,  the  blacksmith's  eldest 
son  (with  whom  you  have  already  some 
acquaintance),  and  to  tell  him  all  about 
it ;  when,  walking  through  the  wood, 
he  met  his  father. 

"  Have  you  been  to  see  that  young 
waterman,  Erne  ?  "  said  his  father. 


'  "  I  have,"  said  Erne.  "  We  ought  to 
be  kind  to  that  fellow,  dad.  He  is  in 
trouble,  and  is  innocent." 

"  I  think  he  is,"  said  Sir  George.  "  I 
have  a  great  fancy .  for  that  fellow.  I 
know  what  is  the  matter  with  him." 

"  Do  you  ?  "  said  Erne.     "  I  don't." 

"  Why,  it's  about  this  Eliza  Burton," 
said  Sir  George,  looking  straight  at  him ; 
"  that's  what  is  the  matter." 

"  You  don't  happen  to  mean  Emma 
Burton,  do  you  ?  "  said  Erne. 

"  Emma  or  Eliza,  or  something  of 
that  sort,"  said  Sir  George.  He  is  in 
love  with  her,  and  she  is  playing  the 
fool  with  some  one  else." 

"  He  is  not  in  love  with  her,  and  she 
has  been  playing  the  fool  with  nobody," 
said  Erne. 

"  So  you  think,"  said  Sir  George  ;  "  I, 
however,  happen  to  know  the  world, 
and,  from  the  familiarities  which  you 
have  confessed  to  me,  as  passing  be- 
tween this  girl  and  yourself,  I  am  of  a 
different  opinion.  I  have  allowed  you 
to  choose  what  company  you  wished  for 
above  a  year  ;  I  have  been  rewarded  by 
your  full  confidence,  and,  from  what 
you  told  me  about  this  girl,  I  believe 
her  to  be  an  artful  and  dangerous  young 
minx." 

"'Don't  talk  in  that  light  way  about 
your  future  daughter-in-law ;  I  am  going 
to  marry  that  girl.  I  am  seventeen,  and 
in  three  years  I  shall  marry  her." 

"  How  dare  you  talk  such  nonsense  ? 

Suppose,  sir,  that  I  was  to  alter 1 

mean,  to  stop  your  allowance,  sir,  hey  ? " 

"Then  the  most  gentlemanly  plan 
would  be  to  give  me  notice.  Her  father 
will  teach  me  his  trade." 

"  You  are  impertinent,  undutiful,  and, 
what  is  worse,  a  fool " 

"And  all  that  sort  of  thing,"  said 
Erne.  "Having  fired  your  broadside 
of  five-and-forty  sixty-eight  pounders, 
perhaps  you  will  let  off  your  big  swivel 
gun  on  deck.  I  tell  you  I  am  going  to 
marry  Emma  Burton." 

"You  know,  you  undutiful  and 
wicked  boy,  all  the  consequences  of  a 
mesalliance " 

"That's  the  big  gun,  hey?"  said 
Erne.  "  Why,  yes ;  your  mesalliance 


460 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons  : 


with  my  mother  having  been  dinned 
into  my  ears  ever  since  I  was  five,  as 
the  happiest  match  ever  made,  I  do 
know ;  you  have  put  your  foot  in  it 
there.  A  blacksmith's  daughter  is  as 
good  as  a  gamekeeper's,  any  day." 

"  Her  relations,  sir  !  Her  relations  !  " 

"My  Uncle  Bob,  sir!  My  Uncle 
Bob !  " 

Old  Compton  the  lawyer  had  warned 
Erne,  on  one  previous  occasion,  against 
what  he  called  "hard  hitting."  But 
Erne,  as  Reuben  would  have  said,  could 
never  keep  his  tongue  between  his  teeth. 
His  Uncle  Bob  was  a  very  sore  subject. 
His  Uncle  Bob  had  not  borne  the  rise 
in  circumstances  consequent  on  his 
sister  becoming  Lady  Hillyar  with  that 
equanimity  which  is  the  characteristic 
of  great  minds.  The  instant  he  heard 
of  the  honour  in  store  for  him,  he  got 
drunk,  and  had  remained  so,  with  slight 
lucid  intervals  ever  since — a  period  of 
eighteen  years.  Having  the  constitu- 
tion of  a  horse,  and  the  temper  of  his 
sister,  he  had  survived  hitherto,  and 
was  quoted  from  one  doctor  to  another 
as  the  most  remarkable  instance  ever 
known  of  the  habitual  use  of  stimulants. 
They  used  to  give  clinical  lectures  on 
him,  and  at  last  made  him  uncom- 
monly proud  of  his  performances.  Such, 
combined  with  a  facility  for  incurring 
personal  liabilities,  which  was  by  no 
means  impaired  by  his  intemperate 
habits,  were  some  of  the  characteristics 
of  Uncle  Bob,  now  triumphantly  thrown 
in  Sir  George's  face  by  Erne. 

He  was  very  angry.  He  said  that 
such  an  allusion  as  that,  on  Erne's  part, 
revealed  to  him  such  an  abyss  of  moral 
squalor  beneath  the  surface  as  he  was 
not  prepared  for  in  the  case  of  one  so 
young, 

"  Now,  mark  me,  sir.  Once  for  all. 
I  do  not  oppose  four  fancy  for  this  girl. 
I  encourage  it.  You  distinctly  under- 
stand that  once  for  all.  Your  brother 
dines  here  to-day." 

"  So  I  hear,"  said  Erne,  seeing  it 
would  not  do  to  go  on  with  any  more 
nonsense. 

"  I  hope  sincerely  that  you  and  your 
brother  will  remain  friends.  I  do  not 


purpose  your  seeing  much  of  him.  His 
wife  has,  I  hear,  some  claims  to  beauty." 

"  She  is  the  sweetest  little  rosebud 
you  ever  saw  in  your  life." 

"  Where  have  you  seen  her  ?  I 
know  you  didn't  go  to  seek  them,  because 
you  promised  me  you  would  not." 

"  I  did  not,  indeed.  I  guessed  who 
they  were  from  a  few  words  they  said 
in  church,  and,  as  I  came  out,  I  intro- 
duced myself." 

"Where  were  you  ?  At  what  church  T 

"  At  the  old  church,  Chelsea." 

"  What  a  singular  thing.  Is  Compton 
come  1 " 

It  was  with  intense  eagerness  that 
Mr.  Compton,  knowing  what  he  knew, 
watched  the  face  of  father  and  son, 
when  they  met  after  so  many  years 
estrangement.  He  knew  perfectly  how 
much,  how  very  much,  each  of  them 
had  to  forgive  the  other ;  and  he  knew, 
moreover,  that  neither  of  them  had 
the  least  intention  of  forgiveness.  He 
guessed  that  George  had  come  over  to 
try  to  win  back  his  father's  good  graces 
with  the  assistance  of  his  wife ;  but  he 
knew  far  too  much  to  hope  much  from 
her  assistance.  One  thing  he  knew, 
which  others  only  guessed,  that  Sir 
George  Hillyar  had  made  a  will,  leaving 
Erne  eight  thousand  a  year.  This  was 
the  paper,  which  (if  your  memory  will 
carry  you  back  so  many  months)  he  had 
exhibited  such  an  anxiety  to  take  to 
his  office,  but  which  Sir  George  insisted 
on  keeping  in  his  old  escritoire. 

He  was  in  the  library,  and  Sir  George 
was  out  when  he  heard  them  drive  up» 
He  knew  that  there  was  no  one  to 
receive  them,  and  saw  from  that  that 
their  reception  was  to  be  formal.  He 
did  not  hurry  at  his  dressing,  for  he 
was  in  some  small  hopes  that  George 
and  his  wife  might  have  a  short  time, 
were  it  only  a  minute,  together  alone 
with  Sir  George,  and  that  either  of  them 
might  show  some  gleam  of  affection 
towards  the  other,  which  might  bring 
on  a  better  state  of  things  than  the 
cold,  cruel  course  of  formality  which 
Sir  George  had  evidently  planned. 

"  It  will  be  a  bad  job  for  Erne,  pos- 
sibly," said  the  old  man.  "  But  my 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


461 


young  friend  must  take  his  chance.  I 
won't  stand  between  father  and  son, 
even  for  him." 

"When  he  came  into  the  drawing-room 
he  found  Erne  and  his  father  dressed 
and  waiting.  They  were  standing  to- 
gether at  the  very  end  of  the  third 
drawing-room;  before  the  fire,  and  Sir 
George  was  talking  to  Erne  about  one 
of  the  horses.  When  he  joined  them, 
a  question  was  put  to  him  on  the  sub- 
ject; and  they  went  on  discussing  it. 
There  was  not  the  smallest  sign  of 
anxiety  or  haste  about  Sir  George's 
manner. 

He  had  not  been  talking  with  Erne 
many  minutes,  when  the  door  by  which 
he  had  entered,  which  was  at  the  very- 
farthest  end  of  the  three  rooms,  was 
opened  again ;  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  George 
Hillyar  came  in,  and  began  making 
their  way  through  the  vast  archipelago 
of  grand  furniture  which  lay  between 
the  opposing  parties.  Sir  George  took 
out  his  watch,  clicked  it  open,  and  told 
Erne  to  ring  the  bell  and  order  dinner. 

The  three  rooms  were  well  lighted 
up,  and,  great  as  the  distance  was,  old 
Compton  saw  in  one  instant  that  Mrs. 
George  was  very  beautiful.  And,  as  she 
came  steadily  and  quietly  towards  them, 
dressed  in  a  cloud  of  white,  he  saw  at 
every  step  she  took  that  she  was  more 
beautiful  still  —  the  most  beautiful 
woman  he  had  ever  seen. 

Sir  George  trod  three  steps  forward, 
and  said,  "  How  d'ye  do,  George  1  I  am 
glad  to  see  you.  And  how  do  you  do, 
my  dear  daughter-in-law  1  I  am  afraid 
you  must  find  this  country  very  cold 
after  Australia." 

Old  Compton  watched  the  father  and 
the  son  as  their  eyes  met.  Neither  of 
them  moved  a  muscle.  George  was 
very  distingue-looking ;  there  was  no 
doubt  about  that.  Nay,  more,  he  was 
in  a  way  very  handsome.  His  features 
had  not  lost  their  regularity,  in  spite  of 
all  his  dissipation.  "He  is  wonder- 
fully true-bred,"  thought  old  Compton. 
"  Half  wild  cat  like  his  mother,  and 
half  bull-terrier  like  his  father.  His 
chance  aint  worth  twopence.  The  will 
in  the  escritoire  is  the  will.  No  new 
job  for  me." 


The  old  man  was  right.  There  was 
no  mistake  about  George's  paternity  to 
any  such  close  observer  as  old  Compton, 
though  a  stranger  might  have  thought 
that  there  was  no  resemblance  between 
them  —  no  resemblance  whatever  be- 
tween the  thickset  figure,  the  sleek  bullet 
stupid  grey-head,  the  square  gladiator 
features,  and  the  clear  brown  red  com- 
plexion of  Sir  George  ;  and  the  slender 
lithe  frame,  the  more  refined  features, 
and  the  pale  complexion  of  his  son. 
In  these  respects  there  was  no  resem- 
blance. George's  physique  was  that  of 
his  wild,  fierce  gipsy-looking  mother. 
But  he  had,  in  common  with  his  father, 
a  queer  contemptuous  trick  of  eye  and 
mouth,  which  showed  a  close  observer 
whose  son  he  was  in  a  moment.  Old 
Compton  saw  it  in  both  their  faces, 
when  their  eyes  met.  If  you  had  told 
him  that  those  eager,  fierce  women, 
through  the  very  force  of  their  nature, 
as  a  rule  reproduced  some  eighty  per 
cent,  of  their  own  characteristics  in 
their  sons,  but  that  a  quiet  and  gentle 
wife  would  sometimes  produce  an 
almost  actual  facsimile  of  tbe  father, 
in  this  case  the  old  man  would  have 
rather  pooh-poohed  you.  But,  once  begin, 
to  talk  to  the  old  lawyer  about  the 
breeding  of  racehorses,  a  matter  he  was 
well -up  in,  and  he  would -soon  have 
showed  you  that  trainers  and  stud- 
grooms  now  and  then  made  fortunes 
by  following,  among  horses,  rules  of 
breeding  practically  treated  as  being 
ridiculous  among  human  beings. 

Mrs.  George  Hillyar,  in  reply  to  her 
father-in-law,  said  that  she  did  find  it 
cold.  That  she  liked  getting  near  the 
fire  best,  for  it  warmed  her.  And  then 
she  asked  Sir  George  whether  he  hadn't 
got  a  glasshouse  full  of  flowers  in  full 
bloom,  and  whether  he  would  show  them 
to  her  to-morrow. 

Her  powers  of  conversation  were  not 
large,  evidently.  George  was  very  angry 
at  what  he  was  pleased  to  call  to  himself 
her  hopeless  silliness.  Yet  the  highest 
tact  could  not  have  done  more,  for  Sir 
George,  as  he  took  her  into  dinner,  said, 

"  I  am  afraid  you  are  an  innocent 
little  babe  in  the  wood,  Gertrude." 

"  Yes,"    she   said,   "  and  I  am   so 


462 


The  Hilly ars  and  the  Burtons  : 


terribly  afraid  of  you.  Don't  scold  me. 
I  am  not  near  so  silly  when  I  am  not 
scolded." 

"  My  poor  little  redbreast/'  said  Sir 
George.  "Who  do  you  think  would 
be  likely  to  scold  you  ?  You  may  de- 
pend on  it  that  I  will  not.  You  must 
trust  me  and  get  fond  of  me,  my  child. 
George,  will  you  take  the  end  of  the 
table,  if  you  don't  mind  sitting  with 
your  back  to  the  fire.  Get  Mr.  Hillyar 
a  screen,  Simpson.  You'll  be  hotter 
than  you  were  in  Australia,  George. 
You  are  sure  you  don't  mind." 

George,  who  didn't  want  for  a  certain 
unregulated  sort  of  humour,  looked  at 
his  father,  and  said  quietly,  "that  he 
had  not  found  himself  in  so  comfortable 
a  position  for  many  a  year ;"  which  made 
the  old  man  laugh  not  ill-humouredly. 

Old  Compton  talked  loudly  to  Erne 
and  George,  and  raised  a  wall  of  sound 
before  Gerty  and  Sir  George.  He  was 
anxious  for  her  to  see  what  she  could 
do  ;  he  was  all  for  fair  play.  Erne  saw 
what  he  wanted,  and  nobly  assisted  him, 
so  that  the  other  two  were  perfectly 
isolated.  Gerty  had  some  dim  idea  that 
she  was  to  make  herself  agreeable  to  her 
father-in-law,  and  she  began  her  little 
game.  As  thus — 

"  I  don't  think  you  at  all  odious  now. 
I  am  sure,  if  they  all  of  them  saw  more 
of  you,  they  would  not  call  you  an  odious 
tyrant." 

"  I  am  sure  they  wouldn't,"  said  Sir 
George,  who,  though  he  might  be  cruel 
and  unjust  to  his  son,  was  so  much  of  a 
gentleman  that  he  was  in  a  state  of 
chivalrous  terror  lest  he  should  lead 
the  beautiful  little  idiot  into  committing 
any  one.  He  said — 

"Do  you  think  you  shall  like  England, 
my  love?" 

"  I  don't  like  it  now,"  said  Gerty.  "  I 
always  want  to  be  near  the  fire.  When 
I  get  cold  I  cry,  and  that  makes  George 
cross." 

"  You  will  like  it  better  in  the  sum- 
mer, my  love." 

"  I  don't  know  whether  we  shall  be 
here  in  the  summer  or  not.  Aggy  said 
it  would  be  no  use  for  George  to  stay 
dawdling  here,  away  from  his  work,  if 
you  weren't  going  to  do  something  for 


him,  or,  at  all  events,  to  define  his 
prospects.  Therefore,  I  suppose,  as  soon 
as  I  am  confined,  and  well  enough  to 
move,  we  shall  go  back  again,  unless 
you  do  something  decided  for  us.  George 
says  you  will  see  him  hanged  first ;  but 
I  don't  think  that.  I  don't  think  so 
badly  of  you  as  I  did.  Are  these  pink 
cups  ice-cream?  I  wonder  whether  I 
dare  eat  some.  I  have  never  seen  iced 
cream  before  in  my  life.  Perhaps  I  had 
better  not ;  it  might  make  me  cry." 

And  so  she  went  on,  twittering  like 
one  of  her  own  zebra  parrakeets.  But, 
in  spite  of  her  utter  simplicity,  Sir 
George  did  what  every  one  else,  young 
or  old,  rich  or  poor,  did,  who  came 
near  her ;  that  is  to  say,  he  fell  in 
love  with  her. 

The  other  three  got  on  amazingly 
well.  Erne  was  as  difficult  to  resist  in 
his  way  as  Gerty  in  hers.  They  were 
to  go  shooting  on  the  morrow,  and 
George,  with  the  assistance  of  the  other 
two,  was  refreshing  his  memory  on  the 
localities.  They  got  on  very  well,  in- 
deed, and  George  became  quite  affec- 
tionate with  Erne.  They  had  been 
talking  about  a  certain  larch  belt, 
as  containing  game,  and  old  Compton 
had  said — 

"  Confound  the  game.  If  you  will  take 
my  advice,  Mr.  Hillyar,  you  will  have 
it  down,  and  let  the  sun  in." 

"  Then  I  am  to  have  Stanlake,  at 
all  events,"  thought  George,  flushing. 
"There  is  two  thousand  a  year  any 
way." 

So  the  George  Hillyars  stayed  at 
Stanlake,  and  Erne  and  George  shot 
and  hunted,  and  played  billiards  toge- 
ther, and  Gerty  sat  crouched  over  the 
fire,  and  saw  the  sunny  woods  and  crags 
of  Neville's  Gap  among  the  burning 
coals.  And  day  by  day  George  saw 
Erne  petted,  caressed,  and  consulted, 
while  he  himself  was  treated  with  a 
calm  politeness  which  was  infinitely 
exasperating.  Each  day  he  began  to 
see  more  clearly  that  a  very  large  por- 
tion of  the  property  was-  lost  to  him, 
and  every  day,  alas  !  his  dislike  and 
jealousy  towards  Erne  grew  stronger 
and  stronger. 


A  Story  of  Two  Families. 


463 


CHAPTEK  XXVT. 

JAMES  BURTON'S  STORY  :  JAMES  AND  HIS 
SISTER  PALL  OUT. 

SIR  GEORGE  HILLTAR  sent  for  Reuben 
to  go  to  Stanlake  and  see  after  some 
waterman's  work.  And  I  was  very  glad 
of  it ;  for  anything,  I  argued,  which  took 
Reuben  away  from  the  bad  company 
with  which  he  seemed  to  be  so  suddenly 
and  mysteriously  involved,  must  be  for 
the  better. 

He  came  down,  as  he  went,  to  leave 
the  key  of  his  roem  with  my  father. 
Erne  had  come  over  to  see  iis  :  to  see 
Emma,  indeed.  I  began  to  see  that 
much,  and  was  talking  with  her  in  the 
window.  They  turned  and  came  towards 
us  again  when  Reuben  came  in,  and  so 
we  four  were  together  once  more,  for  the 
last  time  for  a  long  while. 

Reuben  came  whistling  in,  nodded  a 
good-bye  to  all  of  us,  and  said  to  Erne, 
"  I  shall  see  you  to-morrow,  sir,  I  dare- 
say," and  sauntered  out. 

"  Say  a  kind  word  to  him  for  us," 
said  Emma ;  "  go  to  him  sometimes  at 
Stanlake,  and  cheer  him  up  a  little.  He 
can't  reward  you  for  any  kindness,  but 
I  will  answer  for  him  that  he  is 
grateful" 

Erne  promised,  and  very  shortly  after 
Joe  came  clumping  in,  all  radiant. 

"  Jim,"  he  said,  "  Jim  !  Here,  such  a 
jolly  lark  on.  I  mean,"  he  said,  getting 
rather  red,  and  looking  at  Erne,  laugh- 
ing, "  that  I  anticipate  considerable  en- 
tertainment." 

"  What's  npl"  I  asked,  simply  ;  for 
it  was  no  use  trying  to  get  fine  words 
out  of  me  at  that  time  without,  consider- 
able preparation. 

"  Why,"  he  said,  "  they  are  going  to 
have  the  Harvest  Home  at  the  Victoria 
to-night,  with  Wright  and  0.  Smith 
from  the  Adelphi.  Come  on,  let's  go." 

"Of  course,"  I  said;  or  we  should 
no  more  have  thought  of  missing  such 
a  dainty  treat  as  that  in  those  times 
than  of  losing  our  dinner.  "  But  we 
had  better  go  early.  We  had  a  terrible 
fight  for  a  place  last  time,  remember,  and 
you  lost  all  your  oranges,  and  a  cotton 


handkerchief  worth  three  halfpence,  and 
that  sort  of  thing  makes  the  amusement 
come  dear." 

"  I  say,"  said  Erne,  suddenly ;  "  I'll 
tell  you  what ;  Til  go.  I've  never  been 
to  the  play  in  my  life." 

Joe  and  I  were  delighted  at  the  idea. 
"  But,"  I  said,  "  you  can't  come  dressed 
like  that ;  you'd  have  to  fight  in  a 
minute." 

"  Lend  me  some  of  your  clothes  and  a 
cap,"  said  Erne.  "  This  is  the  greatest 
lark  I  ever  knew.  What  do  you  think, 
Emma;  hey?" 

"I  was  wondering  what  Sir  George 
would  say  if  he  knew  where  you  were 
going,  and  how  !  " 

"  There  is  no  need  he  should,"  said 
Erne. 

"  I  should  have  thought  there  was," 
she  replied,  quietly.  "  Pray  don't  do 
anything  so  insane." 

"  There  can't  be  any  harm  in  it,"  said 
Erne. 

"  I  should  have  said,"  replied  Emma, 
"  that  there  was  the  very  greatest  harm 
in  a  young  gentleman  dressing  himself 
like  a  blacksmith,  and  going  to  the 
gallery  of  the  Victoria  Theatre.  I  con- 
fess /  should  think  so.  More  particu- 
larly when  that  young  gentleman  has 
been  so  generously  trusted  by  his  father 
to  associate  with  people  so  far  below 
him  in  rank.  I  don't  know  why  that 
young  gentleman's  father  has  shown 
such  blind  trust  in  him.  It  may  be 
because  he  has  such  full  and  perfect 
confidence  in  him,  or  it  may  be  that  his 
great  love  for  him  has  made  him  foolish. 
Whichever  way  it  is,  for  that  young 
gentleman  to  abuse  his  father's  confi- 
dence so  utterly  as  to  go  masquerading 
in  a  dress  which  he  has  no  right  to  wear, 
in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  town,  with 
two  common  lads,  is  a  degree  of  mean- 
ness which  I  don't  expect  at  all." 

As  she  said  this  I  saw  Joe's  mag- 
nificent, Byron-like  head  turned  in 
anger  upon  her,  and  I  saw  a  wild,  in- 
dignant flush  rise  upon  his  face,  and  go 
reddening  up  to  the  roots  of  his  close, 
curling  hair ;  I  saw  it  rise,  and  then  I 
saw  it  die  away,  as  Joe  limped  towards 
her,  and  kissed  her.  Whether  she  had 


464 


The  Hillyars  and  the  Burtons. 


seen  it,  or  not,  it  was  hard  to  say,  but 
she  had  guessed  it  would  be  there  :  she 
put  her  arm  round  his  neck,  and  then 
drew  his  face  against  hers,  saying, 

"  Ask  my  brother  Joe,  here,  what  he 
thinks." 

"He  thinks  as  you  do,  and  so  do 
I,"  said  Erne,  quietly.  "  If  you  were 
always  by  me  I  should  never  do  wrong." 
"  Ask  Jim  what  he  thinks  about  it," 
said  Emma,  laughing.  "Ask  that  great 
stupid,  dear  old  Jim,  how  he  would 
like  to  see  his  noble  hero,  with  a  greasy 
old  cap  on,  sucking  oranges  in  the 
gallery  of  the  theatre  in  the  New  Cut. 
Look  how  he  stands  there,  like  a  stupid 
old  ox.  But  I  know  who  is  the  best  of 
us  four,  nevertheless." 

The  "  stupid  old  ox — "  that  is  to  say, 
the  Honourable  James  Burton,  who  is 
now  addressing  you — had  thrown  his 
leather  apron  over  his  left  shoulder, 
and  was  scratching  his  head.  I  am 
afraid  that  I  did  look  very  like  a  stupid 
ox.  But  think  that,  if  you  had  taken 
the  cobwebs  out  of  my  brain,  and  wound 
them  off  on  a  card,  you  would  have 
found  that  I  was  making  a  feeble  effort 
to  tiy  to  think  that  my  brother  and 
sister  were  two  rather  heroic  and  noble 
persons.  After  all,  I  only  fancy  that  I 
remember  that  I  was  trying  to  think 
that  I  thought  so.  I  am  no  fool,  but 
that  fierce  flush  on  Joe's  face  had  con- 
fused and  frightened  me.  I  saw  very- 
great  danger.  I  had  not  seen  that  look 
there  for  a  long  time. 

Erne  gave  up  his  project,  and  soon 
went  -away  in  the  best  of  humours  ;  Joe 
went  to  his  school ;  and  I  was  left  alone 
with  Emma. 

Though  I  still  had  my  apron  over  my 
shoulder,  and  might,  for  all  I  can  re- 
member, have  still  been  scratching  my 
head,  yet  still  all  the  cobwebs  in  my 
brain  were  drawn  out  into  one  strong 
thread,  stronger  than  silk,  and  I  knew 
what  to  say  and  what  to  do.  I  turned 
on  Emma. 


"You  were  perfectly  right,"  I  said, 
"  in  stopping  him  going.  You  were 
right  in  every  word  you  said  to  him; 
but  you  had  no  right  to  speak  of  Joe 
and  myself  as  you  did." 

She  folded  her  hands,  sweet  saint,  as 
if  in  prayer,  and  took  it  all  so  quietly. 

"  It  was  not  good  to  speak  of  your 
brother  so,"  I  went  on,  with  heightened 
voice  and  an  angry  face.  "You  may 
speak  as  you  please  of  me,  but,  if  you 
speak  in  that  way  of  Joe,  before  his 
face,  you  will  raise  the  devil  in  him, 
and  there  will  be  mischief.  You  should 
measure  your  words.  Let  me  never 
hear  that  sort  of  thing  again." 

I  was  right  in  every  word  I  said  to 
her.  And  yet  I  would  give  all  my 
great  wealth,  my  title,  everything  I 
have,  except  my  wife  and  children,  to 
unsay  those  words  again.  Oh,  you  who 
use  hard  words,  however  true  they  may 
be,  when  will  you  be  persuaded  that 
every  hard,  cold  word  you  use  is  one 
stone  on  a  great  pyramid  of  useless 
remorse  1 

How  did  she  answer  me  1  She  ran 
to  me  and  nestled  her  noble  head 
against  my  bosom,  and  called  me  her 
own  sweet  brother,  and  begged  me  not 
to  scold  her,  for  that  she  loved  him, 
loved  him,  loved  him.  That  Erne's 
name  was  written  on  her  heart ;  but  that 
he  should  never,  never  know  it  on  this 
side  of  the  grave ;  for  she  would  devote 
herself  to  Joe,  and  be  his  sister  and 
friend  to  death;  and  that  she  was  so 
sorry  for  what  she  had  said. 

What  could  I  do  ?  What  I  did,  I 
suppose.  Soothe  her,  quiet  her,  and 
tell  her  I  had  been  in  the  wrong  (which 
was  not  altogether  true).  That  is  what 
I  did,  however ;  and  so  I  had  said  the 
first  and  last  harsh  word  to  her.  It 
cannot  be  recalled,  but  there  is  some 
comfort  in  thinking  that  it  was  the  first 
and  the  last. 

To  be  continued. 


465 


SUBSCRIPTION  NO  SECUEITY. 


IN  the  discussions  that  have  taken  place 
respecting  the  Subscriptions  and  De- 
clarations imposed  upon  all  clergymen, 
and  at  Oxford  on  all  candidates  Hot  the 
higher  degrees,  lay  or  clerical,  two  dis- 
tinct things  have  been  more  or  less  con- 
founded— the  Formularies  to  which 
Subscription  is  required,  and  the  re- 
quirement of  Subscription.  It  is  easy 
to  dispense  with  the  requirement,  and 
to  leave  the  Formularies  untouched.  The 
truth  of  the  Formularies  is  one  thing, 
the  expediency  of  requiring  Subscription 
to  them  is  another. 

The  petition,  which  was  signed  last 
year  by  106  members  of  the  University 
of  Oxford,  all  of  whom  were,  or  had 
been,  Professors  or  Tutors  and  Fellows, 
asked  for  the  abolition  of  Subscription 
as  a  test  for  Academical  Degrees,  but 
disclaimed  all  intention  of  interfering 
with  the  theological  teaching  of  the 
University,  and  expressed  a  desire  to 
preserve  the  religious  character  of  aca- 
demical education.  The  letter  of  Dean 
Stanley  advocated  a  relaxation  of  the 
present  Subscriptions  and  Declarations 
imposed  upon  the  clergy,  but  left  alto- 
gether untouched  the  question  of  re- 
vising the  Formularies. 

The  distinction  here  insisted  on  is 
very  lucidly  expressed  in  a  passage  from 
the  Life  and  Times  of  Bishop  Burnet. 
The  Bishop  proposed  to  leave  the  Articles 
as  the  Law  of  the  Church,  but  not  to  re- 
quire any  person  to  bind  himself  before- 
hand by  a  Subscription.  "  Churches 
"and  Societies/'  he  says,  "are  better 
"  governed  by  laws  than  by  Subscrip- 
"  tioris ;  it  is  a  more  reverent,  as  well 
"  as  a  more  easy  mode  of  government." 
No  one  doubts  the  proposition  in  regard 
to  society  in  general,  or  in  regard  to 
particular  societies,  save  those  which  are 
concerned  with  theological  opinion.  No 
society  requires  teachers  of  Natural 
Science  to  subscribe  to  Articles  embody- 
ing the  doctrines  of  gravitation,  of  the 
reflection  and  refraction  of  light,  and  so 
forth.  Judges  and  Magistrates  are  bound 

No.  54. — VOL.  ix. 


to  administer  the  law  of  the  realm,  and 
are  subject  to  penalties  for  wilful  mal- 
administration ;  but  no  one  ever  pro- 
posed that  a  provision  should  be  added 
to  the  statute-book  requiring  Judges  and 
Magistrates  to  subscribe  a  set  of  Articles 
comprising  the  leading  principles  of  the 
law.  The  Colleges  of  Physicians  and 
Surgeons  require  no  subscription  to 
medical  Articles  from  their  members. 
Even  clergymen  are  not  called  on  to 
make  a  profession  of  faith  with  respect 
to  the  principles  of  morality. 

It  is  reasonable  to  ask  why  ecclesias- 
tical bodies  exact  Declarations  or  Sub- 
scriptions from  persons  invested  with 
authority  in  the  Church,  while  other 
societies  find  it  unnecessary  to  take  such 
precautions. 

Waiving  this  inquiry  for  the  present, 
we  will  simply  say  that  the  avowed  pur- 
pose of  Confessions  and  Subscriptions  is 
to  prevent  discord  and  promote  agree- 
ment. The  Convocation,  which  settled 
the  Articles,  says  that  they  were  de- 
signed "for  the  avoiding  diversities  of 
"  opinions,  and  for  the  establishing 
"  of  consent  touching  true  religion." 
History  shows  that  the  political  object 
of  those  who  imposed  Subscription 
•was,  first,  to  expel  from  the  Church 
ecclesiastics  who  held  what  were  judged 
erroneous  opinions  ;  and,  secondly,  to 
prevent  those  who  remained  in  the 
Church  from  holding  such  opinions. 
It  is  alleged  that  these  ends  can  only  be 
gained  in  one  of  two  ways — either  by 
exacting  promises  and  taking  engage- 
ments beforehand,  or  by  penalties  en- 
forced in  a  Court  of  Heresy.  "We  now 
propose  to  inquire  whether,  in  fact,  the 
peace  and  harmony  desired  have  been 
secured  by  Subscriptions  ;  and  whether 
ecclesiastical  authorities  have,  by  Sub- 
scriptions, been  enabled  to  dispense  with 
constraints  and  penalties. 

To  clear  the  way,  it  will  be  useful  to 
have  before  us  a  brief  account  of  the 
imposition  of  the  various  Subscriptions 
and  Declarations  required  in  the  Church 
of  England.  H  H 


466 


Subscription  no  Security. 


Elaborate  Confessions  of  Faith  took 
their  origin  in  Germany  after  the  Re- 
formation. "  The  common-place  and 
"  shallow  argument,"  says  Dr.  Pusey, 
in  his  account  of  German  Theology, 
"  drawn  from  the  variations  of  the  evan- 
"  gelical  statements  of  doctrine  against 
"  the  truth  of  their  system  .  .  .  was 
"  met  [by  the  Eeformers]  not  by  the 
"  easy  task  of  retort  upon  the  Romish 
"  Church,  nor  by  the  obvious  principle 
"  that  all  human  discoveries  of  truth 
"  must  ...  be  effected  by  the  slow  and 
"  toilsome  passage  through  error,  nor 
"  by  showing  that  these  discrepancies  in 
"  collateral  points  .  .  .  were  consistent 
"  with  the  truth  and  harmony  of  the 
"  general  system,  but  by  drawing  still 
"  closer  the  limits  of  the  Church's  pale, 
"  and  by  excluding  as  Jieretics  all  who 
"  departed  from  the  strictest  letter  of 
"  the  symbol."  And  then  he  goes  on 
to  describe  vividly  "the  unhappy,  un- 
"  practical,  and  frequently  presumptuous 
"  polemics,"  which  arose  from  a  perti- 
nacious resolution  to  exclude  every  con- 
ceivable deviation  from  uniformity  of 
creed,  and  to  require  Subscriptions,  De- 
clarations, and  Oaths,  as  a  means  of  en- 
forcing unity.  We,  in  England,  went 
more  cautiously  to  work.  Articles  of 
Faith,  forty-two  in  number,  had  been 
drawn  up  in  the  last  part  of  the  reign  of 
Edward  VI.  They  were  revised  in  the 
early  times  of  Elizabeth  by  the  Convo- 
cation, and  reduced  to  the  present  form ; 
yet  for  some  years  they  were  not  em- 
ployed as  a  test.  It  would,  indeed, 
have  been  dangerous  to  enforce  Sub- 
scription. The  greater  number  of  the 
Articles  were  levelled  against  the  old 
religion ;  and,  in  the  early  days  of 
Elizabeth,  it  was  calculated  by  Cecil 
that  the  Catholics  formed  two-thirds 
of  the  whole  population  of  England. 
Some  few  were  directed  against  the  new 
Puritanic  party,  which  looked  to  Geneva 
for  guidance  ;  and  this  party  was  rapidly 
increasing  in  influence  and  numbers. 
Elizabeth  herself  was  disposed  to  tem- 
porize ;  her  inclinations  led  her  to  the 
Roman,  rather  than  to  the  Puritan, 
opinions,  in  all  points  that  did  not  touch 
the  supremacy.  In  vain,  she  was  solicited 
by  the  Reforming  Divines ;  in  vain,  she 


was  twitted  by  the  Spanish  Ambassador 
as  to  the  variations  of  the  Protestants 
in  regard  to  matters  of  Faith  ; — "  he 
"  should  like  to  know  what  the  religion 
"  was  to  be ;  so  far  as  he  could  hear, 
"  there  were  as  many  opinions  in 
"  England  as  in  Germany."  *  She  re- 
mained firm  to  her  conciliating  policy. 
In  1566,  the  Puritan  majority  in  the 
Commons  sent  up  a  Bill  to  enforce 
Subscription  on  all  preachers  ;  but  the 
Queen  quietly  interfered  and  stopped 
the  Bill.  At  the  close  of  the  Session,  the 
Speaker  took  credit  for  the  attempt ;  but 
Lord  Keeper  Bacon  (specially  instructed 
by  Her  Majesty)  told  the  Commons 
roundly  that  "  in  the  Bill  of  Religion, 
"  with  which  tJiey  meant  to  tyrannize  over 
"  consciences,  they  deserved  reproof."  2 

But  the  course  of  events  rapidly  weak- 
ened the  Catholic  party,  and  gave  cor- 
responding strength  to  their  opponents. 
The  vacillation  of  Philip,  caused  by 
natural  temperament,  by  jealousy  of 
France,  by  distance  from  the  scene  of 
action,  and  by  determination  to  pull  all 
the  wires  with  his  own  hand,  virtually 
deprived  the  Catholics  of  his  support. 
The  miserable  fall  of  the  Queen  of  Scots 
blasted  their  hopes  for  the  future.  The 
moderation  of  Elizabeth  herself  inclined 
them  to  maintain  their  allegiance.  Lastly, 
the  insurrections  and  conspiracies  in  fa- 
vour of  Mary,  and  the  Bill  of  Excom- 
munication launched  by  Pius  V.,  com- 
pelled Elizabeth  more  and  more  to  take 
part  with  the  enemies  of  Rome.  She  at 
length  consented  to  the  Act  of  1571,  by 
which  all  beneficed  clergy  were  obliged 
to  sign  the  Articles,  with  a  provision 
intended  to  exempt  the  Puritans  from 
subscribing  to  those  few  which  laid 
down  principles  relating  to  Episcopacy 
and  civil  supremacy  which  were  repug- 
nant to  the  tenets  of  Geneva. 

The  rule  thus  established  for  the 
clergy  was,  a  few  years  later,  extended  to 
the  University  of  Oxford.  Leicester, 
who,  when  he  thought  the  Catholic  inte- 
rest strong  enough  to  assist  his  ambitious 
schemes,  had  offered  to  accompany  Eng- 
lish Bishops  to  the  Council  of  Trent,3 

1  Froude,  vol.  vii.  p.  82,  cf.  66. 

2  Froude,  vol.  viii.  pp.  328  sqq.,  337. 

3  Froude,  vol.  vii.  p.  328. 


Subscription  no  Security. 


467 


had  now  become  leader  of  the  Puritan 
party.  He  had  been  elected  Chancellor 
of  Oxford.  In  1580  he  addressed 
Letters  to  the  University,  which  re- 
quired them  to  ordain  that  all  Academic 
Preachers  should  subscribe  ;  and  in  the 
following  year  the  requirement  was  ex- 
tended to  all  Graduates  and  to  all  Un- 
dergraduates above  a  certain  age. 

Subscription  to  the  Articles,  how- 
ever, was  not  found  sufficient.  Arch- 
bishop Whitgift  perceived  that  these 
tests  were  not  calculated  to  exclude  the 
Puritan  party  from  the  Church.  He, 
therefore,  exacted  from  all  clergymen  a 
subscription  to  the  three  Articles  after- 
_wards  embodied  in  the  Thirty-sixth 
Canon,  and  thus  bound  them,  first,  to 
recognise  the  Royal  Supremacy;  second- 
ly, to  express  their  readiness  to  use  all 
the  offices  of  the  Liturgy ;  thirdly,  to 
assent  to  the  doctrines  contained  in  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles.  The  Canon  itself 
was  not  passed  by  Convocation  till  some 
twenty  years  later.  And  in  1616,  King 
James  sent  letters  both  to  Oxford  and 
Cambridge,  requiring  them  to  adopt 
this  additional  test  for  all  the  higher 
Graduates.  This  order  was  obeyed. 

It  only  remains  to  notice  the  well- 
known  Uniformity  Act  of  Charles  II., 
by  which  all  beneficed  clergy,  as  well 
as  all  heads  and  fellows  of  colleges, 
professors,  lecturers,  and  tutors,  are 
required  to  declare  their  "  unfeigned 
"assent  and  consent  to  all  and  every- 
"  thing  contained  and  prescribed  in  and 
"by  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer." 

It  appears,  then,  that  the  same  reasons 
which  determined  Parliament  to  exact 
subscription  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles 
from  the  clergy,  determined  the  Chan- 
cellor of  Oxford  to  exact  this  subscrip- 
tion from  all  academics,  lay  and  clerical, 
at  every  stage  of  their  career  ;  that  the 
same  reasons  which  led  Whitgift  and 
the  clerical  Convocation  to  require  sub- 
scription to  the  three  Articles  from  the 
clergy,  induced  James  I.  to  require  this 
subscription  from  all  candidates  for  the 
higher  degrees  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge, 
both  lay  and  clerical,  although  (as  has 
been  often  pointed  out)  the  second  of 
these  Articles  refers  to  the  use  of  the 


liturgy  and  administration  of  the  sacra- 
ments, and,  therefore,  can  only  concern 
the  clergy;  and,  lastly,  that  the  same 
reasons  which  induced  the  parliament 
of  Charles  II.  to  enforce  the  Declaration 
of  the  Act  of  Uniformity  on  all  bene- 
ficed clergy,  induced  them  to  impose  the 
same  Declaration  on  all  persons,  lay  and 
clerical,  holding  any  beneficial  place  in 
the  Universities. 

It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  it  was 
intended  to  treat  the  Universities  as 
ecclesiastical  bodies. 

Bearing  these  facts  in  mind,  we  now 
return  to  our  question,  and  ask  how  fax 
the  purposes  of  those  who  imposed  these 
multiplied  tests  were  answered  ? 

I.  The  first  purpose  was,  as  has  been 
said,  to  expel  dissentients,  especially 
Crypto-Catholics,  from  the  Church  of 
England.  At  the  accession  of  Eliza- 
beth, the  whole  body  of  the  clergy  was 
attached  to  the  old  religion.  Yet,  even 
the  oaths  of  allegiance  and  supremacy, 
though  they  involved  repudiation  of 
Papal  jurisdiction,  were  not  refused  by 
any  large  number  of  the  clergy.  Accord- 
ing to  the  report  of  the  visitors,  about 
200  out  of  9,400  beneficed  clergy  refused 
these  oaths  and  lost  their  benefices. 
The  enforcement  of  subscription  to  the 
Articles,  thirteen  years  later,  seems  to 
have  produced  little  result.  "Several 
ministers,"  says  Strype,  were  deprived 
for  refusing  to  subscribe.  !Nor,  again, 
does  the  test  of  subscription  to  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  appear  to  have 
purged  the  Church  of  Puritans  ;  nay, 
even  the  three  Articles  of  the  thirty- 
sixth  canon  seem  to  have  been  accepted 
without  much  demur.  This  state  of 
things  presents  a  striking  contrast  to 
the  effects  produced  by  the  stringent 
Declaration  of  the  Act  of  Uniformity, 
together  with  the  requirements  of  Epis- 
copal ordination  for  all  the  Presbyterian 
clergy.  Every  one  knows  the  story  of 
Bartholomew's  day,  1662,  when  about 
2,000  beneficed  clergymen  of  that  per- 
suasion resigned  their  benefices  rather 
than  conform. 

With  these  facts  may  be  instructively 
compared  the  history  of  the  Compre- 
hension Bill  of  1689,  as  it  has  been 


468 


Subscription  no  Security. 


told  "by  Lord  Macaulay.  By  that  Bill 
it  was  proposed  to  substitute  for  Sub- 
scription to  the  Articles  a  Declaration, 
from  clerics  and  academics  that  they  ap- 
proved of  the  doctrine,  worship,  and 
government  of  the  Church  of  England, 
and  would  preach  and  practice  accord- 
ing thereunto  ;  and,  further,  to  enable 
ministers  to  dispense,  conscientice  causa, 
with  certain  forms  in  the  Church  services. 
The  objections  raised  to  the  Bill  in  the 
House  of  Lords  related,  so  far  as  appears, 
wholly  to  the  latter  provisions.  "It 
"does  not  appear,"  says  the  historian, 
"that .  .  a  single  high  churchman  raised 
"his  voice  against  the  clause  which 
"relieved  the  clergy  from  the  necessity 
"  of  subscribing  the  Articles.  .  .  .  Nay, 
"  the  Declaration  which,  in  the  original 
"draught,  was  substituted  for  the 
"  Articles,  was  much  softened  down  on 
"the  report.  As  the  clause  finally 
"stood,  the  ministers  of  the  Church 
"were  required  to  declare,  not  that 
"  they  approved  of  her  constitution,  but 
"merely  that  they  submitted  to  it." 

The  inevitable  conclusion  is  that  it 
was  not  subscription  to  the  Articles, 
but  questions  half  ecclesiastical,  half 
political, — questions  regarding  Church 
government  and  Church  ritual,  Royal 
supremacy  and  Episcopal  ordination, 
which  had  the  effect  of  expelling  from 
the  Church  those  who  dissented  from 
her  principles.  All  inquiry  confirms  the 
remark  of  Lord  Macaulay,  that  "the 
"easy  manner  in  which  the  zealous 
"friends  of  the  Church  gave  up  her 
"  confession  of  faith  presents  a  striking 
"  contrast  to  the  spirit  with  which  they 
"  struggled  for  her  polity  and  ritual" 

II.  If,  then,  Subscription  had  little 
effect  in  expelling  those  whom  the  rulers 
of  the  Church  wished  to  expel,  let  ua 
inquire,  in  the  next  place,  whether  it 
had  the  effect  of  so  acting  on  the  con- 
science as  to  produce  a  general  reign  of 
peace  within  the  Church,  and  to  super- 
sede the  need  of  external  force  and 
constraint. 

It  will  be  most  convenient  here  to 
confine  ourselves  to  the  University  of 
Oxford.  We  have  seen  that  the  Uni- 
versities, Oxford  especially,  were  treated 
as  ecclesiastical  microcosms  ;  and,  if  we 


are  able  to  trace  the  success  or  failure  of 
Subscription  in  this  smaller  sphere,  the 
results  may  be  extended  with  tolerable 
certainty  to  the  larger  society.  Anthony 
Wood's  Annals  supply  an  easy  means 
of  applying  this  test  to  Oxford,  for  the 
period  between  the  first  imposition  of 
Subscription  in  Io80  and  the  Meeting 
of  the  Long  Parliament  in  1640. 

First,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  every 
Chancellor  who  held  office  during  this 
period,  excepting  Laud,  finds  it  neces- 
sary to  write  formal  Letters,  complain- 
ing of  the  "secret  and  lurking  Papists," 
who  still  maintained  themselves  in  the 
University  ;  and  to  give  orders  that  such 
persons  should  be  "  sought  out,  sup- 
"  pressed,  and  punished,"  that  "  the  Uni- 
"  versity  should  be  purged  "  of  all  such, 
and  that  "justly-suspected  persons  or 
"  known  Papists  should  not  be  suffered 
"  in  anywise  to  have  the  tuition  and 
"  leading  of  young  scholars."  Complaints 
and  commands  of  this  kind  imply  that 
Subscription,  which  had  failed  (as  we 
have  seen)  to  expel  even  "  known  Pa- 
pists," was  also  ineffectual  to  produce 
even  outward  obedience  and  submission. 

Further,  it  is  to  be  observed  that 
external  force  was  freely  used  to  con- 
strain opinion  during  this  period.  In 
1589,  a  commission  of  Mne  was  named 
to  inquire  the  opinions  of  Thos.  Cromp- 
ton,  when  he  wished  to  proceed  to  the 
Degree  of  Bachelor  of  Civil  Law.  Cromp- 
ion  had  already  subscribed  the  Articles 
twice,  perhaps  thrice ;  but  a  judicial 
inquiry  was  deemed  necessary.  He  made 
a  public  apology,  was  then  allowed  to 
proceed,  and  was  elected  a  few  years 
later  to  be  one  of  the  first  burgesses  to 
represent  the  University  in  Parliament. 
The  whole  proceeding  indicates  strong 
theological  party  spirit,  and  that  in  no 
wise  quelled  by  Subscription.  In  1591, 
Chancellor  Lord  Buckhurst  issued  the 
order  already  quoted,  "  to  seek  out,  sup- 
press, and  punish  "  concealed  Papists. 
It  does  not  seem  that  external  constraint 
was  as  yet  superseded  by  an  appeal  to 
the  conscience  at  Subscription  ;  more 
especially  when  we  find  that  in  the  next 
year  one  of  the  theses  for  disputation 
before  Queen  Elizabeth,  was,  "  whether 
"  it  be  lawful  to  dissemble  in  matters  of 


Subscription  no  Security. 


469 


"  religion."  This  ominous  question  im- 
plies that  there  were  some  at  least  who 
might  take  the  affirmative  side.  In 
1602,  several  persons  were  required  to 
recant  doctrines  advanced  in  sermons  ; 
and  one  of  them,  refusing  to  produce 
his  sermon,  was  imprisoned.  So  serious 
was  the  matter  considered,  that  the 
Government  issued  a  high  commission, 
comprising  the  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, the  Bishop  of  London,  the  Chan- 
cellor, and  others,  and  they  compelled 
the  recusants  to  make  public  submis- 
sion. Not  long  after,  Mr.  Corbet,  a  well- 
known  wit,  was,  for  his  Good  Friday 
sermon,  so  "  rattled  up  by  the  preacher 
"  on  Low-Sunday  (not  without  the 
"  encouragement  of  the  Reg.  Professor 
"  of  Divinity),  that,  if  he  had  not  been 
"  a  person  of  great  courage,  he  would 
"  have  been  driven  out  of  the  Univer- 
"  sity."  About  this  time,  indeed,  public 
censures  and  punishments  became  the 
rule.  The  Arminian  controversy  was 
warmly  carried  on  in  Oxford.  Sub- 
scription had  no  power  to  restrain  it, 
and  the  penal  powers  of  the  University 
were  vigorously  put  forth  to  supply  the 
insufficient  power  of  Subscription.  The 
Articles  were  formally  issued,  with  a 
Royal  Declaration  prefixed,  commanding 
"  all  curious  search  to  be  laid  aside." 
But  in  vain.  Zealous  preachers  per- 
sisted in  trespassing.  Laud  himself 
was  twice  summoned  before  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  for  "  preaching  Popery." 
Humfrey  Leech  of  Christ  Church,  "  for 
"  preaching  scandalous  and  erroneous 
"  doctrine,"  was  silenced  and  discom- 
muned.  From  1610  to  1640  there  may 
be  counted  no  less  than  sixteen  persons 
publicly  censured  for  heretical  preaching 
and  teaching ;  and  these  not  young 
men,  hasty  and  impetuous,  but  Bache- 
lors of  Divinity,  Canons  of  Christ 
Church,  even  a  Professor  of  Divinity. 
They  are  sometimes  summoned  before 
the  Yice-Chancellor,  sometimes  before 
a  tribunal  of  Doctors,  sometimes  be- 
fore the  Professor  of  Divinity  himself. 
Sometimes  they  are  ordered  to  preach 
sermons  refuting  their  own  doctrines; 
sometimes  to  make  submission  in  open 
Convocation  on  their  bended  knees ; 
and  in  case  of  refusal  they  are  liable 


to  imprisonment  and  expulsion.  These 
few  particulars  enable  us  to  under- 
stand the  despairing  letter  addressed, 
in  1631,  by  Dr.  Duppa,  the  Vice-Chan- 
cellor,  to  the  Chancellor.  "Such,"  he 
says,  "  has  been  the  height  of  our  late 
"  disorders  both  within  and  without  the 
"  pulpit,  that,  should  I  not  express  how 
"  I  am  troubled  with  it,  I  might  be 
"  thought  an  insensible  member  of  the 
"  body  which  you  govern."  The  im- 
pression derived  from  the  annals  of  this 
period  is  not  that  of  a  Society  in  which 
external  force  had  been  made  unneces- 
sary by  an  appeal  to  the  conscience,  and 
in  which  subscription  to  Articles  had 
produced  an  epoch  of  peace  and  concord. 

Space  forbids  the  continuation  of  this 
inquiry.  Nor  is  it  necessary.  The 
troubles  of  the  Civil  War  and  the 
long  supremacy  of  the  High  Church 
Party  which  followed  the  Restoration 
made  the  subsequent  history  of  the 
Church,  at  Oxford  at  least,  uneventful 
and  otiose.  And,  though  a  pendant  to 
the  picture  already  exhibited  might  be 
furnished  by  an  analysis  of  the  history 
of  the  last  thirty  years,  this  could  not 
be  done  without  introducing  the  names 
of  living  persons,  and  referring  to  matters 
that  cannot  yet  be  spoken  of  without 
heart-burning  and  recrimination.  But 
it  is  hardly  possible  to  omit  notice  of  the 
fact  that  at  this  very  moment  a  Com- 
mittee of  seven  clergymen  are  urging 
their  brethren,  "for  the  love  of  God," 
to  subscribe  to  two  new  Articles,  one  of 
them  (perhaps  inevitably)  couched  in 
ambiguous  language,  the  other  affirming 
a  dogma  which  was  deliberately  struck 
out  of  Cranmer's  Articles  by  the  first 
Convocation  of  the  Church  of  England. 

Indeed,  Subscriptions  and  promissory 
engagements  to  believe  have  been  so  far 
from  producing  concord  and  preventing 
discord,  that  one  is  tempted  to  assert 
that  open  dissension  or  covert  scepti- 
cism has  been,  and  must  be,  in  direct 
proportion  to  the  stringency  with  which 
such  engagements  are  enforced. 

At  Oxford  we  have  seen  the  effects 
which  followed  the  introduction  of  Sub- 
scription in  the  early  years  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  and  we  might  have 
described  a  similar  course  of  events  in 


470 


Subscription  no  Security, 


the  nineteenth. ; — war,  continued  war, 
except  in  times  of  reaction  and  lassitude 
following  on  political  excitement,  when 
the  united  power  of  Church  and  State 
has  borne  down  all  opposition,  and 
created  a  state  of  torpid  acquiescence, 
which  was  called  peace. 

At  Cambridge  tests  have  played  a 
much  less  important  part  in  Academic 
History.  The  sagacity  and  moderation 
of  her  Chancellor,  Lord  Burleigh,  re- 
frained from  imposing  on  Cambridge 
the  tests  imposed  on  Oxford  by  Leicester. 
No  Subscription  was  there  required  till 
James  I.  exacted  Subscription  to  the 
three  Articles  of  the  Canon ;  and  this 
Subscription  was,  in  the  case  of  can- 
didates for  the  inferior  degrees,  ex- 
changed for  a  Declaration  of  bond  fide 
membership  in  the  year  1772,  about 
the  time  when  the  Feathers'  Tavern 
petition  brought  the  question  of  Sub- 
scription before  the  House  of  Commons 
in  a  most  infelicitous  form.  And  even 
before  the  Act  of  1856  extended  the 
same  relief  to  candidates  for  the  higher 
degrees,  the  University  itself  had  taken 
the  matter  into  serious  consideration.1 
Yet,  though  Subscription  at  Cambridge 
was  introduced  thus  late,  and  relaxed 
thus  early,  it  does  not  appear  that  he- 
terodox opinion  was  so  rife,  or  contro- 
versy so  bitter,  or  external  force  so  much 
employed,  as  in  the  sister  University, 
which  has  never  yet,  except  under  com- 
pulsion, relaxed  one  turn  of  the  rope  by 
which  all  its  members,  lay  and  clerical, 
have  been  equally  and  indifferently 
bound. 

In  Germany,  the  Confessions  of  Faith 
were  most  complete  and  manifold,  and 
the  rigour  with  which  promissory  en- 
gagements were  enforced  was  greatest. 
"  Nothing,"  says  Dr.  Pusey,  "  could  be 
'  hoped  from  measures  so  little  in  uni- 
(  son  with  the  Reformation  as  the  at- 
'  tempt   to   re-establish  a  minute  uni- 
'  formity  by  the  oppressive  accumulation 
'  of  new  formulae  of  Faith,  or  by  the  in- 
'  fliction  of  civil,  sometimes  the  severest, 
'  penalties  for  minute  declensions  even 
'  from  the  human  system."     Strigel,  he 
tells  us,  was  imprisoned  for  three  years 

1  See  Report  of  Cambridge  Commissioners, 
p.  44. 


for  maintaining  "that  man  was  not 
"  merely  passive  in  the  work  of  his  con- 
"  version  ;"  Hardenberg  was  deposed 
and  banished,  and  his  followers  excom- 
municated, for  teaching  "  that  the  body 
"  of  Christ  Avas  distributed  with,  but  not 
"  in,  the  bread  ;"  the  physician  Peucer 
was  imprisoned  for  ten  years  for  some 
equally  shadowy  deviation  from  Lu- 
theran doctrine  ;  the  jurist  Cracau  died 
under  the  torture  for  a  similar  offence  ; 
Crell's  whole  congregation  was  banished 
or  imprisoned,  and  Crell  himself  put  to 
death  for  imputed  Calvinism.  These 
over-strained  severities  produced  their 
natural  result.  The  attempt  to  punish 
all  differences  of  opinion  caused  men  to 
shrink  from  attempting  to  punish  any 
differences.  The  Symbolical  Books  lost 
reverence ;  Rationalism  was  pushed  to 
its  furthest  limits  ;  and  for  many  years 
past  theological  inquirers,  lay  and  clerical, 
have  been  allowed  a  liberty,  or  (call  it) 
licence,  of  speculation  greater  and  more 
complete  than  in  any  other  country. 
Yet  Subscription  to  the  Symbolical 
Books  has,  in  most  parts  of  Protestant 
Germany,  never  been  formally  dispensed 
with.  All  clergymen,  either  at  ordina- 
tion or  on  appointment  to  clerical  office, 
are  required  to  pledge  themselves  to  the 
doctrines  embodied  in  the  Symbolical 
Books  of  their  respective  countries ;  and 
in  some  countries  the  minute  decrees  of 
the  so-called  Fornmla  of  Concord  are 
still  retained  as  the  test. 

Happily,  our  Articles  are  less  precise 
and  rigorous.  The  vague  comprehen- 
siveness with  which  some  dogmas  are 
expressed,  and  the  total  omission  of  other 
dogmas,  leaves  a  latitude  unknown  in 
most  Protestan  t  Confessions.  But  the  en- 
forcement of  Subscription  turns  this  very 
comprehensiveness  to  evil  use.  It  not 
only  allows  communion  between  those 
who  choose  to  differ  without  disagreeing, 
but  it  leads  dissatisfied  persons  to  put 
on  words  an  interpretation  which  those 
words  were  never  intended  to  bear. 
When  our  Articles  were  framed,  the 
Puritan  party  was  rising  into  importance; 
but  the  Catholics,  as  we  have  seen,  were 
still  powerful  in  England,  and  some  of 
their  tenets  were  still  dear  to  the  people. 
Hence  the  Confession  of  Faith  was  so 


Subscription  no  Security. 


471 


framed  that  those  who  incline  to  a  Eo- 
manizing  creed,  still  find  shelter  in  some 
of  the  Articles,  while  those  who  repu- 
diate high  sacerdotal  principles  appeal 
confidently  to  the  self- same  documents. 
Arminians  and  Remonstrants  defended 
their  respective  tenets  with  arrows  drawn 
from  the  same  quiver.  Teachers,  inclined 
to  Lutheranism,  claim  the  Articles  as 
Lutheran  ;  while  Calvinistic  doctors  ap- 
peal to  them  as  undoubtedly  Calvinistic. 
Touching  the  controversies  of  the  pre- 
sent day,  the  Articles  give  an  uncertain 
sound.  Now,  there  might  be  advantage 
in  this  if  men  would  agree  to  differ. 
But  many  men  insist  on  so  differing  as 
to  make  their  differences  paramount ; 
and  they  maintain,  each  for  himself,  that 
they  find  these  differences  countenanced 
by  the  Articles.  Precise  and  prolix 
Formularies  involve  greater  evils,  but 
those  evils  are  less  durable.  For  a 
time  such  Formularies  do  their  work 
and  exclude  all  dissentients  ;  presently, 
human  nature  revolts,  and  the  barrier 
is  broken  down.  But  Articles  which 
are  comprehensive  because  they  are 
ambiguous  leave  the  hostile  armies  in 
view,  and  neither  will  acknowledge 
defeat.  Hence  arise  recriminations  and 
imputations  of  bad  faith — cast  out  freely 
by  one  party,  retorted  as  freely  by  the 
other. 

These  are  not  edifying  spectacles.  One 
who  loves  Christ  and  his  true  Church 
winces  when  he  hears  Bentham  indig- 
nantly declaiming  against  the  immorality 
to  which  young  men  are  tempted  by 
Subscription,  and  alleging  that  "the 
"  stronger  party  says  to  the  weaker : 
"  Stand  forth  and  lie  in  the  sight  of 
"  God,  or  give  up  the  choicest  advantages 
"  of  society,  that  we  may  engross  them 
"  to  ourselves : "  or,  when  he  finds 
the  historian  of  Elizabeth  remarking 
with  refined  sarcasm,  that  "  the  Thirty- 
"  nine  Articles,  strained  and  cracked 
"  by  three  centuries  of  evasive  in- 
"  gennity,  scarcely  embarrass  even  the 
"  feeblest  of  consciences,  and  the  cler- 
"  gymen  of  the  nineteenth  century 
"  subscribe  them  with  such  a  smile  as 
"  might  have  been  worn  by  Samson 
"  when  his  Philistine  mistress  bound 
"  his  arms  with  the  cords  and  withs  ;" 


or,  when  he  follows  the  ingenious  argu- 
mentation by  which  Dr.  Hey  attempts 
to  show  that,  from  the  nature  of  veracity 
and  the  difficulty  of  interpreting  ancient 
laws,  subscription  to  our  Articles  must 
be  regarded  as  a  negative  promise  to 
abstain  from  contradiction,  rather  than 
a  positive  engagement  to  believe. 

It  is  to  Subscription,  not  to  the  Articles 
themselves,  that  these  scandals  are  due. 
Leave  the  Articles  untouched,  and  sub- 
stitute for  Subscription  a  simple  and 
general  form  of  Declaration ;  and  these 
assaults,  these  sarcasms,  this  casuistry, 
these  recriminations,  will  cease.  For 
they  gather  strength  from  the  fact  that 
young  men  bind  themselves  beforehand 
to  engagements,  under  which  many  of 
them  at  a  more  mature  age  feel  galled 
and  uneasy.  In  times  of  quiet  ortho- 
doxy little  inconvenience  is  felt.  But 
the  moment  that  inquiry  is  set  afoot  and 
interest  excited,  sharp  attacks  revive, 
and  these  miserable  disquietudes  follow. 
And  many  a  man,  who,  in  tranquil 
times,  subscribed  thoughtlessly,  because 
all  around  him  were  without  thought, 
finds  that  in  middle  life  the  engage- 
ments he  contracted  by  subscription  are 
interpreted  with  a  stringency  heretofore 
unknown. 

These  are  indications  of  the  practical 
hardships  with  which  it  behoves  states- 
men to  deal.  The  whole  theory  of 
promissory  engagements  to  observe  laws 
belongs  to  a  by-gone  age.  Formerly, 
every  petty  detail  of  academic  life  was 
maintain  ed  by  promissory  oaths.  A  mul- 
titude of  them  was  swept  away  by  the 
Parliamentary  Commissioners  in  1656 
(Wood,  II.  part  2.  p.  671).  But  the 
oath  to  observe  the  University  statutes 
was  exacted  from  all  Undergraduates 
till  a  very  recent  date  ;  and  these  oaths 
were  defended  at  Oxford  as  strenuously 
as  Subscription  to  Articles  is  defended 
now.  It  was  a  patent  fact  that  these 
oaths  were  not  observed,  and  could  not 
be  observed  ;  nay,  the  fact  was  recog- 
nised more  than  two  centuries  ago.  But, 
instead  of  abrogating  the  oath  to  observe 
the  statutes  of  the  University  (oaths  in 
Colleges  gave  occasion  to  yet  greater 
scandal,  but  were  more  difficult  to  deal 
with),  and  substituting  a  simple  address 


Subscription  no  Security. 


to  the  young  men,  the  University  em- 
ployed her  most  eminent  casuist  to 
draw  up  an  epinomis  or  qualification  of 
the  oaths,  by  which  the  youths  were 
instructed  that,  though  they  swore  to 
obey  the  statutes,  the  oath  meant  no- 
thing more  than  that  they  must  submit 
to  punishment  when  they  were  found 
out.  Now  these  oaths  were  wholly 
within  the  power  of  the  University  to 
alter  or  to  abolish.  And  one  would 
have  thought  that  the  natural  course 
would  have  been  to  put  the  statutes  of 
the  University  on  the  same  footing  as  the 
laws  of  the  realm ;  to  require  obedience 
without  exacting  any  previous  engage- 
ments. Yet  no  step  was  taken  in  this 
direction ;  and  it  was  not  till  all  such 
promissory  oaths,  on  the  part  of  the  Uni- 
versity and  in  colleges,  were  prohibited 
by  the  act  of  1854,  that  they  ceased  to 
be  exacted.  The  University  of  herself 
made  no  sign.  Nor  has  she  made  any 
sign  towards  relaxing  her  requirements 
of  Subscription.  Subscription  is  a  pro- 
missory engagement  of  like  nature  with 
these  oaths;  and  Oxford  clings  to  it 
with  the  same  tenacity.  Even  while 
we  write,  she  is  petitioning  against  the 
moderate  provisions  of  Mr.  Dodson's 
Bill,  which  proposes  indeed  to  abolish 
Subscription  for  the  M.A.  degree,  but 
takes  care  that  all  offices  hitherto  tenable 
only  by  members  of  the  Church  of 
England  shall  henceforth  be  held  only 
by  members  of  that  Church.  When  it 
is  remembered  that  the  vast  majority  of 
Masters  of  Arts  are  and  will  be  clergy- 
men, that  in  most  colleges  at  least  two- 
thirds  of  the  fellows  must  be  clergymen, 
that  all  heads  of  colleges  save  one  or 
two  must  be  clergymen,  the  fear  of  intro- 
ducing a  few  nonconformist  members  of 
Convocation  seems  so  extraordinary  as 
to  be  almost  absurd ;  especially  when  it 
is  remembered  that  Presbyterians,  and 
some  others,  who  would  not  and  could 
not  declare  themselves  bond  fide  mem- 
bers of  the  Church  of  England,  do  at 
present  subscribe  the  Articles  ;  and, 
therefore,  that  the  consequences  which 
are  expected  from  admitting  persons  to 
Convocation  without  the  use  of  tests 
do  already  actually  exist  with  and  not- 
withstanding tests. 


If  for  Subscription,  lay  and  clerical, 
a  simple  and  general  Declaration  were 
to  be  substituted  we  should  be  sensible 
of  little  or  no  change.  Laymen  would 
become  free :  clergymen  would  still  be 
liable  to  prosecution  for  controverting 
the  Articles  or  Liturgy.  But,  we  repeat, 
the  miserable  recriminations  incident  to 
the  present  state  of  things,  the  qualifi- 
cations and  the  casuistry,  the  sarcasms 
and  invectives,  the  charges  of  evasion 
and  bad  faith,  would  lose  their  sting 
and  fall  pointless  on  the  ear. 

No  Subscription  is  required  from 
lecturers  at  the  Eoyal  Institution.  Yet 
the  lecturers  do  not  offend  the  religious 
sensibilities  of  their  hearers.  If  Sub- 
scription were  abolished,  why  should 
academical  lecturers  offend  their  audi- 
ences ?  Why  should  preachers  offend 
their  congregations  ?  It  is  not  Subscrip- 
tion that  prevents  offence  now ;  it  would 
not  be  the  absence  of  Subscription  that 
would  instigate  teachers  and  preachers 
to  give  offence  then.  They  would  be 
withheld  then,  as  other  persons  are 
withheld  now,  by  the  force  of  public 
opinion,  by  the  known  sentiments  of 
their  hearers,  by  the  reluctance  which 
good  men  feel  to  engage  in  strife  without 
provocation  or  urgent  need. 

Would  any  stricter  Court  of  Heresy 
be  necessary  ?  Not  unless  stricter 
Articles  and  more  precise  confessions 
were  framed.  If  it  were  desirable,  and 
if  public  opinion  would  suffer  it,  this 
might  be  done ; — at  all  events,  it  might 
be  done  just  as  well  after  Subscrip- 
tion was  abolished  as  before.  But  it 
may  be  assumed  that  things  would 
remain  as  they  are,  the  Articles  and  the 
Liturgy  as  the  law,  the  Courts  to  enforce 
the  law.  But,  since  the  abolition  of 
Subscription  would  diminish  the  bitter- 
ness and  rancour  of  theologioal  disputes, 
it  is  not  likely  that  the  law  would  be 
so  often  appealed  to,  or  the  courts  so 
often  put  in  motion.  Probably  many 
doubtful  and  disputable  points  would 
be  allowed  to  sleep ;  controversy  would 
become  less  personal ;  inquiry  would  be 
freer  and  fairer ;  the  essential  things  of 
religion,  righteousness,  love  of  truth, 
piety,  would  be  less  disturbed  by  the 
jarring  discords  of  speculative  strife. 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


473 


Inferential  theology  would  fall  into  the 
back-ground.  The  Bible  would  be 
studied  more  faithfully,  more  devoutly, 
more  fruitfully.  It  might  be  hoped  that 
many  conscientious  dissenters  would  no 
longer  feel  scruples  in  communion  with 
their  brethren  of  the  Church ;  and  that 


some  good  and  able  men  would  lend  us 
their  aid,  both  in  the  Universities  and 
the  Church,  who  are  now  kept  apart 
by  causes  that  could  not  separate  men 
in  heaven,  and  ought  not  to  separate 
them  on  earth. 

HENRY  G.  LIDDELL, 


ON  SLEEP  AND  DREAMS. 

BY  THE  EEV.  JOHN  CUNNINGHAM,  D.D.,  AUTHOR  OF  THE  "CHURCH  HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND." 


THERE  are  some  things  which  baffle  not 
only  definition  but  even  explanation. 
They  are  so  simple  that  they  cannot  be 
resolved  into  anything  simpler.  They  are 
so  entirely  things  per  se  that  we  can 
only  say  they  are  what  they  are.  It  is 
the  things  we  understand  best — or,  at 
least,  think  we  understand  best — which 
we  can  explain  least ;  for  it  is  their 
very  simplicity  which  defies  us.  What 
is  time?  "We  cannot  tell.  What  is 
life  ?  It  is  a  great  mystery.  What  is 
sleep  1  We  must  confess  our  ignorance. 
Though  we  sink  into  sleep  every  twenty- 
four  hours,  though  we  spend  a  third  of 
our  whole  time  in  sleep,  and  though,  as 
Shakespeare  says,  "our  life  is  rounded 
by  a  sleep,"  we  do  not  know  what  sleep 
is.  Some  physiologists  have  gone  so 
far  as  to  declare  that  sleep  is  our  normal 
state,  out  of  which  we  only  waken  at 
intervals  into  a  condition  of  abnormal 
activity,  and  then  naturally  sink  back 
again  into  it ;  and  that,  therefore,  it 
were  wiser  to  inquire  what  is  wakeful- 
ness  than  what  is  sleep.  I  suspect  that 
both  are  normal  conditions  of  all  animal 
life  :  but  what  is  the  difference  between 
them  1  There  seems,  at  first  sight,  to 
be  a  great  and  easily-recognisable  differ- 
ence ;  but,  when  we  come  to  examine  jt 
it  eludes  our  grasp.  It  is  not  that  the 
one  is  a  conscious  and  the  other  an 
unconscious  state,  for  we  shall  presently 
see  that  in  the  profoundest  sleep  there 
is  consciousness.  It  is  not  that  there 
is,  necessarily  at  least,  less  activity 
during  sleep  than  during  wakefulness  ; 
for  our  dreams  are  often  more  brilliant 
than  our  waking  thoughts,  and  the  foats 
of  the  somnambulist  rival  the  feats  of 


the  wide-awake  athlete.  In  truth,  there 
is  almost  nothing  deemed  peculiar  to 
wakefulness  which  does  not  sometimes 
occur  in  sleep.  In  sleep  we  think  and 
feel,  we  may  be  sorry  or  glad,  we  may 
smile  or  weep,  we  may  be  profoundly 
happy  or  petrified  with  horror.  There 
have  been  Ceases  of  men  reading  aloud 
while  they  were  fast  asleep.  Soldiers 
have  continued  their  march,  postillions 
have  ridden  their  horses,  seamstresses 
have  proceeded  with  their  sewing,  and 
even,  it  is  said,  clergymen  have  written 
on  at  their  sermons  after  sleep  had  over- 
taken them.  In  what,  then,  does  sleep 
differ  from  wakefulness  1  Physiologists 
and  psychologists  alike  have  been  forced 
to  confess  they  cannot  tell.  There  is  a 
difference,  but  they  cannot  exactly  indi- 
cate it. 

The  difficulty  of  distinguishing  be- 
tween sleep  and  wakefulness  is  increased 
by  the  fact  that  the  one  gradually  merges 
into  the  other.  There  appears  to  be  no 
well-defined  line  where  wakefulness  ends 
and  sleep  begins.  Wakefulness  imper- 
ceptibly gives  way  to  sleep ;  sleep,  in 
in  like  manner,  yields  to  wakefulness. 
If  there  be  any  boundary  between  them, 
it  is  a  debateable  land — a  dream-land — 
where  lights  and  shadows,  day-thoughts 
and  night-thoughts,  confusedly  mingle. 
Sleep  and  wakefulness,  in  this  respect, 
follow  a  general  law.  There  are  few 
sharp  boundary  lines  in  nature.  Things 
which  at  their  extremes  are  widely 
different  approach  till  they  meet  and 
melt  into  one  another.  Who  will  sepa- 
rate between  the  organic  and  the  inor- 
ganic, between  the  sentient  and  the 
insentient,  between  the  living  and  the 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


dead?  Every  one  may  satisfy  himself 
by  personal  experience  how  gradually 
wakefulness  gives  way  to  sleep.  Any 
night  he  may  make  thejexperiment  and 
watch  the  process.  He  will  observe  that 
his  thoughts  become  more  and  more 
dissevered  from  outside  influences — 
the  sensational  yields  to  the  ideal — 
the  laws  of  association  act  uncontrolled 
by  material  objects,  everything  becomes 
shadowy,  and  so  he  glides  into  perfect 
sleep ;  but  he  never  discovers  themoment 
when  he  sleeps,  both  because  there  is  no 
such  moment,  and  because  the  farther  he 
advances  into  the  region  of  somnolency 
the  more  the  attention  relaxes,  till  at 
last  it  is  swept  away  by  the  dreamy 
thoughts  which  now  occupy  the  brain. 
It  is  thus  we  have  every  possible  degree 
of  sleep,  from  the  light  sleep  of  the 
nurse — which  the  slightest  movement 
of  her  patient  will  interrupt — to  the 
deep  sleep  of  the  worn-out  man,  which 
almost  nothing  will  disturb. 

The  most  opposite  causes  seem  to  pre- 
dispose to  sleep.  Heat  creates  drowsi- 
ness, and  drowsiness  leads  to  slumber. 
Cold — at  least,  severe  cold — has  the 
same  effect.  The  traveller  in  Arctic 
regions  is  frequently  assailed  by  a  desire 
to  sleep,  so  strong  that  he  cannot  resist 
it,  though  he  should  be  quite  aware 
that  it  will  be  the  "  sleep  which  knows 
no  waking."  Vacuity  of  thought  is 
generally  regarded  as  favourable  to  sleep, 
and  yet  intense  thought,  a'nd  even  in- 
tense anxiety,  have  the  same  result. 
It  is  thus  that  felons  not  unusually 
sleep  soundly  the  night  before  their 
execution.  The  explanation  of  this, 
however,  most  probably  is,  that  the 
mind  is  worn  out  by  the  violence  of  its 
own  emotions,  and  kind  nature  comes 
to  its  relief.  Physicians  tell  us  that 
anything  which  determines  the  blood  to 
the  brain  induces  sleep,  and  also  that 
an  excessive  loss  of  blood  has  the  same 
effect.  From  such  opposite  quarters 
does  sleep  come  :  but  at  the  same  time 
we  must  remember  that  it  is  a  normal 
condition  of  our  being ;  that  it  has  a 
tendency  to  recur  periodically  ;  and  that 
weariness  is  undoubtedly  its  great  pre- 
disposing cause.  When  we  are  wearied 
and  jaded  with  the  duties  of  the  day, 


by  a  kind  law  of  our  being,  "tired 
nature's  sweet  restorer,  balmy  sleep" 
comes  and  lays  us  to  rest. 

Sleep  introduces  us  to  the  region  of 
dreams,    and  dreams  have  ever  been  a 
subject  of  mysterious  interest.     Almost 
all    primitive    peoples    have    regarded 
dreams  as  Divine  intimations.     It  was 
God  whispering  within  them.    "  In  slum- 
"  berings  upon  the  bed,"saysElihu,"Grod 
"  openeth  the  ears  of  men  and  sealeth 
"  their  instruction."     Homer  frequently 
introduces  the  gods  as  inspiring  dreams 
both  good  and  bad  ;  and  in  this  he  is 
followed  by  almost  all  the  ancient  poets, 
who   so  far  only  gave  a  poetic   utter- 
ance to  the  popular  faith.    Philosophers, 
in  more  recent  times,  have  adopted  the 
belief  of  these  ancient  bards.     Baxter, 
in    his  Essay   on   the    Phenomena    of 
Dreaming,  after  rejecting  all  the  theories 
which  represent  dreams  as  originating 
in  the  mind  itself,  and  debarred  by  his 
Christianity  from  calling  into  play  my- 
thological deities,  resorts  to  the  suppo- 
sition that  they  are  suggested  to  us  by 
spiritual  beings  of  some  kind  or  other. 
In  no  other  way,  as  he  thinks,  can  they 
be  accounted  for.     And,  as  dreams  have 
thus  been  attributed  to  a  supernatural 
origin,  so  have  they  very  generally  been 
regarded  as  possessing  a  prophetical  cha- 
racter.    The  farther  back  we   ascend, 
this  belief  becomes  stronger,  but  it  is  far 
from  extinct  in  the  present  day.     In  the 
courts  of  the  ancient  eastern  kings  there 
was  always  to  be  found  an  interpreter 
of  dreams.     Joseph  held  the  office  in 
the  court  of  the  Egyptian  Pharaoh  ;  and 
Daniel  in  that  of  the  Chaldean  Nebu- 
chadnezzar :    and,  though  the  function 
has  now  declined  from  its  pristine  dig- 
nity, the  "  spey-wife "  still  explains  to 
credulous  maidservants  the  meaning  of 
their  dreams.    Nor  need  we  wonder  that 
our  dreams  have  thus  been  ranked  with 
the  supernatural.     There  is  the  gloom 
of  night,  and  the  mystery  of  sleep  ;  and, 
when  our  eyes  are  closed  upon  the  world, 
and  we  no  longer  hear  the  voices  of  our 
fellow-men,    then     mysterious     voices 
whisper  within  us  and  weird-like  shapes 
move  before  us  ;  we  visit  strange  coun- 
tries, converse  with  old  comrades,  get  a 
glimpse  of  things  not  yet  come  to  pass  ; 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


475 


and  everything  is  so  real,  so  life-like, 
and  at  the  same  time  so  unlike  our  usual 
thoughts,  that  we  readily  accept  of  any 
explanation  which  refers  our  dreams  to 
the  Divine. 

But  there  has  always  heen  a  sceptical 
philosophy  in  the  world,  which  repu- 
diates the  supernatural,  and  traces  all 
things  to  the  operation  of  ordinary  law. 
The  Greeks,  who  speculated  about  every- 
thing, speculated  about  dreams,  and  had 
their  ways  of  accounting  for  them. 
Democritus  taught  that  all  material 
things  were  constantly  throwing  off 
filmy  simulacra  of  themselves,  and  that 
these  assailed  the  soul,  while  it  lay  help- 
less in  sleep,  and  formed  the  images  of 
our  dreams.  The  Latin  Lucretius  after- 
wards worked  up  this  idea  in  his  great 
poem.  The  Platonists,  on  the  other 
hand,  held  that  the  mind  itself  might 
evolve  dreams  ;  and  Cicero,  whose  ten- 
dencies were  all  toward  the  Academy, 
defends  this  opinion,  in  his  interesting 
book  on  Divination.  Many  other  old 
theories  about  dreams  might  be  quoted  ; 
hut,  instead  of  getting  ourselves  en- 
tangled in  these  ancient  speculations,  I 
think  it  better  to  follow  the  track  of 
modern  thought. 

One  of  the  questions  which  has  at 
all  times  been  greatly  agitated  is — Do 
we  always  dream  during  sleep  ?  This 
question  is  as  old  as  the  days  of  Aris- 
totle ;  and  equally  illustrious  names  can 
be  quoted  on  either  side  of  the  con- 
troversy. Hippocrates,  Leibnitz,  Des 
Cartes,  Cabanis,  Abercrombie,  and  Sir 
"W.  Hamilton,  maintain  that  we  always 
dream  :  Locke,  Eeid,  Macnish,  Car- 
penter, and  Brougham,  are  of  opinion 
that  sound  sleep  is  dreamless.  In  order 
to  reach  a  satisfactory  solution  of  the 
question,  I  shall  endeavour  first  to 
answer  it  in  this  simpler  and  more  de- 
finite form  —  Are  we  ever  perfectly 
unconscious  during  sleep  1  I  imagine 
that,  when  the  question  is  thus  put,  few 
will  hesitate  to  answer  that  we  are 
never  entirely  unconscious  even  during 
the  profoundest  sleep.  I  question,  in- 
deed, how  far  utter  unconsciousness  is 
compatible  with  the  existence  of  mind. 
I  cannot  think  the  mind  is  like  a  piece 
of  mechanism,  which  may  exist  though 


it  does  not  move  :  the  essence  of  mind 
is  thought ;  and  therefore  the  cessation 
of  consciousness  seems  to  be  tantamount 
to  the  cessation  of  mind.  I  therefore 
apprehend  that  even  in  swoons  there 
must  be  some  remnants  of  conscious- 
ness, though  we  may  not  be  able  to 
reach  them.  There  must  always  be  a 
feeble  glimmer  of  light,  if  it  is  to  be 
blown  again  into  a  flame  :  there  must 
always  be  a  trace  of  life,  however  faint, 
if  reanimation  is  to  take  place.  But 
there  are  more  specific  arguments  which 
greatly  strengthen  these  general  ones. 
It  is  allowed  on  all  hands  that  sensation 
is  greatly  blunted  by  sleep.  The  eyes 
are  closed,  the  ears  are  partially  stop- 
ped, the  whole  surface  of  the  body  loses 
some  of  its  sensitiveness,  and  even  the 
sensations  which  reach  us  from  other 
parts  of  our  system  are  not  so  vivid  as 
when  we  are  awake.  The  famished 
escape  from  the  pangs  of  hunger ;  and 
those  who  are  perishing  for  thirst  forget 
for  a  little  the  agony  of  the  parched 
throat.  But,  though  sensation  is  blunted, 
it  is  not  destroyed.  If  the  sleeper  has 
assumed  an  uncomfortable  position,  he 
feels  the  discomfort,  and  turns  himself 
in  bed.  If  a  whisper  fails  to  awaken 
us,  a  cry  will ;  if  we  do  not  hear  a  step 
softly  treading  our  room,  we  cannot 
help  hearing  if,  perchance,  the  tongs 
rattle  on  the  fender.  A  hand  gently 
laid  on  the  bed-clothes  may  not  disturb 
us,  but  a  hand  somewhat  roughly  laid 
on  our  shoulder  will  make  us  quickly 
start  up  with  confused  thoughts  about 
thieves.  This  proves  there  is  sentiency, 
though  it  is  not  so  sharp-edged  as  when 
we  were  awake.  If  there  were  no  con- 
sciousness, no  sentiency — (as  Macnish 
in  his  Philosophy  of  Sleep  unguardedly 
affirms) — a  cannon  might  be  exploded 
in  our  room  without  awakening  us. 
Indeed,  when  once  we  were  sound 
asleep,  there  would  be  no  possibility  of 
rousing  us  at  all.  It  is  because  con- 
sciousness and  sense  remain  that  the 
connexion  is  maintained  between  the 
sleeper  and  the  external  world. 

We  have  thus  a  basis  for  dreams. 
But  a  dream,  in  the  usual  sense  of  the 
term,  is  something  more  than  a  state  of 
dull,  sluggish,  consciousness.  It  is  a 


476 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


lively  train  of  thought,  resembling  our 
waking  reveries,  but  at  once  more  vivid 
and  more  incoherent.     If  the  question 
be — Are  such  trains  of  thought  con- 
stantly   passing    through    our    minds 
during  sleep  1 — I  think  there  can  be  no 
hesitation  in  answering  in  the  negative. 
I  do  not  see  why  we  should  not  believe 
that  in  sleep,  as  in  wakefulness,  the 
mind  is  sometimes  more  and  sometimes 
less  active.     In  neither  state  is  it  ever 
entirely  without  thought  and  conscious- 
ness, and  in  both  it  is  sometimes  in- 
tensely busy,   and  at  other  times   in 
almost  perfect  repose.     In  short,  there 
may  be  every  gradation  of  thought  and 
feeling,  from  the  highest  consciousness 
down  to  the  very  verge  of  unconscious- 
ness.    There  is  reason  to  believe  that 
in  deep  sleep   the  latter  state  is   ap- 
proached— thought  lies  still,  and  fancy, 
so  lively  at  other  times,  folds  her  wings, 
and  partakes  of  the  universal  repose. 
It  is  certain  that  those  who  sleep  soundly 
seldom  remember  their  dreams,  and  I 
apprehend  that  we  remember  our  night- 
thoughts  just  as  we  remember  our  vivid 
day  ones,  and  quickly  forget  all  others. 
We  shall  be  confirmed  in  this  belief  if 
we  watch  a  person  in  profound  sleep. 
The  whole  frame  lies  motionless,  every 
feature  is  in  perfect  repose  ;   there  is 
nothing  to  indicate  that  thought  is  busy 
within;    and   energetic  thought  gene- 
rally works  its  way  out,  and  manifests 
its   presence.     It  is  very  different  in 
broken  sleep,  and  in  the  transition-state 
between  sleep  and  wakefulness,  which, 
I  suspect,  is  the  true  dream-land.     The 
frequent  changes  of  position,  the  shades 
of  expression  which  pass  over  the  coun- 
tenance, as  with  men  in  a  reverie ;  some- 
times  the    mutterings,   sometimes  the 
uneasy  groans — all  indicate  that  thought 
is  earnestly  at  work,  giving  pleasure  or 
reflecting  pain.     This  opinion  is  greatly 
strengthened  by  the  following  curious 
case,  stated  by  Dr.  Pierquin.     It  fell 
under  his  notice  in  one  of  the  hospitals 
of   Montpellier,   in    1821.      A  young 
woman  had  lost,  from  disease,  a  large 
portion  of  her   scalp,   skull-bone,   and 
dura  mater,  and  a  corresponding  portion 
of  her  brain  was  consequently  bare  and 
open  to  inspection.     "  When  she  was  in 


"  a  dreamless  sleep,"  as  he  relates,  "  her 
'  brain  was  motionless,  and  lay  within 
'  the  cranium.  When  her  sleep  was 
'  manifest,  and  she  was  agitated  by 
'  dreams,  her  brain  moved  and  pro- 
'  traded  without  the  cranium,  forming 
'  cerebral  hernia.  In  vivid  dreams, 
'  reported  as  such  by  herself,  the  pro- 
'  trusion  was  considerable  ;  and,  when 
'  she  was  perfectly  awake,  especially  if 
'  engaged  in  active  thought  or  sprightly 
'  conversation,  it  was  still  greater.  Nor 
'  did  the  protrusion  occur  in  jerks,  alter- 
"  nating  with  recessions,  as  if  caused  by 
"  the  impulse  of  the  arterial  blood.  It 
"  remained  steady  while  the  conversation 
"  lasted."  This  singular  case  is  very 
interesting,  as  not  only  illustrating  the 
action  of  the  brain  under  the  influence 
of  thought,  but  also  as  leading  to  the 
inference  that  the  mind  is  nearly  qui- 
escent in  certain  stages  of  sleep. 

The  facts  of  somnambulism  are  fre- 
quently quoted   in  opposition  to   the 
opinion  I  have  maintained.     The  som- 
nambulist may  be  in  a  sleep  so  profound 
that  almost  nothing  will  awaken  him ; 
he  may  show  the  current  of  his  thoughts 
by  his    actions — by  dancing,   singing, 
climbing  to    house-tops,   performing  a 
hundred  extraordinary  freaks,  for  hours 
together,  and  in  the  morning  have  not 
the  slightest  recollection  of  his  night's 
adventures.       Such    cases    there     un- 
doubtedly are,  but  they  must   be   re- 
garded as  abnormal,  and  as  proving  little 
regarding  the  phenomena  of  ordinary 
sleep.  In  ordinary  sleep  the  body  is  gene- 
rally motionless,  in  somnambulism  it  is 
active ;  and  the  same  may  be  true  ia  regard 
to  the  mind.     Somnambulism  appears, 
in  some  respects,  to  be  like  the  mesmeric 
sleep,  in  which  there  is  perfect  agility 
of  body,  and  a  certain  alertness  of  mind, 
though  coupled  with  a  subjectivity  to 
every  kind   of   hallucination  and  im- 
posture.    In  truth,  it  almost  looks  like 
a  misnomer  to  speak  of  these  states  as 
sleep  at  all — the  mind  seems  simply  to 
be  in  some  degree  detached  from  the 
senses,  and  thrown  into  a  new  frame  of 
thinking,  as  an  organ,  by  the  different 
arrangement  of  the  stops,  may  be  made 
to  emit  a  new  set  of  sounds. 

But  Sir  William.  Hamilton  quotes  hLs 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


477 


own  experience  as  evidence  that  the 
mind  is  husy  with  dreams  during  the 
soundest  sleep.  He  caused  himself  to 
"be  wakened  at  different  periods  of  the 
night  and  always  found  himself  dream- 
ing. It  might  be  said  in  answer  to  this 
that  Macnish  tried  the  same  experiment 
upon  himself,  and  with  the  very  opposite 
result ;  as  he  wakened  he  could  not 
catch  the  least  trace  of  a  receding  dream. 
But,  though  there  were  not  such  op- 
posing testimony,  the  case  of  Sir  William 
Hamilton  would  not  be  decisive.  A 
person  going  to  bed  with  the  knowledge 
that  he  was  to  be  operated  on — aware 
that  he  was  to  be  wakened  at  some 
period  of  the  night,  and  that,  to  make 
the  experiment  successful,  he  must 
start  from  sleep  as  quickly  as  possible, 
and  turn  his  eyes  in  upon  himself,  would 
not  be  likely  to  enjoy  that  deep  sleep 
which  dreams  do  not  invade,  but  would 
almost  to  a  certainty  have  his  mind 
agitated  and  filled  with  thoughts  about 
the  business  on  hand,  thus  destroying 
the  necessary  conditions  of  a  testing 
experiment.  But,  besides,  could  Sir 
William  Hamilton  be  certain  that  the 
dreams  which  he  found  in  possession  of 
his  brain  when  he  awoke  were  not  con- 
fined to  the  short  period  of  transition 
from  sleep  to  wakefulness  ?  There  are 
plenty  of  dreams  on  record — dreams 
which  appeared  long  to  the  dreamers 
and  embraced  a  multitude  of  scenes  and 
circumstances — and  which  yet  could  not 
have  occupied  many  seconds.  And, 
moreover,  as  has  already  been  said,  the 
transition-period  seems  to  be  the  most 
fruitful  of  dreams.  But  Sir  William 
Hamilton  acknowledges  that  on  some 
occasions  when  he  was  thus  suddenly 
roused,  he  was  "  scarcely  certain  of  more 
than  the  fact  that  he  was  not  awakened 
from  an  unconscious  state,"  which  cor- 
roborates the  opinion  that  consciousness 
exists  in  very  various  degrees  of  activity. 
We  may  therefore  rest  in  the  con- 
clusion that  in  sleep  we  are  always 
conscious,  though  not  always  im- 
aginative. 

But  how  comes  it  that  our  night 
thoughts  are  so  different  from  our  day 
thoughts  1  Why  should  the  same  mind 
act  so  differently  in  sleep  and  wakeful- 


ness  ?  These  questions  I  think  admit 
of  a  satisfactory  explanation.  The  two 
chief  characteristics  of  dreams  are  the 
substitution  of  ideas  for  sensations,  and 
incoherency  without  any  perception  of 
it.  Let  us  look  at  each  of  these 
characteristics. 

Dreams  are  nothing  more  than  trains 
of  thought.  We  think  when  we  are 
asleep  as  well  as  when  awake,  and  these 
sleeping-thoughts  we  call  dreams.  But 
there  appears  to  be  something  more 
than  mere  thoughts.  We  see,  we  hear, 
we  smell,  we  taste,  touch,  handle.  We 
pass  through  the  streets  of  a  great  city, 
gaze  at  the  noble  buildings,  admire  the 
splendid  equipages,  hear  suddenly  the 
salutation  of  a  friend,  walk  with  him, 
talk  with  him,  part  with  him  ;  and  every 
thing  is  as  real  to  us,  and  as  firmly  be- 
lieved, as  if  it  were  actual.  How  is 
this  1  How  do  we  manage  to  impose 
upon  ourselves  ?  How  do  our  thoughts 
contrive  to  cheat  the  conscious  mind  out 
of  which  they  spring  1  To  penetrate 
the  mystery  we  must  remember  that  the 
mind  has  two  states  of  consciousness 
— sensations  and  ideas.  Sensations  are 
the  pictures  of  outward  nature,  and  ideas 
are  the  pictures  of  sensations.  Sensa- 
tions are  the  images  of  objects  thrown 
upon  the  mind  with  every  shade  of 
brilliant  colouring,  but  fading  the  mo- 
ment these  objects  are  gone ;  ideas  are 
the  photographic  light-and-shade  im- 
pressions of  these  left  on  the  memory  : 
and  as,  when  photographs  are  placed  in 
the  stereoscope,  the  effect  of  reality  is 
produced,  so  there  are  circumstances  in 
which  ideas,  by  a  wonderful  illusion, 
produce  all  the  effects  of  sensation.  We 
seem  to  see  not  mere  pictures  but  the 
actual  scenes.  I  have  already  shown,  in 
a  previous  paper  (see  Macmillaris  Maga- 
zine, No.  t30,  April  1862),  that  even  in 
our  waking  state  ideas  are  sometimes 
mistaken  for  sensations,  that  we  believe 
ourselves  to  see  or  feel  what  we  merely 
imagine,  and  that  all  ideas  as  well  as 
sensations  bring  their  outward  objects 
before  the  mind.  When  we  think  of 
anything  it  is  always  as  of  something 
outside  of  ourselves.  What  we  think 
of — what  we  are  conscious  of — is  not 
the  thought  itself,  but  its  object.  When 


478 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


we  think  of  objects  of  sight  we  mentally 
see  them.  We  recollect  the  Cathedral 
of  Cologne ;  that  implies  that  its  lofty 
towers,  its  proportions,  its  exquisite 
tracery  are,  more  or  less,  definitely 
present  to  the  mind.  The  memory  re- 
vives the  faded  pictures  of  sensation. 
All  our  thoughts  of  visual  objects  are 
therefore  visions — seen  with  the  mind's- 
eye.  In  our  waking  hours  these  visions 
are  dimly  seen,  because  the  visions  of 
sensation  by  their  greater  brilliancy 
throw  them  into  the  shade  j  in  reveries, 
however,  they  acquire  considerable 
force ;  and  in  sleep,  when  sensation  is 
in  a  great  measure  shut  out,  they  startle 
us  by  their  vividness,  just  as  the  stars 
whic  where  unseen  during  the  day  shine 
brightly  in  the  darkness  of  the  night. 

If  we  reflect  upon  the  limit  which 
sleep  imposes  on  our  field  of  con- 
sciousness, we  shall  not  wonder  at  the 
change  which  it  produces  in  our 
thoughts.  When  awake  we  are  con- 
stantly confronted  by  the  outer  world. 
Our  eyes  are  open,  and  objects  of  sight 
fill  our  mind  and  modify  all  our  other 
mental  states.  Sensation  is  the  dominant 
element  in  our  consciousness.  But  in 
sleep  the  mind  is  in  a  great  measure 
isolated  from  the  outer  world.  The 
avenues  of  sense  are  closed.  The  mind 
is  left  with  its  own  thoughts;  and 
these,  though  dim  when  in  conjunction 
with  sensations,  are  now  bright,  and, 
as  they  are,  as  I  have  already  said,  repre- 
sentations of  outward  things,  we  see  in 
our  own  imaginings  all  the  phantas- 
magoria of  our  dreams — towers  and 
castles  and  towns,  monsters  and  men, 
all  named  and  all  nameless  things. 

It  is  worthy  of  observation,  however, 
that  our  dreams  sometimes  suddenly 
break  down,  from  our  ideas  being  unable 
to  simulate  violent  sensations.  Dr. 
Abercrombie  tells  us  of  a  friend  of 
his,  a  keen  sportsman,  who  frequently 
dreamed  he  was  in  the  turnip-fields 
with  his  gun.  He  saw  his  dog  pointing ; 
he  saw  the  game  rising ;  he  took  his 
aim  and  felt  the  trigger,  but  the  fowling- 
piece  never  went  off.  It  was  because 
he  could  not  realize  in  idea  the  sudden, 
sharp  and  loud  report.  In  like  manner, 
we  frequently  dream  that  we  are  falling 


off  a  precipice,  but  never  that  we  have 
reached  the  ground,  because  thought 
fails  to  realize  the  fatal  crash. 

The  other  characteristic  of  dreams  to 
which  I  alluded  is  incoherency.  Our 
day  thoughts  are  generally  consistent 
Avith  themselves  and  with  the  pro- 
bability of  things.  When  it  is  otherwise 
— when  the  mind  loses  its  ballast ; 
when  hallucinations  take  possession  of 
it;  when  thought  abandons  the  usual 
track,  and  flies  in  the  face  of  possibility 
— we  say  it  is  insanity.  But  all  this 
takes  place  when  we  dream  ;  which  has 
led  eminent  physicians  to  speak  of 
dreams  as  a  temporary  insanity.  At 
one  moment  we  are  in  England,  and 
the  next  hunting  tigers  in  the  jungles 
of  India ;  we  are  speaking  to  a  friend, 
and  while  we  speak  he  is  metamorphosed 
into  a  totally  different  person,  and  we 
scarcely  mark  the  change ;  we  are 
placed  in  the  most  ludicrous  and  even 
imnatural  circumstances, — but,  instead  of 
being  surprised,  it  seems  all  natural  and 
right.  So  far  indeed  does  this  go  that 
at  times  we  forget  not  only  the  difference 
between  the  meum  and  tuum,  but  even 
between  the  ego  and  the  non-ego,  and 
confound  ourselves  with  other  persons. 
There  is  nothing  too  fantastic,  too 
monstrous,  too  improbable  for  dreams. 
Our  imagination,  when  holding  its  high 
revels,  abolishes  space,  annihilates  time, 
jumbles  together  deities  and  demons, 
friends  and  foes,  darkness  and  light, 
truth  and  falsehood,  possibility  and  im- 
possibility. Why  should  this  potent 
power  when  emancipated  by  sleep  be 
restrained  within  the  narrow  bounds  of 
reason  and  sense  ? 

We  have  here,  then,  two  things  to 
explain,  the  incoherence  of  our  dreams, 
and  the  fact  that  we  are,  apparently  at 
least,  not  aware  of  their  incoherency  at 
the  time.  I  suspect  that  the  same  cir- 
cumstance which  gives  to  dreams  their 
scenic  effect  creates  their  incoherence. 
When  we  are  wide  awake,  and  our  mind 
is  divided  between  sensations  and  ideas, 
its  true  balance  is  preserved.  When 
sensations  are  shut  out,  its  balance  is 
lost.  The  one  keep  the  other  in  their 
proper  place.  So  long  as  the  reality  of 
things  is  ever  staring  us  in  the  face,  our 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


479 


ideas    are    kept   from   wandering  into 
absurdity ;  but,  when  everything  real  is 
removed,  and  our  ideas  are  left  to  follow 
their  own  laws  of  association  uncon- 
trolled, a  strange  medley  of  sense  and  non- 
sense is  the  result.     For,  by  the  laws  of 
association,  not  only  does  like  suggest  its 
like,  but  frequently  things  suggest  their 
opposites,  and  thus  the  most  incongruous 
scenes  and  circumstances   are  brought 
together.     We  are  hurried  along  as  on 
a   steed  without   a   bridle.      There   is 
nothing  to  correct  our   extravagances ; 
nothing  to   keep   the   current   of    our 
thoughts  within  the  bounds  of  proba- 
bility ;    nothing  to   bring  us   back  to 
reality  when  once  we  have  wandered 
into   the  region   of    fables.      But  the 
wonder  is  not  so  much  that  we  imagine 
all  monstrous  things,  as  that  we  believe 
them,  and,  in  general,  are  in  no  way 
surprised  at  them.     Even  when  awake, 
our  thoughts  sometimes  run  riot.  What 
castles  in  the  air  do  we  build  in  our 
reveries  !     What  insane  thoughts  some- 
times  enter   sane  minds  !      What  an 
absurd  tissue  of  the  possible  and  the  im- 
possible is  sometimes  woven  by  froward 
fancies  !  But  then  we  generally  perceive 
the  absurdity  of  our  revelling  thoughts, 
and  do  not  for  a  moment  believe  them. 
Why  do  we  believe  them  in  our  dreams  ? 
The  reason  is,  when  awake  the  world  is 
ever  before  us,  recalling  us  to  the  rigid 
truth  so  contradictory  sometimes  of  our 
fond  fancies  ;  whereas  in  sleep  the  world 
is  annihilated,  and  we  see  a  new  heaven 
and  a  new  earth.     When  awake,  sensa- 
tion maintains  its  dominancy,  and  fancies 
are  known  to  be  but  fancies  ;  but,  when 
sleep  overpowers  us,  sensation  becomes 
dull  and  indistinct,  and  our  thoughts 
take  the  shape  of  outside  realities, — they 
move  before  us  as  men  and  women ; 
they  tower  up  around  us  as  mountains 
and  battlements ;  they  stretch  out  be- 
fore us   as  woods  and  fields,  and  we 
believe  what  we  see,  by  a  law  of  our 
being,  just  as  we  do  when  awake.  When 
men  see  spectres  they  generally  believe 
in  the   outside   reality  till   something 
occurs  to  destroy  the  belief. 

But,  when  in  our  dreams  we  meet 
with  a  friend  whom  we  know  to  be  dead, 
why  are  we  not  at  least  surprised  ?  It  is 


because  at  the  moment  we  do  not  re- 
collect that  he  is  dead — we  simply  see 
him  before  us,  and  we  accept  the  fact. 
Memory  may  bring  up  before  us  the 
images  of  the  departed  without  recalling 
their  death ;  the  train  of  thought  may 
sweep   onward,  and  the  very  rapidity 
and  intensity  of  our  mental  action  ex- 
clude    reflections     and    reminiscences, 
which  might  otherwise  occur.     It  is  so 
when  we  are  awake.     Archimedes  was 
not  surprised  at  the  tumult  in  the  streets 
when  Syracuse  was  taken,  because  he 
was  otherwise  so  intently  engaged  that 
it  did  not  occur  to  him  what  the  tumult 
might  mean.     But,  besides  this,  do  we 
not  often,  when  we  are  fully  awake, 
sit    and    converse   for   hours   together 
with   the   distant   and  the  dead.     We 
wander  together  to  the  old  haunts,  we 
re-enact  the  old  scenes,  or  we  lead  them 
to  our  present  places  of  resort,  introduce 
them  to  our  new  associates,  open  up  to 
them  our  future  plans ;  and  it  must  be 
remembered  that  our  dreams  are  just 
our  wayward  thoughts,  without  any  rigid 
reality  at  hand  to  tell  us  they  are  false. 
But  it  is  not  always  the  case  that  we 
are  not  surprised  at  the  metamorphosis 
and  strange  adventures  of  our  dreams. 
We  are  sometimes  both  surprised  and 
sceptical.     In  some  of  our  dreams,  be- 
neath the  appearance  of  reality,  there  is 
an  under-current  of  unbelief;  we  know 
they  are  dreams.     This  is  more  espe- 
cially the  case  with  our  morning  lucu- 
brations, which  are  also  more  rational 
and  coherent  than  those  which  we  have 
when  sinking  into  sleep — which   evi- 
dently arises  from  our  approaching  the 
land  of  wakefulness,  and  a  stream  of 
day  thoughts  mingling  with  our  night 
ones. 

If  all  that  has  been  said  is  true,  there 
is  nothing  extraordinary  about  dreams. 
They  are  referable  to  the  ordinary  laws 
of  thought.  They  are  night  reveries,  in 
which  there  is  simply  such  a  change  in 
the  character  of  the  mental  train  as  we 
should  expect  from  the  change  of  the 
conditions.  Our  day  experiences  fur- 
nish the  materials  out  of  which  they 
are  woven,  "A  dream,"  saith  Solomon 
wisely,  "  cometh  through  much  busi- 
ness." Let  us  reflect  on  what  actually 


480 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


happens.  As  we  gradually  pass  into 
slumber,  we  are  still  thinking ;  but 
some  of  our  sensations,  especially  the 
important  ones  of  vision,  are  now  en- 
tirely shut  out,  and  others  become  dim 
and  still  dimmer ;  we  pass  from  the 
world  of  sense  to  the  world  of  ideas,  and 
our  ideas,  being  no  longer  eclipsed  by  the 
superior  splendour  of  sensation,  shine 
out  with  greater  apparent  brilliancy ;  the 
ordinary  laws  of  association  go  on  in  full 
operation,  idea  suggesting  idea,  but  no 
longer  controlled  by  the  presence  of 
outside  realities ;  sometimes  a  dull  sen- 
sation reaches  the  mind,  and  either 
mingles  imperceptibly  with  the  current 
of  thought,  or  alters  altogether  its  direc- 
tion ;  it  creates  a  hitch  in  the  dream, — 
and  thus  the  mental  theatre-show  pro- 
ceeds till  we  sink  into  deep  sleep,  where 
even  fancy  slumbers,  or  open  our  eyes 
at  morn  and  look  out  upon  these  hard 
facts  which  banish  the  spectres  of  the 
night — for  all  ghosts  disappear  at  cock- 
crowing. 

The  thoughts  of  the  day,  as  I  have 
already  said,  reappear  in  the  visions  of 
the  night.  The  man  of  business  is  again 
seated  at  his  desk,  calculating  his  profits 
and  his  loss.  The  gay  beauty  is  waltzing 
as  vigorously  as  she  did  two  hours  be- 
fore, and  she  hears  yet  again  the  soft 
speeches  of  her  admirers.  The  mother 
who  has  lost  a  child  watches  by  its 
bedside  during  its  great  agony,  or  visits 
its  little  grave,  or  perhaps  dandles  it 
once  more  on  her  knee,  and  listens  to 
its  prattle  and  rejoices  in  the  bloom  of 
the  rosy  cheeks.  But  sometimes  dreams 
are  perverse.  There  are  women  who 
have  been  bereaved  of  their  husbands, 
who  mourn  over  them  all  the  day,  and 
earnestly  long  to  see  them  again  in  their 
dreams — to  meet  them,  as  it  were,  in 
the  Shades ;  but  the  sleeping  thoughts 
uniformly  take  a  different  direction.  If 
the  day  reveals  fhe  dead,  the  darkness 
of  night  comes  to  bury  them  out  of 
their  sight.  This  may,  perhaps,  arise 
from  the  fact  that  the  mind  cannot 
dwell  incessantly  on  the  same  subject 
without  being  worn  out,  and  instinc- 
tively seeks  for  relief  in  change.  Of 
course  our  natural  dispositions  also  give 
their  peculiar  tinge  to  our  dreams  just 


as  they  give  to  our  waking  thoughts  : 
and  we  are  quarrelsome,  loving,  ava- 
ricious, or  benevolent,  according  to  the 
stamp  which  Mature  has  impressed 
upon  us. 

Though  dreams  are  in  general  inco- 
herent and  nonsensical,  yet  there  are 
many  cases  on  record  in  which  the  most 
splendid  conceptions  have  been  furnished 
by  them.     Tartini  is  said  to  have  com- 
posed his  Devil's  Sonata  from  the  in- 
spiration of  a  dream,  in  which  the  devil 
appeared  to  him  and  challenged  him  to 
a  trial  of  his  skill  on  his  own  fiddle. 
Coleridge    declares    he    composed    his 
splendid   poetical  fragment   of    Kubla 
Khan  when  asleep.     Condorcet  relates 
that,  more  than  once,  having  retired  to 
bed  jaded   with    intricate   calculations 
which  he  had  left  unfinished,  he  com- 
pleted them  in  his  dreams.     Franklin 
states  that  he  sometimes  saw  the  bear- 
ing of  political  events  more  clearly  during 
sleep  than  he  had  done  when  awake. 
Dr.   Gregory  mentions   that    thoughts 
sometimes  occurred  to  him  in  dreams 
which  were  so  good  that  he  used  them 
in  his  college  lectures.     Sir  Benjamin 
Brodie   tells  us   of  a  friend  who  had 
more  than  once  invented  an  apparatus 
for  an  experiment  he  wished  to  make  in 
a  dream,  and  of  another  who  had  solved 
mathematical    problems    when     asleep 
which  had  baffled  him  Avhen  awake.    It 
is  certain  that  events  frequently  recur 
to  us  in  sleep  which  we   had  entirely 
forgotten,   and   probably  should   never 
otherwise  have  recalled.      But   this  is 
easily  explicable,   for  not  only  do  our 
sleeping  thoughts  wander  free  and  far 
from  being  unshackled  bysense,  but  they 
become  much  more  vivid.     When  we 
dream  of  those  not  seen  for  long  years 
we  see  them  with  a  distinctness  of  detail 
which  our  waking  memory  could  never 
have  reproduced.     But,  while  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  some  fine  thoughts  and 
remarkable  reminiscences   have   issued 
from  dreams,  we  must  remember  that 
this  is  a  matter  in  which  we  are  very 
apt  to  be  deceived.     While  we  dream 
we  are  in  general  vastly  enamoured  with 
our  own  ideas  and  arguments,  but  when 
we  awake  we  find  them  silly  and  sense- 
less in  the  extreme. 


On  Sleep  and  Dreams. 


481 


Though  dreams  essentially  consist  of 
trains  of  thought,  many  of  them  are 
determined  by  the  presence  of  a  sensa- 
tion. Sir  Walter  Scott  mentions  a 
nobleman  whose  arm  during  sleep  was 
accidentally  exposed  to  the  cold  night 
air  and  became  numb,  and  he  awoke 
from  a  frightful  dream,  in  which  ho 
supposed  a  corpse  had  seized  him  by 
the  arm,  and  was  dragging  him  from  bed. 
Dr.  Gregory,  having  had  a  hot  bottle 
placed  to  his  feet,  dreamed  that  he  was 
ascending  to  the  crater  of  Mount  Etna, 
and  felt  the  ground  burning  beneath 
him.  Dr.  Reid,  having  had  a  blister 
applied  to  his  head,  dreamed  that  he 
was  being  scalped  by  Indians.  During 
the  threatened  French  invasion  a  gentle- 
man in  Edinburgh  dreamed  that  the 
landing  had  taken  place,  that  the  volun- 
teers were  mustering,  that  the  signal-gun 
from  the  castle  was  fired,  and  awoke. 
His  wife  awoke  at  the  same  instant, 
having  had  a  similar  dream  ;  and  it  was 
discovered  that  the  cause  of  both  was 
the  falling  of  a  pair  of  tongs,  acting  upon 
the  thoughts  about  invasion,  which  were 
then  dominant  in  their  minds.  But 
there  are  cases  on  record  in  which  dreams 
of  any  kind  could  be  excited  by  merely 
whispering  into  the  sleeper's  ear. 

If  the  account  here  given  of  dreams 
be  true,  we  need  not  ascribe  to  them 
either  a  supernatural  origin  or  a  pro- 
phetic power.  Yet  many  dreams  are 
undoubtedly 'fulfilled  :  and  it  is  easy  to 
see  why  they  should  be.  We  anticipate 
a  certain  event,  dream  about  it,  and  it 
comes  to  pass.  A  disease  begins  to  de- 
velop itself  in  our  system  ;  it  is  still  too 
obscure  to  be  detected  by  the  ordinary 
observer ;  but  it  affects  the  highly  sensi- 
tive mind,  and  we  have  uneasy  dreams 
about  illness  and  death  ;  and,  when  these 
occur,  it  is  thought  there  has  been  a 
revelation  of  the  future.  It  is  the  same 
circumstance  which  creates,  what  we 
call,  presentiments.  There  are  other 
dreams  which  fulfil  themselves  in  a 
different  way.  An  Italian  merchant, 
travelling  between  Rome  and  Sienna, 
dreamt  he  was  murdered,  and  in  confes- 
sion told  this  to  a  priest,  and  at  the 
same  time  revealed  the  wealth  which 

~No.  54:. — VOL.  ix. 


he  carried  about  with  him ;  the  priest's 
cupidity  was  excited,  and  he  fulfilled, 
his  dream.  A  Hamburgh  apprentice,, 
who  was  to  be  despatched  on  the  follow- 
ing day  to  a  distance  with  a  considerable 
sum  of  money,  had  frightful  dreams  of 
robbery  and  murder,  and  accordingly, 
in  passing  through  a  village  which  lay 
on  the  edge  of  a  wood,  he  revealed  his- 
fears  and  his  errand  to  the  magistrate, 
in  presence  of  some  workmen,  and  begged 
for  a  guide.  The  magistrate  sent  one  of 
the  workmen  who  had  heard  the  story, 
and  the  poor  youth  was  afterwards  found 
murdered  in  the  wood,  and  the  guide 
had  fled. 

But  by  far  the  greatest  number  of 
those  cases  which  appear  propheticaL 
undoubtedly  arise  simply  from  coinci- 
dences. Coincidences  frequently  occur 
betwixt  our  waking  thoughts  and  future 
facts  ;  why  should  it  not  be  so  with  our 
sleeping  ones  ?  How  many  dreams 
prove  false,  compared  with  the  few 
which  prove  true  1  In  London  alone, 
more  than  three  millions  of  dreams  must 
be  dreamt  every  night ;  what  marvel 
though  one  of  these,  which  pointed  to 
the  future,  should  afterwards  be  realised^ 
and  if  so,  it  is  quite  sure  to  be  remem- 
bered, quoted,  perhaps  chronicled,  while- 
all  the  others  are  forgotten  for  ever.. 
Do  those  who  believe  in  these  dreams; 
as  prophetical  reflect  as  to  what  is  in- 
volved in  the  belief  ?  It  involves  that  a 
miracle  has  been  worked  in  their  case. 
It  involves  that  the  Deity  has  specially 
interfered  with  the  ordinary  laws  of 
Nature,  to  reveal  perhaps  some  trifling 
event  to  them.  No  sound  thinker,  in- 
deed no  pious  man,  will  readily  admit 
such  a  supposition. 

Dreams  do  enough  without  laying: 
open  to  us  the  future.  They  fill  with 
beautiful  forms  those  night-hours  which; 
otherwise  would  be  a  solitary  waste ;: 
they  double  our  amount  of  conscious- 
ness, and  thus  in  effect  double  our  sum. 
of  enjoyable  life.  Who  Avould  not  be  a 
dreamer  of  dreams  1  From  how  much 
high  pleasure  should  we  be  cut  off  if  we 
were  deprived  of  them  !  The  beggar, 
who  every  night  dreams  he  is  a  king,  is 
not  very  far  removed  from  royalty.. 

1 1 


482 


LETTEES    FKOM    A    COMPETITION    WALLAH. 
LETTER  XI. -CHRISTIANITY  IN  INDIA. 


DEAR  SIMKINS, — On  my  return  from 
a  "visit  to  Chandernagore,  I  found  two 
letters  full  of  your  reflections  on  the 
question  of  the  advisability  of  our  keep- 
ing India.  One  had  come  through 
Bombay,  and  the  other  by  Point  de 
Galle,  and  I  am  anxiously  expecting 
another  round  the  Cape.  The  problems 
•which  you  select  for  discussion  are  cer- 
tainly rather  antiquated.  Some  three 
months  ago  you  gave  me  your  opinion 
about  the  annexation  of  Oude,  in  a 
treatise  that  displayed  profound  political 
wisdom,  which  more  than  compensated 
for  a  slight  want  of  familiarity  with  the 
details  of  your  subject.  At  first  I  was 
surprised  and  gratified  to  find  that  you 
had  turned  your  attention  to  an  event' 
so  recent;  but  it  gradually  began  to 
'dawn  upon  me  that  the  annexation  of 
Oude,  which  you  had  undertaken  to 
justify  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man, 
was  not  that  accomplished  by  Lord 
Dalhousie,  in  1856,  but  the  arrange- 
ment which  was  effected  by  Lord 
Wellesley,  as  far  back  as  1801.  While 
reading  your  letters  I  seem  to  resemble 
the  traveller,  who,  during  a  tour  in 
Southern  Eussia,  in  the  year  1819, 
came  to  a  Cossack  village,  somewhere 
between  the  Don  and  the  Yolga.  He 
found  the  population  in  a  state  of  wild 
excitement  and  exhilaration.  Bonfires 
were  blazing,  and  oxen  roasting  whole. 
The  gutters  ran  with  raki  and  train-oil. 
Peasants  who  had  never  tasted  any- 
thing daintier  than  a  rushlight  now  had 
their  fill  of  long  sixes.  It  was  evidently 
some  great  occasion.  Perhaps  the  birth- 
day of  an  archduke.  Perhaps  a  victory 
over  the  Circassian.  Possibly  the  return 
of  an  influential  member  of  the  tribe 
from  a  temporary  sojourn  in  Siberia. 
The  tourist  inquired  what  had  given 
rise  to  these  demonstrations.  "  Haven't 
"  you  heard  ? "  was  the  answer.  "  Na- 
"  poleon  has  abdicated  !  The  allies  have 


"  entered  Paris  !  Our  brethren  are  living 
"  at  free-quarters  in  a  land  flowing  with 
"  lard  and  tallow.  Hourah  !  Alexander 
"  for  ever  !" 

Now,  you  are  at  least  as  much  behind 
the  world  as  these  honest  Cossacks. 
Some  four  or  five  years  ago,  when  the 
financial  state  of  our  Eastern  Empire 
seemed  desperate  to  the  most  sanguine 
of  political  economists,  there  was  some 
little  talk  about  the  inconvenience  and 
danger  of  retaining  our  hold  upon  India. 
Men  might  reasonably  question  the  ad- 
vantage of  a  possession  which  cost  more 
than  it  brought  in.  No  one  will  thank 
you  for  leaving  him  an  estate  encum- 
bered with  mortgages,  and  entailing  on 
him  a  yearly  lawsuit ;  and  the  condition 
of  such  an  estate  was  much  that  of  our 
dominions  in  Asia,  loaded  with  a  debt 
of  a  hundred  millions,  surrounded  by 
such  litigious  neighbours  as  Burmese 
and  Afghans,  thronged  with  tenants  as 
turbulent  and  impracticable  as  Sikhs 
and  Santhals.  India  might  be  the 
brightest  jewel  of  the  English  crown, 
but  she  certainly  was  one  of  which  the 
cutting  and  setting  came  uncommonly 
expensive.  There  was  very  little  en- 
couragement and  satisfaction  in  the 
prospect  of  a  budget  which  showed  a 
pretty  steady  annual  deficit  of  five 
millions ;  or,  worse  than  that,  in  the 
prospect  of  an  annual  deficit  of  five 
millions  without  any  budget  at  all. 
Until  the  appointment  of  poor  Mr. 
Wilson,  the  public  resources  of  India 
were  administered  on  the  most  happy- 
go-lucky  system  that  perhaps  ever 
existed  in  any  civilized  country.  That 
grand  old  Company  displayed  very  little 
mercantile  accuracy  in  the  management 
of  the  finances.  It  would  almost  seem 
as  if  the  Anglo-Indian  government  was 
ashamed  of  its  commercial  origin,  and 
sought  to  rival  the  majestic  profusion  of 
ancient  and  time-honoured  dynasties. 


Christianity  in  India. 


483 


Then  the  work  of  conquest  and  annexa- 
tion went  on  so  hriskly,  there  were  so 
many  independent  princes  to  be  turned 
into  allies,  and  so  many  allies  to  be  de- 
graded into  subjects,  that  our  rulers 
had  neither  time  nor  inclination  for  the 
manufacture  of  financial  statements. 
They  found  it  easier  to  pay  their  con- 
tractors and  their  mercenaries  with  the 
first  money  that  came  to  hand,  and 
borrow  whenever  the  treasury  was  not 
in  cash — a  contingency  of  by  no  means 
rare  occurrence.  Even  if  the  powers 
that  then  were  had  been  overtaken  by  a 
fit  of  economy,  even  if  they  had  felt  the 
paramount  necessity  of  effecting  a  com- 
prehensive and  minute  survey  of  the 
resoiirces  and  expenses  of  the  State,  it 
is  doubtful  whether  they  would  have 
found  in  the  ranks  of  the  Civil  Service 
men  endowed  with  the  experience  and 
knowledge  which  such  a  task  would 
demand.  As  long  as  there  were  vast 
conquests  to  be  organized  and  governed, 
mighty  potentates  to  be  cajoled  into 
friendship  or  bullied  into  vassalage, 
justice  to  be  administered,  codes  to  be 
digested,  no  one  cared  to  descend  from 
the  role  of  a  governor,  an  envoy,  a 
judge,  a  lawgiver,  and  assume  the  less 
splendid,  but  certainly  not  less  useful, 
character  of  an  accountant  or  an  auditor. 
Who  would  condescend  to  the  office  of 
quaestor,  when  he  might  be  a  proctor  or 
a  pro-consul  ?  Napoleon  the  Great 
acted  on  a  very  different  principle.  He 
knew  well  that  a  power  which  owes  its 
origin  to  a  period  of  general  confusion, 
and  its  grandeur  to  successful  and  suc- 
cessive wars,  can  least  of  all  afford  to 
neglect  the  finances.  Nothing  short  of 
the  most  rigorous  economy,  the  most 
anxious  and  constant  scrutiny  into 
details,  could  have  kept  afloat  through 
so  many  eventful  years  a  Government 
at  once  revolutionary  and  aggressive, 
whose  chief  was  hated  by  all  the 
monarchs  of  Europe  as  a  usurper  and 
a  parvenu,  and  by  all  the  nations  of 
Europe  as  a  grasping  and  unscrupulous 
Jupiter  Scapin.  While  with  his  terrible 
right  hand  he  was  dealing  home-thrusts 
to  the  heart  of  Austria  and  Branden- 
burg, his  left  hand  was  for  ever  in  his 


breeches-pocket  jingling  the  francs  and 
centimes.  Unfortunately  there  was  no 
Buonaparte  in  India.  Things  went  as 
providence  chose  to  order  them — provi- 
dence, that  is  to  say,  represented  by 
Armenian  stockjobbers  and  Hindoo  con- 
tractors. The  budget  made  itself  as 
best  it  could.  Acting  Governors-general 
wrote  home  by  one  mail  in  a  flurry  to 
announce  a  deficit  of  forty  lacs  of 
rupees,  and  by  the  next  mail  informed 
the  honourable  Court  that  a  slight  error 
had  been  detected  in  the  accounts,  and 
that  instead  of  a  deficit  there  turned  out 
to  be  a  surplus.  Unfortunately  in  far 
the  greater  number  of  instances  the 
case  was  reversed,  and  instead  of  a  sur- 
plus there  resulted  a  very  tangible  and 
palpable  deficit.  By  the  year  1859,  the 
prospects  of  India  were  so  hopeless,  as 
far  as  the  financial  eye  could  reach,  that 
even  those  who  could  view  our  occupa- 
tion of  this  country  from  other  points 
than  that  of  pounds,  shillings,  and 
pence,  began  seriously  to  doubt  whether 
we  were  not  paying  too  dearly  for  the 
privilege  of  governing  and  civilizing  the 
East. 

Now  everything  is  changed.  Mr. 
Wilson  brought  in  the  first  Indian 
budget ;  and,  before  two  years  were  out, 
the  astonished  world  beheld  the  last 
Indian  deficit.  Three  years  ago  a  cer- 
tain Governor  of  Madras  prophesied 
that  the  vast  resources  of  the  country, 
fostered  by  judicious  economy  and  admi- 
nistered by  trained  financiers,  regulated 
and  adjusted  by  means  of  an  exact  and 
sweeping  annual  estimate,  would  more 
than  suffice  to  meet  all  demands.  And 
yet  we  may  well  believe  that  even  he 
would  have  been  astounded  could  he 
have  foreseen  the  state  of  things  which 
it  has  fallen  to  his  lot  to  announce. 
In  1859-60  the  Eevenue  was  Eupees 
39,705,822,  and  the  Expenditure  Rupees 
50,475,683.  .  In  1862-63  the  Eevenue 
was  Eupees  45,105,700,  and  the  Expen- 
diture Eupees  43,825,104.  The  ques- 
tions which  occupy  our  Eastern  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Exchequer  are  no  longer 
how  this  deficit  is  to  be  met,  how  that 
loan  is  to  be  negotiated  ;  but  whether 
an  increased  grant  may  be  allotted  to 

n2 


484 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  XI. 


education,  whether  an  oppressive  mono- 
poly may  be  abolished  with  advantage, 
whether  the  surplus  should  be  absorbed 
in  repealing  taxation,  paying  off  debt, 
or  advancing  reproductive  public  works. 
It  appears,  then,  that  we  can  afford 
to  hold  India  ;  but  how  do  we  establish 
our  right  of  tenure  1     There  is  no  need 
to  justify  our  occupation  in  the  eyes  of 
the  world  in  general.     The  commercial 
interests    of  all    nations    imperatively 
demand  that  the  Government  of  Hin- 
dostan  should  be   in   the   hands  of  a 
great  and  enlightened  power.     As  long 
as  Bombay  and  Calcutta  are  free  ports ; 
as  long  as  the  navigation  of  the  Ganges 
and  the  Indus  is  as  safe  as  the  naviga- 
tion of  the  Elbe  and  the  Ehone ;  as 
long  as  the  tea-plantations  in  Assam  are 
as   secure   as   the   sugar-plantations  in 
Jamaica,  and  the  cotton-fields  of  Cen- 
tral  India  a  great   deal   more    secure 
than  the   cotton-fields  of  South  Caro- 
lina ;   so  long  the  merchants  of  Mar- 
seilles,  of  Hamburg,  of  Baltimore,  of 
Manilla  will  thank  us  for  taking  upon 
ourselves   the   trouble   of  keeping   the 
Ghorkas  out  of  Bahar,  and  the  Burmese 
out  of   Silhet.     Monsieur  Thiers  may 
grumble,  and   Monsieur   Lesseps    may 
rant,  but  almost   every  Frenchman  of 
sense  would  be  very  sorry  to  see  our 
commissioners  and  collectors  succeeded 
by  prefects  and  receivers-general.    Dur- 
ing the  crisis  of  the  mutiny  we  enjoyed 
the  hearty  sympathy  of   the   civilized 
world ;  and  we  may  say  with  pride,  and 
without  ingratitude,  that  that  sympathy 
was    not    entirely   disinterested.     The 
Americans  of  the    North,    who  see   a 
parallel  between  their  present  position 
and  that  of  England  in  1857,  bitterly 
complain  that  we  have  requited  their 
good-will  with  our   cold  neglect.      As 
far  as  India  is  concerned,  we   do  our 
duty  by  the  commonwealth  of  nations. 
It  remains  to  inquire  whether  we  do 
our  duty  by  the  inhabitants  of  India. 

We  are,  as  a  nation,  agreed  that  the 
greatest  benefit  we  can  confer  upon  our 
subjects  is  Christianity.  Our  heart's 
desire  and  prayer  for  India  is,  that  she 
may  be  saved.  Is  that  desire  soon  to 
be  ^  accomplished]  Is  that  prayer  in 


the  course  of  fulfilment?  Let  us  ask 
our  missionaries  who,  with  true  Protes- 
tant honour  and  fidelity,  publish  to  the 
light  the  results  of  their  labours,  be 
they  great,  or  be  they  insignificant. 
The  Report  of  the  Church  Missionary 
Society  for  1862-63  contains  the  follow- 
ing summary : — 

"Taking  the  statistics  of  the  three 
'  presidencies  of  India,  we  find  that, 
'  besides  hundreds  of  thousands  of  lis- 
'  teners  to  the  Gospel  message,  there 
'  were  ten  years  ago  94,145  registered 
'  Christians,  and  that  there  are  now 
'  138,543." 

That  is  to  say,  there  is  something  less 
than  one  Christian  to  every  thousand 
heathen,  and  this  after  European  mis- 
sionaries have  been  sixty  years  in  the 
country. 

As  I  know,  by  personal  observation^ 
nothing  at  all  of  the  presidency  of 
Bombay,  and  little  of  Madras,  I  will 
confine  my  remarks  on  the  progress  of 
Christianity  to  the  North  of  India. 
The  Report  of  the  Church  Missionary 
Society  places  the  number  of  native 
Christians  in  the  North  India  Mission 
at  8,523  ;  that  is  to  say,  at  barely  one 
Christian  to  every  ten  thousand  heathen. 
Like  brave  and  worthy  Englishmen, 
the  labourers  in  this  ungrateful  vine- 
yard are  not  afraid  of  acknowledging 
their  failure.  Let  us  take  the  three 
Mofussil  missions  of  Bengal.  The  Rev. 
S.  Hasell,  of  Burdwan,  owns  in  his 
report  that,  "  but  very  few  converts 
"  have  been  baptized  from  the  Zillah 
"  itself." 

The  Rev.  R.  P.  Greaves,  in  his  annual 
review  of  the  mission  at  Kishnagur, 
writes  : — 

"  One  of  the  most  unsatisfactory  cha- 
'  racteristics  of  the  congregations  in 
'  this  district  at  present  is  their  non- 
'  expansion.  They  are  showing  but 
'  little  light,  and  producing  but  little 
'  good  around.  For  a  series  of  years 
'  they  have  been  stationary,  not  to  say 
'  stagnant." 

The  Rev.  E.  L.  Puxley,  of  the  Bhau- 
gulpore  and  Santhal  mission,  furnishes 
a  statement  containing  the  following 
passage  : — 


Christianity  in  India. 


485 


•*•  As  to  future  prospects,  humanly 
"  speaking,  I  feel  much,  less  hope  now 
"  for  the  rapid  conversion  of  the  San- 
"  thals  than  I  did  at  the  beginning  of 
"  last  year.  I  was  then  new  to  the 
"  work,  and  judged  more  by  reason  than 
"  experience.  The  religion  of  the  San- 
"  thals  is  a  religion  which  they  cherish 
"  as  derived  from  their  fathers,  and  to 
"  which  they  cling  with  far  greater 
"  tenacity  than  I  had  expected.  I  can- 
"  not  help  expressing  my  hope  that  I 
"  am  totally  in  the  wrong  concerning 
"  our  future  prospects,  and  that  events 
"  may  prove  that  my  original  opinion 
"  was  the  most  exact.  We  derive 
"  courage  froinj  the  thought  of  the 
"  unseen  things — God's  power,  and  the 
"  promises  which  are  behind." 

Gallant  words  these,  and  good  words, 
but  what  a  hopeless  state  of  things  do 
they  imply  !  The  cause  of  Faith  must, 
indeed,  be  in  a  bad  way  when  such  men 
despair.  To  fight  an  uphill  fight;  to 
finish  his  course  without  joy ;  to  sow 
where  he  cannot  reap  ;  to  strew  where 
lie  may  not  gather;  to  work  honestly 
and  stoutly  to  the  end,  and  to  work  in 
vain  ;  such  is  the  fate  of  the  English 
missionary  in  the  Northern  Provinces 
of  India.  It  is  idle  to  close  our  eyes 
against  the  fact,  that  with  all  the  advan- 
tages of  civilization  and  domination,  we 
have  hitherto  succeeded  in  converting 
to  our  own  creed  only  one  in  ten 
thousand  of  the  subject-people.  Why 
is  the  most  pure  and  consistent  of  reli- 
gions powerless  against  the  most  foul 
and  fanciful  of  superstitions  1  Why  is 
Truth  worsted  in  the  battle,  though 
science  and  authority,  the  power  of  the 
intellect,  and  the  power  of  the  sceptre, 
are  ranged  at  her  side  in  close  alliance  ? 
Why,  under  the  very  shadow  of  the 
Christian  churches  and  colleges,  do  men 
cry  aloud  to  Seeva,  and  cut  themselves 
after  their  manner  with  knives  and 
lancets,  till  the  blood  gushes  out  upon 
them?  Why  does  Christ  count  his 
followers  by  units,  while  Vishnu  num- 
bers his  worshippers  by  myriads  ?  The 
failure  is  due  partly  to  defects  inherent 
in  our  system  of  evangelization ;  partly 
to  overwhelming  obstacles  without, 


against  which  the  most  perfect  organi- 
zation would  unsuccessfully  contend. 

The  very  excellence  and  perfection 
of  our  religion  constitutes  our  first  and 
most  serious  difficulty.  The  creed  which 
our  missionaries  preach  would  be  far 
more  readily  adopted  if  it  were  not  so 
much  too  good  for  the  men  to  whom 
they  preach  it.  The  days  of  wholesale 
conversion  are  long  gone  by.  It  is 
natural  to  regret  the  golden  age  when 
tribes  of  Huns  and  Vandals  embraced, 
with  easy  unanimity,  the  faith  of  the 
empire  which  they  had  invaded — when 
strings  of  captive  Danes  were  led  from 
the  field  of  battle  to  the  nearest  stream 
before  the  blood  had  dried  upon  the 
weapons  of  the  victors.  But  we  must 
not  forget  that  our  Christianity  differs 
from  the  Christianity  of  the  dark  ages, 
at  least  as  much  as  the  belief  of  Socrates 
differed  from  the  belief  of  Homer.  Ours 
is  an  elevated  and  philosophic  religion, 
adapted  to  the  wants  of  an  enlightened 
and  progressive  society  :  and  a  philo- 
sophic religion  cannot  be  a  proselytizing 
religion.  The  Church  of  Eome,  in  old 
time,  offered  very  different  attractions 
to  converts  of  rank  and  power,  and 
demanded  from  them  a  far  easier  test 
than  do  the  Protestant  missionary 
societies  of  our  own  day.  The  bounty 
was  so  high,  and  the  discipline  in  her 
ranks  so  lax,  that  she  found  no  difficulty 
in  procuring  recruits.  St.  Cuthbert's 
bishop  knew  well  what  he  was  about 
when  he  undertook  to  enlist  the  old 
northern  rover. 

"  Broad  lands  he  gave  him  on  Tyne  and  Wear, 
To  be  held  of  the  Church  by  bridle  and 

spear : 

Part  of  Monkwearmoiith,  of  Tyndale  part, 
To  better  his  will,  and  soften  his  heart. 
Count  Witikind  was  a  joyful  man, 
Less  for  his  Faith  than  the  lands  which  he 

wan  ; 
The  High  Church  of  Durham  is  dressed  for 

the  day, 
And  the  clergy  are  ranked  in  their  solemn 

array. 

There  came  the  Count  in  a  bearskin  warm, 
Leaning  on  Hilda  his  concubine's  arm  : 
He  kneeled  before  St.  Cuthbert's  shrine 
"With  patience  unwonted  at  rites  divine  ; 
But  such  was  the  grisly  old  proselyte's  look, 
That  the  priest  who  baptized  him  grew  pale 

and  shook." 


486 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  XI. 


Nor  did  the  churchman  demand  any 
very  marked  outward  manifestation  of 
the  good  work  that  was  going  on  within 
the  breast  of  his  convert.  Sir  Walter 
tells  us  how — 

« E'en  the  good  bishop  was  forced  to 

endure 
The  scandal  which  time    and  instruction ' 

might  cure. 
It  were  dangerous,  he  deemed,  at  the  first 

to  restrain 

From  his  wine  and  his  wassail  a  half-chris- 
tened Dane. 
The   mead  flowed   around,    and   ale  was 

drained  dry, 
Wild  was  the  laughter,  the  song,  and  the 

cry; 

With  Kyrie  Eleison  came  clamorously  in 
The  war-song  of  Danesniau,  Norweyan,  and 

Fin." 

He  must  have  been  a  very  thick- 
headed old  Viking  who  could  not  ap- 
preciate the  advantages  of  a  conversion 
of  which  the  only  drawback  consisted 
in  a  short  rite  followed  by  a  long  drink- 
ing-bout, and  the  practical  result  was  a 
fat  fief  in  Durham  or  Northumberland. 
If  he  had  been  required  to  give  up 
habits  of  brutality  and  self-indulgence  ; 
to  stint  himself  in  mead  and  ale,  and 
make  Hilda  an  honest  woman  j  to  be- 
come charitable,  devout,  and  unselfish  ; . 
to  have  a  decided  opinion  on  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Heal  Presence,  and  an 
undecided  opinion  on  the  question  of 
Eternal  Punishment ;  to  profess,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  profess  with  reservation, 
his  belief  that,  if  his  ancient  brethren  in 
arms  held  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not 
proceeding,  but  either  made,  created,  or 
begotten,  without  doubt  they  would 
perish  everlastingly — if  such  were  the 
conditions  exacted  of  him  by  his  new 
teachers,  he  would  probably  be  not 
quite  so  ready  to  renounce  the  pleasing 
prospect  of  tippling  through  all  eternity 
in  the  congenial  society  of  Odin. 

As  a  general  rule,  the  religion  of  a 
people  is  ceremonial  in  inverse  propor- 
tion to  their  advance  in  knowledge  and 
civilization.  Among  rude  and  degraded 
nations  the  outward  and  visible  sign  is 
regarded  far  more  than  the  inward  and 
spiritual  grace.  Euskin  has  well  said 
that  the  social  and  moral  condition  of 
the  Alpine  populations  may  be  gauged 


by  the  amount  of  blood  on  the  crucifixes 
at  the  cross-roads.     There  is,  perhaps, 
no   country   in   the  world    where   the 
devout  Roman  Catholics  are  superior  in 
intelligence  to  the  devout  Protestants. 
The  preponderance  of  the  spiritual  ele- 
ment in  the  national  religion  of  Scotland 
is,  in  no   small   measure,   due   to  the 
canniness   of    her  inhabitants ;    while 
poor  Ireland  still  seeks  after  a  sign  as 
she  sought  after  one  in  the  days  of  St. 
Patrick.     Weak  human  nature  craves 
for  a  rite,  until  by  thought  and  effort 
it  has  attained  to  the  power  of  seeing 
God  through,  and  not  in,  his  creatures. 
Our  Lord  was  not  unmindful  of  this 
craving  when  He  bade  His  disciples,  in 
remembrance  of  Him,  do  as  He  had  done 
on  the  last  sad  night  in  that  large  upper 
room  within  the  city.     The  very  sim- 
plicity  which,  to   the  educated  mind, 
constitutes  the  chief  grace  and  virtue  of 
Protestantism,  renders  it  distasteful  to 
the  Oriental.     How  can  we  expect  that 
men  glutted  with  the  coarse  and  gro- 
tesque pomp  of  the  Brahminical  worship 
can  be  attracted  by  the  unadorned  ritual 
of  our  Church  1      How  can  we  expect 
that  men  who  have  been  encouraged  by 
their  priests  to  run  riot  in  debauchery 
and  crime  can  submit  to   bring   their 
bodies  into  subjection,  and  their  minds 
into  true  devotion  ]     What  is  there  in 
common  between   the   faith   of  Heber 
and  Martin  and  a  creed  which  enjoins 
suicide  and  self-mutilation,  prostitution 
and  murder ;  whose  monks  are  fakeers  ; 
whose  knights-errant  are  Thugs  ;    and 
whose   temples   are   little    better  than 
consecrated  brothels  1 

In  these  regions  the  Eomish  Church 
has  always  been  more  successful  than 
our  own,  for  she  has  ever  been  wont  to 
construe  with  considerable  latitude  the 
boast  of  St.  Paul,  and  to  make  herself 
all  things  to  all  men  with  a  versatility 
more  to  be  admired  than  approved. 
One  day  my  servant  came  to  me  in  high 
glee,  and  said  that,  as  he  was  passing  a 
church,  a  padre  who  was  standing  in 
the  doorway  had  given  him  a  gold 
mohur,  stamped  with  a  figure  of  the 
Queen,  and  told  him  to  come  to  Poojah 
that  afternoon.  On  inspection  the  gold, 


Christianity  in  India. 


487 


mohur  turned  out  to  be  a  gilt  copper 
medal  with  the  image  and  superscription 
of  the  Virgin  Mary.  I  had  the  curiosity 
to  visit  the  ceremony  to  which  Abdool 
had  been  invited,  and  found  it  in  all 
essential  points  neither  better  nor  worse 
than  an  ordinary  Hindoo  festival.  There 
were  some  huge  idols,  which  the  con- 
gregation appeared  to  appreciate  under 
the  titles  of  St.  Christopher  and  St. 
Lawrence  as  readily  as  if  they  had  been 
called  by  the  more  familiar  names  of 
their  own  mythology.  No  element  of 
Heathendom  was  wanting.  Torches 
were  flaring,  tomtoms  rumbling,  fana- 
tics howling,  policemen  bullying,  stray 
Europeans  forcing  their  way  through 
the  throng  by  dint  of  Anglo-Saxon 
energy  and  blasphemy.  Except  that 
the  incense  was  somewhat  better,  and 
the  priests  somewhat  cleaner,  I  might 
have  fancied  myself  in  the  Black  Town 
during  the  Doorga  Poojah.  It  was 
indeed  a  very  different  picture  from 
that  presented  by  a  gathering  of  native 
Protestants  —  from  the  white-washed 
walls,  the  modest  deal  benches,  the 
homely  tunes,  the  plain  black  and  white 
costume  of  the  officiating  clergyman, 
the  row  of  dull  brown  prayer-books 
inscribed  with  the  device  of  the  Society 
for  Promoting  Christian  Knowledge. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that,  if  we 
would  consent  to  return  to  the  system 
of  the  Church  in  past  ages,  we  might 
Christianize  the  Hindoos  as  fast  as  our 
clergymen  could  get  through  the  Minis- 
tration of  Baptism  to  such  as  are  of 
riper  years.  If  we  -were  to  entice  the 
great  chiefs  by  .liberal  grants  of  waste 
lands,  and  intimidate  them  with  threats 
of  fine  and  confiscation  ;  if  we  were  to 
attach  no  conditions  to  admission  into 
the  fold  save  the  mere  naked  rite  of 
baptism  ;  if  we  were  to  permit  the 
neophytes  to  indulge  to  their  hearts' 
content  in  lust,  and  perjury,  and  bang, 
and  litigation ;  if  we  were  to  wink  at 
their  marrying  a  plurality  of  wives 
during  life,  and  burning  their  favourites 
after  death ;  if  we  were  to  encourage 
them  to  smoke  opium  and  abstain  from 
beef,  to  class  Krishna  with  St.  John, 
and  Cali  with  the  Holy  Virgin — I  do 


not  hesitate  to  assert  that  we  might 
convert  Maharajas  by  the  dozen,  and 
Zemindars  by  the  hundred  :  and  the- 
populace  would  soon  follow  the  example 
of  their  natural  leaders.  But,  thank 
God,  we  have  not  so  learned  Christ. 
We  do  not  profess  to  do  evil  that  gooi 
may  come ;  least  of  all,  so  certain  an. 
evil  for  a  good  so  illusory.  Better  one 
true  convert  to  ten  thousand  heathen, 
than  a  whole  continent  of  mongrels, 
Brahmins  in  heart  and  in  deed,  and 
Christians  only  in  name. 

Our  missionaries  would  succeed  better 
if  they  were  in  certain  respects  inferior 
men.  According  to  one  theory  very 
generally  received,  the  nature  of  the 
land  in  India  does  not  repay  deep-soil 
ploughing ;  and  the  character  of  the. 
people  seems  to  resemble  that  of  the 
soil  which  they  till.  In  the  moral 
world,  as  well  as  the  agricultural,  work 
may  be  done  too  scientifically.  It  is  to. 
be  feared  that  we  are  using  tools  of  too 
fine  an  edge.  The  men  to  impress  and- 
influence  Oriental  populations  are  not 
scholars  and  gentlemen,  but  devotees.. 
The  mass  of  the  people  of  Hindoostan 
are  of  much  the  same  grade  intellectually 
and  morally  as  the  mass  of  the  Western 
populations  in  the  darkest  centuries  of 
the  Christian  era — those  centuries  which 
produced  such  an  abundant  crop  of 
saints  and  martyrs.  The  peasant  of 
Bengal  could  appreciate  the  self-humi- 
liation of  St.  Paul  of  Thebes,  the  self- 
torment  of  St.  Simeon  of  the  Pillar; 
but  logic  and  learning,  argument  and 
illustration,  are  yet,  and  will  long  be,  to 
him  but  the  dead  letter.  If  an  English 
clergyman  chose  to  stand  for  twenty 
years  at  a  stretch  on  the  top  of  the 
Ochterlony  monument,  or  take  up  his 
abode  under  a  cocoa-nut  tree  in  the 
Sunderbunds,  he  would  have  thousands 
of  worshippers  and  millions  of  admirers ; 
but  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  or  Doctor 
Gutlirie  might  preach  through  all  the 
cities  in  the  north  of  India  without 
making  two  dozen  proselytes.  In  what 
terms  can  you  appeal  to  the  conscience 
or  the  good  sense  of  men  who  canonize 
a  bloated  sensual  scoundrel  for  no  other 
reason  than  because  he  has  never  been 


488 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  XL 


•known  to  wash  himself  or  to  wear  a  rag 
of  clothing?  What  can  you  do  with 
people  who  see  virtue  and  merit  in  the 
performances  of  a  fakeer  ?  The  highest 
phase  of  earthly  existence,  according  to 
the  Menu  books,  is  the  contemplation 
for  seven  years  of  the  divine  essence  as 
represented  by  the  tip  of  your  own  nose. 
If  our  priests  would  conduct  the  service 
with  their  right  foot  held  over  their 
left  shoulder,  if  our  bishops  would 
Biake  their  visitations  by  rolling  along 
the  Grand  Trunk  Koad  from  one  station 
to  another,  we  should  soon  have  converts 
enough  and  to  spare ;  the  high  festivals 
of  our  religion  would  be  among  the 
most  popular  Poqjahs  of  the  year ;  our 
churches  would  reek  with  frankincense, 
and  glitter  with  the  offerings  of  wealthy 
baboos;  and  the  doors  would  be  too 
small  to  admit  the  same  painted,  drunken, 
perspiring,  yelling  mob  which  crowds 
the  temples  of  Juggernauth  and  Tripety. 

However,  it  is  possible  for  those  who 
recognise  this  defect  in  the  native  cha- 
racter to  make  a  worthy  use  of  their 
knowledge.  From  time  to  time  there 
have  been  men  who  have  not  hesitated 
to  sacrifice  comfort,  society,  so-called 
respectability,  to  the  chance  of  doing 
some  great  thing  for  the  cause  of  Christ. 
Sleeping  in  native  huts,  living  on  native 
food,  going  afoot  from  village  to  village 
through  the  sun  of  June  and  the  ex- 
halations of  September,  talking  of  Jesus 
to  the  ryots  in  the  field,  to  the  women 
at  the  well,  under  the  gipsy  tent  in  the 
lonely  jungle,  beneath  the  eaves  of  the 
coffee-shop  in  the  crowded  bazaar,  they 
have  shown  to  the  heathen,  and  shown 
not  in  vain,  that  a  Christian  apostle 
may  equal  a  Hindoo  eremite  in  en- 
durance and  devotion.  Such  a  man 
need  not  fear  the  rival  influence  of  the 
most  punctilious  Brahmin  or  the  most 
disgusting  fakeer.  "When  once  the  people 
of  the  country  have  learnt  to  revere 
him  as  one  who  courts  privation  and 
suffering,  his  humility  and  disinterested 
zeal  give  him  an  unspeakable  advantage 
over  the  ostentatious,  self-seeking  pro- 
fessors of  the  baser  religion. 

I  speak  not  my  own  opinion,  but  that 
cf  men  who  have  gained  by  long  ex- 


perience the  most  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  native  population,  when  I  say 
that  our  missionaries  will  never  obtain 
a  thorough  hold  on  the  Hindoo  mind 
until  they  renounce  that  way  of  life 
which  is  considered  essential  to  the 
health  of  the  European  in  this  climate. 
The  barbarous  people  around  us  refuse 
to  submit  their  belief  to  instructors 
who  live  in  spacious  houses  hung  with 
punkahs  to  cool  the  air,  and  muslin 
netting  to  keep  off  the  musquitoes ; 
who  eat  fish,  and  flesh,  and  fowl,  and 
drink  beer  and  wine ;  who  bathe  and 
change  their  linen  twice  in  every  twenty- 
four  hours.  We  are  well  aware  of  the 
devotion  of  these  our  countrymen.  We 
know  that  their  poor  little  luxuries 
only  render  this  country  something  less 
miserable  and  unwholesome  to  men 
brought  up  in  the  Sixth  Form  Rooms 
of  Kugby  and  Marlborough,  and  the 
quadrangles  of  Merton  and  Balliol.  But 
the  people  for  whose  sake  they  have 
come  into  willing  exile  understand  none 
of  these  things.  The  man  they  go  out  to 
the  wilderness  to  see  must  not  be  clothed 
in  soft  raiment.  He  must  carry  no  sil- 
ver in  his  purse,  nor  bread,  nor  change 
of  coat ;  but,  into  whatsoever  village  he 
enters,  he  should  abide  in  the  house  of 
the  most  worthy,  eating  and  drinking 
such  things  as  are  set  before  him — boiled 
rice,  and  peas,  and  coarse  river  fish, 
and  water  from  the  tank  ;  and  then  he 
need  not  fear  lest  he  should  find  occa- 
sion to  shake  the  dust  off  his  feet  for 
a  testimony  against  that  village.  Our 
Saviour  did  not  preach  abstinence  and 
self-mortification.  He  placed  no  merit 
in  fasting  or  penance.  But  he  knew 
that,  when  simple  souls  are  to  be  won,  it 
does  not  do  to  count  the  cost  too  closely. 
It  was  but  seldom  in  those  three  years 
that  the  Son  of  Man  had  where  to  lay 
His  head. 

Certain  societies  of  German  Lutherans 
have  obtained  a  remarkable  influence 
over  the  people  of  the  country.  These 
men  bear  up  the  battle  under  the  pres- 
sure of  the  most  abject  poverty,  and  a 
very  good  fight  they  make  of  it.  At 
Chupra,  the  children  of  these  goodfolk 
live  on  rice  and  curried  lentils  like  the 


Christianity  in  India. 


489 


young  Hindoos  among  whom  they  are 
brought  up.  The  parents  are  most 
thankful  if  the  collector  sends  them  a 
parcel  of  half-worn  white  trousers,  or  if 
the  judge's  wife  looks  up  some  frocks 
belonging  to  her  little  girl  who  sailed 
for  England  at  the  end  of  the  last  cold 
weather.  Very  touching  are  the  stories 
which  peep  through  the  records  of 
these  small  communities — how  brother 
Eriedrich  was  carried  off  by  the  epidemic 
of  March ;  and  brother  Bernard,  whom  we 
had  hoped  to  be  able  to  afford  to  send  to 
the  hills  during  the  rains,  sank  under 
a  third  attack  of  dysentery  in  the  last 
week  of  August.  But  the  lives  of  these 
men,  and  their  deaths,  are  not  without 
their  due  effect.  Talking  the  vernacular 
languages  with  admirable  fluency  and 
precision ;  sympathizing  with  the  sorrows 
and  joys  of  the  children  of  the  soil; 
fearing  nothing;  doubting  nothing; 
they  go  everywhere,  and  are  everywhere 
welcome.  A  friend  of  mine  was  present 
at  the  baptism  of  a  Brahmin  of  high 
rank,  who  had  been  convinced  by  the 
exertions  and  example  of  the  German 
missionaries.  The  proselyte  publicly 
renounced  his  religion  in  the  presence 
of  a  large  assembly  of  his  friends  and 
retainers  amidst  general  and  profound 
emotion.  When,  at  a  certain  stage  in 
the  ceremony,  he  snapped  with  his  own 
hands  the  Brahminical  cord  which  hung 
about  his  neck,  the  sacred  badge  of  his 
faith  and  grade,  a  long  and  deep  moan 
of  horror  and  wrath  ran  through  the 
multitude.  That  very  night  the  convert's 
house  was  burnt  to  the  ground. 

The  searching  and  incessant  oppres- 
sion to  which  a  native  Christian  is  sub- 
jected by  his  countrymen  at  present 
forms  an  insurmountable  impediment  to 
the  efforts  of  our  missionaries.  Among 
the  hardy  nations  of  the  North  of 
Europe,  persecution  which  stops  short 
of  extermination  would  seem  to  be  the 
most  favourable  condition  under  which 
a  young  religion  can  develope  itself.  But 
the  mild  and  flexible  nature  of  the 
Hindoo  shrinks  from  an  ordeal  which 
would  only  add  zest  to  the  religious 
emotions  of  a  Scotchman.  The  Eree 
Church  nowhere  counts  among  its  vota- 


ries so  large  a  proportion  of  the  popula- 
tion as  in  the  districts  where,  at  the 
period  of  the  secession,  the  secular  au- 
thority was  in  the  hands  of  violent 
opponents  of  the  movement.  In  a 
village,  where  the  attendance  at  the 
worship  of  the  Establishment  is  excep- 
tionally thin,  the  chances  are  that  you 
will  be  told,  on  inquiry,  that  the  father 
of  the  present  laird,  honest  man,  had 
always  steadily  refused  to  grant  a  site 
for  a  Free  Kirk.  But  it  may  be  ques- 
tioned whether  even  an  ardent  Eree 
Kirker  would  not  think  the  most  un- 
premeditated discourse,  from  the  mouth 
of  a  preacher  of  his  own  choosing, 
dearly  purchased  at  the  cost  of  the 
suffering  undergone  by  a  converted 
Hindoo.  The  poor  fellow  is  exposed  to 
a  subtle  and  constant  social  tyranny, 
which  might  well  break  a  heart  of 
sterner  stuff  than  his.  The  words, 
"  loss  of  caste,"  convey  to  an  English 
gentleman's  mind  no  more  terrible  idea 
than  that  of  marrying  his  laundress  ; 
while  to  an  English  lady  they  imply  the 
consequences  attached  to  an  elopement 
with  her  music-master.  But  they  have 
a  far  more  ominous  sound  in  the  ears 
of  a  Hindoo  Christian.  In  the  dark 
hour  of  obloquy  and  outrage  he  does 
not  possess  the  sweetest  and  [most  effec- 
tive of  consolations,  the  sympathy  of 
those  who  are  the  nearest  to  him,  and 
who  should  be  the  dearest.  The  Cove- 
nanter who  gave  testimony  to  the 
death  before  his  own  hearthstone  looked 
boldly  down  the  barrels  of  the  Southron 
carbines,  because  he  was  secure  of  the 
respect,  the  love,  the  compassion  of  his 
neighbours ;  because  his  widow  would 
cherish  the  memory  of  her  goodman  with 
proud  sorrow ;  because  his  children 
would  never  tire  of  telling  how  their 
sire  played  the  man  in  the  time  of  the 
great  troubles.  But  the  Hindoo  martyr 
has  no  more  bitter  foes  than  they  of 
his  own  household.  His  parents  disown 
him.  His  wife  is  taught  to  loathe  him. 
His  very  children  rise  up  and  call  him 
cursed.  It  would  be  vain  for  him  to  ask 
his  new  masters  to  suffer  him  to  go  and 
bury  his  father,  for  the  unconscious  form 
of  the  sire  would  almost  shrink  on  the 


490 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah :  Letter  XL 


funeral  pile  from  the  defiling  touch  of 
the  outcast  son.  He  has  not  with  whom 
to  eat  or  drink  ;  with  whom  to  sit  down 
or  stand  up  ;  with  whom  to  go  on  a  jour- 
ney or  rest  at  an  inn.  If  he  offers  to 
smoke  or  chat  with  the  loungers  in  the 
bazaar,  the  meanest  coolies  would  refuse 
to  squat  in  the  same  circle  as  the  Chris- 
tian. It  is  hard  to  be  unable  to  appear 
in  public  without  being  hailed  as  an 
eater  of  pig,  and  a  wearer  of  hats,  by 
men  with  whom  he  lived,  but  a  month 
ago,  in  intimate  converse.  It  is  hard  to 
be  pelted  through  the  street  of  the 
village  in  which  he  was  born  and  nur- 
tured with  showers  of  dried  mud  and 
broken  pottery,  and  unsavoury  and  most 
ungrounded  assertions  concerning  his 
female  connexions  of  many  generations 
back.  Such  a  trial  would  be  severe 
enough  for  the  most  strong-willed  Teu- 
ton ;  but  to  the  native,  whose  childish 
mind,  singularly  tenacious  of  associa- 
tions, dotes  upon  "  dustoor  "  or  custom, 
this  sudden  breach  of  all  the  ties  of 
family  and  social  life  is  especially 
painful. 

A  native  convert  of  rank  and  wealth 
may  perhaps  have  no  cause  to  dread 
personal  violence,  but  his  position  is 
none  the  less  most  trying  and  melan- 
choly. It  is  not  too  much  to  say,  that 
the  condition  of  an  English  barrister  or 
clergyman  who  had  turned  Brahmin 
would  be  enviable  compared  with  that 
of  a  Brahmin  who  had  turned  Chris- 
tian. If  it  was  to  be  announced  in 
all  the  daily  papers  that  a  peer  of  the 
realm  or  a  bishop  of  the  Church  in- 
tended to  submit  on  a  certain  day  to 
the  rite  of  circumcision,  and  publicly  to 
testify  his  adherence  to  the  Mahomme- 
dan  faith,  we  should  only  have  a  faint 
idea  of  the  horror,  the  scandal,  the  in- 
dignation occasioned  by  the  baptism  of 
a  rich  and  high-born  Hindoo.  In  fact, 
it  may  be  questioned  whether  a  swell 
who  had  adopted  the  Brahminical  creed 
would  not  find  his  position  in  society 
improved  by  his  conversion ;  whether 
his  betel-box  and  turban  would  not  be 
considered  essential  ingredients  in  every 
evening  party  of  note ;  whether  the 
beauties  of  the  season  would  not  treat 


him  to  the  nautch  of  his  adopted  country 
as  he  puffed  his  bubbling  hookah  among 
the  cushions  of  many  a  back  drawing- 
room  in  May-fair.  The  native  society 
of  India,  however,  has  not  yet  arrived 
at  such  a  pitch  of  civilization  as  to  con- 
sider singularity  synonymous  with 
fashion,  and  the  proselyte  must  be  pre- 
pared to  surrender  everything  which  he 
once  held  dear — the  company  of  his 
equals,  the  respect  of  his  inferiors, 
social  distinction,  home  affection.  Unless 
he  is  ready  to  own  whosoever  shall  do  * 
the  will  of  his  Father  which  is  in  Hea- 
ven as  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother, 
he  must  go  through  the  dreary  re- 
mainder of  life  uncheered  by  friendship 
and  unsoothed  by  love. 

The  penalty  attached  to  conversion  is 
so  awful,  the  loss  of  status  and  reputa- 
tion  so   certain,  that  the   majority   of 
converts  belong  to  that  class  which  has 
little  or  no  reputation  or  status  to  lose. 
The     missionaries     acknowledge    with 
grief    the  inferior   character  of   many 
among  their  congregations.      Small  as 
the  flock  is,  they  scorn  to  reckon  the 
black  sheep  among  the  valuable  stock. 
Mr.  Greaves,  of  Kishnagur,  says  :  "  By 
"  withdrawing  unwise  and  indiscriminate 
"  temporal  aids  from  our  Christians,  we 
"shall  be  able  much  better  to  discern 
"the  wheat  from  the  chaff.      Among 
'  our  people  there  are  not  a  few  on  whom 
'  it  is  worse  than  useless  to  spend  our 
'  time,  labour,  and  money.     They  never 
'  have  been  Christians,  but  in  name. 
'  The  pity  is  that  they  ever  received  the 
'  name."     Hence  arises  the  unfortunate 
prejudice  against  native  Christians,  so 
general  in  Anglo-Indian  society.     It  is 
a  positive  disadvantage  to  a  servant  who 
is  looking  for  an   engagement  to  give 
himself  out  as  a  Christian.     I  well  re- 
member hearing  some  members  of  the 
Civil  Service  discussing  the  identity  of 
a  Hindoo.     One  of  the  number,  a  most 
religious  and  estimable  man,  made  use* 
of  the  following  expression :  "  The  fellow 
"  I  mean  was  an  awful  blackguard.    He 
"  turned  Christian  ;  "  and  the  sentiment 
appeared   so   perfectly   natural   that  it 
passed  without  comment  either  from  the 
speaker  or  his  audience. 


Christianity  in  India. 


491 


There  remains  one  stumbling-block  in 
the  path  of  them  who  would  bear  to  the 
Hindoo  the  good  tidings  of  great  joy — a 
stumbling-block  which  we  have  placed 
there  with  our  own  hands,  and  which 
we  do  not  seem  in  a  hurry  to  remove. 
How  can  the  heathen  appreciate  the 
blessings  of  English  Christianity  while 
the  practice  of  English  Christians  is 
what  it  is  ?  Here  is  a  peasant  who,  under 
a  Hindoo  landlord,  has  lived  on  the  pro- 
duce of  a  plot  of  ground  which  has  been 
in  his  family  for  generations,  who  has 
paid  a  moderate  rent,  fixed  by  custom 
more  revered  than  any  law,  and  has 
learnt  under  the  mild  and  equitable  rule 
of  his  countrymen  to  respect  himself  as 
an  independent  yeoman.  The  estate  is 
purchased  by  an  Englishman,  who, 
bragging  all  the  while  of  Anglo-Saxon 
energy  and  public  spirit,  twists  to  the 
ruin  of  his  tenant  some  one  clause  in  a 
law  which  was  compiled  for  his  protec- 
tion ;  and  before  twelve  months  have 
passed  the  poor  fellow  is  a  homeless 
pauper.  With  what  face  can  an  Anglo- 
Saxon  missionary  preach  to  that  man 
in  the  name  of  the  Teacher  who  warned 
His  followers  to  lay  not  up  for  them- 
selves treasures  upon  earth  1  Here  is  a 
village,  whose  inhabitants,  time  out  of 
mind,  have  grown  indigo  for  a  Hindoo 
capitalist  with  profit  to  themselves  and 
satisfaction  to  their  employer.  An  Eng- 
lishman buys  the  factory — an  English- 
man, strong  in  the  consciousness  of  the 
great  principle  of  the  development  of 
the  resources  of  India — and  within  a 
few  short  years  the  thriving  little  com- 
munity finds  itself  changed  into  a  society 
of  poverty-stricken  hopeless  serfs,  bound 
to  their  new  masters  by  indissoluble 
bonds,  forged  by  unscrupulous  shrewd- 
ness and  selfish  foresight.  Let  an  Anglo- 
Saxon  evangelist  go  down  to  that  vil- 
lage, and  stand  under  the  ancient  peepul- 
tree  at  the  hour  of  the  evening  meal, 
and  proclaim  that  our  God  is  love,  and 
that  our  most  cherished  virtue  is  that 
charity  which  doth  not  behave  itself 
unseemly,  and  seeketh  not  her  own  ! 
Here  is  the  widow  of  a  poor  shepherd 
who  has  been  butchered  by  the  wanton 
violence  of  a  European  loafer,  and  whose 


cries  for  vengeance  are  answered  by  the 
statement  that  the  murderer  was  as 
respectable,  as  humane,  as  singularly 
amiable,  as  the  murderers  of  natives 
always  are  in  the  eyes  of  some  of 
our  countrymen,  and  by  the  complaint 
that  those  brutes  of  niggers  have  such 
delicate  spleens.  Go  to  her  and  tell  that 
our  religion  is  too  pure  to  take  count  of 
murder,  because  we  hold  that  whoso- 
ever is  angry  with  his  brother  without  a 
cause  is  in  danger  of  his  immortal  soul ! 

In  vain  do  the  missionaries  preach 
the  gospel  of  love,  and  humility,  and 
self-sacrifice,  as  long  as  the  Bengal 
Hurkwu  preaches  the  gospel  of  national 
hatred,  national  insolence,  and  national 
cupidity.  In  vain  do  one  class  of  our 
countrymen  call  the  converts  "Christian 
brethren,"  as  long  as  another  class  per- 
sist in  dubbing  them  "  damned  niggers." 
To  undertake  the  great  charge  of  govern- 
ing an  alien  population,  and  to  fulfil 
that  charge  by  abusing  our  subjects  as 
if  they  were  our  most  bitter  foes ;  to 
coin  their  sweat  into  rupees,  and  speak 
of  them  all  the  while  in  private  and 
public  as  a  pack  of  treacherous,  worth- 
less scamps  ;  to  revile  those  who  protect 
them  ;  to  hunt  down  and  fling  into  jail 
any  poor  missionary  who  may  strive  to 
interest  the  people  of  the  mother  country 
in  their  behalf — a  worthy  comment  this 
upon  the  words  of  Him  who  bade  us 
love  our  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse 
us,  and  do  good  to  them  who  requite 
that  good  with  hate  ! 

Even  in  those  cases  in  which  the 
errors  of  Hinduism  have  been  extir- 
pated by  a  liberal  education  there  seems 
to  be  little  or  no  disposition  to  admit 
the  truths  of  Christianity  in  their  place. 
The  most  ignorant  and  debased  ryot  is 
a  more  hopeful  subject  for  the  missionary 
than  a  young  Brahmin  loaded  with  prizes 
won  at  a  Christian  colllege,  who  talks 
like  Samuel  Johnson,  and  writes  like 
Addison,  and  will  descant  by  the  hour 
upon  the  distinction  between  Original 
Grace  and  Prevenient  Grace.  For  the 
Hindoo  mind  is  singularly  acute  and 
subtle,  and  dearly  loves  to  disport  it- 
self in  the  intricate  mazes  of  Western 
controversv.  The  cultivated  native  is. 


492 


Letters  from  a  Competition  Wallah:  Letter  XL 


irresistibly  attracted  by  the  curious  and 
complicated  theological  problems  which 
at  present  occupy  so  much  of  the  atten- 
tion of  all  our  most  earnest  men.     He 
regards  the  doctrines  of  Eternal  Punish- 
ment and  verbal  inspiration  much  as  the 
Christian    schoolmen    regarded   Plato's 
doctrine  of  ideas  ;  that  is  to  say,  as  a 
training-ground  for  the  intellect,  as  an 
excellent  field  for  mental  gymnastics. 
While  the  mass  of  the  people,  like  the 
Jews  of  old,  desire  a  sign,  the  upper 
classes  seek  after  wisdom  as  eagerly  and 
insatiably  as  the  Greeks  of  Athens  and 
Alexandria.     The  missionaries  have  not 
failed  to  observe  this  trait.     The  Rev. 
James  Vaughan,  of  Calcutta,  writes  : — 
'  Perhaps  the   saddest  feature   of    all 
'  which  strikes  us  in  dealing  with  the 
'  educated  classes  is  the  extent  to  which 
'  European  infidelity  influences   them. 
'  Newman  and  Parker  have  long  been 
'  household  words  with  them.    German 
'  and  English  rationalism  also  wonder- 
1  fully  strengthen  their  position  of  un- 
'  belief;   and  now  they  triumphantly 
"  point   to   a    mitred    head,   and   cry, 
"  '  Behold,    a    bishop    of    your    own 
"  church  cannot  believe   the  Bible  as 
"  inspired!'" 

The  nature  of  the  process  by  which 
the  weeds  of  Brahminism  are  rooted  out 
and  cleared  away  does  not  prepare  the 
ground  favourably  for  the  reception  of 
the  seed  of  Christianity.  The  most 
effective  spell  with  which  to  exorcise 
the  demons  of  the  Hindoo  mythology 
is  physical  science.  A  native  who  has 
taken  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine, 
or  who  has  learnt  at  the  Presidency 
College  all  that  can  be  taught  him  by  a 
crack  Cambridge  "Wrangler,  must  regard 
the  astronomy  and  geography  of  his  old 
religion  with  a  contempt  which  will 
very  soon  include  that  religion  itself. 
But,  when  he  has  surrendered  his  ancient 
creed  because  the  priests  of  that  creed 
are  at  strife  with  the  European  astrono- 
mers, is  he  likely  to  accept  a  new  creed 
whose  priests  are  at  strife  with  the  Euro- 
pean geologists  1  Until  our  clergymen 
make  their  peace  with  Huxley  they  must 
not  expect  to  meet  with  any  success 
among  the  educated  Hindoos.  To  aggra- 


vate the  evil,  the  leading  Anglo-Saxon 
journals  are  furious  partisans  of  orthodox 
geology.  The  Bengal  Hurlcaru  seems 
unable  to  make  up  its  mind  which  is  the 
most  heinous  crime — to  express  sym- 
pathy with  an  evicted  Bengalee  peasant, 
or  doubts  on  the  extent  of  the  Noachian 
Deluge."  The  doctrines  of  Sir  Charles 
Lyell  are  but  one  degree  less  damnable 
than  the  doctrines  of  Sir  Charles  Wood, 
and  the  name  of  Professor  Owen  is  only 
less  execrable  than  the  memory  of  Lord 
Canning.  So  that  there  occurs  the  ex- 
traordinary phenomenon  of  a  Hindoo 
journalist  praising  the  leading  geologists 
of  the  day  as  men  of  profound  learning 
and  acute  insight,  and  an  English  jour- 
nalist sneering  at  them  as  shallow,  con- 
ceited, impious  blockheads. 

It  is  most  unfortunate  that  the  pre- 
sent Governor  of  Madras  should  have 
so  warmly  and  openly  espoused  the 
cause  of  the  clergy  against  the  geolo- 
gists. When  a  man  who,  from  his  posi- 
tion and  ability,  holds  so  great  a  place 
in  the  eyes  of  India,  goes  out  of  his 
way  to  proclaim  that  the  dearest  inte- 
rests of  the  Church  are  incompatible 
with  the  newest  theories  of  Science,  his 
subjects  naturally  enough  trust  him  to 
the  extent  of  believing  that  it  is  impos- 
sible for  them  to  serve  two  masters 
between  whom  such  an  antipathy  exists, 
and  hasten  to  make  their  choice  between 
Science  and  the  Church.  And  how  can 
men  who  have  but  just  cast  off  one  faith, 
because  the  tenets  of  that  faith  are  in- 
consistent with  Physical  Truth,  accept 
another  faith  whose  tenets  are  declared, 
by  the  Englishman  who  but  lately  held 
the  highest  rank  in  our  Eastern  do- 
minions, to  be  inconsistent  with  what 
is  held  to  be  Physical  Truth  by  the 
most  eminent  savans  of  the  day  1  What 
is  now  passing  among  the  upper  classes 
in  India  is  an  admirable  illustration  of 
that  glorious  simile  by  which  a  great 
and  good  man  rebukes  those  who  stake 
the  truth  of  religion  on  the  event  of  a 
controversy  regarding  facts  in  the  phy- 
sical world.  "Like  the  Israelites  in 
"  their  battle  with  the  Philistines,  they 
"  have  presumptuously,  and  without 
"  warrant,  brought  down  the  ark  of  God 


Christianity  in  India. 


493 


"  into  the  camp  as  a  means  of  ensuring 
"  victory; — and  the  consequence  is,  that 
"  when  the  battle  is  lost,  the  ark  is 
"  taken." 

*  The   struggle  which  must  be  gone 
through  before  a  man  can  expel  a  crowd 
of  false,  but  cherished,  opinions,   and 
abandon  a  host  of  idle,   but  familiar, 
ceremonies,  is  so  intense  and  painful, 
as  to  leave  the  mind  languidly  incredu- 
lous, and,  for  a  time  at  least,  incapable 
of  new  and  prolonged  exertion  ;  and  the 
exertion  of  ascertaining,  sifting,  and  ac- 
cepting the   varied   and  involved  doc- 
trines of  English  Protestantism,  is  no 
slight  one.     For  Protestantism  insists 
that  her  doctrines  shall  be  judged  sepa- 
rately on  their  own  merits,  and  finally 
swallowed  in  the  lump — a  process  which 
requires  a  peculiar  conformation  of  in- 
tellect,  which,    unfortunately,    is    rare 
indeed.     If  we  put  the  Bible  into  the 
hands  of  a  man  who  was  brought  up  a 
Brahmin,  and  now  has  no  faith  at  all, 
can  we,  humanly  speaking,  be  confident 
that  such  a  man  will, evolve  from  the 
pages  of  the  Sacred  Book  exactly  the 
creed  which  we  profess  ?     Will  he,  after 
an  unprejudiced  study  of  the  Word  of 
God,  be  absolutely  certain  to  light  upon 
all  the  doctrines  held  by  the  Church  of 
England,   and    miss   all   the   doctrines 
which  she  eschews  ?     Will  he,  without 
fail,  hit  off  exactly  that  theory  of  the 
Eternity  of  Punishment  which  will  put 
him  out  of  danger  of  the  Council — ex- 
actly that  distinction  between  the  con- 
version of  the  Godhead  into  flesh  and  the 
taking  of  the  Manhood  into  God  which 
will  put  him  out  of  danger  of  hell-fire? 
Rome  has  this  immeasurable  advantage, 
that  she  can  say  to  the  weary,  wounded 
soul :    "  I   am  the   true   and    ancient 
'  Church, whose  authority  has  descended 
'  in  unbroken  stream  from  the  rock  on 
'  which  Christ  himself  built.     Do  not 
'  trouble  yourself  to  weigh  and  investi- 
'  gate  this  rite  and  that  tenet.   Perform 
'  faithfully   whatever  I   bid ;    believe 
'  humbly  whatever  I  enjoin ;  and  it  can- 
'  not  but  be  well  with  you.    Come  unto 
'  me,  "all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
'  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Beau- 
tifully, indeed,  has  this  idea  been  ex- 


pressed by  one  in  whose  conversion  she 
may  well  take  pride : — • 

"  What  weight  of  ancient  witness  can  prevail 
If  private  reason  holds  the  public  scale  ? 
But,  gracious  God,  how  well  dost  Thou 

provide 

For  erring  judgments  an  unerring  guide  ! 
Thy  throne  is  darkness  in  the  abyss  of  light> 
A  blaze  of  glory,  that  forbids  the  sight. 
Oh,  teach  me  to  believe  Thee  thus  concealed, 
And  seek  no  farther  than  Thyself  revealed  ; 
But  her  alone  for  my  director  take 
Whom  Thou  hast  promised  never  to  forsake ! 
My  thoughtless  youth  was  winged  with  vain 

desires  ; 
My  manhood,  long  misled  by  wandering 

fires, 
Followed   false  lights  ;   and,  when   their 

glimpse  was  gone, ' 
My  pride  struck  out  new  sparkles  of  her 

own. 

Such  was  I,  such  by  nature  still  I  am  ; 
Be   Thine   the   glory,  and  be  mine  the 

shame ! " 

The  immediate  prospects  of  missionary 
enterprise  in  India  are,  indeed,  discou- 
raging ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  there 
is  no  hope  for  the  future.  However 
little  we  may  have  succeeded  in  doing 
towards  introducing  Christianity,  we 
have  done  a  great  deal  towards  driving 
out  Brahminism.  The  fresh  air  of  Euro- 
pean civilization  circulates  freely  through 
every  pore  of  this  vast  community.  That 
gross  and  grotesque  system  of  religion 
which  has  prevailed  through  so  many 
ages  of  semi-barbarism,  cannot  hold  its 
ground  in  the  face  of  our  art  and  science, 
our  energy  and  good  sense,  our  liberal 
views  and  purer  morality.  The  gigantic 
edifice  of  class  exclusiveness  is  shaken  to- 
the  very  foundation.  The  Government 
School  had  already  done  much,  and  tho 
railroads  seem  likely  to  complete  the 
work.  A  Brahmin  who  travels  from 
Burdwan  to  Calcutta  cheek  by  jowl  with 
a  butcher,  in  order  to  see  his  son  go  up- 
to  receive  a  prize  at  the  Presidency  Col- 
lege in  company  with  the  offspring  of- 
a  sweeper,  is  likely  to  go  home  with 
some  new  ideas  on  the  question  of  caste. 
Striking  symptoms  of  the  great  change- 
which  is  working  itself  out  in  the  minds 
of  men  meet  us  at  every  turn.  The  ladies 
of  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  respected 
Hindoo  houses  in  Calcutta  lately  ex.- 
changed  visits  with  the  families  of  tho 


494 


Letters  from-  a  Competition  Wallah  :  Letter  XL 


leading  English  public  servants  ;  and  at 
the  Agricultural  Exhibition  of  Alipore 
a  day,  or  rather  a  night,  will  be  set  apart 
for  the  native  women  who  can  prevail 
on  their  lords  to  trust  them  away  from 
the  Zenana  amongst  Christian  prize- 
cattle  and  steam-ploughs.  A  school  has 
been  set  up  for  female  children,  to  which 
Brahmins,  of  high  consideration  among 
their  fellows,  have  promised  to  send 
their  daughters  ;  and  the  more  enlight- 
ened natives  are  agitating  for  the  abo- 
lition of  the  time-honoured  custom  which 
condemns  the  Hindoo  widow  to  life-long 
solitude  and  retirement,  than  which  the 
genial  and  exciting  martyrdom  of  the 
Suttee  would  be  hardly  more  terrible. 

The  missionaries  have  noticed  this 
state  of  things,  particularly  in  the  more 
immediate  neighbourhood  of  European 
influences.  Mr.  Vaughan  says:  "I  have 
'  at  different  times  preached  east,  west, 
'  north,  and  south  of  Calcutta,  and  the 
'  same  grand  features  strike  one  every- 
where. Hinduism  is  dying ;  yea,  is 
'  well-nigh  dead,  as  respects  the  hold 
'  which  it  has  upon  the  minds  of  the 
'  people.  It  is  no  longer  the  battle- 
'  ground.  During  tbe  whole  tour,  I 
'  have  hardly  met  with  a  man  who 
'  stood  forth  as  its  champion ! " 

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  an 
educated  Hindoo  almost  inevitably  be- 
comes a  Deist.  Even  the  great  sect  of 
Dissenters  who  began  by  professing  to 
extract  a  rational  religion  from  the  sacred 
(books  of  the  Veda,  soon  gave  over  play- 
ling  Niebuhr,  and  confined  their  belief 
I  to  the  pure  and  eternal  God.  The  intro- 
!  duction  of  western  learning  has  produced 
I  upon  the  Hindoo  religion  the  same  effect 
/  that  was  produced  upon  the  ancient 
classical  creeds  by  the  progress  of  civili- 
zation. The  leading  men  of  old  Rome 
preserved  as  much  of  the  outward  forms 
of  Paganism  as  their  social  standing 
and  comfort  might  demand.  They  can- 
vassed vigorously  for  the  offices  of  Pon- 
tiff and  Flamen.  In  their  parliamentary 
harangues  they  used  the  Immortal  Gods 
copiously  enough  for  purposes  of  allu- 
sion and  appeal.  They  never  hesitated 
to  accept  a  legacy  on  account  of  the 
sacrifices  and  ceremonies  with  which  it 


might  be  saddled.  They  drove  triumphal 
cars  along  the  Via  Sacra,  and  annual 
nails  into  the  wall  of  the  temple  of 
Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus.  But,  in 
secret,  their  allegiance  was  given  to  the 
Academy,  the  Porch,  the  Garden,  or  the 
Tub.  When  the  day  came  to  dine 
their  brother  augurs,  it  may  be  doubted 
whether  the  conversation  ever  turned 
on  the  mysteries  of  the  art.  It  would 
be  much  if  the  master  of  the  feast 
uttered  the  name  of  some  favoured 
deity  by  way  of  preface  to  the  first 
toast,"  as  he  dashed  along  the  tesse- 
lated  pavement  a  libation  of  wine  drawn 
from  a  cask  which  remembered  the 
Marsian  war — if,  indeed,  any  good 
liquor  had  succeeded  in  escaping  the 
notice  of  Spartacus  the  Contraband. 
When  Lentulus  and  Atticus  entertained 
their  colleagues  of  the  Sacred  College, 
the  talk  ran  fast  and  free  concerning 
the  nature  of  pain  and  pleasure,  the 
Acatalepsy  of  Arcesilaus,  and  the  Cata- 
leptic Phantasm  of  Zeno.  The  Wheel 
of  Ixion,  or  the  Elysian  Fields,  were 
matters  which  concerned  such  men  as 
little  as  the  Jewish  Sabbath  or  the  pro- 
phecies of  Isis.  In  the  same  manner, 
a  Brahmin  is  unwilling  to  surrender  the 
estimation  which  he  holds  in,  the  eyes  of 
his  countrymen  in  virtue  of  his  religious 
rank  and  dignity.  That  he  may  not 
shock  his  weaker  brethren,  he  continues 
to  perform  the  family  rites,  to  wear  the 
prescribed  dress,  and  abstain  from  the 
forbidden  meats.  At  the  great  festivals 
he  keeps  open  house,  and  fills  his  corri- 
dors with  garlands  and  torches,  and  hires 
the  crack  dancer  from  Eajpootana  for 
five  hundred  rupees  and  a  pair  of  Cash- 
mere shawls.  But  at  heart  he  cares  for 
none  of  these  things.  His  creed  is  drawn, 
not  from  the  rolls  of  the  Veda,  but  from 
the  pages  of  Locke,  and  Adam  Smith, 
and  Buckle.  As  Cicero  said  of  the 
augurs  of  his  day,  it  is  hard  to  conceive 
how  one  Calcutta  Brahmin  can  look 
another  in  the  face  without  a  smile. 

And  herein  lies  the  best  hope  for 
those  whose  desire  is  set  upon  Chris- 
tianizing India.  JS"ot  in  our  lifetime, 
nor  mayhap  in  the  lifetime  of  our  sons, 
will  the  good  work  come  to  its  accom- 


.Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


495 


plishment.  It  will  require  many  a  de- 
cade to  batter  down  the  stronghold  of 
tradition,  and  cut  away  the  barriers  of 
caste.  When  that  end  is  attained ; 
when  a  new  generation  has  arisen  that 
knows  not  Vishnu ;  when  men  who 
have  emancipated  themselves  from  the 
trammels  of  Brahminisni  rear  up  sons 
who  know  of  those  trammels  only  by 
hearsay  ;  then,  if  that  crisis  finds  us  still 
in  possession  of  the  reins  of  government, 
we  may  trust  that  the  majority  of  cul- 
tivated Hindoos  will  not  be  averse  to 
accept  the  creed  of  their  rulers. 

To  educate,  to  enlighten,  to  strike  off 
the  fetters  of  custom  and  superstition,  this 
is  the  grand  duty  the  fulfilment  of  which 
we  must  further  by  all  honest  means. 
Colleges  and  railroads,  libraries  and 
newspapers,  national  justice  and  modera- 
tion, national  charity  and  conscientious- 
ness— such  are  the  forces  with  which 
the  battle  of  Truth  is  at  present  to  be 
fought.  The  time  will  surely  come 
when  we  may  bring  up  our  reserves  with 
happy  effect ;  but  that  time  is  not  now, 


and  to  anticipate  the  favourable  moment 
would  be  to  secure  us  nothing  save  disap- 
pointment, chagrin  and  despondency.  Let 
us  not  despair  because  India  is  not  yet 
ripe  ;  because,  being  men,  we  must  stoop 
to  human  means ;  because  the  wind  blow- 
eth  where  it  listeth,  and  not  where  we 
list.  The  world  is  so  ordered  that  we  can- 
not Christianize  the  heathen  of  Bengal 
as  the  Apostles  Christianized  the  heathen 
of  Greece  and  Asia  Minor.  To  none  of 
us  is  given  the  working  of  miracles,  nor 
prophecy,  nor  discerning  of  spirits,  nor 
divers  kinds  of  tongues.  We  must 
labour  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  given 
us  to  labour,  or  not  at  all.  And  at  those 
times  when  our  soul  grows  faint  within 
us,  when  the  toil  seems  excessive,  and 
the  end  remote  and  doubtful,  we  may 
comfort  ourselves  with  the  thought  that, 
though  there  be  differences  of  admini- 
strations, there  is  the  same  Lord,  and, 
though  there  be  diversity  of  operations, 
it  is  the  same  God  that  worketh  all  in 
all.  Yours  ever, 

H.  BBOUGHTON. 


INAUGURAL    LECTURE    ON    POLITICAL    ECONOMY, 

(Delivered  'before  the  ^University  of  Cambridge,  February  3rd,  1864). 


BY   HENRY    FAWCETT. 


IN  an  inaugural  lecture  on  Political 
Economy,  I  can  hope  to  do  little  more 
than  give  a  general  description  of  the 
laws  or  truths  which  the  science  pro- 
fesses to  expound.  I  shall  endeavour 
to  point  out  the  only  method  of  investi- 
gation which  will  enable  us  satisfactorily 
to  prove  the  principles  of  this  science. 
I  also  hope  to  remove  some  of  the 
popular  prejudice  which  too  often  is 
felt  towards  Political  Economy. 

Political  Economy,  as  you  are  doubt- 
less aware,  is  most  usually  defined  to  be 
the  science  which  investigates  the  laws 
which  regulate  the  production  and  dis- 
tribution of  wealth.  A  moment's  con- 
sideration will  at  once  show  you  that 
this  definition  is  much  too  vague.  The 


words  employed  in  it  are  so  general  that, 
unless  a  distinct  signification  is  given  to 
them,  this  so-called  definition  only 
serves  to  convey  a  somewhat  misty  idea 
of  the  scope  and  aims  of  the  science. 
For  instance,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say 
that  almost  every  discovery  in  physical 
science  has  exerted  a  very  decided  in- 
fluence both  upon  the  production  and 
the  distribution  of  wealth.  This  fact  may 
be  illustrated  by  a  profusion  of  examples. 
Numerous  philosophers,  amongst  whom 
Watt  achieved  the  most  signal  success, 
gradually  succeeded  in  applying  the  ex- 
pansive force  of  steam  as  a  motive 
power  of  almost  universal  applicability, 
and  we  all  know  that,  as  the  steam- 
engine  has  thus  been,  step  by  step, 


496 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


"brought  to  its  present  state  of  perfection, 
an  influence  of  stupendous  magnitude 
has  been  exerted  upon  the  production 
and  the  distribution  of  wealth.  This  ques- 
tion, therefore,  is  at  once  suggested  :  Is 
it  intended  that  Political  Economy,  be- 
cause it  investigates  those  laws  which 
determine  the  production  and  distribu- 
tion of  wealth,  should  explain  all  those 
discoveries  which  have  enabled  the 
steam-engine  so  powerfully  to  promote 
the  efficiency  of  man's  industry  ?  Now, 
it  must  be  manifest  that  Political 
Economy  cannot  embrace  such  investiga- 
tions as  these ;  for,  if  it  did  do  so,  it  would 
be  almost  an  encyclopedia  of  human 
knowledge.  It  therefore  becomes  neces- 
sary to  place  some  restrictions  upon  the 
meaning  of  the  general  terms  which  are 
employed  in  the  ordinary  definition  of 
this  science.  We  are  able  to  obtain^this 
necessary  restriction,  if  in  a  treatise  on 
Political  Economy  all  the  physical  cir- 
cumstances which  affect  the  production 
and  distribution  of  wealth  are  assumed 
to.  be  known.  Thus,  Political  Economy 
must  not  be  permitted  to  encroach  upon 
the  domain  of  chemistry  in  order  to 
discuss  whether  this  or  that  manure 
may  be  the  most  efficient  fertilizer, 
although  the  national  wealth  and  the 
general  economy  of  a  nation  may  be 
greatly  influenced  by  cultivating  the 
land  in  such  a  manner  as  to  raise  the 
maximum  of  produce.  Political  Economy 
assumes  the  ascertained  results  of  chem- 
istry, and  then  undertakes  the  important 
.task  of  showing  how  the  interests  of 
different  classes  of  the  community  will 
be  affected,  and  how  also  the  price  and 
value  of  various  commodities  may  be 
changed  by  any  discovery  in  agricultural 
chemistry  which  may  cause  an  increase 
in  the  productiveness  of  the  soil.  If, 
therefore,  we  bear  these  considerations 
in  mind,  we  are  able  to  enunciate  a 
more  precise  definition,  for  we  can  now 
say  that  Political  Economy  investigates 
the  production  as  well  as  the  distri- 
bution of  wealth,  the  physical  facts 
which  affect  this  production  and  dis- 
tribution being  assumed.  Let  not  my 
hearers  suppose  that  the  limitation 
which  is  thus  imposed  upon  the  scope 


of  our  science  detracts  from  its  utility 
and  importance,  by  restricting  it  within 
a  too  narrow  frame.  It  will  soon  be 
found  that  Avithin  this  boundary  pro- 
blems are  to  be  solved  and  questions 
discussed  almost  unlimited  in  number 
and  of  surpassing  interest  and  import- 
ance. This  will  be  immediately  per- 
ceived if  we  take  a  single  example,  and 
dwell  for  one  moment  upon  some  of  the 
salient  features  in  the  material  con- 
dition of  such  a  country  as  England. 

The  wonderful  progress  in  the  wealth 
of  our  country  has  been  vaunted  so  fre- 
quently that  it  has  become  as  familiar 
as  a  household  word.  During  the  pre- 
sent century  the  inventions  of  Watt, 
of  Arkwright,  and  of  many  others  who 
have  become  immortalized  in  the  annals 
of  physical  discovery,  have  so  powerfully 
aided  the  development  of  the  material 
resources  of  this  country  that  we  have 
around  us,  on  every  side,  abundant 
proofs  of  the  vast  accumulation  of 
national  wealth.  But  to  this  glowing 
picture  there  is  a  gloomy  and  sorrowful 
background.  A  large  section  of  the 
people  still  live  in  depressing  poverty, 
which  too  frequently  brings  acute  phy- 
sical suffering,  and  which  stints  the 
development  of  those  intellectual  facul- 
ties which  give  the  highest  nobility  and 
greatest  happiness  to  man.  Here,  then, 
is  one  problem  amongst  countless  others 
for  Political  Economy  to  solve  !  Why 
does  not  constantly  increasing  wealth 
bring  with  it  a  happier  distribution  1 
How  is  it  that  the  rich,  and  those  who 
have  already  enough,  are  still  becoming 
richer,  whilst  at  the  same  time  the 
poverty  of  those  who  are  miserably  poor 
remains  undiminished1?  This  is  a  problem 
which  Political  Economy  can  readily 
explain.  Before  a  cure  can  be  effected 
the  remedy  must  be  known  ;  and,  if 
Political  Economy  by  discovering  the 
remedy  should  assist  the  cure,  this  one 
great  purpose  achieved  ought  to  make 
the  science  welcomed  and  respected  by 
every  one  who  has  a  particle  of  sym- 
pathy for  his  fellow  man.  I  will  not 
here  further  stay  to  vindicate  the  utility 
and  importance  of  this  study  ;  I  shall 
presently  have  to  dwell  on  this  topic 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


497 


again,  when  I  refer  to  the  antipathy 
which  is  sometimes  expressed  towards 
Political  Economy  by  those  whom  we 
should  scarcely  expect  to  participate  in 
an  ignorant  popular  prejudice  ;  but  as 
I  have  now,  and  as  I  hope  with  suffi- 
cient exactness,  defined  the  scope  and 
objects  of  the  science,  I  will  next  pro- 
ceed to  consider  the  method  of  investi- 
gation which  ought  to  be  pursued  in 
order  to  establish  its  principles. 

A  discussion  as  to  the  philosophic 
method  which  ought  to  be  applied  to 
any  science  must  always  be  reduced  to 
an  inquiry  as  to  whether  its  principles 
can  be  most  successfully  and  completely 
established  by  a  deductive  or  by  an  in- 
ductive method  of  investigation.  I  need 
scarcely  tell  you  that  the  majority  or 
the  most  distinguished  writers  on  Poli- 
tical Economy — such  as  Hume,  Adam 
Smith,  Malthus,  Eicardo,  and  Mill,  as 
•well  as  J.  B.  Say,  who  is,  certainly,  the 
most  accomplished  of  French  political 
economists — have  all  treated  the  science 
deductively.  The  late  Richard  Jones, 
the  successor  of  Malthus  at  Hailey- 
bury,  is  almost  the  only  political  econo- 
mist of  any  eminence  who  has  advocated 
the  adoption  of  the  inductive  method. 
His  works  are  fragmentary.  Public 
attention  has,  however,  been  again 
directed  to  them,  from  the  fact  that 
they  have  been  lately  collected  and 
edited  by  Dr.  "Whewell.  He,  of  course, 
can  speak  with  almost  unequalled  autho- 
rity on  every  question  concerning  induc- 
tive philosophy  j  and  he  has  expressed 
a  most  positive  opinion  that  Mr.  Jones 
has  adopted  the  correct  method,  and 
that  all  those  writers  who  produce  syste- 
matic treatises  on  Political  Economy, 
based  on  deductive  reasoning,  are  in 
error.  I  will  endeavour,  as  briefly  and 
as  candidly  as  I  can,  to  state  the  leading 
arguments  which  are  advanced  by  these 
rival  schools ;  and  I  will  then,  with 
confidence,  leave  you  to  judge  between 
them. 

Even  if  I  had  the  time  this  would  be 
scarcely  the  proper  occasion  to  describe 
the  general  points  of  difference  between 
the  deductive  and  the  inductive  method 
of  reasoning.  I  had,  perhaps,  better 

No.  51 — VOL.  ix. 


attempt  to  show,  by  an  example,  how 
the  principles  of  Political  Economy 
must  be  established  according  as  the 
one  or  the  other  method  is  adopted. 
Suppose,  for  instance,  we  wished  to 
enunciate  any  general  maxim  with 
regard  to  the  effect  of  protective  tariffs 
on  national  wealth.  The  political  econo- 
mist who  should  reason  deductively 
would  start  with  the  simple  hypothesis 
— that  man  prefers  a  larger  gain  to  a 
smaller  one.  From  this  first  simple 
hypothesis  various  principles  can  be 
established ;  and,  at  length,  a  sufficient 
number  of  principles  will  be  laid  down 
to  demonstrate  the  proposition  that  a 
protective  duty  must  be  detrimental  to 
national  wealth.  If,  however,  Political 
Economy  is  treated  as  an  inductive 
science,  an  entirely  different  method  of 
investigation  must  be  adopted.  The 
proof  of  a  general  principle  must  then 
be  based  upon  experience,  or,  in  other 
words,  must  rest  upon  a  collection  of  par- 
ticular facts.  Thus,  it  may  be  said,  A  and 
B  are  two  countries  which  have  no  pro- 
tective duties ;  C  and  D,  on  the  other 
hand  have  protective  tariffs.  A  and  B 
advance  in  wealth  much  more  rapidly 
than  C  and  D  ;  therefore  it  follows  that 
protective  duties  diminish  the  wealth  of 
a  nation.  But  mark  how  this  method 
would  be  at  fault,  if  it  were  to  be  found 
that  another  country  E,  whose  tariff  was 
quite  as  protective  as  that  of  either  C  or 
D,  should  advance  in  wealth  as  rapidly 
as  either  of  the  two  free-trade  countries 
A  and  B.  Those  who  have  not  studied 
Political  Economy  no  doubt  generally 
reason  in  this  inductive  way,  when  they 
talk  about  economic  questions ;  and 
consequently  they  may,  at  any  time, 
be  placed  in  the  dilemma  which  has 
just  been  suggested.  The  English  free- 
trader, for  instance,  will  confidently  sav,r 
that  the  remarkable  progress  of  this 
country  in  wealth  since  1848  exemplifies 
the  advantage  to  be  realised  by  the  aboli- 
tion of  protective  duties.  The  American 
protectionist  may  meet  him  with  an 
opposite  experience,  and  may,  with  a 
similar  show  of  reason,  assert  that  his 
own  country  with  a  protective  tariff  has, 
advanced  in  wealth  as  rapidly  as  Engl 


498 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


It  is  easy  to  understand  that,  in  all  those 
departments  of  knowledge  in  which  ex- 
periments cannot  be  applied,  reasoning 
upon  the  experience  of  special  facts  will 
lead  us  into  inextricable  difficulty,  such 
as  that  we  have  just  pointed  out.  Any 
phenomenon,  such  as  an  advance  in 
national  wealth,  is  due  to  a  great  variety 
of  different  causes.  Thus,  from  many  other 
circumstances  which  will  produce  such  an 
effect,  we  may  select  three  :  a  tariff  free 
from  protective  duties  ;  an  improvement 
in  the  means  of  communication ;  and 
a  large  expanse  of  fertile  land  always 
available,  to  supply  an  increasing  popu- 
lation with  cheap  food.  The  two  first 
of  these  three  causes  have  been  in  active 
operation  in  England  for  the  last  fifteen 
years,  and  have  exerted  a  most  powerful 
influence  in  augmenting  the  national 
wealth.  The  last  two  of  these  three 
causes,  namely,  improvements  in  the 
means  of  communication,  and  an  almost 
unlimited  supply  of  fertile  land,  have 
produced  an  equally  powerful  effect  in 
advancing  the  national  wealth  of  Ame- 
rica. It  therefore  appears  that  any 
phenomenon  concerning  the  wealth  of 
a  nation  is  due  to  a  great  variety  of 
causes,  all  acting  simultaneously,  and 
many  of  them  exerting  opposite  influ- 
ences, and  thus  tending  to  counteract 
each  other ;  hence  it  follows,  that  it  is 
possible  correctly  to  ascertain  what  is 
the  precise  effect  due  to  any  one  of  these 
causes,  by  observing  a  phenomenon 
which  it  has  only  partly  contributed  to 
produce,  unless  it  were  possible  to  select 
two  instances,  which  should  resemble 
each  other  in  every  respect,  with  the 
exception  that  the  cause  whose  effect  we 
are  endeavouring  to  ascertain,  should  be 
absent  in  the  one  instance  and  present 
in  the  other.  Experience  and  observa- 
tion would  conclusively  solve  the  pro- 
blem of  protective  duties  if  two  coun- 
tries could  be  found  whose  whole  eco- 
nomy was  identical  with  the  exception 
that  the  one  had  a  protective  and  the 
other  a  free-trade  tariff.  If  it  should  be 
observed  that  the  latter  country  advanced 
in  wealth  more  rapidly  than  the  former, 
t  would  be  legitimate  to  conclude  that 
protection  impeded  the  production  of 


wealth.  In  all  those  sciences  in  which 
the  inductive  method  has  achieved  such 
brilliant  results,  the  skilful  investigator 
can  create  an  experiment  exactly  adapted 
to  evolve  the  truth  or  principle  he  is 
seeking.  The  chemist,  for  instance,  if 
he  wishes  to  ascertain  the  effect  of 
oxygen  on  any  combination  of  elements, 
can  easily  take  two  compounds  exactly 
similar  in  every  respect,  except  that 
oxygen  is  absent  in  the  one  and  present 
in  the  other,  and  if  he  finds  that  the 
former  compound  is  more  combustible 
than  the  other,  he  can  at  once  conclude 
that  oxygen  assists  combustion.  But, 
as  we  have  before  said,  a  political  econo- 
mist has  none  of  these  resources  at  his 
command.  He  cannot  manipulate  nations 
at  his  will — he  cannot  freely  take  away 
or  add  this  or  that  circumstance  to  a 
society,  and  observe  the  consequences 
which  ensue.  But,  although  I  have  been 
anxious  to  point  out  that  the  principles 
of  Political  Economy  must  be  ascertained 
by  deductive  reasoning  from  some  simple 
hypothesis,  that  they  cannot  be  esta- 
blished by  arguing  up,  as  it  were,  from 
special  facts,  yet  let  it  not  for  one 
moment  be  supposed  that  the  political 
economist  ought  to  be  a  mere  abstract 
thinker,  isolating  himself  as  a  closet 
student  from  all  the  social  phenomena 
with  which  he  is  surrounded,  and  the 
laws  of  which  it  is  his  business  to 
explain.  Those  political  economists  who 
have  committed  this  error — and  they  are 
not  a  few — have  done  much  to  impede 
the  progress  and  to  diminish  the  influ- 
ence of  their  science.  The  general  public 
are  prone  to  say,  "We  have  little  concern 
with  the  speculations  of  these  men,  who 
live  in  a  high  abstract  region  of  their 
own.  We  want  political  economists, 
not  to  indulge  in  ideal  investigations, 
but  to  throw  some  light  on  the  facts 
of  every-day  life."  To  this  desire, 
which  is^so  frequently  either  tacitly 
or  explicitly  expressed,  a  political  eco- 
nomist is  certainly  bound  to  pay  par- 
tictilar  deference.  The  principles  of  his 
science  will  never  receive  general  accep- 
tation, unless  they  are  illustrated  and 
also  verified  by  those  facts  concerning 
the  economy  of  a  nation,  with  which 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


499 


various  sections  of  the  community  may 
happen  to  be  most  familiarized.  I  shall 
therefore  endeavour  to  enforce  the  prin- 
ciples which  it  will  he  my  duty  to  ex- 
pound by  showing  how  they  explain  the 
economic  phenomena  of  every-day  life. 

Political  Economy  requires  to  be 
popularized,  perhaps,  more  than  any 
other  branch  of  knowledge.  No  science 
is  more  frequently  talked  about ;  none  is 
so  intimately  connected  with  the  busi- 
ness of  life  ;  and  yet,  perhaps,  none  is  so 
imperfectly  understood.  Those  who  dis- 
course on  geology  and  mathematics 
usually  have  some  knowledge  of  these 
sciences  ;  but  you  can  scarcely  listen  to 
a  conversation  at  a  dinner-table,  you 
can  scarcely  read  an  article  in  the  daily 
press,  or  peruse  the  speech  of  a  states- 
man, without  finding  that  some  glaring 
economic  fallacy  is  unconsciously  asserted 
and  recklessly  repeated.  For  instance, 
it  is  impossible  for  the  slightest  progress 
to  be  made  in  the  science  without  under- 
standing the  nature  and  functions  of 
capital ;  and  there  is  not  a  more  funda- 
mental proposition  concerning  capital 
than  that  it  is  a  fund  from  which  the 
wages  of  the  labourers  are  paid.  Capital 
is  the  result  of  saving — consequently 
any  circumstance  which  promotes  the 
saving  of  wealth  will  pro  tanto  increase 
the  capital  of  the  country,  and  will,  there- 
fore, also  augment  the  wage-fund  of  the 
country.  It  therefore  follows  that  the 
remuneration  of  the  labourer  is  increased 
by  a  saving  of  wealth,  which  tends  to 
augment  capital.  Yet  how  few  there 
are  who  clearly  understand  this  simple 
truth.  How  often,  for  instance,  have 
we  heard  it  said  that  he  is  >  the  best 
friend  of  the  poor  who  spends  his  money 
freely,  and  thus  does  what  he  can  to 
make  trade  active.  The  spendthrift  will 
always  receive  the  homage  due  to  a 
popular  favourite.  His  improvidence  is 
half  excused  because  people  fail  to  see 
that  he  cannot  both  consume  his  wealth 
and  at  the  same  time  distribute  it 
amongst  others.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  individual  who,  with  prudent  fore- 
sight, accumulates  wealth,  and  thus  by 
increasing  the  capital  of  the  country 
augments  the  wages  of  the  labourer,  is 


not  unfrequently  disliked  because  he  is 
supposed  to  be  selfish.  He  is  treated 
as  an  enemy  to  the  poor,  because  people 
fail  to  understand  that  wealth  saved  as 
capital  is  intended  to  be  employed  pro- 
ductively, and  is,  therefore,  destined  to 
be  distributed  in  wages  to  productive 
labourers.  It  is  all  the  more  extraordi- 
nary that  fallacies  as  simple  as  the  one  we 
have  pointed  out  should  be  repeated  by 
generation  after  generation,  when  it  is  re- 
membered that  few  sciences  have  a  more 
distinguished  literature  than  Political 
Economy.  Adam  Smith's  great  work, 
which  was  the  first  systematic  treatise 
on  the  subject,  was  published  eighty 
years  since,  and  it  is  so  perfect  a  model 
of  clear  exposition  and  felicitous  illus- 
tration, that  the  progress  the  science  has 
made  since  then  has  scarcely  detracted 
from  the  interest  or  advantage  with 
which  this  immortal  work  may  still,  and 
will  perhaps  for  ever,  be  read.  Some 
important  truths  in  the  science  Adam 
Smith  certainly  failed  to  comprehend. 
Chief  amongst  these  was  the  doctrine 
of  rent,  the  true  theory  of  which  was 
in  after  years  worked  out  by  several 
investigators,  amongst  whom  were  An- 
derson, Malthus,  and  Eicardo.  The 
latter's  name  will  be  for  ever  associated 
with  the  theory  which  has  thrown  such 
important  light  upon  the  speculations 
of  modern  political  economists.  The 
leading  proposition  of  Ricardo's  theory 
was  that  rent  is  not  an  element  of  the 
cost  of  raising  agricultural  produce.  It 
is  curious  to  remark  how  often  Adam 
Smith  seemed  to  be  on  the  point  of 
grasping  this  great  truth.  In  fact,  it 
affords  another  illustration  that  a  dis- 
covery which  immortalizes  the  name  of 
one  man  has  always  been  more  or  less 
dimly  seen  by  other  great  men  who  have 
gone  before  him.  It  seems  almost  cer- 
tain that  the  theory  of  rent  which  is 
associated  with  the  name  of  Eicardo 
would  have  been  enunciated  by  Hume, 
and  would,  if  he  had  lived  a  few  years 
longer,  have  given  another  proof  of  his 
remarkable  genius.  Adam  Smith  and 
Hume  were  intimate  friends  through 
life,  and  each  felt  the  greatest  respect 
for  the  other's  intellect.  "  The  Wealth 
K  K  2 


500 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


of  Nations"  was  finished  in  1776,  and 
Adam  Smith  was  anxious  that  the  first 
to  peruse  his  work  should  be  his  old 
friend  Hume.  The  great  metaphysician 
was  then  in  his  last  illness.  He,  how- 
ever, although  on  his  death-bed,  read 
his  friend's  work  with  all  the  avidity 
and  interest  of  one  in  the  prime  of  in- 
tellectual power,  and  it  is  a  singular 
illustration  of  Hume's  prescient  genius 
that  he  instinctively  detected  the  chief 
error  which  subsequent  writers  have 
pointed  out  in  "The  Wealth  of  Nations." 
Although  he  expressed  genuine  and 
almost  unbounded  admiration,  yet  he 
said  to  Smith,  "  I  cannot  help  remark- 
ing that  many  of  your  speculations  are 
vitiated,  because  you  have  failed  to  per- 
ceive that  rent  is  not  an  element  of  the 
cost  of  raising  agricultural  produce." 
Although  later  writers  have  corrected 
various  imperfections  and  errors  in  "The 
Wealth  of  Nations,"  yet  I  believe  that 
lie  who  intends  to  study  Political  Eco- 
nomy cannot  do  better  than  commence 
with  this  book.  It  is  easy  to  point  out 
those  chapters  which  may,  with  advan- 
tage, be  omitted ;  but  the  work,  from  its 
almost  perfect  style,  will  always  possess 
a  peculiar  fascination,  and  the  student 
may  thus  be  induced  to  take  a  perma- 
nent interest  in  the  science  which,  in 
the  hands  of  less  happy  writers,  has  too 
frequently  been  made  unattractive. 

I  would,  for  these  reasons,  strongly 
advise  that  the  greater  part  of  "The 
Wealth  of  Nations  "  should  be  carefully 
read ;  yet,  when  the  student  has  obtained 
a  certain  familiarity  with  the  elementary 
principles  of  the  science,  I  should  re- 
commend him  at  once  to  commence  a 
diligent  study  of  the  great  work  of  Mr. 
John  Stuart  Mill.  This  is,  undoubtedly, 
the  most  complete  and  the  most  perfect 
treatise  that  has  ever  been  written  on 
the  science.  Its  excellence,  its  merits, 
have  now  received  almost  universal  re- 
cognition. It  has  been  translated  into 
most  European  languages,  and  the 
French,  who  have  many  eminent  writers 
on  Political  Economy  of  their  own,  have 
adopted  Mr.  Mill's  work  as  the  standard 
book  on  the  science.  It  is  not  alone 
because  I  wish  to  make  you  sound  poli- 


tical economists  that  I  shall  urge  you  to 
study  Mr.  Mill's  work.  I  have  confi- 
dence that,  if  you  take  him  as  your  guide 
in  one  science,  he  will  soon  become  your 
instructor  in  those  other  departments 
of  knowledge  which  his  genius  has  so 
greatly  illustrated  and  adorned,  and  I 
full  well  know  that,  if  you  become  his 
disciples,  you  will  have  a  master  who 
will  not  only  teach  you  with  consummate 
skill,  but,  who  will  also  animate  you 
with  the  best  aspirations  and  with  the 
noblest  sentiments.  If  it  be  true,  as 
Lord  J3acon  has  said,  "  that  a  knowledge 
of  the  speculative  opinions  of  the  men 
between  twenty  and  thirty  years  of  age 
is  the  great  source  of  political  prophecy," 
the  existence  of  Mr.  Mill  will  show 
itself  by  no  slight  or  ambiguous  traces 
in  the  coming  history  of  our  country ; 
for  no  one  has  contributed  more  to 
shape  the  opinions  of  those  among  its 
younger  men  who  give  the  greatest 
promise  of  future  eminence  and  dis- 
tinction. 

And  now  that  I  have  given  yon  a 
few  brief  hints  as  to  the  course  of  study 
which  I  think  you  may  with  most  ad- 
vantage pursue,  I  will  next  proceed  to 
guard  you  against  a  misconception, 
which  is  repeated  with  unceasing  per- 
tinacity, and  which  is  the  source  of 
much  of  the  antipathy  that  is  so  con- 
stantly expressed  towards  Political 
Economy.  "  Hard-hearted  and  selfish  " 
are  the  stereotyped  phrases  which  are 
applied  to  this  science ;  and  a  political 
economist  exists  vaguely  in  the  haze 
of  popular  prejudice  as  a  cold,  calcu- 
lating being,  whose  only  desire  is  to 
make  nations  and  individuals  rich,  and 
who  has  no  sympathy  with  those  higher 
motives  and  those  tenderer  feelings  which 
most  ennoble  man.  It  will  not  be  diffi- 
cult to  show  that  those  who  indulge 
in  these  animadversions  upon  Political 
Economy,  would  not  talk  more  foolishly 
if  they  should  be  pleased  to  pronounce 
that  the  forty-seventh  proposition  of 
Euclid  was  hard-hearted,  and  that  he 
who  should  expound  the  principles  of 
Chemistry  must  necessarily  lose  sight 
of  those  mental  qualities  which  no 
chemical  analysis  will  ever  explain. 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


501 


We  can  readily  trace  the  origin  of  the 
general  misconception  which  exists  with 
regard  to  the  objects  and  aims  to  be 
attained  by  Political  Economy.     It  is 
known  to  be  a  department  of  knowledge 
which  is  concerned  with  wealth ;  hence 
it  is  supposed  that  Political  Economy 
embodies  the  precepts  and    rules  for 
making  nations  and  individuals  wealthy ; 
and  it  is  then  further  concluded  that 
the  person  who  propounds  and  investi- 
gates these  rules  must  believe  that  the 
accumulation  of  wealth  ought  to  be  the 
main  object  both  of  a  nation's  and  an 
individual's  existence.     Let  us  proceed 
to  disentangle  this  remarkable  confusion 
of  ideas.     In  the  first  place  it  must  be 
remembered    that    Political    Economy 
does  not  enunciate  rules  or  precepts. 
It  is  a  science,   and  not  an  art.     A 
science  affirms  principles  or  truths;  it 
states  what  will  happen  if  a  particular 
thing  is  done.     It  is  a  law  of  physical 
science,  that  a  cubic  foot  of  water,  raised 
to  a  certain  temperature,  will  be  con- 
verted into  a  certain  number  of  cubic 
feet  of  steam.     In  the  same  way,  it  is  a 
principle  established  by  the  science  of 
Political  Economy   that,   if   a    proper 
division  of  labour  is  adopted,  the  pro- 
ductiveness of  that  labour  will  be  greatly 
increased.     An  art,  on  the  contrary,  is 
a  collection  of  rules  or  precepts  "giving 
instructions  how  a  particular  thing  is  to 
be  done.     The  mechanical  art  would 
lay  down  rules  as  to  the  best  mode 
of  constructing  a  machine ;  and  in  the 
same  way  you  might   have  an  art  of 
Political  Economy,  which  would  pro- 
pound rules   as  to  the   best  mode   of 
becoming  rich.     Since,  therefore,  Poli- 
tical Economy  is  a  science,  and  not  an 
art,  its  sole  object  ought  to  be  to  ascer- 
tain what  will  be  the  effect  upon  the 
production  and  distribution  of  wealth 
of  any  particular  cause  which  may  be 
brought  into  operation ;   and  Political 
Economy  departs  from  its  proper  sphere, 
if  it  ever  lays  down  rules,  as  if  it  were 
an  art,  and  affirms  that  this  ought  to 
be,  or  that  ought  not  to  be,  done.     The 
proper  business  of  Political  Economy  is 
not  to  advocate  the  doing,  or  abstaining 
from  doing,  this  or  that  particular  act  ; 


its  sole  object  ought  to  be  to  explain 
the  influence  which  any  circumstance 
may  exert  upon  the  production  and  dis- 
tribution of  wealth.  Various  other 
results  not  connected  with  wealth  may 
ensue,  but  the  investigation  of  these 
belongs  to  other  departments  of  know- 
ledge. As  an  example,  let  us  consider 
what  Political  Economy  has  to  do  with 
the  discussion  of  such  a  question  as  a 
compulsory  system  of  national  education. 
The  legislature  might  propose  to  extend 
to  all  employments  those  provisions  of 
the  Factory  Act  which  prohibit  children 
of  less  than  ten  years  of  age  being  em- 
ployed, and  which  compel  those  who 
are  at  work  between  the  ages  of  ten 
and  thirteen  to  attend  school  a  certain 
number  of  hours  per  day.  It  will  be 
most  important  to  know  what  would  be 
the  effect  of  such  a  measure  upon  the 
cost  of  producing  commodities,  and 
upon  the  wages  of  those  whose  labour 
was  subject  to  these  restrictions.  It 
would  be  the  appropriate  business  of 
Political  Economy  to  make  these  inves- 
tigations ;  but  suppose,  when  they  have 
been  made,  that  it  should  be  conclu- 
sively proved  by  the  principles  of 
Political  Economy  that  these  restric- 
tions increased  the  cost  of  producing 
commodities,  and  also  diminished  the 
aggregate  wages  received  by  the  la- 
bourer, who  may  happen  to  have  a 
certain  number  of  his  own  children 
employed.  Political  Economy  would 
consequently  show  that  this  compulsory 
system  of  education  would  offer  some 
impediment  to  the  production  of  wealth, 
and  would  also  lessen  the  aggregate  re- 
muneration received  by  those  labourers 
who  have  children  to  send  to  work. 
It  would,  however,  be  extremely  ir- 
rational thence  to  conclude  that  Political 
Economy  was  opposed  to  the  introduc- 
tion of  such  a  system  of  education. 
This  science  is  only  concerned  with  the 
question  in  one  of  its  aspects ;  it  has 
only  to  investigate  the  effects  which 
may  be-  exerted  upon  the  production 
and  distribution  of  wealth.  Other  con- 
sequences of  far  greater  moment  than  a 
slight  hindrance  to  the  production  of 
wealth  may  be  secured  if  the  labouring 


502 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Enonomy. 


population  of  this  country  were  better 
educated.  The  political  economist  may 
be  amongst  the  warmest  advocates  of 
compulsory  national  education,  for  he 
may  with  reason  say,  Although  my 
science  tells  me  that  the  production  of 
wealth  may  be  in  some  slight  degree 
impeded,  and  the  wages  received  by 
some  labourers  may  be  to  a  small  extent 
diminished,  if  very  young  children  were 
compelled  to  spend  a  certain  time  at 
school,  yet  I  full  well  know  that  these 
advantages  will  be  abundantly  compen- 
sated by  any  improvement  in  the  edu- 
cation of  the  people. 

Again,  let  us  take  another  example, 
and  let  us  consider  in  what  way  Political 
Economy  was  concerned  with  such  a 
question  as  the  emancipation  of  our  West 
Indian  slaves.  It  must  be  at  once  evi- 
dent that  slavery  could  not  be  suddenly 
abolished  in  a  country  in  which  there 
was  previously  scarcely  a  single  free 
labourer,  without  exerting  a  very  decided 
influence  upon  the  production  and  the 
distribution  of  wealth.  It,  therefore, 
became  the  appropriate  business  of  Po- 
litical Economy  carefully  to  explain  this 
influence.  The  principles  of  this  science 
in  the  hands  of  a  skilful  investigator 
would  have  enabled  him  to  predict  that 
the  negro  race,  degraded  by  slavery, 
would  not,  as  free  labourers,  continue 
industrious,  until  new  tastes  and  desires 
were  implanted  in  them,  as  they  gradu- 
ally advanced  towards  civilization.  It 
would,  therefore,  follow  that  the  eman- 
cipation of  the  slaves  would  denude  the 
West  Indian  Islands  of  labour,  and 
would,  therefore,  for  a  time  at  least, 
prevent  the  production  of  wealth,  by  ren- 
dering the  cultivation  of  the  land  almost 
impossible.  It  would  also  belong  to  the 
province  of  Political  Economy  to  show 
that  this  destruction  of  the  industry  of 
the  West  Indian  Islands  would,  by  dimin- 
ishing the  supply,  increase  the  cost  of 
such  a  commodity  as  sugar,  for  the  growth 
of  which  these  islands  possess  such 
peculiar  natural  advantages.  After  these 
politico  -  economical  investigations  had 
been  made,  it  would  have  been  easy 
to  show  that  the  emancipation  of  the 
slaves  would,  temporarily,  cause  an 


immense  loss  of  wealth.  The  culti- 
vation of  fertile  islands  would  cease, 
their  commerce  would  be  ruined,  the 
cost  of  slave-grown  commodities  would 
be  increased  to  the  English  consumer, 
and  West  Indian  proprietors,  in  spite 
of  the  compensation  which  the  English 
Government  most  justly  proffered  them, 
would  be  reduced  from  great  affluence 
to  comparative  poverty.  But,  although 
Political  Economy  might  have  predicted 
all  these  results,  would  any  one  have 
had  a  right  to  assert  that  Political  Eco- 
nomy was  opposed  to  the  emancipation 
of  the  slaves  ?  As  has  been  before  said, 
this  science  expresses  no  opinion,  en- 
forces no  rule  ;  all  that  it  professes  to 
do  is  to  trace  the  effect  which  any  cause 
may  exert  xipon  the  production  and  dis- 
tribution of  wealth.  Political  economists 
did  this  successfully  with  regard  to  that 
great  measure  of  emancipation,  which 
is  the  most  glorious  amongst  English 
achievements  ;  but,  although  they  fully 
recognised  the  loss  of  wealth  which 
would,  at  any  rate  in  the  first  instance, 
ensue,  yet  many  of  them  were  amongst 
the  foremost  to  urge  that  this  loss  of 
wealth  should  be  freely  borne,  rather 
than  the  greatest  wrong  that  the  strong 
have  ever  inflicted  on  the  weak  should 
any  longer  stain  the  English  name,  or 
pollute  the  English  character. 

I  trust  these  exampfes  will  sufficiently 
prove  that  ignorance  and  an  entire  con- 
fusion of  ideas  are  exhibited  by  those 
who  assert  that  Political  Economy  incul- 
cates selfishness,  and  takes  a  low  view 
of  human  nature.  And,  now  that  I  have 
alluded  to  this  very  common  prejudice, 
I  will  next  proceed  to  consider  another 
misconception.  I  have  learnt  from  ex- 
perience— in  fact,  I  may  say  that  I  have 
learnt  from  recent  experience — that  it 
is  very  commonly  supposed  that  Political 
Economy  must  be  connected  with  party- 
politics,  because  the  word  "  political "  is 
employed  to  designate  this  science.  The 
remarks  which  have  just  been  made 
may,  perhaps,  be  a  sufficient  refutation 
of  this  opinion  :  I  will,  however,  say  a 
few  words  upon  it,  because  this  error  is 
not  confined  to  those  who  are  unedu- 
cated. The  science,  as  has  been  so  often 


Inaugural  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 


503 


repeated,  is  alone  concerned  with  the 
production  and  distribution  of  wealth. 
For  instance,  it  would  be  foreign  to  the 
purpose  of  Political  Economy  to  discuss 
what  the  national  expenditure  ought  to 
be.  This  is  a  question  for  the  politician 
to  decide  ;  but,  if  a  certain  revenue  has 
to  be  raised,  Political  Economy  has  the 
important  duty  to  perform  of  showing 
which  are  the  best  taxes  to  be  imposed, 
by  pointing  out  those  imposts  which 
will  least  impede  the  production  of 
wealth,  and  will  at  the  same  time  intro- 
duce the  least  possible  inequality  in  its 
distribution.  Again,  as  another  ex- 
ample, I  would  take  the  Navigation 
Laws,  the  question  upon  which  protec- 
tionists and  free- traders  fought  their  last 
great  battle  in  this  country.  On  each 
side  of  this  question,  which  evoked  such 
angry  party  feelings,  there  were  no  doubt 
arranged  political  economists  of  the 
greatest  eminence.  If  these  laws  were 
maintained  merely  as  a  financial  mea- 
sure, they  must  have  been  condemned 
by  all  political  economists,  because  it 
was  easy  to  prove  that  such  restrictions 
must  interfere  with  the  production  of 
wealth.  Adam  Smith  stated,  with  re- 
markable clearness,  all  the  arguments  in 
favour  of  free-trade,  and  little  has  since 
been  added  to  strengthen  his  condemna- 
tion of  all  protective  duties  considered 
as  financial  measures.  But,  although  he 
spoke  so  strongly  in  favour  of  free-trade, 
yet  he  entertained  the  opinion  that  the 
immediate  loss  of  wealth  which  was 
caused  by  the  "  Navigation  Laws,"  was 
more  than  recompensed  by  the  encou- 
ragement which  they  gave  to  our  navy, 
and  he,  therefore,  expressed  a  very  de- 
cided opinion  in  favour  of  maintaining 
these  laws.  Adam  Smith  might,  there- 
fore, have  been  claimed  as  a  supporter 
by  the  protectionist  party,  when  the 
Navigation  Laws  were  discussed  in 
1849,  although  he  had,  with  unrivalled 
clearness,  enunciated  the  whole  theory 
of  free-trade,  and  had  also  explained  the 
fallacies  of  protection.  Political  Economy, 


even  when  kept  within  its  proper  limits, 
is  so  comprehensive  a  subject,  that  I  am 
sure  I  cannot  do  adequate  justice  to  it 
from  this  chair.  You  may,  therefore,  feel 
assured  that  I  will  never  touch  on  the 
domain  of  party-politics.  I  make  this 
promise,  not  because  I  shrink  from  the 
responsibility  of  my  political  opinions. 
On  suitable  occasions,  I  shall  never  fear 
to  avow  them  ;  but  I  should  be  forget- 
ting my  duty  if  I  did  not  strictly  keep 
within  its  appropriate  sphere  the  science 
which  I  am  placed  here  to  teach. 

In  conclusion,  I  will  only  earnestly 
entreat  'those  Undergraduates  whom  I 
have  the  pleasure  of  addressing  dili- 
gently to  study  Political  Economy.  Some 
of  you  may,  perhaps,  by  wealth  and 
rank,  inherit  political  power.  Your 
position,  proud  though  it  may  be,  will, 
in  after  life,  trouble  you  with  many 
melancholy  reflections,  if  want  of  know- 
ledge should  prevent  you  from  exercising 
that  political  influence  which  was  placed 
within  your  reach.  Others  may  intend 
to  become  the  ministers  of  religion. 
You,  in  performing  your  mission  of 
Christian  charity  and  benevolence,  will 
be  brought  face  to  face  with  terrible 
poverty  :  I  therefore  warmly  urge  you 
to  make  yourselves  acquainted  with  that 
science  which  will  explain  to  you  how 
poverty  is  caused,  and  what  are  the 
most  efficient  remedies  for  its  allevia- 
tion ;  for  you  may  depend  upon  it  that 
philanthropy  unguided  by  the  princi- 
ples of  Political  Economy  has,  too  often, 
been  a  futile  and  a  misdirected  effort. 
But,  whatever  may  be  the  position  in 
life  you  may  aspire  to  occupy,  I  still 
ask  you,  with  the  same  confidence,  to 
study  Political  Economy ;  for  we  must 
all  be  equally  interested  to  understand 
how  the  materials  which  have  been  so 
boiintifully  supplied  by  nature  are 
fashioned  into  wealth,  and  how  that 
wealth  can  be  distributed  so  as  best 
to  minister  to  human  wants  and  human 
enjoyments. 


504 


THE  MIST  OX  THE  MOOR 

THERE'S  a  cottage  on  Conistoun  Moor  to  the  west, 
And  a  wife  sits  sewing  and  singing  there ; 

And  she  rocks  her  babe  in  its  cradle  to  rest 
With  lullaby  words  to  a  lullaby  air. 

"While  baby  is  young,  she  shall  slumber  and  sleep, 
"  And  soft  dreams  alone  around  baby  shall  fall : 

"  When  baby  ia  older,  she'll  watch  and  she'll  weep ; 

"For  to  her  cares  will  come,  as  they  come  to  us  all." 

There's  a  footstep  comes  nearing  the  lone  cottage-door: 
That  step  to  the  wife  is  the  welcomest  sound : 

And  scarce  has  he  cross'd  o'er  his  threshold  before 
Two  arms  round  the  forester's  neck  are  wound. 

"  0  Harry,  your  brow  is  hot  and  dry ! 

"  And,  0  sweetheart,  but  your  hands  are  cold ! 
"A  driving  rain  and  a  starless  sky 

"Make  a  dull,  dull  night  on  the  lonely  wold. 

"But  change  your  hose  that  is  dripping  and  wet; 

"And  a  glass  of  good  ale,  sweet  and  warm, 
"Will  make,  I  warrant,  my  Harry  forget 

"The  starless  sky  and  the  driving  storm." 

He  has  sat  him  down  by  the  ingle-nook ; 

He  has  drunk  his  glass  of  sweet,  warm  ale : 
"  But  why  has  my  husband  so  eerie  a  look  ? 

"And  why  are  his  cheeks  so  wan  and  pale?" 

"Oh  dark  may  the  night  be,  and  lonely  the  wold; 

"And  a  man  may  be  weary  and  wet  to  the  skin; 
"But  it  needs  more,  wife,  than  the  wind  and  the  cold 

"To  quell  the  heart  of  a  man  within. 

"But  sit  thee,  dearest,  down  at  my  feet, 

"And  rest  thy  bonnie  face  here  on  my  knee; 

"And  I'll  tell  thee  what's  making  my  heart  to  beat; 
"What's  making  the  red  from  my  cheek  to  flee. 

"I  had  left  the  road  to  save  me  an  hour, 

"And  struck  up  the  brae  to  the  moor  instead; 

"But  scarce  had  I  reach'd  old  Conistoun  tower 

"When  the  sky  broke  in  thunder  and  rain  overhead. 

"And  the  forked  lightning,  blinding  and  blue, 

"  Made  the  far-away  peaks  of  the  hills  appear 

"As  jagged  and  black  and  plain  to  view 

"As  at  summer-noon  when  the  sky  is  clear. 

"I  stood  by  the  wall,  till  the  storm  went  by, 

"  On  the  side  that  looks  clown  over  Thornton-moss ; 


The  Mist  on  the  Moor.  505 

"And  over  the  marsh-land  a  mist  rose  high, 

"And  I  watched  it  come  trailing  and  trailing  across. 

"The  mist  was  grey  in  the  dim  twilight, 

"But  the  nearer  it  came,  the  blacker  it  grew; 
"And  I  saw  in  its  folds  a  terrible  .sight, 

"As  plain  with  these  eyes  as  I  now  see  you. 

"There  was  Croft  the  miller,  and  farmer  Brown; 

"The  squire's  young  boy,  and  keeper  John; 
"Your  father  and  brothers  from  Appleby  town, 

"And  the  Bensons  of  Croft  Fell,  father  and  son. 

"There  was  cousin  Will,  that  went  over  the  sea 

"Three  summers  ago — how  comes  he  here? 
"And  Ned,  that  has  never  cross'd  hands  with  me, 

"Since  high  words  pass'd  last  May  was  a  year. 

"I  scann'd  them  all  from  top  to  toe; 

"  I  counted  them  over  from  end  to  end : 
"There  was  every  kinsman  whose  face  I  know, 

"And  every  neighbour  that  calls  me  friend. 

"And  one  by  one  they  pass'd  me  by, 

"Dreamlike,  as  still  as  still  could  be, 
"  With  a  look  of  wonder  in  every  eye ; 

"And  every  eye  was  turn'd  on  me. 

"Ay,  one  by  one  they  pass'd  me  by, 

"  Shadowy,  dreamlike ;  and  last  of  them  all 
"Came  a  black-pall'd  coffin,  borne  shoulder-high; 

"Had  I  stretch'd  out  my  hand,  I  had  touch'd  the  palL 

"And  a  creeping  shiver  all  over  me  ran; 

"  And  I  thought  of  my  bairnie,  and  thought  of  thee ; 
"For  my  friends  and  my  kin  were  there,  every  man — 

"  So  that  coffin,  sweet  wifey,  was  meant  for  me ! " 

You  may  hear  her  heart  beat  in  the  still  midnight; 

You  may  see  the  big  tear  on  each  pale  cheek; 
She  is  clasping  his  hands  in  her  own  tight,  tight ; 

And  she  stares  in  his  eyes,  but  she  cannot  speak. 

"  Hist !  there's  a  noise  at  the  window — hark ! 

"A  mocking  laugh  or  a  cry  of  pain! 
"Let  me  open  the  door  and  peer  into  the  dark: 

"  Hush,  wife  !  listen :  I  hear  it  again ! " 

Wistfully  into  the  night  they  peer : 

The  wind  sighs  shrill  through  a  drizzling  rain : 

There's  a  wife  will  be  weeping  ere  long,  I  feaiy 
By  a  coffin  of  deal-wood,  neat  and  plain. 

D'ARCY  W.  THOMPSON. 


506 


TWO  MONTHS  IN  ROME. 


A  COLD,  dark  street,  as  deep  and  narrow 
as  a  well,  and  lighted  apparently,  at  rare 
intervals,  by  farthing  candles ;  a  few 
nraffled-up  forms,  grumbling  and  hungry 
(for  there  is  not  the  ghost  of  an  inn  to 
be  seen),  by  the  side  of  a  vehicle,  con- 
sisting, as  it  would  seem,  of  two  old 
yellow  post-chaises  cemented  together, 
its  bare  pole  stuck  helplessly  out  and 
waiting  for  fresh  horses.  The  horses 
arrive  ;  the  grumblers  are  absorbed  into 
the  vehicle;  the  big  boots  of  the  old 
conductor  stow  themselves  into  some 
mysterious  corner  above  ;  the  postilion 
mounts  ;  and  away,  jingling  and  whip- 
cracking,  creaking  and  groaning,  be- 
tween the  rare  farthing  candles  into  the 
bosom  of  the  night  The  street  was  the 
town  of  Orvieto — the  vehicle  was  the 
diligence  from  Florence,  or  rather  Ficulle 
— and  the  grumblers  were  the  passengers 
for  Rome. 

In  all  the  world  there  is  nothing  more 
pleasant  than  a  night  journey  behind 
four,  or  rather  six,  horses.  I  suppose 
that  night,  in  that  cold  cramped  corner 
of  tha  coupe,  was  the  happiest  of  my 
life.  On,  for  hours  and  hours,  in  a  sleep 
which  is  not  rest  but  something  far  more 
delightful — that  strange  mixture  of  ex- 
citement and  repose  which  is  to  be  had 
in  this  and  in  no  other  way,  and  from 
•which  every  feverish  fitful  waking  is  not 
to  the  gloom  of  a  curtained  chamber, 
but  to  the  stars  of  a  November  night ; 
lulled  by  the  monotonous  motion  into  a 
kind  of  apathy  to  which  nothing  could 
come  amiss,  and  all  that  happened — even 
the  periodical  descent  of  the  big  boots 
and  their  translation  into  the  supernal 
regions — seemed  part  of  a  delicious 
dream ;  on  for  hours,  rattling  merrily 
down  transient  slopes,  or  climbing  pain- 
fully (these  diligence  horses  are  certainly 
immortal)  intermediate  hills ;  on,  while 
the  large  bright  stars  wax  larger  and 
brighter  (you  are  kept  awake  for  an  hour 
or  so  wondering  at  their  marvellous  size); 
and  behind  all — the  background  of  your 


dreams — (if  your   destination  is   what 
mine  was  then)  the  shadow  of  a  coming 

joy- 
Social  institutions,  with  their  usual 
felicity,  have  provided  that  no  one  shall 
see  the  sun  rise  but  those  who  cannot 
appreciate  it.  This  is  much  to  be  de- 
plored. "Stars  fade  out  and  galaxies, 
street-lamps  of  the  city  of  God." *  But, 
before  they  fade,  they  put  on  all  the 
beauty  of  despair,  and  shine,  in  that  hour 
and  in  that  sky,  with  a  lustre  so  broad, 
bright,  and  intense,  that  you  look  at  them 
bewildered,  and  only  after,  a  time  per- 
ceive that  in  the  unearthly  depth  of  their 
deep  blue  setting  there  is  a  strange  look 
where  it  nears  the  horizon,  and  that  a 
faint  white  radiance  is  gradually  melting 
it  away.  And  so,  on  that  morning,  I 
almost  forgot,  for  a  while,  that  day  was 
about  to  dawn  on  the  scene  which,  of  all 
others,  I  had  most  longed  to  see ;  for- 
got for  a  while  that  in  the  coming 
brightness  was  not  only  the  dawn,  but 
Rome. 

At  last,  it  was  day.  The  big  boots, 
which  had  so  long  been  a  dream,  became 
a  fact ;  the  six  horses,  which  had  been 
a  sound,  became  a  jingling,  rattling 
reality ;  around  us,  a  country  undu- 
lating with  low  bills  and  grassy  meads  ; 
and  far  away,  in  the  south-east,  a  long 
sharp  line  of  blue  mountains,  behind 
which,  in  one  spot  more  luminous  than 
the  rest  of  the  orange  background,  a  few 
gold  clouds  were  heralding  the  sun ; 
the  hills  of  Praeneste  and  Tibur,  of  Anio 
and  sweet  Bandusia,  the  very  "  arduous 
Sabines,"  which  Horace  loved  and  sung. 
We  opened  the  window,  and  let  in  some 
of  that  golden  wine  which,  since  we 
entered  Italy,  had  done  duty  for  air. 
Fresh,  ever  cold,  but  not  ungenial,  and 
as  if  still  mindful  of  yesterday's  sun — 
pure  and  sparkling  as  Bandusia's  self — 
it  chased  away  the  night's  fatigue.  It 
is  strange  that  in  such  air  human  life 
should  be  short  and  sickly.  Look  at 
i  Carlyle. 


Two  Months  in  Rome. 


507 


our  new  postilion,  mounting  to  his 
perch  in  a  dress  (for  as  we  approach  the 
great  city  we  put  on  all  our  finery)  of 
the  tawdry-magnificent  order — he  is 
the  feeblest,  most  languid-looking  of 
men ;  and  at  the  two  or  three  remaining 
posts  between  here  and  Home,  the  hag- 
gard countenance  and  tottering  gait  of 
each  succeeding  driver  testifies  to  the 
poisonous  breath  of  that  mephitic  soil. 
But  will  these  long  weary  hills  never 
culminate,  and  show  us  the  city  of  our 
dreams  1  For  full  an  hour  we  have 
been  straining  our  eyes  to  see  it,  and 
have  seen  nothing  but  great  melancholy 
hillsides.  At  last,  between  high  banks 
of  brushwood,  the  road  begins  to  ^wind 
downwards,  and  before  us  lies  a  wide 
sunny  landscape — not  a  plain,  but  a 
succession jof  gentle  ridges ;  and  gazing 
eagerly  forward  we  see  on  the  furthest 
of  these  what  looks  like  scattered  build- 
ings, and  along  the  same  ridge  to  the 
right  of  them — a  Dome  !  Yes,  that  is 
St.  Peter's ;  and  with  that  view  of 
Rome,  or  very  little  more  than  that, 
till  you  get  there  you  must  be  content ; 
for  no  clearer  idea  of  what  Rome  is 
will  gladden  your  eyes  this  day.  Still 
the  same  monotonous  road — the  same 
unending  rise  and  fall ;  and  ever  and 
anon,  grown  nearer  now,  the  distant 
buildings,  and  the  Dome.  But  to  your 
left,  southward  of  the  lovely  Sabines, 
and  cut  off  from  them  by  an  opening 
through  which  your  vision  sounds  the 
blue  distance  and  finds  it  fathomless, 
another  mountain  range  appears,  more 
delicate  in  form  and  colour — they  are 
the  hills  of  Frascati  and  Albano,  of 
Tusculum  and  Cicero.  Suddenly  you 
cross  a  bend,  just  seen  and  lost,  of  a 
noble  river ;  noble,  not  for  his  size 
(though  he  is  not  small),  but  for  the 
sturdy  and  resolute  rush  between  high 
banks  of  his  yellow  waves ;  and  you 
know  that  you  have  seen  the  Tiber,  and 
that  he  is  worthy  of  his  fame.  Now 
you  are  very  near  the  city ;  but  there  is 
nothing  to  show  it,  except  on  the  right, 
by  the  roadside,  that  one  old  solitary 
marble  tomb.  Now  you  are  between 
white  walls  shutting  in  suburban-look- 
ing villas,  with  here  and  there  some 


cypresses  and  pines  ;  and  at  the  end  of 
this  road  a  high  majestic  gate,  with  a 
great  statue  on  each  side  of  its  arch. 
In  a  moment  more  you  are  through  the 
arch  ;  the  diligence  comes  abruptly  to  a 
standstill,  and  you  are  in  Rome.  The 
sun,  flaring  and  streaming  into  your 
narrow  den,  half  blinds  and  consumes 
you  (though  it  is  November)  as  you  look 
round  in  eager  curiosity,  and  ask  your- 
self whether  this  indeed  be  Rome.  You 
are  in  a  bright  "Piazza,"  with  a  fair 
large  fountain  in  the  midst,  splashing 
and  sparkling  round  the  base  of  a  tall 
obelisk,  and  many  groups  of  marble 
statues  circling  it  round,  and  on  one  side 
of  it  a  high  and  terraced  garden ;  and  at 
its  opposite  end  the  bright  Piazza  emits, 
like  rays,  three  long  narrow  streets,  soon 
lost  to  view  in  the  dazzling  sunshine ; 
and  of  these  the  central  and  the  brightest 
ray  is  the  famous  Corso.  Altogether, 
you  would  say,  a  pretty  little  modern 
town.  Not  a  ruin  visible ;  not  a  sign 
to  be  seen  as  yet  that  this  is  really 
Rome.  The  Pope's  "douaniers"  keep 
you  waiting  here  as  long  as  they  decently 
can,  in  the  absence  of  any  reason  for 
doing  so,  then  mount  behind  your  vehicle, 
and  at  a  solemn  pace  you  drive  into 
one  of  the  streets  aforesaid,  and  in  due 
time  into  the  court  of  a  most  business- 
like [and  unclassical-looking  post-office. 
There,  by  the  help  of  your  "  lascia 
pasaare,"  and  a  fee  to  a  corrupt  official, 
you  are  set  free,  and  landed,  by  short 
twistings  and  turnings  of  labyrinthine 
streets,  at  your  hotel. 

It  is  my  custom  in  a  foreign  town  to 
prefer  an  hotel  frequented  by  foreigners 
to  those  which  my  countrymen  delight 
to  honour ;  first,  for  the  sake  of  novelty ; 
secondly,  for  that  of  economy — not  mere 
saving,  but,  on  the  whole,  better  treat- 
ment for  my  money  ;  and  thirdly,  be- 
cause I  think  that  if  the  practice  were 
universal,  it  would  tend  to  remedy  a 
great  evil — the  self-isolation  of  English- 
men. Patriotism,  when  it  means  dis- 
like of  foreigners,  is  a  heinous  and  con- 
temptible vice.  And  so,  being  established 
at  the  "  Hotel  des  Utrangers,"  as  we  will 
call  it,  though  that  was  not  its  name,  I 
looked  out  to  survey  the  situation.  It 


508 


Two  Months  in  Rome. 


was  a  small  piazza — or,  more  properly 
speaking,  a  deep  square  hole,  let  into  the 
dense  mass  of  buildings.  In  the  centre, 
a  small  obelisk,  supported  by  an  ele- 
phant, of  cunning  workmanship  ;  one 
side  is  the  hotel  itself;  another,  the  great 
blank  fa£ade  of  a  church ;  another,  a  col- 
lege of  priests.  At  one  of  the  opposite 
corners,  close  to  the  church,  a  dark 
archway,  and  a  French  sentry,  with 
other  French  soldiers  lounging,  evi- 
dently a  part  of  the  Army  of  Occupation. 
At  the  other  corner,  the  piazza  opens  to 
admit  a  small  street,  and  the  opening 
shows  the  great  round  battered  side  of 
some  huge  building,  black  with  age, 
and  torn  and  stained  exceedingly,  and 
crowned  by  a  low,  lead-covered  dome. 
Ugly  and  uninteresting  enough  all  this, 
you  think  at  first.  But  you  think 
rather  differently  when  you  find  that 
within  that  dark  archway  has  been,  held 
for  ages,  and  is  still  held,  the  Court  of 
the  "Holy  Office,"  the  terrible  Inqui- 
sition ;  and  that  in  that  very  place  the 
ministers  of  the  God  of  Love  and  Truth 
tortured  Galileo,  till  he  declared  that  the 
sun.  went  round  the  earth  ;  and  that  the 
great  black  round  is  the  side  of  perhaps 
one  of  the  very  greatest  of  all  human 
works — the  Eoman  Pantheon.  Stroll, 
when  you  are  rested,  into  the  adjoining 
piazza,  and  judge  of  it  for  yourself.  In 
sorrowful  and  awful  state,  defying  dirt, 
squalor,  crowding-houses,  and  papal  bel- 
fries— defying  the  insult  and  neglect  of 
centuries — contemptuous  of  criticism, 
and  victorious  over  decay — it  stands 
there,  still  triumphant,  with  the  Con- 
sul's name  upon  its  brow.  Enter,  and 
look  upward  ;  have  you  ever  seen  such 
a  cupola  ?  They  have  stripped  it  of  its 
bright  bronze  to  adorn  some  miserable 
Papal  folly ;  but  still  it  puts  to  shame 
all  rival  structures,  and  bends  over  you 
with  a  solemn  majesty,  not  unmixed 
with  love,  though  the  love  is  probably 
intended  rather  for  Eaphael  than  for 
you.  The  only  decent  treatment  which 
the  Pantheon  ever  received  from  the 
Popes  was  when  they  buried  Eaphael 
there. 

The  next  day,  after  an  hour's  amusing 
contemplation  of  the  queer  little  piazza, 


I  sought  the  ruins  of  old  Eome.  I  was 
not  without  misgivings.  Were  they  all 
like  the  Pantheon,  locked  in  the  deadly, 
isolating  embrace  of  the  modern  city, — 
each  a  scarce  discoverable  oasis  in  a  sea 
of  ugliness  and  dirt  ?  I  had  seen  Athens 
and  the  Parthenon,  and  they  had  satis- 
fied me  utterly ;  without  alloy  or  impedi- 
ment, there  had  sunk  into  my  heart  the 
spirit  of  heroic  decay.  "Would  it  be  the 
same  with  Eome  ?  I  consulted  the  map, 
and  walked,  as  it  seemed,  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  Capitol  and  the  Forum.  A 
few  dark,  narrow  streets,  then  a  flood  of 
sunshine,  and  an  oblong  piazza,  shut 
in  by  low,  mean-looking  houses,  and 
one  or  two  flaunting  churches ;  but,  in 
the  midst  of  it,  something  strange.  A 
wide  space,  many  feet  below  the  level  of 
the  piazza,  fenced  round  and  grass-grown, 
and  filled  with  pillars  of  grey  granite, 
still  standing,  but  broken  short  off  at 
the  waist ;  and  at  one  end  of  it  a  noble 
column,  soaring  far  into  the  sky,  and 
wreathed  from  foot  to  head  in  multitu- 
dinous folds  of  spiral  sculpture,  with 
some  history  of  strife  and  triumph.  One 
great  grey  pillar,  broken,  but  as  fresh 
in  every  grain  of  its  enormous  bulk  as 
when  first  it  left  the  quarry,  and  wear- 
ing still  on  its  surface  the  very  polish 
which  it  wore — I  was  about  to  say  in 
life — lies  prostrate  in  the  street  itself,  in 
solid,  imperturbable,  imperishable  gran- 
deur. It  is  the  Forum  of  Trajan ;  or, 
rather,  it  is  a  fragment  of  his  Forum, 
excavated  and  rescued  by  some  Pope 
with  a  glimmering  of  taste.  The  Forum 
itself  must  have  covered  this  whole  re- 
gion far  and  wide,  and  lies  dead  and 
buried,  it  is  to  be  feared,  for  ever. 
Another  street  or  two,  and  you  come 
out  upon  an  open  space,  which  looks,  at 
first  sight,  about  the  size  of  a  village 
common,  with  a  broad,  straight  road 
through  the  midst  of  it,  bordered  on 
either  hand  by  thin,  unhappy-looking 
streets,  but  the  rest  all  gashed  about 
in  great  uneven  pits  and  mounds,  yet 
desolate  and  grass-grown,  as  though  it 
were  long  since  the  spade  had  touched 
it ;  and  standing  up  from  among  the 
pits  and  mounds,  which  are  railed  off 
and  fenced  carefully  round,  a  ruined 


Two  Months  in  Borne. 


509 


column  or  two  of  rare  workmanship — 
in  one  place  three,  clamped  together 
with  iron,  and  supporting  the  fragment 
of  a  cornice ;  to  your  right,  a  pit  some- 
what larger  than  the  rest,  out  of  which 
rises  an  old  arch  of  russet  stone,  all  bat- 
tered and  decayed,  but  richly  decorated  j 
and  behind  the  arch,  a  few  columns,  in 
detached  groups,  and  of  various  orders, 
bearing  always  on  their  graceful  heads 
some  remnant  of  a  frieze  ;  and,  looking 
down,  you  see  that  the  floor  of  the  pit 
is  covered  with  fragments,  scattered 
loosely  along,  or  half  buried  in  the 
mould,  of  fluted  pillars,  marble  steps, 
and  stone  carvings,  of  rare  device;  and 
behind  all/  looking  gloomily  over  it,  a 
low,  overhanging  precipice,  its  dark  face 
pierced  and  caverned  and  undermined 
with  the  toil  of  successive  ages,  and 
wearing  indignantly  upon  its  sullen 
brows  great  staring  structures  of  the 
mansion-house  order  and  mediaeval  taste. 
The  rock  is  the  hill  of  the  Capitol,  and 
the  pits  and  mounds,  the  scattered 
columns  and  the  arch,  are  the  Eoman 
Forum.  Why,  it  is  absolutely  heart- 
rending. This  is  not  ruin  ;  it  is  ghastly 
and  death-like  desolation — "  interest- 
ing," no  doubt,  especially  to  artists 
and  architects  (for  every  one  of  those 
scattered  relics  laughs  to  scorn  the  puny 
attempts  of  modern  men),  but  to  those 
who,  from  their  very  infancy,  have  won- 
dered at  and  loved  old  Eome,  sorrowful 
and  painful  beyond  words.  If  she  had 
perished  utterly — swept  out  of  existence 
by  the  waves  of  time  like  the  structures 
of  children  upon  the  sands — it  would 
have  been  easier  to  bear.  But  here — 
flung  out,  as  it  were,  contemptuously 
from  the  modern  city — you  come  sud- 
denly upon  her  corpse,  so  marred  and 
disfigured  that  by  no  effort  of  fancy  can 
you  picture  her  as  she  lived,  and  yet 
with  trace  enough  of  beauty  left  to  show 
that  she  must  have  been  glorious  and 
beautiful  beyond  most  earthly  things. 

But  let  us  follow  the  straight  road 
between  the  unhappy-looking  trees. 
Except  that  small  arch  of  fair  propor- 
tions, which  spans  it  a  little  way  further, 
there  seems  nothing  worth  noticing  on 
either  hand ;  but,  looking  closer,  you  see, 


on  the  left,  a  noble  old  portico,  sunk, 
like  the  rest,  below  the  present  level 
of  the  ground,  and  which  Theocracy, 
with  ravenous  piety,  has  seized  and 
made  to  do  duty  as  the  front  o :  an  ugly 
church.  Further  on,  great  fragments 
of  arches,  or  rather  half-domes,  of  mere 
brick,  but  lined  with  that  simple  and 
grand  device  which  gives  half  its  beauty 
to  the  cupola  of  the  Pantheon ;  and  you 
are  told  that  it  is  the  Temple  of  Peace. 
You  pass  under  the  graceful  little  arch 
— the  arch  of  Titus — still  rich  with  the 
petrified  spoils  of  Jerusalem ;  and  you 
find  that  the  long  low  hill  on  your  right, 
all  green  and  terraced  and  desolate,  ex- 
cept where  among  dark  cypresses  a  villa 
or  a  convent  flashes  out  in  the  sun, 
is  the  Palatine,  and  that  the  artificial- 
looking  mounds  and  grassy  terraces  are 
all  (to  be  seen  from  here)  of  what  was 
once  a  scene  of  almost  unearthly  splen- 
dour— the  palace  of  the  Csesars.  You 
may  wander  on  that  hill  for  days,  and 
(especially  if  you  are  an  artist)  with  ever- 
increasing  delight :  for  from  its  broad 
plateau  the  views  over  what  the  guide- 
books call  "  Eome  and  its  environs  "  are 
rich  in  a  mournful  beauty  of  the  choicest 
kind;  but  beyond  a  few  huge  brick 
walls,  all  streaming  with  creepers  and 
dark  with  tangled  vegetation  of  flowery 
shrubs  and  trees,  you  will  come  upon 
no  record  of  the  proud  and  gorgeous 
past — except  in  the  villa  which  Napo- 
leon has  bought,  where  they  have  dug 
down  to  a  few  old  vaulted  chambers, 
and  where  they  turn  up  relics  at  the 
rate  of  a  bust  in  a  year.  But  ever  in 
your  walk  you  will  see  strewn  about  you 
fragments  of  rich  marbles  of  all  countries 
and  all  hues :  they  say  that  the  very 
dust  on  which  you  tread,  when  it  ia 
analysed,  is  a  powder  of  gems,  and 
gold,  and  precious  stones.  But  we  are 
forgetting  our  straight  road.  After 
threading  the  arch,  it  dives  gently 
downwards ;  and  there,  at  the  end  of  it, 
in  an  open  space  of  greensward,  with  an 
orchard  on  either  hand  and  here  and 
there  a  cypress,  stands  the  colossal  curve 
of  the  Imperial  folly — the  most  pathetic, 
and  almost  the  grandest,  ruin  in  the 
world.  It  was  vaster  than  I  had  ex- 


510 


Two  Months  in  Rome. 


pected,  more  wrought  upon  by  Time, 
and  more  rich  in  the  infinite  beauty 
of  detail  which,  as  the  art-critics  say, 
"characterizes  the  works  of  that  great 
master."  Two  things  are  most  notable 
in  the  Coliseum  : — the  awful  desolation 
of  the  present,  and  the  ease  with  which 
you  realize  the  past.  Standing  in  the 
grass-grown  arena,  which  the  bright 
morning  sun  had  coaxed  into  a  melan- 
choly smile,  there  came  before  me,  with 
a  vivid  and  fearful  distinctness,  the 
whole  scene  as  it  was  on  some  great 
festal  day, — the  myriads  that  lined  the 
mighty  walls,  a  flashing  and  palpitating 
multitude,  tier  above  tier,  far  up  into 
the  deep  blue  sky  ;  and  about  me,  where 
I  stood,  the  rush  of  chariot  wheels,  the 
gleaming  swords,  the  dust,  the  smoke, 
the  blood,  the  terrible  spring  of  the  lion 
— I  could  stand  it  no  longer,  and  turned 
to  leave  the  place.  This  was  what  I 
saw  in  imagination.  What  I  saw  in 
reality  was  a  few  haggard-looking  figures 
moving  slowly  from  one  to  the  other  of 
a  few  stone  shrines  ranged  round  the 
arena,  and  kissing  them  with  muttered 
prayer.  It  seems  that  by  a  sufficient 
number  of  such  gyrations  you  may 
escape  the  consequences  of  almost  any 
amount  of  sin.  These  are  the  only 
gladiators — these  the  only  games — ex- 
hibited there  now.  Spectators  still  look 
down  upon  them  from  the  vast  amphi- 
theatre, in  multitudes  countless  as  of 
old  :  but  the  multitudes  are  the  creeping 
plants,  and  waving  trees,  and  tangled 
masses  of  mournful  vegetation,  which 
feed  and  flourish  on  its  decay. 

But  if  this  is  your  first  visit  to 
Eoman  ruins,  you  must  not  linger  here. 
Call  one  of  those  light  open  carriages, 
the  "  cabs  "  of  Rome  (you  will  soon  see 
one,  with  a  driver  whose  appearance 
•will  probably  be  that  of  a  most  con- 
summate villain — a  robber  and  murderer 
of  the  blackest  dye — but  who  will  turn 
out  to  be  the  gentlest,  kindest,  most 
amiable,  and  most  honest  of  human 
beings),  and  drive  out  under  that  old 
arch — the  arch  of  Constantino — standing 
there  all  neglected  in  the  shadow  of  the 
Coliseum,  and  with  a  look  as  if  of 
protest  against  the  neglect,  to  the  Ap- 


pian  Way.  For  a  mile  or  so  you  pass 
along  a  dull  road,  mostly  between 
stuccoed  walls,  apparently  of  gardens, 
when  suddenly  the  driver  with  the  de- 
lusive countenance  pulls  up,  and  asks 
you  whether  you  would  like  to  see  the 
tomb  of  the  Scipios.  You  look  about 
in  astonishment,  and  at  last  discover  a 
small  door  in  the  stuccoed  wall,  over 
which  is  scrawled  "  Sepulcra  Scipio- 
nuni."  Tojpass  that  would  be  downright 
profanity.  So  you  ring  the  little  bell, 
which  is  the  usual  key  to  Roman  "  lions," 
and  which  is  answered  by  a  little  urchin, 
who  takes  you  up  a  few  steps  to  a  door 
in  a  great  mound  which  looks  like  a 
heap  of  garden-stuff.  The  urchin  lights 
two  "  dips,"  and  you  dive  into  a  dark 
cave  of  no  great  depth — "  Sepulcra 
Scipionum."  There  is  no  doubt  that  it 
is  the  very  vault ;  but  the  Scipios  and 
their  urns  have  disappeared  together, 
and  you  and  the  little  urchin  have  it  all 
to  yourselves.  Only  here  and  there  in 
a  dark  corner  there  is  a  loose  stone 
with  a  Latin  inscription,  which  you 
reverently  stoop  down  to  read.  "  Fortis 
vir  sapiensque — that  is  all  that  Rome 
had  to  say  in  praise  of  one  of  her  very 
noblest  men ;  the  rest  is  mere  genealogy, 
and  short  concentrated  narration.  That 
is  all ;  but  would  you  have  preferred 
anything  else?  for  instance,  a  funeral 
oration  d,  la  Franqaise.  The  inscrip- 
tions are  only  copies,  charitably  left 
there  by  the  Popes,  the  originals,  with 
a  great  sarcophagus,  having  been  taken 
to  the  Vatican ;  but  for  me  this  did 
not  lessen  the  pathos  of  the  place. 
'•  Fortis  vir  sapiensque  ; "  you  cannot 
improve  upon  that ;  and  you  are  all  the 
wiser  for  having  seen  it.  That  single 
inscription  explains  the  subjection  of 
the  world. 

You  drive  under  the  grand  old 
perishing  arch  of  Drusus,  which  artists 
love  to  libel,  and  out  upon  the  Appian 
Way.  Miles  away,  even  to  the  very- 
foot  of  the  Alban  mountain,  wearing 
Frascati  like  a  diamond  on  its  purple 
breast,  basking  in  the  mild  bright 
sun  and  fanned  by  the  soft  sweet  air, 
you  pass  between  the  sepulchres  of 
mighty  men.  They  are  for  the  most 


Two  Months  in  Rome. 


511 


part  mere  mounds  of  earth,  or  piles  of 
grass-grown  brick,  the  very  graves  of 
graves.  On  some,  larger  than  the  rest, 
you  will  see  a  myrtle  thicket,  or  an  olive 
grove.  On  either  side,  as  you  pass 
along,  the  wild  flowers  on  the  low  banks 
are  strewn  with  fragments  of  pillars, 
and  rich  stone  carvings — a  hand,  or  a 
foot,  or  a  fold  of  marble  drapery ;  and 
here  and  there  scientific  men,  who  have 
lately — rather  too  lately  —  taken  pity 
on  the  old  road,  have  ranged  upon  a 
wall  a  row  of  busts,  or  some  choice 
specimens  of  delicate  architecture,  like 
the  rows  of  defunct  carnivori  nailed  to 
the  side  of  an  English  gamekeeper's 
cottage.  What  a  place  to  come  to,  you 
think,  day  after  day,  and  forget  the 
irksome  and  wearisome  present  in  the 
glorious  and  heroic  past.  As  to  St. 
Peter's,  and  the  hundred  vulgar-looking 
churches  behind  you,  you  despise  them 
utterly.  Modern  Eome,  half  seen  in 
the  distance,  is  at  this  moment  a 
nuisance — a  small  troublesome  thing, 
like  the  rent  in  the  camlet  cloak.  You 
wish  that  you  had  time  to  go  further, 
and  explore  more  thoroughly ;  but  now 
you  must  be  tending  Eomewards,  for 
the  day  is  short,  and  the  Sabines  are 
beginning  to  look  as  Horace  loved  to 
see  them,  "  when  the  sun  had  changed 
"  the  shadows  of  the  mountains,  and  un- 
"  yoked  the  wearied  oxen,  bringing  on  a 
"  lovely  time  in  his  departing  car."  Only, 
on  your  way  home,  stop  at  the  great 
round  tomb  on  your  right,  the  only  one 
whose  stone  masonry  has  survived  the 
assault  of  time;  stop,  I  say,  and  get 
down  from  your  carriage,  and  walk  round 
it,  and  do  homage  to  that  which,  as  an 
Englishman,  you  are  above  all  things 
bound  to  revere — a  "  successful  man." 
For  the  man  who  built  that  tomb  twenty 
centuries  ago  did  what  none  else  could 
do — resolved,  and  fulfilled  his  resolu- 
tion, that,  come  what  come  might,  in 
spite  of  the  lapses  of  ages  and  the  shock 
of  elements,  the  memory  of  Cecilia 
Metella  should  not  die. 

The  table  d'hote  at  the  Hotel  des 
Etrangers  is  a  curious  scene.  As  the 
diners  take  their  places  —  Germans, 
French,  Kussians,  Italians,  Americans, 


Greeks,  even  Turks,  and  a  few  English 
— you  hear  a  confused  Babel  of  tongues, 
in  which  all  are  talking  of  what  they 
have  seen  that  day  in  Eome,  or  hoped 
to  see  the  next.  I  observed  that  very- 
few  of  them  spoke  of  the  ruins. 
Churches,  pictures,  sculptures,  palaces, 
villas,  were  the  staple  of  the  conver- 
sation. One  old  gentleman  was  an  ex- 
ception. He  was  from  the  north  of 
Italy,  where  he  had  been  long  a  fixture 
among  his  olives  and  olive-branches,  the 
the  latter  too  numerous  to  allow  of  his 
leaving  home.  At  last  he  had  grown 
desperate,  and  started  alone,  resolved  to 
realize  the  dream  of  Ms  life,  lest  per- 
chance the  end  should  overtake  him 
before  he  had  seen  Eome.  He  had  been 
since  seven  o'clock  that  morning  among 
the  ruins,  and  was  happy.  He  needed 
no  guide — he  had  known  all  that  was 
to  be  known  of  them  from  his  infancy 
and  was  a  "  Murray  "  in  himself. 

As  yet  I  had  no  sort  of  idea  of  what 
Eome — Eome  in  the  aggregate — was 
like.  The  place  from  which  to  get  this 
is  the  Janicular ;  for  the  other  hills  are 
mere  mounds  to  this,  and  the  city  lies 
at  its  feet.  Like  all  the  other  sights  of 
Eome,  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  so 
easy.  From  the  crowning  beauty  of 
Acqua  Felice — from  St.  Pietro  in  Mon- 
tario,  which  marks  the  spot  where  St. 
Peter  suffered,  and  where  a  brotherhood 
of  miserable  monks  keep  up,  through 
all  the  day  and  half  the  night,  in  a 
low  monotonous  chaunt,  unintennitting 
prayer — from  St.  Onofrio,  where  Tasso 
died,  and  the  church  is  full  of  rare 
frescoes,  and  the  gloomy  old  cloister  is 
warmed  by  the  bewitching  smile  of  one 
of  Leonardo's  very  human  Madonnas  ; 
but  perhaps  best  from  the  Villa  Corsini 
—you  may  see  her  as  she  is,  beautiful 
exceedingly,  and  "  interesting  "  beyond 
compare.  Close  under  you  she  lies,  a 
sea,  or  rather  a  lake  of  densely  packed 
roofs,  out  of  which  rise  in  plentiful  pro- 
fusion the  domes  of  some  four  hundred 
churches,  all  flashing  and  glittering  in 
the  midday  sun  :— a  lake,  of  which  the 

opposite  shore  is  the  Sabine  range the 

sunny  slopes  and  shadowy  dells  of  sweet 
Lucretilis    and    his    train— and   whose 


512 


Two  Months  in  Rome. 


northern  limit  the  great  restful  round 
of  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,  whose 
guardian  angel  stands  dark  against  a 
blue  mountain  distance,  as  buoyant  and 
graceful  as  if  it  were  indeed  a  messenger 
of  heaven,  floating  down  upon  the  old 
city  on  some  errand  of  peace  and  love. 
There  she  lies  before  you — papal  and 
mediaeval  Eome.  But  where  is  the 
Eome,  our  Rome — the  Mistress  of  the 
World  ?  At  first  there  is  hardly  a  sign 
of  her  to  be  seen.  After  a  time  you 
make  out,  standing  like  a  majestic  rock 
in  the  sea  of  modern  houses,  the  great 
leaden  dome  of  the  Pantheon,  and  here 
and  there  a  column,  so  graceful  that 
modern  hands  could  not  have  made  it ; 
and  more  to  the  right,  where  the  city 
ceases,  a  torn  and  rent  brick  ruin  or 
two,  and  a  green  terraced  hill  on  which 
you  descry  with  difficulty,  among  mourn- 
ful cypresses,  other  brick  ruins  crested 
with  dark  trees  and  thick-growing 
brushwood;  and  over  the  hill  a  great 
shattered  round  of  dark  red  stone,  which 
is  the  upper  half  of  the  Coliseum  seen 
above  the  Palatine.  Further  on,  long 
lines  of  old  aqueduct,  apparently  inter- 
minable, stretch  out  across  the  sunny 
plain,  till  they  lose  themselves  at  the 
very  base  of  the  Alban  hills;  and, 
straining  your  eyes  still  more,  you  may 
trace,  running  straight  as  an  arrow,  the 
long  sorrowful  track  of  the  Appian 
Way.  With  one  bold  curving  sweep  of 
his  steady  current — you  may  see  from 
where  you  stand  the  very  swirl  of  his 
sand-coloured  waves — the  Tiber  cleaves 
the  great  city  in  twain,  and  veiling  his 
face  for  a  moment,  as  if  in  sorrow,  when 
he  passes  the  Palatine  and  Aventine, 
and  the  scanty  records  of  the  great  old 
days,  you  see  him  not  again  till  he 
gleams  in  a  long  reach  of  sunny  water, 
far  out  on  the  lonely  Campagna,  re- 
flecting its  calm  and  verdant  shores. 

If,  standing  on  this  Janicular  Hill, 
you  happened  to  look  behind  you,  you 
will  have  seen,  a  little  to  the  left,  peer- 
ing over  the  green  shoulder  of  the  hill 
itself,  an  object  which  might  be  the 
dome  of  St.  Paul's,  cleaned  up  and  en- 
larged. And  if  the  next  day  you  drive 
across  the  bridge  of  St.  Angelo,  and 


under  the  mighty  round  of  the  Castle, 
eternally  vexed  by  the  drumming, 
fifing,  fanfarronade,  and  pop-gunnery  of 
Gallic  ^occupation,  and  along  the  dirty, 
odoriferous  street  before  you,  you  will 
come  all  at  once  upon  a  vast  piazza, 
which  two  7  massive  colonnades,  like 
arms,  encircle,  and  over  which  presides 
the  colossal  fagade  of  the  greatest  and 
most  famous  of  all  Christian  churches. 
You  leave  your  carriage,  and  walk 
straight  up  the  midst  of  the  piazza, 
irresistibly  impelled  towards  the  broad 
white  steps  and  the  great  fagade  above 
them.  It  is  of  no  great  beauty,  but  of 
an  exquisite  colour — the  colour  (if  such 
a  thing  could  be)  of  sunlight  without 
its  radiance — and  from  its  very  size, 
"imposing."  Surely,  I  began  to  think, 
it  is  very  grand ;  yes,  it  is  magnificent ; 
it  is —  There  was  a  pause  and  a  re- 
vulsion of  feeling,  for  at  that  moment 
there  came  before  me,  as  in  a  vision, 
the  front  of  the  Pantheon.  Well,  but 
after  all,  it  is  St.  Peter's,  and  it  is  very 
fine  ;  and,  at  all  events,  there  is  nothing 
to  be  said  against  that  broad,  radiant, 
gently-sloping  stair,  which  to  walk  on 
is  a  pleasure,  and  which,  feeling  "  small 
by  degrees  and  beautifully  less,"  y~u 
are  now  ascending ;  and  passing  under 
the  arched  portico,  you  put  aside  with  a 
nervous  hand  the  heavy  leather  curtain, 
and  stand  in  St.  Peter's.  Of  course  it 
is  superb.  A  church  so  great  and  high, 
so  rich  in  marble  and  gold,  just  in  pro- 
portion and  harmonious  in  colour,  you 
never  have  seen  or  even  imagined  be- 
fore. And  then  how  wonderfully  bright 
and  new  !  This  St.  Peter's  ?  Why,  it 
must  be  a  church  built  last  year  "  by 
subscription;"  or  else  we  have  been 
dreaming,  and  Michael  Angelo  died  but 
yesterday.  So  bright  and  new,  and 
with  the  climate  of  eternal  spring  :  for 
St.  Peter's  is  a  city  rather  than  a 
church,  and  has  a  climate,  and  govern- 
ment, and  manners  and  customs  of  its 
own.  You  might  walk  about  it  for  a 
whole  day,  and  scarcely  have  seen  it 
all.  There  is  much  in  it  to  offend 
your  eyes  :  gigantic-  white  Popes  in  all 
directions,  standing  obtrusively  out, 
and  breaking  the  harmony  of  colour 


Two  Months  in  Home. 


and  form;  monuments  with  no  merit 
tut  size;  little  windows  which  would 
disgrace  a  Scotch  conventicle ;  and 
a  structure  of  ginger-bread  in  the 
centre,  which  looks  as  if  it  could 
be  flattened  down  like  an  opera  hat, 
and  be  all  the  better  for  the  pro- 
cess. But,  when  all  is  said,  it  is  a 
house  of  prayer  and  praise  grandly 
conceived  and  nobly  executed ;  and 
standing  there,  at  the  high  altar,  while 
your  eye  wanders  over  the  rich  mosaics 
of  the  cupola,  and  soars  upwards  to 
where  the  blue  mist  gathers  over  the 
distance  of  infinite  height,  you  wonder 
perhaps  what  the  great  Emperor,  who 
found  Home  brick  and  left  it  marble, 
would  have  said,  if  he  had  been  told 
that  then,  at  that  very  time,  contem- 
porary .  with  him,  Caesar  Augustus, 
there  lived  a  man  over  whose  grave,  in 
his  own  Rome,  there  would  one  day  be 
raised  a  temple  costlier  and  more  vast 
than  any  which  he  had  designed,  and 
that  the  man  was  a  fisherman  of 
Galilee.  Musing  thus  one  evening, 
about  the  time  of  vespers,  I  saw  ap- 
proaching along  the  marble  floor  a  man 
of  respectable  and  responsible  appear- 
ance, and  having  about  him  an  air  of 
extreme  good  sense  and  shrewdness. 
To  my  intense  astonishment,  he  turned 
suddenly  toward  a  high  stone  chair 
on  the  left,  which  I  had  not  before 
observed,  supporting  a  hideous  black 
image,  sitting  bolt  upright  with  two 
fingers  in  the  air,  and,  going  directly 
up  to  it,  imprinted  a  kiss  on  the  toe  of 
its  right  foot.  I  had  scarcely  recovered 
from  the  shock  of  this  incident,  when 
I  saw  that  other  persons,  of  every  age 
and  condition  of  life,  were  performing 
the  same  ceremony.  Sometimes  a  little 
group  of  peasantry  would  kneel  before 
the  image,  and  then  troop  past  it,  each 
man  kissing  its  toe,  after  carefully 
wiping  off  with  his  hand  the  kiss  of  his 
predecessor.  I  found  that  this  image 
was  originally  Jupiter,  but,  having  been 
turned  into  St.  Peter  by  the  pious 
authorities,  had  been  subjected  from 
time  immemorial  to  this  process,  to 
which,  as  the  King  of  gods  and  men, 
it  was  probably  accustomed,  but  which 
No.  54. — VOL.  ix. 


St.  Peter  himself  would  have  been  the 
first  to  repudiate.  Every  Roman  newly 
married  couple,  after  the  nuptial  knot 
is  tied,  proceed  to  clench  the  arrange- 
ment by  this  operation,  and  instead  of  a 
breakfast  you  are  asked  to  a  toe-kissing ; 
which  is  less  irksome,  and  not  much 
more  ridiculous,  than  the  solemn  flutter, 
chalky  cake,  and  wearisome  discourses 
"  on  this  occasion,"  of  an  English  wed- 
ding. 

At  this  hour  of  vespers  there  rolls 
from  one  of  the  side  chapels,  far  out 
among  the  marble  recesses  of  the  great 
church,  the  sound  of  a  deep-toned  organ 
and  rich  human  voices;  and  in  the 
chapel  itself  your  senses  are  rapt  into 
an  Elysium  of  devotion  by  the  strains 
of  divine  music,  and  the  subtle  perfumes 
of  sweet  incense,  and  the  proud  beauty 
of  some  star-throned  Madonna.  But 
if,  in  an  unlucky  moment,  you  chance 
to  look  at  the  functionaries  who  perform 
the  service,  your  devotion  is  apt  to 
vanish  in  an  irresistible  inclination  to 
laugh.  The  persistence  with  which 
they  turn  their  broad  backs  to  the  con- 
gregation ;  their  periodical  and  perfunc- 
tory antics;  their  gaudy  "vestments," 
reminding  you  strongly  of  side-scenes 
and  foot-lights — are  to  me,  whatever 
they  may  be  to  others,  the  reverse  of 
devotional.  There  may  be  proselytizing 
virtue  in  the  gorgeous  ceremonial  which 
surrounds  the  milk-white  hind;  but 
she  must  mend  it  in  these  respects  if 
she  would  have  those  who  are  born 
with  a  keen  sense  of  the  ludicrous  to 
worship  at  her  shrine. 

Externally,  the  Vatican  is  to  St. 
Peter's  as  a  wen  to  the  cheek  of  a  beau- 
tiful woman.  If  it  had  been  built  for 
an  International  Exhibition  in  London,, 
it  could  not  have  been  more  ugly.  In- 
ternally, as  all  the  world  knows,  it  is 
decorated  in  a  style  worthy  of  the  poor 
fisherman  who  lies  hard  by,  and  who  is 
represented  by  the  present  proprietor. 
It  has  only  some  forty  pictures,  but 
every  one  of  these  is  a  gallery  in  itself ; 
and  it  is  so  rich  in  sculpture  as  almost 
to  defeat  its  own  object.  The  interest 
and  beauty  of  the  statues  is  such  that, 
while  you  are  examining  one  of  them, 

L  L 


514 


Two  Months  in  Rome. 


you  are  irresistibly  drawn  off  to  another ; 
the  final  result  being  that  you  have 
totally  failed  to  carry  away  any  distinct 
impression,  except  the  glorious  face  and 
form  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere,  which  will 
haunt  you  to  your  latest  hour.  As  I 
stood  before  it,  I  felt  that  I  was  the 
enemy  of  but  one  man  in  the  world  ; 
and  he  was  the  man  who  "restored" 
the  right  hand.  Would  not  mutilation 
left  alone  have  been  preferable  to  those 
great  white  stiffened  fingers ;  as  if  he 
were  a  pedagogue  who  had  just  boxed 
the  ears  of  a  schoolboy,  and  not  a  god 
in  the  calm  majesty  of  draconticide  1 
"  Can't  you  let  it  alone  ? "  is  a  question 
to  be  addressed,  not  only  to  pragmatical 
politicians,  but  to  these  ruthless  restorers. 
If  only  some  drastic  Pope  would  fulmi- 
nate through  all  the  galleries  of  Rome 
a  decree  that  every  "  restored  "  statue 
should  at  once  be  reduced  to  its  prim- 
aeval condition,  the  loss  of  limbs  and 
features  that  would  ensue  would  be 
an  incalculable  gain  for  Art.  Or  why 
should  not  the  French  General  do  it  1 
They  manage  these  things  so  neatly  in 
France.  "  Restorations  are  and  remain 
abolished  "  would  have  a  racy,  effective 
sound. 

In  the  Vatican  you  will  see  the  Sistine 
Chapel,  interesting  not  for  itself,  but 
for  the  work  done  in  it  by  the  great 
high  priest  of  Roman  art,  who  built 
St.  Peter's  without  pay.  And  if  you 
like  to  sit  for  half  an  hour  on  the  green 
benches,  with  your  head  thrown  back 
till  your  neck  is  almost  broken,  you 
may  make  out  with  difficulty  on  the 
ceiling  many  noble  designs  ;  and  if  you 
like  to  strain  your  eyes  out  of  their 
sockets,  you  may  decipher  some  of  the 
details  of  the  Last  Judgment,  which  is 
at  least  as  grotesque  as  it  is  grand,  and 
which  the  great  painter  must  have  drawn 
(he  has  introduced  one  or  two  of  his 
good-natured  friends  in  situati6ns  the 
very  last  which  they  would  wish  to  have 
occupied),  with  reverence  be  it  spoken, 
in  a  vein  of  magnificent  pleasantry. 
But  this  is  a  rough  sketch,  and  I  am 
not  going  to  write  a  disquisition  on 
Roman  art.  One  remark  only  I  will 
make,  and  it  shall  not  be  very  profound. 


These  sculpture  galleries,  so  beautiful 
that  they  are  worshipped  by  a  concourse 
of  pilgrims  from  every  climate  under 
the  sun,  are  mere  products  of  the  random 
delving  of  the  gardener's  or  the  builder's 
spade — things  unnoticed  by  history,  and 
of  no  account  in  their  own  time.  What 
must  have  been  the  power  and  splendour 
of  that  art  of  which  these  are  but  the 
refuse,  or  at  best  but  average  speci- 
mens 1  What  must  have  been  the  array 
of  which  the  Gladiator,  the  Apollo,  and 
the  Laocoon,  were  the  rank  and  file  ? 
What  must  have  been  the  feast  of 
which  these  are  the  crumbs,  fallen  from 
the  table  of  the  old  city,  and  now  the 
glory  of  the  new  ? 

She  is  a  strange  weird  city,  this  Rome. 
There  is  something  about  her  mystical 
and  wholly  unintelligible.  You  begin 
after  a  time  to  look  upon  her  with  a 
certain  fear,  because  of  the  mysterious 
infinity  of  her  enchantments.  At  first 
she  seemed  but  a  poor  place  compared 
with  what  you  expected — a  moderately- 
sized,  comprehensible  city  enough,  with 
a  great  deal,  no  doubt,  to  be  seen,  but 
which  could  be  seen  in  a  fortnight,  or 
thereabouts.  A  fortnight  passes  ;  and, 
though  you  have  been  lionizing  from 
morning  till  night,  you  find  that  you 
have  done  almost  nothing.  And  still, 
the  more  you  see,  the  more  there  re- 
mains to  be  seen  ;  and  gradually  the 
place  becomes  larger  and  more  won- 
derful in  your  eyes.  It  seems  to  possess 
a  self- expanding  power.  In  vain  you 
attempt  to  fathom  the  depths  of  its 
interest  and  beauty.  It  becomes  un- 
fathomable, incomprehensible,  inexhaus- 
tible. Art-galleries,  churches,  ruins, 
palaces,  villas  ; — art-galleries,  which  to 
pass  once  swiftly  through  would  take 
you  many  weeks,  and  which  to  see  but 
very  imperfectly  is  the  most  for  which 
you  can  hope  to  find  time  ; — churches 
in  countless  numbers,  rich  beyond  imagi- 
nation in  gold,  and  marble,  and  precious 
stones  (stripped  for  the  most  part  from 
the  dead  body  of  the  old  city),  and  rare 
frescoes,  and  sculptures  above  all  price  ; 
— rambles  for  hours  on  some  old  historic 
hill  where  your  steps  are  on  porphyry 
and  serpentine,  and  the  great  brick  walls 


Two  Months  in  Rome. 


515 


and  arches,  remnants  of  some  palace  or 
temple,  are  dark  with  shadowy  copse- 
wood,  and  crowned  with  melancholy 
trees ;  and  where  you  catch,  from  time 
to  time — between  the  rents  of  ruin — a 
blue  mountain  distance,  or  a  tract  of 
sunny  plain ;  villas,  where  fountains 
sparkle  among  the  ilex-groves,  and 
mountain  summits,  touched  with  snow, 
look  down  between  the  stems  of  tall 
Italian  pines,  and  where,  when  you  are 
tired,  you  may  rest  in  halls  of  marble 
filled  with  forms  of  divinest  beauty, 
created  when  sculpture  lived  and  Greece 
was  free ; — the  city  itself,  with  its  foun- 
tains, its  obelisks,  its  piazzas,  its  columns, 
its  network  of  streets  where  the  sun 
scarcely  finds  an  entrance,  but  where 
the  antiquary  may  wander  in  a  chronic 
rapture  of  discovery — its  quaint  court- 
yards, with  their  marble  basins,  and 
broken  statues,  and  old  houses  that 
strike  the  stars — for  every  day  a  new 
pleasure,  for  every  pleasure  too  short  a 
day.  "  II  est  impossible  de  s'ennuyer  a 
Rome,"  said  the  Frenchman,  and  felt 
that  he  had  exhausted  praise. 

But,  with  a  self-expanding,  Eome  has 
also  a  self- contracting  power.  She  is 
the  most  enigmatical,  most  paradoxical, 
most  convenient  city  in  the  world.  Her 
streets  are  a  maze,  in  which  you  cannot 
lose  yourself  if  you  will.  Her  attrac- 
tions are  infinite,  but  the  trouble  they 
give  you  is  infinitesimal.  She  is  the 
greatest  possible  city  in  the  smallest 
possible  compass — an  ocean  in  a  nut- 
shell. What  you  have  to  see  there  is 
endless  :  but  you  see  it  with  a  strange 
facility,  and  you  wonder  the  more  to 
find  that  you  have  never  seen  it  all. 

Decidedly,  whenever  you  are  able, 
you  should  wind  up  your  day's  work 
upon  the  Pincian  Hill.  A  fairer  scene 
it  would  be  hard  to  find.  If  you  look 
down  from  the  stone  balustrade  on  its 
summit,  when  the  sun  begins  to  fall, 
you  will  see  hundreds  of  carriages,  all 
bright  with  flashing  harness  and  gay 
apparel,  begin  to  ascend  the  winding 
road  below  you,  and  come  out  on  the 
gravel  terrace  where  you  stand.  No 
wonder  that  in  long  procession  they 
climb  this  Pincian  Hill.  The  deep 


blue  overarching  sky  comes  down  so 
close  upon  its  level  plateau,  all  glowing 
with  tropical  plants — aloe,  and  cactus, 
and  palm — and  garden-walks  winding 
among  dark  ilex-trees,  that  it  seems  to 
touch  them  ;  and  the  loungers  in  the 
carriages,  tired  with  sight-seeing  or 
jaded  with  last  night's  ball,  drink  new 
life  in  the  air  that  meets  them — pure 
and  fresh  from  the  Sabine  mountains — 
looking  down  over  the  woods  upon  the 
brilliant  throng.  Music  plays  to  them 
through  all  the  afternoon  among  the 
rare  exotics,  that  seem  perfectly  at  home 
in  that  soft  dry  air.  Eome  is  at  their 
feet,  with  its  jangling  bells,  its  sea  of 
houses,  and  its  great  dome  of  the  Pan- 
theon standing  out  against  the  calm 
horizon  line  of  the  Campagna ;  oppo- 
site, the  darkening  side  of  the  Janicular 
Hill,  outlined  with  feathery  pines  ;  and 
to  the  north,  seen  under  arches  of  ilex, 
the  forms  of  distant  hills  so  delicate 
and  yet  so  clear  that  they  would  have 
driven  Claude  to  despair.  With  the 
setting  sun  the  carriages  wind  down- 
wards again,  as  they  came,  along  the 
zigzag  road,  between  the  palms  and 
pines  ;  and  in  a  few  minutes  you  are 
left  alone  upon  the  beautiful  hill.  But 
you  must  not  leave  it  yet,  for  there 
ensues  what  you  should  stay  to  see  » 
(nowhere  else  will  you  see  it  to  such  ad- 
vantage), a  single  combat  "  a  1'outrance  " 
— a  combat  which,  strange  to  say, 
instead  of  a  feverish  excitement,  will 
fill  you  with  a  delicious  calm,  and  feed 
your  eyes  with  beauty  of  colour  such  as 
you  never  looked  upon  before.  It  is 
the  battle  of  day  and  night,  with  Eome 
for  the  victor's  prize. 

Walking  in  the  streets  of  Eome  I 
should  say  that  every  other  person  you 
meet  is  either  a  priest  or  a  French 
soldier  ;  the  form  of  government  being, 
as  the  world  knows,  a  clerical  despotism 
founded  upon  red  pantaloons.  It  is  not 
exactly  the  polity  which  one  would  have 
selected  with  special  regard  to  the  wel- 
fare of  a  people  :  but  I  am  not  a  poli- 
tical traveller,  and  had  no  time  to 
examine  the  institutions  under  which 
the  Eomans  have  the  happiness  to  live. 
This  I  know,  that  there  is  no  city  on 
L  L  2 


516 


Two  Months  in  Eome. 


the  Continent  where  life  is  so  pleasant 
and  comfortable  as  in  Eome ;  and  for 
the  degree  of  municipal  merit  which 
this  may  imply,  let  us  give  due  credit. 
I  was  told  that  the  place  was  full  of 
brigands  and  thieves ;  and,  especially, 
that  I  ought  not  to  walk  after  ten 
o'clock  at  night  unless  in  the  most  fre- 
quented streets.  But  I  soon  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  my  watch  was  as 
little  likely  suddenly  to  leave  my  pocket 
in  Eome  as  in  London;  and  that  the 
advice  as  to  nocturnal  excursions  was 
not  more  valuable  for  one  than  for  the 
other.  Whether  you  would  rather  be 
stabbed  with  a  stiletto,  or  stifled  by  the 
garotte  process  and  jumped  upon  after- 
wards, is  a  mere  matter  of  taste. 

Among  the  municipal  arrangements 
of  Eome,  there  is  one  of  very  old  date 
which  appears  to  have  been  regarded 
with  peculiar  satisfaction  by  its  authors, 
but  of  which  I  confess  that  I  cannot 
approve, — the  coronation  of  pagan 
columns  with  Christian  saints.  The 
plan  has  been  to  set  up  some  noble  frag- 
ment of  the  ancient  city,  to  crown  it  with 
an  Apostle,  and  to  make  it  inform  the 
public,  by  doggrel  verses  on  its  base, 
how  having  been  dedicated  by  one  Pont. 
Max.  (pagan)  to  some  mythological  cele- 
brity, it  was  taken  in  hand  by  another 
Pont.  Max.  (Christian)  and  dedicated  to 
some  holy  man  ;  and  that  it  feels  happier 
and  more  respectable  in  consequence. 
Saint  Paul  and  Saint  Peter,  placed  re- 
spectively at  the  head  of  long  histories 
of  battles,  sieges,  blood,  and  rapine, 
which  enwreath  the  columns  of  Anto- 
ninus and  Trajan,  look  singularly  out  of 
place.  In  front  of  Santa  Maria  Maggiore 
there  is  a  fluted  pillar  of  wonderful 
grandeur  and  beauty,  which  has  been 
dragged  by  some  Pope  from  the  Temple 
of  Peace,  surmounted  with  a  statue  of 
the  Madonna,  and  made  to  proclaim,  in 
execrable  Latin  verse,  the  praises,  not  of 
the  Madonna  but  of  the  Pope  who 
placed  it  there — "  Te,  Paule,  nullis  obtri- 
cebo  seculis."  No  bathos  could  be  more 
complete.  The  obelisks  are  dealt  with 
in  a  similar  manner ;  and  the  same  well- 
meant  zeal  has  converted  in  all  directions 
heathen  temples  into  Christian  churches ; 


the  result  being  that  both  are  spoiled. 
Michael  Angelo  knew  this  well ;  and, 
being  ordered  to  turn  the  Baths  of  Dio- 
cletian into  a  church,  left  the  Baths  of 
Diocletian  just  as  they  were,  with  only 
enough  alteration  to  save  appearances, 
and  by  so  doing  succeeded  in  preserving 
a  splendid  relic  of  antiquity  for  the 
benefit  of  future  times. 

The  French  is  not  the  only  occupa- 
tion of  Eome — there  is  also  the  English. 
In  the  cold  months  they  swarm  in  the 
old  city,  rejoicing  in  the  unwonted  sight 
of  the  real,  living  sun.  As  you  walk 
through  the  Piazza  d'Espagna  and  look 
up  those  magnificent  steps  where  the 
obelisk  soars  up  in  the  clear  blue  sky, 
and  the  beautiful  church  which  crowns 
them  "stands  up  and  takes  the  morn- 
ing," you  are  startled  to  find  yourself 
practically  in  Belgravia.  It  is  long  be- 
fore you  can  recover  the  bewilderment 
caused  by  the  prevalence,  in  such  a 
Bcene,  of  the  fresh,  open  countenances 
which  you  have  been  accustomed  to 
associate  with  supreme  architectural 
ugliness.  There  is  a  building  just  out- 
side the  People's  Gate,  to  which,  every 
Sunday  morning,  crowds  of  carriages,  aa 
well  appointed  as  in  Hyde  Park,  aro 
seen  approaching  ;  and  the  little  French 
soldiers  at  the  gate  thrust  their  hands 
further  than  ever  into  their  red  pockets, 
and  gather  in  small  bright-eyed  knots 
discussing  "les  Anglais,"  as  the  carriages, 
one  by  one,  in  endless  succession  disgorge 
their  comfortable-looking  contents.  It 
is  the  English  church,  at  the  door  of 
which  you  observe  that  two  Papal 
gendarmes  are  posted,  apparently  lest 
the  panther  should  kick  over  the  tracer 
In  all  the  galleries  three-fourths  of  the 
visitors  are  English  ;  and  they  generally 
express  their  opinions  as  loudly  as  if  they 
were  valuable.  I  was  standing  one  day 
before  Guide's  famous  "  Beatrice,"  ab- 
sorbed in  the  surpassing  folly  of  attempt- 
ing to  carry  away  some  recollection  of  it 
on  paper,  and  during  all  the  time  interest^ 
ing  scraps  of  "  Chatham's  language " 
were  buzzing  about  my  ears.  "Sweet 
pretty  thing,  isn't  it  ? " — "  Don't  much 
like  it."—"  Charming  !  "— "  H'm  !  it  is 
and  it  isn't." — "  Best  thing  I  ever  saw  of 


Two  Months  in  Home. 


517 


Ouido's." — "  One  of  the  most  celebrated 
pictures  in  Eome  ; "  the  last  being  a 
sentence  read  aloud  by  Paterfamilias, 
for  the  benefit  of  his  daughters,  from 
the  ubiquitous  Murray.  "  Avez  vous 
le  Guide  a  la  Eome  1  Pitty — pas  grande 
— practical — you  know."  This  was  an 
utterance  which  I  overheard  one  day  in 
Piale's  library.  He  did  know,  and  with 
a  "come  along  old  fellow,  got  lots  to 
•do,"  English  Jones  and  English  Smith, 
honest,  patriotic  fellows,  who  would 
stand  no  nonsense  from  foreigners,  went 
off  and  did  it.  Also  I  remark,  that  for 
one  Englishman  in  Eome,  there  are  some 
ten  English  women — for  which  pheno- 
menon let  those  account  who  can. 
"  Could  you  tell  me,  sir,  which  are  the 
Samnite  and  which  the  Allban  hills  ? " 
asked  one  of  these  fair  girls,  unex- 
pectedly addressing  me  at  an  open 
window  of  the  Villa  Albani.  Her  en- 
joyment of  Eome  from  a  historical  point 
of  view  must  have  been  perfect.  At 
Florence  and  at  Naples  it  is  the  same — 
the  British  Lion  prowls  conspicuous 
in  all  places.  "  Je  crois  qu'ils  aiment 
les  beaux  arts,"  said  a  French  friend  of 
mine,  in  patronizing  explanation. 

Two  months  are  but  a  short  time  in 
Eome  ;  but,  if  you  are  not  an  idle  mil- 
lionaire, or  an  artist,  come  to  study 
under  Eaphael  or  Guido  when  he  had 
better  have  studied  under  nature,  or  an 
invalid  sent  abroad  for  his  health  when 
lie  had  better  have  stayed  at  home, 
you  will  probably  have  to  think  at  the 
end  of  that  time  of  returning  to  the 
ugliness  and  comfort  of  the  place  from 
whence  you  came.  And,  when  the  time 
for  your  last  look  at  Eome  is  come, 
<;linib  again  the  Janicular,  and  pass  out 
at  the  Porta  San  Pancrazio,  and  ring 
the  bell  at  a  large  white  arch  some  hun- 
dred yards  beyond.  It  is  the  "park 
gate  "  of  a  noble  villa,  approached  by  a 
long,  winding  gravel  road,  rising  and 
falling  in  gentle  undulations,  reminding 
you  strangely  of  England,  though  the 
woods  are  of  ilex  and  Italian  pine. 
There  is  the  smooth,  serpentine  car- 
riage-drive, the  gates  at  intervals,  and 
the  gradual  darkening  of  the  shady 
trees  as  you  come  nearer  to  "  the  Hall." 


But  even  as  you  pass  along  you  catch, 
between  the  trees  or  sloping  lawns,  some 
exquisite  Italian  distance,  or  vignette  of 
the  Great  City,  with  the  Apennines  at 
her  back,  or  St.  Peter's  sunning  himself 
in  solitary  state.  An  iron  gate  and  sunk 
fence  divide  the  "  park "  from  the 
gardens,  as  you  have  seen  it  a  hundred 
times  at  home ;  and,  as  you  drive  up 
to  the  bright  little  "  Casino,"  a  stately, 
pleasant-looking  matron  meets  you,  and 
shows  you  through  the  rooms.  The 
Casino  is  all  Italian  outside  ;  but  within 
it  you  are  in  England  again.  The  snug 
parlours — the  comfortable  furniture — 
the  small  dining-room,  in  which  the 
Prince  and  Princess  liked  best  to  live — 
the  little  boudoir,  with  its  feminine 
graces  and  comforts,  which  have  not 
been  touched  or  altered  (you  are  told) 
since  last  she  sat  there,  three  long  years 
ago,  in  one  of  her  last  days  on  earth. 
The  Prince — the  owner  of  the  place — is 
never  seen  there  now,  your  guide  tells 
you,  and  you  are  not  surprised.  For 
how  could  he  face  the  winding  walks, 
the  terraced  flower-garden,  the  cool  re- 
treats, the  long  vistas  among  the  stately 
pines — the  peace,  the  comfort,  and  the 
beauty  of  the  Paradise  that  was  made 
for  him  by  his  long-loved  English  bride  1 
There  are  no  gay  doings  there  now; 
no  social  gatherings  on  the  flowery  par- 
terres— no  sounds  of  festive  laughter 
about  the  bright  fountains,  or  from  the 
depths  of  the  shadowy  glades — no  mid- 
night dances,  with  their  long  line  of 
carriages  rolling  up  from  the  slumbering 
city,  and  under  the  moon-lit  trees. 
"  Senza  Signora,  mai  allegrezza,"  your 
conductress  says,  with  a  sigh.  You 
mount  the  spiral  stair,  and  come  out 
upon  the  roof.  It  is  a  perfect,  consum- 
mate panorama.  Just  under  you  is  the 
flower-garden,  with  its  statues  and  its 
steps,  its  trim  walks  and  its  neat  box- 
edges.  Westward,  the  ilex  groves  of  the 
villa,  with  their  gravel  walks,  their 
mossy  avenues,  their  fountains,  and 
their  shades,  secluded  and  shut  in  by 
a  deep  wood  of  tall  Italian  pines,  in 
close,  magnificent  array.  To  the  north, 
a  long  perspective  of  fair,  open  country, 
bordered  by  blue  mountains  ;  and  near 


518 


A  Gossip  over  my  Portfolio. 


you,  St.  Peter's,  in  isolated  grandeur, 
filling  a  hollow  of  the  hills.  Eastward, 
all  Home  lies  stretched  before  you — 
Borne  in  her  glory  and  her  grief,  her 
beauty  and  her  despair.  Beyond,  the 
Sabines,  with  Tibur  and  Prseneste  hang- 
ing high  upon  their  gentle  breasts ;  then 
that  fathomless  interval  of  pure,  clear 
distance ;  then  the  crested  hills  of  Alba, 
sparkling  all  over  with  gem-like  villas  ; 
and  before  you,  to  the  south,  where  the 
glistening,  snake-like  stems  of  the  great 
pine-wood  come  suddenly  to  an  end, 
the  soft,  undulating  bosom  of  the  Cam- 
pagna  gleams  for  a  while  through  their 
dark  leaves,  and  then,  with  one  great 
bound,  stretches  far  away,  till  your  eyes 
cannot  follow  it,  dissolved  in  the  mellow 
rays  of  the  descending  sun.  You  stand 
entranced  and  amazed ;  but  before  long 


your  eyes  are  caught  by  a  solitary  flower- 
bed cut  on  the  green  slope  of  the  lawn, 
and  upon  it,  in  colossal  letters  of  close- 
trimmed  myrtle,  each  casting  a  long 
shadow  in  the  declining  day,  you  read 
the  single  word  "  Mary."  It  is  the  only 
record  which  that  Eden  contains  of  her 
who  made  it.  Eome  herself — old  Rome, 
lying  there  with  centuries  of  shame  and 
sorrow  upon  her  face,  is  not  so  deeply 
touching.  You  will  never  forget  your  last 
day  in  Rome.  To-morrow  you  must 
brace  your  mind  to  look  back  again 
upon  the  plain,  uncompromising  visage 
of  dear  old,  practical,  sensible,  money- 
getting  England ;  fortunate,  if  you 
escape  the  hurricane  which,  be  sure,  is 
crouching,  like  a  tiger  in  his  lair,  in 
some  mysterious  ocean  ambush  between 
you  and  sunny  Marseilles.  H. 


A  GOSSIP  OVER  MY  PORTFOLIO. 


IT  is  the  beginning  of  autumn,  the 
gathering  in  of  the  full  fruitage  of  the 
year.  The  young  life  which  in  April 
began  faintly  to  stir  in  the  larch's  tas- 
seled  sprays,  and  the  sycamore's  buds,  has 
grown  lusty  and  vigorous,  and  nature  is 
stippling  her  woodlands  with  gold  and 
crimson.  But  no  true  autumn  day  is 
this ;  rather  like  one  borrowed  from 
young  March,  as  he  comes  in  with  blus- 
tering port,  rough,  and  surly,  and  strong. 
A  dull,  leaden  sky,  charged  with  rain,  is 
overhead,  but  a  keen  east  wind  keeps 
back  the  rain,  blowing  in  straight  from 
the  German  Ocean,  pregnant  with  the 
salt  spray  and  the  bitter  coldness  of  the 
sea.  And  the  wind  makes  sea-music 
too  among  the  topmost  branches  of  the 
elm-trees  on  my  lawn,  rocking  the  rooks 
to  sleep  in  their  high  nests  ;  or,  if  they 
sally  out  for  an  adventurous  flight,  blow- 
ing them  wearily  about  the  sky,  so  that 
it  is  all  they  can  do  with  the  strongest 
cleaving  of  their  wings  to  steer  home- 
wards again.  There  is  nothing  to  draw 
one  out  of  doors.  See,  the  wind  has 
died  away,  and  the  rain  begins  to  pour 
down  in  torrents. 


It  is  essentially,  then,  a  fireside  day. 
The  day  for  a  novel,  a  history — more 
than  all,  for  some  book  of  wild  sea- 
adventure  :  just  the  day,  in  fact,  to  read 
of  hair-breadth  'scapes,  of  shipwrecks,  of 
the  solitary  raft,  a  speck  of  human  lives, 
and  human  interests  and  sorrows,  alone 
amidst  the  limitless  level  of  the  greedy 
waves,  drifting  on,  it  may  be  to  safety, 
it  may  be  to  death.  For  the  wild  wind 
in  the  tree-tops  makes  a  fitting  accom- 
paniment to  such  a  narrative,  imitating, 
as  it  does  most  exactly,  the  breaking  of 
the  sea  upon  a  level  shore.  And  the 
dull  booming  roll  of  the  surge  seems  to 
strike  mournfully  and  forebodingly  upon 
the  reader's  ear,  unconsciously  infusing 
a  vivid  reality  into  the  story  he  is 
perusing. 

But  this  will  not  be  our  recreation  to- 
day ;  for,  to  tell  the  truth,  we  have  no 
such  means  of  gratifying  our  strong  wish 
to  change  our  mental  horizon.  Mudie's 
book-parcel  has  not  yet  come  in,  and,  as 
for  our  own  shelves,  we  have  thoroughly 
exhausted  them — at  least,  in  respect  of 
the  light  reading  they  contain.  Some 
naturalist  tells  the  story  of  a  pet  sea- 


A  Gossip  over  my  Portfolio. 


519 


anemone  to  Avhich  he  gave  a  blue-bottle 
fly  for  dinner.     In  the  course  of  a  few 
hours  he  saw  the  fly  floating  on  the  top 
of  the  water,  and  tried  to  take  it  out ; 
but,  lo,  it  was  the  mere  empty  husk  or 
eidolon  of  a  fly,  which  the  anemone  had 
rejected,  having  thoroughly  sucked  out 
and  exhausted  all  the  nutriment  that 
was  in  it.     And   such   we  take  to  be 
pretty  nearly  the  case  with  the  books 
of  travel  and  light  reading  generally  on 
our  shelves.     There  are  the  books  to  be 
sure,  but  the  pabulum  they  contained 
is  clean  sucked  dry,  and  to  us  they  are 
but  a  congeries  of  paper,  and  print,  and 
binding.     There  are  books,    indeed,  of 
•which  one  never  wearies,  which  seem  to 
enjoy  a  perpetual  youth,  a  dewy  fresh- 
ness, as  of  the  Eden  dawn;  and  what 
better  companions  on  a  dull  day  than 
these?     But  such  books,  for  the  most 
part,  require  a  strenuous  attention,  an 
effort ;  one  must  bring  one's  whole  heart 
and  mind  to  the  perusal,  and  these  to- 
day I  cannot  give ;  for,  however  much 
one  may  love  to  climb,  there  are  seasons 
when  the  mind  can  only  saunter  through 
the  green  fields  of  literature,  happy  in 
gathering  a  simple  flower  here  and  there, 
however  flat  and  tame  the  general  pro- 
spect.    And  under  this  aspect  alone,  as 
wiling  away  many  an  hour  which  would 
otherwise  have  dragged  heavily,  -as  admi- 
nistering a  harmless  opiate  to  the  care- 
worn mind,  or  the  restless  spirit,  good 
works  of  fiction  are  no  slight  boon  to 
the  world   at   large.     To-day  I  should 
feel  it  impossible  to  read  anything  else. 
Who  can  fathom  the  strange  influence 
which  the  weather  exercises  upon  us  1 
It  would  be  no  uninteresting  or  unpro- 
fitable task  to  trace  this  influence  in  the 
case  of  authors  and  their  works  ;  to  see 
how  the  history  or  the  poem  grew  into 
life   under    summer    skies,    or   in    the 
warmth  of  winter  firesides,  when  the 
snow  lay  in  drifts  against  the  casement 
and  the  keen  blast  howled  mournfully 
outside.     Chatterton,  writing  under  the 
mild  beam  of  a  summer  moon,  and  Shel- 
ley when  the  wind  blew  strongly  from 
the  west^  both   acknowledged   this  in- 
fluence upon  their  spirits  and  their  com- 
positions.   Crabbe  tells  us  that  he  wrote 


best  and  quickest  when  the  snow  lay 
thick  upon  the  ground  ;  it  braced  him 
for  his  work.  Yet  fancy  reverses  the 
picture,  and  deems  that  the  poet's  eye 
should  roll  with  a  finer  phrenzy  under 
the  glow  of  a  summer  sun,  or  in  the 
shadow  of  green  leaves. 

Not  being  in  the  humour,  then,  for 
study,  or  work  of  any  kind,  but  only 
desirous  of  some  light  employment  which 
may  amuse  the  fancy,  without  making 
any  demand  upon  the  intellect,  I  turn 
over  the  sketches  in  my  old  portfolio. 
Here  I  shall  have  just  the  sort  of  occu- 
pation I  require.  Many  a  ramble  by 
peaceful  lake,  or  wild  mountain-side  will 
be  brought  back  to  me :  scenes  fading, 
alas  !  too  quickly,  from  the  horizon  of 
memory.  And  this,  doubtless,  is  the 
great  charm  which  drawing  has  for  the 
hundreds  who  never  desire  to  exhibit 
their  pictures  in  public,  or  to  see 
H.  M.  E.  A.  or  any  other  mystic  initials 
after  their  name  ;  and  who  do  not  even 
care  for  fame  of  a  humbler  sort  amongst 
their  friends  and  acquaintances.  Quiet, 
self- withdrawn,  observant  seekers  of  the 
beautiful  and  the  good,  it  is  enough  for 
them  that  the  dew  glistens  on  the  grass, 
that  the  sun  shines,  that  the  sky  is  blue. 
Their  pleasures  are  simple,  and  there- 
fore their  pleasures  are  continuous.  A 
weed  gives  them  enough  matter  for 
meditation,  and  more  than  enough  for 
delight.  Nature  is  one  vast  harmony, 
and  their  ears  are  never  closed  :  a  gallery 
full  of  the,  most  brilliant  tints,  and  they 
go  in  and  out  as  they  list,  and  see  with 
keener  eyes  than  their  fellows.  The 
simplest  curves  of  a  leaf,  or  the  bloom 
of  a  petal,  gives  them  as  much  pleasure 
as  most  men  would  experience  in  the 
Trosachs  or  amongst  the  Devonshire 
valleys.  The  purple  of  the  horizon  in 
the  flattest  country,  the  dash  of  shadow 
upon  the  meadow,  or  glow  of  sunshine 
upon  distant  hills, — these,  amongst  the 
commonest  sights  of  the  commonest 
landscape,  fill  them  with  joy.  And 
withal,  the  current  of  their  lives  runs 
so  calmly,  so  peacefully !  one  might 
almost  be  tempted  to  apply  to  them  the 
Psalmist's  words,  "  They  come  not  into 
misfortune  like  other  folk,  neither  arc 


A  Gossip  over  my  Portfolio. 


they  plagued  like  other  men."  The 
keenest  thrusts  of  trouble  never  seem  to 
strike  them  down.  The  arrows  of  envy 
or  malice  glance  off  from  them,  harmless. 
The  little  annoyances  of  daily  life  do  not 
annoy  them.  And  in  great  trials,  too, 
they  show  bravely.  Their  grief  is  less 
petulant  than  the  grief  of  others.  Is  it 
that  they  feel  less  deeply?  No,  it  is 
because  (strange  as  the  paradox  may 
seem)  they  feel  more  deeply,  that  they 
sorrow  less.  Living  much  amongst 
realities,  they  are  less  amazed  when  they 
stand  face  to  face  with  real  trouble  and 
affliction,  with  the  last  great  reality — 
Death — than  those  who  live  with  the 
phantoms  of  the  world,  and  are  erer 
chasing  phantoms  of  fashion,  and  wealth, 
tmd  pleasure.  In  their  solitary  com- 
munings  with  Nature  they  have  learnt 
deeper  lessons  than  those  merely  of  the 
palette  and  the  brush :  they  have  seen 
fairer  visions  than  of  green  leaf  or 
purple  tree-trunk ;  have  heard  finer 
harmonies  than  the  rising  wind  makes, 
or  the  restless  surge,  or  singing  bird  of 
sweetest  note.  There  are,  it  may  be,  so 
many  kinds  of  voices  in  the  world,  and 
none  of  them  without  signification, — to 
the  attentive  ear.  And  in  these  men  the 
imagination  is  generally  healthy  and 
strong.  Their  eye  stops  not  at  the  outer 
husk  and  sensuous  appearance,  but 
pierces  through  and  through,  observing 
all,  taking  note  of  all.  And  while  Fancy's 
idle  dart  glances  off  from  the  hard 
armour  of  seeming  in  which  all  things 
are  "wrapt,  for  disguise  or  for  security, 
the  weapon  of  Imagination  is  of  the 
finest  temper,  and  can  penetrate  to  their 
heart,  to  the  root  and  origin  of  their 
being.  At  any  rate,  the  true  lover  of 
Nature,  the  naturalist,  the  sketcher,  finds 
somewhere  a  charm,  cradled  in  the  heart 
of  creation,  which  is  of  mighty  force  to 
assuage  vain  regrets  for  the  past,  to  drive 
away  the  small  troubles  of  daily  life,  and 
to  throw  a  brilliant  lustre  upon  the 
hopes  and  the  aspirations  of  the  future. 
I  open  my  portfolio.  The  first 
sketch  I  meet  with  is  taken  from  a 
steep  hill,  which  commands  a  wide 
stretch  of  level  country,  not  particularly 
•well  wooded,  or  watered,  or  moun- 


tained,  but  simply  pretty ;  such  as  are 
any  hundred  miles  of  our  midland 
scenery.  The  hill,  whose  broken  ground, 
with  a  few  felled  trees,  makes  the  fore- 
ground of  my  sketch,  is  wood-covered 
almost  to  the  top,  and  gashed  with 
ravines,  each  with  its  little  brook  leap- 
ing from  rock  to  rock  under  the  inter- 
weaving boughs  of  the  moss-grown  trees. 
For  there  is  much  moss  on  the  ground  and 
on  the  tree-trunks  and  boulder-stones, 
chiefly,  I  suppose,  from  the  moist  atmo- 
sphere which  fills  the  deep  wood-clad 
ravines.  Indeed,  when  the  hot  midday 
sun  shoots  down  in  long  golden  arrows, 
through  the  quivering  leaves  to  the  ferns 
which  nestle  in  the  hollows  by  the 
brook-side,  a  damp,  fragrant  steam  goes 
up  from  the  earth,  as  it  were  in  a  hot- 
house or  a  South  American  forest.  But 
from  the  breezy  hill  itself,  crowned 
with  a  circlet  of  tall  pines,  the  eye  wan- 
ders delightedly  over  miles  and  miles  of 
fresh  bright  scenery,  meadow  and  arable 
land,  and  hedge- row  timber,  and  undu- 
lating ground,  and  woodland,  and  around 
all  the  ring  of  purple  horizon,  which 
make  up  nine-tenths  of  our  beautiful 
English  landscape.  Now,  here  was  a 
scene  with  which  I  was  very  familiar, 
having  traversed  that  hill  hundreds  of 
times  ;  perhaps  three  or  four  times  a 
week  for  some  years  ;  but  which  I  had 
left  a  long  while  ago.  But  never  had  I 
appreciated  the  living  beauty  of  that 
scenery  in  my  daily  walks,  as  now  I 
appreciate  the  remembrance  of  it  in 
looking  at  my  rough,  unfinished  sketch; 
and,  filled  as  my  heart  is  with  that 
fondly  remembered  loveliness,  a  strange 
regretful  longing  seizes  me  to  go  and 
stand  once  more  on  that  pine-crowned 
hill,  and  to  stamp  upon  my  mind  for 
ever  the  thousand  details  which  I  now 
know  to  be  so  beautiful,  but  which  in 
the  hurried  strides  of  my  daily  business 
walk  I  had  overlooked  and  disregarded. 
And  I  ask  myself  sadly,  may  it  not  be 
possible  that  I  should  look  back  with  a 
too  late  regret  hereafter  on  many  kind 
thoughts  and  lovely  deeds  (beautiful 
details  in  the  moral  landscape  which 
surrounded  me !)  which  I  was  too  hurried 
and  hasty,  too  much  preoccupied  within, 


A  Gossip  over  my  Portfolio. 


521 


to  recognise  before,  but  which,  might 
have  filled  my  temporary  sojourn  here 
with  a  light  and  a  glow  it  sadly  needed, 
and  have  exercised  an  influence  of  good 
upon  me  which  might  have  borne  a 
fairer  flower,  and  a  finer  fruit  ?  It  is 
difficult,  I  suppose,  for  most  men  to  find 
beauty  in  their  immediate  neighbour- 
hoods, especially  if  they  are  men  of 
business,  and  not  mere  saunterers. 
The  familiar  is  seldom  beautiful,  simply 
because  we  do  not  look  for  beauty  in 
things  upon  which  our  eyes  are  accus- 
tomed to  dwell ;  as,  for  instance,  in  the 
faces  of  those  who  are  constantly  about 
us.  A  busy  man  seldom  looks  about 
him  much  in  the  country  through 
which  his  business  takes  him.  He 
turns  his  thoughts  inwards,  or  talks  to 
his  companion.  But  let  him  tourise 
out  of  the  beaten  track,  if  it  be  only  to 
a  place  twenty  miles  distant,  and  of 
course  he  makes  it  his  business  to  use 
his  eyes,  and  his  business  is  then  his 
pleasure.  It  is  sad  that  this  should 
be  the  case ;  it  is  sad  that  dwellers  in 
pretty  country  places,  and  amidst  the 
grandest  scenery  in  the  world,  should 
miss  much  of  the  joy  and  peace  which 
beautiful  scenery  was  meant  to  infuse. 
But  that  this  is  very  much  the  case 
with  most,  even  lovers  of  the  beautiful 
in  nature  an*  art,  will  scarcely  be  denied 
by  those  who  have  thought  at  all  about 
the  matter.  I  suppose  that  the  world 
is  too  much  with  us,  as  "Wordsworth 
says ;  the  world  of  our  own  interests, 
and  cares,  and  hopes ;  and  that,  even 
where  selfishness  has  utterly  abdicated 
its  throne,  the  memory  of  former  sorrows 
may  linger  amid  the  fair  scenes  we 
know  so  well,  and  cloud  their  beauty 
with  a  present  shadow :  as,  when  a  fair 
face  we  loved  to  look  upon  has  once 
been  darkened  with  a  frown,  it  is  never 
so  fair  to  us  thereafter,  even  though  the 
frown  has  passed  away. 

Possibly  it  is  for  this  reason  that  ar- 
tists seldom  take  out  their  sketch-books 
at  home.  The  amateur,  indeed,  gene- 
rally thinks  he  must  go  amidst  wild 
scenery,  into  Wales  or  Scotland,  or  the 
Lakes,  to  find  any  subject  for  his  pencil 
at  all;  haply  forgetful  that  the  artist 


makes  the  picture  and  not  the  view,  and 
that  the  tyro  might  spend  a  day  in  the 
wildest  pass  of  an  Alp,  and  be  much 
less  profitably  and  successfully  engaged 
than  if  he  had  spent  a  careful  hour  in 
copying  a  stone  and  a  nettle  or  two  at 
his  own  gate.  But,  when  artists  forsake 
the  simple  and  the  familiar,  it  is  oftener 
through  fear  than  from  contempt.  For  it 
is  far  easier  to  wash  in  "  an  effect "  than  it 
is  to  draw,  leaf  by  leaf  and  vein  by  vein, 
the  commonest  herb  which  grows  in  the 
field.  Who  has  ever  painted  a  meadow 
in  June,  just  before  hay  harvest,  when 
the  tall  grass  sways  in  billows  under  the 
soft  west  wind  ?  There  can  be  no  more 
beautiful  or  rewarding  subject ;  yet  I 
have  never  seen  it  well  worked  out  on 
canvass  or  on  paper.  Perhaps  it  is  too 
laborious  :  perhaps  it  cannot  be  drawn  at 
all,  but  only  indicated  with  a  few  sweeps 
of  the  swiftest  brush.  At  any  rate,  it  is 
as  easy  to  draw  the  ever  changing  waves 
of  the  sea  as  to  catch  and  fix  the  gentle 
sway  and  undulation  of  the  rippling 
grass,  green  at  the  root  as  emerald,  but 
touched  here  and  there  on  the  surface 
with  the  russet  of  the  sorrel,  stippled 
into  warmth  by  the  red  clover,  specked 
with  patches  of  white  from  tall  daises, 
and  sheeted  with  the  golden  glow  of 
countless  buttercups,  whilst  the  floating 
clouds  overhead  dapple  it  with  soft 
shadows  which  follow  all  the  undulations 
of  the  ground,  and  throw  into  prominent 
effect  a  sunlit  crown  of  white  hemlock 
flowers  on  their  waving  spray,  or  the  red 
glow  of  the  honey-scented  clover  bloom. 
And  now,  looking  at  the  sketch  I 
hold  in  my  hand,  I  am  at  the  seaside ; 
standing  on  a  boulder-strewn  beach,  be- 
neath an  underclilf  of  sandstone,  seamed 
with  blue  cracks  from  which  water  drips 
and  oozes,  and  patched  with  lichenous 
growth  here  and  there.  One  half  of  the 
cliff  is.blazing  in  the  sun,  the  lower  half 
is  purple,  in  shade ;  and  the  sea  and 
the  sky — both  liquid  azure,  unclouded 
and  unrippled,  meet  behind  the  red 
bluff  headland  glimmering  in  the  noon- 
tide heat.  There  is  the  strip  of  sandy 
beach  on  which  we  stand,  then  a  line  of 
shale  and  ironstone,  and  large  smooth 
boulders,  and  then  the  sea ;  zone  beyond 


522 


A  Gossip  over  my  Portfolio. 


zone  of  various  and  multitudinous  life, 
from  the  strangely  beautiful  forms  only 
revealed  to  us  by  the  dredge,  or  an  oc- 
casional hurried  glimpse  of  them  in 
their  rock  pools  at  low  tide,  up  to  the 
common  limpets  and  crabs  and  sand- 
hoppers  of  the  beach  itself  where  the 
wave  breaks,  hissing  and  bubbling  like 
champagne,  and  spreading  out  into  a 
thin  transparent  film.  A  low  line  of 
rock  runs  out  far  into  the  sea,  into  deep 
water,  the  glory  and  delight  of  the 
swimmer,  far  beyond  the  surf,  beyond 
the  harsh  raking  of  the  pebbles  which 
the  retreating  wave  drags  back.  That 
used  to  be  our  bath.  Oh;  pleasant 
memories  of  summer  time  which  this 
sketch  recalls  !  of  days  that  sped  like 
hours  upon  that  pleasant  shore ;  of 
mornings  with  the  dredge,  or  the  fishing- 
rod,  or  sketch-book,  and  of  evenings 
spent  over  the  miscroscope,  perhaps  with 
a  friend  whose  tastes  were  akin,  and  of 
the  cigar  and  quiet  contemplative  talk  in 
the  verandah  at  night,  when  the  ripples 
of  the  sea  we  overlooked  were  flakes  of 
silver  in  the  moonlight.  I  must  look 
and  remember  no  more,  or  I  shall  be 
packing  up  in  a  hurry,  and  starting  for — 
well,  we  will  say  the  North  Devon  coast. 
And  this  would  never  do.  Ulysses  is 
fast  bound  by  duty,  and  may  not  leave 
his  ship  ;  and  though  the  soft  south 
winds,  and  sunshine  gleams,  and  whis- 
pering trees  of  autumn  beckon  him. 
like  sirens,  to  that  pleasant  shore,  he  will 
close  his  eyes,  nor  hearken  any  more  to 
their  song  ;  but  sail  on  his  accustomed 
way,  haply  not  the  less  mindful  of  their 
beauty,  even  when  he  seems  to  disre- 
gard it  most. 

Here  is  a  figure-piece.  What  can  it 
mean?  A  man,  young  and  stalwart, 
clad  in  a  coarse  blouse  like  a  labourer, 
who  walks  painfully  on  and  on,  with 
clenched  teeth  and  fixed  eyes,  bearing 
in  his  arms  a  heavy  burden, — a  woman 
— a  lifeless  corpse.  Behind,  striving 
almost  in  vain  to  keep  up  with  his 
irregular  footsteps,  runs  a  little  child 
with  large  awe-struck  eyes  and  wan 
wet  cheeks,  who  yet  stops  every  now 
and  then  in  her  running  to  gather  wild 
flowers  by  the  wayside.  The  landscape 


is  not  such  as  we  know ;  the  flowers 
which  the  child  carries  in  her  little 
hand  are  strange  to  our  eyes.  When  I 
say  that  the  sketch  is  drawn  with  Pre- 
Raphaelite  skill,  I,  of  course,  at  once 
disclaim  it  as  my  own.  But  you  can 
verily  see  that  the  man  who  carries  the 
corpse  staggers  and  trembles  in  his  walk, 
and  is  convulsed  from  head  to  foot  by 
some  strong  passionate  agony ;  staggers 
under  a  sudden  blow  rather  than  from 
the  weight  of  his  burden,  so  fragile 
as  it  is,  so  thin  and  wasted.  And  no 
unskilful  hand  could  have  limned  that 
face  and  figure  of  the  little  child,  laugh- 
ing and  weeping  at  once,  under  the 
spell  of  a  great  awe,  and  pleased  with 
every  fresh  flower-toy  which  meets  her 
eye.  The  sketch  is  inscribed,  "  A  Fune- 
ral at  the  Diggings,  Australia,  185 — ." 
Often  have  I  looked  at  this  drawing, 
and  with  a  sad  heart  worked  out  the 
sad  story  which  it  shadows  forth :  epi- 
sode of  that  wonderful  romance-life  of 
which  the  latter  half  of  this  nineteeth 
century  is  so  full.  I  picture  to  myself 
two  loving  and  faithful  hearts  which 
have  agreed  to  share  this  world's  mingled 
good  and  evil  together ;  gentleman  and 
lady,  or  labouring  man  and  lass,  it 
matters  little  which;  poor  they  are  in 
worldly  wealth,  of  course,  but  rich  in 
love,  in  health,  in  hope^  I  like  to 
dwell  upon  that  early  life  of  theirs, 
opal-hued,  nor  chilled  as  yet  even  by 
the  shadow  of  the  coming  storm.  It  is 
in  itself  so  sweet,  so  pure,  so  tinged 
with  the  freshness  of  the  Eden-dawn, 
and  with  the  brightness  of  the  Paradise- 
glory,  the  alpha  and  the  omega  of  man's 
happiness.  I  picture  them,  him  in  his 
manly  strength,  her  in  her  wifely  trust- 
fulness, sailing  forth  beyond  England's 
horizon  to  a  far  off  land,  where  there 
will  be  bread  for  them  and  their 
children;  to  work  out  man's  primeval 
mission,  and  to  multiply  and  replenish 
the  earth  and  subdue  it.  A  year  is 
gone  by,  and  a  little  one  is  born  to 
them.  Two,  three,  four  years  more, 
and  the  wild  current  of  human  life  has 
set  in  towards  the  gold  fields,  a  fierce, 
tumultuous  tide  hurrying  them  with  it. 
I  see  them  in  their  little  tent.  I  trace 


A  Gossip  over  my  Portfolio. 


523 


them  in  amongst  the  vast  crowd  of 
civilized,  and  savage  folk ; — the  world 
turned  topsy-turvy :  Oxford  graduates 
keeping  a  hedge  school,  or  peddling 
small  wares ;  coarse,  hearded  "  roughs  " 
eating  turtle  and  drinking  champagne. 
I  hear  the  child's  bahy-laughter  amid 
the  crash  of  a  thousand  cradles.  But, 
at  last,  to  the  little  tent  we  are  watch- 
ing come  want  and  sickness.  Through 
the  thin  canvass  we  see  a  dim  light 
which  burns  throughout  the  long  night ; 
we  hear  the  husband's  despairing  groan, 
the  child's  wail,  the  dying  wife's  gentle, 
cheering  voice, — ah,  what  agony  it 
hides !  the  prayer  learnt,  what  ages 
ago  it  seems,  in  the  peaceful  English 
village  church.  Then  the  dim  light 
goes  out,  and  there  is  silence,  and 
there  is  darkness.  Oh,  lift  up  the  wan 
corpse,  stricken  man !  clasp  the  lifeless 
form  close  to  thy  bosom,  where  it  may 
rest  no  more  on  earth ;  veil  it  decently  ; 
bear  it  away  from  the  crowd,  the  noise, 
the  struggle,  the  lust  of  gold;  bear  it 
far  off  into  the  still  and  solemn  woods  ; 
bury  it  away  from  thy  sight,  and  bury 
thy  heart  and  thy  joy  with  it  in  the 
grave  for  ever !  Gather  bright  flowers, 
little  Innocent,  sole  mourner  at  thy 
mother's  funeral ;  they  will  serve  to 
strew  thy  mother's  lonely  grave  in  the 
dark  and  silent  depths  of  the  Australian 
forest ! 

The  next  drawing  which  I  take  out  of 
the  portfolio  places  us,  in  imagination,  at 
evening  time  upon  the  brow  of  a  gentle 
declivity  that  overlooks  a  small  village 
nestled  in  the  hollow  of  the  sloping  hills. 
You  can  hardly  call  the  hollow  a  valley ; 
it  is  not  deep,  or  wide,  or  grand  enough 
for  that.  It  is  simply  a  hollow  scooped 
out  of  the  undulating  chalk-hill — may 
be,  by  the  rush  of  some  vast  primeval 
current  or  tidal  river.  And  in  this 
hollow,  sheltered  from  the  rude  east 
winds  which  sweep  so  wildly  over  the 
high  lands  just  above,  there  has  grown 
up  a  little  cluster  of  thatched  cottages 
around  a  grey  flint-built  church ;  each 
cottage  surrounded  by  its  little  garden, 
and  shut  in  with  orchard  hedges.  The 
square,  massive  church  -  tower,  —  dark 
purple  against  the  amber-lighted  evening 


sky — rises  out  of  a  ring  of  tall  elms,  in 
which  the  rooks  love  to  build.  And 
this  abundance  of  wood  in  which  the 
village  nestles,  gives  it  a  home  look,  as 
contrasted  with  the  bleak,  bare  downs 
that  surround  it  on  all  sides.  And  the 
hollow,  with  its  church  and  roofs,  is 
purple  grey,  with  a  soft,  floating  mist  of 
smoke  rising  up  from  the  cottage  chim- 
neys :  for  fires  are  lighted  now,  and  the 
evening  meal  is  set  ready  for  fathers 
and  brothers,  who  have  toiled  long  and 
wearily  with  scythe  or  with  sickle  in 
the  summer  heat.  And  the  merry 
voices  of  children,  whose  school-work  is 
over  for  the  day,  float  upon  the  still  air 
up  to  where  we  stand,  softened  by  dis- 
tance, and  very  musical  and  sweet.  And 
in  the  fair,  unclouded  sky,  with  its  faint 
gleams  of  light  in  the  west;  over  the 
silent  churchyard  and  its  low,  green 
graves ;  throughout  all  the  little  hollow 
amid  the  sloping  hills,  there  is  a  calm- 
ness inexpressible,  and  rest,  and  peace. 

I  put  back  the  sketch  into  its  place, 
and  close  my  portfolio.  I  have  gathered 
food  for  thought  therein,  and  must,  by 
myself,  digest  it. 

But,  in  a  few  last  words,  let  me  im- 
press on  all  who  take  an  interest  in 
looking  at  drawings,  and  would  gladly 
themselves  learn  to  draw,  but  fear  "they 
have  no  talent  that  way,"  that,  to  draw 
well,  that  is  to  say,  to  copy  form  cor- 
rectly, is  in  the  power  of  all  who  have 
ever  learnt  to  write.  The  faculty  itself 
is  merely  a  mechanical  one,  and  only 
demands,  as  indeed  do  all  mechanical 
arts,  perseverence  and  attention.  The 
use  of  that  faculty,  like  the  use  of 
penmanship,  will,  of  course,  be  variously 
applied,  in  accordance  with  the  taste 
and  ability  of  those  who  have  acquired 
it.  One  person  only  uses  his  pen  to 
indite  "elegant  epistles"  of  friendship 
or  affection ;  another  is  more  reflective, 
and  keeps  a  diary ;  a  third  enriches  the 
world  thereby  with  master-pieces  which 
the  world  will  not  willingly  let  die. 
And  so,  with  the  pencil  and  brush  we 
may  aim  at  mere  prettiness,  or  embody 
thoughts.  We  may  wish  to  occupy  idle 
hours,  or  to  carry  away  with  us  a  remem- 
brance of  pleasant  times  and  pleasant 


524 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


places.  And  the  mere  act  of  sketching 
from  nature,  whatever  the  result  may  be 
as  a  work  of  art,  cannot  fail  to  be  pro- 
ductive of  benefit  both  to  mind  and 
body.  It  takes  us  from  the  throng  of 
cities,  from  the  corroding  cares  and 
irritations  of  daily  business,  and  sets  us 


in  some  pleasant  spot,  where  the  eye  is 
never  filled  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear 
with  hearing  ;  leaving  us  free  to  medi- 
tate, and  "  to  delight  in  all  that  in 
which  God  delights  ;  that  is,  in  virtue 
and  wisdom,  in  the  whole  creation,  and 
in  God  Himself." 


LETTERS  FROM  COLERIDGE  TO  WILLIAM  GODWIN". 


[THB  author  of  "  Caleb  Williams  "  en- 
joyed the  acquaintance — and,  at  various 
periods,  the  correspondence— of  almost 
every  contemporary  of  literary  celebrity. 
Methodical  to  a  passion,  endowed  with 
the  most  indefatigable  industry,  he  not 
only  kept  every  letter  of  importance 
that  came  into  his  hands,  but  carefully 
transcribed  his  own  when  he  considered 
that  ne  had  written  anything  worthy  of 
preservation.  The  result  has  been  the 
accumulation  of  a  very  extensive  and  in- 
teresting body  of  documents  in  the  hands 
of  his  descendants,  the  more  important 
portion  of  which,  it  may  be  hoped,  will 
one  day  be  given  to  the  world.  To  it 
belong  the  letters  now  published,  selected 
from  a  larger  number  proceeding  from 
the  same  pen.  It  is  not  much  to  de- 
scribe them  as  superior  in  every  respect 
to  such  of  Coleridge's  letters  as  have 
hitherto  found  their  way  into  print, 
since,  from  causes  on  which  it  is  unne- 
cessary to  dwell,  these  have,  for  the 
most  part,  been  little  calculated  to 
•exhibit  his  powers  to  advantage.  Those 
now  published  constitute,  in  their  edi- 
tor's opinion,  a  much  more  entertaining 
and  lively  body  of  familiar  correspon- 
dence than,  from  the  general  character 
of  Coleridge's  prose  style,  he  had  been 
in  any  way  prepared  to  expect.  Though 
printed  with  but  few  alterations  or 
emissions,  they  will  not,  he  thinks,  be 
found  to  contain  a  line  to  disturb  the 
opinion  entertained  of  Coleridge  by 
those  most  profoundly  impressed  with 
the  pre-eminence  of  his  intellect,  and 
the  goodness  of  his  heart. 

R  GARNETT.] 


WEDNESDAY,  May  21, 1800. 
DEAR  GODWIN, — I  received  your  letter 
this  morning,  and  had  I  not,  still  I  am 
almost  confident  that  I  should  have 
written  to  you  before  the  end  of  the 
week.  Hitherto  the  translation  of  the 
Wallenstein  has  prevented  me,  not  that 
it  engrossed  my  time,  but  that  it  wasted 
and  depressed  my  spirits,  and  left  a 
sense  of  wearisomeness  and  disgust 
which  unfitted  me  for  anything  but 
sleeping  or  immediate  society.  I  say 
this  because  I  ought  to  have  written 
to  you  first ;  yet,  as  I  am  not  behind 
you  in  affectionate  esteem,  so  I  would 
not  be  thought  to  lag  in  those  outward 
and  visible  signs  that  both  show  and 
verify  the  inward  spiritual  grace.  Be- 
lieve me,  you  recur  to  my  thoughts 
frequently,  and  never  without  pleasure, 
never  without  my  making  out  of  the 
past  a  little  day-dream  for  the  future. 
I  left  Wordsworth  on  the  4th  of  this 
month ;  if  I  cannot  procure  a  suitable 
house  at  Stowey  I  return  to  Cumber- 
land and  settle  at  Keswick,  in  a  house 
of  such  prospect  that  if,  according  to 
you  and  Hume,  impressions  constitute 
our  being,  I  shall  have  a  tendency  to 
become  a  god,  so  sublime  and  beautiful 
will  be  the  series  of  my  visual  exist- 
ence. But,  whether  I  continue  here  or 
migrate  thither,  I  shall  be  in  a  beautiful 
country,  and  have  house-room  and  heart- 
room  for  you,  and  you  must  come  and 
write  your  next  work  at  my  house.  My 
dear  Godwin  !  I  remember  you  with  so 
much  pleasure,  and  our  conversations 
so  distinctly,  that,  I  doubt  not,  we  have 
been  mutually  benefited ;  but  as  to 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


525 


your  poetic  and '  physiopathic  feelings, 
I  more  than  suspect  that  dear  little 
Fanny  and  Mary  have  had  more  to  do 
in  that  husiness  than  I.  Hartley  sends 
his  love  to  Mary.1  "What,  and  not 
to  Fanny  ?  "  "  Yes,  and  to  Fanny,  but 
I'll  have  Mary."  He  often  talks  about 
them. 

*  My  poor  Lamb,  how  cruelly  afflic- 
tions crowd  upon  him  !  I  am  glad  that 
you  think  of  him  as  I  think  :  he  has  an 
affectionate  heart,  a  mind  sui  generis; 
his  taste  acts  so  as  to  appear  like  the 
unmechanic  simplicity  of  an  instinct ; 
in  brief,  he  is  worth  an  hundred  men 
of  mere  talents.  Conversation  with  the 
latter  tribe  is  like  the  use  of  leaden 
bells — one  wearies  by  exercise.  Lamb 
ever}'  now  and  then  irradiates,  and  the 
beam,  though  single  and  fine  as  a  hair, 
yet  is  rich  with  colours,  and  I  both  see 
and  feel  it.  In  Bristol  I  was  much 
with  Davy,2  almost  all  day.  He  always 
talks  of  you  with  great  affection,  and 
defends  you  with  a  friendly  zeal.  If  I 
settle  at  Keswick  he  will  be  with  me 
in  the  fall  of  the  year,  and  so  must 
you :  and  let  me  tell  you,  Godwin,  that 
four  such  men  as  you,  I,  Davy,  and 
Wordsworth,  do  not  meet  together  in 
one  house  every  day  in  the  year — I 
mean  four  men  so  distinct  with  so  many 
sympathies.  I  received  yesterday  a  let- 
ter from  Southey.  He  arrived  at  Lisbon 
after  a  prosperous  voyage,  on  the  last 
day  of  April ;  his  letter  to  me  is  dated 
May-Day.  He  girds  up  his  loins  for  a 
great  history  of  Portugal,  which  will  be 
translated  into  Portuguese  in  the  first 
year  of  the  Lusitanian  Eepublic.3 
Have  you  seen  Mrs.  Robinson4  lately 

1  Mrs.  Shelley. 

a  I  like  him  [Godwin]  for  thinking  so  well 
of  Davy.  He  talks  of  him  everywhere  as  the 
most  extraordinary  of  human  beings  he  had  ever 
met  with.  I  cannot  say  that,  for  I  know  one 
whom  I  feel  to  be  the  superior  [Wordsworth 
probably  is  meant],  but  1  never  met  with  so 
extraordinary  a  young  man.  (Coleridge  to 
Wedgwood,  Cottle,  p.  431.) 

J  The  letter  is  printed  in  the  first  volume 
of  Southey's  correspondence,  edited  by  his 
son,  where,  however,  the  passage  respecting 
the  projected  history  is  omitted. 

4  The  celebrated  Perdita,  She  died  in  the 
following  December. 


— how  is  she  1  Remember  me  in  the 
kindest  and  most  respectful  phrases  to 
her.  I  wish  I  knew  the  particulars  of 
her  complaint ;  for  Davy  has  discovered 
a  perfectly  new  acid  by  which  he  has 
restored  the  use  of  limbs  to  persons 
who  had  lost  it  for  many  years  (one 
woman  nine  years),  in  cases  of  supposed 
rheumatism.  At  all  events,  Davy  says, 
it  can  do  no  harm  in  Mrs.  Robinson's 
case,  and,  if  she  will  try  it,  he  will 
make  up  a  little  parcel  and  write  her  a 
letter  of  instructions,  &c.  Tell  her, 
and  it  is  the  truth,  that  Davy  is  exceed- 
ingly delighted  with  the  two  poems  in 
the  Anthology. 

N.B.  Did  you  get  my  attempt  at  a 
tragedy  from  Mrs.  Robinson  ? 

To  Mrs.  Smith  I  am  about  to  write  a 
letter,  with  a  book ;  be  so  kind  as  to 
inform  me  of  her  direction. 

Mrs.  Inchbald  I  do  not  like  at  all ; 
every  time  I  recollect  her  I  like  her 
less.  That  segment  of  a  look  at  the 
corner  of  her  eye — 0  God  in  heaven ! 
it  is  so  cold  and  cunning.  Through 
worlds  of  wildernesses  I  would  run  away 
from  that  look,  that  heart-picking  look  ! 
'Tis  marvellous  to  me  that  you  can  like 
that  -woman. 

I  shall  remain  here  about  ten  days 
for  certain.  If  you  have  leisure  and 
inclination  in  that  time,  write ;  if  not, 
I  will  write  to  you  Avhere  I  am  going, 
or  at  all  events  whither  I  am  gone. 
God  bless  you,  and 

Your  sincerely  affectionate 

S.  T.  COLERIDGE. 
Mr.  T.  POOLE'S, 

N[ETHER]  STOWET,  Bridgwater. 

Sara  desires  to  be  remembered  kindly 
to  you,  and  sends  a  kiss  to  Fanny,  and 
"  dear  meek  little  Mary." 

:  MONDAY,  Sept.  22,  1800. 

DEAR  GODWIN, — I  received  your 
letter,  and  with  it  the  enclosed  note,1 
which  shall  be  punctually  re-delivered  to 
you  on  the  first  of  October. 

Your  tragedy2  to  be  exhibited  at 
Christmas !  I  have,  indeed,  merely 
read  through  your  letter;  so  it  is  not 

1  A  loan  of  ten  pounds, 
*  "Antonio." 


526 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


strange  that  my  heart  continues  beating 
out  of  time.  Indeed,  indeed  Godwin, 
such  a  stream  of  hope  and  fear  rushed 
in  on  me,  as  I  read  the  sentence,  as 
you  would  not  permit  yourself  to  feel ! 
If  there  be  anything  yet  undreamt  of 
in  our  philosophy ;  if  it  be,  or  if  it  be 
possible,  that  thought  can  impel  thought 
out  of  the  usual  limit  of  a  man's  own 
skull  and  heart ;  if  the  cluster  of  ideas 
which  constitute  an  identity,  do  ever 
connect  and  unite  into  a  greater  whole  ; 
if  feelings  could  ever  propagate  them- 
selves without  the  servile  ministrations 
of  undulating  air  or  reflected  light;  I 
seem  to  feel  within  myself  a  strength 
and  a  power  of  desire  that  might  dart  a 
modifying,  commanding  impulse  on  a 
whole  theatre.  What  does  all  this 
mean  ?  Alas  !  that  sober  sense  should 
know  no  other  way  to  construe  all  this, 
than  by  the  tame  phrase,  I  wish  you 
success !  That  which  Lamb  informed 
you  is  founded  on  truth.  Mr.  Sheridan 
sent,  through  the  medium  of  Stewart, 
a  request  to  Wordsworth  to  present  a 
tragedy  to  his  stage  ;  and  to  me  a  de- 
claration, that  the  failure  of  my  piece1 
was  owing  to  my  obstinacy  in  refusing 
any  alteration.  I  laughed  and  Words- 
worth smiled ;  but  my  tragedy  will 
remain  at  Keswick,  and  Wordsworth's 
is  not  likely  to  emigrate  from  Grasmere. 
Wordsworth's  drama2  is,  in  its  present 
state,  not  fit  for  the  stage,  and  he  is 
not  well  enough  to  submit  to  the 
drudgery  of  making  it  so.  Mine  is  fit 
for  nothing,  except  to  excite  in  the 
minds  of  good  men  the  hope  "  that  the 
young  man  is  likely  to  do  better."  In 
the  first  moments  I  thought  of  re- writing 
it,  and  sent  to  Lamb  for  the  copy  with 
this  intent.  I  read  an  Act,  and  altered 
my  opinion,  and  with  it  my  wish. 

My  wife  is  now  quite  comfortable.3 
Surely  you  might  come  and  spend  the 
very  next  four  weeks,  not  without  ad- 
vantage to  both  of  us.  The  very  glory 

1  "  Remorse."  Many  years  afterwards,  when 
Lord.  Byron  had  an  interest  in  Drury  Lane, 
he  generously  procured  the  representation 
of  the  piece,  which  met  with  great  success. 

a  "  The  Borderers." 

3  Mrs.  Coleridge  had  been  confined  ten  days 
previously. 


of  the  place  is  coming  on ;  the  local 
genius  is  just  arraying  himself  in  his 
higher  attributes.  But,  above  all,  I 
press  it  because  my  mind  has  been 
busied  with  speculations  that  are  closely 
connected  with  those  pursuits  that  have 
hitherto  constituted  your  utility  and 
importance ;  and,  ardently  as  I  wish 
you  success  on  the  stage,  I  yet  cannot 
frame  myself  to  the  thought  that  you 
should  cease  to  appear  as  a  bold  moral 
thinker.  I  wish  you  to  write  a  book 
on  the  power  of  words,  and  the  processes 
by  which  human  feelings  form  affinities 
with  them — in  short,  I  wish  you  to 
philosophize  Home  Tooke's  system,  and 
to  solve  the  great  questions — whether 
there  be  reason  to  hold  that  an  action 
bearing  the  semblance  of  predesigning 
consciousness  may  yet  be  simply  organic, 
and  whether  a  series  of  such  actions 
are  possible — and  close  on  the  heels  of 
this  question  would  follow  the  old,  "  Is 
logic  the  essence  of  thinking  1 " — in  the 
words,  "Is  thinking  possible  within 
arbitrary  signs  ?  or  how  far  is  the  word 
arbitrary  a  misnomer?  are  not  words, 
&c.,  parts  and  germinations  of  the 
plant,  and  what  is  the  law  of  their 
growth  ? "  In  something  of  this  order 
I  would  endeavour  to  destroy  the  old 
antithesis  of  words  and  things,  elevating, 
as  it  were,  words  into  things,  and  living 
things  too.  All  the  nonsense  of  vibra- 
tions, &c.,  you  would,  of  course,  dis- 
miss. 

If  what  I  have  here  written  appear 
nonsense  to  you,  or  common  sense  in  a 
harlequinade  of  outre  expressions,  sus- 
pend your  judgment  till  we  see  each 
other.  Yours  sincerely, 

S.  T.  COLERIDGE. 

I  was  in  the  country  when  "  Wallen- 
stein"  was  published.  Longman  sent 
me  down  half-a-dozen — the  carriage 
back  the  book  was  not  worth. 

MONDAY,  Oct.  13,  1800. 
DEAR  GODWIN, — I  have  been  myself 
too  frequently  a  grievous  delinquent  in 
the  article  of  letter- writing  to  feel  any 
inclination  to  reproach  my  friends  when, 
peradventure,  they  have  been  long  silent. 
But,  this  out  the  question,  I  did  not 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


527 


expect  a  speedier  answer;  for  I  had 
anticipated  the  circumstances  which  you 
assign  as  the  causes  of  your  delay. 

An  attempt  to  finish  a  poem l  of 
mine  for  insertion  in  the  second  volume 
of  the  "Lyrical  Ballads,"  has  thrown 
me  so  fearfully  back  in  my  bread  and 
beef  occupations,  that  I  shall  scarcely 
be  able  to  justify  myself  in  putting  you 
to  the  expense  of  the  few  lines  which 
I  may  be  able  to  scrawl  in  the  present 
paper — but  some  parts  in  your  letter 
interested  me  deeply,  and  I  wished  to 
tell  you  so.  First,  then,  you  know 
Kemble,  and  I  do  not.  But  my  con- 
jectural judgments  concerning  his  charac- 
ter lead  me  to  persuade  an  absolute 
passive  obedience  to  his  opinion,  and 
this,  too,  because  I  would  leave  to  every 
man  his  own  trade.  Your  trade  has 
been,  in  the  present  instance,  first  to 
furnish  a  wise  pleasure  to  your  fellow- 
beings  in  general,  and,  secondly,  to  give 
Mr.  Kemble  and  his  associates  the  power 
of  delighting  that  part  of  your  fellow- 
beings  assembled  in  a  theatre.  As  to 
what  relates  to  the  first  point,  I  should 
be  sorry  indeed  if  greater  men  than 
Mr.  Kemble  could  induce  you  to  alter 
a  "but"  to  a  "yet"  contrary  to  your 
own  convictions.  Above  all  things,  an 
author  ought  to  be  sincere  to  the  public  ; 
and,  when  "William  Godwin  stands  in 
the  title-page,  it  implies  that  "W.  G. 
approves  that  which  follows.  Besides, 
the  mind  and  finer  feelings  are  blunted 
by  such  obsequiousness.  But  in  the 
theatre  it  is  Godwin  and  Co.  ex  professo, 
I  should  regard  it  in  almost  the  same 
light  as  if  I  had  written  a  song  for 
Haydn  to  compose  and  Mara  to  sing ; 
I  know,  indeed,  what  is  poetry,  but  I 
do  not  know  so  well  as  he  and  she  what 
will  suit  his  notes  or  her  voice.  That 
actors  and  managers  are  often  wrong  is 
true,  but  still  the  trade  is  their  trade, 
and  the  presumption  is  in  favour  of 
their  being  right.  For  the  press,  I 
should  wish  you  to  be  solicitously  nice ; 
because  you  are  to  exhibit  before  a 
larger  and  more  respectable  multitude 
than  a  theatre  presents  to  you,  and  in 
a  new  part,  that  of  a  poet  employing 
1  "Christabel." 


his  philosophical  knowledge  practically. 
If  it  be  possible,  come,  therefore,  and 
let  us  discuss  every  page  and  every 
line. 

Xow  for  something  which,  I  would  fain 
believe,  is  still  more  important,  namely, 
the  propriety  of  your  future  philosophical 
speculations.  As  to  your  first  objection, 
that  you  are  a  logician,  let  me  say  that 
your  habits  are  analytic,  but  that  you 
have  not  read  enough  of  travels,  voyages, 
and  biography — especially  men's  lives 
of  themselves — and  you  have  too  soon 
submitted  your  notions  to  other  men's 
censures  in  conversation.  A  man  should 
nurse  his  opinions  in  privacy  and  self- 
fondness  for  a  long  time,  and  seek  for 
sympathy  and  love,  not  for  detection  or 
censure.  Dismiss,  my  dear  fellow,  your 
theory  of  collision  of  ideas,  and  take 
up  that  of  mutual  propulsion.  I  wish 
to  write  more,  and  state  to  you  a  lucra- 
tive job,  which  would,  I  think,  be  emi- 
nently serviceable  to  your  own  mind, 
and  which  you  would  have  every  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  here.  I  now  express  a 
serious  wish  that  you  would  come  and 
look  out  for  a  house.  Did  Stuart  remit 
you  101.  on  my  account? 

S.  T.  COLERIDGE. 

T  would  gladly  write  any  verses,  but 
to  a  prologue  or  epilogue  I  am  absolutely 
incompetent. 

WEDNESDAY,  March  25,  1801. 

DEAR  GODWIN, — I  fear  your  tragedy l 
will  find  me  in  a  very  unfit  state  of 
mind  to  sit  in  judgment  on  it.  I  have 
been  during  the  last  three  months  under- 
going a  process  of  intellectual  exsic- 
cation. During  my  long  illness  I  had 
compelled  into  hours  of  delight  many  a 
sleepless  painful  hour  of  darkness  by 
chasing  down  metaphysical  game,  and 
since  then  I  have  continued  the  hunt, 
till  I  find  myself,  unaware,  at  the  root 
of  pure  mathematics,  and  up  that  tall 
smooth  tree,  whose  few  poor  branches 
are  all  at  the  very  summit,  am  I  climbing 
by  pure  adhesive  strength  of  arms  and 
thighs,  still  slipping  down,  still  renewing 

1  I  think,  but  am  not  certain,  that  this 
tragedy  was  entitled  "Abbaa." 


528 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


my  ascent.  You  would  not  know 
me !  All  sounds  of  similitude  keep  at 
such  a  distance  from  each  other  in  my 
mind,  that  I  have  forgotten  how  to 
make  a  rhyme.  I  look  at  the  mountains 
(that  visible  God  Almighty  that  looks 
in  at  all  my  windows) — I  look  at  the 
mountains  only  for  the  curves  of  their 
outlines ;  the  stars,  as  I  behold  them, 
form  themselves  into  triangles  ;  and  my 
hands  are  scarred  with  scratches  from  a 
cat,  whose  back  I  was  rubbing  in  the 
dark  in  order  to  see  whether  the  sparks 
from  it  were  refrangible  by  a  prism.  The 
Poet  is  dead  in  me ;  my  imagination  (or 
rather  the  somewhat  that  had  been  ima- 
ginative) lies  like  a  cold  snuff  on  the 
circular  rim  of  a  brass  candlestick, 
without  even  a  stink  of  tallow  to  remind 
you  that  it  was  once  clothed  and  mitred 
with  flame.  That  is  past  by !  I  was 
once  a  volume  of  gold  leaf,  rising  and 
riding  on  every  breath  of  fancy,  but  I 
have  beaten  myself  back  into  weight 
and  density,  and  now  I  sink  in  quick- 
silver and  remain  squat  and  square  on 
the  earth  amid  the  hurricane  that  makes 
oaks  and  straws  join  in  one  dance,  fifty 
yards  high  in  the  element. 

However  I  will  do  what  I  can.  Tasto 
and  feeling  have  I  none,  but  what  I 
have,  give  I  unto  thee.  But  I  repeat 
that  I  am  unfit  to  decide  on  any  but 
works  of  severe  logic. 

I  write  now  to  beg  that,  if  you  have 
not  sent  your  tragedy,  you  may  re- 
member to  send  Antonio  with  it,  which 
I  have  not  yet  seen,  and  likewise  my 
Campbell's  "  Pleasures  of  Hope,"  which 
Wordsworth  wishes  to  see. 

Have  you  seen  the  second  volume  of 
the  "  Lyrical  Ballads,"  and  the  preface 
prefixed  to  the  first  ?  I  should  judge 
of  a  man's  heart  and  intellect  precisely 
according  to  the  degree  and  intensity  of 
the  admiration  with  which  he  read  these 
poems.  Perhaps,  instead  of  heart  I 
should  have  said  taste ;  but,  when  I  think 
of  the  Brothers,  of  Ruth,  and  of  Michael, 
I  recur  to  the  expression  and  am  en- 
forced to  say  heart.  If  I  die,  and  the 
booksellers  will  give  you  anything  for 
iny  life,  be  sure  to  say,  "  Wordsworth  ' 
descended  on  him  like  the  TrwQv  yeavrov 


from  heaven ;  by  showing  to  him  whafc 
true  poetry  was,  he  made  him  know 
that  he  himself  was  no  poet." 

In  your  next  letter  you  will,  perhaps, 
give  me  some  hints  respecting  your 
prose  plans. 

God  bless  you,  and 

S.  T.  COLEKIDGE. 
GRETA  HALL,  Ketwiclc. 

P.S. — What  is  a  fair  price — what 
might  an  author  of  reputation  fairly 
ask  from  a  bookseller,  for  one  edition, 
of  a  thousand  copies,  of  a  five-shilling 
book? 

I  congratulate  you  on  the  settlement 
of  Davy  in  London.  I  hope  that  his 
enchanting  manners  will  not  draw  too 
many  idlers  about  him,  to  harass  and 
vex  his  mornings. 

GBETA  HALL,  KESWICK. 

DEAR  GODWIN, — I  have  had,  during 
the  last  three  weeks,  such  numerous  in- 
terruptions of  my  "  uninterrupted  rural 
retirement,"  such  a  succession  of  visitors, 
both  indigenous  and  exotic,  that  verily 
I  wanted  both  the  time  and  the  com- 
posure necessary  to  answer  your  letter 
of  the  first  of  June — at  present  I  am 
writing  to  you  from  my  bed.  For,  in 
consequence  of  a  very  sudden  change  in 
the  weather  from  intense  heat  to  a 
raw  and  scathing  dullness,  my  bodily 
health  has  suffered  a  relapse  as  severe 
as  it  was  unexpected  *  *  * 

I  have  not  yet  received  either  An- 
tonio, or  your  pamphlet,  in  answer  to 
Dr.  Parr  and  the  Scotch  gentleman1 
(who  is  to  be  professor  of  morals  to  the 
young  nabobs  at  Calcutta,  with  an  es- 
tablishment of  3,0001.  a  year  !).  Stuart 
was  so  kind  as  to  send  me  Fenwick's 
review  of  it  in  a  paper  called  the 
Albion,  and  Mr.  Longman  has  informed 
me  that,  by  your  orders,  the  pamphlet 
itself  has  been  left  for  me  at  his  house. 
The  extracts  which  I  saw  pleased  me 
much,  with  the  exception  of  the  intro- 
duction, which  is  incorrectly  and  clum- 
sily worded.  But,  indeed,  I  have  often 
observed  that,  whatever  you  write,  the 
first  page  is  always  the  worst  in  the  book. 
I  wish  that  instead  of  six  days  you  had 
]  Mackintosb. 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


529 


employed  six  months,  and  instead  of  a 
half-crown  pamphlet,  had  given  us  a 
good  half-guinea  octavo.  But  you  may 
yet  do  this.  It  strikes  me,  that  both 
in  this  work,  and  in  the  second  edition 
of  the  "  Political  Justice,"  your  retracta- 
tions have  heen  more  injudicious  than 
the  assertions  or  dogmas  retracted. 
But  this  is  no  fit  subject  for  a  mere 
letter.  If  I  had  time,  which  I  have 
not,  I  would  write  two  or  three  sheets 
for  your  sole  inspection,  entitled  "  His- 
tory of  the  Errors  and  Blunders  of  the 
Literary  Life  of  William  Godwin." 
To  the  world  it  would  appear  a  paradox 
to  say  that  you  are  at  all  too  persuad- 
able, but  you  yourself  know  it  to  be  the 
truth. 

I  shall  send  back  your  manuscript 
on  Friday,  with  my  criticisms.  You 
say  in  your  last,  "  How  I  wish  you  were 
here  !  "  When  I  see  how  little  I  have 
written  of  what  I  could  have  talked,  I 
feel  with  you  that  a  letter  is  but  "a 
mockery"  to  a  full  and  ardent  mind. 
In  truth  I  feel  this  so  forcibly  that,  if 
I  could  be  certain  that  I  should  re- 
main in  this  country,  I  should  press 
you  to  come  down,  and  finish  the  whole 
in  my  house.  But,  if  I  can  by  any 
means  raise  the  moneys,  I  shall  go  in 
the  first  vessel  that  leaves  Liverpool  for 
the  Azores  (St.  Michael's,  to  wit),  and 
these  sail  at  the  end  of  July.  Unless 
I  can  escape  one  English  winter  and 
spring  I  have  not  any  rational  prospect 
of  recovery.  You  "  cannot  help  regard- 
"  ing  uninterrupted  rural  retirement  as  a 
"  principal  cause  "  of  my  ill  health.  My 
ill  health  commenced  at  Liverpool,  in  the 
shape  of  blood-shot  eyes  and  swollen 
eyelids,  while  I  was  in  the  daily  habit 
of  visiting  the  Liverpool  literati — these, 
on  my  settling  at  Keswick,  were  fol- 
lowed by  large  boils  in  my  neck  and 
shoulders ;  these,  by  a  violent  rheu- 
matic fever  ;  this,  by  a  distressing  and 
tedious  hydrocele ;  and,  since  then,  by 
irregular  gout,  which  promises  at  this 
moment  to  ripen  into  a  legitimate  fit. 
What  uninterrupted  rural  retirement 
can  have  had  to  do  in  the  production 
of  these  outward  and  visible  evils,  I 
cannot  guess  ;  what  share  it  has  had  in 

No.  54. — VOL.  ir. 


consoling  me  under  them,  I  know  with 
a  tranquil  mind  and  feel  with  a 
grateful  heart.  0  that  you  had  now 
before  your  eyes  the  delicious  picture 
of  lake,  and  river,  and  bridge,  and 
cottage,  and  spacious  field  with  its 
pathway,  and  woody  hill  with  its 
spring  verdure,  and  mountain  with  the 
snow  yet  lingering  in  fantastic  patches 
upon  it,  even  the  same  which  I  had 
from  my  sick  bed,  even  without  raising 
my  head  from  the  pillow  !  0  God  ! 
all  but  dear  and  lovely  things  seemed 
to  be  known  to  my  imagination  only 
as  words  ;  even  the  forms  which  struck 
terror  into  me  in  my  fever-dreams  were 
still  forms  of  beauty.  Before  my  last 
seizure  I  bent  down  to  pick  something 
from  the  ground,  and  when  I  raised  my 
head,  I  said  to  Miss  Wordsworth,  "I 
am  sure,  Rotha,  that  I  am  going  to  be 
ill  ;"  for  as  I  bent  my  head  there  came 
a  distinct,  vivid  spectrum  upon  my 
eyes  ;  it  was  one  little  picture  —  a  rock, 
with  birches  and  ferns  on  it,  a  cottage 
backed  by  it,  and  a  small  stream. 
Were  I  a  painter  I  would  give  an 
outward  existence  to  this,  but  it  will 
always  live  in  my  memory. 

By-the-bye,  our  rural  retirement  has 
been  honoured  by  the  company  of  Mr. 
Sharp,  and  the  poet  Rogers  ;  the  latter, 
though  not  a  man  of  very  vigorous  in- 
tellect, won  a  good  deal  both  on  myself 
and  Wordsworth,  for  what  he  said  evi- 
dently came  from  his  own  feelings,  and, 
was  the  result  of  his  own  observation. 

My  love  to  your  dear  little  ones.  I 
begin  to  feel  my  knee  preparing  to 
make  ready  for  the  reception  of  the 
Lady  Arthritis.  God  bless  you  and 

S.  T, 
TUESDAY  EVENING,  June  23,  1801, 


NIGHT,  June  4,  1803. 
GRETA  HALL,  KESWICK. 
MY  DEAR  GODWIN,  —  I  trust  that  my 
dear  friend,  C.  Lamb,  will  have  informed 
you  how  seriously  ill  I  have  been.     I 
arrived   at  Keswick  on  Good  Friday, 
caught  the  influenza,  have  struggled  on 
in  a  series  of  convalescence  and  relapse, 
the  disease  still  assuming  new  shapes 
and  symptoms  j  and,  though  I  am  cer- 

M  M 


530 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


tainly  better  than  at  any  former  period 
of  the  disease,  and  more  steadily  con- 
valescent, yet  it  is  not  mere  low  spirits 
that  makes  me  doubt  whether  I  shall 
ever  wholly  surmount  the  effects  of  it. 
I  owe,  then,  explanation  to  you,  for  I 
quitted  town,  with  strong  feelings  of 
affectionate  esteem  towards  you,  and  a 
firm  resolution  to  write  to  you  within 
a  short  time  after  my  arrival  at  my 
home.  During  my  illness  I  was  exceed- 
ingly affected  by  the  thought  that  month 
had  glided  away  after  month,  and  year 
after  year,  and  still  had  found  and  left 
me  only  preparing  for  the  experiments 
which  are  to  ascertain  whether  the  hopes 
of  those  who  have  hoped  proudly  of 
me  have  been  auspicious  omens  ••  or 
mere  delusions ;  and  the  anxiety  to 
realize  something,  and  finish  something, 
has,  no  doubt,  in  some  measure  retarded 
my  recovery.  I  am  now,  however,  ready 
to  go  to  the  press  with  a  work  which  I 
consider  as  introductory  to  a  system, 
though  to  the  public  it  will  appear  alto- 
gether a  thing  by  itself.  I  write  now 
to  ask  your  advice  respecting  the  time 
and  manner  of  its  publication,  and  the 
choice  of  a  publisher.  I  entitle  it 
"  Organum  Ver6  Organum,  or  an  In- 
"  strument  of  Practical  Reasoning  in 
•*'  the  Business  of  Eeal  Life ; "  to  which 
'mil  be  prefixed,  1.  A  familiar  introduc- 
tion to  the  common  system  of  Logic, 
namely,  that  of  Aristotle  and  the 
Schools.  2.  A  concise  and  simple,  yet 
•full  statement  of  the  Aristotelian  Logic, 
•mth  reference  annexed  to  the  authors, 
and  the  name  and  page  of  the  work  to 
Hrhich  each  part  may  be  traced,  so  that 
it  may  be  at  once  seen  what  is  Aris- 
totle's, what  Porphyry's,  what  the  addi- 
tion of  the  Greek  Commentators,  and 
what  of  the  Schoolmen.  3.  An  outline 
of  the  History  of  Logic  in  general. 
1st  Chapter.  The  Origin  of  Philosophy 
in  general,  and  of  Logic  speciatim. 
2d  Chap.  Of  the  Eleatic  and  Megaric 
Logic.  3d  Chap.  Of  the  Platonic  Lo- 
gic. 4th  Chap.  Of  Aristotle,  contain- 
ing a  fair  account  of  the  Qpyavov — of 
which  Dr.  Reid,  in  "  Kaimes'  Sketches 
of  Man,"  has  given  a  most  false,  and 
•not  only  erroneous,  but  calumnious 


statement — in  as  far  as  the  account  had 
not  been  anticipated  in  the  second  part 
of  my  work,  namely,  the  concise  and 
simple,  yet  full,  &c.  &c.  5th  Chap. 
A  philosophical  examination  of  the 
truth  and  of  the  value  of  the  Aristo- 
telian System  of  Logic,  including  all 
the  after-additions  to  it.  6th  Chap. 
On  the  characteristic  merits  and  de- 
merits of  Aristotle  and  Plato  as  philo- 
sophers in  general,  and  an  attempt  to 
explain  the  fact  of  the  vast  influence 
of  the  former  during  so  many  ages; 
and  of  the  influence  of  Plato's  works 
on  the  restoration  of  the  Belles  Lettres, 
and  on  the  Reformation.  7th  Chap. 
Raymund  Lully.  8th  Chap.  Peter 
Ram  us.  9th  Chap.  Lord  Bacon,  or  the 
Verulamian  Logic.  10th  Chap.  Exam- 
ination of  the  same,  and  comparison  of 
it  with  the  Logic  of  Plato  (in  which 
I  attempt  to  make  it  probable  that, 
though  considered  by  Bacon  himself  as 
the  antithesis  and  the  antidote  of  Plato, 
it  is  bond  fide  the  same,  and  that  Plato 
has  been  misunderstood).  10th  Chap. 
Descartes,  llth  Chap.  Condillac,  and 
a  philosophical  examination  of  his  logic, 
i.  e.  the  logic  which  he  basely  purloined 
from  Hartley.  Then  follows  my  own 
Organum  VerS  Organum,  which  con- 
sists of  an  EvorrjKa  of  all  possible  modes 
of  true,  probable,  and  false  reasoning, 
arranged  philosophically,  i.e.  on  a  strict 
analysis  of  those  operations  and  passions 
of  the  mind  in  which  they  originate, 
or  by  which  they  act ;  with  one  or  more 
striking  instances  annexed  to  each,  from 
authors  of  high  estimation,  and  to  each 
instance  of  false  reasoning,  the  manner 
in  which  the  sophistry  is  to  be  detected, 
and  the  words  in  which  it  may  be 
exposed. 

The  whole  will  conclude  with  consi- 
derations of  the  value  of  the  work,  or 
its  practical  utility  in  scientific  investi- 
gations (especially  the  first  part,  which 
contains  the  strictly  demonstrative  rea- 
sonings, and  the  analysis  of  all  the  acts 
and  passions  of  the  mind  which  may 
be  employed  to  the  discovery  of  truth) 
in  the  arts  of  healing,  especially  in 
those  parts  that  contain  a  catalogue,  &c. 
of  probable  reasoning ;  lastly,  to  the 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


senate,  the  pulpit,  and  our  law  courts,  to 
whom  the  whole — but  especially  the 
latter  three-fourths  of  the  work,  on 
the  probable  and  the  false — will  be  use- 
ful, and  partly  instructive,  how  to  form 
a  commonplace  book  by  the  aid  of  the 
instrument,  so  as  to  read  with  practical 
advantage,  and  (supposing  average  ta- 
lents) to  ensure  a  facility  and  rapidity 
in  proving  and  in  computing.  I  have 
thus  amply  detailed  the  contents  of  my 
work,  which  have  not  been  the  labour 
of  one  year  or  of  two,  but  the  result 
of  many  years'  meditations,  and  of  very 
various  reading.  The  size  of  the  work 
will,  printed  at  thirty  lines  a  page,  form 
one  volume  octavo,  500  pages  to  the 
volume  ;  and  I  shall  be  ready  with  the 
first  half  of  the  work  for  the  printer 
at  a  fortnight's  notice.  Now,  my  dear 
friend,  give  me  your  thoughts  on  the 
subject :  would  you  have  me  to  offer  it 
to  the  booksellers,  or,  by  the  assistance 
of  my  friends,  print  and  publish  on  my 
own  account?  If  the  former,  would 
you  advise  me  to  sell  the  copyright  at 
once,  or  only  one  or  more  editions'? 
Can  you  give  me  a  general  notion  what 
terms  I  have  a  right  to  insist  on  in 
either  case]  And,  lastly,  to  whom 
would  you  advise  me  to  apply  1  Phillips 
is  a  pushing  man,  and  a  book  is  sure 
to  have  fair  play  if  it  be  his  pro- 
perty ;  and  it  could  not  be  other  than 
pleasant  to  me  to  have  the  same  pub- 
lisher with  yourself,  but — .  Now  if 
there  be  anything  of  impatience,  that 
whether  truth  and  justice  ought  to 
follow  that  "  but,"  you  will  inform  me. 
It  is  not  my  habit  to  go  to  work  so 
seriously  about  matters  of  pecuniary 
business  ;  but  my  ill-health  makes  my 
life  more  than  ordinarily  uncertain,  and 
I  have  a  wife  and  three  little  ones.  If 
your  judgment  leads  you  to  advise  me 
to  offer  it  to  Phillips,  would  you  take 
the  trouble  of  talking  with  him  on  the 
subject,  and  give  him  your  real  opinion, 
whatever  it  may  be,  of  the  work  and  of 
the  powers  of  the  author  ? 

When  this  book  is  fairly  off  my 
hands,  I  shall,  if  I  live  and  have  suffi- 
cient health,  set  seriously  to  work  in 
arranging  what  I  have  already  written, 


and  in  pushing  forward  my  studies  and 
my  investigations  relative  to  the  omne 
scibile  of  human  nature — what  we  are, 
and  how  we  become  what  we  are  ;  so  as 
to  solve  the  two  grand  problems — how, 
being  acted  upon,  we  shall  act;  how, 
acting,  we  shall  be  acted  upon.  But 
between  me  and  this  work  there  may 
be  death. 

I  hope  your  wife  and  little  ones  are 
well.  I  have  had  a  sick  family.  At 
one  time  every  individual — master,  mis- 
tress, children,  and  servants — were  all 
laid  up  in  bed,  and  we  were  waited  on. 
by  persons  hired  from  the  town  for  the 
week.  But  now  all  are  well,  I  only 
excepted.  If  you  find  my  paper  smell, 
or  my  style  savour  of  scholastic  quid- 
dity, you  must  attribute  it  to  the  infec- 
tious quality  of  the  folio  on  which  I 
am  writing — namely,  "Scotus  Erigena 
de  Divisione  Naturae,"  the  forerunner, 
by  some  centuries,  of  the  schoolmen.  I 
cherish  all  kinds  of  honourable  feelings 
towards  you;  and  I  am,  dear  Godwin, 
Yours  most  sincerely, 

S.  T.  COLERIDGE. 

You  know  the  high  character  and 
present  scarcity  of  "Tucker's  Light  of 
Nature."     "  I  have  found  in  this  writer 
(says  Paley,  in  his  preface  to  his  '  Moral 
"  and    Political    Philosophy ')    "  more 
original  thinking  and  observation  upon 
the  several  subjects  he  has  taken  in 
hand  than  in  any  other,  not  to  say 
in  all  others  put  together.     His  talent 
also  for  illustration  is  unrivalled.  But 
his  thoughts  are  diffused  through  a 
long,   various,    and   irregular   work." 
And  a  friend  of  mine,  every  way  calcu- 
lated by  his  taste  and  private  studies 
for  such  a  work,1  is  willing  to  abridge 
and  systematize  that  work  from  eight 
to  two  volumes — in  the  words  of  Paley, 
'  to  dispose  into  method,  to  collect  into 
'  heads  and  articles,  and  to  exhibit  in 
'  more  compact  and  tangible  masses,  what 
'  in  that  otherwise  excellent  perform- 
'  ance  is  spread  over  too  much  surface." 
I  would  prefix  to  it  an  essay  containing 
the  whole  substance  of  the  first  volume 

1  Hazlitt.     The  abridgment  was  made,  and 
published  in  1807. 


532 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


of  Hartley ;  entirely  defecated  from  all 
the  corpuscular  hypothesis,  with  more 
illustrations.  I  give  my  name  to  the 
essay.  Likewise  I  will  revise  every 
sheet  of  the  abridgement.  I  should 
think  the  character  of  the  work,  and 
the  above  quotations  from  so  high  an 
authority  (with  the  present  public,  I 
mean)  as  Paley,  would  ensure  its  suc- 
cess. If  you  will  read  or  transcribe, 
and  send  this  to  Mr.  Phillips,  or  to  any 
other  publisher,  (Longman  and  Kees 
excepted)  you  would  greatly  oblige  me  ; 
that  is  to  say,  my  dear  Godwin,  you 
would  essentially  serve  a  young  man  of 
profound  genius  and  original  mind,  who 
wishes  to  get  his  Sabine  subsistence  by 
some  employment  from  the  booksellers, 
while  he  is  employing  the  remainder  of 
his  time  in  nursing  up  his  genius  for 
the  destiny  which  he  believes  appurte- 
nant to  it.  "  Qui  cito  facit,  bis  facit." 
Impose  any  task  on  me  in  return. 

FBID-AY,  July  10, 1803. 

GBETA  HALL. 

MY  DEAR  GODWIN, — Your  letter  has 
this  moment  reached  me,  and  found  me 
writing  for  Stuart,  to  whom  I  am  under 
a  positive  engagement  to  produce  three 
essays  by  the  beginning  of  next  week. 
To  promise,  therefore,  to  do  what  I 
could  not  do  would  be  worse  than  idle  ; 
and  to  attempt  to  do  what  I  could  not  do 
well,  from  distraction  of  mind,  would  be 
trifling  with  my  time  and  your  patience. 
If  I  could  convey  to  you  any  tolerably 
distinct  notion  of  the  state  of  my  spirits 
of  late,  and  the  train  or  the  sort  of  my 
ideas  consequent  on  that  state,  you  would 
feel  instantly  that  my  non-performance 
of  the  promise  is  matter  of  regret  with 
me  indeed,  but  not  of  compunction.  It 
was  my  full  intention  to  have  prepared 
immediately  a  second  volume  of  poems 
for  the  press  ;  but,  though  the  poems  are 
all  either  written  or  composed,  excepting 
only  the  conclusion  of  one  poem  (equal 
to  four  days'  common  work)  and  a  few 
corrections,  and  though  I  had  the  most 
pressing  motives  for  sending  them  off, 
yet  after  many  attempts  I  was  obliged 
to  give  up  the  very  hope — the  attempts 
acted  so  perniciously  on  my  disorder. 


"Wordsworth,  too,  wished,  and  in  a 
very  particular  manner  expressed  the 
wish,  that  I  should  write  to  him  at 
large  on  a  poetic  subject,  which  he  has 
at  present  sub  malleo  ardentem  et  ignitum. 
I  made  the  attempt,  but  I  could  not 
command  my  recollections.  It  seemed 
a  dream  that  I  had  ever  thought  on 
poetry,  or  had  ever  written  it,  so  remote 
were  my  trains  of  ideas  from  composition 
or  criticism  on  composition.  These  two 
instances  will,  in  some  manner,  explain 
my  non-performance ;  but,  indeed,  I  have 
been  very  ill,  and  that  I  have  done  any- 
thing in  any  way  is  a  subject  of  wonder 
to  myself,  and  of  no  causeless  self-com- 
placency. Yet  I  am  anxious  to  do 
something  which  may  convince  you 
of  my  sincerity  by  zeal :  and,  if  you 
think  that  it  will  be  of  any  service  to 
you,  I  will  send  down  for  the  work ;  I 
will  instantly  give  it  a  perusal  con 
amore  ;  and  partly  by  my  reverential 
love  of  Chaucer,1  and  partly  from  my 
affectionate  esteem  for  his  biographer 
(the  summer,  too,  bringing  increase  of 
health  with  it),  I  doubt  not  that  my  old 
mind  will  recur  to  me  ;  and  I  will  forth- 
with write  a  series  of  letters,  containing 
a  critique  on  Chaucer,  and  on  the  "  Life 
of  Chaucer/'  by  W.  Godwin,  and  pub- 
lish them,  with  my  name,  either  at  once 
in  a  small  volume,  or  in  the  Morning 
Post  in  the  first  instance,  and  republish 
them,  afterwards. 

The  great  thing  to  be  done  is  to  pre- 
sent Chaucer  stripped  of  all  his  adven- 
titious matter,  his  translations,  &c. ;  to 
analyse  his  own  real  productions,  to  de- 
duce his  province  and  his  rank  ;  then  to 
compare  him  with  his  contemporaries, 
or  with  immediate  prede-and  suc-cessors, 
first  as  an  Englishman,  and  secondly  as 
a  European ;  then  with  Spenser  and 
withShakespere,  between  whom  he  seems 
to  stand  midway,  with,  however,  a  man- 
ner of  his  own  which  belongs  to  neither, 
with  a  manner  and  an  excellence ; 


1  I  take  unceasing  delight  in  Chaucer.  His 
manly  cheerfulness  is  especially  delicious  to 
me  in  my  old  age.  How  exquisitely  tender  he 
is,  and  yet  how  perfectly  free  from  the  least 
touch  of  sickly  melancholy  or  morbid  droop- 
ing.— Table  Talk,  p.  310. 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


533 


lastly,  to  compare  Dante  and  Chaucer, 
and  inclusively  Spenser  and  Shakespere, 
•with  the  ancients,  to  abstract  the  charac- 
teristic differences,  and  to  develop  the 
causes  of  such  differences.  (For  instance, 
in  all  the  writings  of  the  ancients  I  re- 
collect nothing  that,  strictly  examined, 
can  be  called  humour  ;  yet  Chaucer 
abounds  with  it,  and  Dante,  too,  though 
in  a  very  different  way.  Thus,  too,  the 
passionforpersonifications  and,  mejudice, 
strong,  sharp,  practical  good  sense,  which 
I  feel  to  constitute  a  strikingly  charac- 
teristic difference  in  favour  of  the  feudal 
poets.)  As  to  information,  I  could  give 
you  a  critical  sketch  of  poems,  written 
by  contemporaries  of  Chaucer,  in  Ger- 
many; an  epic  to  compare  with  his 
Palamon,  and  tales  with  his  Tales,  de- 
scriptive and  fanciful  poems  with  those 
of  the  same  kind  in  our  own  poet.  In 
short,  a  Life  of  Chaucer  ought,  in  the 
work  itself,  and  in  the  appendices  of  the 
work,  to  make  the  poet  explain  his  age, 
and  to  make  the  age  both  explain  the 
poet,  and  evince  the  superiority  of  the 
poet  over  his  age.  I  think  that  the 
publication  of  such  a  work  would  do 
your  work  some  little  service,  in  more 
ways  than  one.  It  would  occasion,  neces- 
sarily, a  double  review  of  it  in  all  the 
Beviews  ;  and  there  is  a  large  class  of 
fashionable  men  who  have  been  pleased 
of  late  to  take  me  into  high  favour,  and 
among  whom  even  my  name  might  have 
some  influence,  and  my  praises  of  you 
some  weight.  But  let  me  hear  from  you 
on  the  subject. 

Now  for  my  own  business.  As  soon 
as  you  possibly  can  do  something  re- 
specting the  abridgement  of  Tucker,1  do 
so  ;  you  will,  on  my  honour,  be  doing 
good,  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word  !  Of 
course  I  cannot  wish  you  to  do  anything 
till  after  the  24th,  unless  it  should  be 
put  in  your  way  to  read  that  part  of  the 
letter  to  Phillips. 

As  to  my  own  work,  let  me  correct 
one  or  two  conceptions  of  yours  respect- 
ing it.  I  could,  no  doubt,  induce  my 
friends  to  publish  the  work  for  me,  but 

1  Godwin  exerted  himself  actively  in  the 
matter,  as  appears  by  the  correspondence  of 
Charles  Lamb. 


I  am  possessed  of  facts  that  deter  me. 
I  know  that  the  booksellers  not  only 
do  not  encourage,  but  that  they  use  un- 
justifiable artifices  to  injure  works  pub- 
lished on  the  authors'  own  account.  It 
never  answered,  as  far  as  I  can  find,  in 
any  instance.  And  even  the  sale  of  a 
first  edition  is  not  without  objections 
on  this  score — to  this,  however,  I  should 
certainly  adhere,  and  it  is  my  resolution. 
But  I  must  do  something  immediately. 
Now,  if  I  knew  that  any  bookseller 
would  purchase  the  first  edition  of  this 
work,  as  numerous  as  he  pleased,  I 
should  put  the  work  out  of  hand  at 
once,  totus  in  illo.  But  it  was  never  my 
intention  to  send  one  single  sheet  to  the 
press  till  the  whole  was  bond  fide  ready 
for  the  printer — that  is,  both  written,  and 
fairly  written.  The  work  is  half  written 
out,  and  the  materials  of  the  other  half 
are  all  in  paper,  or  rather  on  papers.  I 
should  not  expect  one  farthing  till  the 
work  was  delivered  entire  ;  and  I  would 
deliver  it  at  once,  if  it  were  wished. 
But,  if  I  cannot  engage  with  a  bookseller 
for  this,  I  must  do  something  else  first, 
which  I  should  be  sorry  for.  Your 
division  of  the  sorts  of  works  acceptable 
to  booksellers  is  just,  and  what  has  been 
always  my  own  notion  or  rather  know- 
ledge ;  but,  though  I  detailed  the  whole 
of  the  contents  of  my  work  so  fully  to 
you,  I  did  not  mean  to  lay  any  stress 
with  the  bookseller  on  the  first  half,  but 
simply  state  it  as  preceded  by  a  familiar 
introduction,  and  critical  history  of  logic. 
On  the  work  itself  I  meant  to  lay  all  the 
stress,  as  a  work  really  in  request,  and 
non-existent,  either  well  or  ill-done,  and 
to  put  the  work  in  the  same  class  with 
"  Guthrie,"  and  books  of  practical  in- 
struction— for  the  universities,  classes 
of  scholars,  lawyers,  &c.  &c.  Its  profit- 
able sale  will  greatly  depend  on  the 
pushing  of  the  booksellers,  and  on  its 
being  considered  as  a  practical  book, 
Organum  vere  Organum,  a  book  by  which 
the  reader  is  to  acquire  not  only  know- 
ledge, but  likewise  power.  I  fear  that 
it  may  extend  to  seven  hundred  pages ; 
and  would  it  be  better  to  publish  the 
Introduction  of  History  separately,  either 
after  or  before  1  God  bless  you,  and  all 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


belonging  to  you,  and  your  Chaucer.  All 
happiness  to  you.  and  your  wife. 

Ever  yours, 

S.  T.  C. 

P.S.  If  you  read  to  Phillips  any  part 
of  my  letter  respecting  my  own  work,  or 
rather  detailed  it  to  him,  you  would  lay 
all  the  stress  on  the  practical. 

TUESDAY,  March  26,  1811. 
DEAR  GODWIN, — Mr.  Grattan  did  me 
the  honour  of  calling  on  me,  and  leaving 
his  card,  on  Sunday  afternoon,  unfortu- 
nately a  few  minutes  after  I  had  gone 
out — and  I  am  so  unwell,  that  I  fear  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  return  the  call  to- 
day, as  I  had  intended,  though  it  is  a 
grief  even  for  a  brace  of  days  to  appear 
insensible  of  so  much  kindness  and 
condescension.  But  what  need  has 
Grattan  of  pride  1 

"  Ha  d'nopo  solo 

Mendicar  dall'  orgoglio  onore  e  stima, 
Chi  senza  lui  di  vilipendio  e  degno." 

Chiabrera. 

I  half  caught  from  Lamb  that  you 
had  written  to  "Wordsworth,  with  a  wish 
that  he  should  versify  some  tale  or 
other,  and  that  Wordsworth  had  de- 
clined it.  I  told  dear  Miss  Lamb  that 
I  had  formed  a  complete  plan  of  a  poem, 
with  little  plates  for  children,  the  first 
thought,  but  that  alone,  taken  from 
Gesner's  "  First  Mariner ; "  and  this 
thought,  I  have  reason  to  believe,  was 
not  an  invention  of  Gesner's.  It  is 
this — that  in  early  times,  in  some 
island  or  part  of  the  Continent,  the 
ocean  had  washed  in,  overflowing  a  vast 
plain  of  twenty  or  thirty  miles,  and 
thereby  insulating  one  small  promontory 
or  cape  of  high  land,  on  which  was  a 
cottage,  containing  a  man  and  his  wife, 
and  an  infant  daughter.  This  is  the 
one  thought ;  all  that  Gesner  has  made 
out  of  it — (and  I  once  translated  into 
blank  verse  about  half  of  the  poem, 
but  gave  it  up  under  the  influence  of  a 
double  disgust,  moral  and  poetical) — I 
have  rejected ;  and,  strictly  speaking, 
the  tale  in  all  its  parts,  that  one  idea 
excepted,  would  be  original.  The  tale 
will  contain  the  curse,  the  occasions, 


the  process,  with  all  its  failures  and 
ultimate  success,  of  the  construction  of 
the  first  boat,  and  of  the  undertaking 
of  the  first  naval  expedition.  Now, 
supposing  you  liked  the  idea  (I  address 
you  and  Mrs.  G.,  and  as  commerciants, 
not  you  as  the  philosopher  who  gave  us 
the  first  system  in  England  that  ever 
dared  reveal  at  full  that  most  important 
of  all  important  truths,  that  morality 
might  be  built  on  its  own  foundation, 
like  a  castle  built  from  the  rock  and  on 
the  rock,  with  religion  for  the  orna- 
ments and  completion  of  its  roof  and 
upper  stories — nor  as  the  critic  who,  in 
the  life  of  Chaucer,  has  given  us,  if  not 
principles  of  cesthetic  or  taste,  yet  more 
and  better  data  for  principles  than  had 
hitherto  existed  in  our  language) — if 
(we  pulling  like  two  friendly  tradesmen 
together,  for  you  and  your  wife  must  be 
one  flesh,  and  I  trust  are  one  heart) 
you  approve  of  the  plan,  the  next  ques- 
tion is,  Whether  it  should  be  written 
in  prose  or  in  verse,  and  if  the  latter, 
in  what  metre — stanzas,  or  eight-syllable 
iambics  with  rhymes  (for  in  rhyme  it 
must  be),  now  in  couplets  and  now  in 
quatrains,  in  the  manner  of -(Cooper's 
admirable  translation  of  the  Vert-Vert 
of  Gresset.  (1ST.B.  not  Cowper). 

Another  thought  has  struck  me  within 
the  last  month,  of  a  school-book  in  two 
octavo  volumes,  of  Lives  in  the  manner 
of  Plutarch — not,  indeed,  of  comparing 
and  coupling  Greek  with  Roman,  Dion 
with  Brutus,  and  Cato  with  Aristides, 
of  placing  ancient  and  modern  together  : 
Numa  with  Alfred,  Cicero  with  Bacon, 
Hannibal  with  Gustavus  Adolphus,  and 
Julius  Caesar  with  Buonaparte — or  what 
perhaps  might  be  at  once  more  interest- 
ing and  more  instructive,  a  series  of 
lives,  from  Moses  to  Buonaparte,  of  all 
those  great  men,  who  in  states  or  in  the 
mind  of  man  had  produced  great  re- 
volutions, the  effects  of  which  still 
remain,  and  are  more  or  less  distant 
causes  of  the  present  state  of  the  world. 

I  remain,  with  unfeigned  and  affec- 
tionate esteem, 

Yours,  dear  Godwin, 

S.  T.  COLERIDGE, 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


535 


[Godwin  replied  to  Coleridge's  letter 
as  follows  : — ] 

March  27,  1811. 

DEAR  COLERIDGE, — I  am  much  grati- 
fied by  your  yesterday's  letter,  as  I 
shall  always  be  by  every  approach  to  a 
coincidence  of  sentiment  on  the  part  of  a 
man  of  your  originality  and  learning. 
I  published  my  sentiments  respecting 
the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the  human 
species,  from  a  heart  filled  with  a  sin- 
cere conviction  of  the  truth  of  the 
tenets  I  delivered,  and  which  was  no 
longer  able  to  keep  them  pent  up  with- 
in itself ;  and  it  gives  me  a  pain  which 
few  men  can  comprehend,  when  I  see 
such  persons  asSouthey1  and  others  who, 
I  am  told,  are  also  honest  and  philan- 
thropical,  treat  my  efforts  not  only  with 
disdain,  but  with  something  like  ab- 
horrence. Thank  God !  I  have  never 
had  the  persuasion  as  to  the  singleness 
of  heart  of  that  man,  with  which  you 
have  been  impressed :  otherwise  no- 
thing can  be  more  disheartening  than 
to  see  the  few,  who  are  able,  and  ought 
to  be  willing,  to  co-operate  for  general 
good,  doing  their  utmost  to  destroy 
their  kind.  Indeed,  I  am  convinced 
that  (separately  from  the  uncontrollable 
hostility  of  fighting  religious  creeds) 
this  cannot  be  ;  and  of  consequence, 
that  the  man  who  does  not  understand 
me  and  my  intentions,  wants  the  chord 
in  his  own  bosom,  which  (if  it  existed) 
could  not  fail  to  vibrate  in  unison  with 
mine. 

.  I  like  exceedingly  the  plan  you  have 
sketched  of  a  first  mariner.  Mrs.  God- 
win and  I  have  read  it  together ;  and 
she  has  no  other  fear  respecting  it,  but 
•lest  you  should  take  it  in  too  high  a 
key,  and  put  into  it  the  metaphysics 
and  abstrusenesses  in  which  you  are  so 
eminently  at  home.  There  should  not 
be  a  sentence — not  even  a  line — in  a 
book  intended  for  children,  of  which  a 
child  might  not  fairly  be  expected  to 
conceive  an  idea.  In  answer  to  your 
queries  of  the  form,  I  conceive  a  short 
essay  which  is  to  be  illustrated  with 

1  Southey's  dislike  of  Godwin  was  to  a 
great  extent  personal.  He  never  forgave  his 
second_naarriage. 


various  plates,  ought  to  be  in  verse : 
further  than  this  I  dare  not  go ;  I 
think  the  author  who  does  not  consult 
his  own  genius  unshackled,  and  inquire 
within  himself  what  style,  and  what 
scheme  of  harmony  most  naturally 
springs  out  of  his  conceptions,  can 
scarcely  be  expected  to  do  well. 

I  am  bound  to  add,  that  the  encou- 
ragement which  my  limited  means  and 
infant  trade  allow  me  to  afford  to  in- 
tellectual application  and  industry, 
would,  I  am  afraid,  be  wholly  beneath 
your  attention.  If  love  and  a  crust 
would  tempt  you  to  co-operate  in  my 
little  scheme  for  refining  and  elevating 
the  circle  of  juvenile  studies,  it  is  well, 
but 

"  If  these  be  motives  weak,  break  off  be- 
times ! " 

Such  as  I  have  (and  I  will  not  abso- 
lutely say,  with  the  Apostles,  "silver 
and  gold  have  I  none ")  I  tender  unto 
you. 

Mrs.  Godwin  desires  me  to  express 
the  great  pleasure  with  which  she  read 
your  letter,  and  her  best  wishes  in  your 
favour. 

I  remain,  with  great  regard, 
Yours, 

W.  GODWIN. 

FRIDAY  Morning,  March  29, 1811. 
DEAR  GODWIN, — My  chief  motive  in 
undertaking  "The  First  Mariner"  is 
merely  to  weave  a  few  tendrils  around 
your  destined  walking-stick,  which,  like 
those  of  the  woodbine  (that,  serpent- 
like  climbing  up,  and  with  tight  spires 
embossing  the  straight  hazel,  rewards 
the  lucky  schoolboy's  search  in  the 
winter  copse)  may  remain  on  it,  when 
the  woodbine,  root  and  branch,  lies 
trampled  in  the  earth.  I  shall  consider 
the  work  as  a  small  plot  of  ground 
given  up  to  you,  to  be  sown  at  your 
own  hazard  with  your  own  seed  (gold- 
grains  would  have  been  but  a  bad  saw, 
and  besides  have  spoilt  the  metaphor)i 
If  the  increase  should  more  than  repay 
your  risk  and  labour,  why  then  let  me 
be  one  of  your  guests  at  Hendcot  House. 
Your  last  letter  impressed  and  aifected 


536 


Letters  from  Coleridge  to  William  Godwin. 


me  strongly.  Ere  I  had  yet  read  or 
seen  your  works,  I,  at  Southey's  recom- 
mendation, wrote  a  sonnet  in  praise  of 
the  author.  When  I  had  read  them,  reli- 
gious bigotry,  the  but  half-understanding 
your  principles,  and  the  not  half-under- 
standing my  own,  combined  to  render 
me  a  warm  and  boisterous  anti-Godwin- 
ist.  But  my  warfare  was  open;  my 
unfelt  and  harmless  blows  aimed  at  an 
abstraction  I  had  christened  with  your 
name ;  and  at  that  time,  if  not  in  the 
world's  favor,  you  were  among  the  cap- 
tains and  chief  men  in  its  admiration.  I 
became  your  acquaintance,  when  more 
years  had  brought  somewhat  more  tem- 
per and  tolerance ;  but  I  distinctly 
remember  that  the  first  turn  in  my 
mind  towards  you,  the  first  movements 
of  a  juster  appreciation  of  your  merits, 
was  occasioned  by  my  disgust  at  the 
altered  tone  of  language  of  many  whom 
I  had  long  known  as  your  admirers  and 
disciples — some  of  them,  too,  men  who 
had  made  themselves  a  sort  of  reputa- 
tion in  minor  circles  as  your  acquain- 
tances, and  therefore  your  echoes  by 
authority,  who  had  themselves  aided  in 
attaching  an  unmerited  ridicule  to  you 
and  your  opinions  by  their  own  igno- 
rance, which  led  them  to  think  the 
best  settled  truths,  and  indeed  every 
thing  in  your  "  Political  Justice,"  whe- 
ther assertion,  or  deduction,  or  con- 
jecture, to  have  been  new  thoughts — 
downright  creations  !  and  by  their  own 
vanity,  which  enabled  them  to  forget 
that  everything  must  be  new  to  him 
who  knows  nothing  ;  others  again,  who 
though  gifted  with  new  talents,  had 
yet  been  indebted  to  you  and  the  dis- 
cussions occasioned  by  your  work,  for 


much  more  of  their  development,  who 
had  often  and  often  styled  you  the 
great  master,  written  verses  in  your 
honour,  and,  worse  than  all,  now 
brought  your  opinions — with  many 
good  and  worthy  men  —  into  as  un- 
merited an  odium,  as  the  former  class 
had  into  contempt,  by  attempts  equally 
unfeeling  and  unwise,  to  realize  them 
in  private  life,  to  the  disturbance  of 
domestic  peace.  In  all  these  there  was 
such  a  want  of  common  sensibility,  such 
a  want  of  that  gratitude  to  an  intel- 
lectual benefactor,  which  even  an  honest 
reverence  for  their  past  selves  should 
have  secured,  as  did  then,  still  does,  and 
ever  will,  disgust  me.  *  *  *  To  this  add 
that  business  of  review-writing,  which 
I  have  never  hesitated  to  pronounce  an 
immoral  employment,  unjust  to  the 
author  of  the  books  reviewed,  injurious 
in  its  influences  on  the  public  taste  and 
morality,  and  still  more  injurious  OH 
its  influences  on  the  head  and  heart  of 
the  reviewer  himself.  The  prcegusta- 
tores  among  the  luxurious  Romans  soon 
lost  their  taste ;  and  the  verdicts  of  an 
old  prsegustator  were  sure  to  mislead, 
unless  when,  like  dreams,  they  were  in- 
terpreted into  contraries.  Our  reviewers 
are  the  genuine  descendants  of  these 
palate-seared  taste-dictators.  I  am  still 
confined  by  indisposition,  but  mean  to 
step  out  to  Hazlitt's — almost  my  next 
door  neighbour — at  his  particular  re- 
quest. It  is  possible  that  I  may  find 
you  there. 

With    kind    remembrances  to   Mrs. 
Godwin, 

Yoxtrs,  dear  Godwin,  affectionately, 

S.  T.  COLERIDGE, 


[Through  unavoidable  causes,  Part  VI.  of  "A  SON  OF  THE  SOIL,"  which 
should  have  appeared  in  the  present  number,  is  deferred  by  the  author  till 
next. — Editor.] 


AP 

4 

M2 

v.9 


Macmillan ' s  magazine 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


