EGG 
Yee ye 


GE 


JU roa, Fil Bay ay PAY bare ot i! Fi iH yr) CTU heer 
K ; s iy ‘iH HN: Ss il i ikea) dit mt a Hs 
Bo ace igi. PAYA AsIII Ueec||| MRae T NS Wie 
tie) fiers phe reali Ma IS WM 

‘i Me od ca RANT | 

ATT Te A Ni OR y 
Ba | if ) 
cs 
ay =) Bae 


Shi 
ites 
ony 


; ra 
{ a 
Su 


Ml a ‘S 
Me i 


J 
| 


=> 


tak 
I 


An Y : ~ 
es 


} = \ 
ie 


N : 7 aM Ct hege os pues arth oA} 
aa TC Tl NS AR MB a 
] ie oil ceca 


> 
rit 
A 
\, 
~~ FS 


Ex Librfs 
JOHN AND MARTHA DANIELS 


es 


| 


THE CEDARS, 


By STAR 
SAN 
Acai ll 


ant 


ty x " 
Nig 
: ANY 
ne YANN 
i an t ww N 


\}) 
) 


S| 


(Frontispiece. ) 


K\ AS 


LIFE AND WRITINGS 
OF ye 


FRANK FORESTER. 


(HENRY WILLIAM HERBERT) 
EDITED BY DAVID W. JUDD. 
ILLUSTRATED. 

VOL. IT. 


EACH VOLUME COMPLETE IN ITSELF, 


NEW YORK: 
“ORANGE JUDD COMPANY, 
751 BROADWAY, 

1882. 


Hit i) y ih iy 
i hi MA i ull m 
ii me A! un He 


MUM Sc Ry a 
hee) 


okighr 


Eee Wr ENG Ss 


OF 


FRANK FORESTER. 


(HENRY WILLIAM HERBERT) 


EDITED BY DAVID W. JUDD. 
ILLUSTRATED. 


Bhd 8) Oc al 


EACH VOLUME COMPLETE IN ITSELF. 


NEW YORK: 
ORANGE JUDD COMPANY, 
751 BROADWAY. 

1882. 


Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1882, by the 
ORANGE JUDD COMPANY, 
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


age 3 
PAGE 
Frontispiece. (The Cedars.) 
Wiel Codeine: saat see ne Ree, 5 Ae ea ls ae 7 
Myr ELome;. 4 (Gdn) tise 285 pode eee Pane 11 
Snipe Shooting at Cambridge_-..............-.---.--...-.- 13 
My First Day’s Partridge Shooting..__........-....-..-.._- 25 
The Yorkshire Moors_.:-........._. Bae oases elas Sete 28 
Sunset’ on the Hudson. - (Poem) ..._-..<.-25....-c.-2.._2-. 89 
ihe: Woodeock,: “ lustrated)= S202. sce 2 2 ose soso 43 
he Quark (iltisteated)s yosce cA ss 5 5) 0 ee 69 
The Smelt of the Passaic. (Ilustrated)................_._. 97 
Hereward yDiey PUnGeT 62 ot Ss ee by ie x ee Be 108 
mbhie-Mapnolia.; «(FOGM): 92... 5.t oo sateen toe h eo. 124 
pBbes Od) Mom and 24 Bag ape ae ak ee Oe a 126 
Gertrude: Vonekiglenss sc) 20252652 fete oh ia, wn 134. 
eave Ot BAMOCAs soe Se oo. oo oar esas eee ee ee 160 
resis: va..Ceneralsy: #22) sea isk o's. ae ates 166 
The Death Sic O pple ere as ectao, See eaten ioe ee 173 
hevAmmerican Bitherm eS cs 4c saeco he soe ee 188 
ieeative! the Stage taawsas sont n-t 15282 oe Sa ne ey 192 
Long Jakes, ‘The Prairie Man: 2°. «<2 2222: osesccccen eee. 204 
Snipe Shooting on the St. Lawrence. (lllustrated).__..____ 218 
the Soreliiof the: Raritat = 2506.2. oS. loses donc. vee ew 231 
Pine RGUGSHMO CAN 4: ents Sue 2 BSG we il 236 
BANG ORLOND p MOO b= doar. so ieton 2) sigan oe inal eile ti, OA 259 
AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS, 
IN Oise) ANON MC ORCA ie as a Se i Se Seen aS ast 266 
Nos Arriold s\Preason 22ec5 owes acces soe eeu eck 272 
No. I11.—The Surprise of Trenton -...........-2---2---1--- 281 
Oe) Va Manon a) WeASb! S25: eco ao oas abics dom aseSececcde 289 


(5) 


2 a ' 
‘ ‘ 
. % - . 
- La . 
7 a * 
- 
- 
Ps » 
a 
- ~ 5 EY 
id oF) 
’ Ted 
Hey 
e ails - 
+ 
* 
fo 
a ‘ 
‘ iy 
’ is 
' 
@).4 
bd & 
eo 
; 
” many La 
——-- . ' 
oa 
= ‘ i 
fy . ; ty 
_ ’ 
, é -~ 7 
= ; ‘ f 
¢- ad 4 : 
j wt) 
<n 
we ws) 
~* ‘¢ 
+ sq 


7 2 . FS * , aT i 7, i nf 
aay  \ead bai “h = hye 

: >108"" et 
7 er : a Sinpualu Veaty “af sae Ad 
oo pe att —— rf an 4aé Ll aaa? por" ine anor 
ee yee 2.) | es 
ceeces do tate ee ieee Pettis 
ye (aa 


THE CEDARS. 


The first volume describes at length Herbert’s life at 
‘*The Cedars,” located on the right bank of the Passaic 
River, a mile or more from the City of Newark and adja- 
cent to Mt. Pleasant Cemetery. About fifty minutes are 
required in reaching the spot by rail from New York. 
Horse cars lead down to it from the rail-road depot in New- 
ark. This home, ‘The Cedars,” was originally purchased 
by Herbert’s father, the Dean of Manchester, and placed 
in trust with Anson Livingstone, of New York, and others, 
the title being vested for the benefit of Herbert’s only child, 
William, by his first wife. Here, comparatively isolated 
from the world, Frank Forester composed the majority 
of his voluminous works. Following his decease, ‘‘ The 
Cedars” rapidly fell into decay. A superstition prevailed 
in the neighborhood that the place was haunted. Owing 
to this fact, its isolation and proximity to a graveyard, 
no one could be found who would either pay rent for, or 
occupy the premises. At the request of the trustees, su- 
pervision was assumed by Mr. Kinney, of Newark, who 
had looked after Herbert’s affairs following his death, 
among other acts, taking to his own home and keeping 
for many years the little dog Vixen, which was with Her- 
bert when he shot himself. And so for years Herbert’s 
home among the beautiful cedars on the picturesque Pas- 
saic, justly entitled to be regarded as an historical edifice, 
identified with culture in a novel school of literature re- 
mained uninhabited and regarded by many with a feeling 
bordering upon aversion. Finally when Willie, who had 
been sent a mere youth to England, became of age, 

vg 


8 FRANK FORESTER. 


he consented to the sale and ‘‘'The Cedars” became the 
property of a wealthy gentleman, a Mr. Sanchez, His 
first care was to renovate, enlarge, and embellish the pretty- 
cottage, evidently with the intention of transforming it 
into the picturesque villa its original builder aspired for 
in his architectural dreams. [Herbert’s lack of funds 
always prevented his carrying out his plans, constantly 
projected for enlarging and beautifying the building. | 
Now large sums of money were expended in realization 
of this transformation and, although wonderfully changed 
in general appearance, ‘‘ The Cedars,” through retention 
of its significant appellation, might have remained a 
graceful memorial to Herbert’s memory. 

Still, searce had the improvements to the building and 
the surrounding premises been completed, than the edi- 
fice was destroyed by a conflagration of mysterious origin, 
whereby ‘‘ The Cedars” was hopelessly devastated. As 
the reputation of Frank Forester gradually augmented 
with the new generation of sportsmen, a pilgrimage to 
** The Cedars” and its picturesque surroundings natur- 
ally suggested itself, and many enthusiastic admirers 
have, since the unfortunate author’s demise, visited a lo- 
cality, prolific only in traditional memories. 

Herbert’s little estate has been incorporated in the 
Cemetery previously adjoining his domain and separated 
from it simply by a rustic fence, through the gateway 
of which passed the small funeral procession conyey- 
ing the suicide to his grave. This course was taken in 
pursuance of Herbert’s ante-mortem request, as, at that 
gateway, the deceived husband affectionately embraced 
his wife and parted with her with a falsehood dropping 
from her lips—a deception hurrying him to a premature 
mortal ending. After Herbert discovered that his wife 
had left ‘‘ The Cedars,” not to return, he supposed that 
the loneliness of the place and the absence of society had 
caused her departure. It was with this impression that 


THE CEDARS. 9 


he temporarily took rooms for himself at the Stevens’ 
House, in New York, until he should be able, as he sup- 
posed, to find some attractive spot in New York, to 
which she would be willing to come and remain with 
him. Realization of the fact that she had left him, not 
to return, did not come home to him until several days 
afterward. Then it was that he decided to take his life, 

Although of all personal memorials to Frank Forester 
there remains but the ruins of the wine vault, indicative 
of the genial hospitality he ever displayed to visitors be- 
neath his modest roof, an elm, planted with his own 
hands, and a solitary cedar, survivor of the ornamental 
grove, with which he had ingeniously decked a barren hill- 
side—in the immediate vicinity of ‘‘The Cedars’ ” deso- 
lated site, can be found the dwellings of several persons, 
familiarly connected with its deceased owner’s domestic 
relations. In the porter’s lodge erected by Mr. Sanchez, 
narrowly escaping destruction by the flames, now dwells 
Charles B. Holt, Herbert’s confidential messenger, who, 
for years, assisted the author in transmission of manu- 
scripts, proofs, and business missives, to and from pub- 
lishers’ offices and printing houses, a task of trust, as our 
writer was scrupulous, particular and essentially exacting 
in the transaction of his literary affairs. Mr. Holt, at 
present a fisherman on the Passaic, can relate many 
pleasant reminiscences and anecdotes- touching the 
personal habits of his eccentric employer, the site of 
whose former home can be readily determined from the 
fact of the erection of a boat-house projecting into the 
river directly in front of the lawn in the midst of which 
** The Cedars” stood. Upon the top of the bluff, over- 
looking the ruined site, stands the residence of Mrs. 
John Flintoft, sister to the late Miles I’Anson, one of 
Herbert’s warmest and most devoted friends and admir- 
ers, in whose burial plot his remains have been buried. 
Possibly, few men enjoyed the confidence of the misan- 


10 FRANK FORESTER. 


trophic writer as did his hospitable and ever-obliging 
neighbor, a practical agriculturist, a man of genial na- 
ture, and a steadfast friend, whose society was, for years, 
a grateful relief to the monotony of a residence at ‘‘'The 
Cedars” during the dreary winter seasons. By a singu- 
lar coincidence Mr. Anson, who had evinced a fervent 
interest in the proceedings, died upon the day of the 
public unveiling of the head-stone, erected by the citi- 
zens of Newark eighteen years after this gentleman had 
donated, unsolicited, a permanent resting place for Frank 
Forester’s otherwise neglected remains. 

Upon the hill-side, across the Belleville road, which at 
one time, a bleak, forbidden, and barren bluff, had been 
intended to be converted into a counterpart of ‘‘ The 
Cedars” by a literary associate, appears a handsome 
residence, conveying to the present visitor some idea as 
to the location and appearance of Herbert’s house, as 
viewed from the river. The road, or rather lane, lead- 
ing down from the main thoroughfare to ‘‘ The Cedars,” 
is now in a neglected condition, there being considerable 
timber and debris in the lower end of it. Stretching 
down to the bank, from the site of the former residence, 
is a beautiful carpet of green. ‘The view up and down 
the river is exceedingly picturesque. 

During his lifetime, Herbert complained that a deline- 
ation of his residence had not been published in the 
“* Homes of American Authors,” as he conceived it to be 
entitled to that distinction as a model domicile for a 
practical writer, combining picturesque comfort and 
financial economy. There was full justice in this com- 
plaint, inasmuch as, with the exception of Irving’s home 
—‘‘Sunny Side,” no author’s dwelling had grown more 
familiar by name to the world of literature on this con- 
tinent than was ‘‘ The Cedars,” 


“MY HOME.” 


“ A home! a home! yes, yes! though still and small, 
I have a home where soft the shadows fall 
From the dim pine tree, and the river's sigh 
Like voices of the dead wails ever nigh; 
Nor hearth is there, nor hall, nor festive place, 
Nor welcome smile of that bewitching face, 
Nor the low laughter, nor the fond sweet tone 
That made pain pleasant—yet it is mine own— 
My heart’s own home, where’er my foot may tread, 
Oh! for my narrow house, and lowly bed! 


“Let others turn, when each has ceased to roam, 
To the calm pleasures of his childish home— 
Let others turn when the day’s hot toil is o’er 
To that pure kiss which greets him at the door; 
To that bright eye which kindles at the sound 
Of their known footsteps, shedding glory round ; 
I have no childish home, nor earthly hold— 
The kiss that breathed upon my lips is cold ; 
The eye that beamed for me is dimmed and dead— 
Oh! for my narrow house and lowly bed! 


‘‘ Earth has no home that can with mine compare, 
For thou, my own lost one, for thou art there, 
It matters not that they are sealed in death, 
Those founts of light, and still the balmy breath 


11 


12 FRANK FORESTER. 


And wan the radiant lip and lustrous brow— 
It matters not—for it is always thou! 

It matters not how cold, if I at last, 

On that true heart of thine, when all is past 
May pillow once again my lonely head— 
Oh! for my narrow house and lowly bed! 


“Oh! weary, waste and weary is the day, 
And weary is the night. Oh! will away! 
For anguish weakens with the rising morn 
And sleepless sorrow of the night is born ! 
And years must pass, long years, ere I shali run 
To that dear spot, where fools are fain to shun, 
The only home which now my soul doth crave, 
Thy home—the long, the last—thine early grave ; 
Oh! that for me the bridal sheets were spread 
Now in my narrow house and lowly bed.” 


MY FIRST DAY’S SNIPE SHOOTING AT 
CAMBRIDGE. 


My first day’s snipe shooting at Cambridge! Alas ! 
alas ! how many reminiscences, bitter and bleak as the 
cold north-eastern storm that, even while I write, is bel- 
lowing without, fall heavy on my heart, as I indite those 
simple words. How many, many long years wasted ; how 
many generous aims and lofty aspirations blighted ; how 
many kindly deeds and goodly feelings written on sand, 
to be effaced as soon; how many faults and follies, re- 
corded upon brass, perennial; how many warm hearts 
changed to sad, chill ashes; how many friends—dead, 
faithless, or forgetful! Alas! for those young days, and 
young feelings, flown forever, before there was a furrow 
on the brow, or a gray hair on the head, before disap- 
pointment had wrought agony, and agony been mother 
to the dark twins, distrust and despondency, near akin 
to despair. 

That morning—I remember it as well as if twenty long 
and sorrowful years had not lagged along since it dawned 
gay with anticipated pleasure—so well do I remember it, 
that not a small detail of the room in which we met be- 
fore our start, not a picture or trinket, nay, not the very 
colors of breakfast china have faded from my memory; 
and I believe that my tongue could re-word our whole 
conversation, and my steps retrace our whole walk, 
though I doubt not many a fair fen has been drained, 
and many an acre sown and harvested, across which on 
that day we picked our way from bog to bog, or waded 
ankle-deep in coffee-colored water, with now a snipe’s 
shrill whistle, and now a mallard’s harsh qua-ack—qua- 
ack saluting our delighted ears, making our youthful 

13 


14 FRANK FORESTER. 


hearts beat hard and hurriedly, and drawing rash, un- 
steady trigger-pulling from our yet inexperienced hands. 
That morning was a bright, calm, beautiful October’s. 
dawning, as ever awoke sportsmen, too young and ardent 
to be sluggards, from college beds too hard and narrow 
to be very tempting, long ere the earliest cock had crowed, 
or the last loitering reveller ceased from yociferating to 
something, which he deemed a tune, most redolent of 
hot milk-punch or fiery bishop, 

“We won’t go home till morning, we won’t go home till morning, 

Till daylight does appear.” 

I had refused an invitation to a supper party, at which 
a dozen jovial hearts now scattered over this world, or 
passed from it, were to discuss broiled bones and deviled 
kidneys, diluted by hot gin-punch of the strongest—re- 
fused it on the score of keeping my hand steady, and 
my nerves braced for the morrow, and had supped 
quietly in my own rooms, with my companion of the 
day to be recorded, on poached eggs, Edinburgh ale, and a 
single bottle of Carbonell’s best port, brewed into negus. 

With my companion of the day to be recorded—Alas! 
poor George Gordon! Ours was a strange introduction, 
whence arose an entire and uninterrupted friendship, un- 
broken by a single angry word, a single unkind feeling, 
proof against time and undissolved by distance, but sey- 
ered long ago by the insatiate hand of the cold fiend, con- 
sumption. 

We were both from the north, freshmen on our way to 
Cambridge. I from the West Riding of Yorkshire, he 
from the Highland Hills of Aberdeenshire ; and in the 
old Highflyer we travelled all the way from Ferrybridge, 
two hundred mortal miles and eighteen weary hours, the 
only inside passengers to Cambridge. Each of us took 
the other for an old collegian, neither of us being exceed- 
ing verdant, and both cognizant of that excessive college 
etiquette which will not suffer a man to save a classmate, 


SNIPE SHOOTING AT CAMBRIDGE. 15 


unintroduced, from drowning, not a word passed between 
us ; we both wished to be cruel knowing—both proved in 
that respect at least, to be cruel green. It was by odds 
the dullest and most tedious journey I ever haye experi- 
enced—though I have travelled since over the half of two 
hemispheres, and though travelling, like misery, makes 
us acquainted with strange bedfellows. 

I never shall forget how glad I was when the coach 
stopped at the Harp Hotel, and I got out, trusting that I 
should never again encounter that stiff, stately Don, who 
could not even speak to a fellow, because he was a fresh- 
man, 

And he, it seems, was all the while putting up the like 
orisons against all future meetings with myself, Frank 
Forester. 

Six hours later we were sworn friends, and never were, _ 
and now never can be, hap what hap, aught else in this 
world. 

It so happened that I was not acquainted with a single 
man of my own college, when I went up to the univer- 
sity, all my old brother Etonians being either Johnians 
or Trinity men, while I had entered at Caius. I had the 
blues, therefore, most awfully; felt as if I was alone in a 
new and perilous world; a shipwrecked mariner left all 
among the cannibals ‘a-galloping ashore;” and, when 
dinner-time arrived, it was only by a mighty exertion of 
energy and pluck that I put on, for the first time, those 
singularly unbecoming habiliments ycleped cap and gown, 
and sallied forth to brave, as I supposed, alone, unknown 
and unsupported, the criticisms and witticisms, and im- 
pertinent comments of my thereafter to be classmates. 

After inquiring carefully of my gyp the way into hall, 
the particular table at which I was to sit, and all the et- 
iquettes, not to be conversant with which is to a fresh- 
man the very fiend’s arch mock—after taking especial 
care not to put on my trencher wrong side before, and to 


16 FRANK FORESTER. 


arrange my gown in what I imagined to be a very devil- 
may-care fashion, forth I went, with about as pleasant a 
prospect as the gallows before me, but without the des- - 
pairing pluck which enables the poor culprit to face that 
prospect manfully. 


On I went, with my courage screwed to the sticking 
place, but I must confess with my heart thumping against 
my ribs prodigiously, when immediately under the low- 
browed archway—I have not seen it these twenty years 
and better; yet there it stands as palpable before me as 
if it were not a trick of memory—the low-browed arch- 
way giving access by an ascending stair to the hall redolent 
of six-year-old mutton, and by a descending flight to the 
college butteries and cellars, redolent of audit ale, and 
that most cloud-compelling compound, of hot ale, sherry, 
brandy, cloves, nutmegs, toast and cinnamon, which 
gods call nectar, and college men Caius copus—when un- 
der that low-browed archway, I say, of what should I 
become aware, but of my tall friend of the Highflyer, 
arrayed like myself in a cap and gown, which testified by 
their resplendent newness that he too was a freshman. 


No words can, I believe, adequately describe the mu- 
tual delight of that recognition. He, it appears, was in 
precisely the same predicament with myself! He, like 
myself, had remained ensconsed in his own rooms, not 
daring to stir out and meet the animadyerting eyes of 
junior and senior sophomores, until the summons of the 
dinner-bell, and the yet more imperative commands of an 
esurient stomach had driven him out, as they have many 
a hero before and since, to do and dare the worst. 


Instead then of a morose and stately Don, steeped to 
the lips in scorn of verdant youngsters, each of us had 
before him an innocent, and equally imperilled, brother 
freshman. Confound all etiquette! there was no one 
near to see! so out went both our hands at once? 


SNIPE SHOOTING AT CAMBRIDGE. Ly 


‘Believe I had the pleasure of travelling from the 
north—” 

‘*Think we came up together in the Highflyer—” 

** Devilish little pleasure about it, however,” said I, 
Frank Forester, mustering a little of the spice of the 
original fiend that possesses me. 

** Deuced dull work it was, certainly, but, my dear sir, 
I took you for a Don.” 

** And I you—and for a mighty stiff one too.” 

**To tell you the truth,” said the North Briton, “I 
have been thanking Heayen all the morning that I should 
never see that sulky little fellow again.” 

Little! confound his picture! I stand five fect ten in my 
stockings, and measure thirty-eight inches over the chest 
—but, sure enough, little I was beside him ; for he was in 
truth a very son of Anak. Six feet four without his 
shoes, and yet so exquisitely fashioned, and in so perfect 
proportion, that unless there stood some one near him, 
against whom to institute a comparison, you would not 
have taken him for a six-footer. Alas! that very prema- 
tureness of perfect size and stature had perhaps sapped 
already the foundations of that noble piece of architec- 
ture, and foredoomed it to decay as speedy and untimely 
as its growth had been unduly rapid. 

But no such thought as this at that time thrust itself 
upon us—we were young, bold, self-confident, free, fear- 
less of the future, and dreamed of any thing, in our proud 
aspirations after all that was great and noble, rather than 
that which was so soon to befall us—untimely death the 
one, the other, long, long years of weary wandering. 

‘My name is George Gordon,” said the Highland gi- 
ant, ‘‘of Newton, near Old Raine, in Aberdeenshire.” 

“And mine, Frank Forester, of Forest Hall, near 
Wetherby, in the West Riding.” 

“Well, Mr. Forester, seeing that we now know one 


- 


18 FRANK FORESTER. 


another, suppose we eat our first mutton, side by side, in 
this hall of Caius, and send the Dons to the devil!” 

*‘ Agreed, Mr. Gordon, provided that the mutton 
ended, you will take your port with me, at No. 12 in the 
Fellows’ Court. It is some of Carbonell’s purple, and by 
no means to be despised, I assure you. It is a present 
from John L—, of fox-hunting celebrity in Yorkshire, 
whom you may perhaps haye heard of, eyen so far as Ab- 
erdeenshire.” 

** Jack L—! who has not heard of him, I should Jike 
to know. I shall be too happy, Mr. Forester, the rather 
that my wine has not yet made its appearance.” 

** By the way, don’t you think we might just as well 
drop the Mister? ” 

** And be—George Gordon?” 

**And Frank Forester. And make these Caius snobs 
—I have no doubt they are snobs, if they were ten times 
Dons—believe that we haye known each other these ten 
years.” 

“« Agreed!” 

“* Agreed! ” 

And we shook hands again upon it, and went into hall, 
and discussed the six-year-old mutton, undaunted by the 
observation of the oldsters, and astonishing the young- 
sters by the off-hand way in which he talked of Kintore 
and Kennedy, and stalking royal harts with cupped horns 
on Braemar or in Glen Tilt; and I of Paine, of Selby, and 
Harry Goodrich, and brushing at bullfinches, and switch- 
ing twenty-five feet brooks; while the pale snobs about 
us, with tallow faces and sleek hair, short, seedy trousers 
and black gaiters, were deep in the discussion of the Pons 
Asinorum, or exchanging experiences concerning tutors 
and morning lectures, chapels, and deans and proctors. 

That evening, I will not say that we got fou’, but this 
I will say, that my squinting gyp, old Robson, reported 
six fellow-commoners—id est, empty bottles—on the 


SNIPE SHOOTING AT CAMBRIDGE. 19 


hearth the next morning—and that neither of us went to 
evening chapel that night, or to morning chapel the next 
day; which cost each of us the writing of an imposition 
of 600 lines of Virgil, or rather three half-crowns paid 
to old Dick, the barber, for writing it in our stead. 

Thenceforth we were sworn friends forever. Thence- 
forth, eschewing hall, which we voted very slow and bad 
feeling, we dined alternate days each in the other’s room, 
the standing order being, soup, chops, or steaks, game, 
Stilton cheese and walnuts, and ever and aye four bottles 
to be aired before the fire. 

Thenceforth, were we seen rarely at the lecture-room 
or chapel, but often at the covert-side, with Hadbury, or 
Charley Newman, of the East Essex, often with Lord 
Fitzwilliam, or the Oakley, aye, by’r lady, and with Os- 
baldeston’s lady pack, in Northamptonshire, though to 
accomplish that, we had eighty miles of road-work to do 
in coming and returning. 

Thenceforth did our guns often ring together o’er many 
a lowland fen, and in after days on many a Highland hill, 
and this brings me back to the point whence I have so 
widely wandered. 
~ It was, as I have said, a beautiful, calm October morn- 
ing, on which, as soon as the skies were well light, I sal- 
lied forth from the college gates, and took my way 
through Trinity street, in front of the proud gate-house 
in which, above the archway, is still shown the room 
wherein young Newton dreamed perhaps already of celes- 
tial marvels to be made patent soon by his immortal geni- 
us—in front of the brick turrets and square casements of 
dingy-hued St. Johns—turned to the left into Bridge 
street, and soon reached the snug lodging in which my 
friend roomed, within college rules, though without the 
time-honored walls of Caius. 

There never was a more complete specimen, than the 
snuggery into which I was introduced, of a college sports- 


20 FRANK FORESTER, 


man’s room. It was not, it is true, above fourteen feet 
square; but into that small space was crowded almost 
every comfort and convenience that can be conceived. 
Above the mantle-piece, under the ample arch of which 
blazed a glorious sea-coal fire, hung a large, handsome 
looking-glass, between the frame and mirror of which were 
stuck a profusion of visiting-cards, summons to appear 
before the dean, buttery bills, and lists of hunting appoint- 
ments. On each side of the glass was a dog’s head, by the 
inimitable Landseer; and on the right-hand wall a large 
picture of grouse-shooting in the Highlands, by the same 
prince of modern masters. A large and luxurious sofa 
ran along the left-hand wall, on the crimson cushions of 
which were cast at random the black gown and trencher 
cap of the student. 

Before the fire-place stood a table, which had once been 
amply furnished for the morning meal; but now the tea- 
pot stood with its lid staring open, guiltless of souchong 
or bohea; the voiceless urn sent up no spiral wreaths of 
sweetly murmuring steam; the egg-cups contained only 
shells; the massive silver dish, with its cover half dis- 
placed, showed only now, in lieu of the nobly deviled 
kidneys and turkey’s gizzards, the scent of which ‘‘ clung 
to it still,” a little ruby-colored gravy, whereon floated a 
few rings of congealed fatness; the brown loaf was dis- 
mantled; the butter-pats had disappeared in toto; and the 
tout ensemble read me a lamentable lecture on the vices 
of procrastination and delay, the burthen of which was 
still the old college saw of sero venientibus ossa—‘‘ to the 
late comer, bones!” 

Beneath the table, crouched, beautiful spectacle to a 
thorough-bred sportsman’s eye, as superb a brace of set- 
ters as ever ranged a stubble, or brushed. the dew-drops 
from the heather of a highland hill. 

One of them was a red and white Irish dog, with large, 
soft, liquid eyes of the darkest hazel, a coal-black nose, 


SNIPE SHOOTING AT CAMBRIDGE. 21 


palate and lips of the same thorough-bred tint, a stern 
feathered almost as thickly as a fox’s brush, but with hair 
as soft and lucent as floss silk; his legs were fringed two 
inches deep with the same glossy fleece, and his whole 
coat was as smooth and sleekly combed as the ringlets of 
a highborn beauty. The other was English bred, and 
in his own way scarce less beautiful; he was jet-black, 
without a speck or snip of white on forehead, breast, or 
feet; but legs and muzzle were of the richest and warmest 
tan. And he, too, showed in his well-ordered coat, 
bright eye, and cold, moist muzzle, the very perfection 
of care and science in feeding and kennel management. 

Beside the board, alas! for me no longer hospitable, 
sat the tall sportsman, his blue bird’s-eye fogle, his snuff- 
colored velveteen jacket, his scarlet kerseymere waist- 
coat, with pearl buttons, the very pattern of a garb for a 
winter sportsman; but, unaccustomed yet to the wet low- 
. land shooting of the fens, he had arranged his nether 
man in loose trousers of brown corduroy, a most incon- 
venient dress for marsh shooting. ; 

He was in the act of putting together his gun, a short, 
powerful, heavy, double-barrelled Manton, built to his 
own order, of unusual weight and calibre, a weapon of 
sure execution in safe hands, and of range almost extraor- 
dinary. I opened the door and strode in not without 
some considerable racket, but he never raised his eyes 
from the lock, which he was just screwing on, until he 
had accomplished his job; although, perhaps, knowing 
my step, perhaps guessed who it was from the increased 
wagging of the setters’ tails, thumping the floor in joy- 
ous recognition, he said in a quiet voice, not untouched 
by a sort of dry humor. 

‘* How are you, Frank? In time for once. Well, sit 
down, and get your breakfast. I suppose you have not 
fed yet.” 

** Fed, I should think not, truly. We don’t feed in 


22 FRANK FORESTER. 


the night in my country—none of us, at least, except the 
woodcocks! and as for sitting down, that I can do well 
enough, but for the breakfast—” 

**Oh! ah! I had forgotten. I ate that,” said Master 
George, looking up very coolly. ‘* Never mind, Frank; 
I have ordered a capital dinner at eight this evening, 
and there is a cold pheasant, and a bottle of Duff Gor- 
don’s gold sherry in the well of the dog-cart, to say noth- 
ing of anchovy sandwiches. You must hold on till two 
o’clock, and then make up for lost time at luncheon. 
Next time you will be punctual.” 

“The devil take it, man,” responded I; ‘‘I can no 
more walk thirty miles without my breakfast than I can 
leap a thirty-foot fen ditch without a pole. Breakfast— 
by George! I must have some breakfast, or no snipe to- 
day. Holloa! Eustace, holloa! I must have prog of 
some kind—what can you give me?” 

**T will find something, Mr. Forester, I’ll warrant 
you,” replied the gyp, kicking the door open with his 
right foot, and pulling it to behind him with his left as 
he entered, both his hands being occupied in bearing a 
well-apparelled tray—fresh tea, kidneys red-hot, rolls 
smoking, and, to complete the whole, prawn curry. 

‘Now, then, be smart, Frank,” shouted my comrade, 
**T hear the gray cob stamping at the door, and I don’t 
keep him waiting over ten minutes—no not for the em- 
peror of the Chinas!” 

Within ten minutes the kidneys had disappeared, the 
prawn curry was not, the second teapot was empty, no 
crust or crumb of the hot rolls remained to hint to future 
generations what they had been; and to wash down the 
whole, and settle our stomachs for the day, George and 
I had absorbed a thimbleful apiece of the real mountain 
dew of Glenlivat. 

The dogs were stowed under the seat; the guns, in their 
leather cases, strapped to the top-rail of the dog-cart; 


SNIPE SHOOTING AT CAMBRIDGE. 23 


our sporting toggery concealed from keen eyes of proc- 
tors by heavy driving-coats; and, within the given period 
of ten minutes, the lively little gray was stepping it out 
gallantly at twelve miles the hour, snatching at its steel 
curb, and tossing its proud head, as if it had not got 
some forty stone behind it. 

Down Jesus lane we bowled, rattling over the rough 
cobblestones, and bringing all the helpers out of Spar- 
row’s livery-stable to see what was in the wind, past 
Stourbridge Common, and up the hill toward Barnwell, 
hamlet of unclean notoriety, peopled entirely, of men, 
by dog-fanciers, rat-hunters, pigeon-shooters, and the 
lowest of that tribe ycleped the fancy; and of women, by 
those unfortunates, who have to ears polite no appella- 
tion. Through that ill den we rattled merrily, heedless 
of the clamors which followed us, and soon reached Pa- 
per-mill Bar, on the Newmarket road, with its high turn- 
pike gates placed on the keystone of a one-arched bridge 
spanning a deep and turbid stream, flowing from the fens 
to the Cam in devious curves through the deep meadow- 
land. 

Here Gordon pulled up for a moment, and while he 
was paying the toll, pointed to a bit of splashy ground, 
not thirty yards from the road-side to the right hand. 

“Tf you will jump out with your gun, Frank—never 
mind taking a dog along—you’ll flush a couple or two of 
snipe in that pool. Geta double shot if you can, but 
don’t wait to follow them. We are behind time, even 
now.” 

No sooner said than done. Out I jumped, gun in 
hand, and walked forward briskly, with both my barrels 
cocked. I had not in those days attained the cool quick- 
ness which enables the sure finger to cock the piece, as it 
rises to the eye, without delay or hesitancy. Up they 
jumped, just as I had been warned, two couple close 
under my nose. Bang, went my first barrel, harmless, 


24 FRANK FORESTER. 


discharged before the bird was ten paces distant from the 
muzzle. Skeap! skeap!—away they went, twisting and 
zigzaging their way up wind, as wild as hawks; but I had 
rallied already, and fired my second barrel coolly, and 
with better luck than I had deserved by my first miss. 

The bird I shot at was keeled over clean, and quite 
dead, riddled by the mustard-seed at the true distance— 
it must have gone like a single ball at the first snipe— 
and, to my great astonishment, another, which, unseen 
at the moment when I pulled the trigger, was crossing 
the same line at some twelve yards further, went down 
winged-tipped. That was the first and last time that I 
ever have killed myself, or seen killed by another, two 
English snipe with one shot. 

Well pleased, I jumped again into our dog-cart ; and 
away we rattled five miles further to Dry Water, a large 
broad brook, along the banks of which is the best shooting 
in that district, and there, upon the bridge, we found 
awaiting us, with his fourteen foot jumping-pole, and 
his capacious game-bag, Jem Carter, the best guide and 
pole-man of the fens, surnamed the clean, dwcus ad non 
lucendo, from his exceeding filthiness, together with his 
brother, a smart, wicked urchin of sixteen. ‘To the 
guidance of the latter we entrusted the gray cob, to be 
driven to the Rutland Arms, at Bottisham, and there in- 
stalled at rack and manger, to await our coming. To 
the guidance of the former, through mud and through 
mire, we committed ourselves. I remember, as I said 
before, every turn and winding of that long, weary walk, 
every tussock over which we stumbled, every quagmire 
in which we stuck fast, every broad dyke into which, 
jumping short, we blundered; but these things would 
have small attraction to my readers. Much game we did 
not kill that day, assuredly; but we have killed some 
since, sarten! as Tom Draw says. And for the rest, it is 
neither for the shooting performed, nor for the miles tray- 


MY FIRST DAY’S PARTRIDGE SHOOTING. 25 


ersed, but for the memory, never to be forgotten, of old 
frindship interrupted, and good fellowship ended forever, 
that I still cherish, and hold dear, in a deep angle of my 
heart, the recollection of “ my first day’s snipe-shooting 
at Cambridge.” 


MY FIRST DAY’S PARTRIDGE SHOOTING. 


At last. I was eighteen years old. I had been in the 
sixth form at Eton more than six months; had been pro- 
moted from round jackets to long-tailed blue coats, the 
height and front of the Etonian’s ambition; from a pony 
to a fifteen-hand thoroughbred hack—which I believed 
to be the best hunter in the island—and from my seat at 
my sister’s governess’s table to a knife and fork in the 
dining room; and now I was to be promoted from shooting 
rabbits, snipe, wild fowl, larks, and such other animals of 
the half-game order, to the dignity of a game certificate 
and a license to kill game in my own right throughout 
England. 

I was already more than a fair shot, for it had been 
agreed between myself and the Governor that I should be 
entitled to claim a game certificate so soon as I could kill 
nine out of the first twelve skylarks that should get up 
before me—the skylark when he does not rise to sing fly- 
ing low, very swiftly, close to the ground, by no means 
unlike a snipe, and quite as difficult to kill. 

This feat I had accomplished some three weeks before 
the first; my certificate was bought; my first shooting 
jacket built; my gun cleaned for the tenth time within 
the last two days; my shot-pouch and powder-horn filled; 

2 


26 FRANK FORESTER. 


and I, filled full from head to foot with anticipation of 
distinguishing myself before the eyes of the Governor, 
went to bed, but not to sleep, on the night of the thirty- _ 
first of August. 

I was awake and on foot by day-break, and it seemed 
hours, nay years to me, before my father made his ap- 
pearance, rigged for the field, at about eight o’clock. 

Well, to the field we went, in the home farm, and 
within five hundred yards from the house; in a fine tur- 
nip field, knee deep among the broad green leaves, the 
dogs came to a point. I had made some trivial wager 
with the Governor that I would bag my first bird, a dog- 
whip or whistle, or some such trifle; but my heart was 
as much set to win as if a million had been at stake. 

Three young birds rose, two crossed the Governor to the 
right, and both fell to his two barrels killed clean. My 
bird fell, likewise, but he was wing-tipped only, ran and 
was not retrieved. 

I had lost my wager, and my heart was heayy—the 
Governor chaffed me and laughed at me—I grew nervous 
—got out of sorts—blazed right and left at everything. 
I carried both barrels at full cock then; everybody did so 
in those-days—missing it before it got five yards away— 
was quizzed and laughed at more and more, and came 
within an ace of being destroyed and rendered worthless 
as a shot forever. 

Suddenly in a desperate situation, I took a desperate 
resolve: I would never again, while I lived, cock a gun 
till the bird was on the wing at which I was about to fire. 
No sooner said than done. I let my gun down to the 
half-cock and proceeded. The next ten birds that rose 
I put up my gun to my shoulder without cocking it— 
pulled—no fire came, and I got quizzed more and more, 
and, at last, actually scolded, as if I were holding back 
my fire purposely, because I could not get what I consid- 
ered a true aim. 


MY FIRST DAY’S PARTRIDGE SHOOTING. Q4 


Then I was lectured on the beauties of a first sight, and 
on the inutility of picking after my birds and on the 
danger of becoming a pottering shot; all of which I 
knew, every iota, as well as my monitor. But not a 
word deigned I in reply, either in defense or in explana- 
tion. 

At last I got the hang of it. I cocked my gun as I 
raised it, discharged it as it struck my shoulder, and of 
course killed my bird. I killed thirteen birds, one after 
the other, in unbroken succession, four of them double 
shots. Then I missed one bird, killing its mate with my 
second barrel, and fiye more in succession; then two 
misses and eight kills, each after each. 

At nightfall I had bagged twenty-seven birds out of 
twenty-nine shots after missing some nineteen or twenty 
shots without a single kill in the morning. I have neyer 
done much better since. That morning made me all 
that I claim to be at this moment, a deliberately prompt 
shot. But you had better believe, gentle reader, that 
from that day forth, to this, I have never cocked my gun 
till I have seen my game fairly on wing or afoot; and yet 
more, till I have let it go, as far as I intend that it shall 
go at all; and I find that I can kill as many snap shots 
as most men. Let those who will, carry their guns 
cocked. I say let them—so that they don’t carry their 
hammers down on their nipples—it is all one to me. If 
they do so, they don’t shoot in my company no how; but 
for my own use give me the gun at half-cock and delib- 
erate promptitude! 


THE YORKSHIRE MOORS. 


It is now well nigh thirty years since my first day on 
the Yorkshire moorlands. I was then some eighteen 
years of age, and in the sixth form at Eton. In the pre- 
ceding autumn I had been promoted for the first time 
toa game certificate, and had waged war on the gray part- 
ridge, perdia cinerea, with such success as as to kill my 
fifteen brace in one day’s shooting, and to gain the repute 
of being a most promising young shot; for be it known I 
had practised first on hedge-sparrows, field-fares, sky- 
larks and swallows, and afterwards on English snipe, 
water fowl and moor hen, which are not included in the 
category of game or prohibited to the landless and un- 
licensed gunner, until I had acquired the trick of bring- 
ing my stock to my shoulder, my barrel on a level to the 
eye, and drawing my trigger finger with a single motion, 
and that without either winking at the flash or shrmking 
from the recoil. In short, I was in a fair way to be as 
good as I was a keen shot, when few Eton boys had a 
soul above a cricket-ball or a boat race. 

But the moors! the moors! the glorious twelfth of 
August! Hoe erut in votis! This it was that was to con- 
stitute me a dona fide sportsman; to make me the pride 
and envy of my classmates—my classmates! nay, but of 
the country gentlemen, the crack shots, the brag artists 
of the south country preserves, to whom a well-stocked 
turnip field or well-filled pheasant covert, was the noblest 
scene of their exploits with the gun. 

How eager were my days, how sleepless my nights, as 
that day of days approached, which was in my own esteem 
to raise me to the level of a Cesar! and when the missive 
was despatched to ask permission of the eccentric but 

28 


THE YORKSHIRE MOORS. 29 


kind-hearted mistress of Fontague’s abbaye and unnum- 
bered acres of ‘heath and whin and bare wild moor,” 
how did my heart leap to the sound of the postman’s 
horn! how did I strive to anticipate the future, and when 
the reply arrived in the affirmative, where was there to 
be found one so happy as I? My gun cleaned and re- 
cleaned, locks taken apart and put together again, oiled 
and wiped dry and oiled again, till every one in the house 
was, or had good cause to be, utterly a-weary. 

And then my rig for the twelfth—methinks I can see 
it as it lay before me now, just from the hands of the 
most approved artist in St. James street—point device 
according toGunter. The russet-purple shooting jacket 
of light velveteen, precisely the shade of the blooming 
heather; the dun-colored tweed waistcoat and trousers, 
undistinguishable from the tints of the faded grass and 
ling; the stout yet light and easy shoes; the leather 
ankle-gaiters; the-purple cloth shooting cap, with a tuft 
of heather and withered fern in the band—all fashioned 
alike to excite the jealousy of the rival Sportsman and to 
defy the most fastidious eye, while it should at the same 
time pass before the eyes of the vigilant and fearful moor- 
cock without awakening his observation—that all] spec- 
tators should exclaim, ‘ Capital get up indeed!” <* Dey- 
ilish well made, and in good taste too! nota bit overdone, 
like Aston’s liveries there! no one can say that for them!” 

At length the eve of the happy day arrived. The 
weather was inall respects propitious, and at daybreak on 
the eleventh we set forth, myself and the best and dearest 
of all earthly friends long since departed from this world 
of toil and trouble, in a light stanhope drawn by an active 
horse, encumbered by no baggage beyond our gun-cases 
and the changes of raiment necessary for cur trip. 

Old Harry Lee, the sturdy veteran game-keeper, who 
taught ‘‘ my young idea how to shoot,” and to accompany 
whom on his rounds I have been a hundred times from 


30 FRANK FORESTER. 


my bed at daybreak or earlier, when the sun rises at 
three in the morning, had set out two days previously, 
leading a stout shetland pony laden with panniers, and 
taking with him four brace of as staunch and swift and 
beautiful dogs as ever dropped to shot, or stood staunch 
and still as death over a running bevy. ‘There were 
Cynthia and Phebe, a pair of orange and white silky Irish 
setters, with large soft eyes and coal-black muzzles, 
feathered six inches deep on the legs and stern—Pierrot 
and Jason, two liver and white pointers, the former so 
lively a game-finder that the best shot with whom I ever 
pulled a trigger was used to say that he ‘‘ half believed 
Pierrot could make his own game whenever he was at 
a loss”—Charon and Pluto, a brace of black and white 
Russians, fleeced like arctic bears, and with such a fell of 
matted wool hanging over their short bullet heads and. 
grim faces, and almost quenching the light of their quick 
keen fiery eyes, that it was difficult to conceive how they 
could see daylight. They were the best retrievers I have 
ever yet shot over; the staunchest, keenest, most indefat- 
igable and indestructible of dogs. 

Charon was for years my own especial dog; him I was 
allowed to take out of the kennel alone without a keeper 
to accompany me, when I was, or was supposed to be, too 
young, too ignorant, and too impetuous to be trusted 
with any dog that could be damaged. ‘‘ Even Frank,” 
it used to be said, ‘‘ could not spoil Charon!” and I be- 
' lieve the D—I1 himself could not, had he tried it. 

He had been imperfectly broke, and if birds were 
killed, he would run in and fetch them; but eyen in his 
unsteadiness he was so staunch, and so unerring was -his 
sagacity and instinct, that if a fresh bird lay in his 
route as he dashed in to fetch that which had fallen, he 
would invariably point it dead. I never knew him flush 
a single bird in his most impetuous rushes. 

If a covey was missed clean, he would drop sulkily to 


THE YORKSHIRE MOORS. 31 


charge; but he would invariably look round and stare in 
your face with asort of sullen grunt, as who should say, 
“What do you mean by such work as that?” If you 
missed three times in succession, menace and coaxing 
were alike unavailing. Home went Charon, and for that 
day was no more seen. 

More extraordinary yet, he could distinguish by the 
eye when a hare was wounded, when no man living 
would have suspected that the animal was hit; and 
whereas if one went away cleanly missed he would charge 
like a rock; the instant he perceived, how I cannot im- 
agine, that it was carrying away a load, he would chase 
like a devil. But, as in the other instance, I never saw 
him chase a hare that he did not bring it home; and he 
could no more have run down a fresh one with a twenty 
yards start, than I could run down an elk on an open 
prairie. 

The fourth brace were a pair of coal-black setters, 
Death and Dream, beautiful as night which they most 
resembled, without one white speck on their lustrous 
coats, perfectly broken, tractable as lambs, flect as deer, 
yet full of fire and spirit, fearless and tireless, and less 
fleet only than the wind. 

Such was the Goyernor’s kennel; and even as I never 
yet have seen such a shot or sportsman as he was, so 
never have I seen nor shall I see, so far as I expect, such 
a kennel of dogs, whether for staunchness, certainty, 
speed, or beauty, 

All day long we trayelled through scenes of the rarest 
beauty, by the castled crags of Knaresborough, frowning 
over the bright dark waters of the Nid, up the lovely vale 
of which lay our course to the moorlands—by the old 
fortalice of Ripley, where the lady Ingolby of that day 
received Cromwell, when he visited her at the head of 
his Ironsides, with pistols stuck in her apron string—by 
Hampsthwaite’s rural homes, by Dacre pasture and the 


32 FRANK FORESTER. 


oak woods of Darley, across Pately bridge and up to the 
brawling Nid unto the spot where Ram’s ghyll pours its 
tributary torrent into the wider stream. 

Here, after a homely supper, rashers of bacon, new- 
laid eggs, short-bread and home-brewed ale, to which 
fatigue had earned us eager appetites, we turned into the 
coarse clean sheets redolent of the bloomy heather on 
which they had been bleached, and lulled by the ceaseless 
brawling of the mountain brook which foamed down its 
gorge close beneath the window, I, for one, sank asleep 
so soon as my head touched the pillow, and dreamed of 
moorcocks until a light flashed before my eyes, a hand 
was laid heavily upon my shoulder, and the old game- 
keeper’s voice aroused me from my soft slumber. 

It was past three o’clock, and breakfast was ready in 
the parlor. The sun would be up before we could reach 
the moor, and the morning promised to be a fine one. I 
was on my feet in an instant, and my first day on the 
Yorkshire moors had begun—he who will, shall hereafter 
learn how it ended. 

At length the long-wished-for moment arrived. The 
breakfast was duly honored, the panniers packed with 
luncheon, to return as we hoped, packed with moor-fowl, 
and slung on the Shetland pony, were despatched, to- 
gether with two brace of dogs, the bitches Cynthia and 
Phebe, for the morning’s work, and the Russians for the 
afternoon, under the care of the guide, to meet us on the 
verge of the moors. 

It was not yet light when we started from the door of 
the little Inn, to scale the four miles of steep and contin- 
uous ascent, which led by a road liker far to the gulley 
of a mountain torrent, than to any path made by the 
hands of man, from the level of the beautiful bright river 
to the summit of the misty plateau which forms the base 
of the moors, the loftier hills rising above it in huge, 
rounded or square-topped masses, divided from each other, 


’ 


THE YORKSHIRE MOORS. 33 


sometimes by wide plains of the richest heather, some- 
times by mossy bogs, whence steal the rills which, grad- 
ually swelling into burns, as the larger brooks are termed, 
pour down through the ghylls or gorges which they cut 
for themselves through the peat. the gravel, nay! even 
through the solid sand-stone and become the feeding 
tributaries of the lovely rivers of the West Riding. 

The first pale streaks of dawn stole up the east as we 
ascended, the clouds, few, fleecy, and far between, hung 
lightly here and there in the pure dark sky, from which 
all the stars had faded except Venus, who still showed 
her waning lamp near the horizon, for she was now the 
morning star. As we reached the summit, where two 
dark, indistinct shapes were awaiting us, of boy and 
pony, at the swing gate which gaye access through the 
high dry stone wall, to the wild, bare moor, on which 
many of the smaller landholders of the ghylls and daleg 
had right of pasturage for their black-faced sheep, in fu- 
turo the finest of mountain mutton—and black cattle in 
proportion to the number of acres in their respective 
holdings, though the lord or lady paramount of the 
manor only has the right of shooting, or deputizing per- 
sons to shoot over the range; the gray clouds changed 
their tints to amber, to rosy-red, to crimson, to flaming 
liquid gold, as the east gradually flushed brighter and 
brighter, until at length the great sun rushed up like an 
orb of burnished gold, through the thin mist on the 
mountain heads, and, in an instant was perfect day. 


What a scene, what a panorama was there;—beneath 
and behind us the long retiring valley of the Nid, wind- 
ing away in a far perspective of hanging woods, rich 
emerald pastures, crofts bordered with their shadowy syc- 
amores and village roofs and humble chapels peeping out 
between until lost in the blue mists of distance. 


Before us unnumbered leagues of barrenness and deso- 


“ 


34 FRANK FORESTER. 


lation, blue mountain beyond blue mountain, rolling 
away the vast earth billows of that moorland sea, with- 
out a spot of culture, an oasis of fertility, to the borders 
of Scotland, fifty leagues distance to the north-westward. 

Around us knolls, hillocks, hummocks, hills, some 
round, some sugar-loaf, some rock-ribbed and crag- 
crested; deep treacherous morasses tempting the foot of 
the unwary visitor by their exquisite smoothness, and the 
unriyalled richness of their emerald verdure; deep, ab- 
rupt, broken gorges and ravines, with clear brooks brawl- 
ing along their bottoms, but all pathless, seemingly un- 
trodden of man, cursed, one would say, with irredeemable 
barrenness, and inhabited only by the few titlarks which 
faintly hailed the rising sun with hymns, scarcely audible 
amid those vast solitudes, and the snipes and curlews 
which rose now and then, screaming dissonantly, from 
the bogs and peat-holes, whence the turf had been cut for 
fuel, for we had not as yet reached the choicer portion of 
the moor, haunted alike by the black-faced quadrupeds, 
and the red-grouse allured ever to the same vicinity by 
the same succulent food on which their excellence de- 
pends—the young sprouts of the tenderest short heather, 
springing fresh from places over which the fire had run 
in the latest autumn of the past year. Nevertheless, 
with all the desolation, there was a sort of peculiar wild 
beauty, arising for the most part from the singular 
and variegated hues of the surface, where the young 
heather was in bloom, the whole superfices of hundreds 
and hundreds of acres was glowing with the most gor- 
geous hues of amethyst, garnet, and rubies; where the 
dry stalks and sere leaves of the later and older growth 
prevailed, all was deep tawney russet; where the fire had 
recently passed all was black as charred stumps, and the 
very peat soil, scorched to the bottom, could make it— 
then again, there were patches of green furze with their 
golden blossoms, and tracts of dark green, rushy, rank 


THE YORKSHIRE MOORS. 35 


grass, and gleams of the brightest emerald around the 
well-heads, and over all the treacherous morasses. 

But now we had reached our opening ground, the boy 
with the pony and the second brace of dogs was ordered 
to the rear, with instructions to meet us by the side of a 
certain gray rock, and spring-head, on the northern edge 
of Kettletang, a huge bluff-headed hill, overtopping all 
his neighbors, at noon, when we should be there to re- 
fresh the inner man, and take up the fresh dogs for the 
afternoon. 

This arranged, to work we went. The ground was a 
long swell of gentle hillocks, facing the morning and sun, 
and sloping gently down to the south-castward. It was 
covered with short purple heather, in full bloom, with 
here and there a patch of soft, green grass, and now and 
then a well-head, with a small runnel oozing from it, 
and showing by the greener and lighter hues of the ling 
and grass around its course, how vivifying and beneficial 
were its influences. 

It was precisely one of those ranges which the young 
broods love in the early morning, at the beginning of the 
season, and, in fact, the fleet bitches had not ranged five 
hundred yards, which they did at full speed, heads up 
and sterns down, crossing each other at every five hundred 
yards distance, turning unbidden, and quartering their 
ground beautifully, before Cynthia came on her game so 
suddenly that she literally threw a somersault as she set 
the birds, turning herself completely over, so that her 
stern was toward the brood, and that she pointed them 
over her shoulder. Phebe backed her at a quarter of a 
-mile, as steadily as if she had been cast in bronze or 
carved in marble. 

“*Steady now, Frank!” said the Governor—« They are 
close under her nose.” 

Gingerly, but firmly we advanced, finger-nail on the 
trigger-guard, thumb on the hammer, till we were within 


36 FRANK FORESTER. 


six paces of the bitch; she was trembling with intense 
anxiety, her eyes gleaming like coals of fire, her brows 
corrugated, the slaver on her lip. 

‘* Careful, Frank, careful!” said the Governor, ‘I 
fancy it will prove a brood of squeakers, too young to 
kill—don’t shoot the old hen, if it be so.” 

But at the instant, as he spoke, being to the right hand 
of me, the old cock rose clapping his wings in defiance, 
and uttering a loud crow crossed me to the leftward. He 
was a splendid fellow. He rose so close that the bare scarlet 
granulated spots about his eyes, and his angrily erected 
crest were clearly visible, as well as the golden and deep 
red hackles on his neck, and the beautifully pied plumage 
of his brown, red, and black-barred back and wing coyerts, 
his breast was partly turned toward me, and it was black 
as night. He proved afterward to be a three-year-old 
bird, and weighed but a few ounces short of four pounds 
weight,—for I was steady, let him get fifteen yards away, 
then raised my gun deliberately, drew trigger as the butt 
touched my shoulder—a stream of feathers drifted down 
wind, and with a heavy thud the noble cock fell dead 
among the short flowery heather. 

Nothing rose at the report, and it was not till after 
much kicking and beating of the heather, that the old 
hen rose with seventeen squeakers, not bigger than six- 
weeks chickens. 

Them, of course, we bade go their way rejoicing, as 
we did likewise, specially I—for had I not been cool, 
even by the Govornor’s wpse dizxit, and killed my first 
heath-cock fairly? 

Our next find was three old bachelors, as they are 
termed by the initiated, old cock birds, namely, which, 
not having paired or bred the last year, band together 
and become great pests to the breeders, beating off the 
young males, and disturbing the amorous couples. 

They rose wild, at long range—but we sent two snap 


THE YORKSHIRE MOORS. 37 


shots after them, and two fell,—the Governor’s killed 
dead, mine wing-tipped, but the bitches retrieved him 
cleverly after a mile’s roading. The third rise was a well 
grown brood of twelve, with their parents, which also 
got up shy and distant, the heather being as yet too wet 
with dew to allow their lying hard. Yet I knocked one 
over, my father killing two—the old cock, a prodigiously 
long shot, with his second barrel. 

But as the day improved, and the sun grew warmer, 
the birds lay better, and I did my work creditably, to my 
own satisfaction, and won moderate praise from the Goy- 
ernor, and huge kudos from my preceptor in the noble 
art of collineation, as poor Cypress, Jr., was wont to call 
it, old Harry Lee. 

When we counted heads at luncheon I was only two 
brace and a half behind my companion, who, as I said, 
was the best shot, walker and sportsman, it ever was my 
lot to meet, having bagged my thirteen brace and a half, 
six brace of them being clever double shots, to his six- 
teen brace. 

In the afternoon, with the fresh dogs, though I shot as 
well, or, considering the change in the weather and state 
of the game, perhaps better than before luncheon, I did 
not fare so well. 

The day had become overcast, the wind had got up, 
the grouse had packed, and rose very wild and flew like 
hawks—still, when the sun set, and we knocked off work, 
Thad shot eleven brace more, three golden plover, and a 
curlew—but the Governor, who always shot the best when 
the shooting was the hardest, had bagged seventeen brace 
more of grouse, a hare, and a brace of mallards, which 
sprung unexpectedly from a peat bog. 

On the whole I had scored twenty-four and a half brace 
of moor-game, fifty-three head of game in all, against his 
thirty-three brace of grouse, and total of sixty-nine head 
—pretty well that fora green hand in his first season, 


38 FRANK FORESTER. 


shooting beside one of the best guns in the three king- 
doms. 

There were twenty-nine guns on the moor that morn-. 
ing, and the Governor beat the two best, with fourteen 
brace to spare. 

Was not I a proud and a happy man that night, when 
after quaffing a half gallon of new milk, with a modicum 
of Jamaica in it—was too tired to eat supper—I plunged 
into the thyme-scented sheets, and was asleep before my 
head was well on the pillow. 


SUNSET ON THE HUDSON. 


In the cloud-curtained chambers of the West 

Serene and glorious he has sunk to rest— 

Immortal giant—but his parting kiss 

Hath steeped his earthly bride in holier bliss 

Than when he sunned her in his rapturous ray 

Of noontide ardor. Slow they glide away, 

The gorgeous gleams that flash from Hudson’s tide 

And paint the woods that gird old Beacon’s side ; 

Yet round the clouds that veil the bridegroom’s head 

A fringe of lucent glory still is spread ; 

While from the zenith, tints of deeper blue, 

Steal o’er the bright horizon’s azure hue, 

Rob the broad forests of their verdant cheer, 

And tinge the silvery brook with shadows clear, 

The dewy rushes wave in alrowy ranks, 

Now gilt, now gloomy, on the darkening banks; 

And snowy sails, that stud the distant river, 

Glance, and are lost, as in the breeze they shiver, 

There is a thrill in the awakening flush 

Of early morn—there is a breathless hush 

In fainting noonday—but the fairy space 

That parts the evening from the night’s embrace 

Breathes out a stronger charm, a purer spell, 

Bathing the soul in thoughts, that fondly swell 

Like sacred music’s melancholy close— 

Sweeter than grief, and sadder than repose, 

And is it fancy’s fond delusion only 

That hallows so these woods and waters lonely ?— 
39 


40 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Or is there in each bold, majestic hill 

A mighty legend ; in each tinkling rill 

A whispering voice, and in the wind’s low sigh, 
Telling of days and deeds that ne’er shall die, 

"Tis holy all, and haunted! Each green tree 

Hath its own tale, each leaf its memory ; 

The streams, that knew the Indian’s tread of yore, 
The breezy hills, with rock-ribbed summits hoar, 
The lordly river, with its ceaseless moan, 

Have all a power more potent than their own, 
For each and all, with echoing pride, have rung 
To the wild peal which freedom’s trumpet sung, 


When forth, to shield his bleeding country’s breast, 


He stood—the Cincinnatus of the West— 

The founder of a world—whose course was run 
All bright and blessing !—like yon setting sun ; 
Alone of men, his youth was spotless seen, 

His manhood mighty, and his end serene ; 
Without one blot to dim his deathless name, 

Or bid the nations weep, that watch his fame, 


mn 
puny, 


} 


41 


THE WOODCOCK, 


THE WOODCOCK, 43 


THE WOODCOCK. 


Scolopax Minor, as he is judiciously termed by natural- 
ists, to distinguish him from his European brother, Sco- 
lopax Rusticola, which is above one-third larger and 
heavier, in the ratio of sixteen to nine, the mud snipe, 
blind snipe, or big-headed snipe, as he is variously called 
in various parts of the country, may be termed an am- 
phibious bird, and is nearly allied to the waders. He 
haunts woodland streams and swamps ; sunny hill-sides 
covered with saplings, if contiguous to wet feeding 
grounds ; wide meadows interspersed with tufts of alders 
or willows ; and at times, and in peculiar districts, open 
and grassy marshes, quite destitute of underwood or 
timber. 

With us, of the Northern States, he is a summer bird 
of passage, as he may be termed with propriety; although 
he pays us his annual visit early in spring ; sometimes, 
in open seasons, before the last moon of winter has waned 
her snowy round, and defers his departure until the very 
end of autumn. In the Southern States, on the con- 
trary, he is found only during the short and genial win- 
ter, quitting them altogether during the overpowering 
heats, which our water-loving friend finds unendurable. — 
In reply to a question which I propounded some years 
since to the readers of the New York ‘Turf Register,” 
“‘whether in soft and sheltered situations of the most 
northern of the Southern States, the woodcock may not 
be found throughout the year,” I was informed, by an 
anonymous correspondent, that among the higher valleys 
of the Appalachian chain such is the case throughout the 
southern portion of that great ridge; and that in the 
northern parts of Virginia especially they are to be taken 
at all seasons of the year. For this fact, however, I can 
not vouch on my own knowledge, and, indeed, I am some- 


44 FRANK FORESTER. 


what doubtful of its correctness. I prefer, therefore, to 
consider it as everywhere migratory; and of its migra- 
tions I shall speak hereafter, premising only that they 
are but partially understood as yet, that much mystery is 
connected with them, and that their circumstances are as 
interesting as they are curious. 

To describe minutely a bird so well known throughout 
the length and breadth of the cultivated portions of 
North America, for it is a singular fact that he is never 
found in the wilderness, following everywhere the skirts 
of civilization, would be a work, 1t should seem, of 
supererogation. I shall say a few words, however, of his 
general appearance, in order to indicate the very bird I 
mean to my readers, beyond the possibility of a mistake ; 
for mistakes are indeed possible, owing, as I have ob- 
served, to the confused nomenclature of game prevailing 
in this country; and of this I am a good witness, as I 
was once dragged up to the summit of one of the highest 
hills in Orange County, N. Y., by the reiterated asser- 
tions of a very intelligent lad, a farmer’s son in the vicin- 
ity, that he could show me more than fifty woodcock in 
that unusual and remote spot ; the woodcock proving, 
when I had climbed the ridge, breathless and spent, on a 
broiling July day, to be large red-headed woodpeckers ! 
utterly worthless either for sport or for the table, and no 
more like to Scolopax Minor than was Hyperion to a 
Satyr. 

This beautiful bird, then, varying in weight, when full- 
grown, from eight to eleven ounces, I have heard of but 
one instance of his exceeding the latter, is about thirteen 
inches in length, measured from the tip of the bill to the 
extremity of the toes, the bill alone exceeding one-fourth 
of the whole length, and eighteen in breadth, from tip 
to tip of the expanded wings. The curious instrument 
by which he obtains all his nourishment is of a highly 
polished, horny substance, stout at the base, and tapering 


THE WOODCOOK. 45 


gradually to the tip, where the upper mandible, project- 
ing considerably below the lower, is terminated in a knot 
of exquisite delicacy and sensibility. The head is some- 
what triangular in shape, with the large, full black eye,, 
constructed, as is the case of all birds which fly or feed 
by night, so as to catch and concentrate every ray of 
light, situate nearer the apex, or crown, than in any other 
bird ; a peculiarity which, added to the unusual size of 
the head, gives a foolish and clumsy air to this otherwise 
beautiful little fowl. The brow of the adult bird is of a 
grayish white, gradually darkening until it reaches the 
crown, where it is shaded into the richest black. The 
whole hinder parts, from the neck downward to the tail, 
are exquisitely barred and variegated with a thousand 
minute wavy lines of black, ash color, cinnabar brown, 
and umber, the tail-feathers having a broad band of black 
close to their extremities, and beyond this a tip of snowy 
whiteness. ‘The chin is white, but the throat and breast, 
nearly as far as the insertion of the thighs, are of a warm 
yellowish chestnut; the vent and thighs white. The 
legs, in the young birds, are of an olive green; in the 
adults, of a pale fleslt color. There is no distinction of 
plumage, that I have been able to discover, between the 
sexes ; nor has any been detected, so far as I am aware, 
on dissection ; and the only difference between the young 
and old birds, size and weight excepted, is the change in 
the color of the legs, and the increased whiteness of the 
forehead. 

This interesting bird is rarely or never seen by day, 
unless by those who are especially in pursuit of him ; 
and by them even he is found with difficulty, unless when 
hunted with well-broken dogs. At nightfall, however, 
he may often be seen on the wing, darting athwart the 
gloom from the dry upland coverts, in which at many 
seasons he loves to lie, toward his wet feeding grounds. 
During the hours of darkness he is on the alert con- 


46 FRANK FORESTER. 


stantly ; by night he seeks his food ; by night he makes 
his long and direct migrations, choosing for this latter 
purpose foggy weather, or at about the full of the moon, 

By day he lies snugly ensconsced in some lonely brake, 
among long grass and fern, under the shade of the dark 
alder or silvery willow, and near to some marshy level or 
muddy streamlet’s brink during the summer ; but in the 
autumn, on some dry, westering hill-side, clothed with 
dense second-growth and saplings. 

In very quiet spots, especially where the covert over- 
head is dense and shadowy, he sometimes feeds by day; 
and it has been my fortune once or twice to come upon 
him unsuspected when so engaged, and to watch him for 
many minutes probing the soft loam, which he loves the 
best, with his long bill, and drawing forth his succulent 
food, from the smallest red wire-worm to the largest lob- 
worm suitable for the angler’s bait when fishing for perch 
or the yellow bass of the lakes. 

It is by the abundance of this food that his selection of 
haunts is dictated, and his choice of season, in some con- 
siderable degree, controlled. On sandy and hungry soils, 
as that of Long Island for example, he is found rarely in 
comparison, and never in the large congregations which 
so rejoice the heart of the sportsman in more fayored lo- 
calities. Still more does he eschew sour marsh-land and 
peat bogs, wherein, by the way, the worm he most affects 
hardly exists ; while on fat loamy bottom lands, whether 
the color of the soil be red or black, rich with decomposed 
vegetable matter, he may be found in swarms. 

It must be understood, however, that after the young 
brood have left the parent birds, which departure occurs 
after the first moult, the woodcock is a solitary bird, act- 
ing and moving for himself alone, although the same 
causes may draw hundreds of them into one neighborhood, 
and never flying in flocks, or associating in any way with 
his fellows, unless in the breeding season. 


THE WOODCOCK. 43 


Woodcock arrive among us, in the Middle and North- 
ern States, from Pennsylvania so far eastward as to the 
western counties of Maine, almost simultaneously, in Feb- 
ruary or March, according to the earliness or openness of 
the season, often before the snow is off the ground. They 
arrive paired already, and immediately set about the du- 
ties of incubation. : 

The nest is rude and inartificial, consisting merely of a 
hollow in the ground, with a few straws or rushes care- 
lessly gathered round it, the bill of the old bird doubtless 
proving an awkward implement for nidification. This 
nest is made, if made it can be said to be, under the shel- 
ter of areedy tussock or stunted bush, on the verge of 
large wet meadows ; and should the season be dry early, 
enabling the birds to sit on low ground, and should a sud- 
den flood ensue, numbers of broods are destroyed ; a cas- 
ualty from which I do not consider them secure until the 
beginning of June at least, when, in an early season, the 
young birds are able to shift for themselves. 

In such a nest, and in such situations, the woodcock 
lays from two to six bluish eggs, irregularly blotched with 
brown. How long the process of incubation continues, 
I have not been able accurately to ascertain; but I 
have seen the old birds sitting so early as the tenth of 
March, yet never have seen young birds able to fly earlier 
than the middle of May. 

The ordinary number of a hatching is four birds, and 
if the first brood gets off early, the parents immediately 
proceed to asecond incubation; the male bird in this case 
taking care of the first brood until the second gets off, 
when all associate together until after the moulting sea- 
son, when all ties are dissolved, and they know thence- 
forth neither kindred nor kindness. 

Iam aware that the fact of the woodcock rearing two 
broods in the same season has been disputed, but I am 
thoroughly satisfied of the fact, having repeatedly killed 


48 FRANK FORESTER. 


six and eight youngsters, and those of different sizes, with 
but one couple of old birds; and that, too, in places so 
small as to render it next to impossible that any should 
have remained unsprung, and on occasions when eyery 
bird sprung has been brought to bag. 

A stronger proof than this I can adduce, involving, too, 
a pleasant anecdote concerning the maternal affection of 
this usually deemed stupid bird. 

A few years since, I think it was in 1841, there was a 
deep fall of snow, covering the greater part of the State of 
New York, near eighteen inches deep, so late as the 
" twelfth or fifteenth of May. It thawed, of course, imme- 
diately, and produced a complete inundation, the early 
spring having been rather uncommonly dry. From this 
I argued ill for the prospects of the shooting season. But 
fine weather followed, and by most persons the spring 
snow-storm and freshet were forgotten. 

On the first of July I went with a friend, a good shot 
and eager sportsman, to a favorite shooting ground in 
Orange County, New York, on part of which, for it had 
a very large range, and contained many varieties of lying, 
we had bagged in the previous year a hundred and twen- 
ty-five birds in a single day’s shooting. 

We shot the first day on the low meadows, and killed 
hardly any birds, not, to the best of my recollection, above 
ten or adozen, in a severe day’s walking. They were well- 
grown birds, but not a single old one in the number. My 
companion, greatly annoyed, insisted that the ground had 
been hunted before that season, and all the birds killed off 
except the handful we had found. From this conclusion 
I dissented, arguing that if such had been the case, we 
should have found old birds, the young being the easier 
both to find and to kill, especially for cockney sportsmen, 
who alone may be presumed to hunt before that season. 
My friend grew almost angry, and asked me, ‘* Where, 
then, are the birds?” I answered, ‘‘ Wait until to-morrow 


THE WOODCOOK. 49 


evening, when we shall have beat our other ground, and 
I will tell you.” 

The next day we did beat the other ground; wet swales, 
and sloping woods of small extent in valleys watered by 
little streamlets from the hills. The result was the same, 
a wretched day’s sport, and no old birds, or at least hard- 
ly any. 

As usual, each held his own position. My friend again 
asked, ‘‘ How do you account for this ?” I replied, “ All 
the young broods have been destroyed by the freshet, ex- 
cept the very few which got off before the May flood. 
This accounts for the fewness of the birds, and for the 
uncommon size of those few. The old birds are now 
hatching their second broods on the ridges and hill-sides, 
I will show you that I am right, to-morrow.” And to- 
morrow I did show him that the ridges and sapling coy- 
erts, sprouts, as the country people call them, were full 
of old birds hovering, and no young ones. 

Still my companion was incredulous as to the second 
broods, until in the afternoon, as I was passing through 
a little clump of alders, not aboye two or three yards 
square, I flushed a bird, which flew out to him. He fired. 
I called out to inquire whether he had killed, and as he 
answered “yes,” I heard the bird flapping its wings on 
the ground, in the death-struggle, as I imagined. Know- 
ing that he could recover the bird in the open ground, I 
beat out the thicket thoroughly, and left it, satisfied that 
it contained no other bird, though I had some difficulty 
in getting one of my setters away from what I supposed 
to be a field-mouse. On joining my friend, he told me 
that the bird had flapped up, when he was in the act of 
laying his hand upon it, and had staggered away, seem- 
ing every moment on the point of falling, so that he did 
not care to fire at it again, until it had got out of shot; 
but that he had marked it down to a yard, in a thick 
brush fence, three or four hundred yards away. On go- 


50 FRANK FORESTER. 


ing to the place, the dogs took the scent readily ; but 
while they were trailing it, the bird rose, a hundred yards 
off, flapping and staggering about, as if severely hurt, and 
flew some three or four hundred yards farther from the 
thicket in which we first started it, and dropped again in 
a piece of thick hill-side coppice. I marked the bird ac- 
curately by the top of a pine tree, and off we set in pur- 
suit, I more than half suspecting that the bird was un- 
wounded. Scarce had we entered the covert, when up 
whizzed the identical bird, fresh and sound, from the 
very brake in which I had marked him, and away like a 
bullet through the tree-tops. So thoroughly convinced 
was I, that, though I could have killed the bird with 
ease, I would not fire at it; but, to convince my still 
doubting friend, we walked back to the little tuft in which 
we first sprung the cock, he promising not to fire if we 
should again flush her. My dogs were not well in the 
alders before the bird rose again, and was going away at 
her best pace, when my friend’s shot stopped her, to my 
infinite disgust. He is a very quick shot, and in the ex- 
citement of the moment forgot everything except the 
game and the fury of pursuit. 

Almost at the same moment, old Chance, he was the 
best retriever I ever saw in any country, picked up from 
the spot where I had supposed he was snuffing after a 
field-mouse, a young downy, unfledged woodcock, less 
than two inches long. 

Chance was the finest retriever I ever saw, broke by 
Mike Sandford, of Newark, and would carry a hurt bird 
by the tip of his wing, without ruffling a feather; and 
though it will hardly be believed, I took the little fledg- 
ling from his mouth unharmed, and had the satisfaction 
of seeing him run away briskly, and hide himself bebind 
a dock leaf. 

That day we shot no more, nor indeed that summer ; 
but before we left Orange County I went again to the 


THE WOODCOCK, 51 


same brake, with the old dog, but without a gun, and 
flushed what I presumed to have been the male bird, 
which, by its simulated crippled flight, again drawing me 
away from the spot, convinced me that he was watching 
over his motherlegs little ones. 

Had I needed anything to convince me that woodcock 
ought not to be shot in July, that scene would have con- 
vinced me; and since that day I have never ceased to 
advocate a change and simplification of our game-laws, 
which should prohibit the killing of woodcock until the 
first day of October ; and make that one day the end of 
close time for all game whatever, except the ruffed 
grouse, commonly called pheasant, or partridge, the 
reason for which exception I shall give under the head 
of that fine bird, when I reach him in his turn. 

I am satisfied that this change should be made ; be- 
cause the parent birds do not cease from sitting until the 
commencement of the moulting season, that is, about 
the first of August, when they disappear for a while, mi- 
grating, as some believe, yet farther northward, or, as I 
fancy, moving to the difficult mountain tops, and scat- 
tering themselves among the little swales and gulleys 
which intersect them. This is the first grand reason, 
and is in itself all-sufficient ; for as close time is only 
adopted for the protection of the brooding birds, it 
should, of course, continue until the broods are out of 
danger. 

A second reason is scarce less valid : that not one-tenth 
part of the young birds, killed in July, are half-grown, 
and consequently afford little sport to the shooter, and 
are, comparatively speaking, valueless on the table. 

A third may be found in the extreme heat of July 
weather, which renders the sport a toil both to man and 
dog, and makes it impossible to bring home the game in 
a state fit to be eaten, even on the day which sees it 
killed. 


52 F FRANK FORESTER. 


Last, not least, the law, as it now stands, can hardly 
be enforced, so difficult is it to limit men to this or that 
day, when it appears to be a mere arbitrary distinction, 
Prohibit the killing of the bird at all during his spring 
and summer visit ; strictly punish those who vend him 
during that period ; let the cause of the prohibition be 
made thoroughly public, and you will enlist the now law- 
breakers in the cause of law-protection. 

No danger of their anticipating the first of October by 
a few days or weeks, for this simple reason, that before 
that day the bird has not returned from his summer rus- 
tication, and, consequently, is not there to be killed. 

These views I submit humbly, but with full conviction 
of their justice, to all sportsmen and friends of sporting ; 
and earnestly do I entreat them to give them a fair con- 
sideration, if they would save the woodcock from the 
fate of the heath-hen, expatriation and extinction. 

In my next paper I shall treat this question somewhat 
more fully, as connected with the short moulting migra- 
tion, with autumn, or, technically, fall shooting; with 
the use and breaking of the dog; and with what will 
perhaps be new to some of my readers, the fire-hunting 
of the South, as applied to winged game, and shooting 
on the wing. 


PART IL. 


The year has now arrived at the first week of August, 
and the earth is scourged with almost intolerable heat. 
The dwellers of large cities are all on the wing for the 
fresh breezes of the Atlantic Coast, for the mineral 
springs among the cold and quiet mountains, for the 
snug farm-houses in some green and shady vale.. 

Many of these, sportsmen in their own conceit, and 
that only, go forth encumbered with their Purdeys, or 


THE WOODCOCK, 53 


their Mantons, and accompanied by their high-bred and 
_ well-broke dogs, in the vain hope of finding sport in the 
moist woodlands or the marshy meadows, that shall re- 
lieve the tedium consequent on change from the stirring 
habits, and the bustle of dense streets, to the monotonous 
tranquility and calmness of the country. 

In the vain hope, I said. And wherefore vain p 
methinks I hear the reader ask, unlearned in the mys- 
teries of wood and river. 

Vain hope, dear friend, because, of all the months in 
the woodland year, this burning month of August is the 
most barren, to the gentle sportsman, of all legitimate 
occupation. No species of seasonable game is to be 
found, in this month, in sufficient numbers to render its 
pursuit exciting ; while the fierce heat of the summer 
sun renders his sportive labor toilsome to the man, and 
the lack of game is apt to produce carelessness, head- 
strongness, and disobedience to command, in his four- 
footed comrade. 

It is for these good reasons that the gun of the genu- 
ine sportsman hangs idle on the antlers in his hall, with 
pouch, and flask, and empty game-bag at its side, during 
this weary month ; while his employment in the field ig 
limited to keeping his dogs in exercise, and to preparing 
them, by steady house-breaking, for the sport of the more 
genial autumn. 

During this month of August, the English snipe, hay- 
ing withdrawn from our latitudes in June, is luxuriating 
in the Arctic regions of Labrador and scarce thawed 
Greenland. The quail is protected by wise laws, raising 
her first bevy, if the season has been cold and backward ; 
her second, if the times have been times of promise to 
the expectant sportsman. The ruffed grouse is protected 
likewise ; but, as I think, improperly, holding, myself, 
this month to be the fittest of the twelve for his legiti- 
mate and pleasant slaughter. The woodcock, too, our 


54 FRANK FORESTER. 


own woodcock, our present topic of discourse, hath de- 
parted, vanished from his haunts of last month, for a 
season, not to be found of dogs, or shot of men, until 
crisp frosts shall haye embrowned the meadows, until 
the maple shall have changed his leafy green for hectic 
crimson, 

It is strange that no naturalist should have noticed 
this brief migration; for none have done so, none, at 
least, of whose writings I am cognizant. It is scarcely 
less strange that, until very recently, even sportsmen, 
who knew and perceived the sudden disappearance of the 
bird, should have doubted or denied the fact of its migra- 
tion at this period. 

When first I began to sport in this country, some fifteen 
years ago, there were two theories current among sports- 
men whereby to account for the fact that in woods where 
the birds swarmed in July, he was hardly to be found in 
August. Both theories, as I have proved thoroughly to 
my own satisfaction, are absurd and futile. 

The first was this: That the bird did not, in truth, 
disappear at all, but remained on his old ground; though, 
owing to the fact of his being in moult, he gave out no 
scent whereby the dog could detect him ; and from sick- 
ness, or inability to fly with his wonted velocity, refused 
to rise before the tread of his intruding enemy, the man. 

This theory is answered in a word. The woodcock, 
while in moult, does give out as much scent, is pointed 
as readily by dogs, does rise as willingly before the frosts, 
and is as good upon the table as at any other season ; 
facts which are easily proved, since, although the great 
mass of birds withdraw during August, and do not return 
before October, a few do still tarry in their old swamps, 
and may be found and shot; though so few in number, 
and at so great an expense of time and labor, as to ren- 
der the pursuit of them toilsome, and productive only of 
weariness and disappointment. 


THE WOODCOOK. d5 


I have, however, killed them repeatedly, while endeay- 
oring to satisfy myself of the facts which I now assert, 
so deep in the moult that their bodies have been almost 
naked, and that they have fluttered up feebly and with a 
heavy whirring, on wings divested of one half the quill- 
feathers ; and in that state I have observed that the dogs 
stood as staunchly, and at as great a distance from their 
game, as usual; and that the birds took wing as freely, 
though, in truth, half impotent to fly. 

The other theory was this, which I have heard insisted 
on as strenuously as the former: That the woodcock, on 
beginning to moult, betakes himself to the maize, or 
Indian corn fields, and remains there unsuspected until 
the crops have been housed and the cold weather has 
set in. 

That a few scattered woodcock may be found in wet, 
low maize fields, along the edge of woods, is true; and 
it is true, also, that they feed in such situations in great 
numbers, during the night, previous to their remoyal ; 
but that they are ever to be found generally, or for any 
number of consecutive days or weeks, in such ground, is 
an utterly incorrect surmise, disproved by long ex- 
perience. 

I have applied myself carefully to the investigation of 
this circumstance ; and in the last ten years have cer- 
tainly beaten a thousand maize fields thoroughly, with a 
brace of as good setters as any private gentleman pos- 
sessed, at the very period when farmers would tell me 
“‘they were as thick as fowls in the corn fields ended 
have not on any occasion flushed more than three birds 
in any one field ; nor have I killed twenty-five on such 
ground altogether. 

I think the reader will admit that the two theories 
alluded to aboye are, by these facts, indisputably contro- 
verted. 

And now I must expect that it will be inquired of me, 


~ 


56 FRANK FORESTER. 


** Whither, then, do they go ? what becomes of them ?” 
to which sage questions it is, I grieve to say, my fate to 
be unable to make satisfactory reply. I was formerly in- 
clined to believe that when the moult is at hand, the 
woodcock withdraws to the small upland runnels and 
boggy streamlets which are to be found everywhere among 
our hills or mountains. That the moulting season is the 
signal for dispersion, and the termination of all family 
ties between the young and old birds, is certain. From 
this time forth, until the next February brings round 
the pairing time, the woodcock, whether found singly in 
a solitary place, or among scores of his kind, is still a 
lonely and ungregarious bird, coming and going at his 
own pleasure, without reference, undemocratic rascal, to 
the will of the majority. 

In corroboration of this view of the absence of our 
bird during the early autumn, I was once informed by a 
gentleman, whose word I have no reason to disbelieve, 
that on ascending once to the summit of Bull Hill, one 
of the loftiest of the-highlands of the Hudson, with the 
intent of showing the fine view thence to a city friend, 
he found the brushwood on the barren and rocky ledges, 
and eyen on the crown of the hill, literally alive with 
woodcock. This occurred, according to his statement, 
in the beginning of September, when no birds were to be 
found in the level and wet woods below. He further 
stated that he at first intended to revisit the hill the next 
day, with dog and gun, in order to profit by his discoy- 
ery, but was prevented doing so by casual circumstances, 
until the frost had set in keenly in the woods. He then 
climbed the hill, and beat it carefully with dogs, without 
obtaining one point to reward his labor ; and on the next 
day found the swamps below full of birds. 

Not vouching for the truth of this tale, I tell it as 
*twas told to me. The teller was a sportsman, and a man 
of average veracity, that is to say, I should have been 


THE WOODCOCK. 57 


inclined to believe any fact he stated, where I could see 
no interest on his part which should lead him to attempt 
deception. In this case there was no such reason ; not 
even the desire of prevailing in argument, for we were 
not arguing. Ican not, therefore, well doubt the cor- 
rectness of his information. 

If truly stated, as I believe it to have been, this fact 
makes somewhat for my former opinion. I have also 
myself frequently found scattered birds on such hill-tops, 
and in such mountain-swales, while deer-stalking, in 
August and September, though not in numbers which 
would justify the belief in a general migration en masse 
to such localities. 

If, however, my half-formed opinion, for it is no more, 
be correct, the birds are dispersed at this period of the 
year, and are only to be found, casually, in knots of three 
or four, and never in greater numbers, 

The other, and, on the whole, perhaps more probable 
suggestion, is this: That, after rearing their young, 
driven by the heat of the weather, or, it may be, by the 
temporary exhaustion of food on their favorite grounds, 
they move farther northward, as does the English snipe 
yet earlier in the season, not to return until the prema- 
ture cold of northern Canada drives them back, to tarry 
with us a few months on their way southward. 

Should this prove to be the case, the woodcock, instead 
of being termed with us a summer bird of passage, must 
be regarded as a spring and autumnal visitant, like his 
‘congener, the snipe; with this difference, that the snipe 
rarely breeds with us, going northward to nidificate, 
while his fellow emigrant, our Scolopax, invariably rears 
his young before going farther toward the frosts of the 
northern pole. 

Of these suggestions my readers must judge whether 
is the better of the two ; one of the two I believe to be the 
only way for accounting for the woodcock’s short disap- 


58 FRANK FORESTER. 


pearance at this season. Jor the rest, as I leaned at first 
to the former, so do I now rather incline toward the lat- 
ter belief, facts not bearing out the former to my satis- 
faction, although I do not think the question has been, 
as yet, fully tested by experiment. 

It is to be regretted, here, that this question is yearly 
becoming, in these districts, more difficult of solution ; 
and I am the more strenuous in noting this emigration, 
because things may come, ere long, to such a pass that it 
will become wholly undistinguishable. 

When first I shot in New Jersey, and in the river coun- 
ties of New York, the disappearance of the birds was 
evident enough; because, up to a certain day, they 
abounded, and after that, were not. Now, long before 
the second week of July, the woodcock are exterminated 
in their summer haunts for miles and miles around our 
large cities ; too many of them, alas, slaughtered before 
the season, when scarcely able to fly, when nearly unfit 
for the table, when a game despicable to the loyal sports- 
man, and a victim easy to the pot-hunting knave, who 
goes gunning with a half-bred, half-broken cur, and a 
German fowling-piece, dear at a dollar’s purchase. 

Oh, gentlemen legislators—gentlemen sportsmen, 

“Reform it altogether !”” 

Oh, ye choice spirits, who stood forth, after the long, 
hard winter and deep snow-drifts, quail-destroying, of 
1836, to rescue that delightful little fowl from total ex- 
tinction, stand forth in likewise now, in protection of the 
woodcock. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. 
Railroads are ruining the hopes, the pleasures of the 
sportsman; our best shooting grounds now swarm, on the 
first of July, with guns more numerous than birds ; the 
Warwick woodlands, once inaccessible to the pot-hunter 
and the poacher, may now be reached for fifty cents ; 
may now be swept clear in a single day, nay, are swept 
clear of half-fledged younglings, by men, boys, and bung- 


THE WOODCOCK. 59 


lers, and ruthlessly devoured before the season has set in, 
by ignorant, yoracious cockneys, 
“Reform it altogether !” 


Enact that the woodcock shall not be slain, shall not 
be possessed, as Mr. Blunt possessed him, on plate or in 
stomach, until the first day of October. Every true 
Sportsman, every sportsman whatsoever, will go hand and 
heart with the law, will watch and prevent the illegal 
sale of the bird; and then, ye gods of wood-craft ! Syl- 
vans and Fauns! and thou friend of the hunter, Pan ! 
what sport shall we have in brown October, when the 
sere underbrush is bare of leaves to mar the sportsman’s 
aim ; when the cool, dewy earth sends up the odor of the 
game in fresh streams to the setter’s keen and sagacious 
nose ; when the pure air braces the nerves and fans the 
brow, delicious; when the full-grown, white-fronted, 
pink-legged cock springs up, not fluttering feebly now 
and staggering stupidly into the muzzle of the gun, 
to drop again within twenty yards, but on a vigorous and 
whistling pinion, with sharp-piping alarm note, swift as 
a rifle-bullet, soaring away through the tree-tops, or dart- 
ing, devious with abrupt zig-zags, among the thick-set 
saplings. ; , 

Him no boy can blaze at his twenty times in half an 
hour, and slaughter after all with one chance pellet, or 
happily wearied down without one ! Him can no Gegman 
gun achieve, of cast iron, scattering its shot over an area 
of twenty feet, harmless at twenty yards! Him can no 
cur-dog flush in gun-shot of pot-hunting poacher. 

No! gentle reader, him, whether he lies in the tufted 
fern and wintergreens, or the dry slope of some warm 
westering hill-side, among brown second growth of oak 
and chestnut ; whether he wades among the shallow mud- 
pools, sheltered by fern, dock-leaves, and dark colt’s-foot 
of some deep maple swamp, it needs the stealthy pace, 


60 FRANK FORESTER. 


the slow, cat-like, guarded motion, the instinctive 
knowledge of the ground, the perfect nose, and absolute 
docility, which belong only to the thorough dog of the 
thorough sportsman, to find certainly, and stand 
staunchly ! Him, whether he flap up, seen for one second 
only, among the leafless stems, and lost the next among 
the tufted tops of the yet verdant alders; whether he 
soar away, with his sharp whistle, far, far above the red 
and yellow tree-tops; whether he pitch, now here, now 
there, sharply and suddenly, among close saplings, it 
needs the eye of faith, the finger of instinct, the steady 
nerves, the deliberate celerity, the marking glance, which 
characterize the true sportsman, the crack shot, who, as 
poor Cypress ayerred truly, is born like the poet, not 
made like the orator, to cut down at his speed, not wing- 
tipped or leg-broken, but riddled by the concentrated 
charge, turned over and over in mid air, arrested merci- 
fully by quick and unerring death, and fatling with a 
heavy thud, which tells good things of ten ounces’ weight, 
on the brown leaves of gorgeous autumn. 

My words are weak to describe the full charm of this 
noble pastime, noble when followed, as it should be, in 
the true animus and ardor of the chase, but most ignoble 
when perverted to base, culinary, carnal, gluttonous, self- 
seeking ; weak are they when compared with the vivid 
and eart-thrilling reality. Yet read them, gentle legis- 
lators ; spurn not the bill of scolopax, long though it be, 
in no wise tedious, spurn not the humble petition of the 
sportsman. Hnact! enact! and save our gentle, well- 
born woodcock ; preserve our harmless occupation from 
the untimely end which threatens it. And ye, oh gener- 
ous club, who hold your meetings under the sign and 
sanction of the noble woodcock, perpend and ponder. 
Judge if it be not for the best to adopt my plan for our 
bird’s safeguard : one common day of killing in all our 
northern country, for all States, all counties, so we shall 


THE WOODCOCK. 61 


shun all caviling, and that one day the first of October. 
And thou, Colonel D— P——+r, famous although thy 
race of pointers, great although thy renown with the 
Manton, hear my words and repent ; thou who, a member 
of that same sportsmen’s club in Gotham; thou who, 
although thou didst, alas, know better, didst most 
feloniously and basely, taking advantage of a flaw in 
Jersey law, anticipate thy brother sportsmen and shoot 
woodcock long before the fourth day of July, on our 
friend Tom Dekay’s fine farm, nigh unto Vernon, in 
good Sussex County. Oh, fie on thee! repent! repent, 
and be forgiven ! 

Oh! if there be a clause in the New Jersey statute 
permitting every land-owner to slay game, in or out of 
season, on his own farm, to wring the neck of the hen 
quail sitting upon her speckled eggs, to murder the hen 
woodcock hovering her helpless young, if that same 
clause empower that owner to authorize his friend to do 
like shameful murder, does it befit the gentle and the 
generous, the. courteous and the chivalrous, for such 
should the true sportsman be, to avail himself of. so 
miserable a pettifogging subterfuge ? Ashamed to hear 
of it, thou wert, Col. D— P r; for thou didst blush, 
confused, and stammer faint apology, when charged with 
thy misdoings. Why not ashamed to do it, gallant 
colonel ? Or how shall we dare to enforce the law, or pray 
for legislative aid to save our proper birds from others, if 
one from among ourselves resort to small evasion, descend 
to dirty depredations ? 

I trust, indeed, that the day will ere long arrive, if not 
ere long, then will it never be, when all true sportsmen, 
and their name, in this land of guns, is legion, will set 
their faces steadily toward game protection, as steadily 
against those false brothers of the gun, who, crying out, 
**protect !” ‘* protect!” yet lose, themselves, no oppor- 
tunity, when unsuspected or unseen, of slaughtering for 


62 FRANK FORESTER, 


the bag, and for the brag, at all risks, in all manners, and 
at all seasons. 


There certainly is no more manly, no more salubrious, 
no more animating sport than the pursuit of game, with 
the trained dog andthe gun. It naturally induces hardi- 
hood, and strength of limb, freeness of breath, vigor of 
constitution ; it makes men familiar with those works of 
God, in the field and forest, which are unknown to the 
dwellers of pent cities. To the studious and sedentary 
scholar, it is asalutary change of habits, a better tonic and 
restorative than any bark or bitters; to the rich citizen, the 
man of wealth and luxury, and leisure, it is almost the only 
thing that shall save him from drivelling down into a 
mere gluttonous sensualist, or yet worse, a mere effemi- 
nate man-milliner. It leads us into the wildest and the 
fairest scenes of nature; it brings us quietly to think 
and ponder with ourselves ; it teaches us the habits and 
instincts, of those inferior animals which we too much 
incline to undervalue; it causes us to weigh their in- 
stincts, to compare them with our own boasted reason ; 
it discovers to us that the poorest bird, the humblest 
quadruped, has gifts and attributes greater than we pos- 
sess, and exquisitely suited to its wants. 


Does it not lead us, then, to self-examination in some 
sort and to humility ? to the knowledge of ourselves, of 
our fellow men, and of the great works of our Maker ? 


I, for one, think so; and I never hear a greasy-faced, 
sanctimonious fellow declaim against the cruelty, the 
wantonness, and the unprofitableness of field-sports, but 
T set him down for an arrant fool, or an arrant hypocrite. 
But I long to assure him that, in the eyes of Heaven, 
and, God be thanked, even in this world also, some pur- 
suits are held profitable besides that of the almighty 
dollar ; and some amusements innocent besides cheating 
our neighbors in the street, and calling that business; or 


THE WOODCOCK. 63 - 


slandering them by the fireside, and calling that conver- 
sation ! 

I believe, therefore, that field-sports, not carried to ex- 
cess, but used in their proper places, and at their proper 
times, are very innocent, very creditable, and very profit- 
able, and very improving pastime. For my own part, I 
know that they have ministered incalculably to the im- 
provement of my bodily health ; and I am sure, at least, 
that they have not deteriorated my mental faculties ; nor 
do I conceive how any reasonable man can fail to discover 
that some inducement is necessary to lead men to take 
that degree of exercise which is necessary to the main- 
tenance of the mens sana in corpore sano ; and that there 
can be no stronger or better inducement than this ancient 
and masculine amusement, which never was decried until 
these effete days, rich mainly in hypocrisy and humbug. 

Xenophon said, of old, that there was no sport so suit- 
able to the making of soldiers as this said sport of hunt- 
ing; and to this day, it is true that the ability, nay, not 
ability only, but willingness, to endure all extremes of 
heat and cold, of thirst and hunger, of fatigue and 
watchfulness, to which the sportsman must inure him- 
self, is that precisely which in the highest degree con- 
stitutes the aptitude of the citizen to be the soldier. 
Nor is this all; for the readiness of hand and quickness 
of eye, the instinctive rapidity of thought and glance, 
and the coolness under surprise, which the sportsman 
must needs acquire if he would be successful, are quali- 
ties more requisite than any to the warrior. 

Depending, as America does mainly, if not entirely, 
for her defence, on the facility of converting her citizens 
into soldiers, I think that all consistent means should be 
taken to prevent that of which I fancy there is some 
danger, at least in the great cities; the growth, I mean, 
of luxury and effeminate habits among the rising 
generation. 


64. FRANK FORESTER. 


Destroy game, abolish field-sports, and you abolish the 
most manly of exercises; you leave the lounge in fash- 
ionable streets, or the drive in easy chariots, as the sole 
out-of-doors amusement of the wealthy man ; and to the 
poor man you leave none at all, but rioting and what is 
termed rowdyism, if these can be called amusements. 

For all these reasons, therefore, I think it highly ad- 
visable that the extermination of game in the vicinity of 
our large cities should be prevented if possible ; and that 
it can only be prevented by the speedy interposition of 
the States’ Legislatures, backed by a truer and more 
single spirit than now exists among those who are proud 
of the name, even when they possess too few of the attri- 
butes of honorable sportsmen, I hold certain. 

To these, therefore, I appeal in protection, especially, 
of the woodcock, which will, most assuredly, before ten 
years have elapsed, be as utterly exterminated, within 
fifty miles of New York, and within the like circuit of 
all other large cities, as are the deer and the heath-hen, 
nay, the wild turkeys, which once peopled our own hunt- 
ing-grounds, 

In conclusion, I find, on reference to my last article on 
this subject, that I made allusion to a mode of killing 
the woodcock commonly practised in the Southern 
States, which is so singular, and so completely at 
variance with all our ideas of sporting in these regions, 
that it deserves mention, and will, I doubt not, be inter- 
esting to many readers who may never have heard of such 
a process, which, unheard of, they certainly never would 
imagine, 

This process is termed fire-hunting ; it is carried on, of 
course, at night, and arises from the habits of the bird 
in that section of the country, which differ wholly from 
its usages while here. 

In Louisiana and Mississippi, where, chiefly, this mode 
of sporting prevails, the woodcock lies during the day- 


THE WOODCOCK, 65 


time entirely in the dense canebrakes and impenetrable 
swamps which intersect and divide the cultivated lands 
and rich plantations, and wherein it would be almost 
impossible, and altogether weary and unprofitable to 
attempt to follow him; as he could hardly be killed on 
the wing in such covert as is there found, while the toil 
would be imcomparably greater than the pleasure of the 
pursuit. 

No sooner is it dark, however, than out the woodcocks 
come by thousands, from their fastnesses, and pitching 
down on all sides in the old fields and maize stubbles, 
apply themselves to nibbling and boring in the soft, rich 
loam for their succulent worm diet. 

Hereupon the fire-hunt commences. With gun and 
game-bag, powder-flask and shot-pouch, and all appli- 
ances and means secundum artem, the sportsman sallies 
forth ; but no silky-haired, high-strung, sagacious setter, 
no satin-skinned, rat-tailed, obedient pointer follows his 
master’s heels. In lieu of Don or Sancho, an old, crafty, 
grizzle-pated, merry negro comes forth, equipped with 
the brazen vessel of a warming-pan, or the like instru- 
ment, set erect on a pole of some ten or twelve feet 
in length, and filled with light wood, pine-knots, or such 
like bright-burning combustibles. 

Arrived on the feeding-ground, a light is applied ; the 
quick fuel sends out a broad, ruddy glare; and as the 
bearer slowly circumambulates the field, a circle of in- 
tense lustre is shed for ten yards around him, rendering 
every object more clearly visible than at noon-day. The 
shooter walks close to the fire-bearer, on his right hand, 
and ever and anon, as the circular glare passes along over 
the surface of the ground, his eye detects the woodcock, 
crouching close to the earth, and gazing with its full, 
fascinated eye upon the strange illumination. The next 
instant, up it springs, dizzy and confused ; and soaring 
upward toward the light, it is seen for a second, and then 


66 FRANK FORESTER. 


is lost in the surrounding darkness; but of that one 
quick second the sportsman takes advantage, and by a 
snap shot cuts him down with a light charge, never kill- 
ing a bird at above ten paces distant, and often bagging 
his hundred in a single eyening’s work. 

This mode of cock-shooting arises, as it is evident, ez 
necessitate rei, and may, for a while, be sufficiently ex- 
citing. It must, however, lack all that variety which is 
the great charm of northern shooting, variety which 
arises from the working of the emulous, obedient, and 
well-trained dogs, in observing whose exquisite instinct, 
fine attitudes, and beautiful docility, me judice, lies half 
the pleasure of field-sports ; variety which, together with 
the lovely scenery, the brisk, breezy air, and the exulting 
sense of personal independence and personal power, 
springing from these, and from the glow of cheerful ex- 
ercise, renders these sports, to active, energetic, and en- 
thusiastic minds, the first of pleasures, and almost a 
necessary relief from the dull monotony of every-day 
existence. 


ee 


ae 
cod 
PAN 


“ds, 
en | 


PN 


. 
: 


« 
Ao as veg, 


A 
. 


XN, 


i q Wo Ay 


rv" ; it Ki WA Ab \ y ' 
Adit ry ee 4 burns ‘ , / y iat 
uate ‘Stuy aap HAY, ci) { \ ANANDA 


THE QUAIL. 


THE QUAIL. 69 


THE QUAIL. 


Tetrao Coturniz, Lin.; Coturnix Virginianus, Latham ; 
Ortyx Virginianus, Sir William Jardine. The Quail, of 
the Eastern and Middle, the Partridge, of the Southern 
States. 

This beautiful little bird affords one of the most re- 
markable examples of those errors and confusions in the 
nomenclature of game, to which I alluded, in the first 
paper of this series, as being so general in this country. 
It would appear, indeed, at first sight, and I suspect not 
quite untruly, that we have derived the names of all our 
game, and many of our common song-birds, from the 
rude and unpolished men who, for the most part, first 
settled the woodlands of the United States, and who, from 
a desire to cultivate some pleasant memories of home in 
their new country, gave to such varieties as they found 
here, having the slightest affinity to the unforgotten ani- 
mals of Europe, names often incongruous and unfitting. 
This bird is one of the instances in question ; and conse- 
quently, we find that it has, in fact, no name at all in the 
United States, its appellation being made to depend alto- 
gether on that of another bird in no wise connected with 
it, the ruffed grouse, namely, ¢efrao wmbellus ; which it 
has pleased the original nomenclators to call variously 
partridge and pheasant, to neither of which species does 
it bear much more resemblance than does an owl to a 
woodcock, or a game-fowl to a turkey. 

Where the ruffed grouse is called a partridge, the bird 
of which we are now speaking is called a quail, only, I 
believe, because it is smaller than the other, and because, 
in England, the quail is the next gallinaceous fowl in size 
after the partridge. Where the ruffed grouse is called 
the pheasant, our bird becomes the partridge, from pre- 
cisely the same analogy in size, and in that only, to Euro- 
pean game. 


70 FRANK FORESTER. 


With regard to the ruffed grouse, there can be no ques- 
tion for,a moment by what name he should be called; 
for he is a distinct variety of a well-known genus, several 
varieties being found in the United States, and yet others 
in the British Possessions and the Oregon Territory. He 
is neither partridge nor pheasant, but a distinct feather- 
legged grouse, and properly called ruffed or tippet grouse, 
from the beautiful long neck feathers, which, though 
pendulous in the unexcited state of the bird, are set up 
in the form of a magnificent ruff, while the tail is fanned 
like that of a peacock or turkey, by the amorous male 
during the breeding season. It is, therefore, equally un- 
sportsmanlike and unscientific to call the bird pheasant 
or partridge ; and it is, moreover, as needless as it is a 
stupid barbarism, since the bird has an excellent good 
name of its own, by which it should invariably be styled, 
whether in writing or in conversation, by every one 
claiming to share the spirit of the gentle sport. 

As concerns our little friend, whom I judge it best to 
designate as quail, for reasons which I will briefly give 
hereafter, this is not altogether the case ; for, singular as 
it may appear, he is so unfortunate as to possess no legit- 
imate or scientific English name whatever. Formerly, 
he was classed by naturalists as a variety of the quail, 
Tetrao Coturniz of Linneus, and as such was denomi- 
nated Coturnix Virginianus, Virginia Quail, owing to the 
fact, doubtless, than in Virginia he was found more abun- 
dantly, perhaps only, on the first landing of English set- 
tlers in America. 

It has been, however, more recently determined, and I 
presume correctly, that this bird is not a variety of quail, 
but a distinct species, peculiar to the New World, and 
situate about midway between the tribes of partridges 
and quails; and the investigators of these differences, 
which consist in the greater hardness and peculiar shape 
of the bill of the American bird, and in some dissimi- 


THE QUAIL. 71 


larity in the shape of the wing, have agreed to designate 
the new variety, scientifically, as Ortyx Virginianus, but 
have assigned to him no name whatever in the vernacular. 

I may here be permitted to observe, that the new term, 
ortyx, as a designation of a new genus, or sub-genus, is 
absurdly ill-chosen ; since the old name, Coturnix Vir- 
ginianus, signifies Virginian Quail, in Latin, while Ortyz 
Virginianus signifies precisely the same thing in Latin- 
ized Greek. 

Now, it is partly for this reason that I would retain 
the old English name of quail, in preference to that of 
partridge, for this American species ; since I consider the 
choice of the title, by the distinguished naturalists who 
have adopted the designation-ortyx, to indicate that the 
bird is, in their opinion, more nearly allied to the quail 
than to the partridge. ; 

Again, the size, weight, haunts, and habits of the 
American bird all very nearly resemble those of the 
European quail; while they are exceedingly unlike those 
of European partridges, of which there are two vari- 
eties, the gray, or English, and the red-legged, or French 
species. 

The American bird is, perhaps, an ounce heavier than 
the European quail, while it is full one-half lighter than 
either of the partridges. The American bird, like the 
European quail, frequents bushy ground, and the skirts 
of woodland, and often takes to the tree, and perches. 
The European partridges*are very rarely found in the 
shrubbery or coppice, and are never known to perch. 
The American bird, like the European quail, is migra- 
tory. The European partridge never removes, unless in 
consequence of unrelenting pursuit, far from the fields 
on which he is bred ; and lastly, the cry, the flight, and 
the plumage of the American bird very closely resemble 
those of his compeer, the quail of Europe. 

Hence I consider quail to be his correct name, in com- 


2 FRANK FORESTER. 


mon parlance ; I should wish to see American quail adopt- 
ed as his title in works on ornithology; and I sincerely 
trust that I shall live to see one general name, and that 
name quail, adopted by all sportsmen in the United 
States, thereby avoiding the palpable absurdity of shoot- 
ing, I will suppose, twenty of these birds, and two or 
three ruffed grouse, in the morning, in New Jersey, the 
former being quails and the latter partridges ; and, in the 
afternoon, walking across a bridge over the Delaware, 
and shooting more birds of each kind in Pennsylvania, 
which shall there and then haye become partridges and 
pheasants. Heaven save the mark! When it is as clear 
as day that there is not a single variety of partridge or 
pheasant to be found on the whole continent of America, 
North and South. 

The pheasant is an Asiatic bird, like the peacock ; origi- 
nally found on the southern shores of the Black Sea, and 
thence imported into Europe, where it has thriven won- 
derfully ; so that in Germany and France, and yet more 
so in England, it has become indigenous and abundant. 
Many attempts have been made to naturalize it in this 
country, but entirely without success; owing, I fancy, 
to the want of moisture in the climate, and to the sum- 
mer drouths, rather than to the severity of the winter 
season. 

Having premised thus much concerning his name, I 
will describe our bird briefly, and then proceed to his 
habits and haunts, which are both curious and interest- 
ing ; and indicative of a higher degree of instinct than is 
usual to birds of this tribe, and seemingly more nearly 
allied to reason. 

The quail is about nine inches in length, from the tip 
of his bill to the extremity of the toes, by twelve in width, 
from wing to wing, when extended. Though apparently 
much smaller than the woodcock, he is not much lighter, 
for not only are his feathers closer and more compact, but 


THE QUAIL. "13 


he is rounder and plumper in proportion to his length ; 
and when well-grown and full-fed, weighs from seven to 
nine ounces, although he rarely attains the maximum. 

His bill is strong and horny, the upper mandible con- 
siderably arched ; and the whole instrument constituting 
an apparatus calculated to break the shells of the hardest 
seeds, as well as a weapon capable of inflicting severe 
wounds on its rivals; for he is scarcely less pugnacious 
than the game-cock ; and is still kept for the same pur- 
pose by the Chinese and Malays, as he was of old by the 
polished democrats of Athens. 

His eye is large, black, and very lively. The back of 
his head, neck, shoulders, wing-coverts, and rump, are 
all beautifully mottled with brown, black, and chestnut, 
each feather having a yellowish margin, and a dark, ir- 
regular line, diverging from the point towards the stem. 
The quills and tail are of a rich, reddish brown, broadly 
barred with black. 

In the cock-bird, the cheeks and chin are snow-white, 
with the exception of a dark streak, running upward 
from the angle of the eyes. In the hen they are a bright 
ochreous yellow. ‘The breast, in both, is white, speckled 
with wavy lines of black, something like arrow-heads in 
shape, pointing downward toward the tail ; the legs are 
protected by strong scales, of an olive brown, and the 
male bird has rather a formidable spur. 

Otherwise there is no distinction between the sexes, 
which are similar in eye and shape; except, perhaps, that 
the colors of the hen are somewhat less vivid and distinct 
than those of the male, ag is generally the case in the an- 
imal creation. 

It will be seen at once from this description, that our 
American quail is a most beautiful little bird ; but his 
beauties do not consist merely in his plumage, but in his 
gait, his pretty, pert movements, his great vivacity, his 
joyful attitudes, his constant and cheerful activity. 


74. FRANK FORESTER. 


He is in all respects the most social, the merriest, the 
most amiable of his tribe. During the breeding season 
he alone, of the gallinaceous tribe, makes wood and mead 
xesound with his shrill, merry whistle, whence our coun- 
try folk have framed to him a name, Bob White, from 
some fancied similarity of sound, cheering his faithful 
partner during the toils of incubation. 

Afterward, when the bevies are collected, as he runs 
from the huddle in which he has passed the night, he sa- 
lutes his brethren, perhaps thanks his Creator for the 
pleasant dawn, with the most cheerful noise that can be 
fancied, a short, quick, happy chirping, ‘‘and seems to 
be,” to borrow the words of the inimitable Audubon, I 
quote from memory alone, ‘‘ the happiest little creature 
in the universe.” 

Unlike the young broods of the woodcock, which are 
mute, save the twitter with which they rise, the bevies of 
quail appear to be attached to each other by tender af- 
fection. If dispersed by accidental causes, either in 
search of their food, or from being flushed by some casu- 
al intruder, so soon as their first alarm has passed over, 
they begin calling to each other with a small plaintive 
note, quite different from the amorous whistle of the male 
bird, and from their merry day-break cheeping, and each 
one running toward the sound and repeating it at inter- 
vals, they soon collect themselves together in one happy 
little family, the circle of which remains unbroken until 
the next spring, with the genial weather, brings matri- 
monial ardors, pairing and courtship, in the hope of fu- 
ture bevies. 

If, however, the ruthless sportsman has been among 
them, with his well-trained setter and unerring gun, so 
that death has sorely thinned their numbers, they will 
protract their little call for their lost comrades, even to 
nightfall ; and in such cases, I know not if it be fancy on 
my part, there has often seemed to me to be an unusual 


THE QUAIL. 5 


degree of melancholy in their wailing whistle. Once 
this struck me especially. I had found a small bevy 
of thirteen birds in an orchard, close to a house in 
which I was passing a portion of the summer, and in a 
very few minutes killed twelve of them, for they lay hard 
in the clover, and it was perfectly open shooting. The 
thirteenth and last bird, rising with two others, which I 
killed right and left, flew but a short distance and dropped 
among some sumachs in the corner of a rail fence. I 
could haye shot him certainly enough, but some unde- 
fined feeling induced me to call my dogs to heel and 
spare his little life; yet, afterwards, I almost regretted 
what I certainly intended at the time to be mercy ; for 
day after day, so long as I remained in the country, I 
heard his sad call from morn until dewy eve, crying for 
his departed friends, and full, apparently of memory, 
which is, alas, but too often another name for sorrow. 

The quail is not only the most sociable of his tribe in 
reference to his fellows, but is by far the most tamable 
and friendly in his disposition as regards the general ene- 
my and universal tyrant, man. 

In the winter season, when the ground is so deeply coy- 
ered with snow as to render it impossible for them to ob- 
tain their customary food, the seeds, namely, of the va- 
rious grasses which they love the most, or the grains 
which lie scattered in the stubbles, they come naturally 
into the vicinity of man’s dwelling, and it is by no means 
an unusual sight to perceive them running about among 
the domestic fowls in the barn-yard, and flying up, if 
suddenly disturbed, to perch under the rafters of some 
barn or out-house, seemingly fearless and confident, in 
such seasons, of protection. 

At this moment, I have a bevy of thirteen birds lying 
within three or four hundred yards of the room in which 
I sit writing, under the shelter of a rough wooded bank 
whereon I have been feeding them with buckwheat since 


76 FRANK FORESTER. 


the heavy snows have fallen, and they have now become 
so tame that they willallow me to approach within twen- 
ty paces of the spot where they are fed, running about 
and picking up the triangular seeds, perfectly unconcern- 
ed in my presence. As soon, however, as the spring shall 
have commenced, and the bevy separated themselves into 
pairs, their wild habits will return upon them, and I shall 
see no more of my little friends until I meet them next 
autumn in the brown stubble-field, no longer in the light 
of a protector. 

The quail pairs early in the month of February, if the 
winter has been a mild one and the ground at that period 
is free from its snowy winter covering. If, on the con- 
trary, the spring be late and backward, his courtship is 
deferred until March, sometimes even so late as to the 
beginning of April. 

As soon as he has chosen to himself a mate, the happy 
pair retreat to wide, open, rushy meadows, where the 
conformation of the country affords them such retirement, 
among the tussocks of which they love to bask in the 
soft spring sunshine. Where the land is higher, and is 
broken into knolls and gulleys, you will find them at this 
season on the grassy banks beside some sheltered hedge- 
row, or along the green and shrubby margin of some se- 
questered retreat, but never in thick woodlands, and 
rarely in open fields. 

Most birds, so soon as they have paired, proceed at 
once to the duties of nidification and the rearing of their 
young; it seems to me, however, that the quail spends 
some time in pairs before proceeding to this task ; for I 
have frequently seen them paired so early as the twentieth 
of February ; yet I have never found the hen sitting, or a 
nest with eggs in it, during spring snipe-shooting, though 
I have often flushed the paired birds on the same ground 
with the long-billed emigrants. 

I have never, indeed, seen a quail’s nest earlier than 


THE QUAIL. V7 


the middle of May, and have often found them sitting 
so late as the end of July. 

Their nest is inartificial, made of grasses, and situate, 
for the most part, under the shelter of a stump or tussock 
in some wild meadow, or near the bushy margin of some 
clover-field or orchard. The hen lays from ten to two- 
and-twenty eggs, and is relieved at times, in hatching 
them, by the male bird, who constantly keeps guard 
around her, now sitting on the bough of the nearest tree, 
now perched on the top rail of a snake fence, making the 
woods and hills resound with his loud and cheery whistle. 

The period of the quail’s incubation I do not know 
correctly ; the young birds run the moment they burst 
from the egg, and it is not uncommon to see them trip- 
ping about with pieces of the shell adhering to their 
backs. 

The first brood hatched and fairly on foot, the hen pro- 
ceeds at once to the preparation of a second nest ; and 
committing the care of the early younglings to her mate, 
or rather dividing with him the duties of rearing the 
first and hatching the second brood, she devotes herself 
incessantly to*her maternal duties. 

So far as I can ascertain, the quail almost invariably 
raises a second, and sometimes, I believe, a third brood, 
in a single season. Hence, if unmolested, they increase 
with extraordinary rapidity when the seasons are propi- 
tious ; and hence you frequently find young birds, in two 
or three stages of maturity, ina single bevy, and under 
the protection of a single brace of parents. 

The quail cannot endure severe cold weather, hence he 
is never found far to the eastward of Boston ; I have 
never heard of his being found at all in the States of 
Maine and New Hampshire, and can assert of my own 
knowledge that, in the former State, he does not exist, if 
elsewhere, east of the river Kennebeck. In Lower Cana- 
da he is unknown ; and it is only within a few years that 


78 FRANK FORESTER. 


he has become abundant, and a continual resident in the 
upper provinces, along the northern shores of the Niag- 
ara and of Lake Hrie. 

I cannot, however, satisfy myself entirely that this is 
the effect of climate, as it may be the consequence of cul- 
tivation, on the skirts of which only is the quail found, 
with one exception, the great prairies of the West, which, 
whether natural meadows, or, as some persons believe, 
the remnants of aboriginal civilization, present to the 
quail all the comforts which he desires from cultivation 
and the vicinity of man’s dwellings, grass-seeds, I mean, 
and open sunshine. 

In the forest the quail is never found, unless when that 
forest is girded about with settlements, and interspersed 
with partial clearness and buckwheat or corn fields, when 
he will ramble away during the heat of summer noon-tide 
into the cool, green retreats of mountain woodlands. 

I have never seen, nor have I heard of a nest placed in 
a wood; and, were it not for the prairies, which I sup- 
pose to have been their haunt and feeding ground for 
ages, I should be at a loss to conceive where either the 
quail or the woodcock existed, when all the sea-board of 
America, and for leagues upon leagues inward, the whole 
face of the country was covered with primeval wilderness, 
since neither of the birds, as I have before stated, are 
ever found in the wild forest, and both make their ap- 
pearance almost immediately when sunshine is let into 
those deep solitudes by the settler’s axe, and the brown 
stubble has succeeded to the leaf-carpet of the dim and 
steamy wilderness. 

But a few years ago, the woodcock was found in Maine, 
only in the vicinity of Portland and the oldest settle- 
ments; he is now killed abundantly in the intervales, as 
they are called in that region, on the Kennebeck, and is 
extending himself slowly but surely eastward, as the for- 
est recedes before the lumberman. He is, however, a 


THE QUAIL. "9 


rare bird on the waters of the Penobscot, though there 
are ranges of swampy coyerts, miles and miles in length, 
of that very soil and nature which he loves the best; and 
though I have never seen lying or feeding grounds in New 
Jersey superior to the oak-islands, above Indian Oldtown, 
upon the beautiful river I have mentioned. 

Five years have passed, however, since I shot in those 
regions, and found it hard work to bag a couple or two 
of cock on ground which here would haye yielded forty 
or fifty birds ; and I should not be surprised to learn that, 
in the interim, they have become plenty in those very 
woods. That it is not climate which influences the 
woodcock, is evident from the fact that they have 
abounded for many years in the vicinity of Windsor and 
Annapolis, in New Brunswick, where the climate is 
much colder; but the reign of cultivation more widely 
extended, because far older, than in the eastern parts of 
Maine. 

It may, then, in some measure, be attributed to the 
same cause, namely, the prevalence of unbroken wilder- 
ness, and the absence of large grain fields, that the quail 
is not found in our easternmost States ; and if it be true, 
as Latham states, that the quail is found in New Bruns- 
wick and Nova Scotia, this might be assumed, and not 
climate, as the established cause of his aversion to the 
north-eastern country. 

But I believe it is not true; for, of many good and 
staunch sportsmen, with whom I am acquainted in St. 
John, and elsewhere in the British Provinces, I have 
found none who have shot this bird therein. 

I have said above, that the quail, in propitious seasons, 
increases with extraordinary rapidity ; I will now add, 
that in unfavorable years, he often comes to the very 
verge of extinction. Long, severe snows, when the coun- 
try is buried many feet deep, and he can procure no sus- 
tenance, save from the precarious charity of man, fam- 


80 FRANK FORDSTER, 


ishes him outright; heavy drifts, especially when suc- 
ceeded by a partial thaw, and a frost following the thaw, 
stifle him in whole bevies, encased in icy prison-houses. 

It is the peculiar habit of this bird to lie still, squatted 
in concentric huddles, as they are technically called, com- 
posed of the whole bevy, seated like the radii of a circle, 
with their tails inward, so long as snow, sleet, or rain 
continues to fall. So soon as it clears off, and the sun 
shines out, with a simultaneous effort, probably at a pre- 
concerted signal, they all spring up at once, with an im- 
petus and rush so powerful as carries them clear through 
a snow-drift many feet in depth; unless it be skimmed 
over by a frozen crust, which is not to be penetrated by 
their utmost efforts. In this latter case, when the storm 
has been general oyer a large extent of country, the quails 
are not unfrequently reduced so nearly to extinction, that 
but a bevy or two will be seen for years on ground where 
previously they had been found in abundance ; and at 
such time, if they be not spared and cherished, as they 
will be by all true sportsmen, they may be destroyed en- 
tirely throughout a whole region. 

This was the case especially through all this section of 
the country, in the tremendous winter of 1835-6, when 
these birds, which had been previously very abundant, 
were almost annihilated, and would have been so, doubt- 
less, but for the anxiety which was felt generally, and the 
energetic means which were taken to preserve them. 

Another peril, which at times decimates the breed for 
a season, is a sudden and violent land-flood, in June and 
July, which drowns the young birds, or a continuance of 
cold, showery weather in those and the preceding months, 
which addles the eggs and destroys the early bevy. This 
is, however, but a partial evil, as the quail rears a second 
brood, and, as I have before observed, sometimes a third ; 
so that in this case the number of birds for the season 
is diminished without the tribe being endangered. 


THE QUAIL. 81 


The open winters which have prevailed latterly have 
been exceedingly favorable to the increase of this beauti- 
ful and prolific little bird. Never, perhaps, have they 
been more abundant than they were last autumn ; and 
though there has been more than an average of snow 
thus far during the present winter, it has not been heay- 
ily drifted for the most part; it has not laid on the 
ground many consecutive days, and it has not, hitherto, 
been crusted once. The sun is now beginning to gain 
considerable power; the season is rapidly advancing to- 
ward spring, and, with a little care in feeding and pre- 
serving the birds from poachers and trappers, we have 
every prospect of yet a larger supply next autumn. 

In my next paper, for I feel that I am running some- 
what out of bounds, I shall point out where, in my opin- 
ion, the present laws for their protection are inoperative 
and inadequate, and how they may be simplified and 
amended. I shall touch upon that much-disputed point, 
their domestic and internal migrations, in relation to 
which I have collected some curious facts, which are not, 
I believe, generally known, and which may prove inter- 
esting ; and, lastly, I shall dwell at length on the best 
method of quail shooting, with the results of some days’ 
sport, from Connecticut so far southward as Maryland, 
which is the southernmost limit of my sporting experi- 
ence in the United States, 


PART I, 


The migratory habit of the American quail has always 
been in some degree a disputed point, among both natur- 
alists and sportsmen, and I know many of the latter who | 
deny it altogether. 

Notwithstanding this, I am myself thoroughly con- 
vinced of the fact that the bird is, to a certain degree, 
migratory during some weeks of the autumn; and I 


82 FRANK FORESTER. 


think I can establish this fact from my own personal ob- 

servation, as well as from the statements of others worthy 

of high credit. The reason of the doubt on this subject 

arises from two causes ; first, that the migration of this’ 
bird is short, irregular, continuous, and, apparently, 

causeless ; and, secondly, that it is not nearly so distinctly 

marked in this district of the country as it is in the 

Westera States, where the bird is infinitely more abun- 

dant than in these regions. 

When I state that the migration is irregular and con- 
tinuous, I mean to say that the bird, at no season, en- 
tirely leaves any section of the country ; but that there 
is a constant movement of successive beyvies in the same 
direction, which is invariably eastward ; and I am per- 
fectly satisfied that this is more or less the case every- 
where, and that it is more conspicuously so the further 
west we trayel. 

Audubon, than whom no better authority exists, for he 
writes from personal observation, states that on the banks 
of the western rivers, he mentions, I think, particularly 
the confluences of the Ohio, these beautiful little birds 
may be seen regularly in the autumn, running eastward 
in great flocks, not single bevies, and crossing the large 
streams on the wing, always in the same direction. Dur- 
ing a discussion which took place in the pages of the 
New York ‘‘Turf Register,” originating between that 
excellent writer and most estimable man, Wm. P. Hawes, 
and an anonymous author using the signature ‘‘ H.,” of 
Marietta, and subsequently enlisting, on one side or the 
other, half the sporting writers of the country, some new 
and striking authorities were elicited on this fact ; these 
I shall here present to my reader, and, in corroboration 
of these, apply some recent observations of my own, 
which can not, I think, but prove conclusive. 

The first of these authorities is a very distinguished 
writer on turf affairs, under the signature of ‘‘ Alpha,” 


THE QUAIL. 83 


whose testimony is the more valuable on this point, that 
he is in some measure an unwilling witness. 

Quoting from an article of mine, he says: ** “The quail 
is known to be a bird of passage.’ Ours is not so gener- 
ally known to be ; at least I doubt it very much. They 
seem to me, in the fall, to be taken with a sort of crazy 
rambling fit, which lasts for so short a time as not to 
allow of a very distant emigration. Some people say 
they always fly east.” 

The writer then proceeds to speak of the large flocks 
in which the quail is said to travel in autumn, declar- 
ing that he has heard of the fact, but never seen or be- 
lieved it., 

The testimony of ‘ Alpha,” therefore, proves all that 
is asserted, namely, that there is a general migratory 
movement, which he graphically describes as «‘ crazy and 
rambling,” in the early autumn, and that it is thought 
to be eastward. This paragraph brought out another 
witness, the celebrated ‘“N.,” of Arkansas, than whom 
there exists no person better qualified to speak to any 
fact concerning field-sports in America, 

He testifies distinctly, that he has seen, with his own 
eyes, vast congregated flocks of quail; and knows, of his 
own knowledge, that in his own State, and throughout 
the Western States, there is an annual eastward autumnal 
migration. 

So clear and positive is he on this subject, that the 
writer from whom I quoted first, admitted in a subse- 
quent paper: ‘‘‘ Alpha’ must give up to ‘N.,’ of Ar- 
kansas. I know ‘N.’ of old, and although he is no very 
great sportsman in the little bird line, he knows what he 
sees ; and like the young Persian, ‘when a boy he learned 
to shoot, ride a horse, and speak the truth.’ ” 

The admissions of these Western writers, who have 
every opportunity, which we lack, of observing the man- 
ners and disposition of this bird, when combined with 


84 FRANK FORESTER. 


the paramount authority of Mr. Audubon, settle the 
question, as it appears to me, so far, at least, as the West- 
ern country is concerned. 

Now, as it might be replied to this that the quail is 
migratory in the West, but stationary here, I will adduce 
two circumstances which have fallen under my own imme- 
diate observation, and which I think indisputably show 
that the migratory character of the bird is unchanged in 
this region of the country. 

It will be remembered by all sportsmen that the winter 
of 1835-36 was one of extreme and unusual severity ; 
that the ground was covered with snow to the depth of 
several feet, from the early part of January until the 
middle of April; and that much apprehension was enter- 
tained that the quail would be entirely destroyed through- 
out this section of country. Precautions were taken very 
generally to guard against this misfortune ; live quail 
were sought during the winter by many gentlemen, and 
carefully preserved until the spring ; and some were even 
imported from South Carolina. 

Among others engaged in this work of solucrine love, 
I bought myself, and kept in New York, a hundred 
brace of these birds; and on the tenth of April turned 
them out in the vale of Warwick, my favorite shooting- 
ground at that time, on the farms of two different 
friends, by whom I was very confident they would be 
preserved. : 

It so happened that I spent the greater part of that - 
summer, from the middle of June until the end of 
August, in the immediate neighborhood of the place 
where the birds were turned out, and, feeling a good deal 
of interest in the matter, watched them regularly during 
the whole breeding season. 

The consequence was, that I knew the existence and 
locality of above twenty nests, no one of which contained 
less than a dozen eggs, all of which were hatched safely, 


THE QUAIL. 85 


and got off early, by the old birds. There must have 
been, of course, many other nests which were not discoy- 
ered at all ; and many of those birds whose first broods I 
saw, must unquestionably have raised second bevies. 

Naturally enough, I was delighted with the result of 
my experiment, and augured great things concerning the 
autumn shooting of that year. I was on the ground at 
daylight on the first day of the season, with a party of 
friends, whom I had seduced into accompanying me by 
the promise of admirable sport ; we had undeniable dogs 
with us, in considerable numbers ; we spent ten days in 
thoroughly rummaging the country ; and, without vanity, 
I believe I may say that we knew sufficiently well what 
we were about, not to leave many birds behind us. 

The result was that we had no sport whatever ; two or 
three bevies were all that we found over a wide tract of 
country ; and, from that day to this, the race of quail 
has run so nearly extinct in that region, that it is not 
worth looking for them. 

The explanation of this fact is, I think, easy enough. 
The native breed of quail were, as we had expected, 
nearly exterminated ; those which were turned out, emi- 
grated to a bird. 

It is proper that I should add, that the Warwick shoot- 
ing grounds were at that time shot over by no sportsman 
but myself, and that the people of the place hardly knew 
what it was to shoot flying. Birds of prey were scarce, 
and could hardly, however plentiful, have destroyed the 
whole broods of a hundred brace of old birds. 

The second anecdote which I have to relate, is yet more 
conclusive. 

The summer and autumn of 1844, I passed at the 
pleasant village of Bristol, on the western bank of the 
Delaware ; and with my friend Mr. B——, an excellent 
and thorough sportsman, had a good deal of shooting at 
quail, woodcock, and grass-plover, in their seasons. 


86 FRANK FORESTER. 


Having little else to do, I was out shooting certainly three 
times a week, and for some days previous to the com- 
mencement of the quail season, had beaten all the country 
for several miles up and down the river and westward, - 
for woodcock. 

In doing this, I became satisfied that there were no 
quail, to speak of, in the vicinity; not, at the utmost, 
above two or three bevies ; and our sport, after the close 
time expired, corroborated my opinion in this respect. 

Shortly afterward, when the cold weather set in, not an 
evening passed, but bevy after bevy came, about dusk, into 
the gardens and orchards of the village, and into all the 
surrounding coppices, and might be heard calling in every 
direction until nightfall. 


Morning after morning, as soon as it was light enough 
to shoot, I was afoot, expecting to get sport ; but not in 
a single instance did I find any birds, though I subse- 
quently learned that a few, who knew their habits in that 
district, crossing the Delaware to the Jersey shore, had 
good shooting on these very birds, which, it seems, in- 
variably crossed the river, there scarcely a mile in width, 
as soon as the morning twilight was growing gray. 


This migration is perfectly well known to all the sports- 
men in that district ; it takes place regularly every au- 
tumn ; commencing with the first sharp frost, and con- 
tinuing from three to six weeks ; it is invariably from the 
west eastward ; and the countrymen will tell you that the 
birds are making their way to the Pines, on the Jersey 
shore, which I do not believe. Lastly, I could not learn 
that any counter-migration, from the east westward has 
ever been observed, though several intelligent persons, 
whom I questioned, informed me that they had looked 
for such a thing annually, but in vain. 

The birds, I should add, are constantly seen flying across 
the river by early laborers and fishermen ; and occasion- 


THE QUAIL. 87 


ally, if the wind should be adverse, the weaklings of the 
bevy fall into the broad stream and perish. 

These facts, in my opinion, thoroughly establish the 
fact that the quail does migrate, though of all migrations 
it appears to be the most strange and mysterious. 

Contrary to all expectation, at the commencement of 
the cold season the quail runs, for unless in crossing 
large streams or sheets of water, I am satisfied that the 
journey is made on foot, from the warmer west to the 
colder east. 

Food can have nothing to do with the change of local- 
ity, since that abounds most where the climate is mildest. 

Appropriateness of breeding-ground is not involved in 
the movement, for it takes place at the very opposite sea- 
son of the year. 

Lastly, it cannot be ascertained whither the passengers 
go, or where their wanderings terminate. 

The consequence of this annual eastern migration 
ought to be, at least, a temporary accumulation of bevies 
in vast numbers to the eastward; since, as I have stated 
in my last paper, there is an eastern limit, and that not 
very distant, to the existence of the bird at all. 

No such accumulation is known, however, or rather no 
such accumulation exists. 

It is almost certain, therefore, that after what “ Alpha” 
calls its ‘crazy rambling’ fit,” the quail again returns 
westward, though to say the least, it is strange in the ex- 
treme, that constantly seen, as it is in all parts of the 
country, on its eastern movement, it has never been heard 
or seen when working its way backward. 

Of one thing only we are certain, that no instinct of 
the humblest of God’s creatures but has its meaning and 
its use, and I know nothing which should lead us so much 
to doubt our own boasted intellect and superiority, as the 
conviction which must force itself upon us the more 
strenuously as we examine the more deeply, how little we 


88 FRANK FORESTER. 


can comprehend of the wonderful nature and wisely con- 
stituted habits of what we term the inferior animals. 

Kvery year, it is true, brings something to our little 
stock of knowledge, and if sportsmen, and gentlemen 
residing in the country generally, would note down the 
time and incidents which they observe with regard to 
natural history, whether of birds, beasts, fishes, or flowers, 
and would occasionally give these to the public, it is in- 
credible how much information might be collected, and 
in how short a time. 

I will now proceed to the existing laws for the pres- 
ervation of this beautiful little hird ; to the alterations 
which I would desire to see effected in them, and without 
which I despair of ever seeing game adequately or properly 
protected. 

The object of the game-laws of this country, different 
entirely from those in Europe, which reserve the right of 
killing game to privileged classes, is intended merely to 
protect the animals from annihilation, by guarding them 
during the periods of nidification, incubation, and the 
immaturity of the broods, and their operation 1s conse- 
quently limited to prohibiting the killing of game during 
certain seasons of the year. 

The great difficulty which has hitherto resisted the 
efforts of all those who see the utility of protecting game, 
has been found in the impossibility of getting farmers to 
enforce these laws. Misapprehending their object, and 
overlooking their own interests in the matter, they have 
never as yet been willing to prosecute the offenders, or 
to prohibit their own neighbors from killing, in season 
and out of season, although they have, perhaps, at times 
enforced the law against strangers. 

The reason of this seeming perversity lies, I believe, 
mainly in the inadequacy and absurdity of the laws them- 
selves ; which, having been framed without any proper 
understanding of the subject, naturally appear to the 


THE QUAIL. 89 


land-owner useless, vexatious, and made for the pleasure 
of the men of cities, as opposed to that of the country- 
man and farmer. 

I haye shown, in my articles on the woodcock, that 
the law does not protect the bird sufficiently long, for the 
broods are not half-grown in July, and that the wood- 
cock is consequently on the verge of absolute extermina- 
tion. I have shown that July shooting is obnoxious to 
the farmer, because it leads to the damage and destruction 
of his standing crops, and I will now add that it is unfair 
toward him in its operation, because the summer is his 
busy season, and before the autumn, when he has leisure 
to enjoy field-sport, the woodcock are all destroyed by 
loafers and pot-hunters. 

I have proposed, therefore, that the close time during 
which woodeock may not be killed, taken or sold, shall 
be extended from the first day of February until the first 
day of October. 

This alteration will save the immature bird from slaugh- 
ter by mere cockneys ; will act as a guard to the crops of 
the farmer ; and, lastly, will give a fair opportunity of 
enjoying field-sports to him who has the best right to en- 
joy them, the owner and occupant of the land whereon 
the game is bred and reared. 

I now come to the quail ; and, for reasons which I shall 
presently give, as well as to produce simplification and 
uniformity, qualities which always tend vastly to the 
practicability and enforcement of the law, I would pro- 
pose that the close time for this bird shall be the same as 
that for the woodcock, from the first of February, name- 
ly, until the first day of October. 

The laws at present prohibit the killing of quail in the 
State of New York, except between the twenty-fifth day 
of October and the first day of January ; in the State of 
New Jersey, except between the first day of November and 
the first day of January; and in the State of Pennsyl- 


90 FRANK FORESTER. 


vania, except between the first day of September and the 
fifteenth day of January. 

Now the first day of November and the twenty-fifth 
day of October are both needlessly late in the season ; and 
the first of January is needlessly early in the season for 
the termination and commencement of close time. 

The great majority of the bevies of quail are quite 
full-grown on the first of October ; except in very back- 
ward seasons, and except in the case of a very few third 
bevies. 

Let 1t be observed that I do not say that all the bevies 
are full-grown ; but that they are so in the proportion of 
three bevies out of four, will not, I think, be disputed. 

Now the object of the law is chiefly to prevent the 
depredation of pot-hunters, poachers, idle boys and vil- 
lage or city loafers, who will kill game at all times when 
they can sell it. he good sportsman, if he falls upon 
a bevy of half-grown birds, calls off his dog at once ; be- 
cause such cheepers, as they are technically named, afford 
him no sport in the field and are not fit to serve up on 
the table. 

The very class, moreover, from whom all danger accrues 
to the half-grown bird, I mean the prowling market- 
shooter, compusorily spares the half-grown quail, because 
the victualler will not buy it. 

The victualler will buy the half-grown woodcock, be- 
cause at the period when the law allows them to be killed 
and sold, he can get none other, eight-tenths of all July 
birds being half-grown younglings of that summer ; 
the quail, however, he will not buy half-grown at all, 
because he has always the option of purchasing full- 
grown birds at the same period of the year. 

Hence I argue that the quail runs no danger whatever 
from anticipating the present shooting season by one 
month; since the sportsman will not kill the young 
bevies, from true sportsmanship, and the poacher will 


THE QUAIL. 91 


spare them because they are of no use to him when 
killed ; and because to shoot them is, therefore, a mere 
waste of powder and shot. 

Tt will, on the contrary, be a farther protection to 
them ; since the farmer, as the law now stands, clearly 
perceives the absurdity of prohibiting the killing of per- 
fectly mature birds at the very season which is the most 
agreeable for out-of-doors’ exercise and the most suitable 
for sporting. 

Still worse is the prohibition to kill quail during the 
month of January, a prohibition grounded on a total 
ignorance of the habits of the bird. ; 

It neyer pairs, under any circumstances, earlier than 
the beginning of February, and in backward years not 
earlier than March, and even April. 

It was only yesterday that I counted fifteen birds in 
bevy within fifty yards of my door. 

I will now cite a fact to show the evil operation of such 
capricious and useless legislation. 

My notice was called, a fortnight since, to a protest, 
by some highly respectable farmers in the vicinity of 
Newburg, exclaiming against all game laws as oppressive, 
vexatious, and made so as “to restrict not only the liber- 
ties, but the legal rights of one class of society, for the 
exclusive pleasure, and not for the benefit of another,” 
and giving notice that they will kill game on their own 
premises at all such times as their convenience, pleasure, 
or interest may dictate. 

This protest contains the remarkable passage: ‘‘ But 
why prohibit the killing of game after the first of Janu- 
ary ? Clearly because the weather is then too uncomfort- 
able for the loafers to leave their grog-shops, and because 
that is the only season when the farmer has leisure and 
can take such recreation.” 

Now, these gentlemen are in error, it is true ; but only 
as to the intention, not as to the operation of the law. 


92 FRANK FORESTER. 


The prohibition to kill game after the first of January is 
useless, vexatious, absurd, and oppressive to the farmer F 
though certainly it was not intended to be so by those 
who framed it. . 

The only chance there is to having game-laws enforced 
is not only in seeing that they be just, but that they seem 
just. 

They are now unjust, and appear to be more unjust 
than they are. 

Put them in their right form, and no such question as 
the above will be asked ; or, if asked, it can be answered 
at once by a statement of the actual fact, that the close 
time is intended to protect birds during the breeding 
season, and during that only. 

Therefore, I say, open the season for killing and selling 
quail, woodcock, ruffed grouse, vuly. partridge, and rab- 
bit from the first of October to the first, or, if thought 
better, even until the fifteenth of February. We shall 
then protect each of these animals during the whole time 
in which they need protection, and no longer ; we shall 
avoid the appearance as well as the reality, of partiality 
and injustice ; we shall ultimately enlist the farmer as a 
law-preserver, instead of a law-breaker; and in the end, 
we may hope to have fine autumnal shooting throughout 
the land, instead of seeing all the species of game utterly 
exterminated. 

IT have two more observations to make under this head, 
with which I shall close this somewhat, I fear, over-long 
paper. 

The first is addressed to those gentlemen who procured 
the passage and were engaged in the framing of the law 
as it now stands. Their object was, doubtless, to extend 
the utmost possible preservation to the quail, fearing the 
extinction, during the deep snows of winter, by trapping 
and the gun. 


THE QUAIL. 93 


Now, the fact is that the quail is in far less danger of 
extinction than the woodcock. i 

Farmers, seeing the quail bred and wintered on their 
land, accustomed to see them daily feeding on their 
stubbles, and during severe storms taking shelter in their 
barn-yards, regard them in some sort as poultry ; do to 
a certain degree protect them ; and frequently forbid the 
pursuit of them, while they offer no objection to the 
hunting of the migratory and swamp-haunting woodcock. 

The woodcock, moreover, is much more easily killed, 
particularly during the absurd and barbarous summer 
shooting ; and lastly, it is a matter of fact that, while 
for fifty miles around our large cities, and even our con- 
siderable villages, the woodcock has become almost 
extinct within the last ten years, the quantity of quail 
has very slightly declined, if at all, during the same 
period. 

Deep snows and severe weather may thin them for a 
time, but one or two prosperous seasons bring them about 
again, and the stock is as numerous as ever. 

With regard to the woodcock, on the contrary, I know 
fifty swamps myself, wherein, ten years ago, it was an 
easy thing to kill twenty birds in the morning, in which 
there has not been a solitary cock seen for the last six or 
seven seasons. 

There is no fear, therefore, of injuring the quail by ex- 
tending the open season for shooting, while certain an- 
nihilation must fall on the woodcock if summer shooting 
be not instantly abolished. 

My second appeal is to the farmer, to whom I desire to 
point out that it is vastly for his interest to enforce the 
game-laws, even if he care nothing about shooting himself. 

The fondness of field-sports has increased much of 
late, and the quantity of game diminished so greatly, 
that if in any section of the country, where game of any 
kind abounds, two or three owners of adjoining farms 


= 


94 FRANK FORESTER. 


would combine to preserve their game strictly, allowing 
no person to shoot it at any season, and rigorously prose- 
cuting for every trespass and every breach of the game- 
laws, they could readily let the exclusive privilege of 
shooting, over every thousand acres so preserved, for two 
to three hundred dollars a season, or, perhaps, even a 
larger sum. 

Advertisements in the papers, offering the right of 
sporting such tracts of land so preserved, would be readily 
taken up by companies of two or three gentlemen, sup- 
posing that strict reliance could be placed on the strict 
protection of the game against all interlopers. 

There is no doubt, therefore, that in good game coun- 
tries every farmer owning two hundred acres of land can, 
by combining with his neighbors to enforce the game- 
laws, realize his fifty dollars, and from that to a hundred 
a year, without the expense of a dollar or half an hour’s 
trouble. 

I know myself at least fifty gentlemen who would 
gladly combine in parties of three, four, and upwards, to 
hire the privilege of exclusive shooting on good tracts of 
sporting ground. I would myself willingly enter into such 
combinations ; and should any farmers think this sug- 
gestion worthy of notice, would gladly assist them in 
negotiating such arrangements. 

I have no hesitation in saying that for certain tracts of 
land, such as portions of the drowned lands in Orange 
county, New York, the Big Piece on the Passaic river, 
the Long Meadow, the Little Piece, in the same vicinity, 
the Chatham meadows in New Jersey, the quail grounds 
near Sparta, in the same State, and the like, if resolutely 
preserved by the joint owners, many thousand dollars 
annually could be realized merely for the exclusive right 
of shooting over them. 


; . = ‘Mi 0 » JAS i 
Epa d tea Uae. Rt ay {Ave Gils ‘ pe 
zai ute hhse bir Dee “ap 5 a i 4 as ug 


bs reat ane ahs peel oe y 


nt 


Ng 


A \ 


MEMOIR ON THE SMELT OF THE PASSAIC 
RIVER. 


In the earlier investigations of the natural history of 
the animated tribes of this continent, it was the practice 
to refer all the individuals of the same family and order 
to the similar or cognate species, recognized and classified 
in the older countries of the eastern hemisphere, as if 
they were identical. 

In this slovenly, inaccurate, and unscientific method, 
all small discrepancies, and permanent variations of 
structure, habits, etc., on which all true distinctions are 
founded, were either entirely overlooked, or summarily 
dismissed, as being accounted for by climatic degeneracy. 
An absurd doctrine, which, invented in the main by that 
fanciful theorist and incorrect observer, the Count de 
Buffon, has been adopted more or less generally by all 
writers, until the present generation; by which a far 
deeper and truer method has been introduced in all the 
departments of science. So that to the most careful ob- 
servation of facts, the most rigorous examination of the 
narratives of observers, and the holding to the strictest 
accountability all relators of their experiences and dis- 
coveries, a thorough comparison of data and critical 
analysis of causes and results have been superadded. 

In those days, eloquence, plausibility, a bold elaboration 
of brilliant and fanciful theories, imperfectly grounded 
on a few partially considered and inaccurately recorded 
observations, assuming general facts where no such facts 
existed, or perhaps inventing them for the purpose of 


98 FRANK FORESTER. 


according with some preconceived theory, and at the 
same time proving its truth, were esteemed the great 
qualifications of the naturalist. 

Hence, we constantly find, during this period, the 
terms ingenious naturalist, ingenious writer, fanciful 
and brilliant historian of nature, applied as conveying 
the highest praise, to a class of writers, from whom, 
least of all authors, are ingenuity, fancy, invention, and 
_ brillianey to be looked for; and in whom, if they are 
found, they must be regarded as grave defects, not as 
qualities worthy of applause or imitation. 

Patient investigation, careful and minute observation, 
close analytical comparison, and an earnest and scrupu- 
lous record of facts, ever self-doubting, and fearful of 
recording one atom too much, of assuming any thing 
however small which is not absolutely proven, and always 
distrusting evidence the more, the more it seems to 
establish his own foregone conclusion, or embryo theory, 
these are the true qualities which fit a man to become a 
useful observer, a practical student, and an earnest and 
genuine historian of nature. 

These qualities it is, which have given immortal celeb- 
rity to the names of Ouvier, Buckland, Agassiz, of Wil- 
son, Audubon, and Richardson, and others who have 
followed, and are daily following, in their footsteps, with 
the same painful and diligent inquiry after facts, the 
same persistency in truth, and the same love of science, 
for its own sake unadulterated, though it may be with 
less genius and acumen. 

To these qualities it is moreover, of these great men, 
great naturalists, that natural history is becoming daily 
more and more an exact science, and that the love and 
true comprehension of it, instead of being limited as of 
old to a few bookish men, elaborating unproyed theories 
in their studies, are gradually extending themselves to 
thousands of votaries, in the field, in the forest, in the 


THE SMELT OF THE PASSAIC RIVER. 99 


arid desert, on the herbless granite, among the awful 
glaciers, 
7 the difficult air 

Of the iced mountain’s top, 
who are gradually learning how profitably to observe, and 
how understandingly to record, minute and isolated facts, 
each of which is a connecting link in the great chain of 
philosophic evidence to the truth of nature. Hence it 
is, that no student, however humble, should hesitate to 
use his own eyes in seeing, and to set down briefly and 
truthfully what he sees, however trivial it may appear to 
him; for he must know that from a great accumulation 
of trifles, great truths are established; and that what 
may appear trivial to his uneducated eye, might flash the 
great Eureka of a suspected system, to the penetrating 
glance of a Cuvier, a Lyell, a Humboldt, or an Agassiz. 
To return, however, to our starting point— 

To the first vague and unscientific belief in the specific 
identity of the similar and cognate tribes of the Ameri- 
can and Hastern continents, there gradually succeeded the 
conviction, founded on long and patient examination of 
structural and anatomical differences, of various habits, 
relating to parturition, nidification, incubation, food, 
migrations, times and: seasons, that few indeed of the 
American quadrupeds, birds, insects, fishes, and reptilia, 
however closely allied to the congenerous animals of the 
old world, even where to the common eye the identity 
would appear complete and unquestionable, are really 
identical with them. 

The few instances which do exist of absolute identity 
are to be sought and found—of course no reference is 
here had to the domestic animals, the tribes of which 
were obviously imported hither by early colonists, and 
have been constantly maintained, renewed, and reinvig- 
orated by subsequent introduction of stock—among the 
migratory animals, which haunt the extreme northern 


100 FRANK FORESTER. 


regions, within or closely adjacent to the Arctic Circles, 
where the two continents being conterminous and almost 
contiguous, and the climate, seasons, and products of 
the soil identical, no obstacles exist to the intermigrations 
of the neighbors of the animal creation. 

The list of those animals, however, which are abso- 
lutely identical in the two hemispheres, is brief. It is 
limited, for the most part, to a few birds and fishes. Of 
the former, some of the northern anatide and grallatores, 
ducks and waders, a few rapaces, eagles, falcons, and 
diurnal hunting owls, and perhaps one or two of the 
rasores, in their glacial form of ptarmigans, with a very 
limited number of the finches and hard-billed seed-eaters, 
may be enumerated; not forgetting numerous gulls, 
terns, puffins, auks, petrels, and other sea-fowl. Of the 
fishes the identical species are probably more numerous, 
though, for obyious reasons, the history of the move- 
ments and migrations of these creatures, the majority of 
whose lives, being spent in a different and to us unin- 
habitable element, is, of course, in a greater or less de- 
gree, inscrutable and unknown. 

Many of the family of salmonide, however, are known 
to frequent the shores and inlets of both hemispheres; as 
are many of the cetaceous animals, as also several of the 
squalide, including many varieties of shark and dog-fish, 
besides crustaceous shell-fishes, and others on which it is 
unnecessary now to dwell. 

Of quadrupeds the number is infinitely smaller, and is 
in process of daily reduction, as the habits and structure 
of the denizens of those remote and difficult regions are 
becoming better investigated and more thoroughly 
known. The greater polar bear, the blue and white 
foxes, and probably the white wolves, of the Arctic 
Circle, are common to the northern part of both hemis- 
pheres, as are also many varieties of the seal, walrus, 
and amphibious cattle of the great northern deeps. 


THE SMELT OF THE PASSAIC RIVER. 101 


Whether the actual identity of the northern quadrupeds 
can be traced any further, is more than doubtful; the 
common wolf, the brown bear, and the lynx, or loup 
cervier, of the Canadas and northern United States, 
though closely congenerous, are indisputably distinct 
from the cognate animals of northern Europe, the same 
is the case with the foxes, varying hares, and murine 
and mustiline, mouse and weasel families, of the Ameri- 
can, European, and Asiatic continents, 

The common deer are also distinct. That singular 
animal the musk ox of the high American latitudes, is 
unknown in the eastern Arctic regions; the beayers are 
distinct congeners; the European bison, or bonassus, bos ° 
urus, differs completely from the bison, misnamed but- 
falo, of the West; and, though unhappily the elk and 
reindeer of Europe and northern Asia have not been as 
yet sufficiently compared by competent examiners, with 
the moose and reindeer of this continent, to justify the 
enunciation of a positive opinion, as to their difference 
or identity, everything that is known concerning them 
tends to the belief that they are not identical, 

It sometimes happens, however, that while the two 
hemispheres possess each a distinct Species peculiar to 
itself, that of the one occasionally wanders to the other 
locality. This has been found to occur with several of 
the duck family; that careful and accurate observer, Mr, 
J. P. Geraud, having seen at least one specimen of the 
English widgeon, anas Pendope, as distinguished from 
the American species, anas Americana, shot on’ Long 
Island; while I have myself, on four different occasions, 
killed the green-winged teal of Europe, anas crecca, as 
distinguished, by the absence of the white lunated shoul- 
der-bar, from the species anas Carolinensis, peculiar to 
this country. 

This, I suspect, will prove to be the case with the rein- 
deer; for recent travellers lean to the opinion that there 


102 FRANK FORESTER. 


are more than one species or permanent variety of this 
animal found in America; and that the deer frequenting 
the “barren grounds,” on the Saskatchewan, Copper- 
mine and Mackenzie rivers is essentially different, beside 
being smaller and lighter colored, from the cariboo of 
Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, and the British proy- 
inces, which latter I have long since satisfied myself to 
be one-third larger than the domesticated reindeer, arvus 
Tarandus, of Lapland and Finland. 

That this is the case with the delicious little fish, 
known as the smelt, it is the object of my present paper 
to show. 

The smelt, osmerus, is a small fish, with the capelan of 
the northern coasts, the smallest of the salmon family; 
being identified with that family by its second fatty 
dorsal fin, its dental structure, and other peculiarities, 
which fix it irrevocably as a salmon. 

Until recently, as was almost universally the case, 
owing to want of careful and accurate comparison, the 
smelt of North America, which abounds along the east- 
ern and north-eastern coasts of the British provinces and 
the United States, at the breaking up of the ice in the 
rivers in spring, was confounded with the similar fish of 
Europe, and was accordingly set down in all the earlier 
books as osmerus Hperlanus, the smelt. 

It was, I believe, Cuvier who first distinguished the 
fish of the north-eastern waters, from the Gulf of the 
St. Lawrence so far westward as the Connecticut and 
Hudson rivers, as the American smelt, osmerus viri- 
discens, which name he gave to it, from the far deeper 
shade of green which prevails on the back, fading down 
to the lateral line, of the American fish. Its other struc- 
tural differences are decisive; and it may be added that 
its size, which is superior by nearly two-thirds to that of 
the European smelt, its inferior delicacy on the table, 
and the far lesser intensity of that peculiar odor of 


THE SMELT OF THE PASSAIC RIVER. 103 


cucumbers, which it exhales when freshly caught, and 
whence its name osmerws, as derived from the Greek “of, 
**to give forth a perfume,” are too remarkable to be 
overlooked. 

In this classification and nomenclature all succeeding 
naturalists and ichthyologists have acquiesced, as Dekay, 
in his Fauna of New York, Agassiz, and others of com- 
petent authority; it is remarkable, however, that Rich- 
ardson, in his Fauna boreali- Americana, speaking of the 
smelt of the St. Lawrence, seems to doubt the necessity 
of the distinction, perhaps for reasons to which I shall 
allude hereafter. 

It would seem, however, that these distinguished 
authors have gone one step too far, in denying to 
America, while they have vindicated her claim to a 
peculiar smelt of her own, the osmerus viridiscens, the 
possession of the smelt of Europe, the far-famed osmerus 
Lperlanus. 

It was long ago pointed out to me by twe gentlemen, 
of greater celebrity perhaps as epicures and critics on the 
noble art of good-living, than as students of natural his- 
tory or judges of the art piscatorial, that the smelt of 
the Passaic and Raritan rivers of New J ersey is an 
entirely different fish from the smelt of Eastern waters, 
with which the New York markets are ordinarily sup- 
plied by the Boston fisheries, and the mouth of the Con- 
necticut and other Eastern rivers. 

The fact is also well known to the fishermen of New 
Jersey; and the smelt of the Passaic command an infi- 
nitely higher price than those from the Sound, in the 
New York markets. On my first taking up my abode on 
the shores of the beautiful river on the margin of which 
I write, my attention was more particularly attracted to 
this fish; and its differences from the common smelt of 
America became more evident the more closely they were 
examined, These, as appearing to the common and un- 


104 FRANK FORESTER. 


scientific observer, were: 1st, the far inferior size of the 
Passaic fish, which begins to run up this lovely stream so 
soon as it is clear from ice, in order to reproduce its 
species in the clear, cold, highly-icrated waters of its 
tributaries. 

Of five hundred specimens of this fish, closely exam- 
ined, and accurately measured, wherever one presented 
itself of magnitude at all unusual, but one was found 
which came up to ten, and only five to nine inches in 
length; a majority were under six inches, many not ex- 
exceeding five and even four inches, and seven would cer- 
tainly be above a liberal average. 

2d. Their color, which could in no sort be called green- 
ish, viridiscens, the whole fish being of the most bril- 
liant pearly silver, with the slightest possible changeful 
hue of greenish blue along the ridge of the back, while 
the specimen was living, fading when dead into a very 
faint, greenish yellow, on the upper parts, above the 
lateral line, so faint, indeed, as to be scarcely perceptible. 

Observe, in this particular, that the eastern smelt, 
osmerus viridiscens, which certainly averages eleven or 
twelve inches, rarely falls short of nine or ten, and 
is often found up to sixteen and even eighteen, is of 
as dark and rich a mottled shade of cerulean green, from 
the dorsals to the lateral line, as a freshly run salmon, 
salmo salar, with the same silvery whiteness of the lower 
regions. 

3d. The peculiar cucumber odor, in the freshly caught 
fish, and the extreme delicacy of the flesh, both of which 
are so far superior in the fish of the Passaic, as to be ob- 
vious to the least inquisitive observer. 

I early suspected this Passaic smelt to be identical with 
the European fish, osmerus Hperlanus, with which I am 
very familiar, from its being largely taken in the York- 
shire river, the lovely and romantic Wharfe, on whose 
sylvan banks the happiest of my years were spent. But 


THE SMELT OF THE PASSAIC RIVER. 105 


in the spring of 1852, when the run up the Passaic was 
far above the average, I examined above a thousand 
specimens, made accurate drawings of several of the 
finest—one, a correct fac-simile, by accurate measure- 
ment of every part, even to the number of fin-rays, and 
dissected at least twenty individuals. 

In every particular, I found the smelt of the Passaic to 
agree with Yarrel’s and Richardson’s description of the 
European smelt, osmerus Lperlanus, the form of the 
opercula, or gill-coyers, the number of rays in every fin, 
the form and system of teeth, the number of scales on 
the lateral line, the length of the intestines, the num- 
ber of coeca, and above all the attachment of the sharply- 
toothed tongue to the fauces by a short bone margined 
with small recurved teeth, being precisely the same. 

I at the same time dissected several of the large east- 
ern fish, procured from Winderst’s well-known restaurant 
in New York, which had been obtained from the east- 
ward, and found them to agree in all the distinctive 
points, on which the classification and nomenclature of 
the American smelt, osmerus viridiscens, are made to 
depend, with that fish of the American authors, and to 
differ in all of them equally from the British fish of Yar- 
rel and from the fish of the Passaic and Raritan. 

Of both species I had made careful anatomical prepara- 
tions, beside preserving both fishes in spirits; and I took 
careful and minute notes of every part, intending to for- 
ward the whole to my friend, Professor Agassiz; but truly 
it is said that homme propose, mais Dieu dispose; for being 
unluckily called from home on that dies nefasta, Sat- 
urday, devoted to the confounded dispensation of 
house-cleaning, an extremely painstaking, and painfully 
fastidious Betty thought proper to cast all my choice 
preparations, which she profanely designated as ‘‘ nasty 
carrion rubbish,” into the ash-hole, whence there was no 
resurrection. As if to complete the fatality, after care- 


106 FRANK FORESTER. 


fully preparing for Graham, a year since, a fuller and 
more elaborate counterpart of this paper, wherein weight, 
numbers, measurements, and all the facts were minutely 
set down, I destroyed the disjecta membra of the notes, 
and trusted—alas! vain trust of man! to the certainty of 
Uncle Sam’s mail for the safe deliverance of my labors. 
Hence there remains only of my travails a wood-cut of 
life-size, which was copied faithfully from the life to the 
smallest particular, and this veritable memoir of a perish- 
ed paper. 

In the springs of 1853 and 1854, scarcely any of these 
delicious fish ran up the rivers, owing, I am satisfied, to 
the establishment of a chain-ferry at the embouchure of 
the river, about a mile above the opening of Newark 
Bay. The apparatus of this ferry consists of three 
parallel chains reaching from shore to shore, the two on 
the outside acting as guides to the boat, that’ in the cen- 
ter working on a drum, and acting as the propelling 
power of the boat. This boat crosses the river, on an 
average, once in every ten minutes, from 4 o’clock A. M. 
until 10 P. M., so that these chains are kept in a con- 
stant state of vibration, that created by one passage not 
haying entirely ceased before a fresh motion is communi- 
cated to it. 

Since the establishment of this ferry no school of fish, 
either shad or smelt, has run up the river, though they 
are still taken below the obstruction, though in dimin- 
ished numbers. It is seriously apprehended that, unless 
legislative aid be extended to the maintenance of the fish- 
eries, this delicate and curious fish will be lost to 
America; as has already, within the memory of men 
now living, that noble variety of salmo, the Sebago 
trout. 

I may here add, that it is an established fact that both 
these species may be taken with the scarlet Ibis fly; that 
capital sportsman and scientific angler, Moses H. Pesley, 


THE SMELT OF THE PASSAIC RIVER. 10? 


of St. Johns, N. B., having experienced grand sport with 
them, in the Gulf, and off Prince Edward’s Island; and 
I myself having killed them thus on the Passaic. 

I haye recently noticed an illustrated article, descrip- 
tive of the taking of the Eastern smelt, with bait through 
the ice. This I believe to be an error, originating in a 
confusion of the smelt with the frost-fish; since I never 
haye heard or read of an authentic instance of a smelt 
being taken with bait. If, however, it prove to be cor- 
rect, it will be another distinction between the American 
and European or Passaic smelt, which not only never takes 
bait through ice, but is known never to run under it. 

[After Frank Forester wrote this article, Smelt almost 
disappeared from the Passaic River. In later years, how- 
ever, they are reported to be returning.—ED. } 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 


The evening of a summer’s day was rapidly approach- 
ing, and though the sun was still above the horizon, fill- 
ing the heavens with a soft and rosy light, he had yet 
sank so low, that his long rays were intercepted by the 
gigantic trees, which, at the period of our tale, flourished 
in one unbroken tract of forest over the swampy plains, 
now bare and woodless, of Cambridge, and the Isle of 
Ely. Dreary and desolate as is the present aspect of 
those vast, open marshes, which have succeeded to the 
boundless woodlands, far gloomier and sterner was their 
character in the first century, reckoned from the Norman 
conquest. So wild, indeed, and savage was the nature of 
these solitudes, that, till the hapless day when England 
yielded to the fierce and tyrannous foreigner, no foot but 
of the roaming hunter ventured to tread their black and 
treacherous morasses; which, although bearing a thick 
growth of alder, and marsh willow, with here and there 
a group of mighty ash trees towering above the stunted 
underwood and tall rank sedges, offered no sure founda- 
tion to the tread of man or beast, and held forth no in- 
ducement save in the myriads of aquatic fowl which had 
bred, almost undisturbed, for ages, in their sequestered 
pools and perilous quagmires. But when the insatiate 
victor had seized upon the fairest and fattest of the land, 
as lawful spoil of war—when it was found by the un- 
happy Saxons that neither the mail-shirt of the warrior, 
nor the gray cassock of the monk, was proof against the 
rage of Norman persecution—thousands of outlaws fled 
for safety to those impenctrable fastnesses, wherein they 
dwelt for many a year, defying the relentless enmity of 
the usurpers, fearless and free, and happier far than those 
of their own race who, seeking by submission, and on 
sufferance, to hold precarious tenure of the lands once 

108 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 109 


their own, dragged out a wretched and degraded life, the 
serfs and bondmen of their imperious conquerors. 

Into the depths of this stern wilderness, the boldest of 
the Norman barons had never even dreamed of yentur- 
ing; and if, at times, necessity compelled them to traverse 
any one of the few roads which had been carried through 
its borders, they marched as in a hostile country, with 
scouts and prickers in advance, with vizors closed, in 
complete panoply, and even thus, in awe and apprehen- 
sion, so daring and so dauntless were its dwellers, when 
in the limits of their own impregnable demesne. 

It was by one, the most frequented, of these roads 
leading through Huntingdon from the metropolis to the 
more northern districts, at the hour we have just de- 
scribed, two men were lying in concealment, watching, 
as it would seem, for the approach of travellers. The 
spot was one, if their intent were violence or plunder, 
as something in their aspect seemed to indicate, most 
singularly adapted to their purpose. The narrow cause- 
way, floored by rude logs, with the black loam forced up 
through their interstices at every step that pressed them, 
was skirted on the left by an extensive fen; the soil of 
which, half mud, half water, could evidently bear the 
weight of no more bulky visitor than the curlews or her- 
ons which flapped over its surface, or waded in its slimy 
waters. On the right hand the earth was firmer, as 
might be judged from the dense thicket which embow- 
ered it, with many a timber-tree, of venerable age, and 
bulk proportionate, lifting its dark head, clearly defined, 
against the ruddy sky; but from this island of the marsh, 
the road was separated by a wide, sluggish stream, soak- 
ing its way through moss and mire, between deep banks 
of tremulous unstable bog. Beside this stream, concealed 
by the thick foliage of the alders, lurked the two men 
alluded to above—both Saxon by their aspects, for both 
were strong and muscular of limb, blue-eyed, and yellow- 


110 FRANK FORESTER. 


haired, with fair complexions, where their skins had 
been defended from the summer’s sun and winter’s storm, 
which had tanned all parts exposed to their inclemency 
into one general tint of ruddy brown. One of the two, 
and, as it would seem from the deference shown to him 
by his companion, the superior person, was, indeed, of 
size, almost gigantic; considerably aboye six feet in 
height, broad-shouldered, and deep-chested, with muscu- 
lar and brawny limbs, he yet gave promise of activity 
scarcely inferior to his strength—his features were decid- 
edly, although not eminently, handsome, with a frank, 
open, and intelligent expression, and animated by a 
glance of bold and reckless daring. He wore above his 
close-curled auburn hair, an open morion or bacinet of 
steel, once brightly polished and adorned with curious 
carving, but now completely embrowned with the rust, 
which had been suffered to encroach upon its surface, 
partly, it might be, because its present dinginess of hue 
was more congenial to the habits of its wearer, than the 
ostentatious brilliancy with which it had once glanced to 
every wandering sunbeam. ‘The remainder of his dress 
was a steel-shirt or haunberk of the antique and uncouth 
form peculiar to the Saxons, consisting of rude rings of 
iron, not linked into each other, but sewed upon a leather 
cassock edgewise, with hose and buskins of tanned deer- 
skin; about his neck was slung, by a stout chain, the pon- 
derous gisarme, or double-headed bill, which had been 
from the earliest times, the weapon of the Saxon race, a 
long, broad, two-edged wood-knife, thrust carelessly into 
his girdle, and two short, massive boar-spears, in his 
hand, completed hisequipment. His comrade was attired 
in garments similar in shape, though of materials even 
coarser, consisting chiefly of the skins of animals, dressed, 
for the most part, with the hair upon them—he, also, 
wore a headpiece and offensive weapons, like those of his 
superior, but no coat of mail or hauberk. 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 111 


The eyes of both were fixed intently on the farthest 
point at which the road was visible toward the south; and 
by their attitudes, and the expression of their anxious 
and excited countenances, it could be seen at once that 
they were listening anxiously for some expected sound. 

“Twas but the wind, again!” exclaimed the younger 
of the two—‘‘’twas but the wind stirring the tree-tops, 
Hereward! The sun is sinking fast; we shall not have 
them here, I trow, this evening.” 

““'Tarry awhile—they will be here anon, good Elbert; 
two of their horses would fall lame, I know full well, 
this morning—that would delay them somewhat. Americ 
de Bottetourt is not the man to halt, or turn aside, till he 
haye reached his harbor for the night—especially with 
his bride, that should be of the company! He will not 
rest, I warrant thee, till he has lodged her safe with 
the proud priests of Huntingdon. No! no! good Elbert, 
tarry and list, awhile, they will be here anon. Hist! 
hist! what sound was that? Sure ’twas the click of steel.” 

“Tis but the chain that holds yon ash from falling. 
Ringan, let slip a link! but tell me, Hereward, what bride 
doth Americ lead with him? I knew not that he was 
wedded.” 

“Nor is he,” replied Hereward, in a deep voice, that 
actually quivered with the violence of his excitement— 
*‘nor, by the soul of Hengist, shall be! but, an’ he could, 
he would wed Edith, the bright daughter of old Lance- 
lot Valletort—and she, they say, abhors him. A curse 
upon the base marauder! He knows no more of courtesy 
or gentleness toward dame or damsel, than of good faith, 
or truth, or mercy toward men! May his soul find no 
rest hereafter, for his vile carcass I will take order with 
it, and that speedily! And lo, I hear the tramping of 
their horses!” and as he spoke, he laid his ear close to 
the margin of the sluggish stream. ‘I hear them now, 
distinctly; they have already passed our station! Hist, 


112 FRANK FORESTER. 


Ringan, hist! be ready. Hie to our comrades, Elbert; 
when they shall hear me shout, let them cast loose the 
lashings, and cut clear the trees, as speedily as may be— 
but till I cry St. George, let no man quit his covert, and 
as ye love your lives, let no man harm the lady. I care 
not if by chance, or by design, but whoso harms one 
hair of her, dies ere he may crave mercy!” 

Before he had well finished speaking, his follower left 
his side, and instantly lost to sight amid the tangled 
branches of the thicket; at the same moment a loud and 
long-drawn cry was heard at a considerable distancc 
southward, and while its echoes were yet ringing through 
the forest, a crash, as of a huge tree falling suddenly, 
arose from the same quarter, and instantly a second and 
a third report of the same nature, were heard in quick 
succession. 

The party, which had been expected by the foresters, 
might now be seen threading the perilous and toilsome 
windings of the road, and as the distant yell rang on the 
summer air, and was succeeded by the echoes of the fall- 
ing timber, Hereward—known far and wide through 
England, as the most free and fearless of his persecuted 
race, known to the Saxon as the boldest and most uncom- 
promising friend of his unhappy kinsmen, and to the 
Norman, as the most dangerous and deadly foeman they 
had found, since first they landed on the white cliffs of 
Sussex—Hereward, surnamed the Hunter, looked forth 
with eager scrutiny to note what the effect should be of 
these unwonted sounds on his approaching victims. He 
might behold them pause, and halt irresolutely for a 
moment, moving up close together as if to hold brief 
council. Ere they moved on again, a horseman dashed 
up at hard gallop from the rear, and held some converse 
with the leader of the little party, which, as it seemed, 
consisted of some ten or twelve armed men, well-mounted 
and accoutred in the complete panoply of the victorious 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 113 


Normans, besides two waiting-women riding among the 
spear-men on mules or small-sized hackneys, and a horse- 
litter, with close curtains, the usual conveyance, in that 
early age, for ladies of distinguished birth. Scarce had 
he noted these particulars, before the outlaw saw that the 
Normans once again had put themselves in motion. 
Three men—whom his quick eye at once detected, by 
their less cumbersome accoutrements, and the long-bows 
they bore, already bent, with arrows on the string, to be 
the far-famed archers who had performed such fatal feats 
upon his countrymen at Hastings—led the advance at a 
pace as quick as the roughness of the unsafe causeway 
would permit; these were succeeded, at a short distance, 
by the same number of those light-armed horsemen, 
called hobblers, from the small, active animals which they 
bestrode, with their long lances in the rest—the center, 
which consisted of Sir Americ, mounted on his barbed 
war-horse, with his esquire, and two veteran men-at- 
arms, all sheathed from head to heel in complete har- 
ness, rode close behind the hobblers, the females bringing 
up the rear under the escort of two more stout archers. 
It was, indeed, though small, a gallant and a formidable 
body; and on firm open ground, with enemies to meet 
them ‘“‘manfully,” as the phrase ran, “under shield,” 
they would have cut their way, unscathed, through five 
times their own number of assailants, fighting on foot 
with bill and bow-spear. But he with whom they had 
to do, knew well the irresistible, and fiery valor of the 
Norman onslaught—knew well the dogged hardihood of 
his own stubborn countrymen!—closely had he consid- 
ered, and with accurate and wary calculation noted the 
disadvantages to which each mode of fighting was most 
liable—and, with a full appreciation of the high courage 
of his enemies, and of that practice in the use of arms 
which rendered every Norman confident and secure of 
victory, he had so laid his plans, as, while exposing to 


114 FRANK FORESTER. 


eyery possible risk and disadvantage the detested Nor- 
mans, to bring out the peculiarities of the Saxon charac- 
ter and their undisciplined but daring energies with the 
most powerful effect. 

‘**Mine! mine!” he muttered, as he saw them entering 
the toils, ‘‘they are all mine, already! Soul of my 
father, triumph! Mother, thou art avenged!—He, whose 
accursed hand quenched with your blood the embers of 
the hospitable hearth, that never warmed a villain till on 
that hapless night when he craved food and shelter— 
craved entrance only to betray—shall glut the raven and 
the fox, ruthlessly slaughtered by his weapon whom he 
made anorphan. ‘Triumph! rejoice, I say. Souls of the 
mirdered dead!—ye are avenged already!” 

Well was Sir Americ de Bottetourt known, and widely, 
and with good cause, was he dreaded through the green 
confines of that lovely and unhappy island, which he and 
his usurping comrades had watered with the best blood 
of its natural owners. In his first youth, when his red 
field was fought which had consigned fair England to 
the Norman race for ever, he had yet ridden through the 
bloody fray side by side with the bravest; and, gifted 
forthwith by the Duke, with a rich fief torn from its 
right possessor, he had, in fact, been trained up from his 
very boyhood to deeds of barbarous and unrelenting 
cruelty. He was, indeed, that rare occurrence among 
men, even partly civilized, a human monster. Though 
at this period, when the conquest was in fact but half ac- 
complished, all Norman Barons were tyrannical and grasp- 
ing, and, if not actually cruel, reckless at least, of blood- 
shed, none equalled Americ de Bottetourt for dread inten- 
sity of evil. To him, a Saxon life was as that of a boar 
or deer, or even of less value. The slightest pretext was 
sufficient to justify the utmost violence to all of that de- 
graded race—the temporary tenure of a few fertile acres, 
or the supposed possession of a few hoarded angels, was 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 115 


ample cause for the death-warrant of a Saxon Franklin; 
while beauty or accomplishment, or even youth itself, 
was held excuse for the worst injury to his defenceless 
family. Skillful, no less than brave, in fight, this Savage 
Baron had continually risen in the estimation of the suc- 
cessive monarchs who had held sway in England; had 
constantly received fresh fiefs, fresh appanages; but still 
the wealthier and mere powerful, the more ambitious he 
became of greatness, and the less scrupulous of means 
or measures. lLicentious as he was avaricious—when he 
had passed already the mid-years of manhood—when age, 
no less than fiery passions, and exposure to the scorching 
heat of summer, and the keen frosts of winter, had 
plowed a thousand deep, deforming wrinkles on his 
harsh features, and sprinkled his dark locks with snow— 
he had cast on the lovely Alice de Valletort an eye of 
fierce desire. What were the secret links, none knew, by 
which the fierce and overruling spirit of Sir Americ had 
trammelled the whole soul of this lady’s father—a man, 
who ever of a timid and avaricious, rather than bold or 
grasping spirit, now, in his age, had yielded himself-up 
altogether to the direction of his sterner neighbor, whom, 
even while he tremblingly obeyed his slightest mandate, 
he did not even feign to honor, much less to esteem. 
Her absolute reluctance to the marriage, nay, more, her 
utter hatred of the man, had been, for months, the topic 
of almost universal conversation; for so widely had the 
fame of her unrivalled charms been circulated, that in 
that age of chivalry and generous adventure numerous 
were the young and gallant. cavaliers who would have 
deemed it no slight privilege to be permitted to adopt the 
colors of the lovely Alice at tilt or tournament; and 
whom, not even the fierce jealousy and savage prowess of 
her avowed admirer, could deter from offering at the 
beauty’s footstool, the tribute of their admiration. All 
their endeavors were, however, vain; and when it was 


116 FRANK FORESTER. 


discovered that the bright damsel, though she had eyes 
to glance, and lips to smile at times upon some favored 
gallant, had yet no heart to yield—or if she had, pos- 
sessed not the poor option to bestow it where she pleased 
—when it was seen that if she caught the dark eye of Sir 
Americ gazing upon her unwonted mood of merriment, 
she broke off like a guilty thing detected in commission 
of some desperate offence, and voluntarily, as it would 
seem, submitted herself to his imperious will—men 
ceased to strive for that return of courtesy, at least, if not 
affection, which, while it could be sought for only at con- 
siderable risk, it seemed impossible to gain. Such had 
been now, for many months, the state of matters between 
the lady and her lover, if lover it be right to term him, 
who had no mood of gaiety or softness, even for a mo- 
ment’s space—who never offered any admiration, never 
showed any kindness, never feigned any courtesy, much 
less affection. Such, then, for months, had been the 
state of matters, when it was suddenly announced that 
on a near-appointed day, Alice would be surrendered by 
her father into the hands of Sir Americ; for the purpose, 
it was understood, of being under his protection, con- 
ducted in all honor to a well-known and celebrated nun- 
nery of Yorkshire, the abbess of which was sister to the 
puissant Baron—there to remain till such time as she 
should submit herself with no more of reluctance or de- 
lay to the high destiny which waited her. The route by 
which they must proceed, lay, for a space, along the out- 
skirts of the desolate and dreaded tract of fen and forest, 
which was in those days tenanted so wildly by the un- 
conquered Saxons; and as Sir Americ’s name was hated 
by these savage foresters with no small or unmerited de- 
gree of detestation, it had been deemed advisable to travel 
northward with a powerful and well-armed escort—more, 
perhaps, as a matter of precaution, than of necessity, for, 
although, since they had been led by Hereward, the 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. LET 


Saxons had increased amazingly in boldness—although 
they had in many instances surprised, and _pitilessly 
slaughtered those of their oppressors whom they found 
wandering alone, or with but slight attendance, in pur- 
suit of the woodland game among their perilous fast- 
nesses—they had not yet attained to such a pitch of ab- 
solute audacity as would have prompted them to attack 
men-at-arms, equipped in complete panoply of war, and 
on their guard no less against the hidden ambush, than 
the bold front of violence. 

It had been Americ’s intention to pass the dangerous 
morass, in which, if any where, he might expect to meet 
with interruption, at a much earlier hour of the day than 
that at which he reached it. Two of the horses of his 
train had fallen lame upon the route, and much time had 
elapsed before he had been able to replace them; still, he 
had hoped to cross the causeway before the sun should 
set, and therefore had pressed onward, having, in truth, 
no alternative but so to do; for after he had left Cam- 
bridge, which was already miles behind him, there was no 
hostelry or even cottage on the road, wherein it would 
have been advisable, or even possible, to pass the hours 
of darkness. 

It was, then, in no placid mood that Americ de Bot- 
tetourt saw the sun gradually sinking behind the tall 
trees, which now fringed on every side the darkening 
horizon; and little was his hope of making good his pas- 
sage without blows and bloodshed; for he was not uncon- 
scious of the bold valor of the Saxon outlaw, nor of the 
deadly cause he had for waging war to the last extremity 
against himself, especially, as the most hated individual 
of a detested race. 

Drawing up, therefore, his small band according to the 
method most approved in those days of incipient disci- 
pline, he clasped his vizor, felt that his ponderous sword 
was ready to his grasp, and advanced, not without some- 


118 FRANK FORESTER. 


thing of unwonted trepidation, at a hard trot into the 
perilous defile. Already was above one half of its length 
safely passed; and already had Sir Americ begun to deem 
the apprehensions, he had of late entertained, causeless, 
and all unworthy of himself—when from his rear, wildly 
re-echoed from the thick-set stems of a dim grove which 
he had just cleared, without hearing sound or seeing 
sight that could have lead him to suspect the presence of 
a living being, there rose a long, loud yell, succeeded in- 
stantly by the quick clang of axes, and, ere a moment had 
elapsed, by the tremendous crash of falling timber. Scarce 
had Sir Americ paused to listen to the unusual and un- 
welcome sound, before the keen and crafty veteran, whom, 
in consideration of those very qualities, he had appointed 
to bring up his rear, dashed up at a hard gallop to his 
side. 

**We shall be set upon, sir, instantly,” he cried, the 
moment he was near enough to suffer his words to be au- 
dible. ‘* There be a score or two of Saxon varlets down 
in the thicket yonder, and they have felled some three or 
four tall trees across the causeway. Retreat is hopeless!” 

‘* Retreat!” echoed the haughty Baron. ‘‘ Who would 
retreat before a Saxon! forward, brave hearts, and if the 
dogs find heart to show themselves, ‘fore God and our 
Lady, hut we will pin them to the earth with our good 
lances. On, archers, and look sharp—let not a villain 
show his head above these cursed bushes, but mark it 
with a cloth-yard arrow. Forward! Saint Genevieve for 
Americ! ” . 

Such were the words with which the Norman, adopt- 
ing the array which has been heretofore described, dashed 
onward—while from behind, nearer at every instant, 
and more near, rang the wild whoops and yells which had 
in the first instance announced the presence of the enemy. 

‘*Damian, they be behind us yet,” he said, addressing 
himself in a whisper to the veteran ’squire who rode be- 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 119 


side his rein—‘‘behind us all. Beshrew me, but I think 
we shall outstrip them!” 

‘Look! look! Sir Americ,” shouted the old ’squire, 
almost in the selfsame instant, pointing with his long 
lance toward the ash-trees of which Hereward had spo- 
ken. ‘‘ Look! my good lord, a chain. Yon ash is half 
cut through—if it fall we are lost!” 

Even as he spoke, the chain which up to this time had 
sustained the mighty tree, swung free—the branches 
swayed and cracked, and the gigantic trunk groaned, as 
it reeled and tottered to and fro. 

**On, archers!” shouted Americ—“on, archers, for 
your lives; get past yon ash-tree into the open glade—on! 
for your lives—and shoot your deadliest, or we are but 
lost men!” 

Then from the thicket in the front rose, long and loud, 
the same portentous yell, which had alarmed them from 
the rear, while, nearer still and nearer, on every side of it 
was repeated, showing that now they were entirely sur- 
rounded; and fast and frequently might’ be heard the 
ringing clatter of the axes, and the stern voice of Here- 
ward urging the outlaws to their toil. Instantly, as Americ 
spoke, the archers dashed their spurs into their chargers’ 
flanks, and sped at a pace actually fearful along the rough 
and broken causeway, driving at every stroke the mud 
and slime high into air behind them. If they might but 
succeed in passing, ere the large tree should fall, it was 
most probable that the whole party would escape; for, 
cutting on the causeway at right angles, not half an 
arrow-flight beyond the thicket, an open glade extended 
with firm soil and good footing quite to the rear of the 
Saxons; so that, the angle gained, the volley of the Nor- - 
man archery would have commanded their position, and 
rendered it impossible for them to carry their annoyance 
farther. On they went, gallantly and fast—scattering, 
however, as one horse outstripped the other—with their 


120 FRANK FORESTER. 


long-bows already bent, and arrows notched upon the 
string. Fearful, indeed—it was a fearful moment—the 
mighty ash-tree rocked and cracked audibly—one archer 
has already passed it—lo! he has halted—raised his bow 
to his eye—that twang has rung the knell of one of the 
assailants—St. Genevieve, St. Genevieve, for Americ!” 
The second reaches it—even now his charger—goaded to 
his full speed—is springing past the butt—he is safe—and 
the third close behind!—No! no!—a louder, deeper groan 
of the huge tree! and down—down it came, thundering 
to the earth! Heaven, what a fearful sight—even as it 
fell, the hapless Norman who rode second, dashed into 
the dread space, and on the instant, horse and man were 
crushed by the resistless weight into one shapeless mass 
of quivering and gory carnage—the third man close to 
the ruin, had yet the time to note it, and with a desper- 
ate effort succeeded in arresting the speed of his fiery 
horse—and now he stood, the noble animal quivering in 
every limb with terror, its head curbed to the very chest 
by the strong rider, who, unmoved even by that fearful 
peril, watched with a steady eye for the appearance of a 
foeman. Not long did he wait, for, ere the echoes of 
that thundering shock had passed away—cheerily shout- 
ing to his comrades, Hereward sprang upon the fragment 
of the tree, which stood upright in the ground, as if to 
overlook the field. 

‘Down with another tree, my men! One more,” he 
shouted, ‘‘and they are ours, beyond hope of rescue!” 

The moment he appeared, the arrow whistled from the 
bowstring of the Norman, but whether it was that his 
nerves were shaken by the appalling sight he had that in- 
stant witnessed, or that the Saxon, as men said of a 
truth, bore a charmed life, the shaft sung past his head, 
and, quivering, stood fixed in a tree hard behind him, 
buried there almost to the feather. 

**St. George for merry England!” shouted the outlaw 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 121 


in return, and without pausing even to take aim hurled 
the short boar-spear which he held in his right hand, 
against the archer. Hurtling through the air, it smote 
him at the junction of the gorget with the breastplate, 
and driven with resistless force, pierced through and 
through the neck, and hurled him headlong from his 
saddle, a dead man ere he touched the earth. At the 
same point of time, the clatter of the hoofs of the third 
archer who had passed the tree, and in whom all their 
hopes of safety were now vested, might be heard, telling 
of his flight and their abandonment. 

They were entrapped almost beyond hope of redemp- 
tion or resistance!—Before them and behind, the road 
was barred by masses of felled timber, which hours of 
labor would hardly suffice to remoye—on their right hand 
a deep and fordless rivulet, with its banks guarded by the 
ambushed Saxons, and on their left, a dark impassable 
morass. Yet, still in this extremity, Sir Americ dis- 
played his wonted gallantry and conduct. ‘‘ Down with 
your lances!” he exclaimed, ‘there be no use of them! 
Out axes, and dismount! You, Damian,” he continued, 
“with Lancelot and Raoul, hew away at yon timber as 
you best may, to clear a path—we, with God’s aid, will 
guard ye!” 

Down from their saddles sprang the men-at-arms, and 
in the face of dreadful odds, went steadily, and even 
cheerfully, about their work. The light-armed spear- 
men clustered about the person of their leader, who, with 
his long two-handed sword unsheathed, sat perfectly un- 
moved on his tall war-horse. The two remaining archers 


had fallen back with the females to that side of the * 


causeway nearest the morass, and therefore least exposed 
to instant peril. But the plot thickened—for the instant 
the first blow fell upon the timber, a dozen Saxons showed 
themselves on the farther side, and with their bills and 
boar-spears, commenced so violent an assault upon the 


122 FRANK FORESTER. 


men-at-arms, as checked entirely their progress. At the 
same instant, Hereward stepped forward—with a javelin 
in his right hand, and his huge gisarme in his left—be- 
yond the bushes of the thicket directly in the face of 
Americ; while half a score, at least, of his rude followers, 
half-armed, and utterly undisciplined, but hardy, bold, 
and goaded into fury by unnumbered wrongs, appeared 
behind him. 

‘* Sir Americ de Bottetourt,” exclaimed the Saxon, as 
he saw his foeman, using the lingua franca, then the 
sole medium of communication between the hostile races, 
*‘this day your hour is come! T'was this night, seven 
years—” 

**Tt was,” replied the Norman, interrupting him, 
‘*this very night, seven years agone, that this hand slew 
each living dog of thy accursed race, save thyself, only, 
who escaped me then, but to fill up my triumph now. 
Come forth, and meet thy death, dog, an’ thou darest, in 
fair fight with a Norman noble!” 

“* Heayen judge betwixt us,” Hereward hissed between 
his teeth close-set, and launched his second javelin full at 
the speaker’s body. This time, however, his aim was less 
true, than before, for grazing the thigh of his enemy, the 
boar-spear pierced through demipique and housing of the 
Norman’s charger, bearing him earthward in the agonies 
of death. 

**Callest thou this fair fight?” shouted the now infu- 
riated Baron, “ callest thou this fair fight?—then will we 
drive ye from your ’vyantage! Gilbert, thy light-armed 
hobbler hath cleared a broader trench than that before 
thee; over, and charge the dog—there is, I trow, good 
footing! ” 

Without one word, the young and daring spearman 
spurred his horse at the fearful leap—the fiery charger 
faced it gallantly, but in the very act of springing, the 
treacherous footing failed, and, though he made a noble 


HEREWARD, THE HUNTER. 123 


effort, his fore-feet barely reached the farther brink, 
while his hind quarters were engulfed in the tenacious 
quagmire—the rider struggled up for a moment from the 
miry ditch, but it was only for a moment—the ponderous 
axe of Hereward fell like a thunderbolt upon his head- 
piece, and crushed the very skull beneath it. 

“St. George! St. George for merry England!” and 
planting one foot firmly on the back of the exhausted 
horse, Hereward sprang across the streamlet, followed by 
all his dauntless comrades, and was assailed immediately 
by Americ. The fray was ended in ten seconds between 
the vassals of the Norman and the impetuous. outlaws, 
who, caring for neither wounds nor death, bore them 
down to the ground by the mere weight of numbers, 
and unmercifully slew them to the last man. 

Not so, however, nor so rapidly, was the encounter 
ended between the Norman Baron and Hereward, the 
Hunter. Both men of power and muscular strength 
almost unrivalled, both animated by unusual fury, one 
fighting for his: life, the other, dearer to him than life, 
for vengeance, they struggled long and desperately. 
Many and dangerous wounds were interchanged, before 
Sir Americ’s two-handed sword was shivered to the hilt, 
and himself beaten to his knee by one blow of the Saxon 
gisarme. 

‘*Not so!” cried Hereward, “ not so! with weapons in 
thy hand shalt thou die, savage Norman! Thou shalt 
not boast in hell that Hereward was cowardly avenged 
—give him an axe, good Elbert! ” 

His order was obeyed without dispute, though evi- 
dently with reluctance, and armed anew by his foe’s 
mercy or contempt, Sir Americ renewed the combat. 
Not long, however, did it now last—for less accustomed 
to the bill than to the sword, Americ failed to parry the 
third blow, which, glancing from his head-piece, clove 
deep into his shoulder, and was immediately succeeded 


124 FRANK FORESTER. 


by a fourth, which crushed the helmet like a nutshell, 
and laid the tyrant at the feet of the avenger, a quivering 
and lifeless corpse. 

The last rays of the sun barely sufficed for the conclu- 
sion of the fierce encounter, but the pale moon was 
gleaming through the forest, before the outlaws, with the 
lady and her female followers, their honorable captives, 
and treated with due honor, turned to the shelter of 
their woodland fastness, leaving, as Hereward had 
boasted, to the rayen and the fox, the bodies of their 
vanquished conquerors. 


THE MAGNOLIA. 


Ours is no native bud, nor cultured gem, 
Nor in the forest glade 

Brief offspring of some frail deciduous stem 
Was ever meant to fade; 


Nor waits the genial call of peeping morn 
To ope its modest eye ; 

Nursed not by zephyr, nor of slumber born 
To bourgeon, and to die. 


It shall not perish by the nipping cold 
When skies are drear and dun ; 

Nor tremble at the tempest’s summons bold, 
Nor droop i’ the noonday sun. 


Only it dreads the bhght of bitter tongue 
And critic’s censure rude; 

For ever prompt, since Theban Pindar sung, 
To blast the bright and good. 


THE MAGNOLIA. 125 


Oh! guard it ye, who do the muse revere, 
This fragrant thing and frail; 

Nor suffer it unwept to wither here, 
Pinched by cold envy’s gale. 


So, in young dalliance with the balmy May, 
When early flowerets bloom, 

Fairest and first its leaflets shall display 
Their rich and rare perfume ; 


So, in the glare of August’s fiercest glow, 
When every grove is hush, 

It still shall boast its cup of stainless snow 
Without or blame or blush. 


And, when December storms are raving shrill, 
Its deathless prime shall wave, 

Though all beside are marred by frost-winds chill, 
O’er nature’s annual grave ; 


So shall it live, nor ever fear to die, 
‘Spite wind and winter’s rages ; 

Nearer, each season, to its parent sky, 
A Phenix flower of ages, 


THE RED FOX. 


This well-known and widely distributed animal is one 
of the few species, whether of birds or qaudrupeds, that 
is not peculiar to this continent, but co-exists, identical 
in all its characteristics, in Europe and America. 

It is not, indeed, a fact perfectly established that the 
red fox is originally indigenous to this country ; it being 
well ascertained that it was largely imported, as a beast 
of chase, by the founders of the Cavalier settlements of 
Maryland, shortly after their arrival, in order to minister 
to their sporting propensities, for which purposes its 
craft, courage, and endurance, adapt it far more than its 
congener, the gray fox, which is peculiar to the western 
hemisphere. 

This circumstance, together with the fact that the red 
fox of America is not to be distinguished, in any struc- 
tural points, from the European animal, has induced the 
belief among many well-informed persons, that the red 
fox was unknown in America before the arrival of the 
white man, and that the whole race with which the con- 
tinent, in its northern portions especially, abounds, are 
all descendants of those imported by the settlers of Lord 
Baltimore, such as were fortunate enough to escape the 
fox-hounds of the gallant cavaliers. 

Without asserting positively that this derivation is true, 
it may be well to state that it is by no means, as some 
persons have maintained, impossible; since, notwith- 
standing the vast increase, in a comparatively short 
period, which must be assumed in order to account for 
‘the wide diffusion of the race at the present day, such an 
increase is by no means inconsistent with the laws of 
nature as regards the propagation of animals, where they 
are entirely, or in a great degree, unmolested. 

126 


THE RED FOX. 127 


It is, moreover, worthy of remark, in this point of 
view, that the red fox, though in no respect domesticated, 
or, perhaps, susceptible of domestication, is yet the at- 
tendant and concomitant of man, extending his range as 
the range of civilization is extended, and rarely, if ever, 
occurring in the interior of the native wilderness. 

The English rabbit has in this manner become indige- 
nous to parts of Florida, where, I am informed, they are 
now abundant, of all colors, being sprung from a few 
pairs of the domesticated variety ; while it is notorious 
that the countless droves of cattle and wild horses which 
people the pampas of South America, are sprung from 
individuals turned loose by the Spaniards, and that many 
uninhabited islands in the Pacific and elsewhere actually 
Swarm with European animals, the descendants of single 
pairs set ashore by beneficent mariners for the benefit of 
humanity at large. 

The limits inhabited by the red fox of America are, as 
I have stated above, very widely extended, embracing all 
the settled parts of the United States, but more espe- 
cially the central portions along the sea-board, and to the 
eastward. In Florida and further south they are far 
rarer. The red fox is thus described in Dekay’s Fauna of 
the State of New York :— 

** Characteristics. — Reddish above, whitish beneath. 
Ears behind, and anterior part of the legs varying from 
light brown to deep black. Length, three to four fect. 

“* Description.—From a large male killed in Queen’s 
County, Long Island, New York.---Snout, small and 
pointed. Length of head, seven inches. ; 

“* Color.—Anterior part of the head, the flank, and 
back, bright reddish, more particularly along the back 
and foreshoulders, where the color is more intense. Mar- 
gin of the chin and upper jaw, pure white. Throat, 
breast, and a narrow space along the belly, whitish, mixed 
with brown on the latter. Fore and hind feet black in 


128 FRANK FORESTER. 


front, the black on the latter extending up on the outside 
of the thigh. ‘Toes margined with fulvous. Brush, 
ample, reddish, composed of two sorts of hairs, the one 
black at the base and reddish at the tips; the other, 
much longer, entirely black, giving to the whole tail a 
dusky appearance. 


Head and body,....+eesecseeeceeesecece 29.0 
Vertebrao of tail,.......0 eee cece ccececes 12.0 
Ditto tips of hairs,........+++eeeseeeeeee 16.0 


‘<The red fox varies considerably in weight and size ; 
the specimen above described weighing eleven pounds ; 
and I have heard of others weighing fifteen pounds, but 
such are not common; the more usual weight is from 
eight to ten pounds. Although this fox burrows well, 
yet it is not uncommon to find them taking possession of 
the burrows of the shunk for the purpose of rearing their 
young. Richardson states that it burrows in summer, 
and in winter takes refuge under a fallen tree. It brings 
forth from four to six young, about the latter end of 
March or first of April, in the State of New York. These 
are at first covered with a smoke-brown fur. In a litter 
I once saw the tips of the tails in all were white, and, 
like the dog, were blind for some days after birth. They 
feed on the smaller quadrupeds and birds, and are accused 
of destroying lambs. They make occasional forays upon 
the barn-yard, but in this respect are not so daring as the 
other species, and, perhaps, in some measure compensate 
for their injuries by destroying field-mice and other noxi- 
ous vermin. Its flesh is rank and disagreeable. It is to 
this species we refer two strongly marked varieties, which 
have by naturalist been treated as species : 

“<1. The Cross Fox—Decussatus.—The color of the 
preceding, with a dark stripe on the neck from the head 
to the back, crossed at right angles by another dark stripe 
over the shoulders. This cross is sometimes only feebly 


THE RED FOX. 129 


distinct, and at others well defined. It has the s1ze, 
form, habits, and fur of the red fox, and is always con- 
sidered by the hunters as a variety. The caprice of fash- 
ion has attached a great value to this skin. While the 
red fox skin is valued at about two dollars, the cross fox 
has been known to sell for twelve, and sometimes as high 
as fifteen dollars. It occurs in every part of the State, 
but more particularly in the northern districts. 

“2, The Black Fox.—Godman, vol. I., p. 274, pl. fig. 
1—Almost entirely black ; the end of the tail and spots 
on the breast occasionally white, sometimes intensely 
hoary. This is very rare in this Siate. I have never met 
with it, but have been assured by hunters in the northern 
counties that they have sometimes killed it, Richardson, 
page 94, asserts that its fur fetches six times the price of 
any other produced in North America. Its value, doubt- 
less, increases with the intensity and purity of the black 
color.” 

It is the existence of these two varieties only—for it 
appears to be conceded by all the best naturaltists, that 
there are no specific distinctions between the red, cross, 
and black foxes—that inclines me to the belief that the 
American and English, or European red fox is not iden- 
tical ; since no such varieties are to be found in the other 
hemisphere, as might be expected, were we to regard 
them as mere freaks of nature. 

The fox is proverbially cunning, both in hig predatory 
movements, and in the instinct of preservation, which 
prompts him to startegems, when closely pursued by 
hounds and hunters, so sagacious as to baffle the scenting 
qualities of the finest dogs, and to outwit man’s pene- 
tration. 

He is bold, hardy, and indefatigable, whether in pur- 
suit of game, or in escaping from his enemies. In the 
latter category I have myself been in the field more than 
once, when a celebrated and well-known fox, easily dis- 


130 FRANK FORESTER. 


tinguished by the loss of a portion of his brush, ampu- 
tated in a steel trap, has stood before a good pack of 
hounds from ten o’clock in the morning until it became 
too dark to finish the chase, across an open country, 
without wood or coppice, covering about forty miles of 
distance during that time, and thoroughly tiring out 
every horse in the field. 


It was my fortune to be present at the last run afforded 
by this gallant fox, and to assist, as the French call it, 
at his death. On being found, he took his usual line 
from the covert which he haunted, due westward across 
a fine grazing country, consisting for the most part of 
forty and fifty-acre pasture fields, inclosed by dry stone 
walls, from four-and-a-half to six feet in hight. There 
had been a warm rain over night, but not enough to 
render the country deep or heavy ; and a strong but mild 
west wind was blowing directly in the teeth of the fox; 
circumstances the most favorable that can be conceived to 
the hounds, and vice versa to the quarry—since the same 
gale which impedes his progress conveys his effluvium 
fresh and reeking to the olfactory organs of his pursuers, 
lending them redoubled stimulus of speed and vigor. 


Consequently, in many years of fox-hunting, I never 
saw hounds run so fast as they did on that morning, 
topping the walls, ten or twelve abreast, and unable to 
give tongue, beyond an occasional whimper, owing to the 
tremendous pace they were going. 


Thirteen miles were done in one hour and seven min- 
utes, before the gallant fox was run into, without a 
check, a turn, or a double, in the whole line, in the mid- 
dle of a large grass field; only five horses, out of the 
seventy or more which started from the covert side, 
being on the spot when the woo-whoop was given—all 
the remainder had come to a stand still, some farther, 
some nearer, along the entire course of country traversed, 


THE RED FOX. 131 


and not a few were rendered entirely useless by the exer- 
tions of the day. 

This is one of the most remarkable runs with fox- 
hounds on record, so far as speed is concerned; twelve 
miles an hour being considered the utmost rate of speed 
attainable, even for short distances, by either hounds or 
horses, across an inclosed country ; and the maintenance 
of that pace for thirteen consecutive miles being a cir- 
cumstance almost unparalleled in the annals of sporting. 
The fences were, moreover, unusually severe, as, being of 
solid stone, they afforded the hounds no opportunity of 
passing through, or mensing them, as it is technically 
termed, but compelled them to scramble over their tops, 
as it did the horses to take them in their strides. 

The introduction of finely bred and fleet hounds, and 
of thorou%h-bred horses, instead of the slow, staunch old 
Southern breed of dogs, and the short-barrelled, punchy, 
half-bred hunters of the last century, has effected as com- 
plete a revolution in the style of English fox-hunting, as 
the introduction of steam has done with the system of 
travel. ; 

Instead of meeting in the gray of a chill November 
morning before the sun has risen, the modern Nimrods 
muster at the covert-side at half-past ten or eleven o’clock; 
and, if the scent be good and the sport in proportion, the 
day is over by two or three, and both hounds and horses 
have an ample sufficiency of work, and the riders of ex- 
citement, in the death of a brace of flying foxes, in a 
couple of sharp, short and decisive bursts, with a kill at 
the end, each of forty minutes’ to an hour’s duration. 
While in the days of old, six or seven hours’ slow track- 
' ing and trailing, by which the fox was fairly wearied and 
worn out, and badgered to death, was the order of the 
day. The length of time occupied was then the test of a 
good run; staunchness and endurance the crowning 
praise of a pack; and the prize of sportsmanship belonged 


132 FRANK FORESTER. 


to a man who, after trotting about lanes and by-ways, 
nicking the turns of the chase, and cutting off corners, 
without perhaps crossing one field in company with the 
hounds, or leaping a single fence, came in at the death 
after all. 

The number of miles run in a minimum of time, a 
burst without a check, and a kill in the open, are now 
the grand desiderata; extreme fleetness, superadded to 
high scenting qualities, is the chief merit of hounds ; and 
the best rider is he who lives, as it is gnostically termed, 
from the beginning to the end of the run, in the same 
field with the pack, riding nearly abreast, and taking 
every fence in his stroke, as it occurs, without craning or 
faltering. 

In the Northern and Eastern States of this country, fox- 
hunting is not pursued generally as a sport, but rather as 
a method of destroying a noxious animal, and the gun is 
for the most part called in aid of a brace or two of slow, 
old-fashioned southern hounds. 

In the Southern States, however, Maryland, Virginia, 
both the Carolinas and Georgia, fox-hunting is pursued 
with much eagerness and delight, if with less system and 
accuracy of appointment, as in England. 

Many regular packs of hounds are kept by individual 
gentlemen in these States, and searcely any planter is 
without his well-known blooded hunter wherein to join 
the chase. 

In the less thickly settled States of Georgia, Florida, 
Alabama, and Mississippi, the favorite sport is deer- 
hunting; and in any of these it is scarcely possible to 
travel a day’s ride, without hearing the jocund chorus of 
the hounds, and the merry shout of the hunter re-echoing 
through the forest. 

A yet more general method is the formation of sub- 
scription packs, each gentleman ina neighborhood keeping 
two or more couple of hounds at walk, which readily rally 


THE RED FOX. 133 


to a bugle blown at head-quarters on hunting mornings ; 
and, in the wild woodland counties, which constitute the 
greater surface of the hunting grounds, do their work as 
satisfactorily as more regularly constituted packs, where, 
from the nature of the land, equality of speed, size, and 
symmetry ave less needed, since it is rare that hounds 
can run abreast, than in the clear and cultivated cham- 
paigns of old England. 

To this cause, moreover, it is to be ascribed, that here, 
as in England of the olden day, staunchness and endur- 
ance are qualities more demanded than extreme speed ; 
for the character of the country and nature of the soil 
gives the fox every opportunity of dodging, running his 
own back-trail, and otherwise baffling the hounds, while 
the great extent of woodlands, and the extraordinary 
severity of the dense, tangled, and thorny coyerts, pre- 
vent the sportsmen from riding up to the hounds, and 
make it necessary for them to follow often by hearing 
rather than by view. 

Of all sports. there is none so fascinating, none so madly 
exciting, as fox-hunting, with a full cry of hounds 
making the sere woods crash with the melody of their 
woodland chorus—hounds, horses, men alike rejoicing 
and exulting in the hot chase, and the full development 
it calls into existence of their power and pride. Long 
life to it wherever it exists, and health and happiness to 
all who honor it ! 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN; 


OR, 


THE BOAT-RACE OF BROUVERSHAVEN. 


The sun had set, red and lowering, over the inundated 
meadows, that lay stretched for miles on miles around 
the beleagured walls of Ziriczee—beleaguered by the fierce 
Spaniards of Mondragone thirsting for blood and insa- 
tiate of plunder—nor was it the great natural sun only that 
had this evening sunk beneath the horizon, the grand 
light-giver and adorner of the world; but hope likewise, 
that sun of the moral and intellectual world, had set to 
the brave men of Zealand. 

Everything thus far had favored the besiegers, and the 
undaunted resolution of Mondragone, in marching his 
tremendous and irresistible legions through wide arms of 
the sea, and overcoming natural obstacles deemed hitherto 
impregnable, if it had not broken down the valor, had 
yet dispirited the souls of the stout Protestants of 
Schowen, and led them to consider resistance, although 
it were their duty, a point of honor only and religion, but 
wholly desperate and vain. 

The wily leader of Philip’s Spanish veterans, at that 
time the finest and most famous infantry in Europe, al- 
though as cruel and licentious as they were valiant and 
determined, knew far too much of strategy to risk his 
men in rash onslaughts against works defended by men 
rendered dgsperate by the sense of intolerable wrongs, 
and fighting for their hearths and homes, their own lives, 
and their women’s honor. He left them to a foe more 
cruel and unsparing even than the sword of the Castilian 
Papist—to hunger, and, its companion ever in besieged 

134 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 135 


and crowded cities, the pestilence that slays at ncon-day 
alike, and in the silent night. 

When the amphibious Zealanders broke down their 
dykes, and suffered the wild waters—which for years it 
had been their labor to exclude, and their pride to con- 
quer—to pour in over their cultivated fields, drowning 
their valuable cattle, sweeping away their rich harvests, 
covering their choice lands with the barren ooze and bit- 
ter marl of those stagnant seas, destroying in one hour 
the fruit of centuries, the Spanish general had drawn off 
his men, and posted them in strong forts built every- 
where along the margins of the artificial deluge, and 
mounted with the heaviest ordnance, determined that no 
food or succor should be thrown into the starving town, 
and confident that sooner or later it must surrender to 
his arms. 


The efforts, on the other hand, of the Prince of Orange 
and the confederates had been from the beginning to in- 
troduce men and provisions, at it mattered not what risk 
of life, to the unhappy city. 


For this purpose a small canal had been cut from the 
great arm of the sea, separating the island of Schowen 
from Duyeland, which had been forded by Mondragone 
in his first advance, and the banks of this lesser cut had 
been so strongly fortified by the Zealanders that, while they 
retained possession of their works, they could introduce 
flat-bottomed vessels capable of traversing the inundation 
from the Grevelingen Channel, which was occupied by 
their admiral, Boissot, in considerable force; and so long 
the citizens of Ziriczee were well supplied and cheerfully 
determined in resistance. 


After awhile, however, by his great skill in expedients, 
Mondragone contrived to lock up the mouth of the small 
canal, stationing his great ships where the water was 
deepest, and drawing a stacado from each side through 


136 FRANK FORESTER. 


the shallows, which he united finally with strong iron 
chains, and so rendered all access impracticable. 

When this was finished it became necessary for the 
Protestants to discover some new means of giving assis- 
tance to their friends, and, with his wonted energy, the 
Prince of Orange had strained every nerve to do this by 
means of another cut, made from the same canal; but 
here too the Spaniards anticipated him, occupying the 
greater part of their forces, and planting heavy batteries 
on the edge of the cut, so that a few days before the com- 
mencement of my narrative they had beat off Count 
Hohenloe, a German nobleman of most unquestionable 
spirit and resolution, with great loss, and established 
permanent fortifications on the spot. 

On the morning which gave birth to this red and stormy 
afternoon, the hopes of the men of Ziriczee had been 
raised to the highest pitch of expectation—and it was 
time that they should be raised, for it was many days 
since the soldiers even and defenders of the place had 
tasted anything but the flesh of dogs and horses, while 
the burghers and those that were useless in action had 
fared even more wretchedly, on rats and mice and the 
weeds that grew on the ramparts, and even on soup made 
from shoe-leather and sword-belts—the women only of 
the place and the sick had been supplied with an ounce 
or two of flour and a small modicum of wine daily, but 
even these miserable supplies had now failed; and of the 
filthiest and most sordid food there was not now enough 
left to supply the garrison for another day. 

On this morning, however, their hopes had been raised 
by the arrival of two carrier-pigeons with letters from the 
Prince of Orange, announcing that at noon he should 
attack the Spanish force at the village of Dreischer with 
such a power as would, he hoped, ensure success, and 
warning them to hold their gates in hand in readiness 
to receive the supplies at an early hour of the afternoon. 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 11897 


From daybreak they had been on the alert, and when, 
at about ten o’clock, they heard from the right direction 
heavy discharges, and then the sustained and regular roar 
ot a constant cannonade, and that too seeming to ap- 
proach nearer and nearer, their hearts became glad and 
jocund, and they felt certain that they were relieved 
already. At one o’clock a third pigeon was seen winging 
its way toward the city from the dense smoke-clouds 
which had mantled the horizon to the northeastward in 
the blackest gloom. Welcome as Noah’s messenger, 
when it came back with the olive branch, this bird 
brought, like those which preceded it, good tidings! The 
prince had succeeded in his first attack, had thrown the 
Spaniards into confusion, and carried off the cannon 
from one of their batteries—there could be now no doubt 
of his success, for he was winning his way everywhere at 
the pike’s point. 

The walls of Ziriczee rang loud and long with wild 
and repeated cheering, the towers and steeples were 
dressed out triumphantly with flags and streamers, and 
in the churches the Te Deum was sung permaturely 
for the defeat of the Spaniards, and the aid youchsafed 
to them from on high. 

It was sung prematurely, for long, and loud, and 
evenly balanced, continued throughout the greater part of 
the day the roar of the cannonading, and hopes rose and 
fell alternately; but toward night it was clear that the 
sounds of firing were advancing no longer toward the 
city, nor stationary even, but now receding rapidly 
toward the Grevelingen Channel, and down that sea- 
ward, as if the confederates were flying from Outdorp or 
Goeree. As it grew darker, the glare as of some great 
conflagration could be distinguished far off to the east- 
ward, and within two hours a boat with a white flag ap- 
proached the water-gate of Ziriezee, and proclamation 
was made, after a long pacific flourish from a Spanish 


138 FRANK FORESTER. 


trumpet, ‘‘that the confederates had been entirely de- 
feated; the admiral, Boissot, with his flag-ship and all 
his crew cut off and killed, and the prince now in full 
retreat, and at this moment lying off Brouvershayen, to 
repair his shattered squadron previous to bearing off for 
the Trexel.” ‘To this intelligence was added an offer, 
from Mondragone, of more favorable terms than had 
been as yet granted to any of the revolted cities, the 
lives and property of all the citizens being guaranteed to 
them on the general’s honor. But with the offer was 
coupled a positive declaration that, in case of the town’s 
holding out beyond twenty-four hours, the garrison 
should be put to the sword, the city plundered for a 
week, the burghers decimated, and the women given up 
to the mercy of the Spanish soldiery—and Naerden and 
Haerlem had taught men well to comprehend the mean- . 
ing of those words, ‘Spanish mercy.” 

The governor of the place, Adrian yon Halen, had 
hurried to the walls as soon as it was known that a com- 
munication from the besiegers was at hand, and when he 
heard the fatal news the tears streamed down his with- 
ered cheeks to his gray beard, and he beat his steel 
breastplate with his bare hands till the blood gushed 
from beneath his nails-in the violence of his emotion, 
unmarked and unheeded. In a moment or two, how- 
ever, he in some sort recovered his equanimity, although 
he well knew that longer defence was hopeless, and that 
but little confidence could be placed in the good faith of 
any Spanish treaty. 

Directing then his trumpeter to reply with a note of 
parley, he asked permission to send out a boat’s crew, 
unarmed, with a trusty person on board, to whom a safe 
conduct should be given together with a hostage, in order 
to ascertain the fact of the confederates’ discomfiture and 
retreat. 

** And, in case,” he continued, ‘all that you tell us is 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 139 


confirmed by our own countrymen, we will submit our- 
selves at noon to-morrow, and open our gates to Count 
- Mondragone, trusting to his good faith and honor, and 
to God’s everlasting mercy, for our preservation according 
to the terms you have offered.” 


**And if we refuse this permission,” shouted a harsh 
voice from the boat, ‘‘ how will you help yourselves then, 
I pray you?’’ 

‘J will tell you,” replied the old man; “ we will cut 
off our left arms and feed upon them, and fight you 
with our right hands only, and when that food shall fail 
us, we will kill our women and children, and set our 
town on fire, and sally out and fall sword in hand, harm- 
ing our enemies, at least, to the end, and die, if needs 
be we must die, killing!” 

“Try it—try it, at once!” replied the voice. ‘‘Go 
home and sup on your left arm to-night, I trow it will be 
but gristly and unprofitable food; for we will grant no 
such permission. No! you must trust in this, likewise, 
to our Spanish honor—for the confederates are beaten, 
and Boissot slain too, that is certain. If I had thought 
of it, we could have satisfied your doubts right easily, by 
bringing his head with us and pitching it over your 
walls.” 

“That is the reason why we doubt you,” replied 
Adrian; ‘‘ we cannot very well believe that had you con- 
quered, as you say you have, you would not have brought 
down some prisoners to crucify, or hang up by the heels, 
at our gates.” 


““We made no prisoners, not one!” replied the voice; 
‘‘we killed them all—as we shall kill you if you do not 
yield, and that too to-morrow.” 

“Then, you will not grant—” began the governor, 
desirous of gaining his end by any means, but he was in- 
terrupted immediately by the same stern, rough voice— 


140 FRANK FORESTER. 


“No! no! I tell you no! The terms offered now are 
too good for ye—heretic and rebellious boors!” 

“Then, we will not surrender upon any terms—and 
look you to it, for it shall cost you many lives to over- 
power our despair.” 

And, without any farther words, he turned silently 
and sadly from the walls, and walked toward the market- 
place among a constantly increasing concourse of pale, 
emaciated wretches, wasted and worn with pestilence and 
famine till scarce a semblance of humanity or life was 
left on their wan and haggard features. Yet each one of 
those weak and staggering, nay, almost dying! creatures 
was girt about with harness and war-weapons, was reso- 
lute to the last gasp for his country, his religion, and his 
privilege to worship God according to his faith and con- 
science. 

At length, when he had reached the open space in 
front of the Maison de Ville, one of the crowd cried out 
to him, ‘‘ Speak to us, Adrian—speak to us, noble Adrian 
von Halen—tell us what we shall now do.” 

The magistrate had already mounted two or three of 
the steps leading to the Gothic doorway of the town hall 
when this cry arose and was reiterated by two or three 
faint voices, and followed by a feebler cheer. Immedi- 
ately the old man turned about, and addressed them in a 
high and resolute tone. 

‘* Brethren,” he said, ‘‘and fellow-sufferers, we are of 
a truth very hard beset, and, save in the Almighty, we 
have no hope left of any succor or salvation; and, before 
Heaven, where I trust we shall all soon be reassembled, 
I know not well how to counsel you. Haerlem and 
Naerden, my friends, teach us how Spaniards keep their 
faith with those who capitulate; and loth should I be to 
confide whom I love to their honor, or their mercy. 
Moreover, brothers, I believe not altogether the truth of 
this their proclamation. If it be true, why should they 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 141 


offer us conditions so seeming fair and honorable that, 
for that very seeming, I but the more suspect their false- 
hood? My advice, therefore, is, at least, to hold out 
until to-morrow. I think they will not hurl themselves 
needlessly against the edge of our despair by assaulting 
us, and if they should, why we can yet make a pretty 
hash of them, few as we are and feeble; and it is better 
always to die like heroes on a well-defended breach, than 
to be slaughtered, slave-like, in our cellars or our garrets, 
Let us, I say, hold out until tosmorrow, and then if we 
should learn that the prince is indeed driven back we can 
submit; or, if they then refuse us terms, we can set fire 
to our houses, die to a man in the last ditch, leave to our 
oppressed and groaning countrymen a proud example, 
and to our overwhelming foes a solitude which, if they 
will, they may call peace.” * 

“* Well said, well said, Adrian von Halen,” replied 
fifty voices from the multitude; “well hast thou said, 
and as thou sayest we will do.” 


““War to the last!” screamed one who had lost the 
power to shout. ‘‘ Death rather than submission to the 
treacherous Spaniard!” 

** But tell us, Adrian,” exclaimed another, cooler and 
more thoughtful than the rest, “how shall we know if 
William of Nassau have indeed retreated?” 

“That is what I go now to deliberate with the coun- 
cil,” replied Adrian; “the only plan I see is to send a 
boat across the inundation, to make its way into the 
Grevelingen by Brouvershayen, seek out the fleet, and re- 
quire some signal by which we may be certified, but I 
much fear me it will be hard to find a messenger, or men 
to row him over, could we find one.” 

“*It were sure death,” answered nearly a hundred per- 
sons in a breath; “they lie in force both at Bommene 


* Solitudinem faciunt, pacem vocant.— Tacitus, 


142 FRANK FORESTER, 


and Brouvershayen, and they haye store of pinnaces and 
galleys.” 

** No! no!” cried many more. ‘No! no! we will not 
go—none of us! none of us!—did they not crucify Peter 
Schenck with his head downward, and sew Martin Van- 
derhagen up in the carcass of a dead horse, whom they 
caught carrying letters to Boissot? No! none of us will 
do that—death is nothing; but tortures like those are 
worse than twenty deaths.” 

““Then, Heayen have mercy upon us,” he replied, 
‘for earta has no hope.” And, with the words, he en- 
tered the town house and ascended the stairs to the coun- 
cil chamber, where six or eight old men and four or five 
in the prime of manhood were assembled about a table, 
covered with scarlet cloth. That was a splendid cham- 
ber, adorned with arms, hangings, and fine pictures of 
the great Flemish masters, and carvings in wood-work, 
and elaborate gildings, and Venetian mirrors, and soft 
Turkey carpets; and, notwithstanding all of suffering and 
sorrow, famine and pestilence, that had so long brooded 
over that most unhappy town, that chamber had been 
preserved in all its splendor with a care which appeared 
to hold it sacred; and it was Swept on this night and 
garnished as if for some high festival. 

The men, too, old and young, who were gathered 
there, perhaps, for the last time,. though thin, and wan, 
and ghastly, with not a hue of color in their sunken 
cheeks, not a gleam of life in their watery and unmean- 
ing eyes, and scarce strength enough to totter to and fro 
on their attenuated limbs, were accurately and eyen richly 
dressed—the burgomasters in their accustomed suits of 
black velvet, with huge ruffs about their necks, and 
massive chains of gold—the rest in rich coats of plate- 
armor, with gorgets round their necks, and heavy swords 
buckled on their thighs, too heavy it would seem to be 
wielded by arms so feeble as those which hung listlessly 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 143 


by the sides, or were crossed with an air of patient reso- 
lution over the bold breasts of the wearers. 

It was to these that Adrian yon Halen entered with 
the sad tidings of which he was the bearer, nor did he 
look to them with any thing of confidence for the assist- 
ance which he needed. For how could he expect that 
any man would expose himself to the almost certain risk 
of death, protracted not through hours alone, but days 
and nights of excruciating and insufferable torture? 

Still, he laid the matter before them fairly—he told 
them the whole import of the proclamation, and the 
terms offered—of the refusal of the besiegers to permit 
any inquiries concerning the truth of their tidings; of 
his own resolution, and that of the assembled population 
—rather to fire the town, and perish in the flames, with 
all that was dear to them on earth, than to surrender 
uninformed and blindly. He pointed out the only method 
of obtaining tidings, and asked if any there would yol- 
unteer to be the messenger, in case men could be found 
to row the boat. Dull looks and gloomy silence only re- 
plied to his question—and, when he asked each after 
each, a cold refusal followed. 

Then rose the old man’s courage, and he said, “* My 
masters, | am an old man, and have not now many years 
left to live, even if it were peace. I have outlived all 
that I loved on earth these many years, except one being, 
my sweet and gentle Gertrude; had it not been for her I 
would have laid me down and died long, long ago, upon 
the grave where sleeps my sainted Rachel. But now the 
time has come when my death may well be of more use 
to my country than my life has been, though I haye 
striven ever to advance it in peace and preserve it invio- 
late in war. I, therefore, will go now, right cheerfully 
and gladly, if so be, men can be found to man the boat 
to carry me. Say, gentlemen, and fair citizens, which of 
you will exchange the sword for the oar, and pull the old 


144 FRANK FORESTER. 


man seaward over the flats?—it is but a gallant boat-race, 
if ye would only think so.” 

Still there was no response, for, though there was not 
one man there who would not have exposed himself 
cheerfully to death on the breach, or in the daring sally, 
all shrank aghast from the idea of affronting the bar- 
barity of the Spaniards, exercised as it had been on 
all who attempted to break out of the beleaguered town; 
and incurring the penalties denounced against all who 
should be taken within the lines of the besiegers—penal- 
ties which they well knew, from examples too manifestly 
certain to be doubted, would be unsparingly enforced, 
without regard to age, or sex, or station. 


There was no answer from the magnates of the town— 
the council was silent, and heart-fallen. Then the old 
man advanced to the windows which overlooked the great 
Square, and, opening one of them, stepped out upon the 
balcony, conspicuous in the glare of many torches which 
were held up by the multitudes below, and once more 
addressed them. 


*‘ Brothers,” he said, “there is no need of many 
words. I will go forth myself, if any six of you will 
come forward manfully and volunteer to row me over. 
Moreover, out of my own private coffers, I will give a 
thousand guilders to each man that will so offer himself, 
and if he fall in the undertaking, the good town shall 
provide for his wife and little ones, and his name shall 
be ennobled forever.” 


The reply was a laugh!—yes! a laugh! a wild, hys- 
terical and mocking laugh! The proffer of wealth, of 
money, valueless dross and rubbish in times such as 
those—of nobility, a mere name and empty trifle, and 
above all of the town’s protection, when there appeared 
no chance that the town would be in existence twenty- 
four hours afterward, seemed so fantastical and wild, 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 145 


that the starved, miserable, desperate wretches laughed 
—yes! laughed with a shrill, fearful merriment. 

““Out on you, wretches! Do you laugh?” cried 
Adrian severely. ‘Do you laugh at honor, and man- 
hood, and faith to the last? Laugh, then, when you see 
your wives and daughters writhing in agony in the de- 
spoiler’s arms—laugh when you see your infants sprawl- 
ing upon the points of Spanish pikes—laugh when your 
houses blaze and their rooftrees fall—laugh in your own 
death-pangs!—laugh then, but be silent now—and, if ye 
be cowardly and vile, be at least reverent, and for shame 
hold your peace!” 

The stern rebuke checked them for the moment, but 
after a little pause there was a cry, ‘‘ He is mad! old 
Adrian is mad! Hunger and watching have made him 
mad. All is over!—let us go pray! To the churches! 
to the churches! ” 

And with the cry the multitude dispersed—thereafter, 
by the order of the burgomasters, proclamation was made, 
by torch-light and trumpet-sound, through the streets, 
offering five thousand guilders each to any six men who 
would undertake to row a boat with Adrian yon Halen 
over the flats between Bommene and Brouvershayen, into 
the Grevelingen Channel, and put him on board some 
vessel of the Prince’s fleet. But, as before, the reply 
was silence! 

The council were still sitting, although it would have 
puzzled any one of them to say wherefore, for no propo- 
sal had been advanced since Adrian’s was rejected; and 
the magistrates sat round the board silent and utterly 
cast down, for every hope had fled, and, though none 
dared do that which each knew that in virtue and honor 
he ought to do, all were ashamed of their own want of 
courage; all self-convicted of dastardly, unpatriotic sel- 
fishness. And sullen fear, and impenitent remorse, and 
irresolution, and despair sat upon every brow but that of 

7 


146 FRANK FORESTER. 


Adrian, and he walked to and fro the chamber, chafing, 
like a caged hyena, at the fate that barred his will, and 
uttered now and then bitter, and violent, and sarcastic 
words against his companions, which met but the same 
reply as the former—the silence, not of scorn, but of 
dismay and mortal terror. 

An hour had perhaps elapsed since the last flourish of 
the trumpets rang through the streets, and the last cry 
was heard of the heralds making proclamation, when the 
sounds of a great uproar in the market-place, shouts, and 
tumultuous cheering, and loud voices came suddenly up 
to the ears of the council, filling them with surprise 
and, as it were, a sort of consternation. 

Before, however, they had much time for reflection, 
the doors of the chamber were thrown wide open by two 
ushers, the stairs were seen through the apertures, lined 
by a small party of the governor’s halberdiers, and a cry 
followed of <<‘ Place! place for the Lady Gertrude! Place 
for the noble Lady yon Halen!” 

The next moment, a tall, fair, well-formed girl, very 
much emaciated, it is true, and wearing many marks of 
suffering on her pale face, yet with the traces still dis- 
tinctly visible of the sublimest and most noble style of 
beauty, walked with a step singularly majestical and 
queen-like across the corridor, and paused upon the 
threshold, for it was contrary to an immutable and in- 
violate decree of the states that any woman should, 
under any circumstances or on any pretext, intrude her 
presence into the precincts of the sacred council-cham- 
ber. 

She paused, for a moment, on the threshold, and ad- 
dressed the magnates of the city in a clear, liquid, and 
unfaltering voice, full of strong, rich harmony, but 
firmer, deeper, and more resonant than the ordinary 
tones of woman. 

“* Burghers,” she said, “ and noble men of Ziriczee, I 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. “147 


would not be so overbold as thus to force myself into 
your solemn conclave, but that the sound of your procla- 
mation has reached my ears, and the cries, and groans, 
and sufferings of my fellow-citizens pierced even to my 
heart. I have heard what my great and glorious father 
has offered to do in behalf of this calamitous and lamen- 
table city, and how the city has failed to enable him to 
make good his offer. But I thank the great and all- 
merciful God, whose every deed is one of wisdom and 
mercy, that, through this very poverty and lack of spirit 
in the men of Ziriczee, he has worked out a deliverance 
for his people. Lo! burgomasters, and thou, father and 
governor, I, Gertrude yon Halen, have succeeded better 
with our stout mariners than your wisdom and valor, or 
your most liberal terms of nobility, and name, and guer- 
don. I proffered myself to go forth as messenger to the 
good Prince of Orange, and lo! I haye got not six, but 
sixty stout oarsmen to waft me over the inundation, were 
there means to employ them. Give me, then, my cre- 
dentials, noble sirs, and let me begone, for the night 
wears on rapidly, and it will much concern us whether 
we reach Brouvershayen in the mirk morning, or after 
the sun shall have arisen.” 

“Thou, Gertrude!” exclaimed the old man, a tear 
starting to his eye; ‘‘thou, child of my sainted Rachel, 
never, never! ” : 

And the unanimous voice of the council replied, ‘‘ No! 
no! we will not have thee for our messenger—no! no! it 
is too perilous!” 

‘*But if ye will hear reason,” answered the dauntless 
girl, ‘‘I will show you at once why you will have me. 
To me it will be a gain so great and manifest, that, were 
it not for the good it shall work for the city, it were but 
selfish to propose it. If no one go forth to discover this 
thing which ye would learn, very clear is it that within 
three days, at the farthest, the city must needs yield at 


’ 


148 FRANK FORESTER. 


discretion—what then should I gain by remaining here 
—three days of agony, famine, and sorrow, and despair, 
and no hope or chance of safety—three days with a 
choice, at the end, of death or dishonor. Now, on the 
other hand, if I go forth as I propose, the chances are 
great in our favor that, steered by old Dirck Vander 
Bosch, and the oars manned by six sturdy Zealanders 
from the Seven Wolden, we escape safely to the fleet, 
where I shall be out of reach of any arm that Spain can 
thrust out to seize me—and this is the only thing that 
grieves me, that I should seem to fly, and shun bearing 
my part of the sufferings of my fellow citizens and 
friends—if we escape not, and be taken—” she paused 
and cast up her large serene blue eyes to heaven with an 
expression of seraphic resignation, mixed with the forti- 
tude of a dying martyr, and ere she continued her father 
interrupted her. 


“‘ Well! Gertrude, if you be taken—” 
“Still,” in her turn she interrupted him, “there is the 
choice between death and dishonor.” 


“The Spaniards leave no choice!” answered the old 
man, with a fearful expression of horror and hatred on 
his marked features. 


“They cannot but do so—they who are lords of their 
own souls, and fear not to die, never need fear dishonor. 
I have conversed with our good minister, and am in- 
formed thoroughly—and of this be sure, Adrian yon 
Halen, that no dishonor or disgrace shall e’er befall the 
girl who bears thine unblemished name. For the rest, 
a Holland maiden’s breast can meet a dagger’s edge as 
boldly as a Roman matron’s. But God, I feel and know, 
will bless my undertaking, and I shall yet succeed and 
save all of you—now speed me on my way; for the fast 
race-boat, which won the prize last year, lies manned and 
ready in the canal hard by our garden, and Vander Bosch 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 149 


is grumbling before this, I am sure, that we are not al- 
ready under way.” 

Overpowered by her determination, and convinced in 
part by her reasoning, they offered no more Opposition to 
her will, but made out instantly her missives to the 
prince, and rising one and all accompanied the noble and 
heroic girl to the place of embarkation. 

The boat, a long, light, narrow skiff, very low in the 
water, lay by the little garden dock, in a cut from the 
canal which joins the water-gate of Ziriczee to the river 
falling into the Grevelingen Channel at Brouvershayen, 
and was fully manned by six powerful, wild-looking 
Zealanders, with their faces all seamed and scarred by the 
wounds which they had received in the terrible naval 
encounter by which the maritime states had for the time 
won the sovereignty of the sea, and displaying their in- 
domitable resolution and utter hatred of the Spanish 
yoke by the badges which they had adopted and wore in 
their caps, crescents of silver with the motto in em- 
broidery, ‘“‘ Turks rather than Papists.” Old Vander 
Bosch, the pilot, the most famous in those waters, having 
made up his mind to incur the risk for the sake of his 
patron’s daughter, was now all anxiety to be off, and cut 
all leave-taking and parting admonitions very short by 
his continued grumbling. 

But he could not prevent old Adrian from clasping his 
good and noble child to his heart, and whispering in her 
ear, ‘‘ Remember, Gertrude, should you succeed in reach- 
ing the prince’s fleet in safety, and should you never see 
me any more, which would be nothing strange, it is my 
last wish that you should give your hand, as you have 
given your heart long ago, to young Fleureant yon Al- 
leyne. Bear thou my greeting to him. God speed you, 
girl, and bless you.” 

And the next moment she was wrapped in a huge boat- 
cloak of blue serge, with a rough fur cap covering her 


150 FRANK FORESTER. 


luxuriant golden hair, and reclining in the stern sheets 
of the skiff, while the crew plied their long oars power- 
fully but noiselessly in the muffled row-locks, making the 
light boat fly over the stagnant waters of the canal with a 
motion as elegant and steady as that of a swallow on the 
wing. 

The water-gate was opened silently, and the boat shot 
out into the open country, all deluged now for leagues on 
leagues of distance with the foul stagnant waters which 
lay: rotting, motionless, and tideless, over the devastated 
fields. The night was very dark and misty, and for an 
hour or more they pulled rapidly and uninterrupted, ex- 
cept by the hoarse clang of the mighty flocks of aquatic 
fowl which rose at times in myriads from some shoal 
place, or floating reed-bed, through the dull channel of 
the little river, half stream and half canal, the muddy 
banks of which peered out at intervals above the surface 
of the flood, with here and there a stunted willow pining 
and fading from excess of the very moisture, which it so 
dearly loves in moderation. 

At the end of the time I have mentioned, a hoarse, 
gurgling sound began to be heard, as of a strong but 
sullen current, and the accelerated motion of the boat, 
which now floated rapidly on the waters, indicated that 
they were approaching something like a sluice, or water- 
fall. 

“In with the bow oar, Oost,” whispered the old pilot; 
‘‘catch hold of yon clump of bullrushes, and then get 
out upon the bank and craw] as silently as may be along 
the water’s edge to the sluice, and see there that all is 
clear, and then bring us back tidings as quickly as may 
be? 

His orders were obeyed as soon as they were uttered; 
the boat was made fast to the shore, the tall Zealander 
stepped out upon the bank, and, throwing himself flat 
on his face m the mud and ooze, stole forward with a 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 151 


motion as guarded and as silent as that of a serpent 
winding upon its prey. Ten minutes had perLaps passed 
and Vander Bosch was beginning to grow impatient, 
when a little plash was heard close by the spot where 
they were lying, and the man, Oost, raised his head from 
the other side of the bank, but did not rise to his feet. 

**Come, come,” said the pilot, somewhat roughly, and 
rather too loud for caution, “we are losing time sadly 
—step aboard, man; is all clear? ” 

‘*Hush! hush, Dirck!” answered Oost. ‘Be quiet, 
and pass me out the cross-bow and quarrels, they are under 
the bow thwart. The water is running over the sluices 
merrily enough to carry three times our burthen, but 
here have the cunning Dons posted a sentinel on the 
platform close beside it. There he is pacing up and 
down, with his long firelock and his match ready lighted, 
humming the war-song of the Cid. But give me the 
cross-bow, and I'll soon put a stop to his music.“ 

Without a word, Dirck handed him the weapons, and 
he returned as silently as he had come, and for a few 
moments no sound reached their ears—but by and by 
there came a sudden harsh clang on the still night-air, 
followed by one deep groan, and a sullen plunge in the 
water. 

The heart of Gertrude bounded fearfully, and then a 
death-like sickness came over her, and she felt that she 
must faint—but at the moment old Vander Bosch cried 
aloud, ‘‘ Well done! well done! Oost has settled his hash! 
Give way, men, quick, give way.” 

And the long oars dipped into the water, and the spray 
flashed from them, and in an instant the boat was whirl- 
ing like a bubble on the swift sullen waters that gurgled 
through the cut which had been made in the bank to 
admit the inundation to the meadows. 

The momentary bustle dispelled the sense of sickness 
and suffocation, and the next moment the skiff shot past 


152 FRANK FORESTER. 


the little platform, now vacant of its hapless watcher, and 
shot through the narrow chasm in the bank, Oost step- 
ping silently into his place, and resuming his seat with- 
out checking the speed of the little vessel, just as it entered 
the shallower waters of the artificial lake. 

‘‘There is no time to lose, Dirck,” he said; ‘‘ they 
will be relieving that fellow before an hour, and ten to one 
they will fancy that he has deserted, and will be cracking 
off their muskets and alarming the garrisons.” 

“Tt can’t be helped, Oost. It can’t be helped, man,” 
answered the old pilot, replenishing his pipe and striking 
a light, for he had not dared to smoke while in the canal 
for fear of detection. ‘‘ We are in for it now, and all we 
haye got to do is to pull our best, and keep a course for 
the Brouyershayen mouth, there is no other place where 
we can cross the bank and get out to sea—all will be safe 
if we can make it before daylight. So take a pull all 
round atthe black bottle of Scheidam, and then pass it 
this way to me, and give way jollily.” 

All night they pulled steadily and the light boat made 
rapid way through the water, wherever it was deep 
enough to float her, but there were many banks and 
shoals, and the channels were so intricate and difficult to 
find, and they had to put back so many times, and to 
make so many circuitous deviations from their course, 
that the skies began to brighten, and the mist to clear 
away, long ere they reached the neighborhood of Brou- 
vershayen. 

At length, though it was still quite dark, except where 
in the east the sky was dappled with a few tiny gray streaks, 
it became perfectly clear, and they might see the waters 
stretching out on every side of them, dusky but bright as 
a shadowed mirror, with here and there black patches of 
seaweed, or bare spots of elevated mud, or vast flocks of 
aquatic birds breaking their gloomy sheen. Beyond this, 
on all sides, was visible the low range of sand hills which 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 153 


divided the inundation from the sea, looming up black 
against the transparent sky, with here and there a Span- 
ish watch-fire sparkling cheerfully out of the shadows, 
and showing them the position of the out-posts of their 
foes. Directly ahead of them, at about eight miles’ dis- 
tance, were burning, perfectly distinct and visible, the 
lights of the fort at Brouvershayen, which had been 
stormed a few days before the investment of Ziriczee, and 
filled with a Spanish garrison. 

“This is bad, Mistress Gertrude. I fear this is very 
bad—it will be broad day before we get off the batteries, 
and unless there comes in a sea-mist with this wind, 
which is blowing up a little fresh, I do not see how we 
shall clear them. They have boats too! It looks very 
bad.” 

** But will there not be a mist? I thought there always 
was a mist in the morning.” 

** Not always, lady, not always, and I am afraid there 
will be none to-day. Look how hard and dry the 
day breaks yonder, If it is as clear below down to 
the water-line, as it is there above the hills, it is all over 
with us; but I cannot see, and until I can see I must say 
nothing. But keep a good heart nevertheless. Give 
way, my merry men, give way, this is the great deep, and 
there is water enough and more. Give way! give way!” 

Thus they went on, closing gradually with the lights 
of Brouvershayen, and drawing toward the river again, 
into which it was necessary that they should pass before — 
they could gain the open sea. It was now gray and 
glimmering daylight, not wanting above half an hour of 
daybreak. 

‘‘Hold water,” exclaimed Vander Bosch; ‘‘ now, Oost, 
look out ahead, man—where is the sluice?—is it beside 
the second or third windmill? ” 

*‘The third—the third, to be sure,” cried Oost, as the 
boat lost its way for an instant; ‘‘steer straight upon 


154 FRANK FORESTER. 


that—the channel is deep all the way, but very narrow,” 
and with the words he was again bending to his oar, 
when the pilot again exclaimed: 

** No! no! look out, I say, Oost; your eyes are keener 
than any of ours here; look out, I say, and tell me what 
those black things are—there, a mile off, right in our 
line! ” 

Oost now shipped his oar and looked out earnestly, 
“They are boats,” he said; <« by Heaven! they are 
boats, but I see no men in them at all—there are three 
lying together about a cable’s length to the east of the 
channel, and one moored close to the western shore of it. 
But Ican see no men; if there be any men they are all 
asleep on the thwarts, or in the bottom.” 

** What in the fiend’s name is to be done now?” ex- 
claimed Vander Bosch, evidently very much perplexed, 

** Why, steer straight on the single boat—we will out 
knives, board her before they know we are alongside, and 
have them all overboard before they can give an alarm. 
We shall be within a short mile of the sluice then!” 

“There is nothing else for it, I believe,” said the pilot; 
** yet it is a great risk—steady now and together. See, 
see, there comes the sun, and now we open Brouversha- 
ven mouth, ” he added, fixing a long eager glance on the 
horizon at the embouchure of the little river, which might 
now be seen falling into the sea on the horizon. 

“* Aye! aye! and God be praised there comes the mist— 
we shall do! we shall do yet, I trust—give way! cheerily 
now, give way. If the mist comes in before we clear the 
sluice we are but lost men!” : 

Speedily they shot on, and gallantly over the stagnant 
lake; and now they neared the boat, a large flat barge 
which lay close to the channel, with a Spanish flag furled 
round a staff in the stern, but no signs of any men on 
board. The other three boats, which lay moored to 
stakes at about three hundred yards’ distance, were sharp: 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 155 


fast-looking skiffs; but their crews too, if they had any 
on board, were buried in sleep. 

They were now within twenty fathoms of the barge, 
when the pilot made a signal to the four bowmen who 
laid in their oars and drew their short heayy cutlasses, 
and the long two-edged knives which they used in the 
right hand. 

‘* Into her at once,” he whispered, ‘‘ as I lay her along- 
side—there is not a moment to lose—kill all as quickly 
as may be.” 

‘*Good God! but this is very horrible!—must this thing 
be? Oh, spare them, if it be possible, my good Dirck, 
spare them! ” 

“It is not possible lady. Go you down into the bot- 
tom of the boat. Nay! it must be so. Cover her with 
the cloak, Jan Stein! Ha! I see a sail out seaward—two 
—four—eight! By the light of heaven! it must be the 
prince, and he is not a league beyond the forts—cheerily 
now! on board them!” 

As he spoke the skiff shot along-side the barge, and in an 
instant the stout Zealanders sprang on board of her, with 
their cutlasses flashing in the first sunbeams. <A few fierce 
blows were made at the sleepers, the barge was crowded 
with men, and replied to only by groans of anguish. But 
anon the rest sprang to their arms, and for a minute or 
two there was a fierce and furious contest, but it was too 
unequal, and one by one the sleepers were stabbed and 
thrown overboard, and as yet no alarm had been given. 
when the last man, the very last, even as the death-blow 
reached him, discharged a petronel. On the instant, a 
loud shout followed from the other boats, and eighteen 
or twenty men sprang up on their thwarts, and, seeing 
what was in progress, uttered a long fierce war-cry, began 
to unmoor the boats very rapidly, and fired half a dozen 
muskets at the boat, although the distance was too great 
to allow of their doing any execution. 


156 FRANK FORESTER. 


“In with you now, and give way for your lives!’ cried 
the pilot; ‘‘here comes the mist—give way! or we shall 
never reach the sluice!” 

At the same moment, a large sail-boat which lay a 
quarter of a mile above the sluice in the river, fired a 
gun and set all her sail to run down and intercept them; 
and a cannon replied from the fort, which was now a lit- 
tle short of two miles distant, showing that they were 
hemmed in with foes. Still the old helmsman was con- 
fident and undaunted, and Gertrude, now that the blood- 
shed was at an end, arose from the bottom of the boat, 
and sat by his side, pale indeed and agitated, but firm 
and silent, with her head resting on the hilt of a small 
double-edged dagger, her last desperate resource, which 
was concealed in the bosom of her robe, 

The peril was now fearful, the little skiff of the fugi- 
tives lay about half way between the sluice and the boats 
of the pursuers, which gained on them terribly, rowed as 
they were by fresh men, exasperated by the slaughter of 
their comrades and burning for revenge and booty. 

The mist too was driving in at a fearful rate before the 
sea-breeze, threatening to close over them before they 
should be able to shoot through the sluice into the open 
stream. The Spaniards too kept up a rapid and continu- 
ous fire, the bullets glancing and skipping over the waters 
round them on every side, though fortunately none took 
effect on any of the rowers, until the very instant when 
they whirled through the bubbling sluice-way, when one 
bullet pierced the brain of Oost that he fell overboard, 
without a word, a dead man, and another broke the left 
arm of the steersman, but he steered the boat quietly into 
the mid-current of the river, and cried out, “God be 
praised, lady—God be praised—we are safe!—look up, 
and look about you!” , 

And Gertrude did look up, as he desired her, but to 
look about her, she saw at a glance was useless, for the 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 1d 


mist had closed in so thick that no object was visible, 
even at ten yards’ distance. Still in their rear sounded 
wild, and loud, and near, the shouts of the pursuers, 
and the quick dash of oars approaching every moment. 

Still the boat held her way. ‘I can steer seaward by 
the current only, and the foam-wreaths on the water,” 
said the old man, ‘‘ which not one of these Spanish lub- 
bers can, I’ll warrant them. And if this mist holds half 
an hour, they cannot see us to launch a boat from Brou- 
vershayen, and we shall be safe at sea. Only hold that 
stroke, men, and we shall leave them merrily.” 

For half an hour more they continued to row rapidly 
through the gloom, at times hearing the cries of their 
enemies close beside them, at times leaving them wide 
and far behind, owing to the precaution of their own oars 
being muffled. At last, a clear red glare was belched 
across the mist, and the howl of a heavy shot hurtled 
above their heads. Another! and another! 


“‘ We are passing the batteries,” cried Vander Bosch; 
“but tush! they cannot hit us. I am glad even that 
they are firing, for it will tell the confederates, if those 
be they, that we are coming; and it will scatter the mist- 
wreathes too, andI have no use for them any longer.” 


He spoke truly, for in a little while the mist did begin 
to clear away, and before another half hour had passed 
the boat was rising and falling over long ridges of bright, 
foam-crested waves, having now gained the open sea, and 
the whole atmosphere was clear and sunny, and the mist 
melting on all sides so rapidly that they could distinguish 
clearly a dozen large square-rigged vessels clustered to- 
gether in the offing, with the flag of the maritime proy- 
inces flying. But between the boat and these friends 
was a large pinnace laveering, and seemingly on the look- 
out, with no colors displayed. She was about half a mile 
ahead of them and directly in their course, while gaining 


158 FRANK FORESTER. 


on them very fast, though at about the same distance in 
their rear, were the armed row boats of their pursuers. 

“Now,” exclaimed Vander Bosch, “if that pinnace be 
a Spaniard, Mistress Gertrude, we are all but lost Hol- 
landers! and you were better look to your dagger’s point 
—but if she be one of ours, the Dons were better sheer 
off while they yet have the time!” 4 

‘Which do you think she is?—which do you think 
she is?” exclaimed the girl, now more alarmed than she 
had been during the whole of that perilous adventure. 

‘Nota Don, lady!” he replied; but almost as he spoke 
a puff of white smoke burst from one of her bow-ports, 
and a broad yellow ensign ran up to her mast-head. 

‘“Thunder and lightning! and ten thousand devils!” 
shouted the steersman, altering his course on the instant, 
“we are lost.” 

Then followed some twenty minutes of rapid, difficult 
maneuvering, in which the skiff’s crew strained every 
nerve to escape, but in vain. The effect only being to 
protract the agony and to bring the pursuing boats close 
up to them, and themselves close under the guns of the 
pinnace. 

At this moment, just as the Spaniards in the leading 
boat threw out the national flag and set up their war-cry 
of “St. Jago for Castile,” in haughty triumph, the pin- 
nace came to the wind suddenly so as to open her broad- 
side upon them, while Gertrude’s skiff passed athward 
her bows. Down came the Spanish flag in an instant, 
and up soared the ensign of the confederates, and flash 
after flash, roar after roar, outspoke her ready cannon, 
while the waves were lashed into madness by the fierce 
storm of round and grape shot which swept their surface. 

The smoke cleared off, and but one of the Spanish 
boats was visible. crippled and crawling off as well as she 
could—the others sunk with all on board of them,—but the 
survivors attracted not the notice of the pinnace, for Ger- 


GERTRUDE VON HALEN. 159 


trude’s skiff had hooked on to her channels, and in an in- 
stant the heroic girl was on board and in the arms of the 
gallant Fleureant von Alleyne, her young and brave com- 
mander. 

My tale is told—the object was accomplished—that 
. night the prince’s fleet stood into the shore, and made 
the appointed signal, and Ziriczee was in consequence 
surrendered on fair terms, and for once the Spaniards 
kept to the terms which they granted honorably, and, 
save a forced contribution, no wrong was done to the cit- 
izens. It was not very long before in a safe place the no- 
ble Gertrude was clasped in the embrace of her father; 
nor much longer before she was the happy bride of Fleu- 
reant von Alleyne; and though the times in which they 
lived were perilous, and turbulent, and stormy, I never 
heard that any storm, or turbulence, or peril disturbed 
their wedded days, or that either of them ever regretted 
the termination of the Boat-Race of Brouvershaven. 


A BLAZE AT BARNEGAT. 


It is a wild drive from Key Port, on New York Bay, 
through the great pine woods of New Jersey, to Barne- 
gat; and we were, on the whole, a wildish party who set 
out on it ona dark December night of 1845, after the 
sun had set. ‘Two wagons, with brisk teams and rollick- 
ing drivers, carried us, our traps, our provender, and, 
last but not least, our heavy guns and ammunition, 

Jolly *Lishe T——n, mine host of the old Payilion, 
never was there a better heart, seldom a better shot than 
thou wert, good ’Lishe T——n ! Many a day’s fun have 
we had in good old times, many a night’s frolic, but shall 
never have any more ; for that warm heart is cold, and 
thou art gone where, at least, there is no more shooting. 
But not the less for the thought of what shoald or might 
be, were we on that night gay and joyous ; these, and 
Bill T r, and one more who shall be nameless, for he 
is, worse than dead, altered, estranged, a living friend 
no longer. 

At Monmouth we stopped, baited our nags with that 
most famous of all veterans of the turf, Uncle Tom 
Laird, and moderately liquored with our friend, Gentle- 
man Joey, the pilot of the unrivalled Fashion ; then on, 
on again, through the dim shades and the tall pines, on- 
ward, until toward morning, cold, chilled to the bone, 
yawning, half asleep, half awake, we stopped in the yery 
heart of the pines, at a low-browed wayside hostelry, 
with a large pair of stag antlers aboye the door, and there 
warmed our exterior, and rejoiced our interior man with 
copious libations of hot-spiced rum, by such a fire as de- 
ponent never saw, save in the pine woods of New J ersey, 
or in the backwoods of the Penobscot. 

160 


A BLAZE AT BARNEGAT, 161 


Dawn found us at Tom’s River, and then, while the 
rest of the party revelled in gin cocktails, the narrator 
snoozed luxuriantly in a soft-armed chair until breakfast 
was on the table, nor, as some of the company averred, 
fairly awoke then. For it is on record that a portion of 
the repast, and it was a good one, and justice was done 
to it, consisted of sausage meat, artfully shaped into 
flat cakes, fashioned like pork-chops, with segments of 
bone attached, he, the narrator, Frank, after consuming 
six, and holding out his plate for the seventh, quietly 
remarked that pork was very tender at T’om’s River, no 
pork being to the fore. Be that as it may, he woke be- 
fore they reached Barnegat village, at noon, and told and 
listened to some passably good yarns, during the ride and 
during the run across the bay to Perrine’s Shooter’s Para- 
dise, and, as it afterward appeared, a genteel summer 
watering-place for New Jersey fashion and beauty, during 
the bathing season, in a fast-sailing, sloop-rigged sail boat. 

The mansion stands on a bleak, barren sand-bank, 
being the beach between the ocean surf and the famous 
Bay of Barnegat, not a tree could exist on it, not a 
brush, not a thistle, nothing but salt rib-grass, musqui- 
toes, fiddler-crabs, and sand-pipers. Yet a fashionable 
watering-place it is and shall be, as aforesaid, for the 
brave and fair of the Jerseys. This fact was discovered, 
and now duly recorded for the first time, by Frank For- 
rester, thus: When that worthy, having finished his 
supper and his pipe, having selected his boatman, the 
redoubted Jesse Spraggs, seen to his guns and ammuni- 
tion, filled shot-pouches, powder-horns, provision-baskets 
and liquor flasks, as the law directs, was on his way to 
his dormitory, he observed chalked on the door thereof, 
in white characters of a foot long, these hieroglyphics . 


4 StAGs— 


Whereat, being of an enquiring mind, he demanded an 


162 FRANK FORESTER. 


explanation of the chamber-boy, for the maid was in this 
instance represented by a tow-headed, brown-visaged, 
guernsey-shirte 1, fen-booted urchin of thirteen or four- 
teen years. ‘The intelligent being turned on his heel and 
pointed to the opposite door, which bore the correspond- 
ing Inscription : 


4 WIMmINg FolKS,— 


observed, with an astute grin, ‘‘We keeps ’um apart, 
you see, with seprit bathin’ rooms, the gals in here, and 
the stags in thar.” 

From which Frank first discovered that in South 
Jersey all animals of the male sex, quadruped or biped, 
are promiscuously known as stags; and, secondly, that 
in the same literary region, the symbol ‘*4” does not 
represent, as is elsewhere vainly imagined, the fourth nu- 
meral, but the preposition governing the objective case. 

He made no reply, but ensconced himself in the bed- 
clothes and slept until three o’clock in the morning, 
when, after a hurried breakfast, they were off to the bay, 
in two squads. ’Lishe T——n and Bill T——r, with two 
baymen, four Egg Harbor pig-boxes, and any given quan- 
tity of stools, made tracks for Lovelady’s Island, near 
the outer or upper inlet, and Frank, with his partner, 
Jesse Spraggs, and Jim Oakley, proceeded further down 
the bay to the westward, where they ensconced their pig- 
boxes in a contiguous concave are, in the slips dug out of 
the lee side of a sedge bassock, in the following order : 
To the extreme left, or windward, lay Jim Oakley ; next 
to him Frank’s partner ; then Frank ; and last, not least, 
to the leeward, the mighty Jesse Spraggs ; while without 
them, at about eighteen yards distance, rode, bobbing 
and ducking at their anchors, as the swell lifted them 
and now and again broke over them, a whole flock of 
wild geese, brant, broad-bills, red-heads, black ducks, 


A BLAZE AT BARNEGAT. 163 


dippers, and the like, deftly carved in wood and balanced 
with lead, so as to skim the water duck-like. 


It was deathly cold, and deathly silent, too, all save 
the whistle of the wind overhead, for it blew great guns 
from the north-eastward, and an occasional flap of the 
wild waves against the shore. It was not yet sunrise, 
although the skies were beginning to put on a paly yel- 
low, and it was dead low water. 


Smoking was strictly prohibited, motion no less go, 
saving to Jesse Spraggs alone, captain and lookout-man 
at once of the company. Therefore, as closely as might 
be under the circumstances, we snuggled ourselyes down, 
each into his own peculiar pig-box, atop of the salt hay 
which made our beds, and under the drab-colored oiled- 
cloth and sedge which covered our decks, needful conceal- 
ment against the keen eyes of the fowl, until the Lord 
and the turn of the tide should give us luck, and Jesse 
Spraggs the signal. 

To those who know the trick, we aie not, but to 
those who do not, a word is needed ; therefore, in season, 
it shall be spoken. 

The modus operandi is this: The boat lies, with the 
head slightly elevated and inlaid, stern to the bay and 
the decoys. In the boat the shooter lies feet to the stern, 
flat on his back, with his gun handy to his grasp, ready 
to spring to a sitting posture and let drive so soon as the 
fowl, coming down before the wind, as the mounting 
tide overflows their feeding-places, and forces them to 
change their ground, espy his stools, and either hover 
over them or alight among them. One thing more re- 
mains to be stated: when the fowl, skating before the 
wind, enter the defile, or run, as it might be called, the 
gauntlet, between a line of boats, stranded as ours were 
on that morning, and the fleet of decoys, it is absolutely 
a rule that not a shot must be fired until the headmost 


164 FRANK FORESTER. 


bird has crossed the leeward shooter, and he has given 
the signal for the yolley by his opening shot. 

On this eventful morning, all the company, except 
Frank, shot each with a heavy, double-barrelled, four- 
teen-pound, ten-gauged gun. He, with two sixteen- 
pound single-barrels, of five-bore, carrying each a quarter 
of a pound of BB; wherefore they laughed at him in 
the beginning; who laughed in the end this history 
relateth. 

Anon, the sky grew amber, roseate, red; the sun rose 
fiery, the wind rose with him. It grew colder. From 
time to time the noisy, oft-repeated cry, “ ou-ou-otherly, 
otherly ! ou-ou-otherly ! otherly, otherly, ou-ou!” from 
a distance, told where a flock of long-tailed ducks, the 
old wives of the Jersey shore, were at high jinks ; but 
who cares for them ? 

Once, ‘‘ cre-aunk-cre-cre-aunk-aunk-cre-e,” a gaggle of 
brant passed us wild and high, but nought came near 
our stools. Noon was approaching, and not a shot. We 
ate hard-boiled eggs, we qualified, as Jesse calls it, we 
grew sulky, desperate. 

*“Down! every mother’s son of you,” came Jesse’s 
hoarse whisper. ‘‘ Close’t for the lives of you, ‘aunk- 
aunk-aunk-e-e-aunk !’” And far to the windward, out 
of the clouds, came a faint ‘‘e-e-aunk” in answer. 
Nearer and nearer it came still, as Jesse almost rived his 
throat with the clamor, nearer and quicker, and more 
evidently responsive. 

Now it was like a pack of hounds in full cry; now we 
could hear the mighty sweep of their circling pinions ; 
and now their crowded phalanx drove into the perilous 
defile, sweeping right along over our decoys. That 
morning, like Nelson’s crew at Trafalgar, every man did 
his duty ; not a head was raised, not a trigger drawn 
until the leading gander sailed past Jesse Spraggs, and 
seemed doubtful whether to circle or alight. ‘‘ Aunk- 


A BLAZE AT BARNEGAT. 165 


aunk-e-aunk!” It was his last honk in this world, for 
Jesse’s concentrated charge struck him under the pinion 
and he went down at a long tangent, not striking the 
water within a hundred yards, and then throwing up the 
spray as if a stone had cleft it. Two geese fell to his 
second barrel. Then up sprang Frank, and up went his 
first single-barrel, a flash, a roar! the air was full of 
feathers and falling geese, five coming down, instantly 
killed, to the shot. Before he got up his second, some- 
thing the heaviest piece, his partner and Jim Oakley got 
in three barrels, one of Jim’s missing, and three geese 
told that their light pieces were aimed truly. But now 
Frank had seized his second, and at the very moment, 
for, confused by the close reports, lots of them wounded, 
and bothered with their falling kindred, the flock were 
twirling upward, in a great spiral cloud, like a water- 
spout, his shot could not but rake them. 

*‘Ba-a-ng! and the distant hills re-bellowed to the 
roar, and Frank, knocked clear out of his pig-box, was 
landed high and dry on the sand-bank, but little cared 
he for that ; for ere he kneeled over, he saw the air filled 
with birds and a smoke of feathers, and as he brought 
up in a sitting posture, he heard Jesse’s joyous cry : 

“‘ By Jehosophat ! it snows gooses!” and it did well 
nigh snow them, indeed ; for Frank’s two barrels brought 
down twelve birds, and six more fell to the others. Such 
was the result of my BLAzE art BARNEGAT. 


GENTS VS. GENERALS; 
OR 


DICK D. AND THE EARL OF DURHAM. 


Tt was in August of the year 1838, memorable for the 
Canadian rebellion, stimulated by French traitors, such 
as Papineau, and English radicals, such as Nelson and 
McKenzie, with some casual aid and countenance from 
American fillibusterism, which had not then reached the 
breadth and height which it has since attained, but was 
content to be called sympathy,—that there arrived in Que- 
bec, seeking pleasure and information now—not profit— 
though at times he could look as deeply into a ledger, 
and always as closely into an unpaid account before lug- 
ging out his portmonaie, as any other son of the thrifty 
New England capital,—that there arrived, I say, in 
Quebec, and dismounted at the hospitable doors of the 
Albion Hotel, a Boston gent. A very comfortable Boston 
gent, indeed, was Dick D——; not reckoning himself, or 
reckoned by others, at a penny short of two hundred and 
a half of thousands—the owner of a very fine house, in 
which at stated periods, something like angels’ visits— 
for Dick D was never accused of being hospitable— 
he entertained his set, and his endorsers, and his cus- 
tomers—friends he never had any, nor would haye known 
what to do with them if he had—sumptuously, for he 
was proud; savorily, for he was fond of good cheer; 
lavishly, for whenever he gave a spread it was with the 
end of making a show and being well talked about. He 
was the head of a thriving house,—business house, I 
mean,—which he conducted skillfully, ably, and with 

166 


GENTS VS. GENERALS. 167 


credit among men of his own caste—though his own clerks 
knew him to be extremely pompous, and his poor cred- 
itors, when he could afford to bully, a cold-hearted screw. 
He had been the husband of a very lovely, very intellec- 
tual, very superior woman,—who had married him the 
Lord knows why !—whom he had treated very kindly 
and with great consideration, because she was the 
stronger vessel, and he knew it; of whom, while she 
lived, he was very proud, because she gave him a consid- 
eration in the world which on his own account he never 
could have acquired; and of whose death, when she died, 
he was, probably, rather glad than otherwise, though he 
affected to be plunged in the blackest melancholy, because 
he was just not fool enough to be ignorant that he was 
ruled, and just dolt enough to be ignorant that he was 
ruled for his own good. For the rest, he affected a little 
taste; had a little smattering of virtu ; pretended to a 
little literature; had subscribed, I dare say, to the Ob- 
servatory at Harvard, and asked the Scientific Societies to 
suppers, at which the hock was better far than the host’s 
society. 

In short, Dick D was one of that very numerous 
class of mercantile men, who, because they are great per- 
sons on ’Change, suppose necessarily that they must be 
just as great off Change; which, as often as they go out 
into the great world, they discover to be a teetotal mis- 
take, although I never heard of their remembering it was 
such, after they had returned, like dogs to their vomit, 
to Wall or State streets. 

Had it not been for his extreme stinginess, and his’ 
pretension, he would not have been so bad a fellow, after 
all—for he liked a good dinner and a good bottle of wine 
with all his heart; and, as I have said, sometimes gave 
both, though never to any one who wanted them. How- 
ever, he was good tempered; could give and take a joke; 
and though a dolt, as regards the way of the world, was 


168 FRANK FORESTER. 


not utterly ignorant of everything beyond his own line of 
trade, and unfit for the society of cultivated men. 

Well! such as he was, Dick D—— got to Quebec, 
which was at that time garrisoned with some six thou- 
sand of the picked troops of England, including the first 
battallions of the Grenadiers and Coldstream Guards. Of 
these splendid infantry—the finest, probably, for disci- 
pline, steadiness under arms, magnificence of equipment, 
size, muscular vigor, and solidity of movement, in the 
known world—Dick had heard much; and, although 
his military achievements had been confined to Boston 
Common, his soul burned with ardor to inspect these 
world-renowned veterans. 

His first question to mine host of the Albion, after 
ordering dinner, ascertaining of what dishes it would 
consist, and with what wines it could be lubricated, was, 
‘Well, Mr. , and when do the Guards parade?— 
when can I see the Guards under arms?” 

‘‘ Very sorry, Sir, Mr. D: ; very sorry, Sir, but the 
Guards never parade. Never under arms, except on 
field day or at some grand review, Sir. The thirty 
——th,” naming a very distinguished regiment, ‘troop 
the colors, Sir, at seven o’clock to-morrow evening. Very 
fine sight that, Sir, if you like to see it, Sir.” 

**No! Sir; no!” replied Dick. ‘‘If I can’t see the 
Guards, I don’t care to see any of the marching regi- 
ments,” and Dick turned up his nose, as if he had been 
an officer of rank, at least; and one who had served in a 
crack hussar regiment all his days. 

Dinner came, and it was a good one; but still Dick 
was discontented, doleful, and half sulky, and harped so 
much on the hardship of having travelled from Boston 
to Quebec, only to be disappointed of seeing the Guards, 
that at last some sharp young fellows of Dick’s party, 
who were well up to his idiosyncracies and glad enough 
to get some fun out of him, suggested the propriety of 


GENTS VS. GENERALS. 169 


his applying to the Governor-General to order out the 
Guards for his inspection. 

“Pon my word,” said Dick, stroking his chin, and 
imbibing a capital glass of Lafitte,—‘*’Pon my word! not 
a bad idea at all, my dear fellow. I—I have great mind 
to write a card. But, a—a—Horace, do you know they 
say this Lord Durham’s a bit of a Tartar? Do you—do 
you think he’d do it? For ’twouldn’t be pleasant to 
get a refusal to one’s note; would it, now?” 

“Refusal! My dear Sir, why you don’t imagine such 
a thing, as that the Earl of Durham would refuse you? 
Refuse the great Mr. Dick D , of Boston!” 

**But I—I don’t know him; never had the honor— 
don’t you see?” 

“‘Psha-a-w! That don’t matter. He knows you, of 
course; every one knows Dick D——, of Boston! Come; 
you are in for it; you must go it, Dick!—Here’s a pen 
and a card; begin—‘ Mr. Richard’? ”— 

“No! no! hang it, no!” said Dick. ‘I don’t like to 
put it on that footing; it seems like coming it to strong, 
putting it on one’s own personal standing too much— 
don’t it? No! no! Ill put it on the nationality!—hang 
me if I don’t!” 

And he did. For he wrote as follows: 

ALBION HoTEL, Aug. 2, 1838. 

‘*An American Genl. having arrived at Quebec, with no 
other object than to inspect the Foot Guards, and learning, 
much to his regret and surprise, that the household troops never 
parade, having no other opportunity of reviewing these noble 
regiments, presents his compliments to the Governor-General, 
and would feel it the greatest favor if he would order the bat- 
tallion under arms, at any time previous to his departure from 
the city, which will occur on the — proximo, at — o’clock, P. M.” 


Strange as it may appear, this singular card was actu- 
ally and indeed sent to the proudest, most arrogant, 
haughtiest and most irritable peer that ever filled a vice- 
regal chair. Stranger still, it produced its effect! 

8 


170 FRANK FORESTER, 


The Earl was in his drawing room, after a grand din- 
ner, of which Sir J. H——n, the very distinguished 
officer who at that time commanded the corps in question, 
had partaken, with several other guests, military and 
civilian, when this precious missive entered and was 
handed to his lordship. 

It so happened that, at this moment, a large part of 
the provincials being supposed disaffected and on the 
point of rebellion, and a large part of the borderers 
within the States being ayowedly sympathizers, it was 
held advisable to conciliate Americans to the utmost, and 
the Yankees, discovering this, made the most of it. 
There was not, I believe, in that year, one Yankee Militia 
General, between Flood Creek and the Aroostook River, 
who did not review some royal regiment—who was not 
received with all the honors of war. 

In this instance, Dick had forgotten to cross his Zs 
hence his note, instead, as poor Dick, to do him justice, 
had intended it, of ‘‘ American gentleman,” read “ Amer- 
ican General;” and Durham, merely tossing the note 
across to the commander, with a grim smile, said: “This 
concerns you, not me. Here’s another of these wretched 
American militia generals come to Quebec, Upon my 
soul! I believe nineteen-twentieths of the whole male 
population of the United States are Generals!—and he 
wants to see the guards under arms. I suppose you must 
turn them out for him.” 

“Oh! yes, certainly. It will not be much trouble, 
your Excellency. We'll have them out on the race 
course, to-morrow. But as the weather is as hot as it is 
in Sierra Leone, we’d better make it early. The bear- 
skins come very heavy on the poor fellows. Shall we say 
ten o’clock, your Excellency?” 

“Certainly—certainly, Sir John. Send an Orderly 
round to the Albion with my compliments—the Governor- 
General’s compliments—to the American General—con- 


GENTS VS. GENERALS, 171 


found the fellow, he has not wit to put his name on the 
card—and his friends,” turning to his Aide-de-Camp, in 
waiting, ‘‘and say that the Guards will be under arms at 
ten, to-morrow morning, on the race course. And, Sir 
John, as we must do it, we may as well do it well. Sup- 
pose you send him a charger properly housed and capari- 
soned, with one of my Aides and a couple of Orderlies, 
to his lodgings in the morning.” 

Huge was Dick’s delight that evening, and scarcely 
less the wonder of the party who had put him up to it, 
with no possible object but to enjoy his discomfiture, on 
the reception of the gracious message. 


Judge of their wonder, when on the following morn- 
ing, just as they were smoking their segars in the reading 
room, after an early breakfast, an Aide-de-Camp pulled 
up at the door, all white cock-tail feathers, gold lace and 
aiguillettes, followed by two mounted Orderlies of the 
First Dragoon Guards, leading a thorough-bred charger, 
with leopard-skin, demipique, pistol-holsters, and dragoon 
bridle—all point-device. 

A moment’s enquiry haying elicited from the waiter 
the name of the gentleman who had sent the note last 
evening to the Karl of Durham, General D——, of Bos- 
ton, was immediately invited to make his appearance, and 
take saddle. 

The first he did readily enough—a short, jolly-looking, 
red-cheeked, little man, in a full suit of spotless black, 
looking far more like a tailor than a General—which did 
not, however, either disconcert or surprise the dandy 
Aide-de-Camp, who probably considered it de rigueur 
that all Militia Generals should be tailors. 

The sight of the horse, however, did vastly disconcert 
Dick, and he would probably have given half he was 
worth to be out of it. But there was no back out; for he 
did not know his involuntary imposture, and there was 


172 FRANK FORESTER. 


nothing for it, but to put on a brave face and make the 
best of it. 

After all, it was not so bad in reality as it looked. The 
_ horse, though he puffed, and caracoled, and snorted a 
great deal more than Dick thought desirable, was per- 
fectly well drilled, if his rider was not, and as quiet as a 
dog, in spite of all his sham-fire. 

The day was fine, the ride to the race course was very 
agreeable, the officers were very civil. There was a great 
deal of hat-taking-off, in which Dick played his part very 
well; and, as he held his tongue, he acquitted himself 
satisfactorily. ‘ 

The drums and fifes struck up, the beautiful evolutions 
began, about which Dick knew no more than the saddle 
on which he sat. The horse, however, which was the 
charger of the General in command, knew his business, if 
Dick did not, perfectly; and was continually in the right 
place at the right moment, prancing and nodding to the 
colors in time to the band, until all the officers, and even 
Sir John himself, were taken in—for Dick was not a bad 
rider, as far as hand and seat went, when his first alarm 
was over, and he let his horse have his own way. 

At length, to put the climax on the joke,—had it been 
one—after having put the regiment through some of the 
most intricate maneeuvres, Sir John rode up to Dick, and 
taking his sword by the point, offered the hilt to his sup- 
posed brother officer. 

** Would you not be so kind, General,” he said, ‘as to 
put the Guards, yourself, through a few more difficult 
movements?” 

*“Oh! no, no, Sir John! By no means! No, no; 
more difficult? no, no. I think they did it very well— 
very well, indeed. Upon my word! I never saw any men 
do it better.” 

And so, with much bowing and hand-shaking, the 
matter ended—for Dick was by far too knowing to risk 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. ete 


detection by dining at the Grenadier mess to which he 
was invited in the evening, in the citadel; and it was 
never discovered, until the writer, with a gay party of 
friends, met Sir John H n, late that same autumn, at 
Saratoga, that the distinguished stranger who had re- 
viewed the Guards on the race course was only a Boston 
gen/ instead of a Boston Gen/. 


NOTE.—Absurd as this appears, it is true to the letter. Dick Derby 
of Boston was the hero, and Sir John Houston commanded the Grenadiers. 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. 


“But love itself could never pant 
For all that beauty sighs to grant, 
With half the fervor hate bestows 
Upon the last embrace of foes, 
When grappling in the fight they fold 
Those arms that ne’er shall loose their hold: 
Friends meet to part; love laughs at faith, 
True foes, once met, are joined ’till death.” 
Byron. ‘The Giaour,” 


*T was a clear calm morning inthe earliest autumn time, 
before a single touch of frost had painted the leaves of 
the maple with its hectic crimson, or robed the hickory 
in its golden glory. There was a thin yellow haze on the 
far horizon to the eastward, where the earth met the sky, 
leagues upon leagues aloof, in a long wavy dark blue line; 
more like the surface of a rolling but unbroken sea, than 
of the firmer and more stable element. The atmosphere 
overhead was of the purest, palest blue, scarce darker than 
the tint of the aquamarine, with a few fleecy clouds float- 
ing at an extreme height, their lower edges just touched 
with the faintest amber by the first rays of the yet un- 
risen sun. 


174 FRANK FORESTER. 


It was a lovely sight, that fair and tranquil dawning; 
and lovely was the scenery it looked upon—the meeting 
of the first wooded swells of the Rocky Mountains, and the 
illimitable plain of the wild prairie land. On this side, 
millions and tens of millions of green acres, waving and 
rustling with their rich grasses, to the light western 
breeze, and sparkling with their diamond dewdrops to 
the young sunbeams—on that, a labyrinth of wild and 
broken knolls, here thick and tufted with the unpruned 
umbrage of the virgin forest, there grim and gray with 
cliff and crag, horrent with pyramid and spire, hewn 
by the hands of nature out of the hard and herbless gran- 
ite. And far beyond all, and above all, immeasurable 
peaks of misty azure, uncertain whether cloud or moun- 
tain, looming gigantically up against the morning sky, 

At about half a mile’s distance from the commencement 
of the open prairies, and within the maze of knolls, and 
spurs from the loftier ridges, which I have described, 
there was a little lap, or hollow, surrounded, as it would 
seem, on every side by steep and abrupt hillocks covered 
with heavy timber overspreading a dense undergrowth of 
matted thicket. Although, however, this small dell ap- 
peared at first sight to be a mere isolated basin without 
inlet or outlet, it was in truth but the expansion of a 
long and tortuous ravine, through which an impetuous 
mountain streamlet made its way toward the head-waters 
of the great Columbia. The roar of many waterfalls 
came on the ear from many different quarters, and was 
indeed at this early hour the only sound which disturbed 
that green solitude. Through the middle of this verdant 
basin, which could not haye.contained above a couple of 
acres, of the freshest emerald verdure, the stream wound 
its way, bankfull and clear as crystal, and smooth though 
very swift, the frequent beached foam flakes which danced 
upon its eddies, showing that not far above it had leaped 
down from a more elevated level. 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. 175 


On the left bank of this bright water, just as the first 
sunbeams were beginning to steal up the sky, a picturesque 
group was assembled about the smouldering embers of 
a half extinguished camp-fire, which had burned it would 
seem for some hours untended. That group consisted of 
four men, and as many horses; the former, the bearded 
and chivalric rovers of the western wilderness, the wield- 
ers of the western rifle, the pioneers of the pathless prairie 
—the latter, the wild and tameless sons of mares that 
had never known the saddle or the spur, stallions that 
had never neighed in stall or stable. 

The men had just aroused them from their light and 
wary slumbers, and were employed in hasty preparations 
for a day of toil which to them was dearer than the soft 
Southron’s far niente, of peril which to them was the 
blythest pastime. This one was piling on the embers the 
dry stalks of the stunted artemisia, and kindling them 
with his breath into a bright and glaring flame, while that 
one was kneading on a flat white stone rude cakes with a 
little meal and salt, and water from the brooklet, while 
sundry collops of the bison’s hump arranged on pointed 
sticks about the embryo fire gave promise of a savory 
meal, A third was wiping the dew carefully with an 
oiled rag from the locks and barrels of four short large 
bored yager rifles; and the fourth was sewing a large 
patch of buckskin with deer’s sinews in lieu of thread, 
over a yawning rent in his fringed and wampum gartered 
leggings. 

All four were tall, athletic, spare, gaunt men, 
with frames reduced by constant exercise, constant 
exposure to all weather, and scanty fare, to little more 
than bone and brawn and sinew; with faces sunburned 
and embrowned and winter hardened, yet not devoid of a 
certain wild nobility of expression, the offspring of perfect 
freedom and perfect self-reliance; with eyes as keen and 
piercing, as radiant with clear intuition and pervading 


% 


176 FRANK FORESTER. 


instinct as the wild eagle’s; with beards and hair and 
moustaches, unconscious of the razor or the shears, lux- 
uriant as those of the preux chevaliers of olden times, the 
superb orientals of this degenerate day. 

The horses, clean-limbed and wiry, powerfully made 
and, though low in flesh, hard and full of muscle, with 
‘healthy shining coats, long tails, and manes and forelocks 
floating in untrimmed shagginess over their wild eyes,and 
sharp thin withers, already decked with their Mexican sad- 
dles, and many-colored housings, were busily employed 
cropping the long rich succulent bottom-grass, with an 
avidity that showed them old campaigners, as wide awake 
as Sir Dugald Dalgetty himself, to the expediency of stow- 
ing away provant whenever it was to be found abundant. 

** Now, boys,” exclaimed the hunter, who was officiat- 
ing as cook, ‘‘ Our breakfast’s fixed. Lets have a quick 
bite, and to horse—the sun’s high now on the prairies, 
though these knobs hide him from us here like. Come, 
Jake, hain’t you got them rifles clean yet?” 

** Clean as a whistle Mike,” returned the other, ‘ least- 
ways, here’s yourn, and if so be it snaps or makes long 
fire, I'll stand a shot to-night at sixty paces.” 

‘Nuff said!” replied Mike Carson, a splendid speci- 
men, by the way, of the Rocky Mountain man, as ever 
drew a fine bead on a grizzly bear, or set a moccasined 
foot in a wooden stirrup. ‘‘’Nuff said, boy. But I 
want him to shoot quick and true this day anyhow; for 
my name arn’t Mike Carson, boys, if I don’t bring that 
thieving vagabond Mato-tope’s scalp home to-night, 
dangling from my gun’send. That’s all, boys.” 

“* Mato-tope!” cried one, as it would seem in slight 
wonder, ‘‘What’s to pay now, Mike?” 

“The Mandan Braye!” exclaimed Jake, letting fall 
the rifle, about which he was busied, on his knee. 
“You'd best let that be, Mike, I reckon, leastwise unless 
you reckon to take all of us along with you, and make a 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. 177 


right down scrimmage on’t. He never rides with less 
than half a score of tribemen at his back.” 

** I won’t have none on you,” replied the other, grufily, 
tightening his girdle, as he spoke, and loosening his long 
two-edged knife in the scabbard. “My scalp or his’n 
this time, boys, and no mistake! I’ll die or have it, boys. 
Pye said it, boys, and what Mike Carson says is as good 
as sworn, I tell ye. I'll have it, alone too, if I fetch it 
out of his lodge, with all his braves about him.” 

** Why, what’s the Mandan done, Mike, to make you 
so wolfish this fine morning? ” 

“Done! curse him, hain’t I told you that my traps has 
been stole regular, these three days past; a score of bea- 
ver, that was mine, he’s got every one on’em. And yes- 
terday, to cap all, them that warn’t no beavers in, he’d 
been and smashed and stomped to flinders! ” 

**T don’t know, Mike,” returned one of the trappers, 
who had not yet spoken, a tall old man of sixty years 
and upward, with beard and hair as white as the un- 
trodden snow, but with an eye as quick as the forked 
lightning, a hardy, weather-beaten face, and a port erect 
and unbroken, whether on foot or in the saddle, «I 
don’t know—that don’t look nat’ral for a chief, no how 
—let alone such a chief as the great Mandan, as Mato- 
tope! He’s higher deyiltries to plan, I reckon, than to 
steal a few miserable mink and beaver! I guess it’s like- 
lier been some o’ them ridiculous Assiniboais. *Taint 
like a Monitarri brave, no way I can coin it. You had 
best be sure, Mike Carson. If you take Mato-tope’s 
scalp, there’ll be war on the prairie ’n less than no time 
—I tell you!” 

‘I am sure, Louis! I railly am sure on’t, old man. 
Didn’t I see the tracks of his dark sorrel stallion? His 
off-side foot afore is a little crook’d like; and he spans 
three feet more on his jump nor any horse else in these 
diggins. Didn’t I see him, mopin’ round, old man, 


178 FRANK FORESTER. 


when I was settin’ my traps yesterday? And didn’t I 
watch, too, and don’t I know where he sot his’n? They 
will be on the prairie, soon ‘nuff, old man, and that no 
later than this arternoon, nuther. So there’s no need to 
say no more about it!—For my mind’s sot, boys—and 
when it’s sot once, it’s sot for good. I don’t come to 
camp this night, without Mato-tope’s scalp, no how!” 

“* Well! well! *nuff said,” answered another, who 
seemed to be waxing more than a little impatient under 
this protracted argument. ‘If Mato-tope ’s to be 
scalped to-day—to-day he’ll be scalped, I reckon.” 

“* His scalp ’ll be hard taking,” repeated the old man, 
half gloomily, half obstinately, and shaking his head 
with a prolonged oscillation, as he filled the bowl of an 
Indian pipe with kinnikinic, and, his light morning 
meal concluded, began to smoke lazily. 

“* Hard or soft, I tell you, old man, it’s got to be tuk,” 
answered Mike Carson, doggedly, and rising to his feet, 
he began to overhaul the saddle and housings of his 
horse, a magnificent iron-gray stallion of exceeding 
power and great promise of speed. There was not a 
strap or buckle of all the accoutrements to which he did 
not look warily and well. One stirrup leather which was 
frayed somewhat by long use, he exchanged for a fresh 
thong of the bison’s hide; a flaw in his bridle rein he 
repaired with a splice of buckskin overlapped with deer 
sinew—that done, and his knife’s edge and point exam- 
ined, his horn and bullet pouch inspected, and his rifle 
carefully and scientifically loaded, he swung himself de- 
liberately into his easy Spanish saddle, and sat there a 
moment motionless bending over the bow of his rude 
demipique with all the grace and self-reliance of a preux 
chevalier of old. 

No more words were spoken on the subject, for each 
one of the trappers perceived that their comrade’s mind 
was made up, and although there was no one of their 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. 179 


number who did not distrust the correctness of Mike 
Carson’s opinion, and disapprove his meditated aggression 
on a powerful, and hitherto not unfriendly tribe, they 
knew his temper far too well to think of endeavoring to 
dissuade him. He had expressed his fixed resolution to 
slay Mato-tope, and well they knew that he would at 
least attempt it. He had declined their aid or interfer- 
ence; and well they knew that he would die, rather than 
now accept it. 

Each therefore busied himself in looking after his own 
scanty baggage, looked to the condition of his weapons, 
aud mounting his powerful and highly-spirited horse, 
stood ready and prepared for any fortune. 

‘‘ Where shall we meet to camp to-night, boys? ” asked 
the old hunter, of his band. ‘The streams are gittin’ 
bare of beaver hereaware; I reckon we’d best make tracks 
further westward.” 

“‘ Westward be it,” cried Carson, ‘< that suits my day’s 
work well.” 

““Say we camp at Fontaine qui bouit,” said another, 
naming a rendezvous well known in those regions. 
“‘ There’s good grass there, I reckon, and water plenty. 
And I don’t think there has been no band trappin’ there 
this season much,” 

“Shall we then say Fontaine qui bouil?” 

There was no dissenting voice raised against this prop- 
osition, and, silence being as usual interpreted to mean 
consent, after brief salutation, the little band departed, 
each member of it taking a different direction, and rid- 
ing away silent and alone into the deepest recesses of the 
hill-country. 

Carson struck off from the party at first in a due 
northerly direction, following up the ravine of the little 
brook on which they had encamped to its source, at some 
three or four miles distance, through every variety of 
wild and woodland scenery. 


180 FRANK FORESTER, 


Having reached the secluded well-head from which it 
boiled out abundantly, he crossed a steep and rocky 
ridge, the spur of one of the loftier chains, and after 
about an hour’s riding descended into a wide, level bot- 
tom, consisting of rich, rushy meadow land, interspersed 
here and there with tufts of alder and swamp willow, 
and haying a long line of cottonwood and other larger 
timber running in a serpentine course down the center of 
the track, indicating the bed of a large stream or river. 

Here the trapper moderated the pace of his horse, and 
as he rode warily and slowly onward, his quick, clear eye 
was glancing continually around him in all directions, 
like that of some wild animal fearful of surprise or dan- 
ger. Now it would overrun the surface of the deep, 
miry soil, eager to detect the slightest print of man’s or 
horse’s foot, or the faintest track of the deer, the elk, 
the beaver, or the antelope. Fora long time, however, 
his watchfulness was rewarded by no result, and he was 
beginning to cast his eagle glances in a wider circle over 
the great expanse of the horizon, when he caught sight 
of something which seemed to indicate the rapid passage 
through the tall grass and stunted artemisias of some 
large animals, 

He gave spurs to his horse, and in three strides drew 
bridle, and stood still gazing intently on the broad trail, 
left by the transit at full gallop, of at least a dozen horse- 
men. 

So practised was the hunter’s eye, that he did not so 
much as dismount in order to survey the traces with a 
closer scrutiny, but, bringing his hand violently down 
upon his thigh, he exclaimed : 

‘IT thought as much! It is that miserable dog again! 
that dog Mato-tope, with his accursed band of thieving 
Manitarris. But Mike’s on their trail this time; and 
we'll see who wins to-day.” 

Then casting his eye forward over the trail, which ran 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. 131 


in a north-westwardly direction to the bank of the large 
stream, he set spurs to his gallant gray and galloped 
fiercely onward. 

Within ten minutes he reached the verge of the water- 
course, a broad, deep, sluggish current, Sweeping along 
bankfull in turbid eddies, fringed to the right hand and 
the left by a superb treble line of tall and stately timber 
trees. 

At this spot the trail turned due westward, following 
the course of the river as it rolled through its valley, 
which narrowed rapidly as it advanced toward a huge 
rent or chasm in the vast craggy hills which bordered 
the horizon in that quarter of the compass. 

“Jest as I thought,” muttered Carson—“ arter my 
traps agin, curse ’em! The lazy, thieving hounds, but 
Tl fix ’em.” 

And with the word, he lashed his horse to wilder 
speed, and soon reached what to his excited mind ap- 
peared an absolute confirmation of his surmises. At the 
very spot where he had set his first trap, the party which 
he was pursuing had evidently halted, for the ground 
was poached up and trampled for some space around, 
and there were some recent traces of the horses, showing 
that they had been, for some time at least, in a state of 
quiescence. And there on the muddy river marge lay 
his stout beayer trap, broken and shattered into small 
fragments, so as to be utterly incapable of being either 
used or repaired, among the footprints of moccasins, 
which his quick eye recognized at once, as being of Mani- 
tarri or Mandan manufacture. 

One thing, however, he saw not, or if he saw, did not 
heed. It was the deep trace of a naked human foot 
stamped deeply into the black mud, close to the water’s 
edge. It was a larger print than that of any of the 
moccasined feet, strong made and long, and with the 
toes turned outward, as never were the toes of any In- 


182 FRANK FORESTER. 


dian foot. But this Carson saw not, nor remarked; nor 
is it probable that, excited as he was, and predetermined 
to find evidences of the Indian’s guilt in all that should 
meet his eye—nor is it, I say, probable that, had he seen 
it, he would have suffered its mute testimony in anywise 
to invalidate his preconceived opinion. 

Another half hour of sharp riding brought him, still 
following the Indian trail, which ran along the river’s 
course, to an abrupt turn in the stream, where, chained 
fast to a huge oak tree, he had left his second trap on 
the previous night. 

Again the Indian sign gave token of a halt, again the 
Mandan had dismounted and trodden the ground all 
about the trap, which in this case was not broken. 

It was clear, however, at a glance, from the tracks of 
the beayer’s struggles, from some blood gouts in the 
sand, and several tufts of fur scattered around in the 
Vicinity, that the trap had done its duty, and had been 
plundered. 

**Ah ha! I have you now in fact—cursed redskin! ” 
growled the trapper. But as he spoke his eye fell upon 
something which glittered dully among the trampled 
herbage close to the trap. He leaped down and seized it. 
It was a bullet, which must haye fallen from the pouch 
of the robber. He examined it carefully; it bore, as is 
not unusual among the hunters of the West, the peculiar 
mark of its owner, which was in this case a little cross 
composed of six small punctures. 

‘Ha! that is Joe Whiteneck’s mark,” said Carson, 
musing fora moment. ‘‘ How could the redskins have 
got Joe’s bullet? But that’s neither here nor there. 
Pil bother with this trail no longer. Ill ride right 
straight away to where I saw he’d sot his traps last night, 
and make clean work of them, and then ride in the brush 
nigh at hand to the last, and shoot him from the cover. 
He’ll never steal no more traps of Mike Carson.” 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. 183 


And with his heart full of fury he dashed away head- 
long to the gorge in the mountains, through which the 
river, there pent up into a mere thread of water and 
chafed into a wild torrent, roared and raved on its course 
toward the great Columbia. 

Within an hour after he had disappeared in the chasm, 
the old trapper who had so much distrusted the right of 
Carson’s charge against the Mandan, came slowly riding 
down the self-same trail, pausing at each of the spots, 
where the Indians had halted, and where Carson pausing 
likewise, had filled his prejudiced mind with false con- 
clusions, and conyinced himself of the truth of a lie. 

The old man’s calmer temper instantly grasped the 
truth. ‘‘ Aye! aye!” he said, as he dismounted and ex- 
amined the sign more closely than the rage of the other 
had permitted him to do—‘‘ Aye! aye! it’s jest as I 
thought. The traps has been stole and broke by some 
white vagabond or other, and the Mandans are on the 
thief’s track to hunt himup. But Carson’s too mad, I’m 
afeard, to take count of the true sign. I'll away arter 
and try if I can’t hinder bloodshed.” 

And he too galloped off on Carson’s trail at the best 
speed of his horse. But whenever, in the annals of the 
world, did he who would prevent, anticipate or outstrip 
him who would commit injury or crime? 

Some two hours laterin the day Carson might have 
been seen dismounted in a deep, darksome dingle, amid 
crags and hills so steep as well nigh to exclude the beams 
of the noonday sun; he was standing over a trap in which 
a live beaver was still struggling wildly, with a gleam of 
fierce and angry satisfaction in his keen blue eye, a curse 
of satisfied hatred on his well-cut firm lip. 

It was the trap of the Manitarri chief, Mato-tope. 

While he stood there, the tramp of several horses came 
on his ear. In an instant he sprang to his saddle, gath- 
ered the reins in his hand, poised and cocked his rifle. 


184 FRANK FORESTER. 


In another the Mandan chief came at a quick trot 
through the bushes, followed by six or seven other chiefs 
well armed and mounted. 

As quick as light the avenging rifle of the wild hunter 
rose to his shoulder, his keen eye glanced along the barrel, 
the trigger yielded to the unerring finger, the piece 
flashed, and the first indication to the Mandan chief that 
a foe was near him was the sharp crack of the heavy 
yager. 

Strangely enough it fell out, that in the very point of 
time in which the hunter’s piece was discharged, the 
Indian’s horse rose high to leap a fallen tree, and throw- 
ing up its head received the bullet intended for its rider’s 
heart, full in its brain. As it was, horse and man went 
down amid an appalling yell from the other Indians. 

Carson replied by a wild whoop, and setting spurs to 
his good gray, galloped off at speed, beginning with all 
the coolness of a hunter to reload his Weapon even at 
that wild speed. 

But a second yell, fiercer and shriller than the first, 
and the thick beating clang of many hoofs, announced 
that he was pursued, and a moment afterward some six 
or eight full round reports from the smooth-bore fusees 
of the Indians followed, and as many bullets whistled in 
close propinquity to the undaunted hunter. One, indeed, 
struck his wolf-skin cap from his tangled locks, another 
grazed his shoulder, and a third inflicted a long superficial 
gash on the white stallion’s quarter. 

Carson rose high in his stirrups, flourished aloft his 
now reloaded rifle, and replied with the hideous shout 
well known to all western warriors, white or red, as the 
death halloo, for he doubted nothing that he had slain 
his enemy. 

But what was his dismay, his almost terrified astonish- 
ment, when he beheld his mortal foe, the hated Mato- 
tope, mounted on a fresh horse, his own unrivalled chest- 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE. 185 


nut, and thundering on his traces, followed by all his band, 
yelling and whooping out their savage scorn and hatred 
of the White Thief! 

Curbing his horse with a shock so violent that he al- 
most threw him upon his haunches, he again raised his 
rifle; again his steady finger pulled the trigger, but this 
time no bright flash, no sharp crack followed. 

Despair! an Indian bullet of the last volley, had carried 
the cock clean away, and left the weapon useless. With 
a fierce curse, a bitter, snarling imprecation, he dashed 
the broken rifle to the earth; shook his fist in impotent 
malignity at his triumphant enemies; turned, and fled— 
for his life! 

For his life! for his life! up the steep mountain side he 
spurred furiously, and gallantly the gray responded— 
through the deep tangled thickets he crashed at mad 
speed; among the giant trunks he glanced like a meteor, 
over vast fallen trees he bounded like a stag, across wild 
and stony gorges he soared like an eagle. Hours passed 
like minutes, but still, whenever he cast back his eye he 
might see Mato-tope close behind him. 

But still at every bound he shook off another and 
another of his foes, till at length but the chief and one 
tribesman were in sight. 

These also had thrown away their rifles, finding the 
speed of their pursuit encumbered by them. The con- 
test was no longer so uneven. Could he have distanced 
that staunch tribesman, he would have set his life upon 
the cast, and hand to hand and knife to knife, fought it 
out with the chief, confident and fearless. 

They were now galloping at mad speed over a vast and 
level track of table land, on the head of a huge moun- 
tain, cumbered with blocks of stone, and stunted ever- 
greens; and now, his speed diminished and his wonted 
bottom deteriorated by his wound, the gray horse began 
to fail, and stride by stride, yard by yard, the chestnut 


186 FRANK FORESTER. 


gained on him. His nose has passed his tail, his quar- 
ter! now it is level with Mike Carson’s knee; now they 
are side by side. The riders’ knives are out, they are red 
already. The wild yells of the Indian, the stern huz- 
zas of the white hunter, and the cries of the tortured 
beaver, dashed to and fro in his steel trap swinging from 
Carson’s saddle, are blent in horrid discord. 

And still during that deadly struggle the high mettled 
steeds thundered onwards with speed unabated, their 
reins loose, and their heads free, for the riders’ left arms 
are interlinked in the dread grapple, and their right hands 
are plying with terrible effect the keen and deadly knife. 

They crashed through a sudden thicket, they plunged 
down a steep descent, they—horror! Carson’s bold face 
is blank with dismay in an instant—his eyeballs haye 
a frantic glare—can it be terror? His right hand has 
forgotten to stab, and clutches in desperation a limb 
above his head, protruding from the stem of the last tree, 
but it cracks—it yields, impotent to save! 

They are plunging headlong three hundred feet sheer 
down a precipice of naked granite. 

Their horses’ fore-feet have already crossed the verge; 
the stones are rushing down amid smoke and dust and fire 
flashing from the flint, a hundred feet below them—the 
hawks and crows are starting from the tree tops a hun- 
dred feet lower yet. 

It is lost! lost! 

Carson’s eyes glared, but his teeth were set, and he 
plunged down silent, mute in his horrible despair. 

Not so the Indian. Fury and triumph flashed from 
his tawny features, and the appalling yell which burst 
from his lips, as he sheathed his keen knife in the white 
hunter’s breast, after they had crossed the dread brink, 
had more of vengeful joy than of terror in its tones, 

They rushed headlong down—they were lost to sight! 

The wild scream of the tortured horses, and the fierce 


THE DEATH STRUGGLE, 187 


yell of Mato-tope, rang piercingly upon the tribeman’s 
ear, as he reined up his horse hard on the perilous brink 
—a heavy crash rose dull and heavy from the abyss, and 
then, silence! A moment afterwards the voice of the 
torrent moving among the rocks at the base of the preci- 
pice, and the melancholy gale in the tree tops were alone 
audible. ‘ 

At sunset the old trapper stood, too late, gazing at the 
crag’s foot on a pile of blood and mutilated flesh and 
bones crushed and almost indistinguishable. Two 
horses, and one human carcass. It was Mike Carson’s! 
The Indian’s body was remoyed—carried away by his com- 
rades doubtless; and the white hunter’s senseless head 
was scalped and gory, and his clenched hands, dismem- 
bered by the savage knife, showed how tenaciously and 
bull-dog like, he had clung to his mortal foe with those 
cold fingers, riveted, never again to open, in THE DEATH 
STRUGGLE. 


THE AMERICAN BITTERN. 


In the old days of chivalry and knighthood, when the 
glory of falconry had not yet faded from earth, like 
several of his congeners, the herdn, especially, and the 
curlew, which, according to the old rhyme, 


“ Be she white or be she black, 
Carries twelyepence on her back,” 


an enormous price at a time when a sixpence was the 
value of a fat wether sheep, the bittern stood high, if 
not highest, in the estimation both of the epicure and 
the gentle falconer. ; 

Loud was the cheery whoop, and heartfelt the gratula- 
tion, when from some reed-bed in the oozy meadow, be- 
side the silver-winding Trent or royal-towered Thames, 
flushed by the yelping spaniels, the long-necked hermit 
fisher would display his broad yans, mottled like the 
richest tortoise-shell, with bands and wavy lines, and 
variegated blotches of black and chocolate brown, and 
bright ferruginous and cinereous gray, and yellow ochre; 
and stretching his long green legs far behind him, soar 
with his harsh, discordant, clanging cry, into the empy- 
rean, a worthy quarry for the bravest hawk that ever 
fleshed his singles in the fowl of game, and one to test 
his power of wing, his valiant courage, were he the 
bravest peregrine that ever built his eyrie amid the rocky 
fastnesses of Hoy, or the best jerfalcon that was ever 
brought from Norroway, to minister to the sports of 
chivalry and beauty. 

Loud was the clank of flagon and of beaker, and prod- 
igal the red wine flowed, when at high noon, where peers 
and paladins and princes feasted, even at Arthur’s table 

188 


THE AMERICAN BITTERN. 189 


round, where Lancelo de Lac looked love into the sym- 
pathizing eyes of peerless Gueniyere, with heronshaw and 
peacock, cygnet and venison, the bittern held the place 
of pride, and valiant knights took on themselves 


“Empryzes of great pith and moment.” 


and cast their pledges down, plighting their vows before 
**St. George, the Bittern, and the Ladies.” 

But now, like many another first-rate dainty and deli- 
cacy, long admired, the bittern, with his congener, the 
heron, though both still well esteemed by a few wise and 
judicious gourmets, has fallen, for the most part, into 
disrepute. 

In England, toward Christmas-time especially, when, 
like the snipe and woodcock of that country, the bittern 
feeds along the penetrable margins of the unfrozen 
streams and rivulets, which remain open all the winter 
long, and becomes extremely fat, there is rejoicing when 
the game-keeper produces, with a grin of triumph, the 
far-famed ‘“‘bog-bumper”; and he is incontinently manu- 
factured, with other ingredients known to the Wise, into 
a mighty pasty, manducated by appreciative grinders of 
purposely invited guests, and washed down by appro- 
priate libations of Beaune or Clos Vougeot. 

In America, it is difficult to say wherefore, this fine 
bird is the object of an absurd and unjust prejudice ; it 
is known generally by an obscene and disgusting appella- 
tion ; it is shot mercilessly and wantonly by the fowler, 
if he meets it in the marshes. I say wantonly, because 
with no end or object of utility or reason, and it is then 
cast away, like the vilest carrion ; and the sportsman who 
has the rare judgment to insist on its being cooked and 
eaten, like wild fowl, with cayenne pepper, poré wine, 
and lime-juice, is looked upon as a foul-feeder, at least, 
if not as the variety of the genus homo who is supposed 
habitually to keep a cold clergyman on his sideboard, as 


190 FRANK FORESTER. 


a choice dainty, and to luxuriate in the delights of 
*“long-pig.” * 

Bittern shooting can scarcely, as a general rule, be fol- 
lowed as a sport in the United States, for, although the 
bird, as aforesaid, is common, it is not, generally speak- 
ing, numerous ; the only exception to this rule being, in 
so far as I know, the marsh islands in the great south 
bay of Long Island, where it is extremely abundant. 

In these hassocks, as they are often called, it is not easy 
to shoot them, as they will not readily or willingly take 
wing, running with great speed in a crouching posture 
among the long coarse grass, and not exposing any portion 
of their long lanky forms to the aim of the gunner. 

At any high tides, however, when these island meadows 
are submerged, they may be successfully hunted, in the 
Same manner as the great clapper-rail, or big meadow 
hen, by means of boats pulled or, in very shoal water, 
shoved with pushing poles over the flats. Before these 
they cannot avoid rising, and as they do so, heavily, with 
2 slow and laborious flapping, they present an easy and 
obvious mark, even to tyros; and by good marksmen are 
certainly slaughtered with No. 4 or 5 shot, from an ordi- 
nary fowling-piece. At the Riviere aux Canards, in 
Upper Canada, or the Newark Salt Meadows, and in the 
marshes along the margins of the Hackensack river, as 
also, in former times, at the English neighborhood, I have 
occasionally had good sport with these great aquatic 
birds, while in pursuit of English snipe; but it would 
scarcely pay, even in these favored localities, to go out 
especially bittern-shooting. They will lie well to setters, 
which are used to point them steadily, and springers give 
tongug to them keenly, and flush them with ardor ; these 
two facts marking them as legitimately game. 

The bittern is a very beautiful bird, about twenty-seven 
= Ee ere 


* Cannibal for human flesh. 


THE AMERICAN BITTERN. 191 


inches in length, by three feet four inches in extent from 
tip of wing to wing ; its upper parts are beautifully mot- 
tled and variegated, like the finest tortoise-shell ; its under 
parts are of a pale, ochreous yellow, streaked, especially 
on the long feathers in front of the neck, with longi- 
tudinal black lines. It has a pendulous crest, on the 
nape of the neck, which, when wounded or irritated, it 
erects fiercely ; its eyes are of a clear, fierce golden hue, 
almost as bright and dauntless as those of the eagle; its 
legs are yellowish-green; the toes armed with long pecti- 
nated claws, which our ancestors, in their wisdom, were 
wont to carry, when they could get them, in their waist- 
coat pockets, as a specific and antidote against rheuma- 
tism, when shooting in the aguish marshes which he 
affects as his local habitation and his home. 

On the whole, he is the handsomest and noblest of the 
aquatic waders, if we except the lovely snow-white egret, 
and the yet more beautiful and rarer scarlet ibis, of the 
south ; and is as bold and brave as he is succulent and 
savory when fat and smoking on the board. Hence I in- 
variably shoot him when I can ; and never pick him up, 
until [am well assured he ‘‘has shuffled off his mortal 
coil”; for he will fight to the last against man, dog, or 
devil ; and his beak is both sharp and strong, and strikes 
like a Moorish assagay at the eye of his assailant. Hence 
Tavoid him. Verbwum sap. 


THE DEATH OF THE STAG. 


The stag at eve had drunk his fill, 
Where danced the moon on Monan’s rill, 
And deep his midnight lair had made 
In lone Glenartney’s hazel shade ; 
But when the sun his beacon red 
Had kindled on Benvoirlich’s head, 
The blood-hound’s deep resounding bay 
Came swelling up the rocky way. 
—Lavy oF Tux Laxg, 

**Tayho! Tayho!” 

And straightway to the cry responded the long-drawn 
mellow notes of the huge French horns which were in 
those days used by every yeoman pricker, as the peculiar 
and time-honored instrument of the stag-hunt, the mots 
of which were as familiar to every hunter’s ear as so many 
spoken words of his vernacular. 

It was the gray dawn of a lovely summer morning in 
the latter part of July, and although the moorcocks were 
crowing sharp and shrill from every rocky knoll or purple 
eminence of the wild moors, now waving far and wide 
with the redolent luxuriance of their amethyst garniture, 
for the heather was in its full flush of bloom ; although 
the thrush and black-birds were caroling in emulous joy, 
at the very top of their voices, from every brake and 
thicket which feathered the wild banks of the hill-burns, 
the sun had not lifted a portion of his disc above the 
huge, round-topped fells which formed the horizon to the 
north and westward of my scene. That scene was the’ 


slope of a long hill— 
“A gentle hill, 
Green and of mild declivyity—the last, 
As ’twere the cape of a long ridge of such, 
Save that there was no sea to lave its base, 
But a most living landscape, and the wave 
Of woods and corn-fields, and the abodes of men 
Scattered at intervals, and wreathing smoke 
Arising from such rustic roofs.” 


192 


THE DEATH OF THE STAG, 193 


The hills above and somewhat farther off to the south- 
ward and eastward, are clothed and crowned with oak 
woods of magnificence and size so unusual, and kept with 
such marked evidence of care and culture that no one 
could doubt, even if it were not proved by the gray turrets 
of an old baronial manor, and the spire of a tall clock- 
house shooting up high oyer the tops of the forest giants, 
that they were the appendages and ornaments of some 
one of those ancient homes of England, which, full of 
elegancies and graces of the present, remind us so pleas- 
antly of the ruder, though not less homely, hospitalities 
of the past. 

The immediate summit of the slope I have mentioned 
is bare, yet conspicuous for a single tree, the only one of 
its kind existing for many miles in that district, a single 
white pine, tall enough for the mast of some huge ad- 
miral, and as such visible, it is said, from points in the 
four northern provinces of England, and the two south- 
ernmost of Scotland, whence it is known far and wide, in 
many a border lay and legend, as the one-tree ‘hill on 
Reedswood.* Below the brow of this inland promontory, 
for such indeed it is, which is covered with beautiful, 
short, mossy grass, as firm and soft as the greensward of 
a modern race-course, and used as one vast pasture of two 
hundred acres, lies a vast tract of coppice, principally of 
oak and birch, but interspersed with expanses of waving 
heather, where the soil is too shallow.to support a larger 
growth, and dotted here and there with bold, gray crags, 
which have cropped out above the surface, and amongst 
these, few and far between, some glorious old, gnarled 
hawthorns, which may well have furnished May-wreaths 
to the yellow-haired daughters of the Saxon before the 
mailed foot of the imperious Norman had dinted the 
green turf of England. This coppice overspread the 


*In Northumberland, a few miles from the Scottish border. 


194. FRANK FORESTER. 


whole declivity and base of the hill, until it melted into 
the broad, rich meadows, which, with a few scattered 
woods of small size, and here and there a patch of yellow 
wheat, or a fragrant bean-field, filled all the bottom of the 
great strath or valley, down to the banks of a large 
stream, beyond which the land rose steeply, first in rough 
moorland pastures, divided by dry stone walls, then in 
round, heathery swells, then in great broad-backed purple 
fells, and beyond all, faintly traceable in the blue haze of 
distance, in the vast ridges of the Cheyiots and the hills 
of Tevydale. Along the base of the hill-side, parting it 
from the meadows, ran a tall, oak park-paling, made of 
rudely-split planks, not any where less than five fect in 
height, through which access was given to the valley by 
heavy gates of the same material, from two or three 
winding wood-roads into the shadowy lanes of the lovely 
lower country. 

Such was the scene, o’er which there arose before the 
sun, startling the hill echoes far and near, and silencing 
the grouse-cock on the moors, and the song-birds in the 
brake and thicket by their tumultuous din, the shouts 
and fanfares that told the hunt was up. 

**Tayho! Tayho!” 

Tara-tara-tara-tantara-ra-taratantara-tantara-ra-ra-rah. 
Which, being interpreted into verbal dog-talk, is con- 
ceived to say: ‘Gone away! gone away! gone away! 
away! away! away!” and is immediately understood as 
such, not by the well-mounted sportsman only, but by 
what Scott calls, himself no unskilled woodsman, ‘‘ the 
dauntless trackers of the deer,” who rush full-mouthed 
to the cheery clangor, filling all earth and ether with the 
musical discords of their sweet chidings. 

The spot whence the first loud, manly shout ‘‘ Tayho ” 
resounded, was almost within the shadow of the one tree, 
where, as from a station commanding the whole view of 
the covert, which a powerful pack of the famous Talbot 


THE DEATH OF THE STAG. 195 


bloodhounds, numbering not less than forty couple,were 
in the act of drawing, a group was collected, gallantly 
apparelled, gallantly mounted, and all intent, like the 
noble steeds they bestrode, eyes, ears, and souls erect, on 
the gallant sport of the day. 

Those were the days of broad-leaved hats and floating 
plumes, of velvet justaucorps, rich on the seams with 
embroideries of gold and silver, of the martial jack-boot, 
and the knightly spur on the heel, and the knightly 
sword on the thigh, and thus were our bold foresters 
accoutred for such a chase as is never heard tell of in 
these times of racing hounds and flying thoroughbreds, 
when the life of a fox is counted by the minutes he can 
live with a breast-high scent before the flyers, and the 
value of a hunter by the seconds he can go in the first 
flight with a dozen horseman’s stone upon his back. 

Things then were otherwise; the fox was unkennelled, 
or the stag unharbored at daybreak, and killed, if the 
scent lay well, sooner or later, before sunset, runs were 
reckoned by hours, hounds picked up for their staunch- 
ness, not their fleetness, horses bought not for their 
speed, but for their stoutness, and the longest, steadiest 
last rider, not the most daring or the foremost, won the 
palm of the chase, were it brush or antler, when the game 
fox was run into, or the gallant stag turned to bay. 

The gentlemen who were gathered on the broad, bare 
brow of the one-tree hill were in all twelve or thirteen in 
number, all, at first sight, men of gentle blood and gen- 
erous education, although as there ever is, ever must be 
in every company, whether of men or inferior animals, 
there was one to whom every eye, even of the unknown 
stranger or the ignorant peasant, would have naturally 
turned as evidently and undoubtedly the superior of the 
party, both in birth and breeding; he mingled neyerthe- 
less with the rest on the most perfect terms not of equality 
only, but of intimate familiar intercourse and friendship. 


196 FRANK FORESTER, 


No terms of ceremonial, no titles of rank or territorial 
influence, but simple Christian names passed between 
those gay and joyous youths; nor was there anything in 
the habit of the wearers, or the mounting of the riders, 
to indicate the slightest difference in their positions of 
social well-being and well-doing. One youth, however, 
who answered to the name of Gerald, and sometimes to 
the patrimonial Howard, was so far the handsomer both 
in form and feature, the statelier in stature, the grace- 
fuller in gesture, the manlier in bearing, the firmer and 
easier of seat and hand on his hunter, that any one would 
have been prompt to say almost at a glance, there is the 
man of all this gentle and generous group, whom, if war 
waken its clangor in the land, if external perils threaten 
its coast, or internal trouble shake its state, foreign wars 
or domestic strife will alike find the foremost, whether in 
his seat with the senate, or in his saddle on the field, 
wielding with equal force and skill the statesman’s, 
scholar’s, soldier’s eye, tongue, sword; all honored him, 
indeed, and he deserved that all should honor him, 

I have omitted, not forgotten or neglected, to mention 
as first and fairest of that fair company, a bevy of half a 
dozen fair and graceful girls, not like the gentlemen, all 
of one cast, but as was evident, not so much from the 
difference of their grace and beauty, though in these also 
there was a difference, as from the relative difference of 
positions which they maintained, four remaining some- 
what in the rear of the other two, and not mingling un- 
less first addressed in the conversation, and from some 
distinction in the costliness and material of their attire. 

A mounted chamberlain, with four or five grooms, who 
stood still farther aloof, in the rear of the ladies in wait- 
ing, and two or three glittering pages standing afoot 
among the latter, in full tide of gallantry and flirtation, 
their coursers held by the grooms in attendance, made up 
the party. From which must always be excepted the 


THE DEATH OF THE STAG. 197 


huntsman, the verdurer, and eight or ten yeoman prick- 
ers, In laced green jerkins, with round velvet caps, like 
those worn by the whippers-in of the present day, and 
huge French-horns over their left shoulders, who were 
seen from time to time appearing, disappearing, and re- 
appearing in the glades and dingles of the hill-side covert 
and heard now rating the untimely and fallacious chal- 
lenge of some wayward and willful puppy, now cheer- 
ing the earnest and trusty whipper of some redoubted 
veteran of the pack, as he half-opened on a scent of 
yester-even. 

The hounds had been in the coppice above an hour, and 
two-thirds of its length had already been drawn blank, 
the gentlemen were beginning to exchange anxious and 
wistful glances, and two or three had already consulted 
more than once or twice their ponderous, old-fashioned 
repeaters, and now the elder, shorter and fairer of the 
two damsels, giving the whip lightly to her chestnut 
palfry, cantered up to the side of Gerald Howard, fol- 
lowed by her companion, whose dark redundance of half- 
dishevelled nut-brown tresses fell down from beneath a 
velvet cap, with a long drooping plume, on each side of 
a face of the most exquisite oval, with a high brow, long, 
jet-black eyelashes, showing in the cold relief against her 
pure, colorless cheeks, for her eyes were downcast, and 
an expression of the highest intellect, which is ever found 
in woman, mingled with all a woman’s tenderness and 
softness. She was something above the middle hight, 
with a figure of rare symmetry, exquisitely rounded, and 
sat her horse at once most femininely and most firmly, 
without the least indication of manliness in her seat or 
demeanor, yet with a certain air of at-homeness in her 
position and posture, that showed she could ride as well, 
perhaps as boldly, as the best man among them. 

“Ah ! Gerald, Gerald,” said the elder girl, laughingly, 
as she tapped him on the arm with the silver butt of her 


198 FRANK FORESTER. 


riding whip, ‘‘is this your faith to fair ladies, and 
especially to this fairest Kate, that you deluded us from 
our soft beds, at this untimely hour, with promises to 
unharbor us a stag of ten within so many minutes, all 
for the pleasure of our eyes, and the delectation of our 
hearts ; and here haye we been sitting on this lone hill- 
side two hours and upwards, to the great craving of our 
appetites, and the faintness of our hearts, yearning, as 
the queen’s good puritans would have it, after creature 
comfort. Out on you ! out on you for a false knight, as 
I believe not, for my part, that there is one horn or hoof 
from the east to the west on the hill-side, no, not from 
the ‘ throstle’s nest’ to the ‘ thorny brae.’” 

‘Ah ! sister mine, art so incredulous, but I will wager 
you or ere the Talbots reach that great gray stone, with 
the birch boughs moying over it like the plumes, as our 
bright Kate would say, of a dead warrior’s helmet over 
his cold brow, we will have a stag afoot, ay, and a stag 
of ten.” And instantly raising his voice to a quicker and 
clearer note, ‘‘see now!” he cried, ‘‘see now!” as a 
suberb, dark-colored animal, not lower than a yearling 
colt at the forehand, leaped with a bound as agile as if he 
was aided by wings, on the cope-stone of the dry stone 
wall, which bounded the hither side of the hill coppice, 
with vast, branching antlers, tossed as if in defiance, and 
a swan-like neck swollen with pride and anger. He 
stood there an instant, self-poised, self-balanced, “like 
the herald Mercury new lighted on a heayen-kissing hill,” 
uttered a hoarse, bellowing cry, peculiar to the animal in 
his season, and then sailing forth in a long, easy curve, 
alighted on the springy turf, whose enamelled surface he 
scarce dinted, and then swept up the gentle slope almost 
toward the admiring group on the brow, but in a diagon- 
ally curved line that would carry him in the long run to 
the south-west of them, at the distance of perhaps a 
hundred yards, 


THE DEATH OF THE STAG. 199. 


*‘Tayho! Tayho!” burst in a clear and hearty shout 
from the exited lips of Gerald Howard. And instantly 
from every part of the hill-side, from the ‘throstle’s 
nest’ to the ‘thorny brae,’ from ten well-blown French 
horns burst the wild call. ‘*'Tara-tara, tara-tantara-ra- 
tara-tantara-tantara-ra-ra-rah, Gone away, gone away, 
gone away, away, away!” and the fierce rally of the 
mighty Talbots broke into tongue at once through the 
whole breadth and length of the oak coppice, as they 
came pouring up the hills, making the heather bend and 
the coppice crash before them like those famed Spartan 
hounds of Hercules and Cadmus, 


“When in the woods of Crete they bayed the bear, 
So flewed, so randed, and their heads were hung 
With ears that sweep away the morning dew; 
Crook-kneed and dew-lapped like Thessalian bulls ; 
Slow in pursuit but matched in mouth like bells 
Each under each.?? 


At fifty separate spots they leaped the wall nearly 
abreast, but four were in may be a spear’s length the 
leaders, and they laying their heads right at the noble 
quarry, which was still full in view, came straining up 
the hill, making all ring around them with their deep- 
mouthed thunder. The rest topped the wall one by one, 
in view too, and on a breast-high scent came steaming 
up the rich grass slope on converging lines, so that as 
they passed the attentive group to the westward, within 
a hundred yards, the pack had got altogether within, 
perhaps another hundred yards of his haunches, running 
so that a large carpet might have covered the whole forty 
couple, and raving with such a din of harmonious dis- 
cords, stich shrill and fisavage trebles of the fierce bitch 
hounds, such a deep diapasone of the old veteran dogs, 
such sweet and attuned chidings of the whole, that not 
an ear but must have listened with delight, not a heart 


200 FRANK FORESTER. 


but must have bounded with rapture at the exulting 
sounds. 

And ever and anon there rung up from the wildwood 
the deep, mellow blasts of the French horns, blent with 
jangled cries of Talbots into a strange and indescribable 
clangor and crepitation, at once most peculiar and most 
entrancing. 

At the same moment the sun burst into view above the 
eastern hills, and pouring down a great flood of golden 
lustre over the whole glowing scene, kindled up everything 
into life and light, tinging with ruddy light the dappled 
sides of the noble beast as he swept by them, now within 
fifty yards, for he had circled around them, wantoning 
and bounding to and fro, perfectly unconcerned by the 
nearer presence of his pursuers, and seemingly desirous 
to display the miracles of his speed and beauty to the 
fair eyes that admired him, enlivened the dappled hides 
of the many-colored, glossy pack, burnishing the sleek 
and satin coats of the noble coursers, until they glowed 
with almost metallic splendor, flashing upon the rich 
laces, the bright buckles and the polished sword-hilts of 
the hunters, and gilding the bridle-bits and brazen horns 
of the yerdurers and yeomen prickers, until the whole 
hill-side was glittering with a thousand gay hues and 
salient lights, filling the mind with memories of fairy- 
land and magic marvels. 

Hitherto the little group on the brow of the one-tree 
hill had stood motionless, while the gay, animated scene 
had revolved around them, a glittering circle wheeling 
around the stationary center; but now, when the servants 
of the chase, huntsmen and verdurers, prickers and all, 
streamed up the long hill at their best pace, all wheeled 
around the tree and its gay company, swelling the din 
with the flare and braying of their horns, the gallant 
stag appeared to comprehend that a fresh band of ene- 
mies were added to his first pursuers, for he half turned 


. 


THE DEATH OF THE STAG. 201 


his head to gaze on them, half paused for a moment to 
snuff the air, with nostrils pridefully elated, and flanks 
heaving, not with weariness as yet, but with contempt 
and scorn, then with a toss of his antlers, and a loud 
snort of indignation, set his head fair to the northwest, 
full for the hills of Scotland, and went away at long, 
sweeping bounds that seemed to divide the green slope, 
by leaps of eight yards each, soared back again over the 
rough stone wall, and went crashing through the thickets, 
straight for the tall oak palings and the river, as if he 
were bound for some distant well-known point, ona right 
line as the crow flies. 

And now for the gentlemen the chase was begun, and 
Gerald, Howard led it, like their leader as he was in all 
things, and the rest followed him like men as they were, 
and brave ones, but to the ladies it was ended so soon as 
they had breathed their palfries down the slope to the 
stone wall and the woodside at an easy canter; and they 
returned to the hill-top, where they found viands and re- 
freshments spread on the grass; and long they lingered 
there watching the hunt recede; and the sounds of the 
chase die away in the far distance. But it was long ere 
the sights and sounds were lost all and wholly to their 
eyes and ears, for the quarry still drove on, as straight as 
the crow flies, due northward—due northward the chase 
followed. 

They saw the gallant stag swoop over the oak-pales as if 
they were no obstable, they saw the yelping pack crash 
and climb after him; then they saw Gerald Howard on 
his tall coal-black barbe soar over it unhindered, but all 
the rest turned right or left to gate or gap, or ere they 
might follow him. The valley was crossed as by a whirl- 
wind, the river swam by hart, hound, and hunter, un- 
hesitating and unheeding, and far beyond up the green 
moorland pasture, over the stone-walls, now disappearing 
over the hill-tops into the misty hollows, now glinting 


2 


202 FRANK FORESTER. 


up again into the light of some yet more distant stretch 
of purple heath; and still the chidings of the hounds, and 
still the wild bursts of the French horns fell faintly on 
the ears, as the wind freshened from the westward, but 
at length sound and sight failed them, and when silence 
had sunk still and solitude reigned almost perfect over 
the late-peopled slope of thorny brae and the one-tree hill, 
the gay bevy of dames and damsels returned homeward, 
something the more serious if not the sadder for the 
parting, to await the gathering of their partners to the 
gay evening meal, 

Long they waited, late it grew, the evening meal was 
over, the close of night had come, the lights in the bower 
and hall were kindled, the gates were locked and barred, 
long ere the first of the belated foresters returned soiled 
and splashed, way-worn and weary, with the jaded and 
harassed hounds, and horses almost dead from the ex- 
haustion of the day. At midnight, of the field, all the 
men save one were collected, though two or three came 
in on foot, and yet more on borrowed horses, their own 
good steeds left in the morass or on the moorland, to 
feed the kites and the hill-foxes; of the pack all save 
two mustered at the kennel gates in such plight as the 
toil they had borne permitted. 

The man missing was Sir Gerald Howard, the master 
of the pack, the two hounds were its two leaders, Hercu- 
les and Hardheart, of whom no rider had eyer yet seen 
the speed slacken or the heart fail. 

The old vyerdurer, who gave out the last, reported 
Gerald Howard going well when he saw him last, with 
the stag and two Talbots of all in full view, and this many 
miles into Scotland within the pleasant vale of Teviotdale, 
with the great Scottish hills, grim and gray, towering up 
before him, and the night closing fast on those dim soli- 
tudes. 

It was late on the next day when Sir Gerald Howard 


THE DEATH OF THE STAG. 203 


was seen riding up the road on the same steed he had 
backed so gallantly, still weary and worn, though recruit- 
ing, with the huge antlers at his saddle-bow, but no brave 
Talbots at his heel. : 

He had ridden far into the darkness, gtill guided by 
the baying of the staunch hounds; and when he could 
see to ride no longer, had obtained timely succor and re- 
freshment from a stout borderer of Teviot-side. At day- 
light mounted a fresh horse, a garron of the country, to 
renew the chase; but it was now soon ended. Scarce had 
he gone a mile on the straight line they had run through- 
out, ere he found Hardheart stiff and cold on the moun- 
tain heather, and not a hundred yards yet onward, ere 
the great stag lay before him, not a hair of his hide in- 
jured, and Hercules beside him, with his head upon his 
haunches, where he had breathed his last, powerless to 
blood the brave quarry he had so nobly conquered, 

Sixty miles had they run on that summer’s day from 
point ; they had died together, and in their graves they 
were not confounded, for a double tomb was scooped in 
the corrie or hollow of the mountain-side, wherein they 
were found, and above it was piled a rough, gray column, 
whereupon may be seen rudely sculptured this true 
epitaph, 

Hercules killed Hart O’Grease, 
And Hart O’Grease killed Hurcules. 

For, reader mine, this is a real and true tale, and I, 
who tell it you, have sat upon the stone, and tempered 
my cup of Farintosh from the little rill beside it, with 
the wild peak of the Maiden’s Pass before me, the dark * 
Cheviots at my right, the blue hights of the Great Moor 
looming away almost immeasurably to the westward, and 
no companions near me save the red grouse of the heather, 
and the curlew of the morass, nothing to while away the 
time that my weary setters slept in the noonday sun, save 
this old-time tradition. 


LONG JAKES, THE PRAIRIE MAN. 
Known to no other land.—Scorr, 


Our hero is emphatically, and peculiarly, a man—a 
man, at an epoch when manhood is on the decay through- 
out the world; when individuality and personal charac- 
teristics and personal influence are yielding everywhere 
to the pre-eminence of masses. 

A man of energy, and iron will, and daring spirit, 
tameless, enthusiastic, ardent, adventurous, chivalric, 
free—a man made of the stuff which fills the mould of 
heroes, 

It is good for a land to have such men among her chil- 
dren; for it is in the hearts of such men that burns the 
deathless love of liberty and country, when selfish greed 
and the base love of gain have quenched it in the sordid 
bosom of the burgher—that throbs the innate chivalry of 
nature, long after that grand feeling has become a by- 
word and a mockery on the lips of the truckling trader. 

As soon shalt thou tame the ocean eagle, and call him 
fluttering from your dovecotes to pick crumbs from your 
hands; as soon shalt thou bind the unicorn with his 
band in the furrow, and compel him to harrow the yal- 
leys after thee, as thou shalt win Long Jakes from the 
snre rifle and swift courser, and lure him to’the desk and 
the pen, or teach him that the trickeries of trade are 
nobler than the darings of manhood. 

A lie has gone forth through the world, during these 
lazy days of peace: the traffickers of the nations haye 
waxed wanton and vainglorious; and in the insolent sub- 
limity of their petty successes they have imagined them- 
selyes princes, boasted themselves the rulers of the uni- 
verse, proclaimed it loudly that henceforth utility alone 

204 


LONG JAKES, THE PRAIRIE MAN. 205 


should govern, that wealth alone and trade should sway 
the mind of empires, and chivalry and honor be to all 
men, a mockery and a wind-blast. 

This lie it is, which has prevailed so far, and alarmed 
so thoroughly the minds of wise and thinking men, that 
there are many even of the best and most religious who 
would even welcome war with all its havoc, all its horrors, 
as the sole thing that can wipe away this loathsome and 
corrupting blight from the hearts of men; the sole thing 
which can create even a passing elevation in the minds of 
the multitude, which can lead them to suppose that men 
have higher capabilities than that of hoarding money; 
and that there are successes of more importance to man- 
kind than those of thriving bankers; interests of greater 
moment than the spinning of cotton, or the boiling of 
molasses—that there are such things, in a word, as truth, 
and honor; as patriotism and glory; and that the whole 
aim and intention of man’s life, and the world’s existence 
is not, as some would have us to believe, mere selfishness 
and mammon. 

There are spirits in the world—and it is good and 
wholesome that these overgrown traders should some- 
times be reminded of it—spirits of bookmen toiling in 
solitude beside the midnight lamp; spirits of hardy and 
adventurous sailors furrowing the trackless ocean with 
their daring keels; spirits of bold and fiery hunters roy- 
ing the wild interminable prairies on steeds as proud and 
independent as their riders; the slightest word, the most 
casual deed of whom is in the eye of the philosopher of 
vaster influence for good or evil, of wider import to the 
weal or woe of nations, than all the collected gains of the 
united merchants of every age and clime and country, 
from the days of Tarshish and of Tyre, to those of New 
York and Liverpool. 

And when society shall have become rotten to the core, 
when the evils of advanced civilization shall haye outrun 


206 FRANK FORESTER. 


its advantages, when wealth shall have begotten luxury, 
and luxury sloth, and sloth effeminacy, baseness, coward- 
ice, dishonor—such things have ever been from the 
earliest of recorded ages; and such things shall be again as 
surely as we arenow speculating on them—when the world 
shall be plunged in the night of sensuality and selfishness, 
wallowing in the mire of gold-worship, the purifying 
leayen which shall be found to save that weltering mass 
from absolute and utter putrefaction, will be found, not 
in the manufacturers of Manchester or Lowell, not in 
the merchants of New York or New Orleans, of Liver- 
pool or London, but in the Cossacks of the Eastern, the 
hunters of the Western wilderness. 

When hardiness and manhood shall be names of things 
forgotten in great cities, when liberty and patriotism 
shall be by-words, when chastity of women, honor of men 
shall be doubted and disbelieved in the society of the 
rich, the noble, and the proud; they will still dwell, un- 
tainted household gods, in the wigwam of the wild hun- 
ter; still ride, constant companions, with the free, simple 
rover of the desert. 

Oh! if there be one thing great and glorious to behold, 
one thing which makes the blood thrill in the yeins, and 
the hair bristle on the brows with strange excitement but 
to hear of, it is that iron energy of will, that perfect inde- 
pendence, that proud self-confidence of soul which makes 
one individual man a match for hundreds of the spirit- 
fettered, soulless slaves to the world’s opinion, of the 
men machines, into which it is the work of society to 
convert what should be immortal souls, and independent 
men. 

It is this natural and inborn admiration for self-upheld 
and self-relying singleness of character, for the majesty 
of individual manhood, which makes the olden legends 
of knight-errantry and strange chivalric yalor so dear to 
every heart, not of the ardent boy alone or of the romantic 


LONG JAKES, THE PRAIRIE MAN. 207 


maiden, but of the gravest and wisest of mankind. It is 
this natural love for freedom and adventure, which 
makes us turn away palled and cloyed from the narrative 
of vast deeds achieved, great honors won by masses, to 
the rare accidents of private heroism, of single self-denial 
or self sacrifice, as to clear planets blazing out with glory 
unquenched and unquenchable from the confused and 
misty light of a whole galaxy of crowded constellations. 

It is this instinctive love of the wild, the spirited, the 
daring; this throbbing of the heart at acts of generous 
hardihood; this thrilling of the nerves at tales of dangers 
incurred dauntlessly, of accidents by flood or field, of 
‘‘hair breath ’scapesi’ the imminent deadly breach,” which 
the base utilitarian jargon of the day, the sordid pseudo 
philosophy of political economists and world-regenerators, 
would eradicate from our souls, as visionary and unprofit- 
able, vain, fruitless and fantastic. 

Should they succeed, they will have robbed humanity 
of its best attribute, its brightest jewel; they will -have 
abolished patriotism; abolished liberty; abolished -man- 
hood, which is truth and honor; they will have eradicated 
the love of woman, the love of country, and the love of 
God, which are that chivalry, against which they cry 
war unto the knife. 

But they will not succeed; while there are yet free 
plains and bold mountains left to which the few 
grand spirits of the world may fly for freedom—freec- 
dom not from galling rule of autocratic Cxsars, but from 
the tyranny of trade; not from the despotism of indi- 
vidual manhood, but from the soul-enslaving, thought- 
destroying empire of majoritiesand masses; not from the 
chains of cruel kings or the inquisition of fanatic priests, 
but from the more oppressive fetters of general opinion, 
the more intolerable scrutiny of the argus-eyed, all-secing 
public. 

These are the causes politic, which, joined to causes 


208 FRANK FORESTER. 


natural, have created in this our every-day world, in this 
most utilitarian, money-making age, in this most practi- 
caland money-loying country, arace peculiar to America, 
her own appropriate and independent sons, known to no 
other land—the men of the prairies. 

It is no hatred of their fellow-men, no loathing of the 
decencies, the comforts, the affections, the courtesies of 
civilized life, that makes these wild and dauntless spirits 
fly from the smoke of a settlement, as though it reeked 
with pestilence—it is the glorious, the free, the untram- 
melled sense of individual will and independent power, of 
manhood self-sufficient, which prompts them at the ex- 
pense of all domestic ties, of all soft luxuries and fond 
endearments, to possess their own souls, with the desert 
for their dwelling place, and the blue sheen of God’s 
heaven for their roof-tree. Great and earnest spirits are 
invaribly struck with this strange peculiarity, this natural 
want in every bosom, a want eradicated only by the false 
training of city life, and what is called, I fear falsely, 
civilized society. Hark to the grand lines of a great 
thinker, of one to whom the air of courts was native, of 
one who had himself, as he writes ‘‘in turn run through 
all that is beautiful and new,” only to cry at last 


The town was entered. Oh! eternity! 
“God made the country and man made the town,” 
So Cowper says—and I begin to be 
Of his opinion, when I see cast down 
Rome, Babylon, Tyre, Carthage, Nineveh, 
All walls men know, and many never known, 
And, pondering on the present and the past, 
To deem the woods shall be our home at last— 


only to record his opinion, and that not in wantonness 
of the poetic word, or in that spirit of wild and bitter 
paradox which is found running through some of his 
most powerful outpourings, but in graye and serious 


LONG JAKES, THE PRAIRIE MAN. 209 


earnest, that the happiest life on earth is that of the 
backwoodsman who 


Enjoys the lonely vigorous harmless days, 
Of his old age in wilds of deepest maze— 


only to cry aloud, ‘‘ Oh! that the desert were my dwell- 
ing place,” and to reject in very weariness all the advan- 
tages of rank and orders and renown, for independence of 
soul, for freedom from the tyranny of custom, for the 
pure and simple excitements of the boundless woodland 
and the everlasting sea. 

In this consideration, it is worthy of remark that 
while hundreds of native foresters, of Indians, more es- 
pecially, have been taken from the rudeness of a savage 
to the luxurious charms of a civilized life, no one of whom, 
it is believed, has ever failed to return on the very first 
occasion to his darling independence, to the wild, hard 
realities of his free hunter life—hundreds of rich men, 
nobly born, cultivated, polished, learned, have deliberately 
cast away the trammels of a society which had become 
intolerable to them, because its requisitions were as insa- 
tiable as its objects were unreal, and betaken themselves 
to the forest and the prairie, where they might feel them- 
selves indeed men, and not the mere fractional atoms of 
a great mass of human matter; and it is well established 
that no one of these men has eyer waxed so weary of his 
solitude and self-dominion as to return a willing slave to 
the caprices of fashion, and the dogmas of depraved so- 
ciety. 

A young French renegado told a great writer that he 
never was alone galloping a fleet horse in the desert with- 
out experiencing a feeling nearly akin to rapture. That 
feeling was not in the fleet horse, it was not in the lonely 
desert, it was not even in the solitude—it was in this— 
that he burned with the triumphant sense of absolute and 
irresistible freedom; of self-sufficiency to any possible 


210 FRANK FORESTER. 


emergency; of perfect empire over himself, his horse, and 
all around him. 


Such is the feeling that led Columbus across the path- 
less ocean to the shores of a new world; that spurred 
Cortez to found new empires; that drove Balboa to a 
wild peak of Darien, thence to descry new oceans; and 
such is the feeling, although they probably have neither 
analyzed nor could describe it, that prompts hundreds 
and hundreds of fiery, restless souls to roam the prairies 
on untiring steeds, incurring endless toils, immeasurable 
perils, relying for their daily food on the rifle or the lasso, 
in search of that which is to them content and happiness, 
the wildest liberty, the fiercest excitement. 


Hitherto, I have spoken of a class—now look upon a 
specimen, the very picture and model of a man. 


Look on that sinewy and nervous frame, taller than 
falls to the lot of ordinary mortals; and so muscular 
and brawny that the activity to do, the capacity to 
bear, is increased tenfold; is inured by all extremities 
of cold and heat, gaunt famine and distracting thirst, 
to laugh at vicissitudes and sufferings which would be 
certain death to the hardiest inhabitants of cities. Look 
on that bold, frank, sun-burned face, with its keen and 
pervading eye, farsighted as the soaring eagle’s, and its 
expression of indomitable courage, and proud reliance in 
those inborn or acquired faculties which never yet have 
failed him in emergency. Look on the graceful ease of 
hand and leg, as he sits on the wild horse of the prairie, 
with as much negligent abandonment, as you fair reader, 
recline on your embroidered ottoman. His, you may 
see, has been no manége schooling; no riding-house man- 
cuvering has given him the delicate quick finger, feeling 
the mouth of his fierce steed by the slightest touch of the 
slackened rein; has given him that seat so firm and yet 
so easy, from which you might as well expect to see him 


LONG JAKES, THE PRAIRIE MAN, 211 


shaken, as the piled rocks upon the far horizon to top- 
ple down before the breeze of summer. 

Again, what shall you see more perfect, even to its 
smallest details, than all his clothing and equipment, the 
uniform and weapons of the wilderness; what can the 
mind conceive more picturesque, and at the same time 
more effective? One glance of the eye discovers that 
here is no holiday furbishing, no mummery masking, no 
military vamping and padding, horse-millinery of modern 
days. Everything here is real, useful, yet how showy, 
and how more than romantic. 

The broad brimmed sombrero, well suited to guard the 
eyes alike from the overpowering splendor of the level 
sunbeams, on those interminable plains where neither 
tree nor hillock intervenes to break their intolerable fer- 
vor; and from the driving hail and sleet of winter, when 
those wide wastes are one vast expanse of immaculate 
snow, and the storm wind careers in unchecked fury over 
their drear inhospitable surface—the bare and muscular 
neck, the scarlet hunting shirt, with that black kerchief 
negligently knotted beneath its falling collar—the gay 
blanket cloak strapped to the cantle of the high Spanish 
saddle, the twisted coils of the deadly lariat hanging in 
loose wreaths from the pommel—the breeches, moccasins 
and leggins all wrought of the finest buckskin, garted 
and fringed with the best of Indian skill—the massive 
spur and heavy wooden stirrup of the Mexican ranchero 
—the buffalo-horn exquisitely carved and filled with the 
choicest rifle powder-—the hollow alligator’s tooth, its ap- 
propriate charger, swinging by a cord of sinews from the 
shoulder belt—the otter skin pouch full of all implements 
of gunnery; and in the girdle the tremendous two-edged 
knife—most fatal arm for hand to hand encounter since 
theshort stabbing sword and buckler of the Roman made 
him the master of a world—nor is this all, for in his right 
hand swings easily a weapon, unknown to the world-con- 


212 FRANK FORESTER. 


quering Roman, against which the steel coats and levelled 
lances of Normandy’s resistless cavaliers would have been 
weaker and of less avail than straws and parchment, in 
western hands the queen of weapons, the sure and deadly 
rifle. The soaring falcon is not more certain of the heron 
who cowers before him in mid-heaven, blinded through 
dread of his unerring swoop, than are the hand and the 
eye of the prairie man of any beast of chase, of any 
enemy, who is so luckless as to bide his aim within three- 
hundred yards, upon those level hunting grounds. 

Then for the beast, which he bestrides! loftier and 
more graceful coursers you shall see in the training 
stables, and on the courses of the South and East; more 
swanlike necks, and coats more smooth and satin-like; 
cleaner legs, slenderer pasterns; but where shall you find 
limbs strung to hardier endurance, nostrils expanded 
with a fiercer joy to cry ha! ha! amid the trumpets, or a 
more keen and vicious spark of evil in the untamed and 
fearless eye? 

Match him, at Oakland’s or on the Union Course, 
against your Bostons and your Fashions, and they shall 
gallop away from him, over the beaten track, as though 
he were but standing still; and leaye him distanced in 
the rear, while they canter, hard held, and snatching at 
their bits, before the applauding judge’s stand! Match 
them against the wild horse of the wilderness, over his 
boundless plains, cumbered with rocky masses here, there 
torn and gullied by the torrent rains of autumn, here 
matted with the stiff stems of the ragged artemisia, 
there deep and boggy, and fitter for the curlew’s wing 
than for the horse’s hoof—match them there, not for a 
single stretch of four miles, not for a thrice repeated 
match of sixteen, but for the savage and incessant gallop, 
day in and day out, scant of water, ignorant of the taste 
of grain, unconscious of the currycomb or whisk, wet by 
the dews of evening, parched by the heats of noon, chilled 


LONG JAKES. THE PRAIRIE MAN. 213 


by the frosts of autumnal night, and your unrivalled 
champions of the turf shall droop their graceful heads on 
the first day, shall stumble in the thorny brake, shall 
flounder on the swampy level, shall pine and die, and 
feed the vultures of the prairie, while the wild desert-born 
is neighing leagues aloof, in the fullness of his exulting 
triumph. 

Look at him! what point lacks he, that a horse should 
have, for speed, or courage, or endurance? ‘True, he is 
low in stature, true he is cross-made somewhat; but mark 
the points of power; the ample chest, giving free scope to 
laboring lungs; the vast muscles of the quarters, those 
equine propellers; the sinewy volume of the forearm; 
the short cannon bone; the strong and well framed pas- 
tern, the high, round, solid hoof! If he be not stout and 
hardy, look not to shapes for hardihood and courage. 
Then mark the full, clear, limpid eye, with a touch still of 
that wildness in its light, that belongs of nature to every 
bird or beast. whose home is on the ocean or the desert— 
the broad flat brow, with its snip of white, relieving the 
rich brown of its uncurried hide; the basin face, indica- 
tive of his ancestry, the barb or the arab;—the nostrils 
wide, deep, crimson colored! 

Look at him, as he bows his proud head, with the abun- 
dant honors of his untrimmed mane and floating fore- 
lock, with angry snuff and snort, and stamps impatient 
of delay, while the keen eye of his master riveted on some 
point, leagues away, in the blue distance is reading signs 
of sport, or peril—no matter which—since both to him 
are excitement, rapture! 

Look at him, and then say could there be fitter steed 
for fitter rider? 

Centuries have rolled away since his first ancestors 
trampled those grassy solitudes, and filled the prairie 
winds, untainted yet by any breath of horses, with the 
long clamors of their warlike neighings. 


214 FRANK FORESTER. 


_ The blood of the Moorish barb throbs in his generous 
veins, transmitted through the Andalusian strain, not 
the least legacy to Spain of her Saracen invaders!—His 
great, great, grandsire, perchance bore the mail-clad 
weight of Fernando Soto, when he leaped ashore from his 
horse-galley, ‘‘very gallant in polished armor, and gay 
with silk upon silk,” on the young’ forest shores of Flor- 
ida; when the echoes of the woods and the wilderness 
were awakened by the rejoicing clangor of Castilian trum- 
pets; and the old war cry of St. Jago Espanoles! was 
mingled with the war-whoops of the Seminole and 
Cherokee. 

If it were so, as chivalrous a spirit fires the heart, al- 
though that heart throb under so rude a covering as the 
coarse blanket-shirt, of him who now reins the desert- 
born son, as panted under the steel corslet of him who 
backed, centuries ago, the Andalusian sire. 

Hard was the chase that made the wild horse of the 
desert the slave of man’s caprice. Oft pursued, never 
taken, the brown prairie colt had baffled all the best 
horses of the keenest hunters, ’till Long Jakes set his eye 
upon him, and swore he should be his; and when was 
that oath broken? 

Hard was the chase from early morn, when half a 
league aloof the hunter’s falcon eye descried him feeding 
with a small herd in a grassy valley; through the fierce 
noon; *till night was nigh at hand, and the evening 
star was shining clear on the horizon’s edge. 

Miles had flown away with minutes; all forms of coun- 
try had been crossed; the deep and miry swamp, the 
rough and broken hill-side, the long interminable level, 
had quaked, or clattered, or sounded dull and hollow, 
beneath the rapid hoof-tramps. Thick, thorny brakes 
had been traversed at unabated speed, broad rivers had 
been swum, and dangerous ravines had been cleared at a 
reckless bound. 


LONG JAKES, THE PRAIRIE MAN. 215 


Long since the wild herd had been scattered—long 
since the stout horse of the hunter—he had been once an 
officer’s charger—had driven through the terrified and 
neighing squadron; the fatal lariat of the hunter might 
have been cast with sure effect at any one of a dozen charg- 
ers, each well worthan Earl’s ransom. But the brown stal- 
lion only, despising any meaner quarry, Jakes followed, 
staunch and certain as the Scottish sleuth hound. 
He passed a snow-white mare, which was taken the next 
year and sold in St. Louis for five hundred dollars, which 
now bears a noble soldier on the far banks of the Rio Grande 
—I warrant me she was not far behind in that dragoon 
charge which won Arista’s cannon! He passed a straw- 
berry roan, which he took afterward himself, and sold to 
the scion of a high English race, who, smitten with the 
passion of the desert, journeyed beyond the Rocky Moun- 
tains under Jakes’ guidance; and that roan, I have heard 
them say, has led the Queen’s hounds, daily, over the 
rich green meads and thorny bull-fences of merry Eng- 
land! He passed an iron gray, which he has hunted since 
in yain a dozen times from morn to dewy eve! He passed 
them all disdainful—his eye still riveted upon the proud 
head, and unflagging gallop of the brown stallion, though 
half he feared he should but lose his labor. 

Day fleeted rapidly, and his own horse-was laboring 
sorely; the heaving of his flanks was terribly perceptible; 
he answered eyery spur-prick with a sob or a groan; and 
still the wild horse seemed fresh and unwearied, although 
so closely had Jakes pressed him, that he was but a short 
lance’s length ahead of him; nor, toil howe’er he might, 
could he increase that distance. 

Night was already gray upon the plain, and Jakes was 
almost despairing; when, as will often happen, chance, 
and a chance too well nigh fatal, brought about that, 
which skill, and daring, and almost superhuman perse- 
verance had failed to accomplish. 


216 FRANK FORESTER. 


They had toiled up a steep and craggy hillock; Jake’s 
charger rolling now at long stride, as if about to fall, and 
the brown horse at length giving some tokens of fatigue. 
The brown has reached the hill crest, has crossed it, and 
on the instant disappeared beyond it; with a wild cry, 
half neigh half shriek, amid a cloud of dust and rubbish. 

The hunter knew that there laya precipice before him; 
but knew it too late to hinder his own horse from plung- 
ing over headlong. He could not have stopped his wild 
career if he would; perhaps he would not if he could, so 
hot was the passion of the Nimrod in his heart. 

Well was it for him that he did not essay it—had he 
drawn in his rein, he must have checked the impetus by 
which alone he could be saved from immediate death; 
and that he perceived by instinct. 

Two seconds after the brown colt had cleared it, Jakes 
also crossed the summit. It was a broken, abrupt crag of 
limestone, with a steep fall of twenty feet. With a wild 
cheer, his spurs home to the rowel heads, his reins 
gathered firmly in a hand as elastic as a steel cross-bow, 
his head thrown backward almost to his horse’s croup, 
he charged it. 

Another second, and, with his own horse dead under 
him, he was floundering in a heap of sand and rubbish, 
at the base of the precipice, within ten feet of his quarry; 
which stunned and shaken, though uninjured, had not as 
yet recovered its legs after the fall. 

Even in that dread moment Long Jakes’ right hand 
forgot not its cunning; the fatal lariat was unslung in a 
second from the dead horse’s saddle-bow; was whirled 
with a practised finger about the hunter’s head; and sent 
hurtling through the night air, unerring. 

Throttled and choked, the wild horse was subdued—a 
blanket bound across his eyes, the iron curb thrust into 
his untamed jaws; the Mexican saddle belted upon his 
brawny back; and as, at length, he staggered, permitted, 


LONG JAKES, THE PRAIRIE MAN. 217 


to his feet, the indomitable centaur was bestriding him 
with curb, and spur, and thong, never to quit his back, 
*till the desert horse should confess his rider, 

Within a week the initials stamped upon his quarter, , 
and his trained paces and obedient mouth proclaimed the 
victory won: and never did a horse so hardly conquered, 
so nobly bear his victor. 

The lamb is not more gentle, the spaniel more obedient 
to his own lord’s command, than the steed of the prairie 
to the voice of his formidable captor. 

Many times has he saved his life, by his sagacity and 
speed; many times has he won the first honors of the 
chase; many times has he borne him to the rescue of 
human life, and once of female honor. 

The prairie has roared behind him, one furnace of de- 
vouring flame, yet he has still outstripped the lightning 
speed of that destroying element; a host of Savages, with 
bow and spear and rifle, have barred his rider’s passage, 
yet through that host he has borne him unwounded. 

Hurrah! then, for the prairie horse; Hurrah! for the 
Prairie Rider! both children of the wilderness! both 
nobler, stronger, braver, and more faithful, than the pale 
offspring of society! both 


Are America’s peculiar sons, 
Known to no other land! 


10 


SNIPE SHOOTING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE. 


The time had arrived when, as must be the case with 
the best friends, Harry and I were doomed to part, though 
but for a brief season, the special aim and object of my 
trip aeross the broad Atlantic, being no other than to see 
America in all its length and breadth, though long de- 
layed at Harry’s strong solicitation, and the magnificent 
sport I had enjoyed under his auspices on the broad 
marshes of New Jersey, and in the devious woodlands of 
fair Warwick, was now to be accomplished, and one cold 
winter’s afternoon I stepped on board the steamboat Mo- 
hican, for Stonington and Boston, whence I intended to 
visit in detail the eastern portion of the New England 
States ; and crossing by the gorges of the Kennebec, to 
pass the spring and summer in the rich provinces of 
Canada. It was my firm intent on my leaving my 
friend’s hospitable roof, to have gone quite up to Aroo- 
stook, and taken there a snow-shoe tramp after the moose 
and cariboo. But many causes fell out to the preven- 
tion of my plan, not the least of which was the exceeding 
mildness of the winter, and consequent want of snow 
sufficiently deep to render the sport either profitable or 
exciting. ‘The cold months of this year were therefore 
passed in absolute inaction, at least as regards field-sports. 
The double gun and Yager rifle which honest Timothy had 
with his own hands packed in double cases, duly secured 
by painted sail-cloth covers, saw not the light of day! 
The brace of clean-limbed, active setters, which, after 
much debate and consultation, I had at length picked up, 
my choice sanctioned by Harry’s most oracular appro- 
bation, one from that paragon of breakers, Mike San- 
ford, second of that name renowned throughout New 
Jersey, the other from his English rival, Dilke, truly, 

218 


616 


“AdINS FAL 


. 


S a 


7 = goes ; : = ; PW + ahah bye - 
Sif] dealt ec - ye Meera; |}! ‘aip Sind mun 


ic 

> 

‘ 4 
een. a 

7 r 

+ 

a 

2 


i? el ihe wor 


oT) 


7 neg. ial es ae 


a 


af tL pey eerie) . nee ir}; zi] ® en’ a4 
: a bs uh rs = =5 a@ 
m ihowets 1) on) ‘ nw oct oa oie. 


bay v7" 7h ‘ry . is — wa Ay ace Chart: Ye 


gi ype 24 (Vee 


pie hte dae oS 
eke n Pll ae 


° =? 
hy ——SFijse (hsb 


aitewt Sib a brite iP tsed iar hn no: Hots 


= 


7 


SNIPE SHOOTING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE. 221 


though differing in their methods, both Arcadians, had 
no more glorious exercise than trotting many a weary 
mile behind the well-horsed mails of the New England 
States, without which pleasurable interruptions to their 
hybernal slumbers, they would undoubtedly have rivalled 
Falstaff or Fat Tom in magnitude, before the breaking 
up of winter. Though undiversified by my beloved field- 
sports, the winter wore away, however, and that, be it 
said, not tediously, the tardy spring, less tardy in this 
instance than its wont, did break ; and on the fourteenth 
day of April I started on my route toward the ever-mem- 
orable Heights of Abraham, the same route, too, by 
which the then renowned and gallant Arnold led his 
detachment of back woodsmen into a hostile country. 
Greatly had I been misinformed concerning that same 
road, for beautiful, although it be, yea! beautiful exceed- 
ingly, running along the wild and wooded gorge of the 
broad, bright Kennebec, up to its junction with Dead 
river, I must say, that as a road it is most execrable. 
Though barely eighty miles from my starting post, it oc- 
cupied me two full days to reach the forks of the Ken- 
nebec, thence I advanced another day, forty miles fur- 
ther through pine forests, over mountain hights, skirting 
fair wood-embosomed lakes, dragged in a sleigh actually 


Through brush, through briar, 
Through mud, through mire, 


to the Lines, where, in a miserable hovel, I was con- 
strained to linger six-and-thirty most immortal hours, 
and no food save sour bread and smoked fish stewed in 
rancid oil, until horses should arrive to take me onward 
from St. Francis. And when they did arrive, heavens ! 
what a cortege. We proceeded. No less than three cha- 
rettes, or small two-wheeled Canadian carts, dragged by 
three lamentable carcasses, at which the hungriest pack 
of hounds on earth would have turned up their noses, 


222 FRANK FORESTER. 


conveyed me and my baggage twelve miles in six hours to 
the mail-house. There, thanks to the kind. foresight of 
afriend in Quebec, I was met by a capital relay of fleet, 
strong horses, with a good saddle-horse for myself, fur- 
nished by Mr. Colway, the prince of postmasters, who, 
having settled many years ago at the then desolate St. 
Joseph’s, has now long reaped the fruits of his industri- 
ous energy, a happy home, a thriving farm, the good- 
will and respect of all around him ; and, more than all, 
the grateful love of the French habitants, who look up to 
their Monsiewre Jem with feclings nigh akin to the old 
feudal loyalty, better deserved, too, by the kind-hearted, 
sturdy, and frank Englishman, than by the courtilest 
Frank that ever owned a seigneury. Heavens! how deli- 
cious seemed that smoking sirloin which graced his hos- 
pitable board; plum pudding, too, for it was Easter Mon- 
day ; and a ripe Cheshire cheese, with no contemptible 
commodity of old Jamaica to hold these solids in solu- 
tion. Dinner concluded, my good host informed me 
that canoes were ready; for lo! the great Chandiere, 
adown whose broad and cultured vale I had for some 
miles past been journeying, swollen by the unusually 
early thaw, had laid the whole road under water. The 
wind was fresh and cold, and dead against us, and I was 
glad to wrap my box-coat close about me,to pull my fur 
cap over my shivering ears, and to crouch down beside 
the dogs in the boat’s bottom. Anon a dense snow-squall 
came on, hiding the banks on either hand, and pelting us 
unmercifully with its sharp, sleety arrows; still, with 
their measured chant, timed to the dip of their sturdy 
paddles, the boatmen plied their arms ; and the sun had 
not yet sunk behind the western hills, when gladly I quaffed 
in the clean, comfortable tavern at St. Mary’s, a jorum of 
hot brandy toddy, and speedily thereafter turned into a 
sweet, well-aired bed, the first I had slept in for many a 
night, which weariness alone had rendered wakeless. On 


SNIPE SHOOTING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE. 223 


the next morning we were up bright and early, and yet 
so bad was the high road, the snow lying thereon in places 
five feet deep, with ruts cut down quite to the level of the 
soil, that though but thirty miles of distance, it was five 
hours after noon before I reached Point Levi, and saw the 
battled hights of that superb Cape Diamond, which 
years will not efface from my remembrance, towering 
above the mist which shrouded the irregular gables, the 
narrow streets, and busy quays of the lower town, with 
the gigantic flood of the St. Lawrence, turbid and vexed 
by isles of floating ice, wheeling in solemn majesty be- 
neath it. Once arrived at the hospitable mansion of my 
friend, the cheerful fireside, and hearty welcome, the 
genuine old English comforts unseen for many a day, but 
unforgotten, effaced all recollections in a twinkling of the 
fatigues and disagreements of a spring journey by the 
Kennebec, which has become now, tedious as it was at 
the time, and toilsome, one of the many, many passages 
in life concerning which we feel the deep truth and phi- 
losophy of the sweet Mantuan’s sentiment, : 


Olim et hac meminsse juvabit. 


Where all was new and beautiful and famous, and oh, 
how wonderfully beautiful are all the environs of that 
American Gibraltar, it must not be imagined that my 
thoughts turned instantly toward field-sports. Many de- 
lightful days were given to society, many to visiting the 
mighty, a thousand times more mighty than I had fan- 
cied them, fortifications of the strong Hill Town, the 
citadel with its unrivalled panoramic view, the Plains of 
Abraham, rich with the memories of those whose names 
are history, and all the sublime scenery around them. 
But anon, when, as it were in the twinkling of an eye, 
the snow which lay so deep when I arrived in every vale 
and hollow, vanished as if by magic; when the trees, 
which not three days before had been bare and dry and 


224 FRANK FORESTER. 


sapless, burst out as if stricken by some beneficent en- 
chanter’s wand, into bright, tender greenery; when the 
incessant chorus of the vernal frogs was blended with the 
weak but cheerful strain of the American robin; when 
the winds began to breathe with a soft, balmy whisper, 
and the sun to wax very warm at mid-day; then did the 
innate passion stir up the inward man, and I began to 
query concerning the spring sports of Canada. Not 
much, however, did I learn to encourage me in the pur- 
suit, a few unhappy woodcock, which, I blush while I 
write, the Canadian sportsmen blush not to slaughter, 
when they should be most safe from violence, just in the 
act of mating, and some rare, scattered snipe, to be found 
at far intervals by some land-runnel or snow-swollen 
steamlet in the bare open fields, were all the hopes held 
out to me by the sage heads of the Quebec sporting world. 
‘*Had you been three months later,” they all held to the 
same tale, ‘‘ we could have shown you such snipe shoot- 
ing as the world cannot show besides. You may kill 
sixty couple any day in July or August, at Chateau 
Richer, on Crane Island ; but now it’s of no use at all; 
you may walk all day and get a wretched couple, or two 
couple at the best!” ‘‘But why?” I still persisted, 
“‘Why ? Don’t the birds come on here in spring flocks ?” 
‘* Only in straggling whisps, five or six at a time, wild, 
watchful, scattered, making no stay among us.” ‘True, 
in the fields I can believe you readily ; but in the marshes, 
at this Chateau Richer, which you speak of ?” ‘‘ None 
are ever killed there in the spring.” ‘‘ But why not? 
Did you ever go there in spring? Did anybody ever 
go?” **No; no one ever goes in spring ; it was no use,” 
etc., and so on in all the plentitude of my self-wisdom, 
and, as I fancied, of experience, I convinced myself that 
the reason no birds were killed in spring was simply that 
no one went to kill them ; and that I should find all the 
marshes full, and do great things. To this notable con- 


SNIPE SHOOTING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE, 225 


clusion I partially succeeded in bringing a young friend 
of mine, a good shot and ‘staunch walker and highly 
promising, although young sportsman. So we two, 
very quietly determining to give the old shots a lesson, 
set forth one lovely afternoon to introduce spring snipe- 
shooting on the St. Lawrence. After a hearty luncheon 
on mutton-chops and right good ale, we chartered a 
marche-donc, a two-wheeled vehicle not much unlike to a 
New England chaise or New York gig, save that it has 
no head, and in lieu of a dashboard a horizontal strip of 
wood six or seven inches wide, whereon the driver sits, 
encouraging his active, stout and docile cob by the two 
talismanic words whence comes the title of the vehicle. 
Into this we ensconced ourselves, with gun-cases and 
carpet-bags, and due provision of tea, sugar, brandy, and 
bottled porter; and then, my two setters and friend 
Aleck’s spaniels, Tip senior and Tip junior, trotting 
along behind us, followed by a most heterogeneous group 
of turnspits, -mastiffs, terriers, and curs of low degree, 
through the sweet suburb of St. Roche, away we went across 
the long bridge over the St. Charles river, through Beau- 
fort, with its handsome church midway the opposite hill, 
towards the sublime fall of the Montmorenci. Here, for 
a while, we paused to gratify ourselves with a sight never 
too often to be seen, of that most lovely cataract, and to 
refresh our good, chunky little horse, who had trotted 
along most unremittingly, with three stout men and their 
baggage, at a rate of full ten miles the hour. After a 
little stay we started, and I shall not inflict upon my 
reader, if happily I find one, the hundred times repeated 
description of the falls, and as the sketch which I took 
on the spot pertains in nowise to snipe-shooting, I 
omit it, intent on reaching Chateau Richer in time to 
get an hour or two of shooting before sunset. The road 
was very lovely, the season and the evening exquisite. 
Ten miles we drove along the marge of the magnificent 


226 FRANK FORESTER. 


St. Lawrence, his broad and sea-like waters rippling and 
sparkling to our right, with a fair verge of cultured 
fields, meadows, and garden grounds, and here and there 
an orchard lying between them and the road; while to 
our left a steep and abrupt bank, fringed with dense un- 
derwood, overhung us, a thousand small, transparent 
torrents brawling and gurgling down its flanks, were 
lost in the mighty river. Hundreds of whitewashed cot- 
tages, gable end to the road, looked out upon the mead- 
ows and the gorgeous stream, and many an elm tree, 
centuries old, drooped with its newly-budding garlands 
over the winding wheel-track. In short, the whole road 
is a village, a long, long, straggling village ; every house 
clean and tidy to a wonder, with whitewashed walls and 
white blinds to the well-glazed casements, and neatly- 
painted stands with flowers, moss roses and fine clove 
carnations adorning every window ; the peasant maids, 
with their black, roguish eyes and broad-leafed hats of 
home-made straw, the short, full petticoats of homespun, 
laughing and courtesying to the strangers from every 
open door. 

But to return to our shooting. At about four o’clock 
we reached the beginning of the marshes. The road 
swept off toward the hills, which here receded from the 
river, enclosing a wide tract of flat alluvial land, a mile 
or two in length by perhaps half that width—the inner 
edge of this area fenced off and cultivated; the outer, 
next the river, unenclosed, intersected by many creeks, 
and streamlets, now full and glittering to the sunshine, 
for the flood tide was running, and overflowed at times— 
being the famous snipe ground. At the far end of this 
our driver told us we should find easily the house of 
Pierre Dubois, with whom we were to pass the night, and 
we resolved to beat it faithfully to-night, that so we 
might learn the best spots and choicest haunts of our 
predestined victims against to-morrow’s dawn. Well, 


SNIPE SHOOTING ON THE ST, LAWRENCE. 227 


out we jumped and loaded, pulled up our fen boots to 
mid-thigh, whistled our dogs to heel, climbed the Cana- 
dian palings (no easy task, by the way) which intervened 
between the high road and the marsh; and strode on, 
confident cf sport, and in anticipation gloriously trium- 
phant over the old slow coaches of, Quebec. 

Searcely, howeyer, had I made three steps across the 
last fence ere I saw that the laugh wasagainst us. From 
the very nature of the ground, it was at the first glance 
self-evident not only that there could be no snipe on it 
now, but that it never could be spring snipe ground. It 
is, as I have said, a flat alluvial sweep of land, inter- 
sected by innumerable streamlets, filled to the brink and 
over it at high tides, but at low water forming deep chan- 
nelled gulleys through the soft greasy mud, ten or twelve 
feet at least beneath the level of the meadows. This flat 
is covered during the summer by a luxuriant crop of soft 
and tender grass, rarely rising above six inches from the 
soil—watered by all the runs of which I have spoken, and 
overflowed in the vicinity of these, and all along the 
beach, at every tide. In consequence the snipe, which 
come on from the remote north immediately after get- 
ting off their young, alight on this and similar levels by 
myriads at a time toward the latter days of July, and re- 
main there in swarms, fat, lazy and reluctant to get up, 
till the autumnal frosts, which begin early in September, 
drive them down to more southern latitudes. During 
the winter, on the contrary, these meadows are covered 
with snow, which, thawed partially at every rising of the 
tide, is again congealed by the excessive cold, the mo- 
ment that the ebb commences, into a sheet of solid ice. 
The grass is utterly killed down, and the roots are so 
much affected that it requires a more than ordinary de- 
gree of heat and sunshine to regenerate the stricken ver- 
dure. Ata glance, then, when I set foot on it, and saw 
the whole wide range of meadow overspread with the 


228 FRANK FORESTER. 


dead yellow filaments which had been grass last summer, 
without one blade erect, or covered enough anywhere to 
have shielded a grasshopper, I saw that our cake was 
dough. ‘There was, however, nothing for it but to per- 
severe. Our route bedward and supperward lay straight 
ahead, and having come, I thought it quite as well to see 
the thing well out; soon I strode, most manfully, bearing 
my gun half cocked in the hollow of my arm, with the 
forefinger of my right upon the trigger guard, as if I had 
expected at each step to hear the shrill ‘“‘skeap! skeap!” 
Waving my setters to the right and left, as heads up and 
sterns down they scoured the greasy flat, and whistling 
to them cheerily when they stood still and stared in my 
face, as if to ask why in the world I had brought them 
there, bye-and-bye I reached one of the channelled runs 
which I have described, full and flooded, for the tide 
was now well up. Knowing nothing about the nature 
of the ground, seeing all around me a dead level, and 
quite forgetting the great rise and fall of the tide, I never 
suspected above eighteen inches of water, and, confident 
in my fen boots, in I strode fearlessly. For about ten or 
twelve paces it was quite shallow, not at the most above 
my ankles, but very dark and muddy. Well, I had not 
a thought of danger, and on I was just stepping, when by 
strange luck one of the setters, which so far had been fol- 
lowing steadily at my heels, disappeared fora few seconds, 
then rising to the top swam a dozen strokes or two and 
landed, whereat I sagely turned about, walked up the 
runnel, crossed it with ease two hundred yards above, 
and proceeded with my beat. The following morning, 
however, going over the same beat when the tide was out, 
I found to my astonishment my foot-steps at the brink 
of a ravine (for such it was) twelve feet at least in 
depth, and twice that distance over. Had I got in I 
must have lost my gun, and not improbably my life; for 
though a light and active swimmer, I had on huge fen 


SNIPE SHOOTING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE. 229 


boots, which would have dragged me down, and the soil 
Was so slippery and greasy as to yield neither hand nor 
foothold. Of this I knew not anything, and I accord- 
ingly strode on, beating the outer margin of the meadow 
with all diligence, while Aleck, with his spaniels, was 
making good the landward side, until I reached the 
broader channel of the St. Anne’s, which does not cut 
itself a gorge like all the smaller rivulets, but bringing 
down a copious limestone deposit, has actually overspread 
the mud with a shelly coat of petrification, and spreads 
out over a broad bed with a hard bottom, making a loud 
and brawling murmur as it crosses the nearly level 
marshes. Having thus finished our beat, we headed up to 
the road, weary enough, and anxious for our supper. 
On reaching the main road we asked the first habitant 
we met for Pierre Dubois, and were directed half a mile 
ahead to Pierre Dubois le petit. We reached the house 
and cursed our stars to find that no marche-donce was 
there, and that we must hark back again to a mile be- 
yond the spot where we had first enquired, to find the 
. residence of Pierre Dubois le grand. Away we went 
again, and this time went too far, and found that we had 
got to the house of Dubois fils instead of Dubois pere ; and 
at length, when utterly worn out and nearly dead, we got 
to the right place, were pleased to learn that all the people 
for two miles along the road—or twenty for aught I know 
—were called Dubois; and instead of holding ourselves 
unlucky, we ought to have been marvellously thankful 
that we had found the place at all. Once landed at our 
quarters, we lost no time in pulling off our fen boots, 
and replacing them and our heavy shooting jackets by 
easy slippers and loose dressing gowns—ushered as we had 
been, into a large, low, whitewashed room, with two 
large beds decked with check curtains, festooned to huge 
posts of black walnut. A three-legged table in the mid- 
dle of the room, and two or three huge long-backed 


230 FRANK FORESTER. 


chairs completed the furniture, if we except sundry strips 
of rag carpet, a dozen tawdry prints of saints, a crucifix 
at the head of either bed, and a small pot of holy water 
in a narrow niche beside the door. Before the latticed 
window stood the eternal flower stand, with its choicest 
freight of roses and carnations, and on the table, before 
many minutes had elapsed, was laid a snow-white cloth 
with boiled and poached eggs, hot dry toast, fried bacon 
and fresh butter; the teapot duly scalded was brought 
next, and we ourselves, with all the skill we learned at 
Cambridge, prepared the highly flayored brew. We 
supped, smoked our cigars, discussed a jorum of hot 
brandy punch, and, having seen our quadruped compan- 
ions well supped and provided with clean straw, turned 
in. Before we closed our eyes, however, we settled our 
proceedings for the morrow; of snipe it was most clear 
there was no hope; duck, however, it was said, by dint 
of creeping through the gulleys, might be slain on the 
shore; we resolved, therefore, to take an early breakfast, 
to beat along the verge of the St. Lawrence for ten miles 
farther, killing what ducks we might, and then to 
mount our marche-donc, visit the falls of the St. Anne’s, 
a splendid cataract, far embosomed in the hills and lit- 
tle known—comparatively speaking—and_ thence hurry 
home fora late dinner! Our plan devised, we slept upon 
it, rose early and fed heartily, started upon our final 
tramp with the first peep of dawn, picked up a duck or 
two—but nothing to make up for our delinquences— 
drove onward, and saw many things which I cannot here 
describe. Suffice it to say, however, that while we killed 
no game, and got marvellously quizzed and gibed in 
Quebec, I have not yet regretted my trip to Chateau 
Richer, although I there learned that there was no spring 
snipe-shooting on the St. Lawrence. 


THE SMELT OF THE RARITAN AND PAS- 
SAIC. 


Osmerus Neo Cesereisisis. 


The average length of this delicate little fish is about 
five inches, and seven or eight appears to be the very 
largest size to which they ever attain. Of several which 
I have dissected, none exceeded 5'/,, inches. The meas- 
urements and obstructural distinctions of this fish were 
as follows, and the proportions may be assumed to hold 
good for fish of any size: 

Length, from extremity of the lower jaws to that of the 
lower lobe of the tail, 5’/,, inches. From extremity of 
lower jaws to the end of the post-operculum, hinder gill 
cover, 1 inch. From extremity of lower jaws to the 
hinder orbit of the eye, °/,, inch. From extremity of 
lower jaws to the origin of the first dorsal fin, ie. 
inches. From extremity of lower jaws to origin of the 
second dorsal fin, 3°°/,,, inches. From extremity of lower 
jaws to root of tail, 4°/,, inches. 


Frxs.—The Passaic Smelt being of the order of ab- 
dominal Malacopterygians, family Salmonide, genus Os- 
merus, or Smelt, has eight fins. 

Two dorsal or back fins; two pectorals immediately be- 
low the gills; two ventrals under the belly, mid length; 
one anal below, nearly adjoining the tail; and one cau- 
dal appendage, being the tail itself. The first dorsal, 
distant'2*/,, inches from the snout, is °/,, inch in extent 
along the back, ’/,, inch in height, and has eight soft- 
branched rays, the first of which is double at the base. 
The second dorsal, distant from the snout 3°°/,,, inches, is 

231 


232 FRANK FORESTER. 


of a fatty substance, without rays, about */,, of an inch in 
extent along the body, and the same height. The two pec- 
torals, distant 1'/,, inches from the snout, have each thir- 
teen soft-branched rays, and are °/,, inch in length, and 
*/ , inch in extent, at their junction with the body. The 
two ventrals, distant 2’/,, inches from the snout, have 
each eight soft-branched rays, and are °/,, inch in length, 
*°/, inch in extent at their junction with the body. 
The anal, distant 3°/,, inches from the snout, has sixteen 
soft-branched rays, is */,, inch in depth, and ’/,, inch 
in extent along the belly. The caudal fin, or tail, distant 
from the snout at its root 4°/,, inches, is in length, 
from the origin to the extremity of the lower lobe, 1’/,, 
inches; from the root to the foot, °/,, inch; when widely 
expanded, it measures 1°/,, inches in breadth. 

It has nineteen perfect, and eight rudimental soft- 
branched rays—four of the latter connected with the 
outer edge of the first perfect ray of each fin. 


DreNnTAL SystemM.—The dental system of this little 
fish of prey is formidable, and closely allied to that 
of its congeners, the trout and other Salmonide, to which 
family it is known to belong by this very peculiarity, by 
the propulsion of the second fatty dorsal fin, and some 
other peculiarities. On its upper jaws it has two con- 
centric ranges of sharp, re-curved teeth, along the lips 
or labials and on the palatial bones, those in front being 
the longest and most formidable, presenting the instru- 
ments of capture with which this fish secures its prey. 
The lower jaw, which projects at the snout considerably 
beyond the upper, has also a line of small teeth along 
the whole circumference of the labials, and itg tongue 
has a central range of long, hooked tusks, the two at the 
point being by far the largest. The tongue is hinged 
to the spine by a short bone, toothed on both margins. 

The orbit of the eye is **/,,,, of an inch in diameter. 


THE SMELT OF THE RARITAN. 233 


The smelt has seventy-three scales, of an irregular 
oval form, so that the general appearance gives the effect 
of narrow lozenges, rather than the ordinary shape of 
scales. 

The general color is brilliant, iridescent silver slightly 
shaded with greenish-blue along the back. The head 
and gill covers are bright with pearly reflections. The 
pectorals, ventrals, and anal are silvery-white. The cau- 
dal and dorsal dusky, the rays being dark colored. 

The smelt of the Passaic is undoubtedly a carnivorous 
fish of prey, though like the salmon, little is known of 
the nature of its food, as its stomach is always empty 
when taken. Unlike the Eastern or regular American 
smelt, Osmerus Veriolescens of DeKay, this fish is never 
known to take bait. The other is commonly taken 
everywhere to the eastward with bait through the ice. 
Both varieties will rise freely to a small scarlet Ibis fly 
with a tinsel body, 

The smelt is a regular anadromous fish of the salmon 
family, full grown and perfect, running up to the shal- 
low pebbly streams, wherein to deposit its ovum until they 
shall be hatched in the warm and ierated waters, as is 
proved by the fact that the males are full of milt and 
the females of roe ready for expulsion on their entry into 
our rivers. Of the spots where they deposit their ovum 
as well as of the nature, size, and appearance of their 
young fry, as of the time when the latter descend to the 
salt water, we are as yet profoundly ignorant. I hope, 
however, by examination of the smallest fry of some of 
the pebbly feeders of the Passaic, which I presume to be 
their spawning places, that I may be enabled to throw 
some light on the subject. 

Until within a few years, it was believed that the 
American was identical with the European smelt, even 
Cuvier holding that to be the case. Le Sueuer, I be- 
- lieve, first made the distinction between the two appar- 


234 FRANK FORESTER. 


ent, and the distinction is sustained by Agassiz and De- 
Kay. Since this distinction was taken, it has been held 
that there was but one species of smelt known to Amer- 
ica, the Veriolescens, and although the distinction of our 
Passaic smelt, which ascends, I believe, only that river 
and the Raritan, is well known to the fishermen and 
epicures of the locality, it has not yet found its way 
into the books. 

The size of our fish, its delicacy as an article of food, 
its lighter color and far more strongly-marked cucumber 
smell make it closely similar to the English fish, which, 
according to Yarrel rarely exceeds six and never ten 
inches. 

The Eastern smelt is of a much deeper green, whence 
its name Veriolescens, and I think, rarely falls short of 
ten inches, and frequently extends to fourteen and eyen 
sixteen. Its fins are thus stated by DeKay, Fauna Neo. 
Pectorals 14; Ventrals 9; Anal 15; Dorsal 8; first double 
at the base. 

Those of the English smelt are stated by Richardson, 
Fauna Boreali Americana thus: Vins, Branchiostegous 
Rays 7-8; Pectorals 14; Dorsal 10; Ventrals 8; Anal 16; 
Caudal 20. 

Those of the Passaic smelt, by many examinations and 
dissections, as recorded in the annexed figures, are as 
follows: 

Branchiostegous Rays—Pectorals 12-2; Dorsal 8, the 
first double at the base; Ventrals 8; Anal 15; Caudal 
20. 

I must observe that although in all the specimens dis- 
sected by me this year, none have had more than eight 
rays in the dorsal, or nine if the first duplicate ray be 
counted as two, one fish, of full seyen inches in length, 
dissected by me in 1849, had ten rays in the dorsal, or 
eleven, counting the duplicate doubly. 

I have some little doubt whether the pectorals of the 


THE SMELT OF THE RARITAN. 235 


Passaic fish properly contain thirteen or only twelve rays; 
as one is questionable whether it be not a single dupli- 
cate ray. Certainly it has not fourteen, and I am in- 
clined to state it at twelve. 

It will be seen, therefore, that the smelt of the Passaic 
and Raritan rivers differs manifestly from the English 
Smelt, in those obstructural distinctions which, being 
permanent, are admitted to determine specific differences, 
It also differs unmistakably from the large American 
Eastern Smelt, Osmerus Veriolescens. 

Believing it, therefore, to constitute a new undescribed 
specific variety, peculiar to the waters of this State, I 
would respectfully designate it, if such should prove to 
be the fact, Osmerus Neo Cesereisisis, the Smelt of New 
Jersey. 


SIR PETER DE BEARN; 


OR, 


THE BEAR’S VENGEANCE OF BIGORRE. 


The autumnal woods were brown, and golden and rich 
purple on the mountain sides; the vineyards in the vales 
were filled with merry throngs of vintagers, culling the 
ruby clusters and revelling amid their light and jolly 
labors; but on the tops of the distant hills shone the 
perpetual crown of snow, which, though so evanescent 
and unstable, clings eternally to the bald temples of the 
mighty Pyrenees, defying wind or earthquake to rob them 
of their sovereign emblem. For it was in fair France, in 
the province which at that time was called Bigorre,now the 
department of High Pyrenees, and in the early part of 
the delightful month of September, that two travellers 
were journeying leisurely along the road toward the city 
of Tarbes. Two travellers, I say, for although the party 
consisted of nearly a dozen men, with two or three 
sumpter mules and led horses, there were but two who 
seemed to be of any rank or consequence. The principal 
of these, so far as appearance indicated superiority, was 
a tall, handsome, powerfully made man, of perhaps fifty 
years, mounted upon a vigorous and active horse of great 
bone and strength, which had apparently seen harder 
service than that of the road or the hunting field; for on 
his quarter there was a large scar, left evidently by a 
severe wound, since the flesh all around it was seamed 
and corrugated, and the hair about the edges of the bare 
Spot was white as snow. Yet the action of the noble 
animal was in no wise impaired by the injury, nor was his 

236 


SIR PETER DE BRARN. 237 


courage in the least affected, if one might judge from the 
challenge of his clear, tremulous neighing, from his 
bright, fearless eye, and the high-spirited dmeanor with 
which he chafed against the bit. 

The rider, although past the middle age, was erect, 
and sat firmly and gracefully in his saddle with a decided 
military air that harmonized well with his dress and 
aspect, which, both of them, were those of a gentleman 
and soldier; and in those days the words were synonymous. 
He did not, it is true, wear any armor, nor indeed any 
weapons, except a long, straight, cross-handed sword, the 
insignia, as it might be termed, of his class. But the 
black velvet cap of maintenance bordered with costly fur, 
the pourpoint of fine Spanish cloth, the tight fitting and 
long pointed shoes, and above all, the gilded spurs which 
he wore, indicated his knighthood as distinctly as did the 
tonsured crown and loose robe of his companion proclaim 
him a churchman, though he seemed not to be a monk 
of any of the four regular orders of priesthood. 

This was an active, pleasant-looking person, well made 
and by no means deficient in muscular strength, though 
he was somewhat under the middle height and a little 
inclined to corpulence. The ring of hair encircling his 
tonsured crown, which was as smooth and white as Parian 
marble, was very soft and handsome, of a dark auburn 
brown, and was arranged with much care in a series of 
close crispy curls, as was the beautiful and glossy beard 
which fell down in silky tresses, like a woman’s ringlets, 
below his collar bone. His forehead was very fine, broad 
and expansive, though not particularly high, and much 
developed at those points where phrenologists have placed 
the organs of imagination, His dark eyes were, if pos- 
sible, yet finer and more expressive; full of quick life 
and fire; at times, when their possessor was absorbed in 
thought, wearing that deep and searching character 
which gives the idea of looking forward into the endless 


238 FRANK FORESTER. 


future for something more permanent and real than may 
be found on earth; at times, when any legend of high 
deeds or martial daring was recited, flashing with all the 
soul-fraught fire of chivalry, and again melting into the 
sweetest and most sentimental tenderness, at any narra- 
tive of that true love the course of which, in tale or 
history—ay, and in human life’s cold, hard reality!— 
did never yet run smooth. 

His nose was small and neatly chiselled, and although 
along his full lips, and in the florid coloring of his cheeks, 
there might be some indication of sensual appetites, and 
sensual propensities somewhat too much indulged, yet 
was the whole aspect of the face unusually comely, 
pleasant and prepossessing. 

Any one at all skilled in physiognomy would haye 
pronounced him at once a shrewd, quick-witted man, with 
an abundant share of that most uncommon quality of 
mind which, I suppose on the Jwcus a non lucendo prin- 
ciple, is styled common sense, combined with a brilliant 
fancy, a romantic and poetical temperament, a great love 
for adventure, a thoroughly good and amiable disposition, 
a temper rather choleric and hasty, and a very reasonable 
appreciation of the good things of this life, though 
tempered and subdued by sincere and practical piety. 

And he would have pronounced him truly enough—for 
inasmuch as we can judge from his quaint and at times 
highly eloquent compositions, such would appear to have 
been the character of the renowned Jean Froissart. 

The worthy churchman was mounted, not as was usual 
with his order, on a dull mule or plodding ass, but-on a 
stout, active, round-barrelled, short-legged hackney, with 
a high, rainbow crest, a small head, well set on, and a 
gay, mettlesome carriage, which bore good testimony 
both to its generous breeding and carefully preserved 
condition. 

The monk’s seat on this unclerical and gallant palfrey 


SIR PETER DE BHARN. 239 


was, like the animal itself, far more adapted to the tilt- 
yard or the hunting field than to the cloister, being if 
anything easier and more graceful than that of the caya- 
lier who rode beside him, while his hand, pliant 
and light, yielding to every motion, yet controlling 
every effort, showed him to be a perfect and accomplished. 
horseman. 

For the last mile or two of their road the companions 
had ridden along in silence, for the heat of the day was 
sultry and oppressive; and, haying stopped for a few mo- 
ments, half an hour or so before, at a little wayside hos- 
telry, half the distance between the river Lisse and the 
village of Terra Cimitat, they had found the cold larded 
capon which was served to them for luncheon so appetiz- 
ing, and the flagons of Bordeaux wine which were pro- 
duced to moisten it so racy, that after remounting their 
horses they both felt more disposed to somnolent and 
silent rumination than to the lays or legends by which 
the earlier part of their ride had been enlivened. 

It was now nearly noon, and the road which they had 
been following hitherto, at no point very broad or easy, 
skirted on the one side by a thick forest, the property of 
the Lord De Barbaran, and on the other by a strong, 
rapid stream, was becoming at every step wilder, more 
intricate, and indeed almost perilous. 

The forest, which had hitherto been confined to the 
left hand of the road only, lying in scattered masses over 
the rugged slopes which formed the lower steps of the 
great Pyrenees, extended now in one vast, continuous 
range, farther than the eye could reach on the opposite 
side likewise, beyond the river, which at this spot had 
become a wild and furious torrent, roaring and foaming 
along, fifty feet at least below the horse-track, among 
huge blocks of granite and vast boulders. The hills into 
which the path had for the last hour or two been gradu- 
ally advancing now thrust their bare, craggy foreheads 


240 FRANK FORESTER, 


and dark, leafy shoulders forward in many a sudden 
angle, as if they would haye blocked up altogether the 
narrrow glen through which the chafing waters found 
their way seaward from their ice-cold and mountain 
springs. 

The nature of the forest, too, changed constantly; and 
now, instead of the deciduous trees, some wearing still 
their lightsome garb of summer greenery, some clad in 
every shade, from dark dun and russet to bright orange 
and chrome yellow, the flanks of the gorge were over- 
hung with gigantic pines and cedars, casting a brown 
and gloomy shadow, the veritable wmdrarum horrorem of 
the classic poet, from their vault-like boughs over the 
road, which even at noon to-day was steeped in glimmer- 
ing and misty twilight. 

They had just entered this dim pass, when the knight 
touched his horse sharply with the spur and checked it 
with the heavy curb, as it made a blunder and was near 
coming down on the broken road. 

‘* By my faith!” said the knight, with a smile, as he 
recovered the animal skillfully, ‘‘I believe, Sir John, that 
we two, and my good horse here, have all been well nigh 
asleep these two hours. Now look about you; what think 
you of this country? This is the pass of Larre, of which 
I dare say you have heard tell.” 

“Tt is, indeed,” replied the churchman, ‘‘a wild and 
romantic pass as I have seen in all my voyagings. Now 
right glad am I that in this strange and perilous country 
I have the escort of so famous and so brave a knight. 
Otherwise truly should I have thought myself in some 
great danger.” 

**T know not about that,” returned the other. ‘‘ The 
Count de Foix lies with so strong a force of lances at 
Orthes, and is so prompt and active in punishing marau- 
ders and avenging the least evil done to his vassals, 
whether in Béarn, Bigorre, or Armagnac, there is of a 


* 


SIR PETER DE BHRARN. 241 


truth less peril here in this wild country than in the 
Beauoyvisis or the Isle of France, from the free com- 
panies. But if the people speak truly hereabout, these 
woods be frequented by beings more dangerous to men 
than any mortal enemy.” 

** How so, Sir Espaign du Lyon?” exclaimed the monk, 
pricking up his ears delightedly at this hint of a legend 
which he, perchance, might embody in his history. 
“Tell me, I pray you, of your courtesy, what do they 
say here of the gloomy woodlands. They are, I trow, 
dark and remote and wild enough for any dreadful and 
superhuman things to befall in them. ‘Tell me, I do 
beseech you, have they tales of the wood-gods here, the 
Fauns and Sylvans, and the great god Pan, and per- 
chance the wild goddess Diana, with all her nympas and 
demoiselles? Or be they darker tales, such as the gloomy 
Germans hold in the great forests far beyond the Rhine, 
of forest-fiends, and water-elvyes, and gnomes, and all 
things malignant and appalling? I pray you tell me, fair 
sir; nothing beguiles a long and lonely ride like some gay 
or wondrous legend.” 

** Nay! good Sir John,” replied the knight, laughing, 
‘you are too hard for me, who am but a plain and 
somewhat unlettered soldier, with all your clerkly lore; 
for in truth I never heard either of this god Pan, or of 
the beautiful goddess Diana and her demoiselles. Who 
were they I beseech you?” 

“Oh! tale for tale, Sir knight!” replied the monk, 
bursting into a loud and merry laugh, which wakened up 
all the woodland echoes with its clear, ringing mirth. 
“Tell me the legends of these woods, and what has be- 
fallen here of marvellous or terrible, and I will in my 
turn, to requite you, inform you of those gods and god- 
desses of whom you would know something, though it is 
true some say that they have now forsaken the earth alto- 
gether, though others hold that since the advent of our 

11 


242 FRANK FORESTER. 


blessed Lord and Saviour these deities of the old Pagan 
temples may have degenerated, if they were not such be- 
fore, into mere fiends and demons.” 

** J will be blithe to hear tell of them,” answered Sir 
Espaign, ‘‘but in the meantime, for I would do you 
pleasure insomuch as I am able, seeing that eyery one is 
bound to do so much as in him lies for you, who have 
done so much for chivalry and knighthood, by your im- 
moral histories; in the meantime I will relate to you 
what fell out here to Sir Peter de Béarn, the brother of 
our good Count de Foix, whom you are yoyaging even 
now to visit—a very gallant knight and one of whom I 
doubt not that you have heard many honorable deeds.” 

**T shall be much beholden to your yalor,” said the 
churchman, “and I pray you to begin straightway, see- 
ing that I am not a little impatient in my desire to learn 
what manner of things these may be.” 

‘Nay, nay;” said the knight, ‘‘I will pray you to 
moderate your impatience somewhat, for there be places 
in which it is not good to converse of such things, seeing 
it is said that the speaking of these beings, whatsoever 
they may be, gives them some power upon us to torment, 
or at the least to mock and mislead believers.” 

“*T cannot believe that, Sir Espaign,” answered Frois- 
sart, ‘‘nor will I ever think willingly that the innocent 
and right of heart are abandoned over by our good God 
and the blessed Virgin to such delusions as you dread. It 
is but the bloody minded, the unchaste, the evil in ambi- 
tion, or the weak and wavering in faith, over whom the 
powers of darkness have dominion. But if not now, 
when will you tell me?” 

“About two miles hence,” answered the knight, 
*‘there is a little glade in the woodland, with a small 
chapel consecrated to our dear lady of Montgaillard, and 
a well of most holy water; thither, if it please you, we 
will ride onward, quickening our pace a little, and when 


SIR PETER DE BRARN. 243 


there we will lie by for a while during the heat and sul- 
triness of the noon-day; for though the sunbeams can- 
not pierce through the evergreen branches overhead, 
there is not a breath of air stirring in these green cay- 
erns, and the atmosphere is as close and stifling as if it 
came out of the mouth of an oven. Our horses, as you 
see, are all in a lather of white foam, for all so slowly as 
we have ridden since we came into these wild hills; and 
the flies, too, are goading them almost to madness. 
There by the well it will be a little cooler, if I mistake 
not, for there is a sort of glade or wind-row at right 
angles to this road, running directly up to the great gray 
rock on the hill’s brow, which you were looking at 
awhile since, and if there be a breath of wind stirring 
anywhere it is sure to be up there in the crags, and it 
generally draws down, as if through a funnel, into this 
valley. There, if it seem good to you, we will halt for a 
little space and rest our horses, and as the water of the 
holy well is singularly pure and cold, we can refresh our- 
selves at the same time and taste a cup of that excellent 
old wine which I made my esquire put in his wallet at 
Panniers.” 

“By my faith! it is excellently well thought of,” said 
the monk, laughingly. ‘‘ You are as good a caterer, Sir 
Espaign, as though you had been bred the sompnour of a 
Cistercian convent. I like your plan very much, for we 
have not very far to go, I fancy, to Tarbes; and it will 
be far pleasanter to ride in the sweet moonlight than in 
this sultry heat.” 

“TP faith will it; and if it be a thought late or so when 
we arrive at Tarbes, there is a capital hotel at the Star, 
where we can be received well at any hour. Come, let 
us ride on, and when we are sitting in the shade by the 
chapel I will tell you all about Sir Peter de Béarn and 
the bear of Bigorre.” 

And with the words the comrades clapped spurs to 


244. FRANK FORESTER. 


their horses and cantered for a little better than a mile of 
distance through the dark woods, till, as they turned the 
angle made by a sudden winding of the road, a broad 
gleam of sunshine fell through a transverse opening in 
the tree tops and lay bright and cheerful on the green 
turf which laughed like an emerald in the rays, a dew- 
drop yet unexhaled glittering upon every leaflet; so late 
had the shadows slept on that sequestered lawn. 

“Here we are—here we are, at last,” exclaimed Sir 
Espaign du Lyon; ‘alight from your hackney, Sir John, 
and Damien or Raoul will lead him down into yon quiet 
reach of the river and let him cool his feet in the pure 
water. Now-is not this a fair and tranquil spot, in the 
midst of these dark, grim pine woods?” 

“Indeed it is,” said Froissart, gazing with a serene 
and well pleased eye over the little glade of soft and 
mossy turf, surrounded with a belt of shrubbery and 
thicket, among which glanced the dark leayes of the pol- 
ished holly, the white stems of the silvery birch, mingled 
with waving tufts of the tasselled fern, and many a per- 
fumed herb, and many a flaunting wild flower. At the 
extreme end of this sheltered nook, leaning, as it were, 
against a gray, mossy crag, which formed the back- 
ground of the picture, crowned with the purple spike of 
the mountain heather and the abundant bloom of the 
gum cistus, stood the small chapel of our Lady of Mont- 
gaillard, a mere open shrine, with a back and two side 
walls connecting three squat, heavy pillars, whence 
sprung the intersecting arches which composed the roof 
of the little building. In it, however was an altar with 
crucifix, and candlestick, and fount of holy water, and 
a well executed picture of the Madonna, executed appar- 
ently by some Spanish artist; and beside it, partially coy- 
ered by a low, Gothic canopy, wrought in gray sandstone, 
was the cold, limpid well, which probably had induced 
the selection of the spot for its sacred purpose. ‘Indeed 


SIR PETER DE BEARN. 245 


it is a very sweet spot, and nestling here, as it does, so 
pure, and calm and holy, so full of present quietude, 
so rich in promised stores of future blessedness, in 
the midst of the hard and stubborn rocks, under the 
shadow of the black and death-like evergreens, and 
hard by yon roaring and tumultuous river, it reminded 
me, Sir Espaign du Lyon—I say it reminds me very 
much of the one soft and tender spot, redeeming 
half his offences here below and nourishing one spark, 
at least, of heavenly hope for the future, that may 
be found in the heart of the most worldly minded 
and hard hearted worshiper of the earth and its idols! 
Let us go in and pray for grace, that our souls may be 
moved within us and made soft unto salvation.” 

The kinght made no reply, but giving the rein of his 
war-horse into the hand of his esquire—for he had dis- 
mounted already and was standing in a posture of quiet 
attention, listening to the eloquent thoughts of the 
churchman—followed him into the little shrine, and 
kneeling one at each side of the altar, they put up their 
prayers unto Him whose promise has declared that when 
two or three are gathered together in His name, he will 
grant their requests. 

What was the purport of their prayers is known to them 
alone, and to him who knoweth all things. It may be— 
it is ike enough—that they were fantastical and strange; 
for men in those days of almost primitive simplicity were 
wont to do wild deeds and utter uncouth prayers for 
things which, had they gained them, would doubtless 
have been counted loss to them, not profit; but at least 
they were fervent, and sincere, and humble—more so, I 
fear, than many which are offered now in the full congre- 
gations of our churches boasting a purer dispensation— 
offered by gorgeously apparelled votaries, who sometimes, 
it may well be dreaded, bow down the knee, not of the 
heart, but of the body; and that too, it may be, to win 


246 FRANK FORESTER. 


the world’s admiration, rather than His compassion, unto 
whom all hearts are open and all desires are known. 

After a little while, at all events, they arose from their 
knees and came out upon the green before the arched 
doorway, with faces cheerfully composed, but neither 
grim with pharisaical austerity, nor sleek with puritani- 
cal hypocrisy; and filled, as it were, with a quiet inward 
mirth, laid themselves down upon the greensward near 
the holy well and addressed themselves to the good things 
on which they had evoked a blessing. After the monk 
had swallowed a long, cool draught of the Bordeaux 
wine, moderately tempered with the pure element, he 
heaved a long sigh, indicative of the satisfaction which 
his parched throat had derived from the beverage, and 
then, not unmindful of what had passed before, asked 
his friend for the story he had promised him, and he, 
nothing loth, set down the wine cup which he too had 
just drained and spoke as follows:— 


SIR ESPAIGN DU LYON’S TALE. 


“You must know,” he began, “that Sir Peter de 
Béarn, the bastard brother of our good Count de Foix, 
is as magnificent a knight, and as gallant, and as court- 
eous, and withal as renowned a man-at-arms, as stout, 
and as adventurous and hardy, and as ready to imperil 
life and limb in every honorable deed of daring, as any 
other knight in Christendom. He was beloved too by 
the Count, his brother, beyond measure, and exalted by 
him to the highest place in his court, and he found favor, 
in a word, with all men. 

‘* Moreover, he was pre-eminently blessed with one of 
the fairest and most virtuous wives in all France, gentle 
and lowly minded, holy, and pure, and loving him ex- 
ceedingly, yea! with the whole of her heart. 

““{@his lady was the Countess Florence de Biscaye, 


SIR PETER DE BEARN. 247 


daughter of the late Count, who was cousin to King Don 
Pedro of Castile, surnamed the cruel, whom Henry of 
Trastamara slew—and his soul may God assoilzie, for 
though he was a fierce and cruel tyrant, he was as brave 
a knight as ever spurred a horse to battle; and had not 
Bertrand du Guesclin—shame to his knighthood and his 
name therefor! turned him‘upon his back in the death 
struggle, that journey would have ended otherwise; for 
his knee was upon King Henry’s chest, and his dagger at 
his throat, when the French constable set on him, for 
all that he had promised him fair play! 

** But to return; Don Pedro caused them to strike off 
the head of this old Count de Biscaye; and, as they say, 
for no good cause at all; and if he could have laid his 
hands upon the lady, her had he locked up in a dungeon 
while she lived, or perchance slain her likewise. But, 
as 1t was, she escaped hitherward across the mountains, 
that he could only seize her lands, and hold all their rey- 
enues in such sort that she had none of them, while he 
was alive to retain them. | 

‘* And for this cause she fled hither into Béarn, as I 
have told you, as any one naturally desires to fly from 
death, for it was told her, when, by the death of her 
father, she became Countess of Biscaye—‘ Save yourself, 
lady, for :f Don Pedro lay hands on you, he will put you 
to death, since surely he is much enraged against you, 
that you should say he strangled his queen in her bed, 
the sister of the duke of Bourbon and the King of 
France; and the more so, because your evidence is more 
readily believed than that of any other, for you were of 
her bedchamber.’ 

““Then fled the fair Florence hither into Béarn, and 
came to Orthes, the court of the great Count, and it 
chanced when she arrived that he was without the gates 
of the town in a green meadow which is called the pré 
aux chevalers, looking on as his knights and esquires 


248 FRANK FORESTER. 


were managing their horses, and running at the ring, and 
some of them jousting one with the other with blunt 
lances and hurling jayelins in the Moresco fashion. And 
when she saw the Count, who was standing by himself 
with a merlin on his fist, and a fine Spanish greyhound 
at his heel, she alighted down from her palfrey, and 
threw herself at his feet, and would have clasped him by 
the knees and kissed the hem of his pourpoint, but that 
he would not suffer her, and said: 

‘**In God’s name, and for your knighthood’s sake, 
most mighty and gentle sir, grant me your favor and pro- 
tection, seeing that I am a most forlorn and hapless 
damsel, the daughter of the good Count of Biscaye, whom 
that discourteous gentleman and felon knight, Don Pedro 
of Castile, has done to death most foully and despitefully, 
and now would slay me too if he could lay his hands upon 
me; and hath seized all my lands and revenues even now, 
that I have nothing wherewithal to live. Wherefore, 
most noble Count de Foix, to thee have I betaken me in 
this my tribulation, since all men say thon art affection- 
ate and kind to distressed damsels; and now, I pray thee, 
have compassion on me, and suffer me to tarry at thy 
court, and place me with some noble lady that my respect 
may continue good, and as beseems a highborn lady, who 
is kinswoman to great princes, and for no fault of her 
own, disherited of lands and home and country.’ 

*‘Then the Count, who had heard attentively all that 
she said unto him, raised up the Lady Florence, and 
kissed her on the brow, and upon either cheek, and said 
to her:— 

***Gentle and peerless damsel, I pray you have no 
fear, but trust it to my honor to provide all things for 
you suitably to your rank, and to the grievous sorrows 
which have so undeservedly befallen you. For surely no 
true knight or courteous gentleman could see so beautiful 
and virtuous a maiden, in grief and distress so poignant, 


SIR PETER DE BEARN. 249 


and not do all that in him lay to assuage her sufferings, 
and console her. And I swear to you, by my sword, and 
the unblemished bearings of my house, that in all things 
you shall be unto me as a dear and honored sister,’ 

‘And he detained her at his court, and placed her 
with the Baroness de la Karasse, one of the greatest 
ladies in the country, and as he promised provided her 
with all things suited to her rank, and caused her to be 
styled and honored by all his courtiers as the Countess 
of Biscaye, for he cared nothing, like a generous, muni- 
ficent and yalorous prince as indeed he was, for all the 
threatenings and fury of Don Pedro of Castile. 

“Now at this time, Sir Peter de Béarn was a young 
knight, exceeding courtly and well favored, and if he 
lacked the imposing presence, and grand majestic bear- 
ing of his brother—for he was slender rather than stout, 
and very graceful in his form and manners, and fair in 
face and fresh colored, with long-curled amber hair, and 
large amorous gray eyes—he was perhaps even more 
beautiful to look upon, and more acceptable to youthful 
demoiselles and ladies, who are wont ever to be taken 
with handsome forms and pleasant features, especially 
when they are joined to high and noble spirits and great 
renown and skill in manly exercises. 

‘And in all these things, though he was not above 
the middle height, and slender and small-boned, Sir 
Peter de Béarn was excellently skilled and famous. In 
the tilt-yard he had not an equal, for in the management 
of the lance and horse, wherein skill naturalizes strength, 
he was so singularly happy that the stoutest and most 
ponderous champions could rarely keep their saddles when 
opposed to his prowess; and with the battle-axe and 
double-handed sword he would deal blows that no one 
could imagine to be given by a frame so delicate and 
spare. In the chase, too, and the mystery of rivers, and 
those gentle arts m which all real cavaliers are proud to 


250 FRANK FORESTER. 


excel—no one excelled Sir Peter, nor yet in carousing at 
the board, or treading the gay measures in the ball, or 
singing with his rich, manly voice to lute or gittern. 

** And so it fell out, before long, that the sweet Coun- 
tess Florence and the ‘fair knight of Béarn were en 
amours together, but in all purity and honor and the 
proud faith of high and holy love. 

*“‘And when the Count de Foix heard of it, he called 
Peter to him and said to him 

‘*** How is this, Peter of Béarn ? and wherefore have 
you kept it back from me that you are en amours with 
this bright Lady Florence of Biscaye, and that she looks 
smilingly upon your suit ? Peter, this was not well; for 
T have ever dealt with you as a right royal and a gentle 
brother, and have not, that I know, at any time refused 
you anything that I had to give, when you asked me. 
Wherefore, then, have you now put no trust in me, and 
doubted that I would gladly bring about this marriage 
for you, and it may be recover her lands for you likewise 
from the King Don Pedro? Speak now, I pray you, and 
let me know your mind, that there may be no more mis- 
takes between us.’ 

***Gentle sir,’ replied Sir Peter, ‘and very noble 
brother, it was not, on my faith! from any doubt of your 
kind aid or distrust in your fayor, still less from any fear 
of your opposition, that I cared not to speak with you 
before, but that I knew not altogether whether the Lady 
Florence favored me, and wishing to be loved by her that 
should be my wife, not.for my brother’s glory but for 
myself alone, I judged it best to abide until I should be 
satisfied, and then to submit myself to your decision. 
Had you not spoken to me this day, then before night 
had I addressed you in the same matter.’ 

*** You wish, then, to have her for your wife, Peter,’ 
said the Count, ‘and you believe that she has kindly 
looked on you already.’ 


SIR PETER DE BHARN. . 251 


***T do wish that, gentle brother, more than I wish 
for life, or anything, save honor,’ answered the knight, 
‘and I do believe what you say to be quite true.’ 

**«Then set your heart at rest, Peter,’ said the Count, 
“for I will speak with her to-day, and surely I believe 
that I can win her for you. And as for those broad 
lands of hers in Biscaye, we will see if Pedro will not 
yield them with good grace, and if he will not, then 
must we buckle on our harness, and give our steeds a 
breathing in his own realm of Spain. Nay! no thanks, 
brother, none; seeing it is not lightly for mine own ad- 
vantage that all my house should be increased in wealth, 
and renown and power.’ 

“So generous a prince was Gaston, our good Lord of 
Foix, and so attentive a protector ever to all brave men 
in his following, whether his kinsmen, or the knights 
and barons of his train. And you may well believe, Sir 
John, that when the Count took up the wooing his 
brother’s suit-would prosper, seeing that this alone was 
wanting; for the young lady had regarded the good 
knight with favor, and seen, too, how devotedly he bore 
himself toward her, and what a paragon of grace and 
beauty he esteemed her; and when the Count asked her 
fair hand for Peter de Béarn, she was right glad, though 
she concealed her gladness with all maiden modesty, and 
refused not, nor gave a half-consent, but referred herself 
at once to the Count’s good pleasure. And much pleased 
was he that she did so, and laid his hand straightway on 
the cross of his sword, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, 
and sware a mighty oath before our blessed lady and his 
patron saint, that she should never rue the day, for he 
would win her back her lands from Don Pedro, if not 
by favor, then by force, knight-like and under shield. 

‘*And it was never heard of him that he brake such 
an oath as that, nor did he in this imstance; for in a hit- 
tle space he so dealt with Don Pedro, that he gave up 


252 ’ FRANK FORESTER. 


the lady’s lands, and she was wedded to Sir Peter de 
Béarn, and bore him two fair and goodly children, a son 
and a daughter; and a more beautiful or graceful couple 
were never seen on earth than Sir Peter and his sweet 
Spanish bride; nor was there ever a more happy wedding, 
for she adorned her beauty but for him, and pointed all 
her gentle wit only to give him pleasure; and he, who 
had before been very gay and debonair among the ladies, 
and given, as men said, to loving par amours, regarded 
only her, whether of dames or damsels, and loved her 
the more fervently, it seemed, as he loved her the longer. 
Alas! it was a pity that such true love should be so 
ended ! 

‘*For it fell out upon a time, whether by the ill-will 
and artifice of the foul fiend himself, or how else I know 
not, that there was seen often in the woods of Béarn and 
Bigorre, and sometimes beyond the mountains, in the 
cork forests of Biscaye, where at that season Sir Peter 
dwelt in his castle of Languedudon, which he held in 
behalf of his fair wife, the Countess Florence, a bear of 
mighty bulk and fierceness. 

““This bear had been hunted many times, but no man 
ever yet had skill or strength to wound it, but, on the 
contrary, not a few hunters, with their hounds, had ° 
fallen a prey to its indomitable strength and fury. 

** And it destroyed the poor men’s flocks and cattle, so 
that they no more dared to pasture them abroad, for no 
force of men or dogs availed anything to deter him, nor 
when they kindled fires beside their watch, did these 
scare him off, as is the case in general with creatures of 
his kind, but he would stalk into their encampment and 
carry off now a fat wether, and now a yearling heifer, 
and now and then a shepherd or herdsman, even as he 
would, and go off to his fastnesses, and none might hin- 
der or oppose him. 

‘And all the country round was filled with a great 


SIR PETER DE BARN. 2538 


terror, so that the people said, ‘ Of a surety this is no 
common bear, but it must needs be some fiend or devil 
that has put on this shape to afflict us, and it may be to 
punish our transgressions. For clearly it is nothing 
mortal, since neither arms nor valor may ayail anything 
against it.’ 

** Now, at this time it happened that Sir Peter de 
Béarn was hunting in the woods beyond the mountains, 
when he fell in with this wondrous bear; but whether he 
had especially gone forth to rid the country of this 
plague, or whether he fell in with it by chance, I know 
not—for some tell the story one way, some the other— 
but I would willingly say nothing but that which is true 
altogether. Three days, it is said, he hunted him, and 
still his dogs came up many times and assaulted the wild 
beast, and still were beaten off, and many of them slain 
or wounded, so that albeit they were of the very best 
breed in the world, both Spanish greyhounds and choice 
English mastiffs from beyond the sea, they might not 
face him any more. But for all this, neither the knight 
himself nor any of his merry men might come up with 
him, either to shoot with the crossbow or to push at him 
with boar-spear, until the morning of the third day. 
For so keen was Sir Peter de Béarn in pursuit, that he 
would not return home at all, but called off his dogs 
when the night fell, and still encamped with his forest- 
ers and hunters in the woods wherever darkness found 
them. 

‘* But it was noticed that the bear no more came to 
their fires at night, nor attacked them; and therefore 
men argued that the beast, or the fiend, rather, which 
informed him, knew that his time was come, and that 
this gallant knight was fated to be his slayer. 

“* How this was, I know not; but if it were so, it was 
a very grievous and sad fate for him, as you shall know 
hereafter. 


254 FRANK FORESTER. 


“On the third morning the knight arose with the 
dawn, and laid on his hounds upon the track where he 
had called them off last night, and that was in these 
woods above us on the hill, beyond that gray cragg 
peak, for he had run all the way hither from near Arraiz, 
in Biscaye. But on this morning he did not hunt him 
far before he turned to bay, and guided by the fell hub- 
bub, and the wild howlings of the terrified and tortured 
dogs, and the infernal roarings of the monster, Sir Peter 
came up with him and found him in a dense thicket, 
where it would have been difficult to move, but that the 
conflict of the savage beast had crushed down the under- 
wood, and shattered the gnarled branches, and even up- 
rooted many of the lesser trees. 

“The bear, as I have heard tell by those who saw it, 
stood up erect upon his haunches, with the hounds bay- 
ing round him at a distance—for none dared to come 
near him any more, and four of the best and bravest, 
that might almost have matched a lion, lay dead and 
foully mangled under his gory claws. 

“But when the knight saw this, he was very wroth, 
and alighted from his horse and said, ‘ Ha! ha! haye I 
found thee at last? Now, by our lady of Bigorre! I 
swear that one of us two shall rue this day forever! ” 

** Methinks it was a pity that he swore that oath, but 
you shall judge when I have told you more. There he 
alighted, as I said, and for all that his men, some of 
whom were old hunters, very sage ana crafty, advised 
him to let alone the brute, for surely they never had be- 
held his like before, he made at him with a stout hunt- 
ing spear of three cubits length, with a broad steel head 
of two spans, and the bear never stirred, either to fly or 
to attack him, until he thrust the head into his breast, 
striving to reach the heart; but in a moment, as the bear 
felt the steel pieremg his shaggy coat and cutting into 
the flesh, he seized the shaft with his paws and broke it 


SIR PETER DE BHARN. 255 


off right easily, though it was all of tough ash wood, 
banded and linked with iron. Then uttering a fearful 
roar he seized the knight in his arms and hugged him, 
and they fell down together upon the dead leayes of the 
last winter all slippery with gore and foam, and oh! but 
it was a fell and fearful struggle. Then might you have 
beheld the foam, churned from the tushes of the brute, 
fly up into the air white as snow, and the red blood gush 
out in fountains, for the good knight had got out his 
dagger, and stabbed ever at the beast’s throat and paws, 
and mangled him so sorely that at the last he let go his 
hold, and the knight got clear of him and regained his 
feet, which else he never would have done, for his men 
were so terrified that they stood mute and as if thunder- 
stricken round about, and dared not even offer to assist 
him. 

‘‘But when they saw him, that he was afoot once 
again, they returned thanks to God for his safety, and 
besought him that he would now desist, for he had done 
enough for one day; but then Sir Peter drew his sword 
of the best Bordeaux steel, and nothing heeding their 
advice, advanced on the bear a second time with great 
rage, on account of the loss of his dogs, and because the 
first time he had foiled him. He combatted him a long 
time with much bodily peril, and with great difficulty he 
at length slew him; and when he returned home, which 
he did, straightway, to his own castle of Languedudon 
in Biscaye, he had the bear carried with him, and every- 
body was astonished at the enormous size of the beast, 
and the great valor of the knight who had slain it. 

‘* And when the Lady Florence heard the bugles and 
saw the spears of his train, and the dust of their horses’ 
feet from the turrets, she ran down into the court to 
meet him, for she was very glad that he had returned to 
her, for she was fond of him, and constant in her love, 
and eyer grieved when they were parted. 


256 FRANK FORESTER. 


‘«Then, when he saw her, he sprang down from his 
horse, and she clapped her hands and threw her arms 
about his neck and kissed him, for, as I tell you, she was 
very glad. But in a moment, when she saw the carcass 
of the bear, she let go of her husband’s neck and turned 
very pale and fainted, and was carried to her chamber. 
And this was the cause of her fainting—that she remem- 
bered, when she saw the bear, that once her father hunt- 
ed this same bear, and during the chase a voice cried out 
to him, though he saw no one, ‘ Thou huntest me, yet I 
wish thee no ill; yet shalt thou die a miserable death.? _ 

‘‘This is what the lady remembered, when she saw 
the bear, and, moreover, that Don Pedro, within a 
month or so, beheaded her father without any cause, 
and she was sure that something would befall her hus- 
band more fearful yet and strange, for that he had not 
hunted only, but slain this enchanted monster. And 
for three days she continued very ill at ease, but she 
would tell no one what ailed her; but on the third day 
she said to her husband: 

***My dear lord and well-beloved husband, I never 
shall be well again any more till I have made a pilgrim- 
age to the shrine of St. James of Compostella. Give me 
leave, therefore, to go thither, and to carry my son Peter 
and my daughter Adrienne with me, I beseech you.’ 

““And Sir Peter complied, for he loved her tenderly 
and sought in all things to gratify her. But she packed 
up, unobserved by any one, all her gems and her plate 
and set out on her pilgrimage, and that done, she went 
to visit her cousins, King Henry and his Queen, of Cas- 
tile, who reigns now in Don Pedro’s stead; and there 
she still abides, and neither will return herself nor send 
the children, dreading some terrible calamity, which she 
maintains must still befall Sir Peter. 

** And yet much evil has befallen him already, for be- 
side that he has lost-his lovely wife and goodly children 


SIR PETER DE BEARN. 257 


and all her revenues, except the fourth part only, which 
she pays him still, the same night that he slew the bear 
he was seized with a frightful malady or madness, which 
leads men to believe it was, in very truth, a thing pos- 
sessed of a devil which he slew. For every night, now, 
as soon as he is asleep, he rises up and takes his arms, 
and draws his sword and begins to skirmish through the 
house, as though he were in actual combat and would 
slay any one whom he should encounter; but when he 
wakes he knows naught of it and tells any one who men- 
tions it to him that he lies! Sometimes, indeed, they 
leave neither sword nor arms in his chamber, when he 
makes such a noise and clatter, as if all the devils in hell 
were there, that they judge it best to leave the arms 
there and avoid him till the fit passes over. 

‘* This ill already has befallen him, and thus hath he 
lost all that he holds dearest in the world; but all this is 
as nothing to that which shall befall him yet, from the 
bear’s vengeance, if his lady thinks aright; and it would 
seem, by what has passed even now, that she had some 
more knowledge than she dared avow. It is a pity of 
Sir Peter, for he is a good knight and gallant, if there 
was eyer one in all the world justly renowned and famous. 
And now, Sir John, I have told you the story of Sir 
Peter de Béarn; it is a well-known fact—what think you 
of it?” 

The monk mused long before he made any answer, and 
when he did reply it was pensively and almost sadly. “I 
do believe,” he said, ‘‘everything you have told me. We 
find, in ancient authors, how gods and goddesses former- 
ly changed men into beasts, according to their pleasure, 
and women into birds, This bear, therefore, might have 
been a knight hunting in the forest of Biscaye, when he, 
perchance, angered some god or goddess, who changed 
him into a bear, to do penance, as Sir Acteon of Thessaly 
was transformed also into a stag!” 


258 FRANK FORESTER. 


“Sir Acteon of Thessaly!” replied Sir Espaign du 
Lyon. ‘‘ My good sir, do relate it; I shall be very glad 
to listen to you.” 

“*Tt is too long to tell you now,” said Froissart, ‘‘ for 
it is growing very late, and the sun will soon set. We 
will, therefore, if you please, get to our saddles now, and 
when we reach the Star inn at Tarbes, I will recount the 
tale over a flask of wine, which I trust may be as good as 
this which I have now finished.” 

*‘T think you are quite right,” returned Sir Espaign. 
**T did not take note how the time flew; but you must 
not forget to tell it me at Tarbes.” 

“Surely I will not,” answered Froissart, “for you 
have pleased me very much by your recital, and I owe it 
to you to give you, if I may, like pleasure.” 


LIVINGSTONE’S DOOM. 


It was into a desolate and gloomy tract that the young 
Laird of Livingstone dashed, when the last of his band 
fell in the short fatal conflict over the grave of his mur- 
dered victim. As his strong, high-blood charger swept 
over the mountain brook which separated the lone 
church-yard from the broad pastures, with scarce an ef- 
fort, and stretched gallantly away over the gentle slope, 
confident in the speed and vigor of the fine animal that 
bore him, maddened by rage and indignation at the idea 
that his stout troopers, picked veterans of the Scottish 
hfe-guard, should have met an end so inglorious, he 
turned his body half round in his saddle, and shaking his 
hand with a swearing and angry gesture against the six 
or eight men who had started to pursue, he gave vent to 
his excited feelings in a loud shout of scorn and stern, 
contemptuous defiance. It was well for him then, that 
not a musket remained loaded in the hands of those who 
followed him, for there were two or three among them, 
keen and unerring marksmen, and he was still within fair 
carbine distance, and there was not one man of that fierce, 
persecuted party, who would not have esteemed it a good 
deed, and acceptable unto the Lord of Hosts, to shoot him 
like a dog, whose hands, as they said, were purpled with 
the blood of the saints, and “his raiment red with the 
same. He drove the spurs into the flanks of the proud 
charger, who answered with a snort and gleam of his vic- 
ious eye, that told of the untamed and gallant spirit he 
had derived from a long train of desert sires. On, he 
swept—on! unchecked, and free, and fearless, skimming 
the long ascent with all the ease, and almost all the fleet- 
ness of the swallow chasing its insect prey, sweeping 

259 ; 


260 FRANK FORESTER. 


across the brooks and water-courses that crossed his 
course at intervals, as if they were mere furrows in the 
soil, and charging the rough, free-stone walls with vigor- 
ous and exulting joy. The rider turned when he had won 
the first mile of the hill, and as he looked back on the 
men who followed him, scattered and foiled, and breath- 
less, yet breasting still the slope with stubborn resolution, 
and giving vent to their thirst for vengeance in a deep 
solemn shout, a curl of scorn drew up his chiselled lip, 
as he muttered to himself, ‘‘ Fools—blind, presumptuous 
fools!—as if their clumsy feet made but to trample their 
deep, clayey furrows, could vie with thy fleet hoofs—my 
matchless Barbary; for not a pant is in thy clear, slow 
breathing, not a foam-spot upon thy curb, not even a 
shade of moisture on thy sleek, velvet coat.” He paused, 
however, for a moment as he spoke, and gazed half wist- 
fully around him; before him lay the steep and purple 
moors, and to his right, the ridges, steep and precipitous, 
and pathless, of the wild Rutlands—he drew his rein up 
shortly, and wheeling to his left hand, struck into a gal- 
lop, once again crossing the hill obliquely toward the 
lower country, and the road by which he had marched 
upward, but after riding some ten minutes, he crossed 
the top of a small hillock, and gaining a full view of the 
open country, saw, what he had quite forgotten, a broad, 
fierce, brawling river in the valley, at two or three miles 
distance, ‘‘ Ha!” he said, striking his hand passionately 
on his thigh, ‘‘ha! curses on it!—it had escaped my no- 
tice, and long ere this, be sure of it, the only bridge is 
guarded by a mob of these dog puritans!—why, the whole 
nest of them will be astir when the news goes abroad, 
that they have slain eight troopers of Graham’s Guard!— 
and not a ford in that infernal stream, ’till I can reach 
the Preakin hollow. Well! here goes, for the mountain 
—thank Heaven, no foot of man can gain upon black 
Barbary, over these open fields, and ere I reach the 


LIVINGSTONE’S DOOM. 261 


heather, they will be miles behind me!” And, with the 
word, he wheeled his horse again, and rode back up the 
hill in the direction which he had first taken. In doing 
this, the line of his course was turned back somewhat, 
not actually toward the furious foes who were pursuing, 
but in a direction transverse to that which they had 
taken, so that he saw them clearly, so clearly that he could 
mark the sullen, dogged air of each grim visage, and note 
the bitter rage which paled their embrowned counte- 
nances. But it was not this only that he noted, for, half 
way now between the chased and the footmen, who were 
still in resolute chase, he might perceive four peasants 
mounted upon the horses which they had caught after the 
fall of his dragoons, spurring them fiercely up the hill, and 
shouting in anticipated triumph. The sight awoke him 
instantly to a more fit appreciation of his danger, and, 
wasting no more time, he set his horse’s head straight for 
the moors, and without looking back at all, rode as di- 
rectly as the crow flies over all obstacles that came in his 
way, with the calm nerve and splendid horsemanship that 
marked the perfect cavalier. A nearer, wilder yell, than 
any that had yet fallen on his ear, pealed wildly down 
the void; he momentarily turned his head, and saw that 
the parties had united, and that, whereas the men who 
had first taken the chargers of the slain soldiers, were | 
mere clanish rustics, Hackstoun, of Rathillet, and three 
of his companions, all, evidently from their bearing in the 
saddle, old troopers and experienced horsemen, had 
mounted in their place, and had already fearfully dimin- 
ished the space that intervened between them and him- 
self, their destined victim. Another mile had been al- 
ready traversed, and only one remained ere he should 
reach the rough and broken heather—on he spurred— 
on! and with fiery energy, and the black charger glo- 
riously repaid his master’s confidence, by its redoubled 
speed. On! he went; on!—and now he reached the wall, 


262 FRANK FORESTER. 


the last that intervened between the pasture and the 
moors. It was a strong, tall barrier, of sharp, dry lime- 
stone, at least six feet in height, with a broad, rugged 
ditch, on the near side. ‘‘ Ha!” he exclaimed, with a 
gay smile, ‘“‘ha! I am safe, then—not a horse, save mine, 
can clear it!” and, as he spoke, he pulled his horse delib- 
erately up, that he might catch his wind before attempt- 
ing the great leap, and looked quite coolly down the hill 
toward the men who followed, now, having lost a little 
ground in the last gallop, about half a mile behind him. 
They saw him pull up suddenly, and knowing the ground 
themselves accurately, and the formidable height of the 
boundary wall, perceived at once that he declined the 
leap—again, a wild, triumphant yell pealed from their 
lips, and again he shook his gauntleted hand at their 
threatenings, and answered with a shout clearer, higher, 
and more triumphant than their own. Then, setting him- 
self firmly in the saddle, he gathered his reins up lightly, 
pricked the good war-horse with the spur, and charged 
the wall with cool determination. 

With flashing eye, and distended nostril, the good horse 
charged it—with a long, easy stroke he rose into the air, 
swung over it, and was lost in a moment to the sight of 
the pursuers. But not ten bounds had the horse made 
beyond it, before the Laird perceived that to gallop in 
that rough and broken soil, was useless! Nay, more, 
was impossible. His was a mind prompt in expedient, 
fearless, and daring in a degree no less insolent than 
cruel, and oppressive. ‘‘I will turn back,” he said, 
‘*and from behind the wall will shoot the two first with 
my pistols—and then I can cut down the others, if they 
dare cross on foot!” Another moment, and he had 
taken post under the shelter of the wall—had drawn both 
pistols from his holsters, and was examining their 
priming, when the near tramp of the horses apprized 
him that the time was come. Doffing his hat, he raised 


LIVINGSTONE’S DOOM. 263 


his eyes above the level of the crossing stone, so carefully 
that no one of the pursuers witnessed it. He saw Hack- 
stoun within ten paces, and in the very act of putting 
his horse at the leap, and behind him, at perhaps ten 
paces farther, a second trooper, heayily spurring a cum- 
bersome bay stallion. In time of peril, thoughts flash, 
as it were, like lightning on the mind—he knew that 
Hackstoun’s horse, how boldly he might ride soever, 
could not by any possibility carry him over that huge 
fence, and calculating on his certain fall, resolyed that 
him he could slay with the sword merely. So, raising 
himself in his stirrups, he showed himself above the wall, 
and stretching forth his hand, took a quick aim, and 
fired. Through the dense smoke he saw the second 
trooper roll—man and horse—upon the ground; but the 
next instant, the man leaped to his feet with a loud cry, 
apparently unhurt, and instantly began to load his long- 
barrelled fowling piece. Meantime, Hackstown had 
dashed his heavy charger at the wall, with a good will to 
clear it, it is true, and a revengeful heart that would 
have braved ten times the danger, had he been sure of 
making good his purpose. But, well although he rode, 
and daringly, the animal he backed could not accomplish 
it, but forced unwillingly, by the resolution of his rider, 
drove at it, cleared the ditch, but striking the top of the 
wall with its chest, was hurled backward into the chasm 
by the shock, while Hackstoun was thrown completely 
over, as if he had been launched from some gigantic en- 
gine, and pitching on his head among the heather, lay for 
the moment stunned and senseless. 

“* Base dogs,” shouted Livingstone, ‘‘ how dare ye thus 
pursue a gentlemanand soldier?” and, with these words, 
levelling the second of his pistols at the head of the third 
horseman, he pulled the trigger with an aim so steady, 
that the bullet took effect full in the middle of his fore- 
head, and hurled him from the saddle, a dead man, ere he 


264 FRANK FORESTER. 


touched the greensward. The fourth man pulled his 
horse up instantly, and leaping to the ground, began, like 
his companion, to make ready his long musket. With a 
contemptuous laugh, thinking himself now quite safe, 
Livingstone rode away, picking his way at a brisk trot 
among the tangled heather, and now and then, where the 
ground was harder and the heath lower than usual, 
breaking into a gentle gallop, that speedily set a large 
space between the fugitive and his pursuers. It was, 
perhaps, a quarter of an hour before the men who had 
paused to aid their companion, were enabled to continue 
their pursuit. Hackstoun, who had recovered altogether 
from his temporary hurt, leading the way, and cheering his 
men onward—but in that space, Livingstone had gained a 
mile of advantage, and though the nature of the ground 
favored the footmen, three miles were traversed and the 
night was fast gathering around before they had got so 
near to him as to try the effect of their fire-arms. The 
first report fell on his ears startlingly, but the shrill 
whistle of the bullet, not following it, he judged, and 
rightly, that they were yet too distant to aim correctly. 
Another quarter of an hour elapsed, and a ball whistled 
by his ear, and was succeeded instantly by the full round 
report of the nearer gun-shot. Just as this happened, 
he cleared the heather, and gained what seemed a rich 
flat table rock of slaty lime-stone. Taking advantage of 
the firmer ground, he dashed his horse into a gallop, but 
scarcely had he made three bounds, before a shout of 
warning, as it seemed, so wild and piercing that it made 
even Livingstone’s high blood recoil and curdle, rang from 
the lips of Hackstoun. At the same moment a fierce 
gust of wind swept over the bare summit, sending before 
it a thick mass of driving mist, so dense as to be almost 
palpable—an atmospheric change, by no means extra- 
ordinary on the bleak moors of Scotland. Again, and 
again the clang of the steed’s hoofs on the solid rock was 


LIVINGSTONE’S DOOM. 265 


borne to the ears of Hackstoun. Again and again the 
fierce Puritan shouted his note of warning. But it was all 
in vain—once more the heavy horse-tramp sounded—and 
then, one long appalling shriek, and all was silent. The 
breeze came up again and whistled away the mist-wreath, 
and the last gleam of the setting sun broke out of the 
dim storm-clouds. The Covenanters who had halted at 
the piercing notes of that long shriek, advanced as the 
fog melted—advanced two paces only—for right beneath 
their feet the rock broke off a sheer and perpendicular 
wall, six hundred feet in depth, of rifted limestone, with 
a wild torrent at its base—and in the torrent, crushed, 
maimed, and motionless as the black rocks around them, 
lay Livingstone and his bold Barbary. That precipice is 
called to this day, ‘‘ The Laird’s Leap,” where the Lord 
took into his own right hand the vengeance of his per- 
secuted people. 


12 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


NO. I. 


JANE McCREA. 


Tr was brilliant autumn time— 
The most brilliant time of all, 
When the gorgeous woods are gleaming 
Ere the leaves begin to fall, 
When the maple boughs are crimson, 
When the hickory shines like gold, 
And the noons are sultry hot, 
And the nights are frosty cold. 


When the country has no green, 
Save the sword-grass by the rill, 
And the willows in the valley, 
And the pine upon the hill, 
When the pippin leaves the bough, 
And the sumach’s fruit is red, 
And the quail is piping loud 
From the buckwheat where he fed. 


When the sky is blue as steel, 
And the river clear as glass, 
When the mist is on the mountain, 
And the network on the grass, 
When the harvests all are housed, 
And the farmer’s work is done, 
And the stubbles are deserted 
For the fox-hound and the gun. 
266 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


It was brilliant autumn time 
When the army of the North, 
With its cannon, and dragoons, 
And its riflemen came forth; 
Through the country all abroad 
There was spread a mighty fear, 
Of the Indians in the van, 
And the Hessians in the rear. 


There was spread a mighty terror, 
And the bravest souls were faint, 
For the shaven chiefs were mustered 

In their scalp-locks and their paint; 
And the forest was alive— 

And the tramp of warrior men 
Scared the eagle from his eyry, 

And the gray wolf from his den. 


For the bold Burgoyne was marching, 


With his thousands marching down, 


To do battle with the people, 
To do battle for the crown. 

But Starke he lay at Bennington, 
By the Hoosick’s waters bright, 

And Arnold and his forces 
Gathered thick on Bemis’ height. 


Fort Edward on the Hudson, 
It was guarded night and day, 
By Van Vechten and his woodmen— 
Right sturdy woodmen they! 
Fort Edward on the Hudson, 
It was guarded day and night, 
Oh! but in the early morning 
It saw a bitter sight ! 


267 


268 FRANK FORESTER. 


A bitter sight, and fearful, 
And a shameful deed of blood, 
All the plain was cleared around, 
But the slopes were thick with wood, 
And a mighty pine stood there, 
On the summit of the hill, 
And a bright spring rose beneath it, 
With a low and liquid trill— 


And a little way below, 
All with vine-boughs overrun, 
A white-walled cot was sleeping— 
There that shameful deed was done! 
Ob! it was the blythest morning, 
In the brilliant autumn time, 
The sun shone never brighter, 
When the year was in its prime, 


But a maiden fair was weeping 
In that cottage day by day, 

Wo she was, and worn with watching 
For her true-love far away— 

He was bearing noble arms, 
Noble arms for England’s king! 

She was waiting, sad and tearful, 
Near the pine tree, near the spring! 


Weary waiting for his coming— 
Yet she feared not ; for she knew 
That her lover’s name would guard her, 
That her lover’s heart was true. 
True he was; nor did forget, 
As he marched the wild woods through 
Her to whom his troth was plighted, 
By the Hudson’s waters blue. 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 269 


He bethought him of the madness 
And the fury of the strife : 
He bethought him of the peril 
To that dear and precious life— 
So he called an Indian chief, 
In his paint and war-array— 
Oh! it was a cursed thought, 
And it was a luckless day. 


“Go!” he said, ‘and seek my lady 
By Fort Edward, where she lies ; 
Have her hither to the camp! 
She shall prove a worthy prize!” 
And he charged him with a letter, 
With a letter to his dear, 
Bidding her to follow freely, 
And that she should nothing fear. 


Lightly, brightly, rose the sun— 
High his heart, and full of mirth— 

Gray and gloomy closed the night— 
Steamy mists bedewed the earth— 

Thence he never ceased to sorrow 
Till his tedious life was o’er— 

For that night he.thought to see her, 
But he never saw her more. 


By the pine tree on the hill, 
Armed men were at their post, 
While the early sun was low, 
Watching for the royal host, 
Came a rifle’s sudden crack ! 
Rose a wild and fearful yell ! 
Rushed the Indians from the brake ! 
Fled the guard, or fought and fell ! 


270 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Fought and fell! and fiercely o’er them 
Rose the hideous death-halloo ! 

One alone was spared of all— 
Wounded he, and pinioned too! 

He it was the deed that saw, 
As he lay the spring beside— 

Had his manly arm been free, 
He had saved her, or had died ! 


Up the hill he saw them lead her, 
And she followed free from fear— 
And her beauty blazed the brighter, 
As she deemed her lover near— 
He could read the joyous hope, 
Sparkling in her sunny eyes— 
Lo! the sudden strife! the rage! 
They are battling for the prize! 


Guns are brandished—knives are drawn ! 
Flashed the death-shot, flew the ball ! 
By the chief, who should have saved her 

Did the lovely victim fall. 
Fell, and breathed her lover’s name, 
Blessed him with her latest sigh, 
Happier than he surviving, 
Happier was she to die. 


Then the frantic savage seized her 
By the long and flowing hair— 
Bared the keen and deadly knife— 
Whirled aloft the tresses fair— 

Yelled in triumph, and retreated, 
Bearing off that trophy dread— 
Think of him who sent them forth ! 
Who received it—reeking red ! 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


He received it, cold as stone, 
With a ghastly stupid stare— 


Shook not, sighed not, questioned not— 


Oh! he knew that yellow hair ! 
And he never smiled again, 

And was never seen to weep— 
And he never spoke to name her, 

Save when muttering in his sleep! 


Yet he did his duty well, 
With a chill and cheerless heart ; 
But he never seemed to know it, 
Though he played a soldier’s part. 
Years he lived—for grief kills not— 
But his very life was dead ; 
Scarcely died he any more, 
When the clay was o’er his head! 


Would ye farther learn of her? 
Visit, then, the fatal spot ! 
There no monument they raised, 
Storied stones they sculptured not ; 
But the mighty pine is there— 
Go, and ye may see it still, 
Gray and ghostly, but erect, 
On the summit of the hill, 


And the little fount wells out, 
Cold and clear, beneath its shade, 
Cold and clear, as when beside it 
Fell that young and lovely maid. 
These shall witness for the tale, 
How, on that accursed day, 
Beauty, innocence, and youth 
Died in hapless JaNE McCrea! 


No. II. 
ARNOLD'S TREASON, 


Night upon the Highland hills, 
Night upon the mighty river, 
Darkly in the witching calm 
Did the breezeless aspen shiver; 
Darkly o’er the shrouded moon 
Were the misty vapors flying, 
Sadly down the hollow pass 
Sighed the night air softly dying. 


Silence, like a heavy shadow, 
Brooded over Hudson’s breast, 

Brooded over Beacon hoary, — 
Brooded over huge Crow-Nest, 

Save, when, as the tide was making, 
Faintly rose its fitful dash, 

Save, when, all the echoes waking, 
Rose the leaping sturgeon’s flash. 


Once, and oft the katydid 
Shrilled upon the mountain side, 
Once, and oft, from shoal and shadow, 
Deep the bullfrog’s bass replied. 
Mute was all beside and solemn— 
Tread of brute, or wild-fowl’s flight, 
Sounded none i’ the stilly woods, 
Sounded none 7’ the starless night. 
272 


td 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


Leagues of wilderness and river, 
Countless leagues, lay hushed in sleep, 
Scarce a rustle in the trees, 
Scarce a ripple on the deep ; 
Not a sign was there or token, 
Not a sign of human life, 
Yet those woods and waters lonely, 
All with armed foes were rife. 


Floated o’er the fortress, northward, 
New-born freedom’s clustered stars, 
Soon to rank with flags that numbered 

Centuries of glorious scars; 
Southward o’er the Vulture’s pinion, 
Meteor of a thousand years, 


Gleamed old England’s red cross glorious, 


Known wherever pilot steers. 


Noble foemen, southward, northward ! 
Noble foemen! noble cause ! 
These for loyalty and fame! 
Those for liberty and laws ! 
Long had been the strife between them, 
Long and hard ’t was like to be, 
Those the tamers of the forest, 
These the rulers of the sea! 


Yet was treason in the camp, 
Where no treason should have been— 
But it has been so forever, 
So forever ’t will be seen, 
That the highest, holiest cause, 
And the purest patriot band, 
Number with their good and great 
Still the traitor’s heart and hand ! 


273 


274 


FRANK FORESTER. 


When the Persian myriads quailed, 
Quailed before the hundreds three, 
Of the glorious Spartans, one 
Died not at Thermopyle— 
When the consuls yet were new, 
And the Tarquins hardly down, 
One in Rome, a Brutus too, 
Sold his country to the crown. 


And if man the foulest treason 
Plot against his fellow clay, 
How shall we presume to murmur, 
Things whose life is but a day, 
When the Lord of Earth and Heaven 
Counted in his chosen fold 
Judas, who’ betrayed his Master 
For the filthy lust of gold? 


Mark the bullfrog’s startled croak, 
Mark the teal on sudden pinion 

Springing from her watery roost— 
What invades their wild dominion ? 

Lo! with noiseless motion stealing, 
In the shadow of the shore, 

Not a star its course revealing, 
Crawls a boat with muffled oar. 


Crawls a boat with muffled oar 
Slowly toward an inlet deep, 
Where the Long-clove frowns above, 
And dark below the eddies sleep. 
Not an eagle’s eye could pierce 
That recess of utter gloom, 
Suited well for treason’s cradle, 
Suited well for a traitor’s tomb! 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS, 215 


Grated on the rocks the keel, 

Stepped a stately form to land— 
Well could rein the dashing war-horse, 

Well could wield the mortal brand— 
Nobler spirit, braver hand, 

Warmer heart have never met— 
Wo betide the wicked hour 

When ashore his foot he set! 


Not a word had yet been spoken, 
For the rowers knew him not, 
Knew him not the man who steered him 
To that gloomy, guilty spot. 
But there waited one ashore, 
Shrouded in the shades of night, 
Shrouded in the thicke t covert— 
His were deeds that shun the light. 


Yet had he a glorious name— 
Deeds of his i’ the face of day 

Had outgrown all rival laurels, 
None so daring-bold as they— 

By the wild Dead River’s course, 
On Megantic’s stormy lake, 

On the Chaudiere’s boiling rapids, 
In morass, ravine and brake— 


On the plains of Abram glorious, 
All beneath the battled wall, 

That beheld young Wolfe victorious 
In the arms of glory fall— 

In the weary, weary march 
Up the wintry Kennebec— 

In the fight where fell Montgomery 
By the ramparts of Quebec. 


276 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Upon Bemis’ bloody height, 
And ihe field of grounded arms, 
Foremost he, though not their leader, 
Led the men i’ the fierce alarms ; 
Foremost when the works were taken, 
When the Hessian lines were won, 
Fell he, horse and man i’ the port, 
Wounded fell, when his work was done— 


But it galled his haughty spirit, 
And it rankled in his heart— 
Others won the meed of praise, 
Only he had played the part— 
Fame deferred and rank denied 
Turned his very soul to gall— 
Pride it was that conquered him— 
Pride which made an angel fall. 


Heavy debt oppressed him too— 
Oh! but he was sorely tried ! 

Oh! that in the battle’s hurly, 
Young and honored he had died } 

But he hedged aside from truth, 
Held not honor in his eye— 

Pray we, then, for grace to fall not, 
Fall not thus, but rather die! 


Partly spurred by bitter hate, 
Partly driven by sordid need, 
He his patriot laurels bartered 
Basely for a traitor’s meed ; 
He, in falling, by his sin 
Dragged a loftier spirit down, 
Spirit that stooped not to treason, 
Would not stoop to win a crown. 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS, R77 


No man knows the words they said, 
No man knows the villain’s suit— 
For the knave escaped his doom, 
And the martyr perished mute. 
No man knows but only this, 
That his post he should betray— 
Near the sun !—the work not done !—- 
And they mounted and away. 


Hard they galloped up the road ; 

Up the road through Haverstraw : 
Through the village, o’er the bridge ; 
Their approach the sentry saw— 

Challenged loud—advanced his arms— 
** Congress” is the countersign— 
‘* Pass—all’s well!” the sentry cried— 
He is in the foeman’s line. 


Heavily it smote his heart ! 
He, a Briton, thus betrayed— 
2le, who loathed the name of baseness, 
Basely thus a prisoner made ! 
He had risked his person boldly ! 
He was clad in his martial dress ! 
He was perilled, oh! how coldly! 
By the traitor knave’s address. 


oa 


To a lonely house was he taken, 
Never told he what passed there— 
Though he tarried till the morning, 
Till the sun shone broad and fair. 
Then the traitor turned him home, 
Turned him home, his treason planned— 
Little recked he what fell out, 
So the guerdon reached his hand. 


278 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Turned and left his victim there, 
Cheated by a specious lie! 
Left the true and noble-hearted 
By a felon’s doom to die ! 
Sent him not in safety back 
To the Vulture, whence he came— 
But by dastard artifice 
Left him to a death of shame. 


Oh! but he resisted strongly, 
Ere he laid his dress aside { 
Oh! but he consented wrongly. 
Or he never so had died! 
He hac passed the farthest post, 
He was riding free from fear— 
And the foe was far behind, 
And the English lines were near— 


When, beside a little brook, 
Three who lay in ambush nigh, 
Bade him stand—hs ‘lighted down 
And they took him for a spy ! 
Then to Northcastle they led him— 
Sheldon’s horsemen there they lay 
Axd his hours they were numbered—~ 
They were numbered on that day. 


For the papers they were found— 
And the traitor he had fled— 
And the victim would not lie! 
Lie !—no! not tosave his head! 
Would not lie to save his head— 
Would not lie to save his fame ! 
He had risked his person fairly— 
Never risked his soldier name ! 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


Dying, ’t was his only fear 
Lest his leader should suppose 
That obedience to his orders 
Had betrayed him to his foes— 
And the fondest, latest wish 
Of his noble, noble heart 
Was to save Sir Henry’s soul 
From that unavailing smart. 


Then to his doom they led him, 
In-a sunny morning’s light, 
When the mufiled drums were beating, 
And the bayonets glancing bright— 
To his bitter doom they led him— 
He had asked a soldier’s death— 
But he saw the shameful tree, 
And the cursed rope beneath— 


Back he started— ‘ Why this shrinking? 
And what shakes thy gallant breast?” 
**To my death I go all fearless, 
But the manner I detest !” 
To his death he went all fearless 
With a cheerful heart and high 
Not an eye of all the host, 
Not an eye but his was dry ! 


Better, better was it far, 
So like André to be dying, 

With his country mourning o’er him, 
And his foemen round him sighing, 

Than like Arnold to live on, 

- Scorn of his adopted land, 

Loathed of every noble heart, 

Shunned of every honest hand ! 


279 


280 FRANK FORESTER. 


Heard ye not how England’s King, 
With his peers in circled state, 

Would have made him known to one, 
Who in every deed was great ? 

‘*No, my liege,” the earl replied— 

‘Rank, and lands, and life, are thine— 

But no traitor’s touch may sully 
This untainted hand of mine.” 


But the traitor still was brave— 

Quailed not he to the old lord’s secorn— 
Quailed not he to the bravest man 

That was e’er of woman born— 
Challenged him to the deadly field— 
- Met him sternly face to face— 
Levelled! fired ! but erred his ball— 

It may be his soul was touched of grace ! 


Proudly, coldly stood the peer— 
Proudly, coldly turned away! 
‘**Stand and fire!” the traitor cried— 
“Yours, my lord, is the luck to-day!” 
‘No! I leave you,” sternly spake— 
Spake the old and haughty lord— 
‘Leave you to a fitter doom— 
To the hangman and the cord ” 


281 


NO. III. 
THE SURPRISE OF TRENTON. 


Eighteen hundred years had passed, 
Lacking only twenty-four, 
Since the Saviour, one-begotten, 
Meek the virgin mother bore— 
Shepherds on that very night 
In the fields their watch did keep, 
While the busy world around 
Silent lay, and bathed in sleep— 


When the angel of the Lord 
Came upon them, and a light 
Great and glorious shone about 
Through the gloom of the wintry night; 
And the heavenly host was heard 
Singing loud o’er field and fen, 
“*Glory be to God in the Highest, 
Peace on Earth, Good will to men.” 


Lowly in. his cradle-manger 
Then the infant Saviour slept, 
While the maiden mother o’er him 
Tears of humble gladness wept ; 
And the Magi found him there, 
Who had followed from afar, 
When they saw it in the East, 
The Redeemer’s holy star ; 


282 


FRANK FORESTER. 


For the star it went before them, 
And the wise ones followed on, 
Till it stood above the spot, 
And their joyous goal was won; 
Humbly then they bowed the knee, 
Humbly did their gifts unfold, 
Gifts of ivory, and aloes, 
Myrrh, and frankincense, and gold, 


Eighteen hundred years had passed, 
Eighteen hundred years and eight, 
Since the Saviour, one-begotten, 
Bowed him to a felon’s fate— 
Nailed upon the cursed tree 
Suffered then our God and Lord— 
Peace to man he came to leave— 
** Peace he left not, but a sword!” 


Noon it was of Christmas night 
On the wintry Delaware, 
Sullenly the falling snow 
Floated through the murky air, 
Sullenly the flooded river 
Moaned the whitening shores along, 
Sullenly the drifting ice 
Groaned and tossed i’ the current strong, 


Not a star was in the sky, 
Not a sound was on the breeze, 
Not a voice or stir there was 
In the thickly feathered trees— 
Only through the heavy gloom 
Muttered low the mournful rushing 
Of the deep and dismal stream, 
Through its icy fetters gushing. 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


Lonely were the streets of Trenton, 
Trenton town by the Delaware— 
Quartered there were the British horse ! 
Quartered the bearded Hessians there ! 
Deep the snow on the roofs above ! 
Deep i’ the trackless roads below— 
Hark to the bell! ’t was midnight chime ! 
Oh ! but the strokes were stern and slow! 


Not a guard was on his post— 
Not a round its circuit made— 
What the risk in such a storm? 
Where the foe that should invade 
Far beyond the flooded stream, 
Pennsylvania wilds among. 
For the patriot army lay, 
Frail, disjointed, and unstrung— 


Washington, who late so glorious 
Braved in equal arms his king, 

Sees the boasted bird victorious 
Sadly droop its baffled wing. 

‘* Soldiers, spread the Christmas feast— 

Soldiers, fill the bumper fair— 

Pass the bottle! pile the hearth ! 
Cutting cold is the wintry air— 


‘*Let the toast our country be, 

From whatever country we ! 

Sons of German Fatherland ! 
Britons ever bold and free ! 

Comrades, troll the jolly stave— 
Pass the bottle—fear no wrong ! 

For the rebel hosts are weak, 
And the wintry river strong ! 


283 


284 FRANK FORESTER. 


‘Tush ! they dare not! We who drove them 

Weak and weary, faint and few— 

Tracked them, weaponless and wounded, 
O’er the roads by the bloody dew, 

Which to every painful print 
Trickled from their shoeless feet— 

Tush ! the craven dove as soon 
Shall the fearless falcon meet !” 


Madly raged the jovial route— 
Loud the bursts of loyal song 
Rang amid the drifting storm, 
Rang the snowy fields along! 
Little deemed the roistering crew 
As their revelry they plied, 
What avengers stern and sure 
Gathered on the icy tide— 


Gathered, soon their glee to mar, 
Hearts afire ! and hands on hilt ! 
Redder liquor far than wine 
Long ere morning shall be spilt— 
Hark the deep and solemn hum, 
Louder than the river’s flow, 
Rising heavier through the night, 
Nearer through the drifting snow. 


"T is the hum of mustered men— 

Barges with their burthen brave 
Painfully and long are tossing 

On the fierce and freezing wave ; 
Horse and foot and guns are there, 

Struggling through the awful gloom— 
Soon their din shall rouse the foe! 

Rouse him like the trump of doom! 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS, 


Firm, as some gigantic oak, 
Stood their chief on the hither shore, 
Marking how his comrades true 
Prospered with the laboring oar ; 
Marking how each barge and boat 
Slowly battled to the strand, 
Marking how the serried lines 
Mustered as they came to land! 


Calm his high and noble port— 
Calm his mighty face severe— 
None had seen it change with doubt, 
None had seen it pale with fear— 
And it showed as grandly now, 
In that wild and perilous hour, 
Fraught with wisdom half divine, 


Fraught with more than mortal power— 


Steadily he stood and gazed— 
Not a cloud upon his brow— 
Calmer in the banquet hall 
Never had he been than now! 
Yet his fate was on the cast— 
Life! and fame! and country ! all! 
Sterner game was never played— 
Death or Freedom—win or fall! 


Fall he—and his country’s hope 
Sets, a sun no more to rise! 
Win he—and her dawning light 
Yet may fill the unfathomed skies ! 
Fall he—and his name must wane, 
Rebel chief of a rebel band! 
Win he—it shall live forever, 
Father of his native land ! 


285 


286 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Silent stood he—graye and mute, 
Listening now the distant roar 
From the half-heard town, and now 
Gazing on the crowded shore— 
Crowded with his patriot host, 
Burning for the vengeful fray— 
Ear, and eye, and heart, erect, 
Waiting for the trumpet’s bray ! 


Silent—till the latest boat 
Safe had stemmed the wheeling tide, 
Till the latest troop was banded, 
- Heart to heart, and side by side. 
Then he turned his eyes aloft, 
Moved his lips for a little space, 
Mighty though he was, he bowed him 
Meekly to the throne of grace. 


‘*God of battles, Lord of might, 
Let my country but be free, 
To thy mercies I commend me— 
Glory to thy Son and Thee!” 
Then he waved his arm aloft 
With a martial gesture proud— 
‘* Let your march,” he said, ‘be silent, 
Till your cannon speak aloud.” 


Silent was their rapid march 

Through the mist of rain and sleet, 
For the deep and drifted snow 

Gave no sound beneath their feet— 
Clashed no musket, beat no drum, 

As they fleeted through the gloom, 
Liker far, than living men, 

To the phantoms of the tomb. | 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS, 287 


Morn was near, but overcast 
In the dim and rayless sky, 
Not a gleam foreshowed his coming, 
Yet the pallid sun was nigh— 
Morn was near—but not a guard 
Heard their march or saw them come— 
Lo! they form! the very dogs 
In the fated town were dumb ! 


Hark ! the bell! the bugle’s blast ! 
Hark! the loud and long alarms ! 

Beat the drums—but all too late ! 
All too late they beat to arms ! 

Forth they rush in disarray, 
Forming fast with fearful din— 

‘* Open now, ye mouths of flame ! 

Pour your crashing volleys in!” 


See ! the sharp and running flash ! 
Hark! the long and rattling roll ! 

There the western muskets blaze ! 
Every shot a mortal soul ! 

Vain was then the Hessian’s yager— 
Vain the English horseman’s steel ! 

Vain the German’s hardihood— 
Vain the Briton’s loyal zeal ! 


Fast they fall, the best and bravest, 
Unavenged and helpless fall, 
Rallying their men dismayed, 
Campbell bold and gallant Rahl. 
Then before that murderous hail, 
Thick, incessant, sure as death, 
Reel the shattered columns back ! 
Gasp the dying chiefs for breath ! 


288 FRANK FORESTER. 


Lo! ’t is o’er! their arms they ground! 
All, that brave men can, did they ! 
Fought, while fight they could! then yielded ! 
What avails the hopeless fray ? 
What avails the horse’s might, 
Though his neck be clothed in thunder ? 
What the cannon’s fiery breath 
Riving rock-built forts asunder ? 


What avails the speed of navies 
Rocking on the subject tide ? 
Nothing! when the Lord of Hosts 
Battles on the righteous side. 
He who giveth not the race 
To the swift—nor to the strong 
War's red honor—but alway 
Strengthens those who suffer long! 


Surely He on Trenton’s night 
Steeled our mighty champion’s heart ! 
Gave him wisdom, gave him power, 
So to play his destined part ! 
Beat the fiercest down before him, 
Turned the bravest back to fly ! 
Covered aye his head in battle, 
That no hair of it should die! 


Held him steadfast in the right, 
Till his glorious task was o’er, 
And no hostile banner waved 
On Columbia’s hallowed shore— 
Till his name was spread abroad, 
For a nation’s freedom won, 
All-honored, from the setting 
To the rising of the sun. 


NO. IY. 
MARION’S FEAST, 


“Praise the Lord for the mountains old ! 

For the rocks and dark ravine, 

Where the plunging torrent’s might, 
Heard afar, is never seen ! 

Where the herbless crags on high, 
Crowned for aye with trackless snow, 

Castles built by Nature’s hand, 
Frown defiance on the foe ! 


‘Praise the Lord for the mountains old!” 
Thus did the early Christian’s hymn 
Soar aloft from the icy crags, 
Soar aloft from the cataract’s brim. 
‘Praise the Lord! for freedom sits 
On their huge and earth-fast throne, 
Like the eagle upward gazing, 
Proud, invincible, alone!” 


But no mountains were the rampart 
Of our sunny southern strand ; 
Precipice nor torrent held us 
Safe from Tarleton’s bloody brand ; 
Not a hill nor hoary rock 
Fenced the calm and level scene, 
Carolina’s woodland plain— 
Georgia’s soft savannahs green. 
289 13 


290 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Yet as stubbornly and well 
Did the sons of freedom stand— 
Strove as sternly for the rights 
Of that fair and gentle lJand— 
As the bravest mountaineer — 
Ever plied the broad claymore, 
Ever plied the Switzer’s halbert 
By Luzerne, or Leman’s shore. 


Crag and cliff may tower aloft— 

Crag and cliff have oft been taken ! 
Forts may thunder—strongest forts 

Have by the cannon’s breath been shaken ! 
Where, if not in mountain passes, 

Nor in trenched and rampired ground, 
Where shall help in time or trouble, 

Where shall a nation’s strength be found ? 


Not—oh, not! i’ the highland pass! 
Not i’ the deep and fordless stream ! 
Not 7 the trenched and rampired rock ! 
Not i’ the serried bayonets gleam ! 
But in the hands and hearts that rally 

At the first alarum’s sound, 
Matters not in hill or valley, 
Where the foe may best be found. 


Not a rock or hill was there— 
Not a trenched or guarded post— 
Yet was every wo0dd a fortress— 
Every brake had its armed host— 
Dim morass of cypress gray— 
Upland waste of stunted pine— 
Tangled swamp of densest bay, 
Thorny brier, and poisonous vine— 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


Deep bayou and dark lagoon, 
Where the stagnant waters sleep— 
Where the cayman waits his prey, 
Where the venomed serpents creep— 
Where the rivers slow and sad 
Filter through their oozy banks: 
Fenced by walls of verdant gloom, 
Matted canes in serried ranks, 


There did Marion’s bugle muster 
Many a friend to the buff and blue ; 
Oh! but their steeds were swift as wind— 
Oh! but their rifles as death were true ! 
Often, often at dead of night, 
When they heard that bugle ring, 
The British host in guarded post 
To their arms in haste would spring. 


Seen no foe, their best lie low— 
While the rifle’s mortal gleam 
Flashes from the nearest covert, 
From the marge of the reedy stream ! 
Every fern-tuft speeds a death-shot, 
Every bush a marksman hides ! 
Through their camps at noon of night 
Thus with his men stout Marion rides! 


Evening sees a tented plain— 
Evening sees a banner fair— 
Whitening to the level sun— 
Waving to the summer air— 
Morning sees a pile of ashes, 
Smoking still, though quenched in gore— 
Sees a black and shivered staff, 
Whence shall wave no banner more— 


291 


292 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Sees the Britons muster boldly— 
Boldly march i’ the forest shade— 
Watchful eyes in every leaf, 
Ambushed foes in every glade— 
March from dawn to the set of sun 
Meeting not a living thing, 
Save the heron on the marsh, 
And the wild deer at the spring. 


Not a living thing they met 
While the sun was in the sky— 
Every lonesome hut forsaken, 
Moss-grown every well and dry— 
Not a woodman in the glade, 
Not a fisher by the lake, 
Not a plowman in the furrow, 
Not a hunter in the brake. 


Not a foeman could they meet, 
While they mustered in their force, 
Though they swept the country over 
With their fleet and fearless horse. 
But as soon as twilight fell, 
Ere to hoot the owls began, 
Over upland, and through swamp, 
Fast and far the summons ran. 


Fast and far the rifles rallied 
To the holloa and the horn, 
To the foray and the firing, 
As the reapers to the comn— 
Fast and far the rifles rallied— 
When the early sun came back, 
You might trace their wild career 
By the havoc in their track. 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 293 


There was care among the chiefs, 
There was doubt among the men— 
They were perishing by scores, 
In the forest and the fen! 
They were perishing by hundreds— 
Not a foe there was to see, 
Not a foe to bide a buffet, 
From the mountain to the sea, 


Came the British chiefs to council— 
Rawdon, stately earl was there, 
And Tarleton with the fiery eye, 
And the waving lovelocks fair, 
Rawdon’s brow was black as night, 
And his soul was steeped in gloom, 
But Tarleton only dallied 
With his sword-knot and his plume, 


But no plan they might devise, 
From his swamp to lure the foe, 
And the council all were mute, 
For their hearts were sad and low, 
Thinking of the British blood, 
Unavenged, and vainly spilt— 
But Tarleton only played the more 
With his sabre’s golden hilt. 


Then a mighty oath he sware— 
But a mighty oath sware he— 
‘*T will have him to the field, 
If a gentleman he be— 
I will have him face to face! 
I will have him blow to blow! 
This Marion and his merry men— 
Come weal of it or woe!” 


294 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Then he called his gallant cornet— 
Not a braver man than he 

In the glorious little isle— 
In the empress of the sea! 

‘* Saddle, saddle straight,” he said, 

“Saddle straight your dappled steed, 

For I know you well,” he said, 
‘«Tried and true i’ the hour of need ! 


**Tarry not to belt your brand, 
But unfurl a flag of white— 
We have scoured the country through, 
From the dawn of day to night— 
Now away and scour it thou, 
All from sunset unto morn, 
Till you find me Marion out, 
With his rifles and his horn— 


* Tell him Tarleton greets him well, 
Bids him fairly to the fight ! 
To the field and not the wood ! 
To the day and not the night! 
Fit is night for murder foul, 
But for gallant deeds the day ! 
Fit for rapine is the wood, 
But the field for open fray ! 


“Tf a gentleman he be, 
As a gentleman he should, 
If a Christian and a soldier, 
Let him leave the cursed wood ; 
And we'll fight the good fight fairly, 
For the country and the crown, 
With the sun in heaven to see us, 
Until one of us go down!” 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS, 


Staid he not to belt his brand, 
Saddled straight his dappled steed, 
Rode away into the wild wood— 
Oh! but he was true at need ! 
Long ago the sun had set, 
Blacker grew the cypress shade ; 
Onward, onward still he rode— 
Over upland, and through glade. 


Onward, onward still he rode— 
Heard no sound, and saw no sight, 
Till the twilight gleams were lost 
In the gloom of utter night. 
Sounded then that eldritch horn, 
North, and south, and east, and west, 
Not an echo near or far, 
For the bugle blast had rest. 


Sudden from: the covert deep 
Sprung a hundred forms to life— 
Glittered through the murky gloom, 
Rifle, sabre, axe and knife— 
But he drew his bridle rein, 
And displayed his flag of white, 
Showed them how he sought their chief 


Through the mist of the summer night. 


He alighted from his steed, 
And he bade them bind his eyes ; 
But they came not to the camp 
Till the sun was in the skies. 
In a darksome place 1t was— 
Scarce the blessed morning air 
Played among the stirless leaves— 
Scarce the blessed light shone there. 


295 


296 


FRANK FORESTER. 


Heavy gloomed the boughs above, 
Heavy cypress, giant pine ; 
Solid grew the brake around, 
Cane, and bays, and tangled vine— 
Stabled there were a hundred steeds, 
A hundred steeds of the noblest strain ; 
From the branches swung on high 
Gun and sabre, sella and rein. 


On the greensward here and there 
Scattered groups of troopers lay, 
Burnishing the rusted blade 
Fealty for the coming fray. 
Scouring here the rifle-lock, 
Running there the leaden ball, 
Dark of aspect, strange of garb, 
Stalwart, meagre, gaunt and tall— 


Here a suit of buff and blue— 
There a hunting-shirt of green— 
Here a horseman’s spur and boot— 
There an Indian moccasin— 
But beneath the soldier’s garb, 
And beneath the forest gear, 
Breathed one soul alive to honor— 
Throbbed one bosom void of fear!. 


Many a son of proudest sires, 
Rich with the old patrician blood, 
In that wild and woodland camp, 
Clad 1’ the hunter’s raiment, stood, 
Mustering round their chief adored ; 
Gallant partisans as ever 
Charged, with patriotic hate, 
Through morass, ravine and river. 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


Small was he and slight of limb, 
Mild of face and soft of speech, 
Yet no fiercer spirit ever 
Battled in the deadly breach, 
Wild his garb as e’er might deck 
Lawless rover of the night, 
Crimson trews and jerkin green, 
Cap of fur and crescent bright ! 


And the rapier on his thigh, 
It had ne’er been seen to shine, 
Nor had left its scabbard once, 
Though he ever led the line— 
Though, the foremost in the charge, 
And the latest in retreat, 
He was still the lucky leader, 
Who had never known defeat, 


Then the cornet bowed him low, 
And his message straight began, 

Though he marvelled at the camp, 
And the raiment, and the man. 

‘Tarleton greets you well,” he said, 

“Bids you fairly to the fight, 

To the field and not the wood, 
In the day and not the night! 


“Fit the night for murder foul, 
But for gallant deeds the day ! 
Fit for rapine in the wood, 
But the field for open fray ! 
If a gentleman you be, 
As a gentleman you should, 
If a Christian and a soldier, 
You will leave this cursed wood. 


297 


298 FRANK FORESTER. 


‘* That fight you may the good fight, 

For the country and the crown, 

With the sun in heaven to see you, 
Until one of you go down ! 

Now my message it is given, 
So dispatch me on my way, 

For my task it must be done, 
Ere the closing of the day !” 


Marion turned him on his heel, 
And he smiled a merry smile, 
And his answer made he thus— 
Loudly laughed his men the while— 
** Hie thee back to gallant Tarleton, 
Greet him soldierly for me— 
I have seen him do his devoir, 
And that fearlessly and free! 


“« And if I be a gentleman, 

As I surely think to be, 

Pray him read, for me, this riddle 
Which I riddle now to thee : 

Said the lion to the eagle, 
As he floated in the sky 

With the dundeer in his talons, 
‘Stoop thy pinion from on high, 


**¢ And come down and fight me here— 

Let the dundeer be the prize !” 

Twas the lion ruled the earth, 
But the eagle swayed the skies. 

As a Christian and a soldier, 
I will meet him face to face ! 

But ’tis I will choose the weapons, 
And ’tis I will name the place. 


AMERICAN HISTORICAL BALLADS. 


‘* Let him seek me, if he will, 

When the morning skies are bright, 
All as I shall seek for him, 

In the shadow of the night! 
If he love the lightsome day, 

He must meet me in the wood— 
He shall find me in the field, 

If he hold the night as good. 


‘“*T have spoken all my riddle— 

Now repose thee on the grass, 

Thou must taste a soldier’s meal, 
Then in safety shalt thou pass— 

Let the board be spread, my comrades, 

And bring forth our choicest fare, 
Worthy is the gallant guest, 

Worthy our repast to share.” 


Then the board was spread, in haste, 
But their board it was the sod, 
Where the merry men had mustered, 
And the chargers’ hoofs had trod ; 
And their fare it was but water, 
Muddy water from the lake, 
And the roots from the morass, 
And the berries from the brake. 


When the choice repast was ended, 
And the courtesies were done, 
He turned him to the camp again, 
And reached it ere the set of sun. 
Tarleton waited for him there, 
With his hand upon his hilt, 
Which he trusted on the morrow 
Should with rebel blood be gilt. 


299 


300 


FRANK FORESTER. 


, But his hopes they faded all, 
When the cornet’s tale was told, 
Of the leader and his riddle, 
Of the troopers and their hold. 
**Sure their spirits must be hot, 
And determined in the cause, 
If their drink be muddy water, 
And their food be hips and haws. 


‘* If such fools these rebels be 
On such filthy fare to pine, 
Were I King George I'd leave them 
To their liberty divine ! 
' There is nothing in the land 
To be won by so much slaughter, 
I would leave the rogues, by Heaven ! 
To their roots and muddy water !” 


ew ee a) (lu ee Se 
en ee ee 


. 
' 


*. = 
i 
/ 
- _ 
eee a ® 
7 i a’ @ 16> 
ak wa lam Se, 


- wee ea err. 


SO 


SS 


SS 


\ 


SS 


. . SS » See SS 


