N

Nabo - A town mentioned in several passages of the Old Testament

Nabor and Felix, Saints - Martyrs in the Diocletian persecution

Nabuchodonosor - Commentary on the two Babylonian kings of that name, especially the second, who is mentioned in Scripture

Nacchiante, Giacomo - Dominican theologian from Florence (d. 1569)

Nacolia - Titular metropolitan see in Phrygia Salutaris

Nagasaki - History of Catholicism in this Japanese city

Nagpur - Diocese in India, suffragan to Madras

Nahanes - American Indian tribe

Nahum - Essay on the Old Testament prophet and the book which bears his name

Nails, Holy - The question has long been debated whether Christ was crucified with three or with four nails. . .

Naim - The city where Christ raised to life the widow's son

Name of Jesus, Religious Communities of the - Includes Swedish knights, French sisters and a Portuguese confraternity

Name of Mary, Feast of the Holy - Feast commemorating all the privileges given to Mary by God and all the graces we have received through her intercession and mediation.

Names, Christian - Strictly speaking, this is not merely the first name of a person, but the name given to him at his baptism

Names, Hebrew - To the philosopher a name is an artificial sign consisting in a certain combination of articulate sounds, whereby a particular class of people are wont to designate one thing and distinguish it from all others. . .

Names of Jesus and Mary, Sisters of the Holy - Religious congregation founded 1844 in Quebec

Namur - Constituted by the Bull of 12 May, 1559, from territory previously belonging to the Diocese of Liege

Nancy - Diocese in France and heir to the celebrated See of Toul

Nantes - French diocese re-established by the Concordat of 1802

Nanteuil, Robert - French engraver and crayonist (1623-1678)

Naples - The capital of a province in Campania, southern Italy, and formerly capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies

Napoleon I (Bonaparte) - Emperor of the French (1769-1821)

Napoleon III - Emperor of the French (1808-1873)

Napper, Venerable George - Or George Napier. Expelled from university for being Catholic, imprisoned for nearly 9 years for merely visiting the English College at Reims, finally martyred for being a priest. He died in 1610

Nardi, Jacopo - Italian historian; born at Florence (1476-1563)

Nardò - Diocese in southern Italy

Narni and Terni - United dioceses located in central Italy

Narthex - In early Christian architecture a portion of the church separated from the nave and reserved for those who were not admitted amongst the congregation.

Nashville - Comprises the entire territory of the State of Tennessee.

Nasoræans - Pagan Gnostics who once flourished in Mesopotamia and Babylonia

Natal - Vicariate apostolic in South Africa

Natal Day - The anniversary of a person's death

Natalis, Alexander - A French historian and theologian, of the Order of St. Dominic (1639-1724)

Natchez - Diocese located in Mississippi

Natchitoches - Former title of the Diocese of Alexandria, Louisiana

Nathan - Identifies six men of that name mentioned in the Old Testament

Nathanael - One of the first disciples of Jesus, to Whom he was brought by his friend Philip

Nathinites - An inferior class of Temple servants

National Union, Catholic Young Men's - Its objects are the furtherance of practical unity, the spiritual, intellectual, moral, and physical advanced of Catholic youth, and the development of better citizens and Catholics.

Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Feast of the - The earliest document commemorating this feast comes from the sixth century. . .

Natural Law - In English this term is frequently employed as equivalent to the laws of nature, meaning the order which governs the activities of the material universe. Among the Roman jurists natural law designated those instincts and emotions common to man and the lower animals, such as the instinct of self-preservation and love of offspring

Naturalism - Philosophical tendency that consists essentially in looking upon nature as the one original and fundamental source of all that exists, and in attempting to explain everything in terms of nature.

Nature - Has reference to the production of things, and hence generally includes in its connotation the ideas of energy and activity.

Naturism - The term proposed by Reville to designate the worship of nature.

Nausea, Frederic - Bishop of Vienna (1480-1552)

Navajo Indians - The largest group of Indians belonging to the Athapaskan, or Dene stock

Navarre - Territory in the Pyrenees

Navarrete, Domingo Fernández - Dominican missionary and archbishop (1610-1689)

Navarrete, Juan Fernández - (catholic Encyclopedia)

Navarrete, Martín Fernández - Spanish navigator and writer (1765-1844)

Nave - Architecturally the central, open space of a church, west of the choir or chancel, and separated therefrom by a low wall or screen.

Nazarene - A name applied to Our Lord in the New Testament

Nazareth, Sisters of Charity of - Founded in 1812 by Father David

Nazareth - The town of Galilee where the Blessed Virgin dwelt when the Archangel announced to her the Incarnation of the Word, and where Christ lived until the age of thirty years

Nazarite - The name given by the Hebrews to a person set apart and especially consecrated to the Lord.

Nazarius, Saint - Fourteenth abbot of Lerins

Nazarius, John Paul - Dominican theologian (1556-1645)

Nazarius and Celsus, Saints - St. Ambrose discovered the bodies of these martyrs

Nazarius and Companions, Saint - Roman martyrs of the Diocletian persecution

Nazianzus - Titular metropolitan see of Cappadocia Tertia.

Neale, Leonard - Second Archbishop of Baltimore (1746-1817)

Nebo - A town mentioned in several passages of the Old Testament

Nebo, Mount - A mountain of the Abarim range east of the Jordan and the Dead Sea, from which Moses surveyed the Promised Land

Nebraska - One of the United States of America, originally included in the Louisiana Purchase.

Necessity - A strict connection between different beings, or the different elements of a being, or between a being and its existence.

Neckam, Alexander of - English scholar (1157-1217)

Necrologies - The registers in which religious communities were accustomed to enter the names of the dead — notably their own deceased members, their associates, and their principal benefactors — with a view to the offering of prayers for their souls.

Necromancy - A special mode of divination by the summoning of the dead

Nectarius - Patriarch of Constantinople (381-397)

Negligence - The omission, whether habitual or not, of the care required for the performance of duties, or at any rate, for their full adequate discharge.

Nehemiah, Book of - Summary with some commentary

Neher, Stephan Jakob - Church historian (1829-1902)

Nélaton, Auguste - French surgeon (1807-1873)

Nemore, Jordanus (Jordanis) de - The name given in medieval manuscripts to a mathematician called Jordanus Nemorarius

Nemrod - An examination of this Old Testament figure, mentioned in Genesis as 'a mighty hunter before the Lord' and king of Babylon

Neocæsarea - Titular see, suffragan of Hierapolis in the Patriarchate of Antioch sometimes called Caesarea.

Neocæsarea - Titular see of Pontus Polemoniacus

Neophyte - A term used of those who, lately converted from heathenism, have by the sacrament of Baptism, been transplanted into the higher life of the Church.

Neo-Platonism - Article by William Turner covering this movement's principal figures and later influence

Neo-Pythagorean Philosophy - An ethico-religious society founded by Pythagoras, which flourished especially in Magna Graecia in the fifth century B.C.

Neo-Scholasticism - The development of the Scholasticism of the Middle Ages during the latter half of the nineteenth century.

Nephtali - A look at the son of Jacob and the tribe of Nephtali

Nepi and Sutri - United sees of the province of Rome in central Italy

Nepveu, Francis - Ascetical writer (1639-1654)

Nereus and Achilleus, Domitilla and Pancratius, Saints - Roman martyrs who shared a feast day on 12 May

Neri, Antonio - Florentine chemist (d. 1614)

Neri, Saint Philip Romolo - Biographical article on the Apostle of Rome, who died in 1595

Nerinckx, Charles - Missionary priest in Kentucky, founder of the Sisters of Loretto (1761-1824)

Nero - The last Roman emperor (reigned 54-68) of the Julian-Claudian line

Nerses I-IV - Armenian patriarchs.

Nerses of Lambron - Scholar (1153-1198)

Nestorius and Nestorianism - Biography of the Patriarch of Constantinople, and examination of the unacceptable implications of his doctrine

Netherlands, The - The Low Countries, as organized by Charles V, under whom the Burgundian era ended

Netter, Thomas - Theologian and controversialist (1375-1430)

Neugart, Trudpert - Benedictine historian (1742-1825)

Neum - A term in medieval music theory

Neumann, Johann Balthasar - German artist and architect (1687-1753)

Neumayr, Franz - Preacher, writer and dramatist (1697-1765)

Neusohl - Diocese founded in 1776 by Maria Theresa.

Neutra - Diocese in western Hungary, suffragan of Gran

Nevada - A western state of the United States

Neve - Titular see of Arabia, suffragan of Bostra.

Nève, Felix-Jean-Baptiste-Joseph - Orientalist and philologist (1816-1893)

Nevers - Diocese in France

Neville - Biographies of Edmund (1605-1647), Edmund (1563-1648), Edward (1663-1735) and various other Nevilles

New Abbey - Abbey situated near Dumfries, Scotland.

Newark - Diocese created in 1853 in New Jersey

Newbattle - Located near Edinburgh, the second of the six Cistercian monasteries established by St. David, King of Scotland

New Caledonia - Vicariate apostolic in Oceania

Newdigate, Blessed Sebastian - Martyred at Tyburn in 1535 for denying the royal supremacy

Newfoundland - Located in Canada

New Guinea - Large island country

New Hampshire - The most northerly of the thirteen original states of the United States

Newhouse, Abbey of - The first Premonstratensian abbey in England, founded in 1143

New Jersey - One of the original thirteen states of the American Union. . .

Newman, John Henry - Lengthy and admiring biography of Newman as a thinker, author, leader, and illustrious convert to Catholicism

New Mexico - A state of the United States

New Norcia - Benedictine abbey in Western Australia

New Orleans - Archdiocese in the southern United States

New Pomerania - The largest island of the Bismarck Archipelago

Newport (England) - Diocese in the County of Monmouth, England

New Testament - Jesus Christ uses the words 'new testament' as meaning the alliance established by Himself between God and the world, and this is called 'new' as opposed to that of which Moses was the mediator

New Testament, Canon of the - The idea of a complete and clear-cut canon of the New Testament existing from the beginning, that is from Apostolic times, has no foundation in history

Newton, John - Soldier and engineer (1823-1895)

New Year's Day - Since there was no necessary starting-point in the circle of the year, we find among different nations, and among the same at different epochs of their history, a great variety of dates with which the new year began. . .

New York (Archdiocese) - Large archdiocese erected 1808 in the northeastern United States

New York (State) - One of the thirteen colonies of Great Britain, which on 4 July, 1776, adopted the Declaration of Independence and became the United States of America.

New Zealand - Consists of three main islands (North Island, South Island, sometimes also called Middle island, and Stewart island) and several groups of smaller islands . . .

Niagara University - A Vincentian university located near Niagara Falls, New York

Nicaea - Titular see of Bithynia Secunda, situated on Lake Ascanius

Nicaea, First Council of - First ecumenical council, held in 325 to combat Arianism

Nicaea, Second Council of - Seventh Ecumenical Council of the Catholic Church, held in 787.

Nicaragua - Republic and diocese in Central America

Nicastro - A city in Calabria, southern Italy

Niccola Pisano - Pisan architect and sculptor (1205-1278)

Nice - Diocese re-established in France by the Concordat of 1801

Nicene Creed - The profession of the Christian Faith common to the Catholic Church, to all the Eastern Churches separated from Rome, and to most of the Protestant denominations.

Nicephorus, Saint - Long article on the stormy career of the Patriarch of Constantinople, who died in 829

Nicéron, Jean-Pierre - French lexicographer (1685-1738)

Nicetas - Bishop of Remesiana in Serbia (335-414)

Nicetius, Saint - Sixth-century bishop of Trier

Niche - A recess for the reception of a statue, so designed as to give it emphasis, frame it effectively, and afford some measure of protection.

Nicholas I, Saint, Pope - Biography of this pope, d. 867, who upheld the authority of the papacy and the inviolability of marriage

Nicholas II, Pope - Pope who reigned from 1058 to 1061

Nicholas III, Pope - Pope who reigned from 1277 to 1280

Nicholas IV, Pope - Pope who reigned from 1288 to 1292

Nicholas V, Pope - Pope who reigned from 1447 to 1455

Nicholas Garlick, Venerable - Short biography of the English priest and martyr. Also some information on fellow martyr Robert Ludlam. They died in 1588

Nicholas Justiniani - Benedictine monk, dispensed from his vows, never formally beatified

Nicholas of Cusa - Lengthy article on the life and writings of the fifteenth-century canon lawyer, diplomat, and philosopher

Nicholas of Flüe, Blessed - Soldier, husband and father, became a hermit and was known as Brother Klaus

Nicholas of Gorran - Medieval preacher and scriptural commentator (1232-1295)

Nicholas of Lyra - Exegete, author of postillae, insisted that the literal sense of Scripture is the foundation for any spiritual interpretation

Nicholas of Myra, Saint - Fourth-century bishop in Asia Minor. Also called St. Nicholas of Bari because his relics were translated there in the eleventh century

Nicholas of Osimo - Italian preacher and author (d. 1453)

Nicholas of Strasburg - Fourteenth-century French mystic

Nicholas of Tolentino, Saint - Augustinian hermit, d. 1306

Nicholas Owen, Saint - A Jesuit lay brother, skilled in building hiding places for priests. He died under torture in 1606

Nicholas Pieck, Saint - Franciscan, studied at Louvain, was ordained a priest. He was martyred in 1572

Nichols, Venerable George - Biography of the English priest and martyr. Also some information on the Bl. Richard Yaxley, a fellow priest. They were arrested together with laymen Humphrey Prichard and Thomas Belson. All four were martyred in 1589

Nicholson, Francis - English controversial writer (1650-1731)

Nicodemus - A prominent Jew of the time of Christ, mentioned in the Gospel of John

Nicodemus, Gospel of - The Gospel of Nicodemus

Nicolaï, Jean - Dominican theologian and controversialist (1594-1673)

Nicolaites - A sect mentioned in the second chapter of Revelation

Nicolas, Armella - Saintly (though never canonized) French serving-maid (1606-1671)

Nicolas, Auguste - French apologist (1807-1888)

Nicolaus Germanus - Fifteenth-century cartographer

Nicole, Pierre - Theologian and controversialist (1625-1695)

Nicolet - Diocese in Quebec, Canada

Nicolò de' Tudeschi - Benedictine canonist from Sicily (1386-1445)

Nicomedes, Saint - Roman martyr venerated since at least the fifth century

Nicomedia - Titular see of Bithynia Prima, founded by King Zipoetes.

Nicopolis - Titular see, suffragan of Sebasteia, in Armenia Prima.

Nicopolis - Diocese in Bulgaria

Nicopolis - Titular see and metropolis in ancient Epirus.

Nicosia - A city of the Province of Catania, in Sicily

Nicosia - Titular archdiocese in the Province of Cyprus.

Nicotera and Tropea - Suffragan diocese of Reggio di Calabria

Nider, John - Dominican theologian (1380-1438)

Nieremberg y Otin, Juan Eusebio - Theologian and polygraphist (1595-1658)

Niessenberger, Hans - An architect of the latter part of the Middle Ages

Niger, Peter George - Dominican theologian, preacher and controversialist (1434-1481)

Nigeria - A colony of British East Africa

Nihilism - One who bows to no authority and accepts no doctrine, however widespread, that is not supported by proof.

Nihus, Barthold - Convert and controversialist (1590-1657)

Nikolaus von Dinkelsbühl - German theologian (1360-1433)

Nikon - Patriarch of Moscow (1652-1658; d. 1681)

Nilles, Nikolaus - Priest in Luxemburg (1828-1907)

Nilopolis - Titular see and a suffragan of Oxyrynchos, in Egypt.

Nilus, Saint - Fifth-century monk at Mount Sinai

Nilus the Younger - Calabrian monk, hermit, founder, d. 1005

Nimbus - In art and archaeology signifies a shining light implying great dignity.

Nîmes - Diocese; suffragan of Avignon in France

Nimrod - An examination of this Old Testament figure, mentioned in Genesis as 'a mighty hunter before the Lord' and king of Babylon

Ninian, Saint - British by birth, St. Ninian evangelized the southern Picts in Scotland

Nirschl, Joseph - Bavarian theologian and writer (1823-1904)

Nisibis - Titular Archdiocese of Mesopotamia, situated on the Mygdonius at the foot of Mt. Masius.

Nithard - Frankish historian and grandson of Charlemagne (d. 843)

Noah - A study of this Old Testament figure

Noah's Ark - The form, very likely foursquare, was not convenient for navigation, but, as has been proven by the experiments of Peter Jansen and M. Vogt, it made the Ark a very suitable device for shipping heavy cargoes and floating upon the waves without rolling or pitching

Noailles, Louis-Antoine de - Cardinal and bishop (1651-1729)

Nobili, Robert de' - Missionary to India (1577-1656)

Noble, Daniel - English physician (1810-1885)

Nocera - Diocese in Perugia, Umbria, Italy

Nocera dei Pagani - Diocese in Salermo, Italy

Nocturns - The convoluted history of this nighttime prayer

Nogaret, Guillaume de - Counsellor of Philip the Fair (d. 1314)

Nola - Diocese; suffragan of Naples

Nola, Giovanni Marliano da - Sculptor and architect (1488-1558)

Nolasco, Saint Peter - Biographical article on the founder of the Mercedarians

Nollet, Jean-Antoine - French physicist (1700-1770)

Nominalism, Realism, Conceptualism - The theories that have been proposed as solutions of the problem of universals

Nomination - The designation of a person for an ecclesiastical benefice or office made by the competent civil authority and conferring on the person named the right to be canonically instituted by the ecclesiastical superior.

Nomocanon - A collection of Church law, the elements of which are borrowed from secular and canon law

Nonantola - Former Benedictine monastery and prelature nullius, founded in 752

Nonconformists - Denotes those refusing to conform with the authorized formularies and rites of the Established Church of England.

None - Essay on the daytime canonical hour recited in mid-afternoon

Non Expedit - Words with which the Holy See enjoined upon Italian Catholics the policy of abstention from parliamentary elections

Non-Jurors - Anglican Churchmen who in 1689 refused to take the oath of allegiance to William and Mary

Nonnotte, Claude-Adrien - French controversialist (1711-1793)

Nonnus - Egyptian poet (c. 400)

Norbert, Saint - Biography of the founder of the Premonstratensians

Norbertines - Religious order founded in 1120 by St. Norbert

Norcia - Diocese and city in Perugia, Italy

Norfolk, Catholic Dukes of - Under this title are accounts of the prominent Catholic Dukes of Norfolk since the Reformation; includes a list of the dukes

Noris, Henry - Veronese cardinal (1631-1704)

Normandy - An ancient French province, from which five 'departments' were formed in 1790

Norris, Sylvester - Controversial writer and English missionary priest (1570-1630)

Norsemen - The Scandinavians who, in the ninth and tenth centuries, first ravaged the coasts of Western Europe and its islands and then turned from raiding into settlers.

Northampton - Diocese in England

North Carolina - One of the original thirteen states of the United States

Northcote, James Spencer - English convert (1821-1907)

North Dakota - One of the United States of America, originally included in the Louisiana Purchase.

Northern Territory - Territory in northern Australia

Northmen - The Scandinavians who, in the ninth and tenth centuries, first ravaged the coasts of Western Europe and its islands and then turned from raiding into settlers.

Norton, Christopher - English martyr (d. 1570)

Norway - Scandinavian country

Norwich, Ancient Diocese of - Centuries-old diocese in England

Notaries - Persons appointed by competent authority to draw up official or authentic documents

Notburga, Saint - Cook noted for generosity in feeding the poor

Notburga - Belgian statesman (1805-1881)

Nothomb, Jean-Baptiste - Belgian statesman (1805-1881)

Notitia Dignitatum - The official handbook of the civil and military officials in the later Roman Empire

Notitiae Episcopatuum - The name given to official documents that furnish for Eastern countries the list and hierarchical rank of the metropolitan and suffragan bishoprics of a Church.

Notitia Provinciarum et Civitatum Africae - A list of the bishops and their sees in the Latin provinces of North Africa, arranged according to provinces

Notker - Various monks of St. Gall who bore this name

Noto - Diocese and city in Sicily, Italy

Notoriety, Notorious - Whatever is so fully or officially proved, that it may and ought to be held as certain without further investigation, is notorious

Notre Dame de Montreal, Congregation of - Founded in the seventeenth century by Marguerite Bourgeoys

Notre-Dame de Sion, Congregation of - French religious institute of women, founded 1843

Notre-Dame de Namur, Institute of - Founded in 1803 in France, by Julie Billiart

Notre Dame, School Sisters of - A religious community devoted to education.

Notre Dame, Sisters of (of Cleveland, Ohio) - A branch of the congregation founded by Blessed Julie Billiart.

Notre Dame, University of - University in northern Indiana in the United States

Nottingham - One of the original twelve English dioceses created at the time of the restoration of the hierarchy

Nourrisson, Jean-Felix - French philosopher (1825-1899)

Novara - Diocese and city in Piedmont, Italy

Nova Scotia - One of the maritime provinces of Canada

Novatianism - Roman priest, antipope, third-century schismatic, and founder of the sect of the Novatians

Novatus, Saint - Son of St. Pudens and brother of SS. Praxedes and Pudentia

Novello, Blessed Agostino - Counselor to the King of Sicily, joined the Augustinians, renowned for his knowledge of civil and ecclesiastical law, served as the pope's confessor, was General of his Order

Novena - Article on the different kinds of novenas and their place in the spiritual life of the Church

Novice - The canonical Latin name of those who, having been regularly admitted into a religious order and ordinarily already confirmed in their higher vocation by a certain period of probation as postulants, are prepared by a series of exercises and tests for the religious profession

Nubia - A detailed history of Nubia, with emphasis on the religious aspects (primarily Christian and Catholic) of its culture

Nueva Cáceres - Diocese created in 1595 in the Philippines

Nueva Pamplona - Diocese founded in 1549 in Colombia, South America

Nueva Segovia - Diocese in the Philippines

Nugent, Francis - Irish Capuchin priest (1569-1635)

Nugent, James - English philanthropist, temperance advocate and social reformer (1822-1905)

Numbers, Use of, in the Church - No attentive reader of the Old Testament can fail to notice that a certain sacredness seems to attach to particular numbers . . .

Numismatics - The science of coins and medals

Nun of Kent - Born probably in 1506; executed at Tyburn, 20 April, 1534; called the 'Nun of Kent'

Nunc Dimittis - The Canticle of Simeon found in Luke 2:29-32

Nuncio - An ordinary and permanent representative of the pope, vested with both political and ecclesiastical powers, accredited to the court of a sovereign or assigned to a definite territory with the duty of safeguarding the interests of the Holy See.

Nunez, Pedro - Mathematician and astronomer (1492-1577)

Nuns - Females consecrated to God by religious vows

Nuptial Mass - 'Missa pro sponso et sponsa', the last among the votive Masses in the Missal. It is composed of lessons and chants suitable to the Sacrament of Matrimony, contains prayers for persons just married and is interwoven with part of the marriage rite, of which in the complete form it is an element

Nuremberg - One of the largest cities in Bavaria

Nusco - Diocese near Salerno, Italy

Nussbaum, Johann Nepomuk von - German surgeon (1829-1890)

Nutter, Robert, Ven. - Information on this English priest and martyr, blood brother of John Nutter. Also details on Edward Thwing, a priest and professor from near York. Robert Nutter and Thwing were martyred together in 1600

Nuyens, Wilhelmus - Dutch historian (1823-1894)

Nyassa - Vicariate Apostolic in Central Africa

Nympha, Tryphon, and Respicius - Martyrs whose feast is observed in the Latin Church on 10 November

Nyssa - Vicariate Apostolic in Central Africa

Nyssa - Titular see in Cappadocia Prima, suffragan of Caesarea.
